-^/ejriCiilSerti^ 


V 

A 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreiga 
literature,    on  the    Verses   of   the    Sible 


Rev.  TOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M,A. 


ACTS.   Vol.  11 


\  f 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming   H.  Revell    Company 

London     and     Edinburgh 


THE  BIBLIOAL  ILLUSTEATOE. 

THE    ACTS    OF   THE    APOSTLES. 

CHAFTEB  IX. 

VxBS.  1-3.  And  Saul,  yet  breathlng^  oat  threatenlngs  and  slangbter  against  the 
disciples. — Saul,  a  persecutor: — Saul  was  an  educated  young  man,  and  that  he 
should  engage  in  the  work  of  perseoation  strikes  us  as  anomalous  and  uimataral. 
In  young  men  we  naturally  expect  a  frank  concession  of  freedom  to  think  and 
generous  and  chivalrous  impulses.  We  are  not  much  surprised  when  we  find  in- 
tolerance as  men  advance  in  life,  for  age  is  conservative,  and  may  be  narrow  and 
bigoted.  Young  men  are  often  sceptical  and  unsettled  in  their  notions  ;  they  ques- 
tion the  correctness  of  opinions  long  held  to  be  true,  and  employ  themselves  in 
adjusting  new  discoveries  to  received  truths.  But  the  very  nature  of  this  process 
tends  to  make  them  liberal,  for  they  cannot  deny  to  others  the  liberty  they  claim 
for  themselves.  Old  men,  however,  are  confirmed  believers  or  unbelievers;  and 
hate  to  be  opposed  or  unsettled.  Hence  we  are  not  surprised  that  the  Sanhedrin 
should  be  composed  in  a  great  part  of  "  elders,"  nor  that  the  principal  functionaries 
of  the  "  holy  oflSce,"  should  be  men  of  advanced  years.  Yet  few  men,  young  or  old, 
have  been  so  furious  in  persecution  as  was  Saul  (chaps,  viii.  3 ;  xxii.  4 ;  xxvi.  9-11 ; 
Gal.  i.  13 ;  1  Tim.  L  13 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  9).  I.  The  PREVAiiENCB  of  pbbseotjtion.  The 
manner  in  which  new  views  have  been  received  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
things  in  history.  The  public  tears  of  Pericles  were  necessary  to  save  Aapasia, 
suspected  of  philosophy ;  but  all  his  eloquence  could  not  save  Anaxagoras  for 
having  taught  that  there  was  an  intelligent  cause  of  all  things.  Socrates  was  put 
to  death  for  teaching  the  same  thing.  Aristotle  only  saved  his  Ufe  by  flight  in 
order,  as  he  said,  to  save  the  Athenians  a  new  crime  against  philosophy.  Plato 
was  twice  thrown  into  prison,  and  once  sold  as  a  slave.  Galileo  was  imprisoned 
for  maintaining  that  the  sun  is  the  centre  of  the  universe.  The  Saviour  was  cruci- 
fied, and  in  almost  every  country  His  religion  has  encountered  opposition  and 
secured  a  triumph  only  as  the  result  of  a  baptism  of  blood  and  fire.  11.  Its 
OATTSEs.  1.  The  war  of  opinion.  A  man's  opinions  are  a  part  of  himself,  and 
become  as  dear  as  Ufe  or  liberty.  They  are  the  measure  of  his  reputation  and 
influence,  and  are  the  result  of  all  his  experience  and  studies.  To  attack  them  is,, 
therefore,  to  attack  him  ;  to  overthrow  them  is  to  take  away  all  that  constitutes  his 
claim  to  notice  while  living,  or  to  remembrance  when  dead.  This  remark  has 
additional  force,  if  the  matter  is  connected  with  religion.  To  attack  this  is  tc 
assail  that  which  must  be  dearest  of  all  to  the  heart  of  man,  inasmuch  as  it  may  leave 
man  in  a  world  indisputably  wretched  with  no  hope  of  a  better.  Eeligious  opinions, 
therefore,  have  been  among  the  slowest  to  make  progress ;  the  strife  in  regard  to 
them  has  been  the  most  bitter;  and  freedom  of  religious  speech  has  been  among  the 
last  of  the  victories  secured  by  the  conflicts  of  past  ages.  2.  Vested  interests. 
There  are  institutions,  endowments,  orders  of  men,  customs  and  usages,  that  grow 
out  of  forms  of  doctrine.  All  the  religions  of  ancient  and  most  of  modem  times 
■were  sustained  by  law.  Rome  indeed  recognised  those  of  other  nations,  but  then 
it  was  a  principle  that  while  each  country  recognised  the  rest,  it  allowed  no 
attack  on  its  own.  When,  therefore,  Christianity  attacked  all  forms  of  idolatry, 
it  arrayed  against  itself  all  the  malice  of  a  misihty  priesthood,  and  aU  the  power  of 
the  State ;  and  the  result  is  well  known.  3.  The  sanction  given  by  religion  to  the 
corruptions  of  the  human  heart.     The  plan  of  the  Prince  of  darkness  has  been  to 

VOL.  n.  1 


3  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

•eonre  this  for  the  indnlgenoe  of  passion.  Hence  to  attack  vice,  as  trne  Christianity 
always  does,  and  to  carry  a  pare  morality  over  the  world,  was  to  array  against 
itself  the  power  of  all  the  religions  of  the  earth.  4.  The  fixed  aversion  of  the  heart 
by  natnre  to  the  holiness  which  God  requires  of  man  ;  to  the  scheme  of  salvation 
by  the  Cross,  which  is  an  "  offence  "  to  one  class,  and  a  *'  stumbling-block "  to 
another ;  to  the  doctrines  of  human  depravity  and  of  a  just  and  changeless  retribu- 
tion, which  grate  hard  on  the  natural  feelings  and  are  repulsive  to  human  pride. 
III.  Its  effots.  1.  It  has  become,  as  the  result  of  these  trials,  a  settled 
principle  that  nothing  which  is  good  and  true  can  be  destroyed  by  persecution, 
bat  is  established  more  firmly  and  spread  more  widely.  It  has  led  men  to  look 
with  favour  on  what  is  persecuted ;  created  a  conviction  that  a  right  has  been  vio- 
lated ;  awakened  sympathy,  stimulated  inquiry  in  regard  to  the  persecuted 
sentiments ;  and  made  the  persecuted  more  firmly  attached  to  their  principles,  and 
more  eloquent  in  their  defence.  It  has  long  since  passed  into  a  proverb  that  "  the 
blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  Imperial  power  and  every  device 
of  human  ingenuity  has  been  resorted  to  in  order  to  extinguish  it ;  and  it  may  be 
assumed  now  that  if  Christianity  is  to  become  extinct  in  the  world,  it  must  be  by 
some  other  means  than  by  persecution.  2.  In  hke  manner,  persecution  becomes  a 
test  of  the  reality  of  religion.  It  is  not,  indeed,  a  direct  demonstration  of  its  truth. 
The  advocates  of  other  systems  have  borne  persecution  patiently,  but  although  this 
does  not  prove  that  they  were  suffering  for  the  truth,  yet  it  may  be  still  true  that 
the  mass  of  men  will  somehow  see  in  the  endurance  of  Christian  martyrs  an  arga- 
ment  for  the  Divine  origin  of  their  rehgion.  The  number  has  been  so  great — they 
have  borne  their  sufferings  so  patiently — they  have  met  death  so  calmly — so  many 
of  them  have  been  distinguished  for  intelligence — and  so  many  of  them  were  wit- 
nesses of  what  they  affirmed  to  be  true,  that  the  general  impression  on  mankind  is 
that  sufferings  so  varied,  so  protracted,  so  meekly  borne,  could  be  only  in  the  cause 
of  truth.  3.  The  results  of  persecution  are  worth  all  which  they  cost.  The  results 
of  the  imprisonment  of  Galileo,  of  the  sufferings  of  Columbus,  &o.,  are  more  than 
compensated  for.  And  the  happiness  which  has  been  conferred  on  the  world  by 
Christianity  since  the  fires  of  persecution  were  first  kindled,  and  that  which  the 
world  will  yet  enjoy  when  it  shall  be  diffused  over  all  the  earth  have  been  and  will 
be  more  than  a  compensation  for  all  the  sufferings  of  all  the  martyrs.  (A.  Bame$, 
D.D.)  The  conversion  of  great  men  : — As  it  is  in   the   exquisite  mystery  of 

printing,  the  great  difiBculty  lies  in  the  composing  and  working  of  the  first  sheet, 
lor  by  that  one  many  thousands  are  easily  printed ;  so  the  work  of  the  ministry  is 
to  convert  great  men.  In  uno  Ccesare  multi  insunt  Marii. — In  one  great  man  are  many 
inferiors  contained.  When  the  great  wheel  of  the  clock  is  set  a-moving,  all  the  inferior 
wheels  will  move  of  their  own  accord.  How  zealous  was  St.  Paul  about  the  conversion 
of  Sergius  Paulus,  the  deputy  of  the  country  1  He  knew  well  enough  that  to  take  such 
a  great  fish  was  more  than  to  catch  many  little  ones,  though  the  least  is  not  to  be  de- 
spised. (Galamy.)  A  remarkable  conversion : — This  incident  occurrei  many  years 
ago  in  the  heart  of  the  Black  Forest  in  Germany.  It  was  at  the  dead  of  night.  The 
place  was  lighted  by  torches,  which  cast  a  ghastly  glare  through  the  surrounding 
gloom.  Savage  looking  men,  fully  armed,  were  sitting  round  in  a  circle.  One  of  their 
number  was  holding  up  something  in  his  hand.  These  men  were  robbers.  That 
evening  they  had  robbed  a  stage-coach.  According  to  their  custom,  they  were  now 
engaged  in  selling  by  auction  among  themselves  the  articles  that  had  been  stolen. 
Travelling  bags,  different  articles  of  clothing,  and  various  other  things  had  been 
disposed  of  in  this  way.  Last  of  all  a  New  Testament  was  held  up.  The  man 
who  acted  as  auctioneer  introduced  this  "  article  "  with  some  wicked  remark,  which 
threw  tbe  company  into  a  roar  of  laughter.  One  of  the  company  suggested,  as  a 
joke,  that  the  auctioneer  should  open  the  book  and  read  a  chapter,  as  he  said,  "  for 
their  edification."  This  motion  was  seconded,  and  carried  unanimously.  Open- 
ing the  book  at  random,  he  began  to  read  with  an  air  of  mock  solemnity.  As  he 
went  on  reading,  laughs  and  jokes  were  heard  all  round.  While  this  was  going  on 
one  man  in  the  company,  the  oldest  member  of  the  gang,  and  who  had  been  their 
ringleader  in  all  that  was  evil,  became  silent.  He  sat  with  his  hands  clasped  on 
his  knees,  lost  in  deep  thought.  It  happened  that  the  passage  the  auctioneer  had 
just  read  was  the  very  one  he  had  heard  read  thirty  years  before,  at  family  prayer 
m  his  father's  house,  on  the  morning  of  the  day  when  he  lefi  that  home  for  the 
last  time.  In  a  moment  all  that  scene  came  back  to  his  memory.  He  thought  of 
his  father  and  mother,  and  brothers  and  sisters,  and  all  that  had  made  that  home 
SO  sweet  and  hap p^  to  him  Uien.  Since  leaving  home  hs  had  never  opened  a  Bible, 


«HAP.  n.]  THE  ACTS. 


never  offered  a  prayer,  and  oever  had  a  thought  of  God  or  of  eternity.  But  now, 
in  a  moment,  his  soul  seemed  to  wake  from  that  long  sleep  of  thirty  years.  He 
thought  of  God ;  he  thought  of  his  wicked  life,  and  was  filled  with  sorrow  and 
shame  and  fear.  He  was  so  occupied  with  these  thoughts  and  feelings,  that  he 
took  no  notice  of  what  was  going  on  around  him,  till  one  of  his  comrades  clapped 
him  rudely  on  the  shoulder,  and  said,  "  Now,  old  dreamer,  what  will  you  give  for 
that  book  ?  yoo  need  it  most  of  all,  for  you  have  been  the  biggest  sinner  among  us." 
"  That's  true,"  said  the  startled  robber.  •'  Give  me  that  book,  I'll  pay  you  the  full 
price  for  it."  The  next  day  the  robbers  scattered,  and  went  into  the  neighbouring 
towns  and  villages  to  sell  what  they  had  got  by  robbing.  The  man  with  the  Testa- 
ment also  went  away.  But  he  did  not  wish  to  sell  anything.  He  sought  a  quiet, 
lonely  place.  There  he  remained  for  several  days,  reading  that  wonderful  Book  of 
Ood,  shedding  bitter  tears  over  his  sins,  and  earnestly  praying  for  God's  pardoning 
grace.  God  beard  his  prayer.  He  found  pardon  and  peace  in  believing,  and  be- 
came a  new  man.  After  awhile  he  went  into  one  of  the  nearest  towns  to  see  a 
minister  of  the  gospel.  There  he  heard  that  the  gang  of  robbers  to  which  he  had 
belonged  had  all  been  taken  prisoners.  He  told  the  minister,  whom  he  went  to  see, 
ell  about  his  previous  life,  and  the  change  he  had  experienced.  Then  he  gave  him- 
self up  to  the  officers  of  justice.  The  rest  of  the  gang  were  all  put  to  death.  But 
his  free  confession  and  evident  repentance  saved  his  life.  He  was  put  in  prison, 
indeed ;  but,  as  he  continued  to  behave  Uke  a  truly  penitent  man,  he  was  soon  par- 
-doned  and  released,  and  taken  into  the  employment  of  one  of  the  princes  of  that 
neighbourhood,  and  he  proved  a  blessing  to  those  about  him  all  his  days.  (Chris- 
tian Age.)  "  Murder  will  out " : — In  one  sense,  if  not  in  the  common  understand- 
ing of  that  phrase.  If  hatred  is  in  a  man's  heart,  hatred  will  show  itself  in  a 
man's  words  and  acts  ;  for  "  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh." 
And  if  hatred  does  show  itself  in  a  man's  words  and  acts,  it  is  because  hatred  is  in 
his  heart.  It  is  of  no  use  for  a  man  to  say  that  his  harsh  and  bitter  words  don't 
mean  anything ;  that  they  are  only  on  the  surface.  They  do  mean  a  great  deal ; 
they  mean  that  under  the  surface  he  is  fully  as  bad  as  he  shows  himself  above  the 
surface.  And  as  it  is  with  nn^n  so  it  is  with  ohUdren.  When  a  child  stamps  and 
screams  with  anger,  and  '♦  just  wishes  nurse  or  teacher  was  dead,"  that  little  one  is 
breathing  out  the  threatenings  and  slaughter  which  are  in  that  little  one's  heart. 
Parents  and  guardians  ought  to  have  this  truth  in  mind  in  dealing  with  the  chil- 
dren of  their  charge.  {H.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  Went  unto  the  high  priest  and 
desired  of  him  letters  to  Damascus. — Soul's  commission : — We  learn  from  2  Cor.  xi. 
32,  33,  that  Damascus  was  at  this  time  under  the  government  of  Aretas,  the  king 
of  Arabia  Petrsea.  How  it  came  to  be  so,  having  been  previously  under  Vitellius, 
the  Eoman  president  of  Syria  (Jos.  "Ant."  xiv.  4,  §  5),  is  not  clear.  It  is  probable, 
however,  that  in  the  war  which  Aretas  had  declared  against  Herod  Antipas,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  Tetrarch's  divorcing  his  daughter  in  order  that  he  might  marry 
Herodias  (see  Matt  xiv.  3;  Luke  iii.  14),  he  had  been  led,  after  defeating  the  Te- 
irarch  (Jos.  "Ant."  xvii.  6,  §  1),  to  push  his  victories  further ;  and,  taking  advantage 
of  the  absence  of  Vitellius,  who  hastened  to  Eome  on  hearing  of  the  death  of 
Tiberius  (a.d.  37),  had  seized  on  Damascus.  In  this  abeyance  of  the  control  of 
the  Roman  power,  Aretas  may  have  desired  to  conciliate  the  priestly  party  at  Jeru- 
salem by  giving  facilities  to  their  action  against  the  sect  which  they  would  naturally 
represent  as  identified  with  the  Galileans  against  whom  he  had  been  waging  war. 
The  Jewish  population  at  Damascus  was,  at  this  time,  very  numerous.  Josephus 
relates  that  not  less  than  ten  thousand  were  slain  in  a  tumult  under  Nero  ("Wars," 
ii.  25),  and  the  narrative  of  the  Acts  (ver.  14)  implies  that  there  were  many  "  dis- 
ciples of  the  Lord  "  among  them.  Many  of  these  were  probably  refugees  from 
Jerusalem,  and  the  local  synagogues  were  called  upon  to  enforce  the  decrees  of 
the  Sanhedrin  of  the  Holy  City  against  them.  {Dean  Plumptre.)  If  he  found 
any  of  this  way. — The  way  : — We  have  here  the  first  occurrence  of  a  term  which 
seems  to  have  been  used  familiarly  as  a  synonym  for  the  disciples  of  Christ  (chaps. 
xix.  9,  23;  xxii.  4;  xxiv.  14,  22).  It  may  have  originated  in  the  words  in  which 
■Christ  had  claimed  to  be  Himself  the  "  Way,"  as  well  as  the  "  Truth  "  and  the 
"  Life "  (John  xiv.  6) ;  or  in  His  language  as  to  the  "  strait  way  "  that  *ed  to 
eternal  life  (Matt.  vii.  13) ;  or,  perhaps,  again,  in  the  prophec  y  of  Isaiah  (xl.  3)  cited 
by  the  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  3;  Mark  L  3)  as  to  preparing  "  the  way  of  the  Lord." 
Prior  to  the  general  acceptance  of  the  term  "  Christian  "  (chap.  xi.  26)  it  served  as 
a  convenient,  neutral  designation  by  which  the  disciples  could  describe  themselves, 
«ad  which  might  be  used  by  others  who  wished  to  speak  respectfully,  or,  at  least, 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

neutrally,  instead  of  the  opprobrious  epithet  of  the  "Nazarenes"  (chap.  xxiv.  5). 
The  history  of  the  term  "Methodists,"  those  that  follow  a  distinct  "method"  or 
"  way  "  of  Ufe,  offers  a  partial  but  interesting  analogue.  {Ibid.)  The  way  : — I. 
The  way  is  fob  lost  wanderebs.  The  very  expression  suggests  man's  need  of  a 
way,  i.e.,  of  salvation.  This  need  arises  out  of — 1.  Men's  ignorance,  errors,  sin, 
danger.  Men  are  lost,  and  no  created  power  or  wisdom  can  recover  them  and  make 
them  safe.  2.  Men's  practical  progressive  nature  put  them  in  the  right  way,  and  then 
they  need  leading  and  keeping  in  it.  A  religion  adapted  to  mankind  must  not  only 
restore  the  wanderers,  but  further  them  on  the  right  road.  II.  This  Way  is  Christ. 
"  I  am  the  Way,"  "  the  new  and  living  Way."  1.  Every  way  leads  from  some  place. 
Christ  leads  from  the  land  of  bondage  darkness,  death.  He  both  makes  and  shows 
a  way  out  of  a  state  of  sin  and  condemnation.  2.  What  is  the  Way  ?  The  Lord,  who 
delivers  and  conducts  His  emancipated  ones  in  the  way  of  obedience  and  righteous- 
ness by  His  Spirit.  The  new  way  of  life  adopted  by  the  first  Christians  impressed 
beholders,  who  hence  gave  them  the  title  of  the  people  of  "  the  Way."  8.  To  what 
end  ?  (1)  To  God.  (2)  To  heaven.  There  is  fulness  of  satisfaction  in  this  pro- 
vision and  prospect.  III.  The  way  is  wisely  planned  and  made.  It  is — 1.  Clear 
and  plain,  not  to  be  mistaken  by  those  who  are  resolved  to  find  it.  2.  Straight  and 
narrow.  It  is  the  one  only  way  from  which  the  traveller  must  not  deviate.  3. 
Safe.  Narrow,  but  not  too  narrow  for  him  who  will  keep  it.  IV.  The  way  is  for 
ALL  MEN.  Then — 1.  Discover  it.  It  is  not  hard  to  find  it.  Be  not  misled.  Take 
no  other.  2.  Walk  in  it.  It  is  one  of  two.  It  leads  to  life,  the  other  to  destruc- 
tion. It  is  in  vain  to  praise  it  unless  you  make  it  yours.  3.  Perseverance  in  it. 
Only  such  as  continue  in  it  can  reach  the  goal.  4.  Point  it  out  to  others.  All  true 
Christians  live  for  this.  (J.  R.  Thompson,  M.A.)  And  as  he  journeyed,  he  came 
near  Damascus. — Daviascus  : — The  city  ha,s  the  interest  of  being  one  of  the  oldest 
in  the  world.  It  appears  in  the  history  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xiv.  15  ;  xv.  2),  and  was, 
traditionally,  the  scene  of  the  murder  of  Abel.  David  placed  his  garrisons  there 
(2  Sam.  viii.  6  ;  1  Chron.  xviii.  6),  and,  under  Bezon,  it  resisted  the  power  of  Solo- 
mon (1  Kings  xi.  24).  Its  fair  streams,  Abana  and  Pharpar,  were,  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Syrian  leper,  better  than  all  the  waters  of  Israel  (2  Kings  v.  12).  It  was  the 
centre  of  the  Syrian  kingdom  in  its  alliances  and  wars  with  those  of  Israel  and 
Judah  (2  Kings  xiv.  28 ;  xvi.  9,  10  ;  Amos  i.  8,  5).  Its  trade  with  Tyre  in  wares, 
and  wine  of  Helbon,  and  white  wool  is  noted  by  Ezekiel  (chap  xxvii.  16,  18).  It 
had  been  taken  by  Parmenion  for  Alexander  the  Great,  and  again  by  Pompeius.  It 
was  the  birth-place  of  Nicolaos  of  Damascus,  the  historian  and  rhetorician  who  is 
conspicuous  as  the  counsellor  of  Herod  the  Great  (Jos.  "  Ant."  xii.  3,  §  2  ;  xvi.  2,  §  2). 
At  a  later  period  it  was  the  residence  of  the  Ommiyad  caliphs,  and  the  centre  of  the 
world  of  Islam.  The  beauty  of  its  site,  the  river  which  the  Greeks  knew  as  Chry- 
Borrhoas,  the  "  Golden  Stream,"  its  abounding  fertility,  the  gardens  of  roses, 
made  it,  as  Lamartine  has  said,  a  "predestined  capital."  Such  was  the  scene 
which  met  the  bodily  eye  of  the  fanatic  persecutor.  The  historian  does  not  care 
to  dwell  on  its  description,  and  hastens  to  that  which  met  his  inward  gaze.  Assum- 
ing the  journey  to  have  been  continuous,  the  approach  to  Damascus  would  come  on 
the  seventh  or  eighth  day  after  leaving  Jerusalem.  {Dean  Plumptre.)  St. 
Paul  on  the  way  to  Damascus : — How  many  thoughts  have  been  awakened  by  the 
approach  to  the  most  ancient  of  existing  cities  I  Abraham,  as  he  journeyed  from 
the  far  East,  drew  near  to  Damascus,  and  Elisha,  as  he  journeyed  from  Samaria  (2 
Kings  viii.  7),  and  Ahaz  when  he  went  to  meet  the  king  of  Assyria  (2  Kings  xvi. 
9),  and  Mahomet  who,  as  he  approached  it,  exclaimed,  "  Man  can  have  but  one 
Paradise  in  life — my  Paradise  is  fixed  above  " ;  and  turned  away  lest  that  glorious 
city  should  tempt  him  from  his  mission.  But  of  all  the  travellers  who,  "  as  they 
journeyed  came  near  to  Damascus,"  there  is  none  who  has  such  an  interest  for  us 
as  the  great  apostle.  Let  us  consider — I.  Paul's  conversion.  Conversion — i.e.,  "  a 
turning  round  "  from  bad  to  good,  from  good  to  better,  is  necessary  for  us  all.  We 
are  sometimes  inclined  to  think  that  our  characters,  once  formed,  can  never  be 
changed.  This  is  not  true.  Our  natural  dispositions  and  faculties  rarely  change  ; 
but  their  direction  can  be  changed ;  and  the  difference  between  their  upward  and 
their  downward  direction  deserves  the  name  of  conversion.  Paul,  in  great  measure, 
rema  ned  the  same  as  before — he  retained  his  zeal,  his  power,  his  energy;  but  the 
turn  which  was  given  to  these  qualities  gave  a  turn  to  his  whole  life,  and,  through 
him,  a  turn  to  the  life  of  the  whole  world.  He  approached  Damascus  a  furious 
persecutor ;  he  entered  it  a  humble  penitent ;  he  left  it  a  great  apostle.  So  is  it 
with  a&     Much  about  ub  never  can  be  changed ;  but  much  about  us  can  and  ought 


CHAP.  IX.]  THE  ACTS. 


and,  with  God's  help,  will  be  changed.  We  are  all  on  the  road,  not  to  Damascus, 
but  to  some  end  or  object.  To  every  one  of  us,  as  to  St.  Paul,  that  end  or  object 
will  at  last  appear  in  a  light  totally  different  from  what  we  now  expect ;  and  on  that 
changed  light  may  depend  oar  happiness  or  misery,  our  usefulness  or  uselessness. 
II.  How  IT  WAS  BROOGHT  ABOUT.  1.  By  the  vision  of  Christ.  How  this  entered  into 
his  soul  we  know  not ;  but  that  it  did  enter  there  is  sure  from  all  that  he  afterwards 
did  and  said.  And  it  is  this  same  communion  with  Christ  which  still  is  the  most 
powerful  instrument  of  making  every  human  soul  better,  and  wiser,  and  nobler 
than  it  was  before.  2.  By  calling  to  his  mind  the  true  knowledge  of  what  he  was 
doing.  He  thought  that  he  was  doing  God  service  by  trampling  down  an  heretical 
sect.  That  voice  from  heaven  told  him  that  in  those  poor  Christians  he  was  perse- 
cuting the  Great  Friend  and  Deliverer  of  the  world.  So  it  is  still ;  often  we  think 
that  we  are  all  right ;  that  no  one  can  find  fault  with  us.  And  yet  all  the  whUe,  as 
God  sees  us,  we  are  injuring  the  very  cause  we  wish  to  promote  ;  those  of  whom  we 
think  BO  little  may  be  the  very  likenesses  and  representatives  to  us  of  Christ.  *'  In- 
asmuch as  ye  have  done  it  unto  the  least  of  these  My  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto 
Me."  3.  By  the  appeal  to  the  best  part  of  his  own  heart.  "  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick 
against  the  pricks  " — against  the  goad,  against  the  stings,  of  conscience.  He  had 
doubtless  already  had  better  feelings  stirring  within  him  from  what  he  had  seen  of  the 
death  of  Stephen  and  of  the  good  deeds  of  the  early  Christians.  In  this  way  his 
conversion,  sudden  as  it  seemed  at  last,  had  been  long  prepared.  His  conscience 
had  been  ill  at  ease  ;  and  in  this  perplexity  it  needed  only  that  one  blessed  inter- 
position of  his  merciful  Lord  to  recall  him  to  a  sense  of  his  better  self.  And  each 
of  us  has  a  barrier  against  sin  set  up  within  him,  against  which  we  may  kick,  but 
which  will,  thanks  to  the  mercy  of  God,  long  resist  our  efforts.  IIL  What  bb- 
BULTED  FROM  IT.  This  is  too  great  a  subject  to  be  spoken  of  here  in  all  its  parts. 
But  one  single  point  is  put  before  us  by  this  morning's  lesson  (chap.  xxiv.  25).  11 
we  wish  to  make  St.  Paul's  conversion  and  doctrine  anything  more  than  a  mere 
name,  we  shall  try  to  bear  away  from  the  road  on  which  it  took  place  the  thought 
of  at  least  these  three  things — the  duty  of  justice,  and  self-restraint,  and  the  cer- 
tainty of  a  judgment  to  come.     {Dean  Stanley.) 

Vers.  3-19.  And  suddenly  there  sMued  round  about  htm  a  light  from  heaven. — 
The  heavenly  light : — As  the  supernatural  reflects  the  moral  in  all  the  miracles  of 
the  Bible,  so  in  the  conversion  of  St.  Paul.  We  have  here — I.  Ak  emblem  of  thb 
GOSPEL — "  a  light  from  heaven."  All  knowledge  is  light.  But^asTEe  light  here 
was  peculiarly  dazzling,  so  the  gospel  is  a  special  revelation  of  God's  will.  It  is 
heavenly  light,  because — 1.  Of  its  Divine  origin.  The  apostles  denied  that  they 
preached  "  cunningly  devised  fabT^^.^"AFtEeeye  is  made  for  the  light,  so  the  soul 
is  made  for  Divine  truth.  The  gospel  speaks  with  so  much  clearness  and  authority, 
that  conviction  is  carried  home.  Would  any  one  have  convinced  Saul  that  he  saw 
merely  the  blaze  of  a  torch.  Nor  can  any  one  persuade  the  beUever  that  he  is  only 
influenced  by  the  words  of  man  ?  "  Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall 
make  you  free."  2.  Of  it?  b^.|;)ig^  infli^enca.  The  light  and  heat  of  the  sun  come 
like  every  good  and  every  perfect  gift,  from  the  Father  of  lights.  As  heaven  is 
bright  and  loving,  so  the  gospel  is  the  good  news  of  salvation  to  men.  It  brings 
the  peace  afid  smUe  of  heaven.  There  was  darkness  before,  but  now  God  hath 
ehined  in  our  heart.  3.  It  leads  heavenward.  Christians  are  not  pilgrims  because 
they  are  forced  by  time  to  move  on,  but  because  they  have  the  light,  and  move  in 
the  right  direction.  II.  An  illtjstbation  of  Divine  methods.  "  Suddenly  there 
shined  a  light."  1.  The  sovereignty  of  the  Divine  vnll.  God  has  no  need  of 
consultations  with  His  creatures.  His  wisdom  is  infinite,  and  His  tender  mercies 
are  over  all  His  works  (Bom.  xi.  83-36).  How  unexpected  the  scene  near  Damascus. 
You  ask,  why  God  has  done  this  ?  and  the  only  answer  is,  ••  I  am  that  I  am."  You 
must  accept  the  Saviour  on  this  ground :  it  is  the  will  of  God.  2.  The  decisiveness 
and  finality  of  the  Divine  acts.  The  appearance  to  St.  Paul  was  as  emphatic  as  it 
was  sudden.  There  was  no  mistake  as  to  the  source  of  the  communication.  Jesos 
met  with  Saul,  not  to  parley  with  him,  but  to  acquaint  him  with  the  ultimatum  of 
the  court  of  heaven.  You  perceive  this  in  Paul's  answer.  The  gospel  is  of  none 
effect  unless  it  carries  with  it  its  final  appeal  and  authority.  3.  The  mercifulness 
of  the  Divine  purposes.  God  comes  to  save,  and  not  to  destroy  our  souls.  {Weekly 
Pulpit,)  When  JiceiLis  greatest  God  is  nearest : — Proved — I.  To  SauIi.  When 
sin  rose  highest  the  Lord  snatched  him  Back.  II."T6  the  Christians  at  Damascus. 
When  the  enemy  was  even  before  the  gate,  the  Lord  called,  "  Hitherto  shalt  tbott 


«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cwa.  ix. 

come,  bat  no  farther. "  (K.  Gerok.)  8auV$  convertion : — I.  Satti,  befobe  oorvsb- 
BioN.  He  seems  to  have  been  aroused  to  supreme  violence  by  the  martyrdom  of 
Stephen.  Like  some  beasts  of  prey  which  grow  uncontrollable  the  moment  they 
taste  blood,  this  restless  zealot  "  breathed  out  threatenings,"  a  metaphor  which 
reminds  one  of  pictures  of  war-hoises  snorting  fire  from  their  kindled  nostrils.     We 

see  then 1.  That  a  young  man  can  be  thoroughly  moral  and  yet  be  anything  but 

a  Christian.  Compare  what  Paul  said  of  himself  about  this  period  of  his  life  (Acta 
xxiii.  1)  with  what  he  writes  about  his  correctness  according  to  the  standard  of 
those  times  (Phil.  iii.  4-6).  2.  That  a  young  man  can  be  very  eonscientious  and 
honest,  and  yet  not  be  a  Christian  (Acts  xxiv.  16).  Everybody  admitted  that  Saul 
acted  up  to  his  convictions.  What  he  thought  to  be  right,  that  he  did  swiftly  and 
fearlessly  (2  Cor.  i.  12 ;  Acts  xxvi.  9-11).  3.  That  a  young  man  can  be  very  zealous 
in  religion,  and  yet  do  more  injury  than  good.  What  our  Lord  thought  of  the 
Pharisees  we  know,  but  He  never  credited  them  with  indolence  (Matt,  xxiii.  15). 
But  Saul  prided  himself  on  being  one  of  the  "  straitest"  of  them  (Acts  xxvi.  4,  5). 
There  is  a  zeal  not  according  to  knowledge :  and  it  makes  a  vast  difference  what  a 
man  believes,  even  if  he  is  sincere ;  for  the  more  sincere  he  is,  if  he  be  wrong,  the 
worse  it  is  for  him  and  everybody  else.  4.  That  when  a  young  man  becomes  a 
true  Christian  he  perceives  the  sorrowful  mistake  he  made  before  (G&l.  i.  13;  1 
Tim.  i.  12-16 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  9).  H.  Saul's  conversion.  Observe  here — 1.  How 
surely  fixed  is  the  unseen  limit  beyond  which  rebellious  sinners  are  not  permitted 
to  go.  God  sometimes  suffers  a  bad  man  to  succeed  in  a  bad  cause,  so  as  to  make 
his  arrest  more  abrupt,  and  his  final  failure  more  overwhelming.  He  did  not  stop 
Saul  at  Jerusalem  ;  He  let  him  prance  bis  proud  steed  across  Palestine;  then  He 
interposed,  and  with  one  flash  of  His  presence  He  ended  that  high  career.  2.  How 
surely  fixed  is  the  Divine  grace  within  which  a  penitent  sinner  can  find  safety.  The 
issue  is  always  narrowed  down  to  two  persons,  God  and  the  human  soul ;  that  is 
the  reason  why  God  takes  conversion  sovereignly  into  His  own  hands,  and  that  is 
the  reason  why  we  cannot  repent  or  believe  for  each  other.  Mark  the  words  "  thou" 
and  "  me  "  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  the  conversation.  It  was  as  if  Christ 
had  told  Pauli  the  conflict  is  betffiefia_Me  and  thee ;  and  then  it  was  as  if  Paul  told 
Christ  he  admitted  it,  duty  is  from  nie'to  THe'e".  When  that  supreme  point  in  a 
soul's  history  is  reached,  and  never  before,  it  is  easy  to  find  peace ;  for  the  soul 
stands  before  a  merciful  God  at  last.  Conclusion :  The  lesson  leaves  this  proud 
persecutor  in  a  pitiable  condition  of  humiliation.  But  Saul  is  happy ;  he  has 
become  Paul.  He  takes  a  new  commission ;  he  is  a  "  chosen  vessel  "  now  (chap.  v. 
15).  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Conversion  of  St.  Paul:— The  festival  of  the  Con- 
version of  St.  Paul  falls  aptly  near  the  end  of  the  Epiphany  season,  for  it  was 
brought  about  by  a  manifestation  of  Christ,  and  that  vouchsafed  to  one  who,  though 
himself  a  Jew,  was  chosen  to  "  be  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Gentiles." 
The  manifestation  on  the  road  to  Damascus  was  of  Christ  glorified.  St.  Paul 
alludes  to  this  distinction  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galations  (Gal.  i.  1).  The  apostle, 
like  the  original  twelve,  was  called  by  Christ  Himself;  but  it  was  his  special  and 
solitary  honour  to  have  been  "commissioned  by  the  risen  and  glorified  Lord." 
There  are  three  manifestations  of  Christ  in  glory,  or  rather  three  to  whom  these 
epiphanies  were  vouchsafed — St.  Stephen,  St.  Paul,  and  St.  John.  Over  and  above 
their  special  purposes  in  relation  to  the  persons  to  whom  our  Lord  appeared,  these 
unveUings  of  Christ,  since  the  "  cloud  received  Him  out  of  our  sight,"  help  us  to 
realise  the  continuity  of  His  work  in  heaven.  St.  Paul  was  drawing  near  to 
Damascus.  It  was  about  noon.  The  city  may  be  seen  from  afar.  The  desert  is 
passed.  The  eye  feasts  itself  upon  the  green  avenues  through  which  the  ancient 
capital  is  approached.  In  the  distance  may  be  descried  the  faint  outline  of  its 
white  buildings  standing  out  sigaiust  the  azure  sky.  Saul  catches  already  the 
murmurs  of  "  the  rivers  of  Damascus,"  and  the  ripple  of  the  rivulets  which  glisten 
and  sparkle  and  leap  amongst  the  tangled  brushwood.  The  perfume  from  the  Syrian 
gardens,  in  which  shrub,  and  fruit,  and  flower,  are  intermingled  in  wild  profusion, 
which  refresh  the  weary  traveller,  have  little  charm  for  him.  He  is  "  breathing 
out "  slaughter.  His  mind  is  filled  with  the  thought  of  how  many  disciples  of 
Christ  he  may  lay  violent  hands  upon,  and  bring  "  bound  unto  Jerusalem."  There 
is,  however,  another  image  which  will  rise  up  before  his  memory.  There  is  the 
face  of  a  young  man,  his  eyes  uplifted  towards  heaven-  Saul  hears  again  his  dying 
j  praverVand  the  thuds  of  the  stones  which  are  falling  around  him  ;  he  cannot  shake 
\off  the  remembrance — the  courage  and  the  forgivingness  of  the  youthful  martyr — 
!**  Thy  martyr  Stephen  "  (chap.  xiii.  20),  what  was  it  sustained  him  f    When— 


CHIP.  «.]  THE  ACTS.  t 

**  suddenly  there  sbined  ronnd  about  him  a  light  from  heaven :  and  he  fell  to  the 
earth,  and  heard  a  voice  saying  onto  him,  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  Me  ? 
And  he  said,  Who  art  Thou,  Lord  ?  And  the  Lord  said,  I  am  Jesus  whom  then 
persecutest."  The  Church  usually  celebrates  the  martyrdom  of  the  saints,  the  end 
rather  than  the  beginning  of  their  spiritual  course.  But,  as  she  marks  in  her 
Calendar  the  conception  and  nativity  of  our  Lord's  mother,  and  the  birth  of  St. 
John  the  Baptist,  so  she  keeps  a  festival  to  commemorate  the  conversion  of  St. 
PauL  It  is  the  great  turning-point  in  Saul's  history,  a  change  somewhat  out  of 
the  range  of  the  ordinary  operations  of  grace.  We  call  it  in  our  collect  a  "won- 
derful" conversion.  Let  ns  inquire  into  the  cause  of  Saul's  conversion,  and 
secondly,  note  what  is  marvellous  about  it.  I.  The  narrative  of  St.  Paul's  conver- 
sion is  three  times  told  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  besides  the  apostle's  allusions  to 
it  in  several  Epistles.  From  all  we  gather  that  the  great  change  in  Saul's  convic- 
tions WAS  BBOUGHi  A^ouT  BY  A  VISION.  It  was  the  result  of  grace,  though  two  factors, 
as  we  shall  presently  see,  combined  to  produce  it.  Grace  may  come  to  as  &om 
without  or  &om  within.  Grace  in  both  these  ways  moved  the  soul  of  Saul  of 
Tarsus.  God  appeals  to  us  both  through  outward  objects,  and  by  His  voice  within. 
By  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  by  the  working  of  miracles,  by  the  events  of  Divine 
Providence,  by  the  influence  and  power  of  good  example.  He  can  speak  to  us.  He 
spoke  to  Saul  in  a  vision.  There  are  those  who  deny,  or  at  least  doubt,  the  super- 
natural character  of  the  event.  Saul  "  fell  to  the  earth,"  they  say ;  but  this  might 
have  taken  place  through  natural  causes.  The  whole  might  have  been  the  result  of 
a  thunderstorm,  a  sunstroke,  a  fit,  or  simply  might  have  arisen  from  mental 
hallucination.  But  Saul's  companions  in  travel  also  heard  the  "  voice,"  though 
they  saw  not  the  Form,  nor  caught  the  words.  They  "  saw  indeed  the  light,  and 
were  afraid."  The  light  "  above  the  brightness  "  of  the  midday  sun,  St.  Paul  says, 
when  standing  before  Agrippa,  not  only  encircled  himself,  but  "them  which 
journeyed  with  "  him,  and  all  fell  to  the  earth  together.  It  was  at  noon  when  all  in 
Eastern  climes  is  hushed  and  still,  and  beneath  a  cloudless  sky,  that  this  happened. 
All  Saul's  prepossessions,  all  Saul's  interests  from  an  ea'rthJy  point  of  view,  his 
reputation  and  his  honour,  are  against  the  change  which  at  that  moment  was 
wrought.  St.  Paul  is  no  visionary,  but  a  man  of  masculine  mind  and  clear  judgment. 
Intellect  appears  to  predominate  over  the  imaginative  faculty  in  the  apostle,  if  we 
may  judge  from  his  Epistles.  God  speaks  sometimes  in  visions  to  His  saints. 
These  visions  are  of  diderent  kinds ;  some  addressed  to  the  mind,  others  to  the 
imagination,  some  to  the  eye  of  sense.  St.  Paul's  was  of  the  last  kind,  like  the 
burning  bush  which  Moses  saw,  and  from  the  midst  of  which  the  voice  of  God  was 
heard;  so  Saul  saw  with  his  eyes,  and  was  blinded  by  the  glory  which  he  beheld.  But 
grace  from  without  is  not  enough.  The  fact  that  only  one  of  the  two  thieves  who 
were  crucified  with  Christ  repented  will  be  sufficient  to  show  that  man  may  have 
the  grandest  opportunities  and  neglect  them.  The  vision  was  rich,  indeed,  in 
revelation  upon  which  St.  Paul  gazed — Jesus  glorified — "I  am  Jesus  of  Nazareth," 
not  only  "  I  was."  The  memories  of  earth  will  not  be  expunged  by  the  waters  of 
Lethe  horn  the  soul  as  it  passes  into  the  eternal  world.  Jesus  is  still  "  Jesus  of 
Nazareth."  His  history  is  a  part  of  Himself.  Saul,  as  he  was  persecuting  the 
Christians,  looked  back  to  Christ,  thought  of  Him  only  in  reference  to  His  mortal 
life  in  the  past.    Nawherealises  a  present  Christ — that  which  some  who  have 

tbeen  brought  up  as  aCEfistiair'fair'to  'do — and,  moreover,  learns  the  truth  that 
Christ  is  one, with  His  members,  and  that  in  persecuting  them  he  was  persecuting 
Hijn.  It  was,  then,'aricli  external  revelation  of  truth  to  Saul,  but  it  needed 
inward  grace  that  it  might  become  victorious.  The  soul  must  be  Ulumined  also 
from  within.  The  inspirations  of  that  Spirit  whose  work  it  is  to  "  receive  of " 
Christ  and  reveal  Him  unto  as,  must  be  vouchsafed.  And  this  also  was  granted. 
"  It  pleased  God,  who  separated  me  from  my  mother's  womb,  and  called 
me  by  His  grace,  to  reveal  His  Son  in  me "  (Gal.  i.  15,  16).  The  cause, 
then,  of  St.  Paul's  conversion,  as  of  all  others,  is  the  grace  of  God.  But  there  is 
another  factor  which  has  ever  its  share  in  the  work  of  conversion — the  human  wiU. 
God  does  not  destroy  our  moral  accountability.  Even  in  the  case  of  St.  Paul, 
whose  conversion  was  in  many  ways  "  wonderful,"  it  rested  with  himself  whether 
he  would  or  would  not  yield  to  the  grace  which  was  given  him.  He  distinctly 
asserts  that  he  was  "  not  disobedient  unto  the  heavenly  vision  "  (chap.  zxvi.  19). 
It  was  a  moment  not  only  of  rich  revelation,  but  also  of  entire  self-surrender,  when 
Saul  exclaimed,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  II.  We  have  considered 
how  the  grace  of  God,  hrom  without  and  from  within,  and  the  co-operation  of  the 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ek. 

human  will,  changed  Saul  into  Paul,  the  persecutor  into  the  apostle.    Now  look  at 

THE  GREATNESS  OF  THE  EVENT  ;  IN  WHAT  RESPECTS  IT  WAS  WONDERFUL.  The  justifi- 
cation of  a  sinner  is  ever  a  great  event.  St.  Paul's  conversion  was  wonderful 
because  of  the  sharp  antagonism  between  his  previous  and  subsequent  Ufe.  This 
antagonism  is  common  when  of  a  moral  kind.  Such  a  sharp  contrast  may  be 
traced  between  the  life  of  St.  Mary  Magdalene  or  St.  Matthew,  before  their  conver- 
sion and  after.  But  it  was  the  strength  and  violence  of  St.  Paul's  religious  opinions 
which  underwent  this  remarkable  change.  He  was  bUnded  by  prejudice  and 
pa=sion.  1.  It  was  wonderful,  in  that  the  grace  of  God  overtook  him  in  the  very  act 
of  sin,  as  he  was  drawing  near  to  Damascus,  in  the  very  acme  of  opposition  and  of 
violence.  Souls  sometimes  prepare  the  way  for  God's  grace  by  outwardly  ceasing 
from  sin.  The  stone  of  evil  habit  is  removed  from  the  door  of  that  sepulchre  before 
the  voice  of  Christ  penetrates  into  the  realms  of  the  dead.  But  St.  Paul's  experience 
is  an  illustration  of  the  mission  of  God  the  Son  to  mankind — •'  While  we  were  yet 
sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  2.  The  change  was  "  wonderful"  too,  in  its  suddenness. 
Conversions  may  be  suddenly  or  gradually  effected.  St.  Peter's  is  an  instance  of  a 
epiritual  evolution,  the  gradual  development  of  a  vocation :  St.  Paul's  of  a  sudden 
and  more  violent  change.  The  former  is  a  type  of  what  is  normal ;  the  latter,  of 
what  is  wonderful  or  extraordinary.  God  turns  water  into  wine  at  Cana  in  a 
moment,  but  this  was  a  miracle.  He  brings  wine  regularly  out  of  the  vine  by  means 
of  the  natural  processes  of  growth  and  culture.  Nor  again,  must  we  exaggerate  the 
suddenness  of  St.  Paul's  conversion,  though  we  admit  that  it  was  wonderful.  St. 
Stephen's  martyrdom  had  made  an  ineffaceable  impression  on  his  mind.  Bevoln- 
tions  do  not  take  place  in  history  without  a  long  series  of  events  which  lead  up  to 
them,  though  they  seem  to  burst  upon  the  world  in  a  moment :  so  with  the  great 
apostle,  though  sudden  was  the  change,  there  were  doubtless  preparations  of  grace 
going  before  it.  3.  Lastly,  it  was  wonderful  in  its  completeness.  There  is  usually 
the  gradual  growth,  oftentimes  the  fluctuations  or  relapses.  The  new  life  has  "  first 
the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  the  full  com  in  the  ear."  But  in  St.  Paul's  case, 
as  in  the  miracle  of  Cana,  which  we  have  already  alluded  to  as  in  some  sense  its 
analogue — the  miracle  of  turning  water  into  wine,  "  the  good  wine  "  surpassed  the 
ordinary  produce  of  the  grape ;  so  the  operations  of  grace  seemed  to  have  been  so 
condensed  in  the  soul  of  St.  Paul  as  to  bring  fruit  to  perfection  at  once.  He  seems 
not  to  pass  through  what  spiritual  writers  describe  as  the  stages  of  purgation, 
illumination,  and  union  with  God,  but  attains  at  once  to  a  vigorous  spiritual  life 
and  a  burning  love  for  Christ.  (W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.)  Conversion : — To 
consider,  then,  the  circumstances  of  St.  Paul's  conversion  as  an  outline  of  our  own. 
•♦  He  fell  to  the  earth,  and  heard  a  voice  saying  to  him."  It  is,  accordingly,  mostly 
amid  terror  and  amazement  that  men  are  restored  to  God.  God  has  impressed  a 
law  on  the  natural  world  also,  that  healthful  cure  can,  for  the  most  part,  only  take 
place  through  bitterness  and  suffering.  The  cures  of  our  bodies  picture  to  us  the 
cures  of  our  souls.  The  progress  may  be  more  or  less  painful ;  but  bitterness  is 
mixed  in  all.  Those  who  have  felt  it  say  that  the  restoration  of  suspended  life  is 
far  more  suffering  than  apparent  death.  Restored  circulation  has  pain ;  every  touch 
of  our  body,  whereby  health  is  given  back,  has  pain ;  well-nigh  every  healing 
medicine  is  bitter  or  revolting  to  our  taste.  By  this  universal  law  God  would 
reconcile  us  to  those  merciful  bitternesses,  whereby  He  corrects  our  vitiated  love 
for  the  destructive  sweetnesses  of  this  world,  and  cures  our  sickly  tastes  and  appe- 
tites, teaching  us  to  find  no  sweetness  but  in  Him.  So  He  prepares  us  beforehand 
to  look  to  them  as  healthful,  and  find  therein  our  health.  Yes  1  sorrow,  sickness, 
suffering,  loss,  bereavement,  bring  with  them  precious  hours.  God  blinds  us,  like 
Saul,  to  the  world,  that,  like  Saul's,  He  may  open  our  eyes  to  Him.  He  strikes  oa 
down,  that  He  may  raise  us  up.  We  should  not  be  eager  to  escape  sorrow,  but  only, 
through  sorrow,  to  escape  death.  But  pain  of  body,  and  sorrow  of  heart,  have  their 
end ;  if  not  sooner,  yet  in  the  grave  :  terror  of  soul  has  of  necessity  no  end.  Time, 
if  it  does  no  more,  reconciles  to  sorrow,  but  not  to  fear.  Man  can  endure  the  past, 
because  it  is  past ;  the  present,  because  it  must  end  :  but  fear  for  the  future,  when 
the  future  is  eternity,  has  no  end.  Yet  it  was  through  fear  that  God  brought  St. 
Paul  to  Himself ;  "  and  he  trembling  and  astonished  said."  Nay,  bo  wrapt  up  in 
this  fear  and  awe  did  the  heavenly  voice  leave  him,  that  for  three  days  and  three 
nights  he  neither  ate  nor  drank,  but  prayed.  In  fear  He  struck  him  to  the  ground ; 
in  fear  and  blindness,  though  with  hope.  He  raised  him.  Fear,  exceeding  fear  of 
hell,  is  one  of  the  most  usual  ways  in  which  God  brings  us  back  to  Himself.  It 
needs  not  that  otheru  have  warned  us  of  it.    Children  may  hear  of  it,  as  it  should 


CHiP.ix.]  THE  ACTS.  9 

seem,  when  man  intends  it  not  to  reach  them.  But  God  brings  it  home  to  their 
tender  consciences.  To  "  cease  to  do  evil,"  and  "learn  to  do  well,"  is  the  whole  of 
repentance,  but  such  repentance  is  not  learned  without  sorrow,  sorrow,  heart- 
searching  in  proportion  to  the  sin.  "God,"  it  has  been  said,  "willeth  to  save 
sinners,  but  He  willeth  to  save  them  as  sinners.  If  He  saved  them  by  a  simple 
change  of  heart,  without  any  repentance  for  their  past  life,  He  would  save  them  as 
innocent.  He  wills  that  they  should  feel  *  that  it  is  an  evil  thing  and  bitter  to  have 
forsaken  the  Lord  thy  God.' "  God  Himself,  in  His  miraculous  conversion  of  His 
''hosen  vessel,  St.  Paul,  kept  him  three  days  and  three  nights  without  relief.  During 
that  long  space  of  fixed  sorrow  and  humiliation,  intenser  than  we  have  ever  felt.  He 
aUowed  not  his  mind  to  be  ministered  to  by  man.  How  much  more  may  we  be 
content  to  bear  sorrow  and  fear,  who,  wherein  we  have  sinned,  have  sinned  against 
the  light,  not  of  the  law  only,  but  of  the  gospel ;  not  against  the  light  shining 
around  us,  but  against  the  light,  lightened  within  us ;  not  against  a  revelation  made 
without  us,  but  grieving  the  good  Spihi  of  God  placed  within  us.  Sorrow  then  and 
aching  of  heart,  brought  upon  us  by  God,  are  mostly  the  means  by  which  God 
brings  back  His  prodigal  children ;  sorrow  or  fear  without  us,  to  grow  by  His  grace 
into  a  godly  fear  and  dread  within  us.  And  as  we  cannot  make  ourselves  sorrow, 
80  we  should  beware  how  of  ourselves  we  cease  to  sorrow,  or  use  the  promises  of  the 
gospel  to  heal  our  pain  rather  than  our  sickness.  St.  Paul  lay  there  where  he  was 
stricken,  until  God  said  to  him,  "  Arise."  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  see  how  people, 
on  an  imagined  conversion,  contrive  to  forget  what  they  have  been,  or  remember  it 
only  to  thank  God  that  they  are  not  now  such.  Yet  the  sorrow  is  not  to  end  in 
itself.  St.  Paul  had  to  arise  and  do  God's  bidding ;  and  we  must  arise,  and  with 
him  ask,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  With  him  too  we  must  do  it ; 
keeping  back  nothing  when  we  ask,  and  shrinking  from  nothing  which  is  laid  upon 
us.  Such  was  St.  Paul's  conversion.  He  freely  offered  up  all,  and  took  all.  AU 
he  had  been  he  gave  up  ;  what  he  was  not  he,  in  God's  hand,  became.  He  was  a 
ravening  wolf,  he  became  a  lamb  ;  the  persecutor,  he  became  persecuted.  So  was 
be  in  all  things,  and  that  exceedingly,  transformed  into  the  opposite  of  what  he 
was  before.  And  this  is  the  most  hopeful  sign  of  a  real  healthful  change  wrought 
in  us,  when  we  become  in  life  other  than  we  were  before ;  if  we,  like  him,  become 
blinded  to  the  world,  and  see  only  in  the  world  Him  who  was  crucified  for  us,  and 
"with  Him  "  are  ourselves  "  crucified  to  the  world  "  ;  if  for  ambitious,  we  become 
lowly;  for  proud,  humble;  for  angry,  meek;  for  impatient,  patient;  for  self- 
indulgent,  self-denying ;  for  covetous,  liberal.  Nor,  again,  are  we  to  hope  to  have 
aU  our  way  plain  before  us,  or  to  see  His  face  equally  clearly,  as  when  He  first  by 
His  merciful  severity  checked  our  wayward  course,  and  recalled  us  to  ourselves  and 
to  Him.  By  merciful  interpositions,  if  we  heed  them.  He  sets  us,  from  time  to 
time,  in  a  right  course,  but  then  He  leaves  us  to  the  ordinary  channels  of  His 
grace,  and  the  guidance,  which  He  has  provided  in  His  Church.  Even  to  St.  Paul 
He  declared  not  at  once,  all  He  had  in  store  for  him.  {E.  B.  Pusey.)  Saul  of 
Tarsus  converted : — This  event,  which  happened  on  the  Damascus  road  about  the 
year  37  a.d.,  was  truly  one  of  the  most  momentous  of  history.  The  meaning  of  this 
remarkable  occurrence  reaches  out  a  long  way.  Indeed,  since  the  New  Testament 
is  the  final  revelation  for  the  Christian  Church  on  earth,  the  power  of  Saul's  conver- 
sion must  be  felt  to  end  of  time.  I.  Its  meaning  first,  of  course,  concerned  himself. 
1.  He  was  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Christianity.  By  Christianity  we  mean  the 
doctrine  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  By 
what  sort  of  an  argument  was  Saul  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  ?  The 
reasons  for  his  becoming  a  Christian  were  both  external  and  internal.  The  miracle 
was  double,  and  whatever  any  one  of  any  school  of  thought  might  require  as  a 
sufficient  ground  for  such  a  tremendous  change  as  was  brought  about  in  Saul  is 
actually  supplied  in  his  case.  He  became  a  Christian  really  and  rationally.  2.  By 
this  change  Saul  was  led  into  an  entirely  new  kind  of  life,  not  only  in  his  heart,  but 
in  his  work.  Christianity  was  not  only  his  creed,  it  was  his  business.  Saul  was  to 
aboUsh  Judaism  as  a  half-way  step  to  Christianity ;  he  was  to  preach  salvation  to 
the  Gentiles  as  Gentiles.  To  this  change,  planned  by  God  to  be  brought  about 
through  Saul,  our  conversion  is  due.  This  work  was  to  be  done  through  a  life  of 
Qnnsual  obedience  to  Christ.  Its  type  is  presented  to  ns  at  the  very  opening  of 
Saul's  Christian  career  in  the  question,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  " 
8.  And  how  was  all  this  brought  about?  Wholly  of  the  grace  of  God.  Satil  did 
not  convert  himself,  did  not  designate  his  work  to  himself,  did  not  characterise  it 
with  suffering,  did  not  furnish  his  own  spiritual  equipment  for  it.    AU  waa  from 


10  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha*.  ix. 

God.  n.  Saul's  converBion  had  a  obeat  ihtlttemob  on  the  Ghbistians  of  his  dat. 
1.  It  showed  them  that  God's  care  was  over  them.  2.  It  showed  that  God's  power 
was  behind  His  care.  It  is  not  enough  to  watch  unless  one  is  able  to  help.  God 
knew  and  God  was  able.  If  He  ooald  make  a  man  like  Saul  of  Tarsus  over  into  a 
follower  of  Jesus  He  could  do  anything ;  for  this  was  the  impossible,  ordinarily 
speaking.  3.  Saul's  conversion  showed  the  early  Christians  that  God  would  use 
means  for  their  blessing  and  the  furtherance  of  His  work  such  as  they  had  not 
expected.  IH.  To  Christian  tbuth  always  Saul's  conversion  has  espeoiaij 
TALUS.  1.  In  the  line  of  Christian  doctrine  it  has  force.  Saul's  experience  was  not 
in  a  dream  or  in  a  vision.  It  was  in  broad  daylight,  under  normal  conditions. 
Thus  he  beheld  Christ  in  glory.  Christ  then  is  aUve,  He  is  glorified,  and  His  glory 
is  not  spiritual  alone,  but  of  such  a  kind  that  it  can  be  apprehended  by  other  ways 
than  by  thought  upon  His  character.  He  can  be  present  wherever  He  chooses  in 
His  glorified  body,  and  can  reveal  Himself  when  He  likes.  The  doctrine  of  the 
existence  and  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  touched  upon  in  the  story  of  Saul's  con- 
▼ersion.  2.  Saul's  conversion  has  immense  value  in  the  department  of  apologetics— 
the  defence  of  Christianity.  There  is  a  problem  here  which  mere  naturalism  has 
never  been  able  to  solve.  Saul  presumably  was  able  to  know  either  a  stroke  of 
lightning  or  a  sunstroke  if  he  had  experienced  it.  An  attempt  has  also  been  made 
to  explain  Saul's  conversion  on  psychological  lines.  Because  at  once  (ver.  5)  he 
addresses  Christ  as  Lord  (Kyrie,  which  in  this  place  is  nothing  more  than  the 
ordinary  word  of  salutation  to  a  superior),  and  because  Christ  (ver.  5)  says  it  is  hard 
for  bim  to  kick  against  the  pricks  (which  means  only  that  opposition  to  Christ  is 
useless),  it  has  been  thought  that  Saul's  conscience  had  been  troubling  him  and 
making  him  wonder  if  perhaps  Jesus  were  not  the  Christ,  and  so  preparing  him  to 
be  converted  on  a  slight  occasion.  But  the  record  gives  not  a  hint  of  any  such 
psychological  preparation.  Out  of  deliberate  and  bitter  antagonism  Saul  was 
converted  to  Christ,  The  conditions  were  as  unfavourable  to  his  conversion  as 
they  could  be  made.  No  stronger  evidence  for  the  miraculous,  supernatural 
character  of  Christianity  could  be  offered.  If  Saul  did  not  see  Christ,  then  the 
strongest  convictions  of  the  clearest  minds  cannot  be  respected,  and  no  thinking 
whatever  is  ever  worth  anything.  3.  Saul's  conversion  has  an  especial  relation  to 
Christian  mission.  There  are  some  special  notes  worth  making  in  addition  to 
these,  in  connection  with  the  conversion  of  Saul.  (1)  AH  men  need  conversion. 
Saul  was  a  good,  moral,  even  godly  man  before  he  became  a  Christian.  (2)  No  one 
jetoo  hard  a  subject  for  a  possible  future  Christian.  (3)  The  outline  of  the  soul's 
progress  in  conversion  is  the  same  for  all.  (4)  Grace  is  the  only  means  of  our 
salvation.  AH  is  from  God.  (5)  There  is  a  work  for  every  one  who  is  made 
Christ's.  We  are  elected  to  work.  (6)  Our  work  is  accomplished  through  suffer- 
ing. What  we  gain  we  pay  for.  Let  us  not  grudge  the  cost,  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.) 
The  conversion  of  Saul: — I.  The  truth  of  Christianity.  II.  The  sotebeiontt 
OF  God  in  the  conversion  of  men.  What  has  he,  in  regard  to  his  salvation,  which 
he  did  not  receive  ?  It  is  needful,  in  this  connection,  that  we  should  be  cautioned 
in  regard  to  two  points.  1.  The  conversion  of  Paul,  while  it  illustrates  God's 
sovereignty,  does  not  exhibit  any  uniform  plan  as  to  the  exercise  of  that  sove- 
reignty. He  saves  men  by  different  ways.  2.  We  need  to  be  reminded,  by  way  ot 
caution,  that  the  sovereignty  of  God  in  the  conversion  of  men  gives  no  encourage- 
ment to  continued  impenitence.  Therefore,  harden  not  your  heart.  Eeply  not 
against  God.  Presume  not  on  His  forbearance.  HI.  Thb  biohes  of  Divinb 
MERCY  towards  the  chief  of  sinners,  (if.  J.  Van  Dyke.\  SatiVa  conversion 
God's  glorification: — God  is  such  an  Artificer,  that  He  nas  pleasure  only  in 
diflBcult  masterpieces,  and  not  in  trifling  pieces  of  work.  Also  He  works  with 
special  pleasure  from  the  block.  Therefore  He  has  from  of  old  selected  especially 
very  hard  wood  and  stones  in  order  to  show  His  skill  in  them.  {M.  Luther.) 
The  conversion  of  Saul : — The  three  greatest  facts  in  redemptive  history  in 
the  order  of  time  and  importance  are  the  advent  of  Christ,  the  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit,  and  the  conversion  of  SauL  Consider  Saul — I.  As  an  enemy  to 
the  cause  op  Christ.  His  enmity  was — 1.  Intense,  as  we  gather  both  from  the 
narrative  (ver,  1)  and  the  man's  character.  He  was  a  man  of — (1)  Strong  intellect, 
which  gave  power  to  his  passions.  (2)  Strong  impulses,  which  gave  force  to  every 
purpose.  (3)  Invincible  conscientiousness,  which  led  him  to  the  greatest  cruelty 
without  flinching.  2.  Practical  (1)  He  gets  his  persecuting  plans  legalised 
(ver.  2).  (2)  He  prosecutes  his  commission,  (o)  Promptly,  (b)  Thoroughly  (chap. 
TiiL  3).    II.  As  CONQUERED  BY  THE  BEVELATioN  OF  Christ.      1.  The  nature  of  tlUSi 


CHAP.  IS-J  TEE  ACTS,  U 

revelation.  (1)  By  symbol.  **A  light  from  heaven" — probably  the  Shekinah 
glory  —  not  recognised  as  such  by  his  companions,  bat  seen  by  Saul  to  be  the 
garment  in  which  He  clothed  Himself  whom  Saul  was  persecuting.     (2)  By  words. 

(a)  In  the  same  tongue  in  which  He  had  conversed  during  His  earthly  ministry. 

(b)  Emphatic.  Jesus  often  used  such  repetitions,  to  fix  attention,  "Martha, 
Martha."  "Simon,  Simon,"  (c)  Most  exciting.  ''Why  persecute  Me?  What 
injury  have  I  done  to  thee?"  2.  Its  effects.  It  brought  him — (1)  Into  conscious 
contact  with  Christ.  (2)  To  a  complete  submission  to  the  will  of  Christ.  HI.  As 
EXHIBITED  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  Christ  (vcr.  20).  What  a  change  is  this  I  The 
messenger  engaged  to  enlist  Saul  is  here  introduced.  Ananias  was  especially 
selected  and  especially  directed.  Note  here — 1.  The  reason  assigned  for  the  mes- 
sage received.  Paul's  prayer,  which  reached  the  heart  of  Christ,  was  answered  in 
the  mission  of  Ananias.  2.  The  manner  in  which  the  message  was  at  first  received. 
Eeluctantly  (vers.  13,  14).  8.  The  Divine  argument  with  which  the  message  was 
again  urged  (vers.  15,  16).  Saul's  subsequent  history  realised  all  that  is  here  stated 
(chaps,  xxv.-xxvii. ;  2  Cor.  xi.  23-28).  4.  The  manner  in  which  the  message  waa 
carried  out.  (1)  Affectionately.  "Brother  Saul."  (2)  Faithfully.  Ananias  does 
not  go  in  his  own  name,  but  in  Christ's.  (3)  Effectively.  No  remedies  were 
applied,  but  the  cure  was  perfect.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  conversion  of  Saul : 
— Look  at  the  conversion  of  Saul — I.  As  iLLUSTRATiNa  the  great  moral  change 

WHICH   IS  ESSENTIAL   TO   THE    SALVATION   OF  EVERT  SINNER.       Note — 1.     The    feeliugS 

developed  in  connection  with  it.  (1)  A  vivid  consciousness  of  Christ.  (2)  Anxious 
inquiry.  (3)  Profound  contrition.  (4)  Earnest  prayer.  2.  The  display  of  human 
and  Divine  in  effecting  it.  (1)  There  is  the  human  in  Saul.  The  Divine  is  not 
sufficient  to  account  for  Saul's  conversion  ;  for  it  was  as  strikingly  displayed  in  the 
cases  of  Pharaoh,  Balaam,  and  the  witnesses  of  the  crucifixion.  God  created  us 
without  our  consent,  but  cannot  save  us  without  it.  There  was  something  in  Saul 
that  made  him  susceptible  to  the  Divine  influence.  He  was  conscientious,  and 
reverenced  the  Divine  will  as  far  as  he  knew  it.  (2)  There  is  the  human  in  Anauias. 
God  usually  converts  man  by  man.  8.  The  thoroughness  of  the  change.  How 
vast  the  difference  between  the  man  of  ver.  1  and  the  man  of  ver.  20.    II.  As  sup- 

PIiYING   A   COGENT   ARGOMENT  IN   FAVOUR   OF  THE    DiVINITY   OF  THE   CHRISTIAN   FAITH. 

Lord  Lyttleton  has  ably  demonstrated  this.  The  argument  may  be  thus  shaped : 
1.  If  the  testimony  of  Paul  concerning  Christ  be  true,  Christianity  is  Divine.  Jesus 
was  the  grand  theme  of  his  ministry — Jesus  the  promised  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God, 
and  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  If  you  believe  Paul,  you  must  beUeve  in  Christ.  2. 
If  the  conversion  of  Saul  is  a  reality,  his  testimony  must  be  true.  This  conversion 
shows  that  he  had  all  the  qualifications  necessary  to  bear  a  credible  testimony.  (1) 
The  necessary  intelligence.  He  was  no  blind  fanatic,  but  saw,  heard,  and  felt 
Christ.  (2)  The  necessary  candour.  If  a  witness  is  prejudiced,  his  testimony  ia 
vitiated ;  but  Paul's  prejudices  were  all  against  Christ.  (3)  The  necessary  disin- 
terestedness. He  had  everything  to  lose,  and  nothing  to  gain.  III.  As  affordino 
HOPE  OF  MERCY  TO  THE  GREATEST  SINNER  (1  Tim.  i.  16).  {Ibid.)  The  convBTsion 
of  Saul : — 1.  Philip  was  sent  to  the  eunuch  of  Ethiopia,  and  he  made  excellent 
work  in  that  direction.  Why  was  not  Philip  sent  to  the  next  man  ?  He  also  rode 
in  a  chariot,  and  he  also  was  deeply  interested  in  rehgious  questions.  As  well 
have  sent  a  lamb  to  a  Uon  I  Is  there  no  method  in  these  providences  ?  Does  suc- 
cess in  one  case  mean  success  in  another  ?  Will  one  kind  of  preaching  do  for  every 
kind  of  hearer?  Who  vrill  go  to  Saulf  Not  a  man.  Saul  must  be  struck  with 
lightning  Divine.  The  thunder  must  take  him  in  charge  I  3.  Christianity  wrought 
a  marvellous  change  upon  a  man  of  conscience.  Saul  was  in  a  singular  sense  a 
most  conscientious  man.  He  was  not  a  ruffian.  He  was  a  Pharisaic  saint.  He 
was  a  sincere  man.  There  is  nothing  in  all  human  history  so  terrible  in  opposition 
as  conscience  that  is  not  based  on  reason.  8.  Every  man  is  born  into  the  family 
of  God  by  what  may  be  called  a  miraculous  conception.  The  new  birth  is  always  a 
miracle.  Saul  was  converted  miraculously.  You  were  converted  miraculously. 
We  approach  some  mountain  heights  so  gradually,  that  we  are  hardly  aware  that 
we  have  been  climbing  until  we  find  ourselves  without  any  further  height  to  ascend. 
So  it  may  be  with  many  conversions.  The  great  question  for  us  to  settle  is.  Are 
we  really  in  Christ  ?  4.  Christianity  always  creates  the  most  marked  experience 
of  the  individual  mind.  In  the  eunuch  the  experience  was  one  of  J07.  In  Saul  it 
was  one  of  thoughtfulness  and  prayer.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  eonveraion  of 

Saul : — We  have  heard  opinions  about  what  we  term  sudden  conversions.  Some 
persons  do  not  believe  in  them.    But  here  is  the  very  word  that  is  objected  to  I    Ik 


11  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  a. 

it  an  Old  Testament  word.  Suddenness  was  approved  by  the  Lord  of  the  Jewish 
Church.  "  The  Lord  shall  suddenly  come  to  His  temple."  Mark  the  harmony  of 
that  particular  feature  of  the  incident  with  the  Divine  purpose.  A  slow,  deliberate 
intellectual  transformation  would  have  been  a  moral  violence  under  circumstances 
so  peculiar.  What  could  be  more  harmonious  in  all  its  particulars  and  relations 
than  the  conversion  of  the  eunuch  ?  A  man  quietly  reading  in  his  chariot  and 
filled  with  wonder  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  mysterious  Word,  what  more  seemly 
than  that  a  teacher  should  sit  beside  him  and  show  the  meaning  of  the  sacred 
mysteries?  But  here  is  a  man  "  yet  breathing  out  threateniugs  and  slaughter"  ; 
with  such  a  man  you  cannot  reason ;  God  therefore  suddenly  strikes  him  to  the 
ground.  Let  us  admire  this  providence  of  arrangement  and  this  inspiration  of 
incident,  as  well  as  the  stupendous  conversion  itself.  Do  not  reprove  the  sudden- 
ness until  you  understand  all  the  circumstances.  The  very  suddenness  may  itself 
be  part  of  the  occasion.  Now,  look  at  the  incident  as  showing — I.  Saul's  relation 
TO  Judaism — i.e.,  to  his  past  life.  Does  Jesus  Christ  condemn  Judaism  ?  No.  He 
Himself  was  a  Jew.  There  is  not  a  word  of  chiding  in  all  the  speech.  The  only 
thing  that  was  being  done  was  that  Saul  was  hurting  himself.  "  Why  kick  against 
the  pricks  ?  "  The  persecutor  only  hurts  himself.  The  bad  man  digs  a  hell  for 
himself.  Christ  did  not  condemn  the  personal  attitude  of  Saul.  Saul  was  a  man 
of  the  Old  Testament,  which  says  "  an  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth." 
The  heretic  and  blasphemer  must  be  stoned.  Saul  was  therefore  keeping  strictly 
within  historic  lines  and  constitutional  proprieties  when  he  said,  in  effect,  "  This 
novel  heresy  must  be  stamped  out  with  force."  Christianity  does  not  condemn 
Judaism ;  it  supersedes  it.  Christianity  takes  it  up,  realises  all  its  types,  and 
symbols,  and  ceremonies.  Judaism  is  tho  dawn,  Christianity  is  the  fuU  noon-tide. 
Christianity  brings  to  maturity  and  sweetness  all  the  roots  and  fruits  of  the  Judaism. 
The  Jew  is  simply  a  man  who  has  not  come  on  to  the  next  point  in  history.  But 
for  Judaism,  there  could  have  been  no  Christianity.  We  are  debtors  to  the  Jew. 
The  Gentiles  never  converted  themselves.  The  Jew  was  sent  to  the  Gentile.  The 
most  stubborn  prejudices  were  turned  into  the  most  anxious  sympathies,  and  this 
is  the  crowning  miracle  of  the  grace  of  Christ.  II.  His  conversion  as  the  qreatesx 
TRIUMPH  WHICH  CHRISTIANITY  HAS  ACCOMPLISHED.  This  was  the  master -miracle. 
Who  is  this  man  ?  A  Jew,  of  an  ancient  and  honourable  pedigree  ;  a  student,  a 
scholar,  a  man  of  high  and  influential  station.  There  lay  within  him  capacity  to 
do  anything  that  mortals  ever  did.  His  hand  once  upon  the  prey,  the  prey  was  dead, 
unless  the  fingers  be  unloosed  by  Almightiness.  Jesus  Christ  Himself  directly 
undertakes  his  conversion,  and  works  thus  His  supreme  spiritual  miracle.  When 
Saul  was  converted,  there  was  more  than  one  man  changed.  There  is  a  conversion 
of  quality,  as  well  as  a  conversion  of  quantity.  Statistics  cannot  help  you  in  thi^ 
matter.  Let  a  Saul  of  Tarsus  be  converted,  and  you  convert  an  army.  He  will  not 
let  the  world  allow  him  to  travel  through  incog.  We  can  go  through  the  house,  th0 
market,  and  the  exchange,  without  anybody  identifying  us !  Saul  of  Tarsus  will; 
never  pass  without  recognition,  and  no  town  wUl  he  be  in  without  setting  up  his' 
holy  testimony.  Conclusion :  1.  The  Lord  uses  a  remarkable  expression  in  ver.  11. 
"  Behold,  he  prayeth."  Had  he  not  been  praying  all  his  life-time  ?  In  a  certain 
sense,  yes ;  but  whilst  saying  prayers,  punctilious  in  ritual,  exemplary  in  all  the 
outward  observances  of  his  Church,  Saul  had  yet,  in  a  Christian  sense,  never 
prayed.  Prayer  is  a  battering  ram  which  only  a  Christian  arm  can  work.  2. 
Another  remarkable  expression  we  find  in  ver.  16.  "  I  will  show  him  how  great 
things  he  must  suffer  for  My  name's  sake."  Mark  the  harmony  of  this  arrange- 
ment. God  knows  what  we  are  doing,  and  He  pays  to  the  uttermost.  "  Be  not 
deceived,  God  is  not  mocked,"  &o.  Adonibezek  said,  "  As  I  have  done,  so  God 
hath  requited  me."  Samuel  said  to  Agag,  "  As  thy  sword  hath  made  women  child- 
less, so  shall  thy  mother  be  childless  among  women."  Saul  was  in  this  succession, 
a  student  in  that  school  of  compensation.  Saul  was  now  made  to  feel  how  exactly 
true  these  terms  were  (c/.  chap.  viii.  8  with  chap.  xiv.  9;  ohap.  ix.  1  with 
chap,  xxiii. ;  ohap.  xxvi.  10  with  chap.  xvi.  26).  Do  not  suppose  you  can  escape 
God.     (Ibid.)  The  conversion  of  Saul : — I.  As  illustratino  moral  contrasts. 

Saul,  who  went  out  to  persecute,  remained  to  pray  (vers.  1,  11).  1.  He  breathed 
hotly.  How  changed  in  a  little  time  I  for  his  face  is  turned  upward  to  heaven,  and 
its  very  look  is  a  pleading  supplication.  What  has  occurred  ?  These  effects  must 
be  accounted  for.  Have  they  any  counterpart  in  our  own  experience  f  Have  any 
of  us  passed  from  fierceness  to  gentleness,  from  drunkenness  to  sobriety,  from  dark- 
ness to  light,  from  blasphemy  to  worship  ?    Then  we  understand  what  is  meant  b/ 


CHAP,  xz.]  THE  ACTS.  18 

this  most  startling  contrast.    This  is  precisely  the  work  which  Christianity  under- 
takes to  do.    It  ondertakea  to  cool  your  breath,  to  take  the  fire  out  of  your  blood, 
to  subdue  your  rancour  and  your  mahgnity,  and  to  clasp  your  hands  in  childUke  plea 
and  prayer  at  your  Father's  feet.    Such  is  the  continual  miracle  of  Christianity. 
Jesus  makes  the  lion  lie  down  with  the  lamb,  and  He  causes  the  child  to  hold  the 
fierce  beast,  and  to  put  its  hand  with  impunity  on  the  cockatrice  den.    Other 
miracles  He  has  ceased  to  perform,  but  this  continual  and  infinite  surprise  is  the 
standing  testimony  of  Christ.    2.  When  Saul  was  a  Pharisee  he  persecuted ;  when 
Saul  became  a  Christian  (ver.  22)  he  "  proved."    As  a  Pharisee,  he  said,  "  Destroy 
Christianity  by  destroying  Christians."    Having  seen  Jesus,  and  entered  into  Hia 
Spirit,  does  he  now  say,  "  The  persecution  must  be  turned  in  the  other  direction  ;  I 
have  been  persecuting  the  wrong  parties  "  ?    No !    Standing  with  the  scrolls  open 
before  him,  he  reasons,  proving  that  this  is  the  Christ.    When  he  was  not  a  con- 
verted man,  he  never  thought  of  *•  proving  "  anything.    Now  he  stands  up  with  aa 
argument  as  his  only  weapon ;  persuasion  as  his  only  iron ;  entreaty  and  supplica- 
tion as  the  only  chains  with  which  he  would  bind  bis  opponents.    What  has  hap- 
pened ?    Is  there  not  a  counterpart  of  all  this  in  our  own  experience,  and  in  civilised 
history  ?    Do  not  men  always  begin  vulgarly,  and  end  with  refinement  ?    Is  not 
the  first  rough  argument  a  thrust  with  cold  iron,  or  a  blow  with  clenched  fist  7  Does 
not  history  teach  us  that  such  methods  are  utterly  unavailing  in  the  extinction  or 
the  final  arrest  of  erroneous  teaching  T    Christianity  is  a  moral  plea.    Wherein  pro- 
fessing Christians  have  resorted  to  the  block  and  the  stake,  they  have  proved  dis- 
loyal to  their  Master,  and  they  have  forgotten  the  spirit  of  His  Cross.    Yoa  cannot 
make  men  pray  by  force  of  arms.     You  cannot  drive  your  children  to  church, 
except  in  the  narrowest  and  shallowest  sense  of  the  term.    You  may  convince  men 
of  their  error,  and  lead  men  to  the  sanctuary,  and,  through  the  confidence  of  their 
reason  and  the  higher  sentiments,  you  may  conduct  them  to  your  own  noblest  con- 
clusions.    How  far  is  it  from  persecuting  to  praying?     From  threatening  and 
slaughter  to  proving  f    That  distance  Christ  took  Saul,  who  only  meant  to  go  from 
Jerusalem  to  Damascus,  some  hundred  and  thirty-six  miles.    Christ  took  him  a 
longer  journey ;  He  swept  him  round  the  whole  circle  of  poesibiUty.    It  is  thus  that 
Jesus  Christ  makes  us  do  more  than  we  intended  to  do.    He  meets  us  on  the  way 
of  our  own  choice,  and  graciously  takes  us  on  a  way  of  His  own.    8.  In  the  open- 
ing of  the  narrative,  Saul  was  a  strong  man,  the  chief,  without  whose  presence  the 
band  would  dissolve.    And  in  this  same  narrative  we  read  of  the  great  persecutor 
that  "  they  led  him  by  the  hand."    What  has  happened  ?    We  thought  he  would 
have  gone  into  the  city  like  a  storm  ;  and  he  went  in  like  a  blind  beggar !    We 
thought  he  would  have  been  met  at  the  city  gate  as  the  great  destroyer  of  heresy  ; 
and  he  was  led  by  the  hand  like  a  helpless  cripple  1    Woe  onto  the  strength  that  is 
not  heaven-born  I    When  we  are  weak,  then  are  we  strong.    You  are  mightier  when 
you  pray  than  when  you  persecute.    You  are  stronger  men  when  you  prove  your 
argument  than  when  you  seek  to  smite  your  opponent.     Saul  led  by  the  hand ; 
then  why  need  we  be  ashamed  of  the  same  process  ?    Who  will  despise  the  day  of 
small  things  ?    Presently  he  will  increase  in  the  right  strength ;  not  the  power  of 
transient  fury,  but  the  solid  and  tranqaU  strength  of  complete  repose.     U.  As 
GiviNa  us  GLIMPSES  OF  Chbist.    He  is — 1.  Watchful.    "Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway, 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  age."    He  left,  yet  did  not  leave.    He  is  invisible,  yet 
watchful ;  looking  upon  Saul  every  day,  and  looking  at  the  same  time  upon  His 
redeemed  Church  night  and  day.    Events  are  not  happening  without  His  know- 
ledge.   He  knows  all  your  antagonistic  plans.    As  for  you  Christians,  He  knows 
your  sufferings,  and  oppositions,  and  through  how  much  tribulation  you  are  moving 
onward  to  the  kingdom.    2.  Compassionate.    "It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against 
the  pricks."    He  pitied  the  poor  ox  that  struck  its  limbs  against  the  sharp  and 
piercing  goads.      This  expostulation    repeats    the   prayer    of   his    dying    breath. 
He  does  not  bind  Saul  with  his  own  chain ;  He  throws  upon  him  the  happy  spell  of 
victorious  love.     3.  Consistent.     "  I  will  show  him  what  great  things  he  must 
suffer  for  My  name's  sake."    When  Jesus  ordained  the  disciples  to  go  out  into  the 
world,  He  laid  before  them  a  black  picture,  and  told  them  that  they  would  be 
persecuted ;  and  now,  when  He  comes  to  add  another  to  the  number,  He  repeats 
the  ordination  charge  which  He  addressed  to  the  first  band.     HI.  As  showing  thb 
NATDBB  AND  PUBP0SE8  OP  spiBiTUAL  VISION.    All  these  things  Were  seen  in  a  vision. 
Say  some  of  you,  "  We  have  no  visions  now.''    How  can  we  have?    We  may  eat 
and  drink  all  visions  away.    The  glutton  and  the  drunkard  can  have  nothing  but 
nightmare.    A  materialistic  age  can  only  have  a  materialistic  rehgion.    We  may 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  tx. 

grieve  the  Spirit,  quench  the  Spirit ;  we  may  bo  eat  and  drink  and  live  as  to  divest 
the  mind  of  its  wings.  It  may  be  true  that  the  vision  has  ceased  within  a  narrow 
sensa,  but  not  in  its  true  spiritual  intent.  Even  now  we  speak  about  strong  im> 
pressions,  unaccountable  impulses,  uncontrollable  desires,  unexpected  combinations 
of  events.  What  if  the  religions  mind  should  see  in  such  realities  the  continued 
Presence  and  Vision  which  gladdened  the  early  Church  ?     IV.  As  DEMONSTBATisa 

THAT   CHBISTIANrrr  DOES   NOT   MEKELT  AliTEE  A  MAN'S  INTELLECTUAL  VIEWS  OB  UODITI 

A  hair's  moral  prejudices.  Christianity  never  makes  a  little  alteration  in  a  man'i 
thinking  and  action.  Christianity  makes  new  hearts,  new  creatures.  Other 
reformers  may  change  a  habit  now  and  again,  may  modify  a  prejudice,  attemper 
a  purpose  with  some  benign  and  gracious  intent ;  but  this  Bedeemer  wants  us  to  be 
born  again.  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  new  creature  ;  old  things 
have  passed  away,  and  all  things  have  become  new."  There  drop  from  his  eyes 
••  as  it  were  scales,"  and,  with  a  pure  heart,  he  sees  a  pure  God.  (Ibid.)  Saul'$ 
conversion : — Three  distinct  lines  of  thought  appear  in  this  lesson,  each  concen- 
tered in  a  person — Saul,  Ananias,  and  Christ.  I.  Let  us  notice  the  steps  in  Saul's 
CONVERSION,  and  find  in  them  the  story  of  every  seeking  soul.  1.  Sin.  We  see  in 
Saul  an  open,  active,  determined,  and  cruel  enemy  of  Christ.  We  see  a  persistent 
«nemy  resisting  the  convictions  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  kicking  against  the  pricks  of 
his  own  conscience,  yet  an  honest,  sincere  enemy.  "  I  did  it  ignorantly  in  un- 
belief "  (1  Tim.  i.  13).  2.  Conviction.  Saul's  conviction  was  sudden,  yet  gradual. 
Gradual,  for  he  had  been  striving  against  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  (ver.  5)  ever 
since  he  had  seen  the  transfigured  face  of  Stephen  ;  sudden,  when  the  culminating 
instant  came.  In  a  moment  he  awoke  to  the  consciousness  of  his  guilt.  3.  Decision. 
"  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? '  That  sentence  marked  the  crisis  of  a  life, 
when  Saul  chose  Jesus  as  his  Master.  What  mighty  results  followed  that  instant's 
decision  !  4.  Seeking.  For  three  days  Saul  was  in  an  agony  of  prayer,  seeking  ^ 
the  Christ  whom  he  had  persecuted.  The  delay  was  not  because  God  was  unwill- 
ing, but  because  Saul  was  not  yet  in  the  right  condition  to  receive  the  blessing.  5. 
Salvation.  At  last  the  scales  fell  from  his  eyes,  and  Saul  saw  Christ,  not  as  his 
enemy,  but  as  his  forgiving  Saviour.  II.  Another  line  of  thought  is  suggested  in 
Ananias,  the  helper  in  Saul's  conversion.  1.  He  was  a  man.  God  uses  men, 
and  not  angels,  to  point  souls  to  salvation.  Even  Saul  of  Tarsus,  though  called 
by  Christ  Himself,  is  taught  the  way  of  faith  by  a  fellow-man.  2.  He  was  a 
believing  man.  Saved  himself,  he  was  able  to  show  others  the  way  of  salvation. 
Only  the  man  who  has  himself  seen  the  Lord  can  show  Him  to  others.  3.  He  was 
a  man  of  character.  Notice  what  is  said  of  him  in  chap.  xxii.  12.  Those  who  win 
Bouls  must  be  men  of  good  report.  4.  He  was  in  close  and  complete  communion 
with  Christ,  enjoying  direct  revelation  and  holding  familiar  converse  with  bis  Lord. 
He  who  would  have  power  with  men  must  have  power  with  God.  6.  He  was  an 
obedient  worker,  fulfilling  the  Divine  command,  even  when  it  sent  him  into  danger; 
for  it  seemed  perilous  to  visit  a  persecutor  with  the  message  of  the  gospel.  HL 
There  is  also  a  suggestive  subject  in  Christ  as  revealed  in  Saul's  conversion. 
1.  A  living  Christ.  Only  a  little  while  ago  Jesus  died  on  the  Cross,  and  was  buried 
in  the  sepulchre.  Yet  now  a  living  form  stands  forth,  saying,  "  I  am  Jesus  I  "  2. 
A  Christ  with  individual  notice.  He  saw  Saul's  journey,  knew  his  purpose,  and 
recognised  his  character.  He  knew  how  Saul  had  striven  against  the  Spirit.  He 
called  Saul  by  name,  and  called  Ananias  by  name  also.  Christ  in  heaven  has 
knowledge  of  men  and  events  on  the  earth.  3.  A  Christ  of  infinite  sympathy  with 
His  people.  "  Why  persecutest  thou  Me?"  He  felt  the  blow  at  His  Church  more 
keenly  than  the  spear -thrust  into  His  own  body.  In  all  our  afflictions  as  Christians 
Christ  is  afflicted.  4.  A  Christ  who  sees  the  best  in  every  man.  Ananias  saw  in 
Saul  only  the  enemy  and  the  persecutor.  Christ  saw  in  him  "  a  chosen  vessel  " 
and  an  apostle.  He  sees  in  every  soul  infinite  possibilities.  5.  A  Christ  with 
transforming  power.  He  can  transform  Saul  into  Paul,  Stephen's  slayer  into 
Stephen's  successor,  an  enemy  into  a  champion.  What  Christ  could  do  with  Saul 
He  can  do  with  any  man.  The  conversion  of  Saul : — Let  us  regard  this — I.  As 

iLLUSTRATivB  OF  THE  TROTH  OF  Christianitt.  Iu  the  casc  of  the  apostle,  nothing 
but  evidence  the  most  decisive  could  have  effected  such  a  change,  in  such  a  man, 
and  at  such  a  time.  1.  He  had  the  common  prejudices  of  a  Jew  against  Christianity 
and  its  Founder.  2.  He  was  a  Pharisee,  and  had  the  peculiarly  inveterate  pre- 
judices of  his  sect.  8.  He  was  a  man  of  worldly  ambition.  4.  His  very  sincerity 
as  a  persecutor  proves  the  power  of  that  evidence  which  could  convert  such  a  man 
into  a  disciple.    6.  The  tamper  of  his  mind  when  the  great  event  occurred  which 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS,  If 

led  to  his  immediate  conversion,  was  only  oaJoolated  to  indispose  him  for  convio- 
tion.  On  this  we  remark — (1)  That  he  could  not  be  deceived,  either  in  th« 
light  or  in  the  voice ;  or,  supposing  that  to  have  been  barely  possible  with  him,  yet, 
surely,  not  with  those  who  accompanied  him,  at  the  same  time.  Nor  could  he  be 
deceived  in  the  fact  of  his  blindness,  and  of  bis  supernatural  healing  by  Ananias, 
who  gave  him  instruction.  (2)  Nor  was  he  a  deceiver.  St.  Paul  was  a  good  man  ; 
and  tii&t  is  our  security  that  he  would  not  deceive.  If  he  were  not  a  good  man, 
where  shall  we  look  for  one  ?  But  if  he  were  a  good  man,  then  is  the  account  true, 
for  he  could  not  have  been  deceived ;  and  Jesus  did  meet  him  in  the  way,  and  the 
religion  of  Christ  is  from  God.  U.  As  showino  thb  foweb  and  oracb  or  ths 
Savioub.  This  was  manifested — 1.  As  to  the  Church — (1)  By  the  conversion  of  its 
destroyer.  (2)  By  the  revelation  of  its  oneness  with  Christ,  and  His  intense  interest 
in  it.  "  Why  persecutest  thou  Me  ?  "  2.  Aa  to  Paul  himself,  we  see  it  in  the  illu- 
mination of  his  mind,  in  the  extinction  of  his  worldly  temper,  the  conquest  of  the 
love  of  applause,  the  moral  strength  that  was  oonmiunicated.  III.  As  FUBNiSHiNa 
IMPOBTANT  PEACTicAii  LESSONS.  We  are  reminded — 1.  That  love  is  the  test  of 
religion.  2.  That  our  salvation  is  of  Ood.  3.  That  true  religion  implies  con< 
version — the  change  of  the  whole  character.  4.  That  the  end  of  a  thing  is 
better  than  the  beginning  of  it.  6.  Let  as  be  thankful  that  God  raised  np 
this  great  light  for  His  Church.  Let  as  study  his  writings,  and  imbibe 
their  spirit.  Let  us  glorify  God  in  him.  (JR.  Watson.)  The  conversion  of 
—Paul: — I.  Its  cikcxjmstances.  1.  It  was  without  any  preliminary  prepara- 
tion or  special  instruction.  2.  It  was  without  human  instrumentality.  3.  It 
was  attended  with  a  miraculous  display  of  light  and  sound  of  words.  4.  The 
physical  effect  of  these  displays :  blindiMts  and  prostration.  IL  Its  natubb.  A 
sudden  and  entire  change  in  his  views  of  Christ.  1.  He  had  previously  regarded 
Him  as  a  mere  man,  as  a  bad  man,  unfaithful  to  His  ancestral  religion,  and  as  an 
impostor,  one  falsely  pretending  to  be  the  Messiah.  Honestly,  i.e.,  really  entertaining 
these  views,  he  thought  it  his  duty  to  persecute  the  followers  of  Jesus,  and  to  arrest 
the  progress  of  the  new  religion.  2.  This  was  very  wicked  because — (1)  His  views  of 
the  Old  Testament  and  its  prophecies  of  the  Messiah  were  due  to  a  carnal  state  of 
mind.  (2)  The  evidence  of  Christ's  Divine  mission  was  such  that  none  but  a 
wicked  person  could  reject  it.  Hence  Paul  considered  himself  the  chief  of  sinners — 
a  clear  proof  that  honesty  of  conviction  does  not  exonerate.  3.  These  false  views 
of  Christ  were  instantly  rejected.  (1)  He  saw  Him  to  be  the  Lord,  i.e. ,  a  Divine 
Person,  the  Son  of  God  (GaJ.  i.  16).  (2)  He  saw  Him  to  be  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh.  He  beUeved  that  Jesus,  a  man,  was  the  Son  of  God.  (3)  He  saw  that 
Christ  was  the  promised  Messiah.  This  was  the  truth  that  he  at  once  preached 
(ver.  20).  III.  Its  aoemcy.  1.  Not  by  the  outward  circumstances.  2.  Not  by  the 
revelation  of  Christ  to  his  sense  of  vision.  The  wicked  at  the  last  day  shaU  see 
Christ  and  flee  from  Him.  3.  But  by  the  inmiediate  power  of  God  (Gal.  i.  16). 
So  our  Lord  said  to  Peter,  "  Flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  My 
Father."  IV.  Its  ebteots.  1.  Entire  submission  and  devotion,  a  willingness  to 
renounce  anything,  and  to  do  anything  that  Christ  required.  2.  This  supposes 
the  recognition  of  Him  as  God.  So  Christ  became  at  once  the  supreme  object  of 
worship,  love,  and  zeal.  3.  It  made  him  one  of  the  greatest,  best,  and  happiest  of 
men.  4.  It  secured  for  him  a  place  among  the  redeemed  in  glory.  {C.  Hodge,  D.D.) 
Paul's  conversion  a  type  of  the  Reformation  : — I.  Befobe  both.  Christ  was  perse- 
cuted and  beUevers  afflicted.  II.  At  both.  1.  The  light  from  heaven.  2.  Bepent- 
ance  of  heart.  III.  Fbou  both.  1.  Evangehcal  preaching  in  the  Church.  2. 
Evangelical  missions  in  the  world.  {K.  Gerok. )  The  conversicm  of  St.  Paul : — 1. 
That  blessed  war  of  aggression  which  Jesus  Christ  wages  upon  the  evil  one  is  a  war 
which  is  made  to  maintain  itself.  Christ's  soldiers  are  His  captured  enemies.  Per- 
haps the  most  notable  instance  of  this  is  the  conversion  of  Saul.  Jesus  Christ  never 
encountered  a  bitterer  or  an  abler  foe  ;  never  won  a  mightier  captain  for  Hia  army. 
This  conversion  brought  to  the  Church  immediate  rest  from  persecution,  and  prepared 
for  the  ultimate  extension  of  a  free  gospel  to  the  world  at  large.  2.  Now,  the  im- 
portant fact,  that  such  a  man  suddenly  abandoned  the  Pharisaic  theology  and  became 
the  Church's  foremost  preacher,  amply  justifies  the  detail  with  which  the  story  is  here 
related.  The  immediate  occasion  of  Saul's  change  of  life  was  quite  as  exceptional 
as  the  change  itself  was  eventful.  It  was  no  ordinary  case  of  a  man  led  to  believe 
in  Jesus  Christ  through  the  evidence  of  others,  the  testimony  of  the  Church,  or  the 
force  of  spiritual  need.  It  was  quite  unique — a  case  which  has  no  parallel.  The 
•gent  in  this  man's  conversion  was  not  a  mortal  man,  his  fellow.    It  was  the  Lonl 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  iZ. 

Jesas  Christ  Himself,  who  called  him  personally.  The  apparition  was  not  an 
inward  vision  such  as  appeared  afterwards  to  Ananias.  It  was  a  veritable  return 
of  Him  who  went  ap  from  the  Mount  of  Olives.  And  this  personal  manifestation  of 
Him  whom  the  heavens  had  received,  is,  I  suppose,  solitary  in  Christian  history. 
The  evidence  is  therefore  exceptionally  strong.  Of  course  such  a  transaction  canno* 
be  compared  with  public  events,  like  the  death  or  resurrection  of  Jesus,  to  wlficL 
many  could  testify.  Here  there  could  be  no  eye  or  ear  witness  but  one.  His 
evidence  alone  is  to  be  had,  and  it  is  explicit.  For  it  was  upon  the  fact  that  h« 
had  personally  seen  his  risen  Master,  as  the  other  apostles  saw  Him,  that  Paul 
rested  his  claim  to  the  privileges  of  apostleship.  And  the  evidence  of  Paul  was 
confirmed  by  the  vision  of  Ananias,  and  was  accepted  as  conclusive  by  the  Church 
of  Christ  at  the  time.  3.  Now,  I  suppose  it  may  be  due  to  the  emphasis  laid  on 
this  solitary  appearance  of  Christ  that  so  little  has  been  told  us  of  the  internal 
history  of  the  conversion.  But  who  can  tell  the  spiritual  processes  of  any  conver- 
sion ?  and  why  should  we  pry  too  curiously  into  the  mysterious,  secret  place  where, 
tmder  cover  of  the  darkness,  the  Spirit  of  God  broods  over  the  soul  whom  He  will 
renew  with  His  great  grace  into  the  likeness  of  the  Eternal  Son  ?  The  general 
nature  of  the  change,  however,  which  passed  over  Saul,  is,  I  think,  to  be  pretty  well 
made  out  from  what  we  know  of  the  man  before  and  after.  Up  to  the  moment 
when  the  glory  smote  him,  this  man  was  a  Hebrew  of  the  extremest  type,  and  it  needs 
no  great  insight  to  see  that,  to  such  a  man,  the  preaching  of  repentance  and  faith 
/D.  the  Cross  of  a  crucified  deliverer  from  sin  must  have  been  simply  gall  and  worm- 
wood. So  he  fiung  himself  into  the  work  of  stamping  out  this  hateful  heresy. 
Yet,  all  the  while,  I  think  it  probable  that  Saul's  mind  was  not  quite  at  ease.  I 
gather  from  the  first  words  Jesus  spoke  to  him,  as  he  lay  upon  the  road,  that  all 
had  not  been  quite  serene  in  the  soul  of  the  persecutor.  Jesus  had,  ere  this,  been 
trying  to  get  him  into  the  right  way.  Some  words  heard  in  controversy,  some  meek 
victim's  patience  as  he  haled  him  to  prison,  some  great  craving  of  his  own  heart, 
some  breath,  in  a  quiet  hour,  from  the  Spirit  of  God — something  must  have  stirred 
within  this  man,  who  looked,  to  other  men,  so  resolute,  and  who  told  himself  he 
was  so  right,  a  suspicion  that,  after  all,  the  Nazarene  might  not  be  altogether 
wrong.  And  Saul  had  kicked  against  these  pricks.  Ah,  which  of  us,  from  our  own 
experience,  cannot  understand  his  case  ?  To  which  of  us  has  it  never  happened, 
that  when  we  were  well  contented  with  our  religious  state,  some  ghastly  doubt 
looked  up  all  of  a  sudden  and  troubled  as ;  some  fear  lest,  after  all,  our  standing 
might  not  turn  out  to  be  so  very  safe,  and  our  religion  so  very  real  ?  But  suddenly, 
in  the  glare  of  light  that  covered  the  scene  at  noon,  a  man  appeared  whom  Saul 
believed  to  be  a  dead  impostor.  And  the  shock  given  to  his  whole  being  was  as 
awful  as  it  was  sudden.  Everything  in  the  narrative  speaks  of  instantaneous  and 
utter  collapse.  We  trace  it  in  the  few  and  timid  words  which  he  is  able  to  stammer 
out.  ••  Who  art  Thou,  Lord  ?  What  shall  I  do  ?  "  If  Jesus  was  the  living  God, 
then  he,  Saul,  had  always  been  rotten,  hopelessly  rotten.  The  old  is  shattered  for 
ever  ;  it  lives  no  more.  Gamaliel's  pupil,  the  Sanhedrin  inquisitor,  the  blameless 
Pharisee,  the  slayer  of  Stephen — this  old  man  is  dead.  4.  What  were  the  medita- 
tions which  filled  up  these  three  days  before  he  began  to  pray  ?  We  do  not  know. 
But  I  think  we  shall  not  err  if  we  concede  the  grand  disv^overy  of  these  days  to 
have  been  the  discovery  of  a  spiritual  law  which  condemned  his  legal  righteousness 
as  being,  in  his  own  later  words,  loss  and  dung.  He  needed  no  man  now  to  tell  him 
that  his  way  of  pleasing  God,  as  he  thought,  had  been  a  hideous  blunder,  since  he 
had  absolutely  laid  persecuting  hands  on  Christ,  thinking  he  was  doing  God  service. 
Back  through  all  his  past  life,  his  memory  must  have  gone,  discovering,  bit  by  bit, 
that  what  he  had  called  righteousness  became,  to  his  astonished  soul,  pride,  dis- 
charity,  sin  ;  what  he  had  called  gain  became  utter  spiritual  loss.  And  in  the  end, 
when  the  need  of  atoning  blood  to  wash  such  sin  away,  and  bring  Divine  forgiveness, 
grew  up  within  his  soul  into  clear  consciousness,  then,  at  last,  indeed,  he  began  to 
look  up  out  of  his  prostration  and  collapse.  God  began  to  reveal  His  Son  in  him 
by  giving  him  the  first  hint  of  the  Spirit  of  adoption.  His  mind  reverted  for  help, 
turned  round  about  in  his  loneliness  to  the  names  of  those  very  disciples  down  in 
his  notebook  that  he  had  come  to  arrest,  and  now,  in  a  sweet  vision,  he  seemed  to 
see  one  of  these  friends  of  Jesus  come  into  the  home  where  he  lay  helpless  and  in 
darkness,  and  give  him  light.  See  how  Jesus  Christ  must  smite  down  that  He  may 
lift  up.  He  first  came  in  person  by  the  way  and  brought  judgment,  darkness, 
horror,  and  almost  death.  He  came  now,  the  second  time,  by  the  gentle  words  of 
His  hamble  servant,  came  by  the  blessed  sacrament  of  His  Church,  and  so  coming 


CHAP.  IX.]  THE  ACTS.  17 

He  brought  light,  peace,  and  the  hope  and  desire  of  a  new  and  better  life.  Con- 
clusion :  St.  Paul's  conversion  substantially  is  repeated  in  the  historj  of  ten 
thousand  souls.  1.  The  same  appalling  discovery  that  the  exterior  observance  of 
piety  which  one  took  for  righteousness  is  no  righteousness,  but  dead  works,  because 
not  animated  by  the  spirit  of  love  to  God,  has  been  made  times  upon  times  since 
Paul  made  it.  And  if  it  is  not  often  that  God's  disclosure  of  Himself  bursts  upon 
B  man  with  such  violent  catastrophe  as  here,  it  will  be  your  highest  wisdom  to 
see  whether  or  not  you  have  made  the  Pauline  discovery,  and  learned  the  Pauline 
lesson,  2.  One  unexpected  day  has  often  revolutionised  a  life.  We  all  live  in  the 
presence  of  spiritual  forces,  which  may,  at  any  moment,  get  unlooked-for  access  to 
us.  A  stray  word,  a  new  acquaintance,  a  book  you  open,  some  sudden  disaster, 
may  prove,  before  you  know  it,  the  very  turning  of  your  history.  But  let  none  be 
idle  waiters  on  critical  momenta  in  Providence.  "  Seek  the  Lord  while  He  may  be 
found."  (J.  O.  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  conversion  of  St.  Paul : — I.  Its  cikcum- 
STANCES.  1.  In  the  Bible  proper  names  frequently  had  raeanings.  Now  this  Saul, 
or  Shaul  in  Hebrew,  and  especially  in  Arabic,  means  not  only  asked  for,  but  to 
seek  diligently  or  to  be  sought  out.  And  here  you  have  in  the  very  name  the 
history  of  every  sinner  who  comes  to  God;  he  is  not  one  who  is  seeking  God  first, 
but  one  who  is  sought  for.  Was  it  not  the  case  even  with  Abraham  7  '  *  And  He 
said,  Abraham,  Abraham  ;  and  he  answered,  Here  am  I."  Did  Moses  call  God  first, 
or  seek  for  God  ?  Far  from  it ;  ♦'  Moses,  Moses  ;  and  he  said.  Here  am  I."  2.  In 
what  state  was  this  Shaul  at  the  moment  he  was  sought  out  ?  "  Yet  breathing  out 
threatenings,  "&c.  Such  a  man  cannot  have  been  in  his  sound  senses.  And  you  may 
Bee  his  own  candid  confession  of  that  (chap.  xxvi.).  I  "  compelled  them  to  blas- 
pheme, "  I  experienced  something  of  this  lately  at  Cairo.  From  eleven  o'clock  in 
the  night  till  three  o'clock  I  was  with  several  Jews,  who  continually  tried  me  to 
say  "  only  once,  only  once,  curse  the  name  of  Jesus."  And  why  did  he  do  this  ? 
"Being  exceedingly  mad  against  them."  And  it  is  said — "yet  breathing  out." 
Why  yet  ?  Something  must  have  gone  on  before,  which  might  have  changed  his 
opinions  and  his  conduct.  And  many  such  things  went  before,  but  without  use  to 
him.  The  Son  of  God  nailed  on  the  Cross  had  fulfilled  every  prophecy  regarding 
His  sufferings.  Here  is  Stephen  praying  amidst  the  shower  of  stones,  "  Lay  not 
this  sin  to  their  charge  "  ;  a  thinking  mind,  like  Paul's,  one  should  suppose  would 
have  been  struck  with  this.  And  he  "  went  unto  the  high  priest. "  He  had  the 
approbation  of  the  ecclesiastical  authorities.  We  can  have  the  approbation  of  the 
world  and  the  orthodox  churchmen,  and  yet  be  still  far  from  God.  He  desired  of 
him  letters  that  if  he  found  any  of  this  way.  I  was  often  struck  with  this  expres- 
sion, when  I  heard  the  Arabs  speaking  about  religion  ;  they  do  not  say  "  the  religion 
of  Jesus,"  but  "  I  want  to  know  your  way  " — "  What  is  your  way  ?  "  And  do  we 
not  often  find  this  the  case  in  England  ?  Speak  to  men  about  vital  conversion, 
and  they  answer,  "  Oh  1  I  am  not  of  that  way."  3.  "  And  suddenly."  We  find 
often  that  the  grace  of  God  comes  suddenly.  And  so  we  find  frequently  that  genius 
is  awakened.  An  Italian  forty  years  of  age  lived  at  Eome,  and  went  every  day  to 
St.  Peter's,  but  he  never  was  struck  with  the  masterpieces  of  Eaphael ;  but  one  day 
he  went  there,  and  suddenly  struck  with  them  his  genius  awakened,  and  he  exclaimed, 
"  I  am  also  a  painter " ;  and  from  that  moment  he  became  the  great  painter 
Correggio.  So  very  often  the  grace  of  God  comes.  A  man  is  journeying  on  and 
on  carelessly  towards  eternity,  when,  suddenly  struck  by  the  grace  of  God,  he 
exclaims,  "  I  am  also  a  sinner  ransomed,"  Paul  saw  a  light — that  described 
Isaiah — "  The  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light " — "  the 
Sun  of  Eighteousness."  *•  And  he  fell  to  the  earth,"  I  had  an  exact  illustration 
of  this  when  I  was  brought  to  Turkisthaun  in  slavery.  After  I  was  ransomed,  the 
dungeons  of  hundreds  of  slaves  were  opened  ;  these  poor  people  had  not  seen  the 
daylight  for  many  months,  and  when  they  so  suddenly  were  brought  into  it,  they 
were  so  struck  that  several  were  as  if  they  were  going  to  fall  down ;  they  were 
overpowered,  "  Oh  1  "  they  said,  "  we  cannot  see  the  light,  it  is  too  powerful,"  So 
it  is  with  people,  when  they  are  so  suddenly  overpowered  with  this  "light  from 
heaven."  It  makes  such  an  impression  upon  them,  that  they  cannot  bear  it. 
"  And  he  heard  a  voice,  saying  unto  him."  We  see  our  Lord  does  not  use  much 
learning  or  much  eloquence  to  put  down  a  man,  to  bring  him  to  Himself,  but  very 
few  words,  I  read  this  chapter  to  a  Persian  several  years  ago,  a  man  of  great 
powers ;  and  he  said,  "  There  is  one  thing  I  find  in  Christianity  which  I  do  not 
find  in  our  religion  ;  it  is  a  religion  of  the  heart,  it  speaks  to  the  heart."  And  this 
he  found  in  these  very  words,  in  which  here  our  Lord  asks  of  Saul — "  Saul,  Saul  1 " 
Toii.  n.  2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohai.  a. 

— thou  who  art  sought  out,  thou  sought  for,  thou  whom  I  am  seeking  like  a  mother 
her  child,  like  a  father  his  wayward  child — "  why  persecutest  thou  Me  ?  "  What  a 
striking  contrast  I  In  the  first  verse  it  is  said,  "  Yet  breathing  out  threatenings 
against  the  disciples  " ;  but  here  the  Lord  asks,  "  Why  persecutest  thou  Me  ?  " 
Persecute  the  mother,  the  child  will  feel  it ;  persecute  the  child,  the  mother  will 
feel  it.  And  for  this  reason  only  the  Christian  religion  deserves  the  name  of 
religion.  What  is  religion  ?  To  bind  again  together  man  to  God.  "  And  he  said. 
Who  art  Thou,  Lord  ?  " — at  once  confessing  his  ignorance,  as  every  one  struck 
by  the  grace  of  God  will  do.  As  long  as  we  think  ourselves  wise  we  shaU  never 
come  to  the  truth.  But  here — "  who  art  Thou  ?  "  Very  modest ;  he  did  not  know 
Him,  though  he  persecuted  Him.  But  he  felt  His  power,  and  therefore  he  called 
Him  "Lord."  "And  the  Lord  said,  I  am  Jesus" — Jehoshua,  God  the  Saviour. 
This  is  very  affectionate.  "  I  am  not  come  here  to  destroy  thee,  though  thou  hast 
persecuted  Me ;  I  am  still  Jesus."  Whilst  you  may  not  yet  believe  in  Him,  it  is 
Jesus,  the  Saviour,  who  came  to  seek  those  that  were  lost.  "  And  he,  trembling 
and  astonished,  said  " — How  natural  this  is  1  How  little  an  infidel,  however  clever, 
knows  or  understands  the  Bible  1  Schiller  says,  "  We  are  still  in  want  of  a  kind  of 
Liim6  for  the  human  heart  " — i.e.,  in  want  of  a  person  to  give  us  a  development 
of  the  human  heart,  as  that  celebrated  Linn6  did  of  the  natural  kingdom.  Now  if 
he  had  only  studied  the  history  of  Paul,  he  would  have  found  a  development  of  the 
human  heart.  A  man  who  had  stood  for  many  days  near  a  precipice,  and  never 
knew  that  he  was  near  it,  but  had  his  eyes  suddenly  opened  and  was  instantly 
snatched  away  from  it — he  must  "  tremble."  But  a  real  behever  does  not  remain 
trembling.  "And  he,  trembling  and  astonished,  said" — not,  "  Now  I  will  go  and 
read  the  books  of  our  Babbis  " ;  and  a  really  awakened  sinner  would  not  say,  I  will 
go  and  read  Paley,  or  Dr.  Adam  Clarke  or  other  writers  on  the  evidences ;  but  like 
Paul,  "  Lord  I  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  verifying  those  words  of  our  Lord, 
"  Except  ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little  children,"  &o.  A  little  child  does  not 
say,  I  must  speculate  to  get  a  thing  from  my  father  ;  but  it  asks  him  for  it.  Now 
see  how  the  Lord  takes  him  by  the  hand.  **  And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  Arise." 
4.  Let  us  pursue  this  history.  Here  you  will  see  how  a  real  believer  has  to  suffer, 
and  from  a  quarter  where  he  does  not  expect  it — from  beUevers.  What  has  the 
Jew  to  expect  when  he  once  boldly  confesses  the  name  of  Jesus  ?  Mistrust  from  a 
quarter  where  he  ought  not  to  experience  it — from  believers.  If  Ananias  had 
fived  in  our  time,  they  would  have  called  him  a  cautious  and  prudent  man.  Now 
let  us  hear  the  answer  of  the  Lord :  "  Go  thy  way  " — (for  "  His  ways  are  not  our 
ways,  neither  are  His  thoughts  our  thoughts  ") ;  that  very  Saul  who  was  going 
about  "  breathing  out  threatenings  and  slaughter  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord  " 
is  "a  chosen  vessel."  In  Arabic,  Paul  means  an  instrument;  he  was  a  Sliaul,  a 
flought-out — he  is  now  a  Paul,  an  instrument,  "  a  chosen  vessel  to  bear  My  name." 
And  now  Ananias  at  last  was  convinced.  H.  Its  result.  "  And  immediately  there 
fell  from  his  eyes  as  it  had  been  scales."  At  first  he  was  like  the  blind  man,  who 
was  receiving  his  sight ;  things  were  still  indistinct  to  him,  and  he  "  saw  men  like 
trees  walking  "  ;  but  now  that  there  fell  upon  him  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  conceived 
what  it  is  to  be  a  Christian,  was  baptized,  and  joined  the  disciples.  "  And 
straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the  synagogues."  When  the  believer  enters  a 
beautiful  garden  he  invites  others  to  enter.  "  Straightway  " — no  round-aboutery. 
And  a  behever  is  not  ashamed ;  he  preaches  Him  who  had  been  "  a  stone  of 
stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence."  HI.  This  histobv  is  a  type  (1  Tim.  i.  16)— 1. 
Of  the  conversion  of  the  Jewish  nation.  He  was  "  one  born  out  of  due  time." 
And  so  in  every  century  one  has  seen  Jews  "  born  out  of  due  time."  In  the  middle 
ages  there  was  Sixtus  Senensis,  a  Jew  at  Rome,  whose  writings  still  exist,  and 
from  whom  we  may  say  that  the  most  spiritual  part  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church, 
the  Jansenists,  still  derive  all  their  Bibhcal  knowledge.  So  De  Lyra  was  the  teacher 
of  Luther.  And  so  in  our  time.  2.  Of  the  future  conversion  of  the  nation.  He 
was  a  Saul,  a  sought-out;  and  to  Jerusalem  it  is  said,  "Thou  shalt  be  called 
Bought-out,  a  city  not  forsaken."  The  light "  shone  round  about  him  from  heaven  "  ; 
and  to  Jerusalem  it  shall  be  said,  "Arise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is  oome,  and  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee."  And  as  the  Apostle  Paul  was  the  apostle  to  the 
Gentiles,  bo  my  nation  shall  be  the  great  national  apostle  to  the  Gentile  world ; 
"  and  Gentiles  shall  come  to  Thy  light,  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  Thy  rising." 
And  as  there  was  peace  in  the  Church  at  the  time  of  the  conversion  of  Saul,  so 
"  thy  walls,  0  Jerusalem,  shall  be  called  Peace,  and  thy  governors  Righteousness." 
{J.  Wolff,  LL.D.)        The  convenion  qf  St.  Faul ;— L  Ihb  oontebsion  usxu.    1. 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS,  19 

It  was  an  improbable  event.  2.  It  was  miracnlons  in  its  oircnmstances,  and  as  such 
is  a  proof  of  the  gospel.  Because  (1)  No  rational  solution  other  than  that  he  gives 
«an  be  given  for  it.  It  was  not  a  delusion,  nor  a  deception.  (2)  It  proves  Christ's 
resurrection,  and  therewith  the  whole  gospel.  (3)  It  authenticates  Paul's  doctrine 
•s  a  supernatural  revelation  from  Christ.  8.  Though  miraculous  in  its  circum- 
stances it  was  normal  in  its  essentials.  (1)  As  to  the  nature  of  the  change.  (2) 
As  to  the  means  by  which  it  is  effected.  (3)  As  to  the  evidences  of  its  sincerity. 
IL  The  state  op  mind  expressed.  It  included — 1.  Entire  abnegation  of  self.  He 
sought  not  his  own  (1)  Advancement;  (2)  Enjoyment;  (3)  Improvement.  2. 
Absolute  submission  to  Christ's  authority.  (1)  Not  his  own  will.  (2)  Not  that  of 
friends,  rulers,  or  the  world.  (3)  But  Christ  alone  had  authority  to  determine  and 
direct  his  course.  3.  Entire  consecration  to  the  service  of  Christ.  (1)  Readiness 
to  do  His  will.  (2)  Willingness  that  He  should  determine  not  only  the  service,  but 
the  field  and  the  circumstances.  III.  The  means  by  which  it  was  produced.  1, 
The  revelation  of  Christ.  This  was — (1)  External ;  but  this  was  not  all,  for  He  was 
thus  revealed  to  thousands.  (2)  To  the  reason.  A  rational  conviction  was  pro- 
duced. (3)  Spiritual,  effected  by  Christ's  Spirit,  and  consisting  in  spiritual 
manifestation.  2.  The  truth  revealed  was  the  Divinity  of  Christ.  Because — (1) 
He  is  called  Lord.  (2)  Because  in  Qal.  i.  16  he  says,  *'It  pleased  God  to 
reveal  His  Son  in  me."  (3)  Because  of  the  analogy  between  this  revelation 
and  that  on  the  Mount  oi  Transfiguration.  (4)  Because  Paul  makes  con- 
version consist  in  knowing  Christ.  (5)  From  its  effects.  (C  Hodge,  D.D.) 
The  progress  of  St.  Paul's  conversion : — I.  The  first  impression.  The  deep  feel- 
ing of  his  spiritual  inability  (ver.  8).  II.  The  first  signs  of  life  (ver.  11).  III. 
The  first  testimony  (ver.  20).  IV.  The  first  experience  (ver.  23).  (Jaspis.) 
Saul  meets  with  Jesus  : — I.  Spiritual  crisis.  Saul  had  now  arrived  at  his  spiritual 
crisis.  Such  a  crisis  has  occurred  in  the  lives  of  most  great  reformers,  and  at  these 
moments  they  become  absorbingly  interesting.  Buddha  waiting  for  the  final 
illumination  under  his  wisdom  tree;  Mohammed  in  the  caves  of  the  desert ;  Luther 
in  the  monk's  cell ;  Saul  of  Tarsus  on  the  road  to  Damascus — each  in  his  own  way 
was  having  that  last  desperate  encounter  with  the  past  and  its  outworn  traditions, 
which  was  to  fit  him  to  be  the  religious  pioneer  of  the  future.  Such  a  passage 
from  the  old  to  the  new  may  be  fitly  called  conversion.  Most  of  us  may  have 
known  something  like  it.  Not  that  every  one  must  pass  through  an  intellectual  or 
spiritual  convulsion.  Some  souls  seem  to  grow  like  flowers ;  some  leap  like 
cataracts.  There  are  halcyon  as  well  as  earthquake  natures ;  there  are  neutral- 
tinted  people  who  never  seem  to  rise  or  fall  very  much ;  there  are  well-balanced 
people  set  in  harmonious  conditions  who  develop  day  by  day,  and  never  know  the 
shocks  of  sudden  change.  II.  Hindrances  to  spiritual  progress.  In  most  of  us 
there  is  a  bar,  and  that  bar  has  to  be  passed  or  the  soul  will  languish.  1.  Pleasure 
is  one  man's  bar.  Till  he  recognises  something  above  pleasure  he  will  make  no 
way.  A  noble  cause  or  enthusiasm  at  last  lays  hold  upon  him,  and  he  counts 
pleasure  lost  for  the  first  time  that  he  may  compass  the  new  ideal.  He  postpones 
appetite,  he  learns  self-sacrifice.  The  bar  is  passed.  2.  Another  drifts.  Indecision, 
want  of  purpose,  is  his  bar.  The  love  of  a  pure,  strong,  tender  woman  delivers 
him ;  or  the  companionship  of  a  high-minded  friend  steadies  and  directs  his  aims. 

3.  Another  is  an  idolater  of  self.  His  horizon  is  hopelessly  narrowed  in,  and 
there  is  no  progress  until  you  get  out  of  that  dismal,  vicious  circle.  EesponsibiUty, 
interests,  loves  and  lives  of  others,  sense  of  a  spiritual  world — in  one  word,  God 
and  religion  in  some  form  awakening  Divine  echoes,  sounding  undreamed-of  depths 
within,  such  a  revelation  may  come  upon  you  with  a  shock.  The  expulsive  power 
of  a  noble  affection,  the  absorbing  power  of  a  good  cause,  the  emancipating  and 
illuminating  power  of  a  Divine  sentiment  ma.y  be  the  terms  of  your  conversion. 

4.  Saul's  bar  was  intellectual  pride  and  self-sufficiency.  In  politics  this  obstinate 
habit  breeds  the  State  despot,  the  man  who  would  sacrifice  party,  principle, 
country.  In  religion  it  produces  the  fanatic.  The  Son  of  God  may  hang  on  a 
tree ;  Stephen  with  the  angel  face  may  be  stoned ;  Savonarola  and  Huss  may  be 
stoned.  III.  Divine  leadings.  There  came  a  day  when  Paul  wept  to  remember 
how  Saul  had  persecuted  the  Church  of  Christ.  But  at  present  he  breathes  ryjthing 
but  threatenings  and  slaughter,  and  is  off  to  Damascus  on  his  cruel  purpose.  But 
on  that  lonesome  journey  Saul  thinks — 1.  *•  'Tis  an  odious  business,  this.  Is  it  a 
duty  ?  My  duty  I  My  Master  Gamaliel  used  to  say,  '  Let  them  alone,'  &c.  Ah  I 
he  was  too  mild.  One  must  not  tolerate  insult  to  the  Holy  Temple  and  the  Law." 
■Qo  Gamaliel  was  pushed  aside.  2.  Saul  thinks :  "  This  Jesua.  Why  did  the  people 


90  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a» 

hear  TTini  ?  A  magician  of  words  it  seems,  mistaken  at  first  for  an  eloquent  Rabbi- 
most  cursed  perversion  of  talent.  That  He  who  spoke  the  story  of  the  prodigal,  which 
the  very  children  now  prattle,  should  have  uttered  that  hateful  tale  of  the  vineyard 
—that  was  aimed  at  our  holy  rules;  a  poisoned  tongue,  an  insidious,  treacherous 
Babbi  that  Jesus :  His  viper  brood  of  disciples  must  be  stamped  out ;  'tis  the  wUl 
of  God."  And  so  Jesus  was  pushed  aside.  3.  Then  once  again  Saul  thinks  as 
the  face  of  the  murdered  Stephen  rises  before  him :  "  Such  an  one  with  the 
makings  of  a  good  Haggadist,  but  hopelessly  tainted.  Is  it  not  written,  'The 
poison  of  asps  is  under  their  lips  '  ?  yet  did  not  his  looks  belie  his  iniquity  ?  We 
judged  him,  he  seemed  to  be  judging  us.  '  Ye  stiff-necked  and  unoircumcised  in 
heart  and  ears.'  Monstrous  brazen-tongued  heretic,  or  visionary — which  ?  Yes, 
he  saw  a  vision.  I  would  that  face  had  not  been  crushed  in  so  bloody  a  death. 
But  no,  it  was  expedient  that  one  man  died  for  the  people.  We  have  stamped  the 
thing  out  in  Jerusalem  by  that  stroke.  Yet  his  smile,  his  prayer — last  fraud  of  the 
tempter.  Thou  hadst  Stephen  in  thy  toUs — thou  shalt  not  take  me  so  easily." 
And  with  this  did  Saul  smite  his  jaded  steed,  as  Balaam  did  his,  and  for  a  like 
reason.  On  I  on  1  he  fiercely  spurred,  and  again  his  poor  beast  kicked  against  the 
pricks,  as  he  was  himself  kicking  against  the  pricks  of  a  Divine  Master,  who  sought 
to  guide  him  whither  he  would  not  go.  Suddenly  his  brain  reels — like  an  over- 
bent  bow  gives  in  a  moment— he  staggers  on  horseback — the  bolt  seems  to  fall 
from  the  blue.  Is  it  thunder?  Is  it  a  voice?  Is  it  a  hght? — aye,  "  above  the 
brightness  of  the  sun,"  but  it  leaves  Saul  in  darkness.  Jesus  has  met  him  by  the 
way.  (H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  Conversion  hy  the  vision  of  Christ: — In  the  middle 
of  July,  1719,  Colonel  Gardiner,  who  was  then  leading  a  most  licentious  life,  had 
spent  the  evening  of  a  Sunday  in  some  gay  company,  and  had  an  assignation  with 
a  married  woman  at  midnight.  The  company  broke  up  at  eleven,  and  while  he 
was  waiting  for  the  hour  of  twelve,  he  took  up  a  book  to  pass  away  the  time.  As 
he  was  reading,  he  saw  an  unusual  blaze  of  light  fall  on  the  page,  and  looking  up 
he  saw  before  him,  as  it  were  suspended  in  the  air,  a  representation  of  our  Blessed 
Lord  on  the  Cross,  surrounded  by  a  glory.  At  the  same  instant  he  heard  a  voice 
saying,  "  0  sinner,  did  I  suffer  this  for  thee,  and  are  these  the  returns?  "  The 
vision  filled  him  with  unutterable  astonishment  and  agony  of  heart ;  and  pierced 
by  a  sense  of  his  ingratitude  to  God,  he  from  that  moment  forsook  his  evil  life. 
The  completeness  of  St.  Paul's  conversion : — Is  it  not  beautiful  to  see  how  Paul 
forgot  all  his  old  Pharisaism  ?  All  the  hard  words  and  bitter  blasphemies  that  he 
had  spoken  against  Christ,  they  have  all  gone  in  a  moment.  What  strange  changes 
will  come  over  some  beings  in  an  instant  1  One  of  my  students  who  has  been  a 
sailor  has  preached  the  gospel  for  some  long  time,  but  his  English  was  far  from 
grammatical.  Having  been  in  college  some  Uttle  time  he  began  to  speak  correctly, 
but  suddenly  the  old  habit  returned  upon  him.  He  was  in  the  Pri7icess  Alice  at 
the  time  of  the  lamentable  catastrophe,  and  he  escaped  in  an  almost  miraculous 
manner.  I  saw  him  some  time  after,  and  congratulated  him  on  his  escape,  and  he 
replied  that  he  bad  saved  his  life  but  had  lost  all  his  grammar.  He  found  himself 
for  awhile  using  the  language  of  two  or  three  years  ago ;  and  even  now  he  declares 
that  he  cannot  get  back  what  he  had  learnt.  He  seems  to  have  dro\\Tied  his 
grammar  on  that  terrible  occasion.  Now,  just  as  we  may  lose  some  good  thing 
by  a  dreadful  occurrence,  which  seems  to  sweep  over  the  mind  like  a  huge  wave 
and  wash  away  our  treasures,  so  by  a  blessed  catastroi^he,  if  Christ  should  meet 
with  any  man  to-night,  much  which  he  has  valued  will  be  swept  away  I  You  may 
write  on  wax,  and  may  make  the  record  fair.  Take  a  hot  iron  and  roll  it  across 
the  wax,  and  it  is  all  gone.  That  seems  to  me  to  be  just  what  Jesus  did  with  Paul's 
heart.  It  was  all  written  over  with  blasphemy  and  rebellion,  and  He  rolled  the 
hot  iron  of  burning  love  over  his  so;il,  and  the  evil  inscription  was  all  gone.  He 
ceased  to  blaspheme,  and  he  began  to  praise.  (C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  An  inspired 
vision: — A  poor  woman  caught  by  a  slave-raiding  band  in  the  far  inVsrior.  and  in  a 
moment  snatched  with  a  few  of  her  friends  from  home,  from  children,  from  hope, 
found  herself  on  the  march  to  the  coast  in  the  dreadful  slave-gang.  Day  after  day, 
foot-sore  and  heart-sore,  she  wended  her  weary  way,  untU  one  night  in  her  sleep 
visions  of  God  came  to  her.  She  dreamed  she  was  in  a  larger  room  than  she  had 
ever  seen  ;  and  at  one  end  of  it  there  was  a  man  with  a  white  face,  whose  words 
gave  her  great  comfort.  She  rose  the  next  morning  with  heart  relieved,  a  pilgrim 
to  a  blessed  destiny.  She  did  not  know  what  it  was  to  be ;  she  knew  that  she  was 
a  pilgrim  to  the  sunrise.  She  reached  ths  coast,  was  there  sold,  and  embarked  on 
board  a  slaver.    The  slaver  was  taken,  and  a  large  part,  herself  included,  of  the 


OHAF.  IX.]  THE  ACTS.  U 

Blave  cargo  was  landed  at  Fernando  Po.  A  little  while  after  she  was  taken  to  our 
little  chapel  at  Clarence  in  West  Africa.  It  was  the  room  of  her  dream.  There 
was  the  man  of  her  dream,  and  his  message  brought  the  light  of  immortality  to 
her  heart,  which  never  left  it.  And  my  story  is  not  ended.  That  was  fifty  years 
ago.  She  was  living  a  few  years  since,  for  Wright  Hay  told  me  that  whenever  he 
was  in  any  discouragement  or  difficulty  he  went  to  this  noble  old  saint  of  God,  and 
never  left  without  finding  wisdom  and  help  from  her  saintly  counsel.  (S.  Chapman.) 
The  conversion  of  Saul : — Look  at  the  mighty  mountain  lifting  its  head  above  the 
clouds  that  do  but  girdle  it.  How  proud  and  defiant  it  stands!  Far  up  above  the 
dusty  ways  of  man,  clothed  in  robes  of  unsullied  snow,  it  seems  the  very  emblem 
of  the  unchangeable.  Yet  every  day  it  is  being  levelled.  The  glacier  grinds  the 
rock ;  the  frost  frets  and  frays  it ;  the  torrents  wear  away  the  stones  and  hollow 
out  the  sides.  Now  rocks  are  rent  from  it  and  go  sweeping  far  into  valleys,  in  turn 
to  be  ground  into  soil,  until  in  time  the  great  mountain  that  stood  bleak  and  bare 
is  spread  into  the  golden  cornfields  or  into  the  pastures  that  are  covered  with  fl^ocks, 
and  where  the  homesteads  look  forth  from  the  midst  of  the  trees  that  screen  t'hem, 
and  the  happy  people  laugh  and  sing.  Now  that  is  what  the  heavenly  Father  is 
seeking  to  do  for  us  by  the  daily  discipline  of  life,  and  by  the  ministry  of  His 
grace.  He  puts  Himself  within  reach  of  us  that  He  may  bring  down  the  pride  and 
selfishness,  that  He  may  take  away  the  coldness  and  hardness,  and  turn  us  into 
love  and  service  and  a  thousand  forms  of  blessedness.  Have  faith  in  God.  Take 
hold  of  the  power  of  God  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  that  in  you  the  mountain  may  be 
made  into  cornfields.  Look  at  Saul  of  Tarsus.  How  like  a  mountain  did  he  stand  1 
How  proud,  how  defiant,  how  high  he  carried  his  head  !  And  like  the  mountain, 
too,  how  the  black  storms  gathered  around  him,  and  the  lightnings  blazed,  how 
the  thunders  lowered  and  crashed,  and  the  cruel  torrents  roared  and  raged  in  their 
fury  I  It  is  a  volcano  that  rises  before  us  whence  flow  the  streams  of  fire.  But  lo  I 
there  comes  the  grace  of  God.  He  is  broken,  transformed.  Listen  how  long  after 
he  writes  to  the  little  flock  to  whom  he  had  ministered :  "  We  were  gentle  among 
you  even  as  a  nurse  cherisheth  her  own  children,  so  being  affectionately  desirous 
of  you  we  were  willing  to  have  imparted  unto  you  not  the  gospel  of  God  only,  but 
also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  become  very  dear  unto  us."  The  persecuting 
Saul  is  turned  into  an  apostle  of  love.  Faith  has  cast  out  the  mountain  and 
transformed  it  into  the  cornfields  and  pastures.  Now  we  are  to  take  hold  of  the 
grace  of  God  to  do  like  wonders  within  us.  We  have  no  business  to  talk  about  our 
nature,  we  have  to  think  ahout  the  almighty  power  of  God.  {M.  G.  Pearse.) 
God's  method  of  converting  men : — Etienne  de  Grellet  says  he  required  a  reason 
for  everything  from  a  child.  God,  however,  chose  His  own  way  in  his  conversion. 
He  was  walking  in  the  fields,  under  no  kind  of  religious  concern,  when  he  was 
suddenly  arrested  by  what  seemed  to  be  an  awful  voice,  cryiug,  "  Eternity  1 
eternity  1  eternity  ! "  It  reached  his  very  soul.  His  whole  frame  shook,  and,  like 
Saul,  he  fell  to  the  ground.  He  cried  out,  "  If  there  is  a  God,  doubtless  there  is 
a  hell."  For  long  he  seemed  to  hear  the  thundering  proclamation,  and  was 
eventually  led  to  decision.  A  sudden  conversion  : — ^I  knew  a  young  woman  who 
was  brought  to  God  very  suddenly.  She  was  busily  engaged  singing  a  profane 
song,  when  a  flash  of  hghtning  seemed  to  pass  through  the  room  she  occupied, 
illuminating  the  place  with  a  sudden,  supernatural  light ;  then  followed  a  deep, 
loud  roll  of  thunder,  and  the  young  woman,  feeling  as  if  in  the  presence  of  God, 
fell  upon  her  knees  confessing  her  sins  and  crying  for  mercy.  Sins,  which  hitherto 
she  had  not  felt  to  be  sins,  seemed  to  stand  up  and  condemn  her ;  she  felt  that 
there  was  no  safety  for  her  except  through  the  blood  of  Jesus ;  and  Christ,  the 
merciful  Saviour,  accepted  her.  Conversions  may  be  quite  sudden  in  their 
beginnings  : — In  December  the  days  grow  shorter  till  the  twenty-first,  the  shortest 
day,  when,  at  a  precise  moment,  the  sun  pauses  and  begins  to  return  towards  the 
north.  And  then,  though  the  days  are  constantly  growing  longer,  and  the  sun 
coming  nearer,  yet  for  weeks  there  is  no  apparent  change.  The  snow  hes  heavy 
upon  the  earth.  There  are  neither  leaves,  nor  blossoms,  nor  singing  birds ;  nothing 
to  mark  the  summer  time  which  is  surely  advancing.  But  at  length  the  ground 
begins  to  relax  in  the  sunny  places,  and  the  snows  melt,  and  warm  winds  blow  from 
the  south,  and  buds  swell,  and  flowers  spring,  and  ere  long  there  is  the  bloom  and 
glory  of  June.  So  there  is  a  precise  moment  when  the  soul  pauses  in  its  departure 
from  God,  and  begins  to  return  towards  Him.  The  fruits  of  that  return  may  not 
be  at  once  visible ;  there  may  be  long  interior  conflicts  before  the  coldness  and 
deadness  of  the  heart  ia  overcome;   but  at  length  the  good  will  triumph,  an4 


29  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  n. 

instead  of  winter  and  desolation,  all  the  Christian  graces  will  spring  np  in  tha 
summer  of  Divine  love.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  battle  of  Damascus  : — L  Th» 
BNEMTES.  1.  Saul  breathing  vengeance  witu  his  armed  followers,  and  his  weapon* 
of  human  learning  and  carnal  zeal.  2.  Christ  the  Crucified  and  Exalted  One, 
with  the  marks  of  His  wounds  and  in  His  heavenly  glory ;  behind  Him  crowds  ol 
angels,  among  whom  is  joy  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  II.  The  fight.  1. 
Christ  attacks.  2.  Saul  defends  himself.  III.  The  victory.  1.  Saul  surrenders. 
2.  Christ  triumphs.  IV.  The  spoil.  "  He  shall  have  the  strong  for  a  prey."  Saul 
is  led  away  a  prisoner,  not  to  death,  but  to  life.  V.  The  joyful  Te  Deum  or 
THE  Church,     (K.  Gerok.)        The  great  day  of  Damascus : — I.  Its  troubled  and 

STORMT   MORNING.      II.    ItS   HOT  AND   THUNDERY   NOON.      III.    ItS   QUIET   AND   BLESSED 

EVENING.  {Ibid.)  The  proud  rider  unhorsed  : — Damascus  still  stands  with  a 
population  of  135,000.  It  was  a  gay  city  of  white  and  glistering  architecture ;  its 
domes  playing  with  the  Ught  of  the  morning  sun  ;  embowered  in  groves  of  olive, 
and  palm,  and  citron,  and  orange,  and  pomegranate  ;  a  famous  river  plunging  its 
brightness  into  the  scene — a  city  by  the  ancients  styled  "  a  pearl  surrounded  by 
emeralds."  A  group  of  horsemen  are  advancing.  Let  the  Christians  of  the  place 
hide,  for  they  are  persecutors ;  their  leader,  as  leaders  sometimes  are,  insignificant 
in  person — witness  Napoleon  and  Dr.  Archibald  Alexander.  But  there  is  some- 
thing very  intent  in  the  eye  of  the  man,  and  the  horse  he  rides  is  lathered  with  the 
foam  of  a  long  and  quick  travel  of  one  hundred  and  thirty-five  miles.  He  cries,  "  Gk> 
'long "  to  his  steed,  for  those  Christians  must  be  captured  and  that  religion 
annihilated.  Suddenly  the  horses  shy  off  and  plunge,  until  the  riders  are  precipi- 
tated. A  new  sun  had  been  kindled,  putting  out  the  glare  of  the  ordinary  sun, 
Christ,  with  the  glories  of  heaven  wrapped  about  Him,  looked  out  from  a  cloud, 
and  the  splendour  was  insufferable,  and  no  wonder  the  horses  sprang  and  the 
equestrians  dropped.  Struck  stone  blind,  Saul  cries  out,  "  Who  art  Thou,  Lord  f  " 
And  Jesus  answered  him,  "  I  am  the  One  you  have  been  chasing.  He  that  scourges 
Christians  scourges  Me.  I  am  Jesus,  whom  thou  persecutest. "  From  that  wild, 
exciting,  and  overwhelming  scene  there  rises  up  the  greatest  preacher  of  all  the 
ages — Paul,  in  whose  behalf  prisons  were  rocked  down ;  before  whom  rulers  turned 
pale ;  into  whose  hand  Mediterranean  sea-captains  put  control  of  their  ship-wreck- 
ing craft,  and  whose  epistles  are  the  avant  courier  of  a  resurrection  day.  I  learn 
from  this  scene — I.  That  a  worldly  fall  sometimes  precedes  a  spiritual  up- 
lifting. A  man  does  not  get  much  sympathy  by  falling  off  a  horse.  People  say 
he  ought  not  to  have  got  into  the  saddle  if  he  could  not  ride.  Here  is  Paul  on 
horseback ;  a  proud  man  riding  on  with  government  documents  in  his  pocket;  a 
graduate  of  a  most  famous  school  in  which  Doctor  Gamaliel  had  been  a  professor ; 
perhaps  having  already  attained  two  of  the  three  titles  of  the  school — Rab  and 
Babbi,  and  on  his  way  to  Babbak.  I  know,  from  his  temperament,  that  his  horse 
was  ahead  of  the  other  horses.  But  without  time  to  think  of  his  dignity  he  is 
tumbled  into  the  dust.  And  yet  that  was  the  best  ride  Paul  ever  took.  Out  of  that 
violent  fall  he  arose  into  the  illustrious  apostleship.  So  it  has  been  in  all  the 
ages.  You  will  never  be  worth  anything  for  God  and  the  Church  until  you  are 
somehow  thrown  and  humiliated.  You  must  go  down  before  you  go  up.  Joseph 
finds  his  path  to  the  Egyptian  court  through  the  pit  into  which  his  brothers  threw 
him.  Daniel  would  never  have  walked  amid  the  bronzed  lions  that  adorned  the 
Babylonish  throne  if  he  had  not  first  walked  amid  the  real  lions  of  the  cave.  Men 
who  have  been  always  prospered  may  be  efficient  servants  of  the  world,  but  will  be 
of  no  advantage  to  Christ.  II.  That  the  religion  of  Christ  is  not  a  pusillani- 
M0U8  thing.  People  try  to  make  us  believe  that  Christianity  is  something  for  men 
of  weak  calibre,  for  women,  for  children.  Look  at  this  man.  He  was  a  logician, 
a  metaphysician,  an  Eill-conquering  orator,  a  poet  of  the  highest  type.  I  have  never 
found  anything  in  Carlyle,  or  Goethe,  or  Herbert  Spencer  that  could  compare  in 
strength  or  beauty  with  Paul's  Epistles.  I  do  not  think  there  is  anything  in  Sir 
William  Hamilton  that  shows  such  mental  discipline  as  yon  find  in  Paul's  argu- 
ment about  justification  and  resurrection.  I  have  not  found  anything  in  Milton 
finer  than  Paul's  illustrations  drawn  from  the  amphitheatre.  There  was  nothing 
in  Emmet  pleading  for  his  life,  or  in  Burke  arraigning  Warren  Hastings,  that 
compared  with  the  scene  before  Agrippa.  A  religion  that  can  capture  a  man  like 
that  must  have  some  power  in  it.  Where  Paul  leads,  we  can  afford  to  follow.  I 
am  glad  to  know  that  Christ  has  had  in  His  discipleship  a  Mozart  and  a  Handel 
in  music ;  a  Baphael  and  a  Reynolds  in  painting ;  an  Angelo  and  a  Canova  in 
sculpture ;  a  Bush  and  a  Harvey  in  medicine ;  a  Grotius  and  a  Washington  in 


«BAP.  XX.]  THE  ACTS.  23 

statesmanship ;  a  Blackstone,  a  Marshall,  and  a  Kent  in  the  law ;  and  the  time  will 
come  when  the  religion  of  Christ  will  conquer  all  the  observatories  and  universities, 
and  philosophy  will,  through  her  telescope,  behold  the  morning  star  of  Jesus,  and 
in  her  laboratory  see  that  •'  all  things  work  together  for  good,"  and  with  her 
geological  hammer  discern  the  "  Eock  of  Ages."  Oh,  instead  of  cowering  when 
the  sceptic  talks  of  rehgion  as  though  it  were  a  pusillanimous  thing,  show  him  the 
picture  of  the  intellectual  giant  of  all  the  ages  prostrate  on  the  road  to  Damascus ; 
then  ask  your  sceptic  who  it  was  that  threw  him.  Oh,  no  1  it  is  no  weak  gospel 
It  is  a  glorious,  an  all-conquering  gospel ;  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  III. 
That  a  man  cannot  become  a  Christian  until  he  is  unhoesed.  We  want  to  ride 
into  the  kingdom  of  God  just  as  the  knight  rode  into  castle  gate,  on  palfrey  beauti- 
fully caparisoned.  We  want  to  come  into  the  kingdom  of  God  in  &iie  style.  No 
crying  over  sin.  No  begging  at  the  door  of  God's  mercy.  No,  we  must  dismount, 
go  down  in  the  dust,  until  Christ  shall,  by  His  grace,  lift  us  up,  as  He  lifted  Paul. 
IV.  That  the  obace  of  God  can  ovebcome  the  pebsecdtob.  Paul  was  not  going, 
as  a  sheriff  goes,  to  arrest  a  man  against  whom  he  has  no  spite.  He  breathed  out 
slaughter.  Do  you  think  that  that  proud  man  on  horseback  can  ever  become  a 
Christian  ?  Yes  1  There  is  a  voice  from  heaven  uttering  two  words,  "  Saul  I 
Saul  1 "  That  man  was  saved ;  and  so  God  can,  by  His  grace,  overcome  any 
persecutor.  The  days  of  sword  and  fire  for  Christians  seem  to  have  gone  by ;  but 
has  the  day  of  persecution  ceased?  No.  That  woman  finds  it  hard  to  be  a 
Christian  while  her  husband  talks  and  jeers  while  she  is  trying  to  say  her  prayers 
or  read  the  Bible.  That  daughter  finds  it  hard  to  be  a  Christian  with  the  whole 
family  arrayed  against  her.  That  young  man  finds  it  hard  to  be  a  Christian  in 
the  shop  when  his  companions  jeer  at  him  because  he  will  not  go  to  the  gambling 
hell  or  the  house  of  shame.  But,  oh,  you  persecuted  ones,  is  it  not  time  that  you 
began  to  pray  for  your  persecutors  ?  They  are  no  prouder,  no  fiercer  than  was  this 
persecutor.  God  can,  by  His  grace,  make  a  Eenan  believe  in  the  Divinity  of 
Jesus,  and  a  Tyndall  in  the  worth  of  prayer.  John  Newton  stamped  the  ship's 
deck  in  derisive  indignation  at  Christianity  only  a  little  while  before  he  became  a 
Christian.  "  Out  of  my  house,"  said  a  father  to  his  daughter,  "  if  you  will  keep 
praying " ;  and,  before  many  months  passed,  the  father  knelt  at  the  same  altar 
with  the  child.  V.  That  thebe  is  hope  fob  the  wobst  offenders.  It  was 
particularly  outrageous  that  Saul  should  have  gone  to  Damascus  on  that  errand. 
The  Ufe  and  death  of  Jesus  was  not  an  old  story  as  it  is  now.  He  heard  parts  of 
it  recited  every  day  by  people  who  were  acquainted  with  all  the  circumstances ; 
and  yet,  in  the  fresh  memory  of  that  scene,  he  goes  to  persecute  Christ's  disciples. 
Oh,  he  was  the  chief  of  sinners.  No  outburst  of  modesty  when  he  said  that.  He 
was  a  murderer.  And  yet  the  grace  of  God  saved  him,  and  so  it  will  you.  There 
is  mercy  for  you  who  say  you  are  too  bad  to  be  saved.  Ton  say  you  have  put  ofl 
the  matter  so  long.  Paul  had  neglected  it  a  great  while.  You  say  that  the  sin  you 
have  committed  has  been  amid  the  most  aggravating  circumstances.  That  was  so 
with  Paul.  You  say  you  have  exasperated  Christ,  and  coaxed  your  own  ruin.  So 
did  Paul ;  and  yet  he  sits  to-day  on  one  of  the  highest  of  the  heavenly  thrones. 
VL  That  there  is  a  tremendous  beality  in  beligion.  If  it  had  been  a  mere 
optical  delusion  over  the  road  to  Damascus,  Paul  was  just  the  man  to  find  it  out. 
If  it  had  been  a  sham  and  pretence,  he  would  have  pricked  the  bubble.  And  when 
I  see  him  overwhelmed,  I  say  there  must  have  been  something  in  it.  And,  my 
dear  brother,  you  will  find  that  there  is  something  in  religion  in  one  of  three 
places,  either  in  earth,  or  in  heaven,  or  in  heU.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The 
difficulties  in  the  narrative : — There  are  three  accounts  of  the  conversion  of  St. 
Paul,  and  they  are  all  in  this  book.  The  first  is  the  account  of  Luke  here ;  the 
two  others  are  by  Paul  himself — one  to  an  infuriated  mob  in  chap,  xxii.,  the  other 
before  Agrippa  in  chap.  xxvi.  Let  us — I.  Examine  the  apparent  discbepancie« 
in  detail.  1.  In  one  account  the  companions  of  Saul  fell  to  the  ground ;  in  the 
other  they  stood  wondering  and  astonished.  But — (1)  It  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  in 
the  journey  from  Jerusalem  some  were  on  horseback  and  some  on  foot.  This  is  the 
common  way  of  making  up  companies  in  the  East.  I  once  saw  a  caravan,  coming 
out  of  the  desert  into  Cairo ;  some  were  upon  camels,  some  on  asses,  many  were 
walking.  They  had  all  been  to  Mecca  and  back.  Those  who  fell,  therefore,  in  one 
narrative  would  be  those  mounted ;  those  who  stood  in  the  other  would  be  the 
travellers  on  foot.  (2)  But,  again,  at  the  first  shock  all  might  have  fallen,  and 
those  who  were  the  farthest  from  the  centre  might  have  sooner  recovered  them- 
selves,  and  have  been  standing  astonished  even  when  Saul  was  still  lying  npon  the 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

earth.  2.  In  one  account  it  is  said  the  companions  of  Saul  did  not  hear  the  voic« 
that  spake,  and  in  another  that  they  did  hear.  Now,  do  you  think  that  twelve 
men  of  common  honesty  and  common  sense  would  find  much  difficulty  if  there 
was  such  a  discrepancy  as  this  between  two  witnesses  who  were  giving  their 
evidence  before  them ?  The  slightest  cross-examination  would  bring  out  the  fact 
that  in  the  one  case  what  was  heard  was  a  sound,  something  inarticulate,  mysterious, 
and  that  in  the  other  they  did  not  hear  the  words,  the  distinct  utterance  that  wai 
given.  And  further,  the  difference  in  the  word  "  voice  "  in  the  two  passagef 
involves  this  explanation.  In  the  one  case  the  import  is  that  they  heard  (tbi 
sound)  "  of  the  voice"  ;  in  the  other,  that  they  did  not  hear  "the  voice"  itself— 
what  was  said.  3.  In  one  account  Ananias  is  described  as  "  a  disciple,"  find  at 
that  he  says,  and  all  that  is  said  of  him,  is  in  harmony  with  that ;  in  anothei 
account  he  is  described  as  "  a  devout  man  according  to  the  law,"  and  everything 
that  is  said  of  him,  and  that  he  says,  is  in  harmony  with  that.  Well,  the  one 
account  is  not  contradictory  to,  but  only  supplementary  of,  the  other.  But  besidei 
that,  there  is  beauty  and  propriety  in  the  different  way  in  which  Ananias  is  spoker 
of  in  the  two  cases.  In  the  first  case,  where  he  is  spoken  of  as  being  "  a  disciple,' 
is  in  St.  Luke's  history  of  him.  St.  Luke  was  a  Christian  writer,  writing  a  Christiai! 
history  for  Christian  people,  and  therefore  he  naturally  put  forward  the  Christiai 
side  of  Ananias.  In  the  other  case  St.  Paul  is  addressing  an  infuriated  Jewisl 
mob,  all  zealous  for  the  law.  With  admirable  tact,  therefore,  he  endeavours  t( 
conciliate  them,  and  he  naturally  puts  before  them  Ananias'  Jewish  side.  4.  It 
one  case  it  is  said  that  Jesus  directed  Paul  to  go  into  the  city,  and  "  it  should  b( 
told  him  what  he  must  do";  but  when  he  is  addressing  Agrippa,  Paul  himseh 
seems  to  speak  as  if  Jesus  had  said  to  him  a  great  deal  more.  Paul,  I  thiuk,  dio 
not  receive  at  the  moment  of  his  conversion,  from  the  lips  of  Jesus,  all  that  he  sayj 
to  Agrippa ;  but  he  did  receive  it  all,  either  direct  from  Christ  or  through  Ananiai 
as  commissioned  by  Him.  In  addressing  Agrippa  his  one  object  was  fully  to  sel 
before  him  his  apostolic  commissi<m.  The  substance  and  the  source  of  the  trutt 
were  what  was  important ;  and  Paul,  without  attenuating  his  address  by  enumera 
ting  times  and  places  and  circumstances,  exercises  his  common  sense  in  so  puttinj 
the  matter  before  the  king  as  to  fix  his  attention  on  the  authority  and  the  scope  ol 
the  ministry  he  exercised.  II.  Some  observations  akising  odt  of  them.  Not« 
— 1.  The  nature  and  characteristics  of  human  testimony.  If  two  witnesses  expresi 
themselves  precisely  in  the  same  language,  word  for  word,  it  is  suspicious.  What 
we  look  for  is  substantial  agreement  with  circumstantial  variations ;  such  variations 
constitute,  not  the  weakness,  but  the  strength  of  the  testimony.  We  have  humar 
testimony  in  this  book.  Inspiration  in  respect  to  some  things  was  necessarilj 
verbal,  but,  had  it  always  been  that,  yon  could  never  have  two  accounts  of  any- 
thing. And,  moreover,  if  the  guiding  inspiration  had  to  be  such  that  every  word 
was  to  be  exactly  just  that  which  was  uttered,  then  you  have  no  human  afjent,  with 
his  freedom  and  intelligence,  giving  his  evidence,  but  exclusively  the  dictations  oi 
the  presiding  mind,  and  these  mechanically  conveyed.  A  mere  automaton  mighl 
have  been  set  in  motion  to  do  that.  On  this  hypothesis  the  Bible  might  have  been 
photographed,  and  that,  too,  in  human  language,  by  a  Divinely-directed,  material 
force.  You  have  something  better  than  that.  You  have  Divine  thought ;  hut  yon 
have  that  communicated  by  conscious  and  active  minds.  Of  course,  if  we  had  th« 
witnesses  before  us,  we  should  soon  be  able,  by  a  little  cross-examination,  to 
harmonise  their  statements.  2.  These  three  different  accounts  were  aU  vtritten  by  th« 
same  hand.  Though  the  first  account  only  is  in  the  words  of  Luke,  the  others  being 
in  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  yet  Luke  wrote  them  all  down ;  they  lay  before  his  eye  ;  h6 
could  compare  them  as  we  do.  Luke  was  a  man  of  education  and  intelligence ;  ol 
disciplined  faculty  and  sound  judgment.  Now,  if  he  had  included  what  waa 
inherently  contradictory  in  a  book  written  for  the  express  purpose  that  those  who 
read  it  should  know  the  certainty  of  the  things  in  which  tbey  had  been  instructed, 
do  you  suppose  that  he  would  not  be  conscious  of  the  discrepancy  ?  And  do  yoo 
not  see  that  it  was  in  his  power  to  remove  it  ?  He  could  easily  have  made  th« 
accounts  harmonise.    But  he  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  do  it.     (T.  Binney.) 

Yer.  4.  He  fell  to  the  earth,  and  heard  a  voice  saying  unto  him,  Saul,  Saul,  "why 
persecutest  thou  Me  ? — The  Lord's  word : — I.  Consolation.  This  word  is  a  two- 
edged  sword ;  it  carries  comfort  to  those  who  are  within,  and  reproof  to  those  who 
are  without.  It  is  spoken  to  an  adversary;  but  it  is  spoken  for  a  friend.  The  first 
comfort  given  to  fallen  man  was  in  a  word  spoken  to  his  destroyer  (Qeu.  iii.  15). 


CHAP,  tx.]  THE  ACTS.  U 

In  th©  same  way  Israel  was  comforted,  "  Touch  not  Mine  anointed,"  *c.  Here, 
too,  the  Head  will  sustain  the  members  by  a  reproof  addressed  to  the  Master.  I 
scarcely  know  a  more  comforting  word  than  this.  Nowhere  is  the  oneness  of 
Christ  and  His  disciples  more  clearly  expressed.  The  Speaker  is  not  now  the  Man 
of  Sorrows :  all  power  has  been  given  into  His  hands.  As  you  experience  pain 
when  any  member  of  your  body  is  hurt,  so  Christ  cries  out  when  an  enemy's  hand 
strikes  some  poor  saint  in  Damascus.  For  this  is  the  privilege  of  all  Christians. 
Safety  is  secured,  and  therefore  measured,  by  the  power,  not  of  the  saved,  but  of 
the  Saviour.  The  Queen's  flag  is  the  aBgis  of  the  tender  woman  as  well  as  the 
«talwart  warrior,  and  woe  to  the  man  who  strikes  either.  Let  Saul  venture  to  say, 
liord,  when  did  we  persecute  Thee  ?  The  King  shall  answer,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  di(i 
It,"  <feo.  Here  is  my  safety — I  am  His,  part  of  Himself.  We  shall  be  able  by  and 
hy  to  number  up  God's  mercies,  and  nothing  will  be  sweeter  than  the  discovery  of 
those  signal  rescues  which  Christ  has  achieved  for  us  while  we,  like  an  infant 
•leeping  in  a  burning  house,  were  aware  neither  of  the  flame  that  was  already 
singeing  our  garments  nor  of  the  strong  arm  of  that  brother  who  bore  us  beyond  its 
reach.  II.  Repboop.  While  the  word  carries  consolation  to  the  disciples,  it  bears 
terrible  reproof  to  adversaries.  Mark  here — 1.  That  although  Saul  is  an  enemy  to 
Jesus,  Jesus  is  no  enemy  to  Saul,  and  the  word  is  spoken  not  to  cast  him  out,  but 
to  melt  him  down,  and  so  win  him  near.  In  His  glory,  as  in  His  humiliation, 
Jesus  being  reviled  reviles  not  again.  He  draws  a  clear  distinction  between  the 
converted  and  the  unconverted,  but  it  does  not  lie  in  that  the  first  are  received  and 
the  second  rejected,  but  in  this,  that  those  who  are  already  near  are  cherished  as 
dear  children,  and  the  distant  prodigals  are  invited  to  turn  and  live.  Nor  can  we 
be  surprised  at  this  generosity.  If,  when  we  were  His  enemies,  He  won  us,  we 
cannot  wonder  that  the  door  is  still  open  for  those  who  are  without.  2.  The  form 
of  the  address  betrays  the  tenderness  of  Jesus.  The  repetition  of  the  name 
expresses  sharp  condemnation  and  tender  pity.  When  you  intend  simple  approval 
or  disapproval  you  call  the  name  only  once  ;  when  you  intend  to  condemn  and  win 
back  you  duplicate  the  call.  "  John"  may  be  the  prelude  to  either  praise  or  blame, 
but  "John,  John,"  always  means  that  he  is  doing  evil,  and  that  you  mean  him  good 
(see  John  xx.  16 ;  cf.  Luke  x.  41,  42).  It  is  the  double  call  that  Christ  is  ad- 
dressing to  the  world  to-day ;  at  the  great  day  it  will  be  single — Depart  ye  cursed, 
or  Come  ye  blessed.  3.  In  Saul's  case  the  redoubled  stroke  was  effectual.  He 
grieved  for  the  sin  that  was  rebuked,  and  accepted  the  mercy  that  was  offered. 
(W.  Arriot,    D.D.)  The  persecutor: — I.  It  is  the  general  character  of  un- 

converted MEN  TO  BE  OF  A  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT.  "  Cain,"  says  Luthcr,  "  will  kill 
Abel  to  the  end  of  the  world."  Speaking  of  Ishmael  and  Isaac,  the  apostle 
observes,  "  As  then  he  that  was  bom  after  the  flesh,  persecuted  him  that  was  born 
after  the  spirit,  even  so  it  is  now."  The  more  zealous  and  holy  believers  are,  so 
much  the  more  will  the  malice  of  wicked  men  be  levelled  against  them  (Gal.  iv.  29; 
James  v.  6 :  1  John  iii.  12,  13).  There  are,  however,  different  kinds  and  degrees  of 
persecution.  Though  we  are  not  in  danger  of  bonds  and  imprisonments,  yet  the 
enmity  of  the  wicked  will  show  itself,  either  by  injuries,  unneighbourly  treatment, 
vulgar  abuse,  or  by  one  means  or  another.  The  Church  of  Christ  has  always  been 
as  a  lily  among  thorns,  or  like  a  bush  on  fire,  but  not  consumed  (Psa.  Iv.  21 ;  Acts 
xxii.  4 ;  Heb.  xi.  35-39).  II.  Christ  has  His  eye  upon  persecutors,  and  is 
ACQUAINTED  WITH  ALii  THEIR  WAYS.  He  also  views  things  in  their  proper  light,  and 
calls  them  by  their  proper  names.  What  Saul  called  doing  God's  service,  He  calls 
persecution.  There  is  not  a  step  which  His  enemies  take  but  He  marks  it  well,  nor 
a  pain  His  servants  feel  but  He  beholds  it  with  an  eye  of  pity.  Saul  is  on  his  way 
to  Damascus,  unobserved  by  the  disciples,  who  were  now  accounted  as  sheep  for 
the  slaughter  :  but  the  Shepherd  of  the  flock  sees  the  enemy  coming  to  devour,  and 
stops  him  in  his  wild  career.  IH.  The  kindness  or  injuries  done  to  His  people, 
Christ  considers  as  done  to  Himself.  Let  persecutors  think  of  this  and  tremble. 
The  union  between  Christ  and  His  people  is  intimate  and  endearing ;  it  is  like  that 
between  the  vine  and  its  branches,  between  the  head  and  the  members.  If  the 
branch  be  cut  off,  the  vine  will  bleed ;  and  when  one  member  suffers,  the  members 
suffer  with  it,  and  also  the  head  1  The  same  love  that  induced  the  Redeemer 
to  suffer  for  His  people,  constrains  Him  to  suffer  with  them.  Christ  is  more 
tender  of  His  body  mystical  than  He  was  of  His  body  natural,  and  is  more  sensible 
of  His  members'  sufferings  than  He  was  of  His  own.  Amidst  all  the  cruel  treat- 
ment He  Himself  met  with,  he  never  said,  "Why  scourge  ye  Me?  why  crucify  ye 
Me?    Bat  when  Saul  threatened  destruction  to  His  disciples,  He  calls  to  him  &om 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

heaven,  "Why  persecutest  thou  Me?  "    IV.  Cheist'b  call  to  the  pebsecdtob  wia 

lO  CONVINCE  HIM  OF  SIN,  AND  THIS  IS  THE  FIEST  STEP  TOWARDS  CONVERSION.      This   lay* 

the  foundation  of  repentance  and  faith ;  for  we  cannot  repent  of  sin  while  in- 
sensible of  its  evil  nature,  nor  do  the  whole  need  a  physician,  but  they  that  are 
sick.  Saul  trembled  at  the  voice  which  spake  to  him,  and  being  astonished  at  the 
number  and  magnitude  of  his  sins,  as  well  as  at  the  forbearance  and  compassion 
of  the  Saviour,  cried  out,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  He  is  now 
willing  to  be  directed,  and  to  obey  Christ  as  his  Lord.  V.  The  calls  of  Christ 
ABB  earnest  and  particdlab.  From  among  the  rest  of  mankind  He  singles  out 
the  man  towards  whom  He  has  designs  of  mercy.  Thus  He  chose  Matthew,  sitting 
at  the  receipt  of  custom,  and  Zaccheus,  whom  curiosity  had  led  up  into  a  sycamore 
tree.  And  of  the  company  that  were  going  to  Damascus,  one  is  distinguished  from 
the  rest,  and  addressed  by  name.  Hence  his  companions  heard  a  voice,  but  knew 
not  what  was  said.  Ministers  speak  to  all  their  hearers,  and  not  to  one  more  than 
another  :  but  Christ  speaks  to  the  individual,  and  does  not  speak  in  vain.  They 
draw  the  bow  at  a  venture;  but  He  aims  at  a  certain  mark,  and  never  misses. 
Farther :  Christ's  call  was  earnest  and  pressing.  There  is  something  vehement  and 
affectionate  in  the  address :  Saul,  Saul  1  The  Lord  saw  the  danger  he  was  in  :  He 
therefore  warns  him  with  a  loud  voice  from  heaven,  and  both  pities  and  pardons 
his  delusion.  We  see  that  all  intercourse  begins  on  Christ's  part.  His  is  prevent- 
ing mercy,  and  previous  to  any  inclination  or  endeavours  on  our  part  to  seek  after 
Him.  VI.  Persecution  is  a  great  bin,  and  when  brought  home  to  the  consciencb 
OF  AN  awakened  SINNER,  IT  IS  FOUND  TO  BE  SO.  It  is  SO  Unreasonable  as  to  admit 
of  no  defence,  and  none  is  made.  1.  Is  there  any  reason  on  My  part?  What 
injury  have  I  done  thee  ?    For  which  of  My  good  works  dost  thou  persecute  Me  7 

2.  Is  there  any  reason  on  the  part  of  My  people  ?  Because  they  are  My  disciples, 
are  they  therefore  worse  parents  or  children,  subjects  or  servants,  friends  or 
neighbours  ?    Nay,  are  they  not  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and  the  light  of  the  world  ? 

3.  Is  there  any  reason  on  thy  part  ?  Dost  thou  claim  a  right  to  judge  for  thyself : 
and  have  not  they  the  same  right  ?  Who  made  thee  thy  brother's  judge  ?  Thou 
thinkest  that  truth  is  on  thy  side,  and  it  is  natural  for  thy  neighbour  to  think  the 
same.  Dost  thou  allege  the  commission  from  the  chief  priests  ?  Who  authorised 
them  to  grant  such  a  commission?  Dost  thou  plead  the  Divine  glory?  Can  God 
be  glorified  by  a  conduct  contrary  to  all  the  feelings  of  humanity  ?  4.  Will  such 
conduct  answer  the  end  proposed  ?  Force  and  violence  may  make  men  hypocrites, 
but  cannot  produce  conviction.  Will  reproaches  and  injuries  be  more  effectual  than 
kind  treatment  and  persuasion  ?  Conclusion  :  1.  Christ's  question  to  Saul  should 
not  only  convince  us  of  the  evil  of  a  persecuting  spirit,  but  lead  us  to  avoid  and 
abhor  it,  as  utterly  contrary  to  the  very  genius  of  Christianity  (Acts  xxvi.  10 ; 
1  Cor.  XV.  9).  2.  From  this  example  let  not  the  most  atrocious  sinner,  nor  the 
bitterest  persecutor  despair,  if  brought  to  a  sense  of  their  evil  conduct  (1  Tim.  i.  16). 
(B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  case  of  St.  Paul  in  persecuting  the  Church : — It  was  about 
two  years  after  our  Lord  was  gone  to  heaven.  Saul,  for  a  year  or  two  before,  had 
behaved  as  blind  zealots  are  used  to  do,  with  great  warmth  and  fury.  He  was  then  in 
the  heat  of  his  youth,  about  thirty  years  old,  very  honest  and  sincere  in  his  way,  and 
exceedingly  zealous  for  the  law  of  his  God.  The  prejudices  of  education  were  so 
strong,  and  his  natural  temper  withal  so  impetuous,  that  he  stayed  not  to  examine 
into  the  merits  of  the  Christian  cause.  But  as  he  very  well  knew  that  his  own 
religion  was  from  God,  he  too  hastily  concluded  that  this  other,  now  pretending  to 
rival  it,  could  not  be  Divine  also.  I.  Saul  as  a  persecutor,  and  the  guilt  he  con- 
tracted IN  BEING  such.  Howcver  sincere  he  had  been  in  doing  it,  however  fully 
persuaded  in  his  own  mind  that  he  was  serving  God  in  it ;  yet  he  never  reflected 
upon  it  afterwards  but  with  shame  and  regret,  with  a  penitential  sorrow  and 
remorse  for  it  (chap.  xivi.  9,  xxii.  20 ;  I  Tim.  i.  15 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  9).  Saul,  con- 
sidered as  a  persecutor  of  the  Church  of  God,  cannot  be  acquitted  of  prejudice, 
partiality,  and  precipitate  judgment,  in  a  cause  which  demanded  cool  deliberation 
and  the  most  scrupulous  care.  II.  What  mat  be  pleaded  to  alleviate  his  guilt 
IN  it,  on  account  of  which  he  found  mercy.  He  himself  has  intimated  that, 
though  he  had  been  some  time  a  blasphemer  and  a  persecutor  and  injurious,  yet 
he  obtained  mercy  because  he  did  it  ignorantly,  in  unbelief.  He  did  not  know  that 
the  Christian  religion  was  from  God,  and  that  the  Jewish  was  to  cease  and  give  way 
to  it.  He  meant  and  intended  well  while  he  was  doing  amiss  :  this  is  his  excuse. 
It  may  be  said  in  answer,  that  he  might  have  known  better,  if  he  had  been  pleased 
to  examine.      Very  true,  he  might,  and  therefore  he  is  blameable ;  but  still  hia 


OHir.  iz.]  TEE  ACTS.  2^ 

heart  was  honest  and  good,  and  therefore  his  mistake  was  pitiable  and  pardonable. 
His  ignorance  was  not  altogether  affected  and  wilful,  but  had  a  great  mixture  of 
natural  temper  and  human  frailty  to  alleviate  and  qualify  it.  Our  Lord,  knowing 
the  integrity  of  his  heart,  was  pleased  to  overlook  his  failings,  and  to  receive  him 
into  His  own  more  immediate  service.  He  approved  his  upright  zeal,  which 
wanted  nothing  but  clearer  light  and  a  better  direction.  He  indulges  him  the  favour 
of  a  heavenly  vision,  condescends  to  speak  to  him  from  above,  and  finds  him  as 
willing  and  ready  upon  correction  to  embrace  and  propagate  the  Christian  religion 
as  he  had  before  been  to  persecute  and  destroy  it.    III.  The  exceeding  great 

GOODNESS  OF  OXTB  LoBD,  BOTH  TO  St.  PaTJL  AND  TO  THE  ChUBCH,  IN  THIS  AFFAIB.       HoW 

gracious  were  the  words  which  our  Lord  spake :  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou 
Me  ?  Next,  He  gave  the  good  man  a  seasonable  and  a  very  affecting  caution.  I 
am  Jesus,  the  Saviour  of  the  world ;  it  is  hard  for  thee  to  contend  with  One  so  much 
mightier  than  thou  art :  stop  thy  career,  and  retreat  in  time.  These  were  moving 
arguments,  and  pierced  to  the  very  soul.  But,  what  is  still  more  considerable,  was 
the  exceeding  goodness  therein  shown  to  the  Church  in  general.  It  was  not  only 
taking  off  a  very  furious  and  dangerous  enemy  ;  but  it  was  making  of  him  one  of 
the  kindest  and  best  of  friends.  There  was  no  man  better  qualified  to  serve  the 
Church,  both  by  preaching  and  writing,  than  St.  Paul.  He  had  great  natural 
abilities,  improved  by  a  liberal  and  polite  education  ;  to  which  also  were  super- 
added many  extraordinary  supernatural  gifts.  PV.  The  pboper  tjsb  and  applica- 
tion. 1.  Let  us  learn  from  the  instance  of  St.  Paul  how  much  it  concerns  every 
man  to  take  care  that  he  judges  right  in  all  matters  of  high  consequence  especially, 
and  that  his  conscience  be  duly  informed.  Infinite  mischiefs  may  arise  from  an 
erroneous  conscience  and  a  misguided  zeal.  2.  From  the  same  instance  of  St, 
Paul  learn  we  a  ready  submission  and  obedience  to  truth  and  godliness  when 
sufficiently  propounded  to  us.  Lay  we  aside  all  inveterate  prejudices  and  stubborn 
reluctances,  as  soon  as  ever  we  have  light  enough  to  see  that  we  have  been  in  an 
error,  and  that  we  ought  to  retract.  3.  Learn  we  from  the  whole  transaction,  the 
truth  and  certainty  of  our  Lord's  resurrection  and  ascension  into  heaven.  His  power 
and  majesty  there  as  Lord  of  all,  and  His  exceeding  goodness  in  looking  down  from 
thence  to  take  care  of  His  Church  here  below ;  and  how  dangerous  a  thing  it  will 
be,  and  how  fatal  to  the  undertakers,  to  persist  in  any  attempts  against  B!im.  {D. 
Waterland,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  And  he  said,  Who  art  Thou,  Lord  7 — Pressing  questions  of  an  awakened 
mind  : — The  manifestation  of  Jesus  subdued  the  great  man  into  a  little  child.  He 
inquires,  with  sacred  curiosity,  "  Who  art  Thou,  Lord  ?  "  and  then  surrenders  at  dis- 
cretion, crying,  "What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?  "  I.  The  eaknest  inquibeb  seeking 
to  know  his  Lord.  1.  He  is  not  only  willing  to  learn,  but  he  is  eager  to  be  taught. 
If  men  were  but  anxious  to  understand  the  truth,  they  would  soon  learn  it  and 
receive  it.  2.  The  subject  he  wished  to  be  taught.  You  have  heard  that  Christ  is 
the  Saviour,  let  your  ambition  be  to  know  all  about  Him.  Saints  on  earth,  and 
even  saints  in  heaven,  are  always  wanting  to  have  this  question  more  fully 
answered,  "  Who  art  Thou,  Lord  ?  "  (1)  What  is  Thy  person  ?  Learn  well  that 
He  is  man,  thy  brother,  touched  with  the  feelings  of  thy  infirmities,  yet  is  He  God 
eternal,  infinite,  fuU  of  all  power  and  majesty.  (2)  What  are  Thy  offices  ?  He  is  a 
Prophet ;  thou  must  be  instructed  by  Him.  He  is  a  Priest ;  He  has  offered  sacrifice, 
and  thou  must  accept  it  as  being  for  thee.  He  is  a  King,  and  thou  must  let  Him 
govern  thee.  (3)  What  are  Thy  relationships?  The  Son  of  the  Highest,  and  yet 
the  brother  of  the  lowest.  King  of  angels  and  of  kings,  and  yet  the  friend  of 
sinners.  8.  What  were  the  results  of  having  this  question  answered  T  (1)  When 
Paul  knew  that  He  whose  face  had  shone  upon  him  brighter  than  the  sun  was  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  he  was  seized  with  contrition.  When  Christ  is  unknown  we  can  go  on 
refusing  and  even  persecuting  Him  ;  but  when  we  clearly  perceive  that  it  is  the  Son 
of  God  and  the  bleeding  Lamb  whom  we  have  refused  and  persecuted,  then  our 
hearts  melt ;  we  beg  His  forgiveness,  and  cast  ourselves  at  BUs  feet.  (2)  Hope  was 
encouraged,  for  though  Paul  at  the  sight  of  the  Lord  Jesus  must  have  been  full  of 
bitter  anguish,  it  was  by  that  same  sight  that  he  was  afterwards  comforted.  Art 
Thou  He  who  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost?  Then  is  there 
hope  for  me.  Oh,  then,  I  will  trust  Him.  (3)  It  led  him  to  complete  sabmission. 
He  said,  "  Is  this  Christ  whom  I  have  rejected  Lord  of  all  ?  Then  it  is  indeed  hard 
for  me  to  kick  against  the  pricks.  If  all  power  be  in  His  hands,  then  to  oppos* 
film  is  as  hopeless  as  it  is  wicked.    O  Lord  Jesus,  be  my  Idng."    Some  hnmaa 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

leaders  have  had  such  extraordinary  inflaence  over  their  soldiery  that  they  havn 
been  cheerfully  obeyed,  even  at  the  cost  of  life.     The  Christ  of  God  has  a  super- 
lative power  over  aU  hearts  that  know  Him.     See  how  Paul  felt  His  influence,  and 
scoured  the  world  to  win  Christ's  lost  ones.    4.  He  sought  instruction  from  the  best 
possible  Master;  for  who  can  tell  us  who  Christ  is  but  Christ  Himself  ?    Here  is 
His  book.     It  is  the  looking-glass.    Jesus  is  yonder,  and  He  looks  into  it,  and  you 
may  see  His  reflected  image  ;  darkly,  however,  at  the  best.     So,  too,  when  you  hear 
His  faithful  servants  preach  you  may  see  somewhat  of  Christ ;  but  there  is  no  sight 
of  Christ  like  that  which  comes  personally  to  your  own  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
II.  The  obedient  disciple  requesting  direction.     "  Whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus 
has  everlasting  life  "  is  the  basis-doctrine  of  the  gospel ;  but  you  may  not  believe  in 
Him  and  then  live  as  you  like.     Hence  the  question,  ♦'  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have 
me  to  do?  "    The  apostle  here  puts  himself  into  the  position  of  a  soldier  waiting 
for  orders.      He  will  not  stir  till  he  has  received  his  officer's  command.     Before  it 
used  to  be,  "  What  will  Moses  have  me  to  do  ?  "    And  with  some  now  present  it  has 
been,  "  What  should  I  like  to  do  ?  "  Now  take  heed  that  Christ  be  your  Master,  and 
nobody  else.   It  would  never  do  to  say,  "  What  would  the  Church  have  me  to  do?" 
nor  even  "  What  would  an  apostle  have  me  to  do  ?  "  Paul  said,  "  Be  ye  followers  of 
me,  even  as  I  am  also  of  Christ."    But  if  Paul  does  not  follow  Christ,  we  must  not 
follow  Paul.    "  Though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other  gospel,  let 
him  be  accursed."     "  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ."    This  obedience  is — 1. 
Personal.    I  have  little  enough  to  do  with  my  neighbours.     They  have  their  duty ; 
but.  Lord,  what  wouldst  Thou  have  m«  to  do  ?     Other  persons  must  follow  the  lighl 
they  have ;  but.  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  Let  it  separate  the  nearest  ties, 
let  it  cause  your  past  friends  to  give  you  the  cold  shoulder,  let  it  subject  you  to  perse- 
cution even  unto  death ;  you  have  nothing  to  do  with  these  consequences,  your 
business  is  to  say,  "  Show  me  what  Thou  wouldst  have  me  to  do,  and  I  will  do  it." 
Note  again — 2.  Prompt.      He  does  not  ask  to  be  allowed  a  httle  delay.    If  yoa 
would  have  salvation,  you  must  be  ready  to  follow  Christ  to-night.  To-night,  it  may 
be,  is  the  time  when  the  Spirit  of  God  is  struggling  with  you,  and  if  resisted  He 
never  may  return.      3.  Unconditional.     Saul  httle  knew  what  the  doing  of  his 
Master's  will  would  involve,  but  he  was  prepared  for  it.     Oh,  you  that  would  be 
Christians,  do  not  suppose  that  it  is  just  believing  something — an  article  of  a  creed, 
or  undergoing  a  ceremony — that  will  save  you ;  you  must,  if  you  are  Christ's,  yield 
yourselves  up  to  Him.     Conclusion  :  It  is  by  knowing  Christ  that  you  will  learn  to 
obey  ELlm,  and  the  more  you  obey  Him  the  more  easy  it  will  be :  and  in  obeying 
Him  you  will  find  your  honour.     Paul  at  this  day  stands  in  a  most  honourable 
place  in  the  Church  of  God,  simply  because  being  ealled  of  God  to  do  His  will  he 
did  it  faithfully  even  to  the  end.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        It  Is  hard  for  thee  to  kick 
against  the  pricks. — The  ways  of  sin  hard  and  difficult : — You  often  hear  of  the 
narrow  and  rugged  road  which  leadeth  unto  life;  and  some  of  you,  I  am  afraid, 
have  not  courage  enough  to  venture  upon  it.    You  rather  choose  the  smooth,  broad, 
down-hill  road,  though  it  leads  to  death.     It  must  be  owned,  that  a  religious  life 
is  a  course  of  difficulties,  and  it  is  fit  you  should  be  honestly  informed  of  it ;  bat 
then  it  is  fit  you  shonld  also  know  that  it  is  disagreeable  and  difficult  only  as  a 
course  of  action  is  diffi  ult  to  the  sick,  though  it  affords  pleasure  to  those  that  are 
well.    There  are  difficulties  in  the  way  of  sin,  as  well  as  in  that  of  holiness,  though 
the  depravity  of  mankind  renders  them  insensible  of  it.     It  may  be  easy   and 
pleasing  to  you  to  sin,  just  as  it  is  easy  to  a  dead  body  to  rot,  or  pleasing  to  a  leper 
to  rub  his  sores.    If  it  be  hard,  in  one  sense,  to  Hve  a  life  of  holiness,  it  is  certainly 
hard,  in  another  sense,  to  live  a  life  of  sin;  namely,  to  run  against  conscience, 
reason,  honour,  interest,  and  all  the  strong  and  endearing  obligations  you  are  under 
to  God,  to  mankind,  and  to  yourselves.  I.  Is  it  not  a  hard  thinq  to  be  an  onbelieveb, 
while  the  light  op  the  gospel  shines  around  us  with  full  blaze  op  evidence  ? 
Before  a  man  can  work  up  himself  to  the  disbelief  of  a  religion  attended  with  such 
evidence,  and  inspiring  such  Divine  dispositions  and  exalted  hopes,  what  absurdities 
must  he  embrace  !  what  strong  convictions  must  he  resist !   what  tremendous 
doubts  must  he  struggle  with  1  what  glorious  hopes  must  he  resign  1  what  violence 
must  be  offered  to  conscience  1  what  care  must  be  used  to  shut  up  all  the  avenues 
of  serious  thought,  and  harden  the  heart  against  the  terrors  of  death  and  the 
supreme  tribunal  1     How  painful  to  reject  the  balm  the  gospel  provides  to  heal  a 
broken  heait  and  a  bleeding  conscience,  and  the  various  helps  and  advantages 
it  furnishes  us  with  to  obtain  Divine  favour  and  everlasting  happiness  I     How  hard 
to  work  up  the  mind  to  believe  that  Jesus  was  an  impostor,  or  at  best  a  moral 


«BAP.  n.]  THE  ACTS.  t9 

philosopher  I  or  that  the  religion  of  the  Bible  is  the  contrivance  of  artful  and 
wicked  men  I  These  are  no  easy  things.  There  are  many  sceptics  and  smatterera 
in  infideUty,  but  few,  very  few,  are  able  to  make  thorough  work  of  it.  Such  men 
find  the  arms  of  their  own  reason  often  against  them,  and  their  own  conscience 
forms  violent  insurrections  in  favour  of  religion ;  so  that  whatever  they  pretend, 
they  believe  and  tremble  too.  They  find  it  hard,  even  now,  to  kick  against  the 
goads :  how  much  harder  they  will  find  it  in  the  issue  I  Christianity  will  Uve  when 
they  are  dead  and  damned,  according  to  its  sentence.  Infidels  may  hurt  themselves 
by  opposing  it ;  as  an  unruly  stupid  ox,  their  proper  emblem,  may  hurt  himself,  but 
not  the  goads,  by  kicking  against  them.    II.  Is  it  not  habd  fob  men  to  profess 

THEMSELVES   BELEEVEBS,    AND   ASSENT   TO  THE  TBDTH  OF  ChEISTIANITY,   AND  YET  UVE 

AS  IF  THEY  WEBE  INFIDELS  ?  If  you  belicve  Christianity — 1.  You  believe  that  there 
is  a  God  of  infinite  excellency ;  the  Maker,  Preserver,  Benefactor,  and  ruler  of  the 
world,  and  of  you  in  particular.  How,  then,  can  you  withhold  your  love  from  Him, 
and  ungratefully  refuse  obedience  ?  Is  not  this  a  hard  thing  ?  Does  it  not  cost 
you  some  labour  to  reconcile  your  consciences  to  it  ?  This  would  not  be  easy  to  the 
mightiest  archangel.  And  if  it  be  easy  to  you,  it  is  in  the  same  sense  that  it  is 
easy  to  a  dead  body  to  rot.  Tour  strength  to  do  evil  is  your  real  weakness,  or  the 
strength  of  your  disease.  2.  You  believe  the  doctrine  of  redemption  through 
Jesus  Christ.  And  is  it  no  diflSculty  to  neglect  Him,  to  dishonour  Him,  to  slight 
His  love  and  disobey  His  commands?  Does  not  at  least  a  spark  of  gratitude 
sometimes  kindle  which  you  find  it  hard  to  quench  entirely?  Does  not  conscience 
often  take  up  arms  in  the  cause  of  its  Lord,  and  do  you  not  find  it  bard  to  queU  the 
insurrection  ?  Alas  1  if  you  find  little  or  no  difficulty  in  treating  the  blessed  Jesus 
with  neglect,  it  shows  that  you  are  giants  in  iniquity,  and  sin  with  the  strength  of 
a  devil.  3.  You  must  beheve  that  hohness  is  essentially  to  constitute  you  a  real 
Christian,  and  prepare  you  for  everlasting  happiness.  And  while  you  have  this 
conviction,  is  it  not  a  hard  thing  for  you  to  be  only  Christians  in  name,  or  self- 
condemned  hypocrites  ?  Is  it  an  easy  thing  to  you  to  keep  your  eyes  always  shut 
against  the  light,  which  would  show  you  to  yourselves  in  your  true  colours  ?  4.  You 
believe  in  a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punishments.  And  since  you  love  yourselves, 
and  have  a  strong  desire  of  pleasure  and  horror  of  pain,  how  can  you  reconcile 
yourselves  to  the  thoughts  of  giving  up  your  portion  in  heaven,  and  being  ingulfed 
for  ever  in  the  infernal  pit  ?  III.  Is  it  not  haed  fob  a  man  to  live  in  a  constant 
CONFLICT  WITH  HIMSELF  ?  I  mean  with  his  conscience.  When  the  sinner  would 
continue  his  career  to  hell,  conscience,  hke  the  cherubim  at  the  gates  of  paradise, 
or  the  angel  in  Balaam's  road,  meets  him  with  his  flaming  sword,  and  turns  every 
way,  to  guard  the  dreadful  entrance  into  the  chambers  of  death.  The  life  of  the 
sinner  is  a  warfare,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Christian.  Conscience  is  his  enemy, 
always  disturbing  him  ;  that  is,  he  himself  is  an  enemy  to  himself,  while  he  con- 
tinues an  enemy  to  God.  Some,  indeed,  by  repeated  violences,  stun  their  con- 
science, and  it  seems  to  lie  still.    But  this  is  a  conquest  fatal  to  the  conquerors. 

IV.   Is  IT  NOT  HABD  FOB  YOU  TO   DBPBIVB  Y0TJE8ELVES   OF  THE   EXALTED   PLEASDEES  OF 

BELiGioN  ?  Is  not  this  doing  violence  to  the  innate  principle  of  self-love  and  desire 
of  happiness  ?  Can  you  be  so  stupid  as  to  imagine  that  the  world,  or  sin,  or  any- 
thing that  can  come  in  competition  with  religion,  can  be  of  equal  or  comparable 
advantage  to  you  ?  Sure  your  own  reason  must  give  in  its  verdict  in  favour  of 
religion.  And  is  it  not  a  hard  thing  for  you  to  act  against  your  own  reason,  against 
your  highest  and  immortal  interest,  and  against  your  own  innate  desire  of 
happiness?  (S.  Davies,  A.M.)  Kicking  against  the  pricks : — This  expression  is 
highly  characteristic  of  the  Saviour — 1.  From  its  figurative  form.  While  He  was  on 
earth,  without  a  parable  spake  He  not  unto  the  people  ;  and  speaking  out  of  heaven  He 
still  adopts  the  parabolic  style,  as  He  did  in  Patmos.  He  does  not  say  to  Saul, 
"It  is  injurious  to  thee  to  resist  My  appeals,"  that  would  be  mere  abstract  fact,  but 
He  puts  it  more  pictorially,  "  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks." 
2.  From  the  tenderness  of  the  rebuke.  It  is  not,  "  It  is  wicked  of  thee  to  resist 
Me."  The  Saviour  leaves  Saul's  conscience  to  say  that ;  nor  "  It  is  hard  for  My  people 
to  bear  thy  cruelties  "  ;  nor  *'  It  is  very  provoking  to  Me,  and  I  shall  ere  long  smite 
thee  in  My  wrath."  No,  it  is  not,  "It  is  hard  for  Me,"  but  "It  is  hard  for  thee." 
We  have  in  the  parable  of  the  text — I.  An  ox.  No  other  beast  is  driven  by  a  goad. 
1.  "  How  low  is  man  fallen  that  he  can  be  compared  to  a  brute  beast  I  "  Oh."  saith 
the  proud  heart,  "  doth  God  compare  me  to  a  beast  ?  "  Ah  I  and  it  is  the  beast 
which  hath  cause  to  complain  rather  than  you ;  for  what  beast  is  that  who  has 
rebelled  against  ftod  ?    Do  not  be  angry,  for  if  you  knew  yourself  you  would  cry 


aO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

with  Asaph,  "  So  foolish  was  I  and  ignorant,  I  was  as  a  beast  before  Thee." 
Penitent  sinners  have  wished  that  they  had  been  beasts  rather  than  men,  feeling  as 
if  sin  had  degraded  their  nature  below  the  meanest  reptile.  2.  But  courage  1  The 
ox  is  a  valuable  animal.  The  text  does  not  liken  a  man  to  a  wild  beast  without  an 
owner,  but  to  an  ox  for  which  its  master  careth,  and  for  which  he  hath  paid  a  price, 
"  I,"  says  Jesus,  "  whom  Thou  persecutest,  redeemed  thee,  with  My  own  precious 
blood  ;  thou  art  Mine,  and  I  will  break  thee  in.  Why  dost  thou  kick  against  Me  ? 
I  have  paid  for  thee  too  dearly  to  let  thee  be  lost. "  3.  The  ox  is  dependent  upon  its 
master  for  the  supply  of  its  needs.  "  The  ox  knoweth  its  owner."  Thou,  who  art 
an  enemy  to  God,  dost  thou  not  know  that  thou  art  the  object  of  His  daily 
providence?  We  have  been  worse  than  oxen.  We  have  not  known  the  hand  that 
feeds  us,  but  have  kicked  against  the  God  from  whom  all  our  mercies  have  been 
flowing.  4.  An  ox  is  a  creature  of  which  service  is  rightly  demanded.  So  does 
God  expect  of  those  creatures  whose  wants  He  supplies  that  they  should  do  His 
bidding.  Wherefore  should  God  keep  them,  and  they  do  Him  no  service  ?  For 
if  He  gets  nothing  out  of  thee.  He  will  not  for  ever  spare  thee.  The  bullock  whic!« 
is  not  good  for  its  master  in  the  furrows  shall  soon  be  good  for  the  butcher  in  the 
shambles.  5.  The  ox  is  a  perverse  creature,  not  easily  made  accustomed  to  the 
yoke.  Hence  the  rough  and  cruel  instrument  used  by  the  Eastern  husbandman — 
a  long  stick  with  a  sharp  prong  at  the  end.  Ah,  how  perverse  are  our  wills  1  We 
will  not  go  in  the  right  way  ;  we  choose  the  wrong  naturally.  We  go  to  the  fire  of 
sin,  and  we  put  our  finger  in  it,  and  we  burn  it ;  but  we  do  not  learn  better ;  we 
then  thrust  our  hands  into  it,  and  though  we  suffer  for  it  we  return  and  plunge  our 
arm  into  the  flame.  6.  Yet  the  ox  is  a  creature  which  can  be  of  great  service  to  its 
master.  When  it  becomes  docile,  it  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  possessions  of  the 
Oriental  husbandman.  And  when  once  the  brutish  heart  of  man  is  conquered  by 
Divine  grace,  of  what  use  he  is.  H.  The  ox-goad.  A  cruel  instrument,  but  one 
thought  by  the  Oriental  husbandman  to  be  needful  for  the  stubborn  nature  of  the 
ox.  God  has  many  ways  of  goading  us,  but  He  does  not  use  that  where  gentler 
means  will  avail.  I  should  think  that  a  kind  man  would  speak  to  his  ox,  and 
might  get  it  into  such  a  condition  that  it  would  be  obedient  to  his  word.  Now  God 
does  bring  His  people  into  such  a  state  as  that.  God  does  not  come  to  blows  with 
men  till  He  has  first  tried  words  with  them.  Before  the  tree  is  cut  down  there  is  a 
time  of  sparing,  in  which  it  is  digged  about  if  haply  it  may  bring  forth  fruit.  But 
when  words  are  of  no  avail,  then  the  Lord  in  tender  mercy  adopts  sharper  means, 
and  comes  from  words  to  blows  and  wounds — that  He  may  come  in  all  His  power  to 
heal.  1.  Some  of  ns  felt  the  ox-goad  when  we  were  children.  Under  the  govern- 
ment of  our  parents  we  were  often  very  restive,  and  felt  it  hard  to  sin.  2.  Since  that 
time  some  of  you  have  felt  the  irksome  goad  in  the  good  advice  of  friends  with 
whom  you  have  been  situated.  Tou  do  not  like  to  be  talked  to  about  religion. 
3.  The  teachings  of  God's  Word  acts  like  a  goad  to  unconverted  men.  I  have 
known  people  come  in  here,  and  the  sermon  has  made  them  feel  so  angry  that  they 
could  almost  have  knocked  the  preacher  down,  but  yet  they  could  not  help  coming 
again.  They  could  not  tell  why,  but  they  could  not  stop  away  ;  and  yet  they  hated 
the  truth  they  heard.  When  a  man  thinks  enough  about  the  truth  to  begin  to  fight 
against  it,  I  am  in  hope  that  the  truth  will  never  let  him  go  till  it  has  fairly  beaten 
him  into  better  things.  4.  At  times  the  Lord  wiU  goad  us  by  personal  afflictions ; 
a  sickness,  a  failure  in  business,  a  loss  of  property,  a  disappointment  in  marriage, 
or  the  death  of  friends,  or  a  gradual  decay  of  the  constitution,  or  the  loss  of  a  limb 
or  an  eye.  Loud  voices  these,  if  men  had  ears  to  hear.  Some  of  you  have  had  so 
many  afflictions  that  the  Lord  might  well  inquire,  "  Why  should  ye  be  stricken  any 
more  ?  ye  will  revolt  more  and  more."  5.  Sometimes  God  stirs  men  with  the 
eommon  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  their  consciences.  Saul  was  being  goaded 
at  that  very  moment  when  Christ  said,  •'  Why  persecutest  thou  Me  ?  "  And  take 
care  you  do  not  resist  these  goadings.  "  See  that  ye  refuse  not  Him  that  speaketh. 
For  if  they  escaped  not,"  &c.  HI.  The  kicks.  The  ox  when  wounded  is  so  foolish 
as  to  dash  its  foot  against  the  goad,  and  consequently  drives  it  deeper  into  himself 
and  hurts  himself  the  more.  This  is  the  natural  manner  of  men  till  God  makes  some- 
thing more  than  beasts  of  them.  1.  Even  when  we  were  children  we  rebelled  against 
our  teachers ;  prajer  was  distasteful,  the  Sabbath  was  dull,  and  the  house  of  God 
wearisome,  and  therefore  we  kicked  against  them.  2.  As  some  of  you  grow  up,  you 
took  to  sneering  at  those  who  kindly  advised  you.  Many,  the  moment  they  get  a  word 
of  counsel  from  any  person,  treat  him  at  once  as  an  enemy,  and  vow  that  they  will 
take  no  further  notice  of  such  a  *'  cant."  Many  sinners,  when  the  Word  of  God  is  too 


«HAP.  IX.]  THE  ACTS.  SI 

hot  for  them,  take  to  cavilling  at  it,  or  disputing  over  it.  A  man  who  is  reproved  by 
a  sermon  will  perhaps  feel  that  he  must  give  up  his  drunkenness.  "But,"  says  he, 
"  I  will  not  give  up  my  drunkenness  ;  I  do  not  want  to  do  that,  and  therefore  I  do 
not  believe  that  the  sermon  is  true."  Or  another  says,  "  If  this  is  correct,  I  must 
shut  up  my  shop  on  the  Sunday,  and  so  lose  my  Sunday's  profits.  I  cannot  afford 
♦o  lose  money,  and  therefore  I  will  abuse  the  preacher."  The  guilty  conscience 
cries,  "  I  will  pick  a  hole  in  the  minister's  coat,  because  he  has  found  one  in  mine.** 

3.  There  are  many  who  persecute  God's  people.  They  cannot  burn  them,  nor  shut 
them  up  in  prison;  but  they  vex  them  with  cruel  mockings,  they  twist  their 
innocent  actions  into  something  wrong,  and  then  they  throw  it  in  their  teeth. 

4.  Certain  profane  men  have  gone  so  far  as  to  kick  at  God  Himself.  Mind  that  He 
does  not  answer  you,  blasphemer.  IV.  Thb  result.  Christ  says,  "  It  is  hard." 
It  has  been  very  hard  for  your  mother,  for  your  families,  for  your  neighbours  and 
employers ;  Christ  says  it  is  hard  for  yon.  You  know  that  sin  does  not  make  you 
happy.  You  have  had  your  swing  of  it,  and  you  are  miserable.  You  are  afraid  to 
die.  Do  you  know  what  will  very  likely  be  your  history  if  you  run  into  sin  and 
persist  in  it  ?  You  will  make  your  present  afflictions  grow  worse,  and  cause  your 
present  losses  to  accumulate.  You  are  kicking  against  the  pricks,  and  are  making 
the  wounds  already  received  ten  times  worse,  and  so  it  always  will  be  so  long  as  yoa 
keep  on  kicking.  He  that  is  converted  to  God  finds  it  hard  to  have  been  a  sinner  so 
long.  His  repentance  is  bitter  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  his  sin.  Those 
who  are  saved  late  in  life  feel  that  their  sins  will  be  their  plague  till  they  die.  A 
man  does  not  go  and  plunge  into  the  ditoh  of  sin  without  bearing  the  stench  of  its 
vileness  in  his  memory  all  his  Ufe.  An  old  song  that  you  used  to  sing  will  come  up 
and  defile  your  closet  prayers,  and  perhaps  the  recollection  of  some  unholy  scene 
will  trouble  you  even  when  you  are  at  the  sacramental  table.  The  apostle  Paul 
always  bore  the  memory  of  his  sin.  "  God  forgives  me,"  said  one,  "  but  I  never 
can  forgive  myself."  V.  The  good  ooxmsEL.  1.  Since  it  is  hard  for  you  to  kick 
against  the  pricks,  and  there  is  nothing  to  be  got  by  it,  cease.  2.  Yield  thy  heart 
to  the  goadings  of  Divine  love.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Saul's  goads: — The  figure  of 
speech  is  borrowed  from  a  custom  of  Eastern  countries:  the  ox-driver  wields  a  long 
pole,  at  the  end  of  which  is  fixed  a  piece  of  sharpened  iron,  with  which  he  urges 
the  animal  to  go  on  or  stand  still  or  change  its  course ;  and,  if  it  is  refractory,  it 
kicks  against  the  goad,  injuring  and  infuriating  itself  with  the  wounds  it  receives. 
This  is  a  vivid  picture  of  a  man  wounded  and  tortured  by  compunctions  of  con- 
science. There  was  something  in  him  rebelling  against  the  course  of  inhumanity 
on  which  he  was  embarked,  and  suggesting  that  he  was  fighting  against  God.  It  is 
not  difficult  to  conceive  when  these  doubts  arose.  He  was  the  scholar  of  Gamaliel, 
the  advocate  of  humanity  and  tolerance,  who  had  counselled  the  Sanhedrin  to 
leave  the  Christians  alone.  He  was  himself  too  young  yet  to  have  hardened  his 
heart  to  all  the  disagreeables  of  such  ghastly  work.  Highly  strung  as  was  his 
religious  zeal,  nature  could  not  but  speak  out  at  last.  But  probably  his  com- 
punctions were  chiefly  awakened  by  the  character  and  behaviour  of  the  Christians. 
He  had  heard  the  noble  defence  of  Stephen,  and  seen  his  face  in  the  council- 
chamber  shining  like  that  of  an  angel.  He  had  seen  him  kneeling  on  the  field  of 
execution  and  praying  for  his  murderers.  Doubtless,  in  the  course  of  the  perse- 
cution he  had  witnessed  many  similar  scenes.  Did  these  people  look  like  enemies 
of  God  ?  As  he  entered  their  homes  to  drag  them  forth  to  prison,  he  got  glimpses 
of  their  social  life.  Could  such  spectacles  of  purity  and  love  be  products  of  the 
powers  of  darkness  ?  Did  not  the  serenity  with  which  his  victims  went  to  meet 
their  fate  look  like  the  very  peace  which  he  had  long  been  sighing  for  in  vain  f 
Their  arguments,  too,  must  have  told  on  a  mind  like  his.  He  had  heard  Stephen 
proving  from  the  Scriptures  that  it  behoved  the  Messiah  to  suffer ;  and  the  general 
tenor  of  the  earUest  Christian  apologetic  assures  us  that  many  of  the  accused  must 
on  their  trial  have  appealed  to  passages  like  the  fifty- third  of  Isaiah,  where  a  career 
is  predicted  for  the  Messiah  startlingly  like  that  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  He  heard 
incidents  of  Christ's  life  from  their  Ups  which  betokened  a  personage  very  different 
from  the  picture  sketched  for  him  by  his  Pharisaic  informants ;  and  the  sayings  of 
their  Master  which  the  Christians  quoted  did  not  sound  like  the  utterances  of  tho 
fanatic  he  conceived  Jesus  to  have  been  1    (/.  Stalker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  And  he  trembling  and  astonished  lald.  Lord,  what  win  Thou  bave 

ne  to  do  ? — Saul  of  Tarsus  converted : — These  words — I.  Are   illtistrativb  of  ▲ 
flmauiiAit  TRANSFORMATION  OF  umD.    Wo  would  not  forget  the  attendant  miracles. 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  a 

There  is  the  light,  the  voice ;  but  we  now  would  speak  of  the  secret  place  of  th« 
spirit.  There  shines  a  more  marvellous  Ught ;  there  resounds  a  voice,  which 
•*  shakes  not  the  earth  only,  but  also  heaven."  This  is  not  the  effect  of  surprise. 
Astonishment  is  mingled  with  it ;  but  it  was  not  the  ordinary  emotion ;  it  wai 
amazement,  admiration — lofty,  tender,  profound,  awestricken.  It  is  not  the 
working  of  self-righteousness.  Behef  but  seeks  its  proof  ;  submission  but  asks  its 
test.  It  is  the  loosing  of  the  rebel's  weapon  from  the  rebel's  hand.  It  is  not 
"  going  abont  to  establish  a  righteousness  of  its  own,"  it  is  the  incense  of  that 
sacrifice  which  God  approves.  This  language  is  distinguished  by — 1.  Deep  com- 
punction. He  feels  that  his  sin  is  of  no  common  aggravation.  It  is  as  though 
all  the  strokes  he  had  ever  dealt  now  rebounded  on  his  spirit.  It  is  not  mortified 
pride,  abortive  ambition,  lacerating  remorse.  It  is  a  gentler  and  a  more  amiable 
humiliation  of  spirit.  Still  it  is  bitter.  Here  is  self-reproach.  Conscience  has  started 
from  its  sleep.  It  is  a  "  godly  sorrow  working  repentance,  which  needeth  not  to  be 
repented  of."  And  until  we  are  thus  lowered  we  are  strangers  to  that  repentance 
which  the  apostle  embodies  as  he  describes.  2.  Strange  illumination.  The  "  beam  " 
is  plucked  out  from  his  eye ;  the  "  veil "  is  torn  away  from  his  heart.  What  a  world 
of  new  interests,  realities,  relationships,  burst  upon  him  1  His  right  is  wrong ;  his 
faith  is  unbelief ;  his  earnestness  is  treason ;  his  truth  is  error.  All  those  "  old  things  " 
must  pass  away.  For  the  first  time  patriarchs  and  prophets  are  seen  as  frowning  upon 
him ;  for  the  first  time,  "  the  hope  of  Israel "  and  its  '*  consolation  "  condemns  him ; 
for  the  first  time,  the  "  Uvely  oracles  "  ring  alarms  of  danger  in  his  ear.  And 
then  JesQS  stands  up  to  him,  no  longer  a  butt  for  ridicule,  a  stnmbling-stone  for 
reproach,  but  "  altogether  lovely."  How  could  he  have  wronged  that  beauty  that 
fills  heaven  with  praise  ?  3.  Earnest  devotedness.  It  is  not  impulse — the  relief 
of  a  mind  bewildered  and  perplexed.  There  is  an  intentness  upon  all  that  is 
benevolent.  The  malignity  is  turned  to  love  to  Him  whom  he  has  till  then  hated, 
and  to  that  people  whom  he  has  hitherto  oppressed.  And  mark  how  this  tendency 
of  his  soul,  sudden  as  it  was,  was  sustained.  Enters  he  tbe  polished  city  ?  Is  he 
wrecked  upon  the  savage  isle  ?  Is  he  dragged  into  the  amphitheatre,  where  execution 
awaits  him  ?  Still  as  serenely  he  cries  with  unshrinking  spirit,  •'  Lord,  what  wilt 
Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  4.  Entire  revolution.  Here  is  a  new  creature.  He  falls 
a  sinner ;  he  rises  a  saint.  He  falls  an  unbeliever ;  he  rises  a  champion.  He  falls 
a  hater  of  the  gospel ;  he  rises  an  apostle  of  it.  He  falls  a  blasphemer ;  he  rises 
a  martyr.  He  falls  a  hater  of  the  Saviour ;  he  rises,  so  that  "  for  him  to  live  " 
henceforth  "  is  Christ."  II.  Suppose  adequate  causes  fob  the  pboduction  of 
SUCH  A  CHANGE.  The  couversion  of  tbe  apostle,  though  attended  by  prodigies, 
was  no  miracle  itself,  i.e.,  that  which  is  opposed  to  the  particular  laws  of  the 
subject  on  which  it  is  wrought.  The  change  wrought  upon  the  apostle's  mind  is 
not  contrary  to  the  nature  of  that  mind  ;  it  is  contrary  to  its  misdirection,  enmity, 
darkness,  but  it  is  agreeable  to  its  understanding,  affections,  and  modes  of  voUtion. 
Yet  at  the  same  time  it  is  all  that  is  wonderful  and  there  must  be  causes  adequate 
for  its  production.  It  took  place — 1.  By  the  impress  of  power.  This  power  is 
creative  ;  it  therefore  acts  immediately  upon  the  mind.  We  have  not  access  to  each 
other's  mind,  nor  have  angels  ;  but  at  the  same  time  there  is  a  full  access  which 
God  may  claim.  He  knows  the  heart,  and  touches  all  its  springs,  and  unlocks  all 
its  wards,  and  pursues  aU  its  avenues,  and  intricacies,  •'  God  who  commanded  the 
light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts."  Think,  therefore,  of  this 
energy  as  direct ;  coming  from  the  Father  of  Ught  and  from  the  fountain  of  power, 
reaching  at  once  th*'  heart  which,  however  rebel  it  may  be,  is  under  His  control  and 
sway.  Nor  is  it  different  as  to  ourselves.  We  may  not  know  the  hour,  but  if  we 
have  ever  the  heart  opened,  the  Lord  hath  opened  it ;  if  we  have  ever  a  wiQ  at  one 
with  God,  He  worked  within  us  first  "  to  will  and  to  do."  2.  By  the  revelation  of 
truth.  It  is  not  improbable  that  there  was  some  natural  process  at  work.  Saul 
would  know  the  types  and  predictions,  so  that  when  the  beam  fell  upon  them  he 
had  but  to  read  them  at  once,  and  to  construe  them  concerning  Him  whom  he  had 
hitherto  opposed  and  withstood.  But  it  was  far  more  than  a  natural  process. 
There  came  a  hght  from  God,  not  only  in  the  sense  of  power,  but  in  the  sense  of 
"quick  understanding  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  And  what  truth  was  disclosed? 
"  The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  He  seized  it.  It  was  not  by  an  intuition — because 
that  implies  some  power  of  his  own ;  but  it  had  all  the  rapidity  of  such  an 
intuition.  He  saw  it  in  its  dimensions,  in  its  proportions,  in  its  harmony ;  the 
system  arose  before  him  in  its  symmetry,  in  its  breadth,  in  its  perfection.  Every- 
thing connected  with  the  Saviour.    The  same  aa  to  ourselves.    Others  may  teacb 


OHAF.  iz.]  THE  ACTS.  88 

UB  ;  but  unless  we  have  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  taking  of  the  things  of  Christ, 
there  may  be  light  in  us,  but  the  light  is  darkness — and  "how  great  is  that 
darkness  I  "  3.  By  the  sensibility  of  love.  We  may  think  of  that  soul  as  replete 
with  all  the  most  dire  passions  of  enmity  and  of  revenge.  But  now  comes  the 
strongest  of  all  attractions,  the  most  potent  of  all  influences — love  to  God  and  love 
to  man.  Jesus  to  him  is  precious.  What  would  he  not  do,  what  not  endure  to 
show  how  he  loves  that  Saviour,  and  all  who  exhibit  His  image  and  promote  His 
cause  ?  It  is  this  that  causes  us  to  relent  and  makes  us  yield.  When  this  love  is 
"  shed  abroad  in  our  heart,"  every  thought  is  "  brought  into  captivity  to  the 
obedience  of  Christ."  HI.  Furnish  us  with  impobtant  lessons  and  rules  fob  its 
INVESTIGATION.  Couversiou  may  be  considered  a  part  of  the  gospel,  as  it  is  a 
doctrine  always  inculcated  by  it — and  as  it  is  a  blessing  accomplished  wherever  it 
is  preached,  and  the  effect  of  its  being  applied.  And  therefore  we  may  take  a  view 
of  Christianity  beyond  a  mere  theory  of  speculative  truth  ;  we  may  consider  it  as 
God's  constant  doing  in  the  earth.  Now,  as  conversion  amongst  ourselves  may  be 
counterfeited,  let  us  take  this  conversion  and  see  how  it  will  be  to  us  a  key  to  all. 
1.  Conversion  is  sovereign.  For  we  cannot  assign  any  reason  why  one  man  is 
converted  and  another  is  not.  It  is  not  of  "  him  willing,"  or  "  him  running,"  but 
of  "  God  showing  mercy."  You  say,  "  that  there  is  a  pre-disposition."  But  how 
came  that  pre-disposition  ?  We  do  not  mean  to  say  that  there  are  not  reasons 
moving  the  Divine  mind ;  but  the  reasons  do  not  exist  in  the  sinner  himself. 
Think  now  of  this  man.  You  would  have  been  surprised  if  Pilate  had  been 
the  convert,  or  Caiaphas  ;  why  more  surprised,  then,  that  the  convert  is  Saul  of 
Tarsus  ?  Have  you  any  explanations  to  assign  for  it  ?  There  is  one — one  alone ; 
"  He  quickeneth  whom  He  will."  2.  Conversion  is  wrought  by  a  power  fully 
sufficient.  It  would  have  been  easy  to  have  dashed  that  "  vessel  of  wrath  "  into 
pieces ;  but  was  it  not  difficult  to  make  "  a  chosen  vessel"  of  it,  and  •*  to  prepare 
it  to  glory  "  ?  And  yet  there  was  no  difficulty  to  that  power  which  did  it.  "  la 
anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?  "  When  we  think  of  His  power  in  conversion  as 
equal  to  any  power  in  the  creation  of  a  world  or  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
then  have  we  the  right  notion  of  that  power ;  but  not  until  then.  It  is  power — but 
not  mechanical,  not  physical — power  expanding  the  powers,  wielding  the  movements, 
brooding  over  the  rudiments  of  the  mind — the  mind  becoming  supple,  passive  to 
that  power;  eager  with  all  its  energies  still,  with  all  its  accountabihty  and 
determinateness  still — as  the  clay  in  the  potter's  hand.  3.  Conversion  in  itself 
must  always  be  sudden ;  there  can  be  no  interval  between  an  unconverted  and  a 
converted  state  ;  we  pass  "  from  death  unto  life."  But  then  the  consciousness  of 
a  change  may  not  rest  upon  instantaneous  evidence.  But  let  us  not  argue  against 
the  suddenness  of  conversion.  4.  Conversion  may  be  accompanied  with  circum- 
stances very  uncommon  and  extreme.  One  heart  shall  open  hke  the  Philippian 
prison,  battered  by  the  earthquake  and  all  its  avenues  and  doors  thrown  open  by 
the  shock  ;  another  heart  may  open  like  the  full-blown  rose  tremulous  in  the 
breeze,  bathed  with  the  dew,  blushing  to  the  sunbeam.  If  God  takes  the  one 
method,  or  if  He  adopts  the  other,  what  is  that  to  thee  ?  Leave  Him  to  work  in 
His  own  way — according  to  His  own  pleasure.  5.  We  need  not  despair  of  the 
conversion  of  any.  Have  we  any  friends  of  whom  we  have  said.  There  is  no  hope 
for  them  in  God  ?  Why  ?  Because  we  have  shaped  our  thoughts  according  to 
ourselves.  But  "His  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,"  &c.  What  if  He  have 
•'  thoughts  of  peace  "  after  all  ?  What  if  His  ways  are  "  mercy  and  truth  "  after 
all?  "  The  prey  "  may  still  be  "  taken  from  the  mighty."  Malefactor  as  he  is, 
that  day  he  may  "  be  with  Jesus  in  paradise."  6.  There  must  be  a  practical 
exhibition  of  our  conversion.  No  matter  what  our  reverie  by  day,  or  our  vision  by 
night,  our  conversion  must  be  reduced  to  one  standard ;  it  speaks  only  one 
language — "Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?"  {R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 
The  law  of  Christian  life : — He  who  had  come  from  heaven,  and  had  stooped  to 
conquer  the  heart  of  the  proud  Pharisee,  must  have  a  purpose  in  all  this.  To 
know  that  purpose  is  Paul's  chief  desire.  It  is  only  when  the  will  is  surrendered 
to  the  will  of  Christ,  and  Christ  is  taken  as  Saviour  and  Lord,  that  the  hfe  of  God 
begins  to  grow  in  us.  Viewing  this  subject  broadly  in  relation  to  ourselves,  let  ua 
learn  first — I.  How  desibable  it  is  that  we  should  all  have  tboh  the  beginnino 
THE  PLAK  OF  ouB  LiFB  CLBABLT  BEFOBE  US.  No  work  of  any  kind  can  be  effectively 
done  without  a  plan.  The  mind  necessarily  proceeds  to  action  after  processes  of 
thought,  prevision,  anticipation  of  results  and  foreseen  obstacles.  Instinct  acts 
from  immediate  impulse.  The  man  who  dispenses  with  purpose  in  action,  uid 
TOI..  II.  8 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  ix. 

lives  for   the  occasion,  has  no  certainty,   or  consistency,   is  the  slave  of  every 
passing  impulse,  and  accomplishes  little  in  the  battle  of  life.     If  all  nature  were 
not  bound  together  by  a  plan,  it  would  be  a  chaos,  in  which  kingdom  would  war 
against  kingdom,  and  all  would  end  in  disaster.     IJE  the  history  of  a  countiy  do  not 
proceed  upon  a   plan  in  which  successive  generations  co-operate,  there  is   no 
cumulative  progress  in  its  life.     The  Hebrew  race  followed  a  plan.     Why  was 
Carlyle  able  to  accomplish  so  much  and  so  well  as  a  historian  ?    Because  in  early 
days  he  selected  his  precise  vocation  as  a  historian,  and   settling  down  in  the 
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries,  he,  year  after  year,  with  growing  power  and 
speciality,  dealt  with  the  events  of  those  times  in  his  lives  of  Cromwell  and  of 
Frederick,  and  his  history  of  the  French  Bevolution.     Why  was  Darwin  able  to 
effect  so  much  for  science  ?    Because  he  recognised  early  in  life  as  his  special 
destiny  the  study  of  living  forms,  and  the  conditions  of  their  existence,  and  gave 
all  his  life  to  that  branch  of  science.     Such  a  habit  saves  us  from  the  weakening 
effect  of  distracting  aims.     It  raises  us  above  the  power  of  opposing  circumstances. 
It  stimulates  activity.    It  produces  dependence  upon  God.     It  develops  energy. 
II.  The  plan  of  our  life  is  in  the  mind  of  Christ.     He  alone  has  the  knowledge, 
power,  all-embracing  sympathy,  patience,  and  perfection  to  make  the  plan  blessed 
for  us  and  for  all.    IH.  Jesus  Christ  progressively  unfolds  to  His  disciples 
His   life -plan   fob  them.     He  did    so  to   Paul.      But  it  was  revealed  through 
Ananias,   a  general  outline — the  details  after.     Christ's  plan   is  adapted  to  our 
capacity — as  strength  grows  we  grasp  it  more  clearly.     IV.  The  will  of  Christ 
MAY  BE  certainly  KNOWN  BY  US.    Paul  in  this  case  did.      In  most  of  his  subsequent 
experiences  he  knew  the  mind  of  Christ  in  truth  and  conduct.     May  we  know  the 
will  of  Christ  certainly  in  these  days  ?    Yes  !     We  have  the  words  of  Christ.     We 
have  the  Spirit  of  truth.     We  know  certain  facts  in  nature  and  laws  in  science. 
We  may  also   have   spiritual  certainty.      V.    Times  when  we  should  specially 
breathe  this  prayer.     1.  When  burdened  by  sin.     2.  When  seeking  the  blessed- 
ness  of   a  higher  life.     3.   When   our  way  is  uncertain.     Such   prayer  will  be 
answered.     God's  will  be  made  plain  by  obedience.     (J.  Matthews.)        The  question 
of  an  awakened  sinner : — I.  This  language  is  expressive  of  deep  concern.    We 
sometimes  wonder  that  men  are  not  more  concerned  about  what  they  must  do  to 
be  saved.    By  nature  they  are  blind  and  dark  (Isa.  lix.  10).     Saul  felt  his  danger, 
<fec.     Concern  as  to  the  manner  of  salvation.     "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  " 
How  shall  I  escape  the  damnation  of  hell?    What  means  must  I  employ?    A 
man  lost  in  the  Australian  bush  is  not  only  concerned  about  the  fact  of  being 
lost,  but  as  to  the  way  out  of  the  trackless  wilderness.    II.  It  is  the  language  of 
astonishment  and  terror.     "  He  trembling  and  astonished  said,"  &c.     We  have 
seen  men  tremble  under  conviction.     III.  This  is  the  language  of  decision.     Saul 
meant  to  do  whatever  God  should  tell  him.     Many  persons  profess  to  be  seeking 
the  Lord  for  years.      Why  is   He  not  found  of   them  ?  because  it  is  painfully 
manifest  that  they  are  not  decided.    IV.  The  gospel  alone  supplies  a  satisfactory 
ANSWER  TO  this  question.     ConclusioH  :  1.  Have  we  asked  this  question  ?     2.  This 
is  a  matter  of  paramount  importance.     (G.  T.  Hall.)      Man's  part  in  conversioit^ — 
I.  In  men  like  Paul  no  sooner  is  there  a  vision  of  truth  than  there  is  a  new 
resolution  for  duty.     Saul  had  seen  a  new  sight.     One  look  at  that  majestic  and 
tender  countenance  changed  his  anger  to  repentance.     But  he  did  not  spend  much 
time  in  gazing  at  the  radiant  spectacle.     It  purposely  vanished  from  him.     He 
did  not  call  his  fellow-travellers  to  admire  it  as  a  wonder ;  he  looked  instantly  for 
some  new  work.     Such  tremendous  exercises  and  convictions  are  not  meant  to  end 
in  mere  emotion.     So  the  convicted  jailer,  "  Sirs,  what  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  " 
So  the  young  man,  "What  good  thing  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  Ufe?"    And 
80  the  people,  the  publicans,  the  soldiers  to  John  the  Baptist,  "  What  shall  we  do 
then  ?  "     It  is  the  sincere  cir  of  every  earnest  nature  with  a  new  and  Christian 
view  of  life.     2.  There  is  a  supernatural  element  an''  there  is  a  natural  one  in  St. 
Paul's  conversion ;  the  one  for  our  faith,  the  other  for  our  imitation.    After  the 
first  glow  of  religious  interest  there  comes  a  period  of  suspended  energy ;  some- 
times of  reaction  ;  sometimes  of  miserable  complacency — a  looking  back  to  see 
how  far  we  have  come  ;  or  sideways,  to  see  who  is  coming  with  us.     "  Suffer  me 
to  go  first  and  bury  my  father "  :  "  What  shall  this  man  do  ? "    The  strained 
sinews  are  relaxed.     Here  is  the  test  of  a  true  renewing.     Can  you  survive  that 
point  of  peril  ?     If  not,  it  is  not  a  genuine  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Your  will 
was  not  converted,  only  your  feelings  ;  and  as  they  are  the  transient,  variable 
part  of  us,  they  are  easily  converted  back  again  to  falsehood  and  selfishnesa. 


CHAP,  a..]  THE  ACTS,  85 

Hence,  the  very  question  that  belongs  just  there  is  this,  "  What  wilt  Thou  have 
me  to  do  ?  "  How  shall  the  better  feeling  pass  into  a  better  character  ?  In  the 
history,  notice — I.  A  personal  conoeen.  "What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?" — 
not  "  this  man  "  ;  not  people  in  general ;  not  older  or  better  people,  but  myself. 
To  Saul  it  was  no  time  for  anything  but  personal  feeling  and  acting.  Conscience 
told  him  what  the  vision  meant,  and  the  voice  confirmed  the  findings  of  conscience. 
No  wonder  that  he  cried  out  "  trembling  and  astonished,"  as  if  there  were  no  moment 
to  be  lost,  and  as  if  there  were  no  other  soul  in  the  universe  but  himself  before  the 
Judge.  To  those,  then,  who  have  begun  to  inquire  what  they  shall  do,  the  first 
counsel  is,  Keep  it  before  you  as  a  personal  concern.  Do  not  try  to  throw  your 
uneasiness  off  by  saying  you  are  no  worse  than  your  neighbours.  Make  no 
cowardly  attempt  to  shift  your  responsibility  upon  others — whether  society,  your 
education,  employers,  tempters,  or  unfaithful  religionists.  Remember  how  many 
souls  have  missed  their  salvation  by  halting  between  a  general  interest  and  a 
particular  consecration.  II.  Doing  the  fibst  simple  duty  ;  and  for  Christ's  sake, 
because  He  has  required  it.  Human  judgments  would,  very  likely,  have  expected 
something  "  comporting  better  with  the  dignity  of  the  occasion."  After  such  a 
supernal  manifestation,  surely  life  will  not  have  to  settle  down  into  its  tame 
uniformity  again?  Curiosity  would  expect  some  remarkable  mission  at  once. 
Pride  would  suggest  a  sudden  elevation  into  grand  undertakings.  But  no ;  the 
first  step  must  be  plain  and  practical.  The  vision  over,  St.  Paul  must  march  on  as 
before — outwardly  as  before — only  with  a  changed  errand  and  another  heart. 
Above  all,  there  must  be  no  pause  of  indolence.  "  Arise,  and  go  into  the  city,"  &c. 
After  any  spiritual  excitement,  or  start  forward,  there  is  apt  to  come  a  contempt 
for  familiar  tasks.  But  see  how  the  Scriptures  rebuke  this  dangerous  vanity  ;  and 
how  profoundly  they  interpret  human  nature.  After  tbat  rapturous  night  when 
Jacob  saw  the  splendour  of  heaven,  and  the  angels  of  God,  the  next  morning  he 
arose,  put  together  stones  for  a  memorial,  and  went  straight  on  his  journey. 
Naaman  expected  some  magnificent  demonstration  of  miracle.  But  no ;  it  was 
simply,  "  Go,  bathe  seven  times  in  Jordan."  "  Too  simple,  too  common,"  he  said. 
Yet  that  was  the  way  to  health.  At  their  first  call,  the  fishermen  that  were  to  convert 
the  world  were  not  sent  out  with  banners  and  trumpets.  Drop  your  fishing-nets 
and  come  after  Me,  in  a  quiet,  obscure,  daily  doing  of  My  hard  work,  and  in  due 
time  you  shall  be  kings  and  priests  unto  God!  The  healed  leper  was  only  to  go 
home  and  tell  what  great  things  God  had  done  for  him.  The  "  young  man  "  was 
looking  for  some  unprecedented  sacrifice ;  but  to  go  and  increase  his  charity  to 
those  poor  people  he  had  seen  so  often  was  more  than  he  could  bear.  No,  the 
true  self-sacrifice  is  not  on  high  or  in  strange  places.  Back  to  the  old  scenes,  the 
duU  shop,  the  unsocial,  unexciting  day's  work,  the  tedious  routine  of  the  ofifice ; 
but  if  you  take  with  you  the  new  Spirit,  which  has  beamed  upon  you  in  your 
blessed  hour,  then  all  the  dull  taskwork  will  be  transfigured  in  that  light.  Go 
straight  to  the  nearest,  plainest  duty,  and  "  it  shall  be  told  thee  "  there,  in  the 
opening  path  of  Providence,  what  thou  shalt  do  next.  III.  Silent  seclusion  and 
MEDITATION.  Obscrve  how  effectually  the  apostle  was  shut  up  to  himself.  First,  a 
blindness,  then  three  days  of  absolute  privacy,  fastmg,  thinking,  afterwards  three 
years  in  Arabia.  He  needed  this  cooling  air  of  stillness  and  loneliness.  His 
passions  had  been  fiery,  terribly  tempestuous.  Not  long  before  he  had  taken  a 
ferocious  delight  in  Stephen's  martyrdom ;  and  now,  sitting  at  the  feet  of  that 
Jesus,  he  had  that  scene  to  remember.  Food  enough  for  meditation  I  Like  the 
outward  form  of  the  Master,  that  old  life  must  die,  and  lie  "  three  days  "  hid  in  a 
sepulchre,  before  the  new  created  man  could  be  "  risen  with  Christ."  There  is  a 
lesson  for  us  of  this  bustling  age  in  that  strong,  penitent  man,  fasting,  repenting, 
shut  in  his  dark  room,  thinking,  praying.  When  the  deepest  springs  of  life  are 
moved  by  any  grand  experience  we  cannot  speak :  we  ought  to  be  still.  Even 
nature,  whenever  she  discloses  to  us  her  grander  scenery,  shuts  our  lips.  After 
that  call  from  heaven  the  apostle  longed  for  silence,  and  it  came.  Such  seclusion 
is  sometimes  our  salvation.  Every  real  renewal  is  a  winepress  that  must  be  trodden 
alone.  IV.  Submission  to  a  visible  religious  adthobity.  Ananias,  a  representntive 
of  the  Church,  was  sent  to  encourage  him,  and  to  introduce  him  to  the  Church.  If 
Paul's  strong  nature  needed  guidance  and  help,  our  weak  ones  need  it  no  less. 
What  Ananias  and  the  miracle  and  the  heavenly  voice  were  to  him,  one  Book  and 
the  ministry  and  the  ordinances  are  to  us.  This  sounds  very  commonplace,  I 
know.  Visions  are  more  exciting,  ecstasies  more  transporting,  sentimentalists 
win  say  it  is  uninteresting;  pseudo-spiritualists  will  say  it  is  formal;  novelty" 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ix» 

eeekers  will  say  it  is  old-fashioned.  But  remember,  the  supposition  now  is  that 
you  are  in  earnest  about  making  yourself  a  Christian  man,  and  are  willing  to  take 
the  practical,  sensible  means.  One  of  these,  a  chief  one,  is  a  study  of  the  Bible — 
the  text-book  of  the  Christian  knowledge.  Whenever  it  is  displaced,  Christian 
character  loses  richness  and  depth.  One  reason  why  our  modem  religion  is 
superficial,  weak,  irreverent,  is  that  the  intimacy  with  that  nourishing  inspiration 
declines.  Nor  can  you  separate  the  Bible  from  the  Church.  Our  busy  society  haa 
80  little  in  its  influence  that  is  really  spiritual — it  offers  so  few  helps  to  a  weak 
Boul  struggling  to  maintain  a  Christian  conversation — that  we  do  all  need  ta 
replenish  our  inner  light  and  love  and  strength  from  supernatural  and  sacramental 
fountains.  V.  The  appeal  to  Christ  by  peayeb.  St.  Paul  spoke  first,  not  to  himself, 
not  to  Ananias,  not  to  any  friend  on  earth  ;  it  was,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have 
me  to  do  ?  "  There  is  no  such  thing  as  growth  in  a  holy  life  without  communion 
between  the  heart  and  Him.  For  every  perplexity  and  despondency,  a  fresh 
supplication  :  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  and  He  will  show  us.  He 
has  promised  that  He  will.  "  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive,  seek  and  ye  shall  find."^ 
{Bp.  Huntington.)  An  eager  inquiry  : — The  words  are — L  Ak  earnest  appeal 
FOB  Divine  mercy.  Saul  was  conscious  of  his  great  wickedness  in  persecuting 
Christ,  and  doubtless  thought  that  he  would  have  to  "  do"  much  to  secure  forgive- 
ness. The  reply,  "  Arise,"  &c.,  must  have  given  him  hope.  The  period  of  three  day» 
was  one  of  great  anguish,  but  relief  came  through  Ananias,  and  Saul  received  hia 
sight  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Nothing  is  said  about  forgiveness,  but  this  ia 
surely  included  in  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  for  the  one  is  of  no  use  without  the  other. 
So  Peter  said  to  the  penitents  at  Pentecost,  "Repent  and  be  baptized  .  .  .  and  ye 
shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Does  any  one  here  inquire,  "  What 
shall  I  do?"  The  answer  "is  nigh  thee  even  in  thy  heart,"  &c,  II.  A  hearty 
DESIRE  POR  CONSECRATION  TO  God's  SERVICE.  The  question  means  not  only,  "  What 
must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  but,  "  What  must  I  do  to  serve  Thee  ?  "  God  wills — 1. 
That  we  should  hold  communion  with  Him.  This  Saul  did  during  the  three  days  at 
Damascus.  "  Behold  he  prayeth."  He  had  prayed  before,  but  only  as  a  Pharisee 
— outwardly  ;  now  he  came  into  actual  contact  with  God,  and  poured  out  his  soul 
before  Him.  2.  That  we  should  exemplify  the  power  of  the  gospel  in  our  daily 
life.  "  As  ye  have  received  Christ  as  Lord,  so  walk  in  Him  "  in  your  personal 
capacity,  in  your  domestic  relations,  in  your  secular  employments,  in  your  religioua 
and  Church  duties.  3.  That  we  should  help  to  diminish  human  misery.  Our 
Master  went  about  doing  good,  not  only  to  the  souls,  but  to  the  bodies  of  men.  Hia 
religion  is  not  only  one  of  faith  and  hope,  but  of  charity.  ♦'  Pure  religion  and 
undefiled,"  Ac.  "Whoso  hath  this  world's  good,"  &c.  4.  That  we  should  seek  to 
bring  men  to  Christ.  It  was  revealed  to  Paul  that  he  should  be  a  preacher,  and 
right  well  did  he  fulfil  his  task.  Although  all  Christians  are  not  called  upon  to  be 
preachers,  yet  all  are  expected  to  do  something  to  save  souls.  In  the  family, 
Sunday-school,  workshop,  by  the  sick  bed,  &c.  We  may  all  work  for  the  Master. 
In  conclusion  :  1.  This  life  is  the  only  opportunity  we  have  for  working  in  reference 
to  the  world  to  come.  2.  Our  position  in  heaven  will  be  determined  by  our  activity 
on  earth.  3.  Our  work  and  therefore  our  reward  will  be  proportioned  by  the  degree 
to  which  we  yield  to  the  constraint  of  Christ's  love.  (J.  Morris,  D.D.)  The 
Christian's  life : — Standing  on  a  platform  when  the  train,  shooting  out  of  some  dark 
tunnel,  dashes  by  with  the  rush  of  an  eagle,  and  the  roar  of  thunder;  or,  seated 
apon  some  lofty  rock,  when  the  mountain  wave,  driven  on  by  the  hurricane,  and 
swelling,  foaming,  curling,  bursts,  and,  passing  on  either  side,  rushes  to  roll  along 
the  beach — than  these  I  know  no  situation,  under  heaven,  where  a  man  more  feels 
his  weakness.  What  hand  could  stop  these  flying  wheels ;  or,  seizing  the  billow 
by  its  snowy  main,  hold  it  back  ?  Only  one— God's  own  right  hand.  Great 
miracle  that  1  A  greater  is  here,  in  the  sudden  omnipotent  arrest  of  Saul.  With 
what  impetus  he  moves  on  his  career,  and,  breathing  flames  and  slaughter,  he 
rushes  on  his  prey ;  but  in  a  moment  he  is  arrested  in  mid-career,  changed  into  a 
little  child.  The  hand  that  bent  the  arch  of  heaven  has  bent  his  iron  will ;  and, 
now  yielding  himself  up  to  Christ,  he  lies  at  His  feet.  Let  us  now  consider  what 
is  implied  in  this  question  of  his.  I.  That  every  true  convert  submits  himself 
TO  the  will  of  Christ.  It  is  not,  What  will  my  minister,  parents,  friends,  <feo.  ;  but 
what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  1.  This  submission  to  another's  will  is  the  most 
difficult  of  things.  It  is  easier  to  bend  iron  than  a  stubborn  will.  Does  not  every 
parent  find  it  so  ?  Happy  are  the  children  that  have  learned  to  say  to  a  wise,  good, 
Christian  father,  what  Jeeus  said  to  His,  "  Not  My  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  Thia 


<WA».  IX.]  THE  ACTS.  87 

submission  to  the  will  of  another,  the  first,  best  lesson,  the  battle  of  the  nursery, 
trains  us  for  the  battle  of  the  world,  and  also  the  Church.     And  thus  are  we  to 
yield  our  wills  to  Christ,  not  saying  what  would  I  wish,  or  what  will  this  or  that 
one  say  ?  but  Speak,  Lord,  Thy  servant  heareth.     In  the  church,  in  the  place  of 
business,  in  the  family,  in  the  world.  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?    There  is 
a  passage  in  the  history  of  St.  Francis  that  may  throw  light  on  this  subject.    The 
rule  of  the  order  which  he  founded  was  implicit  submission  to  the  superior.     One 
day  a  monk  proved  refractory.     He  must  be  subdued.    By  order  of  St.  Francis,  a 
grave  was  dug,  and  the  monk  was  put  into  it.    The  brothers  began  to  shovel  in  the 
earth.     When  the  mould  had  reached  the  wretch's  knees,  St.  Francis  bent  down, 
and,  fixing  his  eye  on  him,  said,  Are  you  dead  yet — do  you  yield  ?    There  was  no 
answer  ;  down  in  that  grave  there  seemed  to  stand  a  man  with  a  will  as  iron  as 
his  own.     The  burial  went  on.     When  at  length  he  was  buried  up  to  the  neck,  to 
the  lips,  St.  Francis  bent  down  once  more.  Are  you  dead  yet  ?    The  monk  lifted  his 
eye  to  his  superior  to  see  in  his  cold,  grey  eyes  no  spark  of  feeling.    Dead  to  all  the 
weaknesses  of  humanity,  St.  Francis  stood  ready  to  give  the  signal  that  should 
finish  the  burial.     It  was  not  needed ;  the  iron  bent ;  the  funeral  was  stopped ; 
his  will  yielding  to  a  stronger,  the  poor  brother  said,  ♦'  I  am  dead."     Popery  is  not 
so  much  a  contradiction  as  a  caricature  of  the  truth.    I  would  not  be  dead  as  these 
monks  to  any  man.    The  reason  which  I  have  got  from  God  Almighty  is  to  bend 
blindly  before  no  human  authority.    But  the  submission  I  refuse  to  man,  Jesus,  I 
give  to  Thee — not  wrung  from  me  by  terror,  but  won  by  love.    I  wish  to  be  dead, 
not  as  that  monk,  but  as  he  who  said,  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ :  nevertheless  I 
live."    Saul,  the  persecutor,  was  dead;  but  Paul,  the  great  apostle,  lived.     ••Yet 
not  I,"  he  adds,  ••but  Christ  liveth  in  me,"  &c.    2.  Were  it  so  with  us,  what 
iappy,  good,  brave,  devoted  Christians  we  should  be  1    I  have  seen  a  servant  come 
in  the  morning  to  his  master  for  orders,  and  leave  to  spend  the  day  in  executing 
them ;  and  would  that  every  one  of  us  would  go  morning  by  morning  to  Christ, 
saying,  with  Saul,  Lord  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  this  day  ?     There  would  be 
no  difficulty  in  getting  money  for  Christ's  cause,  or  people  to  do  His  work.    I  have 
read  how  a  troop  of  cavalry,  dashing  at  the  roaring  cannon,  would  rush  on  to  death ; 
and  how  the  forlorn  hope  would  throw  themselves,  vrith  a  bound  and  a  cheer,  into 
the  fiery  breach,  knowing  that  they  should  leave  their  bodies  there — it  was  the 
will  of  their  commander.     And  shall  Christians  do  less  for  Christ  ?    Are  you  your 
own  ?    We  have  one  Master  in  heaven  ;  and  if  it  be  true  that  He  bought  us  with 
His  blood,  what  right  has  a  Christian  to  himself  ?     II.  That  evebt  tbtjb  convert 
FEELS  HIS  individuaij  RESPONSIBILITY.    It  is  uot  Only,  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have 
me  to  do  ?  but  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?    1.  In  looking  over  some  vast 
assembly  one  reflection  naturally  suggests  itself — What  power  is  here  I    You  may 
smile  at  him  who,  standing  by  the  cataract  of  Niagara,  instead  of  being  filled  with 
admiration,  began  to  calculate  how  much  machinery  that  water-power  would 
turn.      But  it  is  a  serious,  stirring  thought  to  think  how  much  moral  machinery 
all  this   power  now  before  me  could  turn  for  good,  were  every  scheming  brain 
and  busy  hand,  and  willing  heart,  engaged  in  the  service  of  God.     What  honour 
would  accrue  to  God !  what  a  revenue  of  glory  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  what  invalu- 
able service  to  religion  I    It  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  power  that  lies  latent  in 
our  Churches.    We  talk  of  the  power  latent  in  steam  till  Watts  evoked  its  spirit 
from  the  waters,  and  set  the  giant  to  turn  the  iron  arms  of  machinery.     We  talk 
of  the  power  latent  in  the  skies  till  science,  seizing  the  spirit  of  the  thunder, 
chained  it  to  oar  service — abolishing  distance,  and  flashing  our  thoughts  across 
rolling  seas  to  distant  continents.    Yet  what  are  these  to  the  mortil  power  that  lies 
asleep  in  our  congregations?    2.  And  why  latent?    Because  men  and  women 
neither    appreciate    their    individual   influence,    nor    estimate   their    individual 
responsibilities.     They  cannot  do  everything;  therefore  they  do  nothing.     They 
cannot  blaze  like  a  star ;  and,  therefore,  they  won't  shine  like  a  glow-worm ;  and 
80  they  are  content  that  the  few  work,  and  that  the  many  look  on.    Not  thus  are 
the  woods  clothed  in  green,  but  by  every  little  leaf  expanding  its  own  form.     Nor 
thus  are  fields  covered  with  golden  corn,  but  by  every  stalk  of  grain  ripening  its 
own  head.    You  say.  What  can  I  do  ?  oh,  I  have  no  power,  nor  influence,  nor 
name,  nor  talents,  nor  money  I    Look  at  the  coral  reef  yonder,  which  stretches  its 
unbroken  wall  for  a  thousand  leagues  along  the  sea.     How  contemptible  the 
architects ;  yet  the  aggregate  of  their  labours,  mocking  our  greatest  breakwaters, 
how  colossal  1    I  know  that  all  cannot  be  bright  and  burning  lights  ;  but  see  how 
that  candle  in  a  cottage  window  sends  out  its  rays  streaming  far  through  the 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0H1».  IX. 

depths  of  night.  Why  should  not  we  shine,  though  it  should  be  to  illumine  only 
the  narrow  walls  of  our  country's  humblest  home?  3.  Consider  how  the  greatest 
things  done  on  earth  have  ever  been  done  by  httle  and  little — little  agents,  and  little 
things.  How  was  the  wall  restored  around  Jerusalem  ?  By  each  man,  whether 
hia  house  was  an  old  palace  or  the  rudest  cabin,  building  the  breach  before  his  own 
door.  How  was  the  soil  of  the  New  World  redeemed  from  gloomy  forests  ?  By 
each  sturdy  emigrant  cultivating  the  patch  round  his  own  log  cabin  ?  How  have 
the  greatest  battles  been  won  ?  By  the  rank  and  file — every  man  holding  his  own 
post,  and  ready  to  die  on  the  battlefield.  And  if  the  world  is  ever  to  be  conquered 
for  our  Lord,  it  is  not  by  ministers,  nor  by  office-bearers,  nor  by  the  great,  and 
noble,  and  mighty  ;  but  by  every  member  of  Christ's  body  being  a  working 
member,  and  saying  to  Jesus,  Lord  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  III.  That  thk 
LIFE  ov  THE  TRUE  coNVEET  WILL  BE  ONE  OF  DEEDS.  What  wllt  Thou  have  me  not  to 
believe  or  to  profess,  but  to  do.  1.  I  do  not  set  deeds  against  doctrines,  nor  have 
I  any  sympathy  with  the  fashion  of  setting  small  value  on  creeds  ;  saying,  It 
matters  little  what  a  man  beUeves,  if  he  does  right.  A  man  cannot  do  right  unless 
he  believes  right,  since  every  effect  must  have  a  cause.  I  know  that  doctrines  are 
not  deeds  ;  that  the  foundation  is  not  the  superstructure.  Yet  that  night  when 
the  rains  descend,  and  the  floods  rise,  and  the  winds  blow,  happy  is  the  man 
whose  storm-beaten  house  stands  founded  on  a  rock,  and  happier  still  the  man, 
when  the  hour  comes  which  shall  sweep  away  aU  confidence  in  human  merits,  whose 
hopes  of  salvation  stand  on  the  Kock  of  Ages.  Call  creeds,  as  some  do,  but  the 
bones,  and  not  the  Uving,  lovely,  breathing  form  of  true  religion ;  still,  what  were 
the  body  without  the  bones  ?  Not  less  important  the  place  that  doctrines  hold ; 
and  therefore  I  say,  hold  fast  the  profession  of  your  faith.  2.  StiU,  faith  without 
works  is  dead.  Useless  the  creeds  that  do  not  influence  our  conduct ;  the  preaching 
that  leads  to  no  practice.  Prayer  meetings,  sermons,  are  good ;  but  they  are  not, 
as  some  make  them,  banquets  where  you  are  to  enjoy  yourselves.  Would  you  see 
their  proper  use  ?  Look  at  yon  hardy  and  sun-burned  man,  sitting  down  in  his 
cottage  to  a  simple  meal ;  and  rising  from  the  table  to  spend  the  strength  it  gives 
him  at  the  labours  of  the  field.  So  Sabbaths  and  religious  services  are  to  strengthen 
us  for  work — otherwise  our  religion  is  no  less  selfish  than  the  lives  of  epicures. 
Our  object  should  be  to  get  strength  to  do  God's  work  in  this  world,  and  to  follow 
Him  who,  as  our  pattern  as  well  as  propitiation,  went  about  continually  doing 
good.  Christ  is  the  propitiation  of  none  of  whom  he  is  not  also  the  pattern  ;  and 
on  the  last  day  you  will  never  be  asked  what  was  your  denomination  or  creed.  No  I 
It  is  fruit,  not  leaves  nor  even  flowers,  that  is  the  test  of  the  tree.  Every  tree  that 
bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  shall  be  cut  down,  and  cast  into  the  fire.  Alive  to 
this,  what  good  we  should  do !  ho  w  busy  we  should  be  1  There  would  be  no  time  for  sin ; 
little  even  for  rest.  Best?  What  have  we  to  do  with  that  ?  From  His  cradle  to  the 
grave,  did  Christ  ever  rest  ?  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."  Earth  for 
work,  heaven  for  wages.  "  There  remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God."  (T.  Guthrie, 
D.D.)  The  twofold  subjection  of  humanity  to  God — Pharaoh  and  Paul  (text,  and  Bom. 
xiv.  11 ;  Exod.  x.  17) : — The  passage  from  Bomans,  taken  from  Isa.  xlv.  23,  predicts 
the  universal  subjugation  of  mankind  to  the  Divine  wilL  This  does  not  mean 
universal  salvation,  for  the  subjugation  is  twofold,  the  one  represented  by  Pharaoh, 
the  other  by  Paul.  I.  The  one  is  by  a  conviction  op  God's  terrible  power, 
THE  OTHER  iti  A  CONVICTION  OF  His  LOVE.  Phaiaoh  felt  that  further  rebellion 
would  be  ruin,  and  for  a  moment  "  bowed  the  knee."  Paul  felt  tbat  further  rebel- 
lion would  be  a  crime  against  that  tenderness  that  could  plead,  "  I  am  Jesus  whom 
thou  persecutest."  So  it  is  ever.  Wicked  men  and  devils  are  made  to  bow  by  a 
sense  of  God's  power.  Good  men  and  angels  bow  from  a  sense  of  His  love.  II. 
Thk  one  involves  angdish,  the  other  happiness.  In  what  a  state  of  agony  was 
Pbaraoh  when  he  said,  "  Intreat  the  Lord  for  me."  But  what  joy  came  to  Paul  as 
the  voice  of  Mercy  said,  "  Eise,  stand  upon  thy  feet,"  <fec.  The  one  therefore 
involves  heaven,  the  other  hell.  1.  In  the  one  there  is  a  sense  of  absolute  slavery, 
in  the  other  of  perfect  freedom.  2.  In  the  one  there  is  a  sense  of  despair,  in  the 
other  of  hopefulness.  3.  In  the  one  there  is  a  sense  of  Divine  antagonism,  in  the 
other  of  Divine  favour.  IH.  The  one  becomes  a  ministry  of  destruction,  thb 
OTHER  OF  salvation.  Pharaoh,  the  moment  the  panic  abated,  rushes  on  and  brings 
destruction  to  himself  and  his  hosts ;  Paul  begins  a  ministry  which  issues  in  the 
salvation  of  myriads.  Conclusion :  It  is  not  for  us  to  determine  whether  we  shall 
bow  the  knee  or  not — we  must — but  how  :  by  a  sense  of  God's  power  or  of  His  love, 
by  coercion  or  choice  ?    (P.  Thomas,  D.D.)        Our  mission : — I.  Every  man  has  hi8 


OBAr.ix.]  THE  ACTS.  89 

mssiON.  1.  Life  is  awfully  significant.  2.  Duty  renders  it  sublime.  II.  Oob 
lossioN  MAY  BB  ASCEETAiNED — 1.  By  observing  our  position  and  circumstances.  2. 
By  listening  to  the  voice  of  God.  III.  Our  mission  may  be  accomplished.  1, 
Impossibilities  are  not  required.  2.  God  is  pledged  to  give  the  needful  strength. 
(W.  W.  Wythe.)  The  Christian  for  the  times : — The  great  apostle  was  a  man  for 
the  times  in  which  he  lived.  "  The  Christian  for  the  times  "  must  be — I.  Spiritual. 
He  must  be  '*  converted  "  on  the  conditions  of  repentance  and  faith.  II.  He  must 
be  intelligent.  Must  know  the  Scriptures.  III.  He  must  be  tolerant  in  spirit. 
The  age  of  intolerance  is  past.  IV.  He  must  be  progressive  in  his  methods.  V. 
He  must  be  aqgbessive  in  spirit.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel 
to  every  creature."  To  go  is  to  be  aggressive.  VI.  He  must  be  liberal  with  his 
possessions.    VH.  He  must  possess  stability  op  character.     (J.  Eobinette.) 

Ver.  7.  And  the  men  who  Journeyed  -with  him  stood  speechless,  heaxlng  a  voice, 
but  seeing  no  man  (text,  and  chap.  xxii.  9) : — The  sights  and  sounds  of  life : — Here 
is  a  record  of  the  supernatural  in  the  life  of  Paul  and  his  companions.  The  fact 
that  these  phenomena  were  at  mid-day,  and  that  the  apostle's  fellow  travellers  were 
also  sensible  of  them  demonstrates  that  both  the  voice  and  the  light  were  objective 
realities.  The  slight  discrepancy  between  the  two  accounts  confirms  their  authen- 
ticity. Identity  of  statement  by  two  different  persons  after  an  interval  of  twenty- 
five  years  would  excite  suspicion.  But  it  may  fairly  be  supposed  that  aU  that  Paul 
means  is  that  they  heard  not  articulate  voice  but  mere  sound.  The  same  sound 
that  communicated  no  idea  in  the  one  case,  conveyed  a  message  from  Christ  in  the 
other.  And  the  same  light  which  revealed  nothing  to  "  the  men  "  revealed  the  Son 
of  God  to  Paul.  This  extraordinary  circumstance  indicates  what  is  common  in 
human  life.  A  voice  fraught  with  deep  meaning  to  some,  is  a  mere  empty  sound  to 
others ;  a  light  revealing  the  grandest  realities  to  some,  discloses  nothing  to  others. 
I.  Men's  lives  in  relation  to  material  nature  show  this.  1.  The  lights  of  nature 
reveal — (1)  To  the  thoughtless  multitude  nothing  but  mere  sensuous  forms — ^just 
what  they  reveal  to  the  brute.  (2)  To  the  superstitious,  unearthly  existences — 
dreaded  as  demons  or  worshipped  as  gods.  (3)  To  the  sceptical  philosopher,  nothing 
but  a  grand  system  of  well-organised  forces  working  by  its  own  inherent  impulse 
resistless  as  fate.  (4)  To  the  enlightened  Christian,  a  wise  and  loving  Father.  2. 
The  voices  of  nature,  too,  which  are  boundlessly  varied,  and  set  in  every  key,  convey 
different  impressions  to  different  minds.  (1)  Nothing  but  mere  sensation.  (2) 
Superstitious  awe.  (3)  Scientific  intelligence.  (4)  Thoughts  from  God.  H.  Men's 
LIVES  in  relation  TO  HUMAN  HISTORY  SHOW  THIS.  The  lights  and  voices  of  history 
reveal  varied  and  almost  opposite  things.  1.  To  some  it  is  without  any  governing 
law.  Its  social,  mercantile,  political  movements  are  ascribable  only  to  blind 
impulse  and  capricious  passions.  2.  To  others  it  has  only  the  governing  law  of 
human  might.  Some  explain  all  on  the  principle  that  the  strong  preys  on  the  weak. 
The  progress  and  decline  of  commerce,  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires,  the  fate  of 
battles  are  aU  ascribable  to  superior  might.  3.  To  others  it  is  governed  exclusively 
by  evil.  The  devil  is  in  the  schemes  of  the  trader,  the  thunders  of  the  orator,  the 
craft  of  the  priest,  and  shapes  the  destiny  of  the  race.  4.  To  others  it  is  governed 
by  the  mediatorial  plan  of  God.  The  restorative  purpose  of  heaven  is  seen  running 
through  the  ages.  Even  the  bitterest  sufferings  are  regarded  as  parturition  throes 
giving  birth  to  a  higher  order  of  things.  III.  Men's  lives  in  relation  to  the  inspirei> 
ORACLE  show  this.  The  Bible  has  wonderful  lights  and  sounds,  but  nothing  is 
more  true  than  that  they  differently  affect  different  men.  Ecclesiastical  history, 
theological  polemics,  as  well  as  the  religious  life  of  our  own  age,  are  fraught  with 
illustrations  of  this.  The  sceptic  and  the  believer,  the  Papist  and  the  Protestant, 
the  Socinian  and  the  Trinitarian,  the  Churchman  and  the  Nonconformist  are  strik- 
ing examples.  IV.  Men's  lives  in  relation  to  the  gospel  ministry  show  this. 
How  differently  the  same  sermon  is  regarded  by  various  members  of  the  congrega- 
tion. The  sermon  which  as  a  Divine  voice  speaks  to  the  conscience  of  some,  has 
no  meaning  to  others ;  or  which,  as  a  Divine  hght,  flashes  moral  conviction  and 
reveals  Christ  to  some,  is  either  not  seen  at  aU,  or  regarded  as  a  mere  glare  of  hunian 
genius  or  enthusiasm.  Conclusion :  This  subject — 1.  Reveals  a  distinguishing 
attribute  of  human  nature.  Men  have  the  power  of  hearing  and  seeing  with  the 
Boul.  AU  that  the  brutes  see  and  hear  terminates  in  the  region  of  sensation. 
Ezekiel,  Isaiah,  John,  our  own  Milton  show  what  men  can  see  and  hear  with  the 
organs  of  their  soul.  The  pure  in  heart  see  God.  Man,  in  one  word,  has  the  power 
of  receiving,  modifying,  and  interpreting  the  impression  the  outward  makes  upon 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix, 

him.  2.  Explains  the  great  difference  between  spiritually  and  carnally  minded 
men.  Men  are  divided  into  two  classes,  those  who  live  to  and  for  the  flesh,  and 
those  who  live  to  and  for  the  Spirit.  Why  is  this  ?  The  one  hears  and  sees  in  the 
Bounds  and  sights  of  life  what  the  other  does  not.  The  spiritual  realises  the  spiri- 
tual even  here.  3.  Presents  an  object  in  life  after  which  all  should  strive — viz.,  to 
get  the  eyes  and  ears  of  his  soul  so  quickened  as  to  see  and  hear  the  Divine  every- 
where, as  the  Lord  did  for  Ehsha's  servant.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  And  Saul  arose,  and.  .  .  .  they  led  him  by  the  hand. — Hand-led : — 
A  wonderful  change  in  the  soul  of  which  this  was  the  symbol.  I.  The  hand 
■YIELDED.  1.  Confession  of  futile  character  of  past  opposition.  Sense  of  helpless- 
ness. 2.  Trust  in  a  newly  discovered  guide.  II.  The  hand  geasped.  Soldiers 
accompany  Saul,  or  strangers  to  him ;  they  yet  repref^ented  Divine  guidance 
given  in  weakuess.  The  responsibility  of  those  who  offer  to  guide.  III.  The  hand 
KEPT — a  type  of  soul  attitude.  Continue  with  Christ.  True  progress  was  the  out- 
come of  being  led.  We  shall  be  brought  to  the  great  ends  of  life  by  being  led.  We 
shall  attain  rest.  We  need  to  gain  that  submissiveness  embodied  in  "  Lead,  kindly 
light."  {A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.)  And  was  three  days  without  sight. — Wliat  Snulfelt  in 
his  seclusion  and  saw  in  his  blindness : — Only  one  other  space  of  three  days'  duration 
can  be  mentioned  of  equal  importance.  The  conflict  of  Saul's  feelings  was  so  great 
and  his  remorse  so  piercing  that  he  could  neither  eat  nor  drink.  He  could  have  no 
communication  with  the  Christians,  for  they  had  been  terrified  by  the  news  of  hia 
approach,  and  the  Jews  could  have  no  sympathy  with  his  present  state  of  mind. 
He  fasted  and  prayed  in  silence.  The  recollections  of  his  early  years — the  passages 
of  Scripture  which  he  had  never  understood — the  thoughts  of  his  own  cruelty — the 
memory  of  the  last  looks  of  Stephen — all  these  crowded  into  his  mind,  and  made 
the  three  days  equal  to  long  years  of  repentance.  And  if  there  was  one  feeling 
which  above  all  others  kept  possession  of  his  heart  it  was  that  suggested  by  Christ's 
expostulation,  and  this  feeling  would  be  attended  with  thoughts  of  peace,  with  hope 
and  faith.  He  waited  on  God ;  and  in  his  blindness  a  vision  was  granted  unto 
him.  {Dean  Howson.)  Saul  at  Damascus : — Just  as  an  eagle  which  has  been 
drenched  and  battered  by  some  fierce  storm  will  alight  to  plume  its  ruffled  wings,  so 
when  a  great  soul  has  passed  "  through  fire  and  water,"  it  needs  some  quiet  place  in 
which  to  rest.  Like  Muses,  like  Elijah,  like  our  Lord  Himself,  like  almost  every 
great  soul  in  ancient  or  modern  times  to  whom  has  been  entrusted  the  task  of 
swaying  the  destinies  by  moulding  the  convictions  of  mankind — like  Sakya  Mouni, 
like  Mohammed  in  the  cave  at  Hii-a,  like  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  in  his  sickness,  like 
Luther  in  the  monastery  of  Erfurt,  Paul  would  need  a  quiet  period  in  which  to 
elaborate  his  thoughts,  to  still  the  tumult  of  his  emotions,  to  commune  in  secrecy 
and  silence  with  his  own  soul.  [Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  three  days^  sepulture 
for  the  inward  man : — L  The  old  must  pass  away.  1.  The  old  light  is  gone.  2. 
The  old  enjoyments  are  no  longer  palatable.  3.  The  old  activity  is  paralysed.  4. 
The  old  friends  are  away.  II.  The  new  is  quietly  peeparing.  1.  A  new  light  is 
kindling  within.  2.  A  new  salvation  is  rising  up  in  the  soul.  3.  Strength  is 
collecting  for  a  new  calling.    4.  New  friends  are  standing  at  the  door.     {K,  Gerok.) 

Vers.  10-18.  And  there  wasacertain  disciple  at  Damascus  called  Ananias. — Ananias 
ofDaviascxi* : — 1.  Most  people  have  watched  a  little  steam-tug  busily  towing  some  great 
ship  down  stream  or  out  into  the  sea.  The  tug  is  almost  extinguished  by  the  giant  hull 
that  floats  behind,  and  returns  unnoticed  into  port,  while,  observed  of  all  observers, 
the  big  ship  spreads  her  white  sails  to  the  breeze,  and,  like  a  noble  bird  upon  the 
wing,  speeds  her  silent  but  majestic  flight  across  the  waves.  The  conversion  of 
Saul,  and  the  glorious  work  which  he  achieved,  are  household  words  in  our  Chris- 
tian communities,  and  evidences  of  our  Christian  faith.  Every  one  is  familiar 
with  the  start  of  that  goodly  vessel,  with  the  voyages  it  made,  and  the  precious 
cargoes  which  it  carried.  But  that  ship  also  had  its  steam-tug,  who  appears  at  the 
crisis,  does  the  work  appointed  to  Him  and  then  vanishes.  2.  How  a  Christian 
Church  had  grown  together  at  Damascus  we  know  not ;  but  some  of  the  scattered 
disciples,  doubtless,  fled  thither  after  Stephen's  death,  and  converts  were  added 
from  among  the  native  Jews.  Thus  far  Jews  and  Christians  seem  to  have  lived 
on  peaceable  and  even  friendly  terms,  far  removed  from  the  controversies  of 
Jerusalem.  Ananias  himself  was  universally  respected.  He  was  known  as  "  a 
devout  man  according  to  the  law,"  and  "  had  a  good  report  of  all  the  Jews  which 
dwelt  in  Damascus."    Such  are  the  men  whom  our  Lord  loves  to  employ,  men  of 


«BAP.  a.]  THE  ACTS.  41 

unblemished  character,  "sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Master's  use,"  &c.  3.  It 
does  not  follow  that  Ananias  held  any  official  position  in  the  Church.  We  have 
«  perfect  right  to  consider  him  a  private  Christian,  with  no  special  gift  of  pHblic 
speech  or  pastoral  authority,  but  holding  the  warrant  which  belongs  to  all  disciples, 
to  preach  the  gospel.  Ananias's  commission  is  only  what  may  come  to  any  one 
of  us,  and  for  which  we  should  be  prepared.  True,  the  Lord  spoke  to  him  "  in  a 
vision  " ;  but  He  may  speak  with  equal  emphasis  by  the  whisper  of  His  Spirit, 
or  the  indication  of  His  providence ;  and  our  attitude,  like  his,  must  be  that  of 
the  girded  loins  and  watchful  eye — ••  Behold,  I  am  here,  Lord."  4.  The  work 
prepared  for  Ananias  is  now  unfolded  to  him.  In  the  "street  called  Straight" 
stood  a  house,  belonging  to  a  well-known  citizen,  Judas;  and  there  lies  a  blind 
man,  wanting  help,  which  Ananias  is  to  give.  The  man  is  expecting  him:  for  he 
too  has  had  a  vision  of  such  an  one  coming.  And  mark  the  motive  for  going. 
♦•Behold,  he  prayeth  "  ;  that  is  the  sight  which  attracts  the  eye  of  the  Lord,  and 
ought  to  kindle  the  zeal  of  the  disciples.  Are  you  beginning  to  pray  ?  The  ear 
of  Christ  has  caught  the  sound.  It  comes  floating  up  to  the  high  heavens, 
through  all  the  thunder  of  the  angels'  adoration,  and  the  ceaseless  murmur  of  the 
universe,  heard  as  surely  as  an  infant's  cry  reaches  the  mother's  ear  amidst  the 
bustle  of  the  house.  He  sees  you ;  and  He  will  stir  up  some  Ananias  to  come  to 
you.  5.  The  street  is  called  Straight,  the  house  is  the  house  of  Judas,  and  so  far 
all  is  plain  ;  but  the  man  in  the  house — what  is  his  name  ?  The  sound  of  his  name 
fell  like  a  thunderbolt ;  "  inquire  for  one  called  Saul  of  Tarsus."  Shall  Ananias 
put  bis  head  into  the  tiger's  mouth  ?  Shall  he  carry  the  pearl  of  the  gospel  and 
cast  it  down  at  the  feet  of  its  bitterest  calumniator  ?  "  Lord,  I  have  heard  by 
many  of  this  man,"  and  I  had  rather  have  nothing  to  do  with  him  !  How  often 
has  the  same  answer  started  to  our  lips  at  some  distasteful  call  of  duty.  But 
these  difficult  errands  are  really  our  noblest  opportunities.  "Go  thy  way," 
Ananias ;  thou  art  to  have  part  in  a  work  with  the  fame  of  which  the  world 
shall  ring  I  That  persecutor  is  "  a  chosen  vessel  unto  Me."  To  that  devout 
disciple  it  is  granted  to  take  Saul  of  Tarsus  by  the  hand,  to  introduce  him  into 
the  Church,  and  to  send  him  forth  upon  his  mission  of  self-sacrifice.  May  there 
be  no  such  honours  waiting  for  us  ?  John  Bunyan  was  first  enlightened  by  the 
simple  Christian  talk  of  some  poor  women,  spinning  on  the  summer's  evening 
at  their  cottage  doors.  Sir  Hope  Grant  is  said  to  have  been  brought  out  of  utter 
indifference  by  overhearing  a  group  of  private  soldiers  at  prayer.  The  mouse  lets 
loose  the  lion.  Only  let  us  cultivate  simplicity  and  faith,  and  yield  a  prompt 
obedience  to  the  call  of  duty,  and  to  us  too  may  fall  some  glorious  trophy  of  Divine 
favour.  6.  Brave  believer  as  he  was,  Ananias  reached  the  house,  and  found  the 
man.  He  seems  like  some  skilful  and  friendly  physician  in  his  treatment  of  the 
difficult  case,  and  shows  us  how  to  deal  with  the  inquiring.  (1)  Before  him  Ues  the 
man  whose  hands  have  been  imbrued  in  Christian  blood.  He  would  have  had 
Ananias  himself  in  prison  before  now,  if  he  had  not  been  hindered.  But  it  is  all 
forgotten  and  forgiven.  Friendly  hands  are  laid  on  those  blind  eyes,  and  a  voice, 
full  of  pathos  and  pity,  says,  "  Brother  Saul  1 "  The  salutation  with  which  one 
Christian  was  wont  to  salute  another — breathing  so  different  a  spirit  from  rigid 
Pharisaism.  It  seemed  to  take  in  the  poor  forlorn  sinner  to  a  family  fireside,  with 
its  warmth  and  light.  If  we  want  to  do  men  good,  they  must  be  our  "  brothers." 
Never  stand,  like  some  old  pillar-saint,  on  your  high  pedestal  of  virtue,  and  talk 
down  to  the  people  at  your  feet.  Go  and  sit  at  their  side  ;  put  your  hands  on  them  ; 
make  them  feel  at  home  with  you ;  and  even  if  you  have  to  do  with  the  most 
wicked,  speak  to  him  as  man  to  man,  on  the  common  footing  of  the  love  of  God. 
(2)  There,  is  moreover,  a  cheerful  assurance  in  the  tone  which  Ananias  takes.  He 
might  have  come  to  that  chief  of  sinners  with  stern  words  of  condemnation.  He 
comes  with  words  of  hope  and  with  acts  of  blessing.  The  falling  of  the  scales  from 
Saul's  eyes  was  but  a  symbol  of  the  spiritual  enlightenment  which  Ananias  was  per- 
mitted to  bring  to  his  benighted  soul.  7.  What  a  commission  we  Christians  have 
and  with  what  alacrity  should  it  be  done  I  Happy  must  be  the  surgeon  who 
■with  delicate  skiU  can  give  sight  back  to  the  blinded  eye,  and  bid  it  look  out  once 
more  on  sky  and  earth,  and  springing  flowers,  and  human  faces.  But  higher  and 
happier  still  the  calhng  of  the  disciple,  who  may  send  forth  a  brother  man  rejoic- 
ing on  his  pilgrimage  to  the  eternal  sunshine  of  heaven.  8.  Nor  does  Ananias 
reckon  his  task  yet  complete.  We  preach  the  gospel  to  men,  and  then  too  often  let 
them  go.  It  matters  much  to  a  young  disciple  that  he  should  be  clearly  told  what 
io  do  neztk    And  now  to  Saul's  eager  inquiry,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  ta 


43  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  ix. 

do  ?  "  comes  the  appropriate  answer,  "  Arise  and  be  baptized,"  and  then,  '•  join 
thyself  to  the  disciples."  Was  it  not  a  joyful  day  when  Ananias  entered  the  Chris- 
tian assembly,  leading  by  the  hand  that  changed  and  humbled  man,  and  witnessed 
the  good  profession  which  he  made  ?  And  have  you  been  the  means  of  guiding  a 
soul  to  Christ  ?  That  is  good  ;  but  now  complete  your  work.  Bring  your  friend 
into  the  Church,  among  fellow  Christians,  whose  experience  may  instruct  and  edify 
him,  and  with  whom  he  may  find  a  spiritual  home.  (W.  Brock,  jun.)  The  good 
Ananias  :  a  lesson  for  believers: — I.  The  man.  1.  He  was  simply  a  private  person. 
He  is  not  described  as  pastor,  or  evangelist,  or  deacon :  yet  he  was  the  cbannel  for 
communicating  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  great  apostle.  The  Lord  did  not  send  to 
Paul  an  apostle,  lest  any  should  have  said  that  Paul  received  his  commission  at 
second-hand  from  those  already  in  office.  I  see  in  many  of  you  special  quahfica- 
tions  for  certain  uses,  which  your  being  church  officers  or  preachers  might  take 
from  you.  2.  He  was  a  disciple.  He  sat  at  Jesus'  feet  and  learned  of  Him,  and 
therefore  was  ready  to  instruct  Saul.  How  can  you  teach  others  that  which  Christ 
does  not  teach  you  ?  3.  He  was  "  a  devout  man  "  (chap.  xxii.  12).  Nowadays  we 
greatly  need  more  devout  men,  men  of  prayer,  devoted  men  :  for  the  strength  of  the 
spirit  of  man  lies  in  fellowship  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  he  that  has  power  with 
God  will  not  fail  to  have  power  with  men.  4.  He  had  "  a  good  report  of  all  the 
Jews  which  dwell  in  Damascus."  They  hated  Christians,  but  they  could  not  help 
respecting  this  devout  man.  The  world  had  then,  as  it  still  has,  a  respect  for  those 
who  walk  with  God.  If  we  are  to  be  useful  to  our  fellow-men  we  must  deserve  their 
esteem.  6.  He  was  thoughtful  for  the  Church  of  God.  He  was  grieved  at  the 
afflictions  of  the  saints  in  Jerusalem,  and  he  feared  for  his  brethren  in  Damascus. 
He  is  the  first  to  call  Christians  "  saints,"  or  holy  ones.  He  had  evidently  noticed 
with  delight  this  poiut  of  their  character.  All  the  servants  of  God  should  take  an 
interest  in  the  condition  of  the  Church.  It  is  one  mark  that  a  man  is  right  toward* 
God  when  he  is  right  towards  the  family  of  God.  II.  His  postdre.  He  was  familiar 
with  the  Old  Testament,  and  remembered  how  the  Lord  said,  "  Abraham,"  and  the 
patriarch  answered,  "  Here  am  I,"  and  how  Samuel  and  Isaiah  said  the  same.  Did 
not  this  indicate  that — 1.  His  heart  was  responsive  to  the  Divine  voice  ?  God 
speaks  to  us  many  times  and  gets  no  answer.  Happy  is  he  who  can  say  with  David, 
"  When  Thou  saidst.  Seek  ye  My  face,"  &c.  If  there  be  a  call  to  duty,  or  a  prompt- 
ing to  sacrifice,  does  your  spirit  say  at  once,  "Here  am  I  "  ?  2.  He  was  ready.  He 
did  not  ask,  "What  for?"  but  "Here  am  I,"  ready  for  anything.  Are  we  free  from 
reservations  ?  Whatsoever  the  Lord  saith  to  us,  are  we  prepared  to  do  it  7  What 
drawbacks  there  often  are !  But  blessed  is  that  man  who  says  "  Keady,  aye  ready  1 " 
3.  He  was  all  there.  "  Ananias."  "  Here  am  I."  In  prayer,  in  singing,  how  often 
it  happens  that  the  mind  is  wandering — we  are  not  there.  There  is  such  a  thing  as 
preaching,  and  doing  service  for  God  with  a  portion  of  yourself.  I  often  see  upon 
a  sunny  wall  a  chrysalis,  and  when  I  go  to  take  it  down,  I  find  that  the  summer's 
sun  has  shone  upon  it  and  the  insect  has  developed,  and  left  nothing  but  an  empty 
case  behind.  How  often  in  the  pew  we  find  the  chrysalis  of  a  man,  but  where  is 
the  man  ?  Wait  till  to-morrow  morning,  and  see  him  in  his  shop ;  there  is  the  man  ; 
or,  to  follow  up  the  figure,  there  is  the  butterfly.  But  if  ever  a  man  ought  to  be  all 
there,  it  is  when  he  is  called  to  the  service  of  God.  He  should  marshal  all  his 
faculties,  and  every  faculty  should  reply,  "  Here  am  I."  The  whole  of  a  living  man 
is  something  worth  having,  but  a  fragment  is  only  fit  to  be  buried.  IH.  Hia  dibeo- 
TioN.  When  he  had  thus  said,  "  Here  am  1 1 "'  the  Lord  gave  him  his  orders  in 
detail.  I  do  not  say  that  the  Lord  wiU  give  us  orders  verbally,  and  I  would  have 
you  not  mistake  your  own  whims  for  God's  voice  ;  but  I  do  say  believe  that  God's 
voice  is  calling  you  to  that  service  which  providence  places  in  your  way.  God  still 
guides  His  servants  when  they  are  willing  to  be  guided.  Anauias  had  his  orders  as 
to — 1.  Where  he  should  go.  The  Lord  knows  the  street  and  house  where  the  sinner 
lives  who  is  to  be  blessed  by  you.  Only  wait  upon  Him,  and  if  you  go  in  BQs  name 
He  will  take  care  that  you  are  not  sent  to  the  wrong  person.  2.  To  whom  he  wa» 
to  go.  The  Lord  knows  the  individual  whom  you  are  to  bless,  and  all  about  him. 
Though  you  have  no  verbal  directions,  yet  the  person  who  falls  in  your  way,  if  yoo 
will  but  seek  to  do  God's  work  to  him,  will  turn  out  to  be  the  person  whom  God 
intends  you  to  bless.  3.  When  to  go.  Perhaps  he  had  not  yet  left  his  bed,  for  it 
was  a  vision  of  the  night ;  but  he  was  to  "  Arise  and  go."  God's  errands  are  so 
important  that  we  must  not  delay  their  performance.  Why  he  was  to  go.  Because 
the  Master  was  there  already.  God  had  inspired  the  prayer  of  the  bhnded  perse- 
cutor, and  now  he  was  about  to  answer  it  by  Ananias.    Where  God  has  ploughed 


OHAP.  iz.]  THE  ACTS.  4S 

we  are  to  sow.  Of  that  preparation  you  know  but  little,  but  your  own  duty  is  clear 
enough.  5.  What  he  was  to  do  when  he  found  Saul ;  he  was  to  lay  his  hand  on 
him.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  the  touch  of  an  earnest  man.  If  you  stand  half  a 
mile  off  from  a  man,  and  throw  the  gospel  at  him,  you  will  miss  him  ;  but  if  you 
go  close  to  him,  and  lay  hold  upon  him,  and  show  that  you  have  an  affection  for 
him,  you  will,  by  God's  blessing,  lead  him  in  the  right  way.  IV.  His  mFFiouLTiEs. 
These  were — 1.  Very  natural.  There  is  a  promise  that  the  leopard  shall  lie  down 
with  the  kid,  but  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  kid  should  at  first  shrink  from  the 
monster  ;  and  so  this  simple-minded  man  was  startled  at  the  idea  that  he  was  to 
visit  the  malicious  man  who  had  sought  the  lives  of  Christians.  2.  Were  such  that 
he  could  tell  the  Lord  about  them  ;  and  whenever  you  feel  any  difficulty,  if  you  can 
lay  it  before  the  Lord  in  prayer,  there  may  be  unbelief  in  it,  but  there  will  be  no 
wilful  sin  in  it.  3.  Unfounded.  If  he  had  thought  for  a  minute  he  would  have 
concluded  that  if  Saul  prayed  he  must  have  ceased  to  persecute.  Do  we  not  lose 
opportunities  of  doing  good  by  dwelling  too  much  upon  the  past  characters  of  those 
to  whom  we  are  sent  ?  Utterly  hopeless  people  are  often  the  most  hopeful  when  we 
have  faith  enough  to  approach  them.  Be  hopeful  that  He  who  placed  this  sinner 
in  your  way  and  you  in  the  sinner's  way  has  designs  of  love  which  are  about  to  be 
aceomplisbed.  V.  His  comfort.  The  Lord  reassured  His  servant  by  reminding 
him — 1.  Of  the  doctrine  of  election.  "  He  is  a  chosen  vessel  unto  Me."  Here  was 
one  whom  God  had  chosen  to  bless,  though  Ananias  knew  it  not.  2.  That  He  had 
chosen  this  man  to  a  great  purpose.  "  To  bear  My  name  among  the  Gentiles."  A 
great  sinner  is  to  be  made  a  great  saint.  A  great  opposer  is  to  become  a  great 
labourer.  Who  knows  how  largely  God  may  use  the  sinner  whom  we  seek  to  save  ? 
You  teachers  may  be  teaching  Lathers  or  Melancthons,  holy  men  and  women  who 
shall  serve  the  Lord  abundantly.  3.  That  He  would  go  with  him — ••  For  I  will 
show  him,"  &c.  You  are  bidden  to  teach  an  individual  and  you  fear  that  you  have 
no  strength,  and,  therefore,  you  cry,  "  Lord,  I  cannot  show  this  man  the  truth." 
The  Lord  replies,  "I  will  show  him."  VI.  His  obedience.  It  was — 1.  Prompt. 
He  went  his  way  with  all  speed.  2.  Exact :  he  entered  into  the  house,  and,  putting 
his  hands  on  him,  said,  "  Brother  Saul."  He  did  as  he  had  been  bidden.  And  if 
I  deliver  my  Lord's  message  just  as  He  gave  it  to  me,  then  my  Lord  is  responsible 
for  the  success  of  it,  and  not  myself.  3.  Loving.  "  Brother  Saul."  You  cannot 
win  souls  by  putting  on  a  morose  countenance.  Do  not  be  afraid  to  call  the  indi- 
vidual •♦  Brother  "  ;  but  take  care  that  you  mean  it.  Ananias  did  not  use  the  term 
as  a  cant  expression,  but  his  spirit  and  feeling  were  brotherly.  4.  Wise.  He  did 
not  pompously  say,  '•  I  am  an  ordained  official,  and  therefore  speak  with  authority  "  ; 
but  "  The  Lord,  even  Jesus,  that  appeared,"  &c.  When  he  alludes  to  Paul's  former 
course,  he  only  gives  a  hint  of  it — "  the  Lord  that  appeared  to  thee."  He  does  not 
say,  '•  as  thou  earnest  to  persecute  us,"  but  he  allowed  conscience  to  do  its  own  work. 
He  gives  the  items  of  his  errand — "  that  thou  mightest  receive  thy  sight  and  be  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost."  5.  Faithful.  "  Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away  thy 
sins."  The  tendency  with  many  is  to  say  nothing  upon  that  point.  VII.  Thb 
BESUiiTS.  They  were — 1.  Immediate ;  for  Paul  received  his  sight,  was  comforted 
and  baptized  at  once.  2.  Extensive ;  for  this  Paul  became  a  preacher  of  the  gospel 
to  every  land.  Go  ye,  then,  wherever  God  sends  you.  Everybody  is  not  a  Paul, 
but  yet  you  may  find  a  Paul  among  your  converts.  The  pearl  fisher  plunges  into 
the  sea  ;  he  does  not  know  whether  or  no  he  shall  bring  up  a  pearl  that  will  decorate 
an  emperor's  diadem,  but  he  searches  the  deeps  in  that  hope.  No  matter  though 
the  fisherman  himself  may  be  coarse  and  rugged,  yet  he  may  light  upon  a  priceless 
pearl.  And  you,  whoever  you  may  be,  plunge  into  your  work  with  whole-hearted 
devotion,  and  you  shall  yet  discover  some  hidden  jewel  which  shall  adorn  Immanuel'a 
diadem.    {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  11.  And  the  Lord  said  tinto  him.  Arise,  and  go  into  the  street  wMcIi  is  called 

Straight. — Straight  street  is  distinguished — I.  As  the  temporaby  abode  of  a  be- 
MABKABLE  STRANGER.  •'One  Saul  of  Tajsus."  1.  Eemarkable  for  intellectual  abihty. 
2.  For  prodigious  force  of  character.  3.  For  undivided  concentration  of  purpose. 
4.  For  conscientious  religious  conviction.  5.  For  tragic  success  in  persecution.  6. 
For  startling  change  of  career.  II.  As  a  locality  visited  by  a  Divine  messenger. 
"  And  the  Lord  said  unto  him.  Arise,  and  go,"  &c.  That  Heaven — 1.  Is  intimately 
acquainted  with  the  homes  of  the  good.  2.  Sometimes  utilises  the  homes  of  the 
good  for  its  own  purpose.  3.  Invariably  immortalises  such  occasions  by  the  Divine 
presence    III.  As  ths  sgenb  or  thb  greatest  conversion.    "  Behold,  he  prayeth." 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

The  conversion  was — 1.  Unexpected  in  its  occurrence.  2.  Miraculous  in  its  agency. 
3.  Bitter  in  its  experience.  4.  Prolonged  in  its  process.  5.  Unique  in  its  purpose.  6. 
World-wide  in  its  results.  This  one  conversion  was  a  universal  revival.  (JB.  Z).  Johns.) 
The  dwellers  in  "  the  street  called  Straight  "  ; — I  am  afraid  that  if  Ananias  had  been 
Bent  to  that  street  to  inquire  for  some  of  us  he  would  not  have  found  us  living  there. 
This  street  is  a  very  interesting  one,  because — 1.  The  people  who  live  in  it  are 
honest,  and  would  not  do  a  dishonourable  thing  for  all  that  you  could  give  them. 
Thus  there  are  many  people  who  do  not  think  «♦  worth  their  while  to  live  in  that 
street,  still  less  do  they  think  that  any  one  can  succeed  in  business  there,  as  they 
will  have  to  compete  with  people  who  live  in  other  streets,  and  who  will  do  very 
unworthy  things  for  the  sake  of  gain.  Thus  they  think  they  are  bound  to  do  some 
crooked  things  or  they  will  be  driven  out  of  house  and  home  by  competition.  And 
80  there  are  many  people  who  refuse  to  live  in  "  the  street  called  Straight,"  because 
it  has  no  "  Lying  Corner  "  or  "  Cheating  Alley."  But  we  must  remember  that  the 
only  sense  in  which  we  can  be  rich  is  not  having  a  lot  of  money  to  our  credit  in  the 
bank.  The  richest  man  after  all  is  the  man  who  has  got  a  good  name,  which  can- 
not be  bought  for  money  ;  so  that  if  a  man  loses  occasionally  in  pounds,  shillings, 
and  pence  by  living  in  •'  the  street  called  Straight,"  he  gains  in  having  a  nobler 
spirit,  a  finer  character,  and  a  more  beautiful  life.  2.  The  people  who  hve  in  "  the 
street  called  Straight "  are  truthful.  They  will  not  tell  a  lie  on  any  account,  even 
if  it  gets  them  out  of  a  difiSculty.  Now,  I  wonder  how  many  of  you  children  live 
in  this  street?  3.  Those  who  live  in  "  the  street  called  Straight  "  are  self-denying. 
They  will  gladly  do  a  kindness,  if  by  so  doing  they  can  help  their  neighbour.  Ah, 
there  is  wonderful  neighbourliness  in  this  street.  4.  Those  who  live  in  this  street 
keep  everything  very  clean.  They  sometimes  may  be  mistaken,  but  they  are  very 
pure  in  their  motives.      (D.  Davies.)  Enquire  in  the  house  of  Judas  for 

one  called  Saul,  of  Tarsus :  for,  behold,  he  prayeth. — Behold  he  prayeth : — 
These  words  are  the  hall-mark  of  genuine  conversion.  "Behold,  he  prayeth" 
is  a  surer  witness  of  a  man's  conversion  than,  "Behold,  he  singe th,  or, 
readeth  the  Scripture,  or,  preacheth."  These  things  may  be  admirably 
done  by  men  who  are  not  regenerate;  but  if  a  man  really  prays,  we  may 
know  that  he  has  passed  from  death  unto  life.  Prayer  is  the  autograph  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  upon  the  renewed  heart.  Hence  the  Lord  gave  to  Ananias  his  sure 
indication  that  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  a  converted  man,  by  saying  to  him,  "Behold,  he 
prayeth."  In  Saul's  case,  this  indication  was  very  specially  remarkable :  "  Behold, 
he  prayeth  "  had  a  peculiar  meaning  in  relation  to  this  converted  Pharisee.  I  shall 
have  to  show  you  this  at  length.  It  was  thought  a  great  wonder  that  King  Saul,  of 
the  Old  Testament,  prophesied.  So  unexpected  and  singular  was  the  event  that  it 
became  a  proverb:  "Is  Saul  also  among  the  prophets?"  But  it  was  an  equal 
marvel  when  this  more  modern  Saul  was  seen  to  pray.  Is  Saul  of  Tarsus  among 
those  who  pray  to  Jesus  for  mercy  ?  The  Lord  from  heaven  Himself  mentions  it 
as  a  prodigy,  he  points  to  it  as  a  thing  to  be  beheld  and  wondered  at,  for  He  saya 
to  His  servant  Ananias,  "Behold,  he  prayeth."  This  expression  concerning  Saul 
of  Tarsus  is  remarkable,  for — I.  It  implies  that  hb  had  never  prayed  beforb. 
This  is  very  striking,  for  Saul  was  a  Pharisee,  and  therefore  a  man  who  habitually 
repeated  prayers  ;  but  He  who  searcheth  the  hearts,  and  knew  what  prayer  is,  here 
declares  that  now  at  length  he  begins  to  pray.  What  his  friends  would  have  pot 
down  as  a  great  mass  of  prayer,  the  Lord  makes  nothing  of.  I  want  to  push  this 
fact  home  upon  those  who  in  a  formal  manner  have  always  prayed  and  yet  have 
never  spiritually  prayed.  1.  Eeal  prayer  must  be  spiritual ;  and  Saul's  prayers  had 
not  been  such  before.  Words  are  but  the  body  of  devotion  :  the  confession  of  sin, 
the  longing  for  mercy,  these  are  the  spirit  of  prayer.  A  man  may  have  repeated 
the  choicest  words,  and  yet  not  have  prayed  at  all.  A  man  may  utter  no  word 
whatever,  and  he  may  be  praying  most  effectually,  as  Moses  and  Hannah.  Any- 
how, that  prayer  which  is  not  spiritual  is  not  prayer  ;  for  "  God  is  a  Spirit :  and 
they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  If  the  spirit 
does  not  commune  with  God,  there  may  have  been  music  and  oratory,  but  there  has 
been  no  prayer.  2.  Saul  had  never  offered  prayer  of  the  kind  which  the  Lord  can 
accept.  He  knew  the  letter  of  the  truth  according  to  the  ceremonial  law  ;  but  he 
did  not  know  the  spirit  of  it  as  it  is  embodied  in  Jesus.  He  had  been  going  about 
to  establish  his  own  righteousness,  but  he  had  not  submitted  himself  to  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ ;  and  therefore  in  his  prayer  he  had  not  been  traversing  the  road 
which  led  to  the  heart  of  God.  If  you  employ  a  servant  to  do  a  work,  and  he  per- 
sists in  doing  another  thing,  however  industriously  he  works,  he  will  receive  nothing 


CHAP,  iz.]  THE  ACTS.  45 

at  your  hands.  So  if  you  pray  in  a  way  which  God  has  never  ordained,  you  will 
not  receive  anything  of  the  Lord.  3.  Saul  had  never  made  mention  of  the  name  of 
Jesus.  There  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must 
be  saved ;  there  is  none  other  name  by  which  we  can  hopefully  approach  the  mercy- 
seat.  Saul  had  rejected  that  name,  and  had  come  in  his  own.  4.  Eeal  prayer 
cannot  come  from  men  whose  characters  are  contrary  to  the  mind  of  God.  Their 
lives  have  effectually  pleaded  against  their  hps.  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  opposed  to  the 
Son  of  God  ;  how  could  he  be  in  favour  with  God  Himself  ?  If  we  set  ourselves  in 
opposition  to  His  gospel,  while  we  pretend  to  be  knocking  at  heaven's  gate  we  are 
turning  the  key  against  ourselves.  Saul  had  been  a  persecutor,  and  how  can  a 
persecutor  pray  ?  If  you  have  the  spirit  of  hate  in  you,  it  nullifies  your  devotions ; 
for  prayer  ought  to  be  the  flower  and  crown  of  love.  Friend,  if  you  are  living  an 
ungodly  life,  I  do  not  care  how  regularly  you  bend  your  knee  in  seeming  devotion, 
there  is  nothing  in  it.  5.  Saul  with  all  his  prayers  had  never  truly  prayed,  because 
humility  was  absent  from  his  devotions.  His  prayer  was  the  expression  of  thank- 
fulness that  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,  as  touching  the  law 
blameless.  In  the  courts  above,  where  outward  appearances  are  nothing,  and  God 
looketh  at  the  heart,  his  pious  harangues  were  not  reckoned  to  be  prayers  at  aU. 
n.  It  is  implied  that  it  was  a  bemabkable  thing  fob  buch  a  peeson  now  to  prat. 
*•  Behold,  he  prayeth  1 "  It  is  a  very  diflficnlt  and  marvellous  thing  for  a  man  truly 
to  pray  who  has  been  all  his  lifetime  praying  in  a  false  way.  It  is  a  miracle  of 
grace  to  bring  a  proud  Pharisee  to  plead  for  mercy  like  a  penitent  publican.  It  is 
not  half  so  wonderful  that  an  irreligious  man  should  begin  to  pray  as  that  a  vain- 
glorious professor  should  begin  to  pray ;  because — 1.  He  has  been  a  formalist  for 
so  long,  and  so  rooted  in  the  habit  of  formal  devotion,  and  so  contented  with  it.  It 
is  easier  to  attend  a  thousand  masses,  or  to  go  to  church  every  day  in  the  week, 
than  to  offer  one  true  prayer.  2.  Of  self -righteousness.  In  Christ's  day,  the  publi- 
cans and  harlots  entered  the  kingdom  before  the  Pharisees.  It  is  a  great  thing  to 
conquer  sinful  self,  but  it  is  a  greater  thing  to  overcome  righteous  self.  The  man 
who  is  downright  bad  and  feels  it,  asks  for  mercy ;  but  these  people  are  bad  at 
heart,  and  do  not  feel  it :  therefore  they  wiU  not  seek  the  Lord.  3.  Of  prejudice. 
He  has  made  up  his  mind  that  he  will  not  see  the  light  of  God,  because  he  believes 
in  his  own  light.  4.  Even  religious  fervour  may  become  a  hindrance  when  that 
ardour  is  for  a  false  faith.  The  earnest  formahst  is  cased  in  steel,  and  the  arrows 
of  the  gospel  glance  from  him.  III.  It  is  DmNELY  declabed  that  he  did  prat. 
One  would  have  liked  to  have  heard  him.  See  him  now  1  This  fine,  good  man  I 
How  humble  he  is  I  1.  His  prayers  began  with  a  full  and  grievous  confession  o£ 
sin.  He  offered  neither  excuse  nor  extenuation,  except  "  I  did  it  ignorantly,  in  un- 
belief. "  2.  Now  you  will  find  him  acknowledging  his  great  need — a  new  heart  and 
a  right  spirit.  3.  I  think  I  can  see  mingled  with  that  prayer  the  lowliest  adoration. 
How  he  would  worship  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  his  God  now  that  he  was  conquered  by 
Him  1  4.  Consider  what  pleas  he  had.  Pleading  is  the  truest  and  strongest  part 
of  prayer.  Assuredly  he  urged  the  promises,  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way," 
Ac,  "  Come,  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,"  &a.  "  Deliver  me  from  bloodguilti- 
ness,  O  God."  How  the  fifty-third  of  Isaiah  must  have  flashed  in  on  his 
mind  1  5.  And  all  this  must  have  been  steeped  in  a  wonderful  fervour.  Before, 
you  might  have  said  to  yourself,  "  He  is  saying  his  prayers,"  but  this  time  it  was 
as  when  a  man  wrestleth  for  his  life.  IV.  It  is  evident  that  the  Loed  accepted 
HIS  pratee.  I  know  it  from  the  text,  because — 1.  God  bore  witness  that  he  did  pray. 
2.  He  was  about  to  answer  the  prayer.  He  had  Ananias  in  readiness  to  go  and 
comfort  the  poor  blinded  penitent.  God  is  about  to  answer  your  prayer  if  you  have 
cried  to  Him.  Perhaps  the  man  is  present  who  will  speak  to  you.  3.  He  called 
attention  to  it  by  a  "  Behold."  We  have  heard  of  many  marvels  concerning  which 
men  cry,  "  Behold  "  ;  but  that  which  strikes  God  most  is  a  sinner  praying.  God 
does  not  say,  "Behold  Herod  on  his  throne,"  or  "Behold  Caesar  in  his  palace." 
Conclusion :  I  am  afraid  there  are  many  of  whom  it  would  have  to  be  said,  "  Behold, 
he  never  prays  1  "  What  a  sight — a  man  created  by  his  Maker,  and  daily  fed  by 
His  bounty,  who  never  worships  Him  1  And  yet  when  he  does  pray,  God  makes  a 
wonder  of  it.  It  is  his  first  prayer  this  morning.  He  has  reached  home  and  is 
kneehng  by  the  side  of  that  bed  on  which  he  has  slept  so  often  without  prayer,  and 
he  cries,  "  0  God,  I  do  not  kEW)w  what  to  say,  but  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,  and 
forgive  my  sins."  I  hear  the  rustling  wings  of  angels  as  they  gather  around  the 
sacred  spot.  Anon  they  fly  upward,  crying,  "Behold  he  prayeth."  Years  pass  on, 
joung  man,  and  you  come  to  middle  Ufe  and  are  exposed  to  sharp  temptation. 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Good  spirits  watch  yoa.  You  remember  that  day  when  you  first  prayed  ;  and  you 
go  upstairs,  and  say,  "  Lord,  many  days  have  passed  since,  and  I  have  not  ceased  to 
cry ;  but  now  I  am  in  special  trouble.  I  beseech  Thee,  deUver  me  !  "  And  angels  sing 
and  the  devils  mutter,  "  Bebold,  he  prayeth."  The  young  man  has  grown  old,  and 
has  gone  up  to  the  same  room  for  the  last  time.  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  Prayer, 
which  has  long  been  his  vital  breath  and  native  air,  is  now  "  His  watchword  at  the 
gates  of  death,"  &c.  The  shining  ones  gladly  meet  the  soul  that  is  on  Jordan's 
bank  when  they  hear  the  voice,  "Behold,  he  prayeth."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Saul  praying  : — Notice— I.  The  Person  who  speaks — "  The  Lord."  1.  He  whom 
Peter  preached.  2.  He  whom  Stephen  saw.  3.  He  whom  Saul  heard.  4.  He 
whom  Ananias  served.  II.  The  person  spoken  of — "  Saul."  1.  A  native  of 
Tarsus.  2.  A  persecutor  of  the  Church.  3.  A  sinner  arrested.  4.  A  penitent 
converted.  III.  The  act  described — "Prayeth."  1.  It  was  becoming.  2.  It  was 
necessary.  3.  It  was  beneficial.  4.  It  was  exemplary.  IV.  The  attention 
DEMANDED — "  Bshold."  1.  What  grace  has  done.  2.  What  grace  can  do.  3. 
What  grace  must  do.  4.  What  grace  leads  to.  {A.  Macfarlane.)  Prayer 
the  evidence  of  PauVs  conversion  : — I.  The  circumstances  which  led  Padl 
TO  PBAY.  His  understanding  was  convinced,  his  will  was  subdued,  his  heart  was 
converted,  and  his  soul  was  saved.  II.  The  character  op  Paul's  prayers.  What 
was  there  in  them  which  rendered  them  acceptable  ?  1.  The  prayers  of  a  sinner 
thus  humbled,  we  may  feel  assured,  were  offered  up  in  humiUty.  From  the  proud 
and  self-sufficient  Pharisee  he  is  transformed  into  the  humble  and  self-denying 
penitent,  "  striking  on  his  breast  and  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  2. 
And  not  only  were  his  prayers  offered  up  in  humility,  but  we  cannot  doubt  of  their 
earnestness  also.  Convinced  of  sin,  and  deeply  anxious  for  the  salvation  of  hia 
soul,  he  "  utters  strong  cries  "  in  the  hope  that  they  may  enter  into  the  ears  of  the 
Lord  of  Hosts,  and  meet  with  an  answer  of  pardon  and  peace.  3.  We  may 
naturally  conclude  that  Paul  also  prayed  in  faith,  after  the  recent  wonderful 
revelation  made  to  him.  Our  Lord  Himself,  indeed,  acknowledged  and  accepted 
his  prayer,  when  He  said,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth  I  "  Then  did  that  new  light  break 
in  upon  his  soul,  which  "  shone  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day,"  and  which 
80  wonderfully  displayed  itself  in  his  arduous  work  of  the  ministry.  III.  The 
liiQHT  IN  which  God  regarded  the  praters  of  Paul,  and  in  which  He  regards  the 
prayers  of  all  who  offer  them  up  in  the  same  spirit  that  he  did.  God  regarded  them 
as  a  mark  of  his  real  conversion,  and  as  such  approved  of  and  accepted  them. 
(J.    L.    F.    Russell,    M.A.)  Saul   of  Tarsus  praying : — We   hve  in   a  world 

of  changes.  Seedtime  and  harvest,  summer  and  winter,  &c.  Human  affairs 
are  as  variable  as  the  seasons.  But  no  changes  are  so  important  and  interesting 
as  those  of  a  moral  nature.  It  is  painful  to  see  a  fellow-creature  pro- 
ceeding from  evil  to  evil ;  but  how  pleasing  is  it  to  see  a  sinner  plucked  as  a 
brand  from  the  burning  1  To  one  of  these  remarkable  changes  we  are  referred 
in  the  text,  from  which  we  are  led  to  remark — I.  That  the  Lord  knows  where 
WE  ARE,  AND  HOW  WE  ARE  ENGAGED.  What  was  this  housc  of  Judas?  An  inn?  If 
so,  it  was  a  sad  situation  for  a  man  in  spiritual  distress ;  and  never  did  an  inn 
before  or  since  accommodate  such  a  passenger.  Perhaps  it  was  a  private  dweUing 
belonging  to  one  of  his  acquaintances.  If  so,  what  would  be  the  emotions  of  the 
family  as  he  entered  1  But  however  this  may  be,  the  Lord  knew — the  street — the 
very  house  in  which  he  was  ;  and  what  he  was  doing  there.  It  would  be  easy  to 
multiply  similar  instances,  e.g.,  that  of  Cornelius  and  Peter,  Nathanael,  Zacchteus. 
He  knew  how  to  guide  Cornelius  in  sending  to  Joppa  for  Peter.  "  The  eyes  of  the 
Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good."  Let  sinners  think  of  ii ; 
and  never  dream  of  secresy  in  their  guilt.  Let  hearers  think  of  it ;  and  remember 
that  God  is  privy  to  all  the  workings  of  their  minds  while  in  His  worship.  Let  the 
righteous  believe  this ;  and  remember  that  though  they  are  poor  and  needy,  yet  the 
Lord  thinketh  upon  them.  And,  oh  1  thou  dejected  penitent,  think  of  this  and  be 
comforted.  "To  this  man  will  I  look,"  &c.  II.  However  the  Lord  may  try 
THEM,  He  will  not  suffer  praying  souls  to  call  upon  Him  in  vain.  Saul  was 
deprived  of  sight ;  and  thus  all  his  gloomy  thoughts  were  turned  inward  upon  him- 
self, and  the  anguish  of  his  mind  was  such,  that  he  probably  could  eat  nothing.  All 
that  he  had  heard  was  this,  "  It  shall  be  told  thee  what  thou  must  do  "  :  but  this 
was  general,  and  capable  of  various  explanations.  But  says  the  Church,  "  Come, 
and  let  us  return  to  the  Lord  ...  in  the  third  day  He  will  raise  us  up,  and  we 
shall  hve  in  His  sight."  And  here  this  was  literally  accomplished.  "  I  never  said 
(o  the  seed  oi  Jacob,  Seek  ye  Me,  in  vain."    Joseph  was  a  type  of  the  Redeemer. 


«HAP.  n.]  THE  ACTS.  47 

His  behaviour  to  his  brethren  was  for  a  time  apparently  very  unkind.  But  the  trial 
was  necessary  :  and  at  length  giving  way  to  the  compassion  which  his  prudence  had 
restrained  before,  he  said,  "  I  am  Joseph  your  brother,  whom  ye  sold  into  Egypt — 
but  be  not  grieved."  Thus  Christ  leaves  Saul  three  days  without  comfort ;  but  it 
was  in  order  to  lay  deep  the  foundation  of  a  superstructure  that  was  to  rise  so  high. 
And  all  the  time  Saul  was  praying,  He  was  hearing  ;  and  longing  to  succour  and 
relieve  Him.  What  is  the  use  you  ought  to  make  of  this  ?  To  persevere.  God's 
delays  are  not  denials.  He  has  reasons  for  what  we  deem  severity,  founded  in  a 
regard  to  our  welfare.  You  cannot  be  in  a  worse  condition  than  David  was  :  but 
hear  him.  "  I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord,"  &c.  Say  not,  therefore,  "  My  hope 
is  perished  from  the  Lord — why  should  I  wait  for  Him  any  longer  ?  "  If  you  draw 
back,  you  are  sure  of  destruction  ;  but  if  you  go  forward,  you  are  certain  of  success. 
"Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you,"  <fec.  Perhaps  some  messenger  of  mercy  is  now 
on  his  way.  IH.  Though  the  Lord  can  accomplish  His  wobk  without  human  in- 
ETEUMENTALiTT,  He  IS  PLEASED  TO  MAKE  USE  OF  IT.  The  voice  from  heaven  could 
have  told  Saul  at  once  what  he  must  do — but  a  messenger  shall  be  employed.  He 
could  have  sent  an  angel — but  he  shall  learn  it  from  the  lips  of  a  man  of  like  pas- 
sions with  himself.  His  terror  would  not  make  him  afraid.  With  him  he  could 
hold  free  intercourse  and  famihar  conversation.  He  could  speak  to  him  from  his 
own  experience  ;  and  therefore  sympathise  with  him.  It  would  be  also  useful  to 
Ananias  as  well  as  to  Saul.  By  doing  good  to  others  we  benefit  ourselves.  It  cer- 
tfiinly  was  designed  to  prevent  our  undervaluing  means,  under  a  notion  of  depending 
on  Divine  agency.  Here  let  us  however  beware  of  two  extremes.  Let  us  not,  on 
the  one  hand,  overlook  instruments  in  relying  on  God ;  nor,  on  the  other,  overlook 
God  in  using  instruments.  It  is  not  the  sun  that  warms  us,  but  He  by  the  sun :  it 
is  not  food  that  sustains  us,  but  He  by  food.  "Who  then  is  Paul,  and  who  is 
Apollos,"  &c.     IV.  Things  done  in  oub  own  apprehension,  and  in  the  opinion  of 

OTHERS,  ARE  FREQUENTLT  NOTHING  IN  THE  JUDGMENT  OF  GOD.    "  Behold,  he  prayeth  !  " 

And  what  was  there  strange  or  new  in  this  ?  Was  he  not  of  the  straitest  sect  of  the 
Pharisees  ?  And  were  they  not  more  distinguished  by  their  prayers  than  by  any- 
thing else?  Yes.  Yet  Saul  had  never  prayed  tiU  now.  See  the  difference  drawn  by  an 
unerring  Judge  in  the  parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  the  publican.  V.  Prayer  is  a 
GOOD  evidence  OP  CONVERSION.  "  Go,  Auauias  ;  he  is  ready  to  receive  you.  Go,  and 
be  not  afraid  of  him — the  man  is  changed — he  is  become  a  new  creature — '  for, 
behold,  he  prayeth.' "  "  The  spirit  of  grace  "  is  always  a  spirit "  of  supplications." 
Be  it  remembered,  however,  that  this  mark  is  better  applied  exclusively  than  in- 
clusively. A  man  may  pray,  and  not  be  in  a  state  of  salvation ;  but  he  that  does 
not  pray,  cannot  be  in  a  state  of  salvation.  No  man  can  be  a  partaker  of  Divine 
grace  that  lives  without  prayer.  What  then  is  the  condition  of  many  I  (W.  Jay.) 
PauVs  first  prayer  : — Here  was — I.  An  announcement.  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  It 
was  the  announcement  of  a  fact  which  was — 1.  Noticed  in  heaven.  Saul  had  been 
led  to  cry  for  mercy,  and  the  moment  he  began  to  pray  God  began  to  hear.  See 
what  attention  God  paid  to  Saul.  He  knew  the  street  where  he  lived,  the  house 
where  he  resided ;  his  name ;  the  place  where  he  came  from,  and  that  he  had  prayed. 
God  may  not  regard  battles,  nor  care  for  the  pomp  and  pageantry  of  kings ;  but 
wherever  there  is  a  heart  big  with  sorrow,  the  ear  of  Jehovah  is  wide  open.  Poor 
sinner,  thy  prayers  are  heard.  Where  was  it — in  a  barn?  At  thy  bedside,  or  in 
this  haU  ?  There  is  one  thing  which  outstrips  the  telegraph.  "  Before  they  caU  I 
will  answer,  and  while  they  are  speaking  I  will  hear."  2.  Joyous  to  heaven.  (1) 
Our  Saviour  regarded  it  with  joy.  The  Shepherd  rejoices  more  over  that  lost  sheep 
than  over  ninety  and  nine  that  went  not  astray.  (2)  Angels  rejoiced  too.  Why, 
when  one  of  God's  elect  runs  into  sin,  angels  gaze  with  sorrow.  Presently  the  man 
is  brought  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel.  The  angels  say,  "  Behold,  he  begins  to 
hear."  At  last  he  cries  from  his  inmost  soul,  "  God  have  mercy  upon  me  I " 
The  angels  say,  "Behold,  he  prayeth."  Then  they  set  heaven's  bells  ringing; 
"  there  is  joy  among  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  (3)  There 
are  others  that  rejoice,  besides  the  angels,  our  friends  who  have  gone  before 
us,  and  our  ministers  most  of  all.  3.  Most  astonishing  to  men.  Ananias 
Ufted  up  both  his  hands  in  amazement.  Sometimes  I  look  upon  such-and-such 
individuals  and  say,  "  Well,  they  are  very  hopeful ;  I  trust  there  is  a  work  going  on." 
Soon,  perhaps,  I  miss  them  altogether ;  but  instead  thereof  my  good  Master  sends  me 
one  of  whom  I  had  no  hope — an  outcast.  Then  I  am  astonished,  "  I  should  have 
thought  of  anybody  rather  than  you."  There  was  an  old  sailor,  one  of  the  worst 
men  in  the  village.    He  came  into  the  chapel,  however,  when  one  was  preaching 


48  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

from  J«BU8  weeping  over  Jerusalem.  And  the  poor  man  thought,  "Whatl  did 
Christ  ever  weep  over  such  a  wretch  as  I  am  ?  "  He  came  to  the  minister,  and 
said,  "  Sir,  sixty  years  have  I  been  sailing  under  the  colours  of  the  devil ;  it  is  time 
I  should  have  a  new  owner ;  I  want  to  scuttle  the  old  ship ;  then  I  shall  have  a  new 
one,  and  I  shall  sail  under  the  colours  of  Immanuel."  Ever  since  that  moment 
that  man  has  been  a  praying  character.  Yet  he  was  the  very  last  man  you 
would  have  thought  of.  Somehow  God  does  choose  the  last  men.  God  is  more 
wise  than  the  chemist ;  He  not  only  refines  gold,  but  He  transmutes  base  metals 
into  precious  jewels.  The  conversion  of  Saul  was  a  strange  thing  ;  but  was  it  not 
stranger  that  you  and  I  should  have  been  Christians  ?  4.  A  novelty  to  Saul  him- 
self. All  he  had  ever  done  before  went  for  nothing.  I  have  heard  of  an  old 
gentleman  who  was  taught,  when  a  chUd,  to  pray,  '*  Pray  God  bless  my  father  and 
mother,"  and  he  kept  on  praying  the  same  thing  for  seventy  years,  when  his  parents 
were  both  dead.  After  that  it  pleased  God  to  touch  his  heart,  and  he  was  led  to  seo 
that,  notwithstanding  that  he  had  often  said  his  prayers,  he  had  never  prayed.  So 
it  was  with  Saul.  Now  comes  a  true  petition,  and  it  is  said,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth." 
There  is  a  man  trying  to  obtain  a  hearing  from  His  Maker.  He  sp«aks  Latin ;  but 
God  pays  no  attention.  Then  the  man  tries  a  different  style ;  procures  a  book,  and 
prays  the  best  old  prayer  that  could  ever  be  put  together ;  but  the  Most  High  dis- 
regards his  empty  formalities.  At  last  the  poor  creature  throws  the  book  away,  and 
says,  "  0  Lord,  hear,  for  Christ's  sake."  One  hearty  prayer  is  better  than  ten 
thousand  forms.  H.  An  aeoument.  "  For,  behold,  he  prayeth."  1.  For  Ananias' 
safety.  Ananias  was  afraid  to  go  to  Saul ;  he  thought  it  was  very  much  Uke  step- 
ing  into  a  Uon's  den.  God  says,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  "  Well,"  says  Ananias, 
"  that  is  enough."  You  may  always  trust  a  praying  man.  A  master  likes  to  have 
a  praying  servant,  if  he  does  not  regard  religion  himself.  He  who  communes  with 
God  in  secret,  may  be  trusted  in  public.  Two  gentlemen  were  travelling  together 
in  Switzerland.  Presently  they  came  into  the  forests ;  and  you  know  the  gloomy 
tales  the  people  tell  about  the  inns  there.  One  of  them,  an  infidel,  said  to  the 
other,  a  Christian,  "  I  don't  like  stopping  here,  it  is  dangerous."  But  they  went 
into  the  house,  and  presently  the  landlord  said,  "  Gentlemen,  I  always  read  and 
pray  with  my  family  before  going  to  bed  ;  will  you  allow  me  to  do  so  to-night?  " 
''Yes,"  they  said,  "with  the  greatest  pleasure."  When  they  went  upstairs,  the 
infidel  said,  "  I  am  not  at  aU  afraid  now."  "  Why  ?  "  said  the  Christian.  "  Because 
our  host  has  prayed."  "  Oh  1 "  said  the  other,  •'  then  it  seems,  after  all,  that  you 
think  something  of  religion  ;  because  a  man  prays  you  can  go  to  sleep  in  his  house." 
2.  For  Paul's  sincerity.  Secret  prayer  is  one  of  the  best  tests  of  sincere  religion. 
If  Jesus  had  said,  "  Behold,  he  preacheth,"  Ananias  would  have  said,  "  that  he  may 
do,  and  yet  be  a  deceiver."  If  He  had  said,  "  he  has  gone  to  a  meeting  of  the 
church,"  Ananias  would  have  said,  "  He  may  enter  there  as  a  wolf  in  sheep's  cloth- 
ing." But  when  He  said,  "Behold,  he  prayeth,"  that  was  argument  enough,  A 
young  person  comes  and  tells  me  about  what  he  has  felt  and  what  he  has  been 
doing.  At  last  I  say,  "  kneel  down  and  pray."  Then  I  am  a  little  more  satisfied, 
and  I  say,  "  I  did  not  mind  all  your  talk,  I  wanted  your  prayers."  But  if  I  could 
see  him  pray  alone  then  I  should  feel  sure.  3.  Of  Saul's  election,  for  you  read 
directly  afterwards,  "  Behold,  he  is  a  chosen  vessel."  Some  say,  "  How  can  I  dis- 
cover whether  I  am  God's  elect?"  Do  you  pray?  If  so,  never  be  afraid  of  non- 
election,  ni.  An  application.  1.  To  the  children  of  God.  The  best  mark  of  our 
being  sons  of  God  is  to  be  found  in  our  devotion,  and  as  a  natural  consequence  the 
more  we  are  found  in  prayer  the  brighter  will  our  evidences  be.  Perhaps  you  have 
lost  your  evidence,  and  I  will  tell  you  where,  in  your  closet.  Prayer  is  the  ship 
which  bringeth  home  the  richest  freight — the  soil  which  yields  the  most  abundant 
harvest.  2.  To  the  ungodly.  A  prayerless  soul  is  a  Christless  soul.  I  beseech  yon, 
as  you  love  yourselves,  contemplate  what  will  become  of  you  if  you  should  at  last 
die  without  prayer.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Prayer  in  not  being  able  to  pray  : — I 
went  home  from  my  church  one  Sabbath  evening,  and  a  few  days  after  a  man  and 
his  wife  who  had  not  been  accustomed  to  pray  met  me,  and  said,  "We  had  a 
wonderful  time  at  our  house  last  Sabbath  night."  I  said,  "  What  was  it  7  "  "  We 
went  home  from  church,  and  though  we  had  never  had  prayer  in  our  house,  yet  I 
called  my  family  together,  and  after  I  had  read  a  verse  or  two  (I  am  a  pretty  good 
reader)  I  could  read  no  further.     My  voice  broke,  and  then  I  stopped,  and  we  knelt 

down  and  I  began  my  prayer,  and  I  said,  •  0  God ,'  but  the  thought  that  we  had 

never  had  prayer  in  our  house  so  overwhelmed  me  that  I  could  get  on  no  further 
with  my  prayer  \  and  then  my  wife,  who  is  a  Christian  woman,  began  to  pray,  but 


CHAP,  n.]  TEE  ACTS,  49 

the  thought  that  Christ  had  at  last  come  to  our  house  had  so  OTsrwhehned  her  too, 
that  she  only  advanced  with  one  or  two  sentences,  and  we  could  not  pray,  and  there 
we  lay  on  the  floor,  and  cried  and  cried,  but  we  could  not  pray."  "  Oh,"  I  said  to 
him,  '*  my  brother  you  did  pray.  You  don't  know  what  prayer  is.  Prayer  is  the 
Bigh  of  the  heart,  for  before  even  your  first  tear  touched  the  earth,  God,  I  think, 
despatched  an  angel  from  the  throne,  and  he  thrust  his  wing  under  the  falling  tear 
and  caught  it,  and  sped  with  it  backward  towards  the  throne  of  grace ;  aad  as  that 
tear  glittered  in  the  light  of  the  celestial  throne,  aU  heaven  broke  forth  into  full 
chant,  crying,  'Behold,  he  prayeth.'"  (T.  de  Witt  Talmage.)  Unlikely  men 
praying  : — In  a  weU-known  seminary  in  New  England,  a  notice  was  placed  on  the 
outside  of  the  door  of  a  room  occupied  by  a  student.  '•  No  admittance  "  was  the 
legend  inscribed  in  bold  letters  on  the  notice.  The  occupant  of  the  room  was  not 
the  kind  of  a  man  who  would  be  likely  to  be  so  busy  with  his  studies  as  to  dread 
interruption,  and  he  was,  besides,  a  young  man  fond  of  society.  His  motive  for 
affixing  the  notice  was  a  mystery  to  most  of  the  students.  A  few,  however,  under- 
Btood  it.  A  revival  of  religion  was  in  progress  in  the  seminary,  and  some  young 
men  interested  in  it  had  agreed  together  to  visit  every  non-Christian  member  of 
the  institution  and  plead  for  Christ  personally  with  the  individual  soul.  This  young 
man  had  heard  of  the  arrangement,  and  put  up  the  notice  to  warn  off  his  expected 
visitors.  The  little  band  of  praying  students  resolved  to  test  the  virtue  of  prayer  in 
opening  the  bolted  door.  Fervently  they  committed  the  case  to  God,  entreating 
Him  not  only  to  unbar  the  door,  but  also  and  especially  to  unlock  and  take  posses- 
sion of  the  stubborn  heart  within  the  door.  And  never  can  they  forget  the  thriU  of 
wonder  and  joy  which  they  felt  when  the  message,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth  1 "  was 
announced  to  them.  While  they  were  appealing  to  God  one  of  their  number 
knocked  at  the  bolted  door,  and  to  his  great  surprise,  as  he  listexied  for  a  response, 
heard  the  most  earnest  cries  and  sobs  within.  The  Holy  Spirit  had  evidently  gained 
"  admittance  "  not  only  into  the  room,  but  into  the  far  more  strongly  bolted  heart, 
and  the  bitter  enemy  of  the  revival  was  pleading  for  mercy.  In  a  short  time  the 
door  was  opened,  the  "  Notice  "  was  removed,  thegpraying  student  was  welcomed; 
and  the  result  was,  that  in  a  day  or  two  the  enemy  joined  the  ranks  of  the  friends 
of  Christ. 

Vers.  13-16.  Then  Ananias  answered,  Lord,  I  have  heard  by  many  of  this  man. — 
An  encouraging  lesson  from  Paul's  conversion : — The  conversion  of  Saul  was  one  of 
the  most  remarkable  facts  in  Christian  history.  It  was  important  as  a  testimony 
to  the  power  and  truth  of  the  gospel ;  as  securing  for  the  Church  its  ablest  advocate, 
as  giving  a  mighty  impetus  to  Christian  missions,  and  as  securing  for  Christianity 
the  master  mind  who  formulated  its  theology  and  shaped  its  mode  of  thought  and 
action.  The  Pauline  mark  will  never  be  erased  from  the  page  of  Church  history. 
That,  however,  is  not  my  business  at  present.  I  would  rather  remind  you  of  the 
conversion  of  Paul  as  teaching  the  fact  of  the  Divine  interposition  in  the  Church. 
God  has  been  pleased  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe  ; 
and  it  is  by  the  communication  of  one  earnest  heart  to  another  that  men  are  usually 
converted.  Such,  however,  was  not  the  way  by  which  Paul  was  converted.  The 
Church  has  reason  to  beUeve  that  while  she  uses  all  the  power  committed  to  her, 
there  will  be  interpositions  of  a  power  far  higher  than  her  own,  which  will  work  for 
her  great  successes.  While  Barak  fights  below,  the  stars  in  heaven  shall  also  fight 
against  Sisera.  I.  There  are  other  productive  forces  at  work  for  the  Church 
BESIDES  HER  TEACHING.  1.  The  work  of  the  Spirit.  All  the  success  of  the  Church 
comes  through  Him,  but  have  we  not  reason  to  expect  that  the  Holy  Ghost  will 
occasionally  display  His  power,  by  working  apart  from  the  ordinary  agencies  of  the 
Church?  We  have  heard  of  persons  who  have  not  been  accustomed  to  attend  the  house 
of  God,  who  have  not  been  reading  religious  books,  and  yet  in  the  middle  of  their 
work  they  have  been  filled  with  penitent  and  devout  thoughts,  and  have  known 
cases  of  persons  intending  to  perpetrate  vice,  who  have,  nevertheless,  been  struck 
with  certain  reflections  which  they  had  never  recognised  before,  and  have 
been  led  to  become  men  of  holy  lives.  Why  should  not  the  Holy  Spirit  do 
so  still?  2.  The  intercession  of  our  Lord.  Our  Lord  prays  for  those  we 
never  thought  of  praying  for :  and  shall  there  not  come  to  them  grace  in  due 
season?  3.  The  incessant  intercession  of  the  faithful.  Of  course,  this  brings 
success  to  instrumentality,  but  there  are  prayers  which  are  offered  in  connection 
with  no  particular  agency.  They  are  like  the  clouds  which  ascend  from  the  sea,  as 
the  sun  shines  on  the  waves ;  they  fall  on  the  fields  which  have  been  sown  by  man, 
VOL.  n.  4 


CO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  ts, 

but  they  ilso  drop  upon  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness,  and  the  little  hills  rejoice 
on  every  side  Who  shall  say  that  Saul's  conversion  was  not  traceable  to  the 
prayer  of  Stephen  ?  Yet  there  was  no  distinct  connection  such  as  could  be  defined. 
Who  shall  say  that  the  gatherings  in  Jerusalem  for  prayer,  may  not  have  had  about 
them  power  with  God  for  the  conversion  of  the  persecutors?  Yet  we  do  not  see 
the  same  connecting  link  as  between  the  prayer-meeting  in  the  house  of  John 
Mark's  mother,  and  the  escape  of  Peter  from  prison.  Pray  on,  for  though  there  should 
seem  to  be  no  connection  between  your  prayers  and  the  salvation  of  the  sons  of 
men,  yet  this  shall  be  one  of  the  forces  in  operation  which  shall  not  spend  itself  in 
vain.  4.  The  aroma  of  the  truth  in  the  world.  The  truth  is  mainly  spread  by 
plain  earnest  statements  of  it,  but  there  is  also  a  savour  in  truth,  whereby  even 
in  our  silence  it  spreads  itself.  Where  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  comes,  it  impreg- 
nates the  social  atmosphere,  it  permeates  society,  it  has  an  effect  far  beyond  its 
local  habitation.  Many  men  who  have  not  yet  bowed  before  the  deity  of  Christ, 
have  unconsciously  learnt  much  from  Him,  and  what  they  think  to  be  their  own  is 
but  a  blessed  plagiarism  from  Jesus.  Even  the  philosophies  of  men  have  been  all 
the  soberer,  and  the  laws  of  men  all  the  gentler,  because  of  the  existence  of  the 
gospel.  Men  cannot  hve  in  the  midst  of  Christians,  and  yet  altogether  shut  out 
the  influence  of  Christianity.  6.  The  influence  of  Christian  life  and  of  Christian 
death.  Wherever  the  Christian  acts  up  to  his  profession,  those  who  observe  him 
take  knowledge  of  him  that  he  has  been  with  Jesus ;  and  as  example  speaks  more 
loudly  than  precept,  we  may  look  for  very  marked  results.  The  eloquence  of  Chris- 
tian holiness  is  more  potent  for  conversion  than  all  the  speaking  of  Christian 
orators.  So,  too,  when  the  ungodly  sees  a  Christian  die,  that  happy  death  will  be 
a  potent  agency  to  arouse,  to  win  the  heart  for  Christ.  6.  All  the  work  of  God  in 
providence.  I  might  truly  say  of  the  Church  that  the  stones  of  the  field  are  in  league 
with  her,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  are  at  peace  with  her,  for  all  things  work  her 
good.  Sickness,  when  it  stalketh  through  the  land,  is  a  powerful  preacher  to  the 
unthinking  masses.  When  death  has  come  into  the  house,  it  has  frequently  hap- 
pened  that  hearts  were  impressed  that  were  hard  as  iron  before.  As  God  sent  the 
hornet  before  His  conquering  Israel  to  overthrow  the  Canaanites,  so  doth  He  send 
providences  to  work  together,  for  our  help,  that  the  truth  may  prevail.  7.  Con- 
science, which  though  sadly  impaired  leans  to  the  right  side.  II.  From  thesb 
80URCE3  WE  MAT  EXPECT  REMARKABLE  CONVERSIONS.  1.  Those  who  Were  formerly 
violently  opposed  to  the  truth  through  prejudice.  Paul  was  opposed  to  Christ  not 
because  he  was  opposed  to  truth,  but  because  he  thought  that  Jesus  was  not  the 
Messiah.  Once  convinced  that  he  was  wrong,  he  followed  the  right  at  once ;  and 
we  may  hope  that  interpositions  will  occur  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  will  enlighten 
the  darkness  of  men  who  are  honest  in  their  darkness,  and  that  they,  seeing  the 
light,  will  embrace  the  gospel.  2.  Those  who  have  been  doing  much  mischief  to  the 
^ood  cause,  and  who  are  resolved  to  do  still  more  (vers.  13,  14).  Do  not  despair  of 
a  man  because  he  is  industriously  opposed.  Anytning  is  better  than  indifierence. 
3.  Those  who  are  beyond  the  reach  of  ordinary  ministries.  We  sometimes  regret 
that  the  voice  of  a  thoroughly  faithful  ministry  is  seldom  heard  in  the  courts  of 
kings  ;  but  for  all  that  the  Lord  can  reach  those  whom  we  cannot  reach ;  He  can,  in 
life  or  in  the  dying  hour,  come  to  the  hearts  of  men  whose  ears  were  never  reached 
by  any  testifier  to  the  truth.  Paul  would  not  have  heard  a  preacher  of  Christ ;  but 
the  Lord  hath  a  way  where  we  have  none.  4.  Those  who  will  be  most  earnest.  A 
man  who  feels  that  God  has  had  singular  mercy  upon  him,  feels  that  being  much 
loved,  and  having  had  much  forgiven,  he  must  render  much  service.  5.  Those 
who  will  become  profoundly  evangelical.  I  trace  Paul's  evangelism  to  the  fact  that 
he  was  so  remarkably  converted.  He  saw  in  himself  the  boundless  power,  the  infinite 
mercy,  the  absolute  sovereignty,  of  God  ;  and  therefore  he  bare  witness  more  clearly 
than  any  other  to  these  Divine  attributes.  Courage,  then,  the  noblest  minds  will 
yet  be  engaged  in  the  service  of  our  Master.  The  leaders  on  the  enemy's 
side   shall  yet   be    champions    in    our    Master's    army.     HI.    This    occasionaIi 

SINKINO    OF   INSTRUMENTALITY   ANSWERS     ADMIRABLE   ENDS.        This   might   be   thought 

to  be  a  dangerous  thing  for  the  industry  of  the  Church,  for  some  are  always 
ready  enough  to  clutch  at  excuses  for  leaving  God's  work  alone.  But  there  are 
admirable  reasons  for  the  Lord's  sole  working ;  for  these  interpositions — 1.  Dis- 
close the  presence  of  the  living  Christ.  We  too  often  forget  this,  and  yet  the  power 
of  the  Church  lies  in  Christ.  In  the  Eomish  church  its  power  over  devout  minda 
lies  in  no  small  degree  in  the  fact  that  the  person  of  Christ  is  much  loved  and  rever- 
enced ;  but  you  seldom  Bee  Christ  in  any  but  two  attitudes— as  a  babe  in  His 


<3HAP.  n.]  THE  ACTS.  61 

mother's  arms,  or  else  dead ;  scarcely  ever  is  He  set  forth  as  the  living  Lord.  That 
Church  which,  not  forgetting  His  birth,  nor  His  sacrifice,  yet  most  clearly  recog- 
nises that  He  still  liveth,  is  the  Church  that  shall  win  the  day.  2.  Kemind  us  of 
the  supernatural  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  tendency  nowadays  is  to  expunge 
the  supernatural ;  but  for  all  that  there  is  a  Holy  Spirit.  In  proportion  as  that 
truth  is  made  clear  to  the  Church  by  her  personal  experience,  the  Church  will  be 
girt  with  power  from  on  high.  3.  Unveils  many  of  the  Divine  attributes.  Men  so 
remarkably  converted  are  sure  to  display  the  sovereignty,  power,  grace,  and  long- 
suffering  of  God.  4.  Aids  very  much  the  faith  of  the  Church.  When  she  is 
beginning  to  droop  and  to  sink,  then  it  is  that  these  remarkable  conversions  come 
in  and  inspirit  the  whole  band.  5.  Startles  and  impresses  the  world.  What  knows 
the  world  of  the  conversion  of  those  who  have  sat  in  these  pews  ever  since  they 
were  children  ?  But  let  some  gross  blasphemer  or  persecutor  preach  the  faith 
which  once  he  sought  to  destroy,  and  the  whole  land  is  astonished.  IV.  All  this 
BY  NO  MK4NS  L0WEB8  THE  VALUE  OF  iNSTBUMENTALiTY.  For — 1.  Such  cases  are  rare. 
One  Saul  is  struck  to  the  earth  ;  but  Peter  preaches  at  Pentecost,  and  three  thousand 
axe  pricked  in  their  hearts.  One  Colonel  Gardner,  on  the  night  he  was  about  to 
commit  a  great  sin,  saw,  or  fancied  he  saw,  the  appearance  of  our  Lord,  and  heard 
the  words,  "  I  have  done  aU  this  for  thee,  what  hast  thou  done  for  Me  ?  " 
but  there  were  fifty  thousand  perhaps  in  Scotland  and  in  England  at  that 
time  who  were  brought  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  by  the  ordinary  methods 
of  mercy.  2.  These  cases  involve  human  agency  somewhere.  Saul  struck 
down,  but  how  does  he  get  comfort?  Does  that  come  by  another  voice  from 
heaven  ?  It  might  have  done ;  but  the  Lord  takes  care  that  the  very  instru- 
jnentality  which  is  put  aside  in  one  place  shall  be  honoured  in  another,  and  so 
Ananias  must  be  sent  forth  to  bless  the  penitent.  Conviction  may  be  wrought  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  without  means,  but  in  the  full  decision  somewhere  or  other  God 
"will  use  you.  3.  These  conversions  are  a  provision  of  a  most  remarkable  instru- 
mentality. ••  I  have  called  him  " — not  to  be  a  singular  article  for  exhibition — but 
"  to  be  a  chosen  vessel  unto  Me  to  bear  My  name  among  the  Gentiles."  Eemark- 
able  converts  become  themselves  the  most  indefatigable  servants  of  God.  {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Undue  alarm  at  evils  : — I.  We  live  in  a  day  of  bold,  aggressivb 

WICKEDNESS,  as  personal,  public,  palpable  as  that  of  Saul,  e.g.,  Sabbath  breaking, 
licentiousness,  intemperance,  infidelity,  gambling,  corrupt  literature,  &c.    U.  The 

CIVIL  AUTHORITIES    SANCTION   AND    UPHOLD    OB    FAIL    TO    SUPPRESS    THESE    CURSES,  aS    in 

the  case  of  Saul.    HI.  Like  Ananias  Chbistians  and  mobal  befoemers  are  unduly 

ALARMED  AT    THE    POWER   AND    CIVIL  AUTHOEITY  OF  THESE  EVILS.      Eight  IS  mighty  and 

will  prevail  (Eph.  vi.  10-20).  IV.  Like  Ananias  we  should  lay  aside  oub  feabs 
AND  TIMIDITY,  and,  Seeing  the  right,  go  out  and  meet  these  foes  face  to  face.  V. 
How  SHALL  WE  DO  THIS  GBEAT  woBK.  1.  By  eamcst  personal  effort  rebuking  sin. 
2.  By  combined  and  consecrated  Christian  effort.  3.  By  invoking  civil  as  well  as 
Divine  power.  Prohibition  of  wrong  is  God's  law,  and  professedly  man's  also. 
Politicians  cannot  or  will  not  save  as.     {T.  S.  Love.) 

Ver.  15.  He  Is  a  chosen  vessel  tmto  Me. — A  chosen  vessel : — I.  Its  material.  All 
the  vessels  in  your  house — the  strong  bowls,  the  fine  vases,  and  the  china  tea-cups 
— are  made  of  earth,  though  some  soils  suit  the  potter  better  than  others.  And  so 
the  whole  world  is  the  Great  Potter's  field,  and  Christ's  "  chosen  vessels  "  were  all 
at  first  of  the  earth,  earthy.  The  apostle  tells  us  that  he  was  the  chief  of  sinners, 
and  that  he  owes  all  to  the  grace  of  God.  What  hope  for  all  I  Splendid  vessels  are 
now  made  from  mere  rubbish,  broken  glass,  and  old  bones,  and  so  the  Divine 
Potter's  art  can  triumph  over  the  rudeness  of  the  most  unpromising  materials.  II. 
Its  makeb.  1.  That  beautiful  cup  is  not  self-made.  The  potter  took  the  clay, 
tempered,  moulded,  baked,  painted,  and  fired  it,  and  then  put  his  mark  upon  it. 
And  Christians  "  are  His  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus."  I  have  known  a 
boy  saying  to  his  minister,  "  Please  \vill  you  convert  me  too."  "  I  am  one  of  your 
converts,"  a  man  smelling  of  whisky  once  said  to  Rowland  HiU.  "I  can  believe  it," 
rephed  Mr.  Hill,  "you  look  very  like  my  bungling  work."  2.  In  making  chosen 
vessels,  the  potter  attends  to  the  chief  parts  of  the  work  himself ;  for  all  depends 
on  the  skill  of  the  workman.  With  his  own  hand  he  mixes  the  materials,  and  trims 
the  fire.  3.  The  potter  must  also  have  complete  power  over  the  clay,  and  travellers 
in  the  East  notice  how  thoroughly  it  is  in  his  hands.  Many  vessels  are  made  partly 
of  flint  or  granite,  but  these  rocks  have  first  been  ground  into  the  softest  powder. 
And  Christ's  chosen  vessels  are  all  fashioned  in  contrite  hearts.     Contrite  means 


SS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  i» 

robbed  together  and  made  soft,  exactly  as  stones  are  ground  into  the  softest  clay  in 
our  potteries.  And  youth  is  the  yielding  and  moulding  time  in  life.  The  world 
has  a  strange  power  of  hardening  the  soul  into  an  unbending  frame.    III.  Its  use. 

1.  None  of  Christ's  vessels  are  for  ornament  only,  they  are  all  "meet  for  the 
Master's  use."  A  great  house  has  some  choice  vessels,  preferred  for  their  size, 
strength,  or  beauty.  Such  a  vessel  was  the  apostle.  Christ's  name  was  the  water 
for  the  thirsty  and  balm  for  the  wounded,  and  Paul  was  the  vessel  in  which  that 
heavenly  treasure  was  carried  round  and  offered  to  all.  But  the  humblest  vessel 
has  its  use.  A  poor  broken  cup  may  hold  the  water  that  saves  the  life  of  a  dying 
man,  and  the  humblest  Christian  may  carry  Christ's  name  to  a  perishing  sinner. 

2.  The  vessel  of  the  heart  is  already  full,  and  must  be  emptied  ere  it  can  be  filled 
with  this  heavenly  treasure.     The  Eev.  Narayan  Sheshadri  tells  us  that  as  a  young 
Brahmin  he  was  full  of  pride  and  self-righteousness.    But  as  he  began  to  think  for 
himself  he  was  emptied  of  one  thing  after  another,  till  he  was  left  with  nothing  in 
which  he  could  trust.     Then  the  name  of  Christ  filled  his  soul,  and  he  longed  to 
bear  it  to  the  heathen  around  him  (comp.  Phil.  iii.  4-9).    3.  Again,  an  emptied 
vessel  cannot  be  filled  unless  it  be  rightly  set  and  open  a-top.    It  is  a  Chinese  say- 
ing that  "  the  light  of  heaven  cannot  shine  into  an  inverted  bowl."    Let  your  soul 
be  opened  heavenwards  widely  and  hopefully,  and  then  the  abundance  of  grace  will 
fill  and  warm  your  whole  being.     IV.  Its  beauty.     1.  Our  makers  of  vessels  strive 
to  unite  the  useful  and  the  beautiful.     Our  text  may  mean  that  Christ's  name  was 
to  be  carried  on  as  well  as  in  the  vessel,  just  as  the  costly  vases  in  palaces  bear  the 
name  and  fame  of  the  maker  before  kings.     Bernard  Palissy  once  saw  a  white 
enamelled  cup,  and  resolved  to  discover  the  secret  of  so  beautifying  vessels.     He 
spent  all  his  money  and  sixteen  years  of  his  life  in  making  the  discovery.     He  was 
often  at  death's  door,  had  burnt  all  his  furniture  for  fuel,  and  his  body  was  lean 
and  dried  up  from  hard  work.    At  last  he  made  some  of  the  chosen  vessels,  and 
these  have  borne  his  name  among  nations  and  kings  even  to  this  day.     Thus  Paul 
bore  his  Creator's  name  far  and  wide,  and  multitudes  "  glorified  God  in  him."    2. 
Christ's  vessels  are  not  all  made  in  one  mould.     Every  Christian  should  have  a 
beauty  of  his  own,  and  the  charm  of  that  beauty  lies  in  its  individuahty.     Some  of 
the  most  beautiful  of  Christ's  vessels  are  found  among  day-labourers  and  cottagers. 
Many  a  face  deformed  by  lifelong  hardship  and  disease  has  been  brightened  out- 
wardly from  inward  joy  and  goodness.     The  coarsest  features  have  often  been 
adorned  by  the  beauty  of  the  soul  within.     Such  was  the  case  of  Joan  of  Arc,  who, 
the  historian  says,  grew  beautiful  when  the  great  idea  entered  her.     3.  You  can 
hardly  believe  what  efforts  great  potters  have  made  to  add  beauty  to  their  vessels. 
A  Duke  of  Florence  spent  ten  years  in  discovering  the  way  to  make  porcelain. 
Louis  XIV.  was  so  interested  in  this  work  that,  greatest  monarch  in  Europe  as  he 
was,  he  seriously  proposed  becoming  a  potter  himself.     Many  have  reached  per- 
fection in  this  field,  and  have  ennobled  clay  as  if  by  miracle.     Their  masterpieces 
have  an  incorruptible  beauty  ;  no  Uquid  can  stain  them,  no  fire  can  blacken  them, 
no  knife  can  scratch  them.     Yet  they  are  as  smooth  to  the  touch  as  an  infant's 
flesh.     Place  a  candle  behind  them  and  they  resemble  a  fine  face  lighted  up  with 
the  best  emotions.    If  potters  have  done  so  much  for  clay,  shall  they  not  condemn 
us  if  we  do  not  earnestly  seek  to  have  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  upon  us  ?  If 
a  heathen  philosopher  reproached  a  rich  man  with  having  silver  plate  and  earthen- 
ware principles,  should  we  not  reproach  ourselves  that  we  are  so  eager  to  possess 
every  sort  of  beauty,  except  the  beauty  of  the  soul  ?     When  shall  the  *'  beauty  of 
holiness  "  find  as  passionate  admirers  as  the  beauty  of  art  ha«  in  all  our  cities  ? 
Piety  is  the  finest  art  under  heaven.     Many  there  be  who  say,  "A  thing  of  beauty 
is  a  joy  for  ever,"  yes,  this  chosen  vessel  is  a  joy  for  ever  to  its  possessor  and  to  all 
beholders  who  know  its  worth.    4.  The  secret  of  making  some  choice  vessels  has 
been  lost  because  it  died  with  the  man  who  had  it ;  but  the  seci-et  of  spiritual 
beauty  is  open  to  all.     God  is  the  Great  Beautitier,  and  He  will  perfect  what  He 
begins.     He  will  give  the  finishing  touch  to  His  chosen  vessel — perhaps  in  the 
Bacred  fires  of  affliction — and,  having  thus  perfected  its  comeliness,  He  will  place 
it  in  His  mansions  above.     {-/.  Wells,  ]\I.A.)         Vessels  chose7i,  charged,  and  used. 
— I.  A  VESSEL.     1.  The  world  is  full  of   the  instruments  which  God  employs. 
Every  flower,  leaf,  tendril  is  designed  and  fitted  for  carrying  on  some  process  in  the 
vegetable  economy.     2.  In  animals  every  mtmber  of  the  body  is  a  tool  with  which 
Creator  and  creature  alike  work.     The  eye,  ear,  tongue,  foot  hang  at  hand  in  the 
workshop  ready  for  the  worker's  use.     3.  Each  separate  paii  of  creation,  again,  is 
an  instrument  of  God.     The  internal  fires  of  the  globe  are  His  instruments  foi 


OHAP.  IX.]  THE  ACTS.  68 

heaving  np  the  moontains  and  making  the  valleys.  The  clouds  are  vessels  carrying 
water  from  the  ocean  to  every  portion  of  the  thirsty  land.  The  rivers  are  waste- 
pipes  for  carrying  back  the  soiled  water  that  it  may  be  purified  for  subsequent  use. 
The  sun  is  an  instrument  for  lighting  and  warming  a  troop  of  revolving  worlds, 
and  the  earth's  huge  bulk  a  curtain  for  screening  off  the  sunlight  at  stated 
intervals,  and  so  affording  to  weary  workers  a  grateful  night  of  rest.  4.  Chief  of 
all  implements  is  man — made  last,  made  best  for  his  Author's  service ;  broken,  dis- 
figured, and  defiled  by  sin,  but  capable  of  working  wondrously  yet,  when  redeemed. 
God  has  not  cast  away  the  best  of  all  His  instruments  because  it  was  marred  and 
polluted.  A  soul  won  is  the  best  instrument  for  winning  souls.  11.  A  chosen 
vessel.  God  can  employ  the  evil  as  His  unconscious  instruments,  or  make  them 
willing  in  the  day  of  His  power.  When  He  had  chastised  Israel  by  the  King  of 
Babylon,  He  broke  the  rod  and  threw  it  away.  In  other  cases  He  turns  the  king's 
heart  as  a  river  of  water,  and  then  accepts  the  willing  homage  of  a  converted  man. 
It  was  a  polished  and  capacious  vessel  that  the  Great  King  wrenched  from  the 
grasp  of  the  arch-enemy  near  the  gate  of  Damascus.  He  was  Christ's  chief  enemy 
in  the  world,  God  looks  down  from  heaven  on  this  man,  not  as  an  adversary 
whose  assaults  are  formidable,  but  as  an  instrument  which  may  be  turned  to 
another  use.  Arrested  at  the  crisis  of  its  course  by  a  hand  unseen,  it  is  turned  up- 
side down,  emptied,  and  then  filled  from  heaven's  pure  treasures,  and  used  to  water 
the  world  with  the  Word  of  hfe.  Saul  of  Tarsus,  called  to  be  an  apostle,  is  a  con- 
spicuous example  of  Divine  sovereignty.  He  did  not  first  choose  Christ,  but  Christ 
chose  him.  in.  A  vessel  unto  Me.  Two  things  lie  in  every  conversion  ;  the  man 
gets  an  Almighty  Saviour,  and  God  gets  a  willing  servant.  The  true  instinct  of 
the  new  creature  burst  forth  from  Paul's  breast — "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me 
to  do  ?  "  The  answer,  sent  through  Ananias,  indicated  what  he  should  be,  rather 
than  what  he  should  do :  ♦'  He  is  a  chosen  vessel  unto  Me."  We  get  a  glimpse  here 
of  the  two  tendencies,  the  human  and  the  Divine.  I  shall  do,  says  the  disciple  in 
the  ardour  of  a  first  love  ;  thou  shalt  be,  answers  that  wise  and  kind  Master,  who 
knows  that  the  spirit  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  weak.  I  shall  bear  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord,  volunteers  the  ransomed  sinner ;  the  reply  is.  Thou  shalt  be  the  vessel  of  the 
Lord.  It  is  a  great  thing  that  I  should  take  up  instruments  and  do  a  work  for 
Christ  in  the  world,  but  it  is  a  greater  that  Christ  should  work  out  His  purposes 
with  me.  This  is  our  security  aUke  for  safety  and  usefulness.  The  star  that  is  in 
His  right  hand  is  held  up  so  that  it  cannot  fall,  and  held  out  so  that  it  shines  afar. 
IV.  A  vessel  to  bbab  My  name.  Paul  was  a  vessel  firmly  put  together,  and  filled 
to  overflowing,  before  Jesns  met  him.  At  that  meeting  he  was  emptied  of  his  mis- 
cellaneous vanities,  and  filled  with  the  name  of  Christ.  See  an  account  of  the 
whole  process  by  his  own  pen  (Phil.  iii.  4r-8).  Nature  abhors  a  vacuum  ;  and  in 
nature,  whether  its  material  or  spiritual  department,  a  vacuum  is  never  found. 
Each  man  is  full  either  of  his  own  things,  or  of  Christ's.  The  name  of  Christ  is 
the  precious  thing  wherewith  the  vessel  is  charged.  So  full  was  Paul  of  this 
treasure  that  he  determined  to  know  none  other.  V.  To  bear  My  name  befork 
Gentiles,  and  kings,  and  the  people  of  Israel.  This  bread  of  hfe,  like  the  manna 
which  feU  in  the  wilderness,  is  given  to  be  used,  not  to  be  hoarded.  To  be  ever 
getting,  ever  giving,  is  the  only  way  of  keeping  both  the  vessel  and  its  treasure 
Bweet.  1.  The  form  of  the  expression  indicates  that  in  this  ministry  self-denying 
courage  is  required.  Perhaps  the  series,  in  this  respect,  constitutes  a  climax.  It  ia 
easier  to  speaik  of  Christ  to  the  Gentiles  than  to  kings,  and  to  kings  than  to  His  own 
chosen  people.  In  our  day,  too,  there  are  various  classes  who  need  the  testimony 
of  Jesus.  Those  who  possess  it  should  be  prepared  to  bear  it  about  in  every  place, 
and  hold  it  forth  in  any  company.  If  we  quail  where  the  majority  profess  to  be  on 
our  side,  what  would  have  become  of  us  if  our  lot  had  been  cast  when  its  disciples 
were  obliged  to  comfort  an  adverse  world  ?  But  perhaps  we  should  not  speak  of 
more  courage  being  required  to  maintain  a  good  confession  in  one  place,  and  less 
in  another  :  for  with  God  it  is  as  easy  to  keep  the  ocean  within  its  bed,  as  to  balance 
a  dewdrop  on  a  blade  of  grass ;  and  the  same  principle  rules  in  the  distribution  of 
grace  to  disciples  of  Christ.  Without  it  the  strongest  is  not  sufficient  for  anything, 
with  it  the  feeblest  is  sufficient  for  all.  Our  martyr  forefathers  who  were  enabled 
to  make  good  confession  at  the  stake  would,  if  left  to  themselves,  have  denied  their 
Lord  under  the  blandishments  of  a  godless  drawing-room.  Not  before  Gentilea 
and  kings,  <fec.,  are  we  summoned  to  bear  witness  for  Christ;  but  in  a  place  and 
presence  where  the  temptation  to  deny  Him  ia  equally  strong.  A  Christian  young 
man  in  a  great  workshop,  a  Christian  young  lady  in  a  gay  and  fashionable  family. 


£4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  ta. 

is  either  carried  away  like  chaff  before  the  wind,  or  stands  fast  by  a  modem  miracle 
of  grace.  2.  We  are  so  many  vessels  labelled  on  the  outside  with  the  name  of  Christy 
what  we  are  really  charged  with  may  not  be  seen  at  a  distance,  or  discovered  in  a 
day.  Those,  however,  who  stand  near  these  vessels  will  by  degrees  find  out  what 
they  contain.  By  its  occasional  overflowings,  especially  when  violently  shaken, 
the  secret  will  be  revealed.  Some  are  looking  on  who  do  not  beUeve  that  the  Spirit 
which  fills  us  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ ;  and  they  lie  in  wait  for  evidence  to  prove 
their  opinion  true.  For  their  own  sakes  let  them  find  it  false.  3.  But  an  indolent, 
earthly  selfishness,  under  pretence  of  humility,  cunningly  suggests  the  distinction 
between  a  common  ungifted  man  and  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  He  was  a 
worthy  witness,  but  wbat  could  we  do,  although  we  did  our  best?  If  you  are  a 
sinner  forgiven  through  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  the  greatest  things  V&ul  and  you 
are  equal,  unequal  only  in  the  least.  In  the  economy  of  grace  a  shallower  vessel 
serves  nearly  every  purpose  as  well  as  a  deeper,  if  both  are  full  of  Christ.  In  nature 
the  shallowest  lake,  provided  it  be  full,  sends  up  as  many  clouds  as  the  deepest,  for 
the  same  sunlight  beams  equally  on  both  their  bosoms.  Nay,  more ;  as  a  lake 
within  the  tropics,  though  shallow,  gives  more  incense  to  the  sky  than  a  polar 
ocean  of  unfathomable  depth,  so  a  Christian  of  few  gifts,  whose  heart  lies  open 
fair  and  long  to  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness,  is  a  more  effectual  witness  than  a  man 
of  greater  capacity  who  lies  not  so  near,  and  looks  not  so  constantly  to  Jesus.  Con- 
clusion :  In  the  coarser  work  of  breaking  up  His  own  way  at  first,  God  freely  uses 
the  powers  of  nature  and  the  passions  of  wicked  men ;  but  for  the  nicer  touches 
near  the  finishing,  He  employs  more  sensitive  instruments.  A  work  of  righteous- 
ness is  about  to  be  done  upon  a  jailer  at  PhiUppi.  Mark  the  method  of  the  omni- 
scient Worker.  The  earthquake  rent  the  outer  searing  of  the  jailer's  conscience, 
and  made  an  open  path  into  his  souL  But  what  an  earthquake  could  not  do,  God 
did  by  a  renewed  human  heart  and  loving  human  lips.  From  the  same  chosen 
vessel  that  Ananias  bad  visited  at  Damascus,  the  ointment  was  poured  forth  which 
healed  the  jailer's  wound.  Thus  God  works  to-day  both  in  individual  conversions 
and  in  wide-spread  revivals.  Bankruptcies,  storms,  diseases,  wars,  are  charged  to 
batter  down  the  defences,  and  then  living  disciples  go  in  by  the  breach  to  convert  a 
kingdom  or  win  a  soul.  (W,  Arnot,  D.D.)  Saul  and  Luther  chosen  vessels : — I. 
How  He  pbepaeed  them.  1.  He  selected  the  right  materials — a  Pharisee  for  the 
destruction  of  Pharisaism,  a  monk  for  the  overthrow  of  Popery,  yet  in  both  cases 
the  right  man.  2.  He  laid  hold  of  them  at  the  right  time— (1)  When  the  enemies 
of  the  faith  were  at  their  strongest.  (2)  When  the  need  of  the  Church  was  deepest. 
3.  He  forged  them  in  the  right  fire.  The  fire  was  the  flame  of  repentance  kindled 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  hammer  was  God's  Word.  By  these  means  was  Paul,  as 
the  noblest  Damascus  blade,  forged  at  Damascus,  and  Luther  in  the  cloister  cell  at 
Erfurt.  II.  How  He  used  them.  1.  To  the  confusion  of  His  enemies  ;  Paul  and 
Luther  both  warriors  of  the  Lord,  cutting  swords,  different  from  a  John  and 
Melancthon.  2.  To  the  protection  of  His  friends :  the  faithful  pastorate  of  Paul, 
the  loving  zeal  of  Luther.  3.  To  the  use  of  all :  not  by  attacbing  ourselves  to 
human  means  and  swearing  to  human  words,  but  by  being  directed  to  Him,  whose 
servants  and  instruments  Paul  and  Luther  were.  (K.  Gerok.)  The  character  of 
St.  Paul : — I.  He  is  a  vessel.  The  word  means  either  an  "  instrument "  in  the 
hands  of  the  Divine  Agent  to  carry  out  His  purposes,  or  a  "  vessel"  into  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  poured  abundantly  of  His  mind  and  His  love.  We  are  not  fountains 
which  give  forth.  "  All  our  springs  are  in  Thee."  God  is  an  infinite  Spring  giving 
inexhaustibly  forth  ;  men  are  empty  vessels  receiving  everlastingly  of  His  fulness. 
The  difference  between  men  is  not  in  their  power  to  originate,  but  in  their  power  to 
take  in.  II.  A  vessel  unto  Me,  i.e.,  Paul  was  now  the  actual  possession  of  Christ. 
Heretofore  he  was  in  the  service  of  the  great  enemy,  and  was  the  ablest  and  the 
most  dangerous  opponent  the  young  Church  had  yet  encountered.  But  the  vessel 
was  wrested  from  the  enemy,  and  henceforth  is  a  vessel  separated  unto  and  honoured 
in  the  service  of  Christ.  III.  A  chosen  vessel.  1.  A  choice  vessel ;  "  earthen," 
it  is  true ;  but  there  is  a  great  difference  in  the  quality  of  even  earthen  vessels. 
Chemical  analysis,  it  is  said,  discovers  considerable  difference  in  the  quality  of 
human  brains.  The  brain  of  the  rustic  is  coarse  and  gritty,  whereas  that  of  the 
man  of  genius  is  fine,  smooth,  silky,  and  sensitive.  Be  that  as  it  may,  Paul  was  a 
vessel  manufactured  with  the  greatest  care  out  of  the  finest  materials.  He  was 
"  separated  unto  God  from  his  mother's  womb."  God  even  then  thought  of  the 
purpose  to  which  he  was  to  be  devoted,  and  proceeded  to  fashion  him  accordingly. 
The  same  law  runs  through  grace  as  through  nature — the  perfect  adaptation  ol 


OHAP.  n.]  THE  ACTS.  65 

means  to  ends.  If  God  has  any  special  design  to  accomplish,  He  always  seeks  to 
bring  it  about  by  the  most  suitable  means.  Saul  would  have  been  a  public  man  if 
he  had  never  been  an  apostle.  He  would  have  been  an  orator  if  he  had  never  been 
a  preacher.  The  raw  material  of  an  apostle  was  wrought  into  his  original  make. 
2.  He  was  chosen  or  ordained  of  God  unto  the  work  of  the  apostleship.  "  He  is  a 
vessel  of  election  unto  Me."  The  doctrine  of  election  has  been  wrongly  taught  and 
falsely  apprehended.  The  Scriptural  doctrine  is  that  God  chooses  man  before  man 
chooses  God,  and  the  latter  is  only  the  faint  echo  of  the  former.  The  Divine  elec 
tion  should  be  viewed  in  much  the  same  light  as  the  Divine  love.  "  We  love  Him 
because  He  first  loved  us."  **  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen  you." 
The  fundamental  principle  of  all  false  religions  is  that  man  chooses  his  God.  IV. 
To  BEAB  My  name.  Paul  bore  the  name  of  Jesus — 1.  In  his  intellect.  His  capacious 
mind  had  no  room  for  anything  else.  "  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excel- 
lency of  the  knowledge,"  &c.  The  glorified  Form  appearing  unto  him  on  the  way 
to  Damascus  photographed  itself  so  deeply  upon  his  mind  that  it  could  never  after- 
wards be  effaced.  "To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  Sir  David  Brewster  says  that  Sir 
Isaac  Newton  once  gazed  so  steadfastly  on  the  sun  that  for  days  after,  turn  which 
way  he  would,  he  constantly  beheld  the  image  of  the  sun.  And  Jesus  impressed 
Himself  so  deeply  in  the  "  great  light"  on  the  mind  of  Paul  that  ever  afterwards, 
whichever  way  the  apostle  looked,  he  always  perceived  the  reflection  of  Christ.  2. 
In  his  heart.  Paul  may  be  compared  to  an  "  alabaster  box  of  precious  ointment " 
— the  box  is  valuable,  but  the  ointment  is  more  precious.  "  The  name  of  Christ  is 
like  ointment  poured  forth."  Paul  was  possessed  of  much  genius.  But  only  when 
he  received  the  unction  from  the  Holy  One  did  he  fill  the  world  with  his  perfume. 
You  can  quote  other  ancient  authors  of  surpassing  beauty,  but  I  defy  you  to  quote 
any  where  the  fragrance  is  so  sweet  and  so  abundant.  Carry  the  rose  about  you 
and  you  will  scatter  scent  wherever  you  go.  And  Paul's  writings  are  sweetly  scented 
with  leaves  from  the  Eose  of  Sharon.  Christ  is  an  "  offering  of  sweet  smelling 
savour"  to  men  as  well  as  to  God.  A  lump  of  clay  has  been  made  fragrant  by 
being  thrown  into  the  midst  of  a  bed  of  flowers.  And  although  Christians  in  their 
original  state  are  not  a  whit  better  than  other  men,  yet  by  holding  fellowship  with 
Him  whose  "  garments  smeU  of  myrrh  and  aloes  and  cassia,"  they  catch  the  frag- 
rance. 3.  In  his  ministry.  He  "shall  bear  My  name  before  Gentiles,"  &o.  And 
in  ver.  28  we  see  him  beginning  to  fulfil  the  prediction.  What  then  prompted  him 
60  powerfully  to  bear  the  name  of  Christ  to  perishing  millions  ?  To  return  an 
adequate  answer,  two  factors  must  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  first  was  a 
vivid,  heartfelt  conviction  of  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  Where  the  sense  of 
sin  is  weak  the  sense  of  ministerial  responsibility  is  shallow.  But  the  second  and 
more  powerful  element  was  his  intense  love  to  the  Saviour  (2  Cor.  v.  11,  14).  The 
terror  moved,  the  love  constrained.  The  mill-wheel  may  be  turned  either  by  a 
current  of  water  flowing  underneath  or  else  by  a  stream  falling  upon  it  from  above. 
But  of  the  two  the  latter  is  the  more  efficient.  In  Paul  the  two  currents  worked 
together — the  terror  from  beneath  and  the  love  from  above  ;  and  as  a  consequence 
imparted  unusual  impetuosity  and  rapidity  to  his  revolutions.  V.  Before  Gentiles, 
AND  KINGS,  AND  THE  CHILDREN  OF  IsRAEL.  The  widc  scopo  of  his  ministry  required — 
1.  Certain  social  qualifications  which  the  other  apostles  did  not  possess.  Paul  en- 
joyed all  the  privileges  and  exemptions  of  a  Eoman  citizen.  Born  at  Tarsus,  he 
became  master  of  the  Greek  tongue  and  sensible  to  all  that  was  refined  in  classic 
Ufe.  A  pupU  of  Gamaliel,  he  was  deeply  versed  in  Scriptural  and  rabbinical  lore. 
Thus  in  him  all  that  was  best  in  the  three  dominant  types  of  civilisation  met — the 
freedom  of  the  Roman,  the  language  of  the  Greek,  and  the  theology  of  the  Jew.  2. 
Great  intellectual  culture.  The  sphere  of  his  labour  embraced  all  classes  and  ranks 
of  men.  Moses,  the  founder  of  Judaism,  was  "learned  in  all  the  learning  of  Egypt." 
Paul,  too,  the  foremost  apostle  of  Gentile  Christianity,  was  learned  in  all  the  learn- 
ing of  his  own  and  other  nations.  We  are  here  introduced  to  a  grand  evangelistic 
principle — the  Saviour  ordained  the  most  accomplished  of  the  apostles  to  be  His 
missionary  among  the  heathen.  The  greatest  knowledge  is  always  the  best  instruc- 
tor of  ignorance.  3.  Much  moral  courage.  Before,  literally  in  the  face  of,  Gentiles 
and  kings.  Paul  would  have  to  encounter  innumerable  obstacles  which  only  the 
greatest  courage  could  surmount.  And  perhaps  true  courage  never  towered  more 
sublimely  than  in  hia  life.  Conscience  was  keen  and  strong  in  him,  and  scrupulous 
fidelity  to  its  voice  marks  his  whole  career.  Indomitable  strength  of  his  will  is 
nowhere  seen  to  better  advantage  than  in  the  presence  of  difficulties.  The  eagle 
never  soars  so  hiyh  as  he  ioet  on  the  day  of  tempest — the  wilder  the  gale  the  loftier 


66  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  zx. 

his  flight.  Lord  Chatham,  it  is  said,  made  his  cratches  add  to  the  grandeur  of  his 
oratory;  and  Paul,  dangling  his  chains  in  the  face  of  his  judge,  made  the  most 
impressive  peroration  in  the  literature  of  eloquence.     (J,  Cynddylan  Jones,  DJD.) 

Ver.  16.  For  I  will  show  him  how  great  things  he  must  sofTer  for  My  name's 
Bake. — The  service  of  suffering : — I.  Suffering  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  wb 
MAT  SERVE  GoD.  1.  The  remarkable  feature  here  is,  that  though  it  is  a  part  of 
St.  Paul's  call  to  his  mission,  God  does  not  say,  "I  will  show  him  how  great 
things  he  must  do,"  but  "  how  great  things  he  must  suffer."  The  service  of  work 
is  subordinated  to  the  service  of  suffering.  And  whenever  St.  Paul  makes  a 
retrospect  of  his  own  life  he  always  takes  the  same  view.  As,  for  instance,  in 
that  catalogue  in  2  Cor.  xi.,  the  hardships  and  sorrows  far  outstripped  the  actions — 
the  active  being  literally  only  two — "  journeyings  often,"  ♦'  the  care  of  all  the 
churches," — the  passive  at  least  twenty-seven.  2.  And  no  wonder  that  St.  Paul 
accounted  more  of  the  service  of  suffering  than  of  the  service  of  work.  Was  not 
it  so  with  his  Master  and  ours  ?  What  makes  the  Saviour  what  He  is  to  us,  is 
not  what  He  wrought,  but  what  He  encountered ;  not  what  He  did  for  the  Father, 
but  what  the  Father  did  to  Him.  3.  And  in  a  world  hke  this  it  must  be  so 
always.  Every  man  being  witness,  it  is  a  harder  thing  to  suffer  than  to  work. 
Much  greater  is  the  number  of  them  that  work  well,  than  of  them  that  suffer  well. 
In  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  the  passive  grow  the  highest.  For  four  thousand  years, 
the  service  of  God  was  the  service  of  sacrifice ;  and  the  service  of  sacrifice  was 
essentially  the  service  of  suffering.  And  living,  as  we  do,  in  a  dispensation  in 
which  stUl  "  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until 
now,"  &c.,  it  would  be  sad  indeed  if  we  could  not  believe  that  there  is  a  way  in 
which  every  suffering  thing  does  service  to  God.  4.  Or  take  the  same  thought  a 
step  higher.  What  makes  any  word,  or  any  work,  or  any  thought  which  man  ever 
offers  to  God,  service  ?  Is  not  it  the  Cross  of  Christ,  the  gathering-point  where 
the  suffering  of  the  whole  universe  meets?  Is  not,  then,  all  service  ultimately 
the  service  of  suffering?  The  worship  of  a  world  of  sin  must  be,  to  a  very  great 
extent,  the  service  of  pain.  And  we  cannot  thank  God  too  much  that  the  service 
of  suffering  which  sin  has  made  may,  through  Christ,  go  up  the  best  of  aU  service 
to  Almighty  God.  5.  But  if  any  man  be  tempted  for  a  moment  to  think  that 
his  sufferings  can  add  ought  to  the  efficacy  of  the  death  of  Christ,  or  that  anything 
he  can  ever  bear  will  give  the  slightest  degree  of  merit  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
let  that  man  carefully  study  that  account  of  the  saints  in  Rev.  vii.  II.  How  MAt 
WE,  BY  God's  grace,  make  suffering  service  ?  Have  faith  that  your  suffering, 
in  some  way,  known  or  unknown,  is  service,  and  by  that  faith  it  is.  And  indeed, 
if  you  accept  your  suffering  from  Christ,  and  bear  it  in  and  consecrate  it  to  Christ, 
it  will  have  such  a  savour  of  Christ  in  it,  that  it  cannot  help  to  go  up  and  to  be 
service  in  heaven.  The  service  of  suffering  may  be  divided  thus — 1.  The  direct 
service  of  suffering  to  God  is  to  accept  it  from  a  Father's  hand.  Ask  no  questions, 
but  look  up  trustingly.  Say  if  it  be  but  "Amen,"  and  as  soon  as  you  can, 
"  Hallelujah."  Think, "  This  suffering  of  mine  is  Christ  suffering  in  me.  It  makes 
me  more  one  than  I  ever  was  before  with  Jesus  Christ."  2.  The  service  of  suffer- 
ing in  sanctification.  Whenever  you  pass  into  it,  let  your  first  prayer  be,  "  Lord, 
for  whatever  end  Thou  hast  sent  this  trial,  let  that  end  be  fulfilled  to  me,  in  me, 
by  me,  to  Thy  glory."  The  purposes  of  suffering  for  sanctification  are — (1) 
Humihation.  To  that  end  you  must  connect  your  sorrow  with  what?  Sin? 
Not  most.  With  the  pardon  of  sin,  with  the  love  of  God.  (2)  Purity.  Sorrow, 
passing  through  the  heart,  acts  like  a  moral  chemistry — the  sin  precipitates  to  the 
bottom ;  and  so  it  leaves  the  water  of  the  cup  of  life  pure.  Or  rather,  it  is  fire, 
to  destroy  the  nature  and  self  which,  thank  God,  are  consumable ;  and  to  leave 
the  gold  of  grace,  which,  thank  God,  is  not  consumable.  The  best  service  which 
ever  goes  up  to  God  is  His  own  image.  And  God's  image  is  purity.  (3)  Con- 
secration. The  Christian,  passing  through  suffering,  is  a  servant  gone  into 
his  Master's  presence  to  receive  orders.  3.  The  service  of  suffering  to  man,  or 
more  strictly,  to  God  through  man.  (1)  Intercession.  You  are  sent  up  to  your 
room,  to  a  lonely  place  on  the  mount,  to  pray  for  others  who  fight  in  the  plain. 
Therefore  you  cannot  work  that  you  may  pray.  (2)  Testimony.  Bear  your  witness 
— by  silence,  by  looks,  by  speech,  by  a  sweeter  smile  than  when  all  was  bright,  by 
a  kinder  accent  to  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and  the  sufficiency  of  His  grace.  David 
was  very  great  in  the  service  of  testimony.  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  in 
trouble."    "la  the  multitude  of  the  sorrows  which  I  have  in  my  heart,  Thy 


CHAP,  nc.]  TEE  ACTS.  57 

comforts  have  refreshed  my  soul."  (3)  Sympathy.  We  never  truly  sympathise 
with  what  we  have  not  felt.  Therefore  Christ  sympathises  with  all,  because  He 
felt  aU.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Suffering  for  Christ's  name's  sake: — When  Dr. 
Mason,  a  missionary  in  India,  asked  his  converted  boatman  whether  he  was  willing 
to  go  to  the  Bghais,  a  neighbouring  tribe,  to  teU  them  of  a  Saviour's  love,  he  re- 
minded him  that,  instead  of  twelve  rupees  a  month,  he  would  receive  but  four  rupees. 
*'  Can  you  go  to  the  Bghais  for  four  rupees  ?  "  asked  the  missionary.  The  heathen 
convert  went  by  himself  and  thought  and  prayed,  and  came  back  to  Dr.  Mason. 
"  Well,  Chapon,  what  is  your  decision?  "  *'  My  father,  I  cannot  go  to  the  Bghais 
for  four  rupees  a  month,  but  I  can  go  for  Jesus."    And  for  Jesus  he  went. 

Vers.  17-23.  And  Ananias,  .  .  .  pntting:  his  bands  on  Mm  said,  Brother  Satil. 

— Saul  converted : — I.  The  ministry  which  helps  to  complete  the  great  change. 
If  the  appearance  of  the  Lord  to  the  persecutor  was  miraculous,  the  work  was  not 
completed  without  ordinary  instrumentalities.  "There  was  a  certain  disciple 
named  Ananias."  This  indicates — 1.  The  Lord's  interest  in  the  prayer,  confession, 
and  sadder  experiences  of  the  contrite  heart.  He  heeds  the  sighing  of  the  imperfect, 
even  while  receiving  the  adoration  of  the  perfect.  "  Behold,  he  prayeth  1  "  2.  The 
Lord's  wisdom  in  His  dealing  with  the  penitent.  He  dealt  with  "him  in  the  way 
of  revelation.  He  inspired  the  vision  of  human  help  coming  to  aid  the  convicted 
man  in  his  extremity.  After  great  marvels,  Christ  leads  Saul  on  by  means  of 
common  Church  agencies.  The  pride  of  Pharisaism  was  here  directly  attacked. 
This  man's  religion  was  not  to  rest  on  any  mere  human  authority.  In  Christianity 
ihe  ordinary  is  more  essential  and  valuable  than  the  special  and  extraordinary. 
3.  The  characteristics  of  the  ministry  of  Ananias.  (1)  It  was  conceived  and 
performed  in  the  spirit  of  true  brotherhood.  "  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ, 
and  aU  ye  are  brethren."  Brotherhood  is  a  note  of  valid  Christianity.  (2)  Its 
authority  was  found  in  the  commission  of  the  Lord.  This  humble  man  felt  the 
dignity  of  his  Divine  office,  but  he  knew  that  he  had  only  fulfilled  it  when  Christ 
alone  was  exalted.  (3)  It  was  one  of  enlightenment.  "  There  fell  from  his  eyes 
as  it  had  been  scales."  The  physical  change  was  only  the  type  and  symbol  of  the 
change  perfected  within.  "  The  entrance  of  Thy  Word  giveth  light."  Here,  then, 
is  intelligence,  devotion,  brotherhood,  the  common  ministry  of  the  faithful ;  these 
present  the  conditions  of  healthful  Christian  life.  11.  Forgiven,  but  disciplined. 
One  tendency  of  Christian  society  just  now  is  towards  a  neglect  of  due  and  careful 
Christian  culture.  Men  want  a  gospel  which  confers  a  boon,  but  does  not  demand 
a  duty,  which  secures  forgiveness,  but  does  not  provide  for  holiness.  Saul's 
early  Christian  history  supplies  important  lessons  concerning  Christian  culture. 
"  Then  was  Saul  certain  days  with  the  disciples."  Here  is — 1.  Believing  fellow- 
ship. Saul  became  a  disciple  and  was  baptized.  He  was  designated  as  a  learner 
in  the  school  of  Christ.  When  a  man  feels  the  throb  and  impulse  of  the  Divine 
life  within  him  he  is  moved  to  seek  Christian  fellowship.  To  stand  aloof  ia 
contrary  to  the  spirit  and  genius  of  Christianity.  A  fitful  attendance  at  the 
Table  of  the  Lord  does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Christian  obligation.  2. 
Special  culture  and  training  for  the  life-work.  Although  Saul  had  been  constituted 
a  disciple,  and  had  received  spiritual  gifts,  he  was  not  therefore  equipped  for  life- 
long ministries.  Spontaneous  fellowship  does  not  imply  spontaneous  readiness  for 
Church  ministers.  The  quiet  life  of  brotherly  fellowship  was  foUwoed  by  a  season 
of  silent,  sedulous,  earnest,  secret  preparation  for  the  appointed  task.  Between 
the  "  certain  days  "  of  fellowship  of  verse  19th,  and  the  "  straightway  he  preached 
Christ  "  of  the  20th,  you  have  interposed  the  time  of  retirement  spent  by  him  in 
study,  meditation,  and  prayers  in  Arabia.  A  scholar  among  the  most  learned  of 
his  age  and  country,  he  must  commvme  with  his  own  heart  and  God  before  he  can 
calmly  and  fuUy,  with  that  marvellous  wisdom  which  aU  the  ages  have  admired, 
preach  the  gospel  to  the  people.  A  sacred  reticence  is  becoming  and  healthful. 
There  is  no  encouragement  here  to  the  presumption  of  a  glib  ignorance,  which  waits 
neither  for  the  Divine  caUing,  nor  the  Church's  sending.  Silence  in  the  desert 
prepares  for  the  usefulness  of  thirty  years.  3.  The  life-long  spiritual  and  moral 
discipline.  Forgiven,  there  were  yet  consequences  of  the  old  life  to  be  borne  and 
endured.  He  went  to  Damascus  to  persecute.  At  Damascus  he  was  persecuted. 
He  took  part  in  the  stoning  of  Stephen.  At  Lystra  he  was  stoned.  He  imprisoned 
many ;  he  was  himself  a  prisoner.  He  went  about  to  estabhsh  his  own  righteous- 
ness, and  the  Judaizing  teachers  of  his  own  old  doctrine  poisoned  the  founts  of  his 
joy  in  the  chorches  he  founded,  and  tried  to  turn  away  from  him  the  grateful  1ot« 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix, 

of  his  converts.  {W.  H.  Davison.)  Christian  brotherlinesa : — I.  The  bbotheklt 
MOVEMENT.  As  8000  as  his  difiBculties  were  removed  Ananias  "  went  his  way,"  <fec. 
1.  Many  who  are  required  for  beneficent  ministries  to  the  sick,  poor,  or  sinful 
never  hear  the  call  of  duty.  2.  Others  hear  it,  but  do  not  go.  Either  they  do  not 
care  to  go,  or  regard  it  the  duty  of  the  object  to  come.  Saul  was  not  sent  to 
Ananias,  but  Ananias  to  Saul.  The  nations  were  not  told  to  go  to  the  apostles  to 
be  discipled,  but  the  apostles  to  go  and  disciple  the  world.  Some  cannot  come, 
many  will  not.  Hence  the  example  of  Him  who  "  went  about  doing  good."  3. 
True  brotherliness  goes — (1)  Promptly.  Ananias  questions  no  more.  (2)  Courage- 
ously. "  Went  into  the  house."  Many  who  are  brave  enough  to  meet  a  certain  class 
of  people  in  the  street,  hesitate  when  they  come  to  the  house.  Street  preaching 
requires  less  courage  than  house-to-house  visitation  in  the  slums.  (3)  Without 
ceremony.  It  mattered  not  whether  Judas'  house  was  a  palace  or  a  cottage, 
Ananias  was  on  business  that  must  not  be  hampered  by  social  etiquette,  so  he 
entered  into  the  house.  The  Christian  worker  must  not  be  rude,  but  he  need  not 
be  servile.  The  business  of  the  King  of  kings  should  give  EQs  servant  an  entr4e 
anywhere,  and  that  business  often  requires  haste.  II.  The  bbotherlt  tough. 
"  Putting  his  hands  upon  him."  Many  good  and  kind  people  go,  but  they  are  at  a 
loss  what  to  do  when  they  arrive.  This  is  due  sometimes  to  clumsiness  or  sheer 
nervousness.  Owing  to  this  often  the  very  thing  is  done  which  should  be  left 
undone,  and  needless  embarrassment  and  pain  is  often  innocently  given.  But  the 
spirit  of  brotherliness  should  be  educated,  and  then  there  will  be  no  difficulty 
about  brotherly  contact.  A  brother  of  low  degree  should  have  no  hesitation  at 
shaking  hands  with  a  brother  of  high  degree ;  nor  should  a  wealthy  or  cultured 
Christian  withhold  his  hand  from  a  poor  or  ignorant  brother.  Saul's  social  status, 
gifts,  Ac,  were  altogether  beyond  those  of  Ananias,  yet  Ananias  "put  his  hands 
upon  him."  A  touch  will  sometimes  go  farther  than  a  word  or  even  a  gift,  or 
when  it  accompanies  them  will  double  their  worth.  III.  The  brotherly  word. 
"  Brother  Saul."  There  is  nothing,  perhaps,  more  pathetic  in  all  sacred  hterature 
than  this  utterance  under  these  circumstances.  The  word  has  become  vulgarised, 
and  in  certain  lips  is  a  mere  official  or  cant  expression ;  but  there  is  life  and 
power  in  it  yet.  And  may  the  time  be  far  distant  when  in  our  Church  gatherings 
"Mr."  shall  supplant  "Brother,"  and  "Gentlemen"  "Brethren."  The  term  is 
significant  of — 1.  Common  relationship  to  a  common  Father.  2.  Common  rights 
to  the  same  privileges.  3.  Common  duties.  4.  Common  hopes.  IV.  The 
BROTHERLY  SERVICE.  1.  Auauias  was  the  means  of  restoring  Saul's  sight,  and  thus 
symbolises  the  work  of  all  those  who,  having  light  themselves  from  "  the  Father  of 
lights,"  impart  it  to  the  mentally,  morally,  or  circumstantially  blind.  2.  Ananias 
was  the  means  of  communicating  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  are  all  those  who  strive  for 
the  conversion,  holiness,  or  consecration  of  others.  3.  Ananias  was  the  means  of 
introducing  Saul  to  the  society  of  the  believers.  Without  arguing  the  vexed 
question  whether  Ananias  was  a  layman,  and  by  baptizing  Saul  vindicated  the 
validity  of  lay  baptism,  we  may  assuredly  trace  the  good  man's  influence  in  verse  19. 
Conclusion :  1.  "  Sirs,  ye  are  brethren."  2.  Act  as  brothers.  (J.  W.  Burn.) 
Divine  brotherhood  : — I.  A  brother  received  by  Christ,  though  not  acknowledged 
by  Christians.  1.  We  ought  to  reject  none.  Those  "far  off"  may  be  "made 
nigh."  2.  We  should  not  look  too  closely  at  a  man's  past.  Change  is  possible  in 
any  case  when  grace  works.  II.  A  brother  suddenly  adopted.  1.  God's  grace 
is  mighty  and  sudden,  so  do  not  gauge  another's  condition  by  your  own  experience. 
Do  not  construct  rules  for  the  Holy  Spirit's  working.  2.  Do  not  judge  of  another's 
conversion  by  yonr  own.  III.  A  brother  through  the  appointed  means.  1. 
He  submitted  to  Christ.  2.  He  praj'ed.  3.  He  believed.  All  who  desire  to  join 
the  brotherhood  must  submit  to  these  conditions.  Otherwise  he  is  an  aUen.  IV. 
A  Brother  in  suffering  and  labour  (2  Cor.  ii.  23-28).     (J.  W.  Munday.) 

Vers.  19, 20.  Then  was  Saul  certain  days  wltb  the  disciples.  .  .  .  And 
Btralghtway  he  preached  Christ. — The  society  of  the  good : — I.  The  tendency 
TO  Christian  intercourse  is  generated  by  the  love  of  Christ.  The  love  of 
Jesus  in  the  heart  is  the  magnet.  Dr.  Doddridge  asked  his  little  daughter  how  it 
was  that  everybody  loved  her.  She  answered,  "  I  know  not,  unless  it  is  that  I  love 
everybody."  It  is  a  great  task  to  reconcile  sinners  to  each  other.  We  love  the 
brethren  because  He  loves  us  all.  II.  Christian  social  intercourse  preserves 
THE  best  associations.  The  tabernacle  of  Moses,  the  harp  of  David,  the  cross  of 
Jesus,  the  faith  of  Abraham,  the  experience  of  Paul,  are  all  heirlooms  whioh 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  59 

preserve  the  family  history.  Bring  all  the  drops  of  water  together  and  you  have 
an  ocean  ;  so  the  experiences  of  the  Church  when  gathered  form  a  great  store. 
III.  Chbistian  social  intehcodkse  points  to  the  lasting  fbllowshii'  of  heaven. 
Christians  never  say,  "Good-bye."  The  last  petition  in  the  upper  room  before 
the  crucifixion  was,  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thou  hast  given  Me, 
be  with  Me  where  I  am."      {Weekly  Pulpit.)        Damascus  to  CcBsarea: — I.  The 

EVENTS   intervening    BETWEEN   DAMASCUS   AND    CiESAKEA.       1.    As    SOOU    aS     Saul    WaS 

baptized  he  joined  the  Christian  brotherhood,  and  publicly  declared  his  new  con- 
viction that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.  I  do  not  think  that  that  continued  long. 
Either  through  the  force  of  external  persecution,  or  by  Divine  intimation  and 
guidance,  probably  by  both,  he  was  led  to  leave  Damascus.  And  in  Gal.  i.  he 
tells  us  that  he  left  Damascus  and  went  into  Arabia.  Arabia  lay  round  about 
Damascus  and  my  own  expression  is,  that  he  did  not  go  further  from  Damascus 
than  would  secure  safety  and  solitude.  He  was  not  employed  in  preaching,  but  in 
receiving  those  communications  from  Christ  which  were  to  perfect  his  knowledge 
of  the  gospel.  There  he  studied  the  Old  Testament  under  a  new  teacher ;  reading 
it  by  a  diilerent  light  from  that  which  had  been  held  in  the  hand  of  Gamaliel. 
2.  Then,  when  fully  prepared  for  all  that  he  had  to  do,  he  returned  to  Damascus, 
and  there,  with  greater  boldness  and  vigour,  proclaimed  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of 
God.  But  the  Jews  could  not  stand  this,  and  determined  to  kill  him.  And  we 
learn  from  a  passing  allusion  in  1  Cor.  xi.  23,  xv.  3,  that  in  their  plans  against 
his  life  they  got  the  co-operation  of  the  political  and  military  powers.  But  in  a 
basket,  let  down  from  the  window  of  one  of  the  houses,  which  in  Eastern  cities 
very  often  overhang  the  wall,  Saul  was  placed  by  his  friends,  and,  descending,  so 
escaped  his  enemies'  hands.  3.  He  then  put  into  execution  what  he  had  cherished 
as  a  purpose.  He  determined  to  go  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Peter  (Gal.  i.  18,  19).  It 
is  probable  that  he  had  seen  Peter  before  the  Sanhedrin.  He  knew  that  he  was 
one  of  the  foremost  men  amongst  the  apostles,  and  therefore  he  wished  to  visit 
him — not  to  acknowledge  his  supremacy,  nor  to  get  from  him  any  authority,  but 
as  an  intimate  friend  and  disciple  of  Jesus.  On  his  arrival  Saul  very  naturally 
wished  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples.  But  they  were  in  doubt  and  fear  about  him. 
But  Saul  met  with  Barnabas,  who  believed  Saul,  and  believed  in  him,  and  who 
introduced  him  to  Peter  and  James,  who  were  probably  the  only  apostles  who 
happened  to  be  then  at  Jerusalem.  Saul  was  then  received  with  cordiality  and 
confidence,  and  had  at  once  accorded  to  him  fraternal  recognition.  4.  The  apostle 
was  only  at  Jerusalem  for  a  fortnight  (Gal.  i.  18,  19).  He  lodged  with  Peter,  who, 
as  a  married  man,  could  perhaps  best  accommodate  him.  It  is  rather  odd  that  he 
should  have  become  representatively  the  head  of  a  priesthood  who  are  not  allowed 
to  marry  !  It  was  very  natural  that  Saul  should  suppose  himself  peculiarly  fitted 
for  preaching  in  Jerusalem  that  faith  which,  a  little  time  before,  he  sought  to 
destroy.  He  made  the  attempt,  and,  Grecian  as  he  was,  did  the  very  thing  that 
Stephen  had  done  before,  and  perhaps  in  the  very  same  synagogue  using  probably 
many  of  the  martyr's  arguments.  His  hearers  were  not  subdued  by  his  appeals. 
It  was  not  his  work ;  Christ  had  something  else  for  him  to  do.  There  was  a 
conspiracy,  too,  against  him  in  Jerusalem,  as  there  had  been  at  Damascus  ;  and,  in 
addition,  there  was  a  concurrent  Divine  intimation  urging  his  departure  (chap. 
xxii.  17-21.)  The  apostle  was  at  once  "  obedient  to  the  heavenly  vision,"  and  hia 
friends  got  him  safely  out  of  Jerusalem  and  "  brought  him  down  to  Csesarea." 
II.  The  points  which  requike  explanation.  1.  In  the  history  there  is  no  mention 
of  the  journey  into  Arabia,  a  very  important  event  in  the  life  of  St.  Paul.  But 
note — (1)  An  omission  is  not  a  contradiction.  When  two  writers,  referring  to  the 
same  time,  are  found  to  differ  only  in  that  the  one  omits  what  the  other  records  ; 
the  one  may  be  only  the  supplement  to  the  other.  (2)  The  history  in  the  Acts  is 
BO  constructed  that  an  actual  journey  somewhere  may  possibly  underlie  it.  There 
are  two  periods  mentioned.  "  Then  was  Saul  certain  days  with  the  disciples  at 
Damascus,"  giving  the  idea  of  a  limit  to  the  period.  He  was  "certain  days" 
there  with  the  disciples — well,  what  then  ?  Why,  at  the  end  he  was  not  with 
them.  Then  he  had  left  them.  Then  afterwards — though  this  is  not  mentioned, 
it  is  implied — he  was  with  them  in  Damascus  again  ;  and  this  time,  after  "many 
days  "  there  occurs  the  conspiracy.  Between  the  "  certain  days  "  and  the  "  many 
days  "  a  journey,  because  an  absence  from  Damascus,  may  come  in,  which  might  be 
into  Arabia  as  well  as  to  anywhere  else.  (3)  Then,  again,  the  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians  and  the  history  in  the  Acts  are  perfectly  independent  productions. 
Neither  was  written  from  the  suggestions  of  the  other  and  made  to  harmonise  with 


«0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

it.  If  the  historian  had  invented  this  story  from  reading  the  letter  he  would  hava 
put  in  the  journey  to  Arabia ;  if  the  letter-writer  had  invented  the  letter  from  read- 
ing the  history  he  would  not  have  put  in  the  journey.  This  independetjce  being 
admitted,  all  the  coincidences  rise  into  strength  as  evidences  of  the  perfect  truth 
and  trustworthiness  of  both.  (4)  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Galatians  was 
written  previously  to  the  Acts.  Now  Paul  and  Luke  were  very  often  "  companions 
in  travel,"  and  there  is  every  probability  that  the  historian  wrote  under  the  eye  of 
the  letter-writer,  and  yet  neither  of  them  sees  the  inconsistency  between  the 
account  given  by  the  one  and  the  known  contents  of  the  letter  of  the  other. 
Neither  of  them  thinks  it  worth  while  with  a  stroke  of  the  pen  to  put  it  all  right. 
It  is  perfectly  evident  that  they  who  knew  all  about  it  did  not  see  any  difficulty 
in  what  pei-plexes  us  so  much.  2.  The  difficulty  of  accounting  for  the  way  in 
which  Paul  was  received  by  the  disciples  at  Jerusalem.  Surely  they  might  have 
had  such  full  information  of  all  that  had  occurred,  as  to  receive  with  acclamation 
the  illustrious  convert.  But  observe — (1)  That  the  Jewish  way  of  talking  about 
time  is  worth  recollecting.  Fourteen  months  would  be  three  years,  if  the  first 
month  was  the  last  in  one  year,  and  the  last  month  was  the  first  in  another,  with 
one  whole  year  lying  between.  But  three  years,  even  thus  reckoned,  is  a  long 
time.  Yet  the  possible  compression  of  the  period,  in  the  way  indicated,  is  worth 
being  referred  to.  (2)  But  will  it  not  be  curious  if  the  visit  into  Arabia — which 
is  itself  a  difficulty — should  be  just  the  very  thing  which  enables  us  to  explain 
the  more  difficult  point  before  us  ?  I  will  not  say  that  Paul  was  running  before 
he  was  sent ;  but  he  might  be  trying  to  speak  before  he  was  fully  equipped  for  hia 
work.  Hence  it  was,  that  his  Master  told  him  to  go  into  seclusion  that  he  might 
fully  learn  all  that  was  necessary  for  him  to  know.  In  consequence  of  this,  he 
disappeared  from  Damascus.  It  is  quite  possible  that  none  of  the  disciples  knew 
what  had  become  of  him.  His  companions  would  go  back  with  some  story  or 
other  of  a  strange  occurrence  which  had  happened  on  the  road.  Whatever  it  was, 
it  had  led  him  seemingly  to  recant  his  opinions.  But  he  was  gone  off.  It  waa 
impossible  to  say  what  it  all  meant,  or  in  what  character  he  might  next  appear. 
Of  course  the  enemies  of  the  truth  would  know  how  to  make  the  most  of  this, 
and  to  frighten  the  faithful  by  dark  insinuations  of  what  their  emissary  might 
yet  do.  Supposing,  therefore,  that  he  was  not  very  long  in  Damascus,  even  the 
second  time,  he  might  preach  in  the  synagogues,  and  yet,  in  the  confusion  and 
disorganisation  of  the  period,  intelligence  of  this  might  not  reach  Jerusalem  in 
any  authentic  or  reliable  form.  The  disciples  would  thus  necessarily  be  in  the 
state  in  which  we  find  them.  Fears,  which  simple  ignorance  might  engender, 
would  be  strengthened  if  their  unscrupulous  enemies  were  known  to  insinuate 
that  Saul  was  only  playing  a  deep  game.  3.  The  difference  between  the  statement 
in  the  text  of  the  circumstances  under  which  Paul  left  Jerusalem,  and  the  account 
which  Paul  gives  of  it  in  chap.  xxii.  Luke  attributes  it  to  a  conspiracy,  Paul  to  a 
vision.  But  this  is  only  the  two  sides  of  the  same  event — the  Divine  and  the 
human.  There  is  the  historian  naturally  confining  himself  to  the  outward  fact. 
But  Paul  is  letting  you  into  the  interior.  In  the  complete  view  we  get  the  united 
action  of  Divine  authority  with  human  love.  It  is  nothing,  after  all,  but  the  old 
story  over  again  of  the  gold  and  silver  shield.  4.  Paul  told  Agrippa  that  he 
**  showed  first  unto  them  of  Damascus,  and  at  Jerusalem,  and  throughout  all  the 
coasts  of  Judaea,  then  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  should  repent  and  turn  to  God. " 
But  in  the  text  he  went  up  to  Jerusalem,  was  taken  down  to  Caesarea,  and  sent 
forth  to  Tarsus.  In  Galatians,  he  says,  that  after  going  up  to  Jerusalem,  he  went 
into  the  regions  of  Syria  and  Cilicia,  and  was  unknown  by  face  unto  tbe  churches 
of  Judsea  which  were  in  Christ.  How  is  this  to  be  reconciled?  (1)  When  Paul  is 
writing  to  the  Galatians  he  is  confining  himself  to  the  period  which  transpired 
before  his  going  to  Tarsus.  Well,  the  letter  and  the  history  perfectly  coincide. 
We  find  here  that  he  had  gone  up  to  Jerusalem,  had  been  there  a  short  time, 
had  gone  hurriedly  down  to  CsBsarea,  and  went  thence  into  the  regions  of  Syria 
and  Cilicia.  Of  course  he  was  unknown  to  the  churches  of  Judaea,  and  all  that 
they  knew  about  him  would  be  what  they  might  happen  to  hear.  (2)  But  when  he 
stands  before  Agrippa  and  says,  "And  then  to  the  Gentiles,"  he  refers  to  his  great 
distant  missions.  Now,  previous  to  his  doing  that,  you  will  find  afterwards  that 
he  came  up  from  Antioch  through  Judaea  to  Jerusalem,  and  then  went  back  again, 
perhaps  a  different  way.  On  this  journey  he  would  have  an  opportunity  of  preach- 
ing in  the  villages  and  towns  of  Judaea,  of  which,  we  may  be  sure,  he  would  folly 
Ikvail  himself.    Thus  both  aooounts  are  perfectly  true  and  oonsisteut,  only  the/ 


OEAf.  iz.]  THE  ACTS.  6} 

refer  to  different  times.  (T.  Binney.)  Straightway  : — I.  The  importanck  ane 
DUTY  OF  PBOMPTITUDE  IN  BELIGI0U8  MATTERS.  This  quality  Standing  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  new  course,  and  for  the  carrying  out  of  the  new  convictions,  has  much 
instruction  for  us.  1.  There  are  many  beginnings  in  the  world  which  stand  alone, 
or  which  shine  out  in  mocking  contrast  to  all  that  comes  after.  Many  a  rosy 
morning  becomes  a  cloudy  noon,  precursor  of  a  stormy  night !  Many  a  man  who 
Btarts  in  life  well,  swerves  and  wavers  as  he  goes  on.  The  divine  life  has  to  our 
eyes  the  same  uncertainties  about  it.  We  have  to  wait  for  proof,  for  fruits,  and 
for  patient  continuance  to  the  end.  Yet  in  some  beginnings  we  can  see  conditions 
which,  continued,  lead  to  a  triumphant  issue.  One  of  these,  very  prominent  in 
the  history  of  St.  Paul,  is  promptitude.  2.  Promptitude  is  a  pre-requisite  of 
success.  A  beginning  is  only  a  beginning,  and  yet  much  depends  on  how  it  is 
made.  Some  beginnings  are  like  the  spring  on  the  mountain-side,  gushing  into 
life  and  flowing  clearly ;  some  are  like  waters  from  a  mossy  soil,  trickling,  oozing, 
BO  little  visible  and  so  uncertain,  that  you  cannot  tell  where  they  begin.  But 
here  is  a  vigorous,  clear  beginning.  As  soon  as  Paul  saw  his  duty  he  did  it. 
"  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  had  been  his  prayer.  The  answer  is,  "  Tou 
know  Me  now.  You  have  persecuted — now  preach  "  ;  and  he  did  so  "  straightway." 
In  giving  the  history  of  this  very  time,  Paul  himself  tells  us  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians  that  "  immediately  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood."  If  he  had  so 
conferred,  it  is  almost  certain  that  his  whole  course  would  have  been  different. 
Some  would  have  said :  ♦'  Stay  awhile  until  the  memory  of  your  career  as  perse- 
cutor has  died  away."  Others  would  have  said:  •' Be  cautious.  Do  not  commit 
yourself  thus  early.  Your  present  convictions  may  be  only  transient.  It  can  do 
no  harm  to  wait."  Had  he  gone  to  Jerusalem,  Peter,  who  said  to  the  Master,  "  Not 
80,  Lord,"  would  have  been  quite  as  ready  to  say  "Not  so  "  to  the  servant.  And 
probably  all  the  apostles  would  have  advised  caution  and  delay.  But  Paul  was 
right,  and  his  promptitude  saved  him  from  many  difficulties  which  else  would  have 
beset  his  course.  It  raised  his  conversion  above  suspicion.  It  opened  his  way. 
It  confirmed  his  faith.  It  enlarged  his  knowledge.  It  gave  him  an  advantage 
against  any  who  might  be  his  enemies.  It  put  him  in  possession  of  the  ground. 
It  made  retreat  more  difficult.  It  made  him  a  fit  example  for  all  who  are  begin- 
ning the  Christian  course  to  the  end  of  time.  The  first  sign  of  a  rectified  condition 
will  always  be  the  prayer,  "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  The  next  will  be 
to  do  it  "  straightway."  3.  The  thing  to  be  done  will,  of  course,  be  different  in 
different  cases.  In  a  sense,  every  one  who  receives  the  gospel  must  preach  it. 
There  are  some  who  favour  reserve  in  regard  to  religious  feeling  and  conviction. 
It  is  said  that  such  things  ought  to  be  felt  rather  than  expressed.  That  is  not 
the  teaching  of  the  Bible.  "  We  believe  and  therefore  speak."  "  We  cannot  but 
speak  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard."  "  Ye  shall  be  witnesses,"  &o. 
— not  silent  witnesses  surely.  Such  was  the  original  law,  and  there  is  no  reason 
to  believe  that  it  has  ever  been  changed.  Are,  then,  men  who  can  now  speak  best  on 
such  a  subject  to  speak  least  ?  Because  thoughtless  people  sometimes  talk  not  wisely 
and  not  well  on  religion,  must  thoughtful  people  seal  their  tongues  in  silence  and 
keep  all  dark  tiU  the  day  of  death  ?  Each  man  ought,  in  his  own  measure  and 
way,  to  preach.  For  a  quiet  man  to  speak  in  conversation,  is  as  much  as  for  a 
public  man  to  write.  For  one  man  to  offer  prayer  in  a  house,  would  be  more  than 
for  another  to  preach  in  a  pulpit.  Or  with  some,  a  change  of  habit  and  life  may 
be  the  most  expressive  thing  they  can  say  or  do.  The  question  as  to  the  form 
which  the  duty  of  the  new  state  shall  take  is  a  question  which  one  can  never  settle 
for  another.  But  the  principle  is  this — that  there  is  to  every  one  something  to  be 
done,  by  look,  or  speech,  or  action,  or  habit — or  all  of  these  together — to  be  done 
for  Christ  as  soon  as  you  believe  in  Him ;  and  that  that  thing  ought  to  be  done 
without  delay.  II.  Its  advantages.  1.  "  Straightway  1 "  And  your  new  con- 
sciousness will  become  clear,  as  it  never  will  do  by  repression.  Doubts  gather 
around  the  inactive  mind,  over  the  slumbering  reluctant  will,  as  mists  above  the 
stagnant  pool.  Work  in  spite  of  them ;  work  through  them  on  to  duty — and  they 
are  gone.  2.  "  Straightway  1  "  And  the  outer  difficulties  will  be  dispersed,  and 
you  will  see  them  no  more.  He  who  begins  on  the  yielding  system  will  find  that 
the  difficulties  that  hinder  the  soul's  first  alacrity  will  hinder  it  more  and  more. 
There  are  some  animals  which  will  not  molest  you  if  you  face  them,  but  they  will 
follow  you  if  you  flee.  3.  "  Straightway  I  "  And  you  will  give  to  your  soul  one 
of  the  first  and  most  indispensable  conditions  of  growth.  Children  would  sicken 
and  die  if  they  were  kept  in  a  state  of  inactivity.    4.  '<  Straightway!"    And  you 


«2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

will  lay  the  first  stones  in  the  great  edifice  of  habit.  We  are  in  a  large  measure 
the  creatures  of  habit ;  but  would  it  be  better  if  we  were  all  impulse  and  emotion  ? 
No.  It  is  no  small  part  of  our  greatness  that  we  can  build  our  life  into  strength 
as  well  as  beauty  by  the  stones  of  habit.  5.  "  Straightway  I  "  And  you  will  end 
no  small  part  of  the  lesser  miseries  of  life.  For,  not  a  little  is  the  result  of 
duty  undone — a  word  unspoken,  an  action  postponed.  6.  "  Straightway !  "  And 
the  enemies  of  our  true  life  and  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  are  taken  at  advantage. 
All  their  plans  are  broken,  their  prophecies  of  evil  are  set  at  nought — by 
the  simple  yet  sublime  plan  of  going,  without  hesitation,  right  on  to  duty 
or  endeavour.  7.  "  Straightway  1  "  And  timorous  friends  —  the  discouraged, 
the  weak,  the  halting — receive,  as  it  were,  a  new  inspiration.  [A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
The  new  convert : — BUstory  is  made  up  of  epochs  and  eras.  An  epoch  is  a  pause  in 
the  sequence  of  events  ;  a  marked  moment,  at  which  the  reckoning  of  time  rests 
and  begins  anew.  An  era  is  the  interval  between  two  epochs  ;  the  period  which 
intervenes  between  two  of  those  milestones  of  history,  by  which  the  memory  assists 
itself  in  keeping  count  of  time.  In  all  good  histories  the  epochs  are  strongly 
marked.  Give  the  great  turning-points  of  a  life,  and  we  can  almost  fill  up  the  era 
for  ourselves.  The  conversion  of  St.  Paul  is  a  pause  and  a  signal  memorable  for  all 
time :  the  years  that  follow,  whUe  he  is  a  learner  even  more  than  a  teacher  in 
Christ's  school,  need  but  briefer  notice,  though  one  full  of  instruction  for  us  who 
ponder  it  thoughtfully.  St.  Paul  himself  adds  some  particulars  in  Gal.  i.  17-24. 
1.  He  states  that  three  years  elapsed  between  his  conversion  and  his  first  visit  to 
Jerusalem  as  a  Christian.  The  history  in  the  Acts  speaks  only  of  "  many  days." 
But  this  is  no  contradiction.  In  1  Kings  ii.  we  read  that  Shimei  "  dwelt  in 
Jerusalem  many  days  "  ;  and  then  the  next  verse  opens  thus,  "  And  it  came  to  pass 
at  the  end  of  three  years."  The  expression  '♦  many  days  "  is  large  enough  to  cover 
a  period  of  three  years.  So  it  is  here.  2.  In  the  same  passage  St.  Paul  mentions 
a  journey  into  Arabia,  of  which  we  have  here  no  notice.  The  region  intended  is 
differently  understood :  it  may  have  been  that  Arabia  which  borders  very  closely 
upon  Damascus  itself.  And  the  purpose  of  his  journey  is  not  mentioned — whether 
it  was  undertaken  as  a  first  missionary  enterprise,  or  whether  to  afford  him  a 
season  of  secluded  meditation.  St.  Luke's  account  of  St.  Paul's  life  is  full  of 
omissions,  except  during  that  part  of  it  in  which  he  was  with  him.  We  are  thankful 
for  what  he  tells,  and  we  are  glad  to  supplement  it  from  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul 
himself.  3.  The  same  passage  tells  us  the  length  of  his  stay  at  Jerusalem,  and 
with  which  of  the  apostles  he  then  became  acquainted  (Gal.  i.  18-20).  Why  this 
earnestness  of  expression  ?  Because  St.  Paul  is  vindicating  the  independence  of 
his  own  apostleship.  He  did  not  receive  his  gospel  at  second  hand.  It  was  three 
years  before  he  saw  one  of  the  apostles ;  when  he  at  leugth  visited  Jerusalem  it  was 
but  for  fifteen  days,  and  during  the  whole  of  that  visit  he  saw  but  Peter  and  James 
the  Lord's  brother.  Thus  was  verified  Gal.  i.  1,  11,  12.  Notice  in  the  text — 
I.  Paxxl  preaching  (ver.  20).  "We  preach  not  ourselves,"  he  said  some  years 
afterwards,  "  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  St.  Paul  never  found  it  necessary  to 
change  his  subject.  It  lasted  htm  for  his  life.  But  what  was  it  ?  The  dry  monoto- 
nous repetition  of  one  doctrine  ?  Need  I  ask  this  of  any  reader  of  his  Epistles  ? 
Well  may  he  speak  there  of  "  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ"  ;  of  " all  the  ful- 
ness of  the  Godhead  dwelling  in  Christ  bodily."  He  found  in  Christ  an  inex- 
haustible wealth  of  comfort,  of  sympathy,  of  help,  an  unlimited  supply  of  grace. 
And  this  was  what  he  sought  to  communicate.  That  is  true  preaching ;  the 
endeavour  to  unfold  a  reality  and  a  happiness  first  felt  within.  And  he  could  do 
this  at  once — "straightway."  He  could  tell,  as  a  matter  of  plain  proof,  that  he 
who  had  come  out  to  persecute  had  been  arrested  by  a  stronger  hand,  and  con- 
strained to  confess  that  One  whom  he  had  scouted  as  a  crucified  and  dead  man  was 
indeed  living  in  the  fulness  of  strength  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  II.  Paul  in 
SECLUSION.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  St.  Paul's  knowledge  was  at  once  complete, 
or  his  spiritual  life  perfected.  Doubtless  it  was  during  this  interval  of  three  years 
that  he  learned  many  of  those  things  of  which  he  has  left  the  record  in  his  Epistles 
— many  of  those  "  revelations  of  the  Lord,"  e.g.  And  may  it  not  have  been  that  that 
deep  experience  of  the  conflict  with  indwelling  sin,  which  he  details  so  strikingly  in 
Bom.  vii.,  was  then  especially  gained?  It  is  a  great  error  to  suppose  that  an 
apostle,  because  he  was  specially  called  and  equipped,  was  therefore  raised  out  ot 
the  ordinary  experiences  of  the  Christian  life  within,  was  exempted  from  the  trials 
which  other  men  endure  in  rising  from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  righteousness. 
And  the  same  error  runs  on  into  a  province  in  which  it  is  not  a  mere  loss  of  com* 


flHAP.  IX.]  THE  ACTS.  $3 

fort,  bnt  a  grave  and  sometimes  fatal  deception.  Men  talk  as  if  conversion  were 
the  whole  of  a  Christian  life.  Conversion  is  a  great  thing,  but  conversion  must  be 
tried  by  these  tests — first,  is  it  the  commencement  of  a  chaDge?  and  secondly,  is  it 
the  commencement  of  a  progress  ?  A  conversion  which  begins  and  ends  with  itself 
lacks  every  sign  of  that  which  Scripture  so  designates.  A  conversion  trusted  in  as  a 
security  for  salvation,  usurps  the  very  place  of  the  Saviour  Himself,  and  becomes 
at  once  a  delusion  and  a  snare.  III.  Paul  mistbusted.  How  lifelike  are  the 
lessons  of  Scripture.  Which  of  us  cannot  understand  the  shrinking  of  ver.  26. 
St.  Paul  felt  heart  and  soul  with  the  disciples,  and  longed  to  exchange  with  them 
that  sympathy  which  only  Christians  know,  and  which  it  is  misery  to  them  to  be 
constrained  to  hide.  "  But  they  were  aU  afraid  of  him,  and  believed  not  that  he 
was  a  disciple."  It  was  natural:  the  memory  of  their  beloved  Stephen,  and  of 
many  others,  hunted  down  by  his  relentless  rage,  could  not  but  rise  within  them  at 
the  sight  of  him,  and  make  it  difficult  to  believe  that  the  professed  change  was  real. 
But  these  things  turn  to  the  gospel  for  a  testimony  :  the  thought  of  what  Saul  was 
only  increases  the  miracle  of  what  he  is  ;  such  a  change,  so  thorough,  so  astound- 
ing, is  one  of  the  standing  evidences  of  Jesus  and  the  resurrection.  But  at  the 
time  it  was  hard  to  credit.  This  was  the  punishment  of  long  hostility  to  the 
Saviour.  Doubtless  he  bore  it  meekly  and  confessed  that  it  was  his  due.  Bat 
ought  not  the  record  make  us  all  fearful  of  discouraging  the  nascent  faith  of  others  ? 
Take  heed  not  to  quench  the  smoking  flax.  IV.  Pattl  encouraged.  How  well 
does  Barnabas  justify  the  appellation  "  Son  of  Consolation."  He  knew  the  whole 
history  of  the  new  disciple,  and  therefore  he  lost  no  time  in  mediating  between  bini 
and  those  who  doubted  him.  He  brought  him  to  the  apostles,  and  declared  to 
them  his  history.  Thus,  like  Andrew,  he  acted  as  the  encourager  and  helper  of 
another  in  coming  to  Jesus.  It  is  a  blessed  oflSoe  this  of  the  peacemaker ;  more 
especially  when  the  peace  made  is  not  of  earth  only ;  when  it  affects  the  soul  also, 
whether  in  its  dealings  with  Christ  EQmseLf,  or  in  its  relations  to  Christ's  servants. 
What  is  the  aim  of  a  visitor  of  the  poor,  in  its  highest  aspect  ?  Is  it  not  this — ^to 
bring  to  the  apostles — in  other  words,  to  bring  to  Christ  Himself — those  who, 
but  for  such  aid,  might  be  lost  sight  of,  and  be  left  in  disregard,  in  suspicion,  in 
darkness  ?  How  often  has  the  work  of  Christian  charity  been  privileged  to  per- 
form this  highest  office  1  A  Christian  care  for  the  body  may  be  made  available  to 
save  the  soul.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  The  marks  of  true  conversion : — I.  Joyful  con- 
fession OF  Cheist  (ver.  20).  11.  Willing  endukance  of  the  enmity  of  thb 
woBLD  (ver.  23).  III.  Humble  intebcoubse  with  believees  (ver.  26).  IV.  Godlt 
CONDUCT  in  the  8EEVICB  OF  THE  LoBD  (ver.  28).  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. )  Evidence* 
of  conversion  : — When  Saul,  in  answer  to  his  inquiry,  "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to 
do  ?  "  was  told  that  he  was  to  go  as  best  he  could  into  the  city  and  seek  for  further 
advice  there,  it  was  a  trial  of  his  faith  which  ranks  alongside  of  that  of  Abraham. 
For  where  in  the  great  town  of  Damascus  was  there  a  place  or  a  comrade  to  receive 
a  lonely  blind  man  into  shelter  ?  Who  would  tell  him  his  duty  ?  But  hope  begins 
with  any  Christian  the  moment  he  follows  np  the  light  he  has.     I.  What  was 

THEBE   in   THIS   STOBY   SPECIALLY    BELONGING   TO    SaUL,   AND   HENCE   OP    NO   ESSENTIAL 

TALUB  IN  OBDiNARY  USE  NOW?  1.  It  arrcsts  the  imagination  to  think  of  such  a 
reception  for  one  who  had  reasonably  supposed  he  would  come  in  triumph  as  the 
Inquisitor-general  from  Jerusalem.  But  it  is  not  necessary  for  any  one  now  to  pass 
through  those  personal  trials.  2.  His  intense  fright  and  prostration.  The  words 
"trembling  and  astonished"  do  not  belong  to  the  Bible.  Indeed,  much  more  than 
this  is  left  out  of  verses  6  and  6  (see  E.V.).  In  his  own  accounts  of  his  con- 
version, given  before  Agrippa,  and  before  the  mob,  he  did  use  the  expression,  "  It  is 
hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks,"  and  he  did  ask,  "  What  shall  I  do?  "  but 
he  never  in  any  instance  said  he  trembled,  for  he  was  not  that  sort  of  man.  He 
was  contrite  and  submissive,  but  he  was  not  scared.  3.  His  vision.  We  must 
carefully  discriminate  between  what  belonged  to  this  man's  commission  as  an 
apostle,  and  what  belonged  to  his  conversion  as  a  man.  If  the  Lord  ever  makes  a 
new  apostle,  it  is  possible  He  may  deal  with  another  man  in  the  same  way ;  bat  it 
is  not  necessary  to  see  a  luminous  sign,  nor  to  hear  a  supernatural  voice,  in  order 
io  be  a  faithful,  honest,  and  even  an  assured  follower  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
4.  His  physical  catastrophes.  The  circumstances  of  any  conversion  are  quite 
separate  from  the  conversion  itselt  It  cannot  be  a  necessity  now  to  be  violently 
thjown  on  the  ground.    Suffering  is  not  necessarily  repentance.    11.  What  was 

THEEE   WHICH   WAS  ESSENTIAL  AND  EXEMPLABY  FOB  PEBMANENT   USB?       1.    Hia   entire 

intellectual  acceptance  of  the  doctrine  of  Jesas  Christ  as  the  Savioor  of  men.    And 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a, 

that  carried  the  whole  Christian  creed  with  it.  Jesus  Himself  pressed  this  neces* 
sity  in  His  name  (Luke  vi.  46).  He  admitted  it  to  be  His  own  rightful  designation 
(John  xiii.  13).  And  the  apostles  made  it  to  be  the  form  of  doctrinal  confession  of 
Christianity  (Acts  ii.  36).  When  Saul  saw  Jesus,  he  suspected  his  terrible  error, 
and  asked,  "  Who  art  Thou,  Lord?"  And  when  the  answer  came,  •'  I  am  Jesus 
whom  thou  persecutest,"  then  he  knew  the  truth,  and  took  it  to  his  heart  as  he 
called  that  Being,  knowing  Him  to  be  Jesus — Jehovah.  2.  His  immediate  com- 
mencement of  first  Christian  duty  (ver.  9).  The  earliest  low  cry  of  an  infant  is  the 
definite  evidence  of  life  :  it  breathes.  So  we  sing,  *'  Prayer  is  the  Christian's  vital 
breath."  Paul  knew  the  importance  of  an  evidence  like  this  ;  for  he  wrote  after- 
wards about  it  (1  Tim.  ii.  8).  3.  His  change  of  purpose.  Saul's  life  swung  around 
instantly  and  entirely  both  in  feeling  and  in  fact.  He  had  loved  to  persecute 
Christians:  now  he  loved  to  love  them.  He  had  hated  and  derided  Jesus  of 
Nazareth ;  now  he  accepted  Him  heartily  as  the  promised  Messiah.  He  had  been 
•'  exceedingly  mad  "  ;  now  he  was  commensurately  humble  and  penitent.  He  had 
been  under  commission  from  the  chiefs  of  his  bigoted  nation  ;  now  he  said  simply 
enough,  "Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?  "  4.  His  one  ambition.  He  had 
been  thinking  that  he  verily  did  God  service  by  his  laborious  and  passionate  zeal  in 
persecution  ;  now  he  kept  at  work  for  the  mere  joy  of  doing  some  loving  thing  for 
God.  He  rested  by  faith  in  the  merits  of  a  Redeemer  crucified  (Gal.  ii.  20).  He 
put  off  the  old  man,  he  put  on  the  new  (Col.  iii.  9,  10).  He  now  desired  only  to  be 
found  in  Christ,  and  to  be  found  like  Christ.  In  one  lengthy  passage  of  an  epistle, 
he  discloses  his  clear  purpose,  his  passionate  wish,  all  condensed  into  a  single 
paragraph  which  really  is  worth  studying  word  by  word  (Phil.  iii.  7-14).  5.  He 
gave  himself  at  once  by  public  committal  to  the  friends  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  told 
over  and  over  again  the  story  of  his  conversion  (Gal.  i.  20-24).  At  Damascus  he 
was  '•  with  the  disciples  "  (ver.  19).  Even  under  cold  prejudice  at  Jerusalem,  he 
"assayed  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples"  (ver.  26).  (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
Saul  preaching  : — I.  The  pbeachee  as  evidencing  the  tbuth  of  Christianity.  1. 
What  were  the  moral  antecedents  of  this  man  ?  In  general  terms  he  was  what  we 
all  are  by  nature — the  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others.  But  in  addition  to  that 
there  was  a  strong  development  of  the  carnal  mind  which  brought  out  his  enmity 
against  God  in  a  most  striking  light.  He  was  a  virulent  enemy  of  Christ  and  of 
His  Church.  Such  a  sworn  foe  must  have  been  the  last  man  the  Church  had  sup- 
posed would  have  become  not  only  a  convert,  but  a  preacher.  One  could  almost 
as  soon  have  expected  Caiaphas  or  Pilate.  By  no  previous  process  of  training  was 
this  wonderful  work  accomplished ;  but  in  a  moment  when  his  heart  was  bound 
with  enmity  against  Jesus  and  the  truth,  the  proud  heart  and  the  rebellious  will 
were  broken  and  subdued.  To  what  can  you  ascribe  it  but  to  the  power  of  God  ? 
The  hand  that  had  just  grasped  the  weapon  that  was  to  slay  was  now  clasped  in 
prayer.  The  knees  that  never  trembled  when  he  stood  by  Stephen  were  now 
smiting  for  fear.  The  eyes  that  had  gloated  on  the  agonies  of  martyr  were  now 
overflowing  with  tears  of  penitence.  I  pause  to  ask  you  if  this  is  not  a  fact  in 
evidence  which  must  carry  to  every  ingenuous  mind  the  conviction  that  the  religion 
that  could  change  such  a  heart  as  that  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  must  be  Divine  ?  2.  What 
was  his  subsequent  course?  Follow  his  career  from  the  moment  that  he  said, 
"  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  till  he  closed  it  by  a  martyr's  death,  and 
there  is  not  in  the  annals  of  the  Christian  Church  a  character  so  evidencing  the 
truth  of  the  gospel  as  that  shown  in  Saul.  3.  It  is  of  little  consequence  what  may 
have  been  our  antecedents — whether  we  have  been  persecutors  of  Churches,  or 
Pharisees,  wrapping  ourselves  up  in  our  own  righteousness — we  must  all  pass 
through  the  same  spiritual  change  that  he  did.  11.  The  pbeaching  as  illubteatino 
the  nature  of  Christianity.  1.  "  Straightway."  He  asked  no  authority  from 
man.  He  applied  for  no  orders.  He  passed  through  no  theological  training. 
From  the  moment  of  the  discovery  of  Christ  he  became  His  preacher.  I  would  not 
have  you  infer  that  a  man  may  devote  himself  to  the  ministry  apart  from  a  previous 
training ;  for  the  conversion  of  the  apostle  was  miraculous,  and  he  had  been  trained 
in  one  of  the  first  schools  of  the  times  ;  so  that  when  by  the  power  of  ChriBt  his 
heart  was  changed,  he  had  all  the  intellectual  discipline  that  was  esfientially  neces- 
sary to  become  an  able  minister  of  the  New  Testament.  And  yet,  if  it  please  God 
to  convert  a  man  of  inteUigence,  I  see  no  reason  why  that  man,  now  his  heart  is 
glowing  with  the  love  of  Christ,  should  not  straightway  preach  Christ.  The 
authority  that  we  receive  is  not  from  man.  Ordination  is  but  a  recognition  of  the 
Chiuoh ;  a  pledge  on  the  part  of  oar  brethren  of  their  prayers,  sympathies,  and 


CHAP,  rx,]  THE  ACTS.  6ft 

confidence.  2.  But  what  did  Saul  preach?  ••Jesus."  There  may  be  much 
preaching  so  denominated  that  claims  no  title  to  the  character.  Man  may  preach 
theology  without  God,  Churchianity  without  Christianity,  Christianity  without 
Christ,  the  Bible  without  revelation,  the  Cross  without  atonement.  Man  may  do 
all  this,  and  not  preach  Jesus.  The  theme  of  this  newly  awakened  convert  was  all 
summed  up  in  one  precious  and  Divine  name — Jesus  Christ.     III.  The  place  op 

PBEACHING   AS   MANrFESTINO    THE   POWEB   AND   TRIUMPHS   OF  CHRISTIANITY.       1.    He  had 

to  cope  with  (1)  the  pharisaical  Jews.  There  was  much  that  the  Jew  had  to 
allege  in  favour  of  his  religion.  He  could  claim  the  oracles  of  God's  Word  as  sus- 
taining him.  And  yet  the  apostle  adapted  not  his  subject  to  meet  the  prejudices 
or  objections  of  the  Jews,  but  he  met  them  by  a  simple  uplifting  of  Christ  and  un- 
folding of  the  gospel.  (2)  The  Greek  philosophers.  It  was  here  that  his  learning 
came  to  his  help.  If  God  gives  a  man  intellect  and  furnishes  his  mind  with 
learning,  God  intends  that  he  shall  employ  these  powers  in  the  advancement  of  His 
truth.  But  mark,  although  his  reasoning  was  logical  and  profound  when  he  con- 
fronted the  philosophers  of  Athens,  his  theme  still  was  Christ.  (3)  And  thus  this 
man,  wherever  he  went,  whoever  were  his  audience — whether  he  confronted  the 
Jews  in  the  synagogue,  the  sceptics  of  Athens,  or  the  jailor  at  PhUippi,  Christ 
Jesus  was  his  grand,  his  only  theme  ;  and  no  theme  but  this  will  ever  meet  and 
overcome  the  enemies,  the  false  religions,  and  the  oppositions  of  the  world.  Let 
men  go  forth,  making  Christ  their  great  theme,  and  such  is  the  voice  of  that, 
accompanied  with  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  that  it  would  silence  all  the  enemies  of 
the  Church.  2.  What  is  it  so  to  preach  Christ  ?  (1)  Saul  preached  Christ  as  the 
Son  of  God,  and  we  cannot  properly  preach  Christ  without  in  the  very  foreground 
placing  this  grand  article  of  our  creed — that  Christ  is  essentially  Divine.  The 
whole  fabric  of  Christianity  rests  upon  this.  Cut  this  from  under  us,  and  on  what 
do  we  stand— in  what  is  the  sacrifice  for  sinners?  in  what  our  hope  for  eternity? 
But  if  my  Saviour  is  God,  then  my  hope  is  resting  on  Deity,  and  I  know  whom  I 
have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  commit  unto 
Him  until  that  day.  (2)  We  must  preach  the  sacrifice,  the  atonement  of  Christ, 
without  qualification  or  reserve.  This  is  a  day  of  much  reserve  in  the  statement  of 
those  great  cardinals  of  our  faith.  But  the  work  of  Christ  is  what  it  ever  has  been. 
No  change  in  modern  modes  of  thought  or  of  opinion  has  altered  the  essential 
doctrines  of  Christianity.  We  are  not  to  adapt  our  preaching  to  the  education  or 
the  politics  of  the  times.  We  are  to  preach  the  same  glorious  gospel  which  Paul 
preached  when  he  uplifted  the  Cross  of  Christ  as  the  only  hope  of  a  lost  and 
ruined  world.  What  a  grand  feature  was  that  in  his  ministry — Christ  the  Saviour 
of  sinners  1  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,"  &c.  (0.  Winslow,  D.D.)  Saul 
preaching  Christ : — I.  There  is  an  unofficiaij  pbeachtng  of  Christ  incumbent 
UPON  EVERT  ONE  WHO  IS  CONVERTED  BY  His  GBACB.  As  sooH  as  One  experiences 
the  renewing  power  of  the  Spirit,  he  is  brought  under  the  most  powerful  constraint 
to  make  known  the  benefits  he  has  received,  and  to  commend  to  others  his  Saviour. 
Saul  is  a  noble  example  of  this  generous  testimony  for  Christ.  1.  It  was  prompt. 
"Immediately."  There  was  no  dalliance  with  duty,  no  waiting  upon  frames  and 
feeUngs.  Love,  gratitude,  joy,  a  desire  to  retrieve  the  wrongs  of  the  past,  a  yearning 
to  direct  others,  above  all  a  desire  to  honour  Christ,  led  him  at  once  to  herald  forth 
the  name  of  Jesus.  2.  It  was  brave.  He  did  not  simply  enter  his  name  upon  the 
roll  of  the  disciples,  nor  content  himself  with  speaking  privately  to  his  former 
acquaintances,  nor  open  some  private  apartment  where  the  Jews  might  hear  his 
testimony ;  but  on  the  Sabbath  day,  when  the  synagogues  were  thronged,  Saul,  in 
the  face  of  friend  and  foe,  made  public  confession  of  Jesus.  3.  It  was  uncom- 
promising. He  did  not  undertake  to  strike  a  balance  between  his  own  convictions 
and  the  prejudices  of  his  hearers.  He  did  not  confess  Jesus  as  a  good  man,  or  as  an  in- 
spired prophet,  or  as  a  supernatural  being  above  angel.  He  •'  proclaimed  Jesus  that 
He  is  the  Son  of  God."  II.  A  higheb  and  officiai.  preaching  of  Christ  is  incumbent 
UPON  those,  and  those  only,  who  are  duly  called  and  qualified  to  enter  upon  it. 
This  is  the  preaching  which  Saul  did  after  his  return  from  Arabia.  A  study  of 
his  course  throws  much  light  upon  the  prerequisites  to  the  gospel  ministry.  It 
must  be  preceded — 1.  By  a  Divine  call.  The  call  of  Saul  was  extraordinary 
in  its  method  (Acts  xxvi.  16),  but  in  essence  the  same  that  every  minister  must 
have.  There  must  be  an  impression  deeply  wrought  by  the  Spirit  that  it  is  ouj 
duty  to  serve  God  in  the  ministry — a  conviction  that  grows  stronger  as  it  is  prayer- 
fully deUberated  upon,  and  does  not  yield  in  prospect  of  the  sacrifices  which  such 
a  hf e  entails.  2.  Bj  thorough  preparation.  One  would  have  supposed  that  Saala 
VOL.  Hf  6 


€6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  nc. 

graduate  of  the  school  of  Gamaliel,  a  man  of  broad  literary  culture,  a  master  ol 
the  law,  an  acute  theologian,  a  ready  debater,  an  eloquent  orator,  might  receive  his 
commission  at  once.  But  there  were  schools  for  the  ancient  prophets.  The  twelve 
were  for  three  years  tmder  the  personal  tuition  of  our  Lord.  Saul  must  first  go 
into  Arabia,  and,  like  Moses  and  the  Baptist,  come  under  the  immediate  tuition  of 
Heaven.  There  he  received  what  he  so  expressively  calls  "  my  gospel  "  (Gal.  i.  11). 
If  such  tuition  were  needful  for  one  so  thoroughly  furnished,  what  shall  we  say  o£ 
those  who  would  have  young  converts  rush  into  the  vows  and  responsibilities  of  the 
ministry  ?  3.  By  orderly  commission.  The  usual  method  then,  as  now,  was 
through  the  Church  authorities.  But  with  the  ordinary  office  of  the  preacher  Saul 
was  to  unite  the  extraordinary  office  of  the  apostle.  His  commission,  therefore, 
was  made  an  extraordinary  one.  Instead  of  going  up  to  Jerusalem  to  receive 
ordination  from  the  apostles,  he  went  into  Arabia,  and  there  received  it  immediately 
from  the  hands  of  the  Lord  (Gal.  i.  1).  A  Divine  commission  is  as  necessary  now 
as  it  was  then.  IH.  The  matter,  manneb,  and  EFrEcis  of  pbeachinq  Chbist  arb 
THE  SAME  IN  ALL  AGES.  They  are  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  passage.  1.  The 
matter  is  the  same.  Saul  sounds  here  the  keynote  of  his  whole  after -ministry.  He 
preaches  "  Jesus,  that  He  is  the  Son  of  God. "  Upon  His  Deity  he  bases  the  whole 
system  of  doctrines  that  he  proclaims.  To  this  he  adds  the  evidence  of  Hia 
Messiahship.  He  establishes  His  claim  as  the  anointed  Prophet,  revealing  tke 
Father ;  the  anointed  Priest,  making  atonement ;  the  anointed  King,  reigning  until 
all  enemies  are  subdued.  This  is  the  gospel  which  every  minister  is  commissioned 
to  preach,  which  every  layman  is  under  obUgation  unofficially  to  teach.  Nothing 
can  supersede  it.  It  will  bear  no  admixture  of  human  philosophy,  it  will  submit  to 
no  arraignment  at  the  bar  of  human  reason.  It,  and  it  alone,  goes  down  to  the 
deep  necessities  of  the  human  heart,  and  has  power  to  lift  man  up  into  the  life  of 
holiness  and  into  the  light  of  hope.  2.  The  manner  is  the  same.  Saul's  preaching 
was  (1)  Scriptural.  He  confounded  the  Jews  by  proving  from  the  Scriptures  that 
Jesus  was  Christ.  He  who  does  this  stands  upon  high  vantage-ground.  It  is  the 
men  who  are  "  mighty  in  the  Scriptures  "  whose  teaching  is  crowned  with  success. 
(2)  Fearless.  "  Boldly."  He  did  not  hesitate  through  fear  of  prejudice  or  opposi- 
tion. He  did  not  consult  the  partiaUties  or  caprices  of  his  hearers.  Never  was 
such  preaching  needed  more  than  now.  It  requires  courage  to  deal  faithfully  with 
the  consciences  of  impenitent  sinners  and  worldly-minded  church-members.  (3) 
Humble.  "  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  He  assumed  no  authority  or 
superiority  of  his  own.  He  was  but  the  mouthpiece  through  whom  Christ  spake. 
He  relied  upon  the  power  of  Christ  to  make  his  message  effectual.  3.  The  effects 
are  the  same.  (1)  The  apostle  found  in  Damascus  and  at  Jerusalem  what  he  did 
everywhere  else,  "  To  the  one  we  are  the  savour  of  death,"  &c.  In  every  community 
two  classes  will  appear — enemies  and  friends,  (a)  With  the  former  the  enmity  of 
the  carnal  heart  will  be  aroused,  and  will  lead  on  to  persecution.  If  the  Jews  in 
Damascus  and  Jerusalem  cannot  gainsay  Saul's  arguments,  they  can  at  least  "  lay 
wait  to  kill  him. "  (&)  But  very  different  are  the  effects  upon  another.  Saul  soon 
found  himself  surrounded  by  a  body  of  disciples — "his  disciples,"  as  the  R.V. 
teaches  us  in  ver.  25.  Faithful  work  for  Christ  will  not  be  left  without  result. 
(2)  The  fruits  of  faithful  teaching  are  gathered  after  the  teacher  is  gone.  Saul  has 
been  "  brought  down  to  Caesarea,  and  sent  away  to  Tarsus,"  but  the  Church  of 
God  remains,  and  "  has  peace,  being  edified,"  &c.  (T.  D.  Witherspoon,  D.D.) 
The  testimony  of  Christ : — I.  The  source  from  which  it  must  proceed.  A  heart 
apprehended  of  Christ  and  converted.  II.  Its  contents.  Christ  the  Son  of  God 
and  the  Saviour  of  men.  HI.  Its  success.  1.  Astonishment.  2.  Blessed  fruits. 
(K.  Gerok.)  Paul's  ministry  at  Damascus: — I.  The  character  op  his  spiritoaIi 
chanoe.  1.  It  was  radical.  He  preached  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  what  he  had 
previously  given  his  whole  being  to  deny.  Saul  the  persecutor  becomes  Paul  the 
apostle.  2.  It  was  genuine.  He  preached  in  the  synagogues,  where  he  was  well 
known  as  the  High  Priest's  commissioner — the  worst  place  for  an  impostor, 
but  the  best  place  for  one  who  wished  to  make  some  atonement  for  his  past  life. 
3.  It  was  startling.  The  people  were  "  amazed,"  as  well  they  might  be.  II.  Tetb 
NATURE  OF  HIS  NEW  FAITH  (vcr.  22).  It  was— 1.  Growable — "  he  increased."  The 
more  he  examined  Christ's  claims,  and  reflected  on  His  truths,  the  stronger  grew 
his  confidence  and  affection.  Christianity  is  not  a  dry  notion,  but  a  living  germ. 
Once  planted,  every  earnest  thought  about  it  will  only  serve  to  strike  its  roots 
deeper.  2.  Discussable.  It  was  a  thing  Paul  felt  he  could  take  into  the  synagogues 
and  submit  to  competent  critics.  Christianity  is  no  mystic  sentiment  that  admitfl  ol 


OHAP.  K.]  THE  ACTS.  67 

no  explanation,  nor  a  musty  sentiment  that  totters  on  scrutiny ;  it  is  intelligible  in 
its  facts,  and  rational  in  its  theories.  3.  Demonstrable.  "  Proving."  By  manifes- 
tation of  the  truth  he  commended  himself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of 
God.  III.  The  spirit  of  his  first  auditors  (ver.  23).  Their  malignity  was — 1. 
Deadly.  They  sought  to  kill  him.  Violence  has  always  been  the  argument  of 
bigotry,  which  no  man  knew  better  than  Saul ;  but  truth  ever  seeks  to  kill  error  by 
saving  the  advocate.  2.  Deliberate  evil  as  well  as  good  has  its  plans.  3.  Frustrated 
(ver.  25).  In  his  deliverance  we  see — (1)  The  way  in  which  Providence  delivers 
the  good.  God  could  have  launched  a  thunderbolt  and  crushed  Saul's  enemies ; 
but  as  is  usually  the  case  God  saved  him  by  his  own  caution  and  the  assistance  of 
the  disciples.  (2)  The  inevitable  doom  of  evil.  God  "  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own 
craftiness."  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  first  essay  of  a  warrior  of  Christ : — He 
must — I.  Inviolably  swear  allegiance  to  the  banner  (vers.  20,  23).  II.  Diligently 
EMPLOY  HIS  weapons  (ver.  22).  III.  Modestly  take  his  place  in  the  ranks  (vers. 
26,  28).  IV.  Courageously  look  the  enemy  in  the  face  (vers.  22,  29).  V. 
Obediently  retire  at  the  signal.      (K.  Gerok.)  The  probation  years  in  tJie 

ministerial  office : — Note  here  the  first  ofl&cial — 1.  Tasks.  2.  Joys.  3.  Sufferings. 
{Ibid.)  Conversion  leads  to  Christian  activity : — Sir  James  Young  Simpson,  Bart., 
M.D.,  is  a  name  that  will  shine  in  the  annals  of  Scotland,  and  as  a  star  of  the  first 
magnitude  among  her  numerous  eminent  men.  The  son  of  a  poor  baker  in  Bath- 
gate, who  had  much  ado  to  keep  his  head  above  water,  he  rose  to  receive  the 
honour  of  a  baronetcy  from  the  Queen,  "  in  recognition  of  his  professional  merits, 
especially  the  introduction  of  chloroform."  His  public  life  was  always  marked  by 
outward  consistency,  and  by  an  observance  of  the  externals  of  religion,  numbering 
among  his  friends  some  of  the  leading  divines  of  Edinburgh,  where  he  lived  and 
laboured.  But  he  was  unacquainted  with  the  power  of  religion  until  1861,  and  the 
person  who  was  most  instrumental  in  the  marked  change  which  was  wrought  was 
an  invalid  lady,  one  of  his  patients,  whose  quiet  words  spoken,  and  whose  letters  of 
grateful  Christian  interest  written  to  him,  took  hold  of  his  heart,  by  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  In  one  of  her  letters  she  said,  having  written  in  the  kindest  possible 
way  concerning  him  and  his  household:  "  What  is  to  fill  this  heart  to  all  eternity? 
When  benevolence  shall  have  run  its  course,  when  there  shall  be  no  sick  to  heal, 
no  disease  to  cure :  when  all  I  have  been  engaged  about  comes  to  a  dead  stop,  what 
is  to  fill  this  heart,  and  thought,  and  these  powers  of  mind  ?  Only  the  God-Man  1 
If  then,  why  not  now  ?  "  In  this  way  he  was  led  to  Christ,  and  soon  began  to 
undertake  active  and  public  Christian  work.  The  grass  was  scarcely  green  on  the 
grave  of  his  long-afflicted  son  Jamie,  when  we  find  him  giving  a  public  address  to 
medical  students,  speaking  of  himself  as  "  one  of  the  oldest  sinners  and  one  of  the 
youngest  believers  in  the  room,"  and  earnestly  entreating  them  to  open  the  doors  of 
their  heart  and  receive  the  Saviour.  "  In  Christ,"  said  he,  "  you  will  find  a 
Saviour,  a  Companion,  a  Counsellor,  a  Friend,  a  Brother,  who  loves  you  with  a  love 
greater  than  human  heart  can  conceive."    {The  Quiver.)  "And  straightway 

he  preached  Christ  "  ; — Henry  Ward  Beecher  left  college  with  no  thought  of  the 
Church,  was  rather  a  wild  youth,  and,  with  two  companions,  followed  the  pioneers 
to  the  backwoods  to  shoot,  hunt,  and  fish.  In  the  midst  of  this  wild  life  he 
happened  to  hear  a  Methodist  minister,  and  the  truth  struck  home  to  his  heart. 
The  effect  was  instantaneous.  Like  Saul,  when  he  was  struck  down  on  his  way  to 
Damascus,  his  first  question  was,  "  What  wUt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  Beecher'a 
enthusiastic  nature  admitted  of  nothing  else.  He  sold  his  rod  and  gun  f6r  a  horse, 
and  began  to  move  from  place  to  place,  preaching  to  the  backwoodsmen.  This  was 
the  beginning  of  Beecher's  ministry. 

Vers.  23-25.  And  after  many  days  were  fulfilled,  the  Jews  took  counsel  to  kill 
him.  .  .  .  Tlien  the  disciples  took  him  by  night,  and  let  inm  down  by  the  wall  in 
a  basket. — Paul's  deliverance  by  the  basket: — I.  God  wages  war  with  pride  in 
EVERY  FORM.  1.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  greater  wonder  than  that  man  should  be 
proud.  Turn  where  we  wUl,  everything  seems  to  teach  humility.  The  grass 
whispers,  "  You  are  dependent  on  us  for  food."  The  beasts  say,  "  You  have  to 
borrow  our  strength. "  The  clouds  drop  down  a  voice:  "If  we  descend  not  upon 
you,  you  die."  2.  And  God,  from  time  to  time,  makes  man  learn  this  lesson, 
whether  he  be  His  friend  or  foe.  Frogs,  fiies,  lice,  locusts — all  petty  in  themselves, 
become  terrible  to  proud  Pharaoh ;  and  worms  become  fatal  beneath  the  royal  purplet 
when  the  proud  Herod  is  to  be  destroyed.  3.  To  none  does  God  more  unmistakably 
teach  the  folly  of  pride  than  to  His  own  people.    A  great  part  of  life's  discipline  ia 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Tchap.  a. 

just  a  self-emptying  in  this  respect — that  man  may  learn  that  God  is  all-in-all.  The 
greatest  of  God's  servants  are,  from  time  to  time,  reduced  to  be  dependent  upon  the 
poorest  earthly  instrumentality — Elijah  upon  a  handful  of  meal ;  Jeremiah  upon 
old  rags  and  clouts,  as  he  is  drawn  up  out  of  the  pit ;  Paul  upon  a  basket.  God  so 
often  uses  poor  instrumentaUties  for  accomplishing  the  deliverance  of  His  people, 
because  the  tendency  of  man  is  to  glorify  the  instrument  (Hab.  1  16).  4.  God 
will  fix  man's  eye  upon  Himself.  5.  God  would  show  His  lordship  in  energising  them. 
II.  The  good  effects  of  a  knowledge  of  this.  If  we  see  plainly  that  God  often 
uses  very  poor  earthly  instrumentality — 1.  We  shall  not  dfspair  in  great  troubles, 
because  great  ways  of  deliverance  are  not  opened  up  before  us.  Goliath,  armed  in  his 
panoply  of  brass,  must  surely  be  met  with  something  in  proportion  ;  but  God  teaches 
the  secret  of  the  smooth  stones  of  the  brook — the  proportion  that  He  knows  of,, 
though  we  knew  it  not.  Many  a  child  of  God  is  like  the  lion  entangled  in  the 
meshes  of  the  net,  that  found  deliverance  by  the  nibbhng  of  the  mouse.  2.  We 
shall  be  very  cheerful  in  our  times  of  trial,  feeling  that  there  are  possibilities  of 
deliverance  all  around  us.  "With  God  all  things  are  possible."  The  man  of  God 
is  taught  that  he  has  resources  in  everything.  3.  We  shall  be  in  a  very  humble 
frame  of  mind,  ready  to  receive  help  from  any  direction.  Sometimes  God  has  to 
make  His  people  ready.  The  spirit  of  Naaman  is  too  much  in  them  ;  they  have 
Abanas  and  Pharpars  of  their  own,  which  they  think  better  than  anything  else, 
unless  it  be  something  very  striking  and  grand.  And,  sometimes,  our  blessing 
comes  by  a  very  humble  hand.  During  one  of  his  severe  illnesses,  Bengel,  the  great 
commentator,  sent  for  a  student,  and  requested  him  to  impart  a  word  of  consolation. 
The  youth  replied,  "  Sir,  I  am  but  a  pupil ;  I  don't  know  what  to  say  to  a  teacher 
like  you."  "  What,"  said  Bengel,  '*  a  divinity  student !  and  not  able  to  com- 
municate a  word  of  Scriptural  comfort  I  "  The  student,  abashed,  contrived  to  utter 
the  text,  "  The  blood  of  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  "  That 
is  the  very  word  I  want,"  said  Bengel;  "it  is  quite  enough";  and,  taking  him 
affectionately  by  the  hand,  dismissed  him.  The  great  commentator  was  ready  to 
receive  the  blessing  from  the  hand  of  the  humble  student ;  and  God  was  ready  to 
give  it.  4.  We  thall  be  hearty  to  use  the  means  we  have  at  hand.  We  never  know 
what  such  means  will  do  until  we  try.  There  is  a  wonderful  elasticity  in  little 
means,  when  God  is  giving  them  His  blessing.  In  taking  down  the  scaffolding  of 
a  huge  mill  chimney,  the  men  forgot  to  affix  the  rope  by  which  the  foreman, 
directing  their  operations  from  the  top,  was  to  descend.  Amid  the  frantic  cries  of 
the  poor  fellow  above,  and  of  the  crowd  below,  the  shrill  voice  of  his  wife  was  heard 
exclaiming,  "  Tak'  off  thy  stocking,  lad,  and  unravel  it,  and  let  down  the  thread 
with  a  piece  of  mortar."  Presently  the  little  thread  came  waving  down  the 
chimney,  and  reached  the  outstretched  hands  waiting  for  it ;  then  it  was  attached 
to  a  ball  of  string,  which  Jem  was  asked  to  pull  gently  up.  To  the  end  of  the 
string  was  attached  the  forgotten  rope,  which  was  drawn  up  in  turn,  and  amidst 
cries  of  "  Thank  God  !  "  was  fastened  to  the  iron,  and  bore  the  man  safely  to  the 
ground.  That  is  as  good  an  instance  as  we  could  find  anywhere  of  making  good 
use  of  little  means,  and  let  us  follow  it  ourselves.  5.  The  circle  of  possible  aids 
will  be  enlarged.  We  are  very  apt  in  time  of  trouble  to  take  very  contracted  views 
of  the  circle  in  which  God  is  Ukely  to  work.  We  shut  out  all  the  little  ways  of 
help,  and  then  the  great  ones  are  reduced  to  very  few  indeed ;  and  as  a  necessary 
consequence,  down  sinks  our  heart  in  distress.  We  need  continually  to  be  reminded 
that  even  the  stones  can  be  made  bread.  6.  We  shall  be  kept  humble  in  the  day  of 
prosperity,  not  knowing  when,  and  for  how  much,  we  mny  be  indebted  to  little  things. 
(P.  B.  Power,  M.A.)  Humiliating  deliverance:— (Cf.  2  Cor.  xi.  32,  33).  Saul  had 
returned  from  his  Arabian  retirement,  and  his  powerful  preaching  aroused  the  animo- 
sity of  the  Jews.  The  Ethnarch,  under  the  king  of  the  Nabothaan  Arabs,  sided  with 
them,  and  watched  the  gates  of  the  city  to  take  Saul.  It  was  a  close  investment, 
and  with  such  powerful  enemies  the  chances  were  all  against  him.  At  this  juncture 
a  device  occurred  to  his  friends,  recalling  that  of  Rahab  (Josh.  ii.  15),  and  David 
(1  Sam.  xix.  12).  It  was  a  humiliating  circumstance,  and  is  placed  by  Paul  amongst 
"  the  things  that  concern  my  infirmities."  Most  men  would  have  banished  it  from 
their  thoughts  and  concealed  it.  Of  such  odd  and  inconvenient  things  the  religion 
of  Christ  can  make  splendid  use.  This  was — I.  An  instance  of  peculiak  disci- 
pline. 1.  That  there  was  something  in  Paul's  mental  constitution  requiring  to  be 
80  dealt  with  we  may  be  certain — over-sensitiveness,  a  sense  of  personal  dignity, 
pride  of  race.  In  such  ways  we  get  the  starch  taken  out  of  us.  2.  There  was  need 
lor  the  most  contradictory  quahties  in  an  apostle.     He  had  to  be  strictly  upright, 


<JHAP.  IX.]  THE  ACTS,  69 

yet  "  all  things  to  all  men  " ;  finn  and  stern  in  rebuking  sin,  yet  gentle  and  forgiving 
to  the  penitent ;  keenly  sensitive  to  the  claims  of  the  Master  and  His  representatives, 
but  oblivious  to  mere  personal  consideration.  Whilst  he  had  to  confess  that  he 
was  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints  ;  he  had  to  withstand  "  pillars,"  and  those  who 
•'seemed  to  be  somewhat  to  the  face"  (Gal.  ii.).  Of  the  stiff  Pharisee  God  was 
making  a  keen  and  flexible  weapon.  3.  This  circumstance  was  in  a  line  with  his 
confusion  on  the  highway,  when  he  was  "  led  by  the  hand."  That  it  made  a  deep 
impression  on  his  mind  we  learn  from  the  minuteness  of  the  description  after  so 
many  years.  He  uses  the  specific  word  for  "rope-work  hamper,"  while  Luke 
employs  the  more  general  "  basket."  4.  Many  would  have  hesitated  to  avail  them- 
selves of  such  a  means  of  escape  as  making  them  ridiculous,  and  thus  detrimental 
to  authority  and  usefulness.  H.  A  tkst  of  the  faith  of  the  disciples.  There 
are  many  who  cannot  receive  the  truth  for  its  own  worth.  Moral  influence  is  with 
them  bound  up  with  personal  position  and  external  dignity.  Yet  a  humble  exterior 
is  no  proof  of  real  lowering.  Splendour  may  cloke  corruption  and  spiritual  death. 
The  appearance  of  an  apostle  dangling  in  a  rope-basket  was  therefore  a  trial  to  the 
new  converts.  One  might  fancy  themselves  exclaiming,  "  Where  is  the  miracle,  the 
sign?"  So  Paul  banters  the  Corinthians — I  am  a  fool  I  "bear  with  me."  With 
men  God  ever  pursues  this  separative  process,  dissolving  the  temporal  and  accidental 
from  the  essential  and  eternal.  III.  A  specimen  of  the  ieony  of  Providence. 
In  certain  historical  events  one  seems  to  detect  such  a  mood,  especially  in  the  cries 
of  nations  and  churches.  The  O.  T.,  e.g.,  in  the  stories  of  Moses,  Jacob,  Gideon, 
is  full  of  them.  The  means  of  checkmating  the  enemy  of  souls  is  reduced  to 
a  minimum — a  ridiculous,  preposterous  circumstance,  but  it  is  sufficient.  And 
when  one  compares  the  huge  preparations  and  complex  machinery  of  Satan  with 
tiie  simplicity  of  the  Divine  instrumentalities,  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God  are 
thrown  into  relief.  There  are  traces  of  a  contempt  for  Satan  in  the  Bible.  Let  us 
take  heart,  then,  as  we  think  of  the  grim  laughter  of  the  angels  over  abortive  schemes 
and  transparent  blunders  of  the  prince  of  darkness.      (A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.)  The 

methods  of  Divine  providence  : — I.  Never  involve  an  unnecessary  miracle.  Had 
occasion  required  it,  all  the  forces  of  the  universe  would  have  been  at  Paul's  disposal. 
The  circumstances  were  apparently  desperate,  but  not  beyond  the  God-directed 
ingenuity  of  brotherly  hearts.  God  helps  those  who  help  themselves — and  God's 
ministers.  A  chariot  of  fire  is  not  harnessed  when  a  rope-basket  will  do.  In 
trouble  or  work  expect  deliverance  or  help,  not  from  some  striking  supernatural 
interposition,  but  rather  from  some  humble  source  overlooked  because  so  common- 
place and  seemingly  inadequate.  II.  Often  involve  curious  expedients.  An 
ambassador  of  Christ  making  his  escape  in  a  rope-basket!  Yet  spies,  defeated 
warriors,  and  kings  have  been  glad  of  the  even  more  ridiculous  disguises.  And 
God's  people  in  escaping  persecution  or  seeking  truth  must  not  be,  and  have  not 
been,  particular  as  to  what  people  think.  Carey  posed  as  an  Indigo  planter, 
Zacchffius  perched  himself  in  a  sycamore  tree,  and  the  Bible  had  to  be  smuggled 
into  Italy  under  a  lady's  crinoline.  HI.  Are  frequently  the  simplest  and  thb 
easiest  of  adoption.  There  would  be  no  trouble  in  getting  a  basket.  Saul  would 
have  had  no  difficulty  in  making  one  if  necessary.  Aid  when  hit  upon,  how  much 
more  effective  this  plan  must  have  seemed  than  a  score  of  others  that  possibly  may 
have  been  entertained — bribing  the  governor,  dodging  the  guard,  &o.  How  often 
God  rebukes  us  by  setting  aside  our  apparently  clever  but  really  cumbrous  con- 
trivances, and  using  the  humblest  instruments.  Shamgar's  ox-goad,  Samson's 
jaw-bone,  David's  sling  and  stone,  wrought  wonders  at  times  impossible  to  the 
whole  might  of  Israel.  IV.  Abe  always  the  best  under  the  oibcumstanceb. 
The  question  for  Saul  is  the  question  for  this  practical  age — not "  How  does  it 
look  ?  "  but  ♦*  How  wiU  it  do  ?  "  And  the  rope-basket  did  admirably.  It  was  soft, 
light,  strong,  and  no  one  would  dream  of  looking  for  an  apostle  in  it.  Do  not  then 
criticise  the  form  which  a  given  method  of  providence  may  take  ?  Whatever  it 
may  be,  it  is  the  best  because  God  employs  it.  V.  Differ  AccoRDrNO  to  various 
eequibements.  Paul  was  often  afterwards  in  peril,  but  never  had  occasion  to  use 
the  rope-basket  again.  This  would  have  been  useless  in  a  similar  crisis  (chap, 
xxiii.),  where  a  band  of  soldiers  was  required.  Because  God  delivers  us  in  a  given 
fashion,  or  blesses  us  in  a  certain  way  at  one  time,  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
specific  acts  will  be  repeated.  There  is  as  much  variety  in  the  methods  of  provi- 
dence as  in  the  methods  of  nature ;  both  deal  with  needs  as  they  arise.  {J.  W. 
Bum.)  Providence  :  its  methods  strange  only  to  u» : — I  looked  upon  the  wrong 

«r  back  side  of  a  piece  of  arras  (or  tapestry) :  it  seemed  to  me  as  a  continaed 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx, 

nonsense.  There  was  neither  head  nor  foot  therein,  confusion  itself  had  as  much 
method  in  it — a  company  of  thrums  and  threads,  with  many  pieces  and  patches  of 
several  sorts,  sizes,  and  colours;  all  which  signified  nothing  to  my  understanding. 
But  then,  looking  on  the  reverse,  or  right  side  thereof,  all  put  together  did  spell 
excellent  proportions,  and  figures  of  men  and  cities ;  so  that,  indeed,  it  was  a 
history,  not  wrote  with  a  pen,  but  wrought  with  a  needle.  If  men  look  upon  some 
of  God's  providential  dealings  with  a  mere  eye  of  reason,  they  will  hardly  find  any 
sense  therein,  such  their  muddle  and  disorder.  But,  alas  I  the  wrong  side  is 
objected  to  our  eyes,  while  the  right  side  is  presented  to  the  high  God  of  heaven, 
who  knoweth  that  an  admirable  order  doth  result  out  of  this  confusion  :  and  what 
is  presented  to  Him  at  present  may,  hereafter,  be  so  showed  to  us  as  to  convince 
our  judgments  in  the  truth  thereof.  (T.  Fuller,  D.D.)  Providence,  interposition 
of : — A  story  is  related — in  connection  with  the  ejectment  of  the  two  thousand 
ministers  from  the  Church  of  England — of  Henry  Havers,  of  Catherine  Hall, 
Cambridge.  Being  pursued  by  enemies  who  sought  to  apprehend  him,  he  sought 
refuge  in  a  malt-house  and  crept  into  the  kiln.  Immediately  afterward  he  observed 
a  spider  fixing  the  first  line  of  a  large  and  beautiful  web  across  the  narrow  entrance. 
The  web  being  placed  directly  between  him  and  the  hght,  he  was  so  much  struck 
with  the  skill  of  the  insect  weaver,  that  for  a  while  he  forgot  his  own  imminent 
danger ;  but  by  the  time  the  network  had  crossed  and  recrossed  the  mouth  of  the 
kiln  in  every  direction  the  pursuers  came  to  search  for  him.  He  listened  as  they 
approached,  and  distinctly  overheard  one  of  them  say,  "  It's  of  no  use  to  look  in 
there ;  the  old  villain  can  never  be  there.  Look  at  that  spider's  web ;  he  oould 
never  have  got  in  there  without  breaking  it." 

Vers.  26-30.  And  when  Saul  was  come  to  Jemsalem  he  essayed  to  Join  himself 
to  the  disciples. — Saul's  emotions  on  returning  to  Jerusalem : — He  was  returning 
to  it  from  a  spiritual  as  Ezra  had  from  a  bodily  captivity,  and  to  his  renewed 
mind  all  things  appeared  new.  What  an  emotion  smote  his  heart  at  the  first 
distant  view  of  the  Temple,  that  house  of  sacrifice,  that  edifice  of  prophecy.  Its 
sacrifices  had  been  realised,  the  Lamb  of  God  had  been  offered ;  its  prophecies  had 
been  fulfilled,  the  Lord  had  come  unto  it.  As  he  approached  the  gates,  he  might 
have  trodden  the  very  spot  where  he  had  so  exultingly  assisted  in  the  death  of 
Stephen,  and  he  entered  them  perfectly  content,  were  it  God's  will,  to  be  dragged 
out  through  them  to  the  same  fate.  He  would  feel  a  pecuUar  tie  of  brotherhood 
to  that  martyr,  for  he  could  not  now  be  ignorant  that  the  same  Jesus  who  in  finch 
glory  had  called  him,  had  but  a  little  time  before  appeared  in  the  same  glory  to 
assure  the  expiring  Stephen.  The  ecstatic  look  and  words  of  the  dying  saint  now 
came  fresh  upon  his  memory  with  their  real  meaning.  When  he  entered  into  the 
city,  what  deep  thoughts  were  suggested  by  the  haunts  of  his  youth,  and  by  the 
sight  of  the  spots  where  he  had  so  eagerly  sought  that  knowledge  which  he  had 
BO  eagerly  abandoned.  What  an  intolerable  burden  had  he  cast  off  !  He  felt  as 
a  glorified  spirit  may  be  supposed  to  feel  on  revisiting  the  scenes  of  its  fleshly 
concern.  (J.  S.  Uowson,  D.D.)  Saul's  first  visit  after  his  conversion  to 
Jerusalem : — I.  His  admission  to  Chobch  membeeship.  1.  Sought.  "  He  es- 
sayed," i.e.,  endeavoured  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples.  Amongst  them  was 
Peter — an  object  of  special  attraction  (Gal.  i.  18).  He  had  heard,  doubtless,  of 
his  wonderful  sermon  at  Pentecost,  and  otherwise  from  the  Christians  at  Damascus. 
James  was  there,  too,  the  Lord's  brother.  This  endeavour  to  get  into  the  new 
fellowship  indicated — (1)  A  wonderful  change  in  his  social  character.  Three  years 
before,  the  disciples  were  the  object  of  his  indignation.  (2)  The  law  of  social  life. 
There  is  a  craving  for  intercourse  with  those  of  kindred  thoughts,  sympathies,  and 
aims.  2.  Obstructed.  •'  They  were  all  afraid  of  him."  It  would  seem  that  he 
had  no  letters  of  commendation  from  Damascus,  owing  to  the  hurried  manner  of 
his  escape.  So  that  we  are  not  surprised  at  the  panic  here.  This  obstruction, 
however,  must  have  been— (1)  Painful  to  him.  He  had  been  a  Christian  three 
years,  had  held  fellowship  with  the  disciples  at  Damascus,  had  preached  boldly 
there,  and  had  studied  the  Christian  faith  and  cultivated  the  Christian  life  in  the 
solitudes  of  Arabia.  So  he  must  have  felt  it  hard,  though  just,  to  have  been  now 
suspected.  (2)  Natural.  Purity  and  peace  required  caution,  and  the  apostle'a 
case  was  a  suspicious  one,  with  the  persecution  fresh  upon  the  memory.  3.  At- 
tained. This  was  through  the  kind  offices  of  Barnabas,  a  man  known  and 
honoured  by  them,  and  possibly  an  acquaintance  of  Saul's.  As  Cyprus  was  only  a 
few  hours'  sail  from  CiUcia,  Barnabas,  in  introducing  Saul,  pleads  on  his  behalf 


oaAT.  n.]  THE  ACTS.  71 

the  only  sufficient  qualification  for  Church  membership  (ver.  27),     4,  Enjoyed 
(ver.  28).     He  would— (1)   '« Come  in "  to  them  with   some  new  thought,  new 
impressions,  new  deeds  wrought  for  Christ,  which  would  stimulate  and  cheer  the 
brethren.     (2)  "  Go  out  "  with  their  prayers,  counsel,  love,  bracing  him  for  heroic 
work.    Blessed  the  man  who  has  a  spiritual  home.    Such  homes  are  where  moral 
giants  are  trained.     II.  His  PRociiAMATioN  op  the  gospel  (ver.  29),     1.  The  subject 
of  his  ministry.     "  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  " — a  subject  he  once  hated,  and 
which  he  preferred  to  many  subjects  which,  as  a  man  of  genius  and  learning,  he 
might  have  taken.     He  viewed  everything  through  it,  and  judged  the  world  by  it. 
2.  Its  sphere — '•  Grecians  " — Hellenistic  Jews.    The  same  zeal  which  had  combated 
Stephen  now  defended  the  cause  for  which  he  died.     3.  Its  style.     (1)  "Boldly," 
Nothing  but  an  invincible  courage  could  have  enabled  him  to  appear  before  such 
an  audience  on  such  a  theme.    (2)  He  '^  disputed."    He  did  not,  as  a  fanatic 
would,  declaim,  but  submitted  theses  for  discussion.    4.  Its  results.     (1)  Persecu- 
tion to  himself.     (2)  Increased  sympathy  of  the  Church  (ver.  30).     (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)        Saul  at  Jerusalem: — 1.  It  was  in  bUndness  that  he  had  first  entered 
Damascus,  and  now  he  is  forced  to  flee  from  it  under  the  friendly  cover  of  darkness. 
As  he  proceeded  to  Jerusalem,  he  could  not  pass  the  scene  of  his  conversion  without 
a  holy  shudder.    Every  turn  of  the  road  must  have  reminded  him  of  his  eastward 
journey.     But  he  hurries  westward  a  changed  man.     And  he  must  have  wondered 
how  he  should  meet  his  instigators,  and  have  surmised   how  they  would  curse 
him.    And  if  he  passed  the  place  of  Stephen's  martyrdom,  his  soul  must  have 
trembled  in  its  gratitude  to  sovereign  mercy.     2.  His  arrival  created  as  much  doubt 
among  the  Christians  as  it  had  done  at  Damascus.    He  did  not  attempt  to  take 
them  by  storm,  and  parade  the  glory  of  his  conversion,  but  humbly  sought  ad- 
mission, but  his  veracity  was  questioned,  and  they  deemed  him  to  be  a  wolf  in 
lamb's  clothing— no  small  trial  for  one  who  had  done  and  suffered  so  much  under 
his  new  convictions.     But  Barnabas  kindly  interfered  and  vouched  for  his  sincerity, 
and  then  was  he  admitted  to  fellowship.     3.  The  apostle  of  the  circumcision  and 
the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  dwelt  for  "  fifteen  days  "  under  one  roof,     "What  con- 
versations, discussions,  and  projected  enterprises  from  two  minds  so  unlike  in 
structure  and  discipline,  and  yet  so  very  like  in  zeal  and  courage !     Peter  loved 
Palestine,  yet  Paul  loved  it  none  the  less  that  his  heart  embraced  the  world.     The 
former  felt  at  home  in  the  sphere  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  other  stretched  beyond 
it  while  he  did  not  forsake  it.     Peter  did  what  he  knew  to  be  his  duty  in  repairing 
to  the  house  of  Cornelius,  but  he  did  not  feel  at  perfect  liberty  to  repeat  such 
deeds;  while  the  im trammelled  Paul  exclaims,  "  Inasmuch  as  I  am  the  apostle  of 
the  Gentiles  I  magnify  mine  office."    In  a  word,  Peter  was  like  the  Jordan,  the 
stream  that  belonged  exclusively  to  his  fatherland,  though  a  foreigner,  like  Naaman, 
might  once  be  healed  in  it ;  but  Paul  resembled  the  "  great  sea,"  which  washes  the 
shores  of  the  three  continents.     Saul  stayed  only  a  fortnight  in  Jerusalem,  but 
he  was  not  and  could  not  be  idle.     Four   features  of   his   preaching  come  into 
view.     I.   The  class  to   whom   he  addressed   himself  were  the  Hellenists. 
The  Jews  born  in  Judssa  were  victims  of  narrowness  and  prejudice  ;  the  "  genius 
of  the  plaoe "  held  them  in  bondage.     But  the  Jews  born   and  brought  up  in 
other  countries  had  mingled  with  other  races,  and  their  minds  were  expanded  with 
literary  and  commercial  intercourse.    As  one  of  them,  Saul  specially  appealed  to 
them.     For  there  are  certain  ties  of  blood,  education,  and  language  which  are  to 
be  recognised  even  in  the  advocacy  of  the  truth.     Saul  did  not  fling  the  gospel  in 
the  face  of  the  high  priest,  nor  go  to  the  temple  and  harangue  the  fanatical  crowds. 
He  was  no  unreasoning  fanatic,  unable  to  hold  his  tongue  or  control  his  temper ; 
no  agitator,  reckless  as  to  circumstances.     He  was,  indeed,  a  man  of  one  idea,  but 
it  did  not  so  overmaster  him  that  he  knew  not  when,  how,  and  where  to  develop  it. 
II,  His  PREACHiNa  took  the  form  of  disputation.     He  did  not  come  forth  simply 
with  a  "  set  speech,"  but  after  he  spoke  he  allowed  the  free  criticism  of  all  his 
statements.     He  met  his  opponents  openly  and  fully,  prepared  to  reply  to  their 
questions  and  to  respond  to  their  challenge.     One  opponent  might  question  his 
interpretation  of  the  law  or  the  prophets ;  or  another  would  affirm  some  base  thing 
about  our  Lord's  life,  or  some  stupid  and  malignant  thing  about  his  religion,  while 
to  the  one  and  the  other  Saul  would  speak  with  loving  soul,  reasoning  out  the 
validity  of  his  interpretation  and  teaching  the  truth  as  to  the  facts  of  the  Master's 
career  and  death.    And  though  another  disputant,  with  a  leer  and  a  frown,  should 
refer  to  his  conversion,  the  allusion  could  neither  shame  nor  intimidate  one  who 
"  had  seen  that  Jost  One,  and  heard  the  voice  of  His  mouth."    III.  His  pbeaohinq 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


WAS  BOLD,  for  his  convictions  were  thorough.     He  believed,  therefore   he  spake. 
Had  there   been   any  suspicions   that  possibly  after   all  he  might  be  in  error — 
then  his  preaching  might  have  been  faltering.     But  Saul's  mind  could  not  admit 
the  possibility  of  a  doubt ;  and  the  glorified  Jesus  being  his  shield,  he  was  not 
alarmed  at  "  what  man  shall   do."      He   could   not   modify,  and   he  would  not 
recant.     Pressed  on  every  side  by  the  Grecians,  he  was  impervious  alike  to  execra- 
tion and  ridicule — a  mighty  man  of  valour,  clad  in  "  the  whole  armour  of  God." 
IV.  He  was  bold  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,   i.e.,  he   not    only  preached 
Christ,  but  he  claimed  His  express  authority  for  so  preaching  Him.     Timidity 
would  be  treachery  to  his  Master,  cruelty  to  the  world,  and  unfaithfulness  to  his 
own  convictions.    And  all  this  brave  outspokenness  was  not  the  arrogance  of  a 
"  novice,"  but  the  courage  which  one  feels  who  has  vowed  fidelity  both  to  God  and 
to  man,  and  who  is  supported  by  the  grace  which  never  fails.     Conclusion :  That 
Saul's  appearance  should  impress  some  needs  not  be  doubted,  but  the  multitude 
refused   to    believe.      Nay,    they  went   about   to   slay  him.      In   the   meantime 
he  had  enjoyed  a  remarkable  vision  in  the  Temple,  in  which  he  saw  Christ  and 
heard  Him  say,  "  Get  thee  quickly  out  of  Jerusalem,  for  they  wiU  not  receive  thy 
testimony  concerning  Me."    As  Saul  had  been  only  two  weeks  there,  Jie  wished  to 
remain  a  little  longer,  and,  probably  with  the  advice  of  Peter,  thought  of  selecting 
Jerusalem  as  a  field  of  labour.     Another  scene  like  Pentecost  might  be  anticipated, 
and  Peter  might  be  hoping  much  from  the  ardour,  erudition,  and  eloquence  of  his 
junior  colleague.      Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes.     But  as  Saul  did  nothing 
without  a  reason,  he  honestly  tells   the   Lord  why  he  had  come  to  labour  in 
Jerusalem  (chap.   xxii.  19,  20).     The  ground  taken  by  Saul  is  very  intelligible. 
The  population  of  Jerusalem  had  known  what  he  was,  and  he  wished  them  to 
know  what  he  had  become.     Therefore  he  thought  that  on  the  spot  where  such 
points  were  notorious,  he  had  a  special  claim  to  be  heard  against  himself  and  in 
favour  of  that  system  which  he  had  adopted  from  the  best  of  all  reasons.     Moses, 
when  summoned  to  go  to  Egypt,  pleaded  want  of  eloquence ;  Gideon  would  not 
inarch  till  the  fleece  bad  been   wetted,  nay,   till  the  omen  had  been  reversed ; 
Jeremiah  urged  his  youth  and  inexperience  when  calleil  to  the  prophetic  office; 
Jonah  set  sail  for  Tarshish,  instead  of  proceeding  to  Nineveh ;  Ananias,   when 
bidden  to  seek  out  a  stranger  who  had  recently  arrived  at  Damascus,  demurred ; 
and  Saul,  thinking  himself  possessed  of  special  qualifications  for  a  sphere  of  labour 
which  he  preferred,  was  backward  toward  that  very  work  for  which  he  had  been 
born  and  called,  and  in  which  he  so  soon  achieved  signal  success,  and  won  im- 
perishable renown.     "Who  art  thou,  O  man,  that  repliest  against  God  ?  "     "  The 
right  man  in  the  right  place,"  has  become  a  popular  expression  for  mutual  adapta- 
tion.    Saul  did  not  verify  the  saying  either  in  Damascus  or  Jerusalem,  but  it  might 
be  truly  predicted  of  him  through  his  whole  subsequent  career,  when  he  spoke, 
travelled,  toiled,  and  suffered,  as  one  "  appointed  a  preacher,  and  an  apostle,  and  a 
teacher  of  tlie  Gentiles  in  faith  and  verity."     (J.  Eadie,  D.D.)        Church  member- 
ship  : — I.  The  characteb  op  the  persons  on  whom  the  duty  of  Church  member- 
BHip  devolves.     1.  It  is  the  duty  of  all  who  call  themselves  Christians  to  separate 
themselves  from  the  world  and  to  unite  themselves  with  a  particular  Church  ;  yet, 
before  they  can  do  this  in  a  scriptural  manner,  they  must  exercise  repentance 
towards  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  they  must  "  first  give  themselves 
to  the  Lord,  and  then  to  His  people  according  to  His  will."    Personal  must  precede 
social  religion.     "  A  Christian  is  the  highest  style  of  man  " — he  is  a  disciple  of 
Christ  ;  he  believes  His  gospel ;   he  loves  Him ;    he  imitates  His  example ;  he 
yields  obedience  to  His  commands ;  and  he  lives,  not  unto  himself,  but  unto  Him 
who  died  for  him  and  rose  again.     2.  That  none  but  such  persons  are  qualified  for 
Church  membership  is  evident  from  the  New  Testament.     In  the  case  before  us, 
when  "  Saul  essayed  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples,"  they  did  not  receive  him  till 
they  had  ascertained  from  Barnabas  that  he  was  a  disciple  indeed.    And  when  the 
apostle  wrote  to  the  Churches  he  had  formed  he  addressed  them  to  "the  saints  " — 
to  the  " beloved  of  God" — to  the  "faithful  in  Christ  Jesus,"  &c.     And  if  persona 
of  another  character  gained    admission,  they    were  "  to  put   away  that  wicked 
person," and  to  "withdraw  from  every  brother  that  walked  disorderly."    3.  Besides 
this  direct  evidence  that  personal  piety  is  an  essential  prerequisite  for  Church  com- 
munion, there  are  other  considerations  to  show  its  necessity.     Without  personal 
piety — (1)    A  man  can  have   no   spiritual  communion  with  the   Church — "  for 
what  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with  unrighteousness  ?  and  what  communion 
hath  light  with  darkness  ?  "    (2)  He  is  morally  unable  to  promote  the  great  objecti 


«HAP.  n.]  TEE  ACTS.  73 

for  which  the  Church  of  Christ  was  established.  (3)  His  Church  membership  may 
only  serve  to  confirm  his  self-righteousness  and  self-deception.  4.  The  Church 
would  soon  lose  its  distinctive  character,  and  possess  nothing  of  religion  but  the 
name.  II.  The  indispensable  duty  of  all  such  persons  to  unite  themselves  in 
MEMBERSHIP  WITH  A  Chuech  OF  Christ.  This  appears — 1.  From  the  fact  that 
the  Christian  Church  is  instituted  by  the  authority  of  Christ.  He  is  "  the  head 
over  all  things  to  the  Church,  which  is  His  body,  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all 
in  all."  "  Upon  this  rock,"  says  He,  "  I  will  build  My  Church."  "  The  Lord  added 
to  the  Church  daily  such  as  should  be  saved."  Besides,  when  Christians  are 
addressed,  it  is  not  only  in  their  personal,  but  also  in  their  social  capacity.  They 
are  descrilaed  not  as  scattered  stones,  but  as  a  spiritual  temple — not  as  a  house 
only,  but  as  a  city — not  as  distinct  and  separated  individuals,  but  as  "  fellow 
citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God."  And  the  will  of  Christ,  in 
this  respect,  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  social  character  of  man,  and  with  the 
natural  tendency  and  influence  of  personal  piety.  Not  to  unite  with  His  Church, 
therefore,  is  to  disregard  His  authority,  to  impeach  His  wisdom,  and  to  set  an 
example  of  spiritual  celibacy,  which,  if  followed  by  all,  would  subvert  his  institu- 
tions, and  render  a  Church  of  Christ  entirely  unknown.  2.  The  uniform  conduct 
of  the  primitive  Christians.  In  the  pure  and  primitive  ages  of  Christianity,  the 
several  Churches  contained  the  whole  number  of  the  faithful.  Then  every  one 
who  acknowledged  himself  a  Christian  felt  it  to  be  a  duty  to  join  himself  to  the 
disciples  of  Christ,  though  he  thereby  risked  his  property,  his  hberty,  and  his  life. 
3.  The  command  of  Christ,  relative  to  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
♦'  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me,"  was  a  command  given,  not  to  an  individual,  but 
to  a  society.  It  was  to  be  celebrated  by  "  those  who  came  together  in  the  Church." 
The  same  authority  which  commands,  "  Forsake  not  the  assembling  of  yourselves 
together,  as  the  manner  of  some  is,"  also  commands  this,  and  you  act  in  defiance 
of  that  authority,  whether  you  forsake  the  pubUc  worship  of  God,  or  neglect  com- 
munion with  the  Church  of  Christ.  III.  The  advantages  which  a  prompt  per- 
formance OF  this  duty  will  secure.  Your  communion  with  the  Church  of  Christ 
— 1.  Will  warrant  the  exercise  of  confidence  in  prayer,  and  authorise  you  to  expect 
the  blessing  of  God.  Whilst  you  live  in  the  neglect  of  this  duty,  I  do  not  see  how 
you  can  consistently  exercise  the  one,  or  expect  the  other.  When  we  reverence  the 
Eedeemer  as  our  Lawgiver,  we  may  consistently  expect  Him  to  become  our  Inter- 
cessor, and  when  we  ascend  the  hill  where  His  blessing  is  promised,  we  may 
confidently  expect  that  there  it  will  be  commanded.  2.  Will  furnish  you  with 
additional  means  and  motives  for  perseverance  in  holiness.  You  will  be  brought 
under  the  immediate  charge  and  care  of  the  pastor,  and  become  associated  with 
brethren  who  will  watch  over  you  with  charity,  and  sympathise  with  you  in  your 
Borrows  and  your  joys,  and  pray  for  you.  Besides  which,  you  will  be  surrounded 
with  obligations  to  circumspection,  arising  from  the  sacreduessof  your  relationship. 
You  will  then  be  no  longer  an  isolated  individual,  like  a  flower  in  a  wilderness, 
wasting  its  sweetness  in  the  desert  air,  dimmed  in  its  beauties,  and  stunted  in  its 
growth ;  but,  being  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  you  will  flourish  like  the 
palm  tree,  and  grow  Uke  a  cedar  in  Lebanon,  still  bringing  forth  fruit  even  in  old 
age.  3.  Will  be  a  source  of  much  holy  peace  and  joy.  There  is  a  sweet  and  sacred 
pleasure  which  springs  from  the  conviction  of  having  acted  according  to  the  Divine 
command.     IV.    The   objections   and  apologies   by  which  those  who  neglect 

THIS   DUTY  attempt   TO    JUSTIFY   OB   TO    EXCUSE    THEIR   CONDUCT.      1.    "  I    am    HOt   yet 

qualified  for  Church  membership."  If  by  this  you  intimate  that  you  are  not 
■Christians,  then  your  fear  is  just ;  or  if  you  refer  to  the  righteousness  which  is  of 
the  law,  you  have  not  yet  attained  it,  and  you  never  will.  But  perhaps  you  mean 
a  more  mature  and  perfect  character.  If  so,  you  have  mistaken  the  design  of  the 
institution.  The  Church  is  formed  expressly  for  the  reception  of  all  who  repent 
and  believe  the  gospel ;  and  they  are  commanded  to  enter  it,  not  when  their 
Christian  graces  are  matured,  but  in  order  that  they  may  be  matured.  It  is  at 
once  a  nursery  for  the  babe  in  Christ,  a  school  for  the  education  of  the  young 
•man,  and  a  sanctuary  for  the  refuge  and  repose  of  "such  an  one  as  Paul  the 
-aged."  2.  "I  can  go  to  heaven  without  being  a  member  of  a  Church."  Does 
not  the  ingratitude  and  presumption  which  this  objection  manifests,  render  it 
unworthy  of  a  reply  ?  Is  there  not  a  degree  of  haughtiness  and  flippancy  in  such 
a  sentiment,  which  betrays  a  heart  which  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  Suppose 
you  do  go  to  heaven  without  it — will  the  recollection  of  your  neglect  and  disobedi- 
<dnoe  be  any  source  of  pleasure  to  you  when  you  get  there  ?    Go  to  heaven  without 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nu 

it  I  Shame  on  the  man  who  professes  to  follow  the  Lamb,  and  yet  tells  as  that  he 
can  travel  to  heaven  by  trampling  on  His  institutions,  and  enter  there,  not  by  the 
door,  like  an  honest  man,  but  by  some  other  way,  like  a  thief  and  a  robber,  3.  "  I 
have  a  relative  or  friend  who  is  not  willing  that  I  should  become  a  member  of  the 
Church."  Now,  if  you  were  to  state  this  apology  fully,  you  would  add,  "and 
therefore  I  have  determined  to  consult  his  will  rather  than  the  will  of  Christ." 
But  further,  if  your  relative  or  friend  be  not  pious,  is  your  present  conduct  likely 
to  make  him  so  ?  Will  he  not  suspect  your  loyalty  and  love  to  the  Redeemer,  and 
learn  by  your  example  to  be  negligent  and  disobedient  ?  If  your  relative  or  friend 
wiU  not  accompany  you  to  the  Cross  and  to  the  Church,  you  must  go  alone.  4.  "I 
fear  that  the  Church  will  not  receive  me. "  No  Church  constituted  according  ta 
the  New  Testament  will  refuse  to  receive  you  if  you  profess  and  manifest  repentance 
and  faith.  K  you  are  a  Christian,  however  young  and  feeble,  Christ  has  received 
you,  and  it  would  be  at  our  peril  to  reject  you,  for  the  Church  is  not  ours.  5.  "I 
fear  that,  at  some  future  time,  I  may  bring  dishonour  on  the  cause  of  Christ." 
But  is  there  nothing  dishonourable  in  your  present  conduct  ?  Besides,  are  you 
more  likely  to  be  safe  in  the  world  than  in  the  Church  ?  And  is  Christ  less  likely 
to  preserve  you  when  you  are  keeping  His  commandments?  {J.  Alexander.) 
Barnabas  took  him  and  brought  him  to  the  apostles. — Barnabas  and  Saul : — The 
first  association  of  two  names,  afterwards  linked  together  for  good  or  evil,  is  fraught 
with  interest.  How  much  more  the  earliest  combination  of  Barnabas  and  Saul— 
to  issue  in  widespread  blessing  for  the  Church  and  the  world.  It  is  significant, 
however,  that  Barnabas  alone  had  the  genius  to  detect  the  genuineness  of  Saul's 
conversion,  and  his  latent  possibilities.  How  many  splendid  lives  have  been 
gained  for  the  Church,  in  the  teeth  of  the  Church's  opposition,  by  the  kindness  and 
sagacity  of  some  one  man.  I.  What  Barnabas  did  ;  as  exhibiting  the  conduct  of  & 
true  brother.  1.  "He  took  him."  (1)  Sympathised  with  his  painful  position. 
(2)  Believed  him  from  his  embarrassing  isolation.  (3)  Identified  himself  with  him 
by  taking  his  stand  on  the  same  platform.  And  thus — (4)  Effe.--tually  helped  him 
in  circumstances,  where  from  his  previous  record  he  was  powerless.  2.  He 
•'brought  him  to  the  apostles."  He  was  not  satisfied  with  sending  a  letter  of 
recommendation,  or  with  telling  Saul  to  "mention  his  name" — a  cheap  and  easy 
method  often  adopted  nowadays— but  went  with  him  to  vouch  for  his  character, 
and  to  accept  all  responsibility  for  him.  How  many  good  Christians  to-day  are 
outside  the  fold  because  of  the  unjust  suspicions  of  their  fellow  Christians  ! 
And  how  much  room  there  is  for  a  Barnabas  in  those  Churches  where  mere 
orthodoxy  or  respectability  rule  instead  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  H.  What 
Babnabas  said  :  as  defining  the  character  of  a  true  convert.  1.  "  How  that  he 
had  seen  the  Lord."  The  vision  of  Christ  as  Saviour  and  Lord  essential  to 
true  conversion.  Paul  himself  confesses  as  much  (Gal.  i.  15,  16).  2.  "  That  he 
had  spoken  to  Him."  "  Behold  he  prayeth  "  was  the  assurance  Christ  gave  to 
Ananias  of  Paul's  conversion.  3.  "  That  he  had  preached  boldly  in  the  name 
of  Jesus."  Paul  tells  us  that  when  a  man  believes,  he  will  speak.  •'  With  the 
heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."  {J.  W.  Burn.)  Sympathy  :  its  practical 
value : — To  the  generosity  and  clear-sightedness  of  Joseph  of  Cyprus,  on  this 
and  on  a  later  occasion,  the  apostle  owed  a  vast  debt  of  gratitude.  Next  only 
to  the  man  who  achieves  the  greatest  and  most  blessed  deeds  is  he  who,  perhaps 
himself  wholly  incapable  of  such  high  work,  is  yet  the  first  to  help  and  en- 
courage the  genius  of  others.  We  often  do  more  good  by  our  sympathy  than 
by  our  labours,  and  render  to  the  world  a  more  lasting  service  by  absence  of 
jealousy,  and  recognition  of  merit,  than  we  could  ever  render  by  the  straining 
efforts  of  personal  ambition.     {Archdeacon  Farrar.) 

Ver.  31.  Then  had  the  Churches  rest. — Quiet  times : — The  right  use  of  quiet 
times  is  a  great  secret  of  Christian  living.  Human  life  is  made  up  of  alternations 
of  storm  and  calm,  of  trouble  and  rest.  It  is  so  with  the  life  of  an  individual,  a  nation, 
or  a  Church.  The  earlier  part  of  this  chapter  indicated  a  time  of  trouble.  Bui 
now  the  chief  persecutor  has  himself  felt  the  force  of  truth.  Then  again  the 
Emperor  CaHgula  was  makiug  an  impious  attempt  to  place  his  own  image  in  the 
Temple,  and  so  the  attention  of  the  Jews  was  wholly  occupied  with  plans  for  frustra- 
ting his  design.  They  had  no  time  to  persecute.  So  the  Churches  had  peace :  how 
did  they  use  it?  Did  it  make  them  indolent,  unfruitful,  unfaithful,  quarrelsome? 
Two  things  are  said  of  them :  they  were — L  Edified.  1.  The  whole  Church  is  one 
building,  planned  by  one  Architect,  carried  on  by  one  Builder,  designed  for  one  end, 


CHAP,  iz.]  TEE  ACTS  7B 

to  be  the  habitation  of  God.  This  thought  is  full  of  comfort.  It  shows  us  thai 
however  small  the  place  of  each  one,  yet  each  one  has  his  place,  and  that,  if  it 
be  not  filled,  there  is  a  blank,  be  it  ever  so  small.  Is  not  that  honour  enough? 
Does  it  not  say  to  each,  See  that  thy  place  be  not  a  blank,  or  worse  ?  2.  The  Church 
of  each  land,  age,  town,  is  a  building.  It  may  be  but  a  fragment,  a  buttress,  or  a 
pinnacle  of  the  universal  Church ;  but  you  all  know  how  any  building  would  look  if 
one  buttress  feU ;  and  therefore  you  will  not  count  it  a  small  thing  if  some  such 
position  belongs  to  our  community.  This  congregation  of  ours  is  a  building.  Is  it 
then  being  built  up  ?  is  it  rising,  in  solidity,  unity,  beauty  ?  is  it  giving  signs,  more 
and  more,  of  its  destination  as  a  habitation  of  God  ?  3.  Each  human  soul  is  a 
building.  What  a  question  is  it,  for  each  one.  How  is  that  building  which  is  I  my- 
self, getting  on  ?  Are  the  foundations  deeply  and  soundly  laid  in  the  faith  of  Christ  ? 
Is  the  superstructure  rising  day  by  day  gradually,  regularly,  quietly,  yet  consciously, 
perceptibly,  visibly  ?  Am  I  growing  in  grace  ?  more  and  more  prevailing  over  sinful 
passions  ?  better  able  to  do  the  work  which  He  has  given  me  ?  Times  of  tran- 
quillity ought  to  be  times  of  edifying  :  alas  1  too  often  they  are  times  of  suspended 
energy.  II.  Multiplied.  A  time  of  peace  ought  to  be  a  time  of  outward  as  well 
as  inward  progress.  It  was  so  of  old.  How  is  it  now  ?  Is  there  zeal  in  founding 
or  reinforcing  missionary  institutions  ?  Alas !  you  know  that  with  much  philan- 
thropy there  is  little  gospel  zeal  amongst  us ;  that,  where  a  thousand  pounds  can 
be  gathered  for  a  work  of  charity,  it  is  hard  to  collect  ten  for  a  work  of  piety.  And 
is  the  Church  at  all  multiplying  at  home  ?  Can  we  point,  by  tens,  or  fives,  or  units, 
to  new  persons  brought  to  be  worshippers  by  agencies  now  working  amongst  us  ? 
We  are  not  left  in  the  dark  as  to  how  this  may  be  done.  The  Church  multiplies,  by 
its  own  progress,  in  two  things  :  walking  in — (1)  The  fear  of  the  Lord,  &o.  Christ 
deserves  not  only  our  love  but  our  fear.  Does  that  seem  strange  ?  Is  He  not  our 
"  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest,"  "  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins."  Yes  !  The 
words  are  written  for  our  comfort,  but  not  to  make  us  careless  about  our  sin.  There 
is  nothing  which  so  solemnises  the  mind  as  the  thought  of  an  absolutely  disin- 
terested and  unbounded  love.  It  says  of  itself,  "  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect 
BO  great  salvation  ?  "  To  "  trample  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,"  to  "  count  the  blood 
of  the  covenant,  wherewith  we  are  sanctified,  an  unholy  thing,"  must  indeed  be  of 
all  crimes  the  blackest  and  the  most  fatal.  And  that  is  what  men  do  every  day  for 
want  of  this  very  fear  of  which  the  text  speaks.  To  walk  in  the  fear  of  Christ  is 
one-half  of  Christianity.  (2)  And  then,  so  walking,  there  is  room  for  "  the  com- 
fort of  the  Holy  Ghost."  This  is  not  a  mere  soothing  influence  within ;  it  is  a 
cheering  power  without  also.  The  same  word  is  rendered  exhortation.  God  com- 
forts by  cheering  on ;  by  encouraging  to  action.  We  may  try  the  reality  of  our 
comfort  by  this  one  test :  Does  it  stir  me  up  and  spur  me  on  to  action  ?  Does  it  say 
not,  Kest  from  work,  but,  Eest  in  working?  (Dean  Vaughan.)  I.  The  diffeeent 
PARTS  OF  THE  DEScBiPTioN  HERE  GIVEN.  1.  The  ChuTchcs  "  Were  edified."  A  Church 
may  be  edified  by  the  addition  of  new  members.  The  Church  is  a  building,  and 
those  added  to  it  are  living  stones ;  and  by  the  addition  of  such  stones  the  spiritual 
temple  advances  to  completion.  Such,  however,  cannot  be  the  meaning  of  the 
word  here;  it  means  rather,  "  Growth  in  grace " ;  advancement  in  the  principles  and 
fruits  of  Divine  love.  The  Churches  were  composed  of  individuals,  and  as  the 
wealth  of  a  country  consists  in  the  aggregate  wealth  of  the  individual  inhabitants, 
and  the  national  wealth  increases  in  proportion  as  the  wealth  of  individuals  increases, 
BO  with  the  Church.  If  we  desire  the  edification  of  our  own  Christian  society  or 
the  Church  of  God  generally,  the  first  requisite  is  our  seeking  personal  advance- 
ment in  knowledge,  faith,  and  holiness;  and  the  second  is  our  using  all  the 
appointed  means  for  promoting  the  same  among  our  brethren.  Edification  includes 
— (1)  Growth  in  knowledge.  AH  other  growth  arises  from  this.  There  is  a  kind  of 
knowledge  which  hinders  edification.  "  Knowledge  puff eth  up,  but  love  edifieth. " 
Knowledge  that  engenders  self-conceit  tends  to  the  destruction  of  love ;  and  what- 
ever opposes  love  is  a  foe  to  all  genuine  spirituality  and  improvement.  Yet  there 
can  be  no  edification  without  growth  in  the  spiritual  discoveries  of  the  mind.  ^  The 
Bible  contains  the  inexhaustible  resources  of  wisdom,  and  the  study  of  it  is  in- 
dispensable to  edification.  (2)  Increase  in  faith.  This  is  the  natural  effect  of 
growth  in  spiritual  knowledge.  The  Word  of  God,  like  His  other  works,  contains 
in  it  the  marks  of  its  Divine  origin,  and  the  more  it  is  known  the  more  its  source 
will  be  perceived  and  felt.  (3)  And  connected  with  growth  in  faith  there  is  a  cor- 
responding growth  in  all  the  graces  and  virtues  of  the  Christian  character.  All  the 
ingredients  in  the  composition  of  inward,  vital  godliness,  arise  from  the  inflawoe 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caiP.  a, 

of  Divine  grace  upon  the  heart  and  life,  and  must  be  in  proportion  to  the  growth 
of  faith.    2.  They  walked  "  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."    This — (1)  Imparted  a  becoming 
solemnity  to  all  their  social  meetings  for  worship,  and  a  corresponding  dignity  and 
propriety  to  all  who  were  present.     (2)  Implies  a  sacred  conscientious  regard  in  all 
things  to  His  authority.   (3)  Suggests  that  this  was  the  superior  dominant  principle, 
and  that  the  fear  of  man  was  suppressed  and  kept  in  controL  3.  They  walked  '*  in  the 
comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost. "    Edification  and  practical  godliness  were  associated 
with  spiritual  enjoyment.     The  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  comfort  of  which  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  the  great  Author.    To  walk  in  this  comfort  is  to  enjoy  harmony 
within,  and  to  display  it  externally  to  have  the  powers  of  the  mind  and  the  affec- 
tions of  the  heart  engaged  in  duty.     This  comfort,  then,  is  not  an  indolent,  inactive 
enjoyment.     It  is  only  to  be  found  in  active  service,  not  in  a  life  of  ascetic  seclu- 
sion, or  in  feelings  of  spiritual  epicurism.   There  is  an  intimate  connection  between 
walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  walking  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     All 
pretensions  to  the  latter  without  the  former  are  vain.     There  is  no  true  legitimate 
comfort  from  the  truths  of  God  except  to  those  that  walk  in  the  ways  of  God.     II. 
The  connection  subsisting  between  them  and  especially  between  the  chakacteb 
OP  THE  Churches  with  theie  multiplication.     An  undue  regard  to  members  has 
often  done  incalculable  mischief.     Increase  is  desirable,  but  it  must  be  increase 
of  those  whose  hearts  are  right  with  God.    With  Him  respectability  consists  not  in 
numbers  but  in  character.   He  had  a  few  names  in  Sardis  who  had  not  defiled  their 
garments.   But,  as  a  corrupt  body,  the  Church  of  Sardis  is  admonished,  and  "there 
is  joy  before  the  angels  of  God."     We  rejoice  more  in  an  addition  to  than  in  the  con- 
tinued safety  of  the  sheep.    We  delight  in  seeing  all  the  jewels  of  the  Saviour's 
crown  continuing  to  shine  with  pure  lustre ;  but  our  delight  is  still  more  elevated 
when  a  new  jewel  is  added  to  it.     It  is  in  this  respect  that  missions  to  the  heathen 
are  so  supremely  interesting.   Notice,  then,  a  connection  between — 1.  Rest  and  edi- 
fication.    In  the  Church  as  well  as  in  the  state,  times  of  difficulty  and  trial  often 
call  forth  latent  powers,  and  produce  remarkable  men  where  they  were  least 
expected  ;  but  it  too  generally  happens  that  to  the  members  of  a  persecuted  body 
such  seasons  are  not  times  of  steady  thought,  and  deliberate  and  persevering  study 
of  Divine  truth,  and  consequently  of  general  improvement.    A  state  of  rest,  on  the 
contrary,  affords  opportunities  for  much  study  of  the  Divine  oracles ;  for  private 
and  social  meetings  for  conversation,  and  prayer,  and  mutual  excitement.    Let  it 
be  a  serious  question  whether  the  rest  which  we  enjoy  is  duly  improved  by  us  for 
the  purposes  of  edification?     2.  Eest  and  increase.     (1)  A  state  of  rest  affords 
opportunities  and  leisure  to  attend  to  the  interests  of  others :  for  preaching  and 
using  without  restraint  all  the  means  for  the  conversion  of  sinners.     (2)  Rest  sets 
others  free  from  the  fear  of  attending  at  the  proscribed  places  where  the  obnoxious 
doctrine  is  taught.     Good  cannot  be  done  to  the  souls  of  men  unless  they  are 
brought  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel.     3.  The  state  of  the  Church  as  described 
— increase.    Where  these  characteristics  obtain — (1)  The  influence  of  the  character 
of  Churches  upon  the  augmentation.    In  illustrating  this  we  may  observe — there  is 
an  augmentation  of  holy  and  active  zeal  for  the  glory  of  the  Redeemer  and  for 
the  salvation  of  souls,  which  God  blesses  with  success.     (2)  There  is  combined 
with  the  effort  to  promote  the  truth  the  practical  exemplification  of  its  influence. 
When  the  truth  is  recommended,  not  merely  in  words,  but  by  the  exhibition  of  its 
power — then,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  it  makes  a  successful  appeal  to  the  con- 
sciences of  men,  and  finds  its  way  with  efficacy  to  the  heart.     (3)  There  must  be 
a  most  spiritual,  strengthening  effect  on  those  who  minister  in  holy  things,  to  preach 
the  gospel.   The  sight  of  a  listless,  lukewarm,  divided  Church,  will  act  like  a  heavy 
drag  on  the  spirit  of  the  pastor.    But  when  the  Church  prospers,  when  the  mem- 
bers become  edified,  and  walk  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  when  they  are  united, 
affectionate,  zealous,  steady,  constant,  prayerful — this  is  the  very  zest  of  a  pastor's 
life.     (4)  The  Church  will  be  mighty  in  prayer.     Prayer  is  a  means  of  edification 
and  a  measure  of  its  progressive  amount.     If  believers  are  not  growing  in  the 
spirit  and  exercise  of  prayer,  they  are  not  growing  in  grace.     It  is  a  common  ob- 
servation, and  the  principles  of  the  Word  of  God  lead  us  to  believe  it,  nar  el  ,  that 
revivals  of  religion  have  been  preceded  by  more  than  an  ordinary  predommance 
of  prayer  among  the  people  of  God  for  the  success  of  His  cause  in  all  lands.     (5) 
There  is  secured  an  increase  of  the  blessing  of  the  Redeemer,  and  of  supply  of  His 
grace.     "  Every  branch  in  him  that  beareth  not  fruit  He  taketh  away  ;  and  every 
branch  that  beareth  fruit,  He  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit."   And 
this  proceeds  upon  a  general  principle,  elsewhere  laid  down  by  Him.    •*  Whosoever 


CHAP.  IX.]  THE  ACTS.  77 

hath,  to  him  shall  be  given,"  Ac.  (B.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  characteristics  and 
multiplication  of  Christian  Churches : — I.  The  grand  characteeistics  bx  which 
Christian  Churches  ought  to  be  distinguished.  We  observe  here — 1.  The  Church 
is  governed  by  the  practical  influence  of  religion.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  "  is 
the  scriptural  equivalent  for  the  whole  of  practical  religion,  and  involves  devout 
reverence  of  the  Divine  attributes,  and  continued  obedience  to  the  Divine  com- 
mandments. Churches  are  places  where  impenitence  and  unbelief  should  never 
come ;  where  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart  should  be  expelled  by  the  energy 
of  redeeming  grace ;  where  every  heart  should  be  imbued  with  the  love,  and  should 
be  devoted  to  the  service  of  God,  and  where  every  individual  soul  should  be  growing 
and  meetening  for  the  possession  of  holiness  in  heaven  I  True  it  is  that,  from  time 
to  time,  there  come  among  our  communities  those  who  have  not  the  fear  of  the 
Lord,  but  "  these  are  spots  in  our  feasts  of  charity."  They  have  no  part  and 
no  lot  in  the  matter.  2.  Churches  enjoying  the  consolations  of  religion.  "  The 
comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  signifies,  of  course,  the  comfort  which  the  Holy  Ghost, 
in  His  character  of  Comforter,  is  intended  to  bestow  upon  those  who  are  truly  walk- 
ing in  the  fear  of  the  Lord ;  and  that  comfort  must  be  regarded  as  consisting  in 
feeling  that  they  are  possessors  of  vital  piety  :  of  a  personal  sense  of  their  interest 
in  the  work  of  redemption;  taking  away  from  them  the  spirit  of  fear,  and  im- 
planting within  them  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  administering  to  them  sufficient 
strength  for  all  circumstances,  and  filling  them  with  emotions  of  joy  and  gratitude. 
But  the  enjoyment  of  the  consolations  of  rehgion  must  be  regarded  as  arising  from 
practical  devotedness  and  eminence  in  piety.  The  inspired  historian  mentions  one 
characteristic  as  a  cause  and  the  other  as  an  effect.  The  Spirit  administers  comfort 
where  the  Spirit  receives  honour ;  and  where  the  Spirit  is  grieved  there  the  Spirit 
is  restrained.  His  awakening  influences  precede.  His  consoUng  influences  follow. 
n.  The  blessings  which  Christian  Churches,  as  thus  distinguished,  mat  antici- 
.  PATE.  These  Churches  were  multiplied.  1.  There  are  two  principles  connected  with 
this  multiplication  of  Christian  Churches.  It  is  intimately  connected — (1)  With  the 
state  of  religion  amongst  those  persons  who  belong  to  them.  They  were  multiplied 
because  they  were  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  connection  between  the  holiness  of  Christians  and  the  conversion  of 
sinners  is  in  Scripture  most  distinctly  stated.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men," 
&c.  (see  also  Phil.  ii.  14-16 ;  1  Peter  ii.  11, 12).  K  the  unconverted  world  see  you  incon- 
sistent they  will  be  disgusted,  but  let  them  see  you  walk  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  the 
comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  then  the  verymeanest  of  you  will  be  himself  a  powerful 
minister  of  religion,  will  become  "  a  living  epistle  of  Christ,  known  and  read  of  all 
men."  Your  communities  will  increase  in  reputation,  and  in  augmenting  numbers, 
and  your  spiritual  privileges  will  be  enjoyed  by  men,  who  but  for  your  holiness  would 
yet  have  remained  in  "  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity,"  but 
whom  you  shall  have  to  present,  finally,  as  your  glory,  as  your  joy,  and  as  the 
crown  of  your  rejoicing  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  His  coming.  (2) 
With  their  exertions.  Every  beUever  is  set  apart,  not  only  for  holiness,  but  for  exer- 
tion ;  and  if  Christians  be  idle,  in  whatever  class  of  life  they  may  be  found,  they  are 
guilty  of  the  most  shameful  breach  of  trust.  The  Church  at  Jerusalem  was  one 
mighty  mass  of  activity  (chap.  ii.  42,  &c.).  And  when  they  were  scattered  abroad  by 
persecution,  every  man  was  transformed  into  a  preacher  of  the  gospel- (chap.  viii.  4). 
Now  this  is  the  legitimate  consequence  of  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in 
the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  it  is  too  much  undervalued  and  forgotten.  Are 
ministers  expected  to  be  arduous  and  incessant,  while  their  Churches  are  to  remain 
indolent  and  torpid,  just  to  coolly  receive  their  message,  or  else  to  criticise  their 
defects,  and  to  be  discontented  at  their  want  of  success  ?  There  wants  to  be  sent 
another  Pentecostal  fire,  which  shall  touch  all  ranks  and  classes,  kindling  in  their 
bosom  the  flame  of  that  zeal  which  shall  never  be  quenched  till  death.  2.  This 
multiplication  is  a  most  desirable  and  happy  event.  There  appears  to  be,  in  the 
language  of  the  historian,  an  element  of  pleasure,  but  there  are  nominal  Christians 
in  modern  times  to  whom  it  produces  no  pleasure  at  all  to  hear  of  the  multiplica- 
tion of  Churches.  There  are  two  reasons,  however,  why  this  event  is  so  desirable 
and  so  happy.  Its  intimate  connection — (1)  With  the  promotion  of  the  glory 
of  God.  (2)  With  the  present  and  final  blessedness  of  man.  {J.  Parsom.) 
Rest  and  prosperity  of  Churches : — Our  text — I.  Describes  the  Churches  of  the 
Holy  Land.  1.  Their  nature.  (1)  They  were  "  congregations,"  or  "  assemblies," 
of  good  people.  And  they  are  described  as  being  more  than  one  in  the  same 
eoantry.    (2)  They  were  not  material  edifices ;  although  I  do  not  object  to,  bat 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

prefer,  that  application  of  the  word.  (3)  They  were  not  promiscuous  associations, 
constituted  by  chance,  nominal  profession,  outward  and  involuntary  rites ;  they 
were  real  Christians.  (4)  They  were  not  national  communities,  for  we  read  not  of 
"a  Church,"  but  •' Churches."  2.  Their  quiet.  "Then  had  the  Churches  rest." 
(1)  This  denote^  the  commencement,  not  the  continuance,  of  a  state  of  peace. 
"  Then  " — after  the  persecution  of  chap.  viii.  1-4.  It  was  the  calm  after  the  storm, 
the  joy  coming  in  the  morning,  after  the  weeping  that  endured  through  the  night, 
and  therefore  the  more  precious.  (2)  The  causes  of  this  return  of  quiet,  (a)  The 
conversion  of  Saul.  "  The  grace  of  God  was  exceeding  abundant  towards  him." 
His  opposition  was  destroyed,  not  by  his  punishment  as  a  foe,  but  by  his  trans- 
formation into  a  friend.  Is  there  no  encouragement  to  us  in  this?  His  con- 
version is  set  forth  by  himself  as  a  "  pattern  "  of  the  power  and  the  mercy  of  the 
gospel.  Then  let  Christians  pray,  (b)  The  sohcitude  and  alarm  of  the  Jews.  At 
Alexandria  the  Jews  suffered  dreadfully  from  the  Egyptians,  and  in  Judaa  and 
elsewhere  were  in  imminent  peril  of  ruin.  An  attempt  was  made  to  bring  the 
statue  of  Caligula  unto  the  Holy  of  Holies,  in  consequence  of  some  offence  he  had 
taken  at  the  conduct  of  the  Jews.  Nothing  could  produce  greater  consternation. 
So  they  were  too  concerned  about  their  own  affairs  to  meddle  with  those  of  others. 
God  can  "restrain  the  wrath  of  man,"  as  well  as  make  it  "  praise  Him."  He  can 
control  the  circumstances  as  well  as  change  the  character  of  our  foes.  "  Saul 
returned  from  pursuing  after  David  "when  the  "  Philistines  invaded  the  land." 
3.  Their  experience  and  conduct.  (1)  •'  They  were  edified  " — built  up  "  as  lively 
stones,  a  spiritual  house."  (a)  When  the  storm  ceased  they  set  earnestly  about 
the  completing  of  their  moral  temple.  Persecution  is  unfavourable  to  rehgious,  as 
war  is  to  secular,  commerce.  It  dispirits,  diverts  attention,  employs  resources, 
and  intercepts  communication.  Peace,  however,  permits  the  full  and  unfettered 
employment  of  the  Church's  gifts  and  gi-aces  for  their  appropriate  and  appointed 
purposes.  The  Churches  before  us  were  edified  when  they  had  rest.  Their 
principles  became  broader  in  their  base,  and  more  perfect  in  their  symmetry. 
Their  faith  increased  in  intelligence  and  earnestness.  As  a  natural  result  of  this, 
they  cherished  and  expressed  that  filial  reverence  for  God  which  is  called  for  by 
His  majesty  and  mercy  ;  and  they  sought  and  submitted  to  all  the  intimations  and 
the  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  (b)  This  was  their  course.  They  "  walked  " 
according  to  this  rule.  It  was  not  an  occasional,  but  a  constant  thing.  It 
described  them  in  their  relations  as  men  of  the  Church  and  as  men  of  the  world. 
And  what  was  the  result  ?  4.  Their  increase.  "  Were  multiplied."  They  received 
large  accessions  from  the  world.  There  was  more  Christianity,  and  so  there  were 
more  Christians.  Saints  were  sanctified,  and  sinners  became  saints.  These  are 
the  two  elements  of  Church  prosperity,  the  two  ends  of  Church  association. 
Christians  are  thus  connected  that  they  may  promote  each  other's  spirituaUty,  and 
that,  by  the  union  of  their  graces  and  the  combination  of  their  energies,  they  may 
be  as  light  to  a  dark,  and  salt  to  a  corrupt  world.  And  these  two  things  are 
inseparably  connected.  The  Church  cannot  grow  in  grace  without  diffusing  grace. 
II.  Sets  them  before  tjs  for  imitation.  The  text  was  written  for  our  use. 
Consider — 1.  The  connection  between  the  rest  and  the  edification  of  these 
Churches.  "  They  had  rest,  and  were  edified."  They  made  spiritual  advance- 
ment while  they  enjoyed  civil  repose.  They  did  not  spend  the  season  of  calm  in 
luxury  and  sinfulness.  (1)  Often  quiet  deteriorates  the  Church.  The  favour  of 
the  world  has  been  often  far  more  injurious  to  her  than  its  hatred  and  opposition. 
When  the  civil  sword  has  been  turned  against  the  Church,  she  has  often  "  lived 
more  abundantly  " ;  when  that  sword  has  been  turned  against  the  enemies  of  the 
Church,  she  has  often  as  miserably  died.  (2)  Our  text,  however,  says  that  rest  is 
not  ruin,  of  necessity.  And  all  Churches  in  their  condition  may  have  this  character. 
It  is  quite  a  mistake  to  regard  affliction  as  indispensable  to  spirituality.  And  yet 
how  famiUar  is  the  language,  "  The  Church  is  got  into  a  bad  state  :  it  wants  the 
fire  of  persecution  to  purge  it  from  its  dross."  And  if  nothing  but  persecution 
would  bring  the  Church  into  a  good  state,  let  it  come,  and  the  sooner  the  better. 
But  Christians  should  not  be  dependent  on  the  malice  of  their  enemies  for  the 
welfare  of  their  souls  ;  nor  can  it  be  imagined  that  the  wicked  are  the  "  salt  "  of 
the  Church,  without  which  it  would  speedily  go  into  utter  corruption.  (3)  On  the 
contrary,  the  "  rest "  of  the  Churches  is  both  a  motive  and  a  means  of  their 
prosperity.  We  should  be  stimulated  by  gratitude  to  a  devout  and  diligent 
employment  of  the  privileges  so  peacefully  possessed.  And  then  it  affords  the 
occasion  for  devotednesa.    The  attention  is  not  diverted  by  danger.    There  is 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  » 

the  power  of  a  regular  and  undistracted  attendance  on  all  the  institutions  of 
Christianity.  The  mind  is  left  free  from  a  dispiriting  anxiety  to  study  "  the  great 
things  of  God's  law,"  and  the  machinery  of  means  can  play  away  without  injury 
or  interruption.  See  you  not  how  all  this  apphes  to  us  ?  We  have  rest  in  a  fuller 
measure  than  the  Churches  of  Palestine.  What  is,  what  ought  to  be,  the  effect  ? 
Alas !  they  are  not  the  same  thing.  2.  The  connection  between  the  edification  of 
these  Churches  and  their  increase.  (1)  The  piety  of  a  people  is  necessary  to  the 
safe  and  profitable  enjoyment  of  their  increase.  A  Church  not  eminently  holy 
may  suffer  from  great  multiplication.  Enlargement  will  tend  to  vanity  and  self- 
sufficiency.  Perhaps  we  may  find  in  this  the  reason  why  some  Churches  remain 
80  stationary.  It  would  hurt  them  to  be  otherwise.  (2)  It  is  for  the  benefit  of 
those  who  are  added  to  a  Church  that  it  should  be  greatly  good.  "Who  can  think 
without  concern  and  pity  of  a  multitude  of  souls  being  joined  to  a  worldly  Church  ? 
(3)  The  godliness  of  a  Church  is  a  prime  means  of  its  increase.  God  blesses  an 
eminently  spiritual  Church.  For  there  will  be  prayers  with  labours,  not  instead  of 
them — the  only  prayers  that  God  will  hear.  And  those  labours  will  possess  a 
character  of  earnestness  and  uniformity.  The  spirit  of  self-denying  love  and  zeal 
will  pervade  the  entire  body ;  "  he  that  heareth  will  say.  Come  " ;  each  individual, 
like  his  Master,  will  "seek"  in  order  to  "save."  Nor  is  this  all.  The  holy 
character  of  a  Church  in  itself  has  no  mean  influence  in  "winning  souls."  The 
exhibition  of  holiness  is  calculated  to  arrest  attention  by  its  singularity,  and  to 
produce  impression  by  its  force.  The  reHgion  of  Christ  has  suffered  more  from  the 
inconsistencies  of  its  friends  than  the  opposition  of  its  foes ;  its  professors  have 
created  more  objections  than  they  have  answered ;  and  the  proof  of  its  divinity 
may  be  drawn  from  its  preservation  in  spite  of  its  adherents.  Had  all  Christians 
been  like  Jesus  Christ,  or  anything  like  Him,  the  world  would  have  become 
Christian.  And  the  holiness  of  Christians  is  especially  important  in  an  age  bo 
practical  as  our  own.  The  question  is  being  asked  of  everything,  "For  what 
good  ?  "  Christianity  must  stand  the  test — it  has  always  claimed  to  be  tried  by  it. 
It  depends  on  Christians,  however,  what  shall  be  the  actual  and  immediate  results 
of  such  a  trial.  For  all  these  reasons,  the  sanctification  of  Churches  is  necessary 
to  their  proper  spiritual  extension.  There  is  an  extension  which  Christ  does  not 
approve,  and  which  men  do  not  profit  by — an  increase  of  dimensions  which 
resembles  that  premature  growth  which  issues  in  consumption,  if  not  rather  that 
extension  of  the  body  which  takes  place  at  death.  But  the  legitimate  enlargement 
of  Churches  must  come  of  their  internal  prosperity.  Would  you,  as  Churches,  be 
increased  ?  You  must  be  quickened.  A  revival  of  religion  must  commence  with 
the    religious.      {A.  J.  Morris.)  Prosperous    Churches: — ^I.   Theie    external 

ciBCUMSTANCEB.  "  Eest."  The  hurricane  of  persecution  was  now  hushed,  and 
nnder  the  genial  influence  of  peace  they  grew.  Peace  in  the  nation  is  the  time  to 
build  houses  and  develop  resources.  Peace  in  nature  is  the  time  for  sowing  and 
cultivation.  Persecution,  like  storms,  may  deepen  the  roots  of  piety  when  it  exists, 
but  is  unfavourable  to  the  dissemination  of  seed  and  the  growth  of  fragile  plants. 
1.  This  external  condition  Churches  in  England  now  have.  We  can  sit  under  our 
own  vine,  &c.  Once  our  Churches  were  very  differently  circumstanced — e.g.,  under 
Mary  and  the  Stuarts.  2.  This  condition  we  are  bound  to  improve.  Great  is  our 
responsibility.  All  the  waste  land  should  be  cultivated-  Every  spot  brown  with 
barrenness  should  be  made  emerald  with  life.  11.  Theib  mutual  relation.  There 
was — 1.  Organic  independence.  These  Churches  are  spoken  of  as  distinct ;  they 
were  doubtless  distinct  organisations,  each  having  its  own  laws,  managing  its  own 
affairs,  and  knowing  no  head  but  Christ.  2.  Spiritual  unity.  They  are  all  spoken 
of  as  belonging  to  one  generic  class,  subject  to  one  general  condition,  and  pursuing 
the  same  order  of  life.  And  there  is  vital  unity  between  all  true  Chiurches — the 
unity  of  spirit,  aim,  headship.  They  were  "  all  members  of  one  body."  That 
which  really  unites  Churches  is  not  "  unions,"  "  conferences,"  &c.,  but  Christ's 
spirit  of  truth,  love,  and  goodness.  IH.  Their  internal  condition.  1.  Living 
in  godly  reverence.  2.  Eeceiving  sacred  influences.  IV.  Their  leading  signs. 
Increase — 1.  Of  strength.  2.  Of  numbers.  Strong  Churches,  like  strong  nations, 
will  colonise.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Churches  increased : — I.  What  is  meant 
by  walking  in  the  feab  of  God  ?  1.  A  habitual  and  profound  veneration  for  Hig 
character  and  institutions.  2.  A  humble  and  unreserved  submission  to  His 
authority.  The  influence  of  this  fear  will  extend  to  all  the  powers  and  faculties  of 
the  souL  It  will — (1)  Constrain  the  understanding  to  submit  imphcitly  to  thf 
authority  of  God's  revealed  will.    (2)  Inflaenoe  the  wiU,  rendering  it  pliable  ani 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

submissive,  and  conforming  it  to  the  will  of  God.  (3)  Control  and  isgulate  the 
affections.  (4)  Guide  and  govern  the  imagination.  3.  A  holy  jealousy  of  our- 
eelves,  and  a  watchful  care  to  avoid  everything  which  may  grieve,  displease,  or 
provoke  Him  to  forsake  us.  Now,  as  Churches  are  composed  of  individuals,  it 
follows  that  when  all  or  nearly  all  the  members  of  a  Church  live  under  the  habitual 
influence  of  this  principle,  the  Church  wiU  walk  in  the  fear  of  God ;  and  all  the 
duties  which  are  incumbent  on  it  will  be  diligently  and  faithfully  performed. 
These  duties  are — (1)  To  provide  the  means  of  grace  and  of  religious  instruction 
for  itself,  its  children,  and  those  who  are  immediately  connected  with  it.  (2)  To 
faithfully  maintain  tlae  discipline  of  Christ  in  His  house.  (3)  To  assemble  at 
proper  seasons  for  social  worship.  (4)  To  take  care  o  Ithe  religious  education  of 
its  children.  (5)  To  assist  feeble  and  destitute  sister  Churches  with  pecuniary  aid 
according  to  their  ability.  H.  What  is  meant  by  walking  in  the  comforts  of 
THE  Holt  Ghost?  Having — 1.  Peace  of  conscience,  or  peace  with  God,  arising 
from  a  persuasion  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit  that  we  are  pardoned  and 
accepted  in  the  Beloved.  2.  A  strong  and  well-grounded  hope,  arising  at  times  to 
a  fuU  assurance,  that  we  are  adopted  into  God's  family,  and  that  consequently  we 
have  a  title  to  all  the  privileges  of  His  children.  3.  Foretastes  of  the  joys  of 
heaven.  III.  When  the  members  op  Churches  habitually  walk  in  this  manner, 
GREAT  ADDITIONS  WILL  BE  MADE  TO  THEM.     This  is  probable  whcD  we  Consider — 

1.  That  such  a  life  and  temper  will  naturally  and  most  powerfully  tend  to  convince 
all  around  them  of  the  reaUty  and  happy  effects  of  religion,  to  remove  their 
prejudices  against  it,  and  to  show  them  that  its  possession  is  highly  desirable. 

2.  That  this  state  of  things  is  exceedingly  pleasing  to  God,  and  naturally  tends  to 
draw  down  His  blessing.  Them  that  honour  Him  He  wiU  honour.  3.  That,  when 
Churches  walk  in  this  manner,  it  proves  that  God  is  pouring  out  His  Spirit 
upon  them,  and  that  a  revival  of  rehgion  is  already  begun.  (E.  Payson,  D.D.) 
Complementary  forces  in  the  Christian  life : — I.  We  are  apt  to  regard  these  two 

FORCES — FEAR  AND    CONSOLATION AS   CONTRADICTORY.        1.    "  The    fcai    of    the    Lord  " 

marks  an  abiding  characteristic  of  the  Christian  life — i.e.,  the  fear  which  dwelt  in 
our  Lord  Himself  must  dwell  in  His  disciples.  Christ  *•  was  heard  in  that  He 
feared."  He  was  penetrated  by  a  sense  of  religious  awe  and  conscientiousness, 
and  was  delicately  alive  to  the  will  of  His  Father ;  and  thus  He  had  power  with 
God  and  prevailed.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord,"  like  the  love  or  the  glory  of  the  Lord, 
is  to  be  participated  in  by  His  disciples,  and  is  altogether  a  noble  thing.  It  is  an 
anxious  state  of  mind  lest  we  should  wound  the  love  of  God,  violate  the  law  of 
righteousness,  or  fail  to  reach  the  highest  sanctification  of  character  (1  Pet.  i.  16, 17). 
2.  "  The  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  is  also  an  indispensable  element.  As  the 
name  of  "Comforter"  as  applied  to  the  Spirit  of  God  means  also  "Helper," 
"Advocate,"  so  the  idea  of  comfort  implies  that  of  efficient  succour,  and  the  idea 
of  efficient  succour  that  of  comfort— the  deep  satisfaction  imparted  to  the  soul  by 
the  energy  of  the  Spirit  of  God — "  strong  consolation,"  as  we  have  it  in  Hebrews. 
The  primitive  Christians  felt  this,  and  walked  in  its  power.  Some  praise  ancient 
heathenism  because,  amid  all  its  absurdities,  it  was  a  cheerful  religion.  Now,  it 
must  be  acknowledged  that  Christianity  is  not  a  "  cheerful  religion  "  in  the  sense  in 
which  they  were.  Christ  brought  out  the  deeper  meaning  of  hfe,  and  we  have  far 
deeper  reasons  for  seriousness  than  men  could  possibly  feel  prior  to  the  Advent. 
The  superficial  hilariousness  of  pagan  worship  was  an  impossibihty  to  those  who 
knew  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  who  had  seen  the  awful  beauty  of  Christ,  and  who 
were  expecting  the  manifestation  of  that  perfect  universe  into  which  nothing  can 
enter  that  defileth.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Christ  has  given  us  such  reasons  for 
bravery  and  hope  in  the  moral  life  as  men  never  knew  before.  Do  we  fear  lest  we 
fail  to  realise  the  wondrous  love  of  God  ?  "  The  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our 
hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost. "  Do  we  tremble  lest  we  fail  to  recognise  the  mind  of 
God  ?  "  When  He,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come.  He  will  guide  you  into  all  truth." 
Do  we  shrink  to  contemplate  the  wide  gulf  which  comes  between  us  and  the 
perfection  of  our  Father  in  heaven  ?  The  Spirit  assures  us  of  sonship,  and  gives 
ns  the  earnest  of  the  promised  inheritance,  and  urges  us  forward  to  share  in  God's 
everlasting  glory  and  blessedness.  11.  So  far  from  these  two  phases  beino 
INCOMPATIBLE,  THEY  ARE  COMPLEMENTARY.  In  uatuic  apparently  contradictory  forces 
blend,  and  in  blending  produce  the  grandest  results.  Widely  as  oxygen  and 
nitrogen  differ,  they  are  complementary  gases,  and  combined  make  the  sweet  and 
vital  atmosphere.  Attraction  and  repulsion  are  also  complementary  forces  whose 
combined  action  preserves  the  universe  in  harmonic  movement.     So  the  resultant 


CHAP.  IX.]  TEE  ACTS.  81 

of  the  double  action  of  the  heart  is  life  and  health.  Thus  is  it  in  Christian 
experience.  1.  Fear  is  not  inconsistent  with — (1)  Peace.  "  Then  had  thi 
Churches  rest,  .  .  .  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  (2)  Love.  The  disciple  oi 
love  fell  at  his  Master's  feet  as  dead.  (3)  Hope.  Peter,  who  has  so  much  to  say 
about  the  terrible  day  of  the  Lord,  is  fuU  of  hope.  (4)  The  highest  world  and  the 
fullest  fehcity.  Those  who  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the  harps  of  gold, 
sing,  "  Who  shall  not  fear  Thee,  0  Lord,  and  glorify  Thy  name  ?  for  Thou  only 
art  holy."  2.  And  so  "  comfort"  is  not  inconsistent  with  any  grace  of  the  Spirit. 
Thoughtf nines s  and  a  fuU  assurance ;  a  constant  eye  to  the  imperative  ideal  which 
is  so  far  above  us,  and  to  the  glorious  grace  dwelling  so  richly  in  us ;  a  vivid  sense 
of  our  high  and  holy  calling,  and  of  the  dangerous  path  of  pilgrimage  which  leads 
up  to  it ;  the  recollection  of  "  the  jealous  God,"  and  of  the  God  "  keeping  mercy 
for  thousands";  the  anticipation  of  judgment  and  glory,  are  co-ordinate  and 
co-operative  moods  in  the  working  out  of  our  salvation.  3.  The  danger  lies  in  the 
omission  of  either.  (1)  How  faulty  the  piety  in  which  fear  has  no  place  1  in  which 
there  is  no  trembling  before  the  hoUness  of  God,  no  overwhelming  sense  of  the 
gravity  of  our  position,  no  gazing  with  awe  into  the  dread  eternity  how  surely 
mine  1  The  brighter  the  star,  the  more  it  trembles ;  and  the  purest  saints,  the 
bravest  heroes  of  all  times,  have  stood  "  in  fear  and  in  much  trembling,"  (2)  Not 
less  faulty  is  the  piety  in  which  comfort  has  no  place — legal,  tormenting,  morbid 
religiousness  1  Pale  sorrow  must  consort  with  blooming  joy ;  weakness  must  lean 
on  strength ;  sweet  comfort  must  soothe  awesome  fear.  Only  in  the  equiUbrium  of 
these  opposite  forces  do  we  attain  the  fulness  of  life  and  the  fulness  of  its  blessing. 
Our  grandest  moments  arise  in  the  union  of  two  opposing  emotions  (Gen.  xxviii. 
16,  17 ;  Matt,  xxviii.  8).  III.  Whilst  we  cultivate  both  sentiments,  we  must 
MAINTAIN  BOTH  IN  DUE  PROPORTIONS.  Most  of  US  are  Under  temptation  to  yield  this 
or  that  undue  pre-eminence,  and  the  reason  is  found  both  in  our  constitution  and 
our  circumstances.  1.  To  exaggerate  the  sentiment  of  fear  is  the  peril  of  some. 
An  old  writer  tells  us  of  a  strange  tribe  which  dwelt  in  caves  because  they  were 
afraid  of  the  sunshine ;  many  devout  people  are  afraid  of  the  sunshine  of  the  mind. 
Such  are  burdened  with  a  sense  of  imperfection,  condemnation,  peril,  and  are  slow 
to  consider  the  gracious  aspects  of  the  Divine  character,  the  inspiriting  and  mighty 
aid  of  the  Comforter.  Let  those  of  a  certain  temperament  watch  against  this 
danger.  Let  God  lead  you  into  green  pastures.  "  Abound  in  hope,"  and  you  shaU 
find  yourself  more  than  conqueror.  2.  The  peril  of  others  lies  in  exaggerating  the 
element  of  comfort.  These  chiefly  ponder  the  clement  phases  of  reUgion,  and 
remember  that  "  like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,"  &c.  They  dwell  more  on 
the  promises  of  Christ  than  on  His  requirements.  Those  need  to  be  reminded 
of  the  sterner  side  of  things.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembhng,"  &c.  All  our  austere  thinking  must  be  relieved  by  gracious  hope,  and 
our  bounding  joy  chastened  by  the  hallowed  fear.  "  Eejoice  with  trembling." 
IV.  The  text  exhibits  fear  and  comfort,  not  as  alternative,  but  as  co-existent 
AND  concurrent  MOODS  OF  THE  SOUL.  At  One  and  the  same  time  they  walked  '•  in 
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  1.  The  two  streams 
DUght  to  mingle  in  one  full  tide  of  feeling.  "  Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  alway," 
and  blessed  is  he  also  who  rejoices  evermore,  and  in  everything  gives  thanks.  In 
the  geologic  world,  for  distinct  and  protracted  periods,  different  gases  prevailed ; 
now  you  have  the  Carboniferous  epoch,  and  then  some  other  element  predominates : 
but  in  the  perfected  earth  the  various  gases  mingle  in  due  proportions,  and  the  life 
and  beauty  of  the  whole  orb  are  secured  and  perpetuated.  In  the  cruder  and  more 
imperfect  stages  of  our  reUgious  history,  periods  of  anxiety  are  succeeded  by  periods 
of  jubilation ;  but  in  the  higher  and  riper  development  of  the  soul  there  is  more 
simultaneousness  in  our  moods,  and  they  happily  mingle  in  one  deep  and  rich 
experience.  In  the  Psalms  we  frequently  find  the  most  rapid  transitions  of  thought, 
the  mingling  of  most  diverse  emotion — gladness  suddenly  becoming  thoughtful,  and 
again,  sorrow  smiling  through  her  tears.  And  the  same  comprehensive  experience 
finds  expression  in  the  New  Testament  (2  Cor.  iv.  8-10 ;  vi.  9,  10).  So  far  from 
deprecating  this,  we  must  regard  it  as  God's  wonder-working  order,  and  direct  our 
seH-culture  accordingly.  The  artist  ranges  over  the  whole  chromatic  scale,  and 
makes  his  picture  so  grand  because  the  colours  are  so  skilfully  mixed ;  the  musician 
rapidly  passes  from  key  to  key,  from  stop  to  stop,  and  because  he  does  so  creates 
commanding  music  ;  thus  in  the  believer's  life  it  is  the  constant  concurrent  appeal 
to  law  and  grace,  to  responsibility  and  privilege,  to  the  God  of  righteousness  and 
the  God  of  love,  to  heaven  near  and  heaven  distant,  that  finally  gives  to  the 
you  n.  6 


82  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nu 

character  that  full  and  finished  beauty  of  which  all  artistic  perfection  is  but  the 
coarse  figure.  2.  The  concurrence  of  these  two  habits  of  feeling  secures  the  highest 
welfare  of  the  souU  It  was  whilst  the  first  Churches  walked  in  this  fear  and 
comfort  that  they  were  "edified"  and  "multiplied."  The  truest  condition  of 
Christian  life  is  not  found  in  the  comparative  absence  of  feeling.  The  text  repre- 
sents the  soul  as  full  of  force  and  movement.  A  uniform  experience  is  thought  by 
Bome  a  satisfactory  sign.  The  truth  is  far  otherwise.  How  much  grandeur  would 
be  lost  to  the  world  if  the  mountains  were  levelled ;  how  much  fruitf ulness,  and 
history,  and  poetry,  and  art  I  Somewhat  thus  is  it  with  the  soul.  The  true  soul  ia 
full  of  great  contending  emotions,  the  upheavals  and  subsidences  caused  by  the 
Spirit  which  worketh  in  us  mightily ;  and  in  the  exaltations  and  humiliations,  the 
soaring  hopes  and  lowly  fears,  the  confidence  which  touches  the  heights  and  the 
apprehensions  which  reach  the  depths,  lies  the  perfecting  of  the  soul.  The  more 
life  the  more  feeling,  the  more  feehng  the  more  Ufe.  3.  In  an  experience  which 
contains  the  full  measure  and  compass  of  feeling  we  secure  the  stability  of  the  soul. 
The  perfect  lighthouse  is  a  mighty  column  rising  out  of  the  rock,  the  very  ideal  of 
strength ;  yet  it  is  a  reed  shaken  with  the  wind,  and  because  it  bends  it  stands. 
It  is  thus  with  the  highest  and  safest  characters.  There  must  be  strength  of  mind, 
of  principle,  of  faith,  or  it  is  impossible  that  we  should  bear  the  strain  of  life.  And 
yet  with  all  this  there  must  be  that  sensitiveness  which  is  ever  the  sign  of  sublimest 
strength.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  {W.  L. 
Watkinson.)  Honourable  fear : — There  is  a  filial  fear.  There  is  nothing  more  soli- 
citous than  love.  A  mother  knows  fear  in  connection  with  those  children  that  she 
loves,  but  it  is  not  degrading  fear.  The  chUd,  anxious  to  please,  looks  with  waiting 
expectancy  to  see  if  its  task  has  pleased  father  or  mother.  The  child  that  is 
learning  to  write,  or  that  is  studying  art,  and,  making  sketches,  brings  them  to  the 
teacher  or  to  the  parent,  comes  with  a  kind  of  trembling  apprehension  lest  they 
shall  not  be  approved.  That  is  honourable.  That  has  the  approval  of  affection 
itself,  and  it  is  ennobling.  But  the  fear  of  anger,  the  fear  of  penalty,  the  fear  of 
our  own  suffering  and  loss,  is  admirable  only  in  very  remote  degrees,  and  occasion- 
ally, when  other  motives  fail.  And  yet  there  is  a  filial  fear,  a  love-fear,  which  not 
only  is  permissible,  but  is  honouring  and  uplifting.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The 
Church  at  rest : — Some  men  seem  to  think  that  the  glory  of  the  Church  consists 
in  being  let  alone.  What  they  esteem  above  all  other  things  is  peace.  A  green 
mantling  pool  of  what  they  call  orthodoxy,  with  a  minister  croaking  like  a  frog 
solitary — that  is  their  conception  of  a  Christian  Church  in  a  state  of  prosperity. 
But,  according  to  the  Bible,  we  are  warriors.  The  battles  we  fight,  however,  are 
not  battles  of  blood,  but  battles  of  love  and  mercy.  We  are  sent  to  carry,  not  the 
sword  and  the  spear,  not  rude  violence,  but  conceptions  of  higher  justice,  nobler 
purity,  wiser  laws,  and  more  beneficent  customs.  The  weapons  of  our  warfare  are 
not  carnal.  With  these  we  contest,  and  we  will  contest,  against  rage  and  wrath 
and  bitterness,  knowing  that  He  that  called  us  and  sent  us  is  the  God  of  battles, 
and  will  guide  us  and  give  us  that  victory  which,  if  worth  anything,  is  worth 
achieving  in  the  severest  conflict.  For  victories  that  are  cheap,  are  cheap.  Those 
only  are  worth  having  which  come  as  the  result  of  hard  fighting.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  32-43.  And  It  came  to  pass,  as  Peter  passed  throughout  all  quarters,  he 
came  down  also  to  the  saints  wMch  dwelt  at  Lydda. — Lydda,  the  Lud  of  the  Old 
Testament  (1  Chron.  viii.  12 ;  Ezra  ii.  33 ;  Neh.  vii.  37,  xi.  35),  was  a  town  in  the 
rich  plain  of  Sharon,  one  day's  journey  from  Jerusalem,  founded  originally  by 
settlers  from  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  and  retaining  to  the  present  day  its  old  name 
as  "Ludd."  It  is  mentioned  by  Josephus  ("  Wars,"  iii.  3,  sec.  5)  as  transferred 
by  Demetrius  Sotfir,  at  the  request  of  Judas  Maccabeus,  to  the  estate  of  the  temple 
at  Jerusalem  (1  Maco,  x.  30,  88,  xi.  34),  Under  the  grasping  rule  of  Cassius,  the 
inhabitants  were  sold  as  slaves  (Jos.,  "  Ant,"  xiv.  11,  sec.  2).  It  had,  however,  re- 
covered its  former  prosperity,  and  appears  at  this  time  to  have  been  the  seat  of  a 
flourishing  Christian  community.  In  the  wars  that  preceded  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  it  was  partially  burned  by  Cestius  Gallus,  a.d.  66  (Jos.,  "  Wars,"  ii.  19, 
sec.  1),  all  but  fifty  of  the  inhabitants  having  gone  up  to  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles 
at  Jerusalem,  and  was  again  occupied  by  Vespasian,  a.d.  68  (Jos,,  "  Wars,"  ii.  8, 
eec.  1).  When  it  was  rebuilt,  probably  under  Hadrian,  when  Jerusalem  received 
the*  new  name  of  -Elia  Capitolina,  it  also  was  re-named  as  Diospolis  (  =  city  of  Zeus), 
and  as  such  was  the  seat  of  one  of  the  chief  bishoprics  of  the  Syrian  Church.  It 
vas,  at  the  time  when  Peter  came  to  it,  the  seat  of  a  Eabbinic  school.    Gamaliel, 


CBAr.rx.}  THE  ACTS.  6i 

«on  of  the  great  rabbi  who  was  St.  Paul's  master,  and  himself  honoured  with  the 
title  of  Eabban,  presided  over  it,  and  was  succeeded  by  the  great  Tarphoru  The 
question  which  we  naturally  ask,  who  had  planted  the  faith  of  Christ  there,  carriea 
us  once  more  on  the  track  of  Philip  the  Evangelist.  Lying  as  it  did  on  the  road 
from  Azotus  to  Csesarea,  it  would  he  in  his  way  on  the  journey  recorded  in  chap, 
viii.  40,  as  he  passed  "  through  all  the  cities  " ;  and  we  may  believe,  without  much 
risk,  that  he  was  Luke's  informant  as  to  what  passed  in  the  Church  with  which  he 
was  so  closely  connected.  (Dean  Plumptre.)  Summarised  service  : — I.  How  did 
THEBE  HAPPEN  TO  BE  ANY  SAINTS  AT  Ltdda  ?  That  place  does  uot  appear  before. 
There  are  saints  in  unexpected  places.  Yet  not  unexpected  to  the  attentive  reader. 
Lydda  lay  between  Azotus  and  Csesarea  (chap.  viii.  40),  and  Philip  no  doubt  had 
founded  a  Church  there.  How  summarily  our  work  is  occasionally  mentioned. 
In  many  a  hurried  phrase  there  are  service  and  suffering,  trial  and  triumph,  which 
only  God  can  recognise.  We  hear  it  said  of  the  minister,  that  he  "  called  and 
offered  prayer."  By  the  clock  it  was  but  a  few  minutes,  but  into  those  minutes 
he  condensed  the  experience  of  a  lifetime,  and  spared  not  the  blood  of  his  very 
heart.  Suspect  any  epitome  which  counts  but  as  small  dust  the  details  which 
make  up  the  service  and  suffering  of  the  Christian  toiler.  II.  Peteb  found  his 
WAT  TO  THE  SAINTS.  How  ?  Do  we  not  aU  find  out  our  otberselves  in  every  city 
to  which  we  go  t  When  the  surveyor  would  find  out  metallic  strata,  he  takes  the 
magnet,  and  sees  how  it  dips,  and  says,  "  Here  you  will  find  what  you  are  in  quest 
•of."  We  pine  for  our  own,  and  faU  with  second  naturalness  into  the  ways  of  the 
company  of  which  we  form  a  part.  It  would  do  some  of  us  good  if  we  could  be 
shut  up  with  savages  for  a  few  days.  How  we  should  then  yearn  for  the  most 
defective  Christian  we  ever  knew  I  HI.  The  saints  abb  nameless.  There  is 
something  better  than  a  name.  There  is  character.  There  you  find  no  personal 
renown,  but  you  find  a  sohd  quantity  of  spiritual  being.  It  is  towards  that  estate 
we  should  constantly  be  moving,  to  the  great  repubhc  of  common  holiness.  IV. 
Peteb  found  the  man  who  is  to  be  found  in  eveby  city.  Locally  called  ^neas, 
but  everywhere  called  the  sick  man.  The  genus  remains  unhealed — a  continual 
appeal  to  the  Petrine  spirit.  We  are  not  all  in  the  front  rank  of  the  ministry ; 
because  we  cannot  do  the  first  and  supreme  class  of  work,  it  does  not  follow  that 
we  are  to  sit  idle.  You  can  bring  to  ^neas  the  Christian  friend,  and  there  is  no 
grief  but  one  that  cannot  be  mitigated  by  Christian  love.  We  hear  nothing  of 
Peter's  doings  here  except  this  miracle ;  but  as  Philip  had  done  much  at  Lydda 
without  any  record,  so  Peter  may  have  done  much  beside  this  miracle.  The  miracle 
itself  was  a  sermon.  For  ••  all  that  dwelt  at  Lydda  and  Saron  saw  him,  and  turned 
to  the  Lord."  V.  Now  we  come  to  Joppa,  where  there  dwelt  a  woman  who  "  was 
full  of  good  works  and  almsdeeds  which  she  did."  1.  She  died  1  How  is  thatf 
There  are  some  people  whom  we  almost  wish  would  die,  and  die  they  will  not ;  and 
others  whom  we  want  to  live  always  wither  and  die.  There  seems  to  be  such  a 
■waste  of  nobility  and  service  in  this  mysterious  Providence.  But  we  may  be  wrong 
in  that  outlook  as  we  are  in  others.  Why  should  not  the  good  ship  land  ?  Why 
should  we  shed  tears  when  the  noble  life-vessel  touches  the  shore  ?  It  is  so  that 
God  trains  us,  prunes  us,  and  prepares  us  for  the  wider  revelation  and  the  higher 
service.  2.  Peter  was  sent  for.  He  came  the  nine  miles  to  see  what  could  be  done. 
How  natural  was  this.  There  are  times  when  the  strong  man  is  sent  for,  and  these 
are  times  of  darkness,  trouble,  personal  and  social  despair.  But  there  is  always  a 
strong  man  to  send  for.  In  that  sense  we  must  have  "  all  things  common,"  and 
none  must  say  that  ought  that  he  has  belongs  to  himself  alone.  It  is  in  this  spirit 
of  Christian  communism  that  we  must  keep  society  from  putrefaction  and  sonla 
from  despair.  There  is  a  hint  of  the  One  who  "  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother." 
When  your  house  is  very  dark,  send  for  Jesus.  But  you  are  not  to  wait  for  such 
crises.  Send  for  Him  to-day,  when  the  table  is  laden  with  flowers  and  every  corner 
of  the  dwelling  is  ablaze  with  His  own  sunlight.  Beautiful  was  the  scene  in  that 
house  at  Joppa  (ver.  39).  3.  How  did  these  widows  come  to  be  thus  associated? 
Who  took  any  interest  in  their  welfare  t  If  you  read  again  chap.  vi.  you  will  find 
arrangements  made  for  needy  widows,  and  to  the  name  of  Philip.  So  this  man 
lives  in  his  works.  At  Lydda  he  founded  a  Christian  society ;  at  Joppa  he  organised 
help  for  widows.  Philip  does  not  appear  before  us  in  name ;  but  he  leaves  behind 
him  memorials  of  his  wisdom  and  beneficence.  4.  How  is  it  that  we  like  the  gar- 
ments better  when  the  seamstress  is  dead  than  when  she  was  making  them?  That 
is  a  fact  everywhere.  The  little  child's  toy  becomes  infinitely  precious  when  the 
tiny  player  can  no  longer  handle  it.    And  the  two  httle  shoes  are  the  most  precious 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  loBir.  a 

property  in  the  house  when  the  little  feet  that  wore  them  are  Bet  away  in  God's 
acre.  Let  us  love  one  another  whilst  we  live  I  Not  a  word  do  I  say  against  the 
Bentiment  which  enlarges  the  actions  of  the  dead,  but  I  would  speak  a  word  for 
those  who  are  sitting  next  you  and  making  your  own  house  glad  by  their  deft  fingers 
and  loving  hearts.  5.  Now  we  come  to  the  first  miracle  of  the  kind  to  which 
apostolic  strength  was  summoned.  Up  to  this  time  the  apostles  had  been  healing 
divers  diseases ;  but  now  the  apostles  grapple  without  the  visible  Christ  with 
actual  death.  We  may  well  pause  here  in  the  excitement  of  a  great  anxiety. 
"  Peter  put  them  all  forth."  That  was  what  Christ  did  1  Some  battles  may  be 
fought  in  public,  others  have  to  be  fought  in  solitude ;  so  "  Peter  put  them  aU 
forth."  "Thou,  when  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  closet,"  &c.  Have  you  ever 
prayed  in  the  death  chamber  with  none  there  but  the  dead  friend  ?  How  eloquent 
has  been  your  dumbness  1  When  you  were  weak,  then  were  you  strong.  *'  And  " 
— oh,  conjunctive  that  makes  one  tremble  I — "  turning  to  the  body,"  now  is  the  critical 
moment,  "  said,  Tabitha,  arise."  "And  she  opened  her  eyes,  and  when  she  saw 
Peter  she  sat  up."  Let  your  miracles  come  through  your  prayers.  Let  your  prayers 
always  end  in  the  amen  of  a  miracle.  What  is  the  use  of  your  soUtude  and  your 
prayer,  if  when  you  turn  round  you  cannot  work  some  miracle  of  love  ?  (J.  Parker, 
JD.JD.)  Peter  at  Lydda: — Look  at  this  miracle — I.  As  expbessino  the  genios 
OF  Chbistianity.  ^neas,  a  wretched  sufferer  for  eight  long  years,  Peter  restored 
to  health,  thus  expressing  the  benign  spirit  of  the  new  reUgion.  Christianity  is — 
1.  The  offspring  of  mercy.  It  is  a  stream  from  the  eternal  fountain  of  love.  2. 
The  revealer  of  mercy.  "  Herein  is  love,"  &o.  3.  The  organ  of  mercy.  Through 
it  humanity  is  to  be  redeemed  from  all  evil.  II.  As  symbolising  the  mission  of 
Christunity.  It  was  a  restorative  miracle.  The  mission  of  Christianity  is  re- 
storative. Christ  came  to  seek  and  to  save.  The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation.  It  does  not  create  new  faculties  ;  but  it  restores  the  soul — 1.  To  God's 
knowledge.  2.  To  God's  fellowship.  3.  To  God's  image.  III.  As  indicating  thb 
POWEB  OF  CHRisTiiNiTY.  "  Jesus  Chiist  makcth  thee  whole,"  &c.  1.  The  restora- 
tive power  is  derived  from  Christ.  2.  It  is  derived  from  Christ  by  faith.  IV.  As 
bepbesenting  the  influence  of  Chbistianity.  Men  "  turned  to  the  Lord."  This 
is  to  turn — 1.  From  the  creature  to  the  Creator.  2.  From  the  destroyer  to  the 
Eestorer.  3.  From  the  wrong  and  miserable  to  the  holy  and  happy.  (D.  Thomas^ 
D.B.)  ^neas : — I.  Was  tbuly  bick.  1.  Had  he  not  been  really  sick,  the  in- 
cident would  have  been  a  piece  of  imposture  ;  but  he  was  hopelessly  infirm.  Now, 
as  there  is  no  room  for  a  great  cure  unless  there  is  a  great  sickness,  so  there  is  no 
room  for  God's  great  grace  unless  there  is  great  sin.  Jesus  Christ  did  not  come 
into  the  world  to  save  sham,  but  real  sinners.  2.  The  man  had  been  paralysed 
eight  years.  The  length  of  its  endurance  is  a  terrible  element  in  a  disease.  Per- 
haps yours  is  no  eight  years'  malady,  but  twenty-eight,  or  forty-eight,  or,  perhaps, 
eighty-eight  years  have  you  been  in  bondage  under  it.  WeU,  the  number  of  years 
cannot  prevent  the  mercy  of  God  from  making  us  whole.  You  have  a  very  long 
bill  to  ctscharge,  while  another  friend  has  but  a  short  one ;  but  it  is  just  as  easy 
for  the  creditor  to  write  "  paid  "  at  the  bottom  of  the  large  bill  as  the  smaller  one. 
3.  His  disease  was  incurable.  Mne&s  could  not  restore  himself,  and  no  human 
physician  could  do  anything  for  him.  Your  soul's  wound  is  incurable.  There  is 
no  soul  physician  except  at  Calvary ;  no  balm  but  in  the  Saviour's  wounds.  II. 
Knew  something  about  Jesus;  because,  otherwise,  when  Peter  said,  "Jesus Christ 
maketh  thee  whole,"  iSneas  would  have  inquired  what  he  meant.  Now,  lest  there 
should  be  one  here  who  does  not  know  Jesus  Christ,  and  how  it  is  that  He  is  able 
to  heal  sin-sick  souls,  let  us  briefly  tell  the  old,  old  story  over  again.  III.  Believed 
ON  the  Lobd  Jesus.  1.  He  did  not  believe  in  Peter  as  the  healer.  Peter  does 
not  say,  "  As  the  head  of  the  Church,  I,  by  power  delegated  to  me,  make  thee 
whole."  Peter  preached  too  clear  a  gospel  for  that.  That  is  the  purest  gospel 
which  has  the  least  of  man  in  it,  and  the  most  of  Christ.  2.  Much  less  had  he 
any  faith  in  himself.  He  did  not  say  to  Peter,  "  But  I  do  not  feel  strength  enough 
to  get  well";  nor  "I  think  I  do  feel  power  enough  to  shake  off  this  palsy."  Peter's 
message  took  him  off  from  himself.  "  Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee  whole."  That  was 
what  the  man  had  to  believe ;  and  it  is  what  you  also  must  believe.  3.  With  his 
faith  MnesLB  had  the  desires  which  showed  that  it  was  not  mere  speculation,  but 
solid  practical  beUeving  ;  he  anxiously  wished  to  be  made  whole.  Oh,  that  sinners 
anxiously  wished  to  be  saved  I  I  never  heard  of  men  reckoning  a  cancer  to  be  a 
jewel ;  but  there  are  many  who  look  upon  their  sins  as  if  they  were  gems,  so  that 
they  will  sooner  luse  heaven  than  part  with  their  lustful  pleasures.    4.  And  what 


OHAP.  n.]  THS  ACTS,  6S 

did  ^neas  believe  ?  (1)  That  Jesns  could  heal  him,  ^neas.  John  Brown,  do  yoa 
believe  that  Jesus  Christ  can  cure  you  ?  I  do  not  care  what  your  faith  is  about 
your  wife's  case.  Can  you  grip  that,  and  reply,  •'  Yes,  He  is  able  to  save  me  "? 
(2)  That  Jesns  Christ  was  able  to  save  him  there  and  then,  just  as  he  was.  He 
had  not  taken  a  course  of  physio,  nor  been  under  galvanism  to  strengthen  his 
nerves  and  sinews,  and  prepare  him  to  be  cured,  but  he  believed  that  Jesus  Christ 
could  save  him  without  any  preparation.  When  you  think  what  Christ  is,  and 
what  He  has  done,  it  ought  not  to  be  diflScult  to  believe  this.  IV.  Was  made  whole. 
Just  fancy,  for  a  minute,  what  would  have  been  the  result  if  he  had  not  been  made 
whole.  1.  What  dishonour  it  would  have  been  to  Peter  1  Peter  said,  "  ^neas, 
Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee  whole " ;  but  there  lies  ^neas  as  palsied  as  before. 
Everybody  would  say,  **  Peter  is  a  false  witness."  2.  What  dishonour  would  have 
been  brought  upon  the  name  of  Jesus !  Suppose  you  were  to  believe  in  Jesus,  and 
yet  were  not  saved.  Then  He  has  broken  His  word,  or  lost  His  power  to  save, 
either  of  which  we  are  unwilling  to  tolerate  for  a  minute.  K  thou  believest  in 
Jesus  Christ,  as  surely  as  thou  Uvest  Jesus  Christ  has  saved  thee.  3.  Then  the 
gospel  would  not  be  true.  Shut  up  those  churches,  banish  those  ministers,  burn 
those  Bibles ;  there  is  no  truth  in  any  of  them  if  a  soul  can  believe  in  Jesus  and 
yet  not  be  saved.  V.  Afteb  he  was  healed,  acted  confobmablt.  "  Peter  said 
unto  him,  .  .  .  Arise,  and  make  thy  bed  "  ;  and  he  did  so  directly.  Now,  if 
any  of  you  say  to-night,  "  I  have  beheved  in  Jesus,"  remember  you  are  bound  to 
prove  it.  You  are  to  go  home  and  show  people  how  whole  you  are.  This  man  had 
been  lying  there  eight  years,  and  could  never  make  his  bed  ;  but  he  proved  he  was 
healed  by  making  his  bed  for  himself.  You  will  have  to  prove  this  by — 1.  A  con- 
sistent, holy  Ufe.  2.  An  unselfish  life.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Peter  working 
miracles : — I.  At  Ltdda.  1.  Peter  came  to  the  saints  at  Lydda — an  early  and 
favourite  title  for  the  disciples  of  Christ.  It  has  no  official  application,  but  belongs 
equally  to  all  believers,  and  no  disciple  should  shrink  from  it.  Its  primary  and 
principal  sense  is  one  set  apart  as  sacred.  Believers  are  called  saints,  not  because 
they  are  of  eminent  sanctity,  but  because  they  are  set  apart  as  sacred  to  God.  This 
primary  meaning,  however,  implies  the  secondary,  subjective  sense  of  moral  holi- 
ness. It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  abuse  of  this  inspired  name  should  have  led 
the  Eeformed  Church  into  neglect  of  its  apostolic  use.  2.  In  the  Church  at  Lydda, 
Peter  found  a  case  of  incurable  paralysis.  Christianity,  by  removing  causes  and 
supplying  antidotes,  reduces  the  area  and  violence  of  physical  diseases.  But  the 
gospel  is  designed  chiedy  for  the  more  terrible  moral  diseases  of  mankind.  Would 
it  impugn  the  fair  name  of  ^neas  if  we  regard  him  as  the  type  of  a  paralysed 
beUever  or  Church  ?  3.  The  profit  of  faithful  pastoral  visitation  is  seen  in  the 
discovery  of  paralysing  conditions.  This  palsy  may  be  any  evil  quality  of  character 
or  hfe  sufficient  to  prevent  spiritual  activity  and  growth.  There  is  but  one  relief — 
in  a  miracle  of  grace,  a  revival  stirring  all  the  depths  of  the  soul.  4.  "  ^neas, 
Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee  whole  ;  arise,  upright,  make  use  of  the  power  Jesus  gives 
thee ;  prove  thyself  sound  by  the  activities  of  a  healthy  life  ;  show  to  all  the  saving 
power  of  Jesus  Christ  by  acting  as  one  whom  He  has  saved."  Peter  does  not  men- 
tion himself,  but  acts  in  the  meekness  of  a  true  servant.  He  thus  presents  an 
admirable  example  of  that  combination  of  modesty  and  power  so  characteristic 
of  real  greatness.  5.  The  faith  of  Peter  in  the  power  of  Jesus  is  manifest, 
not  only  in  the  positive  declaration  of  what  Jesus  was  doing  for  .^neas,  but  also  in 
the  imperative  "  arise  "  given  to  one  hitherto  paralytic.  The  faith  which  works 
miracles  on  the  bodies  of  men  no  longer  remains  with  the  ministry  ;  but  that  is  of 
small  account  to  the  faith  that  works  miracles  on  the  souls  of  men.  6.  Though  no 
mention  is  made  of  the  faith  of  Mne&s,  it  appears  in  its  fruit.  The  human  source 
of  that  faith  was  the  faith  of  Peter.  Did  all  who  undertake  to  speak  in  the  name 
of  Jesus  Christ  do  it  with  firm  conviction  in  the  presence  and  power  of  Jesus  to 
save,  their  faith  would  never  fail  to  be  fruitful  in  the  faith  and  conversion  of  others. 
7.  There  was  no  concealment  on  the  part  of  .^Eneas  of  the  Christian  work  effected 
in  him.  The  fame  of  his  healing  spread  through  all  the  region.  The  inultitude 
thronged  to  see  the  paralytic,  now  whole ;  and  when  they  learned  the  Divine  name 
in  which  it  was  effected,  they  were  converted,  and  openly  took  their  stand  with  the 
Church  of  Christ.  This  result,  so  natural  and  logical,  is  a  reason  why  a  converted 
man  should  make  known  Christ's  work  within  him.  II.  At  Joppa.  1.  The  apos- 
toUc  visitation  of  Peter  was  an  upward  as  well  as  onward  progress,  a  rising  from 
one  great  work  to  a  greater,  until  its  sublime  culmination  in  the  house  of  Cornelius. 
In  the  Church  at  Joppa  was  a  prominent  disciple.    Among  her  Syrian  friends  she 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

was  known  as  Tabitha,  her  Greek  acquaintances  called  her  Dorcas,  while  we  would 
have  spoken  of  her  as  "  the  Gazelle."  The  graceful  form  and  pliant  movement, 
and  large,  gentle,  loving  eyes  of  the  gazelle,  after  all,  do  not  express  such  attractive 
beauty  as  the  portrait  of  Dorcas  :  ••  a  woman  full  of  good  works  and  almsdeeda  "  ; 
nor  does  the  rarest  physical  beauty  ever  gain  such  a  hold  on  human  affection  as  is 
portrayed  in  the  pathetic  grief  of  this  Church  of  Joppa  over  her  untimely  death. 
2.  New  Testament  biography  is  brief,  but  comprehensive.  Two  pen-strokes  describe 
the  supernatural  workmanship  in  Dorcas — she  was  a  disciple  and  a  saint.  She 
was  Mary  and  Martha  in  one — as  a  disciple,  she  sat  at  Jesus'  feet ;  as  a  saint,  she 
served  Jesus  in  ministrations  of  charity.  A  disciple,  she  confessed  Jesus ;  a  saint, 
she  consecrated  herself,  in  all  her  possessions  and  capabilities,  to  Christ.  She  did 
not  aspire  to  the  place  of  teacher  or  ruler,  but  took  a  natural  sphere  in  the  abundant 
and  varied  womanly  work  of  the  Church.  Dorcas  presents  a  model  worthy  the 
study  of  every  Christian  woman.  3.  "  She  was  sick  and  died."  This  chamber  of 
death  is  to  witness  what  has  been  often  witnessed  since — a  natural  side,  the  gloom 
and  grief  and  agony  of  bereaved  affection  ;  and  the  supernatural  side — the  wresthng 
prayer  and  submissive  comfort  of  faith  in  the  assured  rest  and  resurrection  of  the 
dead.  4.  And  then  the  stricken  Church  sent  for  Peter.  They  were  expecting  n& 
miracle.  It  was  too  late  for  the  exertion  of  the  power  of  a  healing  like  that  o£ 
JEneas.  They  were  in  sore  need  of  light  and  comfort,  and  they  turned  to  one  on 
whom  Jesus  had  bestowed  other  and  greater  gifts  than  physical  healing.  The 
apostle  left  a  happy  and  rejoicing  Church  at  Lydda ;  it  was  a  sad  and  tearful  con- 
gregation that  greeted  him  at  Joppa.  It  was  said  her  loss  was  irreparable.  But 
we  know  better:  Providence  is  not  limited  to  one  Dorcas,  or  two.  The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  ever  ripening.  We  do  daily  meet  sisters  of  charity — not,  indeed,  flaunting 
a  Pharisaic  zeal  in  the  garb  of  a  religious  order,  but  dressed  as  women  ought  to 
be — who  consecrate  their  means  and  time  in  sacrifices  of  beneficence.  4.  Peter 
desired  to  be  alone  with  the  dead.  Was  it  the  instinct  of  Christian  meekness,  or 
recalling  the  example  of  Jesus  in  the  house  of  Jairus  ?  The  crowded  presence  of 
this  weeping  company  was  not  in  harmony  with  the  great  emotion  now  surging  in 
the  apostle's  heart.  Alone,  he  would  be  more  free  in  prayer  for  the  guidance  of 
Jesus  in  this  crisis.  The  thoughtful  minister,  when  preparing  for  Christian  work 
— all  the  more  if  it  be  unusual  or  critical — prays  in  the  closet,  and  not  before  men. 
Nor  does  Peter  appeal  to  Jesus  in  vain.  5.  How  natural  is  the  story  of  this  resur- 
rection 1  The  eyes  of  "the  Gazelle  "once  more  open.  He  presented  her  to  the 
Church  alive,  her  old  life  of  love,  sympathy,  and  beneficence.  She  would  not  be 
less  a  Christian  for  having  been  in  Paradise.  A  few  hours  of  heaven,  as  was  the 
case  with  Paul,  and  John,  and  Tennent,  gives  new  motives  and  fresh  impulses  to 
Christian  consecration.  6.  The  news  thrilled  the  Church  with  joy,  and  all  Joppa 
with  wonder.  This  is  not  recorded  to  meet  the  demands  of  scepticism,  but  because 
of  the  effect  of  the  miracle  on  the  activity  of  the  Church,  and  on  the  many  who 
believed  and  were  added  to  the  saints  ;  to  conduct  and  confirm  which  work  "  Peter 
tarried  many  days  in  Joppa."  7.  If  the  life  of  Dorcas  was  a  blessing  to  the  Church 
and  world,  even  more  fruitful  of  good  was  her  death.  It  roused  the  Church  through 
grief  and  surprise  to  tears  of  repentance,  gratitude,  and  love.  It  led  them  to  con- 
fession and  prayer  in  seeking  heavenly  sympathy  and  comfort.  The  awakening  of 
her  body  was  the  awakening  of  many  sleeping  souls  to  life  in  Jesus  Christ.  Let 
the  Church  hear  the  cry,  "Arise!  awake  at  the  word  to  the  work  of  Jesus."  (G.  C. 
Heckman,  D.D.)  Peter  working  miracles : — We  are  told  that  faith  in  miracles  is 
passing  away.  No  doubt  in  some  quarters  it  is  ;  and  unhappily  the  same  is  to  be 
said  of  much  else  that  is  good  and  true.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  such 
faith  is  opposed  to  human  reason,  nor  that  it  is  likely  ever  to  lose  its  hold  on  the 
human  heart.  It  is  certain  that,  if  there  be  a  personal  God,  He  can  reveal  His 
presence  by  signs  and  wonders ;  and  equally  certain  that,  if  occasion  requires.  He 
will.  I.  The  time  was  a  season  of  rest.  Saul  of  Tarsus  had  been  converted  ;  the 
storm  of  persecution  had  subsided ;  and  Peter,  with  unresting  activity,  was  on  a 
round  of  Church  inspection,  imparting  courage,  and  working  miracles  of  convincing 
and  persuasive  power.  II.  The  scene  was  north-west  from  Jerusalem.  Lydda 
was  from  Jerusalem  about  a  day's  journey.  Joppa,  nine  miles  beyond.  At  both 
these  places  there  were  Churches.  So  rapid  had  been  the  progress  of  the  faith  in 
Jesus  I  III.  The  subjects  were  both  alike  and  unlike.  The  one  was  a  paralytic ; 
the  other,  a  dead  disciple  greatly  beloved  for  her  good  works.  Both  were  well 
known,  and  known  to  be  beyond  human  help.  Again,  while  one  was  a  beloved 
disciple,  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  other  was  a  disciple  at  all.    For  aught  that 


cmr.  IX.]  THE  ACTS,  87 

appears,  ^neas  was  a  oomi£on  sinnar,  who  had  heard  of  Jesus,  but  had  never 
attached  himsel£  to  the  company  of  His  followers.  Thus  the  miracle  was  not  only 
an  unmistakable  work  of  Divine  power,  but  also  the  outgoing  of  Christian  love. 
IV.  Thb  mannbb.  These  wonders  were  wrought  by  Peter  indeed,  but  in  the  name 
and  power  of  another.  Never  did  the  apostles  claim  to  work  by  any  other  power 
than  that  of  Jesus.  V.  The  pdbpose  was  twofold.  In  part  it  was  the  simple 
relief  of  suffering  and  cure  of  sorrow.  But  Peter  had  a  deeper  purpose.  If  miracles 
were  immediately  beneficial,  they  were  also  and  specially  "  signs."  And,  with  the 
apostles,  they  were  signs  not  only  of  God's  approval  of  their  teachings  and  work, 
but  also  of  the  continued  presence  and  power  of  Jesus.  VL  The  BESuiiT.  Their 
twofold  purpose  was  accomplished.  Not  only  was  suffering  relieved  and  sorrow 
turned  to  joy,  but  far  and  near  it  was  seen  and  owned  that  Jesus  was  still  at  hand 
and  mighty  to  save.  VII.  Pbaoticai.  considebations.  1.  Jesus  is  still  a  living 
and  acting  Presence  with  His  people.  The  continued  nearness  of  Christ  is  the 
hope  and  strength  of  the  individual  believer,  the  warrant  of  the  Church  in  its 
aggressive  work,  and  the  pledge  of  its  final  victory.  2.  The  breadth  of  our  Christian 
work.  Our  Saviour  had  it  as  a  part  of  His  mission  to  relieve  physical  distress. 
He  commissioned  His  disciples  to  do  the  same.  More  than  this,  by  precept  and 
example  He  planted  the  spirit  of  human  kindness  in  the  hearts  of  His  followers. 
Straightway  it  began  to  show  itself  in  them.  It  did  not  more  truly  appear  in  the 
miracles  of  Peter  than  it  did  in  the  good  works  and  almsdeeds  of  Dorcas.  Already 
this  has  wrought  great  changes  in  the  face  of  society ;  but  by  no  means  has  aU 
been  accomplished  which  needs  to  be  done.  This,  then,  is  a  part  of  the  service 
which  the  Master  expects  of  His  present  followers.  The  redemption  He  proposes  is 
for  the  whole  man — body,  soul,  and  spirit.  3.  One  important  way  to  promote 
religious  conversions  and  revivals.  It  was  the  love,  as  well  as  the  Divine  power, 
which  shone  in  the  miracles  of  Peter,  which  won  the  hearts  of  so  many  at  Lydda 
and  Joppa.  Often  does  the  missionary  first  win  his  way  to  Pagan  hearts  by 
ministries  of  bodily  healing.  4.  The  crowning  aim  in  all  Christian  service.  With 
the  Saviour,  this  was  never  the  mere  relief  of  physical  suffering  or  trouble.  He 
would  have  them  know  that  He  had  power  to  forgive  sins,  and  raise  the  spiritually 
dead  to  life  eternal.  So  it  was  Peter's  supreme  purpose  to  multiply  and  confirm 
Christian  converts.  (Sermons  iy  the  Monday  Club.)  Working  like  Christ: — 
These  two  miracles  are  both  evidently  moulded  upon  Christ's  miracles ;  are  distinct 
imitations  of  what  Peter  had  seen  Him  do.  And  their  likenesses  to  and  differences 
from  our  Lord's  manner  of  working  are  equally  noteworthy.  I.  First,  notice  the 
simhaeities  and  the  lesson  they  teach.  The  two  cases  before  us  are  alike  in  that 
both  of  them  find  parallels  in  our  Lord's  miracles.  The  one  is  the  cure  of  a 
paralytic.  The  raising  of  Dorcas  corresponds  with  the  three  resurrections  of  the 
dead  people  which  are  recorded  in  the  Gospels.  And  now,  note  the  likenesses. 
Jesus  Christ  said  to  the  paralysed  man,  "Arise,  take  up  thy  bed."  Peter  said 
to  iEneas,  "  Arise,  and  make  thy  bed."  The  one  conmiand  was  appropriate 
to  the  circumstances  of  a  man  who  was  not  in  his  own  house ;  the  other  a 
man  bed-ridden  in  his  own  house.  And  then,  if  we  turn  to  the  other  nar- 
rative, the  intentional  moulding  of  the  manner  of  the  miracle,  consecrated 
in  the  eyes  of  the  loving  disciple,  because  it  was  Christ's  manner,  is  still  more 
obvious.  Well  now,  although  we  are  no  miracle-workers,  the  very  same  prin- 
ciple which  underlay  these  two  works  of  supernatural  power  is  to  be  applied  to  aU 
our  work,  and  to  our  Uves  as  Christian  people.  I  do  not  know  whether  Peter 
meant  to  do  like  Jesus  Christ  or  not ;  I  rather  think  that  he  was  unconsciously 
dropping  into  the  fashion  that  to  him  was  so  sacred.  Love  always  delights  in  imita- 
tion ;  and  the  disciples  of  a  great  teacher  will  unconsciously  catch  the  trick  of  his 
intonation,  the  peculiarities  of  his  way  of  looking  at  things — only,  unfortunately, 
outsides  are  a  good  deal  more  easily  imitated  than  insides.  Get  near  Jesus  Christ, 
and  you  will  catch  His  manner.  Love  Him,  and  love  will  do  to  you  what  it  does 
to  many  a  wedded  pair,  and  to  many  kindred  hearts,  it  will  transfuse  into  you 
something  of  the  characteristics  of  the  object  of  your  love.  It  is  impossible  to  trust 
Christ,  to  obey  Christ,  to  hold  communion  with  Him,  and  to  live  beside  Him, 
without  becoming  like  Him.  And  if  such  be  our  inward  experience,  so  will  be  our 
outward  appearance.  Jesus  Christ,  when  He  went  through  the  wards  of  the 
hospital  of  the  world,  was  overflowing  with  quick  sympathy  for  every  sorrow  that 
met  His  eye.  If  you  or  I  are  living  near  Him  we  shall  never  steel  our  hearts  nor 
lock  up  our  sensibilities  against  any  suffering  that  it  is  within  our  power  to  stanch 
or  to  alleviate.     Jesus  Christ  never  grudged  trouble,  never  thought  of  Himself, 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xx. 

never  was  impatient  of  interruption,  never  repelled  importunity,  never  sent  away 
empty  any  outstretched  hand.  11.  Further,  note  the  differences  and  the  lessons 
FROM  THEM.  Take  the  first  of  the  two  miracles.  "  ^Eneas,  Jesus  Christ  maketh 
thee  whole  :  arise,  and  make  thy  bed."  That  first  clause  points  to  the  great  dif- 
ference. Take  the  second  of  the  two,  "  Jesus  Christ  put  them  all  forth,  and 
stretched  out  His  hand,  and  said.  Damsel,  arise  1 "  "  Peter  put  them  all  forth, 
.  .  .  and  said.  Damsel  (Tabitha),  arise  I  "  But  between  the  putting  forth  and  the 
miracle  he  did  something  which  Christ  did  not  do,  and  he  did  not  do  something 
which  Christ  did  do.  "  He  kneeled  down  and  prayed."  And  Jesus  Christ  did  not 
do  that.  And  Peter  put  forth  his  hand  after  the  miracle  was  wrought ;  not  to 
communicate  life,  but  to  help  the  living  woman.  Christ  works  miracles  by  His 
inherent  power  ;  His  servants  do  their  works  only  as  His  instruments  and  organs. 
The  lesson,  then,  of  the  difference  is  that  Christian  men,  in  all  their  work  for  the 
Master,  and  for  the  world,  are  ever  to  keep  clear  before  themselves;,  and  to  make 
very  obvious  to  other  people,  that  they  are  nothing  more  than  channels  and  instru- 
ments. The  less  the  preacher,  the  teacher,  the  Christian  benefactor  of  any  sort 
puts  himself  in  the  foreground,  or  in  evidence  at  all,  the  more  likely  are  his  words 
and  works  to  be  successful.  And  then,  further,  another  lesson  is,  be  very  sure  of 
the  power  that  will  work  in  you.  What  a  piece  of  audacity  it  was  for  Peter  to  go 
and  stand  by  the  paralytic  man's  couch  and  say,  "  ^neas,  Jesus  Christ  maketh 
thee  whole  "  1  Yes,  audacity ;  unless  he  had  been  in  such  constant  and  close  touch 
with  his  Master  that  he  was  sure  that  the  Master  was  working  through  him.  And 
is  it  not  beautiful  to  see  how  absolutely  confident  he  is  that  Jesus  Christ's  work 
was  not  done  when  He  went  up  into  heaven  ;  but  that  there,  in  that  little  stuffy 
room,  where  the  man  had  laid  motionless  for  eight  long  years,  Jesus  Christ  is  pre- 
sent, and  working  ?  But  do  we  believe  that  He  is  vei  ily  putting  forth  His  power, 
in  no  metaphor,  but  in  simple  reality,  at  present  and  here,  and,  if  we  will,  through 
us?  We  are  here  for  the  very  purpose  for  which  Peter  was  in  Lydda  and  Joppa — 
to  carry  on  and  copy  the  healing  and  the  quickening  work  of  Christ  by  His  present 
power,  and  after  His  blessed  example.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  36-43.  Now  there  was  at  Joppa. — Joppa  or  Yafa  means  beauty.  The 
modern  name  is  Jaffa  or  Yafa.  It  is  a  seaport  town  of  Palestine,  about  forty  miles 
north-west  of  Jerusalem,  of  which  city  it  was  the  port  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  and 
has  so  remained  down  to  the  present  day.  At  Joppa  was  landed  the  timber  from 
Lebanon  used  in  the  first  building  of  the  temple  (2  Chron.  ii.  16),  and  in  its 
rebuilding  after  the  captivity  (Ezra  iii.  7).  At  Joppa,  Jonah  took  ship  for  Tarshish 
(Jonah  i.  3).  Here  lived  "Simon  the  tanner,"  by  the  seaside,  upon  whose 
housetop  Peter  had  his  "  vision  of  tolerance  "  (Acts  x.  9-16).  During  the  Crusades, 
Joppa  was  taken  and  re-taken  several  times  by  the  opposing  forces.  It  has  been 
Backed  three  times  since  coming  under  the  rule  of  the  Turks — once  by  the  Ai-abs  in 
1722,  by  the  Mamelukes  in  1775,  and  by  Napoleon  I.  in  1799.  The  modern  town 
is  increasing  in  numbers,  its  population  now  being  estimated  at  above  eight  thou- 
sand. (S.  S.  Times).  Acertain  disciple  named  Tabitha. — Dorcas  : — I.  "Tabitha, 
which  by  interpretation  is  called  Dorcas."  1.  The  historian  bestows  considerable 
care  on  the  name.  "  Tabitha,  Dorcas,  Gazelle  " — they  are  the  Aramaic,  Greek,  and 
English  equivalents.  Whereas  we  in  the  present  day  go  to  the  flowers  for  names, 
the  ancients  went  to  animals.  A  bold  man  would  be  compared  to  a  lion ;  a  beautiful 
woman  to  a  "  gazelle."  2.  That  St.  Luke  directs  special  attention  to  the  name  is  a 
presumptive  proof  that  it  was  expressive  of  the  rare  beauty  of  the  maid  who  bore  it. 
She  was  comparable  to  the  gazelle — the  most  exquisite  figure  in  poetry  to  set  forth 
high  physical  attractions.  Read  the  Canticles,  and  the  poet  has  no  apter  figure  to 
Bet  forth  the  glory  of  Solomon  or  the  beauty  of  his  bride  than  roe,  hart,  hind, 
gazelle.  In  Dorcas,  then,  we  behold  beauty  allied  to  Christianity ;  and  beauty  is 
recommended  to  us,  not  because  it  is  beautiful,  but  because  it  is  good.  The  classic 
theory  of  life  exalts  beauty  above  all  things ;  but  the  gospel  theory  makes  goodness 
paramount,  and  makes  beauty  itself  pay  homage  to  goodness.  II.  Tabitha  was  a 
DISCIPLE.  From  the  sphere  of  beauty  we  pass  to  the  sphere  of  knowledge.  1.  She 
was  a  disciple.  Discipleship  is  common  to  all  believers.  The  apostles  in  their  rela- 
tion to  Christ  were  on  a  level  with  ordinary  believers.  2.  She  was  a  female  disciple. 
The  word  here  used  is  not  found  anywhere  else.  The  masculine  form  is  used  often 
enough,  but  not  the  feminine.  In  ancient  Greek  the  word  was  not  used  because  the 
thing  was  not  known.  (1)  Christianity  has  given  woman  what  Plato  and  Aristotle 
never  did — the  rank  of  discipleship.    The  schools  of  the  philosophers  were  made  uf 


eHAP.  n.]  THE  ACTS.  89 

exclusively  of  men,  but  *•  honourable  women,  not  a  few,"  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  and 
learn  of  Him.  Judaism  truly  had  its  "court  of  the  women,"  but  that  was  more 
like  a  sheep-pen.  The  genius  of  Judaism  was  separation,  not  communion.  But  "  in 
Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  male  nor  female,  but  a  new  creature."  (2)  But 
though  the  gospel  has  lifted  woman  to  the  rank  of  discipleship,  it  has  not  raised  her 
to  the  rank  of  apostleship.  Dorcas  also  did  much  good ;  but  she  stUl  continued  in 
the  privacy  of  discipleship.  The  moral  rather  than  the  intellectual  is  the  true 
Fphere  of  womanhood.  The  "  rights  of  women  "  have  been  much  pushed  to  th» 
front  lately ;  and  women  are  not  without  danger  of  forgetting  their  "  duties  "  in  the 
more  exciting  question  of  their  "  rights."  Considerable  tact  is  necessary  deUcately 
to  balance  the  two.  In  the  text  the  Church  accords  to  Dorcas  her  rights — she  was 
a  disciple ;  but  Dorcas  only  thought  of  her  duties,  and  right  faithfully  did  she  fulfil 
them.  III.  Tabitha  was  a  disciple  full  of  good  wosks.  We  now  ascend  from 
the  region  of  beauty  and  faith  to  the  region  of  character.  1.  Mention  is  specially 
made  of  Dorcas's  works.  In  her  are  perceived  the  true  development  of  the  Christian 
life.  Her  natural  powers  are  hallowed  in  discipleship  ;  her  discipleship  is  perfected 
in  beneficence.  When  the  Christian  life  stops  short  in  discipleship,  it  remains  in 
the  embryo  stage,  and  is  in  danger  of  dying  of  inanition.  Knowledge  gets  refined, 
chastened  in  work.  Water  is  filtered  as  it  flows  onward  in  its  channel.  Water 
stagnant  breeds  miasma.  In  like  manner  knowledge,  as  long  as  it  remains  mere 
theory,  becomes  morbid  and  unhealthy  ;  but  let  it  run  out  in  good  works,  and  it  will 
grow  healthful  and  clear.  2.  Dorcas's  works  are  said  to  be  good.  Upon  what  then 
does  the  goodness  of  an  action  depend  ?  (1)  Upon  the  manner  of  doing  it.  Dorcas 
did  not  undertake  to  accomplish  a  thing  and  then  leave  it  in  disorder  and  confusion. 
No  ;  she  finished  her  task  neatly  and  pleasingly.  A  slovenly  life  cannot  be  said  to 
be  a  good  life ;  its  negligence  seriously  detracts  from  its  goodness.  Quality  is  of 
greater  importance  in  the  kingdom  of  God  than  quantity.  "  Well  done,"  not  much 
done,  "  thou  good  and  faithful  servant."  In  creation  "  God  saw,"  not  that  it  was 
great,  but  "  that  it  was  good."  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God  like  dear  children."  Every 
night  review  the  work  of  the  day  to  see  if  it  is  good.  (2)  Upon  the  character  of  the 
doer.  "  Every  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit."  A  bad  man — bad  works  ;  a 
good  man — good  works ;  that  is  the  established  law  of  the  moral  world.  Dorcas 
was  first  a  disciple,  next  full  of  good  works  ;  she  was  first  made  good,  then  she  did 
good.  Herein  consists  the  vital  difference  between  Christianity  and  Utilitarianism. 
Utilitarianism  proposes  to  improve  the  surroundings  of  men — to  secure  them  better 
houses,  wages,  food,  &o.  Christianity  proposes  to  improve  the  men  themselves, 
being  fully  persuaded  that  if  it  can  better  the  men,  the  men  wUl  soon  better  their 
circumstances.  3.  Dorcas  not  only  did  good  works,  but  was  "  full "  of  tbem, 
implying  that  her  heart  was  the  source  of  her  works — the  faith  of  her  discipleship 
flowed  out  in  deeds  of  benevolence.  Look  at  the  natural  and  the  artificial  tree. 
The  fruit  adorning  the  one  is  the  ripe  unfolding  of  the  inward  vitality ;  but  the 
fruit  suspended  to  the  other  has  no  union  of  life  with  the  tree.  No  one  can  be 
inwardly  full  unless  there  be  a  spontaneous  overflow  in  the  daily  life.  And  Dorcas's 
faith  in  the  Saviour  gushed  out  in  works  of  beneficence  to  man.  There  was  no 
spasmodic  strain,  no  painful  effort — doing  good  seemed  to  be  natural  to  her. 
Christ's  "  meat  was  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Him."  The  birds  in  May  are 
80  full  of  life  that  they  feel  inwardly  constrained  to  give  it  free  vent  in  song.  And 
there  are  men  and  women,  too,  who  find  it  their  chief  est  pleasure  to  do  good.  It  is 
as  easy  for  them  to  bless  their  fellows  as  it  is  for  the  sun  to  shine.  And  then  every 
attempt  to  do  good,  whether  it  succeed  or  whether  it  fail,  returns  back  upon  the 
soul  in  an  increase  of  solid  strength.  The  leaves,  which  in  spring  come  out  of  the 
life  of  the  tree,  in  autumn  fall  thick  around  its  roots  and  enrich  the  soil  for  it  to 
draw  nourishment  therefrom  the  ensuing  year.  "  Mercy  is  twice  blessed — it  blesseth 
him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes."  Faith  and  good  works,  discipleship  and  use- 
fulness, represent  the  receptive  and  the  transitive  sides  of  religion.  One  without 
the  other  is  dead.  IV.  "  Tabitha  was  a  disciple  full  of  almsdeeds  which  she  did." 
Here  we  come  to  the  sphere  of  action.  1.  "  Almsdeeds,"  not  almsgifts.  "  When 
thou  doest,"  not  givest,  "  alms."  Throughout  the  Saviour  lays  stress  not  on  giving 
but  on  doing  alms,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the  poor."  The  charity  must 
come,  not  merely  from  the  treasury,  but  from  a  tender  and  sympathetic  heart.  2. 
They  were  not  almsdeeds  which  she  purposed  or  of  which  she  talked,  but  almsdeeda 
which  she  "  did."  No  mention  is  made  of  parents  or  husband  ;  she  was  probably 
a  maid  leading  a  solitary  life.  Will  she  then  spend  her  days  in  idleness  or  vain 
sentiment  ?    No ;  she  will  adopt  the  orphans  for  her  family,  and  serve  Christ  in  th« 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  ix; 

persons  of  the  poor.  She  will  translate  sentiment  into  practice.  In  the  ironwork* 
steam  is  not  blown  oS  at  once  into  the  air  ;  it  must  first  do  work,  and  it  is  worth 
nothing  except  it  work.  And  in  our  public  services  it  is  good  to  have  our  emotions 
well  boiled  at  times.  But  we  are  not  to  let  the  steam  blow  oft  into  the  air,  but  to 
utilise  it  for  the  practical  purposes  of  life.  Sterne  could  weep  over  a  dead  ass,  and 
yet  allow  his  mother  to  starve  for  want  of  bread ;  but  John  Howard  was  never  seen 
to  shed  a  tear.  3.  These  almsdeeds  consisted  principally  in  coats  and  garments  for 
the  poor.  The  primary  meaning  of  "  spinster  "  is  one  who  spins,  and  if  need  be, 
sews  for  the  benefit  of  the  family  and  society.  The  imperfect  tense  "  was  making  " 
shows  that  Dorcas  made  sewing  for  the  poor  the  main  business  of  her  life,  and  thus 
redeemed  dressmaking  from  the  degraded  service  of  the  world.  St,  Paul  exhorts 
women  to  be  "  stayers  at  home  "  ;  on  the  margin,  "  workers  at  home."  It  is  not 
enough  that  they  stay  at  home ;  they  should  also  work  at  home,  and  save  them- 
selves from  the  cankerous  miseries  of  ennui.  Some  people  possess  genius  for 
goodness — they  create  and  invent,  whereas  others  can  only  travel  in  the  beaten 
paths.  Eobert  Raikes,  the  founder  of  Sunday  Schools ;  Charles  of  Bala,  the  founder 
of  the  Bible  Society  ;  William  WUberforce,  the  liberator  of  the  slave — they  all  had 
a  marvellous  genius  for  striking  boldly  out  in  new  directions.  To  the  same  class  of 
benefactors  belongs  Dorcas — she  invented  a  new  method  of  doing  good ;  and  her 
method  has  been  perpetuated  and  her  name  immortalised  in  the  annals  of  the 
Christian  Church.  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  all  thy  might." 
You  should  endeavour  to  find  work  for  yourselves,  and  the  work  for  which  you  are 
best  adapted.  But  if  you  possess  not  the  genius  to  find  work,  follow  diligently  in 
the  paths  already  marked  out.  Dorcas  was  only  a  sweet  violet  blooming  in  the 
shade;  but  her  fragrance  has  filled  all  the  churches  of  Europe.  A.nd  Christian 
charity  is  quite  competent  to  deal  with  honest  poverty  ;  but  no  efforts  of  the  Churqh 
can  ever  overtake  guilty  pauperism.  Our  duty,  then,  is  to  dry  up  the  fountain. 
You  may  give  coats  and  garments,  food  and  fuel ;  but  the  evil  will  remain  unabated 
till  the  traffic  in  intoxicating  drinks  is  restrained.  V.  Tabitha  became  sick,  and 
DIED.  1.  In  the  prime  of  life.  The  words  leave  the  impression  upon  one  that  her 
sickness  was  short  and  violent.  Probably  she  caught  a  fever  on  one  of  her  visits  to 
the  poor,  and  suddenly  died.  But  mark — nothing  is  said  of  the  frame  of  her  mind 
in  her  sickness ;  indeed,  the  Scriptures  are  generally  reticent  about  the  deaths  of 
the  saints.  Men  who  live  piously  and  devoutly  must  die  in  the  peace  of  God.  2. 
In  the  midst  of  usefulness.  Why,  we  cannot  tell.  Theology  and  philosophy  have 
faced  the  question,  but  cannot  solve  it.  But  if  theology  cannot  solve  it,  it  can  help 
to  bring  the  heart  to  acquiesce  in  it.  "  Why  were  you  born  deaf  and  dumb  ?  " 
asked  a  gentleman  of  a  young  lad.  A  strange  light  flashed  in  the  boy's  eyes,  and 
he  wrote  quickly,  "  Even  so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemeth  good  in  Thy  sight."  3.  Dying 
in  the  midst  of  life  and  usefulness,  she  was  naturally  much  lamented.  The  Church 
hurriedly  sent  a  deputation  to  Peter  ;  and  when  he  arrived  the  "  widows  wept,  and 
showed  him  the  coats  and  garments  which  Dorcas  made  while  she  was  with  them." 
They  could  not  speak  much  for  their  tears  ;  but  they  could  exhibit  the  work ;  and 
the  widows'  tears  and  garments  were  more  eloquent  than  any  panegyric.  The  poor 
have  no  grand  way  of  manifesting  their  sorrow  ;  but  they  can  weep  genuine  tears, 
and  point  to  the  coats  and  garments  graciously  given  them  by  the  hand  of  Charity. 
VI.  Dorcas  was  raised  to  life  again.  The  Church  at  Joppa  sent  to  Peter.  They 
did  not  tell  the  apostle  in  words  what  they  wanted ;  but  their  acts  showed  it,  and 
he  understood  it.  Thereupon  Peter  turned  them  all  out,  and  turned  himself  to  the 
Lord  in  prayer ;  he  afterwards  "  turned  to  the  body,  and  said,  Tabitha,  arise."  The 
miracle  of  resuscitation  was  performed :  "  and  when  he  had  called  the  saints  and 
widows,  he  presented  her  to  them  alive,"  and  doubtless  she  continued  the  same 
good  work  as  before — she  finished  the  coats  and  garments  she  had  only  begun.  The 
thread  that  was  broken  was  mended — the  good  work  still  went  on.  This  incident 
reduces  the  vast  drama  of  the  world  to  a  scale  we  can  grasp.  Men  and  women  die  ; 
the  work  of  life  remains  incomplete.  Reason  staggers.  Is  there  a  time  of  restitu- 
tion coming  ?  Yes  ;  they  that  are  in  their  "  graves  shall  be  raised  up  "  ;  the  thread 
of  life  will  be  mended — the  work  begun  will  be  finished.  "  We  spend  our  years  aa 
a  tale  that  is  told."  But  alas  !  many  die  in  the  midst  of  telling  their  tale,  they  die 
before  fully  disclosing  the  rich  meaning  of  their  existence.  Shall  it  never  be  con- 
tinued? Oh,  yes  ;  •'  the  voice  that  is  dumb  shall  again  speak,  the  hands  that  are 
cold  shall  again  serve.  We  can  write  on  the  tombstones  of  our  friends — "  to  be 
continued."  {J.  Cynddylan  Jones,  D.D.)  Dorcas  : — I.  Heb  characteb  :  "  a 
certain  disoiple."    Bat  m  her  case,  discipleship  included  not  only  the  belief  and 


CHAP.  IX.]  THE  ACTS.  91 

profession  of  Christ's  doctrine,  but  also  a  conformity  to  His  example.  Her  religion 
was  not  only  real,  but  eminent.  She  "  was  full  of  good  works  and  almsdeeda 
which  she  did."  There  are  many  whose  life  is  filled  up  with  vanity  and  vice,  but 
is  entirely  void  of  godliness.  And  there  are  others  who  are  satisfied  with  low  and 
common  attainments.  Dorcas  "was  full" — not  full  of  pretences,  words,  hearing 
sermons,  and  public  assemblies,  all  of  which  are  often  the  mere  "  form  of  godli- 
ness." Hers  was  the  religion  of  the  heart  and  life.  1.  The  particular  objects  of 
her  beneficence.  "  Widows " — a  class  of  claimants  upon  kindness  and  charity 
more  often  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  God  than  any  other,  unless  it  be  "  the 
fatherless,"  who  are  commonly  noticed  along  with  them.  And,  surely,  none  have 
greater  demands  upon  our  tenderness  and  compassion,  and  none  have  richer 
promises.  It  would  seem  that  Dorcas  peculiarly  selected  this  class  of  characters 
for  her  beneficence.  And  as  the  charity  of  an  individual  cannot  be  universal  in  its 
efforts,  would  it  not  be  well  for  those  who  wish  to  do  good  to  have  some  definite 
plan  of  usefulness  to  pursue  ?  Only,  here,?two  cautions  are  necessary.  The  one  is, 
not  to  bind  ourselves  down  so  exclusively  to  any  one  class  of  beneficiaries  as  to  be 
unable  or  unwilling  to  aid  other  claimants.  The  other  is,  not  to  lay  such  stress 
upon  our  own  objects  of  charity  as  to  think  slightly  or  meanly  of  those  which  may 
be  preferred  by  others.  2.  The  nature  of  her  charity.  Furnishing  the  poor  widows 
with  clothing.  There  are  many  cases  in  which  it  will  be  found  much  more  useful 
to  supply  the  poor  with  necessaries  than  to  give  them  the  value  of  these  things  in 
money.  Many  poor  persons  have  a  wish  to  appear  decently  clad ;  and  upon  this 
ground  they  excuse  themselves  from  the  house  of  God.  How  desirable  is  it  to  meet 
their  wants  in  this  respect  1  3.  The  manner  in  which  she  suppHed  the  relief.  The 
benefits  were  of  her  own  manufacture.  She  did  not  get  them  made  ;  her  alms  were 
not  only  her  gifts,  but  her  deeds.  There  are  some  who  are  ready  enough  to  give 
who  never  do  anything.  Others  there  are  who  can  do  nothing  in  a  way  of  pecuniary 
assistance.  But  there  are  innumerable  ways  of  being  useful ;  and  if  you  are  com- 
pelled to  say,  "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none,"  it  becomes  you  to  add,  "  Such  as  I 
have  I  give ;  my  prayers :  my  tears ;  my  attentions ;  my  exertions."  4.  The 
promptitude  of  her  beneficence.  It  was  immediate,  not  deferred  or  delayed ;  but 
"  while  she  was  with  them."  Some  are  future  benefactors.  They  do  not  refuse, 
they  only  procrastinate.  "  Say  not  unto  thy  neighbour,  Go,  and  come  again,  and 
to-morrow  I  will  give,"  for  in  the  meanwhile  he  may  be  no  more,  and  you  may  be 
no  more.  Some  are  benevolent  when  they  leave  us.  But  dying  alms  are  commonly 
suspicious  :  they  arise  from  necessity  rather  than  choice.  There  is  little  merit  in 
distributing  what  you  can  hold  no  longer.  Be,  therefore,  your  own  executors.  II. 
Heb  death.  Keligion  does  not  exempt  us  from  the  common  calamities  of  life. 
This  peculiar  consideration,  indeed,  attends  the  death  of  the  godly,  that  they  are 
disposed  of  infinitely  to  their  advantage.  But  this  very  consideration  also  aggra- 
vates our  grief.  In  proportion  to  their  gain  is  our  loss.  There  is  nothing,  perhaps, 
in  Providence  more  mysterious  than  this  :  that  the  useful  should  be  snatched  away 
in  the  midst  of  their  days,  while  the  unprofitable  and  mischievous  are  suiiered  to 
continue ;  that  a  Voltaire  should  hve  upwards  of  fourscore  and  ten  years,  while  a 
nation  prematurely  mourns  over  a  Josiah,  the  poor  widows  over  Dorcas,  their  friend 
and  helper.  But  God  has  a  right  to  do  what  He  will  with  His  own  ;  and  very  often 
these  dark  dispensations  are  enhghtened  and  relieved  by  some  effects  which  serve 
to  discover  their  design.  At  this  season  Peter  was  sent  for  and  came.  It  seemed 
useless,  but  he  knew  it  was  well  to  be  "  ready  to  every  good  work,"  and  he  knew 
that  "  the  things  which  are  impossible  with  men  are  possible  with  God."  No 
sooner  was  Peter  arrived  than  a  scene  was  presented  that  was  sufficient  to  melt  a 
heart  much  less  tender  than  Peter's  (ver.  39).  Here  we  may  remark  that  the  value 
of  persons  is  sometimes  not  known  till  they  are  gone.  This  is  the  case,  indeed, 
with  all  our  mercies.  The  praise  of  this  good  woman  was  like  her  alms,  real  and 
sincere.  Here  are  no  hired  mourners,  no  verses,  no  eulogy ;  but  garments  which 
her  own  hands  had  made ;  and  widows  with  their  tears.  The  best  posthumous 
fame  you  can  acquire  is  derived  from  the  commendation  of  facts ;  from  a  child  you 
instructed,  a  sinner  you  reclaimed.  The  best  proofs  of  your  importance  are  to  be 
found  in  the  affections  and  benedictions  of  your  fellow-creatures  while  you  live,  and 
in  their  regrets  and  lamentations  when  you  die.  I  hate  dry-eyed  funerals.  Though 
it  is  distressing,  it  is  also  satisfactory  to  see  genuine  grief.  Do  all  thus  die  ?  Do 
oppressive  masters?  Do  the  hard-hearted,  and  the  close-fisted?  Peter  happily 
can  do  more  than  "  weep  with  them  that  weep  " ;  and  he  applies  himself  to  his 
work.    He  "  put  them  all  forth."    First,  from  a  principle  of  humility ;  he  did  not 


99  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

wish  to  be  seen.  And,  secondly,  from  a  principle  of  importunity ;  company  might 
have  hindered  the  intenseness  of  his  devotion.  III.  Her  REStniRKCTioN.  Peter 
prayed  and  Dorcas  arose  ;  and  then  Peter  "  gave  her  his  hand,  and  lifted  her  up, 
and  presented  her  ahve."  Oh  I  for  the  painter's  pencil  1  Oh  !  to  see  him  giving, 
and  them  receiving  this  present!  •'  There,  take  your  benefactress,  and  dry  up  your 
tears."  This  is  very  instructive.  It  shows  us  that  kindness  was  the  principle  of 
the  miracle ;  not  self  applause.  Then  Peter  would  have  required  her  to  follow  him 
as  a  standing  proof  of  his  supernatural  powers  :  but  he  resigns  her  to  those  who 
Btood  in  need  of  her  services.  And  does  not  this  show  us  the  importance  of  bene- 
ficence ?  Were  we  left  to  judge,  we,  perhaps,  should  have  thought  it  better  for 
Stephen  to  Lave  been  raised  up  than  Dorcas.  But  God  revives  the  one  and  leaves 
the  other  in  the  grave,  perhaps,  to  teach  us  that  our  thoughts  are  not  His  thoughts ; 
that  persons  whose  excellencies  are  of  a  retiring  character  may  be  more  important 
in  the  eye  of  Heaven  than  those  who  are  more  brilliant  and  marvellous ;  and  that, 
in  some  cases,  a  good  Ufe  may  be  as  valuable  as  good  preaching.  Whom 
does  He,  by  a  miracle,  bring  back  from  the  arrest  of  death  ?  A  hero  ?  a  politician  ? 
a  philosopher  ?  No  I  One  who  made  garments  for  the  poor  1  And  does  He  not 
hereby  show  us  that  He  takes  pleasure  in  those  who,  like  Himself,  delight  in  mercy; 
and  that  "  He  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  their  work  and  labour  of  love,  in  minis- 
tering to  the  saints  "  ?  In  a  word,  does  He  not  say,  "  Them  that  honour  Me,  I  will 
honour  "  7  But  you  ask,  was  this  a  privilege  to  Dorcas  ? — to  be  brought  back  into  a 
vale  of  tears,  and  again  to  have  to  "walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death,"  after  she  had  happily  passed  it  ? — I  answer.  Yes  I  It  was  a  marvellous 
distinction  conferred  upon  her  ;  and  it  added  to  her  usefulness,  and  to  her  reward. 
The  saints  on  earth  have  one  privilege  above  the  saints  in  heaven.  It  is  in  the 
means  and  opportunities  of  doing  good.  (W.  Jay.)  Dorcas  raised  to  life  : — The 
faith  of  this  woman  was  of  the  highest  type  ;  her  belief  was  more  than  a  theological 
assent  to  the  truth  ;  her  faith  worked  by  love  and  purified  the  heart.  "  This 
woman  was  full  of  good  works  and  almsdeeds  which  she  did."  Notwithstanding 
the  faith  of  Dorcas,  '•  It  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  that  she  was  sick,  and  died." 
There  are  several  considerations  that  press  upon  us  in  view  of  these  facts.  Sickness 
is  not  necessarily  an  indication  of  sin  on  the  part  of  the  individual  attacked  by 
disease  ;  neither  is  illness  to  be  attributed  to  a  lack  of  faith.  It  is  God's  purpose 
to  let  the  physical  forces  of  the  universe  take,  in  most  instances,  the  natural  courses 
He  has  made ;  He  has  good  reasons  why  diseases  should  be  allowed,  in  the  majority 
of  cases,  to  develop  through  the  various  stages  of  their  natural  history.  Sometimes 
■we  can  see  the  good  that  comes  to  us  from  illness ;  not  unfrequently  it  brings  forth 
the  fruit  of  a  new  purpose.  There  are  times,  however,  when  for  His  glory  God 
interferes  with  the  natural  order  of  things,  and  brings  to  pass  supernatural  results. 
As  the  Church  members  turned  their  faces  heavenward,  God  put  it  into  their  hearts 
to  send  for  Peter,  a  dozen  miles  away  at  Lydda.  Perhaps  Peter  had  not  the  slightest 
idea  what  he  would  be  called  upon  to  do,  but  he  started  out.  By  the  time  he  had 
reached  the  city  he  had  received  Divine  illumination  as  to  the  course  that  ought  to 
be  pursued.  Entering  into  the  house,  "  Peter  put  them  all  forth,"  that  his  mind 
might  not  be  distracted  from  any  suggestion  that  the  Spirit  might  make  to  him, 
and  he  "  kneeled  down  and  prayed."  Others  equally  deserving  a  resurrection  had 
died  and  were  buried  without  a  word  of  prayer  for  their  resurrection.  Stephen, 
"  a  man  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  was  not  called  back  from  the  spirit- 
world.  It  was  for  the  glory  of  God  that  the  first  martyr  was  taken  by  "  devout 
men  "  from  the  bloody  stones  that  had  been  hurled  at  and  upon  him,  and  carried 
"  to  his  burial."  It  was  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom  of  God  that  Peter  was  inspired 
to  ask  for  the  return  of  Dorcas  to  her  work,  and  Christ  heard  the  petition  He  had 
Himself  put  into  His  servant's  heart.  The  results.  There  was  joy  in  the  household 
of  Dorcas ;  the  night  of  weeping  had  passed,  and  the  morning  of  joy  had  come. 
The  results  abundantly  justified  the  exhibition  of  miraculous  power  in  the  cities  of 
Lydda,  Joppa,  and  Csesarea.  The  inferences  drawn  from  the  healing  of  ^neas  and 
the  raising  of  Dorcas,  so  far  as  the  topic  in  hand  is  concerned,  may  now  be  stated. 
1.  Holiness  is  not  a  bar  to  disease,  although  a  Christian  life  tends  to  health  and 
longevity.  2.  Remedies  are  to  be  used  under  the  advice  of  skilled  physicians.  3. 
Ood  usually  permits  diseases  to  run  through  the  varied  stages  of  their  natural 
history.  4.  There  are  times,  however,  when  it  is  for  the  glory  of  God's  kingdom 
that  the  Head  of  the  Church  should  arrest  disease  by  the  direct  action  of  His  own 
Spirit.  5.  When  it  is  the  purpose  of  Christ  to  "  bear  our  sicknesses,"  He  illuminates 
the  minds  of  certain  faithful  disciples,  impressing  tbem  with  the  belief  that  a 


CHIP.  IX.)  THE  ACTS.  93 

petition  offered  for  healing  will  be  granted.  6.  Faith  exercised  npon  the  gift  of 
eepeoial  illumination  will  be  honoured.  7.  No  person  has  been  raised  from  the 
dead  since  apostolic  times ;  therefore  no  illumination  has  been  given  for  this 
purpose ;  supposed  illuminations  have  been  hallucinations.  8.  The  highest  type  of 
faith  expresses  its  needs  according  to  the  best  knowledge  at  the  time,  and  trustfully 
leaves  the  outcome  to  Him  who  has  said,  "  Your  Father  knoweth  what  things  ye 
have  need  of  before  ye  ask  Him."  (J.  M.  Durrell.)  Dorcas:— I.  The  lite  ov 
Dorcas.  The  brief  biography  is  exceedingly  full,  though  it  is  comprised  in  a  single 
verse  (ver.  36).  1.  Her  appearance.  It  is  a  most  absurd  notion  that  useful  women 
must  be  commonplace  in  their  looks.  The  name  given  to  this  excellent  Christian 
worker  suggests  that  she  was  attractive  and  graceful.  2.  Her  character.  One  word 
is  here  employed,  nowhere  else  to  be  discovered,  that  some  assert  it  was  here 
invented  for  this  occasion — "  a  disciple  " ;  in  its  ordinary  application  tMs  means  a 
learner,  but  the  term  here  is  new,  and  signifies  a  female  learner.  Those  were  days 
of  degradation  for  the  weaker  sex  until  Christianity  came.  3.  Her  activity.  She 
could  not  have  merited  the  name  of  the  agile  denizen  of  the  desert,  if  she  had  not 
been  as  brisk  as  she  was  affectionate.  4.  Lessons.  (1)  "Handsome  is  that  hand- 
some does."  When  a  Christian  lady  gives  herself  to  real  work  for  those  who  are 
in  trouble,  there  springs  up  a  rare,  new,  unconscious  beauty  even  in  her  features, 
which  spreads  over  her  whole  life  like  sweet,  bright  sunshine.  (2)  Dorcas  was 
"  full  of  good  works,"  and  not  of  good  wishes  alone.  So  her  needle  was  as  noble  as 
Moses'  rod,  or  David's  sling,  or  Shamgar's  ox-goad ;  for  it  was  her  answer  to  the 
Lord's  question  (Exod.  iv.  2).  (3)  All  these  works  were  done  by,  not  the  "  Dorcas 
Society  of  Joppa,"  but  by  Dorcas.  Evidently  this  was  not  a  woman  who  bought 
off  from  labour  by  a  contribution.  Perhaps  she  was  so  busy  in  making  "  coats  and 
garments,"  that  she  had  no  time  to  make  an  association.  Some  people  lose  a  great 
deal  of  force  in  running  around  to  get  machines,  and  then  lose  more  yet  in  running 
the  machines  they  get.  Organisation  sometimes  helps;  but  too  much  is  apt  to 
hinder.  It  has  been  known  that  the  election  of  one  secretary  has  taken  more  of 
zeal  than  would  have  fitted  out  three  missionary  boxes.  II.  The  death  of  Dobcas. 
1.  Even  the  best  of  people  may  die  early.  2.  Even  Christian  people  may  mourn 
sometimes.  3.  We  are  bound  to  weep  with  those  that  weep.  Very  fine  example 
is  this  of  the  oneness  of  sympathy  among  the  primitive  believers ;  they  sent  up  to 
Lydda  for  Peter  to  come  and  aid  them  with  counsel  in  their  sore  distress.  III.  The 
BESUBRECTioN  OF  DoBOAS.  Petcr's  actiou  must  be  laid  alongside  of  Elisha's  (2  Kings 
iv.  33).  Also  with  Christ's  (Mark  v.  40,  41).  1.  It  was  done  by  the  sovereign 
and  miraculous  power  of  God.  All  talk  about  collusion,  trick,  animal  magnetism, 
is  not  worth  discussing.  2.  But  Simon's  faith  shines  more  illustriously  than  ever. 
When  the  rationalists  point  to  his  close  imitation  of  the  '•  Talitha  "  of  Jesus  in  hia 
"  Tabitha  "  we  may  thank  them  for  a  beautiful  suggestion  ;  it  is  likely  he  did  think 
of  his  Master  then.  3.  Imagine  Dorcas's  surprise  when  she  first  opened  her  eyes. 
How  strange  it  is  that  no  one  of  those  persons  who  were  raised  from  the  dead  ever 
attempted  to  tell  the  story  of  what  they  saw  or  heard.  As  one  of  the  ancient 
Christian  poets  said  of  Lazarus,  she  was  superstes  sibi — her  own  survivor.  4.  Still 
she  did  not  set  up  for  a  saint,  and  go  on  exhibition.  She  simply  went  to  work  once 
more  among  the  widows.  All  Joppa  heard  of  it,  and  many  beUeved  in  the  Lord.  (C  S. 
Robinson,  D.D.)  Dorcas  :  the  lessoTis  of  her  life  and  death: — I,  The  good  aee  thb 
BTCATiT.Y  BicH.  Thoso  who  are  full  of  good  works  and  of  almsdeeds  are  better  off  than 
those  with  full  bank  accounts.  II.  Good  wobks  abe  the  test  of  Chbistian  life.  If 
one  is  not  fruitful  in  good  works,  he  is  not  joined  to  Christ.  HI.  The  good  abe  not 
BPAEED  BY  Death  because  of  their  good  works.  His  sickle  cuts  down  the  fairest 
flowers  as  well  as  the  obnoxious  weeds.  IV.  Death  shows  how  much  the  good  abb 
APPBECiATED,  as  it  shows,  also,  the  little  value  of  a  money  popularity.  V.  Thb 
DEEDS  OF  thb  good  bemain  TO  TESTIFY  FOB  THEM  after  death  has  taken  them  away. 
{S.  S.  Times.)  The  Christian  needlewoman : — There  is  in  Joppa  a  woman 
with  her  needle,  embroidering  her  name  ineffaceably  into  the  charities  of  the 
world.  In  the  room  where  she  sits  are  the  pale  faces  of  the  poor.  She  Ustens 
to  their  plaint,  and  with  gifts  she  mingles  prayers  and  Christian  encouragement. 
Then  she  goes  out,  and  all  through  the  street  the  cry  runs  :  "  Dorcas  is  coming." 
That  night  a  half-paid  shipwright  reaches  home ;  sees  his  little  boy  well  clad, 
and  they  tell  htm :  «'  Dorcas  has  been  here."  But  there  is  a  sudden  paus« 
in  that  woman's  ministry.  All  through  the  haunts  of  wretchedness  the  news 
comes:  "  Dorcas  is  sick !  "  And  now,  alas,  for  Joppa  !  there  is  wailing.  That  voice 
which  had  uttered  so  many  cheerful  words  is  hushed ;  that  hand,  which  had  mada 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

BO  many  garments  for  the  poor,  is  cold  and  still.  In  every  place  in  that  town, 
where  there  is  sickness,  or  hunger,  or  guilt,  or  sorrow,  there  are  despairing  looks 
and  streaming  eyes  as  they  cry  :  "  Dorcas  is  dead  I "  They  send  for  Peter.  He  urges 
his  way  through  the  crowd,  kindly  orders  that  the  room  be  cleared,  prays,  and  in 
the  strength  of  Him  who  is  the  resurrection,  exclaims :  "  Tabitha,  arise  1 "  We  see 
in  this  subject  Dorcas — I.  The  disciple.  If  I  had  not  seen  the  word  •'  disciple,"  I 
would  have  known  this  woman  was  a  Christian.  Such  music  as  that  never  came 
from  a  harp  which  is  not  stringed  by  Divine  grace.  I  wish  that  the  wives,  and 
mothers,  and  daughters  of  this  congregation  would  imitate  Dorcas  in  her  disciple- 
ship.  Before  you  sit  with  the  Sabbath-class,  or  cross  the  threshold  of  the  hospital, 
<fec.,  attend  to  the  first,  last,  and  greatest  duty — the  seeking  for  God  and  being  at 
peace  with  Him.  II.  The  benefactress.  1.  History  has  told  the  story  of  the 
crown  and  of  the  sword ;  the  poet  has  sung  the  praises  of  nature ;  I  teU  you  the 
praises  of  the  needle.  From  the  fig-leaf  robe  prepared  in  Eden,  to  the  last  stitch 
taken  last  night,  the  needle  has  wrought  wonders  of  kindness.  It  has  preached  the 
gospel,  it  has  overcome  want  with  the  war-cry  of  "  stitch,  stitch,  stitch."  Amid  the 
mightiest  triumphs  in  all  ages  and  lands,  I  set  down  the  conquests  of  the  needle.  2. 
I  admit  its  crimes.  It  has  butchered  more  souls  than  the  "  Inquisition  " ;  it  haa 
punctured  the  eye ;  it  has  pierced  the  side ;  it  has  struck  weakness  into  the  lungs ; 
it  has  sent  madness  into  the  brain ;  it  has  pitched  whole  armies  of  the  suffering 
into  crime  and  wretchedness.  3.  But  now  I  am  talking  of  Dorcas,  I  shall  speak 
only  of  the  charities  of  the  needle.  This  woman  was  a  representative  of  all  those 
women  who  make  garments  for  the  destitute,  knit  socks  for  the  barefooted,  prepare 
bandages  for  the  lacerated,  who  make  up  bales  of  clothing  for  missionaries.  4. 
What  a  contrast  between  the  benevolence  of  this  woman  and  a  great  deal  of  the 
charity  of  this  day  1  Dorcas  did  not  spend  her  time  planning  how  the  poor  of 
Joppa  were  to  be  relieved ;  she  took  her  needle  and  reUeved  them.  She  was  not  like 
those  who  sympathise  with  imaginary  sorrows,  and  then  laugh  at  the  boy  who  has 
upset  his  basket  of  victuals,  or  Uke  that  charity  which  makes  a  rousing  speech  on 
the  benevolent  platform  and  goes  out  to  kick  the  beggar  from  the  step.  The 
sufferers  of  the  world  want  not  so  much  tears  as  dollars,  not  so  much  smiles  as  shoes, 
not  so  much  "  God  bless  you's  "  as  jackets  and  frocks.  There  are  women  who  talk 
beautifully  about  the  suffering  of  the  world,  who  never,  like  Dorcas,  take  the  needle 
and  assavdt  it.  6.  I  am  glad  that  there  is  not  a  page  of  history  which  is  not  a 
record  of  female  beneficence.  The  Princess  of  Conti  sold  all  her  jewels  that  she 
might  help  the  famine-struck.  Maud,  the  wife  of  Henry  I.,  went  down  amid  the 
poor,  and  washed  their  sores  and  administered  to  them  cordials.  But  why  go  so  far 
back  or  so  far  away  ?  Before  the  smoke  had  gone  up  from  Gettysburg  the  women 
of  the  North  met  the  women  of  the  South  on  the  battle-field,  forgetting  aU  their  ani- 
mosities  while  they  bound  up  the  wounded  and  closed  the  eyes  of  the  slain  I  III. 
The  lamented.  There  may  have  been  women  there  with  larger  fortunes  and 
handsomer  faces ;  but  there  was  no  grief  at  their  departure  like  this  at  the  death  of 
Dorcas.  There  are  a  great  many  who  go  out  of  life  and  are  unmissed.  There  may 
be  a  large  funeral,  high-sounding  eulogiums,  a  marble  tomb,  but  the  whole  thing  may 
be  a  sham.  The  Church  has  lost  nothing ;  the  world  has  lost  nothing.  It  is  only  a 
nuisance  abated,  or  a  grumbler  ceasing  to  find  fault ;  or  an  idler  stopped  yawning, 
or  a  dissipated  fashionable  parted  from  his  wine-cellar.  While,  on  the  other  hand, 
no  useful  Christian  leaves  this  world  without  being  missed.  When  Josephine  was 
carried  out  to  her  grave,  there  were  a  great  many  women  of  pride  and  position 
that  went  out  after  her  ;  but  I  am  most  aifected  by  the  story  that  two  thousand  of 
the  poor  of  France  followed  her  coffin,  waUing  until  the  air  rang  again,  because 
they  lost  their  last  earthly  friend.  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord ; 
they  rest  from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do  follow  them  I  "  IV.  Thb  besdb- 
bected.  In  what  a  short  compass  the  great  writer  put  that,  "  she  sat  up  1 "  What 
a  time  there  must  have  been  when  the  apostle  brought  her  out  among  her  old 
friends  I  How  the  tears  of  joy  must  have  started  I  You  and  I  have  seen  the  same 
thing — not  a  dead  body  resuscitated,  but  the  deceased  coming  up  again  after  death 
in  the  good  accomplished.  If  a  man  labours  up  to  fifty  years  of  age  serving  God, 
and  then  dies,  we  are  apt  to  think  that  his  earthly  work  is  done.  No  I  Services 
rendered  for  Christ  never  stop.  A  Christian  woman  toils  for  the  upbuilding  of  a 
Church  thiough  many  self-denials  and  prayers,  and  then  she  dies.  Now  hundreds  of 
souls  stand  up  and  confess  the  faith  of  Christ.  Has  that  Christian  woman  wha 
went  away  fifteen  years  ago  nothing  to  do  with  these  things  ?  The  good  that  seemed 
to  be  buried  has  come  up  again.    Dorcas  is  resurrected.     After  a  while  all  these 


«HAP.n.]  THE  ACTS.  96 

womanly  friends  of  Christ  will  put  down  their  needle  for  ever.  After  making  gar- 
ments for  others,  some  one  will  make  the  last  robe  for  them.  Then,  one  day  there 
will  be  sky  rending,  and  that  Christian  woman  will  rise  from  the  dust,  and  wUl  be 
Burroanded  by  the  wanderers  whom  she  reclaimed,  by  the  wounded  souls  to  whom 
she  administered.  The  reward  has  come.  Dorcas  is  resurrected  I  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage,  D.D.)  The  appropriate  duty  and  ornament  of  the  female  sex : — 1.  I  shall 
not  inquire  whether  the  female  mind  is,  in  aU  respects,  the  same  with  that  of  the 
other  sex.  Whatever  opinion  may  be  formed  on  this  subject,  we  shall  all  agree 
that  women  ought  not  to  be  considered  as  destined  to  the  same  employments  with 
men  ;  and,  of  course,  that  there  is  a  species  of  education,  and  a  sphere  of  action, 
which  more  particularly  belong  to  them.  There  was  a  time  when  a  very  different 
doctrine  was  growing  popular :  viz. ,  that  in  education  and  employments  all  dis- 
tinctions  of  sex  ought  to  be  forgotten  and  confounded.  This  delusion,  however,  ia 
now  generally  discarded.  But  an  error  of  an  opposite  kind  has  gained  a  lamentable 
currency.  This  is,  that  the  station  of  females  is  so  humble,  and  their  sphere  of 
duty  so  limited,  that  they  neither  can  nor  ought  to  aspire  to  extensive  usefulness. 
This  is  the  mistake  of  indolence  or  of  false  humility,  and  is  plainly  contradicted 
by  reason.  Scripture,  and  experience.  2.  The  contrast  between  the  representations 
of  Scripture  and  the  sentiments  of  the  world  seldom  appears  in  a  stronger  light  than 
it  does  on  the  subject  of  which  we  are  now  speaking.  In  the  codes  of  modem  infidelity 
and  licentiousness,  as  well  as  among  uncivilised  nations,  woman  is  exhibited  as  the 
mere  servile  instrument  of  convenience  or  pleasure.  In  the  Bible  she  is  represented 
as  the  equal,  the  companion,  and  the  help-meet  of  man.  In  the  language  of  worldly 
taste,  a  fine  woman  is  one  who  is  distinguished  for  her  personal  charms  and  polite 
accomplishments.  In  the  language  of  Scripture,  she  is  the  enlightened  and  virtuous 
mistress  of  a  family,  and  the  useful  member  of  society.  The  woman  who  is  formed 
on  the  principles  of  the  world,  finds  no  enjoyment  but  in  the  circles  of  affluence, 
gaiety,  and  fashion.  The  woman  who  is  formed  on  the  principles  of  the  Bible, 
"  goeth  about  doing  good."  The  business  of  the  one  is  pleasure ;  the  pleasure  of 
the  other  is  business.  The  one  is  admired  abroad ;  the  other  is  beloved  and 
honoured  at  home.  From  the  representations  of  sacred  writ  it  is  manifest  that  the 
ornament  and  the  duty  of  the  female  sex  are  as  appropriate  as  they  are  important, 
and  that  they  pertain  especially  to  the  relations  which  they  bear  as — I.  Wives.  On 
their  temper  and  deportment,  more  than  those  of  any  other  individuals,  it  depends 
whether  peace,  affection,  order,  and  plenty  reign  in  their  dwellings,  or  waste,  con- 
fusion, discord,  and  alienation  disgrace  them.  n.  Mothers.  Children,  during  the 
first  years  of  their  lives,  are  necessarily  committed  almost  entirely  to  their  care. 
And  the  impressions  which  are  then  made  generally  decide  their  character  and 
destiny  for  this  life  and  for  that  which  is  to  come.  HI.  Domestic  eelations.  1. 
How  much  may  every  daughter,  by  dutiful  and  affectionate  conduct  towards  her 
parents,  promote  the  happiness  of  the  whole  household,  and  by  her  example  con- 
tribute to  the  improvement  of  all  around  her  1  2.  How  much  solid  good  may  every 
sister  daily  accomplish  by  assisting  to  educate  her  younger  brothers  and  sisters,  in 
promoting  the  regularity,  order,  and  comfort  of  the  family,  and  in  recommending, 
by  her  whole  deportment,  the  wisdom  of  economy,  the  sweetness  of  benevolence^ 
and  the  purity  of  holiness  1  3.  How  much  may  every  female  servant  contribute  to 
the  advantage  of  the  family  1  It  was  a  little  maid  in  the  house  of  Naaman,  the 
Syrian,  that  directed  her  master  to  the  prophet  of  the  Lord.  IV.  As  membebs  of 
SOCIETY.  Let  no  woman  imagine  that  she  has  nothing  to  do  beyond  the  sphere  of 
her  own  household.  1.  In  every  walk  and  hour  of  life  she  may  be  contributing 
something  to  the  purity,  the  order,  and  the  happiness  of  the  community.  The 
influence  of  the  female  character  in  forming  public  taste  and  public  manners  is 
incalculable.  No  false  sentiments  can  have  much  prevalence  against  which  they 
resolutely  set  their  faces.  No  corrupt  practices  can  be  general  or  popular  which 
they  are  willing  to  expel  from  society.  2.  To  the  female  sex  also  properly  apper- 
tains a  large  portion  of  those  offices  of  charity  to  which  we  are  constantly  called. 
They  are  best  acquainted  with  domestic  wants,  and  are  the  best  judges  of  domestic 
character.  They  have  more  sympathy,  tenderness,  leisure,  and  patience  than  men. 
Let  me  apply  this  subject — 1.  By  inferring  from  what  has  been  said,  the  unspeak- 
able importance  of  female  education.  If  the  female  character  be  so  important,  then 
the  formation  of  that  character  must  be  equally  so.  2.  By  recommending  the 
character  which  has  been  drawn  especially  to  the  young.  It  is  a  character  which 
involves  the  highest  honour,  and  which  embraces  its  own  reward.  It  ought  to  ba 
yoor  ambition  to  possess  and  to  evince  a  sound  understanding,  and  a  respeotabla 


96  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

portion  of  literary  knowledge.    Bat  it  ought  to  be  more  especially  your  ambition  to 
cultivate  your  hearts.    To  be  so  many  Tabithas,  adorning  the  doctrine  of  God 
your  Saviour,  and  diffusing  happiness  among  all  around  you,  would  be  infinitely 
more  to  your  honour,  as  well  as  your  comfort,  than  to  stand  in  the  list  of  those 
masculine  females  who,  whUe  they  gain  a  proud  civil  pre-eminence,  really  disgrace 
their  sex.     3.  By  encouraging  those  who  are  engaged  in  female  charitable  associa- 
tions.    "  Be  not  weary  in  well-doing."     Your  task  is  arduous  ;  but  it  is  still  more 
delightful,  and  ehall  "  in  no  wise  lose  its  reward."    4.  In  conclusion,  "  the  time  is 
short,  and  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away."    Like  Dorcas,  we  all  must  soon 
sicken  and  die.    Do  we  resemble  this  excellent  woman,  in  our  character  and  hopes, 
as  well  as  in  our  mortality  ?  We  cannot  resemble  her  unless  we  are  disciples  indeed. 
We  may  "  give  all  our  goods  to  feed  the  poor,"  and  "  our  bodies  to  be  burned,"  and 
yet  be  nothing  more  than  "  a  sounding  brass,  and  a  tinkling  cymbal."    But  those 
deeds  of  charity  which  spring  from  a  living  faith  in  a  living  Redeemer  ;  those  works 
of  obedience  which  are  performed  from  a  principle  of  love  for  His  name — these  are 
'•  the  good  works  and  the  almsdeeds"  which  shed  a  lustre  around  the  bed  of  death. 
{S.  Miller, D.D.)      Tlie useful  are  sometimes  snatched  unexpectedly  away  (ver.  37) : — 
With  many  it  is  ebb-water  before  the  tide  be  at  full.     The  lamps  of  their  hves  are 
wasted  almost  as  soon  as  they  are  lighted.    The  sand  of  their  hour-glass  is  run  out 
when  they  think  it  is  but  newly  turned.    But  success  before  God  depends  not  on  the 
duration  of  one's  life.     The  husbandman  may  pluck  his  roses  and  gather  his  Uliea 
at  midsummer,  and  he  may  transplant  yoimg  trees  out  of  the  lower  ground  to  the 
higher,  where  they  have  more  of  the  sun.    The  goods  are  his  own.    The  heavenly 
Husbandman  makes  no  mistakes.    {S.Rutherford.)      The  poor  should  be  cared  for 
(ver.  36)  : — Charity  should  be  warmest  when  the  season  is  coldest.   That  is  the  time 
for  coals  and  blankets.     It  will  warm  your  heart  to  warm  poor  people's  bodies.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)        Power  in  the  gospel : — Here  is  a  lesson  which  shows  the  power  of 
the  gospel  in  two  directions — the  elements  of  gospel  power  and  the  effects  of  gospel 
power.     I.  The  elements  of  power  in  the  oospeii.     What  forces  are  disclosed  in 
these  verses  ?     1.  We  see  the  power  which  dwells  in  organisation.     This  is  hinted 
in  Peter's  journey  "  throughout  all  quarters."    The  bands  of  disciples  throughout 
Judsea  were  united  under  a  central  head  and  with  a  form  of  discipline.     Unity  gives 
power,  2.  We  see  the  power  in  sympathy.  Peter  found  the  palsied  ^neas ;  Dorcas 
sought  out  the  needy  and  sorrowing ;  and  in  the  Church  we  note  the  interest  which 
prompted  the  sending  for  Peter.    This  care  for  others  has  ever  been  an  element  of 
power  in  Christianity.    3.  We  note  also  the  power  in  character.    A  character  hke 
that  of  Dorcas  could  not  remain  concealed.      One  who  Uved  to  do  good  could  not 
help  exerting  an  influence.     The  character  and  influence  of  God's  people  are  most 
potent  factors  in  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  4.  But  mightier  than  all  human  elements 
is  the  Divine  power  of  the  gospel,     ^neas  arose  to  health,  and  Dorcas  was  called 
back  from  death  through  the  supernatural  power  of  a  hving  Christ.    These  were  the 
tokens  of  a  power  for  which  no  human  philosophy  can  account  in  the  history  of  the 
Church.   Miracles  more  wonderful  in  the  conversion  of  souls  are  of  daily  occurrence. 
II.  What  EFFECTS  OF  GOSPEL  powEB  do  wc  see  in  this  story  ?    1.  Holiness  ;  expressed 
in  the  name  "  saints  "  applied  to  the  followers  of  Christ.     Christianity  has  given  to 
the  world  a  new  ideal  of  character.     2.  Practical  works  of  usefulness.     Christians 
have  been  at  work  feeding  the  hungry,  clothing  the  naked,  relieving  the  needy,  ever 
since  the  days  of  Dorcas.     Every  hospital  and  asylum  and  charitable  institution  on 
the  earth  is  a  tribute  to  the  power  of  the  gospel.    3.  Growth.   Verses  35  and  42  call 
attention  to  the  growing  numbers  of  the  Christian  Church.    The  gospel  is  a  seed  re- 
producing itself  by  the  million.  This  is  another  result  of  its  inward  power.  4.  Victory 
over  death.  The  restoration  of  Dorcas  to  life  was  only  a  feeble  type  of  the  more  won- 
derful triumph  of  the  Christian  over  the  grave.   Hers  was  a  few  hours  after  death ; 
ours  may  be  a  few  centuries.  Both  her  restoration  and  our  resurrection  are  wrought 
by  the  same  power.     {Monday  Club  Sermon.)        A  devoted  woman  : — An  American 
paper  teUs  the  story  of  a  woman  who,  because  tired  of  a  life  mainly  employed  in  dress- 
ing and  eating,  resolved  to  devote  herself  and  her  money  to  a  nobler  purpose.  At  the 
close  of  the  war  she  went  to  a  sandy  island  off  the  Atlantic  coast,  where  about  two 
hundred  persons  were  living  in  poverty  and  ignorance,  and  established  her  home 
there,  with  the  intention  of  benefiting  the  inhabitants.    She  began  with  teaching,  by 
example,  how  to  cultivate  the  land  lucratively,  and  was  soon  imitated.     Next  she 
established  a  school  for  the  children,  and  afterwards  a  church.     Now  the  island  is 
a  thriving  region,  with  an  industrious  and  moral  population,  the  change  being  the 
work  of  one  woman.      Noble  womanly  service: — When  even  the  old  coloured  woman 


CHAP.  IX.]  THE  ACTS.  97 

Katy,  who  earned  her  own  livelihood  ;  who  sold  cakes  from  day  to  day ;  who  in  her 
lifetime  took  forty  children  out  of  the  poor-house,  and  taught  them  trades,  and 
bound  them  out  in  places  of  prosperity ;  who  took  no  airs  upon  herself  ;  who  lived 
on  the  abundance  of  her  poverty — when  she  died  out  of  her  sphere  nobody  thought 
to  ask,  "  What  has  become  of  her?  "  She  was  buried,  perhaps,  so  obscurely  that 
no  person  could  say,  •'  I  am  sure  here  is  where  her  old  rattle-bones  lie."  But  there 
went  up  heavenward  a  radiant  procession,  amidst  an  outburst  of  song,  heralding 
the  approach  of  some  bold  conqueror,  crownless  and  sceptreless.  It  was  the  resur- 
rected spirit  of  this  servant  of  God.  She  lived  at  the  bottom  here,  but  there  she 
lives  in  eternal  fame.  At  last  she  broke  into  her  crown  of  light,  and  ascended  her 
throne,  and  took  her  sceptre.  Thou  that  art  doing  noble  things  and  asking  no 
praise  ;  thou  that  art  Uving  to  do  good  because  it  is  sweet  to  do  good,  and  be  like 
Christ,  and  bear  His  cross,  and  walk  with  Him  in  sorrow,  go  up,  thy  Christ  waits 
for  thee.  And  come  down,  thou  hoary-head  of  power  that  on  earth  art  despoiling 
God's  fair  creation  as  food  for  thy  lowest  appetites,  and  living  in  selfishness  for  thy- 
self alone  ;  there  is  no  road  between  thee  and  God  that  does  not  break  short  on  the 
gulf  between  earth  and  heaven.  The  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  shall  be  last. 
Seek  for  glory,  but  be  careful  what  kind  of  glory  you  seek.  Work  for  fame,  but 
look  out  that  you  work  for  the  fame  that  addresses  itself  to  the  top  of  the  brain, 
instead  of  that  which  addresses  itself  to  the  bottom.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Traits 
of  a  noble  woman : — We  have  seen  many  beautiful  tributes  to  lovely  woman,  but  the 
following  is  the  finest  we  ever  read :  Place  her  among  the  flowers,  foster  her  as  a 
tender  plant,  and  she  is  a  thing  of  fancy,  waywardness,  and  folly — annoyed  by  a 
dewdrop,  fretted  by  the  touch  of  a  butterfly's  wing,  ready  to  faint  at  the  sound  of  a 
beetle  or  the  rattling  of  a  window-pane  at  night,  and  she  is  overpowered  by  the 
perfume  of  a  rosebud.  But  let  real  calamity  come,  rouse  her  affections,  enkindle 
the  fires  of  her  heart,  and  mark  her  then  !  How  strong  is  her  heart  1  Place  her 
in  the  heart  of  the  battle ;  give  her  a  child,  a  bird,  or  anything  to  protect,  and  see 
her  in  a  relative  instance,  Hfting  her  white  arms  as  a  shield,  as  her  own  blood 
crimsons  her  upturned  forehead,  praying  for  her  life  to  protect  the  helpless.  Trans- 
plant her  in  the  dark  places  of  the  earth,  caU  forth  the  energies  to  action,  and  her 
breath  becomes  a  healing  value,  her  presence  a  blessing.  She  disputes,  inch  by 
inch,  the  stride  of  stalkiag  pestilence,  when  man — the  strong  and  brave — pale  and 
affrighted,  shrinks  away.  Misfortune  haunts  her  not.  She  wears  away  a  hfe  of 
silent  endurance,  and  goes  forward  with  less  timidity  than  to  her  bridal.  In  pros- 
perity she  is  a  bud  fuU  of  odours,  waiting  but  for  the  winds  of  adversity  to  scatter 
them  abroad — pure  gold,  valuable,  but  untried  in  the  furnace.  In  short,  woman  ia 
a  miracle,  a  mystery,  the  centre  from  which  radiates  the  charm  of  existence. 
{Great  Thoughts.)  Caring  for  others : — You  have  heard  it  said,  and  I  believe 
there  is  more  than  fancy  in  the  saying,  that  fiowers  only  flourish  rightly  ia  the 
garden  of  some  one  who  loves  them.  I  know  you  would  like  that  to  be  true  ;  you 
would  think  it  a  pleasant  magic  if  you  could  flush  your  flowers  into  brighter 
bloom  by  a  kind  look  upon  them ;  nay,  more,  if  your  look  had  the  power,  not  only 
to  cheer,  but  to  guard  them.  And  do  you  think  it  not  a  greater  thing  than  all  this 
you  can  do  for  fairer  flowers  than  these — flowers  that  could  bless  you  for  having 
blessed  them,  and  will  love  you  for  having  loved  them,  flowers  that  have  eyes  like 
yours,  and  lives  like  yours,  which  once  saved  you  save  for  ever.  Is  this  only  a  little 
power  ?  Far  among  the  moorlands,  far  in  the  darkness  of  the  terrible  streets,  these 
feeble  florets  are  lying  with  all  their  fresh  leaves  torn,  and  their  stems  broken — will 
you  never  go  down  to  them,  nor  set  them  in  order,  nor  protect  them  from  the  fierce 
wind  ?  (J.  Ruskin.)  The  work  for  Christian  women : — A  Christian  lady,  who  wa» 
engaged  in  work  for  the  poor  and  degraded,  was  once  spoken  to  by  oue  who  was 
well  acquainted  with  both  the  worker  and  those  whom  she  sought  to  reach,  and 
remonstrated  with  for  going  among  such  a  class  of  people.  "  It  does  seem  wonderful 
to  me  that  you  can  do  such  work,"  her  friend  said.  •'  You  sit  beside  tbese  people, 
and  talk  with  them  in  a  way  that  I  do  not  think  you  would  do  if  you  knew  all  about 
them,  just  what  they  are,  and  from  what  places  they  come."  Her  answer  was, 
"  Well,  I  suppose  they  are  dreadful  people ;  but  if  the  Lord  Jesus  were  now  on 
earth,  are  they  not  the  very  sort  of  people  that  He  would  strive  to  teach  ?  And  am  I 
better  than  my  Master  ?  Would  He  feel  Himself  too  good  togo  among  them?" 
A  poor,  illiterate  person,  who  stood  listening  to  this  conversation,  said  with  great 
earnestness  and  simplicity,  "  Why,  I  always  thought  that  was  what  Christians  were 
for."  The  objector  was  silenced,  and  what  wonder  ?  Is  not  that  what  Christians 
are  for  ?  If  not,  then  what  in  the  name  of  all  that  is  good  are  they  for  ?  {^Chrislian 
VOL.    II.  " 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  x. 

Herald.)  Tabltba,  arise. — The  resurrection  of  Dorcas — a  type : — I.  Thebe  pbb- 
CEDEs — 1.  Sorrow  and  sympathy  of  a  mourning  Church  :  the  weeping  widows.  2. 
Prayer  of  God's  believing  servants  :  the  praying  Peter.  3.  The  awakening  call  of 
the  Divine  Word :  Tabitha,  arise.  11.  Thebe  follows — 1.  The  first  signs  of  hfe  in 
an  awakened  soul :  she  opened  her  eyes,  saw  Peter,  and  sat  up.  2.  Friendly  assis- 
tance for  the  life  yet  weak :  he  gave  her  his  hand  and  lifted  her  up.  3.  Loving 
reception  into  the  Church  :  he  presented  her  alive.  4.  A  blessed  impression  upon 
many,  (K.  Gerok.)  The  home-mission,  a  call  to  our  time : — I.  To  whom  addbessed. 
Arise,  spirit  of  love.  Hear  its  evangeUcal  Christianity.  And  if  men  will  not  hear  it, 
then  shame  them,  ye  women,  who  from  the  days  of  Tabitha  have  always  been  fore- 
most in  works  of  love  and  heroic  deeds.  II.  Wheeefobe  addbessed.  Great  is  the 
need  of  the  time,  and  great  the  obligation  of  rescuing  love.  III.  Whence  ad- 
dbessed. Not  from  without.  The  work  of  home  mission  is  no  mere  matter  of 
fashion  ;  the  arm  of  the  world  can  be  of  no  use  in  it ;  the  Lord  Himself  must  be 
present,  Peter  must  come;  God's  Word  with  its  strength,  the  Church  with  its 
blessing,  the  spiritual  office  with  its  love.    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vebs.  1-48.  There  was  a  certain  man  In  Csesarea  called  Cornelius,  a  eentnrlon. — 

Feter^i  vision: — The  record  of  the  advance  of  the  young  Church  gives  in  quick 
fluccession  three  typical  conversions :  first,  that  of  the  eunuch,  a  foreigner,  but  a 
proselyte  to  the  Jewish  faith  ;  secondly,  that  of  Saul,  born  and  bred  a  Jew;  thirdly, 
this  of  Cornelius,  a  Gentile  seeker  after  God.  Within  the  range  of  these  ex- 
periences the  whole  world  was  compassed.  The  highest  apostolic  sanction  for  an 
unfettered  gospel  was  the  need  of  the  hour.  I.  The  vision  of  the  Eoman  (vers.  1-8). 
The  home  of  Cornelius  lay  thirty  miles  north  of  Joppa.  Built  by  Herod  the  Great 
in  honour  of  CsBsar  Augustus,  the  seat  of  the  Eoman  rule  in  the  land  of  the  Jews, 
a  city  of  splendour,  with  spacious  artificial  haven,  having  a  temple  erected  to  the 
emperor  that  held  his  statue  as  Olympian  Zeus,  and  lying,  as  it  did,  within  the 
sacred  territory,  yet  a  centre  of  Grecian  influence  and  plagued  by  the  corruptions  of 
a  pagan  worship,  Csesarea  afforded  every  possible  phase  of  contrast  to  the  age-long 
intolerance  of  Peter's  countrymen.  Rome's  wide  empire  flashed  before  the  eye  of 
this  true-born  Italian,  nor  could  he  dream  that  faith  in  a  Nazarene  peasant  would 
give  the  Cornelian  name  its  truest  honour.  Yet  he  was  one  of  those  rare  souls  of 
whom  not  a  few  have  illuminated  the  darkness  of  heathenism,  whom  heart-hunger 
leads  to  the  truth.  He  was  a  "devout"  man.  He  "feared"  God.  The  second 
word  is  simply  a  closer  definition  of  his  religious  character.  His  "fear"  was  not 
a  superstitious  dread  of  the  wrath  of  God,  but  a  brave  man's  dread  of  failing  to  do 
the  will  of  God.  Furthermore,  his  piety  had  power  in  it,  and  this,  mingled  with 
peace,  won  over  to  his  faith  "  all  his  house."  No  man's  reUgion  can,  without 
great  hurt,  fail  to  set  forth  the  two  sides  of  the  character  of  his  God.  In  the  m;in 
who  orders  his  household  in  the  fear  of  God  "mercy  and  truth  are  met  together, 
righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other."  Cornelius,  constant  in  alms- 
giving and  prayer,  draws  near  to  the  kingdom  of  God's  Son.  The  kingdom  is 
about  to  be  entered.  The  order  is,  "  Now  send."  The  time  had  come.  The  out- 
lying Gentile  world  had  grown  sick  at  heart.  The  "  middle  wall  of  partition  "  was 
falling  to  the  ground.  Cornelius,  for  the  pagan  world,  was  to  learn  that  the  Cross 
was  the  centre  of  the  circle,  and  Peter,  for  the  Jewish  world,  that  the  circle  was  as 
big  as  the  globe.  The  Divine  direction  is  very  exact.  Both  of  the  apostles'  names 
are  given.  Whether  Cornelius  knew  it  or  not,  Philip,  a  resident  of  Csesarea,  might 
have  been  called  to  his  side  within  an  hour.  But  Philip  was  not  the  man  for  the 
occasion.  Of  all  men  Peter  was  best  fitted  to  preach  Jesus  to  Cornelius,  of  all  men 
the  one  most  needing  the  results  of  his  preaching.  "  He  will  tell  thee  what  thou 
oughtest  to  do."  These  words  emphasise  two  important  truths:  1.  They  point  to 
the  value  of  human  agency  in  the  salvation  of  men.  The  value  of  human 
testimony  to  a  historic  fact  was  never  lost  sight  of  in  the  foundation  of  the  Church. 
The  answer  to  Hume  and  Strauss  may  be  found  in  the  meeting  of  these  men.  A 
man  not  a  myth  has  entered  our  world,  and  God  has  committed  to  men  first  of  all, 
not  to  books,  nor  papers,  nor  tracts,  the  publishing  of  the  gospel.     The  true  witness 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  99 

of  true  men  is  the  snrest  vay  of  redeeming  China  to  God.  A  shipload  of  Bibles  sen% 
to  Africa  will,  unaided,  amount  to  little.  Ten  holy  men  turned  loose  wiU  leaven  it 
for  the  twentieth  century.  The  man  and  the  book  together  are  invincible.  2.  They 
point  to  Jesus  as  the  consummate  revelation  of  God.  When  He  can  be  found  all 
else  is  insufficient.  And  it  was  because  He  could  be  found  that  Cornelius  was  not, 
could  not  be,  allowed  to  remain  where  he  was.  His  devoutness  was  not  enough. 
No  one  dare  teach  that  faith  in  specific  doctrines  of  Christianity  is  superfluous. 
The  opening  words  of  Peter's  sermon  cannot  be  bent  to  prove  that  all  religions  are 
of  equal  value  or  that  faith  in  the  Eedeemer  is  needless.  H.  The  vision  of  the 
Jew  (vers.  9-20).  God's  providences  make  a  perfect  fit.  The  messengers  reached 
the  tanner's  door  not  an  hour  too  soon,  not  a  moment  behind  time.  Was  the  man 
on  the  house-top  ready?  A  great  thing  was  about  to  happen.  A  huge  prejudice 
had  come  to  its  death.  Let  us  pause  to  scan  the  past  life  of  the  fisherman.  He 
had  been  in  part  prepared  for  the  nearing  duty.  A  more  scrupulous  Jew  would  not 
have  entered  a  tanner's  house.  Peter  lodged  there.  He  had  not  been  without  much 
previous  training.  He  had  been  taught,  tried,  had  fallen,  had  been  forgiven  and 
restored  to  honour.  Yet  he  was  not  ready  for  a  world-wide  need.  The  words  of 
Jesus  never  took  the  place  of  the  educating  activities  of  after  life.  Peter  had  been 
called  to  be  a  "fisher  of  men"  (Matt.  iv.  19).  He  had  heard  the  centurion 
commended  (Luke  vii.  7).  He  had  learned  how  meats  defile,  and  how  they  do  not 
(Mark  vii.  18).  Near  the  tragic  close  of  his  Lord's  life  he  had  seen  that  certain 
Greeks  sought  Him  (John  xii.  20),  and  that  in  them  the  Gentile  world  was 
welcomed.  Yet  he  was  not  ready.  Like  his  feUows,  he  saw  in  the  direction  of  his 
prejudices.  "It  required  the  surgery  of  events  to  insert  a  new  truth  into  their 
minds."  Yet  he  was  God's  best  man  for  this  hour,  for,  as  Bruce  has  well  said, 
"Everything  may  be  hoped  of  men  who  could  leave  all  for  Christ's  society." 
To  learn  that  spirit  is  more  than  form,  and  that  God  is  not  partial,  was  a  great 
lesson.  Through  the  opening  in  heaven  a  "  great  sheet  "  was  let  down,  held  "  by 
four  rope-ends  "  (Alford),  or  "  attached  with  four  ends,  namely,  to  the  edges  of  the 
opening  which  had  taken  place  in  heaven "  (Meyer).  In  it  were  all  kinds  of 
animals  without  exception,  clean  and  unclean.  From  these  Peter  was  told  to 
choose.  With  old-time  bluntness  he  refuses.  He  knows  not  who  speaks,  but  calls 
him  "Lord."  What  did  it  mean?  Little  wonder  that  he  was  "perplexed." 
The  most  outward  mark  of  difference  between  Jew  and  Gentile  had  been  set  at 
naught.  He  knew  why  these  regulations  had  existed  (see  Lev.  xi.  and  Deut.  xvi.). 
The  descendants  of  Abraham  were  not  alone  in  making  distinctions  of  animals. 
Yet  none  others  were  so  thorough  as  those  of  the  Jews.  "  The  ordinance  of  Moses 
was  for  the  whole  nation.  It  was  not,  like  the  Egyptian  law,  intended  for  priest's 
alone ;  nor  like  the  Hindu  law,  binding  only  on  the  twice-born  Brahman  ;  nor  like 
the  Parsee  law,  to  be  apprehended  and  obeyed  only  by  those  disciplined  in  spiritual 
matters.  It  was  a  law  for  the  people,  for  every  man,  woman,  and  child  of  the  race 
chosen  to  be  a  'kingdom  of  priests,  an  holy  nation'  (Exod,  xix.  6)."  He 
"  thought "  on.  Was  the  *'  hedge  "  between  races  to  be  destroyed  ?  Possibly. 
Was  the  vision  meant  for  his  own  enlargement  of  privilege?  Surely  not.  The 
sight,  the  order,  shocked  his  sanitary  creed,  his  patriotic  sentiment,  his  con- 
science.  It  was  hard  for  a  Jew  to  yield  even  to  a  command  from  the  skies.  His 
"  thought  "  may  have  taken  in  the  city  spread  below.  (R.  T.  Stevenson.)  Peter's 
vision: — Jesus  Christ  is  the  focus  of  all  good  tendencies  in  history.  His  light, 
lighting  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world,  is  their  origin ;  His  triumph  is  the 
conclusion  toward  which  they  move.  The  story  of  Cornelius  and  Peter  shows  the 
bringing  together  in  Christ  of  two  great  religious  elements — that  of  devout  paganism 
and  that  of  faithful  Judaism.  Both  make  sacrifices,  for  in  Judaism  as  well  as  in 
paganism  there  is  somewhat  that  is  to  be  left  behind.  Yet  in  both  there  waa 
imperfection.  Cornelius  had  yet  to  put  on  the  gospel  life,  Peter  had  yet  to 
renounce  the  imperfect  Jewish  life.  Both  needed  advancement  more  closely 
toward  Christ,  where  they  could  meet  as  one.  I.  Cornelius,  the  Gentile,  is  one  of 
the  noblest  figures  of  pre-Christian  hfe  that  we  have.  It  has  often  been  pointed 
out  that  the  Roman  centurions  are  always  well  spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament. 
But  Cornelius  is  more  plainly  set  before  us  than  either  of  the  others.  1.  As  a  man 
Cornelius  is  deserving  of  our  admiration.  We  see  in  him  a  high  religious  longing, 
He  was  not  a  dabbler  in  speculation,  such  as  he  might  have  been  if  he  had  been  a 
Greek,  or  a  Eoman  of  a  hundred  years  later.  He  was  one  of  the  sort  of  men 
Archdeacon  Farrar  has  called,  "  seekers  after  God  " :  men  like  Socrates,  Seneca, 
Epictetus,  and  Marcus  Aurelius ;  men  to  whom  the  utmost  heathenism  could  ofie^ 


100  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

in  the  way  of  religioueness  was  tmsatisfying  (as  God  meant  it  to  be)  to  the  wants  of 
the  soul.  The  quantity  of  religiousness  offered  by  the  Eoman  religion  was  not  at 
fault ;  there  was  an  abundance  of  theory  to  appeal  to  the  mind,  plenty  of  super- 
natural legend  about  the  gods,  and  a  ritual  elaborate  enough  to  giatify  the  most 
ardent  longing  for  the  externals  of  worship.  But  there  was  not  that  quality  in  it 
all  which  could  appease  the  cravings  of  the  heart.  It  was  not  Divine.  Cornelius 
longed  for  something  better.  He  had  been  led  to  Judaism.  Here  were  no  idols, 
here  were  no  debasing  legends  of  deity,  here  was  real  spiritual  religion.  The  purity 
and  spirituality  of  the  Hebrew  monotheism,  and  the  loftiness  of  its  code  of  morals, 
must  have  come  like  a  revelation  to  thoughtful  hearts.  They  came  so  to  Cornelius. 
The  God  of  the  Jews  was  a  better  God  to  him  than  Jupiter.  Yet  Cornelius  made  a 
discriminating  use  of  Judaism.  Cornelius  penetrated  to  the  eternally  true  elements 
of  the  Hebrew  religion,  and  disregarded  those  parts  of  it  which  were  merely  typical 
and  temporary  and  had  no  power  to  satisfy  the  soul.  For  his  characteristics, 
named  at  some  length,  are  spiritual  and  not  ritualistic.  He  was  "  a  devout  man, 
and  one  that  feared  God  with  all  his  house  "  (ver.  2).  The  word  devout,  it  is  true, 
says  Lechler,  "  may  be  applied  even  to  a  strictly  pagan  form  of  devoutness."^ 
It  designates  a  worshipful  bent  of  mind,  full  of  reverence  toward  Heaven.  But  in 
Cornelius'  case  this  reverence  was  rightly  directed,  for  it  rose  toward  the  true  God. 
It  is  said  also  of  Cornelius  that  he  "  gave  much  alms  to  the  people  (of  Israel),  and 
prayed  to  God  always."  His  religiousness  was  shown  not  only  in  devoutness,  but 
in  the  outward  life.  "Because,"  says  Calvin,  "  the  Law  is  contained  in  two  tables, 
Luke  in  the  first  place  commends  Cornelius'  piety  ;  then  he  descends  to  the  second 
part,  in  the  fact  that  he  practised  the  duties  of  charity  towards  men."  That  such 
a  man  should  have  no  influence  was  impossible,  above  all  in  those  days  when  the 
possibilities  of  the  pagan  religions  were  exhausted  and  men  were  reaching  out 
after  something  more  satisfying,  after  that,  indeed,  which  Cornelius  had  found.  We 
are  not  surprised,  therefore,  to  learn  that  "  all  his  house  "  joined  him  in  his  fear 
of  the  true  God  (ver.  2).  A  man  like  Cornelius,  reverent  and  thoughtful,  cannot 
but  influence  others  toward  the  same  traits.  And  the  reason  for  this  was  his 
strength  of  character,  Eoman  soldiers  were  not,  as  a  general  thing,  very  reverent. 
Out  of  this  same  strength  of  character  also,  doubtless,  came  his  patience.  He  had 
prayed  earnestly  to  God,  we  know  not  for  how  long,  but  no  unusual  answer  had 
come.  2.  Such  a  man  in  himself  is  a  delightful  study  in  character  ;  but  he  is  much 
more  valuable  in  this  case  because  of  his  spiritual  significance  in  relation  to  the 
gospel.  He  shows  us  plainly,  by  his  obedience  to  it,  the  obligation  of  the  universal 
law  of  living  up  to  the  light  one  has.  Keligious  emancipation  is  by  means  of  the 
principle  of  exhaustion.  You  use  an  imperfect  form  of  religion  faithfully,  and  yoU' 
are  led  out  of  it  into  something  better.  So  those  who,  like  Paul,  were  zealous  Jews 
were  offering  themselves  to  God  as  fit  subjects  for  something  higher  still.  Because 
aJl  phases  of  behef  have  in  them  the  potency  of  better  things,  men  are  rightly  to  be 
judged  of  God  by  their  use  of  what  they  have.  And  no  one  need  fear,  whatever 
his  present  phase  of  belief  Godward,  that  his  aspirations  toward  something  better 
are  ever  overlooked  by  God.  The  angel  said  to  Cornelius,  "  Thy  prayers  and  thine 
alms  are  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  God  "  (ver.  4).  It  is  a  comforting  thought 
that  not  a  single  hope  for  religious  advancement  in  any  human  soul  is  ever  over- 
looked by  God.  Cornelius  was  a  good  man,  a  religious  man.  Even  these,  however, 
did  not  merit  the  gift  of  the  gospel.  The  best  of  men  can  never  claim  anything  at 
God's  hands,  because  even  the  best  of  men  never  use  all  their  prinleges  and  perfectly 
fulfil  the  will  of  God.  But  although  Cornelius  had  not  by  his  life  come  to  deserve 
the  gift  of  the  gospel  (which  is  impossible),  he  had  by  it  prepared  himself  for  the 
gospel,  and  plainly  evinced  to  God  his  desire  for  it,  although  the  knowledge  of  just 
what  it  was  that  he  desired  and  craved  for  had  not  crossed  his  mind.  To  those  who 
ask  it  shall  be  given,  and  by  his  good  life  Cornelius  had  shown  himself  to  be  one  of 
those  who  ask.  God  gives  grace  in  exchange  for  grace.  Using  what  light  we  have 
leads  on  to  the  desire  for  more,  until  we  are  led  to  want  Christ,  who  is  the  final  and 
best  gift  of  God.  II.  Peter,  the  Jewish -Christian,  gives  us  a  study  in  advancing 
Christianity.  Cornelius  shows  how  Judaism  helps  to  Christ ;  Peter  shows  how 
Judaism  must  be  thrown  off  in  order  to  reach  Christ.  The  same  thing  which  is  set 
before  us  as  a  help  in  Cornelius  is  shown  a  hindrance  in  Peter.  Do  you  wonder 
that  a  man's  early  training  should  stay  by  him  ?  Was  it  not  intended  so  to  stay  ? 
Peter's  prepossession  against  Gentile  ways  of  living  was  fortified  by  the  knowledge 
that  Jewish  life  was  founded  upon  Divine  ordinances.  The  things  unclean  to 
Judaistic  thought  had  not  been  made  unclean  by  the  Jews  themselves,  but  by  the 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  Id 

Tery  declaration  of  God.  And  yet  it  was  narrow.  It  did  not  rise  to  the  idea  that 
God  might  be  planning  to  displace  even  His  o^vn  work.  Peter  could  not  see  that  a 
thing  might  be  instituted  of  God  and  yet  be  temporary.  He  could  not  advance  to 
the  full  conception  of  the  possibility  of  progressiveness  in  God's  revelation.  Not 
that  there  was  anything  defective,  improper,  or  bad  in  any  part  of  God's  ancient 
work.  But  He  meant  it  for  a  certain  purpose  which  was  temporary.  And  it  was  a 
wonder  so  great  that  it  took  a  miracle  to  dispel  it.  So  hard  is  it  for  us  to  get  away 
from  our  own  set  ideas  of  how  God  must  work  when  He  works  at  all.  And  yet 
God  can  do  the  difficult,  even  what  seems  the  impossible.  He  can  give  a  form  of 
religion  to  men  that  seems  perfect,  and  then  He  can  displace  it  by  another  to  which 
the  former  is  but  as  night  to  noonday.  Peter  was  to  learn  that  a  Gentile  soul  as 
such  is  as  ready  for  the  kingdom  as  a  Jewish  soul  as  suoh,  if  it  is  truly  longing  for 
salvation.  And  as  this  came  to  him  it  brought  a  lesson  in  humiUty,  for  he  learned 
that  the  judgment  of  God  was  far  better  than  his  own.  He  had  his  prepossessions, 
founded  in  the  very  Word  of  God.  He  was  asked  to  give  these  up  by  the  same  God. 
Here  seemed  inconsistency,  impossibility.  But  Peter  must  yield.  The  ways  of  man 
must  submit  to  the  ways  of  God.  Our  conceptions  of  God,  religion,  piety,  must  all 
yield  before  God's  thoughts.  And  if  He  displaces  His  own  revelations  by  better 
ones  who  shall  say  Him  nay?  IH.  The  general  lessons  of  our  study  are 
apparent.  1.  Cornelius  and  Peter,  Jew  and  Gentile,  both  had  visions  granted  by 
God.  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  Some  very  ignorant,  uneducated  man, 
despised  in  our  eyes,  may  find  the  truth  as  well  as  we.  2.  Christ  takes  what  is  best 
out  of  all  as  the  foundation  of  advance  into  new  truth  concerning  Himself.  God's 
Spirit  makes  a  preparatio  evangelica  everywhere.  3.  All  men  need  progress 
religiously — progress  not  beyond  Christ,  but  progress  deeper  into  the  mysteries  of 
the  sublime  truth  given  to  us  in  Him.  Let  no  one  ever  say  he  has  no  more  to 
learn  about  the  Son  of  God.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Breams: — The  subject  of 
dreams  and  dreaming  is  a  fascinating  one.  There  have  been  many  extraordinary 
dreams  ;  but  there  is  an  element  of  mystery  in  all  dreams.  They  are  witnesses  to 
cur  spiritual  nature.  They  reveal  the  spirit  that  is  in  man.  They  give  us  glimpses 
of  the  inner  life  of  the  soul.  Sometimes  they  may  indicate  our  moral  state.  Some 
dreams  are  the  children  of  an  idle  brain ;  others  are  shaped  by  the  master  passion 
of  the  soul.  President  Edwards  entered  all  his  dreams  in  his  diary,  and  carefully 
examined  them.  He  looked  upon  them  as  indicating  the  real  bias  of  his  waking 
thoughts.  Good  seeds  sown  in  the  day  meant  a  good  crop  of  dreams  at  night. 
Undoubtedly  there  is  much  truth  in  this  view.  Dreams  are  sometimes  instruments 
of  Divine  teaching.  The  Holy  Spirit  speaks  to  men  by  dreams  and  visions. 
*'  Many  of  the  inspired  parts  of  Scripture  came  through  that  channel.  Jacob,  at 
Bethel,  saw  the  ladder  of  mediation  between  heaven  and  earth  in  a  dream.  Peter 
received  his  commission  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles  in  a  dream.  The 
spirit-world  was  uufolded  to  Paul  in  visions.  He  saw  heaven,  but  not  with  his 
mortal  eyes  ;  and  heard  the  language  spoken  there,  but  not  with  ears  of  clay.  The 
panorama  of  the  ages  passed  before  John  in  Patmos  while  in  a  state  of  bodily  un- 
consciousness. The  Spirit  of  God  can  waken  the  rnsources  of  thought  in  man,  and 
impress  his  mind  without  disturbing  a  single  eyelash,  or  one  beat  of  the  heart." 

"  For  human  weal  Heaven  husbands  all  events, 
Doll  sleep  instructs,  nor  sport  man's  dreams  in  vain. " 

(G.  H.  James.) 

ComeUus: — 1.  Gsesarea  was  situated  on  the  Mediterranean,  about  thirty  miles 
north  of  Joppa.  It  was  built  by  Herod  the  Great,  b.c.  22,  and  named  after  his 
imperial  patron.  It  was  a  civil  and  mihtary  capital,  the  residence  of  the  Boman 
procurator.  It  was  garrisoned  mostly  by  native  soldiers,  but  there  was  one  cohort 
composed  of  volunteers  from  Italy,  and  over  a  division  of  that  thpre  was  the 
centurion  Cornelius.  He  belonged  to  an  illustrious  clan  which  had  given  to  the 
state  some  of  its  most  distinguished  men ;  but  greater  than  the  glory  of  Sulla  and  the 
Scipios,  who  had  made  the  Cornelian  family  everywhere  renowned,  is  that  which  is 
conferred  on  this  centurion  in  ver.  2.  2.  Cornelius  was  not  a  proselyte,  for  had 
he  been  Peter  would  have  had  no  difficulty,  and  chap.  xv.  14  is  decisive  against  it. 
He  belonged  to  that  large  class  of  thoughtful  men  who  had  become  weary  of  the 
worthlessness  of  paganism.  He  had  outgrown  idolatry,  and  perhaps  made  himself 
familiar  with  the  Septuagint,  and  certainly  was  couvinced  that  God  was  the  hearer 
of  prayer.    He  might  have  become  a  proselyte,  and  possibly  was  contemplating 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  z. 

that  step  when  he  heard  of  Jesus,  and  being  a  genuine  truth-seeker  he  determined 
to  wait  for  light.  This  will  enable  us  to  understand  the  object  of  his  fasting  and 
prayer.  There  had  come  to  him  the  inevitable  question,  "  What  wilt  thou  do  with 
Jesus,  that  is  called  Christ  ?  "  and  in  his  anxiety  as  to  the  answer  he  cried  to  God 
for  light.  And  not  in  vain  (vers.  3-6).  3.  In  response  to  the  Divine  direction  he 
dispatched  two  of  his  servants  and  a  soldier  to  Peter ;  but  God  had  gone  before 
them,  and  was  even  now  preparing  His  servant  for  their  appearance  (vers.  9-16), 
who  received  a  symbolic  revelation  of  the  fact  that  the  restrictions  of  the  Mosaio 
law  were  removed,  and  that  the  distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile  was  abolished. 
It  indicated  that  creation  itself  had  been  purified,  and  rendered  clean  for  our  use  by 
the  satisfaction  of  Christ.  But  Peter  did  not  understand  it  so,  but  was  helped  by 
the  message  of  the  servants  of  Cornelius,  and  putting  the  two  together  he  determined 
to  go  to  Caesarea.  As  a  precaution  he  took  six  brethren  with  him.  Convinced  that 
some  important  event  in  the  history  of  the  Church  was  going  to  happen  he  desired  to 
have  Jewish  witnesses:  an  action  which  shows  that,  in  spite  of  his  impulsiveness, he 
was  not  destitute  of  prudence.  4.  On  arriving  Peter  found  a  considerable  assembly, 
and  after  a  preliminary  discussion  and  explanation  delivered  a  sermon  as  remarkable 
as  any  recorded  in  the  history.  While  he  was  speaking  the  Holy  Ghost  descended, 
which — (1)  Certified  the  truth  of  Peter's  words.  (2)  Proved  to  Peter  and  his  companions 
the  genuineness  of  the  faith  of  these  Gentile  converts.  (3)  Indicated  that  those  who 
received  Him  should  be  then  and  there  admitted  to  the  Church  (chap.  xi.  17).  5. 
This  was  the  Pentecost  of  the  Gentiles,  and  so  Peter  opened  the  door  for  their 
admission  as  the  Lord  had  promised  him.  Thus  the  infant  Church  took  a  new 
departure,  and  entered  on  that  world-wide  mission  in  which  it  is  stiU  engaged. 
Learn  then — I.  That  the  way  to  get  light  is  to  act  up  to  what  we  have,  and  pray 
FOB  MORE.  Cornelius  had  not  found  Christ  (chap.  xi.  14),  but  he  had  found  some- 
thing, and  "  whereto  he  had  attained  he  walked  by  that  rule."  This  is  a  uniform 
method  of  God's  procedure  (Deut.  iv.  29 ;  Psa.  cxii.  4 ;  Matt.  xxv.  29 ;  John  vii.  17  ; 
James  i.  5,  6).  F.  W.  Robertson  stayed  himself  up  with  this  principle  during  that 
dark  wrestle  with  doubt  in  the  Tyrol.  Everything  else  went  from  him,  but  he  could 
hold  by  this  :  "  It  is  always  right  to  do  right  "  ;  and  in  the  acting  out  of  that  he 
regained  his  hold  of  Christ.  II.  That  in  all  spiritual  matters  we  should  be 
PROMPT.  1.  Cornelius  lost  no  time  in  sending  for  Peter;  nay,  after  Peter  came  he 
took  in  all  he  said  while  he  was  speaking,  and  so  received  the  Holy  Ghost.  Do, 
therefore,  at  once  what  is  needed  to  secure  your  soul's  welfare.  When  Pharaoh  was 
asked  by  Moses  when  he  should  entreat  the  Lord,  he  said,  "  To-morrow! "  and  you 
marvel  at  his  folly.  You  would  have  said,  "  The  sooner  the  better  " ;  but  beware  lest 
you  condemn  yourself.  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice,"  &c.  You  need  not 
send  to  Joppa,  "  The  word  is  nigh  thee  "  (Rom.  x.  8, 9).  2.  But  the  promptitude  of 
Peter  is  quite  as  noteworthy  (ver.  29),  and  we  who  have  to  deal  with  men  about 
their  souls  should  take  a  lesson.  I  once  preached  to  an  enormous  audience  in  a 
circus.  When  I  had  finished  I  was  quite  prostrated,  and  while  in  that  condition  a 
man  wished  to  speak  with  me  about  the  way  of  life,  I  made  an  appointment  for 
the  next  morning.  But  he  never  came.  And  I  have  written  down  that  as  one  of 
the  list  opportunities  of  my  life,  and  its  memory  has  been  a  spur  to  me  ever  since. 
"  The  King's  business  requires  haste,"  Now — alike  for  preacher  and  hearer — is  the 
accepted  time.  III.  That  preach?;rs  and  hearers  are  prepared  for  each  other 
BY  God.  Cornelius  is  led  in  a  pecuUar  manner  to  send,  and  Peter  to  go:  when  they 
come  together  the  result  is  blessing.  It  is  the  same  now.  The  preacher  is  led 
through  a  special  spiritual  history ;  he  is  guided  to  the  choice  of  a  particular 
subject,  to  treat  it  in  a  peculiar  way,  to  preach  it  at  some  distant  place.  The 
hearer  is  brought  through  circumstances  of  trial  perhaps ;  he  is  led  on  a  certain  day 
to  a  certain  place  of  worship,  how  he  knows  not,  but  there  he  hears  the  message 
God  sends  for  him.  It  seems  as  he  listens  that  the  preacher  must  know  his  past 
life,  and  so  speaking  to  his  circumstances  he  is  blessed  in  his  conversion.  This  is 
no  uncommon  history.      {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  character  and  eonverxion 

of  Cornelius: — I.  The  characteb  of  Cornelius.  1.  He  was  a  devout  man, 
and  one  who  feared  God.  His  morality  was  not  of  that  mean  character,  or 
dwarfish  stature,  or  unhallowed  allowance,  which  satisfied  the  scanty  require- 
ments of  paganism  and  idolatry.  He  had  reverence  for  the  demands,  he  hnd 
Eeal  for  the  glory,  he  had  impulse  from  tbe  love  of  God.  2.  He  was  a  charitable 
man.  To  heal  the  sick,  feed  the  hungry,  clothe  the  naked,  visit  the  fatherless  and 
widows  in  their  affliction,  was  his  delightful  employment.  3.  He  was  a  man  of 
prayer.    Here  lay  the  great  excellence  of  bis  character ;  here  the  grace  which 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  108 

sanctified  every  other,  implanted  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  heart ;  and  here  the 
secret  of  that  mercy  of  which  he  was  made  a  partaker.  His  supplication  was  no 
transient,  hasty  homage  of  the  lip  or  knee,  but  the  settled  habit  of  his  mind,  the 
unwearied  uninterrupted  practice  of  his  life.  4.  He  was  a  man  of  family  religion. 
U.  The  couesb  of  Divine  dealing  towards  Cobnelids.  Lessons :  1.  God  is  no 
respecter  of  persons.  2.  What  should  be  the  character  of  ministerial  labour  and 
duty.  (1)  The  more  earnestly  and  faithfully  a  minister  of  religion  labours,  the 
more  certainly  will  he  find  cause  to  know  that  the  way  of  God  is  not  as  his  way, 
nor  the  thoughts  of  God  as  his  thoughts.  (2)  The  more  earnestly  a  minister  is  en- 
gaged in  private  prayer  for  himself,  and  for  the  success  of  the  great  cause  of  mercy 
and  of  man  in  which  he  is  engaged,  the  more  surely  wiU  he  learn  the  mind  of  God, 
the  more  enlarged  will  be  his  views,  the  more  certain  his  success  in  preaching  the 
gospel.     (R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)         Cornelius: — ^We   learn  from  the  history 

1.  That  it  is  possible  to  live  a  life  of  piety  under  unfavourable  circumstances. 

2.  That  goodness,  wherever  found,  is  noticed  and  remembered  by  God.  3. 
That  God  gives  more  light  to  him  who  is  conscious  of  his  need  of  it  and  who 
humbly  seeks  it.  4.  That  in  order  to  impart  this  greater  light  the  human  ministry 
of  the  Word  has  been  appointed.  (Janies  Owen.)  Cornelius: — I.  He  was  a 
DEVooi  MAN,  This  takes  him  out  of  the  ranks  of  those  whose  religion  is  not  a 
reUgion  of  devotion.  The  religion  of  too  many  is  a  religion  of  fashion.  They  are 
expected  to  go  to  church,  to  pray  and  sing  and  hear  while  there,  but  they  are  glad 
when  it  is  over,  and  that  it  will  not  have  to  be  repeated  for  a  week.  As  a  devout 
man  Cornelius  was — 1.  Thoroughly  in  earnest.  Earnestness  alone  will  never  take 
a  man  to  heaven,  but  no  one  ever  got  there  who  was  not  in  earnest.  2.  Impressed 
with  the  majesty  of  God.  He  had  realised  something  of  the  glorious  character  of 
Him  with  whom  he  had  to  do.  Are  you  overshadowed  by  the  august  presence  of 
the  Most  High  ?  If  not,  you  are  not  in  the  same  category  as  Cornelius.  II.  Hb 
FBAEED  God  with  all  his  house.  He  took  an  interest  in  the  well-being  of  his  sub- 
ordinates. He  did  not  regard  himself  as  a  mere  ruler.  Too  many  ofl&cers  treat 
their  men  as  mere  automata,  made  to  stand  before  them  in  a  line  and  go  through 
their  evolutions  like  machines.  Is  it  a  matter  of  solicitude  with  us  that  our 
servants  should  feel  the  power  of  God's  grace  ?  How  many  ladies  speak  to  their 
maids  about  their  souls  ?  IH.  He  gave  much  alms  to  the  people.  He  was  a  man  of 
large-hearted  liberality.  How  many  professing  Christians  would  be  startled  if  they 
asked  the  question  faithfully,  "  What  proportion  of  my  income  do  I  give  to  God  ?  " 
Eemember  the  generosity  of  the  Pharisees,  and  our  Lord's  declaration,  •'  Except 
your  righteousness  shall  exceed,"  &c.  IV.  He  peated  to  God  always.  How  many 
are  content  with  a  few  hurried  moments  of  prayer,  and  think  that  a  trouble.  1.  He 
prayed  for  greater  light.  Many  are  perfectly  satisfied  with  their  attainments,  or 
even  with  their  non-attainments,  and  prefer  darkness  or  twihght  to  light.  2.  He 
prayed  like  a  man  who  expected  to  receive  the  answer.  Would  anything  surprise 
some  of  you  more  than  if  God  were  to  answer  your  prayer?  3.  When  his  prayer  was 
partially  answered,  he  took  pains  to  secure  the  full  blessing.  V.  We  have  said 
A  GOOD  deal  in  Cobnelius's  favoub  :  Now  what  do  you  think  of  him  ?  Some 
may  say.  That  is  an  excellence  I  cannot  hope  to  attain.  Stop  1  Cornelius,  with 
all  his  excellence,  was  an  unsaved  man.  Let  me  not  be  misunderstood.  He  had 
been  faithful  to  the  light  he  had,  and  if  he  had  been  called  away  he  would 
have  been  judged  according  to  that,  and  not  by  a  standard  that  he  was  unacquainted 
with.  Peter  lays  down  this  principle  clearly  in  vers.  34,  35.  But  Cornelius  was  so 
far  unsaved  that  if  when  the  gospel  reached  him  he  had  rejected  it,  he  could  not 
have  escaped  condemnation  (see  chap.  xi.  14).  You  cannot  save  a  man  who  is 
saved  already.  If  so  good  a  man  could  yet  be  a  lost  soul,  what  must  be  the  case 
with  many  here?  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Cornelius  of  Cmsarea : — 1.  In  religious 
biography  "  army  Christians  "  have  a  recognised  place  and  honour  for  simplicity 
and  thoroughness.  To  the  soldier  the  very  conditions  of  his  life  render  compromise 
an  impossibility.  In  discipline,  in  the  habit  of  obedience,  in  the  self-restraint  and 
self-effacement  required  of  the  true  man  in  arms,  are  also  to  be  found  true  elements 
in  the  education  of  the  man  of  God.  In  Bible  history,  many  of  those  whom  we  most 
admire  were  warriors — the  simple  Joshua,  the  lordly  Gideon,  the  "  Sweet  Singer  " 
David,  the  pious  Josiah  ;  and  in  what  book  is  more  praise  given  to  worth  than  is 
given  to  faithful  Ittai,  grateful  Naaman,  "  My  servant  Cyrus,"  the  courteous  Julius, 
and  the  nameless  but  immortal  centurion  of  Capernaum  ?  2.  When  introduced 
to  us,  Cornelius  is  an  officer  of  the  Boman  garrison  stationed  at  Csesarea,  then  the 
oiyil  capital  of  Judasa.    His  name  at  once  attracts  attention.    What  the  name  ol 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

Howard,  or  Russell,  or  Talbot  is  to  English,  or  Douglas,  or  Gordon,  or  Stewart  to 
Scottish  history,  that  was  the  gens  Cornelia  to  the  City  of  the  Seven  Hills.  A  cadet 
of  a  noble  house  we  may  therefore  conceive  him  to  have  been.  The  benign 
influence  of  noblesse  oblige  would  be  upon  him  and  help  to  preserve  a  stainless 
name  from  stain.  The  regiment  to  which  he  was  attached  seems  to  have  been  one 
of  special  honour,  and  the  position  of  an  officer  in  it  would  be  correspondingly 
eminent.  Later  on  we  encounter  an  officer  of  an  "  Augustan  "  cohort  at  Caesarea, 
Julius,  the  courteous  custodier  of  St.  Paul.  It  is  quite  possible  that  Cornelius  and 
Julius  may  have  been  officers  of  the  same  regiment,  which  would  readily  account 
for  the  kindly  feeling  which  the  latter  manifested  towards  his  prisoner.  3.  As 
regards  the  piety  of  Cornelius  the  narrative  speaks  enthusiastically  (ver.  2).  This 
eulogy  seeuis  to  describe  a  "  proselyte  of  the  gate."  The  more  exclusive  Jews  made 
the  "  gate  "  to  be  as  high  and  forbidding  as  possible,  but  the  Hellenists  gloried  in 
the  tribute  paid  by  every  inquirer  to  the  spu-itual  supremacy  of  the  prophets,  and 
encouraged  them  to  study  the  Scriptures  and  to  attend  the  synagogues.  So  it  came 
that  there  was,  more  or  less  loosely,  connected  with  the  synagogues  in  almost  every 
great  centre,  a  floating  body  of  students  of  all  shades  of  opinion,  from  those  who  were 
merely  attracted  by  the  simple  and  central  principle  of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead, 
on  to  those  who  were  on  the  threshold  of  circumcision.  Among  these  it  is  strange 
if  we  cannot  find  room  for  one  to  whom  the  terms  applied  to  proselytes  are  given, 
"  devout,"  and  "  one  that  feared  God  " ;  who  gave  alms  to  Jews ;  observed  the 
Jewish  hours  of  prayer,  and  was  manifestly  familiar  with  the  Jewish  Scriptures. 
4.  The  narrative  at  once  lets  us  see  that  this  man  is  thoroughly  in  earnest.  He  is 
one  of  those  "  violent "  ones  who  take  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  by  force."  We  find 
him  spending  a  whole  day  (ver.  30)  in  fasting  and  prayer.  At  the  ninth  hour 
^3  p.m.),  the  hour  of  evening  prayer,  the  answer  comes.  He  had  heard  about  Jesus 
(ver.  37,  "Ye  know");  bis  mind,  enlightened  by  Jewish  prophecy,  and  unob- 
Bcured  by  Jewish  prejudice,  saw  neither  "stumbling-block"  nor  "  foolishness  "  in 
a  suffering  Saviour.  The  angelic  visitor  does  not  constitute  himself  the  expounder 
of  Divine  truth  ;  he  only  tells  where  such  an  expounder  may  be  found.  The  miracle 
ceases,  as  it  always  does,  at  the  earliest  possible  point.  5.  There  is  a  fitness  in  the 
Eoman  from  Caasarea  seeking  the  Jew  at  Joppa.  For  Caesarea  was  new-built  and 
heathen  ;  Joppa  from  time  immemorial  had  been  the  port  of  Jerusalem,  a  town 
Jewish  in  all  its  history  and  relations,  and  associated  with  many  of  the  most  stirring 
events  of  Jewish  history.  It  is  still  further  fitting  that  the  city  of  Jehovah  should 
linger  on,  like  the  Jewish  people,  dejected  but  not  destroyed,  whilst  that  of  Caesar 
has  ceased  to  be.  6.  But  meanwhile  a  preparatory  work  had  to  be  accomphshed  in 
the  mind  of  the  prejudiced  fisherman  of  Galilee.  It  is  impossible  for  one  who  has 
not  encountered  it  to  gauge  the  mastering  tyranny  of  religious  caste.  Our  class 
distinctions  exist  in  spite  of  religion,  under  its  mollifying  influence,  and,  when  they 
pass  beyond  certain  bounds,  under  its  ban.  But  in  caste  religion  adds  its  sanction  to 
the  distinctions,  and  stereotypes  and  stamps  them  as  Diviuely  appointed,  permanent 
and  necessary.  Caste  had  crept  into  the  Jewish  Church.  The  Jews,  instead  of 
regarding  themselves  as  Heaven's  instrumeuts  for  the  sake  of  others,  had  come  to 
plume  themselves  on  being  Heaven's  favourites  for  their  own  sake.  The  atmosphere 
of  such  a  caste  pride  is  like  a  spiritual  sirocco,  drying  up  the  moisture  of  charity, 
and  parching  into  an  unbrotherly  Pharisaism.  In  such  an  atmosphere  St.  Peter 
had  been  born  and  bred.  Then  he  and  the  other  disciples  are  called  of  Jesus 
Christ.  For  three  or  four  years  they  are  within  the  sweep  of  His  liberalising  love. 
Then  comes  Calvary,  the  Resurrection,  and  thereafter  Pentecost.  On  that  day 
Peter  expounded  the  prophecy :  "  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh."  Surely 
the  truth  has  now  entered  into  him,  and  will  never  more  leave  room  for  caste.  But 
n«I  It  is  in  him  still,  hving  and  strong,  and  He  who  "  knows  what  is  in  man" 
has  a  feeling  for  His  servant's  infirmity,  and  provides  that  special  symbolic  teaching 
which  he  needs  before  he  may  dare  to  enter  upon  the  work  whereuuto  he  is  now 
called.  7.  Thus  prepared  the  apostle  goes  with  the  messengers  of  the  centurion. 
And  now  the  two  are  face  to  face.  It  is  a  strange  meeting — the  servant  of  Christ 
and  the  soldier  of  Ccesar.  That  Cornelius  did  not  resent  or  recoil  from  such  a 
teacher  proves  at  once  how  truly  religion  had  done  its  royal  work  within  him.  Two 
men  more  opposed  as  to  race,  birth,  breeding,  and  habits,  can  scarcely  ba  conceived; 
and  it  could  not  but  be  that  there  was  much  in  the  peasant  calculated  to  rasp  the 
Patrician,  yet  the  soldier  of  Caesar  deems  it  no  dishonour  to  bow  the  knee  before 
the  legate  of  Jehovah.  8.  We  need  not  trace  the  interview  through  its  details. 
The  significant  fact — one  of  overwhelming  importance  in  the  development  of  tha 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  105 

idea  of  the  Church — is  that  Comelioa  and  his  household  are  received  as  Christians, 
not  through  the  preliminary  "gate"  of  circumcision,  but  directly  through  that  of 
baptism.  What  the  significance  of  that  fact  was  it  now  concerns  us  to  see.  The 
infant  Church  was  surrounded  by  dangers  on  all  sides  and  far  ahead.  It  had  to 
face  those  which  arose  from  the  hostility  of  the  world's  governments  and  from  the 
contact  of  Oriental  theosophies.  But  its  nearest,  and  deadliest  danger  arose  from 
the  Church  from  which  itself  sprung.  Springing  forth  from  the  bosom  of  Judaism, 
the  Christians  were,  at  the  outset,  regarded  as  a  Jewish  sect,  amenable  to  Jewish 
ecclesiastical  law  and  discipline.  They  worshipped  in  the  synagogues  and  in  the 
temple.  In  this  aspect  the  danger  was  that  the  hierarchy  might  crush  them. 
This  was  a  danger  that  could  be  measured.  But  the  Church's  friends  were  more 
to  be  feared  than  her  foes.  Those  without  might  cruelly  seek  to  destroy,  but  those 
within  conscientiously  sought  to  corrupt.  Every  Jew  was  brought  up  to  believe 
that  the  Law  was  eternal  in  its  minutest  details,  ceremonial  and  judicial.  Other 
than  Jews  might  enter  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  only  by  the  entrance  of  circum- 
cision. The  majority  of  the  Jewish  Christians  carefully  dovetailed  their  conceptions 
of  the  Messiah  into  conformity  with  this  fundamental  requirement.  The  popular 
thought  placed  the  law  first ;  and  the  Messiah  was  to  be  gloried  in  as  the  magnifier 
of  its  scope  and  the  extender  of  its  authority.  If  we  rightly  understand  this 
prejudice,  so  deeply  bedded  in  the  Jewish  mind  as  to  be  with  difficulty  dragged  out 
of  the  hearts  of  even  apostles,  we  shall  be  in  a  position  to  understand  the  danger  to 
the  Church  from  the  influx  of  Jewish  converts.  They  came  into  the  Church 
devoutly  believing  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah  ;  but  they  continued  to  believe  that,  first 
of  all,  He  was  a  Jewish  Messiab,  and  all  the  citizens  of  His  kingdom  must  first 
become  Jews.  This  was  the  position  assumed  by  an  active  and  aggressive  party — 
"they  of  the  circumcision,"  i.e.,  "  Judaizing  Christians."  The  position  taken  up 
by  the  Church  and  by  all  the  apostles,  but  most  strongly  by  St.  Paul,  was 
antagonistic  to  this.  The  law  was  but  a  pedagogue  to  lead  up  to  Christ ;  in  all 
its  ceremonial  it  was  local  and  temporary,  designed  for  a  special  purpose  of 
preparation,  which  purpose  was  accomplished  when  the  Saviour  came ;  it  was 
therefore  no  longer  required.  Here  was  the  momentous  issue,  whether  Christianity 
will  shrink  into  a  mere  Jewish  sect,  or  swell  into  the  Catholic  Church.  When  we 
consider  the  character  of  the  danger,  we  cease  to  be  surprised  that  Paul  became  a 
"  chosen  vessel"  to  bear  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  free  from  all  the  demands  of  a 
ceremonial  Judaism.  Neither  the  training  nor  the  temperament  of  St.  Peter  fitted 
him  for  the  task ;  the  cause  was  therefor^aken  out  of  his  hands.  In  those  of  St. 
Paul  it  was  safe.  But  let  us  not  forget  that  the  older  and  less  qualified  man  was 
the  instrument  selected  of  God  for  the  introduction  of  the  first  heathen  into  the 
Church.  As  was  to  be  expected  from  the  presence  of  such  a  party  as  I  have 
described,  his  action  was  promptly  challenged  at  Jerusalem.  The  defence  was  a 
simple  narrative  of  facts.  "What  was  I  that  I  should  withstand  God?"  The 
reply  was  satisfactory  to  the  Church,  and  ought  to  have  been  final  to  all.  But 
caste  dies  hard.  9.  And  so  we  have  the  noble  Roman  recognised  as  a  member  of 
the  Visible  Church.  The  baptism  did  not  make  him  a  Christian ;  it  proclaimed  a 
fact  that  already  existed.  God  owned  him  first ;  man  afterwards.  (G.  M.  Grant, 
B.D.)  Cornelius;  or,  new  departures  in  religion: — Cornelius  marks  the  begin- 

ning of  a  new  epoch.  Like  the  first  flower  of  spring  he  is  the  sign  and  herald  of  the 
new  forces  at  work  changing  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  His  history  carries  us 
to  the  final  fighting-ground  of  the  "  decisive  battle "  between  the  narrow  and 
fettering  forces  of  Judaism  and  the  cathoHc  energies  of  Christianity.  He  stands  at 
the  head  of  Gentile  Christianity,  and  is  to  Saul  of  Tarsus  what  John  the  Baptist 
was  to  Jesus  Christ.  Coming  up  out  of  the  darkness  of  heathenism,  he  bursts  upon 
the  vision  of  the  Church  like  a  flash  of  unexpected  light.  No  prophet  announces 
his  advent ;  no  visible  teacher  prepares  him  for  his  work.  He  is  outside  the 
"  churches,"  but  in  the  kingdom.  The  building  of  the  City  of  God  offers  room  for 
the  lowhest  worker  as  well  as  demands  the  man  of  transcendent  gifts.  It  welcomes 
the  inconspicuous  Ananias  of  Damascus  not  less  than  the  famous  pupil  of  Gamaliel, 
and  advances  to  its  perfection  by  the  experience  and  toil  of  Cornelius,  the  Roman 
soldier,  as  well  as  by  the  practical  wisdom  of  James,  the  chipf  pastor  of  the  Christian 
flock  in  the  holy  city.  Let  each  man,  therefore,  heed  the  light  he  now  sees,  do  the 
duty  that  is  next  him,  fill  with  unfaltering  faithfulness  his  own  sphere  in  the 
Divine  will,  and  it  is  enough.  God  orders  our  way.  If  we  know  and  do  our  own 
work  all  is  well — its  value,  its  near  or  far-off  results,  we  cannot  estimate.  In  some 
callings  men  easily  assess  their  gains,  and  take  their  true  place  in  a  graded  scale  of 


10«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  » 

workers.  We  cannot.  They  know  what  they  earn.  We  never  do.  Gold  is  easily 
counted ;  but  where  is  the  ledger  account  of  new  ideas  disseminated,  of  spiritual 
renewals  awomplished,  of  human  justice  and  right  established,  of  souls  made  true, 
and  peaceful,  and  strong  ?  Saul,  unlikeliest  of  all  the  Jews  to  human  seeming,  will 
take  up  and  advance  the  labours  of  the  martyred  Stephen ;  and  Cornelius,  unlikelier 
Btill,  for  he  is  not  a  Jew,  will  make  the  crooked  straight  and  the  rough  places  plain 
for  the  advent  and  ministry  of  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  I.  Approaching  in  this 
spirit  of  trust  and  hope  and  ardour,  the  study  of  Cornelius,  as  he  appears  in  Luke's 
history,  revealing  the  methods  and  movements  of  God  in  securing  new  departures 
in  religion,  we  note  first  that  Cobnelius  gathees  into  himself  in  co-operatino 
FULNESS  the  CHIEF  PBOviDENTiAL  FORCES  OP  THE  AGE,  and  80  becomes  the  fitting 
instrument  for  incarnating  and  manifesting  the  remedial  energy  and  wide  range  of 
the  religion  of  the  Saviour.  The  historian  compels  us  to  see  that  Cornelius  is  a 
Roman.  The  whole  atmosphere  is  Eomanl  How,  then,  could  he  whose  chief 
business  it  was  to  trace  in  his  two  Gospels  the  gradual  growth  of  Christian  work  from 
Nazareth  to  Rome,  pass  by  this  first  Christian  Roman  of  them  all,  as  he  is  led  into 
the  clear  radiance  of  "  the  light  of  the  world."  Cornehus  was  not  a  proselyte.  He 
is  still  within  the  circle  of  alienated  heathendom,  and  yet  by  one  step  he  passes 
into  the  school  of  Christ,  and  enters  into  living  relations  with  Him,  without  being 
detained  for  a  moment  or  a  lesson  in  the  training  school  of  Moses.  It  is  this 
which  marks  the  crisis.  Herein  is  the  revolution.  The  germ  of  the  Christian 
religion  is  planted  in  this  uncircumcised,  uninitiated  Gentile,  finds  in  his  devout 
yearnings  for  God,  loyalty  to  Christ,  generous  love  of  the  needy,  and  beautiful 
largeness  of  soul,  the  appropriate  conditions  for  rapid  and  sure  development,  and 
forthwith  gives  incontrovertible  signs  that  though  the  planting  may  be  Peter's,  yet 
the  increase  belongs  first  to  the  germ  itself,  and  has  been  secured,  in  the  Divinely- 
prepared  soil,  by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Religious  particularism  is  in 
Him  exposed,  condemned,  and  cast  out  for  evermore.  God's  great  ♦'  universalities 
of  love,  provision,  and  ministry  to  souls"  are  manifest;  Christianity  has  a  new 
starting-point,  and  henceforth  pursues  a  new  line  of  progress.  As  a  river  it  had 
entered  into  human  history  in  Nazareth  and  Jerusalem,  and  had  made  its  channels 
deep  and  wide ;  here  in  Caesarea,  at  the  borders  of  the  non-elect  world,  it  starts 
along  a  new  course,  cuts  for  itself  wider  and  deeper  chaimels,  and  makes  everything 
to  live  whithersoever  it  comes.  So  the  Judaism  in  which  Christianity  was  born  is 
left  behind,  and  that  transference  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  to  the  Latin  world,  by 
which  it  was  to  work  as  a  regenerating  leaven  in  the  European  races,  is  commenced. 
In  Cornelius  the  centurion,  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God  makes  its 
auspicious  start  for  the  Great  West.  Now  this,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  the  first 
proof  of  the  realisation  of  the  world-purpose  of  God  in  the  gift  of  revelation. 
"  The  universe,"  as  Renan  has  said,  *'  is  incessantly  in  the  pain  of  transformation," 
and  goes  towards  its  end  with  what  he  calls  "  a  sure  instinct,"  but  with  what  we 
beheve  to  be  a  Divinely-redeeming  impulse ;  that  end  being  the  salvation  of  all  men 
through  a  universal  religion.  The  first  fathers  of  the  Hebrew  faith  caught  a 
glimpse  of  that  world-embracing  aim,  and  the  exile  of  Israel  in  Babylon  lifted  it  on 
high,  brought  it  into  the  life  of  the  people,  so  cleansing  their  conceptions  of  God 
and  man,  and  preparing  them  for  their  world-wide  mission.  Then  the  victories  of 
Alexander  the  Great  brought  in  their  train  the  diffusion  of  the  Greek  language, 
Greek  thought,  and  Greek  culture,  throughout  the  world.  To  these  beneficent 
ministries  were  added  the  discovery  of  new  routes  to  the  East,  the  development  of 
traffic,  and  the  commingling  of  the  different  races  of  men;  all  to  be  perfected  and 
crowned  by  the  ascent  to  the  summit  of  power  of  Roman  Imperialism,  and  the 
shaping  of  the  nations  into  that  one  political  federation  which  became  the  basis  for 
that  universal  civilisation  which  was  the  material  condition  for  the  reception  and 
dissemination  of  a  really  universal  religion.  But  for  us,  hving  in  the  midst  of 
dreaded  religious  changes,  the  biography  of  Cornelius  is  not  only  an  argument,  but 
also  a  message  of  peace  and  hope.  It  bids  us  trust  in  the  living  God — the  God  who 
is  a  consuming  fire,  but  whose  fires  only  burn  up  the  waste  materials  of  old 
religions  to  make  room  for  the  building  of  the  new  and  better  edifice.  The  king- 
dom of  truth  and  of  redemption  is  His.  He  rules  it,  and  all  new  departures  in 
religion  are  under  His  sway.  He  prepares  for  its  advances  by  processes  out  of 
sight,  continues  the  succession  of  heroic  souls,  who  free  us  from  the  tyranny  of 
dead  dogmas ;  who  gather  up  the  results  of  His  manifold  working  in  all  the  depart- 
ments of  life,  scientific  and  social,  political  and  religious,  and  who  then,  vitalising 
and  unifying  them  all  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  Jesus,  lead  the  life  of  the  world  to 


CHAP.  X.]  TEE  ACTS.  107 

higlier  and  heavenlier  places.  Lessing  says  :  ••  The  palace  of  Theology  may  seem  tc 
be  in  danger  through  the  fire  in  its  windows,  but  when  we  arrive  and  study  the 
phenomenon  we  find  it  is  but  the  after-glow  from  the  west  wL^ch  is  shining  on  the 
panes,  really  endangering  nothing,  but  yet  for  a  moment  or  two  attracting  all." 
Let  us  not  fear.  The  God  of  CorneUus  is  the  Father  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
Saviour  of  all  men.  11.  Advancing  to  a  further  point  in  the  record,  it  appears  that 
God  perfects  the  spirituaij  education  of  Peter  by  Cornelius  ;  in  short,  He 
fiuishes  the  work  that  was  commenced  on  and  in  the  chief  apostle  by  John  the 
Baptist  and  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  agency  of  a  saint  of  paganism.  Peter  was  a  dull 
scholar,  and  required  to  be  converted  a  good  many  times.  It  was  a  hard  task  to 
surrender  his  Jewish  exclusiveness.  All  his  traditions  and  preferences  were  against 
the  sacrifice.  He  could  not  see  the  bearing,  and  did  not  admit  the  far-reaching 
applications  of  the  truths  he  proclaimed.  Thus  the  soldier  comes  to  the  aid  of  the 
seer.  So  the  saint  of  heathendom  goads  into  bold  and  aggressive  action  the 
disciple  of  Jesus  Christ.  Christianity  advances  through  vision  and  service  ;  through 
prophets  on  the  heights  of  meditation  and  warriors  confronted  with  crowds  of  foes 
in  the  valleys  of  evU.  Some  men  require  arousal.  They  see,  but  they  stand  still; 
they  know,  but  they  will  not  do.  They  linger  shivering  on  the  brink,  waiting  for 
the  leadership  of  a  more  venturesome  spirit.  We  need  one  another.  Tiie  men  of 
intelligence  require  the  men  of  action  ;  the  press  cannot  dispense  with  the  pulpit, 
nor  the  pulpit  with  the  press:  even  apostles  may  learn  from  the  humblest  in- 
quirers.  The  Reformation,  prepared  by  Erasmus  and  the  Humanists,  waits  lor 
the  moral  fervour  and  splendid  courage  of  Martin  Luther.  Peter,  leader  and 
apostle  though  he  was,  owes  an  unspeakable  debt  to  the  God-trained  soldier  of 
Cffisarea.  III.  Truth,  like  a  torch,  the  more  it  is  shook  it  shines.  The  new 
light  in  the  house  of  Cornelius  sends  out  its  radiance  to  Jerusalem,  arresting  the 
attention  and  arousing  the  opposition  of  the  fathers  and  brethren  of  the  new 
Christian  society.  Peter  appeared  before  the  Church  and  told  his  simple  tale. 
The  appeal  was  victorious.  God  was  understood  and  glorified,  and  the  verdict  was 
given  by  the  Church  with  heartiness  and  praise,  saying,  "  Then  to  the  Gentiles  also 
Lath  God  granted  repentance  unto  life."  Is  not  that  the  way  God  is  working 
amongst  us  to-day?  Is  He  not  preparing  a  glorious  future  for  the  Churches  by  tbe 
work  and  experience  of  individuals  here  and  there,  in  and  out,  of  the  Churchfs? 
Cornelius  is  a  religious  reformer.  God  puts  into  his  experience  tlie  truths  of  His 
Gospels  in  th^ir  widest  range,  and  thereby  they  are  built  into,  and  operate  as  part 
of,  the  working  energies  of  the  Christian  system.  The  centurion  himself,  in  the 
fulness  of  his  spiritual  gifts  and  achievements,  demonstrates  that  God  is  not  a 
respecter  of  persons  and  races,  but  of  aims  and  faiths,  of  yearnings  and  character. 
The  unit  of  the  Christian  theology  is  a  Christian  man ;  a  man  who  has  come  to 
Jesus  Christ  as  he  was,  with  all  God  has  done  in  him  and  for  him,  with  all  he  has 
acquired,  in  intellect  and  character,  at  home  and  in  contact  with  men ;  and  has 
come  through  Jesus  Christ  to  the  possession  of  the  ideas,  motives,  aud  powers  of 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  is  by  that  Spirit  made  a  new  man.  I  adopt  the  language  of 
Milton  :  "Now  once  again  by  all  concurrence  of  signs,  and  by  the  general  instinct 
of  holy  and  devout  men,  God  is  decreeing  some  new  and  great  period  in  this 
Church,  even  to  the  reforming  of  the  Reformation  itself."  Let  us  be  hopeful  and 
patient.  No  knowledge  can  be  a  menace  to  the  truth  of  Christ  Jesus.  It  must 
glorify  Him.  The  wise  men  will  bring  their  gifts  and  lay  them  at  the  feet  of  Christ. 
A  new  Cornehus — now  outside  the  Churches  not  unlikely — will  God  give  to  His 
children  who,  himself  freighted  with  the  rich  results  of  the  intellectual,  social,  and 
spiritual  activity  of  the  century,  will  force  us  into  the  presence  of  God,  to  hear 
what  He  Himself  has  commanded  His  Peters  to  say  to  us :  and  He  will  follow  the 
preaching  with  such  signs  of  salvation  and  power,  that  the  Churches  will  gratefully 
say :  "  Then  hath  God  granted  unto  the  learned  and  scientific,  and  to  the  social 
outcast  also  repentance  unto  life."  IV.  Finally,  the  portrait  of  Cornelius,  tog-ther 
with  the  glimpses  we  obtain  of  Peter,  reveals  the  men  in  whom  God  prefkrably 

WORKS    FOR    the    TRUEST   SPIRITUAL   PROGRESS    OF    MEN.        1.    ComeliuS    is    a    "  deVOUt 

man."  He  cultivates  communion  with  God.  Strong  impulses  urge  him  towards 
the  higher  significance  of  life,  prepare  his  sp'rit  for  visions  of  the  unseen  world, 
and  open  his  soul  for  the  larger  faith  he  avers,  and  the  sublime  inspirations  he 
receives.  2,  With  this  intense  spiritual  yearning  he  blends  a  wise  management  of 
his  house,  as  if  himsflf  consciously  under  God's  authority,  and  responsible  for  the 
well-being  of  those  under  him,  so  tint  some  of  his  soldiers  catch  the  infection  of 
his  devoutness,  and  hie  domestics  share  his  solitude  to  hear  God's  messenger.    3.  In 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  l. 

him  also  is  seen  the  Boman  love  of  rectitude  and  fair  dealing.  He  is  a  "  just 
man."  4.  He  has  not  taken  advantage  of  his  place  to  plunder,  as  too  many  others 
did.  But  he  gave  much  alms  to  the  people.  His  social  sympathies  were  as  strong 
as  his  religious.  You  cannot  hope  to  take  any  helpful  part  in  hastening  the  arrival 
of  an  era  of  purified  and  enlarged  thought  of  God,  of  intenser  love  of  God  and  men, 
of  spiritual  quickening  and  social  regeneration,  unless,  conscious  of  your  weakness 
and  sin,  you  make  it  your  business,  whilst  believing  in  Him  "  who  is  the  propitia- 
tion for  our  sins,"  to  walk  in  the  Ught  as  He  is  in  the  light,  and  so  to  have  fellow- 
ship with  men  and  experience  that  continuous  "  cleansing  from  all  sin  "  which  is 
the  pledge  and  guarantee  of  Divine  adequacy  for  faithful  and  fruitful  work.  (J. 
Clifford,  D.D.)  Cornelius,  an  exavijyle  of  piety : — Here  is  one  man  who  is  a 
truth-seeker,  and  there  is  another  who  is  a  truth-teacher.  One  has  what  the  other 
needs ;  but  they  are  unknown  to  each  other,  and  separated  by  a  great  chasm.  How 
can  they  be  brought  together?  God  commissions  an  angel  to  appear  to  Cornelius, 
and  to  tell  him  to  send  Peter.  God  appears  to  Peter,  and  shows  him  that  "  nothing 
that  He  has  made  is  common  or  unclean."  The  scholar  and  the  teacher  are  soon 
face  to  face  ;  and  then,  "while  Peter  spake,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  those  who  heard 
the  word."  This  incident  shows  that  every  step  in  the  work  of  conversion  is 
known  and  arranged  by  God.  The  text  affords  a  beautiful  illustration  of — I. 
Personal  piety.  "Cornelius  was  a  devout  man,  and  one  that  feared  God,"  A 
devout  matt  how  is  one  that  is  devoted  to  the  service  and  worship  of  God.  This 
word  seems  originally,  howeverTTo  have  had  the  meaning  of  thoughtful,  serious, 
and  reverently  inclined.  Cornelius  had  not  found  ♦'  the  pearl  of  great  price,"  the 
"  one  thing  needful,"  but  he  was  an  earnest  seeker,  prayerful,  and,  according  to 
his  light,  sincerely  pious.  The  "Word  of  God — 1.  Points  out  the  necessity  of 
personal  piety.  It  affirms  first  that  "  we  have  all  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the 
glory  of  God " ;  and  then,  "  that  without  holiness,  no  man  can  see  the  Lord." 
Jesus  said,  "Except  ye  be  converted,"  &c.  2.  Explains  the  nature  of  personal 
piety — a  change  of  heart  that  leads  to  a  change  of  life.  Godhness  is  Godlikeness — 
in  thought,  and  spirit,  and  Ufe  :  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature," 
&c.  It  is  possible  to  observe  the  outward  forms  of  religion  without  experiencing 
its  saving  power,  and  to  have  a  name  to  live,  but  to  be  dead.  Knowledge,  liberahty, 
morality,  prayer,  cannot  save  us.  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see 
the  kingdom  of  God."  II.  Domestic  piety.  "  With  all  his  house."  We  are  not  told 
how  many  members  it  contained,  nor  whether  they  were  old  or  young  ;  but  we  are 
told  that  they  feared  God.  Cornelius  not  only  renounced  idolatry  himself,  but  he 
taught  his  children  to  renounce  it.  If  we  want  our  children  to  give  themselves  to 
Christ,  we  must  lead  the  way.  Example  is  better  than  precept.  Domestic  piety 
adds  very  much — 1.  To  the  general  comfort  of  the  family  circle.  In  the  most 
orderly  households  there  may  be  much  to  disturb  the  peace  and  try  the  temper,  but 
where  the  home  atmosphere  is  pervaded  by  a  devout  spirit,  there  will  be  a  kindliness 
of  speech  and  a  tenderness  of  spirit  that  will  lighten  the  burdens  of  life.  2.  To  the 
spiritual  welfare  of  the  family  circle.  The  "curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the  house  of 
the  wicked  ";  but  "  the  Lord  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just."  The  poor  man 
may  not  enjoy  the  dainties  that  are  found  on  the  rich  man's  table,  or  the  pictures  that 
adorn  his  walls ;  but  "  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  it  maketh  rich,  and  addeth  no 
sorrow  thereto."  Are  we  not  more  anxious  about  the  mental  culture  and  the  social 
status  of  our  children  than  about  their  spiritual  growth  ?  Do  not  our  prayers  pull 
oneway  and  our  lives  another?  III.  Practical  piety.  "Who  gave  much  alms 
to  the  people,  and  prayed  to  God  alway."  It  is  not  every  servant  that  has  a  good 
word  for  his  master.  If  there  be  any  defect  in  a  man's  character,  no  one  can  detect 
it  sooner  than  his  servant.  But  Cornelius's  servant  says,  "  His  master  is  a  just 
man,  and  one  that  feareth  God,  and  of  good  report  among  all  the  nations  of  the 
Jews."  1.  True  piety  manifests  itself — (1)  In  generous  deeds.  This  was  not  a 
speaking,  but  a  shining  religion.  He  sounded  no  trumpet,  but  his  light  streamed 
forth,  like  the  light  from  a  lighthouse,  far  over  the  troubled  sea  of  life.  True  piety 
must  report  itself.  Benevolence  is  one  of  the  natural  fruits  of  piety.  "  Pure  religion 
and  undefiled  before  God,"  <fec.  (2)  In  a  prayerful  spirit.  This  combination  is  very 
beautiful.  Work  and  worship ;  profession  and  practice  ;  grace  and  generosity. 
{J.  T.  Woodhmise.)  The  cliaracter  of  Cornelius,  the  first  Gentile  convert  to  the 

faith  of  Chritt  : — Although  it  seemed  good  to  Almighty  God,  under  the  old 
dispensation,  to  separate  for  Himself  a  peculiar  people,  and  to  make  Himself 
known  to  them  in  a  wonderful  manner,  He  gave  frequent  intimations  that  thia 
knowledge  should,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  be  extended  to  the  GentUes  also.    In  this 


CHAF.x.]  THE  ACTS.  109 

incident,  in  the  conversion  of  Cornelius,  we  behold  the  rise  of  that  mighty 
stream  which  has  poured  its  healing  waters  over  so  large  a  portion  of  the  civilised 
world,  fulfilMng  in  its  course  the  prediction  of  the  evangelical  prophet:  "The 
people  that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light :  they  that  dwell  in  the  land 
of  the  shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the  light  shined  "  (Isa.  ix.  2).  I.  The 
CHABACXEB  OF  CoBNELTDS.  He  is  introduced  in  the  text  as  a  Roman  soldier,  a 
centurion,  an  officer  of  considerable  rank  and  distinction,  in  the  cohort  or  regiment 
called  the  Italian  band,  quartered  at  Caesarea.  He  had  been  a  heathen,  but  by  the 
grace  of  God  had  been  delivered  from  the  vain  and  idolatrous  worship  of  the  gods 
of  his  own  country  to  serve  the  true  and  living  God,  How,  or  in  what  way,  this 
change  had  been  effected,  we  know  not  with  any  certainty.  It  is  not  improbable 
that,  in  consequence  of  bis  residence  in  Judaea,  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament 
had  fallen  in  his  way,  and  he  had  been  led  to  study  them  in  an  unprejudiced  and 
teachable  spirit,  and  had  become  convinced  that  the  gods  of  the  heathen  were  no 
gods,  and  that  the  God  of  Israel  He  was  the  true  and  only  God.  He  is  introduced 
to  us  as  "one  that  feared  God  with  aU  his  house."  And  such  must  ever  be  the 
result  of  an  honest  fear  or  reverence  of  God,  drawn  from  the  Word  of  God,  and 
wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  It  is  the  "beginning  of  wisdom":  it  works  in  the 
mind  of  the  individual  to  produce  conviction.  But  conviction  once  produced,  it  stops 
not  with  the  individual ;  it  moves  him  to  exert  his  influence  for  the  benefit  of  others, 
and  especially  of  those  of  his  own  household ;  and,  if  we  are  right  in  our  conjecture 
that  it  was  from  the  Holy  Senptures  that  the  centurion  had  become  acquainted  with 
Israel's  God,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  these  same  Scriptures  would  be  employed 
by  him  as  the  means  of  instructing  those  about  him.  If  you,  like  Cornehus, 
fear  God,  are  you  not  afraid  to  neglect  His  "Word?  Let  me  urge  it  upon  you  to 
assemble  your  children  and  the  members  of  your  house  once  at  least  on  every  day, 
and  read  aloud  some  portion  of  that  blessed  Book,  and  then  conclude  with  a  few 
words  of  supplication.  But  it  is  stated  of  Cornehus,  whose  conduct  suggests  to  us 
these  remarks,  that  he  "  prayed  to  God  alway."  It  may  be,  that  whilst  I  have  been 
urging  on  you  once  at  least  each  day  to  gather  your  famihes  together  for  a  few 
minutes  to  read  the  Word  of  Life,  you  have  been  finding  out  excuses  in  your 
manifold  engagements,  and  saying  within  yourselves,  "  It  is  impossible,  it  is  utterly 
impossible :  at  such  an  hour  I  have  to  be  at  such  a  place,  and  at  such  and  such  a 
time  to  do  such  and  such  things:  it  is  quite  impossible."  Listen  to  me,  if  it  be 
really  and  truly  impossible,  God  may  possibly  accept  the  excuses  you  have  been 
framing.  But  here  the  question  naturally  arises,  Had  Cornehus,  concerning  whom 
it  is  recorded  that  "  he  prayed  to  God  alway,"  no  engagements  ?  Had  he,  a  Roman 
soldier,  appointed  to  command  at  least  a  hundred  men,  and  to  communicate  con- 
tinually with  the  authorities  at  Rome  concerning  the  conduct  of  the  refractory  Jews, 
at  this  time  subjects  to  the  emperor  his  master,  had  he  nothing  to  do  ?  Might  he 
not  easily  have  found  excuses  ?  But  how,  it  may  be  inquired,  could  he,  if  thus  f uUy 
occupied,  how  could  he  possibly  pray  to  God  alway?  Listen  to  me  whilst  I 
endeavour  to  supply  the  answer.  He  feared  God,  felt  reverently  and  gratefully  His 
mercy  in  making  Himself  known  to  him  ;  and  he  was  afraid  lest,  if  left  an  mstant 
to  himself,  he  might,  at  some  time  or  other,  relapse  into  his  former  state  of  idolatry 
and  heathenism  ;  and  it  was  his  aim,  therefore,  to  live  in  a  constant  spirit  of  prayer, 
BO  that  the  fire  might  ever  be  burning  on  the  altar  of  his  heart :  his  very  duties 
were  so  performed,  and  his  mind  so  carefully  regulated  by  continual  meditation 
upon  and  intercourse  with  his  heavenly  Friend,  that  it  was  no  exaggeration  to  say 
of  him,  "He  prayed  to  God  always."  Cornelius  was  a  soldier — a  profession, 
generally  but  too  hastily,  supposed  unfavourable  to  the  growth  of  grace  in  the 
heart.  Undoubtedly  some  callings  seem,  from  their  very  nature,  to  afford  larger 
opportunities  of  the  means  of  grace  and  association  with  God's  dear  children  than 
do  others:  but  I  should  say,  in  general,  that  the  state  of  all  others  the  most 
unfavourable  to  vital  godliness  is  a  state  of  idleness  and  inactivity.  God  appoints 
us  duties  ;  and  it  is,  I  am  thankful  to  be  enabled  to  state  from  extensive  personal 
experience  and  observation,  quite  possible  dihgently  to  attend  to  them,  and  yet 
eedulously  to  cultivate  the  paramount  interests  of  the  immortal  soul ;  nay,  more, 
BO  to  perform  things  temporal  that  they  may  minister  to  the  attainment  of  things 
eternal.  In  this  view  of  the  subject,  let  us  stay  a  moment  to  see  what  the  profession 
of  Cornelius  would  teach  him.  First,  then,  his  profession  would  teach  one  who 
prayed  to  God  alway,  faithfulness  to  his  earthly  sovereign,  who  had  committed  to 
him  the  overseership  of  that  portion  of  the  Roman  empire  ;  and  thus  such  a  one 
would  be  reminded  of  the  fidehty  and  integrity  which   be  owed  to  his  heavenly 


lie  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

Master,  to  his  own  soul,  and  to  the  interests  of  those  who  formed  his  household. 
Next,  his  profession,  the  very  life  of  which  is  vigilance,  would  suggest  the  need 
there  is  of  continual  watchfulness,  lest  "  the  adversary,  who  goeth  about  seeking 
whom  he  may  devour,"  "  should  obtain  an  advantage  over  him."  I  wiU  mention 
only  one  other  lesson  which  he  would  learn,  referred  to  in  pointed  terms  by  the 
apostle  in  2  Tim.  ii.  4  :  "  No  man  that  warreth  entangleth  himself  with  the  affairs 
of  this  life ;  that  he  may  please  him  who  hath  called  him  to  be  a  soldier."  To  sit 
loosely  by  all  earthly  matters.  I  might  pursue  the  thought :  and  if  you  were  each  to 
tell  me  what  are  the  occupations  to  which  God  has  called  you — whether  you  be  one  to 
whom  God  has  committed  the  responsibility  of  wealth  and  influence ;  whether  you 
be  lawyer,  physician,  student,  man  of  business,  mechanic,  handmaid,  or  domestic 
servant — it  would  not  be  difficult  to  make  out  before  you  how  each  particular  depart- 
ment of  your  earthly  caUing  might  be  made  subservient  to  the  growth  of  some 
spiritual  grace,  and  to  suggest  the  exercise  of  that  blessed  state  of  mind  which 
possessed  Cornelius,  who  "  prayed  to  God  alway."  But  the  Boman  soldier  did  not 
restrict  himself  to  his  privilege  of  prayer  ;  neither  was  he  watchful  only,  as  became 
him.  We  are  therefore  in  no  respect  surprised  to  find  it  written  of  him  that  he 
"  gave  much  alms."  He  discovered  a  liberal  disposition  in  relieving  the  distresses 
of  the  poor,  as  well  as  a  peculiar  fervour  of  mind  towards  God  by  the  constancy 
and  devoutness  of  his  prayers.  His  benevolence  and  his  piety  were  intimately 
connected,  and  they  reflected  a  lustre  upon  each  other.  They  who  are  always 
asking,  and  as  constantly  receiving,  will  not  fail  to  be  continually  communicating. 
Other  particulars  are  recorded  of  this  most  exemplary  soldier  which  I  can  only 
cursorily  glance  at.  In  the  thirtieth  verse  we  read  that  it  was  "  while  fasting  " 
tliat  the  "man  in  bright  clothing  stood  before  him";  in  the  twenty-second  verse 
that  he  was  a  just  man,  and  "  of  good  report  among  all  the  nation  of  the  Jews  " ; 
and  this  notwithstanding  the  hatred  which  they  entertained  towards  the  Eomans, 
whose  servant  Cornelius  was  ;  so  justly  had  he  conducted  himself,  so  '*  unspotted 
had  he  kept  himself  from  the  world,"  that  God  had  given  him  favour  in  their  sight, 
and  he  was  well  reported  of  "  amongst  all  the  nation  of  the  Jews."  How  lovely  and 
consistent  is  his  character  in  the  view  of  man  1  There  is  not  a  shade  upon  it  to 
dim  its  lustre.     U.  The  reasons  wherefore  he  was  selected  from  the  heathen 

WORLD  AS  THE  FIRST   CONVERT  TO    THE    FAITH  OF  A  CRUCIFIED    BeDEEMER.       SomC  have 

thought  it  ' '  vain  for  us  to  seek  the  reason  wherefore  he  obtained  this  honourable 
preference,"  and  have  contented  themselves  with  the  reflection  that  ♦ '  God 
distributes  His  favours  as  He  pleases."  This  is  indeed  true:  "He  giveth  not 
account  of  any  of  His  matters "  (Job  xxxiii.  13)  ;  but  I  think  a  reason  may 
be  gathered  from  the  history  itself,  viz.,  that  *'  such  was  his  amiable  character 
before  his  extraordinary  call,  that  he  seemed  less  likely  than  many  others  to 
offend  the  prejudices  of  the  Jews."  I  do  not  think  this  enough.  I  think  the 
facts  of  the  case  supply  a  more  probable  and  instructive  reason.  Something  more 
was  needed  in  the  counsels  of  Jehovah  than  this  bright  and  lengthened  catalogue  of 
gifts  and  graces.  What  1  shall  the  man  who  is  exemplifying  in  his  daily  walk  and 
conversation  an  amount  of  excellence  so  near  perfection  that  there  is,  perhaps,  no 
merely  human  character  in  the  New  Testament  which  surpasses  it — does  he  need  to 
be  "  told  words  whereby  he  and  all  his  house  may  be  saved  "  ?  and  shall  there  be 
no  salvation  for  them  without  ?  It  is  even  so.  The  Word  which  states  the  need 
informs  us  what  it  was  which  Cornehus  needed,  and  which  all  have  need  to  know 
as  well  as  he.  You  wiU  find  it  in  the  discourse  addressed  by  Peter  to  Cornelius, 
and  "  his  near  kinsmen  and  near  friends,"  whom  his  piety  had  called  together  upon 
the  occasion.  Speaking  to  them  of  "Jesus  of  Nazareth" — of  Him  "  whom  God 
anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power  " — the  apostle  says,  at  the  forty-third 
verse  of  the  chapter  whence  our  text  is  taken,  "To  Him  give  all  the  prophets 
witness,  that  through  His  name  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  receive  remission 
of  sins."  These  were  the  words  whereby  he  and  all  his  house  were  to  be  saved: 
these  were  the  "  things  "  which  "  God  "  had  "commanded  "  to  be  "  heard."  These 
were  the  fundamentals  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  HI.  We  must  at  this  point 
seek  to  gather  up  from  the  entire  subject  some  practical  instruction,  which  may, 
by  the  gracious  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  fell  on  all  who  heard  the  apostle's 
word,  be  blessed  to  us.  And  first,  let  those  who,  hke  Cornelius,  are  just,  devout, 
prayerful,  liberal,  self-denying,  and  of  good  report  among  the  people,  let  them  know 
assuredly  that  they  are  sinners  as  Cornelius  was,  and  have  need  to  learn,  if  they 
have  not  yet  learned,  "  words  whereby  they  must  be  saved."  All  their  virtues  are 
inadequate  to  the  blotting  out  one  single  sin.    It  must  be  oonfessed  that  the  case 


•HAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  Ill 

of  the  Eoman  soldier,  whose  character  we  have  been  considering,  is  a  very  strong 
one ;  but  if  the  view  which  I  have  taken  of  it  be  correct,  it  would  seem  to  have  been 
selected  in  order  to  lay  the  axe  to  the  root  of  all  self-righteousness,  of  all  regard  to 
and  dependence  upon  works  as  the  ground  of  men's  acceptance  before  God.  But 
are  there  none,  on  the  other  hand,  who  profess  to  have  laid  hold  upon  Christ,  to 
believe  on  Him,  to  depend  on  Him  alone,  who  reject  the  merit  of  good  works ;  are 
there  none  of  these  who  are  yet  neghgent  to  "  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  their 
Saviour  in  all  things,"  in  their  tempers,  in  their  moderation,  in  their  freedom  from 
selfishness?  who  possess  but  little  of  the  energy  and  benevolence,  the  charitable, 
prayerful,  estimable  spirit  of  Cornelius?  If  such  there  are  among  ourselves,  let 
them,  let  all  of  us,  be  stirred  up  by  the  example  of  the  Eoman  convert  to  greater 
faithfulness  and  watchfulness  and  diligence  and  love.  {G.  Spence,  D.C.L.) 
Cornelius,  a  monument  of  the  omnipotence  of  grace : — A  Gentile,  a  Eoman,  a  soldier, 
a  centurion  :  all  barriers,  one  would  think,  to  Divine  grace  ;  but  it  goes  through  them 
all.  {K.  Gerok.)  Cornelius  the  truth-seeker : — I.  The  sceiptubal  pokteaituke  of 
HIS  CHAEACTEB.  1.  He  was  devout ;  he  reverenced  the  Supreme  Being.  This  he 
might  do  as  a  sincere  pagan  TTtWil  in  this  the  pious  heathen  of  all  lands  may  put  to 
the  blush  the  irreligious  man  in  Christian  lands.  2.  He  was  God-fearing.  His 
character  was  not  built  upon  any  mere  materialistic  philosophy  that  makes  all 
virtue  spring  from  self-interest.  3.  His  influence  was  felt  throughout  his  household. 
A  man's  religion  that  does  not  affect  his  family  is  a  very  weak,  sentimental~thrng, 
not  worth  the  having.  The  religion  of  Cornelius  made  his  very  soldiers  devout.  4. 
In  him  there  was  a  happy  blending  of  subjective  piety  and  of  objective  goodness. 
(1)  He  "  prayed  " — not  merely  the  instinctive  prayer  of  nature,  nor  the  sentimental 
prayer  of1!he"Traturalist.  His  was  the  intelligent  cry  of  a  personal  soul  to  a  personal 
God.  And  that  not  in  some  moment  of  distress,  as  does  the  terrified  atheist  whose 
fear  overmasters  his  creed ;  but  "  always  " — habitually.  Herein  does  Cornelius 
robuke  the  prayerless  man.  (2)  He  * '^gave  much  alms" — not  to  his  own  kindred 
and  friends  alone,  the  limit  of  many  a  man's  benevolence,  but  to  the  despised  Jews. 
There  are  many  whose  religion  is  all  breath  and  no  bread.  The  prayer  of  faith  and 
the  gift  of  love,  like  the  two  wings  of  a  bird,  bear  the  heart's  burden  up  to  the  bosom 
of  the  Infinite,  and  come  back  again  like  a  white  dove  of  peace,  with  a  new  blessing 
and  a  Divine  strength.  The  alms  of  Cornelius  had  no  merit  in  themselves  ;  but,  as 
an  index  of  the  heart's  longing  and  aim,  they  were  acceptable  to  God.  5.  He  was 
eincere — a  word  signifying  without  wax,  and  originaUy  applied  to  pure  honey. 
Applied  to  man  it  indicates  the  pure  honey  of  honest  desire  and  purpose  without 
the  wax  of  self-deception,  prejudice,  or  pride.  God  loves  a  true,  sincere  man, 
though  his  head  be  enveloped  in  clouds  of  error  and  of  doubt.  6.  He  was  an  honest 
seeker  after  truth.  Paganism  had  not  satisfied  him  ;  he  wandered  through  the 
halls  of  philosophers,  but  the  vision  of  truth  came  not  to  his  weary  eyes.  With 
yearning  of  heart  he  had  fled  to  Judaism,  and  in  its  clearer  vision  of  God  he  had 
rejoiced  ;  but  even  there  he  had  not  rested,  for  he  felt  that  the  revelation  was  not 
full.  So  he  waited  and  longed  for  the  completed  vision  as  travellers  on  the  mountains 
watch  and  wait  for  the  rising  of  the  sun.  7.  He  was  susceptible  and  receptive.  There  is 
many  a  man,  dissatisfied  with  old  formulas  and  dogmas,  calling  himself  truth-seeker 
and  progressionist,  who  yet  has  in  his  heart  no  open  door  for  truth.  There  are  many, 
like  Pilate,  whose  intellects  cry,  "  What  is  truth?  "  but  whose  souls  have  no  eye  to  per- 
ceive it,  and  no  welcome  for  it.  Cornelias  cried  for  it,  hailed  it,  and  was  therefore  led  on 
by  the  angel  into  the  fair  kingdom  of  truth,  down  to  its  deepest  mysteries,  up  to  its 
gleaming  heights.  II.  God's  dealings  with  him.  1.  Cornelius  was  praying  when  he 
saw  an  angel,  who  said,  "  Cornelius,  thy  prayers  and  thine  alms,"  &c.  This  was  God's 
response  to  the  prayer  of  that  devout,  sincere  thinker,  and  everywhere  God  seeks 
the  soul  that  seeks  Him.  2,  But  the  angel  does  not  preach  the  gospel  to  Cornelius. 
No  angel  ever  preached  Christ  since  that  first  announcement  of  His  advent.  Man 
preaches  to  his  brother  man — the  sinner  saved,  to  the  sinner  lost.  To  Peter  shall 
be  given  the  distinguished  honour  of  gathering  in  this  first  Gentile  fruit  to  the 
Christian  Church.  But  even  he  is  not  prepared  for  so  great  a  mission,  and  it 
required  a  miracle  to  induce  him  to  open  the  door  for  Gentiles  to  come  in.  Preju- 
dice is  an  evil  spirit  not  easily  cast  out  of  the  human  mind.  Hardly  yet  is  the 
entire  Church  free  from  its  pernicious  influence.  Are  there  not  high  walls  surround- 
ing sections  of  the  Church  to-day,  outside  of  which  there  is  believed  to  be  no  salva- 
tion? Each  in  his  own  way  the  radical,  the  sceptic,  the  free-religionist,  and  the 
agnostic  is  alike  the  bigoted  slave  of  prejudice.  Let  us  heed  this  Divine  rebuke  of 
all  unscriptural  distinctions  in  Christ's  kingdom.    What  is  their  basis?    Wealth, 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  », 

social  poBition,  colour,  and  nameless  other  foolish  dividing  lines.     3.  While  Peter 
hesitated,  the  messengers  from  Cornelius  arrived,  and  Peter  returned  with  them, 
yielded  to  the  heavenly  teaching,  declaring,  '*  Of  a  truth,"  &o.  And  preached  Jesus; 
the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all  them  that  heard,  who  were  immediately  received  into 
the  Church.     III.  The  great  lesson  concerning  the  sufficiency  of  moral  excellence 
for  the  individual  character,  or  of  natural  religion  for  the  race.    Let  us  be  candid. 
1.  God  does  set  a  value  upon  moral  excellence.     Good  works  springing  from  right 
motives  are  good  in  His  sight,  and  nothing  is  gained,  but  much  is  lost,  when  Chris- 
tian teachers  speak  too  disparagingly  of  moral  virtues.    Whether  there  be  or  be  not 
a  hereafter,  it  is  far  better  to  be  moral  than  immoral.     2.  True  moral  excellence  is 
an  important  and  hopeful  foundation  upon  which  to  build.     It  is  not  a  matter  of 
surprise  that  men  are  alienated  if  they  find  themselves  classed  with  criminals  with- 
out a  word  of  qualification.     Let  us,  then,  put  a  right  estimate  on  moral  character 
and  good  works.  The  misguided  religionist  says,  "  Good  for  nothing  "  ;  the  moralist 
says,  "  Good    for    everything " ;   God  says,  "  Good   according  to  the  spirit  that 
prompts  them."    3.  It  is  important  that  this  whole  matter  should  be  better  under- 
stood.    The  imputation  of  teaching  a  religion  that  does  not  fully  recognise  th» 
value  of  morality  is  a  libel  upon  Christianity.    The  Christian  religion  alone  contains 
an  absolutely  perfect  system  of  morals,  inseparably  connected  with  its  facts  and 
doctrines.     And  wherever  Christianity  has  been  faithfully  presented  the  highest 
type  of  character  has  been  its  unfailing  fruit.    And  yet  it  is  quite  possible  that  the 
moral  element  is  sometimes  less  emphasised  than  the  spiritual.    But  the  reUgion  of 
Christ  is  not  chargeable  with  such  confusion  of  ideas,  or  failure  in  application  of 
Christian  ethics.     It  ia  not  only  a  gospel  of  grace,  but  a  gospel  of  character.     It 
does  recognise  all  that  is  good  in  man  ;  but  in  seeking  his  highest  development  it 
bids  him  beware  of  trusting  his  own  deceitful  heart,  and  of  seeking  to  build  his 
character  on  the  sandy  foundation  of  self-righteousness.    4.  But  there  is  nothing 
in  this  narrative  to  prove  that  simple  morality  is  aU  that  a  man  needs  to  fit  him  for 
heaven,  and  that  the  religion  of  nature  is  all-sufficient.     (1)  Cornelius  was  no  mere 
moralist ;  he  placed  no  dependence  on  good  works.     He  received  the  gospel  under 
the  influence  of  the  first  gospel  sermon  that  he  ever  heard.     (2)  The  history  teaches 
us  that  even  this  man's  character  was  not  in  its  natural  state  sufficient,  and  could 
only  find  completeness  in  Christ.     Were  his  condition  and  character  all  that  could 
be  desired,  why  did  not  God  leave  him  as  he  was  ?     This,  then,  is  the  prime  thought 
that  underlies  this  entire  subject.     There  is  no  completeness  of  character,  of  happi- 
ness, or  of  life,  apart  from  Christ.     Grant  that  you  are  thoroughly  moral,  is  it  not 
better  to  be  Christly  too  ?    What  if  in  winter  you  say,  "  The  air  is  crisp  and  bracing, 
the   hearth-fire  is  cheerful;  I  want  no  better  cUmate   than  this"?      Will  you 
shut  yourself  in  when  spring  comes  ?     (G.  H.  Payne, D.D.)        Family  devotion: — 
Sir  Thomas  Abney  had  been  accustomed  to  have  family  prayer  at  a  certain  time- 
He  was  made  Lord  Mayor  of  London.     His  hour  of  family  prayer  being  some  time 
about  the  time  of  the  banquet,  he  begged  to  be  excused  for  a  little,  for  he  had  an 
urgent  engagement  with  a  special  friend.     He  then  went  and  called  his  family 
together  to  meet  with  God  in  prayer.     Do  the  same ;  if  even  a  banquet  should 
come  down  upon  you,  quit  the  table  for  the  altar,  and  your  guests  for  your  God. 
{G.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Gornelius,  the  truth-seeker: — I.  His  chabacter.     He  was  no 
mere  moralist.     1.  He  acted  up  to  the  light  he  had,  which  the  moralist  does  not. 
2.  His  morality  was  only  the  outward  proof  of  his  devoutness.     3.  He  did  not 
depend  upon  his  good  works,  but  sought  something  better.     4.  He  embraced  Christ 
when  revealed  to  him.     6.  He  impressed  others  with  his  devoutness.     II.  Thh 
heavenly  interest  in  him.     This  shown  by  angels,  who  take  active  part  in  the  work 
of  human  recovery.     This  interest  is  seen — 1.  In  their  minute  acquaintance  with 
our  circumstances.    Cornelius  mentioned  by  name,  and  Peter,  and  the  town,  house, 
situation,  host  all  indicated.     2.  In  their  joy  over  repenting  sinners,     3.  In  their 
ministry  during  the  whole  career  of  the  heirs  of  salvation.     Thus  angels  are  our 
examples.     III.  His  hdman  guide.    Peter  rather  than  the  angel.     1.  This  is  God's 
plan.     Man  and  man  only  employed  to  prophesy,  give  Divine  news,  to  be  a  vehicle 
of  Christ's  manifestation.     2.  Salvation  is  a  practical  work.     We  need  the  Uviug 
illustration  of  a  human  life.     We  need  not  only  a  teacher  but  a  witness;  one  who 
can  verify  from  experience.     3.  It  redounds  more  to  the  glory  of  God  and  Chris- 
tianity.    The  greatness  of  the  result  is  heighteued  by  the  feebleness  of  the  instru- 
ment.'   4.  It  confers  honour  upon  and  promotes  unity  among  men.     The  most 
important  work  reserved  for  men.     IV.  The  obstacles  removed  out  of  ma  wat. 
There  ^ere  grtat  barriers  of  race,  rank,  culture,  &o.,  but  all  were  broken  down. 


CHIP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  118 

(J.  G.  Hughes.)  Cornelius,  or  grace  operating  beyond  the  pale  of  the  visible  Church : 
— I.  The  workings  of  bedemptive  peovidence  ake  manifold  and  complex.  Paul 
is  converted,  and  is  being  trained  for  his  future  work.  Peter  receives  a  vision 
intended  to  break  down  exclusiveness.  Cornelius  receives  Divine  instructions  to 
send  for  the  apostle.  Each  is  done  separately  and  miles  apart.  Yet  Divine  power 
and  wisdom  unite  them,  and  bring  out  of  them  the  subjection  of  the  Roman  empire 
to  Christ  and  the  creation  of  modern  Europe.  How  much  depended  on  these  three 
men,  strangers  to  each  other  1  11.  Divine  grace  operates  beyond  the  pale  of  the 
VISIBLE  Church.  Cornelius  a  good  man  according  to  his  Hght.  Eeverent  and 
charitable,  two  indubitable  marks  of  rehgion.  Not  a  proselyte,  but  not  counted 
common  or  unclean.  Entered  the  kingdom  of  Christ  without  passing  through  the 
Jewish  gate.  Many  hke  Cornelius  at  Eome  and  in  Greece,  and  now  in  India,  China, 
<fec.  III.  The  limits  and  insufficienct  of  natural  religion.  The  prayer  and 
alms  of  Cornelius  went  up  as  a  memorial  to  God  ;  but  these  were  not  enough,  or 
he  would  not  have  been  bidden  to  send  for  Peter.  But  faithfulness  to  the  light 
of  nature  led  up  to  the  Christian  revelation.  1.  A  caution  against  latitudinarian 
indifference.  There  is  no  foundation  for  a  belief  in  the  sufficiency  of  natural 
light.  2.  The  breaking  down  of  natural  impediments  to  the  progress  of  the  gospel. 
"  In  every  nation."  3.  Here  is  the  ground  of  hope  for  humanity.  4.  Here  is  the 
essential  character  of  the  provisions  of  the  gospel.  "  There  is  none  other  name,"  &c. 
(Preacher^  8  Monthly.)  Cornelius:  a  model  for  volunteers  : — 1.  How  often  Eoman 
officers  are  honourably  mentioned  in  Scripture.  "  I  am  not  worthy  that  Thou 
shouldest  come  under  my  roof,"  &c.,  was  the  humble  language  of  one  of  them. 
•'  Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of  God!  "  cried  another,  as  he  witnessed  the  Cruci- 
fixion. How  humane  and  prudent  the  chief  captain  who  saved  St.  Paul  from 
scourging  and  treachery ;  or  the  centurion  who  saved  all  the  prisoners  from  execu- 
tion at  Mehta,  in  order  to  secure  the  hfe  of  St.  Paul !  It  says  much  for  the  disci- 
pline of  the  Roman  army  that  men  of  such  humanity  and  intelligence  were  promoted 
to  places  of  authority,  and  partly  accounts  for  the  marvellous  successes  of  that  won- 
derful nation  ;  while,  again,  it  testifies  to  the  power  of  Christianity,  that  men  so  much 
opposed  to  it  should  be  induced  to  admire  those  in  whom  it  was  seen  most  conspi- 
cuously. Look  now,  however,  at  this  centurion  mentioned  in  the  text.  You,  who 
have  volunteered  to  buckle  on  the  sword  in  defence  of  your  country,  may  well  con- 
template the  picture  of  this  good  soldier  of  Caesar  and  of  Christ.  2.  Note  hia 
bravery.  Some  say  that  Christianity  and  bravery  cannot  co-exist.  Nonsense  I 
The  Christian  is  the  only  brave  man  in  existence.  Ungodly  men  are  the  cowards  t 
Why  is  it  that  so  many  never  enter  the  house  of  God,  or  make  a  profession  of 
religion  ?  Because  they  are  ashamed  to  be  taunted  with  the  title  of  saint  or  Chris- 
tian. Not  so,  Cornelius.  He  was  valiant  as  a  soldier  serving  beneath  the  Roman 
eagles.  He  was  brave,  too,  as  he  showed  his  anxiety  to  enlist  under  the  banner  of 
the  Cross !  3.  He  was  also  religiously  brave,  for  he  is  described  as  "  a  devout  man, 
and  one  that  feared  God."  He  was  at  this  period  in  a  most  interesting  state  of 
mind.  He  had  come  over  from  Rome  a  worshipper  of  false  gods.  While  in  Judaea,. 
he  appears  to  have  become  convinced  that  heathenism  was  wrong ;  and,  in  search- 
ing after  truth,  he  was  probably  influenced  by  the  proceedings  of  the  devout  among 
the  Jews  in  Caesarea.  He  also  became  "devout."  How  he  reproves  the  careless 
talkers  in  Christian  England,  whose  hps  are  often  glib  for  the  oath,  and  ready  for 
the  immoral  jest !  4.  The  acorn  contains  the  oak,  and  the  hero  may  be  often  dis- 
covered in  the  recruit.  It  is  beautiful  to  notice  in  the  centurion  the  early  germ 
which  needed  only  the  fuller  hght  of  the  gospel  to  bring  it  into  maturity.  This 
'*  devout  man  "  already  "  feared  God."  It  would  require  more  moral  courage  than 
many  who  have  been  enlisted  under  Christ's  banner  possess,  to  enable  them  to  say, 
"  I  fear  God."  It  is  a  noble  testimony  when  a  man  can  "  put  down  "  the  scene  of 
godless  hilarity  and  the  foohsh  jesting  of  the  scoffer  by  any  such  noble  confession. 
5.  And  now  observe  a  yet  more  eloquent  proof  of  the  reality  of  the  work  which  was 
proceeding  in  that  man's  soul  1  Cornelius,  if  he  had  been  a  hypocrite,  might  have 
disguised  the  fact  from  his  soldiers  and  from  his  neighbours  ;  but  he  would  hardly 
succeed  with  his  household.  What  a  testimony  it  is  to  this  noble  centurion,  that 
he  stood  not  alone  in  his  family,  while  he  avowed  his  creed  in  Jehovah  as  the  Lord 
God  of  heaven  and  earth!  "He feared  God  with  all  his  house.''  It  may  be  one 
great  cause  why  we  have  so  few  specimens  of  thorough  family  rehgion  that  the  con- 
sistency which  adorned  this  centurion  is  not  found  in  modern  professors.  6.  And 
there  is  yet  another  testimony  to  his  sincerity.  It  is  usual  for  officers  to  select 
their  attendants  and  servants  from  amongst  the  soldiers  of  their  regiment.  Corne- 
voit.  n.  8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  «. 

lius  did  BO,  and  when  he  was  bidden  to  send  for  Peter,  to  whom  could  he  look  for 
ambassador  on  so  unportant  an  enterprise  ?  Does  it  not  tell  a  tale  that  he  found 
no  sort  of  difficulty  ?  He  could  look  at  home  and  find  persons  whose  character 
fitted  them  to  go,  ay,  and  in  the  ranks  of  his  own  men  as  well  (ver.  7).  7.  Notice 
further  how  excellently  this  truth-seeking  man  endeavoured  to  live  according  to  his 
profession.  He  "  gave  much  alms  to  the  people."  True  religion  is  an  active, 
living  energy,  which  influences  you  in  every  one  of  your  proceedings.  It  enforces 
acts  of  self-denial ;  and  in  this  list  of  self-denying  deeds  is  the  act  of  almsgiving. 
8.  "  Thy  prayers  "  too  1  I  can  remember  when  it  was  considered  a  soldier-like  act 
to  swear  lustily.  Happily  that  day  is  over ;  but  the  day  has  not  yet  arrived  when 
a  prayerful  soldier,  or  indeed  a  prayerful  civihan,  is  not  exposed  occasionally  to 
Bcorn  and  derision  for  his  piety.  Conclusion :  You  who  have  come  forward  so 
nobly,  when  your  queen  and  country  were  imperilled,  aim  to  rival  the  Eoman  in 
bravery,  and  see  that  you  are  not  outdone  by  him  in  the  heartiness  of  your  piety, 
and  in  your  confession  of  Christ.  (G.  Venables,  M.A.)  A  good  man's  conversion 
(chap.  X.  24) ; — L  God's  Word  teeats  all  men  as  needino  to  be  "  saved."  It  is 
interesting  to  notice  how  the  language  changes  as  the  story  runs  on.  In  his  vision 
Cornelius  is  informed  that  Peter  "  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do  "  (chap. 
X.  6).  When  the  man  comes  to  relate  it  to  others,  he  quotes  it  thus,  "  Who,  when 
he  Cometh,  shall  speak  unto  thee  "  (chap.  x.  32).  But  Simon  declares  that  what  he 
had  been  sent  to  do  was  to  tell  CorneUus  words  whereby  he  and  all  his  house  might 
be  "  saved  "  (chap.  xi.  14).  It  becomes  evident,  therefore,  that  this  centurion  was 
as  yet  an  unsaved  man.  And  this  is  worth  noticing,  when  we  look  at  his  character. 
1.  He  was  a  thoroughly  religious  man  (ver.  2).  2.  He  was  prayerful.  That  is  a 
great  fehcity  which  in  the  New  Revision  changes  our  tame  expression  into,  "  I  was 
keeping  the  ninth  hour  of  prayer  in  my  house  "  (ver.  30).  It  is  likely  that  Cornelius 
had  family  prayers  regularly.  3.  Twice,  also,  it  is  stated  that  he  was  liberal  in 
benefactions.  4.  He  was  a  useful  man.  There  comes  out  a  fact  which  is  in  many 
respects  more  impressive  because  of  its  artless  form.  His  servants  and  orderly 
were  religious.  It  might  be  conjectured  that  Cornelius  had  had  something  to  do 
with  the  training  of  these  people.  5.  He  was  of  good  reputation  among  his  neigh- 
bours (ver.  22).  What  could  any  one  need  more?  Yet  God's  inspired  Word 
declares  here  tnat  Cornelius  was  not  "  saved."  II.  God's  Word  gives  us  to  undeb- 
BTAND  THAT  ALL  MEN  CAN  BE  "  SAVED."  Simou  Peter  is  dispatchcd  on  the  errand  of 
saving  Cornelius.  Just  think,  for  a  moment,  of  the  disabilities  of  this  man.  If 
we  should  doubt  anybody's  chance,  we  should  doubt  his.  1.  He  was  a  heathen  from 
Italy  at  the  start.  2.  He  was  a  soldier.  His  daily  Ufe  led  him  constantly  to  be  in 
the  barracks,  and  among  the  followers  of  a  legion  of  loose  homeless  creatures  whose 
lives  were  apt  to  be  immoral.  Still,  we  must  be  fair  :  there  are  four  centurions 
mentioned  in  the  New  Testament,  and  each  of  them  has  left  behind  him  a  most 
creditable  record.  One  of  them  Jesus  commended  for  his  remarkable  faith  (Matt, 
viii.  10).  One  of  them  bore  witness  to  the  divinity  of  the  Lord  Jesus  on  the  Cross 
(Mark  xv.  39).  One  of  them  was  of  much  help  and  comfort  to  the  Apostle  Paul  at 
what  was  very  nearly  the  lowest  point  in  his  fortunes  (Acts  xxvii.  3).  And  this  is 
the  fourth  one,  and  he  certainly  shows  well.  But  war  is  a  hard  trade  ;  piety  in 
military  life  is  pitifully  like  an  alpine  flower  pushing  up  through  the  snow,  and 
trying  to  blossom  on  a  rock  beside  a  glacier.  And  so  it  is  the  more  beautiful  when 
it  succeeds  in  its  pure  purpose.  3.  Cornelius  was  a  government  officer.  That  army 
of  possession  was  in  a  sense  poHtical.  It  is  natural  always  for  the  spirit  of  authority 
to  generate  arrogance ;  and  true  piety  invariably  demands  humility  and  charity. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  known  now  that  Palestine  in  those  days  was  a  hot-bed  of 
corruption  ;  the  Roman  officers  oppressed  and  fleeced  the  conquered  inhabitants 
unmercifully.  All  this  was  against  Cornelius :  he  was  once  a  heathen,  military, 
politician.  But  it  is  edifying  to  learn  that  even  he  could  be  "  saved  "  (vers.  34, 35). 
III.  God's  Word  prescribes  the  conditions  of  every  man's  beinu  "  saved."  1. 
The  two  conditions  which  Simon  Peter  lays  down  plainly  are  faith  (chap.  x.  43) 
and  repentance  (chap.  xi.  18).  There  is  a  voluminousness  in  his  argument  that 
renders  this  quite  clear.  2.  It  is  of  inestimable  advantage  for  any  teacher  of  the 
gospel  that  he  should  surrender  all  other  dependences,  and  rely  only  on  the  pure 
gospel  for  the  conversion  of  souls.  It  is  manifestly  of  the  highest  moment  that 
Simon  Peter  should  have  been  intelligently  informed,  and  now  humbly  possessed, 
of  the  doctrines  of  grace.  We  do  not  see  how  he  could  have  made  his  speech 
and  fulfilled  his  duty  that  day,  if  he  had  not  felt  precisely  what  the  prophet 
Isaiah  once  said  (Isa.  1.  4).    IV.  God's  Word  settles  the  conclusion  that  kvek 


iOHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  115 

A  GOOD  MAN,  IT  WITHOUT  Chkist,  CANNOT  BE  "  SATED."  1.  One  may  be  aroused  in 
conscience,  and  yet  remain  unsaved.  Suppose  Cornelius  had  been  mortified,  and 
"wounded,  and  grown  petulant,  and  so  refused  to  obey  the  angel's  command  I  2.  One 
may  be  diligent  in  religious  routine,  and  yet  remain  unsaved.  How  exemplary  this 
man  appears  to  us  nowl  3.  One  may  be  virtuous  in  his  life,  and  remain  unsaved.  Cor- 
nelius was  "  just  "  and  "  devout "  ;  but  he  was  yet "  lacking."  4.  One  may  be  counted 
«xcellent,  and  yet  remain  unsaved.  5.  One  may  even  be  instrumental  in  saving  others, 
and  yet  remain  unsaved.  Cornelius  needed  the  whole  gospel  still.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
The  conversion  of  the  Gentiles : — I.  There  aee  three  dramatic  chapters  in  the 
Bible  that  stand  out  with  special  prominence  and  significance.  Take — 1. 
Gen.  i.  How  worlds  are  made,  and  light  is  parted,  and  arrangements  are  com- 
pleted as  if  some  stupendous  event  were  about  to  transpire  !  Something  is  going 
"to  happen  I  The  secret  is  revealed  in  these  words,  and  God  said,  "  Let  us  make 
man."  2.  Matt.  i.  The  first  of  Genesis  turned  into  human  history.  There  again  you 
have  that  movement,  urgency,  and  great  rapidity.  The  reading  of  the  genealogical 
record  means  something.  The  secret  is  revealed  in  the  statement  that  Jesus  was 
born  to  save  His  people  from  their  sins.  3.  Acts  x.  What  movement,  what 
dreaming  and  visioning  and  singular  combination  of  events  1  Having  read  the  first 
of  Genesis  and  the  first  of  Matthew,  I  feel  that  all  these  visions  and  trances  must 
lead  to  something.  What  is  it?  The  secret  is  revealed  in  these  words,  "  God  is 
no  respecter  of  persons,"  &o.  In  all  the  three  chapters,  therefore,  I  find  a  result 
which  explains  the  process  and  satisfies  the  imagination.  II.  What  unconscious 
JBEPAEATioNS  ABE  PROCEEDING  IN  LIFE  I  1.  Wc  caunot  tell  what  wc  do.  No  occa- 
Bion  ends  in  itself.  We  know  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth,  but  to-morrow  will 
certainly  bring  forth  the  seed  of  to-day.  Always  know  that  you  are  being  pre- 
pared for  some  Divine  issue.  Your  coming  to  church  to-day  may  be  the  making 
of  you  !  The  introduction  to  a  friend  this  morning  may  change  every  aspect  of 
your  coming  history  I  The  grave  you  dug  but  yesterday  may  be  the  altar  at  which 
your  first  heart-prayer  was  uttered  1  2.  How  wondrously  Peter  was  prepared  for 
this  marvellous  outcoming  of  Divine  purpose.  We  read  in  the  preceding  chapter, 
last  verse,  that  he  "  tarried  many  days  in  Joppa  with  one  Simon  a  tanner."  He 
has  got  so  far  on  the  road  to  the  Gentiles.  A  Jew  of  Peter's  temper  who  could 
lodge  with  a  tanner  may  to-morrow  go  to  convert  a  Gentile.  God  fixes  lodgings. 
An  ancient  Eabbi  said,  '*  It  is  impossible  that  the  world  can  do  without  tanners, 
but  woe  unto  that  man  who  is  a  tanner."  The  address  is  given — "  whose  house  is 
by  the  seaside."  The  reason  being  that  the  Jews  would  not  have  tanneries  in  the 
towns.  If  a  man  married  without  telling  his  bride  that  he  was  a  tanner,  she  could 
instantly  demand  release.  The  law  which  provided  that  the  childless  widow  was 
to  marry  the  brother  of  a  deceased  husband  was  set  aside  in  the  event  of  that 
brother  being  a  tanner.  You  see,  then,  how  stubborn  were  the  prejudices  against 
tanning,  and  yet  we  read  as  if  it  involved  no  extraordinary  principle  that  Peter 
*' tarried  many  days  with  one  Simon  a  tanner."  It  means  everything,  there  is  a 
revolution  in  these  words.  This  makes  a  breach  in  the  wall,  buttressed  with  the 
traditions  of  generations — a  breach  that  will  widen  until  the  whole  falls,  and  man 
everywhere  hail  man  as  brother  I  3.  The  point  to  be  observed  is,  how  unconsciously 
men  are  being  prepared  for  higher  communications  and  wider  services.  God  leads 
us  on  step  by  step.  We  do  not  jump  to  conclusions  in  Divine  Providence.  We  go 
forward  a  step  at  a  time,  and  we  never  know  how  far  we  have  advanced  until  we 
come  to  the  last  step,  and  find  that  it  is  but  a  step.  This  is  God's  way.  This  is 
how  He  trains  you,  dear  children,  for  the  last  step  which  we  now  call  death.  Now 
in  this  early  morning  of  your  life  you  do  not  want  to  die.  But  little  by  little,  day 
by  day,  suffering  by  suffering,  trial  by  trial,  loss  by  loss,  a  time  will  come  when 
even  you  will  say,  "I  have  a  desire  to  depart."  God  deals  thus  gradually  and 
gently  with  us.  Sometimes  His  providences  seem  to  be  abrupt  and  even  violent, 
but  in  reality  they  move  along  a  gradation  settled  and  adjusted  by  the  tenderest 
love.  Things  that  are  impossible  to  you  to-day  will  be  the  commonplaces  of  to- 
morrow. You  do  not  speak  to  the  farthest-off  man  at  once  ;  but  you  speak  to  the 
man  who  is  next  to  you,  and  then  to  the  one  following,  and  so,  a  man  at  a  time, 
you  move  on  until  the  distance  is  traversed  and  he  who  was  once  far  off  haf  been 
brought  nigh  !  Upon  this  daily  and  inevitable  process  rests  your  confidence  that 
prejudice  of  the  most  stubborn  kind  shall  be  broken  down,  and  one  day  we  shall 
know  that  every  land  is  home  and  every  man  is  brother  I     III.  What  mysterious 

COMBINATIONS     OF     EXPERIENCES     AND     EVENTS     ARE     CONTINUALLY    TAKING    PLACE.       1. 

OorneliuB  saw  in  a  vision  an  angel.    Peter  fell  into  ft  trance  and  heard  a  Toio«. 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

That  is  our  daily  life.  We  cannot  be  shut  up  within  the  four  corners  of  a  vulgar 
materialism.  God  has  still  over  us  the  mysterious  reign  of  dreams.  Why  wonder 
if  dreams  will  come  true,  when  dreams  are  true  ?  You  should  have  spoksn  to  the 
angel,  and  said,  "What  is  it,  Lord?"  You  should  even  have  contradicted  tha 
angel,  and  said,  "  Not  so.  Lord,"  and  then  further  conversation  would  have  ensued. 
Instead  of  that  you  continue  to  sleep,  and  in  the  morning  ask  if  dreams  come  true! 
You  had  your  chance  and  missed  it.  The  night  is  full  of  crowds.  In  the  infinite 
galleries  of  the  night  the  angels  walk,  visiting  the  beloved  of  God.  Dreams  of 
your  own  causing  are  not  the  dreams  we  are  now  speakiug  about.  Physical  night- 
mare is  one  thing,  spiritual  vision  is  another.  2.  But  even  apart  from  the  ministry 
of  the  night  we  have  in  our  day-dreams  events  sufficiently  spiritually  mysterious  to 
inspire  the  religious  imagination.  "  How  strange,"  say  we,  "  that  it  should  have 
been  so."  "  How  remarkable  that  our  letters  should  have  crossed."  "  Why,  at 
the  very  time  I  was  doing  this  you  must  have  been  coming  to  me  1  How  singular  1 " 
This  is  an  irreligious  way  of  talking  about  human  history  and  Divine  issues.  I 
want  to  cleanse  my  life  of  all  mere  accidents,  and  to  feel  that  my  down-sitting  and 
my  up-rising,  and  my  out-going,  my  in-coming  are  matters  of  importance  in  heaven 
— that  the  very  hairs  of  my  head  are  all  numbered  I  Why  do  we  be-little  our 
experience  and  deplete  it  of  everything  that  could  give  nobility,  and  enlargement, 
and  apocalypse  to  our  highest  nature  ?  Kather  be  it  mine  to  say  the  vision  was 
from  heaven,  and  an  angel  spake  to  me,  than  to  vulgarise  the  universe  and  to  find 
in  it  nothing  that  I  cannot  mark  with  plain  figures.  IV.  Here  we  have  a  higher 
LAW  swallowing  UP  A  LOWER  ONE — "  God  bath  showed  me  that  I  should  not  call 
any  man  common  or  unclean."  It  requires  God  to  show  that  to  some  men.  This 
is  nothing  short  of  a  Divine  revelation — to  see  the  man  within  the  creature.  I  see 
the  poor  clothing,  the  unkempt  body — there  is  something  behind  I  I  see  the  rough- 
ness, rudeness— there  is  something  behind.  A  man  1  Said  the  murmuring  multitude 
respecting  ZacchEeus,  "  Christ  hath  gone  in  to  be  the  guest  of  a  man  who  is  a 
sinner."  But  Jesus  called  the  sinner  "a  son  of  Abraham."  Lord,  open  our 
eyes  that  we  may  see  one  another !  Christianity  has  come  to  eat  up  and  absorb 
all  our  little  laws  and  to  set  us  under  a  nobler  legislation.  Said  Christ,  "  Who  is 
My  mother,  and  who  are  My  brethren  ?  "  And  turning  to  His  disciples.  He  said, 
"  Whosoever  doeth  the  will  of  My  Father  that  is  in  heaven,  the  same  is  My 
mother,  and  sister,  and  brother."  We  are  under  the  foolish  notion  that  a  man  is 
a  brother  because  we  were  born  of  the  same  mother.  Nothing  of  the  kind.  There 
may  be  no  greater  stranger  in  the  universe  than  the  one  born  of  the  same  mother. 
They  are  brothers  who  are  one  in  soul,  one  in  conviction,  one  in  hope  !  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  providential  guidance  of  the  Church: — The  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles  was  no  new  idea  to  Jews  or  Christians,  but  it  had  been  universally 
regarded  as  to  take  place  by  their  reception  into  Judaism.  A  gospel  of  the  uncir- 
cumcision  however  soon  began  to  be  recognised  by  some.  Stephen,  carrying 
out  the  principles  of  his  own  apology,  could  hardly  fail  to  recognise  it,  and  the 
Cyprian  and  Cyrenean  missionaries  of  chap.  xi.  20  preached  the  Word  to  pure 
heathen  certainly  before  the  conversion  of  Cornelius.  This  state  of  things  might 
have  given  rise  to  a  permanent  schism  in  the  Church.  The  Hellenists,  and  per- 
haps Saul,  with  his  definite  mission  to  the  Gentiles,  might  have  formed  one  party, 
and  the  Hebrews,  with  Peter  at  their  head,  the  other.  But  as  Neander  observes: 
The  pernicious  influence  with  which  from  the  first  the  self-seeking  and  one-sided 
prejudices  of  human  nature  threatened  the  Divine  work  was  counteracted  by  the 
superior  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  did  not  allow  the  differences  of  men 
to  reach  such  a  point  of  antagonism,  but  enabled  them  to  retain  unity  in  variety. 
We  recognise  the  preventing  wisdom  of  God — which,  while  giving  scope  to  the  free 
agency  of  man,  knows  how  to  interpose  His  immediate  revelation  just  at  the 
mpment  when  it  is  requisite  for  the  success  of  the  Divine  work — by  noticing  that 
when  the  apostles  needed  this  wider  development  of  their  Christian  knowledge  for 
the  exercise  of  their  vocation,  and  when  the  lack  of  it  would  have  been  exceedingly 
detrimental,  at  that  very  moment,  by  a  remarkable  coincidence  of  inward  revelation 
with  a  chain  of  outward  circumstances,  the  illumination  hitherto  wanting  was 
imparted.  (Dean  Alford.)  The  supernatural  preparation : — This  consisted  in  a 
miraculous  communication — I.  To  Cornelius.  It  required  a  special  Divine 
interposition  to  prepare  in  the  Gentile  world  an  audience  for  a  gospel  sermon,  and 
one  occurred  in  the  case  of  this  heathen  soldier.  An  angel — 1.  Visited  him.  (1) 
The  form  was  human.  Painters  and  jjoets  give  angels  wings,  the  Bible  does  not. 
(2)  Ths  appearance  was  appalling.    The  sentimental  may  talk  about  the  beauty  of 


CHAP.  X.)  THE  ACTS.  117 

angels,  but  to  the  sinner  their  manifestation  is  always  connected  with  terror.  2. 
Encouraged  him  (ver.  4).  (1)  Genuine  goodness  includes  piety  and  philanthropy 
(2)  The  virtues  of  good  men  are  recognised  in  heaven.  What  more  encouraging 
than  this  ?  3.  Directed  him  (ver.  5).  Why  not  tell  him  what  to  do  thyself,  angelic 
spirit  ?  Because  the  gospel  is  to  be  preached  by  men,  not  angels.  The  super- 
natural communication  answers  the  end.  Cornelius  is  prompt  to  obey.  What 
Abraham  is  to  Jewish  saints,  Cornelius  is  to  the  Gentile  Christians — the  first  called 
out  miraculously  by  God,  the  moral  father  of  the  great  family.  The  preparation  of 
the  heart  for  the  reception  of  the  gospel  is  a  work  of  the  Lord.  When  the  Great 
Husbandman  prepares  the  soil  the  seed  will  germinate.  II.  To  Peteb.  Observe 
— 1.  His  circumstances.  (1)  His  spiritual  exercise.  He  had  just  been  employed 
in  prayer.  He  who  would  see  heaven  opened  must  pray.  (2)  His  physical  state 
— hungry.  Both  soul  and  body  therefore  were  craving,  the  one  for  communications 
from  God,  the  other  for  food.  (3)  His  mental  state — in  a  trance,  a  state  of  utter 
abstraction  from  all  external  objects.  Then  the  vision  came.  There  was  a  natural 
connection  between  his  hunger  and  the  creatures  he  saw.  In  God's  revelations  the 
human  often  plays  a  conspicuous  part.  The  vision  was  symbolic.  The  vessel  may 
denote  the  human  creation  containing  Jews  and  Gentiles :  its  descent  from  heaven 
the  equal  Divine  origin  of  both  ;  the  command  to  kill  and  eat  the  advent  of  a  dis- 
pensation to  annul  all  that  was  ceremonial  and  narrow  in  Judaism.  The  vision 
teaches — (a)  The  Divine  origin  of  the  race.  "  AU  let  down  "  from  heaven.  Every 
birth  is  a  Divine  emanation.  There  is  nothing  new  but  souls,  (b)  The  great 
diversities  of  the  race.  "  All  manner,"  &c.  Great  are  the  distinctions  among 
men — physical,  mental,  and  moral ;  yet  all  from  heaven,  (c)  The  ceremonialisms 
which  divide  the  race.  They  are  to  be  killed  by  the  apostles  of  Christianity.  2. 
His  strong  antagonism  to  the  purpose  of  this  wonderful  vision  (ver.  14).  The  fact 
that  the  vision  occurred  thrice  plainly  indicated  how  potent  his  religious  antipathies 
were.  3.  The  providential  agency  by  which  this  antagonism  was  removed.  While 
Peter  was  in  doubt,  just  at  that  point  the  centurion's  emissaries  came.  If  our 
doubt  is  honest,  as  was  Peter's,  Providence  will  send  an  interpreter.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  4  Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms  axe  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  God. — 
Prayers  and  alms : — I.  The  conjunction  of  alms-deeds  with  pbateb.  Cornelius 
joined  them,  and  he  is  therefore  commeuded  for  "  a  devout  man  and  one  that  feared 
God,"  and  God  graciously  accepted  them.  Therefore  our  Saviour  (Matt.  vi.  1-5)  joins 
the  precepts  of  alms  and  prayer  together.  It  was  also  the  ordinance  of  the  Church  in 
the  apostles'  times,  that  the  first  day  of  the  week,  which  was  the  time  of  public  prayer, 
should  be  the  time  also  of  alms  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1).  Which  institution  seems  to  be 
derived  from  the  commandment  of  God  in  the  law  twice  repeated  (Exod.  xxiii.  15  ; 
Deut.  xvi.  16).  The  Primitive  Church  after  the  apostles  followed  the  same  pre- 
cedent, and  our  own  Eeformed  Church  asks  God  "  to  accept  our  alms,  and  receive 
our  prayers."  H.  The  power  and  efficacy  which  pbayeb  and  alms  have  with 
God.  God  is  said  to  remember  our  prayers  when  He  grants  them,  our  alms  and 
good  deeds  when  He  rewards  them,  or,  in  a  word,  when  He  answers  either  of  them 
with  a  blessing ;  as  on  the  contrary  He  is  said  to  remember  iniquity  when  He 
sends  some  judgment  for  it  (1  Sam.  i.  19 ;  Neh.  v.  19).  1.  Prayer.  What  is  it 
that  prayer  hath  not  obtained  ?  It  hath  shut  and  opened  heaven  and  made  the 
sun  and  moon  to  stand  still.  It  is  the  key  that  openeth  all  God's  treasures.  For 
Bpiritual  blessings,  Cornelius  we  see  obtained  thereby  illumination  and  instruction 
in  God's  saving  truth  (see  James  i.  5  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  18-20  ;  Psa.  xxxii.  6,  6).  Prayer 
also  obtaineth  corporal  blessings.  When  heaven  was  shut  and  it  rained  not,  Elijah 
prayed  for  rain,  and  it  rained.  Hannah  prayed  for  a  son,  and  she  conceived.  If  we 
be  sick,  "  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  heal  the  sick."  Nehemiah  prayed  that  he  might 
find  favour  in  the  sight  of  King  Artaxerxes  (Neh.  i.  11),  and  found  it  (ii.  4).  But 
some  man  will  say.  If  prayer  have  such  power  and  efficacy,  how  comes  it  to  pass 
that  many  even  godly  men  oft  pray  and  yet  speed  not  ?  I  answer — ( 1)  We  pray  not 
as  we  ought,  either — (a)  We  pray  not  heartily  or  constantly  (Luke  xyiii.  1).  (6) 
We  rely  not  upon  God  (James  i.  6).  (c)  We  make  not  God's  glory  the  end  of  what 
we  ask  (James  iv.  3).  (d)  We  may  ask  something  that  crosseth  the  rule  of  Divine 
providence  and  justice.  (2)  We  are  indisposed  for  God  to  grant  our  request,  (a) 
When  some  sin  unrepented  of  lies  at  the  door  and  keeps  God's  blessing  oat  (Psa. 
1.  16;  Prov.  xxviii.  9;  Jos.  vii.  10-12).  Or— (6)  We  appear  before  the  Lord 
«mpty ;  we  do  not  as  Cornelius  did,  send  ap  prayers  and  alms  together ;  we  should 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

have  two  strings  to  our  bow  when  we  have  but  one.  For  bow  can  we  look  that 
God  should  bear  us  in  our  need,  when  we  turn  away  our  face  from  our  brother  in 
his  need  ?  (3)  Add  to  all  these  reasons  of  displeasure  a  reason  of  favour,  because 
we  ask  that  which  He  knows  would  be  hurtful  for  us.  As,  therefore,  a  wife  and 
loving  father  will  not  give  his  child  a  knife  or  some  other  hurtful  thing,  though  it 
cries  never  so  much  unto  him  for  it :  so  does  God  deal  with  His  children.  (4) 
Moreover,  we  must  know  and  believe  that  God  often  hears  our  prayers  when  we 
think  he  doth  not.  (a)  When  He  changes  the  means,  but  brings  the  end  we  desire 
another  way  to  pass  (2  Cor.  xii.  7-9).  (b)  When  He  defers  it  till  some  other  time 
when  He  thinks  best  (Dan.  ix.  1 ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  22 ;  Eev.  vi.  10,  11).  (c)  When 
He  gives  us  instead  thereof  something  which  is  as  good  or  better.  2.  Alms.  Not 
thy  prayer  only,  saith  the  angel,  but  thine  alms  also  are  come  up  for  a  remembrance. 
For  alms  is  a  kind  of  prayer,  namely,  a  visible  one,  and  such  an  one  as  prevails 
as  strongly  with  God  for  a  blessing  as  any  other  (Psa.  xH.  1-3 ;  Prov.  xix.  17, 
xxviii.  27,  xi.  25  ;  Eccles.  xi.  1).  These  are  for  corporal  blessings,  and  of  this  life. 
But  hear  also  for  spiritual  blessings,  and  those  of  the  life  to  come  (Psa.  cxii.  9; 
Luke  xvi.  9;   1   Tim.   vi.   17;  Matt.   xxv.  34,  35).     III.   The  eeasons  why  God 

BEQUIRES    THEM,    AND    WHY   THEY   ARE    SO    PLEASING    UNTO    HiM  :    which    reaSOUS  whcn 

they  are  known,  wiU  be  also  strong  motives.  1.  Prayer.  The  reasons  why  God 
requires  this  are  these — (1)  That  we  might  acknowledge  the  property  He  hath  in 
the  gifts  He  bestows  upon  us  :  otherwise  we  would  forget  in  what  tenure  we  hold 
them.  (2)  That  we  might  be  acquainted  with  God  (Job  xxii.  21).  Now  ac- 
quaintance we  know  grows  amongst  men  by  conversing  together.  So  by  accustom- 
ing to  speak  to  God  in  prayer  we  grow  acquainted  with  Him,  (3)  That  our  hearts 
may  be  kept  in  order.  For  to  come  often  into  the  presence  of  God  breeds  an  holy 
awe,  and  makes  us  to  call  our  sins  to  remembrance  with  sorrow.  Men  are  afraid 
to  offend  those  into  whose  presence  they  must  often  come  to  ask  and  sue  for  favours  ; 
and  if  they  have  offended,  the  first  thing  they  do  will  be  to  sue  for  pardon.  2, 
Alms.  We  are  to  offer  alms — (1)  To  testify  our  acknowledgment  of  whom  we 
received  and  of  whom  we  hold  what  we  have.  For  as  by  prayer  we  ask  God's 
creatures  before  we  can  enjoy  them  ;  so  when  we  have  them  there  is  another 
homage  due  for  them,  namely,  of  thanksgiving,  without  which  the  use  of  the 
creature  which  God  gives  us  is  unclean  and  unlawful  to  us  (1  Tim.  iv.  4).  Now 
our  thanksgiving  to  God  must  express  itself  in  work  and  deed ;  that  is,  we  must 
yield  Him  a  rent  and  tribute  of  what  we  enjoy  by  His  favour  and  blessing  ;  which 
if  we  do  not,  we  lose  our  tenure.  This  rent  is  twofold :  either  that  which  is  offered 
unto  God  for  the  maintenance  of  His  worship  and  ministers ;  or  that  which  is 
given  for  the  relief  of  the  poor,  the  orplian,  and  the  widow,  which  is  called  alms. 

(2)  That  we  might  not  forget  God  (Matt.  vi.  19,  20 ;  Luke  xii.  33).  The  proper 
evil  of  abundance  is  to  forget  God  and  our  dependence  upon  Him,  the  remedy 
whereof  most  genuine  and  natural  is  to  pay  Him  a  rent  of  what  we  have. 
(./.  Made.)  Prayer  and  almsgiving  : — I.  Peayer.  1.  Its  nature — the  ascent  of 
the  mind  to  God.  When  the  soul  lays  aside  the  thoughts  of  all  things  else  and 
converses  only  with  God,  then  it  prays.  (1)  When  we  speak  to  so  glorious  a 
Majesty  we  ought  to  begin  by  confessing  our  unworthiness  (Ezra  ix.  6-9 ;  Psa.  li. 
1-5 ;  Dan.  ix.  3-5).  (2)  And  as  we  are  to  confess  our  sins  so  we  are  to  beg  for 
mercy.  (3)  And  as  we  must  desire  of  God  what  we  want,  so  must  we  praise  Him 
for  what  we  have  (Psa.  cvii.  8).  2.  The  reasons  why  it  is  acceptable  to  God.  (1) 
In  praying  we  come  as  near  as  we  can  to  the  princi^ial  end  of  our  creation,  which 
was  to  enjoy  communion  with  God.  (2)  Hereby  we  acknowledge  His  supremacy 
over  and  propriety  in  the  world,  by  paying  daily  homage  and  tribute  of  tlianks. 

(3)  Especially  we  give  Him  the  glory  due  to  His  Name  which  is  the  ultimate  end 
of  His,  and  ought  to  be  of  all  our  actions  (Psa.  1.  23,  xxiv.  1).     3.  How  to  perform 


it  acceptably.  (1)  You  must  know  that  it  is  a  duty  of  that  weight  and  moment 
that  it  is  not  to  oe  undertaken  without  due  preparation  beforehand,  (a)  Lay  asida 
all  earthly  thoughts.  (/>)  liethink  yourselves  of  the  mercies  for  whicn  you  should 
pray  and  those  for  which  you  should  give  thanks,  (c)  Get  your  hearts  possessed  with. 
a  sense  of  God's  transcendent  excellency.  (2)  Having  thus  prepared  yourselveg 
set  upon  the  work  itself :  and  while  praying — (a)  Remember  what  you  are  doing 
and  carry  yourselves  with  that  reverence  which  becomes  sinful  creatures  (Hub.  xii. 
28,  29).  (b)  Be  sure  to  observe  the  wise  man's  counsel  (Eccles.  v.  2  ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  1  f 
Gen.  xviii.  27-32).  (c)  Have  a  great  care  to  keep  your  thoughts  and  affections 
together  (1  Cor.  xiv.  15).  {d)  Pray  in  faith,  desiring  nothing  but  in  the  name  ol 
Christ  (John  xvi.  23).    (3)  After  prayer — that  it  may  be  accepted  and  answered— 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS,  1» 

(a)  EecoUect  yourselves  and  consider  the  sins  you  have  confessed  that  you  may 
avoid  them,  and  what  mercies  you  have  begged  that  you  may  expect  them  (Mark 
li.  24 ;  James  i.  5,  6).  (6)  Trust  in  Christ  for  the  acceptance  and  answer  of  your 
prayers  (Mark  xi.  24).  4.  Its  advantages.  (1)  Such  solemn  addresses  to  the 
Most  High  will  refine  and  enlarge  your  conceptions  of  Him,  and  so  you  will  be 
more  and  more  acquainted  with  Him,  and  in  and  through  Christ  ingratiate  your- 
selves with  Him  (Job  xxii.  21).  (2)  This  will  also  be  an  excellent  means  to  keep 
our  hearts  in  a  continual  awe  of  Him.  (3)  This  is  the  most  powerful  way  to  prevent 
all  evil  and  secure  all  good.  If  we  lack  wisdom,  by  prayer  we  may  get  it 
(James  i.  5).  If  we  be  sick,  by  prayer  we  may  be  recovered  (James  v.  15).  If 
our  sins  be  many  and  great,  by  prayer  they  may  be  pardoned  VPsa.  xxxii.  5,  6). 
If  our  graces  be  weak,  by  prayer  they  may  be  strengthened  (2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9).  II. 
ALMSGiviNa.  1.  The  nature  of  this  duty — the  supplying  of  others'  necessities  to 
the  utmost  of  our  power  whatever  they  may  be — feeding  the  hungry,  clothicg  the 
naked,  visiting  the  sick,  relieving  the  afflicted,  being  kind  and  liberal  to  all.  2. 
Its  reasonableness.  (1)  God,  as  He  is  the  Maker,  so  is  He  the  Owner  of  all  things, 
and  therefore  we  can  have  nothing  but  what  we  receive  from  Him.  He  is  the 
Landlord,  you  His  tenant,  and  He  requires  you  to  pay  Him  rent  to  be  employed 
in  His  immediate  service,  or  else  for  the  relief  of  His  poorer  servants  (Matt.  xxvi. 
11).  (2)  He  has  imposed  this  duty  to  make  you  always  mindful  of  your  obligations 
to  Him.  A  confluence  of  earthly  enjoyments  is  apt  to  make  us  forget  Him  (Hos. 
xiii.  6 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  15-18).  Hence  Agur  feared  riches  (Prov.  xxx.  8,  9).  (3)  God 
requires  this  duty  because  this  is  the  means  whereby  He  has  provided  for  persons 
who  are  destitute  of  other  maintenance  (Mai.  iii.  8  ;  Prov.  iii.  27).  Seeing,  there- 
fore, God  has  strictly  required  this  duty,  and  there  being  such  reasons  for  it,  it 
cannot  but  be  acceptable  to  Him,  and  its  neglect  displeasing.  What  we  do  to  the 
poor  He  regards  as  done  to  Himself  (Matt.  xxv.  40-45 ;  Prov.  xiv.  31).  3.  The 
manner  in  which  it  is  to  be  performed.  (1)  Purely  out  of  obedience  to  God,  for 
His  sake  who  first  gave.  (2)  Universally — to  every  one  in  need,  i.e.,  not  to  our 
own  friends  only,  nor  only  when  we  are  in  a  good  humour,  or  applied  to,  or  likely 
to  get  credit.  (3)  Not  reluctantly  (Deut.  xv.  10  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  7  ;  Eom.  xii.  8 ;  Acts 
XX.  35).  (4)  Proportionably  to  what  God  has  given  us  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2).  (5) 
Sincerely,  and  not  to  gain  applause.  III.  The  connection  between  the  two. 
Both  went  up  to  heaven  together.  There  can  be  no  true  piety  towards  God  that 
is  not  accompanied  with  charity  towards  our  neighbour.  This  applies  to  all  acts 
of  piety.  No  man  can  fear,  honour,  obey,  or  trust  in  God  who  is  not  kind  to  his 
brother.  As  for  its  principal  act — prayer — the  teaching  of  Scripture  is  plain  that 
it  will  not  be  accepted  if  severed  from  alms.  Hence  Christ  joins  the  two  (Matt. 
vi.  1-6),  and  Paul  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2),  and  Moses  (Exod.  xxiii.  15 ;  Deut.  xvi.  16,  17). 
(Bp.  Beveridge.)  Praying  and  almsgiving : — 1.  Alms  are  the  correlative  of  prayers, 
branches  from  a  common  stem — the  moral  law,  which  enjoins  love  to  God  and 
love  to  man.  The  man  who  really  prays  fulfils  the  first  branch  ;  the  effectual 
fervent  prayer  of  the  righteous  man,  such  as  was  Cornelius,  is  the  expression  of 
man's  duty  to  God.  It  is  called  "  incense  "  partly  from  its  reaching  the  Throne 
of  Grace,  as  incense  soars  to  the  sky ;  partly  from  its  spiritual  fragrance  and 
acceptability.  And  the  man  who  acts  in  the  true  spirit  of  almsgiving  equally 
fulfils  the  second  branch.  The  act  passes  further  than  our  neighbour ;  it  cornea 
before  God  as  a  memorial  and  finds  also  in  the  fragrant,  soaring  incense  its 
Scriptural  emblem  (Phil.  iv.  18).  2.  Thus  prayer  and  almsgiving  are  co-ordiuate, 
which  alone  lends  a  value  to  the  latter.  We  have  been  suspicious  of  it  as  though 
we  heard  a  legal  ring  instead  of  genuine  gospel  coin,  a  means  of  justification  by  the 
law,  instead  of  faith  in  Christ.  But  almsgiving  need  be  no  more  a  work  of 
huraan  merit  than  prayer.  Neither  can  justify  the  sinner  ;  that  is  the  prerogative 
of  Christ's  atonement.  But  both  "  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  God  "  when 
offered  in  faith,  even  in  such  imperfect  faith  as  that  of  Cornelius.  3.  But  as  it 
is  not  every  so-called  prayer,  so  it  is  not  every  alms  of  which  this  can  be  predicated. 
In  both  the  act  has  become  detached  from  the  spirit  which  alone  can  render  it 
acceptable.  Prayer  is  performed  merely  because  conscience  or  the  usages  of  society 
exact  it.  And  alms  are  exto^-ted  reluctantly  with  the  feeling  that  any  petition 
for  them  is  an  importunity  of  which  we  would  willingly  be  rid.  In  such  cases 
neither  are  acceptable.  4.  If  either  is  to  come  up  as  a  memorial  before  God  it 
must  be  offered  not  on  a  casual  impulse,  the  mere  inspiration  of  a  happy  moment, 
but  on  principle.  As  regards  prayer  this  is  acknowledged.  No  one  thinks  he  has 
acqu'tted  himself  of  his  duty  unless  he  has  prayed  systematically.    No  one  could 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

Batisfy  his  conscience  by  lifting  up  his  heart  to  God  only  when  he  found  himself 
in  a  happy  frame.  For — (1)  The  duty  which  is  left  to  a  convenient  season  is  sure 
to  find  no  season  convenient :  he  who  is  apt  to  defer  sailing  till  wind,  weather, 
and  tide  are  all  in  his  favour  is  apt  to  end  in  not  sailing  at  all.  (2)  Prayer  is  no* 
simply  the  duty  of  the  individual  soul,  but  an  act  of  homage  to  God :  thus  they 
must  be  offered  systematically.  All  this  is  conceded  as  regards  prayer,  but  as 
regards  almsgiving  how  different  the  view  generally  taken.  Instead  of  recognising 
a  certain  proportion  of  his  income  as  being  due  to  God,  the  modern  Christian 
abandons  himself  for  the  most  part  to  appeals,  and  helps  those  objects  only  when 
his  sympathies  are  stirred.  A  charity  sermon  awakens  a  kindly  interest,  or  there 
are  cases  of  distress  personally  known,  and  he  responds  without  the  slightest  idea 
of  the  proportion  his  alms  bear  to  his  resources.  5.  Modern  almsgiving  being 
thus  for  the  most  part  the  result  of  impulse  rather  than  principle,  has  adjusted 
itself  to  the  sentiments  of  the  majority.  Money  must  be  had  for  beuevolence ;  and 
as  it  is  not  to  be  had  upon  principle,  it  must  be  had  by  an  appeal  to  sensibilities, 
or  even  by  more  questionable  methods.  Inducements  to  give  are  held  out  by  the 
showy  oratory  of  the  public  meeting,  the  little  dissipation  of  the  bazaar,  or  the 
luxury  of  the  public  dinner.  The  least  objectionable  form  is  the  charity  sermon. 
But  even  this  is  not  the  true  way.  If  the  standard  of  Christian  sentiment  and 
practice  at  all  resemble  that  of  early  days  this  would  be  unnecessary  (1  Ci^r.  xvi.  1). 
The  Primitive  Church  acted  on  this  precept,  and  a  trace  of  their  practice  is  found 
in  that  office  of  the  Holy  Communion  called  the  offertory.  In  the  course  of  the 
liturgy,  or  service  of  communion,  offerings  of  money,  food,  or  clothing,  were  made 
by  the  congregation,  which  wient  to  the  poor,  the  bishop,  the  fabric  of  the  church, 
and  the  subordinate  clergy  respectively.  Chrysostom  tell  us  that  the  Christians 
never  entered  church  without  giving  alms;  so  deeply  were  the  minds  of  our 
fathers  imbued  with  the  connection  between  alms  and  prayer.  Now  without 
enforcing  the  same  form  we  may  surely  say  that  the  methodical  principle  is  as 
binding  as  ever.  6.  All  that  is  necessary  in  order  to  this  is  a  little  time,  trouble, 
and  moral  courage.  Let  us  settle  what  proportion  of  our  income  is  due  to  works 
of  piety  or  charity.  The  proportion  will  vary  as  it  is  subtracted  from  a  very 
narrow  income  or  a  very  large  one  ;  but  that  being  settled,  all  that  follows  may  be 
done  with  a  small  expenditure  of  time.  A  private  account  is  oijeued  showing  on 
the  one  side  all  our  receipts  and  on  the  other  our  charitable  expenditure.  This 
is  examined  periodically,  and  should  it  appear  that  the  expenditure  comes  up  to 
the  proportion  we  have  determined  upon,  well  and  good  ;  should  it  exceed  (a  rare 
occurrence)  the  excess  may  be  balanced  by  retrenchment;  should  it  fall  short  it 
should  be  made  a  point  of  conscience  to  make  it  up  at  once.  If  every  one  would 
act  thus  the  resources  of  deserving  charities  would  never  fail.  7.  But  benefits 
of  a  much  higher  kind  would  accrue  to  the  giver.  It  would  greatly  contribute  to 
that  peace  of  mind  which  is  so  essential  an  element  of  spiritual  progress.  And 
again  the  very  satisfactoriness  of  the  process  would  lead  to  a  further  advance  in 
the  same  direction.  He  who  has  conscientiously  given  one-twentieth  this  year 
may  be  urged  to  give  one-tenth  next.  The  appetite  for  Christian  liberality  will 
grow  when  it  is  healthily  indulged  instead  of  being  morbidly  stimulated.  And  that 
wretched  feeling  that  every  fresh  appeal  is  an  exaction  would  cease.  8.  The  offer- 
ings made  to  God  out  of  this  treasury,  if  made  with  faith  in  His  name  are 
represented  as  memorials  of  us  in  heaven.  The  beautiful  act  of  the  woman  in 
Simon's  house  was  rewarded  in  a  similar  manner.  Do  you  desire  that  your  name 
should  be  known  in  heaven  7  Aspire  with  devout  prayers  and  seek  Christ  with 
devout  sympaihies  in  His  representatives.  Multiply  acts  of  faith  and  love,  and 
these  will  keep  alive  remembrance  of  you  in  the  heavenly  court,  where  no 
remembrance  is  witbout  a  requital.  Cornelius  was  recompensed  by  the  visit  of  an 
angel  and  an  apostle,  the  glad  tidings,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  {Dean 
Goulburn).  Giving  as  an  act  of  worship  : — I.  What  is  wobsuip?  1.  It  will  be 
a  sufficient  answer  to  say  that  love,  faith,  and  obedience  are  the  graces  chiefly 
exercised.  We  cannot  worship  whom  we  do  not  love,  in  whom  we  do  not  believe, 
or  whom  we  refuse  to  obey.  All  these  graces  are  implied  in  praise,  thanksgiving, 
confession,  supplication,  and  intercession,  and  where  they  exist  we  have  all  the 
essential  conditions  of  acceptable  worship.  2.  But  external  acts  are  required  as 
well  as  internal  conditions.  Under  the  Old  Testament  the  offering  of  sacrifices, 
&o. ;  under  the  New,  the  sacraments  together  with  such  other  forms  as  may  be 
expressive  of  this  required  inward  state.  3.  That  we  may  not  hide  our  light  under 
a  bushel — that  we  may  give  tangible  form  to  our  love,  faith,  and  obedience ;  that 


■CHAP.  ».]  THE  ACTS.  121 

God  may  be  publicly  glorified,  and  that  those  about  as  may  be  benefited,  we  are 
required  to  worship  Him  in  the  use  of  external  and  visible  forms.     II.  Abe  these 

ESSENTIAL    CONDITIONS    OF    WORSHIP   EVEB   FOUND    IN   ALMSGIVING  ?       Giving  is    a   mOSt 

natural  expression  of  these  graces.  They  are  implied  in  the  word  *'  memorial " — 
that  which  brings  to  remembrance  (Lev.  ii.  2-16).  The  same  Greek  word  in  the 
Septuagint.  Observe  :  All  giving  is  not  worship.  If  it  is  not  unto  God,  if  done 
grudgingly,  if  done  with  low  conceptions  of  the  duty,  it  may  be  offensive.  III. 
^y)VANTAGES  OF  GIVING  AS  AN  ACT  OF  woBSHip.  1.  It  lifts  the  wholo  department  of 
Christian  duty  to  a  higher  plane.  It  removes  it  from  the  region  of  beggary.  It  no 
longer  treats  God  as  if  He  was  some  Lazarus  seeking  the  crumbs  that  otherwise 
we  would  give  to  the  dogs.  2.  It  makes  giving  a  joyous  service.  3.  It  makes 
giving  a  means  of  grace.  (W.  F.  Beatty,  D.D.)  Giving  and  praying  : — The 
venerable  Father  SewaU,  of  Maine,  once  entered  a  meeting  in  behalf  of  foreign 
missions,  just  as  the  collectors  of  the  contributions  ^ere  resuming  their  seats.  The 
chairman  of  the  meeting  requested  him  to  lead  in  prayer.  The  old  gentleman 
stood,  hesitatingly,  as  if  he  had  not  heard  the  request.  It  was  repeated  in  a 
louder  voice  ;  but  there  was  no  response.  It  was  observed,  however,  that  Mr. 
Sewall  was  fumbling  in  his  pockets,  and  presently  he  produced  a  piece  of  money, 
which  he  deposited  in  the  contribution-box.  The  chairman,  thinking  he  had  not 
been  understood,  said  loudly,  "  I  didn't  ask  you  to  give,  Father  Sewall ;  I  asked  you 
to  pray."  "  Oh,  yes,"  he  replied,  "  I  heard  you,  but  I  can't  pray  tiU  I  have  given 
something."      {N.    T.    Anecdotes.)  Devotion    and    beneficence  : — A    coloured 

Presbyterian  deacon  was  in  the  habit  of  shutting  his  eyes,  while  he  sang  with 
great  unction,  "  Fly  abroad,  thou  mighty  gospel !  "  and  not  seeing  the  contribution- 
plate.  "  Oh,  yes  1 "  said  the  plate-bearer  ;  "  but  you  just  give  something  to  make 
it  fly."  Prayer  and  gifts  : — A  poor  man  who  had  a  large  family  gave  them  a 
very  comfortable  support  while  he  was  in  health.  He  broke  his  leg,  and  was  laid 
up  for  some  weeks.  As  he  would  be  for  some  time  destitute  of  the  means  of  grace, 
it  was  proposed  to  hold  a  prayer-meeting  at  his  house.  The  meeting  was  led  by 
Deacon  Brown.  A  loud  knock  at  the  door  interrupted  the  service.  A  tall,  lank, 
blue-frocked  youngster  stood  at  the  door  with  an  ox-goad  in  his  hand,  and  asked  to 
see  Deacon  Brown.  "Father  could  not  attend  this  meeting,"  he  said;  "but  he 
sent  his  prayers,  and  they  are  out  in  the  cart."  They  were  brought  in,  in  the 
shape  of  potatoes,  beef,  pork,  and  corn.  The  meeting  broke  up  without  the 
benediction.  Nor  did  the  poor  fellow  suffer  during  his  whole  confinement.  The 
substantial  prayers  of  the  donors  became  means  of  grace."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  best  almsgiving : — S.  Carlo  Borromeo,  the  great  patron  of  idle  almsgiving, 
came  hither  (the  palace  and  church  buildings  of  Caprarolo)  to  see  it  when  it  was 
completed,  and  complained  that  so  much  money  had  not  been  given  to  the  poor 
instead.  "  I  have  let  them  have  it  all  little  by  Uttle,"  said  Alessandro  Farnese, 
"  but  I  have  made  them  earn  it  by  the  sweat  of  their  brows."  (A.  J.  C.  Hare.) 
Beneficence,  Godlike  : — Men  resemble  the  gods  in  nothin-f  so  much  as  in  doing 
good.  (Cicero.)  Beneficence  knovm  to  God  : — A  poor  Irishwoman  went  to  a 
venerable  priest  in  Boston,  and  asked  him  to  forward  to  Ireland  her  help  for  the 
famine  sufferers.  "How  much  can  you  spare?"  asked  the  priest.  "I  have  a 
hundred  dollars  saved,"  she  said,  "and  I  can  spare  that."  The  priest  reasoned 
with  her,  saying  that  her  gift  was  too  great  for  her  means,  but  she  was  firm  in  her 
purpose.  It  would  do  her  good  to  know  that  she  had  helped  ;  she  could  rest  happier 
thinking  of  the  poor  famiUes  she  had  saved  from  hunger  and  death.  The  priest 
received  her  money  with  moistened  eyes.  "  Now,  what  is  your  name  ?  "  he  asked, 
•'  that  I  may  have  it  published."  "  My  name  ?  "  said  the  brave  soul,  counting  over 
her  money;  "  don't  mind  that,  sir.  Just  send  them  the  help — and  God  will  know 
my  name."  Beneficence  recompensed  by  God  : — A  poor  man  came  one  day  to 
Michael  Feneberg,  the  pastor  of  Seeg,  in  Bavaria,  and  begged  three  crowns,  that 
lie  might  finish  his  journey.  It  was  all  that  Feneberg  had  ;  but  as  he  besought 
him  earnestly  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  he  gave  it.  Immediately 
afterwards  he  found  himself  in  gi-eat  outward  need,  and  seeing  no  way  of  relief,  he 
prayed,  "  Lord,  I  lent  Thee  three  crowns  ;  Thou  hast  not  yet  returned  them,  and 
Thou  knowest  how  I  need  them.  Lord,  I  pray  Thee  give  them  back."  The  same 
day  brought  a  messenger  with  a  money-letter,  which  Gossner,  his  assistant,  reached 
over  to  him,  saying,  "  Here,  father,  is  what  you  expended."  It  contained  two 
hundred  thalers,  or  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  dollars,  which  the  poor  traveller 
had  begged  from  a  rich  man  for  the  vicar ;  and  the  childlike  old  man,  in  joyful 
Amazement,  cried  out,  "  Ah,  Lord,  one  dare  ask  nothing  of  Thee,  for  straightway 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

Thou  makest  one  feel  so  much  ashamed."  {H.  T.  Williams.)  Beneficence,  a 
Christian  obligation : — As  the  moon  doth  show  her  light  to  the  world  which  she 
receiveth  from  the  sun ;  so  we  ought  to  bestow  the  benefits  received  of  God  to  the 
profit  of  our  neighbour.     (Cawdray.) 

Vers.  9-16.  On  the  morrow  .  .  .  Peter  went  up  upon  the  housetop  to  pray. — 

Retirement  necessary  for  prayer : — Have  you  noticed  that  if  all  day  long  there  is 
not  a  knock  at  the  door,  there  will  be  one  if  you  retire  to  pray  ?  It  is  wise  to  do 
as  the  Saviour  says,  "  Enter  into  thy  closet,  and  when  thou  hast  shut  to  the  door, 
pray  to  thy  Father  that  seeth  in  secret."  That  shutting  of  the  door  means  that 
we  are  to  seek  secrecy,  and  to  prevent  interruption.  A  little  boy,  who  was  accus- 
tomed to  spend  a  time  every  day  in  prayer,  went  up  into  a  hayloft,  and  when  he 
climbed  into  the  hayloft  he  always  pulled  the  ladder  up  after  him.  Some  one 
asked  him  why  he  did  so.  He  answered,  "  As  there  is  no  door,  I  puU  up  the 
ladder."  Oh,  that  we  could  always  in  some  way  cut  the  connection  between  our 
soul  and  the  intruding  things  which  lurk  below !  There  is  a  story  told  of  me  and  of 
some  person,  I  never  knew  who  it  was,  who  desired  to  see  me  on  a  Saturday  night, 
when  I  had  shut  myself  up  to  make  ready  for  the  Sabbath.  He  was  very  great 
and  important,  so  the  maid  came  to  say  that  some  one  desired  to  see  me.  I  bade 
her  say  that  it  was  my  rule  to  see  no  one  at  that  time.  Then  he  was  more  impor- 
tant and  impressive  still,  and  said,  "  Tell  Mr.  Spurgeon  that  a  servant  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  desires  to  see  him  immediately. "  The  frightened  servant  brought  the 
message  ;  but  the  sender  gained  little  by  it,  for  my  answer  was,  "  Tell  him  I  am 
busy  with  his  Master,  and  cannot  see  servants  now."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Peter's 
vision: — 1.  When  Cornelius,  the  Gentile,  prayed  in  his  house,  it  was  at  the  ninth 
hour,  the  hour  of  prayer  among  the  Jews  ;  when  Peter,  the  Jew,  prayed,  it  was  at 
the  sixth  hour,  or  noon,  which  was  not  one  of  the  stated  times.  This  is  worthy  of 
being  noticed  as  occurring  at  a  time  when  in  far  greater  matters  the  Jews  were 
about  to  become  as  the  Gentiles,  the  Gentiles  as  the  Jews.  This  is  the  second 
instance  of  the  great  honour  put  upon  prayer.  A  praying  Gentile  is  the  first  un- 
circumcised  person  admitted  into  the  Christian  Church.  A  praying  apostle  the 
instrument  employed  to  bring  about  this  happy  consummation.  And  to  each  was 
his  own  blessing  given  at  the  very  time  when  he  was  in  the  exercise  of  prayer.  It 
is  well  for  Christians  to  have  fixed  hours  of  prayer ;  and  though  they  should  not 
be  in  bondage  to  such  hours,  yet  without  good  reason  they  should  not  dei^art  from 
them.  There  is  in  our  hearts  such  a  backwardne.ss  to  so  spiritual  a  duty,  that  if 
we  do  not  charge  it  upon  our  conscience  to  observe  the  hour,  the  world  will  find  us 
other  employment.  Peter  observed  the  time,  and  was  careful  also  in  selecting  the 
place  for  prayer :  in  the  temple  at  the  stated  hours,  at  other  times  in  the  best 
adapted  part  of  the  house.  He  affords  in  this  an  edifying  example.  The  house  of 
God  is  open  to  all :  at  the  stated  times  the  rich  and  the  poor  may  repair  thither  ; 
and,  surely,  on  the  Lord's  day,  all,  unless  distance  or  sickness  hinders,  should 
offer  both  their  morning  and  their  evening  sacrifice.  As  to  private  prayer,  many 
have  not  the  advantage  of  a  private  apartment.  But  men  can  accommodate  them- 
selves to  circumstances.  Noise  is  a  disturber  of  sleep ;  but  men  who  live  in  the 
midst  of  noise  can  sleep  in  the  midst  of  it  as  if  in  the  stillest  solitude.  And  thus 
a  poor  Christian  may  pray  with  much  collectedness  in  the  midst  of  interruptions 
which  would  altogether  discompose  others,  and  what  a  man's  house  does  not  afford 
the  open  field  does.  2.  But  wherever  a  man  is  praying,  the  great  point  is  to  let 
prayer  be  his  one  business,  to  be  absorbed  in  it.  Peter,  while  he  prayed,  was  in  a 
trance ;  the  world  was  altogether  shut  out  from  him.  A  man  in  prayer  should 
have  his  senses,  memory,  imagination,  closed  against  all  other  objects,  and  should 
converse  with  God  aloue.  This  would  be  the  way  to  behold  heaven  indeed  opened, 
and  blessings  of  every  kind  descending  upon  him  ;  for  prayer  is  the  key  which 
opens  heaven,  unlocks  its  sacred  treasures,  and  brings  down  the  richest  gifts  both 
of  providence  and  grace  on  the  head  of  the  supplicant.  3.  Yes,  every  good  and 
every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  &c.  And  the  vision  of  Peter  affords  a  lively  illus- 
tration of  this  truth.  If,  instead  of  buying  what  we  know  has  been  killed  in  the 
slaughter-house,  we  saw  a  vessel  descend  from  heaven,  and  if,  after  we  had  taken 
out  of  it  what  was  sufficient  for  our  repast,  we  saw  it  again  taken  up  into  heaven, 
we  should  feel  that  the  food  thus  given  was  indeed  sent  down  from  God.  But  in 
that  case  the  truth  would  not  be  more  certain  than  it  is  now.  For,  whence  cam& 
these  creatures  into  being?  Who  gave  them  the  properties  which  render  them  fit 
for  meat?    And  who  keeps  up  the  successive  generations  of  them  from  age  to  age? 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  123 


For  a  season,  and  to  answer  a  particular  purpose,  a  great  restriction  was  put  upon 
these  creatures.  But  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so.  The  grant  to  Noah  is 
uuhmited — "  Every  moving  thing  that  liveth  shall  be  meat  for  you,  even  as  the 
green  herb  have  I  giv«n  you  all  things."  And  now  that  the  law  with  its  cere- 
monies and  carnal  ordinances  is  aboUshed,  to  us  this  original  grant  is  restored  in 
all  its  fulness.  We  know  that  "  every  creature  of  God  is  good,  and  nothing  to  be 
refused  if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving,  for  it  is  sanctiHed  by  the  word  of  God 
and  prayer."  Oh,  why  do  we  not  thus  sainctify  our  meals  ?  To  do  so  would  give  a 
sweetness  to  the  humblest  fare,  and  exalt  our  ordinary  repasts  into  means  of 
grace.  Acd  surely,  when  all  things  are  become  lawful  to  us,  and  no  other  restraints 
laid  on  us  than  those  of  charity  and  temperance,  our  larger  hberty  demands  from 
us  more  abundant  thanksgiving.  But  the  doing  away  of  all  distinction  between 
clean  and  unclean  in  meats  is  a  light  matter  in  comparison  of  the  doing  away  of 
all  distinction  between  clean  and  unclean  in  persons.  The  Jews  considered  all  but 
themselves  unclean.  To  remove  this  prejudice,  the  vision  significantly  taught 
that  God  had  cleansed  them,  in  order  to  comprehend  which  we  must  understand 
two  things.  First,  that  He  looked  upon  them  as  clean,  as  fit  to  be  received  into 
the  covenant.  Every  person  who  is  born  into  the  world  is  really  unclean — Jew 
and  Gentilfi  alike,  for  there  is  no  difference.  But  hitherto  God  regarded  the  Jews 
as  clean,  and  admitted  their  children  by  circumcision  into  His  covenant,  giving 
them  the  seal  of  righteousness  by  faith,  while  the  Gentiles  He  accounted  unclean, 
and  such  were  not  admitted  without  circumcision.  But  now  men  of  every  nation 
were  accounted  clean,  and  could  be  received  into  the  Church  by  baptism  on  pro- 
fessing their  faith  in  Christ ;  and  the  children  of  such  parents  were  holy,  and 
would  be  admitted  into  the  Christian  Church  by  baptism.  But  the  gospel  covenant 
not  only  cleanses  from  legal  uncleanness ;  it  provides  also  for  inward  cleansing 
and  meetness  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  hght.  (J.  Fawcett,  M.A.) 
Peter's  vision: — The  world  has  had  seven  birthdays.  1.  The  creation.  2.  The 
day  of  the  unfolding  of  redemptive  purpose.  3.  The  call  of  Abraham.  4. 
Christmas  Day.  5.  Ascension  Day.  6.  The  Day  of  Pentecost.  7.  The  day  which 
banned  the  distinctions  of  race  and  creed  and  opeued  the  kingdom  to  all.  I.  The 
NEW  REVELATION  IN  ITS  MANNER  AND  METHOD.  1.  Peter  had  sought  retirement  for 
prayer.  Prayer  has  a  subjective  influence.  Perceptive  faculties  are  refined  and 
stimulated.  Christ's  physical  form  was  transfigured.  2.  After  prayer  there  was 
ecstasy.  Intuition  quickened  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Equivalent  to  the  "opening" 
of  eyes  and  ears.  Not  delirium  or  rhapsody.  Men  should  cultivate  "  the  faculty 
divine,"  and  expect  the  Spirit  to  "  take  the  things  of  Christ  and  show  them  " 
(1  Cor.  ii.  12,  13).  II.  The  meaning  of  the  vision.  1.  The  abrogation  of  the 
ceremonial  law  as  of  binding  obligation  (Kom.  xiv.  14,  17).  2.  The  separations  of 
men  no  longer  lawful.  The  narrowness  of  old  Judaism  contrary  to  the  all-embracing 
spirit  of  gospel  grace.  Nc  class  is  to  be  favoured  at  the  expense  of  another.  Two 
great  ideas  are  thus  suggested.  (1)  That  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood.  (2)  That  of 
tbe  brotherhood  of  man.  {Preacher's  Monthly.)  The  Petrine  vision  at  Joppa  : 
— There  is  something  very  restful  in  the  picture  drawn  for  us  of  St.  Peter  at 
this  crisis.  There  is  none  of  that  feverish  hurry  and  restlessness  which  make 
some  good  men  and  their  methods  very  tryir,g  to  others.  St.  Peter,  indeed, 
did  not  hve  in  an  age  of  telegrams  and  postcai'ds  and  express  trains,  which  all 
contribute  more  or  less  to  that  feverish  activity  and  restlessness  so  characteristic 
of  ti)is  age.  But  even  if  he  had  lived  in  such  a  time,  I  am  sure  his  faith  in  God 
would  have  saved  him  from  that  fussiness,  that  life  of  perpetual  hurry,  yet  never 
bringing  forth  any  abiding  fruit,  which  we  behold  in  so  many  moderns.  It,  is  no 
wonder  such  men's  fussiness  should  be  fruitless,  because  their  natures  are  poor, 
shallow,  uncultivated,  where  their  seed  springs  up  rapidly  but  brings  forth  no  fruit 
to  perfection,  because  it  has  no  deepness  of  earth.  It  is  no  wonder  that  St.  Peter 
should  have  spoken  with  power  at  Cajsarea  and  been  successful  in  opening  the  door 
of  faith  to  the  Gentiles,  because  he  prepared  himself  for  doing  the  Divine  work  by 
the  discipline  of  meditation,  and  thought,  and  spiritual  converse  with  his  risen 
Lord.  I.  The  place.  1.  Joppa  has  been  from  ancient  times  the  port  of  Jerusalem, 
and  is  even  now  rising  into  somewhat  of  its  former  commercial  greatness,  special'y 
owing  to  the  late  development  of  the  orange  trade,  for  the  production  of  which  fruit 
Jaffa  or  Joppa  has  become  famous.  Three  thousand  years  ago  Joppa  was  a  favourite 
resort  of  the  Phoenician  fleets  (2  Chron.  ii.  16).  At  a  later  period,  when  God  would 
send  Jonah  on  a  mission  to  Gentile  Nineveh,  and  when  Jonah  desired  to  thwart 
God's  merciful  designs  towards  the  outer  world,  the  prophet  fled  to  Joppa  and  there 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

took  ship.  And  now  again  Joppa  becomes  the  refuge  of  another  prophet,  -who  feela 
the  same  natural  hesitation  about  admitting  the  Gentiles  to  God's  mercy,  but  who, 
unlike  Jonah,  yields  immediate  assent  to  the  heavenly  message,  and  finds  peaca 
and  blessing  in  the  paths  of  loving  obedience.  2.  It  was  with  Simon,  the  tanner  of 
Joppa,  that  St.  Peter  was  staying.  Tanners  as  a  class  were  despised  and  compara- 
tively outcast  among  the  Jews.  Tanning  was  counted  an  unclean  trade,  because  of 
the  necessary  contact  with  dead  bodies  which  it  involved.  Yet  it  was  to  a  tanner's 
house  that  the  apostle  made  his  way,  and  there  he  lodged  for  many  days,  shewing 
that  the  mind  even  of  St.  Peter  was  steadily  rising  above  narrow  Jewish  prejudices 
into  that  higher  and  nobler  atmosphere  where  he  learned  in  fullest  degree  that  no 
man  and  no  lawful  trade  is  to  be  counted  common  or  unclean.  II.  The  time.  Joppa 
is  thirty  miles  from  Caesarea.  The  leading  coast  towns  were  then  connected  by  an 
excellent  road.  The  centurion's  messengers  doubtless  travelled  on  horseback, 
leading  spare  beasts  for  the  accommodation  of  the  apostle.  Less  than  twenty-four 
hours  after  their  departure  from  Caesarea  they  drew  nigh  to  Joppa,  and  then  it  wa8 
that  God  revealed  His  purposes  to  His  beloved  servant.  The  very  hour  can  be  fixed. 
Cornelius  saw  the  angel  at  the  ninth  hour,  when  he  "  was  keeping  the  hour  of 
prayer."  Peter  saw  the  vision  at  the  sixth  hour,  when  he  went  up  on  the  house- 
top to  pray,  according  to  the  example  of  the  Psalmist  (Psa.  Iv.  18).  St.  Peter  evi- 
dently  was  a  careful  observer  of  all  the  forms  amid  which  his  youthful  training  had 
been  conducted.  He  did  not  seek  in  the  name  of  spiritual  religion  to  discard  these 
old  forms.  He  recognised  the  danger  of  any  such  course.  Forms  may  often  tend 
to  formalism  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  human  nature.  But  they  also  help  to 
preserve  and  guard  the  spirit  of  ancient  institutions  in  times  of  sloth  and  decay,  till 
the  Spirit  from  on  high  again  breathes  upon  the  dry  bones  and  imparts  fresh  life. 
St.  Peter  used  the  forms  of  Jewish  externalism,  imparting  to  them  some  of  his  own 
intense  earnestness,  and  the  Lord  set  His  seal  of  approval  upon  his  action  by  re- 
vealing the  purposes  of  His  mercy  and  love  to  the  Gentile  world  at  the  noontide 
hour  of  prayer.  III.  The  vision.  To  the  mere  man  of  sense  or  to  the  mere  carnal 
mind  St.  Peter's  hunger  may  seem  a  simple  natural  operation,  but  to  the  devout 
beUever  it  appears  as  Divinely  planned  in  order  that  a  spiritual  satisfaction  and  com- 
pleteness may  be  imparted  to  his  soul  unconsciously  craving  after  a  fuller  knowledge 
of  the  Divine  will.  And  if  St.  Peter's  hunger  was  taken  up  and  incorporated  with 
the  Divine  plan  of  salvation,  we  may  be  sure  that  our  own  wants  and  trials  do  not 
escape  the  omniscient  eye  of  Him  who  plans  all  our  hves,  appointing  the  end  from 
the  very  beginning.  St.  Peter  was  hungry,  and  as  food  was  preparing  he  fell  into 
a  trance,  and  then  the  vision  answering  in  its  form  to  the  hunger  which  he  felt  waa 
granted.  The  hour  had  at  last  come  for  the  manifestation  of  God's  everlasting 
purposes,  when  the  sacred  society  should  assume  its  universal  privileges  and  stand 
forth  resplendent  in  its  true  character  as  God's  Holy  Cathohc  Church — of  which  the 
Temple  had  been  a  temporary  symbol  and  pledge — a  house  of  prayer  for  all  nations, 
the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  the  city  of  the  Great  King,  until  the  consummation  of 
all  things.  (G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.)  The  vision  of  Peter: — 1.  "A  man  can 
receive  nothing  except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven "  (John  iii.  27 ;  James 
i.  17).  As  a  single  seed  of  corn  cannot  unfold  itself  without  the  quickening 
influence  and  care  of  God,  so  the  immortal  seed,  through  which  we  become  "  the 
firstfruits  of  His  creatures,"  must  be  vivified  by  the  Almighty  I  We  do  not  see  this 
influence  descend ;  we  only  observe  the  unfolding  after  it  is  completed.  We  see 
the  rose  bloom,  but  not  the  act  of  blossoming  ;  but  how  can  we  doubt  the  care  of 
an  Almighty  hand,  or  the  wafting  around  it  of  an  invisible  breath  ?  All  depends 
on  God's  blessing  (2  Cor.  iii,  5).  How  could  we  come  to  God  if  God  had  not  first 
come  to  us !  He  must  bless  our  labour,  and  work  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do. 
This  work  of  God  in  us  is  a  mystery,  yet  not  altogether  incomprehensible ;  it  is 
like  the  visible  and  palpable  influence  of  the  sun.  In  order  to  exhibit  this  truth  we 
have  here  a  visible  example  of  the  invisible  influence  of  God,  and  of  the  descent  of  His 
Holy  Spirit.  We  may  also  be  assured  from  the  history  that  if  we  seek  the  kingdom 
of  God  and  His  righteousness,  all  things  that  we  need  shall  be  added  unto  us.  2. 
The  gospel  history  has  depicted  with  peculiar  openness  the  character  of  Peter. 
The  Lord  had  given  him  the  surname  of  "Rock,"  not  merely  in  reference  to  what 
he  should  become,  but  also  to  that  which  he  was  by  nature.  He  was  distinguished 
from  the  rest  of  our  Lord's  followers  by  an  impetuosity  of  temper  which  seems  to 
have  been  born  with  him,  and  which  showed  itself  by  obstinately  holding  any 
opinion  which  the  mind  had  once  embraced.  None  of  the  disciples  gainsaid  our 
Lord  so  often  as  Peter.     When  Jesus  told  them  of  His  approaching  sitSerings,  ha 


CHAP.  X.]  TEE  ACTS.  125 

eaid,  "  Be  it  far  from  Thee."  ^  When  Jesus  washed  the  disciples'  feet,  Peter  with- 
stood Him.  In  his  fall  also,  in  spite  of  his  better  judgment,  he  showed  a  stubborn 
obstinacy.  He  also  subjected  himself  in  Antioch  to  the  severe  reproof  of  Paul, 
when,  to  please  the  Jews,  he  once  more  came  under  the  bondage  of  the  Levitical 
law,  to  the  offence  of  the  Gentile  Church.  The  Bible  has  never  been  silent  with 
regard  to  the  human  weakness  and  errors  of  its  heroes.  3.  It  appears  to  have  been 
particularly  difficult  for  the  apostle  to  comprehend  the  counsel  of  God  with  regard 
to  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  Though  he  had  announced  at  Pentecost  that  the 
Lord  was  about  to  call  those  who  were  afar  off,  yet  he  did  not  say  this  from  him- 
self, but  from  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  The  time  and  the  hour,  the  grand  moment 
of  the  second  birth  of  the  world,  was  now  come.  Our  Lord  had  often  alluded  to 
it  before,  "  Other  sheep  I  have  which  are  not  of  this  fold,"  &c.  On  another 
occasion  He  praised  and  rewarded  the  faith  both  of  a  Canaanitish  woman  and  a 
Gentile  centurion.  He  had  also  commanded  His  apostles  to  go  to  all  nations  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  Peter,  who  found  it  so  difBcult  to  wean  him- 
self from  the  old  covenant,  had  to  begin  the  work  of  God  among  the  Gentiles.  The 
beginning,  however,  must  first  be  made  in  himself.  4.  Peter  went  up  about  mid- 
day to  pray  on  the  flat  roof  of  the  house.  The  Jews  were  fond  of  praying  there 
under  the  open  heaven,  because  they  were  here  undisturbed,  and  could  turn  their 
face  towards  the  temple.  In  this  circumstance  we  may  perceive  how  Peter  con- 
tinued faithfully  to  observe  the  rules  and  customs  of  Judaism,  little  aware  that 
they  were  soon  to  cease,  and  give  place  to  the  worshipping  of  God  in  spirit  and 
in  truth.  After  he  had  finished  his  prayer  "  he  became  very  hungry,  and  would 
have  eaten,"  but  he  must  now  be  fed  with  other  food.  He  was  entranced,  i.e., 
transported  out  of  his  natural  state  into  a  supernatural  one  ;  his  outward  senses 
were  closed,  but  the  eyes  of  his  inner  man  were  opened,  that  he  might  behold 
heavenly  thingB.  "  He  saw  heaven  opened,"  &c.  This  was  done  thrice,  to 
strengthen  the  impression  of  the  Divine  testimony.  In  this  vision  we  behold  the 
condescension  of  our  Lord.  The  whole  of  revelation  is  a  letting  down,  a  humani- 
sation  of  the  invisible  God ;  through  it  alone  can  man  come  to  his  heavenly 
Father  and  become  His  child.  Almost  all  the  Old  Testament  consists  of  types  and 
similitudes.  Even  in  this  day  of  light  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly  the  secrets  of 
the  future  and  perfected  kingdom  of  heaven ;  yet  the  time  shall  come  when  we 
shall  see  them  face  to  face.  Thus  the  Apostle  Peter,  like  all  the  prophets  who 
were  before  him,  was  led  to  a  higher  knowledge  gradually.  We  see  also  in  this 
vision  that  something  entirely  new  was  about  to  begin  in  the  kingdom  of  God 
upon  earth.  The  prophet  had  for  ages  foretold  it ;  and  our  Lord  Himself  had 
ordained  and  predicted  it ;  but  the  contracted  view  of  the  disciples  could  not  dis- 
tinguish it ;  therefore  the  thing  itself  was  done,  and  they  were  led  to  comprehend 
it  slowly  and  gradually.  The  Ughtning's  flash  destroys  the  aged  tree;  but  the 
gentle  daylight  develops  a  new  life  out  of  what  seems  passed  away  and  decayed. 
This  new  light  removed  the  old  covenant  and  declared  the  new,  by  which  all  the 
Gentiles,  without  the  law,  were  led  into  the  path  of  grace.  5.  The  time  of  dis- 
tinction and  separation  was  now  to  cease  (Eph.  ii.  13-16).  "  Kill  and  eat,"  said 
the  voice ;  the  same  which  commanded  Isaiah  to  write,  "  They  shall  bring  an 
offering  unto  the  Lord  out  of  all  nations  "  (chap.  Ixvi.)  ;  the  same  which  inspired 
Paul  to  say  in  Eomans  (chap,  xv.),  "  That  the  offering  up  of  the  Gentiles  might  be 
acceptable,  being  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  sanctification  of  the  Gentiles 
has  been  going  on,  even  to  the  present  day,  and  will  continue  to  go  on  until  all  be 
fulfilled  which  God  has  promised.  Conclusion  :  We  have  visions  and  words  from 
heaven  no  longer  ;  we  have  both  in  our  Bible ;  nor  is  there  ever  awanting  a  mani- 
festation of  the  mind  of  God  in  daily  occurrences,  in  providential  events,  and,  above 
all,  in  the  secret  history  of  our  souls  ;  thus  beholding  God  in  everything,  what  is 
in  itself  common  and  unclean  becomes  purified  and  sanctified ;  and  in  this  way  is 
the  grace  of  God  revealed  to  all  men.  (F.  A.  Krummacher,  D.D.)  An  apostle 
dreaming  : — 1.  Aspiring  I  Hungering  I  Sleeping  !  Such  manner  of  creatures  we 
are ;  strange  conjunctions  of  spirit  and  flesh,  of  heaven  and  earth ;  in  whom 
•'  thoughts  that  wander  through  eternity "  are  stopped  by  needs  and  cravings 
identical  with  those  of  "  all  cattle  and  creeping  things  " ;  in  whom  are  arms  that 
reach  after  the  Infinite,  with  the  stomach  and  the  appetites  of  the  beast ;  one 
minute  lost  in  lofty  meditation,  the  next  yawning  for  bed,  or  responding  with 
moist  mouth  to  the  odour  of  baked  meats.  Yet,  "  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
is,  there  is  liberty,"  and  there  eating  and  sleeping  are  never  wholly  of  the  earth 
earthy.    The  meal  refines  more  or  less  toward  the  grace  of  a  sacrament,  and 


12«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

again  and  again  into  the  slumber  heaven  opens.  There  is  an  ethereal  way  of 
getting  your  dinner,  in  which  the  soul  both  gives  and  receives;  and  some  men 
are  greater  often  in  visions  than  others  in  their  intensest  and  most  active  wake- 
fulness. The  apostle  who  prayed,  slept  after  a  godly  sort,  was  capable  of  being 
Divinely  touched  and  taught  through  his  dreams.  There  is  a  latent  heavenliness 
in  the  flesh  of  an  eminent  saint,  and  there  are  heavenly  possibilities  in  the 
saint's  sleep.  He  is  more  susceptible  at  all  times  to  communications  and  impres- 
sions from  the  Lord.  2,  Some  men  can  hardly  afford  to  stand  at  ease  and 
unoccupied  without  running  the  risk  of  immediate  invasions  from  beneath.  An 
habitual  downward  bent  leaves  them  open  in  their  dreams  to  hell.  But  to  the  pure 
and  lofty  heart,  its  loose,  lazy  intervals  are  frequently  among  its  most  growing 
and  nourishing  times,  when  that  which  it  loves  supremely,  and  is  accustomed  to 
cultivate,  visits  it  vrithout  being  sought,  when  its  very  quiescence  becomes  a  clear 
mirror,  in  which  new  Divine  messages  form  and  flash.  If  only  we  are  earnest, 
thoughtful,  and  nobly  aspiring,  we  need  not  be  afraid  in  the  least  to  pause  and 
play  now  and  then,  nor  imagine  that  such  occasional  abandonment  must  be  fruitless 
in  relation  to  our  higher  aims.  We  are  revealed  by  that  which  flows  in  upon  us 
in  empty,  unemployed  moments  ;  and  blessed  are  they  to  whom  in  these  moments 
the  best  has  first  and  facile  entrance,  whose  vacancies  angels  rush  to  fill,  and  with 
whose  earthiest  elements  heaven  can  freely  mix  and  blend.  3.  But  no  heavenly 
susceptibility,  however  large  and  fine,  will  exempt  us  from  having  to  ask  at  times, 
What  is  it?  Is  it  phantom  or  reality?  Is  it  God  or  devil?  St.  Peter  was  left 
wondering  whether  the  strange  scenery  amidst  which  he  had  been  moving  in  the 
land  of  slumber  was  really  the  shrine  of  a  Divine  communication,  or  merely  a 
coloured  vapour  exhaled  from  the  seusation  of  hunger.  And  how  often,  in  our 
waking  moments,  have  we  been  visited  with  mental  glimpses  or  impressions  that  we 
could  not  understand  1  ••  Why,"  he  asked,  "have  I  seen  this  thing,  which  yields 
to  my  inquiry  no  fruit  of  admonition  or  instruction?"  Yet  such  fruit  it  was 
designed  to  yield  him,  and  would,  ere  long;  not,  however,  by  continued  brooding 
over  it,  but  in  the  course  of  events.  Let  him  wait  until  summoned  to  come  down 
to  men  who  are  even  now  on  their  way  to  the  tanner's  house,  and  then  all  will 
grow  clear.  Well,  is  it  not  often  thus,  that  life  comes  in  time  to  explain  the  Divine 
reason,  concerning  which  we  have  wondered,  perhaps  fretfully,  why  we  were  sub- 
mitted to  them,  and  have  thought  that  they  might  have  been  spared  us  without 
loss  or  detriment  ?  And  yet  long  afterwards,  maybe,  we  have  discovered  that  they 
were  not  for  nothing.  In  some  later  crisis  of  life  we  have  found  them  contributing 
to  excite  and  strengthen  us  for  it.  We  have  lived  to  find  in  our  life  the  fruit  of 
some  of  those  experiences,  the  Divine  message  of  which  we  have  been  unable  to 
read,  have  lived  to  learn  that  they  were  needful  for  us  and  could  not  have  been 
spared.  We  have  felt  as,  in  listening  to  the  deputation  from  Cornelius,  St.  Peter 
felt  with  respect  to  his  mysterious  dream.  Ah  1  this  is  why  they  occurred  ;  this 
is  what  they  were  intended  to  fit  us  for  1  {S.  A.  Tipple.)  And  he  saw  heaven 
opened,  and  a  certain  vessel  descending. — The  coviprehensiveness  of  the  gospel: 
— The  gospel  is  here  compared  to — I.  A  geeat  sheet.  A  small  sheet  would 
not  suffice  to  convey  the  truth  God  was  about  to  reveal — that  all  nations  were 
to  be  gathered  into  His  Church.  Judaism  was  only  a  small  sheet,  just  big  enough 
to  cover  Palestine.  But  Christianity  was  a  "  great  sheet " — a  clear  hint  as  to 
its  cosmopolitan  character.  Christianity  as  let  down  from  heaven  is  larger  than 
as  reproduced  inhuman  creeds;  as  revealed  by  God  it  is  larger  than  as  apprehended 
by  man.  The  tendency  of  man  is  to  narrow  the  love  of  God,  to  contract  the  Divine 
sheet  till  it  becomes  no  bigger  than  a  pocketbandkerchief.  But  just  as  the  creation 
is  larger  than  science,  so  is  the  Church  of  God  greater  than  any  one  particular 
Church.  Just  as  God  is  greater  than  man,  so  is  the  Divine  revelation  more  com- 
prehensive than  any  creed  formulated  by  human  wisdom.  "  Our  little  systems 
have  their  day,"  &c.  II.  Let  down  from  heaven.  The  idea  of  the  comprehen- 
siveuess  of  the  gospel  has  come  down  from  God.  1.  You  will  not  find  it  in 
heathenism.  The  idea  of  universal  fellowship  based  on  universal  equahty  never 
occurred  to  any  philosopher.  True,  tbere  was  a  dark,  unconscious  feeling  after  it. 
Plato's  republic  was  a  strenuous  groping  after  the  Christian  kingdom  of  God ;  but 
it  falls  far  short  of  it,  because  it  places  the  ground  of  unity  in  the  intellect  instead 
of  in  the  spiritual  nature.  That  is  only  a  republic  among  philosophers;  the 
labouring  classes  are  reduced  to  a  condition  of  hopeless  servitude.  2.  You  will 
not  find  it  in  Judaism.  A  few  prophetic  intimations  were  given  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment that  the  Gentiles  would  pay  homage  to  the  Messiah ;  but  how  they  were  to 


CHAp.x.]  THE  ACTS.  127 

reap  the  benefits  of  redemption  was  not  known.  Now,  however,  the  mystery  is 
made  known,  but  the  majority  of  the  believers  utterly  failed  to  realise  it,  and  sought 
to  discredit  it.  Upon  this  truth  hinged  the  great  controversy  of  the  apostolic  age ; 
and  so  novel  was  it,  so  contrary  to  the  current  of  thought  of  the  age,  that  it  took 
the  whole  lifetime  of  the  apostles  to  establish  it.  A  great  truth  is  always  slow  to 
be  apprehended  by  the  masses  of  men.  Take,  for  instance,  gravitation.  At  the 
time  of  Sir  Isaac's  death  no  astronomer  above  forty  years  of  age  beUeved  in  it. 
Take  again  the  principle  of  Free  Trade  ;  to-day  England  is  the  only  country  which 
thoroughly  believes  in  it,  and  not  all  England.  But  these  truths  were  not  by  any 
means  of  the  same  consequence  to  society  as  the  important  truth  taught  Peter. 
in.  Knit  at  the  foub  corners.  The  gospel  is  to  extend  its  frontiers  and  to 
exert  its  influence  over  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe.  1.  God  began  with  a 
family.  He  calls  Abraham  and  separates  him  to  Himself.  In  Genesis,  accordingly, 
we  find  family  religion  the  first  step  in  the  recovery  of  the  lost  world.  In  Genesis 
God  has  a  cause,  though  not  a  kingdom — just  a  few  worshippers,  but  no  visible 
organisation.  2.  After  the  family  comes  the  nation.  Out  of  Abraham's  posterity 
God  formed  a  nation  for  Himself.  That  is  progress.  It  would  not  do  to  take  any 
nation.  It  was  necessary  to  have  a  people  whose  fundamental  characteristic  was 
religiousness;  and  it  was  equally  necessary  to  train  them,  else  they  would  constitute 
a  kingdom  of  the  devil.  Judaism  was  not  a  very  spiritual  kingdom,  but  it  was  the 
best  which  could  be  established  under  the  circumstances,  and  served  as  a  nucleus 
for  a  more  spiritual  kingdom  to  come.  But  this  kingdom  could  only  be  continued 
on  two  conditions :  that  it  be  small  in  extent,  and  that  it  be  fenced  off  from  the 
rest  of  the  world.  If  it  were  wide  in  area,  the  sense  of  oneness  in  the  subjects 
would  have  been  weakened,  if  not  destroyed,  in  the  early  stage  of  spiritual  educa- 
tion. If  it  were  not  partitioned  off,  there  would  be  such  a  rush  of  world-life  into 
it  that  the  Divine  element  would  soon  be  quenched.  The  laws  of  this  kingdom, 
however,  as  of  every  new  kingdom,  point  to  defensive,  not  aggressive,  measures, 
which  is  as  much  as  it  can  do  for  centuries  in  presence  of  the  huge  world- 
powers  ;  and  in  order  to  defence  it  must  be  consolidated  in  one  country  and  one 
nation.  3.  But  as  the  family  merged  in  the  nation,  so  the  nation  must  merge  in 
the  world.  The  text  evidently  points  out  that  another  bold  move  forward  is  about 
to  be  made.  Peter  is  directed  to  go  and  convert  Cornelius,  an  uncircumcised 
heathen.  His  conversion  created  more  excitement  than  any  single  conversion  on 
record,  not  because  one  more  soul  was  added,  but  because  of  the  new  principle  it 
embodied,  the  new  policy  it  served  to  inaugurate.  Circumcision  was  here  declared 
to  be  nothing,  and  uncircumoision  nothing,  but  to  many  they  were  then  everything. 
This  shows  a  marvellous  change  in  the  policy  of  the  kingdom.  Henceforth  it  is 
to  act  on  the  aggressive.  It  is  no  longer  to  be  confined  to  one  people — it  claims  all 
nations.  "  God  shall  enlarge  Japheth,  and  He  shall  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem." 
Shem  means  concentration,  Japheth  expansion.  Therein  we  have  summed  up  the 
characteristics  of  religion  among  the  Asiatics  and  Europeans.     IV.  Containing  am. 

MANNER  OF   FODR-FOOTED   BEASTS   OF    THE    EARTH,    AND    WILD    BEASTS,   AND    CREEPINQ 

THINGS,  AND  FOWLS  OF  THE  AIR.  Peter  is  here  taught  that  the  distinction  between 
clean  and  unclean  is  abolished.  1.  We  trace  here  the  same  progress.  First,  the 
family  is  made  clean.  Through  the  fall  the  whole  creation  had  become  common 
and  profane.  Is  it  to  remain  so  ?  Is  God  to  be  for  ever  cheated  out  of  the  world 
His  hands  had  made  ?  No  ;  He  resolves  to  reclaim  it.  Not,  however,  all  at  once. 
God  will  make  a  beginning  by  separating  one  family.  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob 
are  each  separated,  made  clean  unto  God.  2.  WiU  God  stop  there?  No;  the 
order  of  His  operation  is  progress.  The  Israelites,  like  all  other  nations,  were  by 
nature  unclean,  lying  under  the  curse.  But  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  the 
covenant  they  were  made  clean.  But  this  nation  is  the  "  firstfruits."  Not  only 
man  had  become  unclean,  but  the  irrational  creation.  Sin  struck  the  universe 
with  leprosy  to  its  very  heart.  The  animal  creation,  therefore,  needs  to  be  made 
clean.*  The  clean  nation  must  have  clean  food.  God  accordingly  cleanses  certain 
species  of  animals.  Behold  then  a  small  proportion  of  the  rational  and  irrational 
creation  made  clean  by  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  In  Genesis  all 
the  world,  with  the  exception  of  one  family  only,  is  unclean ;  but  in  Exodus,  one 
nation,  at  least,  and  a  certain  proportion  of  animals,  have  been  made  clean.  That 
is  progress  anyhow.  3.  Is  the  rest  of  the  world  to  remain  under  the  dominion  of 
sin  7  No  ;  the  kingdom  of  God  under  the  New  Testament  undertakes  the  task  of 
cleansing  the  whole  universe.  The  difference  once  established  between  the  Jews 
and  other  nations  is  annulled,  not  because  the  Jews  are  made  unclean,  but  because 


128  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap.  x. 

the  Gentiles  are  made  clean.  The  whole  world  was  lying  under  the  curse,  and 
therefore  unclean ;  but  Jesus  Christ  was  made  a  curse  for  the  world,  and  conse- 
quently lifted  it  from  men  and  animals.  Since  His  sacrifice  the  world  in  its  totality 
is  clean,  not  morally,  but  judicially.  What  Judaism  did  ceremonially  for  one 
nation,  Christianity  has  done  efficaciously  for  all  nations.  The  whole  world  is 
now  clean.  All  mankind  now  virtually  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  it  is  the 
paramount  duty  of  the  Church  to  take  possession  of  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Bedeemer  and  make  them  so  in  reality.  "  What  God  hath  cleansed  call  not  thou 
common."  "  Clean  " — this  is  the  keyword  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  Beauty  was 
the  keyword  of  Greek  civilisation ;  strength  of  the  Boman ;  but  the  keyword  of 
Christianity  is  "clean."  V.  After  the  vision  came  the  inteepbetation.  1.  Peter 
thought  on  the  vision.  This  truth  of  revelation  was  to  become  a  truth  of  reason. 
The  Church  is  to  continue  its  study  of  the  Divine  Word  till  all  the  truths  of  revela- 
tion become  at  last  truths  of  reason.  Bevelation  answers  its  purpose  only  as  it 
becomes  the  legitimate  property  of  reason.  Take,  e.g.,  the  existence  and  unity  of 
God.  When  this  truth  was  revealed  to  Israel,  no  man  in  the  native  hght  of  reason 
had  a  clear  perception  of  it.  But  the  reason  has  at  last  been  educated  up  to  it. 
So  again  with  the  moral  law — the  eternal  difference  between  right  and  wrong. 
When  this  truth  was  revealed  to  Israel  it  was  in  advance  of  reason.  But  the 
reason  has  been  gradually  educated  up  to  it.  The  Incarnation  is  stiU  in  advance  of 
reason.  But  then  is  it  never  to  enter  reason  7  It  is  no  more  unbelievable  to 
Christians  than  the  unity  of  God  to  the  Hebrews;  and  as  the  latter  has  passed 
from  the  region  of  mystery  to  that  of  reason,  so  I  believe  will  do  the  former.  Take 
again  the  truth  made  known  in  the  text — the  equahty  of  Jews  and  Gentiles.  At 
the  time  it  was  made  it  was  far  in  advance  of  reason.  Peter  thought  on  it  and 
beUeved  it ;  but  his  whole  history  shows  he  had  never  been  able  to  think  right 
into  it  and  through  it.  To  the  last  it  was  to  him  more  of  a  truth  of  faith  than  a 
truth  of  reason.  But  this  truth  is  gradually  working  its  way  into  the  universal 
reason.  2.  But  Peter  was  not  left  to  unravel  the  meaning  of  the  vision — the  clue 
was  afforded  him  by  the  arrival  of  messengers  from  Cornelius.  God  always  explains 
His  supernatural  revelations  by  natural  events.  Providence  is  the  best  commentary 
on  the  Bible.  Just  when  God  was  stirring  large  thoughts  in  Peter  respecting 
the  universaMty  of  the  gospel,  He  was  also  working  in  Cornelius  to  send  a 
messenger  to  the  apostle  desiring  a  fuller  knowledge  of  salvation  at  his  hands. 
God  often  brings  about  these  secret  correspondences.  Hardly  is  there  an 
important  discovery  made  in  science  but  two  or  three  inventors,  ignorant  of 
each  other's  designs,  claim  it  as  their  own.  (J.  Cynddylan  Jones,  D.D.) 
Creeping  things. — The  presence  of  "creeping  things  "  in  the  sheet  is  a  voice — I. 
Manifesting  God.  1.  The  largeness  of  His  mercy.  This  sheet  was  a  great  sheet, 
and  it  included  "  creeping  "  things.  Satan  aims  at  contracting  our  views  of  God; 
at  making  us  think  that  He  has  no  room  for  us,  or  that  He  has  no  room  for 
others.  2.  The  sovereignty  of  God's  grace.  He  makes  as  much  of  the  creeping 
things  hidden  away,  despised  by  men,  as  of  the  four-footed  beasts.  He  sent  His 
messengers  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges  to  compel  the  poor  to  come  in.  3. 
The  minuteness  of  God's  arrangements.  The  lesser  were  not  lost  to  sight  in  that 
great  sheet ;  they  were  presented  to  the  apostle's  eye  in  their  proper  place,  as  well 
as  the  four-footed  beasts.  4.  The  depth  of  God's  condescension.  Proud  man 
would  have  gathered  into  that  sheet  only  what  was  of  apparent  value  ;  it  would 
never  have  entered  into  his  mind  to  think  about  the  creeping  things  at  all — to 
tame  a  wild  beast  would  be  something,  but  what  credit  or  honour  or  profit  could  he 
get  out  of  "creeping  things  I  "  11.  Directive  to  ourselves.  And  this — 1.  When 
we  are  oppressed  with  a  sense  of  our  insignificance  and  meanness.  Satan,  for 
his  own  purpose,  helps  on  this  thought.  He  says,  "  I  can  understand  God  caring 
about  so  and  so,  he  is  worth  something ;  but  who  knows  or  cares  about  you  T  " 
Then  we  are  troubled  about  the  httle  capacity  we  have  for  glorifying  God,  and 
Satan  marshals  before  our  minds  all  our  weaknesses,  our  unfavourable  position, 
our  want  of  intellect  or  wealth.  And  how  shall  we  meet  all  this  ?  Only  by  falling 
back  upon  God  Himi<eK.  We  cannot  explain  His  making  any  account  for  us,  any 
more  than  we  can  for  His  including  "  creeping  things  "  in  that  great  sheet  let 
down  from  heaven.  Then,  again,  the  child  of  God  is  often  tempted  to  have  heart 
sinkings  about  the  future  ;  but  let  him  remember  that  God  has  His  eye  on  every 
particle  of  the  believer's  dust.  It  is  recorded  of  Lady  Maxwell  that  she  was  at  one 
tim  •  much  troubled  by  the  curious  temptation  that  she  was  so  insignificant  she 
ivuuld  be  liable  to  be  passed  over  hereafter.    But  we  may  meet  all  such  temjtai 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  129 

tions  as  Monica,  the  mother  of  Augustine,  met  the  surprise  of  her  friends  at  Ostia, 
when  they  expressed  their  wonder  that  she  did  not  fear  to  leave  her  body  so  far 
from  her  own  country.  '*  Nothing,"  said  she,  "  is  far  from  God,  and  I  do  not  fear 
that  He  should  not  know  where  to  find  me  at  the  resurrection."  The  small,  as 
well  as  the  great,  are  remembered  in  the  grand  distribution  of  rewards.  2,  When 
we  compare  ourselves  with  those  who  seem  to  have  some  pretensions.  The  creep- 
ing thing  seems  ready  to  shrink  into  nothingness  when  placed  side  by  side  with 
the  four-footed  beast.  Very  often  we  review  the  character  of  such  and  such  a 
believer,  and  we  say,  "  Oh,  if  only  I  were  like  this  man,  I  might  feel  some  com- 
fort." But  remember  the  great  beasts  had  no  cleanhness,  except  from  the  solitary 
fact  of  being  in  the  sheet,  and  so  the  safety  and  acceptance  of  small  and  great  aUke 
are  due  to  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  3.  In  forming  our  estimate  of  others  we 
shall  not  exalt  the  great  ones  nor  despise  the  weak  ones  if  we  remember  well  what 
there  was  in  this  sheet  that  Peter  saw.  4.  We  have  also  the  comforting  thought 
that,  however  humble,  we  have  our  place.  We  may  be  small,  and  of  no  reputa- 
tion, but  the  Lord  thinketh  on  us,  has  a  place  for  us,  and  this  should  be  enough. 
And  as  regards  our  affairs,  it  is  true  that  they  are  mere  straws  in  comparison  with 
the  great  affairs  of  others  ;  we  have  only  to  do  with  shillings  where  they  have  tc 
do  with  thousands  of  pounds;  we  have  only  to  do  with  aches  and  pains,  where  they 
have  to  do  with  life  and  death.  But  He  who  fashioned  the  creeping  thing  knows 
its  needs,  and  He  who  fashioned  us  knows  ours.  {P.  H.  Power,  M. A.)  Rise» 
Peter;  Mil,  and  eat.  .  .  .  Not  so,  Lord  ;  for  I  have  never  eaten  anything  that  Is 
common  or  unclean. — Peter's  blunder :  a  lesson  to  ourselves  : — "  Not  so,  Lord,"  is  a 
very  strange  compound.  "  Not  so  "  would  have  been  consistent.  But  "  Not  so. 
Lord,"  is  an  odd  jumble  of  self-will  and  reverence.  We  are  not  without  fault  in 
the  matter  of  incorrect  speech.  In  our  utterances  there  has  been  faith  mixed  with 
unbelief,  love  defaced  with  a  want  of  submission,  gratitude  combined  with  distrust, 
humility  flavoured  with  self-conceit,  courage  undermined  with  cowardice,  fervour 
mingled  with  indifference.  Note  here — I.  That  the  old  man  bemains  in  the 
Christian  man.  Though  crucified,  it  is  long  in  dying,  and  struggles  hard.  1.  Peter 
was  Peter  still.  I  thini  that  if  I  had  read  Peter's  life  in  the  four  evangelists,  and 
somebody  had  newly  shown  me  the  present  text,  and  asked,  "  Who  said  that?  "  I 
should  have  been  sure  that  it  was  Peter.  The  best  of  men  are  but  men  at  best. 
And  Peter,  after  the  Holy  Ghost  has  fallen  upon  him,  is,  nevertheless,  Peter; 
the  accent  of  his  words  still  bewrays  him.  2.  Peter  here  shows  how  readily  he 
fell,  not  precisely  into  the  same  sin,  but  into  the  same  kind  of  sin.  This  Peter  who 
said,  "  Not  so,  Lord,"  is  the  same  man  who  rebuked  his  Master,  and  said,  "  That 
be  far  from  Thee,  Lord."  It  is  the  same  man  who  at  supper-time  refused  his 
Master.  When  the  Lord  was  about  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  Peter  said,  "  Thou 
shalt  never  wash  my  feet."  And  this  is  he  who  flatly  contradicted  his  Master,  and 
said,  "  Though  all  men  shall  be  offended  because  of  Thee,  yet  will  not  I."  He  did 
this  in  his  earher  days,  but  after  the  Holy  Ghost  had  come  upon  him,  yet  he  stUl 
tripped  in  the  same  place  where  he  used  to  fall.  What  were  your  faults  before 
conversion  ?  Guard  against  them  now.  Ton  notice  about  Peter,  then,  this  thing 
still  remaining,  that  he  blurts  out  what  he  feels.  Be  it  for  bad  or  good,  prompt 
deliverance  of  his  mind  is  still  the  characteristic  of  Peter.  He  was  always  blunder- 
ing because  he  was  in  such  a  hurry.  I  may  be  addressing  young  folk  here  who 
are  very  impulsive,  and  speak  all  in  a  hurry  things  which  they  afterwards  are  sorry 
for.  Be  on  your  guard  against  it.  It  is  a  strength  if  it  be  rightly  managed.  Give 
me  the  man  who  in  a  good  cause  does  not  thiuk  twice,  but  acts  upon  the  warm  im- 
pulses of  a  ready  mind  ;  but  that  same  characteristic,  if  not  kept  in  proper  order 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  may  lead  you  into  a  world  of  mischief.  You  cannot  call 
back  the  words  which  now  cause  you  to  bite  your  tongue  with  regret.  3.  Yet 
Peter  as  Peter  still  has  good  points,  for  he  owns  all  this.  Luke  could  not  have 
recorded  this  incident  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  unless  Peter  had  personally 
told  him,  and  when  Peter  was  brought  up  before  the  other  apostles  for  what  he 
had  done,  he  confessed,  "  But  I  said,  '  Not  so,  Lord  '  " — always  outspoken,  honest, 
and  clear  as  the  day.      In  this  let  us   be  at   one  with  him.      II.  The  old  man 

GENERALLY   FIGHTS   AGAINST    GOSPEL    PRINCIPLES.       Tbis    "  Not    SO,    Lord,"    applied    tO 

— 1.  The  abolition  of  the  ceremonial  law.  Peter  was  to  know  that  those  laws, 
which  forbade  the  eating  of  this  and  that,  were  now  to  be  abrogated.  All  of 
us  are  apt  to  err  here,  for  we  incline  to  attach  undue  importance  to  matters 
which  are  proper  and  useful  in  their  places,  but  which  are  by  no  means  essen- 
tial to  salvation.  Where  Jesus  has  made  no  rule  we  are  not  to  make  any 
VOL.   II,  9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  X. 

None  are  nnclean  whom  He  has  cleansed.    Yet  this  lesson  is  not  soon  learned 
by  sticklers  for  propriety.      2.    The  equality  of  men  before  the   law  and  under 
the  gospel.     An  evangelist  attracts  the  poorest  and  worst.     This  ought  to  be  a 
great  joy,  but  in  certain  cases  it  is  not.     Many  in  effect  say,  "  '  Not  so,  Lord.' 
I  do  not  like  sitting  next  to  one  who  smells  so  vilely,  or  to  a  woman  of  loose 
character."     Never  let  us  set  up   the  tyranny  of  caste,  and  rebuild  the  middle 
wall  of  partition  which  our  Saviour  died  to  throw  down.    We  sprang  of  a  com- 
mon parent,  and  for  men  there  is  but  one  Saviour.     3.  The  gospel  principle  of 
free  and  sovereign  grace.     You  war  against  this  yourself  when  you  are  conscious 
of  having  done  wrong,  and  therefore  doubt  the  grace  of  God ;  as  if  God  wanted 
some  good  in  us  before  He  would  bestow  His  grace  upon  U3.    A  diseased  man  is  fit 
to  be  healed,  a  poor  man  is  fit  for  alms,  a  drowning  man  is  fit  to  be  rescued,  a  sin- 
ful man  is  fit  to  be  forgiven.     UI.  The  old  nature  shows  itseu  in  many  ways. 
"  Not  so,  Lord,"  is  the  cry  of  our  unregenerate  part  against — 1.  The  doctrine  of 
the  gospel.     Some  persons  do  not  believe  the  gospel  because  they  do  not  want  to 
believe  it.     They  studiously  omit  to  read  all  such  parts  of  Scripture  as  would  en- 
lighten their  minds.    It  is  mine  to  believe  what  the  Bible  teaches  ;  it  is  not  mine 
to  object,  and  cry,  "  Not  so,  Lord."    2.  Duty.    We  can  do  anything  except  the 
special  duty  of  the  hour,  and  as  to  that  one  thing,  we  say,  "  Not  so.  Lord."    Yon- 
der young  woman  knows  that  according  to  God's  Word  she  must  not  be  unequally 
yoked  together  with  an  unbeliever.     Now,  she  was  quite  willing  to  be  baptized,  to 
give  her  money  to  the  Lord,  and,  in  fact,  to  do  anything  except  that  one  act  of 
self-denial.    Yet  I  do  not  know  what  sorrow  you  will  make  for  yourself  if  you  really 
break  that  salutary  rule.     Take  you  the  precept,  and  knowing  that  it  is  God's  mind 
concerning  you,  never  dare  even  for  a  moment  to  hesitate.     "  Whatsoever  He  saith 
unto  you,  do  it."    3.  Processes  of  sanctification.    We  are  anxious  to  bear  fruit, 
but  we  do  not  care  to  be  pruned ;  we  are  glad  to  be  deUvered  from  dross,  but  not 
by  the  fire.     4.  The  dispensation  of  the  kingdom.    We  like  not  that  God  should 
bless  men  by  a  sect  to  which  we  do   not  belong;   we  are  envious  for  our  own 
Moses,  lest  the  irregular  Eldads  and  Medads  should  echpse  him.    6.  Our  suffer- 
ings.   Whenever  you  are  called  to  endure  trial,  do  not  complain  of  the  particular 
form  it  takes.     Perhaps  it  is  great  bodily  pain,  and  you  say,  "  I  could  bear  any- 
thing better  than  this."     This  is  a  mistake.     God  knows  what  is  the  best  for 
His  child.     Do  not  cry,  "  Not  so."      '♦  Oh,  I  could  bear  sickness,"  says  another, 
"  but  I  have  been  slandered  1  "    Thus  our  will  asserts  its  place,  and  we  pine  to 
be  our  own  god  and  ruler.     This  must  not  be.    A  dear  sister  had  quarrelled  with 
the  Lord  for  taking  away  her  husband,  and  she  would  not  go  to  any  place  of  wor- 
flhip,  she  felt  so  angry  about  her  loss.    But  her  httle  child  came  to  her  one  morning 
and  said,  "  Mother,  do  you  think  Jonah  was  right  when  he  said,  '  I  do  well  to  be 
angry,  even  unto  death '  ?  "     She  replied,  "  Oh,  child,  do  not  talk  to  me,"  and  put 
the  little  one  away,  but  she  felt  the  rebuke,  and  it  brought  her  back  to  her  God, 
and  back  to  her  Church  again,  humbly  rejoicing  in  Him  who  had  used  this  instru- 
mentality to  set  her  right  with  her  Lord.    6.  Our  service.     The  Lord  says,  "  Go 
into  the  Sunday-school."     "  Not  so,  Lord ;  I  should  Uke  to  preach,"  says  the 
young  man,  and  thus  he  misses  his  hfe-work.     Who  would  employ  servants  who, 
when  they  are  told  to  do  this  or  go  there,  should  say,  "  No,  sir ;  I  prefer  another 
engagement "  7      IV.   It  is  a  geeat  pity  when  this  kind  of  wilfulness  stands 
IN  THE  WAY  OF  USEFULNESS.    In  Bomc  things  Peter  was — 1.  Too  conservative.    He 
says,  "  Not  so.  Lord,"  and  some  read  it,  "  Never,  Lord,  never,  Lord,  for  I  have 
never  "  ;  that  is,  "  I  must  never  do  a  thing  I  have  never  done."    Many  are  of  this 
mind ;  they  cannot  advance  an  inch.     Many  wiU  only  act  as  others  act ;  they  must 
keep  in  the  fashion,  even  though  they  fall  asleep  in  the  doing  of  it.     This  kind 
of  routine  forbids  enlarged  usefulness,  prevents  our  getting  at  out-of-the-way  people, 
and  puts  a  damper  upon  all  zeal.    2.  Propriety  hinders  very  many ;  decorum  is 
their  death.     Shake  yourself  up  a  little.     If  you  are  too  precise  may  the  Lord  set 
you  on  fire,  and  consume  your  bonds  of  red  tape  I     3.  Some  are  hindered  by  their 
great  dignity.    We  have  seen  very  great  little  people,  and  very  little  great  people 
who  have  given  themselves  mighty  airs ;  but  we  have  never  seen  any  good  come  of 
their  greatness.    God  seldom  sends  His  Elijahs  bread  and  meat  by  peacocks.    If 
you  go  into  the  houses  of  the  poor  very  finely  dressed,  and  you  "  condescend  "  to 
them,  they  will  not  want  to  see  you  any  more.     Let  I  grow  very  small,  and  let  J 
grow  very  great.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  idolatry  of  aelf-uill : — He  that  will 
not  submit  himself  to  nor  comply  with  the  eternal  and  uncreated  will,  but,  instead 
of  it,  endeavours  to  set  up  his  own  will,  makes  himself  the  most  real  idol  in  th« 


0BAF.  z,]  THE  ACTS.  181 

world,  and  exalts  himself  against  all  that  is  called  God,  and  ought  to  be  worshipped. 
To  worship  a  graven  image,  or  to  make  cakes  and  burn  incense  to  the  queen  of 
heaven,  is  not  a  worse  idolatry  than  it  is  for  a  man  to  set  up  self-will,  to  devote 
himself  to  the  serving  of  it,  and  to  give  up  himself  to  a  compliance  with  his  own 
will,  as  contrary  to  the  Divine  and  Eternal  Will.    (John  Smith.)    Sectarian  narrow' 
ness : — Whitefield,  on  arriving  at  Edinburgh,  found  great  commotion  among  the 
Presbyters,  who  would  not  hear  him  preach  unless  he  declared  himself  on  their 
aide.     "  I  was  asked,"  he  says,  "  to  preach  only  for  them  until  I  had  further  light. 
I  inquired  why  only  for  them.     '  Because,'  said  Ealph  Erskine,  '  they  were  the 
Lord's  people.'     I  then  asked  were  there  no  other  Lord's  people  but  themselves  ; 
and  supposing  all  others  were  the  devil's  people,  they  certainly  had  more  need  to 
be  preached  to ;  and  therefore  I  was  more  determined  to  go  into  the  highways  and 
hedges,  and  that  if  the  Pope  himself  would  lend  me  his  pulpit  I  would  gladly  pro- 
claim the  righteousness  of  Christ  therein."     {J.  R.  Andrews.)        Common  and  un- 
clean things : — Ruskin,  in  his  •'  Ethics  of  the  Dust,"  calls  our  attention  to  the 
silent  forces  of  nature,  which  never  appear  so  grand  as  when  they  transmute  baser 
materials  into  higher  forms.     We  see  the  pool  of  slime  transformed  by  the  action 
of  light  and  heat,  repose  and  quiet,  so  that  the  clay  hardens  into  blue  sapphire, 
the  sand  into  burning  opal,  the  soot  into  flashing  diamond.    And  even  Jesus  never 
appears  so  glorious  in  loveliness  as  when  we  see  Him  transforming  the  very  filth 
and  slime  of  society  into  gems  fit  to  burn  and  shine  in  an  immortal  crown.     [A.  T. 
Pierson.)        The  beautiful  in  the  common  brought  out  by  cleansing  : — In  Florence 
there  is  a  fresco  by  Giotto  that  for  many  ages  was  covered  up  by  two  thicknesses 
of  whitewash.     It  is  only  within  a  very  few  years  that  the  artist's  hand  has  come 
and  removed  that  covering,  and  the  fresco  has  come  out  clear  and  beautiful.    Some- 
times we  see  a  person  whom  we  feel  inclined  to  despise,  and  think  of  little  value, 
but  God  comes  to  him,  cleanses  him  by  removing  his  sin,  and  reveals  a  beauty  in 
him  that  we  little  dreamt  of.         The  ground  of  the  antipathy  between  Jew  and 
Gentile : — The  distinction  between  clean  and  unclean  meats  was  one  of  the  insuper- 
able barriers  between   the  Gentile  and  the  Jew — a  barrier  which  prevented  all 
intercourse  between  them  because  it  rendered  it  impossible  for  them  to  meet  at 
the  same  table  or  in  social  life.    In  the  society  of  a  Gentile  a  Jew  was  liable  at 
any  moment  to  those  ceremonial  defilements  which  involved  all  kinds  of  seclusion 
and  inconvenience  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  it  was  mainly  by  pai-taking  of  unclean 
food  that  the  Gentiles  became  themselves  so  unclean  in  the  eyes  of  the  Jews.     It 
is  hardly  possible  to  put  into  words  the  intensity  of  horror  and  revolt  with  which 
the  Jews  regarded  swine.     They  were  to  them  the  very  ideal  and  quintessence  of 
all  that  must  be  looked  upon  with  an  energetic  concentration  of  disgust.    He  would 
not  even  mention  a  pig  by  name,  but  spoke  of  it  as  "  the  other  thing."     When  in 
the  days  of  Hyrcanus  a  pig  had  been  surreptitiously  put  into  a  box  and  drawn  up 
the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  the  Jews  declared  that  a  shudder  of  earthquake  had  run 
through  400  parasangs  of  the  Holy  Land.     Yet  this  filthy  and  atrocious  creature 
was  the  chief  delicacy  at  Gentile  banquets,  and  in  one  form  or  other  one  of  the 
commonest  articles  of  Gentile  consumption.     How  could  a  Jew  touch  or  speak  to  a 
man  who  might  on  that  very  day  have  partaken  of  the  abomination  ?     The  clean- 
sing of  all  articles  of  food  involved  inunediately  the  acceptance  of  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles on  equal  footing  to  equal  privileges.     {Archdeacon  Farrar.)        What  God  hath 
cleansed,  that  call  thou  not  common. — The  cleansing  of  all  meats  by  Christ : — 
Doubtless  Peter  remembered  that  remarkable  parable  of  Jesus  (Mark  vii.  14-19)  of 
which  he  and  his  brother  disciples  had  once  asked  the  explanation.     Jesus  in  few 
words,  but  with  both  of  the  emphatic  formula9  which  He  adopted  to  arrest  special 
attention,  had  said,  "  There  is  nothing  from  without  a  man  entering  into  him 
which  can  defile  him."     What  He  had  proceeded  to  say — that  what  truly  defiles 
a  man  is  that  which  comes   out  of  him — was  easy  enough  to  understand,  and 
was  a  truth  of  deep  meaning,  but  so  difficult  had  it  been  to  grasp  the  first  half 
of  the  clause  that  they  had  asked  Him  to   explain  a   parable  which  seemed  to 
be  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  Mosaic  Law.     Expressing  His  astonishment  at 
their  want  of  insight.  He  had  shown  them  that  what  entered  into  a  man  from 
without  did  but  become  a  part  of  his  material  organism,  entering  "  not  into  the 
heart,  but  into  the  belly,  and  so  passing  into  the  draught."     "  This  He  said  " — as 
now  for  the  first  time,  perhaps,  fiashed  with  full  conviction  into  the  mind  of  Peter 
— "  making  all  meats  pure,"  as  he  proceeded  afterwards  to  develop  those  weighty 
truths  about  the  inward  character  of  all  real  pollution,  and  the  genesis  of  all  crime 
from  evil  thoughts,  which  convey  so  solemn  a  warning.     To  me  it  seems  that  it 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [oha».  x, 

was  the  trance  ani  vision  of  Joppa  which  first  made  Peter  realise  the  true  meaning 
of  Christ  in  one  of  those  few  distinct  utterances  in  which  He  had  intimated  the 
coming  annuhnent  of  the  Mosaic  Law.  It  is  doubtless  due  to  the  fact  that  Peter, 
as  the  informant  of  Mark  in  writing  his  Gospel,  and  the  sole  ultimate 
authority  for  this  vision  in  the  Acts,  is  the  source  of  both  narratives, 
that  we  owe  the  hitherto  unnoticed  circumstance  that  the  two  verbs 
"  cleanse  "  and  ♦'  profane  " — both  in  a  pecuharly  pregnant  sense — are  the 
two  most  prominent  words   in   the   narrative  of   both  events.       {Ibid.)  The 

transition  from  the  Old  to  the  New  : — 1.  We  have  here  one  of  the  great  hinges 
on  which  history  turns.  Peter's  vision  opened  up  a  new  era ;  and  here,  too,  as 
in  eveiy  act  of  the  human  life-drama,  is  made  visible  the  hand  of  God.  He  stood 
by  man  in  the  dawn  of  his  personal  history,  and  spoke  to  Adam  face  to  face ;  in 
the  dawn  of  the  patriarchal  era,  and  spoke  to  Abraham  as  the  Father  of  the  family 
relationship ;  in  the  dawn  of  political  life,  and  spoke  to  Moses  the  head  of  the 
nation  as  the  God  of  nations ;  at  last,  at  the  dawn  of  the  world's  consciousness  of 
its  final  vocation,  God  made  the  fact  of  the  God-manhood  the  spring  from  which 
eternal  progress  should  proceed.  2.  The  questions  raised  by  the  narrative  are  not 
met  by  the  consideration  of  Peter's  narrowness,  nor  of  the  Hberal  teachings  of  the 
vision.  The  apostle's  views  were  narrow  as  the  discipline  of  the  school  is  narrow 
to  the  student,  and  that  of  the  student  to  the  man ;  but  they  were  God's  handi- 
work, and  Peter  was  only  pleading  God's  Word  against  another  which  seemed  to 
be  opposed  to  it.  You  will  ever  find  some  of  the  truest  lovers  of  liberty  among  the 
partisans  of  ancient  forms,  while  the  man  who  throws  up  his  cap  and  cries  liberty 
is  often  the  veriest  tyrant  at  heart.  Nathaniel  was  resisting  the  idea  that  good 
could  come  out  of  Nazareth  when  Jesus  said, "  Behold  an  Israelite  indeed,"  &c.  Note 
— I.  The  exclusions  of  the  Mosaic  Law.  1.  Here  was  the  school  in  which  Peter 
learned  his  prejudice  (Lev.  xi.  2-20  ;  Deut.  liv.  3-21).  It  is  easy  to  speak  of  his 
proud  and  arrogant  Judaism  (Ezek.  iv.  14  is  a  parallel  case).  But  as  we  live  and 
learn  we  get  more  distrustful  of  the  so-called  spirit  of  progress  which  cares  not 
what  it  destroys,  so  that  it  may  reach  its  Utopian  goal.  An  intellect  quick  ta 
seize  novelties  is  mostly  found  in  conjunction  with  a  vain  and  shallow  moral 
nature,  and  is  sure  to  disappoint.  The  moral  qualities  are  those  which  tell,  and 
among  the  deepest  of  these  is  reverence ;  and  one  gets  to  bear  with  the  slow  move- 
ment of  a  reverent  spirit  for  the  sake  of  the  great  prizes  it  wins  for  mankind.  The 
men  who  work  most  solidly  at  the  construction  of  the  new  are  men  who  are  most 
deeply  rooted  in  the  old.  You  cannot  build  from  balloons,  but  must  have  firm 
foundations.  2.  Consider  the  philosophy  of  the  Mosaic  system.  Man  is  a  being  of 
a  double  nature.  An  animal  cannot  go  far  wrong  about  food ;  he  has  an  instinct 
which  tells  him  what  is  good  and  what  bad.  But  man  is  far  more  richly  furnished 
with  appetites,  and  with  objects  which  gratify  them.  Why?  Because  God  in- 
tended to  teach  him  that  aj^ipetite  is  not  a  sufficient  guide,  and  that  he  must  bring 
judgment  into  play.  This  remark  applies  far  more  widely  than  to  matters  of 
eating  and  drinking;  our  habits,  associates,  work,  are  to  be  by  the  elections  of  a 
will  guided  and  governed  by  a  reason  which  acquaints  itself  with  the  mind  of  the 
Creator.  When  man  was  in  his  first  estate  this  was  a  simple  "  of  course."  Hence 
the  liberty  of  Adam  (Gen.  ii.  15-17)  and  of  Noah  (Gen.  ix.  1-3).  But  man  again 
corrupted  his  way,  and  the  wanton  indulgence  of  appetite  became  the  great  bane 
and  destroyer  of  mankind.  So  God  took  the  Jewish  people,  and  instructed  them 
in  the  art  of  discernment  of  moral  choice.  His  way  with  their  food  is  but  a 
specimen  of  His  way  in  all  the  education  of  their  souls.  And  men  had  to  ask  about 
everything — "Is  it  lawful?"  The  aim  of  the  discipline  being  that  they  should 
ask,  "  Is  it  good  ?  "  and  make  their  election  accordingly.  Pork  is  a  harmless  thing 
to  us  ;  eaten  freely  in  the  East,  leprosy  results.  But  the  real  question  is.  Why  does 
not  the  law  put  the  prohibition  on  the  simple  ground — it  is  not  for  your  good  ? 
This  leads  me  to  another  principle.  3.  In  the  early  stages  of  human  culture 
nothing  is  strong  enough  to  curb  man's  desires  and  to  stimulate  the  exercise  of 
discernment  but  religion.  There  is  hardly  one  thing  precious  to  man's  secular 
life  which  has  not  been  won  for  him  by  the  force  which  religion  has  brought  to 
bear  on  his  natural  powers.  The  knowledge  of  letters  was  kept  alive  solely  by  the 
desire  of  man  to  read  and  understand  the  Word  of  God  and  religious  books.  The 
desire  to  calculate  rightly  church  festivals  bej^'an  all  the  investigations  and  triumphs 
of  modern  astronomy.  Monks  established  the  truce  of  God,  and  only  by  the  strong 
hand  of  religion  could  the  horrors  of  war  be  mitigated.  Tlie  risht  of  our  dead  to 
undisturbed  repose  was  secured  by  the  cross  of  the  Church  under  whose  shadow 


<!HAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  13J 

the  ashes  of  our  ancestors  lay.  And  God  began  from  the  beginning  with  the  Jews, 
and  made  the  simplest  matters  of  right  or  prudence  matters  of  religion  from  the 
very  first.  They  were  to  eat,  and  fulfil  every  function  of  life  "  because  the  Lord 
their  God  "  would  have  it  so.  II.  The  progress  of  society  has  tended  to  release 
MEN  FROM  these  BONDS,  and  to  bring  all  that  concerns  man's  welfare  under  the 
influence  of  the  special  faculties  which  have  charge  of  the  separate  departments  of 
life.  1.  Of  old  men  wrote  books  for  the  glory  of  God ;  and  the  religious  guardians 
of  men  judged  whether  they  fulfilled  that  purpose  and  might  be  safely  read.  Now 
men  write  books  simply  to  tell  what  they  know,  and  it  is  left  to  the  taste  of  society 
to  read  them  or  not.  Of  old  men  abstained  from  meats  because  they  were  an 
abomination  to  God  ;  now  He  leaves  them  free  to  judge  and  to  choose  that  which 
they  find  to  be  for  their  good.  Peter  might  stiU  practise  an  abstinence  which  a 
Eoman  might  regard  as  idle,  but  Peter  would  not  be  suffered  to  let  that  stand  in 
the  way  of  the  conversion  of  the  world.  The  child  fuU-grown  was  to  judge  for 
himself  where  his  legal  tutor  had  hitherto  judged  for  him.  Paul  fully  understood 
this  (Rom.  xiv.  1-9).  And  so  it  is  with  all  things,  A  man  may  eat  in  England  not 
what  he  likes,  but  what  he  finds  to  be  for  his  good.  So  with  fast  and  feast  days, 
services,  places,  &g.  2.  But  is  this  use  of  the  natural  faculties  a  less  sacred 
religious  duty  than  was  of  old  obedience  to  a  religious  law  ?  Certainly  not.  The 
secular  duly  becomes  sacred  to  the  spirit,  and  the  whole  life  is  brought  under  the 
broad  religious  obligation  of  a  freeborn  son  to  a  gracious  God.  "  Shall  we  sin 
because  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace  ?  God  forbid."  The  progress 
of  Christianity  tends  to  place  all  man's  acts  under  the  rule  of  his  natural  faculties 
given  to  him  for  this  very  end,  and  to  make  the  right  use  of  these  faculties  the 
most  sacred  duty  of  his  life  before  God.  First  law,  then  liberty,  in  order  to  the 
discovery  of  the  Diviner  law,  "  the  perfect  law  of  Liberty,"  wherein  to  continue  is 
to  be  blessed.  God  has  made  all  Ufe  sacred.  He  gives  up  some,  to  claim  the 
whole ;  but  to  claim  it,  not  peremptorily  as  a  Master,  but  lovingly  as  a  Father,  who 
seeks  not  your  works,  but  yourself.  3.  God  hath  cleansed  all  things  to  the  godly, 
but  to  the  ungodly  nothing  is  clean.  There  is  nothing  common  or  unclean  but  a 
common  and  unclean  soul  and  its  life.  That  is  essential  uncleanness,  and  only  one 
Fountain  can  cleanse  it,  only  one  Spirit  consecrate  it.  (J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.) 
Now  while  Peter  doubted  .  .  .  the  men  which  were  sent  from  Cornelius  .  .  .  stood 
before  the  gate. — The  m/'ssengers  of  the  centurion  at  Peter's  door : — How  proud 
heathenism  knocks  humbly  at  the  gates  of  Christ's  kingdom.  I.  The  great  gulf 
WHICH  HAD  TO  BE  OVERPASSED.  1.  Eoman  pride.  2.  Jewish  prejudice.  II.  The 
HEAVENLY  POWER  WHICH  PAVED  THE  WAT.  1.  With  the  conturion,  the  drawing  of 
the  Father  to  the  Son.  2.  With  the  apostle,  the  emancipating  Spirit  of  Truth,  and 
the  constraining  love  of  Christ.  IH.  The  propitious  welcome.  1.  On  the  part 
of  the  messenger's  humble  request.  2.  On  the  part  of  Peter's  friendly  reception. 
{K.  Gerok.)  Doubt:  its  cause  and  cure: — Peter  was  a  type  of  the  better  class  of 
sincere,  humble,  open-minded  doubters.  There  is  no  affinity  between  his  case  and 
that  of  the  inveterate,  conceited,  and  propagandist  sceptic  who  airs  his  infidelities 
as  symptomatic  of  genius,  and  bids  thereby  for  leadership  in  modern  thought.  But 
there  is  considerable  resemblance  between  the  apostle  and  a  large  class  who  deserve 
from  us  what  he  received  from  God — sympathy  and  guidance.  I.  The  cause  of 
DOUBT.  1.  Prejudice  arising  from  early  education.  Peter  only  held  what  he  had 
been  taught  upon  parental,  ministerial,  and  even  Divine  authority.  Much  of 
modern  doubt  is  a  mere  matter  of  prejudice.  Ideas  received  as  truths  from  others 
clash  with  what  Christians  beUeve  to  be  Divine  truths,  and  the  former  are  preferred. 
2.  Habit.  The  ingrained  custom  of  eating  only  "  clean  "  meat,  and  conversing 
only  with  "clean"  men,  incapacitated  Peter  to  conceive  of  the  abandonment  of 
ceremonial  distinctions.  And  so  there  is  a  sceptical  habit  of  thought  which  grows 
with  indulgence,  and  which  almost  without  any  volition  on  the  part  of  the  doubter 
bars  the  entrance  of  Christian  truth.  3.  Narrow  views  of  God's  dispensations  and 
purposes.  What  God  meant  for  a  time  only,  Peter  held  He  meant  for  ever.  So 
sometimes  the  sceptic  fastens  on  some  temporary  act  or  partial  principle  of  the 
Divine  administration  as  types  of  the  whole.  He  raises  objections,  e.g.,  against 
euffering,  overlooking  its  disciplinary  character,  or  against  the  immoralities  of 
some  of  God's  agents,  forgetting  that  God  makes  the  wrath  of  men  to  praise  Him. 
4.  Mental  unrest.  The  vision  was  the  cause  of  Peter's  doubts.  His  mind  was  in 
a  state  of  shaos,  as  the  foundations  of  all  that  he  held  dear  and  certain  seemed  to 
be  undermined.  All  the  convictions  instilled  by  training,  ingrained  by  habit,  and 
deepened  by  narrow  but  intense  thought,  suddenly  began  to  give  way — a  state  of 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAr.  x, 

mind  familiar  to  sincere  donbters.  The  truth  has  not  dawned,  but  all  that  justifies 
Bcepticism  as  a  defensible  intellectual  mood  has  disappeared.  II.  Its  cdee.  1.  The 
illumination  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Keason  will  not  resolve  doubt,  hence  the  futility 
of  mere  controversy.  Truth  must  be  apprehended  by  the  heart,  and  only  He  who 
made  it,  and  knows  what  it  needs,  can  reach  that.  Pray,  and  sooner  or  later  the 
Comforter  will  guide  you  into  aJl  truth.  2.  Promptitude  and  activity  in  duty. 
"Arise  and  get  down."  Brooding  over  it  wUl  only  intensify  that  morbidity  of  mind 
which  is  its  most  fruitful  soiL  Working  will  at  least  find  an  outlet  for  the  im- 
prisoned  sentiments  which  knock  so  painfully  at  the  interior  walls  of  the  soul. 
And  get  about  some  practical  employment  at  once.  Delays  are  weakening.  3. 
Obedience  to  Divine  impulses.  These  are  seldom  still  in  the  seeker  after  truth. 
What  God's  Spirit  did  to  Peter  miraculously  He  does  for  us  naturally  by  impres- 
sions, opportunities,  strange  feelings  leading  or  driving  us  now  here  and  now  there. 
But  as  Peter's  going  with  the  men  led  to  the  dissolving  of  his  doubts,  so  if  any 
man  will  do  God's  wiU  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine.  4.  The  cure  is  often  effected 
by  unexpected  incidents,  and  in  unlikely  ways  ;  but  the  man  who  prays,  works,  and 
is  obedient  to  the  light  he  has,  wiU  find  these  lying  across  life's  ordinary  path. 
(J.  W.  Burn.)  While  Peter  thought  on  the  vision,  the  Spirit  said,  .  .  .  Arise. — 
Devotion  and  action : — The  Spirit  calls  the  apostle  from  prayer  and  meditation  to 
action.  The  contemplative  hfe  is  but  the  preparation  for  the  active,  as  the  active 
is  strengthened  by  solitude  and  contemplation.  The  man  of  God  needs  both,  and 
either  without  the  other  is  a  maimed  and  imperfect  life.  [Dionysius  of  Carthage.) 
A  Divine  call  to  preach : — I  was  present  at  the  Eev.  Peter  Mackenzie's  oral  ex- 
amination. At  the  close  the  president  said,  "All  may  retire  except  Mr.  Mackenzie." 
When  by  himself  he  was  asked,  amongst  other  questions,  "What  led  you  to 
preach?  "  He  answered,  "After  my  conversion  I  was  asked  to  address  the  Sunday 
School,  and  did  so.  Then  two  local  preachers  asked  me  to  go  with  them  to  try 
and  preach.  I  hesitated,  and  they  said  they  would  call  for  me.  While  prajring 
npstairs  that  God  would  direct  me,  I  heard  them  below  asking  for  me.  I  got  up 
irom  my  knees,  still  undecided,  and  opened  my  Bible  on  these  words :  •  While 
Peter  thought  upon  the  vision,  the  Spirit  said  unto  him,  Behold,  three  men  seek 
thee.  Arise,  therefore,  and  get  thee  down,  and  go  with  them,  nothing  doubting, 
for  I  have  sent  them.' "  This  answer  produced  not  only  surprise,  but  something 
like  a  scene.  Other  questions  followed,  which  he  answered  with  such  beautiful 
simplicity  and  naturalness  that  several  members  of  the  committee  were  moved  to 
tears.  (T.  McCullagh.)  Ministry  of  men : — In  photography  it  is  the  sun  that 
makes  the  portrait.  There  is  no  drawing  of  the  outline  by  a  human  hand,  and  no 
shading  of  the  figure  according  to  rules  of  the  painter's  art.  The  person  stands  up 
in  the  light,  and  the  light  lays  his  image  on  the  glass.  Yet  in  this  work  there  is 
room  for  the  ministry  of  man.  Without  the  ministry  of  man  the  work  could  not 
in  any  case  be  done.  A  human  hand  prepares  the  plate  for  securing  the  picture, 
and  adjusts  the  instrument  for  throwing  the  light  at  the  proper  moment  on  the 
prepared  surface.  Although  in  the  real  work  of  making  the  picture  man  has  no 
hand  at  all,  his  place  is  important  and  necessary.  A  similar  place  under  the 
ministry  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  the  ministry  of  men.  God  does  not  send  angels 
to  make  the  gospel  known.  We  learn  it  from  men  of  flesh  and  blood  like  our- 
selves. Cornelius  and  his  house  will  be  saved,  but  Peter  must  go  from  Joppa  to 
Ceesarea  and  open  up  to  them  the  way  of  salvation.  The  humility  of  Cornelius  : 
— The  Bomans  were  quite  as  proud  as  the  Jews,  and  "  the  condescension  of  a  man 
in  the  station  of  Cornelius,  in  sending  to  a  tanner's  house  for  light  from  an  obscure 
person  of  the  common  sort  seems  incredible  in  the  ordinary  course  of  Oriental 
thought  and  custom.  To  send  to  such  a  one  for  religious  instruction  is  alto- 
gether incredible.  No  one  among  us,  even  in  the  face  of  cruel  religionist 
riots,  can  conceive  of  the  wall  that  exists  between  religious  parties  in  the  East, 
or  the  way  that  rehgious  sects  wield  power  and  maintain  their  adherents.  The 
truth  is,  that  this  lesson,  with  the  passages  that  precede  it,  heralds  one  of 
the  greatest  Oriental  revolutions  that  the  world  has  ever  seen,  and  one  which 
gives  the  deepest  view  of  the  prophecy  of  Isa.  hi.  13-15.  (Prof.  I.  H.  HaU.) 
Get  thee  down,  and  go  with  them,  doubting  nothing^. — Hoiv  may  we  know  our  work  t 
— "Doubting  nothing  " — that  is  the  secret  of  liberty,  efiiciency,  and  success.  Yon 
see  it  in  the  inventor  who  is  certain  of  the  combination  of  instruments  by  which  he 
!b  to  accomplish  a  result  of  value  to  mankind ;  in  the  teacher  who  knows  that 
he  has  a  truth  to  communicate  which  it  is  of  importance  to  men  to  apprehend  ;  in 
the  soldier  who  knows,  because  he  knows  the  commander,  that  the  order  which  ha» 


OHAf.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  18S 

been  given  is  wise,  practicable,  needful ;  in  the  sailor  who  trusts  his  clock  and  his 
compass,  and  goes  on  his  course,  after  his  observation,  doubting  nothing,  knowing 
where  he  is  exactly.  Everywhere  this  confidence  is  the  condition  of  enthusiasm 
and  of  success,  and  in  Christian  enterprises  it  is  a  confidence  not  merely  in  the 
usefulness  of  the  work,  but  in  the  Divine  authority,  care,  affection,  impulse,  which 
attend  us  in  our  endeavours  to  perform  it.  It  was  precisely  this  that  Peter  felt. 
Except  for  the  vision  out  of  which  this  confidence  was  flashed,  except  for  the  voice 
of  the  Spirit  which  interpreted  the  vision,  he  would  hardly  have  been  ready  to  go. 
But,  in  consequence  of  this,  he  recognised  the  call  which  was  made  upon  him  by 
the  centurion's  servants.  They  were  not  bearing  merely  a  message  from  the  Roman 
officer,  but  from  the  Author  of  the  world  and  the  King  of  the  Church.  Peter 
doubted  afterward,  in  the  characteristic  reaction  of  his  impetuous  spirit,  whether 
the  Jew  could  receive  a  Gentile  and  eat  with  him.  But  at  this  point  he  went, 
doubting  nothing,  and  made  the  world  free  to  enter  into  the  Church  of  Christ. 
There  come  often  questions  of  duty  to  individual  Christians  or  to  Churches  who 
wish  that  they  could  have  instruction  like  that  which  was  given  to  the  apostle.  The 
work  to  which  they  appear  to  be  called  by  God  is  difficult  and  dangerous  and  costly. 
There  are  arguments  for  it  and  against  it ;  and  so  they  confuse  themselves  in  per- 
plexities, balancing  the  reasons  for  and  the  reasons  against,  until,  perhaps,  the  oppor- 
tunity  has  passed.  Now  we  do  not  see  visions  or  hear  voices,  but  there  are  certain  indi- 
cations, when  a  work  is  appointed  for  us,  which  are  as  intelligible  and  impressive.  I. 
When  the  work  is  part  of  the  plan  God  would  have  accomplished.  When  it 
concerns  His  glory  properly  it  is  then  connected  with  His  plan.  Not  that  Christian 
duty  is  restricted  to  efforts  for  the  religious  instruction  and  conversion  of  men ; 
there  are  multitudes  of  interests  which  are  connected  with  this.  Enterprises  that 
seek  the  intellectual  culture  of  mankind,  the  secular  and  social  interests  of  the 
community ;  the  public  welfare  in  the  matter  of  health,  order,  just  and  liberal 
government ;  all  these  are  as  obligatory  upon  the  Christian  as  a  duty  as  that  which 
immediately  concerns  the  in^ruction  of  men  in  religious  truth.  Every  stone  in 
the  wall  has  its  office  to  accomplish.  A  man  who  is  building  a  cathedral  cannot 
say,  "  I  will  make  it  all  of  statues,  or  spire."  And,  therefore,  Christian  duty  is  never 
narrow.  When  any  work,  then,  contributes  to  the  plan  of  God  and  meets  us 
directly  in  our  path,  we  may  be  persuaded  that  it  is  a  part  of  the  work  which  God 
assigns  to  us.  II.  When  it  is  possible  to  be  realised  yet  with  effort  and  self- 
denial.  We  are  not  responsible  for  what  we  cannot  accomplish ;  e.g.,  for  preach- 
ing in  tongues  we  do  not  know,  for  building  churches  and  floating  them  over  the 
seas  to  china  and  Japan.  God's  errand  is  always  a  practicable  errand,  and  in  pro- 
portion to  the  effort  and  self-denial  required.  His  authorship  of  the  message  con- 
cerning the  work  becomes  more  evident  to  the  thoughtful  Christian  mind.  We 
usually  judge  exactly  the  opposite.  We  say,  "  That  is  a  good  work,  and  I  can  do 
it  in  a  minute  ;  therefore  that  is  God's  errand  for  me.  It  is  a  good  work,  and  I  can 
help  it  by  a  little  gift  which  I  never  shall  miss.  That  is  evidently  God's  plan." 
No ;  God's  plan  exactly  reverses  that.  He  makes  duty  the  more  obligatory  the 
more  difficult  it  is,  for  the  development  of  Christian  energy,  generosity,  patience. 
God  does  not  need  our  help.  Why,  then,  does  He  ask  for  it  ?  Because  thus  He 
develops  us.  He  applies  not  tests  merely,  but  stimulants  to  whatever  is  best  in  us. 
The  man  who  has  given  himself  to  his  country  loves  it  better,  the  man  who  has 
fought  for  his  friend  honours  him  more,  the  man  who  has  laboured  for  his  com- 
munity values  more  highly  the  interests  he  has  sought  to  conserve.     IH.  When  the 

CALL  FOR  it  COMES  UNEXPECTEDLY  AND  BY  NO   PRE-ABRANGEMENT   OF   OURS.      We  rCCOg- 

nise  God's  intervention  in  our  plans,  in  part,  by  the  suddenness  with  which  th» 
event  occurred  contrary  to  expectation,  as  when  a  friend  is  restored  from  sicknesa 
when  all  our  hope  had  faded  ;  as  when  a  path  is  suddenly  opened  to  prosperity  and 
usefulness,  where  everything  seemed  hedged  up  and  we  could  not  contrive  any  way^ 
by  which  to  reach  the  result.  When  the  Bible  Society  was  formed  no  man  was  ex- 
pecting it.  A  Welsh  missionary  had  distributed  some  thousand  copies  of  the  Welsh 
Scriptures,  and  went  to  London  to  get  more  and  could  not.  He  said  to  one  and 
another,  "  Why  cannot  we  have  a  society  to  print  the  Bible  in  Welsh?"  They 
came  together  to  see  if  it  could  be  done,  and  one  man,  whose  name  had  hardly  ever 
been  heard,  rose  and  said :  "  Yes  ;  but  if  for  Wales,  why  not  for  all  the  world?  '* 
Sudden  as  a  flash  it  came  out  of  the  clear  sky,  and  instant  was  the  response.  Out  of 
that  came  the  Bible  Society  of  England,  of  America,  of  the  world.  When  a  man 
contemplates  Gcd's  glory  in  the  sanctification  of  men,  proposes  to  us  a  work  pos- 
Bible  for  U3  with  effort  and  self-denial,  comes  to  us  without  our  j^re vision  or  pro- 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x- 

arrangement,  it  is  God's  work.  IV.  When  the  impeession  is  bubxed  in  upon  thb 
WIND,  day  after  day,  week  after  week,  an  ever-deepening  sense  of  duty  concerning 
that  work — that  is  God's  voice  to  ns.  This  silent  influence  of  the  Spirit  was  what 
wrought  for  us  the  Bible.  This  silent  influence  of  the  Spirit  is  the  privilege  of 
every  Christian  now.  When  that  remains,  deepening  continually  in  you,  becoming 
clearer  and  stronger,  we  must  trust  it  as  the  discovery  of  God's  mind  to  us  con- 
cerning our  duty.  No  man  who  has  once  learned  to  trust  it  will  ever  trust  anything 
else  in  preference  to  it.  In  the  great  crisis  of  life  that  is  always  the  way.  Hold 
the  mind  prayerfully  in  conference  with  God,  unresistingly  under  the  impression  of 
His  Spirit.  When  it  points  in  a  certain  direction,  then  follow  it  into  darkness  or 
day ;  wheresoever  that  leads,  go.  We  are  certain  of  success  ;  go,  nothing  doubting. 
When  all  those  signs  combine,  then  Peter  may  keep  his  vision  and  the  voice  of  Zioo 
which  spoke  in  the  air  around  him.  I  hear  a  voice  within,  and  whosoever  follows 
that  voice  follows  God  and  follows  Him  into  His  glory.  {Christian  Age.)  Peter' » 
obedience  to  an  unexpected  intimation  : — Mr.  Joseph  C.  Palmer,  in  the  early  days  of 
California,  was  a  member  of  a  bank  which  did  an  immense  business.  Once  a  depositor 
called  to  draw  £5,600  from  the  bank.  Mr.  Palmer's  consent  was  necessary,  but  he 
had  been  called  away  to  attend  some  duty  a  mile  or  more  from  the  bank.  Thither  the 
depositor  hastened  and  made  known  his  wants  and  the  necessity  of  having  them 
attended  to  at  once.  Mr.  Palmer  could  find  neither  pen,  pencH,  ink,  nor  paper. 
But  without  a  moment's  hesitation  he  picked  up  a  shingle,  borrowed  a  piece  of  red 
chalk,  and  with  it  wrote  a  cheque  on  the  sbingle  in  large  and  distinct  letters  for 
£5,600.  This  was  promptly  honoured  when  presented.  It  is  probably  the  only 
instance  on  record  of  such  a  cheque  being  drawn  and  honoured  ;  but  in  this  case 
the  paying  clerk  accepted  the  instructions  of  his  principal,  though  conveyed  in  an 
unusual  manner,  without  hesitation.  Would  that  Christian  men  were  as  ready  to 
obey  the  intimations  of  God's  will,  even  if  they  are  revealed  in  nnlooked-for  wa^s 
and  are  opposed  to  pre-conceived  notions.  The  apostle  Peter  showed  this  readi 
ness  on  one  memorable  occasion  (chap.  x.  10-23).     {Christian  Herald.) 

Vers.  24-33.  And  the  morrow  after  they  entered  Into  Csesarea.  And  Cornelius 
waited  for  them. — Model  pastoral  visitation: — I.  The  preparation  fob  it.  1.  With 
the  household,  an  earnest  desire  for  salvation.  2.  With  the  minister,  a  holy  impulse 
of  the  Spirit.  II.  The  oonveesation  at  it.  1.  On  the  part  of  those  confessing,  an 
honest  exhibition  of  the  state  of  their  heart.  2.  On  the  part  of  the  pastor,  a 
powerful  testimony  of  Christ  and  His  salvation.  III.  The  fedit  thereof.  1.  For 
the  hearers  ;  strengthening  and  vivification  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  For  the  minister ; 
joy  in  the  Lord  over  rescued  souls  and  the  increase  of  His  kingdom.  (K.  Gerok.) 
Peter  and  Cornelius : — The  incident  before  us  teaches — I.  That  Chbistianity  can 
EEADicATE  THE  MOST  iNVETEEATK  HABITS.  Until  this  houT  Peter  had  not  under- 
stood the  world-conquering  mission  of  Christianity,  so  that  when  the  messengers  of 
Cornelius  met  him  he  was  the  very  embodiment  of  ceremonial  sanctity.  He  must 
now  feel  the  expansive  power  of  Christianity — and  run  to  the  moral  rescue  of  a 
branded  Gentile  1  In  achieving  this  eradication  of  habit,  no  compulsory  agency  is 
employed.  Conviction  is  produced  by  illumination.  How  was  it  in  the  case  of 
Peter  ?  There  was — 1.  Visible  revelation — the  descending  vessel  was  patent  to  his 
vision.  2.  Oral  communication — '•  What  God  hath  cleansed  that  call  not  thou 
common."  3.  Concurrent  personal  evidence — "  while  Peter  doubted  himself,  the 
men  which  were  sent  from  CorneUua  "  stood  at  his  door.  4.  Divine  instigation — ' '  Get 
thee  down,  and  go  with  them."  5.  In  all  this,  however,  there  was  nothing  beyond 
moral  suasion.  Peter's  conviction  was  won,  hence  he  avers,  *'  God  hath  showed 
me."  Is  aught  bo  mighty  as  religious  conviction  ?  Has  it  not  shaken  thrones,  con- 
vulsed dynasties,  and  made  the  history  of  humanity  glorious  ?  It  is  by  the  force  of 
conviction  that  Christianity  is  to  eradicate  moral  evil.  II.  That  the  propagation 
OF  Christianity  has  been  devolved  on  human  instrumentality  (vers.  5,  6).  The 
angel  might  have  been  delegated  and  thus  obviated  the  necessity  of  Peter's  ministry. 
But  there  are  three  all-sufficient  reasons  for  the  employment  of  human  agency — 1. 
Man  can  practically  attest  the  advantages  of  Christianity.  He  testifies  to  what  he 
has  experimentally  realised.  It  is  not  a  "  thing  of  beauty  "  to  his  outward  eye, 
but  a  reality  and  a  power  in  his  soul.  2.  Man  can  sympathise  with  the  peculiar 
difliculties  which  beset  the  human  mind.  The  Christian  has  passed  through  the 
purifying  process.  Hence,  having  "passed  from  darkness  to  light"  himself,  he 
may  guide  others  into  the  mysterious  way.  When  he  meets  the  doubter,  the  anxious 
inquirer,  the  tempted,  he  can  sympathise  with  each  phase  of  human  experience,  and 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  137 

thus  is  qualified  to  propagate  the  gospel.  3.  Man  can  expose  the  delusiveness  of 
Bin.  He  has  experienced  its  hollow  and  heartless  treachery.  This  gives  him  power 
in  reasoning  with  the  Felixes  of  society.  When  they  recount  their  pleasures,  he 
can  testify  of  their  bitterness.  These  qualifications  were  combined  in  a  superlative 
degree  in  Peter.  Could  not  he  attest  the  advantages  of  Christianity  ?  III.  The 
TRUE  METHOD  OF  EXPOUNDING  Cheistianitt.  Mark  the  directness  of  this  sermon  I 
Wherever  the  preacher  travels  he  never  loses  sight  of  Christ.  If  he  reverts  to  the 
"  children  of  Israel,"  he  connects  them  with  Jesus  ;  if  he  traverses  the  Holy  Land 
it  is  to  track  the  footprints  of  the  Saviour;  if  he  refers  to  the  Great  White 
Throne  of  time's  final  day,  it  is  to  point  to  the  Eedeemer  Judge.  1.  There  are 
lessons  for  preachers  here.  The  world  is  to  be  saved  by  the  preaching  of  "  Christ 
crucified."  2.  There  are  lessons  for  listeners  here.  For  what  purpose  do  ye 
assemble  ?  Cornelius  summoned  the  apostle  "  to  hear  all  things  that  are  com- 
manded thee  of  God."  Come  for  mental  gratification  and  your  hope  may  be  turned 
to  confusion — come  to  commune  with  the  condescending  Deity,  and  answers  of 
peace  will  refresh  your  soul  I  3.  Peter  emphatically  preached  the  gospel.  His 
address  was  not  an  essay  upon  the  gospel  nor  a  dissertation  upon  any  of  its  doc- 
trines— it  was  a  bold  and  powerful  proclamation  of  "  remission  of  sins  "  through 
faith  in  Christ.  In  modem  days  such  a  sermon  might  be  termed  commonplace — 
scholars  might  describe  it  as  being  fit  for  unlearned  plebeians,  and  critics  might 
charge  it  with  want  of  finish :  notwithstanding  this,  however,  can  we  imagine  any- 
thing more  exquisitely  adapted  to  the  necessities  of  Cornelius  and  his  fellow-audi. 
tors?  Adaptation,  in  fact,  is  the  true  secret  of  power.  Paul  could  reason,  Apolloa 
could  declaim,  and  Peter  could  present  the  gospel  with  condensation  and  compre- 
hensiveness unsurpassed  by  any  of  his  contemporaries.  So,  in  the  modern  Church, 
every  man  must  work  in  his  own  order ;  each,  however,  striving  to  exalt  the  Cross 
as  being  at  once  a  pledge  of  infinite  love  and  the  medium  of  human  salvation.  IV. 
The  connection  between  human  agency  and  Divine  power  (ver.  44).  This  fact 
shows  us — 1.  That  human  agency  is  not  self-sufficient  as  to  spiritual  results.  It  is 
net  in  man  to  raise  the  Lazaruses  of  society  from  their  moral  death.  They  may 
•'  roll  away  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre,"  but  God  alone  can  relax  the 
tyrant's  grasp.  2.  That,  apart  from  the  delivered  Word,  there  must  be  distinct 
Divine  iuSuence.  The  word  had  been  spoken,  and  in  addition  to  the  oral  message 
there  was  a  distinct  effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  While,  therefore,  we  •'  search  the 
Scriptures,"  and  give  ear  to  the  human  ministry,  we  must  implore  the  presence 
and  benediction  of  the  Eternal  Spirit.  Conclusion :  Lingering  near  this  house  in 
Caesarea,  one  may  overhear  lessons  vitally  affecting  our  personal  peace  and  destiny 
as  well  as  witness  the  triumph  of  evangelical  truth.  We  learn — 1.  That  spiritual 
perfection  is  an  impossibility  apart  from  Christ.  Cornelius  was  an  evidently  religious 
man,  yet  he  lacked  the  true  light ;  something  more  was  needed  to  purify  and  perfect 
his  character.  2.  That  man's  worth  is  to  be  estimated  by  his  moral  condition.  "  In 
every  nation  he  that  feareth  God  and  worketh  righteousness."  The  time  will  come 
when  every  man  shall  be  estimated  according  to  his  character.  3.  The  transcen- 
dent honour  connected  with  Christian  usefulness.  Was  ever  man  crowned  with 
higher  honour  than  that  of  being  the  instrument  of  leading  sinners  to  a  knowledge 
of  the  true  Saviour  ?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Peter  and  Cornelius  : — 1.  Surely  this 
is  put  on  record  as  a  pattern  of  the  Lord's  chosen  way  of  doing  His  work,  by 
making  each  one  who  receives  His  grace  a  centre  for  making  his  own  immediate 
Burroundings  bright  therewith.  Cornelius  "  called  together  his  kinsmen  and 
near  friends."  §.  When  each  agent  in  the  Lord's  service  obediently  fulfils  hia 
own  task  "  without  gainsaying  or  tarrying,"  all  the  manifold  parts  fit  together 
in  a  wondrous  completeness  of  success.  It  is  one  portion  of  a  perfect  design 
which  the  Master  accomplishes  when  He  works  in  you  to  serve  Him.  Another 
portion  of  the  same  design  He  is  preparing  elsewhere.  Obedient  faith  brings 
the  portions  together.  3.  When  Peter  received  the  Lord's  Word  about  "  the 
keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  he  little  thought  that  it  would  be  given  to  him  to 
throw  open  the  gates  of  the  kingdom  to  the  Gentile  world.  Glad  surprises  of  result 
are  given  also  to  the  humblest  and  weakest  disciple,  who  simply  takes  each  step  of 
service,  waiting  on  Jesus  with  dutiful  love.  4.  In  the  few  full  words  of  Peter  here, 
we  are  made  to  feel  how  all  the  gathered  riches  of  the  old  covenant  are  completed 
and  freely  given  to  all  in  Christ,  so  that  "whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  receive 
remission  of  sins."    This  "  the  law  could  not  do."    {G.  S.  Rowe.) 

Ver.  28.  A  man  that  is  a  Jew.— The  Jew : — ^I  can  oonceive  of  no  object  more  pro* 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciuv.I, 

foundly  interesting  than  this — *•  a  man  that  is  a  Jew ! "  All  that  is  yenerable  in 
antiquity,  sacred  in  religion,  rich  in  story,  sublime  in  poetry,  cleaves  to  this  extra- 
ordinary race.  But  for  such  a  man  infidelity  would  have  lost  one  of  the  most  un- 
answerable proofs  of  her  falsehood  and  her  folly.  I.  His  common  oiaims  as  a  man. 
A  recent  pope  was  passing  through  Bome ;  a  Jew,  fallen  in  a  fit,  lay  prostrate  on 
the  pavement ;  the  people  who  saw  him,  like  the  priest  and  the  Levite,  passed  by 
on  the  other  side  ;  but  the  sovereign  pontiff,  ahghting  from  his  carriage,  ran  to  his 
help.  "  He  is  a  Jew  1 "  they  cried,  as  if  in  horror  of  a  contact  so  contaminating. 
"  He  is  a  man  I  "  cried  the  pontiff ;  and,  like  the  good  Samaritan,  he  hastened  to  hia 
relief,  saw  him  safely  conducted  to  his  home,  and  sent  his  own  physician  to  attend 
him.  1.  He  is  a  man  as  weU  as  a  Jew,  although  he  is  a  Jew,  and  all  the  claims 
that  humanity  can  present  to  the  sympathy  of  the  species  belong  to  him.  He,  too» 
may  make  the  appeal,  so  long  urged  in  vain  by  the  enslaved  African,  "  Am  I  not  a 
man  and  a  brother  ?  "  You  owe  to  him  the  performance  of  a  brother's  part ;  and  if 
you  fail  to  render  it  the  voice  of  your  brother's  blood  will  cry  against  you.  2.  He 
is  a  man,  the  offspring  of  the  same  parent,  the  workmanship  of  the  same  Creator,  aa 
fearfully  and  wonderfully  made  as  you  are,  the  same  Ufe-blood  flows  in  his  veins, 
the  same  heart  throbs  in  his  breast,  and  to  all  the  iUs  to  which  flesh  is  heir,  he  is 
subject  as  well  as  you.  3.  That  man  that  is  a  Jew  has  a  soul,  precious  as  yours. 
God's  breath  inspired  it ;  His  Spirit  endowed  it ;  and  He  who  has  emphatically  said, 
•'  All  souls  are  Mine,"  claims  it  as  His  own.  Think  of  the  faculties  with  which  it 
is  endowed,  its  vast  capacity  of  happiness  or  misery,  the  perilous  circumstances  in 
which  it  is  placed  under  the  curse  and  condemning  sentence  of  God's  violated  law, 
and  the  dread  eternity  it  is  destined  to  inherit  if  it  pass  into  it  unforgiven.  4.  And 
was  not  the  same  precious  blood  shed  for  its  redemption  ?  On  what  other  ground 
than  this  can  you  seek  with  any  degree  of  propriety,  or  with  any  hope  of  success, 
the  salvation  of  the  Jews  ?  And  if  it  be  so  precious,  what  an  argument  does  that 
consideration  furnish  for  our  best  efforts  to  promote  the  salvation  of  the  soul  for 
whose  redemption  even  that  was  not  esteemed  a  price  too  great.  II.  The  claims 
PECDLiAB  TO  HIM  AS  A  Jew.  He  bclougs  to  a  race — 1.  Venerable  in  antiquity.  Who 
can  boast  of  a  heraldry  or  of  a  history  like  theirs  ?  A  heraldry  whose  emblazon- 
ment is  from  heaven,  and  a  history  whose  records  are  wiitten  by  inspired  pens. 
The  origin  of  other  nations  is  veiled  in  obscurity  and  so  blended  with  fable  that  it 
is  hard  to  separate  fact  from  fiction.  But  here  is  a  people,  all  whose  story  is  drawn 
out  in  hues  of  accuracy  and  in  characters  of  truth.  And  is  it  not  an  affecting 
spectacle  to  behold  a  people,  thus  hoary  with  the  accumulation  of  ages,  treated 
with  contumely,  and  left  to  perish  ?  2.  Which  once  enjoyed  the  special  tokens  of 
the  Divine  favour.  Now,  indeed,  they  are  trodden  under  foot  of  the  Gentiles.  But 
they  were  a  great  nation  once.  They,  and  they  alone,  could  boast  a  pure  theocracy, 
and  laws  given  from  heaven.  Are  a  people,  then,  once  thus  signally  owned  and 
honoured  by  God,  to  be  regarded  with  indifference  or  contempt  ?  A  people  too, 
whose  abandonment  by  God  is  not  final,  and  whose  restoration  to  His  favour  shall 
assuredly  come.  I  am  not  sure  that  the  tardy  progress  of  the  Christian  cause  may 
not  be,  in  some  measure,  attributed  to  the  unconcern  which  Christians  have  mani- 
fested towards  Jews.  3.  To  which  we  are  laid  under  the  deepest  obligation.  There 
is  nothing  great  or  good  that  we  possess  but  we  are  indebted  for  it  to  the  Jews.  The 
best  of  books,  the  best  of  gifts,  we  owe  to  them — the  sacred  volume  and  the  Saviour 
of  the  world.  Who  is  the  most  ancient  and  the  most  authentic  of  all  historians — 
but  a  Jew  ?  What  poets  can  compare  with  theirs  ?  Beloved  they  must  be,  for  the 
fathers'  sake  if  not  for  their  own  ;  and  though  we  may  well  despair  of  ever  paying 
the  debt  due  to  them,  still,  by  our  efforts  for  their  welfare,  we  will  testify  tliat  we 
are  not  altogether  unconscious  of  or  unwilling  to  acknowledge  it.  And  think  how 
long  this  debt  has  been  contracting,  while  scarcely  a  fraction  of  the  interest  has 
been  paid.  Societies  there  are  expending  hundreds  of  thousands  on  the  distant 
heathen,  but  how  few  there  are  interested  in  the  restoration  of  the  lost  sheep  of  the 
house  of  Israel  1  4.  To  whose  conversion  prodigious  advantage  must  accrue.  If  the 
fall  of  them  be  the  riches  of  the  world,  and  the  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of 
the  Gentiles,  how  much  more  their  fulness  ?  The  Jews,  in  the  event  of  their  conver- 
sion, will  become  the  most  zealous  and  successful  missionaries ;  while  the  Church 
herself,  aroused  by  this  event  to  a  life  and  energy  and  unanimity  unknown  to  former 
times,  »'ill  take  the  field  against  the  common  foe  in  numbers  compared  with  which 
all  present  figures  will  appear  contemptible.  Who  can  go  forth  and  announce  the 
faithful  saying,  "  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners,"  and  add,  with  the  same  emphasis  as  the  Jew,  **  of  whom  I  am 


«HAP.  X.]  TEE  ACTS,  139 

«hief  "  ?  5.  For  whose  salvation  there  has  never  been  a  period  more  favourable 
than  the  present.  Already  there  seems  to  be  a  shaking  amongst  the  bones  in  the 
valley  of  vision.  Tho  Jews  begin  to  be  weary  of  the  long  delay  that  attends  the 
coming  of  their  vainly  expected  Messiah.  They  have  their  misgivings  as  to  the 
correctness  of  their  views.  They  feel  as  though  the  system  to  which  they  have  so 
tenaciously  clung  had  waxen  old  and  was  ready  to  vanish  away.  Hope  deferred 
begins  to  make  the  heart  sick.  They  long  for  some  better  teaching  than  their  Eab- 
bins  give,  and  for  some  more  satisfying  and  sustaining  influences  than  their  Tahnuda 
and  their  Targums  yield.  In  this  state  of  things  their  enlightened  and  intelligent 
men  are  more  disposed  to  converse  and  argue  upon  the  subject  of  the  Messiahship  of 
Christ  in  former  times.  And  most  assuredly  when  infidelity,  under  the  guise  of 
rational  Christianity,  is  overspreading  the  continent,  we  shall  do  well  to  seek  the 
conversion  of  the  Jews.  InfideUty  can  meet  no  antagonist  more  formidable  than  a 
learned,  intelligent,  and  converted  Jew.  (T.  Raffles,  D.B.)  God  hath  showed  me 
that  I  should  not  call  any  man  common  or  unclean. — A  beautiful  faith  in  the  sparks 
of  divinity  in  every  human  soul : — I.  Its  good  geound,  1.  By  creation.  (1)  After  the 
image  of  God.  (2)  All  from  one  pair.  2.  By  redemption.  (1)  God  wiU  have  all 
men  to  be  saved.  (2)  Christ  sends  His  apostles  to  all  nations.  3.  By  experience. 
(1)  In  the  heathen  world.  (2)  In  the  pastoral  oversight  of  criminals.  II.  Its 
BENEFICIAL  INFLUENCE.  1.  For  the  Christian  contemplation  of  the  world  and  con- 
ceptions of  history  in  general.  2.  For  Christian  intercourse  in  daily  Ufe.  3.  For 
the  Christian  ministry.  (K.  Gerok.)  The  value  of  common  things : — A  rich 
nobleman  was  once  showing  a  friend  a  great  collection  of  precious  stones  whose 
value  was  almost  beyond  counting.  There  were  diamonds,  and  pearls,  and  rubies, 
and  gems  from  almost  every  country,  and  had  been  gathered  by  their  possessor  at 
the  greatest  labour  and  expense.  "And  yet,"  he  remarked,  "  they  yield  me  no  in- 
come." His  friend  replied  that  he  had  two  stones  which  had  only  cost  him  five 
pounds  each,  but  which  yielded  him  a  very  considerable  income,  and  he  led  him 
down  to  the  mill  and  pointed  to  two  toiling  grey  millstones.     {W.  Baxendale.) 

Ver.  29.  Therefore  came  I  unto  you  without  gainsaying. — Faster  and  people : — 
I.  Concerning  the  tbue  ministeb,  I  afiSrm  that — 1.  He  is  a  special  creation  of 
Divine  grace.  The  mantle  of  the  prophet  is  not  personal  property ;  God  is  its 
owner,  and  He  Himself  must  determine  who  shall  be  invested  with  it.  (1)  The 
processes  through  which  men  reach  the  pulpit  are  diverse ;  but  if  true,  each  has 
been  guided  by  the  Divine  eye.  Some  require  years  of  mental  preparation  ;  others 
are  summoned  at  once  from  obscurity.  What  then?  Shall  each  question  the 
Divinity  of  the  other's  mission?  God  forbid  I  "  There  are  diversities  of  operation, 
but  the  same  Spirit."  He  who  spoke  the  universe  into  being  can  suddenly  qualify 
men  to  bear  the  standard  of  the  Cross.  He  also  who  has  established  the  processes 
of  creation  may  gradually  train  men.  We  must  therefore  test  the  Divinity  of  each 
man's  mission  more  by  the  results  secured  than  by  the  discipline  undergone.  Every 
true  minister  is  a  special  creation  of  Divine  grace,  just  as  every  planet  is  a  special 
creation  of  Divine  power.  He  does  not  enter  upon  the  publication  of  the  gospel  as 
a  profession,  but  as  a  vocation.  "Woe  is  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel."  You 
may  as  well  attempt  to  arrest  the  whirlwind,  or  roll  back  the  planets,  as  to  silence 
the  God-created  minister.  Kings  and  councils  have  attempted  the  task  ;  but  above 
the  fury  and  clamour  of  hell  this  voice  has  sounded,  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the 
sight  of  God  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than  God,  judge  ye.  For  we  cannot  but 
speak  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard."  Aye  I  that  is  one  secret  of  the 
true  minister's  power — he  has  "  seen  and  heard  "  his  Divine  Master.  (2)  The 
Divinity  of  this  mission  is  in  no  wise  affected  by  the  variety  of  manner  which  may 
be  adopted  by  individual  ministers.  Each  man  has  his  own  style  of  working,  and 
is  never  so  effective  as  when  he  is  natural.  The  whirlwind  has  a  mission,  and  so 
has  the  zephyr ;  the  summer  sun  and  the  wintry  blast  are  alike  useful ;  and  so  in 
relation  to  the  spiritual  ministry  one  man  speaks  in  tones  of  thunder,  and  lays  his 
grasp  upon  the  piUars  of  the  temple  of  sin.  Another  speaks  in  tenderness,  and 
stretches  forth  a  helping  hand  to  those  that  "  have  no  might."  One  man  is  pecu- 
liarly qualified  to  make  havoc  among  the  ranks  of  infidelity ;  another  is  constructive, 
and  builds  up  the  Church  in  its  most  holy  faith.  In  the  Christian  ministry  you 
find  the  accomplished  scholar,  the  eagle-eyed  critic,  the  eloquent  orator.  But  you 
must  not  expect  in  any  one  man  a  summary  of  qualifications ;  take  each  in  his  own 
sphere,  and  be  thankful  for  what  he  is,  rather  than  regretful  for  what  he  is  not. 
Do  you  depreciate  the  sun  because  without  fragrance  ?  the  rose  because  without 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  j, 

light?  2.  He  seeks  the  highest  spiritual  culture  of  his  auditors.  (1)  The  sanctuary 
is  not  an  academy  in  which  the  sciences  are  courted,  or  in  which  learned  prelectiona 
are  to  be  dehvered.  Men  are  less  anxious  to  understand  a  technical  theology  than 
to  be  brought  into  contact  with  the  life-giving  religion  of  Jesus.  After  the  anxieties 
of  life,  after  fellowship  with  men  destitute  of  Divine  sympathy,  your  spirits  require 
something  more  than  scholastic  criticisms.  (2)  There  will  be  great  diversity  in  the 
character  of  my  hearers.  I  shall  not  address  all  in  the  same  strain,  nor  always 
luxuriate  amid  the  green  pastures  of  doctrine,  assurance,  and  promise.  I  shall 
erect  the  standard  of  eternal  rectitude,  and  give  men  to  feel  their  true  moral  stature. 
I  shall  tear  the  mask  from  the  hypocrite,  and  lay  hold  on  the  prodigal  and  try  to 
woo  him  to  repentance.  (3)  The  power  of  the  Church  consists  in  its  piety.  There 
is  force  in  genius ;  but,  contrasted  with  the  strength  of  piety,  it  is  weakness.  There 
is  power  in  money ;  but  the  pauper  whose  heart  glows  with  love  to  the  Saviour  is 
a  mightier  power  than  the  millionaire.  Holiness  is  power ;  with  it  we  are  valorous 
as  giants — without  it  we  are  "  reeds  shaken  with  the  wind."  Holiness  is  peace. 
The  peace  which  exists  apart  from  holiness  is  a  treacherous  lull.  The  mischief- 
maker  can  secure  no  sympathy  in  a  holy  Church ;  every  ear  is  closed  to  his  slander, 
and  every  tongue  ready  to  rebuke  his  impiety.  II.  Concerning  those  who  wait 
UPON  THE  MiNisTBT.  1.  The  pastor  has  a  right  to  expect — (1)  Their  punctual  and 
regular  attendance.  This  is  necessary  to  enjoyment.  The  devotional  part  of  the 
service  is  of  the  highest  importance.  And  even,  taking  the  lowest  ground,  there  is 
something  opposed  to  public  decency  and  rectitude  in  late  attendance.  (2)  The 
exercise  of  a  charitable  judgment.  While  the  enemy  rages,  let  the  friends  unite  I 
If  you  prove  faithful,  I  shaU  calmly  survey  any  external  storm  !  (3)  An  abiding 
interest  in  their  prayers.  Without  prayer  we  shall  perish.  Prayer  gives  strength, 
elevation,  self-oblivion.  (4)  Their  zealous  co-operation.  A  minister  feels  himself 
strong  just  in  proportion  as  he  possesses  the  sympathy  of  his  people.  2.  The 
people  must  not  expect — (1)  Uniformity  in  the  mode  of  address.  Ministers  are  but 
men.  Their  physical  functions  may  be  deranged,  their  social  peace  may  be  in- 
vaded, their  souls  may  be  distracted,  and  all  such  disturbances  will  produce  an 
influence  on  their  ministry.  We  must,  therefore,  be  discriminating  and  sympathetic 
in  relation  to  pulpit  services,  and  must  at  all  times  endeavour  to  secure  in  worship 
what  is  lacking  in  meditation.  (2)  A  system  of  theology  in  every  sermon.  Some 
auditors  are  unreasonable  enough  to  expect  a  preacher,  in  every  discourse,  to  com- 
mence at  the  creation  and  end  at  the  harps  of  heaven,  paying  special  attention  to 
intervening  circumstances.  My  object  will  be  to  analyse  each  text,  and  to  develop 
the  meaning  peculiar  to  it.  I  hold  most  tenaciously  the  great  doctrines  of  Scrip- 
ture ;  but  it  would  be  impossible  to  discuss  these  in  connection  with  every  Scrip- 
tural statement.  At  the  same  time  it  will  be  my  aspiration  ever  to  exalt  Jesus  as 
man's  only  and  all-sufficient  Saviour  I  (3)  Periodical  visitation.  Much  time  will 
be  required  to  prepare  for  the  pulpit,  and  the  calls  of  the  sick,  the  dying,  and  the 
penitent  shall  secure  my  fullest  attention.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  design  of  the 
Christian  ministry  : — Let  us  consider  the  reasons  under  which  a  people  ought  to 
act  when  they  seek  the  aid  of  ministers.  I.  Personal  salvation.  The  end  of  the 
ministry  is  the  salvation  of  men — not  the  performance  of  ceremonies,  nor  the  pro- 
nouncing of  discourses.  The  forms  and  shadows  of  the  Levitical  priesthood  have 
passed  away ;  and  disputation  and  laboured  oratory  have  their  places  in  the  schools. 
Could  we  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  angels,  or  open  to  you  mysteries,  yet 
eloquence  and  learning  would  not  be  a  reason  why  you  should  have  sent  for  us. 
What  is  the  harmony  of  periods,  if  aU  is  to  end  in  words  ?  What  are  the  researches 
of  the  study,  if  all  is  to  terminate  in  the  increase  of  your  knowledge?  The  ques- 
tion with  us  is,  how  we  may  turn  any  talents  with  which  God  has  endowed  us  to 
the  account  of  your  salvation.  II.  Instruction  in  the  truth.  Salvation  and 
truth  are  inseparably  connected.  Cornelius  sent  for  Peter,  that  he  might  "  bear 
words  of  him."  Words  of  Jewish  tradition  or  Gentile  philosophy?  No;  but 
"  words  whereby  thou  and  all  thy  house  shall  be  saved."  You  have  sent  for  us, 
then,  to  declare  the  truth  ;  but  have  you  considered  its  nature  and  extent  ?  And 
can  you  bear  it  ?  It  is  not  all  comprehended  in  the  love  of  God.  Can  you  boar  to 
be  slain  by  the  law  ?  Can  you  bear  the  ministry  of  the  Baptist  ?  Can  you  bear  to 
be  told  that,  virtuous  as  many  of  you  may  be,  yon  must  seek  this  salvation  as 
sinners,  and  that,  if  any  man  will  be  Christ's  disciple,  he  must  deny  himself  daily, 
and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  his  Lord?  Can  you  bear  to  have  it  enforced  upon 
you,  "  Be  not  conformed  to  this  world,"  and  to  be  reminded  that  there  must  be  no 
intermission  in  duty ;  that  you  must  run  with  diligence  the  race  set  before  you. 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  141 

and  war  a  good  warfare  ?  If  you  have  sent  for  as  for  this  "  intent,"  yon  may  say, 
"  Thou  hast  done  well  that  thou  art  come."  May  you  therefore  so  "  purify  your 
souls  by  obeying  the  truth,"  that  you  may  "know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  may 
make  you  free  1  "  III.  Faithful  and  constant  application  and  enforcement  of 
TEUTH.  Ministers  ought  to  be  better  skilled  in  Divine  knowledge  than  the  majority 
of  their  hearers ;  but  it  would  be  a  false  view  that  the  ministry  is  appointed  to 
teach  us  constantly  some  new  thing.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  no  less  important  that 
we  should  apply  and  enforce  known  truth.  For — 1.  Conscience  often  sleeps,  and 
needs  another  to  awake  it.  2.  We  are  prone  to  judge  others.  The  ministry  ia 
appointed  to  oblige  us  to  judge  ourselves.  3.  We  are  liable  to  religious  delusions  ; 
and  we  avoid  those  truths  which  would  disturb  us.  The  minister  of  Christ  must 
declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God ;  and  the  very  truths  you  need  are  thus  pressed 
upon  you.  4.  All  sinful  habits  and  passions  raise  a  haze  and  mist  about  them- 
selves ;  and  it  is  for  the  Christian  ministry  to  dispel  that  delusive  atmosphere.  5. 
All  temptation,  too,  places  a  bias  on  the  judgment.  You  only  seethe  fruit  pleasant 
to  the  eye,  and  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise.  It  is  for  the  ministry  to  remind 
you  that  God  hath  said,  "  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die." 
Or  your  temptation  may  be  to  discouragement  and  unbelief ;  and  then  it  is  for  us  to 
call  your  attention  to  the  great  and  precious  promises.    IV.  The  establishment  ob 

CONTINDANCB   OF   THE   OltDINANCES  AND   DISCIPLINE   OF   THE   ChUECH.      St.   Peter  here 

opens  the  Church  to  the  Gentiles.  They  come  in  ;  and  this  was  their  mercy  and 
their  privilege ;  and  so  it  ought  to  be  esteemed  by  us.  For  a  Christian  Church  is  one 
of  the  most  important  institutions  on  earth.  Its  members  are  in  special  covenant 
with  God.  Sabbaths  are  observed,  public  assemblies  are  held ;  and  in  these  the 
Divine  presence  is  both  promised  and  realised.  Christian  fellowship  is  enjoyed. 
The  Church  is  an  association  formed  to  make  war  upon  sin  and  error.  Here  the  aged 
are  comforted  and  strengthened ;  children  are  brought  to  Christ,  and  trained  up  for 
His  service ;  and  servants  made  free  by  the  truth.  In  the  Church  there  are  holy 
rules  of  living  and  acting  in  force.  Baptism  is  administered  ;  and  "  by  eating  "  of 
the  sacramental  "bread,  and  drinking  of  that  cup,"  the  followers  of  Christ  •'  show 
forth  His  death  till  He  come."  Did  you  send  for  us  to  maintain  or  subvert  this 
beautiful  order  f  "  To  maintain  it,"  I  know  you  say.  We  rejoice  to  meet  you  on 
this  ground.  Well,  then,  be  co-workers  with  us,  or  the  end  will  fail.  Conclusion : 
1.  If  you  have  proposed  important  ends  in  sending  for  us,  these  impose  important 
duties  upon  us,  which  we  cannot  perform  but  by  special  assistance.  We  shall  need 
your  candour,  and,  above  all,  your  prayers.  2.  Maintain  the  teachable  spirit. 
Except  a  man  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child,  he  cannot  enter 
therein.  3.  Be  "intent"  upon  growth  and  advancement  in  knowledge  and  piety. 
{B.  Watson.) 

Vers.  80-48.  And  Comellns  said,  Four  days  ago  I  was  fiastlng. — Peter  at  Casarea: 
— We  welcome  his  revelation  that  the  grace  of  God  has  so  boundless  a  reach ;  that 
in  His  government  men  are  accountable  not  for  knowledge  which  they  have  not,  but 
for  what  they  have.    It  suggests  certain  practical  lessons  like  the  following  :  I.  It 

JB  ODB  PBrVHiEGE   TO   EXEECISB   A   WIDE    CHARITY    TOWAED    BELIGIONS    WHICH    MFTEB 

FEOM  OUB  OWN.  We  have  the  authority  of  Scripture  for  recognising  the  truth 
wherever  found.  No  one  of  the  apostles  stands  more  resolutely  for  sound  doctrine, 
for  righteous  Uving,  than  Paul ;  yet  more  than  once  he  takes  pains  to  quote  from 
heathen  writers  opinions  that  are  correct  as  far  as  they  go.  He  believed  that  so  far 
as  they  had  any  truth,  it  was  the  truth  of  God.  We  have  a  feeling  sometimes  that 
to  acknowledge  anything  of  good  in  one  who  is  not  a  Christian,  or  in  a  Church  with 
which  we  have  no  fellowship,  or  in  a  nation  that  is  in  spiritual  darkness,  is  disloyalty 
to  God ;  but  we  are  really  doing  Him  larger  honour  to  believe  that  something  of 
His  image  is  left  in  His  creatures  everywhere  ;  that,  in  the  plenitude  of  His  grace. 
His  Spirit  is  working  to  some  extent  in  all  men  the  fruits  of  righteousness  ;  that  He 
only  demands  of  His  creatures,  in  Christian  or  in  heathen  lands,  to  follow  the 
knowledge  which  they  have ;  that  "  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  Him,  and 
worketh  righteousness,  is  accepted  with  Him."  JI.  We  may  be  inspired  by  thb 
viBTUES  OF  THE  PAGANS.  It  is  B  part  of  charity  not  only  to  recognise  virtue  any- 
where, but  to  be  willing  to  copy  it.  That  is  a  high  attainment  in  the  study  of  this 
grace.  If  a  man  is,  in  your  judgment,  a  heathen  or  a  heretic,  it  is  humiliating  to 
admit  that  he  can  teach  you  anything  of  goodness  ;  but  perhaps  he  can.  He  may 
have  some  excellencies  that  are  far  beyond  yours  in  the  same  line.  Why  should 
you  not  make  these  a  subject  of  study  and  emulation  ?    Certainly  it  is  not  di»> 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  z. 

paraging  the  Christian  system ;  it  is  not  reflecting  upon  God ;  they  all  came  from 
Him  ;  they  are  not  the  product  of  the  human  will;  they  are  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and 
in  copying  them  you  are  but  copying  God.     For  example,  the  Stoics,  who  knew 
little  of  Christianity,  had  rules  for  right  living  as  exalted  in  some  particulars  as 
those  prescribed  by  Christian  men  in  any  age.     One  of  their  philosophers  says  of 
human  depravity  :  "  Let  us  first  persuade  ourselves  of  this,  that  there  is  not  one  of 
us  without  fault."     *'  If  you  wish  to  be  good,  first  believe  that  you  are  bad."     That 
is  as  strong  as  the  Saviour's  words :  "  They  that  be  whole  need  not  a  physician, 
but  they  that  are  sick."     Another,  writing  of  self-examination,  refers  to  an  old 
scholar  who,  when  the  day  was  over  and  he  went  to  rest,  used  to  ask  himself, 
"  What  evil  have  you  cured  to-day  ?    What  vice  have  you  resisted  ?    In  what  par- 
ticular have  you  improved  ?  "     That  would  be  a  good  rule  for  Christians.     Here  ia 
another  precept:   "What  ought  not  to  be  done,  do  not  even  think  of   doing." 
Virtues  Uke  these  were  taught  by  a  few,  at  least,  centuries  before  the  Christian  era. 
There  seems  ground  for  the  opinion  that  the  prevalence  of  these  to  such  an  extent 
helped  to  prepare  the  world  for  the  gospel,  as  St.  Augustine  admitted  that  he  had 
been  led  first  toward  Christianity  by  the  stoical  teachings  of  Cicero.     A  flower  that 
springs  up  in  a  field  of  weeds  and  surprises  you  with  its  fragrance,  is  as  really  the 
work  of  a  Divine  Creator  as  that  which  grows  in  a  gardener's  bed.     Virtue  is  always 
Divine,  and  wherever  she  leads  it  is  safe  to  foUow.     III.  We  ought  to  be  gratb- 
F0ii  foe  the  light  of  Christianity.     But  why,  if  there  is  so  much  to  commend 
in  the  pagan  philosophers  ?    What  need  is  there  of  the  gospel  ?     This  simply  : 
religion  is  something  more  than  a  system  of  ethics.     If  it  be  asked  more  definitely 
what  was  it  that  they  lacked  as  compared  with  us,  the  answer  is  many-sided  ;  but 
this  is  its  substance :  they  lacked  Christ.     Here,  then,  is  a  vast  gulf  between  those 
sages  and  ourselves.     They  did  not  have  the  idea,  as  we  do,  of  a  personal  God — a 
Father,  a  Friend.     More  particularly  they  did  not  know  Jesus,  did  not  have  Him 
as  a  guide.     With  all  their  beautiful  precepts,  they  had  no  example  ;  they  did  not 
know  of  any  one  who  had  ever  obeyed  these  laws.     One  of  them  writes,  "Follow 
the  guidance  of  nature  :  that  is  the  great  thing."    What  a  rule  for  a  weak  human 
being  !     One  of  them  speaks  of  waiting  for  death  with  a  cheerful  mind  ;  but  look 
back  a  sentence  or  two,  and  see  what  he  means :  "  What,  then,  is  that  which  is 
able  to  enrich  a  man  ?    One  thing,  and  only  one — philosophy."     That  is  as  far  as 
their  wisdom  rose.     That  is  why  we  have  reason  for  gratitude  that  we  know  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Eedeemer  of  men.     He  is  "  the  true  Light,  which  lighteth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  the  world."     "  Every  man,"  whoever,  wherever,  whatever  he 
is.     If  any  one  claims  that  he  is  sufiQcient  in  himself,  and  needs  no  Divine  revelation 
other  than  that  which  comes  from  his  own  consciousness,  he  is  making  a  fatal  mis- 
take ;  he  cannot  quote  Cornelius  as  an  example.    (T.  J.  Holmes. )       Peter  at  Ccesarea : 
— Peter's  bringing  of  the  gospel  to  Cornelius,  and  Cornelius'  subsequent  baptism, 
seem  very  much  matters  of  course  to  us  ;  but  they  were  revolutionary.     They  were 
like  John  Wesley's  ordination  of  men  to  preach  the  gospel  in  America.     Thence- 
forth he  knew  he  had  violated  the  canons  of  the  Church  of  England.     Thenceforth 
Peter  knew  that  he  had  repudiated  Judaism  as  a  necessary  preparative  to  Christianity. 
I.  Cornelius'  preparation.    No  man  can  make  himself  worthy  of  God's  blessing. 
But  one  can  so  prepare  himself  for  the  Divine  blessing,  that  it  shall  come  more 
easily  down  and  find  a  quicker  acceptance.     In  this  sense  Cornelius  had  made  ready 
for  God.     He  says  he  was  fasting  at  the  time  the  special  revelation  came  to  him, 
and,  indeed,  it  was  at  the  very  moment  of  prayer  (ver.  30).     God's  ways  of  dealing 
with  men  conform  to  none  of  the  laws  which  we  might  construct.    We  cannot  say 
that  religious  exercises,  in  which  Cornelius  was  engaged,  offer  the  only  occasions 
when  God  may  come  to  men.     We  recall  Balaam,  addressed  when  on  an  ungodly 
mission ;  we  recall  Saul,  converted  while  journeying  to  persecute  the  saints.    But 
these  revelations  were  not  in  congruity  with  the  soul's  antecedents.     They  came  by 
crushing  down  opposition.     Yet  we  are  safe  in  saying  that  such  is  not  God's  usual 
way  of  granting  insight  into  His  truth.     We  cannot  bind  God  by  law ;  but  con- 
versely we  can  assert  law  of  ourselves,  and  say  confidently  that  prayer  and  all 
reUgious  exercises  are  used  by  God  in  leading  us  into  new  visions  of  truth.     The 
angel  told  Cornelius  that  his  prayerful  and  upright  life  had  commended  him  to  God 
for  His  blessing  (ver.  31).     What  God  remembered  was  not  Cornelias'  worthinesj 
of  a  blessing,  h9t>  his  fitness  for  a  blessing,  shown  by  the  desire  for  it,  witnessed  to 
by  a  prayerful  and  righteous  life.     Cornelius'  hfe  commended  him  to  God  not  aa 
accomplishment,  but  as  a  sign  of  aspiration.    A  good  man  is  one  who  wants  to  be 
better.    Fox  such  God's  blessing  is  surely  prepared.    Being  of  such  a  temper  of 


«HAP.  X.J  THE  ACTS.  14S 

mind,  it  was  natural  that  Cornelius  showed  an  immediate  acceptance  of  God's 
revelation  and  an  immediate  obedience  toward  it  (ver.  33).  II.  Peter's  addeess 
was  the  fuller  form  of  God's  answer  to  Cornelius.  The  appearance  of  the  angel, 
and  the  directions  he  gave,  were  only  preliminary  to  something  else.  This  was 
furnished  by  Peter ;  it  was  the  revelation  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour.  Peter's  address 
divides  itself  easily  into  three  parts — 1.  The  introduction  (vers.  34,  35)  lays  down 
the  double  statement  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  but  that  a  good  man, 
whatever  his  nationality,  is  accepted  of  Him.  The  special  lesson  needed  by  Peter 
and  the  other  leaders  of  the  Church  then  was  that  circumstantials  make  no  dif- 
ference to  God.  The  passage  has  been  immensely  abused  by  misinterpretation. 
It  has  been  supposed  to  teach  that  all  religions  are  equally  pleasing  to  God ;  from 
which  has  been  deduced  the  inference  that  our  duty  is  to  let  men  alone  in  their 
rehgions,  and  not  try  to  convert  them  to  Christianity.  But  if  Cornelius  was  already 
in  the  proper  condition  Godward,  why  did  he  need  conversion  ?  Again,  the  passage 
has  been  used  to  teach  the  doctrine  that  if  one  is  a  good  man,  and  tries  con- 
scientiously to  do  his  duty  towards  his  fellow-men,  and  reveres  God,  he  is  all  right, 
is  "  accepted  with  Him,"  and  needs  nothing  more.  Faith  in  Christ  is  thus  not 
enumerated  among  the  things  necessary  to  reconciliation  vrith  God.  But  if  to  fear 
God  and  to  work  righteousness  were  enough  in  Cornelius,  why  did  Peter  preach  to 
him  the  gospel?  The  truth  is,  "  accepted  "  here  does  not  mean  accepted  as  aU  he 
ought  to  be,  but  accepted  as  a  proper  subject  for  that  work  of  conversion  which 
tends  to  make  one  what  he  ought  to  be.  2.  The  main  part  of  Peter's  address 
describes  the  life  and  function  of  Jesus  (vers.  36-42).  The  external  facts  of  Hia 
career  are  touched  upon  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  the  solid  grounding  of  His  super- 
natural work  upon  indisputable  material  fact.  8.  The  application  of  Peter's  address 
(ver.  43)  makes  the  doctrines  concerning  Christ  which  he  has  just  stated  practical 
and  pointed.  Christ  is  given  to  men  that  "  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  re- 
ceive remission  of  sins."  The  other  functions  of  Christ  do  not  press  so  immediately 
apon  as  as  His  office  as  a  Saviour.  To  miss  this  is  to  miss  aU  that  He  would  have  us 
know.  ni.  The  blessing  feom  on  high  came  while  Pbteb  was  speaking.  The 
Holy  Ghost  fell  upon  them  (ver.  44).  No  distinction  of  nationaUty  was  observed 
by  the  heavenly  Visitor.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Cornelius  and  Peter : — I.  Eeady 
TO  heab  the  Word.  Comehus  was  a  Roman  centurion — ^in  modem  phrase,  a 
heathen.  How  did  he  become  ready  to  hear  the  Word  ?  1.  By  prayer.  At  the 
time  the  angel  came  he  was  engaged  in  prayer.  This  prayer  was  not  a  mere  form. 
(1)  He  had  not  stopped  just  when  the  ninth  hour  expired,  but  had  persisted  in 
hia  suppUcations  "  until  this  hour."  It  is  fair  to  infer  from  that,  that  he  was  in 
earnest  about  something.  Such  prayers  only  are  effective.  General  prayers,  that 
seek  for  nothing  specific,  get  just  what  they  seek,  and  no  more.  It  is  safe  to  take 
the  mission  of  the  angel  as  an  answer  to  Cornelius'  prayer,  and  to  deduce  that  Cor- 
nelius was  praying  that  he  might  be  shown  the  way  of  salvation  (chap.  xi.  14).  (2) 
The  angel  came  in  response  to  his  prayer.  No  celestial  messengers  are  sent  where 
the  prayers  are  merely  formal.  2.  By  a  vision.  His  vision  was  not  a  dream  or  a 
trance.  "  He  saw  in  a  vision  openly  "  (chap.  x.  3).  He  was  wide  awake,  as  one 
engaged  in  earnest  prayer  could  not  help  but  be.  "  A  man  stood  before  me  in 
bright  apparel."  CorneKus  tells  how  he  looked.  Luke  tells  what  he  was  (chap.  x. 
3).  When  Cornelius  saw  him,  he  was  affrighted,  and  said,  "  What  is  it.  Lord  ?  " 
The  celestial  character  of  his  visitor,  the  circumstances  of  his  appearing,  and  the 
fear  that  sinful  mortals  must  ever  feel  in  the  presence  of  sinless  immortals,  com- 
bined to  compel  Cornelius  to  accept  without  questioning  whatever  the  angel  might 
say.  3.  By  the  angel's  words.  They  were — (1)  Words  of  assurance.  *'  Thy  prayer 
is  heard,  and  thine  alms  are  had  in  remembrance."  Faith  now  takes  the  place  ol 
an  angel  in  assuring  all  who  approach  the  throne  of  grace  that  their  prayers  have 
prevaHed.  Neither  are  their  alms  or  good  deeds  forgotten.  "  God  is  not  un- 
righteous," &c.  The  declaration  that  his  prayers  and  his  ahns  were  gone  up  for  a 
memorial  before  God,  gave  comfort  and  prepared  for  further  revelation.  (2)  Words 
of  direction.  "Send  therefore  to  .  .  .  Peter."  Whatever  Peter  might  say  had 
celestial  endorsement  beforehand.  Many  hearts  are  Divinely  made  ready  for  the 
reception  of  the  gospel,  when  the  Spirit  moves  one  to  speak  the  words  of  me.  But 
observe,  the  angel  himself  did  not  tell  the  story  of  the  Cross  to  Cornelius.  He  lef* 
that  to  Peter.  No  one  can  tell  the  story  of  redemption  so  well  as  one  who  himself 
nas  been  redeemed.  That  Cornelius  was  thus  prepared  to  hear  the  Word  is  made 
•vident — (a)  By  hia  sending  for  Peter.  He  lent  "  forthwith."  He  was  in  haste  to 
heai.    (b)  By  hia  oommendalion  oi  Ptter.     "  Thou  hast  well  done  that  thou  ari 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

cae."  Cornelius  believed  that  Peter  was  about  to  do  that  which  would  show  him 
that  he  was  right  in  disregarding  the  ceremonial  barriers  between  Jew  and  Gentile, 
(c)  By  his  declaration  to  Peter.  "  Now  therefore  we  are  all  here  present  in  the 
sight  of  God  to  hear."  Cornelius  had  improved  the  time  while  waiting  for  Peter  to 
come  (ver.  24).  He  was  in  earnest  to  learn  the  way  of  life,  not  only  for  himself, 
but  for  all  of  his  friends.  II.  Pboolaiming  the  Word.  We  turn  now  from  Cor- 
nelius to  Peter.  1.  The  truth  perceived.  (1)  "  Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that  God  is 
no  respecter  of  persons."  Until  this  moment,  Peter  had  not  known  why  he  had 
been  sent  for,  nor  the  real  meaning  of  his  vision.  So  far  he  had  interpreted  the 
vision  to  mean  nathing  only  that  he  must  not  hesitate  to  associate  with  the  Gentiles, 
to  whom  he  was  sent.  But  now  he  sees  it  meant  a  great  deal  more — spiritual  as 
weU  as  social  equality.  This  was  no  new  thought  (Deut.  x.  17 ;  2  Chron.  xix.  7  ; 
Job  xxxiv.  19).  But  Peter  and  others  had  been  thinking  of  this  as  true  only  as 
between  Jews.  He  had  not  realised  the  truth  he  himself  had  declared  (Acts  iiu 
25).  (2)  "  But  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  Him,  and  worketh  righteousness,  is 
acceptable  to  Him."  Mark  here  two  things — (a)  Peter's  change  of  standards.  His 
criterion  for  judging  was  dutward  no  longer.  He  instantly  dropped  the  notion  that 
circumcision  was  necessary  to  salvation.  All  essentials  were  suddenly  reduced  to 
two — fearing  God  and  working  righteousness.  (6)  That  those  two  essentials  were 
not  enough.  They  made  Cornelius  '*  acceptable,"  but  not  accepted.  If  any  one, 
by  good  works,  could  be  saved,  there  was  no  need  for  Cornelius  to  hear  about  Christ 
the  Saviour  (ver.  2).  But  his  good  works  did  not  satisfy  God,  nor  did  they  satisfy 
himself.  Salvation  cannot  be  purchased  with  good  works.  The  only  adequate 
price  for  that  is  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  2.  The  truth  preached.  Note — (1) 
That  Peter  did  not  teU  anything  new.  His  auditors  were  aware  of  the  story  of 
Christ.  "  Ye  yourselves  know."  It  was  "  the  old,  old  story  "  that  was  effective, 
and  that  will  be  effective  to  the  end  of  time.  (2)  That  he  verified  what  he  did  tell. 
He  offered  himself  and  the  other  apostles  as  witnesses  of  the  death  and  the  resur- 
rection of  Christ.  He  offered  also  the  prophets  as  witnesses,  and  probably  showed 
how  the  sufferings  and  atoning  death  of  Christ  were  symbolised  in  sacrifices  and 
foretold  in  prophecy.  III.  Blessed  by  the  Word.  "  The  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all 
them  which  heard  the  Word."  Notice — 1.  The  time.  "  While  Peter  yet  spake." 
There  was  no  laying  on  of  apostolic  hands.  The  conferring  of  the  gift  was 
as  direct  from  God  to  those  Gentiles  as  it  had  been  to  the  Jews  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost.  2.  The  abundance.  "Was  poured  out."  3.  The  manifestations. 
'•  Heard  them  speak  with  tongues,  and  magnify  God."  They  were  affected  and 
endowed  in  the  same  way  that  their  Jewish  brethren  had  been.  Thus  this  Pente- 
cost of  the  Gentiles  proved  their  right  to  an  unquestioned  place  in  the  brother- 
hood of  the  saints — their  baptism  of  the  Spirit  to  baptism  by  water.  {M.  C.  Hazard.) 
Peter  and  Cornclhis : — Here  we  have  a  Conservative  Jew  and  a  Liberal  Gentile. 
The  Jew  wants  to  keep  things  as  they  are.  He  is  quite  content  to  preach  Christ  to 
his  countrymen.  The  Gentile,  on  the  other  hand,  has  come  to  feel  that  all  truth  is 
not  confined  to  the  systems  of  his  fathers.  He  has  heard  of  Christ,  and  wants  to 
know  more  of  Him.  So  the  narrative  shows  how,  in  the  providence  of  God,  these 
opposite  men  meet  at  the  Cross,  and  there  forget  their  differences  as  they  learned 
that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  Let  us  consider — I.  A  good  preacher. 
1.  Opinions  greatly  differ  on  what  constitutes  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Some  say  educate  your  men  ;  others  say  you  wiU  educate  all  the  fire  out  of  them. 
Some  say  that  the  minister  must  take  an  active  part  in  social  movements  ;  others, 
that  he  must  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  Some  think  he  must  give  his  strength  to 
visitation ;  others,  that  he  must  be  strong  in  the  pulpit.  Some  leave  a  man's 
ministry  because  he  is  too  noisy ;  others,  because  he  is  too  quiet.  Some  object  to 
men  who  do  not  rush  to  the  door  to  shake  hands  with  everybody;  others  object  to 
such  familiarity.  2.  But  there  was  one  thing  about  Peter  that  all  may  imitate — 
he  was  a  man  of  prayer,  as  every  good  preacher,  teacher.  Christian  must  be.  Christ 
Himself  was.  Nothing  great  or  good  can  the  man  of  God  expect  without  prayer. 
While  Elijah  prayed  the  fire  fell ;  in  answer  to  prayer  Joseph  was  able  to  interpret 
Pharaoh's  dreams;  while  the  little  Church  prayed  at  Pentecost  the  Holy  Ghost 
came  down ;  while  the  disciples  prayed  Peter  was  released  from  prison  ;  and  as  he 
prayed  on  the  housetop  God  gave  him  the  vision.  You  cannot  preach,  but  you  can 
pray,  and  that  will  make  the  weak  strong.  U.  The  remarkable  conoreoatiom 
(ver.  33).  Observe — 1.  They  were  aU  in  time.  No  notice  was  put  up  in  the 
porch,  saying,  "You  are  requested  not  to  enter  during  prajer."  No  one  disturbed 
the  singing  or  preaching.    We  are  not  told  that  anybody  came  in  knocking  down 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  U5 

hall  a  dozen  hymn  books,  and  attracting  attention  to  the  last  new  bonnet.  2.  No 
one  went  to  sleep.  Judged  by  modern  practice  that  was  remarkable.  Our  fathers 
must  have  been  wakeful  people,  for  they  would  hsten  to  sermons  two  hours'  length 
in  straight- backed  pews.  Now  the  pews  are  so  shaped  and  furnished  as  to  invite 
Bleep.  3.  They  were  anxious  to  hear.  That,  too,  was  remarkable.  How  vastly 
different  would  be  our  worship  if  we  came  in  that  expectant  condition  1  How 
helpful  would  be  the  preacher's  word  I  Once  a  week  worship,  empty  seats,  and 
deserted  churches  would  be  things  of  the  past.  III.  The  veby  stbiking  sermon. 
1.  It  was  very  short ;  one  could  have  wished  it  longer.  The  main  objection  to  long 
sermons  is  that  the  quahty  is  not  in  proportion.  2.  It  was  full  of  Christ,  although 
the  Name  appears  only  twice.  We  should  not  be  always  repeating  the  Name,  but 
all  our  sermons  and  lessons  should  be  as  full  of  Christ  as  they  can  carry ;  and  our 
daily  lite  and  conduct  too.  You  need  not  for  ever  carry  a  Bible  in  your  hand. 
When  your  Utile  one  draws  a  cat  she  is  obliged  to  say  so  underneath,  or  no  one 
would  recognise  it ;  but  by  and  by  she  will  draw  what  will  describe  itself.  So  all 
should  be  able  to  recognise  the  Master  in  us.  "  Let  your  Mght  so  shine,"  &c.  S» 
let  it  be  with  your  lessons.  Christ  is  to  be  your  diamond ;  set  it  as  you  hke,  but  be 
Bure  it  is  seen.  3.  One  which  declared  God's  impartiality  (vers.  34,  35).  '*  GocB 
cares  for  lowly  toilers,"  &o.  IV.  The  glorious  effects  (ver.  44).  We  learn  that — 
1.  Peter  did  not  labour  in  vain.  He  had  immediate  results ;  you  may  not ;  but  wait 
God's  good  time.  2.  The  people  did  not  hear  in  vain.  How  could  they,  hstening  as 
they  did.  (C.  Leach,  D.D.)  The  gospel  to  the  Gentiles  : — The  hasty  and 
impetuous  Peter  had  now  become,  under  the  influence  of  transforming  grace,  a 
considerate  and  self-governed  man.  But  though  he  had  lost  his  impetuosity  and 
was  fast  losing  his  prejudices,  he  had  not  lost  his  vigour  nor  his  readiness  to  give 
effect  to  conviction.  After  one  night  of  calm  reflection,  diligent  search,  and  earnest 
prayer,  he  was  ready  to  set  forth  on  his  errand.  At  the  door  ComeUus  meets  him 
with  an  act  of  homage  to  the  exalted  character  of  his  visitor,  which  was  already 
familiar  to  a  Roman  in  the  case  of  his  emperor,  but  which  the  apostle  refused  as  an 
act  of  superstition.  The  minister  of  Christ,  even  if  he  be  an  apostle,  is  stiU  but  a 
man  :  in  that  identity  of  nature  with  his  people  Hes  as  much  his  strength  as  his 
weakness.  Compassed,  hke  them,  with  every  infirmity,  he  can  both  feel  for  the  sina 
and  the  weaknesses  of  others,  and  also  comfort  them  with  the  comfort  wherewith 
he  himself  is  comforted  of  God.  Now,  therefore,  having  come,  he  must  know  for 
what  intent  they  have  sent  for  him.  Comehus  answers  by  recounting  the  story  of 
his  vision.  Ten  verses  comprise  the  whole  of  St.  Peter's  answer ;  the  whole  of  that, 
revelation  which  was  to  be  the  eternal  life  of  CorneUus  and  his  house.  Note  that — I. 
The  gospel  was  a  record  of  facts  ;  and  out  of  the  facts  grew  the  doctrines.  It 
was  not  a  mere  lesson  of  moraUty.  It  did  not  say,  Do  your  best  and  God  wiU  accept 
you.  It  did  not  say.  Care  not  about  opinion,  or  doctrine,  if  only  your  Ufe  is  right. 
Cornehus,  whose  hie  was  blameless  and  exemplary,  still  needed  Christ,  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  for  his  salvation.  His  dihgent  use  of  the  light  he  had,  brought  him 
more  hght :  such  is  God's  rule :  but  it  did  not  enable  him  to  dispense  with  it. 
What  showed  God's  acceptance  was,  God's  teaching,  God's  illumination ;  not  God's 
acquiescing  in  his  condition,  and  leaving  him  as  he  was.  1.  And  when  that 
teaching  and  illumination  came,  what  was  it  ?  It  was  the  account  of  a  Person ;  of 
One  who,  though  Himself  man,  had  altogether  changed  and  reversed  man's 
condition ;  had  broken  the  yoke  of  sin  and  Satan  in  instances  numerous  and 
decisive  enough  to  show  that  He  could  do  it  in  all ;  had  Hved  a  life  such  as  never 
man  hved,  and  spoken  words  such  as  never  man  spake ;  had  then  given  His  very 
life  as  a  ransom  for  many ;  had  died  upon  the  Cross  to  take  away  sin,  and  after 
dying  had  also  risen  again  to  be  the  hving  High  Priest,  the  Mediator  and  the 
Advocate  with  God,  of  all  who  believe ;  to  be  both  the  Judge  of  human  kind,  and 
also  the  Atonement  and  the  Propitiation  for  human  sin.  It  was  our  apostles'  creed 
which  formed  the  original  gospel  to  the  Gentiles.  2.  And  is  it  not  so  still  ?  And 
has  that  gospel  now  lost  its  savour?  Must  we  look  out  for  some  other  because  the 
first  is  worn  out  ?  So  the  world  judges,  and  the  Church  has  too  much  caught  the 
infection.  We  fear  that  even  Christian  sermons  are  too  much  estimated  now  by 
their  eloquence  or  their  novelty,  and  too  httle  by  their  proclamation  of  Christ 
Himself.  God  help  us  to  come  back  to  the  simplicity  and  (with  it)  to  the  strength 
of  St.  Peter's  first  sermon  to  the  Gentiles  I  H.  God  in  a  remarkable  manner 
BABE  IT  WITNESS.  1.  While  the  narrative  was  proceeding,  the  gift  of  Pentecost  waa 
poured  upon  the  hearers.  The  fire  of  the  Lord  fell,  and  attested  the  sacrifice.  By 
an  inversion  of  which  we  possess  no  other  record  in  Scripture,  the  inward  giii 
VOL.  H.  10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  X, 

preceded  the  outward  dedication.  Elsewhere  baptism  went  first,  and  the  gift  of  the 
Spirit  followed.  God  is  a  God  of  order,  but  He  is  not  restricted  by  His  own  laws. 
Nothing  less  than  the  Pentecostal  sign  would  have  furnished  an  irresistible  argument 
for  this  first  Gentile  baptism  (chap.  xi.  17, 18).  2.  Yet,  lest  any  should  draw  from  this 
an  argument  against  the  importance  of  forms,  it  was  required  that  the  oufward 
sign  should  follow.  How  presumptuous  then,  in  later  times,  to  say,  Because  the 
form  is  not  all,  therefore  the  form  is  nothing  1  if  I  have  the  Spirit,  I  may  dispense 
with  the  baptismal  water  I  God  has  been  pleased,  in  His  two  holy  Sacraments,  to 
remind  us  that  in  this  life  we  are  body  as  well  as  soul,  and  that  the  two  elements  of 
our  being  are  wonderfully  and  fearfully  commingled.  The  body  acts  upon  the  soul ; 
the  soul,  in  all  its  volitions,  must  act  through  the  body.  3.  Those  who  talk 
slightingly  of  forms  are  seldom  those  who  know  most  of  the  Spirit.  Not  without 
form,  though  not  by  forms  only,  can  the  work  of  Christ  be  carried  forward  in  the 
world.  If  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  had  been  launched  in  the  world  without  the 
institution  of  a  Church,  it  might  have  waxed  feebler,  generation  by  generation,  until 
at  last  it  actually  died  and  vanished  away.  The  Church  is  the  pillar  and  ground  of 
the  truth.  And  we  all  know  how  much  our  faith  owes  to  the  possession  of  a  house 
of  prayer,  regular  seasons  of  worship,  and  a  standing  ministry  to  lead  and  to  guide 
and  quicken  our  devotion.  Take  away  all  these  things,  or  any  of  these  things,  and 
where  should  we  be  ?  Destroy  this  temple,  make  its  services  rare  or  repulsive ;  let 
there  be  no  one  to  exercise  a  regular  ministration ;  let  there  be  no  visitation  of  the 
sick,  no  care  for  the  poor,  no  catechising  of  the  young ;  and  who  does  not  know  how 
serious  would  be  the  loss  to  himself  and  to  the  cause  of  good  ?  I  know  not  whose 
faith  would  stand  the  test  of  an  utter  denial  of  aU  help  either  from  public  worship 
or  from  private  ministrations ;  an  absolute  removal  of  that  candlestick,  the  Church, 
which  is  not  indeed,  but  which  yet  holds,  the  hgbt  of  the  Word,  the  lamp  of  the 
truth.  Let  us  not  lose,  my  brethren,  by  lethargy  of  soul,  the  advantages  which  God 
has  given  us.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Gomplemental  ministry: — In  the  Garden  of 
Plants  at  Paris  a  certain  rare  tree  grew  for  many  years.  It  was  a  thriving  and 
mature  plant.  Year  by  year  it  was  covered  with  blossom,  and  year  by  year  the 
white  blossoms  were  shed  on  the  ground  leaving  no  fruit  behind.  After  every 
promise  it  remained  barren  still.  At  last  one  season,  although  nothing  extra- 
ordinary had  been  observed,  after  flower  came  fruit ;  it  swelled  apace,  and  in  due 
time  ripened.  The  tree  for  the  first  time  brought  to  maturity  self -propagating  fruit. 
They  sought  and  found  the  cause.  Another  tree  of  the  same  species,  but  bearing 
flowers  the  counterpart  and  complement  of  this,  had  then  for  the  first  time 
blossomed  in  a  garden  at  some  distance.  The  small  white  dust  from  the  flowers  of 
that  other  tree,  necessary  to  make  the  flowers  of  this  tree  fruitful,  had  been  borne 
on  the  feet  of  bees,  or  wafted  by  the  wind  into  their  bosom,  and  forthwith  they  bore 
fruit.  This  in  the  natural  department  is  the  work  of  the  same  all-wise  God,  who 
prepared  Cornelius  for  receiving  Peter's  word,  and  brought  Peter  with  the  word  to 
Cornelius.  ( W.  Arnot,  D.  D.)  Immediately  therefore  I  sent  to  thee ;  and  thouhast 
well  done  that  thou  art  come. — Cornelius's  sending  and  Peter^s  coming: — I.  Cornelius's 
BENDING  was — 1.  The  outcome  of  a  felt  want.  Heathenism,  Judaism,  devotion, 
moral  excellence,  noble  birth,  popularity  were  insufficient  to  fill  the  void  in  this 
good  man's  soul.  2.  After  prayer,  or  he  might  have  sought  the  counsel  of  Jewish 
rabbi,  Gentile  philosopher  or  candid  friend  who  would  have  directed  him  to  ritual, 
wisdom  or  self-complacency,  but  never  to  one  by  whose  words  he  might  be  saved. 
3.  By  Divine  direction.  (1)  To  an  unlikely  man.  (2)  At  an  unlikely  place.  "  God 
moves  in  a  mysterious  way."  but  always  in  the  right  way.  II.  Peter's  coming. 
Peter  did  well  in  coming,  for  thereby— 1.  He  conquered  his  Jewish  prejudices.  This 
was  well  for  himself.  Bigotry  and  exclusiveness  are  everywhere  self-hindering  and 
harmful.  2.  He  opened  the  door  of  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  thus  anticipating 
and  preparing  for  the  world-wide  mission  of  Paul.  3.  He  satisfied  the  aspirations 
of  a  genuine  soul,  and  in  doing  so  who  knows  what  else?  The  influence  of  the 
converted  centurion  could  not  but  have  been  felt  in  the  army.  Did  Cornelius  take 
the  gospel  to  Eome?  4.  He  was  the  means  of  converting  an  entire  congregation. 
What  a  phenomenon  1  {J.  W.  Burn.)  Now  therefore  are  we  all  here  present 
before  God,  to  hear  all  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of  God. — A  model  congre- 
gation:  It  was — I.  Earnest,  which  is  obvious  from — 1.  The  religious  character 

that  was  given  to  it.  It  was  composed  of  Cornelius  and  his  family.  The 
centurion's  religion  (ver.  2)  was— (1)  Domestic,  "  all  his  house."  (2)  Generous,  "  he 
gave  alms  to  the  people."  (3)  Habitual,  •'  he  prayed  to  God  alway."  There  were 
no  frivolous  spirits  among  Peter's  listeners.     2.  The  invitation  they  gave  tha 


JCHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  147 

preacher,  "Immediately  therefore  I  sent  to  thee."  II.  Solemn,  "Before  God." 
The  expression  implies  belief  in — 1.  The  existence  of  God— they  were  neither 
atheists,  pantheists,  nor  polytheists.  2.  The  presence  of  God,  not  merely  His 
influence.  3.  The  claim  of  God.  He  is  our  Maker,  Proprietor,  Judge,  demanding 
the  homage  of  our  souls.  4.  This  belief  was  grounded  in  such  a  consciousness  that 
-would  sweep  from  their  minds  aU  that  was  secular,  sceptical  and  frivolous,  and  fill 
them  with  a  profound  solemnity.  III.  Inquiring.  "  To  hear  all  things,"  <fec.  They 
were  assembled  not  as  a  matter  of  custom,  not  to  sit  passive  and  be  acted  upon  by 
the  preacher,  not  for  a  mere  performance,  but  to  inquire.  In  this  inquiry  they 
were — 1.  Profoundly  religious.  They  were  in  quest  of  the  Divine,  "  Commanded 
thee  of  God."  They  were  not  seekers  after  Peter's  private  speculations,  but  after 
the  Divine  Will.  2.  Thoroughly  free,  "To  hear  aU  things."  Their  minds  were 
untrammelled  by  prejudices,  unbiassed  by  dogmas.  They  wanted  to  know  the 
whole  counsel  of  God.  May  not  such  a  congregation  be  regarded  as  a  model  ?  Such 
&  congregation  would  not  have  tolerated  the  pulpit  crudities  and  priestly  assumptions 
of  modern  times.  (D.  Thomas^  D.D.)  The  model  congregation : — Is  it  true  that 
it  was  composed  of  men  who  were  neither  Jews  nor  Christians,  and  that  it  met  in 
the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era ;  yet  there  are  many  points  in  which  it  might 
"be  an  example  to  nineteenth  century  Christian  congregations.  They  were  present — 
1.  EvEBTONE.  When  was  it  ever  said  of  a  modern  congregation,  "  We  are  all  here 
present "  ?  Naturally,  all  cannot  be ;  but  how  many  are  absent,  who  might  have 
been  present,  if  animated  by  the  spirit  of  Cornelius  and  his  friends  1  II.  PoNCTUAiiLT. 
When  Peter  arrived,  Cornelius  met  him  with  the  announcement,  "We  are  all  here." 
Want  of  punctuality  is  an  evil  in  our  services.  Some  are  always  late.  They  lose 
part  of  the  services ;  they  disturb  the  minister  and  congregation.  In  many  cases  it 
is  a  mere  habit,  that  could  be  overcome  by  a  Mttle  attention.  III.  With  a 
DEFINITE  PURPOSE.  "  To  hear."  How  many  motives  influence  attendance  nowadays ! 
Some  are  present  to  see,  some  to  criticise,  some  from  habit,  some  to  while  away  the 
time,  some  from  curiosity.  IV.  With  prepared  hearts.  •*  Now,  therefore."  We 
are  here  expectantly.  If  the  minister  ought  to  prepare  to  speak,  not  less  ought  the 
people  to  prepare  to  hear.  Our  Lord  solemnly  warns  us:  "Take  heed  how  ye 
hear."  V.  With  reverent  spirits.  "  Present  before  God."  This  was  an  act  of 
solemn  worship.     They  did  not  come  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  some  popular  preacher. 

"  The  worship  of  Dr. vdll  be  resumed  next  Sabbath,"  said  an  usher  to  some 

persons  who  were  leaving  the  church,  upon  learning  that  their  favourite  minister 
was  not  to  preach  that  day.  VI.  With  attentive  ears.  How  many  absent- 
minded  men  there  are  in  our  congregations !  They  could  not  say,  "  We  are  all 
present."  Wandering  thoughts  are  servants  of  the  devil.  This  congregation 
expected  "  to  hear  all  things  that  were  commanded  of  God."  There  were,  evidently, 
no  sleepers  among  them.  A  parishioner,  upon  his  deathbed,  confessed  to  his 
pastor  that  he  had  not  heard  a  sermon  for  years — his  thoughts  had  habitually 
reverted  to  his  business  as  soon  as  the  text  was  announced.  Worshippers  ought  not 
to  have  their  bodies  in  the  house  of  God,  and  their  hearts,  with  the  fool's  eyes,  in 
the  ends  of  the  earth.  VII.  With  one  mind.  No  divisions  in  this  congregation. 
They  were  all,  with  one  accord,  in  one  place.  VIII.  With  a  rioht  idea  of  thb 
preacher.  They  wished  to  hear  the  things  that  God  commanded  him  to  speak. 
They  cared  more  for  the  message  than  the  messenger.  If  some  of  our  con- 
gregations would  think  more  of  God's  deliverance  and  less  of  man's  deUvery,  it 
woudd  tend  to  their  spiritual  edification.  IX.  To  hear  the  whole  counsel  of  God. 
They  wished  to  hear  aU  things  that  God  commanded.  A  modem  congregation  must 
have  some  fortitude  before  it  asks  for  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but 
the  truth.  X.  With  a  spirit  of  obedience.  The  word  which  we  translate 
"  to  hear  "  oftentimes,  as  in  this  case,  means  "  to  hear  and  obey."  It  is  well  to  be 
ready  to  hear  all  of  God's  commands  ;  better  to  be  ready  to  obey  them.  Results : 
1.  The  gospel  was  faithfully  preached  (ver.  34).  Faithful  hearers  make  faithful 
preachers.  2.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  given  (ver.  44).  "  Peter  yet  spake  these  words 
the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  aU  them  which  heard  the  Word."  [A.  Henry.)  The 
presence  and  the  Word : — I.  The  great  fact  and  truth  realised  by  Cornelius : 
"  Now,  therefore,  are  we  all  here  present  before  God."  II.  The  devout  and  sincere 
PURPOSE  OF  heart  EXPRESSED !  "  To  hear  all  things,"  &c.  1.  "  Now  therefore,"  &c. 
Evidently  spoken  by  a  man  who  had  before  recognised  and  felt  God's  presence  in 
his  life  and  ways.  We  are  of  a  truth  alway  in  God's  presence  if  we  knew  it :  but 
there  are  times  when  the  reality  breaks  forth  with  special  power  for  special 
purposes.    But  there  are  other  times  and  ways  beside  those  in  which  we  are  met 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  & 

together  for  public  worship,  when  we  may  be  made  feel  that  we  are  "  present  before 
God."  All  time  and  place,  thought  and  feeling,  are  sacred  when  this  great  &nd 
holy  truth  is  impressed  upon  us,  "  the  Lord  God  is  there."  (1)  Have  we  never  fell 
we  were  present  before  God,  in  our  own  soul  and  conscience  ?  Have  we  never  felt 
within,  that  there  was  another  Presence  besides  our  own,  that  penetrated  and 
searched  our  inmost  thoughts  ?  (2)  We  may  feel  we  are  present  before  God  in  His 
works.  (3)  In  the  course  of  the  Divine  providence,  its  ways  and  dealings.  Behind 
and  above  all  these  busy  outward  actors,  scenes  of  engagement,  there  is  the  Divine 
Seer  and  Actor,  and  His  hand  is  outstretched  upon  every  man,  woman  and  child. 
Were  our  eyes  opened  to  see  the  greatest  truth  and  reality  of  this  scene  of  our 
existence  and  probation,  we  should  feel  no  words  were  so  true  as  these ;  "  Now,  then, 
are  we  all  here  present  before  God. "  (4)  Again  in  the  dispensation  of  truth  and 
privilege  vouchsafed  to  us,  God  is  and  comes  very  near  to  us.  What  in  fact  is 
Divine  truth  but  the  immediate  touch,  teaching,  and  reality  of  God?  (5)  Our 
parents,  specially  if  pious  parents,  are  they  not  witnesses  to  us  of  God's  presence, 
authority  and  grace,  seeing  they  are  given  and  appointed  to  represent  Him  and  lead 
us  to  Him  ?  II.  We  must  have  regard  to  the  sinceke  devout  purpose  of  heabt 
expressed:  "To  hear  aU  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of  God."  Here  are 
three  things  to  be  noted  :  the  preacher ;  his  message  and  its  source ;  the  receptive 
state  of  mind  and  heart  among  the  hearers.  1.  The  preacher  was  Peter  the  apostle, 
who,  when  Cornelius  would  have  worshipped  him,  on  entering  his  house,  said, 
"Stand  up,  I  myself  also  am  a  man  "  (ver.  26).  It  has  been  well  and  wisely 
observed,  not  the  angel  but  the  man  must  preach  the  gospel  to  Cornelius.  Even 
salvation  itself  came  to  us  through  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  God  laying  hold  of  na 
through  the  medium  of  our  own  nature.  Peter  had  all  the  experiences  of  an 
ignorant,  weak,  failing,  sinful  man,  and  of  a  man  forgiven,  converted,  transformed, 
consecrate.  Divinely  taught  and  led.  Such  experiences,  with  their  vital,  soul- 
thrilling  power,  could  never  proceed  from  the  tongues  of  angels.  2.  Next  Peter's 
message  and  its  source :  "  All  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of  God."  CorneUus 
had  no  idea  of  any  self-made  or  man-made  gospel.  We  now  come — 3.  To  the  state 
of  mind  and  heart  in  the  hearers:  "To  hear  all  things  that  are,"  &c.,  that  are 
commanded  us  also,  through  thee  as  the  Divine  organ  and  representative.  The 
mind  of  Cornelius  was  not  passive,  but  as  the  whole  chapter  shows,  was  in  intense 
action  and  engagement ;  and  he  knew  and  felt  by  the  present  hving  testimony 
of  God's  Spirit  and  truth  in  his  own  spirit,  that  the  things  which  Peter  spake  came 
from  God  and  were  commanded  of  God.  It  is  God  Himself  who  calls  us  to  the 
obedience  of  His  gospel.  It  is  not  man's  gospel,  but  His,  commanding  us  in  His 
name,  on  His  authority.  Let  man  stand  aside,  that  God  may  be  heard  and  obeyed. 
{Watson  Smith.)  The  ideal  congregation: — I.  The  ideal  congregation  will,  be 

present  at  the  appointed  place  betimes.  "  Now  therefore  we  are  all  here." 
II.  The  ideal  congregation  will  never  fail  to  have  uNANimTT  OP  representation 
AS  FAR  AS  THAT  IS  POSSIBLE.  "  We  are  all  here."  If  it  could  be  said  truly,  all  who 
could  be  are  here,  we  would  have  great  reason  to  rejoice.  IH.  The  ideal  con- 
gregation will  be  reverent.  "We  are  all  here  before  God."  IV.  The  ideal 
congregation  will  be  ATTENTIVE.  "  We  are  all  here  present  before  God  to  hear 
all  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of  God."  They  do  not  come  to  see 
or  be  seen,  but  to  hear ;  not  to  be  gratified  or  entertained,  but  to  be  spiritually 
profited.  V.  The  ideal  congregation  will  be  sympathetic.  There  were 
some  communities  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  could  not  perform  mighty 
works.  There  are  congi-egations  so  cold  and  unresponsive  that  the  preacher's 
thoughts  are  chilled  in  transmission.  A  man  can't  be  packed  in  ice  without  freezing. 
The  Church  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  making  the  minister.  Many  a  sermon  has 
caught  its  glow  and  power  from  the  sympathies  of  those  to  whom  it  was  delivered. 
A  genial  summer  is  not  more  effective  in  calling  forth  buds  and  blossoms,  than  warm 
hearts  are  in  drawing  out  all  that  is  best  and  noblest  in  a  preacher's  soul.  VI.  The 
IDEAL  congregation  WILL  BE  RKCKPTivE.  Like  nature  in  the  spring  time,  with  every 
tree  and  flower  and  grass  blade  open  to  receive  the  gracious  ministries  of  heaven. 
Vn.  The  ideal  congregation  will  be  unprejudiced.  "  We  are  all  here  before 
God  to  hear  all  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of  God."  Prejudice  is  the  hardest 
thing  to  cope  with,  for  it  is  not  amenable  to  conviction  even  when  the  evidence  is 
overwhelming.  "  Argument  cannot  do  the  work  of  instruction  any  more  than  blows 
can  take  the  place  of  sunlight."  Not  what  suited  their  tastes  and  harmonised  with 
their  preconceived  notions,  but  all  that  was  commanded  of  God.  It  would  be  well 
if  congregations  now  came  together  with  this  absolute  simplicity  and  guilelessneas 


CHIP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  149 

of  disposition.  Vlll.  The  ideal  conobeoation  wilIi  be  obediently  disposed. 
••  AH  that  is  commanded  thee  of  God."  Nothing  can  be  of  real  value  in  God's 
sight  which  does  not  shape  itself  into  obedience.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
reciprocal  duties  of  a  minister  and  of  his  people : — I.  Let  us  consider  the  duty  of 
A  minister  of  beligion,  which,  though  not  explicitly  laid  down,  is  nevertheless 
impUed  in  the  words  of  my  text :  he  is  to  teach  "  all  things  that  are  commanded  him 
of  God  " ;  not  teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men ;  not  setting  forth 
human  tradition  as  of  equal  importance  with  the  oracles  of  the  living  God,  but,  in 
humility  and  godly  sincerity,  declaring  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Let  us  now 
consider  more  particularly  what  the  minister  is  commanded  to  teach.  1.  He  is  com- 
manded to  remind  his  hearers  that  they  are  aU  "by  nature  born  in  sin,  and 
the  children  of  wrath  "  ;  that  they  are  very  far  gone  from  original  righteousness, 
and  are  of  their  own  nature  inclined  to  evU.  2.  Having  shovm  his  hearers 
their  state  by  nature,  and  their  utter  helplessness  and  inability  to  dehver 
themselves  from  this  spiritual  bondage  as  slaves  of  sin  and  Satan,  he  is 
authorised  to  point  out  to  them  a  way  of  deliverance.  3.  We  are  com- 
manded to  set  before  our  hearers  the  precepts,  as  well  as  the  doctrines,  of 
our  holy  religion  ;  to  tell  them  plainly  that  profession  without  practice,  that  faith 
without  works,  wiU  be  of  no  avail  to  them  (Matt.  viii.  20).  I  have  dwelt  on  the 
duty  of  a  Christian  minister :  permit  me  now  to  invite  your  attention — II.  To 
THAT  OP  OUR  HEARERS,  WHICH  IS  IMPLIED  IN  MY  TEXT :  "  We  are  all  here  present 
before  God,  to  hear  all  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of  God."  "  Take  heed  how 
ye  hear."  1.  Eeceive  the  Word  with  an  humble  and  a  teachable  mind.  This  is  the 
disposition  that  was  so  exemplified  in  Mary,  when  she  sat  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and 
listened  to  the  sweet  expressions  that  dropped  from  His  lips.  This  is  the  disposition 
recommended  by  St.  James  in  the  following  words:  "Eeceive  with  meekness  the 
engrafted  Word,  which  is  able  to  save  your  souls."  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many 
of  our  hearers  enter  into  the  sanctuary  strangers  to  this  temper ;  more  eager  to 
judge  than  to  hear ;  ever  on  the  alert  for  an  opportunity  to  condemn ;  putting  every 
phrase  to  the  rack,  if  it  accords  not  with  their  notion  of  propriety.  2.  Hear  with 
faith.  '•  The  Word  preached,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  did  not  profit  the  Jews,  not  being 
mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard  it " :  it  had  no  influence  on  their  conduct, 
because  they  did  not  believe  what  they  beard.  3.  If  ye  would  hear  with  profit,  be 
constant  in  prayer,  not  only  in  the  church,  but  in  the  closet.  "Every  good  gift 
and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights. " 
Remember  "the  preparation  of  the  heart  in  man  is  from  the  Lord."  Paul  may 
plant,  Apollos  water ;  but  it  is  God  only  that  giveth  the  increase.  4.  Be  ye 
practical  hearers.  St.  Paul  represents  some  as  "  ever  hearing,  and  never  able  to 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  "  Be  ye  doers  of  the  Word,  and  not  hearers 
only,  deceiving  yourselves."  (J.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Congregations  to  bewellfedwith 
the  truth : — ^Dogs  often  fight  because  the  supply  of  bones  is  scanty,  and  congregations 
frequently  quarrel  because  they  do  not  get  sufficient  spiritual  meat  to  keep  them 
happy  and  peaceful.  The  ostensible  ground  of  dissatisfaction  may  be  something 
else,  but  nine  times  out  of  ten  deficiency  in  their  rations  is  at  the  bottom  of  the 
mutinies  which  occur  in  our  Churches.     (C  H.  Spurgeon).  The  best  remedy 

for  small  congregations  : — Mr.  Christopher  Richardson,  minister  of  Kirk  Heaton,  in 
Yorkshire,  was  much  followed.  A  neighbouring  minister,  whose  parishioners  used 
to  go  to  hear  him,  complaining  once  to  him  that  he  drew  away  his  flock,  Mr. 
Richardson  answered,  "  Feed  them  better,  and  they  wiU  not  stray."  Punctuality 
in  attendance  at  church  : — An  earnest  minister  once  had  the  misfortune  to  succeed 
a  tardy  man  who  had  had  the  congregation  in  charge  for  some  years.  He  despaired 
of  reforming  them  in  great  matters  if  he  could  not  reform  them  in  small.  He  found 
them  in  the  habit  of  meeting  at  twelve  o'clock,  though  the  hour  appointed  and 
agreed  upon  was  eleven.  The  preacher  knew  his  duty,  and  began  at  the  minute. 
The  first  day  after  his  settlement,  his  sermon  was  well-nigh  closed  before  most  of 
his  congregation  arrived.  Some  actually  arrived  just  at  the  benediction.  They 
were  confounded.  He  made  no  apology.  He  only  asked  the  seniors  if  they  would 
prefer  any  other  time  than  eleven  o'clock,  and  he  would  be  sure  and  attend.  A  few 
weeks  passed  and  the  church  was  regularly  full,  and  waiting  for  the  minute.  The 
preacher  never  failed  in  twenty  years,  except  in  a  few  cases  of  indisposition,  to  com- 
mence at  the  hour  appointed.  His  congregation  soon  became  as  punctual  and  circum- 
spect in  other  matters  as  in  their  attendance  at  church.  (CyclopoRdia  of  Illustrative 
Anecdotes. )  A  model  congregation  .-—This  congregation  may  be  held  up  as  a  model  m 
ihree  things.    I.  Puhctualixy  or  attendancb.    "i^ow  therefore  are  we  all  here.      1. 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xi 

All  were  present.     No  absentees.     2.  All  were  present  in  proper  time.     They  were 
waiting  for  Peter,  and  not  Peter  for  them.     No  coming  in  during  service,  and  dis- 
turbing both  preacher  and  hearers.     II.  Devoctness  of  spirit.     "Before  God." 
Eealised  God's  presence.     This  would  inspire — 1.  HumiUty  (Exod.  iii.  2-6  ;  1  Sam. 
xvi.  7  ;  Gen.  xviii.  27 ;  Isa.  vi.  5 ;  Job.  xlii.  5,  6).      2.  Sincerity.     Here,  if  any- 
where, there  should  be  truth  (Isa.  Ivii.  15 ;  Psa.  li.  6).     Hypocrisy  may  walk  the 
earth  invisible  to  men,  but  not  to  God.   3.  High  expectation  (Matt,  xviii.  20).   Here 
the  Father  is  present  (Rom.  viii.  32).     Here  the  Son  is  present  (John  vi.  48-53 ; 
Matt,  xxviii.  26).     Here  the  Holy  Ghost  is  present  (Jolm  vi.  63,  xvi.  15).     We 
should  attend  upon  ordinances  with  diligence,  preparation,  and  prayer.     Come  to 
God's  house  fresh  from  the  company  of  the  gay  and  the  thoughtless,  and  with  no 
real  seriousness  of  spirit,  and  is  it  any  wonder  if  you  are  not  benefited.      III. 
Pbacticalness  of  pdbpose.     "  The  more  part  knew  not  wherefore  they  had  come 
together  "  (Acts  xix.  32).      Not  so  here.     Had  a  clear,  settled,  well-uuderstood 
purpose.     1.  To  hear.     Sense  of  God's  personal  interest  and  love  (Rom.  x.  17  ;  1 
Thess.  V.  21 ;  John  xiii.  17).     2.  To  hear  what  was  commanded  of  God.    Looked 
above  the  messenger  to  Him  that  had  sent  him.    Recognised  the  Divine  authority 
of  the  truth.     Without  this  there  can  be  no  real  good  (Exod.  iii.  13  ;  Deut.  v.  27  ; 
Heb.  iv.  2).     3.  To  hear  all  that  was  commanded  of  God.     Law  and  gospel.     The 
whole  counsel  of  God.     There  should  be  fearless  honesty  both  in  speaking  and 
hearing.     [William   Forsyth,  A.M.)         A  model  audience: — I.   It  was  noted  for 
PUNCTUALITY.     1.  A  sense  of  the  importance  of  the  service.     Men  generally  careful 
to  secure  a  front  seat  at  theatre,  entertainment,  banquet.     Religion  paramount. 
2.  It  secures  the  whole  of  the  service.     3.  It  is  helpful  to  the  preacher.     4.  It 
makes  the  service  enjoyable.     II.  It  was  noted  for  reverence.     1.  Conscious  of 
the  Divine  superintendence.     2.  Regard  for  the   Divine  dignity.     3.  Awe  of  the 
Divine  purity.     4.  Engagement  in  Divine  service.     III.  It  was  noted  for  attention. 
1.  Unprejudiced  attention.    2.  Docile  attention.    3.  Practical  attention.     4.  Success- 
ful attention.     They  believed  and  obeyed.     (J5.  D.  Johns.)       Concerning  audiences, 
preachers,  sermons,  and  conversions : — I.  The  audience.    1.  Before  the  preacher  began 
this  "innovation"  takes  place — the  audience  spoke  up  to  the  preacher,  the  pew  to  the 
pulpit.    It  was  a  splendid  audience,  though  not  very  large.    How  earnestly  they  came 
together  1    What  a  solidarity  there  was  I    No  wandering  thought  or  eye,  but  aU  was 
focussed  ;  calm  and  purposeful  both  in  body  and  soul ;  so  that  ere  the  preacher  began, 
one  man  could  speak  for  all,  "  Now  therefore  are  we  all  here  present  before  God." 
May  this  audience  bring  its  contribution  to  the  preacher,  while  it  expects  the 
preacher  to  bring  his  !     The  contribution  he  has  a  right  to  expect  is,  that  the  people 
should  come  united,  full  of  expectation,  led  into  the  temple  like  Simeon  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  at  the  very  moment  when  Jesus  came.     No  chance,  no  haphazard  in 
this  gathering.     We  have  not  come  here  to  spend  an  idle  hour.     When  asked, 
"Where  have  you  been  this  morning  ?  " — it  is  wrong  to  answer  "  Oh,  I  dropped  in 
to  Regent  Square."    You  did  not  drop  in  nor  drop  out.     The  Lord's  providences 
for  the  whole  of  the  week  have  been  hedging  up  your  way,  and  securing  that  you 
should  be  here.     Fall  in  with  God's  arrangement.     2.  I  like  to  dwell  on  the  word 
all.     The  people  were  invited,  and  they  came.     This  morning  the  very  hour  invites 
us.     I  know  there  are  many  excuses.      You  can  tell  me  about  young  children, 
sickness,  waiting  on  the  sick,  fogs,  east  winds,  long  distances,  wet  days,  &c.    In 
many  families,  at  ten  o'clock  on  the  Sabbath  morning,  attendance  at  church  is  still 
an  open  question.     It  is  no  open  question  on  the  Monday  morning,  "  John,  will 
you  go  to  work  to-day  ?  "     "  Oh,"  said  a  farmer  in  Scotland,  when  a  minister 
rebuked  him  for  not  attending  church,  and  said,  "You  know,  John,  you  are  never 
absent  from  the  market."     "  Oh,"  was  the  reply,  "  we  maun  gang  to  the  market." 
Unconsciously  it  came  out.     To  come  to  the  house  of  God  was  not  so  urgent.     But 
when  we  look  at  this  audience  we  see  the  benefit  of  setting  ourselves  the  task  of 
coming  with  a  purpose  to  God's  house.  Itwill  need  planning  and  self-denial.  Some  of 
you  are  here  to-day  only  because  you  have  trampled  upon  a  hundred  obstacles. 
And  some  are  not  here  because  they  have  given  way  to  things  which  will  not  be 
allowed  to  stand  in  the  way  of  to-morrow's  engagements.     3.  And  then  when  \ye  all 
come — (1)  The  Lord  marks  how  we  have  pressed  forward  to  meet  Him.     I  think 
there  is  no  sweeter  sight  to  His  holy  eyes  than  to  see  the  people  wending  their  way 
to  His  house.     "  Forsake  not  the  as.'^embling  of  yourselves  together,  as  the  manner 
of  some  is,  and  so  much  the  more,  as  ye  see  the  day  approaching."     (2)  And  when 
yon  come  in  this  expectant  way,  how  it  helps  the  reception  of  the  sermon  1     How 
we  have  all  suffered  from  coming  to  the  house  of  God  in  a  disorderly,  hurried  way. 


CHAP.  «.]  THE  ACTS.  161 

both  as  regards  body  and  aool  1  Then  you  look  up  to  the  preacher  and  expect  him  to 
work  miracles  on  your  higgledy-piggledy  soul.     4.  "  We  are  all  here  present  before 
God."     (1)  Try  to  reaUse  God's  presence  ;  get  past  outward  and  temporal  things, 
and  call  upon  your  soul  to  pass  into  the  secret  place  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Most 
High.     Compel  your  soul  to  grasp  the  thought—"  Surely  God  is  in  this  place  " ; 
and  instead  of  saying,  "  I  knew  it  not,"  let  us  say,  "  We  know  it,  and  wait  for  a 
clearer  revelation  of  His  presence."     This  is  holy  ground.     Where  you  are  sitting 
God  has  converted  men  ere  now.     Canst  thou  come  where  God  has  done  His 
mightiest  work,  carelessly,  heedlessly,  and  merely  as  a  matter  of  custom  and 
routine  ?    Thou  art  occupying  the  room  of  men  and  women  who  to-day  are  before 
the  eternal  throne.     This  word  is  true :  "  We  are  all  present  before  God  " — and 
therefore  let  there  be  nothing  unworthy  of  such  a  Presence  and  such  a  place.     (2) 
And  how  the  thought  of  God's  presence  will  help  to  focus  our  attention ;  to  take 
our  eyes  off  each  other,  and  off  the  preacher  1    How  it  will  help  to  prepare  us  to 
receive  God's  Word  1     How  it  will  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  over-critical  spirit ! 
Said  a  preacher  to  myself,  '•  I  notice  when  I  give  out  my  text,  my  people  settle 
down  and  settle  back ;  but,  I  am  afraid,  not  so  much  to  hear  what  I  have  to  say  as 
to  watch  how  I  get  through."     5.  "  To  hear  all  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of 
God."     They  came  to  hear  God's  Word.     You  know  that  to-day  there  is  a  tendency 
to  say,  "  Hearing  has  been  too  much  magnified.      What  I  come  to  God's  house  for 
is  to  worship.     The  preacher  gets  far  too  much  space."  There  may  be  something  in 
that,  but  it  is  exaggerated.     What  was  central  here,  and  what  must  always  be 
central  in  a  gathering  of  saints  or  sinners  is  the  preaching  of  God's  Word,  and  the 
attending  thereto  by  the  hearer.     That  is  worship  at  its  highest.    All  the  powers  of 
the  soul  get  their  highest  use  and  their  fullest  freedom  when  God's  Word  is  faith- 
fully and  lovingly  proclaimed.     Faith  cometh  by  hearing.     H.  The  pkeacheb.     1. 
I  have  been  speaking  straightly  to  you,  but  now  your  turn  comes.    The  pew  has  a 
right  to  say  to  the  preacher,  "  Now,  give  us  what  God  has  told  you.     There  are 
many  things  that  might  interestingly  occupy  an  hour ;  give  us,  however,  the  thing 
that  brought  us  here."    And  this  is  nee(flul,  for  we  get  so  immersed  in  favourite 
lines  of  reading  which  unconsciously  colour  our  utterances,  so  that  we  need  from 
the  audience — "  Now,  preacher,  God's  Word  and  truth  ;  all  things  from  TTim  to-day, 
and  nothing  else.    Never  mind  about  reconciling  science  and  revelation ;  we  can  get 
that  in  our  magazines  and  read  it  at  home.     Give  us  to-day  what  really  concerns 
us,  '  All  things  commanded  thee  of  God.'  "     Peter  needed  that.     He  was  a  narrow, 
bigoted  Jew,  and  he  would  never,  of  himself,  have  preached  to  Cornelius  and  his 
company  the  sermon  they  needed.     At  the  best  we  are  but  men,  and  of  narrowness 
and  prejudice  we  have  our  share.     Therefore  there  is  tremendous  need  that  the 
preacher  should  be  in  God's  hand,  and  come  from  God's  presence  with  his  soul  and 
voice  attuned  to  a  large,  full,  free,  and  glorious  utterance  of  the  gospel  of  the  grace 
of  God.    Leave  us  to  ourselves,  and  there  may  be  some  little  glimmering  light  in  our 
preaching,  but  only  a  little ;  there  may  be  light  from  every  quarter,  to  use  the 
phrase  of  the  day,  save  the  Sun  1     The  Lord  blow  out  all  our  penny  candles.     His 
light  has  come.     We  need  to  come  forth  from  God,  He  having  poured  into  us  some- 
thing of  the  fulness  of  His  mind  and  heart.    2.  "  Then  Peter  opened  his  mouth." 
Do  not  run  over  that  phrase  and  say,  "  Of  course."    A  number  of  us  cannot  open 
our  mouths  when  we  preach — it  is  the  most  piteous  mumbling.     Sabbath -school 
teacher,  preacher,  "  Open  your  mouth,  and  teach  the  people,  as  your  Lord  did  and 
His  chief  apostle."    Let  it  be  seen  in  the  very  manner  of  our  speech  that  our  mouth 
is  open,  for  our  heart  is  enlarged ;  that  it  comes,  not  feebly  and  faint  and  con- 
stricted, but  glad  and  full  and  free,  for  the  Lord  is  with  us.    Do  not  say,  "  I  have 
no  eloquence  ;  I  have  a  stammering  tongue."    Who  made  man's  mouth  ?    *'  Have 
not  I  the  Lord  ?     Open  thy  mouth  ;  behold  I  put  My  words  into  thy  mouth."   What 
does  Isaiah  say  ?     "  Lift  up,"  he  says — and  how  much  it  is  needed  in  this  namby- 
pamby,  over-refined,  hypercritical  age — "  Lift  up  thy  voice  with  strength,  lift  it  up  ; 
be  not  afraid  ;  say  unto  the  cities  of  Judah,  Behold  your  God."     "  Peter  opened  hia 
mouth."    He  lifted  up  his  head,  and  let  go  !    We  put  down  ours,  and  hold  on  I 
ni.  The  sebmon.    It  was  the  old  gospel.    It  was  new  and  fresh  then.    That  is  one 
thing  that  one  does  sometimes  envy  the  first  preachers  for ;  for  they  had  seen  Him 
and  His  glory.    Peter  preached  Christ,  not  theology,  not  a  creed ;  but  Jesus,  sent 
for  a  particular  purpose  by  God  ;  how  that,  carrying  out  that  purpose.  He  had  died 
on  the  Cross  and  risen  again,  and  that  through  Him  is  preached  forgiveness  of  sins. 
That  is  where  the  gospel  began  then,  and  where  it  begins  to-day — forgiveness  of 
sins  to  a  deyoat  man,  and  one  that  feared  God,  and  made  prayers,  and  gave  alma. 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 


People  would  have  said  to-day,  "  with  an  audience  like  that,  what  you  want  to  do  ia 
not  to  take  them  to  the  Cross.  Show  them  Christ,  of  course  ;  but  Christ  as  the  great 
ideal  and  embodiment  of  all  that  is  good,  and  a  devout,  God-fearing  man  like  Cor- 
nelius will  be  enamoured  with  Him  and  make  Him  his  Leader  and  Pattern."  "No," 
says  Peter;  "We  preach  the  Christ  who  died  for  sin  to  everybody."  A  French 
officer,  whose  ship  had  been  taken  by  Nelson,  was  brought  on  board  Nelson's  vessel, 
and  he  walked  up  to  the  great  admiral  and  gave  him  his  hand.  "  No,"  said 
Nelson  ;  "  your  sword  first,  if  you  please."  That  is  the  gospel.  IV.  The  besdlt. 
There  is  a  new  name  brought  in  here.  I  have  talked  of  ComeUus,  of  Peter,  of  Jesus, 
of  God  the  Father,  but  here  is  another  name.  While  Peter  yet  spake  these  words 
about  Jesus,  "  The  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all  them  that  heard  the  Word."  ComeUua 
possibly  had  heard  of  Jesus  as  a  name  of  reproach  and  blasphemy.  Now,  Jesua 
leapt  up  into  his  heart  as  his  Friend  and  Saviour,  and  God.  That  is  the  miracle  of 
the  Gospel.  That  is  what  the  Holy  Ghost  does.  If  you  know  Jesus  Christ,  flesh 
and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  you.  Peter  was  there,  as  the  preacher  is  here ; 
and  the  sermon ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  the  increase  and  blesses  the  Word,  and 
without  Him  fruit  cannot  be.  (J.  McNeill.)  Attending  at  ordinances  enforced  : — 
We  have  here — 1.  A  call  to  Peter  related — "  I  sent."  2.  Peter's  compliance  with 
the  call  commended,  "  Thou  hast  well  done  that  thou  art  come."  3.  An  address 
made  to  Peter  when  he  was  come.  In  which  take  notice — (1)  Of  a  congregation, 
though  BmaU,  yet  well  convened  (ver.  24).  (2)  An  acknowledgment  of  God's 
presence  in  a  special  manner  in  religious  assemblies,  "  We  are  all  here  present 
before  God."  (3)  The  great  end  of  tlaeir  meeting  was  their  soul's  edification,  to 
hear,  i.e.,  to  hear  and  obey.  And  here  is  what  the  minister  is  to  preach  and  the 
people  to  receive :  "  what  is  commanded  of  God."  The  extent  of  both  is  "  all 
things."  Observe — 1.  When  God  discovers  His  mind  in  any  particular  to  a  person 
or  people,  it  is  their  duty  presently  to  comply  with  it  without  delay.  The  contrary 
was  the  fault  of  Balaam,  and  of  the  Jews  in  Egypt  (Jer.  xliv.).  2.  It  is  a  blessed 
thing  for  a  people  to  call  that  minister  to  whom  God  Himself  directs  and  inclines 
them.  Cornelius  did  not  so  much  as  know  Peter  by  name  (ver.  5),  but  he  goes 
to  God,  and  God  directs  him.  3.  It  is  a  commendable  thing  in  a  minister  of  Christ 
to  comply  with  the  call  of  God  and  His  people,  though  it  should  be  offensive  to 
some,  and  not  very  agreeable  to  his  own  inclinations.  The  doctrine  arising  from 
the  text  is — "  It  is  the  duty  of  a  people  to  attend  on  ordinances."  In  discoursing 
from  this  I  shall  —  I.  Give  reasons  why  people  should  attend  on  and  be  present 

AT  ordinances,  WHERE    GoD   HAS    SET    THEM  UP  AMONG    THEM.       BeCaUSe — 1.    God    haS 

commanded  it  (Heb.  x.  15).  The  Lord  calls  His  people  to  be  present  there,  where- 
ever  it  is.  Thus  there  was  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  and  afterwards  the 
temple,  and  the  synagogues.  It  was  the  practice  of  Christ  Himself  to  attend  these 
places  (Luke  iv.  16).  2.  The  public  assemblies  are  for  the  honour  of  Christ  in  the 
world.  They  are  where  His  honour  dwells,  where  His  people  meet  to  profess  their 
subjection  to  His  laws,  to  receive  His  orders,  to  seek  His  help,  to  pay  Him  the 
tribute  of  praise.  3.  These  assemblies  are  the  ordinary  place  where  Christ  makes 
His  conquest  of  souls  (Rom.  x.  14).  The  gospel  is  Christ's  net  wherein  souls  are 
caught.  And  it  is  always  good  to  be  in  Christ's  way.  4.  They  are  Christ's  trysting- 
place  with  His  people,  the  galleries  wherein  our  Lord  walks  (Exod.  xx.  24).  What 
a  disadvantage  had  Thomas  by  his  absence  from  one  meeting  where  Christ  met  with 
the  rest  of  the  disciples  I  5.  The  delights  of  Christ  and  His  people  meet  there  ;  for 
ordinances  are  the  heaven  on  earth.  Christ  delights  to  be  there  with  His  people 
(Psa.  Ixxxvi.  2. ;  Luke  xxii.  15).  And  they  delight  to  be  there  with  Him,  and  for 
Him  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  1,  2,  xxvii.  4,  cxxii.  1).  6.  The  necessities  of  all  that  mind  for 
heaven  require  it.  Had  the  ordinances  not  been  necessary,  God  would  never  have 
appointed  them.  Have  not  Christ's  soldiers  need  of  them  to  clear  their  rusty 
armour  ?  do  not  dead  souls  need  them  to  quicken  them  ?  sleepy  souls,  to  awaken 
them?  n.  Show  in  what  respects  people  are  before  the  I^rd  at  public 
ORDINANCES.  The  Lord  is  everywhere  present  (Psa.  cxxxix.  7).  But  we  are  before 
Him  in  a  special  manner  in  the  pubhc  assemblies.  He  holds  the  stars  in  His  right 
hand,  and  walks  in  the  midst  of  the  golden  candlesticks.  Christ  is  in  the  assembhes 
of  His  people — 1.  Representatively.  He  has  His  agents  there.  His  ministers,  who 
are  the  Lord's  proxies  to  court  a  wife  for  their  Master's  Son  (2  Cor.  xi.  2)  ;  His 
ambassadors  to  negotiate  a  peace  betwixt  God  and  sinners  (2  Cor.  v.  20  ;  Matt.  x.  40). 
2.  Efficaciously.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  a  powerful  word.  Christ  is  there  giving 
life  to  some,  strength  to  others,  and  death's  wounds  to  others  (Mic.  ii.  7 ;  Psa.  xlv.  5  ; 
Hos.  vi.  6).    8.  As  oui  wicness.    Men's  eyes  and  the  devil's  eyes  are  upon  us ;  bat 


«HAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  153 

what  should  affect  us  most  is,  that  God's  eye  is  on  us  in  a  special  manner,  and 
though  our  outward  carriage  be  never  so  promising,  God  is  witness  to  the  heart- 
wanderings  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31).  4.  As  our  Judge.  God  has  a  tribunal  as  well  as  a 
throne  in  the  pubUc  ordinances,  to  reward  or  punish  His  worshippers  according  to 
their  works.  A  curious  look  into  the  ark  cost  the  Bethshemites  dear ;  and  a  wrong 
touch  of  it  cost  Uzzah  his  life.  It  is  true  the  gospel  dispensation  is  more  spiritual ; 
and  therefore  spiritual  plagues  are  more  usual  now ;  but  these  ordinances  cure  the 
worst  of  plagues.  5.  As  our  Lawgiver  (Isa.  xxxiii.  22).  He  has  set  up  the  ministry 
to  declare  to  people  their  duty  (Mai.  ii.  7).  6.  As  the  Lord  and  Master  of  the  family, 
who  has  provided  liberally  for  aU  of  His  house  (Isa.  xxv.  6).  7.  As  our  God,  which 
should  strike  us  with  reverence  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  7,  xcv.  6).  in.  Consider  the  dispo- 
sition OF  SOUIi  WHEREWITH  PEOPLE  SHOULD  COME  TO  THE  PUBLIC  ORDINANCES.      It  is 

with  a  spirit  ready  to  hear  all  things  commanded  of  God.  It  implies  that — 1. 
Ministers  are  to  preach  nothing  to  the  people  but  what  is  the  mind  and  will  of  God. 
Lawyers  must  not  speak  without  authority  of  the  law  ;  and  ministers  must  not  speak 
but  with  a  Thus  saith  the  Lord.  To  coin  new  articles  of  faith  or  ceremonies  is  the 
work  of  Antichrist  (Matt.  xv.  9).  2.  Ministers  are  to  labour  to  know  the  mind  of 
God,  as  to  particular  messages  which  they  are  to  carry  to  their  people.  A  word  in 
season  is  very  precious  (Prov.  xxv.  11,  xv.  23).  And  ministers  had  need  of  the 
•tongue  of  the  learned.  3.  Whatever  message  the  Lord  gives  them  to  a  people,  they 
are  to  dehver  it  impartially,  All  things  commanded  them  (chap.  xx.  20).  4.  People 
ought  to  receive  these  messages  from  ministers  as  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord, 
and  comply  with  them.  We  should  hear — (1)  Eeverentially  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  7).  (2) 
Diligently  and  attentively  (Isa.  Iv.  2).  God  does  not  take  up  our  time  with  trifles. 
(3)  Understandingly,  so  as  to  know  the  mind  of  God  (Matt.  xiii.  11).  (4)  Believ- 
ingly  (John  ix.  27).  Ministers  make  the  plaister,  but  faith  of  application  makes  it 
stick.  (5)  So  as  to  practise  what  we  hear  (James  i.  22).  That  hearing  that  fills 
the  head  with  knowledge,  but  not  the  heart  with  holiness,  will  serve  only  to  let 
people  see  the  way  to  heU  more  clearly.  Conclusion  :  This  doctrine  reproves — 1. 
Those  who  absent  themselves  from  ordinances.  2.  Those  who  come  to  ordinances, 
but  hear  not  the  Word  as  becomes  those  who  are  to  hear  what  is  commanded  of 
God.  Such  are — (1)  Irreverent  hearers.  Many  behave  so  as  it  appears  there  is  no 
fear  of  God  before  their  eyes.  Some  are  sleeping,  others  gazing  hither  and  thither, 
to  whom  the  Word  is  as  the  seed  presently  picked  up  by  the  fowls.  (2)  Supercilious 
nice  hearers,  who  sit  as  judges  of  the  Word,  and  not  as  they  that  are  to  be  judged 
by  it.  (3)  Ignorant  and  stupid  hearers,  who  hear  the  Word,  but  neither  know  nor 
endeavour  to  know  God's  mind  in  it.  (4)  Unbelieving  hearers  (Isa.  liii.  1 ;  Matt. 
xiii.  68).  (5)  Such  as  make  no  application  of  the  Word  to  themselves,  but  are  ready 
to  give  it  away  to  others.  3  Those  who  do  not  set  themselves  to  hear  what  God 
commands  ministers  to  preach,  but  will  command  ministers  to  preach  so  and  so  ; 
but  every  faithful  minister  will  say  as  Micaiah  (1  Kings  xxii.  14).  {T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Searing  without  doing  : — When  the  emperor  himself  (Constantine)  was  announced 
to  preach  thousands  flocked  to  the  palace.  He  stood  erect,  with  his  head  tossed 
back,  and  poured  forth  a  torrent  of  facUe  eloquence,  and  the  people  applauded  aU 
■his  points.  Now  he  denounced  the  follies  of  paganism,  now  it  was  the  unity  of 
Providence  or  the  scheme  of  redemption  that  formed  his  theme  ;  and  often  he  would 
denounce  the  avarice  and  rapacity  of  his  own  courtiers.  It  was  then  observed  that 
they  all  cheered  lustily,  but  it  was  also  noticed  that  they  did  not  mend  their  ways. 
{H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  Careless  hearers: — It  is  said  by  naturalists,  that,  if 

water  ajid  wine  be  poured  into  a  vessel  made  of  the  ivy-tree,  the  wine  will  leak  out, 
and  leave  the  water  behind.  Such  are  all  worldly,  careless  hearers  of  God's  Word. 
(J.  Spencer.)  Expectant  hearers  : — It  is  said  that  the  Jogers,  or  pilgrim  saints  of 
Ceylon,  will  take  their  station  at  the  foot  of  the  cypress,  and  there  remain  night 
and  day,  watching  and  watchful,  heedless  of  sunshine  or  of  storms,  impelled  by  the 
tradition  that  the  leaves  of  that  ancient  tree,  falling  only  at  distant  and  uncertain 
intervals,  can,  it  gathered  and  eaten,  restore  the  wasting  frame  to  all  the  energies 
of  youth.  A  plant  of  nobler  growth  has  been  sown  in  our  world ;  the  leaves  of 
which  never  fade,  nor  are  its  fruits  consumed.  The  latter  are  for  meat,  and  the 
former  are  for  medicine ;  and  out  of  the  heavenly  sanctuary  issue  the  waters 
which  maintain  their  freshness.  Not  at  long  and  unknown  intervals  do  they 
descend.  Kegularly  and  ever  weekly  are  they  within  our  reach.  Shall  we  think 
it  an  unwelcome  task  to  tarry  a  few  moments  beneath  the  consecrated  shade  while 
we  await  the  first  shaking  of  the  blessing-laden  boughs  ?  {Miss  Henderson.) 
Imjpatient  hearers: — A  remarkable  change  has  taken  place  among  the  people  of 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  z. 

this  country  in  regard  to  the  public  service  of  religion.    Our  forefathers  put  their 
clocks  on  the  outside  of  their  places  of  worship,  that  they  might  not  be  too  late 
in  their  attendance :  we  have  transferred  them  to  the  inside  of  the  house  of  God, 
lest  we  should  stay  too  long  in  the  service — a  sad  and  an  ominous  change.    {R. 
Watson.)        Don't  grumble  about  the  fodder : — "  Now,  deacon,  I've  just  one  word  to 
say.    I  can't  bear  our  preaching  I     I  get  no  good.     There's  so  much  in  it  I  don't 
want  that  I  grow  lean  on  it.     I  lose  my  time  and  pains."     "  Mr.  Bunnell,  come  in 
here.     There's  my  cow  Thankful — she  can  teach  you  theology  1  "     "A  cow  teach 
theology  I     What  do  you  mean  ?  "     "  Now,  see,  I  have  just  thrown  her  a  forkful  of 
hay.    Just  watch  her.    There  now  1     She  has  found  a  stick — you  know  sticks  will 
get  into  the  hay — and  see  how  she  tosses  it  to  one  side  and  goes  on  to  eat  what  is 
good.     There,  again  1     She  has  found  a  burdock,  and  she  throws  it  on  one  side 
and  goes  on  eating.    And  there  1     She  does  not  relish  that  bunch  of  daisies,  and 
leaves  them  and  goes  on  eating.     Before  morning  she  will  have  cleared  the  manger 
of  all,  save  a  few  sticks  and  weeds,  and  she  will  give  milk.     There's  milk  in  that 
hay,  and  she  knows  how  to  get  it  out,  albeit  there  may  be  now  and  then  a  stick  or 
weed  which  she  leaves.    But  if  she  refused  to  eat,  and  spent  the  time  in  scolding 
about  the  fodder,  she,  too,  would  '  grow  lean,*  and  the  milk  would  dry  up.     Just  so 
with  our  preaching.     Let  the  old  cow  teach  yon.    Get  all  the  good  you  can  out  of 
it  and  leave  the  rest.    You  will  find  a  good  deal  of  nourishment  in  it."     Interested 
hearers : — A  gentleman  once  said  to  Rowland  Hill,  "  It  is  sixty-five  years  since  I 
first  heard   you  preach ;  and  the  sermon  was   well  worth  remembering.     You 
remarked,  that  some  people  are  very  squeamish  about  the  manner  of  a  clergyman 
in  preaching ;  but  you  then  added,  '  Supposing  one  is  hearing  a  will  read,  expecting 
to  receive  a  legacy,  would  you  employ  the  time  in  criticising  the  lawyer's  manner 
while  reading  it  ?      No :  you  would  give  aU  your  interest  to  ascertain  if  anything 
were  left  to  yourself,  and  how  much.     Let  that,  then,  be  the  way  in  which  you 
listen  to  the  gospel."    Different  kinds  of  hearers : — There  are  four  diSerent  kinds  of 
hearers  of  the  Word — those  Uke  a  sponge,  that  suck  up  good  and  bad  together,  and 
let  both  run  out  immediately  ;  those  like  a  sand-glass,  that  let  what  enters  in  at  one 
ear  pass  out  at  the  other,  hearing  without  thinking  ;  those  Uke  a  strainer,  letting 
go  the  good,  and  retaining  the  bad ;  and  those  like  a  sieve,  letting  go  the  chaflf,  and 
retaining  the  good  grain.     {T.  Boston,  D.D.)         Various  kinds  of  hearers  : — One  is 
like  an  Athenian,  and  he  hearkeneth  after  news ;  if  the  preacher  say  anything  of 
our  armies  beyond  the  sea,  or  council  at  home,  or  matters  of  court,  that  is  his  lure. 
Another  is  like  the  Pharisee,  and  he  watcheth  if  anything  be  said  that  may  be 
wrested.    Another  smacks  of  eloquence,  and  he  gapes  for  a  phrase.     Another  is 
malcontent,  and  he  never  pricketh  up  his  ears  till  the  preacher  come  to  gird  against 
some  whom  he  spiteth  ;  and  when  the  sermon  is  done  he  remembereth  nothing 
which  was  said  to  him,  but  that  which  was  spoken  against  another.    Another 
cometh  to  gaze  about  the  church ;  he  hath  an  evil  eye,  which  is  still  looking  upon 
that  from  which  Job  did  avert  bis  eye.     Another  cometh  to  muse ;  so  soon  as  he  is 
set,  he  f alleth  into  a  brown  study ;  sometimes  his  mind  runs  on  his  market,  some- 
times of  his  journey,  sometimes  of  his  suit,  sometimes  of  his  dinner,  sometimes  of 
his  sport  after  dinner ;  and  the  sermon  is  done  before  the  man  thinks  where  he  is. 
Another  cometh  to  hear ;  but  so  soon  as  the  preacher  hath  said  his  prayer,  he  falls 
fast  asleep,  as  though  he  had  been  brought  in  for  a  corpse,  and  the  preacher  should 
preach  at  his  funeral.     (H.  Smith.)        Truth  liked  as  a  sentiment,  but  disliked  as  a 
law  of  life  : — A  man  comes  to  New  York  on  an  errand  of  fraud.    He  is  seeking  to 
take  an  estate  away  from  the  rightful  heirs,  because  he  has  some  little  legal  advan- 
tage.    He  has  resisted  his  conscience,  and  suppressed  all  his  reluctances,  and  his 
purpose  is  fixed.     On  arriving  here  he  goes  to  the  theatre — that  school  of  morals  1 — 
and  witnesses  a  play,  the  point  of  which  turns  on  the  defrauding  of  heirs  by  an  old 
rich  uncle — just  the  same  thing  as  he  is  attempting.     The  various  parts  are  gone 
through  with,  and  everybody  cries,  and  he  cries,  and  he  goes  away  feeling,  ••  How 
mean  it  is  for  a  man  to  supplant  poor  orphans  in  that  way  1  "    He  cries  over  and 
denounces  the  very  act  which  he  is  himself  performing.     You  know  that  such  things 
take  place.     There  are  hundreds  of  men  that  love  to  hear  about  temperance,  and 
go  and  get  drunk.     There  are  many  men  that  love  to  hear  about  truth,  and  lie  like 
witches  afterwards.     There  is  nothing  more  common  than  instances  which  go  to 
show  that  we  like  as  a  sentiment  things  that  we  do  not  like  as  an  ethical  rule.  Often- 
times, when  a  thing  comes  to  us  as  a  rule  of  conduct,  and  lays  its  law  on  us,  and 
demands  our  obedience,  we  resist  it ;  but  when,  instead  of  that,  it  comes  to  us  as 
•n  emotion,  we  Uke  to  lie  upon  its  bosom,  as  a  duck  lies  on  a  swell  of  water.   Wicked 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  155 

men  like  to  undulate  on  these  moral  elements.  They  like  to  go  to  sea  on  the  gospel. 
They  swing  to  and  fro  upon  it  with  infinite  pleasure.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Hearing 
and  its  proper  effect*  : — When  a  man  says  he  received  a  blessing  under  a  sermon,  I 
beg  to  inquire  what  effect  it  has  produced.  The  Eoman  soldiers  proved  the  effect 
produced  by  Antony's  sermon  when  they  flew  to  avenge  the  death  of  CsBsar.  (J. 
Newton.) 

Vers.  34,  35. — Then  Peter  opened  Ms  mouth  and  said,  Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that 
God  Is  no  respecter  of  persons.  God  the  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek 
Him ;— I.  To  show  by  what  maeks  we  shall  know  whetheb  we  ourselves,  and 
OTHEKS,  ABE  SINCERE  IN  THE  FEAR  OF  GoD.  1.  The  first  mark  of  sincerity  in  the 
concerns  of  religion  is  having  carefully  endeavoured  to  find  our  duty.  For  if  we 
take  a  matter  of  this  importance  upon  trust,  and  leave  custom  and  fashion  to 
choose  our  opinions,  we  must  confess  that  we  are  very  fortunate  if  we  are  in  the 
right.  Interest  and  indolence  are  always  on  the  side  of  giving  in  to  popular 
systems.  If  loss  of  esteem  and  authority  attend  embracing  any  opinion,  men 
examine  timorously,  and  are  afraid  of  evidence ;  and  when  reason  begins  to  strike, 
then  they  ask  themselves,  Have  any  of  the  rulers  of  the  people  believed  on  Him? 
They  creep  and  fix  their  sentiments  upon  others,  and  like  tiie  ivy,  never  ascend 
higher  than  that  which  chance  has  given  them  for  a  support.  But  the  foundation 
of  Protestantism  and  Christianity  is  another  method  of  examination  :  we  must 
throw  aside  the  world  and  all  the  consequences  that  may  attend  it,  and  have  our 
thoughts  wholly  on  our  duty.  We  must  empty  our  minds  of  every  favourite 
prepossession,  and  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  like  little  children ;  have  no 
opinion  of  our  own,  and  no  desire  that  either  this  or  that  doctrine  or  action  should 
be  true  and  our  duty ;  but  only  that  we  may  know  what  is  truth  and  our  duty. 
No  person  can  pretend  that  he  has  not  abilities,  because  all  that  is  required  is  that 
they  use  the  abilities  they  have.  If  with  an  honest  and  teachable  heart  they 
desire  to  do  the  will  of  God,  His  promise  and  His  goodness  are  engaged  that  they 
BhaU  know  the  truth  in  everything,  on  which  their  everlasting  happiness  depends. 
And  if  we  find  difficulties  in  performing  this  duty,  and  ourselves  liable  to  mistakes, 
it  ought  to  fill  us  with  modesty  aud  diligence,  with  mutual  forbearance  and  charity, 
and  then  our  very  errors  may  be  useful.  2.  The  second  mark  by  which  we 
may  judge  whether  we  are  sincere  is  by  working  righteousness,  and  doing 
everything  we  know  to  be  our  c^uty.  The  end  of  faith  is  practice,  and  the 
only  thing  valuable  in  knowing  our  Master's  will  is  that  we  may  obey  Him.  We 
may  the)efore  comfort  ourselves  with  being  sincere  in  our  fear  of  the  Lord,  if  we 
join  a  religious  perfoi'mance  of  the  duties  we  know  with  our  endeavouring  to  go  on 
to  perfection.  And  we  religiously  perform  our  duty  if  we  are  virtuous  in  secret, 
as  well  as  in  the  eye  of  the  world.  We  must  perform  the  whole  of  our  duty  if  we 
truly  fear  God,  and  not  choose  some  darling  folly  to  indulge  in  secret,  aud  flatter 
ourselves  that  He  hideth  away  His  face  and  will  not  see  it.  We  must  throw  aside 
at  once  all  our  vices,  and  caution  most  against  that  we  are  most  willing  to  palliate 
and  excuse,  and  be  in  every  known  instance  obedient.  It  is  true  indeed  that  God 
has  given  us  no  commands  but  what  is  our  interest  and  present  happiness  to 
obey ;  but  if  we  perform  them  upon  the  low  motives  of  convenience  only,  they 
are  the  actions  of  a  man  of  prudence,  but  cease  to  be  the  offices  of  religion  or 
Christian  graces.  3.  The  third  maik  of  sincerity  in  our  fear  of  God  is  expressing 
our  zeal  for  things  in  proportion  to  their  real  value.  4.  Another  mark  by  which 
we  may  manifest  a  sincere  fear  of  God  is  our  being  charitable  to  those  who  differ 
from  us  in  our  sentiments.  5.  The  last  mark  I  shall  mention,  by  which  we  may 
know  our  sincerity  in  seeking  for  the  will  of  God,  is  by  the  methods  we  use  to 
convince  others  of  the  truth  of  what  we  ourselves  embrace  and  believe  II. 
Which  brings  me  in  the  second  place  to  show  why  this  virtue  entitles  us  to 
THE  FAVOUR  OF  GoD.  1.  And  first,  it  is  all  that  we  can  possibly  perform.  The 
text  tells  us  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  and  therefore  He  must  have  put  it 
into  every  man's  power  to  please  Him  :  but  He  hath  given  them  nothing  besides 
their  whole  abilities,  and  therefore,  if  these  are  employed  with  honesty  and  fair- 
ness, God  can  expect  no  more.  The  knowledge  which  is  sufficient  to  recommend 
a  poor  man,  obliged  to  take  care  by  his  industry  for  the  subsistence  of  his  family, 
may  be  inexcusably  little  in  those  who  are  raised  above  such  low  solicitudes  and 
enjoy  leisure  and  improvement.  2.  The  secoud  reason  why  this  is  so  pleasing  to 
God  is  because  it  will  improve  our  natures.  God  who  created  man  to  communicate 
happiness  to  him,  must  be  pleased  to  see  him  advance  to  all  the  perfection  and 


IW  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  x. 

felicity  He  gave  him  capacities  to  enjoy.  3.  The  last  reason  why  this  sincer* 
fear  of  God,  expressed  by  diligently  inquiring  after  His  will,  is  so  pleasing  to  Him, 
is  because  it  will  always  teach  us  those  things  which  are  most  truly  useful  and 
worth  knowing.  This  discourse  may  be  thought  liable  to  one  objection,  viz.,  that 
if  sincerity  is  the  only  thing  required  to  make  us  acceptable  to  God — and  that  may 
belong  to  men  of  every  religion — therefore  all  religions  are  equal.  But  to  answer 
this  objection,  which  would  have  never  been  thought  so  much  as  plausible,  had  it 
not  of  late  been  so  often,  and  with  so  much  delight,  repeated,  if  it  be  granted  that 
men  may  support  their  hves  by  herbs  and  acorns,  would  it  not  be  a  strange  con- 
clusion to  infer  from  thence  that  we  esteem  a  country  which  produces  that  food 
only  equal  to  one  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  ?  Yet  the  case  is  exactly  the  same 
and  exposes  the  absurdity  of  the  objection.  HI.  The  conclusion  I  would  draw 
from  what  I  have  said,  suitable  to  the  design  of  the  day,  is  this,  that  thence  we 
may  learn  to  soften  our  conduct  toward  all  well-disposed  men  that  differ  from  us. 
(Thomas  Rundle,  LL.B.)  God  no  respecter  of  persons  : — Here  we  have  one  of  the 
many  strong  contrasts  between  God  and  man.  I.  Why  God  is  no  respecter  of 
PERSONS  AS  MAN  IS.  Bccausc — 1.  Man's  estimate  is  of  very  limited  compass  as  to 
the  number  of  persons  taken  account  of — God's  is  universal.  Men  can  take 
account  of  but  very  few  persons  for  either  respect  or  contempt.  Look  at  the 
multitude  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  great  city,  or  province,  what  a  great  majority  of 
them  we  can  have  no  individual  estimate  of  at  all  1  And  then,  think  of  a  nation — 
and  the  whole  world.  There  are,  indeed,  a  few  distinguished  persons  who  have 
a  character  in  the  estimate  of  a  great  part  of  the  civilised  world,  but  what  a 
diminutive  number  do  these  make  I  But  God  has  His  estimate  of  every  person  of 
the  entire  race.  2.  The  whole  world  of  mere  exteriors  is  as  nothing  to  God. 
Man  is  the  dupe  and  idolater  of  them  all  over  the  world.  Nothing  so  mean  or  bad, 
but  if  a  fine  appearance  can  be  thrown  over  it,  it  becomes  as  a  god  to  him.  But 
God  estimates  men  in  their  intrinsic  qualities.  What  an  infinity  of  superficial 
shows  part  off  from  them  under  that  inspection  1  What  a  different  thing  must 
man  appear  when  all  these  are  fled  1  And  if  men  could  be  presented  thus  to  one 
another,  what  would  become  of  most  of  the  human  gods  of  human  idolatry  ?  The 
feebleness  of  our  vision  cannot  do  this  entirely.  But  it  is  true,  also,  that  we  are 
far  too  willing  to  be  imposed  on  by  the  delusive  show  of  the  world.  3.  Men  are 
respecters  of  persons  from  self-interest.  They  are  looking  up  to  certain  men,  and 
thinking  what  advantages  they  can  confer.  It  were  but  trifling  to  show  how  the 
Divine  Being  can  be  under  no  such  influence  in  His  estimates.  4.  Men  respect 
persons  because  others  do,  without  well  knowing  any  other  reason  why.  As  a 
number  of  persons  collected  at  a  spectacle  will  quickly  draw  a  multitude,  so  let  an 
individual  come  to  be  accounted  of  importance  by  a  portion  of  society,  and  the  rest 
soon  follows.  God  has  no  opinion  in  the  universe  to  regard  but  His  own.  What 
is  it  to  Him  that  one  diminutive  creature  after  another  adds  its  slender  intellect  in 
aflEirmation  of  the  judgment  of  a  crowd  ?  In  every  view,  He  is  infinitely  superior 
to  the  influence  of  all  the  causes  by  which  men  are  made  to  be  "  respecters  of 
persons."  II.  Contemplate  this  Divine  superiority  in  reference  to  beveral 
OF  those  things  which  command  men's  highest  respect.  We  all  see  how  men  are 
affected  towards  persons  of — 1.  Great  wealth.  What  deference — what  attention 
to  what  is  said — what  prompt  comphance  1  Suppose  the  impression  a  man  not 
known  to  be  rich  makes  shall  be  simply  that  of  his  apparent  personal  qualities — his 
dispositions — his  sense — his  manners.  And  supjpose  it  then  to  become  suddenly 
known  that  he  is  very  rich,  what  a  difference  f  A  very  considerable  degree  of 
misconduct  or  vice  does  not  put  the  rich  down  in  society.  They  can  at  once  defy 
opinion,  and  be  sure  of  obsequiousness.  What  a  state  of  human  sentiments  is 
this  in  the  night  of  God  I  He  "  is  no  respecter  of  persons."  2.  High  station  in 
what  is  called  birth,  rank,  and  power.  In  former  times  (and  in  many  parts  it  is  so 
still)  the  multitude  have  regarded  this  class  as  actually  being  of  some  mysteriously 
higher  order  of  human  nature.  Still  there  is  quite  enough  "respect"  to  grati^ 
their  utmost  pride — pompous  titles  of  honour,  a  vast  parade  of  state  and  ceremony. 
The  ground  is  cleared  for  them,  in  society,  wherever  they  appear ;  their  mere  wiU, 
or  caprice,  is  considered  as  authority,  without  requiring  a  reason  ;  the  worship  o£ 
God  itself  is  deemed  to  be  vastly  honoured  if  they  deign  to  pay  it  some  formalities 
of  attention.  Every  conceivable  palliation  is  adduced,  by  force,  in  their  behalf,  to 
extenuate  the  grossneas  of  sin  ;  and  pompous  funeral  celebrations  are  given  them 
when  they  die.  Now  turn  the  thought  to  God.  Think  I  If  He  had  any  partiality 
'like  this,  what  would  become  of  His  government  7    What  would  then  have  been  Hia 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  '  167 

dispensations  in  Egypt,  in  Babylon,  in  Judaea  ?  What  would  then  be  the  condition 
of  the  oppressed,  when  they  cry  and  appeal  to  Him?  He  looks  on  all  these 
distinctions  as  the  mere  transitory  accidents  of  the  mortal  condition.  He  requires 
the  same  self-abasement,  and  repentance,  from  all  these  loftier  persons,  as  by  the 
meanest — or  they  reject  them  at  their  peril.  And  His  great  messenger,  Death, 
makes,  as  it  were,  melancholy  sport  of  all  these  robes  of  grandeur.  3.  Great 
mental  endowment.  And  this  is  different  from  the  others,  in  being  a  more 
intrinsic  quality.  And  from  that  cause,  and  from  its  being  less  obvious  to  vulgar 
apprehension,  it  has  nothing  like  so  many  idolaters.  Nevertheless,  it  has  always 
been  an  object  of  perverted  regard.  Every  epithet  appropriate  to  divinity  has  been 
appUed.  There  are,  at  this  hour,  many  enthusiastic  admirers  of  human  talent, 
who  are  despisers  of  God  I  In  behalf  of  men  of  great  talent  there  has  been  and  is 
a  disposition  to  suspend  or  abrogate  the  most  essential  laws  of  morality.  And 
short  of  such  an  extreme,  respect  of  persons  may  be  excessive.  There  are 
persons  who  have  no  relish  for  truth,  but  as  displayed  in  the  style  of  genius  or 
eloquence ;  as  if  the  grave  matter  were  nothing,  and  the  decorations  were  all. 
There  are  some  who  habitually  indulge  contempt  for  all  who  are  not  distinguished 
by  mental  superiority,  of  whatever  excellence  otherwise.  But  think  of  Him ! 
What  is  all  this  in  His  sight  ?  The  Being  whose  intellect  pervades  all  things. 
What  is  the  greatest  human  intellect  compared  with  the  least  angelic  spirit? 
What  may  even  that  spirit  be,  compared  to  the  most  elevated  created  mind? 
What  is  that — what  are  all  minds  together,  as  compared  with  the  mind  ot  God  ? 
(J.  Foster.)  God  no  respecter  of  persona: — Here  we  note  —  First,  Peter's 
acknowledgment  of  his  former  mistake,  in  which  are  three  things.  1.  The 
preface.  '*  Then  Peter  opened  his  mouth " — a  Hebraism  indicating  that  he 
is  about  to  speak  something  weighty  on  mature  deliberation  (Matt.  v.  2 ; 
Psa.  viii.  2,  Ixxviii.  2.)  2.  The  means  of  his  conviction.  "  Of  a  truth  I  perceive  " — 
a  phrase  used  of  those  who  are  persuaded  to  change  their  opinion  on  full  conviction. 

3.  The  error  that  God  was  such  a  respecter  of  persons  that  He  would  not  reveal 
Himself  to  any  but  Jews.  Here  we  see — (1)  That  God's  people  may  err.  Peter  had 
read  the  prophecies  about  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  and  had  received  Christ's 
commission  to  disciple  all  nations.  So  we  often  hear  the  truth  expounded  and  yet 
perceive  it  not.  Therefore  we  had  need  to  be  careful  lest  we  be  ignorant  of  an 
obvious  truth.  (2)  That  the  godly,  when  convinced,  confess  their  errors.  Con- 
troversies would  soon  end  if  we  could  learn  Peter's  modesty.  Second,  Peter's 
positive  assertion  of  the  truth  now  learned.  I.  What  is  respect  of  persons  ? 
Eegard  for  that  outward  condition  whereby  one  differs  from  another.  1.  Gifts  of 
the  body.  It  is  not  the  strong  or  the  beautiful  that  are  accepted  of  God,  but  the 
good  and  holy.  (1)  He  is  strong  in  a  spiritual  sense,  not  that  overcometh  another 
man,  but  that  tameth  his  own  flesh  (Prov.  xvi.  32)  and  vanquishes  temptation 
(1  John  ii.  14).  (2)  So  not  beauty  but  grace  makes  us  amiable  in  the  sight  of  God 
(1  Peter  iii.  3,  4).  2.  Gifts  of  mind.  Learning,  &c.,  may  make  us  more  serviceable 
in  the  world,  but  do  not  commend  us  to  God  (Gen.  iii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  18).  3.  Gifts 
of  estate,  rank,  quality.  The  blood  of  the  poor  is  of  the  same  colour  as  of  the  rich 
(chap.  xvii.  26).  Social  distinctions  have  no  weight  with  God  (1  Cor.  i.  26 ;  Job 
xxxiv.  19 ;  Eev.  xx.  12).  So  with  bond  and  free  (1  Cor.  vii.  22  ;  Eph.  vi.  9 ;  Col.  iii.  25). 

4.  Nationality.  Some  peoples  lie  nearer  the  sun  than  others,  but  they  are  all  alike 
near  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  (Gal.  iii.  28).  5.  Eeligious  prof ession  and  privileges. 
CorneUus  was  a  good  man,  but  wanted  circumcision,  and  was  accepted,  while  many 
a  carnal  Jew  was  rejected  (Eom.  ii.  9-11).  If  by  outward  profession  there  be  a 
people  nearer  God  than  others,  they  have  the  privilege  to  be  first  rewarded  if  they 
do  good,  but  to  be  first  punished  if  they  do  evil.  II.  In  what  sense  is  this 
denied  of  God  ?  1.  He  is  no  respecter  of  persons  in  His  government.  This  is 
forbidden  to  man  (Lev.  xix,  15) ;  and  so  denied  of  God  (1  Peter  i.  17).  God  may 
be  considered  as  a  righteous  Governor  and  as  a  free  Lord.  In  the  latter  capacity 
He  may  do  as  He  seeth  meet.  Hence  of  His  free  mercy  He  called  the  Gentiles, 
and  gives  the  grace  of  His  gospel  to  one  and  not  to  another  (Matt.  xx.  15).  We 
can  plead  no  right  either  by  merit  or  purchase.  On  the  other  hand  God  govema 
man  by  a  law,  and  judges  according  to  that  law  (C/.  Eom.  ix.  16  and  1  Cor. 
ix.  24).  2.  He  is  no  respecter  of  persons  in  His  gifts  of  grace  (Matt.  xi.  27).  III. 
What  is  the  meaning  of  this  qualification  ?  "  That  feareth  God  and  worketh 
righteousness."  1.  Fear  is  the  principle  of  obedience.  Not  that  this  excludes  faith 
in  Christ  (John  xv.  5 ;  Heb.  xi.  6 ;  Hosea  iii.  5).  (1)  Holy  fear  is  of  two  kinds. 
(a)  The  fear  of  reverence,  which  is  necessary  that  we  may  not  offend  God  (Jer.  x. 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  k. 

7  ;  Eev.  xv.  4).  (b)  The  fear  of  caution,  which  is  necessary  to  make  us  watchful 
against  temptations  (Heb.  iv.  1 ;  2  Cor.  x.  12  ;  1  Pet.  v.  8).  (2)  Why  is  this  frame 
of  heart  pitched  upon  ?  (a)  That  we  may  carefully  abstain  from  what  displeases 
God  (Gen.  xxxix.  9  ;  Phil.  ii.  12).  (6)  Because  it  produces  a  diligent  endeavour  to 
approve  ourselves  to  Him.  2.  Working  righteousness  is  the  fruit  of  this  sense  of 
God  upon  our  hearts.  This  is  required — (1)  In  respect  of  God  that  we  may  honour 
Him  in  the  world :  for  our  obedience  makes  our  esteem  of  Him  visible  (2  Thess. 
11,  12 ;  Acts  X.  2).  (2)  It  is  for  our  own  comfort.  When  we  obey  God  it  leaves 
an  evidence  in  our  consciences  (1  John  iii.  19 ;  2  Cor.  i.  12 ;  Prov.  iii.  17). 
Comforts  are  the  rewards  of  obedient  children  (Psa.  xi.  6).  IV.  The  meaning  op 
THE  PRiviiiEGE.  "  Is  accepted  of  Him."  He  that  feareth  God,  &c. — 1.  Is  sure  of 
God's  favour  and  protection  (Phil.  i.  6).  2.  God  will  increase  this,  for  He  delighteth 
to  crown  His  own  gifts  (Prov.  iv.  18,  x.  29).  3.  God  will  perfect  it  and  reward  it 
(Psa.  XV.  2,  cvi.  3).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  God  no  respecter  of  persons  : — I.  A  point 
NEWLY  PEBCEiVED.  "  Now."  That  80  great  an  apostle  should  confess  this  shows 
that  his  Boman  chain  was  not  yet  made,  and  that  his  brother  apostles  (chap, 
xi.)  had  no  idea  of  his  infallibility.  Job  in  scorn  said  to  some  in  his  time,  "You 
are  the  only  men,  you  perceive  all " ;  but  Moses  did  not  (Numb.  xv.  34),  nor  Elijah 
(2  Kings  iv.  27).  But  Caiaphas  perceived  all  (John  xi.  49) ;  not  so  Peter  here,  and 
Paul  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9).  Of  a  truth  we  perceive  Peter  comes  not  near  his  successor,  who 
perceives  all  that  is  to  be  perceived  at  once,  and  gets  Caiaphas'  knowledge  by  sitting 
in  Peter's  chair.  But  it  is  not  only  this  they  difEer  in.  For  Peter  took  Cornelius  up 
(ver.  26) ;  his  successor  lets  Cornelius's  lord  lie.  The  Samaritan  woman  said,"  The 
Messiah  when  He  is  come  will  tell  us  all."  Yet  when  He  came  He  said  even  to 
Peter,  "  What  thou  knowest  not  now  "  (John  xiii.  7).  I  speak  this  for  some  who  are 
far  enough  from  Rome  but  think  they  perceive  all  God's  secret  decrees.  Luther 
well  said  that  every  one  has  by  nature  a  Pope  within.  Even  they  that  beUeve 
it  not  of  Rome  are  easily  brought  to  believe  it  of  themselves.  "  Of  a  truth  I 
perceive  "  will  bear  two  senses — "  I  perceive  that  I  did  not  before,"  or  "  I  perceive 
that  the  contrary  whereof  I  conceived  before."  Not  to  perceive  is  only  to  be 
ignorant,  but  Peter  had  held  quite  contrary.  Ignorance  is  but  privative,  this 
positive,  and  so  an  error — an  error  in  the  great  mystery  of  godliness  (1  Tim.  iii. 
16),  a  part  whereof  was  preached  to  the  Gentiles.  And  this  error  he  held  in 
common  with  his  brethren.  This  only  we  are  to  look  to,  that  with  Peter  we  be  not 
wilful,  but  ready  to  repent,  when  shown  our  error.  Then  we  may  conclude  that  if 
we  be  otherwise  minded  God  will  show  it  unto  us  (Phil.  iii.  15).  II.  What  that 
POINT  IS.  1.  Privative — that  "  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons  " — i.e.,  in  Greek 
and  Hebrew  "  faces "  which  show  themselves  first  (1  Sam.  xvi.  6).  Under  the 
face  we  understand  the  facing ;  under  the  person  everything  that  personates  and 
makes  personable — country,  condition,  birth,  riches,  &c.  Men  respect  all  this,  but 
it  is  nothing  to  God.  Was  Peter,  then,  ignorant  of  this?  No,  for  Moses  had  said 
it  (Deut.  X.  17),  and  Elihu  saw  it  by  the  light  of  nature  (Job  xxxiv.  19).  And  so 
Samuel  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7)  and  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xix.  7).  The  answer  is  that 
Peter  knew  it  before,  but  not  as  now.  We  know  many  things  by  book  and  specu- 
lation, which,  when  we  come  to  an  experience  of  it,  we  say,  "  Yea,  I  know  it 
indeed,"  as  if  we  had  never  known  it  before.  Experimental  knowledge  is  knowledge 
in  truth.  Was  this  Peter's  knowledge?  No;  for  he,  as  we,  have  experience  of  it 
daily.  God  deals  His  gifts  of  nature — outward  :  beauty,  strength,  &c. — inward  : 
wit,  memory,  judgment — without  respect  of  persons.  He  bestows  them  on  the 
child  of  the  mean  as  soon  as  of  the  mighty.  So  it  is  in  wealth  and  worldly  prefer- 
ment (Psa.  cxiii.  7),  and  in  God's  judgments.  And  no  man  had  better  experience 
of  it  than  Peter,  who,  a  poor  fisherman,  was  accepted  to  be  an  apostle  (Gal.  ii.  6). 
What  shall  we  say  then  ?  Though  he  could  not  but  know  this  general  truth,  yet 
he  thought  that  there  were  exceptions,  not  of  persons,  but  of  nations,  and  that  of 
all  nations  the  Jews  alone  were  accepted  of  God  (Amos  iii.  2 ;  Psa.  cxlvii.  20) 
This  had  run  in  Peter's  head,  but  he  perceives  he  was  wrong,  and  that  by  Cornelius* 
vision  compared  with  his  own.  2.  Positive.  "  In  every  nation,"  &c.  Solomon  in 
effect  said  as  much  long  before  (Eccles.  iii.  13).  (1)  "Feareth"  and  "worketh  " 
jointly.  Not  the  one  without  the  other — neither  fear  which  works  not,  nor  works 
which  do  not  come  from  God's  fear  in  our  hearts.  Pharisaic  personations,  Paul's 
"  mask  of  godliness  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  5),  Peter's  "cloke  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  16)  God  cannot 
accept.  God  Himself  told  Samuel  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7)  that  He  "  looks  not  as  man 
looks."  Man  looks  upon  the  outside,  God  looks  within.  The  inwards  were  God'a 
part  in  everj  sacrifice.     He  looks  first  at  the  heart,  and  in  the   heart  to  tho 


CHAP.  Z.]  THE  ACTS.  159 

affections ;  of  all  affections  that  of  fear ;  of  all  fears  that  of  God.  How  comes  God 
to  be  feared  ?  We  fear  evil,  but  there  is  no  evil  in  God.  Ans. :  Not  for  any  evil  in 
Him,  but  for  some  evil  we  may  expect  from  Him,  if  we  fear  not  to  offend  Him,  by 
doing  that  which  is  evil,  which  punishment  is  not  evil  but  just.  Paul,  knowing 
the  terror  of  this,  persuades  men  (2  Cor.  v.  11).  This  fear  to  suffer  evil  for  sin 
makes  men  fear  to  do  the  evil  of  sin  or  to  forsake  it  (Job  i.  1 ;  Jonah  iii.  5).  (2) 
Separately,  (a)  First,  fear — because  it  is  first ;  "the  beginning  of  wisdom  "  (Psa. 
cxi.  10).  It  was  the  first  passion  that  was  raised  in  Adam  (Gen.  iii.  10).  Then  he 
began  to  play  the  wise  man  and  forethink  of  the  foUy  he  had  committed.  Fear  is 
a  bridle  to  hold  us  in  or  turn  us  from  evil  (Prov.  iii,  7).  Another  reason  is,  fear  is 
most  general.  It  goes  through  all — heathens,  as  is  shown  in  the  case  of  Nineveh  ; 
beasts,  as  in  the  case  of  Balaam's  ass.  And  this  fear,  if  it  have  its  fuU  work  to 
make  us  depart  from  evil,  is  wisdom  complete  (Job  xxviii.  28  ;  Eccles.  viii.  12) ;  for 
of  the  seven  spirits  which  are  the  divisions  of  one  and  the  same  Spirit,  the  last  and 
chief  is  "  the  Spirit  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  "  (Isa.  xi.  2).  Eegard  not  them  who 
say  that  this  is  no  New  Testament  doctrine,  for  even  there  it  abideth.  There  it 
is  the  dawning  of  the  day  (Mai.  iv.  2).  It  is  as  the  court  is  to  the  temple,  as  the 
needle  that  first  enters  and  draws  after  it  the  thread  that  sews  all  together.  Not 
to  fear  is  the  next  way  to  fear.  The  work  of  fear  is  to  make  us  cease  from  sin ; 
ceasing  from  sin  brings  with  it  a  good  life ;  a  good  life  carries  with  it  a  good 
conscience ;  and  a  good  conscience  casts  out  fear.  This  for  the  introduction,  and 
ever  after,  when  faith  is  entered  it  is  a  sovereign  means  to  preserve  (Phil.  ii.  12  ; 
1  Pet.  i.  17 ;  Matt.  x.  28).  So,  then,  this  fear  is  not  Moses'  song  only  (Kev.  xv.  3, 4). 
{b)  But  works  also.  Is  God  aU  for  within  ?  Accepts  He  of  nothina;  without  ?  He 
accepts  a  good  righteous  work  too  if  it  proceed  from  His  fear  in  the  heart.  God 
would  have  us  begin  with  •'  fear,"  but  not  end  there.  For  neither  fear  alone  nor 
faith  alone  is  accepted  of  Him.  If  it  be  true  fear  such  as  God  will  accept,  it  is  not 
a  duU,  lazy  fear,  his  fear  that  "  went  and  digged  his  talent  in  the  ground."  God 
will  have  his  talent  turned  above  ground,  and  not  have  religion  invisible  within. 
And  observe  that  it  is  not  "  that  doeth,"  but  *'  worketh  righteousness,"  i.e.,  that 
makes  it  a  trade.  "  Learn  it,"  says  Isaiah  (i.  17),  as  one  would  learn  a  handicraft 
to  live  by ;  learn  it  and  make  an  occupation  of  it,  after  Christ's  example  (ver.  38). 
This  "  righteousness  "  is  described  in  ver.  2.  III.  God's  acceptation.  1.  He  will 
take  them — (1)  Where  they  be  to  take  ;  but  where  they  are  not  He  cannot  take. 
Our  "  alms,"  alas  I  are  shrunk  up  pitifully;  "  prayer  "  swallowed  up  with  hearing, 
and  feasting  substituted  for  •'  fasting."  (2)  But  it  is  said  that  there  is  no  faith 
here,  without  which  it  is  impossible  to  please  God.  But  would  Cornelius  have 
spent  his  words  and  chastened  his  body  without  some  faith?  Would  he  have 
called  upon  a  God  in  whom  he  did  not  believe  ?  (Kom.  x.  14).  Nay,  he  must  have 
believed  that  God  is,  that  He  may  be  sought,  and  that  He  will  not  fail  them  that 
seek  Him  (Psa.  ix.  10  ;  2  Cor.  viii.  12).  The  flax  did  but  smoke,  but  Christ 
quenched  it  not,  Ac.  He  took  him  as  He  found  him,  and  that  in  order  to  bring 
him  nearer  the  ways  of  His  salvation.  (3)  But  now,  lest  one  error  beget  another, 
take  this — that  he  was,  and  we  shall  be,  accepted,  gives  us  some  heart ;  and  that 
he  was  but  accepted  takes  away  all  self-conceit.  It  is  neither  our  fear  nor  our 
works,  but  God's  gracious  acceptation.  God  counts  them  worthy  and  so  makes 
them  worthy.  His  taking  our  works  of  righteousness  well  in  work  is  their  worth. 
There  was  another  ceuturion  whom  the  elders  of  the  Jews  dignified  highly ;  but  he 
indignified  himself  as  lowly  (Luke  vii.  4-6).  So  with  Job  (i.  8,  ix.  15,  x.  15).  See 
Eph.  i.  6.  Our  work  is  to  get  men  to  do  well,  but  not  to  ween  of  their  well-doing. 
2.  To  what  end  accepted.  The  profession  of  religion  by  baptism.  (Bp.  Andrewes.) 
GQdno_resj)ecter  of  persons  : — "  Oh,"  you  say,  "  I  am  such  a  little  plant ;  I  do  not  grow 
well ;  i  do  not  put  forth  as  much  leafage,  nor  are  there  so  many  flowers  on  me,  as  many 
round  about  me."  It  is  quite  right  that  you  should  think  little  of  yourself ;  perhaps 
to  droop  your  head  is  part  of  your  beauty.  Many  flowers  had  not  been  half  so 
lovely  if  they  had  not  practised  the  art  of  hanging  their  heads.  But  "  supposing 
Him  to  be  the  gardener,"  then  He  is  as  much  a  gardener  to  yon  as  He  is  to  the  most 
lordly  palm  in  ihe  whole  domain.  In  the  Mentone  garden  grows  the  orange  and  the 
aloe,  and  others  of  the  finer  and  more  noticeable  plants ;  but  on  the  wall  to  my  left 
grow  common  wall  flowers  and  saxifrages  and  tiny  herbs  such  as  we  find  on  our  own 
Tocky  places.  Now  the  gardener  has  cared  for  all  of  them,  little  as  well  as  great. 
In  fact,  there  were  hundreds  of  specimens  of  the  most  insignificant  growths  all 
duly  labelled  and  described.  The  smallest  saxifage  will  say,  "He  is  my  gardener 
just  as  surely  as  he  is  the  gardener  of  the  Gloire  de  Dijon  or  the  Marechal  Neil." 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

Prejudice : — Prejudice  is  one  of  the  greatest  enemies  to  human  welfare.  Of  aU 
the  train  of  mental  ills  with  which  we  are  affected  it  is  one  of  the  most  difficnlt  to 
be  eradicated.  1.  Prejudice  has  given  protracted  vitality  to  countless  social  abuses. 
One  of  the  best  remedies  for  this  evil  is  to  inspect  closely  the  grounds  of  our 
cherished  prepossessions,  and  to  ask,  Why  do  I  do  this  ?  Why  do  I  feel  so  ?  2. 
The  strongest  prejudices  are  religious.  What  is  given  to  ns  by  tradition  from  our 
forefathers,  familiarised  to  our  earliest  associations,  we  can  hardly  bring  ourselves 
to  question  or  examine,  and  we  often  hold  as  enemies  those  who  differ  from  us 
even  in  minor  points.  As  we  generally  feel  more  earnestly  about  religion,  to  our 
prejudices  here  we  may  trace  all  those  religious  feuds  and  bitter  persecutions 
which  have  disgraced  the  page  of  history.  3.  In  the  context  we  have  a  memorable 
instance  of  relinquishment  of  the  strongest  possible  prejudice,  so  strong  even  in  a 
good  and  noble  man  that  direct  Divine  interposition  was  necessary  for  its  removal. 
Notice — I.  Spibitual  excellence,  and  not  the  accidents  of  extebnal  condition, 
ALONE  AVAILS  WITH  GoD.  Take  some  illustrations  confirmatory  of  this  from — 1. 
The  Scriptures  :  e.g. ,  the  choice  of  Abraham,  Moses,  &c.  2.  The  dispensations  of 
Providence.  (1)  Wealth  and  power  are  administered  impartially.  (2)  Health  ia 
equally  shared  by  rich  and  poor.  (3)  Genius :  our  poets,  legislators,  inventors, 
orators,  and  divines  have  more  frequently  emerged  from  the  cottage  than  from 
the  mansion.  (4)  So  with  the  blessings  of  happiness,  life,  and  age.  Death  which 
spares  not  the  hovel  spares  not  the  palace,  just  as  the  wind  fades  the  cottage 
flowers  as  well  as  the  productions  of  the  conservatory.  3.  The  administration  of 
the  benefits  of  redemption.  Not  many  mighty  are  called,  yet  there  are  some — 
Wilberforce  and  Bunyan.  Only  one  door  of  mercy  to  all.  "Whosoever  will," 
Ac.  4.  The  day  of  judgment  and  its  results.  "  We  shall  all  stand  before,"  &o. 
II.  Why  has  God  no  respect  of  persons  except  in  belation  to  moral  goodness  T 
1.  Accidents  in  condition  seemingly  great  to  us  bear  no  such  relation  to  Him. 
This  world  is  like  a  grain  in  the  balance  of  His  mighty  creation.  Its  revolv- 
ing centuries  are  but  "as  yesterday  when  it  is  past."  He  surveys  all  toils, 
plans,  &c,  serenely  as  the  stars  look  with  undisturbed  light  on  mortal  things.  2. 
They  are  not  the  essential  elements  of  our  being.  They  spring  from  birth,  «S;c. 
They  are  not  the  man,  and  pass  away  with  time.  III.  Why  does  God  supremely 
VALUE  spiritual  EXCELLENCE  ?  1.  It  is  the  true  basis  of  worth  in  every  intelligent 
creature.  It  is  so  of  angels,  and  of  man  as  man.  "  In  every  nation,"  <fec.  2.  It  is 
God's  own  spiritual  reflection,  and  therefore  the  true  basis  of  friendship  with  Him. 
God's  moral  nature  must  take  cognizance  of  its  kindred  elements.  Here,  then,  is 
consolation  for  alL  None  are  too  lowly  or  poor  to  be  the  accepted  friends  of  the 
Lord  of  the  universe.  (cT".  Foster,  B.A.)  On  the  reception  of  neic  truth: — 1. 
^e  main  purpose  of  the  Acts  is  to  unfold  the  broadening  spirit  and  form  of  the 
Church  of  God.  It  is  a  history  of  transition.  On  its  first  page  the  Christ  ascends. 
As  the  heavens,  into  which  He  rises,  overarch  the  whole  world,  so  His  gospel 
spreads  its  wings  for  its  world-wide  flight.  Soon  the  Spirit  breathes  upon  the 
apostles,  and  they  begin  to  act  under  an  inspiration  as  free  and  wide  as  the  wind 
that  typifies  it.  On  every  page  some  barrier  gives  way ;  with  every  line  the  horizon 
broadens.  One  feels  as  if  sailing  in  a  great  ship,  under  a  bounding  breeze,  out 
of  a  narrow  harbour  into  the  wide  sea.  2.  With  this  change  of  scene  there  is  cor- 
responding change  of  personal  attitude ;  conversions  not  only  in  character,  but  in 
opinion  ;  it  is  a  record  not  only  of  repenting  and  turning,  but  of  broadening. 
Valuable  as  this  book  is  as  a  record  of  events,  it  is  more  valuable  as  introducing 
the  life  of  the  Spirit,  and  as  showing  how  the  faith  of  ages  develops  into  liberty  ana 
the  full  life  and  thought  of  humanity.  3.  The  incident  before  us  is  a  happy  illus- 
tration of  this  in  its  assurance  of  possible  sainthood  outside  of  the  Church,  yet 
showing  its  hard  conditions,  telling  us  how  the  centurion's  devout  aspirations 
carried  him  into  the  realm  of  vision,  and  brought  upon  him  an  inspiration  greater 
than  any  that  came  upon  his  blind  yearnings  after  righteousness.  Here  also  is  a 
somewhat  similar  experience  of  Peter.  Sleep  is  not  vacant  of  spiritual  impression. 
Into  that  mystery  the  Spirit  may  come  as  unto  its  own,  and  say  what  it  could  not 
when  the  man  is  hedged  about  with  wakeful  and  watchful  powers.  Shakespeare 
puts  the  deepest  moral  experiences  of  men  into  their  dreams.  4.  Notice  how  Qod. 
not  only  enlarges  and  broadens  the  views  of  these  men,  but  does  this  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Himself.  For  there  is  an  enlargement  of  view  that  is  mere  breadth  without 
height ;  it  grows  wise  over  matter  and  force,  creeps  but  never  soars,  deeming  the 
heii.'hts  above  to  be  empty.  In  preceding  centuries  the  mind  shot  upward,  but 
within  narrow  limits.     There  was  no  look  abroad ;  nature  was  simply  to  be  used  88 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  161 

found,  not  studied  for  further  uses.  Hence,  there  was  great  familiarity  with  the 
lore  of  religion,  but  dense  ignorance  of  the  laws  of  matter  and  of  human  society. 
To-day  the  reverse  is  true.  It  is  interesting  to  note  how  this  tendency  pervades 
classes  that  apparently  do  not  influence  one  another  :  thus  the  scientific  class,  and 
the  lighter  literary  class  ;  neither  reads  the  works  of  the  other,  yet  in  each  we  find 
the  same  study  of  matter  and  man,  and  the  same  ignoring  of  God  and  the  spiritual 
nature.  Or,  compare  the  man  of  universal  culture  with  the  average  man  of  the 
world,  who  reads  the  newspaper,  and  keeps  his  eyes  open  on  the  street :  the  latter 
knows  little  of  the  former,  yet  we  find  them  holding  nearly  the  same  opinions 
about  God  and  the  faith,  vague  and  indifferent ;  but  both  are  very  observant  of 
what  is  about  them.  And  all  this  is  for  some  wise  end.  It  had  become  necessary 
that  man  should  have  a  better  knowledge  of  the  world,  and  of  his  relations  to  it  and 
to  society.  Hence  his  attention  is  directed  thither  by  a  Divine  and  guiding  inspira- 
tion, and  no  thinking  man  can  be  exempt  from  it.  The  only  danger  is  lest  the 
tendency  become  excessive,  and  we  forget  to  look  upward  in  our  eagerness  to  seo 
what  is  about  us.  It  is  the  office  of  Christian  thought  to  temper  and  restrain  these 
monopolising  tendencies  and  secure  a  proper  balance  between  them.  "  God  fulfils 
Himself  in  many  ways,  lest  one  good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world."  5.  I  have 
fallen  into  this  train  of  thought  by  reflecting  how  God  led  Peter  away  from  his 
small  notions  of  rehgion,  and  brought  him  into  a  higher  and  larger  conception  of 
Himself.  As  we  read  the  story  we  wonder  at  the  readiness  and  ease  with  which  f 
Peter  gave  up  old  habits  of  thought  and  entered  into  new  ones.  What  is  the/ 
explanation?  I.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  religious  changes  that  they  shalii 
OCCUR  SDDDENLT.  There  may  be,  there  must  be,  long  seasons  of  preparation,  but 
the  transition  is  instantaneous.  Saul  goes  a-persecuting,  and  a  light  above  the 
sun's  dazzles  him  into  instant  submission.  The  Holy  Spirit  comes  like  a  rushing 
wind  upon  the  disciples,  and  in  an  hour  they  are  new  men.  The  jailer  hears  and 
believes  in  a  night.  Luther,  while  toiling  up  the  holy  stairs,  holding  to  salvation 
by  works,  drops  that  scheme  on  the  way,  and  lays  hold  of  the  higher  one  of  salva- 
tion by  faith.  Ignatius  Loyola  in  a  dream  has  sight  of  the  Mother  of  Christ,  and 
awakes  a  soldier  of  Jesus.  It  is  often  so.  We  do  not  so  much  grow  into  the  pos- 
session of  new  spiritual  truths  as  we  awake  to  them.  Their  coming  is  not  like  the 
sunrise  that  slowly  discloses  the  shapes  and  relations  of  things,  but  is  like  th"j 
lightning  that  illuminates  earth  and  sky  in  one  quick  flash,  and  so  imprints  them 
for  ever  on  the  vision.  Character  is  of  slow  and  steady  growth,  but  the  revelations 
of  truth  that  inspire  character  are  sudden.  A  new  outlook  is  gained,  and  the  man 
is  changed,  as,  in  cUmbing  a  mountain,  it  is  some  sharp  turn  in  the  path  that 
reveals  the  new  prospect  which  inspires  the  onward  march.  Some  can  affirm  that 
it  was  in  a  moment  that  the  charm  of  poetry,  the  pleasurable  consciousness  of 
thought,  the  passion  of  love,  the  dignity  of  manhood,  the  obligation  of  service,  the 
sense  of  the  Divine  goodness,  came  upon  them.    II.  Peter  got  sight  of  larges 

AND   MORE   spiritual   TRUTHS   THAN   HE   TTAT>   BEEN    HOLDING.        When   what   claim   tO 

be  truths  are  of  equal  proportion,  we  balance  them,  or  try  one  and  then  the  other ; 
but  as  soon  as  one  asserts  itself  as  larger  and  finer  we  accept  it  instantly.  Peter 
had  been  used  to  beUeving  that  God  was  a  respecter  of  persons,  but  when  he  caught 
sight  of  the  fact  that  God  has  no  partialities,  his  true-loving  nature  rushed  at  once 
toward  the  greater  truth.  1.  We  have  an  appetence  for  new  spiritual  truth,  and 
take  to  it  readily.  This  does  not  imply  that  we  are  to  go  about  peering  into  the 
corners  of  the  universe  to  find  new  truths,  nor  that  we  are  to  ait  down  and  manu- 
facture them.  Truth  already  exists ;  there  is  now  all  there  ever  will  be.  All  we 
have  to  do  is  to  take  it ;  to  hold  ourselves  open  to  it ;  to  do  God's  will,  and  we  shall 
know  it.  The  fundamental  Christian  idea  is  God  seeking  man,  not  man  seeking 
God.  We  make  but  a  poor  figure  when  we  attempt  to  think  out  a  religion.  It  ia-j 
not  a  search  after  God,  but  a  revelation  of  God.  We  ourselves  can  find  nothing. 
The  main  thing  for  us  to  do  is  to  get  out  of  the  caves  of  sin  and  self-conceit  into 
"ItHe  open  air,  where  the  sun  shines  and  the  Sphit  breathes.  2.  There  is  also  in 
such  truth  a  self-attestuag  power  that  tends  to  secure  mstant  reception.  When  one 
comes  to  me  with  a  new  machine,  or  a  new  theory  of  government,  or  of  matter,  or 
life,  I  hesitate;  but  when  I  see  a  new  disclosure  of  the  Divine  love,  or  a  fresh 
exhibition  of  humility  and  patience,  or  of  some  new  adaptation  of  Christianity  to 
human  society,  I  at  once  beUeve.  It  is  simply  another  candle  brought  into  a 
lighted  room.  3.  This  self-attesting  quality  goes  farther  and  becomes  commanding. 
Peter  says,  "  God  hath  showed  me  that  I  should  not  call  any  man  common  or 
unclean."  It  is  one  of  the  subtle  workings  of  all  high  truth  that  it  vests  itself,  aft 
VOL.  n.  11 


162  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


by  some  instinct,  with  the  Divine  attributes.    4.  I  have  had  in  mind  thus  far  not 
any  new  truths,  but  rather  a  fresh  and  expanding  vision  of  other  sides  of  many- 
sided  truth.     Strictly  speaking,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  new  truth ;  but  there  ia 
such  a  thing  as  fresh  sight  of  the  truth.     We  can  hardly  do  anything  worse  for  our 
moral  growth  than  to  hold  it  in  such  a  way  that  it  may  not  change  its  form.     Not 
that  one  is  to  hold  his  faith  as  in  a  constant  flux,  or  suffer  himself  to  be  blown 
about  by  every  new  wind  of  doctrine,  but  rather  that  he  should  attain  the  twofold 
attitude  of  alertness  and  passivity :  passive  to  the  Spirit  that  is  ever  breathing 
upon  us,  and  alert  to  note  and  follow  the  unfolding  revelation  of  God  in  the  world. 
III.  Having   spoken  generally,  I  shall  now  speak  more  pabticdlarlt  of  bomb 
OF   these   truths.      To  call  attention  to  this  intermingling  of  permanent    and 
changing  qualities.     1.  Take  that  of  the  Trinity.     It  has  another  look  to-day  from 
that  it  wore  a  hundred  years  ago.     It  is  the  characteristic  thought  of  God  at 
present  that  He  is  immanent  in  all  created  things,  yet  personal,  the  life  of  all  Uves, 
.  the  soul  of  the  universe.    With  such  a  conception  of  God,  it  becomes  easy  to  see 
how  there  should  be  a  Son  of  man  who  is  also  the  Son  of  God,  and  a  Spirit  every- 
where present  and  acting — a  paternal  heart  and  will  at  the  centre,  a  Sonship  that 
stands  for  humanity,  a  spiritual  Energy  that  is  the  life  of  men,  and  through  which 
they  come  into  freedom    and    righteousness.      This  conception  of  God  may  be 
brought  into  the  category  of  science,  and  even  be  required  by  it.    2.  So  of  the 
atonement :  it  has  always  been  putting  on  new  forms  and  yielding  a  richer  life.     It 
is  the  most  elastic  of  the  doctrines,  and  we  are  getting  to  understand  it  as  contain- 
ing the  law  and  method  of  hfe  for  every  man  :  "  He  that  loseth  his  life  for  My  sake 
shall  find  it."     3.  So  also  of  regeneration.     It  has  been  held  simply  as  a  moral 
necessity,  having  its  basis  in  sin ;  bat  we  are  beginning  to  see  that  Christ  taught  it 
also  as  a  psychological  necessity.    We  must  be  born  again,  not  merely  because  we 
are  wicked,  but  because  we  are  flesh  and  need  to  be  carried  forward  and  hf ted  up  into 
the  realm  of  the  spirit, — a  constructive  rather  than  a  reconstructive  process.  4.  In  the 
same  way  the  doctrine  of  Divine  sovereignty  is  resolving  into  the  universality  of  law. 
Science,  with  its  doctrine  of  an  original,  ultimate  force,  advances  more  than  half  way 
towards  this  assaulted  truth.    5.  Or  take  the  doctrine  of  sin,  its  inheritance  and  ita 
relation  to  the  personal  will.     The  doctrine  of  heredity  as  found  in  the  pages  of 
science,  the  doctrine  of  freedom  as  found  in  the  pages  of  philosophy  and  the  observa- 
tion of  life,  yield  nearly  all  we  care  to  claim.     6.  So,  too,  of  the  miracles.     Modern 
intelligence  has  grown  so  wide  that  it  embraces  both  law  and  miracle  in  one  harmony. 
No  one  now  defines  one  as  the  violation  of  the  other.    An  assertion  of  "  the  reign  of 
law  "  does  not  disturb  us  so  long  as  we  are  conscious  of  the  hourly  miracles  wrought 
by  personality.     7.  Take  next  retribution.     It  will  never  be  denied  so  long  as  men 
have  eyes  to  trace  cause  and  effect.     Just  now  we  are  finding  out  that  it  is  not  a 
matter  of  future  time,  but  of  all  time ;  an  eternally  acting  principle.     The  true 
preacher  of  retribution  makes  it  clear  that  the  wages  of  sin  is  death,  and  empha- 
sises the  two  features  of    retribution  that  alone  are  effective,  its  nearness   and 
its  certainty.     8.  Take  the  inspiration  of   the  Bible.    There    is   not   now,   and 
probably   never   will  be,  any  generally  accepted  theory,  simply  because  inspira- 
tion cannot  be   bo    compassed ;   as    Christ   said,  ••  Thou  canst   not   tell   whence 
it  cometh   and    whither    it    goeth."      It  is  the   breathing  of    God    upon   the 
Boul.     We  are  getting  to  speak  less  of  the  inspired  book,  and  more  of  the  inspired 
men  who  wrote  it.     The  revelation,  therefore,  will  have  a  twofold  character :  it 
will  be  Divine  and  human,  the  one  conditioning  the  other  ;  not  an  imperfection, 
but  rather  the  only  kind  of  revelation  that  could  serve  our  needs,  for  the  line  of 
revelation  from  God  to  man  must  run  through  the  human  heart.     But  without  a 
theory,  we  are  reading  the  Bible  with  fuller  faith  than  ever  before.     The  more 
light  we  bring  to  it  from  nature  and  study  and  experience,  the  clearer  its  truths 
stand  out ;  in  such  light  it  is  becoming  its  own  evidence,  and  no  more  needs  an 
apologetic  theory  than  a  candle  needs  an  argument  for  illumination.    FV.  Box  a. 

THOUGHTFUL  MIND  WELL  ASK,  HOW  HAPPENS  IT  THAT  CHRISTIANITY  HAB  TmS  TWO- 
FOLD FEATURE  of  a  permanent  essence  and  a  shifting  form  ?  The  answer  will  take 
him  into  that  world  of  thought  recently  opened,  the  main  feature  of  which  ia  the 
law  of  development.  The  timid  may  hnger  on  the  threshold,  but  once  in,  the 
atmosphere  is  found  friendly.  It  is  not  something  to  be  quelled,  but  an  ally  to  be 
pressed  into  service.  What  it  does  for  every  other  department  of  thought  it  may 
do  for  the  faith — open  another  door  between  the  m}  stery  of  the  external  order  and 
the  human  reason.  Eecognising  this  principle,  we  can  r^ad  the  Old  Testament, 
and  need  no  other  explanation  or  apology  than  it  affords.    The  sayings  of  the 


tJHA*.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  163 

Christ  become  principles  and  revelations  of  eternal  truth.     The  mustard  seed,  the 
leaven,  <fec.,  not  only  faU  in  with  the  principle,  but  attest  Christ's  absolute  know- 
ledge of  it.     It  will  be  noticed  that  the  reception  of  new  truth  has  been  spoken  of 
in  two  ways  that  are  apparently  contradictory :  one  as  quick  and  as  by  instant 
revelation  ;  the  other  gradual,  a  growth  or  development.     They  are  not  inconsistent, 
but  represent  the  twofold  nature  of  truth  as  having  a  Divine  source  and  element 
and  a  human  ground  and  element,  and  the  twofold  nature  of  man  as  spirit  and  mind. 
These  methods  play  into  each  other.  One  prepares  the  way  for  the  other.  One  is  slow, 
and  keeps  pace  with  the  gradual  advance  of  society  and  a  like  development  of  the  indi- 
vidual.     The  other  is  quick,  is  allied  to  the  mysterious  action  of  the  Spirit,  which 
knows  not  time  nor  space,  and  accords  with  the  loftiest  action  of  our  nature.     I  gain 
knowledge  slowly ;  I  gain  the  meaning  of  knowledge  instantly.    {T.  T.  Hunger.)      The 
outside  saints: — When   we  assume  the  certain  exclusion  from  God  of   all  bora 
subjects  of  false  religions,  is  not  Peter's  vision  as  truly  for  us  as  for  him  ?    The 
Old  Testament  denounces  idolatry,  it  is  true,  but  these  denunciations  were  not 
made  to  the  idolaters,  but  to  God's  own  people  dwelling  in  a  clearer  light.     So  when 
we  say,  "  There  is  none  other  Name,"  &c.,  do  we  not  fall  into  the  mistake  of  not 
observing  that  it  is  those  who  have  heard  of  the  name  of  Christ  that  are  put  under 
this  ban,  and  not  Pagan  people  who  have  never  heard  of  Him  ?     If  in  every  nation 
he  that  feareth  God,  (fee,  is  accepted  of  Him,  how  many  may  there  be  who  never 
heard  of  Christ,  to  whom  God  is  an  unknown  God,  who  yet  are  so  far  right  with 
God  as  to  be  fitly  joined  with  us  in  the  common  hope  !     They  compose  a  Church 
beyond  the  Church  who,  without  a  gospel,  have  learned  to  walk  in  God's  private 
light.     A  glance  at  certain  great  first  principles  would  induce  the  hope  tbat  many 
more  than  one  commonly  suspects  are  harvested  for  the  kingdom.     (1)  That  God 
loves  all  men  impartially,  having  the  desire  to  be  loved  by  all.     (2)  That  He  is 
never  afar  off  from  any,  but  is  putting  in  them  a  desire  to  seek  and  to  find  Him. 
(3)  That  the  Spirit  of  God  is  going  through  aU  minds,  drawing  their  incUnings 
towards  the  inborn  grace  that  will  be  in  turn  His  finding  of  them.     My  present 
object  is  to  show  how  God  finds  access  to  outsiders,  and  engages  them  in  a  felt 
devotion  to  His  friendship,  by  an  examination  of  Bible  examples.     1.  Take  Enoch. 
There  was  no  Scripture  or  Church  in  his  day.     He  lived  a  solitary  life  of  walking 
with  God.     He  was  probably  derided  by  his  contemporaries,  which  made  it  his 
necessary  comfort  to  live  "  in  the  testimony  that  he  pleased  God."     And  this  was 
not  audible,  but  was  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  who  came  in  the  door  of  nature  set 
open  wider  by  his  faith  till  finally  he  became  so  leavened  by  the  Divine  affinities 
that  he  was  translated.     2.  Noah  was  a  preacher  of  righteousness  without  a  Bible, 
and  there  was  no  person  out  of  his  own  family  who  had  any  care  for  rehgion.     And 
the  oracle  that  found  him  so  verified  itself  as  to  put  him  on  building  the  ark ;  for 
God,  by  a  process  which  he  could  only  trust,  and  not  understand,  was  preparing 
him  to  be  the  father  of  a  better  age.     3.  With  Abraham  the  Church  begins,  and  yet 
he  is  prepared  by  an  outside  training.     He  had  no  written  revelation  or  organised 
religion.     But  he  came  out  a  profoundly  religious  character,  from  amidst  idolaters, 
so  that  he  could  receive  a  life  call  at  first  hand,  and  take  the  necessary  guidance  in 
that  call.     4.  Moses  was  brought  up  as  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  separated 
from  his  race,  and  trained  in  aU  the  learning  of  the  Egyptians,  a  training  which 
shows  itself  in  all  his  politics.     Then  in  Midian  Jethro,  an  outside,  but  grandly 
reUgious  man,  comes  to  help  him  in  his  religious  development.     So  Moses  was  a 
virtual  outsider  till  his  call  in  the  burning  bush.     5.  Then  take  Balaam,  the  beauty 
and  evangelical  richness  of  whose  oracles  are  inimitable.     He  was  a  soothsayer, 
but  while  divination  had  been  forbidden  to  the  Jews,  it  had  not  been  forbidden  to 
the   Mesopotamians.     And  therefore  it  was  only   natural   that   he   should    mix 
enchantments  with  his  oracles — just  as  our  astrologers   and  alchemists    sought 
religious  light  with  mixtures  of  incantation.     He  was  certainly  faithful  to  his  con- 
victions, against  the  blandishments  employed  to  win  his  consent.     6.  Job  is  not  a 
Jew,  and  his  book  not  a  Jewish  book.     Its  piety  is  real,  but  out  of  all  conuection 
with  Bible  history.     And  thus  you  have  one  of  its  most  remarkable  books  of  Scrip- 
ture, a  theodicy  for  after  ages,  the  work  of  an  outsider.     7.  Cyrus  is  one  of  the  best 
characters  of  ancient  history,  and  the  reason  of  his  conduct  towards  God  and  His 
people  is  given  by  Isaiah,  who  declares  that  God  unseen  has  holden  his  right  hand, 
and  raised  him  up  in  righteousness.     8.  At  the  very  opening  of  the  New  Testament 
we  encounter  the  Magi,  religiously  related  to  Cyrus,  priests  of  the  Medo-Persiau 
religion,  watching  the  stars  to  spell  God's  oracle,  and  becoming  so  spiritualised  in 
habit  as  to  be  not  unfitly  honoured  by  the  guidance  of  a  star  to  Christ.     9.  Th« 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   «, 

Syrophoenician  woman,  whose  faith  was  so  heartily  commended,  was  Pagan  bom, 
but  by  some  heavenly  guidance  went  to  Christ  for  help.  10.  The  case  of  the 
centurion  was  like  that  of  Cornelius,  about  whom  Christ  says,  •*  I  have  not  found  so 
great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel."  And  He  did  not  stop  there,  "  I  say  unto  you,  that 
many  shall  come  from  the  east,"  &o.  11.  I  might  turn  off  here  to  such  as  Numa, 
Marcus  Aurelius,  Plotinus,  Plato,  and  Socrates,  and  look  directly  into  the  workings 
of  the  reUgious  nature  in  many  thoughtful  men  outside  revelation,  and  see  their 
notions  of  God,  their  expressed  longings  for  a  revelation,  their  gropings,  and 
almost  findings.  Their  yearnings  sometimes  put  them  in  a  state  in  which  they  lay 
hold  of  Christ  at  the  very  first  discovery,  even  as  a  starving  man  of  bread.  12. 
And  if  we  go  apart  still  further— among  the  savage  tribes,  we  find  many  traditions 
that  seem  almost  to  have  the  sanctity  of  a  revelation,  and  now  and  then  a  charac- 
ter assuming  the  distinctions  of  genuine  piety.  So  we  see  that  God  has  had  His 
witnesses  in  every  age  of  the  world  apart  from  His  covenant  and  the  institutions  of 
His  grace.     From  all  this  we  may  learn  the  following  lessons :   L  We  abb  not  to 

JUDGE  THAT  THE  MEEE  POSSIBILITY  OF  A  REVELATION  OUTSIDE  THE  BiBLE  SUPER- 
SEDES THE  WANT  OF  IT.  That  was  not  the  opinion  of  God  when  He  sent  His  angel 
to  Cornelius  to  put  him  in  the  way  of  one  who  should  teach  him  Christ.  The  souls 
most  enlightened  have  sighed  for  a  veritable  revelation.  Having  gleams,  almost 
visions  of  God,  they  wanted  it  the  more.  Christ,  the  Bible  not  wanted !  Just  as 
well  to  be  without  a  revelation  I  What  could  show  the  unsupportable  destitution 
of  such  a  state  better  than  the  gropings  and  only  casual  findings  of  hungry  millions? 
II.  Let  no  one  turn  the  blame  upon  God  that  what  is  so  much  wanted  every- 
where IS  NOT  everywhere  GIVEN.  Doubtless  God  might  rain  Biblcs,  but  He  must 
also  rain  written  languages,  and  the  power  to  read  them.  And  then  the  readers 
would  want  to  know  bow  the  book  grew  to  be  a  book,  the  revelation  how  revealed. 
If  a  Bible  could  be  got  up  mechanically  as  showers  in  the  sky  it  might  justly  be 
concluded  that  all  men  ought  to  have  it.  But  it  has  first  to  be  incarnated,  and  so 
revealed  through  humanity;  for  truths  must  be  enunciated  in  persons.  Bibles 
could  not  be  made  faster  than  men  are  good  enough  to  have  revelations  made 
through  them.  III.  We  are  not  to  push  the  dissemination  of  this  gospel  by 
ANY  false  argument  THAT  DISHONOURS  GoD.  Tell  US  Hot  that  ovory  man  ignorant 
of  Christ  must  perish.  Why  should  we  push  ourselves  to  this  work  of  gospelling 
the  world,  by  putting  it  on  that  He  has  given  no  possibility  of  life  to  millions  ? 
Bather  let  us  tell  what  God  is  doing  for  them,  what  possibilities  He  opens  for 
them,  and  how  certainly  He  sometimes  gains  them  to  His  love.  Then  as  we  are 
so  gloriously  privileged  let  us  give  them  our  privilege.    IV.  Let  us  have  it  as 

ONE  OF  OUR  MOST  SACRED  DUTIES  TO  THE  BiBLE,  NOT  TO  USE  IT  SO  A3  TO  SHUT 
ourselves   and   all    that   HAVE    IT   AWAY   FROM    God's    IMMEDIATE    REVELATION    BY    IT. 

The  external  revelation  is  not  given  to  be  a  substitute  for  the  internal,  but  a  guide 
into  it.  We  are  to  find  God  after  all  by  an  immediate  knowledge  like  all  the  outside 
saints,  only  with  the  help  of  the  Bible  which  they  had  not.  The  Bible  is  received 
only  when  spiritually  discerned:  i.e.,  when  it  brings  us  in  where  God  is,  to  know 
Him  by  our  faith  and  love,  and  have  Him  in  a  first-hand  knowledge,  even  as 
Abraham  had,  or  Job,  or  Cornehus.  If  we  desire  to  know  Boston,  the  map  of  the 
way  will  not  show  it,  but  will  only  take  us  thither,  and  let  us  get  the  knowledge 
for  ourselves.  The  Bible  in  hke  manner  tells  us  how  others  found  God,  that  we 
may  find  Him  also.  Conclusion :  Let  us  cast  a  glance  into  that  future  life,  in 
which  all  righteous  souls  are  gathered.  Many  of  them  will  belong  to  the  class  of 
inside  saints,  some  to  the  class  of  outside;  the  former  will  have  known 
Christ  all  their  Uves  and  been  fashioned  by  His  Gospel  and  character;  the 
latter  will  now  meet  Him  perhaps  for  the  first  time,  and  will  salute  Him  as  the  un- 
known Friend  they  had  always  with  them.  To  meet  with  these  outside  saints — 
outside  no  longer— how  blessed  it  will  be  I  And  what  a  beautiful  variety  they  will 
give  to  the  general  brotherhood  1  •'  Other  sheep  I  have  which  are  not  of  this  fold," 
&c.     (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)        The  law  of  Christian  enlargement : — I.  It  has  been 

MADE  AN  OBJECTION  TO  CHRISTIANITY  THAT  IT  INVOLVES  A  STiSTEM  OF  RELIGIOUS 
PRIVILEGES    LIMITED,     FOB    SOME     TWO    THOUSAND    TEARS,    TO    A    SINGLE    NATION  I  ^  and 

although  the  New  Testament  proposes  a  more  catholic  plan,  still  it  makes  itself 
responsible  for  the  Old.  How  is  this  consistent  with  the  benevolence  of  a  God 
whose  love  is  wider  than  the  world  ?  1.  Long  before  this  separation  of  Israel,  God 
declared  that  it  was  not  a  permanent  law.  At  the  very  moment  when  the  selection 
began,  an  explicit  prediction  was  carefully  annexed  to  it  that  it  would  be  expanded 
into  a  grand  broLhorhood  of  the  world.    Abraham,  in  whom  the  special  calling 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  166 

began,  was  the  very  man  to  whom  the  Lord  said,  that  among  his  descendants  there 
should  be  a  "  seed,"  a  certain  wonderful  Son,  in  whom  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
should  be  blessed.  That  mysterious  Shepherd-king  of  the  whole  human  flock  was 
to  have  a  Hebrew  mother  (Gal.  iv.  4),  so  as  to  connect  the  special  preparation  with 
the  universal  blessing  :  but  that  He  might  be  free  of  every  possible  human  restric- 
tion, His  Father  was  to  be  the  Father  of  all  that  Uve.  The  promise  in  Genesis  is  as 
broad  and  as  cathohc  as  the  preaching  in  the  Acts.  2.  Is  there  anything  in  this 
selection  that  justifies  it  ?  Why  does  a  missionary  gather  in  a  score  or  two  of 
children,  out  of  hundreds,  into  a  school,  leaving  the  rest  for  the  time  untaught  ? 
When  a  Christian  merchant  wants  to  benefit  paganism,  why  does  he  choose  out  one 
or  two  native  youths  of  bright  parts  and  send  them  to  England  for  an  education, 
instead  of  scattering  spelling-books  among  the  heathen  houses  ?  When  you  want 
to  introduce  into  a  manufacturing  interest  an  improved  machinery,  why  do  you  send 
a  single  student  to  the  best  engineering  school  instead  of  exhorting  the  agents  and 
masters  of  the  mills  to  improve  themselves  in  that  department  of  science  ?  The 
principle  is  that  of  selection  and  concentration,  for  the  sake  of  a  general  benefit,  and 
such  is  the  nature  of  the  human  mind  and  of  human  society  that  practically  this  is 
the  better  and  shorter  way.  Now,  when  Moses  was  lying  all  unconscious  of  it  in 
the  little  rush-basket  in  the  Nile,  the  great  problem  was  how  to  stop  the  race  from 
going  any  further  wrong,  and  how  to  turn  it  about,  and  get  it  ready  for  the  setting 
up  of  a  Divine  order.  And  this  was  to  be  done  not  by  thrusting  in  of  an  arbitrary 
revolution  which  would  simply  set  the  outward  works  all  right,  but  would  leave  the 
springs  of  spiritual  life — love,  choice,  energy,  faith — all  untouched.  The  thing 
wanted  was  to  bring  in  and  set  up  these  grand  interior  holy  forces  in  the  soul.  God 
took,  therefore,  the  practical  way.  He  chose  out  one  nation,  and  sent  it  to  school 
to  learn  the  prophetic  rudiments  of  Christianity  and  to  make  ready  a  people  pre- 
pared for  the  Lord.  This  is  the  key  to  the  scheme.  Was  not  the  plan  magnificent  ? 
Can  the  best  critic  or  the  shrewdest  objector  suggest  a  wiser  ?  And  when  we  take 
a  view  of  the  whole  Old  Testament  history,  with  all  its  strange  incidents,  its  erring 
heroes,  and  faulty  saints,  intermingled  with  its  splendid  virtues,  its  sublime  loyalty, 
its  eloquence  and  poetry,  and  its  supernatural  prophecies,  is  it  not  a  very  poor  thing 
indeed  to  carp  at  an  unexplained  passage  here  and  there,  or  to  sneer  and  cavil  at 
some  half -veiled  feature  in  the  majestic  working  out  of  the  design  ?  And  all  this 
while  the  original  intention  was  never  forgotten.  When  the  Jew  should  have  been 
drilled  and  taught,  the  Gentiles  would  be  gathered  in.  No  sidereal  motion  in 
astronomy,  no  regularity  in  celestial  cycles  and  orbits  will  be  more  sure  than  the 
rising,  in  the  due  time,  of  the  Epiphany  star — "Alight  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and 
the  glory  of  My  people  Israel."  3.  Another  explanation  to  relieve  the  alleged 
narrowness  of  the  Jewish  religion  is  its  constant  progress  as  it  goes  on.  We  have 
only  to  study  the  Hebrew  prophets  with  this  clue  in  hand,  to  find  ample  demonstra- 
tions that  the  Divine  tuition  they  were  under  was  doing  its  work.  With  the  in- 
tensest  hostility  to  everything  foreign ;  with  an  intolerance  and  superciliousness 
all  the  more  tenacious  because  bound  up  with  their  religious  scruples,  there  was 
ever  a  mighty  hope  of  the  breaking  down  of  all  international  walls,  and  the  gather- 
ing in  of  all  to  an  equal  share  with  themselves  in  the  peace  and  glory  of  the 
Messiah's  dominion.  The  strain  grows  louder  and  more  confident  all  along  :  till, 
in  Malachi,  we  have  it  resounding  in  that  sentence,  to  which  the  famous  saying  of 
the  ^rsat  orator,  where  the  morning  drum-beat  of  the  British  Empire  circles  the 
earth,  is  but  a  feeble  figure  :  "  From  the  rising  of  the  sun,  even  unto  the  going  down 
of  the  same,  My  name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles,"  &c.    II.  Give  a  few 

MOMENTS  TO  A  T3SE  OF  St,  PeTER's  WORDS  WHICH  WILL  BRING  THEM  DOWN  TO  OUR- 
SELVES. "In  every  nation  he  that  feareth  God,"  &c.  1.  The  sense  here  is  not 
theological,  but  popular ;  so  that  they  are  wide  of  the  mark  who  suppose  that  the 
apostle  means  to  take  back  all  that  he  preached  of  every  man's  need  of  repentance 
and  faith.  He  means  this : — In  every  nation,  now  that  Jesus  Christ  has  come, 
there  is  an  equal  access  to  the  open  door  for  every  tongue  and  tribe  and  people. 
The  Pentecostal  signs  mean  nothing  less.  There  are  no  external  disqualifications,''^^ 
and  no  internal  incapabilities  for  being  saved.  "  Fearing  God  and  working  righteous- 
ness "  is  the  ground  of  acceptance,  not  meritoriously,  into  heaven,  but  into  the 
privileges  and  helps  of  the  Church  as  the  school  for  heaven.  Christ  died  for  all. 
The  Church  is  Catholic.  And  while  St.  Peter  spoke,  "  on  the  Gentiles  also  was 
poured  out  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  2.  So  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  Christ  go 
on  constantly  filling  out  our  small  measures  of  charity  and  hope — breaking  up  our  ^ 
petty  judgments,  enlarging  our  sympathies  for  all  classes.     We  have  a  great  jaaajT^p  -^v 


/<■ 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  & 

personal  and  private  limitations.  (1)  The  circle  of  our  own  purely  personal 
interests.  Christ,  by  the  Cross  of  His  sacrifice,  makes  a  constant  remonstrance 
against  these ;  and  unless  we  catch  His  spirit,  and  give  up  self  for  service,  we  can 
be  none  of  His.  (2)  The  circle  of  the  family.  This  is  a  Uttle  wider,  but  often  only 
a  Uttle.  We  may  only  see  ourselves,  and  love  ourselves,  in  our  children.  But  our 
doctrine  requires  us  to  see  whether  our  absorption  in  our  own  domestic  pleasures 
restricts  our  sympathies  for  strangers.  (3)  The  circle  of  our  own  social  set — a  very 
dangerous  as  well  as  subtle  enemy  to  true  spirituality  and  nobleness.  All  the  mutually 
admiring  and  complacent  members  just  reflect  each  other's  prejudices,  study  to 
please  each  other's  whims,  and  so,  of  course,  must  stop  growing  in  all  that  consti- 
tutes greatness  of  heart.  Then  there  is  the  circle  of  business  engagements,  where 
the  slave  of  mercantile  ambition,  or  routine,  sacrifices  home,  church,  and  his  higher 
life  for  the  poverty  that  is  starving  him.  (4)  The  circle  of  patriotic  attachments. 
Scarcely  yet — Christian  as  we  claim  to  be — has  the  idea  of  the  brotherhood  of 
nations  entered  into  the  statesmanship,  much  less  into  the  politics  and  legislation, 
of  even  civilised  man.  3.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  Epiphany  signifies  to  us  a 
mere  sending  out  of  a  few  missionaries  to  foreign  countries.  Done  earnestly  and 
heartily,  that  is  worth  doing,  and,  the  more  we  do  it,  the  more  Christianlike  we 
become.  Men  may  say  they  prefer  to  give  their  missionary  money  nearer 
home,  where  they  see  what  becomes  of  it.  But  remember  that  it  is  by  setting  up 
standards  and  beacons,  Christianising  a  few  here  and  there,  even  when  results 
look  small,  that  a  great  testimony  to  Christ  is  finally  given.  {Bp.  Huntington.) 
■""fie  that  feareth  Him,  and  worketli  righteousness,  is  accepted  with  Him. — Piety 
and  virtue  both  required  by  the  gospel: — ^Keligion  consists  of  two  constituent 
branches— faith  and  practice.  1.  The  fear  of  God,  in  the  most  extensive  sense  of 
it,  denotes  the  whole  of  piety ;  all  those  devout  affections  of  soul,  reverence,  love, 
gratitude,  and  truth ;  and  all  those  external  acts  of  worship,  prayer,  and  praise, 
which  we  are  bound  to  pay  to  the  Supreme  Being.  2.  Kighteousness,  in  its  most 
general  meaning,  signifies  the  whole  of  moral  virtue ;  and  to  do  works  of  this  kind 
is  not  barely  to  abstain  from  acts  of  injustice  and  oppression,  but  to  abound  in 
offices  of  kindness  and  humanity.     L    Piety   without  virtue,   faith   without 

MORALITY,    FALLS    SHORT   OF   THE    CHRISTIAN    CHAEACTER,    AND   WILL    NOT    BB    ACCEPTED 

BY  THE  Supreme  Being.  There  is  no  part  of  religion  more  binding  upon  mankind 
than  justice  and  beneficence.  From  our  situation  in  society,  in  the  midst  of  our 
fellow  creatures,  dependent  on  one  another,  we  are  taught  to  cultivate  humanity 
as  the  most  useful  virtue  in  life.  From  our  Christian  obligations  we  are  bound  to 
practise  universal  benevolence,  not  merely  as  an  ordinary  virtue,  but  as  the  dis- 
tinguishing quality  of  a  true  Christian.  What,  then,  shall  we  think  of  the 
immoral  devotee,  the  man  of  prayers  without  good  works  ?  He  wants  the  most 
godlike  disposition  of  heart,  and  the  most  substantial  virtues  in  life.  He  wants 
the  distinguishing  character  of  a  Christian,  and  an  indispensable  qualification  for 
eternal  glory.  His  devotion  is  either  a  hypocritical  appearance  assumed  to  impose 
upon  the  world,  and  to  serve  his  own  ends;  or  it  is  only  a  transient  glow  of 
devotion  raised  occasionally  in  the  mind,  which,  like  the  morning  cloud  and  the 
early  dew,  soon  passeth  away  ;  or,  which  is  oftener  the  case,  it  is  the  superstitious 
observance  of  a  mistaken  and  corrupted  mind,  which  would  substitute  a  form  of 
godliness  in  place  of  virtue.  True  piety  is  a  principle  which  regenerates  the  heart 
and  reforms  the  hfe.     H.  INIorality  without  piety,  good  works  without  faith, 

A  REGARD  TO  SOCIETY  WITHOUT  THE  FEAB  OF  GOD,  18  EQUALLY  INSUFFICIENT  TO  SALVA- 
TION. There  is  no  sentiment  of  mind  which  is  more  deeply  founded  in  nature  and 
reason  than  a  sense  of  God  and  of  religion.  Devotion  is  no  enthusiastic  rapture. 
It  is  only  the  exercise  of  affections  which  form  a  part  of  our  constitution,  and  are 
essential  to  the  human  mind.  We  are  formed  by  nature  to  admire  what  is  great, 
and  to  love  what  is  good.  You  treat  great  men  with  marks  of  respect.  And  is  no 
reverence  due  to  the  greatest  of  all  beings,  to  the  King  of  kings,  and  the  Lord  of 
lords  ?  You  profess  esteem  for  worthy  characters,  and  have  you  no  regard  to  the 
infinite  perfections  of  the  Divine  nature?  To  remain  unmoved  at  the  view  of 
infinite  goodness  implies  the  utmost  degree  of  corruption.  Such  a  person  must, 
indeed,  be  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  Depravity  of  heart,  however,  is  not  the 
only  crime  of  the  mere  moralist,  the  man  of  good  works,  without  faith.  His 
discharge  of  the  moral  duties,  upon  which  he  values  himself,  must  be  exceedingly 
defective.  A  sense  of  what  is  right,  a  regard  to  honour,  and  the  instinct  of 
benevolence,  may  work  upon  men's  minds,  and  engage  them  to  do  many  good 
aciious.    But  those  natural  principlts  are  too  weak  to  resist  the  force  of  corrupt 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  167 

passions.    Such  is  our  propensity  to  vice,  and  so  n?imerous  the  temptations  to  sin, 
that  far  stronger  restraints  are  necessary.    Accordingly,  the  man  of  mere  morality 
is  always  inconsistent  in  character.     If  it  be  fair  on  one  side  it  is  strained  on  the 
other.    Though  he  practise  some  virtues  which  deserve  to  be  applauded,  he  ia 
guilty,  at  the  same  time,  of  vices  which  tarnish  his  reputation;  and  thus,  while  he 
is  confessedly  devoid  of  piety  to  God,  he  is  defective  in  justice  and  charity  to  men. 
III.  The  sufficiency  when  united.     The  union  of  these  amiable  qualities  forms 
the  character,  not  only  of  the  respectable  man,  but  of  the  true  Christian.    Fear 
God,  and  keep  His  commandments,  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man.    The  true 
Christian,  the  man  who  fears  God,  and  works  righteousness,  is  not  merely  entitled 
to  acceptance  through  Christ.     He  is  also  qualified  for  the  enjoyment  of  future 
glory.    His  charity  joins  him  to  man ;  his  piety  unites  him  to  God.      {A.  Donnan.) 
Acceptance  of  God: — There  is  no  argument  here  in  favour  of  heathenism — it  is  rather 
an  argument  in  favour  of  Judaism.  Cornelius's  character  was  not  the  result  of  classic 
culture,  but  of  classic  culture  supplemented  by  Divine  revelation.  Secicg,  then,  that 
he  was  accepted  of  God  before  his  conversion,  why  not  let  him  and  others  like  him 
alone  ?    Simply  because  they  cannot  let  themselves  alone.    They  are  still  conscious 
of  a  painful  void  in  the  heart,  which  only  God  in  Christ  can  fill.     To  be  "  accepted 
of  God  "  is  not  the  only  desire  of  the  heart ;  man  wants  to  be  perfected.     Judaism 
would  enable  a  man  to  be  accepted ;  but  it  could  not  "  make  the  comers  thereto 
perfect."     "For  the  law  made  nothing  perfect,  but  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope 
did."     This,  then,  is  the  reason  why  Cornelius  needed  the  gospel — the  gospel  alone 
could  fill  the  desires  of  his  heart  and  perfect  him  in  goodness.    And  what  aspect  of 
the  gospel  did  Peter  present  to  him  ?    First,  that  God  in  Christ  came  to  seek  man, 
to  do  him  good.     In  this  Christianity  differed  from  all  the  heathen  religions.    The 
latter  always  represent  man  seeking  God  but  never  finding.     One  of  their  own 
writers  was  at  last  obliged  to  exclaim — "  Man  cannot  find  God,  God  must  therefore 
find  man."    Bead  the  Bible  and  you  discern  in  every  page,  not  man  seeking  God,  but 
God  seeking  man.  But  Peter  not  only  spoke  of  the  Saviour's  life,  he  dwelt  also  upon 
His  death.     Other  religions  declared  what  man  ought  to  do  for  God  ;  this  religion 
declares  what  God  has  done  for  man.     The  preaching  of  the  gospel  thus  tended  to 
revolutionise  the  world.     The  world,  so  to  speak,  is  thrown  off  its  centre.     In 
ancient  astronomy  the  sun  revolved  around  the  earth  :  in  modern  astronomy  the 
earth  revolves  around  the  sun.     We  see  a  corresponding  change  in  the  science  of 
religion.     Compare  the  end  of  the  chapter  with  the  beginning.   The  beginning  tells 
us  what  Cornelius  did  for  God — he  prayed,  he  fasted,  he  gave  alms : — that  is  the 
groundwork  of  all  ancient  rehgions.   The  end  tells  us  what  God  did  for  Cornelius — 
He  sent  His  Son  Jesus  to  Uve  and  die, "  that  through  His  name  whosoever  believeth 
in  Him  should  receive  remission  of  sins  "  :  that  is  the  groundwork  of  the  Christian 
faith,     (J.  Cynddi/lan  Jones,  D.D.)         The  glorious  doctrines  : — I.  The  absolute 
iMPAKTiAiiiTY  OF  GoD-     The  words  "  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons  " — 1.  Do  not 
teach — (1)  That  God  pays  no  regard  to  men.     The  deist  would  have  us  believe 
this ;  reason,  consciousness,  analogy,  and  the  Bible,  however,  refute  it.     (2)  That 
God  looks  upon  men  indiscriminately — regards  them  merely  in  the  mass.     No  ;  He 
looks  on  each  individually.  (3)  "  That  God  bestows  blessings  on  some  which  He  denies 
to  others  ?  although  this  is  true,  for  He  has  given  to  each  some  distinguishing 
blessing  of  mind,  body,  or  estate.     2.  They  do  teach  that  God  does  not  respect 
persons — (1)  In  the  same  sense  that  man  does.     Man's  respect  for  persons  is — (a) 
Very  hmited.     How  little  man  knows  of  his  race,     God  knows  the  millions.     (6) 
Very  superficial,  whereas  God  looks  at  the  heart,     (c)  Selfish,  whereas  God's  is 
beneficent,     (d)  Popular.     Man  respects  those  whom  the  multitudes  applaud,     (e) 
Adventitious.    It  is  because  of  what  man  has  rather  than  what  be  is.     (2)  In  the 
sense  of  disturbing  for  any  the  settled  conditions  of  happiness.     The  conditions  of 
physical,  mental,  and  moral  health  are  the  same  to  all.   (3)  In  the  sense  of  hmiting 
His  salvation  to  any  particular  class.     This  is  what  the  apostle  means  here.   God's 
provisions  of  mercy  are  for  the  world,     (a)  The  merits  of  the  atonement  are  suffi- 
cient for  all.     (6)  The  force  of  moral  motive  is  adapted  to  all.     (c)  The  agency  of 
the  Spirit  is  available  to  all.     II.  The  necessary  element  of  moral  goodness. 
"  He  that  feareth  God,"  &c.     1.  The  fear  here,  of  course,  is  not  the  servile,  but  the 
filial ;  it  is  the  fear  of  a  love  which  casts  out  all  slavish  f eehng.  The  word  stands  here, 
as  elsewhere,  to  represent  that  state  of  mind  which  God  requires  from  every  man. 
It  is  a  fear  that  worketh  righteousness.     It  must  be  of  such  a  character  as  inspires 
and  secures  right  conduct  in  relation  to  God,  man,  find  the  universe.     There  is  a 
lear  toward  God  that  worketh  nothing.    It  just  touches  the  soul  occasionally  and 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  x, 

goes  off  in  a  sigh.  There  is  a  fear  that  worketh  wrong — a  superstitions  feeling  that 
leads  to  an  unnatural  and  intolerant  life.  The  fear  that  worketh  right  is  alone  the 
genuine  thing  ;  it  is  the  essence  of  moral  goodness.  2.  This  is  that  in  a  man  which 
God  respects  and  accepts  wherever  found.  He  does  not  accept  a  man  because  of 
his  birth,  country,  or  particular  form  of  worship,  or  because  of  his  Judaism,  Gen- 
tnism,  or  Christianity.  He  that  is  right,  whether  he  be  a  Socrates  or  a  Paul,  a 
Cornelius  or  a  Peter,  is  accepted  of  Him.  The  Bible  is  full  of  this  tiMth  (2  Kings 
xxii.  19 ;  Psa.  xxxiv.  18,  lii.  15-19  ;  Deut.  x.  12  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  22  ;  Hos.  vi.  6  ;  Micah 
vi.  8;  Matt.  v.  8).  III.  The  mbdiatorship  of  Chbist  (ver.  36).  The  Word,  i.e., 
gospel,  is  God's  instrument  to  generate  this  rectitude  of  soul.  Peter  shows  that 
Christ's  mission — 1.  Was  Divine  in  its  origin.  2.  Was  redemptive  in  its  purpose. 
3.  Was  universal  in  its  aspect.  4.  Involved  His  death  on  the  Cross,  and  His  resur- 
rection from  the  dead.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  God's  plan,  and  our  part  in  it : — To 
study  the  unfolding  of  the  Divine  plan  is  one  of  the  greatest  occupations  that  can 
engage  the  mind  of  man.  It  engages  the  student  of  nature.  It  is  the  pursuit  of 
the  devout  historian,  to  whom  the  track  of  human  history  appears  spread  out  as  a 
river  from  its  source  to  its  mouth.  It  is  above  all  the  study  of  the  Christian,  who, 
Bible  in  hand,  loves  to  muse  on  that  wonderful  development  of  the  Divine  plan 
which,  through  page  on  page  of  psalm,  and  prophecy,  and  history,  has  wrought  out 
the  wealth  of  meaning  that  lay  enshrined  in  that  earliest  promise  given  to  man 
between  his  fall  and  his  expulsion  from  the  gate  of  Paradise.  The  chapter  from 
which  our  text  is  taken  possesses  extreme  interest  because  it  records  a  marked 
stage  in  the  development  of  the  Divine  plan.  I.  The  Divine  plan  is  coincident 
WITH  HUMAN  NEED.  "  While  Peter  thought  on  the  vision,  the  Spirit  said  unto  him, 
Behold,  three  men  seek  thee,  arise,  get  thee  down,  and  go  with  them."  The  point 
to  notice  is  that  these  three  men  were  representatives  of  the  great  heathen  world — 
i.e.,  they  were  not  acquainted  with  what  is  known  as  revealed  religion.  One  was  a 
devout  soldier,  the  other  two  were  household  servants  of  a  Koman  officer,  who  com- 
manded one  of  the  choicest  regiments  in  the  Eoman  army.  We  are  thus  confronted 
with  the  whole  question  of  the  heathen  needs.  There  are  men  whose  goodness  is 
unquestionable  who  reason  thus,  "The  gospel  is  the  ordained  means  of  salvation 
and  the  only  means ;  now  it  is  clear  that  the  heathen,  having  never  heard  the 
gospel,  cannot  believe  it,  therefore  they  cannot  be  saved."  Now,  this  hne  of  reasoning 
cannot  be  true.  Even  if  it  were  argued  as  consistent  with  God's  justice,  it  could 
not  be  shown  to  be  consistent  with  His  pitiful  goodness,  to  condemn  them  to  suffer 
for  the  ages  of  the  ages,  if  there  were  no  way  of  salvation  for  them  but  the  holding 
of  definite  convictions  about  the  person  and  work  of  One  who  had  never  been  re- 
vealed to  them.  1.  Nationality  is  of  no  account  to  God.  The  Jew  thought  that 
salvation  was  for  him  alone.  2.  It  is  also  clear  that  God  deals  with  men  according 
to  their  light.  Our  Lord  drew  a  clear  distinction  between  the  servants  that  knew 
and  those  that  knew  not  their  Lord's  will.  3.  It  is  also  clear  that  God  can  give 
credit  for  the  quality  of  man's  moral  attitude.  After,  on  one  occasion,  upbraiding 
the  cities  in  which  His  mighty  works  had  been  done,  our  Lord  went  on  to  say,  "  If 
the  mighty  works  done  in  you  had  been  done  in  Tyre  and  Sidon,  they  would  have 
repented  long  ago  in  sackcloth  and  ashes."  He  here  tells  us  what  would  have  been. 
Now,  this  intimate  knowledge  of  the  moral  condition  of  man,  of  the  quality  of  the 
Boul,  and  of  the  way  in  which  it  would  act,  is  an  essential  qualification  of  the  Judge 
of  all  men.  It  enables  Him  to  deal  not  with  the  results  or  manifestation  of 
character,  but  with  its  essence.  I  go  into  the  market,  and  on  a  barrow  I  see  some 
spring  flowers.  An  experienced  friend  says,  "Buy  them."  On  inquiring  I  find  the 
price  enormous.  "  What !  "  I  whisper  to  my  friend,  "  Are  they  worth  so  much  ?  " 
"  Yes,"  he  replies,  "  if  .vou  plant  them  in  your  hothouse,  or  beneath  a  sunny  wall, 
they  will  bloom  and  fruit  thus  and  thus."  His  knowledge  of  what  they  may  do 
nnder  certain  conditions  justifies  me  in  buying  the  unsightly  bulbs  at  an  extravagant 
figure.  Now,  it  is  so  that  our  Lord  deals  with  men.  He  thinks,  not  so  much  of 
their  creed,  or  even  of  their  actions,  but  of  their  moral  nature,  and  of  what  they 
may  or  might  become,  if  favoured  by  certain  soil,  and  sun,  and  rain.  And  if  in  the 
twilight  of  heathenism  the  soul  has  yet  attained  but  a  sickly  growth,  the  Lord  will 
still  set  a  high  value  on  it,  and  if  He  sees  that  in  the  full  light  of  the  gospel  it 
would  have  equalled  the  moral  nature  of  the  best.  He  will  put  it  on  a  level  with 
them.  We  cannot  too  much  insist  on  this,  that  our  Master  knows  the  moral  nature 
of  each,  and  what  it  would  do  under  more  favourable  circumstances,  and  He  judges 
us  not  by  what  we  say  or  do,  but  by  what  we  are.  He  knows  low  much  of  our 
failure  to  put  to  the  credit  of  ignorance,  and  how  much  to  the  essential  s 'cupidity 


«HAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS,  169 

and  stubbornness  of  our  hearts.  4.  It  is  also  clear  that  God  has  not  left  Himself 
or  His  truth  without  witness  in  the  heathen  world.  5.  It  is  also  clear  that  no  man 
is  saved  apart  from  the  death  of  Christ.  6.  It  is  clear  also  that  the  acceptance  of 
men,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  is  only  possible  to  faith.  7.  But  if  this  be  the  case 
with  the  heathen,  why  send  them  the  gospel  ?  For  two  reasons.  First,  because 
what  they  have  cannot  satisfy  the  noblest  spirits.  Cornelius  is  said  to  have  prayed 
to  God  alway.  For  what  did  he  pray?  Evidently  for  what  he  bad  not  got,  for 
light  and  grace  and  power,  for  the  fulness  of  God's  salvation.  Outside  of  Christ 
there  is  no  certain  knowledge  of  the  love  of  God,  of  forgiveness  of  sin,  or  of  eternal 
life  ;  the  heathen  can  only  guess  at  the  best ;  he  longs  to  know  that  God  is  love,  that 
sin  may  be  forgiven,  and  that  there  is  a  future  life.  And  for  further  light  and  teaching 
on  these  momentous  subjects,  the  heathen  world  sends  its  representatives  to  knock 
at  the  door  of  the  Christian  Church.  But  there  is  a  yet  more  imperious  demand 
which  sends  them  there,  referred  to  in  the  expression,  "  Words  by  which  thou  shalt 
be  saved."  Great  as  is  the  yearning  to  know,  there  is  a  stiU  stronger  one  to  be. 
The  one  demand  of  the  noblest  souls  was  for  power — power  to  salvation,  power  to 
resist  sin,  power  to  fulfil  the  noblest  yearnings  of  the  soul.  And  this  is  the  burden 
of  our  message  to  the  heathen  to-day.  We  do  not  deny  to  them  visions  of  God, 
intuitions  of  truth,  lofty  unselfishness,  moraUty,  prayer ;  but  we  afiirm  that  they 
lack  power,  power  unto  salvation.  But,  secondly,  the  heathen  for  the  most  part  are 
not  represented  by  Cornelius.  They  have  not  faith.  They  do  not  live  up  to  their 
light.  They  fail  to  do  justly,  love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  God.  They  do 
not  fear  God  and  work  righteousness.  They  are  sunk  in  sin,  from  which  they  show 
no  inclination  to  arouse  themselves.  In  this  case  they  have  to  be  saved  from  the 
results  of  their  own  evil  choice.  They  must  be  awakened,  convicted  of  sin,  led  to 
repentance.  There  is  no  doubt,  therefore,  as  to  the  need  of  man,  and  we  adore  the 
grace  of  God  that  His  plan  has  been  coincident  with  it.  It  is  always  so.  Nature  and 
Providence  work  as  a  double  hinge.  The  fish  do  not  seek  insects  in  the  summer 
afternoon,  which  do  not  flutter  over  the  silver  surface  of  the  pool.  Birds  do  mot 
seek  for  fruits  and  berries  which  are  not  strewn  through  the  woodlands.  II.  The 
Divine  plak  can  only  be  wrought  out  through  human  co-operation.  In  each 
stage  of  its  unfolding  it  has  been  so.  WTien  from  amid  the  recreant  race  of  man 
God  was  desirous  to  select  one  family  to  become  the  depository  of  the  sacred  trust. 
He  called  Abraham  from  kindred  and  country,  and  prepared  him  by  special  trials 
for  his  high  commission.  When  the  progress  of  the  Divine  purpose  seemed  to  be 
arrested  by  the  captivity  in  Egypt,  He  took  up  the  broken  thread  in  Moses,  the 
faithful  servant.  And  at  each  successive  crisis  there  was  a  David  or  a  Hezekiah, 
an  Ezra  or  a  Nehemiah  to  carry  it  forward ;  as  in  the  torch-bearing  of  the  old 
Greek  games.  And  thus  it  has  been  in  aU  subsequent  ages,  as  the  plan  of  God  has 
taken  some  new  phase  there  has  ever  been  a  Paul,  an  Augustine,  a  Luther,  a  Wesley, 
a  Carey,  through  whom  it  has  wrought.  By  men  the  will  of  God  has  been  done  on 
earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  This  is  the  one  passionate  yearning  of  all  true  hearts,  to 
know  whether  they  are  carrying  out  God's  plan.  There  is  plenty  of  work  which  is 
being  done  in  the  world  which  is  abortive.  Great  beginnings,  poor  endings.  This 
line  of  thought  suggests  some  very  serious  reflections.  It  is  clear  that  God's  plan 
is  not  as  yet  realised.  And  what  sort  of  men  are  they  through  whom  He  will  work  ? 
Ah,  Peter  shall  furnish  the  illustration.  There  was  plenty  of  human  nature  about 
him.  But  with  all  the  peculiar  idiosyncrasies  that  marked  this  foundation-stone 
from  all  the  rest  in  the  foundations  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  there  was  that  devotion 
to  the  Lord  and  Saviour,  that  love  for  prayer,  that  openness  of  heart  to  the  Divine 
Spirit,  that  willingness  to  obey,  that  absence  of  assumption,  which  lifted  the  pros- 
trate soldier  to  his  feet  with  the  words,  "  Stand  up,  I  also  am  a  man  " ;  which  are 
the  prime  notes  of  any  soul  to  whom  God  will  reveal  His  purpose,  and  by  whom  He 
wUl  effect  it.  Is  this  thy  state  of  heart  ?  Then  wait  at  Joppa,  however  obscure 
the  place,  and  tiresome  the  delay.  Nourish  thy  heart  with  prayer  and  meditation. 
Dare  to  wait  though  all  men  bid  thee  begone.  If  the  vision  tarry,  wait  for  it.  III. 
The  evolution  of  the  Divine  plan  is  always  accompanied  by  the  outpouring 
OF  THE  Holy  Ghost.  Plan  and  power  always  go  together.  "  While  Peter  yet  spake 
these  words,  the  Holy  Ghost  feU  on  all  them  that  heard  the  word."  There  is  no 
need  to  expatiate  on  our  need  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  need  is  twofold,  first  as 
respects  His  influence  on  the  worker,  then  as  respects  His  co-operation  in  the  work. 
Tbere  is  a  mysterious  sometbing  in  the  worker  who  is  endued  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  you  can  neither  define  nor  imitate.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  individual  not 
overlooked  in  the  mass : — This  is  not  an  answer  to  the  question,  Are  there  few  that 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  x. 


be  saved  ?  It  only  states  the  conditions  of  being  acceptable  to  God.  This  is  not  » 
Baying  which  the  profane  and  prayerless  may  take  comfort  in,  for  it  speaks  of  the 
acceptance  only  of  those  who  are  reverent  toward  God.  It  is  not  a  message  of  peace 
to  any  who  are  selfish,  unjust,  or  immoral,  but  to  those  only  who  work  righteous- 
ness toward  their  fellow-men.  It  does  not  say  there  is  no  difference  between 
rehgions ;  that  Christianity  and  the  worship  of  heathen  temples  are  just  alike  in 
the  sight  of  God.  It  simply  says  that  God  is  indifferent  to  national  lines,  and 
accepts  an  obedient  heart  and  life  in  one  nation  as  readily  as  in  another.  It  does 
not  foUow  that  men  are  just  as  likely  to  be  devout  and  righteous  in  one  land  as  in 
another.  Bace,  training,  associations,  occupation,  do  influence  character.  God 
never  overlooks  the  individual  in  the  mass  of  which  he  is  a  part.  God  regards 
biography  more  than  history.  If  your  son  or  daughter  has  gone  to  some  new 
region  or  strange  city,  you  are  more  concerned  in  your  child's  welfare  than  in  the 
history  of  the  place.  General  and  individual  forces  appear  everywhere  inlerworking 
in  human  life,  yet  can  be  broadly  distinguished  everywhere.  History  occupies 
itself  with  general  movements  under  the  impulse  of  physical  conditions,  or  tides  of 
public  feeling.  Biography  is  concerned  with  the  development  of  individual 
character  in  the  midst  of  these  general  forces.  History  is  vaster  than  biography. 
Social  hfe  makes  individuals  part  of  an  organisation.  History  is  more  and  other 
than  the  sum  of  the  Uves  of  its  actors,  as  a  twisted  rope  has  more  strength  than  the 
sum  of  its  strands.  History  is  vaster  than  biography.  Yet  on  the  other  hand  we 
cannot  explain  the  character  and  lives  of  individual  men  and  women  by  the  social 
and  physical  conditions  into  which  they  are  born  and  among  which  they  develop. 
In  the  later  centuries,  at  least,  race  has  been  a  stronger  element  than  climate  in 
determining  the  course  and  development  of  history,  the  English  stock  showing  its 
superior  vigour  in  all  the  zones,  though  not,  it  must  be  confessed,  in  all  the  arts. 
The  superiority  of  race  to  physical  conditions  is  not,  however,  the  highest  point  of 
man's  dignity.  Peter  saw  a  more  glorious  sunlit  summit  of  truth  when  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  poured  out  upon  the  family  of  the  Gentile  Cornelius.  He  saw  that  the 
individual  is  more  even  than  race  and  environment,  more  than  the  fated  develop- 
ment of  inherited  characteristics  under  the  influence  of  these  or  those  external  condi- 
tions. Each  soul  is  a  living  unit,  responsible  to  God  and  under  God's  particular 
regard.  Bace,  climate,  and  the  movements  of  surrounding  life  affect  every  indi- 
vidual. Yet  is  the  individual  supreme.  Shall  Joseph  because  he  is  in  Egypt  say. 
It  avails  nothing'  to  worship  the  God  of  my  fathers  in  this  strange  land  ?  If  Joseph 
had  taken  the  colour  of  his  surroundings,  where  had  been  his  honour  as  the  de- 
liverer of  his  people,  and  who  had  saved  Egypt  from  the  famine  ?  If  Moses  had 
become  a  courtier  in  Pharaoh's  court,  or  a  hermit  in  Arabia,  who  had  led  Israel  out 
of  Egypt  ?  That  God  is  thus  a  Father  and  never  overlooks  the  individual  in  the 
mass,  is  a  truth  of  the  greatest  practical  importance  to  us.  God  never  uses  men 
as  a  chess  player  does  his  pawns — to  win  a  victory  for  himself  without  regard  to  the 
pieces  used.  The  chess  player  moves  his  pieces  here  or  there  for  the  sake  of  the 
game.  God  rules  and  overrules  the  aiiairs  of  history  for  the  sake  of  individuals. 
The  earth  was  made  for  man.  Institutions,  as  the  family  government,  and  the 
like,  have  been  established  of  God,  not  for  their  own  sake  but  for  their  share  in 
promoting  the  welfare  of  individuals.  No  individual  need  ever  be  in  despair  because 
the  drift  of  life  about  him  is  toward  evil  and  the  multitudes  are  swept  on  by  the 
current  toward  ruin.  Fear  God  and  work  righteousness,  and  you  shall  be  accep- 
table to  God.  The  evil  drift  of  life  about  us  is  never  a  sufficient  excuse  for  evil 
living  or  neglect  of  Christian  duty  on  our  part.  We  may  not  be  responsible  for  the 
general  tendency  of  life  in  our  time  or  community,  but  we  are  responsible  for  the 
way  we  individually  behave  in  the  current.  The  ship-master  must  sail  for  his  port 
whichever  way  the  currents  run.  The  more  adverse  the  currents,  the  more  reso- 
lutely must  he  hold  the  helm.  The  chance  for  a  Cornelius  to  be  acceptable  to  God, 
while  in  the  brutal  army  of  Bome,  lay  in  the  individual  power  to  be  different  from 
his  surroundings.  It  does  not  signify  much  in  respect  to  individual  character  to  be 
swept  along  in  general  movements,  whether  of  religious  fervour,  of  temperance 
enthusiasm,  or  of  patriotic  zeal.  What  most  signifies  both  in  manifesting  and 
developing  character,  is  the  individual  movement  apart  from  that  which  is  general. 
We  are  of  such  high  estate  in  God's  image  that  every  individual  can  be  more  than 
his  surroundings.  It  is  just  in  such  times  that  righteousness  most  shines  out  in 
costrast  with  evil-doing,  and  the  strength  of  reverent  faith  grows  stronger  by  the 
very  lack  of  anything  short  of  God  to  cling  to.  The  hope  of  religion  in  the  world, 
the  hope  of  every  reform  and  of  all  progress,  lies  in  the  superiority  of  the  indi vidua?" 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  171 

Bonl  to  its  surroundings,  in  the  vital  power  of  individual  character.  If  men  must 
be  formed  by  their  surroundings,  no  generation  could  ever  break  away  from  the 
corruptions  of  the  past.  But  men  are  individual  centres  of  power.  So  you  and  I 
are  called  to  fear  God  and  work  righteousness,  whether  others  hear  the  Divine  call 
or  forbear.  We  may  make  our  own  calUng  and  election  sure,  and  we  may  by  God's 
blessing  turn  the  current  of  the  time  to  piety  and  righteousness.  (W.  E.  C, 
Wright.) 

Vers.  36,  37.  The  Word  which  God  sent  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  preaching 
peace  by  Jesus  Christ. — St.  Peter  at  Gasarea  to  a  Gentile  company : — 1.  Christ 
gave  to  Peter  "  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  " — not  keys  of  heaven,  not  keys 
of  the  Church,  militant  or  triumphant,  but  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth. 
St.  Peter  used  one  at  Jerusalem  to  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  the  Jews  ;  a 
second  at  Samaria,  to  open  it  to  the  Samaritans  ;  a  third  at  Caesarea,  to  open  it  to 
the  Gentiles.  We  know  that  the  Lord  designed  Saul  to  be  His  apostle  to  the 
Gentiles,  but  there  was  obvious  advantage  in  the  employment  of  Peter  to  open  the 
door.  He  was  known  to  all  as  a  strict  Jew ;  and  if  he  was  satisfied  of  the  extension 
of  God's  grace  to  the  Gentiles,  that  would  go  far  to  abate  the  prejudice  of  the 
Hebrew  Christians.  2.  At  Ctesarea  Peter  did  not  make  the  occasion  for  his  speech. 
It  was  made  for  him  by  Jesus,  who  was  now  directing  from  heaven  the  activities  of 
His  servants  in  the  foundation  and  extension  of  the  Church.  3.  At  Jerusalem  the 
apostle  began  by  removing  a  misconception  from  the  minds  of  those  whom  he 
addressed  ;  at  Csesarea  he  acknowledged  the  removal  of  a  misconception  from  his 
own  mind.  The  definiteness  and  decision  which  marked  his  address  were  admir- 
ably suited  to  a  military  audience.  He  also  showed  both  tact  and  fairness  in 
putting  his  statements  on  ground  which  was  common  to  aU.  At  Jerusalem  he  had 
spoken  to  Jews,  and  therefore  rested  on  the  ground  of  the  Old  Testament.  But  at 
Cfesarea,  though  Cornelius  was  doubtless  acquainted  with  the  Septuagint,  the 
ancient  Scriptures  were  not  to  Gentiles  what  they  were  to  Jews.  Such  adaptation 
is  in  harmony  with  common  sense,  and  must  be  practised  if  justice  is  to  be  done  to 
religious  truth.  To  missionaries  it  is  indispensable.  A  missionary  to  the  Jews 
must  reason  from  Moses  land  the  prophets.  But  to  the  GentUes  it  is  not  of  much 
consequence  to  learn  how  the  gospel  is  related  to  "  Moses'  law."  What  they  need 
is  to  hear  of  One  who  has  come  "  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,"  and  to  transfer 
men  "from  darkness  into  marvellous  light."  This  principle  of  adaptation  shows 
itself  clearly  in  Peter's   train  of  thought.     His  speech  was — I.  A  eehearsal  of 

FACTS    OF   WHICH    THE    AUDIENCE    WAS    ALREADY    COGNISANT    (VCIS.    36-39).        ThoUgh 

Jesus  had  never  visited  Caesarea,  its  inhabitants  could  not  be  unaware  of  the  facts 
of  His  life  and  death.  The  fact  that  He  had  been  accused  before  Pilate  of  high 
treason,  and  had  been  crucified  as  King  of  the  Jews,  must  have  attracted  the  notice 
of  military  men.  St.  Peter  affirmed  that  this  Jesus  was  no  revolutionary  agitator, 
but  a  preacher  of  good  tidings  of  peace ;  though,  as  the  apostle  happily  observed  in 
a  parenthesis.  He  was  Lord,  not  of  Israel  only,  but  of  all  mankind.  He  did  not 
touch  the  imperial  rights  of  Caesar,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  He  was  far  above  all 
the  Caesars.  The  word  and  authority  of  Jesus  had  been  attested  by  good  deeds  and 
works  of  healing  ;  and  these  again  were  accounted  for  on  this  ground — that  God, 
-who  had  sent  Him,  was  with  Him,  and  anointed  Him  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and 
with  power.  If  there  was  any  hesitation  to  believe  this,  Simon  Peter  and  his 
companions  were  ready  with  personal  testimony  ;  and  although  the  speech  was  not 
interrupted  by  any  question,  we  can  well  suppose  that  in  the  "  certain  days  "  which 
he  spent  at  Caesarea,  St.  Peter  told  many  an  incident  which  his  own  eyes  had  seen 
in  his  Master's  career.  Such  a  Prophet,  such  a  Healer,  the  Jews  had  slain.  The 
fact  was  already  known,  but  the  apostle  saw  fit  to  lay  emphasis  on  the  entire 
innocence  of  Jesus.  He  did  so  in  order  to  remove  any  impression  which  may  have 
lurked  in  the  minds  of  an  Italian  officer  that  One  whom  the  Boman  goveri^or  had 
sentenced  must  have  in  some  measure  deserved  His  fate.     H.  The  announcement 

OF  A  NEW    FACT,    WHICH    CHANGED    THE   WHOLE    ASPECT   OF  THE    CASE    (vcrS.   40,   41). 

God  had  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day.  No  allusion  to  the 
16th  or  118th  Psalm  meets  us  here.  Quotations  from  these  were  for  a  Jewish,  not 
a  Gentile,  audience.  What  they  cared  for  was  sufficient  proof ;  and  the  apostle 
adduced  the  proof  with  an  exactness  admirably  suited  to  the  occasion.  He  said, 
not  that  his  Master  was  seen  to  rise,  but  that  He  was  seen  after  He  had  risen  ;  not 
that  He  was  seen  by  as  many  as  saw  Him  crucified — for  the  Christ-rejecting  Jews 
were  to  see  Him  no  more — but  that  He  was  seen  by  duly  qualified  witnesses,  chosen 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  S. 

by  God.  And  in  what  way  can  any  historical  fact  of  an  unasual  nature  be  more 
sufficiently  proved  ?  If  any  allege  that  not  even  God  can  raise  the  dead,  we  have 
no  argument  with  them  here.  But  grant  that  the  thing  is  possible  with  God,  and 
then  say  what  conditions  of  evidence  would  satisfy  the  mind.  All  mankind  could 
not  be  present,  so  that  it  is  a  question  of  sufficient  evidence.  Now,  in  regard  to 
Christ's  resurrection,  note  that — 1.  The  witnesses  were  sufficiently  numerous — 
men  and  women,  apostles  and  less  prominent  disciples  ;  one  at  a  time,  then  two, 
then  eleven,  then  seven,  then  "  five  hundred  brethren  at  once."  2,  They  were  of 
unblemished  character.  The  rulers  despised  them  as  unlearned,  but  could  never 
prove  deceit.  One  of  them,  James,  was  honoured  of  all  classes  in  Jerusalem  as 
"  the  Just."  3.  They  were  Christ's  close  companions,  and  could  not  have  mistaken 
any  other  for  Him.  4.  They  had  ample  opportunity  to  identify  Him  ;  for  they  not 
only  saw  and  heard  Him,  but  "  did  eat  and  drink  with  Him  after  He  rose  from  the 
dead."  5.  They  told  the  story  from  the  beginning,  and  at  the  greatest  possible 
risk  to  themselves.  They  laid  on  it  at  once  the  whole  weight  of  the  cause  wluch 
they  maintained  ;  if  it  was  a  he  or  an  illusion,  the  Church  would  fail.  6.  They 
adhered  to  it  till  their  last  breath ;  and  not  one  of  them  could  be  induced  to  modify 
the  statement  that  the  Lord  had  risen.  IH.  A  statement  of  the  poweb  and 
GLOBY  of  the  bisen  Jesus  (vers.  42,  43).  1.  "  This  is  He  who  is  ordained  of  God 
to  be  Judge  of  the  living  and  the  dead."  St.  Peter  had  touched  on  this  at 
Jerusalem,  when  he  spoke  of  the  "  time  of  restitution  of  all  things,"  addressing 
Jews,  and  confining  himself  to  the  sphere  of  Jewish  expectation.  But  now  he 
stated  it  in  the  way  most  suited  to  impress  Gentiles.  There  was  a  special  fitness 
in  the  first  announcement  of  this  to  Gentiles  being  made  to  a  Eoman  officer.  The 
Bomans  were  men  of  the  sword,  the  sceptre,  and  the  judgment-seat.  The  Emperor 
was  looked  up  to  by  the  world  as  lord  of  all.  And  he,  too,  was  judge  of  aU,  for 
appeals  went  up  from  all  regions  of  the  known  world  to  the  supreme  throne  of 
judgment  at  Rome.  The  apostle  Peter  had  a  startling  statement  to  make  to  those 
men,  which  involved  no  treason  against  Caesar,  and  yet  made  the  Emperor's  glory 
pale.  2.  "  Through  His  name  every  one  that  believeth  on  Him  shall  receive 
remission  of  sins."  This  came  in  well  after  tbe  previous  announcement.  He  who 
will  be  the  Judge  is  now  the  Saviour.  To  this  truth  St.  Peter  said  that  all  the 
prophets  were  bearing  witness.  Not  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament,  which 
would  have  no  significance  for  Eoman  soldiers,  but  prophets  of  the  new  age,  as 
foretold  in  the  ancient  oracle  of  Joel  (see  chap.  xi.  27,  xiii.  1),  As  in  music  one 
does  well  to  end  on  a  full  clear  note,  so  the  apostle  did  well  to  close  with  this 
abundant  testimony  to  the  blessing  of  forgiveness  through  Jesus  Christ.  Good 
news  to  the  Gentiles  I  It  was  such  an  assurance  as  none  of  their  prophets,  priests, 
or  philosophers  could  give.  And  then  this  blessing  was  to  be  obtained  on  so  simple 
a  plan  as  faith  in  His  name.  He  had  not  time  to  call  on  them  to  believe,  for  he  was 
gloriously  interrupted  in  his  address.  Soon  as  the  good  tidings  of  pardon  fell  from 
his  lips,  the  audience  was  suffused  with  spiritual  tenderness — "  The  Holy  Ghost 
fell  on  all  of  them."  Mark  what  power  resides  in  one  short,  clear  sermon  on  Jesus 
Christ,  when  God  has  prepared  both  preacher  and  congregation.  A  hearty,  straight- 
forward preacher,  brethren  with  him  who  are  in  prayerful  sympathy,  and  an 
audience  penetrated  by  the  feeling  that  they  are  all  assembled  "  before  God" — what 
may  not  such  a  combination  secure  1  That  day  was  the  Pentecost  of  the  Gentiles. 
It  is  inaccurate  to  pray  for  another  Pentecost,  because  the  dispensation  of  the 
Spirit  cannot  begin  again.  But  it  is  a  constant  duty  to  pray  that  the  Spirit  may 
continue  to  demonstrate  to  the  hearts  of  men  that  word  of  salvation  which  is 
preached.  (D.  Frascr,  D.D.)  The  Messiahship  of  Jesus  : — Peter  places  foremost 
— I.  The  pbophetic  office  of  Christ.  God  has  proclaimed  peace  by  Him ;  hence 
the  message  of  peace,  the  Word,  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  comes  into  the  foreground. 
Next  come  the  works  of  Christ  (ver.  38) — the  deeds  harmonised  with  the  Word. 
The  Word  proclaimed,  the  deeds  effected,  peace  and  salvation.  The  deeds 
corroborated  the  Word  ;  and  if  Christ  were  now  to  cease  to  bestow  salvation,  fiea- 
dom,  peace  on  enslaved  souls.  His  Word  of  the  gospel  would  find  no  more  belief. 
II.  The  pbiestly  office  of  Christ.  1.  In  His  death  (ver.  39).  2.  In  His  resurrec- 
tion, by  which  the  atonement  was  completed  and  accepted.  3.  In  His  bpstowment 
of  the  virtues  of  His  atonement — remission  of  sins  through  faith.  III.  The  kinolt 
office  of  Christ.  1.  He  is  Lord  of  all  (ver.  36).  2.  He  is  Judge  of  quick  and  dead 
(ver.  42).  He  is  highly  exalted,  the  Lord  of  all  men,  Jews  and  Gentiles,  so  that 
all  are  bound  to  honour  and  obey  Him.  The  climax  of  this  glory  is  that  Christ  is 
appointed  Judge  of  the  world,  even  of  the  dead ;  bo  that  His  kingly  power  embraces 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  17a 

even  the  lower  regions,  and  generations  long  since  dead,  as  well  as  those  who  are 
still  unborn.  (O.  V.  Lechler,  D.D.)  Peace : — I.  This  peace,  which  was  not  only 
preached  to  the  Jews  by  Christ,  but  was  procured  for  all  by  His  life  and  death, 
was — 1.  Peace  with  God,  through  the  blood  of  Christ  offering  atonement  for  guilt 
and  removing  the  ground  of  enmity.  2.  Peace  within — the  ceasing  of  the  conflict 
of  earthly  passion  through  the  subjugation  of  the  will.  3.  Peace  between  man  and 
man,  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  through  the  breaking  down  of  the  middle  wall  of 
partition.  II.  As  the  gift  was  peace,  so  are  the  means  by  which  this  is  assured  to 
mankind.  1.  The  ministers  of  the  gospel  are  messengers  of  peace.  They  were 
neither  Boman  centurions  nor  Eoman  legions,  but  Peter  and  Christian  disciples. 
2.  The  weapons  by  which  this  peace  is  procured  are  weapons  of  peace  (Gal.  v. 
22,  23) —gentleness,  goodness,  meekness.  In  this  the  mUdness  of  the  gospel  is 
contrasted  with  the  stem  punitive  character  of  the  Mosaic  law.  III.  This  Preacher 
OP  peace  is  Lord  op  all.  His  sceptre  is  one  of  peace,  for  those  who  yield  obedience 
to  His  law  will  not  fear  man  (1  Pet.  iii.  13).  His  sceptre  is  an  almighty  sceptre,  so 
that  where  He  bears  rule  no  enemies  can  hurt  (Kom.  viii.  31).  (fV.  Denton,  M.A.) 
Negotiations  for  peace : — I.  Beasons  wht  those  who  are  not  reconciled  to  God 
8HOT7LD  DEsntE  PEACE  WITH  HiM.  1.  It  IS  uot  Commendable  to  be  at  enmity  with 
any  of  the  wise  and  good ;  but  when  it  comes  to  opposition  to  God,  who  in  his 
right  mind  can  do  other  than  bewail  it,  and  desire  to  see  it  ended  by  a  gracious 
peace  7  Strife  against  evil,  injustice,  and  tyranny  is  honourable,  but  no  possible 
benefit  can  arise  from  a  conflict  in  which  we  are  on  the  wrong  side.  "  Acquaint 
thyself,"  then, "  with  God,  and  be  at  peace,  for  thereby  good  shall  come  unto  thee." 
2.  The  war  in  which  you  are  engaged  is  an  unjust  one.  It  never  ought  to  have 
been  begun ;  and  what  ought  never  to  have  been  begun  had  better  be  dropped  as 
soon  as  possible.  Sin  is  war  against  right,  love,  happiness.  To  love  evil  is 
dishonourable,  wrong,  unfair,  and  the  conscience  of  man  teUs  him  it  is  so.  What 
evil  hath  our  Creator  done  us  that  we  should  go  to  war  against  Him  ?  Doth  He 
not  command  His  sun  to  rise  upon  the  evil  as  well  as  the  good  ?  If  He  were  a 
cruel  tyrant,  I  could  understand  your  warfare ;  but  the  Lord  is  fuU  of  mercy,  and 
His  name  is  love.  3.  He  who  began  it  has  been  terribly  defeated.  Our  first 
parents  were  the  dupe  of  an  older  rebel.  ApoUyon,  once  an  angel,  would  fain  have 
become  equal  with  his  Maker,  but  he  was  banished  from  heaven,  and  then  resorting 
to  this  lower  region,  seduced  our  race.  Little  has  he  gained  by  this  stratagem, 
overwhelming  has  been  his  defeat.  Jesus  has  led  captivity  captive.  He  whose 
heel  was  bitten  by  the  old  dragon  has  broken  the  serpent's  head.  Bevolt,  then, 
against  him.  What  right  has  the  devil  to  reign  over  you?  He  neither  made, 
preserved,  or  blessed  you ;  evil  only,  and  that  continually,  will  he  do  unto  you. 
Strike  for  your  freedom  at  once,  and  shake  off  his  galling  yoke.  The  wages  of  sin 
will  be  death  ;  why  continue  in  so  unprofitable  a  service  ?  4.  The  force  which  is 
brought  against  you  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  you  effectually  to  resist.  It  is  well 
■when  we  contemplate  warfare  to  see  whether  we  are  equal  to  the  combat.  Who 
with  one  thousand  can  meet  him  that  oometh  with  twenty  thousand?  Consider 
ye  this,  ye  that  forget  God.  Can  your  puny  arm  hope  to  rival  the  right  hand  of 
Jehovah  ?  As  weU  might  you  seek  to  dry  up  the  Atlantic,  or  bid  Niagara  leap  up 
the  rock  instead  of  down  1  Let  not  the  wax  contend  with  the  fire,  nor  the  stubble 
with  the  flame.  A  man  stands  in  the  way  of  a  steam  engine  rushing  on  at  express 
speed ;  he  knows  that  according  to  the  laws  of  nature  its  weight  and  velocity 
effectually  prevent  his  staying  its  course.  Do  you  call  it  courageous  on  his  part 
that  he  stands  on  the  track  and  defies  the  iron  horse?  It  is  madness,  suicide. 
God  will  not  alter  His  laws  for  you.  They  are  just  and  right ;  wherefore  should 
He  change  them  ?  Fire  will  burn,  and  if  a  drunken  madcap  persists  in  thrusting 
his  arm  between  the  bars  of  a  furnace,  shall  fire  cease  from  its  nature  to  secure 
him  immunity  from  his  folly?  If  a  man  expose  himself  to  the  rush  of  an 
avalanche,  can  he  expect  the  rolling  mass  to  suspend  itself  in  mid  air  for  him  ? 
If  a  mariner  will  go  to  sea  in  a  vessel  worm-eaten  and  unseaworthy,  will  the  waves 
pity  the  barque  ?  If  a  man  wUl  act  contrary  to  natural  laws,  he  must  suffer  for  it ; 
and  it  is  just  so  with  moral  laws — certain  results  follow  from  sinful  courses  of 
action.  Yield,  then,  to  the  Divine  wisdom  which  has  rightly  ordained  the  conse- 
quences of  sin.  Do  not  necessitate  your  own  destruction.  6.  Any  resistance 
which  you  may  be  able  to  offer  will  be  carried  on  at  a  very  fearful  price.  You  will 
have  to  bear  the  expenses  of  the  war  which  you  foolishly  prolong.  Even  if  you 
should  yield  ultimately,  you  will  regret  rebellion  as  long  as  you  Uve.  Even  when 
they  are  forgiven,  jour  iniquities  wall  be  a  source  of  danger ;  for  though  God  healg 


174  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRAIOB.  [chap.  r. 

the  xvoundB,  we  shall  carry  the  scars  to  our  graves.  And  if  you  should  not  receive 
God's  saving  mercy,  these  rebellions  are  noted  against  you ;  and  when  the  Great 
Judge  comes,  you  shall  be  made  to  feel  the  weight  of  ELis  terrible  hand.  6.  Your 
total  defeat  is  absolutely  certain  sooner  or  later.  No  man  ever  did  set  himself 
against  God  and  prosper  for  long.  Look  at  Pharaoh,  0  sinner,  thy  fate  may  not 
be  to  be  drowned  in  the  Eed  Sea,  but  worse  than  that — thou  will  be  shut  in  for 
ever  where  hope  is  shut  out.  7.  It  wiU  be  altogether  to  thine  advantage  to  be  at 
peace  with  God.  It  will  be  for  thy  present  happiness,  and  thy  eternal  welfare. 
Were  there  no  hereafter,  it  is  profitable  to  have  God  for  our  Friend  ;  but  when  we 
think  of  the  eternal  future,  the  most  superficial  consideration  suffices  to  convince 
OS  of  the  necessity  of  being  reconciled  to  God.  II.  The  tekms  on  which  peack 
MAT  BE  negotiated.  Wouldst  thou  have  peace  ?  Then  learn — 1.  The  great  sine 
qua  non  is,  that  peace  be  made  through  an  Ambassador  nominated  of  God — namely, 
His  Son.  "  Preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ."  There  will  be  no  peace  between 
God  and  any  man  who  despises  Christ.  Eeject  that  name,  and  there  is  no  other 
whereby  you  can  be  saved.  This  Jesus  Christ  is  God,  knowing  the  mind  of  God, 
and  able  to  negotiate  with  Divine  authority.  But  He  is  also  man,  and  therefore 
fitted  to  deal  graciously  with  man.  He  is  fit  to  be  a  daysman,  and  arbitrator,  since 
He  has  sympathy  with  thee  and  equality  with  God.  2.  The  great  difficulty  is  put 
away  which  might  have  prevented  peace,  for  the  justice  of  God  which  thou  hast 
provoked  has  been  satisfied  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  sacrifice  of  Jesus  has  made 
recompense  for  the  injury  done  by  human  sin.  God  asks  no  price  of  thee.  If  thou 
hadst  the  wealth  of  the  Indies,  the  Lord  would  despise  such  a  bribe.  He  asks  no 
suffering  from  thee.  It  would  be  no  satisfaction  to  Him  to  see  thee  suffer,  for  He 
dehghts  in  happiness.  Neither  does  He  ask  thee  to  achieve  merits.  Thou  couldst 
not  if  He  should  demand  it,  God,  therefore,  graciously  tells  thee  that  He  is  fuU  of 
mercy,  delighting  to  forgive ;  and  all  He  asks  of  thee  is  to  trust  unfeignedly  in  His 
only-begotten  Son.  Then  down  with  thy  weapons  of  rebellion  ;  confess  that  thou 
hast  erred.  Now,  is  this  hard  ?  Nay,  man,  look  to  the  Cross,  and  hate  thy  sin  ; 
for  sin  nailed  the  Well-beloved  to  the  tree.  III.  The  claim  which  ought  to  bb 
tiBGED  whereveb  THE  GOSPEL  IS  PBEACHED.  "  He  is  Loid  of  all."  This  means — 
1.  That  Jesus  Christ,  who  died  on  Calvary,  is  Lord  of  all  mankind.  Because 
Christ  has  "  power  over  all  flesh,"  we  preach  the  gospel  to  all  flesh.  You  are  not 
ruled  so  much  by  the  iron  sceptre  of  an  absolute  God  as  by  the  silver  sceptre  of 
the  Mediator.  "  Kiss  the  Son  lest  He  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way, 
when  His  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  Utile."  2.  If  Christ  be  Lord  of  all,  then  I  may 
with  safety  rely  upon  Him.  Oh,  then,  trust  Him,  for  all  power  is  His.  He  is 
exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  3.  Because  Jesus  is 
Lord,  I  pray  you  to  yield  Him  reverence  and  serve  Him.  He  is  your  liege  Lord 
and  sovereign.  History  tells  us  that  the  Welsh  could  not  bear  the  yoke  of  an 
English  king,  but  wanted  a  native  prince  ;  and  therefore  their  English  conqueror 
brought  before  them  his  own  son,  bom  in  their  own  principality,  and  they  accepted 
him  as  Prince  of  Wales.  God  reigneth  over  us,  but  that  we  may  love  His  reign  He 
has  anointed  His  own  Son  our  own  Elder  Brother,  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 
4.  Be  it  also  known  that  Jesus  the  Saviour  must  be  received  as  Lord  in  the  souls  of 
those  whom  He  redeems.  You  must  obey  Him,  or  your  trust  is  hypocrisy.  If  we 
trust  a  physician  we  follow  his  prescriptions ;  if  we  trust  a  guide  we  follow  his 
directions ;  and  if  we  fully  rely  on  Jesus,  we  obey  His  gracious  commands.  The 
faith  which  saves  is  a  faith  which  produces  a  change  of  life,  and  subdues  the  soul 
to  obedience  to  the  Lord.  5.  I  do  not  put  this  to  you  as  a  matter  of  choice ;  I 
demand  of  you  that  you  obey  Him,  and  receive  Him  as  the  Christ  of  God.  Do  you 
refuse  the  summons  that  I  give  you  now  as  His  officer  to-night  ?  Then  take  heed 
what  you  do,  for  as  the  Lord  liveth  you  shall  answer  for  this  in  the  great  day  of 
His  appearing.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Peace  through  Christ: — When  the  Romans 
by  conquest  might  have  given  law  to  the  Grecians  at  Corinth,  in  the  solemn  time 
of  the  Isthmian  games,  their  general  by  a  herald  unexpectedly  proclaimed  freedom 
to  all  the  cities  of  Greece.  The  proclamation  at  first  did  so  amaze  the  Grecians 
that  they  did  not  believe  it  to  be  true  ;  but  when  it  was  proclaimed  the  second  time 
they  gave  such  a  shout  that  the  very  birds  flying  in  the  air  were  astonished 
therewith,  and  fell  dead  to  the  ground.  But  if  you  will  have  a  better  story,  take 
that  of  the  Jews,  who,  when  at  first  they  heard  of  Cyrus's  proclamation,  and  that 
the  Lord  thereby  had  turned  the  captivity  of  Sion,  they  confess  that,  at  the  first 
hearing  of  it,  they  were  like  men  that  dreamed  ;  but  afterwards,  their  mouths  were 
filled  with  laughter,  and  their  tongues  with  singing.     Now,  the  peace  that  the 


.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  175 

Grecians  and  the  Jews  had  was  but  the  peace  of  a  people,  or  a  nation,  and  a  great 
blessing  of  God,  too ;  but  how  much  more  reason  is  there  that  our  affections  should 
be  strained  to  the  highest  pitch  of  joy  and  thanks,  when  we  hear  of  the  proclama- 
tion of  the  peace  of  conscience — that  peace  which  is  not  of  our  bodies,  but  of  our 
Bouls?  {J.  Spencer.)  He  is  Lord  of  alL — Lord  of  all: — I.  By  right,  as  the 
Creator.  II.  By  merit,  as  the  Kedeemer.  m.  By  gift,  as  the  only-begotten  of 
the  Father.  {St.  Bernard.)  Lord  of  all : — I.  The  claim  hebb  made.  1.  This 
claim  is  made  by  the  whole  Bible  ;  notably  by  Paul  (Eph.  i.  21),  by  Peter  (1  Pet. 
iii.  21),  by  John  (Eev.  i.  17, 18 ;  xix.  16).  2.  Christ  is  Lord  of  all,  and  the  telescope 
has  not  revealed  a  star,  nor  the  microscope  an  atom,  that  is  not  subject  to  Him. 
The  spirits  of  darkness  cannot  elude  His  Lordship,  and  the  spirits  of  light  glory  ia 
it.  We  too  are  subject  to  it,  whether  we  will  or  no.  But  Christ  wills  to  connect 
us  with  Himself  by  other  ties  than  that  of  His  irresistible  control.  He  wants  us  to 
choose  to  be  bound  to  Him  by  ties  of  faith  and  love,  and  then  we  shall  delight  to 
follow  Him,  and  find  the  most  perfect  union  with  Him.  3.  If  you  reject  this 
claim,  whom  will  you  serve  ?  Self  ?  You  cannot  make  a  worse  choice.  (1)  Put  the 
reins  in  the  hands  of  your  senses,  and  you  know  whither  they  will  drive  you. 
(2)  You  will  fare  no  better,  though  more  respectably,  if  you  bow  your  neck  to 
covetousness— the  ambition  to  be  rich.  (3)  The  love  of  applause  and  honour  is 
only  less  injurious ;  it  may  inspire  in  soldiers  heroism,  but  it  substitutes  man's 
judgment  for  God's  law  and  conscience.  (4)  The  love  of  power  is  just  as  bad  a 
master.  See  what  it  made  of  Alexander  and  Napoleon  1  II.  What  yielding  to 
THIS  CLAIM  WILL  DO  IN  AND  FOE  YOU.  1.  It  wiU  bring  you  to  your  knees  in  humble 
acknowledgment  of  your  guilt,  and  in  grateful  recognition  of  God's  love  in  offering 
reconciliation.  Christ  does  not  come  suing  your  heart  and  service  as  blameless. 
You  are  "  His  own,"  but  you  have  not  acted  as  His  own.  He  finds  you  in  a  state 
of  rebellion,  and  the  first  word  He  speaks  to  you  is  "  Eepent."  It  was  by  the  way 
of  the  Cross  that  Jesus  went  to  the  throne,  and  you  must  go  the  same  way.  2.  It 
will  place  you  under  a  law  the  most  beneficent  and  pure ;  one  which  \nll  make 
your  heart  and  Mfe  unselfish.  It  will  not  make  a  man  in  any  sense  effeminate,  but 
will  inspire  manliness  with  grace.  3.  It  will  bring  you  aids  and  influences  without 
which  you  will  find  yourselves  unable  to  overcome  the  evil  or  attain  the  good. 
The  road  is  a  diificult  and  perilous  one,  and  you  have  neither  the  wisdom  nor  the 
strength  to  avoid  the  dangers  or  to  overcome  the  hardships.  It  should  be  good 
news  that  Christ  gives  both.  III.  What  have  you  to  object  to  this  claim? 
1.  You  want  to  be  left  alone  and  not  be  troubled.  Is  this  manly  ?  Happily  for 
you,  you  don't  act  on  this  principle  elsewhere.  When  you  are  in  want  of  a  situa- 
tion, you  search  for  one  till  you  find  it.  You  go  to  work  at  the  set  hour,  and  keep  at 
it  till  it  is  finished.  How,  then,  can  you  suppose  that  it  will  be  well  with  you  in 
the  higher  concerns  of  your  soul,  if  jou  fold  your  arms  and  commit  yourselves  to 
the  care  of  chance  ?  The  ship,  if  left  to  itself,  will  founder ;  the  soul,  how  can  it 
escape  destruction  if  left  to  drift  where  it  may?  2.  The  rule  of  Christ  is  too 
exacting  and  too  wide.  But  what  would  you  think  of  a  law  which  would  make 
purity,  truth,  and  honesty  contingent  on  circumstances  ?  Christ  demands  the  whole 
of  your  being,  that  He  may  bless  body  and  soul  to  all  eternity,  and  prohibits  aU 
compromise  with  sin  because  sin  is  everlasting  ruin.  (J.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  Jesus 
Lord  of  all : — I.  What  ?  "  Lord."  1.  Jehovah,  demanding  our  worship.  Jesus 
claims  Divine  honours,  and  His  servants  gladly  render  them.  2.  Sovereign, 
demanding  our  homage,  loyalty  to  His  throne,  pride  in  His  name ;  zeal,  valour, 
and  activity  in  the  extension  of  His  realm.  3.  Master,  demanding  our  service.  A 
good  subject  has  not  only  to  defend  his  sovereign's  dominions  in  war,  but  to  build 
up  their  prosperity  by  persevering  industry.  Our  work  is  to  grow  in  grace  and  to 
promote  that  growth  in  our  fellow  Christians.  U.  What  of  ?  •*  All."  1.  In  the 
widest  sense,  of  all  creation,  from  the  moat  colossal  world  down  to  the  minutest 
molecule.  All  matter,  and  all  the  laws  by  which  He  permits  matter  to  be  influenced, 
are  His,  and  He  does  with  them  according  to  the  pleasure  of  His  will.  2.  In  a 
narrower  sense,  of  all  created  intelligences.  He  is  Lord  of  angels,  who  obey  Him 
willingly ;  of  devils,  who  obey  Him  unwillingly ;  of  men,  who  are  divided  into  two 
classes — (1)  Those  who  disobey  Him,  but  whose  disobedience  is  overruled  to  serve 
His  purposes.  (2)  Those  who  gladly  obey  Him,  and  find  in  their  obedience  an 
exceeding  great  reward.  III.  By  what  bight?  1.  An  original  right,  as  God. 
"  All  souls  are  mine."  2.  A  filial  right,  as  Son  of  God.  •'  Heir  of  all  things." 
"All  power  is  given  unto  Me."''  3.  A  redemptive  right,  as  Saviour.  "Ye  are  not 
yooi  own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price."    4.  A  victorious  right,  aa  Conqueror. 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  x 

5.  A  donative  right,  by  the  glad  surrender  of  the  will  of  those  constrained  by  Hia 
love.     {J.  W.  Burn.) 

Ver.  38.  How  God  anointed  Jesos  of  Nazareth. — The  ministry  of  Jesus : — 
I.  Its  natdbe  and  charactebibtics.  It  was — 1.  Active — "  went."  He  did  not  sit 
passively  and  receive  applicants :  like  many  nowadays,  who  are  either  indolent,  or 
think  it  sufficient  to  satisfy  a  claim  when  made,  or  else  are  afraid  of  encountering 
too  many  claims.  2.  Incessant — "  about."  Not  to  one  place,  but  everywhere ;  not 
in  the  straight  line  of  duty  or  circumstances,  but  in,  out,  and  around.  Much  of 
modern  charity  is  partial,  and  confines  itself  to  '•  deserving"  cases,  or  those  who 
have  superior  claims  on  the  ground  of  kindred,  neighbourhood,  nationality,  &c. 
3.  Inquiring — "  went  about."  Jesus  "  sought "  that  He  might  save.  Many  of  the 
objects  of  His  compassion  were  those  who  lay  outside  the  beaten  track  and  had 
to  be  found.  4.  Practical — "  doing,"  not  simply  "  speaking,"  although  sympathetic 
words  are  helpful :  but  a  Uttle  assistance  is  worth  a  good  deal  of  pity.  5.  Eeally 
beneficent — "  good."  It  is  to  be  feared  that  much  of  so-called  charity  does 
more  harm  than  good.  6.  Victorious — "  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the 
devil."  Destruction  has  often  to  precede  construction.  The  devil  has  to  be  van- 
quished before  good  can  be  done.  II.  Its  sanction.  "God  anointed  Him  with 
the  Holy  Ghost."  1.  This  was  fore-announced  (Isa.  IxL  1-3) ;  and  when  the 
prophecy  was  so  abundantly  fulfilled  nothing  but  the  blindness  of  criminal  unbelief 
could  refuse  to  see  it.  2.  This  was  abundantly  given  to  Christ  and  claimed  by 
Him.  3.  This  demonstrated  His  Messiahship.  He  was  the  anointed — (1)  Prophet 
— to  declare  man's  need.  All  need  is  not  conscious.  Men  have  to  be  convinced 
of  the  existence  of  their  deepest  requirements.  How  many  are  bound  by  the  fetters 
of  sin,  and  yet  are  senseless  to  their  slavery.  (2)  Priest — to  provide  for  man's 
need.  Through  His  mediatorial  work  Christ  becomes  the  grand  storehouse  of 
God's  riches.  (3)  King — to  supply  man's  need.  "  AU  power  is  given  unto  Me  in 
heaven  and  in  earth."  "  He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly."  He  received 
gifts  for  the  rebellious.  HI.  Its  power.  Christ  was  anointed  with  "power." 
1.  He  was  equal  to  every  emergency.  When  the  wine  failed  He  turned  the 
water  into  wine.  Those  whom  physicians  gave  up  as  incurable  He  healed  with  a 
touch.  When  the  disciples  were  in  danger  of  perishing  in  the  storm  He  rebuked 
the  winds  and  the  waves.  When  Lazarus  was  dead  He  recalled  him  to  life.  And 
all  this  without  delay  and  without  exertion.  2.  His  power  was  acknowledged  by 
aU:  nature,  men,  devils.  IV.  Its  reward.  "  ftod  was  with  Him."  1.  En- 
couraging. 2.  Approving.  3.  Eendering  effectual.  {Ibid.)  Who  went  about  do- 
ing good. — The  Jir  St  philanthropist. — Here,  then,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  to  whom 
St.  Peter  was  addressing  himself.  Before  him  stood  the  centurion  Cornelius,  pro- 
bably a  few  comrades,  and  certainly  some  Jews,  who  on  an  occasion  like  this  would 
not  have  had  the  largest  place  in  the  apostle's  thought.  The  persons  of  whom  St. 
Peter  was  chiefly  thinking  were  Cornelius  and  the  other  soldiers  present,  above  all 
Cornelius.  The  band  to  which  Cornelius  belonged  consisted  of  Italian  levies,  and 
Cornelius,  as  his  name  shows,  belonged  to  an  old  Eoman  family,  and  when  St. 
Peter  says  that  our  Lord,  during  His  earthly  life,  went  about  doing  good,  he  knew 
perfectly  well  that  such  an  account  of  that  life  would  have  appeared  anything 
but  tame,  commonplace,  inadequate,  to  those  whom  he  was  especially  anxious 
to  influence,  because  it  was  so  sharply  contrasted  with  anything  that  they 
had  left  behind  them  at  home.  For  that  great  world  in  which  Cornelius  and 
his  comrades  had  been  reared  must  indeed  have  made  the  men  and  affairs  of 
Palestine,  generally  speaking,  seem  by  comparison  petty  enough — as  we  would 
say,  provincial.  Everything  outward  at  Eome,  the  world's  centre,  was  on  a 
splendid  scale.  The  public  buildings,  the  temples,  the  baths,  the  public  shows, 
everything  connected  with  the  army,  everything  connected  with  the  machinery 
and  the  apparatus  of  government,  was  calculated  to  impress,  and  even  to  awe  the 
imagiaation.  But  there  was  one  overshadowing  defect  in  that  great  world  which 
would  have  come  home  with  especial  force  to  the  minds  of  the  class  from  which 
the  rank  and  file  of  the  Eoman  forces  were  chiefly  recruited.  It  was  a  world  with- 
out love.  It  was  a  world  full  of  want  and  suffering,  and  the  whole  of  the  great 
social  and  political  machine  went  round  and  round  without  taking  any  account  of 
this.  Commenting  on  this  fact  nearly  three  centuries  later,  Lactantius,  after 
describing  the  Balient  features  of  heathen  life,  adds  :  "  Compassion  and  humanity 
are  peculiar  to  the  Christians."  Now,  isolated  efforts  to  relieve  suffering,  gifts  to 
the  needy,  liberality  of  the  orators  and  the  inscriptions,  these  largesses  to  the 


CHAP.  X.]  TEE  ACTS,  177 

people,  these  public  works,  these  costly  entertainments,  as  Cornelius  and  his  friends 
knew  weU,  were  not  the  outcome  of  love.    They  were  forms  of  an  expenditure  which 
was  essentially  selfish.     The  main  object  of  such  expenditure  was  to  secure  that  sort 
of  popularity  which  means  political  power.    It  was  repaid,  if  not  in  kind,  yet  sub- 
stantially. _  The  Roman  people,  under  the  system  of  imperial  largesses  and  enter- 
tainments, increasingly  hated  work.     It  cared  only  for  such  ease  and  enjoyment 
as  it  could  wring  out  of  its  rulers.     It  became  utterly  indifferent  to  everything  in  its 
rulers  except  their  capacity  and  willingness  to  gratify  itself.     In  order  to  do  real 
good,  the  eye  must  rest  not  on  what  is  prudent  in,  or  on  what  is  expected  of  the 
giver,  but  on  what  is  needed  in  the  recipient.    And  thus  mere  liberality,  if  active, 
is  blindfold,  while  charity  seeks  out  its  objects  with  discrimination  and  sympathy ; 
liberality  has  no  eye  for  the  really  sore  places  in  the  suffering  and  destitute  world! 
Nothing  was  done  systematically  in  that  world  with  which  Cornehus  and  his  friends 
were  familiar  for  classes  or  for  individuals  who  could  make  no  return.     There  was 
no  sort  of  care  for  widows  or  for  orphans.     And  if  here  and  there  there  were  schools, 
like  those  under  Severus,  their  main  object,  when  we  come  to  examine  them  closely, 
appears  to  have  been  to  provide  recruits  for  the  Roman  army.     And  aU  this  was  in 
harmony  with  principles  laid  down  by  the  great  teachers  of  the  ancient  world, 
such  as  Plato  and  Aristotle.     In  Plato's  ideal  state  the  poor  have  no  place,  beggars 
are  expelled  or  left  to  die,  as  injuring  the  common  prosperity.     In  Aristotle's 
account  of  the  virtues,  the  most  promising,  from  a  Christian  point  of  view,  is 
generosity;   but  on  examination,  generosity  turns    out  to  be  a  prudential  mean 
between  avarice  and  extravagance.     The  generous  man,  we  are  told,  gives  because- 
it  is  a  fine  thing  to  give,  not  from  a  sense  of  duty,  still  less  at  the  dictates  of  love 
for  his  fellow-creatures.    It  is  no  wonder  that,  when  these  were  governing  prin- 
ciples, there  were  few  efforts  in  that  old  world,  to  which  Cornelius  had  belonged , 
that  deserved  the  name  of  doing  good.     When,  then,  Cornelius  heard  from  St. 
Peter  of  such  a  life  as  that  of  our  Lord,  and  had  further,  in  aU  probability,  asked 
and  received  answers  to  the  questions  which  St.  Peter's  description  suggested,  he 
would  have  listened  to  a  narrative  which  had  all  the  charm,  all  the  freshness 
of  a  great  surprise.     Those  poor  lepers,  and  paralytics,  and  fever-stricken  peasants, 
could  make  no  return  to  their  Benefactor,  and  He  did  not  ask  for  any.     And  this, 
Cornelius  would  have  observed,  implied  nothing  short  of  a  new  ideal  of  life  and 
work.     The  highest  and  greatest  good  which  He  did  was  done  for  the  souls  of  men. 
To  have  done  everything  for  man's  bodily  frame  and  leave  his  spiritual  being  un- 
touched would  have  been  a  poor  and  worthless  kind  of  doing  good  in  the  estima- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ.     The  lessons  by  which  our  Lord  brought  men  to  know  and  to 
love  the  Father  and  Himself,  the  pardon  which  He  won  for  them  on  the  Cross,  the 
grace  which  He  promised  them   after   His  Ascension,  were   His    chiefest   bene- 
factions.   But  besides  this  He  did  abundant  good  in  the  physical,  material,  social 
sense.     It  has  been  said  that  Christ  our  Lord  was  the  first  Social  Reformer.     If  by 
Bocial  reform  be  meant  the  doing  away  with  all  the  inequalities  between  classes,  or 
even  the  removal  from  human  life  of  the  permanent  cause  of  a  greal  deal  of  phy- 
sical suffering,  it  cannot  be  said  that  this  description  of  Him  is  accurate.    He 
showed  no  wish  whatever  in  any  sort  of  way  to  interfere  with  the  existing  structure 
of  society.     He  insisted  on  Caesar's  claims  to  tribute.  He  i^rescribed  obedience  to 
the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  who  sat  in  Moses'  seat.     His  real  work  was  to  point  to 
truths  and  to  a  life  which  made  the  endurance  of  poverty  and  distress  for  a  short 
time  here  so  easy,  as  to  be  in  the  estimate  of  real  disciples  comparatively  unim- 
portant, but  at  the  same  time  He  reUeved  so  much  of  it  as  would  enable  human 
beings  to  make  a  real  step  forward  towards  the  true  end  of  their  existence.     If  our 
Lord  was  not,  in  the  restricted  modern  sense,  the  first  social  reformer.  He  was  un- 
doubtedly, in  the  true  and  ample  sense  of  the  word,  the  first  philanthropist.     He 
loved  man  as  man.  He  loved  not  one  part  but  the  whole  of  man.  He  loved  man  as 
none  had  ever  loved  him  before  or  since,  He  died  for  the  being  whom  He  loved  so 
well.    And  when  our  Lord  had  left  the  earth  the  spirit  of  His  work  became  that  of 
a  Christian  Church.     It,  too,  after  its  measure,  went  about  the  world  doing  good. 
The  New  Testament  guides  us  through  the  first  stage  of  the  subject.   The  wealthier 
Churches  of  Greece  were  directed  to  lay  by  small  offerings  every  Sunday,  so  that 
when  the  apostle  came  by  to  fetch  the  collection  the  money  might  be  ready  for 
the  poor  Churches  in  Palestine.     The  poorer  members  of  the  Church  were  regu- 
larly supplied  with  food  at  the  Agape  or  love-feast.     Widows  were  especially  pro- 
vided for.     It  would  be  impossible  here  and  now  to  notice  the  various  activities  of 
Chiistian  work  in  the  primitive  times  which  followed  the  Apostolic  age.    Eaxly 
vol..  u.  12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [cha».  X, 

in  the  third  century,  if  not  in  the  second,  there  were  houses  for  the  reception  of 
poor  widows ;    orphans  were  brought   up  at  the  expense  of   the  Church  by  the 
bishop,  or  by  some  private  person.     Thus,  for  instance,  after  the  martyrdom  of 
Leonidas  at  Alexandria,  his  boy,  who  became  the  celebrated  Origen,  was  brought 
up  by  a  pious  woman  who  lived  in  the  city,  and  an  excellent  man,  Severus,  is 
named  as  having  devoted  himself  in  Palestine  to  the  education  of  all  children — 
they  were  a  considerable  number — whose  parents  were  martyrs.     In  the  middle 
of  the  third  century  the  Boman  empire  was  afflicted  by  a  pestilence  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  historian  Gibbon,  destroyed  not  less  than  half  the  population.      It 
broke  out  at  Carthage  while  St.  Cyprian  was  still  alive.     There  was  a  general  panic, 
all  the  heathen  that  could  do  so  fled  ;  they  avoided  contact  with  infected  persons, 
they  left  their  own  relations  to  die  alone.     Corpses  were  lying  unburied  about  the 
streets,  and  there  were  rogues  who  seized  the  opportunity  of  making  horrible  profits. 
Cyprian  summoned  the  Christians  to  aid  him  in  doing  all  that  could  be  done.     He 
was  everywhere  encouraging,  advising,  organising,  helping  the  sick  and  dying  with 
his  own  hands,  and  each  man  under  him  had,  and  knew  that  he  had,  his  appointed 
task.     Some  of  the  Christians  were  anxious  to  confine  their  aid  to  their  fellow- 
believers,  their  feelings  against  the  heathen  had  been  irritated  by  a  recent  persecu- 
tion, and  they  knew  that  another  persecution  was  impending,  but  they  received  no 
countenance  from  their  bishop.     "  If,"  exclaimed  St.  Cyprian,  in  a  sermon  preached 
at  this  crisis,  "  if  we  only  do  good  to  those  who  do  good  to  us,  what  do  we  more 
than  the  heathen  and  the  publicans  ?    If  we  are  the  children  of  God,  who  makes 
His  sun  to  shine  upon  the  good  and  the  bad,  and  sends  His  rain  on  the  just  and 
on  the  unjust,  let  us  now  prove  it  by  our  own  acts,  let  us  bless  those  who  curse 
us."    One  class  of  persons  who  were  especial  objects  of  primitive  Christian  charity 
were  those  who  were  sent  to  work  in  the  mines.     They  were  almost  naked  ;  they 
had  the  scantiest  supply  of  food ;  they  were  often  treated  with  great  cruelty  by 
the  inspectors  of  public  works.     We  find  from  the  letters  of  St.  Cyprian  these  poor 
people  were  special  objects  of  his  attention  ;  he  regularly  sent  them  supplies  by 
the  hands  of  a  trusted  sub-deacon ;  and  he  wrote  to  them  continually,  assuring 
them  of  his  sympathy  and  his  prayers.     And  another  work  of  mercy  in  which 
the  primitive  Church  especially  interested  itself  was  the  improvement  of  the  con- 
dition of  the  prisoners.     The  prisons  in  old  Bome  were  crowded  with  persons  of 
all  descriptions — prisoners  of  war,  especially  after  the  barbarian  inroads ;  prisoners 
for  the  non-payment  of  taxes  and  for  debt— subjects  on  which  the  Boman  law  was 
very  severe ;  prisoners  for  the  various  kinds  of  felony ;  and,  when  a  persecution 
-was  going  on,  prisoners  for  the  crime  of  being  Christians.    These  unhappy  people 
were  huddled  together,  it  is  little  to  say,  with  no  attention  to  the  laws  of  health 
or  to  the  decencies  of  life,  and  one  of  the  earUest  forms  of  Christian  charity  was 
to  raise  funds  for  the  redemption  of  prisoners  by  payment  as  a  specially  Christian 
form  of  mercy.     Cyprian  raised  large  sums  from  his  flock  to  purchase  freedom  for 
prisoners  of  war.     It  would  be  impossible  within  our  limits  to  do  any  sort  of 
justice  to   this   vast    subject — the    manner   in   which   the   ancient    Church    of 
Christ  carried  on,  both   in  the  higher  and  the  lower  senses   of   the   term,  her 
Master's  work  of  doing  good.     The  most  unshowing  and  unromantio  methods  of 
doing  good  may  be  the  most  acceptable.     To  work  at  a  night-school,  to  keep  the 
accounts  of  a  charity,  to  get  up  Sunday  breakfasts  for  poor  people,  may  mean 
more  in  the  eyes  of  the  Infinite  Mercy  than  to  dispose  of  immense  charitable  re- 
sources, or  even  to  be  a  great  teacher  or  ruler  in  the  Church.     The  vital  condition 
of  doing  good,  whether  it  be  spiritual  or  physical  good,  is  that  simple  unity  of  pur- 
pose which  springs  from  disinterestedness,  and  this  can  best  be  learned  at  His 
blessed  feet,  who  remains  the  first  and  the  greatest  of  philanthropists,  since  in 
life  and  in  death  He  gave  Himself  for  us,  that  whether  we  wake  or  sleep  we  might 
live  together  with  Him.     (Canon  Liddon.)         The  model  life  : — He  "  went  about 
doing  good  " — I.  Because  He  was  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.    II.  As  the  onh 
GBEAT  AIM  OF  Hi8  LIFE.    The  painter  or  sculptor  gives  himself  up  to  days  and 
nights  of   arduous,    patient   labour,  it   may  be  for   years,    over  some  favourite 
piece  of   art ;    his   soul   is    inspired,  cheered,   sustained   by  the   motives   which 
his  own  genius  and  the   art   whicli   he   worships   supply.      The   philanthropist 
pursues  his  scheme  for   the   amehoration   of   human  misery  with  an  intensity 
that    brooks    no    delay,    with   an    absorbing    interest    which   robs    him    of   his 
sleep  by  night,  and  fills  all  his  waking  thoughts  by  day.     But  what  is  all  this 
devotion  to  an  earthly  object  compared  with  the  Divine  intensity  of  Christ  in  the 
prosecution  of  His  life-work,  and  that  in  the  midst  of  perishing  multitudes  f    Hia 


«HAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  179 

Aife-work  was  not  that  of  delineating  the  human  form  on  the  glowing  canvas,  or 
the  breathing  marble,  but  the  work  of  bringing  back  a  lost  world  to  peace,  of  repro- 
ducing the  Divine  life  and  the  Divine  image  in  the  soul  of  man — not  a  mere  work 
of  fancy,  but  of  faith,  not  a  mere  display  of  genius,  but  of  goodness,  not  the 
redressing  of  a  wrong,  or  the  lessening  of  human  suffering,  but  nothing  short  of  a 
new  creation  in  the  soul  that  was  dark  and  dead,  sunk  in  trespasses  and  sins.     III. 
With  a  constancy  and  devotion  that  neveb  failed.      Notwithstanding  aU  the 
hostility  that  met  Him,  He  continued  with  unabated  ardour.     IV.  To  all  without 
exception.     Like  the  stream  that  loves  to  linger  amid  its  village  homes,  nestled 
amid  the  shadows  of  mountains,  and  the  embowering  foliage  of  ancestral  trees, 
where  there  is  little  to  disturb  the  even  tenor  of  daily  life,  it  was  the  special  delight 
of  our  Lord  to  move  amongst  the  homes  of  the  poor  and  the  lowly,  and  pour  the 
riches  of  His  grace  around  their  humble  dwellings.    But  like  the  rill  that  will  not 
rest  from  t  he  moment  it  bursts  on  its  way,  but  travels  onwards  to  the  sea  in  ever 
widening  course,  and  passes  on  through  quiet  villages  and  sweet  homesteads  till  it 
becomes  a  great  river,  bearing  on  its  bosom  the  mart  of  nations,  the  blessings  of 
commerce,  and  making  everything  glad  and  beautiful  where  it  flows,  the  stream  of 
Divine  goodness  in  the  life  of  Jesus,  beginning  first  in  the  mountain  home  at 
Nazareth,  amid  the  village  retreats  of  Galilee,  went  forth  from  that  seclusion  to 
carry  its  rich  dower  of  blessings  to  villages,  towns,  and  cities,  and  to  pour  its 
treasures  at  the  feet  of  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men.     He  was  free  to  all,  as 
the  light  of  the  sun,  the  air  of  heaven,  the  waters  of  the  deep,  broad  river.     His 
sympathies  for  man  and  all  his  concerns  were  strong,  pure,  enduring.     V.  By  Hig 
INSTRUCTIONS,  AS  WELL   AS   BY   Hi3  W0KK8   OF  HEALING.      These  miraclcs  live  in 
history  as  great,  godlike  facts.  His  words  live  in  the  heart,  and  by  sanctifying  the 
inner,  bless  and  dignify  the  outer  life.     VI.  As  an  example  to  His  followers  in 
A  Till   time   coming.      {Alex.  Wallice,  D.D.)         The   Christian's    encouragement  to 
seek  and  do  good : — I.  Illustrate  the  view  of  Christ's  character  given  in  the 
text.     1.  The  kind  of  good  which  He  dispensed.     2.  The  extent  of  good  which  He 
thus  dispensed.     3.  The  great  diligence  which  He  exercised  in   doing  good.     4. 
The  spirit  of  compassion  with  which  He  did  all  this  good.     5.  The  unwearied 
patience  and  perseverance  with  which  He  continued  to  do  good.     H.  Application  : 
1.  You  are  thus  instructed  and  encouraged  to  seek  good  from  Christ.     2.  Yon  are 
thus  instructed  and  engaged  to  do  good  as  Christ  did.     The  shortest  description 
and  the  surest  mark  of  every  true  Christian  is  this,  to  be  a  doer  of  good.     (Jas. 
Brewster.)         The   life    beneficent : — There   is   in   this    Scripture   furnished    for 
life  a  test,  an  enterprise,  a  habit.     I.  A  test.     Christ  went  about  doing  good. 
By  precisely  this  question,  whether  your  life  is  beneficent,  are  you  to  test  your 
life.      1.    Test  your  speech  by  it.     Let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed  out 
of  your  mouth,  but  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of   edifying.      2.    Test  your 
amusements  by  it.     Do  they  do   you    good   in   the   way  of   recreating  you  for 
better  toil;    do   they  exert   no   harmful  influence   upon  others?     3.    Test  your 
business  by  it.    Is  the  general  outcome  of  your  business  beneficent ;  and  do  yoa 
carry  it  on  in  beneficent  fashion  ?    4.  Test  your  use  of  time  by  this  question. 
Are  you  putting  your  time  to  high  and  holy  uses?      5.  Test  your  position  and 
culture  thus :  Are  you  the  readier  to  serve  the  higher  you  get  up  ?    II.  There  is 
here  suggested  an  enterprise  for  life.     Christ  went  about  doing  good.     H'^  per- 
sonally did  it — did  not  content  Himself  with  doing  good  by  proxy.     Cnrist  went 
after  the  chance  of  doing  good ;  did  not  simply  wait  for  the  chance  to  come  tc 
Him.     III.  There  is  suggested  also  here  a  habit  for  Ufc.     Christ  was  not  inter- 
mittent in  this  matter.   It  was  the  habit  of  His  life  to  go  about  doing  good.    Oh  fol 
Christians  of  such  pithy  pluck  that  they  will  habitually  keep  hold  of  duty !     ( W. 
Hoyt,  D.D.)        The  benevolent  conduct  of  Jesus  : — I.  The  conduct  of  Jesus.     He 
*'  went  about  doing  good."     1.  Jesus  did  good  to  the  bodies  of  men.     He  opened 
the  eyes  of  the  bUnd ;    He  gave  hearing  to  the  deaf ;  and  He  raised  the  dead 
(Matt.  xi.  5).     2.  He  did  good  to  the  souls  of  men.     The  ignorant  were  instructed 
by  Him  in  the  essential  doctrines  and  duties  of  religion  (Matt.  v.  1,  2;  Luke  xix. 
47 ;  John  viii,  2).    He  strengthened  the  weak  and  wavering,  and  comforted  mourn 
ing  penitents  (Matt.  v.  4 ;  xi.  28).     3.  Our  Lord  went  about  doing  good.     He  was 
an  itinerant  preacher.    And  to  accomplish  His  merciful  designs.  He  frequently 
visited  large  and  populous  places,  and  places  of  public  resort.     4.  The  motives  of 
our  Lord  in  doing  good  were  pure  and  perfect.     He  was  moved  by  the  transcen- 
dent goodness  of  His  nature  to  acts  of  kindness.     5.  J-^sus  persevered  in  doiiitj 
;good.     It  was  His  constant  employment,  and  He   f^as  never     eary  of  it.     6.  Is 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  X, 

all  the  works,  and  in  all  the  ways  of  our  Saviour,  His  lovely  temper  and  amiable 
conduct  shone  with  resplendent  glory.  How  unlike  the  renowned  conquerors  and 
tyrants  of  the  world,  whose  glory  has  been  acquired  by  blood  and  slaughter  I 
II,  Wk  should  endeavour  to  imitate  the  conduct  of  Jesds.  1.  That  we  may 
do  so,  let  us  study  the  character  and  conduct  of  our  great  Exemplar,  To  this 
end  we  should  carefully  read  His  public  and  private  discourses,  examine  His 
temper,  and  weigh  His  conduct,  2,  But  those  who  copy  after  His  blessed  example, 
must  have  the  mind  which  was  in  Him  (PhU,  ii,  6),  3.  Having  acquired  the  mind 
of  Jesus,  let  us  endeavour  to  imitate  His  conduct.  We  cannot  imitate  His 
miracles ;  the  attempt  would  be  presumption ;  but  we  should  endeavour  to  copy 
His  benevolent  actions,  4.  Let  us  proceed  in  these  works  of  love,  as  the  Lord 
may  enable  us.  More  than  this  is  not  required ;  and  less  than  this  vrill  not  be 
accepted,  5,  This  conduct  will  please  the  Lord,  who  is  good  to  all,  and  whose 
tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works  (Psa,  cxlv.  9),  He  blesses  us  that  we  may 
be  a  blessing  (Gen.  xii.  2),  1.  Li  the  world,  and  in  the  visible  Church,  we  have 
many  bad  examples ;  but  we  must  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil  (Exod.  xxiii. 
2),  2,  There  are  a  few  in  the  Church  who  may  be  followed  in  some  things;  but 
whatever  their  excellencies  are,  we  cannot  safely  follow  them  in  aU  their  ways, 
3,  But  we  have  a  perfect  example  in  the  conduct  of  our  Saviour  ;  and  we  are  bound 
by  the  most  sacred  ties  to  walk  in  His  steps  (1  Pet,  ii.  21).  {Theological  Sketch-book. ) 
Going  about  doing  good : — We  have  aU  heard  of  the  celebrated  Cook,  the  circum- 
navigator who  went  round  the  globe.  Wherever  Cook  landed  he  was  noticed  by 
the  boatmen  to  go  up  away  from  them  a  bit,  and  he  was  seen  to  take  Uttle  packets 
out  of  his  pockets  and  keep  on  going  round,  throwing  them  out  of  his  hand  and 
circulating  them.  He  belted  the  whole  world  with  English  flowers.  He  took 
packets  of  our  seeds,  and  at  those  places  where  he  landed  he  took  care  to  walk  a 
little  bit  away  and  sow  some  of  the  seed  where  most  likely  it  would  grow.  Hence 
other  navigators  have  been  surprised  to  find  that  Enghsh  flowers  were  growing 
where  they  never  could  have  dreamt  of  seeing  them.  That  is  how  we  ought  to 
do — get  some  of  the  precious  seed  into  your  own  soul,  and  carry  it  with  you 
wherever  you  go.  Have  it  with  you  on  the  trip  to  the  seaside,  or  even  to  Switzer- 
land, or  have  it  when  you  stay  at  home.  Always  sow  the  seed  of  kiudness  and 
true  happiness,  above  all  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  in  this  you  will  be  follow- 
ing Christ,  of  whom  it  is  written,  "  He  went  about  doing  good."  (C.  H.  Spurgcon.) 
The  ways  of  doing  good  (children's  sermon) : — When  we  hear  of  any  great  man 
we  always  want  to  know  how  he  lived,  and  what  he  used  to  do — General  Washing- 
ton, e.g.,  Benjamin  FranMin,  Christopher  Columbus,  Alfred  the  Great,  &c.  But 
you  may  put  all  great  men  together,  and,  compared  with  Jesus,  they  are  only  like 
stars  compared  with  the  sun.  "  Jesus  went  about  doing  good  "  because  He  was 
so  able  to  do  it.  He  hadn't  much  money  ;  for  though  He  made  the  world,  when 
He  was  here.  He  said,  "  The  foxes  have  holes,"  &c.  But  though  He  had  no 
money  to  give  away,  He  could  do  good  in  hundreds  of  other  ways.  Then,  again, 
He  went  about  doing  good  to  show  us  how  to  live  (1  Pet.  ii.  21).  And  this  is 
what  I  wish  to  talk  to  you  about,  viz.,  four  ways  in  which  we  should  all  try  to  do 
good,  I,  By  becoming  Christians  ourselves.  True  Christians  are  the  most 
useful  people  in  the  world.  Many  of  our  houses  have  iron-rods  running  from 
above  the  top  of  the  chimney  down  into  the  ground.  Those  lightning-rods  carry 
the  lightning  off  and  prevent  it  from  doing  any  harm.  And  true  Christians 
are  like  lightning-rods.  When  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked.  He  is  often  kept  from 
punishing  them  on  account  of  the  good  Christians  who  hve  among  them.  You 
see  this  in  Abraham's  prayer  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrha.  You  know  how  useful  the 
light  is.  Well,  Jesus  said  to  His  disciples,  "  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world."  If  we  were 
travelling  along  a  dangerous  road,  the  hght  would  show  us  the  road,  and  how  we 
might  keep  out  of  the  pits.  Now,  this  world  is  a  road  full  of  dangers.  But  true 
Christians  see  them  and  know  how  to  avoid  them.  And  if  we  would  be  lights  in  the 
world,  showing  people  their  danger  and  how  they  may  escape,  we  must  become  true 
Christians.  Here  is  a  watch,  a  very  useful  thing.  The  inside  is  full  of  works, 
and  in  the  midst  is  the  mainspring :  that  makes  the  watch  go  and  keep  good  time. 
But  suppose  the  mainspring  is  broken,  will  it  keep  time  ?  No.  So  I  must  take  it 
to  the  watchmaker,  and  get  a  new  mainspring.  Now,  our  hearts  are  like  a  broken 
mainspring,  and  we  must  take  our  heart  to  Jesus,  and  ask  Him  to  change  it ;  to 
put  a  new  mainspi'ing  in  the  broken  watch  of  your  soul.  Then  it  will  be  ready  to  keep 
time,  to  do  good.  II.  By  trying  to  make  others  Christians.  Suppose  you  were 
traveUing  through  a  desert  with  a  company  of  friends.     You  have  no  water,  and 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  181 

are  almost  perishing  from  thirst.     Yon  separate  and  go  in  different  directiong 
searching  for  water.    Presently  you  find  a  spring.     You  kneel  down  and  take  a 
nice  long  drink.    And  then  of  course  at  the  top  of  your  voice  you  would  cry  out — 
"  Come  this  way ;— here  is  water  1 "    And  this  is  just  the  way  we  should  feel  when 
we  become  Christians.      A  little  heathen  girl  was  taken  from   New  Zealand  to 
England  to  be  educated.     She  became  a  Christian.    Before  this  she  was  so  pleased 
with  England  that  she  didn't  care  about  going  back.     But  as  soon  as  she  learned 
to  love  Jesus,  she  said :  "  Do  you  think  I  can  keep  the  good  news  to  myself?    No ; 
I  want  to  go  home  and  tell  my  friends  there  about  Jesus."     Some  time  ago  an 
old  man  became  a  Christian,  and  asked  himself  how  he  could  be  doing  good.     He 
made  out  a  list  of  his  old  associates,  which  contained  one  hundred  and  sixteen 
names.     Some  of  these  were  the  worst  men  in  the  town.     He  began  to  pray  for 
these.    He  talked  to  them,  and  gave  them  good  books  to  read.     Some  refused  to 
listen,  and  others  made  fun  ;  but  still  he  went  on  praying  and  working  for  them. 
And  what  was  the  result?     Why,  within  two  years,  one  hundred  of  them  had 
become  Christians  too !     That  was  doing  good  indeed !     A  Christian  gentleman 
while  travelling  on  a  steamboat,  distributed  some  tracts.     Many  read  them  care- 
fully.   But  one  gentleman  took  one  of  the  tracks  and  doubled  it  up,  and  then  cut 
it  into  little  pieces  and  scattered  them  over  the  side  of  the  boat.    But  one  of  the 
pieces  stuck  to  his  coat.     He  looked  at  it  a  moment  before  throwing  it  away,  and 
found  on    one  side  only  the    word   "  God,"  on  the  other  the  word   "Eternity." 
He  threw  it  away  ;  but  these  two  solemn  words — "  God  "  and  "  Eternity  " — he 
could  not  get  rid  of.     They  haunted  him  wherever  he  went,  and  he  never  had  any 
comfort  till  he  became  a  Christian.     III.  By  helping  the  sick  and  pooe.     Jesus 
was  always  especially  ready  to  help  the  poor.     He  told  His  disciples  that  whenever 
they  did  a  kindness  to  one  of  His  poor  He  would  consider  it  as  done  to  Himself. 
And  James  teUs  us  that   true  religion  consists   in  *'  visiting  the   fatherless  and 
widows  in  their  affliction."     We  find  poor  people  everywhere,  and  children  can  do 
good  in  this  way  as  well  as  grown-up  people.     Mary  Parsons  was  a  bright,  happy 
little  girl,  because  she  was  always  trying  to  do  good.     One  day  a  lady  called  in  to  see 
her  mother.     This  lady  had  just  been  visiting  a  poor  old  woman  eighty-six  years 
old,  who  lived  by  herself  in  a  dark,  damp  cellar.     Mary  listened  with  great  interest 
while  the  lady  was  speaking,  and  then  she  said,  "  Oh,  mother,  please  let  me  carry 
her  over  some  breakfast  and  dinner  every  day  :  we  have  so  much  left."     Mary  was 
so  earnest  about  it  that  her  mother  said  she  might  do  it.     No  matter  how  anxious 
her  little  sisters  were  for  Mary  to  play  with  them  ;  no  matter  whether  it  was  hot 
or  cold,  wet  or  dry,  Mary  never  got  tired.    Sometimes  she  would  read  the  Bible  and 
sometimes  take  her  doll's  frocks  and  sit  down  by  her  side,  and  chat  away  merrily  to 
amuse  her.     And  the  poor  old  woman  speaking  about  her  one  day,  her  eyes  filled 
with  tears,  said,  "  Oh,  she  brings  a  ray  of    sunshine  with  her  every  time  she 
comes,  and  it  seems  to  brighten  my  dark  room  long  after  she  is  gone.     God  bless 
her!     She  is  one  of  the  dear  lambs  of  Jesus,  I  am  sure."     Now  Mary  was  only 
eight  years  old  when  she  began  to  do  this.     Is  there  no  poor  old  woman,  or  sick 
and  hungry  child,  in  your  neighbourhood  to  whom  you  can  take  food  from  your 
table  that  would  not  be  missed  ?     IV.  By  being  kind  to  ail.     Jesus  was  aU  the 
time  speaking  kind  words  and  doing  kind  things.     Read  what  He  said  to  the  widow 
of  Nain,  and  what  He  did  for  her.     Two  ragged  barefooted  boys  were  going  along 
one  of  the  streets  of  New  York.     One  was  perfectly  happy  over  a  half-withered 
bunch  of  flowers  which  he  had  just  picked  up.     "I  say,  Billy,"  said  he,  "wasn't 
somebody  real  good  to  drop  these  'ere  posies  just  where  I  could  find  them — and 
they're  so  pooty  and  nice  ?     Look  sharp,  Billy,  mebby  you'll  find  something  bime- 
hj."    Presently  the  boy  exclaimed,  "  Oh  jolly,  Billy,  if  here  ain't  'most  half  a 
peach,  and  'tain't  mush  dirty  neither.     'Cause  you  hain't  found  nothin'  you  may 
bite  first."    Billy  was  just  going  to  take  a  very  little  taste  of  it,  when  his  com- 
panion said,    "Bite  bigger,  BiUy,  mebby  we'll  find  another  'fore  long."    What 
a  noble  heart  that  poor  boy  had  in  spite  of  his  rags  and  dirt !     He  was  "  doing 
good"    in    the    fourth    way    that  we    are   speaking    of.        {R.    Newton,    D.D.) 
The  example  of  Jesm  in  doing  good : — I.  His  great  wobk  and   business  in  the 
WORLD  WAS  TO  DO  GOOD.     What  He  did,  and  we  in  imitation  of  Him  ought  to  do,  I 
shall  reduce  to  two  heads.     1.  Doing  good  to  the  souls  of  men,  and  endeavouring 
to  promote  their  spiritual  and  eternal  happiness.     (1)  By  good  inytruction.    And 
under  instruction  I  comprehend  all  the  means  of  bringing  men  to  the  knowledge  of 
ftheir  duty,  and  exciting  them  to  the  practice  of  it ;  by  instructing  their  ignorance. 
And  removing  their  prejudices,  and  rectifying  their  mistakes,  by  persuasion  and  bj 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

reproof  ;  and  by  making  lasting  provision  for  the  promoting  of  these  ends.     (2)  By 
good  example.     And  this  our  blessed  Saviour  was  in  the  utmost  perfection.    And 
this  we  should  endeavour  to  be.    For  good  example  hath  a  secret  influence  upon 
those  with  whom  we  converse,  to  form  them  into  the  same  disposition  and  manners. 
It  is  a  Uving  rule  that  teacheth  men  without  trouble,  and  lets  them  see  their  faults 
without  open  reproof.    Besides  that,  it  adds  great  weight  to  a  man's  persuasion, 
when  we  see  that  he  advises  nothing  but  what  he  does,  nor  exacts  anything  from 
which  he  himself  desires  to  be  excused.      As,  on  the  contrary,  nothing  is  more 
insignificant  than  good  counsel  from  one  that  does  not  foUow  the  advice  which  he 
is  so  forward  to  give  to  others.     2.  Procuring  their  temporal  good,  and  contributing 
to  their  happiness  in  this  present  life.     And  this  was  a  great  part  of  Christ's  busi- 
ness in  this  world.    And  though  we  cannot  be  beneficial  to  men  in  the  miraculous 
manner  that  He  was,  yet  we  may  be  so  in  the  use  of  ordinary  means ;  we  may 
comfort  the  afflicted,  and  vindicate  the  oppressed,  and  do  a  great  many  acts  of 
charity  which  our  Saviour,  by  reason  of  His  poverty,  could  not  do  without  a  miracle ; 
we  may  take  a  poor  child  and  bring  him  up  in  the  knowledge  and  fear  of  God,  and 
put  him  into  a  way  wherein,  by  his  industry,  he  may  make  a  fortune,  and  be  able 
to  reheve  hundreds  of  others.     Men  glory  in  raising  magnificent  structures,  and 
find  a  secret  pleasure  to  see  sets  pf  their  own  planting  to  grow  up  and  flourish  ;  but 
surely  it  is  a  greater  and  more  glorious  work  to  build  up  a  man,  to  see  a  youth 
of  our  own  planting  take  root  in  the  world,  and  to  shoot  up  and  spread  his  branches 
BO  that  we,  who  first  planted  him,  may  ourselves  find  comfort  under  his  shadow. 
And  those  who  are  in  the  lowest  condition  may  do  great  good  to  others  by  their 
prayers.     For  "  the  fervent  prayer  of  righteous  man  avaUeth  much."      n.  His 
DILIGENCE  IN  THIS  woBK.     This  will  f  ully  appear  if  we  consider — 1.  How  unwearied 
He  was.     He  was  not  only  ready  to  do  good  to  those  that  gave  Him  opportunity, 
and  besought  Him  to  do  it,  but  went  Himself  to  seek  out  objects.     2.  How  self- 
denying  He  was.     He  neglected  the  ordinary  refreshments  of  nature,  that  He  might 
attend  this  work.     He  was  at  everybody's  beck  and  disposal.     Nay,  He  was  willing 
to  deny  Himself  in  one  of  the  dearest  things  in  the  world — His  reputation  and  good 
name.     3.  Consider  the  malicious  opposition  and  sinister  construction  that  His 
good  deeds  met  with.    For  His  casting  out  of  devils.  He  was  called  a  magician  ;  for 
His  endeavour  to  reclaim  men  from  their  vices,  "  a  friend  of  pubhcans  and  sinners  " ; 
for  His  free  and  obUging  conversation,  "  a  wine-bibber  and  a  glutton."    4.  How 
cheerfully,  notwithstanding  all  this,  He  persevered  I     It  was  not  only  His  business, 
but  His  delight ;  "  I  delight  (says  He)  to  do  Thy  will,  0  My  God."     Conclusion : 
The  subject  will  be  of  excellent  use.     1.  To  show  us  our  defects.     How  does  this 
blessed  example  upbraid  those  who,  instead  of  "  going  about  doing  good,"  are 
perpetually  intent  upon  doing  mischief  ?    And  those  likewise  who,  though  they  are 
far  from  being  so  bad,  yet  whoUy  neglect  this  blessed  work  of  doing  good  ?    And 
this  too  under  a  pretence  of  being  employed  about  other  duties.     They  are  so  taken 
up  with  prayer,  and  reading  and  hearing  sermons,  and  sacraments,  that  they  have 
scarce  any  leisure  to  mind  the  doing  of  charitable  offices.     Others  spend  all  their 
zeal  about  some  controversies  in  religion  ;  and  therefore  think  it  but  reasonable 
that  they  should  be  excused  from  those  meaner  kind  of  duties,  as  those  who  serve 
the  king  in  his  wars  used  to  be  exempted  from  taxes.     But  "  pure  religion  and 
undefiled  before  God  and  the  Father  is  this,  to  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in 
their  affliction."    2.  To  persuade  us  to  the  imitation  of  this  blessed  example.    Let 
us  "go  and  do  likewise."     The  work  itself  is  such  that  men  should  not  need  to  be 
courted  nor  urged  to  it.    But  dwell  upon  these  considerations.     (1)  It  shows  an 
inchnation  and  desire  to  have  others  happy  as  well  as  ourselves.     Those  who  are  of 
a  mean  and  sordid  disposition  love  to  contract  themselves  within  themselves,  and 
like  the  hedgehog,  to  shoot  out  their  quUls  at  every  one  who  comes  near  them. 
But  the  noblest  and  most  heavenly  dispositions  think  themselves  happiest  when 
others  share  with  them  in  their  happiness.     (2)  It  is  the  most  pleasant  employment 
in  the  world.     This  Cato  boasts  of,  as  the  great  comfort  of  his  old  age — '•  that 
nothing  was  more  pleasant  than  the  conscience  of  a  well-spent  life,  and  the  remem- 
brance of  many  kindnesses  done  to  others."     Sensual  pleasures  are  not  lasting,  and 
leave  a  sting  behind  them.    But  the  pleasure  of  doing  good  remains,  and  the  reflec- 
tion upon  it  afterwards  does  for  ever  minister  joy.     (3)  It  is  to  imitate  the  highest 
excellency  and  perfection  ;  it  is  to  be  like  God,  who  is  good  and  doth  good,  and  to 
be  like  Him  iu  that  which  He  esteems  His  greatest  f,'lory,  and  that  is.  His  goodness. 
(4)  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  substantial  duties  of  religion  ;  and,  next  to 
the  love  and  honour  which  we  pay  to  God  Himself,  the  most  acceptable  service  that 


CHAP.  X.]  TEE  ACTS.  183 

•we  can  perform  to  Hhn.  It  is  one  half  of  the  law,  and  next  to  the  first  and  great 
command,  and  very  like  unto  it :  in  the  excellency  of  its  nature,  and  in  the  necessity 
of  its  obhgation,  (5)  It  will  give  us  the  greatest  comfort  when  we  come  to  die.  (6) 
It  is  attended  with  the  greatest  consideration  I  shall  offer  to  you — which  is  reward 
both  in  this  world  and  the  other.  {Abp.  Tillotson.)  The  example  of  Christ: — I. 
Look  at  THE  LIFE  OP  OUB  LoBD  as  here  described.  1.  That  life  was  very  short, 
three  and  a  half  years  at  most ;  but  it  was  long  in  point  of  action  ;  it  was  filled  up 
with  works  which  will  stand  for  ever.  No  one  ever  made  such  a  mark  on  the  earth  as 
our  Lord.  2.  Here  is  one  of  the  great  "  notes  "  that  no  infidel  can  explain— Who 
Christ  was,  whence  Christ  came,  why  Christ  did  what  He  did,  and  left  the  mark 
upon  the  world  that  He  certainly  left.  Had  He  money  wherewith  to  bribe  the 
world  and  make  men  follow  Him  ?  He  was  poor  in  every  way.  Had  He  power  to 
turn  men  to  follow  Him  as  Mahomet  had  ?  His  followers  were  a  few  pubUcans  and 
fishermen.  Whence,  then,  the  power  that  Christ  had  ?  How  account  for  the  effect 
that  He  produced  on  the  world  ?  There  is  no  accounting  for  it  all,  but  on  the 
Christian  theory  that  Christ  was  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  3.  When  we  look  on 
the  life  of  our  Lord,  how  unlike  it  is  to  the  conquerors  who  have  shaken  the  world  I 
Run  your  mind  over  the  long  list — Ctesar,  Alexander,  Napoleon,  &o.  What  mark 
their  victories  ?  Death,  wounds,  poverty,  sorrow,  ruin.  Then  turn  to  the  hf e  of  that 
King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  See  the  amazing  contrast.  He  brought  hfe  and 
immortaUty  to  light ;  He  opened  up  to  men  hopes  for  the  present  and  for  the 
future ;  the  way  of  peace  between  God  and  men.  He  did  good — (1)  To  bodies.  No 
disease  was  too  loathsome  for  Him  to  show  kindness  to.  (2)  By  His  words.  Think 
how  they  have  travelled  through  the  world  for  eighteen  hundred  years,  and  wherever 
they  have  gone,  they  have  been  the  comfort  and  peace  of  those  who  have  received 
them.  Think  how  a  text,  dormant  it  may  be  for  many  long  years,  has  revived 
when  the  time  of  trial  and  sickness  comes.  (3)  Continually,  Wherever  He  went 
He  brought  blessing  with  Him.  (4)  By  His  witness  against  sins  and  superstitions 
of  the  generation  among  which  He  lived.  (5)  By  His  patience,  "  When  He  was 
reviled,  He  reviled  not  again,  when  He  suffered,  He  threatened  not."  4.  Learn 
here — (1)  The  wickedness  of  human  nature.  Think  for  a  moment  how  this  won- 
derful Person  was  treated.  (2)  What  constitutes  greatness  in  the  sight  of  God. 
He  is  the  good  man,  not  who  had  the  highest  title  and  greatest  position,  and  the 
largest  amount  to  pay  for  income  tax,  but  he  who  does  the  greatest  amount  of 
good.  Our  Lord  says,  "  He  that  will  be  great  among  you,  let  him  be  as  your 
minister."  II.  The  duty  of  Christians  to  follow  His  example.  1.  I  doubt 
whether  that  is  as  much  looked  at  as  it  should  be.  We  seldom  look  at  more  than 
one  thing  at  a  time,  for  men  are  so  occupied.  When  they  first  feel  their  sins  they 
think  only  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour,  and  they  are  apt  to  forget  that  He  is  our  Pattern 
and  Example.  Yet  Christ  and  the  apostles  ever  insisted  upon  it.  We  ought  to  ask 
ourselves  continually,  "  Is  there  anything  of  Christ  ever  seen  in  my  tempers,  efforts, 
conduct,  home,  business  ?  "  Am  I  walking  in  Jesus  Christ's  steps  ?  Am  I,  like 
Him,  endeavouring  to  do  good  ?  2.  You  and  I  were  never  meant  to  be  idle,  nor  to 
be  always  trying  to  get  good  for  ourselves.  Many,  however,  run  from  place  to  place ; 
hear  sermon  after  sermon,  are  always  thinking  of  getting ;  but  we  are  not  meant  to 
be  always  receiving ;  we  are  meant  to  be  doing  for  Christ  and  for  Christ's  cause. 
3.  Men  may  say,  "What  can  I  do?"  There  is  always  something  that  every  one 
can  do.  There  is  no  one  who  has  not  some  influence  upon  some  one  or  other.  If 
you  have  a  single  grain  of  influence  throw  it  into  the  scale  of  good,  and  not  into  the 
scale  of  evil.  Parents  can  do  good  to  their  children  ;  masters  and  mistresses  to 
their  servants.  4.  To  labour  for  this  does  ourselves  good.  Little  by  little  we  find 
graces  grow  in  proportion  as  we  try  to  exercise  them.  And  it  helps  forward  the 
cause  of  Christ  in  the  world.  The  eyes  of  many  are  upon  you,  and  if  the  watching, 
envious  world  sees  you  a  mere  idle  Christian,  thinking  only  of  your  own  enjoyment, 
but  never  trying  to  do  good,  the  world  vrill  think  little  of  your  religion.  But  when 
they  see  you  walk  in  the  steps  of  the  Saviour,  striving  to  make  all  around  you 
happy,  it  sets  the  world  thinking.  There  is  no  book  or  set  of  lectures,  which  ever 
does  so  much  good  to  sceptics  as  a  Christ-like  life.  5.  This  was  the  way  of  the  old 
Christians ;  their  ways  and  manners  made  the  heathen  think.  This  was  the  conduct 
of  the  followers  of  old  John  Wesley,  It  was  part  of  that  wonderful  man's  first 
principle  to  impress  the  necessity  of  doing  good,  "  Now,  then,  what  are  you  going 
to  do  ?  We  do  not  want  any  drones  in  our  hive ;  we  want  every  one  that  becomes  a 
member  of  our  body  to  do  something  for  the  glory  of  God,  for  the  benefit  of  man." 
{Bf.  Eyle.)        Christ  our  Example : — We  ought  to  foUow  Chost  in  taking  all  oppor* 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

tunities  of  doing  good.  I.  What  are  the  good  works  we  should  do  in  imitatioh 
OF  Christ  ?  1.  Works  of  piety.  (1)  Internal  (John  iv.  24).  (a)  Love  (Matt.  xxii. 
37).  (6)  Fear  (Prov.  xxiii.  17).  (c)  Faith,  [d)  Trust  (Prov.  iii.  5).  (e)  Submission 
(Luke  xxii,  42).  (2)  External ;  as  praying,  hearing,  &o.  42.  Works  of  equity 
(Micah  vi.  8).  (1)  Distributive  (Rom.  xiii.  7  ;  Matt.  xvii.  27).  (2)  Communicativa 
(Prov.  iii.  27,  28  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  6).  3.  Works  of  charity  (1  Tim.  vi.  17,  18).  (1)  To 
pity  others  in  misery  (Matt.  xv.  32 ;  xx,  34).  (2)  To  pray  for  their  feUcity  (Luke 
xxiii.  34).  (3)  To  supply  their  necessities  (Matt.  xx.  34).  Consider — (a)  Without 
this  there  is  no  true  religion  (James  i.  27).  {b)  By  it  we  imitate  God  (Luke  vi.  36). 
(c)  Whatsoever  we  have  more  than  is  necessary  is  given  for  this  end.  (d)  God, 
notwithstanding,  will  repay  it  (Prov.  xix.  17).  11.  What  things  are  necessar'J 
FOR  ODR  imitation  OP  Christ  IN  DOING  GOOD  7  1.  Exerting  the  utmost  of  oui 
power  in  doing  it  (Eccles.  ix.  10).  2.  Managing  all  the  circumstances  aright.  3. 
Doing  it  constantly  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  (1)  Negative,  (a)  Not  for  the  applause  of 
men  (Matt.  vi.  1).  (6)  Nor  to  merit  anything  from  God  (Luke  xviiL  10).  (2)  Posi- 
tive.  (a)  Subordinately  for  our  own  safety  (1  Cor.  ix.  24,  27).  (6)  Ultimately  for 
God's  glory  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  III.  In  what  sense  are  wb  always  to  be  doing  good? 
1.  So  as  never  to  do  evU  (1  Pet.  ii.  22 ;  1  John  iii.  5).  2.  So  as  always  to  b« 
designing  good.  3.  So  as  to  embrace  aU  opportunities  for  doing  good  (John  iv.  7, 8  ; 
vi.  25).  IV.  Why  should  we  be  always  doing  good  ?  1.  We  are  commanded 
(Luke  i.  74,  75  ;  Psa.  xxxiv.  13).  2.  We  are  always  receiving  good.  3.  Our  beinga 
were  first  given,  and  are  now  continued  to  us,  that  we  might  always  be  doing  good 
fisa.  i.  2-4).  4.  When  we  are  not  doing  good  we  are  doing  evil  (Psa.  xxxvii.  27). 
(Bp.  Beveridge.)  Our  great  example  : — "  Who  went  about  doing  good."  1.  Such 
was  the  recollection  of  one  who  was  amongst  the  nearest  and  dearest  companions  of 
Jesus.  Peter  had  in  recollection  the  aims  and  habit  not  of  one  day,  but  of  every 
day.  2.  We  are  living  in  times  when  "many  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge 
is  increased."  All  classes  are  restless ;  the  facilities  of  travelling  are  induce- 
ments to  that  restlessness.  We  do  not  grudge  what  science  has  done  to  annihilata 
distance  and  make  moving  to  and  fro  easy.  3.  But  here,  as  elsewhere,  are  dangers. 
Facilities  for  evil  may  be  made  out  of  what  God  intended  only  to  be  facilities  fol 
good.  "  Some  people,"  says  Pascal,  "  wish  to  move  about  the  more,  only  that  they 
may  just  talk  the  more.  For  the  mere  pleasure  of  seeing,  without  the  pleasure  oi 
telling,  would  have  little  force  upon  many."  Let  us  remember,  in  these  days,  when 
so  many  of  us  are  about  to  part  company  for  awhile  in  the  excursions  of  the  summer, 
that  we  have  a  Christian  rule  to  walk  by  in  all  our  journey — a  rule  which  has  ita 
example  in  Jesus,  "  who  went  about  doing  good."  4.  The  text  describes  what  waa 
the  very  law  of  the  Redeemer's  nature.  He  was  shown  to  be  the  Son  of  the  living  God 
in  the  active,  unwearied  beneficence  of  His  life.  God's  providence  over  this  world 
is  active.  It  is  not  beneath  the  dignity  of  the  Almighty  to  regulate  particular  events. 
And  the  history  of  Divine  interference  and  legislation  is  told  in  these  words — "  Ha 
went  about  doing  good."  The  active  beneficence  of  the  Divine  Being  is  concealed 
from  our  eyes  behind  the  curtain  of  matter ;  but  is  exhibited  to  us  in  the  person  of 
Jesus.  And  I  may  go  a  step  further.  If  active  benevolence  was  a  necessary  feature 
in  the  perfect  character  of  Jesus,  because  of  His  relationship  to  His  Father,  bo 
active  beneficence  should  be  a  necessary  feature  in  the  real  Christian,  because  of  hia 
relationship  with  Christ.  And  now  think  a  little  of  His  sphere  of  active  benevolence. 
It  took  in  the  whole  range  of  human  distress.  And  His  ministrations  of  mercy 
were  equally  to  the  evil  and  the  good.  And  the  labour  was  incessant  too.  His  very 
rest  was  devoted  to  the  rehef  of  spiritual  and  bodily  want.  And  yet  the  humanity 
of  Jesus  wanted  calm  recreations,  still  retirement,  just  as  yours  and  mine  does. 
Note,  too,  another  circumstance.  We  are  all  ready  to  be  beneficent  when  we  are 
sustained  by  large  sights,  and  great  occasions  ;  but  how  was  it  with  our  Divine 
Master  ?  The  isolated  case,  which  no  eye  saw  but  His  own.  His  mind  and  heart 
were  as  much  absorbed  in  it  as  if  the  appeal  of  a  multitude  was  before  Him. 
Amongst  the  poorer  sort  He  was  always  found  comforting,  healing,  feeding,  teaching. 
5.  That  we  may  be  Christlike  in  active  beneficence,  we  must  seek  more  of  that  faith 
which  works  by  love,  and  is  careful  to  maintain  good  works.  This  is  the  only 
principle  of  Christian  obedience.  Having  faith  in  Him,  let  ug  adopt  Him  as  our 
example.  Let  each  one,  then,  ask  himself,  "Am  I  living  for  myself  or  for  my 
Saviour?  Does  my  faith  show  itself  in  works  of  active  beneficence?"  All  have 
some  talent.  Only  one  thing  is  wanted — unselfish  love.  If  you  are  converted,  you 
can  go  and  tell  others  what  conversion  is.  If  you  pray,  you  can  go  and  tell  others  what 
prayer  Ib.    If  you  have  a  sick  neighbour,  you  can  visit  him.      You  could  take  a  clasf 


«H1P.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  185 

in  the  Sunday-school ;  or  fill  up  one  of  the  many  chasms  in  the  District  Visiting  Society. 
And,  my  poorer  brethren,  because  you  are  no  scholars,  do  not  think  that  you  cannot 
imitate  your  Master,  and  go  about  doing  good.  You  may  speak  a  word  in  season  to 
your  poor  neighbours,  and  you  may  shine  as  a  light  in  the  world.  {G.  J.  P.  Eyre,  M.A.) 
The  Saviour's  active  benevolence : — He  went  about  doing  good — I.  By  His  mikacles, 
which  not  only  compelled  attention  to  His  instructions,  and  demanded  assent  to 
His  claim  of  being  Divinely  sent,  but  were  all  deeds  of  mercy.  Not  one  of  them 
^vas  a  useless  or  vengeful  display  of  power.  His  first  miracle  contributed  to  the 
social  enjoyment  of  a  festive  occasion ;  and  His  last  was  the  heahng  of  a  man 
whom  one  of  His  own  disciples  had  wounded.  Objection  has,  indeed,  been  made 
to  two  of  our  Lord's  miracles  on  the  ground  that  they  were  not  of  a  merciful  and 
useful  character.  One  is  that  by  which  the  demons  were  sent  into  the  herd  of 
swine.  Here,  it  is  said,  an  injury  was  inflicted  on  the  owners.  But  it  may  be 
answered  that  the  first  and  main  object  was  merciful — the  restoration  of  the 
lunatics  to  their  right  mind.  Secondly,  the  injury  inflicted  was  not  done  revenge- 
fully, but  punitively.  To  keep  swine  was  contrary  to  the  Jewish  law.  The  other 
miracle  is  the  withering  of  the  barren  fig-tree.  But  the  tree  probably  stood  in  the 
highway,  and  was  therefore  no  one's  property ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  occurrence, 
was  one  of  great  profit  to  the  disciples.  II.  By  His  insteuctions.  In  an  age  when 
the  art  of  printing  was  unknown,  and  when  manuscripts  could  come  into  the  hands 
of  but  few,  the  oral  mode  of  communicating  knowledge  was  the  only  way  in  which 
instruction  could  reach  the  multitude.  How  indefatigably  Jesus  went  about,  "  teach- 
ing  in  the  synagogues  and  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom."  That  His  teach- 
ing was  altogether  good  His  recorded  precepts  are  abundant  proof.  If  He  stirred 
up  the  people,  it  was  with  admiring  wonder  to  hear  the  words  of  grace  and  truth 
which  He  spake ;  it  was  to  repentance  and  holiness,  to  faith  and  obedience,  to  love 
and  piety.  HI.  By  His  example.  His  conduct  was  a  clear  and  holy  commentary 
on  His  words.  His  life  transcended,  if  possible,  His  instructions ;  because  it  is  so 
much  more  difficult  and  rare  to  live  unexceptionably  than  to  instruct  wisely.  His 
character  was  tried  in  many  scenes  and  under  diverse  circumstances ;  and  in  all 
appeared  pure,  hke  gold  tried  seven  times  in  the  fire.  And  they  who  know  the 
power  of  example,  and  the  efficacy  which  practice  gives  to  preaching,  and  the  great 
part  which  being  good  is  of  doing  good,  will  perceive  that  our  Saviour's  example  is 
an  inseparable  portion  of  His  benevolence.  Conclusion  :  If  the  benevolence  of  Hia 
miracles  did  not  make  its  due  impression  on  the  Jews,  let  us  not  be  likewise  in- 
sensible to  that  mark  of  their  truth  and  divinity.  If  but  few  of  them  were  con- 
verted by  His  doctrine,  let  not  us  also  blindly  refuse  the  proffered  light  and  salva- 
tion. If  they  were  not  affected  by  the  bright  consistency  of  His  example,  let  us 
give  it  more  attentive  heed  ourselves,  and  transfer  it  with  more  exactness  to  our  own 
conduct.  (F.  W.  P.  Greenwood.)  The  life  of  Christ: — Here  is  the  life  of  our 
Lord  comprehended  in  a  single  sentence.  Note — I.  The  business  which  oub  Lord 
FOLLOWED.  As  all  Ordinary  men  have  their  callings,  so  our  Lord  had  His.  It  was 
none  of  those  occupations  by  which  the  gains  of  this  world  are  acquired  ;  it  was  the 
holy  business  of  "doing  good."  One  part  of  this  was  the  "doing  good" — 1.  To 
men's  bodies.  And  what  a  Ust  might  be  enumerated  of  His  benefactions  I  How 
many  bhnd  eyes  were  opened,  &c.  None  applied  to  Him  in  vain.  None  were  sent 
from  Him  unrelieved.  2.  To  men's  souls.  (1)  By  His  holy  ministrations.  What 
a  preacher  of  righteousness  was  He,  and  in  what  a  variety  of  ways  did  He  address 
the  hearts  of  men  !  (2)  By  His  death.  Our  case  was  such  as  all  the  preaching  in 
the  world  could  not  have  rectified.  We  were  dying  sinners.  We  wanted  a  salva- 
tion to  be  wrought  for  us  ;  and  the  only  way  of  doing  us  effectual  good  was  to  pro- 
vide us  one.  So  Christ  crowned  all  His  other  acts  of  goodness  by  the  goodness  of 
His  Gross.  II.  The  way  in  which  He  cabeied  on  His  business.  "  He  went 
about."  Just  as  the  trader  goes  about  with  his  wares,  and  is  unwearied  in  pursuit 
of  gain,  so  Jesus  "  went  about "  upon  the  business  of  blessing  man.  The  great 
enemy  "  goeth  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,"  and  the  Great  Friend  went 
about  seeking  whom  He  might  do  good  to ;  and  literally,  for  whithersoever  the 
Wessed  Jesus  travelled.  He  was  a  traveller  on  foot.  I  know  not  a  more  striking 
illustration  of  our  text  than  is  contained  in  Matt,  ix.,  which  contains  the  story  of  a 
-day  spent  by  Him.  in.  What  improvement  can  we  make  of  the  text?  Let 
me  ask  you — 1.  Do  you  want  to  have  good  done  to  you?  If  so,  behold  your  Bene- 
iactor  1  He  that  "  went  about  doing  good  "  when  upon  earth,  is  now  as  ready  to  do 
^ood  to  you  from  heaven.  2.  Are  you  copying  His  character  ?  Jesus  is  set  forth 
not  as  the  Saviour  only  of  His  people,  but  their  Pattern.    We  may  do  good — (1)  Sj 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

our  examples.  (2)  By  our  exertions ;  watching  for  opportunities  of  usefulness,  and 
endeavouring  to  be  a  help  and  a  comfort,  both  in  spirituals  and  temporals,  to  all 
about  us  and  around  us.  (A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The  matchless  life  : — Christ  went 
about,  not  like  a  Pharisee,  to  make  a  show ;  not  like  the  Eomans,  to  parade  military 
prowess ;  not  like  the  Greeks,  to  display  worldly  wit  and  wisdom  ;  but  to  do  good 
to  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men.  During  the  great  work  of  creation,  God,  in  each 
step,  pronounced  it  "  very  good  "  ;  and  when  God  entered  upon  the  work  of  human 
redemption  He  did  good,  and  at  its  close  He  exclaimed,  with  perfect  satisfaction, 
*•  It  is  finished."  He  did  not  go  about  getting  good,  or  becoming  good,  but  dis- 
pensing good.  He  did  good  because  He  was  good.  By  laying  emphasis  upon  each 
of  the  five  words  before  us,  we  shall  see  their  beauty  and  feel  their  power.  L  The 
life  of  Christ  was  full  of  benevolent  effobt — who  went  about  doing  "  good."  How 
different  this  from  what  it  might  have  been  !  He  might  have  performed  miracles 
of  vengeance,  as  Moses  did ;  He  might  have  come  as  a  judge,  to  condemn.  He 
remembered  mercy,  He  dealt  not  with  men  after  their  sins.  He  did  good  to  all,  at 
all  times  and  under  all  circumstances.  His  goodness  was  pure,  unmerited,  and 
free.  He  went  about,  not  to  get  to  Himself  a  name,  not  to  climb  to  positions  of 
worldly  influence  and  power,  nor  to  serve  His  own  ends,  but  to  show  by  His  own 
example  the  beauty  and  blessedness  of  His  precept,  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than 
to  receive."  The  benevolent  acts  He  performed  for  the  bodies  of  men  were  symbols 
and  types  of  what  He  would  do  for  their  souls.  In  His  gospel  Jesus  still  goes  about 
doing  good,  for  Christianity  is  philanthropic  in  its  spirit.  II.  Practical  effort — 
"  doing."  He  was  no  dreamy,  sentimental  philanthropist,  imagining  Utopian  plans, 
nor  did  He  spend  His  life  in  pronouncing  eulogiums  upon  goodness,  and  in  en- 
deavouring to  stimulate  others  in  that  direction.  He  became,  not  the  president  or 
secretary  of  a  society  to  do  good,  but  He  went  about  doing  the  good  Himself. 
Societies  are  good,  but  they  must  never  supersede  individual  effort.  Christ  did 
good  with  His  own  hands — earnestly,  heartily,  personally,  perpetually ;  not  by 
proxy,  but  enjoyed  the  luxury  of  being  His  own  almoner.  What  an  example  for  us 
to  go  and  do  likewise  !  III.  Extensive  effort — "  about."  Not  only  in  Jerusalem, 
but  throughout  GaUlee.  His  miracles  were  not  performed  among  a  select  company, 
but  out  and  about  among  aU  sorts  and  conditions  of  men,  in  secular  as  well  as  in 
sacred  places.  What  an  example  for  the  Christian  Church ;  His  followers  are  to 
begin  at  Jerusalem,  but  they  are  to  go  out  also  into  all  the  world.  The  blessings  of 
Christianity  are  not  to  be  kept  within  select  limits,  or  enjoyed  by  one  class.  The 
cathohcity  of  the  benevolence  of  Christ  should  lead  us  to  regard  every  hving  man 
as  our  neighbour.  IV.  Willing  effort — "went."  God  sent  His  Son,  but  it  is 
equally  true  that  Jesus  Christ  came.  It  was  from  no  compulsion,  but  from  choice. 
It  is  interesting  to  notice  how  many  of  the  benevolent  acts  He  performed  for  men 
were  done  unsolicited.  He  went  to  those  who  could  not  and  to  those  who  would  not 
come  to  Him,  that  they  might  be  blessed.  V.  Personal  effort — "  who."  When 
•we  remember  the  Deity  of  Christ,  we  see  that  it  was  the  great  Creator  going  about 
and  doing  good  to  His  creatures ;  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory  condescending  to 
attend  personally  to  the  wants  and  woes  of  fallen  men.  He  might  have  sent 
angels,  who  would  gladly  have  gone  about  upon  so  merciful  a  mission ;  but  He 
came  Himself.  {F.  IF.  Brown.)  The  model  home  mission  and  the  model  horn* 
missionary : — Our  Lord's  ministry  was  a  home  mission.  "  I  am  not  sent  save  to 
the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel."  Afterwards  there  sprang  out  of  His  home 
work  the  foreign  mission,  when  they  that  were  scattered  abroad  went  everywhere 
preaching  the  gospel.  And  herein  we  see  His  wisdom,  for  it  will  be  of  little  avail 
to  attempt  much  abroad  unless  there  be  a  sohd  basis  at  home,  in  an  earnest  sancti- 
fied Church,  affording  a  fulcrum  for  our  lever.  When  England  is  converted,  then 
shall  she  become  the  great  herald  of  Christ's  gospel  to  other  lands.  We  have 
before  us — I.  A  model  home  mission.  1.  Christ  selected  as  His  great  instrument 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  He  would  have  His  followers  depend  upon  the  same 
agency.  Other  godly  efforts  are  not  to  be  neglected ;  but  first  and  foremost  it 
pleases  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe.  2.  In  con- 
nection with  His  preaching  we  find  the  Master  forming  a  seminary  for  the  training 
of  ministers.  After  He  had  called  Peter  and  John,  and  others,  He  at  first  admitted 
them,  as  it  were,  into  His  evening  classes ;  for  they  pursued  their  ordinary  busi- 
ness, and  came  to  Him  at  fitting  seasons  for  instruction.  But  after  awhile  they 
separated  themselves  from  all  the  pursuits  of  business,  and  were  continually  with 
their  great  Teacher.  They  learned  how  to  preach  as  they  marked  how  He  preached. 
He  even  taught  them  to  pray.    Now  this  has  been  too  much  forgotten.     When 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  187 

Calvin  and  Luther  exerted  an  influence  over  Europe,  it  was  not  only  through  their 
preaching  or  writings,  but  through  the  young  men  who  swarmed  at  Wirtemburg  and 
Geneva  to  listen  to  the  great  Eeformers'  teaching,  and  then  afterwards  went  forth 
to  tell  abroad  what  they  had  learned.  3.  The  Master  also  connected  with  His 
preaching  and  His  college  the  invaluable  agency  of  Bible  classes ;  indeed,  the  whole 
machinery  of  a  Church  can  be  found  in  embryo  in  the  doings  of  Christ.  He  '  •  ex- 
pounded unto  them  in  all  the  Scriptures  the  things  concerning  Himself."  If  any 
home  mission  would  see  its  work  established,  the  converts  must  be  trained  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  Word.  4.  Our  Lord's  mission  work  did  not  overlook  the  children. 
Our  Sunday-school  work  is  not  only  justified,  but  even  enforced,  by  "  Suffer  the 
little  children  to  come  unto  Me,  and  forbid  them  not,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven";  and  also  by  His  saying  to  Peter,  "Feed  My  lambs."  5.  Of  late  there 
has  been  frequently  used  by  evangelists  the  plan  of  free  teas,  breakfasts,  and 
dinners,  at  which  the  poorest  persons  are  affectionately  exhorted  to  seek  salvation. 
It  is  remarkable  that  this  method  has  been  so  long  disused,  because  it  is,  with  a 
small  difference,  a  plan  adopted  by  our  Lord.  Though  many,  no  doubt,  followed 
Him  because  they  did  eat  of  the  loaves  and  fishes,  yet  I  do  not  doubt  that  some  who 
were  first  attracted  by  the  earthly  food  remained  to  eat  of  the  bread  of  heaven. 
6.  A  mission  would  also  find  great  strength  in  imitating  Jesus  by  combining  medical 
aid  with  religious  teaching.  Our  Lord  was  a  medical  missionary.  True,  we  cannot 
work  miracles,  but  we  may  do  what  is  within  human  reach  in  the  way  of  heaUng, 
and  so  we  may  follow  our  Lord,  not  with  equal  footsteps,  but  in  the  same  track.  I 
pray  for  a  closer  connection  between  the  surgeon  and  the  Saviour.  May  there  be 
many  who,  like  Luke,  are  both  physicians  and  evangelists.  7.  Our  Lord  also 
associated  vrith  His  mission  work  the  distribution  of  alms.  A  poor  man  was  found 
in  the  street  one  Sunday  morning  as  he  was  about  to  commit  suicide.  Two  of  our 
brethren  met  him,  and  led  him  to  this  Tabernacle,  but  first  they  took  him  to  a 
coffee-shop.  I  had  a  far  more  likely  hearer  in  the  man  whose  hunger  was  relieved 
than  I  coiid  have  had  in  the  poor  famishing  sinner.  Then,  after  the  sermon,  they 
gave  him  a  good  dinner,  and  so  detained  him  till  they  brought  him  here  again  in 
the  evening,  and  God  was  pleased  to  bless  the  Word  to  him.  8.  Our  Master's 
mission  was  carried  on  very  largely  through  open-air  preaching.  All  over  England 
there  are  tens  of  thousands  who  never  will  hear  the  gospel  while  open-air  preaching 
is  neglected.  It  is  altogether  a  mischievous  thing  that  we  should  confine  our 
preaching  within  walls.  9.  Our  Lord  also  set  an  example  to  home  missionaries,  in 
that  He  had  pity  on  the  villages.  Small  villages  are  often  thought  to  be  too  insig- 
nificant for  the  founding  of  churches  in  them.  But  the  villages  help  to  make  the 
large  towns,  and  the  character  of  London  depends  upon  the  character  of  village 
homes.  10.  At  the  same  time  the  Master  also  gave  much  attention  to  the  towns. 
II.  The  model  home  missionaby.  The  success  of  a  work  depends  very  little  upon 
the  system  ;  almost  everything  rests,  under  God,  upon  the  man.  There  have  been 
men  who,  with  systems  unwise  and  imperfect,  have  accomplished  noble  results, 
while  others  with  admirable  organisations  have  done  nothing.  1.  The  man  who  is 
to  serve  God  as  a  leading  missionary  must  be  a  man  of  teaching  power  and  of 
personal  influence.  It  is  of  no  use  to  send  out  a  man  who  cannot  speak.  If  you 
want  a  man  to  spread  the  gospel  he  must  be  one  who  can  preach.  Our  Lord  had 
this  grand  capacity  in  the  highest  degree.  2.  Our  Lord  as  a  missionary  fraternised 
with  the  people.  How  many  of  us,  if  we  had  seen  a  poor  harlot  coming  to  the  well, 
would  have  remained  purposely  to  converse  with  her  ?  He  was  holy,  harmless, 
nndefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners,  but  He  was  the  friend  of  publicans  and 
sinners.  And  we  must  be  one  with  those  whom  we  would  bless  ;  we  must  not  be 
ashamed  to  call  them  brethren.  3.  Our  Lord  was  a  man  who  could  toil.  He  never 
preached  a  sermon  without  weaving  His  soul  into  it.  His  life  was  a  scene  of  un- 
rivalled labour.  Now,  if  the  Church  would  see  souls  saved,  the  work  will  never  be 
achieved  by  agents  who  are  half  asleep.  4.  For  a  home  missionary  we  want  a  man 
who  can  pray  as  the  Master  prayed.  He  was  as  great  with  God  in  prayer  as  He  was 
with  man  in  preaching.  If  we  prevail  with  God  for  men,  we  shall  prevail  with  men 
for  God.  5.  And  if  we  are  to  secure  useful  men  and  women  we  must  choose  those 
who  can  weep.  I  do  not  covet  that  moistness  of  the  eye  which  is  the  result  of 
effeminacy,  but  manly  weeping  is  a  mighty  thing.  Our  Lord,  when  He  beheld  the 
city,  could  not  restrain  the  waterfloods,  His  great  soul  ran  over  at  His  eyes.  If  He 
had  not  been  a  man  who  could  weep  BUmself,  He  could  not  have  made  others 
weep.  6.  To  crown  all,  our  Lord  knew  how  to  die !  Love  of  life  must  yield  to  love 
of  souls.    Christ  revealed  the  great  secret  when  it  was  said  of  Him,  "  He  saved 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  j, 

others,  Himself  He  cannot  save."    In  proportion  as  a  man  saves  himself  he  can- 
not  save   others.     III.  Let  us  heab  His  call  and  imitate  Him.      1.  It  is  your 
privilege  to  be  a  worker  together  with  God,  therefore  keep  close  to  the  footsteps  o£ 
the  great  Master  worker.     2.  Eemember  that  before  He  went  to  work  He  was  Him- 
self personally  obedient  to  that  gospel  which  He  had  to  preach.     He  did  not  bid 
others  beUeve  and  be  baptized,  and  neglect  to  be  baptized  Himself.     3.  This  being 
done,  let  me  say  to  you,  Is  there  not  some  department  of  mission  work  at  home 
that  you  could  undertake  ?      Most  probably  you  could  not  do  all  those  things  which 
I  have  mentioned  as  having  been  done  by  Christ,  but  you  know  that  young  artists 
will  often  be  instructed  by  their  masters  to  sketch,  not  the  whole  of  a  great  statue, 
but  one  single  limb,  an  arm,  a  hand,  or  a  foot.     Just  so  it  shall  be  enough  to  teach 
you  service  if,  being  unable  to  attempt  the  whole  of  the  great  scheme,  yoa  will 
undertake  zealously  to  labour  in  one  department  of  it.     4.  But  whatever  you  do, 
do  it  thoroughly,  do  it  heartily,     5.  Take  one  word  which  is  often  used  by  Mark  as 
a  motto  for  yourselves.     Mark  is  always  saying  of  Christ  that  "  straightway  "  He 
did  so  and  so.     Now,  if  you  have  work  for  Christ  before  your  eye,  straightway 
hasten  to  do  it.   Do  something  to-night  before  you  go  to  bed,  if  it  be  only  the  giving 
away  of  a  tract.     6.  There  is  an  aU-sufficient  power  which  you  may  obtain  for  this 
service.     Our  Lord  is  declared  in  this  very  verse  to  be  one  who  was  anointed  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power.     That  same  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  the  Church, 
and  that  same  power  lingers  in  the  assemblies  of  the  faithful.     ( C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  great  Itinerant : — The  text  is  an  exquisite  miniature  of  Christ.     There  are  not 
many  touches,  but  they  are  the  strokes  of  a  master's  pencil.     The  portrait  cannot 
be  mistaken  for  any  one  else.     Alexander,  Csesar,  Napoleon  went  about  destroying. 
Prophets  who  professed  to  have  been  sent  of  God  have  compassed  sea  and  land  to 
make  proselytes,  but  the  good  which  they  accompUshed  none  could  see.      What 
Peter  here  draws  in  words,  God's  grace  drew,  in  some  measure,  in  lines  of  real  life 
in  the  case  of  Howard  and  some  other  followers  of  Jesus  ;  still,  in  the  highest  and 
fullest  sense,  these  words  are  applicable  to  none  but  the  Master.     His  is  the  model, 
and  theirs  the  humble  copy.     He  did  good,  and  good  only  :  but  the  best  of  men, 
being  men  at  the  best,  sow  mingled  seed.     I.  Consider  Him.     1.  His  object.     "  Ha 
went  about,"  but  His  travel  was  no  hstless  motion,  no  purposeless  wandering.     O 
man  of  God,  have  a  purpose,  and  devote  thy  whole  life  to  it !     Be  not  an  arrow  shot 
at  random,  but  choose  thy  target.     Christ's  object  was  "  doing  good. "    This  was 
— (1)  His  eternal  purpose.    Long  before  man  was  formed  Jesus  was  set  upon  doing 
good.     He  did  good  among  the  angels,  for  the  heavenly  harps  owe  aU  their  musio 
to  His  presence.    Among  the  devils  there  was  no  room  for  positive  good  ;  but  even 
there  restraining  goodness  bound  them  down  in  iron  bands,  lest  their  mischief 
should  grow  too  rampant.     On  earth,  however,  was  the  widest  scope  for  goodness  in 
its  largest  sense  ;  for  that  goodness  which  descends  to  sin-stricken  mortals,  to  set 
them  upon  the  throne  of  glory.     (2)  His  practical  object.     His  presence  in  the 
manger  did  good,  as  it  cheered  both  rich  magi  and  poor  shepherd  with  the  knowledge 
that  God  had  come  down  to  men.      His  childhood  did  good,  for  it  has  become  the 
mirror  of  childhood's  obedience  to  this  day.     Ye  know  how  His  after  hie  was  one 
practical  carrying  out  of  this  sohtary  object.     (3)   His  official  prerogative.     He 
received  the  name  of  Jesus,  "  For  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins."    He 
was  named  "  Christ,"  because  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  upon  Him,  &c.     Mention 
any  name  you  please,  and  you  will  see  that  it  is  incumbent  upon  Him,  ex  officio,  to 
go  about  doing  good.      Shepherd,  Husband,  Friend,  Lion,  Lamb.     (4)  His  actual 
performance.     He  did  good  in  all  senses — physically  and  spiritually.     2.  His  mode. 
(1)  He  went  about.     Personally.    He  might  have  sent  out  His  apostles  to  do  good 
in  His  stead  ;  but  when  He  sent  them  out,  it  was  not  as  proxies,  but  as  heralds, 
"whither  He  Himself  would  come."     The  evangelists  constantly  tell  us  that  He 
touched  the  leper  with  His  own  finger,  that  He  visited  the  bedside  of  the  sick,  <feo. 
I  would  that  much  more  of  benevolence  were  performed  by  men  themselves.     Why 
should  you  not  go  and  give  away  your  guinea  lovingly  and  tenderly  ?    It  will  be  better 
than  letting  somebody  else  pare  it  down  to  fifteen  shillings,  and  giving  it  away  coldly 
and  officially.     So  much  depends  upon  the  way  of  doing  good.     The  look,  the  word, 
the  prayer,  the  tear,  will  often  be  more  valuable  to  the  widow  than  that  half-crown 
which  you  have  given  her.     The  Saviour's  very  presence  did  good,  apart  from  the 
blessings  which  He  bestowed.     (2)  He  went  about  with  incessant  activity.     He  did 
not  only  the  good  which  was  round  about  Him,  which  was  brought  to  Him,  but  He 
"  went  about."     He  could  not  be  satisfied  to  be  still.     Scarcely  a  village  or  a  hamlet 
which  had  not  been  gladdened  by  the  sight  of  Him.    Oh  1  the  creeping,  crawling 


0HAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  189 

manner  in  which  some  people  serve  the  Lord !  (3)  He  went  out  of  His  way  to  do 
good.  You  must  not  be  content  to  do  good  in  the  regular  circle  of  your  movements. 
Break  through  the  bounds  of  propriety  every  now  and  then,  and  do  an  odd  thing. 
That  was  a  quaint  expedient  of  those  who  brake  up  the  roof  to  let  down  a  palsied 
man  that  Jesus  might  heal  him.  (4)  He  went  far  in  doing  good.  The  district  of 
Palestine  was  not  very  large,  but  He  went  to  the  limit  of  it.  He  was  not  sent  except 
to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  But  He  went  to  the  verge  of  it.  And  I 
admire  the  Lord's  going  about  not  simply  for  the  miles  He  travelled,  but  for  the 
space  of  character  over  which  He  passed.  It  is  nothing  wonderful  that  He  went  as 
far  as  Tyre  and  Sidon,  but  it  is  much  that  He  went  as  far  as  publicans  and  sinners. 
A  minister  once  announced  to  his  congregation,  "I  am  going  on  a  mission  to  the 
heathen."  The  good  people  thought  their  minister  was  going  to  leave  them,  and 
felt  sad  at  the  bare  idea  of  losing  him.  "  But,"  he  added,  "  I  shall  not  be  out  of 
town."  If  you  want  men  who  have  gone  far  in  sLq,  great  foreigners  in  that  respect, 
you  need  not  leave  London,  (5)  No  doubt  Christ's  perseverance  is  intended,  for 
when  rejected  in  one  place.  He  goes  to  another.  (6)  The  unity  of  His  purpose  is 
also  hinted  at.  He  does  not  go  about  with  two  aims.  (7)  And  the  success  is  here 
intended.  He  went  about,  and  not  only  tried  to  do  good,  but  He  did  it.  3.  His 
motive.  (1)  He  did  good  partly  because  He  could  not  help  it.  It  was  His  nature 
to  do  good.  AU  the  good  things  which  God  has  made  are  diffusive.  There  is 
light ;  the  clouds  ;  air ;  fire.  (2)  His  grand  motive  no  doubt  is  the  display  of  the 
Divine  attributes.  He  is  the  manifestation  of  Godhead.  Poor  troubled  sinner, 
oannot  He  glorify  God  in  you  ?  You  need  pardon  ;  you  wiU  be  an  illustrious 
instance  of  God's  grace  if  He  should  ever  save  you.  U.  Consider  oueselves.  1. 
As  to  the  past.  There  are  some  in  all  callings  who  either  do  positive  harm, 
or  at  any  rate  cannot  imagine  that  they  are  doing  any  good.  Let  them  repent 
themselves.  But  you  who  are  saved,  have  you  done  all  the  good  you  could  ?  2. 
As  to  the  future.  The  old  question  comes  up,  if  any  man  says  to-day,  '*  I  am 
resolved  to  go  about  doing  good  " — is  he  able  to  do  it  ?  And  again,  the  reply  comes, 
we  must  first  be  good,  or  else  we  cannot  do  good.  The  only  way  to  be  good  is  to 
seek  to  the  good  Master.  Then  whatsoever  our  hand  findeth  to  do,  let  us  do  it. 
Let  us  not  ask  for  greater  abihties.  If  we  can  get  them  let  us  do  so  ;  but  meanwhile 
let  us  use  what  we  have.  Go,  thou  housewife,  to  thy  house,  and  from  the  lowest 
chamber  to  the  top  go  thou  about  doing  good.  Go,  thou  teacher,  to  thy  Uttle 
school,  and  let  thine  example  tell,  and  there  is  range  enough  for  thee.  You  domestic 
servants,  the  kitchen  is  sphere  enough  for  you.  {C.H.  Spurgeon.)  Seeking  to  do 
good  in  little  ways  : — Mr.  Harvey  was  riding  slowly  along  the  dusty  road,  looking 
in  all  directions  for  a  stream,  or  even  a  house  where  he  might  refresh  his  tired  and 
thirsty  horse  with  a  good  draught  of  water.  While  he  was  thinking  and  wondering, 
he  turned  an  abrupt  bend  in  the  road,  and  saw  before  him  a  comfortable-looking 
farmhouse,  and  at  the  same  time  a  boy  ten  or  twelve  years  old  came  out  into  the 
road  with  a  small  pail,  and  stood  directly  before  him.  "  What  do  you  wish,  my 
boy  ?  "  said  Mr.  Harvey,  stopping  his  horse.  "  Would  your  horse  like  a  drink  ?  " 
said  the  boy,  respectfully.  "  Indeed  he  would,  and  I  was  wondering  where  I  could 
obtain  it."  Mr.  Harvey  thought  httle  of  it,  supposing,  of  course,  the  boy  earned  a 
few  pennies  in  this  manner,  and  therefore  he  offered  him  a  bit  of  sUver,  and  was 
astonished  to  see  him  refuse  it,  "  I  would  like  you  to  take  it,"  he  said,  looking 
earnestly  at  the  child,  and  observing  for  the  first  time  that  he  limped  sUghtly. 
"  Indeed,  sir,  I  don't  want  it.  It  is  httle  enough  I  can  do  for  myself  or  any  one  ; 
I  am  lame,  and  my  back  is  bad,  sir,  and  mother  says,  no  matter  how  small  a 
favour  may  seem,  if  it  is  all  we  are  capable  of,  God  loves  it  as  much  as  He  does  any 
favour ;  and  this  is  the  most  I  can  do  for  others.  You  see,  sir,  the  distance  from 
Painesville  is  eight  miles  to  this  spot,  and  I  happen  to  know  there  is  no  stream 
crossing  the  road  that  distance,  and  the  houses  are  all  some  distance  from  the 
road,  and  so,  sir,  almost  every  one  passing  here  from  that  place  is  sure  to  have  a 
thirsty  horse."  Mr.  Harvey  looked  down  into  the  grey  eyes  that  were  kindling  and 
glowing  with  the  thought  of  doing  good  to  others,  and  a  moisture  gathered  in  his 
own,  as  a  moment  later  he  jogged  off,  pondering  deeply  upon  the  quaint  httle 
sermon  that  had  been  dehvered  so  innocently  and  unexpectedly.  {Christian  Age.) 
The  blessedness  of  doing  good : — A  Piedmontese  nobleman,  whom  I  met  at  Turin, 
had  not  long  before  experienced  its  efficacy  ;  and  his  story,  which  he  told  me  with- 
out reserve,  was  as  foUows :  "  I  was  weary  of  life,  and,  after  a  day  such  as  few  have 
known,  and  none  would  wish  to  remember,  was  hurrying  along  the  street  to  the 
river,  when  I  felt  a  sadden  check.     I  turned  and  beheld  a  little  boy,  who  had 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  X. 

caught  the  skirt  of  my  cloak  in  his  anxiety  to  solicit  my  notice.  His  look  and 
manner  were  irresistible  ;  not  less  so  was  the  lesson  he  had  learned.  '  There  are 
six  of  us,  and  we  are  dying  for  want  of  food.'  '  Why  should  I  not,'  said  I  to  myself, 
*  relieve  this  wretched  family  ?  I  have  the  means,  and  it  will  not  delay  me  many 
minutes.  But  what  if  it  does  ? '  The  scene  of  misery  he  conducted  me  to  I  cannot 
describe.  I  threw  them  my  purse,  and  their  burst  of  gratitude  overcame  me ;  it 
filled  my  eyes — it  went  as  a  cordial  to  my  heart.  '  I  will  call  again  to-morrow  1 '  I 
cried.  Fool  that  I  was  to  think  of  leaving  a  world  where  such  pleasure  was  to  be 
had,  and  so  cheaply !  "  May  many  a  reader  of  these  lines  find  in  the  true  romance 
of  London  a  relief  for  all  hypochondriacal  and  dyspeptic  sorrows.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Doing  good  as  a  remedy  for  soul  depression  : — Richard  Cecil  went  to  preach  at  Bed- 
ford Road  Chapel,  London,  and  one  day  a  person  came  up  to  him  about  a  certain 
lady,  a  great  professor  of  religion.  He  represented  that  she  was  quite  out  of  spirits, 
unhappy  and  miserable,  and  that  Mr.  Cecil  ought  to  go  and  try  and  do  her  some 
good.  He  went  to  the  lady  and  found  her  sitting  by  the  fire,  with  her  feet  on  the 
fender  and  looking  very  miserable,  with  a  great  shawl  on  her  back,  while  the  sun 
was  shining  in  at  the  window.  She  asked  Mr.  Cecil  to  sit  down  ;  but  he  said,  "  I 
will  not  sit  down  ;  I  know  what  is  the  matter.  Get  up,  put  on  your  bonnet,  and  go 
out  and  try  and  do  some  good.  Within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  this  very  house 
there  are  people  dying,  and  persons  that  want  help.  Go  out  and  do  something, 
and  try  and  do  good  in  the  world."  She  took  his  advice,  and  went  out  and  tried  to 
do  some  good,  and  when  he  called  on  her  two  or  three  weeks  after,  he  found  her 
quite  an  altered  person.  Her  voice  was  altered,  she  looked  cheerful  and  happy, 
and  her  low  spirits  were  all  gone.  She  said,  *'  Oh,  Mr.  Cecil,  you  could  not  have 
done  me  a  greater  favour  than  ask  me  to  try  and  do  some  good."  (Bp.  Ryle.) 
Doing  good : — It  is  said  of  a  certain  New  England  Congregational  minister  that 
when  he  was  young,  "  in  the  college  and  at  the  seminary  he  loved  to  spend  his 
strength  in  doing  that  kind  of  good  which  other  men  neglected — and  that  remained 
his  characteristic  through  life."  In  his  parish  work  he  was  sure  to  be  after  the 
"  one  sheep"  which  had  been  given  up  as  lost.  Norman  M'Leod,  the  great  friend 
of  the  Scotch  poor,  was  industriously  maligned  in  all  quarters,  although  on  the  day 
when  he  was  carried  out  to  his  burial  a  workman  stood,  aud,  looking  at  the  funeral 
procession,  said  :  "  If  he  had  done  nothing  for  anybody  more  than  he  has  done  for 
me,  he  should  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever."  Doing  good  within  our 
sphere  : — Christ  spent  His  hfe  in  domg  good  within  the  sphere  in  which  He  Uved, 
and  to  the  objects  within  His  reach.  Thus  He  has  taught  us  irresistibly  that, 
instead  of  consuming  our  time  in  wishes  to  do  good  where  we  cannot,  the  true 
dictate  of  universal  goodwill  is  to  do  it  where  we  can.  (T.  Dwight.)  Good  not  to 
he  done  by  deputy  : — Not  one  of  the  least  remarkable  features  of  the  present  age  is, 
the  system  of  doing  those  things  by  deputy  which  our  forefathers  did  for  them- 
selves. Provided  a  man  has  plenty  of  ready  money,  he  may  recline  on  the  sofa,  or 
loll  in  the  easy  chair  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  and  still  be  a  most  active  Christian 
by  deputy.  Does  his  heart  yearn  to  provide  for  the  orphan,  or  to  comfort  the 
widow,  to  clothe  the  naked  and  to  feed  the  hungry  ?  He  has  no  longer  to  seek  them 
out  as  of  old ;  he  is  not  compelled  to  visit  the  scenes  of  destitution  and  misery ;  he 
has  but  to  subscribe  a  few  guineas  to  some  half-dozen  institutions  to  quaUfy  himself 
as  a  "life-governor";  and  for  the  remainder  of  his  days  he  is  freed  from  the 
obligations  of  Christian  benevolence,  by  discharging  the  mere  peppercorn  rent  of 
signatures  to  tickets  and  proxy  papers.  Benevolence  peripatetic  : — Genuine  bene- 
volence is  not  stationary,  but  peripatetic  ;  it  goeth  about  doing  good.  (.Dr.  Neviiis.) 
A  long  life  of  benevolence : — Eighty-seven  years  have  I  sojourned  on  this  earth, 
endeavouring  to  do  good.     {John  Wesley.) 

Vers.  39-43.  And  we  are  witnesses  of  all  things  which  He  did. — T?ie  apostolic 
testimony: — I.  Its  substance.  1.  Christ's  miracles.  "  All  things  which  He  did." 
These  miracles  were — (1)  Declarative  of  His  Divine  power,  and  thus  credentials  of 
His  Messiahship.  (2)  Symbols  of  His  saving  influence.  As  there  was  a  miracle  in 
every  parable,  so  there  was  a  parable  in  every  miracle.  Thus,  when  Christ  opened 
bhnd  eyes,  it  typified  the  restoration  of  spiritual  sight ;  when  He  healed  disease,  it 
showed  His  power  over  the  paralysis  and  leprosy  of  sin ;  when  He  raised  people 
from  the  dead,  it  proclaimed  His  ability  to  raise  from  the  death  of  trespasses  and 
sins.  2.  Christ's  crucifixion.  "Whom  they  slew."  This  was  the  central  fact  of 
all  apostolic  testimony.  It  was  the  burden  of  Peter's  earliest  message  and  latest 
epistle,  and  the  ruhng  theme  of  all  Paul's  ministry.    This  was  not  only  (1)  Martyr- 


«HAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  191 

dom  for  truth,  or  (2)  An  example  of  self-sacrifice,  but  also  (3)  Atonement  for  sin. 
As  the  preacher  afterwards  testified,  "  He  bore  our  sins,"  "  He  died  the  Just  for  the 
•unjust,"  and  redeemed  us  with  His  "precious  blood."  3.  Christ's  resurrection 
(ver.  40).  This  was  declarative  of — (1)  His  Divine  Sonship.  (2)  His  victory  over 
aeath  and  the  grave.  (3)  The  acceptance  of  His  atonement.  (4)  Our  resurrection, 
of  which  ffis  was  a  pledge  and  type.  4.  His  second  coming  (ver.  42).  This  was  a 
matter  of  revelation,  not  of  eye-witnessing,  but  it  was  the  inevitable  outcome  of  all 
they  saw.  Christ  was  to  come — (1)  As  Judge,  and  assert  openly  His  universal 
Lordship.  (2)  As  Eaiser  of  the  dead.  5.  Bemission  of  sins  through  faith  in 
Christ  (ver.  43).  Thus  we  have  in  the  first  sermon  to  the  Gentiles  the  whole 
gospel  in  substance,  and  the  main  articles  of  the  Christian  creed.  U.  Its 
AUTHOEiTT.  1.  The  testimony  of  their  senses.  They  were  trustworthy  men.  They 
could  see,  and  actually  saw,  and  had  no  inclination  or  inducement  to  make  a  false 
report ;  and  their  clear  knowledge  and  full  conviction  gave  body  and  strength  to 
their  testimony.  2.  The  Divine  choice  and  command.  They  were  selected  because 
they  had  seen,  and  were  commanded  to  tell  what  they  saw.  Hence  they  were  not 
lecturers  on  history,  which  they  would  have  been  without  a  Divine  call,  but 
missionaries  of  a  gospel.  3.  Their  own  sanctified  impulse.  They  could  not  but, 
out  of  the  love  of  Him  who  had  died  for  them  and  rose  again,  declare  the  things 
they  had  seen  and  heard.  HI.  Its  method.  1.  It  was  not  simple  declaration. 
Merely  to  say  that  they  saw  Jesus,  Ac,  would  have  excited  interest,  stimulated 
inquiry,  imparted  information,  and  perhaps  have  founded  a  school,  but  would 
never  have  converted  a  soul  or  established  a  Church.  2.  It  was  persuasive  preach- 
ing. Their  aim  was  not  merely  to  secure  belief  in  certain  truths,  but  to  save  souls ; 
and  so  "  it  has  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  those  who 
believe."  How  faithful,  earnest,  telling,  and  successful  this  preaching  was  these 
early  sermons  testify.  IV.  Its  beabino  on  oueselves.  1.  We  are  not  eye- 
witnesses, but  we  may  be  heart-witnesses.  We  have  not  seen  Christ's  physical 
miracles,  but  we  may  be  the  subjects  of  His  spiritual  miracles.  We  have  not  seen 
the  crucifixion,  but  we  may  receive  the  atonement.  We  are  not  witnesses  of 
Christ's  resurrection,  but  we  may  feel  its  power.  2.  Being  heart-witnesses,  we  are 
bound  to  testify  what  we  feel.  {J.  W.  Bum^  St.  Peter's  boldness,  delicacy, 
and  candour : — 1.  We  look  for  boldness  in  St.  Peter ;  and  we  find  it  in  those 
words,  "  We  are  witnesses,"  &o.  He  takes  upon  himself  and  his  colleagues  all 
the  responsibility;  they  are  prepared  to  stand  by  the  truth  of  the  facts  which 
they  allege.  We  feel  the  value  of  this  emphatic  announcement;  miracles,  to 
be  believed  at  all,  must  be  believed  on  testimony  which  is  beyond  suspicion 
and  which  cannot  be  shaken.  2.  Then,  for  his  delicacy,  we  find  it  in  the 
suppression  of  all  reference  to  the  part  which  Romans  took  in  the  crucifixion 
of  our  Lord ;  no  word  of  Pontius  Pilate,  or  Boman  soldiers,  or  sentinels  over  the 
tomb.  Any  one  who  read  the  account  for  the  first  time  would  conclude  that  none 
bat  Jews  and  dwellers  in  Jerusalem  had  a  hand  in  His  death  ;  especially  as  the 
nailing  to  the  Cross,  which  was  essentially  a  Boman  punishment,  is  softened  down 
to  the  expression,  "  hanged  on  a  tree,"  which  was  as  essentially  a  Jewish.  Ha 
might  well  spare  the  feeUngs  of  such  men  as  he  saw  before  him ;  men  in  spirit,  as 
well  as  in  fact,  utterly  guiltless  of  the  blood  of  Jesus.  3.  And  for  the  apostle'a 
candour,  we  trace  it  in  his  assertion  that  God  had  shown  the  risen  Saviour  "  not  to 
all  the  people,  but  unto  witnesses  chosen  before  of  God,  even  to  us."  *•  An 
announcement,"  as  Paley  remarks,  "which  no  impostor  would  ever  have  made." 
{E.  T.  Marshall,  M.A.)  Him  God  raised  up  the  third  day,  aad  shewed  Him 
openly ;  not  to  all  the  people,  but  unto  witnesses. — The  privacy  of  Christ's  resur' 
rection  no  argument  against  the  truth  of  it : — There  is  no  article  of  the  Christian 
faith  more  necessary  to  be  embraced,  more  undeniably  to  be  proved  than  that  of 
Christ's  resurrection.  But  our  modern  unbelievers  have  been  at  the  woeful  paina 
to  furnish  the  world  with  arguments  against  this  fundamental  article  of  the 
Christian  faith,  the  overturning  of  which  they  too  well  know  would  be  no  less  than 
the  entire  extirpation  of  all  religion.  Happy  had  it  been,  say  they,  for  the  Christian 
cause  in  general  if  the  proof  of  Christ's  resurrection  had  been  made  a  little  more 
public.  For  whatever  may  be  said  in  apology  for  St.  Thomas's  incredulity,  it 
cannot  be  doubted  but  that,  had  our  Lord  appeared  personally  to  the  high  priesta 
and  rulers  after  He  was  risen,  made  an  open  entry  into  Jerusalem,  and  frequented 
the  temple  and  other  places  of  public  concourse,  that  every  eye  might  see  Him, 
He  would  have  given  the  world  fuller  satisfaction  than  in  remitting  us  to  the 
testimony  of  His  apostles,  who  were   aXL  His  own  creatures,  and  consequently 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA*.  r, 

evidences  against  whom  we  may  make  a  just  exception.  Bat  let  us  answer  thia 
•vain  objection,  and  see  whether  the  privacy  of  Christ's  resurrection  was  not  more 
agreeable  to  the  majesty  of  the  Almighty,  and  also  no  less  convincing  to  those  who 
were  in  any  tolerable  disposition  to  be  satisfied.  1.  And  there  is  no  one  will  deny 
but  upon  the  certainty  of  Christ's  resurrection  lies  all  the  stress  of  the  Christian 
religion,  and  likewise  that  all  necessary  means  of  convincing  the  world  of  the 
truth,  and  confirming  them  in  the  reality  of  i*,  were  highly  expedient ;  but  then 
it  should  be  remembered  that  Christ  now,  after  His  resurrection,  was  not  to 
condescend  to  any  action  beneath  the  majesty  of  His  Divine  nature,  which  He  had 
then  more  fuUy  assumed.  And,  besides,  of  all  men  living,  none  ever  had,  or 
could  render  themselves  more  unworthy  of  this  extraordinary,  I  had  almost  said 
unnecessary,  way  of  conviction  than  the  unbeheving  Jews  and  chief  priests. 
Another  thing  let  me  observe  to  you.  They  had  long  rejected  all  the  evidence  our 
Saviour  had  given  them,  and  when  they  could  not  directly  deny  the  truth  of  any  of 
the  miracles  He  wrought,  they  rather  chose  to  impute  them  to  the  assistance  of 
darkness ;  and  can  it  with  any  justice  be  urged  that  such  men  should  again  be 
favoured  with  such  a  visitation,  especially  after  His  summoning  Lazarus  from  the 
grave,  which  was  so  far  from  removing  their  prejudice  that  they  after  even  waxed 
more  inveterate  against  Him.  2.  Again,  let  us  suppose  that  our  Lord  had  made 
His  personal  appearance  before  the  high  priests  and  rulers  after  He  was  risen,  yet, 
if  you  remember,  how  little  they  were  moved  and  affected  with  the  relation  of  the 
centurion  at  His  death,  and  with  that  of  the  soldiers  at  His  resurrection,  with  the 
shock  the  whole  frame  of  nature  felt,  and  when  everything  else  was  moved,  except 
themselves,  can  you  imagine  they  would  immediately  have  been  convinced,  and 
worshipped  what  they  so  lately  had  scoffed  and  crucified.  3.  Suppose,  then,  He 
had  made  this  pubUc  entrance,  and  they  had  been  convinced  of  His  Divinity,  what 
sort  of  creatures  must  we  conceive  them  to  have  been,  able  to  sustain  themselves 
under  this  shock  ?  Something  more  inhuman  than  we  can  imagine  them.  Could 
flesh  and  blood  behold  the  glorified  Son  of  the  Most  High,  whom  just  before  it  had 
arraigned,  condemned,  and  executed,  and  Uve  ?  The  more  of  majesty  and  terror 
He  had  appeared  in,  the  greater,  and  more  insupportable,  must  have  been  their 
dread,  and  the  more  of  love  and  compassion  the  greater  and  more  abundant  their 
confusion.  4.  Now  the  method  which  our  Saviour  took,  and  the  account  the 
Scriptures  give  us  of  it,  was  neither  attended  with  any  of  these  inconveniencies, 
which  would  otherwise  have  happened,  nor  any  ways  defective  to  procure  our 
assent.  He  neither  exposed  Himself  to  fresh  insults  nor  laid  the  Jews  under  a 
necessity  on  the  one  hand  of  adding  still  to  their  sin  by  denying  Him  in  His 
glorified  Person,  nor  endangered  their  lives  on  the  other  by  exhibiting  to  their 
view  the  reproach  that  a  late  crucified,  but  then  eternally  crowned  Jesus,  would 
have  been  to  them.  As  to  that  expression  used  by  our  modern  unbehever,  wherein 
he  calls  the  apostles  creatures  of  our  Saviour,  and  consequently  evidences  against 
whom  exception  might  justly  be  taken,  I  say  it  is  unfair  and  ungeneroiis.  Every 
circumstance  proves  they  actually  were  as  St.  Peter,  in  the  words  of  my  text,  styles 
them,  "  Witnesses  chosen  before  of  God,"  and  they  not  only  called  themselves 
BO,  but  Ukewise  were  enabled  to  confirm  the  same  by  undeniable  demonstrations 
of  such  power  as  could  only  be  given  them  by  Him  whose  witnesses  they  were. 
(S.  Eccles,  M.A.)  Witnesses  of  the  resurrection  : — ^Vhy  did  not  our  Saviour 
show  Himself  after  His  resurrection  to  all  the  people?  Why  only  to  witnesses 
chosen  before  of  God  ?  Because  this  was  the  most  effectual  means  of  propa- 
gating  His  religion   through   the   world.     I.   Consider   what   would  have   been 

the    PROBABLE     EFFECT    OF   A     PUBLIC    EXHIBITION     OF     HiS    BE8URRECTI0N.        SuppOBO 

our  Saviour  had  shown  Himself  as  openly  as  before  He  suffered  crucifixion, 
preaching  in  the  temple,  talking  to  His  disciples,  &c.,  the  people  would  perhaps 
have  shouted  hosannas  once  more,  but  the  impression  would  soon  have  passed 
away ;  and  then  only  a  few  of  the  multitude  would  have  had  an  opportunity  of 
testing  the  reality  of  the  fact  that  He  had  risen.  In  all  probability  they  would 
have  denied  the  miracle.     H.  He  showed  Himself  to  a  few,  because,  humanly 

BPEAKINQ,     ONLY     A     FEW     CODLD     BE     MADE     INSTRUMENTS.        No     OUe    COUld      bcCOme 

witnesses  of  the  fact  of  His  resurrection  who  did  not  know  Him  intimately  before 
His  death.  The  apostles  alone  had  this  knowledge.  III.  Every  great  change  ia 
EFFECTED  BY  THE  FEW,  AND  NOT  BY  THE  MANY.  By  Satisfying  the  fow,  the  many 
would  be  influenced.  The  few,  thoroughly  convinced,  become  convincers  of  th* 
many.  This  is  always  the  case.  The  twelve  apostles  overturned  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness.and  established  the  kingdom  of  righteousness.     (J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.)       It  li 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  193 

He  which  was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead. — The  Mediator — 
Judge  and  Saviour: — I.  Oub  Divine  Mediator's  position  involves  two  offices. 
We  are  not  now  living  under  the  immediate  government  of  God,  but  under  the 
reign  of  the  Mediator.  Jesus  as  Mediator  has  become — 1.  Our  Judge.  "  The 
Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son."  "  To 
this  end  Christ  both  died,  and  rose,  and  revived,  that  He  might  be  Lord  both  of 
the  dead  and  hving,  for  we  shaU  all  stand  before  the  jadgment  seat  of  Christ." 
In  this  capacity  Christ  has  judicial  authority  over  all  men,  and  He  will  try  all  of 
us  at  the  last,  as  He  is  even  now  sitting  in  judgment  upon  all  our  acts  and  thoughts 
and  intents.  We  shall  each  one  appear  before  His  great  white  throne,  and  if  any 
are  condemned,  His  lips  shall  say,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed  " ;  if  any  are  glorified,  from 
His  hpa  shall  proceed  the  sentence,  "  Come,  ye  blessed."  That  judgment  will  be 
authoritative  and  final.  2.  A  Saviour.  "  That  through  His  name  whosoever 
believeth  in  Him  should  receive  remission  of  sins."  He  has  the  sovereign  right  of 
condemnation  or  justification.  He  has  authority  to  pass  by  transgression.  His 
atonement  has  made  it  possible  for  Him  to  do  this  in  perfect  consistency  with  His 
character  as  Judge,  ^d  the  same  universality  which  pervades  the  Mediator's 
dignified  proceedings  as  Judge  is  to  be  seen  in  His  condescending  operations  as 
Saviour.  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  them  that  come  unto  God  by 
Him.  Let  the  two  offices  dwell  together:  "He  is  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour." 
II.  Both  these  offices  eegaed  men  as  sinners.  I  am  sick  to  the  death  of  hearing 
men  talk  about  the  goodness  which  is  latent  in  human  nature.  The  case  of 
Cornelius  makes  it  evident  that  the  best  natural  rehgion  needs  to  be  illuminated  by 
revelation,  and  instructed  by  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross.  1.  Christ  comes  to  judge 
because  there  are  sinners  to  be  judged.  If  you  find  me  a  nation  which  has  no 
tribunals,  no  punishments,  it  must  either  be  the  scene  of  utter  anarchy,  or  else  a 
nation  where  all  obey  the  law,  and  such  a  thing  as  a  criminal  is  unknown.  The 
Betting  up  of  the  last  great  assize,  and  the  making  of  that  assize  to  have  reference 
to  all  men,  and  the  appointment  of  the  supremest  Person  in  existence  to  conduct 
that  assize — aU  these  facts  imply  guilt  somewhere,  and  abundance  of  it.  2.  Christ 
comes  to  save  because  there  are  sinners  to  be  saved.  He  comes  to  remit  sin ;  but 
there  can  be  no  remission  of  sins  to  those  who  have  never  transgressed.  However 
wide  the  "whosoever  "  is,  so  wide  is  the  guilt :  the  remedy  measures  the  disease. 
3.  Putting  the  two  things  together,  the  very  fact  that  there  is  a  Mediator  at  all 
regards  man  as  fallen.  God  could  have  dealt  with  us  immediately,  without  an 
Intercessor,  had  we  been  as  the  first  Adam  was  before  his  fall.  It  is  by  reason  of 
sin's  influence  upon  the  race  that  it  became  necessary  that  there  should  be  a 
"  Daysman  that  might  lay  His  hand  upon  both,"  and  deal  with  God  in  His  Divine 
Person,  and  yet  deal  with  fallen  man  in  His  humanity.  IH.  The  qualifications 
required  by  our  Lord  as  Judge  materially  comfort  us  in  looking  at  Him  as 
Savioub.  1.  As  Judge,  Jesus — (1)  Has  full  authority:  He  is  fully  commissioned 
of  God  to  acquit  or  to  condemn.  Oh,  then,  if  He  gives  me  pardon  through  His 
blood,  it  is  a  free  pardon  under  the  King's  own  hand  and  seal.  (2)  Possesses  the 
amplest  knowledge.  A  judge  should  be  the  most  instructed,  or  he  is  not  fitted  to 
decide  in  matters  of  difficulty  and  importance.  Jesus  Christ  as  Judge  is  incom- 
parably fit  to  judge  men,  for — (a)  He  knows  men  thoroughly.  He  is  Himself  a 
Man,  and  knows  all  about  us  by  experience  as  weU  as  by  observation.  (6)  Hfl 
knows  the  law.  Hath  He  not  said,  "  Yea,  Thy  law  is  within  My  heart "?  No  one 
knows  the  law  of  God  as  Jesus  did,  for  He  kept  it  in  every  point,  (c)  He  knows 
what  sin  is.  He  has  lived  among  sinners  as  a  Physician,  making  a  specialty  of 
the  disease  of  sin.  Though  He  had  no  sin  of  His  own,  yet  all  sin  was  laid  on  Him. 
(d)  He  knows  the  punishment  of  sin.  A  judge  must  know  what  penalties  to  award. 
Jesus  knows  this  well  enough,  for  He  Himseli  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sin,  the 
Just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.  2.  Inasmuch  as  Christ  is  qualified  to  be 
Judge,  it  equally  quahfies  Him  to  pardon.  For — (1)  He  knows  thee  thoroughly^ 
and  can  cleanse  thee  thoroughly.  He  knows  the  law,  and  therefore  He  knows  how 
legally  to  acquit,  so  that  no  further  question  can  be  raised.  Since  He  knows  the 
penalty,  because  He  has  borne  it  aU,  He  will  take  care  that  none  of  it  shall  ever 
fall  on  us.  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  since  God  hath 
justified?  (2)  All  the  personal  qualifications  of  our  Lord  as  Judge  remarkably  tend 
to  make  the  pardon  of  His  people  the  more  blessedly  clear,  for  as  a  Judge  He  is 
very  just.  "  Thou  lovest  righteousness  and  hatest  wickedness."  Well,  then,  when 
He  forgives  it  must  be  just  to  forgive.  IV.  Our  knowledge  of  the  first  office 
OF  THE  Mediator  is  nbcbssabic  to  oub  acoeftancb  of  Hiu  in  His  second  cap aciix. 
Toii.  n.  13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Z. 

This  was  why  Peter  preached  it ;  this  was  why  Paul  before  Felix  reasoned  con- 
cerning righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come.  This  is  why  the  Holy 
Spirit  Himself  convinces  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment.  If 
you  do  not  believe  in  Christ  as  your  Judge,  you  never  will  accept  Him  as  your 
Saviour.  V.  The  saving  wobk  of  Chkist's  mediatorial  office  is  that  which 
CONCERNS  US  MOST  AT  THIS  PRESENT  TIME.  1.  Notc  the  words,  "  Shall  receivo 
remission  of  sins."  What  is  this?  It  is  the  causing  of  sin  to  cease  to  be.  God 
in  wondrous  mercy  is  prepared  to  forijet  your  sin,  to  blot  it  out,  to  oast  it  behind 
His  back,  to  cast  it  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  2.  Note  that  this  is  to  be  done  in 
Christ's  name.  There  is  no  other  name  in  which  pardon  can  be  bestowed.  3.  This 
is  to  be  had  through  faith.  4.  This  blessed  news  has  reference  to  every  one  in  the 
whole  world  that  will  beUeve  in  Jesus.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Jesus,  the  Judge : — 
I.  The  MESSAGE.  1.  This  begins  with  the  assurance  that  there  is  a  moral  govern- 
ment. There  is  a  Judge  over  the  race  of  men.  Men  are  not  permitted  to  do  what- 
soever is  right  in  their  own  eyes.  The  race  is  not  left  to  anarchy :  Jesus  Christ  is 
Head  of  all.     2.  We  have  to  go  on  to  say  that  there  will  be  a  judgment.    Consider — 

(1)  The  character  of  God.  Being  the  Euler  of  the  world,  He  must  do  justice.  We 
should  count  any  man  a  miserable  counterfeit  of  a  monarch  if  he  never  adminis- 
tered justice.  And  "  the  Father  who  without  respect  of  persons  judgeth  according 
to  every  man's  works  "  will  not  permit  offenders  to  insult  His  laws  with  impunity. 

(2)  The  character  of  man  equally  involves  a  judgment,  for  he  is  evidently  a 
responsible  being.  We  count  not  the  cattle  of  the  hills  or  the  fish  of  the  sea 
responsible ;  no  one  blames  the  wolf  that  he  ravens,  or  the  lion  that  ho  devours  ; 
but  when  we  come  to  think  of  man,  we  regard  him  as  a  creature  whose  actions  have 
a  moral  quaUty  about  them,  and  are  either  right  or  wrong.  Surely,  where  there  is 
responsibility  there  is  a  law,  and  where  there  is  a  law  there  must,  some  day  or 
other,  be  rewards  for  well-doers  and  punishments  for  malefactors.  (3)  The  present 
tangled  condition  of  the  world's  history  requires  that  there  should  be  a  day  of 
rectification  at  the  end  of  time.  We  often  see  the  wicked  prosper,  while  the 
righteous  are  abased.  The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  must  do  right ;  and  how  can  this 
be  but  by  a  final  adjustment  in  which  it  shall  be  clearly  seen  that,  though  the 
wicked  prosper  for  a  while,  they  are  as  bullocks  fattening  for  the  slaughter ;  and 
though  the  righteous  suSer  for  a  while,  it  is  but  as  the  gold  suffers  in  the  furnace, 
that  it  may  come  forth  purified  ?  (4)  Moreover,  there  is  in  the  consciences  of  most 
a  testimony  to  a  coming  judgment.  I  will  not  say  of  aU  men,  for  I  believe  that 
some  manage  so  to  drug  their  self- consciousness  as  at  last  to  quiet  all  their  fears  ; 
but  yet  the  most  of  men  believe  in  a  judgment  to  come,  and  in  their  more  thoughtful 
moods  are  alarmed  thereat.  3.  This  judgment  will  be  conducted  by  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus.  He  will  be  thus  enthroned,  I  suppose,  partly  because  it  is  involved  in  His 
mediatorial  office,  in  which  the  Lord  hath  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  His 
feet.  But  specially  remember  that  the  Judge  is  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  There  must 
be  special  reason  for  this  honour  done  to  the  manhood  of  our  Lord,  or  it  would  not 
be  so  continually  insisted  upon  (Dan.  vii.  13 ;  John  v.  22,  27 ;  Matt.  xxv.  31,  32, 
xiii.  41).  Be  ye  sure,  then,  of  His  impartiality.  He  is  God,  yet  Man,  having  an 
intense  sympathy  both  with  the  King  and  with  the  subjects.  4.  This  judgment 
will  concern  all  mankind.  He  wUl  judge  the  quick  and  dead ;  that  is,  those  who 
will  be  alive  at  His  coming  He  will  judge,  as  well  as  those  who  have  already  died. 
The  summons  will  exempt  no  man.  Here  and  there  a  criminal  escapes  the 
vigilant  eye  of  human  law ;  but  there  shall  be  no  such  instance  at  the  coming  of 
the  Lord.  5.  A  few  words  concerning  this  judgment.  It  will  be — (1)  A  very 
eminent  one.  It  will  be  a  judgment  fixed  by  the  peremptory  ordinance  of  God,  for 
the  text  saith  that  He  hath  "ordained"  Jesus  to  sit  as  Judge.  The  whole  trial 
wUl  be  most  solemnly  conducted  (1  Thess.  iv.  16).  (2)  Very  searching,  into  deeds 
(2  Cor.  V.  10) ;  words  (Matt.  xii.  36) ;  every  secret  thing  (Eccles.  xii.  14).  (3)  Very 
exact.  It  will  proceed  upon  evidence  and  documentary  testimony,  and  slander  and 
hearsay  will  not  be  mentioned  there.  "  The  books  were  opened."  (4)  Very  severe; 
for  things  will  n^^t  be  judged  by  their  outward  appearance,  but  put  to  thorough  test 
and  trial.  6.  The  sentences  will  be  so  just  as  to  be  indisputable,  and  even  the 
condemned  will  own  the  justness  thereof.  That  verdict  will  be  final  and  irre- 
versible. When  Jesus  has  once  pronounced  it,  there  will  be  no  appeal,  no  suing 
out  of  a  writ  of  error,  no  reversal  of  the  decree.  "  These  shall  go  away  into  ever- 
lasting punishment :  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."  II.  The  evident 
IMPORTANCE  OP  THIS  MESSAGE.  1.  This  may  be  gathered  from  the  text.  (1)  "  Ha 
commanded  us."    Then  God  must  know  that  there  is  a  great  necessity  fol  its  being 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  19& 

declared.  (2)  "  To  preach  " — to  herald,  to  proclaim.  Lo,  we  this  day  precede  the 
great  Judge,  as  the  trumpeters  go  before  our  judges  on  assize  day,  and  this  is  oar 
cry,  "He  cometh  !  Jesus,  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead!"  (3)  "To  testify." 
Having  given  the  proclamation,  we  are  then  to  bear  witness  solemnly,  and  to  speak 
the  fact  over  and  over  again  for  God,  adding  our  own  belief  that  it  is  surely  true. 
(4)  "  Unto  the  people  " — not  to  some  few,  but  to  aU.  2.  There  is  importance  in 
this  from  other  reasons.  (1)  It  sheds  a  great  light  upon  the  future  of  the  ungodly. 
(2)  It  reflects  great  glory  upon  Christ.  Te  may  despise  Him,  but  He  is  your 
Master  after  all.  (3)  It  has  a  beneficial  effect  upon  our  everyday  life.  I  constantly 
hear  people  say,  "  TeU  the  people  about  something  that  has  to  do  with  to-day — 
about  cleanUness  and  honesty,  and  all  that."  But  if  I  want  men  to  live  righteously, 
I  know  of  no  motive  that  can  have  greater  weight  than  this.  You  are  stewards  ; 
you  will  have  to  give  in  your  account.  Will  anybody  tell  me  that  this  is  unpractical  ? 
If  God  will  judge  men  at  the  last,  it  behoves  men  to  see  how  they  live  to-day. 
(4)  It  has  a  convincing  and  awakening  power.  Men  tremble  when  they  hear  of 
judgment  to  come,  and  they  are  led  to  cry,  "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  This 
is  the  plough  which  makes  furrows  for  the  good  seed  ;  the  surgeon's  knife  which 

Erepares  for  the  reception  of  the  heaUng  balm.  Years  ago  a  gentlewoman  had 
een  spending  an  afternoon  at  cards,  and  the  evening  at  a  ball.  She  came  home 
very  late,  and  found  her  maid-servant  reading  a  book.  "Ah,"  said  she,  "  are  you 
still  poring  over  your  dull  books  ?  They  make  you  moping  and  melancholy. "  The 
lady  retired  to  her  chamber,  but  she  slept  not.  In  the  night  she  was  troubled, 
and  fell  a-weeping  She  tossed  to  and  fro  ;  and  at  length  she  called  her  maid. 
She  said,  "Madam,  what  ails  you?  I  thought  I  left  you  very  merry  and  well." 
"  Oh,"  said  she,  "  but  I  looked  over  your  book,  and  I  only  saw  one  word,  but  that 
word  stings  me :  I  cannot  sleep ;  I  cannot  bear  it  I  "  "  What  word  was  it,  madam  ?  " 
"It  was  that  word  'eternity.'  Oh,  maid,"  said  she,  "it  is  very  well  for  me  to 
sport  and  play  and  waste  my  time  as  I  have  done;  but  oh,  eternity,  eternity, 
eternity  1  How  can  I  face  eternity?"  And  so  that  night  was  turned  to  prayer. 
I  could  wish  the  like  might  happen  now  to  many  of  you.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christ's  coming  to  judgment : — This  last  act  of  Christ  is  a  special  part  of  His  exulta- 
tion and  honour.,  bestowed  upon  Him  because  He  is  the  Son  of  Man  (John  v.  27). 
Wherein  we  have  four  things  to  be  distinctly  considered — 1.  The  subject  of  it, 
Christ.  Judgment  is  the  act  of  the  undivided  Trinity.  The  Father  and  Spirit 
judge  in  respect  of  authority  and  consent,  but  it  is  the  act  of  Christ  in  respect  of 
visible  management  and  execution.  2.  The  object.  The  quick  and  dead — i.e.,  all 
that  at  His  coming  do  live,  or  ever  have  Uved.  This  is  the  object  personal,  and  in 
this  is  included  the  real  object,  viz.,  all  the  actions  (2  Cor.  iv.  5  ;  Bom.  ii.  16).  3. 
The  fountain  of  this  authority  is  God  the  Father ;  for  He  hath  ordained  Christ  to 
be  the  Judge.  4.  The  infallible  truth,  or  unquestionable  certainty  of  aU  this.  He 
gave  us  commandment  to  preach  and  testify  it  to  the  people.  We  had  it  in  charge 
from  His  own  mouth  ;  and  dare  not  hide  it.  This  truth,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
is  ordained  by  God  the  Father,  to  be  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead,  stands  upon  the 
firm  basis  of  Scripture  authority  (John  v.  22  ;  Acts  xvii.  31 ;  Eom.  ii.  16).  Three 
things  will  be  opened  here.  I.  First,  the  certainty  of  a  JtrnsMENT.  This  is  a 
truth  of  firmer  establishment  than  heaven  and  earth.  1.  As  the  Scriptures  afore- 
mentioned (with  2  Cor.  v.  10 ;  Eocles.  xii.  14 ;  Matt.  xii.  36,  &c.)  do  very  plainly 
reveal  it :  so  the  justice  and  righteousness  of  God  require  it  should  be  so  (Gen.  xviii. 
25).  Righteousness  requires  that  a  difference  be  made  betwixt  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked  (Isa.  iii.  10).  But  no  such  distinction  is  fully  made  in  this  world  (Eccles, 
vii.  15  ;  Hab.  i.  13  ;  Eccles.  iii.  16,  17;  James  v.  6.  7).  2.  Man  is  an  accountable 
being.  His  actions  have  a  relation  to  a  law  (Rom.  xiv.  12  ;  Matt.  xxv.  14,  15).  3. 
What  need  we  seek  evidence  of  this  truth,  further  than  our  own  conscience  S  II. 
The  nature  and  manner  of  this  jodoment.  1.  It  will  be  a  great  and  awful  day 
<Jude  vi).  Three  things  vdll  make  it  so.  (1)  The  manner  of  Christ's  coming  will 
be  awfully  solemn  (1  Thess.  iv.  16,  17).  (2)  Much  more  the  work  itself.  For  it  is 
to  judge  the  secrets  of  men  (Rom  ii.  16).  To  sever  the  tares  from  the  wheat.  To 
make  every  man's  whites  and  blacks  appear.  (8)  And  no  less  the  execution  of  the 
sentence.  2.  It  will  be  a  critical  and  exact  judgment,  every  man  will  bo  weighed  to 
his  ounces  and  drachms.  The  name  of  the  Judge  is  the  Searcher  of  Hearts.  No 
hypocrite  can  escape.  Justice  holds  the  balances  in  an  even  hand.  3.  It  will  be  a 
universal  judgment  (2  Cor.  v.  10;  Rom.  xiv.  12;  Rev.  xx.  12).  4.  It  will  be  a 
judgment  full  of  convictive  clearness.  6.  It  will  be  a  supreme  and  final  judgment, 
from  which  hes  no  appeal.     III.  This  judgment  makes  fob  Christ's  honour.     For — 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [3hap.  x. 

1.  This  act  of  judging  pertaining  properly  to  the  kingly  office  ;  Christ  will  be  glori- 
fied as  much  in  it  as  He  hath  been  in  either  of  the  other.  We  find  but  some  few 
glimpses  of  the  kingly  office,  breaking  forth  in  this  world.  Now  that  office  wiH 
shine  as  the  sun  in  the  midst  of  the  heavens.  2.  This  will  be  a  display  of  His 
glory  in  the  highest,  before  the  whole  world  (2  Thess.  i.  10).  3.  This  wiU  roll  away 
for  ever  the  reproach  of  His  death.  Inferences  :  Is  Jesus  Christ  ordained  of  God  to 
be  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead  ?  1.  How  great  then  is  the  security  believers  have, 
that  they  shall  not  be  condemned  in  that  day.  Who  shall  condemn,  when  Christ 
is  Judge  ?  2.  How  miserable  a  case  will  Christless  souls  be  in  at  that  day  !  They 
that  are  Christless  now  wiU  be  speechless,  helpless,  and  hopeless  then.  3.  How  are 
all  concerned  to  secure  their  interest  in  Christ,  and  therein  an  eternity  of  happiness 
to  their  own  souls,  by  the  work  of  regeneration  ?  4.  Then  look  to  it,  all  you  that 
hope  to  be  found  of  Him  in  peace,  that  you  avoid  those  sins  and  live  in  the  daily 
practice  of  those  duties  which  the  consideration  of  that  day  powerfully  persuades 
you  to  avoid  or  practise.  (1)  See  you  be  meek  and  patient  under  all  injuries  and 
abuses  for  Christ's  sake  (James  v.  7-9).  (2)  Be  communicative,  public-hearted 
Christians,  studying  and  devising  liberal  things  for  Christ's  distressed  members 
(Matt.  XXV.  34,  35).  (3)  Be  watchful  and  sober,  and  see  that  you  be  not  over- 
charged with  the  cares  and  love  of  this  present  life  (Luke  xxi.  34,  35).  (4)  Improve 
all  your  Master's  talents.  Take  heed  of  the  napkin  (Matt.  xxv.  14,  18).  (5)  But 
above  all,  be  sincere  in  your  profession  (Luke  xii.  1-3).  {J.  Flavel.)  The  cer- 
tainty and  circumstances  of  a  future  judgment : — I.  There  la  A  judomknt  ordained 
BY  God,  and  to  be  declared  to  men.  The  Holy  Scripture  teacheth  us — 1.  That 
God  hath  appointed  a  determinate  time  for  this  judgment.  "  A  day  in  which  He 
will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness."  2.  That  in  order  to  this  judgment  all  the 
actions  of  men  are  with  greater  exactness  registered  in  books.  "  The  books  were 
opened."  3.  That,  in  order  thereto,  there  shall  be  a  general  resurrection  of  all 
persons,  both  just  and  unjust.  4.  That  then  all  persons  so  raised  shall  be  presented 
at  the  bar  of  our  Lord,  to  answer  and  undergo  their  trial.  6.  That  then  and  there 
every  thought,  word,  and  work  of  men  shall  be  throughly  disclosed  and  discussed ; 
so  that  it,  together  with  its  due  quality  and  desert,  shall  plainly  appear.  6.  Thai 
on  each  man,  according  to  the  true  quality  of  his  doings,  a  definitive  sentence  shall 
pass,  whereby  he  shall  be  acquitted  or  condemned.  7.  That  according  to  the 
purport  of  this  sent'^nce  a  discrimination  shall  be  made;  and  to  one  party  a  gracious 
reward  ;  to  the  other,  a  sore  punishment.  8.  That  all  this  shall  be  transacted  in  a 
regular,  pubUc,  and  most  solemn  manner,  in  open  court,  in  the  face  and  audience 
of  all  the  world,  before  angels  and  men.  9.  That  the  judgment  shall  pass  to  the 
fuU  conviction  and  entire  satisfaction  of  all  that  are  present ;  so  that  each  one  con- 
cerned therein  shall  be  forced  in  conscience  to  acquiesce  in  his  doom,  as  most  just 
and  equal.  II.  The  Jddqe  ordained  ;  Jesus,  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  Why  it  should 
be  so,  many  reasons  may  be  assigned.  1.  It  was  requisite  that  the  judge  should 
be  visible,  and  audible ;  such  whom  the  parties  concerned  might  discern  and  con- 
verse with,  in  order  to  their  clearer  and  fuller  satisfaction,  or  conviction :  such  our 
Lord,  the  Son  of  man,  clothed  with  glorified  flesh,  will  be.  2.  This  Judgeship  ia 
a  good  part  of  that  regal  office  which  God  did  confer  on  Christ ;  giving  Him  a 
power  over  all  flesh,  all  authority  in  heaven  and  earth.  3.  It  is  an  office  of  too 
great  eminence  to  be  imparted  to  any  other.  "  Worthy  is  He  alone  to  receive  the 
book."  4.  He  alone  also  capacities  proper  for  this  judicature  :  that  Divine  faculty 
of  searching  men's  hearts  ;  wisdom  to  know  all  matters  of  fact  that  ever  were,  and 
to  discern  the  right  in  every  case  ;  absolute  goodness,  perfect  equity  and  immutable 
love  of  right,  and  that  exact  temperament  of  affection  toward  men  which  is  requisite  to 
the  distribution  of  equal  justice  toward  them,  according  to  due  measures  of  mercy 
and  severity.  6.  By  this  designation  the  glory  of  God  is  especially  promoted :  His 
wisdom  appeareth  in  constituting  one  so  in  all  respects  most  fit  to  discharge  the 
office;  and  His  goodness,  for  since  it  was  requisite  that  a  judgment  should  pass  on 
us,  how  could  the  terror  thereof  be  better  allayed  than  by  putting  it  into  the  hands 
of  His  Son  ?  How  also  could  He  exhibit  a  more  illustrious  instance  of  His  justice 
and  love  to  righteousness  than  in  advancing  Hira  to  so  glorious  an  office,  who,  out 
of  perfect  compliance  to  His  will,  did  freely  stoop  so  low,  and  gladly  undergo  so 
much  ?  6.  Just  it  likewise  was  that  to  Him  should  be  consigned  a  power  to  reward 
His  friends  and  do  Himself  right  on  His  enemies.  7.  This  appointment  is  con- 
ducible  to  our  edification.  (1)  It  is  apt  to  raise  in  us  a  high  reverence  of  our 
Saviour  ;  and  consequently  to  dispose  ns  to  the  observance  of  His  laws  and  imita- 
tion of  His  example.     (2)  It  is  a  matter  of  special  comfort  and  encouragement  to 


CHAT.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  197 

consider  that  hence  assuredly  we  shall  find  a  fair  and  favourable  trial ;  since  it  is 
no  enemy,  but  our  best  friend.  III.  The  objects,  oe  the  extent  of  the  judgment 
OBDAiNED.  All,  without  exception.  IV.  Application  :  The  doctrine  is  calculated — 
1.  To  make  us  circumspect  and  vigilant ;  for,  since  we  must  render  an  account  of 
every  thought,  word,  and  action,  what  exceeding  reason  have  we,  with  most  atten- 
tive and  accurate  regard,  to  mind  whatever  we  do !  2.  To  beget  and  preserve 
sincerity  in  us.  What  a  foUy  is  it  to  delude  men  with  false  appearances,  or  rather 
by  them  to  abuse  themselves ;  seeing  they  soon  wiU  be  rightly  informed,  and  we 
grievously  disgraced  for  it  I  3.  To  render  us  serious  in  all  our  thoughts,  opinions, 
affections,  actions  ;  suppressing  all  proud  conceits,  all  admiration  of  these  transitory 
things,  all  wanton  joys  ;  for — (1)  Why  should  any  apprehension  of  worldly  state,  of 
any  endowment,  puff  up  our  minds,  seeing  the.  day  is  near  at  hand  which  will 
quite  level  men  ?  (2)  Why  should  we  value  those  splendid  toys,  or  that  sordid 
trash,  which  men  here  do  so  eagerly  scramble  for ;  which  then  evidently  will  be  dis- 
countenanced ?  (3)  Why,  having  affairs  on  foot  of  such  vast  importance,  should  we 
amuse  ourselves  with  trivial  matters?  (4)  How  shall  we  dare  to  embrace  the 
serpent  of  sinful  excess  ?  (5)  And  how  can  we  be  easily  transported  into  wild  merri- 
ments, if  we  consider  how  infinitely  serious  business  Ueth  on  us  ;  how  nearly  our 
everlasting  welfare  lieth  at  stake  ?  4.  To  engage  us  carefully  to  improve  all  the 
talents  by  God's  providence  and  grace  committed  to  us.  Hath  God  bestowed — (1) 
Wealth  on  us  ?  this  will  engage  us  so  to  use  it  in  God's  service.  (2)  Power  ?  this 
should  induce  us  to  use  it  moderately  and  fruitfully.  (3)  Any  parts,  wit,  know- 
ledge? this  should  move  us  to  employ  them  in  drawing  men  to  the  practice  of 
virtue  and  piety.  (4)  Honour  or  credit  among  men  ?  this  may  oblige  us  to  use  it 
as  an  instrument  of  bringing  honour  to  God.  5.  To  induce  us  to  the  observing 
strict  justice  and  equity  in  all  our  dealings.  "  Let  no  man  go  beyond  and  defraud 
his  brother  in  any  matter,  because  God  wiU  judge  and  avenge  for  all  these  things." 

6.  To  breed  charity  in  us  ;  in  giving,  in  forgiving,  in  judging  and  censuring  of  men. 

7.  To  support  and  comfort  us,  as  against  all  other  wrongful  dealing,  so  against  a'U 
unjust  and  uncharitable  censures,  groundless  slanders  and  surmises,  undeserved 
reproaches  of  men  ;  for  that  assuredly  at  that  judgment  right  will  be  done,  and 
innocence  cleared.  8.  To  preserve  us  from  being  deluded  and  poisoned  by  the 
more  favourable  opinions  of  men.  For  "God  seeth  not  as  man  seeth;  for  man 
looketh  on  the  outward  appearance,  but  God  looketh  on  the  heart."  9.  To  en- 
courage us  to  "  judge  ourselves  so  that  we  be  not  judged,"  or  not  condemned  with 
the  world.  10.  To  guard  us  from  infidelity  and  from  impatience  in  regard  to  the 
providential  dispensation  of  affairs  here.  "  We  know  that  all  things  work  together 
for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  (I.  Barrow,  D.D.)  Whosoever  believeth 
In  TTitn  shall  receive  remission  of  sins.  Forgiveness  of  sin : — I.  The  blessing 
cokfebbed — "  Eemission  of  sins."  Kemission  is  to  remove  the  guilt  of  sin, 
that  the  punishment  of  it  may  not  be  inflicted  upon  the  sinner.  God  alone  can 
fully  forgive  sins  in  this  way ;  and  He  does  it  eminently,  so  that  not  a  vestige 
of  it  remains.  Eemission  implies — 1.  An  offence,  and  consequently  an  offender. 
We  have  offended  God.  2.  A  sovereign  act.  It  is  a  pure  act  of  grace  and  love. 
3.  A  complete  and  perfect  act.  He  does  not  forgive  the  greater  offences  and  omit 
the  smaller  ones ;  neither  does  He  forgive  the  smaller  and  leave  the  greater  ones 
unpardoned.  II.  The  unlimited  natube  of  the  blessing.  "  Whosoever  believeth 
in  Him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins."  The  quahfication  necessary  in  the  recipient 
of  the  blessing  is  to  believe.  This  includes  penitence  for  the  past  offences,  and  a 
full  reliance  on  Christ  for  pardon.  There  is  no  respect  of  persons — "  Whosoever." 
This  may  be  regarded  alike  in  respect  to  nations,  in  respect  to  class,  and  in  respect 
to  moral  character.  1.  The  Jews  were  still  "  slow  of  heart  to  believe  "  that  the 
Gentiles  were  to  be  partakers  of  the  grace  of  the  gospel.  There  is  no  distinction  of 
race  or  colour  of  skin.  "  Whosoever  believeth  "  among  all  nations,  and  languages, 
and  tribes,  and  shades  of  mankind,  shall  receive  remission  of  sins.  2.  As  the 
blessing  of  forgiveness  is  applicable  to  all  nations,  so  it  is  also  to  all  classes.  3. 
Moral  character  does  not  exclude  from  the  blessing .  Some  have  run  to  a  greater 
*♦  excess  of  riot "  than  others  ;  still  there  is  no  distinction  made.  III.  The  medium 
theough  which  the  blessing  is  conveyed — "  Through  His  name."  God  could  not, 
consistently  with  His  justice  and  holiness,  forgive  sins  without  atonement.  IV. 
The  cnfvebsal  testimont  bobne  by  the  ancient  pkophets  to  the  fact  that  bik 
MUST  be  fobqiven  THEOUGH  Cheist — "  To  Him  give  all  the  prophets  witness." 
Soon  after  the  entrance  of  sin  it  was  intimated  that  it  should  be  remitted  through 
the  Saviour.     The  door  of  hope  was  opened  when  God  said,  "  I  will  put  enmity 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

between  thee  and  the  woman."  We  refer  to  some  of  the  propheciea  on  this  point. 
Isaiah  tells  us — "  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions  .  .  .  and  with  His  stripes 
we  are  healed."  "  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  be  satisfied  ;  by  His 
knowledge  shall  My  righteous  servant  justify  many ;  for  He  shall  bear  their 
iniquities."  Jeremiah  says — "  This  is  His  name,  the  Lord  our  Eighteousness." 
We  see,  then,  that  Christ  is  the  medium  of  communication  between  God  and  man. 
If  we  shall  be  reconciled  to  God  it  must  be  through  Him.  (Homilist.)  The  univer- 
sality  of  the  gospel : — It  was  John  Berridge  who  thanked  God  for  "  that  blessed  word 
•whosoever,' "  in  the  gospel  invitations  and  promises.  "If  it  had  been  written, 
•  John  Berridge  may  come,'  there  might  have  been  a  doubt  as  to  who  was  meant  by  it ; 
for  there  may  be  a  hundred  John  Berridges  in  the  world.  But  with  that  word  '  whoso- 
ever '  just  there,  there  is  no  room  for  questioning."  Whosoever  will,  may  come. 
Whosoever  comes,  shall  receive.  If  you  or  yours  are  without  remission  of  sins, 
whose  fault  is  it  ?  Way  to  accept  remission  of  sins  : — To  accept  pardon  and  its 
peace,  not  from  any  perception  of  God's  power  to  pardon,  but  from  the  conviction 
that  love  carries  pardon  with  it ;  to  accept  it  as  the  inevitable  consequence  of  grati- 
tude and  growing  affection  ;  to  accept  it,  feeling  the  preciousness  and  sweetness  of 
the  Divine  paternal  love ;  to  accept  it,  and  by  it  to  be  led  through  sickness  and 
trials  of  every  kind  ;  to  accept  it,  and  find  that  it  is  enough  for  every  emergency ; 
to  accept  it,  and  feel  that  it  is  all,  and  in  all — if  that  does  not  fashion  the  character 
more  potently  than  conscience  and  reason,  then  character  is  no  more  the  effect  of 
a  cause,  and  cause  and  effect  are  disjoined.  Christ,  the  preacher's  great  theme  : — 
The  best  sermon  is  that  which  is  fullest  of  Christ.  A  Welsh  minister,  when 
preaching  at  the  chapel  of  Jonathan  George,  was  saying  that  Christ  was  the  sum 
and  substance  of  the  gospel,  and  he  broke  out  into  the  following  story : — "  A  young 
man  had  been  preaching  in  the  presence  of  a  venerable  divine,  and  after  he  had 
done  he  foolishly  went  to  the  old  minister  and  inquired,  '  What  do  you  think  of  my 
sermon,  sir  ? '  'A  very  poor  sermon  indeed,'  he  replied.  '  A  poor  sermon  1  it 
took  me  along  time  to  study  it.'  'Ay,  no  doubt  of  it.'  'Why,  then,  do  you  say 
it  is  poor  :  did  you  not  think  my  explanation  of  the  text  to  be  accurate  ?  '  '  Yes.' 
'  Were  not  the  metaphors  correct  and  the  arguments  conclusive  ? '  *  Yes.' 
'  Why,  then,  do  you  say  that  it  was  a  poor  sermon  ?  '  '  Because  there  was  no 
Christ  in  it.'  '  Well,  there  was  no  Christ  in  the  text,  we  are  not  to  be  preaching 
Christ  always,  we  must  preach  what  is  in  the  text.'  So  the  old  man  said,  '  Don't 
you  know,  young  man,  that  from  every  town,  village,  and  hamlet  in  England,  there 
is  a  road  to  London  ?  and  so  from  every  text  in  Scripture  there  is  a  road  to  the 
metropolis  of  the  Scriptures — that  is  Christ,  and  my  dear  brother,  your  business  is, 
when  you  get  to  a  text,  to  say,  "  Now,  what  is  the  road  to  Christ  ?  "  then  preach  a 
sermon  running  along  that  road  to  Him.  And,'  said  he,  '  I  have  never  yet  found  a 
text  that  had  not  a  plain  and  direct  road  to  Christ  in  it ;  and  if  ever  I  should  find 
one  that  had  no  such  road,  I  will  make  a  road,  I  would  go  over  hedge  and  ditch  bat 
I  would  get  at  my  Master.' "    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  44-48.  While  Peter  yet  spake  these  words,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all  them 
which  heard  the  Word. — Peter's  preaching  : — I.  The  effects  or  Peter's  pbeachino. 
It — 1.  Converted  Gentiles.  Peter  preached  the  gospel  (vers.  34-43).  And  the  gospel 
thus  proclaimed  is  never  in  vain.  Man's  cratoi-y  may  please  the  ear :  it  is  the 
Word  of  God,  applied  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  alone  can  convert  the  heart.  God 
often  works  suddenly  and  unexpectedly.  A  thoughtless  sinner  enters  a  church, 
pays  no  attention ;  but  all  at  once  some  word  strikes  his  ear.  It  is  an  arrow  from 
the  Divine  quiver.  He  quits  the  Church  converted.  It  was  thus  with  this  congre- 
gation. "While  Peter  yet  spake,"  intending,  probably,  to  say  much  more,  "the 
Holy  Ghost  fell " — just  as  while  Ezekiel  was  prophesying  the  dry  bones  moved. 
2.  Astonished  Jews  (vers,  45,  46).  (1)  The  proof  that  Peter's  preaching  was  owned 
of  God,  was  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  converts  spake  with  tongues,  and 
thereby  showed  their  qualifications  and  willingness  to  go  as  missionaries  in  foreign 
lands,  and  at  once  used  their  tongues  to  magnify  God.  And  this  is  ever  the  effect. 
Whether  the  convert  speaks  in  his  own  or  foreign  language,  he  will  glorify  God 
by  telling  others  of  Christ's  pardoning  love  and  redeeming  grace.  (2)  The  astonish- 
ment of  the  six  Jewish  disciples  who  had  come  from  Joppa  with  Peter  arose 
from  prejudice.  It  probably  gave  them  some  uneasiness,  because  that  "  upon  the 
Gentiles  also  was  poured  out  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  They  conceived  that 
these  blessings  belonged  exclusively  to  their  own  nation.  Had  they  understood 
their  Scriptures,  they  would  have  known  that  this  event  had  been  loug  ago  predicted. 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  ACTS.  199 

Beware,  therefore,  not  only  of  prejudice,  but  also  of  ignorance  of  the  Scriptures. 
How  many  are  being  carried  away  by  all  kinds  of  delusions  from  this  neglect  of 
the  Word  of  God  1  Some  are  settling  down  in  a  dependence  upon  the  outward 
ceremonies  of  rehgion,  because  forgetful  that  a  man  may  have  *'  the  form  of 
godliness"  without  its  "power."  Some  are  trying  to  combine  the  love  of  the 
world  with  the  service  of  Christ,  forgetful  that  "No  man  can  serve  two  masters." 
Some  are  panic-struck  at  the  existence  of  infidelity,  forgetful  that  *'  In  the  last 
days  scoffers  shall  arise."  II.  Petee's  AOKNowiiEDOMENT  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
WOBK  (vers.  47,  48).  This  inquiry  of  Peter  shows  us — 1.  How  unsound  are  the 
views  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  who  afi&rm  that  the  baptism  of  water  is  unnecessary, 
if  we  have  received  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  must  never  forget,  how- 
ever, that  it  is  an  ordinance  of  Christ.  We  admit  that,  like  the  thief  upon  the 
Cross,  a  believer  may  enter  Paradise  without  baptism ;  still,  our  Lord's  own  words 
are — that  "  he  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  The  same  remarks 
apply  to  the  other  sacrament.  Many  approach  those  emblems  with  devout  joy 
and  gratitude  and  experience  the  richest  blessing.  But  others  turn  their  backs 
upon  that  precious  ordinance,  which  was  appointed  by  none  other  than  our  Lord 
Himself.  2.  How  erroneous  are  the  views  of  those  who  hold  that  baptism  is 
invariably  accompanied  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  These  converts  received 
the  Holy  Ghost  first,  and  were  baptized  afterwards.  It  was  with  them  as  it  was 
with  Abraham.  Abraham  first  believed  and  then  was  circumcised.  And  our 
Church  says  that  before  an  adult  is  baptized  he  must  have  repentance  and  faith  ; 
both  which  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  working  in  the  soul.  These  we  could  not  have 
as  infants ;  but  we  must  have  them  now,  otherwise  our  infant  baptism  is  a  delusion. 
How  wrong,  therefore,  is  it  to  speak  of  regeneration  accompanying,  by  necessity, 
infant  baptism  1  Jewish  children,  at  eight  days  old,  were  admitted  into  covenant 
by  circumcision ;  and  we  conclude  that  the  ohildrea  of  Christian  parents  should  be 
brought  into  the  Christian  covenant  by  the  rite  of  baptism  :  but  then,  to  dogmatise 
upon  the  effects  of  infant  baptism  is  to  dogmatise  where  the  Word  of  God  is  totally 
silent.  3.  How  wrong  they  are  who  exalt  baptism  at  the  expense  of  preaching. 
Peter  felt  (as  Paul)  that  his  grand  commission  was  not  so  much  to  baptize  as  to 
preach  the  gospel ;  for  "  he  commanded  them  to  be  baptized, "  III.  The  anxiety 
OF  the  converted  soul  fob  spiritual  instruction  (ver.  48).  Peter,  in  another 
place,  describes  believers  as  "  new-born  babes,"  desirmg  "  the  sincere  milk  of  the 
Word,  that  they  might  grow  thereby."  These  converts  gathered  themselves  together, 
as  in  the  presence  of  God,  to  hear  Peter  preach ;  and  after  they  had  received  saving 
instruction,  by  the  blessing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  were  anxious  to  obtain  further 
benefit  from  Peter's  ministry.  Learn  that  those  of  you  who  have  received  the 
Holy  Ghost  need  the  further  ministry  of  the  Word.  It  is  a  sure  proof  that  there  is 
spiritual  good  going  forward  when  we  perceive  this  thirst  for  larger  acquaintance 
with  the  love  and  the  work  of  the  Saviour.  (G.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  direct  results 
of  Peter's  sermon : — I.  The  effusion  of  the  Holt  Spirit.  1.  It  came  to  those 
who  heard  the  Word.  The  gospel  is  the  channel  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  His  regenerating  influences  flows  into  the  soul ;  the  chariot  on  which  the  Divine 
Conqueror  goes  forth  to  crush  the  soul's  enemies,  and  to  bring  it  forth  to  freedom, 
light,  and  glory.  True,  He  works  through  all  nature  for  various  purposes,  but 
lor  salvation  He  works  through  the  Word.  2.  It  produced  miraculous  as  well  as 
moral  effects.  The  recipients  spoke  with  "  tongues."  In  what  language  they 
expressed  their  gratitude  we  are  not  told.  Now  as  at  Pentecost  new  thoughts  and 
emotions  require  a  new  dialect  Change  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  world  and 
you  will  change  its  language.  11.  The  administration  of  baptism  (ver.  47).  From 
this  we  conclude  that  baptism  is — 1.  A  symbol  of  the  Spirit's  action  on  the  soul ; 
not  only  perhaps  in  His  cleansing  influence,  but  in  the  mode  of  communication — 
"poured  out."  2.  A  ceremony  of  easy  observance.  "Can  any  forbid  water?" 
which  implies — (1)  That  the  water  was  in  the  house.  (2)  That  water  could  be 
brought.  Christianity  is  an  universal  system,  and  any  ordinance  that  cannot  be 
attended  to  anywhere  and  always  has  no  vital  connection  with  it.  3.  A  service  of 
subordinate  importance.  Peter  does  not  baptize ;  He  has  a  higher  work.  Christ 
baptized  not  (John  iv.  3),  and  Paul  said,  "  Christ  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to 
preach  the  gospel."  (X).  Thomas,  D.D.)  Preaching  and  success  : — "  How  cornea 
it,"  demanded  a  bishop  of  Garrick,  '•  that  I,  in  expounding  Divine  doctrines, 
produced  so  little  effect  upon  my  congregation,  while  you  can  so  easily  rouse  the 
passions  of  your  auditors  by  the  representation  of  fiction  ?  "  The  answer  was 
short  and  pithy — "  Because  I  recite  falsehoods  as  if  they  were  trae,  while  yoa 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [Cha?.  x. 

deliver  truths  as  if  they  were  fiction."  (Clerical  Anecdotes.)  The  Holy  Ghost 
given : — There  are  two  things  we  may  notice  concerning  Peter's  discourse — I. 
The  rMPOKTANT  topics  it  embbaced.  "While  Peter  spake  these  words."  What 
words  ?  Christ  was  the  theme  of  this  sermon ;  and  is  the  grand  subject  of  our 
ministrations.  We  tell  you  of  Him,  in  the  dignity  of  His  person,  the  perfection  of 
His  character,  the  fulness  of  His  grace,  and  the  suitableness  of  His  salvation.  In 
Peter's  address  there  are  five  things  he  mentions  respecting  Christ.  1.  His 
mediatorial  qualifications  (ver.  38 ;  see  also  Isa.  Ixi.  1).  2.  The  activity  of  His  life. 
"  Who  went  about  doing  good."  3.  The  fact  of  His  death  (ver.  39).  4.  The 
power  of  His  resurrection  (ver.  40).  5.  The  extent  of  His  dominion  (ver.  42). 
II.  The  Divine  influence  with  which  it  was  accompanied.  1.  Its  import. 
♦•  The  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all,"  &c.  There  are  three  principal  things  He  does :  He 
— (1)  Enlightens  the  mind.  (2)  Convinces  the  conscience.  (3)  Sanctifies  the 
soul.  2.  Its  objects.  Those  "  which  heard  the  Word."  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing, 
and  hearing  by  the  word  of  the  Lord."  3.  Its  extent.  "  On  all  them  that  heard." 
WTiat  vast  numbers  were  converted  to  God  in  the  first  ages  of  Christianity  1  Two 
reflections  naturally  arise  out  of  this  subject — 1.  The  importance  of  the  Christian 
ministry.  2.  The  necessity  of  the  Spirit's  agency.  (E.  Temple.)  The  descent  of 
the  Holy  Ghost : — I.  Some  circumstances  that  preceded  this  descent.  1.  The 
time  of  the  miracle — "  While  Peter  was  speaking."  The  Holy  GLost  cannot  go  at 
a  slow  pace ;  it  is  the  devil  in  the  serpent  that  creeps,  but  the  Spirit  as  a  dove 
flies.  As  regards  the  centurion  we  may  say,  "  When  God  teaches,  how  fast  a  godly 
man  learns."  Christ  did  His  miracles  in  an  instant.  It  is  true  that  there  is  a 
growth  in  knowledge,  and  ignorance  is  overcome  by  degrees ;  but  when  the  Holy 
Ghost  takes  a  man  into  His  school.  He  deals  not  with  him  as  a  painter  who  makes 
an  eye,  an  ear,  &c. ,  and  passes  his  pencil  a  hundred  times  over  every  muscle  and 
hair,  and  in  many  sittings  make  up  one  man,  but  He  deals  as  a  printer  that  in  one 
strain  delivers  a  whole  story.  The  time,  then,  was  when  Peter  prepared  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  was  to  prepare  others  for  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  When  he  spoke,"  i.e. — 
2.  Preached  to  them.  For  to  him  who  has  a  spiritual  taste  no  honey  is  so  sweet 
as  the  Word  of  God  preached  according  to  His  ordinance.  If  a  man  taste  a  little 
of  this  as  Jonathan  did,  though  he  think  his  eyes  enlightened,  it  may  be  to  his  death 
(1  Sam.  xiv.  27).  If  a  man  read  the  Scriptures  a  httle,  superficially,  he  thinks  he 
sees  everything  clear  as  the  sun :  but  he  may  find  wormwood  in  this  honey, 
because  he  finds  "the  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  and  he  will  take  no  more  of  the 
honey,  viz.,  that  "  when  a  sinner  repents  he  shall  find  mercy."  As  the  Essential 
Word,  the  Son  is  Light  of  light,  so  is  the  written  Word — one  place  takes  light  of 
another :  and  if  thou  wilt  so  read  and  hear  that  thine  affections  mislead  thee  ;  if 
thou  hear  sermons  so  that  thou  art  glad  when  sins  are  rebuked  that  thou  art  free 
from,  and  art  deaf  when  thine  own  sins  are  declaimed  against,  thou  wilt  take  so 
little  of  this  honey  that  Jonathan's  case  will  be  thine.  The  Scriptures  are  made  to 
agree  with  one  another,  but  not  to  agree  with  thy  particular  humour.  But  yet 
the  counsel  is  good  on  the  other  side  too  (Prov.  xxv.  16).  Content  thyself  with 
reading  and  hearing  what  is  clear  and  profitable,  and  perplex  not  thyself  with 
those  things  which  God  has  not  revealed.  3.  "  Whilst  he  yet  spake."  The  Spirit 
did  not  leave  them  to  future  meditations,  but  spoke  at  once  to  their  consciences. 
As  a  gardener  takes  every  bough,  and  places  it  against  a  wall  where  it  will  produce 
most  fruit,  so  the  Holy  Ghost  places  the  words  of  the  preacher,  one  upon  an  usurer, 
another  on  an  adulterer,  another  on  an  ambitious  person,  another  on  a  briber, 
when  the  preacher  knows  of  none  of  these.  4.  Nay,  it  is  not  only  "  whilst  he  was 
yet  speaking,"  but  as  St.  Peter  says  in  the  next  chapter,  "  As  I  began  to  speak." 
It  was  then  when,  whilst,  and  as  soon  as,  he  preached  ;  but  Peter  had  some  prepara- 
tion as  we  know  from  the  vision,  and  with  the  subject  of  his  preaching  he  was 
well  acquainted  (ver.  43).  So  while  his  manner  was  extemporal,  his  matter  was 
prepared.  II.  The  descent  itself.  1.  The  Person  who  fell.  As  the  Trinity  is  the 
most  mysterious  part  of  our  religion,  so  in  the  Trinity  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  most 
mysterious  Person.  But  these  mysteries  are  not  to  be  chewed  by  reason,  but  to 
be  swallowed  by  faith.  We  professed  the  three  Persons  in  one  God  at  our  baptism, 
and  have  sealed  that  contract  in  the  other  sacrament :  and  this  is  our  eternal 
life.  There  is  a  Holy  Ghost,  and  He  falls  down  on  those  who  hear  the  Word. 
2.  It  is  as  wonderfid  that  He  should  fall  down  from  heaven  and  yet  be 
in  heaven.  "  How  art  thou  fallen  "  (Isa.  xiv.  12)  was  asked  of  a  being  who 
should  never  return.  But  the  Spirit  fell  so  from,  tbatHe  remained  in  heaven.  This 
Dove  did  more  than  that  which  was  sent  from  the  ark  (Gen.  viii.  7).   3.  But  tkereia 


CHAP.  X.J  THE  ACTS.  201 

more  than  a  descent,  even  an  earnest  communication,  a  throwing,  a  pouring  out  of 
Himself.  He  falls  as  waters  that  cover  that  it  falls  on,  as  an  army  which  conquers 
and  governs  that  on  which  it  falls.  Bat  He  falls  otherwise  on  the  ungodly ;  on 
him  He  falls  like  hail,  and  leaves  him  in  impenitence  because  he  hath  despised  the 
Holy  Ghost.  But  when  the  Spirit  puts  on  the  nature  of  a  dove,  and  a  dove  with  an 
clive  branch,  and  that  in  the  ark — i.e.,  testimonies  of  our  peace  and  reconciliation 
vith  God,  in  His  Church — He  falls  as  that  kind  of  lightning  which  melts  swords  and 
Y  urts  not  scabbards — He  shall  melt  thy  soul,  and  not  hurt  thy  body.  4.  Further, 
this  falling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  such  an  insinuation  that  He  conveyed  Him- 
self into  these  particular  men  for  their  salvation,  but  such  a  powerful  and  diffusive 
falling  as  made  them  work  for  others.  A  great  doubt  was  removed  by  them  whether 
it  were  lawful  to  receive  Gentiles.  So  this  faUing  was  not  an  infusion  of  justifying 
grace  merely,  but  also  such  an  infusion  of  gifts  as  might  edify  others.  Good 
hearers,  then,  became  good  preachers.  (J,  Donne,  D.D.)  The  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit: — I.  What  it  is.  "The  Holy  Ghost  fell,"  i.e.,  "descended" — 
1.  As  lightning,  flashing  conviction  suddenly,  startlingly,  effectually.  2.  As 
rain,  gentle,  refreshing,  fertilising.  3.  As  cataracts  and  waterfloods,  destroying 
and  bearing  away  all  obstacles.  4.  As  fire  consuming  stubble,  purifying  dross, 
and  turning  the  true  metal  into  its  own  nature.  The  Holy  Spirit  thus  convinces  of 
gin,  prepares  the  heart  for  the  Word,  vanquishes  unbelief  and  self-will,  consumes 
Bin  and  inspires  enthusiasm.  U.  What  it  accompanies.  The  preaching  of  the 
Word.  "  WTiile  Peter  yet  spake."  1.  The  Spirit  honours  the  instrument  of  His 
own  making.  "  Holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost," 
and  what  they  said  He  reinspires,  and  makes  the  gospel  the  power  of  God  unto  sal- 
vation. Sometimes  He  works  directly,  sometimes  with  other  instruments — pros- 
perity or  adversity,  sickness  or  restoration,  the  commonplace  or  extraordinary 
events  of  life,  hfe  or  death,  for  "  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth  " ;  but  usually 
it  is  by  the  Word.  2.  Let  men  not  dishonour  this  instrument.  (1)  The  tendency 
is  to  disparage  preaching  and  exalt  devotion,  but  without  preaching  there  will  be 
few  converted  worshippers,  although  there  may  be  many  who  draw  near  with  their 
lips  whose  hearts  are  far  from  God.  (2)  If  preaching  is  to  be  tolerated  it  must  be 
short.  But  this  usually  comes  from  people  who  can  sit  out  three  hours  at  a  concert 
or  a  play,  whereas  they  tire  with  half  an  hour  of  the  "  words  of  eternal  life."  3. 
The  preacher's  duty  is  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God,  whether  men  will  hear 
or  not.  But  let  him  so  preach  as  to  win  the  ear  ;  then  he  may  expect  the  same 
results  as  Peter  had.  "  My  Word  shall  not  return  unto  Me  void."  III.  With  what 
it  IB  FOLLOWED,  1.  On  the  part  of  the  beholders — astonishment.  (1)  It  was 
astonishing  in  itself.  It  ought  not  to  have  been  in  the  case  before  us,  for  we  have 
the  record  of  three  similar  manifestations,  of  which  these  spectators  must  have 
heard  from  Peter,  if  they  were  not  actual  witnesses.  Let  us  not  blame  them,  for 
nothing  would  surprise  an  average  church  to-day  more  than  a  revival,  although  "  we 
have  heard  with  our  ears  and  our  fathers  have  told  us,"  <fec.  (2)  It  was  astonishing 
in  the  subjects  of  it.  Yet  it  ought  not  to  have  been,  for  it  had  been  clearly  predicted, 
as  Peter  announced  at  Pentecost.  But  we  must  not  judge  them  harshly,  for  the 
Church  to-day,  with  a  wider  knowledge,  throws  up  its  hands  in  wonder  at  the  con- 
version of  any  one  of  more  than  ordinary  depravity.  2.  On  the  part  of  the  subjects. 
(1)  Testimony.  They  spoke  with  tongues — miraculously  endowed  in  this  case.  But 
when  the  Spirit  comes,  does  He  sanctify  the  heart  and  not  the  tongue?  Our 
modem  proprieties  permit  the  use  of  every  other  instrument,  but  lay  an  embargo 
on  the  tongue.  But  the  Scripture  saith,  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
mouth  speaketh."  (2)  Praise.  They  magnified  God  the  Author  of  this  good  and 
perfect  gift.  If  conversion  does  not  lead  to  rapturous  thankfulness,  it  may  well  be 
suspected.  (3)  Baptism — obedience  to  Christ's  particular  requirement,  and  involv- 
ing all  else  in  the  way  of  duty.  3.  On  the  part  of  Peter — (1)  Continuous  instruction 
(ver.  48).  (2)  Vigorous  defence  of  his  policy  (chap.  xi.  1-18).  {J.  W.  Burn.) 
Holy  Spirit :  His  workings  inscrutable  : — What  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ? 
It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  interworking  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  the  souls  of  men.  I 
have  no  philosophy  about  it.  All  I  say  is  this — that  God  knows  what  is  the  secret 
way  in  which  mind  reaches  mind :  I  do  not ;  you  do  not.  I  do  not  know  why  words 
on  my  tongue  wake  up  thoughts  corresponding  to  those  words  in  you.  I  do  not 
know  why  the  soul  of  man,  like  a  complex  instrument  of  wondrous  scope,  is  played 
upon  by  my  words,  so  that  there  are  waked  up  in  it  notes  along  the  whole  scale  of 
being.  I  do  not  understand  why  these  things  are  so ;  but,  unquestionably,  they  are 
so.     I  do  not  know  how  the  mother  pours  her  affection  on  the  child's  heart ;  but 


202  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

she  does.  Two  stars  never  shone  into  each  other  as  two  loving  souls  shine  inta 
each  other.  I  know  it  is  so  ;  but  I  do  not  know  why  it  is  so.  I  do  not  know  how 
Boul  touches  soul,  how  thought  touches  thought,  or  how  feehng  touches  feeling ; 
but  I  know  it  does.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  Holy  Spirit  needed  for  effective 
preaching  : — Mental  power  may  fill  a  chapel ;  but  spiritual  power  fills  the  Church. 
Mental  power  may  gather  a  congregation  ;  spiritual  power  will  save  souls.  We  want 
spiritual  power.  We  know  some  ministers  before  whom  we  shrink  into  nothing  as 
to  talent,  but  who  have  no  spiritual  power,  and  when  they  speak  they  have  not  the 
Holy  Spirit  with  them ;  but  we  know  others,  simple-hearted,  worthy  men,  who  speak 
their  country  dialect,  and  who  stand  up  to  preach  in  their  humble  sanctuary,  and 
the  Spirit  of  God  clothes  every  word  with  power ;  hearts  are  broken,  souls  are  saved, 
and  sinners  are  born  again.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Holy  Spirit  needed  for  re- 
generation : — It  may  be  that  during  a  sermon  two  men  are  listening  to  the  same 
truth  ;  one  of  them  hears  as  attentively  as  the  other,  and  remembers  as  much  of  it ; 
the  other  is  melted  to  tears  or  moved  to  solemn  thoughts ;  but  the  one  sees  nothing 
in  the  sermon,  except  certain  important  truths  well  set  forth ;  as  for  the  other, 
his  heart  is  broken  within  him  and  his  soul  is  melted.  How  is  this  ?  I  reply, 
because  the  mysterious  Spirit  of  the  living  God  goes  with  the  truth  to  one  heart 
and  not  to  the  other.  Yonder  sinner  only  feels  the  force  of  truth,  and  that  may  be 
strong  enough  to  make  him  tremble,  like  Fehx ;  but  this  man  feels  the  Spirit  going 
with  the  truth,  the  Spirit  causes  him  to  pass  into  the  state  of  salvation.  This 
change  takes  place  instantaneously.  It  is  as  miraculous  a  change  as  any  miracle 
of  which  we  read  in  Scripture.  It  may  be  mimicked,  but  no  imitation  of  it  can  be 
true  and  real.  Men  may  pretend  to  be  regenerated  without  the  Spirit,  but  regene- 
rated they  cannot  be.  It  is  a  change  so  marvellous  that  the  highest  attempts  of 
man  can  never  reach  it.  We  may  reason  as  long  as  we  please,  but  we  cannot 
reason  ourselves  into  regeneration ;  we  may  meditate  till  our  hairs  are  grey  with 
study,  but  we  cannot  meditate  ourselves  into  the  new  birth.  This  is  worked  in  us 
by  the  sovereign  will  of  God  alone.  {Ibid. )  Holy  Spirit  needed  to  make  ordi- 
nances effectual: — In  vain  do  the  inhabitants  of  London  go  to  their  conduits  for 
supply  unless  the  man  who  has  the  master-key  turns  the  water  on  ;  and  in  vain  do 
we  think  to  quench  our  thirst  at  ordinances,  unless  God  oommuuicates  the  living 
water  of  His  Spirit.    (H.  Q.  Salter.) 


CHAPTER  XL 

Yebb.  1-8.  And  the  apostles  and  brethren  .  .  .  beard.  .  .  .  And  when  Peter 
was  come  up  to  Jerusalem,  they  that  were  of  the  circumcision  contended  with 
him. — The  dispute  in  the  early  Church: — Learn — 1.  That  even  among  God's  saints 
no  one  has  been  without  blemish  and  folly.  2.  That  we  must  not  put  down  the 
faults  of  the  saints  to  wickedness.  3.  That  when  we  truly  recognise  and  experience 
the  universal  love  of  God  we  shall  be  able  to  judge  better  of  many  events  in  God's 
kingdom  though  they  occur  without  the  limits  of  our  own  Church.  {Biblical 
Museum.)  Rents  in  the  primitive  Church: — These  are  here  represented — I.  Fob 
HUMILITY — in  order  to  observe  from  them  the  power  of  the  enemy,  who  never 
neglects  to  sow  tares  among  the  wheat.  II.  For  comtobt — in  order  to  recognise  in 
them  that  nothing  new  befalls  the  Church  in  the  divisions  of  the  present  day.  HI. 
For  doctrine — in  order  to  see  from  them  how  the  rents  are  to  be  healed  by  the  power 
of  evangelical  truth  and  love.  {K.  Gerok.)  The  ecclesiastical  opposition : — We  have 
here — I.  A  striking  imperfection  in  the  first  Church.  •'  The  apostles  and  brethren 
heard  "  ;  and  the  point  to  be  considered  is  the  highly  improper  state  of  mind  which 
the  information  produced.  Instead  of  rejoicing  at  the  event,  and  congratulating 
Peter,  they  called  him  to  account  as  a  criminal.  This  imperfection  teaches  us — 
1.  That  antiquity  does  not  confer  infallibiUty.  There  are  churches  which  are  con- 
stantly referring  us  to  the  ancient  and  patristic  for  the  final  settlement  of  theological 
questions.  Nay,  there  are  men  of  antiquarian  proclivities  in  every  Church  who 
refer  to  the  past  for  the  unerring  and  the  perfect.  Now,  the  fact  that  the  Apostoho 
Church  was  imperfect  exposes  this  folly.  2.  That  Christianity  does  not  perfect  its 
disciples  at  once.     Some  of  these  men  had  attained  the  rank  of  apostles,  and  yet 


CHAP,  xu]  THE  ACTS.  203 

had  many  errors  to  correct  and  habits  to  overcome.  Christian  excellence  is  a 
growth  only,  the  germ  of  which  is  given  at  conversion ;  and  unless  the  soil  is  well 
looked  after,  and  the  noxious  weeded  out,  it  will  continue  a  frail  and  imperfect 
thing.  Christians  must  "grow  in  grace,"  &c.  II.  A  geeat  man  censured  for  a 
KOBLE  work;  which  teaches  us — 1.  That  Peter  was  not  regarded  as  an  infallible 
dictator  in  spiritual  matters.  The  circumstance  that  he  was  called  to  account  by  the 
whole  body  of  Christians  goes  against  the  assumption  that  he  was  vicar  of  Christ — 
the  pope.  "  Call  no  man  rabbi :  one  is  your  Master,  even  Christ."  2.  That  men's 
works  must  not  be  determined  by  the  judgment  of  contemporaries.  The  best  works 
have  generally  met  with  contemporary  censure.  Men  ahead  of  their  time  awaken 
envy  and  alarm.  The  greatest  theologians  have  been  the  heretics  of  their  age,  and 
the  greatest  heroes  its  martyrs.  III.  An  inspired  apostle  conciliating  his  brethren. 
There  was  nothing  of  the  haughtiness  of  modern  primacy  about  Peter.  He  might 
have  heard  in  silence  and  withdrawn  in  contempt,  or  denounced  their  ingratitude 
an  J  narrowness.  Instead  of  that  he  listens  attentively,  and  offers  a  cahn,  generous, 
dignified  reply.  1.  He  recites  facts — those  of  the  previous  chapter,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  his  sermon  which  was  productive  of  such  mighty  results.  He  bases  his 
defence,  not  on  what  he  said,  but  on  what  God  did,  wbich — (1)  Indicates  his  own 
modesty ;  (2)  rebukes  vanity  in  preachers.  2.  He  makes  an  appeal  (ver.  17).  This 
is  the  logic  of  his  address — God  had  onmistakably  indicated  His  will ;  who  was  he 
that  he  should  oppose  it?  III.  A  glorious  victory  over  an  old  prejudice  (ver. 
18).  1.  They  heartily  acquiesced  in  the  fact :  "  They  held  their  peace,"  feeling 
that  the  apostle  had  done  the  right  thing.  2.  They  devoutly  rejoiced  in  the  fact : 
"  They  glorified  God."  That  which  had  pained  them  now  filled  them  with  delight. 
8.  They  joyfully  declared  the  fact:  "Then  hath  God,"  &o.  (1)  Salvation  is  the 
life  of  man.  (2)  Repentance  is  essential  to  salvation.  (3)  Repentance  is  the  gift  of 
God  through  the  gospel  ministry.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  best  testimony  of  the 
servant  of  God  against  opposition  and  misapprehension : — 1.  The  Divine  injunction 
of  which  he  is  conscious.  2.  The  eyes  of  men  under  which  he  acted.  3.  The 
tranquillity  of  spirit  with  which  he  can  vindicate  himself.  4.  The  fruits  of  his 
work  to  which  he  is  permitted  to  point.  (K.  Gerok.)  Religious  contention  is  the 
devil's  harvest.  {Fontaim.)  Sectarianism,  the  strife  of  brethren: — I  recollect  on 
one  occasion  conversing  with  e  marine,  who  gave  me  a  good  deal  of  his  history.  He 
told  me  that  the  most  terrible  engagement  he  had  ever  been  in  was  one  between  the 
ship  to  which  he  belonged  and  another  EngUsh  vessel,  when,  on  meeting  in  the 
night,  they  mistook  each  other  for  enemies.  Several  persons  were  wounded,  and 
both  vessels  were  much  damaged  by  the  firing.  When  the  day  broke  great  and 
painful  was  the  surprise  to  find  the  English  flag  hoisted  from  both  ships.  They 
saluted  each  other,  and  wept  bitterly  together  over  their  mistake.  (W.  Williams.) 
Bigotry,  Narrowness  of: — What  a  circumstance  is  that,  that  in  1624,  at  the 
request  of  the  University  of  Paris,  and  especially  of  the  Sorbonne,  persons  were 
forbidden  by  an  arret  of  Parliament,  on  pain  of  death,  to  hold  or  teach  any 
maxim  contrary  to  ancient  or  approved  authors,  or  to  enter  into  any  debate  but 
such  as  should  be  approved  by  the  doctors  of  the  faculty  of  theology.  So, 
again,  after  the  telescope  had  been  invented,  many  of  the  followers  of  Aristotle 
positively  refused  to  look  through  the  instrument  because  it  threatened  the  over- 
throw of  their  master's  doctrines  and  authority ;  and  so  when  Galileo  had  discovered 
the  satellites  of  Jupiter  some  persons  were  infatuated  enough  to  attempt  to  write 
down  these  unwelcome  additions  to  the  solar  system.  (Paxton  Hood.)  Bigotry  is 
concealed  selfishness  : — Sir  Humphry  Davy,  when  he  introduced  his  "  safety- 
lamp,"  which  has  saved  so  many  valuable  hves,  declined  to  take  out  a  patent  for 
it,  saying  that  his  sole  object  was  to  serve  the  cause  of  humanity.  What  of  men 
who  claim  prescriptive  rights  to  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  I  (W.  Baxendale.)  Peter 
reports  to  the  Church: — 1.  The  importance  of  the  centurion's  baptism  rested  not  simply 
on  its  being  the  issue  of  a  series  of  Divine  interpositions,  but  on  its  being  accepted  as 
the  commencement  of  a  new  era.  Its  recognition  by  the  Church,  however,  hinged  on 
its  having  been  brought  about  by  God.  Hence  Peter's  narrative  was  necessary 
before  the  new  conditions  of  membership  could  be  welcomed.  2.  The  news  reached 
Jerusalem  before  Peter,  and  in  an  imperfect  form,  viz.,  that  Peter  had  been  trea,ting 
nncircamcised  men  ecclesiastically  and  socially  as  though  they  were  circumcised. 
Why  they  did  not  know,  and  hence  they  hardly  knew  whether  to  be  glad  or  vexed. 
8.  Peter  gave  his  report  when  "  they  of  the  circumcision  were  disputing  with  him," 
i.e. ,  those  who  afterwards  came  to  form,  and  had  when  Luke  was  writing  formed, 
the  Judaizing  party.  The  strong  Jewish  prejudice  which  was  to  work  such  mischief 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  Xb 

must  have  already  been  latent  in  the  minds  of  many  baptized  Jews.  This  was  the 
first  occasion  on  which  that  prejudice  was  stirred  into  activity.  The  apostles  would 
have  inquired  into  the  spiritual  side  of  the  transaction — the  reception  of  Christ  by 
heathen — whereas  the  question  raised  was  merely  that  of  "  eating."  Nor  would  the 
heads  of  the  Church  have  used  the  phrase  rendered  softly  "men  uncircumcised," 
an  untranslated  expression  of  rude  and  displeased  contempt.  4.  Peter  met  the 
question  with  a  calm  and  careful  narrative  of  facts.  It  can  hardly  fail  to  startle 
those  who  know  how  his  name  has  been  used  to  cover  the  most  unbounded  claims, 
that  he  should  be  reduced  to  justify  his  apostolic  action.  Yet  this  is  in  perfect 
accord  with  the  whole  New  Testament.  The  Church  is  never  represented  as  a  close 
oligarchy,  much  less  as  an  empire  with  an  infallible  head.  Before  the  assembly  of 
the  faithful  this  "  Prince  of  the  apostles,"  this  Eock-Man,  to  whom  Jesus  had  given 
the  keys,  was  content  to  plead,  and  that  on  a  matter  which  could  justify  itself,  and 
to  disputatious  brethren  whom  he  might  have  treated  with  contempt.  5.  Peter 
passed  over  matters  already  known  to  detail  the  circumstances  which  prepared  him 
for  the  reception  of  Cornelius — the  vision,  the  coincident  arrival  of  the  messengers, 
the  monition  of  the  Holy  Ghost — a  threefold  strand  spun  by  a  celestial  hand, 
which  drew  him  with  a  force  he  dared  not  withstand.  So  far  the  incident  had  been 
personal ;  now  came  the  corroborative  evidence  of  the  six  brethren  who  were 
witnesses  that  the  Master's  promise  to  baptize"  His  disciples  with  the  Divine  Spirit 
was  fulfilled.  Nay,  more  ;  God  had  bestowed  that  Spirit  on  the  original  disciples, 
not  because  of  their  Jewish  birth  or  circumcision,  but  simply  because  they  had. 
believed  on  Christ.  To  the  Gentiles,  therefore,  who  believed  had  now  come  tha 
very  same  "  free  gift,"  to  prove  that  "  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything  nor 
uncircumcision."  In  Peter's  words  there  hes,  as  in  a  seed,  the  whole  doctrine  ef 
free  grace  and  justification  by  faith,  and  no  better  commentary  on  them  can  be 
found  than  in  Gal.  ii.  15,  16,  which  was  addressed  to  Peter  when  he  renounced  for 
a  time  the  position  that  he  here  defends.  6.  The  general  enthusiasm  over  this  new- 
won  freedom  and  the  happy  consciousness  of  a  wider  brotherhood  broke  forth  in 
praise.  It  might  have  been  hoped  that  the  Church  would  now  pass  from  its 
subordination  to  the  Mosaic  law  into  the  spiritual  freedom  of  Christ.  Alas  !  the 
rise  of  a  Gentile  Church  at  Antioch  soon  after  came  to  be  viewed  with  rivalry,  and 
a  synod  at  Jerusalem  could  not  compose  the  strife.  Upon  Peter's  vacillation  Paul 
became  the  rock  which  turned  aside  from  the  Gentile  Churches  a  current  which 
would  have  swept  Christianity  into  Mosaic  legalism  and  exclusi\  eness.  Yet  in  their 
convictions  the  two  apostles  were  one.  7.  The  hmitation  which  for  so  many 
centuries  confined  God's  favour  to  one  tribe  was  one  which  must  have  for  ever  shut 
out  us  and  our  fathers.  In  His  wise  plea,sure  He  bad  elected  Israel,  and  might  have 
let  the  election  stand.  But  the  very  election  contemplated  ultimate  catholicity, 
Israel  was  made  a  guarded  focus  of  hght  just  that  it  might  one  day  enlighten  the 
Gentiles.  But,  in  spite  of  their  prophets,  they  kept  to  their  tribes  what  God  had 
given  to  mankind.  Thus  it  came  that  the  grace  of  life  had  to  tear  itself  away  from 
their  grip  to  overspread  the  globe.  Yet  it  was  by  the  hands  of  Jews  after  all  that 
the  grace  of  God  was  first  conveyed  to  Gentiles  in  Ctesarea,  and  by  Jewish  mis- 
eionaries  that  the  gospel  has  at  length  reached  ourselves.  {J.  0.  Dykeg,  D.D.) 
Peter  to  Jewish  Christians  : — 1.  This  differs  from  the  previous  speeches  of  the 
apostle  (except  the  first),  in  that  it  is  not  an  appeal  to  men  to  become  Christians, 
but  an  explanation  to  Christians  of  a  fresh  course  of  action  taken  in  the  service  of 
Christ.  2.  While  Peter  tarried  at  Csesarea  the  apostles  and  brethren  heard  with 
surprise  of  this  unexpected  victory  of  the  gospel.  He  was  well  aware  of  the  necessity 
for  a  full  explanation,  and  therefore  went  straight  to  Jerusalem,  and  with  excellent 
judgment  took  the  six  Jewish  Christians  from  Joppa  who  had  baptized  the  believing 
Gentiles,  who  could  corroborate  his  story.  3.  "  They  that  were  of  the  circumcision 
contended  with  him,"  not  apparently  about  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the 
Gentiles,  or  even  their  baptism,  but  about  his  eating  with  them.  They  were 
displeased  that  an  apostle  had  broken  a  tradition  of  strict  Judaism.  4.  Such  a 
condition  of  mind  we  regard  with  wonder  and  pity ;  and  yet  something  very  like 
it  is  far  too  common  in  modern  Christendom.  Wlio  has  not  seen  Christian  faith 
miserably  united  with  small-minded  prejudices?  And  this  also  we  see,  that  narrow- 
ness of  sympathy  goes  with  dulness  of  perception.  These  Jews  could  not  see  anything 
more  important  than  the  question  whether  Peter  did  well  or  ill  in  sitting  at  table 
with  the  uncircumcised.  So  now :  the  more  that  men  make  of  external  restriction 
in  rehgion,  the  more  they  incapacitate  their  minds  for  appreciating  what  is  spiritual 
and  permanent.     Note — I.   Thje:  position  takkn  bt  even  the  leaoinq  apostle. 


CHAP,  a]  THE  ACTS.  205 

1.  The  name  of  Peter  has  been  used  to  cover  the  claim  of  supremacy  advanced  by 
the  Pope.  But  here  we  see  that  the  brethren  were  not  afraid  to  "  contend  with 
him  " ;  and  he  made  no  attempt  to  silence  the  objectors  by  dint  of  authority,  but 
patiently  explained  his  action  till  he  won  their  approval.  Is  it  not  plain  that  tbere 
was  no  such  thing  as  Popedom  known  to  St.  Peter  ?  There  was  not  even  oligarchic 
government  by  the  apostles.  The  Church  had  leaders  and  guides ;  but  the  wisdom 
of  Christ  was  imparted  to  the  whole  body,  not  to  a  few  conspicuous  members  only. 

2.  It  is  not  well  that  any  one  should  reckon  himself  above  question  from  the 
brethren.  It  is  quite  possible  that  they  may  find  fault  through  ignorance ;  but  in 
such  a  case  Christ's  servant  must  not  give  way  to  irritation,  but  calmly  explain 
what  they  have  misunderstood.  Let  him  tell  the  unvarnished  truth,  and  leave  it  to 
the  heavenly  Master  to  vindicate  him.  II.  The  best  way  to  remove  misundeb- 
STANDINGS  AMONG  BRETHREN.  1.  Niuc-tenths  of  the  fault-finding  comes  of  defective 
information.  The^^objectors  here  knew  but  very  partially  what  Peter's  conduct  had 
been,  and  none  of  the  reasons.  They  heard  that  he  had  been  living  among  Gentiles, 
but  nothing  of  the  visions  or  of  the  spiritual  results.  They  certainly  laid  them- 
selves open  to  a  sharp  reproof.  But  the  apostle  did  not  even  make  complaint.  He 
wished  to  conciliate  their  better  judgment,  and  preserve  peace  in  the  Church.  2. 
This,  too,  conveys,  a  most  valuable  lesson  to  those  who  find  their  course  of  action 
called  into  question.  It  will  be  often  found  that  fault-finders  proceed  on  most 
inaccurate  information ;  and,  by  doing  so,  they  lay  themselves  open  to  retort.  But 
the  object  of  Christ's  servant  should  be  not  to  triumph  over  an  unreasonable  brother, 
but  to  gain  victories  for  the  truth  and  maintain  peace  and  charity.  III.  The  most 
BFFBOTiVE  ANSWER  TO  STICKLERS  ON  POINTS  OF  ORDER.  1.  St.  Peter  did  not  enter 
into  an  argument  upon  the  permanence  of  those  restrictions  which  had  separated 
the  Jews  from  the  GentUes.  He  was  himself  scarcely  prepared  for  such  an  argu- 
ment, though  a  new  light  had  been  cast  into  his  mind  by  the  vision.  No  such  light, 
however,  had  fallen  on  those  at  Jerusalem ;  and  it  would  have  been  worse  than 
useless  to  argue.  Peter  took  them  on  ground  which  no  Christian  could  call  in 
question.  As  the  Word  of  life  was  being  preached  to  the  Gentiles  the  Holy  Ghost 
fell  on  them,  just  as  on  the  Jews  at  Pentecost.  Did  not  that  one  momentous  fact 
settle  all  questions,  overcome  all  misgivings  ?  2.  This  way  of  handhng  a  difficulty 
makes  short  work  with  many  Church  controversies  about  holy  orders,  correct  ritual, 
and  the  like.  In  ways  that  we  consider  exceptional,  and  through  the  labours  of 
persons  whose  ordination  has  but  an  uncertain  validity,  thousands  have  been  con- 
verted from  sin  to  righteousness.  This  seems  to  us  to  be  matter  of  fact  which  only 
a  desperate  bigotry  can  ignore  ?  Surely  when  we  see  that  sinners  are  turned  from  their 
evil  ways  our  simple  duty  is  to  acknowledge  the  work  of  God  whenever  and  wherever 
He  pleases  to  work  and  give  Him  thanks.  IV.  The  true  place  and  jtjstificatiok 
OF  BAPTISM.  The  Gentiles  at  Caesarea  having  been  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
it  was  impossible  to  deny  to  them  baptism  with  water.  Indeed,  there  are  not  two 
baptisms,  but  one,  having  an  outer  form  and  inner  sense.  The  former  requires 
water,  the  latter  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Superstition  holds  that  the  former 
always  involves  the  latter,  and  therefore  urges  people  to  be  baptized,  or  to  have 
their  infants  baptized,  in  order  that  by  that  rite  they  may  receive  the  Holy  Ghost. 
This  is  "  Christening  "  of  which  the  Bible  knows  nothing.  It  is  enough  to  trace 
the  dispensation  of  baptism  through  these  early  chapters.  At  Jerusalem  they  that 
received  the  Word  of  salvation  were  baptized.  At  Samaria  they  that  believed  the 
good  tidings  were  baptized.  On  the  road  to  Gaza  the  Ethiopian  treasurer  first 
received  Philip's  preaching  of  Jesus,  and  then  was  baptized.  At  Damascus,  Saul, 
through  the  intervention  of  Ananias,  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Then  "  he 
arose,  and  was  baptized."  So  here.  Conclusion  :  1.  Peter's  speech  had  a  marked 
success.  The  Jewish  brethren  ••  glorified  God,  saying,  Then  to  the  Gentiles  also 
hath  God  granted  repentance  into  fife."  Would  that  they  had  cherished  this  mood  I 
What  controversies  would  have  been  avoided  1  What  trouble  might  have  been 
spared  to  Paul  I  2.  These  disciples  had  a  clear  conception  of  repentance — (1)  In 
its  origin  as  the  gift  of  God's  grace ;  (2)  in  its  issue  as  "  unto  life."  And  with  this 
doctrine  ought  "  the  fallow  ground  "  of  men's  hearts  to  be  broken.  It  is  God's 
command;  it  is  God's  gift;  it  is  God's  encouragement:  "Turn  ye;  why  will  ye 
die  ?  "    (D.  Fraser,  D.D.) 

"Ver.  8.  But  I  said.  Not  so.  Lord. — Not  so,  Lord  : — How  mental  and  morafi 
characteristics  cling  to  a  man  even  after  he  has  received  grace  I  It  is  a  false  theory 
of  conversion  which  represents  human  nature  as  changed.    Grace  is  a  principle 


206  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

working  a  slow  and  graiual  change — ♦•  First  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  fuli 
com  in  the  ear."  The  leaven  was  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal,  until  the  whole 
was  leavened.  Peter  is  the  same  before  and  after  conversion — strong-willed,  vehe- 
ment, and  impatient  of  contradiction.  He  is  here  seen  meeting  the  Divine  directions 
with  outspoken  resistance.  Here  is — I.  Pbe&dmptdous  resistance  of  Divine  wisdou 
AND  GRACE.  The  most  perilous  endowment  of  a  mortal  is  free  wiU,  AU  possibili- 
ties of  evil  and  good  are  contained  in  this  great  endowment.  How  near  the  true  use 
of  will  stands  to  its  abuse  1  Will  changes  into  wilfulness.  "  I  will "  becomes  self- 
assertion,  denies  the  rights  of  others,  sets  man  in  array  against  the  rights  and 
claims  of  God.  This  was  Peter's  moral  weakness,  the  source  of  errors  and  sins. 
Strong-willed,  he  had  firmness.  It  had  grown  into  seK-assertion  and  presumption. 
There  was  a  clear  openness  about  him  in  his  sinning ;  he  was  not  a  sneaking,  backdoor 
sinner,  and  not  a  polished,  snivelling  hypocrite.  It  is  better  so.  There  is  more  hope  for 
such  a  man  than  he  who  sins  secretly  ;  but  it  does  not  lessen  his  guilt.  On  several 
occasions  Peter  thought  he  knew  better  than  the  Lord.  He  said,  "  The  Son  of  Man 
shall  be  rejected,"  &c.  Peter  answered  Him,  "  Be  it  far  from  Thee,  Lord.  This 
shall  not  be."  Jesus  said,  *'  I  have  prayed  for  thee. "  Peter's  reply  was,  "  I  am  ready 
to  go  with  Thee,  even  to  prison  and  death."  Jesus  said,  "  Whither  I  go  thou  canst 
not  follow  Me  now,  but  thou  shalt  afterwards."  Peter  says,  "  Lord,  why  ?  I  am 
ready."  And  then  the  Lord  warned  him :  "  Verily  the  cock  shall  not  crow,"  &c. 
The  Master  bade  His  disciples  tarry  in  Jerusalem  and  wait  for  the  promise  of  the 
Father.  Peter,  instead  of  waiting,  set  about  electing  an  apostle.  Here  the  Lord 
was  disciplining  him,  that  he  might  open  the  door  of  the  kingdom  to  the  Gentiles. 
"Arise,  Peter  ;  kill  and  eat."  He  refuses  point  blank,  and  begins  to  justify  refusal. 
There  is  a  good  deal  of  Peter  in  most  men.  They  generally  act  as  though  they 
knew  better  than  God  what  ought  to  happen  and  what  they  ought  to  do.  This 
spirit  gets  into  men — 1.  When  they  object  to  the  provisions  of  Divine  wisdom  and 
grace.  Some  sinners  want  to  show  God  the  conditions  on  which  sin  ought  to  be 
pardoned  and  heaven  secured.  Some  are  not  content  with  unbelief  and  rebellion  ; 
they  find  fault  with  the  scheme  of  mercy.  Why  should  not  God  let  the  guilty  go 
free  ?  2.  The  same  spirit  is  manifested  in  aU  murmurings  against  Providence. 
How  strange  are  the  vagaries  of  the  restless  wiU !  Men  say  God  is  all-wise  in  the 
ordinations  of  life,  and  sing,  "  Thy  will  be  done  1 "  But  let  a  sickness  come,  a 
project  miscarry,  one  dearer  than  Hfe  be  smitten,  and  what  rebellion  there  is  1 
Often  what  we  call  resignation  is  only  the  exhaustion  of  nature  after  a  useless  fight 
with  the  inevitable.  3.  All  refusal  to  foUow  the  leadings  of  Providence  grows  out  of 
this  resistance  to  the  all-wise  wiU.  God  is  a  guide.  He  has  a  way  of  life  for  each. 
Men  miss  the  providential  way ;  they  will  not  simply  trust  and  follow.  They  want 
certainty.  "  The  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the  bush,"  and  when  God  says, 
"  Forward,"  they  say,  "  Let  us  alone,"  or  "  Let  us  choose  a  new  leader  and  go  back 
to  Egypt,"  or  they  shut  aU  up  with  a  "  Not  so.  Lord."  Christ  says  to  a  young 
Christian,  "  Come  out  and  be  separate."  The  reply  is,  "  Not  so.  Lord.  I  can  use 
the  world  without  abusing  it. "  The  Lord  says,  "  Honest  poverty  is  better  than 
dishonest  riches."  "  Not  so  Lord;  I  mean  to  be  generous  to  the  poor,  to  help  Thy 
cause."  II.  The  consequences  of  this  presdmptoous  rebellion.  "  Not  so.  Lord," 
takes  a  man  out  of  the  circle  of  Divine  and  helpful  benedictions  and  co-operations. 
He  who  will  not  have  God  for  a  friend  when  he  may  shall  not  find  Him  when  he 
would.  Men  resent  presumptuous  opposition  and  folly.  They  think  it  a  wonder 
God  does  not.  But  here  are  all  the  irregularities  created  by  sin,  and  they  work  out 
a  punitive  disoiplioe.  Under  the  Divine  government  presumptuous  and  rebellious 
men  come  into  contact  with  the  negative  action  of  the  Divine  laws,  and  cannot 
avoid  their  chastisement.  But  God's  harsh  ways  are  kindnesses.  Thorns  in  the 
hedge,  which  tear  us  as  we  attempt  to  get  out  of  the  right  way,  are  admonitions  to 
us  to  go  back.  Things  go  awry ;  troubles,  worry.  What  is  it  all  but  the  reapmg 
what  we  have  sown  ?  Sensitive  nerves  suffer  pain  to  warn  us  against  what  causes 
pain.  If  God  be  resisted,  pain  must  follow,  for  we  are  out  of  the  way  of  peace. 
Our  wisdom  is  to  submit  to  God,  accept  His  plan  of  mercy,  look  unto  Jesus,  walk 
in  His  way.  "Lead,  kindly  Light,  amid  the  encircling  gloom,  lead  Thou  me  on." 
(W.  H.  Davison.)  Human  ignorance  contradicting  Divine  wisdom: — Peter  had 
before  this  supposed  that  he  knew  better  than  the  Lord  what  was  right.  Accordingly, 
this  "  Not  so.  Lord,"  was  very  Petrine.  God  was  going  to  honour  Peter  by  giving 
him  the  second  key  wherewith  he  would  open  the  kingdom  to  the  Gentiles.  Peter 
is  shocked  at  the  idea,  and  says, "  Not  so.  Lord."  He  not  only  refuses  to  obey,  but 
offers  a  reason.     His  refusal  and  his  buttressing  argument  were  both  shivered  to 


«aAP.  n.]  THE  ACTS.  207 

atoms  by  the  Lord's  reply :  •*  What  God  hath  cleansed,  that  call  not  thou  common." 

I.   POOB,  WEAK,  IGNOBANT  MAN  IS  FOUND  CONTEADIOTINQ  AND  COBBEOTING  THE  ALMIGHTY 

AND  Aiiii-wisE  God.  If  God  had  a  human  heart,  the  thing  would  not  happen  twice 
from  the  same  person.  The  Divine  fire  would  consume  the  presumptuous  soul. 
But  God  is  not  a  man.  He  patiently  endures  all  man's  presumptuous  folly.  Many, 
arguing  from  impunity,  go  on  to  increase  their  rebellion  against  God.  '•  Because 
sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,"  &c.  But  this  daring 
resistance  to  God  is  not  confined  to  unbelievers.  Our  text  shows  that  a  Peter  can 
say,  "  Not  so,  Lord."  There  may  be  politeness  in  the  form,  but  in  the  matter  it  is 
rebellion  and  nothing  else.  It  is  a  declaration  that  "  I  know  better  than  God." 
What  is  complaint  of  our  lot  (which  God  has  arranged)  but  a  saying,  "  Not  so  "  ? 
What  is  refusal  to  follow  the  clear  leadings  of  Providence  but  saying,  "Not  so, 
Lord  "  ?  And  then  we  wonder  we  are  not  prospered.  As  if  children  in  open 
rebellion  could  prosper  I  II.  All  the  fobloen  expeeiences  of  Christians  comb 
FBOM  theib  sating,  "  NoT  SO,  LoKD."  An  Abraham  going  unhesitatingly  to  offer 
up  his  son  at  the  Divine  command  is  given  us  as  a  marked  example  of  spiritual 
attainment.  If  ever  man  could  have  said,  "  Not  so.  Lord,"  it  was  Abraham.  He 
might  have  said,  "  Lord,  I  cannot  commit  murder  ;  and  I  cannot  commit  sin 
against  my  natural  affections.  Furthermore,  what  will  people  say  of  it  ?  Not  so. 
Lord ;  I  cannot  do  this  thing."  But  that  which  made  Abraham's  name  the  synonym 
of  faith,  and  which  exalted  him  to  the  very  highest  rank  in  sainthood,  was  a 
humble,  unquestioning,  immediate  obedience.  Compare  him  with  Jacob,  who  was 
fond  of  saying,  "  Not  so,  Lord,"  and  see  the  difference.  A  young  Christian  starts 
out  in  life.  The  Lord  says  to  him,  "  Come  out  and  be  separate  from  the  world  "  ; 
and  the  young  Christian  replies,  "  Not  so.  Lord,  for  if  I  can  marry  into  that 
influential  family  it  will  be  of  great  benefit  to  me,  and  I  can  persuade  my  wife  to 
become  a  Christian  " ;  and  so,  repeating  his  "  Not  so,"  he  marries  and  is  soon  led  into 
the  entanglements  of  a  thoroughly  worldly  society.  To  another  young  man  the 
word  of  the  Lord  comes,  "  They  that  desire  to  be  rich  fall  into  a  temptation,"  and 
the  young  man  responds,  "  Not  so,  Lord — there  must  be  exceptions.  I  want  to  be 
rich  in  order  to  do  more  good,"  And  so  this  young  man  starts  on  a  career  for  gold, 
and  whether  he  grows  rich  or  ends  his  life  in  poverty,  his  life  is  a  wretched  failure 
on  the  side  of  God.  HI.  The  soul  that  says,  "  Not  so,  Lord,"  must  necessaeilt 
meet  with  evil.  The  unfortunate  experiences  are  not  accidents,  but  belong  to  the 
Divine  system  of  government.  Every  departure  from  God's  way  has  a  sting  in  it, 
that  we  may  be  stung  into  going  back  into  the  right  way.  Conscience  does  a  godly 
service  to  every  Christian  wanderer.  It  is  harsh  in  its  kindness.  But  the  work  of 
conscience  is  supplemented  by  events  around  us.  Are  you  finding  things  going 
awry  ?  Are  troubles  multiplying  ?  Look  and  see  if  you  have  not  been  saying, 
"Not  so,  Lord."  David  suffered  greatly  from  his  children,  and  two  "Not  so's  " 
stand  out  conspicuously  as  the  cause  of  it  aU.  What  a  man  soweth  that  must  he 
also  reap.  If  we  resist  God's  commands,  we  shall  certainly  meet  a  reversal,  because 
we  are  out  of  the  only  way  where  He  insures  our  peace.  It  is  of  God's  mercy  that 
those  reactions  occur,  just  as  it  is  of  God's  mercy  that  it  I  run  a  nail  in  my  foot 
I  am  pained.  IV.  The  very  opposite  spirit  to  that  which  we  have  been  con- 
templating  IS  THE   spirit   op   HUMBLE   INQUIRY   FOB   God's   WILL.      It   beCOmeS  US  tO 

be  distrustful  of  our  own  knowledge  and  wisdom.  James  describes  God  as  giving 
wisdom  liberally  to  aU  who  ask  Him.  We  surely  need  not  be  discouraged.  Now, 
the  only  method  for  every  child  of  God  to  pursue  is  to  go  to  God  for  everything,  to 
seek  constantly  the  Divine  guidance.  "  But,"  some  one  says,  "  how  can  you  tell 
when  it  is  God's  will  ?  "  Let  me  answer,  "  If  you  stand  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off  from 
your  father,  you  will  be  sore  puzzled  to  know  what  he  says  ;  but  if  you  go  within 
five  feet  of  him,  everything  will  be  plain.  So,  if  you  stand  away  from  your  Heavenly 
Pather,  you  will  undoubtedly  be  much  at  a  loss  to  know  what  is  His  will ;  but  if 
you  live  near  to  Him,  you  will  have  no  difficulty  of  this  sort.  Now,  it  is  true  (and 
Peter  is  an  example  of  it)  that  a  Christian  may  live  near  to  God  and  understand 
His  will  and  yet  say,  "  Not  so,  Lord."  A  paroxysm  of  self-confidence  may  seize 
him  even  in  the  very  presence  of  God.  It  is  a  sad  commentary  on  our  feeble  faith. 
The  reaction  in  such  a  case  is  overwhelming.  Peter's  "  Not  so,"  when  Jesus  told 
him  of  a  coming  Calvary,  was  the  direct  antecedent  of  the  threefold  denial  and  the 
deep  scar  which  it  made  on  his  whole  life.  Such  a  catastrophe  arises  from  breaking 
what  should  be  the  invariable  rule  of  going  to  God  for  everything.  "  Pray  without 
ceasing  "  is  the  Divine  injunction,  and  its  fulfilment  is  this  .life  which  is  habituated 
to  rest  upon  the  Divine  support  and  guidance.     The  thought  of  opposing  God's  will 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

would  cause  a  shudder  in  such  a  soul.    As  in  the  case  of  a  little  child,  it  feels  that 
independence  would  be  only  misery.     {Howard  Crosby,  D.D.) 

Yer.  14.  Who  shall  tell  thee  words,  whereby  thou  and  all  thy  house  shall  be 
saved. — Words  whereby  we  may  be  saved : — I  am  about  to  tell  you  such  words ; 
yet  I  am  far  from  supposing  that  this  announcement  of  my  purpose  is  calculated 
to  ensure  to  my  message  that  attention  which  it  demands  ;  for  man  is  interested 
about  anything  rather  than  the  salvation  of  his  soul — and  yet,  "  what  should  it 
profit  "  man  ?  The  soul  once  lost  is  lost  for  ever.  I.  Eveby  man's  first  and  chief 
CONCERN  OUGHT  TO  BE  ABOUT  THE  SALVATION  OF  HIS  SOUL.  1.  Every  man  is  a 
sinner,  and  without  salvation  he  must  perish.  You  may  be  too  proud  to  acknow- 
ledge this,  or  too  much  occupied  to  give  it  attention,  or  too  indifferent  to  ponder  it, 
or  ready  to  deny  it  in  the  sense  which  we  contend.  Well,  "  you  make  God  a  liar, 
and  His  truth  is  not  in  you,"  for  "  God  has  included  all  under  sin,"  Perhaps  you 
will  point  me  to  that  abandoned  woman,  or  to  that  bloody  blasphemer,  or  to  that 
iron-hearted  jailer,  and  bid  me  go  preach  this  doctrine  to  such  as  these.  Ah,  the 
question  is  not  whether  you  have  sinned  like  this  or  that  man,  but  whether  yoa 
have  sinned  at  all,  for  so  it  is  written,  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in 
all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  Oh,  you  will 
say,  I  never  did  anybody  any  harm,  I  have  been  a  kind  parent,  an  upright  trades- 
man, my  reputation  without  a  blemish ;  but  that  is  not  the  question ;  the  question 
is,  hast  thou  "  loved  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart "?  &c.  I  see  you  shudder 
and  shrink  back  1  I  hear  you  cry,  •'  But  God  is  merciful " — so  He  is,  but  then,  il 
you  appeal  to  His  mercy,  you  give  up  the  point,  you  confess  yourselves  sinners,  for 
if  you  be  not  sinners  you  may  appeal  with  confidence  to  His  justice.  2.  Every 
man's  first  and  chief  concern  ought  to  be  about  the  salvation  of  his  soul,  because, 
being  a  sinner,  he  is  placed  by  his  sin  in  circumstances  of  the  most  imminent 
peril.  The  wretch  that  trembles  on  the  brink  of  a  tremendous  precipice,  over 
whose  head  a  sword  is  suspended  by  a  hair,  upon  whom  the  volcano  is  ready  to 
burst  or  the  earth  to  yawn,  is  in  safety  compared  to  that  sinner  who  has  trans- 
gressed the  law  of  God,  and  is  exposed  by  his  transgression  to  His  righteous  indig- 
nation and  wrath.  Oh,  then,  what  wiU  you  do  to  be  saved  ?  Will  you  present  an 
atoning  sacrifice  for  your  sins  ?  Where  will  you  obtain  it  ?  Have  you  wealth  to 
purchase  it  ?  The  ransom  of  ten  thousand  monarchs  would  do  little,  rivers  of  oil 
and  oceans  of  blood  are  not  sufficient.  Do  you  propose  to  work  out  a  righteousness 
whereby  you  can  be  justified  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  How  can  you  do  it  ?  Can  an 
imperfect  creature  work  out  a  perfect  righteousness  ?  and  even  if  you  could  for  the 
time  that  is  to  come,  how  would  it  avail  for  the  atonement  of  the  sin  that  was 
past?  List'  n,  it  is  our  business  to  tell  you  the  response  to  this  cry  from  heaven. 
II.  The  gospel  is  the  only  source  from  which  satisfactory  information  ib 
OBTAINED  ON  THIS  MOST  MOMENTOUS  OF  ALL  SUBJECTS.  Take  this  question,  "  What 
must  I  do  to  be  saved,"  to  the  system  of  modern  infidelity  or  of  ancient  philosophy. 
What  answer  do  you  get  ?  The  sneer  of  derision,  or  the  sullen  silence  of  despair 
— they  cannot  tell.  Take  it  to  this  Book,  and  the  answer  is  instant,  decisive, 
••  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  What  does  the 
violated  law  of  God  demand  ?  Perfect  obedience.  Behold  it  in  the  person  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Does  justice  demand  an  infinite  atonement  ?  Behold  it  in 
"the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  1.  In  the  gospel  there  are 
words  whereby  we  may  be  saved,  and  the  salvation  they  announce  is  precisely 
adapted  to  the  sinner's  case.  You  are  guilty,  but  there  is  forgiveness  for  you,  and 
you  are  condemned,  but  there  is  a  righteousness  that  justifies  you  freely;  you  are  a 
rebel  and  an  outcast,  but  there  is  an  Advocate  that  pleads  for  you  ;  you  are  polluted, 
but  there  is  "  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness."  2.  These  are  words 
whereby  you  may  be  saved  individually.  Let  us  hear  your  personal  history.  I 
hear  one  say,  "  I  am  a  child  of  pious  parents,  and  I  have  sinned  against  early 
instruction  and  impressions  I  "  Well,  but  thou  mayest  be  saved  I  I  hear  another, 
"  I  trampled  under  foot  a  father's  admonitions,  and  despised  a  sainted  mother's 
tears,  and  brought  down  their  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave  1  "  Well,  but 
you  may  be  saved  1  I  hear  another  say,  "Ah,  but  I  mingled  with  infidels  and 
apostiites,  I  mocked  the  Bible,  at  God,  I  blasphemed  Christ  I  "  Ah,  but  yon  may 
be  saved  1  3.  But  while  these  are  words  whereby  you  may  be  saved,  rejecting 
these,  you  must  perish.  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  "How  shall 
you  escipe  if  you  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  (T.  RaJIIcs,  D.D.)  Saved  by  tlie 
Word : — 1.  Cornelius  was  no  common   publican  or  siuuer,  but  possessed  all  the 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  209 

qualifications  of  a  saint,  if  a  saint  can  grow  in  the  soil  of  this  earth,  without  a 
seed  from  heaven.  If  any  man  could  be  just  with  God  ^part  from  Christ,  surely  this 
is  the  man.  Yet  the  Word  of  God  treats  him  as  a  sinner,  and  tells  him  what 
he  must  do  to  be  saved.  There  is  no  escape  from  the  force  of  this  case.  It 
effectually  shuts  out  all  hope  of  merit.  The  difficulty  of  attaining  a  conviction 
of  sin  is  greater  where  sins  are  less  gross.  Hence  publicans  and  harlots  go  into 
the  kingdom  more  readily  than  Pharisees.  2.  By  what  means  shall  Cornelius  be 
saved?  By  words.  Strange  when  the  loss  is  so  deep  and  real  that  words, 
articulated  air,  should  bring  deliverance.  It  was  natural  for  Naaman  to  toss  his 
head  in  contempt  at  the  proposal  of  a  bath  in  Jordan  as  a  cure  for  disease,  and 
there  is  a  class  of  scholars  in  our  day  who  sneer  at  the  proposal  to  cure  sin  by 
words.  They  have  no  confidence  in  doctrines  that  enter  the  mind  from  without ; 
they  would  rather  trust  to  principles  that  spring  up  within.  Beware  of  wander- 
ing into  the  mist  here.  Words  become  life  or  death  when  God  employs  them 
to  proclaim  His  will.  God  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light." 
"Lazarus,  come  forth,"  and  he  came.  Even  in  the  ordinary  experience  of  life  men 
are  saved  or  lost  by  words.  An  ocean  steamer  is  rushing  through  the  water — two 
words,  "Breakers  ahead!"  from  the  watchman,  "Starboard  hard!"  from  the 
master,  words  that  passed  away  as  breath  on  a  breeze,  saved  five  hundred  human 
beings  from  a  watery  grave.  Humanity  is  like  that  ship,  and  God  sends  words 
whereby  we  may  be  saved.  3.  Truth,  like  spirit,  is  invisible  till  embodied,  and 
words  are  the  body  of  truth.  They  may  be  spoken,  or  printed,  or  wired,  it 
matters  not  what  form  they  assume,  they  are  the  body  in  which  truth  dwells. 
Satan  embodies  himself  in  words  whereby  man  may  be  destroyed,  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  words  whereby  we  may  be  saved.  Take  heed  how  ye  hear ;  the  missing  of  a 
word  may  be  the  loss  of  a  soul.    {W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Yer.  18.  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  repentance  nnto  life. — 
Repentance  unto  life  : — Consider — I.  Cebtain  false  repentances.  1.  Trembling 
beneath  the  sound  of  the  gospel  is  not  repentance.  "  Felix  trembled,"  but  had  no 
sorrow  for  sin.  2.  You  may  be  "almost  persuaded  "  to  turn  to  Christ,  you  may 
even  desire  the  gospel,  you  may  even  go  upon  your  knees  in  prayer,  and  yet  have 
no  repentance,  for  you  may  get  no  further  than  Agrippa's  "  almost."  3.  It  is 
possible  for  men  to  positively  humble  themselves  under  the  hand  of  God,  and  yet 
they  may  be  total  strangers  to  repentance.  Ahab  humbled  himself,  but  did  not 
turn  from  sin.  4.  It  is  possible  that  you  may  confess  your  sins,  and  yet  may  not 
repent,  for  you  may  acknowledge  your  transgressions,  and  yet  have  no  abhorrence 
of  sin.  5.  You  may  do  some  work  meet  for  repentance,  and  yet  you  may  be 
impenitent.  Judas  made  restitution,  but  "he  went  out  and  hanged  himself."  II. 
Tbue  repentance.  1.  Let  me  correct  one  or  two  mistakes.  (1)  That  there  must 
be  deep,  horrible  manifestations  of  the  terrors  of  law  and  of  hell  before  repen- 
tance. Terrible  thoughts  are  very  often  not  the  gift  of  God  at  all,  but  the  insinua- 
tions of  the  devil ;  and  even  where  the  law  worketh  these  thoughts,  they  do  not 
enter  into  the  essence  of  repentance.  "  Eepentance  "  is  a  hatred  of  sin ;  a  turning 
from  sin  and  a  determination  in  the  strength  of  God  to  forsake  it.  (2)  That  they 
cannot  repent  enough.  But  there  is  not  any  eminent  degree  of  ' '  repentance  "  which 
is  necessary  to  salvation.  There  are  degrees  of  faith,  and  yet  the  least  faith  saves  ; 
so  there  are  degrees  of  repentance,  and  the  least  repentance  will  save  the  soul  if  it. 
is  sincere.  2.  And  now  what  are  the  signs  of  true  "  repentance  "  in  the  sight  of 
God?  (1)  There  is  always  sorrow  with  it.  More  or  less  intense,  it  may  be, 
according  to  the  way  in  which  God  calls,  and  previous  manner  of  life ;  but  there 
must  be  some  sorrow.  Not,  however,  that  you  must  shed  actual  tears.  Some  men 
caimot.  (2)  Practice — practical  repentance.  "  'Tis  not  enough  to  say  we're  sorry, 
and  repent,  and  then  go  on  from  day  to  day,  just  as  we  always  went."  We  know  a 
tree  by  its  fruit ;  and  you  who  are  penitent  will  bring  forth  works  of  repentance. 
(3)  Does  it  last  or  does  it  not  ?  Many  of  your  repentances  are  hke  the  hectic  flush 
upon  the  cheek  of  the  consumptive  person,  which  is  no  sign  of  health.  (4)  Do  you 
think  you  would  repent  if  there  were  no  punishment  ?  Do  you  repent  because  you 
know  you  shall  be  punished  for  ever  if  you  remain  in  your  sins?  Every  murderer 
hates  his  crime  when  he  comes  to  the  gallows.  If  you  knew  that  you  might  give 
up  your  life  to  sin  with  impunity,  would  you  still  desire  holiness  ?  If  so,  you  need 
not  fear  but  that  you  have  a  "  repentance  "  which  is  "  unto  hfe."  III.  The  blessed 
beneficence  of  God  in  ORANTiNa  to  men  "  repentance  unto  life."  It  is  the 
marvel  of  Divine  mercy  that  it  not  only  provides  the  way  of  salvation,  and  not 

vou  n.  14 


«10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xi. 

only  invites  men  to  receive  grace,  but  that  it  positively  makes  men  willing  to  be 
saved.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  propagation  of  the  gospel  in  foreign  parts : — I.  I 
begin  with  the  blessing  ob  benefit  hebe  said  to  be  bestowed.  "  Eepentanca 
nnto  life."  Repentance  is  the  infinite  and  inestimable  gospel  privilege,  which  the 
grace  of  God  does,  in  and  through  Jesus  Christ,  allow  to  sinful  men,  and  the  happy 
consequence  of  this  being  no  less  than  eternal  life,  it  is  therefore  styled  repentance 
unto  life.  As  to  the  import  of  the  word  "  repentance,"  the  expression  in  the 
Greek  plainly  signifies  a  change  of  mind ;  and  the  Scripture  sense  of  the  word 
implies  somewhat  more  than  that,  and  takes  in  besides  a  thing  which  naturally 
follows  it,  or  is  caused  by  it,  via.,  an  alteration  likewise  of  practice  or  behaviour,  a 
changing  or  turning  from  one  course  or  custom  of  Ufe  to  another.  By  "  life  "  here 
Bome  indeed  understand  that  present  most  blessed  and  desirable  state  and 
condition  in  which  sinners  are  placed  by  repentance  ;  whereas  before  this  they 
were  in  a  state  of  wretched  darkness,  no  better  than  spiritually  dead.  And  this  is 
undoubtedly  a  true  and  good  notion  of  repentance  unto  life,  viz.,  that  repentance 
is  that  which  brings  men  to  live  like  themselves,  i.e.,  happily  and  at  ease  and  with 
comfort ;  which  it  was  not  possible  for  them  to  do,  so  long  as  they  continued 
in  their  former  course.  For  that  was  irregular  and  disorderly  and  unnatural ; 
and  whatsoever  is  so  is  a  certain  enemy  to  quiet,  and  utterly  destructive  of  true 
satisfaction.  I  see  no  inconvenience  in  considering  life  in  this  place  in  both 
acceptations,  viz.,  the  rational  and  religious  life  which  repentance  brings  men 
to  here,  and  that  blessed  and  immortal  life  to  which,  upon  their  true  repentance, 
they  are  to  be  advanced  hereafter.  For  they  are  of  very  near  affinity  to  each 
other.  Life  considered  in  the  former  sense  is  the  certain  forerunner  of  life 
considered  in  the  latter,  and  the  latter  is  the  undoubted  effect  of  the  former,  and 
a  greater  benefit  or  blessing  than  both  of  them  together  cannot  be  desired  or 
imagined.  And  happy  is  it  for  us,  happy  for  the  whole  race  of  mankind,  that 
God  has  dealt  out  so  great  a  blessing  with  so  liberal  a  hand.  For — II.  The  pebsons 
IT  IS  bestowed  upon.  "  The  Gentiles."  We  find  that  this  favour  was  not 
confined,  as  the  Jews,  upon  the  first  promulgation  oi  the  gospel,  imagined  it  to 
be,  to  one  people  and  nation,  so  that  none  besides  themselves  were  to  be  partakers 
of  it.  By  the  term  Gentiles  the  Jews  understood  aU  that  were  not  of  their  own 
people  and  country  and  religion.  Heathens  and  nations  and  Gentiles  are 
synonymous  expressions  in  Holy  Scripture,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  following  texts : 
1  Sam.  viii.  20  ;  Psa.  xliv.  2,  and  Ixxix.  1,  and  by  many  other  places.  These  were 
the  people  whom  the  Jews,  in  comparison  of  themselves,  greatly  scorned.  "  Stand 
by  thyself,  come  not  near  to  me,  for  I  am  holier  than  thou  "  (lea.  Ixv.  6),  was 
the  scornful  language  of  the  Jew  to  the  poor  neglected  Gentile.  And  this  distinc- 
tion between  the  Jews  and  the  other  nations,  or  Gentiles,  was  also  mightily  kept 
up  even  in  the  time  of  our  Saviour  ;  nay,  perhaps  never  was  at  a  greater  height 
than  then.  So  Uttle  aware  were  they,  at  the  time  of  the  appearance  of  the  Son  of 
God,  of  the  gracious  errand  upon  which  He  was  sent,  which  was  to  break  down  the 
partition  wall  that  was  betwixt  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  to  make  both  one,  imply 
two  things  considerable.  1. 1  say,  here  is  implied  the  wide  and  universal  extent  of 
this  blessing,  which  seemed  to  the  Jews  very  strange  and  wonderful.  2.  Here  waa 
likewise  a  great  difficulty  and  stumbling-block  in  their  way,  and  that  was,  that 
the  people  on  whom  this  favour  was  conferred  seemed  to  them,  on  other  accounts, 
so  utterly  unfit  for  it,  besides  their  not  being  of  their  stock  and  country.  The 
Gentiles  were  persons  that  wholly  set  themselves  against  God,  and  were  addicted  to 
all  manner  of  idolatry,  but  as  for  themselves  they  were  a  holy  and  a  peculiar 
people.  Nay,  St.  Peter  himself,  till  convinced  by  the  fore-mentioned  miracle,  waa 
of  this  mind.  He  was  for  keeping  up  the  distinction  of  clean  and  unclean  till  God 
Himself  commanded  him  to  the  contrary.    IH.  The  aoeeeableness  of  this  method 

OF  PKOCEEDINO  WITH  THE  NATDBE  AND  ATTRIBUTES  OF  GOD  AND  WITH  THE  SEVERAL 
DBOLABATIONS    He    HAD    MADE    TO   THIS   PURPOSE    BY   HiS    PROPHETS.         NoW     they     had 

great  reason  to  think  it  highly  probable  that  even  to  the  Gentiles  God  would  grant 
repentance  unto  life,  from  the  three  following  considerations.  1.  From  the  con 
templation  of  the  bonndlesa  mercies  and  infinite  goodness  of  God.  The  infinite 
goodness  of  G<id,  if  the  Jews  had  attended  to  that  consideration,  might  have 
rendered  it  to  them  highly  probable  that  God  would  allow  to  the  Gentiles  also 
access  to  eternal  salvation,  or,  in  the  words  of  the  text,  "repentance  unto  life." 
These  attributes,  though  inseparable  from  the  idea  of  God,  the  Jews  most  plainly 
overlooked,  or  else  they  would  never  have  gone  about  to  confine  God's  blessings 
and  engross  His  favours  wholly  to  themselves,  but  must  have  argued  after  this,  ox 


CHiP.  XI.]  THE  ACTS.  211 

the  like  manner,  with  themselves.  "  God  being,  as  the  very  natural  notions  of 
Him  do  imply,  a  God  of  infinite  and  unlimited  goodness,  surely  He  will  not  continue 
to  shine  upon  us  only,  but  wUl  dart  the  rays  of  His  bounty  over  all  the  world.  He 
is  not,  as  Esau  suspected  of  his  father  Isaac,  furnished  only  with  one  blessing,  but 
has  an  unexhausted  fountain  of  blessings,  and  wiU  therefore  undoubtedly  visit 
other  nations  in  His  good  time  with  the  same.  For  they  likewise  are  the  work  of 
His  hands  as  well  as  we.  They,  too,  are  of  the  same  make,  and  have  enstamped 
upon  them  the  like  Divine  and  heavenly  image  with  ourselves.  They  are  pre- 
served by  the  continual  care  of  His  providence,  and  do  already  enjoy  the  common 
blessings  of  this  life,  such  as  health  and  strength  and  sunshine  and  rain."  2.  The 
Jews  might  have  argued  the  great  probability  of  this,  from  the  extraordinary  great 
need  the  Gentiles  had  of  the  blessing  here  spoken  of,  and  that  whether  they  con- 
sidered their  number  or  their  condition.  As  to  their  number  they  were  vastly  the 
greater  part  of  the  world,  the  inhabitants  of  Judaea  being  very  few  and  inconsider- 
able in  comparison  of  those  of  all  the  earth  besides ;  and  yet  that  only,  like 
Goshen  in  Egypt,  was  a  land  of  light,  whilst  other  parts  were  overspread  with 
darkness  and  ignorance ;  and  this  suggests  to  us  also  the  consideration  of  their 
condition.  And  the  more  sick  the  more  need  had  they  of  a  physician.  Such 
sinners  as  they  had  the  greatest  need  of  aU  to  be  called  upon  to  repentance. 
Their  necessities  were  great,  their  indigences  and  wants  were  pressing  and  crying 
out  for  help ;  and  these  were  such  things  as  could  not  but  plead  strongly  for  them, 
with  a  good  and  merciful  God,  that  they  too  might  have  a  share  in  the  blessed 
redemption  effected  by  the  Son  of  God.  3.  This  was  not  an  instance  of  the  Divine 
goodness  barely  to  be  hoped  for  from  those  lovely  attributes  of  God,  His  mercy  and 
lovingkindness,  but  it  is  what  God  had  promised  and  foretold  He  would  do  (Gen. 
xxii.  18,  xlix.  10 ;  Isa.  ii.  2 ;  ix.  2 ;  v.  2 ;  Psa.  xcviii.  3 ;  Hag.  ii.  7). 
IV.  The  gbeat  reason  that  persons  already  admitted  to  the  blessing  op  thk 

GOSPEL,    HAVE    TO    USE     THEIR     HEARTY     ENDEAVOURS,     THAT     IT     MAY     BE     ENJOYED    BY 

OTHERS  AS  vraLL  AS  BY  THEMSELVES.  1.  In  the  first  place,  I  say,  gratitude  to  our 
Lord  and  Saviour,  who  hath  redeemed  us  with  His  most  precious  blood,  should 
make  us  not  only  pray  that  the  kingdom  of  God  may  come,  but  should  make  us  as 
on  the  one  side,  highly  delighted  to  see  it  flourishing,  so,  on  the  other,  uneasy 
whenever  we  see  either  any  of  the  subjects  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  danger  of  falling 
away  from  Him,  or  others  (who  might,  would  we  but  take  the  pains  to  gain  them, 
become  subjects  of  His  kingdom),  not  so  much  as  knowing  the  Lord  that  bought 
them,  nor  consequently  capable  of  bringing  their  thoughts  and  actions  to  the 
obedience  of  Christ.  2.  And  in  the  next  place,  this  is  the  greatest  instance  of 
charity  to  man  that  is  possible  (1  John  v.  12).  If,  affirmatively,  the  belief  of  the 
gospel  be  the  way  to  life,  and  negatively,  there  be  no  other  way  beside  it,  how  great 
a  blessing,  how  valuable  a  privilege  do  we  suffer  men  to  want  by  letting  them 
continue  in  unbelief  ?  But  to  this  it  may  be  said,  with  regard  to  the  infidel  part  of 
the  world,  Ignoti  nulla  cupido.  As  they  have  not  heard  of  the  joys  of  heaven,  so  it 
is  not  to  be  supposed  that  want  of  knowing  the  gospel  can  cause  in  them  any  un- 
easiness. But  then  we  are  to  consider  that  the  rewards  of  the  gospel  are  a  great 
prize,  and  to  miss  of  that  prize  is  a  great  loss  for  any  to  sustain,  who  might,  if  we 
so  pleased,  have  had  an  opportunity  of  obtaining  it.  In  the  meantime,  their  being 
at  present  sensible,  or  not  sensible,  of  their  loss,  makes  no  manner  of  alteration  as 
to  the  truth  and  reality  of  it.  With  regard  to  persons  who  are  in  a  lethargy,  whilst 
they  lie  under  the  power  of  their  distemper,  and  are  utterly  insensible  of  the  bad- 
ness of  their  own  case,  it  cannot,  because  they  are  so,  be  therefore  said  of  them 
that  they  are  well.  No  ;  bystanders  know  the  contrary,  and  pity  them,  and  if  they 
have  any  humanity  will  endeavour  to  relieve  them.  Just  so  should  Christians  act 
with  regard  to  the  Gentile  world.  We  know  how  wretched  a  state  the  heatlien 
world  was  in  at  the  time  of  the  promulgation  of  the  gospel.  And  what  reason  have 
we  to  think  that,  at  this  present  time,  it  can  fare  better  with  any  people  who  have 
not  amongst  them  the  gospel  of  Christ  to  free  them  from  these  evils  ?  Has  not  the 
•common  enemy  of  mankind,  now  as  formerly,  the  same  frailties  and  corruptions  of 
fallen  man  to  work  upon  ?  Or  has  he,  since  the  mischief  he  did  to  our  first  parents, 
abated  anything  of  his  inveterate  hatred  to  our  race  ?  (Bishop  of  St.  David's,  1736.) 
Repentance  unto  life : — Consider — 1.  A  blessing  granted;  "  repentance  unto  life  "  ; 
so  called,  to  distinguish  it  from  legal  repentance,  and  the  sorrow  that  is  unto  death. 
This  true  repentance  is  unto  life ;  for,  by  God's  appointment,  it  must  go  before 
eternal  life ;  and  whoso  have  it  shall  be  sure  of  that.  2.  The  parties  to  whom  it 
was  granted  ;  "  the  Gentiles,"  those  who  were  once  withL.ut  hope  and  without  God 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

in  the  world.  3.  The  author  of  it,  "  God."  It  is  His  gift,  as  well  as  faith  is.  He 
works  it  in  the  heart.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  is,  "Kepentance  unto  Ufe  is  a 
saving  grace,  whereby  a  sinner,  out  of  a  true  sense  of  his  sin,  and  apprehension  of 
the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  doth,  with  grief  and  hatred  of  his  sin,  turn  from  it 
unto  God,  with  full  purpose  of,  and  endeavour  after,  new  obedience."  Note — I. 
The  KINDS  of  repentance.  1.  Legal,  such  as  was  in  Judas,  and  is  not  saving  (Matt, 
xxvii.  3),  being  produced  by  law  terrors,  without  gospel-grace  changing  the  heart. 
2.  Evangelical,  which  is  that  in  the  text,  and  is  the  only  true  and  saving 
repentance.  The  general  difference  betwixt  them  lies  here,  that  in  this  last,  one 
repents  of  his  sin  as  it  is  sin,  or  offensive  to  God,  as  David  did  (Psa.  li.  4) ;  in  the 
other,  only  as  it  brings  wrath  on  him  (Gen.  iv.  13).  11.  Its  general  nature.  It 
is  a  saving  grace  (2  Tim.  iii.  25),  disposing  the  soul  unto  all  the  acts  of  turning 
from  sin  unto  God.  1.  It  is  not  a  transient  action,  a  sigh  for  sin,  a  pang  of  sorrow 
for  it,  which  goes  away  again ;  but  an  abiding  grace,  a  new  frame  and  disposition, 
fixed  in  the  heart,  disposing  one  to  turn  from  sin  to  God  on  all  occasions  (Zech. 
xii.  10).  2.  Nor  yet  a  passing  work  of  the  first  days  of  one's  rehgion,  but  a  grace 
in  the  heart,  setting  one  to  an  answerable  working  all  their  days.  3.  It  is  a  saving 
grace,  distinguishing  one  from  a  hypocrite,  and  having  a  necessary  connection 
with  eternal  life.  III.  Its  author.  1.  Not  men  themselves  ;  it  is  not  owing  to  one's 
natural  powers  (Jer.  xxii.  23).  The  stony  heart  is  beyond  man's  power  to  remove. 
2.  It  is  God's  free  gift,  and  wrought  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit  in  the  heart  (Ezek. 
xxxvi.  26,  27  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19).  Sometimes  notorious  sinners  become  penitents, 
as  Manasseh,  Paul,  &c.  The  knottiest  timber  is  as  easy  for  the  Spirit  to  work  as 
any  other.  The  means  the  Spirit  makes  use  of  is  the  Word ;  hence  we  read  of 
preaching  repentance.  And  (1)  The  law  serves  to  break  the  hard  heart  (Jer.  xxiii. 
29).  It  is  like  the  Baptist  preparing  the  way  for  the  Messiah's  coming.  Hence  it 
is  called  "  the  Spirit  of  bondage  "  (Eom.  viii.  15J.  (2)  The  gospel  serves  to  melt 
the  hard  heart,  like  a  fire  (Jer.  xxiii.  29) ;  and  so  Dow  and  bend  it  toward  God.  The 
soul  is  driven  by  the  law,  but  drawn  by  the  gospel.  IV.  Its  sprinqs.  1.  A  true 
sense  of  sin.  (1)  A  sight  of  it  (Psa.  li.  3).  The  man's  eyes  are  opened  to  hia 
sinfulness ;  the  evil  of  his  sin,  its  misery  and  danger  to  himself,  and  the  dishonour 
it  does  to  God.  (2)  A  painful  feeling  of  it  (chap.  ii.  37,  xvi.  30).  This  is  necessary, 
because  otherwise  the  sinner  will  never  part  with  his  sin,  nor  prize  Christ  and  His 
grace  (Rev.  iii.  17).  2.  An  apprehension  of  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  (Joel  ii. 
12,  13).  Not  mercy  for  mercy's  sake,  but  Christ's  sake.  This  is  necessary.  For 
without  it,  one  wUl  either — (1)  Go  on  in  secret  despair,  casting  off  the  thoughts  of 
his  case,  and  making  the  best  of  it  he  can  (Jer.  ii.  25)  ;  or  (2)  Lie  down  in  tormenting 
despair,  like  Judas.  Both  which  will  fix  sin  in  the  heart,  and  bar  out  repentance. 
V.  Its  parts.  1.  Humiliation.  The  sinner  goes  from  God  by  the  highway  of 
pride  and  self-conceit,  but  always  comes  back  the  low  way  of  humiliation.  Grace 
pulls  him  down  from  the  seat  of  the  scorner,  and  lays  him  at  the  Lord's  feet  (1  Pet. 
V.  6).  In  it  there  is — (1)  Sorrow  for  sin;  (2)  A  holy  shame  for  sin  (Rom.  vi.  21). 
They  see  now  their  spiritual  nakedness  and  pollution.  (3)  Self-loathing  (Ezek. 
xxxvi.  31 ;  Luke  xviii.  13).  (4)  Penitent  confession  (Jer.  iii.  13),  accusing  and 
condemning  themselves.  2.  Conversion,  or  returning — (1)  From  sin,  (2)  To  God  and 
hoUness.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Apostolic  and  modern  missions  compared: — The 
passage  I  have  chosen  as  the  subject  of  our  present  inquiry  informs  ns  of  the 
impressions  produced  on  the  minds  of  the  Jewish  converts  at  Jerusalem  by  St. 
Peter's  relation  of  the  circumstances  and  success  of  his  first  mission  to  the  Gentiles. 
The  passage  implies  the  previous  operation  of  prejudice ;  it  records  the  confutation 
of  that  prejudice ;  and  it  illustrates  the  argument  in  support  of  missions  which 
arises  from  their  success.  I.  The  passage  implies  the  previous  operation  of 
PREJUDICE — a  prejudice  against  missions  to  the  Gentiles.  "  They  held  their  peace." 
Then  they  had  before  opposed  them.  Was  there  anything  in  the  character  and 
genius  of  the  gospel  that  could  warrant  the  indulgence  of  this  prejudice  J  No. 
How  can  we  account  for  their  prejudices  against  missions?  They  can  be  ascribed 
to  their  strong  nationality,  their  religious  distinction,  and  their  material  views  of 
the  Messiah's  reign.  The  old  Jewish  spirit  was  specially  exclusive.  II.  The 
passage  records  the  confutation  of  their  prkjudioes.  "When  they  heard  these 
things,  they  held  their  peace."  Their  prejudices  were  refuted  and  their  objections 
silenced  by  the  facts  which  the  apostle  reported.  IH.  The  passage  illustrates  the 
argument  for  the  support  of  missions  arising  from  their  success.  Success, 
abstractedly  considered,  is  not  the  invariable  criterion  of  a  Divine  religion,  or 
th«  unei^uivocal  proof  of  truth.     The  success  of  the  false  prophet  of  Mecca  and 


CHAP,  xi.]  TRE  ACTS.  213 

of  the  Jesuits  in  China,  on  account  of  the  way  in  which  that  success  was  won, 
proves  nothing  as  to  the  value  of  their  mission.  But  the  success  of  the  gospel 
does.  It  is  a  success  against  the  passions,  prejudices,  and  habits  of  mankind,  won 
by  moral  means,  and  moral  means  alone.  (1)  The  success  explains  and  vindicates 
the  object  of  missions.  (2)  The  success  supports  and  confirms  our  expectations. 
{3)  The  success  demands  increased  exertions.  (J.  Fletcher,  D.D.)  Repentance 
to  life  granted  to  the  Gentiles : — The  wise  man  hath  said,  "  He  that  answereth  a 
matter  before  he  heareth  it,  it  is  folly  and  shame  to  him."  Without  waiting  for 
the  reasons  of  the  apostle's  conduct,  his  Jewish  brethren  had  contended  with  him. 
They  listened  to  his  explanation,  and  their  reproaches  are  converted  into  praise. 
Upright  minds  may  err  in  opinion  and  feeling,  but  they  are  accessible  to  evidence. 
They  deny  not  themselves  the  pleasure  and  advantage  of  fresh  discoveries  in  the 
path  of  truth,  because  they  cannot  endure  the  proof  of  their  own  fallibiUty.  I. 
Its  nature.  1.  In  general.  Eepentance  is  distinguished  by  infalhble  signs.  Not 
only  does  it  awaken  fear,  by  considerations  of  consequences,  but  hatred,  by  a 
perception  of  its  intrinsic  malignity.  Such  a  repentance  never  f  aUs  to  produce  meet 
fruits.  The  subject  of  it  abandons  the  sins  he  mourns,  and  enters  on  a  new  and 
holy  course.  Such  was  David's  repentance,  but  not  Herod's  or  Judas's.  2.  This 
repentance  is  unto  life.  The  life  with  which  it  is  connected  is  of  the  highest  order ; 
not  animal  life,  alike  the  gift  of  worms  and  man ;  not  mere  intellectual  life,  by 
which  man  bears  resemblance  to  angels,  whether  holy  or  fallen  ;  but  spiritual  life, 
consisting  in  a  right  bias  and  employment  of  natural  powers ;  its  business,  the 
service — its  bliss,  the  enjoyment  of  God.  True  repentance  originates  in  a  principle 
of  this  life,  implanted  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  introduces  into  a  course  of  it  on  earth, 
and  issues  in  the  eternal  perfection  of  it  in  heaven.  H.  Its  Author  and  Giver. 
So  hardening  is  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  that  repentance  to  hfe  would  never  have 
become  the  inmate  of  the  human  bosom,  but  as  a  gift  from  God.  I.  Who,  except 
the  merciful  Author  of  our  being,  grants  space  and  opportunity  to  repent?  Why 
was  not  the  persecuting  Saul  cut  down  in  his  sins  ?  The  prolongation  of  existence 
is  the  continuance  of  opportunity  to  return  to  God.  He  is  "  long-suffering,  not 
willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance."  The 
long-suffering  of  God  waited  on  the  people  of  the  old  world.  They  disregarded, 
and  they  perished.  Let  their  example  be  our  warning.  2.  He  who  grants  the 
opportunity  also  bestows  the  means.  Are  some  awakened  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel?  It  is  His  appointment.  Are  others  affected  under  the  reading  of  the 
Word?  All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God.  Is  a  third  aroused  by 
afflictions  ?  They  are  the  chastisements  of  their  heavenly  Father's  hand.  If,  in 
a  further  instance,  the  coiinsel  and  prayers  and  holy  example  of  friends  have  been 
instrumental,  whose  gift  are  they?  And,  if  in  any  cases  the  effect  has  been  the 
result  of  a  concurrence  in  these  various  kinds  of  subordinate  agency,  from  whom 
do  they  all  descend?  3.  The  best  adapted  means,  however,  will  be  unavailing 
unless  the  Father  of  lights  bestow  the  Spirit  of  repentance.  Jesus  is  exalted  to  be 
a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  that  He  may  give  repentance.  Shall  the  necessity  of  this 
heavenly  gift  be  pleaded  to  excuse  a  neglect  of  the  means  of  repentance  ?  Nothing 
can  excuse  it.  Penitence  is  God's  command  as  well  as  His  gift ;  and  the  Spirit 
which  produces  it  is  promised  to  him  who  seeks.  III.  Its  effects  on  CnRisxtAN 
BEHOLDERS.  The  joy  here  was — 1.  Benevolent.  The  good  man  knows  the  way  of 
transgressors  to  be  hard.  He  thinks  of  the  tremendous  end  that  awaits  them  ;  of 
the  felicities  in  which  penitence  results.  2.  Devout  joy.  He  beholds  in  the 
repentance  of  a  sinner  a  glorious  triumph  of  almighty  power  over  the  might  and 
artifice  of  Satan,  and  the  ignorance,  pride,  and  obstinacy  of  the  human  mind ;  of 
Divine  mercy  over  its  awful  demerit.  He  contemplates  an  immortal  mind  debased 
and  polluted  by  subjection  to  sin,  emerging  from  its  degradation,  and  resuming  its 
primitive  beauty.  And  thus  it  is  an  exultation  like  that  of  the  angels  of  God. 
Such  a  blessing  granted  to  an  individual  may  well  kindle  joyful  admiration  of 
Divine  goodness  and  power,  but  extended  to  many  the  effect  should  be  piopor- 
tionably  augmented.  If  the  bestowment  of  this  blessing  on  others  be  a  just  ground 
of  exultation,  what  pleasure  and  gratitude  should  it  awaken  when  conferred  on 
ourselves  ?  Of  a  blessing,  so  pre-eminently  important,  can  any  regard  themselves 
as  destitute,  and  abide  in  tranquiUity  ?     {Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.) 

Vers.  19-21.  Now  they  which  were  scattered  abroad  .  .  .  travelled  as  far  as 
Phenlce,  and  Cyprus,  and  Antioch. — Christianity  at  Antioch  : — I.  Its  entrance 
iNio  Antioch.    Here  (ver.  19)  we  discover — 1.  Evil  overruled  for  good.     The  very 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

efforts  to  crush  the  gospel  gave  it  new  vigour  and  a  wider  sweep.  Thus  it  has 
ever  been.  2.  The  invincibility  of  Christian  courage.  The  fugitives  did  not  flee 
from  the  cause  they  had  espoused,  nor  relax  their  efforts  to  advance  it.  While 
true  courage  does  not  consist  in  callous  indifference  to  danger,  it  demands  at  all 
risks  eternal  fealty  to  principle  and  duty.  3.  The  legitimacy  of  lay  preaching.  It 
is  significant  that  the  planting  of  Christianity  here,  and  in  numerous  instances 
since,  has  been  the  work  of  private  men  holding  no  ecclesiastical  office  whatever : 
which  shows — (1)  That  it  is  the  duty  of  every  one  who  knows  the  gospel  to  proclaim 
it.  (2)  That  those  who  would  restrict  preaching  to  the  professionally  ordained 
are  opposed  to  the  best  interests  of  man  and  to  the  genius  of  the  New  Testament. 
4.  The  universaUty  of  the  gospel.  It  is  a  system  as  suited  to  the  Greek  as  to  the 
Hebrew  mind,  and  equally  essential  to  the  highest  interests  of  both.  II.  Its 
ACHIEVEMENTS  AT  Antioch,  which — 1.  luvolvcd  a  Divine  change  in  the  characters 
of  many  (ver.  21).  Observe — (1)  The  Divine  power  which  attended  their  ministry. 
(2)  The  faith  which  their  ministry  generated.  (3)  The  revolution  which  their  faith 
effected.  2.  Attracted  the  attention  of  the  mother  Church  (ver.  22).  This  was 
natural.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Church  at  Antioch: — Persecution  was  the 
fii-st  means  of  propagating  the  gospel.  Blow  on  the  candle,  and  you  extinguish  the 
flame  ;  blow  on  the  fire  in  the  grate,  and  you  increase  it.  The  reason  is  in  the 
hold  the  fire  has  upon  the  combustible  substance.  If  the  hold  is  slight,  blovrfng 
will  put  it  out ;  if  deep,  will  intensify  it.  Christ  came  to  send  fire  on  the  earth ; 
the  fire  ate  its  way  down  to  the  very  depths  of  the  disciples'  spirits.  Saul 
•'  breathed  out  threatenings,"  &c. ;  but  the  breathing  only  fanned  the  fire. 
Observe  that  this  Church — I.  Was  established  by  lay  agency.  These  men  were 
not  commissioned  by  any  ecclesiastical  authority  to  preach.  They  did  it  in- 
stinctively. The  flowers  do  not  require  to  be  told  to  blossom ;  let  the  sun  but 
shine,  and  they  do  it  without  being  told.  Biids  do  not  need  an  almanack  to 
remind  them  that  May  is  come,  and  that  the  season  for  outdoor  concerts  has 
arrived.  And  as  soon  as  a  man  has  knowledge  of  the  Saviour,  he  feels  an  impulse 
to  tell  others  of  Him.  Some  Churches  object  to  what  they  call  irregular  teachers. 
They  forget  that  there  are  two  ordinations.  Sometimes  the  human  and  the  Divine 
meet  in  the  same  person  ;  sometimes  they  diverge.  If  you  can  get  the  two,  well ; 
if  not,  give  me  the  Divine,  let  who  will  have  the  human.  The  hand  of  an  apostle 
had  not  been  laid  on  the  heads  of  these  disciples.  But  what  of  that?  "The 
hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  them."  If  that  "  hand  "  is  with  a  man,  surely  the 
bishop's  is  not  vitally  essential.  II.  Was  established  among  the  Gentiles.  1.  It 
was  the  first  Gentile  Church.  Ver.  19  tells  us  that  they  "  preached  the  Word  to 
Jews  only."  But  the  following  verse  tells  us  that  the  natives  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene 
preached  to  the  "  Greeks  "  also.  The  text,  therefore,  marks  a  new  epoch  in  the 
history  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  Christ  had  plainly  intimated  the  admission  of  the 
Gentiles  into  the  fold.  But  the  disciples  understood  Him  not,  and  for  years 
confined  their  labours  to  "Jews  only."  And  when  Peter  ventured  to  preach  to 
CorneUus,  he  was  put  on  his  defence.  We  are  prone  to  look  upon  the  primitive 
Church  as  our  pattern  ;  but  the  infant  Church  cannot  be  a  pattern  to  the  Church 
in  its  maturity.  Shame  upon  us  if  modem  Churches  are  not  much  better  than 
primitive  1  How  narrow  and  bigoted  was  the  Church  of  Jerusalem  1  How  con- 
tentious and  immoral  the  Church  of  Corinth  I  But  life  proved  too  much  f»r 
prejudice  ;  whilst  they  of  the  circumcision  were  contending  the  Church  was 
instinctively  extending  its  frontiers — it  claimed  the  Gentiles  also  as  its  inheritance. 
2.  Three  stages  are  traceable  in  the  growth  of  this  idea.  (1)  From  the  establish- 
ment of  the  Church  in  the  wilderness  down  to  the  Babylonish  captivity,  it  was 
strictly  Jewish.  Not  but  that  there  was  provision  made  in  the  law  for  the  stranger 
and  the  alien ;  but  the  system  was  more  tolerant  tban  the  men,  and  born  Jews 
only  were  allowed  to  participate  in  its  manifold  privileges.  (2)  But  during  the 
Captivity,  Jews  and  Gentiles  were  brought  into  frequent  contact,  and  better 
knowledge  led  to  kindlier  feelings.  The  Jews,  therefore,  on  their  return,  attached 
to  their  temple  a  court  of  the  Gentiles.  Such  a  thought  never  entered  the  mind  of 
Solomon  or  of  his  architects.  Henceforth  they  displayed  a  missionary  spirit,  and 
compassed  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte.  True,  they  did  not  pull  down  the 
wall ;  but  they  did  put  a  few  gates  in  it  through  which  the  Gentiles  might  be 
admitted.  But  mark — they  were  not  received  as  Gentiles,  but  as  Gentiles  cir- 
cumcised. (3)  The  third  stage  is  that  indicated  in  this  chapter.  The  wall  is 
being  pulled  down,  and  Greeks  may  become  Christians  without  first  becoming 
JtiWS*    X'he  Jewish  Church  was  like  the  chrysahs  containing  life  in  an  andoveloped 


CHAP.  XL)  THE  ACTS,  811 

Btate ;  the  Christian  Church  is  the  chrysalis  emerging  in  the  winged  butterfly.  In 
Judaism  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  standing ;  in  Christianity  it  is  flying.  '*  And 
I  saw  an  angel  fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  having  the  everlasting  gospel."  III. 
Was  floubishing  in  gkacb.  1.  When  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  heard  of  the  great 
things  that  had  taken  place  at  Antioch,  "  they  sent  forth  Barnabas  "  mainly  for 
his  natural  fitness  (vet.  24).  "  Good  "  signifies  more  than  mere  moral  worth  ;  it 
means  that  he  was  a  kind,  genial,  loving  man.  Many  men — good,  morally 
speaking — are  stern  and  hard.  But  Barnabas  was  a  man  of  a  very  gracious  dis- 
position— a  very  attractive  man.  A  rash,  haughty,  domineering  man,  coming  down 
upon  a  Church  to  which  he  was  a  stranger,  would  do  more  harm  than  good.  But 
Barnabas — a  son  of  sweetness  and  light — would  disarm  opposition,  and  secure  con- 
fidence. 2.  No  sooner  did  he  arrive  in  Antioch  than  "he  saw  there  the  grace  of  God." 
If  you  have  true  religion  in  the  heart,  it  is  superfiuous  to  declare  it.  If  it  is  in  the 
heart,  it  will  be  seen  in  the  life.  An  ancient  poet  tells  the  painters  of  Greece,  in 
a  period  of  great  art  decadence,  to  write  under  their  pictures  the  names  of  the 
animals  they  pourtrayed,  implying  that  vrithout  the  name  it  would  be  impossible 
to  tell  one  animal  from  another — a  very  bitter  satire  upon  the  painters.  And  some 
men's  religion  is  such  that  you  would  never  suspect  it  unless  they  carried  about 
them  the  label ;  they  do  not  shine  before  men,  that  their  good  works  may  be  seen, 
&c.  But  the  moment  Bamabas's  eye  caught  the  canvas,  he  could  tell  the  picture. 
Nay,  BO  decided  was  the  likeness  between  them  and  Christ  that  the  public  recog- 
nised it,  and  there  "  the  disciples  were  first  called  Christians."  3.  •'He  exhorted 
the  people  that  with  purpose  of  heart  they  would  cleave  unto  the  Lord."  Barnabas 
is  by  interpretation  the  "  son  of  consolation  "  or  exhortation.  From  this  word  we 
can  partly  judge  of  the  character  of  his  preaching ;  his  exhortation  brimming  over 
with  comfort,  full  of  cheer  and  encouragement.  His  preaching  was  fine  and 
stimulating  rather  than  deep  and  convincing.  He  had  the  good  sense  to  know  this, 
and  therefore  hastened  to  Tarsus  to  fetch  Saul.  Barnabas  would  be  worthy  of 
grateful  remembrance  were  it  only  for  this  one  act.  Barnabas  exhorted  the 
people ;  but  when  Saul  came  to  his  help,  the  "  exhorting  "  became  "  teaching  " ; 
deeper  thoughtfulness  characterised  the  ministry.  The  people  were  before  growing 
in  grace — they  are  now  growing  in  knowledge.  Man  has  both  a  heart  and  a  head. 
And  every  true  minister,  if  he  cannot  accomplish  the  twofold  work  himself,  will,  like 
Barnabas,  seek  another  to  help  him.  The  dahlia  is  a  gorgeous  flower,  but  it  has 
no  fragrance.  The  perfection  of  a  flower  consists  in  exquisiteness  of  colour  com- 
bined with  deliciousness  of  fragrance.  And  the  perfection  of  Christians  consists 
in  the  combination  of  grace  and  knowledge.  (J.  Cynddylan  Jones,  D.D.)  Success 
of  preaching  Christ: — I.  The  impoet  ob"  peeachino  Cheist.  1.  The  season  in 
which  these  words  were  spoken.  2.  The  persons  addressed — Jews  only.  3.  The 
impediments  in  the  way — prejudice,  ignorance,  unbeliet   4.  The  topics  announced. 

(1)  The  harmony  between  Christ  and  the  Old  Testament  representations  of  Him. 

(2)  The  certainty  of  His  resurrection  and  ascension  into  heaven.  (8)  The  design 
of  the  whole  in  its  adaptation  to  them  as  sinners.  II.  What  was  connected  with 
THIS  PEEACHINO.  1.  The  Dlvino  authority  and  approbation.  2.  Divine  aid  and 
support.  3.  Power  attending  their  ministry.  III.  The  effects  peoduced. 
"Many  beUeved  and  turned  to  the  Lord."  1.  "They  believed."  (1)  They 
credited  the  facts  relative  to  Christ.  (2)  They  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the 
whole  design.  2.  ••  They  turned  unto  the  Lord."  (1)  Eenounced  Jewish  pre- 
jadices  and  ceremonies.  (2)  They  renounced  justification  by  the  law.  (3)  Became 
holy  in  their  Uves,  and  manifested  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  Application :  1.  God 
acts  mysteriously  in  accomphshing  His  important  designs.  2.  God  never  wants 
means  to  fulfil  His  gracious  intentions.  3.  All  instruments  and  means,  though 
weak  in  themselves,  are  mighty  through  Divine  power.  (W.  Kent.)  The  first 
preaching  at  Antioch  : — 1.  It  needed  a  vision  to  impel  Peter  to  preach  to  Cornelius, 
but  here  some  Cypriote  and  African  Jews,  with  no  vision,  command,  nor  precedent, 
with  nothing  but  the  truth  in  their  minds  and  Christ's  love  in  their  hearts, 
unconsciously  do  the  thing  about  the  propriety  of  which  there  had  been  such 
serious  question  in  Jerusalem.  2.  Ver.  19  is  a  repetition  of  words  in  an  earlier 
chapter.  The  writer  returns  to  take  up  another  thread  of  his  narrative  con- 
temporaneous with  those  already  pursued.  Three  distinct  lines  of  expansion 
appear  to  have  started  from  the  dispersion  of  the  Jerusalem  Church — Phihp'a 
mission  to  Samaria,  Peter's  to  Cornelius,  and  this  work  in  Antioch.  8.  This,  th« 
effort  of  a  handful  of  unnamed  men,  was  the  true  '•  leader  " — the  shoot  that  grew. 
PhUip's  work,  and  Peter's,  were  side  branches,  which  came  to  little ;  this  led  ou  to 


S16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi, 

a  Church  at  Antioch,  and  so  to  Paul's  missionary  work,  and  all  that  came  of  that. 
Notice — L  The  spontaneous  impulse  which  these  men  obeyed.  Wherever  they 
went  they  took  their  faith  with  them,  and,  as  a  matter  of  course,  spoke  about  it. 
The  coals  were  scattered  from  the  hearth,  but  that  did  not  put  the  fire  out,  but 
only  spread  it.  They  had  no  special  injunction  "  to  preach  the  Lord  Jesus."  They 
believed,  and  therefore  spoke.  Such  a  spontaneous  impulse  is  ever  the  natural 
result  of — 1.  A  personal  possession  of  Christ.  In  regard  to  worldly  good  the  instinct 
is  to  keep  the  treasure.  But  even  in  the  natural  sphere  there  are  possessions 
which  to  have  is  to  long  to  impart,  such  as  truth  and  knowledge.  And  in  the 
spiritual  sphere  this  is  emphatically  the  case.  The  old  prophet  spoke  a  universal 
truth  when  he  said :  "  Thy  word  was  as  a  fire  shut  up  in  my  boues,  and  I  was 
weary  with  forbearing,  and  I  could  not  stay."  Deep  conviction  and  strong  emotion 
demand  expression.  True,  sometimes  the  deepest  love  can  only  "  love  and  be 
silent,"  and  there  is  a  just  suspicion  of  vehement  protestations.  But  for  aU  that, 
it  remains  true  that  a  heart  warmed  with  the  love  of  Christ  will  give  it  forth,  as 
certainly  as  light  must  radiate  from  its  centre,  or  heat  from  a  fire.  2.  True 
kindhness  of  heart.  We  cannot  truly  possess  the  treasure  for  ourselves  without 
pity  fur  those  who  have  it  not.  What  kind  of  Christians  must  they  be  who  think 
of  Christ  as  "  a  Saviour  for  me,"  and  take  no  care  to  set  Him  forth  as  "  a  Saviour 
for  you"?  What  should  we  think  of  men  in  a  shipwreck  who  were  content  to 
get  into  the  life-boat,  and  let  everybody  else  drown  ?  What  should  we  think  of 
people  in  a  famine  feasting  sumptuously  on  their  private  stores?  3.  Loyalty  to 
Christ.  If  we  are  true  to  our  Lord,  we  shall  feel  that  we  cannot  but  speak  up  and 
out  for  Him.  He  who  lives  among  rebels  and  is  afraid  to  show  his  colours  is 
already  a  coward,  and  is  on  the  way  to  be  a  traitor.  Our  Master  has  placed  in  our 
hands  the  honour  of  His  name,  and  the  carrying  out  of  the  purposes  on  wlaich  His 
heart  is  set.  How  can  we  be  loyal  to  Him  if  we  are  not  constrained  to  respond  to 
His  trust  in  us,  and  if  we  know  nothing  of  the  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me  ;  yea, 
woe  is  unto  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel  1 "  II.  The  dniveksal  obligation  on 
Axii  Christians  to  make  known  Cheist.  1.  In  these  early  days  the  Church  had  a 
very  loose  organisation.  But  these  fugitives  had  among  them  none  even  of  the 
humble  office-bearers  of  primitive  times.  Neither  had  they  any  commission  from 
Jerusalem.  Whatever  functions  may  be  committed  to  Chui'ch  officers  the  work  of 
telling  Christ's  love  to  men  belongs  to  every  one  who  has  found  it  for  himself 
or  herself.  "  This  honour  have  all  the  saints."  2.  Whatever  may  be  our 
differences  as  to  Church  order  and  offices,  they  need  not  interfere  with  our  firm 
grasp  of  this  truth.  "  Preaching  Christ  "  implies  no  special  method  of  proclaiming 
the  glad  tidings.  A  letter  to  a  friend,  a  sentence  in  casual  conversation,  a  lesson 
to  a  child  on  a  mother's  lap,  or  any  other  way  by  which  the  grtat  story  of  the  Cross 
is  told,  is  as  truly  preaching  Christ  as  the  set  discourse  which  has  usurped  the 
name.  3.  We  profess  to  beheve  in  the  priesthood  of  all  believers,  in  opposition  to 
sacerdotal  assumptions.  Are  we  as  ready  to  recognise  it  as  laying  a  very  real 
responsibihty  upon  us,  and  involving  a  very  practical  inference  as  to  our  own 
conduct?  Every  Christian  is  solemnly  bound  to  take  heed  to  this:  "Freely  ya 
have  received,  freely  give."  III.  The  simple  message  which  thet  proclaimed.  1. 
••  Preaching  Jesus  as  Lord."  Their  message  was  a  proclamation  of  the  person  and 
dignity  of  their  Master,  the  story  of  the  life  of  the  Man,  of  the  Divine  sacrifice  by 
which  He  had  bought  the  right  of  supreme  rule  over  every  heart ;  and  the  urging 
of  His  claims  on  all  who  heard  of  His  love.  And  this,  their  message,  was  but  the 
proclamation  of  their  own  personal  experience.  They  had  found  Jesus  for  them- 
selves to  be  lover  and  Lord,  and  the  joy  they  had  received  they  sought  to  share 
with  these  Greeks.  All  have  not  the  gifts  which  would  fit  for  public  speech,  but 
aU  who  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious  can  tell  somehow  how  gi-acious  He  is. 
The  first  Christian  sermon  was  very  short,  and  it  was  very  efficacious,  for  it 
"  brought  to  Jesus  "  the  whole  congregation.  "  He  first  findeth  his  brother  Simon, 
and  saith  unto  him.  We  have  found  the  Messias."  Surely  we  can  all  say  that,  and 
shall  long  to  say  it,  if  we  are  glad  that  we  have  found  Him,  and  if  we  love  our 
brother.  2.  Notice,  too,  how  simple  the  form  of  the  message.  "They  spake." 
It  was  no  set  address,  but  familiar,  natural  talk  to  ones  and  twos,  as  opportunity 
offered.  What  we  want  is  that  Christian  people  should  speak  anyhow.  What 
does  the  shnpe  of  the  cup  matter  ?  What  does  it  matter  whether  it  be  gold  or  clay  ? 
The  main  thing  is  that  it  shall  bear  the  water  of  life  to  some  thirsty  lip.  All 
Christians  have  to  do  is  to  tell  the  good  news — (1)  Simply  and  faithfully,  as  one 
who  oul;  cares  to  repeat  what  he  has  had  given  to  him.    (2)  Confidently,  as  having 


•HAP.  n.]  THE  ACTS.  217 

proved  it  true.  (3)  Beseechingly,  as  loving  the  souls  to  whom  they  bring  it. 
Let  His  mighty  salvation,  experienced  by  yourselves,  be  the  substance  of  your 
message,  and  let  the  form  of  it  be  guided  by  the  old  words,  *'  It  shall  be,  when  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  come  upon  thee,  that  thou  shalt  do  as  occasion  shall  serve 
thee."  IV.  Thb  mighty  Helper  who  prospered  their  work.  "  The  hand 
of  the  Lord  was  with  them."  However  feeble  our  hands,  that  mighty  hand 
is  laid  on  them  to  direct  their  movements  and  to  lend  strength  to  their  weakness. 
It  is  not  our  speech,  but  His  presence  with  our  words  by  which  a  great 
number  shall  believe  and  turn  to  the  Lord.  (1)  There  is  our  encouragement 
when  we  are  despondent.  There  is  our  rebuke  when  we  are  self-confident. 
(2)  There  is  our  stimulus  when  we  are  indolent.  (3)  There  is  our  quietness 
when  we  are  impatient.  (4)  If  ever  we  are  tempted  to  think  our  task  heavy, 
let  as  not  forget  that  He  who  set  it  helps  us  to  do  it.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Primitive  Christianity  : — Wearied  of  manifold  errors  and  corruptions,  we  listen 
gladly  when  we  hear  of  this.  But,  alas  1  those  who  are  most  ready  to  adopt  the 
name  are  the  most  ready  to  abuse  it.  They  boldly  set  out  in  search  of  it,  but  they 
lose  their  way  in  the  Dark  Ages,  and  never  emerge  into  the  Scriptural  light  that 
shines  beyond.  Three  things  appear  at  this  point.  I.  The  ministry  of  men. 
These  evangelists  kept  back  their  own  names,  but  put  forward  their  Lord's  ;  their 
only  record  is  the  multitude  they  brought  to  the  Saviour.  Persecution  was  the 
blast  which  spread  the  living  seed.  Being  themselves  Jews  they  preached  at  first 
to  Jews  only.  The  first  opening  into  the  wider  world  was  made  by  Peter,  but  being 
made  the  crevasse  widened  rapidly.  The  theme  of  these  evangelists  was  "the 
Lord  Jesus."  Doctrines  cannot  arrest  and  control  men :  they  are  like  spirits  not 
embodied :  they  elude  us.  But  when  the  soul  of  doctrine  is  embodied  in  a  person 
we  can  apprehend  it,  and  when  that  Person  is  Jesus  faith  looks  and  lives.  Primi- 
tive preaching  is  to  tell  the  story  of  Jesus  until  hearts  of  stone  give  way  and  flow 
down  like  water.  II.  The  hand  of  the  Lord.  The  instrument  human,  the  power 
Divine  (1  Cor.  iii.  9),  just  as  in  the  cultivation  of  fields.  Man  breaks  up  the 
ground,  watches,  weeds,  drains.  The  God  of  nature  does  nothing  which  man  can 
do  for  himself.  He  gives  rain,  sun,  and  air.  So  in  the  cultivation  of  souls,  as 
here,  after  man  has  done  all  he  must  wait  for  the  hand  of  the  Lord  to  give  the 
increase.  III.  The  fruit  that  followed.  "Believing"  and  "turning  to  the 
Lord  "  stand  in  interesting  relation  to  each  other — the  one  the  root,  the  other  the 
fruit.  The  root  of  a  tree  lies  out  of  sight,  but  the  fruit  can  be  both  seen  and  tasted, 
and  by  it  we  know  the  tree.  To  believe  is  the  secret  act  of  the  soul ;  to  turn,  Ac, 
is  the  visible  course  of  the  disciple's  life.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Primitive  Christi- 
anity : — I.  Extension.  Ver.  19  is  a  condensation  of  vers.  1-18.  1.  To  the  amaze- 
ment of  the  early  Christians  the  "Word  took  effect  upon  others  besides  Jews.  In 
this  way  the  gospel  became  quite  as  much  a  revelation  to  Jews  as  to  Gentiles. 
They  saw  that  Christianity  was  not  a  local  lamp,  but  a  sun,  and  as  its  glory 
brightened  the  distant  hills  and  made  the  far-off  valleys  sing  with  new  joy,  they 
were  glad  ;  they  felt  themselves  invested  with  a  new  responsibility,  and  stirred  with 
a  new  hope.  Some  such  passions  should  fill  our  hearts  when  we  see  far-off  men 
touched  by  the  power  of  Christ.  Herein  is  a  proof  of  the  Divine  origin  of  Christi- 
anity. All  other  religions  remain  at  home.  Christianity  is  an  aggressive  religion. 
If  its  professors  are  non-militant  they  give  the  lie  to  their  own  faith.  In  the 
universality  of  the  Christian  offer  I  see  its  Godhood.  Luxuries  are  only  here  and 
there,  but  necessaries  are  everywhere.  Wines  do  not  grow  everywhere.  But  men 
need  water,  not  wine.  Some  of  God's  gifts  are  local  and  individual,  but  whatever 
is  necessary  to  salvation  is  to  be  spoken  in  every  language  of  earth.  2.  There  are 
two  typical  instances  in  the  narrative.  Christianity  touched  the  mind  of  the 
centurion.  Let  him  represent  Roman  strength,  sternness,  law,  dignity.  Christi- 
anity touched  the  Grecian  mind.  Let  that  stand  for  refinement,  elegance,  philosophy, 
for  the  completing  line  of  human  thought  and  service.  Christianity  becouaes 
Boman  to  the  Eoman,  Grecian  to  the  Grecian — a  great  rock  to  the  rocky  man,  a 
rainbow  to  the  dreaming  genius,  a  summer  light  to  the  poet's  fancy.  No  other 
reUgion  does  this.  II.  Recognition.  What  was  the  effect  of  the  news  upon  the 
Church  ?  At  once  they  sent  Barnabas  to  inquire.  1.  When  he  came  he  saw  the 
grace  of  God.  There  is  no  mistaking  it.  It  is  like  nothing  else.  Imitations  perish 
under  scrutiny,  but  the  real  grace  of  God  grows  upon  examination.  He  did  not  find 
»  number  of  technical  theologians,  skilful  disputants.  He  found  men  praying, 
with  eager  minds,  with  forgiving  souls,  more  on  high  than  bJow.  2.  When 
Barnabas  saw  this  he  was  glad.    Is  the  farmer  glad  when  he  sees  corn  growing 


S18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [cha*.  n. 

upon  land  on  which  it  never  grew  before  ?  It  is  so  the  Christian  feels  when  h« 
Bees  strange  men  turning  to  the  faith.  Are  we  glad  when  we  see  men  converted  ? 
Do  newly-converted  men  find  a  warm,  cordial,  comforting  atmosphere  in  the  Church 
•when  they  come  in?  3.  Having  made  this  recognition,  Barnabas  said,  "Now  with 
full  purpose  of  heart  you  must  cleave  unto  the  Lord."  Exhortation  will  do  more 
than  suspicion.  A  word  of  encouragement  is  what  young  beginners  in  the 
Christian  race  require.  You  who  gave  your  heart  to  Christ  a  week  ago  or  a  month 
since — persevere.  4.  Why  did  Barnabas  take  so  much  interest  in  these  new  con- 
verts ?  Because  "  he  was  a  good  man,  and  fuU  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith." 
Good  men  see  goodness  in  other  men.  Evil  be  to  him  who  evU  thinks.  The  good 
man  comes  to  be  made  glad.  With  a  charitable  spirit,  and  benign  and  hopeful 
heart,  he  looks  upon  the  work,  and  it  must  be  very  bad  if  he  does  not  see  in  it 
something  to  quicken  his  own  faith,  and  deepen  his  own  grace,  and  heighten  his 
own  love  to  God.  5.  What  was  the  consequence  ?  "  Much  people  was  added  unto 
the  Lord."  Barnabas  did  not  go  to  Antioch  for  nothing — the  work  grew  upon  him^ 
and  now  he  said,  "  Saul  must  come."  So  he  brought  him  to  the  Syrian  capital, 
and  there  for  a  whole  year  they  taught  much  people.  Thus  are  spheres  found  for 
men,  and  thus  have  men  sometimes  to  tarry  at  Tarsus  till  their  proper  Antioch  is 
found.  But  God  will  find  it.  IH.  Proof  (vers.  27-30).  Were  the  men  at  Antioch 
really  converted  ?  Read  in  ver.  29  the  proof.  These  men  have  received  the  Lord 
Jesus ;  and  instantly  on  hearing  that  men  who  are  partakers  of  the  same  faith  are 
in  prospect  of  want,  they  send  to  such  men  under  the  name  of  "  brethren,"  accord- 
ing to  their  ability.  This  is  how  Christianity  works.  Here  is  the  communism  of 
the  Church.  The  formal  communism  of  chap.  ii.  soon  broke  down,  but  the  spiritual 
communism  must  continue  for  ever.  Wherever  there  is  Christian  need.  Christian 
brotherhood  must  be  acknowledged.  The  Cross  broke  down  the  middle  waU  of 
partition,  and  made  the  human  family  one.  Conclusion :  '*  And  the  disciples  were 
called  Christians  first  at  Antioch."  This  name  stands  above  all  other  names  to-day. 
Of  no  man  is  so  much  expected  as  the  Christian.  The  man  who  despises  your  faith 
expects  from  you  on  its  account  what  he  expects  from  no  other  man.  So  he 
answers  himself.  After  having  traduced  your  Lord,  and  disproved  your  documents, 
and  cast  scorn  on  your  theology,  if  you  do  anything  that  calls  down  his  displeasure 
he  is  the  first  to  accuse  of  treason  to  the  faith  you  profess.  I  ask  for  no  higher 
intellectual  and  moral  recognition  of  the  purity  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ. 
From  no  atheist  is  so  much  expected  as  from  the  weakest  Christian.  By  Christians 
I  understand  Christ-ones,  and  were  we  what  we  ought  to  be  there  should  be  no 
other  designation.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  spread  of  the  gospel : — Here  we  trace 
a  series  of  providences — I.  In  the  instrumentalities.  As  the  gospel  was  to  be  first 
preached  to  the  Jews,  it  was  fitting  that  Jews  should  be  the  first  to  proclaim  it. 
Between  that  people,  however,  and  all  other  nations,  there  existed  formidable 
barriers.  When,  therefore,  the  time  was  come  for  them  to  be  broken  down,  some 
medium  must  be  found  less  hampered  than  the  Jews  by  prejudice,  and  at  the  same 
time  so  far  Jewish  as  to  have  received  from  the  Jews  the  gospel.  Such  a  medium 
was  afforded  here  (ver.  19)  by  Greeks  who  had  become  Jewish  proselytes.  Belong- 
ing to  a  class  "  who  sometime  were  afar  off,"  to  whom  should  they  turn  so  naturally 
as  to  their  kindred,  the  Greeks  ?  As,  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come  for 
Christ  to  be  born,  God  had  prepared  Gentile  watchers  to  be  looking  for  His  star,  so 
when  the  gospel  was  ready  for  the  world  the  same  Providence  had  prearranged  that 
messengers  fitted  for  the  work  should  be  ready  to  be  to  it  as  wings  to  bear  it  on  its 
world-wide  flight.  It  is  ever  thus.  He  who  has  prepared  the  gospel  for  the  race, 
prepares  means  for  its  extension.  In  this  God  has  often  been  in  advance  of  His 
Church.  When  she  has  faltered  He  has  opened  ways  into  regions  beyond,  where 
His  preordained  messengers  might  plant  Christian  standards.  II.  Thb  place. 
Antioch  was  a  centre  of  commanding  influence.  If  the  new  religion  could  be 
planted  in  this  queen  of  Gentile  cities,  with  her  wealth,  her  culture,  her  sources  of 
widespread  influence,  her  teeming  thousands,  then  the  followers  of  Christ  would 
stand  on  vantage-ground  unequalled.  And  this  was  substantially  accomplished. 
Antioch  became  a  Christian  city.  In  the  time  of  Theodosius  it  is  alleged  that  one 
half  of  her  population  were  professed  followers  of  Christ.  Between  the  years  252 
and  380  a.d.  ten  Christian  assembUes  were  here  convened.  Here  Paul  exercised  his 
first  systematic  ministerial  work,  and  from  this  point  he  started  on  all  his  missionary 
journeys.  Here  Chrysostom  was  bom,  and  here  Ignatius  wielded  his  mighiy 
power  for  the  Christian  faith.  Thus,  this  city,  where  the  first  Gentile  Church  was 
fathered,  exerted  for  centuries  a  controlling  influence  in  spreading  the  new  religion. 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  ACTS.  219" 

From  this  let  us,  who  are  now  entrusted  with  the  gospel,  learn — 1,  To  be  bold. 
Christ  calls  for  no  timorous  messengers.  Christianity  is  in  this  world  to  conquer, 
and  it  will.  2.  To  plant  the  gospel  in  centres  of  influence.  There  were  other 
cities  than  Antioch,  but  none  of  so  extended  and  controlling  influence.  III.  In 
SHAPING  THE  IMMEDIATE  RESULTS.  1.  The  name  by  which,  for  all  ages,  the  followers 
of  Christ  are  to  be  known  (ver.  26).  To  the  formation  of  this  word  each  of  the 
three  leading  nations  of  earth  made  a  contribution.  The  thought  is  Jewish, 
denoting  "  The  Anointed  One  "  ;  the  root,  Xptor,  is  Greek  ;  the  termination,  lavoi, 
is  Latin.  Thus,  in  the  providence  of  God,  the  same  three  nations  whose  differing 
dialects  proclaimed  above  the  Cross,  "  Jesus,  the  King  of  the  Jews,"  now  unite  in 
forming  a  word  which  for  aU  time  shall  be  apphed  to  those  who  follow  Christ.  2. 
The  breaking-down  of  jealousies  between  Jewish  and  Gentile  converts,  as  seen  in — 

(1)  The  mission  of  Barnabas.  (2)  The  generosity  evoked  by  the  prophecy  of 
Agabus.  (Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)  The  spread  of  the  gospel : — I.  Believing 
IN  Christ's  name.  In  this  story  three  forces  are  to  be  noted.  1.  Persecution  (ver. 
19).  The  devil  made  nothing  when  he  stirred  this  up.  The  blood  of  the  martyred 
Stephen  was  the  seed  of  many  Churches.  2.  Conservatism.  "  Speaking  the  Word 
to  none  save  only  to  Jews."  Conscientiously  seeking  "  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house 
of  Israel."  Unlike  Peter,  they  had  had  no  vision.  They  were  acting  under  the 
impulse  of  hereditary  bigotry  and  natural  afiiliations.  3.  Progression.  "  Some  of 
them  .  .  .  spake  unto  the  Greeks  also."  Notice — (1)  That  it  was  only  "  some  of 
them."  When  an  old  bondage  is  to  be  thrown  off,  emancipation  comes  to  indi- 
viduals before  it  comes  to  the  many.  (2)  That  it  was  not  native  Jews.  Men  of 
Cyprus  and  Cyrene,  who  had  associated  with  Greeks  as  well  as  with  Jews,  it  was  as 
easy  for  them  to  speak  to  the  one  as  to  the  other,  and,  not  blinded  by  Jewish  preju- 
dice, they  could  see  their  equal  right  to  the  benefit  of  the  sacrifice  upon  Calvary. 
(8)  That  they  were  unknown  men.  In  the  time  of  Chrysostom  about  100,000  were 
reputed  to  be  Christian — here  truly  a  great  result  from  the  efforts  of  a  few  obscure 
men.  (4)  That  their  work  was  a  simple  one.  They  held  up  Jesus  as  Saviour  andLord — 
that  which  any  other  earnest  disciple  of  Christ  can  do,  and  must  do  if  the  world  is  to 
be  evangeUsed.  (5)  That  their  work  was  immediately  attested.  "  The  hand  of  the 
Lord  was  with  them."  II.  Known  by  Christ's  name.  Let  us  see  how  this  came 
about.  1.  The  work  reported  (ver.  22).  2.  The  work  approved.  (1)  The  sending. 
The  case  of  Cornelius  had  prepared  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  for  such  tidings. 
Perhaps  they  were  afraid  that  the  workers  might  do  some  things  ill-advised,  but 
they  showed  their  sympathy  with  the  work  by  sending  such  a  man  as  Barnabas. 

(2)  The  rejoicing.  The  joy  of  Barnabas  was  the  best  sort  of  approval.  Barnabas 
knew  the  Lord's  handiwork  when  he  saw  it.  (3)  The  exhortation.  Barnabas 
believed  in  the  perseverance  of  the  saints — not  in  putting  the  hand  to  the  plough, 
and  then  looking  back.  God  wants  no  ninety-day  recruits  in  His  service.  His 
enlistment  roU  is  for  life.  Note,  that  continued  fideUty  to  Him  comes  from  "  pur- 
pose of  heart,"  rather  than  purpose  of  the  will  or  conviction  of  the  head.  (4)  The 
man.  "  For  he  was  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  of  faith."  This 
statement  is  given  as  the  reason  why  Barnabas  so  instantly  showed  his  sympathy 
with  the  work  among  the  GentUes.  3.  The  work  assisted.  (1)  By  the  countenance 
that  Barnabas  gave  to  it.  *'  And  much  people  was  added  to  the  Lord."  As  a 
representative  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  his  approval  would  give  the  work  a  new 
impetus,  as  being  done  under  the  sanction  of  the  Church.  To  this  was  added  the 
force  of  his  own  personahty,  made  potential  by  his  goodness  and  possession  of  faith 
and  the  Holy  Spirit.  (2)  By  the  united  efforts  of  Barnabas  and  Saul.  The  work 
too  great  for  one.  The  glory  of  much  of  Paul's  career  is  due  to  the  man  who 
believed  in  Paul,  and  gave  to  him  his  opportunity.  Many  a  man  who  is  no  Paul 
himself  may  set  a  Paul  to  work.  The  revival,  as  such,  appears  to  have  been  over, 
and  they  devoted  themselves  to  instructing  these  converts  in  the  new  faith  they 
had  professed.  4.  The  new  name.  "  The  disciples  were  called  Christians  first  at 
Antioch."  Ill,  Helping  believers  in  Christ's  name  (vers.  27-30).  The  starving 
Jewish  believers  at  Jerusalem  learned  how  good  it  was  to  have  brethren  not  of  the 
direct  seed  of  Abraham.  The  Gentiles  and  Jews  indeed  had  become  "  one  flock, 
one  Shepherd."  (M.  C.  Hazard.)  The  diffusive  power  of  the  gospel : — As  there 
is  in  aU  living  objects  a  reproductive  capacity,  so  the  gospel  has  in  it  a  certain 
vitality  which  ensures  its  diflusion.  Our  Lord  illustrates  this  in  His  parables  of 
the  wheat  and  the  mustard  seed.  The  incident  of  the  text  is  a  singular  illustration 
of  this  wonderful  potency.  Note  here — ^I.  The  stimulating  power  op  the  gospel. 
1.  These  men  di  Cyprus  and  Cyrene  continued  without  the  least  abatement  of  seal 


220  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 


to  preach  the  gospel  whilst  in  the  very  act  of  fleeing  for  their  life.  The  storm  of 
persecution  seemed  rather  to  fan  the  flame  of  their  holy  enthusiasm.  2.  This 
enthusiasm  is  the  Christian's  normal  condition.  The  rehgion  of  Jesus  is  a  religion 
of  love  and  gratitude,  and  where  these  emotions  abound  they  never  fail  to  kindle 
enthusiasm.  In  the  face  of  this,  an  apathetic,  unimpassioned  Christian  is  an 
anomaly  as  incongruous  in  conception  as  a  frozen  sunbeam  or  a  petrified  flame. 
The  sun  floats  in  an  atmosphere  of  flame,  which  is  the  source  of  its  marveUoui 
influence  over  scores  of  worlds,  of  its  power  to  quicken  their  myriad  forms  of  life. 
The  true  Christian  is  a  moral  sun  surrounded  by  an  atmosphere  of  enthusiasm. 
3.  This  enthusiasm,  born  of  love  and  gratitude,  constitutes  the  gospel's  most 
effective  guarantee  for  its  diffusion.  For  in  nothing  is  this  enthusiasm  more 
assiduously  manifested  than  in  efforts  to  spread  the  story  of  the  love  which  kindled 
it.  4.  This  enthusiasm  the  gospel  is  ever  capable  of  awakening.  So  long  as  its 
power  of  benefiting  men  remains,  so  long  will  its  power  of  awakening  gratitude 
remain,  and  where  this  gratitude  exists  there  will  be  enthusiasm  ever  impeUing  men 
to  self-sacrificing  labours  for  Christ.  6.  This  spirit  should,  however,  be  manifested 
not  in  the  ministry  alone,  nor  in  the  more  official  walks  of  Christian  service,  but 
should  permeate  equally  all  its  humbler  forms.  Wherever  present  it  illumines  the 
most  commonplace  things,  and  invests  the  humblest  service  of  God's  house  with 
sublime  dignity.  II.  Its  ASSiJiiLATrvE  poweb — its  power  of  raising  men's  minds 
into  loving  unison  with  its  own  spirit  and  aim.  This  comes  out  in  relation  to  these 
men  in  the  fact  that  they  preached  the  gospel  to  the  Greeks — uncircumcised 
heathen.  1.  It  was  a  course  of  action  for  which  they  had  no  precedent,  and  was 
opposed  to  all  their  previous  notions.  Such  views  came  even  to  apostles  only  as 
the  result  of  extraordinary  training.  Could  it  come  to  them  otherwise  than  by  the 
broadening  and  heart-expanding  influence  of  the  gospel  itself  ?  They  rightly  appre- 
hended that  a  scheme  so  rich  in  grace  and  wisdom  must  comprehend  all  nations. 
As  with  the  ancient  Jews,  so  is  it  with  many  modern  Christians.  There  is  a 
tendency  to  regard  the  grace  of  God  as  the  special  monopoly  of  a  sect.  Such 
feeling  wUl  cramp  every  effort  to  extend  its  operations.  The  gospel  must  be  viewed 
as  a  thing  destined  for  humanity,  and  it  is  only  in  the  measure  that  Christians  rise 
to  this  conception  that  their  hearts  will  receive  that  breadth  which  will  bring  them 
into  sympathy  with  every  institution  having  for  its  object  the  realisation  of  its 
world-embracing  aims.  2.  But  this  new  departure  involved  considerably  more  than 
the  breaking  away  from  Jewish  traditions.  In  preaching  to  the  Jews,  the  utmost 
that  they  had  had  to  encounter  were  Jewish  prejudices  regarding  the  Messiah. 
They  both  beUeved  in  the  Scriptures ;  but  in  presenting  the  gospel  to  the  Greeks 
they  were  brought  face  to  face  with  idolatry — a  foe  which  enlisted  every  element 
hkely  to  secure  the  sympathy  of  corrupt  human  nature.  They  had  also  to  confront 
philosophies  commended  by  the  highest  culture.  Before  these  men  could  have 
ventured  to  initiate  such  a  stupendous  campaign,  they  must  have  had  the  most 
unfaltering  conviction  that  the  gospel  was  fuUy  adequate  to  grapple  with  every 
form  of  opposition  that  the  heathen  world  could  furnish.  Have  we  not  in  the  firm, 
unwavering  faith  of  these  men  in  the  gospel  a  most  fitting  lesson  for  the  times  ? 
There  are  stiU  to  be  encountered  prejudices  as  strong  as  Jewish  intolerance, 
abominations  as  foul  as  ever  characterised  ancient  heathendom,  assumptions  of 
science  and  philosophy  far  more  daring  and  arrogant  than  those  of  apostolic  times. 
Like  these  men,  we  must  not  only  believe  that  the  gospel  is  for  all  men,  but,  also, 
that  it  is  a  power  capable  of  overcoming  every  opposition  standing  in  the  way  of  it 
reaching  all  men.  III.  Its  utilising  poweb.  These  persons  were  not  recognised 
preachers,  but  men  constrained  to  engage  in  the  work  by  force  of  circumstances. 
Had  they  been  persons  of  official  standing  their  names  would  have  been  given. 
Philip,  who  was  a  deacon,  is  mentioned  by  name  when  his  evangeUstic  labours  are 
referred  to.  The  lessons  are — 1.  That  efforts  to  promote  the  spread  of  the  gospel 
are  not  to  be  confined  to  those  formally  set  apart.  Otfices  are  necessary.  Christ 
has  ordained  them.  This  was  essential  to  ensure  order  and  steady  systematic 
labour.  Unofi&cial  labour  is  subject  to  ebbs  and  flows,  and  hence  the  need  of  a 
duly  appointed  class  to  ensure  regular  and  unbroken  efforts.  In  countries  subject 
to  long  droughts  extensive  systems  of  irrigation  are  provided  to  ensure  a  steady 
supply  of  moisture.  But  the  falling  rain,  however  intermittent,  is  no  less  welcome. 
Similarly  the  irregular  services  of  voluntary  workers  are  peculiarly  acceptable  to 
Christ,  and  He  has  not  only  sanctioned  but  enjoined  such.  2.  It  is  a  great  defect 
that  ordinary  Church  members  have  come  to  regard  all  efforts  to  promote  the  causa 
of  Christ  as  an  obhgation  resting  solely  upon  the  official  portion  of  the  Church. 


CHIP.  XI.]  TEE  ACTS.  221 

Consequently — (1)  They  make  no  personal  effort  to  promote  the  salvation  of  the« 
fellow-men,  and  manifest  the  utmost  indifference  with  regard  to  Sabbath-school 
work  and  the  operations  of  kindred  agencies.  (2)  The  effect  of  this  notion  upon 
the  official  section  of  the  Church  is  no  less  disastrous.  It  becomes  the  prolifio 
source  of  some  of  the  worst  evils  of  priestism.  The  ministry  becomes  isolated  from 
the  people,  and  is  lifted  up  with  an  undue  sense  of  its  authority,  and  surrounds 
itself  with  an  air  of  cool  official  propriety.  3.  The  highest  ideal  of  a  Christian 
Church,  and  the  one  which  is  most  in  harmony  with  the  primitive  type,  is  that  in 
which  both  official  and  voluntary  agencies  are  found  skilfully  blended  and  wisely 
co-operating.  (1)  Those  spiritual  energies  and  aspirations  awakened  by  the 
influence  of  the  gospel  in  the  breast  of  every  Christian  would  by  voluntary  labours 
obtain  a  proper  channel  for  development  and  usefulness.  Personal  piety  would 
gain  considerably  in  breadth  and  depth  by  being  called  upon  to  act  and  interest 
itself  on  behalf  of  souls ;  and  officers,  looking  on  the  results,  would  be  •'  glad,''  and 
would  work  with  redoubled  ardour,  and  so  many  would  be  turned  to  the  Lord.  (2) 
By  these  efforts  Christianity  becomes  clearly  recognised.  "  The  disciples  were  first 
called  Christians  at  Antioch."  (3)  Generous  sympathies  are  evoked  (vers.  27-30). 
(4)  Gifts  are  multiplied.  This  Church  abounded  in  prophets  and  teachers.  (5) 
Spheres  of  usefulness  are  indefinitely  widened.  To  this  Church  was  allotted  the 
great  honour  of  being  made  the  centre  of  the  first  systematic  efforts  to  evangelise 
the  world.  It  seemed  fitting  that  a  Church,  thus  composed  of  Gentile  converts, 
should  become  the  principal  channel  for  communicating  the  blessings  of  the 
gospel  to  their  own  brethren  in  the  flesh  (chap.  xiii.  3).  {A.  J.  Parry.)  How  the 
manifold  gifts  of  Christians  contribute  to  the  general  use : — 1.  Those  who  are 
received  as  guests  give  the  gospel  as  a  present  in  return  (vers.  19-21).  2.  Those 
who  possess  the  Word  in  abundance  impart  it  to  those  who  are  in  the  first 
beginnings  (vers.  22-28).  8.  Those  who  are  blessed  vnth  earthly  wealth  assist 
those  who  have  nothing  (vers.  29-30).  {Lisco.)  The  essentials  of  successful 
work: — 1.  Undaunted  courage  in  opposition  to  the  world  (ver.  19).  2.  Docile 
attention  to  the  Divine  iatimations  (ver.  22).  3.  Brotherly  concord  among  the 
labourers.  {K.  Oerok.)  Christ  all  in  all  to  His  Church  : — ^I.  The  central  sub- 
ject OP  PEEACHiNO  (ver.  20).  II.  The  light  and  poweb  op  belibveks  (vers.  21, 
23).     III.  The  example  and  model  op  ministbbs  (vers.  24,  25).     IV.  The  name 

AND  WATCHWOBD   OP  THE   ChUBOH.      (Ibid.) 

Ver.  21.  The  hand  of  the  Lord. — TTie  hand: — The  word  "hand"  occurs  in 
Scripture  no  fewer  than  1,295  times.  Man  is  the  only  being  on  earth  that  is 
furnished  with  two  hands.  Some  other  creatures  have  claws,  but  not  hands.  They 
cannot  do  as  you  can,  make  the  thumb  meet  all  the  four  fingers,  so  as  to  seize  and 
hold  all  the  most  minute  objects ;  nor  can  they  perform  one  thousandth  part  of  the 
skilful  acts  that  man  can  perform  with  his  hand.  What  other  creature,  e.g.,  can 
make  a  watch,  or  a  needle  ?  And  there  is  power  in  man's  hand  as  well  as  skill ;  he 
can  apply  force  in  ways  which  none  of  them  can  approach.  I.  In  relation  to  God 
Himself,  the  word  "  hand "  is  used — 1.  To  denote  His  eternal  purpose  and 
almighty  power  (chap,  iv.28,  30).  2.  To  denote  His  mighty  power  to  keep,  defend, 
preserve  (John  x.  28,  29;  Isa.  xlix.  2).  3.  To  express  His  rich,  providential 
provision  for  the  wants  of  all  His  creatures  (Psa.  civ.  28 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  16).  4.  To 
signify  God's  right  to  be,  as  He  is,  the  sovereign  disposer  of  all  circumstances, 
persons,  and  events  (Psa.  xxxi.  15;  Job  ii.  10).  5.  When  His  inflictions  and  cor- 
rections are  referred  to  (Judg.  ii.  15 ;  Psa.  xxxh.  4 ;  Heb.  x.  31).  6.  To  denote  His 
power  to  help  (Psa.  Ixxiv.  11 ;  Ezra  vii.  6,  9,  viii.  18,  22 ;  Neh.  ii.  8,  18  ;  Psa.  Ixxx. 
17  ;  Luke  i.  66).  As  an  expression  for  God's  Spirit,  putting  the  spirit  of  power 
into  us,  as  well  as  of  love  and  of  a  sound  mind  (Ezek.  i.  3,  iii.  14,  22,  viii.  1, 
zxxvii.  1).  We  can  be  strong  for  any  high  and  arduous  duty  only  in  His  strength ; 
all  power  indeed,  all  energy  of  purpose,  all  special  skiU  in  any  art,  cometh  of  Him. 
And  not  only  is  this  spoken  of  as  God's  "  hand  "  as  the  mover,  but  the  term  is 
applied  to  the  agent — the  doer  of  the  particular  thing.  The  men  of  the  world  are 
spoken  of  as  God's  " hand";  and  His  hand  is  also  to  be  upon  all  them  for  good 
who  seek  Him.  The  "right  hand,"  as  specially  denoting  power,  ia  an  expression 
that  often  occurs  in  Scripture,  and  is  almost  always  applied  to  God  (Psa.  xvi.  11, 
xvii.  7,  XX.  6,  xxi.  8,  xliv.  3,  xlv.  4,  9,  xlviii.  10,  Ix.  5,  Ixiii.  8,  Ixxiv.  11 ;  Isa.  xlviii. 
13,  Ixii.  8 ;  Mark  xvi.  19 ;  Heb.  i.  3,  &o.,  &c.).  II.  In  relation  to  man  the  word 
*'  hand  "  is  used — 1.  To  denote  power  in  all  its  various  applications  (Prov.  iii.  27  ; 
EcoL  ix.  10).    To  "give  one's  hand"  is  an  expression  which  signifies  to  pledg« 


^22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tt 

peace,  promise  security,  swear  friendship,  make  an  alliance.  2.  To  denote  help 
{Psa.  xvi.  8,  Ixxiii.  23,  cxlii.  4).  3.  To  indicate  possession,  as  to  rend  it  out  of  the 
hand  of  any  one  denotes  deprivation  (1  Kings  xi.  11,  12).  4.  For  the  giving  of 
advice  (2  Sam.  xiv.  19,  5).  5.  For  deliverance  from  the  power  and  oppression  of 
others  (Exod.  xviii.  9,  10).  6.  To  denote  work  of  any  kind  (Luke  i.  1,  ix.  62 ;  Acts 
XX.  34;  Prov.  x.  4,  xii.  24).  {S.  Jenner,  M.A.)  A  great  number  believed,  and 
turned  to  the  Lord.  — Conversions  desired : — I.  The  end  which  wb  desire.  1. 
That  men  may  believe  the  testimony  of  Christ  to  be  true.  There  are  some  who 
have  not  reached  as  far  as  that :  they  reject  the  inspired  Word,  and  to  them  the 
incarnation,  cfec,  are  so  many  old  wives'  fables.  There  are  also  many  who  profess 
to  beUeve  these  things,  but  their  only  reason  is  that  they  have  been  taught  so,  and 
it  is  the  current  religion  of  the  nation.  But  we  want  more  than  this  faith  of 
indifference,  which  is  little  more  than  unbelief ;  we  want  men  to  believe  for  them- 
selves because  they  have  felt  the  saving  power  of  Christ.  We  pray  that  nominal 
believers  may  treat  the  doctrines  of  revelation,  not  as  dogmas,  but  as  facts.  2.  That 
men  may  savingly  believe  by  patting  their  trust  in  Christ.  A  man  commits  his 
soul  to  Christ  for  safe  keeping,  and  that  saves  him.  He  makes  the  Saviour  trustee 
of  his  spiritual  estates.  3.  That  men  may  so  believe  in  Jesus  that  they  may  be 
turned  unto  the  Lord.  This  means — (1)  To  turn  from  idols  to  the  living  and  true 
God.  We  desire  that  faith  in  Jesus  may  lead  you  to  give  up  the  objects  of  your 
idolatrous  love,  yourselves,  your  money,  your  pleasures,  the  world,  the  flesh,  the 
devil.  (2)  To  turn  from  the  love  of  sin.  He  who  looks  sinward  has  his  back  to 
God — he  who  looks  Godward  has  his  back  to  sin.  (3)  That  henceforth  God  shall 
be  sought  in  prayer.  The  man  who  lives  without  prayer  lives  without  God,  but  the 
man  who  has  turned  to  God  is  familiar  with  the  mercy-seat.  (4)  To  yield  yourself 
obediently  to  His  sway.  Faith  is  nothing  unless  it  brings  with  it  a  willing  mind. 
II.  The  power  by  which  this  can  be  attained.  •'  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with 
them."  Be  encouraged ;  the  hand  of  God — 1.  Is  upon  men  before  we  speak.  I 
am  studying  a  certain  subject,  and  praying  for  a  blessing  on  it,  and  in  a  chamber, 
which  I  have  never  seen,  one  of  my  hearers  is  smitten  with  a  sense  of  sin,  or 
troubled  with  uneasy  thoughts,  or  rendered  hopeful  of  better  things,  and  thus  he 
is  being  made  ready  to  accept  the  Christ  whom  I  shall  preach  to  him.  Sickness 
and  pain,  shame  and  poverty,  often  produce  a  condition  of  mind  most  hopeful  for 
the  reception  of  the  gospel.  Sow,  brother,  for  God  has  ploughed.  Go  up  and 
build,  for  God  has  prepared  the  stones  and  made  ready  the  foundation.  2.  Upon 
the  teachers  and  preachers  themselves.  There  are  strange  impulses  which  come 
over  us  at  times,  which  make  us  think  and  say  what  otherwise  had  never  crossed 
our  minds,  and  these  work  with  power  upon  men's  minds.  8.  Upon  the  hearts  of 
men  when  the  gospel  is  preached.  Not  only  is  the  Spirit  in  the  Word,  but  over  and 
above  that  He  makes  men — (1)  Recollect  their  sins.  Men  who  have  been  giddy 
and  careless  and  forgetful  have  on  a  sudden  found  themselves  reviewing  the  past. 
(2)  See  the  beauty  of  holiness.  When  the  preacher  proclaims  the  way  of  salvation 
the  Spirit  leads  men  to  admire  it  and  to  long  for  a  share  in  it.  Yes,  it  is  not  the 
preacher,  and  it  is  not  altogether  what  the  preacher  says,  but  there  is  a  power 
abroad  as  potent  as  that  by  which  the  worlds  were  made.  IH.  The  desirableness 
OF  OUR  OBJECT.  Becausc  conversions — 1.  Promote  the  extension  of  truth,  godli- 
ness, and  virtue.  2.  Make  men  happy.  If  religion  be  indeed  a  source  of  joy  to 
yourself,  you  are  inhuman  if  you  do  not  wish  others  to  drink  of  it.  3.  Save  men 
from  hell.  4.  Increase  the  Church.  Self-preservation  is  a  law  of  nature,  and  the 
Church  can  never  preserve  herself  except  by  increasing  from  the  world  by  con- 
version. 5.  Promote  the  glory  of  Christ  and  give  Him  to  see  the  travail  of  His 
soul.  6.  Augment  personal  blessedness.  IV.  How  we  mat  promote  its  attain- 
ment. 1.  We  must  distinctly  aim  at  it.  As  a  rule,  a  man  does  what  he  tries  to  do, 
and  not  that  which  is  mere  by-play.  There  is  the  target,  and  if  you  continue  ts 
shoot  into  the  air  long  enough  an  arrow  may  perhaps  strike  it ;  but  if  you  want  to 
win  the  prize  of  archery  you  had  better  fix  your  eye  upon  the  white  and  take  your 
aim  distinctly  and  with  skill.  2.  We  must  press  upon  men  the  truths  which  God 
usually  blesses  (ver.  20).  If  we  do  not  preach  Christ  we  shall  not  see  souls  saved. 
Who  ever  heard  of  a  Unitarian  Whitfield,  or  a  Socinian  Moody  gathering  twenty 
thousand  people  to  listen  to  a  Christless  gospel?  We  must  equally  avoid  the 
modern  intellectual  system  in  all  its  phases.  How  many  conversions  are  wrought 
by  displays  of  genius,  fine  rhetoric,  &c.  ?  Certain  views  as  to  man's  future  are 
equally  to  be  kept  clear  of,  if  you  would  be  the  means  of  conversion.  Diminish 
your  ideas  of  the  wrath  of  God  and  the  terrors  of  hell,  and  in  that  proportion  you 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  ACTS,  S28 

will  diminish  the  results  of  your  work.  Other  crotchets  and  novelties  of  doctrine 
are  also  to  be  let  alone,  for  they  are  not  likely  to  promote  your  object,  and  wiU  most 
probably  divert  men's  attention  from  the  vital  point.  If  you  want  a  harvest,  look 
well  to  your  seed.  If  I  had  to  sow  my  fields  with  wheat  I  would  not  take  any  but 
the  very  best.  3.  We  must  feel  a  solemn  alarm  about  souls.  Believe  their  danger, 
their  helplessness,  that  only  Christ  can  save  them,  and  talk  to  them  as  if  you 
meant  it.  The  Holy  Spirit  wiU  move  them  by  first  moving  you.  4.  There  must  be 
much  prayer.  In  your  closets,  at  your  family  altars,  and  in  your  prayer-meetinga 
be  importunate,  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  must  and  will  be  with  you.  5.  There 
must  be  direct  personal  effort  on  the  part  of  all  of  you.  Great  numbers  may  be 
saved  by  my  preaching  if  the  Holy  Spirit  blesses  it,  but  I  shaU  expect  larger 
numbers  if  you  all  turn  witnesses  for  Christ.  We  must  expect  converts.  "  Accord- 
ing to  your  faith  so  be  it  unto  you."    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  22-26.  Then  tidings  of  these  things  came  to  the  ears  of  the  Church, 
.  .  .  and  they  sent  forth  Barnabas. — A  St.  Barnabas  the  need  of  the  hour : — You 
know  the  strain  and  the  stress  of  the  situation  recorded  in  my  text.  We  are 
speaking  of  Antioch,  to  which  Barnabas  is  sent.  Here,  then,  we  have  a  strong, 
central,  organised  Church,  going  its  own  way  on  somewhat  new  lines,  with  a  new 
environment,  with  a  new  development.  And  yet  it  causes  a  great  deal  of  anxiety 
in  those  who  are  left  at  home  in  the  old  places  in  Jerusalem.  This  strong,  assertive 
child  of  theirs,  to  what  wiU  it  grow,  what  will  happen  to  it  ?  The  very  preachers 
who  founded  it  made  them  at  Jerusalem  nervous.  The  gospel  was  in  them  as 
Stephen  had  proclaimed  it ;  and  they  knew  it  was  for  the  Greeks  as  well  as  for  the 
Jews.  It  was  the  Greeks  that  were  flocking  in,  from  beyond  the  strict  borders  of 
the  old  race,  and  it  was  out  of  this  people  the  Church  grew.  Such  a  Church  would 
sit  light  by  the  old  traditions.  It  was  a  new  capital  for  Christianity,  with  alto- 
gether Gentile  associations ;  and  habits,  and  customs,  and  interests,  and  environ- 
ment, and  style  of  thought,  and  even  of  language,  would  none  of  them  be  Jewish. 
How  different !  And  it  was  all  going  on  so  fast  1  "  To  what  lengths  are  they  going 
at  Antioch  ?  Where  will  they  stop  ?  "  And  so  there  was  a  bitter  problem  to  solve, 
then  as  at  all  times ;  and  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  realise  how  deep  their  anxieties 
would  go  ;  how  possibly  the  Twelve  would  be  almost  as  anxious  as  any.  They 
might  share  the  alarm  with  perfect  loyalty.  And  then  they  had  so  much  to  think 
of — those  Twelve  at  Jerusalem.  There  were  the  angry,  hot-headed  Pharisees,  who 
believed  in  such  numbers  after  the  Lord  had  risen.  They  came  pouring  into  the 
Ohurch ;  but  they  were  half  Pharisees  still.  Their  prejudices  were  very  strong; 
and  they  had  always  been  in  terror  of  these  Gentile  converts ;  and  here  were  the 
people  at  Antioch  going  ahead  in  a  way  just  to  give  these  people  a  sort  of  excuse  to 
Bay,  "  Ah,  we  told  you  what  would  happen  if  these  foreigners  were  let  in  1  "  And 
naturally  the  apostles  say,  "  Well,  we  must  be  tender  to  these  Jewish  converts  of 
ours,  we  must  consider  them,  they  are  sensitive  ;  there  may  be  a  recoil,  a  schism, 
if  we  do  not  hold  in  those  at  Antioch."  We  can  measure  how  terrible  the  danger 
was  by  remembering  how  fierce  was  the  storm  when  it  did  finally  burst  on  the  head 
of  St.  Paul.  So  severe  was  the  crisis,  so  imminent  the  peril.  And  yet  aU  was 
warded  ofL  ;  the  storm  that  afterwards  broke  on  St.  Paul  was  kept  clear  for  the 
moment,  and  it  was  all  done  by  one  man.  One  name,  the  most  honourable  and 
beautiful ;  one  name  that  could  hold  things  together  for  the  time  ;  one  name  that 
could  persuade,  conciliate,  win  confidence,  and  avert  wrath.  It  is  the  name  of  a 
man  of  healing,  of  advocacy,  of  intercession,  of  prevailing  comfort— Joses,  who 
was  called  Barnabas,  the  Son  of  Consolation.  Now,  Barnabas  held  this  unique 
position,  that  each  side  of  the  controversy  had  a  claim  upon  him.  First  for 
Jerusalem.  He  is,  as  we  know,  the  very  model  and  hero  of  the  earliest  Church  in 
Jerusalem.  In  those  very  first  days  of  the  Church,  when  it  still  lingered  on  the 
Temple  steps,  when  the  apostles  were  altogether  dominant,  even  then  one  name  is 
singled  out  as  specially  catching  the  spirit  of  the  hour — Baruabas,  the  Levite,  who, 
"  having  land,  sold  it,  and  brought  the  money  and  laid  it  at  the  apostles'  feet."  As 
if  to  say  that  in  that  beautiful  little  Church,  out  of  the  host  of  people  who  were  so 
good,  one  was  supremely  good,  and  he  was  Barnabas.  He  had  the  very  spirit  of 
generosity  and  charity  that  marked  that  hour.  And  yet  Barnabas  was  not  himself 
a  Jew  of  Jerusalem ;  he  was  not  a  man  who  had  been  hedged  in  by  all  the  ancient 
barriers  and  customs  of  the  Jewish  life.  No  ;  he  was  from  Cyprus  ;  he  came  from 
the  very  place  to  which  these  Antioch  preachers  had  gone.  He  was  a  Jew  of  the 
Dispersion ;  he  had  got  the  temper  and  mind  of  a  Jew  who  had  lived  in  dose 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

contact  with  the  Gentile  life  ;  and  so  disposed,  he  had  been  quick  to  understand, 
accept,  and  trust  St.  Paul.  He  was  in  sympathy  with  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  ; 
he  was  in  sympathy  with  the  freer,  bolder  doings  of  the  Church  at  Antiooh,  He 
would  know  these  men  who  were  going  forward  with  such  a  dash.  "  Let  Barnabas 
go  " — that  was  the  end  of  all  these  consultations.  It  was  not  a  hostile  mission, 
but  one  sent  to  allay  a  little  tilarm  caused  by  wild  rumour  and  exaggeration. 
Barnabas  is  just  the  man  to  review,  to  advise,  to  control  anything  amiss,  to  give 
confidence  if  he  approves.  So  it  was  decided — "They  sent  forth  Barnabas."  It 
was  a  delicate  mission ;  and  we  know  what  happened,  and  how  well  he  carried  it 
out.  We  read  of  his  wisdom,  his  sympathy,  his  width,  his  firmness,  his  insight, 
hia  courage.  He  came,  and  he  saw  "  the  grace  of  God."  Not  suspicious,  jealous, 
no  standing  aloof  and  refusing  to  acknowledge  it.  No  I  he  saw  it — it  was  "  grace." 
Only  he  gave  them  some  warnings  against  unsteadiness,  "  exhorting  them  all  that 
with  purpose  of  heart  they  would  cleave  unto  the  Lord."  And  then  he  does  a 
most  bold  thing.  He,  so  far,  recognises  that  it  is  grace,  true  and  real,  that  works 
at  Antioch,  that  he  determines  to  forward  it  with  all  his  might ;  and  he  goes  to 
Tarsus,  where  Paul  is  still  in  hiding,  unable  to  work  in  a  Church  that  suspects 
him.  So  he  made  the  stroke  of  strokes — brought  Saul  to  Antioch.  That  was  the 
beginning  of  the  work  of  St.  Paul,  of  his  ministry  to  the  Gentiles  ;  and  all  came 
from  Barnabas,  who  had  the  courage  to  hold  out  his  hand  to  Saul,  and  give  him 
twice  over  to  the  Church.  So  triumphantly  did  he  keep  the  unity  of  the  Church 
and  avert  the  storm.  Antioch  goes  on  growing  apace,  Barnabas  and  Paul  working 
hand  in  hand  for  a  whole  year,  "  assembling  themselves  with  the  Church  and 
teaching  much  people.  And  the  disciples  were  called  Christians  first  in  Antioch." 
*'  Barnabas,"  the  mediator  between  the  contrasted  forces  that  press  for  mastery 
over  the  fortunes  of  the  Church.  Ah  1  yes,  we  need  his  name  still,  to-day 
as  much  as  ever.  There  is  always  a  Jerusalem  and  an  Antioch  in  the  story 
of  the  Church.  There  is  always  an  Antioch  being  occupied,  always  some  new 
centre  of  action  to  be  taken  up,  some  new  post  on  the  line  of  advance,  some 
new  venture  to  be  made,  breaking  new  ground.  There  must  always  be  a  new 
Antioch  where  the  fresh  forces  of  civilisation  and  culture  are  active — forces  which 
the  Church  must  go  out  to,  and  establish  herself  in  the  midst  of  them.  They 
cannot  be  reached  from  the  old  centres.  There  must  be  some  adaptation  of 
methods  to  reach  them.  Then  Jerusalem  too.  There  is — there  always  ought  to 
be — "  Jerusalem  "  behind  us — the  witness  to  the  Eternal  Truth,  the  unchanging 
apostolic  deposit,  on  which  the  passage  of  time  marks  no  alteration ;  there  must 
always  be  the  infallible  experience,  which  touched,  which  felt,  and  knew  the  Word 
of  God — the  old,  firm,  solid  centre,  whence  indeed  all  new  effort  must  take  its  rise. 
Jerusalem — the  sacred  hearth  of  the  holy  fire  whence  all  other  fires  were  lighted  ; 
the  ancient  home,  dear  to  all  who  name  the  One  Name,  Jesus  Christ — Jerusalem, 
the  mother  of  us  all.  There  must  always  be  Jerusalem,  and  always  Antioch  ;  but 
the  difficulty  is  to  keep  the  two  together.  Each  will  be  apt  to  misjudge  and  to 
think  the  worse  of  the  other.  Each  will  judge  the  other  by  its  most  perilous 
adherents.  At  Jerusalem  they  will  hear  of  nothing  of  Antioch  but  what  is  head- 
strong, reckless,  rash,  audacious,  insolent.  At  Antioch  they  will  be  groaning  at 
the  rigid  stiffness  and  obstinacy,  nervous  timidity,  narrowness,  and  suspiciousness 
of  Jerusalem.  So  there  will  alway  be  the  need  of  a  Barnabas,  ready  to  pass  from 
the  one  to  the  other  centre  ;  gracious,  capable,  sympathetic,  loyal  to  the  backbone ; 
yet  appreciative,  sensitive,  inside  the  movement,  strong  yet  benign.  Such  men 
save  the  Church  at  each  sharp  crisis  in  her  story.  We  want  this  son  of  advocacy 
to  hold  us  together,  some  one  who  is  courageous  without  hardness,  conciliatory 
without  weakness,  who  is  so  strong  that  he  can  afford  to  be  firm.  We  shall  want 
him  in  days  to  come  I  doubt  not.  We  remember  the  simple  qualification  that  the 
Bible  gives  of  St.  Barnabas — "  He  was  a  man  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith." 
That  is  all  we  want — some  one  sound  and  healthy  to  the  core,  some  one  felt  to  be 
morally  wholesome,  to  have  a  good  heart  and  a  good  nature  all  through,  with 
nothing  perverted  or  twisted  about  him,  a  man  who  has  proportion  and  balance, 
and  all  his  gifts  in  genial  exercise.  That  first,  "  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost " — 
that  Holy  Ghost  who  is  the  Spirit  of  advocacy,  who  is  bo  strong,  who  is  so 
Bweet  and  gentle  —  that  Holy  Ghost  who  is  the  very  power  that  binds  these 
two  opposite  gifts.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  fire,  of  vehement  decision,  the  uncon- 
querable purging  force.  And  yet  the  Spirit  of  the  wind — the  Spirit  so  pliable,  bo 
elastic,  so  sensitive,  so  free,  so  moving,  so  quick,  so  ready  to  pass  in  and  out, 
♦'  blowing  where  it  listeth."    The  fire  and  the  wind,  strength  and  gentleness — that 


«BAr.  XL]  THE  ACTS.  225 

is  the  power  of  this  blessed  Spirit  of  Qoi.  Barnabas  has  both  gifts  ;  and  we  want 
a  Barnabas  nourished  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  lifted  and  transformed  by  the 
power  of  Him  who  is  fire  and  wind,  to  be  full  of  faith,  to  be  full  of  loyalty  ta 
the  living  Christ,  (if.  Scott  Holland,  M.A .)  Barnabas  at  Antioch ; — I.  What 
Babnabas  was.  1.  "  He  was  a  good  man  " — a  man  of  a  kind,  affable,  and  courteous 
disposition.  This  "goodness,"  which  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  God's  Spirit,  should 
characterise  all  Christians.  It — (1)  Adorns  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour. 
(2)  Attracts  the  notice  of  the  unhappy  worldling.  (3)  Wins  the  affections  of  the- 
young.  2.  He  was  also  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  An  amiable  disposition  does  not 
make  a  Christian.  There  are  many  whom  we  esteem  for  their  sweetness  of 
character,  but  who,  like  the  young  man  that  Jesus  loved,  yet  lack  one  thing — the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (1)  No  man  can  be  said  to  be  a  true  Christian  tiU  the 
Holy  Spirit  has  shown  him  his  guUt,  and  led  him  to  the  Saviour.  (2)  No  man  can 
call  Jesus  Lord  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3)  The  sons  of  God  are  led  by,  pray, 
walk,  and  live  in  the  Spirit.  3.  He  was  full  of  faith.  He  had  the  most  implicit 
confidence  in  the  remedy  he  was  to  apply  to  the  souls  of  men.  H.  What  he  saw. 
"  The  grace  of  God  " — i.e.,  its  effects.  These  are  sometimes  seen  in  mea's — 1.  Coun- 
tenances. Wisdom  "  maketh  the  face  to  shine."  "  A  merry  heart  maketh  a  cheerful 
countenance."  And  what  can  make  the  heart  so  roerry  as  the  assurance  of  salvation  ? 
Stephen's  face  was  as  "  the  face  of  an  angel."  Thus,  too,  was  it  with  Moses.  The 
believer  may  not  be  conscious  of  this  heavenly  expression.  Others,  however,  will 
observe  it.  2.  Conversation.  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
Bpeaketh."  A  man  cannot  himself  feel  the  value  of  the  Saviour  without  commend- 
ing His  preciousness  to  others.  3.  Conduct.  A  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits,  so  are 
believers  known  by  their  works.  HI.  What  he  felt.  He  was  glad  because — 1.  Souls 
were  saved.  A  thirsty  traveller  would  not  rejoice  over  a  dry  well,  nor  a  musician 
over  a  tuneless  organ.  Nor  will  the  believer  rejoice  over  ordinances,  however  well 
administered,  unless  he  has  evidence  afforded  that  Christ  is  faithfully  preached, 
and  that  good  is  being  done  to  the  souls  of  men.  2.  A  pubUc  profession  of  Christ 
was  made.  "  With  the  heart  man  believeth,  but  with  his  mouth  he  maketh 
confession."  Nothiug  gives  so  much  consolation  and  influence  to  a  minister  and 
his  people  as  when  they  first  see  one  and  then  another  coming  out  from  the  world 
and  joining  themselves  boldly  to  the  Lord's  side.  3.  Christ's  presence  was  vouch- 
safed. Excellent  as  are  a  pure  creed,  a  large  Church,  and  an  attentive  congregation, 
the  faithful  minister  will  esteem  them  but  formal  and  unprofitable  unless  he  can 
see  resting  upon  his  labours  Christ's  presence  and  blessing.  IV.  What  he  did. 
Barnabas  knew  the  weakness  of  the  fiesh  and  the  power  of  Satan ;  and  hence, 
although  he  saw  the  grace  of  God,  he  rejoiced  with  trembling.  He  saw  the  tree 
covered  indeed  with  blossoms,  and  this  made  him  the  more  anxious  lest  any  of 
those  blossoms  should  be  blighted.  He  therefore  exhorted  these  disciples.  In 
every  age  similar  exhortation  has  been  needful.  There  are  now,  as  there  were 
then,  false  teachers,  and  temptations  to  seduce  men  from  Christ  into  the  world. 
Suffer  ye  the  word  of  exhortation.  1.  Do  I  address  any  who  are  growing  weary  in 
well-doing  ? — any  who  are  beginning  to  be  backsliders  ?  I  have  an  errand, 
O  worldly  professor,  to  thee:  "Remember  Lot's  wife."  Arouse  yourselves,  then, 
and  do  your  first  works.  2.  I  am  doubtless  addressing  some  who  do  not  wish  to 
be  considered  as  religious  professors.  Now  you  I  cannot  exhort  *'  to  cleave  unto 
the  Lord,"  for  you  have  never  yet  come  to  the  Lord.  To  you  I  address  this  :  •'  If 
in  that  day  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner 
appear?"  (C.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  mission  of  Barnabas: — I.  Authenticated' 
THE  genuineness  OF  CHRISTIANITY  AT  Antioch.  Vers.  23,  24,  shows  us  that  per- 
sonal Christianity — 1.  Is  essentially  identified  with  Divine  grace.  It — (1)  Originates 
in  it.  "  Of  His  own  will  begat  He  us."  (2)  Is  sustained  by  it.  (3)  Is  a  reflection 
of  it.  2.  Is  an  observable  fact.  Barnabas  saw  it.  It  is  not  an  inoperative  senti- 
ment, a  light  under  a  bushel.  It  must  reveal  itself.  (1)  The  ruling  spirit  of  life 
is  new.  There  is  a  new  heart.  Old  things  are  passed  away.  (2)  The  master- 
purpose  of  life  is  new.  The  aim  is  not  how  to  serve  self  or  the  world,  but  to  glorify 
God.  (3)  The  prevailing  conduct  of  life  is  new.  Converted  men  are  about  their 
Father's  business.  3.  In  its  extension  delights  the  heart  of  the  good.  They  know 
that  as  it  spreads — (1)  The  world's  happiness  will  be  promoted.  It  is  the  only 
power  that  works  off  social,  political,  and  moral  evils.  (2)  God's  character  will  be 
revealed.  It  clears  away  all  that  conceals  the  moral  beauty  of  God.  4.  In  its 
development  is  dependent  on  personal  efforts.  Though  it  originates  in  Divine 
grace,  it  is  only  kept  by  cleaving  to  God.  II.  Gave  a  new  name  xo  the  DisciPtas. 
¥OL.    U.  15 


226  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx. 

1.  Though  given  in  derision — (1)  It  towers  above  every  other  name,  (2)  Represents 
the  highest  thinking.  (3)  Stands  for  the  Divinest  sympathies.  (4)  Is  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  grandest  enterprises.  (5)  Produces  the  sublimest  characters.  2.  Is 
destined  to  supersede  all  other  names  that  have  usurped  its  place.  III.  Developed 
A  NEW  spiKiT  of  BENEFICENCE  (vers.  27-30),  This  was — 1.  Individual.  "  Every 
man ."  There  was  no  one  who  did  not  contribute  something.  2,  Proportionate. 
"According  to  his  ability" — not  according  to  what  others  did  or  expected. 
3,  Prompt.  They  did  not  postpone  it  for  future  consideration.  4.  Judicious . 
(ver.  30),     {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Yer.  23.  WIio,  when  he  came,  and  had  seen  the  grace  of  God,  was  glad, — The 

grace  of  God : — I.  Its  source.      1,  God  is  the  God  of  all  grace  (1  Pet.  v.  10), 

2,  God  is  the  giver  of  (Psa,  Ixxxiv,  11).  3.  God's  throne  is  the  throne  of  (Heb, 
iv,  16).  4.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Spirit  of  (Zech.  xii.  10;  Heb.  x.  29).  6.  Christ 
was  full  of  (John  i.  14).  6.  Came  by  Christ  (John  i.  17 ;  Rom.  v.  15).  7.  Given  by 
Christ  (1  Cor.  i.  4).  II.  How  described.  1.  As  great  (chap.  iv.  33).  2,  Abundant 
(Rom.  V,  20,  21),  3.  Rich  (Eph.  i.  7 ;  ii.  7).  4.  Exceeding  (2  Cor.  ix,  14),  6, 
Manifold  (1  Pet.  iv,  10).  6.  All-sufficient  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  7.  True  (1  Pet.  v,  12), 
8.  Glorious  (Eph.  i.  6,  9).  IH.  Its  necessity.  1.  Necessary  to  God's  service 
(Heb.  xii.  28).  2.  Necessary  that  Jesus  may  be  glorified  in  the  saints  (2  Thess. 
i,  11,  12).  3.  Necessary  to  prevent  pride  (Rom.  iv.  4,  5,  xi.  6 ;  Gal.  v.  6 ;  Eph.  ii. 
7-9).  4.  Saints  are  what  they  are  by  (1  Cor.  xv.  10;  2  Cor.  i.  12).  IV.  Its 
EECiPiENTS.  Saints — 1.  Are  heirs  of  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  2.  Receive  from  Christ  (John 
i.  16).  3.  Abound  in  gifts  of  (chap.  iv.  33  ;  2  Cor.  viii.  1,  ix.  8,  14).  4.  Should  be 
estabhshed  in  (Heb.  xiii.  9).  5.  Should  be  strong  in  (2  Tim.  ii.  1).  6.  Should 
grow  in  (2  Pet.  iii,  18).  7.  Should  speak  with  (Eph.  iv,  29  ;  Col.  iv.  6).  (S.  S. 
Times.)  The  grace  of  God  : — I.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  the  grace  of 
God  ?  1.  His  free  love  or  favour  (Eph.  ii.  5),  by  which  believers  are  delivered  from 
the  curse  of  a  broken  law,  from  wrath,  from  the  guilt,  love,  and  dominion  of  sin, 
2,  A  Divine  principle  in  the  heart  (2  Pet.  iii.  18  ;  Col.  iii.  16).  II.  How  this  grace 
MAY  BE  SEEN.  1.  In  Spiritual  quickening  (Eph.  ii.  1).  2.  In  the  work  of  conver- 
sion. 3.  In  the  outward  deportment  (Matt.  vii.  17 ;  xii.  35).  4.  By  the  company 
kept.  6.  By  the  places  of  resort  frequented  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  1,  2).  III.  The  effect 
the   sight   HAD  ON  Babnabas.      1.    He  was  glad — (1)   That  sinners  were  called. 

(2)  That  their  lives  were  reformed.  (3)  That  Christ  was  believed  on.  (4)  That 
the  gospel  was  received.  (5)  That  God  was  glorified  thereby.  2.  He  exhorted 
them  to  cleave  unto  the  Lord.     (1)  Unto  His  Person.     (2)  To  His  blood  for  pardon. 

(3)  His  righteousness  for  acceptance,  (4)  His  fulness  for  supplies  of  grace. 
{S.  Barnard.)  A  glorious  sight  and  a  good  nmn : — 1,  That  persecution,  instead 
of  silencing,  has  spread  the  gospel.  "  Tidings  of  these  things."  What  things  ? 
The  persecution  wliich  had  Saul  for  its  instigator,  Stephen  for  its  martyr,  and  the 
widespread  distribution  of  Christians  for  its  effect.  2.  That  God  can  render  any 
pious  agency  in  His  Church  soul-saving  and  successful.  The  fouuders  of  this 
Church  at  Antioch,  which  was  destined  to  play  a  most  conspicuous  and  com- 
manding part  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  do  not  appear  to  have  been  apostles,  or 
regular  ministers.  3.  That  whenever  God  extends  His  Church,  the  Church  should 
add  to  her  concernment  and  care.  The  Church  at  Jerusalem  does  not  appear  to 
have  taken  umbrage  at  what  was  going  on  at  Antioch.  They  did  not  say,  "  This  is 
irregular,  we  must  interdict  it ;  this  has  not  had  our  sanction,  it  must  receive  our 
condemnation."  They  would  not  pronounce  a  judgment  until  they  had  investigated 
the  cause.  They  selected  a  true  and  trusty  messenger ;  they  sent  him,  as  far  as  I 
can  see,  not  as  a  spy,  or  a  critic,  or  a  censor,  but  as  a  friend,  an  inquirer,  a  coun- 
sellor. The  eye  of  Barnabas  filled  his  heart.  He  was  "  glad."  I.  What  he  saw. 
He  saw  "  the  grace  which  (is)  of  God  "  (r/)v  xapiv  rfi%>  rov  6sov),  i.e.,  the  grace  which 
is  manifestly,  unmistakably,  of  God.  But  how  could  he  see  that  which  in  itself  is 
invisible  ?  The  grace  of  God  is  as  viewless  as  the  wind,  as  impalpable  as  gravita- 
tion. It  is  a  life,  and  it  grows  ;  a  leaven,  and  it  leavens  the  lump  ;  but  we  might 
look  in  vain  to  see  the  growth  of  life,  or  the  influence  of  leaven.  How  then  did 
Barnabas  see  the  grace  of  God  ?  He  saw  it,  as  other  invisible  things  are  seen,  by 
its  effects.  We  cannot  see  the  wind ;  but  when  the  trees  rustle  and  their  leaves 
wave,  we  know  that  it  is  because  the  wind  blows.  We  cannot  see  gravitation ;  but 
when  the  earth  rotates,  producing  day  and  night,  and  revolves,  producing  the 
seasons  of  the  year,  with  their  characteristic  varieties  and  attractive  beauties,  we 
see  by  these  effects  that  gravitation  is  at  work.    We  cannot  see  the  tree  grow ;  but 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  227 

we  know  from  its  foliage  and  its  fruit  that  it  must  have  grown.  It  is  thus  the 
invisible  puts  on  visibility;  and  "the  invisible  things" — even  of  God  Himself — 
"are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made."  Where  the 
grace  of  God  is,  ignorance  of  God,  both  shameful  and  baneful,  gives  place  to  a 
knowledge  of  Him  which  is  as  wondrous  as  glorious.  Virtue  supersedes  vice, 
holiness  displaces  wickedness,  the  liar  becomes  truthful,  the  blasphemer  reverent, 
the  cruel  merciful,  the  selfish  beneficent ;  in  fine,  God's  grace  transforms  the  lion 
of  violence  and  vice  into  the  lamb  of  innocence  and  uprightness.  Now,  Barnabas 
saw  the  wondrous  effects  of  God's  grace  upon  the  Grecian  believers  at  Antioch. 
He  saw  idolaters  discarding  their  gods,  and  turning  to  the  "Living  God."  "  Is 
not  this  the  finger  of  God  ?  "  II.  What  he  felt.  Great  sights  always  produce 
inappreciative  observers,  powerful  emotions.  The  stupendous  works  of  God,  the 
splendid  productions  of  art,  and  the  manifold  inventions  of  genius,  in  this  way 
fascinate  the  eye  and  stimulate  the  mind  of  those  who  study  them.  But  for  a 
devout  mind  no  sight  is  so  pleasing,  and  no  work  so  glorious,  as  the  progress  and 
peace  of  God's  Church.  Of  what  character  was  his  gladness?  1.  Sympathetic. 
We  are  sometimes  glad,  and  sometimes  sad,  we  know  not  why.  Now,  it  was  holy 
unction,  associated  with  a  holy  gathering,  and  admitted  by  a  holy  sympathy,  that 
led  Barnabas,  "  when  he  saw  the  grace  of  God,"  to  be  "  glad."  2.  Intelligent. 
Sympathy  is  a  distinguished  power  in  man,  but  it  is  not  a  distinctive  prerogative. 
It  exists,  often  in  a  larger  degree,  in  the  "  inferior  creatures  "  around  him.  But  if 
they  feel,  if  they  love,  if  they  rejoice  like  him  in  virtue  of  a  sympathetic  nature, 
they  are  not  Uke  him  endowed  with  the  powers  of  reason  and  the  appliances  o£ 
ratiocination.  So  here,  Barnabas  not  only  felt  when  he  saw  this  sight,  but  he 
thought ;  and  whether  he  looked  upon  it  with  a  sympathetic  eye,  or  reflected  with 
an  intelligent  mind,  he  saw  equal  cause  for  gladness.  For  what  did  this  work 
imply  ?  It  implied  the  presence  and  the  propitiousness  of  God.  It  implied  the 
triumph  of  truth  over  falsehood,  and  of  Christ's  beneficent  rule  over  the  devil's  foul 
usurpation.  If,  then,  Barnabas  had  looked  upon  this  spiritual  phenomenon  as 
a  Christian  philosopher  only,  he  might  well  have  been,  as  he  was,  "  glad." 
3.  Eeligious.  If,  however,  as  a  social  and  an  intellectual  man,  Barnabas  found 
gladness  in  the  contemplation  of  this  scene,  how  much  more  as  a  religious  man  and 
a  gospel  minister  ?  It  was  his  religion,  indeed,  that  gave  complexion  and  character 
to  the  whole  case.  It  was  his  goodness  that  gave  to  him  his  gladness.  Hence 
ver.  23,  declaring  his  gladness,  is  conjoined  with  ver.  24,  describing  his  goodness — 
"  For  he  was  a  good  man,"  &c.  IH.  What  he  did.  Barnabas  was  called 
Paraclesis  (a  name  similar  to  that  given  to  the  Holy  Ghost),  and,  in  harmony  with 
his  name,  he  "  exhorted  them"  (Trape/caXst) — encouraged  them,  comforted  them. 
Now,  his  exhortation  related  to  three  distinct  objects.  1.  To  God.  In  fine,  God 
alone  is  the  great  Guide,  the  Almighty  Guard,  the  impregnable  Fortress,  and  the 
everlasting  Friend  of  His  people ;  and  to  cleave  unto  Him  is  at  once  their  duty, 
their  safety,  and  their  glory.  Then  think  how  suggestive  this  word  "  cleave  "  is. 
To  cleave  to  anything  is  to  grasp  it  firmly,  to  hold  it  tenaciously,  and  to  prefer  to 
be  torn  in  pieces  rather  than  to  be  torn  from  it.  It  is  thus  the  ivy  cleaves  to  the 
oak,  the  sailor  hangs  to  the  rope  that  is  to  rescue  him  from  a  furious  sea  and  a 
watery  grave,  and  thus  Euth  "  clave  "  unto  Naomi.  "  Orpah  kissed  her  mother- 
in-law  ;  but  Euth  clave  unto  her  ";  and  the  incident  teaches  how  much  more  there 
is  in  cleaving  than  in  kissing.  So  let  young  converts,  and  even  aged  saints,  cleave 
unto  or  continue  " to  abide  with  the  Lord";  then  they  will  avoid  every  by-path. 
2.  To  their  own  hearts.  "  With  purpose  of  heart."  There  is  tremendous  force  in 
these  words.  Without  a  purpose  a  man  in  this  world  will  never  become  a  power- 
never  !  Abraham  and  Moses,  Paul  and  Peter,  Augustine  and  Peter  the  Hermit, 
Luther  and  Knox,  Latimer,  Eidley,  and  Cranmer,  wielded  great  powers  because 
they  were  swayed  by  great  purposes.  But  of  all  purposes,  that  of  the  heart  is  the 
most  thorough.  It  quails  in  presence  of  no  danger.  The  eye  may  fail  to  see  the 
shore  from  which  we  sail ;  the  hand  may  fail  to  hold  its  grasp,  or  may  be  severed 
from  its  object ;  but  when  the  eye  is  lost  in  distance,  and  the  hand  is  no  longer 
capable  of  grasping,  the  heart  "  clings  "  to  a  land  it  cannot  see,  and  to  a  person  or 
«ause  it  cannot  grasp — "  clings  "  with  infinite  longing  and  undying  love.  3  To 
their  entire  number.  He  exhorted  them  "  all."  This  shows— (1)  His  impartiality. 
He  did  not  select  for  special  regard  the  rich,  the  learned,  and  the  Hellenist,  tothe 
exclusion  of  the  poor,  the  unlearned,  and  the  Hebrew.  (2)  His  discrimination. 
He  knew  full  well  there  were  duties  which  were  not  common  to  all  ChristiHus. 
(John  Stokoe.)     Apostolic  yemrosity  in  encouraging  goodness : — The  character  in  which 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

St.  Barnabas  is  here  presented  to  us  is  that  of  a  person  greatly  rejoicing  in  other  men'» 
goodness.  He  was  glad  when  he  saw  the  grace  of  God  in  his  brethren.  Of  his  doing 
so,  there  are  several  other  instances ;  indeed,  almost  the  whole  of  his  conduct 
towards  St.  Paul  is  full,  from  the  beginning,  of  such  generous  and  affectionate  joy. 
Now,  concerning  this  disposition  to  rejoice  in  other  men's  goodness,  it  is  much 
easier  to  see  how  amiable  it  looks  in  others  than  to  practise  it  one's  self  in  good 
earnest.  Do  not  men  envy  others,  not  merely  for  their  outward  advantages,  but  for 
their  goodness  itself ;  especially  for  those  parts  of  goodness  which  they  themselves 
have  not  the  heart  to  imitate  ?  It  is  an  ancient  story,  told  ol  a  virtuous  heathen, 
that  when  a  loud  outcry  was  once  raised  against  him,  and  he  was  to  be  banished 
from  his  country,  a  person  of  whom  he  asked  a  reason  why  he  gave  his  vote  against 
him,  replied,  **  I  have  no  objection  to  you,  but  I  am  quite  tired  of  hearing  every  one 
call  you  the  Just."  And  so  throughout  life,  there  is  a  disposition  in  the  unrenewed 
heart  to  grudge  all  those  graces  which  go  too  far  beyond  itself  ;  a  disposition  the 
very  opposite  to  that  which  the  Holy  Ghost  wrought  in  St.  Barnabas  by  faith.  He 
rejoiced,  but  these  are  sorry,  on  beholding  the  grace  of  God.  It  certainly  must 
require  no  small  faith  to  believe  that  it  is  better  on  the  whole  for  others  to  do  the 
good  which  you  desire  than  for  it  to  be  done  by  yourself.  St.  Barnabas  must  have 
his  heart  steadily  fixed  on  the  unseen  rewards  prepared  on  high,  to  make  him 
acquiesce  thus  joyfully  in  his  companion,  St.  Paul,  receiving  so  much  more  of  the 
encouragement  provided  for  apostoUcal  men  in  this  life.  Such  self-denial,  when 
regularly  kept  up,  and  not  only  indulged  now  and  then,  out  of  laziness  or  partial 
affection,  is  one  of  the  clearest  tokens  that  God's  Holy  Spirit  is  with  men,  preparing 
them  for  eternal  glory.  And  it  is  seen  in  nothing  so  much  as  in  making  persons 
continually  watchful,  to  cherish  and  confirm  one  another  in  every  good  purpose  of 
heart ;  in  which  respect  the  Spirit  of  the  gospel  is  most  directly  opposed  to  the  evil 
and  selfish  spirit  of  this  age.  For  I  know  not  how  it  is,  but  people,  under  pretence 
of  liberty  of  one  sort  or  another,  are  come  to  be,  very  generally,  quite  indifferent 
about  the  grace  and  salvation  of  others.  Surely  the  hard,  indifferent  way  in  which 
too  many  of  us  treat  the  thought  of  our  neighbour's  condition  towards  God  is  sadly 
like  Cain's  way:  sadly  like  the  temper  which  led  to  a  brother's  murder.  The 
Christian,  Catholic,  renewed  heart  is  altogether  different  from  this  ;  it  is  not  at  all 
satisfied,  as  men  of  the  world  are,  with  persons  going  on  decently  and  quietly ;  it 
wants  them  to  be  inwardly  sound  and  pure;  first  of  all  to  have  a  good  "  purpose  of 
heart,"  and  then  to  persevere  in  that  purpose,  "  cleaving  "  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
continually.  That  anxiety  about  your  neighbour's  soul,  which  Christian  love  causes 
you  to  feel,  wiU  be  a  continual,  a  watchful,  a  self-denying,  but,  for  the  most  part, 
a  silent  principle.  It  will  show  itself  in  deeds  rather  than  in  words,  in  timely 
prevention  of  mischief  rather  than  in  late  and  loud  remonstrance.  It  will  not  be 
very  sanguine,  nor  reckon  too  much  of  any  good  which  appears  to  be  done,  knowing 
that  we  are  all  by  nature  unstable  as  water.  Nor  yet  will  it  be  too  soon  disheartened 
or  disconcerted,  knowing  that  there  is  hope  even  of  the  worst,  and  that  constant 
efforts  and  prayers,  with  the  Church  of  God  to  your  aid,  will,  by  the  aid  of  His  good 
Spirit,  prevail  against  everything  but  hardened  obstinacy.  Above  all,  this  care  of 
others*  good  purposes,  to  be  at  all  like  that  of  St.  Barnabas,  must  be  accompanied 
with  scrupulously  good  example ;  even  as  it  is  here  said  of  this  holy  apostle,  very 
emphatically,  that  "  he  was  a  good  man."  Finally,  the  good  advice  of  St.  Barnabas, 
here  given  to  the  people  of  Antioch,  may  well  serve  as  a  kind  of  watchword  for  all 
Christians  of  every  station,  in  times  when  the  Faith  and  the  Church  are  being 
violently  assailed  by  their  enemies.  Then  is  the  time  to  practise  a  holy  obstinacy ; 
not  to  mind  if  you  be  not  able  to  give  reasons,  and  talk  knowingly  about  things, 
but  "  with  purpose  of  heart  to  cleave  to  the  Lord  "  ;  that  is,  to  abide  by  what  the 
Church  has  taught  you,  let  people  say  what  they  will.  This  will  be  called  bigotry 
and  stubbornness  ;  and  they  who  are  wise  in  their  own  conceit  will  insist  on  your 
giving  a  reason  for  everything.  Well,  then,  let  your  reason  be  given,  not  in 
words,  but  in  a  holy  life.  [Sermons  by  Contributors  to  "  Tracts  for  the  Times.'*) 
Barnabas : — I.  His  history  and  character.  1.  His  ancestors  had  settled  in 
Cyprus,  for  what  purposes  we  know  not.  There  Barnabas  was  born.  He  was 
called  at  first  Joses,  but  after  his  conversion  to  Christianity,  Barnabas,  perhaps 
because  of  his  estate — he  was  a  wealthy  man,  and  relieved  the  necessities 
of  the  poor — or  because  by  his  preaching  he  consoled  the  people  of  God,  and 
encouraged  sinners  to  come  to  Christ.  2.  Ministers  often  differ  considerably. 
Some  are  sons  of  thunder,  others  have  "  the  tongue  of  the  learned."  Now,  never 
^oppose  ministers  to  each  other.     Their  situation,  natural  complexion,  gifts,  graces,. 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  ACTS.  229 

are  different ;  but  the  Church  needs  them,  and  can  well  employ  them  all.    Let  Paul 
therefore  plant,  and  ApoUos  water ;  let  one  comfort  the  feeble-minded,  and  another 
be  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel ;  let  one  lay  the  foundation,  and  another  build 
thereon.    Each  has  his  own  work,  and  each  shaU  have  his  own  reward.     3.  Much 
of  the  dispositions  of  persons  may  be  discovered  by  the  objects  which  awaken  their 
attention  and  desire  when  they  first  enter  a  country  or  a  town.     Some  are  imme- 
diately looking  about  for  scenery,  some  for  curiosities,  some  for  trade,  some  for 
buildings,  some  for  libraries,  some  for  pictures.    Barnabas  was  alive  to  something 
else — ^it  was  "  the  one  thing  needful."    He  immediately  looked  after  the  cause  of 
God.    n.  Hi8  DiscovEET.     1.  «'  The  grace  of  God  "  is  a  principle.     Seen  it  must 
be  to  Goii,  "to  whom  aU  hearts  are  open";  and  known,  it  may  be,  by  the  indi- 
viduals themselves.     But  how  can  it  be  seen  by  others  ?    I  know  only  one  way : 
by  its  effects.     You  cannot  see  life,  but  you  can  see  the  man  alive.     You  cannot 
see  health,  but  you  can  see  the  freshness  and  vigour  of  the  healthy  man.     You  do 
not  break  a  tree  to  examine  the  rind,  or  open  it  to  examine  the  wood,  to  know 
of  what  sort  it  is ;  a  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.     God  says,  •'  I  will  put  My  Spirit 
within  them."    But  who  is  to  know  this  ?    Kead  on — •'  and  cause  them  to  walk  in 
My  statutes."  James  says  to  the  professor  of  religion,  "  Show  me  thy  faith  without 
thy  works.     I  will  show  thee  my  faith  by  my  works  "  :  I  will  show  thee  the  spring 
by  the  stream ;  the  sun  in  the  shining  ;  the  creed  by  the  conduct.      2.  When  may 
'we  be  said  to  "  see  the  grace  of  God  "  ?     I  expect  to  find  in  a  man  in  whom  there 
is  a  work  of  grace — (1)  A  change  in  his  outward  conduct.    If  he  has  been  vicious 
before,  he  learns  to  be  virtuous  ;  the  drunkard  becomes  sober,  &c.     (2)  A  love  of 
good  men  ;  for  hke  not  only  begets,  but  also  attracts,  like.      "  We  know  that  we 
have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."     (3)  A  peculiar 
attachment  to  the  Scriptures.     (4)  A  regard  for  the  Sabbath.     I  am  sure  that  the 
righteous  man  always  "  calls  the  Sabbath  a  delight,  and  the  holy  of  the  Lord, 
honourable."    "  The  grace  of  God,"  therefore,  will  lead  a  man  to  regard  the  means 
of  grace.     (5)  Speech  seasoned  with  grace.    Physicians  look  at  the  tongues  of  their 
patients.     Ministers  should  always  examine  the  tongues  of  their  patients.    If  these 
are  disordered,  they  may  be  assured  something  else  is  disordered ;  for  "  out  of  the 
abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."     (6)  A  temper  conformed  to  the 
spirit  of  Christ.     Some,  in  exculpation  of  their  fretful  or  fierce  tempers,  say,  that 
the  grace  of  God  is  sometimes  grafted  on  a  crab  tree  ;  yes,  but  when  the  tree  is 
so  grafted,  we  expect  that  it  will  bring  forth  fruit,  not  according  to  the  stock, 
but  according  to  the  scion.     (7)  Family  piety.     (8)  Consistency.     3.  With  regard 
to  the  visibiUty  of  Divine  grace,  there  are  three  things  which  I  must  remark.      (1) 
We  may,  after  all,  be  deceived  with  regard  to  it.      The  imitation  may  be  so  nice 
and  fine  as  to  impose  upon  the  most  judicious  observers.    None  of  the  disciples 
suspected  Judas  ;  and  Peter,  after  baptizing  Simon  Magus,  was  careful  to  write  of 
Stephanas,    "A  faithful  brother,  as   I   suppose."     (2)  You  are  not  to  consider 
persons  as  destitute  of  "  the  grace  of  God,"  when  their  lives  are  blameless,  and 
they  are  regular  at  the  means  of  gi'ace,  and  in  their  discharge  of  the  duties  of 
religion.    When  things  are  fair  in  character,  you  are  not  to  go  motive-hunting. 
It  is  better  to  be  occasionally  deceived,  than  to  live  always  in  a  temperature  of 
suspicion.     (3)  Divine  grace  is  compatible  with  infirmities ;  otherwise  we  should 
exclude  all  from  the  possession  of  it.     Our  Saviour  does  not  "  despise  the  day  of 
small  things."    Let  us  follow  His  example.     III.  His  pleasueb.    What  he  saw 
was  not  a  pleasing  sight  to  all  men.     It  was  a  hell  to  Satan  to  see  how  things 
were  now  going  on;  and  there  are  those  who  too  much  resemble  him.     The  elder 
brother  did  not  rejoice  when  he  saw  the  prodigal  received,  and  there  are  Pharisees 
now  who  are  ready  to  say,  "  Go  to  heaven  with  publicans  and  harlots  "  !    But  the 
salvation  of  the  sinner  is  "  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord."     The  Saviour  here  "  sees 
of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  is  satisfied."     The  angels  "  rejoice  over  one  sinner 
that  repenteth."      And  every  convert  may  say,  "  They  that  fear  thee  will  be  glad 
when  they  see  me."    We  may  consider  Barnabas  as  a  partaker  of  this  pleasure. 
1.  As  a  man  of  pie.ty.     Whenever  a  man  is  converted,  God  has  a  subject  bom. 
Here  is  one  in  whom  He  is  then  glorified  passively,  because  he  displays  traces  of 
His  perfections,  actively,  as  he  is  now  "  made  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power." 
Can  a  man  of  piety  see  this  and  not  rejoice  ?      2.    As  a  man  of   benevolence. 
Barnabas  was  pleased  when  he  saw  the  poor  healed,  the  hungry  fed,  &c.      But 
lie  knew  that  the  body  was  nothing  to  the  soul,  or  the  time  to  eternity.     What  is 
every  other  attainment  compared  with  that  godliness  which  is  "  profitable  unto 
aJl  tuings" !     Besides,  every  su''ject  of  Divine  grace  is  not  only  blessed  in  himself, 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tt 

but  he  is  made  a  blessing  to  others.  Can  a  man  of  benevolence  look  on  such,  and 
not  rejoice?  3.  Asa  minister  who  had  come  here  from  preaching.  There  are 
some  who  cannot  rejoice  to  see  things  done  by  others,  especially  if  they  do  not 
belong  to  their  own  communion.  But  if  a  man  has  the  spirit  of  Barnabas,  he  will 
be  able  to  say,  Let  God  employ  what  instruments  He  pleases,  therein  I  rejoice,  yea, 
and  will  rejoice.  IV.  His  concern.  "  Exhorted  them."  Observe — 1.  The  impor- 
tance of  his  admonition — that  they  would  "cleave  unto  the  Lord,"  i.e.,  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Him  they  had  received  ;  in  Him  they  were  to  walk.  Had  we  heard 
Barnabas,  it  would  have  been  something  to  this  effect :  Cleave  to  Him  as  your 
Teacher,  as  your  Eedeemer,  as  your  Support  in  all  your  duties  and  in  all  your 
conflicts,  as  your  Comforter,  as  your  Master,  as  your  Example.  2.  The  nature 
of  it.  He  "  exhorted  them  all  that  with  purpose  of  heart  they  should  cleave 
unto  the  Lord."  Now  this  impulse — not  only  conviction,  but  resolution — always 
issues  out  of  the  heart ;  and  what  is  religion,  unless  the  heart  is  engaged  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end?  Where  the  man  can  say  with  David,  '•  My  heart  is 
fixed,"  he  will  push  on  notwithstanding  difficulties,  and  will  convert  hindrances 
into  furtherances.  3.  Its  extensiveness.  He  "exhorted  them  all";  not  only 
those  who  were  weak  in  the  faith,  but  those  who  were  strong ;  not  only  the  young, 
but  the  old.  When  was  Solomon's  heart  led  away?  In  his  old  age.  And  does  not 
Paul  even  say  to  that  fine  young  man  Timothy,  "  Flee  youthful  lusts  "  ?  {W.Jay.} 
The  experience  and  work  of  Barnabas: — I.  The  fact  which  he  obsebved.  The 
grace  of  God  operating  in  the  converts.  Note — 1.  That  conversion  is  always  the 
result  of  Divine  grace — that  is,  God's  free  and  sovereign  favour.  "  For  by  grace 
are  ye  saved,  through  faith,"  &c.  True  conversion  thus  resulting  from  Divine 
grace  always  becomes  apparent  and  manifest  by  its  effects.  In  place  of  the  works 
of  the  flesh  there  will  be  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  in  place  of  carelessness,  impeni- 
tence, unbeUef,  worldliness,  and,  peradventure,  open  and  flagrant  crime,  there  will 
be  seriousness,  there  will  be  contrition,  faith,  holiness,  love  to  God  and  to  man. 
II.  The  emotion  with  which,  m  the  contemplation  of  the  fact,  he  became  inspibed. 
"  He  was  glad."  This  gladness  is  justly  excited  because  of — 1.  The  personal  happi- 
ness which  the  operation  of  Divine  grace  in  conversion  secures  to  those  who  feel  it.  2. 
The  honour  which  the  operation  of  Divine  grace  in  conversion  secures  to  the  Godhead 
In  every  conversion  there  is  a  display  of  the  Father ;  for  by  His  purpose  the  conver- 
sion was  accomplished,  the  conversion  was  directed.  There  is  a  display  of  the  Son ; 
for  by  His  sacrifice  the  conversion  was  purchased.  There  is  a  display  of  the  Spirit ; 
for  by  His  agency  the  conversion  was  effected.    HI.  The  exhortation  which,  in 

CONNECTION    WITH   THE    EMOTION,    HE    EXPRESSED   AND    URGED.       Mark 1.    ItS    Uature. 

Purpose  signifies  firm  and  resolute  determination.  "  Cleave  to  the  Lord  "  is  an 
expression  of  Hebrew  origin,  and  it  occurs  two  or  three  times  in  the  earlier  part  of 
the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  in  a  striking  manner.  To  cleave  to  an  individual 
seems  to  imply  the  act  of  a  man  anxious  to  obtain  a  blessing  from  another — a 
man  who  lays  fast  hold  on  his  person,  being  resolved  not  to  permit  his  departure 
until  the  blessing  has  been  obtained  ;  and  this  is  the  spirit  in  which  we  are  exhorted 
with  purpose  and  determination  of  heart  to  cleave  unto  the  Lord.  We  ought  to  be 
steadfast  in  cleaving  to  the  principles  of  the  Lord  ;  in  obeying  the  commandments 
of  the  Lord  ;  in  promoting  the  praise  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  And  each  one  in 
whom  Divine  grace  has  operated  must  have  it  as  a  constant  desire,  that  in  the  spirit 
of  steadfastness  he  may  be  preserved  till  death.  For  this  purpose,  use  the  means 
which  God  has  been  pleased  to  appoint — meditation,  the  study  of  His  Word  with 
prayer,  social  conversation  with  those  who  are  established  in  the  faith  and  hope  of 
the  gospel,  diligent  and  devout  attendance  on  the  public  ordinances  and  means  of 
grace,  and  then  the  result  will  be  accomplished,  and  you  will  cleav«  unto  the  Lord. 
You  will  emphatically  be  kept  from  falling,  and  be  presented  faultless  before  the 
presence  of  the  Divine  glory  with  great  and  exceeding  joy.  2.  The  reasons  by 
which  this  exliortation  may  be  enforced.  "  Cleave  to  the  Lord  " — (1)  That  you  may 
not  produce  disgrace  to  the  gospel  you  have  professed.  (2)  That  you  may  continue 
and  complete  the  joy  of  those  who  have  rejoiced  over  your  conversion.  (3)  That 
you  may  partake  of  the  highest  joy  in  this  world  which  Christianity  can  impart. 

(4)  That  you  may  become  endowed  with  capacities  of  usefulness  to  the  hearts  of  others, 

(5)  That  you  may  prepare  for  that  final  recompense  which  will  be  your  portion 
throughout  the  eternity  of  heaven.  [J.  Parsons.)  The  experience  and  work  oj 
JUirnabds : — I.  The  grace  that  Barnabas  saw.  1.  What  a  man  sees  depends  on 
wliat  he  looks  for.  An  architect  would  have  seen  buildings,  a  merchant  wares,  a 
soldier  fortifications.    And  Barnabas  had  an  eye  to  business.     He  saw  a  temple 


CHAP,  n.]  TEE  ACTS.  231 

built  of  living  stones ;  to  win  souls  was  the  gain  he  coveted ;  and  like  a  good 
soldier  he  calculated  how  these  teeming  thousands  might  be  made  subjects  of  Hia 
King.  True,  he  saw  sights  that  made  him  weep,  but  he  does  not  mention  them 
any  more  than  a  navigator  reports  the  vast  tracts  of  water  over  which  he  travels. 
The  business  of  the  latter  is  to  report  the  discovery  of  islands  standing  out  of  the 
waste  of  waters,  of  the  former  the  state  of  the  Church  which  stood  out  amidst  the 
waste  of  stQ.  2.  Barnabas  had  this  grace  in  himself,  or  he  would  never  have  see& 
it  in  others.  Philosophers  saw  the  same  people  and  pronounced  them  vile  fanatics, 
and  many  to-day  would  have  done  the  same.  God's  grace  is  only  to  be  spiritually 
discerned.  8.  But  this  grace  is  nothing  less  than  the  free  pardon  of  sin,  bestowed 
by  God  and  accepted  by  man.  II.  The  gladness  he  expebienced.  Incidentally 
it  throws  light  on  his  own  character.  TeU  me  what  gladdens  or  grieves  a  man  and 
I  wiU  teU  you  what  he  is.  The  prosperity  that  made  him  glad  was — 1.  Spiritual. 
Men  with  an  eye  and  a  taste  like  his  are  wanted  now.  We  are  carried  away  in  a 
mighty  tide  of  material  progress ;  but  the  gospel  is  a  more  precious  treasure  than 
all  our  inventions.  2.  Possessed  and  exercised  by  others.  There  is  no  finer 
feature  in  a  man's  character  than  the  tendency  to  rejoice  in  a  neighbour's  good. 
"  Charity  en vieth  not."  3.  Produced  by  others.  It  is  easy  for  a  minister  to  be 
glad  when  he  sees  his  own  work  prospering ;  but  it  requires  no  little  piety  to  rejoice 
over  another's.  But  God  teaches  us  that  converting  power  does  not  reside  in  an 
arm  of  flesh.  Unknown  refugees  founded  a  Church  in  Antioch  whUe  gifted  apostles 
seemed  to  be  spending  their  strength  in  vain.  4.  Heightened  by  the  contrasted 
masses  of  moral  misery  around.  6.  No  sentimental  or  selfish  emotion.  He  brought 
Saul  to  share  it.  HI.  The*  exhobtation  that  he  gave.  That  they  should  cleave 
to  the  Lord.  There  is  nothing  here  about  sacramental  grace,  the  true  Church,  or 
a  consecrated  priesthood.  In  primitive  Christianity  everything  was  made  to  depend 
on  personal  union  to  a  personal  Saviour.  There  is  mystery  here.  Yes,  and  I  have 
seen  a  huge  piece  of  iron  hanging  on  another  not  welded  or  glued,  but  clinging  with 
Buch  a  tenacity  that  it  could  bear  my  weight  and  its  own.  A  wire  charged  with  an 
electric  current  was  in  contact  with  its  mass,  and  hence  the  adhesion.  What  that 
wire  is  to  it,  love  is  to  us.  We  love  Him,  for  He  first  loved  us.  Those  who  would 
keep  a  man  close  to  God  by  brandishing  the  terrors  of  judgment  before  him,  turn 
the  wrong  pole  of  the  magnet  to  the  steel  and  thereby  repel  instead  of  attract.  {W. 
Amot,  D.D.)  The  exhortation  of  Barnabas: — I.  What  hb  saw.  "  The  grace  of 
God,"  and  wherever  that  grace  is  made  visible  there  we  are  to  recognise  a  brother. 
Augustine  said,  "  Where  Christ  is  there  is  the  Church."  True  1  but  where  is  Christ  ? 
Wherever  Christlike  men  manifest  a  life  drawn  from,  and  kindred  with,  His  life. 
And  so  we  say  where  the  grace  of  Christ  is  visible,  there  is  the  Church.  That  great 
truth  is  sinned  against  by  the  successors  of  the  more  Jewish  portion  of  that  Church 
who  sent  Barnabas  to  Antioch,  who  exalt  sacraments  and  priests  to  the  same 
place  as  the  Judaizers  did  the  rite  of  the  old  covenant.  The  attempt  is  about  as 
wise  as  to  try  to  measure  a  network  fine  enough  to  keep  back  a  stream.  The  true 
answer  to  all  that  assumption  which  confines  the  free  flow  of  the  water  of  life  to 
the  conduits  of  sacraments  and  orders,  and  will  only  allow  the  wind  that  bloweth 
where  it  listeth  to  make  music  in  the  pipes  of  their  organs,  is  simply  the  homely 
one  which  shivered  a  corresponding  theory  in  the  fair  open  mind  of  Barnabas.  It 
used  to  be  an  axiom  that  there  was  no  Ufe  in  the  sea  beyond  a  certain  Umit  of  a 
few  hundred  feet.  And  then  when  that  was  settled,  the  Challenger  put  down 
her  dredge  five  imles,  and  brought  up  healthy  and  good-sized  hving  things.  We 
have  all  been  too  much  accustomed  to  draw  arbitrary  limits  to  the  diffusion  of  the 
life  of  Christ  among  men.  U.  What  he  felt.  It  was  a  triumph  of  Christian 
principle  to  recognise  the  grace  of  God  under  new  forms,  and  in  so  strange  a  place. 
It  was  a  still  greater  triumph  to  hail  it  with  rejoicing.  We  are  apt  to  forget  the 
strength  of  the  convictions  which  these  Jewish  Christians  had  to  overcome.  Hence 
the  context  seems  to  consider  that  Barnabas's  gladness  needs  explanation,  and  so 
it  adds,  "  for  he  was  a  good  man,  fuU  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith."  And  there 
is  much  to  overcome  if  we  would  know  this  ChristUke  gladness.  Our  natural 
interest  in  the  well-being  of  our  own  Churches  makes  our  sympathies  flow  most 
deeply  in  denominational  channels.  And  then  come  in  abundance  of  less  worthy 
motives,  and  we  have  but  a  very  tepid  joy  in  anybody  else's  prosperity.  Let  us  set 
a  jealous  watch  over  our  hearts  that  self-absorption,  or  denominationalism,  or  envy 
do  not  make  the  sight  a  pain  instead  of  a  joy ;  and  let  us  remember  that  the  eye 
salve  which  will  purge  our  dim  sight  to  behold  the  grace  of  God  in  all  its  forms  is 
that  grace  itself.    lU.  Whaz  hb  said.    1.  The  exhortation  itseli.    Ihe  sum  of  all 


832  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

objective  religion  is  Christ — the  sum  of  all  subjective  religion  is  cleaving  to  Him. 
From  whatever  point  we  approach  Christianity,  it  all  resolves  itself  into  the  person 
of  Christ.  He  is  the  revelation  of  God ;  theology  properly  bo  called  is  but  the 
formulating  of  the  facts  which  He  gives  us.  He  is  the  perfect  exemplar  of  human- 
ity 1  Wrenched  away  from  Him,  Christian  moraUty  has  no  being.  He  is  the 
sacrifice  for  the  world,  the  salvation  of  which  flows  from  what  He  does,  and  not 
merely  from  what  He  taught,  or  was.  There  is  a  constant  tendency  to  separate 
the  results  of  Christ's  life  and  death,  and  unconsciously  to  make  these  the  sum  of 
our  religion  and  faith.  Therefore  it  is  well  to  mark  how  vividly  these  early  Chris- 
tains  apprehended  a  living  Lord  as  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  which  they  had  to 
grasp.  We  begin  to  be  Christians,  as  this  context  tells  us,  when  we  "  turn  to  the 
Lord."  We  continue  to  be  Christians,  as  Barnabas  reminded  these  beginners,  by 
"  cleaving  to  the  Lord."  Let  us  cleave  to  Him — (1)  By  continual  renewal  of  our 
-Irst  faith  in  Him.  The  longest  Une  may  be  conceived  of  as  produced  simply  by 
'•he  motion  of  its  initial  point.  So  our  progress  should  not  consist  in  leaving  our 
early  acts  of  faith  behind  us,  but  in  repeating  them  over  and  over  again  till  the 
joints  coalesce  in  one  unbroken  line  which  goes  straight  to  the  throne  and  heart 
of  Jesus.  As  in  some  great  symphony  the  theme  which  was  given  out  in  low  notes 
on  one  poor  instrument  recurs  over  and  over  again  embroidered  with  varying 
fcarmoniej,  and  unfolding  a  richer  music  till  it  swells  into  all  the  grandeur  of  the 
triumphau'i  «Jose,  so  our  lives  should  be  bound  into  a  unity,  and  in  their  unity 
bound  to  Chiist  by  the  constant  renewal  of  our  early  faith.  Each  moment  must  be 
united  to  Christ  by  its  own  act  of  faith,  or  it  wiU  be  separated  from  Him.  So 
living  in  the  LoiJ,  dying  in  the  Lord,  sleeping  in  Jesus,  we  shall  at  the  last  be 
found  in  Him  at  that  day,  and  shall  be  raised  up  together,  and  made  to  sit  together 
in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.  (2)  By  habitual  contemplation.  There  can  be 
no  real  continuous  closeness  of  intercourse  with  Him,  except  by  thought  ever 
recurring  to  Him  amidst  aU  the  tumult  of  our  busy  days.  The  Church  has  forgotten 
how  to  meditate.  Many  of  us  are  so  busy  thinking  about  Christianity  that  we 
have  lost  our  hold  of  Christ.  Cleave  to  the  Lord  by  habitual  play  of  meditative 
thought  on  the  treasures  hidden  in  His  name,  and  waiting  like  gold  in  the  quartz, 
to  be  the  prize  of  our  patient  sifting.  And  when  the  great  truths  embodied  in  Him 
stand  clear  before  us,  next  must  come  into  exercise  the  moral  side  of  faith,  the 
voluntary  act  of  trust,  the  making  our  own  of  the  blessings  which  He  holds  out  to 
us.  (3)  By  constant  outgoings  of  our  love  to  Him,  The  same  love  which  is  the 
bond  of  perfectness  between  man  and  man,  is  the  bond  between  us  and  Christ. 
Cold  natures  may  carp,  but  love  is  justified  of  her  children,  and  Christ  accepts  the 
homage  that  has  a  heart  in  it.  The  order  is  faith,  love,  obedience,  that  threefold 
cord  knits  men  to  Clirist  and  Christ  to  men.  For  the  understanding  a  continuous 
grasp  of  Him  bs  the  object  of  thought.  For  the  heart  a  continuous  out-going  to 
Him  as  the  object  of  our  love.  For  the  will  a  continuous  submission  to  Him  as  the 
Lord  of  our  obedience.  For  the  whole  nature  a  continuous  cleaving  to  Him  as  the 
object  of  our  faith  and  worship.  2.  Its  sufficiency.  If  Barnabas  had  been  like 
some  of  us,  he  would  have  said,  This  irregular  work  has  been  well  done,  but  there 
are  no  authorised  teachsrs  here.  The  first  thing  is  to  give  these  people  the  bless- 
ing of  bishops  and  priests.  Some  of  us  would  have  said,  A  good  work  has  been 
done,  but  these  people  are  terribly  ignorant.  The  best  thing  would  be  to  get  ready 
as  soon  as  possible  some  manual  of  Christian  doctrine.  Some  of  us  would  have 
said.  No  doubt  they  have  been  converted,  but  we  fear  there  has  been  too  much  of  the 
emotional  in  the  preaching.  Plain  practical  instruction  in  Christian  duty  is  the 
one  thing  they  want.  Barnabas  knew  better.  He  did  not  despise  organisation, 
nor  orthodoxy,  nor  practical  righteousness,  but  he  knew  that  all  three,  and  every- 
thing else  that  any  man  needed  for  his  perfecting,  would  come,  if  only  they  kept 
near  to  Christ,  and  that  nothing  else  was  of  any  use  if  they  did  not.  (1)  We  spend 
much  effort  in  perfecting  our  organisations,  and  I  have  not  a  word  to  say  against 
it.  But  heavier  machinery  needs  more  power  in  the  engine,  and  that  means  greater 
capacity  in  your  boilers  and  more  fire  in  your  furnace.  (2)  A  definite  theology  ia 
needful,  but  the  basis  of  all  theology  is  the  personal  possession  of  Him  who  is  the 
wisdom  of  God,  and  the  light  of  the  world.  (3)  Plain  straightforward  righteonsnesa 
and  every-day  morality  come  most  surely  when  a  man  is  keeping  close  to  Christ. 
The  same  life  is  strength  in  tbe  arm,  pliancy  in  the  fingers,  swiftness  in  the  foot, 
Ijyht  in  the  eye,  music  on  the  lips;  so  the  same  grace  is  Protean  in  its  forms,  and 
to  His  servants  who  trust  Him,  Christ  ever  says,  "  What  would  ye  that  I  should  do 
unto  you  ?    Be  it  even  as  thou  wilt."    The  same  mysterious  power  hves  in  the  swaying 


CHAP.  Xi]  THE  ACTS.  233 

branch,  and  in  the  veined  leaf,  and  in  the  blushing  clusters.  With  like  wondrous 
transformations  of  the  one  grace,  the  Lord  pours  Himself  into  our  spirits,  fiUing  aU 
needs  and  fitting  for  all  circumstances.  Therefore  for  us  all,  individuals  and 
Churches,  this  remains  the  prime  command.  With  purpose  of  heart  cleave  unto  the 
Lord.  (A.  Maclaren,  B.D.)  Visible  grace  : — Provide  things  honest  in  the  sight 
of  all  men.  Not  only  be  honest,  but  let  your  honesty  be  seen.  "A  city  that  is  set 
on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid."  "  Show  forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  hath  called  you." 
As  Bengel  remarks  in  connection  with  our  text:  "A  gem  should  not  merely  be  a 
£;em ;  it  should  be  properly  set  in  a  ring,  that  its  splendour  may  meet  the  eye." 
Exhorted  them  all,  that  with  purpose  of  heart  they  would  cleave  unto  the  Lord. — 
Cleaving  unto  the  Lord : — The  only  rational  religious  belief  is  that  goodness  is 
almighty,  and  the  great  Being,  who  comprehends  aU  goodness  in  Himself,  our 
Father.  We  owe  Him  everything,  for  He  hath  both  made  and  redeemed  us,  and 
we  should  cherish  towards  Him  the  devoted  affection  of  a  son  to  his  father,  such  as 
was  shown  in  the  following  story.  A  little  boy,  the  son  of  Sir  George  Staunton, 
was  with  his  father,  during  his  return  to  England,  on  the  deck  of  the  ship  Lion. 
The  father,  imagining  that  a  French  man-of-war  was  going  to  attack  them,  desired 
his  son  to  go  below.  "  My  father,  I  wOl  never  forsake  you,"  was  the  youth's  spirited 
and  affectionate  reply.  So,  when  God's  way  seems  the  path  of  danger,  we  should 
resolve  to  stand  to  it  at  all  cost.  Determined  purpose  of  heart: — The  Pastor  Jacob  of 
Oroomiah,  Persia,  writing  to  his  son,  in  Manchester,  narrates  the  following:  "  I  have  a 
young  Mohammedan  friend  whose  name  is  Koola  Bak.  For  nearly  a  year  and  a  half  he 
has  been  coming  to  my  house  to  hear  the  Word  of  God.  On  account  of  his  being 
BO  Christ-hke,  some  wicked  people  went  and  complained  to  their  Great  Moshtahed, 
or  priest.  He  was  taken  to  the  Moshtahed's  house  and  asked  what  was  his  faith. 
He  replied, '  In  Jesus  Christ.'  Upon  hearing  this  the  Moshtahed  rose  up  in  great 
rage  and  beat  him  with  his  stick  on  the  head.  He  again  asked  him  the  same 
question  three  times.  The  young  man  gave  the  same  reply  each  time.  He  was 
then  bound  upon  a  beam  and  beaten  by  three  servants  with  switches  until  the  blood 
gushed  out  of  his  back  and  feet.  Shortly  afterwards  the  young  man  came  to  my 
house  with  his  bleeding  body  and  told  me  all  about  it.  He  said  to  me  :  '  Pastor,  I 
will  not  give  up  Christ,  even  if  I  am  to  be  killed.  I  believe  that  He  is  my  Saviour, 
and  is  able  to  deliver  me  from  these  wicked  people,  who  try  to  torment  me  because 
of  my  belief  in  Jesus.'  A  few  days  after  this  incident  took  place,  the  Moshtahed 
Bent  a  gift  to  the  young  man  and  asked  his  pardon.  The  next  day  the  Moshtahed 
with  his  brother  visited  the  young  man's  house,  and  they  still  try  to  win  his 
heart,  but  he  boldly  said,  '  No,  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  forsake  Jesus,  in  whom 
I  have  believed  as  my  Eedeemer.'  So  they  left  him  and  went  their  way." 
Religious  persistency : — Barnabas  was  the  "  Son  of  Consolation."  But  exhortation  is 
as  needful  as  consolation,  and  he  could  stir  up  as  well  as  comfort.  He  knew  that 
it  was  not  sufficient  to  begin  weU  ;  it  is  the  end  that  proves  and  crowns  the  whole. 
I.  Thb  ATM  OF  THE  EXHOBTATioN.  Bamabas  urges  his  hearers  to  cleave  unto  the 
Lord.  The  exhortation  is  urgently  needed — 1.  Because  there  is  a  natural  tendency 
in  the  human  heart  to  cleave  to  inferior  things.  2.  Because  He  is  the  only  one  worthy 
of  our  regard.  He  is  the  only  Teacher,  Saviour,  Helper,  Protector.  The  only  Com- 
forter, for  He  is  the  God  of  all  comfort.  II.  The  chakacteb  of  the  duty.  "  With 
full  purpose  of  heart."  This  implies  thoroughness  and  persistency.  1.  Without 
the  heart  religion  is  a  poor  business.  So  in  anything  else.  Unless  the  affections 
and  purpose  are  enlisted  a  man  enters  upon  his  business  concerns  with  listlessness 
and  apathy.  2.  Without  the  heart  nothing  else  can  be  given.  It  is  principle  God 
looks  at.  Outward  actions  weigh  but  httle  with  Him.  But  it  is  here  "  full  purpose 
of  heart."  The  whole  soul  is  thrown  into  the  work.  It  is  not  a  divided  heart. 
{Homilist.)  Religious  steadfastnet$ : — I.  We  exhort  you  to  this  decision  and 
MANIFESTATION  OF  cHABACTEB.  «'  Clcavc  uuto  the  Lord,"  cousecTate  yourselves  to 
Him.  n.  We  exhort  you  to  adhebb  to  the  fundamental  tbuths  of  the  gospeii. 
"  Cleave  unto  the  Lord "  in  His  personal  character  as  revealed  in  the  sacred 
Scriptures.  HI.  We  exhort  you  to  cherish  a  spirit  of  chabity  to  all  who  diffeb. 
The  difference  of  Christians  on  minor  points  proves  the  truth  of  the  great  ones  on 
■which  they  are  agreed.  IV.  We  exhort  you  to  pbomotb  the  worship  of  God. 
Attend  to  private,  to  family,  and  to  public  worship.  V.  We  exhort  you  to 
vigorous  attempts  to  becoveb  binnebs.  (J.  Lie/child,  D.D.)  Cleaving  to 
the  Lord : — I.  The  exhortation.  1.  It  supposes  those  to  whom  it  is  directed 
to  be  already  entered  upon  a  religious  course  of  life.  2.  It  requires  the 
habitual  exercise  of  all  the  graces  of  the  Christian  life ;  the  constant  perf ormanct 


S34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

of  every  commanded  duty.  3.  It  requires  that  we  make  an  open  and  honest 
profession  of  our  adherence  to  the  Lord.  4.  It  requires  that  we  persevere  in  our 
adherence  to  the  Lord  to  the  end  of  our  hves.  We  must  hold  on  our  way,  and 
wax  stronger  and  stronger  as  we  proceed.  11.  Some  motives  and  aeguments.  1. 
That  the  same  reasons  which  at  first  determined  you  to  choose  the  ways  of  God, 
are  equally  forcible  for  inciting  you  to  persevere  in  them  to  the  end.  2.  That  all 
the  bribes  which  can  be  offered,  in  order  to  seduce  you  from  your  adherence  to  the 
Lord,  are  vain,  precarious,  and  unsatisfying.  3.  What  obligations  you  lie  under 
to  this  Lord  to  whom  you  are  exhorted  in  the  text,  to  "  cleave  with  purpose  of 
heart."  4.  That  this  duty,  although  difficult,  is  by  no  means  impracticable.  All 
necessary  aid  is  provided  for  you,  and  ready  to  be  conveyed  to  you  as  often  as  you 
shall  ask  it.  III.  Some  directions.  1.  Labour  to  have  your  minds  as  richly  fur- 
nished as  possible  with  true  Christian  knowledge.  2.  Besides  the  speculative 
knowledge  of  Divine  truths,  you  must  also  labour  to  acquire  an  inward  experience 
and  rehsh  of  them.  3.  If  you  would  cleave  with  steadfastness  unto  the  Lord, 
attend  constantly  to  the  inward  frame  and  temper  of  your  hearts.  Make  conscience 
of  watching  over  your  most  secret  thoughts.  4.  "  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear." 
Bemember  what  our  blessed  Lord  said  to  His  disciples,  "Without  Me  ye  can  do 
nothing."  A  holy  diffidence  of  ourselves  is  the  true  temper  of  a  Christian,  and  will 
both  serve  to  keep  us  out  of  the  way  of  temptation,  and  teach  us  to  act  with  the 
caution  of  men  who  perceive  their  danger  and  are  careful  to  shun  it.  5.  Avoid, 
as  much  as  possible,  the  fellowship  of  wicked  men.  6.  Beware  of  neglecting  the 
instrumental  duties  of  religion.  {R.  Walker.)  The  subjects  of  Divine  grace 
exhorted  to  cleave  unto  the  Lord: — I.  That  the  conversion  of  sinners  to 
THE  Lord  is  justly  ascribable  to  His  grace.  11.  That  where  the  oraob 
OF  God  is  enjoyed  it  will  be  seen  in  its  effects.  1.  All  who  profess  to 
enjoy  the  grace  of  God  should  be  careful  thus  to  show  it — On  principles  of 
prudence ;  that  their  own  eternal  salvation  may  be  secured  (2  Pet  i.  5-10).  On 
principles  of  piety ;  that  God  may  hereby  be  glorified  (Matt.  v.  16 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  11, 
12).  On  principles  of  benevolence  ;  that  their  weak  brethren  may  be  strengthened 
(Heb.  xiii.  13),  and  that  their  pastors  may  hereby  be  comforted  (1  Thess.  iii.  8;  3 
John  4).  As  an  incitement  to  holy  diligence,  on  this  generous  principle,  our 
text  teaches  us — IH.  That  when  the  grace  of  God  is  seen  it  affords 
PLEASURE  TO  WELL-DISPOSED  MINDS.  "  When  he  saw  the  grace  of  God,  he  was 
glad "  ;  and  his  joy  was  both  pious  and  pure.  1.  His  joy  on  this  occasion  was 
pious.  It  was  the  joy  of  a  saint  excited  by  seeing  the  grace  of  God  manifested,  and 
sinners  saved.  He  was  glad,  as  " a  good  man,"  or  a  lover  of  mankind;  because 
hereby  many  were  benefited,  being  raised  to  a  state  of  safety,  happiness,  and 
honour  (Rom.  v.  1 ;  Eph.  ii.  1-6) ;  and  the  welfare  of  the  civil  state  was  also 
promoted  (Prov.  xiv.  32).  He  was  glad,  as  a  holy  man ;  for  he  was  "  full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  Hence  he  was  glad,  because  the  felicity  of  angels  was  hereby  aug- 
mented (Luke  XV.  10).  Christ  was  hereby  most  pleasingly  satisfied  (Isa.  liii.  10, 
11)  ;  and  God  was  hereby  glorified  (Isa.  Ixi.  1-3).  He  was  glad,  as  a  faithful 
man  ;  for  he  '*  was  full  of  faith."  Hence,  he  confidently  expected  the  fulfilment  of 
God's  Word  (Psa.  ii.  8).  He  beheld  in  these  converted  Gentiles  the  earnest  of 
Christ's  universal  dominion,  and  could  exclaim  with  David  (Psa.  Ixxii.  19,  20).  2. 
His  joy  on  this  occasion  was  pure.  He  was  glad,  though  the  subjects  of  this  grace 
were  Gentile  strangers  ;  it  was  not  the  joy  of  bigotry  :  and  though  he  was  not  the 
instrument  of  their  conversion,  it  was  not  the  joy  of  self-complacency.  3.  His  joy 
on  this  occasion  was  exemplary ;  worthy  of  our  imitation.  Wherever  the  grace  of  God 
is  seen  we  should  rejoice :  without  bigotry,  this  is  unchristian  (Eph.  v.  24),  and 
without  envy,  for  this  is  devilish  (James  iii.  14-16).  Our  text  teaches  us — IV. 
That  cleaving  unto  the  Lord  is  the  indispensable  duty  of  all  Christian 
CONVERTS.  1.  By  the  Lord  is  meant  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  our  Guide 
(Psa.  xlviii.  14),  our  Sovereign  (Matt,  xxiii.  8),  our  Strength  (Psa.  xlvi.  1),  and  our 
Foundation  (Isa.  xxviii.  16).  2.  It  is  the  duty  of  Christian  converts  to  cleave  unto 
the  Lord.  Cleave  unto  Him — By  habitual  attention  (Acts  iii.  22,  23),  by  persever- 
ing obedienc.  (Heb.  v.  9  ;  Psa.  cvi.  3),  by  importunate  prayer  (Heb.  iv.  16),  and 
by  entire  dependence  (1  Pet.  ii.  5,  6 ;  Jude  21,  22).  3.  All  Christian  converts 
should  thus  cleave  unto  Him.  All,  of  every  age,  of  every  religious  attainment, 
and  of  every  station  in  the  Church  (John  xv.  6  ;  Heb,  iii.  12).  4.  We  should  thus 
cleave  unto  the  Lord  "  with  purpose  of  heart."  This  should  and  must  be  the 
object  of  our  deliberate  choice  (Deut.  xxx.  19,  20),  of  our  steadfast  resolution  (Josh, 
xxiv.  15),  and  of  our  incessant  care  (1  John  ii.  28  ;  Phil.  iii.  16).     Our  text  teacbe» 


OEAP.  XI.]  THE  ACTS.  235 

as — V.  That  aftectionate  exhortation  is  coNDncTivE  to  the  steadfast  perse- 
verance OF  BEiiiEVKRS  IN  Christ.  "  He  exhoited  them,"  &c.  Here  we  may 
observe — 1.  To  whom  this  exhortation  should  be  addressed.  As  cleaving  unto  the 
Lord  is  a  duty  required  of  all  Christians,  so  we  find  all  of  every  description 
exhorted  in  the  oracles  of  God.  Private  Christians  are  urged  to  this  (John  xv.  4 ; 
Col.  ii.  6) ;  and  pubUc  characters  are  also  thus  stimulated  to  exertion  (1  Tim.  iv.  16). 

2.  By  whom  this  exhortation  should  be  employed.  It  should  be  given — By  all 
those  to  whom  the  care  of  souls  is  committed  (1  Cor.  xiv.  3  ;  Col.  i.  28),  and  by  all 
private   Christians   in   their    mutual   communications   (Heb.   iii.  13,  x.  24,  25). 

3.  How  this  exhortation  should  be  enforced.  It  should  be  urged  by  the  consider- 
ation of  our  own  total  insufl&ciency  (Jer.  x.  23  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  5),  of  Christ's  aU-suffi- 
ciency  (Heb.  vii.  25),  of  Satan's  maUce,  who  purposes  and  seeks  to  destroy  us  (1 
Pet.  V.  8,  9),  of  the  dreadful  evils  to  which  apostacy  would  expose  us  (Heb.  x.  38 ; 
Bev.  iii.  11 ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9),  and  of  the  blessings  with  which  God  is  engaged  to 
crown  uufainting  perseverance  (Gal.  vi.  9  ;  2  Pet.  i.  10,  11).  Converts  exhorted : 
— Barnabas  knew  that  it  required  quite  as  much  •'  grace  "  to  go  on  as  it  does  to 
begin.  And  he  knew  how  only  they  could  secure  it,  by  cleaving  unto  the  Lord. 
L  The  importance  of  a  purpose.  When  there  are  religious  feeUngs,  and  con- 
victions, the  great  thing  is  to  gather  them  all  up  to  some  distinct  object.  This 
♦'  purpose  "  must  not  be  only  of  the  deliberate  intention  of  the  mind,  but  a  "  purpose 
of  the  heart."  But  then  feeUng  needs  a  focus.  If  you  wish  to  keep  a  thought, 
turn  that  thought  into  action,  else  it  would  all  evaporate.  Give  it  an  object,  and 
it  will  live.  The  question  then  is,  what  fixed  "purpose  of  heart"  can  we  make 
for  ourselves  to-day  ?  I  advise  you  to  determine — 1.  That  henceforth  it  shall  appear 
to  all  men  "  whose  you  are  and  whom  you  serve."  2.  That  your  besetting  sin — 
temper,  or  selfishness,  or  indolence  shall  be  conquered.  3.  That  you  will  be  more  real 
and  earnest  in  your  private  devotions.  4.  That  you  will  throw  more  love  into  daily 
life,  and  be  more  attentive  to  all  home  duties.  5.  That  you  wiU  exercise  greater 
care,  and  more  regularity,  in  your  rehgious  duties.  6.  That  you  will  undertake 
some  new  work  for  God  ;  become  a  Sunday-school  teacher,  or  a  district  visitor,  &c. 
Now  if  you  would  live  for  any  such  purpose,  you  must  be  much  in  prayer.  Put 
less  trust  in  your  own  good  intentions.  Be  looking  up  for  sustaining  grace,  for 
the  great  gift  of  perseverance.  II.  The  great  purpose  of  Christian  life  is  to 
CLEAVE  unto  THE  LoRD.  1.  This  means  to  be  feeling  that  He  is  your  very  Hfe ; 
and  to  be  always  trying  to  make  Him  closer,  and  closer.  It  is  God's  word  for 
marriage  :  "A  man  shall  cleave  unto  his  wife."  2.  Only  remember  the  power  of 
this  *' cleaving  "  comes  not  from  you  who  "cleave,"  but  from  Him  who  all  the 
while  draws  and  holds  you  to  the  "  cleaving."  He  has  "  apprehended,"  i.e.,  "laid 
hold  of  you,"  that  you  may  "  lay  hold  "  on  Him.  3.  Meanwhile,  be  very  jealous  of 
anything  coming  in  to  separate  you  for  a  moment,  for  that  moment  that  you  are 
separated  from  Christ  your  soul  dies !  4.  But  do  not  be  content  even  with  mere 
nearness.  There  must  be  oneness.  If  you  are  really  a  behever,  you  are  one  with 
the  Christ,  just  as  any  member  in  your  body  is  at  this  moment  one  with  your  head. 
And,  oh  1  what  life,  strength,  safety,  heaven  is  here.  Your  life  is  in  Him.  WJiere 
you  are,  at  this  moment,  He  is.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  New  disciples  admonished : 
— To  cleave  to  the  Lord  is — 1.  To  adhere  to  Him  as  the  Eevealer  of  the  Truth,  and 
to  the  Truth  as  revealed  by  Him.  2.  To  make  Him  the  object  of  our  constant 
faith.  3.  To  abide  in  His  commandments.  4.  To  follow  His  example,  who  went 
about  doing  good  and  bore  His  Cross.  6.  To  abide  in  Him  who  is  the  fountain  of 
grace  and  the  Giver  of  the  Spirit.  6.  To  cling  to  Him  as  our  Portion  and  Happi- 
ness. {J.  W.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Cleaving  to  the  Lord : — At  the  ocean-side,  where 
cliffs  jut  out  to  the  waves,  certain  molluscs  may  be  found  sticking  tightly  to  the 
rocks.  Each  mollusc  clings  so  tenaciously  that  the  concussion  of  the  waves  can- 
not smite  it  off.  The  secret  of  its  hold  is  that  the  moUusc  is  empty.  If  it  were 
fiUed  either  with  flesh  or  with  air,  it  would  drop  off  immediately.  This  beautifully 
illustrates  the  condition  of  every  sincere,  humble,  conscientious  believer,  who  has 
been  emptied  of  self,  and  therefore  clings,  by  a  Divine  law  of  adhesion,  closely  to  the 
Eock  of  Ages.  If  he  should  become  puffed  with  pride  and  self-conceit,  or  gorged 
with  fleshly  indulgence,  he  would  yield  to  the  waves  of  temptation  and  be  swept 
away. 

Ver.  24.  Por  lie  was  a  gooi.  man. — TJu  fea^t  of  St.  Barnabas  the  apostle :  toler- 
ance of  religious  error : — The  text  says  that  "  he  was  a  good  man,  fuU  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  of  faith."    This  praise  of  goodness  is  explained  by  his  very  name. 


^6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  tu 

Barnabas,  "the  Son  of  Consolation,"  which  was  given  him,  as  it  appears,  to  mark 
his  character  of  kindness,  gentleness,  considerateness,  warmth  of  heart,  compassion, 
and  munificence.  His  acts  answer  to  this  account  of  him.  The  first  we  hear  of 
him  is  his  selling  some  land  which  was  his,  and  giving  the  proceeds  to  the 
apostles,  to  distribute  to  bis  poorer  brethren.  The  next  notice  of  him  sets  before 
ns  a  second  deed  of  kindness,  of  as  amiable,  though  of  a  more  private  character. 
•'  When  Saul  was  come  to  Jerusalem,  he  assayed  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples ; 
but  they  were  all  afraid  of  him,  and  believed  not  that  he  was  a  disciple.  But 
Barnabas  took  him  and  brought  him  to  the  apostles,  and  declared  how  he  had  seen 
the  Lord  in  the  way,  and  that  He  had  spoken  to  him,  and  how  he  had  preached 
boldly  at  Damascus,  in  the  name  of  Jesus."  Next,  he  is  mentioned  in  the  text, 
and  still  with  commendation  of  the  same  kind.  How  had  he  shown  that  "  he  was 
a  good  man  "  ?  by  going  on  a  mission  of  love  to  the  first  converts  at  Antioch.  On 
the  other  hand,  on  two  occasions  his  conduct  is  scarcely  becoming  an  apostle,  as 
instancing  somewhat  of  that  infirmity  which  uninspired  persons  of  his  peculiar 
character  frequently  exhibit.  Both  are  cases  of  indulgence  towards  the  faults  of 
others,  yet  in  a  different  way  ;  the  one,  an  over-easiness  in  a  matter  of  doctrine,  the 
other,  in  a  matter  of  conduct.  With  all  his  tenderness  for  the  Gentiles,  yet  on  one 
occasion  he  could  not  resist  indulging  the  prejudices  of  some  Judaizing  brethren, 
who  came  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch.  Peter  first  was  carried  away  ;  before  they 
came,  "  he  did  eat  with  the  Gentiles,  but  when  they  were  come,  he  withdrew,  and 
separated  himself,  fearing  them  which  were  of  the  circumcision.  And  the  other 
Jews  dissembled  likewise  with  him ;  insomuch,  that  Barnabas  also  was  carried 
away  with  their  dissimulation."  The  other  instance  was  his  indulgent  treatment 
of  Mark,  his  sister's  son,  which  occasioned  the  quarrel  between  him  and  St.  Paul. 
"Barnabas  determined  to  take  with  them,"  on  their  apostolic  journey,  "John, 
whose  surname  was  Mark.  But  Paul  thought  not  good  to  take  him  with  tV)em,  who 
departed  from  them  from  Pamphyha,  and  went  not  with  them  to  the  work."  He  is 
an  ensample  and  warning  to  us,  not  only  as  showing  us  what  we  ought  to  be,  but 
as  evidencing  how  the  highest  gifts  and  graces  are  corrupted  in  our  sinful  nature, 
if  we  are  not  diligent  to  walk  step  by  step,  according  to  the  light  of  God's  com- 
mandments. Are  we  sufficiently  careful  to  do  what  is  right  and  just,  rather  than 
what  is  pleasant?  do  we  clearly  understand  our  professed  principles,  and  do  we 
keep  to  them  under  temptation  ?  The  history  of  St.  Barnabas  wiU  help  us  to 
answer  this  question  honestly.  Now  I  fear  we  lack  altogether,  what  he  lacked  in 
certain  occurrences  in  it,  firmness,  manliness,  godly  severity.  I  fear  it  must  be 
confessed,  that  our  kindness,  instead  of  being  directed  and  braced  by  principle,  too 
often  becomes  languid  and  unmeaning ;  that  it  is  exerted  on  improper  objects,  and 
out  of  season,  and  thereby  is  uncharitable  in  two  ways,  indulging  those  who  should 
be  chastised,  and  preferring  their  comfort  to  those  who  are  really  deserving.  We 
are  over-tender  in  dealing  with  sin  and  sinners.  We  are  deticient  in  jealous 
custody  of  the  revealed  Truths  which  Christ  has  left  us.  We  allow  men  to  speak 
against  the  Church,  its  ordinances,  or  its  teaching,  without  remonstrating  with 
them.  To  be  kind  is  their  one  principle  of  action  ;  and,  when  they  find  offence 
taken  at  the  Church's  creed,  they  begin  to  think  how  they  may  modify  or  curtail  it, 
under  the  same  sort  of  feeling  as  would  lead  them  to  be  generous  in  a  money 
transaction,  or  to  accommodate  another  at  the  price  of  personal  inconvenience. 
Not  understanding  that  their  rehgious  privileges  are  a  trust  to  be  handed  on  to 
posterity,  a  sacred  property  entailed  upon  the  Christian  family,  and  their  own  in 
enjoyment  rather  than  in  possession,  they  act  the  spendthrift,  and  are  lavish 
of  the  goods  of  others.  Undoubtedly,  even  the  best  specimens  of  these 
men  are  deficient  in  a  due  appreciation  of  the  Christian  mysteries,  and  of 
their  own  responsibility  in  preserving  and  transmitting  them ;  yet,  some  of 
them  are  such  truly  "good"  men,  so  amiable  and  feeling,  so  benevolent  to  the 
poor,  and  of  such  repute  among  all  classes,  in  short,  fulfil  so  excellently  the  office 
of  shining  like  lights  in  the  world,  and  witnesses  of  Him  "  who  went  about  doing 
good,"  that  those  who  most  deplore  their  failing,  will  still  be  most  desirous  of  ex- 
cusing them  personally,  while  they  feel  it  a  duty  to  withstand  them.  Such  is  the 
defect  of  mind  suggested  to  us  by  the  instances  of  imperfection  recorded  of  St. 
Barnabas  ;  it  will  be  more  clearly  understood  by  contrasting  him  with  St.  John. 
Now  see  in  what  he  differed  from  Barnabas ;  in  uniting  charity  with  a  firm  main- 
tenance of  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  So  far  was  his  fervour  and  exuberance 
of  charity  from  interfering  with  his  zeal  for  God,  that  rather,  the  more  he  loved 
men,  the  more  he  desired  to  bring  before  them  the  great  unchangeable  verities  ta 


CHAP.  XL]  THE  ACTS.  83T 

•which  they  must  sabmit,  if  they  would  see  life,  and  on  which  a  weak  indulgence 
suffers  them  to  shut  their  eyes.  He  loved  the  brethren,  but  he  •'  loved  them  in  the 
Truth"  (3  John  1).  Strictness  and  tenderness  had  no  "sharp  contention  "  in. 
the  breast  of  the  beloved  disciple ;  they  found  their  perfect  union,  yet  distinct 
exercise,  in  the  grace  of  charity,  which  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  whole  law.  I  wish 
I  saw  any  prospect  of  this  element  of  zeal  and  holy  sternness  springing  up  among 
us,  to  temper  and  give  character  to  the  languid,  unmeaning  benevolence  which  we 
misname  Christian  love.  I  have  no  hope  of  my  country  tiUI  see  it.  Many  schools 
of  religion  and  ethics  are  to  be  found  among  us,  and  they  all  profess  to  magnify, 
in  one  shape  or  other,  what  they  consider  the  principle  of  love ;  but  what  they 
lack  is  a  firm  maintenance  of  that  characteristic  of  the  Divine  nature,  which,  in 
accommodation  to  our  infirmity,  is  named  by  St.  John  and  his  brethren  the  wrath 
of  God.  Regarding  thus  "  the  goodness"  only,  and  not  "  the  severity  of  God,"  no 
wonder  that  they  ungird  their  loins  and  become  effeminate  ;  no  wonder  that  their 
ideal  notion  of  a  perfect  Church  is  a  Church  which  lets  every  one  go  on  his  way, 
and  disclaims  any  right  to  pronounce  an  opinion,  much  less  inflict  a  censure  on 
religious  error.  But  those  who  think  themselves  and  others  in  risk  of  an  eternal 
curse  dare  not  be  thus  indulgent.  Here,  then,  lies  our  want  at  the  present  day,  for 
this  we  must  pray — ^that  a  reform  may  come  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias. 
Then  only  can  we  prosper  (under  the  blessing  and  grace  of  Him  who  is  the  Spirit 
both  of  love  and  of  truth),  when  the  heart  of  Paul  is  vouchsafed  to  us,  to  withstand 
even  Peter  and  Barnabas,  if  ever  they  are  overcome  by  mere  human  feelings,  to 
"  know  henceforth  no  man  after  the  flesh,"  to  put  away  from  us  sister's  son,  or 
nearer  relative,  to  relinquish  the  sight  of  them,  the  hope  of  them,  and  the  desire  of 
them,  when  He  commands,  who  raises  up  friends  even  to  the  lonely,  il  they  trust 
in  Him,  and  will  give  us  "  within  His  walla  a  name  better  than  of  sons  and  of 
daughters,  an  everlasting  name  that  shall  not  be  cut  off."  {J.  R.  Newman.)  A 
good  man ; — Has — I.  A  good  cbeed.  Divine  truth  is  the  basis  of  all  holy  and  devoted 
life.  A  good  man  has  just  views  of  Deity,  of  the  method  of  salvation,  of  the  present 
life,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come.  II.  A  qood  heabt.  It  is  not  possessed  as 
natural  to  himself.  The  declaration  with  respect  to  the  human  heart  is  that  it  is 
"deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked."  We  require,  therefore,  to 
have  it  renewed.  And,  hence,  the  promise  under  both  Testaments  is,  that  God  will 
take  away  the  heart  of  stone  and  give  the  heart  of  flesh — that  is.  He  will  give  ua 
new  dispositions ;  He  wiE  reclaim  us  from  our  corrupt  affections.  Hence,  therefore, 
we  are  said  to  be  bom  again,  to  have  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  of  which  Barnabas 
was  fulL  III.  A  GOOD  lepb.  The  Christian's  life  is  essentially  right.  It  is  governed 
by  the  fear  of  God ;  it  is  moved  by  love  to  Himself ;  and  it  is  dedicated  to  the 
glory  of  His  name.  {The  Pulpit.)  What  a  good  man  is,  and  how  he  becomes  so  : 
— ^All  words  describing  moral  excellence  tend  to  deteriorate,  just  as  bright  metal 
rusts  by  exposure,  and  coins  become  illegible  by  use.  So  it  comes  to  pass  that 
any  decent  man,  with  an  easy  temper,  and  a  dash  of  frankness  is  christened 
with  this  title  "  good."  The  Bible  is  more  chary.  Christ  rebuked  a  man  for 
calling  Him  good,  because  he  did  so  oat  of  mere  conventional  politeness.  But  here 
we  have  the  picture  in  the  Scripture  gallery,  catalogued  "He  was  a  good  man." 
Note — ^I.  The  sobt  op  man  whom  the  Judge  wiijL  oalii  good.  1.  Barnabas  was 
a  Levite  of  Cyprus.  A  Jew  who  had  so  come  in  contact  with  foreigners  that  many 
a  prejudice  was  beaten  out  of  him.  We  first  hear  of  him  as  taking  a  share  in  the 
burst  of  brotherly  love,  so  as  to  entail  an  after  life  of  manual  labour.  Next,  when 
the  older  Christians  were  suspicious  of  Saul,  Barnabas,  with  that  generosity  which 
often  sees  deepest,  was  the  first  to  cast  the  asgis  of  the  protection  of  his  recognition 
round  him.  In  like  manner  here,  when  Christianity  developed  in  a  suspicious 
direction,  Barnabas  was  sent,  and  being  a  "good  man  "he  saw,  and  rejoiced  in 
goodness  in  others.  The  new  conditions  led  him  to  enhst  Saul's  services,  to  engage 
with  him  in  missionary  service,  and  then,  without  a  murmur,  to  allow  his  junior 
colleague  to  take  the  first  place.  Then  came  the  quarrel  in  which  he  lost  his 
friend,  and  we  hear  of  him  no  more.  2.  Note  the  lessons.  (1)  That  the  tap  root 
of  all  goodness  is  reference  to  God  and  obedience  to  Him.  Not  that  nothing  is 
good  that  is  done  without  reference  to  God,  but  the  noblest  deed  done  without  this 
reference  lacks  nobleness.  {2}  That  the  truest  goodness  is  the  suppression  of  self 
— a  characteristic  of  the  whole  Life  of  Barnabas.  (3)  That  the  further  traits  of 
character  are  pre-eminent  in  Christian  goodness.  All  this  man's  virtues  were  of 
the  meek  and  gracious  sort,  which  make  but  a  poor  show  by  the  side  of  some  of 
the  tawdry  splendours  which  the  vulgar  world  caUs  virtues.    A  thrush  or  a  black. 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

bird  is  but  a  soberly  clad  creature  by  the  aide  of  paroquets,  but^the  one  has  a  song, 
and  the  other  only  a  screech.  So  there  is  comfort  for  us  commonplace  people. 
We  may  be  little  violets,  if  we  cannot  be  flaunting  tiger  lilies.  4.  That  true  good- 
ness does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  falling.  The  Bible  is  frank  in  telling  us  of 
the  imperfections  of  the  best.  Often  imperfections  are  exaggerations  of  cha- 
racteristic goodness.  Never  let  gentleness  fall  away  like  badly  made  jelly  into  a 
trembling  heap,  and  never  let  strength  gather  itself  into  a  repulsive  attitude.  But 
remember  that  only  One  could  say,  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of  sin."  II. 
The  Divine  helpee  who  makes  men  good.  1.  This  Helper  is  not  merely  an 
influence  but  a  Person,  who  not  only  helps  from  without,  but  so  enters  that  their 
whole  nature  is  saturated  with  Him.  2.  Strange  language,  but  does  not  the  ex- 
perience of  every  man  who  has  tried  to  make  himself  good  show  its  necessity? 
Think  of  what  is  needed  to  make  us  good — the  strengthening  of  the  will  which  we 
cannot  brace  sufficiently  by  any  tonic  or  support  we  know  of ;  consider  the  resis- 
tance with  which  we  have  to  cope  from  our  passions,  tastes,  habits,  occupations, 
friends,  &c.  You  have  got  the  wolf  by  the  ears  for  a  moment,  but  your  hands  will 
ache  presently  in  holding  him,  and  what  then  ?  Ah,  you  need  a  Divine  Helper,  who 
will  dwell  in  your  hearts  and  strengthen  your  wills  to  what  is  good,  and  suppress 
your  inclinations  of  evil.  3.  The  great  promise  of  the  gospel  is  precisely  this.  The 
first  word  is  "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,"  the  second,  "  Arise  and  walk."  The 
gift  of  pardon  is  meant  to  be  introductory  to  what  Christ  calls  emphatically  "  the 
gift  of  God,"  the  fountain  of  living  streams  of  holy  Ufe  and  noble  deeds.  He  who 
is  good  must  surely  delight  in  seeing  us  good,  and  must  be  able  to  turn  us  into  His 
own  likeness.  4.  "  Full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  as  a  vessel  might  be  to  its  brim  of 
golden  wine.  Does  that  describe  you  ?  Full !  A  dribbling  drop  or  two  in  the 
bottom  of  the  jar :  whose  fault  is  it?  Why  with  that  mighty  rushing  wind  to  full 
our  sails  should  we  be  lying  in  sickly  calms  ?  Why  with  those  tongues  of  fire 
should  we  be  cowering  over  grey  ashes  ?  Why  with  that  great  tide  should  we  be 
like  dry  watercourses  ?  III.  How  that  Divine  Helper  comes  to  men.  "  Full  of 
.  .  .  faith."  1.  No  goodness  without  the  Spirit,  no  Spirit  without  faith  in  Christ. 
If  you  open  a  chink  the  water  will  come  in.  If  you  trust  in  Christ  He  will  give  you 
the  new  life  of  His  Spirit.  2.  The  measure  in  which  we  possess  the  power  that 
makes  us  good  depends  on  ourselves.  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide  and  I  will  fill  it." 
You  may  have  as  much  of  God  as  you  want,  and  as  little  as  you  will.  The 
measure  of  your  faith  will  determine  at  once  the  measure  of  your  goodness,  and  of 
your  possession  of  the  Spirit  that  makes  good.  Just  as  when  the  prophet  miracu- 
lously increased  the  oil  in  the  cruse,  the  stream  flowed  as  long  as  they  brought 
vessels,  and  stayed  when  there  were  no  more ;  so  long  as  we  open  our  hearts  for  the 
reception  the  gift  wiU  not  be  withheld,  but  God  will  not  let  it  ran  like  water  spilled 
on  the  ground.  [A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  moral  sympathies  of  a  good  man: — It  is 
interesting  to  distinguish  the  historic  names  of  the  Church,  and  to  recognise  the 
forms  of  greatness  that  we  associate  with  them.  As  were  Peter  and  Paul  and  John 
in  the  apostoUc  age — men  distinctively  practical,  intellectual,  and  spiritual,  so  it 
has  been  in  every  age  since.  The  Church  has  had  its  practical  workers,  men  full 
of  spiritual  earnestness  and  power — its  dauntless  and  fervid  preachers,  its  Chrysos- 
toms,  F6nelons,  Whitefields,  Baxters,  Wesleys  ;  its  apologists,  its  men  of  broad  in- 
tellectual views,  its  teachers,  its  controversialists,  its  Augustines,  Luthers,  Pascals, 
Butlers,  Chalmerses.  And  it  has  had  its  contemplative,  spiritual  men — men 
full  of  goodness,  and  practical  sohcitude,  charity  in  them  triumphantly  reigning 
over  knowledge,  and  tongues,  and  prophesying.  Such  were  Bernard,  F^nelon, 
Melanchthon,  Fletcher  of  Madeley,  Watts,  and  Doddridge.  In  this  latter  class  we 
should  assign  a  place  to  Barnabas.  Note — I.  The  evangelist's  idea  of  a  "  good 
man."  He  evidently  means  more  than  that  he  was  merely  a  good-natured  man,  and 
more  than  that  he  was  simply  a  virtuous  man.  He  was  good  in  the  sense  in  which 
the  work  was  good  ;  himself  a  converted,  a  spiritual  man ;  good  in  the  sense  of 
being  "  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  faith."  In  the  highest  and  scriptural  sense  of 
the  term,  no  man  can  be  good  who  is  unspiritual.  A  man's  goodness  must  regard 
God  as  well  as  man  ;  spiritual  obligations  as  well  as  social  ones.  The  most  moral 
imperatively  needs  conversion  ;  for  what  is  conversion  but  the  awakening  in  a  man 
of  the  thought  of  God  ;  the  quickening  in  him  of  the  love  of  God;  the  producing 
within  him  of  sympathy  with  God  ;  the  restoration  of  him  to  the  image  of  God  ;  the 
begetting  within  him  of  a  feeling  of  practical  gratitude  to  God,  which  makes  him  do 
everything  to  please  and  to  glorify  God  ?  A  man  may  be  very  virtuous,  and  yet  be 
utterly  godless.     As  such  he  is  only  half  a  good  man.     The  "  faith  "  which  is 


«HA».  n.]  TEE  ACTS.  239 

attributed  to  Barnabas  was  his  spiritual  recognition  and  reference ;  he  "  walked  by 
faith,  not  by  eight";  Uved  ever  ••As  in  the  Great  Taskmaster's  eye";  did  all 
things  with  a  spiritual  reference,  and  to  a  spiritual  end.  A  man  can  preach 
jnly  as  he  believes,  and  he  will  preach  vividly  or  dully,  tamely  or  earnestly, 
in  proportion  as  he  believes.    II.  It  was  in  vibtue  op  this  eminent  spieituai. 

GOODNESS   THAT     HE     BEJOICED    IN    THE     WOEK    WHICH    HE     SAW     GOING    ON.       It    WaS 

contrary  to  his  national  and  dispensational  theories ;  it  shocked  many  of  his 
prejudices ;  his  instructions  were  to  discourage,  if  not  prohibit  it ;  but  the 
spiritual  sympathies  of  the  saint  were  too  strong  for  the  notions  of  the  theolo- 
gian, for  the  proprieties  of  the  ecclesiast,  for  the  dignity  of  the  commissioner.  He 
sees  the  manifest  work  of  grace ;  and  who  is  he  that  he  is  to  gainsay  it.  He  is 
learning  that  our  proprieties  are  not  always  God's  methods ;  that  God  often  chooses 
uncanonised  ways  and  imconsecrated  agents  to  do  the  mightiest  things.  The  work 
appeals  to  the  good  man's  heart ;  it  touches  his  spiritual  sympathies.  He  sees 
sinners  converted,  however  irregularly;  he  "sees  the  grace  of  God,  and  he  is 
glad."  And  should  we,  were  we  men  of  holier  hearts,  of  stronger  spiritual 
sympathies,  have  so  much  difficulty  with  our  ecclesiastical  theories  and  proprieties  ? 
li  our  piety  were  more  fervent,  we  should  more  vividly  appreciate  the  precious- 
ness  of  men's  souls,  and  the  unspeakable  blessing  of  their  salvation ;  and  in  our 
joy  over  the  fact  we  should  scarcely  care  to  ask  who  had  done  it.  Wherever  we 
saw  a  spiritual  work  done,  there  we  should  recognise  God's  worker,  and  rejoice 
over  spiritual  conversion  by  whomsoever  effected.  If  we  be  good  as  Barnabas  was 
good,  we  shall  rejoice  with  his  joy  whenever  we  see  what  he  saw.    IH.  The 

fiPIBITUAL  GOODNESS  WHICH  LED  BaENABAS  TO  EEJOICE  IN  THE  GOOD  THAT  HAD  ALBEADX 
BEEN     DONE,     LED    HIM|   ALSO    TO    CO-OPEBATE    WITH    IT ;   AND    THUS     "  MUCH    PEOPLE 

WEBB  ADDED  TO  THE  LoED."  He  found  a  work  of  conversion  going  on  ;  and  in- 
stead of  contenting  himself  with  mere  commendation,  he  gave  himself  heartily  to 
co-operate  with  these  irregular  men  and  their  irregular  work.  He  had  energies  to 
contribute,  an  influence  to  exert.  Who  was  he  that  he  should  stand  aloof  when 
God  Himself  was  working?  If  it  be  ours  to  work,  in  the  mere  peradventure  that 
God  will  work  with  us,  assuredly  we  may  not  without  culpability  withhold  our 
effort  when  He  is  palpably  working.  Who  but  He  can  awaken  solicitudes  about 
salvation,  and  out  of  the  sinner  evolve  a  saint  ?  And  when  these  results  are  seen, 
we  need  be  in  no  doubt  whose  work  they  are.  And  eagerly  and  fervently  should 
■we  strive  for  the  honour  of  working  with  Him.  AH  good  men  do  this.  They  will 
turn  away  from  your  strifes  of  doctrines  and  modes ;  but  demonstrate  your  devout- 
ness  by  your  spiritual  achievement,  and  then,  just  in  proportion  to  their  goodness, 
they  will  come  and  help  you.  IV.  The  goodness  op  Baenabas  was  the  cause  op 
HIS  SUCCESS.  And  so  it  wiU  ever  be.  Men  are  not  converted  by  demonstrations  of 
the  gospel,  but  by  inspirations  of  it.  Men  are  never  reasoned  into  spiritual  life ; 
they  are  quickened  into  it.  We  must  ourselves  be  what  we  seek  to  make  others. 
We  can  raise  them  no  higher  than  our  own  level.  I  am  not  faithful  to  Christ 
merely  because  I  eloquently  and  urgently  preach  His  gospel ;  He  demands  of  me 
that  I  be  what  I  preach — His  "living  epistle,  known  and  read  of  aU  men." 
Learning  may  be  desirable,  eloquence  needful ;  but  piety  is  essential :  it  ia 
the    basis   and    power    of  aU    spiritual    work.       (H.    Allon,  D.D.)  Charac- 

teristics of  the  good  man : — A  good  man  is — I.  A  conveeted  man.  •'  In  me,  that 
is,  in  my  flesh,  dweUeth  no  good  thing."  "  There  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not 
one."  These  statements  are  not  inconsistent  with  the  fact,  that  there  is  a  natural 
conscience  in  man,  and  that  there  are  amiable  feelings  urging  to  noble  and  generous 
actions ;  nor  can  it  be  denied  that,  apart  from  the  power  of  Divine  grace,  there  is 
often  a  striking  superiority  of  one  man  above  another.  But  the  qualities  of  uncon- 
verted men  come  far  short  of  goodness  ;  nay,  they  serve  to  show  more  strongly  the 
wickedness  of  the  human  heart,  which  resists  the  dictates  of  natural  conscience, 
and  the  admonitions  of  the  Word  of  God.  We  must,  therefore,  be  "  transformed, 
by  the  renewing  of  our  minds,  that  we  may  prove  what  is  that  good,  and  acceptable, 
and  perfect  will  of  God."  The  eyes  of  our  understanding  must  be  enlightened,  our 
affections  must  be  fixed  supremely  on  God.  We  must  be  dead  to  sin,  that  we  may 
live  unto  righteousness.     Till  then,  sin  must  have  dominion  over  us.     II.  A  man 

WHO  BELIEVES  IN  ChEIST,  AND  MAKES    OPEN    AND    STEADFAST    PROFESSION    OF    HIS    FAITH. 

Infidelity  is  obviously  incompatible  with  true  goodness  ;  for  it  is  the  wilful  deUbe- 
rate  rejection  of  the  truth.  But  unbelief,  in  the  sense  of  the  refusal  of  a  sinner  to 
accept  of  Christ  as  his  Saviour,  is  equallyincompatible.  How  can  it  be  otherwise  ?  All 
have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God.    A  Saviour  has  been  provided,  and, 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n. 

in  the  riches  of  the  Divine  beneficence,  has  been  freely  offered  to  men.  Can  there 
be  any  goodness  in  the  heart  which  remains  unmoved  by  love  like  this  ?  Is  there 
anything  but  the  spirit  of  unholy  rebellion  in  the  breast  of  that  man  who  refuses  ta 
comply  with  the  first  duty  of  a  perishing  sinner  ?  No,  a  life  of  holy  obedience  must 
have  its  begianing  in  submission  to  the  righteousness  of  Christ  as  the  only  ground 
of  acceptance.  And  this  faith  we  must  openly  and  steadfastly  profess.  Believing 
with  the  heart  unto  righteousness,  with  the  mouth  we  must  make  confession  unto 
salvation.  This  is  one  of  the  evidences  of  the  sincerity  of  our  faith,  the  proof  to 
ourselves,  and  the  world  around  us,  that  our  faith  is  a  true  and  a  saving  faith,  and 
Bot  merely  the  cold  speculative  belief  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  III.  A  man  op 
prBTT  AND  DEVOTEDNESS.  Who  cau  deny  that  it  is  one  of  the  first  duties  of  man  to 
love  God,  and  to  seek  to  please  Him  ?  He  is  the  all-perfect  Jehovah,  the  fountain 
of  our  being,  and  the  source  of  all  our  happiness ;  one  whom  we  are  under  the 
strongest  obligations  to  love,  and  fear,  and  serve.  If  it  be  our  duty  to  love  and 
honour  our  fellow-men,  much  more  it  is  our  duty  to  love  and  honour  God.  This 
wiU  appear  still  more  evident  if  we  consider  that  where  there  is  no  piety,  the  oppo- 
site dispositions  must  have  the  ascendency  in  our  souls.  If  we  do  not  love  God,  we 
must  be  at  enmity  with  Him  (Matt.  vi.  24  ;  James  iv.  4).  IV.  A  man  of  actitb 
AND  enlightened  BENEFICENCE.  The  Sccoud  Commandment  of  the  law  is  as 
essential  to  real  goodness  as  the  First.  Love  to  men  never  fails  to  flow  from  love  to 
God.  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  ;  it  completes  the  character  of  a  true  Chris- 
tian. No  gifts  or  endowments,  however  excellent,  can  compensate  for  the  want  of 
Christian  love.  But  all  beneficence  is  not  goodness.  There  is  the  beneficence  of 
Budden  impulses ;  the  beneficence  which  needs  to  be  awakened  by  touching  repre- 
sentations ;  the  beneficence  of  the  Pharisee,  who  doeth  his  alms  before  men  to  be 
Been  of  them  ;  extorted  beneficence  compelled  by  the  example  of  others — the  bene- 
ficence of  fashion  or  custom,  not  of  religious  or  even  moral  principle.  True  good- 
ness or  beneficence  is  different  from  all  these.  It  has  its  root  in  a  renewed  heart. 
It  is  constant  and  uniform — a  habit  not  an  act — an  ever-flowing  stream,  not  the 
effervescence  of  momentary  feeling.  A  good  man  loves  his  fellow-men,  and  because 
he  loves  them  he  is  earnestly  desirous  of  promoting  their  real  welfare.  His  "  liberal 
mind  deviseth  liberal  things."    V.  A  man  who  endeavours  to  regulate  his  whole 

TEMPER    AND    CONDUCT    BY    THE    MAXIMS   AND    PRECEPTS  OF  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ChRIST.       He 

recognises  the  law  of  God  as  the  only  rule  of  his  life  and  conversation.  The  law  is 
not  made  void,  it  is  established,  by  faith.  Other  men  are  governed  by  the  principles 
of  the  world,  principles  often  decidedly  at  variance  with  the  law  of  God,  and  the 
morality  of  the  gospel.     A  good  man  steadfastly  refuses  to  submit  to  their  authority. 

"VI.  A  MAN  WHO  EARNESTLY  DESIRES  THE  ADVANCEMENT  OF  THE  DiVINE    GLORY,  AND    THE 

ESTABLISHMENT  OF  His  KINGDOM.  "  Nouc  of  US  Uvcth  to  himsclf ,  and  no  man  dieth 
to  himself,"  &c.  This  desire  is  not  confined  to  the  duties  of  prayer  and  praise. 
The  good  man  is  actuated  by  a  holy  solicitude  that  every  part  of  his  conduct  may 
be  so  entirely  in  agreement  with  the  law  of  Christ,  as  to  curb  and  restrain  the 
wickedness  of  the  ungodly,  and  to  strengthen  and  encourage  the  hearts  of  true 
believers  in  the  diligent  pursuit  and  practice  of  true  holiness.  (P.  McFarlan,  D.D.) 
Goodness,  as  illustrated  in  the  character  of  Barnabas : — Mark — I.  The  good  man  as 
DEPICTED  BY  THE  WORLD.  1.  There  18  the  decent  and  orderly  man.  He  is  so 
regular  in  his  attendance  on  the  ordinances  of  the  Church,  so  decorous  in  all  his 
proceedings,  that  if  you  venture  to  ask  whether,  while  he  bears  the  form  of  godli- 
ness, he  also  manifests  the  power  thereof,  you  are  decried  as  uncharitable,  and 
never  to  be  satisfied.  "  What  is  goodness,  if  such  a  man  as  this  is  not  good?  "  2. 
Then  comes  the  liberal,  open-hearted,  and  benevolent  man.  If  you  examine 
whether  his  liberality  may  not  be  thoughtless  profusion,  whether  his  benevolence 
may  not  be  a  mere  natural  feeUng,  whether  other  parts  of  his  conduct  uphold  or 
contradict  the  supposition  of  his  goodness,  you  are  encountered  with  declarations 
that  a  better  man  never  existed ;  and  are  silenced  with  the  perverted  text,  that 
"  charity  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins."  3.  Then  comes  the  industrious  and  frugal 
man — so  laudably  diligent  in  his  business,  so  careful  to  provide  for  his  family  I  If 
you  intimate  a  doubt  whether  his  labours  exemplify  any  disposition  beyond  covet- 
onsness  or  mere  worldly  prudence,  you  are  treated  as  a  man  determined  to  find 
fault,  as  one  whom  neither  generosity  nor  frugality  can  please.  4.  The  next  person 
is  tlie  cautious  man.  His  object  is  never  to  give  offence.  He  says  civil  things  of 
every  person ;  yet  not  so  civil  of  any  person  as  to  excite  the  jealousy  of  another. 
He  attaches  himself  to  no  party  ;  but  endeavours  to  induce  all  severally  to  regard 
him  as  well  inclined  to  their  cause,  and  yet,  while  his  conduct  is  a  tissue  of  time- 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  241 

Berving  insincerity,  he  is  generally  allowed  to  be  "  a  very  good  sort  of  man."  4. 
Another  is  the  easy,  good-humoured  man.  He  is  so  pleasant,  so  harmless,  so 
neighbourly  !  Every  person  whom  he  meets  he  appears  delighted  to  see.  It  is  thus 
that,  possibly  without  possessing  a  single  estimable  moral  quality,  he  obtains  far 
and  wide  the  denomination  of  as  excellent  a  man  as  ever  was  born.  5.  The  last 
character  is  the  "  man  of  honour,"  who  studiously  practices  whatever  is  creditable, 
and  avoids  whatever  is  discreditable,  in  the  class  of  society  in  which  he  moves.  Ask 
him  why  he  shuns  any  particular  practice.  Does  he  reply,  "Because  it  is  sinful?  " 
The  expression  is  foreign  to  his  lips.  He  answers,  '*  Because  it  is  mean,  low, 
degrading,  unbecoming  a  gentleman. "  Why  does  he  pursue  a  specified  line  of  con- 
duct ?  Because  it  is  acceptable  to  God  ?  He  thinks  not  of  such  a  standard.  He 
pursues  it  because  it  has  the  stamp  of  fashionable  estimation.  Destitute,  it  may  be, 
of  a  grain  of  true  religion,  this  man  is  regarded  by  multitudes  as  a  model  of  perfec- 
tion 1  n.  The  good  man  as  pourtkated  in  Sceiptuee.  Barnabas — 1.  Was  full  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  words  describe  him  as  sanctified  by  Divine  grace,  as  being 
no  longer  of  the  world,  even  as  Christ  was  not  of  the  world,  and  as  filled  with  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  with  all  righteousness  and  godUness,  with  holy  views,  principles, 
tempers,  desires,  purposes,  *'  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  glory  and  praise  of 
God."  2.  Barnabas  was  full  of  faith.  His  faith  was  sincere,  cordial,  warm,  ener- 
getic, productive.  It  was  not  a  cold  and  naked  assent  to  the  historical  truth  of  the 
actions  of  Christ,  such  as  he  might  yield  to  a  true  account  of  Pontius  Pilate  or  o£ 
Judas.  It  was  not  a  barren  speculation  dwelling  in  his  head  as  a  portion  of  abstract 
knowledge,  Uke  a  curious  principle  in  mechanics,  or  a  subtle  theorem  in  astronomy. 
It  was  faith  in  a  Saviour.  On  that  Saviour,  to  whom  he  owed  all,  he  depended  for 
aU.  To  that  Saviour  he  looked  with  assurance  for  strength  and  guidance.  He 
knew  in  whom  he  trusted.  His  works  were  the  fruits  of  faith,  and  his  faith  was 
manifested  by  his  works.  3.  "  When  he  came,  and  had  seen  the  grace  of  God,  was 
glad. "  He  would  have  rejoiced  had  he  beheld  no  more  than  the  tranquillity  and  out- 
ward comfort  of  his  fellow  Christians.  But  the  delight  which  swallowed  up  aU 
other  motives  of  joy  was  to  behold  the  growing  estabhshment  of  the  Church  of 
Christ ;  to  behold  sinners  turning  with  abhorrence  from  their  iniquities,  and  glori- 
fying the  Lord  their  Eedeemer  by  newness  of  life.  4.  "  Exhorted  them  all,  that  with 
purpose  of  heart  they  would  cleave  unto  the  Lord,"  The  joy  of  Barnabas  did  not 
waste  itself  in  idle  contemplation.  His  love  of  Christ  constrained  him  to  labour  for 
Christ.  His  love  of  man  impelled  him  to  the  assistance  of  man.  How  many 
sufferers  previously  (chap.  iv.  36,37)  experienced  from  his  compassion  the  comforts  of 
food  and  raiment  1  He  went  about  as  a  minister  to  mankind  of  those  blessings, 
which  exclusively  confer  complete  and  durable  consolation.    (T.  Giiborne,  M.A.) 

Vers.  25, 26.  Then  departed  Barnabas  to  Tarsus  for  to  seek  Saul. — Saul  brought 
to  Antioch;  buriedtalent  called  forth  to  its  appropriate  field  of  labour: — How  Saxil 
had  been  employed  aU  this  time  (chap.  ix.  30)  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining. 
We  cannot  well  doubt  that  he  would  bring  the  claims  of  Christianity  before  philo- 
sophers and  urge  the  proofs  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  in  the  synagogue ;  nor  can 
we  doubt  that  his  labours  would  be  in  some  degree  successful.  The  work  at  Antioch 
required  one  like  Saul,  and  in  our  age  a  telegraphic  despatch  would  have  summoned 
Mm  ;  but  then  Barnabas  had  to  go  and  find  him.  Notice — I.  The  emeegency  which 
HAD  THEN  occuEEED  IN  THE  Chuech.  Obscrvc  that — 1.  The  ideas  of  Christians  up 
to  that  time  had  been  limited.  It  was  a  slow  process  by  which  the  attention  of  the 
apostles  was  directed  to  the  regions  beyond  Palestine,  and  even  then  their  thoughts 
were  directed  to  Hebrews.  2.  The  events  at  Antioch  could  not  well  be  mistaken  as 
bearing  on  this  point.  The  gospel  had  been  preached  there  to  heathen  with  great 
power  and  success.  3.  The  name  Christian  was  conferred  and  adopted  just  as  this 
enlarged  view  of  the  nature  of  their  religion  was  becoming  the  common  view  of  the 
Church.  II.  The  ample  fxeld,  on  which  the  talents  or  Saul,  now  summoned 
FECM  obscueitt,  MIGHT  ACT.  1.  Autioch  itscLf.  Thls  Syrian  capital,  by  its  wealth, 
its  commerce,  its  accessibility,  its  communication  with  the  other  parts  of  the  world, 
its  numbers,  was  one  of  the  most  important  centres  of  influence ;  and  we  may 
readily  understand,  therefore,  why  he  was  called  by  Providence  to  labour  there.  2, 
The  world  itself  would  be  suggested  as  a  field  for  which  Saul  was  especially  quali- 
fied, and  which,  in  his  call,  he  had  been  designated  to  occupy.  The  new  idea  was 
one  which  could  not  be  confined  in  its  operations  to  Antioch,  for  the  principles  which 
made  it  proper  to  preach  the  gospel  there,  made  it  proper  to  preach  it  everywhere. 
The  events  now  occurring  could  not  but  suggest  to  a  mind  like  Saul's  the  fact  that 

YOi..  n.  16 


243  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

the  whole  world  was  to  be  visited  by  like  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God.     HI.  Thb 

ARRANGEMENTS  FOB  CALLING  TALENT  FORTH    TO  ACCOMPLISH    THE  DlVINE    PCBPOSES.       1. 

Talent  is  found  in  one  of  these  forms.  (1)  In  preparation  for  the  future.  (2)  In 
obscurity.  (3)  Employed  in  a  purpose  corresponding  to  the  design  for  which  it  was 
created.  (4)  Perverted  and  abused.  These  forms  may  exist  separately,  or  two  of 
them  may  be  combined.  Thus  talent  in  preparation,  and  as  yet  in  obscurity,  may 
be  combined,  for  the  occasion  may  not  yet  have  arisen  to  call  it  forth.  We  have  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  while  Saul  was  in  Arabia  and  in  Tarsus  he  was  preparing 
for  his  great  work.  2.  There  is  talent  created  in  each  age  of  the  world,  for 
all  the  purposes  of  that  age.  It  is  not  developed  from  the  past ;  nor  is  it  the 
production  of  the  mere  laws  of  nature  or  hereditary;  it  is  as  much  a  new 
creation  as  would  be  the  introduction  of  a  new  world.  There  was  nothing 
in  Stratford-on-Avon  that  could  produce  Shakespeare ;  nor  anything  in  his  father 
of  which  "Lear,"  and  "Hamlet,"  and  "Othello"  could  be  the  development. 
The  mind  of  Shakespeare  was  as  really  an  act  of  creation  as  the  creation  of  a  world. 
So  with  Johnson,  Milton,  Michael  Angelo.  These  minds  were  made  of  such 
capacity,  power,  and  adaptedness  to  a  particular  end,  as  God  pleased ;  and  were 
brought  upon  the  earth  at,  when,  and  how  He  saw  best.  There  is  a  difference 
between  the  Divine  arrangements  for  the  physical  wants  of  the  world,  and  for  its 
mental  and  moral  wants.  In  the  former  case,  long  before  man  was  upon  the  earth, 
God  had  created  all  that  the  race  would  need  in  all  its  history.  Mind,  on  the  con- 
trary, He  brings  upon  the  earth  as  it  is  wanted.  At  every  period  there  is  a  class  of 
minds  needed  to  carry  the  world  forward  in  its  ordinary  eourse — in  working  the 
fields  already  cultivated.  As,  however,  the  world's  most  marked  advances  are  not 
by  a  steady  ascent,  but  rather  per  saltum,  so  (when  the  time  arrives  for  such  a 
new  elevation)  God  creates  the  mind  or  minds  fitted  to  the  occasion.  Thus  some 
great  law-giver,  poet,  painter,  soldier,  philosopher.  Such  men  as  Moses,  Cassar, 
&c.,  lay  the  foundation  for  new  epochs,  and  such  "  epochs  "  really  constitute  the 
history  of  the  progress  of  the  world.  3.  Under  this  arrangement  much  talent  may 
be  hidden ;  much  may  be  in  a  state  of  almost  unconscious  preparation.  How  little 
did  Washington,  amid  the  quiet  scenes  at  Mount  Vernon,  how  little  Oliver  Crom- 
well, on  his  farm,  dream  of  the  great  part  each  wao  to  act  in  the  history  of  the 
world  1  The  emergency  came.  There  was  enough  for  those  great  men  to  do,  and 
God  had  endowed  them  with  talent  sufficient  to  do  aU  that  was  needful  to  be  accom- 
plished in  their  age.  4.  Emergencies  do  arise  to  call  forth  the  talent  which  God 
has  conferred.  When  liberty  is  endangered,  when  reforms  are  to  be  effected,  when 
the  world  is  to  be  prepared  for  some  new  and  signal  advance,  then  talent  before 
hidden  is  brought  forward  to  do  its  work.  Such — in  a  more  eminent  degree  than 
aught  else — was  the  period  when,  after  so  long  a  preparation,  and  when  "  the  ful- 
ness of  the  time  was  come,"  the  Son  of  God  was  called  from  His  obscurity  in 
darkened  Galilee.  Such  also — subordinate  to  that  higher  purpose,  but  still  so 
marked  in  its  character  as  to  constitute  a  new  epoch  in  the  world's  history — was 
the  calling  forth  of  Saul  to  act  his  part  on  the  great  theatre  of  human  affairs.  (A. 
Barnes,  D.D.)  The  disciples  were  called  Christians  first  in  Antloch. — What  the 
world  called  the  Church,  arid  what  the  Church  calls  itself: — Nations  and  parties 
often  call  themselves  by  one  name,  and  are  known  to  the  world  by  another.  These 
outside  names  are  generally  given  in  contempt ;  and  yet  they  sometimes  hit  the 
very  centre,  and  so  by  degrees  get  to  be  adopted  as  an  honour.  So  it  has  been 
witb  the  name  "  Christian."  It  is  never  used  in  the  New  Testament  by  Christians 
about  themselves.  It  occurs  here  in  Agrippa's  half-contemptuous  exclamation,  and 
in  1  Pet.  iv.  16.  Consider — I.  This  name  given  by  the  world  to  the  Church,  ^^HICH 
IHE  Church  has  adopted.  1.  Observe  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was  given. 
A  handful  of  Jews  from  Jerusalem  had  come  down  to  Antioch,  and  there  they 
preached  the  gospel  to  heathen,  and  their  success  has  for  its  crowning  attestation 
that  it  compelled  the  sarcastic  Antiochenes  to  find  t^ut  a  new  name  for  this  new 
thing  ;  to  find  out  a  new  label  for  the  new  bottles  into  which  the  new  wine  was 
being  put.  Clearly  the  name  shows — (1)  That  the  Church  was  beginning  to  attract 
the  attention  of  outsiders.  (2)  That  there  was  a  novel  element  in  the  Church.  The 
earlier  disciples  had  been  all  Jews.  But  here  is  something  that  could  not  be  called 
either  Jew  or  Greek,  because  it  embraces  both.  The  new  name  is  the  first  witness 
to  the  cosmopolitan  character  of  the  primitive  Church.  (3)  That  even  these  super- 
ficial observers  had  got  hold  of  the  riglit  notion  of  what  it  was  that  did  bind  these 
feople  together.  They  called  them  "  Christians  " — Christ's  men,  Christ's  followers. 
If  they  had  called  them  "  Jesuits  "  that  would  have  meant  the  followers  of  the  mere 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  ACTS.  243 

man ;  but  it  is  not  Jesus  the  Man ,  but  Jesus  Christ,  the  Man  with  His  office,  that  makes 
the  centre  and  the  bond  of  the  Christian  Church.  2.  Plain  lessons  lie  on  the  sur- 
face. (1)  The  Church  should  draw  to  itself  the  notice  of  the  world  not  by  advertising, 
and  ostentation,  and  singularities.  If  you  are  live  Christians  it  will  be  plain 
enough  to  outsiders.  What  shall  we  say  of  leaven  which  does  not  leaven,  or  of 
light  which  does  not  shine?  Are  the  world's  names  for  themselves  enough  to 
describe  you  by,  or  do  you  need  another  to  be  coined  for  you  ?  The  Church  that 
does  not  provoke  the  attention  of  outsiders  is  not  the  Church  as  Christ  meant  it  to 
be.  (2)  The  clear  impression  made  by  our  conduct  should  be  that  we  belong  to 
Christ.  The  eye  of  an  outsider  may  be  unable  to  penetrate  the  secret  of  the  deep 
sweet  tie  uniting  us  to  Jesus,  but  there  should  be  no  possibility  of  his  overlooking 
the  fact  that  we  are  His.  He  should  manifestly  be  the  centre,  guide,  impulse,  pat- 
tern, strength  and  reward  of  our  whole  lives.  Do  you  think  that,  without  your 
words,  if  you,  living  the  way  you  do,  were  put  down  into  the  middle  of  Pekin,  the 
wits  of  the  Chinese  metropolis  would  have  to  invent  a  name  for  you  ;  and,  if  so,  the 
name  that  would  naturally  come  to  their  lips  would  be  "  Christians  " — "  Christ's 
men."  If  you  do  not,  there  is  something  wrong.  (3)  It  is  a  very  sad  thing  when 
the  world's  inadequate  notions  of  what  makes  a  follower  of  Jesus  Christ  get 
accepted  by  the  Church.  The  name  •'  Christian  "  ran  all  over  Christendom  in  the 
course  of  a  century  and  a  half,  largely  because  it  was  a  conveniently  vague  name. 
Many  a  man  is  quite  willing  to  say,  "  I  am  a  Christian,"  that  would  hesitate  a  long 
time  before  he  said,  "  I  am  a  believer  "  ;  "a  disciple."    II.  Side  by  side  with  this 

VAGUE,  GENEBAL,  OUTSIDE   NAME    THE    MOKE    SPECIFIC    AND    INTERIOR   NAMES,  BY  WHICH 

Christ's  followers  at  first  knew  themselves.  1.  "  Disciples,"  the  name 
employed  almost  exclusively  during  the  time  of  Christ's  life  upon  earth,  sets 
forth  Christ  as  being  the  Teacher,  and  His  followers  His  scholars,  who  learned  at 
His  feet.  Now  that  is  always  true.  He  teaches  us  still  by  the  record  of  His  life, 
and  by  the  living  influence  of  that  Spirit  whom  He  sends  forth  to  guide  us  into  all 
truth.  But  that  name  is  not  enough,  and  so  after  He  had  passed  from  earth,  it 
unconsciously  and  gradually  dropped  out  of  the  lips  of  the  disciples,  as  they  felt  a 
deepened  bond  uniting  them  to  Him  who  was  not  only  the  Teacher  of  the  Truth, 
which  was  Himself,  but  was  their  sacrifice  and  Advocate  with  the  Father.  And  for 
all  who  hold  the  essentially  imperfect  conception  of  Jesus  Christ  as  being  mainly  a 
Teacher,  either  by  word  or  by  pattern,  it  is  worthy  of  consideration  that  the  name 
of  disciple  was  speedily  felt  to  be  inadequate  to  represent  the  bond  that  knit  men 
to  Christ.  2.  Teacher  and  scholars  move  in  a  region  which,  though  it  be  impor- 
tant, is  not  the  central  one.  And  the  word  that  was  needed  next  lifts  us  into  a 
higher  atmosphere.  Believers,  they  who  yield  not  merely  intellectual  submission  to 
the  dicta  of  the  Teacher,  but  Uving  trust  in  the  Eedeemer.  We  believe  a  truth,  we 
trust  a  Person ;  and  that  trust  is  the  one  thing  that  binds  men  to  God,  and  the  one 
thing  that  makes  us  Christ's  men.  Apart  from  it,  we  may  be  very  near  Him,  but  we 
are  not  joined  to  Him.  By  it,  and  by  it  alone,  the  union  is  completed,  and  His 
power  and  grace  flow  into  our  spirits.  8.  The  name  "  saints  "  has  suffered  perhaps 
more  at  the  hands  both  of  the  world  and  of  the  Church  than  any  other.  It  has 
been  by  the  latter  restricted  to  the  dead,  and  further  restricted  to  those  who 
excel,  according  to  the  fantastic,  ascetic  standard  of  mediseval  Christianity.  It  has 
been  used  by  the  world  with  a  bitter  emphasis  to  mean  a  pretender  to  be  better  than 
other  people,  whose  actions  contradict  his  claim.  But  the  name  belongs  to  all 
Christ's  followers.  It  makes  no  claim  to  special  purity,  for  the  central  idea  of  the 
word  "  saint "  is  not  purity,  but  separation.  The  New  Testament  idea  of  saint  has 
in  it  these  elements — consecration,  consecration  resting  on  faith  in  Christ,  and  con- 
secration leading  to  separation  from  the  world  and  its  sin.  And  that  must  be  the 
experience  of  every  true  Christian.  All  Christ's  people  are  saints,  not  as  being  pure, 
but  as  being  given  up  to  Him,  in  union  with  whom  alone  wiU  the  cleansing  powers 
flow  into  their  Uves  and  clothe  them  with  "  the  righteousness  of  saints."  4. 
Brethren — a  name  much  maltreated  both  by  the  insincerity  of  the  Church,  and  by 
the  sarcasm  of  the  world.  An  unreal  appellation  which  has  meant  nothing,  so  that 
the  world  has  said  that  our  "brethren"  signified  a  good  deal  less  than  their 
"  brothers."  But  the  main  thing  about  that  name  is  not  the  relation  of  the  fcreth- 
len  to  one  another,  but  their  common  relation  to  their  Father.  As  society  gets 
more  complicated,  as  Christian  people  get  unlike  each  other  in  education  and  social 
position,  it  gets  more  and  more  difficult  to  feel  that  any  two  Christian  people,  how- 
ever unlike  each  other,  are  nearer  each  other  in  the  very  roots  of  their  nature,  than 
ill  Christian  and  a  non-Christian,  however  like  each  other.    It  is  difficult  to  feel 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

that  but  for  all  that  it  is  a  fact.  And  now  I  wish  to  ask  yon  whether  you  feel  more 
at  home  with  people  who  love  Christ,  or  whether  you  like  better  to  be  with  people 
who  do  not.  The  duties  of  your  position,  of  course,  oblige  each  of  you  to  be  much 
among  people  who  do  not  share  your  faith  ;  but  for  Christian  people  to  make  choLce 
of  heart  friends,  among  those  who  have  no  sympathy  with  their  love  to  Jesua- 
Christ,  does  not  say  much  for  the  depth  and  reality  of  their  religion.  A  man  is  known 
by  the  company  he  keeps,  and  if  you  deeply  feel  the  bond  that  knits  you  to  Christ, 
and  really  live  near  to  Him,  you  will  be  near  your  brethren.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  name  "  Christian  "  : — I.  When  it  was  given.  1.  Not  until  twelve  years,  appa- 
rently, of  most  intense  life,  persecution,  growth,  did  the  Christians  receive  any 
abiding  name,  which  serves  to  show  us  that  God  cares  for  things,  not  names.  God 
makes  the  things,  man  gives  the  names ;  yet  how  much  controversy  is  merely 
about  names.  2.  Not  until  after  the  disciples  had  become  known  among  the 
Gentiles.  The  Jews  would  never  have  given  us  this  holy  name.  II.  Where.  In 
Antioch.  Which  was — 1.  Beautiful.  Situate  on  the  Orontes,  where  it  breaks 
through  between  Lebanon  and  Taurus ;  the  scenery  magnificent,  itself  splendidly 
adorned,  and  surrounded  with  groves  and  gardens.  2.  Eich,  The  capital  of  Syria 
and  the  third  city  of  the  world ;  centre  of  traffic  between  east  and  west.  3.  Plea- 
sure-loving. The  meeting-place  between  the  Lively  Greek  and  self-indulgent  Eastern, 
with  every  inducement  and  advantage  for  enjoyment.  4.  Wicked.  Antioch  was 
exceptionally  depraved.  Eome  was  horribly  bad ;  but  when  the  satirist  wished  to  say 
that  Eome  was  made  tenfold  more  corrupt,  he  wrote  that  Orontes  had  emptie** 
itself  into  the  Tiber.  5.  Heathen.  Here  were  the  notorious  groves  of  Daphne, 
where  Apollo  was  worshipped  with  all  magnificence  and  vice.  III.  Why.  That  is 
not  quite  so  certain  ;  but  we  may  safely  say  that  it  came  about  ttut  The  Antio- 
chenes  noticed  some  among  them  who  differed  from  others  The  beauty  of  the 
place  they  regarded  with  sober  admiration ;  its  riches  and  busmess  they  cared  little 
for :  they  were  industrious,  used  nc  trickery,  abandoned  many  trades  altogether, 
and  did  not  grieve  much  if  they  lost  their  money ;  iti  amusements  they  shunned, 
and  as  for  the  sins  of  the  place,  they  both  avoided  d,nd  rebuked  them.  Then  the 
heathen  were  astonished,  and  asked,  "  Who  hat  caught  you  this  ?  Who  has  given 
you  this  new-fangled  view  of  the  beauty,  wealth,  pleasure,  and  sin  (as  you  call  it) 
of  Antioch?  Who  has  forbidden  you  to  worship  our  gods?  "  To  this  the  answer 
was  ever,  "  Christ  has  told  us  that  the  world  and  its  beauty  pass  away ;  but  He  has 
told  us  of  a  new  heaven  and  earth  far  better.  He  has  taught  us  to  think  but  little 
of  the  world's  wealth,  for  He  has  given  us  treasure  in  heaven.  He  has  taught  us  to 
look  for  higher  pleasures,  and  to  beware  of  yours,  lest  they  lead  us  to  sin  and 
death.  He  has  taught  us  above  all  to  know  and  hate  sin,  and  not  to  give  to  your 
gods  that  which  is  His  due.  " So,"  the  Antiochenes  would  say,  "this  is  your  God." 
"  Yes,"  they  would  reply,  "  we  are  His,  and  cannot  take  the  absorbing  interest  you 
do  in  the  beauty,  wealth,  pleasure,  sin,  and  idolatry  of  Antioch."  Some  among 
the  heathen  would  believe,  the  rest  would  scoff  and  call  them  "  Christians." 
(E.   Winterbotham,  M.A.)  The  Christian  name: — 1.  At  first  sight  this  might 

seem  to  be  a  piece  of  information  such  as  is  to  be  met  with  in  an  old  chronicle,  or  in 
Notes  and  Queries,  and  it  probably  was  meant  to  correct  the  idea  that  the  disciples 
were  first  called  Christians  at  Jerusalem.  But  we  have  here  much  more  than  this. 
2.  The  name  of  a  man  or  society  is  not  like  a  label,  which  may  be  detached  from  a 
piece  of  hfeless  furniture ;  it  is  a  factor  of  which  account  must  be  taken  for  good 
or  evil.  Men  have  borne  names  which  they  have  felt  to  be  a  stigma — an  active 
cause  of  discouragement  and  failure.  Men  have  also  inherited  names  which  have 
lifted  themselves  into  a  fellowship  with  a  past  of  high  effort.  And,  in  religion 
names  have  a  mighty  power  of  shaping  thought  and  sympnthy.  This  applies  to 
the  greatest  of  names — Christians.  I.  How  came  the  my  >  i.es  by  this  name? 
1.  It  comes  into  view  together  with  the  first  attempt  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the 
pagan  world.  The  Jews  would  not  have  given  it.  They  believed  in  a  coming 
Christ,  but  rejected  the  true  Christ.  But  His  appearance  was  an  entirely  new  and 
original  idea  to  pagans,  and  the  constant  repetition  of  His  name  would  suggest  to 
the  keen-witted  Greeks  to  call  the  disciples  Christians.  2.  It  is  probable  that  the 
name  was  a  nickname,  meant  to  suggest  that  those  who  could  do  nothing  but  talk 
about  their  Christ  were  a  set  of  fanatics  to  be  laughed  out  of  existence.  The  case 
was  parallel  to  the  feeling  about  Christ  crucified  at  Corinth.  II.  There  were  otheb 
HAMES  BT  WHICH  THE  DISCIPLES  WERE  KNOWN.  I.  Before :  Brethren,  Disciples, 
Elect,  Saints,  Faithful.  2.  After:  Gnostics,  men  who  had  a  knowledge  of  Divine 
things — Theophori,  Christopheri  (God  bearers,  Christ  bearers),  Nazarenes,  and  at 


«HAP.  XI.]  THE  ACTS.  245 

Eome  especially,  impostors,  magicians.Galileans,  sophists,  atheists,  Sarmerefzf  Ji.despe- 
rate  men,  who  were  indifferent  to  death ;  Parabolani,  men  who  lived  only  to  die,  Bia- 
thanati,  men  whose  garments  smelt  of  the  faggot,  <fec.  3.  Srace  :  Catholic,  a  name  of 
commanding  power,  but  this  describes  a  quaUty,  Christian,  the  substance  of  true 
rehgion ;  the  one  views  it  in  relation  to  mankind,  the  other  in  its  source  and 
author ;  Catholic  might  be  dissociated  from  Christ — Christian  never.  III.  The 
IMPOBT  AND  GLOBY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  NAME.  The  apostles  highly  prized  it :  James 
calls  it  "  that  worthy  name  "  ;  St.  Peter  a  name  for  which  it  is  a  glory  to  suffer. 
It  is  a  great  distinction — 1.  To  be  a  learner  in  the  one  great  school  of  truth.  This 
is  the  very  least  that  the  name  can  mean,  just  as  those  who  followed  Plato  were 
called  Platonists.  2.  To  be  in  the  service  of  such  a  commander  as  Christ.  We 
know  the  feeling  which  attaches  in  our  army  to  being  in  the  best  regiments  ;  to  be 
in  the  regiment  led  by  Jesus  Christ  across  the  centuries,  ought  to  satisfy  a  nobler 
ambition.  3.  To  be  endowed  with  a  new  nature — that  of  Christ  the  Lord.  Com- 
pared with  this,  how  poor  is  "  noble  "  birth  1  A  Christian  is  a  member  of  the 
aristocracy  of  heaven.  IV.  The  responsibility  oi"  the  bearers  of  this  great 
NAME.  1.  It  is  a  summons  to  unity.  (1)  Because  it  distiaguishes  the  disciples 
from  others  it  has  been  stigmatised  as  a  badge  of  division.  Human,  it  is  contended, 
would  represent  a  more  adequate  bond  of  brotherhood.  But  the  aim  of  Christi- 
anity is  to  make  one  synonymous  with  the  other,  and  the  name  is  a  pledge  that  it 
wiU  one  day  do  so.  (2)  This  name  is  borne  by  miUions  of  Christian  worshippers 
•who  are  divided  widely  from  each  other.  But  the  name  implies  amid  all  their 
divisions  the  substantial  loyalty  of  all  to  Christ.  2.  It  is  a  call  to  holiness. 
"  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  Applica- 
tion :  Let  us  remember  this  name — (1)  In  the  morning.  (2)  At  night.  (3)  In  the 
hour  of  death.  (Canon  Liddon).  The  Christian  name  : — We  may  consider  thia 
name  in  various  views ;  as  a  name  of  distinction  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  who 
know  not  Christ,  or  reject  Him ;  as  a  patronymic  name,  pointing  out  the  Founder  of 
the  Christian  Church ;  as  a  badge  of  our  relation  to  Christ  as  His  servants.  His 
children,  His  bride  ;  as  intimating  our  unction  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  as  Christ  was 
anointed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  above  measure,  as  a  name  of  appropriation,  signify- 
ing that  we  are  the  property  of  Christ  and  His  peculiar  people.  But  my  pre- 
sent design   confines  me   to    consider   the    Christian    name — I.  As  A   catholio 

NAME,    INTENDED    TO   BURY   ALL   PARTY     DENOMINATIONS.       1.    The    name    GeutUe    Wa3 

odious  to  the  Jews,  and  the  name  Jew  to  the  GentUes.  The  name  Christian 
swallows  up  both  in  one  common  and  agreeable  appellation.  He  that  hath  taken 
down  the  partition-wall,  has  taken  away  partition  names,  and  united  all  His  fol- 
lowers in  His  own  name  (Col.  iii.  11  ;  Gal.  iii.  28 ;  Zeoh.  xiv.  9).  2.  It  is  but  a  due 
honour  to  Christ,  the  founder  of  Christianity,  that  all  who  profess  His  reUgion 
should  wear  His  name  ;  and  they  pay  an  extravagant  compliment  to  his  ministers 
when  they  take  their  denomination  from  them.  Had  this  humour  prevailed  in  the 
primitive  Church  there  would  have  been  Paulites  from  Paul,  Peterites  from  Peter, 
Johnites  from  John,  Barnabites  from  Barnabas,  &o.  Paul  took  pains  to  crush  the 
first  risings  of  this  party  spirit  in  Corinth  (1  Cor.  i.  12-15).  But  alas  !  how  little 
has  this  convictive  reasoning  of  the  apostle  been  regarded.  Not  to  take  notice  of 
Jesuits,  Jansenites,  Dominicans,  Franciscans,  &c.,  in  the  popish  Church,  where, 
having  corrupted  the  thing,  they  act  very  consistently  to  lay  aside  the  name,  what 
party  names  have  been  adopted  by  the  Protestant  Churches,  whose  religion  is  sub- 
stantially the  same.  To  be  a  Christian  is  not  enough  nowadays,  but  a  man  must 
also  be  something  more.  But  where  is  the  reason  or  propriety  of  this  ?  I  may 
indeed  beUeve  the  same  things  which  Luther  or  Calvin  beheved :  but  I  do  not 
beUeve  them  on  the  authority  of  Luther  or  Calvin,  but  upon  the  sole  authority  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  therefore  I  should  not  call  myself  by  their  name,  as  one  of  their 
disciples,  but  by  the  name  of  Christ,  whom  alone  I  aclmowledge  as  my  only  Master 
and  Lord.  3.  To  guard  against  mistakes  on  this  head  I  would  observe  that  every 
man  has  a  right  to  choose  for  himself  in  matters  of  rehgion.  In  the  exercise  of 
this  right  he  will  find  that  he  agrees  more  fully  with  some  particular  Church  than 
others,  and  thereupon  it  is  his  duty  to  join  that  Church  ;  and  he  may,  if  he  pleases, 
assume  the  name  which  that  Church  wears,  by  way  of  distinction  from  others ;  this 
is  not  what  I  condemn.  But  for  me  to  glory  in  the  denomination  of  any  particular 
Church  as  my  highest  character,  to  lay  more  stress  upon  the  name  of  a  Presby- 
terian or  a  Churchman  than  on  that  of  Christian ;  to  make  it  the  object  of  my  zeal 
to  gain  proselytes  to  some  other  than  the  Christian  name ;  to  connive  at  the  faults 
of  those  of  my  own  party,  and  to  be  blind  to  the  good  qualities  of  others,  or  in* 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

vidiously  to  misrepresent  or  diminish  them  ;  these  proceed  from  a  spirit  of  bigotry 
directly  opposite  to  the  generous  catholic  spirit  of  Christianity.    II.  As  A  namb  or 

OBLIGATION  UPON  AT.T.  THAT  BEAB  IT  TO  BE  ChBISTIANS  INDEED,  OB  TO  FOBM  THEIB 
TEMPEB  AND  PEACTICE  UPON  THE  SACRED  MODEL  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  To  bs  a  Chris- 
tian, in  the  popular  and  fashionable  sense,  is  no  difficult  or  excellent  thing.  It  is  to 
be  baptized,  to  believe,  like  our  neighbours,  that  Christ  is  the  Messiah,  and  to 
attend  ui^on  pubhc  worship  once  a  week.  In  this  sense  a  man  may  be  a  Christian, 
and  yet  be  habitually  careless  about  eternal  things  ;  a  Christian,  and  yet  fall  short 
of  the  morality  of  many  of  the  heathens.  To  be  a  Christian  in  this  sense  is  no 
high  character ;  and  if  this  be  the  whole  of  Christianity  it  is  very  httle  matter 
whether  the  world  be  Christianised  or  not.  But  to  be  a  Christian  indeed  is  the 
highest  character  and  dignity  of  which  the  human  nature  is  capable.  To  be  a 
Christian  is — 1.  To  depart  from  iniquity  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  What,  then,  shall  we  think  of 
the  profligate,  profane  Christians,  that  have  overrun  the  Christian  world  ?  Can 
there  be  a  greater  contradiction  ?  A  loyal  subject  in  arms  against  his  sovereign, 
an  ignorant  scholar,  a  sober  drunkard,  a  charitable  miser,  an  honest  thief,  is  not  a 
greater  absurdity,  or  a  more  direct  contradiction.  Therefore,  if  you  will  not 
renounce  iniquity,  renounce  the  Christian  name.  Alexander  had  a  fellow  in  his 
army  that  was  of  his  own  name,  but  a  mere  coward,  "  Either  be  Uke  me,"  says 
Alexander,  "  or  lay  aside  my  name."  2.  To  deny  yourselves  and  take  up  the  cross 
and  follow  Christ  (Luke  ix.  23).  To  deny  ourselves  is  to  abstain  from  the  pleasures 
of  sin  ;  to  deny  our  own  interest  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  To  take  up  our  cross  is  to 
bear  sufferings,  to  encounter  difficulties,  and  break  through  them  for  His  sake.  To 
follow  Him  IS  to  trace  His  steps  and  imitate  His  example  whatever  it  cost  us. 
These  are  the  terms  if  you  would  be  Christians.  These  He  honestly  warned 
mankind  of  when  He  first  called  them  to  be  His  disciples  (Luke  xiv.  25,  &c.).  What, 
then,  shall  we  think  of  those  crowds  who  retain  the  Christian  name,  and  yet  will 
not  deny  themselves  of  their  sensual  pleasures,  nor  part  with  their  temporal 
interest  for  the  sake  of  Christ  ?  A  Christian,  without  self-denial,  and  a  supreme 
love  to  Jesus  Christ,  is  as  great  a  contradiction  as  fire  without  heat,  or  a  sun  with- 
out light,  a  hero  without  courage,  or  a  friend  without  love.  3.  To  be  a  follower  or 
imitator  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  xi.  1 ;  1  Vet.  ii.  21 ;  Eom.  vii.  29  ;  Phil.  ii.  5).  Conclu- 
sion :  I  might  add  that  the  Christian  name  is  not  hereditary,  but  you  must  be 
born  anew  of  the  spirit  to  entitle  you  to  this  new  name ;  that  a  Christian  is  a 
believer,  believing  in  Him  after  whom  he  is  called  as  his  only  Saviour  and  Lord, 
and  that  he  is  a  true  penitent.  You  may  hence  see — 1.  That  the  Christian  character 
is  the  highest  in  the  world,  it  includes  everything  truly  great  and  amiable.  To 
acquire  the  title  of  kings  and  lords  is  not  in  your  power ;  to  spread  your  fame  as 
scholars,  philosophers,  or  heroes,  may  be  beyond  your  reach ;  but  here  is  a  cha- 
racter more  excellent,  more  amiable,  more  honourable  than  all  these,  which  it  is  your 
business  to  deserve  and  maintain.  And  this  is  a  dignity  which  begfjars  and  slaves 
may  attain.  2.  That  if  all  the  professors  of  Christianity  should  behave  in 
character,  the  religion  of  Christ  would  soon  appear  Divine  to  all  mankind, 
and  spread  through  all  nations  of  the  eartli.  It  would  be  as  needless  to  offer 
arguments  to  prove  it  Divine  as  to  prove  that  the  sun  is  full  of  light:  the  conviction 
would  flash  upon  all  mankind  by  its  own  intrinsic  evidence.  (S.  Davies,  M.A.) 
The  Christian  name  : — I.  What.  All  that  the  name  has  come  to  mean  was  quite 
aninteiided  by  the  Antiochenes.  But  the  question  now  is  not  what  these  ancient 
people  meant,  but  what,  after  nineteen  centuries  of  Christian  literature  and  life,  it 
has  come  to  mean.  Undoubtedly  it  comprehends — 1.  Faith  in  Christ.  2.  Love  to 
Christ.  3.  Imitation  of  Christ.  4.  Union  with  Christ,  with  all  the  effects  which 
flow  from  tlese,  such  as  obedience  to  Christ's  will,  loyalty  to  Christ's  cause,  fellow- 
ship with  Clirist's  people,  profession  of  Christ's  principles,  and  the  blessed  hope  of 
being  with  Christ  for  ever.  Without  each  of  these  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  no 
man  is  entitled  to  the  Christian  name.  II.  Where.  At  Antioch.  1.  An  unlikely 
place,  one  would  think.  Why  should  the  worshippers  of  physical  beauty,  the 
slaves  of  lust,  the  devotees  of  gain,  the  priests  of  a  false  religion,  and  tlie  teachers 
and  disciples  of  an  agnostic  philosophy  care  a  straw  about  the  followers  of  a  cruci- 
fied Jew  whose  teachings  ran  counter  to  all  their  desires,  practices,  traditions,  and 
disbeliefs,  much  less  trouble  to  give  them  a  new  name?  But  experience  should 
teach  us  that  people  are  not  so  indifferent  as  they  stem.  With  every  motive  to 
ignore  the  Christianity  of  to-day,  people  are  earnestly  noting  and  talking  about  it. 
2.  Really  a  most  likely  place.  Here  Christianity  stood  out  in  marked  contrast  ta 
all  the  Antiochenes  had  ever  known.    It  was  a  uew  thing.    Its  positive  belieff 


CHAP.  XL}  THE  ACTS,  247 

purity,  charity,  brotherhood,  stood  in  contrast  with  the  prevalent  scepticism, 
iniquity,  and  selfishness  of  the  place.  Light  cannot  but  be  seen  in  darkness,  and 
of  all  places  Christianity  must  have  been  most  conspicuous  at  Antioch.  It  com- 
pelled attention,  and  the  symptom  of  this   attention  was  the   name  Christian. 

3.  The  best  place.  No  city  in  the  world  except  Rome  and  Alexandria  afforded  such 
facihties  for  the  dissemination  of  the  knowledge  of  this  name.  Antioch  was  the 
Liverpool  of  the  age.  Let  once  a  religious  movement  get  well  rooted  in  the  great 
northern  port,  and  all  the  world  will  soon  hear  of  it.  III.  By  whom.  1.  Perhaps 
by  matter  of  fact  men  who  wanted  a  word  which  they  could  use  in  current  conver- 
sation and  be  nniversally  understood  when  talking  of  this  new  movement.  Just  aa 
when  a  name  was  required  to  describe  the  followers  of  Aristotle  or  Plato  in  ancient, 
and  of  Luther  and  Pusey  in  modern  times,  the  convenient  designations  were  Aris- 
totelians, (fee.  2.  Perhaps  by  wits  and  scoffers,  who  gladly  availed  themselves  of 
the  opportunity  of  fixing  the  name  of  a  crucified  malefactor  on  fanatics  whose 
tenets  were  only  worthy  of  laughter  or  scorn.  3.  Perhaps  by  admirers  who  saw  a 
resemblance  between  the  disciples  and  all  that  was  known  of  Christ.  IV.  When. 
When  a  new  name  was  required  to  describe  a  new  thing.  Up  till  now  aU  Christiana 
were  Jews,  but  even  now  there  were  such  characteristics  that  marked  them  oft 
from  the  rest  of  their  race  that  a  separate  designation  was  required.  When,  how- 
ever, Greeks  came  into  the  fold  a  distinctive  name  became  imperative,  and  one 
was  found  which  covered  both  Jew  and  Greek.  V.  Why.  Because  the  disciples 
were — 1.  Consecrated  to  Christ.  2.  Always  talking  about  Christ.  3.  Ever  seeking 
to  secure  disciples  for  Christ.  VI.  With  what  eesults.  The  name — 1.  Gradually 
superseded  every  other  name.  2.  Still  towers  above  every  other  name.  All  genuine 
Christians  are  glad  to  subordinate  denominational  distinctions.  3.  Will  eventually 
be  the  only  name.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  The  disciples  called  Christians : — I, 
Although  every  one  admits  that  the  appellative  "  Christian "  is  derived  from 
our  great  Master  Christ,  there  is  considerable  variety  of  opinion  as  to  the 
WAY  in  which  it  was  so  derived.  1.  The  view  taken  by  one  class  of  expositors 
is,  that  this  appellative  was  first  given  in  derision  and  contempt.  2.  A  second 
opinion  is,  that  the  title  in  question  was  first  assumed  by  the  Christians  them- 
selves, as  a  new  and  significant  distinction.  3.  But  a  more  probable  account  of 
this  matter  is,  that  the  name  Christian  was  first  adopted  by  Divine  appointment 
and  authority.  (1)  The  word  translated  "  called,"  in  the  text,  is  sometimes  used  in 
the  sense  of  '♦  to  warn,  or  appoint  by  Divine  authority."  (2)  The  mere  fact  of  the 
first  use  of  the  term  •'  Christian  "  being  recorded  in  so  abbreviated  and  important  a 
history  as  that  of  the  Acts  would  argue  that  it  was  an  event  of  much  interest  to 
the  Church  of  Christ  in  all  succeeding  ages.  (3)  As  it  is  mentioned  in  immediate 
connection  with  the  teaching  of  Barnabas  and  Paul,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  infer 
that  those  holy  men  instructed  the  disciples  at  Antioch  not  only  to  believe  in  Christ, 
but  also  to  adopt  His  name.  II.  Having  considered  the  derivation  and  meaning  of 
the  name,  we  must  not  inquire  respecting  the  chabacter  ;  for  it  is  one  thing  to  be 
called  a  Christian,  and  another  thing  to  be  one.  Suppose  that,  with  the  New 
Testament  in  our  hand,  we  were  required  to  give  some  account  of  one  of  those  early 
Antiochian  Christians ;  we  should,  without  fear  of  contradiction,  assert  the  following 
particulars : — 1.  That  he  was  a  man  who  received  and  believed  the  doctrines  of  the 
Lord  Christ.  2.  Our  disciple  at  Antioch,  one  of  those  first  called  Christians,  would 
place  his  confidence  in  the  Lord  Jesus  as  his  Saviour,  and  in  Him  alone.  3.  He 
would  be  one  that  yielded  implicit  obedience  to  the  commands  of  the  Son  of  God. 

4.  He  would  consider  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  that  perfect  and  illustrious  example 
he  was  bound  by  every  obligation  to  imitate.  (1)  Do  Christians  imitate  the  Lord 
Jesus  ? — then  are  they  an  inoffensive  people ;  for  He  was  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled, 
separate  from  sinners"  (Heb.  vii.  26).  (2)  Are  Christians  imitators  of  Christ? 
then  are  they  a  useful  people ;  for  He  "  went  about  doing  good,"  and  then  "  gave 
Himself  a  ransom  for  all."  (3)  Are  Christians  people  who  foUow  the  example  of 
the  holy  Jesus  ?  then  are  they  a  holy  and  devout  people ;  for  He  frequented  the 
temple  and  the  synagogue,  to  pray  in  public  ;  and  retired  to  the  mountain's  summit, 
to  pray  in  private  ;  and  in  that  exercise  sometimes  wasted  the  hours  of  the  night  1 
III.  It  only  remains  to  deduce  certain  consequences  in  which  we  have  all  an  intimate 
and  deep  concern.  1.  The  first  is,  that  no  man  can  become  a  Christian,  in  the 
evangelical  sense  of  the  word,  without  the  intervention  of  Divine  mercy  and  power. 
2.  Tue  next  is,  that  as  a  religious  designation,  the  term  "  Christian "  is  of  itself 
quite  sufficient ;  and  that  all  sectarian  additions  are  but  proofs  of  the  infirmity  or 
depravity  of  men.    On  this  subject  I  venture  to  advise — (1)  That  yoo  esteem  m 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

denomination  as  Christian,  only  as  its  members  embrace  the  truth,  imbibe  tha 
spirit,  and  obey  the  commands  of  Christ ;  and — (2)  That  you  glory  in  the  name  of 
••  Christian,"  and  make  no  account  of  any  other.  3.  It  is  clear  from  what  has  been 
advanced,  that  to  assume  the  name  without  sustaining  the  character  of  a  Christian 
is  a  serious  evil.  No  man  can  be  so  called  •without  being  eternally  better  or  worse 
for  it  1  4.  It  is  evident  from  the  whole,  that  to  be  called  a  Christian,  and  to  be  one, 
is  the  supreme  happiness  of  man  1  Oh  the  honour  !  to  have  that  dear,  that  sacred, 
that  exalted  name,  named  upon  us  !  Christians  ! — happy  people !  Innumerable, 
exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  are  theirs.  Then  why  hesitate  a  moment  to 
become  an  entire  and  decided  Christian  ?  To  this  high  and  unspeakable  honour 
you  are  all  invited  ;  Oh,  spurn  not  this  mark  of  infinite  mercy,  condescension,  and 
love  !      {Jas.    Bromley.)  The  Christian   nickname : — A  father  once  planned  a 

pleasant  surprise  for  his  son  who  was  just  beginning  to  think  for  himself.  In 
a  corner  of  his  garden  he  wrote  with  his  finger  his  boy's  name  in  soft  mould. 
The  furrows  he  then  sowed  with  seeds  of  cress.  A  few  days  after  this,  as  was 
expected,  the  astonished  lad  came  running  in  with  the  news  that  his  name  was 
growing  up  out  of  one  of  the  flower-beds.  Then,  with  the  explanation  immediately 
rendered,  followed  the  lessons — that  nothing  comes  by  chance  ;  that  many  myste- 
ries can  be  traced  out  very  easily  by  a  little  patient  study ;  that  it  is  possible  for 
men  to  seem  to  do  many  things  of  their  own  accord,  when  reaUy  it  is  God  who 
overrules  even  the  powers  of  nature  to  His  own  glory ;  and  that,  noble  and  excellent 
a  thing  as  it  is  to  have  a  Christian  name,  it  is  always  worth  while  to  ask  where  it 
comes  from,  and  what  it  actually  means.  Here  is  a  use  for  the  illustration  at  once. 
Our  young  people,  coming  into  life,  find  the  name  of  "  Christian  "  meeting  their 
eyes  at  every  turn,  almost  as  if  it  had  grown  up  out  of  the  ground  of  human  history 
with  no  hand  to  plant  the  seed.  I.  Where  was  it  that  the  name  was  first  re- 
ceived? Twenty  miles  from  the  Mediterranean,  just  at  the  point  where  Syi"ia 
joins  Asia  Minor,  stood  a  town  so  magnificent  that  even  the  fastidious  Greeks 
called  it  "  Antioch  the  beautiful,"  and  the  Komans  "the  Queen  of  the  East."  But, 
as  too  often  happens  in  this  world,  Antioch  was  as  vile  as  it  was  beautiful.  No  man 
cared  for  God  or  for  his  fellow-man.  II.  Who  gave  the  name  ?  The  Eomans  or 
the  local  inhabitants  of  Antioch  under  their  sway.  The  term  reads  like  the  rest  of 
Latin  appellations.  They  called  the  followers  of  Herod  "  Herodians,"  of  Vitellius 
"  Vitellians,"  and  so  they  easily  invented  the  name  of  "  Christians  "  from  the  name 
of  Christ.  Hence  we  see  that  in  the  beginning  it  was  a  mere  nickname  ;  probably 
they  hissed  it  out  hatefully,  and  pointed  their  fingers  at  the  man  who  gloried  in  a 
crucified  Leader.  All  we  need  to  say,  however,  is  that  the  beautiful  city  is  to-day 
lying  in  unsightly  ruins  ;  and  if  any  one  were  to  ask  what  Antioch  was,  the  answer 
would  be,  the  town  where  "  the  disciples  were  first  called  Christians."  That  nick- 
name preserves  Antioch  from  being  forgotten.  III.  What  does  the  name  mean  ? 
One  who  goes  after  Christ  as  His  Kedeemer  and  Pattern.  Change  only  one  of  tha 
letters,  and  we  have  the  whole  significance  ;  a  Christian  is  a  Christ-man.  And 
this  includes  these  things  at  the  least :  one  who  has  learned  about  Christ ;  one 
who  trusts  to  Christ  for  pardon;  one  who  resembles  Christ  in  his  life;  and  one 
who  gives  to  Christ  his  entire  heart  in  a  lasting  love.  1.  The  first  of  these  it  might 
be  assumed  we  all  have  already.  Those  person  would  be  called  heathen  who  had 
never  been  told  of  Jesus'  life  and  death.  2.  But,  most  of  all,  we  need  to  see  that 
we  are  sinners  ;  then  we  shall  perceive  how  gracious  God  was  in  sending  His  only 
Son  to  die  for  us  ;  and  then  we  shall  be  ready  to  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Saviour. 
3.  Then,  to  be  a  Christian  means  that  one  shall  grow  like  the  Saviour.  God  haa 
given  us  four  portraits  of  Him  in  the  Gospels.  These  we  can  study  constantly.  4. 
Then  we  are  to  give  our  liearts  to  Christ  in  a  loving  service.  We  are  to  go  about 
doing  good,  as  He  did.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  What  is  it  to  he  a  Christian  : — 
1.  The  Divinity  of  Christ  is  the  object  of  the  Christian's  worship.  2.  The  con- 
descension and  atonement  of  Christ  are  the  objects  of  the  Christian's  gratitude  and 
trust.  3.  The  life  and  teachings  of  Christ  are  the  subjects  of  the  Christian's 
example  and  belief.  4.  The  reign  of  Christ  is  the  object  of  the  Christian's  confi- 
dence and  joy.  5.  The  return  of  Christ  is  the  object  of  the  Christian's  expectation. 
"Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly."  (Homiletic  Monthly.)  Christian  life: — Tha 
history  of  Christianity  at  Antioch  is  on  a  small  scale  the  bistory  of  Christianity  in 
the  world.  Study  the  growth  of  one  tree,  and  you  will  have  a  knowledge*  of  tha 
laws  which  regulate  development  in  the  vegetable  world.  The  flowers  that  bloom 
to-day  obey  the  same  laws  as  did  those  of  Paradise,  and  the  Churches  of  to-day 
spread  themselves  after  the  same  fashion  as  did  that  of  Antioch.     It  is  of  the  first 


«HAP.  n.]  THE  ACTS.  849 

importance,  then,  that  we  should  know  all  that  the  name  Christian  means.  I. 
Choice.  Choice  does  not  rule  everywhere.  We  did  not  choose  whether  we  would 
have  life,  parents,  name,  country,  or  not.  And  there  are  some  things  connected 
with  Christianity  which  may  be  put  in  the  same  list — Christian  land,  books, 
thoughts,  facts,  &c.  We  are  not  Christians  because  we  Uve  among  these  circum- 
stances, any  more  than  a  man  becomes  a  horse  by  being  put  into  a  stable,  any 
more  than  a  sheep's  clothing  makes  a  sheep.  Doubtless  there  are  thousands  who 
believe  that  baptism  makes  them  Christians,  just  as  Pagans  believed  that,  by  going 
through  certain  rites,  they  obtained  the  favour  of  the  gods.  But  the  New  Testament 
teaches  that  Christianity  is  to  be  chosen.  There  must  be  first  a  willing  mind — 
not  a  mere  non-rejection  of  Christianity,  but  a  clear  acceptance  of  Christ.  There 
is  something  inspiriting  in  this.  Christ  appeals  to  our  manhood.  He  does  not 
treat  us  like  children  to  be  led  by  the  hand,  nor  compel  us  to  a  kind  of  religious 
slavery,  but  teaches  us  to  stand  erect  in  our  humility.  II.  Obedience.  Authority 
is  essential  to  all  life.  Natural  life  must  be  regulated  by  well  known  rules,  which 
we  did  not  invent,  but  which  we  found  invented  for  us.  So  with  spiritual  life  and 
communion.  We  may  be  improving  their  outward  forms  and  adapting  them  to  the 
changing  culture  of  the  age.  But  we  must  build  on  the  same  foundations,  and 
progress  on  the  same  principles  as  the  earliest  Christians  did — in  one  word,  bow  to 
the  authority  of  Christ.  The  Church  has  suffered  from  the  usurped  authority  of 
kings,  parliaments,  bishops,  mobs ;  but  the  Church's  true  Head  is  Christ.  Alas 
for  the  Churches,  they  have  too  often  lived  as  though  the  Head  were  a  mere  caput 
mortuum.  But  the  Head  of  the  Church  is  a  mind  that  thinks  of  its  difficulties  and 
trials  ;  it  governs  a  hand  that  can  guide  it  in  all  its  devious  paths  ;  it  moves  a  will 
that  can  defend  it,  and  has  a  mouth  by  which  the  law  of  God  can  be  made  known. 
III.  Separation.  One  of  the  reasons  why  Christians  were  so  much  hated  was  that 
they  stood  aloof  from  the  common  enjoyments  of  hfe.  But  this  was  inevitable,  for 
the  festivities  and  customs  of  Greece  and  Rome  were  so  leavened  with  idolatry  and 
sin  that  indulgence  ia  the  one  involved  complicity  with  the  other.  The  early  Chris- 
tians consequently  were  in  danger  of  asceticism,  and  were  tempted  to  confound 
what  was  innocent  with  what  was  sinful.  Society,  thanks  to  Christian  influence, 
is  not  now  so  corrupt.  And  yet  our  danger  lies  in  too  much  laxity  and  indifference. 
Depravity  has  not  been  charmed  away,  and  there  is  no  less  peril  in  the  world's 
friendship  to-day  than  there  was  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  If,  then,  we  would 
do  good  service  in  the  world  we  must  separate  from  its  evil.  The  hope  of  the 
Church  is  in  its  clean  hands  and  pure  heart.  Separation  from  all  known  evil  is 
the  mark  alike  of  the  Christian  soul  and  the  Christian  community.  IV.  Willing- 
ness to  SUFFER  for  Christ  (1  Pet.  iv.  16).  {S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  What  constitutes  a 
Christian: — A  friend  of  mine  was  staying  at  a  farm  in  the  South  of  Scotland.  The 
district  was  supposed  to  be  very  religious  ;  and  one  afternoon,  while  sitting  in  the 
dining-room,  my  friend  and  the  hostess  fell  into  a  conversation  about  Church 
affairs.  The  lady  was  quite  well  informed  of  the  difference  between  these  two 
great  branches  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  the  Free  and  the  Established;  but 
when  her  visitor  asked  if  there  were  many  real  Christians  in  the  parish,  she  only 
stared  in  blank  amazement  as  she  replied,  "  Why,  we  are  all  Christians."  "  But," 
continued  her  friend,  "  it  is  true  Christians  I  mean,  not  merely  nominal  Christians, 
but  men  and  women  who  have  really  trusted  Christ  with  their  souls,  and  are  trying 
to  convince  and  persuade  their  feUowa  to  do  the  same."  But  the  distinction  between 
real  and  nominal  Christians  seemed  too  subtle  for  her,  and  all  she  replied  was, 
♦'But  we  are  aU  Christians,  we  were  all  born  Christians!  "  Her  guest,  however, 
was  determined,  if  possible,  to  bring  home  the  difference  to  her,  and  mentioning  a 
man  well  known  in  the  locality  for  his  drunken   and  disorderly  habits,  asked, 

"Would  you  call  K a  Christian?"     "  Yes,  I  suppose  he  must  be."     "Then 

there  is   G ,"   mentioning   a  gentleman   equally  well  known  for   his  godly 

and  philanthropic  life,  "  would  you  caU  him  a  Christian  ?  "  "  Yes  !  " — the 
"  yes  "  came  more  heartily  this  time.  "  Then  both  these  men  are  Christians. 
There  is  no  difference  between  them."  "  Oh,  yes,  there  is  a  difference." 
"Then  what  is  that  difference?"  But  she  would  not  attempt  to  define  it. 
She  wished  to  keep  that  comfortable  delusion  that  we  are  all  Christians, 
whose  principal  Christian  duty  is  to  go  to  church  on  Sunday  and  put  a  penny 
in  the  plate.  It  is  from  such  lukewarm,  nominal  Christians  that  the  Church 
must  shake  herself  loose  before  she  can  take  her  true  place  as  a  militant  force 
against  the  powers  of  evil.  (H.  Hamilton.)  Nominal  Christians: — To  what 
sort  of  a  character  should  we  attach  the  name  of  Christian ;  what  life  is  it  deserves 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

that  ?  The  medals  given  to  the  Indians  at  the  treaty  of  Eed  Elver  were  supposed 
to  be  of  silver,  but  were  really  of  a  baser  metal.  Said  an  Indian  chief,  striking  his 
in  such  a  way  that  the  deceit  was  apparent,  "  I  think  it  would  disgrace  the  Queen, 
my  mother,  to  wear  her  image  on  so  base  a  metal  as  this."  What  it  it  to 
he  a  Christian : — A  little  child  was  once  asked  what  it  was  to  be  a  Christian,  and 
Bhe  wisely  answered,  "  It  is  just  to  do  what  Jesus  would  do  if  He  was  a  little 
girl  and  lived  at  our  house."  A  Christian  by  profession  and  practice  : — The 
Christian  man  is  to  be  something  like  a  physician.  You  know  we  call  a  physician 
a  professional  man.  Well,  how  does  he  profess?  There  is  a  large  brass  plate  on 
his  door  and  a  big  bell,  and  everybody  knows  what  the  brass  plate  and  the  bell 
mean.  That  is  part  of  his  profession.  What  else  ?  How  does  he  profess  to  be  a 
physician  ?  He  goes  into  company,  and  his  dress  is  like  anybody  else's.  You  do 
not  see  a  box  of  lancets  hanging  at  his  side ;  you  do  not  observe  that  he  is  dressed 
in  any  peculiar  costume.  He  is  a  physician,  and  he  is  always  a  physician ;  but  hia 
profession  is  carried  on  by  his  practice.  This  is  how  a  Christian's  profession  is  to 
be  carried  on,  by  his  practice.  The  man  is  a  physician  professionally,  because  he 
really  does  heal  people  and  write  prescriptions  and  attend  to  their  wants.  I  am  to 
be  a  Christian  in  my  actions,  my  deeds,  my  thoughts,  my  words.  Therefore,  if 
anybody  wants  a  Christian,  I  should  be  known  by  my  words  and  my  acts.  When 
we  used  to  go  to  school,  we  would  draw  houses,  and  horses,  and  trees  on  our  slates, 
and  we  remember  how  we  used  to  write  "  house  "  under  the  house,  and  "  horse  " 
under  the  horse,  for  some  persons  might  have  thought  the  horse  was  a  house.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  What  constitutes  a  Christian  : — Four  things  are  necessary  to 
constitute  a  Christian.  1.  Faith  makes  a  Christian.  2.  Life  proves  a  Christian. 
3.  Trials  confirm  a  Christian.     4.  Death  crowns  a  Christian.  Wliat  is  a  Chris- 

tian:— ^A  young  convert  arose  in  the  prayer-meeting  and  said,  "A  few  days  since 
the  foreman  of  my  room  came  to  me  and  said,  '  Henry,  are  you  a  Christian  1 '  I 
replied,  '  Yes,  sir,  I  am.  At  least  I  am  trying  to  be.  I  look  to  the  Lord  for  strength 
and  grace  1 '  And  then  I  could  think  of  nothing  better  to  say,  so  I  thought  I  would 
ask  him  a  question  ;  so  I  said,  '  Mr.  Smith,  are  you  a  Christian  ?  '  He  replied,  *  I 
go  to  church  1 '  Then  I  didn't  know  what  to  say.  But  a  few  days  before  this  con- 
versation a  boy  of  about  twelve  years  old  came  into  the  shop  and  asked  for  work. 
"When  the  foreman  told  him  he  had  none  for  him,  he  told  a  pitiful  story  of  the 
Bickness  of  his  father  and  mother.  The  foreman  then  asked  him  if  he  had  ever 
worked  in  a  jeweller's  shop,  and  he  replied,  '  No,  sir,  but  I  have  worked  next  door 
to  one  ! '  So,  when  I  could  not  think  what  to  say  to  my  foreman,  this  came  into 
my  mind,  and  I  said, '  Mr.  Smith,  do  you  remember  the  little  boy  who  came  in  here 
the  other  day  and  said  he  once  worked  next  door  to  a  jeweller's  shop  ? '  •  Yes.' 
•  Do  you  think  that  working  next  to  a  jeweller's  shop  made  him  a  jeweller? '  •  No.' 
'  Do  you  think  that  going  to  church  makes  you  a  Christian  ?  '  Who  does  not  see 
that  the  answer  of  this  young  convert  razes  to  the  earth  all  the  refuges  of  our  dear 
friends  away  from  the  Saviour,  who  have  become  accustomed  to  substituting  falla- 
cies for  reasons,  and  good  deeds  of  their  own  for  faith  in  Christ's  blood  and  New 
Testament  obedience  ?  Many  who  are  deferential  and  reverential  in  the  presence 
of  the  gospel's  proclamations  say  that,  while  such  a  way  as  it  prescribes  is  doubtless 

E roper  for  most  people,  they  must  be  allowed  to  present,  as  the  ground  of  their 
opes,  their  uniform  kindness  to  Christian  ministers,  their  constant  readiness  to 
aid  in  their  support,  their  presence  and  devout  behaviour  in  church  service,  their 
compassionate  and  self-sacrificing  ministrations  to  the  unfortunate,  their  honourable 
business  dealing,  and  their  high  regard,  generally,  for  the  rights  of  men.  These  are 
grand  things.  True  Christianity  is  very  far  from  discarding  them  ;  it  insists  upon 
them.  But  with  equal  vigour  it  protests  against  their  substitution  for  the  "  faith 
which  works  by  love."  This  is  evidently  working  "  next  door  to  a  jeweller's  shop." 
{Christian  Age.) 

Vers.  27-30.  And  In  these  days  came  prophets  from  Jerusalem  unto  Antioch. — 
Fruit  from  the  Gentiles: — 1.  The  relation  between  the  old  Church  at  Jerusalem 
and  the  new  at  Antioch  was  that  which  St.  Paul,  writing  under  parallel  ciroum- 
stances,  described  in  Rom.  xv.  27  {cf.  2  Cor.  ix.  12-15).  It  was  a  becoming 
acknowledgment  of  the  vast  debt  under  which  all  the  world  must  lie  to  the  Jew,  but 
it  was  no  repayment  of  it,  when  rich  Autioch  sent  bread  to  starving  Judasa.  Jeru- 
salem sent  prophets,  Antioch  sent  back  corn,  Agabus  appears  once  again  (chap, 
xxi.  10),  and  again  as  a  predicter  of  disasters.  This  is  the  more  noticeable  that 
prediction  was  not  the  usual  function  of  the  prophetic  order  of  the  apostolia 


OHA*.  XI. J  THE  ACTS.  95X 

Church.  They  were  men  whom  the  Spirit  had  gifted  with  persuasive  speech,  and 
insight  into  truth.  We  have  'est  the  name,  but  the  thing  remains.  2.  The  pre- 
diction of  Agabus  had  a  practical  design.  He  foretold  the  dearth  that  the  Church 
might  act  upon  it,  and  on  the  hint  they  acted.  The  reign  of  Claudius  was  one  of 
disaster ;  in  the  opening  year  it  was  Italy  which  suffered  from  the  failure  of  crops  ; 
in  the  fourth,  Palestine ;  in  the  eighth  and  ninth,  Greece ;  in  the  eleventh,  Italy 
again.  It  was  to  the  second  of  these  dearths  that  Agabus  pointed  which  occurred 
in  A.D,  45-46.  We  are  here  on  sure  chronological  ground,  and  know  that  the  want 
was  so  great  that  many  were  starved  to  death.  A  new  convert  to  Judaism,  the 
Queen  of  Adiabene,  was  so  struck  with  the  condition  of  things  that  she  sent  to 
Alexandria  aud  Cyprus  for  supplies ;  and  her  son  also,  as  Josephus  tells  us, 
contributed  great  sums  of  money  to  the  same  object.  3.  On  such  occasions  it  was 
usual  for  the  foreign  synagogues  to  remit  aid,  as  at  this  hour  numbers  of  indigent 
Jews  in  Jerusalem  are  sustained  by  the  charity  of  their  European  compatriots.  The 
Church  at  Antioch,  however,  did  not  contribute  through  the  synagogue,  and  in  this 
separate  assistance  there  is  the  first  historical  recognition  of  the  fact  that  church 
aud  synagogue  had  parted  company ;  that  to  be  a  Christian  cut  off  a  Jew  from 
the  charities  of  his  own  people ;  and  that  henceforth  the  tie  of  fellow-Christian 
was  to  prove  a  stronger  bond  betvrixt  Jew  and  Gentile,  than  any  other  which 
bound  Jew  to  Jew  or  Gentile  to  Gentile.  A  new  force  had  entered  into  human- 
ity, the  name  of  Christian  had  already  begun  to  dissolve  ancient  unities  and  to 
reconcile  ancient  feuds  and  to  construct  on  the  ruins  of  race  hatreds  a  catholic 
society.  4.  It  is  true  to  this  day  that  Christianity  plants  in  genuine  Christian 
hearts  a  brotherhood  which  can  cross  the  barriers  of  nationality.  When  the 
Eeformation  revived  the  primitive  faith,  the  newly-formed  Churches  of  Germany, 
Switzerland,  England,  &c. ,  were  brought  into  close  and  friendly  relations.  They 
exchanged  famous  teachers,  sheltered  one  another's  confessors,  shared  each  other's 
fortune,  and  leagued  their  political  iniiuence  for  their  common  good.  The  Evan- 
gelical Churches  of  our  own  day  have  shown  a  similar  readiness  to  succour  feeble 
and  struggling  foreign  congregations.  If  ever  that  decaying  virtue  called  patriot- 
ism is  to  lose  itself  in  a  more  cosmopolitan  charity,  it  must  be  on  a  Christian, 
not  on  a  socialistic,  basis.  It  is  sad  to  see  the  best  hearts  of  Europe  groping 
after  the  foundations  of  a  new  civil  order  in  which  all  men  shall  be  brothers 
while  they  cast  off  the  name  of  One  in  whom  alone  the  principles  of  love  and 
freedom  and  authority  meet.  It  is  sadder  still  to  see  a  Christian  Church  so  rent 
by  animosity  that  instead  of  demonstrating  to  distracted  peoples  where  to  find  the 
true  secret  of  brotherhood,  it  rather  repels  from  Christ  those  who  are  most 
passionate  for  peace  and  fellowship.  But  when  Jerusalem  shall  not  envy  Antioch 
nor  Antioch  vex  Jerusalem,  when  Churches  that  are  poor  in  this  world  are  rich  in 
faith,  and  those  who  are  rich  in  this  world  are  "  ready  to  distribute,"  then  will 
men  learn  that  to  be  a  Christian  is  to  be  free  of  a  universal  commonwealth  whose 
citizens  are  all  equal  and  all  loving.  5.  The  Gentile  Church  made  its  gift  more 
precious  by  sending  it  through  its  most  honoured  members.  It  is  notable  that  just 
before  we  part  with  the  mother  Church,  we  hear  for  the  first  time  of  its  being 
ruled  by  presbyters  (ver.  30).  This  official  name,  the  most  venerable  and  Biblical 
of  all  ecclesiastical  distinctions,  frequently  recurs,  at  first  associated  with  apostles 
at  Jerusalem,  and  afterwards  with  deacons  or  alone  in  the  Churches  of  Ephesus, 
Crete,  Philippi,  &c.      (J.  O.  Dykes,  D.D.)  Early  Christian    beneficence  : — I. 

The  want  predicted.  The  prophets'  functions  were  twofold:  to  forth-tell,  i.e., 
to  utter  the  present  truth  in  forceful  and  convincing  language,  and  to  foretell 
future  events.  The  latter  entered  largely  into  Old  Testament  prophecy,  rarely 
into  the  New.  The  office  has  survived,  and  the  former  and  more  important  func- 
tion is  discharged  by  the  Christian  ministry  ;  but  what  has  become  of  the  latter  ? 
That  the  future  should  be  an  utter  blank,  tliat  the  Church  should  live  from  hand 
to  mouth,  that  Christians  should  be  mere  opportunists,  is  dead  against  the  doctrine 
of  the  Divine  presence  in  and  leadership  of  the  Church.  What  had  become  of 
Christianity,  not  only  in  great  crises,  but  in  its  normal  developments,  if  it  had 
lacked  "  seers,"  "  men  who  had  understanding  of  the  times  to  know  what  Israel 
ought  to  do  "  ?  Inspired  prediction  has  ceased,  and  men  can  no  longer  tell  with 
minute  circumstantiality  what  a  century  may  bring  forth.  But  men  are  endowed 
with  sagacity,  prudent  forethought,  keen  foresight,  and  in  politics,  business,  &c., 
often  make  their  calculations  with  the  nicest  accuracy,  and  lay  plans  which  only 
exiraor.linary  contingencies  frustrate.  It  is  this  facultv  that  the  great  Head  of 
the  Church  now  consecrates  and  employs — v.hen  the  Church  places  them  at  Hif 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

disposal  which,  alas,  is  not  always  the  case.  It  is  the  duty  of  Christians  to  be 
on  their  watch  tower  and  to  look  out  for  advantages,  and  not  only  within  the 
citadel  economising  resources  or  strengthening  fortifications,  e.g.,  a  town  Church 
should  anticipate  the  migration  of  the  surrounding  population  to  the  suburbs,  and 
make  timely  provision  for  future  extension.  If,  however,  it  is  content  with  its  own 
immediate  work,  and  with  the  supply  of  its  present  needs,  it  may  find  itself,  as 
many  a  city  Church  has  done,  utterly  stranded.  Again,  the  home  Church  should 
ever  keep  its  eye  on  emigration  to  our  colonies.  How  many  descendants  of 
Christian  people  have  grown  up  practically  heathen  from  the  neglect  of  this !  Once 
more,  as  regards  ecclesiastical  buildings — churches,  schools,  <fec. — there  should 
always  be  room  for  expansion,  or,  lacking  accommodation,  adults  or  children  will 
go  elsewhere  or  go  nowhere.  Lastly,  to  recur  to  the  text,  how  requisite  it  is  that 
wise  and  timely  provision  should  be  made  for  the  necessities  of  the  poor.  The 
poor  we  have  always  with  us,  and  we  know  from  bitter  experience  that  their  wants 
are  augmented  in  winter.  Yet  we  allow  winter  to  come,  and  when  the  evil  is  on 
us,  there  is  a  terrible  spasm  of  effort  to  collect  money,  hold  sewing  meetings,  open 
soup  kitchens,  &c.  How  much  better  to  make  timely  provision  in  the  summer 
when  resources  are  more  ample,  and  when  we  might  encourage  the  poor  themselves 
to  "put  by  for  a  rainy  day."  II.  The  want  met.  1.  In  the  spirit  of  brotherhood. 
"Disciples  .  .  .  brethren."  They  were  people  of  different  races,  and  the  Christians 
at  Antioch  had  been  regarded  with  none  too  much  of  charity  by  the  Church  at 
Jerusalem.  This,  however,  was  unnoticed.  It  was  enough  that  "  brethren  "  were 
in  trouble,  and  "  disciples  "  could  relieve  them.  There  were  poor  at  Antioch  no 
doubt ;  but  Christians  had  not  then  learned  to  confine  their  benefactions  to  their 
own  communities.  How  many  rich  Churches  with  few  or  no  poor  need  this 
example  !  2.  Universally.  "  Every  man  "  did  something.  It  is  an  unhealthy 
state  of  things  when  contributions  are  confined  to  the  more  opulent  of  a  congre- 
gation. Christians  sadly  need  teaching  the  privilege  as  well  as  the  duty  of  giving. 
3.  Conscientiously.  "  According  to  his  ability."  (1)  Not  according  to  some 
arbitrary  rule.  Tithing  in  many  cases  would  be  far  more  than  the  poor  could 
afford,  but  far  less  than  the  rich.  (2)  Not  according  to  mere  inclination.  This 
fluctuates,  and  at  one  time  impels  a  man  to  be  unjust  to  himself  and  at  another 
unjust  to  others.  (3)  Not  according  to  urgent  solicitation.  Agabus  asked  for 
nothing.  (4)  But  according  to  ability  at  the  time.  4.  Delicately.  "  By  the  hands 
of  Barnabas  and  Saul."  A  gift  is  enhanced  by  the  medium  through  which  it 
passes.  If  you  cannot  give  yourself,  see  that  your  gifts  are  conveyed  by  those  who 
will  not  make  it  disagreeable  to  receive  them.  6.  Wisely.  To  the  elders  of  the 
Church,  who  best  know  the  cases  to  be  relieved,  and  can  distribute  economically 
and  kindly.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Practical  Christianity : — 1.  It  is  impossible  for  ua 
to  read  this  record  without  being  struck  with  the  spirit  and  devotion  which  stamped 
the  character  of  Divinity  upon  the  religion  in  connection  with  which  it  is  shown. 
It  was  one  of  the  remarks  made  by  a  heathen  author  in  those  days,  '•  See  how 
these  Christians  love  one  another."  Men  looked  to  their  opinions,  and  could  not 
accept  them — to  the  peculiarities  of  their  religion,  and  were  offended  by  them.  But 
there  was  an  argument  which  these  Christians  could  adduce,  which  an  unbeliever 
could  not  impugn  ;  it  was  a  positive,  practical,  evident  demonstration  of  the  power 
of  God.  2.  The  history  is  soon  told.  Light  loves  to  radiate.  For  a  long  time 
Christian  light  was  centred  in  Jerusalem,  but  there  came  a  time  when  God  chose  to 
disperse  that  central  light.  Men,  imbued  with  Christian  faith  and  love,  were 
scattered  abroad  ;  and  among  them  were  some  who  went  as  far  as  Antioch  preach- 
ing the  Word.  Christianity  is  cathoho ;  is  also  reflex  in  its  operation  :  it  is  not 
one  of  those  lights  which  fall  upon  a  non-reflecting  surface.  It  is  intended  that 
God  should  sliine  upon  individuals,  and  that  individuals  in  their  turn  should  shine 
upon  each  other.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,"  Ac.  Christian  light  had 
come  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch,  and  these  men  of  Antioch  necessarily  sought 
for  some  opportunity  of  showing  their  gratitude.  They  could  not  send  them  light, 
for  this  they  had,  perhaps,  in  a  more  perfect  form  than  themselves.  But  they 
were  rich,  and  the  others  were  poor ;  for  the  Christians  at  Jerusalem  had  beggared 
themselves  by  their  liberality  in  times  past.  And  so,  when  the  occasion  arose, 
the  men  of  Antioch  made  a  bold  and  a  noble  determination  that  "  every  man, 
according  to  his  ability,  should  send  help  to  the  saints  in  Judaea."  Not  that  thej 
passed  resolutions  merely;  nor  that  they  went  through  that  parody  of  bene- 
volence that  you  find  in  public  meetings,  where  you  shall  find  men  hold  up 
their  hands  in  accordance  with  some  proposition  that  they  never  iniend  to  carry 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  25S 

out.    The  men  of  Antioch  determined  to  do ;  and  as  they  detennined  they  did. 

I.  The  occasion  which  pboddced  this  libbrality.  The  destitution  assumed  two 
features — 1.  It  was  predicted.  There  was  no  exhibition  of  harrowing  details — 
no  picture  of  wide-spread  distress — held  before  the  men  of  Antiooh.  It  was  a 
thing  to  be.  Nevertheless,  these  men  acted  upon  it  as  though  it  were,  and 
prepared  to  meet  it.  What  does  this  teach  us?  (1)  The  simplicity  of  their 
faith.  They  had  nothing  objective  to  look  to  which  told  them  of  the  existence  of 
distress.  They  looked,  perhaps,  at  the  state  of  the  soil,  at  the  state  of  the  atmo- 
sphere, at  the  circumstances  of  times  past ;  but  there  was  nothing  to  create  appre- 
hension. All  was  quiet,  except  the  voice  of  prediction  ;  and  God,  who  seeth  not  as 
man  seeth,  told  them  that  the  famine  was  coming.  And  what  did  they  do  ?  Other 
men  might  have  stood  by  in  silent  expectation,  or  have  derided  the  prediction,  but 
these  men  took  prophecy  for  fact.  In  these  days,  probably,  when  men  walk  by 
sight  in  place  of  by  faith,  they  would  have  said,  "  Wait  till  the  calamity  comes." 
No,  said  these  men ;  it  has  come.  "  Come  where  ?  There  is  no  trace  of  it  I  " 
God  has  predicted  it,  and  in  the  simphcity  of  their  faith  that  was  enough. 
(2)  A  positive  refinement  of  benevolence.  There  is  a  certain  vulgarity  of 
benevolence.  In  these  days  we  have  to  place  before  men  a  picture  of 
calamity,  to  come  down  to  statistics,  to  state  the  absolute  startling  facts. 
But  these  men  looked  not  for  facts.  They  were  prepared  to  act  upon  the  intima- 
tion, and  they  required  no  appeal  to  their  feelings ;  they  took  the  fact  as  given 
at  their  hands  by  God.  2.  It  was  universal.  The  Jewish  historian  tells  us,  it 
was  over  the  entire  world,  and  that  multitudes  died  on  account  of  it,  and  therefore 
these  men  of  Antioch  were  included  in  it.  What  might  have  happened  then? 
They  might  have  said.  When  that  dark  calamity  falls,  it  will  touch  ourselves ;  we 
shall  come  to  the  time  of  high  prices,  of  scant  food,  of  short  employment ;  let  us 
therefore  be  wise  now  in  the  principles  of  political  economy,  and  lay  by  for  our  own 
destitution.  No.  Notwithstanding  that  they  themselves  stood  on  the  very  thres- 
hold  of  the  disaster,  they  passed  a  resolution  which  they  carried  out  into  action. 

II.  The  motives  by  which  these  men  weee  probably  actuated.  1.  The 
smallest  and  lowest  of  the  dictates  of  humanity.  There  are  feelings  within  feel- 
ings, and  circles  within  circles,  and  humanity  is  not  the  less  practised  because 
Christianity  is  received.  You  shall  find  it  among  heathen  nations.  It  was  one  of 
the  noblest  sayings  of  antiquity,  "I  am  a  man,  and  hold  nothing  that  concerns 
human  kind  to  be  strange  to  me."  Those  men  of  Antioch  were  men.  They  felt  for 
others.  It  was  not  simply  that  the  men  at  Jerusalem  were  Christians — they  were 
men,  and  because  they  were  men,  it  was  in  the  first  place  that  they  determined  to 
help  them.  2.  But  there  are  principles  not  buUt  upon  the  mere  instinctive  and 
natural  feelings — a  love  to  men,  on  account  of  their  being  brother-Christians.  The 
disciples  determined  to  send  relief  to  the  brethren.  These  men  had  never  looked 
upon  each  other  face  to  face,  nor  exchanged  a  thought.  What  then  ?  Sons  of  God 
in  Jerusalem — sons  of  God  in  Antioch — members  of  the  same  family  of  Christ 
looked  upon  each  other  as  brethren  1  We  oftentimes  ask  ourselves  the  meaning  of 
the  expression,  "  The  communion  of  saints."  You  have  an  exhibition  of  it  here. 
Did  not  the  men  of  Jerusalem  feel,  "  We  have  sent  light  to  Antioch  "  ?  And  did  not 
the  men  of  Antioch  feel,  "  We  are  going  to  return  it  after  our  poor  fashion  "?  What 
is  all  that  but  communion  ?  There  is  such  a  link  in  the  natural  world,  where  you 
shall  see  the  loadstone  drawing  to  it  the  particles  of  iron  that  approach  to  it,  im- 
parting the  same  quality  to  the  particles  which  it  touches,  and  thereby  drawing 
these  particles  the  one  to  the  other.  And  it  is  the  peculiarity  of  Christian  truth,  to 
bind  believers  the  one  to  the  other.  Why  ?  Because,  first  of  all,  they  have  been 
bound  to  Christ.  3.  Gratitude.  The  very  best  of  blessings  which  one  people  could 
confer  upon  another,  had  been  by  the  men  of  Jerusalem  conferred  upon  the  men 
of  Antioch.  They  had  sent  to  them  their  spiritual  things;  it  was  no  wonder 
that  they  should  reap  their  carnal  things.  4.  The  love  that  they  bore  to  Christ, 
and  which  constrained  them  to  love  one  another.  And  it  is  that  principle,  after 
aU,  that  tells.  "  He  that  loveth  God  will  love  his  brother  also."  III.  The  modes 
IN  which  their  benevolence  was  manifested.  We  have  oftentimes  heard  the 
charge  of  want  of  judgment  brought  against  Christians.  "They  have  all  things 
but  common  sense."  Now,  look  at  the  steps  taken  by  the  men  of  Antioch.  The 
distribution  of  their  charity  was  marked  by  three  features.  1.  Universality  and 
proportion.  "  Every  man"  was  expected  to  feel  for  the  brethren,  and  to  show  that 
feeling  by  contributing  according  to  his  means.  It  was  not  one  of  those  things 
which  a  certain  class  or  section  was  to  take  upon  them.    Now,  why  need  we  adopt 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

house-to-house  visitation,  but  because  there  are  multitudes  in  this  world  who  are 
content  to  stand  by,  and  to  see  others  bear  the  burden,  and  push  it  from  themselvea. 
Eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  that  was  not  the  course  taken  by  the  men  of  Antioch. 
There  was  no  working  upon  the  passions  of  people  and  constraining  them  to  give. 
It  was  a  simple  method  of  giving  in  proportion  to  means.  The  matter  was  thus 
left  to  each  man's  conscience  to  say  what  his  abiUty  was.  Look  at  thy  means.  See 
whether,  in  the  midst  of  thine  affluence,  comfort,  and  family  expenditure,  thou 
mayest  not  knock  off  something  that  is  not  absolutely  necessary,  and  briug  it  to 
the  rule  of  thine  abiUty.  Ask  thyself  not  what  thou  wishest  to  do,  not  what  thou 
mayest  be  seen  to  do,  not  what  others  are  doing ;  but  give  in  proportion  to  thy 
means.  Is  it  not  a  righteous  principle  ? — a  principle  recognised  in  Scripture — 
"  Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week  let  every  one  lay  by  according  to  his  abihty."  Is 
it  so  ?  If  so,  then  must  you  learn  a  lesson  from  these  poor,  enthusiastic  Chris- 
tians in  Antioch.  2.  Promptitude.  They  did  not  trust  to  second  impressions,  or 
to  second  suggestions  ;  and  wisely.  Upon  hearing  of  a  great  deal  of  distress,  our 
first  emotions  are  generous ;  our  second  emotions  are  narrowed.  At  first,  there  is 
a  burst  of  feeling ;  we  draw  out  our  purses,  and  almost  pour  out  their  contents. 
Second  thoughts  however  come  ;  but  these  men  of  Antioch  would  not  trust  them- 
selves to  second  thoughts.  No,  said  they ;  we  had  better  act  at  once,  before  the 
blessed  influence  has  left  us.  They  put  it  out  of  their  own  power— out  of  their 
own  hands.  (Dean  Boyd.)  Apostolic  philanthropy : — Van  Lennep  tells  us  that 
among  the  Nestorian  Christians  dwelling  in  the  fertile  plain  of  Ooroomia, 
Persia,  charity  assumes  an  almost  apostoUo  form  ;  for  it  is  their  yearly  practice  to 
lay  by  a  certain  portion  of  their  crops  in  order  to  supply  the  wants  of  their 
brethren  living  among  the  rugged  mountains  of  Koordistan,  whose  food  often 
fails  them  altogether,  or  is  carried  away  by  their  more  powerful  enemies.  Deeds 
of  charity  are  highly  extolled  in  the  Koran,  but  the  Mohammedans  ignore  these 
precepts,  so  the  value  of  such  acts  by  the  Christians  is  more  particularly  felt  where 
the  rulers  take  no  interest  in  works  of  public  utUity.  The  law  of  brotherhood : — 
The  Irish  famine  (1847)  touched  the  hearts  of  outside  and  distant  peoples  to  a 
sentiment  of  their  common  humanity  which  was  never  stirred  in  them  before  to 
such  fine  issues.  In  America  this  feUow-feehng  pervaded  the  whole  population. 
North  and  South,  black  and  white,  bond  and  free.  The  very  slaves  in  the  South, 
at  their  rude  cabin  meals  at  night,  thought  and  spoke  of  the  hungry  people  some- 
where beyond  the  sea,  they  knew  not  in  what  direction.  And  they  came  with  their 
small  gifts  in  their  great  hands,  and  laid  them  among  the  general  contributions, 
each  with  a  heart  full  of  kindly  feeling  towards  the  suffering.  Never  was  there 
such  a  rummaging  in  cellars,  garrets,  wardrobes,  and  granaries  in  the  United 
States  for  things  that  would  be  comfortable  to  the  hungry  and  needy.  .  .  .  The 
barrels  and  bags  of  flour,  wheat,  and  Indian-corn,  the  butter,  cheese,  and  bacon 
sent  from  the  prairie  farmers  of  the  Western  States,  were  marvellous  for  number 
and  heartiness  of  contribution.  From  a  thousand  pulpits  a  thousand  congregations 
of  different  creeds  were  invited  to  lend  a  hand  to  the  general  charity  in  a  few 
earnest  and  feeling  words  about  the  Universal  Fatherhood  ol  God  and  the  Uni- 
versal Brotherhood  of  Men.    {Elihu  Burritt.) 


C5HAPTER  xn. 


Vebs.  1-19.  Now  about  that  time  Herod  the  king  stretched  forth  Us  hands  to  rex 

certain  of  the  Church. — Herod  the  king  : — The  previous  life  of  this  prince  had  been 
full  of  strange  vicissitudes.  The  son  of  Aristobulus  and  Bernice,  grandson  of 
Herod  the  Great,  brother  of  the  Herodias  who  appears  in  the  gospel  history,  named 
after  the  statesman  who  was  the  chief  minister  of  Augustus,  he  had  been  sent, 
after  his  father  had  fallen  a  victim  (b.c.  6)  to  his  grandfather's  suspicions,  to  Rome, 
partly  perhaps  as  a  hostage,  partly  to  be  out  of  the  way  of  Palestine  intrigues. 
There  he  had  grown  up  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  the  prince  afterwards  known  as 
Caligula.  On  the  marriage  of  Herod  Antipas  with  his  sister,  he  was  made  the 
ruler  of  Tiberias,  but  soon  quarrelled  with  the  tetrarch,  and  went  to  Rome,  and, 
falling  under  the  displeasure  of  Tiberius,  as  having  rashly  given  utterance  to  a  wish 


CHAP,  ra.]  THE  ACTS,  265 

for  the  succession  of  Caligula,  was  imprisoned  by  him,  and  remained  in  confinement 
till  the  death  of  that  emperor.  When  Caligula  came  to  the  throne  he  loaded  his 
friend  with  honours,  gave  him  the  tetrarchies  first  of  Philip,  and  then  that  of 
Lysanias  (Luke  ui.  1),  and  conferred  on  him  the  title  of  king.  Antipas,  prompted 
by  Herodias,  came  to  Eome  to  claim  a  like  honour  for  himself,  but  fell  under  the 
emperor's  displeasure,  and  was  banished  to  Lugdunum  in  Gaul,  whither  his  wife 
accompanied  him.  His  tetrarchy  also  was  conferred  on  Agrippa.  Coins  are  extant, 
minted  at  Caesarea,  and  bearing  inscriptions  in  which  he  is  styled  the  Great  King, 
with  the  epithets  sometimes  of  PhUo-Csesar,  sometimes  of  Philo-Claudios.  At  the 
time  when  Cahgala's  insanity  took  the  form  of  a  resolve  to  place  his  statue  in  the 
temple  at  Jerusalem,  Agrippa  rendered  an  essential  service  to  his  people,  by  using 
all  his  influence  to  deter  the  emperor  from  carrying  his  purpose  into  execution,  and, 
backed  as  he  was  by  Petronius,  the  Governor  of  Syria,  was  at  last  successful.  On 
the  death  of  Caligula,  Claudius,  whose  claims  to  the  empire  he  had  supported, 
confirmed  him  in  his  kingdom.  When  he  came  to  Judaea,  he  presented  himself  to 
the  people  in  the  character  of  a  devout  worshipper,  and  gained  their  favour  by 
attaching  himself  to  the  companies  of  Nazarites  (as  we  find  St.  Paul  doing  in  chap. 
xxi.  26)  when  they  came  to  the  temple  to  offer  sacrifices  on  the  completion  of  their 
vows.  It  would  seem  that  he  found  a  strong  popular  excitement  against  the 
believers  in  Christ,  caused  probably  by  the  new  step  which  had  recently  been  taken 
in  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles,  and  fomented  by  the  Sadducean  priesthood,  and 
it  seemed  to  him  pohtic  to  gain  the  favour  of  both  priests  and  people,  by  making 
himself  the  instrument  of  their  jealousy.  {Dean  Plumptre.)  James,  Herod, 
and  Peter: — How  strangely  our  prayers  are  sometimes  answered  I  James  and 
John  had  prayed  that  they  might  sit,  the  one  on  the  right  and  the  other  on 
the  left  of  the  Lord  when  He  came  to  His  kingdom.  And  now  the  cup  and  the 
baptism  came  to  James  in  the  form  of  a  terrible  and  disgraceful  martyrdom.  May 
I  covet  the  best  gift,  not  the  most  conspicuous  position.  May  I  keep  in  remem- 
brance that  they  at  the  front  fall  first.  But  may  I  not  shrink  from  the  front  if  it 
be  the  will  of  the  Lord  to  assign  me  that  position.  "  Peter  was  kept  in  prison." 
Kept  in  prison !  All  work  suspended,  and  apparently  aU  usefulness  at  an  end. 
Peter,  the  most  active  of  them.  What  does  the  Lord  mean  ?  This  question  comes 
up  so  often  in  Christian  experience.  To  suffer  James  to  be  killed  and  Peter  to  be 
imprisoned  would  not  be  our  way  of  propagating  the  Church.  Now,  I  pray  that  I 
may  never  be  scared  for  the  cause  of  Christ.  For  my  personal  comfort  let  me 
learn  from  Peter's  case  that  the  Lord  may  not  always  keep  me  out  of  the  hands  of 
the  enemy,  but  He  will  keep  those  hands  from  destroying  me.  I  may  see  the  two 
soldiers  to  whom  I  am  chained,  but  not  the  ones  that  in  secret  are  pouring  out 
prayers  for  me.  Oh,  the  unknown  helpers !  The  unseen  forces  of  the  universe 
are  stronger  than  the  visible  agencies.  (C.  F.  Deems,  LL.D.)  The  martyrdom  of 
James : — One  might  have  expected  more  than  a  clause  to  be  spared  to  tell  the  death 
of  a'chief  man,  and  the  first  martyr  amongst  the  apostles.  I  think  the  lessons  of 
the  fact,  and  of  the  slight  way  in  which  the  writer  of  this  book  refers  to  it,  may 
perhaps  be  most  pointedly  brought  out  if  we  take  four  contrasts — James  and 
Stephen,  James  and  Peter,  James  and  John,  James  and  James.  Now,  if  we  take 
these  four  I  think  we  shall  learn  something.  I.  First,  then,  James  and  Stephen. 
Look  at  the  different  scale  on  which  the  incidents  of  the  deaths  of  these  two  are 
told;  the  martyrdom  of  the  one  is  beaten  out  over  chapters,  the  martyrdom 
of  the  other  is  crammed  into  a  corner  of  a  sentence.  And  yet,  of  the  two 
men,  the  one  who  is  the  less  noticed  fiUed  the  larger  place  officially,  and  the 
other  was  only  a  simple  deacon  and  preacher  of  the  Word.  The  fact  that 
Stephen  was  the  first  Christian  to  follow  his  Lord  in  martyrdom  is  not  sufficient  to 
account  for  the  extraordinary  difference.  The  Bible  cares  so  little  about  the  people 
whom  it  names  because  its  true  theme  is  the  works  of  God,  and  not  of  man  ;  and 
the  reason  why  the  '*  Acts  of  the  Apostles  "  kills  off  one  of  the  first  three  apostles  in 
this  fashion  is  simply  that,  as  the  writer  tells  us,  his  theme  is  "  all  that  Jesus" 
continued  "  to  do  and  to  teach  "  after  He  was  taken  up.  Since  it  is  Christ  who  is 
the  true  actor,  it  matters  uncommonly  little  what  becomes  of  James  or  of  the  other 
ten.  What  is  the  reason  why  so  disproportionate  a  space  of  the  gospel  is  concerned 
with  the  last  two  days  of  our  Lord's  life  on  earth  ?  What  is  the  reason  why  years 
are  leaped  over  in  silence  and  moments  are  spread  out  in  detail,  but  that  the  death 
of  a  man  is  only  a  death,  but  the  death  of  the  Christ  is  the  life  of  the  world  ?  James 
sleeps  none  the  less  sweetly  in  his  grave,  or,  rather,  wakes  none  the  less  trium- 
phantly in  heaven  because  his  life  and  death  are  both  so  scantUy  narrated.    If  we 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

"  self -infold  the  large  results  "  of  faithful  service,  we  need  not  trouble  ourselves 
about  its  record  on  earth.  But  another  lesson  which  may  be  learned  from  this 
cursory  notice  of  the  apostle's  martyrdom  is — how  small  a  thing  death  reaUy  ia ! 
Looked  at  from  beside  the  Lord  of  life  and  death,  which  is  the  point  of  view  of  the 
author  of  this  narrative,  "  great  death  "  dwindles  to  a  very  little  thing.  We  need 
to  revise  our  notions  if  we  would  understand  how  trivial  it  really  is.  From 
a  mountain-top  the  country  below  seems  level  plain,  and  what  looked  like  an 
impassable  precipice  has  dwindled  to  be  indistinguishable.  The  triviaUty  of  death, 
to  those  who  look  upon  it  from  the  heights  of  eternity,  is  well  represented  by  these 
brief  words  which  tell  of  the  first  bfeach  thereby  in  the  circle  of  the  apostles. 
II.  There  is  another  contrast,  James  and  Peter.  Now  this  chapter  tells  of  two 
things :  one,  the  death  of  one  of  that  pair  of  friends ;  the  other,  the  miracle  that 
was  wrought  for  the  deUverance  of  the  other  from  death.  Why  should  James  be 
slain,  and  Peter  nairaculously  delivered  ?  A  question  easily  asked  ;  a  question  not 
to  be  answered  by  us.  We  may  say  that  the  one  was  more  useful  for  the  develop- 
ment of  the  Church  than  the  other.  But  we  have  all  seen  lives  that,  to  our  poor 
vision,  seemed  to  be  aU  but  indispensable,  ruthlessly  swept  away,  and  lives  that 
seemed  to  be,  and  were,  perfectly  profitless,  prolonged  to  extreme  old  age.  We  may 
say  that  maturity  of  character,  development  of  Christian  graces,  made  the  man 
ready  for  glory.  But  we  have  all  seen  men  struck  down  when  anything  but  ready. 
Only  we  may  be  sure  of  this,  that  James  was  as  dear  to  Christ  as  Peter  was,  and 
that  there  was  no  greater  love  shown  in  sending  the  angel  that  delivered  the  one 
from  the  "  expectation  of  Herod  "  and  the  people  of  the  Jews,  than  was  shown  in 
Bending  the  angel  that  stood  behind  the  headsman  and  directed  the  stroke  of  the 
fatal  sword  on  the  neck  of  the  other.  James  escaped  from  Herod  when  Herod  slew 
him,  and  could  not  make  him  unfaithful  to  his  Master,  and  his  deliverance  was  not 
less  complete  than  the  deliverance  of  his  friend.  But  let  us  remember,  too,  that  if 
thus,  to  two  equally  beloved,  there  be  dealt  out  these  two  different  fates,  it  muat  be 
because  that  evil,  which,  as  I  said,  is  not  so  big  as  it  looks,  is  not  so  bitter  as  it 
tastes  either;  and  there  is  no  real  evil,  for  the  loving  heart,  in  the  stroke  that 
breaks  its  bands  and  knits  it  to  Jesus  Christ.  The  contrast  of  James  and  Peter  may 
teach  us  the  equal  love  that  presides  over  the  Ufe  of  the  living  and  the  death  of  the 
dying.  IH.  Another  contrast  is  that  of  James  and  John.  The  close  union  and 
subsequent  separation  by  this  martyrdom  of  that  pair  of  brothers  is  striking  and 
pathetic.  By  death  they  were  separated  so  far  :  the  one  the  first  of  all  the  apostles 
to  "become  a  prey  to  Satan's  rage,"  the  other  "lingering  out  his  fellows  all," 
and  "  dying  in  bloodless  age,"  living  to  be  a  hundred  years  old  and  more,  and 
looking  back  through  all  the  long  parting  to  the  brother  who  had  joined  with  him 
in  the  wish  that  even  Messiah's  kingdom  should  not  part  them,  and  yet  had  been 
parted  so  soon  and  parted  so  long.  Ah  1  may  we  not  learn  the  lesson  that  we  should 
recognise  the  mercy  and  wisdom  of  the  ministry  of  death  the  separator,  and  should 
tread  with  patience  the  lonely  road,  do  calmly  the  day's  work,  and  tarry  till  He 
comes,  though  those  that  stood  beside  us  be  gone.  IV.  Lastly,  James  and  Jaubs. 
In  his  hot  youth,  when  he  deserved  the  name  of  a  son  of  thunder — so  energetic, 
boisterous  I  suppose,  destructive  perhaps,  he  was — he  and  his  brother,  and  their 
foolish  mother,  whose  name  is  kindly  not  told  us,  go  to  Christ  and  say,  •'  Grant  that 
we  may  sit,  the  one  on  Thy  right  hand  and  the  other  on  Thy  left,  in  Thy  kingdom." 
That  was  what  he  wished  and  hoped  for,  and  what  he  got  was  years  of  service,  and 
B  taste  of  persecution,  and  finally  the  swish  of  the  headsman's  sword.  Yes  I  And 
BO  our  dreams  get  disappointed,  and  their  disappointment  is  often  the  road  to  their 
fulfilment,  for  Jesus  Christ  was  answering  the  prayer,  "  Grant  that  we  may  sit  on 
Thy  right  hand  in  Thy  kingdom,"  when  He  called  him  to  Himself,  by  the  brief 
and  bloody  passage  of  martyrdom.  So  let  us  leave  for  ourselves,  and  for  all 
dear  ones,  that  question  of  living  or  dying  to  Him.  Only  let  us  be  sure  that 
whether  our  lives  be  long  like  John's,  or  short  like  James's,  "  living  or  dying  we  are 
the  Lord's. "  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Herod  vexet  the  Church : — 1.  The  scene  changes. 
After  intinaating  that  the  door  was  open  among  the  Greeks,  the  historian  shows  us 
that  it  was  shut  among  the  Jews.  By  His  apostles  as  well  as  in  His  own  Person 
Christ  came  to  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not.  2.  The  king  who  appears 
here  was  mUd  in  his  natural  temper,  but  fond  of  popularity.  The  persecution  was 
not  of  his  own  motion,  but  to  please  the  Jews,  as  was  the  case  with  Pilate.  8. 
Koeping  Judas  out  of  view — this  is  the  first  breach  in  the  apostoUo  circle.  The 
Church  had  learned  to  walk  by  faith,  and  even  the  fall  of  an  apostle  will  not  crush 
them  now.    In  the  case  of  James,  the  Lord  shows  that  He  will  not  always  int«>rfere  to 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  267 

protect  His  servants,  and  in  the  case  of  Peter  that  He  will  eometimes,  lest  the  spirit 
should  fail  before  Him.  This  first  apostolic  martyrdom  marks  a  law  of  the  kingdom, 
and  illustrates  the  Master's  word,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world."  Not  an  inch 
of  territory  will  Christ  maintain  for  Himself  by  the  sword.  4.  Observing  that  no 
Divine  power  was  put  forth,  either  to  protect  James  or  to  avenge  him,  and  finding 
that  one  murder  procured  him  favour,  Herod  determined  to  perpetrate  another. 
Peter  was  imprisoned,  but  the  remainder  of  the  king's  wrath  it  pleased  God  in  this 
instajice  to  restrain.  "  Peter  was  kept  in  prison,  but  prayer  was  made,"  &o. — a 
remarkable  antithesis.  Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes  ;  and  the  prayer  of  faith 
reaches  the  Disposer's  hand.  James  was  suddenly  seized  and  taken  off,  but  there  was 
time  to  pray  for  Peter.  God  opened  the  door  of  opportunity  through  Herod's  desire 
to  keep  all  quiet  till  after  the  passover  ;  the  Church  eagerly  entered  that  door.  5. 
Peter  meanwhile  was  sleeping,  and  his  sleep  brought  as  much  glory  to  God  as  his 
wakefulness,  although  he  had  sung  psalms  till  the  rafters  »ang  again.  He  slept  in 
Gethsemane  through  weakness  of  the  flesh  :  he  sleeps  here  through  the  strength  of 
his  faith.  How  sweet  to  lie  down  every  night  ready,  if  the  Lord  will,  to  awake  in 
heaven  1  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Herod  and  Peter: — I.  Hekod's  peesecdtion.  1. 
**  Now  about  that  time  " — we  know  that  troubles  never  come  alone.  A  time  of 
famine  was  prophesied  (chap.  xi.  28).  Famine  might  kill  slowly;  Herod  would 
find  a  quicker  way  1  How  well  it  would  have  been  when  Herod  "  stretched  forth 
his  hand  "  to  have  kept  it  there !  Such  would  be  our  way.  God's  thought  has  a 
wider  compass,  and  He  needs  more  time  for  the  exemplification  of  His  purpose. 
2.  "He  killed  James  the  brother  of  John  with  the  sword."  This  was  not  a  Jewish 
method  of  killing  people.  But  what  is  crime  if  it  cannot  be  inventive  ?  What  if  a 
king  cannot  take  a  short  cut  to  the  consummation  of  his  purpose  ?  Beheading  is 
quicker  than  stoning  1  The  wicked  cannot  wait.  They  need  no  further  con- 
demnation. Justice  can  wait.  "  Though  hand  join  in  hand  the  wicked  cannot  go 
unpunished."  3.  Having  performed  this  trick  of  cruelty,  Herod  proceeded  further. 
That  is  the  natural  history  of  wickedness  1  It  gathers  momentum  as  it  goes.  You 
cannot  stop  with  one  murder.  You  acquire  the  bad  skill,  and  your  fingers  become 
nimble  in  the  use  of  cruel  weapons.  Murder  does  not  look  so  ghastly  when  you 
have  done  it  once.  How  many  people  have  you  murdered?  Murder  is  heart- 
breaking ;  lif e-bUghting ;  hope-destroying  1  "  He  proceeded  further."  The  one  glass 
needs  another  to  keep  it  company.  Crimes  do  not  like  sohtude ;  and  so  one  crime 
leads  to  another.  If  you  can  do  one  sin,  the  whole  life  is  lost.  We  are  not  thieves 
because  of  a  thousand  thefts ;  we  are  not  liars  because  of  a  thousand  hes ;  we  find 
our  criminality  in  the  opening  sin.  Therefore,  what  I  say  unto  one,  I  say  unto  all, 
"  Watch  "  1  4.  "Because  he  saw  it  pleased  the  Jews."  There  are  those  who  like  to 
see  you  play  the  fool  and  the  criminal,  but  what  will  they  do  for  you  in  the  critical 
hour?  All  the  while  Herod  thought  he  was  king;  in  reality  he  was  a  slave. 
Sometimes  the  judge  has  been  the  prisoner.  Sometimes  the  conqueror  has  been  the 
loser.  Herod  lived  upon  the  popular  pleasure.  Therein  he  tarnished  his  crown, 
and  sold  his  kingdom,  and  lost  his  soul  1  II.  Peieb's  delfvebance.  In  ver.  5  there 
is  a  pitched  battle.  Eead  it :  "  Peter  therefore  was  kept  in  prison  :  "  there  is  one 
side  of  the  fight ;  after  the  colon — "  but  prayer  was  made  without  ceasing  of  the 
Church  unto  God  for  him."  Now  for  the  shock  of  arms!  Who  wins?  Prayer 
always  wins.  You  can  only  be  of  a  contrary  opinion  when  you  take  iu  too  little 
field.  There  is  no  action  of  any  importance  that  is  bounded  by  a  single  day.  Such 
prayer  as  this  is  irrepressible.  The  prayers  you  could  keep  down  if  you  liked  will 
never  be  answered.  This  prayer  was  answered  by  a  miracle,  in  which  observe — 
1.  Last  extremities  (ver.  6).  Have  we  not  been  in  that  very  same  darkness, 
when  we  were  to  be  injured,  or  impoverished,  not  seven  years  from  date,  but  the 
next  day?  Have  we  not  taken  up  the  pieces  of  the  one  loaf  and  said,  "  This  is  all"  ? 
Bo  far,  then,  you  have  no  difficulty  about  the  miracle.  2.  Appearances  dead  against 
ns.  Thus — two  soldiers,  two  chains,  and  the  keepers  keeping  the  door  before  the 
prison  I  These  were  compliments  to  Peter  1  The  devU  cannot  avoid  paying  us 
compliments  all  the  time  he  is  trying  to  destroy  us.  Why  all  this  arrangement  about 
a  man  like  Peter  ?  Why  all  these  temptations  addressed  to  a  man  like  one  of  us  ? 
It  is  a  reluctant  but  significant  tribute  to  the  character  whose  destruction  is  con- 
templated. Have  not  appearances  been  dead  against  us  ?  No  letters,  no  friends,  no 
answer  to  the  last  appeal,  no  more  energy,  no  more  hope,  the  last  staff  snapped  in  two. 
So  far  the  miracle  is  true.  3.  Unexpected  deUverers.  Have  we  no  experience  here  ? 
Is  it  not  always  the  unexpected  man  who  delivers  and  cheers  us  ?  "  But  a  certain 
Samaritan  came  where  he  was,"  that  is  the  whole  history  of  human  dehverance  ui 
¥01..  n.  17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.  HI, 

one  graphic  sentence.  "Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity."  "It  is  always 
darkest  before  the  dawn."  All  our  life  properly  read  is  a  chain  of  unexpectedness. 
Deliverance  shall  arise  from  an  unthought-of  quarter  1  4.  Spiritual  transport 
(ver.  11).  Have  we  not  sometimes  taken  down  our  harp  from  the  willows  and 
struck  it  to  some  new  tone  of  joy  and  gladness  and  hope?  Peter  did  not  understand 
this  miracle  at  first.  He  thought  he  saw  a  vision.  "And  when  Peter  was  come  to 
himself  he  said  " — that  is  the  point  we  must  wait  for.  We  are  not  "ourselves" 
just  now.  Our  eyes  are  dazed  by  cross  lights,  and  we  caimot  see  things  in  their 
right  proportion,  distance,  and  colour.  Do  not  let  us  imagine  that  we  are  now 
speaking  final  words  or  giving  final  judgments.  Innumerable  visions  float  before 
my  wondering  eyes.  The  righteous  are  trodden  down ;  the  bad  man  has  a  plentiful 
table.  The  little  child  is  torn  from  its  mother's  arms.  What  is  it  ?  When  we  are 
come  to  ourselves  we  shall  know  and  praise  the  Lord,  whose  angels  have  been  our 
ministering  servants  1     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Herod  and  Peter : — I.  The  value  of 

SMALL   ACCURACIES   IN   THE   EXPRESSIONS    OF   THE    INSPIRED   HISTORY.       Palcy  plaCeS  the 

first  verse  among  his  evidences  of  Christianity,  because  Herod  is  called  "the  king." 
For  he  declares  that  there  was  never  a  period,  for  more  than  thirty  years  previously, 
nor  was  there  ever  subsequently  at  Jerusalem  one  who  wielded  such  authority  as 
entitled  him  to  the  name  of  monarch.  No  one  except  this  Herod,  and  he  only 
during  the  last  three  years  of  his  life,  could  have  been  properly  called  "the  king." 

II.    How   LITTLE    THE    NeW    TESTAMENT   MAKES    OF   THE  MARTYRDOM  OF  EVEN  THE  BEST 

OF  MEN.  Only  two  words  in  the  Greek  describe  James's  execution  :  "killed — sword." 
The  Bible  does  not  dwell  upon  the  deaths  of  Christians  so  much  as  upon  their  lives. 
Whitefield  used  to  remark,  "  You  will  have  no  dying  testimony  from  me,  you  must 
take  my  living  witness  for  my  blessed  Lord."  III.  That  there  is  a  limit  set  to 
THE  wickedness  OF  THE  WICKEDEST  OP  opposERS  (vcr.  3).  Herod  was  a  time-server 
ajid  a  trimmer.  His  political  motto  is  found  in  "  It  pleased  the  Jews."  He  thought 
he  had  made  a  hit  when  he  slew  John's  brother.  But  even  in  that  crime  he  only 
helped  to  fulfil  a  prophecy  of  Christ  (Mark  x.  39).  So  Herod  "  proceeded  further" ; 
but  aU  he  was  suffered  to  do  was  "to  take  Peter."  There  he  had  to  pause  before 
a  higher  power.  The  all-wise  God  permits  sin  to  move  on  for  a  while,  but  He  may 
be  trusted  to  interpose  when  the  time  for  restraining  wrath  arrives  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  10). 

IV.  That  prayer  is  the  welcome  instrument  op  communication  between  separated 
FRIENDS  (ver.  5).  A  friend  when  I  was  abroad  sent  me  a  letter  with  a  triangle  in  it. 
At  the  top  of  it  he  wrote  "  the  mercy-seat  "  ;  and  drew  for  the  base  a  rough  wavy 
mark,  which  he  meant  for  the  ocean ;  then  he  wrote  his  initials  at  one  angle  and 
mine  at  the  other.  He  felt  that  I  knew  that  the  shortest  path  to  those  we  love  is 
around  via  heaven,  where  our  faithful  High  Priest  is  to  receive  our  petitions. 

V.  That  true  religious  trust  is  always  tranquil  and  undismayed  (ver.  6).  Peter 
must  have  understood  that  he  was  now  in  the  power  of  a  wild  bad  man.  He  could 
not  expect  to  fare  any  better  than  did  James.  But  evidently  he  was  not  in  the 
least  troubled.  This  old  fisherman  meant  to  have  as  easy  a  night  of  it  as  was 
possible  with  the  poor  accommodations.  He  took  off  his  outer  garments  and  sandals 
before  he  lay  down,  as  was  his  habit  anywhere.  And  now  think  of  it :  while  Herod 
in  the  palace  was  uneasy,  and  the  soldiers  wide  awake,  and  the  outsiders  getting 
ready  for  "  no  small  stir  "  (ver.  18),  and  the  disciples  holding  an  agitated  prayer- 
meeting,  and  an  angel  on  the  errand  of  relief,  so  that  it  seems  to  us  as  if  the  whole 
exterior  world  was  disturbed,  Peter  went  quietly  into  a  sweet  good  sleep  as  usual. 
We  have  no  record  of  his  experiences,  but  we  conjecture  he  said  over  the  old  psalm 
(Psa.  xxiiv.  7).  VI.  An  affecting  illustration  of  the  unhurried  exercise  os" 
God's  patient  power  (ver.  8).  The  angel  had  nothing  to  fear  there  in  the  prison, 
and  he  knew  Peter  could  take  all  of  time  and  care  he  needed  without  danger.  It 
was  not  necessary  that  he  should  dress  in  the  dark  ;  the  messenger  from  heaven  Ut 
up  the  room  for  him,  and  calmed  him  with  tranquil  words  of  direction  ;  and  the 
apostle  put  on  his  shoes  and  his  loose  garment  before  he  started.  The  chains  had 
already  been  removed  so  cautiously  that  they  made  no  clanking.  There  was  no 
hurry  nor  confusion ;  when  God  takes  care  of  a  man.  He  takes  good  care.  How  calm 
God  is  in  the  heavens  where  He  reigns  ;  and  how  little  He  respected  the  ingenuities 
of  Herod  (Psa.  ii.  4).  We  have  no  wonder  that  Peter  afterwards  quoted  Isaiah's 
words  with  a  fresh  turn  of  interpretation  after  such  an  experience  (1  Pet.  ii.  6).  The 
only  thing  Herod  could  do  the  next  morning  was  to  kill  his  own  soldiers ;  Peter  was 
out  of  his  reach.  Why  are  we  so  troubled  ?  How  calm  is  the  service  of  such  a 
Saviour  as  ours  (Isa.  xl.  22).  VII.  If  people  are  surprised  by  answers  to  prayer, 
IX  IS  becauss  they  do  not  "consider."    Peter's  conclusion  (ver.  11)  is  in  editing 


CHAP,  xn.}  THE  ACTS.  259 

contrast  with  the  petulant  rjbuke  which  Bhoda  received  from  the  Christiana 
(ver.  15).  He  had  "considered  the  thing  "  (ver.  12).  That  must  be  the  reason  why 
he  was  not  "astonished"  as  they  were  (ver.  16).  Ehoda  was  not  "mad,"  only 
"  glad."  A  clearer  mind  was  never  known  than  Peter  had,  only  he  had  now  and 
then  to  "  come  to  himself,"  and  get  his  bearings.  The  one  grand  conclusion  is  found 
well  phrased  in  the  remark  of  Christian  in  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  After  some  days 
of  useless  suffering,  he  suddenly  exclaimed,  •'  Why,  I  have  all  along  had  in  my  hosonx 
a  key  called  Promise,  which  is  able  to  open  any  door  in  Doubting  Castle  I "  What  is 
the  reason  any  one  now  is  afraid  of  the  power  of  Giant  Despair?  (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
A  short-lived  triumph  : — We  have  here  a  royal  persecution  in  its  beginning,  progress, 
and  end.  We  see  it  in  its  success,  failure,  and  punishment.  We  have  before  us  a 
whole  career,  in  its  pride  and  its  humiliation,  its  triumph  and  its  discomfiture,  its 
short-lived  arrogance  and  its  frightful  dismay.  That  is  the  aspect  of  the  chapter 
towards  them  that  are  without.  Its  aspect  towards  the  Church  within  shows  what 
danger,  anxiety,  and  death  itself  is  to  the  Christian ;  enough  to  bring  out  great 
graces  and  to  exercise  faith  and  patience,  but  not  enough  to  make  a  single  true 
heart  doubt  where  safety,  strength,  victory  lie.  Let  us  look — I.  On  the  dark  sros 
OP  THIS  piCTUBB.  There  is  a  king  stretching  forth  his  hands  to  vex  certain  of  the 
Church.  1.  His  first  act  of  aggression  was  directed  against  an  apostle.  •'  He 
killed  James  the  brother  of  John  with  the  sword."  Such  is  the  short  record  of  the 
first  and  only  apostolical  martyrdom  of  which  we  have  any  record  in  Scripture.  Far 
more  was  told  of  the  martyrdom  of  the  deacon  Stephen.  Such  is  the  character  of 
the  Scriptures.  One  thing  is  dwelt  upon  and  another  briefly  told.  Simplicity, 
naturalness,  undesignedness,  absence  of  rhetorical  trick  and  stage  effect,  this  we 
notice  throughout,  and  we  think  we  can  see  it  to  be  of  God.  Thus  one  of  the 
chosen  witnesses  passed  away  early  from  his  work  to  his  reward.  It  was  scarcely 
fifteen  years,  I  suppose,  since  he  had  first  heard  that  word  which  had  changed  him 
from  a  fisherman  into  a  fisher  of  men.  He  had  been  one  of  the  favoured  few  in 
various  striking  occurrences  of  the  Saviour's  life  and  ministry.  He  had  been  one 
of  two  brothers,  who,  in  days  of  ignorant  zeal,  had  proposed  to  call  fire  from 
heaven  upon  a  Samaritan  village,  and  who,  again,  in  days  of  a  no  less  ignorant 
ambition,  had  asked  to  sit  on  His  right  hand  and  on  His  left  hand  in  their  Master's 
glory.  Boanerges,  sons  of  thunder.  He  had  named  them,  in  days  when  the  im- 
petuosity of  nature  had  not  yet  been  checked  by  the  influence  of  grace.  But  now 
this  was  past ;  past  too  the  mighty  transformation  of  Pentecost,  and  the  devoted 
years  of  the  ministry  which  that  day  had  opened.  To  him,  first  of  the  brothers,  is 
that  prophecy  fulfilled,  ••  Ye  shall  drink  indeed  of  My  cup,"  &c.  And  see  how  lightly 
the  inspired  record  passes  over  that  great  transition.  Not  one  word  of  the  circum- 
stances. No  death-bed  scene,  no  dying  testimony,  save  indeed  that  best  of  testi- 
monies which  the  death  itself  afforded.  He  had  given  his  life  in  one  sense ;  now 
he  gave  it  in  another.  Nothing  is  made  of  it.  He  did  his  duty ;  and  to  him,  as  a 
matter  of  course,  belonged  the  recompence  of  the  reward.  2.  The  fate  of  the  next 
destined  victim  is  widely  different.  He  too  seems  to  be  marked  out  for  martyrdom. 
The  appetite  for  blood  is  ever  whetted  by  its  indulgence.  It  was  a  crowded  time  in 
Jerusalem :  strangers  from  aU  parts  of  the  world  flocked  together  to  the  festival ; 
and  the  spectacle  of  an  apostle's  execution  was  to  be  their  pastime  in  the  intervals 
of  religious  duty.  Such  is  religion  when  it  is  once  possessed  and  saturated  with 
bigotry,  fanaticism,  and  party  zeal  I  All  seemed  to  promise  well  and  surely  for  the 
persecutor  and  his  people.  Peter  then  was  kept  in  the  prison  :  by  night  and  by  day 
he  is  the  one  care  of  sixteen  armed  men.  Surely  nothing  can  elude  such  vigilance  ? 
So  might  man  well  judge.  There  is  one,  there  is  but  one,  impediment,  which 
brings  us  to — H.  The  bright  side  of  the  picture.  1.  "  But  there  was  fervent  prayer 
going  on  by  the  Church  unto  God  concerning  him."  Is  there  not  great  meaning  in 
that  little  word  "  but  "  ?  The  Church  below  was  calling  in  a  help,  not  of  man,  to 
counteract  man's  design.  Little  would  Herod  or  his  friends  account  of  that ;  but 
He  who  neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps  has  Israel  in  His  keeping,  and  let  no  man  pre- 
sume to  say,  apart  from  Him,  what  one  day  or  one  night  may  bring  forth  I  2.  The 
last  night  is  come,  but  not  gone.  Peter  sleeps,  while  the  Church  prays  :  it  is  their 
time  for  action,  it  is  his  for  repOse.  "  In  quietness  and  in  confidence  shall  be  your 
strength";  " Cast  all  your  care  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for  you."  What  if  hia 
martyrdom  is  to  follow  close  upon  that  of  James,  and  they  who  were  so  lately 
partners  in  a  fisher's  calling,  and  have  since  been  associated  in  a  noble  ministry,  are 
tb  be  speedily  reunited  in  a  blessedness  not  of  this  world — "  lovely  and  pleasant 
in  their  lives,  and  even  in  their  deaths  not  cUvided  "  ?  3.  "  And,  behold  an  angel  of 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHip.  xn. 

the  Lord  stood  near,"  Ac.,  &o.  God  does  nothing  in  vain :  He  begins  where  man 
must  end,  and  ends  where  man  can  begin.  Deliverance  achieved,  reflection  follows. 
•'  He  comes  to  himself,"  and  to  the  right  conclusion.  4.  And  whither  shall  he  now 
betake  himself  ?  He  knows  the  deep  anxiety  with  which  the  Church  of  which  he  is 
a  pillar  must  have  regarded  his  imprisonment ;  so  he  bends  his  steps  first  to  one  of 
the  homes  of  the  Church.  His  knock  brings  to  the  door  a  maiden  of  the  house- 
hold ;  not  at  once  to  open — for  they  were  hard  and  evil  times,  and  peril  might  lurk 
in  the  admittance  of  a  stranger — but  to  hearken  to  the  voice  which  should  tell  its 
errand  and  report  upon  it  to  those  within.  The  voice  which  calls  to  her  is  one  well 
known.  She  had  heard  it  often,  we  doubt  not,  leading  the  devotions  of  that  pioua 
home:  she  knew  it  at  once  for  Peter's,  and  for  very  joy  ran  in  before  she  opened. 
Her  tidings  were  incredible.  "  They  said,  It  is  his  angel "  ;  one  of  those  minister- 
ing spirits  who  have  in  their  charge  the  heirs  of  salvation,  and  who,  in  the  charac- 
ter of  the  angels  of  Christ's  "  httle  ones,  do  always  behold  the  face  of  His  Father 
wbo  is  in  heaven."  But  no;  there  is  no  mistake  here,  and  no  apparition;  the 
angel's  ofiQce  is  ended,  and  Peter  himself,  in  flesh  and  blood,  is  seen,  when  they 
open,  to  stand  before  the  gate.  Silencing  with  a  motion  of  the  hand  their  eager 
and  wondering  exclamations,  he  tells  his  own  story  and  bids  them,  while  he  departs 
elsewhere  for  security,  to  carry  the  report  of  his  miraculous  deliverance  to  James, 
the  Lord's  brother,  and  to  the  brethren  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Church.  IH, 
The  narrative  would  be  incomplete  without  a  record  of  the  end  of  the  peb- 
SECUTOB  AND  HIS  INSTRUMENTS.  1.  Just  as  whcH  the  faithful  three  were  thrown 
into  the  furnace,  "  the  flame  of  the  fire  slew  those  men "  who  acted  as  his 
executioners  ;  even  so  the  activity  of  Peter  was  fatal  to  the  soldiers  to  whose 
charge  he  had  been  consigned.  Disappointed  rage  must  hava  its  victim.  If  it 
cannot  be  an  apostle,  it  must  be  an  apostle's  keeper.  But  the  retribution  ends 
not  there.  2.  Herod  himself  goes  down  from  Jerusalem  to  Csesarea.  There 
was  at  this  time  a  feud  between  him  and  the  people  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  They  were 
ill  able  to  part  with  his  friendship,  and  came  to  him  therefore  imploring  reconcilia- 
tion. This  was  the  crowning  point  of  Herod's  triumphs.  With  an  ambition  glutted 
with  success,  and  a  vanity  inflated  by  flattery,  he  appeared  gorgeously  arrayed. 
Flattery  ran  on  into  impiety,  and  they  all  with  one  accord  shouted,  "  It  is  the  voice 
of  a  God,  and  not  of  a  man."  This  cry  was  the  signal  of  the  Divine  punishment. 
"  Immediately  an  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him,"  &c.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  chapter 
before  us  is  an  epitome  of  all  history.  In  it  the  world  and  the  Church  are  arrayed 
on  opposite  sides,  the  hosts  of  God  and  of  Satan  being  marshalled  for  the  encounter. 
On  the  one  side  there  is  kingly  power,  on  the  other  poverty  and  insignificance ;  but 
the  one  calculates  without  the  Divine  arm  on  which  the  other  depends.  For  a  time 
the  one  succeeds,  in  the  end  the  other  wins.  Herod  is  eaten  with  worms,  but  the 
Word  of  God  grows  and  multiplies.  2.  The  practical  lesson  is  to  learn  the  power 
and  practise  the  grace  of  that  efTectual  fervent  prayer  which  availeth  much.  (Dean 
Vauphan.)  And  he  killed  James  the  brother  of  John  with  the  sword. — James' 
noble  end,  or  "  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  ix  the  death  of  His  saints  " : — I. 
Before  man — a  melancholy  death.  1.  Bloody  and  cruel :  the  noble  head  of  the 
apostle  falls  under  the  sword  of  the  executioner.  2.  Premature  and  sudden :  he 
quits  this  earthly  scene  before  effecting  anything  important  in  his  apostolic  calling. 
3.  Without  glory  and  quiet :  he  departs  uncelebrated  by  the  world,  unpraised  even 
by  the  Word  of  God.  II.  Before  God — a  noble  end  and  a  beautiful  death.  1.  He 
had  fulfilled  his  vocation  here  below  :  not  how  long,  but  how  we  live,  is  the  chief 
matter.  2.  He  dies  in  the  service  of  His  Lord  and  preaches  as  powerfully  by  his 
death,  as  his  fellow  disciples  do  by  their  word.  3.  He  hastens  towards  his  heavenly 
destination,  whilst  he  as  the  first  among  the  brethren  receives  the  martyr's  crown, 
and  is  honoured  by  sitting  where  he  desired  at  Christ's  right  hand.  (K.  Gerok.) 
The  bleeding  James  and  the  rescued  Peter :  or,  God  leads  His  people — I.  By  many 
PATHS.  1.  James'  short  hour  and  Peter's  long  day  of  work.  2.  James'  sad  end  and 
Peter's  glorious  deliverance.  II.  To  one  end.  1.  Both  promote  the  kingdom  of 
God — James  by  his  death  and  Peter  by  his  life.  2.  Both  carry  off  the  crown  of 
life — James  after  a  short  contest,  Peter  after  a  long  service.  {Ibid.)  The  martyr- 
dom of  St.  James  : — As  the  apostle  was  led  forth  to  the  place  of  execution  the  per- 
son who  had  accused  him  was  so  touched  with  the  courage  and  constancy  which  he 
dispbiyed,  that  he  repented  of  what  he  had  done,  came  and  foil  down  at  his 
feet  and  earnestly  begged  pardon  of  what  he  had  said  against  him.  St.  James 
tenderly  raised  him  up,  kissed  him  and  said  to  him,  "Peace  be  to  thee,  my  son,  and 
the  pardon  of  all  thy  faults."    At  this,  his  former  accuser  publicly  professed  himseL* 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  261 

a  Christian,  and  so  both  were  beheaded  at  the  same  time.  (Clemetit  of  Alexandria.) 
Early  death: — 1.  This  is  one  of  those  incidents  in  sacred  story  which  had  we  lived 
in  the  apostolic  age  would  have  moved  our  wonder  if  it  did  not  shake  our  faith. 
The  Church  is  yet  in  its  infancy,  and  already  a  chief  pillar  is  moved,  leaving  the 
«difice  deprived  of  what  was  certainly  one  of  its  best  supports  and  fairest  ornaments 
— one,  in  fact,  of  its  twelve  precious  foundations.  What  token  was  there  here  of 
Divine  love  watching  over  a  Divine  institution  ?  How  shall  such  a  dispensation  be 
reconciled  with  what  we  believe  of  the  power,  and  wisdom,  and  mercy,  and  justice, 
and  love,  and  truth,  and  faithfulness  of  God  ?  2.  On  the  Festival  of  St.  James,  we 
never  can  do  amiss  if  we  refresh  our  memories  by  recalling  the  events  of  the  apostle's 
life.  And  this  is  soon  done.  Originally  a  disciple  of  the  stern  Baptist,  and  there- 
fore a  man  of  no  common  earnestness,  James  was  brought  to  Christ  by  the  report 
of  his  brother  John — and  therefore  was  the  fourth  to  become  a  member  of  the 
apostolic  band.  Subsequently,  we  are  shown  his  former  call  to  apostleship.  On 
him,  with  his  brother,  our  Lord  bestowed  the  title  "  son  of  thunder  "  ;  and  (no  un- 
apt illustration  of  the  name  I)  the  two  proposed  to  call  down  fire  from  heaven  on 
the  inhospitable  Samaritans.  But  subsequently  there  is  nothing  characteristic 
recorded  of  St.  James,  with  the  single  exception  of  his  ambitious  desire  for  a  chief 
place  in  the  kingdom  of  Messiah.  He  was  indeed  highly  distinguished  on  other 
occasions — as  when  he  was  made  a  witness  of  the  raising  of  Jairus'  daughter,  and 
yet  more  of  our  Lord's  transfiguration.  Again,  he  was  with  our  Lord  during  His 
agony,  and  lastly,  he  was  one  of  the  four  who  heard  His  prophecy  on  the  Mount  of 
Olives.  But  of  the  characteristic  events  of  his  life  none  are  recorded — save  his 
call ;  the  token  of  a  fiery  spirit  alluded  to  ;  his  ambitious  aspiration  ;  and  his  death. 
3.  When  we  say  something  similar  of  other  members  of  the  apostolic  body  and  re- 
hearse the  meagre  chronicle  of  the  recorded  lives  of  the  other  apostles,  we  all 
Becretly  feel  that  their  unrecorded  history  must  have  made  full  amends,  by  its  ful- 
ness and  variety,  for  the  scantiness  of  the  gospel  record.  Thomas  in  India  ;  Mat- 
thew in  Ethiopia ;  Andrew  in  Scythia ;  Philip,  Bartholomew,  and  the  other  James — 
the  life  must  have  been  most  varied,  and  doubtless  was  most  eventful.  But  in  the 
case  of  James  we  know  that  this  was  not  the  case.  His  history  brings  home  to  us 
the  familiar  phenomenon  of  a  precious  life  early  shortened — a  burning  spirit  sud- 
denly quenched — a  large  and  a  brave  heart,  which  was  willing  to  do  and  to  dare  all 
in  his  Master's  service,  early  laid  to  rest ;  the  goodly  promise  of  his  youth  and  early 
manhood  all  unfulfilled — the  work  which  he  longed  to  do  left  unaccomplished — a 
legacy  of  tears  left  to  friends  and  kindred ;  a  subject  of  wonder  and  perplexity  to 
all.  4.  I  do  not  pretend  to  have  anything  of  importance  to  say  on  this  difficult 
problem.  (1)  The  uses  of  bereavement  to  the  survivors  have  been  often  insisted 
upon.  No  doubt  it  is  a  salutary  medicine — just  as  salutary  as  it  is  inexpressibly 
bitter  and  repugnant  to  the  natural  taste.  In  this  way  we  speak  of  the  death  of 
children  especially ;  but  the  wonder  is  greater  when  men  of  grand  promise  are 
taken  away  in  their  prime,  especially  at  any  great  crisis  of  affairs.  We  are  more 
perplexed  at  the  sight  of  a  John  Baptist  imprisoned  at  the  end  of  a  year's  ministry, 
a  James  beheaded  before  his  ministry  on  a  great  scale  had  begun.  Add  that  the 
first  was  slain  at  the  instigation  of  a  dancing  girl,  and  the  other  at  the  caprice  of  a 
cruel  tyrant — and  the  wonder  is  complete.  "  Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?  " 
Will  not  the  wrath  of  heaven  fall  on  the  head  of  the  guilty  ?  Bather — Why  was 
not  this  prevented,  and  the  life  prolonged  to  the  full  term  of  years  allotted  to  man  ? 
(2)  But  do  we  not,  in  all  oar  reasonings  on  this  and  similar  subjects,  confine  cor 
regards  much  too  exclusively  to  this  world  ? — think  of  time  and  its  concerns,  too 
much  ;  the  things  of  eternity  and  of  God,  too  little  ?  Since,  however,  this  life  is 
inappreciably  short  in  comparison  of  the  life  to  come — and  the  concerns  of  this 
world  inconceivably  petty  if  contrasted  vnth  the  concerns  of  the  next ;  we  should, 
in  our  meditations  on  the  subject  now  before  us,  never  fail  to  give  a  considerable 
^lace  to  the  possible  share  which  the  concerns  of  the  other  life  may  have  in  deter- 
mining  the  affairs  of  this.  What  shall  we  say,  then,  of  the  deaths  of  the  young  and 
"the  promising — nay,  of  those  whose  promise  has  begun  to  ripen  into  performance — 
BO  reasonably  as  this ;  that  it  would  certainly  appear  that  they  were  wanted  else- 
where ?  that  their  appointed  work  in  another  world  could  no  longer  be  kept  waiting 
for  them  ?  that  they  had  done  quite  enough  here  below  to  warrant  their  removal ; 
and  that  therefore,  and  only  therefore,  they  were  removed  ?  (3)  Shall  we  not,  too, 
further  open  our  hearts  to  the  comfortable  thought  that  the  race,  however  brief, 
may  yet  have  been  f uUy  run  ?  that  the  spirit  may  have  been  perfected,  although  in 
an  increditably  short  space  of  time  ?  that  the  allotted  work  may  have  been  accom- 


«62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

plished,  altliough  the  bud  of  life  has  scarcely  yet  expanded  into  a  blossom  ?  and 
that  wondering  angels  may  have  already  carried  away  the  subject  of  so  many  teara 
to  the  enjoyment  of  an  imperishable  crown  ?  {Dean  Burgon.)  The  quiet  disciples 
of  the  Lord,  how  they  yet  bear  testimony  for  Him  : — 1.  Though  not  by  shining  gifts, 
yet  by  the  meek  and  quiet  spirit  which  is  precious  in  the  sight  of  God,  2.  Though 
not  by  mighty  deeds,  yet  by  patient  suffering  and  holy  dying.  3.  Though  not  in 
the  annals  of  the  world's  history,  yet  in  the  brotherly  circles  of  the  children  of 
God.    (K.  Gerok.)        Times  of  trial  testing  times  : — Then  is  tested — L  The  sincebitt 

OP  FAITH    IN    StJFFEBING   AND    DEATH    (vCrS.    1-3).       II.    BeOTHERLT   LOVE    IN    WATCHINa 

AND  PRAYER  (ver.  5).  III.  Spiritual  peace  in  rest  and  waiting  (ver.  6).  IV.  The 
POWER  OF  God  in  rescuing  and  helping  (vers.  7-11).  (Florey.)  The  weapons  of 
the  Church  in  the  contest  against  its  enemies  : — 1.  Inflexible  courage  in  witnessing. 
2.  Quiet  patience  in  suffering.  3.  Unwearied  perseverance  in  prayer.  (Leonhard 
and  Spiegel.)  Lessons  for  the  Church  : — The  Church — 1.  May  expect  to  be 
attacked  by  its  enemies  so  long  as  it  has  any.  2.  Often  has  had  to  sustain  the  loss 
of  leaders  who  seemed  to  be  almost  indispensable.  3.  Has  had  to  learn  that  God 
will  not  always  interfere  to  save  his  servants  from  death — that  one's  death  may  be 
of  more  service  than  his  life.  4.  Often  has  had  to  suffer  from  those  who  attacked 
it  simply  to  curry  favour  with  others.  6.  Has  been  taught  that  many  a  seeming 
calamity  has  turned  out  to  be  a  blessing  signally  manifesting  the  glory  of  God.  6. 
Has  found  that  prayer  is  its  best  weapon  in  fighting  with  persecution.  7.  Has  found 
tbrough  prayer  that  God  could  overcome  the  enemies  whom  it  was  too  weak  to  en- 
counter.    (S.  S.  Times.) 

Ver.  5.  Peter  therefore  wa3  kept  In  prison :  but  prayer  was  made  without 
ceasing  of  the  Church  unto  God  for  him. — In  and  out  of  prison  (children's  sermon) : 
— 1.  There  is  more  than  one  way  of  getting  into  prison.  (1)  If  you  were  a  minister, 
and  some  prisoner  wanted  you  to  speak  to  him  about  his  soul,  you  might  get  in  to 
him.  (2)  If  you  wanted  to  see  inside  you  could  get  an  order  from  the  Home  Secre- 
tary. (3)  If  you  were  so  unhappy  as  to  have  a  friend  there  you  might  see  him  at 
stated  times.  (4)  You  might  become  a  prisoner  yourself  by  breaking  the  good  laws 
of  the  country :  but  there  was  a  time  when  our  laws  were  bad,  and  people  were  im- 
prisoned for  doing  right.     This  was  the  case  with  John  Bunyan,  and  with  Peter. 

2.  There  are  several  ways  of  getting  out  of  prison.  (1)  Some  break  out  themselves 
— but  this  would  be  impossible  to  those  who  like  Peter  were  not  only  behind  strong 
walls,  but  chained  to  a  soldier.  (2)  Friends  break  in  and  take  them  out — but  this 
involves  the  risk  of  their  being  killed,  and  many  prisoners  would  prefer  to  remain 
rather  than  this  should  occur.  (3)  The  Sovereign  sends  a  pardon  and  lets  them 
out.  Now  Peter  knew  tbat  he  could  not  break  out,  and  that  his  friends  were  not 
strong  enough  to  take  him  out,  and  that  Herod  was  not  good  enough  to  let  him  out. 
So  his  friends  went  to  a  greater  King,  who  told  one  of  His  angels  to  take  him  out. 

3,  The  angel  found  Peter  asleep.  When  night  has  come  it  is  the  proper  time  to  go 
to  sleep.  If  you  have  done  no  wrong,  and  have  finished  your  work  you  can  go  to 
sleep  very  well.  You  feel  that  your  father  is  in  the  house,  and  he  will  take  care  of 
you.  Now  Peter  knew  that  his  head  might  soon  be  cut  off,  yet  he  could  sleep  com- 
fortably, because  he  felt  that  his  Father  was  in  the  prison  with  him,  and  that  il 
Herod  did  kill  him  he  would  go  to  heaven.  Now  notice — I.  What  the  angel  did 
FOB  Peter.  He  came  into  the  cell,  and  the  soldiers  could  not  prevent  him  any 
more  than  they  could  the  angel  from  rolling  away  the  stone  from  the  Saviour's 
tomb.  He  filled  the  prison  with  light  so  that  Peter  could  see;  then  he  had  to  wake 
Peter  up.  When  you  have  gone  to  sleep  very  tired  you  have  to  be  shaken  before 
you  can  awake.  So  Peter  had  to  be  struck  by  the  angel,  and  then  when  be  was  a 
little  awake  he  lifted  him  up  as  though  he  were  a  Uttle  child.  Then  Peter's  chains 
fell  off.  II.  What  Peter  did  for  himself.  He  put  on  his  clothes  and  shoes. 
When  a  boy  is  able  to  dress  himself  his  father  wiU  not  do  it  for  him.  Neither  will 
God  or  His  angels  do  for  us  what  we  can  do  for  ourselves.  And  when  a  child  ia 
old  enough  to  walk  his  mother  will  not  carry  him.  So  the  angel,  who  might  have 
carried  Peter  and  set  him  down  among  his  friends,  told  him  to  walk.  III.  What 
THE  IRON  GATE  DID  FOR  THE  ANGEL  AND  Peter  (ver.  10).  There  are  two  ways  to  open 
a  gate — by  using  a  key,  or  by  breaking  it  open  as  Samson  did.  But  Peter  did  not 
unlock  the  gate,  nor  did  the  angel  break  it  open.  It  opened  as  if  it  knew  that  God 
wanted  to  let  the  angel  and  Peter  out.  This  is  what  we  call  a  miracle.  Let  us  see 
what  we  can  learn  from  the  story.  1.  That  you  may  pray  people  out  of  trouble. 
When  you  pray  fey:  any  one  you  carry  him  to  God  upon  your  mind.    If  your  brothel 


,/ 


CHAP,  xw.]  THE  ACTS.  263 

were  ill  you  could  carry  him  in  your  arms  to  the  doctor,  or  you  might  tell  the 
doctor  about  him.  When  Jesus  was  on  earth  many  were  carried  to  Him  in  the 
arms  of  others ;  but  some,  like  the  Syro-Phcenician  woman's  daughter,  were  carried 
upon  the  mind.  This  is  what  Peter's  friends  did.  And  so  we  may  carry  any  one 
whom  we  love  to  God  when  they  are  far  away  and  we  want  them  blessed.  2.  How 
strong  a  power  prayer  is.  It  was  stronger  in  this  case  than  Herod  and  his  prison 
and  his  soldiers.  And  it  is  stronger  now  than  sin  and  Satan.  {W.  Harris.) 
Peter  prayed  out  of  prison : — It  is  not  the  perseverance  but  the  fervency  of  this 
prayer  which  is  really  in  the  mind  of  the  writer.  The  margin  of  the  Authorised 
Version,  and  the  text  of  the  Revised,  concur  in  substituting  for  "  without  ceasing," 
earnestly ;  and  that  is  the  true  idea  of  the  expression.  I.  Now,  the  first  thought 
that  suggests  itself  to  me  is  based  on  the  first  word  of  our  text,  that  eloquent 
BDT.  It  brings  into  prominence  the  all-powerful  weapon  of  the  unarmed. 
Peter  was  kept  in  prison,  and  we  know  all  the  elaborate  precautions  that  were 
taken  in  order  to  secure  him.  But  he  was  lying  quietly  asleep.  There  were 
some  people  awake  ;  the  Church  was  awake,  and  God  was  awake.  Peter 
was  kept  in  prison ;  but  what  vanity  and  folly  it  all  was  to  surround  him 
with  soldiers  and  gates  and  bars  when  this  was  going  on.  "Prayer  was  made 
earnestly  of  the  Church  unto  God  for  him."  On  the  one  side  was  the  whole 
embodied  power  of  the  world,  moved  by  the  malignity  of  the  devil ;  and  on  the 
other  side  there  were  a  handful  of  people  in  Mary's  house,  with  their  hearts  half 
broken,  wrestling  with  God  in  prayer ;  and  these  beat  the  others.  So  they  always 
do,  but  not  always  in  the  same  fashion.  No  doubt  there  were  plenty  of  prayers 
offered  for  James,  but  he  was  killed  off  in  a  parenthesis.  Let  us  remember,  too, 
that  this  is  the  only  weapon  which  it  is  legitimate  for  Christian  people  to  use  in 
their  conflicts  with  an  antagonistic  world.  To  stand  still  unresisting,  and  with  no 
weapon  in  my  hand  but  prayer  to  God,  is  a  strong  impregnable  position  which,  if 
Christ's  disciple  takes  up,  in  regard  of  his  individual  life,  and  of  the  Church's  diffi- 
culties and  enemies,  no  power  on  earth  or  hell  can  really  overcome  him.  The  faith 
that  keeps  itself  within  the  limits  of  its  Master's  way  of  overcoming  evil  is  more 
than  conqueror  in  the  midst  of  defeat,  and  that  life  is  safe,  though  all  the  Herods 
that  ever  were  eaten  of  worms  should  intend  to  slay,  II.  Further,  notice  the 
TEMPER  OF  THE  PKA1EB  THAT  PREVAILS.  I  havc  already  said  that  the  true  idea  of  the 
word  of  my  text  is  earnestness,  and  not  of  perseverance  or  persistence.  The  author 
of  the  Book  of  the  Acts,  as  you  know,  is  the  evangelist  Luke ;  and  he  uses  the 
same  words  as  descriptive  of  another  prayer  :  "  Being  in  an  agony  He  prayed  the 
more  earnestly,"  he  says  about  the  Master  in  Gethsemane.  The  disciples,  when 
they  prayed  for  their  brother,  were  fervent  in  supplication.  Ah  !  if  we  take  that 
scene  beneath  the  olives  as  explaining  to  us  the  kind  of  prayer  that  finds  acceptance 
in  God's  ears,  we  shall  not  wonder  that  so  much  of  what  we  call  prayer  seems  to 
come  back  unanswered  upon  our  heads.  Air  will  only  rise  when  it  is  rarefied ;  and 
it  is  only  rarefied  when  it  is  warmed.  And  when  our  breath  is  icy  cold  as  it  comes 
out  of  our  lips,  and  we  can  see  it  as  a  smoke  as  it  passes  from  us,  no  wonder  it 
never  gets  beyond  the  ceiling  of  the  room  in  which  it  is  poured  out  in  vain.  I  dare- 
say— for  they  were  but  average  people  after  aU — they  prayed  a  deal  more  fervently 
to  get  Peter  back  amongst  them  because  they  did  not  know  what  they  were  to  do 
without  him  than  they  prayed  for  the  spiritual  blessings  which  were  waiting  to  be 
given  them.  But  still  they  prayed  earnestly ;  and  if  you  and  I  did  the  same  we 
should  get  our  answers.  And  then,  remember  that,  of  course,  this  earnestness  of 
petition  is  of  such  a  kind  that  it  keeps  on  till  it  gets  what  it  wants.  Although  the 
word  does  not  mean  *•  without  ceasing,"  it  implies  "  without  ceasing,"  because  it 
means  •'  earnestly."  A  man  that  does  not  much  care  for  a  thing  asks  languidly 
for  it,  and  is  soon  tired.  And  this  is  how  many  people  pray :  they  ask  for  the  thing 
and  then  go  away,  and  do  not  know  whether  God  ever  gave  it  them  or  not.  But 
others,  who  really  want  the  blessing,  plead  till  it  comes.  These  good  people  were 
prnying  the  night  before  the  execution ;  no  doubt  aU  day  long  they  had  been  at  it, 
and  nothing  came  of  it.  The  night  fell,  they  continued,  nothing  came  of  it.  But, 
according  to  the  story,  the  answer  came  so  late  that  Peter  had  barely  time  to  get 
to  the  Christian  home  that  was  nearest  before  daybreak.  And  so  at  the  very  last 
possible  moment  to  which  it  was  safe  to  defer  Peter's  deUverance,  and  not  a  tick  of 
the  clock  sooner,  did  God  send  the  answer.  He  does  in  like  fashion  with  us  many 
a  time :  and  the  great  lesson  is.  Wait  patiently  on  Him.  Rest  in  the  Lord,  nor 
faint  when  the  answer  is  long  in  coming.  HI.  And  now  the  last  point  that  I  would 
suggest  does  not  lie  so  much  in  my  text  itself  as  in  its  relation  to  the  whole  inoi* 


2U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

dent.     And  it  is  this — that  fervent  peater  has  often  a  strange  allot  of  unbelief 
MIXED  WITH  IT.     You  remember  the  end  of  the  story,  so  life-like  and  natural ;  how 
Bhoda  in  her  excitement  leaves  Peter  standing  at  the  door  in  peril,  whilst  she 
rushes  into  the  house  to  tell  everybody  what  had  happened.    Then,  while  they  are 
arguing  inside,  as  to  whether  it  is  Peter  or  his  angel,  see  how  Peter  keeps  on 
hammering  at  the  door.     "  Peter  continued  knocking."     There  we  see  the  whole 
nature  of  the  man  in  that  graphic  phrase.     How  true  to  nature  is  what  was  going 
on  inside  !    The  people  that  had  been  so  fervently  praying  for  the  answer  could  not 
believe  it  when  they  got  it.     The  answer  stood,  waiting  outside,  to  be  admitted, 
and  they  could  do  nothing  but  discuss  whether  it  was  Peter's  angel  or  his  ghost. 
And  through  all  our  lives  there  will  be  more  or  less,  in  varying  proportions,  of  this 
strange  alloy  of  fervour  with  coldness,  and  of  faith  with  wavering  unbelief,  and  in 
our  most  beheving  prayers  a  dash  of  unpreparedness  for  the  answer  when  it  comes. 
There  is  another  thing  that  may  be  suggested,  and  that  is  that  we  should,  if  I  may 
80  say,  expect  to  get  more  than  we  expect,  and  beUeve  that  however  large  may  be 
our  anticipations  of  what  God  will  do  for  us  if  we  trust  ourselves  to  Him,  the 
answer  when  it  comes  will  be  astonishing  even  to  our  widest  faith.     "  He  is  able  to 
do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think."    {A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)        Peter  in  prison  : — He  was  imprisoned  unjustly,  and  therefore  it  was  no 
prison  to  him,  but  a  sanctuary  with  God's  hght  irradiating  it.    Peter  saw  and 
heard  more  here  than  others  do  in  palaces.     There  are  a  thousand  prisons  in  life. 
He  is  in  prison  who  is  in  trouble,  in  fear,  in  conscious  penitence  without  having 
received  the  complete  assurance  of  pardon;  he  is  in  prison  who  has  sold  his  Uberty, 
who  is  lying  under  condemnation,  who  has  lost  his  first  love.     But  whatever  our 
prison  is  God  knows  it,  can  find  us,  can  make  us  forget  our  outward  circumstances 
in  inward  content,  can  send  His  angel  to  deliver  us.     Peter  had  been  in  prison 
before,  and  had  been  miraculously  delivered.     Fools  never  learn  wisdom  ;  for  the 
people  who  had  shut  him  up  before  had  seen  that  you  cannot  really  imprison  a  good 
man.     His  influence  increases  by  the  opposition  that  is  hurled  against  him  ;  good- 
ness turns  hostility  into  nutrition.     Who  can  put  an  apostle  into  such  a  position  as 
Jeremiah  was  thought  to  be  occupying  ?     You  can  put  his  body  there,  but  his  soul 
is  swinging  around  the  horizon,  and  his  heart  is  among  the  singing  angels.     You 
cannot  imprison  the  soul.     But  a  man  may  lose  the  liberty  of  his  spirit,  and  when 
he  gives  up  the  key  of  his  soul  he  is  already  in  perdition.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Peter  inpriaon;  the  weakness  of  Satan: — Every  chapter  in  Church  history  develops 
the  old  decree  that  enmity  should  exist  between  the  seed  of  the  serpent  and  the 
seed  of  the  woman.    This  is  the  underlying  spring  of  all  the  commotions,  anarchies, 
persecutions,  and  wars  of  the  ages.     But  the  "  old  serpent "  assumes  no  serpentine 
nor  supernatural  form  in  carrying  out  his  aims,  but  the  form  of  a  man — here  the 
form  of  a  malignant  and  servile  king.     "  On  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go."    Note  what 
Satan  cannot  do.     I.  Render  unavailing  the  intercessions  of  the  good  (ver.  5). 
It  would  have  been  easier  for  Herod  to  have  controlled  the  winds  of  heaven  than 
to  have  neutralised  the  prayers  of  these  poor  people.     Satan  was  mighty  in 
Pharaoh,  but  a  few  of  the  oppressed  ones  prayed  and  their  deliverance  came.     H>3 
was  mighty  in  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  God's  people  prayed  and  were  rescued  from 
his  demon  grasp.     II.  Destroy  the  peace  of  a  good  man  (ver.  6).     Think  of  the 
place — a  dark,  filthy  cell.     Think  of  his  position — linked  to  two  wretches  from 
whose  nature  he  must  have  recoiled  with  horror.     Think  of  those  who  watched — 
sixteen  soldiers.     Think  of   the   time — the   night  before   execution.     Yet  Peter 
sleeps ;    which   suggests — 1.    A  gracious   providence.     '•  He  giveth  His  beloved 
sleep."     Sleep  is  one  of  God's  choicest  gifts.     How  it  drowns  our  cares,  re-string3 
the  harp  of  life,  binds  up  our  energies  afresh.     Wliat  more  did  Peter  want  than 
sleep  ?     Had  he  the  most  comfortable  chamber  in  Herod's  palace  could  he  have 
had  more  than  sleep?    2.  An  approving  conscience.     A  condemning  conscience 
would  have  kept  sleep  away.     Peter  knew  that  he  was  engaged  in  the  right  work. 
3.  A  sense  of  security.    He  had  no  fear  about  the  future.    He  had  committed 
himself  to  the  care  of  Heaven.     "God  is  our  refuge  and  strength."    III.  Hinder 
the  visit  of  angels  to  good  men  (ver.  8).     The  Bible  teaches  not  only  the  existence 
of  angels,  but  their  ministration.     Note — 1.  The  ease  with  which  an  angel  does  hia 
work.     The  walls,  gates,  &c.,  presented  no  obstruction.     The  chains  fell  off  with- 
out effort,  and  Peter  led  through  his  guards  without  a  struggle.     God's  greatest 
agents  work  quietly.    2.  The  extent  to  which  an  angel  does  his  work.     Only  what 
a  good  man  cannot  do  tor  himself.     Peter  could  tie  on  his  sandals,  &c.,  buj'.  could 
Qot  snap  hia  chains.    lY.  Cannot  prevent  the  fbcbibation  of  bis  own  punpoasi 


CHAP,  ra.]  THE  ACTS.  265 

(ver.  11).    That  Herod's  purpose  was  frustrated  is  seen — 1.  In  the  deliverance  of 
Peter.     This  deliverance  viras — (1)  Consciously  Divine.     "I  know  of  a  surety." 
(2)  Very  wonderful.     The  disciples  were  incredulous.     2.  In  the  progress  of  tru^,h. 
"  Go  show  these  things  unto  James,"  <feo.     What  an  impulse  this  fact  must  have 
given   to  the  new  cause  1      3.   In  his  confusion  fvers.  18,  19).      Satan's  plans 
may    be    very    subtle    in    their    structure,   vast    in    their    sweep,   imposing    in 
their  aspect,  and  promising  in  their  progress ;    but  their  failure  is   inevitable. 
They  must  break  down,  and  their  author  and  abettors  must  be  everlastingly  con- 
founded.   Take  heart,  ye  children  of  the  truth;  as  soon  as  God's  day  comes  "  there 
will  be  no  small  stir"  amongst  God's  enemies.   (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)      Peter  in  prison, 
uleeping  between  two  soldiers : — A  beautiful  picture  of^ — I.  Christian  faith,  which 
in  prison  and  in  the  horrors  of  death  lies  sleeping  like  a  chUd  in  the  bosom  of  God. 
II.  Divine  love,  which  stands  with  its  eyes  open  over  its  sleeping  and  bound 
children  day  and  night.     (K.  Gerok.)        Peter's  passion,  and  the  Churches  com- 
passion : — 1.  When  the  devU  draws  his  sword,  he  flings  his  scabbard  away ;  and 
though  he  strike  not,  yet  he  hath  it  always  ready.     It  was  already  dyed  in  the  blood 
of  James  (ver.  2) ;  and  now  he  strives  to  latch  it  in  the  sides  of  St.  Peter  also.  2.  These 
words  present  unto  us  the  true  face  of  the  Church  militant :  one  member  suffering, 
and  all  the  members  suffering  with  it ;  St.  Peter  in  chains,  and  the  Church  on  their 
knees.     Though  they  cannot  help  him,  yet  they  will  pray  for  him  ;  and  they  will 
pray  for  him,  that  they  may  help  him.    I.  Peter's  passion.     1.  His  imprisonment. 
A  prison  one  would  think  were  not  a  fit  place  for  St.  Peter.    Will  God  suffer  this 
great  light  to  be  confined,  and  this  piUar  to  be  shaken  with  the  storms  of  persecution  ? 
Shall  he  who  was  to  teach  and  govern  the  Church  now  stand  in  need  of  the  prayers 
of  the  Church  ?    It  is  a  common  sight  to  see  Herod  on  his  throne,  and  St.  Peter  in 
prison.     But  in  this  world  it  matters  not  where  he  is  confined  who  is  akeady  out 
of  the  world.     St.  Peter  lost  not  his  peace  with  his  Uberty,  nor  was  he  a  saint  less 
glorious  because  he  was  in  prison.    Imprisonment  and  persecution  are  not  only 
good,  but  blessed  (Matt.  v.  11),  as  our  Saviour  says.     2.  The  motives  which  induced 
Agrippa  to  keep  him  in  prison.    You  may  perhaps  imagine  that  zeal  for  religion 
drew  his  sword.     We  read  indeed  that  Herod  was  ' '  a  great  lover  of  the  Jews  "  and 
their  religion,  but  it  was  not  this.     Eeligion  may  be  the  pretence,  but  the  cause  is 
his  crown  and  kingdom.     It  was  to  please  the  people  who  could  make  his  throne 
secure.     But  as  Seneca  says,  "  He  that  strives  to  please  the  people,  is  not  well 
pleased  himself  with  virtue  :  for  that  art  which  gains  the  people,  wiU  make  him 
like  unto  them."    If  Herod  will  please  the  Jews,  he  must  vex  the  Christians,  and 
be  as  cruel  as  a  Jew.     II.  The  Church's  compassion.     1.  And  you  may  know  them 
to  be  Christians  by  this  (Matt.  v.  48).      And  therefore  Tertullian  tells  us  that 
amongst  the  heathen,  professors  of  Christianity  were  called  Chrestiani,  from  a  word 
signifying  '•  sweetness  and  benignity  of  disposition."    Is  St.  Peter  in  prison?  they 
are  not  free.     Is  he  in  fetters  ?  their  compassion  binds  them  in  the  same  chains  : 
and  though  be  alone  be  apprehended,  yet  the  whole  Church  doth  suffer  persecution. 
For  it  is  in  the  Church  as  in  Pythagoras's  family,  which  he  shaped  and  framed  out 
unto  his  lute  :  there  is — (1)  "  An  integrity  of  parts,"  as  it  were  a  set  number  of 
strings.     (2)  "An  apt  composition  and  joining  of  them  together. "    The  parts  are 
"  coupled  and  knit  together  by  every  joint  "  (Eph.  iv.  16) ;  even  by  the  bond_  of 
charity,  which  is  that  virtue  which  couples  all  together.   And  then — (3)  Every  string 
being  touched  in  its  right  place  and  order  begets  a  harmony.     2.  But  compassion 
will  not  rest  in  the  heart,  but  will  publish  itself.    If  you  see  it  not  active  in  the 
hand,  you  shall  hear  it  vocal  in  the  tongue  (Psa.  cxix.  131).     It  will  pour  forth  itself 
in  prayer.     The  prayers  of  the  Church  are  the  best  weapons.     This  prayer  was — (1) 
The  prayer  of  the  whole  Church.    (2)  It  was  "  instant  and  earnest."    For  "  Fervent 
prayer  avaUeth  much."     Otherwise,  if  it  be  faint  and  heartless,  it  is  but  breathed 
out  into  the  air,  there  to  vanish  ;  it  is  lost  in  the  very  making,  and,  like  a  glass,  in 
the  very  blowing  falls  to  nothing;  yea  (which  is  worse),  it  is  turned  into  sin.     We 
may  think  perhaps  that  it  is  a  great  boldness  thus  to  urge  the  Majesty  of  heaven  ; 
but  we  much  mistake  the  God  we'pray  to.     He  loves  to  be  entreated  ;  He  commands 
us  to  be  urgent.     We  must  knock,  and  knock  again.     Though  He  hear  not,  we  must 
call  till  He  do  hear  ;  and  though  He  open  not,  we  must  knock  till  He  do  open  (Matt. 
xi.  12).     Thy  hunger  will  make  thy  meat  the  sweeter ;  and  thy  frequent  prayer  will 
not  only  obtain,  but  enlarge  thy  soul  and  make  it  more  capable  of  that  good  which 
thou  dost  long  for.     {A.  Farindon,  B.D.)         Peter  asleep  .-—Peter  was  in  his  cell, 
and  if  we  could  borrow  the  jailer's  lantern  and  visit  that  dungeon,  we  should  find  a 
**  quaternion  of  soldiers  "  watching  the  manacled  apostle.     Two  of  them  are  in  the 


S69  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xu, 

cell  and  two  are  before  the  door.  If  the  prisoner  escapes,  the  guards  must  pay  the 
forfeit  with  their  Uves.  This  is  stern  Roman  law.  The  keepers,  therefore,  are  wide 
awake.  Perhaps  some  of  the  leaders  in  this  wicked  persecution  are  awake  and  busy 
in  preparation  for  the  auto-da-fe  on  the  morrow.  Around  at  the  house  of  Mary,  the 
mother  of  John  surnamed  Mark,  are  a  company  of  God's  people  who  cannot  close 
their  eyes  on  that  eventful  night.  They  are  holding  a  prayer-meeting  and  entreat- 
ing God  to  interpose  and  spare  their  brother  "  Great-Heart "  from  his  cruel  doom. 
It  was  the  right  sort  of  prayer,  for  the  Greek  word  describes  them  as  straining  in 
supplication  ;  for  they  realise  that  this  is  their  last  resort.  But,  in  the  meantime, 
where  is  Peter  ?  Lo,  he  is  fast  asleep  1  The  children  of  heaven  are  awake  to  pray 
for  him  ;  the  children  of  hell  are  awake  to  destroy  him.  But  the  heart  for  which 
other  hearts  are  throbbing  dismisses  its  own  anxieties,  and  falls  asleep  as  quietly  as 
a  tired  child  on  its  mother's  breast.  There  were  many  things  to  keep  him  awake 
during  that  doleful  night ;  there  was  a  far-away  wife,  and  perhaps  a  group  of  children 
up  in  that  home  on  the  shore  of  Galilee,  and  he  might  have  worried  his  parental 
heart  about  them.  John  Bunyan,  when  in  prison  for  Christ's  cause,  teUs  us  that 
"  this  parting  from  my  wife  and  children  hath  often  been  to  me  in  this  prison  as  the 
pulling  of  my  flesh  from  my  bones.  Especially  from  my  poor  blind  child,  who  lay 
nearer  my  heart  than  all  I  had  besides.  But  I  must  venture  you  all  with  God,  though 
it  goeth  to  the  very  quick  to  leave  you."  So  did  the  heroic  apostle  venture  all  with 
God.  Family,  home,  labours  for  Christ,  the  welfare  of  the  Churches,  and  his  own 
life,  were  all  handed  over  into  God's  keeping,  and  he,  like  a  trustful  child,  sinks  to 
rest  in  his  Father's  arms.  So  God  "  giveth  His  beloved  sleep."  Here  is  a  lesson 
for  us  all.  How  did  the  apostle  attain  that  placid  serenity  of  spirit  ?  As  far  as  we 
can  understand,  he  attained  it  by  keeping  his  conscience  void  of  offence,  and  by 
anchoring  his  soul  fast  to  God.  An  uneasy  conscience  would  never  have  allowed 
Peter  to  cover  himself  under  the  sweet  refreshment  of  slumber.  Troubled  child  of 
God,  go  look  at  that  most  suggestive  scene  in  that  Jewish  gaol.  Paul  knew  that  hia 
martyrdom  was  just  at  hand,  but  he  had  made  Jesus  Christ  his  trustee,  and  he  felt 
no  more  uneasiness  than  he  did  about  the  rising  of  to-morrow's  sun.  Both  those 
men  were  just  what  you  profess  to  be,  no  more  and  no  less ;  they  were  Christ's  men. 
They  had  no  more  promise  than  you  have,  and  no  other  arm  to  rely  on  than  you 
have.  In  this  world,  so  fuU  of  difficulties  and  diseases  and  disasters,  there  are  a 
great  many  anxieties  that  make  people  he  awake.  "  To-morrow  morning  I  will  go 
and  draw  that  money  out  of  that  bank,"  says  the  uneasy  merchant,  who  has  heard 
some  suspicions  of  the  bank's  solvency.  Distrust  of  our  fellow-creature's  honesty, 
or  truthfulness,  or  fidelity  is  sad  enough,  but  a  Christian's  distrust  of  his  Saviour 
and  his  Almighty  Friend  is  a  sin  that  brings  its  own  punishment.  Half  of  the  misery 
of  life  comes  from  this  very  sin.  There  was  a  world  of  truth  in  the  remark  of  the 
simple-hearted  nurse  to  the  mother  who  was  worrying  over  her  sick  child:  "Ma'am, 
don't  worry;  you  just  trust  God;  He's  tedious,  but  He's  sure."  (T.  L.  Cuyler.) 
Peaceful  sleep  at  night : — Dr.  Alexander  was  often  heard  to  say  in  substance  as 
follows :  "  Clergymen,  authors,  teachers,  and  other  persons  of  reflective  habits  lose 
much  health  by  losing  sleep  ;  and  this  because  they  carry  their  trains  of  thought  to 
bed  with  them.  In  my  earlier  years  I  greatly  injured  myself  by  studying  my 
sermons  in  bed.  The  best  thing  one  can  do  is,  to  take  care  of  the  last  half-hour 
before  retiring.  Devotion  being  ended,  something  should  be  done  to  quiet  the 
strings  of  the  harp,  which  otherwise  would  go  on  to  vibrate.  Let  me  commend  to 
you  this  maxim,  which  I  somewhere  learnt  from  Dr.  Watts,  who  says  he  had  it  in 
his  boyhood  from  the  lips  of  Dr.  John  Owen  :  Break  the  chain  of  thoughts  at  bed- 
time by  something  at  once  serious  and  agreeable.  By  all  means  break  the  con- 
tinuity, or  sleep  will  be  vexed,  if  not  even  driven  away.  If  you  wish  to  know  my 
method  of  finding  sleep,  it  is  to  turn  over  the  pages  of  my  English  Bible  without 
plan,  and  without  allowing  my  mind  to  fasten  on  any,  leaving  any  place  the  moment 
it  ceases  to  interest  me.  Some  tranquilising  word  often  becomes  a  Divine  message 
of  peace."  (Lady  BountifuVa  Legacy. '\  Peril  and  prayer  : — I.  Danqee.  Peter 
might  say,  "There  is  peril  for  me.'  1.  Intimated  in  the  sayings  of  our  Lord 
(John  xvi.  2 ;  xxi.  18,  19).  Has  the  dark  day  at  last  come  ?  2.  In  the  raoa 
now  on  the  throne.  The  race  of  Edom.  In  the  Old  Testament  always  hostile  to 
the  Church.  Well  did  the  Herods  sustain  the  traditions  of  their  race.  Herod  the 
Great  sought  to  kill  Christ ;  his  son  slew  the  Baptist ;  and  his  son  had  just  put 
James  to  the  sword.  In  tbis  connection  note  a  striking  providence.  The  family 
was  at  this  time  numerous ;  in  a  century  scarcely  a  descendant  remained  ;  and  like 
many  a  petty  Asiatic  dynasty,  miyht  have  passed  into  oblivion.    But  God  set  them- 


CBAT.  xnj]  THE  ACTS.  267 

on  a  hill,  brought  them  into  contact  with  the  Divine  kingdom  and  the  King.  So 
brought  under  this  central  light,  all  their  dark  deeds  become  illuminated  for  the 
warning  of  all  time.  They  knew  not  the  part  they  played.  Our  relation  to  the 
kingdom  of  God  should  be  our  chief  concern.  "We  may  then  leave  fame  and  all 
other  results  to  Him.  3.  In  the  man's  motives.  Everything  depended  on  his 
pleasing  the  Jews.  He  had  imperilled  the  favour  of  Caligula  by  resisting  the  con- 
templated outrage  of  erecting  the  emperor's  image  in  the  temple.  Claudius  was  now 
emperor,  and  to  stand  well  with  him  it  was  necessary  to  secure  the  favour  of  the 
people.  The  opportunity  now  was  to  strike  a  fatal  blow  at  Christianity.  4.  In  the 
deeds  of  Herod  already  done.  The  persecution  of  the  Church,  the  murder  of  James, 
one  of  the  inmost  three.  Distinguished  service  no  exemption  from  suffering.  5.  In 
the  respite  given.  For  some  unknown  reason  it  was  intended  to  make  Peter's  trial 
solemn  and  public.  Strict  regard,  therefore,  was  paid  to  the  traditional  law  that  no 
feast  day  could  be  a  day  of  judicial  trial.  Sentence  was  therefore  deferred  till  after 
the  Passover.  In  the  motive  and  deliberateness  of  the  respite  read  certain  doom. 
6.  In  the  character  of  the  imprisonment.  No  chance  of  escape.  Peter  had  been 
delivered  before ;  now  extra  precaution.  7.  The  last  night  had  come.  Lessons : 
1.  In  direst  extremity  the  Lord's  people  may  be  at  peace.  Note — (1)  Peter's  con- 
science is  at  rest.  A  step  between  him  and  death  ;  but  asleep.  (2)  He  expects  no 
deliverance.  No  watching  !  DeUvered,  he  will  believe  his  deliverance  to  be  a  dream 
(Psa.  cxxvi.  1).  2.  Man's  extremity  is  often  God's  opportunity.  For  the  highest 
illustration,  see  Bom.  v.  6.  H.  Hope.  Observe  the  "  but."  The  might  of  prayer 
is  set  against  the  power  of  Herod.  1.  Time  was  given  for  prayer.  Contrast  with 
the  case  of  James.  2.  The  prayer  was  special.  They  wanted  one  thing.  No  vague 
generalities.  3.  Earnest — stretched  out,  strained — prayer  at  white  heat.  Same 
word  is  used  of  Christ's  prayer  in  the  garden,  and  in  James  v.  16.  4.  Ceaseless. 
One  prayer  would  not  suffice.  As  the  imprisonment  went  on  prayer  went  on.  For 
the  style  of  the  prayer,  read  chap.  iv.  24-28.  5.  Eose  with  the  terror  of  the  exigency. 
In  the  dead  of  the  night,  as  the  last  hope  was  dying  away,  "  many  were  gathered."  6. 
Courageous.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  obnoxious  to  the  government  than  this 
act,  if  discovered.  7.  On  a  large  scale.  Perhaps  as  many  were  gathered  as  the 
house  could  hold  ;  some  in  one  room,  some  in  another.  8.  Grounded  on  the  words 
of  the  Loi'd  Jesus.  One  disciple  would  remind  of  one  promise,  another  of  another, 
e.g.,  "Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given,"  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  My  name,"  "  If  two  of 
you  shall  agree."  We  know  some  who  were  present.  None  so  notable  as  Saul  (cf .  chap, 
xi.  30,  with  xii.  25).  The  late  persecutor  now  praying  for  the  persecuted  1  Knock- 
ing 1  Perhaps  the  emissaries  of  Herod  !  Away  Ehoda  I  Seel  III.  Deliverance. 
Supernatural,  yet  how  simply  told.  IV.  Subpbise.  Perhaps  Peter  knew  of  this 
prayer-meeting,  and  so  wended  his  way  thither.  Note  here — 1.  The  genuineness  of 
the  history.  An  impostor  would  have  made  the  disciples  welcome  the  answer  to  their 
prayer.  The  history  makes  them  astounded.  Which  is  truest  to  the  deepest  things 
of  life  ?  2.  Truth  oft  mingles  with  superstition  in  the  best  minds.  "  His  angel." 
It  is  true  that  for  every  one  there  is  an  angel  guardian  (Matt,  xviii.  10).  It  is  not 
true  that  he  can  assume  the  form  and  voice  of  the  person  guarded.  3.  The  grace 
of  expectation  does  not  always  accompany  the  spirit  of  prayer.  It  does  some- 
times (1  Kings  xviii.  42-44).  4.  Deliverance  came  at  the  very  last  moment  (ver.  18). 
{H.  T.  Robjohns,  B.A.)         A  prayer-meeting  in  apostolic  times  : — I.  They  conitned 

THEIR  EFFORTS  TO  PRATER.      II.    ThEY    CONTINOED  IN  THIS    EFFORT.       They  mUSt    haVC 

had  strong  faith.  III.  They  reaped  the  benefit.  The  answer — 1.  Filled  them 
with  amazement.  2.  Was  superabundant.  3.  Was  speedy.  {Stems  and  Twigs.) 
The  story  of  a  prayer-meeting  and  what  came  of  it : — I.  The  Church  suffering. 
The  name  of  Herod  is  to  the  Christian  Church  almost  all  that  Ahab  is  to  the  Jewish, 
and  Peter  comes  before  us  in  these  earlier  chapters  of  the  Acts  as  another  Elijah — 
the  prophet  of  fire.  Herod  stretches  out  his  hand  to  vex  certain  of  the  Church, 
which  must  have  been  driven  to  its  wits'  end.  Stephen  had  already  been  stoned, 
and  almost  aU  the  leading  men  had  been  scattered.  And  now  the  Apostle  James  is 
slain.  The  trembling  Church  clings  about  Peter.  And  now  Peter  is  carried  off  to 
prison ;  and  Herod  is  going  to  put  him  to  death  as  soon  as  the  Passover  is  over. 
How  the  hearts  of  the  Christians  must  have  sunk  down  within  them,  sick  with  help- 
lessness !  Oh  these  dreadful  times,  when  it  seems  so  hopeless,  so  useless  to  do 
anything  more;  the  conflict  is  so  unequal !  II.  The  Chuech  peating.  Then  comes 
a  blessed  "  but."  "  But  prayer  was  made  without  ceasing."  Though  every  other 
door  be  shut,  this  one  is  ever  open.  We  have  seen  in  our  day  what  has  been  called 
an  attempt  to  go  back  to  primitiv  e  custom  in  the  Church.     We  can  do  nothing 


868  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


better,  if  only  we  go  back  far  enough.  I  find  no  controversy  about  vestments,  no 
going  to  law  about  attitudes,  no  mystery  of  the  mass,  but  I  find  prayer  constant, 
everywhere.  The  primitive  Church  was  born  in  a  prayer-meeting,  and  in  the 
prayer-meeting  she  renewed  her  strength.  The  prayer-meeting  is  the  thermometer 
of  the  Church — it  tests  what  degree  of  warmth  there  is.  The  prayer-meeting  is  the 
barometer  of  the  Church,  and  points  us  to  showers  of  blessings  or  to  seasons  of 
drought.  The  Church's  warming  apparatus  is  in  the  prayer-meeting  room.  The 
light  that  is  in  the  Church  comes  in  that  way.  A  praying  Church  is  a  mighty, 
prosperous,  resistless  Church.  He  helps  the  Church  most  who  sets  himself  to  make 
the  prayer-meeting  most  largely  a  success.  Let  us  turn  to  this  company.  "  I  don't 
see  any  hope  whatever,"  says  one ;  "  if  we  had  only  somebody  of  influence  to  plead 
with  Herod,  but  we  all  are  so  poor.  And  then  there  are  all  these  rulers  and  Phari- 
sees urging  him  on."  Then  says  some  simple  soul  timidly,  "  I  think  we  had  better 
pray  about  it."  But  nobody  noticed  it.  Then  another  sighs  :  "  Herod  has  declared 
his  purpose,  and  the  Jews  will  take  care  to  keep  himi  up  to  it."  "  No  hope,"  says 
another  bitterly  ;  "  Peter  is  inside  that  iron  gate  and  those  stone  walls,  chained  to 
soldiers  and  watched  by  sentries  I  Poor  Peter  I  there  is  not  a  chance  for  him."  "  I 
think  we  had  better  pray,"  says  the  simple  soul  again,  more  urgently.  "  Really, 
brother,  do  be  practical  I  Whatever  can  prayer  do  in  a  case  like  this?  "  ask  they 
all  impatiently.  "  What  can  it  not  do  ?  "  says  the  simple  soul.  *'  Ah,  but  you  see 
God  works  according  to  law,"  says  another  very  solemnly.  That  silences  them  aU. 
The  simple  soul  doesn't  know  what  law  means  ;  most  likely  none  of  them  do.  They 
only  think  of  it  as  something  very  dreadful  indeed  that  shut  Heaven's  door  and  left 
Peter  hopelessly  in  prison.  And  so  Peter  might  have  perished  and  the  Church  have 
died  out — all  because  God  works  by  laws  !  But  now  there  is  a  familiar  knock,  that 
told  of  an  earnest  and  resolute  man.  "  Ah,  here  is  Brother  Faith,"  says  the  simple 
Boul,  looking  op  brightly.  "Well,"  says  Faith,  "what  are  you  going  to  do?" 
"  Have  you  got  anything  to  propose  ?  "  at  last  one  asks  doubtfully.  "  Yes,"  Faith 
answers,  "  I  happen  to  know  One  who  has  great  influence  with  Herod,  and  could 
get  him  to  change  his  mind  about  this  matter.  And  besides  that.  He  has  the  key 
of  that  iron  door,  and  He  can  open  it.  And  as  for  the  soldiers,  they  are  bound  to 
do  His  bidding.  I  think  we  had  better  speak  to  Him."  "Who  can  do  that  but 
Caesar?"  they  ask  in  a  tone  of  disappointment.  "And  however  are  we  to  get  at 
Csesar?  Besides,  there  is  no  time  to  communicate  with  him."  "  No,"  says  Faith, 
"  I  mean  One  here  in  Jerusalem,  our  Heavenly  Father."  "  But  God  works  accord- 
ing to  law."  "  True,"  says  Faith,  "  and  isn't  this  a  mighty,  deep,  abiding  law, 
that  •  like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  Him '  ? 
And  is  not  this  a  law,  that '  if  we  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  our  children, 
our  Father  shall  much  more  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  to  them  that  ask  Him  '  T 
I  believe  in  law,"  says  Faith,  "  but  I  believe  at  the  back  of  aU  law,  its  source  and 
strength,  is  the  heart  of  our  Fatlier  God.  He  can  help  us,  and  He  will.  Let  us 
pray."  And  without  more  ado  Faith  knelt  down,  and  one  by  one  all  followed  and 
they  began  to  pray.  Oh  Faith !  verily  thou  hast  logic  and  philosophy  and  common 
sense  and  the  promises  and  everything  on  thy  side — for  thou  hast  God.  As  they 
pray  on  they  get  to  the  very  heart  of  God.  Was  not  this  poor  trembling  Church 
the  very  Bride  of  God's  dear  Son,  for  whom  He  had  lain  down  His  life?  What 
then  ?  If  God  had  given  His  Son  for  their  sakes,  could  He  withhold  His  help  f  Oh 
Herod!  you  cannot  succeed  against  this.  This  little  company  has  got  hold  of 
Omnipotence.  IIL  Leaving  the  company  let  us  see  how  it  fabes  with  Petbb. 
Poor  Peter  1  the  sentence  has  gone  out  that  to-morrow  he  must  die,  amidst  every 
condition  that  should  afford  his  enemies  a  gloating  triumph.  Little  wonder  if  we 
find  him  cast  down,  beset  with  grief  and  fear.  But  look,  here  he  lies,  asleep.  Well, 
what  else  should  he  be  doing  ?  Of  old  he  slept  because  the  flesh  was  weak ;  now  he 
sleeps  because  his  faith  is  strong.  Ah,  it  is  the  very  climax  of  faith  when  it  haa 
learnt  to  sleep.  Many  a  man  can  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  who  cannot  sleep  the 
good  sleep  of  faith.  Now  suddenly  the  dungeon  is  illuminated  as  with  the  glory  c^ 
the  Lord.  Then  Peter  saw  the  angel,  he  felt  the  fetters  loosened,  and  forth  he 
went.  Then  the  angel  was  gone,  and  Peter  stood  under  the  starry  heavens— free. 
At  first  his  thoughts  went  up  to  God  to  thank  Him  for  His  great  deliverance.  Then 
his  thoughts  went  away  to  the  httle  company  that  had  met  in  prayer  for  him.  He 
found  the  door  shut  1  The  prison  gate  fell  back  before  him  ;  but  here  were  they, 
praying  that  Peter  might  be  fetched  out  of  prison,  and  they  had  forgotten  to  leave 
their  own  front  door  on  the  latch  for  him.  The  only  place  that  Peter  found  im- 
passable was  the  house  of  his  friends  I    Have  we  not  heard  of  the  little  maiden  who 


«SAP.  zn.]  THE  ACTS.  969 

when  the  church  met  to  pray  for  rain  took  her  big  umbrella  with  her ;  and  when 
the  congregation  came  out  to  find  their  prayers  answered,  they  almost  forgot  to  be 
thankful  in  their  concern  about  their  dresses  and  bonnets,  whilst  she  went  safely 
sheltered  on  her  way  ?  When  you  begin  to  pray,  let  faith  set  the  door  of  expecta- 
tion open.  So  is  it  that  many  go  on  praying  for  forgiveness,  and  they  forget  to  go 
to  the  door  to  see  if  the  Saviour  is  there.  Many  are  praying  for  the  peace  and  joy 
of  the  indwelling  Christ,  and  lo  I  He  Himself  is  standing  without  knocking  and 
waiting  if  they  would  but  open  unto  Him  and  let  Him  come  in.  Poor  Peter  1  it 
seemed  a  cold  reception  for  him,  standing  there  and  knocking  thus.  Eventually 
Bhoda,  hearing  some  one,  creeps  timidly  to  listen.  They  were  times  of  perU,  and 
all  kinds  of  dreadful  things  might  happen ;  and  fearfully  she  asked  who  it  was.  It 
was  Peter.  And  in  very  joy,  without  staying  to  open  the  door,  she  ran  in  and 
carried  the  good  tidings — "  Peter  is  come."  "  Nonsense,"  said  one,  "  you  are  mad." 
Ah,  they  were  a  little  like  us  of  to-day,  it  seems.  "  But  I  am  sure  it  is  he :  I  heard 
his  voice,"  persisted  the  damsel.  Then  said  one  and  another  rather  frightened — 
•'  It  is  his  ghost."  It  is  wonderful  what  people  will  believe  in  sooner  than  believe  in 
answers  to  prayer.  Then  the  company  crept  tunidly  to  the  door.  Yes,  there  was 
Peter  himself,  and  he  told  them  how  the  Lord  had  sent  an  angel  and  delivered  him. 
Then  they  saw  why  this  mystery  of  Peter's  imprisonment  had  been  permitted — that 
they  might  prove  the  mighty  power  of  prayer.  And  Peter  went  forth  beyond  the 
reach  of  Herod.  But  a  little  time  after,  Herod  was  smitten  by  the  angel  of  the 
Lord.  Do  let  us  believe  in  God,  and  let  there  be  no  limit  to  our  faith,  since  there  is 
no  limit  to  the  power  and  goodness  of  our  God.  We  have  access  to  the  same 
God;  let  us  make  much  use  of  it.  If  Herod  be  dead,  his  successors  are 
stUl  very  much  alive.  There  are  many  rulers  of  public  opinion  who  do 
stretch  out  their  hands  to  vex  the  Church.  Others  are  there  whose  lust 
hates  that  which  condemns  their  indulgence.  Our  power  to  triumph  over  our 
foes  is  in  our  power  to  pray.  What  hosts  are  there  who  lie  away  from  the  reach 
of  the  gospel !  How  can  we  get  at  them  ?  Amongst  us  there  are  old  beset- 
ting sins,  that  are  riveted  upon  wrist  and  ankle,  binding  men  and  women  in  a 
miserable  bondage,  making  them  useless  to  the  Church — avarice,  ill-temper,  world' 
liness,  lukewarmness,  prejudice,  pride.  Their  gold  is  under  lock  and  key,  and  it 
wants  a  strong  angel  of  the  Lord  to  loosen  it.  They  are  shut  up  in  an  inner  dungeon 
of  indifference  or  laziness,  bound  by  the  opinion  of  those  about  them,  as  Peter  was 
by  the  chains  of  the  soldiers.  What  can  we  do  ?  Let  but  prayer  be  made  without 
ceasing  of  the  Church  unto  God  ;  and  rulers  shall  be  powerless  for  mischief,  and 
prison  doors  shall  be  opened,  and  again  it  shall  be  recorded,  "  The  word  of  God  grew 
and  multiplied. "  {Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  Release  from  prison  as  an  answer  to  prayer  : 
— An  aged  woman  came  to  one  of  our  chapels  bowed  down  with  sorrow.  Her  husband 
was  constable  of  the  village  and  consequently  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the 
people.  A  murder  had  been  committed  in  the  village,  and  news  of  it  had  reached 
the  ears  of  the  magistrate.  The  murderer  had  escaped,  the  magistrate  was  very 
angry,  and  said  he  would  punish  the  constable  instead  of  the  murderer,  as  is  often 
done  in  some  parts  of  China  ;  but  he  was  an  old  man,  so  the  magistrate  took  his 
son  instead,  and  everybody  said  that  unless  the  murderer  could  be  found  he  would 
lose  his  head.  So  she  had  come  with  her  heart  almost  breaking  to  know  if  Ah- 
kying,  the  native  helper,  could  assist  her.  He  told  her  that  to  go  and  plead  with 
the  magistrate  for  her  son  would  be  useless ;  but  he  could  pray  to  God  for  her ; 
that  God  would  hear  and  answer  prayer,  and  help  her  if  they  prayed  to  Him.  The 
mother  said  she  would  gladly  pray  to  God  if  she  knew  how.  So  they  knelt  down 
together.  Ah-kying  told  the  Lord  all  her  trouble,  asked  God  to  deliver  her  son, 
and  also  that  both  mother  and  son  might  be  saved  from  eternal  death.  She 
returned  to  her  home,  told  her  husband  and  neighbours  how  this  Christian  had 
prayed  to  God,  and  how  confident  he  was  of  his  prayer  being  speedily  answered. 
Day  after  day  passed,  and  stiU  no  news  of  the  poor  prisoner ;  but  one  afternoon,  just 
as  hope  was  beginning  to  die  away,  she  saw  coming  towards  the  house  her  son, 
alive,  set  free  from  prison.  He  could  not  understand  it  himself,  for  be  had  not  the 
least  expectation  of  being  released.  That  morning  the  magistrate  had  sent  for  him, 
had  him  beaten,  then  set  him  at  liberty.  Great  was  the  joy  at  his  return.  The 
mother  told  him  about  Ah-kying's  prayer,  and  for  weeks  they  walked  about  eight 
miles  to  the  chapel  to  worship  the  God  who  had  answered  prayer,  and  saved  the  son 
from  death.  (JF.  Rudland,  Missionary  in  China.)  Continuance  in  prayer: — 
During  my  recent  visit  to  Italy,  when  in  the  hotel,  I  desired  the  attention  of  the 
waiter,  and  observing  the  button  to  be  pressed,  I  applied  my  thumb  as  instructed, 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xbl 

but  no  waiter  appeared  ;  I  repeated  the  experiment  several  times,  with  no  bettef 
success.     Presently  another  visitor  entered,  and,  hearing  my  desire,  asked  if  I  had 
rung  the  bell.     I  told  him  I  had,  without  success.     "  Ah,"  said  he,  "  you  do  not 
understand  ;  I  have  been  here  before,"  and  placing  his  thumb  upon  the  button,  he 
kept  it  there  till  the  waiter  appeared.     That  is  how  we  must  pray :  keep  up  con- 
tinuous application  until  the  answer  arrives.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Prayer  and  pro- 
tection : — In  the  year  1793,  when  Ireland  was  in  a  state  of  rebellion  against  England, 
some  discontented  spirits  in  county  Wexford  thought  that  now  was  a  favourable 
opportunity  to  vent  their  spleen  upon  the  small  settlement  of  Moravians  dwelling  in 
that  district.    They  had  long  threatened  to  make  an  end  of  them,  and  when  would 
they  get  a  better  chance  ?    The  Moravians  expected  some  such  attack,  and  resolved 
to  trust  not  to  their  own  strength  or  weapons,  but  in  God.     They  gathered  in  their 
chapel,  and  with  earnest  prayer  besought  Him  to  be  their  shield  in  the  time  of 
danger.   The  attacking  party  drew  near ;  they  had  expected  to  meet  with  opposition, 
and  were  prepared  for  butchery  and  the  wildest  excesses,  but  instead  of  that  they 
beheld  those  whom  they  had  come  to  slay  on  their  knees  before  God.     They  heard 
the  earnest  prayers  for  protection,  and  stranger  still,  for  forgiveness  and  pardon  for 
their  intending  murderers.    When  their  song  of  praise  rang  out  in  the  still  air  there 
was  not  one  in  all  that  ruffianly  band  who  would  have  raised  a  hand  against  these 
Bweet  singers ;  they  felt  powerless  to  harm  them.     They  stayed  all  that  day  in  the 
settlement,  then  with  one  accord  departed,  without  having  injured  a  single  indi- 
vidual or  having  stolen  a  single  article.    So  the  Lord  looked  after  His  own,  and  did 
help  and  protect  those  who  had  put  their  trust  in  Him.     {J.  McGregor.)         Safety 
through  prayer : — In  1872  a  missionary  in  the  city  of  Cadareita,  Mexico,  made  it  a 
special  subject  of  prayer  that  the  Lord  would  open  the  way  for  the  return  of  himself, 
his  wife  and  child  to  the  States  for  a  little  season,  the  circumstances  seeming  to 
indicate  this  as  a  duty.     The  needed  means  were  provided,  but  the  country  was  in 
a  state  of  revolution,  and  his  friends  tried  to  dissuade  him  from  going,  as  General 
Cortinas  would  probably  cross  their  path,  who  was  a  murderous  man  and  regarded 
as  having  a  special  hatred  for  Americans.    He  determined  to  go  forward,  however, 
trusting  to  Divine  protection,  and  they  started  for  Matemoras,  some  three  hundred 
miles  distant,  two  hired  men  and  their  wives  accompanying  them,  the  brethren 
"  promising  to  pray  daily  for  their  safety."     "  The  third  morning,  after  commend- 
ing ourselves  as  usual  into  the  care  of  our  covenant-keeping  God,"  he  relates,  "  we 
started  on  our  journey,  and  soon  espied  the  troops  of  General  Cortinas  two  miles 
distant,  marching  toward  us.     We  again  all  looked  to  God  for  protection,  and  then 
went  on  until  we  met  the  advanced  guard,  who  commanded  us  to  halt  and  wait  until 
the  general  came  up.     Riding  up  to  our  company  with  the  salutation,  he  asked 
whence  we  came  and  whither  we  were  going ;  he  then  asked  the  news  from  Nueva 
Leon.     After  replying  to  his  question,  the  missionary  inquired  if  the  road  was 
safe  between  his  party  and   Matemoras.      He  repUed,   '  Perfectly ;    you  caai  go 
on  without   any  fear,  and  as  safely  as  you  would  in  your  own  country  ' ;  then 
bidding  us  good  morning,  he  rode  on,  not  even  inquiring  about  or  examining 
any  of   our   baggage."  Upon  reaching  Brownville,   Texas,   friends    pronounced 
the  conduct  of  General  Cortinas  as  truly  a  miracle,  for  they  "could  not  have 
believed    him    capable    of    such    kindness    to    Americans    so    in    his    power." 
Answered  prayers  (text  and  Philem.  22) : — The  two  passages  cover  the  entire  sub- 
ject.    Here  are  prayers  of  the  same  kind  as  when  a  mother  asks  God  to  restore  her 
sick  child,  or  a  Church  asks  a  beloved  officer  to  be  spared.     I.  The  smrLABiTT  in 
THE  TWO  CASES.     The  circumstances  are  almost  identicaL  In  both  cases  the  Church 
pleads  for  the  life  of  an  apostle  from  the  hands  of  a  blood-thirsty  tyrant,  and  in 
both  oases  the  prayer  is  answered.    Learn — 1.  The  region  into  which  prayer  may 
enter.     Men  say  this  is  only  the  personal,  inward,  and  spiritual.     To  pass  from 
ourselves  to  affairs  of  human  government  and  laws  or  to  nature  is  vain.     The  ex- 
amples here  are  against  these  statements  and  show  that  prayer  has  a  voice  in  the 
action  of  our  fellows,  in  the  arrangements  of  life,  and  in  the  laws  of  nature.     2. 
Prayer  has  direct  results  therein.     Good-humoured  sceptics  say,  "  Pray  for  othera 
as  much  as  you  hke  that  they  may  be  deUvered  from  nature's  laws,  and  from  human 

wrong it  may  do  you  good  in  the  way  of  deepening  your  sympathies,  but  outward 

results  are  impossible."  But  we  see  here  that  through  the  prayers  of  the  Church 
Peter  and  Paul  are  restored  to  liberty.  3.  Prayer  does  not  always  receive  the 
answer  desired.  Peter  and  Paul  were  in  prison  again,  and  without  doubt  the  Church 
prayed  for  their  release.  The  apostles  were  released  indeed,  but  by  death,  not  to 
earthly  toil  but  to  heavenly  rest.   It  is  a  misrepresentation  that  the  Church  teaohea 


CHAP,  xn.]  TEE  ACTS.  271 

that  the  good  asked  for  is  always  given.  Christians  pray  not  with  a  desire  to  im- 
pose their  will  upon  God  and  His  universe.  When  the  answer  is  not  given  accord- 
ing to  their  desire,  they  are  content  to  believe  that  it  is  in  respect  of  things  they 
would  not  have  desired  could  they  have  known  as  God  knows.  4.  Yet  prayer  is  a 
mighty  power  in  the  affairs  of  men — a  mighty  weapon  in  the  hands  of  the  Church. 
How  unequal  the  forces ;  Herod  or  Nero,  with  prisons  and  soldiers,  and  on  the 
other  side  a  few  weak  men  and  women  bowed  in  prayer.  Yet  note  which  wins.  5. 
The  Church  is  resistless  for  the  purposes  of  her  great  mission  when  fully  armed 
with  the  power  of  prayer.  A  king  once  led  forth  Ins  steel-clad  chivalry  to  place  a 
despot's  yoke  upon  the  neck  of  a  free  people.  Just  before  the  battle  he  saw  their 
ranks  bending  to  the  ground.  "  See,"  he  cried,  "  they  submit  already."  "Yes," 
said  a  wise  counsellor,  who  knew  them  better;  "  they  submit,  but  it  is  to  God,  not 
to  us."  And  in  a  few  hours  the  king  and  his  army  were  scattered.  Let  the  Church, 
as  she  stands  face  to  face  with  opposing  forces,  submit  to  God  in  prayer  and  every 
foe  will  be  vanquished.  H.  The  distinction  between  the  two  cases.  The  same 
answer  is  given,  but  in  different  ways.  In  the  first  case  there  is  direct  Divine  inter- 
position, in  the  other  nothing  miraculous. — ^Paul  pleads  his  case,  is  adjudged 
innocent  and  set  free.  Learn — 1.  The  blessedness  of  the  man  who  lives  and  moves 
in  an  atmosphere  of  prayer,  around  whom  cluster  as  guardian  forces,  the  petitions 
of  the  people  of  God.  2.  The  exalted  privilege  of  being  identified  with  the  visible 
Church.  Men  may  speak  lightly  of  it,  but  is  it  a  light  thing  to  be  remembered  by 
thousands  in  their  prayers  ?  III.  The  relation  of  the  one  case  to  the  otheb. 
The  one  explains  the  other.  A  miracle  teaches  us  that  God  is  everywhere  working, 
and  that  the  ordinary  operations  of  nature  are  but  the  veil  behind  which  He  screens 
Himself,  and  which  in  the  miracle  is  for  the  moment  removed.  Learn — 1.  Not  to 
expect  supernatural  operations  in  answer  to  prayer.  2.  To  recognise  God  in  the 
natural,  and  to  accept  the  answer  when  it  comes  in  the  ordinary  course  of  events. 
It  is  a  miserable  condition  of  mind  that  sees  God  in  the  rescue  of  Peter  but  not  in 
the  rescue  of  Paul.  {W.  Ferki7is.)  The  liberating  power  of  prayer  : — Mr.  Elliot, 
who  laboured  as  a  missionary  among  the  American  Indians,  was  eminent  in  prayer, 
and  several  instances  are  recorded  of  remarkable  answers  having  been  given  to  his 
petitions.  The  following  is  striking  : — Mr.  Foster,  a  godly  gentleman  of  Charles- 
town,  was,  with  his  son,  taken  by  the  Turks  ;  and  the  barbarous  prince,  in  whose 
dominions  he  was  become  a  slave,  was  resolved  that,  in  his  lifetime,  no  captive 
should  be  released ;  so  that  Mr.  Foster's  friends,  when  they  had  heard  the  sad  news, 
concluded  that  all  hope  was  lost.  Upon  this,  Mr.  Elliot,  in  some  of  his  next  prayers 
before  a  great  congregation,  addressed  the  Throne  of  Grace  in  the  following  very 
plain  language  :  "  Heavenly  Father,  work  for  the  redemption  of  Thy  poor  servant 
Foster.  And  if  the  prince  who  detains  him  will  not,  as  they  say,  dismiss  him  as  loug 
as  himself  lives,  Lord,  we  pray  Thee,  kill  that  cruel  prince ;  kill  him,  and  glorify 
Thyself  upon  him."  In  answer  to  this  singular  prayer,  Mr.  Foster  quickly  returned 
from  captivity,  and  brought  an  account  that  the  prince  who  had  detained  him  had 
come  to  an  untimely  death,  by  which  means  he  had  been  set  at  liberty.  "  Thus  we 
knew,"  says  Dr.  Cotton  Mather,  "  that  a  prophet  had  been  among  us."  Peter 
prayed  out  of  prison : — Learn  from  the  narrative — I.  The  true  unity  of  the 
Chdbch.  Paul  tells  us  that  when  one  member  suffers,  all  the  members  suffer  with 
it,  and  here  we  see  how  the  assault  made  on  Peter  affected  all  the  saints  in  Jerusalem. 
They  felt  regarding  him  as  Luther  felt  regarding  Melanchtbon  when,  with  amazing 
boldness,  the  reformer  told  the  Lord  that  he  could  not  do  without  his  Philip.  They 
had  in  him  not  an  interest  of  benevolence  alone  but  one  of  identity.  Peter's 
extremity  was  their  extremity.  So  let  one  child  in  a  home  be  smitten  aU  the  mem- 
bers are  deeply  affected.  Let  some  public  spirited  patriot  be  stricken,  and  the  whole 
nation  feels  the  blow.  But  even  more  keenly  the  Christian  feels  the  afiliction  of  a 
brother  in  Christ.  There  is  nothing  which  merges  relationship  into  identity  so 
thoroughly  as  the  gospel.  In  Christ  we  are  all  one ;  and  so  each  feels  the  other's 
woe.  And  then  Christ  feels  with  us  ;  "in  all  our  affliction  He  is  afiQicted."  This 
is  the  true  brotherhood.  Better  than  all  secret  lodges,  or  mystic  grasps,  or  tahs- 
manic  passwords  is  this  union  with  Christ.  The  Church  ought  to  be  the  most  help- 
ful and  loving  society  in  the  world ;  and  if  it  were  there  would  be  no  craving  among 
men  for  some  other  association  to  meet  their  needs.  II.  The  power  of  earnest, 
believing  united  prayer.  The  answer  in  this  case  was  long  delayed.  The  last 
night  had  arrived,  yet  they  continued,  and  lo  !  at  the  darkest  hour  the  dawn  broke. 
Here  is  an  example  for  us.  We  are  not  warranted  to  expect  such  answers  as  thi?, 
yet  God  would  sooner  work  a  mkacle  than  suffer  His  faithfulness  to  fail,  or  let  Hia 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

cause  be  put  back.  For  the  resources  of  the  universe  are  at  His  command,  and  it 
is  equally  easy  for  Him  to  answer  prayer  through  the  ordinary  operations  of  His 
providence,  or  through  bringing  new  causes  into  operation.  What  we  have  to  re- 
member is  that  He  is  the  hearer  of  prayer.  Did  we  do  so  there  would  be  more 
definiteness,  directness  and  business-like  purpose  in  our  petitions.  Is  it  not  a  fact 
that  when  we  have  concluded  our  devotions  it  would  often  puzzle  us  to  tell  what  we 
have  been  praying  for  ?  And  then  when  we  have  asked  for  certain  things,  we  have 
become  discouraged  because  we  have  not  had  an  immediate  answer.  Why  are  God's 
answers  delayed?  It  may  be  because  we  are  desirous  of  sharing  in  the  glory  of  the 
answer ;  or  because  God  wishes  to  mature  patience  and  faith ;  but  in  any  case  if  we 
were  more  definite  and  continuous  we  should  see  more  frequently  the  results.  They 
tell  us  of  the  fixed  laws  of  nature ;  but  who  dares  maintain  that  He  who  fixed 
those  laws  cannot  use  them  for  the  purpose  of  answering  His  people's  prayers  f 
There  are  postal  laws  in  this  country  ;  but  are  the  facilities  for  answering  letters 
open  to  all  but  those  who  made  them  ?  And  yet  men  who  are  using  the  laws  of 
nature  every  day  to  help  their  fellows — e.g.,  medical  men — will  deny  to  their  Author 
the  same  hberty.  Nay,  more  ;  if  I  do  not  post  my  letter  may  I  not  telegraph  for  a 
message-boy  and  send  him  on  with  an  immediate  answer  ?  And  am  I  breaking 
postal  laws  to  do  that  ?  Yet  I  may  send  my  little  liveried  messenger,  but  God  may 
not  send  an  angel  1  IH.  While  earthly  globy  fades  the  Wobd  of  God  endures 
FOB  EVER.  Like  a  foam  bell  on  the  stream  Herod  dazzled  men's  eyes  for  a  moment 
with  the  reflection  of  the  sunlight ;  and  then  Uke  it  too,  he  burst  and  disappeared 
— while  "  the  Word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied."  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The 
deliverance  of  Peter : — 1.  A  triumph  of  Divine  power.  2.  A  reward  of  apostolic 
fidelity.  3.  A  fruit  of  intercessory  brotherly  love.  4.  An  overthrow  of  proud 
tyrannical  rage.  {K.  Gerok.)  The  deliverance  of  Peter: — From  the  narrative 
learn  the  following  lessons  —  I.  If  ever  our  enemies  get  hold  of  us,  thet 
WILL  hold  us  as  fast  AS  THEY  CAN.  Hcrod  was  not  content  with  ordinary  meaus  of 
keeping  Peter  in  custody.  He  was  too  great  a  prize  to  be  lost.  Mark  you,  if 
by  any  fault  of  our  own  we  ever  fall  into  the  hand  of  our  enemies,  we  need  expect 
no  mercy  from  them.  And  if  without  fault  we  be  delivered  for  a  little  season  into 
their  hands,  whoever  may  be  spared,  the  Christian  never  is.  Men  will  forgive  a 
thousand  faults  in  others,  but  they  will  magnify  the  most  trivial  offence  in  the  true 
follower  of  Jesus.  Nor  do  I  very  much  regret  this,  for  it  is  a  caution  to  us  to  walk 
very  carefully  before  God  in  the  land  of  the  hving.  The  Cross  of  Christ  is  in  itself 
an  offence  to  the  world ;  let  us  take  heed  that  we  do  not  add  any  offence  of  our  own. 
It  is  "  to  the  Jew  a  stumblingblock  "  ;  let  us  mind  that  we  put  no  stumbUngblocks 
where  there  are  enough  already.  "  To  the  Greek  it  is  fooUshness  "  ;  let  us  not  &di. 
our  folly  to  give  point  to  the  scorn  with  which  the  worldly-wise  deride  the  gospel. 
We  pilgrims  travel  as  suspected  persons  through  the  world.  Not  only  are  we  under 
Burveillance,  but  there  are  more  spies  than  we  reck  of.  H.  When  a  case  is  put  into 
Gods  hands.  He  will  manage  it  well,  and  He  will  interfere  in  sufficient  timb 
to  bring  His  servants  out  of  theib  distress.  Peter's  case  was  put  into  God'g 
hands.  Well,  we  can  leave  it  there.  But  it  is  the  last  night  1  Yes,  but  just  at 
that  last  and  darkest  hour  of  the  night,  God's  opportunity  overtook  man's  extremity. 
A  light  shone  in  the  dungeon.  Peter  was  awakened.  God  never  is  before  His  time ; 
nor  is  He  ever  too  late.  But  see,  there  is  Peter  asleep  I  doing  nothing  1  Well,  and 
the  best  thing  for  him  too,  for  the  case  was  put  into  God's  hands.  Suppose  Peter 
had  been  awake,  what  could  he  do  ?  Had  he  been  fretting  and  troubling  himself, 
what  good  could  he  have  done  7  Sleep  on,  blessed  slumberer  1  Well  might  Herod 
envy  thee.  Thy  spirit  is  free  ;  and  it  may  be  that  in  thy  dreams  thou  art  rejoicing 
"  with  a  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory."  When  the  case  is  taken  into  God's 
hands,  and  you  and  I  feel  that  we  can  do  nothing  for  ourselves,  we  may  take  sleep, 
and  while  we  sleep,  His  watchful  eyes  do  keep  their  ceaseless  guard,  and  at  the  right 
time  deliverance  comes.     IH.  When  God  comes  to  delivkb  His  people,  all  thh 

CIRCUMSTANCES  WHICH  SEEM   TO   OO  AGAINST  THEIB  DELTVERANOE   SHALL  ONLY  TEND  TO 

bet  FORTH  THE  MORE  His  oLOBY.  What  coutempt  He  puts  upon  chains,  &o.  I  know 
of  nothing  that  seems  to  illustrate  more  God's  splendid  triumph  over  man's  canning 
than  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  So,  Christian,  rest  assured  that  everything  that 
looks  black  to  your  gaze  now,  shall  only  make  it  the  brighter  when  God  delivers 

you.      IV.    No  DIFFICULTY  CAN  EVER  OCCUR  WHICH    GOD    CANNOT  MEET  WHEN  He  MAKES 

BABE  His  arm.  The  chains  are  gone,  the  warders  are  passed,  but  fhere  is  that  iron 
gate.  You  get  fretting  for  montbs  about  the  iron  gate,  as  those  holy  women  did 
lor  hours,  who  went  to  the  sepulchre  and  said,  "  Who  shall  roll  us  a^vay  the  stone?  " 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  275 

There  was  no  stone  to  roll  away  1  And  when  you  go  to  this  place,  you  will  find  that 
there  is  no  iron  gate  there,  or  it  wUl  open  of  its  own  accord.  Oh,  how  often  have 
we  had  to  wonder  at  our  own  folly.  V.  The  omnipotence  of  peayer.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  deliverance  of  Peter : — ^We  obtain  here  a  pleasing  view  of — I. 
The  deep  and  tendeb  sense  of  bbotheehood  which  pervaded  the  early  Church. 
This  is  one  of  the  best  gifts  which  the  gospel  brought  to  men.  It  is  indeed  the 
primary,  unique  element  of  the  human  race  as  a  special,  distinct  creation.  Sin 
struck  a  disastrous  blow  at  this  distinguishing  principle.  If  reclamation  should 
evar  come  for  the  race,  this  principle  must  be  called  into  life  again.  Men  must  be 
taught  not  only  to  know  God  as  a  Father,  but  each  other  as  brothers.  And  so  wo 
perceive  that  Christ  made  this  brotherhood  the  kasio  elcmeot  of  His  kingdom.  How 
beautifully  did  the  early  Church  display  this  principle  1  How  closely  were  they 
joined  together !  How  generously  they  sold  their  property  for  the  common  good ! 
Out  of  the  fruitful  soil  of  loving  brotherhood  sprang  up  the  intense  concern  of  the 
whole  Church  for  Peter.  It  is  the  true  cement  which  binds  Christians  of  every 
name  and  country  together  in  an  indissoluble  bond.  It  is  the  only  sentiment  of 
BufiQcient  power  to  arouse  the  Church  to  carry  the  gospel  to  the  millions  yet  lying 
in  the  shadow  of  death.  II.  The  Church  in  the  attitude  of  prater  fob  an  im- 
periled brother.  1.  It  was  a  praying  Church.  When  they  had  returned  from  the 
ascension,  they  all  continued  with  one  accord  in  prayer.  When  they  would  select 
one  to  fiU  the  place  made  vacant  by  Judas,  they  prayed.  When  they  had  received 
three  thousand  souls  into  the  Church  they  continued  steadfastly  in  prayers.  When 
Peter  and  John  returned  after  their  first  arraignment,  the  whole  company  lifted  up 
their  voice  to  God.  As  the  result  of  this  habitual  prayerfulness  "  they  were  filled 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  "  they  spake  the  Word  with  boldness,"  the  multitude  of  them 
that  believed  "  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul,"  "  and  great  grace  was  upon  them 
all."  2.  By  the  habit  of  prayer  the  Church  was  prepared  for  trying  emergencies 
(ver.  5).  Here  was  a  great  emergency.  Through  this  dreary  week  prayer  was  their 
constant  occupation.  They  had  no  carnal  weapons,  no  distinguished  friends  at 
court,  no  treasures  to  offer  as  a  ransom  ;  but  there  was  a  Power  above  the  might  of 
kings,  standing  ready  to  be  invoked  ;  and  to  this  Power  they  made  their  appeal.  S. 
They  prayed  in  concert.  All  hearts  were  touched,  all  minds  agreed.  4.  They 
prayed  unceasingly.  Through  the  long  week,  amid  the  distractions  of  the  crowded 
city,  with  the  danger  of  a  bloody  persecution,  they  prayed.  There  was  no  relaxation 
of  energy,  no  manifestation  of  doubt,  no  giving  over  of  entreaty.  The  vision  of  their 
father  Jacob  wresthng  at  Mahanaim  may  have  risen  before  them,  or  the  thought  of 
the  unbroken  vigils  of  their  Master  may  have  come  to  strengthen  them.  Three 
potent  elements  met  and  mingled  in  their  prayer :  namely,  their  sense  of  need,  a 
present  God,  and  the  undoubting  conviction  that  He  was  able  and  willing  to  help. 
Could  it  be  less  than  unceasing?  5.  They  prayed  to  the  point.  It  was  all  for  Peter. 
Self  was  forgotten.  There  were  no  diffuse  and  rambling  petitions,  no  grooved 
snetences  or  highflown  expressions,  or  dull  repetitions,  certainly  no  prescribed  form. 
They  could  not  run  wide  of  the  mark :  "  Hear  us  for  Peter  in  his  lone  prison."  6. 
To  God  direct  they  spoke.  No  appeal  to  angels  ;  no  mention  of  Mary,  no  saint  is 
thought  of  as  a  helper,  not  even  Stephen,  or  the  saintly  James,  fresh  in  heaven 
from  his  baptism  of  blood.  No  living  man  is  called  on  to  help  ;  no  message  is  sent 
to  Herod.  They  cast  themselves  on  God  nakedly.  The  case  is  urgent,  and  the 
mighty  Presence  alone  filled  the  scene.  III.  The  issue.  The  festival-week  is  over. 
The  day  is  fixed  to  bring  Peter  forth  to  his  doom.  It  is  the  morrow.  But  the  Church 
is  still  praying.  One  place  of  meeting  is  full.  Most  likely  all  the  places  of  assembly 
were  similarly  attended.  Peter  was  asleep  in  his  cell,  chained  by  each  arm  to  % 
soldier.  There  is  no  thunderstorm,  no  earthquake.  No  jailer  is  bribed  to  release 
Peter.  An  angel  is  in  the  prison.  He  aroused  Peter.  Peter  followed  him  and  was 
free.  {W.  G.  Craig,  D.D.)  Peter's  deliverance  from  chains,  an  image  of  our 
gracious  deliverance  from  the  chains  of  sin : —  I.  The  severe  imprisonment.  1. 
The  chains.  2.  The  keepers.  3.  The  sleep.  II.  The  merciful  deliverance.  1. 
The  messenger  from  heaven  with  his  joyful  light  and  awakening  voice.  2.  The 
awakening  with  its  fears  and  joys.  3.  The  first  walking,  with  its  hindrances  and 
aids — walking  as  in  a  dream  through  the  first  and  second  watch,  and  the  iron  gate. 
in.  The  glorious  liberty.  1.  The  firm  standing  on  one's  own  feet.  2.  The  joy- 
ful reception  by  the  brethren.  3.  The  impotent  rage  of  the  world.  {K.  Gerok.) 
The  security  of  God's  servants  : — The  true  servant  of  God— 1.  Can  rest  in  peace  even 
when  seemingly  in  the  power  of  those  who  intend  to  take  his  life.  2.  Is  never  fully 
in  the  power  of  his  enemies.  God  never  irrecoverably  surrenders  him.  3.  Has 
VOL.  n.  18 


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

celestial  messengers  sent  to  his  comfort  and  deliverance.  4.  Is  cared  for,  not  only 
in  great,  but  also  in  small  matters.  5.  Though  for  the  while  not  recognising  the 
fact,  yet  soon  wiE  be  sure  to  see  that  God  has  helped  him  in  every  deliverance  from 
trouble.  (S.  S.  Times.)  Aspects  of  sainthood  : — On  the  whole  narrative  we  note 
— 1.  The  saint's  tribulation.  Peter  in  prison — various  sorts  of  prisons.  2.  The 
saint's  treasure.  Peter  slept — peace  of  heart.  3.  The  saint's  power.  Prayer  in 
Mary's  house.  4.  The  saint's  deliverance.  God  interferes.  6.  The  saint's  duty. 
Peter  must  gird  himself  and  bind  on  his  sandals,  and  cast  his  garment  about  him 
and  foUow  the  angel.  Divine  interposition  : — This  old-world  story  is  fuU  of  en- 
couragement and  instruction  for  the  men  to-day.  It  teaches — I.  God  knows  all 
ABOUT  His  children.  Beyond  the  bare  fact  of  Peter's  arrest,  the  disciples  were  in 
profound  ignorance.  The  secrets  of  the  Eoman  prison-house  were  well  kept.  But 
God  kept  watch  over  Peter,  knew  in  what  cell  he  was  confined,  the  names  of  bis 
guards,  and  just  where,  when,  and  how  to  send  His  angel.  Peter  had  no  occasion 
to  feel  solitary  or  forsaken.  God's  children  are  never  alone.  The  shipwrecked 
sailor  adrift  on  a  spar  in  mid-ocean ;  the  traveller  lost  in  the  trackless  desert ;  the 
pauper  dying  in  the  attic  with  no  friend  to  speak  a  word  of  comfort — all  these,  if 
they  are  God's  children,  are  cheered  by  His  presence.  Human  experience  is  so  full 
of  enforced  solitudes  that  this  is  the  most  precious  of  all  truths.  Our  recognised 
afflictions  are  not  the  hardest  to  bear.  The  tears  we  shed  in  secret,  the  disappoint- 
ments of  which  we  never  speak,  the  sorrowful  hearts  which  we  hide  under  smiling 
faces — these  are  the  things  that  test  and  strain  the  fibre  of  manhood.  It  greatly 
helps  us  to  bear  troubles  like  these,  to  remember  that  God  knows  all  about  them. 
II.  God  keeps  Himself  informed  about  His  children  in  order  to  help  them.  He 
kept  watch  of  Peter  in  order  that,  when  the  right  time  came,  He  might  deUver  him 
from  prison.  He  keeps  watch  of  you  and  me  that,  when  our  need  is  too  sore  for 
our  unaided  strength.  He  may  put  the  right  hand  of  His  omnipotence  underneath 
the  burden.  Providence  is  pro-viD-ence — the  foreseeing  and  arranging  that  pre- 
cedes helpful  doing.  Men  have  too  mechanical  an  idea  of  life.  Our  common 
blessings  are  supposed  to  come  in  what  we  caU  the  "  order  of  nature."  The  farmer 
who  rejoices  in  a  bountiful  harvest  says:  "It  was  because  the  seed  was  good,  and 
the  soil  was  good,  and  the  season  was  propitious,  and  I  spared  no  pains."  True, 
but  back  of  all  these  recognised  conditions  was  God,  giving  the  seed  its  vitality  and 
the  soil  its  fertility,  &c.  III.  When  God  helps  His  children  He  expects  them  to 
HELP  themselves.  It  was  possible  for  God,  in  working  a  miracle  for  Peter's  de- 
liverance, to  have  wrought  out  every  item  of  it.  But  that  is  not  the  Divine  method. 
There  were  some  things  which  the  apostle  could  do  for  himself,  and  only  what  he 
could  not  do  for  himself  was  done  for  him.  In  the  Divine  economy  of  the  universa 
there  is  no  provision  for  idleness.  Prayer  is  not  such  a  power  as  allows  men  to  fold 
their  hands,  and  expect  results  which  they  might  secure  by  t^e  proper  use  of  means. 
Prederick  Douglass  says  :  "  When  I  was  a  slave,  I  prayed  earnestly  for  freedom 
and  made  no  attempt  to  gain  it,  and  I  got  no  response  ;  but,  when  I  began  to  pray 
with  my  legs,  my  prayers  began  to  be  answered."  Men  pray  for  a  revival  of  religion, 
and  make  no  attempt  to  secure  it  by  more  consecrated  lives  and  more  earnest  effort, 
and  the  revival  does  not  come.  If  anything  comes,  it  is  a  temporary  surge  of 
emotion,  as  fatal  as  it  is  evanescent.  Pilgrimages  to  Lourdes,  and  the  modern 
"  faith-cure,"  are  only  different  phases  of  the  same  mischievous  delusion.  Prayer 
and  effort  are  designed  to  go  hand-in-hand.  We  are  "  workers  together  with  God," 
and,  so  long  as  we  are  idle,  the  heavens  keep  silence.  IV.  When  God  moves  in  be- 
half OF  His  children  no  oii.TACLE  IS  TOO  GREAT  FOR  HiM.  Humauly  judging,  how 
many  and  what  insuperable  difficulties  stood  in  the  way  of  Peter's  deliverance  I 
But  how  easy  for  God  to  do  that  which  was  impossible  for  man  !  He  had  but 
to  will  it,  and  the  keepers  were  helpless  and  asleep.  He  had  but  to  com- 
mand it,  and  chains  melted  like  wax  in  the  heat  of  His  word.  He  had  but  to 
say  it,  and  every  door  opt-ned  wide.  And  yet  how  apt  men  are  to  limit  the  range  of 
their  petitions  to  the  things  which  it  seems  to  them  can  be  done,  and  have  no  heart 
to  ask  God  for  what  seems  too  hard  for  them.  Our  philosophies  of  prayer  often 
ignore  the  fact  that  Omnipotence  is  at  the  head  of  the  universe.  The  scientist 
argues  the  futility  of  all  prayer,  because  inflexible  laws  of  nature  block  the  way. 
As  though  God  were  not  more  than  nature,  and  His  assurance,  "  Ask  and  ye  shall 
receive,"  as  much  a  factor  in  the  conduct  of  the  universe  as  gravitation  1  We  have 
nothing  to  do  with  probabilities.  The  hand  that  holds  aU  worlds  is  able  to  work 
beyond  our  thouglit.     (Sermons  by   the   Monday   Club.)  Dicine  deliverance : — 

What  can  we  learn  from  this  storj  which  ma^  do  something  more  for  us  thaa 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  STi 

«ven  promoting  the  spirit  of   confidence  towards   God  in  time  of  distress  or 
perplexity  ?     The   answer   is   to   be   found   in  that   figure   of   Scripture   which 
describes   sinners   as   slaves   and   captives,   tied   and  bound   with   the   chain  of 
sinful  habit  (2  Pet.  ii.  29).     And  therefore  they  need  that  Deliverer  who  is  sent 
(Isa.  Ixi.  1).     The  tyrant  enemy  of  the  soul  plans  its  destruction,  and  takes  his 
measures  for  keeping  it  fast  in  the  dungeon  of  sin,  bound  with  strong  fetters  of 
passion  and  habit  to  evil  associations  and  bad  companions,  that  he  may  make  it 
his  victim  when  he  pleases.    And  now  see  how  in  every  particular  of  St.  Peter's 
captivity  and  deliverance  we  may  find  the  picture  of  our  own  souls  while  under  the 
dominion  of  sin,  and  of  the  steps  by  which  our  deliverance  is  accomplished.     In 
the  four  quaternions,  we  have  the  same  image  of  the  incessant  siege  laid  to  the 
soul  in  its  four  main  parts  of  human  nature — the  emotions,  the  understanding,  the 
memory,  and  the  will,  as  is  figured  in  Psa.  xci.  5,  6,  where  the  four  Hebrew 
divisions  of  daUy  time  into  evening,  midnight,  morning,  and  midday,  each  with 
its  special  risks  and  troubles,  are  signified.     And  then  for  the  two  chains :   we 
know  them  but  too  well ;  the  chain  of  aggressive  overt  acts,  the  chain  of  neglected 
duties.    Any  evil  habits  to  which  we  have  become  wedded,  any  dangerous  com- 
panions with  whom  we  needlessly  associate — these  are  the  warders  to  whom  we 
are  linked  by  the  same  fetters  of  inveterate  custom,  which  we  are  powerless  to 
break.    And  so,  like  the  apostle,  we  resign  ourselves  to  laxity  and  inaction,  typified 
by  the  loosened  belt,  cast-off  cloak,  relinquished  sandals,  heavy  slumber.     Then  it 
is,  in  our  worst  need,  that  our  succour  comes.    1.  The  first  token  of  the  angelio 
presence  was  that  "  a  light  shined  in  the  prison."    So  the  light  of  God's  Word, 
while  lighting  up  the  conscience,  and  revealing  the  foulness  of  the  sins  which 
-defile  the  heart,  shows  us  also  Him  who  can  save  us  from  those  sins.    The  bane 
and  the  antidote  are  both  set  before  our  eyes  together,  and  we  can  choose  which 
we  will.     2.  Next  comes  the  personal  call,  the  direct  summons  to  the  individual 
conscience,  "  Arise  up  quickly  " — the  one  note  of  haste  in  the  whole  transaction. 
Quickly,  for  the  need  is  urgent,  the  deadly  peril  imminent,  life  itself  is  at  stake, 
and  there  is  no  time  for  dawdling.     The  angel  "  smote  Peter  on  the  side."   A  blow, 
a  shock,  some  sudden  chastisement  or  calamity,  is  frequently  needed  before  man, 
dead  asleep  in  sloth  and  sin,  can  be  roused  to  a  sense  of  his  condition.    But  that 
we  may  know  that  the  smiting  hand  is  friendly  there  follows  at  once,  "  and  raised 
him  up."     This  denotes  the  action  of  Divine  grace,  not  quitting  the  sinner  till  he 
is  fully  roused,  and  made  capable  of  exertion  ;  for  we  read  further  that  '•  his  chains 
fell  off  his  hands."     That  is,  the  first  grade  of  conversion  is  the  sudden  breaking 
away  from  evil  habits  and  bad  companions.     3.  But  next  we  find  the  invariable 
law  of  Divine  action  for  and  on  man  observed.     God  does  that  part  of  the  work 
which  we  cannot  do  ;  He  expects  us  to  do  the  part  within  our  own  powers  and 
opportunities.     To  be  ungirded  meant  idleness,  relaxation,  self-indulgence.     And 
therefore    our   Lord   counsels    his    disciples   (Luke    xii.    35) ;   and  his    apostles 
repeat  the  injunction  (Eph.  vi.  14;  1  Pet.  i.  13).     That  is,  check  and  restrain 
yourselves,  discipline  your  powers  and  passions,  prepare  yourselves  for  active 
work.    And  the  sandals  point  yet  further  that  this  work  must  take  us,  so  to  speak, 
out  of  doors,  in  the  service  of  a  charity  which,  though  it  may  begin  at  home,  may 
not  stop  there  ;  which  shall  go  where  it  is  needed,  whether  for  word  or  work  (Eph. 
vi.  15).     The  cloak  denotes  a  further  advance  in  effort,  implying  that  we  may  have 
to  journey  some  distance  and  encounter  inclement  weather,   to  undergo   some 
personal  inconvenience,  in  the  discharge  of  our  duty.    And  there  may  be  this 
additional  sense,  that  as  the  wide  cloak  covers  the  whole  person,  so  the  whole 
purpose  and  will  of  the  now  active  worker  should  be  engaged  in  his  occupation 
(Isa.  hx.  17).     Then  comes  the  most  important  precept  of  all,  which  prescribes  not 
the  act  only  of  exertion,  but  the  manner:  "Follow  me."    Only  so  far  as  the 
teacher  through  whom  God's  message  has  reached  the  sinner  is  himself  a  follower 
of  the  Lord  is  his  example  to  be  taken  for  a  pattern ;  but  the  path  of  the  saints 
who  took  Him  for  their  Guide  and  Model  is  the  only  road  out  of  the  prison  of  sin, 
and  into  the  open  air  of  life  and  freedom.    But  the  obstacles  in  the  escaping 
captive's  way  are  not  even  yet  overcome.   Two  wards  or  stations  of  posted  sentinels 
lie  beyond  the  part  of  the  prison  from  which  he  has  thus  far  been  rescued,  and 
must  needs  be  gone  through.     First  comes  the  purgative  way,  tha  process  of 
abandoning  old  evil  habit ;  the  "  Cease  to  do  evil  "  (Isa.  i.  16) ;  the  path  pointed 
out  by  the  Psalmist  (Psa.  cxix.  9) ;  the  counsel  of  the  Baptist  (Luke  iii.  13,  14). 
Next  is  the  illuminative  way,  the  way  of  Ught,  in  which  we  learn  more  of  God's 
will,  and  advance  from  mere  passive  blamelessness  to  active  holineas ;  the  "  Leara 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xu. 

to  do  well "  (Isa.  i.  17) ;  of  which  is  written  (Prov.  iv.  18).  And  beyond  this  is  the 
third  and  final  stage  of  the  unitive  way  (Jer.  1.  5) ;  the  road  which  brings  us  to  Christ 
Himself,  and  makes  us  one  with  Him  (1  Cor.  vi.  17).  Through  these  first  and 
second  wards,  then,  the  converted  sinner  must  pass,  and  so  reach  the  iron  door, 
which  keeps  the  foulness  and  sin  of  the  criminal  prison  from  overflowing  into  the 
streets  of  the  holy  city  ;  as  it  is  written  (Kev.  xxii.  15).  What  is  this  door,  then, 
that  is  at  once  the  bar  against  sin  and  the  issue  to  happiness  and  freedom  ?  What 
but  He  who  has  said  (John  x.  9)  ?  for  (Eph.  ii.  18).  No  obstacle  awaits  us  there, 
if  only  we  have  followed  in  the  appointed  path ;  for  the  gracious  words  succeed 
(Acts  xii.  10) ;  another  way  of  expressing  what  He  has  said  to  all  of  us  (Matt, 
vii.  7),  and  again,  to  every  soul  that  strives,  even  feebly,  to  do  His  will  (Rev.  iii. 
8).  This  is  the  one  and  only  way  of  access  to  the  city,  that  New  Jerusalem  which 
is  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  and  which  has  the  glory  of  God.  But  when  that 
one  street,  that  way  that  leadeth  unto  life,  has  been  traversed,  forthwith  the  angel 
departs  from  the  pilgrims  he  has  hitherto  guided,  since  they  have  no  further  need 
of  his  services.  Once  within  the  holy  city,  they  cannot  go  astray,  for  all  her 
streets  lead  to  the  throne  of  God  ;  once  in  sight  of  the  beatific  vision,  they  want 
no  lesser  help,  "  for  in  the  light  of  the  King's  countenance  is  life  "  (Prov.  xvi.  15). 
{R.  F.  Littledale,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  7-10.  And  behold  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him. — The  tender 
offices  of  angels  towards  the  saints  of  God : — It  enhances  the  moral  dignity  of  the 
Christian  that  he  should  have  such  exalted  beings  in  constant  attendance  upon 
him.  It  seems  to  bring  God  nearer  to  us,  to  bridge  over  the  measureless  void 
between  the  finite  and  the  infinite,  to  feel  that  in  sickness  or  in  sorrow,  or  in 
mental  darkness,  they  are  present  with  us  who  have  just  come  from  God's  presence. 
The  hand  supports  us  which  a  moment  before  had  been  tuning  to  lofty  melody  the 
harps  of  God.  They  bring  themselves  to  our  doors,  that  we  may  have  a  bright 
and  hallowing  presence  in  our  houses  and  among  our  children  ;  they  are  witnesses 
in  the  place  of  our  holy  assemblies ;  they  stand  as  weeping  friends  stand  by  the 
bedside  of  the  departing  righteous,  while  in  the  end  of  time  they  shall  arrest  the 
ministers  of  desolation  in  their  world-wide  havoc,  saying,  "  Hurt  not  the  earth, 
neither  the  sea,  nor  the  trees,  till  we  have  sealed  the  servants  of  God  on  their 
foreheads."  So  near,  so  loving,  so  constant  are  the  tender  ofiSces  of  angels  towards 
the  saints  of  God.  No  worship  do  we  offer  them ;  they  will  have  none.  They  ask 
only  to  be  loved  by  us  as  guardian  friends,  to  be  honoured  by  our  consistent  walk, 
to  be  thought  of  as  humble  servants  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  sent  forth  to  minister 
unto  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation."  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Angel  visits  in 
the  night : — 1.  When  we  climb  to  some  mountain  height,  and  look  forth  upon  the 
broad  landscape  in  the  blaze  of  the  bright  moon,  it  seems  as  if  our  earth  were  the 
universe,  and  the  sun  were  a  single  globe  of  fire  hung  in  the  heavens  to  give  it 
light.  When  we  stand  upon  the  deck  of  the  ship  in  mid  ocean  it  seems  impossible 
that  there  can  be  anything  else  but  the  sun  and  the  sea.  When  we  look  up  to  the 
BUent  sky  at  night,  it  seems  as  if  the  bright  array  of  stars  were  only  camp-fires 
kindled  on  the  plains  of  heaven  to  guide  some  wanderer  through  the  solitudes  of 
earth.  When  we  go  down  into  the  depths  of  the  cavern  it  seems  as  if  we  were 
alone  in  the  universe,  and  when  we  mingle  with  the  multitude  it  seems  as  if  man 
and  earth  were  everything.  All  these  natural  and  uninstructed  impressions  con- 
spire to  narrow  the  range  of  our  thought,  and  shut  us  up  to  the  occupations  of  man 
alone.  It  is,  therefore,  a  salutary  disclosure  that  we  are  not  the  only  actors  in  the 
busy  scenes  of  daily  life.  There  is  no  solitude  where  we  may  not  have  the  unseen 
companionship  of  beings  that  think  and  feel  and  work  more  mightily  and 
constantly  than  ourselves.  2.  And  these  invisible  partners  of  our  toil,  and 
sharers  of  our  spiritual  life,  have  sometimes  stepped  forth  from  behind  the  curtain 
to  show  us  that  we  may  have  witnesses  of  our  conduct  when  we  think  ourselves 
most  alone.  And  these  celestial  visitants  have  shown  themselves  better  acquainted 
with  human  history,  and  belter  able  to  do  our  work,  than  we  ourselves.  They 
have  defeated  great  armies,  overthrown  populous  cities,  sent  forth  and  arrested 
the  pestilence.  They  have  rested  under  the  shadow  of  oaks  at  noon,  as  if  weary, 
eat#n  bread,  as  if  hungry,  received  hospitality,  as  if  coming  in  from  a  journey, 
guided  and  protected  travellers,  rolled  away  the  stone  from  the  tomb,  kindled  the 
fire  of  the  altar,  clothed  themselves  in  garments  that  shone  like  the  lightning,  and 
appnarcd  in  so  common  a  garb  as  to  be  taken  for  wayfaring  men  needing  lodgings 
for  the  nii^ht.     It  gives  us  a  higher  and  truer  estimate  of  our  own  place  in  the 


CHAP.  XII.]  THE  ACTS.  277 

great  ccnamon wealth  of  intelligent  beings,  to  find  that  we  are  objects  of  intense 
interest  to  the  inhabitants  of  other  worlds.  It  enlarges  the  range  of  our  thought, 
and  lifts  our  desires  and  aspirations  above  all  earthly  and  perishable  things,  to 
know  that  our  present  habitation  is  only  one  little  province  of  a  universe  of  worlds  ; 
and  that  this  mighty  empire  is  bound  together  by  ties  of  intelligence,  co-operation, 
and  sympathy,  to  its  utmost  extent.  3.  The  deliverance  of  Peter  shows  that  these 
mighty  visitants  have  Uttle  regard  for  the  pomp  and  splendours  of  earthly  state. 
Suppose  a  prophet  had  said  the  day  before  that  on  that  night  a  mighty  being  from 
the  central  province  in  God's  great  empire  would  visit  Jerusalem,  and  only  one  man 
in  all  that  city  would  be  honoured  by  receiving  that  celestial  messenger — could  any 
have  guessed  that  that  man  would  be  found  in  prison  ?  There  were  many  other 
persons  besides  Peter,  many  other  places  besides  a  prison  for  an  angel  to  visit. 
But  the  angel  did  not  show  himself  in  the  palace  of  the  king.  He  did  not  enter 
the  temple.  He  did  not  address  himself  to  the  pilgrims  at  the  feast.  The  one 
man,  whom  that  mighty  servant  of  God  had  come  to  see,  was  shut  up  in  stone 
walls,  asleep  on  a  stone  floor,  bound  with  iron  chains,  &c.  If  the  very  chain  with 
which  Peter  was  bound  were  now  kept  in  Jerusalem,  every  intelligent  traveller 
would  wish  to  see  it.  And  not  necessarily  from  any  superstitious  regard,  but  from 
the  feeling  that  Christian  faith  and  suffering  consecrate  everything  they  touch.  If 
the  cell  were  preserved  any  intelligent  traveller  would  think  it  something  to  re- 
member and  to  teU  of,  that  he  had  entered  that  cell.  So  much  consecration  do 
rude  homes  and  vile  dungeons  derive  from  the  faith  and  toil  and  suffering  of  the 
servants  of  God.  Let  love  to  Christ  become  the  law  and  the  life  of  everything  we 
do,  and  then  the  place  where  we  toil,  and  the  home  where  we  rest,  will  become  as 
attractive  to  angels  as  the  dungeons  where  the  martyrs  suffered.  4.  Peter  slept  so 
roundly  that  only  the  sound  of  the  angel  voice,  and  the  touch  of  the  angel  hand 
could  awake  him.  A  man  with  a  good  conscience  can  sleep  on  a  very  hard  bed, 
and  in  the  midst  of  very  great  danger.  The  anxieties  and  perils  of  liie  and  the 
dread  of  death  would  not  weary  and  wear  us  out  so  much  if  we  went  to  our  daily 
duties  with  such  high  and  happy  faith  in  God  as  martyrs  have  shown  in  the  prison 
and  the  flames.  If  we  fuUy  believed  that  God  has  given  his  angels  charge  over  us 
to  keep  us  in  all  our  ways,  we  could  fulfil  our  day  of  duty  without  fear,  and  we 
could  gratefully  accept  such  sleep  as  God  gives  to  his  beloved  when  the  night 
comes.  I  know  the  doctors  say  that  sound  sleep  comes  of  a  good  digestion.  And 
while  I  do  not  deny  that,  I  know  another — that  a  good  digestion  depends  greatly 
upon  a  good  conscience.  To  be  in  the  best  health  of  both  body  and  mind,  we 
must  be  at  peace  with  God.  And  it  makes  very  little  difference  how  humble  or 
■exalted  the  chamber  in  which  we  lie  down  to  rest,  if  we  have  done  our  duty  well, 
and  trust  wholly  in  Him  who  giveth  His  beloved  sleep.  The  sleep  that  renews  the 
life,  and  restores  the  soul,  and  gives  a  loretaste  of  heavenly  rest,  is  the  sleep  which 
God  gives  to  them  that  love  Him.  The  time  is  not  far  distant  when  the  sleep  of 
death  will  steal  upon  us  all.  What  strange  and  bewildering  joy  it  will  be  to  be 
waked  from  that  last  sleep  by  the  touch  of  an  angel's  hand  1  What  surprise  it  will 
be  to  the  soul  to  find  itself  able  to  obey  that  command,  "  Eise  up  quickly,"  and  to 
follow  the  angel-guide  to  the  paradise  of  God !  5.  The  care  with  which  Peter 
was  kept  was  a  confession  that  even  Herod  was  afraid  of  him.  And  we  have  much 
reason  to  be  obliged  to  the  king  for  making  the  guard  so  strong ;  just  as  the  sealing 
of  the  stone  and  the  setting  of  the  watch  over  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus,  only  helped 
and  confirmed  the  demonstration  of  His  resurrection  ;  just  as  we  may  well  thank 
the  proud  and  passionate  Voltaire  for  saying  he  was  tired  of  hearing  that  twelve 
men  established  Christianity  throughout  the  world,  and  he  would  yet  live  to  hear 
it  said  that  one  man  had  banished  Christianity  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  We 
may  coiant  ourselves  debtors  to  the  remorseless  criticism  which  has  exhausted  the 
resources  of  learning  and  industry  in  the  endeavour  to  shake  our  confidence  in  the 
aacred  records,  for  all  its  efforts  have  only  served  to  lay  bare  the  everlasting 
foundations  on  which  our  faith  rests.  We  may  be  thankful  for  the  bigotry  which 
determined  to  crush  out  the  spirit  of  Christian  liberty.  6.  Peter  was  accustomed 
to  see  miracles  ;  and  yet  I  do  not  wonder  that  he  was  bewildered,  and  thought  he 
had  seen  a  vision  that  night.  If  we  try  to  imagine  the  circumstances,  we 
shall  the  better  understand  his  feelings.  At  last  he  has  time  to  think.  The 
bewildered  man  begins  to  come  to  himself.  He  recognises  the  place.  And  so  God's 
an(,el  shall  come  in  the  appointed  time  to  deliver  the  disciple  of  Jesus  from  the 
prison  of  the  flesh.  And  oh,  how  much  more  glorious  than  the  change  which  so 
bewiliii-ed  the  mind  of  the  apostle  I    We  try  in  vain  to  express  in  words  the 


278  THj!:  biblical  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap,  xia 

blessed  bewilderment  of  the  happy  soul  in  the  first  moment  of  waking  from  the 
sleep  of  death  to  the  life  of  heaven.  It  is  here  that  we  sleep  and  dream.  The 
great  reality  of  life  is  yet  to  come.  Here  the  soul  is  bound,  like  Peter  in  the  prison, 
with  two  chains — one  the  burden  and  sorrow  of  life,  the  other  the  fear  of  death. 
Faith  in  Christ  alone  delivers  us  from  the  double  bondage.  Faith  in  Christ  alone 
can  prepare  us  to  be  waked  by  the  touch  of  the  angel  of  death,  and  to  see  our- 
selves surrounded  with  a  greater  light  than  shone  in  the  prison  of  the  apostle 
when  his  angel  deliverer  said  to  him,  "Arise,  follow  me."  (D.  March,  D.D.} 
The  ministry  of  angels : — I.  With  James  they  were  employed  to  convey  his  soul 
to  glory.  II.  With  Peter  they  were  instruments  to  deliver  him  from  bonds. 
III.  With  Heeod  they  were  agents  of  God's  vengeance.  The  iron  gate. — Difficulties 
giving  way  : — This  incident  may  be  used  to  illustrate  certain  important  truths.  I. 
That  matter  is  the  servant  of  spirit.  Matter  is  found  in  diverse  forms.  But  we  can 
only  win  the  use  by  conquest.  Take  iron  as  a  sample.  It  is  stored  up  in  the  earth. 
Its  discovery  an  era.  From  that  moment  man  rose  in  power.  What  countless  uses 
are  now  made  of  iron !  And  as  with  iron,  so  with  other  materials :  everything 
has  its  use.  There  have  been  great  discoveries  in  the  past,  there  may  be  greater 
in  the  future.  But  mark  our  responsibilities.  We  are  the  heirs  of  all  the  ages. 
If  "much  given," '•  much  required"  (Luke  xii.  48).  Such  is  the  law;  always, 
matter  should  be  made  subordinate  to  the  good  of  man :  the  lower  should  serve  the 
higher.  II.  That  DimcuLTiES  give  way  before  men  that  are  moving  in  the  path 
OF  DUTY.  Tiie  ministry  of  angels  still  goes  on.  They  are  for  us,  and  not  against 
US  ;  and  often,  in  ways  unknown  to  us,  they  may  be  employed  for  our  good.  Be 
this  as  it  may,  the  release  of  Peter  shows  us  how  we  too  may  obtain  deliverance. 
First,  we  must  put  ourselves  under  the  guidance  of  God,  and  at  His  call  we  must 
go  forward  bravely,  without  faltering  (Psa.  xxxvii.  6).  Difficulties  are  a  test.  They 
show  what  spirit  we  are  of.  Difficulties  are  a  challenge ;  they  appeal  to  our  manhood ; 
courage  mouuteth  with  occasion.  Difficulties  are  an  education.  It  is  not  ease,  but 
effort  that  makes  men.  "  Our  antagonist  is  our  helper,"  said  Burke.  III.  That, 
walking  under  the  guidance  OF  God,  our  path  shall  ever  be  toward  what  IB 
higher.  Peter  and  the  angel.  So  ever — Onward ;  from  darkness  to  light ;  from 
restraint  to  liberty ;  from  the  presence  of  the  evil  to  the  companionship  of  the 
saints ;  from  fear  of  death  to  glory,  honour,  and  immortality  in  the  city  of  God. 
How  striking  the  contrast  in  the  case  of  Herod !  His  pride  had  a  terrible  fall.  An 
angel  was  sent  to  him ;  but  in  judgment.  The  oppressor  is  dealt  with  differently 
from  the  oppressed.  Dr.  Watts  says:  "Death  to  a  good  man  is  but  the  passing 
through  a  dark  entry,  out  of  one  little  room  in  his  Father's  house  into  another 
which  is  fair  and  large,  lightsome  and  glorious,  and  divinely  entertaining.  Oh ! 
may  the  rays  and  splendours  of  my  heavenly  apartment  shoot  far  downward,  and 
gild  the  dark  entry  with  such  a  cheerful  gloom  as  to  banish  any  fear  when  I  shaU 
be  called  to  pass  through."      (William  Forsyth,  A.1\I.) 

Vers.  12-25.  And  when  he  had  considered  the  thing,  he  came  to  the  bouse  of 
Mary  the  mother  of  John,  whose  surname  was  Mark. — John  Mark : — 1.  Two 
names  are  here,  one  Jewish,  the  other  Eoman;  the  latter  adopted  at  first  as 
a  secondary  one,  and  gradually  superseding  the  former,  just  as  "  Joses  "  grew  into 
"Barnabas,"  and  "  Saul"  became  universally  knowTi  as  "Paul."  Thus  we  have 
•'  John,  whose  surname  was  Mark  "  ;  but  later  always  "  Mark  "  or  "  Marcus,"  the 
Jewish  name  being  entirely  gone.  2.  The  scenes  of  this  man's  youth  are  not 
difficult  to  imagine.  His  father  is  never  mentioned,  but  his  mother  is  of  note  in 
the  Christian  community.  She  has  a  house  commodious  enough  to  receive  a 
number  of  its  members  when  they  desire  to  meet.  She  has  servants ;  the  name  of 
one  of  them  we  know,  "  Ehoda,"  or  "  Rose."  There  would  meet,  on  various 
occasions,  the  choicest  spirits  of  the  early  Church.  Barnabas  was  Mary's  nephew, 
and  would  often  be  her  guest.  Peter  must  have  been  an  intimate  friend.  We  find 
traces  of  these  connections  in  the  Epistles.  "  Marcus,  sister's  son  "  (or  rather 
cousin)  "  to  Barnabas,"  is  the  designation  given  to  him  in  Colossians,  and  in 
Peter's  first  Epistle  he  is  called  "  Marcus  my  son,"  no  doubt  in  the  spiritual  sense, 
as  Timothy  stood  related  to  Paul.  Mary  was  a  devout  and  courageous  woman, 
ready,  even  when  Herod's  sword  was  loose,  with  a  welcome  for  all  who  loved  the 
Lord.  It  was  a  fine  moral  atmosphere  for  a  youth  to  breathe:  a  godly  mother, 
praying  friends,  missionaries  and  martyrs  and  aposiles  coming  and  going  there; 
and  a  bracing  one  withal,  with  frequent  winds  of  fierce  opposition  racing  around. 
Something  it  must  have  been  to  be  a  son  in  the  house  to  which  Peter  came  that 


OHAP.  XII.]  THE  ACTS.  279 

night,  and  to  have  been  in  the  company  when  cousin  Barnabas  introduced  Saul  of 
Tarsus.  But,  so  far,  we  have  proceeded  mainly  on  conjecture.  Mark's  recorded 
history  begins  about  the  year  a.d.  44,  the  era  of  the  earliest  mission  to  the  heathen. 
3.  When  Barnabas  and  Saul  were  set  apart  for  this  work,  it  was  settled  that  Mark 
should  accompany  them  as  their  "  minister,"  or  servant.  It  was  the  excellent 
custom  of  the  older  evangelists  to  associate  the  younger  with  them ;  just  as  Moses 
chose  Joshua  for  his  assistant,  and  Elisha  "  poured  water  on  the  hands  of  Elijah." 
The  design  was  to  inure  them  to  the  discipline  of  the  missionary  life,  and  to  instruct 
them  in  its  duties.  It  was  the  squire  learning  to  win  his  spurs  in  the  Christian 
chivalry  by  attendance  on  the  knight  who  had  won  them  already.  And  what  could 
be  more  suitable,  or  full  of  promise,  than  that  Mark  should  serve  his  first  campaign 
under  Barnabas.  4.  But  what  sudden  change  is  this,  occurring  when  that 
missionary  journey  has  been  but  a  little  whUe  begun  ?  •'  John,  departing  from 
them,  returned  to  Jerusalem. "  Short  words,  but  how  significant  and  disappoint- 
ing I  After  witnessing  the  awful  judgment  on  Elymas,  and  the  glorious  conversion 
of  Sergius  Paulus ;  after  seeing  how  Paul  could  smite,  and  how  Barnabas  could 
heal ;  after  feeling  some  thrill  of  holy  emulation  in  his  own  bosom,  does  he  now 
give  up  the  Christian  work  ?  What  motive  can  have  turned  him  back  ?  Matthew 
Henry  says,  "Either  he  did  not  like  the  work,  or  he  wanted  to  go  see  his  mother." 
A  fit  of  home-sickness,  in  fact  I  Perhaps  also  Paul,  himself  so  hardy  and  self- 
sacrificing,  was  a  little  impatient  with  the  young  man,  and  treated  him  with  an 
outspoken  severity  not  pleasant  to  endure.  Mark  was  no  traitor,  for  his  heart  waa 
true  at  bottom ;  but  he  was  at  present  a  coward,  too  soft  to  suffer  hardship,  and  he 
had  forgotten  to  count  the  cost.  A  failure,  it  would  seem  ;  a  hand  taken  from  the 
plough  ;  a  ship,  scarcely  out  of  dock,  and  already  stranded  on  the  shore  !  What 
a  sorrow  to  that  noble  mother  to  see  her  son  return  like  this ;  better  he  had  been 
borne  home  dead  upon  his  shield  than  have  cast  it  away  in  dishonourable  flight. 
5.  Five  years  must  be  supposed  to  pass.  Barnabas  and  Paul  have  accompUshed 
their  journey,  and  returned.  The  great  conflict  with  the  Pharisaic  party  at 
Jerusalem  has  been  fought  out.  The  two  missionaries  are  panting  to  be  at  work 
again.  And  of  all  men,  who  should  appear,  applying  to  accompany  them,  but  the 
deserter  Mark  ?  Paul  has  never  seen  him  since  that  unhappy  parting  at  Perga ; 
and  he  does  not  mean  to  be  deceived  a  second  time.  Barnabas  must  do  as  he 
thinks  right,  but  Paul  will  rather  break  their  own  old  companionship,  and  go  by 
himself.  Then  Barnabas  will  break  it  too.  Barnabas  takes  the  more  hopeful, 
more  indulgent  view ;  he  has  probably  heard  better  things  of  his  young  cousin. 
The  decision  of  the  "  son  of  consolation"  is  to  give  him  another  chance.  "And  so 
Barnabas  took  Mark,  and  sailed  unto  Cyprus."  How  often  has  that  "  other 
chance  "  been  the  making  of  a  man  1  6.  Another  blank  occurs  here.  We  lose 
sight  for  ten  years  of  Barnabas  and  Mark.  Barnabas  may  be  dead ;  and  Mark 
appears  again,  and,  singularly  enough,  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul  to  the  Colossians 
and  to  Philemon.  But  can  it  be  the  same  man  ?  Another  stamp  is  set  now  upon 
his  name  by  the  very  hand  that  was  once  ready  to  brand  "  deserter."  Surely  our 
stranded  ship  floats  again  1  Our  fallen  brother  has  lifted  himself  up,  with  heaven's 
help,  and  is  on  his  own  feet,  pressing  forward  with  as  stout  a  heart  as  the  bravest. 
Barnabas  was  right ;  there  was  a  true  heart  in  the  man  after  aU.  7.  We  turn  to 
the  first  Epistle  of  Peter,  and  Mark  is  now  at  Babylon ;  what  an  indefatigable 
traveller  he  has  grown,  and  what  a  heart  has  he  for  labour !  And  he  is  found  with 
aged  Peter,  his  father  in  the  faith.  Presently  Paul  is  writing  again ;  it  is  the  last 
of  all  his  letters,  the  second  to  Timothy.  His  friends  have  left  him  ;  he  is  cold, 
and  he  is  ill,  and,  with  aU  his  steadfast  faith  in  the  Divine  support,  he  craves  for 
a  Uttle  human  sympathy.  Therefore  let  Timothy,  if  it  may  be,  come  quickly  from 
Ephesus,  where  he  is,  bringing  cloak  and  parchments,  and  his  own  filial  care ;  and 
let  him  bring  also  some  other  tried  and  trusty  brother,  as  a  second  source  of 
consolation.  Who,  then,  shall  the  chosen  one  be?  "  Take  Mark,  and  bring  him 
with  thee  " ;  a  "  profitable  man,"  the  very  man  for  a  minister,  a  servant,  a  friend  I 
Mark,  the  runaway  ?  Even  him ;  for  years  have  passed  since  then,  and  the  timid 
striphng  has  become  the  resolute  and  energetic  veteran.  8.  One  further  reference 
remains,  a  large  and  a  long  one ;  for  it  is  a  whole  book  of  Scripture—"  the  Gospel 
according  to  Mark."  All  the  early  traditions  agree  in  attributing  this  to  Mark,  as 
the  scribe  and  interpreter  of  Peter.  And  thus  the  image  which  remains  is  not  that 
of  the  fugitive  youth,  but  of  the  missionary,  the  faithful  companion  of  the  chief 
apostles,  and  one  among  the  four  evangelists.  9.  On  the  northern  coast  of  Devon 
there  spreads  a  bay,  along  which  the  sea  comes  tide  after  tide,  washing  a  broad 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  uu 

beach  of  tiny  shells  ;  but  you  may  search  the  shore  for  hours,  and  find  no  perfect 
Bpecimen  :  the  shells  are  broken.  I  can  conceive  many  a  disheartened  traveller  ia 
life's  hard  journey  sitting  down  on  that  beach,  and  saying,  "  Behold  the  image  of 
my  own  experience,  of  my  broken  resolutions,  unaccompUshed  purposes,  and  per- 
petual failures  1  "  Even  in  the  Christian  Church  there  are  not  a  few  who  feel  that 
they  have  failed  of  the  high  aims,  the  noble  impulses,  which  warmed  and 
quickened  them  at  first  !  To  any  such  disheartened  souls  this  story  of  Mark's 
recovery  should  come  like  a  trumpet  call  of  hope.  Never  too  late,  while  life  lasts. 
Once  more  to  the  front !  If  Paul  does  not  trust  you,  Barnabas  will.  If  Paul  does 
not  care  for  you  now,  he  may  come  to  lean  on  you  with  all  his  strength.  And  One, 
of  whom  you  know,  clearer-sighted  by  far  than  that  shrewd  apostle,  tenderer  of 
heart  than  that  "  son  of  consolation,"  marks  your  struggles,  and  prays  for  your 
success ;  and  He,  as  you  arise,  will  breathe  into  your  ear  those  words  of  unutter- 
able hope  and  encouragement,  "  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee  :  go  and  sin  no  more." 
{W.  Brock.)  And  many  were  gathered  together  praying. — The  special  prayer- 
meeting  : — It  was  a  great  wonder  that  the  infant  Cliurch  of  Christ  was  not 
destroyed.  She  was  like  a  lone  lamb  in  the  midst  of  furious  wolves.  With  what 
weapons  did  she  protect  herself  ?  The  answer  is — prayer.  Whatever  may  be  the 
danger  of  the  times,  and  each  age  has  its  own  peculiar  hazard,  our  defence  is  of 
God,  and  we  may  avail  ourselves  of  it  by  prayer.  But  this  is  not  all:  the  new- 
born Church  not  only  escaped,  but  it  multiplied.  What  made  it  grow?  The 
answer  is  that  on  all  occasions  "  many  were  gathered  together  praying  "  ;  and  if  our 
Churches  are  to  live  and  grow  they  must  be  watered  from  the  self-same  source. 
We  have  heard  a  great  deal  of  talk  in  certain  sections  of  the  Church  about  going 
back  to  primitive  times ;  but  unfortunately  what  they  call  the  early  Church  is  not 
€arly  enough.  If  we  must  have  the  early  Church  let  us  have  the  earliest  Church  of 
all.  Notice — I.  The  imfobtance  which  the  eablt  Chdkch  attributed  to  prayer- 
meetings.  1.  As  soon  as  we  begin  to  read  in  the  Acts,  and  continually  as  we  read 
on  we  note  that  meetings  for  prayer  had  become  a  standing  institution  in  the 
Church.  They  were  not  met  to  hear  a  sermon,  although  that  is  proper,  but 
praying  was  the  business  on  hand.  The  eminent  speakmg  brethren  seem  to 
have  been  all  away,  and  perhaps  the  Church  was  too  much  engrossed  in  inter- 
cession. There  is  a  serious  flaw  in  the  arrangements  of  a  Church  when  such 
gatherings  are  omitted  or  placed  in  a  secondary  position.  The  private  Christian 
will  read,  and  hear,  and  meditate,  but  none  of  these  can  be  a  substitute  for  prayer : 
the  same  truth  holds  good  upon  the  larger  scale.  2.  It  appears,  however,  that 
while  prayer-meetings  were  a  regular  institution,  the  prayer  was  sometimes  made 
special  It  adds  greatly  to  the  interest  and  fervency  of  prayer  when  there  is  some 
great  object  to  pray  for.  Here  the  special  object  was  Peter.  They  priced  the  man, 
for  they  saw  what  wonders  God  had  wrought  by  his  ministry,  and  they  could  not 
let  him  die  if  prayer  would  save  him.  Why  not  pray  for  a  certain  missionary,  or 
some  chosen  district,  or  class  of  persons,  or  order  of  agencies  ?  We  should  do  well 
to  turn  the  grand  artillery  of  suppUcation  against  some  special  point  of  the  enemy's 
walls.  3.  These  friends  fully  believed  that  there  was  power  in  prayer ;  for,  Peter 
being  in  prison,  they  did  not  meet  together  to  arrange  a  plan  for  getting  him  out. 
It  looked  as  if  they  could  do  nothing,  but  they  felt  they  could  do  everything  by 
prayer.  They  thought  little  of  the  fact  that  sixteen  soldiers  had  him  in  charge. 
If  there  had  been  sixteen  thousand  these  believing  men  and  women  would  still 
have  prayed  Peter  out.  Let  it  never  be  insinuated  in  the  Christian  Church  that 
prayer  is  a  good  and  useful  exercise  to  ourselves,  but  that  it  would  be  superstition 
to  suppose  that  it  affects  the  mind  of  God.  As  surely  as  any  law  of  nature  can  be 
proven,  we  know  both  by  observation  and  experiment  that  God  assuredly  hears 
prayer.  4.  This  prayer  was  industriously  continued.  As  soon  as  Herod  had  put 
Peter  into  prison  the  Church  began  to  pray.  As  in  times  pf  war,  when  two  armies 
lie  near  each  other  they  both  set  their  sentries,  so  in  this  case  Herod  had  hia 
sentries,  and  the  church  had  its  pickets  too.  As  soon  as  one  little  company  were 
compelled  to  separate  they  were  reheved  by  another,  and  when  some  were  forced 
to  take  rest  in  sleep,  others  were  ready  to  take  up  the  work.  Some  mercies  are  not 
given  to  us  except  in  answer  to  importunate  prayer.  There  are  blessings  which, 
like  ripe  fruit,  drop  into  your  hand  the  moment  you  touch  the  bough ;  but  there 
are  others  which  require  you  to  shake  the  tree  again  and  again,  until  you  make  it 
rock  with  the  vehemence  of  your  exercise,  for  then  only  will  the  fruit  fall  down. 
I  wculd  pause  here,  and  urge  vay  brethren  ti>  attach  as  much  importance  to  prayer 
as  the  early  Church  did.     Some  prize  active  agencies,  but  prayer  is  the  steam 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  281 

engine  which  makes  the  wheels  revolve,  and  really  does  the  work,  and  therefore  wa 
cannot  do  without  it.  Suppose  a  foreman  were  employed  by  some  great  builder  to 
manage  works  at  a  distance.  He  has  to  pay  the  men  their  wages  weekly,  but  ha 
forgets  to  write  for  cash  to  go  on  with.  Is  this  wise  ?  Keep  up  a  constant  com- 
munication  with  heaven,  or  your  communications  with  earth  will  be  of  Uttle  worth. 
You  may  go  on  preaching  and  teaching,  and  giving  away  tracts,  and  what  you  like, 
but  nothing  can  possibly  come  of  it  when  the  power  of  Almighty  God  has  ceased  to 
be  with  you.  II.  The  number  assembled.  1.  This  is  a  rebuke  to  some  here 
present.  The  text  says,  "  Many  were  gathered."  Somebody  said  that  two  or  three 
thousand  people  had  no  more  power  in  prayer  than  two  or  three.  That  is  a  grave 
mistake  in  many  ways ;  but  clearly  so  in  reference  to  each  other ;  for  have  you 
never  noticed  that  when  many  meet  together  praying,  warmth  of  desire  and  glow 
of  earnestness  are  greatly  increased.  Have  you  not  observed  how  one  brother 
suggests  to  another  to  increase  his  petition,  and  so  the  petitions  grow  by  the 
mingling  of  heart  with  heart,  and  the  communion  of  spirit  with  spirit  ?  Besides, 
faith  is  a  cumulative  force.  "  According  to  thy  faith  so  be  it  done  unto  thee  "  is 
true  to  one,  to  two,  to  twenty,  to  twenty  thousand.  2.  This  is  not  a  very  common 
occurrence,  and  why  is  it  that  so  many  prayer-meetings  are  so  very  thin  ?  Gentle- 
men who  do  not  get  home  from  the  City  and  have  their  dinner  till  seven  o'clock, 
cannot  be  expected  to  go  out  to  a  prayer-meeting.  They  work  aU  the  day,  so  much 
harder  than  working  men.  Some  of  you  who  have  your  delightful  villas  are  very 
careful  of  your  health,  and  never  venture  out  into  the  evening  air  at  prayer- 
meetings,  though  I  rather  suspect  that  your  parties  and  soirees  are  still  kept  up. 
After  aU,  this  is  a  personal  matter.  How  are  we  to  increase  the  number  ?  Not  by 
complaining  of  those  who  stay  away,  but  by  coming  yourself.  The  largest  numbers 
are  made  up  of  units.  3.  I  am  not  sure  that  quite  so  many  would  have  been 
gathered  together  that  night  if  it  had  not  been  that  Peter  was  in  prison.  Ministers 
laid  aside  by  illness  find  their  people  pray  better,  and  perhaps  one  reason  for  his 
being  afflicted  was  God's  desire  to  stir  the  hearts  of  His  people  to  intercede.  Now, 
the  best  way  to  do  good  to  your  pastor  is  to  pray  to  be  kept  in  a  right  condition, 
and  not  need  his  sickness  as  a  stimulus  to  prayer.  III.  The  place  of  assembly. 
A  private  house,  and  I  want  to  urge  my  brethren  to  consecrate  their  houses  by 
frequently  using  them  for  prayer-meetings.  There  was  a  meetness  in  their 
meeting  in  this  particular  house,  for  the  family  stood  in  a  very  dear  relationship  to 
Peter.  Peter  in  his  First  Epistle  refers  to  "  Marcus,  my  son."  Mark  would  be  sure 
■to  pray  for  his  spiritual  father.  There  is  sure  to  be  prayer  for  the  pastor  in  tbe 
house  where  the  pastor  has  been  blessed  to  the  family.  Mark  was  not  aU  we 
should  like  him  to  have  been,  but  he  might  have  been  a  useless  Christian,  and 
never  have  used  his  graphic  pen  for  the  Lord  had  not  the  good  people  come  to  his 
house.  The  house  received  a  blessing,  and  so  will  you,  too,  if  your  house  shall  be 
every  now  and  then  opened  for  special  prayer.  Prayer-meetings  at  private  houses 
are  very  useful,  beca»se  friends  who  would  be  afraid  to  pray  before  a  large 
assembly  are  able  to  feel  free  and  easy  in  a  smaller  company  in  a  private  house. 
Sometimes,  too,  the  social  element  is  consecrated  by  God  to  promote  a  greater 
warmth  and  fervour,  so  that  prayer  will  often  burn  in  the  family  when  perhaps  it 
might  have  declined  in  the  public  assembly.  IV.  The  time  of  this  prateb- 
MEETiNG.  At  dead  of  night.  Now,  if  the  time  for  prayer-meetings  be  an  incon- 
venient hour,  and  I  should  think  the  dead  of  night  was  rather  inconvenient,  never- 
theless go.  Better  hold  prayer-meetings  at  twelve  o'clock  at  night  than  not  at  all. 
But  the  dead  of  the  night  was  chosen  for  safety.  Let  the  time  fixed  for  modern  prayer 
meetings  be  an  hour  suited  to  the  habits  of  the  people.  V.  The  success  of  the 
PRAYEB  meetings  AS  AN  ENCOURAGEMENT  TO  US.  The  auswcr  camc  so  speedily  that 
they  were  themselves  surprised.  It  has  sometimes  been  said  that  their  astonish- 
ment was  the  result  of  unbelief.  I  doubt  that,  for  their  prayer  did  set  Peter  free, 
and  therefore  it  could  not  have  been  unbelieving  prayer.  I  trace  their  surprise  to 
their  probable  expectation  that  Peter  would  be  dehvered  at  a  different  time  and 
manner.  And  God  can  send  us  surprises  quite  as  great  as  this.  We  may 
pray  fol  some  sinner,  and  while  we  are  yet  praying  we  may  hear  him  cry, 
"  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? "  We  may  offer  our  prayers  for  the 
sleeping  Church,  and  while  we  pray  it  may  be  answered.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
And  as  Peter  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  gate,  a  damsel  came  to  hearken,  named 
Bhoda. — Rhoda : — "  Ehoda  "  means  "  a  rose,"  and  this  rose  has  kept  its  bloom  for 
eighteen  hundred  years,  and  is  still  sweet  and  fragrant.  What  a  lottery  undying 
lame  is  I    Men  will  give  their  lives  to  earn  it ;  and  this  servant-girl  got  it  bj  ona 


J82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

little  act,  and  never  knew  that  she  had  it.  Now  there  is  a  very  singular  resem- 
blance between  the  details  of  this  incident  and  those  of  another  case,  when  Peter 
•was  recognised  in  the  dark  by  his  voice,  and  the  evangelist  Luke,  who  is  the  author 
of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  seems  to  have  had  the  resemblance  between  the  two 
scenes,  that  in  the  high  priest's  palace  and  that  outside  Mary's  door,  in  his  mind» 
because  he  uses  in  this  narrative  a  word  which  occurs,  in  the  whole  of  the  New 
Testament,  only  here  and  in  his  account  of  what  took  place  on  that  earlier  occa- 
sion. In  both  instances  a  maid  servant  recognises  Peter  by  his  voice,  and  in  both 
she  "constantly  affirms"  that  it  was  so.  Luke  felt  how  strangely  events  sometimes 
double  themselves ;  and  how  the  man  that  is  here  all  but  a  martyr  is  re-enacting, 
with  differences,  something  like  the  former  scene,  when  he  was  altogether  a  traitor. 
I.  We  may  notice  in  the  kelations  of  Ehoda  to   the   assembled   beuevebs  a 

BTKIKING    illustration     OF     THE     NEW     BOND     OF     UNION     SUPPLIED     BY     THE     GOSPEL. 

Ehoda  was  a  slave.  The  word  rendered  in  our  version  "  damsel  "  means  a  female 
slave.  Her  name  being  a  Gentile  name,  and  her  servile  condition,  make  it  pro- 
bable that  she  was  not  a  Jewess.  If  one  might  venture  to  indulge  in  a  guess,  it  is 
not  at  all  unlikely  that  her  mistress,  Mary,  John  Mark's  mother,  Barnabas'  sister, 
a  well-to-do  woman  of  Jerusalem,  who  had  a  house  big  enough  to  take  in  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Church  in  great  numbers,  and  to  keep  up  a  considerable  establishment, 
had  brought  this  slave-girl  from  the  island  of  Cyprus.  At  aU  events,  she  was  a 
slave.  In  the  time  of  our  Lord,  and  long  after,  these  relations  of  slavery  brought 
an  element  of  suspicion,  fear,  and  jealous  espionage  into  almost  every  Eoman 
household,  because  every  master  knew  that  he  passed  his  days  and  nights  among 
men  and  women  who  wanted  nothing  better  than  to  wreak  their  vengeance  upon 
him.  And  now  here  this  child-slave,  this  Gentile,  has  been  touched  by  the  same 
mighty  love  as  her  mistress ;  and  Mary  and  Bhoda  were  kneeling  together  in  the 
prayer-meeting  when  Peter  began  to  hammer  at  the  door.  In  God's  good  time, 
and  by  the  slow  process  of  leavening  society  with  Christian  ideas,  that  diabolical 
institution  perished  in  Christian  lands.  Violent  reformation  of  immoralities  is 
always  a  blunder.  "Eaw  haste  "  is  "  half-sister  to  Delay."  Settlers  in  forest  lands 
have  found  that  it  is  endless  work  to  grub  up  the  trees,  or  even  to  fell  them.  "Eoot 
and  branch  "  reform  seldom  answers.  The  true  way  is  to  girdle  the  tree  by  taking 
off  a  ring  of  bark  round  the  trunk,  and  letting  nature  do  the  rest.  Dead  trees  are 
easily  dealt  with ;  living  ones  blunt  many  axes  and  tire  many  arms,  and  are  alive 
after  all.  Thus  the  gospel  waged  no  direct  war  with  slavery,  but  laid  down  prin- 
ciples which,  once  they  are  wrought  into  Christian  consciousness,  made  its  con- 
tinuance impossible.  But,  pending  that  consummation,  the  immediate  action  of 
Christianity  was  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  slave.  The  whole  aspect  of  the 
ugly  thing  was  changed  as  soon  as  master  and  slave  together  became  the  slaves  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  That  slight,  girlish  figure,  standing  at  the  door  of  Mary, 
her  slave,  and  yet  her  sister  in  Christ,  may  be  taken  as  pointing  symbolically  the 
way  by  which  the  social  and  civic  evils  of  this  day  are  to  be  healed,  and  the  war  of 
classes  to  cease.  11.  Note  how  we  get  here  a  very  striking  picture  of  the  sacbed- 
NEss  AND  greatness  OF  SMALL  COMMON  DUTIES.  Ehoda  Came  out  from  the  prayer- 
meeting  to  open  the  gate.  It  was  her  business,  as  we  say,  "  to  answer  the  door," 
and  so  she  left  off  praying  to  go  and  do  it.  So  doing,  she  was  the  means  of  deliver- 
ing the  apostle  from  the  danger  which  still  dogged  him.  It  was  of  Uttle  use  to  be 
praying  on  one  side  of  the  shut  door,  when  on  the  other  he  was  standing  in  the 
street,  and  the  day  was  beginning  to  dawn ;  Herod's  men  would  be  after  htm  as 
soon  as  daylight  disclosed  his  escape.  It  is  not  unnecessary  to  insist  that  no  heights 
or  delights  of  devotion  and  secret  communion  are  sufficient  excuses  for  neglecting 
or  delaying  the  doing  of  the  smallest  and  most  menial  task  which  is  our  duty.  If 
your  business  is  to  keep  the  door,  you  will  not  be  leaving,  but  abiding  in  the  secret 
place  of  the  Most  High,  if  you  get  up  from  your  knees  in  the  middle  of  your  prayer, 
and  go  down  to  open  it.  The  smallest,  commonest  acts  of  daily  life  are  truer  wor- 
ship than  is  rapt  and  solitary  communion,  or  united  prayer,  if  the  latter  can  only 
be  secured  by  the  neglect  of  the  former.  Let  us  remember  how  we  may  find  here 
an  illustration  of  another  great  truth,  that  the  smallest  things,  done  in  the  course 
of  the  quiet  discharge  of  recognised  duty,  and  being,  therefore,  truly  worship  of 
God,  have  in  them  a  certain  quaUty  of  immortality,  and  may  be  eternally  com- 
memorated. III.  The  same  figure  of  the  damsel  named  Ehoda  may  give  us  a 
warning  as  to  the  possibility  of  forgetting  very  plain  duties  under  the  pressure 
OF  vkhy  lkgitijiate  excitement.  "  She  opened  not  the  door  for  gladness,"  but 
ran  in  and  told  them.     Yes !    And  if,  whilst  she  was  running  in  with  her  message. 


CHAP,  rn.]  THE  ACTS.  28S 

Herod's  quaternions  of  soldiers  had  come  down  the  street,  there  would  have  been 
*'no  small  stir"  in  the  Church  as  to  "what  had  become  of  Peter."  Now  joy  and 
Borrow  are  equally  apt  to  make  us  forget  plain  and  pressing  duties,  and  we  may 
learn  from  this  little  incident  the  old-fashioned  but  always  necessary  advice,  to 
keep  feeling  well  under  control,  to  use  it  as  impulse,  not  as  guide,  and  never  to  let 
emotion,  which  should  be  down  in  the  engine-room,  come  on  deck  and  take  the 
hehn.  It  is  dangerous  to  obey  feeling,  unless  its  degrees  are  countersigned  by  calm 
common  sense  illuminated  by  Scripture.  Sorrow  is  apt  to  obscure  duty  by  its 
darkness,  and  joy  by  its  dazzle.  It  is  hard  to  see  the  road  at  midnight,  or  at  mid- 
day when  the  sun  is  in  our  eyes.  Both  need  to  be  controlled.  Duty  remains  the 
same,  whether  my  heart  be  beating  like  a  sledge-hammer,  or  whether  my  "  bosom- 
lord  sits  lightly  on  its  throne."  Whether  I  am  sad  or  glad,  the  door  that  God  has 
given  me  to  watch  has  to  be  opened  and  shut  by  me.  IV.  Lastly,  we  have  here  an 
instaoce  of  a  vert  modest  but  positive  and  fully  warranted  trust  in  one's  own 
EXPERIENCE,  IN  SPITE  OF  OPPOSITION.  They  had  been  praying,  as  has  often  been 
remarked,  for  Peter's  deliverance,  and  now  that  he  is  delivered  they  will  not  believe 
it.  Nobody  ever  seems  to  have  thought  of  going  to  the  door  to  see  whether  it  was 
he  or  not,  but  they  went  arguing  with  Rhoda  as  to  whether  she  was  right  or  wrong. 
The  unbelief  that  alloys  even  golden  faith  is  taught  us  in  this  incident.  Rhoda 
"  constantly  affirmed  that  it  was  so."  The  lesson  is — trust  your  own  experience 
whatever  people  may  have  to  say  against  it.  If  you  have  found  that  Jesus  Christ 
can  help  you,  and  has  loved  you,  and  that  your  sins  have  been  forgiven,  because 
you  have  trusted  in  Him,  do  not  let  anybody  laugh  or  talk  you  out  of  that  convic- 
tion. If  you  cannot  argue,  do  Uke  Rhoda,  "  constantly  affirm  that  it  is  so." 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Rhoda: — I.  Her  name.    Miriam  and  Rhoda  are  the  only 

two  girls  of  the  Bible  whose  names  we  know.  A  learned  German  has  written  a  book 
on  "  the  names  of  women  taken  from  flowers."  He  shows  that  these  names  mark 
the  qualities  which  we  expect  to  find  in  girls.  Now  Rhoda  is  the  Greek  name  for  a 
rose.  It  is  the  first  part  of  the  word  "  rhododendron,"  which  means  "  rose-tree." 
In  the  olden  times,  as  nowadays,  people  hoped  that  girls  would  be  in  the  home 
what  thf!  rose  is  in  the  garden :  that  they  would  add  a  charm,  a  beauty,  and  a  sweet 
perfume  to  hfe.  I  have  read  somewhere  that  a  rose  is  carved  on  a  girl's  tombstone 
in  France,  with  these  words  underneath,  "She  was  just  like  that."  The  rose,  how- 
ever, is  as  famed  for  its  speedy  decay  as  for  its  sweetness  and  beauty.  But  when 
the  ancients  gave  this  name  to  their  girls,  they  meant  that,  as  they  would  wear,  so 
they  would  justify  and  deserve  their  name  all  their  days.  Some,  however,  grow 
like  the  rose  that  has  shed  its  leaves,  and  kept  only  its  bare  thorns.  Others  re- 
semble the  autumn  flower,  whose  leaves  are  highly  coloured  while  its  sweet  savour 
is  gone.  Some  are  like  the  rose  into  whose  bud  the  cankerworm  has  crept ;  some 
are  like  the  rose  planted  among  thorns,  which  shows  its  wounds  as  well  as  its  beauty; 
and  some  are  even  like  the  rose  that  is  soiled  and  trampled  in  the  dust  of  the  high- 
way. But  Rhoda  was  a  girl  who  deserved  her  beautiful  name,  and  wore  it  well. 
Fur  she  was  good  ;  and  to  be  good  is  to  be  beautiful  with  the  best  beauty.  In  old 
languages  they  used  to  call  the  bad  ugly,  and  they  do  so  in  some  parts  of  the  world 
at  this  day.  The  good  and  the  beautiful  are  reaUy  the  same,  when  the  matter  is 
rightly  understood.  The  grace  of  God  is  the  grand  beautifier.  It  makes  people 
gi-aceful,  that  is  both  good  and  beautiful.  II.  Her  company.  It  is  the  very  best  in 
the  world ;  she  is  among  the  Christians.  Whether  she  was  the  slave  or  the 
daughter  of  Mary,  we  know  not ;  but  it  is  plain  that  she  was  among  the  Christiana 
not  by  chance,  but  by  choice,  or  else  she  would  have  gone  to  bed,  or  fallen  asleep, 
like  Eutvehus.  But  Peter  had  hardly  done  knocking  when  she  was  at  the  keyhole, 
asking  who  was  there.  She  knew  his  voice  at  once  in  the  dark,  and  so  must  have 
been  intimate  with  hijn.  She  was  hke  the  blind  girl  who,  unexpectedly  hearing 
her  old  minister  at  a  meeting,  shook  with  excitement,  and  said  aloud,  "  Oli,  that's 
my  minister !  "  And  Rhoda's  gladness  shows  where  her  heart  was.  What  efforts 
many  make  to  get  into  what  they  call  "  good  society  "  !  This  restlessness  to  be 
something  which  we  are  not,  causes  a  world  of  misery.  But  Rhoda  easily  gained 
admittance  to  the  very  flower  of  human  kind.  They  who  come  to  Christ  at  once 
enter  into  the  most  splendid  society  in  the  world.  Who  would  be  foolish  enough  to 
shut  herself  out  from  that  glorious  band  which  embraces  the  best  of  every  sge  and 
nation,  all  God's  heroes,  and  the  noble  army  of  the  apostles  and  martyrs  ?  III. 
Her  courage.  Every  Christian  then  was  a  hero  for  God  ;  for  he  ran  the  risk  of 
poverty,  prison,  and  death.  It  was  so  in  this  land  two  hundred  years  ago.  In 
Knoda's  days  it  needed  double  courage  to  be  a  Christian  in  JerussJem,  for  tht 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

maddest  of  the  Jews  lived  there,  and  Herod's  sword  was  smoking  with  the  blood  of 
the  saints.  James,  one  of  their  leaders,  had  just  been  slain ;  and  Peter  was  in 
prison,  ready  to  be  offered  up.  Ehoda,  who  shared  the  dangers,  must  have  alsc 
shared  the  courage  of  the  apostles.  It  was  as  much  as  her  life  was  worth  to  attend 
that  prayer-meeting.  One  small  touch  in  her  story  gives  us  a  hint  of  her  dangers. 
When  Peter  knocked,  she  did  not  open  the  door  till  she  knew  who  was  knocking: 
they  were  afraid  of  Herod's  soldiers.  Persecution  has  passed  away,  but  none  the 
less  on  that  account  do  you  need  the  courage  you  admire  in  Ehoda.  For  mean, 
false  shame  is  one  of  the  worst  of  your  snares.  Pray  that  you  may  have  the  free 
and  fearless  spirit  of  those  bold  hymns  which  you  love  to  sing :  "  Dare  to  be  a 
Daniel  " ;  "  Stand  up  for  Jesus."  Be  ready  with  a  round,  rousing  No,  when  sinners 
entice  you.  IV.  Her  service.  Though  only  a  girl,  we  see  her  here  doing  service. 
It  was  very  humble  ;  for  she  was  as  one  who  keeps  a  door  in  the  house  of  God. 
But  she  did  her  part,  and  did  it  right  heartily.  And  God  asks  no  more  of  you.  Angela 
are  perfect  servants  of  God,  and  this  chapter  gives  us  a  specimen  of  their  way  of 
serving.  Watch  the  angel  delivering  Peter  from  prison,  and  take  him  as  your 
model  in  doing  God's  work.  How  swiftly  he  works  !  Most  pictures  give  angels 
wings,  to  denote  the  swiftness  of  a  willing  mind.  Thus  when  Rhoda's  heart  was 
full  of  joy,  she  ran  on  her  errand.  Be  this  your  resolve,  "  I  will  run  the  way  of 
Thy  commandments,  when  Thou  shalt  enlarge  my  heart."  Gratitude  makes  winga 
grow  on  the  feet  of  life.  And  how  humbly  the  angel  does  his  work !  He  does  not  even 
mention  his  name,  but  hastens  back  to  God,  to  whom  he  gives  all  the  glory.  An  old 
minister  was  once  preaching  a  funeral  sermon  upon  the  death  of  an  "  elect  lady," 
who  had  been  his  helper  in  Christ.  She  was  angel-like  in  humility ;  and  he  com- 
pared her  to  a  fair  taper  in  a  room,  which  is  bright  to  others,  but  is  itself  hid  in 
the  shade  made  by  its  own  light.  You,  too,  may  have  an  angel's  spirit  in  doing  the 
work  God  has  put  into  your  hands.     (J.  Wells,  M.A.)  And  they  said  unto  her, 

Thou  art  mad. — Surprised  by  answers  to  prayer : — Mr.  MuUer,  of  Bristol,  believea 
in  God  for  the  support  of  his  benevolent  institution,  and  God  supplies  him  with  all 
his  needs;  but  whenever  you  speak  about  him  you  say,  "  What  a  wonderful  thing!" 
Has  it  come  to  this,  that  in  tlie  Christian  Church  it  is  accounted  a  marvel  for 
Christians  to  believe  in  the  promises  of  God,  and  something  like  a  miracle  for  God 
to  fulfil  them  ?  Does  not  this  wonderment  indicate  more  clearly  than  anything 
else  how  fallen  we  are  from  the  level  of  faith  at  which  we  ought  constantly  to  live  ? 
If  the  Lord  wants  to  surprise  His  people.  He  has  only  at  once  to  give  an  answer  to 
their  prayers.  No  sooner  had  they  obtained  their  answer,  than  they  would  say, 
"Who  would  have  thought  itl  "  Is  it  really  surprising  that  God  should  keep  His 
own  promise  ?  Oh,  what  unbelief !  Oh,  what  wretched  unbelief  on  our  part  1  We 
ask  and  we  receive  not,  because  we  do  not  believe  in  God.  We  waver ;  we  mu^-t 
not  expect  to  receive  anything  at  His  hand  except  what  He  chooses  to  give  as  a 
gratuity ;  an  act  of  sovereign  mercy,  not  a  covenanted  blessing.  We  do  not  get 
what  we  might  have  as  the  reward  of  faith,  because  we  have  not  got  the  faith  that 
He  honours.  I  like  that  story  of  a  godly  old  woman,  who,  when  told  of  God's 
answering  prayer,  supplemented  with  a  reflection,  "Is  not  that  wonderful?" 
replied,  "No,  it  is  just  like  Him.  Of  course  He  answers  prayer;  of  course  He 
keeps  His  promise."     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Forgetfulness  through  joy  : — On  one 

occasion,  in  Limehouse  chapel,  a  woman  dressed  in  her  working  clothes  appeared 
amongst  the  penitent  inquirers.  After  being  taught  the  way  of  salvation  and 
prayed  with,  she  found  peace  in  beheving.  She  suddenly  remembered  that  her 
house  was  locked  and  the  key  in  her  pocket,  and  told  us  that,  in  leaving  home,  she 
had  no  thought  whatever  of  a  religious  service.  Seeing  the  chapel  lit  up  and  hear- 
ing the  singing,  she  entered,  heard  the  sermon,  was  convinced  of  sin,  and  remained 
to  pray,  with  the  result  already  mentioned,  llhoda,  seeing  Peter  standing  at  the 
gate,  was  so  overjoyed  that  she  forgot  to  let  the  liberated  apostle  in  ;  so  the  woman 
at  Limehouse,  rejoicing  that  she  herself  was  made  free  indeed,  forgot  that  her 
house-key  was  in  her  pocket,  and  that  some  of  her  family  might  be  knocking  at  her 
door  unable  to  enter.  {T.  McCxillagh.)  The  girl  who  was  called  mad: — This 
girl— I.  Had  a  beautefdl  name.  Many  Jewish  and  other  parents  gave  to  their 
children  the  names  of  certain  plants,  trees,  and  flowers.  Hadassa,  a  myrtle ; 
Susanna,  a  lily ;  Tamar,  a  palm-tree  ;  llhoda,  a  rose.  That  is  beautiful,  because 
it  leads  us  to  think  of  the  garden  in  summer,  and  one  of  the  pretiiest  flowers  there. 
Have  you  such  a  name  ?  Be  thankful.  Have  you  not  such  a  name  ?  Be  content. 
It  was  given  to  you  by  others.  They,  and  not  you,  are  responsible.  Besides,  to 
grumble  about  it  is  to  do  no  good.     The  time  may  coiae  when  it  will  be  your  duty 


CHAP,  xil]  the  acts.  885 

to  give  names  to  children.  Select  those  only  that  are  associated  with  lovely  things. 
Let  all  the  words  which  you  employ  in  writing  and  speaking  be  of  the  same  descrip- 
tion, n.  Was  a  domestic  servant.  Her  duty  was  to  open  the  door  when  any 
one  knocked.  In  this  respect  she  has  advantages  over  those  in  other  situations. 
She  is  more  free  from — 1.  Care.  Nothing  to  pay  for  except  her  clothing.  2. 
Danger.  Has  not  to  go  out  in  aU  kinds  of  weather.  Sheltered  from  rains  and 
storms.  3.  Temptations.  Others  may  have  greater  liberty.  This  often  leads  to 
temptations  which  do  not  come  to  the  domestic  servant.  4.  Eisk  of  losing  her 
situation.  Her  class  not  so  numerous  as  others-  Masters  and  mistresses  value  a 
good  servant,  and  will  keep  her  as  long  as  she  does  her  duty.  Nothing  degrading 
about  such  a  situation.  To  serve  in  a  good  family  is  exceedingly  honourable.  To 
show  this  the  Bible  has  recorded  some  of  the  nanles  and  doings  of  domestic 
servants.  IH.  Was  a  Christian.  1.  She  was  serving  in  a  Christian  home.  2. 
There  was  a  prayer-meeting  in  that  home,  and  she  loved  to  be  there.  3.  She  was 
quite  familiar  with  the  voice  of  one  of  the  apostles.  Your  parents,  teachers,  and, 
above  all,  Jesus,  wish  you  to  be  Christians.  IV.  Was  very  cautious.  It  was  night. 
AU  around  lonely  and  still.  Some  one  knocking  at  the  door.  Instead  of  opening 
it  at  once,  she  said,  "  Who  is  there  ?  "  Never  open  the  door  at  night  tiU  you  know 
who  is  on  the  outside.  Be  cautious  in  all  other  things — in  writing  to,  speaking 
about,  and  acting  in  the  presence  of  others.  V.  Was  accused  of  madness.  When 
she  heard  Peter's  voice,  she  was  so  glad  that  she  could  not  open  the  door.  The 
same  thing  has  often  happened ;  and  the  praying  company,  instead  of  believing 
her,  said  she  was  mad.  This  did  not  make  her  angry,  for  she  knew  that  she  was 
right.  If  you  know  you  are  right,  and  others  say  you  are  wrong,  be  not  angry,  but 
calm.  The  truth  sooner  or  later  wiU  appear  to  others  as  it  does  to  you.  {A.  McAus- 
lane,  D.D.)  But  Peter  continued  knocking. — Christian  persistency : — That's  right. 
Bang  away !  If  Christians  wiU  not  bestir  themselves  at  your  first  call,  hammer  at 
them  until  they  do.  There  is  nothing  like  persistency  for  overcoming  the  sluggish- 
ness and  sloth  of  half-hearted  faith.  The  preacher,  or  the  teacher,  or  the  parent,  or 
the  Christian  worker  in  any  sphere,  who  turns  away  from  the  door  of  the  heart  he 
wants  to  enter,  simply  because  it  is  not  opened  at  his  first  call,  is  not  really  deserving 
of  success  in  his  mission.  •'  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  If  it  is  not 
opened  the  first  time,  knock  again.  If  it  is  not  opened  after  ten  times  knocking, 
continue  knocking  until  it  is  opened.  When  the  door  is  opened,  you  can  enter  in. 
But  until  it  is  opened,  your  duty  is  to  keep  up  a  knocking.     {H,  C.  Trumbull.) 

Vers.  19-26.  And  .  .  .  Herod  .  .  .  went  down  from  Judsea  to  Csssarea. — The 
death  of  Herod : — This  journey  of  Herod  is  described  by  Josephus.  It  would  seem 
that  he  left  Judsea  in  disgust  and  spleen  because  Peter  had  escaped  from  his  hands. 
We  are  next  informed  that  "  Herod  was  highly  displeased  with  them  of  Tyre  and 
Sidon, "  Ac.  Judsea  being  an  agricultural  and  a  pastoral  country,  and  Tyre  and 
Sidon  being  mercantile  countries,  the  latter  were  dependent  on  the  iioland  trade  for 
their  support,  and  therefore  it  would  have  been  almost  ruin  to  them  if  Herod  had 
carried  his  thoughts  into  execution  ;  for  the  expression  "  highly  displeased  "  means 
that  he  contemplated  war.  They,  therefore,  came  to  him  in  the  most  submissive 
manner,  and  bribed  Blastus  to  use  his  influence.  Herod  having  acceded  to  their 
request,  and  being  a  vainglorious  man,  determined  to  receive  the  ambassadors  of 
Tyre  and  Sidon  with  a  display  of  royal  splendour.  He  also  made  an  eloquent 
oration,  probably  reminding  them  of  his  own  great  condescension  in  receiving  their 
ambassadors  and  granting  them  peace ;  and  then  "the  people  gave  a  shout,  saying, 
It  is  the  voice  of  a  god,  and  not  of  a  man.  And  immediately  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  smote  him."  And  when  the  tyrant  was  dead,  it  is  added,  in  striking  and 
beautiful  contrast, '•  But  the  Word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied."  Note — I.  The 
MiSEEABiiE  END  OF  Heeod.  Obscrve — 1.  The  extreme  emptiness  of  earthly  splen- 
dour. How  wonderful  it  is,  that  with  such  a  lesson  as  this  continually  recorded  in 
the  page  of  history,  and  in  our  own  experience,  we  should  still  need  to  be  reminded 
of  it ;  for  it  seldom  happens  that  any  grand  ceremonial  takes  place  without  there 
being  some  circumstance  connected  with  it  to  stamp  vanity  upon  it.  But  it  is  not 
merely  in  the  dazzling  circumstances  of  courts  and  kings  that  the  worldliness  of 
man's  heart  is  shown ;  it  is  ingrained  in  us  all.  We  are  by  nature  lovers  of  this 
present  world ;  and  even  when  they  are  not  actually  removed,  God  often  embitters 
to  us  our  idols,  and  although  we  clearly  see  our  own  foUy  in  idolising  them,  yet  we 
cannot  tear  the  idols  away.  We  are  all  hastening  towards  the  grave  ;  and,  painful 
as  it  must  be,  it  would  be  very  wholesome  if  we  could  look  upon  each  ether's 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

countenances,  and  feel  an  abiding  sense  that  dissolution  must  soon  come.  Parentg 
and  children,  brothers  and  sisters,  husbands  and  wives,  dear  as  they  are  to  each 
other,  must  soon  part.  Oh  I  that  we  could  meditate  then  upon  this  ;  and  when  we 
see  a  great  king  thus  awfully  cut  down — when  there  seems  but  a  step  between  the 
gorgeous  apparel  and  the  filthy  worm — let  us  pause,  learn  how  short  our  time  is, 
and  pray  that  we  may  not  set  our  hearts  upon  the  fleeting  shadows  of  the  world, 
but  may  seek  to  lay  up  treasure  where  "  rust  and  moth  doth  not  corrupt,  and  where 
thieves  do  not  break  through  nor  steal."  How  blessed,  to  think  that  there  is  a 
garment  which  shall  never  be  exchanged  for  the  worm,  that  there  is  a  crown  which 
shall  never  fall  from  our  heads,  that  there  is  an  abode  where  sorrow  cannot  come  1 
Who  would  believe  it,  to  see  men  frantically  pursuing  things  that  are  not  worth  the 
having?  2.  An  awful  instance  of  God's  wrath  against  the  persecutors  of  His 
Church  and  people.  This  man  had  killed  James,  &c.  What  a  change  is  here,  A 
little  while,  and  Peter  is  safe,  and  the  proud  and  mighty  Herod  is  the  prey  of  worms. 
"  So  let  all  Thine  enemies  perish,  O  Lord  " ;  and  so  must  they  perish,  if  they  die 
in  their  sins.  There  are  few  sins  which  are  followed  up  with  more  signal  punish- 
ment than  the  persecution  of  God's  saints.  We  see  this  in  the  fate  of  those  who 
persecuted  Israel,  and  it  would  be  easy  to  show,  from  the  history  of  modem  Europe, 
that  there  has  not  been  a  power,  papal  or  heathen,  which  has  persecuted  the  Church 
of  God,  but  the  Lord  has  rendered  an  awful  retribution  into  their  bosoms.  "  He 
that  toucheth  you,  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye."  There  is  no  organ  so  deli- 
cate as  the  apple  of  the  eye.  The  smallest  puncture  there  will  give  pain  over  the 
whole  body.  How  strikingly  is  this  illustrated  in  the  case  of  SauL  "  Why  perse- 
cutest  thou  Me?  "  And  our  Saviour  says  that  it  would  be  better  for  a  man  who 
persecutes  the  saints  of  God  "  that  a  millstone  had  been  hung  around  his  neck, 
and  he  had  been  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  And  let  us  remember  that  it  is 
the  spirit  of  the  persecutor  which  God  looks  at.  You  may  say  that  men  are  not  now 
sent  to  prison  and  to  bonds  for  serving  Christ.  Bat  ungodly  men  show  the  same 
disposition  as  ever  to  persecute.  They  point  with  the  finger  of  scorn  ;  they  apply 
names  of  contempt,  and  endeavour  to  injure  reputation.  This  is  nothing  else  but 
the  spirit  which  lifted  the  hand  of  Herod,  and  aU  that  were  like  him,  to  persecute 
the  saints  of  God.  Happy  are  they  who  are  "  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake," 
but  woe  be  unto  them  that  persecute  them.  3.  God's  jealousy  of  His  own  glory 
and  condemnation  of  human  pride.  The  sin  for  which  he  was  eaten  of  worms 
was  only  a  negative  sin.  When  the  people  said,  "  It  is  the  voice  of  a  god,  and 
not  of  a  man," Herod  did  nothing,  said  nothing;  but  it  is  added,  "Immediately  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him."  Ajid  why?  "  Because  he  gave  not  God  the  glory." 
Oh,  what  a  little  sin  does  this  appear  I  How  singular  that  this  man  should  have 
been  suffered  to  go  through  a  long  career  of  cruelty,  oppression,  and  profligacy, 
ending  with  the  murder  of  God's  saints,  and  that  the  blow  should  be  withheld  until 
he  had  committed  this  apparently  little  sin — namely,  not  to  reproach  the  people  for 
their  idolatry  I  Now  this  is  well  worthy  of  our  serious  consideration,  because  it  la 
just  by  such  things  as  these  that  we  are  led  to  the  secret  root  of  sin,  and  led  to 
detect  its  hidden  springs.  It  is  of  no  use  just  to  cut  off  the  tops  of  the  weeds  incur 
gardens ;  we  must  pluck  them  up  by  the  roots,  or  they  will  grow  again.  So  it  is 
with  sin.  The  case  of  Herod  is  not  a  singular  one.  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  we 
read  of  many  instances  in  the  Old  Testament  in  which  persons  known  to  be  of  the 
most  profligate  and  wicked  character,  and  nations  and  people  of  the  most  debauched 
habits,  have  had  the  judgments  of  God  poured  out  upon  them,  not  for  what  are 
ordinarily  considered  great  crimes,  but  for  the  crime  of  pride  and  exaltation  against 
God  (Isa.  X.  6,  &c. ;  xlvii.  10;  Dan.  iv.).  It  is  perhaps  said,  "But  this  is  an 
uncommon  sin."  Certainly  in  its  full  development  it  is ;  for  all  are  not  kings,  nor 
can  they  array  themselves  in  royal  apparel ;  but  as  to  the  sin  itself,  it  is  universal. 
Oh  !  how  many  are  there  amongst  us  who  spend  their  lives  "  in  arraying  themselves 
in  apparel!  "  The  love  of  personal  admiration  is  one  of  the  most  universal  sins  of 
our  fallen  nature.  From  the  queen  upon  her  throne  down  to  the  meanest  of  her 
subjects,  the  love  of  dress  and  personal  display  is  an  indigenous  sin  in  the  hearts 
of  all  of  us,  according  to  our  various  stations  in  life.  But,  you  observe,  it  was  not 
for  liis  apparel  that  the  people  admired  Herod,  but  for  h  ss  oration.  Here  is  the 
pride  of  oratory,  the  pride  of  intellect.  There  are  many  who  utterly  despise  the 
former,  who  feed  eagerly  upon  the  latter ;  and  the  more  intellectual  our  sin,  the 
more  subtle  it  is,  and  perhaps  the  more  venomous  and  deadly.  There  is  no  pride 
i^'-re  detestable  in  the  sight  of  God  than  intellectual  or  spiritual  pride.  And  here 
again  you  see  the  love  of  flattery,  the  love  of  the  admiration  of  our  fellow-creatures. 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  287 

There  is  scarcely  any  human  being  insensible  to  this.  If  there  be  any  avenue  by 
which  you  can  infuse  folly  into  a  wise  man's  heart,  it  is  by  flattering  him.  Oh  ! 
how  mean  and  little  do  we  seem  when  these  bosom  sins  of  ours  are  stripped  open  ! 
How  many  a  splendid  action,  how  many  an  apparently  virtuous  one,  how  many  a 
seemingly  self-denying  one,  becomes  a  detestable  and  abominable  sin,  when  the 
secret  self-love  and  self-adrniration  that  guided  it  is  exposed !  "  God  resisteth  the 
proud,  but  giveth  grace  to  the  humble."  "  Humble  yourselves,  therefore,  under 
the  mighty  hand  of  God."  II.  The  pbogress  of  the  gospel,  notwithstanding  aU 
these  events  (ver.  24).  Remarkable  juxtaposition  of  facts  1  Here  is  the  persecutor 
eaten  of  worms,  and  gives  up  the  ghost.  Poor,  feeble,  wretched  man  I  he  can  do 
nothing  against  God  and  His  truth ;  and  while  he  is  dying,  the  Word  of  the  Lord 
multiplies.  This  is  a  sort  of  recurring  chorus  in  the  whole  history  of  the 
Acts.  Thus  it  was  after  the  deliverance  of  Peter  and  John,  after  the  doom  of 
Ananias  and  Sapphira,  after  the  death  of  Stephen,  and  the  conversion  of  Saul. 
What  an  idea  does  this  give  us  of  the  omnipotence  with  which  the  Word  is  clothed, 
and  of  the  mighty  purposes  of  God  concerning  it  I  He  hath  said,  "  So  shall  My 
Word  be,  that  goeth  forth  out  of  My  mouth,"  &c.  And  so  it  has  been  throughout 
the  whole  of  the  history  of  Christ's  Church  militant  here  upon  earth.  Infinitely 
diversified  is  the  story ;  there  is  no  history  so  romantic  as  that.  The  Church, 
founded  upon  a  Eock,  never  can  be  shaken  ;  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against 
it ;  men  and  devils  may  unite,  but  they  shall  be  "  eaten  of  worms  "  and  *'  give  op 
the  ghost  "  ;  while  the  "  Word  of  God  "  shall  "  grow  and  multiply."  Let  us  repose 
our  minds  on  these  glorious  considerations.  It  is  the  consolation  of  every  well- 
regulated  Christian  mind  that  aU  the  things  which  we  see  around  us,  however 
untoward,  work  together  for  the  purpose  of  God.  The  Lord  will  show  who  is  right 
and  who  is  wrong ;  the  work  of  every  man  will  be  submitted  to  the  fire,  and  we 
shall  then  see  which  was  the  gold,  and  which  the  wood,  hay.  and  stubble.  Mean- 
while His  people  have  a  confidence  that  they  are  serving  a  Master  who  cannot  be 
defeated,  and  obey  Him  who  has  aU  things  in  His  hands,  and  who  said  to  another 
persecutor,  ♦•  Thou  couldest  have  no  power  at  all  against  Me,  except  it  were  given 
thee  from  above."  (Dean  Close.)  The  death  of  Herod  : — I.  He  would  not  gloeift 
God.  To  exceed  a  just  proportion,  even  in  that  which  is  good,  is  sometimes  blame- 
ful ;  too  much  justice ;  too  much  love.  But  to  give  God  the  glory  is  a  duty  unto 
which  we  are  bound  with  an  infinite  devotion.  Wherefore  if  God  gave  children  by 
seventies,  He  asked  but  the  first  born.  Every  hour  of  our  time  is  His  benevolence ; 
yet  the  law  is  only  to  keep  the  Sabbath  day.  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  yet  His 
portion  is  but  the  tenth ;  but  of  His  glory,  it  is  His  own  entirely ;  He  will  not  part 
with  it.  Themistocles,  demanding  tribute  of  the  men  of  Andria,  told  them  that 
Jie  had  brought  two  powerful  advocates  to  plead  his  cause — Persuasion  if  they 
pleased,  Violence  if  they  refused.  These  two  apparitors  go  before  the  glory  of 
the  Most  High.  Doth  it  like  you  to  bless  His  name  ?  So  God  is  glorified  by  the 
devotion  of  His  creature.  Doth  it  like  you  to  exalt  yourself  ?  Then  He  will  be 
honoured  in  your  confusion.  He  that  swells  to  the  greatest  in  this  world  shall  be 
called  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  When  the  heathen  traduced  the 
Christians  that  they  debased  their  emperor  and  made  him  less  than  the  God  of 
heaven,  "  Know  you  not,"  says  Tertullian,  "  that  this  is  the  eminency  of  your 
emperor  to  be  less  than  God  ?  "  The  heathen  said  that  everything  which  grew  too 
tall  was  thunder-blasted,  and  that  great  fortunes,  when  they  came  to  excess,  did 
end  in  shameful  ruin.  As  Virgil  says  of  his  bees,  that  one  hive  will  fight  cruelly 
against  another ;  but  cast  a  little  dust  into  the  air,  and  the  fray  is  parted.  So  when 
the  pride  of  man  swells  with  vain  opinion,  methinks  the  casting  of  a  little  dust 
should  pluck  down  our  stomach,  the  base  mould  of  which  our  flesh  is  made.  Says 
St.  Austin,  "  Set  aside  this  corrupt  leaven  of  ostentation,  and  all  men  are  but  men,  as 
naked  in  their  pomp  as  when  they  were  born,  or  when  they  shall  be  buried."  It  wag 
pride  that  dethroned  the  bad  angels,  and  it  is  that  which  makes  man  stubborn  against 
the  law  and  refractory  against  faith.  Now  there  are  four  ways  whereby  this  daring 
vice  of  pride  doth  diminish  from  that  which  should  be  given  to  God's  glory.  1.  It 
is  a  sin  no  less  ungrateful  than  presumptuous  to  enjoy  wit,  and  art,  and  memory, 
and  the  blessings  of  the  best  portion,  and  to  forget  God.  Everything  that  renowns 
us,  feeds  us,  preserves  us,  is  but  a  crumb  that  falls  from  our  Master's  table.  2. 
Violence  is  done  to  God's  glory  when  conscience  will  acknowledge  that  God  doth 
give  all ;  but  arrogancy  will  infer  that  man  deserves  all.  The  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  free  gift  of  God  the  Father,  the  unction  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  are 
turned  quite  aside,  like  a  river  from  his  own  true  channel,  when  it  falls  into  such 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  m, 

a  soil  that  thinks  it  deserves  it.  When  good  works  sue  to  be  called  merits,  they 
are  like  the  ambitious  men  of  the  world,  that  spend  their  whole  revenue  to  buy 
some  gaudy  title  of  honour ;  and  when  they  have  it,  they  want  substance  to  main- 
tain it.  3.  The  third  transgression  is  a  lofty  stomach,  that  will  seem  to  be  no  lesB 
than  to  have  no  equals.  The  proud  man  is  deciphered  by  the  single  horn  of  the 
unicorn,  who  would  be  solitary  in  all  God's  graces,  and  without  a  companion  ; 
whereas  the  congregation  of  the  militant  church  is  compared  to  a  field  of  wheat, 
where  all  the  ears  of  the  field  are  of  an  equal  growth,  and  if  any  stalk  over-top  the 
rest  it  is  lank  and  without  fructification.  They  that  are  not  contented  to  be 
equal  with  the  common  condition  of  men,  shall  never  be  equal  with  the  angels ;  and 
he  that  despiseth  the  gifts  of  God  in  his  feUow  servants,  is  not  the  man  that  gives 
God  the  glory.  4.  There  is  one  feather  more  in  the  tail  of  pride,  and  full  as  long 
as  the  rest :  when  they  arrogate  to  themselves  that  which  indeed  they  have  not. 
Christ  hath  said  we  cannot  add  one  cubit  to  our  stature ;  no,  nor  make  one  hair  of 
our  head  black  or  white.  Why  do  ye  practise  it,  then,  0  ye  gaudy  beauties  I  to 
bring  that  about  which  Christ  told  you  was  impossible?  I  have  seen  books  of 
meditations  whose  subject  was  to  let  all  men  know  that  they  are  vain,  and  sinful, 
and  ignorant,  and  yet  they  were  dedicated  to  some  great  man  most  virtuous  and 
most  religious.  Presume  not  to  take  false  titles  upon  you,  as  Herod  encroached 
upon  the  name  of  God  Himself.  But  as  to  the  pride  of  Herod,  it  is  a  monster  that 
riseth  up  into  two  heads — 1.  A  tongue  fuU  of  vain  and  insolent  speech.  2.  An  ear 
obnoxious  to  the  flattery  of  the  people.  Of  both  in  their  order,  and  for  your 
edification.  It  was  Epaminondas's  praise  that  he  seldom  met  with  a  man  that 
knew  more  than  himself  or  spake  less ;  and  so  the  least  doers  inch  out  their  poor 
works  with  much  talk.  As  the  artificial  prospective  to  the  eye,  so  is  the  tongue 
unto  the  ear  an  hollow  instrument  to  make  everything  seem  bigger  and  fairer  than 
it  is.  The  beasts,  the  birds,  the  serpents  may  be  sooner  tamed,  says  St.  James, 
than  the  tongue  of  man.  Worse  than  these  creatures  is  the  tongue  of  man  ;  fiercer 
than  the  beasts,  more  flitting  than  the  birds,  more  poisonous  than  the  serpents.  It 
is  a  member  of  the  body  that  can  taste  everything  but  itself,  and  knows  how  all 
things  relish  but  its  own  pride  and  bitterness.  And  as  we  are  taught  from  hence 
to  set  a  watch  before  our  lips,  so  let  us  learn  from  Herod's  example  to  circumcise 
our  ears,  to  renounce  the  flatteries  of  evil  men.  The  French  proverb  says  that  the 
boiling  pot  doth  discover  the  little  pea  which  is  in  the  bottom  of  it,  and  the  applause 
of  a  little  vainglory  doth  discover  the  disposition  of  the  mind  of  man  more  than 
any  other  passion.  Says  Seneca, "  Glory  is  the  fire  that  kindles  virtue  when  it  pro- 
vokes virtue  to  good  achievements  ;  but  when  glory  begets  nothing  but  the  desire 
of  glory,  it  is  but  childish  popularity."  All  flattery  is  the  corruption  of  true  glory  ; 
but  to  flatter  any  man  in  his  vices  is  a  sacrilege  against  virtue.  It  is  a  note  of  a 
reprobate  that  he  speaketh  good  of  the  covetous,  whom  God  abhorreth.  To  flatter 
vice  is  to  promote  Satan's  kingdom  ;  to  flatter  princes  is  to  destroy  their  kingdoms; 
to  flatter  princes,  as  the  Sidonians  did  Herod,  is  to  pluck  dovra  God's  kingdom. 
The  Athenians,  who  were  but  Gentiles  at  the  wisest,  could  not  endure  such  injury 
to  be  offered  to  the  God  whom  they  knew  not,  but  put  Timagoras,  their  ambassador, 
to  death,  because  he  adored  the  king  of  Persia  like  a  god.  II.  God  was  globified 
IN  HIM.  1.  He,  the  king.  The  obedience  of  the  law  was  violated  ;  but  the  casti- 
gation  of  the  law  cannot  be  avoided.  Machiavel,  among  his  irreligious  principles, 
says  that  all  the  credit  of  great  enterprises  depends  upon  success;  for  if  Csesar  had 
miscarried  in  his  civil  wars,  his  infamy  liad  been  more  odious  than  Cataline's. 
Mighty  sinners  run  into  mighty  destructions  ;  and  such  conspicuous  offenders  as 
Herod  was,  leave  themselves  as  a  beacon.  Where  is  his  eloquence  now  ?  Where 
is  his  costly  garment  ?  Where  is  the  outcry  of  the  Sidonians  that  canonised  his 
tongue  for  the  voice  of  a  god  ?  Take  heed  lest  you  forfeit  your  own  possession  of 
the  earth  for  denying  God  the  possession  of  heaven.  The  Sidonians  gave  Herod  so 
much  of  heaven,  that  they  lost  him  all  the  earth  but  a  grave.  St.  Chrysostom  asks 
why  the  people  giving  the  first  offence,  yet  Herod  is  punished,  and  the  principal 
malefactors  acquitted.  (1)  Josephus  gives  the  reason  :  he  should  have  reproved 
and  abhorred  their  fiatteries.  He  should  have  rent  his  spangled  garment,  as  St. 
Paul  did  at  Lystra.  Woe  will  be  to  thousands  that  suffer  so  many  unsavoury 
words  to  fly  about  their  ears  and  not  reprove  them.  (2)  God  will  take  a  more  exact 
account  of  great  men's  actions  than  of  the  vulgar  multitude,  because  their  livea 
are  conspicuous  and  should  be  exemplary  ;  and  if  their  life  is  infectious  unto  many, 
Bo  their  doom  will  be  dreadful  unto  many.  (3)  The  people  were  not  altogether  free 
from  ^astisemsnt.  Look  now  upon  him  that  was  your  idol,  ye  Sidonians  1    Imagine 


CHAP,  xa.]  THE  ACTS,  289 

with  what  astonishment  the  whole  assembly  was  dissolved,  if  their  consciences 
were  not  as  full  of  worms  as  Herod's  body !  (4)  Clemency  and  justice,  when  they  meet 
together,  attend  how  they  may  punish  few  and  save  many.  If  Herod  suffer  the 
malediction,  one  man  feels  the  smart,  and  the  whole  assembly  may  repent  and  be 
saved.  (5)  Let  the  rabble  go  home  in  peace  for  this  time ;  they  were  not  all  white 
for  harvest  upon  that  day,  but  behold  the  end-  Where  is  Cassarea  now  ?  Or  who 
almost  knows  the  Sidonians?  They  have  learnt  to  know  by  dear  experience  that 
thunder  and  judgment  is  the  voice  of  God,  and  not  an  eloquent  oration.  2.  He  was 
smitten  by  an  angel  of  the  Lord.  Strange  wickednesses  procure  strange  kinds  of 
death.  If  the  earth  will  not  avenge  them,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  will  come  down 
and  fight.  Do  the  trees  of  paradise  deserve  to  have  a  cherubin  set  before  them 
with  a  flaming  sword?  And  shall  not  all  the  host  of  heaven  stand  about  the 
majesty  of  the  Most  High,  and  see  the  honour  of  His  name  preserved  ?  3.  Imme- 
diately he  was  smitten.  In  such  splendour  of  attire,  in  such  celebrity  of  attendants, 
before  the  face  of  strangers,  among  those  who  in  their  hearts  were  no  better  than 
his  enemies ;  never  did  he  come  out  of  that  chair  of  the  scorner,  from  that  throne 
wherein  he  was  canonised,  till  he  was  stripped  of  all  dignity.  It  is  the  most  dread- 
ful thing  upon  earth  to  be  suddenly  apprehended  by  judgment.  But  let  the 
Christian  pray  every  morning  as  if  he  should  see  the  sun  rise  no  more ;  every 
evening  as  if  he  should  see  the  sun  set  no  more ;  be  ready  to  meet  the  bridegroom 
at  midnight,  and  yet  despise  not  that  supplication,  "From  sudden  death,  good 
Lord  deliver  us."  4.  Lest  he  should  glory  that  he  was  smitten  by  no  less  than  au 
angel,  behold  the  meanest  of  all  creatures,  the  worms,  are  made  his  executioners  1 
He  that  humbled  himself  to  be  a  worm  and  no  man,  he  is  exalted  above  men  to  the 
right  hand  of  God.  He  that  would  have  been  Deus  non  homo,  a  God  and  not  a  man, 
is  dejected  below  a  man,  and  made  a  worm.  This  disease  is  more  observed  in 
histories  to  be  the  arrow  of  the  Lord  against  sinners  of  high  presumption  than 
any  other.  Thus  Sylla  died  ;  thus  Antiochus  Epiphanes  ;  thus  Herod  the  Great ; 
thus  Amulphus,  that  spoiled  the  churches  of  the  Christians ;  thus  Phericides,  that 
gloried  he  never  offered  sacrifice,  and  yet  Hved  as  prosperously.  {Bp.  Racket.) 
Herod's  death : — I.  Wherefore  has  it  found  a  place  in  the  Acts  ?  Not  as  if  it 
had  been  a  punishment  for  the  murder  of  James,  but  also  because  political  events 
are  not  matters  of  indifference  to  Christianity.  II.  What  are  we  to  learn  from 
IT  ?  That  the  commonweal  can  prosper,  not  by  fiattery  and  yielding  to  the  lusts 
and  passions  of  men,  but  only  when  we  are  free  from  both,  looking  to  the  eternal 
and  unchangeable  will  of  God.  (Schleirmacher.)  Herod  smitten  by  the  angel — an 
old  picture  of  human  society  : — Here  we  have — I.  National  interdependence.  The 
Phoenicians  wanted  what  the  Palestinians  had,  and  vice  versa.  This  is  a  glorious 
fact  in  God's  government  of  man.  Throughout  the  earth  one  zone  produces  what 
other  zones  want,  and  the  pecuKar  products  of  each  contribute  towards  the  consum- 
mation of  man's  well-being.  This  interdependence  serves — 1.  To  stimulate  human 
activities.  It  presses  ever  on  the  sense  of  need  and  love  of  gain,  and  thus  keeps 
man's  faculties  ever  on  the  stretch  contriving  and  constructing  methods  to  work 
the  soil  to  the  greatest  advantage,  and  to  increase  facilities  of  transit.  He  makes 
seas  his  high  road,  electricity  his  messenger,  winds  and  fire  the  carriers  of  his  com- 
modities. 2.  To  check  all  monopolies.  There  are  narrow  souls  who  would  keep  all 
their  land  produces  to  themselves.  Ignorant  alike  of  the  laws  of  the  universe,  the 
genius  of  the  world,  and  their  own  insignificance,  they  vainly  talk  of  national  inde- 
pendence. Nature  laughs  them  to  scorn.  Creature  independence  is  a  solecism. 
3.  To  promote  international  concord.  (1)  A  free  commerce  throughout  the  world 
is  one  of  the  best  means  by  which  men  may  become  mutually  acquainted.  Buyers 
and  sellers  mutually  show  themselves  in  their  transactions.  (2)  It  advances  interest 
in  man.  It  is  to  the  interest  of  traders  to  be  on  terms  of  amity  and  free  intercourse. 
The  commercial  interests  of  the  world  are  against  war.  (3)  But  the  higher  concord, 
the  brotherhood  of  soul,  commerce  can  only  effect  this  as  it  becomes  thoroughly 
inspired  and  ruled  by  those  principles  which  were  embodied  in  Him  who  came  to  break 
down  all  partition  walls.  H.  Class  wickedness.  1.  Unbounded  arrogance  oii  the  part 
of  the  ruler.  (1)  The  "  set  day  "  some  think  was  in  honour  of  Claudius'  return  from 
Britain,  which  he  had  reduced  to  a  Roman  province.  Anyhow,  the  occasion  was 
a  grand  one.  Cassarea  was  crowded  with  pleasure-seekers.  The  king  enters  that 
theatre  which  had  been  erected  by  his  grandfather.  The  stone  seats,  rising  in  a 
great  semicu'cle,  tier  above  tier,  were  covered  by  an  excited  multitude.  (2)  The 
king  magnificently  arrayed  makes  an  oration.  What  he  said  we  know  not ;  but  we 
may  be  sure  it  was  very  "  grand,"  like  modern  "  orations  " — as  gorgeous  as  hia 
VOL.  n.  19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

costume,  as  arrogant  as  his  pretensions.  Probably  it  dealt  with  the  message  he 
received  through  Blastus.  Herod  is  a  type  of  his  class.  The  haughtiness  of  rulers 
is  proverbial.  Many  treat  their  fellow  men  as  if  they  themselves  were  a  race  of 
gods.  (2)  Base  servility  on  the  part  of  the  ruled.  Who  can  credit  the  shrewd 
Phoenician  traders,  the  cultured  Greeks,  and  the  religious  Jews  with  sincerity  here  ? 
It  was  simply  that  base  flattery  which  has  been  the  sin  and  curse  of  the  people  in 
all  ages.  It  is  not  uncommon,  even  in  these  days  of  enlightenment,  to  see  men 
crushed  by  the  injustice  of  rulers  shouting  hosannas  in  their  ears.  There  is  no 
greater  obstruction  to  free  government,  wholesome  law  and  national  advancement, 
than  the  servile  spirit  of  miUions  to  those  above  them.  No  government  can  help 
the  man  who  respects  not  the  high  prerogatives  of  his  own  humanity.  IH.  Retbi- 
BtJTivE  JUSTICE.  Augels  havc  often  done  such  work  before  (Exod.  xii.  21 ;  2  Kings 
xix.  35 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  16 ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  21).  The  justice  of  this  man's  fate  is 
clear.  Surely  he  who  had  killed  James,  imprisoned  Peter,  and  massacred  his  own 
guards,  and  now  accepted  Divine  homage,  deserved  the  end  which  befeU  him.  Such 
instances  of  retributive  justice  had  occurred  with  Pharaoh,  Belshazzar,  &c.,  but 
they  are  confessedly  rare  as  compared  witli  the  number  of  notorious  offenders.  Yet 
they  are  sufficient  to  show  that  there  ia  a  moral  government  in  the  world,  and  to 
prophesy  the  coming  of  a  time  when  retribution  shall  be  fairly  dealt  out  to  all.  IV. 
Remediai,  FORCES.  1.  The  Word  of  God.  This  "grew  and  multiplied."  The  seed 
was  growing  everywhere,  and  the  fruit  was  the  antidote  to  the  world's  evils,  the 
provision  for  the  cravings  of  the  human  soul.  Herod  had  done  his  best  to  crush  it, 
but  it  went  on,  and  as  it  advanced  it  elevated  and  blessed.  2.  The  agency  of  the 
good.  Here  are  Barnabas,  and  Saul,  and  Mark,  all  working  to  help  on  the  true  and 
the  right.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  This  world's  honour : — Death  strips  us  of 
this  world's  glory  as  a  boot-jack  draws  off  your  boots.  Another  wears  my  boots 
when  I  am  dead,  and  another  wears  my  glory.  It  is  of  little  value.  (Martin 
Boos.)  Fleeting  honour: — It  was  a  custom  in  Rome,  that  when  the  emperor 
went  out  upon  some  grand  day  in  all  his  imperial  pomp,  there  was  an  officer 
appointed  to  burn  flax  before  him,  crying  out,  ^^  Sic  transit  gloria  mundi" ; 
which  was  done  to  put  him  in  mind  that  all  his  honour  and  grandeur  should  soon 
vanish  away  like  the  smoke  from  the  burning  flax.  The  law  of  reprisal : — When 
we  consider  the  almost  invincible  power  which  the  crustaceans  derive  from  their 
armour,  their  muscular  vigour,  their  ferocity,  and  their  numbers,  we  ask  how  is  it 
that  they  have  not  depopulated  the  shores  where  they  meet  none  but  victims,  no 
enemies  capable  of  contending  with  them  upon  equal  terms  ?  For  formidable  as 
they  are  to  all  the  tribes  of  molluscs  and  zoophytes,  what  have  they  to  fear — except 
in  a  few  countries  certain  littoral  or  amphibious  mammals  which,  for  the  most 
part,  only  attack  them  as  a  last  resort,  preferring  prey  more  easily  devoured,  and 
assisting  them  in  their  work  of  extermination  rather  than  fighting  them  ?  Their 
tyranny  then  seems  at  first  sight  absolute  and  without  counterbalance.  Such, 
however,  is  not  the  case.  The  crustaceans  undergo  at  certain  epochs  a  fatal  crisis, 
which  delivering  them  up  defenceless  to  external  shocks  and  the  blows  of  their 
enemies,  places  an  easy  vengeance  within  the  reach  of  the  oppressed.  These 
epochs  are  their  sloughing  times,  when,  willy  nilly,  with  great  difficulty,  and  at  the 
cost  of  the  most  painful  and  sometimes  the  deadliest  efforts,  they  are  forced  to  shed 
their  armour  of  proof,  to  expose  their  living  flesh  barely  covered  with  a  thin  soft 
pellicle,  and  to  bury  themselves  piteously  under  the  sand  until  the  calcareous 
secretion  shall  be  re-formed  and  solidified  anew.  This  is  their  season  of  fear  and 
fright.  Their  hiding-places  are  easily  discoverable,  and  once  unearthed  the  dis- 
armed brigands  are  lost  beyond  redemption.  Myriads  perish  in  this  manner, 
devoured  by  other  animals,  crushed  among  the  stones,  or  dashed  in  pieces  against 
the  rocks  by  the  movement  of  the  waves.  Thus  Nature  enforces  her  law  of  reprisal. 
The  power  of  all  tyrants  and  oppressors  has  its  fixed  limits.  The  quarrelsome 
crustacean  and  the  despotic  king  are  alike  subject  to  the  hour  of  retaliation. 
{Scientific  Illnstratiotis.)  Danger  of  flattery : — Whitefield,  when  flattered,  said, 
"  Take  care  of  fire  :  I  carry  powder  about  me."  Flattery  answered  : — When  the 
French  ambassador  visited  Lord  Bacon  in  his  last  illness,  and  found  him  in  bed, 
with  the  blinds  drawn,  he  addressed  this  compliment  to  him  :  "  You  are  like  the 
angels,  of  whom  we  read  and  hear  much,  but  have  not  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
them."  The  reply  was  the  sentiment  of  a  philosopher,  and  not  unworthy  of  a 
Christian  :  "  If  the  complaisance  of  others  compares  me  to  an  angel,  my  infirmities 
tell  me  I  am  a  man."  Flattery  rebuked  : — A.  flattering  priest  told  Constantina 

khe  Great  that  his  virtues  deserved  the  empire  of  the  world  here,  and  to  reign  with 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ACTS,  291 

the  Son  of  God  hereaftjr.  The  emperor  cried,  "  Fie,  fie  I  for  shame !  let  me  hear 
no  more  such  unseemly  speeches ;  but,  rather,  suppliantly  pray  to  my  Almighty 
Maker,  that,  in  this  life  and  the  life  to  come,  I  may  be  reckoned  worthy  to  be  Hia 
servant."  Royal  piety  : — One  of  the  first  acts  performed  by  George  III.  after  his 
accession  to  the  throne,  was  to  issue  an  order  prohibiting  any  of  the  clergy  who 
should  be  called  to  preach  before  him,  from  paying  him  any  compliment  in  their 
discourses.  His  Majesty  was  led  to  this  from  the  fulsome  adoration  which  Dr.  Thos. 
"Wilson,  prebendary  of  Westminster,  thought  proper  to  deliver  in  the  Chapel  Eoyal, 
and  for  which,  instead  of  thanks,  he  received  from  hia  royal  auditor  a  pointed 
reprimand,  his  Majesty  observing  that  he  came  to  chapel  to  hear  the  praises  of 
God  and  not  his  own.  {Clerical  Anecdotes.)  The  certainty  of  retribution  : — As 
you  stood  some  stormy  day  upon  a  sea-cliff,  and  marked  the  giant  billow  rise  from 
the  deep  to  rush  on  with  foaming  crest,  and  throw  itself  thundering  on  the  trembling 
shore,  did  you  ever  fancy  that  you  could  stay  its  course,  and  hurl  it  back  to  the 
depths  of  ocean  ?  Did  you  ever  stand  beneath  the  leaden,  lowering  cloud,  and  mark 
the  lightning's  leap,  as  it  shot  and  flashed,  dazzling  athwart  the  gloom,  and  think 
that  you  could  grasp  the  bolt  and  change  its  path  ?  Still  more  foolish  and  vain  his 
thought,  who  fancies  that  he  can  arrest  or  turn  aside  the  purpose  of  God,  saying, 
^'  What  is  the  Almighty  that  we  should  serve  Him  ?  Let  us  break  His  bands 
asunder,  and  cast  away  His  cords  from  us  1  "  Break  His  bands  asunder  I — How  He 
that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh  1     {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  God's  ministers  of 

retribution  : — An  angel  was  the  agent  of  judgment  here,  but  worms  were  the  minis- 
ters of  vengeance.  But  God  can  dispense  with  superior  ministers  altogether.  No  need 
that  He  should  grasp  ten  thousand  thunders,  or  come  riding  on  the  wings  of  the 
wind.  A  grasshopper,  a  wire  worm,  a  taint  of  air,  the  sporule  of  a  microscopic 
mass,  the  bacillus  of  an  invisible  animalculae — ah !  these  loathly  nothings  are 
potent  enough  in  the  hand  of  God  to  abase  into  dust  the  majesty  of  man.  Julian 
would  fain  have  trampled  Christianity  into  the  dust ;  a  devious  arrow,  and  Julian 
was  struck  down  before  the  face  of  his  enemies.  Napoleon  insolently  remarked 
that  God  he  usually  found  on  the  side  of  the  strongest  battalions ;  softer  than 
feathers,  melting  at  a  breath,  fell  on  the  plains  of  Russia  the  white  flakes  of  snow, 
and  Napoleon  was  a  fugitive,  and  his  grand  army  lay  wrapped  in  its  ghastly 
■winding  sheet.     (Archdeacon  Farrar.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  But  the  Word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied. — The  progress  of  God's 
Word  : — This  progress — growth  and  multiplication  of  God's  Word — was  displayed — 
I.  In  the  men  of  that  pekiod.  1.  The  spirit  of  every  age  or  movement  of  history 
is  reflected  in  its  leading  characters.  The  Elizabethan  age ;  the  American  Revolu- 
tion ;  the  age  of  Pericles.  2.  Displayed  in  its  leaders  or  exponents.  (1)  In  Barnabas 
we  see  tenderness  and  generosity.  (2)  In  Paul  strength  and  genius.  (3)  In  John 
Mark  imperfection,  but  eventual  usefulness  after  failure.  3.  In  its  enemies.  It 
defied  Herod's  craft  and  power,  and  its  success  was  coincident  with  his  doom.  II. 
In  the  makch  of  events.  1.  "  Happy  is  a  land  when  it  has  no  history,"  is  true 
only  of  the  old  and  false  conceptions  of  history.  2.  God's  Word  did  not  return  unto 
Him  void.  (1)  Gentile  Christianity  was  launched  on  the  stream  of  ages.  (2)  Thus 
the  policy  of  Christianity,  of  the  Church  as  a  missionary,  world-evangelising  move- 
ment, was  fixed  by  whatever  force  lies  in  the  example  of  the  primitive  Church.  III.  In 
the  advance  of  ideas.  1.  Pentecost  did  not  end,  but  only  began,  the  enlargement  of 
mind  to  take  in  God's  thoughts.  2.  The  minds  of  the  disciples  gained  that  flexibility  as 
to  method  and  inflexibility  as  to  principle  by  which  they  could  go  "  to  every  ereatuie." 
"All  things  to  all  men,  so  that  I  might  by  all  means  save  some."  "We  must  obey  God 
rather  than  men."  3.  The  New  Testament  itself — especially  all  of  it  except  the  four 
Gospels — shows  how  the  minds  of  men  were  enlarged  and  mspired  to  apply  the  "  Word 
of  God  "  to  human  wants  ;  and  here,  in  an  almost  literal  sense,  it  "grew  and  multi- 
pUed."  Conclusion  :  1.  Thus  it  appears  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  phrases, 
"new  theology,"  "advanced  thought,"  &c.,  may  represent  a  state  of  things 
thoroughly  satisfactory,  upon  which  the  Church  and  the  world  are  to  be  congratu- 
lated. 2.  It  equally  appears  that  all  true  progress  in  religious  thought  and  action 
is  made  by  men  who-e  instrument  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  whose  power  and 
guidance  are  supplied  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  (J.  P.  Otis.)  The  success  of  the  gospel 
in  the  days  of  the  apostles  : — I.  The  Wobd  was  opposed.  1.  By  the  Word  we  may 
understand  the  gospel  of  God  our  Saviour.  2.  Jewish  prejudices  opposed  the 
gospel.  3.  Heathenish  superstitions  were  opposed  to  the  Word.  4.  Human 
learning  was  opposed  to  the  Word  of  God.    The  Greeks  and  Romans  excelled  in 


292  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

learning ;  but  that  learning  produced  bad  effects.  5.  The  devil  opposed  the  gospel, 
by  his  influence  and  agency  on  the  hearts  of  men.  6.  In  spreading  the  Word,  the 
apostles  had  to  endure  many  grievous  afflictions,  both  from  wicked  men  and  evil 
spirits.  II.  Opposition  did  not  pbevent  the  rapid  success  of  the  gospel  ;  fob 
THE  Word  grew  and  was  multiplied.  1.  The  Word  is  fitly  compared  to  good  seed. 
2.  This  seed  was  sown  by  the  apostles  in  prepared  hearts ;  and  it  cannot  bring 
forth  good  fruit  unless  the  heart  be  prepared.  3.  When  the  Word  sinks  into  the 
heart,  and  takes  deep  root,  it  produces  holy  tempers  and  holy  actions ;  and  when 
we  abound  in  these,  the  Word  grows  in  us,  and  our  prayers  go  up  to  God  with 
acceptance.  4.  The  Word  is  multiplied  when  many  are  converted  to  God  by  the 
instrumentality  of  converts.  IIL  But  what  were  the  principal  causes  of  the 
extensive  promulgation  of  the  gospel  in  the  age  of  the  apobtles  1  1.  The 
extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  conferred  on  the  apostles,  and  on  many  in  the 
Chureh,  promoted  the  success  of  the  gospel.  2.  Another  cause  of  the  rapid  spread 
of  the  gospel  in  those  days  was  the  burning  zeal  of  the  apostles  and  primitive 
Christians.  3.  Divine  power  attended  the  Word.  4.  The  holy  tempers,  and  the 
holy  conduct  of  the  apostles,  and  of  the  first  believers,  produced  powerful  effects  on 
the  hearts  of  the  people.  5.  The  unity  of  the  Church  gave  success  to  the  Word. 
6.  Persecution  promoted  the  cause  of  Christ,  and  gave  success  to  the  Word.  7. 
Judgments  poured  out  on  wicked  men,  and  on  persecutors,  gave  success  to  the 
gospel.  8.  The  united  prayers  of  the  Church  gave  success  to  the  Word.  In- 
ferences :  1.  How  widely  different  was  the  propagation  of  Christianity  from 
that  of  Mohammeilism  !  The  one  was  by  the  force  of  truth  and  holy  example ; 
but  the  other  was  by  the  sword  and  acts  of  Violence  I  2.  The  effects  of  primitive 
times  have  reached  us  in  these  last  days.  3.  We  lay  no  claim  to  apostoUc  gifts  ; 
but  God  has  opened  a  wide  door,  in  our  day,  for  the  spread  of  His  gospel.  {Theo- 
logical Sketchbook.)  The  success  of  the  gospel : — I.  The  Word  was  opposed  by — 
1.  Jewish  prejudices.  2.  Heathen  superstitions.  3.  Human  learning.  4.  Kingly 
cruelty.  5.  The  devil,  by  his  influence  on  the  hearts  of  men.  II.  This  did  not 
prevent  its  rapid  success.  1.  The  Word  is  good  seed.  2.  This  seed  was  sown  by 
the  apostles  in  prepared  hearts.  3.  When  this  seed  takes  root  it  produces  holy 
tempers  and  actions.  III.  The  principal  causes  of  this  success.  1.  The  extra- 
ordinary gifts  of  the  Spirit.  2.  The  burning  zeal  of  the  apostles.  3.  Divine  power. 
4,  Chureh  unity.  5.  Persecutions.  6.  Prayer.  {Pulpit  Sketches.)  The  success 
of  the  gospel: — I.  The  Word  of  God  grew  in — 1.  Convincing.  2.  Converting.  3. 
Sanctifying.  4.  Comforting.  5.  Stimulating  power.  II.  The  Word  of  God  multi- 
plied—1.  In  the  number  of  believers  who  embraced  it.  2.  In  the  number  of 
preachers  who  proclaimed  it.  3.  In  the  extent  of  territory  over  which  it  spread 
(chap.  xiii.  4,  &c.).  III.  The  Word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied  notwithstanding — 
1.  The  miglit  that  was  arrayed  against  it.  (1)  The  tyranny  of  Herod.  (2)  The  plea- 
sure of  the  Jews.  State  authority  and  sectarian  bigotry  were  combined  for  the  first 
time  since  the  crucifixion  to  oppress  the  Church  ;  how  often  since  has  this  unholy 
alliance  been  made  for  the  same  end !  2.  The  persecution  it  endured.  (1)  The 
vexation  of  Christians,  espionage,  loss  of  goods,  &c.  (2)  The  martyrdom  of  James. 
(3)  The  imprisonment  of  Peter.  IV.  National  prosperity  was  imperilled,  but  the 
Word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied.  There  is  more  tban  ai^pears  in  ver.  20.  Tyre 
and  Sidon  as  purely  commercial  cities  were  largely  dependent  on  the  purely  in- 
dustrial interior  for  the  supply  of  merchandise,  and  the  interior  was  dependent  on 
those  cities  for  its  very  sustenance.  The  prosperity  of  both  was  threatened  by  a 
war  which  would  further  aggravatt^  the  situation.  Tyrants  may  frown,  and  people 
may  cringe,  but  the  Word  of  God  is  independent  of  both.  V.  Human  glory  was 
humbled,  and  kingly  power  was  destroyed,  but  the  Word  of  God  grew  and 
multiplied.  Head  vers.  23  and  24  as  one,  and  the  intended  contrast  is  clear.  "  Al! 
flesh  is  grass  .  .  .  but  the  Word  of  God  shall  stand  for  ever."  The  Eoman, 
German,  Italian,  and  English  potentates  who  oppressed  the  Church  are  in  their 
graves,  but  the  Word  of  God  grows  and  multiplies  still.  VI.  The  Word  of  God 
grew  and  multiplied  by  means  of — 1.  Prayer — the  normal  condition  of  success 
throughout  the  ages.  2.  Striking  interpositions.  These  are  exceptional,  but  are 
always  at  hand  if  need  be.  Here  we  see — (1)  The  deliverance  of  Peter  by  an  angel. 
(2)  The  death  of  Herod  by  an  angel.  3.  EHniest  evangelists  (vers.  25-xiii.  3).  {J. 
W.  Bum.)  The  invincihilitij  of  the  Word  : — The  truth  of  God  is  not  only  invul- 
nerable, it  is  invincible.  Smallest  of  all  seeds  dropped  upon  the  gorgeous  temple 
floor  of  the  world's  heathendom,  lo !  it  burst  into  fragments  the  starred  mosaics, 
and  split  the  monstrous  idols  till  they  fell  and  crushed  their  worshippers.   Theona 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ACTS,  2»8 

main  reason  why  the  triumph  of  Christianity  had  from  the  first  all  the  certainty  of 
a  law  was  this — God  is  in  her,  and  therefore  shall  she  not  be  moved.  God  shall 
help  her,  and  that  right  early.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  vitality  of  the  Word : — 
How  strange,  how  providential  has  been  its  history  I  and  how  deep  ought  to  be  our 
attachment  to  a  Book  so  mercifully  made  our  inheritance  1  From  the  Churches  of 
the  primitive  times  it  passed  (as  ecclesiastical  tyranny  grew  strong,  and  would  not 
brook  a  collateral  authority)  to  the  seclusion  of  the  monasteries  for  many  a  long 
and  barren  century ;  but  God  was  with  it  through  the  darkness,  and  He  brought  it 
forth  in  His  own  good  time.  It  was  like  those  seeds  of  which  naturalists  tell  us, 
that  lie  for .  ages  dormant  and  unfruitful  in  cells  beneath  the  earth,  but  whose 
vitality  has  never  been  lost,  and  which,  when  brought  upon  the  surface,  shoot  up 
with  vigour  into  all  the  beauty  of  luxuriant  vegetation.  Such  has  been  the  story  of 
the  written  Word.  (Prof.  Archer  Butler.)  The  enduring  kingdom : — We  have  here 
the  kingdom  of  Herod  and  Agrippa,  as  a  type  of  all  earthly  kingdoms,  brought  into 
contrast  and  collision  with  the  enduring  kingdom  of  Christ  the  Lord.  In  many 
points  of  view — in  similarity  and  in  opposition — the  parallel  is  most  peculiarly 
striking.  The  rise  of  both  was  unobserved.  Herod's  had  grown  up  from  nothing. 
There  had  been  a  time  when  he  was  hving  as  a  mere  hanger-on  upon  the  court  of 
Tiberius.  He  was  gifted  with  those  powers  by  which  such  men  rise  in  such  courts. 
As  he  ingratiated  himself  with  Tiberius,  the  visions  of  greater  things  would  begin 
to  fill  his  earthly  soul.  He  was  the  grandson  of  the  great  Herod ;  perhaps  he  might 
yet  make  himself  a  name  greater  than  that  of  the  prosperous  founder  of  his  house. 
But  upon  this  early  sunshine  feU  the  blackness  of  a  sudden  frost,  and  nipped  the 
opening  bud  of  his  greatness.  He  was  accused  of  wishing  the  emperor  dead,  and 
BO  the  rising  Idumaean  found  himself  in  a  dungeon,  and  not  upon  a  throne.  Then 
followed  the  tyrant's  death,  and  again  Herod  rose  to  favour.  He  was  made  king  of 
Batanea  and  Trachonitis  by  Caligula ;  and  by  Claudius  of  Samaria  and  Judaea  also. 
He  was  one  of  the  few  who  thoroughly  succeed,  as  it  is  called,  in  life ;  and  he 
governed  his  kingdom  vnth  great  splendour  and  success.  He  affected  popularity ; 
wished  to  reign  in  the  hearts  of  his  subjects  ;  was  a  man  who  would  stretch  a  point 
that  he  might  do  so.  But  all  suddenly  at  noonday  his  sun  sank  in  outer  darkness. 
Puffed  up  with  the  applause  of  his  subjects,  he  took  to  himself,  as  the  great  founder 
of  his  own  fortunes,  the  honour  which  belonged  to  God  only.  An  angel  hand  strikes 
him  ;  and,  as  self-exaltation  had  been  his  master-sin,  so  the  circumstances  of  his 
death  are  made  humiliating  in  their  accidents  as  well  as  sudden  in  their  issue :  ha 
was  eaten  by  worms.  His  kingdom  passed  away  ;  the  cunning  web  which  had  been 
woven  so  successfully,  the  fruit  of  youthful  enterprise,  of  mature  experience,  of  long 
labours,  of  late  and,  as  it  seemed,  complete  success :  all  was  torn  away  by  the  first 
counterblast  which  the  Almighty  sent  forth  to  scatter  it.  "  But  the  Word  of  God 
grew  and  multiplied. "  Here  is  the  contrast.  Here  is  a  kingdom  which  "  fadeth 
not  away."  With  this,  Herod  had  just  come  into  collision ;  but  now  he  himself 
was  gone  ;  and  that  despised  kingdom  ' '  grew  and  multiplied  1 "  The  blood  which 
he  had  shed  to  quench  it,  made  but  its  flame  burn  brighter  and  spread  around  iu 
wider  circles.  And  the  cause  of  this  power  of  growth  is  suggested  in  its  very  title : 
it  was  "  the  Word  of  God."  It  was  not  the  mere  creature  of  outside  circumstance ; 
it  was  not  a  kingdom  formed  by  Caligula's  passing  favour,  augmented  by  the  good- 
will of  Claudius,  and  built  up  and  widened  by  the  policy  of  Herod ;  it  had  a  life 
within,  which  was  life  for  all  men.  Now  from  this  contrast  there  flow  one  or  two 
necessary  consequences.  I.  That  this  kingdom  or  the  Word  of  God  will  at  last 
SUBDUE  all  opposition.  That  which  we  have  seen  in  this  chapter  of  the  Acts  has 
been  going  on  ever  since  the  day  when  the  angel  smote  Herod.  It  is  going  on  round 
about  us  now.  1.  It  is  going  on  in  the  world  of  nations.  Thrones  have  been  built 
up  since,  higher  than  King  Herod's ;  the  nations  of  the  earth  have  gone  out  to 
wonder  at  their  greatness.  Caesar  and  Charlemagne,  Clovis  and  Solyman,  and  how 
many  more,  have  heard  in  their  day  the  flattering  cry,  "  It  is  the  voice  of  a  god  I  " 
And  they  have  passed  away,  with  their  dynasties  and  their  institutions  :  the  great 
world-stream  has  flowed  on,  and,  as  its  waves  have  swept  by,  they  have  overwhelmed 
what  was  once  so  great,  until  their  very  record  has  departed.  And  still  the  Word 
of  God  has  "  grown  and  multiplied."  The  outward  forms  of  Christ's  kingdom 
abide,  as  fresh  as  they  were  in  their  earliest  morning.  StUl  does  baptism  admit 
into  this  kingdom  ;  still  does  the  simple  breaking  of  bread,  and  the  pouring  out  of 
wine,  endure  amongst  us.  And,  if  possible,  yet  more  marvellous  still,  its  inward 
power  over  countless  multitudes  is  just  what  it  was  of  old ;  still  they  tremble  under 
the  Word  spoken ;  still  soul  after  soul  melts  in  contrition,  kindles  iu  love,  rejoices 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHiP.  xuu 

in  exultation,  \<ait3  in  hope,  when  the  words  which  are  the  words  of  that  kingdom 
of  the  unseen  Lord  sound  in  their  ears  ;  still  in  their  trouble  men  gather  together, 
as  they  did  in  the  house  where  Khoda  went  to  the  door  at  Peter's  knocking  ;  and 
still  deliverances  are  given  in  answer  to  those  supplications,  and  angels  from 
heaven  bear  to  the  saints  of  the  King  the  succour  they  need.  And  now  what  does 
all  this  foreshadow?  What  but  that  this  kingdom  which  alone  has  in  it  this 
principle  of  life  shall  endure  for  ever  ?  that  it  shall  break  in  pieces  all  that  are  against 
it  ?  2.  Ah  1  that  which  is  thus  plain  in  the  worldwide  history  of  nations  is  just  as 
true  in  the  detail  of  all  private  life.  There,  too,  are  the  two  kingdoms :  the  one 
full  of  show  for  vain  men,  the  other  full  of  strength  for  believing  men.  There  are 
great  promises  of  success,  of  rising  in  life,  of  acquiring  a  name,  of  a  mail's  enjoying 
his  pleasure  ;  and  there  is  an  angel  ever  ready  to  strike  at  his  noonday  of  seem- 
ing success  every  such  worldly-minded  man.  There  is  a  "  Thou  fool,  this  night  thy 
soul  shall  be  required  of  thee  ;  and  then  whose  shall  this  be  which  thou  hast  stored 
up  for  thyself  ?  "  And  there  are  dungeons  and  chains  on  the  other  side,  the  follow- 
ing Christ  in  self-denial  and  self-sacrifice  ;  and  with  these  there  is  still,  as  of  old, 
a  portion  in  the  Church's  prayers,  angels'  visits,  and  a  God  and  Father  who  sends 
them  for  our  deliverance.  Surely,  then,  it  is  plain  which  of  these  kingdoms  will 
endure.  II.  The  blessedness  of  being  engaged  upon  the  side  of  this  living 
POWEB.  We  look  into  God's  Word,  and  we  see  the  worthlessness  of  all  outer  things  ; 
the  utter  vanity  of  Herod's  pompous  worm-eaten  enthronement ;  the  blessedness 
and  the  glory  of  Peter's  dungeon,  of  saints'  prayers,  of  martyrdom,  of  being  the 
care  of  angels,  and  the  children  of  the  Highest ;  and  our  hearts  are  a  little  stirred, 
perhaps,  and  we  have  half  resolved  that  we  will  seek  this  portion  for  ourselves ; 
and  then  we  look  into  the  great  world,  and  we  are  fooled  again  by  the  sounds  of 
empire  and  greatness.  Ay  1  and  we  look  into  our  own  Uttle  world  ;  and  do  we  not 
find  it  hard  to  remember  and  to  feel  how  blessed  it  is,  when  God  so  orders  it,  for 
us  to  be  disappointed  and  calumniated,  and  despised,  and  brought  low,  and  afflicted  ? 
Do  we  not  every  one  of  us  know  how  thoughts  of  ease  and  of  comfort,  how  ambitious 
longings  to  be  a  little  greater  than  we  are,  a  httle  richer,  a  little  higher  in  the  world's 
estimation — how  this  clings  to  us  ?  Do  we  not  every  one  of  us  know  how  the  secret 
curse  of  the  world's  measure  and  the  world's  judgment  creeps  back  upon  us  almost 
unawares  ?  Do  we  not  know  how  ready  we  are  to  forget  in  practice  the  blessedness 
of  being  of  that  little  flock  which  shall  yet  possess  the  kingdom  for  ever  ?  III. 
And  then  put  these  together.  If  there  be  this  blessedness  in  being  upon  God's  side, 
and  if  there  be  this  glory  in  bearing  it  truly  in  mind — may  we  not  gather  this 
further  inference,  that  it  is  our  wisdom  to  set  odeselves  diligently  to  act  upon 
THE  truth  that  WE  CONFESS  ?  For  it  is  only  by  acting  upon  it  that  we  can  make 
head  against  the  temptation  to  forget  it.  This  was  the  wisdom  of  the  apostles. 
Eemember  how  in  their  day,  when  the  world  threatened  them,  they  went  first  unto 
their  own,  and  "  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  said."  They  made  their  cry  to  Almighty 
God,  and  then  having  made  their  prayer  they  went  forth  again  into  that  evil  world, 
and  began  directly  to  act  for  Christ ;  and  in  that  union  of  retiring  for  secret  prayer, 
to  draw  His  strength  down  upon  them,  and  then  simply  going  forth  to  act  in  thai 
strength,  as  though  He  was  present  with  them,  they  were  enabled  to  keep  their 
own  hearts  firm  and  their  own  heads  clear,  amidst  the  dizzying  and  amazing  cir- 
cumstances of  their  daily  life.  And  we  must  do  the  same,  each  one  of  us,  if  we 
would  make  head.  There  must  be  with  us  this  mixture  of  prayer  to  God,  and  of 
work  for  God.    (Bp.  S.  Wilberforce.) 


CHAPTER  Xm. 


Teb.  1.  Now  there  were  In  the  Churcli  that  was  at  Antloch  certain  prophets 
and  teachers. — The  nature  and  sources  of  the  narrative: — We  now  lose  sight  for  a 
time  of  the  Church  of  Jerusalem  and  the  apostles,  and  in  the  place  of  Jerusalem, 
Antioch  becomes  the  centre  of  Church  history.  Indeed  chaps,  xiii.  and  xiv.  form 
an  independent  and  self-contained  memoir  from  an  Antiochean  point  of  view.  And 
it  has,  not  without  plausibility,  been  supposed  that  Luke  has  here  made  use  of  tin 
original  document  and  inserted  it  in  his  book,  which  document  may  have  proceeded 
from  ihe  Church  at  4  ntioch,  or  may  have  belonged  to  a  biography  of  Barnabas,  at 


CHAf.  xm.]  THE  ACTS,  295 

may  have  been  a  missionary  narrative  which  Barnabas  and  Saul  had  made.  {G. 
V.  Lechler,  D.D.)  The  first  designatory  and  valedictory  service  to  missionary 
work : — In  this  text  notice — I.  Those  members  of  the  Church  at  Antioch  as  con- 
BPiCDOUS  MEN.  They  were  stars.  Among  the  thousands  connected  with  the  Bible, 
only  a  few  are  named,  so  they  must  have  been  special  noteworthy  men : — "  Barna- 
bas," "  Simeon,  that  was  called  Niger" — black.  It  has  the  same  root  as  negro. 
•'  Lucius  "  of  Cyrene,  an  African  settlement.  Simeon  was  black.  He  might  have 
been  an  African ;  and  Lucius  was  for  certain.  '♦  Manaen,"  brought  up  with  Herod 
the  tetrarch.  It  was  the  old  custom  to  have  a  sort  of  adopted  child  as  companion 
for  young  princes,  thus  forming  what  would  seem  a  companionship  for  life.  A  man 
who  had  lived  in  court  would  be  a  fine  man,  but  his  Uving  with  Herod  throws 
another  light  upon  things.  He  was  •'  brought  up  "  in  court — then  he  had  heard 
John  the  Baptist  thunder  and  lighten  in  his  preaching.  "  Brought  up  "  in  court — 
then  be  knew  John  in  prison.  Was  he  one  of  John's  disciples  ?  "Brought  up  with 
Herod."  Then  he  knew  that  woman,  the  wife  of  the  steward,  who  ministered  so  to 
Jesus.  "  Brought  up  with  Herod."  Then  he  was  at  the  crucifixion  when  Jesus 
was  "  set  at  nought,"  when  on  bended  knees  the  cruel  shout  was  raised,  "  Hail, 
King  of  the  Jews."  Probably  that  was  the  crisis  that  brought  him  out.  Now, 
here  we  find  him  among  the  disciples,  not  with  Herod,  but  his  name  written  in  the 
Lamb's  book  of  life.  He  leaves  the  court  and  goes  into  the  tents  at  Antioch,  struck 
his  sword,  and  is  here  a  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  composed 
of  wonderful  variety.  II.  We  have  a  new  Speaker — •'  The  Holy  Ghost."  Wh& 
and  what  is  tHe  Holy  Ghost  ?  No  one  can  answer.  The  Holy  Ghost  never  intended 
that  we  should.  The  doctrine  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  is  a  tremendous 
doctrine.  We  cannot  draw  a  circle  round  infinity ;  we  cannot  even  understand  our- 
selves. How,  then,  can  we  understand  God?  We  must  leave  the  question,  for  it 
cannot  be  questioned.  There  are  two  very  plain  things — 1.  That  the  Spirit  is  a 
person,  not  simply  an  influence.  2.  Not  only  a  person,  but  a  Divine  person.  III. 
We  have  an  important  command — "  Separate  Me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the  work," 
&o.  1.  Here  is  a  beginning — the  first  mission  to  the  heathen.  The  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  is  a  book  of  beginnings.  We  read  of  the  first  fear,  first  hope,  fijst  joy,  first 
sermon,  first  prayer-meeting,  the  first  sinner  converted,  the  first  Christians,  the  first 
baptism,  the  first  Lord's  supper,  and  now  the  first  instance,  by  order,  of  men  set 
apart  for  the  work  of  missions.  There  were  no  Christians  in  England,  in  Spain,  in 
Italy  then.  Everything  then  had  to  begin.  And  the  Holy  Ghost  said,  "  Now  " 
is  the  time  to  begin.  2.  Here  is  a  wise  choice.  "  Now,  there  were  at  Antioch  in 
the  Church  prophets  and  teachers."  So  Barnabas  and  Saul  were  not  called  away 
till  they  could  be  spared.  The  two  captains  were  not  removed  tUl  the  ship  was 
officered.  Note,  they  were  the  best  men.  Not  inexperienced  or  young,  but  the  kind 
the  Holy  Ghost  requires  to  send  out — the  very  Barnabas  and  the  very  Saul.  The 
Church  may  spare  Barnabas  and  Saul  now.  3.  Here  are  propitious  circumstances — 
"  As  they  ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fasted."  As  they  were  going  on  in  their 
ministry.  It  was  a  special  meeting,  because  they  were  fasting.  They  wanted  to 
know  something,  and  as  they  were  inquiring  the  Holy  Ghost  spake.  (1)  The  Holy 
Ghost  requires  that  He  Himself  should  call  persons  to  the  ministry  before  the 
Church  calls  them — "  I  have  called  them."  We  cannot  make  ministers  or  mission- 
aries. When  we  call  them,  we  only  ratify  the  call  of  God.  (2)  Those  who  go 
should  be  sent  out  by  the  act  of  the  Church.  (3)  Missionaries  are  separated  men. 
Separate  from  home,  separate  from  the  refinement  of  life,  separate  from  wealth, 
separate  from  those  who  have  watched  them  grow  into  Christians,  separate  from 
old  companions,  separate  from  the  elders  of  the  Church,  separate  by  the  rolling 
sea,  separate  by  the  mountain,  separate  by  the  wilderness.  (4)  '•  Separate  Me 
Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the  work,"  &c.  This  work  is  a  work,  (C  Stanford,  D.D.) 
Prophets  and  teachers: — The  two  were  not  necessarily  identical  (Eph.  iv.  11), 
though  the  higher  gift  of  prophecy  commonly  included  the  lower  gift  of  teaching. 
The  former  implies  a  more  direct  message  from  God,  coming  thiough  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  the  latter  a  more  systematic  instruction,  in  which  reason  and  reflection 
also  bore  their  part.  {Dean  Plumptre.)  Simeon  that  was  called  Niger. — The 
name  seems  to  indicate  the  swarth  complexion  of  Africa ;  but  nothing  more  is  known 
of  him.  The  epithet  was  given  to  him,  probably,  to  distinguish  him  from  the  many 
others  of  the  same  name,  possibly,  in  particular,  from  Simon  of  Cyrene.  (Ibid.) 
Lucius  of  C3rrene. — Probably  one  of  the  company  of  "  men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene  " 
(chap.  xi.  20)  who  had  been  among  the  first  evangelists  of  Antioch.  On  the  ground 
that  Cyrene  was  famous  for  its  School  of  Medicine,  some  writers  have  identified 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm, 

him  with  the  author  of  the  Acts,  but  the  two  names  Lucius  and  Lucar  are  radically 
distinct,  the  latter  being  contracted  from  Lucanus.  {Ibid.)  Manaen,  whlcli  had 
been  brought  up  with  Herod  the  tetrarch. — Manaen ; — This  statement  has  been 
interpreted  to  mean  that  he  was  Herod's  foster-brother,  and  the  Vulgate  translates 
the  term  by  one  which  signifies  "  fed  from  the  same  breast."  But  all  that  is  im- 
plied is  that  Manaen  and  Herod  were  companions  in  studies  and  amusements.  In 
tlie  same  household  Joanna  the  wife  of  Chuza  the  steward  was  a  believer  in  Christ. 
Thus  early  had  the  Word  of  God  been  known  and  acknowledged  in  a  royal  court. 
God  indeed  has  had  from  the  first  those  in  all  ranks  who  served  Him — Moses, 
Obadiah,  Daniel,  and  the  "  saints  in  Caesar's  household."  As  now,  so  it  has  ever 
been,  those  with  the  same  advantages  make  a  different  use  of  them.  Manaen, 
numbered  amongst  the  first  ministers  of  the  Church  ;  Herod,  remembered  for  his 
part  in  the  murder  of  John  and  Christ.  (W.  Denton,  M. A.)  Manaen: — This  ia 
the  only  record  that  we  have  of  this  man.  Yet  it  is  impossible  not  to  find  a  melan- 
choly interest  in  the  juxtaposition  of  characters  and  lives  so  strangely  contrasted. 
At  the  very  time  that  the  one  foster-brother  was  prominent  among  the  ministers  of 
Christ,  the  other  was  living  in  a  dishonoured  exile  with  a  dark  past  and  a  hopelesa 
future — a  fact  of  daily  experience,  viz.,  that  the  lives  of  men  may  begin,  in  the 
closest  companionship,  and  under  nearly  the  same  conditions,  and  yet  the  end  of 
the  one  shall  be  honour  and  the  other  shame.  1.  The  name  Manaen  was  connected 
earlier  with  the  Herods.  When  Herod  the  Great  was  a  boy,  an  Essene  of  this  name, 
Relieved  to  possess  prophetic  gifts,  met  him  as  he  went  to  school,  and  reading,  per- 
laps,  in  his  features  the  signs  of  an  insatiable  ambition  and  an  indomitable  will, 
■iailed  him  as  "  king  of  the  Jews."  He  stood  in  somewhat  the  same  relation  to 
faim  that  Ahijah  did  to  Jeroboam.  As  with  the  son  of  Nebat,  so  with  the  son  of 
A.ntip!iter,  the  early  prophecy  was  not  forgotten.  When  he  attained  the  summit  of 
3his  power  he  would  fain  have  attached  the  prophet  to  his  court  as  friend  and 
counsellor.  What  the  identity  of  name  renders  probable  is  that  on  the  refusal  of 
the  old  man  the  king  transferred  his  offer  of  patronage  to  his  son,  or  grandson,  and 
had  broaght  him  up  as  the  companion  of  one  of  his  favourite  sons.  If  so,  the  first 
great  evtnt  in  the  life  of  Manaen  must  have  been  the  change  from  the  stern  purity 
of  the  life  of  the  Essenes  to  the  pomp  and  luxury  of  the  court  of  Herod.  Soon  this 
would  be  followed  by  a  yet  greater  change.  Antipas  and  Archelaus  were  sent  to 
receive  their  education  at  Kome,  and  Manaen  would  naturally  share  this  training. 
He  may  have  heard  of  the  arrival  of  the  "  wise  men,"  and  could  not  have  been 
altogether  ignorant  of  the  Messianic  hopes  which  animated  the  people.  The  very 
name  which  he  bore  (Menahem,  the  comforter),  bore  witness  of  this  hope.  2.  One 
so  brought  up  would  continue  to  be  attached  to  the  royal  household,  and  Manaen 
may  have  adopted  the  life  and  the  principles  of  those  with  whom  he  hved.  He  may 
have  acquiesced  in  the  king's  incestuous  marriage,  but  we  can  estimate  the  effect 
which  the  teaching  of  the  Baptist  must  have  had  upon  him.  Here  he  saw  a  life, 
like  in  form  to  that  devotion  which  he  had  known  in  hie  youth,  the  reappearance 
of  the  prophetic  character,  the  open  and  fearless  speech,  as  of  a  new  Elijah,  and  as 
we  find  traces  of  the  influence  of  the  Baptist's  teaching  within  the  circle  of  Herod's 
attendants,  it  is  reasonable  to  think  that  he  too  must  have  come  under  it.  3.  The 
first  trace  is  in  Luke  iii.  14,  where  "  the  soldiers  "  were  literally  "  men  on  a  march  " 
to  the  war  with  Aretas,  the  father  of  the  wife  whom  the  tetrarch  had  divorced  in 
order  that  he  might  indulge  his  guilty  passion  for  Herodias.  The  line  of  their 
march  would  take  them  down  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and  so  they  would  pass  by 
the  chief  scene  of  the  Baptist's  ministry.  From  that  hour  there  must  have  been 
many  among  the  attendants  of  Herod  who  were  disciples  of  John.  4.  The  next 
trace  meets  us  in  John  iv.  46,  where  the  word  "  nobleman  "  means  an  attendant  of 
the  king,  i.e.,  of  the  tetrarch  Antipas.  I  do  not  assume  the  identity  of  this  "  noble- 
man "  with  Manaen,  but  I  point  to  it  as  one  of  the  tokens  of  the  Baptist's  work  as 
"  preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord,"  even  among  Herod's  followers.  The  nobleman 
thus  believed,  and  Herod's  court  now  included  some  who  were  disciples,  not  of  the 
Baptist  only,  but  of  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth.  5.  The  imprisonment  of  John 
brought  him  into  yet  closer  contact  with  the  tetrarch's  immediate  followers.  Even 
Herod  himself  '*  heard  him  gladly."  It  is  clear  from  Matt.  xi.  2,  3,  that  some  of 
the  Baptist's  disciples  were  allowed  free  access  to  him,  and  who  so  likely  as  atten- 
dants of  the  prince?  If  we  believe  that  every  word  which  our  Lord  spoke  at  such 
a  time  was  full  of  meaning,  "  they  that  wear  soft  clothing  and  are  gorgeously 
ai'pnrellcd,  and  live  delicately,  are  in  kings'  houses,"  may  have  been  those  who  were 
halting  between  two  opinions,  "like  reeda  shaken  by  the  wind,"  whom  it  waa 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  ACTS.  297 

necessary  to  remind  that  the  true  servants  of  God  were  to  be  found,  not  "  in  kings' 
houses,"  but  in  prison.     6.  The  narrative  of  the  circumstances  of  the  Baptist's 
death  includes  notice  of  the  feast  of  "  lords,  high-captains,  and  chief  estates  of 
Galilee,"  amongst  whom  must  have  been  the  "  nobleman  "  of  Capernaum,  and  the 
"  steward  "  of  Herod's  household,  and  the  king's  "  foster-brother  and  friend,"  who 
must  have  shuddered  with  an  unimaginable  loathing.     It  was  time  for  them  to 
make  their  choice.    7.  At  or  about  this  time,  some  at  least  did  make  it,  and  among 
them  was  she  who  *'  ministered  to  Christ  of  her  sustenance,"  e.g.,  "  Joanna,  the 
wife  of  Chuza,  Herod's  steward."     This  she  could  hardly  have  done,  according  to 
the  Jewish  law  of  property  and  marriage,  without  her  husband's  consent.    8.  It 
may  be  that  up  to  this  point  the  foster-brother  had  continued  faithful  to  the 
relationship  which  that  name  involved.    But  soon  the  course  of  events  brought 
about  a  disruption  of  it.    The  ambitious  intrigues  of  Herod  Agrippas  (Acts  xii.) 
enabled  him  to  assume  the  disused  title  of  king.    This  gave  him  a  higher  dignity 
than  that  of  his  uncle  the  tetrarch,  and  the  pride  of  Herodias  was  stung  to  the 
quick,  and  she  gave  her  husband  no  peace  until  he  had  taken  the  fatal  step  of  leav- 
ing his  tetrarchy,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  the  privilege  of  regal  rank.    But  the 
attempt  failed,  and  he  had  the  mortification  of  seeing  his  tetrarchy  merged  in  the 
kingdom  of  Agrippa,  and  was  exiled  first  to  Gaul  and  then  to  Spain.    The  tradition 
that  Pilate  also  was  banished  to  the  former  province,  suggests  the  probability  that 
the  two  may  have  met  once  again  there,  to  test  the  value  of  the  friendship  which 
had  been  purchased  at  so  terrible  a  price.    9.  About  this  time  we  have  the  first 
actual  mention  of  Manaen.     Unknown  as  he  is  to  us,  he  stood  then  on  the  same 
level  as  Barnabas,  in  a  higher  position  than  St.  Paul.    Whatever  his  past  life  had 
been,  it  had  led  him  to  this.    But  what  calls  for  special  notice,  as  showing  the 
tendency  of  the  Baptist's  teaching,  is  the  fact  that  he  is  found  at  Antioch,  not  at 
Jerusalem.     The  words  of  the  Baptist,  "  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up 
children  unto  Abraham,"  contained  by  implication  the  whole  gospel  of  the  calhng 
of  the  heathen,  and  Manaen  must  have  seen  that  they  did  so.    At  Antioch,  too,  he 
must  have  taken  upon  himself  the  new  name,  and  to  one  who  had  seen  Antipas  and 
Jesus  face  to  face  it  must  have  been  a  joy  unspeakable  to  cast  off  aU  connection  with 
the  Herodiani,  and  to  take  his  place  among  the  Christiani.    In  hirn,  the  prophetic 
form  of  utterance  which  had  reappeared  in  John  after  long  centuries  of  desuetude 
was  powerful.    As  the  disciples  of  John  fasted  oft,  so  he  and  those  who  were  with 
him  "  fasted  "  as  they  ministered  to  the  Lord.     From  his  Ups  and  theirs  came  the 
words  which  marked  out  the  fittest  labourers  for  the  new  and  mighty  work.     One 
who  had  begun  with  the  training  of  an  Essene,  and  the  teaching  of  the  Baptist,  now 
gave  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  to  the  two  new  apostles,  not  of  "  the  twelve,"  aa 
they  went  forth  to  their  work  among  the  heathen.     10.  To  such  a  man  the  Gentile 
Church,  in  its  infancy,  must  have  owed  much.     He  alone  of  aU  the  earlier  teachers 
of  the  Church  may  have  sojourned  in  the  imperial  city.     From  him  the  Apostle  of 
the  Gentiles  must  have  had  encouragement  and  support,  and  there  is  a  probability 
that  the  debt  is  even  greater.     St.  Luke's  life  as  a  Christian  must  have  begun  at 
Ajntioch,  and  if  so,  then  he  must  have  known  Manaen,  and  from  him  he  may  have 
learnt  many  of  the  facts  of  the  history  of  the  Baptist,  and  the  details  of  Herodian 
history,  pf  which  the  third  Gospel  is  so  fuU.     Conclusion :  "Whatever  interest  may 
attach  to  the  juxtaposition  of  the  two  names  of  Manaen  and  Antipas,  is  deepened 
and  strengthened  by  this  fuUer  study.    The  danger  of  the  weak  will — untrue  to  its 
own  convictions,  and  therefore  losing  them  altogether,  or  keeping  them  only  to  its 
own  condemnation — the  power  of  earnestness  and  faith  to  triumph  over  the  tempta- 
tions of  outward  circumstances  and  perilous  companionship  are  seen  more  clearly. 
Our  inquiries,  too,  will  have  added  something  to  the  conviction  as  we  read  the  Gospels 
that  we  are  deaJing,  not  with  "  cunningly  devised  fables,"  but  with  true  histories, 
dropping  hints,  after  the  manner  of  all  true  histories,  naturally  and  incidentally, 
suggesting  more  than  they  tell,  and  rewarding  those  who  seek  diligently  with  new 
insight  into  the  facts  which  they  record.     {Dean  Plumptre.)        Manaen  and  Herod, 
the  different  effects  of  a  secular  education : — It  would  be  natural  to  expect  that 
children  who  grew  up  together  under  the  same  examples  and  instruction  should 
appear  in  the  same  religious  character  in  after  life.    But  in  this  case  the  result  waa 
otherwise.     One  became  a  minister,  the  other  a  libertine.    Manaen  was  a  man 
eminent  for  faith  and  virtue,  learning  and  ability,  or  he  would  not  so  soon  have 
become  a  prophet  in  this  celebrated  Church.    Herod  was  vicious  and  debauched  in 
private  life;   haughty,  cruel,  and  tyrannical  in  his  government,   and  was  the 
murderer  of  the  Baptist.    Herod  made  no  virtuous  improvement  of  his  early  advan* 


998  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnu 

tages ;  Manaen  early  became  religiona  and  escaped  the  corruptions  of  the  world. 
Men's  lives  are  not  always  answerable  to  the  advantages  they  enjoy.  The  same 
gospel  which  is  a  savoar  of  life  and  a  rock  of  salvation  to  some,  is  a  savour  of  death 
and  a  rock  of  offence  unto  others.  The  difference  between  these  two  men  is  observed 
in  other  famihes.  How  is  this  ?  I.  Thebe  is  a  okeat  divebsitt  in  natdbal  tempeb. 
1.  There  is  in  all  an  incUnation  to  evil,  but  in  a  different  degree.  2.  It  is  the  wisdom 
of  parents  to  watch  the  various  tempers  and  propensities  of  their  children.     II. 

DiFFEBENT   WOBLDLY   PEOSPECXS   often    MAgTI!  A    GBEAX    DIFFEBENCE  IN  CHABAOTEB  AND 

CONDUCT.  1.  Herod  was  of  royal  descent,  and  had  early  prospects  of  a  throne. 
Manaen  had  no  such  object,  and  was  more  at  Uberty  to  admit  the  sober  concerns  of 
religion.  2.  Different  passions  and  capacities  put  young  men  on  different  pursuits. 
Some  through  natural  indolence  and  diffidence  fall  so  low  in  their  designs  that  they 
never  rise.  Others  are  animated  by  an  ambition  that  proves  a  snare.  Others, 
again,  set  out  with  a  governing  aim  to  please  God.  III.  The  sovebeign  obacb  or 
God  must  be  taken  into  account.  Men  are  dependent  on  the  Holy  Spirit.  He 
strives  with  them.  Some  resist,  others  yield.  IV.  Eefleotions.  1.  The  particular 
care  which  was  taken  in  apostohc  times  to  secure  men  of  learning  and  ability  as 
public  teachers.  The  unlettered  men  whom  Christ  called  were  trained  by  the 
Master  Himself.  Paul  was  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  GamaUel.  Timothy  from  a 
child  had  known  the  Scriptures  ;  Apollos  was  mighty  in  them.  Luke,  Stephen,  and 
others  appear  to  have  had  superior  literary  abilities.  The  apostles  cautioned 
ministers  to  lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man  who  had  not  had  time  to  furnish  his 
mind.  2.  The  duty  of  parents  to  pay  particular  attention  to  the  different  dispositions 
of  their  children.  Some  must  be  ruled  with  great  rigour,  others  with  more  lenity. 
3.  The  young  may  here  see  that  no  worldly  connections,  temptations,  Ac,  will 
excuse  them  in  the  neglect  of  religion.  4.  The  young  are  here  cautioned  not  to 
abuse  the  grace  of  G  od.  5.  Let  the  young  be  rational  and  discreet  in  forming  their 
•worldly  prospects.     {J,  Lathrop,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2-13.  As  they  ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fasted,  the  Holy  Ohost  said. 
Separate  \mto  Me  Barnabas  and  Saul. — The  completion  of  the  apostolute  : — This 
act  was  no  conferring  of  the  apostleship  by  the  prophets  and  teachers  ;  the  apostles 
themselves  had  received  no  power  from  Christ  to  do  that.  Both  the  vocation  and 
its  bestowal  could  only  come  direct  from  God.  Barnabas  and  Saul  were  appointed 
to  fill  up  the  vacant  places  caused  by  the  execution  of  James  the  son  of  Zebedee, 
and  by  the  withdrawal  of  James  the  son  of  Alphaeus  from  apostolic  to  episcopal 
work,  and  thus  the  number  of  those  bearing  the  apostohc  mission  was  restored  to 
its  normal  condition  of  twelve.  The  apostohc  college  always  consisted  of  twelve 
men  at  a  time,  and  therefore  the  Apocalypse  knows  only  of  twelve  apostles  as 
foundation-stones  of  the  holy  city.  (Prof.  Von  Dollinger.)  Bodily  abstinence  : 
— Deep,  earnest  thoughts  have  often  stirred  in  me  on  bodily  abstinence,  as  the  con- 
dition of  helping  the  spirit  through  the  strait  gate  of  opposing  animahsm,  into  the 
sweet  and  holy  Paradise  element.  There  is  an  element  of  which  Jesus  is  the  Prince, 
and  there  is  an  element  of  which  Satan  is  prince.  While  we  appropriate  the 
elements  of  the  nethermost  prince,  we  may  be  strong  in  the  powers  of  nature,  but 
perhaps  not  so  strong  in  the  life  that  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God  ;  for  in  the  exercise 
and  indulgence  of  our  fleshly  appetites  we  do  not  breathe  deeply  enough  to  inspire 
the  holy  element  of  our  risen  Prince.  Finding  that  deep  and  holy  spirit-breathing 
was  suspended  during  bodily  enjoyments,  godly  souls  have  often  interdicted  the 
gratifications  of  the  flesh,  in  order  to  help  their  spirits  in  the  God-ward  direction. 
(J.  Pulsford.)  Mission  and  commission  (with  2  Tim.  i.  6) : — In  words  such  as  these  we 
have  a  picture  out  of  that  earliest  life  of  the  Church,  of  which  the  books  from  which  I 
take  it  tell  the  story.  How  fresh  and  vivid  itisl  What  high  enthusiasm,  unhesitat- 
ing self-sacrifice !  We  look  at  the  mighty  forces  against  which  the  first  Christian 
disciples  hurled  themselves,  at  the  spiritual  torpor,  the  black  hopelessness,  the 
unutterable  moral  degradation  to  which  they  made  their  appeal,  and  we  wonder  at 
their  audacity — or  their  faith  1  No  hostility  daunted  them  ;  no  tremendous  bulk 
of  evil  deterred  them.  They  were  on  fire  with  a  consuming  purpose,  and  they  did 
ntt  stop,  whether  to  measure  their  task  or  to  discuss  its  ditliculties.  This,  we  say, 
is  the  fruit  of  a  great  enthusiasm.  It  always  works  this  way,  and  it  would  be  with- 
out results  if  it  did  not.  Yes,  but  the  moment  we  look  a  little  closer  at  the  story  of 
this  enthusiasm  we  shall  see  tbat  along  with  it  there  was  something  more.  It  has 
been  common  to  disparage  the  gifts  of  the  first  founders  of  Christianity,  and  to 
Beek  to  make  the  more  of  its  distinctive  characteristics  by  making  as  Uttle  a» 


CHAP,  xin.]  THE  ACTS.  899 

possible  of  the  men  who  illustrated  them.  They  have  been  described  as  insignifi- 
cant among  the  great  of  their  own  day  ;  and  measured  in  one  way  they  were.  But 
when  we  come  close  to  some  at  least  among  them  we  cannot  so  easily  disesteem 
them.  One  among  tham  was  chosen  to  be  the  leader  among  his  fellows.  Can  any- 
body who  reads  the  story  of  his  life  find  it  easy  to  beheve  that  he  had  not  in  him 
that  natural  genius  of  leadership  ?  The  voices  that  have  stirred  the  world,  the 
messages  that  have  thrilled  and  enkindled  cold  and  discouraged  hearts,  have  not 
been  the  voices  and  messages  of  fools.  And  does  anybody  suppose  when  the 
Church  at  Antioch  fasted  and  celebrated  its  solemn  Eucharist,  and  prepared  to 
choose  who  were  to  go  forth  on  its  high  errands,  that  Simeon,  Lucius,  Manaen,  and 
the  rest  of  them  were  there  at  haphazard  ?  Out  from  these  half-dozen  men,  more 
or  less,  were  to  be  chosen  two  to  be  consecrated  on  that  memorable  day  to  a  great 
and  memorable  work.  Do  you  suppose  that  they  did  not  seek  for  eloquence  (if  they 
could  find  it),  for  sympathy,  for  the  quick  power  of  understanding  another's  per- 
plexities, for  that  infinite  hopefulness  of  human  nature  which,  I  sometimes 
think,  is  quite  its  finest  quaUty  ?  We  may  be  sure  they  did.  And  no  less  sure 
may  we  be  that  when  Barnabas  and  Saul  were  singled  out  from  among  their 
associates  for  the  rare  dignity  of  suffering  and  loneliness  and  privation  in  their 
high  office,  they  were  chosen  because,  among  any  set  of  men,  and  in  whatever 
service,  they  would  sooner  or  later  inevitably  have  come  to  the  front.  Yes,  but  how 
were  they  singled  out  ?  "  There  came  a  voice,"  &o.  Whose  voice  was  it  ?  Were 
those  men  called  thus  to  their  high  office  by  the  high  acclaim  of  a  public  assembly  ? 
For  myself  I  have  little  doubt  that  before  the  Voice  that  spoke  those  few  words  was 
heard  there  had  been  heard  another  and  more  multitudinous  one.  That  city  of 
Antioch  contained  the  first  Church  organised  among  the  Gentiles,  and  it  became  in 
time  the  centre  of  those  missionary  activities  by  which  the  Roman  world  was 
evangelised.  The  prophets  and  teachers  who  began  the  work  were  supplemented 
later  by  Barnabas  and  Saul ;  and  step  by  step  in  the  simple  story  we  may  trace  the 
unfolding  of  the  organic  life  of  the  Church.  There  was  an  assembly  first,  and  then 
there  came  to  be  the  ecclesia — and  it  was  this  community  of  the  brethren,  it  may 
easily  have  been,  that,  with  more  or  less  formality,  first  indicated  its  preferences, 
and  pointed  its  finger  of  designation  towards  the  men  who  were  fittest  and  worthiest 
for  the  higher  service  of  the  Church.  But  this  was  not  mission.  That  came  into 
view  when  we  read  that  the  Voice  which  said  "  Separate  Barnabas  and  Saul "  was 
the  voice  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  not  only  "  separate  "  ;  it  is  "  separate  Me."  li 
is  not  only  for  the  work  ye  are  to  separate  them,  but  "for  the  work  whereunto  I 
have  called  them."  And  thus  we  come  into  the  presence  of  that  unique  distinction 
which  for  ever  differentiates  the  enthusiasm  of  the  disciples  from  all  other  en- 
thusiasms. It  was  the  enthusiasm  of  a  new  creation  by  the  power  of  a  Divine 
breath.  It  is  the  sevenfold  power  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  Call  it  an  influence, 
water  it  down  to  be  a  cult,  disparage  it  as  so  much  mysticism,  verily  you  will  have 
to  tear  yonder  story  to  pieces  before  you  can  get  that  element  out  of  it  1  Bereft  of  the 
mission  and  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  calling,  arresting,  convicting,  convincing, 
enUghtening,  transforming,  empowering — the  whole  fabric  of  primitive  history 
becomes  somehow  invertebrate,  and  crumbles  into  a  shapeless  mass  of  incident  and 
talk.  But  a  still  further  question  remains.  What  was  not  alone  the  evidence  or 
token  of  that  mission,  but  its  authentication  ?  Was  this  the  whole  story  of  that 
mission — ^that  certain  men  being  assembled  together,  a  voice  said,  "  Separate  Me 
Barnabas  and  Saul,"  and  that  then  those  who  were  named  separated  themselves 
and  went  away,  and  henceforth  did  their  work  as  men  fully  and  sufficiently 
authorised  and  empowered  thus  for  its  discharge?  On  the  contrary,  there  is 
something  more  in  the  history,  which  we  may  not  arbitrarily  leave  out,  and  which 
is  just  as  essential  to  its  integrity  as  anything  that  has  gone  before.  "  When  they 
had  fasted  and  prayed,  and  laid  their  hands  on  them,"  &c.  Certainly  there  is  no 
obscurity  here.  Juggle  with  the  words  as  one  may,  he  cannot  separate  the  inward 
call  and  the  outward  ordinance,  the  spiritual  mission  and  the  tactual  commission, 
the  Divine  empowerment  and  the  human  authentication  of  it.  There  is  a  way 
which  is  of  God's  appointment ;  there  is  a  ministry  which  He  first  commissioned, 
and  which  they  whom  He  first  commissioned  passed  on  and  down  to  others.  Its 
authority  does  not  come  up  from  the  people ;  it  descends  from  the  Holy  Ghost. 
And,  as  in  the  beginning,  its  outward  and  visible  sign  was  the  laying  on  of  apostolio 
hands  upon  men  called,  whether  to  this  or  that  or  the  other  service — pastoral, 
priestly,  or  prophetic,  yet  still  to  an  apostohc  ministry — so  it  has  been  ever  since. 
We  turn  ficai  this  scene  at  Antioch  to  those  memorable  ministries  that  came  after 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xuj," 

it.  One  of  them  stands  forth  conspicuous  above  all  the  apostolates  of  its  age — 
unique  in  its  energy,  unapproachable  in  its  heroism,  incomparable  alike  in  the 
power  of  its  preaching  and  in  the  inexhaustible  richness  of  its  writings.  What  a 
tine  scorn  there  is  in  those  writings  for  that  retrospective  piety  which  lingered 
regretfully  among  the  beggarly  elements  of  the  elder  order  and  ritual — what  im- 
patience of  the  latter,  what  bold  assertion  of  Christian  liberty,  what  intense  ardour 
of  spiritual  enthusiasm  1  Yes ;  but  what  scrupulous  respect  for  authority,  what 
careful  observance  of  apostolic  tradition,  what  reverent  use  of  appointed  means. 
There  came  a  day  when  St.  Paul  is  to  set  apart  a  youthful  son  in  the  faith  to  be  an 
overseer  of  the  Church  in  Ephesus.  How  does  he  do  it  ?  Does  he  teU  him  of  the 
work  that  he  is  to  do,  and  then  simply  dismiss  him  to  do  it?  Does  he  say,  "  Go, 
my  son,  and  tell  men  in  Asia  Minor  the  story  of  your  Lord's  love,  and  write  me 
occasionally  how  you  are  getting  on  "  ?  Not  such  is  the  meaning  of  that  clear  and 
unequivocal  language  which  he  uses  :  "  Stir  up  the  gift  of  God  which  is  in  thee  " — 
and  wliich  is  in  thee,  not  by  inherited  cleverness,  or  acquired  learning,  or  popular 
endowment — but  "  by  the  laying  on  of  my  hands  " ;  or,  as  the  same  fact  is  else- 
where stated,  "Neglect  not  the  gift  that  was  given  thee  .  .  .  with  the  laying  on  of 
the  hands  of  the  presbytery."  And  thus  once  and  again  does  this  apostle  of  a 
spiritual  religion  guard  against  that  disesteem  of  the  outward  institutions  of  the 
Church,  without  which  history  demonstrates  that  reUgion  runs  thin  and  runs  out. 
(Bp.  H.  C.  Potter.)  Church  enterprises,  how  they  must  begin  in  order  to  be  blessed : 
— 1.  Not  with  worldly  computation,  but  from  the  impulse  of  the  Spirit.  2.  Not 
with  a  premature  shout  of  triumph,  but  with  humble  prayer.  3.  Not  trusting  to 
human  names,  even  those  of  Barnabas  and  Saul,  but  in  the  name  of  the  hving  God 
on  whose  blessing  all  things  depend.  {K.  Gerok.)  The  messengers  of  the  gospel, 
how  they  should  be  sent  to  the  heathen : — I.  On  the  call  and  intimation  of  thh 
LoBD.  1.  Those  who  send  must  be  moved  not  by  their  own  spirit,  but  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  2.  Those  who  are  to  be  sent  must  be  chcjsen,  not  according  to  the  dictates 
of  human  prudence,  but  according  to  the  evident  marks  of  Divine  grace.  IL  With 
HOLT  BEHAVIOUR.  1.  Those  who  send  should  fast,  i.e.,  abstain  from  all  superfluities 
in  order  to  have  enough  for  the  wants  of  the  heathen.  2.  They  should  pray ;  the 
prayer  of  the  sender  co-operates  mightily  with  the  word  of  the  preachers.  3.  The 
messengers  should  depart  with  the  imposition  of  hands ;  regularly  ordained  if  they 
are  to  have  an  orderly  ministry  for  the  salvation  of  the  heathen  and  the  advancement 
of  the  Church.  (Lisco.)  Church  offices ;  their  value  dependent  on  the  Diviru  choice 
of  the  officers  : — The  meanest  office  imposed  on  one  according  to  the  Divine  call  is 
worthy  to  be  received  :  the  greatest  dignity  is  not  worth  running  after.  {Rieger.) 
The  first  missionarg  ordination  at  Antioch : — I.  Wht  did  the  fibst  MissioNAsraa 
PROCEED  FROM  Antioch  ?  1.  On  accouut  of  the  flourishing  condition  of  that  Church, 
2.  According  to  the  pecuUar  will  of  Divine  wisdom.  II.  The  appointment  of  thb 
FIRST  MISSIONARIES.  1.  What  men  were  appointed  7  (1)  Barnabas,  the  Son  of 
Consolation.  (2)  Paul  the  scholar.  2.  Their  ordination.  (1)  Called  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  (2)  Separated  by  the  Church.  (Lisco.)  The  first  foreign  mission : — I. 
Separated  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Missions  are  of  Divine  origin.  Saul  had  been 
chosen  for  the  work,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  had  finally  to  give  the  word  of  command 
and  direction.  With  regard  to  these  pioneers  in  mission  work,  note — 1.  The  Church 
from  which  they  were  called.  It  was  a  strong  Church.  It  had  a  large  membership, 
and  men  inspired  to  declare  the  will  and  instruct  in  the  Word  of  God.  Important 
as  Saul  and  Barnabas  were,  there  were  those  who  could  carry  on  their  work  after 
they  were  gone.  The  Holy  Spirit  does  not  ask  any  Church  to  cripple  itself  even  for 
the  sake  of  missions.  2.  The  circumstances  of  their  calling.  The  Church  was  just 
in  the  condition  to  hear  the  Divine  call.  They  were  offering  their  services  to  the 
Lord,  and  God  designated  what  their  service  should  be.  The  Church  or  the  man 
that  offers  all  to  God  will  be  made  use  of  somehow  and  somewhere.  3.  How  they 
were  called.  "The  Holy  Ghost  said,  Separate  Me  Barnabas  and  Saul."  Observe 
here — (1)  The  personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Separate  Me.  ...  I  have  called." 
(2)  The  rulership  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Jesus  had  said  that  when  the  Comforter 
should  come.  He  would  be  the  one  to  guide  the  disciples.  This  declaration  now 
was  being  fulfilled.  To  Him  behevers  should  look  for  direction.  (3)  The  co- 
operation of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  did  not  say,  "  I  have  separated  Barnabas  and 
Saul,"  but  "  Separate  Me  Barnabas  and  Saul,"  that  they  might  have  back  of  them 
not  only  the  authority  of  the  Spirit,  but  the  authority  of  the  Church.  Doubtlesa 
this  was  done  that  the  missionaries  might  feel  that  they  were  sent  forth  by  their 
biethien  as  well  as  by  the  Holy  Ghost.   4.  Who  were  called.    "  Barnabas  and  Saul," 


CHAP,  zm.]  THE  ACTS.  301 

the  two  chief  factors  in  the  edifying  of  the  Church  at  Antioch.  The  Holy  Spirit 
chose  the  two  best  men,  the  men  that  least  coald  be  spared.  It  is  a  grave  mistake 
to  send  out  to  foreign  fields  third  or  tenth-rate  men.  Few  Churches  ever  have 
made  the  sacrifice  for  the  mission  cause  that  was  made  by  the  Church  at  Antiooh. 
5.  For  what  they  were  called.  "  For  the  work  whereunto  I  have  called  them." 
The  "  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  "  was  in  the  thought  of  Christ  and  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  alike.  Their  oneness  is  suggested  in  the  wording  of  the  call.  6.  How  their 
call  was  responded  to.  Cheerfully  and  promptly.  II.  Sent  forth  by  the  Holy 
Ghobt.  1.  The  missionaries  departing.  "  So  they  .  .  .  went  down,"  &c.  They 
were  not  only  called  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  directed  by  Him  as  to  their  journey. 
That  guidance  continued,  the  Holy  Spirit  not  suffering  Paul  to  go  into  Bithynia,  or 
to  preach  the  gospel  in  Asia,  Those  who  are  called  of  the  Spirit  may  trust  to  the 
Spirit  for  direction.  2.  The  missionaries  at  work.  ' '  They  proclaimed  the  Word  of 
God  in  the  synagogues  of  the  JewB."  They  entered  upon  their  work  with  wisdom 
— making  use  of  the  regular  channels  for  religious  effect.  Where  pulpits  were  all  ready 
for  them  they  did  not  try  to  find  new  ones.  They  tried  to  reach  God's  chosen 
people  first  as  a  means  of  reaching  others.  HI.  Bebuking  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
1.  The  two  missionaries  were  to  score  one  more  triumph  for  Christianity  as  against 
paganism,  like  that  which  was  achieved  by  Philip  in  Samaria.  2.  The  sorcerer 
overcome.  (1)  His  opposition  evidently  had  a  mercenary  inspiration.  He  was 
afraid  of  losing  a  powerful  and  generous  patron.  (2)  His  rebuke — (a)  Was  inspired 
by  the  Holy  Spirit.  More  inspired  denunciation  is  needed,  but  there  is  already  too 
much  of  that  which  is  uninspired,  (b)  Justly  characterised  the  man.  Elymas  was 
"  full  of  all  guile  and  aU  viUiany."  He  made  his  living  by  fraud  and  trickery.  He 
was  "  a  child  of  the  devil " — doing  the  devil's  work  by  seeking  to  turn  men  to 
destruction.  He  was  an  "  enemy  of  all  righteousness" — hating  the  true  as  much 
as  he  loved  the  false.  He  was  perverting  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  trying  to 
make  them  seem  like  wrong  ways.  For  such  men  to-day  there  ought  to  be  the 
same  righteous  wrath  and  severe  rebuke.  (3)  His  sentence.  In  this,  inspired  by 
the  Holy  Spirit,  there  was  for  the  sorcerer — (a)  Terror.  He  was  to  feel  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  upon  him  in  judgment — to  experience  the  power  of  God  whom  he  had 
defied.  (6)  Hope.  It  was  to  be  for  '•  a  season  "  only.  He  was  to  have  opportunity 
for  repentance — to  be  blinded  for  a  while  that  he  might  come  out,  if  he  would,  into 
the  marvellous  light  of  the  children  of  God.  (4)  His  punishment.  He  was  blinded 
physically  as  he  had  blinded  others  spiritually.  The  impostor  was  unmasked,  and 
deprived  of  his  power  to  harm.  The  false  had  met  with  the  true,  and  had  been 
vanquished.  3.  The  proconsul  convinced.  The  prompt,  punitive  miracle  "  taught  " 
the  proconsul — (1)  That  his  old  teacher  really  was  a  "  child  of  the  devil,"  instead 
of  being  a  true  prophet.  Hence  it  showed  him  his  danger.  (2)  That  Barnabas 
and  Saul  (henceforth  Paul)  were  teachers  accredited  of  God,  and  therefore  to  be 
heeded.  (3)  That  God  was  not  to  be  trifled  with,  but  to  be  feared  and  followed. 
And  the  proconsul,  being  ready  to  accept  the  truth,  believed.  The  hand  of  the 
Lord  was  outstretched  to  save  him  as  it  had  been  outstretched  to  smite  Elymas. 
The  opposer  of  truth  always  wUl  feel  its  weight — the  seeker  after  truth  always  will 
receive  its  help.  (M.  C.  Hazard.)  The  first  foreign  mission: — "Westward  the 
star  of  empire  takes  its  way  " :  and  the  same  may  be  said  about  the  star  of  truth. 
A  new  departure  is  now  to  be  noticed  in  the  policy  of  the  Church.  Propagation 
had  thus  far  grown  oat  of  persecution  ;  here  is  the  first  deliberate  organisation — 
and  that  on  behalf  of  foreign  missions.  Notice — I.  This  beautiful  picture  of 
THE  Church  in  Antioch.  1.  Strong  people  make  a  congregation  strong.  This 
body  of  disciples  numbered  among  them  a  group  of  fine  intelligent  Christians. 
Besides  the  unnamed  "  prophets  and  teachers,"  we  recognise  Barnabas  and  Saul, 
both  brilliant,  eloquent,  scholarly  men.  It  is  not  prince  merchants,  nor  members 
of  congress,  nor  fashionable  women,  that  usually  build  up  the  piety  of  our  families, 
unless  they  are  devoted  workers,  and  are  constant  in  prayer.  2.  Even  inconspicu- 
ous Christians  can  be  exceedingly  useful.  Nobody  knows  who  Simeon  was ;  Lucius 
received  a  message  from  Paul  (Rom.  xvi.  21),  but  that  is  all  that  is  heard  of  him. 
Manaen  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere.  These  are  only  a  few  among  the  plain  Church 
members  in  Antioch — persons  who  often  accomplish  most  for  Christ  to-day.  3. 
The  missionary  spirit  is  the  first-fruit  of  Divine  indwelling  in  the  hearts  of  believera 
(Psa.  Ixvi.  16).  It  is  not  always  the  most  vigorous  Christians  who  are  content  to 
sit  down  and  wipe  their  weeping  eyes  the  moment  they  think  they  can  read  their 
title  clear  to  mansions  in  the  skies.  4.  Those  in  high  service  may  expect  to  be 
invited  higher.     These  people  were  ministering  to  the  Lord  faithfully  where  ihey 


802  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

were,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  gave  them  the  chance  of  starting  the  first  foreign  mis» 
sion  in  history.  It  is  a  pity  that  good  men  forget  the  chief  glory  of  being  Christians, 
which  is  to  spread  the  truth  swiftly  and  widely  and  vigorously.  II.  Tms  sudden 
APPOINTMENT  OF  MissioNABiES.  We  shall  find  much  instruction  concerning  evange- 
listic methods.  1.  The  Church  should  choose  its  best  men  for  foreign  missionaries. 
The  great  systems  of  infidelity  are  to  be  besieged  by  the  finest  generals  the  Church 
can  select.  2.  The  Holy  Spirit  will  tell  such  praying  people  whom  to  commission. 
Three  times  does  this  mention  of  the  Holy  Ghost  occur.  The  high  authority  of  the 
ministry  comes  straight  from  Christ ;  all  the  Church  can  do  is  to  follow  where  He 
leads.  3.  The  missionaries  should  be  well  supported  in  each  enterprise.  Our  Lord 
told  His  disciples  to  go  forth  two  by  two  (Mark  vi.  7).  There  is  great  comfort  in 
companionship  (Prov.  xxvii.  17).  The  most  pathetic  spectacle  in  this  world  is  that 
of  one  foreign  missionary  in  some  distant  heathen  city.  Paul  never  grew  plaintive 
until  he  was  alone.  Elijah  never  lost  his  courage  until  he  was  alone.  4.  Those 
sent  out  in  prayer  wiU  be  likeliest  to  return  in  triumph  (chap.  liv.  26,  27).     HI.  Thb 

ACCOUNT     OF     THE     VOYAGE     AND     THB     GENERAL     RESULTS     OF     THE     MISSION.       Let     U9 

notice — 1.  Some  of  the  successes.  (1)  They  had  a  safe  voyage.  The  Mediter- 
ranean is  exceedingly  vicious,  as  Paul  had  reason  afterwards  to  know.  The  Lord 
will  make  His  providence  protect  those  whom  His  grace  sets  apart  for  risky  endeavour. 
(2)  They  found  free  chance  to  preach  the  gospel.  It  is  quite  a  grand  success 
always  to  have  an  open  door.  The  chief  man  in  the  city  gave  them  a  hearing. 
There  is  hope  in  every  case  when  people  give  the  chance  for  conversation.  2. 
Some  set-backs.  It  was  to  be  expected  that  Satan  would  show  himself  somewhere. 
Things  were  getting  serious  for  him  :  so  he  stirred  up  opposition  from  two  sources, 
(1)  Earliest  there  came  trouble  from  one  of  the  devil's  children  (ver.  10).  But  God 
turned  the  wrath  of  man  into  praise  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  10).  (2)  Then  there  came  trouble 
from  one  of  God's  children.  Mark  left  the  company ;  Paul's  heart  was  grieved  (chap. 
XV.  36-40).  It  is  sad  to  get  weary  in  well-doing  (Luke  ix.  62).  Young  Christiana 
must  be  steadfast.  Mark  did  better  afterwards  (Col.  iv.  10,  11).  {C.  S.  Robinson, 
D.D.)  The  first  missionary  joxtrney  : — 1.  "In  the  Church," — how  much  is 
implied  in  these  three  words  1  Why  this  separateness  of  indication  ?  Why  not 
refer  to  the  human  family  as  a  whole  ;  the  greater  which  includes  the  less  ?  There 
must  be  some  meaning  in  this  society  within  society.  Who  ever  speaks  of  society  as 
a  grand  sum  total  of  human  life  ?  The  integer  is  broken  up  into  innumerable 
fractions,  but  there  is  one  fraction  which  says  that  it  will  and  must  become  itself 
the  whole  number — that  fraction  is  the  Church.  How  many  men  does  it  take  to 
make  a  Church  ?  Two  1  Where  do  they  meet  ?  Where  they  please  I  What  pomp 
and  circumstance  are  requisite  to  constitute  them  into  a  Church?  How  much 
money  ?  How  much  learning  ?  None  I  Then  they  must  be  very  weak  ?  No  : 
the  side  on  which  Omnipotence  fights  cannot  be  weak.  Then  they  may  be  very 
poor  ?  No  I  The  side  that  banks  in  heaven  can  never  be  short  of  treasure.  But 
they  must  have  some  place  to  meet  in  ?  Not  necessarily.  Under  a  tree  wUl  do,  or 
in  the  middle  of  a  meadow,  or  in  the  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth.  And  the  moment 
two  men  come  together  to  constitute  a  Church,  nothing  further  is  requisite  but  the 
presence  of  Christ.  The  Church  is  composed  of  redeemed  and  regenerated  men. 
They  are  one  in  Christ :  diverse  in  everything  that  enters  into  the  composition  of 
humanity,  yet  one  in  Him  who  breaks  down  all  middle  walls  of  partition.  Why  do 
they  not,  then,  "  cleave  unto  the  Lord  "  ?  When  we  pray  we  are  one  ;  when  we 
speak  to  each  other  we  are  divided.  Then  why  do  we  not  pray,  and  let  opinion 
alone  ?  We  have  torn  the  seamless  robe  of  Christ  into  innumerable  rags !  Chris- 
tianity has  now  become  a  tissue  of  opinions ;  once  it  was  a  world-shaking  faith. 
Pray  on  1  Worship  is  the  union  of  the  Church !  2.  "  Certain  prophets  and 
teachers," — different  gifts,  but  the  same  subject.  The  prophet  had  a  higher  gift 
than  the  teacher  ;  the  teacher  read  a  book  that  was  written  with  pen  and  ink  ;  but 
the  prophet  read  a  book  that  was  going  to  be  written.  We  have  excluded  the 
prophet  from  the  Church;  we  call  him  "heterodox,"  unsafe,  not  always  to  be 
relied  upon ;  men  speak  of  him  with  many  parenthetic  qualifications ;  they  write 
about  him  with  so  many  footnotes  that  the  substantial  text  is  reduced  to  a  minimum. 
Yet  it  is  the  prophet  that  must  lead  us.  3.  "  The  Holy  Ghost  said."  The  Holy 
Spirit  dwells  in  the  Church ;  there  He  can  whisper  and  touch  gently  the  minda 
which  He  seeks  to  afifect.  Had  we  listened  more,  had  we  invited  fuller  confidencea 
from  heaven,  we  should  have  known  that  "  tho  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that 
fear  Him."  The  Holy  Spirit  must  be  our  genius,  our  ability,  our  inspiration,  our 
wealth.    It  is  the  function  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  elect  Hia  own  ministers  :  do  not 


OHAP.  xin.]  THE  ACTS.  803 

let  TIB  meddle  with  God  in  this  matter.  A  minister  is  not  a  manufacture — he  is  an 
inspiration  1  "  Pray  ye  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,"  <fec.  There  our  interest  may 
well  cease.  Young  men  are  not  to  be  driven  into  the  ministry ;  they  are  called  to 
particular  work  and  to  particular  places.  The  Lord  hath  a  candlestick  for  every 
candle ;  He  allots  the  place  as  weU  as  calls  the  man.  4.  A  singular  combination  of 
the  human  and  the  Divine  you  will  find  in  vers.  3,  4.  When  the  Church  "  had 
fasted  and  prayed,  and  laid  their  hands  on  Barnabas  and  Saul  they  sent  them 
away."  That  is  the  human  side.  "  So  they,  being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost," 
presents  the  Divine  aspect.  This  was  a  joint  work  of  the  Spirit  and  of  the  Church. 
This  is  the  solution  of  the  whole  controversy  about  the  Divineness  of  our  salvation 
and  our  share  in  it.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  for 
it  is  God  that  worketh  in  you."  So  then  we  are  fellow-workers  with  God.  5.  The 
two  men  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Church  had  their  way  made  clear 
for  them.  God  will  take  care  of  His  own  ministers.  No  minister  of  Christ  in  all 
this  world  but  has  friends.  You  may  meet  an  Elymas,  but  you  will  also  meet  a 
Sergius  Paulus.  But  the  true  ministry  develops  the  evil  spirit  of  the  times.  We 
sometimes  hear  timid  people  saying  that  this  or  that  movement  may  be  good,  but 
certainly  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  rioting  on  account  of  it.  Wherever  Barnabas 
and  Saul  are,  Elymas  will  put  in  his  claim,  and  there  will  be  controversy  in  any  town 
whose  possession  by  the  sorcerer  is  disputed  by  those  who  claim  it  in  the  name  of 
Christ.  We  are  disabled  by  timidity.  Did  Barnabas  and  Saul  write  home  that 
opposition  having  arisen,  they  would  return  by  the  next  boat  ?  They  were  not 
given  to  returning  except  with  victory,  or  to  equip  themselves  for  further  Christian 
assault !  6.  It  is  beautiful  to  mark  how  Saul  takes  his  right  position  by  a  most 
natural  process.  Nothing  can  keep  down  a  man  whom  God  has  appointed  to  the 
throne.  There  will  be  no  controversy,  for  Barnabas  was  a  good  man,  and  he 
instantly  knew  where  the  power  was,  and  he  stood  aside  with  the  graceful  courtesy 
which  is  taught  and  acquired  only  in  the  school  of  heaven.  7.  *'  Then  Saul " 
wrought  his  first  miracle.  He  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  Sorcerer,  and  said :  "  0  full  of 
all  subtilty,"  &c.  Truly  his  speech  was  then  not  "  contemptible !  "  Stung  by  fire, 
he  turned  into  a  mighty  and  thrilling  speaker.  That  fire  we  have  lost.  We  talk 
to  Elymas  in  syllables  of  ice ;  we  look  at  him  with  vacant  eyes,  he  returns  our 
unmeaning  stare.  We  shall  presently  hear  Paul's  first  speech.  Truly  he  begins  in 
this  chapter  I  He  has  been  at  home  waiting,  wondering,  reading,  thinking,  and  pray- 
ing ;  and  now  his  turn  has  come,  and  in  this  chapter  we  see  his  first  miracle,  and  hear 
his  first  thunder,  and  know  that  the  king  of  men  has  arisen  in  the  Church  1  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  first  missionary  journey  : — 1.  At  Antioch  there  was  a  very  large  Christian 
society.  But,  however  large,  it  is  always  spoken  of  as  "  the  Church,"  and  not  "  the 
Churches,"  as  was  the  case  in  Judaea  and  Galatia.  We  do  not  wonder,  therefore,  at 
finding  that  there  were  several  instructors,  as  was  probably  always  the  case. 
Variety  of  gifts,  division  of  labour,  adaptability  for  special  service,  a  governing  body, 
with  other  advantages,  were  naturally  secured  by  this  arrangement.  In  the  present 
case  it  is  very  likely  that  each  of  the  persons  named  was  a  man  of  some  considera- 
tion and  culture.  God  is  a  God  of  order ;  and  however,  in  introducing  into  the 
world  something  new,  men  who  are  rude  and  unlettered  may  be  employed,  yet 
when  things  get  into  a  condition  that  is  to  be  permanent,  then  laws  come  into 
operation  which  belong  to  the  ordinary  requirements  of  common  life.  When  you 
have  not  inspiration,  you  must  have  men  who  have  original  power  and  acquired 
knowledge,  and  cultivated  faculty,  which  become  "  spiritual  gifts,"  fitted  for  "  the 
work  of  the  ministry  and  the  edification  of  the  body  of  Christ,"  when  they  are 
sanctified  by  God.  2.  There  was  something  special  about  the  exercises  in  which 
we  find  these  men  engaged.  They  were  fasting  and  praying  perhaps  under  the 
influence  of  the  state  of  things  in  the  persecuted  Church  in  Judaea,  and  because 
there  was  a  growing  feeling  amongst  them  that  they  should  be  making  aggressions 
upon  the  world.  As  they  fasted  and  prayed  the  Holy  Ghost  said,  "  Separate  Me 
now,  Barnabas  and  Saul,"  &c.  They  had  been  called  long  before,  and  had  been 
endowed  with  gifts  and  authority,  but  now  they  were  to  be  solemnly  set  apart  to  go  to 
their  special  "  work."  They  went  forth,  seeing  perhaps  the  first  step  or  two  before 
them,  but  not  knowing  whither  they  were  to  be  led.  3.  In  being  called  specially 
to  set  forth  on  a  work  of  this  kind,  I  do  not  know  whether  they  were  directed,  or 
whether  they  were  left  to  decide  for  themselves.  If  the  latter,  several  circumstances 
and  motives  might  have  influenced  them.  Saul  had  been  to  his  native  place  ; 
what  was  more  natural  than  that  they  should  now  go  to  Barnabas's  ?  And  then  the 
Church  at  Antioch  owed  its  very  existence  to  men  of  Cyprus.    A  sense  of  oblifi;atioa 


804  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nn. 

to  Cyprus,  as  well  as  the  natural  feeling  of  Barnabas,  might  determine  them  to  go 
there  first.  4.  The  first  place  they  came  to  was  Salamis,  whore  they  preached  in 
the  synagogues ;  it  is  not  said  with  what  success,  unless  there  be  an  underlying 
implication  of  success,  when  it  is  said  that  "  they  had  also  John  to  their  minister  "  ; 
in  which  capacity,  as  Peter  did  not  baptize  Cornelius,  and  Paul  tells  us  that  "  Christ 
sent  him  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  the  gospel,"  he  probably  assisted  Barnabas 
and  Saul  by  taking  that  work.  5.  From  Salamis  they  passed  on  through  the  island, 
to  Paphos,  but  most  likely  preaching  as  they  went.  We  have  here,  in  vivid  type,  an 
image  of  that  grand  contest  between  truth  and  error  which  was  then  beginning — 
the  age,  with  its  inqif^y  and  philosophy,  looking  on.  First  of  all  we  have  "  a 
certain  sorcerer,"  the  representative  of  corrupted  Judaism  and  perverted  intelli- 
gence. He  has  got  a  wonderful  amount  of  knowledge  from  the  study  of  the  Divine 
Word  and  the  science  of  the  day,  but  he  seeks  to  turn  it  to  selfish  purposes,  and  by 
false  pretensions  impudently  pretends  to  be  possessed  of  supernatural  powers.  This 
sort  of  thing  was  very  common  in  tbat  age,  just  as  it  is  now,  when  some  of  the 
most  gifted  are  to  be  found  putting  faith  in  communications  from  the  dead — com- 
munications which  never  are  anything  that  seems  worth  coming  from  "  Hades  "  to 
tell !  But,  on  the  other  hand,  you  have  in  Paul  Judaism  refined,  elevated,  purified 
— its  prophecies  fulfilled,  its  dark  sayings  illuminated,  and  the  old  faith  developed 
into  that  high  and  perfect  form  of  truth  which  is  in  future  to  rule  the  world.  Then, 
in  Sergius  Paulus  yon  have  the  age  looking  on.  Sergius  Paulus  was  "  prudent," 
most  probably  an  earnest  philosophical  inquirer,  who  had  seen  the  absurdity 
of  idolatry,  and  the  insufficiency  of  scepticism,  and  in  search  of  truth  was  ready  to 
welcome  it  however  it  came.  He  thinks  he  may  learn  something  from  Bar-Jesns, 
and  therefore  he  listens.  He  hears  of  the  other  strangers,  and  he  "  calls  for  "  them. 
When  the  two  are  brought  together  they  are  found  to  be  opponents.  Truth  in  the 
one  instantly  detects  the  lie  in  the  other.  Then  there  comes  forth,  at  last,  a  mani- 
festation of  Divine  power.  Immediately  there  fell  upon  Elymas  "  a  mist  and  a 
darkness,"  &c.  An  outward  and  visible  type  of  his  spiritual  state,  and  of  the 
vanity  of  his  pretensions  !  Instead  of  being  able  to  be  a  guide  it  was  his  place  to 
ask  for  those  who  might  lead  the  blind.  The  intelligence  of  the  age,  in  the  person 
of  the  deputy,  was  subdued  by  "the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God  " — and 
thus  he  became  an  unconscious  prophecy  of  what  was  afterwards  seen  in  the  Roman 
empire,  and  what  will  one  day  be  seen  in  every  part  of  the  "  round  world."  6. 
But  now  there  comes  a  change  in  the  language  of  the  narrative.  "  Barnabas  and 
Saul,"  which  we  have  always  had  before,  now  gives  place  to  "Paul  and  Barnabas." 
It  is  very  singular  that  this  change  should  take  place  just  where  this  illustrious 
convert  is  introduced.  It  can  hardly  be  thought,  however,  tbat  Saul  took  the  name 
of  Paul  out  of  compliment  to  the  deputy.  It  is  most  probable  that  he  had  always 
had  the  name,  and  it  came  to  be  used  in  consequence  of  his  becoming  recognised  as 
the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  7.  Passing  from  Cyprus,  they  went  over  to  the  con- 
tinent, and  got  to  Perga,  and  there  Mark  left  them.  We  must  not  be  too  hard  upon 
this  young  man.  His  conduct,  no  doubt,  was  very  disappointing  and  mortifying  to 
his  uncle,  and  it  greatly  displeased  Paul.  He  was  inexperienced,  and  perhaps 
naturally  timid.  When  he  got  to  Asia,  and  saw  the  savage  aspect  of  the  country, 
heard  of  rivers  and  robbers,  his  young  heart  probably  failed.  Perhaps  he  thought  that 
he  was  not  called  like  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  it  is  also  very  likely  that  his  natural 
feelings  towards  Peter,  his  spiritual  father,  who  was  more  to  him  than  either  Paul 
or  Barnabas,  had  something  to  do  with  it.     So  the  two  men  had,  henceforth,  to 

i'ourney  alone.  8.  They  travelled  on ;  and  probably  the  journey  was  such  as  to 
ead  to  the  reference  which  we  have  in  one  of  the  apostle's  letters  to  "  perils  of 
waters,  and  perils  of  robbers,  perils  in  the  city,  and  perils  by  the  heathen,"  &c. 
At  last  they  got  to  Antioch  in  Pisidia.  There  were  a  good  many  Jews  in  this  city. 
On  the  Sabbath-day  they  "  went  into  the  synagogue,"  where  they  were  recog- 
nised in  the  synagogue  as  brethren,  though  strangers.  Their  personal  appp»rance 
indicated,  possibly,  that  they  were  not  ordinary  men ;  or  they  had  been  long  enough 
in  the  town  to  give  rise  to  some  curiosity.  After  that  part  of  the  service  was 
concluded,  in  which  the  "  minister"  brought  out  the  scroll,  and  read  portions  of  the 
law  and  the  prophets,  the  rulers  sent  to  Paul  and  Barnabas,  saying,  "If  ye  have 
any  word  of  exhortntion  for  the  people,  say  on" — expressing  both  national  and 
religious  unity,  which  made  the  Jewish  people  one  throughout  all  the  world.  Paul 
began  by  addressing  himself  both  to  the  Jews  and  proselytes,  and  then  "  reasoned 
out  of  the  Scriptures."  Referring  to  the  history  of  the  people,  he  sketched  it  from 
God's  first  choice  of  them,  through  their  fortunes  in  Egypt  and  the  wilderness,  dowr 


CHAP,  xni.]  THE  ACTS.  805 

to  the  time  of  David.  He  then  came  out  with  the  statement,  "  Of  this  man's  seed 
hath  God  raised  unto  Israel  a  Saviour,  Jesus."  He  then  referred  to  the  ministry  of 
John ;  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  in  the  rejection  and  death  of  Jesus  ;  and  the  fact 
that  God  had  raised  Him  from  the  dead.  After  further  "  reasoning  out  of  the 
Scriptures,"  he  came  to  the  grand  Christian  proclamation : — "  Be  it  known  unto 
you  "  (ver.  38).  This  was  not  the  end  of  his  speech,  but  it  was  the  end  of  his 
argument;  and  the  Jews  who  had  listened  up  to  this  time  rose  up,  were  offended, 
and  made  for  the  door.  Seeing  them  pressing  out,  Paul  added  the  warning — 
"  Beware  "  (ye  who  are  moving  away)  "  lest  that  come  upon  you  "  (vers.  40,  41). 
They  went  their  way,  but  the  Gentiles  were  left,  and  after  Paul  had  spoken  to  them, 
the  congregation  dispersed.  Some  of  the  Gentiles,  glad  to  learn  what  they  had 
heard,  with  some  of  the  Jews,  accompanied  Paul  and  Barnabas,  who  talked  with 
them  as  they  went  along,  and  persuaded  them  to  "  continue  in  the  grace  of  God." 
What  a  week  it  would  be  that  followed  1  And  the  next  Sabbath  "  almost  the  whole 
city  came  together."  There  were  many  of  them  who  never  would  have  gone  under 
ordinary  circumstances,  and  the  Jews  were  offended.  '•  Then  Paul  and  Barnabas 
waxed  bold  "  (ver.  46).  When  they  turned  to  the  Gentiles,  every  man  and  woman 
amongst  them  who  had  anything  like  religious  earnestness  in  them  in  seeking 
after  eternal  life,  "glorified  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  believed."  (T.  Binney.) 
Barnabas  and  Paul  sent  forth : — The  original  destination  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  when 
he  was  called  to  the  apostleship,  was  to  the  heathen — or,  as  we  should  now  say,  to 
a  missionary  life  (chap,  ix,  15,  xxii.  17-21 ;  Gal.  ii.  8  ;  Eom.  xi.  13 ;  Gal.  i.  16  ; 
Eph.  iii.  8).  The  appointment  of  Saul  and  Barnabas  to  this  work  was  an  important 
event  in  each  of  their  lives,  determining  their  own  future  course.  It  was  important 
as  the  manifestation  of  a  more  just  view  of  Christianity  itself ;  it  was  the  first 
development  of  the  idea  which  has  since  gone  so  essentially  and  so  far  into  the 
civihsation  of  the  world :  viz.,  that  Christian  nations  should  send  to  the  heathen  a 
knowledge  of  that  to  which  they  owe  their  own  elevation.  The  following  points 
here  occur  as  proper  to  be  illustrated.  I.  The  babriees  which  hindek  the  spebad 
OP  A  NEW  BELiQioN.  1.  Differences  of  nationality.  Where  nations  belong  to 
different  races — where  their  independence  has  been  established  as  the  result  of 
wars,  where  they  speak  diverse  languages,  where  they  have  different  religions, 
where  they  have  pecuhar  manners  and  customs,  where  they  are  rivals  in  trade, 
where  one  is  warlike  and  another  peaceful — all  these,  and  kindred  things,  constitute 
barriers  not  easy  to  overcome.  Thus  to  the  ancient  Jews  the  whole  world  was 
divided,  "  Jews  and  Gentiles,"  producing  in  their  minds  the  feeling  that  they  were 
the  peculiar  favourites  of  heaven,  and  that  all  others  were  outcasts.  Thus  the 
Greeks  divided  the  world  into  •*  Greeks  and  Barbarians."  In  modern  times,  a 
similar  instance  occurs  among  the  Chinese,  who  regard  themselves  as  the  children 
of  heaven,  the  "  Celestials," — and  aU  others  as  "  outside  Barbarians."  In  a  world 
thus  divided,  any  new  religion  that  claims  to  be  universal  must  find  serious 
obstructions.  2.  Distinctions  in  social  life — of  rank  and  caste.  These  exist  within 
a  nation,  dividing  the  rich  and  the  poor — the  learned  and  the  ignorant — the  bond 
and  the  free  j  or  they  are  based  on  a  derivation  from  royal  blood,  an  aristocracy  or 
a  priesthood.  3.  Diversities  of  colour  and  complexion.  The  class  favoured  with 
what  they  deem  a  fairer  complexion,  have  not  only  sought  to  enslave  those  of  a 
different  colour,  but  they  have  been  slow  to  believe  that,  even  in  the  eye  of  God,  a 
dark  skin  is  not  an  emblem  of  a  darker  debasement  than  is  found  under  a  white 
one,  and  seem  to  imagine  that  even  the  blood  of  the  atonement  fails  to  efface  the 
distinction,  and  to  place  them  in  any  manner  on  a  level.  This  is  the  most  formidable 
barrier  of  aU.  4.  Separate  religious  beliefs.  The  idea  stUl  prevails  that  the  rehgion 
of  each  nation  is,  by  the  purpose  of  the  Creator,  their  own— designed  like  their  laws, 
customs,  climate,  mountains,  &o.,  to  separate  them  from  other  people — a  religion 
good  for  them  ;  adapted  to  them ;  intended  for  them ;  and  not  to  be  changed  for 
another.  II.  The  dipficolty  op  oveecomino  these  baeeiebs.  This  diflBculty 
exists — 1.  In  those  who  regard  themselves  as  of  the  more  favoured  class.  How 
difficult  for  them  to  offer  to  others  the  same  privileges  as  themselves,  or  to  admit 
that  others  are  on  the  same  level  I  To  counteract  this  narrow  feeling  in  the  apostles 
required  all  the  skill  of  the  Saviour  Himself ;  and  after  three  years'  teaching  it 
required  a  special  revelation  to  convince  Peter  that  he  should  go  and  carry  the 
gospel  to  fr  Gentile.  2.  In  men's  tmwiliingness  to  receive  a  communication  in 
favour  of  a  new  religion  from  one  of  inferior  rank  or  condition.  Who  knows  not 
what  a  mighty  obstacle  this  was  when  the  gospel  was  preached  at  Athens,  at 
Ephesus,  at  Antioch,  at  Borne  ?  How  hard  it  is  for  a  master  to  receive  the  lessons 
TOL  n.  20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xra 

of  religion  from  those  whom  he  regards  as  slaves — a  prince  from  one  of  his  own 
subjects — a  rich  man  from  a  beggar — a  philosophei  from  one  occupied  in  the 
humbler  arts.  With  what  contempt  would  a  Brahmin  turn  away  from  one  ot 
humbler  "  caste  "  who  should  undertake  to  teach  him  the  nature  of  true  religion. 
The  relative  condition  of  nations  has  changed  in  our  times,  and  the  missionary  goes 
out  under  better  auspices.  He  goes  now  from  a  land  of  civilisation,  and  science, 
and  art,  to  those  lands  where  such  things  are  unknown  ;  yet  still  this  difficulty 
exists.  Take,  for  illustration,  the  Chinesd.  An  obstacle  exists  in  their  case  as 
stem  as  in  the  case  of  Athens  or  Eome.  III.  The  teachings  by  which  Chbibtiakity 
TRIUMPHS  ovEB  THESE  OBSTACLES.  It  dcclares — 1.  That  mankind  are  one  race ;  the 
children  of  a  common  parent ;  on  a  level  before  God.  No  truth  more  vital,  more 
far-reaching,  more  powerful  in  its  bearing  on  human  rights  and  human  liberty, 
more  potent  in  elevating  man,  has  ever  been  proclaimed  to  the  world.  Kevelation 
describes  the  creation  of  man  as  the  creation  of  a  single  pair,  and  declares  that 
"  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men."  The  doctrine  of  depravity 
which  it  urges  pertains  to  men  everywhere,  as  derived  from  the  fall  of  that  one 
pair;  and  it  makes  no  exception  when  it  says  that  "all  have  sinned,  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God."  The  Redeemer  gloried  in  the  title  "  Son  of  Man,''  for 
He  came  not  to  take  on  Him  the  nature  of  the  Caucasian,  the  Ethiopian,  or  the 
American,  as  such — but  the  nature  of  man.  2.  That  the  work  of  Christ  had 
respect  to  all  men ;  and  whatever  there  was  in  the  atonement,  as  such,  was  designed 
for  one  as  much  as  for  another.  There  is  no  higher  argument  that  can  be  addressed 
to  men  to  prove  their  equaUty,  than  to  say  to  them  that  they  all  have  been  redeemed 
by  the  same  blood.  3.  That  the  hopes  inspired  by  the  gospel  are  the  same  for 
every  human  being.  When  it  makes  known  a  heaven  for  one,  it  unfolds  it  for  all. 
And  it  is  a  great  thing  to  go  forth  to  a  world  where  men  are  separated  from  each 
other,  and  to  say  to  them  that,  in  the  hope  of  immortality,  they  are  all  placed  on 
the  same  level  before  their  Maker.  4.  That  the  way  of  salvation  is  the  same  for 
all.  No  one  has  any  priority  of  claim  by  his  rank,  or  enjoys  any  peculiar  facilities 
for  salvation  by  his  titles  or  his  wealth ;  and  no  one  is  excluded,  or  placed  in  less 
favourable  circumstances,  by  his  poverty,  his  ignorance,  his  servile  condition.  The 
prince  and  the  sage  are  not  more  welcome  to  heaven  than  the  poor  and  ignorant. 
6.  That  all  men  are  invested  with  the  same  natural  rights  to  the  light  of  the  sun, 
to  the  tides,  and  the  winds,  and  the  stars  ;  the  same  right  to  limb,  and  liberty,  and 
life  ; — the  same  right  to  the  air,  and  to  the  productions  of  the  teeming  earth,  and 
to  a  spot  wherein  to  sleep  the  long  sleep  when  they  are  dead.  Conclusion  :  1.  The 
gospel  cannot  be  preached  without  sooner  or  later  breaking  down  every  false 
distinction.  2.  Christians,  admire  and  adore  the  goodness  of  that  Universal 
Father  who  has  sent  the  messages  of  grace  to  you,  so  that  you  are  "  no  more 
strangers  and  foreigners,  but  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household 
of  God."  Our  ancestors  were  heathens.  The  gospel  raised  them  from  their  low 
condition.  Be  it  ours  to  spread  the  religion  to  which  we  owe  so  much.  Other 
nations  have  a  right  to  it ;  and  it  would  elevate  them  as  it  has  done  our  fathers  and 
ourselves.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  A  piC'Ce  fomid  at  last  for  Saul: — No  place  had 
been  found  big  enough  for  Saul;  Damascus,  Jerusalem,  Antioch — none  of  these 
could  hold  him.  He  had  to  go.  There  was  that  irresistible  and  expansive  force 
about  him.  To  shut  him  up  in  those  rotten  old  cities,  full  of  prejudice  and  arti- 
ficiality, was  like  shutting  up  dynamite  in  an  eggshell.  Saul  burst  his  fetters  :  he 
was  beginning  to  feel  his  freedom.  The  world  hunger  took  possession  of  him — the 
wide  sea  was  before  him — the  future  beckoned  to  him — the  time  was  come  and  he 
had  to  go,  and  he  went  eagerly,  elated,  triumphant.  The  Church  at  Antioch 
probably  heaved  a  great  sigh  of  relief  as  he  departed — they  probably  saw  rocks 
ahead.  (//.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  Thestrengthof  missionary  work: — It  consists  in — 
I.  The  CALL  OF  God,  which  it  follows.  II.  The  fidelity  op  the  labourers,  whom  it 
sends.  III.  The  prayer  of  the  Chdroh,  on  which  it  relies.  {K.  Gerok.)  The 
best  travelling  attendance  for  a  departing  missionary  : — 1.  The  Di  vi  iie  call  concerning 
him.  2.  The  impulse  of  the  Spirit  within  him.  3.  The  prayers  of  the  Church 
behind  him.  4.  The  sighing  of  the  heathen  world  before  him.  (Ibid.)  Missions, 
home  and  foreign: — A  gentleman  once  said  to  Dr.  Skinner,  who  was  asking  aid  for 
foreign  missions,  "  I  don't  believe  in  foreign  missions.  I  won't  give  anything 
except  to  home  missions.  I  want  what  I  give  to  benefit  my  neighbours."  "  Well," 
the  Doctor  made  reply,  "  whom  do  you  regard  as  your  neighbours  ?  "  "  Why,  those 
around  me."  "  Do  you  mean  those  whose  land  joins  yours  ?  "  "  Yes."  *'  Well," 
■aid  Dr.  Skinner,  "  how  much    land  do  you  own  ? "     "  About  five  hundred 


CHAP,  xra.]  THE  ACTS.  807 

acres,"  was  the  reply.  ' '  How  far  down  do  you  own  it  ?  "  inquired  Dr.  Skinner. 
"  Why,  I  never  thought  of  it  before,  but  I  suppose  I  am  half-way  through." 
"  Exactly,"  said  the  Doctor  ;  "  I  suppose  you  do,  and  I  want  this  money  for  the 
Chinese — the    men  whose  land  joine  yours  at  the   bottom."  Obligation  of 

Christians  to  send  out  missionaries  : — A  Karen  convert  in  Burmah  who  was  taken 
to  America,  and  was  asked  to  address  a  meeting  upon  their  obligation  to  send  out 
missionaries.  After  a  moment  of  thought  he  asked  with  a  good  deal  of  meaning, 
"  Has  not  Christ  told  you  do  it  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,"  was  the  reply,  •'  but  we  wish  you 
to  remind  them  of  their  duty."  "  Oh,  no,"  said  the  Karen  ;  "  if  they  will  not  mind 
Jesns  Christ,  they  will  not  mind  me  1  "  The  duty  of  sending  the  gospel  to  the 
heathen : — The  possession  of  the  gospel  involves  the  duty  of  giving  it  to  those  who 
have  it  not.  If  the  Jewish  Christians  of  the  apostolic  days  had  not  performed  their 
^uty  in  that  respect,  we  should  not  have  it  now.  Yet  probably  they  regarded  the 
iGentiles  as  quite  as  hopeless  as  we  are  apt  to  regard  the  savages  of  Patagonia. 
When  in  1788  William  Carey  ventured  to  advocate  an  effort  being  made  to  send 
the  gospel  to  the  heathen,  Kev.  John  Eyland,  a  venerable  minister,  reproved  him. 
"  When  God  pleases  to  convert  the  heathen,"  said  the  clergyman,  •'  He  will  do  it 
without  your  help  or  mine."  But  the  son  of  that  minister  was  one  of  the  first  to 
join  in  the  great  rejoicing  when  forty  years  later  William  Carey  could  tell  of 
thousands  of  heathen  who  had  received  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  duty  might  involve 
difficulty,  but  he  who  loved  his  fellow-man,  and  knew  how  much  good  the  gospel 
would  do  to  any  who  accepted  it,  would  be  anxious  to  preach  it  at  any  cost  to  him- 
self. Blessing  sent  to  others : — Loch  Katrine,  embowered  among  the  highlands 
of  Scotland,  a  poem  in  water,  immortalised  in  story  and  song,  till  it  seems  almost 
transfigured  with  a  glory  beyond  its  natural  beauty  and  charm,  is  yet  the  source  of 
the  water  supply  of  the  city  of  Glasgow,  fiowing  down  among  the  homes  of  the 
poor,  cleansing  the  filth  from  the  streets,  bringing  refreshment,  cheer,  comfort, 
cleanliness,  and  health  everywhere.  So  to  every  one  who  has  the  living  water — and 
all  the  more  if  it  is  possessed  amid  wealth,  culture,  education,  talent — is  given 
the  privilege  of  sending  the  living  water  in  copious  streams  to  the  heathen,  to  the 
poor,  to  the  sinful,  to  all  who  are  in  need.  Work  of  missions : — I  remember,  when 
in  Wales,  seeing  the  men  working  in  the  quarries  there.  A  man  is  suspended  by  a 
rope  half-way  down  the  stone  quarry,  and  I  have  seen  him  there  for  a  length  of 
time  boring  a  hole  in  the  rock  ;  and  after  spending  much  care  and  toU  and  time  in 
boring  the  hole  to  a  sufficient  depth,  I  have  seen  him  fiU  it  vnth  some  black  dust, 
and  if  I  did  not  know  what  power  lodged  in  that  black  dust  I  should  say,  "What  a 
fool  that  man  was  to  spend  so  much  time  in  boring  a  hole  in  the  rock,  and  then  fill 
it  up  again  1 "  But  1  know  that  that  black  dust  is  powder.  There  is  a  wonderful 
explosive  power  in  it.  And  then  when  he  has  filled  the  hole  with  powder  he  has 
applied  his  fuse  and  lighted  his  match,  and  while  the  fuse  was  burning  in  the 
direction  of  the  powder  he  has  taken  the  opportunity  of  fleeing  to  a  distance  by 
climbing  up  the  rope  to  the  mountain-top.  WeU,  that  is  just  what  many  of  our 
missionaries  are  doing  abroad.  At  present  they  are  preparing  the  way.  They  are 
cutting  a  hole  into  the  very  rock  of  heathendom,  and  they  are  filling  it  up  with  the 
powder  of  Divine  truth.  What  we  want  is  fire  from  heaven  to  touch  it.  And  God 
is  doing  it.  He  is  preparing  the  people.  By  and  by  we  shall  have  a  mighty 
upheaving  in  this  rock  of  heathenism  and  ignorance  and  superstition,  and  from  it 
polished  stones  to  adorn  the  temple  of  our  Lord.    (i2.  Boberts.) 

Vers.  3-12.  And  when  they  had  fasted  and  prayed,  and  laid  their  hands  on  them, 
they  sent  them  away. — Undying  fame : — History  has  contemptuously  obliterated 
from  her  annals  the  names  of  countless  kings,  who  have  set  forth  from  their 
capitals  for  the  scourge  or  conquest  of  nations  at  the  head  of  armies,  and  with  all 
the  pomp  and  circimastance  of  glorious  war ;  but  centuries  after  these  conquerors 
are  in  their  turn  forgotten,  whom  she  still  deigns  to  commemorate,  she  will  preserve 
in  the  grateful  memory  of  mankind  the  names  of  these  two  poor  Jews,  who  started 
on  foot,  staff  in  hand,  with  little,  perhaps,  or  nothing  in  their  scrip  but  the  few 
dates  that  suffice  to  satisfy  the  hunger  of  the  Eastern  traveller.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.) 
So  they,  being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  departed  imto  Seleucia. — SeUucia: — 
The  port  of  Antioch,  distant  by  land  fifteen  miles ;  by  water,  through  the  windings  of 
the  Orontes,  forty-one  miles.  Built  by  the  first  Seleucus,  it  had  bj  this  time  attained 
the  privileges  of  a  free  city.  Polybius  described  a  very  extensive  excavation,  which 
was  the  only  communication  between  the  city  and  the  sea;  and  vestiges  of  its 
slopes  and  tunnels  are  stili  conspicuous.    Two  piers,  the  remains  of  its  once  mag- 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rta.. 


nificent  harbour,  retain  the  names  of  Paul  and  Barnabas.  {Bp.  Jacobson.)  AAd 
from  thence  they  sailed  to  Cyprus. — The  first  missonary  ship: — I.  Its  bold  crew. 

1.  The  great  Paul.  2.  The  noble  Barnabas.  3.  The  youthful  Mark.  II.  Its  fresh 
WIND.  1.  The  east  wind  filled  the  sails.  2.  The  Holy  Ghost  inspired  the  teachers. 
III.  Its  favourable  anchorage.  The  renowned  Cyprus,  with  its  natural  beauties 
and  sinful  abominations.    IV.  Its   great   prizes.     1.  The  sorcerer  vanquished. 

2.  The  governor  converted.  {K.Gerok.)  Cyprus: — The  population  of  the  island 
was  largely  Greek,  and  the  name  of  the  chief  town  at  the  east  end  recalled  the 
history  or  the  legend  of  a  colony  under  Teucer,  the  sou  of  Telamon,  from  the 
Salamis  of  the  Saronic  gulf.  It  owne^  Aphrodite,  or  Venus,  as  its  tutelary  goddess, 
Paphos  being  the  chief  centre  of  her  worship,  which  there,  as  elsewhere,  was  con- 
spicuous for  the  licentiousness  of  the  harlot-priestesses  of  her  temple.  The  copper- 
mines  (the  metal  Cuprum  took  its  name  from  the  island),  fanned  by  Augustus  to 
Herod  the  Great,  had  attracted  a  considerable  Jewish  population,  among  whom  the 
gospel  had  been  preached  by  the  evangelists  of  chap.  xi.  19.  An  interesting 
inscription — the  date  of  which  is,  however,  uncertain,  and  may  be  of  the  second  or 
third  century  alter  Christ — given  in  M.  de  Cesnola's  "  Cyprus  "  (p.  422),  as  found 
at  Golgoi  in  that  island,  shows  a  yearning  after  something  higher  than  the  poly- 
theism of  Greece :  "  Thou,  the  one  God,  the  greatest,  the  most  glorious  name,  help 
us  all,  we  beseech  Thee."  At  the  foot  of  the  inscription  there  is  the  name 
"Helios,"  the  sun,  and  we  may  probably  see  in  it  a  trace  of  that  adoption  of  the 
worship  of  Mithras,  or  the  sun,  as  the  visible  symbol  of  Deity,  which,  first  becoming 
known  to  the  Eomans  in  the  time  of  Pompeius,  led  to  the  general  reception  of  the 
Dies  Soils  ( =  Sunday)  as  the  first  day  of  the  Koman  week,  and  which,  even  in  the 
case  of  Constantine,  mingled  with  the  earlier  stages  of  his  progress  towards  the 
faith  of  Christ.  The  narrative  that  follows  implies  that  the  prudence  or  discern- 
ment which  distinguished  the  proconsul  may  well  have  shown  itself  in  such  a 
recognition  of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead  ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  M.  de 
Cesnola  ("  Cyprus,"  p.  425)  discovered  at  Soli,  in  the  same  island,  another  inscrip- 
tion, bearing  the  name  of  Paulus  the  Proconsul,  who  may,  perhaps,  be  identified 
with  the  Sergius  Paulus  of  this  narrative.  (Dean  Phimptre.)  Cyprus  and  its 
people : — Cyprus  was  by  no  means  a  reputable  island  :  it  was  devoted  to  the  goddess 
Venus,  and  you  can  imagine  what  her  worhhip  was,  and  what  would  be  the  fruitful 
licentiousness  which  sprang  of  it.  It  was  the  native  country  of  Barnabas,  and,  as 
he  was  at  first  the  leader  of  the  missionary  party  sent  out  by  the  Church  of  Antioch, 
it  was  fit  that  Barnabas  and  Saul  should  begin  preaching  there.  Landing  at  one 
end  of  the  island  the  two  apostolic  men  traversed  it  tiU  they  came  to  Paphos,  where 
the  Roman  governor  resided.  Now,  this  Paphos  was  the  central  city  of  the  worship 
of  Venus,  and  was  the  scene  of  frequent  pro^igate  processions  and  abciminable 
rites.  We  might  call  it  "  the  place  where  Satan's  seat  is."  Athanasius  styled  its 
religion  "  the  deification  of  lust."  Neither  men  nor  women  could  resort  to  the 
shrine  of  Venus  without  being  defiled  in  mind  and  depraved  in  character.  Yet  it 
was  no  business  of  the  apostles  to  stop  away  either  from  Cyprus  or  Paphos  because 
they  were  the  resorts  of  the  gay  and  vicious ;  but  the  rather  there  was  a  special 
need  for  them  to  go  thither  with  the  purifying  waters  of  the  gospel.  The  more 
wicked  the  locality  the  more  need  for  Christian  efifort  in  that  very  spot.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Saul  in  Cyprus : — 1.  Evangelistic  work  hitherto  had  been  sporadic, 
the  mere  result  of  circumstances,  or  the  prompting  of  spiritual  instinct.  The 
Church  had  made  no  direct  effort  to  carry  the  truth  abroad.  But  now  Antioch  has 
the  honour  of  sending  out  the  first  heralds  of  the  Cross.  The  vessel  which  carried 
them  bore  in  the  highest  sense  the  fortune  of  the  world.  The  two  strangers  were 
inaugurating  a  new  era,  and  commencing  a  work  which  should  be  repeated,  until 
every  people  shall  have  its  sanctuary  and  its  Scriptures,  and  the  world  bow  to  the 
happy  reign  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  2.  The  evangelists  landed  at  the  nearest  port,  that 
of  Salamis,  which  had  a  number  of  synagogues,  while  other  towns  usually  had  but 
one.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  numerous  proselytes  must  have  been  in  those 
synagogues,  for  paganism  had  greatly  lost  its  hold,  and  the  unsatisfied  spirit  of 
many  sought  refuge  in  Judaism.  Such  minds  were  the  more  easily  impressed  by 
the  gospel,  for  they  would  find  in  it  a  doctrine  that  spoke  to  their  inmost  longings. 
A  preference  was  given  to  the  Jews.  How  could  it  have  been  otherwise  ?  It  was 
impossible  even  in  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  to  throw  off  the  attachments  of  blood 
and  kindred.  3.  Barnabas  and  Saul  went  through  the  whole  isle  as  far  as  Paphos, 
a  place  infamous  for  its  temple  and  dissolute  worship.  Here  the  gospel  came  again 
Into  contact  with  the  magic  of  the  East.     Already  it  had  confronted  Simon  at 


«HAP.  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  309 

Samaria.  Bar-Jesna — son  of  Jesas  or  Joshua,  "was  with  the  governor" — had 
attached  himself  to  his  court,  and  probably  exercised  no  little  sway  over  him  as  a 
confidential  adviser.  The  proconsul  had  apparently  thrown  off  the  religion  of  his 
country,  but  had  adopted  none  other.  His  soul  was  groping  in  darkness,  scarce 
knowing  what  it  yearned  after.  To  a  mind  in  such  a  state  any  doctrine  claiming 
Divine  authority  is  welcome,  and  the  theology  of  this  Jewish  magician  must  have 
to  some  extent  commended  itself.  It  brought  with  it  the  unity  and  spirituality  of 
the  Divine  Being — a  refreshing  doctrine  to  a  mind  wearied  out  with  the  very  names 
of  numberless  divinities.  But  he  was  not  satisfied,  and  the  same  desire  that  brought 
him  under  the  power  of  Elymas  led  him  to  send  for  the  preachers  of  a  new  religion. 
He  could  not  be  supposed  to  know  much  of  the  gospel,  yet  he  seems  to  style  it  "  the 
Word  of  God,"  for  it  was  in  its  character  of  a  Divine  revelation  that  he  wished  to 
hear  it.  It  was  not  speculation  or  philosophy  that  his  soul  thirsted  after.  4.  The 
addresses  of  the  evangelists  produced  a  deep  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  pro- 
consul. The  sorcerer  could  not  suffer  those  impressions  to  be  deepened.  His 
selfish  schemes  would  aU  vanish  if  his  patron  should  yield  to  the  teaching  of  the 
two  strangers.  So  he  sought  "  to  turn  away  the  deputy  from  the  faith."  How,  is 
not  known ;  probably  by  sophistry  and  malignant  insinuation.  But  so  perti- 
nacious was  he  and  dexterous,  that  an  example  must  be  made  of  him ;  and  Saul's 
first  miracle  must  be  one  of  judgment  on  a  spiteful  and  irreclaimable  adversary. 
The  contest  was,  whether  Elymas  the  sorcerer  or  the  truth  of  Christ  was  to  have 
the  ascendency.  5.  Saul,  henceforth  to  be  named  Paul,  has  been  during  this 
mission  rising  to  a  full  conception  of  his  apostolical  dignity  and  prerogative.  "  The 
Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him  "  to  do  a  mightier  act  than  Samson  ever  did  by  the 
same  influence.  Intensely  conscious  of  his  position  and  what  it  involved  at  that 
awful  moment,  and  looking  on  the  wizard  with  an  eye  that  read  his  soul,  the 
anathema  burst  from  his  lips.  ' '  Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost " — armed  with  a 
supernatural  power  to  chastise  the  incorrigible — Paul  said  :  "  0  full  of  all  subtilty  " — 
a  master  of  low  cunning  and  ingenious  retort.  "And  all  mischief" — facility  of 
evil-working.  "  Thou  child  of  the  devil " — not  a  child  of  Jesus,  as  thy  name  is — 
proving  thy  lineage  by  showing  thy  father's  spirit  and  doing  thy  father's  work. 
"  Thou  enemy  of  aU  righteousness,  wUt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of 
the  Lord  ?  "  Not  only  the  gospel,  but  also  the  old  dispensation,  which  he  contrived 
either  to  give  a  crooked  turn,  that  it  might  lead  in  an  opposite  direction,  or  made 
it  such  a  labyrinth  that  none  could  find  their  way  in  it  save  such  as  paid  him  for 
the  clue.  6.  The  apostle  adds  the  terrible  words  (ver.  11).  This  challenge  was 
Paul's  first  conscious  putting  forth  of  supernatural  power.  Strange  that  his  earliest 
miracle  should  be  one  of  doom — the  infliction  of  such  a  blindness  as  in  the  moment 
of  his  conversion  had  come  upon  himself.  That  blindness  was  a  symbol  of  Elymas' 
spirit  and  work.  His  moral  sense  was  blunted,  and  in  attempting  to  sway  Sergiua 
Paulus,  it  was  the  blind  leading  the  bUnd,  while  he  needed  to  be  led  himself.  His 
sin  might  be  read  in  his  judgment.  His  boast  was  of  insight,  but  he  was  taught 
that  he  saw  nothing.  Infliction  coming  direct  from  God's  hand,  often  takes  its 
shape  from  the  crime.  Ham  mocked  his  father,  and  his  doom  was  one  of  servitude, 
under  which  a  father's  claims  are  ignored.  Abimelech  wished  to  add  Sarah  to  his 
harem,  and  sterility  was  the  penalty  of  his  household.  Israel,  God's  first-bom,  are  kept 
in  bondage,  and  Pharaoh's  first-bom  fall  before  the  destroying  angel.  Jeroboam  put 
forth  his  hand  against  "  the  man  of  God  which  had  cried  against  the  altar  in  Bethel," 
"  and  his  hand  dried  up,  so  that  he  could  not  pull  it  in  again  to  him."  When  Herod 
accepted  homage  as  a  god,  his  godship  "  was  eaten  up  of  worms,  and  gave  up  the 
ghost. "  7.  Paul  had  risen  to  the  dignity  and  authority  of  his  apostolate.  He  had 
a  "  power  to  edification,"  though  it  now  assumed  a  terrific  aspect;  and  the  deputy, 
awed  and  overcome,  believed,  "  being  astonished  at  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord."  He 
was  awe-struck,  and  unable  to  refuse  his  assent.  He  could  not  allow  the  sorcerer 
to  trifle  with  him  any  longer,  nor  durst  he  longer  "  halt  between  two  opinions." 
Thus  judgment  and  mercy  have  been  often  associated.  "  Behold,  therefore,  the 
goodness  and  severity  of  Godl  "  [J.  Eadie,  D.D.)  The  first  missionary  intelli- 
gence:— An  emblem  of  all  succeeding,  representing  missionary  work — I.  In  its 
MANIFOLD  COURSES.  1.  ExtemaUy,  Seleucia  and  Cyprus,  by  sea  and  land.  2.  In- 
ternally, to  Jews  and  Gentiles.  11.  In  its  sevebe  contests.  1.  With  heathen 
vices — the  worship  of  Venus  at  Paphos.  2.  With  heathen  superstition — the  Sorcerer 
Elymas.  IH.  In  its  blessed  tictokies.  1.  The  powers  of  darkness  are  over- 
thrown. 2.  Souls  are  gained.  {K.  Gerok.)  Paul's  fitness  for  his  mission : — He 
was  a  Jew,  well  up  in  the  hterature  and  prejudices  of  his  countrymen.    That  surely 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  nn. 

would  be  a  great  help  to  him  as  he  passed  from  Jewry  to  Jewry.  He  was  fairly 
well  read  in  Greek,  and  tolerably  fluent ;  speaking  it,  however,  as  a  ready  English- 
man is  apt  to  speak  French,  with  a  bad  accent  and  a  faulty  construction,  but 
rapidly,  impetuously,  and  to  good  purpose.  Greek  was  the  passport  language  in 
those  days  as  French  is  now.  Then  Saul  was  a  Roman  citizen — by  that  he  saved 
his  life  more  than  once.  And  lastly  Saul  had  a  large  heart,  a  great  fund  of 
humanity.  This  made  him  fit  to  treat  on  equal  terms  with  princes  like  Agrippa, 
without  being  above  slaves  like  Onesimus.  Saul  had,  too,  the  restless  enterprise  of 
all  Nature's  great  missionaries,  explorers,  and  conquerors.  In  the  early  days  he 
was  extraordinarily  rash  and  reckless,  and  always  utterly  fearless,  regardless  of 
personal  comfort  and  suffering — a  perplexing  and  somewhat  difiBcult  person  to  work 
with,  no  doubt.  In  controversy  unyielding,  but  subtle  and  full  of  tact  in  trying 
situations,  and  with  an  abnegation  of  self  at  all  times  perfect.  In  person,  according 
to  tradition,  Saul  was  short  in  stature,  with  perhaps  a  stoop,  rather  bald,  with 
black  hair  early  streaked  with  grey,  and  a  full  beard ;  a  defective  eyesight,  and 
perhaps  a  slight  impediment  in  his  speech.  "His  bodily  presence,"  men  said, 
"was  mean,  and  his  speech  contemptible."  But  his  soul  made  itself  felt.  People 
soon  forgot  what  he  looked  like  when  he  began  to  speak.  There  was  a  charm  about 
him  that  few  could  resist.  Such  was  Saul  of  Tarsus.  Not  man's  conception  of  a 
popular  preacher,  but,  taking  him  all  in  all,  almost  an  ideal  apostle  to  the  Gentiles. 
{H.R.  Ilaioeis,  M.A.)  And  when  they  were  at  Salamis. — Salamis  : — The  Greek 
capital  of  the  island  on  its  eastern  side,  the  nearest  port  to  Seleucia,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Perdicas,the  largest  river  in  Cyprus,  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Venetian  capital,  Fama- 
gusta.  Under  its  subsequent  name,  Constantia,  given  when  it  had  been  rebuilt  by 
Constantine  after  an  earthquake,  Salamis  had  Epiphanius  for  one  of  its  bishops. 
Lactantius  reports,  that  human  sacrifices  were  offered  there  periodically  till  the  time 
of  Hadrian.  {Bp.  Jacobson.)  They  preached  ...  in  the  synagogues. — To  the 
Jew  first : — There  is  always  a  gain  in  touching  others  at  the  point  of  sympathy, 
rather  than  at  the  point  of  divergence.  A  lawyer  who  would  win  over  a  jury, 
addresses  himself  first  to  the  one  man  who  is  clearly  on  his  side  of  the  case,  rather 
than  to  the  eleven  men  who  are  against  him,  to  begin  with.  The  wife  who  proposes 
to  carry  her  own  way  quietly,  starts  out  by  agreeing  with  her  husband  at  some 
point ;  and  with  that  beginning  she  will  have  him  agreeing  with  her  at  the  main 
point,  before  she  is  through  with  him.  There  is  sound  philosophy  in  this  way  of  work- 
ing, and  God's  plan  is  aJways  the  perfection  of  philosophy.  The  Holy  Ghost  led 
the  first  foreign  missionaries  to  begin  their  work  abroad  in  the  synagogues  of  their 
Jewish  brethren.  The  Holy  Ghost  would  now  lead  every  Christian  worker  any- 
where to  look  first  for  points  of  sympathy  or  agreement  with  those  whom  he  would 
win  over  or  influence,  rather  than  to  start  out  by  recognising,  and  battling,  differ- 
ences and  prejudices,  which  will  thus  be  made  to  stand  as  permanent  barriers  to 
an  agreement,  when  they  might  have  been  quietly  passed,  and  left  behind  per- 
manently. {H.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  "  They  preached  the  Word  of  God"  : — Those 
Christians  have  done  most  service  who  have  in  every  instance  trusted  the  Word  for 
the  power  of  the  truth  in  it.  Dr.  James  W.  Alexander  put  in  one  of  his  letters, 
near  the  end  of  his  career,  the  statement  that,  if  he  were  to  Uve  his  public  life  over 
again,  he  would  dwell  more  upon  the  familiar  parts  and  passages  of  the  Bible,  like 
the  story  of  the  ark,  the  draught  of  fishes,  or  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son.  That 
is,  he  would  preach  more  of  the  Word  of  God  in  its  pure,  clear  utterances  of  truth 
for  souls.  When  the  saintly  Dr.  Cutler  of  Brooklyn  died,  the  Sunday-school 
remembered  that  he  used  to  come  in  every  now  and  then  during  the  years  of  his 
history,  and  repeat  just  a  single  verse  from  the  superintendent's  desk ;  and  the 
next  Lord's-day  after  the  funeral,  they  marched  up  in  front  of  it  in  a  long  line,  and 
each  scholar  quoted  any  of  the  texts  tliat  he  could  recollect.  The  grown  people 
positively  sat  there  and  wept,  as  they  saw  how  much  there  was  of  the  Bible  in  the 
hearts  of  their  children,  which  this  one  pastor  had  planted.  Yet  he  was  a  very 
timid  and  old-fashioned  man  ;  he  said  he  had  no  gift  at  talking  to  children ;  he  could 
only  repeat  God's  Word.  Is  there  anybody  now  who  is  ready  to  say  that  was  not 
enough  for  some  good  ?  {C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  They  had  also  John  to  their 
minister. — John  Mark : — Saul  and  Barnabas  were  highly  educated  men.  Mark  was  a 
friend  of  the  fisherman  Peter — young,  active,  a  useful  courier,  no  doubt,  but  not  in 
his  habits  or  tastes  the  social  equal  of  his  companions.  From  the  first  Mark  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  one  of  them.  His  heart  was  still  at  Jerusfiiem,  his 
sympathies  were  Judaic,  his  natural  friend  and  master  was  Peter,  not  Saul.  He 
had  his  own  work,  but  he  soon  found  he  was  not  called  to  the  Gentiles.    No.  Mark  ' 


CHAP,  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  311 

When  you  get  to  Perga  and  see  those  wild  hills  of  Pisidia  in  the  distance,  when 
you  think  of  those  heathen  cities  beyond,  those  treacherous  lone  countries,  yoa 
wont  care  to  face  them.  Your  mother  is  at  Jerusalem,  your  teacher  also  is  there ; 
you  cannot  assimilate  brother  Saul's  strong  anti-Judaic  doctrines,  just  yet  at  least ; 
you  don't  share  his  contempt  for  ceremonies.  You  are  a  little  nettled  at  one  so 
new  to  the  work  (not  one  of  the  twelve)  posing  as  an  authority  not  quite  in  accord 
either  with  Peter  or  James,  and  yet  habitually,  and  without  question,  stepping  in 
front  of  Barnabas.  Saul  thinks  you  lukewarm.  You  are  not  exactly  that.  Never- 
theless, you  will  "  not  go  with  him  to  work  " — you  will  return  to  Jerusalem.  Per- 
haps you  are  right.  You  have  your  own  work  ;  do  it  in  your  own  way.  Had  you 
gone  with  those  two  you  might  never  again  have  sat  at  Peter's  feet,  collected  his 
memoirs,  written  that  priceless,  brief,  matter-of-fact  statement — the  earliest,  the 
most  authentic  of  the  Synoptic  documents — which  was  once  called  Peter's  Gospel, 
and  which  we  know  as  the  Gospel  according  to  Mark.  {H.  B.  Haweis,  M.A.) 
And  when  they  had  gone  through  the  isle  unto  Paphos.  Paphoa  : — Now  Ba£Fo,  at 
the  western  extremity  of  the  island,  about  a  hundred  miles  from  Salamis,  on  a  rocky 
eminence  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  sea,  with  a  small  harbour,  which  at 
certain  seasons  affords  no  shelter  from  the  prevalent  winds.  The  city  was  restored 
by  Augustus,  after  suffering  most  severely  from  an  earthquake  ;  but  in  Jerome's 
time  its  site  was  covered  with  ruins.  (Bp.  Jacobson.)  Paul  in  Paphos : — Or  the 
preaching  of  the  Cross  in  its  power  to  conquer  the  world.  It  conquers — I.  Thb 
SINFUL  LUSTS  OF  THE  WORLD.  In  the  lascivious  myrtle  and  rose  groves  of  Venus, 
the  apostle  plants  the  Cross  of  Christ  as  the  symbol  of  repentance,  and  of  the  cruci- 
fixion of  the  flesh.  II.  The  false  wisdom  of  the  world.  The  deceits  of 
Elymas  dissolve  before  the  light  of  evangelical  grace  and  truth.  III.  The  power 
AND  WEAPONS  OF  THE  WORLD.  The  Roman  proconsul  surrenders  as  a  prisoner  to 
the  Word  of  God.  (E.  Gerok.)  They  found  a  certain  sorcerer,  a  false  prophet, 
a  Jew,  whose  name  was  Bar-Jesus.  Prevalence  of  sorcery  : — The  incident  presents 
a  true  picture  of  the  times.  At  that  period  impostors  from  the  East,  pretending  to 
magical  powers,  had  great  influence  over  the  Roman  mind.  The  East,  but  recently 
thrown  open,  was  a  land  of  mystery  to  the  western  nations.  Reports  of  the  strange 
arts  practised  there,  of  the  wonderful  events  of  which  it  was  the  scene,  excited 
almost  fanatically  the  imagination  both  of  the  populace  and  the  aristocracy  of 
Rome.  Syrian  fortune-tellers  crowded  the  capital,  and  appeared  in  aU  the  haunts 
of  business  and  amusement.  The  strongest  minds  were  not  superior  to  their  in- 
fluence. Marius  relied  on  a  Jewish  prophetess  for  regulating  the  progress  of 
his  campaigns.  Pompey,  Crassus,  and  Ca3sar  sought  information  from  Oriental 
astrology ;  Juvenal  paints  to  us  the  Emperor  Tiberius  "  sitting  on  the  rock  of  Capri, 
with  his  flock  of  Chaldseans  round  him."  ♦'  The  astrologers  and  sorcerers,"  saya 
Tacitus,  "are  a  class  of  men  who  will  always  be  discarded,  and  always  cherished." 
(H.  B.  Hackett,  D.D.)  Elymas  the  sorcerer  : — The  word  is  Magos,  the  same  as 
that  used  for  the  "  wise  men,"  Matt.  ii.  1,  but  it  is  obviously  used  here  in  the  bad 
sense  which  had  begun  to  attach  to  it  even  in  the  days  of  Sophocles,  who  makes 
(Edipus  revile  Tiresias  under  this  name,  as  practising  magic  arts  ("  CEd.  Rex.,"387), 
and  which  we  have  found  in  the  case  of  Simon  Magos,  the  sorcerer.  The  man 
bore  two  names,  one  Bar-Jesus,  in  its  form  a  patronymic,  the  other  Elymas  (an 
Aramaic  word,  probably  connected  with  the  Arabic  Uiema,  or  sage),  a  title  describ- 
ing his  claims  to  wisdom  and  supernatural  powers.  We  have  already  met  with  a 
character  of  this  type  in  the  sorcerer  of  Samaria.  The  lower  class  of  Jews  here,  as 
in  chap.  xix.  14,  seem  to  have  been  specially  addicted  to  such  practices.  They 
traded  on  the  religious  prestige  of  their  race,  and  boasted,  in  addition  to  their 
sacred  books,  of  spells  and  charms  that  had  come  down  to  them  from  Solomon. 
{Dean  Plumptre.)  Paul  and  Elymas  : — 1.  Among  the  chief  enemies  to  the 
gospel  in  early  times  was  the  sorcerer.  He  was  the  degenerate  descendant  of  the 
astrologers  and  wise  men  of  the  courts  of  Pharaoh,  and  Babylon.  They  inter- 
preted dreams,  explained  the  language  of  the  stars,  and  had  knowledge  of  the  laws 
of  nature.  We  can  account  for  their  ascendency.  It  would  be  easy,  e.g.,  for  the 
wise  man  to  account  for  the  cure  of  disease,  by  ascribing  it  to  his  power  over  occult 
qualities  or  evil  spirits.  A  mysterious  look  would  do  much  I  2.  They  were  the 
Jesuits  of  antiquity.  Their  one  object  was  to  make  all  things  work  together  for  the 
glory  of  thsir  order.  The  stars,  the  past,  the  future,  the  dream,  the  disease,  the 
earthquake,  the  eclipse,  were  all  taxed  for  their  interest.  All  depended  on  making 
men  think  that  they  had  iofluence  over  nature.  Thus  their  power  rested  on  a  he. 
8.  The  light  of  the  East  was  waning,  the  craft  of  the  sorcerer,  therefore,  moved 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xm. 

westward,  and  the  Rome  of  Tiberius  was  inundated  with  them.  I.  The  sobcebeb 
LIVES  on  from  age  TO  AGE.  He  belongs  to  no  particular  profession,  he  is  in  all. 
There  is  the  sorcery  of  the  political  economy  school ;  the  magician  of  literature  ; 
the  false  prophet  of  science ;  last,  but  not  least,  worse  than  all,  is  the  Church- 
Magus,  who  calls  attention  to  himself  instead  of  directing  it  to  God.  To  make  usa 
of  the  Bible,  of  sacraments,  of  heaven  and  hell,  to  terrify  men  into  conviction  of 
our  authority  and  influence,  is  the  essence  of  modern  sorcery.  The  ancient  used 
a  star,  the  modern  a  cross ;  the  old  Magus  availed  himself  of  diseases  of  the  body, 
the  new  of  diseases  of  the  mind.  For  one  man  to  stand  up  and  proclaim  himself 
to  be  possessed  of  power  or  privilege  not  possessed  by  all,  is  to  write  Elymas  in 
large  letters  on  his  forehead.  II.  Yes  !  and  the  cdrse  of  Elymas  is  on  vod  !  The 
gospel  darkens  and  blinds  this  sorcerer,  by  showing  what  are  "  the  right  ways  of 
the  Lord."  The  apostle  disclaimed  all  power.  He  came  to  turn  men  away  from 
man  ;  to  say  that  all  were  sinners,  he  the  chief;  that  all  must  turn  to  God,  from 
all  false  and  hollow  supports  ;  and  being  converted  from  man  to  God,  they  became, 
through  faith  in  Christ,  priests — offering  up  their  bodies  a  Uving  sacrifice  through 
Christ.  And  any  one  who  calls  away  the  attention  of  the  priestly  people  oSeriug 
themselves  to  God,  to  himself,  is  a  thief  and  robber.  The  glory  of  the  gospel  is 
that  it  gives  glory  to  God  only.  "  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom,"  &c. 
The  glory  of  the  gospel  is,  that  it  points  sinners  to  God,  away  from  all  human, 
secret  ways  of  giving  aid.  These  are  the  "  cunning  craftiness,"  the  "  sleight  of 
men,"  which  the  apostle  denounces  ;  the  "  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,"  "  the 
hidden  things  uf  dishonesty,"  which  he  disclaimed.  The  doctrine  of  the  universal 
Christian  priesthood,  of  the  one  sole  High  Priest,  is,  therefore,  Paul  meeting  Elymas. 
This  it  is  most  needful  to  ponder  ;  for  human  indolence,  guilty  fear,  and  love  of  power 
are  all  equally  interested  in  the  support  of  the  sorcerer  ecclesiastic.  III.  Thet  aee 
BLIND,  BOTH  SORCERER  AND  VICTIMS.  How  blind  to  think  it  a  greater  thing  to  make  him- 
self mysterious,  than  to  be  simply  a  channel  of  God's  truth  to  a  soul !  How  blind  to 
think  it  better  to  seem  than  to  be!  How  much  more  glorious  to  break  in  on  supersti- 
tion with,  "  We  are  men  of  like  passions  with  you,"  and  come  to  turn  you  away 
from  idols  to  the  "  living  God  "  1  How  much  greater  to  wake  men  up  to  a  sense 
of  their  priesthood,  than  to  claim  an  exclusive  priesthood  which  degrades  them  1 
There  is  absolutely,  then,  but  one  way  of  dealing  with  Elymas  and  his  victims, 
that  is  to  preach  the  whole  truth  of  Christ  respecting  the  lofty  privileges  of  the 
sons  of  God.  We  cannot,  if  we  would,  strike  the  sorcerer  blind.  He  is  blind,  blinder 
he  cannot  be  ;  but  we  can  proclaim  the  truth  he  hides.  We  can  tell  them  that  the 
only  way  to  be  sure  of  "  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord,"  is  to  receive  and  experience 
its  gracious  influence  ;  that  we  preach  "  tlu  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  to  make 
all  men  see  what  is  the  fellowship  of  the  mystery."  {B.  Kent,  M.A.)  Which 
was  with  the  deputy  of  the  country,  Sergius  Paulus,  a  prudent  man. — Sei-(jiu^ 
Paulus : — The  first  great  trophy  of  the  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  I.  Taken 
FROM  THE  MIDST  OF  A  HOSTILE  CAMP.  A  Eomau,  a  man  of  power,  a  man  of  educa- 
tion. II.  Wrested  from  a  crafty  possessor.  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  as  the 
representative  of  the  falsely  praised  art  of  human  sophistry.  III.  As  a  permanent 
ornament  TO  THE  APOSTLE.  Supplanting  his  Jcwish  name.  (K.Girok.)  A  prudent 
man : — In  a  worldly  point  of  view,  nothing  could  be  considered  more  imprudent, 
than  for  a  prominent  man,  in  a  Pagan  empire,  to  recognise  the  claims  of  the 
prophet  of  Galilee,  who  had  so  lately  been  crucified  at  Jerusalem.  Sergius  Paulua 
ran  the  risk  of  losing,  not  only  his  ofiice,  but  his  life,  and  yet  the  Divine  record 
describes  him  as  "A  prudent  man."  The  cunning,  artful  man  is  not  prudent, 
neither  is  he  always  prudent  who  is  most  successful  in  the  pursuit  of  worldly 
gain.  Prudence  is  discovered  in  the  preference  which  it  gives  to  every  object 
according  to  its  relative  value.  And  what  better  evidence  can  we  have  of  it,  than 
the  choice  of  an  everlasting  portion  in  heaven,  instead  of  being  content  with  the 
short-lived  pleasures  of  sin  ?  How  fearfully,  in  the  great  day  of  account,  will  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God  vindicate  this  use  of  the  term,  when  all  other  wisdom  shall  be 
proved  to  have  been  folly,  and  all  other  prudence  insanity,  except  that  which  leads 
men  too  seek  diligently  for  the  pearl  of  great  price,  and  when  they  have  found  it,  to 
sell  all  that  they  have  to  purchase  itl  Are  you  acting  the  part  of  "a  prudent 
man,"  in  God's  sight?  Alasl  in  how  many  hundred  ways  has  this  point  been 
brought  home  to  the  conscience  of  some  thoughtless  worldling,  who  is  hardening 
his  heart  against  it  now  1  One  can  almost  hear  his  imprudent  resolution  to 
delay,  although  he  does  not  put  it  into  words.  A  railway  passenger  observed  three 
persons  in  the  same  car  with  himself,  in  three  very  diSerent  conditions.    The 


<JHAP.  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  318 

first  was  a  maniac,  guarded  by  his  keepers,  who  was  on  his  way  to  an  asylum, 
perhaps  to  spend  weary  years.  Another  was  a  culprit,  in  chains,  on  whom  the 
iron  hand  of  justice  had  seized.  The  third  was  a  bride,  gay  and  joyous,  speeding 
onward  to  her  new  home,  where  a  warm  welcome  awaited  her.  Thus  are  we  all 
flying  towards  eternity;  some,  the  veriest  madmen,  because  they  neglect  to 
care  for  their  souls ;  some,  condemned  culprits,  for  grievous  violations  of 
Divine  law;  and  some,  prepared  for  a  Father's  welcome  to  the  heavenly  city. 
We  all  belong  to  one  of  these  classes.  Which  one  ?  (J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.) 
Christian  prudence : — I.  Its  natube.  1.  The  cunning  man  is  not  prudent.  2. 
The  worldly-minded,  persevering  for  their  own  advantage  in  this  Ufe,  are  not 
prudent.  3,  Conceit  of  our  own  wisdom  does  not  prove  us  among  the  prudent,  II. 
Its  sphere.  It  is  seen — 1.  In  an  insatiable  thirst  for  useful  knowledge.  2.  In 
the  preference  it  gives  to  every  object  according  to  its  relative  value.  3.  In  the 
subordination  of  the  passions.  4.  In  foresight  of,  and  provision  for,  circumstances. 
5.  In  a  willing  subjection  to  reproof.  6.  In  a  capacity  to  be  silent  on  fit  occasions. 
7.  In  observing  the  fittest  seasons  for  the  improvement  of  opportunities.  III.  Its 
MEANS  AND  MOTIVES.  1.  Be  it  your  concern  to  imbibe  a  fixed  sense  of  its  vast 
importance.  2.  Consider  the  numerous  evils  sure  to  result  from  its  absence.  3. 
Eemember  that  prudence  sweetens  all  the  endearing  charities  of  domestic  life.  4. 
Prudence  increases  and  facilitates  the  means  of  doing  good.  5.  Prayer  and  an 
intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Scriptures  are  the  grand  means  of  its  successful 
cultivation.  (<?.  Clayton.)  Prudence,  false : — James  I.  once  said  of  armour, 
that  "  it  was  an  excellent  invention,  for  it  not  only  saved  the  life  of  the  wearer,  but 
it  hindered  him  from  doing  harm  to  anybody  else."  Equally  destructive  to  all  use- 
fulness is  that  excessive  prudence  upon  which  some  professors  pride  themselves ; 
not  only  do  they  escape  all  persecution,  but  they  are  never  able  to  strike  a  blow, 
much  less  fight  a  battle,  for  the  Lord  Jesus.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Prudence  im- 
prudent : — Prudence,  in  its  ordinary  and  most  inadequate  sense,  has  done  Uttle  for 
the  world,  except  to  tease  and  hinder  many  of  its  masters.  It  would  have  kept 
every  mariner  from  the  deep,  and  deterred  every  traveller  from  the  desert ;  it  would 
have  put  out  the  fires  of  science,  and  clipped  the  wings  of  poetry ;  it  would  have 
kept  Abram  at  home,  and  found  Moses  a  comfortable  settlement  in  Egypt.  Beware 
of  imprudent  prudence  ;  it  will  lull  you  to  sleep,  and  bring  you  to  a  nameless  and 
wortMess  end.  Prudence  defined  : — Prudence  is  that  virtue  by  which  we  discern 
what  is  proper  to  be  done  under  the  circumstances  of  time  and  place.  (Milton.) 
Prudence  is  the  art  of  choosing : — He  is  prudent  who  among  many  objects  can 
distinguish  that  which  deserves  the  preference.  (L.  M.  Stretch.)  Prudence  is 
practical  wisdom,  and  comes  of  the  cultivated  judgment.  It  has  reference  in  all 
things  to  fitness,  to  propriety,  judgment  wisely  of  the  right  thing  to  be  done,  and 
of  the  right  way  of  doing  it.  It  calculates  the  means,  order,  time,  and  method  of 
doing.  Prudence  learns  of  experience,  quickened  by  knowledge.  (S.  Smiles,  LL.D.) 
Prudence :  its  necessity  for  self-protection : — The  child  who  has  only  sailed  his 
paper  boat  on  the  edge  of  a  placid  lake,  might  wonder  what  was  wanted  with 
enormous  beams  and  bars  of  iron,  innumerable  bolts  and  screws,  and  clasps,  and 
bars  of  metal,  in  making  a  ship.  Ask  the  sailor  and  he  will  answer.  He  says  we 
must  be  prepared  for  something  more  than  calm  days,  we  must  look  ahead,  the 
breakers  will  try  us,  the  winds  wiU  put  us  to  the  test,  we  may  come  upon  an 
unknown  rock ;  we  must  be  prepared  for  the  worst  as  well  as  for  the  best.  We 
call  this  prudence.  We  condemn  its  omission.  We  applaud  its  observance. 
What  of  men  who  attempt  the  stormy  and  treacherous  waters  of  life  without 
having  any  regard  for  the  probable  dangers  of  the  voyage?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Seeking  for  the  truth: — The  position  of  Sergius  Paulus  was  just  this.  On  the  one 
side  were  the  spirit-stirring  reports  of  a  Divine  message ;  and  on  the  other,  this 
false  prophet  plying  all  his  subtle  arts  to  discredit  it.  The  situation  is  not  an 
uncommon  one.  A  young  man  often  finds  himself  standing  between  his  evil 
genius  and  his  faithful  friend,  without  very  clearly  discerning  which  is  which, 
or  wavering  between  the  tidings  of  salvation  and  the  spells  of  infidelity,  and 
the  question  with  him  is,  in  which  direction  shall  he  turn  ?  like  a  traveller 
standing  where  two  roads  meet,  at  the  foot  of  a  guide-post,  unable  in  the  grey 
twilight  of  morning,  to  read  it,  and  knows  not  which  will  lead  him  to  his  home.  In  the 
case  before  us,  the  deputy  was  a  "prudent  man,"  i.e.,  thoughtful,  having  a  spice  of 
<3ommon  sense ;  and  therefore  he  "  sent  for  the  apostle,"  &c.  I.  The  deputy,  beins 
IN  DOUBT,  SEEKS  FARTHER  LIGHT.  1.  It  is  natural  to  supposc  that  some  features  in 
the  reports  which  had  reached  him  impressed  him  favourably,  and  that  others 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xm. 

■were  perplexing.  Elymas,  playing  upon  his  old  prejudices,  would  take  care  to 
exaggerate  some  and  to  explain  others  away,  and  to  feed  his  Roman  pride ;  but 
after  all  his  arts  were  exhausted,  the  deputy  still  desired  additional  light,  and 
determined  to  act  for  himself.  All  this  suggests  to  us  an  honest  mind.  He  does 
not  rush  to  a  conclusion ;  does  not  all  at  once  swear  by  Bar-jesus  or  by  Barnabas, 
or  even  take  a  middle  course,  and  dismiss  the  whole  matter  from  his  thoughts ; 
but  he  determines  to  get  more  knowledge.  2.  Now,  there  are  many  professed 
truth-seekers  in  the  world  who  vaunt  their  love  of  truth  and  proclaim  certain 
principles  with  unflinching  boldness.  But  they  never  go  a  step  out  of  their  way 
to  catch  the  sound  of  any  voice  but  their  own,  or  of  their  own  school.  Their 
reading  is  all  on  one  side ;  and  their  beliefs  float  along  with  the  same  tide  as 
their  worldly  interests.  But  he  who  unfeignedly  sets  himself  to  the  pursuit  of 
truth,  welcomes  her  in  every  situation  and  guise.  It  is  not  this  system  or  that 
which  he  seeks.  Truth  is  the  pearl  of  great  price,  for  which  he  is  prepared  to  sell 
all  that  he  has,  even  if  it  be  found  beneath  his  feet  and  entrusted  with  miry  clay. 
II.  The  deputy  desibed  to  hear  the  Word  of  God.  1.  Barnabas  and  Saul  did 
not  come  with  a  philosophy  or  a  new  theory.  They  claimed  to  speak  in  the  name 
of  God,  and  to  be  entrusted  with  His  own  Word,  and  it  was  this  which  the  deputy 
was  anxious,  or,  at  least,  curious,  to  hear.  2.  It  is  difficult,  perhaps  impossible, 
for  us  to  conceive  the  thrill  of  interest  which  the  very  phrase  the  Word  of  God 
would  awaken  in  a  devout,  truth-seeking,  heathen  soul,  and  yet  most  natural. 
The  soul  was  made  for  Gud.  In  its  fallen  state  it  is  unconscious  of  this.  But 
when  God  is  pleased  to  breathe  upon  it,  it  begins  to  yearn  after  Him,  and  soon 
finds  the  signs  of  His  presence,  but  it  wants  to  hear  His  voice.  3.  Imagine,  then, 
the  impetuous  rush  of  feeling  when  the  deep  silence  is  broken  by  the  voice  of  God  ; 
or  when  only  the  report  comes — God  has  spoken  I  But  some  one  may  say,  but, 
after  all,  it  may  really  not  be  the  Word  of  God,  but  some  specious  fabrication. 
Possibly,  for  many  false  prophets  had  gone  out  into  the  world,  as,  e.g.,  this  Elymas 
the  Sorcerer.  There  was  the  possibility  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  might  be  pre- 
tenders of  the  same  kind.  But  suppose  your  father  had  gone  to  a  distant  part  of 
the  world,  and  after  a  long  absence  you  were  hoping  for  his  return,  would  not 
every  new  voice,  every  reported  arrival  naturally  excite  the  question,  Is  this  he? 
And  if  the  news  reached  you  that  a  gentleman  from  a  far  country  had  arrived  at  • 
distant  port,  answering  somewhat  to  the  description  of  your  father,  how  eagerly 
would  you  set  out  to  ascertain  the  fact  and  to  rush  into  his  arms  I  But  if  the 
tidings  arrived  that  your  father  had  returned,  though,  after  all,  it  might  be  a 
false  report,  yet  how  enthusiastically  would  you  fly  to  meet  him !  So,  in  like 
manner,  if  you  hunger  after  your  heavenly  Father,  and  anything  comes  in  the 
shape  of  a  message  from  Him,  you  will  certainly  determine  to  hear  it.  It  may 
possibly,  after  all,  not  be  His  word,  but  you  wiU  hear  it.  There  can  be  no  harm  in 
hearing  it.  It  may  be  your  Father's  arrival.  IH.  The  deputy  desired  to  heab 
THE  Word  of  Gud  at  first  hand.  1.  It  is  always  best  to  go  to  headquarters  for 
our  information.  Judge  not  of  any  man,  or  system,  or  Church  through  the  eyes 
of  another,  but  look  and  see  with  your  own.  There  must  have  been  all  kinds 
of  rumours  in  reference  to  Paul  and  Barnabas,  rumours  exaggerating,  disparaging, 
caricaturing,  or  falsifying.  Now,  there  are  many  people  in  our  day,  and,  no  doubt, 
there  were  some  then,  who  would  have  contented  themselves  with  these  flying 
reports,  and  would,  perhaps,  have  helped  to  distort  and  to  spread  them.  Or  they 
might  have  made  a  selection,  each  taking  up  just  those  elements  which  were  most 
congenial  with  his  own  tendencies.  But  the  sensible  man  who  wanted  to  know  the 
truth  would  have  done  just  what  the  deputy  did — "  sent  for  the  apostles."  Pay  all 
proper  respect  to  the  judgments  of  others,  and  open  your  ears  to  every  voice  which 
may  possibly  direct  your  way ;  but,  in  dependence  on  the  guidance  of  God's  Spirit, 
examine  and  judge  for  yourself ;  for  you  are  responsible  for  yourself,  and  you 
have  your  account  to  render  at  last  to  God.  2.  But  I  would  especially  urge 
this  course  in  reference  to  your  own  study  of  the  Word  of  God.  You  desire  to  hear 
it.  Then  do  as  the  deputy  did.  The  Scriptures  are  in  your  hands,  and  you  can 
read  them  for  yourselves.  This  is  the  best  school  in  which  to  learn  spiritual 
truth.  Do  not  be  content  with  the  mere  assertions  of  others  as  to  what  is 
contained  in  the  Scriptures;  but  like  the  noble  Bereans,  search  the  Scriptures 
themselves  daily,  to  see  if  these  things  are  so.  But  take  care  how  you  deal  with 
them  ;  not  hastily  or  lightly  caught  by  the  sound  of  words,  or  the  first  blush  of  a 
text;  not  taking  out  of  it  what  you  have  first  put  in,  but  making  it  your  earnest 
endeavour  to  draw  from  it  what  God  has  intended  tc  teach  and  nothing  elsa. 


CHAP,  xiu.]  THE  ACTS.  315 

Before  all  things,  therefore,  invoke  the  Divine  Spirit  of  light  and  truth.  Then 
take  the  best  help  yoo  can  get,  in  order  to  reach  the  real  meaning ;  compare  one 
part  of  Scripture  with  another.  This  may  be  a  toilsome  labour,  but  it  is  gainful. 
Men  do  not  shrink  from  the  labour  and  dangers  of  mining.  The  Scripture  is  a 
mine,  which  must  be  worked  with  equal  earnestness  and  hard  labour,  but  with 
infinitely  more  profit  (Prov.  ii.  3).  In  this  manner  the  Bible  becomes  its  own 
witness,  and  proves  itself  to  be  the  Word  of  God.  IV.  The  deputy  having  desired 
to  hear  the  Word  of  God,  was  favoub^  with  a  wondebfol  display  of  its  Divine 
POWER.  But  the  Spirit  of  truth,  here  as  everywhere,  was  too  mighty  for  the 
spirit  of  lies.  Here  was  the  man  who  was  going  to  enlighten  others,  himself 
immersed  in  darkness ;  he,  who  was  going  to  lead  all  wanderers,  is  seeking  some 
one  to  lead  himself  by  the  hand.  There,  as  you  see  him  staggering  and  groping 
about  in  bewilderment,  how  striking  is  the  emblem  of  the  dismal  confusion  of  his 
soul !  He  had  opened  his  eyes  to  stare  impiously  at  the  glorious  Sun  of  truth,  and 
its  beams  have  blinded  him.  The  Eoman  is  astonished  at  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord, 
and,  convinced  by  such  overwhelming  evidence,  becomes  a  believer  in  the  gospel  of 
Christ.  Observe — 1.  That  the  form  in  which  this  Divine  manifestation  was  made 
was  one  of  power.  This  was  the  one  thing  which  the  Romans  reverenced.  They 
had  httle  taste  for  the  speculations  of  philosophers,  or  for  the  tenderness  of  poets. 
They  were  not  fascinated  by  the  arts,  unless,  indeed,  in  the  creations  of  stately  and 
massive  buildings ;  but  they  were  profoundly  impressed  with  power.  They  had 
aspired,  not  without  success,  to  be  the  masters  of  the  world,  and  to  give  laws  to 
subject  nations.  Sergius  Paulus  was  a  Eoman,  and  had  come  with  these  proud 
conceptions  to  rule  over  Cyprus.  A  gospel  preached  by  a  few  poor  Jews,  having  for 
its  object  a  crucified  Jew,  would  naturally  appear  to  him  a  weak  and  contemptible 
thing,  which  no  eloquence  could  render  worthy  of  his  notice.  But  when  Paul, 
speaking  in  the  name  of  the  living  God,  hurled  the  thunderbolt  of  His  vengeance 
against  an  impostor,  the  pride  of  the  Eoman  was  subdued  into  a  humility  of 
wondering  reverence.  2.  That  the  power  of  God  is  here  put  forward  to  expose 
imposture  and  to  unmask  pretence.  It  was  a  false  prophet  who  was  thus  smitten 
with  blindness.  It  was  the  lurid  light  of  cunning  and  lies  which  was  queuched  by 
the  sunbeams  of  truth.  The  Eoman  ruler  must  have  in  this  event  recognised  the 
awful  presence  of  a  God  of  purity,  whose  eye  pierced  into  the  inner  chambers  of 
the  soul,  and  to  whom  lying  lips  are  an  abomination.  And  therefore  he  beheved. 
If  you  will  earnestly  bring  yourselves  into  contact  with  the  Word  of  God,  you,  too, 
in  like  manner,  will  become  the  witnesses  of  its  Divine  power.  But  there  is  a  mist 
and  a  darkness  still  ready  to  fall  on  those  who,  like  Elymas,  deal  in  hypocrisies. 
Beware  how  you  stifle  your  hidden  convictions,  or  disguise  your  real  character,  or 
deal  in  hoUow  pretence.     (J.  M.  Charlton,  M.A.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Then  Saul  (who  also  Is  called  Paul). — The  crisis  in  SauVs  history 
and  his  change  of  name  : — From  this  point  Paul  appears  as  the  great  figure  in  every 
picture,  and  Barnabas  faUs  into  the  background.  The  great  apostle  now  enters  on 
his  work  as  preacher  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  simultaneously  his  name  is  changed. 
As  '*  Abram  "  was  changed  into  "  Abraham  "  when  God  promised  that  he  should 
be  the  "  father  of  many  nations  "  ;  as  "  Simon  "  was  changed  into  "  Peter  "  when 
u  was  said,  "On  this  rock  I  wUl  build  My  Church";  so  Saul  is  changed  into 
"  Paul "  at  the  moment  of  bis  victory  among  the  heathen.  What  the  plains  of 
Mamre  were  to  the  patriarch,  what  Csesarea  PhUippi  was  to  the  fisherman  of 
Galilee,  that  was  Paphos  to  the  tent-maker  of  Tarsus.  Are  we  to  sut  pose  that 
the  name  was  now  given  for  the  first  time — that  he  adopted  it  as  significant  of 
his  own  feelings — or  that  Sergius  Paulus  conferred  it  on  him  in  grateful  com- 
memoration of  the  benefits  he  had  received,  or  that  "  Paul,"  having  been  a  Gentile 
form  of  the  apostle's  name  in  early  life  conjointly  with  the  Hebrew  "  Saul,"  was 
now  used  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other  to  indicate  that  he  had  receded  from  his 
position  as  a  Jewish  Christian,  to  become  the  friend  and  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  ? 
We  are  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the  Cilician  apostle  had  this  Eoman  name 
before  he  was  a  Christian.  This  adoption  of  a  Gentile  name  is  so  far  from  being 
alien  to  the  spirit  of  a  Jewish  family,  that  a  similar  practice  may  be  traced 
through  all  the  periods  of  Hebrew  history.  Beginning  with  the  Persian  epoch 
(B.C.  550-350),  we  fiaid  such  names  as  Nehemiah,  Schammai,  Belteshazzar,  which 
betray  an  oriental  origin,  and  show  that  Jewish  appellatives  followed  the  growth 
of  the  living  language.  In  the  Greek  period  we  encounter  the  names  of  Philip, 
and  his  son  Alexander,  and  of  Alexander's  successors — Antiochus,  Lysimachus, 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xni. 

Ptolemy,  Antipater;  the  names  of  Greek  philosophers,  snch  as  Zeus  and  Epicurng; 
even  Greek  mythological  names,  as  Jason  and  Menelaus.  When  we  mention  the 
Roman  names  adopted  by  the  Jews  the  coincidence  is  still  more  striking — Crispus, 
Justus,  Niger,  Drusilla  and  Priscilla  might  have  been  Boman  matrons.  The 
Aquila  of  St.  Paul  is  the  counterpart  of  the  Apella  of  Horace.  Again,  in  the  earher 
part  of  the  Middle  Ages  we  find  Jews  calling  themselves  Basil,  Leo,  Theodosius, 
Sophia,  and  in  the  latter  part  Albert,  Benedict,  Crispin,  Denys.  It  is  indeed 
remarkable  that  the  separated  nation  should  bear  in  the  very  names  recorded  in  its 
annals  the  trace  of  every  nation  with  whom  it  has  come  in  contact  and  never 
united.  It  is  important  to  our  present  purpose  to  remark  that  double  names  often 
occur  in  combination,  the  one  national,  the  other  foreign.  The  earliest  instances 
are  Belteshazzar-Daniel  and  Esther-Hadasa.  Frequently  there  was  no  resem- 
blance or  natural  connection  between  the  two  words,  as  in  Herod-Agrippa,  Salome- 
Alexandra,  Inda-Aristobulus,  Simon  Peter.  Sometimes  the  meaning  was  repro- 
duced, as  in  Malich-Kleodemus.  At  other  times  an  alliterating  resemblance  of 
sound  seems  to  have  dictated  the  choice,  as  in  Jose-Jason,  HiUel-Julus,  Saul- 
Paulus.  Thus  satisfactory  reasons  can  be  adduced  for  the  apostle's  double 
name  without  having  recourse  to  the  hypothesis  of  Jerome,  who  suggests  that 
as  Scipio  was  called  Africanus  from  the  conquest  of  Africa,  and  Metellua 
Creticus  from  the  conquest  of  Crete,  so  Saul  carried  away  his  new  name  as  a 
trophy  of  his  victory  over  the  heathenism  of  the  proconsul  Paulus,  or  to  the  notion 
of  Augustine  when  he  alludes  to  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word  Paulus,  and 
contrasts  Saul  the  unbridled  king,  the  proud,  self-confident  persecutor  of  David, 
with  Paul,  the  lowly,  the  penitent,  who  deliberately  wished  to  indicate  by  his 
very  name  that  he  was  "the  least  of  the  apostles"  and  "less  than  the  least  of 
all  saints."  Yet  we  must  not  neglect  the  coincident  occurrence  of  these  two  names 
just  here.  We  need  not  hesitate  to  dwell  on  the  associations  which  are  connected 
with  the  name  of  Paulus,  or  on  the  thoughts  which  are  naturally  called  up  when 
we  notice  the  critical  passage  where  it  is  first  given  to  Saul.  It  is  surely  not 
unworthy  of  notice  thiit  as  Peter's  first  Gentile  convert  was  a  member  of  the 
Cornelian  house,  so  the  surname  of  the  noblest  family  of  the  CorneUan  house 
was  the  link  between  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  and  his  convert  at  Paphos. 
Nor  can  we  find  a  nobler  Christian  version  of  any  line  of  a  heathen  poet  than 
by  comparing  what  Horace  says  of  him  who  fell  at  Cannse,  "Animce  magna 
prodigum  Paulum,"  with  the  words  of  him  who  said  at  MUetus,  "  I  count  not 
my  life  dear  unto  myself,"  Ac.  And  though  Saul  most  probably  had  the  name  of 
Paul  at  an  earlier  period,  and  that  it  came  from  some  connection  of  his  ancestors 
(perhaps  as  manumitted  slaves)  with  some  member  of  the  iEmilian  Pauli ;  yet  we 
cannot  believe  it  accidental  that  it  occurs  at  this  point  of  the  inspired  narrative. 
The  heathen  name  rises  to  the  surface  at  the  moment  Paul  enters  on  his  ofi&ce  as 
apostle  to  the  heathen.  The  Boman  name  is  stereotyped  at  the  moment  when  he 
converts  the  Boman  governor ;  and  the  place  where  this  occurs  is  the  very  spot 
which  was  notorious  for  what  the  gospel  forbids  and  destroys.  Here,  having 
achieved  his  victory,  the  apostle  erected  his  trophy,  as  Moses,  when  Amalek  was 
discomfited,  "  built  an  altar,  and  called  the  name  of  it  Jehovah-nissi — the  Lord  my 
banner."  (J.  S.  Howson,  D.D.)  Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  set  Ms  eyes  on 
Mm,  and  said,  0  full  of  all  subtlety  and  mischief. — Sin  arid  its  punishment : — 
Paul's  rebuke,  of  course,  applies  to  the  specific  iniquity  of  Elymas,  but  with  a 
master  hand  the  apostle  at  the  same  time  delineates  the  characteristics  of  sin  in 
general.  The  punishment  of  Elymas  is  also  typical.  I.  Sin.  1.  Its  subtle 
methods.  There  is  nothing  straightforward  about  sin  ;  nor  can  there  be  :  for  were 
its  nature  and  consequences  clear,  it  would  be  universally  shunned  and  abhorred. 
Its  methods,  therefore,  must  needs  be  crooked  and  insinuating.  Evil  is  dressed  up 
in  the  gaise  of  good.  The  fruit  of  the  tree  was  made  pleasant  to  the  eyes  of  Eve. 
So  is  it  all  through  time.  2.  Its  mischievous  effects.  It  debases  the  body, 
degrades  the  mind,  debilitates  the  will,  and  damns  the  soul.  3.  Its  Satanic 
paternity.  •'  The  serpent  was  more  subtle  than  all  the  beasts  of  the  field." 
The  devil  injects  the  sinful  thought,  guides  the  sinful  resolution,  helps  the  sinful 
action,  and  enjoys  the  sinful  effect.  4.  Its  enmity  to  righteousness.  Bight  and 
wrong  are  not  co-ordinate  powers  which,  like  adjacent  states,  can  flourish  side  by 
side  and  enter  into  peaceful  alliances  with  each  other.  They  are  ever  in  irrecon- 
cilable antagonism,  and  the  prosperity  of  the  one  is  absolutely  dependent  on  the 
destruction  of  the  otLior.  6.  Its  perversion  of  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord.  This 
is  the  essence  of  sin.     It  is  not  simply  negation,  but  perversion ;  and  its  highest 


BHAP.  xm.]  TEE  ACTS.  817 

achievement  is  to  secure  the  acceptance  of  evil  under  the  guise  of  good.  Elymas, 
as  a  Jewish  prophet,  armed  with  the  authority  of  a  Divine  dispensation,  threw 
a  spell  over  the  mind  of  the  proconsul,  and  endeavoured  to  use  his  usurped 
authority  for  selfish  and  villainous  purposes.  Wherein  does  he  differ  from  the 
modern  hypocrite?  II.  Its  punishment.  1.  Its  subtlety  is  detected.  (1)  Some- 
times sin  overreaches  itself;  it  is  not  suflBciently  comprehensive  in  its  views. 
Ahab  calculated  on  getting  Naboth's  vineyard,  but  did  not  calculate  on  Elijah.  So 
here  Elymas  overlooked  the  possibility  of  the  advent  of  a  Paul.  (2)  Sometimes  its 
detection  is  the  result  of  some  extraordinary  Divine  agency — "  Saul,  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost."  The  common  saying,  "  Murder  will  out."  How  often,  by  a 
trivial  oversight  on  the  part  of  the  criminal,  or  by  some  trifling  coincidence,  has 
a  great  crime  been  revealed.  2.  Its  mischievous  effects  are  turned  upon  the  sinner. 
He  who  sought  to  blind  the  intellect  of  Sergius  Paulus  is  himself  made  blind. 
••  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  3.  The  son  inherits  the  father's  punish- 
ment. Satan  is  the  prince  of  darkness,  and  his  children  are  doomed  to  walk  in 
darkness.  The  dark  ways  in  which  the  devil  leads  his  victims  leads  to  "  outer 
darkness."  4.  Its  enmity  to  righteousness  is  met  by  the  righteous  God.  "  Though 
hand  join  in  hand  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished."  5.  Its  perversion  is 
met  by  perversion.  "He  went  about,"  &c.  (ver.  11).  (J.  TF.  Burn.)  Reproof: 
how  a  true  servant  of  God  uses  his  office  of : — 1.  Not  in  carnal  passion,  but  in  the 
Holy  Ghost  (ver.  9).  2.  Not  with  worldly  weapons,  but  with  the  sword  of  the 
Word,  by  which  he  discloses  the  evil  state  of  the  heart  (ver.  10),  and  announces 
the  judgment  of  God  (ver.  11).  3.  Not  for  death  or  condemnation,  but  for  warning 
and  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  {K.  Gerok.)  The  punishment  of  Elymas  was — 
I.  In  cokeespondence  with  the  teansgbession.  He  who  blinded  others  is  himself 
blinded.     U.  Stbiking  and  convinci^'q  fob  the  spectatobs.     III.  With  all  its 

BEVEEITT   CONDUCIVE   TO   AMENDMENT  BY  AN   INTIMATION    OF   THE  DiVINE  MERCY.      Paul 

himself,  at  his  conversion,  had  been  blind  for  a  season,  and  knew  from  his 
experience  how  profitable  this  darkness  was  for  internal  collection  and  composure 
of   mind.      {Apostolic  Pastor.)  The   exceptional  character  of  the  miracle : — 

The  miracles  of  the  New  Testament  are  generally  distinguished  from  the  Old  by 
being  worthy  works  of  mercy.  Two  only  of  our  Lord's  were  inflictions  of  severity, 
and  those  were  attended  with  no  harm  to  the  bodies  of  men.  The  same  law 
pervades  the  miracles  of  the  apostles.  One  miracle  of  wrath  was  worked  by  Peter 
and  Paul ;  and  we  can  see  sufficient  reasons  why  liars  and  hypocrites  like  Ananias 
and  Sapphira,  and  impostors  like  Elymas,  should  be  publicly  punished,  and  made 
examples  of.  A  passage  in  the  life  of  Peter  presents  a  parallel  which  is  closer  in 
some  respects  with  this  interview  of  Paul  with  Bar-jesus.  As  Simon  Magus,  "  who 
had  long  time  bewitched  the  Samaritans  with  his  sorceries,"  was  denounced  by 
Peter  "  as  still  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,"  Ac,  and  solemnly  told  that  his  heart  was 
not  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  so  Paul,  conscious  of  his  apostolic  power,  and  under 
the  power  of  immediate  inspiration,  rebuked  Elymas  as  a  child  of  that  devil  who  is 
"  the  father  of  lies,"  as  a  worker  of  deceit  and  mischief,  <fec.  He  proceeded  to 
denounce  an  instantaneous  judgment,  and  according  to  his  prophetic  word,  the 
"  hand  of  the  Lord  "  struck  the  sorcerer,  as  it  had  once  struck  the  apostle  himself — 
the  sight  of  the  magician  began  to  waver,  and  presently  a  darkness  settled  on  it  so 
thick  that  he  ceased  to  behold  the  sun's  light.  This  blindness  of  the  false  prophet 
opened  the  eyes  of  the  deputy.  That  which  had  been  intended  as  an  opposition  to 
the  gospel  proved  the  means  of  its  extension.  We  are  ignorant  of  the  degree  of 
this  extension  in  Cyprus.  But  we  cannot  doubt  that  when  the  proconsul  was 
converted,  his  influence  would  make  Christianity  reputable ;  and  that  from  this 
moment  the  Gentiles  of  the  island  as  well  as  the  Jews  had  the  news  of  salvation 
brought  home  to  them.  {J.  S.  Howson,  D.D.)  Seeking  to  turn  men  from  the 
faith: — Unprincipled  white  men  have  often  been  great  stumbling-blocks  in  the 
way  of  Indian  evangelisation.  An  Englishman  made  his  boast  that  he  could 
induce  the  Indians  again  to  drink  ;  and  providing  himself  with  ardent  spirits,  he 
moved  in  his  canoe  over  to  the  island  where  the  Indians  were  encamped.  Leaving 
all  at  the  shore,  he  went  up  to  the  camp,  and,  inviting  the  Indians  down,  brought 
forth  his  bottle.  "  Come,"  he  said,  "  we  always  good  friends  ;  we  once  more  take 
a  good  drink  in  friendship."  "  No,"  said  Captain  Paudaush,  "  we  drink  no  more 
of  the  fire  waters."  "  Oh,  but  you  will  drink  with  me  ;  we  always  good  friends  "  ; 
but  while  this  son  of  Belial  was  urging  them  to  drink,  the  Indians  struck  up,  in  the 
tune  of  Walsall,  the  hymn  they  had  lately  learned  to  sing — 


818  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnt 


**  0  for  a  thousand  tongues  to  sing 
The  great  Bedeemer's  praise  1 " 


And  while  the  Indians  were  singing,  this  bacchanalian,  defeated  in  his  wicked 
device,  and  looking  completely  crestfallen,  paddled  away  from  the  island,  leaving 
the  Indians  to  their  temperance  and  their  religious  devotions  1  An  enemy  of 
righteousness : — Mr.  Beecher  once  met  Colonel  Ingersoll,  a  great  American  atheist, 
and  Colonel  Ingersoll  began  to  discourse  on  his  atheistic  views.  Mr.  Beecher  for 
some  time  was  silent,  but,  after  a  time,  asked  to  be  allowed  to  tell  a  story.  On 
being  requested  to  do  so,  he  said,  ••  As  I  was  walking  down  town  to-day,  I  saw  a 
poor  man  slowly  and  carefully  picking  his  way  through  mud,  in  the  endeavour  to 
cross  a  street.  He  had  just  reached  the  middle  of  the  filth  when  a  big,  burly 
rufifian,  himself  all  bespattered,  rushed  up  to  him,  jerked  the  crutches  from  under 
the  unfortunate  man,  and  left  him  sprawling  and  helpless  in  the  pool  of  liquid 
dirt,  which  almost  engulfed  him."  "What  a  brute  he  wasl"  said  the  colonel. 
"  What  a  brute  he  was  I  "  they  all  echoed.  "  Yes,"  said  the  old  man,  rising  from 
his  chair,  and  brushing  back  his  long  white  hair,  "  yes,  Colonel  Ingersoll,  and  you 
are  the  man.  The  human  soul  is  lame,  but  Christianity  gives  it  crutches  to  enable 
it  to  pass  the  highway  of  life.  It  is  your  teaching  that  knocks  these  crutches  from 
under  it,  and  leaves  it  a  helpless  and  rudderless  wreck  in  the  Slough  of  Despond. 
If  robbing  the  human  soul  of  its  only  support  on  this  earth — religion — be  your 
profession,  why,  ply  it  to  your  heart's  content.  It  requires  an  architect  to  erect  a 
building ;  an  incendiary  may  reduce  it  to  ashes."  Seeking  to  turn  men  from  the 
truth: — A  boy  was  impressed  in  one  of  Mr.  Moody's  meetings.  But  his  mother 
said  he  was  "good  enough  without  religion,"  and  threw  her  influence  against  Mr. 
Moody's  efforts  to  win  him  to  Christ.  She  "Succeeded,  and  some  time  after  Mr. 
Moody  found  him  in  the  county  jail.  "  How  came  you  here ?  Does  your  mother 
know  of  it  ?  "  "  No,  sir,  and  pray  don't  tell  her.  I  came  in  under  an  assumed 
name,  and  am  going  to  JoUet  State  prison  for  four  years.  She  thinks  I  am 
in  the  army."  And  Mr.  Moody  often  heard  her  afterwards,  mourning  that  her 
boy  was  killed. 

Ver.  12.  Then  the  deputy,  when  he  saw  what  was  done,  believed. — Two  Paul* 

and  a  blinded  sorcerer: — Note — I.  Opposition  to  the  faith.  1.  Elymas  "with- 
stood them,  seeking  to  turn  away  the  deputy  from  the  faith."  This  is  true  the 
world  over.  The  greater  the  opportunity  the  greater  the  opposition.  The  devil  is 
ever  on  the  look-out  to  defeat  the  servants  of  God  and  hinder  the  effect  of  truth. 
2.  But  opposition  is  overruled  for  good.  The  intense  opposition  of  Elymas  only 
served  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  deputy  more  intently  to  the  doctrine  of  God'a 
Word.  But  more  than  this :  when  Saul  pronounced  upon  him  the  solemn  judg- 
ment of  God,  the  proconsul  saw  that  it  was  in  very  deed  the  Word  of  God.  Tho 
bUnded  sorcerer,  seeking  some  one  to  lead  him  by  the  hand,  was  a  visible  witness 
lor  the  truth  against  which  he  had  fought.  So  that  the  overthrow  of  the  opposi- 
tion made  the  victory  of  truth  the  more  conspicuous.  And  this  is  always  so.  II. 
Aids  to  faith.  I  have  not  called  miracles  causes  of  faith,  for  they  do  not  cause 
it,  although  they  may  lead  up  to  it.  What  Sergius  Paulus  saw  did  not  make  him 
beheve,  but  it  helped  him  to  believe.  What  did  he  see,  then?  1.  The  great 
courage  of  Paul.  In  another  case  boldness  struck  a  blow  at  unbehef,  for  when  the 
rulers  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  John,  and  perceived  that  they  were  unlearned 
and  ignorant  men,  they  marvelled.  In  this  case  the  effect  would  be  the  same. 
Saul  fixed  his  eyes  oa  Elymas  as  though  he  were  perfectly  master  of  the  situation— 
as  indeed  he  was,  and  without  hesitation  or  apology  addressed  him,  "  O  full  of  all 
subtlety,"  &c.  Intense  conviction  in  the  mind  of  Paul  led  him  to  speak  thus 
plainly  and  sternly,  but  it  was  not  the  heat  of  his  own  spirit,  for  he  was  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Let  every  teacher  of  Christ  be  thus  filled,  and  then  let  him 
speak  boldly,  as  he  ought  to  speak.  Come  not  forward  with  your  "  ifs "  and 
"buts"  and  "peradveutures  "  to  prove  God's  Word.  Tell  out  the  message  God 
hath  told  thee,  as  from  Him,  and  not  as  thine  own  opinion  1  2.  God's  judgments. 
If  Sergius  Paul  was  deeply  impressed  with  Paul's  boldness,  he  was  still  more 
deeply  moved  when  he  saw  Elymas  stricken  with  blindness.  3.  God's  wonders  of 
mercy.  Conversions  are  the  standing  miracles  of  the  gospel,  the  best  attesting 
seals  the  truth  can  have.  I  knew  a  man  who  was  of  a  fierce  temper,  a  troubler  to 
his  own  household  ;  I  have  seen  that  man  since  his  conversion,  and  the  lion  has 
become  a  lamb.    We  have  seen  persons  revelling  in  liceutiousness,  bat  they  have 


CHAp.xm.]  THE  ACTS.  819 

heard  the  gospel  and  become  chaste.  What  has  'wrought  this?  What  teach> 
ing  must  that  be  which  accomplishes  such  marvels  ?  III.  The  soubce  of  faith. 
It  is  '*  doctrine,"  or  faithful  teaching,  which  brings  men  to  Christ.  Let  those  who 
despise  doctrine  beware,  for  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross  is  only  foolishness  to  them 
•who  perish.  Under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the  plain  teaching  of  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  leads  men  to  beUeve  in  Jesus.  I  do  not  think  it  is  any  great 
good  for  a  preacher  to  cry,  "BeHeve,"  if  he  never  teUs  you  what  is  to  be 
believed.  There  is  plenty  of  this  kind  of  preaching  about,  and  the  result  is  sadly 
transient  and  superficiaL  If  we  do  not  preach  the  great  doctrine  of  the  atoning 
sacrifice,  we  have  not  put  before  men  the  basis  on  which  their  faith  is  to  be  built. 
Justification  by  faith  and  regeneration  by  the  Spirit  must  be  taught  continually. 
The  proconsul  was,  no  doubt,  astonished  to  see  Elymas  blinded,  but  he  was  a 
great  deal  more  astonished  at  the  doctrine  which  Paul  preached  when  he  began  to 
tell  him  that  salvation  was  not  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ; 
that  the  way  to  be  accepted  of  God  was  not  by  presenting  to  the  Lord  anything 
performed  by  us  or  felt  within  us,  but  by  laying  hold  upon  the  righteousness  which 
Jesus  Christ  has  wrought  out  and  brought  in.  When  he  heard  this  good  news  he 
might  well  be  astonished,  and  yield  his  heart  to  Jesus.  The  most  astonishing  thing 
in  the  world  is  the  gospel.  Come,  then,  and  candidly  study  what  is  to  be  believed. 
If  you  desire  to  know  God  you  shall  know  Him.  The  great  Father  is  not  far  from 
any  one  of  you.  There  is  the  Ught  1  It  is  not  dim,  nor  far  away.  The  fault  is  in 
your  eyes  if  you  do  not  see.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  conversion  of  Sergius 
Paulus : — I.  He  saw.  Probably  no  special  stress  is  laid  upon  the  seeing,  yet  the 
fact  that  opportunity  was  given  him  to  see  is  worthy  of  emphasis.  Had  the 
Church  of  Antioch  loved  their  own  better  than  the  things  of  Christ,  the  mis- 
sionaries had  been  kept  at  home.  If  we  turn  over  the  opportunity  of  Sergius 
and  examine  its  obverse  side,  we  shall  find  written  thereon  a  duty  and  a  privilege. 
Paul,  who  felt  it  and  obeyed  it  thus  early  in  his  career,  later  states  it  (Kom.  x. 
13-15).  The  great  salvation  is  provided  for  all ;  let  it  be  carried  to  all.  No  vio- 
lence is  done  human  thought  or  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  by  discerning,  in  the  pro- 
consul's opportunity  to  see,  the  Church's  opportunity  to  send.  Paul  came  and 
preached,  therefore  Paulus  saw  and  heard.  II.  He  was  astonished.  The  transi- 
tion from  sight  to  faith  is  explained  in  the  astonishment  produced  by  the  matter 
and  manner  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord.  Two  teachers,  each  professing  to  possess 
the  oracles  of  the  Highest,  had  confronted  each  other  with  contradictory  doctrine. 
The  mind  of  the  heathen  deputy,  unrestful  and  discontented  with  the  fables  of 
Roman  mythology,  must  have  been  perplexed  with  these  rival  claimants  for 
his  faith  and  devotion.  But  the  purer  doctrine  had  the  prevailing  power,  and 
Paulus  wondered  at  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord,  and  admired  it.  Then  came  the  proof 
that  the  story  of  Divine  love  was  no  bright  fiction  nor  sweet  poem,  but  a  genuine 
fact  and  power  in  the  world  among  men  by  the  method  of  the  teaching — persua- 
sively to  him  who  was  ready  to  hear — judicially  to  him  who  was  determined  to 
resist.  It  could  sue  or  subdue.  lU.  He  believed.  The  simphcity  and  freshness  of 
youth  adorned  and  invigorated  the  gospel  of  that  early  day.  The  deputy's  mind 
was  not  perplexed  by  half  a  dozen  kinds  of  faith,  each  with  a  technical  name 
requiring  special  instruction  to  understand.  The  story  of  the  living,  personal 
Christ,  what  He  bad  said  and  done,  and  what  He  wanted  and  waited  to  do,  was  the 
simple  and  unformulated  theology  of  that  earliest  day.  Sergius  Paulus,  in  be- 
heving,  was  conscious  of  no  such  abstract  process  as  that  of  accepting  a  theory  or 
adopting  a  system.  This  might  come  afterwards ;  but  when  he  believed  he  simply 
trusted  himself  into  the  care  of  God,  he  took  Him  at  His  word.  The  Eoman  pro- 
consul became  the  Christian  disciple ;  faith  gave  him  a  higher  rank  and  a  sublimer 
title.  He  had  before  represented  the  emperor  of  the  world.  He  then  represented 
the  One  "  seated  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  The  name  "  Eoman  proconsul"  pales 
before  the  title  "Heir  of  God."  (J.  R,  Danforth.)  PauVs  first  convert  from 
heathenism  : — When  Napoleon  landed  on  his  return  from  Elba,  and  one  man  came 
and  presented  himself  as  willing  to  serve  the  Emperor,  "  Here,"  said  Napoleon, 
"is  one  recruit  at  least."  So  may  we  say  when  we  have  converts,  "  Here  is  one 
recruit,  and  thank  God  for  one  ;  for  the  same  attractive  influence  which  draws  one 
will  draw  multitudes  more."  We  have  got  the  right  medicine,  we  have  got  the 
right  power,  and  therefore  let  us  hope  that  there  is  a  harvest  to  be  reaped  now. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  conversion  of  one  soul: — The  conversion  of  one  soul  by 
the  gospel  should  be  to  you  a  hopeful  sign  that  God  intends  to  convert  others. 
For  see,  the  cholera  is   raging  in  certain  towns,  say,  on  the  continent,  and  a 


820  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xih. 

physician  has  been  studying  the  disease.  He  has  administered  a  variety  of  drugS; 
but  in  every  case  without  success.  He  has  prescribed  different  methods  of  treat- 
ment, but  in  no  case  has  he  succeeded  in  effecting  a  cure.  At  last  he  has  hit  upon 
the  right  drug,  and,  administering  it,  he  sees  his  patient  rallying,  strength  evi- 
dently given  by  the  medicine  ;  the  struggle  ends  favourably,  and  the  patient  rises 
to  life  and  health.  "Now,"  says  the  physician,  "I  know  that  I  shall  have  a 
harvest  of  men  who  will  be  preserved  from  this  disease,  because  the  same  medicine 
which  heals  one  will  heal  two,  will  heal  twenty,  will  heal  a  thousand,  or  even 
twenty  thousand ;  it  only  has  to  be  administered  ;  that  one  person  has  been  healed 
by  this  compound,  and  it  is  clear  that  as  many  more  may  be  healed  as  are  willing 
to  receive  it."  Brethren,  we  do  not  lack  this  sign  with  regard  to  the  gospel  {Ibid.} 
Opposition  helpful  to  the  gospel : — In  all  probability  the  opposition  of  Bar-jesus  may 
have  called  the  attention  of  Sergius  Paul  more  intently  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Word  of  God.  When  a  certain  doctrine  is  neglected  and  half  forgotten  by  the 
Church  of  God  there  rises  up  a  bold  heretic  who  rails  at  the  truth  most  bitterly, 
and  then  Christian  people  remember  it,  defend  it,  and  propagate  it.  A  Colenso 
attacks  the  story  of  the  Exodus,  and  all  eyes  are  fixed  upon  Moses  and  the  tribes  of 
Israel.  Some  critic  or  other  attacks  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  and  straightway 
we  get  a  host  of  books  about  Deuteronomy;  all  the  scholars  of  the  Christian 
Church  begin  to  study  it,  and  as  a  part  of  the  Word  it  is  valued  exceedingly.  This 
Elymas  £inds  fault  with  the  gospel,  and  Saul  and  Barnabas  are  thus  called  upon  to 
clear  up  the  points  at  issue,  and  by  refuting  the  magician's  maUcious  errors  they 
make  the  truth  the  more  apparent  to  the  mind  of  the  prooonsoL  So  far  bo  good. 
{Ibid.) 

Vers.  13-62.  Now  when  Paul  and  bis  company  loosed  from  Paphos,  they  came  to 
Perga  In  Pamphylia. — Perga  in  Pamphylia : — Because  Perga  was  little  known 
Pamphylia  is  subjoined.  It  was  an  ancient  city  on  the  river  Oestrus,  about  seven 
miles  from  its  mouth.  The  stay  in  it  was  very  short,  and  there  seems  to  have  been 
no  preaching  till  the  return  journey  (chap.  xiv.  25).  Some  of  the  perils  from 
robbers  and  rivers  (2  Cor.  xi.  16)  may  have  been  encountered  at  this  time.  {Bp. 
Jacobson.)  And  John  departing  from  them  returned  to  Jerusalem. — The  defec- 
tion of  Mark: — We  are  not  to  suppose  that  this  implied  a  rejection  of  Christianity. 
A  soldier  who  has  wavered  in  one  battle  may  live  to  win  a  glorious  victory.  Mark 
was  afterwards  not  unwilling  to  accompany  the  apostles,  and  actually  did  accom- 
pany Barnabas  again  to  Cyprus  (chap.  xv.  37-39).  Nor  did  Paul  always  retain  his 
unfavourable  judgment  of  him  (CoL  iv.  10;  2  Tim.  iv.  11).  Yet  if  we  consider  all 
the  circumstances  of  his  life,  we  shall  not  find  it  difficult  to  blame  his  conduct,  and 
to  see  good  reasons  why  Paul  should  distrust  his  steadiness  of  character.  The 
child  of  a  religious  mother,  who  had  sheltered  in  her  house  the  Christian  disciples, 
he  had  been  a  close  spectator  of  the  wonderful  power  of  the  religion  of  Christ,  and 
had  been  a  minister  of  the  apostles  in  their  successful  enterprise ;  and  now  he  for- 
sook them  when  they  were  about  to  proceed  through  greater  difficulties  to  more 
glorious  success.  We  are  not  left  in  doubt  as  to  the  real  character  of  his  departure. 
He  was  drawn  from  the  work  of  God  by  the  attraction  of  an  earthly  home. 
"  Either  he  did  not  like  the  work,  or  he  wanted  to  go  and  see  his  mother  "  (M. 
Henry).  {J.  S.  Howson,  D.D.)  The  departure  of  Mark  and  the  continuance  of  the 
apostle* : — 1.  Any  one  who  turns  back  from  God's  work  does  himself  an  injury.  2. 
The  work  will  go  on,  no  matter  who  turns  back.  3.  Those  in  the  work  should  seek 
every  fit  opportunity  to  proclaim  the  Word.  4.  Those  in  the  work  should  seek  the 
regular  and  appointed  chaimels  for  proclaiming  the  Word.  5.  Those  who  seek  for 
opportunities  for  work  will  have  opportunities  given  them.  6.  Those  in  the  work  should 
make  use  of  all  their  tact  to  make  the  Word  acceptable.  7.  Those  who  are  earnest 
and  persistent  in  the  work,  guided  by  the  Spirit,  will  be  successful.  {S.  S.  Times.) 
John  Mark  : — I.  Consider,  first,  his — what  shall  I  call  it?  Well,  if  I  may  use  the 
word  which  Paul  himself  designates  it  by,  in  its  correct  signification,  we  may  call  it 
HIS  APOSTASY.  It  was  not  a  departure  from  Christ,  but  it  was  a  departure  from  very 
plain  duty.  He  was  quite  ready  for  missionary  work  as  long  as  it  was  easy  work ; 
quite  ready  to  do  it  as  long  as  he  was  moving  upon  known  ground  and  there  was  no 
great  call  upon  his  heroism,  or  his  indolciice ;  does  not  wait  to  test  the  difficulties, 
but  is  frightened  by  the  imagination  of  them  ;  does  not  throw  himself  into  the 
work  and  see  how  he  gets  on  with  it ;  but  before  he  has  gone  a  mile  into  the  land, 
or  made  any  real  experience  of  the  perils  and  hardships,  has  had  quite  enough  oi 
it,  and  goes  away  back  to  his  mother  in  Jerusalem.    Yes  1  and  we  find  exactly  th« 


CHAP,  xin.]  THE  ACTS.  321 

Bame  thing  in  all  courses  of  honourable  life.     Many  begin  to  run,  but  one  after 
another,  as  "  lap  "  after  "  lap  "  of  the  race-course  is  got  over,  has  had  enough  of  it, 
and  drops  on  one  side ;  a  hundred  started,  and  at  the  end  the  field  is  reduced  to 
three  or  four.    And  so,  in  regard  of  every  career  vrhich  has  in  it  anything  of  honour 
and  of  effort,  let  this  man  teach  us  the  lesson  not  swiftly  to  begin  and  incon- 
siderately to  venture  upon  a  course,  but  once  begun  let  nothing  discourage.     "  Nor 
bate  one  jot  of  heart  or  hope,  but  still  bear  up  and  steer  right  onward."     Some  of 
you  need  the  word  of  exhortation  and  earnest  beseeching,  to  contrast  the  sluggish- 
ness, the  indolence  of  your  present,  with  the  brightness  and  the  fervour  of  your 
past.    And  I  beseech  you,  do  not  let  your  Christian  life  be  like  snow — when  it  first 
lights  upon  the  earth,  radiant  and  white,  but  day  by  day  more  covered  with  a  veil 
of  sooty  blackness  until  it  becomes  dark  and  foul.     II.  Look,  next,  in  the  develop- 
ment of  this  Uttle  bit  of  biography,  to  Mask's  eclipse.     Paul  and  Barnabas  differed 
about  how  to  treat  the  renegade.     Which  of  them  was  right  ?     Would  it  have  been 
better  to  have  put  him  back  in  his  old  post,  and  given  him  another  chance,  and 
said  nothing  about  the  failure  ;  or  was  it  better  to  do  what  the  sterner  wisdom  of 
Paul  did,  and  declare  that  a  man  who  had  once  so  forgotten  himself  and  abandoned 
his  work  was  not  the  man  to  put  in  the  same  place  again  ?    Barnabas  made  a  mis- 
take.    It  would  have  been  the  cruellest  thing  that  could  have  been  done  to  his 
relative  to  have  put  him  back  again  without  acknowledgment,  without  repentance, 
without  riding  quarantine  for  a  bit,  and  holding  his  tongue  for  a  while.     He  would 
not  then  have  known  his  fault  as  he  ought  to  have  known  it,  and  bo  there  would 
never  have  been  the  chance  of  his  conquering  it.    God  treats  His  renegades  as  Paul 
treated  Mark,  and  not  as  Barnabas  would  have  treated  him.     Eeady,  and  infinitely 
ready,  to  forgive  and  to  restore,  but  needing  to  see  the  consciousness  of  the  sin  first, 
and  needing,  before  large  tasks  are  committed  to  hands  that  once  have  dropped 
them,  to  have  some  kind  of  evidence  that  the  hands  are  stronger  and  the  heart 
purified  from  its  cowardice  and  its  selfishness.    Let  us  learn  the  difference  between 
a  weak  charity  which  loves  too  foolishly,  and  therefore  too  selfishly,  to  let  a  man 
inherit  the  fruit  of  his  doings,  and  the  large  mercy  which  knows  how  to  take  the 
bitterness  out  of  the  chastisement,  and  yet  knows  how  to  chastise.     Mark's  eclipse 
may  teach  us  another  lesson,  viz.,  that  the  punishment  for  shirking  work  is  to  be 
denied  work.     You  have  been  asked  to  work — I  speak  now  to  professing  Christians 
— duties  have  been  pressed  upon  you,  fields  of  service  have  opened  plainly  before 
you,  and  you  have  not  had  the  heart  to  go  into  them.     And  ao  you  stand  idle  all 
the  day  now,  and  the  work  goes  to  other  people  that  can  do  it.    And  God  hoDours 
them,  and  passes  you  by.     Mark  goes  away  to  Cyprus,  he  does  not  go  back  to 
Jerusalem ;  he  and  Barnabas  try  to  get  up  some  little  schismatic  sort  of  mission  of 
their  own.     Nothing  comes  of  it ;  nothing  ought  to  have  come  of  it.    He  drops  out 
of  the  story ;  he  has  no  share  in  the  joyful  conflicts  and  sacrifices  and  successes  of 
the  apostle.     The  punishment  of  indolence  is  absolute  idleness.    Beware  1  all  of 
you  professing  Christians,  lest  to  you  should  come  the  fate  of  the  slothful  servant 
with  his  one  buried  talent,  to  whom  the  punishment  of  burying  it  unused  was  to 
lose  it  altogether  ;  according  to  that  solemn  word  fulfilled  in  the  temporal  sphere 
of  this  story,  on  which  I  am  commenting.     "  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,"  &c. 
III.  Again,  consider  the  process  of  recovery.     Concerning  it  we  read  nothing 
indeed  in  Scripture;  but  concerning  it  we  know  enough  to  be  able  at  least  to 
determine  what  its  outline  must  have  been.     There  is  only  one  road,  with  well- 
mai-ked  stages,  by  which  a  backsliding  or  apostate  Christian  can  return  to  his 
Master.    And  that  road  has  three  halting-places  upon  it,  through  which  our  heart 
must  pass  if  it  have  wandered  from  its  early  faith,  and  falsified  its  first  professions. 
The  first  of  them  is  the  consciousness  of  the  fall ;  the  second  is  the  resort  to  the 
Master  for  forgiveness;  and  the  last  is  the  deepened  consecration  to  Him.    No  man 
that  wanders  into  the  wilderness  but  comes  back  to  the  King's  highway,  if  he  comes 
back  at   all.      IV.   And  so,  lastly,  notice  the  reinstatement   of   the  penitent 
renegade.     Notwithstanding  the  failure,  notwithstanding  the  wise  refusal  of  Paul 
to  have  nothing  to  do  with  him  years  before,  he  is  reinstated  in  his  old  office,  and 
the  aged  apostle  before  he  dies  would  like  to  have  the  comfort  of  his  presence  once 
more  at  his  side.     Is  not  the  lesson  out  of  that,  this  eternal  gospel,  that  even  early 
failures,  recognised  and  repented  of,  may  make  a  man  better  fitted  for  the  tasks 
which  once  he  fled  from  ?     Just  as  they  tell  us— I  do  not  know  whether  it  is  true 
or  not,  it  will  do  for  an  illustration — just  as  they  tell  us  that  a  broken  bone  renewed 
is  stronger  at  the  point  of  fracture  than  it  ever  was  before,  so  the  very  sin  that  we 
commit,  when  once  we  know  it  for  a  sin ,  and  have  brought  it  to  Christ  for  f orgive- 
VOL.  u,  21 


822  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ini. 

nesB,  may  minister  to  our  future  efficiency  and  strength.  The  sin  which  we  have 
learned  to  know  for  a  sin  and  to  hate,  teaches  as  humility,  dependence,  shows  us 
where  the  weak  places  are ;  sin  which  is  forgiven  knits  us  to  Christ  with  deeper  and 
more  fervid  love,  and  results  in  a  larger  consecration.  Think  of  the  two  ends  o£ 
this  man's  life — flying  Uke  a  frightened  hare  from  the  very  first  suspicion  of  danger 
or  of  difficulty,  sulking  in  his  solitude,  apart  from  all  the  joyful  stir  of  conse- 
cration and  of  service ;  and  at  the  end  of  it  made  an  evangelist  to  proclaim 
to  the  whole  world  the  story  of  the  gospel  of  the  servant.  God  works  with 
broken  reeds,  and  through  them  breathes  His  sweetest  music.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Abandonment  of  missionary  work : — Felix  Carey,  a  nephew  of  the  great  Dr. 
Carey,  the  Indian  missionary,  was,  like  his  uncle,  devoted  to  missionary  life. 
He  abandoned  his  sacred  calUng,  however,  to  become  an  ambassador  to  the  court 
of  Burmah.  Speaking  of  the  change,  Dr.  Carey  said,  "  FeUx  was  a  missionary,  but 
he  is  now  shrivelled  up  to  an  ambassador."  ( JF.  Walters.)  They  came  to  Antloch 
in  Pisidia. — Antioch  in  Pisidia : — Seleucus  Nicanor  is  said  to  have  built  nine  cities 
to  which  he  gave  his  own  name,  Seleucia,  and  sixteen  which  he  called  after  his 
father  Antiochus.  Amongst  these  are  the  Syrian  and  the  Pisidian  Antioch.  Six 
others  were  called  Laodicea,  after  his  mother,  and  at  least  one  after  Apamea,  his 
wife.  This  recurrence  of  the  same  name  is  a  cause  of  some  confusion  when  con- 
sidering either  the  geography  or  history  of  this  part  of  Asia.  Antioch  in  Pisidia  is 
situated  on  a  table-land  of  a  ridge  of  hills  on  the  confines  of  Pisidia  and  Phrygia, 
to  which  latter  province  it  is  sometimes,  but  inaccurately,  reckoned  to  belong.  It 
lies  north  of  Perga,  and  east  of  ApoUonia,  and  the  roads  which  radiated  from  it  in 
every  direction  made  it  a  port  of  considerable  importance,  commercial  as  well  as 
military.  The  city  was  originally  founded  by  Magnetes,  and  subsequently  re- 
founded  by  Seleucus.  It  was,  however,  of  little  importance  until  Augustus  made 
it  a  Colonia,  and  a  free  city  with  the  Jus  Italicum,  from  which  circumstance  it  is 
sometimes  called  Antiochea  Casarea.  Until  that  time  it  was  distinguished  for  the 
worship  of  the  moon,  as  a  male  deity,  and  large  numbers  of  priests  were  supported 
by  the  rich  endowments  belonging  to  the  temple  at  this  place.  The  population 
was  a  very  mixed  one,  with  a  larger  amount  of  the  Latin  element  than  was  usual  in 
the  cities  of  Asia  Minor.  The  Jews  were  probably  not  numerous,  as  we  only  read 
of  the  synagogue,  not,  as  at  Salamis  and  other  places,  in  the  plural.  It  is  referred 
to  in  the  New  Testament,  in  Acts  xiii.  14 ;  xiv.  19-21 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  11.  Many  of  the 
inscriptions  and  coins  belonging  to  the  Pisidian  Antioch  are  for  this  reason  in 
Latin.  This  city  is  now  entirely  deserted,  and  its  site,  having  been  long  unknown, 
has  only  been  rediscovered  in  modem  times.  (W.  Denton,  M.A.)  The  continental 
mission : — L  The  Word  accepted.  1.  Giving  up  the  work.  The  return  of  Mark 
■very  much  displeased  Paul.  In  his  eyes  a  deserter  was  worse  than  an  enemy ;  no 
man  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough,  and  looking  back,  was  fit  ever  again  to  be 
taken  into  such  service.  Hence,  when  Barnabas  would  have  given  him  another 
trial,  Paul  would  not  consent.  But  Barnabas  was  right.  His  kindly  nature  waa 
better  than  the  stern,  uncompromising  disposition  of  Paul.  Barnabas  was  "a  good 
man,"  his  goodness  leading  him  to  lean  toward  the  erring.  Under  his  training  and 
influence  Mark  recovered  the  character  he  had  lost,  so  that  at  last  Paul  himself 
said,  "  He  is  useful  to  me  for  the  ministering."  In  his  dealing  with  Mark,  Barnabas 
again  proved  his  right  to  the  title,  "  Son  of  Consolation."  2.  Going  on  with  the 
work.  It  was  a  small  force,  numerically,  that  moved  upon  the  intrenched  idola- 
trous hosts  of  Asia  Minor.  By  the  desertion  of  Mark,  the  army  of  three  had  been 
reduced  one-third.  But  the  soldiers  of  Christ  are  not  to  be  estimated  by  their 
numbers,  but  by  the  personality  in  and  back  of  them — the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  The 
opportunity  for  work.  They  followed  the  course  pursued  by  their  Master  before 
them.  They  reverenced  the  Sabbath,  and  had  regard  for  its  institutions.  They  so 
commended  themselves  by  this,  and  by  their  devout  behaviour,  as  to  receive  from 
the  rulers  the  invitation,  •'  Brethren,  if  ye  have  any  word  of  exhortation,  say  on." 
The  result  was  a  surprise  to  those  who  gave  it.  A  word  of  exhortation  was  given, 
the  like  of  which  they  never  had  heard  before.  What  they  heard  was  to  them  a 
revelation.  (1)  Paul  declared  that  God,  who  had  done  such  great  things  for  His 
chosen  people  of  old  time,  had  now,  according  to  promise,  completed  His  work  of 
grace  by  giving  unto  Israel  a  Saviour  fvers.  17-23).  (2)  Paul  went  on  to  prove  the 
truth  of  this  assertion  by  showing — (a)  That  Jesus'  advent  was  prophetically  pre- 
announced  by  John,  His  forerunner  (vers.  24,  25).  (b)  That  Jesus  rose  from  the 
dead  (vers.  26-37).  After  reciting  how  the  Messiah  was  slain,  Paul  proved  His 
resurrection,  first,  by  the  fact  that  He  was  seen  of  chosen  witnesses ;  second,  by 


«HAP.  xin.]  THE  ACTS.  823 

quotations  from  the  Psalms,  which  showed  that  this  resurrection  was  nothing  more 
than  a  fulfilment  of  the  promise  made  unto  the  fathers.  (3)  Paul  declared  that 
"through  this  Man  is  proclaimed  unto  you  remission  of  sins."  (4)  Paul  warned 
his  hearers  of  the  fatal  consequences  of  despising  this  offer  of  salvation.  4.  The 
fruit  of  the  work.  The  address  of  Paul — (1)  Aroused  a  general  interest  (ver  42). 
It  is  a  good  sign  when  there  is  a  general  desire  to  have  a  sermon  repeated.  (2) 
Secured  many  converts  (ver.  43).  These  had  become  so  obedient  to  the  truth,  that 
the  apostles  needed  only  to  urge  them  "  to  continue  in  the  grace  of  God."  (3) 
Bitter  opposition  was  aroused  (ver.  45).  Jealousy  has  been  the  secret  of  the  oppo- 
sition to  many  a  new  religious  movement.  The  Jews  here  were  jealous  of  their  new 
leaders,  and  of  the  hold  they  and  their  doctrines  were  getting.  II.  The  Wobd  ee- 
JECTED,  1.  The  bold  word  (ver.  46).  They  were  not  cowed  by  the  opposition. 
They  had  within  them  a  moral  courage,  born  of  the  Spirit  and  of  a  conviction  of 
right,  that  made  them  more  than  a  match  for  their  opponents.  Bold  words,  uttered 
under  such  circumstances,  make  revolutions  in  opinions.  2.  The  spoken  word. 
The  Divine  order  was  Jews  first,  then  Gentiles.  The  Jews  were  the  natural  sons 
of  the  household,  and  therefore  had  the  first  right  to  the  Father's  proclamation  of 
a  new  inheritance  for  aU  of  His  children.  3.  The  word  thrust  away.  Note — (1) 
That  those  who  reject  the  gospel  judge  themselves  to  be  "unworthy  of  eternal  life." 
The  choice  that  a  man  makes  determines  his  personal  worth.  God  demands  no 
more  worthiness  in  men  than  that  they  shall  accept  the  offer  of  salvation.  (2) 
That  when  men  demonstrate  that  they  are  unworthy  of  eternal  life,  it  is  the  duty 
of  Christian  workers  to  turn  to  others.  There  is  no  use  in  labouring  in  a  barren 
field,  when  a  rich  harvest  can  be  reaped  near  by.  Better  save  ten,  than  work  on 
unavailingly  with  one.  4.  The  word  of  command  (ver.  47).  The  redemption  of 
the  Gentiles  was  no  new  addition  to  the  plan  of  salvation.  From  the  beginning 
God  intended  that  those  who  sat  in  darkness  should  see  a  great  light.  His  eye  was 
fixed  upon  "  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth,"  as  well  as  upon  the  land  of  the  cove- 
nant. 5.  The  word  glorified  (ver.  48),  They  proved  themselves  to  be  worthy  of 
eternal  life,  for  many  believed,  "  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  spread  abroad 
throughout  all  the  region."  III.  The  Woed  peesecuted.  Note — 1.  The  unbeliev- 
ing Jews.  They  demonstrated  that  they  were  unworthy  of  eternal  life  by  conduct- 
ing themselves  as  though  inspired  by  the  evil  one.  2.  The  beUeving  disciples. 
"  The  disciples  were  filled  with  joy  and  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  persecutors,  on  the 
contrary,  were  filled  with  jealousy  and  with  hate.  They  succeeded  in  driving  away 
Paul  and  Barnabas,  but  the  apostles  left  behind  them  a  peace  and  joy  that  could 
not  be  banished.  The  missionaries  were  expelled,  but  the  gospel  had  come  to  stay. 
{M.  C.  Hazard.)  And  went  into  the  synagogxie  on  the  sabbath  day,  and  sat 
down. — Paul  at  Antioch : — In  these  verses  there  are  many  inferential  lessons : 
e.g.,  ver.  26.  We  are  not  to  cast  our  pearls  before  swine;  it  was  to  those  who 
feared  God  that  Paul  spoke  of  the  great  salvation.  To  him  that  hath  shall 
be  given ;  those  who  fear  God  shall  be  led  to  the  knowledge  of  His  truth.  Ver. 
27.  Ignorance  is  a  frequent  cause  of  crime;  hence  the  importance  of  educational 
effort.  It  is  possible  for  us  to  misunderstand  the  things  with  which  we  are  most 
familiar.  How  little  we  know  of  the  tendencies  of  our  actions ;  they  may  actually  accom- 
plish the  very  opposite  of  what  we  intended.  Ver.  28.  A  blameless  life  will  not  neces- 
sarily exempt  from  hatred  and  persecution.  Hatred  is  irrational ;  let  us  be  on  our 
guard  against  its  perverting  influences.  Ver.  29.  There  is  a  limit  to  all  that  men 
can  do  to  us,  and  it  is  soon  reached.  Ver.  34.  The  men  of  the  greatest  influence  and 
activity  soon  reach  the  end  of  their  course  and  pass  away ;  only  Christ  remains  the 
same  efficient  power  in  aU  generations.  Note  here — I.  Paul's  method  of  peeach- 
INQ  THE  gospel  TO  THE  Jews.  He  Urged  them  to  accept  it  because — 1.  In  Christ 
were  fulfilled  the  promises  made  to  their  fathers.  This  Paul  used  to  establish  by 
copious  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,  his  object  being  always  to  prove  that 
Jesus  was  not  the  founder  of  a  new  religion,  but  the  Messiah  of  whom  the  prophets 
had  spoken.  2.  The  ignorance  and  wickedness  of  the  Jewish  rulers  had  led  to  the 
accompUshment  of  predictions  that  could  not  otherwise  have  been  fulfilled.  3.  By 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  God  had  completely  reversed  this  condemnation  by  men. 
4.  Christ  confers  on  them  who  believe  on  Him  greater  blessings  than  could  be 
obtained  from  the  Mosaic  law.  H.  Lessons  to  be  leaened  from  this  method. 
1.  Let  us  endeavour  to  conciliate  those  whom  we  seek  to  convert.  2.  Let  us  make 
Christ  the  central  theme  of  our  teaching.  3.  In  our  presentation  of  Christ  and  all 
truth,  let  us  adapt  ourselves  to  our  hearers.  What  a  contrast  between  this  address 
and  that  on  Mars  Hill  |    4.  Yet  no  fear  of  offending  the  prejudices  of  our  hearers 


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xm. 

mnst  lead  us  to  keep  back  any  portion  of  the  truth.  5.  While  always  maintaining  the 
spirit  of  love,  let  us  not  hesitate,  if  need  be,  to  persuade  our  hearers  by  the  terror* 
of  the  Lord.      {R.  A.  Bertram.)  Paul  at  Antioch  : — I.  He  brought  a  great 

MESSAGE.  It  was  net  an  ingenious  development  of  a  trivial  theme.  No  doubt  the 
account  of  tte  sermon  is  only  the  merest  outline,  but  it  calls  to  a  living  interest 
in  the  few  great  themes  of  the  gospel.  A  true  religious  knowledge  is  not  an  infinite 
number  of  anatomical  bits  of  information  about  the  Bible.  He  whose  heart  and 
mind  are  filled  with  the  thoughts  of  God's  sovereignty,  and  Christ's  redemption 
and  the  resurrection  life,  has  a  true  knowledge  of  the  revelation.  Other  things 
are  important  only  as  they  throw  light  on  these.  II.  He  reinforced  his  message 
BY  the  power  of  HIS  OWN  INTENSE  CONVICTION.  He  was  not  half  persuaded  merely 
of  the  truth  he  preached.  It  was  a  message  to  the  utterance  of  which  he  had  given 
his  life,  upon  the  truth  of  which  he  had  staked  his  own  destiny.     III.  The  gospel 

message    THUS    BROUGHT    TO    AnTIOCH     REVEALED     THE     HEARTS    OF    HER   CITIZENS.       1. 

The  Jews  were  narrow,  unteachable,  holding  what  truth  they  had  in  unrighteous- 
ness :  they  judged  themselves  "  unworthy  of  eternal  life."  2.  The  Gentiles 
awakened  to  a  transient  interest  in  a  new  religion,  in  their  sudden  excitement 
betokened  their  lack  of  thought  and  earnestness  in  receiving  the  grace  of  God. 
They  were  the  "stony-ground"  hearers.  3.  The  "devout  women  of  honourable 
estate  "  were  able  to  influence  the  municipal  authorities,  and  to  stir  up  persecution 
against  the  apostles.  In  so  doing,  they  passed  judgment  upon  themselves,  separating 
themselves  from  the  greater  number  of  "honourable  women,"  who  elsewhere 
greatly  aided  the  apostles  in  their  labours.  4.  The  Roman  authorities,  tolerant  of 
the  Jewish  religion  because  careless  about  all  rehgion ;  deprecating  excitements, 
solicitous  for  peace ;  easily  persuaded,  for  the  sake  of  quiet,  to  banish  the  disturbers 
— their  irreUgious  nature  is  disclosed  to  us.  Thus  the  gospel  revealed  the  hearts 
of  all.  It  compelled  all  to  take  sides.  And  so  now  men  cannot  come  into  the  full 
light  of  the  gospel  without  showing  what  manner  of   men  they  are.    IV.  The 

MESSAGE     NOT     ONLY     REVEALED     CHARACTER IT     FORMED     CHARACTER.         God'S     Word 

does  not  leave  men  as  it  finds  them.  The  gospel  has  power  to  quicken  the  con- 
science ;  but  when  the  clearer  voice  of  conscience  is  disobeyed,  estrangement  from 
God  is  deepened.  More  evident  and  remarkable  was  its  transforming  power  upon 
those  that  believed.  They  were  "filled  with  joy  and  vsdth  the  Holy  Ghost."  V. 
The  OPPOSITION  of  the  Jews  to  the  message  suggests  that  there  is  a  limit 
TO  responsibility  for  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  at  given  times  AND  places. 
Having  clearly  set  before  the  Jews  the  claims  of  the  gospel,  Paul  had  discharged 
his  obligation  (ver.  46).  Every  man  who  has  learned  from  the  gospel  what  the 
state  of  the  natural  heart  is,  and  what  the  power  is  by  which  God  renews  the  heart, 
and  what  the  channel  is  through  which  Divine  grace  comes  to  men,  has  learned  enough 
to  be  fully  accountable  for  his  own  salvation.  To  him  the  Church  has  performed 
her  mission  and  discharged  her  obligation.  When  she  has  set  before  you  the  gift 
of  God,  which  is  eternal  life,  you  must  judge  yourself  worthy  or  unworthy  of  it. 
VI.  The  gospel  brings  abiding  and  increasino  blessings  to  those  who  receivb 
it  (ver.  52).  The  persecution  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  did  not  shake  their  faith.  By 
the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  they  were  freed  from  shame  and  fear,  and  filled 
with  joyous  hope.  (W.  G.  Speiry.)  Paul' $  first  recorded  speech: — 1.  Paul  and 
Barnabas  did  not  violently  separate  themselves  from  old  traditions  and  religious 
coiupanionships.  The  Christian  is  not  the  enemy  of  the  Jew;  he  owes  everything 
precious  in  his  civilisation  and  in  his  hope  to  the  Jew.  There  was  a  custom  in  the 
synagogue  which  we  have  not  in  the  church.  The  rulers  of  the  synagogue,  noticing 
distinguished  persons  in  the  audience,  would  invite  them  to  address  the  assembly. 
In  the  olden  time  they  believed  that  the  Word  was  its  own  defence,  that  the  fire  of 
the  Lord  would  disinfect  whatever  it  touched,  and  that  to  be  in  the  synagogue  was 
to  be  deeply  religious,  and  loyal  to  the  spirit  of  the  house.  These  things  have  all 
changed.  Men  can  be  in  the  Christian  church  in  an  unchristian  spirit.  The  mere 
verbalist,  yes,  and  even  the  mocker,  may  find  his  way  into  the  church,  and  be  only 
too  glad  to  have  an  opportunity  to  contradict  what  he  did  not  understand.  The 
usual  challenge  having  been  given,  Paul  stood  up.  That  was  an  event  in  history. 
In  that  brief  sentence  you  have  the  beginning  of  a  battle  which  was  concluded  with 
these  words — "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,"  &c.  Paul  did  not  stand  up  by  himself. 
Men  are  lifted  up.  Every  action  of  the  loyal  hfe  is  an  action  of  inspiration.  The 
good  man  lays  no  plans,  and  makes  no  arrangements  which  can  exclude  the  sudden 
and  incalculable  inspiration  of  God.  2.  This  is  Paul's  first  recorded  speech.  I 
like  to  be  present  at  beginnings.     There  is  a  subtle,  tender,  mysterious  joy  about 


CHAP,  xm.]  TKE  ACTS.  825 

planting  roots  and  sowing  seed,  covering  it  up  and  leaving  it  in  the  darkness;  then 
what  a  surprise  it  is  to  come  back  in  due  time  and  find  the  green  lancet  puncturing 
the  soil  and  coming  up  to  look  at  the  light  it  has  been  groping  for  all  the  while ! 
Sometimes  our  first  speeches  were  very  poor  because  they  were  our  own.  We  made 
them,  wrote  them  out,  graved  them  upon  the  unwilling  memory,  and  they  were  like 
something  put  on,  not  growing  out ;  and  so  we  begged  our  friends,  who  were  un- 
happy enough  to  be  able  to  quote  some  portions  of  them,  to  forget  them  if  they  could  1 
But  the  first  speeches  of  the  Christian  defender  were  incapable  of  improvement.  They 
were  as  complete  as  the  fiat  of  God  which  said — "  Let  there  be  light :  and  there 
was  light."  3.  Paul  based  his  apology  on  the  model  of  Stephen.  We  cannot  teU 
of  what  elements  our  life  is  made  up.  It  is  no  one  shower  of  rain  that  makes  the 
summer  green.  We  are  gathering  from  every  point  all  day  long.  Paul  was  no 
student  of  rhetoric  when  he  listened  to  Stephen ;  but  Stephen's  speech,  hke  all 
vital  speech,  got  into  the  man,  and  became  part  of  his  intellectual  and  spiritual 
life.  Paul  began  as  Stephen  did,  with  a  narrative  of  Jewish  history.  To  their 
credit  be  it  spoken,  the  Jews  were  never  tired  of  hearing  their  own  history.  Are  we 
patient  under  the  citation  of  the  facts  which  make  up  our  history?  We  cannot  live 
in  sentiment.  You  cannot  build  a  castle  in  the  air  that  you  can  live  in ;  it  must  be 
founded  upon  rock,  however  high  up  into  the  air  you  may  carry  it.  This  was  the 
great  law  of  Jewish  eloquence  and  Jewish  appeal,  basing  the  whole  argument  upon 
the  rock  of  undisputed  history.  Do  not  some  of  us  occasionally  say,  "  TeU  me  the 
old,  old  story  of  Jesus  and  His  love"? — therein  we  are  partly  Jewish — that  is  our 
stovj  !  As  the  Jews  began  from  the  formation  of  themselves  as  a  people,  we  begin 
at  Bethlehem,  and  in  proportion  as  we  are  in  the  right  spirit  and  temper,  we  are 
never  tired  of  hearing  the  old,  old  story.  4.  Notice  in  this  speech  what  we  may 
call  Paul's  grip  of  God.  I  know  not  any  speech  of  the  same  length  in  which  the 
sacred  word  occurs  so  frequently.  The  factor  we  have  omitted  from  our  sermons 
is  only — God  1  We  are  afraid  or  ashamed  of  His  name ;  we  pronounce  it  hesitatingly, 
mincingly,  timidly.  Paul  did  not  use  it  so ;  he  hurled  it  like  a  thunderbolt ;  he 
measured  everything  by  that  grand  standard.  All  through  history  he  saw  a  Figure 
after  the  similitude  of  God.  You  can  dislodge  a  man  from  any  position  but  that. 
5.  As  we  find  Stephen's  character  in  Stephen's  apology,  so  we  may  find  Paul's 
character  in  Paul's  exposition.  Mark  his  courtesy.  He  was  no  rough  intruder, 
but  a  gentleman  born,  and  indestructible  all  through  and  through,  polite,  refined, 
courteous,  gentlemanly.  His  tact  is  most  wonderful ;  he  notices  how  the  assembly 
is  made  up — he  is  a  poor  speaker  who  takes  no  note  of  his  hearers.  Paul  saw  not 
only  the  Jews,  but  the  Greeks  and  proselytes,  who,  wearied  with  the  absurdities  of 
polytheism,  had  come  to  believe  there  was  one  God,  a  spiritual,  invisible,  eternal 
God!  So  Paul  accosted  both  classes,  "Men  of  Israel" — always  distinguishable, 
never  to  be  confounded  with  others — "and  ye  that  fear  God" — converted  from 
mythology  to  true  spirituality  of  thought — "give  audience."  How  dehcately  he 
puts  the  case  in  ver.  27 1  6.  How  wondrously  Paul  introduced  the  right  way  of 
quoting  Scripture  I  There  is  hardly  a  quotation  which  he  makes  here  which  is  not 
a  double  or  a  treble  quotation  turned  into  one  :  e.g.,  ver.  22  cannot  be  found  in  the 
Old  Testament ;  it  is  at  least  three  passages  made  into  one.  It  is  all  in  the  Bible, 
but  is  in  no  one  place  in  the  Scripture.  He  does  not  quote  the  Bible  who  quotes  mere 
texts.  The  Bible  is  larger  than  any  one  text  that  is  in  it.  There  is  a  spirit  of 
collocation  and  a  spirit  of  quotation,  a  Bible-spirit  that  can  bring  from  east,  west, 
north,  and  south  lines  that  shall  focalise  in  one  intense  and  dazzling  glory.  7. 
Paul's  voice  surely  had  a  quiver  in  it  which  no  reporter  could  catch — for  in  reports 
we  do  not  get  the  tonic  colour  and  force  of  speech — when  he  said,  "  God  gave  unto 
them  Saul,"  &c.      (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Paul's  first  reported  sermon : — Note  three 

great  facts  which  he  was  anxious  to  impress  on  their  attention.    I.  That  their 

SCRIPTDBES,     WHICH     EXHIBITED     God'S     SPECIAL    KINDNESS     TO     THEM     A9     A    PEOPLE, 

CONTAINED  THE  PROMISE  OF  A  Messiah.  After  reminding  them  of  certain  striking 
facts  in  their  history,  showing  how  wondrously  kind  God  had  been  to  them  as  a 
people,  extending  from  vers.  17  to  21,  he  directs  them  at  once  to  the  great  prophetic 
truth  that  there  was,  according  to  their  Scriptures,  to  come  a  Messiah.  He  states — 
1.  That  David  was  to  be  the  progenitor  of  that  Messiah  (vers.  22,  23).  2.  That 
John  the  Baptist,  one  of  the  greatest  prophets  of  their  age,  was  to  be  His  forerunner 
(vers.  24,  25).  This  fact,  namely,  that  their  Scriptures  pointed  to  a  Messiah,  they 
would  be  prepared,  of  course,  readily  to  admit.  Hence  he  proceeds  to  another  fact 
arising  out  of  this  which  would  not  be  so  easily  admitted.     II.  That  the  Messiah 

f BEDICTBD  By  IHEIB   S^BIPICBES  HAD   ACTUALLY  APPEASED   ON   THE   EABTH   (ver.    26). 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

He  states  facts  that  occurred  in  the  history  of  the  Messiah  while  here.  1.  That 
He  was  crucified  and  buried  according  to  their  Scriptures  (vers.  27-29).  In  their 
Scriptures  they  would  find  an  account  of  just  the  treatment  Ho  actually  met  with 
on  the  earth.  2.  That  God  actually  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  also,  according  to 
their  Scriptures  (ver.  31).  He  states  that  His  resurrection  formed  the  glad  tidings 
which  they  had  to  declare  unto  them  (ver.  32).  He  states  that  His  resurrection 
was  a  fulfilment  of  their  Scriptures  (vers.  33-35).  In  quoting  these  passages  he 
seemed  to  anticipate  that  some  of  his  audience  would  say  that  they  referred  to 
David  ;  but  this  he  declares  is  impossible,  as  that  David  "  was  laid  unto  his  fathers, 
and  saw  corruption."  The  other  great  fact  we  discover  in  this  sermon  is — III. 
That  this  Messiah  is  the  Mediator  throdgh  whom  the  world  is  to  be  saved. 
He  states — 1.  That  faith  in  Him  will  secure  the  forgiveness  of  all  sins  (ver,  38). 
2.  That  the  rejection  of  Him  is  of  all  crimes  the  most  to  be  deprecated  (vers. 
40,  41).  (1)  That  sometimes  the  Divine  judgments  following  the  rejection  of 
God's  Word  have  been  foretold.  It  is  the  principle  of  the  Divine  government 
that  punishment  shall  ever  follow  unbelief.  Numerous  instances  in  the  Bible 
might  be  cited.  The  apostle  quotes  a  case  here  where  such  punishment  had  been 
predicted  (Hab.  i.  6).  The  original  design  of  the  prediction  was  to  proclaim  the 
ruin  that  would  come  upon  the  Jewish  nation  by  the  Chaldeans.  The  reason  why 
that  ruin  came  on  them  from  God  was  their  unbelief.  (2)  That  the  judgments 
that  have  followed  unbelief  in  past  times  should  be  taken  as  types  and  warnings  of 
those  that  will  follow  the  rejection  of  God's  Word  in  Jesus  Christ.  Thus  the  apostle 
uses  Divine  judgment  here.  The  passage  which  he  quotes  from  the  Septuagint, 
not  by  any  means  with  literal  accuracy,  he  cites  to  show,  not  that  this  particular 
prophecy  will  be  fulfilled  in  the  experience  of  the  rejecters  of  Christ,  but  that 
something  as  terrible.  From  the  language  we  may  infer — (a)  That  the  judgment, 
when  it  comes,  will  fill  the  victim  with  amazement — "  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and 
wonder."  What  wild  amazement  seized  the  antediluvians,  the  men  of  Sodom,  &c., 
when  the  judgment  came,  (b)  That  the  judgment,  when  it  comes,  will  effect  utter 
destruction — "perish."  (c)  That  the  judgment  that  is  to  come  is  incredibly 
tremendous.  It  is  "  a  work  which  ye  shall  in  no  wise  believe,  though  a  man 
declare  it  unto*  you."      (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Paul  in  his  introductory  discourse 

already  a  complete  Paul: — 1.  The  profound  interpreter  of  Scripture  (vers.  17,  33). 
2.  The  large-hearted  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  (vers.  16,  26).  3.  The  truly  evangelical 
preacher  of  the  faith  (vera.  38,  39).  4.  The  undaunted  witness  of  the  truth  (vers. 
40,  41).  {K.  Gerok.)  "I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men"  : — The  apostles,  in 
obedience  to  this  saying,  have — 1.  Cast  their  net  in  many  places  (ver.  13).  2. 
Suffered  not  themselves  to  be  hindered  in  their  work,  though  some  went  back  (ver. 
13).  3.  Eegarded  every  time  of  work  as  opportune  (ver.  14).  4.  Taken  advantage 
of  every  place  (ver.  14).  6.  Disregarded  no  request  in  order  to  testify  of  the  grace  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus  (ver  16).     (Lisco.) 

Vers.  17-41.  The  God  of  this  people  of  Israel  chose  our  fathers. — The  hours  on 
the  world's  clock  : — 1.  Moving  slowly  forward  as  the  hours  of  the  Eternal  God,  with 
whom  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day,  and  of  the  long-suffering  God,  whose 
patience  has  borne  with  this  perverse  world,  as  it  did  vnth  Israel  for  forty  years  in 
the  wilderness.  2.  But  unceasingly  progi-essing  to  the  end  appointed  of  God — of 
the  world's  redemption,  and  the  world's  judgment.  (K.  Gerok.)  The  history 
of  the  kingdom  of  God: — The  history  of  the  world  in  the  hght  of  the  gospel 
transfigured  into  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  I.  Its  place  is  sketched 
out  before  in  the  eternal  counsels  of  Divine  wisdom,  power,  and  love.  II.  Its 
SECTIONS  OF  TIME  are  stations  on  the  progress  of  humanity  to  its  destination. 
III.  Its  heroes  are  the  vassals  of  Christ,  and  willingly  or  unwillingly  the 
servants  of  His  kingdom.  IV.  Irs  end  is  the  glorification  of  God  in  humanity. 
(Ihid.)  The  providence  of  God  in  the  history  of  Israel : — An  encouraging  type 
of  the  Divine  government  of  mankind.  I.  Wuerkin  this  providence  is  recog- 
nised. 1.  In  the  history  of  Israel.  2.  In  the  history  of  the  world.  II. 
What  influence  the  certainty  of  this  Divine  government  shooid  have  upon 
us.  1.  We  should  be  comforted  with  the  sure  confidence  that  the  issue  of  things 
wUl  be  the  best.  2.  We  should  do  our  part,  in  order  that  the  Divine  plan  of 
salvation  maybe  more  and  more  realised.  {Lisco.)  Christ,  the  world's  Saviour: — 
I.  Foretold  in  the  Old  Testament  (vers.  16-25.)  II.  Rejected  by  His  peoplh 
(vers.  26-29.)  III.  Preached  ab  the  salvation  of  believers  (vers.  30-41.) 
(Ibid.) 


CHAP,  zm.]  THE  ACTS.  827 

Y&T.  18.  And  about  the  time  of  forty  years  suffered  He  their  maimers  In  the 
'Wilderness.  — Divine  forbearance  toward  human  perverseness  retraced  : — The  good- 
ness of  God  to  man  and  the  ingratitude  of  man  to  God  form  a  very  striking  and 
affecting  contrast.  No  one  can  seriously  review  his  own  history  or  that  of  the 
Church  of  God  for  any  given  period  without  being  impressed  with  these  two 
thoughts.  How  man  tries  God  J  how  God  bears  with  man  1  Consider — I.  Thr 
PEBiOD  OF  TIME.  How  long  ?  "  About  the  time  of  forty  years, "  This  was  the 
period  during  which  Israel  was  wandering  in  the  wilderness.  This  time  was  ap- 
pointed by  God  Himself.  Modem  travellers  go  the  whole  distance  in  some  two  or 
three  weeks.  1.  Thus  we  see  how  more  or  less  of  time  may  be  spent  in  the  same 
journey.  The  journey  of  life  occupies  sometimes  a  shorter,  sometimes  a  longer 
period  of  time.  The  little  infant  sometimes  accomplishes,  in  a  few  hours,  aU  the 
space  which  lies  for  man  between  the  cradle  and  the  grave,  while  others  are  forty 
years,  or  sometimes  forty  years  twice  told,  in  completing  the  same  journey.  There 
is  a  strange  diversity  as  to  the  length  of  life.  Certainty  and  uncertainty  are  here 
wonderfully  intermingled.  The  certainty,  as  to  any  number  of  persons  of  the  same 
age,  that  they  will  on  an  average  live  so  long — the  utter  uncertainty,  as  to  indi- 
viduals, how  long  this  or  that  person  may  hve — are  very  instructive.  Our  con- 
clusion ought  to  be,  "  My  times  are  in  Thy  hand."  It  is  for  God  to  determine  the 
limits  of  our  wanderings ;  it  is  for  ns  to  use  the  space  allotted  us  with  fidelity. 
2.  For  the  time  allotted  is  also  throughout  a  season  of  responsibility.  We  surely 
see  this  in  our  text.  Throughout  that  period  the  Jews  were  observed  by  God,  as 
persons  responsible  to  Him  for  their  use  or  abuse  of  their  privileges.  And  it  is  so 
with  us.  Our  birth  in  a  Christian  country,  in  one  age  of  the  world  rather  than 
another,  with  certain  advantages  and  opportunities  more  or  less  favourable — all 
form  part  of  the  circumstances  of  our  responsibility.  And  this  responsibility  goes 
with  us  throughout  our  life,  although  some  may  carelessly  forget,  and  others  pre- 
sumptuously deny  it.  There  is  "  a  book  of  remembrance  "  with  our  God,  in  which 
is  recorded  a  faithful  history  of  our  lives.  "We  cannot  blot  out  a  letter  in  that 
book.  There  is  One,  who  can.  "  I  have  blotted  out  as  a  cloud  thy  transgression," 
&c.  3.  The  time  is  also  a  time  of  mercies.  (1)  Those  forty  years  with  Israel 
were  years  of  mercies.  There  were  mercies  in  their  deliverance  from  Egypt,  in 
the  provisions  of  the  wilderness,  in  their  education  by  the  moral  law  showing  the 
holiness  of  God,  and  by  the  ceremonial  law  showing  forth  His  mercies  in  Christ 
Jesus — in  their  guidance  by  that  pillar  of  a  cloud  by  day  and  that  piUar  of  fire  by 
night — in  their  preservation  amid  hostile  nations,  &c.,  &c.  (2)  But  are  not  our 
years  years  of  mercies  ?  (a)  If  Christians  indeed,  have  there  not  been  mercies  of 
conviction,  conversion,  justification,  regeneration  ?  Mercies  in  our  education  by 
the  law  leading  to  Christ,  and  by  Christ  writing  the  law  by  His  Spirit  upon  our 
hearts — mercies  also  in  our  guidance  by  the  Word  and  Spirit,  and  Providence, 
mercies  too  in  our  recoveries  from  sickness,  dc,  &o.  (6)  But  if  some  of  you  are 
not  Christians,  yet  your  past  years  have  also  been  years  of  mercies,  God  has  dealt 
very  mercifully  with  you,  in  sparing  you  so  long.  Seek  then  that  God's  mercies  of 
forbearance  may  lead  you  to  know  His  mercies  of  loving-kindness  in  saving  you  also 
through  His  dear  Son,  H.  The  fact.  •'  Suffered  He  their  manners."  1.  They 
provoked  God  in  the  wilderness.  "  Harden  not  your  heart,"  says  the  psalmist,  "  as 
in  the  provocation,"  &c.  Scarcely  had  they  entered  the  wilderness,  when  they 
began  to  murmur  at  Marah.  They  go  but  a  little  further,  when  again  they  murmur 
for  bread.  Soon  after  at  Massah  and  at  Meribah  for  water.  They  come  to  Sinai, 
and  there  they  fall  into  idolatry.  Then  at  Taberah  again  they  complained.  Then 
how  badly  the  spies  behaved.  After  this  was  the  rebellion  of  Korah,  and  murmur- 
ings  again  and  again.  Is  not  the  term  used  in  our  text  exceedingly  appropriate  and 
expressive?  Could  any  people  have  behaved  much  worse  than  this  called  the 
people  of  God  ?  2.  Thus  then  He  had  to  "  suffer  their  manners,"  and  He  did 
suffer  them  with  a  patience  that  is  truly  wonderful.  Yet,  observe,  it  was  not  with 
the  weak  patience  of  one  who  gives  up  the  rod  of  government,  and  leaves  a  people 
to  "  do  what  is  right  in  their  own  eyes. "  His  patience  was  that  of  one  who  yet 
showed  Himself  just  and  holy.  He  sent  repeated  punishments ;  He  gave  many 
warnings ;  He  plied  them  with  remonstrance  and  expostulation.  III.  The  in- 
BTKUCTioN  FOB  US.  They  were  very  like  us,  and  we  have  been  very  Uke  them.  Let 
any  one  of  you  review  any  definite  portion  of  his  life  and  he  will  be  alike  humbled 
and  surprised  to  see  how  like  he  has  been  to  those,  whose  "  manners  God  suffered 
in  the  wilderness."  More  indeed  has  been  expected  from  us,  because  more  has 
been  given.    1.  They  mormured  repeatedly,  and  so  displeased  God.    "Neither 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

murmur  ye,"  says  the  apostle,  •'  as  some  of  them  also  murmured."  And  yet  what 
fault  more  common  ?  Many  murmur  if  "  their  bread  and  their  water  "  be  scarce, 
when  they  had  much  better  be  praying,  "  Give  us  our  daily  bread,"  and  be  trustiog 
to  Him  who  has  said,  "bread  shall  be  given  them  and  their  water  shall  be  sure." 
There  are  who  murmur  for  "  the  flesh-pots  of  Egypt,"  and  complain  because  they 
are  debarred  from  some  of  the  pleasures  of  the  world.  2.  The  Israelites  were 
guilty  of  idolatry,  and  Christians  are  exhorted,  "Little  children,  keep  yourselves 
from  idols."  Nor  is  the  exhortation  needless.  To  love  riches  as  the  world  do,  is  to 
be  an  idolater  of  Mammon.  To  love  pleasure  is  to  be  an  idolater  of  pleasure.  To 
love  sin  is  to  give  to  sin  what  belongs  to  God.  Who  of  us  can  review  life  for  any 
term  of  years,  and  not  now  own  that  in  some  or  in  many  or  in  all  of  these  ways  we 
have  been  idolaters  ?     {J.  Hainbleton,  M.A.) 

VtSlEU  22-23.  He  raised  up  David. — David : — David  la  one  of  the  grandest  men 
in  the  Bible,  and  his  character  is  more  fully  pourtrayed  than  that  of  any  other 
with  one  exception.  The  sweet  singer  of  Israel  was  royally  dowered  with  charms 
of  the  person,  with  gifts  of  the  mind,  and  with  susceptibihtieB  of  the  heart ;  and, 
from  a  youth  up,  he  was  as  one  who  is  well  beloved,  and  therefore  rightly  named. 
He  was  great  in  all  the  faculties  of  his  soul,  and  has  not  been  placed  higher  in  the 
esteem  of  the  Church  than  his  virtues  have  warranted.  It  has  been  questioned 
how  he  could  be  called  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,  and  his  crimes  have  been 
sketched  with  nauseating  fulness.  But  the  Church  no  more  defends  them  than 
he  did  or  the  Bible.  I.  Why  then  abe  his  sins  so  fully  presented  ?  1.  That 
we  may  see  how  full  of  infirmity  are  the  best  of  men.  2.  That  we  may  see  how 
efficacious  grace  is  to  overcome  them.  3.  That  we  may  see  how  bitter  is  the 
sorrow  of  the  truly  penitent,  and  how  wide  is  the  door  of  mercy.  U.  Why  is  hk 
CALLED  A  MAN  AETEE  God's  OWN  HEART  ?  1.  David  was  choseu  by  God.  2.  As  thus 
chosen  he  would  more  strictly  observe  the  revealed  will  of  God.  3.  David  was 
a  man  of  fervent  piety,  of  swift  repentance,  and  of  the  deepest  spiritual  aspirations. 
4.  He  was  large-hearted,  true  as  a  friend,  affectionate  as  a  father,  and  ever  ready  to 
be  reconciled  with  his  foes — to  forgive  and  forget.  In  these  attributes  of  a  fatherly 
heart  he  resembled  God.  IH.  Three  inferences  from  his  history.  1.  This  life 
is  not  an  encouragement  to  commit  sin  or  to  continue  in  sin,  but  an  encouragement 
to  those  struggling  to  be  delivered  from  their  sins.  2.  Any  one  may  be  called  a  man 
after  God's  own  heart,  if  his  life  is  marked  by  the  same  religious  fervour,  by  the  same 
sincere  penitence,  and  by  the  same  deep  longings  after  God  by  day  and  by  night. 
3.  We  must  seek  after  likeness  to  God  in  our  moral  nature — in  our  likes  and  dislikes. 
(Homiletic  Monthly.)  The  ability  to  see  the  beautiful: — How  much  easier  it  is  to 
see  defects  than  to  see  beauties,  in  anything  at  which  we  look.  No  art  education 
is  requisite  to  the  perceiving  of  a  broken  arm  or  a  nose,  on  an  ancient  Grecian 
statue,  or  of  the  weather-stains  on  its  marble  surface ;  but  it  does  require  a  trained 
eye  and  a  cultivated  taste  to  recognise  the  lines  of  beauty,  and  the  tokens  of  power, 
in  a  discoloured  and  a  battered  fragment  of  a  master-work  of  art.  And  so  it  is  in 
the  reading  of  a  book,  or  in  the  observing  of  a  character :  the  abUity  to  perceive 
that  which  is  worthy,  and  that  which  is  admirable,  is  higher  and  rarer  than  the 
abUity  to  perceive  errors  and  flaws.  No  teacher  or  scholar  has  been  too  stupid  to 
see  David's  faults.  Only  here  and  there  has  one  been  noble  enough,  and  clear-eyed 
enough,  to  recognise  the  exceptional  high  qualities,  and  the  transcendent  attrac- 
tions of  character,  which  lift  David  above  his  fellows.  And  so,  again,  this  truth  ia 
continually  being  illustrated.  Let  him  who  would  have  the  credit  of  superior 
ability  be  careful  not  to  criticise  or  to  condemn  too  freely ;  for  that  is  a  sure  mark 
of  inferiority.  The  power  to  point  out  beauty  and  worth,  where  others  would  pass 
it  by,  is,  in  itself,  a  proof  of  excellence.  Why  can  not  all  aim  at  that  higher 
standard?  (The  Sunday-school  Times.)  A  man  after  Mine  own  heart. — T)ie 
gins  of  the  saints  : — 1.  We  all  know  of  the  frequency  with  which  testimony  is  given 
to  God's  affection  for  David.  Speaking  of  him  to  his  successors.  He  always  holds 
him  up  to  their  admiration  (1  Kings  ix.  4).  And  the  writer  of  the  Chronicles  sums 
up  the  life  of  any  monarch  who  had  turned  into  devious  ways  in  such  words  as 
those  of  2  Chron.  xxviii.  1.  2.  Now,  God  did  not  choose  the  Psalmist-warrior  as 
we  choose  our  friends,  by  a  sort  of  self-blinding ;  discerning  in  them  gifts  and 
graces  which  to  all  other  eyes  they  obviously  lack,  God  will  never  prefer  a  man  to 
hold  such  a  position  in  His  thoughts  as  David  held,  without  some  just  cause  of 
e-tecm.  The  assertion  that  God  takes  an  unworthy  man  into  His  pre-eminent 
affection  because  He  wills  to  do  so  carries  in  it  its  own  contradiction.    Qod,  llko 


CHAP.  XIII.)  THE  ACTS.  329 

man,  has  to  obey  the  law  of  His  nature,  and  that  law  is  that  He  can  only  choose 
what  is  right  and  good.  Even  the  passage,  "  Jacob  have  I  loved  and  Esau  have 
I  hated,"  must  not  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  He  loved  the  less  worthy  and  con- 
demned the  better.  Otherwise  we  strip  God  of  His  noblest  attributes,  and  make 
Him  inferior  to  man  in  the  moral  equities  of  reason  and  conscience ;  and,  in  the 
words  of  Bacon,  "  It  were  better  to  have  no  opinion  of  God  at  all,  than  such  an 
opinion  as  is  unworthy  of  Him,  for  the  one  is  unbelief  and  the  other  is  contumely. 
Plutarch  saith  well  to  this  purpose :  •  Surely,'  saith  he,  '  I  had  rather  a  great  deal 
men  should  say  there  was  no  such  man  as  Plutarch,  than  that  they  should  say 
there  was  one  Plutarch  who  would  eat  his  children  as  soon  as  they  were  born,  as 
the  poets  speak  of  the  god  Saturn.'  "  3.  Now,  this  representation  of  God's  prefer- 
ence for  David  seems  not  to  be  justified  when  you  turn  to  his  life.  Of  course  in 
estimating  the  man  we  must  take  into  account  the  morality  of  his  age,  his  moral 
superiority  to  the  contemporary  sovereigns,  and  the  temptations  kings  were  subject 
to,  and  we  ought  not  to  judge  him  by  the  light  of  these  later  times,  but  by  the  light 
that  was  given  to  him.  But  our  purpose  is  not  to  extenuate  or  minimize  David's 
sins,  but  to  vindicate  God's  joy  in  him.  Doubtless  there  were  in  David's  life  hours 
of  nearness  to  God,  times  of  serenest  reliance,  and  trust,  and  joy  in  God,  and  faith- 
ful service,  and  prompt  obedience.  But  there  were  also  in  this  same  man's  life 
depths  of  infamy.  What,  then,  was  this  something  that  dwarfed  the  glaring  defects 
of  the  life  ?  We  shall  understand  this  if  we  consider — I.  The  pkopeb  way  to  esti- 
mate THE  SINS  of  the  SAINTS.  It  Is  our  custom  to  fix  our  eyes  on  any  virtuous  or 
vicious  action  we  have  found  out  in  a  man's  hfe,  not  caring  to  inquire  whether  it  is 
the  expression  of  virtuous  or  vicious  principle.  Now,  we  ought  to  a  great  degree  to 
overlook  the  outward  details,  be  they  blemishes  or  merits,  and  estimate  the  man  by 
the  principles  on  which  he  is  deliberately  endeavouring  to  mould  his  character — by 
the  moral  spinal  column  that  in  the  main  holds  his  Ufe  together.  Neither  Noah's  act 
of  drunkenness  nor  Moses'  murder  of  the  Egyptian  on  the  one  hand,  nor  Balaam's 
truthfulness  nor  Judas'  penitence  or  remorse  on  the  other,  should  depreciate  or 
exalt  them  in  our  eyes,  as  neither  of  these  actions  or  mental  states  are  traceable  to 
vital  principle.  Now,  David's  sins,  gross  and  coarse  though  they  were,  were 
accidental ;  they  belied  the  principle  on  which  he  was  painfully  endeavouring  to 
mould  his  character  ;  and  so  God,  who  looks  upon  such  frailties  "  with  larger,  other 
eyes  than  ours,  making  allowance  for  us  all,"  forgave  and  overlooked  the  casual 
blemishes,  the  life  in  the  main  being  faithful  and  true.  His  sins  brought  awful 
retribution  upon  him,  for  God's  forgiveness  only  cancels  the  alienation  between  the 
human  and  Divine  mind.  What  he  sowed,  that  he  reaped  ;  but,  when  the  anguish 
of  penitence  filled  his  spirit,  the  enmity  which  the  sin  had  established  between  hia 
mind  and  God's  became  a  thing  of  the  past,  and  David  was  restored  to  the  grace 
and  favour  from  which  he  had  temporarily  lapsed.  For  there  was  in  this  man 
a  soul  that,  often  plunged  in  the  mire,  refused  to  abide  there,  and  ever  strove  to  rise 
up  and  take  its  flight  to  a  serener  and  purer  atmosphere.  If  I  do  the  sin  I  would 
not,  the  sin  which  is  not  in  keeping  with  the  moral  habits  I  am  faithfully  endeavour- 
ing to  acquire,  then  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me.  And  if 
I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inner  man,  and  see  another  law  in  my 
members  warring  against  this  law  in  which  I  delight,  and  by  which  I  aspire  to  live, 
and  leading  me  into  great  and  grievous  sins,  then,  though  with  my  flesh  I  serve 
sin,  with  my  mind  I  serve  God,  and  I  claim  to  be  judged  to  be  what  I  am  in  my 
aspirations  and  hopes.    IL  Wb  shall  undebstand  God's  love  and  praise  of  David 

IF  WB  BEFLEOT  that  LOVB  AND  PBAISE  ABE  DUE,  NOT  NECESSARILT  TO  THE  MAN  WHO 
LIVES   MOST  VIETUOTJSLT,  BUT    TO   THE    MAN    IN  WHOSE    LIFE    THE   MORAL  STRUGGLE  HAS 

BEEN  MOST  FAITHFULLY  MAINTAINED.  There  are  many  men  virtuous  because  it  is 
constitutionally  easier  for  them  to  be  virtuous  than  not.  Purity  that  springs  from 
a  heart  that  keeps  pure  because  it  never  warms,  can  lay  no  claim  either  to  human 
or  Divine  admiration.  There  is  nothing  meritorious  in  automatic  goodness.  But 
there  is  something  great  and  heroic  in  the  Ufe  of  the  man  who  has  had  aU  his  days 
to  fight  with  moral  infirmities  and  passions,  and  who,  though  often  conquered  and 
crushed,  has  risen  again  with  resistance  in  his  heart  and  defiance  on  his  lips  to 
renew  the  contest.  This  is  what  I  find  in  God's  love  for  David,  and  in  the  way 
Scripture  always  refers  to  him.  No  more  difficult  life-problem  has  been  given  to 
mere  man  than  was  given  to  him  to  solve.  Look  under  what  trying  conditions  he 
contrived  to  keep  his  heart  subject  to  the  fear  of  God.  One  day  we  find  him  a 
shepherd  lad,  the  next  the  hero  of  Israel,  and  in  rapid  succession  court  musician, 
king's  son-in-law,  the  freebooter  of   the  wilderness,  the  leader  of  outlaws,  tha 


830  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap,  xau 

mercenary  soldier,  the  monarch,  the  exile,  and  finally  the  monarch  again.  And 
this  leads  me  to  conclude  with  a  question  which  has  often  perplexed  us — the 
unequal  distribution  of  moral  natures,  one  man  receiving  from  God  a  nature  prone 
to  goodness,  another  a  nature  prone  to  evil.  We  have  men  with  constitutional 
infirmities  saying,  "  God  has  given  me  a  nature  that  prevents  me  ever  being  a  saint ; 
why  should  God  punish  me  for  not  being  that  which  the  rigorous  necessities  of  the 
nature  He  has  given  me  makes  it  impossible  for  me  to  be  ?  I  am  not  responsible 
for  my  nature.  It  is  my  fate."  Yes  ;  and  David's  life  was  lived  and  is  written  to 
be  your  answer,  and  throw  light  upon  your  case.  There  is  your  nature :  easy  to  be 
brought  within  the  power  of  goodness  or  difficult,  it  is  your  work.  Others  with 
a  milder  task  set  before  them  may  march  from  moral  victory  to  moral  victory.  But 
ii  you  have  not  left  the  evil  within  you  to  govern  you,  but  have  resolutely  essayed  to 
drive  it  out,  and  subject  your  lower  nature  to  the  sovereignty  of  your  higher,  God 
will  pronounce  His  "  Well  done  "  upon  you.  Failure  is  no  sin,  faithlessness  is  ; 
and,  judged  by  this  standard,  there  may  be  more  of  the  grace  of  God,  more  of  the 
divinest  moral  energy,  more  conscience,  reason,  and  love  admitted  into  the  heart, 
and  shaping  the  life  of  a  man  fighting,  like  David,  against  the  infirmities  of  his  flesh 
and  the  savage  bias  of  his  nature,  though  the  fighting  be  unsuccessful,  than  in  the 
heart  and  life  of  many  a  saint  to  whom  goodness  comes  easy.  (J.  Forfar.)  Of  this 
man's  seed  hath  God  .  .  .  raised  .  .  .  Jesus. — Christ,  the  Son  of  David,  more  than 
David. — I.  According  to  His  spieitual  disposition.  1.  David  a  man  according  to 
God's  own  heart  to  do  all  His  will  (ver.  22).  2.  Christ,  God's  own  Son,  fulfilling  in 
perfect  obedience  His  Father's  work.  II.  Accokdino  to  His  caeeer.  1.  David 
ascended  the  throne  through  lowliness  and  hardships.  2.  Christ  humbled  to  death 
on  the  Cross,  exalted  to  the  Father's  right  hand  (vers.  27-31).  III.  According  to 
THE  SPHERE  OF  His  WORK  .  1.  David  as  king  over  Israel,  a  shepherd  of  his  people, 
and  a  terror  to  his  enemies.  2.  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  an  Eternal  Prince 
of  Peace  to  His  people,  and  a  terrible  Judge  to  the  despisers  (vers.  88-41). 
(K.  Gerok.) 

Ver.  25.  John  fulfilled  his  course. — On  the  duty,  happiness,  and  honour  of 
maintaining  the  course  prescribed  to  us  by  Providence : — The  life  of  every  individual 
may  be  compared  to  a  river :  rising  in  obscurity,  increasing  by  the  accession  of 
tributary  streams,  and,  after  flowing  through  a  longer  or  shorter  distance,  losing 
itself  in  some  common  receptacle.  Whilst  a  stream  is  confined  within  its  banks, 
it  fertilises,  enriches,  and  improves  the  country  through  which  it  passes  ;  but  if  it 
deserts  its  channel,  by  stagnating  in  lakes  and  marshes,  its  exhalations  diffuse 
pestilence  and  disease  around.  Some  glide  away  in  insignificance  :  whilst  others 
become  celebrated.  Some  are  tranquil  and  gentle  in  their  course ;  whilst  others, 
rushing  in  torrents,  dashing  over  precipices,  become  objects  of  terror  and  dismay. 
But,  however  diversified  their  character,  or  their  direction,  all  agree  in  having 
their  course  short,  limited,  and  determined.  Thus  human  characters,  however 
various,  have  one  common  destiny ;  their  course  of  action  may  be  greatly  diver- 
sified, but  they  all  lose  themselves  in  the  ocean  of  eternity.  Few  have  appeared 
on  the  stage  of  action  whose  life  was  more  important  than  of  John.  His  course 
was  a  very  extraordinary  one.  John  was  called  to  a  very  singular  work ;  his 
ministry  formed  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  It  was  the  connecting 
link  between  the  two  dispensations.  His  career  was  brilliant,  successful,  short, 
and  his  end  violent  and  tragical.    I.  That  there  is  a  prescribed  course  or  sphere 

OF  action   appointed  to  every   INDIVIDnAL   BI    THE    AUTHOR  OP  OUR  NATURE.       1.    We 

are  not  a  race  of  independent  creatures  sent  into  the  world  to  follow  the 
dictates  of  our  own  will.  We  are  not  our  own ;  we  belong  to  another.  To  do 
God's  will,  to  serve  the  end  of  His  government,  and  to  promote  His  glory ;  these  are 
the  great  ends  of  our  existence.  Thus  our  Saviour  Himself  when  in  this  world 
was  devoted  to  His  Father's  will.  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent 
Me,"  &c.  And  we  live  to  no  purpose,  or  to  a  bad  one,  but  as  we  conform  to  this. 
2.  IJut,  although  this  is  the  universal  principle  by  which  all  are  to  be  actuated, 
yet  it  admits  of  great  and  numerous  variations  in  its  practical  application.  The 
manner  in  which  an  apostle,  for  instance,  was  called  upon  to  do  this,  is  not  that 
in  which  an  ordinary  teacher  is  to  do  it ;  nor  the  manner  of  an  ordinary  teacher 
that  of  a  private  Christian.  Tlie  duties  of  a  sovereign  are  different  from  those  of 
his  ministers ;  and  those  again,  from  the  duties  of  inferior  magistrates  ;  and  of 
magistrates,  from  those  of  private  subjects.  Of  the  rich  it  is  required  '*  to  do 
good  and  to  communicate  "  ;  of  the  poor,  to  be  prudent,  diligent,  careful ;  and  so  on. 


CHAP,  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  831 

Although  the  end  is  the  same  in  all,  yet  the  manner  in  which  this  end  is  viewed 
wil]  be  various :  the  rays  of  Ught,  when  blended  in  day,  are  simple  and  of  a 
nniform  colour  ;  but  when  they  are  refracted  through  a  prism,  they  exhibit  all  the 
colours  of  the  rainbow.  II.  That  there  is  a  set  and  limited  time  allotted  to 
THAT  SPHERE  AND  COURSE  OP  ACTION  :  "  There  is  an  appointed  time  to  man  upon  the 
earth."  1.  The  course  of  man  is  not  indeterminate,  but  has  its  limits.  If  "a 
sparrow  falleth  not  to  the  ground  without  His  knowledge,"  much  less  can  the 
death  of  a  human  creature  take  place  without  His  interposition.  Whether  we  fall 
premature  victims  to  disease,  or  perish  by  what  men  call  accident,  or  sink  under 
the  burdens  of  age,  still  it  is  according  to  the  will  of  God,  "  whose  counsels  shall 
stand,  and  who  will  do  all  His  pleasure."  2.  It  is  short.  *'  Thou  hast  made  my 
days  as  an  handbreadth."  Whether  we  drop  in  infancy,  from  the  cradle  to  the 
grave,  or  are  cut  off  in  youth ;  whether  we  attain  to  manhood,  or  even  to  old  age  ; 
still,  we  soon  reach  the  end  of  our  course,  and  often  without  passing  through  its 
intermediate  stages.  3.  It  is  rapid  and  impetuous  ;  its  waves  foUow  each  other  in 
quick  succession,  and  many  are  engulfed  almost  as  soon  as  they  appear.  Early  in 
infancy  the  stream  glides  away  like  a  summer  brook,  and  leaves  the  fond  parent 
mournfully  to  recall  the  pleasure  he  received  in  contemplating  its  unsullied  purity 
and  its  playful  meanders.  Of  those  who  set  out  with  us  in  this  journey  of  life, 
how  many  have  disappeared  from  our  side  1     III.  Oue  happiness  and  our  honour 

CONSIST  ENTIRELY   IN  COMPLETING    THE  COURSE  WHICH  GoD  HAS  ASSIGNED  TO  US.       Here 

we  are  liable  to  fall  into  two  great  mistakes.  1.  That  there  is  some  other  happiness 
and  honour  than  that  which  is  to  be  found  in  fulfilling  our  course,  in  occupying 
that  sphere  of  duty  which  God  hath  been  pleased  to  assign  us.  Some  are  looking, 
for  their  satisfaction,  to  the  pleasures  of  sin  ;  others  to  the  gratification  which  the 
world  affords ;  some  attach  their  notion  of  happiness  to  some  external  situation 
not  yet  found,  and  imagine  it  is  to  be  met  with  there.  Settle  it  in  your  minds  that 
the  only  happiness  worth  seeking — that  which  will  live  in  all  circumstances,  and 
abide  the  vicissitudes  of  life,  consists  in  fulfilling  our  course,  conforming  to  the 
Divine  wUl,  and  this  fountain  of  water  flows  for  the  refreshment  of  the  meanest 
peasant,  as  well  as  of  the  greatest  monarch.  2.  That  we  should  be  able  to 
conform  ourselves  to  the  will  of  God,  and  to  our  own  sphere  of  action,  better  in 
some  other  state  ;  and  beiug  therefore  dissatisfied  with  that  precise  state  in  which 
His  providence  has  placed  us.  The  wisdom  of  each  consists  in  fulfilling  His  own 
course.  The  course  of  John  the  Baptist  was  difficult,  obstructed  with  afflictions, 
and  beset  with  daugers  :  but  he  fulfilled  it.  How  many  objections  might  he  have 
formed  against  the  precise  course  assigned  him  !  The  poor  may  easily  imagine 
how  amiably  and  liberally  they  should  have  acted  if  their  lot  had  been  cast  among 
the  rich  ;  and  the  rich,  on  the  other  hand,  how  safely  they  should  have  been 
preserved  from  a  variety  of  snares,  if  they  had  been  screened  by  the  privacy  of  the 
poor.  The  young  will  ascribe  their  errors  to  the  impetuosity  so  natural  to  their  age  ; 
and  the  aged  wish  for  the  energy  which  belongs  to  youth  :  their  time,  they  plead, 
is  passed  ;  it  is  too  late  for  them  to  change.  But  all  these  are  great  mistakes.  It 
is  not  a  change  of  state  that  we  want,  but  a  change  of  heart.  The  grace  of  God 
will  keep  us  humble  in  prosperity,  cheer  us  in  adversity,  sustain  and  direct  us  in 
life,  support  us  in  death,  and  go  with  us  into  eternity.  Finally,  let  each  of  us 
attach  himself  with  more  seriousness,  alacrity,  and  fervour  than  ever,  to  the  proper 
duties  of  his  station  ;  let  each  consider  in  what  instances  he  fails  to  fulfil  his  course. 
The  memory  of  John  the  Baptist  is  perpetuated  with  honour,  because  he  "  fulfilled 
his  course  " ;  while  that  of  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate  are  covered  with  infamy. 
Which  of  these  characters  will  you  imitate?  Whenever  the  gospel  is  preached, 
this  alternative  is  presented  of  "  shining  like  the  sun  for  ever ;  or  of  awaking  to 
shame  and  everlasting  contempt."    {R.  Hall.) 

Ver.  26.  Men  and  brethren,  children  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  and  whosoever 
among  you  feareth  God,  to  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent. — To  you: — 
I.  What  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  ?  1.  It  is  the  testimony  that  Jesus  is  the 
promised  Saviour  (ver.  23).  2.  The  word  which  promises  forgiveness  to  all  who 
exhibit  repentance  of  sin,  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  (ver.  38,  39).  3.  In  a  word, 
it  is  the  proclamation  of  perfect  salvation,  through  the  risen  Saviour  (ver.  32,  33). 
(1)  It  is  comparable  to  a  word  for  conciseness  and  simplicity.  (2)  It  is  a  word, 
as  being  spoken  by  God,  and  as  being  His  present  utterance  even  at  this  moment. 
(3)  It  is  a  word  ;  for  it  reveals  Him  who  is  truly  "  the  Word."  (4)  It  is  a  word  of 
salvation ;  for  it  declares,  describes,  presents,  and  presses  home  salvation.    (5)  It 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  no. 

is  a  word  sent,  for  the  gospel  dispensation  ir  a  mission  of  mercy  frcin  God,  the 
gospel  is  a  message,  Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself  is  sent  to 
work  salvation  among  men.  II.  In  what  manner  is  the  gospel  sent  to  too  ?  1. 
In  the  general  commission,  which  ordains  that  it  be  preached  to  every  ereatnre. 
2,  In  the  fact  that  the  gospel  is  preached  in  our  land,  the  Bible  is  in  every 
house,  and  the  word  is  proclaimed  in  our  streets.  3.  In  the  providence  which 
lias  brought  you  this  day  to  hear  the  word.  Very  specially  may  yoa  be  sent 
to  the  preacher,  the  preacher  sent  to  you,  and  the  special  message  be  sent 
through  the  preacher  to  you.  4.  In  the  peculiar  adaptation  of  it  to  your 
case,  character,  and  necessity.  A  medicine  which  suits  your  disease  ii 
evidently  meant  for  you.  6.  In  the  power  which  has  attended  it,  while  you  have 
been  hearing  it,  though  you  may  have  resisted  that  power.  It  would  be  a  sad  thing 
if  we  had  to  single  out  even  one,  and  say,  "This  word  is  not  only  sent  to  you"; 
but  we  are  under  no  such  painful  necessity.  III.  In  what  position  does  it  place 
Tou  ?  In  a  position — 1.  Of  singular  favour.  Prophets  and  kings  died  without 
hearing  what  you  hear  (Matt.  xiii.  16).  2.  Of  notable  indebtedness  to  martyrs  and 
men  of  God,  in  past  ages,  and  in  these  days ;  for  these  have  lived  and  died  to  bring 
you  the  gospel.  3.  Of  great  hopefulness  ;  for  we  trust  you  will  accept  it  and  live. 
4.  Of  serious  responsibility  ;  for  if  you  neglect  it,  how  will  you  escape  ?  (Heb.  ii, 
3).  It  puts  it  out  of  your  power  to  remain  unaffected  by  the  gospel.  It  must  either 
save  you,  or  increase  your  condemnation.  IV.  In  what  manneb  will  you  tkeat  this 
woBD  ?  1.  Will  you  decidedly  and  honestly  refuse  it  ?  This  would  be  a  terrible 
determination  ;  but  the  very  idea  of  so  doing  might  startle  you  into  a  better  mind  ? 
2.  Wm  you  basely  and  foolishly  delay  your  reply  ?  This  is  a  very  dangerous  course, 
and  many  perish  in  it.  3.  Will  you  play  the  hypocrite,  and  pretend  to  receive  it, 
while  in  your  heart  you  reject  it?  4.  WiU  you  act  the  part  of  the  temporary 
convert  ?  5.  WiU  you  not  rather  accept  the  word  of  salvation  with  delight  ? 
Suppose  the  gospel  should  be  taken  from  you  by  your  removal  to  a  place  where  it  is 
not  preached,  or  by  the  death  of  the  minister  whom  you  so  greatly  esteem.  It  would 
be  just.  It  may  happen.  It  has  happened  to  others.  Refuse  the  heavenly 
message  no  longer,  lest  your  day  of  grace  should  end  in  an  eternity  of  woe.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  To  you  is  the  word  of  salvation: — I  remember  when  Mr.  Richard 
Weaver  preached  at  Park  Street  Chapel,  in  his  younger  days,  he  came  down  from 
the  pulpit,  and  ran  over  the  pews  to  get  at  the  people,  that  he  might  speak  to  them 
individually,  and  say,  "  you,"  and  "  you,"  and  "  you."  I  am  not  nimble  enough  on 
my  legs  to  do  that,  and  I  do  not  think  I  should  try  it  if  I  were  younger  :  but  I  wish 
I  could,  somehow  or  another,  come  to  each  one  of  you,  and  press  home  these  glad 
tidings  of  great  joy.  You,  my  dear  old  friend,  it  means  you  I  You,  young  woman, 
over  there  to  the  right,  it  means  you  I  You,  dear  child,  sitting  with  your  grand- 
mother, it  means  you  I  "  Whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall 
be   saved."      (Ihid.)  The  word  of  salvation  : — I.    The   general  characteb 

OF  THE  GOSPEL.  The  gospel  is  "  the  word  of  this  salvation  " — 1.  As  being  the 
sole  authority  on  which  we  ascertain  the  possibility  of  that  salvation.  Without  it 
we  should  be  inextricably  bewildered  on  the  question  whether  or  not  our  salvation 
could  be  made  consistent  with  the  character  of  God.  (1)  We  may  learn  much 
respecting  the  Divine  character  without  the  aid  of  written  revelation.  The 
"  heavens  above,  the  earth  beneath,  the  waters  under  the  earth,"  startle  us  with 
the  conviction  that  He  who  made  them  and  still  preserves  them  must  necessarily 
be  a  God  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  We  gaze  on  the  stupendous  structure  and 
mechanism  of  the  universe,  and  we  perceive  inscribed  on  every  part  of  it  the  signs 
of  an  almighty  hand.  We  look  upon  the  creatures  of  various  kinds  that  people 
this  world  of  ours,  and  we  remark  indications  equally  expressive  of  the  goodness 
of  Him  "  by  whom  all  things  consist."  And  in  addition  there  is,  in  the  law  He 
has  promulgated,  a  revelation  of  His  perfect  purity  and  justice.  (2)  But  whence  are 
we  to  ascertain  His  mercy?  Or  by  what  means  may  we  discover  that  "  God  may 
be  just  and  yet  the  justifier  "  of  those  who  have  broken  His  commandment  ?  From 
other  quarters  we  look  for  information  in  vain.  Or,  if  an  answer  come,  it  is  to 
assure  us  that  God  "  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  (8)  It  is  the  gospel  only, 
which  satisfies  us  in  this  great  inquiry.  Here  and  here  alone  we  learn  that  in  the 
restoration  of  our  nature,  mercy  and  truth  may  meet  together,  and  righteousness 
and  peace  embrace  each  other.  2.  As  it  reveals  to  us  the  plan  and  means  of  our 
"  salvation."  It  opens  to  us  the  very  principle  and  motive  in  which  the  plan 
originated,  by  assuring  us  that  "God  so  loved  the  world,"  and  that  it  is  "not  by 
works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  bat  according  to  His  mercy  He  hata 


CHAP,  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  833 

saved  us.**  Do  we  inquire  in  what  manner  the  purpose  of  this  grace  and  mercy 
was  carried  into  practical  effect  ?  We  are  informed  it  was  by  the  gift  of  His  well- 
beloved  and  only-begotten  Son.  Are  we  desirous  of  knowing  in  what  respect  this  Son 
was  given  ?  We  learn  that  though,  "  being  in  the  form  of  God,"  yet  He  "  humbled 
HimseK  "  and  "  took  upon  Himself  the  form  of  a  servant,"  and  finally  was  put  to 
death.  Do  we  inquire,  what  was  the  immediate  issue  of  the  amazing  series  of 
Bufferings  through  which  He  passed  ?  We  are  assured  that  on  the  third  day  He 
«« rose  again  from  the  dead,"  and  that  therefore  "  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him 
to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins."  Are  we 
concerned  to  know  by  what  means  we  are  to  receive  the  benefit  of  all  this  love  and 
condescension  ?  Directions  clear  and  numerous  are  set  before  us,  so  that  we  need 
not  miss  our  providential  way.  3.  As  being  the  instrument  by  which  it  is  effected. 
It  is  not  merely  the  wisdom  of  God,  or  the  grace  of  God,  it  is  also  "  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation."  The  gospel  is  indebted  for  its  former  and  its  present 
triumphs,  not  to  the  zeal  or  eloquence  of  its  ministers,  but  to  that  Divine  power 
which  was  breathed  into  it  on  its  original  promulgation,  and  which  stUl  continues 
to  make  it  effectual.  "  Not  by  power,  nor  by  might,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the 
Lord  of  Hosts."  4.  The  character  of  the  gospel  as  a  "word  of  salvation,"  becomes 
stiU  more  strikingly  apparent,  when  it  is  compared  with  preceding  revelations.  (1) 
Let  it  be  compared,  for  instance,  with  the  law  of  Moses.  That  law  was  eminently — 
(a)  A  word  of  terror.  How  different  were  the  circumstances  under  which  "  grace 
and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ  to  those  under  which  the  law  came."  Instead  of 
being  terrified  and  driven  back  with  "  thunderings  and  lightnings,"  we  are 
encouraged  to  •♦  come  with  boldness  to  a  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain 
mercy,"  &c.  (6)  A  word  of  condemnation.  How  different  are  the  accents  in 
which  the  gospel  speaks  to  us.  For,  whilst  it  fully  secures  the  glory  of  the  Divine 
holiness,  it  assures  us  at  the  same  time  "  that  through  this  Man  is  preached  unto 
us  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  (2)  And  the  gospel  is  distinguished  from  aU  preceding 
revelations,  as  in  comparison  they  were  at  best  but  words  of  promise.  In  their 
clearest  discoveries  they  were  but  as  the  dimness  of  the  twilight  which  precedes  the 
glory  of  the  risen  day.  (3)  And  in  contrast  with  false  systems  of  religion, 
which,  as  regards  their  effects  on  the  habits  of  civil  life  and  of  domestic  society, 
are  systems  of  destruction  and  cruelty,  the  gospel  is  a  "word  of  salvation";  since 
it  instructs  us  to  "do  ourselves  no  harm,"  and  directs  us  to  love  our  neighbour 
as  ourselves.  And  if  it  be  contrasted  with  such  systems,  with  regard  to  their  effect 
upon  man's  spiritual  and  eternal  interests,  they  appear  not  only  systems  of  cruelty 
to  the  body,  but  also  systems  of  awful  destruction  to  the  soul.  II.  The  PBACTiciJU 
DUTIES  WHICH  RESULT  FROM  ITS  COMMUNICATION.  It  has  uot  indeed  been  sent  to  you 
as  it  was  sent  originally  to  the  Jews,  by  special  revelation  from  heaven,  or  by  the 
personal  ministry  of  Christ.  Still  it  has  been  sent.  And  the  practical  duties  are — 
1.  To  receive  implicitly  the  "  form  of  doctrine  "  which  that  word  inculcates.  In 
matters  which  depend  on  human  authority  we  have  a  right  to  doubt,  and  if  we 
please,  to  contradict  and  to  deny.  But  the  "  word  of  the  gospel "  is  not "  the  word 
of  men  " ;  it  is  "  in  truth  the  word  of  God."  As  such,  it  is  clothed  with  an  authority 
which  precludes  at  once  all  right  on  our  part  to  question  any  doctrine  it  proposes. 
"  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker."  2.  To  gratefully  accept  the  benefits 
it  offers.  3.  To  expect  that  salvation  which  constitutes  the  subject  of  it.  The 
very  reason  why,  notwithstanding  your  repeated  rejection  of  this  word,  it  has 
continued  to  be  sent  to  you,  has  been  that  God  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner, 
but  would  rather  that  all  men  should  repent  and  Uve.  4.  To  send  it  to  others.  For 
every  benefit  bestowed  upon  us  involves  an  obligation  to  be  "  merciful  even  as  our 
Father  who  is  in  heaven  is  merciful."  {Jormthan  Crowther.)  The  word  of 
salvation : — I.  Needed.  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  the  question  of  questions. 
1.  Men  are  lost,  and  need  saving  from  the  consequences  of  their  wandering.  2. 
Men  are  under  condemnation,  and  need  saving  from  the  threatenings  of  the  broken 
law.  3.  Men  are  sundered  from  God,  the  Fountain  of  life  and  blessedness,  and 
need  saving  from  the  death  that  never  dies.  4.  Men  are  in  bondage  to  sin  and  evil 
habits,  and  need  saving  from  that  dire  captivity.  And  where  is  the  saving  word  f 
Nature  is  dumb  on  the  subject  of  salvation  ;  conscience  emphasises  the  existence  of 
the  evil,  but  is  silent  as  to  the  remedy ;  philosophy  has  grappled  with  the  problem, 
but  has  left  it  where  it  was  ;  educational  and  reformatory  measures  have  removed 
a  few  symptoms,  but  left  the  root  of  the  disease  untouched.  History  is  the  arena 
on  which  many  saving  experiments  have  been  tried ;  let  the  student  say  which  has 
succeeded.     II.  Sent.     1.  From  whom?     (1)  Not  from  man.     The  patient  is 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOE.  [chap.  xm. 

unequal  to  effect  his  own  cure.  The  declaration  of  the  text  is  a  disclaimer  of 
originality  to  an  age  sick  of  original  efforts  to  cure  an  inveterate  disease — a  disease, 
too,  beyond  the  power  of  original  physicians  even  to  understand.  The  office  of 
the  gospel  preacher  is  simply  to  tell  what  he  has  been  told  in  the  clearest  way.  (2) 
From  God  who  knows  the  evil  thoroughly  ;  who  pities  and  loves  the  sinner ;  who 
desires  above  all  things  his  salvation,  and  has  made  abundant  provision  for  it  in 
Christ.  2.  To  whom.  "  You,"  whoever  you  may  be.  (1)  Jews  ineffectually 
striving  to  work  out  their  salvation  by  the  works  of  the  law.  (2)  God-fearing 
Gentiles  endeavouring  to  construct  a  salvation  out  of  the  elements  of  their  morahty. 
(3)  Sinners  of  every  degree.  III.  Accepted.  1.  Heard.  Hence  the  need  of 
Scripture  study,  and  attendance  on  the  ministry  of  reconciUation.  Ignorance  is 
inexcusable  in  a  land  of  Bibles  and  churches.  2.  Believed  in.  A  sick  man  who 
has  no  faith  in  his  doctor  or  his  prescriptions  will  hardly  be  persuaded  to  take  his 
prescriptions.  So  there  must  be  an  assent  to  the  verity  and  divinity  of  the  gospel 
message.  3.  Embraced.  Not  simply  with  the  intellect,  but  with  the  heart.  "  With 
the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."  When  may  the  word  of  salvation 
be  accepted  ?  Now.  For  it  is  needed  now ;  it  is  sent  now.  The  need  for  it  will 
not  grow  less  by  lapse  of  time ;  nor  will  time  make  it  more  acceptable.  (J.  W.  Burn.) 
The  word  of  salvation : — I.  To  whom  sent.  To  all  sinners,  for  all  sinners  need  it, 
and  it  is  suited  to  the  case  of  all.  II.  Fob  what  pubpose  sent.  As  a  word  of — 
1.  Pardon  to  the  condemned  sinner.  2.  Peace  to  the  rebelUous  sinner.  3.  Life  to 
the  dead  sinner.  4.  Liberty  to  the  captive  sinner.  5.  Healing  to  the  diseased 
sinner.  6.  Cleansing  to  the  polluted  sinner.  7.  Direction  to  the  bewildered  sinner. 
8.  Refreshment  to  the  weary  sinner.  9.  Comfort  to  the  disconsolate  sinner.  {R. 
Erskine.)  The  word  of  salvation  delivered: — I.  The  tbub  ohaeacteb  of  thb 
GOSPEL  WHICH  wB  PBEACH.  It — 1.  Ecveals  salvation  clearly.  2.  Offers  it  freely. 
3.  Confers  it  actually  on  all  who  will  receive  it.  II.  The  commission  which  we 
BEAB  IN  BELATioN  TO  THB  GOSPEL.  We  must  address — 1.  Those  who  on  account  of 
their  attachment  to  the  law  suppose  themselves  not  to  need  it.  2.  Those  who 
through  their  alienation  from  God  and  His  law  suppose  themselves  beyond  its 
reach.      [G.   Simeon,  M.A.)  Words   of  salvation  : — Even    in    the    ordinary 

experience  of  life  men  are  saved  by  words — the  words  of  their  fellows.  When  a 
blind  man  avoids  a  precipice,  and  turns  into  a  path  of  safety  at  the  warning  voice 
of  a  benevolent  passenger,  he  has  been  saved  by  words.  When  the  various  portions 
of  an  army  make  a  combined  movement  by  orders  of  its  chief,  they  are  saved  from 
ruin,  and  placed  in  safety,  by  words.  Words,  false  and  meaningless,  however 
reverently  they  may  be  received,  will  not  save,  and  on  the  other  hand,  words  true  and 
Divine  will  not  save  those  who  despise  and  neglect  them.      (W.  Amot.)  A 

message  of  salvation : — It  has  been  stated  that  Addison,  the  great  essayist,  found 
peace  by  beUeving  in  Christ  ere  he  died.  But  it  has  remained  for  a  recent 
biographer  of  Addison  to  inform  us  how  it  came  about,  for  he  was  never  known  to 
have  had  any  clerical  friends  who  would  be  likely  to  influence  him.  It  is  now 
stated  that  a  pastrycook  sent  home  a  pie  on  Christmas  Day,  and  under  it  he  placed 
a  page  of  Richard  Baxter's  "  Call  to  the  Unconverted."  Addison,  upon  perusing 
it,  purchased  the  whole  book,  which  was  the  means  of  leading  him  to  Jesus. 
Words  of  salvation  providentially  sent: — A  young  man  in  America  was  once  at  work 
upon  his  farm.  He  was  careless  about  religion — indeed  nobody  had  ever  said  a 
word  to  him  about  it ;  and  as  he  had  no  Bible  and  only  worldly  friends,  there 
seemed  little  chance  of  his  ever  hearing  of  Christ  and  salvation,  and  of  heaven  and 
hell.  On  this  particular  day,  it  was  a  bright  morning  in  early  summer,  he  had  to 
take  his  cart,  drawn  by  oxen,  along  the  high  road.  He  was  thinking  of  nothing 
except  his  daily  work  and  his  daily  bread.  A  gentle  breeze  was  blowing,  and  as 
he  went  along  it  stirred  a  little  piece  of  paper  which  had  been  lying  by  the  roadside, 
so  that  it  fluttered  in  front  of  him.  But  on  went  the  young  man,  the  oxen  and  the 
cart,  all  the  same.  When  he  had  gone  a  short  way  farther,  however,  a  thought 
came  over  him,  "  I  wonder  what  that  bit  of  paper  was — I've  a  great  mind  to  go  back 
and  see."  And,  stopping  his  team,  he  did  go  back.  He  picked  it  up  and  read  it 
as  he  walked  along.  It  was  a  leaf  out  of  the  Bible.  The  summer  passed  away 
with  its  flowers  and  sunshine,  and  the  corn  grew  ripe,  and  was  gathered  into  the 
garner  ;  there  was  another  harvest,  too,  standing  ready  for  the  sickle.  The  young 
man  who  had  found  the  leaf  lay  upon  a  sick  and  dying  bed.  A  sore  disease  had 
smitten  him,  and  his  parents  knew  there  was  no  hope  of  his  life.  They  were 
stricken  with  grief,  but  he — oh,  hf  was  rejoicing  I  And  now  his  lips  were  open  to 
teU  them  what  he  had  never  told  before.     The  leaf  oat  of  the  Bible  had  brought  to 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  ACTS.  835 

him  first  the  sense  of  sin  and  then  the  knowledge  of  a  Saviour.  He  sought  for  a 
whole  Bible,  and  ever  since  it  had  been  his  constant  companion,  and  now,  though 
caUed  almost  suddenly  away  from  life  with  all  its  happiness,  he  knew  whom  he  had 
believed,  and  he  was  ready.  He  had  an  anchor,  sure  and  steadfast,  for  the  Lamb 
that  was  slain  to  take  away  sin  had  taken  away  his  sin.  And  without  a  doubt  or  a 
fear  he  entered  into  rest.  Salvation,  for  all : — If  I  were  to  come  as  an  accredited 
agent  to  you  from  the  upper  sanctuary,  with  a  letter  of  invitation  to  you,  with  your 
name  and  address  on  it,  you  would  not  doubt  your  warrant  to  accept  it.  Well, 
here  is  the  Bible — your  invitation  to  come  to  Christ.  It  does  not  bear  your  name 
and  address ;  but  it  says,  "  Whosoever  "  :  that  takes  you  in.  It  says,  "  All "  :  that 
takes  you  in.  It  says,  '•  If  any  "  :  that  takes  you  in.  What  can  be  surer  and  freer 
than  that?  (T.  Chalmers,  D.I).)  Salvation,  common  : — The  gospel  river  of  hfe 
does  not  branch  out  into  divers  streams.  There  is  not  a  broad  sweep  of  water  for 
the  rich,  the  intellectual,  and  the  cultivated,  and  a  little  scant  runnel  where  the 
poor  may  now  and  then  come  and  get  healed  by  the  side  of  its  precarious  wave. 
There  is  no  costly  sanatorium  beneath  whose  shade  patrician  leprosy  may  get  by 
itself  to  be  fashionably  sprinkled  and  healed.  Naaman,  with  all  his  retinue 
watching,  must  come  and  dip  and  plunge  like  common  men  in  Jordan.  There  is  no 
sort  of  salvation  except  the  one  ransom  and  deliverance  that  is  purchased  for  rich 
and  poor  together  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  the  poor  beggar, 
his  garment  ragged  from  the  havoc  of  a  hundred  storms,  and  his  flesh  bleeding 
from  the  ulcers  of  a  hundred  wounds,  may  dip  eagerly  into  the  same  Bethesda,  and 
emerge  unscarred  and  comely  as  a  child.  {W.  M.  Pwnshon,  LL.D.)  Salvation, 
neglecting  : — Most  of  the  calamities  of  hfe  are  caused  by  simple  neglect.  By 
neglect  of  education,  children  grow  up  in  ignorance ;  by  neglect,  a  farm  grows  up 
to  weeds  and  briers ;  by  neglect,  a  house  goes  to  decay;  by  neglect  of  sowing,  a  man 
wiQ  have  no  harvest ;  by  neglect  of  reaping,  the  harvest  would  rot  in  the  fields. 
No  worldly  interest  can  prosper  where  there  is  neglect ;  and  why  may  it  not  be  so 
in  religion  ?  There  is  nothing  in  earthly  affairs  that  is  valuable  that  will  not  be 
ruined  if  it  is  not  attended  to ;  and  why  may  it  not  be  so  with  the  concerns  of  the 
soul?  Let  no  one  infer,  therefore,  that  because  he  is  not  a  drunkard,  or  an 
adulterer,  or  a  murderer,  that  therefore  he  wiU  be  saved.  Such  an  inference  would 
he  as  irrational  as  it  would  be  for  a  man  to  infer,  that,  because  he  is  not  a  murderer, 
his  farm  will  produce  a  harvest ;  or  that,  because  he  is  not  an  adulterer,  therefore 
his  merchandise  will  take  care  of  itself.  Salvation  would  be  worth  nothing  if  it 
cost  no  effort ;  and  there  wiU  be  no  salvation  where  no  effort  is  put  forth.  (A. 
Barnes,  D.D.)  Salvation,  simplicity  of: — A  physician  who  was  anxious  about 
his  soul  asked  a  beUeving  patient  of  his  how  he  should  find  peace.  His  patient 
rephed,  "  Doctor,  I  have  felt  that  I  could  do  nothing,  and  I  have  put  my  case  in 
your  hand :  I  am  trusting  in  you.  This  is  exactly  what  every  poor  sinner  mast 
do  in  the  Lord  Jesus."  He  saw  the  simpHcity  of  the  way,  and  soon  found  peace 
in  Christ. 

Vers.  27-32.  For  they  that  dwell  at  Jemsalem,  and  their  rulers,  because  they 
knew  Him  not. — The  rejection  of  Christ : — I.  Its  gkotjnd.  1.  Ignorance  of  Christ 
Himself.  (1)  Of  His  Divine  Sonship.  ^2)  His  mediatorial  authority.  (3)  His 
saving  mission.  Had  they  known  all  this,  •'  they  would  not  have  crucified  the 
Lord  of  glory."  2.  Deafness  to  the  voices  of  the  prophets  who  predicted  Him. 
Here  we  have  the  twofold  ground  of  aU  rejection  of  Christ.  If  men  only  knew 
Him,  and  recognised  the  force  of  those  many  prophecies  which  find  their  fulfilment 
only  in  Him,  the  acceptance  of  His  Person  and  saving  benefits  would  be  inevitable. 
n.  Its  inexcusableness.  1.  Christ  was  with  them,  and  demonstrated  His  Divine 
personality  and  mission  by  many  infaUible  proofs — His  sinless  humanity,  His  mira- 
culous works,  His  wonderful  teaching.  Christ  is  not  with  us  in  the  same  sense ; 
but  we  have  the  record  of  His  hfe,  which  renders  His  modern  rejection  none  the 
less  inexcusable.  2.  They  heard  the  prophecies  frequently  read ;  and  had  they 
Ustened  without  prejudice,  they  must  have  seen  how  they  all  converged  in  Him. 
So  now.  3.  There  was  no  cause  for  His  rejection  (ver.  28).  He  did  them  no  harm, 
but  ever  strove  to  do  them  good.  Why  do  you  reject  Himf  Is  it  not  because  you 
will  not  come  to  Him  that  you  may  have  life  ?  HI.  Its  fbusteation.  1.  Their 
rejection,  in  its  most  aggravated  form,  only  fulfilled  the  prophecies  which  went 
before  on  Him  (vers.  27,  29).  2.  God  reversed  the  himiiliation  of  death  which  they 
inflicted  on  Him  by  raising  Him  from  the  dead.  What  to  them  was  the  end  of  Hia 
mission,  proved  only  its  beginning.    3.  Their  rejection  proved  the  origin  of  that 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

gospel  which  Paul  was  now  preaching  to  the  wide  world.  Nor  is  this  rejection  any 
more  successful  now.  "  Whosoever  falleth  on  this  stone  shall  be  broken,"  &c. 
{J.  W.  Bum.)  Nor  the  voices  of  the  prophets. — The  voices  of  the  prophets : — 
Some  men  ask,  If  the  prophets  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  why  did 
they  not  all  speak  in  the  same  manner  ?  Why  these  varieties  of  style  ?  I  will 
answer  that  by  asking  another  question :  Why  do  not  all  the  pipes  of  the  organ 
give  one  and  the  same  sound  ?  What  awakens  aU  the  sounds  but  one  and  the  same 
blast  from  the  wind  chest  ?  If  there  be  a  mono-blast,  why  is  there  not  a  mono- 
tone ?  Because  the  pipes  are  of  different  shapes  and  sizes  ;  the  awakening  breath 
is  one  ;  the  intonation  varies  with  the  shape  and  size  of  the  pipe.  The  inspiration 
was  one,  but  the  style  and  manner  varied  with  the  disposition  and  character  of  the 
individual  employed.  {H.  McNeile,  D.D.)  Messianic  prophecy :  its  characteristics: 
— Christ  is  the  only  Person  whose  life  was  written  beforehand  ;  aa,  e.g.,  in  the  time, 
place,  and  manner  of  His  birth ;  in  the  kind  of  hfe  He  was  to  lead,  the  kind  of 
teaching  He  was  to  give,  the  kind  of  death  He  was  to  die.  The  strength  of  pro- 
phecy lies  in  its  chain  of  references  to  Christ,  from  the  first  mention  of  the  "  seed 
of  the  woman  "  to  the  virgin-born  Immanuel ;  from  the  sufferer  whose  heel  ia 
bruised  in  terms  of  the  earUest  promise,  to  the  "  Man  of  Sorrows  "  in  Isa.  liii. ; 
from  the  peace-giving  law-giver  of  a  yet  uncrowned  tribe  to  the  heir  of  David,  who 
enters  the  long-established  seat  of  rule  as  a  king.  Even  the  predictions  that  bear 
on  the  Church  of  God  and  its  universal  progress  are  but  the  sequel  to  those  which 
foretell  the  personal  Christ,  and  they  then  reflect  the  light  of  His  exaltation ;  nor 
can  the  judgments  of  the  Jewish  nation  be  dissociated,  as  the  depth  of  their  fall  ia 
but  the  measure  of  the  grace  and  truth  that  were  in  Christ,  and  for  rejecting  which 
they  were  to  be  cast  away.  {Principal  Cairns.)  Messianic  prophecy  :  its  fulfil- 
ment : — WTien  we  see  the  predicted  mission  of  the  Messiah  so  faithfully  fulfilled  ; 
when  we  see  the  great  world's  history  bending  itself  to  the  birth  of  Jesus  in  the 
"anno  domini  "  of  its  dates  and  superscriptions  ;  when  we  see  that  the  world  has 
moved  as  in  deepest  sympathy  with  the  humble  Nazarene,  working  ever  in  His 
behalf ;  when  we  behold  all  events  marching  onwards  through  the  centuries  to  the 
beat  of  time,  preserving,  as  Napoleon  thought,  "  a  celestial  order,"  to  accomplish 
one  given  result,  the  universal  and  final  ascendency  of  the  Son  of  David  ;  when  we 
see  that  all  opposing  systems  can  no  longer  hold  comparison  with  the  rehgion  given 
to  the  world  by  Him  than  can  the  pale,  thin,  extended  crescent  ring  of  the  setting 
moon  hold  comparison  to  the  full  blaze  of  the  unclouded  noonday  sun;  when  we  dis- 
cover that  this  mighty  One  issued  from  the  House  of  David  before  its  fall,  and  from 
Bethlehem  in  the  days  of  Herod,  must  we  not  acknowledge  that  He  is  the  Being 
whom  the  prophets  declared  to  be  one  with  the  Father  Almighty  ?  As  we  see  Him 
standing  alone  among  the  millions  of  the  race,  the  only  pattern  of  absolute  per- 
fection, whose  entire  hfe,  without  inclining  a  hair's  breadth  to  either  side,  pointed 
straight  upwards  to  heaven — as  all  the  separate  and  wandering  rays  of  prophecy 
that  had  sparkled  through  the  Divine  Word  are  combined  and  concentrated,  and 
rest,  as  with  a  sacred  halo,  on  His  head — how  can  we  do  otherwise  than  proclaim 
our  convictions  in  that  prophetic,  startling,  and  sublime  word,  "  Immanuel  1 " 
— "  God  with  us  "?  (Credo.)  Ignorance  of  prophecy  : — I  was  visited  by  a  very 
distinguished  young  Israelite,  who  had  seen  me  distributing  the  sacred  volume,  and 
I  proposed  that  we  should  read  a  portion  of  Scripture  together.  He  agreed  on  the  con- 
dition that  it  should  be  from  the  Old  Testament ;  and  I  read  the  fifty-third  chapter 
of  Isaiah.  "  But,"  said  he,  "that  is  in  the  New  Testament."  "No,  no,"  I  replied. 
"  There,  take  the  book.  Read  it  with  that  true  heart  which  I  perceive  in  you,  and 
you  will  find  what  you  seek."  He  has  found  his  Saviour,  has  accepted  Him,  and 
confesses  Him  with  joy.  {Pasteur  Hirsch.)  Necessity  of  an  unprejudiced  study 
of  prophecy  : — It  is  evident  from  this,  and  from  Luke  xxiii.  34  and  chap.  iii.  17, 
that  the  predictions  of  Holy  Scripture  may  be  accomplished  before  the  eyes  of  men, 
while  they  are  unconscious  of  that  f  ullilment ;  and  that  the  prophecies  may  be  even 
accomplished  by  persons  who  have  the  prophecies  in  their  hands  and  do  not  know 
that  they  are  fulfilling  them,  flence  also  it  is  clear  that  men  may  be  guilty  of 
enormous  sins  when  they  are  acting  according  to  their  own  consciences  and  with  a 
view  to  God's  glory,  and  while  they  hold  the  Lible  in  their  hands  and  hear  its  voice 
Bounding  in  their  ears ;  and  that  therefore  it  is  of  unspeakable  importance,  not  only 
to  hear  the  words  of  Scripture,  but  to  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest  them,  with 
humility  and  prayer,  in  order  to  understand  their  true  meaning.  Therefore  the 
Christian  student  has  great  reason  to  thank  God  that  He  has  given  in  the  New 
Testament  a  Divinely-iaspired  interpretation  of  the  Old,  and  has  also  sent  the  Hoi; 


CHAP,  rrn.]  THE  ACTS.  837 

Spirit,  the  Divine  Interpreter,  to  abide  with  the  Church.  If  the  Jews  and  their 
rulers  had  not  been  swayed  by  prejudice,  but,  in  a  careful,  candid,  and  humble 
spirit,  had  considered  the  evidence  before  them,  they  would  have  known  that  their 
promised  Messiah  was  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  He  was  thus  reveaJed  as  such 
in  their  own  Scriptures,  and  thus  His  miracles  would  have  had  theii  due  effect 
upon  their  minds.     {Bp.  Chr.  Wordsworth.) 

Vers.  82-34.  And  we  declare  unto  you  glad  tidings,  how  that  the  promise  .  ,  . 
Crod  hath  fulfilled. — The  glad  tidings  : — I.  What  they  abe.  The  origin  of  the 
gospel  conception  is  connected  with  Jewish  history.  The  people  were  often  assailed 
by  enemies,  and  in  Jerusalem  they  waited  with  anxiety  to  learn  the  issue.  By 
agreement,  a  messenger  was  to  be  sent,  and  especially  when  God  crowned  them 
with  victory.  And  as  the  watchman  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  the  people  saw  the 
sight,  they  cried,  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains,"  &c.  Hence,  when  the 
angel  spoke  on  the  plains  of  Bethlehem,  he  used  words  with  which  the  shepherds 
were  familiar.  So  when  our  Lord  rose,  He  gave  the  disciples  commandment  to 
proclaim  these  glad  tidings,  to  which  Paul  was  obedient  here.  What,  then,  is  the 
gospel?  1.  It  is  news.  Man  did  not  know  it — could  not  find  it,  or  invent  it.  Not 
the  least  proof  that  the  gospel  comes  from  heaven  is  that  it  is  beyond  the  intellect 
and  contrary  to  the  temper  of  man.  2.  It  is  good  news.  All  the  attributes  of 
goodness  are  in  it.  "  Mercy  and  truth  have  met  together,  righteousness  and  peace 
have  kissed  each  other."  3.  It  is  good  news  about  a  Person,  and  that  Person  the 
Son  of  God — the  adequate  revelation  of  the  Father — and  Son  of  Man — the  typical 
manifestation  of  humanity.  The  Person  also  the  atonement  for  the  world's  guilt, 
and  its  DeUverer  from  condemnation  and  death.  II.  To  whom  they  abe  bent. 
♦'  To  you " — i.e.,  every  one.  1.  To  the  sad  heart.  They  come  to  the  wakened 
mind,  to  the  alarmed  conscience,  to  the  despairing  spirit.  What  glad  tidings  to 
know  that  the  burden  of  guUt  has  been  borne  and  the  punishment  of  sin  endured 
by  Christ  1  2.  To  a  sad  world,  whose  disappointment,  sorrow,  and  tears  makes  it 
a  very  Marah,  which  nothing  can  sweeten  but  the  Cross.  III.  With  what  end. 
To  produce  joy — pure,  deep,  everlasting.  (J.  Aldis.)  God's  promises  fuif  lied  : — 
God  is  always  true  to  what  He  promises  to  do.  He  will  fulfil  every  word  of  what  He 
has  promised  ;  yet  how  few  take  Him  at  His  word  I  When  I  was  a  young  man  I  was 
clerk  in  the  establishment  of  a  man  in  Chicago,  whom  I  observed  frequently 
occupied  sorting  and  marking  bills.  He  explained  to  me  what  he  had  been  doing  ; 
on  some  notes  he  bad  marked  B,  on  some  D,  and  on  others  G ;  those  marked  B  he  told 
me  were  bad,  those  marked  D  meant  they  were  doubtful,  and  those  with  G  on  them 
meant  they  were  good.  "  And,"  said  he  "  yon  must  treat  all  of  them  accordingly." 
And  thus  people  endorse  God's  promises,  by  marking  some  as  bad,  and  others  aa 
doubtful ;  whereas  we  ought  to  take  all  of  them  as  good,  for  He  has  never  once 
broken  His  word,  and  all  that  He  says  He  will  do  will  be  done  in  the  fulness  of 
time.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ  glad  tidings : — He  speaks  of 
Christ's  resurrection — I.  As  an  accomplishment  of  prophecy  (c/.  Psa.  cxviii.  22,  with 
Luke  XX.  17).  We  must  not,  however,  suppose  this  to  be  an  uninteresting  fact ;  for 
the  apostle  further  speaks  of  it — II.  As  giiAd  tidinqs  to  the  soul.  To  the  dis- 
consolate disciples  the  tidings  of  Christ's  resurrection  were  doubtless  exceeding 
joyful.  But  they  ought  to  be  no  less  so  to  us,  since  that  event  ascertains — 1.  The 
virtue  of  His  sacrifice.  Had  He  not  risen.  His  death  had  been  in  vain  (1  Cor.  xv. 
14,  17,  18).  But  His  resurrection  clearly  proved  that  He  had  satisfied  the  demands 
of  law  and  justice.  2.  His  sufficiency  for  our  help.  If  He  were  still  dead,  it  would 
be  in  vain  to  look  to  Him  for  help.  3.  The  certainty  of  our  own  resurrection. 
Because  He  liveth,  we  may  be  sure  that  we  shall  Uve  also  (John  xiv.  19).  As  a 
further  improvement  of  this  passage,  permit  me  to  observe — 1.  How  deeply  are  we 
interested  in  the  writings  of  the  Old  Testament  1  In  them  are  promises  of  which 
we  receive  the  accomplishment.  2.  What  enemies  are  they  to  themselves  who 
despise  the  ministry  of  the  gospel!  3.  What  a  near  relation  subsists  between 
behevers  in  all  ages  !  (Theological  Sketch-book.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ  the 
great  promise : — I.  God  pbomised  to  the  pateiaechs  and  pkophets  that  He  wouli> 
EAisE  Christ  from  the  dead.  1.  To  Adam,  as  we  read  in  Genesis  iii.  The  whole 
four  themes  of  revelation  are  contained  in  these  words  :  the  first  coming  of  Christ 
in  the  flesh  ;  "  her  seed."  His  death  ;  •'  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel."  His  resur- 
rection, and  the  present  state  of  the  Church ;  "  I  wiU  put  enmity  between  thee  and 
the  ^^oman."  His  coming  in  glory,  when  He  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  2. 
To  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii. ;  cf.  Heb.  zl.  17-19).  Isaac  was  dead,  in  design  ;  and  ou 
TOL.  n.  22 


838  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xnft 

the  third  morning  he  was  raised  up.  It.  this  transaction  Abraham  saw  the  day  of 
Christ,  and  rejoiced.  This  would  also  be  a  promise  to  Isaac.  3.  To  Moses  also. 
Let  us  examine  some  types.  (1)  The  maima  represented  Christ  coming  down 
from  heaven,  that  the  Church  might  feed  on  Him  and  live.  We  learn  that  a  por- 
tion of  manna  was  to  be  brought  into  the  holy  place,  and  there  set  before  the 
testimony  of  the  Lord.  Which  teaches  us  that  He  who  came  down  from  heaven 
was  also  to  go  up  thither  again,  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us.  (2)  In 
Leviticus  xiv.  we  read  of  the  law  of  cleansing  the  leper.  There  was  a  bird  killed, 
and  a  bird  flying  away.  The  hving  bird  was  to  be  sprinkled  with  the  blood ;  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  is  available  through  the  atonement,  and  the  atonement  through 
the  resurrection.  (3)  So  in  the  history  of  the  two  goats.  One  was  to  be  slain ; 
over  the  other  the  priest  was  to  confess  all  the  sins  and  trespasses  of  the  people, 
and  to  send  him  away  into  the  wilderness.  So  it  is  not  on  Jesus  crucified  merely 
that  our  sins  are  laid,  or  they  would  be  there  still.  But  the  glory  of  the  gospel  is 
this :  "  He  was  deUvered  for  our  offences,  and  raised  again  for  our  justification." 
(4)  In  Leviticus  xxiii.  we  read  of  the  waving  of  the  sheaf.  "  Christ  is  raised  from 
the  dead,  and  is  become  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  slept."  And  as  the  first  fruits 
were  to  be  waved  the  morning  after  the  Sabbath,  which  was  the  first  day  of  the 
week,  on  which  day  Christ  also  rose.  4.  To  David.  The  second  Psalm  is  imme- 
diately connected  with  our  text.  On  the  morning  of  the  resurrection,  God  owned 
His  beloved  Son :  then  He  said,  *'  Thou  art  My  Son ;  this  day  have  I  begotten 
Thee."  Again,  in  Psalm  xvi.,  "  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me,"  &c. 
Then,  again,  in  Psalm  cxviii.,  *'  The  stone  which  the  builders  refused  is  become 
the  head  stone  of  the  corner,"  Ac.  Which  passage  is  also  quoted  by  Peter,  in  Acts 
iv.,  when  questioned  as  to  the  miracle  performed  on  the  impotent  man,  6.  To  the 
prophets.  In  the  context  there  is  one  remarkable  quotation,  from  Isa.  Iv.  3.  In 
that  Christ  is  raised,  never  to  die  again ;  therefore  He  says,  "  I  will  make  an 
everlasting  covenant  with  you,  even  the  sure  mercies  of  David."  6.  We  are 
taught  this  promise  also  by  the  history  of  Jonah.  "  As  Jonah  was  three  daya 
and  three  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  so  shall  the  Son  of  Man  be  three  days 
and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth."  II.  BLb  pebfoemed  this  peomisb. 
He  did  what  He  said.  The  day  after  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  the  priests  and 
Pharisees,  who  were  His  enemies,  came  to  Pilate  and  said,  "Sir,  we  remember  that 
that  deceiver  said,  while  he  was  yet  alive.  After  three  days  I  will  rise  again,"  &c. 
On  the  day  after  the  Sabbath  "  there  was  a  great  earthquake ;  for  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  came  and  rolled  back  the  stone."  What  avails  the  vigilance  of  Koman  soldiers 
against  the  angels  of  God  1  The  Lord  afterwards  showed  Himself  aUve,  by  many 
infallible  proofs,  to  Mary,  to  two  of  His  disciples  on  their  way  to  Emmaus,  to  ten 
of  His  disciples  when  they  were  assembled  with  the  door  shut  for  fear  of  the  Jews. 
To  some  of  them  at  the  sea  of  Tiberias,  &o.  But  some  will  say,  "  Were  the  dis- 
ciples proper  witnesses?  "  In  a  court  of  justice,  what  are  the  requisites  of  a  com- 
petent witness  ?  He  must  have  known  the  person  of  whom  he  speaks,  so  that  he 
may  know  him  again  when  he  sees  him.  And  also  he  must  be  trustworthy.  Now 
the  disciples  were  fully  competent.  They  knew  Christ.  And  that  they  knew  them, 
selves  to  be  competent  witnesses,  and  that  they  knew  it  was  necessary  that  they 
should  be  bo,  is  evident  from  the  words  of  Peter  (Acts  i.  21).  And  they  were  trust- 
worthy also.  We  know  the  nature  of  man  too  well  not  to  know  that  he  will  say 
anything  to  gain  favour.  But  what  did  they  gain  ?  Scourging,  bonds,  imprison- 
ments, death.  III.  Theeefobe  we  declaee  onto  tod  glad  tidings.  And  how 
is  the  resurrection  of  Christ  glad  tidings  ?  Because — 1.  It  has  caused  the  gospel 
to  be  preached.  It  would  not  have  been  preached  had  it  not  been  for  this  event. 
2.  It  shows  that  the  justice  of  God  is  fully  satisfied,  and  sin  fully  expiated.  8.  It 
directs  our  minds  to  our  great  Intercessor.  "  It  is  Christ  that  died ;  yea,  rather, 
that  is  risen  again  ;  who  has  also  appeared  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us."  4.  It 
excites  and  maintains  a  lively  hope.  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,"  &c.  6.  Through  this  hope  it  draws  up  the  tiffections  of  the  soul, 
and  mortifies  the  deeds  of  the  body.  The  man  who  believes  that  Christ  has  died 
and  rose  again,  and  whose  life  is  •*  hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  turns  away  with  dis- 
gust from  that  which  satisfies  others.  6.  It  is  the  ground  of  our  expectation  of 
His  second  coming.  If  He  be  not  risen.  He  cannot  come  again ;  but  He  is  risen, 
and  He  will  come  again.     {H.  McNeile,  D.D.)  The  sure  mercies  of  David. — 

The  words  do  not  seem  in  themselves  to  have  the  nature  of  a  Messianic  prediction. 
To  those,  however,  whose  minds  were  full  to  overflowing  with  the  writings  of  the 
prophets,  they  would  be  pregnant  with  meaning.     What  were  the  "  sure  mercies  of 


CHAP,  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  839 

David"  (Isa.  Iv.  3)  but  the  "everlasting  covenant  "  of  mercy  which  was  to  find  its 
fulfihnent  in  One  who  should  be  "  a  leader  and  commander  to  the  people  "  t  We 
may  well  beheve  that  the  few  words  quoted  recalled  to  St.  Paul  and  to  his  hearers 
the  whole  of  that  wonderful  chapter  which  opens  with  "Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth, 
«ome  ye  to  the  waters."  The  Greek  word  for  "  mercies  "  is  the  same  adjective  as 
that  translated  "holy  "  in  the  next  verse,  "holiness"  being  identified  with  "mercy," 
and  so  forms  a  connecting  link  with  the  prophecy  cited  in  the  next  verse.  (Dean 
Plumptre.)  Sure  mercies  : — Consider — I.  WnxT  these  meecies  are.     1.    The 

knowledge  of  God  in  Christ.  "  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of 
darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,"  &c.  Great  is  this  mercy.  By  this  alone  we 
are  delivered  from  idolatry.  No  man  can  worship  the  true  God,  except  in  Jesus 
Christ.  The  poor  ignorant  heathen  is  not  the  only  idolater.  The  Deist,  Eationalist, 
the  man  that  flatters  himself  that  above  all  men  he  is  the  farthest  removed  from 
idolatry,  is  nevertheless  worshipping  an  idol,  which  he  himself  creates — the  imagi- 
nation of  his  own  heart.  2.  Forgiveness  of  sin  by  Christ.  The  present  complete- 
ness of  this  blessing  is  the  distinguishing  feature  of  true  religion  from  all  false 
leligion  whatever.  And  therefore  the  very  outset,  the  very  A  B  C  of  the  gospel,  is — 
"  By  this  Man  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  3.  Renewal  of  heart 
in  Christ.  Unto  the  perfection  of  man's  happiness,  association  is  indispensable. 
Man  cannot  live  alone ;  fellowship  with  God  there  cannot  be  without  holiness  of 
heart,  leading  to  sincere  obedience.  Here,  then,  is  a  great  mercy — that  the  man 
to  whom  God  has  given  the  knowledge  of  Himself,  and  to  whom  He  has  proclaimed 
forgiveness  of  sins,  shall  also  experience  in  himself  such  a  renewal  of  his  affections, 
that,  instead  of  shrinking  from  God,  he  shall  now  find  a  congeniality,  a  sympathy, 
an  association,  and  begin  to  find  a  happiness  of  companionship,  without  which  no 
man  can  really  be  happy.  These  are  some  of  the  mercies  spoken  of  in  this  text. 
And  they  are  at  the  same  time,  as  you  may  observe  in  the  margin  of  your  Bibles, 
"  holy  or  just  things."  They  are  "  holy  " — (1)  Or  God  would  never  have  done 
them.  (2)  As  the  purchase  of  the  holy  One.  (3)  As  procured  according  to  law. 
-(4)  In  their  results.  II.  How  these  mebcies  abb  obtained.  In  answer  to  this 
inquiry,  consult  the  prophecy  in  Isa.  1y.,  the  passage  referred  to  by  the  apostle. 
Here  is  a  threefold  e^ortation  to  hear :  the  first  in  connection  with  the  satisfying 
of  the  soul — "  Hearken  diUgently,  and  eat  what  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight 
itself  " ;  the  second  in  connection  with  coming  to  the  Lord — "  Incline  your  ear,  and 
come  unto  Me  "  ;  the  third  in  connection  with  everlasting  life  thus  given — "  Hear, 
And  your  soul  shall  live."  Now,  mark  these :  "  hearken  " — "  incline  your  ear  " — 
"  hear."  They  are  all  explained  by  that  great  truth  which  the  apostle  proclaims 
when  he  says,  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  We  have  all  these  mercies  by  faith, 
because  we  have  Christ  by  faith,  and  in  no  other  way.  God  has  appointed  this 
medium  in  order  that  the  attainment  might  be  manifestly  of  grace — not  of  study, 
not  of  time,  not  of  hereditary  descent,  not  of  instruction  by  man.  Now,  see  what 
is  attained  by  the  appointment  of  this  medium.  It  is  confidence.  Faith  is  con- 
fidence ;  faith  places  God  and  man  in  their  proper  places — God  in  authority,  man 
in  dependence.  Man  fell  through  an  attempt  to  be  independent.  Man  is  recovered 
through  a  willingness  to  be  dependent.  This  is  attained  through  the  appointment 
of  faith  as  the  medium  through  which  the  blessings  are  conveyed ;  and  "  faith 
comes  by  hearing  " — hearing  "  the  Word  of  God."  Hence  the  importance  of  the 
ministry  of  the  Word.  You  cannot  have  the  Word  proclaimed  without  a  voice  to 
proclaim  it ;  you  cannot  have  a  voice  without  a  man  to  raise  it ;  you  cannot  have 
a  man  without  sustenance  and  support.  III.  The  desobiftiom  hebb  orrKN  or 
THESE  meecies.  "  Sure."  1.  They  are  infallibly  "  sure  "  to  rest  on  all  for  whom 
they  were  designed.  2.  They  are  immatably  "  sure  "  to  all  on  whom  they  rest. 
'  {H.  McNeile,  D.D.) 

Ver.  36.  For  David,  after  he  had  served  his  own  generation. — TTie  life, 
character,  and  death  of  David: — I.  Thb  qbnbral  ohaeactee  of  the  man.  We 
shall  not  attempt  to  extenuate  his  sins.  But  let  his  penitential  Psalms  bear 
witness  for  him,  that  no  judgment  can  be  passed  upon  him  more  severe  than  that 
which  he  pronounced  upon  himself.  Which  of  the  saints  has  not  been  more  or 
less  guilty  ?  But  Scripture  teaches  us  to  form  our  judgment,  not  from  one  or  two 
prominent  particulars,  but  from  a  comprehensive  survey  of  them  all.  Let  us  con- 
aider  some  of  them .  1.  In  very  early  life  David  appears  to  have  been  a  sincere 
believer.  The  incidents  of  the  lion  and  the  bear  discover  both  his  faith  and  his 
ihabit  of  ascribing  all  his  success  to  the  Divine  help.    Again,  when  Samuel  was 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

directed  to  anoint  a  successor  to  Saul,  the  preference  of  David  is  expressly  grounded 
upon  the  state  of  his  heart.     From  these  considerations  we  conclude  that  David, 
even  among  the  sheepfolds,  was  a  child  of  grace,  and  that  the  fields  of  Bethlehem 
echoed  with  the  earhest  effusions  of  that  Divine  harp  which  still  contributes  to  the 
edification  of  the  saints.     2.  Eemark  the  high  principle  under  which  David  acted 
in  relation  to  Sa'il.     We  find  no  schemes  of  daring  ambition,  no  crooked  poUcies. 
Twice,  when  his  enemy  was  delivered  into  his  hand,  he  only  cut  off  a  portion  of 
Saul's  robe,  to  use  it  as  a  testimony  of  his  integrity.    When,  at  length,  the  guilty 
monarch  lay  under  the  vengeance  of  Heaven,  grief  is  the  predominating  sentiment 
which  he  expresses  in  a  noble  elegy.    8.  Note  the  holy  dispositions  for  which  he 
was   conspicuous  throughout  his  life.    His  Psalms  exhibit  a  heart   supremely 
delighting  in  God.     Who  can  deny  his  love  to  the  Divine  Word,  his  attachment  to 
the  services  of  the  sanctuary  ?    Happy  is  the  man  whose  heart  is  filled  with  the 
same  affections  1     4.  Remember  that  his  conduct,  though  sometimes  criminal, 
presents  no  permanent  deviation  from  the  path  of  rectitude.     If  he  offends,  it  is 
not  long  before  we  hear  him  say,  "  I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep  ;  seek  Thy 
servant ;  for  I  do  not  forget  Thy  commandments."     The  general  tenor  of  his  life 
is  not  broken ;  but,  for  the  most  part,  it  is  indisputably  holy.     6.  Survey  him  in 
his  decline,  when  his  head  was  white  with  age ;  what  a  fine  picture  does  he  exhibit 
of  gratitude,  humility,  and  devotion  I    Nothing  is  more  impressive  than  the  picture 
of  this  aged  saint,  in  solemn  convocation,  deUvering  the  treasures  provided  for  the 
work  of  God  into  the  hands  of  his  successor.    Like  another  Moses,  he  spends  his 
last  breath  in  faithful  admonitions  to  his  people  and  to  his  son.     Thus,  his  course 
was  emphatically  as  the  shining  light,  admirable  in  his  youth,  troubled,  yet  not 
less  illustrious  in  manhood,  fruitful  in  old  age  :  a  glorious  morning,  a  day  overcast 
with  long-continued  tempests  ;  but,  at  evening,  hke  the  setting  sun,  which  seems 
to  grow  more  ample  and  refulgent,  in  proportion  as  it  draws  nearer  to  the  horizon; 
and,  finally  descending  among  the  fleecy  clouds  which  reflect  its  brightness,  and 
curtain  it  with  glory,  leaves  a  long  track  of  light  behind — emblem  of  that  grateful 
remembrance  which  a  good  man  commands  from  his  stirvivors,  and  of  the  rising 
again  to  immortality,  with  the  prospect  of  which  religion  illuminates  the  sepulchre. 
II.  The  desceiption  given  of  his  life.    1.  Which  suggests — (1)  That  the  life 
of  every  man  ought  to  be  profitable  to  his  contemporaries.     God  has  bound  up  the 
race  in  families,  societies,  and  kingdoms,  that  each  may  act  in  his  sphere  for  the 
common  advantage  of  all.     Therefore  the  hfe  of  that  man  who  has  not  served  his 
generation  is  a  public  detriment,  perhaps  a  pestilence.     (2)  That  he  who  serves 
God  takes  the  best  and  surest  method  of  serving  his  generation.     Our  Divine 
Master  declares  that  His  disciples  are  "  the  salt  of  the  earth."     The  righteous  are 
lights  to  their  own  age,  and  often  prove,  Uke  David,  instructors  of  posterity.     (3) 
That  he  who  serves  his  generation  upon  right  principles  is  serving  God.     All  the 
actions  of  a  pious  man,  whether  secular  or  sacred,  are  religious,  consecrated  by 
the  motives  and  sentiments  under  which  they  are  performed.    God  sanctifies  them, 
and  converts  them  into  sacrifices.     (4)  That  to  be  acceptable  to  God  our  conduct 
must  be  governed  by  His  revealed  will.     2.  Now  let  us  survey  David  in  his  rela- 
tions.    In  these  we  shall  see  that  the  eulogy  of  the  text  is  fully  justified.     (1)  To 
estimate  his  political  conduct,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  contrast  the  kingdom  when  he 
received  it  with  what  it  was  when  bequeathed  to  Solomon.    In  like  manner  the 
kingdom  of  his  great  antitype  began  in  weakness  and  suffering  ;  proceeds  through 
rebuke  and  opposition ;  yet  cannot  but  finally  prevail,  in  virtue  of  that  covenant 
which  is  "  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure."     (2)  Consider  David  in  his  relation  to 
the  Church.     The  composition  of  the  Psalms  was  a  grand  epoch  in  the  history  of 
revelation  ;  and  its  illustrations  of  religious  experience  are  so  copious  and  exact  as 
to  express  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  believers  to  the  end  of  time.     In  addition 
to  this  great  work,  we  find  him  at  one  time  bringing  the  aik  of  God  to  the  taber- 
nacle; at  another,  appointing  the  settled  order  of  public  worship;  then  collecting 
materials  for  the  future  temple ;  but  the  noblest  feature  of  all  is  the  spirit  of  love 
to  God,  and  zeal  for  His  house,  by  which  thoy  were  dictated.     8.  Let  us  follow 
him  into  his  family.     We  find  him  following  bis  own  determination,  "  I  will  walk 
within  my  house  with  a  perfect  heart."    We  can  obtain  but  a  glimpse  or  two,  yet 
these  are  highly  satisfactory.     After  a  clay  of  arduous  public  service,  •'  then  David 
returned  to  bless  his  houfehold."    The  affecting  teims  in  which  he  deplores  that 
his  house  "  was  not  so  with  God,"  shows  as  that  it  was  not  lost  sight  of  in  the 
multiplicity  of  his  official  engagements.     4.  But,  after  all,  David's  eminence  as  a 
saint  appears  mtst  in  the  regulatif  n  of  his  own  heart.     We  will  not  dwell  upon 


flHAP.xiu.]  THE  ACTS.  841 

the  frequency  of  his  devotions,  nor  upon  his  diligence  in  studying  the  Divine 
Oracles.    But  remember  how  careful  he  was  to  examine  his  own  soul,  and  how 
earnestly  he  implores  the  scrutiny  even  of  the  Omniscient  Eye  !     Remember  his 
jealousy,  lest  "  secret  faults  "  should  cling  to  him  unobserved,  and  the  sins  of  his 
youth  pass  unrepented  and  unforgiven.     Oh  I   remember   how,   when   sunk   in 
depressions,  he  challenges  his  very  griefs,  lest  they  should  prove  unsanctified,  and 
rouses  his  own  spirit  to  a  renewed  exercise  of  trust  I     ••  Why  art  thou  cast  down, 
O  my  soul?  hope  thou  in  God."    He  was  a  sinner,  I  know;  but  it  is  through 
spiritual  tribulations  and  tempests  like  these  that  every  sinner  must  find  his  way 
to  heaven.     Great  offenders  that  offer  the  sacrifice  of  a  broken  and  contrite  heart, 
may  mount  to  thrones  of  glory,  when  Pharisaic  boasters  shall  be  cast  into  "  outer 
darkness."    III.  The  becobd  of  his  death.     1.  Notioe  the  terms  employed.    Death 
is  a  sleep,  and  the  grave  a  house,  where  departed  saints  repose  in  honourable 
company.     It  is  true  that,  under  the  Jewish  dispensation,  the  future  was  wrapt  in 
deep  obscurity ;  but  the  darkness  was  not  altogether  impenetrable,  or  else  how 
should  David  comfort  himself  ?     "  As  for  me,  I  will  behold  Thy  face  in  righteous- 
ness," &c.     The  expressions  of  the  text  are  full  of  consoling  thoughts.    We  resign 
ourselves  to  sleep  without  fear.    If  we  believe  that  death  is  but  a  sleep,  why  do  we 
contemplate  it  with  dismay?     In  both,  the  functions  of  life  are  but  suspended,  not 
extinguished.     Whatever  were  the  infirmities  of  ancient  saints,  they  all  left  the 
world  with  holy  dignity.     Though  they  had  but  dim  shadows  of  heavenly  truth  to 
guide  them,  they  have  taught  us  how  to  live  ;  and,  though  their  views  of  eternal 
glory  were  far  less  distinct  than  ours,  by  their  example  we  may  learn  how  to  die. 
2.  David  must  go  the  way  of  all  flesh.     Neither  the  love  of  God,  nor  the  admira- 
tion of  His  people,  nor  his  eminent  fidelity,  can  exempt  him  from  the  universal 
decree.     The  fairest,  wisest,  noblest,  holiest  heads  must  he  down  alike   in  the 
dust.     A  day  of  mourning  over  fallen  greatness  or  departed  usefulness  leads  us  to 
imagine  that  our  loss  cannot  be  repaired ;  but  a  Solomon  rises  in  the  place  of 
David.     Thus  the  work  of  God  goes  on.     Never  let  the  Church  despair,  though 
kings  and  prophets  die.     3.  The  Son  of  David  lives  ;  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever."     (D.  KatUrns.)         The  service  of  the  age : — 1.  Few  things  are  more 
painful  than  unfulfilled  lives.    A  broken  column  is  their  expressive  symbol.  Beauty 
smitten  in  the  springtime ;  little  children  taken ;  the  promise  of  life  cut  off  and 
blasted — aU  suggest  painful  mystery.     2.  Some  lives   are  morally  unfulfilled  ; 
powers  have  been  wasted.     They  did  not  "  stir  up  "  the  gift  that  was  in  them,  and 
their  power  was  never  fully  ripened  into  fruitful  service.     3.  Others,  while  not 
accomplishing  aU  their  purposes,  are  not  to  be  numbered  with  those  who  have 
failed.     In  the  studio  of  the  dead  sculptor  there  is  a  statue  wanting  the  last 
touches,  a  block  just  marked,  works  in  various  stages  of  their  growth.     But,  we 
remember,  the  finished  works  whose  beauty  shall  be  the  delight  of  the  generations 
to  come.     That  is  not  an  unfulfilled  life.     4.  David  served  his  own  generation 
according  to  the  will  of  God — rounded  off  completely  the  work  given  him  to  do. 
Illustrious  as  ruler,  he  was  much  more  so  as  "  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel."     The 
figure  is  that  of  the  sailor  in  the  ancient  galley,  who  served  in  the  lowest  tier  of 
seats,  where  the  work  was  most  important  and  arduous.     The  generation  is  com- 
pared with  the  stately  vessel  thus  impelled — David  "  rowed  onwards  "  his  own  age, 
added  his  efforts  to  those  of  others  to  secure  its  progress  and  to  render  it  illustrious. 
I.  The  trxte  man's  vocation.     He  is  set  apart  as  "  the  servant  of  the  age."     Our 
own  generation  has  immediate  claims  upon  us.     The  dead  are  not  touched  by  our 
influence  or  moved  by  our  activities.     The  future  we  cannot  reach  save  through 
present  faithfulness.   -Now  is  our  acceptable  time.     There  is  no  work,  or  wisdom, 
or  device  in  the  grave.     1.  In  this  service  the  force  of  individual  character  is  of 
the  utmost  importance.     Men  affect  and  mould  men  more  by  what  they  are  than 
by  what  they  profess  or  do.    But  there  is  also  a  conscious  service  to  which  men 
are  appointed.     Each  successive  age  presents  the  common  human  characteristics 
in  some  special  development  or  relationship.     The  age  has  its  special  questions 
and  needs,  its  special  section  of  the  purpose  of  the  Almighty  to  fulfil.     True  men 
are  born  for  the  time,  not  of  it.     The  age  is  philosophical,  and  the  teacher  is  the 
prominent  figure.     It  is  warlike,  and  the  soldier  plays  his  part.     It  is  instinct  with 
the  craving  for  something  better,  and  the  reformer  comes  to  the  front.     It  is 
longing  for  knowledge  of  the  unseen  or  preparation  for  it,  and  the  fervid  evangelist 
answers  the  question.  What  must  we  do  ?   Sometimes  it  is  eclectic,  and  various  actors 
crowd  the  stage.   But  one  thing  is  amazing,  whatever  the  general  characteristic,  the 
■yastness  of  the  work  which  may  be,  and  often  is,  accomplished  by  single  individuals. 


842  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xra 

Masses,  generations,  never  move  onwards  by  themselves.  They  follow  a  leader. 
Hence  earnest  natures  force  on  reformations.  Such  men  have  removed  mountains ; 
created  new  philosophies ;  won  a  people's  freedom,  and  raised  their  own  genera- 
tion to  heights  of  renown.  But  where  the  results  may  not  be  as  palpable,  the 
service  of  the  age  may  be  as  real  and  as  effective.  There  are  prayers  to  be  offered, 
ignorant  ones  to  be  instructed,  fallen  ones  to  be  rescued,  errors  to  be  corrected, 
lonely  hearts  to  be  ministered  to,  and  wounded  ones  to  be  healed.  Such  services 
may  not  be  meet  subjects  for  the  historian,  but  they  are  written  in  the  books  of 
Divine  remembrance.  2.  The  service  of  the  age  implies  living  sympathy  with  its 
sorrows  and  sins ;  identity  of  interest  and  aim.  True  men  are  of  generous  heart. 
Acquiescence  in  things  as  they  are  destroys  capacity  for  service.  What  a  craving 
the  true  man  has  for  something  better  1  Greatness  of  heart,  mighty  energy,  and 
patience  are  needed  when  the  service  of  the  age  involves  a  climbing  of  Calvaries. 
The  kingdom  of  Christ  was  founded  when  He  hung  upon  the  Cross.  But  the 
sorrow  which  wrung  the  Bedeemer's  heart  was  intense  because  of  His  identity 
with  a  doomed  nation  and  a  perishing  world.  He  bore  our  sins,  and  carried  our 
sorrows.  Nothing  essential  to  human  well-being  can  be  indifferent  to  us  if  we 
would  serve  faithfully.  II.  The  true  man's  service  of  his  own  age  is  divinelt 
coNnncTED  AND  FASHIONED.  «'  By  the  will  of  God."  This  implies — 1.  The  inspira- 
tion of  this  service.  God  suggests  the  form  of  service,  and  guides  the  faithful  to 
it.  His  own  love  in  the  heart  prompts  it.  2.  The  means  of  this  service.  There 
are  Divine  provisions  and  remedies  for  the  age's  necessities  and  ills.  The  special 
forms  of  service  will  harmonise  with  the  great  spiritual  redemption  God  is  working 
out  in  human  history.  All  real  human  rights  were  consecrated  in  the  Cross.  All 
true  reformations  spring  out  of  the  Cross.  Baptized  into  its  spirit,  the  true  servant 
becomes  qualified  for  the  highest  achievements.  3.  The  Divine  designation  of  the 
worker  and  his  work.  God  distributes  gifts,  and  suits  men  to  His  purpose. 
"  There  was  a  man  sent  from  God."  So  Peter,  Paul,  Luther,  the  martyrs  were 
sent.  This  is  true  of  times.  They  are  in  His  hands.  The  faithful  live  for  the 
work's  sake,  and  die  for  the  work's  sake.  Life  is  prolonged,  for  service  is  to  be 
continued.  Life  cpases,  and  the  service  becomes  a  memory  because  it  is  finished. 
III.  The  best  of  the  true  servant  of  his  age  The  long  day  of  rowing  is  over ; 
and  tired  with  long  continued  exertion,  David  laid  himself  down  and  fell  asleep, 
and  was  gathered  to  his  fathers.  1.  Sleep  is  the  image  of  death  in  contrast  with 
the  activity  of  the  working  life ;  then,  as  a  natural,  orderly  sequence  to  it ;  but 
also  as  a  condition  precedent  to  new  activities  for  which  its  recuperative  influence 
is  essential.  2.  But  also  there  was  a  gathering  to  the  fathers.  This  does  not 
mean  being  laid  in  the  family  burying  place,  for  David  was  not  laid  in  it.  He  was 
gathered  to  the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first-born  in  the  realms  unseen. 
At  last  the  golden  gates  are  thrown  open  for  the  servants  of  the  King,  who  on 
distant  fields  upheld  His  cause,  carried  His  banner,  kept  the  faith,  and  they  are 
all  together  in  one  assembly  at  home  with  the  Lord.  What  a  blest  assembly  to 
which  our  dead  have  been  joined  !  What  an  august  prospect  opens  before  those 
who  are  faithful  unto  death  1  (TF.  H.  Davison.)  A  servant  of  the  oge: — I.  Oub 
AGE — the  people  of  the  nineteenth  century  now  resident  upon  earth.  For  this 
lasting  earth  was  destined  to  be  the  successive  habitation  of  thousands  of  genera- 
tions. "  One  generation  passeth  away,"  &c.  The  edifice  has  lasted  for  ages,  and 
is  much  as  it  was  in  the  morning  of  time ;  but  its  tenantry  are  ever  changing. 
Notwithstanding  the  alterati  onsin  the  material  world,  there  is  nothing  new  but 
souls.  For  each  the  Father  of  spirits  builds  an  earthly  house,  and  every  one  who 
has  answered  the  Divine  purpose  of  its  short  residence  ascends  to  the  "  house 
eternal  in  the  heavens."  It  is  a  solemn  thought  that  earth  as  well  as  heaven  is  a 
world  of  spirits.  These  are  the  generation  we  are  to  serve.  II.  The  spiritual 
BERvicE  WE  OWE  IT.  Other  services  are  demanded,  but  these  are  inferior  in  worth 
and  consequences.  Many  serve  their  age  not  according  to  the  will  of  God.  There 
are,  e.g.,  those  who  investigate  matter,  study  the  human  fmme,  shed  fresh  light  on 
the  origin,  nature,  and  destiny  of  mind,  dedicate  themselves  to  education  or  reform; 
in  a  word,  those  who  labour  to  promote  man's  temporal  interests.  Amongst  these, 
indeed,  are  some  of  the  holiest  men  in  the  world ;  but  there  are  others  who  are 
wholly  dead  to  God.  Yet  these  latter  often  subserve  the  religious  interests  of  the 
age,  but  without  professing  it  or  knowing  it.  III.  How  are  we  to  serve  the 
SPIRITUAL  interests  OF  THE  AGK  ?  We  must — 1.  Be  the  servants  of  God.  In 
Phil.  ii.  15,  16,  Paul  described  the  moral  character  of  his  age.  In  its  mind, 
morals,  laws,  institutions,  &o.,  it  was  "  crooked  and  perverse  "  ;  and  he  reminded 


CBAF.  zm.]  THE  ACTS.  848 

Christians  placed  in  their  age  that  it  was  their  oflSoe,  by  living  holiness  and  new 
truth  frona  heaven,  to  direct  their  perilous  course  in  the  deep  towards  that  land  of 
life  and  glory.  And  finally  he  taught  them  that  to  be  fit  for  this  they  must  be  and 
act  as  sons  of  God.  Divine  worship  was  then,  and  is  now,  the  first  qualification 
for  serving  souls.  With  God's  power,  love,  and  will  within  us  what  wonders  may 
we  do  1  2.  Study  the  age.  An  age  does  not  know  itself ;  just  as  an  individual,  it 
dislikes  self-examination.  The  ages  of  Eome,  Greece,  Persia,  Assyria,  Noah,  nay, 
even  Paradise,  did  not  know  themselves.  Yet  every  age  has  had  its  prophet. 
Enoch  read  his  age,  and  served  it.  So  did  Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  John,  <fec. 
And  if  past  ages  were  only  efficiently  served  by  those  who  studied  them,  how 
important  that  we  should  study  our  own  1  To  do  this  certain  qualifications  are 
necessary.  E.g.,  there  must  be  correct  views  of  the  Divine  government,  a  clear, 
observant  eye  to  discern  the  signs  of  the  times,  and,  as  a  key  to  the  interpretation 
of  those  signs,  an  acquaintance  with  the  religious  history  of  past  ages.  No  two 
ages  are  alike,  or  can  be.  We  must  therefore  study  its  peculiarities— its  distin- 
guishing privileges ;  its  predominant  virtues  and  sins ;  its  moral  tendencies  and 
wants ;  and,  above  all,  its  first  duties  to  the  age  which  is  immediately  to  follow. 
3.  Spread  our  affections  over  the  length  and  breadth  of  it.  Love  for  souls  is  one 
of  the  Divinest  virtues  which  God  breathes  into  our  nature.  The  reigning  philo- 
sophy of  every  age  has  denied  or  overlooked  the  spirituaUty  of  man.  It  is  only 
the  man  whose  spiritual  nature  has  been  divinely  awakened  that  feels  the  love  of 
heaven  :  it  is  only  he  who  can  send  it  forth  on  the  world.  Greatly  as  we  value 
natural  love,  we  must  not  mistake  nor  substitute  it  for  spiritual  love.  Love  for 
souls  as  souls  is  not  a  passion  of  earthly  growth ;  love  for  their  justification,  re- 
newal, and  union  with  God  is  a  holy  fire  from  heaven.  Let  us  take  care  lest  the 
best  things  we  have — our  schools,  benevolent  societies,  churches,  religion,  should 
have  more  to  do  with  "  the  life  that  now  is  "  than  with  "  the  life  that  is  to  come." 
This  love  we  should  spread  over  our  age.  And  how  numerous  and  constraining 
are  our  obligations  1  God  has  given  us  hearts  capacious  enough  to  embrace  the 
human  family,  and  can  we  reflect  on  the  love  of  God  who  spared  not  His  own 
Son  without  feeling  our  hearts  burn  for  the  restoration  of  aU  souls  to  their 
Father's  bosom  ?  4.  Ascertain  the  particular  department  of  service  assigned 
us  by  God,  and  be  thoroughly  devoted  to  it.  By  self  acquaintance,  by  con- 
sulting the  wise  and  faithful,  by  the  teachings  of  Providence,  by  prayer,  let  us 
learn  what  our  mission  is,  and  then  in  the  name  and  power  of  God  let  us 
live  only  to  fulfil  it.  IV.  Why  should  we  seeve  oub  age  ?  1.  It  is  the  will 
of  God.  This  is  our  law,  but  can  we  love  and  obey  it  without  knowing  what  it 
is  ?  God  has  not  left  us  to  infer  His  will  from  His  works  and  ways.  His  paternal 
love  has  given  us  a  book  which  reveals  as  much  of  His  infinite  will  as  it  is 
necessary  for  us  to  know  on  earth.  And  if  God  wills  us  to  serve  our  age  it  must 
be  right  to  do  so,  and  we  may  rely  upon  His  help.  He  expects  the  right  use  of 
what  He  gives — nothing  less,  nothing  more.  To  serve  our  age  is  a  difficult  work, 
but  let  us  not  be  discouraged,  for  there  is  an  infinite  fulness  of  power  for  us  in 
God.  2.  It  has  faithfully  served  us.  What  have  we  that  we  have  not  received 
through  the  instrumentality  of  our  age,  either  temporally  or  spiritually  ?  Let,  then, 
a  holy  sense  of  our  numberless  obhgations  to  the  age  bind  us  to  its  spiritual  ser- 
vice. 3.  This  is  the  only  age  we  can  directly  serve,  and  both  the  age  and  ourselves 
must  soon  appear  before  the  Lord  of  all  ages.  Let  us  work,  then,  while  it  is  day. 
(Caleb  Morris.)  Life  :  its  mission  and  opportunity  : — I.  Its  mission — to  serve 
your  generation.  That  is  what  the  most  worthless  do,  being  slaves  to  the  opinion, 
fashion,  and  spirit  of  the  time.  But  the  word  is  not  bond  service.  David  served 
his  age  not  as  a  slave  his  master,  but  as  a  rower  his  captain.  Others  again,  pos- 
sessed by  the  spirit  of  the  evil  one,  ask,  "  How  can  I  make  my  generation  serve 
me?"  The  Christian  asks,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  that  I,  like 
Thee,  may  do  good  to  this  race  ?  "  This  good  must  be  done  under  the  inspiration 
of  faith  in  God  and  faith  in  man.  What  is  this  latter  ?  Suppose  yourself  in  a 
heathen  city  crowded  with  temples,  priests,  idols,  and  idolaters.  Instead  of  look- 
ing on  with  disgust  or  despair,  you  must  look  upon  them  as  God's  degenerate  off- 
spring, but  capable  of  becoming  His  true  children  once  more.  The  good  that  God 
calls  us  to  do  is  every  work  of  His,  no  matter  what.  Some  think  that  Christian 
good  is  only  for  the  soul,  but  God  regards  man  as  one  composite  being.  The  great 
principle  of  the  Mosaic  legislation  as  much  as  of  the  gospel  is  that  God  sets  Him- 
eelf  by  the  side  of  every  man,  and  takes  his  part  as  long  as  he  is  in  the  right ;  and 
He  invites  to  that  itan's  side  every  other  man  to  be  his  friend ;  and  whatever  a 


844  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xttt 


man  does  to  another  in  the  way  of  benefit  the  Lord  accepts  it  8us  a  tribute  to  Him- 
self :  e.g.,  the  farmer  is  to  leave  the  gleanings  for  the  widow.     Why  ?     "  Because  I 
am  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  of  the  rich  farmer,  and  the  poor  widow,"     So  with  the 
prohibitions  not  to  mock  the  deaf  or  put  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of  the  blind. 
A  wrong  done  to  the  poor  is  an  offence  to  God.    But  always  remember  that  man 
does  not  live  by  bread  alone,  and  seek  in  all  temporal  benefit  to  wake  up  in  a  man 
eonie  consciousness  of  Him  from  whom  all  blessings  come.     So,  then,  select  your 
path  according  to  the  indications  of  Providence,  but  determine  by  the  grace  of  God 
to  leave  the  world  better  than  you  found  it.     II.  Its  opportunity — your  own  gen» 
ration.     David  may  have  wished  himself  back  in  the  days  of  Abraham.     "  I  might 
have  done  something  in  that  old  time,  but  what  can  I  do  now  ?  "     So  we  say  some- 
times.   And  yet  if  we  are  to  do  anything  it  must  not  be  for  any  other  generation 
but  our  ov/n.     And  how  much  ampler  our  opportunity  1     How  long  would  it  take 
for  David  to  get  his  psalms  known  in  his  own  dominions  ?    How  long  did  it  take 
to  get  them  known  in  Europe  ?     Whereas  a  good  man's  thought  in  London  to-day 
may  be  fermenting  the  whole  world  in  less  than  twelve  months.     You  cannot  serve 
the  past,  you  must  accept  it.    But  which  past  ?     In  the  case  of  David  there  was 
the  past  of  Saul  and  the  past  of  Samuel.     And  so  to  us  there  are  two  pasts,  and 
the  one  you  accept  will  determine  your  service  of  the  present,  and  by  serving  the 
present  you  can  serve  the  future.     David  is  serving  you  to-day.     Carry  you  on  the 
grand  succession.     III.  Its  source  and  standard.     "  The  wiU  of  God."     1.  There 
would  be  no  working  for  the  benefit  of  the  world  were  it  not  that  God's  will  is  good- 
will to  men.     He  wiUs  the  salvation  of  the  lost,  the  comforting  of  the  mourner,  &c. 
See  that  will  expressed  in  the  bounties  of  Providence,  in  the  Bible,  in  the  Cross. 
*'  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son  " — let  that  fill  your  heart  and  move  you  forward 
to  seek  the  welfare  and  salvation  of  the  world.     2.  The  wiU  of  God  is  the  standard 
of  the  mission.     That  will  appoints  you  your  time  to  be  born  and  to  die,  the  bounds 
of  your  habitation,  the  sphere  of  your  duty.     God  did  not  give  to  David  the  sphere 
of  Samuel.     Each  man  in  his  own  place.     Your  point  is  not  to  do  everything  that 
is  to  be  done,  but  what  God  would  have  you  do  ;  not  what  your  romance  or  ambi- 
tion would  find  to  do,  but  "  what  your  hand  findeth  to  do."    If  you  can  lay  your 
hand  upon  it,  that  is  the  proof  that  God  means  you  to  go  to  work.     If  you  cannot 
reach  it,  pray  that  He  mny  bi-ing  it  nearer  ;  but  don't  spend  time  in  praying  for  the 
distant  while  you  neglect  the  near.     IV.  Its  close.     "  He  fell  on  sleep."     What  a 
blessed  end  to  a  life  of  labour  !     (W.  Arthur,  M.A.)         Public  spirit: — As  God  is 
pleased  to  employ  human  agents  in  carrying  on  His  designs  in  this  world,  so  He 
never  fails  to  find  those  persons  who  are  best  qualified  to  answer  His  pur^jose  (ver. 
22).     The  Lord  saw  something  in  David  which  neither  he  nor  Samuel  saw  when  he 
was  sent  to  anoint  him  and  set  him  apart  for  the  service  of  God.     Nor  was  the 
Divine  choice  misplaced  ;  for  as  soon  as  David  appeared  in  public  he  seized  every 
opportunity  of  promoting  the  cause  of  God  and  the  good  of  his  fellow  men.    Let 
us  consider — I.  What  it  is  to  live  a  useful  life.     There  is  a  sense  in  which  all 
men  are  useful.    Pharaoh,  Haman,  and  the  King  of  Assyria  were  instrumental  in 
bringing  about  the  designs  of  Providence.     They  intended  to  accomplish  their  own 
ambitious  designs,  but  God  overruled  all.     But  in  order  to  be  useful  in  the  sense 
of  the  text — 1.  Men  must  live  in  the  exercise  of  supreme  love  to  God.     They  must 
give  Him  the  throne  in  their  hearts  before  they  can  take  their  proper  place  at  His 
footstool.     2.  Men  must  have  a  spirit  of  universnl  benevolence.     Every  man  ought 
to  love  his  neighbour  as  himseK,  and  live  in  the  exercise  of  that  charity  which 
seeketh  not  her  own.     3.  Men  must  faithfully  perform  the  various  duties  of  their 
stations.     As  God  has  endowed  different  men  with  different  talents,  so  He  has 
assigned  them  different  parts  to  act  upon  the  stage  of  life.    And  it  is  only  by 
moving  properly  in  their  proper  spheres  of  action  that  they  can  become  the  most 
extensively  serviceable  to  the  world.     II.  Such  a  life  will  terminate  in  a  happy 
DEATH.    For — 1.  It  contains  a  source  of  pleasing  reflections  upon  what  is  past. 
2.  It  contains  a  source  of  agreeable  anticipations.     Those  who  have  taken  delight 
in  serving  God  on  earth  may  look  forward  to  the  happiness  of  serving  Him  in  a 
higher  and  nobler  manner  in  glory.     3.  It  will  meet  a  glorious  and  ample  reward 
beyond  the  grave.     Conclusion  :  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said — 1.  That  real 
religion  is  necessary  to  qualify  every  person  for  the  station  he  fills.     2.  That  use- 
fulness forms  the  most  beautiful  character  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  as  well  as  in  the 
sight  of  God.    David,  while  he  served  his  own  generation  by  the  will  of  God,  was 
greatly  admired  and  applauded.     3.  The  goodness  of  God  in  prolonging  the  lives  of 
Hia  faithful  servants.     {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Three  great  principles  :—  -1,  Ihh 


^CHAP.  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  845 

PRINCIPLE  OP  GBEATNEss — to  benefit  others.  II.  The  principle  of  socoess — 
working  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God.  Philanthropists  may  efifect  a  tem- 
porary reformation.  Philosophy  may  awaken  thought.  But  only  he  who  works 
out  earthly  information  in  the  light  of  Divine  revelation  can  benefit  his  generation. 
III.  The  principle  of  destiny.  By  benefiting  his  generation — 1.  David  benefited 
the  world  in  all  ages.  2.  Promoted  his  own  eternal  salvation ;  and — 3.  Glorified 
God.  {Homilist.)  The  work  and  the  end  of  life  : — I.  The  duty.  1.  It  may 
seem  a  humble  thing  to  do,  but  what  else  is  there  for  the  greatest  of  us  ?  To  serve 
your  generation.  The  next  will  have  its  own  ways  of  thinking  and  acting.  If  any- 
thing of  yours  should  survive,  it  will  be  but  to  be  criticised,  disparaged,  incorpo- 
rated and  lost  in  the  new.  Be  satisfied  if  you  can  serve  your  own  generation,  and 
when  we  have  made  generation  mean  only  town  or  parish  or  family,  we  must  be 
satisfied  still.  It  is  not  for  the  creatures  of  a  day  to  affect  either  universality  or 
permanence.  2.  To  serve  your  own  generation.  Not  to  lord  it  over,  not  to  stamp 
your  mind  or  will  upon  your  generation,  but  to  serve  it.  How  humbling,  yet  how 
salutary  a  description  1  The  greater  a  man  is  the  more  has  he  to  serve.  A  sove- 
reign is  but  a  servant.  How  much  more  a  tradesman,  a  lawyer,  a  physician,  a 
clergyman  1  If  it  is  a  humble  it  is  also  an  honourable  and  even  a  sacred  service. 
To  do  good  to,  to  help  forward  the  men,  women,  and  children  with  whom  it  has 
pleased  God  that  we  should  spend  our  few  days  or  years  on  earth.  What  a  sum- 
mons is  this  to  every  possible  work  of  charity  !  What  a  motive  does  this  give  to 
diligence  in  visiting  the  poor,  in  supporting  schools,  in  trying  to  set  forward  every 
effort  and  enterprise  of  good !  II.  The  end.  Sleep  is  the  Christian  name  for 
death.  1.  Because  it  is  a  gentle  thing.  It  has  already  lost  its  sting  by  reason  of 
the  forgiveness  of  sins.  The  sting  of  death  is  sin  ;  and  he  whose  sins  have  been 
dismissed  is  set  free  also  from  the  fear  of  death.  2.  Because  it  is  a  refreshing  and 
a  restoring  thing.  The  weary  man  wants  rest.  And  the  forgiven  man  who,  in  the 
strength  of  that  forgiveness,  has  for  many  years  been  serving  his  generation,  needs 
rest ;  he  must  renew  his  strength  before  he  enters  upon  the  occupations  of  the 
world  of  resurrection  and  of  eternal  Ufe.  3.  Because  a  Christian  after  a  pause 
will  awake,  and  be  satisfied,  when  he  awakes,  with  God's  hkeness.  {Dean 
Vaughan.)  The  true  life  ever  worth  living  : — I.  The  sweet  reasonableness  op 

THE  TRUE  LIFE.  "  David  scived."  There  was  a  man  of  Uke  passions  with  our- 
selves ;  and  he  lived  out  his  life,  a  truly  human  life,  a  life  of  rare  powers,  of  rich 
and  varied  endowments,  of  widest-ranging  experiences  and  most  exquisite  sensi- 
bilities ;  and  of  tbat  life  the  simple  but  sublime  summation  lies  in  this  spirit- 
given  word,  "  served,"  and  service,  according  to  highest,  holiest  wisdom,  is 
supremely  reasonable  and  worthy  of  man ;  for  stUl  that  voice  is  sounding,  "  I 
came  to  minister."  Such  a  life  of  aU  "  reasonable  service  "  opens  to  every  man. 
How,  you  ask  me,  has  it  then  become  possible  for  men  to  ask,  "  Is  Ufe  worth 
living  ?  "  The  possibihty  lies  largely  in  the  lives.  There  are  lives,  alas !  which 
almost  demand  the  grim  reply  of  blunt-spoken  Samuel  Johnson,  "  I  do  not  see, 
sir,  the  necessity  for  your  living."  Lives  of  service  fit  into  this  universe  of 
reason,  for  our  universe  is  most  reasonable.  All  God-made  things  serve.  Thus 
they  show  their  reason.  There  is  a  need-be  for  them ;  they  move  to  ends. 
Whatever  truth  may  be  in  evolution,  this  for  me  is  at  present  the  chief  truth — 
all  the  past  has  served  unto  this  present,  all  this  present  is  seen  aiming  at  some 
coming  fulness  ;  and  here  I  bow  before  the  holy  reason  of  an  all-ordaining  will, 
II.  The  RANGE  of  the  true  life.  "  Served  his  generation."  This  true  life,  lived 
with  rational  purpose  and  with  heroic  patience  under  law  and  by  love,  this  rea- 
sonable life  of  Christ-like  service,  is  no  mean,  contracted,  slavish  thing  of  low 
and  narrow  aims  and  dismal  drudgery.  It  is  wide.  It  is  strong.  It  is  joyous. 
It  has  the  sweep  and  the  freshness  of  the  sea  in  it ;  round  and  round  it  courses, 
generously  leaving  the  broad  shores  and  stealing  with  a  resolute  gentleness  into 
every  little  quiet  nook.  It  has  the  beauty  and  the  strength  of  the  mountain  in 
it ;  it  gladdens  every  healthy  eye,  and  uplifts  the  weary  into  fresh  power.  It 
has  the  outstreaming  gladness  and  the  beneficent  onroll  of  the  great  continental 
river  in  it ;  it  brings  its  rich  tributes  from  afar  and  deals  them  out  freely  adown 
its  long-drawn  banks.  It  claims  its  "generation"  for  its  field.  With  the  bold- 
ness of  purest  charity  it  owns  no  bounds  save  the  stretch  of  its  own  years  and 
the  outreach  of  its  own  love-constrained  forces.  David  served  his  own  generation. 
How  variously  he  served !  As  the  shepherd  lad  in  the  Judcean  farmer's  home ;  as 
the  young  mmstrel  before  the  maddenmg  king  ;  as  the  brave,  cool,  self-mastering 
fioldier  in  days  of  trial  and  of  triumph;   as  the  faithful  friend  and  the  eager 


846  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  xni. 

patriot ;  as  the  singer  of  the  deepest  songs  of  the  pious  heart  and  unwearying 
worker  for  the  coming  temple  ;  as  the  Prince  of  Judah  and  King  of  Israel ;  as  the 
saint — ay,  as  the  sinner.  And  how  patiently  he  served!  from  elastic  youth  to 
decrepit  age.  Let  us  go  and  do  likewise.  Let  us  serve  our  generation,  our  whole 
generation ;  all  the  circles  of  life  that,  in  wider  and  yet  wider  spheres,  sweep  around 
us.  We  are  central.  Souls  are  ever  insular.  My  own  selfhood  is  the  centre  of  my 
possible  activity.  All  around  me  sweep  the  concentric  circles  of  impressionable 
life.  Here  we  see  the  inspiration,  the  grandeur,  the  far-reaching  projection,  yes, 
the  endless  perpetuity,  of  the  true  life.  Our  lives  go  down  the  centuries  and  out 
into  eternity  in  the  following  lives  of  those  who  have  been  blessed  and  uplifted  by 
our  own.  Ideals  of  youth ;  yes,  have  them  1  cherish  them  !  It  is  sometimes  sting- 
ingly  said,  oftener  sneeringly  thought,  that  the  man  of  ideals  is  not  the  man  for  the 
rough,  real,  practical  work  of  his  times.  Young  men,  be  not  deceived  I  Never  were 
there  men  of  loftier  ideals  than  the  Hebrew  seers.  They  were  pre-eminently  the 
men  of  and  for  their  times.  III.  The  bule  for  the  true  life,  "  According  to  the 
will  of  God."  Yes  !  according  to  this  will ;  here  we  meet  the  regulative  principle 
for  these  resolute,  aggressive  lives.  Under  the  law  of  God  :  0  surest  bulwark  of 
freedom !  With  the  counsel  of  God :  0  sublime  advice !  After  the  pattern  of  God : 
O  glorious  ideal  1  It  is  the  child  recognising  the  paternal  voice  falling  from  the 
throne  of  love.  The  "  I  ought  "  of  my  soul  is  its  answer  to  the  "  I  will  "  of  my 
King.  Eegulated  movement  is  everywhere.  Shall  I  not  know  it  ?  "  Thy  will  be 
done  "  is  nature's  universal  cry.  Shall  I  stand  in  the  profane  without  ?  No  "  un- 
chartered freedom  "  mine,  for  I  am  child  and  He  is  Father ;  therefore  am  I  not 
without  law,  but  under  law.  There  is  for  me,  as  for  all  things,  the  chief  end.  My 
chief  end  is  to  glorify  God  and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever.  His  plan  then,  His  wiU, 
must  be  my  law.  Now,  God's  law  is  ever  the  same,  for  He  is  one  and  changeless. 
But  that  one  will  has  its  personal,  special,  individual  applications  to  each  man, 
and  to  each  man  in  each  age.  The  infinity  of  its  author  is  reflected  in  that  law's 
inexhaustible  fulness  and  its  endless  variety  of  possible  adaptations.  Like  Paul  it 
can  make  itself  all  things  to  all  men,  and  that,  too,  in  order  to  win  each  to  the 
high  and  blessed  life  which  God  would  have  him  live.  Like  God's  ever  old  yet 
ever  fresh  face  of  nature,  the  Word  of  God  has  new  features  for  each  new  student, 
for  each  moral  artist,  each  soul  sculptor  working  out  his  own  reahsation  of  the  one 
grand  ideal — the  true  life  for  godlike  man.  The  work  varies  with  the  man  and 
with  the  varieties  of  the  man's  age.  Innovations  are  the  law  and  the  life  of  hvunan 
society,  specially  within  its  field  of  highest,  intensest  activity,  which  is,  or  ought  to 
be,  the  Church.  Paul's  work  is  not  the  Baptist's  ;  the  Baptist's  is  not  Malachi's  ; 
Malachi's  is  not  Isaiah's ;  nor  Isaiah's  Ehjah's ;  and  yet  to  each  the  law  of 
the  Lord  was  a  light  and  a  lamp.  "  In  that  purest  light  of  Thine  we  see  all 
things  clearly  " — no  shade  of  the  many-coloured,  ever-moving  web  of  life  left  out 
of  view  !  IV.  The  rewaed  of  true  life.  David's  was  twofold.  It  was  both  human 
and  Divine.  Men  honoured  him.  God  crowned  him.  Men  honoured  him;  "he 
was  laid  unto  his  fathers."  He  passed  into  the  ranks  of  the  never-forgotten,  the 
honoured,  the  beloved  dead,  whose  memories  make  the  past  a  power  and  the  future 
a  joy.  Live  in  the  Spirit ;  and  so  become  the  fathers,  the  progenitors  of  the  pro- 
gressive centuries ;  make  them  fresher,  sweeter,  saintlier ;  then,  indeed,  men  will 
rise  up  and  call  you  blessed,  acknowledging  that  the  potent  wine  of  your  loving, 
laborious  Uves  is  stimulating  them.  And  God,  your  own  God,  will  not  be  unfaith- 
ful to  forget  your  works  of  faith  and  your  labours  of  love.  God  did  indeed  remem- 
ber David  and  all  his  travail.  David  won  the  Divine  recognition ;  and,  in  signal 
manner,  God  has  kept  guard  over  his  life-work  ;  his  royal  line  lives  on  in  David's 
greater  Son,  and  his  sweet  songs  go  singing  down  the  centuries,  the  guide  of  our 
childhood  to  God  and  the  comfort  of  the  parting  soul.  God  accepted  David's  work, 
and  enshrined  it  in  His  holy  places.  That  Davidic  work  was  manifold,  but  its 
three  highest  manifestations  were  David's  literary,  political,  and  religious  activities. 
A  new  literature,  art,  and  song  1  How  we  need  them  1  New  states  of  society,  and 
happier  forms  of  national  existence  1  How  the  world  is  crying  for  them,  and  the 
cry  sharpens  into  agony  in  the  lands  most  civilised  1  The  new  temple,  the  living 
temple  of  the  Spirit-born,  the  Christlike  I  Oh,  blest  solution  of  a  thousand,  thou- 
sand problems  1  (J.  S.  Mcintosh.)  St.  PauVs  epitaph  on  David: — The  text  is 
capable  of  three  different  constructions.  The  Authorised  Version  gives  it  in  the 
form  just  read  to  you.  "  David,  after  he  had  served  his  own  generation  by  the  will 
(counsel)  of  God,  fell  on  sleep."  The  Revised  Version  gives  it  in  another  way  : 
"  David,  after  he  had  in  his  own  generatfon  served  the  counsel  of  God,  fell  on 


CHIP,  xra.]  THE  ACTS.  84' 

sleep."  The  margin  of  the  Revised  Version  suggests  a  third  arrangement :  "David 
after  he  had  served  his  own  generation  by  the  counsel  of  God,  fell  on  »leep. "  In 
all  forms  of  the  sentence  we  have  the  threefold  thought  of  a  generation,  a  service, 
and  a  counsel  of  God  concerning  it.  There  may  be  longer,  more  detailed,  more 
laudatory  epitaphs — the  fashion  of  the  last  century  covered  the  walls  of  our  churches 
with  elaborate  and  fulsome  panegyrics,  amongst  which  this  short  sentence  of  St 
Paul's  might  have  seemed  scanty  and  grudging  in  its  meed  of  praise — but  the  truer 
taste  and  more  reverent  feeling  of  our  own  age  will  appreciate  the  more  expressive, 
and  in  reality  the  more  majestic,  brevity,  "  He  served  his  generation,  and  fell  on 
sleep."  The  text  presents  us  with  two  pairs  of  synonyms :  Life  is  Service,  and 
Death  is  Sleep.  I.  Life  is  seevice.  One  rendering  says,  the  service  of  God. 
Another  rendering  says,  the  service  of  a  generation.  But  the  most  ignorant  of 
thinkers  or  scholars  will  see  no  conflict,  scarcely  a  divergence,  in  this  variation. 
The  moment  the  idea  of  service  has  attached  itself  to  the  idea  of  life  enough  has 
been  done  to  preclude  any  practical  uncertainty  as  to  its  nature  or  object.  To  be 
told  that  this  life  is  not  self-contained,  not  self-centred,  not  dominant,  and  not 
independent,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  is  a  ministry  and  a  service  as  much  as  if 
I  were  receiving  the  wages  and  wearing  the  livery  of  an  employer,  is  a  surprise  and 
a  shock  at  the  first  hearing,  or  would  be  so  if  it  were  heard  in  the  heart,  heard  as  a 
revelation  and  heard  as  a  call.  Who  shall  pretend  to  say  that  the  service  of  the 
generation  may  not  have  in  it  the  service  of  a  second  or  a  third  or  a  tenth  genera- 
tion, by  reason  of  the  impression  made  by  its  elevation,  by  its  purity,  by  its  bene- 
volence, by  its  wisdom,  upon  the  very  ideas  and  principles  of  human  living  ?  It  is 
given  to  a  few  men  to  leave  a  memory  behind  them  in  the  shape  of  immortal 
writings,  powerfully  affecting  the  thought  of  all  nations  and  languages,  sometimes 
starting  afresh  into  a  novelty  of  influence  at  some  great  crisis  of  history,  and  mould- 
ing the  taste  or  the  judgment  of  posterity  by  a  power  only  strengthened  by  lapse  of 
time.  Such  men  are  necessarily  few  and  far  between.  But  speaking  of  average 
men,  and  of  men  above  the  average,  men  who  have  not  one  of  these  exceptional 
embassies,  whether  of  transcendent  genius  or  of  Divine  inspiration,  to  a  world-wide 
and  age-long  audience,  it  is  true — painfully  true,  or  instructively  true,  as  they  hear 
and  as  they  read  it — that  they  can,  at  the  best,  serve  but  one  generation,  and  then 
must  "  see  corruption."  Great  ability,  great  knowledge,  great  sagacity,  great  per- 
sonal influence,  great  oratory,  great  generalship,  great  statesmanship,  all  are  of  the 
generation.  There  is  nothing  in  any  one  of  these  of  a  nature  to  live  on  after  the 
death  of  the  possessor.  We  have  seen  all  these  by  turns  wield  enormous  power 
and  yet  pass  away.  In  this  place  it  is  not  inappropriate  to  speak  of  knowledge  hs 
ephemeral.  The  man  who  has  only  read,  never  written,  the  man  who  has  spent 
his  strength  in  accumulating  from  libraries  and  observatories — the  man  who  has 
written,  and  written  largely,  and  for  a  world  of  readers,  while  he  was  here  to  hold 
them — is  as  much  lost  to  the  succeeding  generation  (for  there  is  a  fashion,  as  well 
as  a  progress,  even  in  knowing)  as  the  brilliant  talker  who  was  the  fascination  of 
society,  or  the  persuasive  ecclesiastic  of  the  pulpit  or  the  confessional.  Commonly, 
if  life  reaches  anything  like  its  natural  limit  of  the  threescore  and  ten  or  four- 
score years,  all  these  powers  of  which  we  have  spoken  wane  and  fade  before  the 
reaching.  Not  to  mention  probabilities  of  physical  enfeeblement,  the  latter  days 
of  the  life  are,  from  perfectly  distinct  causes,  less  brilliant  than  the  earlier — less 
active,  less  conspicuous,  less  impressive,  less  attractive,  less  influential.  It  is  the 
rarest  thing  in  the  world  if  a  man  remains  to  the  end  so  much  as  in  sympathy  with 
his  generation.  When  at  last  the  fulness  of  the  time  is  come,  and  he  is  laid  to  his 
fathers  to  "  see  corruption,"  it  is  but  in  a  very  few  hearts  that  he  leaves  either  a 
void  or  an  impression.  "He  served  his  own  generation,  and  then  fell  on  sleep." 
This  is  all  that  can  be  said  of  him.  Shall  we  count  this  a  small  thing  ?  Is  it  not 
enough  if  it  can  be  said  with  truth  of  any  man  ?  If  there  is  here  the  reproof  of 
human  vanity,  is  there  not  also  here  the  repose  of  human  restlessness  ?  To  serve 
one  generation,  is  not  this  large  enough  and  grand  enough  to  satisfy  any  reason- 
able ambition  ?  We  fear  rather  lest  some  here  should  be  saying,  It  is  too  large  and 
too  grand  for  such  as  I  am  I  "  He  served  his  own  generation  "  ;  yes,  it  is  much  to 
say  of  any  man.  A  generation  is  a  vast  thing,  an  inconceivable  thing,  while  we  sa 
speak  of  it.  We  must  break  it  iip  into  its  elements  before  we  can  apprehend  it. 
A  generation  in  the  mass  and  in  the  gross  is  the  whole  number  of  living  and  think- 
ing beings  alive  at  one  time  upon  this  great  earth.  How  can  a  man  imagine  him- 
self to  be  serving  all  that  multitude  ?  It  is  to  fill  the  post  assigned  with  diligence^ 
with  seriousness,  with  unselfishness,  with  God  in  sight.     It  may  be  done  equalljt 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

by  prince  and  peasant,  by  master  and  servant,  by  man  and  woman.  No  one 
touches  his  generation  at  more  than  a  few  points — most  people  touch  it  but  at  one. 
That  point  of  contact  is  the  place  of  service  ;  he  serves  his  generation  who  serves 
faithfully  that  particular  town  or  village  or  hamlet,  that  particular  neighbourhood 
or  family  or  home  which  is,  for  him,  the  little  fragment  or  morsel  of  the  genera- 
tion as  a  whole.  There  is  this  also  to  reconcile  us  to  the  humbler  and  less  con« 
spicuous  places  of  service — that  the  smaller  the  surface  covered  the  deeper 
commonly  and  the  more  intense  is  the  influence  exercised.  These  are  the  com- 
pensations of  the  humble  service,  and  of  the  generous  Lord  who  takes  it  for  His 
own.  There  is  another  sense,  also,  in  which  the  thought  of  life  as  service  has  a 
tranquilising  and  even  equalising  influence.  We  have  seen  that  the  extent  or  space 
covered  by  it  is  nothing — so  is  it  also  with  the  duration  of  time.  Some  of  the  moat 
telling  "  servicss  of  the  generation  "  have  been  accomplished  within  the  span  of  a 
few  years.  Thi^  thought  of  the  "  generation  "  is  pregnant  with  applications.  It 
reminds  us  of  the  succession  and  series  of  the  inhabitants  of  each  spot  of  this 
earth.  It  reminds  us  that  there  is  no  standing  still  and  no  looking  backward,  but 
a  perpetual  movement  and  reaching  forth,  in  the  collective  life  of  God's  human 
family.  To  serve  one's  generation  is  to  help  it  on.  We  ought  to  be  ashamed  of 
contributing  nothing  to  the  old  sum,  such  as  we  found  it,  of  human  notions  and  of 
human  practices.  Each  true  servant  of  his  generation  does  in  some  real,  though 
to  himself  unconscious  way,  help  to  make  the  next  generation  after  it  better  and 
happier.  Certainly  in  this  place  of  brief  generations  we  have  seen,  we  have  felt  it 
so  1  Something  survives  of  each  life  of  service.  Something  is  immortal  of  each 
beautiful  life  I  Some  one  is  assisted  in  being  good  by  each  servant  of  the  past. 
What  has  not  David  done  for  them  that  came  after  ?  The  thought  never  came  to 
him,  but  the  thing  was  done.  Who  does  not  turn  in  trouble  to  that  man's  compo- 
sitions ?  Who  stays  to  say  to  himself,  David  lived  so  many  hundreds  of  years  before 
Christ,  how  then  can  he  sound  the  depths  of  Christian  sorrow  and  Christian 
ecstasy  ?  He  was  as  much  the  commissioned  minstrel  of  the  universal  Church 
of  God  as  Moses  was  its  lawgiver  or  Isaiah  its  prophet.  And  yet  David  was  no 
saint,  if  saintliness  were  perfection.  Oh,  if  this  thought  of  serving  the  one  gene- 
ration were  ouce  rooted  and  grounded  in  us — if  the  last  suggestion  of  the  mani- 
foldness  and  unexpectedness  of  the  ways  and  forms  of  serving  were  but  worked 
out  by  each  one  in  reference  to  his  own  experiences,  the  joyous  and  the  grievous, 
as  it  ought  to  be,  there  would  be  an  end  in  us  for  ever  of  all  restlessness  and 
all  mortification,  there  would  be  a  definiteness  and  a  concentration  of  purpose  in 
us  all ;  we  should  know  exactly  where  we  stood  and  how,  we  should  feel  it  honour 
enough  and  to  spare  for  the  like  of  us  if  it  could  be  written  by  the  finger  of  God  at 
last  on  the  tomb  of  our  resting,  "  He  served  his  generation  .  .  .  and  fell  on  sleep." 
"  He  served  his  generation,"  and  in  doing  so  he  served  "  God's  counsel  "  concerning 
himself.  How  reassuring  amidst  all  adverse  appearances,  how  comforting  amidst 
aU  misgivings  and  all  gainsayings,  to  know  that  God  has  a  will,  has  a  "  counsel" 
concerning  each  life  I  We  are  not  the  casual,  accidental,  haphazard  things  that 
infidelity  would  make  of  us.  God  had  a  "  counsel  "  concerning  each  one,  in  fixing 
the  place  and  the  time,  the  conditions  and  circumstances  of  His  being.  Let  us 
fulfil  their  high  destiny  1  Enough  if  of  one  of  us  this  may  be  the  record,  "  He  served 
the  counsel  of  God,  .  .  .  and  he  fell  on  sleep."  Who  shall  tell  us,  concerning  one 
of  whom  this  is  God's  record,  that  that  sleep  shall  have  no  waking?  The 
very  words  which  tell  of  it,  that  it  is  a  "  laying"  or  "  adding"  or  "  gathering  "  to 
our  fathers,  seem  to  make  the  funeral  itself  a  reunion.  In  the  light  of  such  revela- 
tions, death  a  falling  on  sleep,  burial  a  gathering  to  the  fathers,  even  the 
thought  of  "seeing  corruption"  shall  lose  for  us  its  terror.  (Bean  Vaughan.) 
Serving  our  generation : — I.  First,  then,  what  ib  it  to  serve  our  own  genera- 
tion ?  This  is  a  question  which  ought  to  interest  us  all  very  deeply.  Though  our 
citizenship  is  in  heaven,  yet,  as  we  live  on  earth,  we  should  seek  to  serve  our 
generation  while  we  pass  as  pilgdms  to  the  better  country.  What,  then,  is  it  for 
a  man  to  servo  his  own  generation  ?  1.  I  note,  first,  that  it  is  not  to  be  a  slave 
to  it.  It  is  not  to  drop  into  the  habits,  customs,  and  ideas  of  the  generation  in 
which  we  live.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  not  only  for  one  generation,  it  is  for 
all  generations.  It  is  the  faith  which  needed  to  be  only  "  once  for  all  delivered 
to  the  saints  "  ;  it  was  given  stereotyped  as  it  always  is  to  be.  That  man  serves 
his  generation  best  who  is  not  caught  by  every  new  current  of  opinion,  but  stands 
firmly  by  the  truth  of  God,  which  is  a  solid,  immovable  rock.  But  to  serve  our 
own  generation  in  the  sense  of  being  a  slave  to  it,  its  vassal,  and  its  varlet — 1*4 


eHAP.  zm.]  THE  ACTS,  84t 

those  who  care  to  do  so  go  into  snch  bondage  and  slavery  if  they  will.  Do  you 
know  what  such  a  course  involves?  If  any  young  man  here  shall  begin  to 
preach  the  doctrine  arid  the  thought  of  the  age,  within  the  next  ten  years, 
perhaps  within  the  next  ten  months,  he  will  have  to  eat  his  own  words,  and 
begin  his  work  all  over  again.  2.  In  the  next  place,  in  seeking  to  answer  the 
question,  What  is  it  to  serve  our  own  generation  ?  I  would  say,  it  is  not  to 
fly  from  it.  If  he  shall  shut  himself  up,  like  a  hermit,  in  his  cave,  and 
leave  the  world  to  go  to  ruin  as  it  may,  he  will  not  be  like  David,  for  he 
served  his  own  generation  before  he  fell  asleep.  If  you  do  not  take  your  stand  in 
this  way,  it  can  never  truly  be  said  of  you  that  you  served  your  generation. 
Instead  of  that,  the  truth  will  be  that  you  allowed  your  generation  to  make  a 
coward  of  you,  or  to  muzzle  you  like  a  dog.  3.  If  we  ask  again.  What  is  it  to 
Berve  our  generation  ?  I  answer,  it  is  to  perform  the  common  duties  of  life,  as 
David  did.  David  was  the  son  of  a  farmer,  a  sheep-owner,  and  he  took  first  of  all  to 
the  keeping  of  the  sheep.  Many  young  men  do  not  like  to  do  the  common  work  of 
their  own  father's  business.  The  girl  who  dreams  about  the  foreign  missionary 
field,  but  cannot  dam  her  brother's  stockings,  will  not  be  of  service  either  at  home 
or  abroad.  But  serving  our  generation  means  more  than  this.  4.  It  is  to  be  ready 
for  the  occasion  when  it  comes.  In  the  midst  of  the  routine  of  daily  life,  we 
should,  by  diligence  in  duty,  prepare  for  whatever  may  be  our  future  opportunity, 
waiting  patiently  until  it  comes.  Look  at  David's  occasion  of  becoming  famous. 
He  never  sought  it.  If  you  are  to  serve  God,  wait  tiU  He  calls  you  to  His  work ; 
He  knows  where  to  find  you  when  He  wants  you  ;  you  need  not  advertise  yourself 
to  His  omniscience.  If  you  want  to  serve  the  Church  and  serve  the  age,  be  wide 
awake  when  the  occasion  comes.  Jump  into  the  saddle  when  the  horse  is  at  your 
door ;  and  God  will  bless  you  if  you  are  on  the  look-out  for  opportunities  of  serving 
him.  What  is  it,  again,  to  serve  our  generation  ?  6.  It  is  to  maintain  true  religion. 
This  David  did.  He  had  grave  faults  in  his  later  life,  which  we  will  not  extenuate ; 
but  he  never  swerved  from  his  allegiance  to  Jehovah  the  true  God.  No  word  or 
action  of  his  ever  sanctioned  anything  like  idolatry,  or  turning  aside  from  the 
worship  of  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel.  6.  To  serve  our  own  generation  is  not 
a  single  action,  done  at  once,  and  over  for  ever ;  it  is  to  continue  to  serve  all  our 
life.  Notice  well  that  David  served  "  his  own  generation  "  ;  not  only  a  part  of  it, 
but  the  whole  of  it.  He  began  to  serve  God,  and  he  kept  on  serving  God.  How 
many  young  men  have  I  seen  who  were  going  to  do  wonders  1  Ah,  me  1  they  were 
as  proud  of  the  intention  as  though  they  had  already  done  the  deed.  Some,  too, 
begin  well,  and  they  serve  their  God  earnestly  for  a  time,  but  on  a  sudden  their 
service  stops.  One  cannot  quite  tell  how  it  happens,  but  we  never  hear  of  them 
afterwards.  Men,  as  far  as  I  know  them,  are  wonderfully  like  horses.  You  get  a 
horse,  and  you  think,  "  This  is  a  first-rate  animal,"  and  so  it  is.  It  goes  well  for 
a  while,  but  on  a  sudden  it  drops  lame,  and  you  have  to  get  another.  So  it  is  with 
church-members.  I  notice  that  every  now  and  then  they  get  a  singular  lameness. 
Yet  more  is  included  in  this  faithful  serving  of  our  generation.  7.  It  is  to  prepare 
for  those  who  are  to  come  after  us.  David  served  his  generation  to  the  very  end 
by  providing  for  the  next  generation.  He  was  not  permitted  to  build  the  temple ; 
but  he  stored  up  a  great  mass  of  gold  and  silver  to  enable  his  son  Solomon  to 
carry  out  his  noble  design,  and  build  a  house  for  God.  This  is  real  service ;  to 
begin  to  serve  God  in  early  youth  ;  to  keep  on  till  old  age  shall  come ;  and  even 
then  to  say,  "  I  cannot  expect  to  serve  the  Lord  much  longer,  but  I  will  prepare 
the  way  as  far  as  I  can  for  those  who  will  come  after  me."  H.  In  the  second 
place,  let  ns  ask  a  question  even  more  practical  than  the  first :  What  pakts  op 
OXTB  GENEEATiON  CAN  WB  6EBVB ?  It  Is  truly  Written,  "None  of  us  liveth  to 
himself  " :  we  either  help  or  hinder  those  amongst  whom  we  dwell.  Let  us  see  to 
it  that  we  serve  our  age,  and  become  stepping-stones  rather  than  stumbling-blocks 
to  those  by  whom  we  are  surrounded.  We  shall  serve  our  generation  best  by 
being  definite  in  our  aim.  In  trying  to  reach  everybody  we  may  help  nobody.  I 
divide  the  generation  in  which  we  live  into  three  parts.  1.  First,  there  is  the  part 
that  is  setting.  Some  are  like  the  sun  going  down  in  the  west ;  they  will  be  gone 
eoon.  Serve  them.  Tou  that  are  in  health  and  vigour,  comfort  them,  strengthen 
them,  and  help  them  all  you  can.  Be  a  joy  to  that  dear  old  man,  who  has  been 
spared  to  you  even  beyond  the  allotted  threescore  years  and  ten,  and  praise  God 
for  the  grace  that  has  upheld  him  through  his  long  pilgrimage.  2.  The  second 
portion  of  our  generation  which  we  can  serve  is  the  part  that  is  shining.  I  mean 
those  in  middle  life,  who  are  like  the  son  at  its  zenith.    Help  them  all  you  can. 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xnt 

3.  Specially,  however,  I  want  to  speak  to  yoa  about  serving  your  own  generation 
in  the  part  that  is  rising ;  the  young  people  who  are  like  the  sun  in  the  east,  as 
yet  scarcely  above  the  horizon.  In  them  lies  our  hope  for  the  future  of  God's 
cause  on  earth.  In  the  first  place,  they  are  the  most  reachable.  Happily, 
we  can  get  at  the  children.  Moreover,  the  children  are  the  most  impressible. 
What  can  we  do  with  the  man  who  is  hardened  in  sin  ?  The  salvation  of  the 
children  ought  to  be  sought  with  double  diligence,  for  they  will  last  the  longest. 
Eemember,  too,  that  those  who  are  converted  when  children  usually  make  the  best 
saints.  We  ought  to  look  after  the  children,  again,  for  they  are  specially  named 
by  Christ.  He  said,  '•  Feed  My  sheep  "  ;  but  He  also  said  "  Feed  My  lambs." 
Look  after  the  children  of  this  generation,  again,  for  the  dangers  around  them  at 
the  present  time  are  almost  innumerable.  III.  What  will  happen  to  us  when 
OUR  SERVICE  IS  DONE  ?  "  David,  after  he  had  served  his  own  generation  by  the 
will  of  God,  fell  on  sleep."  The  day's  work  is  done ;  the  worker  is  weary ;  he 
falls  on  sleep:  what  can  he  do  better?  It  was  all  "by  the  will  of  God."  To 
what  part  of  the  sentence  do  you  think  that  clause  belongs?  Did  David  serve 
his  generation  by  the  will  of  God ;  or  did  he  fall  asleep  by  the  will  of  God  ?  Both. 
Guided  by  the  will  of  God,  ie  did  his  work  on  earth ;  and  calmly  resigned  to  the 
will  of  God  he  prepared  to  die.  Even  when  passing  away,  he  served  his  genera- 
tion by  giving  Solomon  some  last  charges  concerning  the  kingdom,  saying,  "I  go 
the  way  of  all  the  earth  ;  be  thou  strong  and  show  thyself  a  man."  Over  both  hig 
life  and  his  death  may  be  written  the  words,  "By  the  will  of  God."  David  is  an 
example  of  what  will  befall  those  who  know  Christ,  at  the  end  of  their  service. 
1.  He  did  not  go  to  sleep  till  his  work  was  done.  *'  David,  after  he  had  served 
his  own  generation  by  the  will  of  God,  fell  on  sleep. "  Do  not  want  to  die  till  you 
have  done  your  work.  2.  But,  next,  we  are  told  that  when  his  work  was  done,  he 
fell  on  sleep.  Did  his  soul  sleep  ?  By  no  means.  It  is  not  his  soul  that  is  spoken 
of  here,  for  we  read  that  he  "saw  corruption."  Souls  do  not  see  corruption, 
Paul  is  speaking  of  David's  body.  "He  fell  on  sleep,  and  was  laid  unto  his 
fathers,  and  saw  corruption."  His  body  fell  into  its  last,  long  sleep,  and  saw 
corruption.  If  you  like  to  take  the  words  in  the  wider  sense,  he  was  asleep  as 
far  as  the  world  was  concerned ;  he  had  done  with  it.  No  sorrow  came  to  him, 
no  earthly  joy,  no  mingling  with  the  strife  of  tongues,  no  girding  on  his  harness  for 
the  war.  3.  Does  not  this  word  further  mean  that  his  dying  was  Uke  going  to 
sleep  ?  It  usually  is  so  with  God's  people.  Some  die  with  a  considerable  measure 
of  pain ;  but,  as  a  rule,  when  believers  pass  away,  they  just  shut  their  eyes  on 
earth,  and  open  them  in  heaven.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Scriptural  ideal  of  a 
good  man's  life  and  death : — We  have  in  the  text  an  inspired  representation.  L 
Of  a  good  man's  life.  1.  It  is  distinguished  as  a  service  on  behalf  of  others. 
David  '•  served  "  his  own  generation.  The  word  is  expressive  of  laborious  useful- 
ness. It  intimates  that  the  "man  after  God's  own  heart,"  was  not  content  with 
idle  wishes,  fruitless  theories,  abortive  projects.  And  still,  wherever  there  is  true 
goodness,  there  will  be  the  effort  to  "  serve."  "  No  man  liveth  to  himself."  The 
grand  model  of  holy  living  was  among  His  followers  "  as  one  that  serveth."  He 
' '  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister. "  2.  It  is  specially  devoted  to ' 
the  benefit  of  his  contemporaries,  "  his  own  generation."  He  acquired  a  familiarity 
with  the  wants  and  woes  of  the  men  and  women  around  him,  and  laboured  to 
supply  and  alleviate  them.  Though  good  men  may,  and  must,  do  many  things 
that  will  only  yield  fruit  in  after  days,  they  will  seek  to  have  "  understanding  of 
the  times,"  and  to  know  what  they  ought  to  do  to  promote  and  conserve  the  welfare 
of  those  around  them.  Where  there  is  want,  they  will  strive  to  supply  it ;  where 
there  is  ignorance,  they  will  strive  to  dispel  it ;  where  there  is  weakness,  they 
will  strive  to  uphold  it ;  and  where  there  is  guilt,  they  will  be  pitiful  and  tender, 
if  by  any  means  the  wrong-doer  may  be  reclaimed.  Think  how  soon  the  oppor- 
tunity of  helping  will  have  slipped  away  from  us.  Our  own  "  generation,"  how 
it  is  diminishing  every  day  I  In  a  very  little  while,  we  ourselves,  as  members  of 
it  will  have  disappeared.  3.  It  is  regulated  by  a  paramount  regard  to  the  will  of 
God.  Of  David,  God  said,  "I  have  found  a  man  after  Mine  own  heart,  which 
shall  fulfill  all  My  will."  The  early  promise  was  not  belied.  Now,  if  there  be 
one  thing  that  is  more  distinctive  of  good  men  than  any  other,  it  is  just  this  high 
regard  for  the  will  of  God.  To  know  that,  is  their  most  earnest  desire ;  to  do  it, 
is  their  most  strenuous  endeavour.  II.  Of  a  good  man's  death.  Note — I.  That 
little  word  "  after."  "  After  "  he  had  lived  his  true  life.  "  After  "  he  had  fulfilled 
his  mission.     "After"  he  had  accomplished  his  day,  then  he  died;  not  before. 


CHAP.  xiii.J  THE  ACTS.  851 


We  are  thus  taught  that  the  time  of  a  godly  man's  departure  out  of  the  world  i« 
definitely  appointed.  It  is  not  an  affair  of  chance.  It  is  ordered  of  God.  "  Precious 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints " — so  precious  that  He 
pre-arranges  all  the  circumstances  of  their  death,  directs  its  causes,  and  ordaiuf 
its  period.  Each  of  us  is  "  immortal  till  his  work  is  done."  "  God's  witnesses," 
says  Henry,  "  never  die  till  they  have  finished  their  testimony."  2.  The  peculiar 
character  of  a  good  man's  death.  David,  when  his  work  was  done  "feU  on 
sleep  " — as  the  tired  labourer,  when  his  daily  toils  are  ended,  wends  his  way  to 
his  much-loved  home,  and  calmly  lays  him  down  to  rest,  without  a  thought  of 
Binxiety  or  dread ;  glad  that  the  hour  is  come,  thankful  for  its  provision.  {G. 
M.  Merry.) 

Vers.  38, 39.  Be  It  known  unto  yon  .  .  .  that  througli  this  Man  is  preached  unto 
you  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;  and  by  Him  all  that  believe  are  justified. — The  gospel 
message : — I.  The  blessings  which  the  text  exhibits — forgiveness  and  justification. 

1.  Forgiveness  imphes  offence,  and  have  not  we  transgressed  the  law  of  God,  whicll 
is  "  holy,  just,  and  good  "  ?  Divine  forgiveness  is  a  blessing  of  the  highest  worth. 
Whom  the  Lord  pardons  He  pardons  freely  and  completely.  Hence  He  is  repre- 
sented as  passing  by  transgression,  not  imputing  iniquity,  blotting  out  sin,  casting 
it  behind  His  back,  sinking  it  in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  remembering  it  no  more. 

2.  But  this  leads  to  the  other  blessing — justification,  "  an  act  of  God's  free  grace, 
whereby  He  pardoneth  all  our  sins,  and  accepteth  us  as  righteous  in  His  sight,  only 
lor  the  righteousness  of  Christ  imputed  to  us,  and  received  by  faith  alone."  It  is 
not  a  work  wrought  in,  but  an  act  passed  upon  us.  It  is  also  an  act  of  God — "  It  is 
God  that  justifieth  "  :  and  His  act,  not  merely  as  a  gracious  Sovereign  conferring  a 
favour,  but  as  a  righteous  Governor  and  Judge  doing  that  which  is  every  way  equit- 
able. The  blessing  includes  not  only  the  pardon  of  sins,  but  the  acceptance  of  our 
persons.  It  is  not  only  exemption  from  punishment,  but  restoration  to  favour ;  not 
only  release  from  danger,  but  admittance  into  a  state  of  high  honour  and  real  safety. 
n.  The  extent  to  which  thet  beach.  "  The  forgiveness  of  sins  "  means  all  sins ; 
"justified  from  all  things,"  i.e.,  from  every  charge  which  from  any  quarter  can 
possibly  be  brought  against  us.  Their  atrocity  shall  not  hinder  any  more  than  their 
number.  Hence  this  clause,  "  from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of 
Moses."  Moses  justified  from  some  sins.  Sin-offerings  were  appointed  to  expiate 
smaller  offences;  but  these  did  not  avail  in  cases  of  more  flagrant  crimes;  the 
sentence  of  the  law  against  such  offences  was  death,  and  no  exemption  was  allowed. 
Nor  could  the  legal  sacrifices  ever  take  away  guilt  from  the  conscience,  except  as 
the  penitent  offender,  through  them,  had  a  believing  reUance  on  the  promised  Re- 
deemer. But  the  justification  which  the  gospel  sets  forth  extends  to  all  classes  of 
transgressions.  III.  The  medium  thbough  which  these  blessings  are  conferred. 
"  Through  this  Man,"  and  "  by  Him."  1.  By  Him  these  blessings  were  proclaimed. 
He  preached  the  gospel  with  His  own  lips :  He  forgave  the  sins  of  many.  He  com- 
missioned His  apostles  to  announce  the  same  things.  And  He  has  instituted  the 
gospel  ministry,  whose  grand  object  is  the  publication  of  what  He  Himself  and  His 
apostles  published.  2.  Through  Him  they  are  also  procured.  As  it  regards  for- 
giveness, '♦  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  As  it 
regards  justification,  ♦'  As  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,  so 
by  the  obedience  of  One  shall  many  be  made  righteous."  He  is,  "  made  of  God 
onto  us,  wisdom  and  righteousness. "  But  all  this  implies  the  substitution  of  Christ. 
He  suffered  not  only  for  our  good,  but  in  our  place.  "  He  who  knew  no  sin  was 
made  sin,"  a  sin-offering,  "  for  us,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  Him."  IV.  The  peksons  bt  whom  these  blessings  are  enjoyed.  ♦'All  that 
believe."  On  the  doctrine  of  forgiveness  this  is  the  language  of  Scripture; 
"  Through  His  name,  whosoever  beUeveth  in  Him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins." 
On  that  of  justification  it  is  equally  clear,  •'  Knowing  that  a  man  is  not  justified  by 
the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ."  And  what  is  believing?  It 
is  not  an  inward  feeling  which  cannot  be  accounted  for.  It  is  not  a  presumptuous 
persuasion,  which  a  man  acquires  he  knows  not  how,  that  his  state  is  certainly  safe. 
It  is  giving  credit  to  the  truth  of  God's  Word ;  a  resting  of  the  soul  on  that  which 
He  hath  graciously  revealed,  so  as  to  fall  in  heartily  with  the  method  of  salvation 
made  known  in  the  Scriptures.  As  to  the  influence  of  faith  in  the  justification  of  a 
sinner,  it  is  evident  faith  does  not  effect  it — "  It  is  God  that  justifieth."  Faith  does 
not  procure  it — "  It  is  Christ  that  died."  But  faith  receives  it.  But  mark  the  ex- 
pression— "  By  Him  all  that  believe  are  justified  "  ;  whether  young  or  old,  rich  ot 


852  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap,  xnu 

poor,  learned  or  illiterate,  &c.  Conclusion :  From  this  subject  learn — 1.  The  en- 
couragement which  springs  from  the  love  of  Christ  1  2.  How  just  is  the  condem- 
nation of  impenitent  transgressors  I  3.  How  free  is  the  salvation  of  the  righteous  ! 
It  is  "  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast."  4.  What  a  motive  to  gratitude 
and  obedience  1  {T.  Kidd.)  Through  this  Man : — I.  The  way  of  a  sinner's  fob- 
GivENESS — "Through  this  Man."  And  notice — 1.  There  is  no  other  way.  2.  There 
is  no  need  of  any  other  way.  This  "  Man  "  satisfied  all  the  requirements  of  God 
and  man.  3.  God  will  accept  no  other  way.  "  There  is  none  other  name  given 
under  heaven  whereby  men  must  be  saved."  II.  The  nature  of  the  way  of  man's 
FORGIVENESS.  1.  It  Is  rational — consistent  with  justice,  with  mercy,  with  weak  men, 
and  a  great  God.  2.  It  is  gracious ;  free  from  cost,  easily  attained,  a  blessed  gift 
only  to  be  accepted,  an  offer  of  love.  3.  It  is  complete.  It  makes  a  man  holy  as 
well  as  safe.  It  fits  for  heaven  as  well  as  separates  from  earth.  4.  It  is  full.  There 
is  no  distinction  or  separation  of  classes  or  sorts  :  all  are  admitted  to  partake  of  its 
provisions.  There  is  no  sin  it  will  not  cover,  no  hardness  it  will  not  overcome.  5. 
It  is  absolute.  There  is  no  revocation  or  withdrawal.  It  was  a  transaction  made 
once  for  all  between  Father  and  Son.  {Homilist.)  The  true  aim  of  preaching : — 
Paul's  mode  of  preaching,  as  illustrated  by  this  chapter,  was  first  of  all  to  appeal  to 
the  understanding  with  a  clear  exposition  of  truth,  and  then  to  impress  that  truth 
upon  the  emotions  with  earnest  exhortations.  This  is  an  excellent  model  for 
revivalists.  They  must  not  give  exhortation  without  doctrine,  for  if  so,  they  will 
be  like  men  who  burn  powder  but  have  omitted  the  shot.  At  the  same  time  let 
such  of  our  brethren  as  are  passionately  fond  of  mere  doctrine,  but  having  Uttle  o£ 
the  marrow  of  Divine  mercy  or  the  milk  of  human  kindness  stand  rebuked  by  the 
example  of  the  apostle.  He  knew  well  that  even  truth  itself  must  be  powerless  un- 
less applied.  We  cannot  expect  that  men  \7ill  make  an  application  of  the  truth  to 
themselves.  Let  us  now  notice — I.  Paul's  subject,  the  subject  of  subjects — the 
great  master-doctrine  of  the  Christian  ministry.  The  "  forgiveness  of  sins  "  is  a 
topic  interesting  to  every  one  in  proportion  as  he  feels  the  guilt  of  sin.  To  those 
good  people  who  fold  their  arms  and  say,  "I  have  done  no  wrong  either  to  God  or 
man,"  I  have  nothing  to  say.  You  need  no  physician,  for  you  are  not  sick.  1.  The 
Christian  minister  tells  men  the  exclusive  method  by  which  Go4  will  pardon  sin. 
"  Through  this  Man."  The  Lord  Jesus  has  a  monopoly  of  mercy.  Into  the  one 
silver  pipe  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  God  has  made  to  flow  the  full  current  of  pardon- 
ing grace.  If  you  will  not  go  to  that,  you  may  be  tempted  by  the  mirage,  you  may 
think  that  you  can  drink  to  the  full,  but  you  shall  die  disappointed.  God  will  for- 
give sin,  because  the  sin  which  He  forgives  has  been  already  atoned  for  by  the 
sufferings  of  His  dear  Son.  You  know  the  story  of  the  young  Eoman  who  was  con- 
demned to  die.  But  his  elder  brother  who  had  often  been  to  the  front  in  the  battles 
of  the  Eepublic,  came  and  showed  his  many  scars,  and  said,  "  I  cannot  ask  life  for 
my  brother  on  account  of  anything  that  he  has  done  for  the  RepubUc ;  he  deserves 
to  die,  I  know,  but  I  set  my  scars  before  you  as  the  price  of  his  life,  and  I  ask  you 
whether  you  wiU  not  spare  him  for  his  brother's  sake."  Sinner,  this  is  what  Christ 
does  for  you.  2.  It  is  our  business  also  to  preach  to  you  the  instrument  through 
which  you  may  obtain  this  pardon.  AH  that  thou  hast  to  do  is  to  come  to  Him  as 
thou  art,  and  trust  in  Him  where  thou  art.  Cling  to  the  Cross,  thou  shipwrecked 
sinner,  and  thou  shalt  never  go  down  while  clinging  to  that.  You  will  be  saved,  not 
by  repentings  and  tears,  not  by  wailings  or  workings,  or  prayings.  When  thy  soul  saith 
by  faith  what  Christ  said  in  fact — "  It  is  finished,"  thou  art  saved,  and  thou  mayt  st 
go  thy  way  rejoicing.  8.  We  are  also  enjoined  to  preach  about  the  character  of 
this  forgiveness  of  sin.  (1)  When  God  pardons  a  man's  sins,  He  pardons  them  all, 
never  half  leaving  the  rest  in  His  book.  Luther  tells  us  of  the  devil,  in  a  dream, 
bringing  before  him  the  long  roll  of  his  sins,  and  when  he  recited  them,  Luther 
said — "  Now  write  at  the  bottom,  •  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  cleanseth 
us  from  aU  sin.'  "  (2)  It  is  a  full  pardon  and  it  is  a  free  pardon  Ukewise.  God 
never  pardons  any  sinner  from  any  other  motive  than  His  own  pure  grace.  It  cost 
the  Saviour  much ;  but  it  costs  us  nothing.  (3)  It  is  irreversible.  Whom  God 
pardons  He  never  condemns.  Let  Him  once  say,  I  absolve  thee,  and  none  can  lay 
anything  to  our  charge.  (4)  Present  pardon.  It  is  a  notion  still  current  that  you 
cannot  know  you  are  forgiven  tUl  you  come  to  die.  If  you  reckoned  a  clear  profit  of 
ten  thousand  pounds  upon  some  speculation,  and  somebody  said  to  you,  "  It's  all 
foolery  !  "  the  proof  would  be  unanswerable  if  you  had  received  the  amount.  So 
the  Christian  can  say.  Being  justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God.  II.  Thb 
CONauKUA'x'ioN  which  Paul  al>x>u£ssei>.     Never  mind  the  Jews  and  Gentiles.    The 


CHAP,  xni.]  THE  ACTS.  865 

verse  is  quite  as  applicable  here  as  it  was  there.  "  Unto  you."  My  friend,  it  is  no 
small  privilege  to  be  where  this  message  can  yet  be  heard.  Tens  of  thousands 
have  gone  the  way  of  aU  flesh,  unpardoned.  What  would  they  give  to  have  another 
opportunity  ?  I  said  that  this  was  a  privilege  ;  but  it  is  a  privilege  which  some  of 
you  have  despised.  Those  who  heard  Paul  had  never  heard  it  before.  Many  of 
you  have  heard  it  from  your  youth  up.  All  the  exhortations  in  the  world  are 
to  you  as  if  they  were  spoken  to  an  iron  column  or  a  brazen  wall  1  Why  wiU  ye 
die?  When  you  die  we  shaU  have  to  think,  "  Ah,  that  man  is  lost,  and  yet  unto 
him  was  preached  the  forgiveness  of  sins  1  "  Well,  notwithstanding  that  you  have 
neglected  the  privilege,  it  is  still  preached  unto  you.  Fain  would  I  point  with  my 
finger  to  some  of  you,  and  say,  "  Well,  now,  we  really  do  mean  you  personally." 
III.  What  became  of  them.  1.  Some  of  them  raved  at  a  very  great  rate,  until  Paul 
shook  off  the  dust  of  his  feet  against  them,  and  went  his  way.  But  there  was 
another  class  (ver.  48).  Here  was  his  comfort — there  were  some  upon  whom  there 
had  been  a  blessed  work,  and  those  *'  some  "  believed.  Now,  you  need  not  ask  the 
question  whether  you  are  God's  elect.  If  you  are  God's  chosen  ones,  you  will  know 
it  by  your  trusting  in  Jesus.  But  if  thou  believest  not,  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitter- 
ness and  the  bonds  of  iniquity.  May  eternal  mercy  bring  thee  out  of  that  state  at 
once.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Preaching  the  forgiveness  of  sins: — I.  An  alarming  fact 
IN  man's  moral  condition  implied.  Sin  is — 1.  Human.  2.  Personal.  II.  A  Divine 
METHOD  OF  PARDON  DECLARED.  1.  Forgivcncss.  2.  Justification.  III.  This  bless- 
ing OFFERED  ON  EASY  AND  HONOURABLE  TERMS.  Not  by  purchase,  doiug,  meriting, 
but  by  believing — 1.  In  God's  love.  2.  In  Christ's  readiness  and  power  to  save.  3. 
In  God's  truth  that  He  will  save  all  who  beUeve.     IV.  This  method  and  offer  op 

SALVATION    constituted    BY    GOD    A    STANDING    PROCLAMATION    IN  HiS  ChURCH  FOR  THB 

WORLD.  (J.  Boss.)  The  forgiveness' of  sins  : — 1.  Not  the  forgiveness  of  crimes. 
There  may  be  sin  where  there  is  no  crime.  Crimes  are  social,  between  man  and 
man,  between  man  and  human  law.  Crime  can  be  measured,  weighed,  and  punished. 
But  who  knows  sin?  Only  God.  I  can  forgive  a  crime,  but  I  have  no  jurisdiction 
in  the  province  of  sin.  If  I  have  done  you  wrong  and  am  sorry  for  it  you  can  on  the 
spot  say,  "  There  is  an  end  of  it  "  ;  but  after  that  I  must  have  some  plain  talk  vnth 
God.  Aiter  I  have  apologised  I  have  still  a  grievous  discontent  with  myself.  How 
to  get  clear  of  that  ?  and  whilst  I  am  debating  this  serious  question  a  sweet  voice 
says  to  me,  "  Be  it  known  unto  you,"  &c.  That  is  the  word  which  a  self-convicted, 
sin-burdened  soul  most  eagerly  dehghts  to  hear.  But  he  must  have  felt  the  bitter- 
ness and  guiltiness  of  sin  before  he  can  feel  the  need  of  such  a  gospel.  When  his 
heart  is  in  a  right  state  then  the  Cross  becomes  heaven  to  him,  and  the  gospel 
the  cry  of  God  seeking  His  lost  child.  2.  In  making  this  statement  I  lay  all  who 
are  not  yet  forgiven  under  a  tremendous  responsibility.  A  man  cannot  hear  a  gospel 
sermon  and  be  the  same  after  as  before.  You  are  on  one  side  of  a  great  swollen 
river  and  want  to  cross  it  to  get  home.  I  come  and  say,  "Be  it  known  unto  you 
that  I  have  found  a  bridge."  The  fact  of  my  telling  you  so  alters  the  complexion 
of  the  whole  case.  You  must  prove  me  a  liar  before  you  can  get  back  to  your  former 
state  of  negative  responsibility.  You  are  bound  to  say,  "  Where?  "  I  am  bound  to 
tell  you  where ;  and  if,  after  having  pointed  out  the  bridge,  you  will  not  go  home 
those  on  the  other  side  have  a  right  to  condemn  you.  Brethren,  you  are  on  one  sida 
and  truth  on  the  other.  An  infinite  distance  lies  between ;  but  Paul  says  it  ia 
bridged  by  Christ.  You  are  bound  to  accept  or  disprove  the  statement.  If  not  —to 
die.  You  are  suffering  from  a  great  plague.  I  come  and  say,  "Be  it  known  unto 
you,  I  have  found  a  bahn  which  has  never  failed."  Your  state  of  responsibility  is 
changed  from  that  moment.  Prove  me  false,  or  accept  the  remedy,  or  die.  We  are 
dying,  and  Jesus  is  set  forth  as  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  No  man,  therefore,  can 
hear  that  statement,  and  be  the  same  after  it  as  before.  3.  How  little  is  this  word 
"  forgiveness  "  understood,  however  we  may  assume  we  understand  it.  We  some- 
times  ignorantly  say,  "  Why  does  not  God  forgive  all  men,  and  make  an  end  of  sin  ?  " 
He  cannot.  You  cannot.  We  must  be  williug  to  be  forgiven.  I  may  say,  if  you 
have  wronged  me,  "  Sir,  I  forgive  you,"  and  you  may  contemptuously  refuse  to  be 
forgiven.  "  But  if  we  confess  our  sins  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive,"  &c.  Did  He 
forgive  the  Pharisee  ?  How  could  He  ?  The  Pharisee  confessed  nothing.  Whom 
did  He  forgive?  The  poor  self-accusing  creature  who  cried,  "  God  be  merciful  to 
me  a  sinner."  So  it  is  with  us.  4.  When  God  forgives,  what  happens  ?  He  for- 
gets. "  I  will  remember  no  more."  Where  there  is  no  forgetting  there  is  no  for- 
giving. What  does  God  do  with  our  sins  when  He  has  forgiven  them  ?  He  casta 
them  behind  Him.  Where  is  that  ?  He  puts  them  away  as  far  as  the  East  is  from 
vcL.  n.  23 


854  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnfc 

the  West.  How  far  is  that  ?  6.  Here,  then,  ia  forgiveness.  God  is  waiting  I  am 
authorised  to  say.  Are  you  ready  ?  "  But  I  do  not  understand."  Sir,  your  under- 
standing will  damn  you,  if  you  use  it  so.  Do  you  feel  your  need  ?  Then  helieve. 
The  apostle  distinctly  says  there  is  only  one  way — through  faith  in  Christ.  If 
there  were  but  one  door  to  this  hall,  and  the  guide  said,  "  This  is  the  door,"  what 
folly  to  seek  elsewhere  or  try  to  climb  up  to  the  windows.  To  take  his 
word  simply  is  to  save  time  and  promote  comfort.  But  Paul  is  only  one 
man — then  I  call  the  innumerable  multitude  who  have  believed  his  word 
and  been  forgiven  to  corroborate  him.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Full  and  free 
pardon : — I.  Through  this  Man.  Such  a  man  as  there  never  was  nor  will 
be  —  '*  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  »'  the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory, 
and  the  express  image  of  His  person."  In  consequence  of  this  union  He  becomes 
the  proper  object  of  our  faith,  and  therefore  the  proper  object  of  our  preaching. 
If  Jesus  Christ  were  but  a  mere  man,  we  could  not  have  preached  pardon  through 
Him.  What  merit  could  there  be  in  the  actions  or  sufferings  of  a  mere  man  7  For, 
when  he  had  done  all,  he  would  only  have  done  what  was  commanded  him.  Gold 
in  bullion  is  valuable,  but  it  is  not  the  circulating  medium  of  the  country,  and, 
before  it  can  become  so,  it  must  be  melted  down  and  stamped  with  the  king's  arms 
and  image.  Now,  if  Christ  had  been  the  best  of  mere  men.  His  actions  and  suffer- 
ings would  have  been  mere  gold  in  the  bullion,  not  the  circulating  medium.  But 
when  I  consider  the  Divine  nature  in  union  with  the  human,  then  I  see  that  they 
are  stamped  with  the  king's  arms  and  image,  and  thus  they  become  the  circulating 
medium  of  salvation,  and  they  will  pay  every  man's  debts  on  this  side  hell.  II. 
We  point  TO0  TO  this  Man  on  the  Cross,  and  you  there  see  Him  bearing  our  sina 
in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  There  is  infinite  merit  in  the  sacrifice  of  this  God- 
man.  Prophets  looked  at  Him  on  the  Cross,  and  they  saw  and  proclaimed  pardon 
through  Him,  and  the  sole  song  of  heaven's  joy  is,  "  He  has  redeemed  us  to  God 
by  His  blood."  We  cannot  tell  why  Jesus  Christ  did  suffer  and  die,  except  on  th» 
ground  of  atonement.  He  could  not  suffer  and  die  on  His  own  account.  "  The 
soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die  " ;  but,  as  Jesus  Christ  never  had  sinned,  therefore 
He  had  no  right  to  die.  On  the  contrary,  by  the  letter  of  the  law.  He  had  a  right 
to  live.  "  Do  this  and  thou  shalt  live."  Eationally,  we  can  give  no  account  except 
this:  "He  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  to  God."  When 
you  look  at  the  Cross,  and  see  the  infinite  value  of  the  sacrifice,  you  need  not 
wonder  "  that  we  preach  through  this  Man  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  III.  This  is 
jdst  the  very  blessing  we  want.  Look  at  the  poor  man  condemned  to  be  hanged. 
A  messenger  might  be  sent  to  say,  "  His  majesty  has  graciously  taken  your  case 
into  consideration,  and  I  have  brought  you  a  purse  with  a  thousand  sovereigns." 
The  poor  man  would  say,  "  What  good  can  they  do  me  ?  I  must  be  hanged  to- 
morrow." "  Well,  but  I  have  another  message  ;  he  has  considered  your  case,  and 
■sent  you  the  title-deeds  to  an  estate  of  £50,000  a-year."  "  What  will  that  do  for 
me?  I  may  be  hanged  to  morrow."  "  Stop ;  I  have  another  proposition  to  make; 
I  have  brought  you  his  coronation  robe,  the  richest  robe  that  ever  covered  a 
monarch."  The  man  bursts  into  tears ;  he  says,  "  Do  you  intend  to  mock  me  ? 
What  a  creature  I  shall  appear  when  I  ascend  the  scaffold  with  the  coronation 
robe  1  But  what,  no  news — none  at  all ?  "  "I  have  another  word  ;  his  majesty 
has  taken  your  case  into  consideration,  and  sent  you  a  pardon,  signed  and  sealed 
by  the  great  seal  of  the  king.  Here,  I  have  brought  you  a  pardon — what  do  you 
say  to  that  ?  "  The  poor  man  looks  at  him,  and  says  that  he  doubts  it  is  too  good 
news  to  be  true.  Then  he  leaps  and  praises.  But  the  messenger  says,  "  I  have 
not  done  ;  I  have  got  you  the  pardon,  and  here  is  the  purse  of  gold,  the  title-deeds, 
and  the  robe  into  the  bargain  1  "  So  we  preach  pardon  through  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  and  more  than  simple  pardon.  Not  merely  is  the  displeasure  of  God  re- 
moved, but  His  favour  enjoyed.  Not  merely  is  the  pardoned  sinner  made  a  subject, 
but  a  child,  brought  to  the  king's  palace,  and  made  an  heir  of  God  and  a  joint  heir 
with  Christ.  IV.  And  how  must  we  obtain  it  ?  "  Whosoever  believeth."  Where 
a  sinner  believes  the  testimony  of  God,  that  he  is  a  guilty  sinner,  sees  the  evil  of 
his  sin,  the  danger  of  his  state,  and  feels  a  deep  abhorrence  of  himself,  a  deep 
hatred  to  sin,  and  breathes  out  his  soul  in  prayer — I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  obtain 
remission  of  sins,  but  that  is  a  preparatory  operation  that  must  take  place,  more  or 
less,  in  all  our  souls.  Eemission  of  sins  is  not  attached  to  believing  God's  record 
concerning  Himself,  but  the  eye  turns  itself  out  of  itself,  out  of  its  own  sins,  out  of 
its  own  weakness,  and  fixes  itself  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  dignity  of  His 
person,  the  virtue  of  His  sacrifice,  the  prevalence  of  His  mediatorial  office,  th« 


«HAP.  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  35* 

riches  of  His  love.  And  then,  when  it  looks  to  Jesus,  there  is  in  Christ  e^^rything 
that  the  guilty  sinner  wants.  Here  is  the  pardon  presented,  but  he  can  bring  no 
price.  What,  then,  can  he  do?  Why,  he  can  open  his  hands  and  receive  the 
blood-bought,  freely-offered  pardon  for  all  his  transgressions.     V.  There   is   no 

OTH£B  SYSTEM  IN  THE  WORLD  THAT,  AT    THE    SAME    TIME  THAT  IT  BRINGS  PARDON  TO  TKB 

SINNER,  BRINGS  THE  HIGHEST  GLORY  TO  GoD.  Here  is  pardou,  the  fullest  and  the 
freest.  Even  in  the  Mosaic  economy  there  were  some  sins  for  which  there  was  no 
propitiatory  sacrifice,  and  consequently  those  who  Uved  under  that  economy  could 
not  be  justified  from  all  things.  But  the  soul  that  believeth  on  Jesus  Christ  is 
justified  from  aU  things.  And  then  it  brings  the  highest  glory  to  God,  for  He  is 
glorified  in  the  very  exhibition  of  pardon  to  a  ruined  world.  Some  may  say  that 
to  look  for  mere  pardon  and  acceptance  is  a  narrow  and  selfish  principle ;  that  we 
should  look  to  a  higher  object,  viz.,  the  glory  of  God.  Well,  when  I  am  pardoned, 
God  is  glorified,  the  plan  of  salvation,  the  merits  of  Christ,  the  goodness  and  holi- 
ness of  God  are  glorified.  When  our  Lord  was  a  babe  in  the  manger,  angels  sang, 
*'  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest."  I  think  we  can  sing  it  better  now  that  He  is  a 
prince  on  the  throne.  We  cannot  glorify  God  without  loving  Him,  and  how  can 
we  love  Him  without  being  pardoned  ?  Having  much  forgiven,  we  love  much  ;  and 
"when  we  love  much,  we  shall  glorify  God.  We  glorify  God  when  we  prize  Him. 
When  the  sinner  obtains  pardon,  he  says,  •'  I  will  praise  thee,  though  Thou  wast 
angry  with  me."  God  is  glorified  by  our  devotedness.  We  glorify  God  with  our 
todies  and  our  spirits,  which  are  His.  (W.  Dawson.)  Justification  by  faith : — 
Consider — I.  That  mankind  are  naturally,  and  without  Christ,  in  a  state  of 
GUILT  AND  CONDEMNATION.  This  proposition  is  here  implied ;  it  is  that  upon  which 
the  whole  statement  of  the  apostle  proceeds  ;  for  it  would  be  idle  to  talk  of  "  for- 
.giveness  of  sins,"  and  to  press  it  on  the  acceptance  of  those  who  are  not  sinners. 
God  made  man  holy.  To  holy  man  he  gave  a  holy  law,  which  partook  of  the  nature 
of  a  covenant.  The  language  of  it  was,  "  Do  it,  and  thou  shalt  live;  but  in  the 
day  that  thou  transgresseth,  thou  shalt  die."  The  first  man,  the  federal  head  of 
the  whole  human  race,  did  transgress,  and  by  transgression  forfeited,  for  himself 
and  for  our  race,  the  blessing  of  obedience,  the  blessing  of  the  covenant,  and  in- 
curred the  penalty  of  the  law — that  is,  he  forfeited  the  right  to  life,  and  he  incurred 
the  punishment  of  death.  From  him  we  all  derive  a  nature  which — like  his  after 
his  apostasy — was  alienated  from  God,  and  inclined  to  evil.  The  effect  of  this  is 
that,  when  temptations  occur,  we  all  act  again  the  part  which  he  acted  before  us. 
"  All  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  "  The  wrath  of  God  abideth 
on  them."  II.  That  from  this  natural  condition  men  cannot  extricate  them- 
selves. "Ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  Moses."  This  undoubtedly 
includes  a  reference  to  the  sacrifices  and  other  ritual  observances  of  the  law.  But 
we  are  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  and  are  in  no  danger  of  relying  on  Jewish  cere- 
monies. It  is  necessary,  however,  that  we  be  convinced  that  we  cannot  be  justified 
by  the  works  of  the  moral  law.  To  show  you  this  you  have  only  to  look  at  what 
kind  of  obedience  it  is  that  the  law  requires  when  it  says,  "Do  this,  and  thou  shalt 
live."  In  order  to  your  justification  by  law,  the  law  requires  an  obedience  perfect— 
1.  In  its  principles  and  motives.  The  law  of  God  is  spiritual,  and  will  not  be  con- 
tent with  an  external  obedience.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  aU  thy 
heart,"  &c.  This  law  of  God  is  so  spiritual  that  it  charges  an  idle  thought  as  actual 
wickedness,  a  licerjtious  desire  as  adultery,  anger  of  heart  as  murder.  Now,  will 
any  man  stand  the  scrutiny  of  such  a  law  as  this  ?  2.  In  its  practice  and  perform- 
ance. On  the  one  hand  there  are  some  who  appeal  to  what  they  think  the  very 
tolerable,  or  even  commendable  regularity,  of  their  outward  conduct,  and  they  ask 
whether  they  may  not  claim  to  be  justified.  Our  last  observation  met  their  inquiry. 
But  there  are  others  who  allow  they  have  done  that  which  they  ought  not  to  have 
done,  but  appeal  to  the  supposed  goodness  of  their  hearts.  "  We  meant  well.  We 
have  failed  in  the  performance,  but  will  not  God  take  the  will  for  the  deed  ?  "  Now, 
the  second  observation  is  meant  to  correct  that.  The  law  will  not  take  the  will  for 
the  deed,  or  the  deed  for  the  wUl.  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all 
things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  There  must  be  actual 
and  perfect  performance  in  order  to  sustain  the  plea  on  the  ground  of  your  own 
works  to  'ife  eternal.  It  is  not  enough  to  say  that  you  thoroughly  approve  of  the 
law  ;  you  may  approve  of  it,  and  yet  transgress  it.  It  is  not  enough  to  say  that 
you  really  desire  to  fulfil  the  law ;  the  law  makes  justification  depend  not  on 
desiring  to  keep  the  law,  but  on  actually  keeping  it.  It  is  nof  enouj?h  to  say  you 
iave  really  used  your  strenuous  endeavours  to  keep  the  law  of  God.     The  question 


856  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xm. 


is  not  whether  you  have  been  endeavouring,  but  whether  you  have  performed  it  to 
the  letter.  Now  how  is  it  possible  that  any  of  us  should  stand  on  that  ground 
before  God  ?  3.  In  its  extent.  "  In  all  things."  It  is  not  enough,  therefore,  to 
show  that  you  have  kept  some  of  God's  precepts.  It  is  very  possible  that  you 
may  have  continued  in  those  parts  of  the  law  regulating  your  intercourse  with  the 
world,  and  yet  have  been  extremely  faulty  in  reference  to  those  parts  which  relate 
to  your  feehngs  and  conduct  towards  God.  Now  can  you  meet  God  on  such  ground 
as  that  ?  4.  In  its  duration.  Think  again  of  the  passage  already  cited.  Cursed  is 
he  that  continueth  not  from  the  first  moment  at  which  personal  responsibility 
commences  to  the  latest  period  of  his  life  "in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the 
book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  Oh  1  how  inconceivably  vain  are  all  self-righteous 
hopes  1  in.  That  what  the  law  thus  fails  op  accomplishing,  through  no  defects 
of  its  own  (for  it  is  in  every  respect  perfect  and  good),  but  through  the  perversity 
and  weakness  of  human  nature,  the  gospel  offers  freely  to  impart.  1.  "For- 
giveness of  sins,"  that  is,  the  remission  of  the  penalty  due  to  the  commission  of 
guilt.  (1)  This  is  not  the  alteration  or  diminution  in  the  slightest  degree  of  that 
intense  abhorrence  of  sin  which  God  must  ever  feel.  He  does  not  come  to  the 
conclusion,  upon  a  view  of  all  the  particulars,  that  because  the  law  has  been  severe 
the  sinner  is  to  be  excused.  It  is  part  of  the  imperfection  of  human  laws  that  such- 
things  as  these  sometimes  occur,  but  which  never  can  occur  in  reference  to  the 
perfect  law  of  an  infinitely  wise  and  righteous  lawgiver,  who  makes  no  mistakes, 
who  has  no  errors  to  correct.  (2)  But  though  there  is  no  change  in  God's  views  of 
Bin  when  He  pardons  it,  there  is  great  and  almost  infinite  change  in  its  conse- 
quences in  His  dealings  with  the  sinner.  When  sin  is  pardoned,  that  curse  is 
entirely  taken  away,  and  the  blessedness  of  righteousness  comes  in.  2.  The  same 
transaction,  substantially,  is  called  "  justification."  To  be  justified  is  to  be 
accounted  righteous,  and  to  be  treated  as  righteous.  And  the  pardoned  man, 
being  thus  at  the  same  time  accounted  righteous,  becomes  entitled  to  blessings  of 
unspeakable  value.  He  has  peace,  is  adopted  into  the  family  of  God,  is  entitled  to 
the  inheritance  of  children.     IV.  That  fob  this  great  and  unspeakable  blessing 

PROVIDED  FOR  US  IN  THE  GOSPEL  WE  ARE  ALTOGETHER  INDEBTED  MERITORIOUSLY  TO  THE 

Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "Through  this  Man  .  .  .  and  by  Him."  The  Word  was 
made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  for  the  pui-pose  of  saving  us.  You  owe  your 
pardon,  justification,  and  all  subsequent  blessings — 1.  To  this  Man's  holy  and 
spotless  life.  The  perfect  purity  of  our  Saviour  was  essential  to  His  becoming  an 
accepted  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  men.  According  to  the  law  none  but  a  lamb 
without  blemish  could  be  accepted.  2.  To  this  Man's  death  on  the  Cross.  Not  all 
the  condescension  implied  in  His  assuming  our  nature,  not  all  the  sublimity  of 
His  doctrines,  could  have  availed  to  the  salvation  of  men.  3.  To  this  Man's  resur- 
rection from  the  dead.  He  "  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  but  raised  again  for 
our  justification."  Hence  to  the  apostles  "Jesus  and  the  resurrection"  was  the 
great  point  to  which  they  bare  testimony.  Not  that  His  resurrection  was  the 
meritorious  consideration  on  which  God  extended  pardon,  but  that  the  resurrection 
bore  a  satisfactory  attestation  to  the  death  which  did  atone.  For  if  there  had  been 
no  real  death,  there  could  not  be  a  real  resurrection.  4.  To  this  Man's  ascension 
and  to  His  mediatorial  administration  of  all  the  affairs  of  His  spiritual  kingdom. 
'•  He  has  ascended  on  high  ;  He  has  led  captivity  captive  ;  He  has  received  gifts 
for  men,"  &c.  The  dispensation  of  those  blessings  which  He  procured  for  our 
race  is  entrusted  to  His  own  bunds ;  out  of  His  fulness  it  is  that  we  receive  the 
grace  of  penitence  and  faith,  and  that  seals  the  pardon  by  the  Spirit  of  adoption. 
V.  That,  in  order  to  the  personal  appropriation  of  the  blessings  thus  procured 
BY  Christ,  faith  is  required  as  the  appointed  instrument.  "  By  Him  all  that 
believe  are  justified."  No  unbeliever  is  justified.  Let  us  learn  from  this  that  the 
forgiveness  of  sin  is  not  a  very  rare  and  extraordinary  thing.  Some  objectors  say 
that  the  enjoyment  rather  belongs  to  persons  of  eminent  attainments  in  religion,  or 
that  it  is  the  recompense  for  some  eminent  sacrifice  for  Christ  and  conscience. 
But  the  text  says  that  "  all  who  believe  are  justified."  And  this  is  in  accordance 
with  St.  John's  testimony:  "  I  write  unto  you  little  children,  because  your  sins  are 
forgiven  you,  for  His  name's  sake."  So  that  even  the  weakest  believer  has  the 
forgiveness  of  sins.  What,  then,  is  that  believing  to  which  such  important  conse- 
quences are  attached?  1.  It  is  not  merely  education,  the  faith  wliich  results  from 
our  having  the  privilege  of  being  born  in  a  Christian  land.  It  is  not  the  historical 
faith  merely  which  results  from  the  exercise  of  our  judgment  upon  Divine  revela 
tion,  its  evidence,  and  its  contents.     The  heart  must  be  brought  to  bear  on  th» 


•HAP.  xm.]  TEE  ACTS.  857 

trath  thus  apprehended,  the  will  must  embrace  it,  and  the  affections  must  be  called 
forth  and  exercised  by  it.     It  is  a  "  believing  with  the  [heart "  that  is  "  unto 
righteousness."    There  may  be  the  "  evil  heart  of  unbelief  "  where  there  is  not  the 
smallest  approach  to  theoretical  and  speculative  infidelity.    2.  And  then,  to  cctne 
a  little  nearer  still,  it  is  not  merely  that  going  out  after  God  in  penitential  desire, 
and  with  that  measure  of  hope  and  anticipation  which  belongs  to  the  true  penitent. 
A  man  effectually  convinced  of  sin  cannot  but  go  out  after  Christ  in  penitential 
desire,  for  he  perceives  that  without  Christ  he  is  undone.     This  faith  implies  the 
actual  laying  hold  upon  Christ  by  the  power  of  the  Eternal  Spirit  with  beUeving, 
trust,  and  reUance.     3.  Do  you  wish  to  get  a  clearer  and  more  distinct  view  of  it  ? 
T  tell  you  how  it  is  to  be  done ;  you  must  make  the  experiment ;  you  will  never 
understand  it  till  you  practise  it.    In  the  exercise  of  penitent  and  self-renouncing 
and  self-despairing  feelings  turn  your  eye  to  Christ ;  look  on  Him  that  you  may 
be   saved.    Look  off  from  everything   else ;   look  off   from  yourself,  from  every 
other  pretended  saviour ;  look  to  Jesus ;  and  while  you  are  thus  looking,  the  aid 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  will  be  imparted  to  you,  and  you  wiU  perform  that  special  and 
distinct  act  of  faith  which  is  trusting  on  Christ,  which  is  believing  with  the  heart 
unto  righteousness  ;  and  while  you  are  performing,  when  you  thus  perform  it,  you 
will  understand  it  better.     (Jabez  Bunting,  D.D.}        Forgiveness  is  free  for  all  who 
believe : — I  recollect  in  Martin  Luther's  life  that  he  saw,  in  one  of  the  Romish 
churches,  a  picture  of  the  Pope,  and  the  cardinals,  and  bishops,  and  priests,  and 
monks,  and  friars,  all  on  board  a  ship.     They  were  all  safe,  every  one  of  them.    As 
for  the  laity,  poor  vnretches,  they  were  struggling  in  the  sea,  and  many  of  them 
drowning.     Only  those  were  saved  to  whom  the  good  men  in  the  ship  were  so  kind 
as  to  hand  out  a  rope  or  a  plank.    That  is  not  our  Lord's  teaching ;  His  blood  is 
shed  "  for  many,"  and  not  for  the  few.    He  is  not  the  Christ  of  a  caste,  or  a  class, 
but  the  Christ  of  all  conditions  of  men.    His  blood  is  shed  for  many  sinners,  that 
their  sins  may  be  remitted.   (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)      Salvation  is  through  Christ  only  : — 
I  recoUect  a  story  told  of  William  Dawson,  whom  our  Wesleyan  friends  used  to  call 
BiUy  Dawson,  one  of  the  best  preachers  that  ever  entered  a  pulpit.     He  once  gave 
out  as  his  text,  "  Through  this  Man  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins." 
When  he  had  given  out  his  text  he  dropped  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  pulpit,  so 
that  nothing  could  be  seen  of  him,  only  there  was  a  voice  heard  saying,  "  Not  the 
man  in  the  pulpit — he  is  out  of  sight — but  the  Man  in  the  book.   The  Man  described 
in  the  book  is  the  Man  through  whom  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins." 
I  put  myself  and  you  and  everybody  else  out  of  sight,  and  I  preach  to  you  the  re- 
mission of  sins  through  Jesus  only.    I  would  sing  with  the  children,  "  Nothing  but 
the  blood  of  Jesus."     Shut  your  eyes  to  all  things  but  the  Cross.     Jesus  died,  and 
rose  again,  and  went  to  heaven,  and  all  your  hope  must  go  with  Him  I     Come,  my 
hearer,  take  Jesus  by  a  distinct  act  of  faith  this  morning !     May  God  the  Holy 
Ghost  constrain  thee  to  do  so,  and  then  thou  mayest  go  on  thy  way  rejoicing  I     So 
be  it  in  the  name  of  Jesus.     {Hid.)         God's  forgiveness : — ^A  Christian  worker 
Bays:  "We  were  asked  one  day  to  caU  and  see  a  poor  woman  who  was  very  ill. 
We  found  her  worn  and  faint,  in  a  state  of  extreme  discomfort  and  poverty.    In 
the  room  were  screaming  children,  whose  mother  was  loudly  bidding  them  *  Be 
Btill,  or  she'd  beat  them,'  so  that  at  first  it  seemed  doubtful  whether  the  invalid 
would  be  able  to  listen  to  anything.     '  It's  all  there,'  said  the  poor  woman,  laying 
her  hand  on  her  chest,  •  and  don't  leave  me  night  nor  day.    I  can't  get  rid  of  the 
burden  1 '    Our  efforts  to  arrange  the  pillow  and  straighten  the  rags  meant  for 
bed-clothes  did  not  afford  any  relief.    •  No,  my  dear,  it's  not  that,  it's  not  that.  Its 
all  my  sins  as  I've  done  ever  since  I  was  a  child ;  they  come  up  before  me,  and  lie 
there  so  heavy.    They  tell  me  I  must  die ;  but  I  can't.'    ♦  Now,  listen,  and  I  will 
tell  you  of  a  man  who  felt  just  as  you  did,  only  perhaps  worse.    He  was  so  bad 
that  he  could  not  keep  from  roaring  day  and  night.    He  could  not  lie  still  as  you 
can ;  and  he  said,  *•  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is 
covered.    When  I  kept  silence  my  bones  waxed  old,  through  my  roaring  all  the 
day  long.    For  day  and  night  Thy  hand  was  heavy  upon  me."     '  Oh,'  broke  in  the 
woman,  '  that's  like  me ;  and  what  did  he  do  ? '    *  I  acknowledged  my  sin  unto 
Thee.    I  said,  I  will  confess  my  transgressions  unto  the  Lord ' ;  and  on  explaining 
what  this  was,  the  poor  woman  started  up  in  bed,  took  hold  of  my  arm,  and,  with 
»n  eagerness  beyond  description,  asked,  '  What  did  the  Lord  say  ?    What  did  God 
say  to  him  ?  '    •  And  Thou  f orgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin ;  for  this  shall  every 
one  pray  unto  Thee.'    No  more  need  be  told.     The  woman  acknowledged  her  sins, 
«ad  David's  God  spake  forgiveness  to  her  heart  through  Jesas  Christ,    from  that 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

day  the  burden  was  gone,  and  the  praise  that  rose  from  that  sick  bed  continuous." 
Justification  hy  faith  : — Luther  sought  rest  for  his  troubled  breast  in  self-denial  and 
retirement  as  a  monk,  but  did  not  find  it.  In  1500  he  started  as  a  delegate  for 
Eome,  hoping  to  find  relief  from  his  burden  there.  As  he  came  in  sight  of  the  city 
he  fell  on  his  knees,  exclaiming,  "Holy  Borne  1  I  salute  thee."  He  was  disappointed 
and  shocked  at  the  wickedness  which  he  found  there.  The  people  said  to  him,  "If 
there  is  a  hell,  Eome  is  built  over  it."  At  last  he  turned  to  ascend  Pilate's  stair- 
case, thronged  by  the  superstitious  crowd,  upon  his  knees.  He  toiled  from  step  to 
step,  repeating  his  prayers  at  every  one,  till  a  voice  of  thunder  seemed  to  cry  within 
him,  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  Instantly  he  rose,  saw  the  folly  of  his  hopes 
of  relief  through  works  of  merit.  A  new  hfe  followed  his  new  hght.  Seven  years 
after  he  nailed  his  theses  to  the  doors  of  the  Wittenberg  church,  and  inaugurated 
the  Eeformation.  {Christian  Age.)  From  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the 
law  of  Moses. — The  superiority  of  the  gospel  to  the  law : — The  law  cannot  save, 
"  for  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  no  flesh  is  justified  "  ;  but  the  gospel  is  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation.  The  law  is  all  righteousness — the  gospel  all  grace.  The  law 
can  only  justify  the  just;  the  gospel  justifies  the  sinner.  The  law  is  a  royal  chariot 
that  will  convey  the  perfect  man  to  heaven,  but  it  is  a  Juggernaut  car  which  crushes 
the  rebel  under  its  wheels.  The  law  can  only  declare  a  man  just ;  the  gospel  makes 
him  just.  The  law  demands  obedience,  but  it  never  helps  men  to  obey  ;  the  gospel 
effectually  helps  those  who  cannot  help  themselves.  The  law  cries  out,  "  Do  this 
and  live  " ;  the  gospel,  in  gentler  tones,  says,  "  Believe  and  live."  The  law  has  a 
prison  in  which  to  punish  ;  the  gospel  has  a  reformatory  in  which  to  save.  Th© 
law  is  a  taskmaster  sternly  commanding ;  the  gospel  is  a  philanthropist  generously 
helping  and  inspiring.  The  law  can  only  show  the  sins ;  the  gospel,  with  an 
almighty  fiing,  casts  them  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  The  law  can  say,  "  If  Thou, 
Lord,  shouldst  mark  iniquities,  who  shall  stand  ?  '*  The  gospel  gives  the  grand 
reply,  "  There  is  forgiveness  with  Thee."  The  law  can  say,  "  Sin  hath  abounded" ; 
the  gospel,  "Grace  hath  much  more  abounded."  The  law  has  not  saved  one  soul; 
the  gospel  has  saved  its  myriads.  Thank  God  that  where  the  law  fails  the  gospel 
triumphs.     {J.  Ossian  Davies.) 

Vers.  40,  41.  Beware  therefore. — A  solemn  •warning  to  the  ungodly : — We  are,  in 
this  world,  represented  as  being  remarkably  under  the  influence  of  self-love ;  but, 
with  regard  to  the  eternal  future,  the  self-love  of  man  is  strangely  perverted  and 
enfeebled.  One  of  the  main  objects  of  the  sacred  writings  is  to  grapple  with  this 
fatal  tendency,  and  one  mode  is  to  announce  men's  danger  by  reason  of  their  sinful 
folly ;  and  also  the  only  method  by  which  that  danger  can  be  averted.  Notice — L  Thb 
INFLICTION  TO  WHICH  THIS  SOLEMN  CAUTION  RELATES.  What  is  it  that  we  have  to 
beware  of?  You  will  find  in  the  context  that  it  is  "  the  anger,"  or  "  the  wrath  of 
God  "  (ver.  41 ;  Isa.  xxix.  14;  Hab.  i.  5).  Observe — 1.  The  cause  from  which  the 
threatened  anger  arises.  God  created  the  universe  for  His  praise,  and  filled  it  with, 
all  the  elements  of  happiness.  And  when  we  find  Him  going  forth  amid  the 
threatenings  of  vengeance,  to  what  is  the  change  to  be  ascribed  ?  To  the  introduc- 
tion of  sin.  The  first  transgressors  were  angels  who  kept  not  their  first  estate,  and 
are  reserved,  under  chains  and  darkness,  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day  I 
Afterwards  man  became  a  sinner,  and  "by  one  man's  disobedience,  many  have  been 
made  sinners."  Hence  it  is  that  there  comes  the  threatening.  Now,  is  there  any- 
thing in  this  but  an  equitable  arrangement  of  consequence  as  following  cause? 
2.  The  operations  in  which  that  wrath  is  manifested.  (1)  We  have  tokens  around 
us  of  the  anger  of  God  against  sin.  In  the  barrenness  of  the  wilderness ;  in  the 
scorching  of  the  summer  heat ;  in  the  withering  of  the  wintry  frost ;  and  in  disease, 
pestilence,  and  death.  (2)  And  then  we  must  not  forget  that  there  are  examples  of 
His  vengeance  of  a  temporal  nature.  The  deluge,  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of 
the  Plain,  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  the  punishment  of  the  Jews,  &o.  (3)  And  have 
there  been  no  manifestations  of  the  wrath  of  God  against  sin  in  modem  times? 
(4)  But  is  there  nothing  beyond  ?  We  have  spoken  of  temporal  evils,  but  we  hear 
of  many  announcements  in  the  sacred  writings  of  "  the  wrath  which  is  to  come." 
II.  The  considerations  by  which  this  solemn  caution  mat  be  especially 
ENFOKCED.  Bewarc  of  this  wrath — 1.  On  account  of  the  suddenness  with  which 
it  is  frequently  inflicted.  "  Because  there  is  wrath,  beware  lest  He  take  thee  away 
wiih  a  stroke."  "  He  that  being  often  reproved  hurdeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly 
be  destroyed,  tkid  that  without  remedy."     There  are  examples  which  God  ha» 


CHAP,  zm.]  THE  ACTS.  859 

given,  in  order  to  illustrate  and  confirm  these  general  declarationa.    For  example, 
Nabad  and  Abihu,  Korah  and  his  company,  Belshazzar,  Ananias,  Herod.     And 
have  we  had  no  instance  of  the  infliction  of  the  wrath  of  God  in  our  own  times 
and  amongst  ourselves  ?    Beware  1  for  the  wrath  of  God,  on  account  of  sin,  may 
come  upon  you  unawares.     2.  Because  when  inflicted  it  causes  irreparable  ruin. 
We  are  not  speaking  now  of  temporal  evils,  but  of  the  future  state  (Luke  xiii. 
24-50).    III.  The  conduct  to  which  this  solemn  cadtion  should  lead.    1.  Men 
are  to  embrace  the  refuge  which  God  has  provided  from  the  wrath  to  come.     The 
Governor  of  the  universe  has,  whUe  preserving  the  honour  of  His  justice,  magnified 
the  riches  of  His  grace,  and  He  is  willing  that  none  should  perish,  but  that  all 
should  come  to  repentance.     And  if  men,  feeling  their  guilt  and  their  danger,  will 
but  come  unto  Him  in  the  exercise  of  faith,  they  shall  be  forgiven.     2.  The  resort 
to  the  remedy  which  has  been  provided  must  be  without  delay.    Why  should  we 
delay  ?    You  have  delayed  long  enough.    You  have  often  been  invited,  and  often 
summoned  to  beware.    Eemember — 1.  The  brevity  and  uncertainty  of  life.    2.  The 
hardening  influence  of  sin.     {J.  Parsons.)        Behold  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and 
perish. — The   destruction  of  despisers  : — L    The   characteb  of  these  despisees. 
1.  There  are  some  who  despise  aU  religion,  and  reject  even  those  fundamental 
principles  which  revelation  presupposes  ;  such  as  the  existence  and  providence  of 
God,  the  difference  between  moral  good  and  evil,  and  the  freedom  and  accountable- 
ness  of  man.    2.  There  are  some  who  pretend  to  believe  the  truths  of  natural 
religion,  but  despise  all  revelation.    From  the  supposed  suflBciency  of  human 
reason  for  all  the  purposes  of    religion,  they  conclude  that    no  supernatural 
discovery  ever  has  been  or  ever  will  be  made.     3.  There  are  some  who  acknowledge 
in  general  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  but  despise  its  peculiar  doctrines.    4.  There  are 
those  that  profess  to  believe  the  gospel  in  all  its  essential  doctrines,  and  yet  in  their 
hearts  and  lives  oppose  it.     II.  In  what  bespects,  it  mat  be  said,  thet  will  pekish 
WONDEBFULLY.     Here  are  two  things  asserted.    1.  Destruction  awaits  contemptuous 
sinners.     Whatever  may  be  the  condition  of  heathens,  who  never  heard  of  Christ, 
awful  must  be  the  fate  of  those,  who,  having  heard  of  Him,  despise  and  refuse  the 
only  Lord  who  bought  them.    "They  who  believe  not,  shall  die  in  their  sins"; 
they  are  "  condemned  already,  because  they  believe  not  in  the  name  of  the  only 
begotten  Son  of  God."    If  obedience  to  God  is  necessary  to  salvation,  faith  in 
Christ  must  be  necessary  ;  for  this  is  the  command  of  God,  '♦  That  we  believe  on 
Him  whom  He  hath  sent."     2.  This  destruction  when  it  comes  will  be  wonderful. 
(1)  Unexpectedly.     A  punishment  which  they  little  thought  of  will  therefore  fill 
sinners  with  wonder  and  astonishment.    It  is  said  of  Jerusalem,  "Because  she 
remembered  not  her  last  end,  therefore  she  came  down  wonderfully."     The 
Scripture  represents  the  destruction  of  sinners,  in  general,  as  coming  upon  them 
by  surprise.     (2)  Exceeding  all  present  conception.    There  is  a  strange  punishment 
for  the  workers  of  iniquity.    Some  temporal  judgments  are  so  great,  that  they  are 
called  strange  and  marvellous  works.    How  much  more  strange  and  marvellous 
will  be  the  future  punishment  of  despisers  t    *'  God  wiU  perform  a  work  which 
they  would  not  believe,  though  a  man  should  declare  it  to  them."    Who  knows  the 
power  of  God's  anger?"    We  cannot  conceive — (a)  the  great  anguish  of  a  self- 
condemning  conscience.     (6)  That  positive  punishment  which  awaits  sinners,    (c) 
The  distress  of  total  despair.     (3)  Wonderful,  compared  with  that  of  other  sinners. 
Despisers  will  be  distinguished  in  the  world  of  misery  from  others.     Moses  having 
enumerated  the  singular  privileges  of  the  favoured  people,  says,  "If  ye  will  not 
observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law,  the  Lord  will  make  your  plagues  wonderful." 
The  gospel  abounds  in  warnings  of  this  kind.     "  If  the  word  spoken  by  angels  wag 
steadfast,"  &o.    III.  Let  me  enfoecb  the  caution  in  the  text.    •'  Beware,"  &o. 
In  mercy  to  our  guUty  world,  God  has  sent  His  Son  to  make  the  purchase,  proclaim 
the  offers,  and  state  the  terms  of  eternal  salvation.     To  us  the  word  of  this  salva- 
tion is  sent.    The  question  now  proposed  is,  Will  you  accept  it  ?    If  you  will  accept 
the  benefit  you  must  submit  to  the  terms  of  it.     You  must  repent  and  yield  to  the 
government  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.    If  you  will  not  do  this,  you  despise  His 
gospel,  and  all  the  blessings  which  it  reveals.    Consider  what  it  is  that  you  despise. 
It  is  a  gospel  preached  by  the  Son  of  God  from  heaven ;  confirmed  by  miracles, 
preserved  in  the  world  by  a  merciful  providence,  and  transmitted  to  you  by  peculiar 
favour.     How  worthy,  then,  of  your  thankful  acceptation  I     To  despise  this  is  to 
despise  that  pearl  of  great  price,  to  purchase  which  you  should  be  willing  to  sell  all 
that  you  have.     To  despise  this  is  to  despise  God's  greatest  gift,  even  the  gift  of 
His  own  Son,  who  came  to  seek  and  to  save  them  who  were  lost.    Judge,  now. 


•60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chxp.  xnv 

what  must  be  the  consequence  of  this  contempt.  Know  ye,  that  your  judgmen 
lingers  not.  The  Lord  will  soon  arise,  that  He  may  do  His  strange  work.  {J. 
Lathrop,  D.D.) 

Vers.  42-52.  And  when  the  Jews  were  gone  out  of  the  synagogue,  the  Gentiles 
besought  that  these  words. — Growth  of  apostolic  power : — 1.  There  are  always 
unexpected  hearers  arising  to  give  encouragement  to  the  preacher.  Strangers  are 
there,  who  spring  up,  and  say,  "  This  is  the  gate  of  heaven."  The  Gentiles 
hailed  the  Word  as  strangers  might  hail  tidings  of  home.  We  know  some  things 
not  by  direct  intellectual  instruction,  but  by  subtle  and  inexpressible  sympathy. 
We  feel  that  certain  words  are  true.  We  may  not  know  music  technically,  but 
surely  the  dullest  man  knows  when  the  right  tune  is  being  sung.  The  Gentiles 
heard  a  strange  speech  that  day,  yet  they  knew  it.  The  Lamb  was  slain  before  the 
universe  wsia  built.  The  gospel  comes  to  a  measure  of  preparation.  Somehow  in 
the  most  savage  breast  there  rises  up  an  answering  voice,  saying,  "  This  is  what  I 
nave  been  waiting  for."  2.  But  preachers  have  to  find  out  their  hearers.  Paul  and 
Barnabas  were  no  doubt  amazed  at  the  desire  of  the  Gentiles.  The  invitation 
would  have  come  naturally  from  the  Jews,  It  would  be  a  pleasant  thing  if  our 
neighbours  would  invite  us  to  this  or  that  renewal  of  service,  but  they  go  away  and 
leave  us.  But  we  are  not  alone ;  for  God,  who  is  able  to  raise  up  out  of  the  stones 
children  unto  Abraham,  raises  up  strange  hearers,  unknown  hearts,  and  from  them 
comes  the  cry  which  we  cannot  refuse  to  answer.  3.  We  think  we  have  expressed 
the  very  last  formula  of  science  when  we  say  the  same  causes  produce  the  same 
effects  ;  in  all  moral  questions  the  axiom  is  not  only  doubtful  but  untrue.  The  Jews 
were  "  filled  with  envy,"  the  Gentiles  were  "  filled  with  joy."  How  do  you  account 
for  that  ?  It  was  the  same  Sabbath,  preacher,  doctrine,  congregation.  There  the 
same  cause  did  not  produce  the  same  effect.  You  are  not  dealing  with  cause  and 
effect  only  in  a  case  of  this  kind;  you  are  dealing  with  the  middle  quantity,  human 
nature.  Like  goes  to  like.  The  same  preacher  cannot  minister  to  all  people.  A 
man  may  dislike  this  ministry  or  that  solely  because  he  may  not  understand  it  or 
be  in  sympathy  with  it,  but  to  another  man  it  is  the  very  breath  of  heaven. 
Thanks  be  unto  God,  every  true  Paul  has  at  least  some  few  Gentiles  who  understand 
and  love  Him.  4.  "Now,  when  the  congregation  was  broken  up  "  (ver.  43).  Was 
it  then  all  over  ?  Congregations  should  never  break  up  in  the  sense  of  terminating 
spiritual  ministry.  There  were  after -meetings.  Beza  says  that  herein  is  a  justifica- 
tion for  mid-week  meetings  and  lectures.  "  Now  when  the  congregation  was  broken 
up,  the  people  dispersed,  and  referred  no  more  to  the  matter."  Does  the  text  read 
BO  ?  It  would  read  so  if  it  had  been  written  to-day.  I  never  hear  any  one  make 
reference  to  the  solemn  engagements  of  the  sanctuary  after  they  are  over.  It  is  a 
decency  observed,  a  ceremony  passed  through,  a  fact  accomplished.  In  the  olden 
time  Christian  service  used  to  be  the  be-aU  and  the  end-all  of  the  life  of  those  who 
engaged  in  it.  Here  is  life  in  the  olden  time  (vers.  44,  45).  That  was  life  I  A 
man  could  preach  then !  Sermons  were  thunderbolts  1  Eeligious  services  were  not 
opportunities  for  sanctified  slumber;  they  were  calls,  as  with  the  blast  of  a  thousand 
trumpets,  to  the  standard  and  to  the  sword  of  the  Lord.  6.  In  the  forty-sixth  verse 
the  ministers  become  new  men.  "  Then  Paul  and  Barnabas  waxed  bold."  There 
is  history  in  these  words  ;  it  was  a  critical  moment ;  it  was  one  of  two  things — 
the  Jews  by  their  blasphemy  prevailing,  or  the  apostles  of  Christ  saying,  "  The  day 
shall  be  ours."  Some  men  are  so  easily  put  down.  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  not 
made  of  such  material ;  history  is  not  made  of  such  stuff  1  Somewhere,  in  symbol 
or  in  speech,  you  must  find  the  heroic  element  in  every  true  man.  I  know  nothing 
of  that  marvellous  love  of  Christ  that  never  mentions  His  name,  that  never  touches 
His  memorial  bread  or  wine ;  that  never  gives  Him  a  cup  of  cold  water.  Be  ours 
the  Christianity  that  is  heroic  and  self-sacrificing.  Let  the  world  know  that  we  are 
followers  of  the  Cross.  When  I  read  that  Paul  "  waxed  bold,"  I  am  not  surprised ; 
but  when  I  read  that  Barnabas  waxed  bold,  I  wonder  if  he  would  have  done  so  if 
Paul  had  not  been  there.  Barnabas  1  take  care  that  your  strong  brother  is  always 
nigh  at  hand  when  you  go  out  to  do  Christian  work,  for  in  his  strength  you  may  be 
strong.  6.  "  As  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life  believed."  How  many  poor 
souls  have  stumbled  there,  as  if  a  door  had  been  shut  in  their  faces,  whereas  there 
is  no  door  but  an  open  one  to  the  heart  of  God  I  Never  found  what  you  call  goo4 
theology  upon  bad  grammar.  Happily  these  words,  the  most  learned  men  tell  us, 
might  be  read,  "  And  so  many  as  set  themselves  in  order  "  were  saved  ;  as  many  aa 
took  ap  this  matter  ;  as  many  as  accepted  the  Word  ;  as  many  as  disposed  them- 


aup.xin.]  THE  ACTS.  861 

selves  in  soldierly  order  and  array  went  on  to  victory  and  honour.  There  can  be  no 
more  terrible  blasphemy  than  for  any  man  to  think  that  God  has  a  spite  against 
him,  and  will  not  let  him  be  saved.  God  would  have  all  men  to  come  unto  Him 
and  be  saved.  7.  Notice  an  extraordinary  expression.  In  ver.  46  "  the  Jews  were 
filled  with  envy  ";  in  ver.  52  "  the  disciples  were  filled  with  joy."  It  is  always  so 
with  the  gospel ;  it  is  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death  ;  it  makes 
a  man  a  worse  man,  or  a  better  man.  But  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with 
man."  The  apostles  said,  "  It  was  necessary  that  the  Word  of  God  should  first  be 
spoken  to  you  "  ;  but  after  that  comes  the  withdrawal  of  the  opportunity,  the  taking 
away  of  the  light,  the  shutting  of  the  hospitable  door.  This  may  be  our  last 
chance !  "  He  that  being  often  reproved,  hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly  be 
destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy."  (<7.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  results  of  Paul's 
first  reported  sermon  : — L  A  genekaIj  spikit  of  religious  inquibt  (ver.  42).  A 
sermon  has  done  much  when  it  has  broken  the  monotony  of  thought,  and 
excited  the  spirit  of  religious  inquiry.  II.  The  conveesion  op  many  of  thb 
HEAEEBS  (ver.  43).  The  fact  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  exhorted  them  to  con- 
tinue in  "  the  grace  of  God  "  implies  of  course — 1.  That  they  had  received  it. 
Had  been  converted.  2.  That  there  was  a  danger  of  losing  it.  HI.  A  great 
excitement  amongst  all  classes  (ver.  44).  The  words  of  Paul  had  struck  into 
the  heart  of  the  population,  and  set  the  minds  of  all  alive.  During  the  previous 
week  his  sermon  was  the  one  subject  of  talk  in  all  circles.  All  felt  anxious  to  hear 
more  ;  so  that  now,  at  the  dawn  of  the  Sabbath  day,  they  gather  in  crowds  to  hear 
the  wondrous  truths  again.  The  gospel  breaks  the  stagnant  atmosphere  of  the 
mind,  and  unchains  the  strong  winds  of  thought.  IV.  The  stieeino  up  op  a 
bitter  persecution  (ver.  45).  When  the  Jews  saw  the  crowds  of  Gentiles  flocking 
to  the  apostles,  and  treated  by  them  as  on  terms  of  equality  vrith  the  chosen 
people,  their  envy  was  kindled,  the  fiendish  flame  raged  in  their  bosoms,  and  they 
began  to  contradict  and  blaspheme.  They  dealt  in  calumny,  reviled  them  as 
heretics  and  false  teachers.  True  and  powerful  sermons  will  excite  antagonism  as 
well  as  win  converts.  V.  The  increased  power  of  the  apostles  in  their  work 
(ver.  46).  Like  all  true  men,  they  grew  greater  in  the  presence  of  difficulties,  and 
braver  as  perils  thickened  around  them.  Opposition  never  intimidates  great 
natures  in  a  good  cause.  On  the  contrary,  it  brings  out  their  manhood  in  defiant 
attitudes.  In  the  text  we  have  three  things — 1.  The  gospel  offered  by  a  Divine 
plan.  " It  was  necessary,"  &c.  Why?  Because  Christ  had  commanded  that  the 
Jews  should  have  the  first  offer.  There  were  reasons  for  this.  Their  offer  to  the 
Jew  "  first"  was — (1)  The  strongest  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  their  own  faith.  The 
Jew  lived  on  the  very  scenes  where  the  great  facts  of  Christianity  occurred.  They 
were  eye-v?itnesses  of  the  whole.  (2)  The  strongest  proof  of  the  mercifulness  of 
their  system.  The  Jew  was  the  greatest  sinner ;  the  Jews  crucified  the  Lord  of  life 
and  glory.  2.  The  gospel  rejected  by  an  unbelieving  people.  "  Judge  yourselves 
unworthy  1 "  Is  not  this  withering  irony  ?  The  Jew  thinks  himself  unworthy  of 
eternal  life  1  Proud  spirits ;  they  considered  nothing  too  good  in  heaven  or  earth 
for  them  ;  they  felt  themselves  worthy  of  heaven's  choicest  gifts.  (1)  Man's  con- 
duct is  his  true  verdict  upon  himself.  A  man  is  not  what  he  may  think  he  is,  or 
say  he  is,  or  what  others  may  judge  he  is.  His  everyday  life  pronounces  the  true 
sentence  upon  himself.  (2)  Man's  sentence  upon  himself  when  he  rejects  the 
gospel  is  terribly  awful.  "  Unworthy  of  everlasting  life."  The  man  who  rejects 
the  gospel  declares  by  the  very  act  his  thorough  unfitness  for  eternal  life.  He 
dooms  himself  to  eternal  death.  3.  The  gospel  promoted  by  earnest  men.  "  Lo, 
we  turn  to  the  Gentiles."  We  have  no  time  to  lose.  Souls  by  millions  around  us 
want  the  salvation  we  are  commissioned  to  offer.  We  have  offered  it  to  you.  You 
have  rejected  it.  Adieu,  we  hasten  to  other  spheres.  Two  things  are  suggested 
here — (1)  A  lamentable  condition  for  a  people.  These  unbelieving  Jews  are  left — 
the  apostles  turn  from  them — the  gospel  is  withdrawn.  A  greater  calamity  this 
than  &  the  sun  went  down  and  left  their  heavens  in  sackcloth.  Mercy  will  not 
always  continue  with  a  people.  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man." 
(2)  An  obvious  duty  for  a  ministry.  It  was  right  for  these  gospel  labourers  to 
leave  a  rocky,  sterile,  and  unproductive  soil,  and  try  elsewhere.  Their  field  is  the 
world.  Ministers  are  justified  and  often  bound  to  leave  their  sphere  of  labour. 
That  ministry  which  is  unsuccessful  in  one  sphere  is  often  prosperous  in  another. 
The  apostles  wrought  wonders  amongst  the  Gentiles.  4.  The  gospel  designed  for 
the  world  by  the  mercy  of  God.  "  For  so  hath  the  Lord  commanded  us,  saying," 
&0.    They  assured  them  first  of  God's  special  kindness  to  them.    YI.  A  rsAcxiCAb 


SeS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xtn, 

ACCEPTATION    OF   THR    GOSPEL   BY  A   LAEGE     KTTMBEB   OF  THE    GeNTILES   (verS.    48,   49). 

The  idea  is,  that  as  many  as  were  disposed  unto  eternal  life — the  gospel — believed 
in  it ;  and  this  is  evermore  the  case.     VII.  The  expulsion  of  the  apostles  fkou 

THEIR   COASTS,   AND   THEIR   DEPABTTJRB   TO   ICONIUM    (vCrS.  50-52).      "  DeVOUt  "  in   the 

sense  of  being  proselytes,  "  honourable  "  in  the  sense  of  social  rank.  The  perse- 
cuting Jews  used  the  influence  of  these  v^omen  to  banish  the  apostles.  Women 
have  often  been  used  as  tools  in  the  hands  of  persecutors.  The  persecutors  so  far 
succeeded  that  the  apostles  withdrew.  "  But  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet 
against  them."  The  act  does  not  mean  indignation.  No  fires  of  revenge  or 
resentment  glowed  in  their  bosoms.  It  was  a  dramatic  act  expressing  abhorrence 
of  their  conduct  in  desecrating  the  most  sacred  of  missions.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Now  when  the  congregation  was  broken  up. — The  congregation  and  its  dis- 
jiersion: — I.  The  congregation.  1.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing  when  we  reflect  upon 
it.  It  differs  from  every  other  gathering.  It  is  a  mixed  assemblage.  Persons  of 
all  ages  and  of  all  ranks  are  here.  Persons  who  meet  nowhere  else  meet  here. 
The  house  of  mourning  and  the  house  of  feasting  alike  contribute  their  quota  to 
this  one  gathering.  In  this  one  place  there  is  silence,  except  from  certain 
authorised  speakers,  or  at  certain  prescribed  points.  To  the  words  of  a  man,  one 
of  themselves,  aU  are  bound  to  listen  in  respectful  silence.  2.  The  inference  which 
all  must  draw  from  such  a  scene  is  that  there  is  a  consciousness  of  a  great  want — 
the  want  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  communion  with  God,  directions  from  God. 
Men  cannot  do  without  a  religion,  and  that  religion  must  have  its  exercises.  It 
could  scarcely  be  accounted  for,  except  on  the  supposition  that  there  is  a  God, 
whom  to  reverence  is  man's  first  duty,  whom  to  know  is  life.  And  this  supposition 
condemns  us.  We  do  not  (it  may  be)  know  God,  and  we  do  not  reverence  Him. 
What  the  congregation  does,  the  individual  does  not.  3.  We  may  well  form  a 
high  estimate  of  this  great  institution.  What  is  done  here  tells  upon  the  life ;  yea, 
upon  the  eternal  life.  Carelessness  of  thought,  the  entrance  of  the  world  and  the 
devil  into  the  heart  here,  does  involve  consequences  of  which  none  can  set  the 
limit.  When  we  come  together,  as  St.  Paul  says,  in  one  place,  it  must  be  either 
for  the  better  or  for  the  worse.  II.  The  breaking  up  of  the  congregation. 
1.  He  who  sees  the  gradual  emptying  of  this  holy  place,  aud  pictures  to  himself 
the  various  scenes  to  which  the  worshippers  are  returning,  may  well  look  after 
them  anxiously,  and  wonder  where  and  how  the  seed  sown  is  to  have  its  develop- 
ment, if  at  all.  Whither  will  the  All-seeing  eye  track  its  dispersion  ?  Shall  there 
be  any  deed  of  darkness  done  by  one  who  is  now  hearing  the  Word  of  God  ?  Shall 
there  be  around  any  hearth  thoughts  of  unkindness  or  words  of  dispute  and  bitter- 
ness ?  Or  shall  there  be  any  lying  down  to  sleep  unblessed  by  prayer  7  Surely,  if 
the  sight  of  a  congregation  has  its  solemnity,  the  sight  of  its  dispersion  is  mora 
solemn  and  more  anxious  still.  Ye  cannot  be  partakers  of  the  Lord's  table  and  of 
the  table  of  devils.  2.  In  this  case,  an  apostle  had  been  the  preacher,  his  topio 
was  a  new  gospel,  and  "the  impression  made  had  been  such  that  the  audience 
wanted  to  hear  the  same  sermon  again.  And  yet  even  when  Paul  preached,  even 
when  One  greater  than  Paul  preached,  some  believed  the  things  that  were  spoken, 
and  some  believed  not.  It  is  even  so  now.  Those  who  were  satisfied  with  the 
hearing  went  away ;  those  who  desired  to  live  by  it  stayed  behind.  Is  there  nothing 
now  to  correspond  with  this  distinction?  Where  amongst  us  are  the  religious 
proselytes  who  follow  the  ministers  when  the  congregation  is  hroken  up  ;  use,  in 
other  words,  the  opportunities  afforded  them  for  a  more  private  and  personal 
instruction,  link  together  the  Sunday  services  by  a  chain  of  holy  effort  and 
assiduous  devotion  in  the  week  between,  and  thus  set  themselves  with  all  earnest- 
ness to  grow  in  knowledge  and  in  grace?  3.  Paul  and  Barnabas  felt  that  an 
attentive  congregation,  though  a  great  blessing,  is  an  ambiguous  sign.  They  knew 
the  precariousness,  as  well  as  the  importance,  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  never  rested 
satisfied  with  one  symptom  or  evidence  of  a  strong  impression.  They  spoke  to 
these  new  disciples,  and  persuaded  them  to  continue  in  the  grace  of  God.  It  is  a 
great  thing  to  set  out  well ;  it  is  more  to  run  well :  it  is  more  still  to  end  well. 
(Dean  Vaughan.)  And  the  next  Sabbath  day  came  almost  the  whole  city 
together;  .  .  .  but  when  the  Jews  saw  the  multitudes  they  were  filled  with 
envy. — Denoviinational  envy  : — And  aro  not  religious  bodies  sometimes  guilty  of 
this  sin  t  Has  it  no  existence  in  the  breasts  of  professing  Christians  of  different 
denominations?  Is  there  no  envy  in  Dissenters  towards  the  Church  of  England, 
or  of  the  Church  of  England  towards  Dissenters?  Of  Baptists  towards  Paedo- 
baptists,  Poidubaptists  towards  Baptists  ?     Of  Methodists  towards  Congregation- 


OHiP.  xni.]  THE  ACTS.  863 

alists,  and  Congregationalists  towards  Methodists  ?  What  meaneth  that  disposition 
to  suspect  and  traduce  each  other,  which  is  but  too  common  amongst  all  the 
divisions  of  the  Christian  Church?  If  one  denomination  prospers,  are  not  all  the 
rest  too  apt  to  look  on  with  envious  eyes,  because  theirs  is  likely  to  be  eclipsed  or 
diminished  ?  Are  not  all  the  little  arts  of  detraction  most  busily  employed,  and  a 
hundred  tongues  made  voluble  to  arrest  the  progress  and  limit  the  prosperity  of 
the  rising  sect  ?  And  how  much  of  this  spirit  is  often  seen  in  the  conducting  of 
rising  congregations  of  the  same  denomination !  What  ill-will  is  often  cherished 
by  the  members  of  the  declining  cause  towards  those  of  the  prosperous  one,  and 
only  because  they  are  prosperous  I  They  can  never  hear  of  the  success  of  their 
neighbour  society,  their  sister  Church,  without  feeling  and  appearing  uneasy  and 
displeased,  as  if  an  injury  were  done  to  them ;  they  profess  to  be  incredulous  of 
the  fact ;  they  suggest  that  it  is  more  in  outward  show  than  reaUty ;  they  do  not 
scruple  to  mention  drawbacks  in  the  talents  or  perhaps  the  inconsistencies  of  the 
minister ;  detraction,  yea,  even  slander,  is  employed  against  some  of  the  members 
of  this  "  prosperous  "  society,  as  it  is  sneeringly  called.  Such  even  in  Christian 
Churches,  or  rather  in  the  minds  of  some  of  their  members,  are  the  operations  of 
envy.  {J.A.James.)  Envy  at  the  success  of  the  gospel : — A  witness — I.  Against 
THE  ENVIOUS.  1.  Their  secret  pride.  2.  Their  evil  conscience.  3.  Their  internal 
unhappiness.  II.  For  the  envied.  There  must  be  something  in  it.  1.  A  truth 
which  cannot  be  denied.  2.  A  good  against  which  we  cannot  contend.  3.  A 
blessedness  which  cannot  be  mocked  away.  {K.  Gerok.)  The  opponents  of  the 
gospel  injure  only  themselves : — 1.  They  disclose  their  evil  hearts  (ver.  45).  2.  They 
make  themselves  unworthy  of  eternal  life  (ver.  46).  3.  They  disgrace  themselves 
by  the  bad  weapons  they  employ  (ver.  50).  4.  They  do  not  arrest  the  victorious 
course  of  truth  (vers.  48-52).  (Ibid.)  Then  Paul  and  Barnabas  waxed  bold,  and 
Bald,  .  .  .  seeing  ye  put  it  from  you,  and  judge  yourselves  unworthy  of  ever- 
lasting life. — Unworthy  of  eternal  life: — I.  That  clearly  we  all  are,  however 
exorbitant  may  be  our  estimate  of  our  own  excellencies.  Finite  merit  can  never 
entitle  us  to  an  infinite  reward.  If  it  were  ordained  that  for  each  year  hved  in 
perfect  virtue  we  were  to  have  meted  out  to  us  one  year  more  of  heaven,  he  would 
be  a  rash  man  who  would  affirm  that  the  reward  was  insufficient.  But  suppose 
that  for  each  such  year  we  were  to  have  a  thousand  years  in  glory,  who  would  dare 
to  say  that  the  reward  was  not  far  in  advance  of  our  deserts  ?  1.  Try  and  form 
some  idea  of  everlasting  Ufe,  that  you  may  be  the  better  able  to  reaUse  how  Uttle 
you  can  merit  it.  (1)  It  stands  contrasted  with  aU  forms  of  Ufe  in  this  transient 
world.  We  read  of  some  who  seem  to  have  hved  to  an  extraordinary  age  in 
primitive  times.  Yet  each  record  ends  with  the  words,  "And  he  died."  Even 
Methuselah  had  to  come  to  this  at  last.  I  have  seen  trees  in  England  that  possibly 
may  have  been  growing  in  the  time  of  Csesar,  and  there  are  trees  in  America  that 
may  have  been  young  in  the  days  of  Moses,  but  even  these  have  to  die  at  last.  Let 
your  mind  wander  backwards  until  you  reach  the  time  when  man  first  appeared, 
and  back  further  through  the  long  ages  in  which  animal  life  assumed  a  thousand 
forms  of  wonder  and  beauty,  while  type  after  type  appears  only  to  pass  away.  Go 
back  further  still  through  those  past  ages  whose  history  is  written  only  in  "  scarped 
cliff  and  quarried  stone,"  until  you  reach  the  period  inconceivably  remote,  when 
the  earliest  forms  of  life  began  to  exist.  Look  back  beyond  that  to  the  time  when 
the  world  was  desolate  and  Ufeless,  and  back  beyond  that  to  the  time  when  it  was 
but  a  stormy  aggregation  of  gases  and  vapours,  and  back  beyond  that  to  a  time 
when  the  planet  had  no  separate  existence ;  and  as  you  contemplate  these  vast 
geological  periods,  which  have  to  be  measured  by  millions  of  years,  reflect  that  all 
these  are  but  as  a  watch  in  the  night  as  compared  with  everlasting  life,  and  then 
tell  me  who  can  merit  such  a  destiny  as  that.  (2)  Try  to  present  the  wondrous 
vision  of  the  future.  Everlasting  life  1  the  glory  of  an  age  that  has  no  period ;  a 
God-like  life — a  life  in  which  existence  itself  must  be  an  unmixed  boon,  because  all 
that  could  interfere  with  its  blessedness  has  passed  away  for  ever ;  and  as  you 
contemplate  the  wondrous  object,  pause  and  ask,  "  What  can  I  do  that  I  should 
win  for  myself  such  a  prize  ? "  2.  But  now  look  at  the  other  side.  Although 
eternal  life  is  so  glorious,  yet  there  is  not  a  man  in  this  congregation  who  can  bring 
his  own  heart  to  be  satisfied  with  the  prospect  of  anything  less.  Promise  to  your- 
self, if  you  will,  a  thousand  ages,  or  multiply  that  thousand  by  any  number  of 
figures,  yet  let  it  be  understood  that  there  is  to  come  a  term  at  last,  sooner  or  later, 
and  at  once  there  is  a  bitter  drop  in  your  cup  of  pleasure.  3.  But  now  place  these 
two  definite  conclusions  side  by  side— that  we  none  of  us  can  deserve  eternal  life. 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xm. 

and  that  we  cannot  be  satisfied  with  anything  short  of  it.  Bring  these  two  facta 
together,  and  then  you  will  find  yourselves  landed  in  one  of  two  further  ooncla- 
sions — either  that  man  is  to  be  disappointed,  and  that  human  life  is  to  be  the 
victim  of  death,  or  else  eternal  life  must  become  ours  without  our  meriting  it,  that 
is  to  say,  by  deed  of  gift  on  the  part  of  Him  who  alone  has  the  power  to  impart  it. 
Nothing  can  be  more  plain  than  the  utterances  of  the  New  Testament  upon  thia 
point  (John  x.  27,  28 ;  Rom.  vi.  23 ;  1  John  v.  9-11).  4.  But  if  God  has  given  it, 
why  is  it  that  we  do  not  possess  it  ?  The  answer  is,  that  a  gift  needs  to  be  accepted 
as  well  as  given.  The  gift  has  not  been  given  to  each  sinner  severally,  but  it  has 
been  treasured  up  in  the  Son  for  aU.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life  ;  and  he 
that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life."  Over  and  over  again  we  are  taught 
that  our  eternal  life  is  dependent  upon  our  faith  in  Christ  as  God's  provision  for 
our  need.  Now  it  is  obvious  that  this  faith  is  not  an  exhibition  of  merit,  but 
rather  a  confession  of  helplessness.  Hence  clearly  it  follows  that  this  life  is  only 
to  become  ours  by  deed  of  gift.  We  may  receive  a  gift  by  an  act  of  simple  faith, 
but  something  more  than  faith  is  required  to  earn  it.  If,  for  instance,  the  condi- 
tion had  been  prayer,  we  might  have  felt  entitled  to  some  sort  of  favourable 
consideration  because  we  had  struggled  so  long  and  so  patiently.  Or  if  the  con- 
dition had  been  fasting,  &c.,  we  should  have  felt  that  our  penances  had  established 
some  sort  of  claim  upon  God's  mercy.  Or  had  the  condition  been  almsgiving, 
should  we  not  have  felt  as  if  we  had  paid  a  very  considerable,  if  not  a  sufficient, 
price  for  this  wondrous  boon  ?  But  faith  is  at  once  the  simplest  and  the  least 
meritorious  of  conditions,  and  in  ordaining  this  God  has  not  only  proved  that 
eternal  life  is  a  gift,  but  that  it  is  a  gift  that  none  need  fi^nd  it  difficult  to  appro- 
priate. 5.  And  this  leads  to  the  next  point,  that  there  is  no  excuse  for  us  if  we  do 
not  possess  ourselves  of  eternal  life.  If  we  had  to  earn  it  we  might  well  despair. 
But  what  have  we  to  say  for  ourselves  if  we  are  so  bhnd  to  our  own  interests  as  to 
refuse  to  accept  everlasting  Hf e  as  a  gift  ?  Are  you  possessed  of  eternal  life  ?  You 
have  no  right  to  remain  uncertain  about  this.  It  is  not  too  much  then  to  say  that 
you  may  become  possessed  of  this  blessed  gift  to-day.  Will  you  spurn  such  a 
splendid  gift  as  this  ?  And  will  you  barter  this  for  fleeting  trifles,  and  thus  judge 
yourselves  unworthy  of  everlasting  life  ?    II.  But  you  say,  •'  How  can  we  avoid 

JUDGING   OUESELVES  UNWORTHY    OP   ETERNAL  LIFE    IF,  AS  YOU   HAVE   YOURSELF   SHOWN, 

THIS  IS  OUR  REAL  CONDITION  ?  If  we  are  unworthy  of  it,  nothing  is  gained  by  our 
abstaining  from  judging  ourselves  to  be  so."  This  objection  brings  us  to  ask,  "  In 
what  sense  were  these  Jews  judging  themselves  unworthy?  "  Obviously  not  in  the 
sense  lq  which  we  have  used  the  words ;  had  that  been  so,  they  would  have  been 
the  more  disposed  to  listen  to  the  messengers  who  brought  it  as  a  gift.  It  is  one 
thing  to  be  absolutely  unworthy  of  any  particular  benefit,  and  another  to  prove 
relatively  unworthy  of  it  when  it  is  brought  within  our  reach.  If  a  benevolent 
man  chooses  to  take  a  homeless  street  Arab  and  offer  him  the  benefits  of  a  comfort- 
able home,  it  is  clear  that  this  fortunate  boy  is  receiving  treatment  that  he  can  lay 
no  claim  to ;  he  is  absolutely  undeserving  of  it.  If,  however,  his  benefactor 
chooses  to  bestow  all  this  kindness  upon  him,  it  is  a  deed  of  gift,  and  the 
unworthiness  of  the  boy  is  no  bar  to  his  enjoying  it.  But  suppose  the  silly  boy 
does  not  know  when  he  is  well  off,  turns  his  back  upon  his  benefactor,  and  prefers 
the  gutter  to  the  mansion — what  do  we  say  of  him  now?  It  is  with  quite  a 
different  meaning  now  that  we  affirm  that  he  is  unworthy  of  his  benefactor's  good- 
ness ;  and  so  absolutely  we  are  all  unworthy  of  everlasting  life.  But  when  God 
brings  this  unspeakable  gift  within  our  reach,  we  judge  ourselves  relatively 
unworthy  when  we  treat  the  priceless  treasure  as  though  it  were  not  a  thing  worth 
having.  Now  this  is  the  great  sin  of  man.  "Ye  put  it  from  you."  Ah  I  that  ia 
how  we  pronounce  sentence  upon  ourselves.  Men  put  it  from  them — 1.  When 
they  are  too  busy  vdth  other  concerns  to  pay  any  attention  to  this.  The  making 
of  money,  the  improvement  of  our  social  position,  the  politics  of  the  day,  the 
claims  of  science  or  of  art,  these  things  are  allowed  to  absorb  the  attention,  while 
the  great  question,  besides  which  all  other  things  are  mere  trifles,  How  shall  I 
inherit  eternal  life?  remains  unanswered  and  unconsidered.  2.  When  they  en- 
deavour to  feel  satisfied  with  a  religion  that  does  not  impart  this  gift.  3.  When 
they  allow  themselves  to  be  blinded  by  prejudice,  or  held  In  bondage  by  the 
opinions  of  others.  This  was  the  way  in  which  these  Jews  of  Antioch  put  it  from 
them..  The  first  thing  to  be  settled  before  we  touch  doctrines  or  party  creeds 
is  the  quefstion  of  life.  4.  When  they  treat  it  with  contempt,  sneering  at  it  as 
cant  and  hypocrisy,  instead  of  examining  carefully  the  nature  of  the  spiritual 


OHAP.  zm.]  THE  ACTS.  86& 

phenomena  occurring  before  their  eyes.    5.  By  clinging  to  the  sins  and  follies  of 
•which  the  apostle  says  so  truly,  "  The  end  of  those  things  is  death."    We  cannot 
BOW  the  seeds  of   death  and  reap  the  harvest  of  life.      (IF.  Hay-Aithen,  M.A.) 
Lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles. — The  apostles  turning  to  the  Gentiles  : — L  The  resdlts 
of  the  apostles'  labours  are  set  before  us  in  their  variety.     1.  We  see  their  success. 
At  Antioch  "  came  almost  the  whole  city  together  to   hear  the  Word  of  God  " 
(ver.  44).     At  Iconium  "a  great  multitude,  both  of  the  Jews  and  also  of  the 
Greeks  believed "  (ver.  1).  "  The  quality  of  this  success  was  most  encouraging. 
2.  This  success  was  the  cause  of  opposition.     The  Jews  at  Antioch,  jealous  over 
the  impression  made  by  Paul,  contradicted  what  he  said,  and  even  cursed  the 
name  of  Jesus  and  all  concerning  Him  (ver.  45).    Confront  evil  with  the  gospel, 
and  you  must  expect  an  answer,  as  the  sign  that  your  challenge  is  satisfactory. 
A  gospel  which  raised  no   opposition  would  be  questionable.      3.  Out  of    this 
opposition   came  failure.     The  apostles  had  to  leave  Antioch  under  the  ban   of 
the  law  with  their  work  unfinished.     Such  is  the  mixed  result  of  Christian  work 
always.    We  know  no  place  where  the  gospel  has  entered  to  convert  every  heart, 
where  no  opposition  of  any  sort  has  arisen  to  check  the  peaceful  conquest,  where 
every  soul  has  remained  wholly  true  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     No.     The  gospel 
wins  its  way  by  struggling  with  evU.     II.  The  causes  of  this  variety  of  results  are 
hinted  at.     1.  Man  is  shown  to  be  responsible  himself  for  his  attitude  toward  the 
gospel.     The  Jews,  to  whom  Paul  preached  first,  rejected  the  gospel,  and  Paul 
told  them  that  they  had  judged  themselves  unworthy  of  everlasting  life  (ver.  46). 
The  Gentiles  of  Antioch,  on  the  contrary,  by  their  deeds,  by  their  gladness  at 
receiving  the  gospel  and  their  glorifying  God  for  it  (ver.  48),  showed  that  they  were 
worthy  of  it  in  Paul's  sense.     So  there  is  a  curious  paradox  in  the  coming  of  the 
gospel  to  men  :  men  think  it  comes  before  them  to  be  tested  as  to  its  truth,  whereas 
it  comes  to  test  them  as  to  their  character,  whether  they  are  worthy  to  receive  it 
or  not.     The  responsibility  for  the  result  therefore  rests  with  them.     2.  At  the 
same  time  Paul  points  to  the  mysterious  fact  that  God  works  in  the  choice  of  men. 
Man  chooses ;  and  God  is  choosing  in  man's  choice.     For  God  works  in  us  to 
wUl  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure.     Therefore  Paul  says  (ver.  48)  that  '•  as  many 
as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life  believed."    He  shows  us  first  the  earthly  stage, 
with  the  will  of  men  directing  events.     Then  he  draws  back  the  curtain  and  shows 
us  God  at  work  directing  things  His  way,  through  the  direction  of  men.    But  how 
shall  we  reconcile  the  two,  the  sovereignty  of  God  with  the  freedom  of  the  human 
will  f    They  are  irreconcilable  to  a  finite  mind.     III.  The  conduct  of  the  apostles 
in  view  of  these  diverse  results  should  be  noticed.     1.  As  opposition  arose  in  the 
form  of  contradiction,  the  apostles  "waxed  bold"  (ver.  46).     They  told  the  Jews 
of  Antioch  plainly  that  they  were  unworthy  of  everlasting  life  and  showed  it  by 
their  deeds.     They  were  not  afraid  of  men.     The  strength  of  Christian  confidence 
needs  opposition  in  order  to  be  fuUy  seen.     2.  As  they  left  Antioch  they  warned  its 
inhabitants  most  solemnly  :  "  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  against  them  " 
(ver.  51).     This  was  a  common  Jewish  symbolical  act.     3.  But  the  apostles  did 
not  stay  in  hostUe  Antioch  while  other  fields  lay  untouched ;  they  went  on  to 
Iconium.     And  when  this,  too,  showed  itself  hostile,  they  "  fled  unto  Lystra  and 
Derbe,  cities  of  Lycaonia,  and  unto  the  region  that  lieth  round  about "  (ver.  6). 
They  were  but  human.     They  did  what  they  could.     When  they  could  do  no  more 
they  went  to  new  places,  and  so  on  and  on.     In  our  Christian  work  we  are  to  do 
the  best  we  can,  using  our  wisest  judgment,  going  on  from  Antioch  to  Iconium,  and 
from  Iconium  to  Lystra,  if  need  be.     But  in  all  we  are  to  remember  that  God 
works  in  our  presence  and  in  our  absence ;  and  even  by  preventing  our  active 
work  may  do  through  us  better  things  than  we  know.     4.  For  all  their  hardships 
the  apostles  had  an  abundant  joy  (ver.  52).     And  it  was  just  when  conscious  of 
their  failure  that  this  joy  was  given.     It  takes  the  night-time  and  the  prison  to 
bring  out  the  best  songs.     Earthly  disappointment  is  God's  opportunity.    Luther 
wrote  his  hymns  of  Christian  exultation  when  his  enemies  were  nearest  to  over- 
coming him.     IV.    The  general  lessons   of    the    passage    are  easily  seen.     1. 
Humanity  is  a  vast  democracy  in  the  presence  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.     There  is 
no  distinction  of  persons  here. .  All  fall  short  of  the  glory  of  God.    All  men  are 
equal.     The  proclamation  is  to   every  creature.     Let  no  man  say  ever  that  the 
gospel  is  not  meant  for  him.     2.  Salvation  is  of  grace.     The  plan  of  it  was  formed 
away  back  in  the  counsels  of  eternity.     3.  Every  man  is  responsible  to  God  for 
his  relation  to   Christ.      Our   deeds  are  our  own  judges.      4.  The   Holy   Spirit 
goes  up  and  down  the  world  seeking  whom  He  may  comfort.        Turning  to  th*. 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

Gentiles: — In  this  brief  declaration  we  gather — I.  The  dkliberatk  judomeht 
OF  THE  Jews.  Theirs  was  no  hastily  formed  opinion.  They  had  learned  what 
were  the  central  truths  of  the  gospel,  and  they  deliberately  said,  "  If  the 
Gentiles  are  to  receive  this  message,  we  put  it  away  from  us."  Abraham  saw 
Christ's  day,  and  was  glad.  The  ritual  of  the  old  covenant  was  typical  of  what 
should  come.  The  life  and  death  of  the  Eedeemer  fulfilled  the  words  of  their 
prophets.  It  was  such  a  people,  with  such  privileges,  who,  in  rejecting  the  fulfil- 
ment of  their  own  faith,  judged  themselves  unworthy  of  everlasting  life,  or 
decreed  their  own  sentence  of  condemnation.  The  fact,  historic  in  their  case,  ia 
repeated  every  day.  By  our  own  deeds  we  decree  our  own  judgment,  by  accepting 
or  rejecting  the  truths  of  the  gospel.  No  one  wiU  be  condemned  who  has  not  by 
his  own  deliberate  choice  condemned  himself.  11.  The  decision  of  Paul.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  all  his  sympathies  had  been  with  the  Jews.  He  too  had 
once  rejected  Christ.  He  stood  before  the  great  crowd  in  Antioch,  and  heard  their 
words  of  blasphemy.  The  Jews  had  formed  their  choice  as  between  Christ  and 
the  Gentiles  ;  the  choice  of  Paul  was  made  between  Christ  and  the  Jews.  He  chose 
Christ,  and  weaned  himself  from  all  his  early  associations.  How  keen  a  rebuke 
to  many  in  all  ages  1  Every  one  is  called  upon  to  choose  between  the  gospel  and 
its  enemies.  The  question  is  not  concerning  family  or  business  connections,  how 
these  would  be  affected  by  our  choice.  "He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more 
than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me."  Paul's  foes  were  "they  of  his  own  household." 
Thus  is  Christian  heroism  the  highest  of  all,  never  asking  man's  opinion  in  order 
to  follow  it,  but  doing  what  Christ  enjoins,  whether  men  will  hear  or  forbear. 
III.  The  blessikg  of  the  Gentiles.  It  was  the  early  dawn  of  the  promised  day. 
From  henceforth  there  should  be  no  difference  between  the  children  of  men. 
"  The  light  to  the  Gentiles  "  had  come.  It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  "  when 
the  Gentiles  heard  this  they  were  glad."  No  body  of  men  can  reject  the  Word  and 
cover  up  its  truths  from  others.  Whom  and  what  one  class  rejects,  another  class 
will  receive.  There  is  no  faithful  minister  but  can  find  work  somewhere.  Whom 
one  Church  refuses,  another  calls.  But  the  Gentiles,  among  whom  we  belong, 
may  exercise  the  same  spirit  in  other  ways.  Christ  came  to  seek  and  to  save 
the  lost.  It  is  possible  that  many  a  disciple  may  forget  those  who  live  in  the  hedges, 
and  for  whom  the  gospel  feast  has  been  spread.  It  is  possible  for  us  to  become 
so  Jewish  as  to  think  God  despises  whom  we,  in  our  sinfulness,  despise.  (D.  0. 
Hears.)  The  iise  of  opportunities  of  grace  : — Such  was  the  speech  of  the  apostles 
Barnabas  and  Paul  to  the  Jews  who  dwelt  at  Antioch,  in  Pisidia.  That  an  oppor- 
tunity had  passed  by  them  ;  that,  being  solemnly  offered  to  them,  they  had  rejected 
it ;  and  now  that  it  had  left  them.  This  was  being  fulfilled  at  that  time  all  over 
the  world,  wherever  the  Jews  had  been  scattered — to  them  "  first  was  the  news  of 
this  salvation  sent " — they  were  first  to  be  called  into  Messiah's  kingdom.  But  the 
Jews  would  not  hearken,  and  so  these  gracious  purposes  of  God  were  defeated — the 
offer  of  salvation  passed  from  them  to  the  Gentiles ;  their  birthright  departed  from 
them.  The  first  blessing  was  lost ;  and  this  was  a  loss  which  they  could  not  now 
repair.  It  is  a  leading  principle  of  that  rule  under  which  we  are  living — I  mean, 
that  all  through  our  lives  God  is  setting  before  us,  at  certain  times,  certain 
opportunities,  upon  our  employment  of  which  our  after  life  will  depend ;  that  we 
ai'e  continually  beset  by  opportunities  which  may  be  used,  and  which  may  be  lost 
— but  which,  if  lost,  are  lost  for  ever.  And,  first,  see  how  this  has  always  marked 
the  dealings  of  God  with  man.  Begin  at  the  very  first  opening — when  God  created 
Adam  and  Eve,  and  blessed  them,  and  placed  them  in  paradise.  They  were  placed 
there  in  a  state  of  trial ;  they  had  the  opportunity  of  obedience  or  of  rebellion.  If 
they  obeyed,  there  were  before  them  the  choicest  of  God's  blessings.  We  know 
that  they  trans}j;ressed,  and  that  they  lost  this  opportunity.  And  now  look  at  God's 
dealings  with  the  children  of  Israel,  which  we  are  told  are  expressly  recorded  to 
instruct  us  in  His  ways.  God  chose  them  to  deliver  them  from  their  hard  slavery 
in  Egypt,  and  to  plant  them  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  Here  was  their  trial,  their 
opportunity ;  and  if  they  had  obeyed,  doubtless  they  would  have  gone  straight  up 
into  the  land,  and  God  would  have  prospered  them  so  that  they  would  at  once  have 
taken  possession  of  it :  but  they  rebelled,  and  they  lost  their  opportunity.  God 
threatened  to  destroy  them  ;  but  upon  their  repentance,  at  the  intercession  of  Moses, 
He  spared  and  pardoned  them.  But  to  what  were  they  admitted  by  this  pardon 
on  their  repentance?  Not  to  the  same  blessing  which  they  would  have  had.  This 
was  lost,  and  lost  for  ever.  Now  they  were  told  that,  though  accepted,  they  should 
not  enter  into  the  land  of  promise,  but  that  their  children  should  enter  in  if  they 


•CHAP,  xrn.]  THE  ACTS.  86T 

were  obedient.  And  again,  in  the  case  of  those  children,  when  at  last  they  got 
possession  of  Canaan ;  God  promised  to  cast  out  at  once  all  their  enemies,  if  they 
made  no  alliance  with  them,  nor  spared  them.  Here  was  their  opportunity,  and  if 
they  had  used  it,  they  would  have  had  ever  after  a  peaceable  possession  of  their 
land ;  but  they  neglected  it,  and  what  was  the  result  ?  God  forgave  them,  and 
told  them  their  enemies  should  not  overcome  them ;  but  they  had  lost  the  full 
blessing — He  would  not  now  cast  out  these  remnants  of  the  people  of  the  land,  but 
suffered  them  to  remain  to  be  a  perpetual  grief  and  trial  to  His  people.  And  to 
take  only  one  more  instance  from  the  Old  Testament.  We  read  in  2  Kings, 
chap,  xiii.,  that  the  prophet  EUsha,  just  before  his  death,  promised,  by  a  sign  to 
the  king  of  Israel,  certain  victories  over  his  enemies,  the  Syrians,  and  he  bade 
faim,  in  token  of  his  trust  in  the  promise,  smite  on  the  ground  with  his  arrows. 
Here  was  his  opportunity ;  but,  being  weak  of  faith  and  faint-hearted,  he  "  smote 
thrice  upon  the  ground  and  stayed."  And  what  was  the  prophet's  conduct  ?  He 
told  him  that  he  had  lost  this  opportunity — that  it  was  gone.  "  Thou  shouldst 
have  smitten  five  or  six  times,  then  hadst  thou  smitten  Syria  until  thou  hadst 
«onsumed  it :  whereas  now  thou  shalt  smite  Syria  but  thrice."  And  now,  from  the 
history  of  God's  dealings  with  men  in  Holy  Scripture,  turn  to  what  we  see  in  hfe 
around  us.  Here  we  may  mark  on  every  side  the  constant  action  of  the  very  same 
rule.  We  may  see  it  in  the  growth  and  strengthening  of  our  bodies — childhood  and 
youth  are  the  appointed  opportunity  for  this  growth ;  if  there  be  then  provided 
food,  and  exercise,  and  the  like,  and  so  the  frame  is  kept  healthful  and  vigorous, 
the  body  reaches  its  full  strength  and  stature ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  starved 
and  sickly  childhood  and  youth  will  lead  surely  to  a  stunted  and  weakly  manhood, 
and  this  can  never  be  wholly  replaced  ;  a  certain  measure  of  health  and  strength 
may  be  afterwards  regained,  but  not  the  full  measure — that  is  lost,  because  the 
opportunity  of  growth  is  gone.  And  so  it  is  in  all  around  us.  Seed-time  comes  but 
once  in  the  year,  and  he  who  loses  that,  may  weep  in  vain  for  a  harvest,  but  he 
cannot  reap.  And  so  it  is  with  a  man's  business  and  his  fortune.  See,  then,  how 
this  principle  runs  through  all  of  God's  dealings  with  men ;  and  now  see  how 
forcibly  it  applies  to  the  higher  and  better  life  of  our  immortal  souls.  1.  First,  then, 
it  applies  most  awfully  to  the  whole  space  of  a  man's  Hfe  here,  as  a  preparation 
for  eternity.  Here  is  his  trial — his  opportunity — extending  over  more  or  fewer 
years,  as  God  may  appoint ;  but,  be  it  shorter  or  longer,  forming  altogether  his  only 
opportunity  of  preparing  for  eternity,  and  if  lost,  lost  therefore  for  ever.  2.  But 
this  principle  applies  not  only  to  the  whole  of  our  lives  here,  as  our  only  opportunity 
of  preparing  for  eternity,  but  also  to  all  the  particular  circumstances  of  life,  through 
some  of  which  we  are  every  day  passing ;  and  it  is  this  which  I  would  desire  you 
more  especially  to  notice.  Take  a  few  of  them  as  examples  of  the  rest,  and  begin 
with  the  very  first.  When  by  baptism  we  are  brought  into  the  fold  of  Christ,  some 
measure  of  God's  most  Holy  Spirit  is  then  doubtless  given  to  us.  Now  here  is  a 
special  opportunity ;  for,  if  these  strivings  of  the  Spirit  of  God  be  attended  to — 
if  the  child,  is  a  holy  child,  and  does  not,  by  resisting  the  Spirit,  drive  Him 
away,  his  heart  is  purified  in  an  especial  manner ;  the  habits  grow  up  pure, 
and  there  is  a  meekness,  and  gentleness,  a  purity  and  simplicity,  a  tenderness  of 
heart,  and  a  deep  quiet  delight  in  God's  service,  which  is  most  rarely  known  in  its 
entire  fulness  by  those  who  have  wandered  from  God,  and  lost  the  first  opportunity 
of  a  religious  childhood.  Here,  then,  is  an  opportunity  of  gaining  a  blessing, 
which,  of  God's  mercy,  may  last  all  our  Hfe  through,  and  which  if  lost  cannot  be 
regained.  And  this  early  blessing  is  the  type  and  earnest  of  others  which,  all  our 
!ife  through,  are  waiting  upon  unnumbered  opportunities  to  pour  upon  us  in  all 
their  fulness.  From  the  greater  occasions  of  our  Hfe — from  our  holy  vows  at  con- 
firmation— from  the  marriage  blessing,  and  the  funeral  separation,  down  to  every 
duty  and  temptation  of  our  common  days — from  the  monthly  eucharist  to  the 
Sunday's  worship.  And  now,  from  this  view  of  the  character  and  condition  of  our 
Hfe,  there  flow  many  and  most  important  lessons.  Two  or  three  of  the  chief  of 
these  shall  be  pointed  out  to  you  in  conclusion.  1.  And,  first,  this  subject  teaches  all 
of  us  a  lesson  of  habitual  watchfulness.  What  a  picture  is  this  of  life  1  how  fuU 
is  it  of  the  seeds  of  things  I  how  great  a  blessing  or  how  great  a  loss  lie  hid 
continually  under  its  most  common  opportunities !  2.  Let  us  learn,  secondly, 
another  lesson — and  that,  one  of  humiliation.  Let  the  most  watchful  look  back 
upon  his  course,  and  how  thickly  wUl  he  see  scattered  all  along  his  path  the 
memorials  of  too  frequent  negligence— lost  opportunities  ;  each  one,  like  broken 
urns,  with  its  blessing  spilled  upon  the  ground  and  its  grace  wasted.    S.  Lastly, 


868  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

with  humiliation  for  the  past,  let  us  learn,  for  the  time  which  yet  remains,  a  lesson 
of  earnestness  and  patience.  (Bp.  Samuel  Wilberforce.)  Man's  need  and  Ood'i 
help  : — There  is  no  great  boldness  in  reading  that  now,  and  it  does  not  precisely 
appear  that  it  was  a  very  bold  speech  in  them  ;  but  it  was.  So  we  find  constantly, 
in  the  apostle's  ministry,  that  while  he  began  with  the  Jews,  they  very  soon  turned 
against  him,  and  he  had  his  chief  success  among  the  Gentiles.  It  is  very  hard  for 
old  men  or  the  ruling  class  to  have  young  men  or  a  new  class  come  in  and  take  the 
reins  out  of  their  hands.  Among  the  Jev/s  the  word  "  Gentile"  was  a  hedgehog, 
all  bristling.  It  was  one  of  those  words  of  indignation  which  exist  in  every 
language,  and  which  change  in  every  period,  by  which  men  express  the  pent-up 
prejudices  and  hatreds  which  are  collected  in  them  with  regard  to  certain  classes 
and  certain  tendencies.  It  was  very  bold,  therefore,  in  Paul  and  Barnabas  to  say 
what  they  did — that  the  GentUes  were  more  worthy  of  Christ  than  the  Jews  were, 
according  to  the  testimony  of  the  Je\,  s.  Now,  by  reason  of  changes  that  are  going 
on  I  observe  a  good  deal  of  disenchantment.  It  is  a  very  painful  thing,  I  think, 
for  a  man  of  any  sensibility  to  give  up  that  which  has  come  down  to  him  from  his 
childhood,  and  which  carries  with  it  the  memories  of  his  father  and  mother  and 
of  his  own  early  life.  What  you  believe  when  you  are  young  you  cling  to  with 
great  tenacity.  All  the  mystery  and  charm  that  the  imagination  and  the  twining 
affections  inject  into  any  thought  or  belief  renders  it  exceedingly  precious  and 
beautiful.  As  when  Nature  etches — in  the  winter — on  panes  of  glass,  pictures  which 
no  artist  dare  touch,  because  to  touch  would  be  to  mar,  so  there  are  these  natural 
inspirations  of  childhood's  early  days,  which  are  exquisite,  charming,  and  whicL, 
if  they  are  marred,  are  beyond  rectification.  Alas  1  that  the  kindling  of  a  fire  in 
the  stove  for  domestic  uses  should  destroy  all  these  pictures,  and  that  the  wonder- 
ful picturesqueness  of  Nature  should  melt  with  the  growing  convenience  of  th>; 
household  !  If  you  are  losing  all  your  early  thoughts  and  imaginations,  if  you  are 
losing  all  sense  of  sanctity,  and  nothing  else  comes  to  take  their  place,  woe  is  yoo ! 
Scepticism  is  to  human  life  what  the  arid  sands  of  the  Great  Sahara  are  in  Africa 
— unpopulous,  ungarden-like,  useless,  dreary,  death-dealing  to  those  who  dwell  in 
them.  But  if,  while  you  lose  the  poetry  of  early  impressions,  you  are  somewher 
else  gaining  a  firmer  foothold,  and  are  subjecting  yourself  to  impressions  that  sr 
mightier — that  is,  that  run  more  nearly  with  the  educated  tendencies  of  a  jus 
reason — then  you  lose  no  power  over  the  moral  sense  :  you  even  gain  power  over  it 
When  I  was  a  student  in  Amherst  College  I  used,  in  autumnal  days,  to  go  up  on 
the  tower  of  the  chapel  in  order  that  I  might  see  the  clearing  off  of  those  mists 
which  would  steal  in  with  the  darkness,  and  cover  with  a  sUver  veil  the  whole  of 
that  magnificent  panorama  of  the  valley  of  the  Connecticut — a  beautiful  valley  full 
of  sparking  villages  and  undulations  of  land.  When  I  came  very  early  in  the 
morning — though  never  before  the  sun  had  come  up — this  vast  landscape  had  i«8 
own  new  mountains.  I  saw  that  the  mist,  following  the  secret  touch  and  the 
warmth  of  the  coming  sun,  had  lifted  itself  up ;  and  there  were  elevations  here 
and  openings  there  which,  as  compared  with  the  shores  of  mist  round  about  them, 
looked  like  deep  seas.  There  were  fantastic  rifts  and  scarfs,  and  everything  thai 
was  strange  and  weird,  and  shadows  of  hills  as  yet  undispersed.  As  I  stood  and 
looked  upon  that  picture,  and  made  it  more  picturesque,  I  was  filled,  and  I  filled 
it,  with  my  own  work.  The  sun,  steadily  rising,  and  penetrating,  and  agitating, 
drank  up  the  vision  ;  and  in  half  an  hour  the  whole  thing  had  taken  wings  and 
faded  away  into  vacuity,  and  there  was  nothing  of  it  to  be  seen ;  but  when  it: 
lifted  there  were  Mount  Holyoake,  Mount  Tom,  Sugarloaf  Mountain,  Hadiey, 
Northampton,  all  the  mountains  and  villages,  and  a  great  territory  of  peaceful  and 
beautiful  farms.  The  mist  had  gone,  to  be  sure,  but  the  landscape  was  as  charming 
as  the  mist  had  been.  So  when  men,  looking  back  upon  the  beliefs  of  other  days, 
see  that  they  take  wings  and  fly  away,  woe  be  to  them  if  there  is  nothing 
under  them ;  but  blessed  are  they  who,  ^ben  the  mist-picture  is  gone,  see 
the  substantial  earth  lying  sweet  and  beautiful  underneath  their  sight.  Upon 
this  state  of  facts  I  propose  to  give  an  account  of  what  is  the  substance- 
matter  of  the  New  Testament  teaching,  and  to  ask  you  whether  religion  as 
it  is  taught  there  is  not  justified,  by  your  experience  and  by  your  moral  sense, 
to  your  reason.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Turning  to  the  Oentiles : — The  history 
reminds  us  of — I.  The  narrowness  of  orthodoxy.  To  be  right  in  our  opinions  is 
immensely  important ;  but  history  shows  that  orthodox  people  are  apt  to  dislike  the 
progress  of  opinions.  Moreover,  we  are  all  apt  to  think  ourselves  orthodox  ;  and  so 
ProtestantB  aru  apt  to  be  (jrieved  when  they  hear  of  the  success  of    Popish 


CHAP,  xm.^  THE  ACTS.  369^ 

missionaries,  and  vice  versd.  More  is  thought  of  the  progress  of  the  one  or  the 
other  than  of  the  overthrow  of  idolatry.  So  here  the  Jews  instead  of  rejoicing 
that  the  Gentiles  were  leaving  heathenism  were  envious  at  their  becoming  Christians. 
II.  The  possibility  that  excellent  persons  mat  become  the  tools  of  bad  meu 
(ver.  50).  Otherwise,  in  this  case,  the  envious  Jews  would  have  been  harmless. 
The  Jews  persuaded  these  ladies,  and  the  ladies  their  husbands,  that  the  apostlea 
were  dangerous  men.  Just  as  priests  in  Roman  Catholic  countries  stir  up  excellent 
people  to  persecute  Protestant  teachers.  Similar  things  happen  in  this  country. 
Always  suspect  those  who  incite  you  to  dislike  your  neighbours.  III.  The  fate 
OF  the  benefactors  of  mankind.  We  must  not  take  it  for  granted  that  beneficence 
will  be  rewarded  with  gratitude,  but  that  more  often  than  not  we  shall  meet  with 
the  fate  of  Paul  and  Barnabas.  IV.  The  bight  method  of  dealino  with  prejudiced 
AND  obstinate  sceptics.  After  having  placed  before  them  the  considerations 
which  ought  to  convince  them,  let  us  go  to  others  who  will  listen  more  readily. 
To  argue  further  with  them  will  only  inflame  their  self-conceit;  and  there  are 
multitudes  yearning  for  the  truths  these  men  reject.  Life  is  too  short  to  be  wasted 
in  duels  with  men  who  will  not  receive  the  truth.  V.  The  glorious  fact  that 
Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Not  of  Jews  only.  Let  this  thought  check 
ns  when  we  are  inclined  to  be  intolerant.  He  is  the  Saviour  of  all  who  believe — 
whatever  their  doctrines  may  be.  Let  this  comfort  us  when  we  are  suffering  from 
intolerance ;  those  who  hate  us  may  excommunicate  us,  but  they  cannot  cut  u» 
off  from  Christ.  VI.  Chbistiak  jot  is  independent  of  outward  circumstances  " 
(vers.  51,  52).  The  loss  of  the  apostle  had  its  compensations.  (R.  A.  Bertram.) 
The  severe  farewell : — 1.  Not  the  language  of  cowardly  fear  of  men,  but  of  resolute 
obedience  to  the  intimations  of  the  Lord.  2.  Not  an  expression  of  proud  contempt^ 
but  of  commiserating  pity  towards  the  despisers  of  salvation.  3.  Not  a  cignal  to 
a  lazy  retreat,  but  to  a  new  field  of  labour.    (K.  Gerok.)  The  gospel  for  the 

Gentiles : — In  Flanders  there  is  a  pretty  legend  told  of  a  place  called  Temsche. 
A  clear  fountain  was  in  a  farmer's  field.  He  was  a  churlish  man,  and  would  not 
let  the  villagers  go  into  his  field  to  draw  water  from  it  one  hot  summer,  when  the 
land  was  parched,  and  all  the  wells  were  dry.  Then  a  holy  maiden,  living  there, 
went  and  fiUed  a  sieve  with  water,  and  shook  it  over  the  neighbouring  common, 
and  wherever  a  drop  fell,  there  sprang  up  a  living  fountain.  Now  the  old  Jewish 
nation  was  much  Hke  that  farmer,  that  would  keep  Divine  grace  for  itself  alone. 
It  would  have  the  living  fountain  of  spiritual  life  for  its  own  use  only,  and  deny  it 
to  the  Gentile  world.  But  then  came  the  apostles,  who  took  up  the  living  water 
given  them  by  Christ,  and  scattered  it  over  all  the  wide  earth.  (Baring  Gould.) 
Gather  the  outcasts : — If  you  have  been  mainly  labouring  with  the  children 
of  godly  parents,  and  these  refuse,  turn  you  to  the  slum  children.  If  you  have 
tried  to  bless  respectable  people,  and  they  remain  unsaved,  try  those  who  are 
not  respectable.  If  those  to  whom  it  was  natural  and  necessary  that  the  word 
should  first  be  spoken,  have  put  it  from  them,  turn  to  those  who  have  hitherto 
been  left  out  in  the  cold.  Take  the  Lord's  hint  in  this  apostolic  history,  and 
distinctly  turn  to  those  people  who  are  not  yet  gospel  hardened.  Turn  to  those 
who  have  not  been  brought  up  under  rehgious  influences,  but  have  been  looked 
upon  as  without  the  pale.  That,  I  believe,  is  the  Lord's  mind  towards  the  Church 
of  to-day.  Let  her  break  up  fresh  soU,  and  she  will  have  richer  harvests.  Let  her 
open  new  mines,  and  she  shall  find  rare  riches.  We  too  often  preach  within  a 
little  circle  where  the  message  of  life  has  already  been  rejected  scores  of  times. 
Let  us  not  spend  all  our  time  in  knocking  at  doors  from  which  we  have  been 
repulsed,  let  us  try  elsewhere.  If  you  work  for  Christ  among  those  who  are  in  our 
religious  circles,  and  fail  to  win  them,  the  field  is  the  world,  and  the  larger  part  of 
that  field  has  never  been  touched  as  yet.  We  have  laboured  for  London ;  but  if 
London  counts  itself  unworthy  of  eternal  life,  let  us  think  of  Calcutta,  Canton, 
and  the  Congo.  If  these  near  ones  will  not  reward  our  endeavours,  let  us  be  ol 
enterprising  spirit,  and  do  as  traders  do,  who,  when  they  find  no  market  at  home, 
strike  out  new  Unes.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Light  for  men  who  are  to  see  : — If  I 
saw  a  wise  man  going  into  a  blind  asylum,  laying  on  gas  or  making  preparation 
for  the  electric  light,  I  should  feel  sure  that  he  had  a  view  to  people  who  can  see ; 
and  if  none  but  blind  people  could  come  into  the  building,  I  should  conclude  that 
he  anticipated  a  time  when  the  poor  blind  folks  would  find  their  eyes  again,  and 
would  be  able  to  use  the  light.  So,  as  the  Lord  has  set  Jesus  to  be  a  Hght,  you 
may  be  sure  that  He  means  to  open  bhnd  eyes.  Jesus  will  enlighten  the 
people,  souls  will  be  saved.     (Ibid.)        Jeius  a  Saviour  for  all : — God  has  nul 

VOL.  u.  24 


«70  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

appointed  His  Son  to  save  a  few  dozen  people  who  go  to  a  particular  meeting- 
house. He  has  set  Him  to  be  a  light  to  the  nations,  and  He  means  He  shall  be  bo. 
This  encourages  us  to  labour  among  all  classes.  Jesus  is  a  fit  hght  for  the  upper 
ten  thousand,  and  some  of  them  shall  rejoice  in  that  light :  He  is  equally  set  to  ba 
a  light  to  the  teeming  millions,  and  they  shall  rejoice  in  Him,  too.  What  God  haa 
appointed  must  be  carried  out.  Jesus  is  yet  to  be  a  light  to  outcast  people — to  tha 
persons  of  whom  we  have  never  thought  favourably,  the  classes  whom  even 
philanthropy  has  felt  ready  to  abandon.  This  is  God's  set  purpose  concerning 
His  Son  Jesus,  and  His  omnipotence  will  carry  it  out.  [Ibid.)  Seeing  the 
tun: — The  Burman  Missionary  tells  the  story  of  an  old  man  who,  years  ago, 
when  a  heathen,  came  in  possession  of  a  copy  of  the  Psalms,  in  Burmese,  which 
had  been  left  behind  by  a  traveller  stopping  at  his  house.  He  began  to  read,  and 
before  he  had  finished  the  book  he  had  resolved  to  cast  his  idols  away.  For  twenty 
years  he  worshipped  the  eternal  God,  revealed  to  him  in  the  Psalms,  using  the 
fifty-first  (which  he  had  committed  to  memory)  as  a  daily  prayer.  Then,  having 
occasion  to  go  to  Bome,  he  feU  in  with  a  white  missionary  who  gave  him  a  New 
Testament.  With  joy  unspeakable  he  read  for  the  first  time  the  story  of  salvation 
by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  Twenty  years  I  have  walked  by  starlight,"  he  said. 
•'  Now  I  see  the  sun."  A  light  of  the  Gentiles  : — Dr.  Yanderhemp  was  a  Dutch 
military  officer,  and  then  a  distinguished  physician.  For  some  years  he  was  a 
sceptic,  but  he  was  converted.  When  converted,  he  gave  up  all  for  Christ,  and,  at 
the  age  of  fifty-one,  sailed  for  South  Africa,  where  he  laboured  amongst  the 
natives  for  thirteen  years  with  singular  self-denial.  Well  did  the  venerable  Mofifatt 
Bay  of  him  :  "  He  came  from  a  University  to  teach  the  alphabet  to  the  poor  naked 
Hottentot  and  Kaffir ;  from  the  society  of  nobles  to  associate  with  beings  of  the 
lowest  grade  of  humanity  ;  from  stately  mansions  to  the  filthy  hovel  of  the  greasy 
African ;  from  the  army  to  instruct  the  fierce  savages  in  the  tactics  of  a  heavenly 
warfare  under  the  banner  of  the  Prince  of  Peace  ;  from  the  study  of  medicine  to 
become  a  guide  to  the  Balm  of  Gilead  and  the  Physician  there  ;  and,  finally,  from 
a  life  of  earthly  honour  and  ease  to  be  exposed  to  perils  of  waters,  of  robbers,  of 
his  own  countrymen,  of  the  heathen,  in  the  city  and  in  the  wilderness."  TJie 
great  alternative  : — The  Jews  contradicted,  the  Gentiles  were  glad  as  effects  of  the 
eame  gospel.  The  gospel  is  a  savour  of  hfe  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death.  As 
on  the  highest  Alps,  up  there  where  the  summits  join  the  clouds,  there  are  masses 
of  ices  which,  when  acted  on  by  the  sun,  pass  down  as  refreshing  streams, 
beautifying  and  fertilising  the  country  through  which  they  pass,  and  side  by  side 
\»ith  those,  other  masses  of  ice  which,  when  acted  upon  and  loosened  by  the 
same  sun,  rush  down  as  roaring  avalanches,  carrying  death  and  destruction  in 
their  path,  and  at  last  dashing  themselves  to  pieces  on  the  crags  beneath ;  so  it  is 
to  men  to  whom  the  gospel  comes.  It  may  be  with  one  man  operating  as  "  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation,"  blessing  him  and  making  him  a  blessing,  whilst 
with  his  neighbour,  if  it  is  not  producing  this  benign  effect,  it  is  hardening  hia 
heart,  adding  fearf uUy  to  his  power  for  evil  in  the  present  world,  and  preparing 
for  him  the  darker  condemnation  of  the  next.  If  the  gospel  is  not  the  Bun  to 
Boften  the  wax,  it  is  the  sun  to  harden  the  clay.     (J.  A.  Mac/adyen,  D.D.) 

Ver.  48.  And  when  the  Gentiles  heard  this,  they  were  glad. — Right  relation  to 
the  truth  : — On  hearing  the  gospel  the  Gentiles — I.  Were  glad.  1.  This  should 
be,  but  alas  is  not,  the  uniform  effect  of  gospel  hearing.  (1)  Some  are  indifferent, 
for  they  feel  no  need  of  it.  (2)  Some  are  critical.  They  may  feel  their  need, 
but  are  not  disposed  to  receive  the  gospel  as  a  supply  for  their  need.  (3)  Some 
are  hostile  and  reject  the  gospel  utterly  as  a  possible  supply  for  their  need,  and 
look  elsewhere — to  formalism,  infidelity,  worldliness.  2.  These  Gentiles  were  glad. 
(1)  They  heard  attentively,  with  candid  minds,  with  eager  desire.  They  were  con- 
vinced and  so  they  believed,  and  the  Word  of  God  had  its  proper  effect  on  them  ;  it 
became  "  Good  tidinps  of  great  joy."  (2)  This  gladness  was  that  of  conscious 
pardon,  satisfied  longing.  Divine  acceptance,  joyful  anticipation.  3.  If  the  gospel 
has  not  made  those  who  profess  to  have  accepted  it  glad,  it  is  probably  for  one  or 
two  reasons.  (1)  They  have  not  received  the  whole  of  it.  A  spoonful  of  water 
•will  not  quench  thirst,  but  will  only  aggravate  it.  (2)  They  have  received  it  ia 
an  adulteiater".  form.  II.  They  gi.oiufikd  thb  Word  of  God.  This  was  tha 
inevitable  result  of  th''ir  gladness.  1.  They  were  thankful  for  it.  Thanklessnesa 
dishonours  the  gospel.  The  least  that  a  man  can  do  who  receives  a  gift  is  to 
express  his  gratitude  for  it.     2.  They  praised  it.     Specimens  of  such  praise  w« 


CHAP,  xin.]  THE  ACTS,  871 

have  in  the  Psalms — notably  in  Psa.  cxix.    It  is  refreshing  to  turn  to  this  record 
in  an  age  of  Bible  disparagement.     When  a  man  receives  a  gift  he  is  not  only 
thankful  for  it,  but  examines  it,  or  puts  it  to  some  use,  so  that  he  may  properly 
appraise  its  value.    Every  candid  examination  of  God's  Word,  and  self  application 
of  its  truth,  ■will  give  it  enhanced  worth.  3.  They  made  it  known  to  others  (ver.  49). 
The  gospel  is  not  meant  for  its  immediate  recipients.    It  is  a  gift  for  men.     Only 
as  it  has  "free  course"  is  it  fully  "glorified."      Conclusion:  Gladness  is   the 
inspiration  of  true  service.     It  is  as  steam  to  machinery.     Has  the  gospel  made 
you  happy?     Go  then  and  make  others  glad.     (J.  W.  Burn.)        The  first  last  and 
the  last  first : — I.  The  fiest  last.     1.  Who  are  the  first?    Those  who  have  earliest 
experienced  the  Divine  love,  and  are  considered  most  richly  endowed.    2.  Why  do 
they  become  last  ?    Because  they  do  not  use  to  their  salvation  the  love  of  God, 
and  become  proud  of  their  gifts.     3.  How  do  they  become  last  ?    By  receiving, 
according  to  the  measure  of  their  small  fidelity,  only  an  inferior  position  in  the 
kingdom  of  God  (Matt.  xx.  10),  or,  as  the  reward  of  their  complete  unfaithfulness, 
by  being  excluded  entirely  from  the  blessings  of  that  kingdom  (ver.  46).     II.  The 
LAST  FIRST.     1.  Who  are  the  last  ?    Those  who  are  called  at  a  later  period,  and  who 
possess  inferior  gifts.     2.  Why  do  they  become  first  ?    Because  the  knowledge  of 
their  defects  makes  them  desirous  of  salvation.     3.  How  do  they  become  first  ? 
By  being  themselves  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  assisting  in  its  wider  extension 
^vers.   49,  52).     (Lisco.)        The  Word  of  God  the  revealer  of  the  thoughts  of  many 
hearts : — I.  Op  the  Gentiles — i.e.,  of  those  who  were  hitherto  at  a  distance  and 
strangers  to  the  Word  of  God  (vers.  48,  49).     1.  They  rejoice  in  its  contents.     2. 
They  praise  the  grace  of  God.    3.  They  receive  it  by  faith.     4.  They  taste  the 
blessedness  of  beheving.     II.  Of  the  Jews — i.e.,  the  self-righteous  who  will  not  be 
saved  by  grace  (ver.  50).     1.  They  are  inflamed  with  hatred  against  the  evangelical 
message.     2.  They  mterest  others  against  it.     3.  They  persecute  the  messengers 
of  salvation.     III.  Of  believers,  who  experience  in  themselves  the  power  of  the 
Word.     1.  Their  faith  is  not  perplexed  by  calamity  (ver.  51).     2.  They  experience 
holy  joy  (ver.  62).     3.  They  grow  in  the  grace  of  God  through  the  Holy  Ghost 
(ver.  52).     (Ibid.)        The  gospel  appreciated  hy  the  outcasts  : — The  man  who  has 
grown  accustomed  to  luxuries  is  the  man  who  turns  his  meat  over,  and  picks  off  a 
bit  here,  and  a  bit  there ;  for  this  is  too  fat,  and  that  is  too  gristly.     Bring  in  the 
poor  wretches  who  are  half-starved.     Fetch  in  a  company  of  labourers  who  have 
been  waiting  all  day  at  the  docks,  and  have  found  no  work,  and  in  consequence 
have  received  no  wage.     Set  them  down  to  a  joint  of  meat.     It  vanishes  before 
them.     See  what  masters  they  are  of  the  art  of  knife  and  fork  I     They  find  no 
fault ;  they  never  dream  of  such  a  thing.     If  the  meat  had  been  a  little  coarse, 
it  would  not  have  mattered  to  them ;  their  need  is  too  great  for  them  to  be  dainty. 
Oh,  for  a  host  of  hungry  souls  I     How  pleasant  to  feed  them  !     How  different  froiii 
the  task  of  persuading  the  satiated  Pharisees  to  partake  of  the  gospel  1     Go  for 
them,  beloved  1     Lay  yourselves  out  to  reach  poor,  needy  souls.     They  will  come 
to  Jesus,  though  the  self-righteous  will  not.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        As  many  as 
■were  ordained  to  eternal  life  believed. — Eternal  life : — 1.  The  Jews  put  from  them 
the  Word  of  God,  and  thus  judged  themselves.     This  was  not  a  Divine  judgment ; 
that  came  afterwards  to  ratify  and  give  effect  to  what  was  done  already.    And  the 
judgment  that  the  Jews  by  the  rejection  of  Christ  passed  upon  themselves,  un- 
consciously but  really,  was  that  they  were  unworthy  of  eternal  hfe.     Their  case  is 
typical.     Men  who  despise  the  gospel  do  now  for  themselves  what  will  be  done 
for  them  at  the  Day  of  Judgment.      2.  The  Gentiles,  on  the  contrary,  accepted 
the  gospel,  and  thus   fulfilled   the  conditions  on  which  eternal  Mfe  was  given. 
They  thus  judged  themselves,  and  were  judged  worthy — i.e.,  qualified,  ready — for 
eternal  life.    "  Ordained  "  is  misleading.   The  original  is  a  military  word  suggestive 
of  the  putting  an  army  in  order,  drawing  it  up  for  battle — the  disposition  of  the 
troops.     "  As  many  as  were  disposed  " — i.e.,  were  in  an  attitude  for — "  eternal  life, 
believed,"  i.e.,  accepted  it.    The  Jews  were  in  no  such  attitude — hence  their  unbelief, 
and  loss  of  eternal  life.     I.  Eternal  life  is — 1.  A  quantitive  term — everlasting  dura- 
tion.   But  this  is  its  lower  meaning.     This  is  true  of  all  souls.     The  wicked  as  well 
as  the  good  will  live  for  ever.    But  the  life  of  the  former  will  be  "  the  death  that 
never  never  dies."     2.  A  qualitative  term.     What  sort  of  life  ?     Not  bare  exutenae, 
hut  a  life  of  eternal— (1)  Union  with  God.     (2)  Holiness.     (3)  Happiness.     II.  Thb 
disposition  for  eternal  life.      The  Gentiles  who  were  so  disposed — 1.  Heard  the 
Word  of  God  with  gladness.     Then  how  indisposed  must  those  be  who  in   our 
modern  congregations  are  indifferent  to  it,  or  who  hear  it  captiously,  or  only  to 


S72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xni, 

reject  it.  2.  Ascepted  it,  and  more  than  that,  they  glorified  it.  It  met  their  case 
thoroughly,  and  they  Jelt  and  acknowledged  that  it  did  so.  Thus  they  were  in  an 
attitude  for  eternal  life,  and  so — 3.  Believed.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath^ 
everlasting  life."  4.  Enjoyed  eternal  life.  "  They  were  fiUed  with  joy  " — the 
evidence  of  it,  "  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost" — its  source.     {J.  W.  Burn.) 

Ver.  49,  And  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  published  throughout  all  the  region. — 

Gospel  missions  : — We  feel  persuaded  that  all  of  you  are  of  one  mind  in  this  matter, 
that  it  is  the  duty  as  well  as  the  privilege  of  the  Church  to  proclaim  the  gospel  to 
the  world.  But  we  have  not  been  successful  to  the  extent  we  might  have  expected. 
What  is  the  reason  of  this  ?  Perhaps  we  may  think  we  find  that  reason  in  the 
sovereignty  of  God.  But  still  we  must  look  at  home  for  the  cause.  When  Zion 
travails,  she  brings  forth  children  ;  when  Zion  is  in  earnest,  God  is  in  earnest  about 
His  work.  We  must  not,  therefore,  arbitrarily  look  for  the  cause  of  our  failure  in 
the  will  of  God,  but  we  must  see  what  it  is  that  renders  our  success  so 
trifling  in  comparison  with  the  tremendous  results  of  apostolic  preaching.  I.  We 
HAVE  FEW  APOSTOLIC  MEN.  Here  and  there  we  may  have  one  or  two.  We  had  a 
WOliams,  we  had  a  Knibb,  but  they  have  entered  into  rest.  We  have  one  or  two 
still  remaining.  We  say,  "  God  bless  such  men  as  Moffatt  1 "  But  cast  your  eyes 
around,  and  where  can  we  find  many  such  men  ?  They  are  all  good  men  ;  they  are 
better  than  we ;  but  we  must  still  say  of  them  that  they  differ  from  the  mighty 
apostles  in  many  respects.  I  am  not  speaking  of  missionaries  only,  but  of  ministers 
too.  We  have  not  men  with — 1.  Apostolic  zeal.  Converted  in  a  most  singular  way, 
by  a  direct  interposition  from  heaven,  Paul,  from  that  time  forward,  became  an 
earnest  man.  He  had  always  been  earnest,  in  his  sin  and  in  his  persecutions  ;  but 
after  he  had  received  the  mighty  office  of  an  apostle  you  can  scarcely  conceive  the 
awful  earnestness  which  he  manifested.  His  zeal  was  so  burning,  that  he  could  not 
(as  we  unfortunately  do)  restrain  himself  within  a  little  sphere  ;  but  he  preached 
the  Word  everywhere.  Where  are  the  men  like  that  man  ?  We  have  no  eyes  now 
like  the  eyes  of  the  Saviour,  which  could  weep  over  Jerusalem.  If  ministers  were 
more  hearty  in  their  work  of  preaching,  then  we  might  expect  great  success ;  but  we 
cannot  expect  it  while  we  go  about  our  work  in  a  half-hearted  way.  2.  Apostolic 
faith.  What  did  Paul  do  ?  He  went  to  Philippi ;  did  he  know  a  soul  there  ?  No. 
He  had  his  Master's  truth,  and  he  believed  in  the  power  of  it.  He  was  devoid  of 
pomp,  or  show,  or  parade  ;  he  did  not  go  to  a  pulpit  with  a  nice  cushion  in  it  to 
address  a  respectable  congregation,  but  be  walked  through  the  streets  and  began  to 
preach  to  the  people.  He  went  to  Corinth,  to  Athens,  alone,  single-haiided,  to  tell 
the  people  the  gospel  of  the  blessed  God.  Why?  Because  he  had  faith  in  the 
gospel  and  believed  it  would  save  souls,  and  throw  down  idols  from  their  thrones. 
But  nowadays  we  have  not  faith  in  the  gospel  we  preach.  How  many  there  are 
who  preach  a  gospel  which  they  are  afraid  wont  save  souls;  they  insert  little  bits 
of  their  own  to  it  in  order,  as  they  think,  to  win  men  to  Christ  I  '\\Tieu  I  have  faith 
in  my  doctrines,  those  doctrines  will  prevail,  for  confidence  is  the  winner  of  the 
palm.  He  who  hath  courage  enough  to  grasp  the  standard,  and  hold  it  up,  will  be 
sure  enough  to  find  followers.  We  want  a  deeper  faith  in  our  gospel ;  we  want  to 
be  quite  sure  of  what  we  preach.  3.  ApostoHc  self-denial.  We  are  mere  carpet- 
knights  and  Hyde-park  warriors.  But  I  hear  some  whispering,  "  You  ought  to  make 
a  little  allowance."  I  make  all  allowance.  I  am  not  finding  fault  with  those 
brethren  ;  they  are  a  good  sort  of  people ;  but  I  will  only  say,  that  in  comparison 
with  Paul,  we  are  little  insignificant  Liliputiau  creatures,  who  can  hardly  be  seen 
in  comparison  with  those  gigantic  men  of  old.  II.  We  do  not  go  about  our  work 
IN  AN  APOSTOLIC  STYLE.  1.  There  is  not  enough  preaching  by  ministers  and  mis- 
sionaries. They  sit  down  interpreting,  establis)iing  schools,  and  doing  this,  that, 
and  the  other.  It  is  the  tendency  of  the  times  to  decry  preaching,  but  it  is  "  the 
foolishness  of  preaching  "  which  is  to  change  the  world.  2.  A  great  mistake  has 
been  made  in  not  afiinningthe  divinity  of  our  mission,  always  holding  out  this,  "  he 
tbat  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved  ;  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned." 
The  gospel  is  lowered  by  controversy.  How  did  Mahommed  come  to  have  so  strong 
a  religion?  He  said,  "  I  have  received  a  revelation  from  heaven."  It  was  a  lie, 
but  he  persuaded  men  to  believe  it.  Did  he  prove  what  he  said  ?  Not  )'e.  "  You 
must,"  he  said,  "  believe  what  I  say,  or  there  is  no  Paradise  for  you."  There  is  a 
power  in  that  kind  of  thing.  3.  We  have  not  enough  of  the  Divine  method  of 
itinerancy.  Paul  was  a  great  itinerant ;  he  preached  in  one  place,  and  there  were 
twelve  converted  there ;  he  made  a  church  at  once ;  he  did  not  stop  till  he  had  five 


«HAP.  XIII.]  THE  ACTS.  873 

hundred ;  bat  when  he  had  twelve,  he  went  off  to  another  place.  We,  nowadays, 
go  and  settle  in  a  place,  make  a  station  of  it,  and  work  around  it  by  little  and  httle, 
tind  think  that  is  the  way  to  succeed.  No,  no  I  ravage  a  continent ;  attempt  great 
things,  and  great  things  shall  be  done.  There  should  be  fixed  ministers  and  pastors, 
but  those  who  are  like  apostles  should  itinerate  far  more  than  they  do.  III.  Wb 
HAVE  NOT  APOSTOLIC  CHUBCHK3.  1.  Where  is  our  prayerfulness  compared  with  theirs  ? 
2.  We  have  not  the  apostolic  mode  of  liberahty.  In  the  apostles'  days  they  gave 
all  their  substance.  It  was  not  demanded  of  them  then,  and  it  is  not  now  ;  still 
we  have  run  to  the  other  extreme,  and  many  give  nothing  at  all.     IV.  We  have 

von  THE   HoIjT    SpIBII  IN   THAI    MEASUSB   WHICH  ATTENDED   THE    APOSTLES.      (C    H. 

Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  50-52.  But  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  devout  and  honourable  women. — 
Jewish  tactics  : — The  fact  brings  before  us  another  feature  of  the  relations  between 
Jews  and  Gentiles  at  this  period.  They  "  compassed  sea  and  land  to  make  one 
proselyte."  They  found  it  easiest  to  make  proselytes  of  women.  Such  conversions 
had  their  good  and  their  bad  sides.  In  many  cases  there  was  a  real  longing  for  a 
higher  and  purer  life  than  was  found  in  the  infinite  debasement  of  Greek  and  Roman 
society,  which  found  its  satisfaction  in  the  hie  and  faith  of  Israel.  But  with  many, 
such  as  Juvenal  speaks  of  when  he  describes  {"  Sat."  vi.  542)  the  Jewish  teacher  who 
gains  influence  over  women,  "  The  trembling  Jewess  whispers  in  her  ear.  And  teUs 
her  of  the  laws  of  SolymsB  "  (i.e.,  Jerusalem).  The  change  brought  with  it  new 
elements  of  superstition  and  weakness,  and  absolute  submission  of  conscience  to  its 
new  directors,  and  thus  the  Rabbis  were  often  to  the  wealthier  women  of  Greek  and 
Roman  cities  what  Jesuit  confessors  were  in  France  and  Italy  in  the  seventeenth 
and  eighteenth  centuries.  Here  we  get  the  darker  side  of  the  picture.  The  Jews 
Btir  up  the  women  of  the  upper  class,  and  they  stir  up  their  husbands.  The  latter 
were  content  apparently  to  acquiesce  in  their  wives  accepting  the  Judaism  with 
l^hich  they  had  become  famihar,  but  resented  the  intrusion  of  a  new  and,  in  one 
sense,  more  exacting  doctrine.  (Dean  Plumptre. )  But  they  shook  off  tiie  dust 
of  their  feet  against  them. — When  should  a  servant  of  God  shake  off  the  dust  of  his 
feet  ? — 1.  When  he  has  not  only  knocked  in  a  friendly  manner,  but  also  boldly  kept 
nis  ground.  2.  When  he  has  been  called  on  to  proceed,  not  only  by  men,  but  by 
God.  S.  When  not  only  the  door  here  is  closed,  but  when  he  also  sees  it  opened 
elsewhere  for  successful  work.  {K.  Gerok.)  Israel's  temporary  rejection: — 1. 
Wickedly  caused  by  themselves,  through  pride  and  ingratitude.  2.  Righteously 
ordained  by  the  Lord  in  virtue  of  hohness  and  truth.  3.  An  admonitory  example 
to  Christianity,  and  also  an  impressive  call  to  go  after  the  lost  sheep  of  Israel.  {Ibid.) 
And  the  disciples  were  filled  with  Joy  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost. — Holy  joy  : — 
L  The  prospebitt  of  the  Word  of  God  is  a  special  source  op  bejoicinq  to 
Christians.  It  was  not  an  ordinary  gladness,  but  the  special  and  overflowing  joy 
which  can  only  be  stirred  up  by  extraordinary  manifestations  of  the  grace  of  God. 
We  are  fuU  of  joy — 1.  Because  we  are  saved.  Deliverance  from  danger  and  death 
is  ever  a  source  of  gratitude.  A  soul  rescued  from  the  power  of  sin  and  the  conse- 
qnences  thereof,  is  a  theme  of  the  highest  inspiration,  whether  we  think  of  the  value 
of  the  soul,  or  the  price  of  deliverance.  The  brave  rescuer  risks  his  life  to  save 
others.  Jesus  died  to  save  mankind.  2.  Because  Jesus  sees  of  the  travail  of  His 
soul.  3.  At  the  prospect  of  seeing  the  glory  of  the  Lord  fiUing  the  earth.  Every 
step  onward  which  the  Word  of  God  takes,  revives  the  hope  of  universal  restoration. 
II.  The  pt-esencb  op  the  Holt  Ghost  in  the  heart  is  a  special  source  of  sup- 
port TO  Chbistians.  The  Comforter  sustained  them  in  their  trial.  1.  They  were 
fuU  of  holy  courage.  The  circumstances  of  the  disciples  at  Antioch  were  depressing. 
Devout  and  honourable  women,  with  the  chief  men  of  the  city,  had  raised  the  storm 
of  persecution.  The  apostles  were  driven  out  of  the  city.  The  number  of  believers 
was  small,  and  probably  they  were  poor ;  but  the  source  of  their  strength  was  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  in  their  heart.  They  could  not  be  cast  down  while  they  were 
under  such  influence.  There  could  be  no  darkness  while  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
shone  within  them.  2.  They  were  full  of  consecration  to  their  work.  They  were 
resolved  to  labour  on  until  the  name  of  Jesus  would  become  universal.  The  light 
which  shone  on  their  path  revealed  the  triumph  of  faith.  3.  They  were  full  of 
assurance  that  Jesus'  name  would  become  glorious  in  the  earth.  ( Weekly  Pulpit.) 
Joy  in  the  Holy.  Ghost : — When  I  was  a  country  minister  in  Scotland,  some  time 
ago,  the  most  joyous  person  in  my  parish  was  a  poor  old  woman  whose  every  joint  was 
iuaotted  with  rheumatism  ;  her  husband  was  a  poor  labouring  old  man,  her  home  « 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

crowded  hnt,  yet  her  life  was  bright  and  cheerful.  When  I  was  dejected  I  used  to  visit 
her,  and  after  ten  minutes  conversation  my  load  would  be  lightened.  She  diffused  glad- 
ness wherever  she  was,  because  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelt  in  her  as  a  temple.  (Dr.  Boyd.} 
Spiritual  experience : — The  description  is  brief  but  noteworthy.  I,  It  kecords  an 
EXPEEiENCE — 8PIKITUAL,  BEAL,  AND  EXEMPLARY.  There  was  emotionalism,  high  and 
holy;  and  it  was  visible.  The  elements  were  simple,  but  grand.  1.  "Joy."  2.  "The 
Holy  Ghost."  Each  is  suggestive,  and  both  were  prominent  features  of  those  early 
times.  They  are,  too,  co-related.  Instead  of  spirituahty  and  gladness  being  antago- 
nistic, the  soul  is  joyous  just  because  it  has  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit's  influence  is  a  more  perfect  joy,  so  that  the  more  largely  we  possess  the 
Spirit,  the  greater  becomes  our  joy.  II.  The  degree  and  measure  op  this 
EXPERIENCE  dcscrves  consideration.  It  was  not  the  possession  of  a  favoured  few, 
but  of  the  "  disciples."  By  them  it  was  possessed,  not  scantUy,  or  partially,  they 
were  "  filled  "  with  it.  These  emotions  did  not  spring  from  external  circumstances, 
but  were  independent  of  them  and  superior  to  them :  they  were,  despite  outward 
adversity  (see  vers.  60-51,  and  chap.  xiv.  22).  III.  The  attainment  of  like  ex- 
perience can  never  be  deemed  impossible  when  we  remember  the  exhortations  of 
Scripture,  and  the  testimony  of  "  disciples  " — learners  in  the  school  of  Christ.  "  If  ye 
being  evil  know  how,"  &c.  If  possible,  how  advantageous  to  us  would  such  an  experi- 
ence prove  1  joyous  in  itself  ;  an  evidence ;  an  energy ;  a  foretaste.  (J.  P.  Allen,  M.A.) 
Full  of  joy  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (chap.  viii.  39) : — There  is  a  striking  resemblance 
between  the  condition  of  the  eunuch  deprived  of  his  teacher  and  of  these  raw  dis- 
ciples, in  Pisidian  Antioch,  bereft  of  theirs.  Both  were  very  recent  converts  ;  both 
had  the  scantiest  knowledge  ;  both  were  left  utterly  alone.  Now  this  phrase,  "  full 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  is  not  an  uncommon  one  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles ;  and  the 
writer  is  fond  of  connecting  with  it  other  graces,  of  which  it  is  declared  to  be  the  cause. 
So  they  were  to  be  "men  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  wisdom";  and  of  Stephen 
we  read  that  "  he  was  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith."  The  text  traces  the 
joy  of  these  solitary  Christians  to  the  complete  possession  of  that  Divine  Spirit.  So 
filled,  we  shall  have  an  all-sufficient  Teacher  for  all  our  ignorance  ;  a  Companion 
for  all  our  solitude ;  a  fountain  of  joy  in  all  our  sorrow.  And  the  stories  before  ua 
may  help  to  illustrate  these  three  things.  I.  First,  then,  note  here,  the  all- 
BUFFiciENT  Teacher  FOR  ODB  IGNORANCE.  Think,  for  instance,  of  that  Ethiopian 
statesman.  An  hour  or  two  before  he  had  said,  "  How  can  I  understand  except 
some  man  guide  me  ?  "  And  now  he  is  going  away  into  the  darkness,  without  a 
single  external  help,  knowing  only  the  little  that  he  had  gathered  from  Philip.  He 
had  not  a  line  of  the  New  Testament.  He  had  nothing  but  a  scroll  of  the  prophet 
Isaiah,  but  he  went  away  with  a  glad  heart,  quite  sure  that  he  would  be  taught  all 
he  needed  to  know.  And  these  other  people  at  Antioch,  just  dragged  out  of  the 
darkness  of  heatbenism,  with  no  teaching  beyond  the  rudimentary  instruction  ot 
the  two  apostles  for  a  few  days — they,  too,  were  left  by  their  teachers  without  a 
fear.  We  trust  far  too  little  to  the  educating  and  enlightening  power  of  God's  grace 
in  the  hearts  of  men  who  have  no  other  teacher.  And  if  Christian  people  more 
really  believed  the  promise  of  their  Master,  "  He  will  guide  you  into  all  truth,"  they 
would  be  more  likely  to  realise  the  promise,  and  be  all  taught  of  God.  Only  remem- 
ber the  instrument  of  that  Divine  Teacher  is  the  Word  of  God.  And  if  we,  as 
Christians,  neglect  our  Bibles,  we  sh  tU  not  get  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
And  remember,  too,  that  that  teaching  is  granted  to  us  on  plainly  defined  conditions. 
There  must  be  a  desire  for  it.  And  there  must  be  patient  waiting  and  solitary 
meditation.  Let  us  take  the  lesson,  and  whosesoever  scholars  we  may  be,  let  us 
enrol  ourselves  in  the  school  of  the  Master,  and  learn  from  that  Spirit  who  will 
guide  us  into  all  truth.  II.  Now,  note,  secondly,  the  Companion  in  all  odr  soli- 
tude. Think  of  the  loneliness  of  this  man  on  the  Gaza  road,  or  of  that  handful  of 
sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves  at  Antioch.  And  yet  they  were  not  alone.  "  Full  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,"  they  were  conscious  of  a  Divine  presence.  And  so  it  may  be  with 
us  all.  We  are  all  condemned  to  live  alone,  however  many  may  be  the  troops  of 
friends  round  us.  Every  human  soul,  after  all  love  and  companionship,  lives  iso- 
lated. There  is  only  One  who  can  pass  the  awful  boundary  of  personality  which 
hedges  off  every  man  from  every  other.  Besides  the  natural,  necessary  solitude  in 
which  every  human  soul  lives  there  are  some  of  us,  no  doubt,  on  whom  God,  by  His 
providence,  has  laid  the  burden  of  a  very  lonely  life.  God's  purpose  in  making  ua 
solitary  is  to  join  Himself  to  us.  Left  alone,  nestle  close  to  Him.  Beside  the 
natural  and  the  providential  solitudes  there  is  yet  another.  We  must  make  a  soli- 
tude for  ourselves  if  we  would  have  God  speaking  to  us  and  keeping  us  oompanjs 


CHAP.  xiT.J  THE  ACTS.  875 

Solitude  is  the  mother-country  of  the  strong.  To  be  much  alone  is  the  condition 
of  sanity  and  nobleness  of  life.  No  man's  religion  will  be  deep  and  strong  unless 
he  has  learned  to  go  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  and  shut  his  doors 
about  him,  and  there  receive  the  fulness  of  that  Spirit.  III.  Lastly,  notice  thb 
JOT  IN  ALL  THE  80BR0W.  "  FuU  of  joy  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  says  the  latter  of  the 
two  texts.  That  collocation  is  famili&r  to  the  student  of  the  New  Testament.  You 
will  remember  the  apostle's  great  enumeration  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  •'  Love, 
joy,  peace. "  And  in  another  place  he  speaks  to  the  members  of  one  of  his  Churches, 
and  tells  them  that  they  had  "  received  the  Word  in  much  affliction  with  joy  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  So  then,  whoever  has  this  Divine  Guest  dwelling  in  his  heart  may 
possess  a  joy  as  complete  as  is  its  possession  of  him.  I  need  not  remind  you  how 
that  Divine  Spirit,  that  enters  into  our  souls  by  faith,  brings  to  us  the  consciousness 
of  forgiveness  and  of  sonship,  nor  how  it  fits  the  needs  of  every  part  of  our  nature, 
and  brings  all  our  being  into  harmony  with  itself,  with  bircumstances,  and  with 
God.  But  I  may  remind  you  that  not  only  does  this  Divine  Spirit  in  us  make  pro- 
vision for  joy,  but  that,  with  such  an  indwelling  Guest,  there  is  the  possibility  of 
the  c6-existence  of  joy  and  sorrow.  It  is  no  paradox  that  the  apostle  gave  forth 
when  he  said,  "  Sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  Even  in  the  midst  of  the  snow 
and  cold  and  darkness  of  Arctic  regions  the  explorers  build  houses  for  themselves 
of  the  very  blocks  of  ice,  and  within  are  warmth  and  light  and  comfort  and  vitality, 
while  around  is  a  dreary  waste.  But  remember  that  this  joy  from  the  Spirit  is  a 
commandment.  I  am  sure  that  Christians  do  not  sufficiently  lay  to  heart  that  glad- 
ness  is  their  duty,  and  that  sorrow  unrelieved  by  it  is  cowardice  and  sin.  We  have 
no  business  to  be  thus  sorrowful.  But  remember  the  conditions.  If  you  and  I  have 
that  Divine  Spirit  vdthin  us  we  shall  be  enlightened,  however  ignorant ;  com- 
panioned, however  solitary ;  joyful,  however  ringed  about  with  sorrow.  If  we  have 
not,  the  converse  will  be  true.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Persecution  not  incon- 
sistent with  joy : — As  if  a  man  should  throw  precious  stones  and  jewels  at  another, 
with  intent  to  kill  him,  and  the  other  should  gather  them  up  and  enrich  himseK 
with  them ;  even  so  do  persecutors  enrich  the  children  of  God,  that  they  may 
rejoice  being  worthy  to  suffer  for  Christ's  sake.  (Cawdray.)  Joy  a  Christian 
evidence : — The  ordinary  idea  is  that  a  Christian  is  sombre,  but  that  is  a  perversion 
of  the  gospel.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  if  God 
comes  into  the  soul,  we  may  expect  that  the  result  will  be  the  imparting  of  the 
element  of  joy  which  is  so  eminent  in  him.  Sometimes  through  secular  instru- 
ments God  makes  us  joyful,  for  He  employs  the  whole  world  to  work  out  His 
purposes ;  but  somtimes,  by  seemingly  breaking  upon  the  spirit  of  His  people.  He 
makes  them  joyful.  You  cannot  tell  why  you  are  so  musical  at  times.  On  some 
days  you  are  full  of  music.  There  are  some  hours  that  are  radiant  above  all  other 
hours.  And  when  these  transpire  among  God's  people,  it  is  not  an  unfair  thing  to 
infer  that  they  are  signs  of  Christ's  presence  with  them.    (H.  W.  Beecher.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


VfiBS.  1-18.  And  It  came  to  pass  In  Iconlum. — Iconium : — A  considerable  city  of 
Asia  Minor,  generally  considered  as  belonging  to  Lycaonia.  It  lay  in  a  fertile  plain 
at  the  foot  of  Taurus,  on  the  great  line  of  communication  between  Ephesus  and  the 
more  eastern  cities  of  Tarsus  and  Antioch,  and  the  Euphrates.  From  Pliny'a 
description  it  would  appear  to  have  been  a  populous  and  important  city  at  the  time 
of  Paul's  visit.  Under  the  Byzantine  emperors  it  was  the  metropolis  of  Lycaonia, 
was  subsequently  captured  by  the  Turks,  and  made  the  capital  of  an  empire  whose 
sovereigns  took  the  title  of  Sultans  of  Iconium.  During  this  period  of  its  history  it 
acquired  its  greatest  celebrity.  It  is  now  called  Koniyeh,  and  has  a  population 
estimated  at  from  twenty  to  thirty  thousand.  The  houses  are  mostly  of  stone  or 
Bon-dried  brick,  and  are  poorly  built,  except  the  mosques  and  palaces.  The  place 
oontaips  some  remains  and  inscriptions,  mostly  of  the  Byzantine  period.  (Lyman 
Abbott,  D.D.)  The  ministry  of  the  apostles  at  Iconium  : — Here  are  four  thinga 
noteworthy.  I.  An  ExxENsrvE  conversion  (ver.  1).  The  preaching  that  ends  in 
enlightened  practical  faith  is  that  which  Christ  ordained,  and  what  the  world  wants. 
There  is  a  preaching  that  produces — 1.  Mere  passing  emotion.    2.  Superstition. 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chip.  xit. 

3.  Scepticism.  II.  A  violent  opposition  (ver.  2).  The  spiritual  victories  thej 
■won  in  the  synagogue  roused  the  antagonism  of  the  unbelieving  Jew,  who  used  his 
great  social  inlluence  to  their  injury.  They  "  stirred  up  the  Gentiles,"  i.e.,  excited 
and  embittered  their  minds  with  hostile  passions.  It  is  ever  true  that  those  who 
reject  the  gospel  seek  to  deter  others  from  accepting  it.  * '  Ye  go  not  in  yourselves, 
and  prevent  those  who  would,"  is  a  Divine  allegation,  ever  true  of  the  rejectors  of 
Christianity.  III.  A  Divine  demonstration.  Opposition  neither  drove  them  at 
once  from  the  sphere  of  their  labour,  nor  lessened  the  displays  of  Divine  power. 
Divinity  appears — 1.  In  their  subject.  The  "  Word  of  His  grace,"  His  gracious 
Word,  the  gospel.  Whatever  doctrines  men  draw  from  the  gospel  that  are  not 
gracious,  are  not  true.  2.  In  their  spirit.  "  Speaking  boldly."  They  show  a 
heroism  more  than  human  in  continuing  and  speaking  in  the  very  scene  of  perse- 
cution. 3.  In  their  miracles.  The  stronger  the  evil  one  appeared  in  Iconium 
opposing  the  mission  of  the  apostles,  the  higher  rose  the  mauifeitations  of  God  in 
their  behalf.  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  IV.  A  social  sepabation 
{ver.  4).  "  Divided  " — the  Greek  word  from  which  schism  is  derived.  There  was 
a  rent  created  through  the  ministry  of  the  apostles.  Such  unity  of  sympathy  as 
existed  before  in  the  population  was  divided,  and  part  flowed  towards  the  Jews  and 
part  towards  the  apostles.  The  searching  ministry  of  the  apostles  made  bare  the 
hearts  of  the  people.  Those  who  took  part  with  the  Jews  made  "  an  assault  "  upon 
the  apostles.  The  storm  raised,  however,  was  under  the  direction  of  God.  It  was 
a  Divine  breeze,  to  bear  the  precious  seeds  of  truth  to  regions  farther  on.  The 
apostles  fled  unto  Lystra  and  Derbe,  not  from  fear,  but  from  the  instinct  of  duty. 
{D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  At  Iconium: — I.  What  the  missionabies  did.  They  went 
immediately  to  work.  They  did  not  stop  to  complain  of  the  treatment  they  had 
received  at  Antioch.  Persecution  made  them  change  their,  place,  but  not  their 
purpose.  Neither  did  they  abandon  their  method  of  working.  Though  they  had 
turned  to  the  Gentiles,  they  had  not  turned  away  from  the  Jews.  II.  How  the 
missionaries  spoke.  So  convincingly,  that  Jews  as  well  as  Greeks  believed.  Care 
Bhould  be  taken  so  to  speak  as  to  give  effect  to  the  Word.  III.  How  the  mis- 
BioxARiES  WERE  OPPOSED.  As  was  natural,  the  Jew  who  did  not  accept  the  gospel, 
was  its  bitterest  enemy.  The  man  who  is  acting  against  God  and  his  own  conscience 
must  permit  himself  no  rest.  He  cannot  endure  lo  see  others  accept  what  he  has 
rejected.  Hence  he  tries  to  make  the  souls  around  him  "  evil  affected."  IV.  How 
the  missionaries  were  prospered.  1.  They  continued  their  work.  Not  because 
of  the  opposition,  but  in  spite  of  it,  and  for  the  reason  that  so  many  were  believing. 
So  long  as  a  harvest  was  to  be  reaped,  they  would  not  abandon  the  field.  2.  They 
spoke  boldly.  The  threatening  cloud  of  danger  did  not  abate  their  courage.  "Boldly 
in  the  Lord."  Their  courage  came  from  Him,  and  not  from  themselves.  3.  They 
were  borne  witness  to  by  the  Lord.  He  spoke  through  their  hands  as  well  as  their 
lips.  He  made  it  impossible  for  any  but  the  incorrigible  to  doubt  that  they  were 
His  ambassadors.  4.  They  divided  the  city  (ver.  4).  The  division  appears  to  have 
been  pretty  even.  Whether  evenly  or  not,  the  gospel  always  divides  a  community. 
Every  one  must  be  on  the  one  side  or  on  the  other.  V.  How  the  missionaries 
WERE  driven  out  (vcr.  5).  They  were  not  rash  as  well  as  bold.  There  was  no  call 
here  to  lay  down  their  lives.  So,  being  persecuted  in  this  city,  they  followed  the 
Saviour's  injunction,  and  fled  into  the  next.  "  And  there  they  preached  the 
gospel."  Persecution  was  God's  plan  for  propagating  His  gospel.  Having 
furnished  certain  seeds  with  wings,  God  sends  rough  winds  for  their  transportation. 
{M.  C.  Hazard.)         Mode  of  preaching  the  gospel  adapted  to  success  : — I.  There  is 

A    mode    of    PKEACHINO    the     OOSPEL     which     is     adapted     to     8ECDRE     THE     FAITH    OF 

hearers.  The  gospel  itself  is  adapted  to  beget  cordial  faith  and  repentance  in 
men.  For  evidence  of  this,  I  would  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  employs  the  gospel  for  this  very  purpose.    II.  To  point  out  some  of  the 

THINGS     WHICH      ARE     ESSENTIAL     TO     SUCH     A     MODE     OF     PREACHING     THE     GOSPEL.       I 

would  remark  that  to  secure  a  manner  of  preaching  the  gospel  adapted  to  success, 
it  set-ms  essential — 1.  That  it  should  be  preached  with  a  heart  deeply  intent  on 
the  very  design  of  securing  the  cordial  faith  and  obedience  of  hearers.  Cicero  has 
justly  remarked,  that  if  the  feelings  with  which  you  represent  a  fact  and  the  fact 
itself  do  not  accord,  you  have  not  in  reality  presented  the  truth,  but  have  mis- 
represented it  to  the  minds  of  your  hearers.  2.  That  it  should  be  preached  as  a 
system  of  consistent  truths,  bearing  with  one  harmonious  design  on  the  great  object 
of  repentance  and  salvation.  3.  That  it  should  be  preached  in  a  way  of  application 
(o  the  hearers,  so  as  to  call  for  the  decision  of  their  hearts  at  the  time.    From  this 


CHAP,  xrr.]  THE  ACTS.  877 

subject  I  remark — 1.  The  dependence  of  preachers  of  the  gospel  on  the  co-operating 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  give  success  to  their  labours,  is  of  all  reasons  the 
weightiest  why  they  should  speak  in  a  manner  adapted  to  beget  repentance  and 
faith  in  their  hearers.  2.  We  may  learn  what  are  some  of  the  important  qualifica- 
tions for  a  skilful  and  successful  handling  of  the  Word  of  life.  {E.  T.  Fitch,  D.D.) 
Iconium  and  Lystra  : — The  work  done  in  these  two  places,  together  with  the  varied 
experiences  of  the  missionaries,  may  suggest  that — I.  The  manneb  op  presenting 

OOSPEL   TRUTH   HAS    MUCH   TO    DO    IN  PRODUCING  RESULTS  ON    THE  HEARERS.       They  "  SO 

Rpake  that  a  great  multitude  believed."  Paul  afterward  told  the  Corinthians,  "  that 
he  came  not  with  excellency  of  speech,"  &c.  He  evidently  did  not  disregard  the 
character  of  his  audience,  the  kind  of  evidence  he  should  produce,  and  the  manner 
of  expressing  his  thoughts,  any  more  than  he  showed  carelessness  as  to  his  subject, 
which  was  always  "  Christ,  and  Him  crucified."  Increase  depends  more  upon  the 
good  seed  and  soil,  and  warm  rains  and  sunshine,  than  upon  the  sower,  yet  the 
skilful  sower  is  the  successful  husbandman.  So  in  the  economy  of  grace  the 
teacher  and  his  methods  have  a  prominent  place  in  the  production  of  results.  To 
the  teacher  the  responsibility  of  speaking  rightly  is  as  great  as  the  responsibility  of 
trusting  supremely.  II.  Present  the  truth  as  wisely  as  we  may,  different 
RESULTS  WILL  BE  PRODUCED  AMONG  THE  HEARERS.  "  Part  held  with  the  Jcws  and 
part  with  the  apostles."  There  were  divisions  in  Iconium  before,  but  so  soon  as 
the  Word  was  spoken  the  people  were  newly  classified.  III.  The  wisdom  op  pre- 
serving  AN  UNTARNISHED   REPUTATION  ON  THE   PART   OP   THOSE   WHO   WOULD   WIN   S0UL3 

TO  THE  TRUTH.  We  read,  "  longtime  therefore  they  abode."  Wherefore  ?  Because 
the  "  Gentiles  had  been  stirred  up  and  their  minds  evil  affected  against  the 
brethren."  Whatever  the  allegations  were,  the  two  resolved  to  stay  and  confront 
those  who  circulated  them,  and  live  down  their  calumnies.  It  took  a  "  long  time," 
but  the  end  to  be  gained  was  worth  the  time  it  took  to  reach  it.  Very  often  the 
enemy  tries  to  weaken  the  power  of  the  teacher  by  damaging  his  reputation.  It 
may  take  a  "  long  time  "  to  lift  the  name  fairly  above  the  cloud,  but  for  the  sake  of 
the  truth  we  love  and  the  souls  we  would  help  it  may  be  duty  to  abide  where  we  are 
till  this  is  done.  IV.  Popularity  need  not,  and  must  not,  turn  from  stead- 
fastness TO  THE  TRUTH.  At  Iconium  they  were  bad  men,  to  be  shunned.  They 
stood  that  test,  and  by  their  lives  gave  the  lie  to  the  base  charge.  At  Lystra  they 
are  not  men,  but  the  chief  among  the  gods,  the  great  Jove  and  his  attendant.  But 
they  refuse  the  homage  and  make  the  offering  a  text  from  which  to  preach  a  telling 
sermon  against  all  forms  of  false  worship.    V.  Miracles,  even  when  admitted, 

HAVE    BUT   LITTLE    INFLUENCE    IN   LEADING   BITTER    OPPOSERS  OF  THE  TROTH    TO    ACCEPT 

IT.  They  deified  the  worker,  and  then  stoned  him.  Miracles  strengthened  the  faith 
of  those  who  believed  on  other  testimony ;  but  neither  where  philosophy  ruled,  nor 
where  untutored  Nature  guided,  did  the  supernatural  lead  the  mind  set  bitterly 
against  God  to  accept  him.  VI.  God's  claims  may  be  fearlessly  maintained 
ANYWHERE.  It  is  the  first  time  the  gospel  has  met  idolatry  pure  and  simple,  and  it 
promptly  and  confidently  offers  a  better  God  than  the  greatest  in  their  list.  Notice 
the  marked  difference  between  Paul's  method  of  attacking  idolatry  and  that  adopted 
byfthe  modern  opposers  of  the  God  Paul  worshipped.  He  would  take  every  idol  out 
of  Lystra,  but  he  would  leave  a  God  far  better  in  their  stead.  But  these  would 
take  away  our  God,  and  then  leave  us  alone  and  hopeless  with  the  ruin  they  have 
wrought.  VII.  How  fickle  is  the  favour  of  men  1  The  distance  is  short 
between  the  garlands  and  the  stones,  between  "  Hosanna  !  "  and  "  Crucify  him  !  " 
but  the  favour  of  God  endureth,  and  it  satisfies  the  soul.  VIII.  Let  us  beware  op 
WRITING  ALL  ADVERSE  THINGS  AS  DISADVANTAGEOUS.  I  doubt  if  there  was  a  plsce  in 
all  Paul's  wanderings  to  which  he  looked  back  with  such  delight  as  Lystra,  because 
it  was  the  home  of  Timothy,  the  best  beloved,  the  choicest  fruit  ever  given  to  his 
ministry.  "  Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat,  and  out  of  the  strong  come  forth 
sweetness."  (T.  H.  Hanna,  D.D.)  Perils  of  viissionary  life  : — The  peril  of — 
I.  Misconstruction.  It  is  always  easy  to  pervert  what  a  preacher  says,  and  so 
arouse  prejudice  (ver.  2).  We  are  not  told  just  how  these  jealous  Israelites  sought 
4o  inflame  the  Gentiles.  In  one  instance  (chap.  xix.  26),  opposers  raised  the  working- 
man's  question.  In  another  (chap.  xvi.  20,  21),  it  was  wickedly  suggested  that  an 
attack  on  social  and  political  institutions  was  concealed  under  the  pretence  of  incul- 
cating religion.  There  is  a  tale  considered  authentic  in  the  papal  church,  of  one 
called  "St.  Thekla,"  who  was  converted  by  Paul.  She  had  been  previously 
betrothed  to  a  heathen,  but  now  refused  from  conscientious  scruples  to  marry  him. 
So  the  ingenious  opposers  might  have  told  the  populace  that  this  was  the  way  la 


878  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit, 

which  Christianity  was  going  to  break  up  their  closest  relations.  Anything 
can  be  started  among  ignorant  people.  II.  Positivb  violence  (ver.  5).  No 
one  can  recall  one  of  a  hundred  histories  of  cruelty  and  death  inflicted  by  popular 
outbreak  under  malicious  instigation,  without  knowing  that  there  is  always 
the  one  danger,  in  every  land  and  generation,  of  losing  life  (Mark  viii.  35). 
III.  Sperituaij  distrust  of  God.  The  day  of  miracle-working  has  passed 
away,  but  great  risks  have  to  be  run,  and  now  and  then  the  hearts  of  God's 
people  faU  them  through  fear.  We  detect  here  nothing  of  this  sort ;  Paul  standa 
up  and  works  a  stupendous  miracle,  without  apparently  a  misgiving  or  a  tremor. 
Characteristics  of  apostolic  preaching : — I.  Paul  made  his  pbeaohing  first.  He 
performed  miracles.  But  the  miracle  was  a  secondary  thing — but  a  bell-ringing. 
The  disciples  were  commissioned  to  preach,  and  the  triumphs  of  the  gospel  are 
owing  to  that.  But  the  term  covered  teaching  and  "  religious  conversation."  The 
Saviour  preached  to  the  woman  of  Samaria.  But  that  mode  of  discourse  is 
peculiarly  preaching  in  which  the  truth  is  presented  to  masses  of  hearers.  At 
Iconium,  at  Lystra,  and  in  fact  everywhere,  with  Paul  preaching  was  the  first  and 
the  leading  agency.  God  has  honoured  this  above  all  others.  II.  Paul  preached 
BOLDLY,  i.e.,  fearlessly,  unequivocally,  but  especially  with  power.  The  preacher 
should  be  persuasive,  but  above  all,  powerful.  This  trait  Paul  very  highly  valued. 
He  urged  his  disciples  to  pray  for  him,  that  he  might  speak  the  Word  boldly.  The 
Spirit  endues  us  with  this  holy  boldness.  By  this  we  commonly  intend  plain 
speaking  upon  politics,  temperance,  morals,  &c.  But  in  nothing  do  we  bo  need 
boldness  as  in  the  preaching  of  the  simple  truths  of  redemption.  III.  Paul's 
PREACHING  WAS  WATCHFUL.  He  had  Spiritual  discernment  to  see  the  effects  of  his 
preaching  (ver.  9).  Preachers  of  his  discernment  are  ready  for  digression.  Earnest 
preachers  are  bent  upon  saving,  not  sermons,  but  men.  Paul  stopped  his  discourse 
when  he  saw  that  the  cripple  had  faith  to  be  saved.  He  saw  an  opportunity  to 
extend  the  interest  in  his  message.  How  much  fruit  we  lose  from  lack  of  spiritual 
watchfulness !  Deacon  Safford  was  deeply  interested  for  a  young  man  in  his 
Sunday-school  class.  One  day  Dr.  Kirk  preached  a  sermon  which  seemed  to  the 
deacon  precisely  adapted  to  reach  his  young  friend.  He  watched  him.  He  thought 
he  saw  the  evidences  of  conviction  in  the  intent  face.  In  passing  out  of  church  he 
said  in  a  low,  earnest  tone,  "  What  are  you  going  to  do  about  it  ?  "  The  impression 
was  fixed.  By  that  timely  word  the  young  man  was  saved.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  is 
as  needful  to  make  us  watchful  as  to  make  us  bold.  IV.  In  his  pbeachino  Paul 
FOLLOWED  UP  IMPRESSIONS  MADE.  Loug  time  he  tarried  in  Iconium.  The  ability  to 
follow  up  a  work  is  quite  distinct  from  that  to  begin  it.  Many  persons  can  make  an 
impression,  but  want  the  knowledge,  the  patience,  or  perhaps  the  interest,  to  develop 
it.  Revivalism  outside  the  Churches  involves  the  danger  of  producing  a  class  of 
immature,  weak,  enthusiastic  disciples,  who  may  be  left  at  critical  stages  of 
experience ;  ready,  vrith  proper  care,  to  become  established  Christians,  but  ready 
also,  without  long  and  wise  nurture,  to  become  enemies  or  schismatics.  Faithful 
Christian  work  in  the  pulpit,  the  Sunday  school,  the  home,  will  aim  at  two  ends — 
conversion,  and  the  training  of  converts.  V.  The  theme  op  Paul's  pbeachino 
WAS  THE  gospel.  When  the  first  Moravian  missionaries  were  about  leaving  for 
Greenland,  a  solid  and  pious  minister  advised  them  to  give  the  natives  "  a  sound 
body  of  divinity,  beginning  with  the  being  and  attributes  of  God,  following  with  the 
doctrine  of  sin,  and  thus  leading  on  at  last  to  Christ  and  the  Cross."  Thus  learned 
counsel  was  followed,  and  for  several  years  their  labour  was  in  vain.  One  day,  at  a 
funeral  service,  quite  by  accident,  a  missionary  told  the  story  of  the  Cross,  and 
explained  its  meaning.  To  his  astonishment  the  truth  made  a  profound  impression. 
Conversions  followed.  Thereafter  the  missionaries  began  with  the  Cross.  (O.  R. 
Leavett.)  Strike,  hut  hear  us : — Themistocles,  the  Athenian  general,  by  warmly 

urging  a  point  in  a  council  of  war,  is  said  to  have  so  provoked  the  displeasure  of 
Eurybiades,  the  Spartan,  the  commander-in-chief,  that  the  latter  lifted  up  his  cane 
over  his  head  in  a  menacing  posture.  "  Strike,"  said  the  noble  Athenian,  "  but 
hear  me  1  "  He  did  hear  him,  and  the  country  was  saved.  And  why  may  not  a 
Christian  act,  or  rather  forbear  to  act,  on  the  same  principle,  and  for  an  infinitelj 
greater  end,  even  the  eternal  salvation  of  his  enemies  ?  What  else  has  been  the 
language  of  the  noble  army  of  the  martyrs  from  the  beginning  ?  Have  they  not  prao> 
tically  said  to  an  enraged  world,  "  Strike,  but  hear  us  "  ?  (A.  Fuller.)  The  courage 
ofdevot'd  Christians : — The  Shanghai  correspondent  of  the  Bombarj  Guardian  narrates 
the  following  suggestive  item  of  information  :  "  The  captain  of  a  steamer,  plying 
on  the  Yangtse  river,  told  me  that  when  he  stopped  on  a  dark  night  at  one  of  the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS.  879 

stations  on  the  bank,  several  of  the  inland  missiouaries  came  on  board  among  a 
crowd  of  Chinese  seeking  a  passage  in  the  steerage,  as  they  invariably  do.  They 
had  encountered  a  mob  of  anti-foreign  natives,  which  it  is  still  very  easy  to  do  in 
this  country,  and  had  been  well  pelted  and  bespattered  with  mud.  One  of  the 
ship's  officers,  seeing  especially  the  ladies  in  their  humiliating  condition,  exclaimed 
with  the  customary  profanity,  that  he  wondered  they  did  not  leave  the  Chinese  to 
go  to  heU  if  they  preferred  to  do  so.  That  is  the  world's  view  of  the  case  ;  and,  as 
I  said  to  the  captain,  there  would  have  been  no  other  view  in  the  world  to-day  if 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  had  not  taught  it  and  set  an  example  of  it,  and 
bestowed  the  grace  for  the  imitation  of  it."  Courage  requisite  in  reformers  : — 

There  is  nothing  which  the  world  resents  so  much  as  an  attempt  to  carry  out  a 
better  measure  than  existed  before.  A  man  who  would  benefit  the  world  must  take 
leave  of  his  own  reputation  first ;  for  the  world  never  let  a  man  bless  it  but  it  first 
fought  him ;  it  never  let  him  give  it  a  boon  without  first  giving  him  a  buffet.  If 
with  one  effort  you  should  raise  a  tree  twenty  feet  high,  so  as  to  make  it  forty  feet 
high,  you  would  not  do  more  violence  to  its  roots  than  you  do  to  society,  when  you 
attempt  suddenly  to  elevate  it  above  its  former  level.  If  there  were  a  hundred 
violins  together,  all  playing  below  concert  pitch,  and  I  should  take  a  real  Cremona, 
and  with  the  hand  of  a  Paganini  should  bring  it  strongly  up  to  the  true  key,  and 
then  should  sweep  my  bow  across  it  like  a  storm,  and  make  it  sound  forth  clear 
and  resonant,  what  a  demoniac  jargon  would  the  rest  of  the  playing  seem  1  Yet 
the  other  musicians  would  be  enraged  at  me.  They  would  think  aU  the  discord  was 
mine,  and  I  should  be  to  them  a  demoniac.  So  it  is  with  reformers.  The  world 
thinks  the  discord  is  with  them,  and  not  in  its  own  false  playing.  All  those  rosy 
philosophers  who  go  dancing  along  the  ways  of  Ufe,  and  expect  to  reform  men 
through  ease  and  pleasure,  and  are  surprised  when  at  first  snow-flakes  are  thrown 
at  them,  and  then  icicles,  and  then  avalanches,  had  better  fold  their  gauzy  wings 
at  once.  They  are  not  wanted.  They  are  not  of  that  heroic  race  who  advance  the 
world.  (W.  H.  Beecher.)  Effects  of  gospel  preaching  : — Wherever  the  gospel  is 
proclaimed  with  power — 1.  It  secures  believers.  The  Word  of  God  does  not  return 
to  Him  void.  2.  It  secures  some  bitter  enemies.  It  divides  every  community  into  two 
parties.  3.  People  are  not  content  with  merely  rejecting  the  gospel  for  themselves. 
They  stir  up  the  minds  of  others  to  make  them  evU-affected  against  its  preachers. 
4.  The  Lord  is  sure  to  bear  witness  unto  the  Word  of  His  grace.  5.  Its  preachers 
must  expect  personal  attacks  of  some  kind  or  other.  (S.  S.  Times.)  Proper  witness 
bearing: — I.  Whebein  it  consists.  1.  Not  in  the  degree  of  the  external  sufferings 
endured  on  account  of  faith,  but  in  the  measure  of  the  fideUty  displayed  for  Christ. 
2.  The  apostles  waited  on  their  ministry  with  perseverance  and  joyful  courage, 
and  therein  lay  their  fideUty.  3.  They  forsook  the  places  which  had  become  dear 
to  them  as  soon  as  they  were  made  away,  that  the  Lord  had  no  further  use  for  them 
there.  II.  Why  is  it  bo  difficult?  Because — 1.  There  is  nothing  in  it  to 
flatter  our  refined  selfishness.  There  is  wanting  the  "  halo  before  the  world,"  for 
fidelity  is  clothed  in  homely  garments.  2.  It  destroys  self-will.  Perhaps  death 
was  easier  than  flight.  IIL  In  what  lies  its  blessing.  1.  It  secures  God's  wUl, 
not  man's.  2.  Therefore  it  is  rich  in  fruits  of  aU  kinds — (1)  Faith  (ver.  1).  (2) 
Divine  manifestation  (ver.  3).  (3)  The  conversion  of  calamity  into  blessing  (ver.  7). 
{Lisco.)  Persecution  turned  into  inspiration  : — The  apostles  had  finished  their 

work  at  Antioch  in  a  storm.  Can  that  be  true ;  the  gospel  dividing  quiet  cities  into 
hostile  camps  ?  Surely  the  heavenly  Word  wiU  bring  heavenly  peace  along  with  it. 
No  1  The  Son  of  man  came  not  to  send  peace  on  the  earth,  but  a  sword.  But  now 
that  the  apostles  have  come  to  Iconium  they  will  act  in  a  different  manner  and 
correct  their  mistake.  No ;  there  again  we  have  angry  division,  and  stoning  1  How 
is  this  ?  These  histories  throw  some  light  upon — I.  What  is  called  unanimity. 
Unanimity  is  no  virtue,  nor  sincerity,  nor  earnestness ;  we  must  ascertain  what  the 
unanimity  is  about,  and  what  men  are  sincere  and  earnest  in,  because  good  fire 
may  be  used  for  forging  of  bad  instruments.  Surely  it  was  a  pity  for  two  wandering 
tent-makers  to  go  from  town  to  town  disturbing  the  unanimity  of  famihes  and  of 
townships  I  Why  not  let  families  and  corporations  alone  ?  Why  this  propagation 
of  a  fighting  faith  ?  This  is  the  way  of  Christianity.  It  will  not  let  people  alone. 
Hence  we  find  some  light  thrown  upon — II.  Chbistian  doctrine.  It  was  not  a 
httle  puzzle  to  please  the  fancy,  nor  a  pyrotechnic  display  to  gratify  children.  It 
saves  or  slays.  What  wonder  if  it  came  upon  sleepy  towns  Uke  a  thunderstorm  ? 
Christianity  is  not  a  compromise  ;  it  does  not  propose  to  give  a  little  and  take  a 
little,  and  make  a  pacific  arrangement  with  anybody.    Christianity  insists  upon 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xw. 

having  everything;  it  makes  room  for  nothing  else.      What  wonder,  then,  that 
everywhere  it  broke  up  families.     Seeing  your  hand  locked  in  evil  friendship,  it 
Hoes  not  hesitate  to  rend  your  hearts  asunder.    Christianity  says,  "  Behold,  I  make 
all  things  new."   It  will  not  say  to  a  man,  "  Hand  me  your  work,  and  I  will  complete 
it ;  it  cumes  with  a  mighty  hammer,  and  shatters  our  idols  and  all  our  best  per- 
formances.   III.  Christian  SERVICE.    Christian  service — 1.  Is  the  supreme  passion  ; 
it  puts  out  everything  else,  it  has  no  partnerships,  no  relations  except  those  which 
it  can  press  into  its  own  sacrifice.    2.  Exposes  to  daily  danger.    If  we  have  escaped 
the  danger,  it  is  because  we  have  escaped  the  service.     When  did  we  ever  rebuke  a 
wrong-doer  ?    We  have  talked  about  him  when  he  was  not  there — that  I  admit ; 
and  that  has  proved  our  unchristianity.    When  did  we  ever  say  to  a  man  face  to 
face — "  You  lie  "?     That  would  now  be  called  discourtesy ;  but  when  were  we  ever 
licensed  to  be  courteous  to  falsehood  ?    Christianity  is  not  a  book  of  etiquette — it 
is  a  book  of  commandments,  a  gospel  of  righteousness  as  well  as  a  gospel  of 
compassion.     When  did  we  ever  stand  before  a  house  and  say,  "  This  house  must 
come  down  if  the  price  be  fivefold  what  it  will  fetch  in  the  market ;  it  is  a  trapdoor 
into  hell,  and  it  must  fall "?  Let  a  man  say  that,  and  he  will  soon  see  that  England 
is  Uko  Aiitioch  and  Iconium.    But  if  we  come  into  the  church,  pass  through  the 
services,  and  lose  ourselves  in  controversy  that  has  no  heavenly  savour,  I  wonder 
not  that,  luUed  by  some  theological  narcotic,  we  think  we  are  going  to  heaven.    It 
is  no  heaven  we  are  going  to  I     It  may  have  written  heaven  above  its  portals,  but 
that  inscription  is  a  lie  1     "If  any  man  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  shall 
suffer  persecution.     3.  Divides  public  opinion  (ver.  2).     That  is  how  it  ought  to  be 
always.     There  are  those  who  say  they  do  not  beUeve  in  sensationalism.     What  do 
they  believe  in  ?    Are  they  in  sympathy  with  the  ministry  of  their  own  professed 
Lord  and  Master  ?     If  Christianity  were  amongst  the  Churches  to-day,  men,  instead 
of  criticising  sermons,  would  go  out  and  borrow  any  chair,  or  stand  on  any  stone 
at  the  street  comer,  and  if  they  could  not  preach  the  gospel,  they  could  at  least 
read  it.    Fifty  thousand  men  at  the  street  corners  to-day  reading,  with  one  voice, 
the  third  chapter  of  John ! — why,  apostoUc  times  would  have  come  back  again  1 
Nothing  divides  society  hke  Christianity :  its  voice  is,  "  Come  out  from  among 
them,  and  be  ye  separate ;  the  good  to  the  right,  the  bad  to  the  left."    4.  Survives 
all  ill-treatment.   The  time  had  come  when  the  Jews  determined  to  use  the  apostles 
despitefully.    And  as  soon  as  the  apostles  became  aware  of  it  they  "  fled  unto  Lystra 
and  Derbe  "  ;  and  then  in  ver.  7,  as  if  nothing  had  happened  before,  "  there  they 
preached  the  gospel."     They  preached  better  for  their  persecution.     We  should 
have  wonderful  preaching  if  we  had  more  stoning.   We  should,  too,  have  wonderful 
hearing  as  well  as  wonderful  preaching  1     If  we  had  to  steal  into  the  church  by 
some   backway,  and    had   to  hsten   in   fear    and   trembling   lest  the   oppressor 
should  lay  his  iron  grip  upon  us — oh,  how  we  should  listen  1     Do  not  say  that 
Antioch  was  at  peace  until  the  apostles  visited  it ;  there  is  a  so-called  peace  that  is 
only  a  false  name  for  death.    IV.  So-called  hebest.     The  heretics  may  be  Paul 
and  Barnabas  with  modern  names.     If  men  come  amongst  us  denying  the  Bible, 
then  have  no  part  or  lot  with  them ;  but  if  men  of  spotless  character  and  sacred 
devotedness  arise  and  say,  •'  We  have  found  the  interpretation  of  this  Scripture 
or  of  that,"  hear  them,  though  many  an    old    notion   may  be  displaced.     We 
use  heretics  of   that  kind   most  basely  1     What  was  the  fault  of  Paul  ?    This  ; 
that  he  said  a  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled — nothing  more;  and  so  he  was  stoned. 
And  Christianity  has  its  prophecies ;  Christian  doctrine  has  yet  its  issues  brighter 
than  our   fancy  has   measured;  and  if   any  man   shall   say,  "Let   us   together 
read  the  Holy  Word,   and  hear  what  I   believe  to  be  its  true  meaning,"  let 
us  not  take   up   stones  against  him,  but  listen,  knowing   *'  that  God  hath  yet 
more  light  and  truth  to  break  forth  from  His  Holy  Word."     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Which  gave  testimony  unto  the  Word  of  His  grace. — God's  testimony  to  the  Word  of 
His  grace : — I.  The  propriety  of  this  appellation  :   "  the  Word  of   His  grace." 
The  gospel  is  so  called,  because — 1.  It  originated  in  unmerited  mercy,  smd  was  sent 
to  us  as  a  matter  of  free  favour.    2.  It  is  a  proclamation  of  grace  and  mercy.     The 
lata  is  a  ministration  of  wrath,  accusing,  convincing,  and  condemning  the  sinner. 
The  gospel  reveals  the  grace  of  God,  as  abounding  in  our  salvation.     8.  It  is  grace 
alone  that  renders  it  effectual      Sinners  own  their  conversion,  saints  their  edifica- 
tion, mourners  their  comfort,  and  the  oppressed  their  relief  to  it.   But  it  derives  all  its 
influence  and  energy  from  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    The  gospel  reaches  only 
the  ear ;  grace  renews  and  sanctifies  the  heart.     The  gospel  is  a  means,  but  God 
performs  the  work,  and  to  Him  we  must  ascribe  the  glory.    XL  Tax  wax  m  WHioa 


oxup.  xiv.]  THE  ACTS.  S61 

God  beaks  testimont  to  thb  Wobd  of  His  gbace.  1.  By  miracles  wrought  in  oon- 
firmation  of  it.  2.  By  raising  up  a  constant  succession  of  ministers  to  propagate 
and  defend  it.  He  who  sends  the  message,  can  be  at  no  loss  for  want  of  messengers. 
As  soon  as  one  earthem  vessel  is  broken,  the  heavenly  treasure  is  put  into  another ; 
and  though  the  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof  fadeth  away,  yet  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  3.  By  the  awe  impressed  upon  the  consciences  even 
of  wicked  men.  God  will  magnify  His  Word,  whether  it  be  a  savour  of  life  unto 
Ufe,  or  of  death  unto  death.  Felix's  trembling,  Agrippa's  being  almost  persuaded, 
and  Simon  Magus's  hypocritical  profession,  were  so  many  testimonies,  though 
involuntary  ones,  to  the  truth  of  the  inspired  Word.  4.  By  rendering  it  effectual  to 
the  salvation  of  all  them  that  believe.  Having  tasted  its  sweetness,  and  felt  its 
power,  the  believer  has  the  witness  in  himself.  When  the  dark  understanding  is 
enlightened,  the  conscience  awakened,  the  heart  softened,  and  the  sinner  truly 
converted,  what  greater  proof  can  we  have  of  the  power  and  efficacy  of  the  gospel, 
or  of  its  being  worthy  of  its  Divine  Author  ?  5.  By  the  life  and  conversation  of 
such  as  walk  worthy  of  the  gospel.  The  grace  of  God  revealed  in  the  gospel, 
teaches  "  men,  that  denying  ungodUness  and  worldly  lusts,  they  should  live  soberly  " 
Ac.  What  can  be  a  stronger  confirmation  of  the  reality  of  religion,  than  the  change 
it  produces  in  the  lives  and  manners  of  its  professors  ?  6.  By  the  triumphant 
deaths  of  His  saints.  To  see  a  Christian  exulting  in  death  is  an  amazing  instance 
of  the  power  of  faith,  and  of  the  reality  of  true  religion.  Many  an  unbeliever 
has  turned  pale  at  this,  and  been  confounded  with  the  evidence  which  he  had  not 
power  to  resist.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  God's  testimony  to  the  Word  of  His  grace  : — 
I.  This  gospel  is  the  Woed  of  God's  grace  because — 1.  It  is  the  revelation  of  His 
grace.  Its  very  errand  is  to  make  known  that  "  by  grace  are  ye  saved,  through 
faith  "  &c.  2.  It  is  the  history  and  delineation  of  the  grace  of  God.  Study  the  Bible 
with  this  key,  then,  from  the  first  promise  to  the  last  you  find  that  the  key-note  of 
grace  sounds  through  the  whole  glorious  concert.  3.  It  is  the  great  instrument  of 
grace ;  for  God  works  by  His  gospel ;  and  it  is  "  the  power  of  God."    II.  The  Lord 

GAVE    testimony    TO    THB    WoED    OF    HiS     GRACE,   AND    He   DOES    SO   STILL.        1.     God 

has  given  testimony  to  the  Word  of  His  grace — (1)  In  that  wondroui  chain  of 
prophecy  of  what  was  come  upon  the  world.  The  chain  is  still  unbroken,  though 
we  may  not  always  see  it — as  is  the  case  sometimes  in  a  chain  across  a  river,  the 
two  ends  are  visible,  but  the  chain  is  in  the  depth  of  the  river — but  it  is  not  the  less 
knit  together  because  you  cannot  trace  it.  (2)  By  miracles.  2.  But  it  is  said  with 
some  plausibility,  these  supernatural  signs  were  wrought  in  times  past ;  show  us 
some  now.  Now,  this  challenge  may  be  fairly  met.  Surely  every  reflecting  and 
reasonable  man  will  admit  that,  as  far  as  mind  surpasses  matter,  so  much  further 
must  the  mighty  power  put  forth  in  the  mind  surpass  that  put  forth  in  the  body. 
Therefore,  whether  is  it  the  greater  miracle,  to  make  the  deaf  spirit  to  hear,  the 
dumb  spirit  to  sing,  the  dead  spirit  to  have  life  return  to  it,  or  to  raise  the  bodily 
infirm  or  dead  ?  But  were  these  miracles  confined  to  the  past  ?  Could  we  not  show 
these  scornful  philosophers  who  tell  us  there  is  nothing  wonderful  or  preternatural 
now,  the  infidel,  who  has  become  devout  and  humble  ?  not  the  drunkard,  who  has 
become  sober,  the  pubUcan  and  the  harlot,  who  have  become  just  and  pure  ?  3. 
God  bears  testimony  to  the  Word  of  His  grace,  and  to  that  only.  It  is  natural  that 
He  should  be  jealous  of  His  own  blessed  specific,  lest  it  should  be  either  marred  or 
corrupted  by  human  traditions,  or  macerated  by  man's  vain  and  subtle  explaining  it 
away,  or  destroying  its  miraculous  nature.  Wherever  the  simple  grace  of  God  has 
been  set  aside  by  self -righteousness  on  the  one  hand — as  it  is  largely  by  the  Church 
of  Kome — or,  on  the  other  hand,  its  mysterious  and  miraculous  character  denied  by 
those  who  deny  the  divinity  of  Christ  and  the  efficacy  of  the  atonement,  there  may 
have  been  some  moral  influence ;  but  where  are  the  results  that  show  the  new 
creature  ?  The  apostles,  reformers,  martyrs,  with  one  voice  proclaimed  that  God 
bears  testimony  to  the  Word  of  His  grace.  Application  :  It  is  in  the  power  of  the 
humblest  and  plainest  to  give  one  of  the  very  best  evidences  of  the  power  of  the 
gospel  that  ever  can  be  given,  by  leading  a  holy  life.  {H.  Stowell,  M.A.)  God's 
testimony  to  His  Word : — I.  The  iukaoles  which  the  apostles  weought  in 
ATTESTATION  OP  THE  TBUTH  OF  THEiE  DOCTRINE.  And  whcu  the  infidel  sneciingly 
asks,  "  What  connection  is  there  between  truth  and  power,  or  can  the  truth  of  a 
doctrine  be  established  by  a  miracle  ?  "  we  reply,  by  asking  him,  "  What  connection 
is  there  between  a  man's  signature  and  the  validity  of  the  bill  or  bond  which  be  has 
Bubscribed  ?  What  connection  is  there  between  the  credentials  of  an  ambassador 
and  his  right  to  transact  the  business  of  his  sovereign  ? "    Miracles  are  God's  sub* 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chip.  xit. 

Bcription  to  the  truth  of  Christianity ;  and  as  no  man  could  have  wrought  them 
■unless  God  was  with  him,  so  in  proportion  to  their  number  was  testimony  given  to 
the  gospel  of  grace.     II.  The  sdfterings  to  which  the  apostles  and  fibst  Chbis* 

TIANS  WBBE  EXPOSED.  III.  ThE  EARLY  AND  RAPID  PKOPAOATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  Con- 
sidering the  circumstances  in  which  Christianity  was  introduced,  we  should  not 
have  been  surprised  had  it  made  but  slow  progress  in  the  world.  Not  only  are  its 
principles  distasteful  to  the  natural  feelings  of  mankind  ;  it  opposed  itself  to  the 
firmest  prejudices,  to  the  most  estabUshed  opinions  of  those  to  whom  it  was  first 
addressed.  IV.  God  still  testifies  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel  bt  aocompanying 
ITS  proclamation  with  a  spiritual  influence.     {Jas.  Jeffrey. ) 

Vers.  4-7.  But  the  multitude  of  the  city  was  divided. — The  effects  of  the 
gospel : — I,  Division.  "  Behold  I  come  not  to  cause  peace,  but  division."  So  said 
the  Master ;  so  felt  the  disciples.  1.  The  gospel  causes  division  in — (1)  The  man 
himself — between  inclination  and  conviction ;  interest  and  conscience ;  intellect 
and  passion.  (2)  Families,  between  parents  and  children ;  brothers  and  sisters, 
Ac.  (3)  Society.  The  gospel  has  often  sundered  life-long  friendships  and 
associations.  2.  Why  ?  (1)  Because  of  the  incessant  vigilance  and  activity  of  the 
great  enemy  of  the  gospel,  who  stirs  up  opposition  to  it.  (2)  Because  of  the 
revolutionary  power  of  the  gospel.  Men  do  not  Uke  to  have  the  old  convictions, 
customs,  &c.,  disturbed.  There  is  no  objection  per  se  to  the  existence  of  the 
gospel,  if  its  possessors  will  only  keep  quiet.  Professing  Christians  who  make  no 
effort  to  disturb  existing  arrangements  live  quietly  enough.  (3)  Because  of  the 
intolerance  of  the  gospel.  Had  Christians  in  ancient  times  been  content  with  a 
place  for  Christ  in  the  Pantheon  there  would  have  been  no  persecutions ;  it  was 
because  they  claimed  for  Christ  the  only  place,  that  excited  the  ire  of  heathendom. 
And  men  of  all  shades  of  opinion  to-day  would  allow  Christianity  a  place  as 
a  system  of  thought  or  ethics ;  but  it  is  when  she  claims  for  herself  absolute 
and  undisputed  supremacy  in  politics,  society,  business,  Ac,  that  the  conflict 
begins.  II.  Opposition.  "  Part  held  with  the  Jews."  1.  Sympathetically.  There 
is  an  opposition  nowadays  which  does  not  proceed  to  active  antagonism- 
Indifference  to  the  gospel  is  sympathy  with  its  foes.  "  He  that  is  not  for  Me 
is  against  Me."  This  form  of  opposition  is  the  most  difiBcult  to  deal  with.  An 
army  would  sooner  meet  its  enemy  than  pass  through  a  country  secretly  at  league 
with  the  enemy.  What  the  gospel  has  to  dread  is  not  infidel  propaganda,  or 
blatant  vice ;  but  mere  intangible  negativism.  This  we  find  not  only  outside  the 
Churches  but  within.  2.  Actively.  This  opposition  exists  in  various  forms. 
(1)  Intellectual — controversy.  (2)  Political  —  bad  laws.  (3)  Moral  —  vicious 
influence.  (4)  Social — evil  customs.  (5)  Physical — persecution.  III.  Acceptance. 
♦'  Part  with  the  apostles."  This  acceptance  is — 1.  Secret.  There  are  thousands 
like  Nicodemus,  in  heathen  and  Christian  lands,  whose  whole  sympathy  is  with 
the  gospel,  but  who,  for  domestic  or  social  reasons,  withhold  profession.  This  is 
not  to  be  commended,  but  condemned  ;  nevertheless,  in  estimating  the  forces  for 
and  against  the  gospel  it  should  be  considered.  If  it  shows  a  heart  yet  unrenewed, 
it  is  evidence  of  feelings  touched,  intellect  convinced,  and  perhaps  will  trembling 
in  the  balance.  Such  should  be  encouraged  to  not  only  hold  with  the  apostles,  but 
to  stand  boldly  by  their  side.  2.  Public.  To  take  part  thoroughly  with  the 
apostles  is — (1)  To  defend  their  gospel.  (2)  To  assist  them  in  their  work.  Some- 
thing more  is  required  than  to  listen  to  their  teaching  and  to  attend  ordinances  at 
which  they  preside  once  a  week.  Yet  how  many  who  profess  to  be  decided 
Christians  do  no  more.  The  work  of  the  gospel  requires  the  help  of  every 
disciple ;  as  a  matter  of  fact  an  average  congregation  yields  one  worker  to  ten 
members.     [J.  W.  Burn.)         And  when  there  was  an  assault  made  .  .  .  they 

.  .  fled  unto  Lystra  and  Derbe. — Tlie  permitted  flight  of  the  servant  of  God: — 
How  it  takes  place.  I.  After  the  conflict,  as  with  the  apostles  here ;  not  before, 
as  with  Jonah.  II.  In  obedience  to  the  Lord,  and  not  from  fear  of  man  or  carnal 
tenderness.  III.  With  weapons  in  their  hands,  as  the  apostles  continue  to  preach 
with  unbroken  courage,  not  after  having  cast  their  weapons  away.  IV.  To  a 
new  field  of  conflict  (Derbe  and  Lystra),  not  to  rest.  {K.  Gerok.)  And  there 
they  preached  the  gospel. — Gospel  preaching  : — A  new  and  characteristic  incident 
in  the  life  of  that  sweet  singer  of  Israel,  Miss  Havergal,  comes  to  light  in  the 
recently  published  autobiography  of  her  sister.  The  former  was  conversing  with 
a  minister  who  was  not  disposed  to  press  home  the  gospel  message.  "  Oh,  why 
don't  you  preach  the  gospel  of  Christ  ?  "  she  exclaimed.    "  My  congregation  are 


CHAP,  nv,]  THE  ACTS.  382 

well  educated  and  well  acqnainted  with  the  truths  of  salvation ;  if  thej  were  Zulus, 
I  should  preach  differently,"  was  the  reply.      "  Then  let  me  be  a  Zulu  next 
Sunday,"  was  the  rejoinder,  "  and  just  preach  at  me."    A  real  gospel  sermon  waa 
the  result.  It  might  pay  a  minister  now  and  then  to  imagine  some  Zulus  among  hia 
auditors,  and  prepare  his  sermon  accordingly.        The  preaching  of  the  gospel : — 
I.  The  natube  of  the  gospel.     In  etymology,  the  term  signifies  "  glad  tidings." 
In  theology,  the  thing  signified  is  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  through  Christ. 
The  gospel  is  the  new  law  as  distinguished  from  the  old ;  for  there  is  much  gospel 
in  the  old,  and  much  law  in  the  new.    The  gospel  is  the  foundation  of  a  sinner's 
hope  as  distinguished  from  the  rule  of  the  creature's  conduct.     It  is  called  "  the 
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,"  because  the  whole  system  originated  in  the  free  and 
unmerited  favour  of  God;  "the  everlasting  gospel,"  because  it  occupied  the  mind 
of  God  from  eternity,  and  its  blessings  extend  to  the  end  of  time ;  "  the  minis- 
tration of  glory,"  because  it  combines  the  attributes  of  Jehovah ;  "  gospel  of  the 
kingdom,"  because  it  is  the  basis  on  which  the  whole  empire  of  the  Kedeemer 
rests.   It  includes  in  itself  our  Lord's  divinity  and  atoning  sacrifice,  the  justification 
of  the  sinner  by  faith,  the  renovation  of  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  universal 
invitation  to  all  sinners  to  avail  themselves  of  its  provisions,  the  promise  that  all 
that  believe  shall  be  saved.     II.  To  preach  the  gospel  is  to   exhibit — 1.   The 
crucifixion  of  Christ  as  a  fact,  in   connection  with  the  design  of  that  fact,  as 
connected  with  the  moral  government  of  God.     2.    Christ  in  the  divinity  of  EQa 
person.     The  divinity  of  Christ  is  essential  to  His  atonement.     3.  The  atonement 
and  righteousness  of  Christ,  as  the  exclusive  foundation  of  the  sinner's  hope  of 
acceptance  before  God.     4.  The  death  of  Christ  as  the  great  means,  in  the  hand  of 
the  Spirit,  for  the  sanctification  of  the  sinner's  heart.     5.  An  invitation  of  mercy 
co-extensive  with  the  aspect  of  the  atonement,  and  both  as  co-extensive  with  the 
.  wretchedness  of  human  guilt  and  misery.     6.  The  supreme  and  ultimate  object  of 
the  Christian's  hope,  namely,  the  second  advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when 
He  shall  come  without  sin  unto  salvation.    IH.  The  importance  of  preaching  thb 
GOSPEL.     Consider — 1.  The  subhmity  of  its  ultimate  design — the  salvation  of  the 
soul.     The  proudest  monuments  of  genius  are  not  worth  a  thought,  compared  with 
the  salvation  of  one  of  those  children  that  belong  to  your  Sunday  school.     2.  Its 
collateral  benefits  on  the  individual  and  society.     I  am  aware  that  education  is  the 
idol  of  the  day,  that  knowledge  is  sounded  forth  ;  and  let  it  be  sounded  forth,  for 
it  is  not  good  for  the  soul  of  man  to  be  without  it ;  but  we  are  mistaken  if  we 
suppose  that  anything  short  of  a  preached  gospel  will  purify  society  or  elevate  the 
human  race,  and  meet  the  moral  necessities  of  men.     3.  Its  adaptation  to   effect 
these  things.     Where  can  we  find  such  a  message  from  God  to  engage  us  ?     Where 
such  power  calculated  to  subdue  our  hearts  ?      Where  such  a  token  of  good- will 
towards  the  sinner  as  in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?    4.  Its  effects  in  the 
world.     Conclusion  :  Learn — 1.  The  main  purpose  of  a  Christian  place  of  worship — 
the  preaching  and  hearing  of  the  gospel.     2.  The  great  business  and  duty  of  the 
minister  of  rehgion  to  preach  Christ.   3.  How  important  it  is  to  private  Christians, 
to  feel  their  obligation  to  provide  places  of  worship  I     4.  If  it  is  our  obligation  to 
preach  the  gospel,  it  is  yours  to   receive  it.     {J.  Angell  James.)        The  goapel 
ministry : — I.  The  subject  which  the  text  presents  to  our  attention — "  The 
(gospel, "    If  you  examine  the  gospel  as  it  was  preached  by  Christ  and  His  apostles, 
you  wiU  discover  that  merely  to  inculcate  Christian  virtues  or  to  describe  a  future 
state,  is  not  preaching  the  gospel.   Every  system  must  have  some  leading  principles 
which  are  essential  to  it,  and  when  these  are  renounced  or  overlooked,  the  system 
itself  is  opposed  or  concealed.    Look  at  the  meaning  of  the  word  "gospel " — "  Glad 
tidings  of  great  joy,"  &c.     Therefore,  to  preach  the  gospel  is  to  imitate  the  angelic 
host,  to  preach  Christ.     If  there  be  not  a  full  and  plain  declaration  of  "  Christ  and 
Him  crucified,"  then  there  is  an  awful  void  in  the  preacher's  message.     We  are  as 
the  heralds  of  mercy,  to  exhibit  the  atonement  and  righteousness  of  Christ,  as  the 
exclusive  foundation  of  the  Christian's  hope  of  acceptance  before  God.     Without 
the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  there  can   be  no  gospel.      Let  it  only  be 
alleged,  or  even  hinted,  that  there  is  something  more  than  the  work  of  Christ 
necessary  for  the  reconciliation  of  a  sinner  to  God,  and  the  silver  trumpet  falls 
from  the  lips  of  the  preacher,  and,  to  be  a  little  more  particular,  we  may  remark 
that  the  Christian  minister  must  proclaim  Christ  to  his  hearers  as — 1.  A  suitable 
Saviour.     We  are  enslaved,  and  need  a  Eedeemer ;  diseased,  and  need  a  physician; 
perishing,  and  require  a  benefactor;  condemned,  and  want  pardon.     Christ  is  our 
King,  Benefactor,  Physician,  Kedeemer,  Saviour.     2.  An  Almighty  Saviour.    He  ia 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ht. 

the  maker  and  upholder  of  all  things.  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  all 
fulness  should  dwell."  See  whom  He  has  saved  1  Many  of  the  most  guilty  of  the 
human  race.  And  this  assures  us  that  He  can  •'  save  to  the  uttermost  all  who 
come  unto  God  by  Him."  3.  A  willing  Saviour,  His  invitations  are  given  to 
all  sinners,  without  exception.  4.  An  everlasting  Saviour.  He  "  is  the  Author 
of  eternal  salvation  "  ;  He  gives  "  a  kingdom  that  cannot  be  shaken  " — "  a  crown 
of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away."  II.  The  manneb  in  which  the  gospel  is  to  bb 
PBocLAiMED,  namely,  by  preaching.  When  the  Saviour  ascended  up  on  high.  He 
"  received  gifts  for  men."  "And  He  gave  some  apostles,"  &c.  But  for  how  long 
was  this  to  continue?  "Until  we  all  come  to  the  unity  of  the  faith,"  <fec.  The 
gospel  trumpet  is  to  be  blown  until  its  sound  shall  be  succeeded  by  the  voice  of  the 
archangel  and  the  trump  of  God.  The  office  of  preaching  is  not  only  a  wise 
institution,  but  one  of  paramount  importance.  This  will  be  seen  if  we  appeal  to — 
1.  The  declarations  of  God.  What  was  to  crown,  according  to  Jeremiah,  the  return 
of  the  Jews  from  the  Babylonish  captivity  into  their  own  land ?  "I  will  give 
them,"  says  God,  •'  pastors  after  Mine  own  heart,"  &o.  What  does  Isaiah  consider 
as  a  compensation  for  aJl  the  calamities  of  life  ?  *•  Though  the  Lord  give  you 
the  bread  of  adversity  .  .  .  yet  shall  not  thy  teachers  be  removed  into  a  comer  any 
more."  2.  The  adaptation  of  preaching  to  extensive  usefulness.  There  is  no  mode 
of  communicating  information  that  can  awaken  hall  the  attention,  or  excite  hall 
the  interest,  that  the  ordinance  of  preaching  does ;  it  is  not  only  the  understanding 
speaking  to  the  understanding,  but  the  heart  speaking  to  the  heart,  and  the 
conscience  to  the  conscience.  So  that  by  this  engine,  if  rightly  used,  every  power 
of  the  mind  is  effected,  and  every  feeling  of  the  soul  is  touched  and  excited.  3.  Its 
design.  The  profession  of  a  lawyer  is  important,  because  it  affects  oar  property ; 
and  that  of  a  physician,  because  it  concerns  our  health ;  but  these  are  nothing, 
whencompared  with  the  soul  and  eternity;  and  with  these,  the  ministerial  office  is 
peculiarly  concerned  ;  and  by  these,  it  is  infinitely  dignified.     III.  The  condition 

OF    THOSE    PLACES    IN  WHICH  THE  GOSPEL  HAS  BEEN  PROCLAIMED.       1.    Every  SUCh  plaCe 

is  peculiarly  favoured.  In  other  places  there  is  no  heavenly  bread,  no  water  of 
consolation  for  the  support  of  the  soul.  Capernaum,  a  little  fishing-place,  was 
"  exalted  to  heaven,"  because  there  Christ  preached  the  gospel.  You  should 
think  of  this  when  you  change  your  residence,  and  when  you  make  excarsions  for 
health.  On  such  occasions  ask,  not  only,  •'  Is  there  a  good  air  ?  Is  there 
delightful  scenery  ? "  but  also,  "  Is  the  gospel  proclaimed  there  7 "  2.  Its 
inhabitants  are  awfully  responsible.  If  you  perish,  you  will  have  no  cloak  for  your 
sin,  and  no  alleviation  of  your  punishment.  ' '  It  will  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre 
and  Sidon,  at  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  you,"  if  you  neglect  the  gospel.  (T. 
Gibson,  M.A.)  The  gospel  for  all: — "Go  into  all  the  world,"  was  our  Lord's 
command  to  His  disciples,  "  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  They  might 
have  said  in  objection,  that  some  parts  of  the  world  were  philosophical  and  refined; 
that  other  parts  were  uncivilised  and  rude.  Their  Master  held  those  objections  to 
be  nothing  worth.  Hence  we  find  them  in  Jerusalem,  for  one  place ;  we  find  them 
by  and  by  in  Ephesus  and  Athens ;  and  here  in  what  may  fairly  be  called  a  rural  and 
outlandish  place.  There,  exactly  as  in  other  places,  they  just  did  what  that  text 
declares.  "There  they  preached  the  gospel."  Where?  Anywhere.  I.  Because 
IN  EVEBT  PLACE  THE  GOSPEL  IS  WANTED.  Man  may  be  regarded  as  addicted  to  religion. 
Man  has  never  been  found  without  having  as  to  his  intellect  the  power,  and  as  to 
his  heart  the  solicitude  to  use  that  power,  of  trusting  to  some  objects  which  are 
superior  to  himself.  Hence  it  is,  that  we  have  all  manner  of  religions  very 
generally.  The  Hottentot  has  his  religion,  and  the  Esquimaux  has  his.  But  now, 
how  comes  man  to  be  thus  affected  everywhere  ?  I  believe  that  it  is  by  a  necessity 
of  his  nature.  Men  want  to  have  strength  found  them  for  their  weakness,  and  light 
for  their  darkness,  and  wisdom  for  their  ignorance,  and  pardon  for  their  sin.  You 
may  find  Atheism  trying  to  get  that  instinct  out  of  man's  nature  ;  but  you  will  find 
humanity  revolting  from  it ;  and,  if  it  has  not  got  the  true  rehgion,  it  will  somehow 
or  other  try  to  content  itself  with  a  false.  Why  is  it  that  men  will  put  up  with 
heavy  self-denial  and  sacrifice  of  the  very  best,  and  sometimes  to  an  unknown  God? 
Here  hes  the  mystery  of  it  ail — "  they  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of 
God."  They  want  to  have  their  relations  with  their  Maker  rectified  into  the 
position  whence  sin  took  them.  And  unto  that  position  the  gospel  offers  to  bring 
them.  Whether  a  man  be  a  peasant  or  a  prince,  whether  he  be  a  Pagan  or  a 
nominal  Christian,  the  man  stands  in  need  of  that  gospel ;  let  that  be  preached  to 
him,  and  he  accept  it,  and  the  aspirations  of  his  humanity  are  all  met;  his  troubled 


CHAP,  xrv.]  THE  ACTS.  885 

heart  is  tranquillised,  and  his  guilt  forgiven.  "  There  they  preached  the  gospel" : 
in  the  antipodes  ;  here,  in  some  mission  room,  aye,  and  by  the  side  of  some  sick 
and  dying  bed,  in  a  London  attic,  "  there  they  preach  the  gospel "  :  why?  Because 
nothing  but  the  "  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  "  would  avail  for  the  misery  and  spiritual 
want  that  are  discovered  there.  II.  Because  in  eveby  place  undeb  heaven  the 
GOSPEL  MAY  BE  PEOCLAiMED.  Different  forms  of  religion  to  a  large  extent  have  arisen 
out  of  the  circumstances  of  the  particular  place,  or  have  got  associated  almost 
exclusively  with  the  peculiarities  of  some  time,  or  apostle.  There  is,  e.g.^ 
Hindooism,  that  needs  such  a  place  as  Hindostan  with  its  great  rivers.  The 
rehgion  of  the  Caffre  is  well  adapted  to  all  the  region  of  Caffraria.  Mahometan- 
ism  tells  aU  its  votaries  that  they  are  not  to  touch  food  from  sunrise  to  sunset. 
Now,  how  could  that  be  attended  to  in  those  lands  where  the  sun  never  sets  and 
rises  for  weeks  together?  A  disciple  of  Vishnu  or  Brahma  could  not  proclaim 
his  religion  here  so  as  to  carry  into  operation  all  its  requirements.  It  was  not 
made  for  man,  it  will  not  do  for  man.  But  this  heaven-born  gospel  of  ours,  the 
land  does  not  exist  to  which  you  could  not  take  it ;  the  man  cannot  be  found  by 
whom  its  sacred  precepts  and  doctrines  might  not  be  received  and  followed  out. 
Spiritual  in  its  nature,  and  simple  in  its  ritual,  it  can  go  anywhere.  "  There  they 
preached  the  gospel."  There  among  the  luxurious  groves  of  the  Asiatic ;  there 
among  the  consolidated   snowa  of  Lapland.      III.  For  eveeywheee  the   gospel 

IS   ADAPTED   TO    ALL   THE    CIECUMSTANCE3    OF    MANKIND,    BE    THEY  WHAT    THEY    MAY.       1. 

There  are  peculiarities  touching  age  and  with  all  those  peculiarities  there  come 
corresponding  necessities.  The  young  man  looks  forward  to  his  Life  ;  everything 
appears  to  him  bright  and  auspicious:  he  is  brimful  and  overrunning  with  human 
life.  Now  the  gospel  puts  before  him  another  medium,  and  in  God's  light  tells  him 
to  see  light ;  tells  him  to  understand  that  there  are  difficulties  and  adversities  and 
vicissitudes,  but  bids  him  trust,  and  not  be  dismayed,  for  all  that.  There  is  the 
man  of  business,  and  there  the  gospel  stands,  not  telling  him  to  exchange 
commercial  life  for  conventual,  but  to  buy,  sell,  and  get  gain  as  seeing  God  who  is 
invisible.  Then  there  is  the  mother  in  the  midst  of  her  family,  the  old  man,  &c. 
"  There  they  preached  the  gospel."  To  be  sure  they  did ;  whatever  may  be  the 
variety  of  our  necessities,  the  gospel  has  a  word,  and  has  provision  for  them  all. 
2.  There  are  the  differences  of  constitutional  temperament.  Some  men  are  lively, 
others  taciturn ;  and  there  are  gradations  between  thene  two  extremes.  "  There 
they  preached  the  gospel,"  because  it  was  not  a  thing  for  a  great  occasion,  or  for 
the  salvation  of  the  soul  only,  but  in  this  present  evil  world  to  be  as  a  portion  in 
due  season.  Is  impulse  required,  or  restraint,  or  equanimity  ?  The  gospel  provides 
it  all.  I  have  seen  it  take  a  selfish  man  and  make  him  generous  ;  take  a  timid 
man  and  make  him  brave;  take  a  man  proud  and  austere,  and  make  him  congenial 
and  kindly.  3.  There  are  peculiarities  in  intellectual  power,  and  in  corresponding 
intellectual  attainment.  5fow,  take  the  man  that  is  not  very  intellectual,  and 
the  man  that  is  profoimdly  intellectual ;  they  both  want  the  glad  tidings  ;  to  both 
of  them  are  the  tidings  preached.  There  was  "The  Dairyman's  Daughter,"  and 
there  was  Sir  Isaac  Newton.  When  the  one  was  weary  with  his  intellectuKl  work, 
and  the  other  with  her  uninteUectual  work,  where  did  they  go  ?  They  sat  down  by 
the  same  Book,  read  about  the  same  Saviour,  and  both  of  them  set  their  seal  to  it 
that  God  is  true.  4.  There  are  peculiarities  as  to  guilt  and  crimioality.  All  men 
are  not  alike  bad  ;  there  is  the  minimum  and  there  is  the  maximum  of  human 
guilt.  The  gospel  is  adapted  to  the  drunkard,  to  the  profane,  to  the  voluptuous, 
to  the  outcast  of  every  kind ;  not  that  he  may  go  on  living  in  sin  that  grace  may 
abound ;  but  suited  to  him,  to  "  bring  him  up  out  of  the  horrible  pit  and  the  miry 
clay."  IV.  Because  anywhebe  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  may  be  proffeeed 
UNIVERSALLY,  AND  TO  INDIVIDUAL  PERSONS.  We  must  not  Call  uucommon  what  God 
has  called  common;  we  must  not  restrict  what  God  has  left  unlimited.  (IF. 
Brock,  D.D.)  The  insiifflcient  and   the   efficacious : — What   will   convince  and 

convert  men?  What  will  revive  and  enlarge  the  Church  of  God?  Many  means 
are  useful ;  one  only  is  efficacious.  1.  The  voice  of  God  in  nature  is  not  sufficient. 
2.  Miracles  do  not  avail.  3.  Zeal,  however  ardent,  coiues  short.  4.  Machinery, 
perfect  though  it  be — good  preaching,  a  strong  Church,  all  the  ordinances  of  God's 
house,  Sunday  schools,  &c. — does  not  convert  souls  or  give  life  to  the  people  of 
God.  The  only  efficacious  instrument  is  God's  truth,  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of 
God,  the  gospel  faithfully  preached  and  made  efficacious  by  the  agency  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  it  was  at  Lystra  and  at  Jerusalem  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  as  it  is 
now  wherever  the  conditions  are  faithfully  observed.  {Homiletic  Eeview.) 
YOU   IL  2& 


386  T3E  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrr. 

Vers.  8-18.  And  there  sat  a  certain  man  at  Lystra. — Paul  and  Barnahaa  in 
Lystra  : — I.  The  incident.  1.  The  case  of  the  cripple  resembles  that  of  the  man 
at  the  gate  Beautiful;  and  a  particular  statement  of  it  is  given,  to  show  the 
reality  and  the  greatness  of  the  miracle.  It  was  not  an  incidental,  but  a  radical 
infirmity  which  was  removed,  He  had  been  lame  from  his  birth.  His  cure,  there- 
fore, would  appear  to  all  to  be  the  effect,  not  of  superior  skill,  but  of  supematoral 
power.  Thus  the  design  of  the  miracle  would  be  gained,  which  was  not  only  to  re- 
lieve the  patient,  but  to  demonstrate  that  God  was  present  with  Paul  and  Barnabas, 
and  consequently  that  their  doctrine  was  true.  Miracles  are  a  sign  "  to  them  that 
believe  not."  They  are  not  merely  prodigies  intended  to  raise  wonder.  To  the 
Jews  the  argument  from  prophecy  was  sufficient;  and  accordingly,  we  find  the 
apostles  insisting  much  upon  it  in  their  discourses  to  that  people.  But  to  the 
Gentiles  it  would  not  have  been  addressed  with  propriety,  because  they  were  not 
acquainted  with  the  prophecies.  Miracles,  however,  were  an  obvious  and  easy 
species  of  evidence.  2.  Paul  perceived  that  the  lame  man  had  "  faith  to  be 
healed."  This  faith  seems  to  signify  either  a  general  behef  of  the  power  of  Barna- 
bas and  Paul,  or  rather  of  Jesus  Christ,  whose  ministers  they  were,  to  cure  his  in- 
firmity ;  or  a  persuasion  that  a  cure  would  be  performed  upon  himself  in  particular. 
In  the  former  case,  his  faith  was  founded  on  the  account  which  he  had  heard  of  the 
character  and  miracles  of  Christ,  and  of  the  gifts  of  healing  which  He  had  bestowed 
on  His  apostles  ;  in  the  latter  it  was  the  effect  of  a  supernatural  impression  on  hia 
mind.  This  faith  Paul  perceived  by  the  power  of  discerning  spirits.  "  Paul  there- 
fore said,  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet.  And  he  leaped  and  walked,"  and  the  cure 
instantly  followed  the  command.  3.  Paul  said,  "with  a  loud  voice."  The  circum- 
stances in  which  the  miracles  of  the  gospel  were  performed  leave  no  room  for  sus- 
pecting that  they  were  dexterous  impositions  on  the  credulity  of  mankind.  They 
were  not  done  in  a  corner,  but  in  the  chief  places  of  concourse.  The  juggling 
tricks  of  heathenism  need  only  to  be  strictly  examined  to  be  rejected 
with  contempt ;  whereas  the  miracles  of  Christianity  are  displays  of  omnipotent 
power,  which  wiU  be  the  more  admired  the  more  closely  they  are  considered.  4. 
The  evidence  of  miracles  is  not  irresistible,  but  may  be  counteracted  by  the  power 
of  prejudice.  The  Jews  attributed  those  of  our  Saviour  to  Satanical  influence;  the 
Gentiles  believed  that  those  of  the  apostles  were  operations  of  magic ;  and  the  in- 
habitants of  Lystra  were  disposed  to  turn  this  miracle  into  an  argument  in  favour 
of  their  own  idolatrous  religion  (ver.  11,  &c.).  As  soon  as  the  idea  was  adopted, 
that  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  gods,  the  people  assigned  to  them  their  respective 
names.  If  the  gods  bad  condescended  to  visit  the  city  of  Lystra,  religion  required 
that  they  should  be  received  with  appropriate  honours  ;  but  the  sacrifice  was  pre- 
vented by  the  zeal  of  Barnabas  and  Paul,  who  "  ran  in  among  them,  saying,  Sirs, 
why  do  ye  these  things  ?  We  are  fellow-mortals."  Their  being  of  "  like  passions  " 
with  themselves  would  not  have  appeared  a  good  reason  why  Paul  and  Barna- 
bas should  not  be  worshipped  :  for  Jupiter  and  Mercury,  and  all  the  rest,  if  history 
might  be  credited,  had  given  many  shocking  displays  of  them.  But  if  they  were 
feUow-mortals,  beings  subject,  like  others,  to  disease  and  death,  it  was  evident  that 
they  were  not  gods.  Mortals,  indeed,  there  have  been,  who  demanded  reUgioua 
honours ;  and  base  flatterers  have  not  been  wanting  to  comply  with  the  extravagant 
request.  Some  of  the  Eoman  emperors  were  deified  during  their  lives.  But,  surely, 
the  worshippers  and  the  worshipped  must  have  secretly  regarded  one  another  with 
mutual  contempt.  Jealous  of  the  glory  of  the  true  God,  the  apostles  rejected,  with 
abhorrence,  any  honour  offered  to  themselves  which  intrenched  on  His  prerogative. 
5.  In  the  Old  Testament  the  heathen  gods  are  frequently  styled  vanities.  Of  the 
deities,  whom  the  blinded  nations  adored,  some  had  no  existence  except  in  the 
imagination  of  their  worshippers  ;  and  the  rest  were  dead  men  and  women,  whom 
the  gratitude  and  admiration  of  posterity  had  consecrated.  Their  images,  in  which 
a  Divine  virtue  was  supposed  to  reside,  were  alike  unworthy  of  religious  honours 
and  incapable  of  doing  good  or  evil,  as  inanimate  matter  in  any  other  shape  (Psa. 
cxxxv.  1(5-18).  These  pretended  gods,  and  their  unprofitable  service,  the  apostles 
call  upon  the  men  of  Lystra  to  forsake,  and  henceforward  to  worship  "  the  living 
God  " — Jehovah,  the  self-existent  Being,  the  source  of  life  to  all  who  breathe.  6. 
But  if  the  God,  whom  Paul  and  Barnabas  preached,  was  the  true  God,  why  was  He 
Bo  late  in  asserting  His  claim  to  their  homage?  To  obviate  this  objection  against 
the  Christian  doctrine  as  a  novel  system,  the  apostles  add,  "  Who  in  times  past 
suffered  all  nations  to  walk  in  their  own  ways."  Although  He  did  not  leave  Himself 
altogethcjc  without  a  witness,  yet  He  employed  no  extraordinary  means  to  stem  the 


XHAP.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS.  S87 

torrent  of  apostacy.  No  prophet  arose  among  them  to  reprove  their  errors  and  re- 
store the  knowledge  and  service  of  the  Creator.  "  The  times  of  this  ignorance  He 
■winked  at,"  seeming  to  take  no  notice  of  it,  as  a  man  closes  his  eyes  that  he  may 
not  observe  what  is  passing  around  him.  Every  nation  was  suffered  to  adopt  what- 
ever form  of  religion  was  most  agreeable  to  its  taste.  Idolatry  seems  to  have  begun 
early  after  the  flood.  It  was  practised  in  the  family  of  Abraham  prior  to  his  call 
(Josh.  xxiv.  2).  7.  But  this  idolatry  was  inexcusable,  because  "  God  did  not  leave 
Himself  without  a  witness,"  &c.  No  man,  who  consults  his  reason,  can  consider 
the  productions  of  the  earth  as  the  result  of  chance,  because  chance  signifies  no 
cause  of  any  kind,  but  merely  expresses  our  ignorance.  It  is  not  less  irrational  to 
imagine  that  vegetation  is  the  effect  of  certain  independent  qualities  or  powers  of 
matter.  Wherever  we  observe  design,  reason  and  experience  point  to  an  intelligent 
agent.  The  process  by  which  "  our  hearts  are  filled  with  food  and  gladness,"  consists 
of  80  many  steps  aU  conducting  to  a  specific  termination,  that  no  person  can  survey 
them  without  an  immediate  conviction  of  the  existence  and  providence  of  God. 
The  heathens,  amidst  all  their  ignorance,  were  not  so  atheistical  as  some  modem 
philosophers.  They  erred  only  in  overlooking  the  true  Author  of  their  enjoyments, 
and  returning  thanks  for  their  fruitful  seasons  to  Jupiter,  and  Ceres,  and  Pomona, 
instead  of  acknowledging  the  various  productions  of  the  earth  to  be  the  work  of 
one  God,  "  from  whom  cometh  down  every  good  and  perfect  gift."  TL.  Its  lessons. 
1.  We  learn  from  this  passage  that  the  contemplation  of  nature  should  be  rendered 
subservient  to  the  purposes  of  piety.  Man  is  dehghted  with  the  view  of  what  is 
sublime  and  beautiful,  and  with  instances  of  curious  contrivances  and  exquisite 
workmanship ;  but  the  ultimate  design  of  this  delight  is  to  conduct  him  to  the 
knowledge  and  love  of  its  Author.  Philosophy  vrill  afford  us  much  entertainment 
by  unfolding  the  secret  operations  of  nature ;  but  the  pleasure  of  the  unlettered 
Christian  is  incomparably  greater  when  he  traces,  in  the  grand  outUnes  of  crea- 
tion, the  footsteps  of  his  Father,  and  the  smiles  of  His  goodness.  2.  Let  us  give 
thanks  to  God  for  our  deliverance  from  idolatry.  It  is  not  to  reason  that  we  are  in- 
debted for  this  deliverance.  We  indeed  find  no  difficulty  in  proving  that  there  is  only 
one  God,  who  ought  to  be  worshipped ;  but  to  demonstrate  a  truth  already  known 
is  a  much  easier  task  than  to  discover  a  truth  buried  under  the  rubbish  of  prejudice 
and  superstition.  The  wisest  and  greatest  men  of  antiquity  were  polytheists.  Were 
Christianity  banished,  the  absurd  and  exploded  systems  of  Paganism  would  be  re- 
stored. No  sooner  had  the  French  nation  renounced  the  rehgion  of  Christ  than 
they  began  to  worship  the  Goddess  of  Beason,  3.  As  we  profess  to  be  the  servants 
of  the  living  God,  let  us  remember  that  it  is  a  pure  and  spiritual  worship  which  He 
requires.  He  must  not  be  treated  as  one  of  the  idols  of  the  Gentiles,  to  whom 
their  votaries  presented  the  empty  homage  of  ceremonies  and  oblations.  Then  only 
do  we  serve  Him  when  we  present  to  Him  the  offering  of  our  hearts,  commit 
ourselves  to  the  direction  of  His  wisdom,  submit  to  His  authority,  and  regulate  our 
thoughts  and  actions  by  His  law.  {J.  Dick,  D.D.)  Apostolic  service  and  tempta- 
tion:— 1.  This  man  would  not  be  admitted  into  a  drawing-room ;  he  would  be  a  spoil 
on  any  feast  of  high  conviviality ;  but  Christianity  always  begins  with  the  cripples. 
It  will  begin  anywhere.  Its  one  cry  is,  "  Give  me  a  man,"  and  in  reply  to  this  the 
cripple  has  always  been  given.  This  is  the  defence  of  the  Church,  that  it  shuts  out 
no  man,  but  finds  a  seat  even  for  the  cripple  who  cannot  stand.  2.  Paul  perceived 
"  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed."  That  man  is  here  ;  don't  teU  me  you  are  not  a 
Christian ;  your  being  here  means  Believest  thou  the  prophets  ?  I  know  that  thou 
beUevest.  What  you  want  is  the  faith  to  use  faith,  confidence  to  use  the  power  you 
have.  The  great,  kind  sea  waits  for  you.  It  is  a  great  easy  nurse,  and  says,  "  Come, 
throw  yourselves  right  upon  me,  and  you  shall  not  sink."  Who  can  teU  but  that 
some  poor  soul  now  may  say,  "  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief  "  ?  If  so, 
this  will  be  the  day  of  miracle.  3.  I  vrish  we  could  be  as  sure  that  Paul  is  here  as 
that  the  cripple  is.  You  have  here  an  illustration  of  Paul's  insight  into  character. 
Not  long  since  we  noticed  that  Barnabas  "  saw  the  grace  of  God."  What  eyes  those 
men  had.  They  knew  faith  when  it  was  only  a  light  in  the  face,  a  gleam  in  the  eye. 
There  is  more  faith  in  the  world  than  the  preachers  have  yet  conceived.  We  make 
great  mistakes  in  confounding  one  character  with  another,  and  in  mistaking  the 
jymptoms  that  are  offered  in  order  to  deceive  the  very  elect.  Many  a  man  laughs 
to  keep  you  off  the  scent ;  whilst  under  his  assumed  gaiety  his  heart  is  suffering 
from  the  bite  of  an  adder.  Many  a  man  is  silent  who  wants  to  speak.  You 
have  thought  him  cold,  distant,  indifferent,  whereas  in  his  heart  he  has  beon 
saying,  ••  Would  God  I  knew  bow  to  begin."  Let  us  pray  for  the  spirit  of  discerning, 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nw 

and  80  use  that  spirit  as  to  bring  men  who  have  taken  one  step  on  the  right  road 
forward  on  their  journey.  4.  Why  did  Paul  speak  "  with  a  loud  voice  "  ?  Some 
people  object  to  loud  voices — they  say  they  could  hear  quite  well  if  the  preacher  did 
not  exert  himself  so.  It  is  not  enough  to  hear — you  must  overhear.  An  utterance 
must  not  deliver  its  own  syllables  only,  but  take  with  it  heart,  fire,  life.  If  you  had 
spoken  with  a  sublimer  audacity  you  would  have  elicited  a  nobler  reply.  People 
knew  that  Christ  spoke  with  authority,  and  Paul's  heart  went  with  his  voice,  and 
his  every  syllable  was  glorified  into  a  power.  5.  Not  only  had  Paul  keen  insight  into 
the  character  of  others,  he  had  also  keen  insight  into  his  own  spirit.  That  kept 
him  right.  The  high-priest  of  Jupiter  was  prepared  to  offer  sacrifice  to  him ;  but 
he  cried,  ♦•  We  also  are  men  of  Uke  passions  with  you."  Their  self-knowledge  was, 
humanly  speaking,  their  salvation.  If  we  knew  ourselves  we  could  not  so  inhale 
the  incense  of  adulation  as  to  lose  our  balance.  Let  all  men  know  themselves  to  be 
but  men,  and  then  eulogium  will  bring  with  it  honest  encouragement,  and  instead 
of  offering  sacrifices,  we  shall  offer  the  nobler  homage  of  confidence  and  love.  6. 
This  narrative  throws  some  hght  upon  Christianity  itself.  Christianity  makes 
people  do  what  they  never  did  before.  The  man  had  never  walked.  Christianity 
does  not  make  us  do  things  a  Uttle  better  than  we  did  them  before ;  it  makes  us  do 
things  we  and  the  world  thought  it  impossible  for  us  ever  to  do.  When  the  priest 
of  Jupiter  saw  what  was  done,  he  was  prepared  to  put  the  knife  to  Jupiter's  own 
throat.  Christianity  must  vindicate  itself  by  the  men  it  makes.  Convince  the 
priests  of  Jupiter,  not  by  eloquent  reasoning,  but  by  noble  manhood.  7.  The  man 
•'  leaped  and  walked."  You  cannot  leap  long — the  law  of  gravitation  is  against  that 
— but  you  can  walk  all  your  lifetime.  A  man  leaping  always  is  beside  himself  ;  a 
man  walking  has  serious  business,  and  he  is  going  to  do  it.  We  cannot  hve  in  rap- 
tures, but  we  must  leap  at  first.  Those  who  have  seen  God,  and  have  received  of 
His  strength,  mount  up  as  on  the  wings  of  eagles :  then  they  run,  then  they  walk. 
It  would  be  pleasant  to  see  some  of  us  leaping  a  little.  Without  enthusiasm,  what 
is  the  Church  ?  It  is  Vesuvius  without  fire  ;  it  is  Niagara  without  water ;  it  is  the 
firmament  without  the  sun.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Worship :  the  false  and  the 
true: — I.  Man  worship.  Look  at — 1.  The  great  miracle.  (1)  The  cripple.  His 
condition  was,  humanly  speaking,  hopeless.  So  the  sinner  (Rom.  vii.  18  ;  Psa. 
li.  5).  (2)  The  cure.  Look  at  the  steps,  (o)  "  The  same  heard  Paul  speaking." 
The  gospel  came  with  healing  to  the  soul  before  healing  was  given  to  his  body,  (b) 
Perceiving  how  undoubting  was  the  man's  faith  in  Christ  as  a  Saviour,  Paul  saw 
that  he  would  have  just  as  much  faith  in  Him  as  a  healer,  (c)  "  Stand  upright  on 
thy  feet."  To  that  clarion  call  all  the  energies  of  the  lame  man's  being  responded. 
The  sense  of  impotence  gave  place  to  a  sense  of  power.  There  was  a  second 
miracle  in  the  leaping  and  walking ;  for  with  man  walking  and  leaping  are  the 
result  of  many  trials  and  failures.  2.  The  great  mistake.  The  miracle  set  the 
people  reasoning.  By  no  mere  human  power  could  such  a  wonder  be  performed ; 
therefore  these  men  must  be  gods.  Even  the  priest  of  Jupiter  himself  came  to  do 
priestly  homage.  II.  True  worship.  Some  would  have  let  the  people  suppose  for 
a  time  that  their  surmise  was  true.  It  would  give  them  influence,  and  gradually, 
they  could  turn  attention  away  from  themselves  to  Christ,  &o.  But  the  false  never 
can  represent  the  true.   How  did  Paul  and  Barnabas  act  ?   1.  Self -worship  rejected. 

(1)  The  apostles'  horror.    Evidently  no  such  temptation  had  appealed  to  them. 

(2)  The  apostles'  declaration.  "  We  also  are  men,"  &c.  Capable  of  suffering,  and 
hence  unlike  gods.  (3)  The  apostles'  mission.  "  Bring  you  good  tidings,  that  ye 
should  turn  from  these  vain  things  unto  the  living  God."  The  worship  of  the  living 
God  is  the  only  one  that  brings  returns.  AH  other  worship  is  empty  of  results — a 
waste  of  time,  of  means,  of  energy — an  eternal  disappointment.  2.  True  worship 
enjoined.  The  sermon  of  the  apostles  is  short,  but  it  presents  God — (1)  As  Creator. 
"  Who  made  the  heaven,"  &o.  God  was  "living,"  while  their  gods  were  of  stone, 
or  of  their  own  imagination.  He  was  self -existent — their  gods  were  "vanities." 
(2)  As  Father,  (a)  Indulgent.  "  Who  suffered  aU  nations  to  walk  in  tlieir  own  ways." 
He  would  not  compel  their  adoration,  but  left  it  to  themselves  to  find  out  that  evil 
was  hurtful,  idolatry  nothing  but  vanity,  and  that  the  wages  of  sin  is  death,  (b) 
FaithfuL  "  Yet  He  left  Himself  not  without  witness,  in  tliat  He  did  good."  Tne 
apostacy  of  the  nations  did  not  cause  God  to  turn  away  from  them.  With  infinite 
patience,  born  of  infinite  love,  He  continued  to  treat  them  as  though  they  were  His 
children,  (c)  Provident.  "  And  gave  you  from  heaven  rain,"  <fec.  With  wonder- 
ful kindness  our  Father  "  maketh  His  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  the  good,"  Ac. 
His  love  and  goodness  continually  plead  with  men  to  repent.     "  And  with  the:>o 


«HAP.  xiT.]  TEE  ACTS.  388 

sayings  scarce  retained  they,"  &q.  The  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  ra 
them  to  do  evil.  It  is  as  hard  sometimes  to  turn  them  as  it  is  to  turn  the  course 
of  a  river.     (M.  C.  Hazard.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  same  heard  Pattl  speak :  who  . . .  perceiving  that  he  had  faith 
to  be  healed,  said  .  .  .  Stand  upright. — Faith  to  he  healed : — I.  What  preceded 
HIS  FAITH?  Faith  Cometh  by  hearing;  but  the  hearing  of  what?  The  gospel 
(ver.  7).  Yes,  he  declared  to  these  ignorant,  superstitious  fanatics  the  very  same 
truths  which  he  spoke  to  his  enlightened  Jewish  brethren.  He  makes  no  difference 
between  the  education  of  his  hearers  in  different  places.  To  Epbesian  sorcerers, 
to  philosophic  Athenians,  to  Corinthian  merchants,  to  rustic  Leptrians,  his  only 
message  is  the  gospel.  What,  then,  was  this  gospel  which  Paul  preached  every- 
where? 1.  It  was  a  gospel  of  facts.  Every  time  Paul  preached  he  told  the 
following  unvarnished  tale  :  God  beheld  men  lost  and  ruined.  Out  of  love  to  them 
He  sent  His  only-begotten  Son,  who  lived  a  life  of  innocence  and  perfect  obedience. 
He  was  crucified,  rose  again,  and  ascended  up  to  heaven,  where  He  sitteth  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  from  whence  He  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 
2.  There  were  certaia  doctrines  flowing  out  of  the  facts.  To  wit,  that  Jesus  Christ 
had  offered  a  full  atonement  for  the  sin  of  His  people,  so  that  whosoever  would 
believe  on  Him  should  be  saved.  Then  would  come  the  doctrioe  of  pardon,  how 
God  could  be  just,  and  yet  the  Justifier  of  him  who  believeth.  3.  And  out  of  these 
there  sprung  certain  commands  :  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt 
be  saved."  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  "  Well,"  says 
one,  •'  do  you  think  the  world  wiU  be  turned  upside  down  by  this  ?  "  It  has  been, 
and  wUl  be  again.  In  vain  do  men  attempt  to  find  a  nobler  iastrument.  This  is 
the  great  battering-ram  which  shall  yet  shake  the  bastions  of  error.  This  is  the 
true  Excalibur,  which,  if  any  man  knoweth  how  to  wield  it,  shall  cut  through  joints 
and  marrow,  and  make  him  more  than  a  conqueror.  Do  ye  ask,  then,  where  this 
man's  faith  came  from  ?  It  came  from  Paul's  preaching  of  the  gospel.  II. 
Wherein  lay  this  man's  faith  ?  1.  Paul  perceived  "  that  he  had  faith  to  be 
healed."  As  he  listened  to  Paul  he  thought,  perhaps,  "  That  seems  to  be  the  truth  ; 
it  is  the  truth ;  I  am  sure  it  is  true  ;  and,  if  so,  perhaps  I  may  be  healed  ;  I — I — 
I  think  I  may  ;  I  hope  I  may  ;  I  believe  I  may  ;  from  what  Paul  says  of  Christ's 
character,  I  think  He  must  be  willing  to  do  it."  Then  Paul  said  to  him,  "  Stand 
upright  on  thy  feet,"  and  he  did  so  in  a  moment,  for  "  he  had  faith  to  be  healed." 
2.  You  say,  "  It  does  not  appear  that  Paul  had  any  previous  communication  with 
the  cripple."  Now  I  know  from  my  own  experience  that  it  is  no  uncommon  thing 
for  some  one  to  arrest  the  preacher's  attention.  The  group  of  countenances  before 
him  might  to  the  first  glance  of  a  stranger  look  confused  and  inexplicable,  as  a 
Chinese  grammar  to  those  who  know  not  the  language.  But  a  practised  eye  can 
learn  to  read  the  one  as  well  as  the  other.  The  languor  and  indifference  of  some  ; 
the  curious  inquiring  look  of  others  ;  the  cold,  critical  attention  of  more,  form  a 
picture  which  often  reacts  upon  us,  and  kindles  a  desire  to  reach  those  who,  for  a 
brief  hour,  hang  upon  our  lips.  But  there  will  sometimes  be  one  who  has  faith 
dazzling  in  his  very  eyes,  seeming  to  drink  in  every  syllable,  till  the  preacher 
becomes  as  absorbed  in  that  man  as  the  man  had  been  in  the  preacher.  And  while 
he  pursues  the  discourse,  he  perceives  that  at  last  this  man  has  heard  the  very 
truth  which  meets  his  case.  Preacher  and  hearer,  unknown  to  all  the  rest  of  the 
audience,  have  secretly  saluted  each  other,  and  met  on  the  common  ground  of  a 
vital  faith.  3.  Shall  I  describe  this  "  faith  to  be  saved  "  ?  You  have  "  faith,"  but 
you  have  not  fully  exercised  it.  Now,  you  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God's  Son  ? 
"  Yes."  That  He  has  made  a  full  atonement  1  "  Yes."  That  He  is  worthy  to  be 
trusted  ?  You  depend  on  nothing  else  ?  "  No."  Then  you  only  need  that  gracious 
command — "  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet."  III.  The  spibitual  teaching  of  the 
MiBACLE,  AND  OF  THE  BLESSING  CONFEBBED.  Ato  there  uot  many,  who  though  they 
have  "faith  to  be  saved,"  are  still  limping?  The  reasons  may  be  different  in 
different  cases.  1.  Some  have  been  so  stunned  by  grief  on  account  of  sin,  that 
while  they  do  believe  that  Christ  is  able  and  willing  to  save,  they  cannot  get  a  hold 
of  the  fact  that  they  are  saved.  "  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet,"  thou  trembling 
sinner.  If  thou  believest  in  Jesus,  whatever  thy  fears  may  be,  there  is  no  cause 
for  the*.  2.  Some  are  still  lame,  though  they  have  faith,  through  ignorance. 
They  are  waiting  for  something,  they  hardly  know  what,  to  embellish  their  faith, 
or  to  fortify  it  with  signs  and  wonders.  All  that  you  have  to  do  with  is  this — "Do 
I  believe  in  Jesus  ?  "    If  you  do  you  are  saved.     Stand  upright  on  your  feet.     3. 


S90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xcf) 

How  many,  too,  are  kept  lame  because  of  a  fear  of  self-deception.  Away  with  that 
affectation  of  modesty,  saying,  "I  hope";  "I  trust";  but  "I  feel  such  doubts, 
Buch  fears,  and  such  gloomy  misgivings,"  that  is  a  vain  unseemly  questioning  of 
God.  4.  Others,  again,  cannot  stand  upright  because  they  are  afraid  that  if  they 
did  begin  they  would  go  back  again,  and  so  bring  dishonour  to  Christ.  This  would 
be  a  very  proper  fear  if  you  had  anything  to  do  with  keeping  yourselves,  but  Christ 
gives  you  His  promise  to  pres-erve  you  even  to  the  end.  6.  Then  possibly  there  ia 
one  here  who  cannot  stand  upright  because  of  his  many  sins.  Sinner,  stand  upright 
on  thy  feet,  for  "  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men." 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Faith  to  be  healed: — 1.  Faith  is  the  one  condition  indispens- 
able whenever  one  would  receive  blessings  from  God.  2.  We  must  be  willing  to  look 
for  and  recognise  even  feeble  faith  (Isa.  xlii.  3).  It  requires  alertness  and  charity, 
3.  Christians  must  instantly  honour  tnie  faith  when  they  find  it,  not  stop  to  question, 
and  to  search,  and  to  disturb  it.  4.  He  who  has  greatest  faith  of  his  own  will  detect 
faith  in  others  most  quickly.  5.  Our  Lord  is  wont  to  see  faith  sometimes  when  we 
declare  we  cannot.  [0.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  efficacy  of  faith : — Take  a  piece 
of  wax  and  a  piece  of  gold  of  the  same  magnitude ;  the  wax  is  not  valuable  with 
the  gold ;  but  as  this  wax  is  placed  at  the  end  of  some  will,  by  virtue  of  which 
some  great  estate  is  confirmed  and  conveyed,  so  it  may  be  worth  many  hundred 
pounds.  So  faith,  considered  purely  in  itself,  doth  challenge  nothing  more  than 
any  other  graces :  nay,  in  some  sense  it  is  inferior,  it  being  an  empty  hand ;  but  as 
this  hand  receives  the  precious  alms  of  Christ's  merits,  and  is  an  instrument  or 
channel  through  which  the  blessed  streams  of  life  flow  to  us  from  Him,  so  it  doth 
challenge  a  superiority  over,  and  is  more  excellent  than,  all  other  graces  whatso- 
ever. {J.  Spencer.)  Essential  faith : — Why  is  faith  so  essential  ?  It  is  because 
of  its  receptive  power.  A  purse  will  not  make  a  man  rich,  and  yet,  without  some 
place  for  his  money,  how  could  a  man  acquire  wealth  ?  Faith  itself  could  not  con- 
tribute a  penny  to  salvation,  but  it  is  the  purse  which  holds  a  precious  Christ 
within  itself,  yea,  it  holds  all  the  treasure  of  Divine  love.  If  a  man  is  thirsty,  a 
rope  and  a  bucket  are  not  in  themselves  of  much  use  to  him,  but  yet  if  there  is  a 
well  near  at  hand,  the  very  thing  that  is  wanted  is  a  bucket  and  a  rope  by  which 
the  water  can  be  hfted.  Faith  is  the  bucket  by  which  a  man  may  draw  water  out 
of  the  wells  of  salvation,  and  drink  to  his  heart's  content.  You  may  sometimes 
have  stopped  a  moment  at  a  street  fountain,  and  have  desired  to  drink,  but  you 
found  you  could  not,  for  the  drinking  cup  was  gone.  The  water  flowed,  but  you 
could  not  get  at  it.  It  was  tantalising  to  be  at  the  fountain-head,  and  yet  to  be 
thirsty  still  in  want  of  a  little  cup.  Now  faith  is  that  little  cup,  which  we  hold  up 
to  the  flowing  stream  of  Christ's  grace ;  we  fill  it,  and  then  we  drink  and  are 
refreshed.  Hence  the  importance  of  faith.  It  would  have  seemed  to  our  fore- 
fatliers  an  idle  thing  to  lay  down  a  cable  under  the  sea  from  England  to  America, 
and  it  would  be  idle  now  were  it  not  that  science  has  taught  us  how  to  speak  by 
lightening ;  yet  the  cable  itself  is  now  of  the  utmost  importance,  for  the  best 
invention  of  telegraphy  would  be  of  no  use  for  purposes  of  transatlantic  communica- 
tion if  there  were  not  the  connecting  wire  between  the  two  continents.  Faith  is 
just  that;  it  is  the  connecting  link  between  our  souls  and  God,  and  the  living 
message  flashes  along  it  to  our  souls.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  11-13.  The  gods  have  come  down  to  us  In  the  likeness  of  men. — The 

theology  of  heatliendom  : — In  the  words  and  acts  of  these  heathen  Lystrians,  there 
comes  out  the  native  theology  of  human  hearts  everwhere  and  in  all  conditions. 
There  are  three  great  theological  beUefs  involved  in  their  conduct :  I.  That  thh 
Divinity  is  always  MANirESX  in  the  miraculods.  Though  logically,  perhaps,  it 
could  not  be  proved,  man  everywhere  believes  it.  Whenever  anything  extraor- 
dinary in  nature  occurs,  the  human  spectators,  as  well  in  civilised  as  savage  states, 
involuntarily  feel  that  God  is  at  work.  This  doctrine,  thus  held  by  the  heart  of 
depraved  humanity,  accords  with  the  teachings  of  the  Bible.  II.  That  the 
Divinity  assumes  human  forms.  "  In  the  likeness  of  men."  This  was  the  general 
beUef  of  heathendom.  This  may  be  regarded — 1.  As  a  dim  memory  in  the  soul  of 
paradise,  where  God  held  fi  llowship  with  man.  2.  As  a  prophetic  sentiment  of 
thit  grand  incarnation  "  when  the  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  amongst  us." 
III.  That  the  Divinity  is  to  be  woiisnirPED  whkn  appeauing  in  the  human  fokm. 
These  heathens,  believing  that  Barnabas  w.iS  Jupiter,  and  Paul,  Mercurins,  began 
their  worship.     Now,  the  theology  which  comes  out  from  the  hearts  of   these 


OBAP.  xiT.]  THE  ACTS.  891 

heathens,  and  which  is  written  in  the  souls  of  all,  serves  several  important 
purposes.  1.  As  an  eternal  hindrance  to  the  reign  of  atheism.  Atheism  is  a 
contradiction  to  the  profoundest  faith  of  the  human  heart.  Whatever  system  of 
doctrine  is  contrary  to  the  intuitions  of  humanity  cannot  stand.  2.  As  indicating 
the  responsibihty  of  heathens.  "There  is  a  light  that  lighteth  every  man  that 
Cometh  into  the  world."  God  has  left  no  man  without  some  measure  of  inner 
light.  3.  As  presumptive  evidence  in  favour  of  the  gospel.  The  gospel  agrees  with 
the  primitive  beliefs  of  human  hearts.  4.  As  a  guarantee  for  the  spread  of  Chris- 
tianity. The  congruity  of  Christian  theism  with  the  theism  of  the  soul  is  a  pledge 
of  its  ultimate  triumph.  The  gospel  brings  God  to  man  in  miraculous  works  and 
in  a  human  form,  and  all  this  that  he  might  worship.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
worship  of  success : — How  ready  the  world  is  to  pay  tribute  to  apparent  success  1  If 
a  physician  works  a  startling  cure ;  if  a  commander  wins  a  great  victory ;  if  an 
author  writes  a  popular  book :  if  an  inventor  contrives  a  wonderful  machine  ;  if  a 
financier  roUs  up  a  vast  fortune — the  world  looks  up  to  him  and  calls  him  great. 
There  are,  indeed,  those  who  are  ready  to  give  him  homage  beyond  what  mere  man 
ought  ever  to  receive.  It  is  rarely  an  intelligent  tribute  which  is  paid  to  such  a 
man.  The  display  of  his  power  dazzles  the  eyes  of  those  who  observe  him,  and 
they  are  ready  to  worship  him  because  he  possesses  what  they  lack  and  long  for. 
(H.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  And  they  called  Barnabas,  Jupiter ;  and  Paul,  Mercurius. 
A  well-known  legend  recounts  how  Jupiter  and  Mercury  had  once  wandered  through 
this  region  in  quest  of  shelter  and  entertainment,  which  was  everywhere  refused 
until  they  came  to  the  cottage  of  PhUemon.  When,  then,  the  people  saw  the  miracle, 
and  heard  the  words  of  Paul  and  Barnabas,  they  thought  that  the  gods  of  their 
old  legend  had  again  come  down  to  them.  In  calltag  Barnabas  Jupiter  it  is 
supposed  that  they  were  guided  by  the  greater  age,  and  probably  the  more  dignified 
appearance  of  this  apostle  over  his  companion,  whose  bodily  presence  was  weak, 
while  the  greater  eloquence  of  Paul  procured  him  the  name  of  Mercury — the  God 
of  eloquence.     (W.  Denton,  M.A.) 

Vers.  15-18.  Sirs,  vrhj  do  ye  these  tblngs  ? — Apostolic  sincerity : — In  a  position 
similar  to  that  of  Herod,  they  act  in  an  opposite  manner  (chap  xii.  22).  And  yet 
there  was  no  small  temptation  in  the  matter.  They  mignt  think  this  idolatrous 
prejudice  must  be  excused :  there  is  a  spark  of  truth  in  it ;  the  esteem  for  our 
persons  may  be  serviceable  in  the  spread  of  the  gospel ;  the  idea  of  the  appearance 
of  gods  on  earth  may  lead  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ  the  Son  of  God.  But  that 
would  be  nothing  else  than  to  suppose  that  the  end  sanctifies  the  means.  How  often 
do  we  thus  act  ?  And  always  to  the  detriment  of  the  truth  and  honour  of  God, 
which  we  thought  to  promote.  The  apostles  took  vigorous  measures ;  they  tore 
asunder  the  web  of  this  delusion  when  it  was  yet  forming  itself,  instead  of  helping 
to  complete  it ;  and  God  permits  them  to  succeed.  {G.  V.  Lechler,  D.D.)  The 
danger  of  accepting  false  homage : — Let  no  one  say,  this  is  nothing,  for  a  creature, 
conscious  of  his  infirmity  and  mortality,  to  refuse  to  be  worshipped  as  a  god.  Alas  1 
we  have  painful  evidence  that  it  is  something.  For,  not  to  mention  the  deification 
of  emperors,  one  of  our  own  countrymen.  Captain  Cook,  suffered  himself  to  be 
taken  for  Oro,  the  god  of  war,  in  the  Sandwich  Islands,  and  to  be  worshipped  with 
idolatrous  ceremonies,  thinking  it  afforded  a  fortunate  opportunity  of  swaying  th<* 
savage  mind.  Alas  1  the  savages  killed  him  whom  they  had  adored.  (J.  Bennett, 
D.D.)  The  flatterer  repulsed: — When  the  French  ambassador  visited  the 
illustrious  Bacon  in  his  last  illness,  and  found  him  in  bed  with  the  curtains  drawn, 
he  addressed  this  fulsome  compliment  to  him  :  "  You  are  like  the  angels,  of  whom 
we  hear  and  read  much,  but  have  not  the  pleasure  of  seeing  them. "  The  reply 
was  the  sentiment  of  a  philosopher  and  language  not  unworthy  of  a  Christian :  "  If 
the  complaisance  of  others  compares  me  to  an  angel,  my  infirmities  teU  me  I  am  a 
man."  (Biblical  Museum.)  Effects  of  turning  to  God : — "  I  saw  with  mine  own 
eyes,  when  in  Africa  two  or  three  years  ago,"  says  the  Eev.  W.  Allen,  "  the  notorious 
skull  temple,  or  Juju  house,  not  long  ago  the  scene  of  the  most  ghastly  horrors ;  I 
saw  the  very  men  who  had  been  the  high  priests  of  Juju,  and  ringleaders  in  all 
kinds  of  atrocities  ;  I  saw  the  accursed  grove  where  human  victims  were  constantly 
slain,  and  twins  cast  out  to  die ;  but  the  temple  had  fallen  into  ruins,  the  skulls 
were  crumbhng  to  dust,  the  idola  lay  grovelling  on  the  ground,  the  grove  was  the 
highway  to  God's  house,  and  the  once  cannibal  priests  and  people  were  all  assembled 
in  church,  and  joining  with  earnest  fervour  in  the  worship  of  Almighty  God.  And 
since  then,  and  within  the  last  two  years,  the  tottering  temple  has  been  deliberately 


892  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  or. 

razed  to  the  ground,  the  human  skulls  decently  interred,  and  all  the  detestable 
tokens  of  their  former  idolatry,  some  of  which  had  been  procured  at  a  tremendous 
cost,  and  had  been  regarded  as  of  priceless  value,  were  handed  over  to  Bishop 
Crowther,  forwarded  by  him  to  me,  and  are  now  in  London.  In  lieu  of  their 
former  skull  temple  the  natives  have  erected  at  their  own  expense,  at  a  cost  of  not 
less  than  £2,000,  a  church  which  seats  two  thousand  people,  which  is  now  Bishop 
Crowther's  cathedral,  and  at  the  consecration  of  which  over  three  thousand  natives 
were  present."  The  sublimity  of  Christianity  and  the  worthlessness  of  human 
popularity  : — I.  The  sublimity  of  Chbistianitt.  This  is  seen — 1.  In  the  spirit  it 
generates.  It  is  the  characteristic  of  mean-natured  men  that  they  seek  homage 
from  their  fellows.  Many  of  the  heathen  emperors  put  themselves  up  as  gods  ;  and 
there  are  those  now  in  every  circle  who  are  craving  to  be  the  idols  of  their  sphere. 
But  here  you  have  two  men  to  whom  the  highest  honours  were  unanimously  and 
enthusiastically  offered — repudiating  them  with  a  holy  indignation.  What  gave 
them  this  spirit  ?  Christianity  1  The  man  who  has  this  spirit  is  too  great,  not 
only  to  seek,  but  to  receive  the  honours  which  worldly  men  covet.  2.  In  the  God 
it  reveals,  (1)  The  absolutely  hving  One — "  the  living  God  "  ;  not  like  their  gods, 
dead  idols.  His  life  is  the  life  of  the  universe.  (2)  The  universal  Creator.  (3J 
The  patient  Governor  of  men.  Their  conduct  was  offensive  to  film,  and  opposed 
to  His  requirements ;  but  He  allowed  them  full  scope  for  the  play  of  their  intellect, 
genius,  and  passions.  (4)  The  constant  Worker  in  the  universe.  The  operations 
of  nature  were  only  His  power  in  action.  He  works  everywhere  in  nature,  always 
doing  good,  and  all  His  works  are  "  witnesses  "  of  Himself.  This  discourse  of  the 
apostles  shows  how  they  adapted  their  subject  to  their  hearers.  When  they  address 
Jews,  they  deal  with  the  Hebrew  Scriptures ;  when  they  address  heathens,  they 
expound  the  Bible  of  nature.  3.  In  the  revolutions  it  effects.  The  work  of 
Christianity  is  to  turn  souls  from  the  false  to  the  true,  from  the  shadowy  to  the 
real,  from  the  creature  to  the  Creator.  The  gods  of  men  are  vanities,  whether 
Jupiter  or  Mercurius,  or  worldliness,  fashion,  pleasure,  or  pride.  What  a  grand 
thing,  then,  is  Christianity  1  All  the  systems  of  men  to  it  are  as  tapers  to  the  sun. 
II.  The  wobthlessness  of  human  populabity.  How  long  did  this  public  desire  to 
worship  the  apostles  continue  at  Lystra  ?  It  had  a  very  brief  existence  (ver.  19). 
What  a  rapid  reaction  I  The  enthusiastic  adorers  are  transformed  to  maUgnant 
ioes  ;  the  men  who  are  honoured  as  gods  one  hour,  are  treated  the  next  as  wretched 
criminals  deserving  death.  This  is  popularity.  "  Hosanna  "  to-day,  '•  Crucify  " 
to-morrow.  What  a  worthless  thing  1  How  much  beneath  the  man  to  value,  still 
less  to  court.     He  who  worships  popularity  worships — 1.  A  corrupt  god.     So  long 

^  as  the  world  is  depraved,  the  popular  thing  must  be  wrong.     2.  A  capricious  god. 

"  It  approves  to-day  what  it  denounces  to-morrow.  Little  men  go  after  popularity, 
and  their  Uttle  souls  adore  it ;  great  men  are  followed  by  popularity,  and  their 
great  natures  care  nothing  for  it.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  apostolic  testimony 
against  heathenism : — Derbe  and  Lystra  would  be  as  different  from  Iconium  and 
AJitioch  as  villages  in  India  would  be  from  the  larger  towns  of  the  presidencies. 
But  we  need  not  go  so  far  to  find  illustration.  In  spite  of  railways,  telegraphs, 
newspapers,  and  cheap  postage,  there  are  many  quiet  places  in  our  own  land  where 
the  pulses  of  our  great  national  life  are  feebly  felt,  and  where  the  people  are  living 
very  much  as  their  fathers  did  fifty  years  ago.  The  gospel  message  confronts 
totally  fresh  circumstances.  At  Lystra  there  was  heathenism  densely  ignorant  and 
loyal,  there  were  superstitions  much  less  easily  dealt  with  and  destroyed.  Three 
things  are  here  declared — I.  A  living  God  of  eedemption,  as  against  hero-worship. 
I  do  not  see  much  to  choose  between  the  ancient  heathen  deification  of  heaven,  and 
its  more  modern  form  of  the  canonisation  of  saints.  I  do  know,  however,  that  the 
men  so  dealt  with  would  recoil  from  such  worship.  There  was  only  one  that 
accepted  homage  and  worship.  Angels  and  apostles  repudiated  it.  And  yet  there 
has  always  been  a  readiness  to  offer  homage  to  the  heroes  in  every  age,  and  especially 
when  the  honour  is  useless  to  him  to  whom  it  is  paid.  The  fathers  persecute  and 
slay  the  prophet,  whose  sepulchre  their  children  build.  Is  it  wrong,  then,  that  men 
should  honour  human  greatness?  By  no  means.  No  true  man  can  read  of 
heroisms  of  cahn,  patient  endurance,  as  well  as  of  daring,  without  having  his  nobler 
pulses  stirred.  But  hero-worship  has  its  dangers.  It  may  be  paralysing  instead  of 
inspiring.  Because,  when  you  come  to  think  about  it,  a  man's  heroism  is  a  lonely 
and  incommunicable  splendour.  And  the  greatest  men  have  their  imperfections. 
Then  what  glad  tidings  are  these  of  the  apostles  of  the  Cbrist,  leaiiing  the  generous 
and  appreciative  instincts  of  men  aright  1      Our  hopes  and  prujers,  our  trubts  und 


CHAP,  nv.]  THE  ACTS.  893 

appeals,  are  tamed  to  Him  from  whom  all  heroes  have  their  nobility,  and  in  Him 
all  we  also  may  live  and  move  and  have  a  grander  being.  Our  life  is  in  the  living 
God,  and  the  gospel  has  not  done  its  perfect  work  until  the  trust  of  the  soul  is 
drawn  up  away  from  all  things  lower  and  temporal,  and  fixed  upon  Him  whom  to 
know  is  hfe  eternal.     Then  in  our  own  kind  and  way  we  shall  have  heroes  also.     II. 

A  LIVING  PbOVIDENCE  AS  AGAINST   THE   WOBSHIP   OF   NATURAL   F0ECE8.      Who  shall  Say 

that  this  is  aimed  but  at  the  superstition  of  a  barbaric  age,  and  that  there  is  no  such 
heathenism  now  f  Heathenism  is  ignorance.  Anciently  it  was  an  ignorance  by 
reason  of  the  clearer  truth  having  been  not  yet  proclaimed.  To-day  it  is  an  ignorance 
through  rejection  of  the  message  of  the  Most  High.  The  older  heathenism  is  the 
nobler  of  these  two.  But  better,  happier  than  either,  the  glory  of  the  gospel  which 
points  to  the  living  God,  who  is  the  careful,  loving  Providence  of  all  His  children. 
To  know  this  is  to  fear  no  evil ;  it  is  to  live  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  continually. 
ni.  A  LIVING  God  op  bighteotjsness  and  tbxje  command,  as  against  self-will. 
Who  shall  tell  us  what  is  right  and  good  ?  Man's  own  reason  and  instinct,  the 
agreement  of  society.  Thus  speaks  heathenism,  and  its  moraUty  has  been  a 
disastrous  failure.  The  nations  who  have  walked,  and  still  walk,  in  their  own  ways, 
are  not  the  benefactors  of  the  world.  The  gospel  says  national  interests  lie  in  the 
path  of  national  duty.  Selfishness  is  never  right.  Violence  carries  its  own  death 
sentence.  A  man  is  too  wayward  to  guide  his  life  in  safety,  too  weak,  too  change- 
ful to  be  left  to  fashion  his  own  destiny.  Thank  God  for  the  word  He  has  spoken 
and  the  doings  of  His  activity  ;  good  unto  all,  even  to  the  unthankful  and  evil.  The 
very  heart  of  the  glad  tidings  is  the  fact  of  a  personal,  Hving  Lord.  Not  a  force, 
not  a  general  drift  of  things,  but  a  Father,  who  is  eager  to  redeem  His  children 
onto  Himself.  (D.  Jones  Hamer.)  The  pastoral  office  : — I.  Its  tbue  spieit.  The 
minister  of  Christ  is  a  man  of  "  like  passions  "  with  his  hearers,  and  his  success 
depends  on  his  estabhshing  a  sense  of  oneness  with  them.  This  is  one  of  Paul's 
grand  themes.  It  behoved  Christ  *' to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren."  II.  Its 
PERILS.  Notwithstanding  the  levelling  attacks  on  it,  an  undoubted  respect  for  it 
stiU  exists.  In  this  lies  danger.  Our  people  place  us  on  a  high  pedestal  on  which 
we  are  expected  never  to  stagger.  Should  we  fail  in  any  degree  our  influence  is 
diminished.  If  it  be  enjoined  that  men  should  account  ministers  "  stewards  of  the 
mysteries  of  God,"  it  is  no  less  plainly  declared  that  "  we  are  not  sufficient  of  our- 
selves to  think  anything  as  of  ourselves."  III.  Its  wobk.  To  call  men  to  "  turn 
from  vanities  to  the  Uving  God."  1.  No  vanity  can  satisfy  the  human  spirit. 
2.  God  is  ready  to  welcome  all  who  turn  to  Him.  {M.  B.  Hogg,  B.A.)  The 
living  God. — The  living  God  : — Is  God  real  t  This  is  the  question  of  the  ages. 
Four  philosophers  are  discussing  it  together.  The  first  says,  "  There  is  no 
God."  This  is  the  atheist.  The  second  says,  *'  I  cannot  tell,  and  therefore 
I  do  not  think  about  it."  This  is  the  agnostic.  The  third  says,  *'  I  cannot  be 
sore  that  God  is,  nor  what  He  is ;  but  I  think  He  is  thus  and  so,  and  I  act 
opon  this  supposition."  The  fourth  says,  *'  God  is:  I  know  Him."  This  is  the 
apostle  of  religion.  We  have  to  ask.  Which  of  these  four  has  the  facts  on  hia 
side  ?  In  regard  to  the  first,  he  stands  alone,  and  is  in  the  difficult  position  of 
having  to  prove  a  positive  by  negatives.  He  must  sweep  the  universe  from  end  to 
end,  and  show  that  it  is  empty,  and  prove  that  an  effect  may  exist  without  a  cause. 
The  second  and  third  stand  together  in  theory,  though  they  differ  in  practice.  They 
both  admit  the  idea  of  God,  but  they  cannot  discover  the  reaUty.  The  second  says 
that  he  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  But  the  third  declares  it  is  so  beautiful 
that  he  will  worship  it  and  make  it  the  guide  of  his  life.  Now,  in  regard  to  their 
common  view,  one  thing  is  clear.  It  is  unreasonable.  For  if  there  were  no  God  it 
would  be  impossible  for  us  to  find  traces  of  Him.  But  if  He  is  in  the  universe, 
there  must  be  evidences  of  His  being  and  power.  We  have,  therefore,  an  antecedent 
probability  in  favour  of  the  fourth  view.  I.  The  wobld  is  fttll  or  God.  He  is  on 
every  side  of  you.  You  touch  not  His  substance,  nor  see  His  face,  but  He  is  here 
as  really  as  fight,  gravity,  electricity,  though  you  cannot  see  them.  You  know 
them ;  they  are  manifested  by  their  workings.  So  God  is  manifested  in  the  world. 
There  are  three  forms  in  which  this  manifestation  comes  to  us.  Power,  wisdom, 
beauty.  1.  Look  at  these  mighty  forces  which  permeate  onr  globe.  Do  not  all 
these  tell  us  of  a  living  fountain  of  force  ?  The  heathen  saw  in^  a  lightning  flash  a 
thunderbolt  hurled  by  Jupiter.  We  call  it  an  effect  of  electricity.  But  what  is 
electricity  but  an  effluence  of  an  Almighty  Will  ?  2.  But  consider  how  wonderfully 
these  forces,  and  the  material  substances  which  they  are  incessantly  changing,  are 
Adapted  to  the  production  of  certain  definite  and  desirable  results.    No  intelligent 


894  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

person  can  fail  to  see  in  the  universe  that  which  in  any  human  production  we  should 
call  wisdom,  though  on  a  scale  much  more  vast.  How  intricate  and  majestic  the 
combination  of  forces  which  keeps  the  heavens  balanced  ;  how  skilful  and  exact  the 
construction  of  the  eye  1  3.  And  then,  the  beauty  of  it  all  1  Whence  is  this  derived  ? 
If  the  universe  were  but  a  vast  machine,  what  power  could  it  have  to  touch  our 
spirits  ?  Why  should  our  hearts  leap  up  when  we  behold  a  rainbow  ?  It  is  but  the 
refraction  of  certain  rays  of  light  in  certain  drops  of  water.  An  orchard  in  the 
spring-time ;  a  field  of  golden  grain  in  summer,  &c.,  these  are  but  chemical  effects, 
the  natural  results  of  the  changes  of  the  seasons.  Why  should  they  be  so  lovely  ? 
Surely  the  grain,  the  fruit,  the  snow,  could  have  been  produced  just  as  well  without 
beauty.  Who  has  informed  them  with  this  gracious  splendour  ?  God  it  is  whose 
presence  makes  the  world  alive  with  beauty  :  He  it  is  whose  vision  thrills  us  when 
we  know  it  not.  II.  In  the  moral  world  we  touch  Him  yet  more  closely :  He 
reveals  Himself  to  us  as  a  person.  Here  we  stand  in  another  world  from  that  which 
is  known  to  our  senses.  Absolutely  different  from  the  feelings  of  wonder  or  delight 
at  the  things  which  are  seen  is  the  sentiment  of  moral  obligation,  the  distinction 
between  right  and  wrong,  the  voluntary  movement  of  the  soul  under  the  laws  of 
good  and  evil.  No  external  force,  no  law  of  nature,  no  command  of  man  can 
create  that  which  we  call  duty ;  and  yet  it  is  a  reahty  which  we  cannot  question. 
Nothing  in  the  universe  is  more  real  than  this,  and  in  this  I  touch  God.  He  it  is 
that  commands  and  binds  me.  He  reveals  to  me  this  world  within  the  world,  and 
summons  me  to  live  aright.  The  universe  is  filled  with  His  voice,  saying,  '♦  Thou 
shalt,"  and  "  Thou  shalt  not."  But,  mark  you,  there  is  no  constraint  laid  upon  me. 
My  will  is  free.  lean,  I  must,  choose  for  mjself  between  good  and  evil.  And  here 
is  the  wonder  of  it ;  here  is  the  manifest  presence  of  the  living  God.  For  if  the 
moral  law  were  natural  and  impersonal,  it  would  bind  us  resistlessly  as  giavity  or 
electricity.  III.  We  find  God  in  the  world  as  an  historical  reality.  Just  as  we 
know  the  reality  of  the  Persian,  or  the  Grecian,  or  the  Eoman  empires  by  their 
records  on  stone  or  parchment,  by  the  traces  which  they  have  left  in  the  world,  so 
we  know  that  God  is  a  reality  by  the  records  and  results  of  His  dealings  with  men. 
If  you  deny  all  traces  of  a  supreme  Providence,  the  history  of  the  world  becomes  an 
inexplicable  fable.  How  has  the  race  been  preserved  in  numberless  perils  ?  how 
have  human  industry  and  knowledge  and  character  been  unfolded  and  developed  ? 
how,  amid  the  crash  of  falling  empires  and  the  dust  of  ruined  civilisations,  have 
learning  and  virtue  been  kept  alive,  and  the  happiness  of  humanity  enlarged  century 
by  century  ;  if  it  be  not  by  the  indwelling  and  inworking  of  an  almighty  and  allwise 
Governor  ?  God  in  history  is  a  reality.  And  more  than  this,  we  have  the  actual 
record  of  His  special  dealings  with  men  and  nations.  The  Bible  is  a  history  of 
men  and  of  God.  Above  all.  He  has  shined  forth  clearly  in  the  person  and  life  of 
Jesus  Christ.  This  Divine-human  Master  and  Saviour  of  men  is  to  us  the  imshaken 
evidence  of  the  reality  of  God.  When  we  see  Him  we  see  the  Father,  for  He  and 
the  Father  are  one.  IV.  In  the  spiritual  life,  the  Ufe  of  faith  and  hope  and  love 
and  prayer,  we  meet  and  touch  the  Uving  God.  No  mere  vision  of  distempered 
sleep  was  that  experience  of  Jacob,  by  the  ford  of  Jabbok.  It  was  a  reality.  When 
the  tide  of  penitence  sweeps  over  the  soul,  and  we  are  humbled  in  the  dust  crying 
for  pardon,  have  we  not  felt  the  touch  of  His  forgiving  hand  laid  upon  us  in  secret? 
Have  we  not  cast  ourselves  in  faith  upon  Him  whom  we  see  not,  as  one  who 
leaps  into  the  darkness,  and  found  our  Father's  everlasting  arms  embracing, 
bearing  us  up?  {H.  J.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.)  Which  made  heaven  and  earth. — 
God  in  Nature : — as — I.'  The  Almighty  Creator  (ver.  15).  II.  The  Holt 
Governor  (ver.  16).  III.  The  Gracious  Preserver  (ver.  17).  {K.  Gerok.) 
God  known  by  His  works  : — It  is  said  of  the  great  Galileo — who  had  been  accused 
of  infidelity,  because  he  asserted  that  the  earth  went  round  the  sun,  in  apparent 
contradiction  to  the  language  of  Scripture — that  when  questioned  by  the  Koman 
Inquisition  as  to  his  belief  in  God,  he  pointed  to  a  straw  lying  on  the  floor  of  his 
dungeon,  and  said  to  his  accusers,  that  from  the  structure  of  even  so  insignificant 
an  object  as  that,  he  could  infer  the  existence  of  an  intelligent  Creator.  The  book 
of  revelation  and  of  nature : — There  are  two  books  whence  I  collect  my  divinity 
besides  that  written  one  of  God,  another  of  His  servant,  Nature — that  universal  and 
public  manuscript  that  lies  exposed  to  the  eyes  of  all.  Those  who  never  saw  Him 
in  one  have  discovered  Him  in  the  other.  Surely  the  heathens  knew  better  how  to 
read  and  join  these  msstical  letters  than  we  CLristians,  who  cast  a  more  careless  eye 
on  these  common  hieroglyphics,  and  disdain  to  suclc  divinity  from  the  flowers  of 
nature.     (-Sir  T.  Browne.)        Natuial  religion,  its  uses  and  defects  : — I.  God  maybb 


BHAP.  XT?.]  IHE  ACTS.  395 

KNOWN  BY  THE  LIGHT  OF  NATCRH  (Bom.  i.  19,  20).  1.  His  existence ;  for  it  is  cer- 
tain that  nothing  could  make  itself,  but  must  have  been  made  by  some  one.  Who 
but  God  made  the  worlds  ?  2.  What  He  is,  viz.,  that  He  is  a  Spirit,  perfect  in 
wisdom  and  power.  3.  His  absolute  dominion  over  all  things  (Gja.  xiv.  19),  and 
His  right  to  dispose  of  all  things  as  He  pleases  (Eom.  ix.  20).  4.  That  though  He 
is  the  absolute  and  natural  Lord  of  all  things  that  He  has  made,  yet  He  is  pleased 
to  deal  with  His  rational  creatures  in  a  way  of  moral  government,  and  will  reward 
them  according  to  their  works.  Conscience  may  discover  so  much  of  the  natural 
law  and  will  of  God  as  a  righteous  Governor  if  it  be  properly  and  wisely  employed 
(Rom.  ii.  14,  15).  5.  That  He  is  a  universal  Benefactor  to  mankind,  even  above  and 
beyond  their  deserts,  and  notwithstanding  all  their  provocations.  The  text  declares 
this.  n.  What  abb  the  vakioos  uses  of  this  knowledge  op  God,  which  is 
ATTAINABLE  BY  THE  LIGHT  OF  NATURE  ?  1.  To  convinco  men  of  sin  against  the  law 
of  God,  and  to  lay  all  mankind  under  a  sense  of  guilt  and  self-condemnation.  The 
Apostle  Paul  begins  with  this  doctrine  in  the  first  chapter  of  Romans.  2.  As  it  is 
de-signed  to  awaken  men  to  the  practice  of  their  duty,  so  it  has  had  some  influence 
on  mankind,  at  least  by  the  fear  of  punishment,  to  keep,  preserve,  and  restrain  part 
of  them  from  the  extremest  degrees  of  wickedness.  Where  there  has  been  nothing  of 
this  knowledge,  mankind  have  almost  lost  their  superior  rank  among  the  creatures, 
and  dej,'enerated  into  a  brutal  nature.  3.  It  gives  some  encouragement  to  guilty 
creatures  to  repent  of  their  sins,  and  to  return  to  God  by  a  general  hope  of  accep- 
tance, though  they  had  no  promise  of  pardoning  grace.  And  this  was  the  very 
principle  upon  which  some  of  the  better  sort  of  the  Gentiles  set  themselves  to  practise 
virtue,  to  worship  God  and  endeavour  to  become  like  Him.  4.  It  serves  to  vindicate  the 
conduct  of  Gcd  as  a  righteous  Governor  in  His  severe  dealings  with  obstinate  and 
wilful  sinners  both  here  and  hereafter.  This  will  leave  them  without  excuse  in  the 
great  day  when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  all  hearts.  Their  own  consciences 
will  accuse  them  and  bear  witness  against  them  (Rom.  i.  20,  21 ;  ii.  15  ;  iii.  5,  6).  5. 
It  prepares  the  way  for  preaciing  and  receiving  the  gospel  of  His  grace.  St.  Paul 
(chap.  xvii.  '22,  &c.),  by  discoursing  first  on  natural  religion  comes  at  last  to  awaken 
men  to  repentance,  and  preaches  Jesus  with  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  eternal 
judgment  (ver.  31).  III.  What  ake  the  defects  or  imperfections  of  it?  1.  It  is 
but  a  small  portion  of  the  things  of  God  which  the  bulk  of  mankind  can  generally 
be  supposed  to  learn  merely  by  their  own  reasonings.  The  bulk  of  mankind,  even 
in  the  learned  nations,  did  actually  know  but  little  of  the  true  God,  or  of  their  duty 
towards  Hiui,  or  the  way  of  obtaining  future  happiness.  2.  The  light  of  nature, 
even  in  those  things  which  it  did  teach  the  heathen  world,  is  but  dim  and  feeble, 
and  leaves  mankind  under  many  doubts  and  uncertainties  in  matters  of  considerable 
importance  (chap.  xvii.  27).  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God."  3.  All  the 
knowledge  of  God  which  they  arrived  at  by  the  light  of  nature  had  actually  but 
little  influence  to  reform  the  hearts  or  the  lives  of  mankind  (ver.  16).  See  the 
iniquities  numbered  up  in  a  large  and  detestable  catalogue  (Rom.  i.).  4.  This  know- 
ledge of  God  by  the  light  of  nature  doth  rather  serve  to  show  men  their  sin  and 
misery  th.in  discover  any  effectual  relief ;  and  in  this  respect  it  comes  infinitely 
short  of  what  the  revelation  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  hath  done.  Reflections:  1. 
Since  the  rational  knowledge  of  God  and  natural  religion  has  its  proper  uses,  and 
especioJly  to  lay  a  foundation  for  our  receiving  the  gospel  of  Christ  let  it  not  be 
despised.  There  may  be  some  necessary  occasions  for  our  recourse  to  it  in  a  day 
of  temptation,  when  our  faith  of  the  gospel  maybe  tried  and  shaken.  2.  Since  this 
knowledge  of  God,  which  is  attainable  by  the  light  of  nature,  has  so  many  defects, 
let  us  never  venture  to  rest  in  it.  3.  Since  the  nations  which  have  only  the  light  of 
nature  are  forced  to  feel  out  their  way  to  God  through  such  dusky  glimmerings,  let 
us  bless  the  Lord  that  we  are  born  in  a  land  where  the  Book  of  Grace  lies  opeu 
before  us,  as  well  as  the  book  of  nature,  to  teach  us  the  knowledge  of  God  and  His 
salvation.  (I.  Watts,  D.D.)  Nevertheless  He  left  not  Himself  wiLIiout  witness. — 
Witnesses  for  God: — I.  The  text  in  its  immediate  bearing — that  God  hath  a 
"witness "of  Himself.  1.  In  His  visible  creatii^n.  "Which  made  heaven  and 
earth,"  <fec.  Look  at  nature,  composed  of  an  endless  diversity  of  organised  sub- 
stances. Examine  thene,  and  you  will  see  that  each  part  is  admirably  adapted  to 
its  particular  end.  The  design  indicates  a  designer.  The  universe  cculd  no  more 
make  itself,  than  a  watch  could  make  itself.  Intelligence  is  equally  visible  in  the 
contrivance  by  which  the  minutest  creature  puts  out  its  smallest  antennce  to  the 
warm  sun,  as  in  the  very  movements  of  the  solar  system.  God  "  left  not  Himself 
without  a  witness  "  also  of  His  power :  that  evidences  itself  in  carrying  on  th» 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.]  [ohap.  nr, 

inflaence  under  which  each  thing  severally  performs  its  own  functions.  2.  In  Hi> 
providence.  To  wisdom  and  power  He  has  superadded  goodness.  The  great  end 
in  view  is  a  benevolent  end.  The  Creator  is  the  Governor.  He  appointed  certain 
seasons  for  the  benefit  of  man ;  and  this  the  apostles  referred  to.  And  this  too 
amidst  human  unworthiness,  superstitions,  and  idolatries.  Justly  had  He  swept 
away  a  rebellious  people ;  but  goodness  withheld  the  sword,  and  it  only  pierced  the 
cloud  to  let  down  fatness  upon  their  heads.  In  the  midst  of  wrath  He  "  remembers 
mercy."  Amidst  the  wonders  of  the  visible  creation  are  not  many  of  you  living 
♦'  without  God  in  the  world  "  ?  Ask  this  yourselves  ;  and  ask,  in  aU  your  unworthiness, 
in  all  your  proneness  to  idolatry,  if  aught  can  restrain  the  Divine  and  righteous  indig- 
nation but  the  Divine  goodness.  II.  The  text  undek  its  mobe  amplified  considera- 
tion. God  has  other  "witnesses."  1.  The  Bible — a  standing  exposition  of  His 
will,  record  of  His  laws,  exhibition  of  His  perfections  ;  containing  His  judgments 
against  sin ;  presenting  His  remonstrance  against  offending  man.  But  the  Bible — 
pregnant  with  the  great  scheme  of  human  redemption  ;  unfolding  His  new  covenant ; 
rich  in  promises  to  "  all  who  call  upon  Him,"  The  Bible  is  the  grandest,  the  most 
magnificent  monument  of  the  love  of  God.  2.  The  Church.  God  has  never  been 
without  a  band  of  holy  men  upon  the  earth.  They  have  been  its  salt  to  preserve  it 
from  a  universal  putrefaction.  It  is  as  old  as  Abel's  day.  It  hved  in  the  forms  of 
patriarchal  life.  And  from  the  time  of  Christ,  amidst  all  the  malice  of  the  wicked, 
and  the  assaults  and  conspiracies  of  hell  itself,  its  existence  shall  continue  until  the 
Church  militant  becomes  the  Church  triumphant.  God,  in  the  foundations  of  Hia 
Church,  in  its  appointed  ordinances,  in  the  burden  of  its  devoted  preachers,  in  the 
conversion,  the  blessed  experience  of  its  members,  has  a  "  witness  "  rpo  i  earth.  3. 
The  Holy  Spirit.  He  is  a  "  witness  "  of  God  whom  believers  have  u^thia  them,  in 
an  experimental  knowledge  of  the  truths  and  comforts  from  God,  where  all  before 
was  the  utter  darkness  of  ignorance  and  the  barrenness  of  perished  hopes.  4.  The 
reason  of  man.  This,  in  its  healthy  exercise,  when  it  is  unwarped  by  prejudice, 
makes  certain  discoveries  of  God  in  the  moral  relations  which  His  character  bears 
to  us  ;  and  out  of  which  great  responsibilities  grow.  Reason,  that  in  admitting  Hia 
claims,  draws  an  inference  of  the  guilt  of  man  in  not  fulfilling  them  ;  but  whereby 
man,  in  His  own  eyes,  becomes  obnoxious  to  punishment,  is  a  "  witness  "  of  God. 
5.  Conscience.  If  by  its  fears  and  its  pains,  painting  a  judgment  to  come,  a  man 
is  restless  and  perturbed,  there  is  in  it  surely  a  witnessing  for  God  in  the  verity  of 
His  Word,  "  Be  sure  your  sin  shall  find  you  out."  6.  Believers  are  the  witnesses 
of  His  faithfulness,  of  His  power,  of  His  love.  [T.  J.  Judkin.)  God's  witnesses  : — 
It  has  been  perhaps  too  much  the  fashion  to  leave  out  this  topic  from  our  teaching. 
The  Christian  minister's  one  business  is  to  preach  Christ.  But  is  he  therefore 
bound  to  narrow  his  teaching  to  some  one  or  two  of  Christ's  doctrines  ?  I  do  not 
find  our  Lord  Himself,  nor  His  apostles,  refusing  the  topics  of  what  is  called  the 
religion  of  nature.  These  things  are  the  avenues  of  the  gospel.  I.  God's  witnesses. 
1.  Paul  says  distinctly  that  nature  is  God's  witness  (Rom.  i.  20).  Men  may  argue 
themselves  out  of  anything :  and  so  they  may  argue  themselves  out  of  the  belief 
that  this  fair  world,  with  its  bright  lights  and  its  fruitful  seasons,  its  ordinances  of 
day  and  night,  of  Ufe  given  and  hfe  replenished,  is  a  proof  of  a  personal  Creator. 
But  we  can  heartily  echo  the  wise  saying,  "  Nature  could  no  more  have  made  me, 
than  fashion  could  have  made  the  coat  I  wear."  2.  And  Providence  too  is  God's 
witness.  We  can  say  with  perfect  confidence  to  any  young  man  whose  course  in 
life  is  still  undecided  for  good  or  evil,  there  is  no  doubt  that  that  power,  whatever 
it  be,  which  presides  over  the  course  of  the  world  is  a  power  which  loves  righteous- 
ness and  hates  iniquity.  If  you  Uve  morally  and  religiously  you  will  live,  on  the 
whole,  happily.  Act  as  if  there  were  no  God,  and  you  will  live  to  curse  the  day 
when  you  first  gave  way  to  temptation.  Somehow  or  other  human  life  is  so  ordered 
that  in  the  long  run  it  is  well  with  the  righteous  and  ill  with  the  wicked.  3.  And 
who  shall  deny  that  God  has  a  witness  also  in  the  human  conscience  ?  What  is 
this  strange  thing  within  me  which  presumes  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  myself? 
this  thing  which  certainly  I  did  not  place  there,  and  which  however  I  may  disregard 
and  disobey  I  cannot  wholly  dethrone,  but  something  through  which  God  still  com- 
municates with  me  still  threatens,  punishes?  These  elementary  evidences  are  too 
much  left  out  or  slurred  over  in  our  modern  teaching.  And  they  lie  under  all  that 
is  more  distinctively  Christian.  It  is  only  a  man  with  a  con^'cience  to  whom  Christ 
can  call.  It  is  only  a  man  whom  Nature  has  instructed  and  Providence  has  dis- 
ciplined who  can  feel  the  mercy  of  a  gospel  or  see  any  beauty  in  a  Saviour  that  he 
should  desire  Him.    Mj  brethren,  have  we  all  learned  these  elementary  lessons  T 


•HAP.  xiT.]  THE  ACTS.  891 

For  these  also,  like  the  gospel,  may  be  first  disregarded  and  at  last  denied.    And 
then,  with  them,  goes  &U.  else ;  all  living  sense  of  responsibility,  all  godly  fear,  all 
qoickening  and  sustaining  hope.    4.  Nor  has  God  left  Himself  without  a  witness 
to  you.    You  did  not  bring  yourselves  into  being,  nor  can  you  preserve  for  one  day, 
by  any  choice  or  any  providence  of  your  own,  the  very  spark  and  seed  of  Ufe.   And 
as  the  gift,  and  the  continuance,  of  being,  so  also  the  things  which  have  befallen 
you  ;  sickness  and  health,  sorrow  and  joy,  failure  and  success,  danger  and  deliver- 
ance, neglect  and  love  have  been  rather  ordered  for  you  than  chosen  by  you.    And 
not  only  so  ;  but  something  within  tells  you  how  tenderly  and  how  f orbearingly  you 
have  been  dealt  with ;  that  you  have  not  been  forgotten  in  trouble,  nor  let  alone  in 
sin,  nor  rewarded  entirely  according  to  your  wickedness :  the  lot  assigned  you  has 
been  even  more  medicinal  than  penal,  and  yet  more  evidently  considerate  and  per- 
sonal than  either.    These  things  your  better  self  confesses  to  you ;  and  the  experi- 
ence of  life  has  been  to  you  God's  witness.    II.  To  what  ?    To  His  own  being  and 
character.    To  the  fact  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  He  is  this  and  not  that ;  a  God 
of  truth,  not  of  falsehood ;  a  God  of  holiness,  not  of  evil ;  a  God  of  love,  not  of 
hatred.     You  remember  how  often  these  words  close  a  paragraph  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment prophecies ;  "  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  Even  so  it  is  with  those 
evidences  of  which  we  have  spoken.    They  are  to  make  Gk)d  known  to  man.    And 
for  what  purpose?    As  a  point  of  theory  or  of  doctrine?    As  a  display  of  Divine 
greatness  to  end  with  itself  ?    Not  so  :  but  for  this  end  which  is  worthy  of  God ; 
"  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  Thee."    "  That  by  these  ye  might  be 
partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,"  &c.    This  knowledge  can  be  communicated  only 
through  Jesus  Christ ;  only  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  working  in  man's  heart  aa 
the  Spirit  of  the  Eternal  Father  and  of  the  Eternal  Son.    (Dean  Vaughan.)       The 
"beneficence  of  God,  manifested  in  fruitful  seasons,  a  witness  for  God : — God  never 
wrought  a  miracle  to  confute  an  atheist,  because  His  ordinary  works  are  sufficient. 
Yet  many  move  among  the  works  of  God,  without  acknowledging  their  Divine  Author. 
How  useful  to  all  such  might  be  the  serious  study  of  our  text.     Consider — I.  Thb 
BENEFICENCE  07  GoD.    This  Is  too  copious  a  thing  to  speak  of  as  it  deserves.    Its 
origin  is  in  past  eternity  ;  it  extends  throughout  eternity  to  come.  Think  of  a  Being, 
all-perfect,  all-powerful,  all-wise,  employing  His  mighty  energies  in  perpetually 
doing  good.     What  an  immense  amount  of  happiness  He  must  be  continually 
diffusing  I    It  is  true,  God  has  other  attributes,  some  of  sterner  aspect.    He  is  the 
moral  Governor  of  mankind ;  bound  to  punish  all  iniquity.    And  visitations  of  the 
Divine  wrath  against  sin  are  no  proofs  against  the  Divine  beneficence.    It  is  also 
true  that  God's  own  people,  who  now  love  Him,  do  also  suffer ;  but  our  very  suffer- 
ings are  sent  in  beneficence.    They  come  with  a  message  of  our  Father's  love ;  they 
are  softened  by  His  kind  pity ;  they  do  us  good  while  they  stay ;  they  leave  a  fragrant 
remembrance  when  they  go.    H.  Its  manifestation  in  "  fbditful  seasons."    1. 
God  '•  gave  us  rain  from  heaven."   So  Jeremiah  :  "  Are  there  any  among  the  vanitiea 
of  the  Gentiles  that  can  cause  rain?  "    So,  too,  Zechariah :  *'  Ask  ye  of  the  Lord 
rain  ...  for  the  idols  have  spoken  vanity."    The  rain  coming  in  its  season,  is  the 
gift  of  God.     In  giving  rain  God  uses  means ;  vapours,  being  exhaled  from  the  sea 
and  the  surface  of  the  earth,  gather  into  clouds,  and  clouds  being  condensed  by  cold 
descend  in  showers ;  but  who  gave  these  laws  to  Nature ?    Is  Nature  God?    Is  she 
not  rather  a  handmaid  to  Deity  ?  Philosophers  often  stop  at  the  second  causes ;  and 
'having  shown  how  certain  causes  produce  certain  effects,  seem  reluctant  to  say  who 
is  the  cause  of  these  causes.     Not  so  the  apostle.     "  He  gave  us  rain  from  heaven." 
Their  danger  was,  to  attribute  to  idols  what  was  the  gift  of  God.     There  is  a  danger 
now  of  making  second  causes  idols.     "  Behold,"  says  Elihu,  "  He  maketh  smaU  the 
drops  of  water,"  &o.     Think  what  the  earth  would  become  if  God  were  to  withhold 
the  rain  in  its  season.  2.  God  gives  the  rain,  and  the  rain  helps  to  make  the  fruitful 
seasons ;  but  God  is  their  true  Author.     He  created  the  earth  with  its  properties 
suited  to  vegetation ;  He  made  the  plants ;  He  has  preserved  their  succession ;  He 
"  giveth  seed  to  the  sower."     The  very  strength  and  skill  of  the  cultivator  of  the 
soil  are  from  Him.     And  thus  "He  gives  us  fruitful  seasons."     Some,  indeed, 
more  so  than  others ;  but  this  is,  that  our  dependence  may  be  felt,  our  obhgations 
owned,  our  prayers  and  our  praises  called  forth.     Take  the  seasons  altogether 
through  a  considerable   series  of   years ;   do  we   not  find  that  fruitfulness  ia 
their  general    characteristic,  unfruitfulness  the    exception? — while   the   Divine 
goodness  is  continually  manifested  both  in  giving  and  withholding,  the  very 
harshness  in  the  latter  case  being  meant  as  a  salutary  chastening.    HI.  The  wit- 
KESs  FOB  God  which  His  manifbsies  beneficence  beabs  sk  aiiL  coc»iBiBau     1, 


S98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

Although  "  in  times  past  God  suffered  all  nations  to  walk  in  their  own  ways,  He 
left  not  Himself  without  witness."  The  "  rain  "  was  His  "witness  "  ;  all  its  showers 
testified  of  His  power,  His  providence,  and  His  beneficence.  "  Fruitful  seasons  " 
were  His  "witnesses";  the  spring  with  its  opening  buds,  the  summer  with  its 
chaplets  of  flowers,  autumn  with  its  golden  sheaves,  the  very  winter  with  its  weU- 
stored  fruits,  all  testified  of  God  in  the  ears  of  nations,  too  often  unheeding  the 
voice  from  heavan  and  bent  on  their  own  ungodliness.  How  clear  is  Scripture  in 
showing  the  inexcusableness  of  heathenism  and  idolatry  1  2.  Now  surely,  if  the 
beneficence  of  God  in  "  giving  rain  and  fruitful  seasons  "  was  a  witness  for  God  to 
heathens,  it  is  so  also  to  us.  To  how  many  careless,  thoughtless  and  ungrateful 
people,  even  in  Christian  lands,  are  the  "  fruitful  seasons  "  a  witness  for  God,  leaving 
them  without  excuse  1  (J.  Hamhleton,  M.A.)  Man  must  have  some  religion  : — 
Lord  Chesterfield,  being  in  Brussels  on  one  occasion,  supped  with  Voltaire  and  a 
Madame  C,  his  disciple.  "  I  think,"  said  the  lady,  •'  the  British  Parliament  con- 
sists of  some  five  or  six  hundred  members,  the  best  informed  and  sensible  men  in 
the  kingdom,  does  it  not  ?  "  "  It  is  so  supposed,  madame,"  was  the  formal  reply. 
"  What  then,"  continued  she,  "  can  be  the  reason  they  tolerate  so  great  an  absurdity 
as  the  Christian  religion  ? "  "I  suppose,  madame,"  said  his  lordship,  "  it  is 
because  they  have  not  been  able  to  substitute  anything  better  in  its  place ;  when  they 
can,  I  doubt  not  but  that  in  their  wisdom  they  will  readily  accept  it."  Chesterfield, 
in  his  sly,  ironical  reply,  went  on  the  assumptions — I.  That  some  eeligion  men 
MUST  HiVE,  This  he  shared  with  the  most  sagacious  men  in  all  ages.  It  has  been 
inferred — 1,  From  the  teachings  of  the  past,  as  found  in  history,  tradition,  and 
fable.  From  the  beginning  to  this  hour,  wherever  the  foot  of  man  has  trod,  religion 
has  been  found.  2.  From  the  necessity  of  religion  to  the  well-being  of  society.  All 
great  legislators  and  statesmen  have  seen  this  and  acted  accordingly ;  for,  as  De 
Tocqueville  remarks,  "Despotism  may  govern  without  faith,  but  liberty  cannot." 
3.  From  the  manifest  requirements  of  the  individual.  Every  man  stands  in  mani- 
fest need  of  religion,  and  that,  however  it  may  be  with  the  hving,  when  men  come 
to  die,  almost  all  wish  this  want  were  supplied,  and  regret  that  they  had  not  before 
taken  measures  to  supply  it.  4.  From  a  consideration  of  human  nature  and  the 
elements  which  compose  it.  The  religious  instinct  belongs  to  it  as  much  as  any 
other.  This  religiousness  is  no  accident :  it  comes  of  man's  weakness  and  depend- 
ence as  a  finite  being ;  of  his  intelligence,  which  looks  for  and  is  not  satisfied 
without  a  first  cause,  personal  and  infinitely  wise ;  above  all  of  his  conscience.  Till 
this  is  torn  from  man's  breast,  he  must  believe  there  is  a  ruler  over  him  in  the 
heavens.  U.  That  if  any  is  nowadays  adopted  it  must  be  Chkistianity.  The 
choice  is  only  between  Paganism,  Mohametanism,  Deism,  and  Christianity.  1.  The 
first  may  be  dismissed  at  once.  When  the  world,  under  apostolic  teaching,  renounced 
heathenism,  it  renounced  it  for  ever.  2.  The  claims  of  Mohametanism  may  be  dis- 
posed of  with  like  despatch.  All  that  is  contained  in  the  Koran,  which  commends 
itself  religiously  to  our  judgment,  has  been  taken  from  the  Bible  :  the  rest  is  folly 
and  impurity.  Bereft  of  external  advantages,  there  is  nothing  within  to  recom- 
mend it,  either  in  its  origin,  history,  or  spirit.  The  adoption  of  such  a  system  by 
persons  brought  up  under  Christian  influence  is  not  to  be  thought  of.  3.  But 
what  about  Deism  or  natural  religion — a  system  which  acknowledges  God,  but 
rejects  revelation  and  Christianity.  Well,  we  need  a  religion  which  will  with 
authority  and  certainty  instruct  us  about  the  nature  and  character  of  God,  and  our 
relations  to  Him.  We  need  it  to  assure  us  of  and  guide  us  to  immortality.  We 
need  it  to  help  us  to  bear  the  burdens  of  life ;  to  strengthen  us  in  holy  hving,  and 
to  cheer  us  with  bright  and  well-grounded  hope,  and  make  us  more  than  conquerors 
over  death.  So  much  for  the  individual's  wants.  But  for  society  we  further  need 
a  religion  that  will  take  strong  hold  on  the  general  mind,  and  by  its  own  inherent 
energy,  acting  through  appropriate  means  on  the  public  conscience,  will  purify  and 
elevate  it,  giving  us  honesty  in  business,  moderation  and  forbearance  in  ordinary 
intercourse,  and  kindliness  and  affection  in  domestic  life.  Now,  can  Deism  accom- 
plish these  purposes  for  the  world  ?  (1)  It  has  never  proved  its  sufficiency  by  the 
actual  accomplishment  of  these  ends  for  any  community.  It  lacks  power.  It  bas 
no  aggressive  energy.  It  was  never  the  permanent  religion  of  a  nation.  (2)  An 
actual  inspection  of  the  system  itself  shows  that  it  must  needs  be  so.  It  is,  indeed, 
not  30  much  a  system  of  unbelief  as  of  unbeliefs.  It  is  destructive,  not  construc- 
tive. Dei><m  comes  not  with  authority :  it  speaks  as  the  Scribes.  It  is  not  the 
voice  of  God  :  it  even  spurns  the  idea  that  God  has  ever  spoken  to  the  race : 
it  is  confessedly  the  voice  of  man.    In  the  matter  of  religion  man  needs  the  direet 


«HAP.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS,  899 

interposition  of  Divine  authority.  A  religion,  without  such  authority,  is  like  a  bank 
note,  well  engraved  it  may  be,  but  lacking  the  proper  signature.  Further,  Deism 
has  no  outward  standard  to  which  all  may  resort  for  information  and  direction.  In 
all  matters  touching  government  (religion  is  governmental)  we  need  a  written  con- 
stitution. We  need  it  for  protection  and  convenience.  In  civil  and  religious 
matters  we  want  to  know  our  duties  and  the  rights  of  the  government ;  and  we 
further  need  to  have  them  recorded  where  all  may  find  access  to  them.  Without 
such  record  we  should  be  at  the  mercy  of  our  own  fickleness,  of  the  crafty  assaults 
of  the  plausible,  of  the  weakness  of  the  human  memory,  and  of  the  strength  of 
human  passion.  But  Deism  has  no  sacred  book ;  no  standard  to  walk  by.  Our 
conclusion  then  is,  that  the  high  purposes  of  religion  for  the  world  cannot  be 
answered  by  Deism.  4.  Thus  has  God  shut  us  up  to  Christianity.  God  hath  not 
left  Himself  without  witness.  By  the  very  nature  which  He  hath  given  us,  the 
circumstances  in  which  He  has  placed  us,  and  the  facilities  which  He  has  sup- 
plied to  our  hand  (to  say  nothing  of  miracles,  and  prophecies,  and  various  other 
historical,  moral,  and  critical  proofs).  He  has  plainly  and  unmistakably  shown 
where  truth,  interest,  and  duty  lie.  As  by  a  voice  from  heaven  He  has 
said  of  Jesus  :  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son  ;  hear  ye  Him."  "  This  is  the 
Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  {W.  Sparrow,  D.D.) 
Revelation  to  be  expected :  —  I.  Revelation  necessary  for  man.  1.  To  give  ua 
more  Ught  respecting  God.  The  Ught  of  nature  shows  us  that  there  is  one  God, 
who  is  intelhgent,  powerful,  righteous,  good.  But  what  do  you  find  flooding  almost 
the  entire  world  ?  Polytheism — the  belief  that  there  is  not  simply  one  God,  but 
many.  And  not  only  so  ;  there  is  not  a  single  instance  of  a  nation  rising  out  of  its 
belief  in  many  gods,  and  by  its  own  culture  attaining  to  the  knowledge  of  one  God. 
2.  To  give  us  more  light  in  reference  to  our  duty.  Some  heathen  moralists  taught 
much  and  admirably  respecting  human  duty,  but  they  also  taught  what  was 
the  very  reverse.  But  we  have  to  look  not  at  what  one  or  two  have  reached 
through  their  unaided  powers,  but  at  what  have  been  the  prevalent  views  and 
moral  practices  of  the  world.  Bead  the  close  of  the  first  chapter  of  Paul's 
Epistle  to  the  Romans.  A  man  wiU  in  character  take  after  the  being  he 
worships.  The  heathen  gods  were  immoral.  What  could  you  expect,  therefore, 
but  to  find  the  people  as  vile  at  least  as  the  imaginary  beings  they  worshipped. 
Nay,  immorality  of  the  foulest  kind  was  a  part  of  the  worship  of  the  gods.  Both 
Cicero  and  Cato  throw  their  apologetic  mantle  over  the  grossest  vices.  3.  To  give 
us  more  light  on  human  destiny.  Taking  the  light  of  nature  alone,  there  is  good 
ground  for  the  conclusion  that  the  soul  is  immortal,  and  that  sin  will  not  go  un- 
punished. But  philosophers,  who  reasoned  weU  of  a  future  state,  lost  faith  in  their 
own  conclusions.  And  then  how  dim  and  shadowy  the  notions  of  the  future  world  1 
The  druids  believed  in  something  like  the  transmigration  of  souls.  The  Scandi- 
navians had  their  Flame  world  and  their  Mist  world,  and  their  Valhalla  for  the 
brave,  and  their  Hellheim  for  the  coward.  The  Greeks  and  Romans  had  their 
Tartarus  and  their  Elysium.  4.  To  give  us  new  power.  We  not  only  need  more 
power  than  nature  gives,  but  more  power  than  nature  has.  The  heathen  moralists 
knew  a  great  deal  more  than  they  practised.  Whatever  their  amount  of  light,  they 
never  acted  up  to  it,  and  had  no  power  to  act  up  to  it.  What  was  also  needed  was 
a  new  passion.  Suppose,  as  some  have  averred,  that  you  can  extract  a  perfect  code 
of  morals  from  heathen  teachers,  there  is  one  thing  you  cannot  do,  and  that  is  make 
men  love  it.  Kindle  in  the  heart  such  a  flame  of  love  as  burned  in  the  heart  of 
Paul,  and  then  you  wiU  have  done  something  to  establish  your  position.  5.  To  give 
man  comfort.  Human  sorrow  is  a  great  subject ;  and  what  is  the  root  of  our  sorrow  ? 
It  is  sin.  The  conscience  is  guilty,  and  hence  remorse,  anxiety,  and  fear.  Nature 
spake  of  God's  goodness,  but  when  man  cried  for  mercy  there  was  no  answer. 
Nature  spake  of  righteousness,  and  told  him  that  sin  would  be  punished  ;  but  when 
he  asked  if  there  could  be  no  forgiveness,  nature  was  dumb.  That  man  might  have 
peace  for  his  conscience,  joy  in  his  grief,  and  hope  in  his  death,  a  revelation  from 
■God  was  needed  assuring  him  that  there  is  forgiveness  with  Him.  II.  Revelation 
likely  for  God.  The  grounds  of  this  hope  are — 1.  The  constitution  of  the  human 
race.  Humanity  has  descended  from  a  single  pair,  and  is  continuing  to  multiply. 
The  population  of  the  globe  is  over  1,200,000,000,  add  to  this  the  millions  that  have 
■died,  and  the  question  raised  is  :  Is  it  likely  that  God  would  have  made  man  to 
multiply,  if  He  had  had  no  intention  of  countei-acting  in  some  way  the  ruin  of  his 
sin  ?  I  hardly  think  it,  and  therefore  I  see  here  something  which  begets  the  hope 
oi  a  revelation.    2.  The  struggle  which  we  see  everywhere  between  good  and  eviL 


400  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit. 

Sin  certainly  has  the  mastery,  but  it  is  not  a  mastery  which  is  unchallenged.  Now* 
if  man  had  been  abandoned  of  God,  I  can  hardly  think  we  should  have  had  this 
struggle.  Nay,  more,  look  at  the  world,  and  say  if  it  seems  made  for  a  race  of  beinga 
who  are  as  certainly  given  over  to  extinction.  Is  this  not  a  world  in  which  there 
is  much  goodness?  "  Thou  hast  sinned,  but  hope  still ;  these  are  the  two  sayings 
that  predominate  in  the  vast  murmur  of  nature."  3.  The  fatherly  relationship  of 
God  to  man.  This  idea  is  certainly  one  which  obtains  full  recognition  only  in 
Christ,  but  wherever  God  has  been  acknowledged,  He  has  been  understood  and 
worshipped  as  a  Father.  Now,  we  know  what  an  earthly  father's  feelings  are.  Can 
we  suppose  that  they  are  less  strong  and  less  tender  in  God  ?  Now  look  at  man's 
necessities  on  the  one  hand,  and  God's  fatherly  compassion  on  the  other,  and  then 
Bay  if  it  is  likely  that  God  would  make  no  revelation  of  Himself,  and  give  no  relief. 
{A.  Oliver, B.A.)  Bain  from  heaven. — RainaDivine  blessing  : — Eain  indicates  sove- 
reign power  and  goodness — "  it  tarrieth  not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of  men." 
In  seasons  of  eastern  drought,  when  the  earth  is  parched,  when  "  the  field  is  wasted, 
and  the  land  mourneth,  and  the  new  wine  is  dried  up,"  when  the  dread  of  hunger 
appals  every  one,  and  even  the  dumb  brutes  are  looking  up  to  heaven  in  stupid 
despair  ;  then  it  is  felt  that  man  cannot  help  himself,  that  he  must  only  wait  and 
long  and  pray  till  the  clouds  begin  to  gather,  for  he  is  conscious  of  being  wholly  in 
the  power  of  a  higher  Will.  Day  after  day  passes,  and  the  sun  looks  down  on  burnt 
pasture,  dry  channels,  and  a  cracked  and  dusty  soil.  At  evening  there  are  hopeful 
symptoms,  but  they  are  vanished  before  the  morning.  The  heavens  are  anxiously 
scanned  if  the  smallest  speck  may  be  discovered,  and  the  imagination  often  creates 
it.  It  is  hoped  that  the  wind  may  veer,  and  every  breath  excites,  and  then  beUes 
such  an  expectation.  Spirit  and  energy  are  gone — "  dimness  of  anguish  "  is  seen 
on  every  countenance.  Men  dream  of  floods,  and  waken  to  more  disappointment. 
They  can  do  nothing,  and  devise  nothing,  to  better  themselves.  No  wonder,  then, 
that  the  giving  of  rain  was  associated  with  Divinity.  It  is  pointedly  asked  in  a 
Greek  drama,  when  the  existence  of  Jupiter  is  denied — "  And  who  then  giveth 
rain  ?  "  as  it  this  were  proof  beyond  all  doubt.  In  Southern  Africa,  where  the  idea 
of  God  is  nearly  effaced,  there  is  still  a  belief  in  a  Supreme  Power,  whose  awful 
prerogative  is,  not  to  create  men  or  govern  them,  but  simply  to  give  rain — a  gift 
which  is  felt  to  be  so  necessary,  and  withal  is  conferred  or  withheld  in  such  pre- 
carious and  variable  times  and  quantities ;  the  dreaded  Deity  is  He  who  brings 
them  what  they  so  much  want,  and  on  the  gift  of  which  they  can  never  count — He 
is  the  rain-maker.  Nay,  in  that  dry  upland  region  of  Lycaonia  water  was  often 
scarce ;  the  heaven  as  iron,  and  the  earth  as  brass,  and  water  fetched  up  from 
deep  wells  was  so  precious  as  to  be  sold  for  money.  It  was  with  peculiar  point, 
therefore,  that  the  apostle  turned  his  audience  to  God — who  is  doing  good — giving 
rain  from  heaven.  {J.  Eadie,  D.D.)  Fruitful  seasons. — Fruitful  seasons  are — I. 
The  gift  of  God.  "  He  gave,"  **  He  fills."  Among  the  numerous  scenes  of  beauty 
with  which  the  world  is  furnished,  there  are  few  more  calculated  to  delight  the  eye 
and  heart  than  a  rich  autumnal  prospect.  It  is  delightful  to  allow  the  mind  to 
rest  on  a  wide  extent  of  country  whose  plains  are  richly  covered  with  waving  fields 
of  corn,  and  the  mountains  clothed  with  verdant  pasturage,  or  overshadowed  by  the 
stately  forest.  It  is  delightful  to  reflect  what  a  prodigious  amount  of  enjoyment  is 
prepared  for  sensitive  and  rational  beings  by  the  fruits  of  the  earth  arriving  and 
arrived  at  maturity.  It  is  natural  to  put  the  question,  Whence  originates  so  rich  a 
scene  ?  1.  Man  is  a  proud,  vain  creature,  and  he  is  very  apt  to  take  the  credit  of 
almost  everything  to  himself.  Even  in  what  is  the  production  of  human  ingenuity 
and  industry,  man  has  but  little  to  boast ;  it  is  merely  the  result  of  powers,  which 
God  bestowed  on  him,  on  materials  bestowed  by  God.  But  there  is  seen  less  to 
nourish  pride  when  contemplating  the  riches  of  harvest.  Man  has  been  at  work, 
but  human  ingenuity  and  labour  have  done  but  little  in  producing  the  results.  Man 
can  plant  and  water,  but  man  cannot  give  the  increase.  He  cannot  cause  it  to  rain 
on  the  earth,  to  cau.-e  the  bud  of  the  tender  herb  to  spriug  forth.  2,  But  it  may  be 
said  that  it  is  to  be  traced  to  the  eternal  laws  of  nature,  to  the  independent  qualities 
and  powers  of  matter.  It  is  not  very  easy  to  attach  meaning  to  these  phrases  ;  we 
question  their  existence  altogether  if  they  mean  anything  more  or  less  than  a  name 
for  tbe  ordinary  way  in  which  tbe  great  Supreme  Agent  has  been  accustomed  to 
manifest  His  wisdom  and  power  in  producing  certain  effects.  And  if  we  were  to 
admit  the  existence  of  "  the  eternal  laws  of  nature,"  or  "  the  independent  qusilitiea 
and  powers  of  matter,"  they  could  not  satisfactorily  account  for  the  result  ;  for 
surely  they  must  operate  always  precisely  in  the  same  way,    11  the  productions  ot 


CHAP.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS,  401 

the  earth  are  to  be  attributed  to  them,  we  should  naturally  expect  that  all  Stiasons 
would  be  alike.    Nothing  is  more  self-evident  than  that  what  is  in  itself  inert  can 
act  only  as  it  is  acted  upon.    And  it  is  a  principle  of  our  nature  which  we  cannot 
resist,  that  whenever  we  perceive  an  end  steadily  prosecuted,  and  means  employed 
in  order  to  gain  that  end,  there  has  been  the  operation  of  a  superintending  being — 
there  has  been  intelligence  at  work.     The  language  of  the  Bible  is  the  language  of 
sound  philosophy.     "  Thou  visitest  the  earth,  and  waterest  it,"  &c.     IL  A  witness 
OF  God  to  men.     When  God  gives  us  rain   from  heaven   and  fruitful   seasons. 
He  gives  us  a  testimony  with  regard  to — 1.    His  existence.      We  reason  from 
the  effects  to  a  oause.     There  is  no  way  of  accounting  for  the  regular  motion 
of  the  earth,  but  by  admittiug  that  there  does  exist   such  a  Being,  infinitely 
wise,  powerful,   and  good,   as  the    Being  whom  we  describe  by  the  name   of 
God.     2.  His  power.     All  the  created  powers  in  the  universe  cannot  produce  the 
humblest  weed  that  grows  in  our  fields.     If  we  allow  our  minds  to  reflect  on  what 
is  necessary,  in  order  to  the  production  of  a  fertUe  harvest,  we  shall  be  struck  with 
amazement  at  the  display  of  the  power  of  God.     Think  of  what  is  exhaled  in  the 
shape  of  vapour  from  seas,  and  rivers,  and  lakes,  ha  every  part  of  the  earth — taken 
into  the  upper  regions  of  the  atmosphere,  and  there  condensed,  and  sent  down  on 
the  earth  in  the  shape  of  dew  and  of  rain — insinuating  itself  into  the  soU,  making 
the  seeds  that  are  imbedded  there  to  expand  and  grow  upward.     Thus  God  brings 
forth  the  various  fruits  of  the  earth  to  maturity,  and  furnishes  abundance  of  food 
for  man  and  beast.     3.  His  wisdom.    How  wonderfully  does  God  adapt  different 
soils  to  different  grains — different  grains  to  the  constitutions  of  different  animals  I 
How  wonderfully  does  He  regulate  the  various  degrees  of  beat,  and  cold,  and 
moisture,  so  as  to  gain  the  great  end  of  producing  abundance  of  salutary  food  for 
His  prodigious  farmly  of  sensible  and  irrational  beings.     "  How  wonderful  are  Thy 
works,  0  Lord  1  in  wisdom  hast  Thou  made  them  all."     4.  His  goodness.     Think 
what  a  quantity  of  suffering  is  prevented  by  an  abundant  harvest.     What  mind  can 
form  any  conception  of  the  horrors  produced  by  a  single  season  failing  ?  And  there 
is  also  the  communication  of  an  incalculable  measure  of  happiness.     No  mind  can 
form  any  conception  of  the  degree  of  enjoyment  that  is  produced  through  the  world 
in  consequence  of  the  bounties  of  harvest.    5.  His  sovereignty.    Every  season  is 
not  a  fruitful  season ;  and  the  same  seasons  are  not  equally  fruitful  in  every  district 
of  the  same  country,  or  in  different  countries.      The  same  God,  who,  when  He 
causes  it  to  rain  on  one  land,  withholds  rain  from  another — punishes  one  part  of 
the  world  with  scarcity,  whilst  He  blesses  another  with  plenty.     It  is  the  voice  of 
God  proclaiming,  "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God :  have  not  I  a  right  to  do 
what  I  will  with  My  own?    None  shall  stay  My  arm ;  and  none  dare  say  to  Me, 
What  doest  Thou?"     6.  His  patience.     The  pensioners  upon  the  Divine  bounty  are 
rebels  against  it.     Surely,  though  God  be  not  slack  concerning  His  threatenings,  as 
some  men  count  slackness,  He  is  long-suffering,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish. 
Oh,  how  hardened  are  men's  hearts  not  to  feel  the  force  of  this  appeal.    (J.  Brown, 
DJD.)      The  witness  of  harvest : — We  are  met  to  acknowledge  the  goodness  of  God  in 
giving  us  the  fruits  of  the  earth  in  their  season.     It  is  a  supreme  function  of  the 
Church  to  idealise  common  things,  to  give  a  religious  interpretation  to  all  the  great 
interests  and  occasions  of  our  earthly  life,  and  by  means  of  prayer  and  praise, 
sileut  meditation  and  spoken  discourse,  to  make  men  and  women  more  truly  and 
deeply  conscious  of  the  Eternal  Presence  and  Care.      The  harvest  is  really  an 
occasion  which  has  a  direct  relation  to  all  our  hves.     For  us  the  sun  shines  and 
the  rain  falls,  and  the  order  of  creation  keeps  its  unbroken  course,  and  the  miracle 
of  growth  and  fruition  is  yearly  wrought.     Agriculture  is  not  only  the  oldest  but 
the  most  fundamental  of  aU  human  industries.     Our  whole  social  order  rests  upon 
it,  and  all  our  interests  and  activities  are  affected  by  it.     We  live  by  bread,  though 
not  by  bread  alone.      Our  daily  bread  is  the  material  basis  of   aU  our  higher 
functions   and  energies  —  trade  and  politics,  science  and  art,  law  and  poetry, 
religion  and  philanthropy.     1.  A  harvest  thanksgiving  service  is  helpful  to  us  by 
making  us  include  what  are  called  the  works  of  nature  in  our  devout  meditations. 
There  are  not  a  few  religious  people  upon  whom  the  manifestations  of  power  and 
wisdom,  of  beauty  and  goodness  in  the  natural  order  of  the  world  are  in  a  great 
part  thrown  away.      In  his  diary  of  his  travels   on   the   Continent  the  saintly 
Fletcher  laments  the  delight  he  took  in  the  beauty  of  the  Rhine  as  an  evidence  of 
his  woridliness,  and  the  type  of  religionists  which  he  represented  is  far  from  being 
extinct.     We  need  not  judge  them  ;  only  we  have  a  right  to  turn  to  the  book  of 
Job.  to  the  Psalms,  and  the  f  arables  of  Jesus  to  prove  that  the  highest  order  of  the 
vol..  n.  26 


402  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiTa 

religious  mind  is  that  which  is  most  alive  to  the  spiritual  significance  of  material 
things.  By  the  whole-souled  religious  man  nothing  natural  is  treated  with  in- 
difference. Every  instance  of  beneficent  order  and  ministry  deepens  his  sense  of 
the  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness.  The  moving  Ufe  of  nature  is  a  parable  of  the 
higher  life.  2.  A  harvest  thanksgiving  service  is  a  distinct  and  beautiful  confession 
of  God  as  the  living  God,  in  whom  we  and  all  creatures  and  things  live  and  move 
and  have  our  being.  Anything  that  helps  to  quicken  and  deepen  this  confidence 
is  of  real  use  when  there  is  a  spirit  abroad  in  the  world  which  would  wither  and 
destroy  it.  Physical  science  is  in  the  ascendant,  and  the  language  of  the  ancient 
Scriptures  which  represents  God  as  the  living  God,  the  Uving  Spirit  of  thought, 
order,  power,  beauty,  and  goodness  that  pervadeth  all  things,  does  not  appeal  to 
us  as  it  once  did.  The  danger  to  faith  is  not  in  results  and  theories,  but  in  the 
excessive  and  exclusive  concentration  of  men's  minds  on  the  material  side  of 
things ;  in  such  an  absorbing  attention  to  one  class  of  facts  that  other  facts  of 
transcendent  importance  are  sUghted  or  ignored.  Indeed,  all  the  great  results  of 
our  latter-day  knowledge  instead  of  making  the  world  less  divine  make  it  more 
divine,  and  if  their  significance  was  by  us  truly  realised,  then,  instead  of  being  set 
forth  in  abstract  propositions  and  mathematical  signs  they  would  be  expressed  in 
poetry  and  set  to  music.  The  gains  of  science,  instead  of  being  the  losses  of  faith, 
only  enlarge,  make  more  wonderful  and  glorious,  the  temple  in  which  God  is  seen 
and  worshipped.  But  there  is  another  form  of  modern  thought  which  some  seem 
to  think  strikes  at  the  root  of  the  faith  which  gives  meaning  to  this  service,  and  is 
simply  fatal  to  the  spirit  of  thanksgiving  to  God.  It  is  a  human  Providence,  we 
are  told,  which  makes  us  what  we  are  and  gives  us  what  we  have,  and  if  we  are 
to  give  praise  and  glory  to  any  one  for  the  things  which  make  the  world  beautiful, 
and  human  life  fair  and  good  and  worth  living,  let  it  be  to  humanity,  to  the  men 
in  past  and  present  times  through  whose  thought  and  labour  and  sacrifice  this 
"hard,  unfriendly  earth  has  been  subdued,  and  discoveries  and  inventions  have  been 
made,  and  all  the  things  which  are  covered  and  expressed  by  the  word  "  civilisa- 
tion "  have  been  won.  It  is  little  or  nothing  that  any  deity  outside  humanity  does 
or  has  done  for  us ;  let  us  be  grateful  to  mankind.  Yes,  grateful  to  mankind  we 
ought  to  be ;  but  must  our  gratitude  end  there,  and  the  sacrifice  of  our  thanks- 
giving be  only  for  human  altars  ?  Nay !  After  we  have  done  all  that  is  meet  and 
right  in  the  way  of  expressing  our  gratitude  to  the  humim  race  and  to  individual 
members  of  the  race,  we  still  have  left  in  our  hearts  an  immense  fund  of  gratitude 
which  can  only  spend  itself  on  one  object,  one  Being,  one  God,  the  Fathet  of  all, 
-who  is  above  all,  through  all,  and  in  all.  The  earth,  God  has  given  to  the  children 
of  men,  and  like  all  God's  best  gifts  we  have  to  work  for  it  in  order  to  win  it. 
And  whence  the  power  to  work  ?  In  the  last  and  final  analysis  we  must  ascribe  all 
to  God,  confess  the  human  providence  to  be  after  all  the  Divine  Providence,  and 
bow  down  before  the  Deity  who  not  only  transcends  but  is  immanent  in  fiis 
creation  and  in  His  children,  the  ultimate  and  everlasting  Source  of  all.  8.  A 
harvest  thanksgiving  service  is  a  recognition  of  the  Divine  presence  in  the  regular 
courses  and  ordinary  processes  of  nature.  Among  men  from  age  to  age  the  extra- 
ordinary phenomena  have  been  regarded  as  most  Divine.  "  If  the  sun  were  to 
rise  but  once,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  "we  should  all  be  ready  to  turn  Persians  and 
worship  it,  but  because  we  see  it  rising  and  setting  every  day  no  man  regardeth 
it."  Like  the  Jews  of  old,  unless  we  see  signs  and  wonders  we  will  not  believe. 
But  to  the  devout  and  deep-seeing  man  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  the  glory  of  the 
Lord,  its  sights  and  sounds  a  constant  and  continuous  revelation  of  the  living  God ; 
and  for  him  to  be  impressed  with  the  thought,  "  Surely  God  is  here,"  things  do 
not  need  to  be  invested  with  scarlet  robes.  The  daily  dawn,  the  depths  of  the 
midnight  sky,  the  spring  flowers  breaking  from  the  earth,  the  loveliness  of  June, 
the  golden  glories  of  the  autumn,  the  outspread  snow,  are  to  the  wise  man  none  the 
less  wonderful  because  they  are  familiar.  4.  A  harvest  thanksgiving  may  also 
remind  us  that  in  our  sowing  and  reaping,  in  our  buying  and  selhng,  and  in  all 
our  material  interests  and  concerns  we  have  to  do  with  God,  What  atheism  worse 
than  that  which  excludes  God  from  the  world  of  daily  life,  which  gives  us 
practically  a  world  without  God  except  so  far  as  the  Church  is  concerned,  which 
conceives  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  to  be  only  interested  in  ecclesiastical 
assemldies  and  conferences,  in  missionary  and  evangelistic  schemes,  and  societies 
for  converting  Jews,  and  such  like  things  1  We  need  to  be  reminded  again  and 
again  that  there  is  but  one  God,  one  law,  one  life,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  ruleth 
over  all,  over  our  corn-fieids  as  well  as  over  our  mission  fields,  over  our  shops  aa 


CHAP,  xif.]  THE  ACTS.  403 

well  as  over  our  churches,  over  our  domestic  and  business  relations  as  well  as  ovei 
our  holy  orders  and  our  ecclesiastical  connections,  over  farmers,  tradesmen, 
bankers,  architects,  lawyers,  clerks,  artisans  as  well  as  over  bishops  and  curates. 
Scripture-readers  and  travelling  evangelists.  Until  we  believe  this  and  act  upon 
the  belief,  the  life  tnat  now  is  will  never  be  what  God  meant  it  to  be,  and  what  it 
ought  to  be — a  Divine  discipline  and  service,  holy  throughout  unto  the  Lord.  6- 
A  harvest  thanksgiving  service  reminds  us  in  a  very  vivid  and  impressive  way  of 
the  ever-old  and  ever-new  fact  of  the  Divine  goodness.  There  are  three  aspects  of 
the  Divine  goodness  which  the  harvest  more  especially  puts  before  us  :  first  of  all 
its  free  character.  Its  bounty  is  God's  free  gift.  Though  we  must  work  with  God 
to  get  the  Divine  blessing  out  of  many  things,  for  we  are  not  God's  paupers  but 
His  children,  yet  from  the  help  we  get  from  the  daisy  at  our  feet  to  the  unspeak- 
able help  that  comes  from  the  Christ  dying  on  the  Cross,  it  is  all  in  a  most  real  and 
profound  sense  the  free  gift  of  God.  Then,  secondly,  harvest  speaks  to  us  of  the 
universal  character  of  the  Divine  goodness.  The  ungodly  man  who  obeys  faithfully 
the  natural  conditions  which  are  but  another  name  for  the  Divine  order  and  will, 
succeeds  as  well  as  the  godly  man,  even  better,  if  the  godly  man  is  ignorant, 
indolent,  and  careless.  God  is  good,  and  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His 
works.  Then,  again,  harvest  speaks  to  us  of  the  constancy  of  the  Divine  goodness. 
"While  the  earth  remaineth,  seed-time  and  harvest,  summer  and  winter,  day  and 
night  shall  not  cease.  0  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for  His  goodness  I 
Thanksgiving  is  bom  of  a  reasonable  spiritual  confidence  in  the  Divine  goodness. 
The  mystery  and  sublimity  of  the  universe  may  excite  wonder  and  awe,  but  only 
the  sense  of  the  essential  goodness  of  the  universe  can  awaken  and  nourish 
gratitude.  Gratitude  in  its  highest  sense  and  noblest  quality  is  only  possible  to 
the  man  whose  religious  faith  enables  him  to  trust  the  world  and  life  as  meaning 
good  to  him  and  to  all  men.  But  how  is  gratitude  to  be  shown  ?  Only  let 
gratitude  be  felt,  and  it  cannot  help  showing  itself.  Words  of  thanksgiving  are 
good  when  they  are  sincere,  and  expression  develops  and  strengthens  the  inward 
feeling.  But  words  are  not  the  only  form  of  self-expression,  nor  the  highest. 
And  how  displeasing  to  God  must  be  some  kinds  of  thanksgiving — empty  words,  or 
the  thanksgiving  of  successful  wickedness,  of  men  whose  good  things  have  been 
,got  by  cheating  and  lying,  by  unjust  and  unbrotherly  competition,  and  by  grinding 
the  faces  of  the  poor  1  The  praise  God  likes  best  is  the  praise  of  the  life.  Not  in 
words  only,  but  in  acts  of  sympathy  and  lovingkindness,  in  love  giving  itself  in 
service  to  mankind,  in  lives  consecrated  to  truth  and  goodness,  to  duty  and  charity, 
let  our  souls  ascend  now  and  always  in  thankfulness  to  God.  (John  Hunter.) 
The  witness  of  the  harvest : — Nothing  is  more  worthy  of  note  in  St.  Paul's 
methods  than  the  care  which  he  always  took  to  adapt  himself  to  the  varying  con- 
ditions and  characters  of  those  amongst  whom  he  laboured.  This  statement  con- 
cerning his  mode  of  work  is  amply  borne  out  by  the  narrative  of  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles.  His  theme  was  always  the  same,  but  his  method  of  presenting  that 
theme  was  constantly  changing  with  his  change  of  place  and  circumstances.  He 
had  but  one  gospel  to  preach — the  gospel  of  Christ  crucified  ;  but  he  preached  that 
gospel  with  an  ever-varying  accent  and  with  great  manifoldness  of  expression.  At 
Athens  he  found  his  text  not  in  Jewish  lore,  but  in  the  altars  of  their  gods,  and  in 
that  literature  of  which  every  Greek  was  lawfully  proud.  And  here  at  Lystra 
amongst  the  Barbarians  of  Lycaonia  he  speaks  from  that  revelation  of  God  whose 
"  line  is  gone  out  through  all  the  earth,  and  its  words  to  the  end  of  the  world." 
Let  us  not  suppose,  however,  that  the  witness  of  God's  works,  to  which  the  apostle 
appeals  in  my  text,  is  of  importance  only  to  such  people  as  those  of  Lystra.  There 
is,  perhaps,  a  danger  of  our  thinking  that  the  teachings  of  Natural  Religion  have 
been  superseded  by  those  of  Revelation.  This  is  a  great  mistake.  Our  Lord  came 
not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil  that  exhibition  of  religious  truth  which  is  contained  in 
the  works  of  nature.  The  Bible  does,  it  is  true,  exhibit  the  imperfection  of  that 
revelation ;  but  it  nowhere  discredits  it.  On  the  contrary,  it  constantly  pays  its 
tribute  to  it,  and  urges  us  to  study  it,  as  containing  the  alphabet  of  its  own  more 
glorious  disclosures.  On  the  part  of  the  first  Christian  teachers  there  was  no 
wholesale  churlish  denunciation  of  other  religions.  They  rejoiced  to  recognise  the 
truths  which  they  contained,  though  those  truths  were  encrusted,  and  often  hidden 
out  of  sight,  by  the  accumulated  errors  of  ages.  Nor  does  the  Bible  regard  natural 
theology  as  merely  a  stepping-stone  by  which  men  are  to  pass  into  the  holy  of 
holies  of  its  revelations,  and  which  afterwards  is  to  be  disregarded  as  of  no  further 
use ;  but  it  speaks  of  it  as  being  an  essential  part  of  the  whole  fabric  of  truth,  which 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm 

must  ever  remain  an  integral  and  necessary  portion  of  it.    Natural  theology  is  the 
base  of  the  ladder  which  rests  upon  the  earth,  while  the  top  of  it  is  in  heaven  ;  and 
the  ladder  cannot  stand  without  its  base.    Nowhere  is  this  more  distinctly  set  forth 
than  in  the  teaching  of  our  blessed  Master  Himself.     He  directs  our  attention  to 
the  lilies,  the  mustard-seed,  the  tares,  and  the  harvest,  as  being  Divinely  ordained 
preachers  of  the  truths  of  religion.    Indeed,  never  was  there  any  teacher  who  lived 
in  such  intimate  communion  with  nature  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth.     No  writer  of  the 
New  Testament  was  more  perfectly  versed  in  this  department  of  the  school  of  Christ 
than  the  apostle  Paul.    His  sermons  and  his  treatises  teem  with  lessons  drawn  from 
the  storehouse  of  nature.     I.  Obseeve  that  the  operations  of  nature  through 
WHICH  God  provides  for  the  creatures  bear  witness  to  His  existence,  and  to  His 
continual  presence  and  activity  in  the  midst  op  His  works.     1.  I  know  that  it  is 
fashionable  to  sneer  at  the  design  argument  for  the  Being  of  God.     But  sneering  is 
a  very  common  device  resorted  to  by  men  who  have  no  argument  with  which  to 
sustain  their  cause.    In  spite  of  all  the  sneers  of  our  critics  we  are  prepared  to 
maintain  that  the  argument  is  irrefragable,  that  the  universe  exhibits  thought,  and 
that  thought  implies  a  thinker  ;  that  the  universe  exhibits  uniformity  of  thought, 
and  that  this  uniformity  of  thought  implies  that  there  is  but  one  Thinker  whose 
wisdom  has  laid  the  plans  of  this  marvellous  world  in  which  we  dwell.  No,  the  man 
is  without  excuse  who  can  look  at  this  masterpiece  of  thought  and  say,  *'  There  is 
no  Thinker  behind  it  all."   2.  For  a  moment  let  us  single  out  from  the  midst  of  the 
manifold  operations  of  nature  those  to  which  the  apostle  particularly  refers  in  my 
text,  that  is  to  say,  those  connected  with  the  supply  of  food  for  the  creatures. 
When  we  consider  that  the  seasons  of  our  climate,  with  all  their  manifold  effects, 
are  produced  by  an  inclination  of  the  axis  of  the  earth  at  an  angle  of  23^°  to  the 
plane  of  its  orbit,  and  when  we  consider  what  would  follow  if  there  were  no  such 
inclination,  or  were  that  inclination  varied  through  ever  so  small  an  angle,  we  can- 
not but  feel  that  there  must  have  been  a  Designer  who  gave  the  earth  the  exact 
tilt  necessary  to  the  production  of  its  harvests.   When  we  consider  how  that,  in  the 
production  of  every  blade  of  corn,  and  of  every  apple  upon  the  tree,  there  is  a  nice 
mathematical  balancing  of  the  forces  of  gravitation  and  life,  in  order  that  the  vital 
force  may  be  able  to  overcome  the  force  of  gravitation,  and  shoot  forth  the  corn- 
stalk or  the  tree  to  the  proper  height  necessary  for  its  fruit-bearing  ;  we  cannot  but 
believe  that  there  must  have  been  a  great  Mathematician  who  made  these  delicate- 
adjustments.  When  we  look  at  the  marvellous  machinery  by  which  all  this  vegetable 
life  takes  up  and  appropriates  to  itself  the  fructifying  properties  of  the  soil  beneath 
it,  of  the  air  around  it,  of  the  clouds  above  it,  and  of  the  sun  which  is  millions  of 
miles  away  from  it,  we  are  bound  to  confess  that  this  machinery  must  have  had  a 
Constructor  to  make  it.     The  apostle  mentions  rain,  and  well  he  may,  for  the 
laboratory  in  which  God  jjrepares  His  rain  is  well  worthy  of  our  inspection.     Con- 
sider the  mighty  force  which  the  sun  exerts  as  he  lifts  the  water  up  into  the  clouds. 
See  how  by  the  air-currents  God  carries  the  fruit-bearing  showers  from  one  region 
to  another.     Look  into  the  processes  of  rarefaction  and  condensation  by  which  He 
prepares  the  golden  drops  to  distil  fatness  upon  the  earth,  and  then  answer  the 
question  which  God  put  to  Job,  "  Hath  the  rain  a  father  ?     Or  who  hath  begotten 
the  dropn  of  dew  ?    Out  of  whose  womb  came  the  ice  ?    And  the  hoary  frost  of 
heaven  who  hath  gendered  it?"  (Job  xxxviii.  28,  29).      3.  "Ah,  but,"  says  the 
modern  objector,  "  this  is  all  done  in  obedience  to  law  I  "     Exactly,  that  is  our 
point.   It  is  all  done  in  obedience  to  law.    And  law  means  order.    And  order  means 
thought.     And  thought  means  a  thinker.     The  fact  that  the  whole  world  is  under 
the  sway  of  law  is  a  proof  that  it  has  been  created  by  a  Designer,  and  is  not  the 
evolution  of  chance.    4.  "  Well,  but,"  says  the  objector  again,  "  it  may  be  that  God 
must  have  been  there  to  give  the  laws,  but,  when  He  had  given  them,  He  left  the 
universe  to  their  sway,  and  now  it  is  vain  to  seek  for  God  in  a  world  which  He  has 
given  over  to  the  control  of  law."    Again  we  ask,  "  What  is  the  use  of  laws  without 
an  executive  to  administer  them  ?  "    He  Himself  administers  the  laws  which  He 
has  given.    God  not  only  was  in  nature.  He  is  in  it.     6.  In  our  stupidity,  when  the 
stupendous  is  often  repeated  before  our  eyes,  we  forget  its  wondrousness,  and  the 
very  regularity  and  profusion  with  which  God's  mercies  are  bestowed  seem  to  deaden 
our  sense  of  obligation.   Custom  is  a  juggler  who  befools  us  all,  and  makes  us  think 
that  a  thing  is  not  wonderful  when  we  see  it  often.     I  know  that  to  some  the  dis- 
coveries of  science  seem  to  militate  against  worship.    But  this  is  only  because  these- 
persons  imagine  that  when  things  are  discoveied  and  named  they  are  brought  out 
of  the  region  of  mystery.     Ignorance  is  not  the  mother  of  religion.     II.  Our  text 


CHIP.  xiT.]  THE  ACTS.  405 

BIDS  US  SEE  IN  THE  FBUITFUL  SEASONS   A  PBOOP   OF   God'S  GOODNESS  TOWABDS  MEN.      In 

epite  of  all  the  sorrow  and  discord  of  human  life,  the  apostle  declares  that,  even 
apart  from  revelation,  there  is  in  the  bounteous  provision  of  God's  providence 
abundant  proof  of  His  goodness  towards  men.  Notwithstanding  men's  wickedness, 
He  makes  age  after  age  provision  for  their  wants  (Matt.  v.  45).  Nothing  shows  the 
hardness  of  men's  hearts  much  more  than  the  way  in  which  they  partake  of  the 
bounties  of  God's  providence,  without  any  grateful  recognition  of  the  Giver.  Paul 
declares  in  my  text  that  an  unenlightened  heathen  ought  to  hear  the  harvest  wit- 
ness to  God's  goodness.  How  much  more  then  ought  we,  who  have  the  light  of 
revelation,  to  acknowledge  His  hand  in  the  bounty  of  His  gifts  1  How  careful 
should  we  be  not  to  squander  these  blessings  in  the  service  of  our  lusts  1  These 
gifts  of  God  proclaim  how  lovingly  He  provides  for  our  happiness.  He  might  have 
made  our  food  unpleasant  and  insipid.  Instead  of  that  He  has  associated  much 
pleasure  even  with  the  lowest  actions  of  our  life,  to  be  a  symbol  to  us  of  His  good 
will  respecting  us  in  all  things.  Ungodly  man,  let  God's  mercies  awaken  thee  to  a 
sense  of  thy  guUt,  and  let  gratitude  to  Him,  because  He  has  not  visited  thee  with 
the  ruin  due  to  thy  sins,  constrain  thee  to  offer  the  only  harvest  thanksgiving  which 
God  will  accept.  III.  Lastly,  the  harvest  witness,  though  valuable,  is  afteb  all 
VERT  IMPERFECT.  (O.  A.  Bennetts,  B.A.)  The  voices  of  the  harvest : — I.  Harvest- 
time  AS  A  witness  fob  God.  The  apostles  reminded  the  people  that  they  had  no 
excuse  for  their  ingratitude  or  idolatry ;  the  order  and  fruitfulness  of  the  seasons 
testified  to  the  fact  of — I.  The  Divine  existence.  Every  court  in  the  temple  of 
nature  is  crowded  with  witnesses  to  the  Divine  existence.  2.  The  Divine  attributes 
— (1)  Natural,  e.g.,  self -existence,  intelligence,  almighttQess.  (2)  Moral  ;  e.g., 
rectitude,  benevolence,  faithfulness.  The  fertility,  regularity,  variety,  beauty,  free- 
ness  of  the  seasons,  these  all  illustrate  the  excellency  of  the  character  and  perfec- 
tion of  the  working  of  the  God  of  the  harvest,  who  opens  His  hand  and  supplies 
the  wants  of  every  living  thing.  II.  Habvest-timb  as  an  apocaltpse  to  man.  The 
processes  and  phenomena  speak  to  the  reason  and  spiritual  intuitions  of  man.  The 
brutes  gaze  unconsciously  upon  creation,  but  man  can  reflect,  deduce,  conclude. 
When  the  brawny  reapers  thrust  in  the  sickle  and  gather  the  harvest  home,  we 
have  revealed — 1.  The  complex  character  of  nature's  laws.  From  the  initial  step 
in  preparing  the  ground  for  the  reception  of  the  seed  to  the  time  when  the  garners 
are  stored  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat,  what  majesty,  manifoldness,  mercy,  and 
mystery  are  displayed  1  Life  out  of  death  ;  real  good  out  of  apparent  evil — blight, 
mildew,  <fec.  Kept  under  restraint,  under  constant  control.  2.  The  connection 
between  Divine  sovereignty  and  human  free  agency.  (1)  Man's  sphere  in  the 
economy  of  nature  is  clear  and  free,  with  liberty  to  plough,  sow,  reap ;  we  may  use 
our  choice  as  to  when,  how,  what,  where.  (2)  God's  sphere  is  absolute.  He  sends 
rain,  gives  fruitful  seasons.  We  have  no  command  or  control  over  winds,  or  rain, 
or  sun.  3.  The  correspondence  between  cause  and  effect.  In  quality  and 
quantity.  "Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  also  shall  he  reap."  The  more 
thorough  and  severe  the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  the  richer  the  harvest.  In 
moral  discipline,  the  severer  the  trial,  the  nobler  and  richer  the  character. 
4.  The  dependence  of  man  upon  God — "In  Him  we  live  and  move,"  <fec. 
♦'  He  gives  rain,"  &c.  "  He  fills  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness."  The 
thought  with  which  we  plan  and  purpose ;  the  strength  with  which  we  labour  and 
gather,  all  come  from  Him.  5.  The  duty  of  man  to  bless  God.  {F.  W.  Brown.) 
Seasons  of  spiritual  fruitfulness: — I.  The  befreshing  communication — "Bain 
from  heaven."  1.  Its  celestial  origin.  Neither  rain  nor  that  which  it  illustratea 
is  a  creature  of  man  or  nature.  Spiritual  influences  come  direct  from  God.  2.  Its 
Divine  manifestations.  (1)  Gentle.  (2)  Tempestuous.  3.  Its  connection  with 
other  gifts.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  must  never  be  dissociated  from  that  of  Christ. 
In  the  spiritual  world  "  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  "  is  as  needful  as  the  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit.  II.  The  jebtilitt  effected.  1.  The  seasons — private  and  public. 
There  are  spring,  summer,  autumn,  winter  for  the  soul ;  seed-time  and  harvest. 
Each  is  as  needful  in  grace  as  in  nature.  2.  Their  fr«itfulness.  A  fruitful  season 
is  beautiful  and  useful.  The  Christian  is  to  grow  in  grace  and  utility.  HI.  Thb 
RESULT  experienced^"  filUng  our  hearts."  1.  The  sphere — "  the  heart." 
EeMgion  is  experimental.  When  refreshing  seasons  come  they  are  felt.  2.  The 
action — "  filling,"  not  leaving  the  heart  half  empty.  3.  The  contents — "food  and 
gladness."  (1)  Sustenance.  (2)  Delight.  IV.  The  witness  of  all  this  to  God 
— to  His  wisdom,  power,  love,  <fec.  (R.  C.  Dillon,  D.D.)  Food  and  gladness. — 
Food  and  gladness: — wiiat  God  hath  joined  together  lei  no  man  put  asunder. 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxf, 

I.  He  gives  food.  By  the  clumsy  management  and  the  disastrous  sin  of  man,. 
there  are  in  some  places  and  times  many  who  want  food.  But  this  is  not  God'g 
fault.  He  giveth  food  though  we  may  waste  or  withhold  it.  He  giveth  milk  to  the 
babe  from  the  breast  of  the  mother,  and  bread  to  man  from  the  bosom  of  the  earth. 
Bad  laws,  bad  government,  artificial  society,  evil  habits,  ignorance,  waste,  extrava- 
gance, drink,  and  laziness  starve  the  weaker  children  in  His  household,  but  the 
living  God  giveth  food.  II.  He  gives  gladness.  Some  think  of  this  as  a  thing 
which  God  permits  rather  than  gives ;  and  some  are  driven  from  religion  by  a  fancy 
that  it  is  all  gloomy  and  austere.  This  is  not  so.  Learn,  then,  to  thauk  God  for 
what  some  of  you  have  never  associated  with  His  gifts — your  joys;  passing  gladness 
as  well  as  spiritual  ecstasy :  for  the  sense  of  sight,  hearing,  taste,  and  touch.  Learn 
to  feel  God  as  near  you  when  the  sun  shines  and  the  marriage  hells  ring  as  when 
the  cloud  depresses  or  the  knell  tolls.  But  remember  that  lasting  gladness  is 
dependent  on  union  with  Christ,  the  imperishable  Bread  of  Life.  {Henry  Jones, 
M.A.)  Food  and  gladness: — I  propose  to  caU  your  attention,  first,  to  what  God 
does  for  us  through  nature,  and,  secondly,  to  the  limit  of  His  beneficence,  a  hmit 
which  in  our  case,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Lycaonians,  points  toward  the  kingdom  of 
grace.  First,  then,  God  "  fills  onr  hearts  with  food  and  gladness,"  or,  rather,  more 
literally.  He  "  fiUs  our  hearts  with  nourishment  and  cheerfulness."  If  through  the 
agencies  of  nature  we  have  food  and  gladness,  we  owe  these  to  the  kindness  of  God. 
But,  further,  in  the  case  of  man,  who  is  far  the  highest  of  the  animals,  God  sup- 
plies other  wants  besides  the  hunger  and  thirst  of  the  body.  He  feeds  our  minds 
and  hearts  by  furnishing  us  with  various  interests  and  resources.  While  He  gives 
us  work  to  do,  He  gives  us  also  times  for  rest,  and  in  our  times  of  rest  He  surrounds 
us  with  objects  of  interest.  Paul  gives  this  truth  a  still  deeper  meaning  when  he 
says  that  God  fills  our  hearts  with  gladness,  or  with  cheerfulness — i.e..  He  gives  ua 
the  material  not  only  for  living,  but  for  living  cheerfully.  Those  fresh  children  of 
nature  at  Lystra  were  happy  in  their  lives — with  their  oxen,  and  their  garlands, 
and  their  belief  that  the  gods  might  come  down  to  them  any  day  in  the  likeness  of 
men.  Far  from  blaming  their  happiness,  the  apostle  told  them  that  God  was 
pleased  with  it,  and  had  arranged  the  world  so  as  to  secure  it.  To  us,  as  to  them, 
nature  is  a  witness  that  He  intends  us  to  be  happy.  There  is  a  certain  free  and 
reckless  pleasure  in  nature  which  is  one  of  God's  straight  gifts  to  our  humanity. 
And  if  Nature  thus  makes  even  the  ignorant  aud  thoughtless  happy,  it  brings  fuller 
and  more  lasting  joys  to  the  well-trained  mind.  Observe,  however,  what  Paul  says 
about  those  teachings  of  nature.  Not  that  they  convince  all  men  of  the  goodness  of 
the  Uving  God.  There  are  many  upon  whom  they  have  no  such  influence — many 
who  take  nature's  benefits  thanklessly  and  sceptically.  He  merely  says  that  God 
has  "  not  left  Himself  without  a  witness."  The  teaching  of  nature  confirms  our 
faith,  and  deepens  our  faith,  and  enlarges  our  faith;  but  it  is  not  sufficient  in  itself  ; 
it  is  incomplete,  variable,  and  broken,  requiring  other  teachers.  We  shall  take  note 
of  some  points  at  which  nature  may  fail,  and  does  fail,  to  effect  this  good  work  of 
witness-bearing  with  which  God  has  entrusted  her.  1.  Observe,  then,  that  God 
does  not  fill  the  hearts  of  all  men  with  food.  Even  in  this,  the  plainest  of  her 
offices,  nature  fails.  There  is  a  dark  cellar  in  her  workshop,  where  she  keeps  many 
prisoners,  and  appears  rather  as  a  pitiless  monster,  "  ravening  with  tooth  and 
claw,"  than  as  a  kindly  fostering  nurse.  2.  Observe,  secondly,  that  even  when  He 
fills  the  mouth  with  food  He  does  not  always  fill  the  heart  with  gladness.  We  have 
seen  that  His  general  design  in  surrounding  us  with  what  is  good  and  pleasant  is 
to  make  us  happy.  But  not  always.  Sometimes,  through  no  fault  of  ours,  but 
through  His  mysterious  providence,  there  are  causes  of  bitterness  which  turn  all 
life's  comforts  into  gall.  3.  Thus  we  are  led  to  the  last  consideration  which  will 
occupy  us,  viz.,  that  even  if  God  fills  our  hearts  both  with  food  and  with  gladness, 
we  require  something  more.  In  order  to  reach  the  purpose  of  our  existence  it  is 
not  enough  that  we  should  be  comfortable,  well  fed,  cheerful,  and  appreciative  of 
the  general  goodness  of  God.  Food  and  gladness,  for  example,  however  plentifully 
and  liberally  they  are  supplied,  do  not  prepare  us  for  the  time  when  our  food  may 
be  taken  away  from  us  and  our  gladness  turned  into  mourning.  On  the  contrary,. 
they  only  serve  to  accentuate  the  severity  of  such  an  issue  by  giving  it  the  bitter- 
ness of  contrast.  Still  less  do  these  things  equip  us  for  the  hour  of  death  and  for 
our  reckoning  with  the  laws  of  God.  We  have  the  hunger  of  our  souls  for  peace — & 
restless  craving  which  is  also  sure  to  grow,  and  which  we  shall  never  be  able  to 
satisfy  so  readily  as  we  can  now,  even  at  this  present  time.  We  need  a  grasp  of  th» 
Gieat  Hand  that  orders  our  life,  to  steady  us  when  our  oup  overflowu  with  blessings^ 


CHAP.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS,  407 

and  to  hold  our  heads  above  the  waves  when  all  the  billows  are  going  over  us.    {A, 
R.  MacEwen,  D.D.) 

Vers.  19-28.  And  there  came  thither  certain  Jews  .  .  .  who  persuaded  the 
people,  and,  having  stoned  Paul,  drew  him  out  of  the  city. — The  fickleness  of  the 
Lystrians : — It  would  not  be  difficult  to  find  a  parallel  to  this  among  modern  con- 
verts, and  it  is  easy  to  account  for  it.    The  Jews  would  b»  ready  with  another 
interpretation  of  the  miracle.     They  would  say  that  it  had  been  accomplished,  not 
by  Divine  agency,  but  by  some  diabolical  magic,  as  once  they  had  said  at  Jerusalem 
(Matt.  xii.  24).     The  Lystrians,  whose  own  interpretation  had  been  disavowed  by 
the  apostles,  would  readily  adopt  the  new  theory  suggested  by  those  who  appeared 
to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  strangers.     Their  feelings  changed  with  a  revulsion 
as  violent  as  that  which  afterwards  overtook  the  barbarians  of  Malta,  who  first 
thought  Paul  a  murderer  and  then  a  god.     {J,  S.  Howson,  D.D.)      Fickleness  of  the 
populace : — One  of  the  most  curious  stones  in  the  world  is  found  in  Finland,  where 
it  occurs  in  many  places.    It  is  a  natural  barometer,  and  actually  foretells  probable 
changes  in  the  weather.    It  is  called  *'  semakuir,"  and  turns  black  shortly  before 
an  approaching  rain,  while  in  fine  weather  it  is  mottled  with  spots  of  white.    For 
a  long  time  this  curious  phenomenon  was  a  mystery,  but  an  analysis  of  the  stone 
shows  it  to  be  a  fossil  mixed  with  clay  and  containing  a  portion  of  rock-salt  and 
nitre.    This  fact  being  known,  the  explanation  was  easy.     The  salt,  absorbing  the 
moisture,  turned  black  when  the  conditions  were  favourable  for  rain,  while  the  dry- 
ness of  the  atmosphere  brought  out  the  salt  from  the  interior  of  the  stone  in  white 
spots  on  the  surface.    How  many  men  are  like  these  rocks,  variable  and  changeful 
according  to  their  surroundings.      At  one  moment  they  will  applaud  a  certain 
person,  or  course  of  action,  but  when  their  enthusiasm  cools  down  they  will  seek  to 
destroy  the  one  they  had  previously  exalted.    It  was  so  in  the  days  of  our  Lord  and 
the  apostles,  and  is  so  still  (chap.  xiv.  11-19).     The  stoning  of  Paul : — 1.  Stones  are 
the  answer  of  those  who  have  no  arguments.     2.  Those  who  have  no  arguments 
are  wont  to  try  to  inflame  the  passions  of  the  people.     3.  When  God  has  a  great 
work  for  a  man  to  do,  his  enemies  cannot  take  his  hfe.     4,  When  a  true  servant  of 
God  is  made  to  suffer  in  one  city,  he  will  not  cease  to  work,  but  will  go  on  to  the 
next.   5.  When  a  true  servant  of  God  is  made  to  suffer,  he  will  intermit  his  work  as 
little  as  possible.   "  On  the  morrow,"  if  he  can,  he  will  take  it  up  again.   (S.  S.  Times.) 
Stoning  the  gods  (text,  and  2  Cor.  xi.  25) : — That  is  no  ordinary  heap  of  stones. 
See,  there  is  blood  on  it,  the  blood  of  one  of  earth's  best  sons.     Only  a  dozen  years 
between  the  man  who  held  the  clothes  of  Stephen's  murderers  and  the  martyr  Paul, 
for  he  was  a  martyr  then  in  intention,  and  for  anything  we  know  he  literally  died 
for  the  truth.     For  he  tells  us,  "  Whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body  I  cannot 
tell."    Persecutors  may  become  helpers.    The  pirate  may  yet  carry  lawful  cargo. 
Do  you  wish  it  were  so  ?    Then  haul  down  your  ensign  and  run  up  the  white  flag 
and  red  cross.    Cease  to  do  evU,  learn  to  do  weU.    "  Sermons  in  stones."    Yes, 
there  are  many  homilies  in  such  a  blood-stained  stone-heap  as  this.    I.  The  wat 
THE  world  uses  ITS  BBNEFACT0B8.     Stone  the  man  who  healed  the  cripple  I     That 
is  the  way  we  always  do.    Does  not  the  world  often  starve  its  geniuses  ?    Who 
expects  wealth  for  an  inventor?    The  history  of  poets  and  painters  tells  us  of 
hunger  and  nakedness.     Some  of  the  books  that  live  were  written  in  garrets  and 
cells.     Don't  expect  gratitude  if  you  are  doing  good.    You  will  be  better  off  than 
God  if  you  get  thanks  for  kindness.    Look  at  the  Cross.    II.  Bigotet  bkutalises 
iGNOBANCB.    "  Certain  Jews  persuaded  the  people."    Yon  have  the  history  of  perse- 
cution epitomised  in  that  nineteenth  verse.     The  priests  have  puUed  the  strings 
before  to-day,  and  are  trying  to  get  hold  of  them  now.    Let  us  beware  of  ignorance. 
Education  has  always  been  the  foe  of  priestcraft.    But  let  us  not  content  ourselves 
with  our  children  learning  everything  but  the  Word  of  God.   Popery  has  no  chance 
so  long  as  the  Bible  is  understood  by  the  people.    Do  not  fear  new  ideas.    There 
will  be  quite  enough  to  throw  stones  at  the  man  with  a  new  idea  without  your 
throwing  one.     If  a  man  loves  God  he  has  been  promised  "  a  crown  of  life,"  and 
you  will  not  like,  should  you  see  him  crowned,  to  think  of  the  time  when  you  threw 
a  stone  at  his  head  1    Eehgion  will  not  save  you  from  bigotry ;  there  are  no  bigots 
like  religious  ones.    Let  us  learn  to  tolerate  the  man  who  loves  God,  seeing  that 
we    shall  have  to  live  with  him  for  ever.      III.  Persecution  is  limited  in  its 
RESULTS.     "  Once  was  I  stoned."     Paul  lived  twenty  years  after  this,  but  never 
was  stoned  again.     The  enemy  had  tried  to  do  it  before,  but  was  not  able.    I  waa 
Stoned,  not  killed ;  at  least,  though  le£t  for  dead,  I  rose  up  and  came  into  (he  city. 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

The  foes  of  God  may  beat  out  our  brains,  but  they  cannot  kill  the  truth.  Paul  did 
not  give  up  the  work  to  which  he  was  called  because  he  had  to  suffer.  No,  brave 
little  man.  He  comes  into  Lystra  again.  Here  was  good  for  evil.  Mark  how  the 
Christian  hero  makes  his  very  sufferings  useful,  telling  the  Church,  and  every  scar 
illustrated  the  truth  that  "  we  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  God."  By  and  by  he  visited  Lystra  again,  and  found  fruit  remaining. 
How  true  it  is  that  the  blood  of  the  martyr  is  the  seed  of  the  Church.  Such  men 
as  Timothy  are  cheap  at  such  a  price.  Let  us  trust  God,  even  when  we  are  hurt  in 
doing  good ;  out  of  our  wounds  there  may  flow  that  which  shall  heal  many.  (T. 
Champness.)  The  next  day  he  departed  •with  Barnabas  to  Derbe. — From  Derbe 
to  Antioch : — I.  The  apostles'  woke  on  the  way  shows  that  duly  in  them  was 
superior — (1)  To  fear.  They  pass  through  the  scenes  where  they  had  endangered 
their  lives.  "  They  counted  not  their  hves  dear  unto  them."  (2)  To  convenience. 
They  could  have  reached  Antioch  much  easier  and  sooner.  Their  work  was — 1. 
Indoctrinating.  The  apostles  confirmed  them  in  the  faith — (1)  By  urging  duty. 
They  had  embraced  the  faith,  and  there  were  strong  influences  tending  to  loosen 
their  interest  in  it.  There  is  no  better  way  of  strengthening  our  souls  in  the  faith 
than  by  continuing  our  duty  in  relation  to  it.  Obedience  is  the  best  interpreter  of 
doctrine.  "He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God,"  &c.  (2)  By  inculcating  principle. 
"  We  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  the  kingdom  of  God."  The  principle  is 
that  trial  is  the  condition  of  true  elevation.  We  must  sow  in  tears  to  reap  in  joy. 
The  vine  must  be  pruned  to  make  it  fruitful.  Heavenly  dignities  are  reached,  not 
as  some  voyagers  reach  their  haven  while  sleeping,  but  as  heroes  reach  their  laurels 
by  agony.  "  These  are  they  that  have  come  up  out  of  great  tribulation,"  &c. 
What  a  Divine  work  was  theirs!  What  is  the  work  of  the  mere  sage,  hero,  poli- 
tician, artist,  compared  with  the  work  of  making  souls  strong  in  all  that  is  true  in 
thought,  holy  in  sympathy,  and  righteous  in  purpose.  2.  Organising.  "  And  when 
they  had  ordained  them  elders  in  every  Church."  Because  the  oldest  men  are  sup- 
posed to  have  the  greatest  knowledge  and  experience,  the  most  influential  officers  in 
the  Church  are  spoken  of  as  "  elders."  The  Churches  were  young  and  inexperienced. 
The  apostles,  therefore,  took  from  their  number  some  of  the  most  competent  to  take 
charge  of  the  Churches  in  their  own  absence.  3.  Dedicating.  "  And  had  prayed 
with  fasting,"  &c.  They  did  not  commend  them  to  the  officers  they  had  appointed, 
but  to  "  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls."  Probably  they  had  no  prospect  of 
seeing  them  again.  H.  Theib  work  when  they  reached  Antioch  (vers.  26-28). 
1.  This  is  the  first  missionary  meeting,  and  therefore  of  special  interest.  (1)  The 
ecene  was  Antioch,  and  no  fact  in  its  history  was  more  important  than  this.  There 
were  many  good  reasons  for  holding  the  meeting  here,  (a)  It  was  a  very  populous 
place,  and  the  meeting  was  likely  to  obtain  large  pubhcity.  The  two  great  sections 
of  the  ancient  world,  Jews  and  Gentiles,  would  have  an  opportunity  of  knowing 
something  about  the  triumphs  of  this  new  religion,  {b)  Its  wealth,  too,  would 
enable  it  to  render  support  to  the  good  cause,  (c)  It  was,  moreover,  the  place 
whence  the  mission  had  originated  (chap.  xiii.  1).  (2)  The  deputation  was  Paul  and 
Barnabas.  These  two  men  were  very  different.  Barnabas  does  not  seem  to  have 
had  the  force  and  fire  of  Paul ;  still,  however  constitutionally  dissimilar,  they  were 
morally  harmonious.  They  were  missionaries.  Missionary  meetings  should  be 
addressed  by  missionaries  rather  than  by  men  who  have  only  long  purses  or  tongues. 
(3)  The  audience  was  the  Church.  The  mission  was  theirs,  they  had  probably  con- 
tributed to  its  support,  and  they  were  bound  to  sustain  it.  (4)  The  speeches  were 
narrations.  They  "  rehearsed  all  that  God  had  done."  They  did  not  deal  in  tricks 
of  oratory  to  wake  loud  applause.  They  merely  "  rehearsed  " — related  what  they 
had  done ;  and  they  had  wonderful  things  to  tell.  2,  The  following  things  are 
taught  by  this  first  missionary  meeting : — That  the  missionary  enterprise — (1)  la 
nnquestionably  right.  It  is  based  upon  the  authority  of  Christ,  and  supported  by 
the  conduct  of  the  apostles.  "  Go  into  all  the  world,"  <feo.  (2)  Demands  our 
prayers.  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  been  •'  recommended  to  the  grace  of  God  "  (see 
also  chap.  xiii.  1-3).  The  true  missionary  should  have  the  prayers  of  the  Church. 
(3)  It  is  the  cause  of  the  Church.  "  They  gathered  the  Church  together  " ;  not  any 
particular  officers.  It  was  that  which  concerned  every  individual  member.  (4) 
Has  a  history  worth  relating.  These  missionaries  "  rehearsed  all  that  God  had 
done  with  them."  We  have  a  short  account  of  their  tour  (chaps,  xiii.  and  xiv.). 
There  is  no  history  so  interesting  or  valuable  as  that  of  the  triumphs  of  the  gospel — 
the  8tronf,'c.'5t  arguments  for  the  common  origin  of  the  race  and  the  Divinity  of 
Christianity.     (5)  Is  under  the  special  direction  of  Gud.     This  missionary  deputa 


CHAP.  XXV.}  THE  ACTS.  409 

tion  regarded  Him  as  giving  access  to  the  Gentiles.  "He  had  opened  the  door." 
There  has  been  an  immense  amount  of  clap-trap  about  this.  Men  have  spoken  of 
war  as  opening  the  door  for  the  gospel  of  peace.  Violence  must  ever  shut  the  door 
of  the  heart.  The  breaking  down  of  the  walls  of  China  by  military  violence, 
instead  of  opening  a  door  for  the  gospel,  may  only  be  the  building  up  a  barrier. 
{D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  close  of  the  first  missionary  journey  : — 1.  The  enemy 
can  be  as  active  as  the  friend  ;  sometimes  we  think  can  outdo  him  in  energy.  The 
Jews  had  no  easy  work  to  get  to  Lystra.  They  also  had  to  travel  the  hundred  and 
thirty  miles  which  separated  the  towns.  But  what  is  that  when  the  heart  is  burn- 
ing with  hatred  ?  2.  Paul  was  but  once  stoned,  and  he  never  forgot  it !  "  Once  was 
I  stoned."  No  man  can  forget  that  experience.  Those  who  stoned  Stephen  lay 
down  their  clothes  at  a  young  man's  feet  whose  name  was  Saul.  The  wheel  of 
Providence  turns  round  1  There  is  justice  at  the  very  heart  of  things.  3.  They 
left  Paul,  '•  supposing  he  had  been  dead."  Many  a  time  has  Christianity  been 
stoned  and  "  supposed  to  be  dead,"  but  the  error  is  in  the  supposition.  Whatever 
is  true  rises  again.  It  may  be  thrown  down ;  over  it  all  hell  may  have  a  moment's 
laugh — but  it  finds  its  feet  again  I  "  Truth  is  great,  and  must  prevail."  4.  The 
next  day  Paul  travelled  twenty  miles  with  Barnabas  to  Derbe ;  and  the  thought 
came  to  them  that  they  would  go,  step  for  step,  along  the  road  they  had  come. 
People  do  not  know  you  on  one  visit.  Paul  and  Barnabas,  therefore,  went  back, 
•'  confirming,"  &c.,  with  this  line  added :  "  we  must  through  much  tribulation," 
&c.  We  cannot  copy  pathos.  We  must  learn  it  by  hfe.  We  may  not  write  our 
eennons  with  ink,  for  then  they  would  be  but  rhetorical  emptiness.  We  must  hve 
them.  Paul  was  suffering  when  he  said  those  words.  There  was  a  subdued  sob  in 
the  man's  emphasis  as  he  said  this.  Strangers  might  not  detect  it,  but  the  speaker 
himself  was  conscious  that  a  new  thread — a  golden  one — was  being  run  through  the 
web  of  his  eloquence  as  he  exhorted  the  Christians  to  accept  tribulation,  not  as  a 
discredit,  but  as  an  endorsement.  5.  Paul  and  his  colleague  came  back  to  Antioch. 
Into  no  speech  with  which  I  am  acquainted  is  so  much  meaning  condensed  as  there 
is  in  ver.  27.  Look  at  it.  (1)  "  And  when  they  had  gathered  the  Church  together." 
How  easily  we  say  these  words  I  How  much  they  may  possibly  involve !  The 
Church  did  not  live  on  the  open  street,  or  in  the  fine  houses.  The  Church  was  a 
scattered  people,  perhaps  often  communicating  secretly — despised  amid  the  pomp 
and  splendour  of  the  Syrian  Antioch.  But  why  not  tell  the  little  missionary  story 
on  the  open  thoroughfare  to  the  passers-by  ?  Because  it  is  useless  to  speak  to  men 
in  an  unknown  tongue.  Only  the  Church  can  understand  the  speech  of  the 
Church.  (2)  They  connected  the  whole  story  with  God.  The  statement  does  not 
read  that  Paul  put  his  hand  upon  his  head,  and  said,  "  Oh,  what  I  have  suffered 
for  you  I  "  Stoning  and  hunger  and  peril  and  persecution — these  things  God  has 
done  1  It  is  because  we  do  not  recognise  that  fact  that  we  suppose  ourselves  to  be 
the  victims  of  circumstances  and  the  butt  of  enemies.  It  is  part  of  the  Divine 
education.  The  Lord  reigneth.  6.  They  left  one  impression  upon  the  Church — 
how  God  "had  opened  the  door  of  faith  unto  the  Gentries."  There  is  no  whine  in 
that  tone  1  They  were  very  heroes.  Instead  of  saying,  "  The  way  is  very  difficult," 
they  said,  "  The  door  is  open."  The  stoning  was  a  very  httle  thing  when  the 
apostles  thought  that  the  Gentile  provinces  were  to  be  added  to  the  empire  of  their 
Lord.  7.  Nor  was  this  all.  An  incident  happened  not  recorded  here.  Twenty  years 
afterwards  Paul  wrote  a  letter  to  his  "  own  son  in  the  faith,"  and  in  that  letter  he 
said,  "  Thou  hast  fully  known  my  . .  .  afflictions,  which  came  unto  me  at  Antioch,  at 
Iconium,  at  Lystra,"  &c. ;  and  in  the  loving  Timothy,  who  would  carry  on  his  own 
noble  work,  he  found  a  compensation  for  the  stoning  at  Lystra.  We  do  not  always 
know  what  we  are  doing,  but  the  Master  knows,  and  that  is  enough.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  end  of  the  first  missionary  journey : — I.  Suffebino  fob  the  faith.  WiUingness 
to  suffer  for  Christ  is  the  highest  test  of  devotion  to  Him.  Persecution  soon 
nnmasks  hypocrisy,  while  real  piety  has  a  face  that  appears  the  more  beautiful  and 
Barntly.  1.  The  stoning  of  Paul.  Note — (1)  The  persistency  of  the  persecution. 
•'  There  came  Jews  thither  from  Antioch,"  over  a  hundred  miles  away,  "  and 
Iconium,"  near  fifty,  to  carry  out  the  purpose  they  had  failed  to  execute  in  their 
own  cities.  The  hatred  of  the  gospel  was  as  remarkable  in  the  one  case  as  was  its 
power  over  the  hearts  of  men  in  the  other.  (2)  The  fickleness  of  popular  favour. 
*'  Having  persuaded  the  multitudes."  The  multitudes  were  in  a  condition  easily  to 
be  persuaded.  Their  vanity  had  been  wounded.  They  had  supposed  Paul  and 
Barnabas  to  be  gods,  and  having  made  a  blunder  so  mortifying,  their  resentment 
was  natural.    Therefore,  when  these  Jews  intimated,  as  probably  they  did,  that  tho 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xit. 

miracle  was  worked  through  Beelzebub,  the  reverence  of  the  people  was  changed  to 
horror.  There  is  no  truth  in  the  apothegm,  "  The  voice  of  the  people  is  the  voice 
of  God."  (3)  The  stoning  of  Paul.  Stoning  was  the  sign  which  marks  the  deed 
as  the  Jews'.  Had  Lystra  been  a  Jewish  city,  they  would  have  scrupulously  takea 
the  apostle  outside  its  walls.  But  here  they  had  no  ceremonial  punctiliousness. 
And  after  the  stoning  was  over,  they  dragged  the  supposed  lifeless  body  outside  the 
gates,  thus  subjecting  their  victim  not  only  to  indignity,  but  to  further  injury. 
His  recovery.  Observe — (1)  The  fidelity  of  the  disciples.  Their  affection  for  Paul, 
and  their  mourning  for  his  death,  are  hinted  at  in  their  gathering  around  his  body. 
(2)  Paul's  unexpected  recovery.  Perhaps  a  miracle  here  is  intimated ;  but  it  looks, 
rather,  as  though  the  apostle  merely  had  been  stunned.  His  work  was  not  yet 
over,  God  had  still  greater  things  for  him  to  do — and  to  suffer,  3,  His  departure. 
Paul  was  indomitable,  He  did  not  lose  a  day's  work  because  of  his  stoning.  Such 
a  witness  for  Christ  is  a  host  in  himself,  H.  Confibming  in  the  faith,  1.  Preach- 
ing the  gospel.  The  missionaries  were  as  eager  for  souls  as  ever.  The  cause  that  we 
suffer  for  becomes  the  more  dear  to  our  hearts.  At  Derbe  the  two  appear  to  have 
met  with  no  opposition.  Paul  omits  it  in  the  list  of  places  where  he  suffered 
(2  Tim,  iii,  11),  2,  Confirming  the  disciples,  (1)  The  return  of  the  apostles. 
They  went  back  to  the  very  places  out  of  which  they  had  been  driven.  They  could 
have  gone  a  nearer  way,  but  duty  called  them  again  to  face  danger,  and  they  obeyed 
the  call.  (2)  Their  work.  They  devoted  themselves  to  the  upbuilding  of  the 
disciples  they  had  won.  In  this  they  set  a  lesson  for  the  Church  of  to-day.  They 
confirmed  the  converts,  first,  by  exhortation.  Such  exhortations  on  the  part  of 
those  established  in  the  faith  do  young  converts  good.  Second,  by  warning. 
"  That  through  many  tribulations,"  &c.  The  apostles  did  not  represent  the 
Christian  life  as  a  bed  of  thornless  roses.  Their  words  were  emphasized  by  the 
marks  of  Paul's  recent  experience.  Men  make  the  best  soldiers  who  enUst  expecting 
to  face  great  dangers.  3,  Organising  the  churches.  In  their  up  journey,  a  body  of 
believers  had  been  gathered  in  each  place.  On  their  way  down,  the  apostles 
"  appointed  for  them  elders,"  giving  them  a  form  of  organisation  apparently  much 
like  that  of  the  synagogue.  The  object  seems  to  have  been  not  so  much  church 
government,  as  the  securing  of  leaders  to  whom  the  disciples  could  look  for 
encouragement  and  instruction.  Thus  the  two  missionaries  ensured  permanency 
to  their  work.  III.  Bepobtimo  the  proobess  of  the  faith.  1,  Eeturning  home. 
The  return  journey  was  a  sort  of  triumphal  tour,  very  different  from  the  going. 
Then  they  were  unknown — now,  multitudes  of  disciples  were  eager  to  give  them 
greeting.  Persecutions  awaited  them  then — blessings  now.  They  came  back,  as 
come  the  husbandmen  from  the  harvest-fields,  with  their  arms  full  of  sheaves. 
2,  Beporting  to  the  Church,  The  first  missionary  report  contained — (1)  What  God 
had  done  with  them.  They  did  not  rehearse  what  they  had  done.  (2)  How  God 
had  opened  a  door  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles,  The  door  the  Jews  had  shut  God  had 
opened,  and  it  has  never  been  shut  since.  (M.  G.  Hazard.)  End  of  Paul's  first 
missionary  journey  : — I.  Paul  coming  forwabd  as  the  gbbatest  missionaby  to  thb 
Gentiles,  1.  What  position  he  should  take,  how  he  would  discharge  the  duties  of 
his  office,  were  unsettled  questions  when  he  was  separated  to  this  work.  When  the 
parties  set  out,  their  names  stand  Barnabas  and  Saul.  Now  the  pen  of  Luke  seems 
naturally  to  write,  Paul  and  Barnabas,  2,  He  went  out  with  the  sanction  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  The  Spirit  to-day,  as  then,  calls  and  makes  genuine  missionaries  ; 
not  churches,  not  missionary  societies.  We  cannot  say  how  this  call  may  come. 
We  are  not  to  look  for  visions  and  voices.  The  knowledge  of  one's  own  powers,  the 
circumstances  of  life,  the  trend  of  thought,  and  the  outward  invitation  from 
authorised  sources,  it  may  be,  may  constitute  a  clear  call  of  God.  3,  He  wrought 
miracles  to  attest  his  place  as  an  ambassador  of  Jesus  Christ.  Elymas  and  the  lame 
man  at  Lystra.  4.  More  remarkable,  and  far  more  lasting  in  its  power,  was  Paul's 
true  eloquence.  He  so  spake  that  great  multitudes  believed.  Now,  to  produce 
these  immediate  effects,  we  ought  to  remember  that  he  did  not  address  those  ta 
whom  the  gospel  was  a  tale  that  had  been  told.  This  is  the  position  of  the  modem 
Christian  audience.  But  the  mind  of  Paul  was  originally  broad,  penetrating,  and 
fertil>>.  He  had  been  well  trained,  and  to  his  native  strength  and  careful  culture 
must  be  added  his  marvellous  experience  at  conversion.  Yet  his  chief  power  was 
that  which  we  may  share — the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  5.  Throughout  the 
journey  Paul  showed  the  highest  forms  of  Christian  courage.  The  journey  was 
att  nded  with  manifold  perils.  He  was  stoned  and  left  for  dead  at  Lystra.  In  all 
this  he  bore  up  bravely  and  patiently.     He  endured  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  ol 


CHAP.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS.  411 

Jesus  Christ.  He  fought  the  good  fight  of  faith.  In  all  respects,  he  came  back  to 
Antioch  approved  as  a  workman.  II.  The  rejection  of  Christ  by  the  Jews. 
They  were  in  all  the  places  whither  the  apostles  came.  It  was  natural  and  neces- 
sary for  the  apostles  to  mnke  the  offer  of  salvation  to  their  own  countrymen  first, 
nor  was  this  in  vain ;  but  the  fires  of  jealousy  burst  forth  when  they  heard  the 
Gentiles  invited  to  come  to  their  own  feast.  So  Paul  was  compelled  to  take  a  new 
and  definite  position,  saying,  "  Lo  I  we  turn  unto  the  Gentiles."  Unto  the  Gentiles  t 
Has  the  Church  of  Christ  remembered  the  words  of  Paul,  and  been  true  to  hia 
spirit  ?  Christ's  ministry  was  chiefly  to  the  lapsed  and  overlooked  classes.  Cen- 
turies of  history  show  little  effort  on  the  part  of  the  Christian  body  to  reclaim  the 
lost  sheep  wandering  in  the  wilderness.  III.  The  open  doob  among  the  Gentiles. 
At  Cyprus,  Sergius  Paulus  was  eager  to  hear  God's  Word.  At  Antioch,  the  whole 
city  came  out  to  hear  Paul.  Even  the  superstition  that  led  the  Lycaonians  to 
propose  Divine  honours  to  Paul  and  Barnabas  was  in  itself  a  force  that  might  be 
turned  to  useful  channels.  The  heathen  were  not  prejudiced  against  the  gospel  aa 
the  Jews  were.  IV.  The  establishment  of  Churches.  The  new  faith  must  have 
a  new  form.  It  would  not  do  to  let  the  zeal  of  first  love  expend  itself  in  indivi- 
dualised work.  There  must  be  organisation  and  order.  We  cannot  determine 
precisely  the  form  of  these  young  apostohc  churches,  nor  is  it  necessary  that  we 
should.  Christ  left  no  external  organisation,  but  gave  over  this  work  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  who  should  come  to  guide  into  all  truth.  {Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.) 
The  best  gain  of  a  servant  of  God  returning  home : — 1.  Wounds  received  in  the 
service  of  his  Lord  (vers.  19,  20).  2.  Souls  gained  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
{vers.  21-23).  3.  Psalms  sung  by  the  assistance  of  God  (vers.  26,  27).  Apostles 
and  Crusaders  on  the  same  track : — Conrad  and  Louis,  each  with  an  army  at  first  of 
seventy  thousand  men,  marched  through  part  of  the  districts  traversed  by  Paul  and 
Barnabas  alone  and  unprotected.  The  former  came  to  fight  the  battle  of  the  Crosa 
with  human  power,  and  their  journey  was  encompassed  with  defeat  and  death ;  the 
latter,  too,  passed  through  much  tribulation,  but  from  victory  to  victory,  for  the 
Lord  was  their  tower  and  shield.  {J.  S.  Howson,  D.D.)  And  when  they  had 
preached  the  gospel. — The  minister's  work : — I.  Preaching.  Announcing  the  glad 
tidings;  proclaiming  that  gospel  which  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  and  so 
securing  conversions.  II.  Teaching.  Instructing  the  converts  in  the  doctrines, 
displaying  the  privileges,  and  enforcing  the  duties  of  the  new  faith.  IH.  Confirma- 
tion— establishment  in  the  faith.  IV.  Exhortation.  Stimulus  and  encouragement 
to  higher  privilege  and  nobler  endeavour. 

Ver.  22.  We  must  through  much  trlbxilatlon  enter  the  kingdom  of  God. — Con- 
tinuance in  the  faith : — I.  The  disciples  had  been  but  newly  converted  to  the  faith, 
and  THEY  required  to  be  established  through  grace.  They  were  very  likely  to 
have  been  discouraged  by  the  sufferings  of  the  apostles,  their  instructors  in  the 
faith.  They  may  have  begun  to  fear  that  they  had  not  counted  the  cost  of  religion : 
they  had  looked  on  the  bright  side  of  their  profession ;  they  had  glowed  with  the 
zeal  of  new  converts  to  Christ.  But  they  might  now  have  begun,  for  the  first  time, 
to  discover  that  religion  has  its  dark  side.  It  is  altogether  probable  that  they  had 
found  it  easier  to  make  resolutions  than  to  keep  them ;  and  to  be  exalted  in  hope 
more  practicable  than  to  be  weaned  from  the  world.  We  see,  then,  at  once  the  bent 
and  the  need  of  the  soul ;  its  bent,  to  fall  back,  after  the  fairest  professions  o£ 
rehgion ;  its  need,  to  be  daily  strengthened  and  advanced  in  the  saving  gifts  of 
Divine  grace.  The  seed  may  be  withered  by  the  early  blight — the  slender  flame 
may  be  extinguished  by  the  rising  blast.  Watchfulness  must  be  added  to  know- 
ledge, and  prayer  to  watchfulness ;  and  the  seat  of  religion  must  be  not  in  the 
imagination  nor  the  affections  merely — not  in  the  understanding  even,  as  separate 
from  the  heart,  but  in  the  soul.  II.  The  apostle,  in  the  text,  "  exhorted  them  to 
continue  in  the  faith."  The  source  of  all  final  perseverance  in  religion  is  doubt- 
less the  grace  of  God.  The  means  by  which  that  grace  operates  on  the  heart  is  by 
a  "continuance  in  the  faith."  The  apostles  Barnabas  and  Paul,  we  must  suppose, 
on  this  occasion  opened  to  their  new  converts  the  whole  foundation  of  Christian 
belief — the  whole  body  of  Christian  motives,  and  a  corresponding  practice.  To  the 
Jews  amongst  them  they  appealed  from  their  own  Scriptures,  and  showed  the 
prophecies  that  had  gone  before  respecting  Jesus  and  His  great  salvation.  To  the 
Gentiles  they  preached,  no  doubt  in  kindred  strains,  Jesus  and  the  resurrection, 
Christ  and  Him  crucified.  Here  was,  no  doubt,  a  faith,  which  both  admitted  and 
required,  and  would  reward,  inquiry.     The  more  they  reflected  upon  the  great 


41S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnr. 

truths  of  the  gospel,  the  more  they  observed  the  state  of  the  world  around  them, 
the  more  they  would  hail  the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel.  It  was  a  revelation  of 
truth,  a  communication  of  strength,  from  God  to  men.  It  embraced  that  which 
was  most  suitable  to  their  wants,  and  most  agreeable  to  their  hopes.  It  promised, 
on  the  most  sure  grounds,  pardon  of  sin,  peace  with  God,  renovation  of  the  heart. 
This  is,  then,  the  faith  in  which  stiU  we  exhort  you  to  continue.  It  is  that  which 
we  invite  you  to  gain,  and  then  to  hold  fast  even  to  the  end.  It  is  no  single  effort 
of  the  understanding  embracing  these  Divine  truths,  no  words  of  confession.  It 
must  be  a  deliberate  consideration  of  the  grounds  on  which  your  faith  is  built,  and 
all  your  hopes  depend.  It  must  be  a  comparison  of  the  feelings  of  the  heart  with 
the  standard  of  Divine  truth.  It  must  be  an  application  of  the  great  truths  of 
Scripture  to  all  the  circumstances  and  relations  of  life.  It  must  be  a  daily  viewing 
of  things  through  the  glass  of  God's  Word,  and  a  reference  of  all  events  to  the  future 
and  eternal  world.  III.  We  are  warned  that  the  walk  of  faith  will  not  be  altogether 
a  thomless  path — the  triumph  of  faith  not  a  bloodless  victory;  "and  that  we  must 

THKODOH    MUCH    TRIBULATION   ENTEB   INTO    THE     KINGDOM    OF    GOD."        The    WOlds   are 

introduced  in  the  text  with  an  abruptness  in  the  language,  which  shows  the  strong 
impression  on  the  mind  of  the  apostle  delivering  them,  of  their  nature  and  truth. 
Each  apostle  was  ever  anxious  assuredly  to  impress  on  the  minds  of  his  converts, 
no  less  than  on  his  own,  the  costs,  as  well  as  the  gains,  of  religion.  It  may  be 
doubtless  necessary  that  outward  afflictions  should  first  bring  home  the  wandering 
einner  to  God.  His  past  life  may  have  been  conversant  with  companions  who 
must  be  forsaken,  and  habits  to  be  renounced.  He  will,  at  all  events,  find  himself 
placed  in  a  world  that  will  little  understand  the  principles  on  which  he  is  acting, 
and  that  may  deride  the  faith  which  he  professes,  or  the  purity  which  he  exhibits. 
Nor  can  he  feel  otherwise  than  painfully  affected  at  the  sight  of  wickedness  around 
him.  {G.  J.  Hoare,  M.A.)  The  necessity  of  tribulation: — In  some  of  the  most 
delicate  manufactures  of  the  country,  the  web  in  a  rude  and  unsightly  state  enters 
a  vessel  fiUed  with  a  certain  liquid,  passes  slowly  through,  and  emerges  continuously 
at  the  opposite  side.  As  it  enters  the  cloth  seems  aU  of  one  colour,  and  that  dim ; 
as  it  emerges  it  glitters  in  a  variety  of  brilhant  hues  arranged  in  cunning  figures" 
The  liquid  is  composed  of  biting  acids ;  and  the  reason  why  the  fabric  is  strained 
through  it  is  that  aU  the  deforming  and  defiling  things  which  have  adhered  to  it  in 
preceding  processes  may  be  discharged,  and  the  figures  already  secretly  imprinted 
may  shine  out  in  their  beauty.  If  it  were  allowed  to  remain  one  minute  too  long 
in  tiie  bath  the  fabric  would  be  destroyed  ;  but  the  manufacturer  has  so  tempered 
the  ingredients  and  timed  the  passage  that  while  the  impurities  are  thoroughly 
discharged  the  fabric  comes  out  uninjured.  In  wisdom  and  love  the  Lord  has 
mingled  the  ingredients  of  our  tribulation,  and  determined  its  duration,  so  that 
none  of  his  should  be  lost,  and  so  that  every  grace  of  the  Spirit  should  be  brought 
out  in  all  its  beauty.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  necessity  of  tribulation  : — It  would 
seem  to  be  a  great  hardship  to  a  lump  of  iron  ore,  if  it  were  conscious,  that  it  should 
have  to  be  melted,  separated  from  its  accretions,  beaten  together  into  a  bar  of  pure 
metal,  then  heated  again  and  cooled  suddenly,  exposed  in  this  way  in  quick  succes- 
sion to  the  most  rapid  and  intense  changes  of  temperature,  and  hammered  furiously 
while  these  terrible  processes  are  going  on.  "  Why  can  not  I  be  left  in  peace,"  it 
might  say,  "  in  my  condition  as  ore?  I  am  contented  with  that  form  of  life."  Yet 
it  is  only  by  such  processes  that  it  can  be  promoted  in  quality  from  the  sluggish 
state  of  raw  metal,  compounded  with  alloy,  to  steel.  (T.  Starr  King.)  The  condition 
of  tribulation : — The  expression  is  used  in  the  sense  of  travelling  through  :  as  if 
they  lay  about  our  road.  And  this  is  an  encouraging  similitude.  It  sets  us  forth 
as  superior  to  the  tribulations  :  and  sets  them  forth  as  our  appointed  way,  not  to  have 
the  mastery  over  us,  but  to  be  faced  and  left  behind,  just  as  the  traveller  faces  and 
leaves  behind  the  dangers  or  rough  places  of  his  road.  •'  Tribulation,"  a  term  imply- 
ing "  crushing  "  or  "  fretting  "  ;  that  outward  galling  which  narrow  and  intricate 
ways,  or  long-borne  burdens,  produce  on  the  traveller.  It  is  a  word  joined  by  St. 
Paul  to  another  signifying  "  narrowness  of  space  to  move  in,"  and  which  we  render 
"  anguish,"  as  representing  the  Latin  angusticB,  "  narrowness  of  space."  It  is  then 
through  many  of  these  gallings,  these  narrow  inlets,  or  pressing  burdens,  that  our 
way  must  be  made  to  the  land  of  rest.  Let  us  trace  the  fact — I.  In  its  bisk. 
First  of  all,  strait  is  the  gate  itself  that  leadeth  unto  life.  Through  one  mental 
process  in  the  main  do  men  enter  into  the  life  of  the  Spirit.  And  though  that  life 
issues  in  the  best  expansion  of  the  whole  man,  yet  this  introductory  process  ia 
eminently  a  contracting  one.    When  a  man  for  the  first  time  opens  his  eyes  on 


CHAP.  HT.]  THE  ACTS.  413 

God's  true  state,  and  his  own ;  when  he  first  sees  what  God  demands  of  him,  and 
what  he  has  to  render  to  God,  the  sight  is  one  which  shrinks  up  whatever  he  may 
before  have  thought  of  anything  that  is  his  own ;  it  is  a  tribulation,  a  passing 
through  a  strait,  too  narrow  for  any  of  those  encumbrances  which  lay  about  and 
almost  constituted  his  unrenewed  and  worldly  being.  This  hes  at  the  very  head  of 
his  course,  and  cannot  be  avoided.  Many  endeavour  to  avoid  it ;  and  no  doubt  it 
is  easy  enough  :  but  in  doing  so,  they  miss  the  way  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  They 
Btand  with  the  strait  gate  before  them,  looking  up  the  narrow  path.  Between  it 
and  the  broad  way  are  several  tracks,  not  so  difficult,  and  better  frequented ;  decoys 
which  the  enemy  has  constructed — the  ways  which  seem  right  unto  a  man,  but  the 
end  thereof  is  the  way  of  death.  1.  There  is  the  comely  track  of  formahsm — 
spanning  the  valleys  of  humiliation  with  its  perfect  arches,  piercing  the  toilsome 
steeps  with  its  readier  and  smoother  approaches.  There,  is  no  tribulation  ;  daily, 
conscience  is  set  to  sleep  with  choicest  music ;  daily,  the  satisfied  eyes  gaze  on  the 
fair  pictures  of  self-denial  and  piety.  2.  Then  there  is  the  wide  and  smooth  path 
of  worldly  profession,  where  all  that  is  rough  and  unpleasing  in  religion  is  avoided 
and  cast  aside.  Tribulation  enough  there  is  indeed  in  such  a  course,  but  not  of 
the  right  sort  for  our  purpose ;  for  ever  and  anon  the  rough  unmannerly  protest  of 
God's  inward  witness  breaks  through,  and  in  laughter  the  heart  is  sorrowful.  And 
tribulation  enough  to  come  :  for  the  hope  of  such  an  one  shall  perish.  II.  In  its 
»ATUBB,  it  is  twofold,  essential  and  incidental ;  that  which  every  Christian  must 
feel,  and  that  into  which  he  is  liable,  from  varying  circumstances,  to  be  thrown. 
1.  He  is  guilty ;  unworthy ;  grieves  God's  Holy  Spirit ;  does  the  evil  thing  he  hag 
resolved  against,  and  the  good  which  he  has  determined  to  do  falls  unwrought  from 
his  hands.  And  from  this  springs  grief  and  trouble  continually.  Nor  does  such 
necessary  trouble  come  from  self-contemplation  only.  "  Elvers  of  water,"  said  the 
psalmist,  "  run  down  mine  eyes,  because  men  keep  not  Thy  law."  And  then  ••  every 
one  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecution."  The  world  will 
not  endure  tranquilly  one  who  lives  above  the  world.  "  If  they  have  hated  Me, 
they  will  hate  you."  2.  This  last-mentioned  tribulation  seems,  from  its  varying 
aspect,  to  form  our  transition  to  those  which  are  incidental :  not  necessary  to  every 
child  of  God,  but  sent  to  some  in  full  measure,  to  some  in  less  degree,  and  to  others 
perhaps  hardly  at  all ;  providential  chastenings  of  our  heavenly  Father,  the  sick- 
nesses, dejections,  and  bereavements  of  the  people  of  God.  These  troubles  are  in 
fact  our  highest  privileges.  To  be  allowed  to  enter  into  the  fellowship  of  Christ's 
sufferings— do  we  not  ever  feel  this  to  be  our  truest  exaltation  in  life  ?  III.  Its 
PBOGBESS.  "  Tribulation  worketh  patience."  Oh  blessed  advance  I  from  suffering, 
to  •'  Father,  if  it  be  Thy  will "  ;  from  patience  to  "  approval  " — the  passing  through 
and  coming  out  of  the  fire  tested  and  fit  for  the  Master's  use.  Would  you  have  a 
counsellor  in  the  things  of  God?  Take  a  Christian  who  has  known  sorrow.  Would 
you  have  a  comforter  and  a  Christian  friend  ?  Consort  with  one  who  has  known 
sorrow.  Wouldst  thou  thyself  become  mature  in  Christ,  a  ripened  and  ready 
Christian,  glorifying  Him  largely,  and  bearing  witness  to  Him  with  power?  Oh 
refuse  not,  pass  not  by,  the  cup  of  tribulation  ;  learn  obedience  from  the  things  which 
thou  hast  suffered  ;  be  thou,  as  He  was,  made  perfect  through  sufferings.  But  this 
is  not  all.  And  now  in  the  end,  let  us  look  onward  and  upward.  Let  us  stand  with 
the  beloved  apostle,  and  behold  that  great  multitude.  "These  are  they  which 
came  out  of  great  tribulation  I "  (Dean  Alford.)  Tribulation:  its  necessity 
and  issue :  —  I.  Tbibdlation.  You  may  think  something  more  consolatory 
might  have  been  looked  for  from  Barnabas  than  "much  tribulation,"  but 
we  recognise  the  voice  of  "the  son  of  consolation,"  when  those  sorrows  are 
represented  as  preparing  us  for  heaven.  But  we  must  take  care  not  to  misapply 
bis  words.  1.  Though  the  kingdom  is  to  be  entered  through  "much  tribula- 
tion," there  may  be  "  much  tribulation  "  which  does  not  lead  to  the  kingdom. 
Admitting  that  all  suffering  is  the  consequence  of  sin,  yet  what  man  endures  now  is 
at  most  but  a  temporal  punishment.  There  is  no  expiatory  power  in  our  suffer- 
ings. You  are  not  to  think  that  because  "  many  are  the  troubles  of  the  righteous," 
that  every  one  who  has  many  troubles  must  therefore  be  righteous.  2.  There  is, 
however,  a  different,  though  equally  erroneous  inference,  which  may  be  drawn  from 
our  text.  When  a  man,  whose  course  of  life  on  the  whole  is  one  of  evenness,  reads 
of  entering  the  kingdom  through  much  tribulation,  there  is  great  likelihood  of  his 
suspecting  that  he  is  destitute  of  the  chief  evidence  of  being  a  child  of  God.  If  the 
greatness  of  trouble  distress  and  harass  one  Christian,  the  very  want  of  trouble  may 
be  a  trial  to  another.    But — (1)  Life  is  not  finished  yet ;  there  may  remain  time 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

enough  for  many  calamities.     It  does  not  take  long  to  darken  the  brightest  sky, 
when  God  has  once  commanded  the  clouds  from  above.     (2)  May  it  not  be  that  the 
want  of  trial  is  thy  trial ;  unbroken  sunshine  may  be  a  trial  as  well  as  continued 
strife.     (3)  The  "  much  tribulation  "  is  not  made  up  exclusively  of  what  the  world 
counts  distress.    It  consists  generally  in  conflicts  with  our  own  evil  hearts  ;  in  the 
grief  occasioned  by  our  sin  ;  in  the  sorrow  of  finding  the  Divine  image  so  faintly 
traced — the  power  of  corruption  still  so  strong — the  will  so  biassed — the  effectiona 
so  depraved.     And  have  you  nothing  of  this  ?     (4)  And  then  the  tribulation  of  the 
text  arose  mainly  from  persecution.    But  has  the  trial  of  the  Cross  ceased  ?    Is 
there  no  longer  any  "persecution  for  righteousness'  sake"?     The  world  must  dis- 
like genuine  piety  as  that  by  which  it  is  condemned  ;  and  it  ought  to  make  us 
doubt  whether  our  piety  be  genuine  if  it  do  not  cause  a  clash  between  the  world  and 
ourselves.     Have  you  been  faithful  in  reproving  sin  ?     Have  you  drawn  a  line 
with  due  breadth  and  distinctness  between  the  world  and  yourself  ?     No  wonder 
that  the  world  does  not  persecute  you,  when  you  do  not  openly  separate  from  the 
world  1     II.  Its  necessity  and  issue.     The  text  describes  affliction  as  the  ordinary 
instrument  through  which  God  fits  His  people  for  their  glorious  inheritance.     God 
thereby  disciplines  His  people ;  detaches  them  from  earthly  things ;  refines  their 
affections.     It  is  in  the  furnace  of  trial  that  He  burns  out  of  us  the  impurities  of 
indwelling  corruption.    For  whatever  tends  to  increase  present  hoUness,  tends  equally 
to  increase  future  happiness.     Not,  indeed,  that  the  tribulation  is  indispensable. 
God,  if  He  pleased,  could  make  us  ready  for  the  kingdom  through  some  other  pro- 
cess ;  but  the  "much  tribulation"  is  His  ordinary  course.    I  understand  from  this 
what  St.  Paul  means  when  he  says,  "  We  glory  in  tribulations."    He  found  tribula- 
tion grievous  in  itself,  but  he  gloried  in  it  as  a  preparation  for  heaven.     Of  what 
avail  would  it  be,  that  the  palace  should  be  prepared  for  the  inhabitant,  unless  the 
inhabitant  be  prepared  for  the  palace.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)         Tribulation  and  its 
uses  :  — I.  The  declaration  that  the  people  of  God  must  through  tribulation  enter 
the  kingdom  of  God.     1.  That  they  are  an  afflicted  people  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
And  not  only  so,  but  those  whom  God  blesses  the  most  He  afflicts  the  most.     Take, 
e.g.,  Abraham,  Jacob,  Job,  Moses,  Paul,  &c.    But  not  only  these,  all  the  saints  must 
expect  it.     The  Word  tells  us  not,  "  we  may"  but "  we  must."     Sometimes  we  forget 
that  it  is  God's  appointment,  that  it  cannot  be  otherwise.     2.  Many  reasons  might 
be  given  for  this.     (1)  That  we  may  know  and  feel  what  that  body  of  sin  and  death 
is  that  is  within  us  ;  and  it  is  no  small  blessing  to  have  a  thief  that  is  in  the  heart 
detected.     (2)  That  we  may  know  the  value  of  Christ,  as  the  brother  born  for 
adversity.    We  are  most  of  us  like  children  on  board  a  vessel  when  a  storm  comes, 
we  think  of  nothing  but  the  storm.     The  life  of  faith  looks  to  Him  who  is  the  pilot. 
{3)  The  great  secret  of  all  this  living  in  much  tribulation  is,  that  we  may  live  out 
of  ourselves  and  to  God.     The  Word  of  God  is  full  of  promises  ;  and  we  never  find 
their  worth  but  as  we  are  placed  in  circumstances  that  make  them  needful.     We 
need  not  ask  a  hungry  man  to  eat  if  the  bread  is  placed  before  him.     II.  Thb 
EXHOETATioN.     "  Exhortiug  them  to  continue  in  the  faith."    The  great  remedy  for 
this  much  affliction  is,  not  to  be  looking  at  the  affliction  ;  it  is  to  continue  in  the 
faith.    Whether  we  regard  faith  as  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  or  as  continuing  in  faith, 
Uving  not  to  ourselves,  but  to  God — in  either  point  of  view  it  comes  to  the  same 
truth  ;  it  is  the  life  of  faith.    Happy  is  the  man  who,  the  more  the  waters  come 
upon  him,  the  higher  he  rises.     We  can  honour  Christ  in  nothing  more  than  in  the 
life  of    faith.     IH.   The    pbospect.     We  sometimes  read  of  a  Chinese  taking  a 
traveller  through  a  wilderness,  and  then  bringing  him  at  once  into  a  beawtiful 
garden.     He  passes  oyer  craggy  rocks,  through  brambles  and  nettles,  and  everything 
offensive ;  and  then  in  one  moment  his  guide  brings  him  into  the  most  lovely 
exhibition  of  the  powers  of  nature  and  art.     Just  so  is  it  with  God :  He  takes  ua 
through  a  world  of  brambles  into  a  garden  of  Eden,  and  if  we  have  more  foretaste 
of  it  we  sihould  think  of  it  more.    If  a  man  eats  grapes,  he  cannot  avoid  being 
reminded  that  there  is  a  place  where  grapes  come  from.     The  way  to  be  living 
above  the  troubles  of  life  is  to  be  much  in  the  anticipation  of  glory  :  for  as  surely 
as  the  earnest  is  given,  so  surely  shall  the  eternal  reality  be  enjoyed.     The  great 
principle  is  to  be  looking  forward  to  future  glory.     But  we  want  more  than  this; 
we  want  a  present  Christ  and  if  we  are  living  by  faith  we  shall  possess  this.     God 
wants  our  hearts  for  Himself.     (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)         The  path  of  tribulation  : — 
I.  The  boad  to  the  kingdom  of  God.     The  text  does  not  mean  that  all  who  are 
the  subjects  of  suffering  shall  be  the  inheritors  of  glory.     So  far  is  the  one  from 
securing  the  other,  that  unless  suffering  is  improved,  the  trials  of  this  life  will  onlj 


CHAP.  xiT.]  THE  ACTS.  415 

add  to  the  guilt  and  misery  of  eternity.  What  is  meant  is  that  tribulation  is  found 
a  means  of  sanctifying  the  family  of  God,  and  that  it  is  a  means  so  extensively 
employed  and  blessed  for  that  purpose  that  it  may  with  propriety  be  represented 
as  the  road  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  n.  The  travellers — The  disciples.  There 
are  many  who  walk  in  the  paths  of  suffering  who  are  not  Christ's  disciples ;  but 
the  path  now  in  view  is  the  path  of  holy  suffering :  Jesus  Christ  Himself  travelled 
this  road.  The  best  friends  of  God,  in  every  age  of  time,  have  travelled  it.  The 
prophets  (James  v.  10).  The  apostles  (1  Cor.  iv.  9-13).  Let,  then,  the  traveller  on 
this  road  know,  not  only  that  God's  best  friends  have  preceded  him,  and  that  many 
will  follow  Him ;  but  let  him  also  know  that  he  forms  a  part  of  a  large  and  goodly 
fellowship  (1  Peter  v.  9).  IH.  The  necessity  for  their  travelling  by  this 
BOAD.  As  men  we  are  fallen  sinful  creatures,  and  therefore  we  must  meet  with 
punishment,  and  as  Christians  we  are  imperfect  creatures,  and  therefore  we  must 
meet  with  discipline.  IV.  Its  termination.  It  conducts  to  God's  heavenly  king- 
dom. The  world  receives  a  very  different  treatment  from  the  master  it  serves,  from 
that  which  Christians  receive  at  the  hands  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  prince  of  this 
world  promises  his  servants  a  happiness  in  this  life,  which  he  can  never  afford ;  but 
is  either  altogether  silent  about  the  end  of  their  course,  or  deceives  them  with  the 
expectation  of  a  felicity  which  they  will  never  attain.  Christ  predicts  tribulation ; 
but  then  He  more  than  counterbalances  the  tribulation  by  the  present  joys  of 
religion  ;  while  He  promises  glory  at  the  end  of  their  course.  In  the  kingdom  of 
God  there  will  be  no  more  tribulation.  Sin,  which  is  the  grand  scourge  of  man, 
will  obtain  no  admittance  there ;  consequently  sorrow,  which  is  the  inseparable 
companion  of  sin,  shall  be  equally  excluded  (Eev.  xxi.  4 ;  Psa.  xvi.  11).  In  the 
kingdom  of  God  the  tribulations  of  this  life  will  increase  the  happiness  of  the 
former  sufferer  (Heb.  xii.  10,  11 ;  Eev.  vii.  14-17).  {Essex  Congregational  Ee- 
membrancer.)  The  way  of  tribulation  : — I.  Its  travellers  :  all  true  Christians ; 
•'  we  " ;  therefore  do  not  wonder  at  it.  H.  Its  necessity.  '•  We  must  " ;  therefore 
do  not  shun  it.  HI.  Its  nature  :  rugged  and  long ;  "  through  much  tribulation," 
therefore  prepare  for  it.  IV.  Its  end  :  blessedness ;  "  the  kingdom  of  God '' ; 
therefore  do  not  neglect  it.  {K.  Gerok.)  The  way  to  the  kingdom: — This  verse 
exhibits  the  ordinary  Christian  curriculum.  Paul  and  Barnabas  pass  through  a 
whole  district  expressly  to  teach  this.  The  instruction  is  the  same  in  every  city. 
1.  "  The  kingdom  of  God,"  in  its  widest  sense,  denotes  the  Church,  under  all  its 
forms  and  dispensations.  In  New  Testament  usage,  the  reference  of  the  phrase  is 
to  Messiah's  kingdom.  Either  in  its  initial  and  visible  state  here,  or  in  its  perfected 
condition  in  a  future  life.  The  latter  is  its  meaning  here.  We  who  are  in  the 
kingdom  in  its  incipiency  here,  *'  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into  "  the 
perfection  of  the  same  kingdom  hereafter.  2.  In  this  way  heaven  and  earth  do  not 
lie  far  asunder.  The  one  grows  out  of  the  other.  Heaven  is  the  summer  of  the 
year  of  which  we  have  in  this  world  the  vrintry  beginning.  And  from  the  first  there 
is  a  looking  springwards,  and  even  a  touch  of  summer  in  the  soul  that  is  panting 
towards  it.  Even  physically  there  is  no  vacuum  between  this  lower  and  the  higher 
world,  while,  morally,  there  stretches  between  them  "  a  new  and  living  way,"  by 
which  all  the  faithful  are  going  up  to  heaven,  yet  carrying  something  of  heaven 
with  them  as  they  go.  The  toilsome  journey  through  this  world  of  peril  and  sin 
is  not  merely  the  passing  of  so  much  time  until  the  dawning  of  the  day  ;  it  is  an 
express  progress  by  the  right  way  to  the  city  of  habitation.  3.  Entertain  the 
thought  that  going  through  earthly  tribulations  is  "  entering  in."  It  is  not  that 
we  must  pass  through  all  the  straits  and  pressures  of  this  life,  and  then  the 
entrance  will  be  given  according  to  the  dictate  of  an  arbitrary  will.  If  we  "  con- 
tinue in  the  faith,"  the  entrance  is  accomplished  :  death  then  is  but  a  servitor  to 
open  the  gate :  the  grave  is  but  a  sideroom  where  we  leave  a  vestment  which 
will  not  be  needed  for  a  while,  and  which  meantime  will  be  changed  into  a  glorious 
robe  fit  for  immortal  wear.  4.  Think  for  a  httle  of  this  unalterable,  yet  very 
gracious  necessity  of  this  lifelong  "  must."  For  this  is  not  a  truth  that  comes  to 
us  naturally.  Look,  for  instance,  at  a  palace  or  a  gentleman's  estate.  They  are 
talked  of  far  and  near  for  their  beauty.  Suppose  one  sets  out  for  the  purpose  of 
seeing  them,  what  will  he  expect  to  see  when  he  comes  near?  Kough  roads, 
neglected  fields,  thorns  and  briars  up  to  the  very  gate  and  doors  ?  No.  That  being 
the  focus  and  centre  of  all,  it  "  must "  have  meet  setting.  Well,  God  is  taking  His 
children  to  a  kingdom  1  to  a  "  house  "  with  "  many  mansions,"  and  our  natural 
thought  would  be  that  as  soon  as  they  turn  face  heavenwards,  there  will  be,  not 
■only  a  great  inward,  but  also  a  great  outward  change.    There  will,  now,  be  some- 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xir. 

thing  of  the  bloom  of  the  garden  on  everything  ;  and  as  they  go  on,  the  way  will 
become  more  pleasant,  obstructions  in  it  fewer,  and  more  easily  overcome.  But 
against  that  theory  of  life  lies  this  text.  Of  course  there  are  many  exceptions. 
Multitudes  of  infants  go  to  the  perfect  kingdom  of  God  almost  as  soon  as  they  are 
born.  Also,  there  are  great  "  varieties  "  of  experience  among  those  who  live.  The 
principle  is  not  one  of  mechanical  exactness.  Nor  are  we  to  conclude  that  tribula- 
tion is  measured  out  according  to  character — much  of  it  to  the  sinful,  and  less  to 
the  pure.  In  some  instances  the  reverse  of  this  is  the  truth — the  finest  gold  some- 
times lies  molten  in  the  hottest  fires.  "  We  must " — I.  For  probation.  A  man 
must  be  proved  before  he  can  be  approved.  A  thing — or  still  more,  a  man — may 
look  fair,  and  be  useless.  In  mercantile  and  public  life,  men  are  advanced  from 
lower  to  higher  place  only  after  successful  probation.  God  tries  and  trains  men, 
before,  and  for,  advancement.  The  advancement  is  to  be  very  great :  the  trial 
must  be  very  true™  And  in  order  to  be  true  it  must  be  severe  and  searching.  II. 
For  purification.  God's  fires  are  hot,  but  they  are  purifying.  He  BUmself  ia  "  a 
consuming  fire  "  only  to  what  is  evil :  He  is  a  purifying  and  preserving  fire  to  all 
that  is  good.  But  is  not  all  tribulation  punitive  ?  No.  It  is  not  possible  to  trace 
all  suffering  up  to  sin  in  the  suffering  person.  Broken  laws  bring  down  their 
penalties  ;  and  is  so  far  as  tribulation  consists  of  penalty,  of  course  it  is  punitive. 
But  many  a  sufferer,  in  his  little  human  measure,  "  bears  the  sins  "  of  others.  If 
in  the  sufferer  there  be  faith,  all  that  is  punitive  is  yet  so  assuaged  and  filled  with 
grace  that  it  is  purifying  far  more  than  punitive.  Thus  proving,  and  purifying, 
run  on  together  to  the  very  end,  when  the  death-fire  will  burn  out  the  last  dregs  of 
corruption,  and  perfect  the  life-process  of  conformity  to  the  image  of  Christ.  III. 
In  order  to  the  attainment  of  a  real  and  deep  fellowship  with  Christ.  Chris- 
tian fellowship  is  life  in  Christ.  All  that  life  is,  or  contains  of  good,  of  growth  by 
grace  to  glory,  is  "  in  Him."  We  have  joy  in  Him  ;  "  That  My  joy  might  remain 
in  you."  We  have  peace  in  Him ;  "  My  peace  I  give  unto  you."  And  strength,, 
the  "  strength  "  that  "  is  made  perfect  in  weakness."  And  should,  then,  the  trouble 
of  life  be  excluded?  No.  It  is  the  unchanging  law  that  we  "bear  about  with  u» 
in  the  body  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  This  is  "  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings  " 
from  which  in  due  time  fellowship  in  glory  will  arise.  IV.  Fob  the  sake  op 
others.  God  often  uses  the  suffering  of  one  for  the  sanctifying  of  another.  Here 
is  a  house  through  which  a  spirit  of  worldliness  would  soon  flow  ;  but  up  in  the  top 
room  is  a  little  sufferer  from  whose  bed  every  day  flows  out  another  spirit  which 
keeps  the  house  in  dewy  softness.  Or,  one  in  maturer  life,  and,  in  so  far  as  man 
can  judge,  ripe  for  the  better  state,  is  kept  hngering  here,  a  living  lesson  of  patience 
and  gentleness,  a  living  proof  to  many  of  the  all-sufficiency  of  the  grace  of  Christ. 
As  •'  no  man  liveth,"  as  '*  no  man  dieth,"  so  no  man  suffereth  to  himself.  {A.  Raleigh^ 
D.D.)  Consolations  on  the  way  to  the  kingdom : — 1.  Have  I  lost  my  goods,  and  fore- 
gone a  fair  estate  ?  Had  all  the  earth  been  mine,  what  is  it  to  heaven  ?  Had  I  been  the 
lord  of  all  the  world,  what  were  this  to  a  kingdom  of  glory  ?  2.  Have  I  parted  with  a 
dear  consort — the  sweet  companion  of  my  youth  ;  the  tender  nurse  of  my  age  ;  the 
partner  of  my  sorrows  for  many  years  ?  She  is  but  stepped  a  little  before  me  to 
that  happy  rest,  which  I  am  panting  towards,  and  wherein  I  shall  speedily  overtake 
her.  In  the  meantime  and  ever,  my  soul  is  espoused  to  that  glorious  and  immortal 
husband,  from  whom  it  shall  never  be  parted.  3.  Am  I  bereaved  of  some  of  my 
dear  children,  the  sweet  pledges  of  our  matrimonial  love,  whose  parts  and  hopes 
promised  me  comfort  in  my  dechned  age  ?  Why  am  I  not  rather  thankful  it  hath 
pleased  my  God  out  of  my  loins  to  furnish  heaven  with  some  happy  guests  ?  Why 
do  I  not,  instead  of  mourning  for  their  loss,  sing  praises  to  God  for  preferring  them 
to  that  eternal  blessedness  ?  4.  Am  I  afflicted  with  bodily  pain  and  sickness,  which 
banishes  all  sleep  from  my  eyes,  and  exercises  me  with  lingering  torture  ?  Ere 
long  this  momentary  distemper  shall  end  in  an  everlasting  rest.  6.  Am  I  threatened 
by  the  sword  of  an  enemy?  Suppose  that  man  to  be  one  of  the  guardians  of 
paradise,  and  that  sword  as  flaming  as  it  is  sharp,  that  one  stroke  should  let  me 
into  that  place  of  inconceivable  pleasure,  and  admit  me  to  feed  on  the  tree  of  life 
for  ever.  Cheer  up,  then,  oh  my  soul :  and  upon  thy  fixed  apprehension  of  the 
glory  to  be  revealed,  even  in  the  midnight  of  thy  sorrows,  and  in  the  deepest  dark- 
ness of  death  itself,  sing  then  to  thy  God  songs  of  confidence,  of  joy,  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving.      {Bp.  Hall.)  Difficulties  in  the  way  : — The  old  proverb  tells  us 

that  the  way  to  the  stars  lay  through  difficulties.  To  reach  high  ground  we  must 
expect  hard  climbing.  It  is  so  in  the  life  of  the  world.  Look  at  the  great  soldier : 
the  country  honours  him,  crowds  shout  his  praises.    But  to  gain  his  position,  he 


CHAP,  iiv.]  THE  ACTS.  417 

has  endured  hardness.  Look  at  a  famous  painter  at  his  work.  How  easily  he 
seems  to  cover  his  canvas  with  almost  living  forma.  But  you  forget  the  years  of 
patient  toil,  and  study,  and  self-denial.  I.  If  we  abb  to  gain  the  high  places  of 
HEAVEN  WE  MUST  EXPECT  OBSTACLES  IN  OTTB  WAY.  1.  But  the  trus  Christian  will 
not  be  driven  back  by  difficulties.  Diogenes  wished  to  become  the  pupU  of  a 
famous  cynic  philosopher,  and  was  refused.  Still  Diogenes  persisted,  and  the 
philosopher  raised  his  staff  to  smite  him.  "  Strike,"  said  Diogenes,  "  you  vriU  not 
find  a  staff  hard  enough  to  conquer  my  perseverance."  And  so  he  had  his  wish. 
Let  no  blows  be  hard  enough  to  drive  us  back  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  For 
ns  all  there  is  the  HiU  Difficulty  to  be  climbed,  and  the  Valley  of  Humiliation  to  be 
entered.  We  are  proud  of  our  schemes,  and  God  sweeps  them  aU  away  Uke  a 
cobweb.  We  trust  to  our  own  righteousness,  and  God  aUoWs  us  to  fall  into  a  terrible 
temptation,  like  David.  We  thought,  like  St.  Peter,  that  we  could  stand,  and,  behold, 
we  have  fallen.  We  trusted  in  our  own  strength,  like  Samson,  and  the  Philistines,  our 
Bins,  have  bound  us  hand  and  foot  in  the  prison.  3.  Sometimes  the  difficulty  lies  right 
across  our  path  like  a  rock,  or  like  a  band  of  armed  men.  Once  in  battle  an  Austrian 
general  was  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  the  enemy.  He  sent  a  message  to  his  com- 
mander asking  whither  he  should  retreat.  And  the  answer  came  back  in  one  word 
— "  Forward  1 "  That  is  the  watchword  of  every  true  Christian  man.  II.  The 
GREATEST  OBSTACLES  IN  ouB  PATH  TO  HEAVEN  ABE — 1.  The  world  which  hinders  ua 
on  our  heavenly  journey  in  the  form  of  bad  company.  Many  a  pilgrim  has  lost  hia 
way  by  forming  godless  or  careless  acquaintances.  2.  The  flesh.  Who  has  not 
the  desire  to  go  forward  in  the  path  of  duty,  and  yet  suffered  himself  to  listen  to 
the  whisper,  "A  httle  slumber,  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  to  sleep"?  Who 
has  not  found  the  bad  thought,  hated  and  unwelcome,  yet  forcing  itself  upon 
him  at  the  holiest  seasons  ?  Well,  if  we  are  to  continue  our  journey  to  heaven  wa 
must  be  masters  of  our  flesh.  It  is  better  for  us  to  enter  into  life  maimed  or  blind,, 
than  to  have  two  eyes,  all  that  we  desire  or  wish  for,  at  the  cost  of  our  own  soul. 
8.  The  devil.  Sometimes  he  comes  as  a  roaring  hon,  openly  attacking  us ;  some- 
times he  comes  as  an  angel  of  light,  whispering  soft,  tempting  promises  in  our  ears. 
III.  The  WAT  TO  meet  these  diffiodltie8.  1.  Do  not  think  too  much  of  them 
beforehand ;  meet  them  bravely  when  they  come,  but  do  not  meet  them  half  way. 
When  a  man  builds  a  house  he  does  not  stay  to  think  what  a  long  task  it  is ;  he 
just  goes  on  day  by  day  adding  brick  to  brick,  tiU  the  whole  is  finished.  Let  na 
day  by  day  try  to  do  our  duty,  to  build  up  a  Uttle  bit  of  a  holy  Hfe,  and  the  diffi- 
culties and  obstacles  will  be  overcome.  2.  Then  we  must  trust  ourselves  to  our  Guide. 
If  you  were  to  try  to  climb  some  of  the  Swiss  mountains  you  would  come  to  places 
where  it  would  be  impossible  for  you  to  proceed  alone.  Then  your  guide  would  bid 
you  to  trust  entirely  to  him,  to  allow  yourself  to  be  bound  to  him,  and  to  have  no 
fear.  In  all  the  difficulties  and  dangers  of  our  pilgrimage  we  must  trust  ourselvea 
entirely  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  {H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton,  M.A.)  The  process  of 
purijication : — I.  The  univebsality  of  tribulation.  No  one  who  has  thoroughly 
observed  the  conditions  of  life  can  avoid  coming  to  this  conclusion,  that  suffering 
forms  a  large  portion  of  human  history.  Youth  encounters  troubles ;  then,  as  hfe 
advances,  there  are  deeper  sorrows.  And  as  we  get  older  stOl,  life  assumes  the 
character  of  a  struggle,  and  ofttimea  in  the  very  midst  of  it,  "  man  goeth  to  his  long 
home."  Not  that  this  constitutes  the  whole  of  life ;  but  we  do  Uve  in  a  world  whose 
Creator  appears  to  have  consulted  something  else  besides  the  happiness  of  Hia 
creatures.  II.  The  beason  foe  this.  1.  If  we  were  to  discover,  say  some  plant, 
BO  widely  distributed  that  we  could  not  go  into  any  one  region  of  the  globe  without 
beholding  it,  our  reason  would  at  once  compel  us  to  the  conclusion,  that  its  universal 
existence  proves  some  universal  purpose,  and  that  its  secret  must  sooner  or  later  be 
discoverable.  Sorrow  is  universal,  and  there  must  therefore  be  a  reason  for  its 
being  universal.  Paul  says  in  our  text,  "  we  must "  ;  "  it  is  the  order  of  things 
that  through  much  tribulation  we  enter  the  kingdom  of  God."  Wherever  he  went 
he  found  trouble ;  and  he  found  everywhere  necessity  for  the  same  line  of  argument ; 
he  had  to  "  confirm,"  that  is,  to  strengthen  the  souls  of  the  disciples  ;  to  exhori 
them  to  continue  steadfast  in  the  belief  of  Christianity  as  a  message  of  glad  tidings, 
notwithstanding  all  their  present  trials.  2.  But  does  the  kingdom  of  God  here  mean 
heaven  ?  Not  exclusively.  It  means  the  government  of  God.  The  kingdom  oi 
God  means  the  government  of  God ;  and  "  tribulation  "  is  derived  from  the  Latin 
tribulum,  the  threshing  instrument  or  roller  by  which  the  Bomans  separated  the 
corn  from  the  husks.  3.  Tribulation  looked  at  in  this  light  is  capable  of  the  most 
extended  application.  We  may  apply  it  to  youth,  at  its  very  entrance  upon  the 
VOL.  u.  27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [«hap.  jit. 

real  discipline  of  life ;  to  some  thoughtful  mind,  harassed  with  doubts ;  to  the 
active,  hearty,  energetic  man  of  business,  who  may  in  this  day  of  unnatural  com- 
petition be  tempted  to  practical  falsehoods,  to  neglect  the  soul  for  the  body ;  to  the 
man  of  fixed  income,  whose  family  cares  are  a  perpetual  embarrassment.  ILL 
What  is  meant  by  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  how  does  tribulation  FAcniiTATB 
OUB  entrance  into  it?  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but — 1. 
*' Eighteousness,"  and  righteousness  is  only  attainable  by  tribulation.  It  is  not 
easy  to  be  good.  2.  "Peace  " :  and  this  is  another  happy  result  of  tribulation.  By 
nature  we  do  not  love  peace.  You  have  seen  the  horse  broken  in  for  man's  use. 
Now  peace,  the  very  opposite  of  all  this  discontent,  only  comes  through  the  discipline 
of  tribulation.  3.  "Joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  But  this  in  the  present  Ufe  only 
comes  through  the  tribulation  of  penitence  ;  and  the  happy  throng  above  have  come 
out  of  great  tribulation.  {W.  G.  Barrett.)  Through  tribulation  to  glory  : — We  have 
here — I.  The  designation  or  heaven — the  kingdom  of  God.  A  kingdom  has  its 
king,  its  laws,  its  social  relationships.  It  conveys  the  idea  of  locahty  and  grandeur. 
It  is  both  a  place  and  a  state.  II.  The  pabticdlar  chabactebistic  of  heaven.  It 
is  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  wiU  therefore  be  inconceivably  great,  inconceivably 
holy,  inconceivably  blessed  and  happy.  III.  The  difficulty  of  admission.  To  get 
there  we  must  pass  through  much  tribulation.  No  man  gained  heaven  without 
difficulty.  He  must  be  tried  and  purified  as  in  a  furnace.  He  must  endure  the 
assaults  of  Satan.  He  must  overcome  his  natural  evil  nature.  He  must  struggle 
with  unbelief,  persecution,  pain.  But  he  shall  enter  in  and  obtain  joy  and  gladness. 
Sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away.  (Homilist.)  We  grow  best  under  weights  : — 
We  learn  that  it  is  out  of  struggles  that  we  must  get  the  nobleness  and  beauty  of 
character  after  which  we  are  striving.  One  of  the  old  Scotch  martyrs  had  on  his 
crest  the  motto,  Subpondere  cresco  ("  I  grow  under  a  weight ").  On  the  crest  was  a 
palm-tree,  vdth  weights  depending  from  its  fronds.  In  spite  of  the  weights  the  tree 
was  straight  as  an  arrow,  lifting  its  crown  of  graceful  foliage  high  up  in  the  serene 
air.  It  is  well  known  that  the  palm  grows  best  loaded  down  with  weights.  Thus 
this  martyr  testified  that  he,  like  the  beautiful  tree  of  the  Orient,  grew  best  in  his 
spiritual  life  under  weights.  This  is  the  universal  law  of  spiritual  growth.  There 
must  be  resistance,  struggle,  conflict,  or  there  can  be  no  development  of  strength. 
We  are  inclined  to  pity  those  whose  lives  are  scenes  of  toil  and  hardship,  but  God's 
angels  do  not  pity  them  if  only  they  are  victorious ;  for  in  their  overcoming  they 
are  climbing  daily  upward  towards  the  holy  heights  of  sainthood.  The  beatitudes 
in  the  Apocalypse  are  all  for  overcomers.  Heaven's  rewards  and  crowns  lie  beyond 
battle-plains.  Spiritual  life  always  need  opposition.  It  flourishes  most  luxuriantly 
in  adverse  circumstances.  We  grow  best  under  weights.  We  find  our  richest 
blessings  in  the  burdens  we  dread  to  take  up.  (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)  Tribulation  : 
its  necessity : — Many  Christians  are  dull,  and  stupid,  and  useless,  because  they 
have  not  had  disaster  enough  to  wake  them  up.  The  brightest  scarf  that  heaven 
makes  is  thrown  over  the  shoulders  of  the  storm.  You  cannot  make  a  thorough 
Christian  life  out  of  sunshine  alone.  There  are  some  very  dark  hues  in  the  ribbon 
of  the  rainbow ;  you  must  have  in  life  the  blue  as  well  as  the  orange.  Mingling 
all  the  colours  of  the  former  makes  a  white  light ;  and  it  takes  all  the  shades, 
and  sadnesses,  and  vicissitudes  of  life  to  make  the  white  lustre  of  a  pore  Christian 
life. 

Vers.  26-28    And  thence  sailed  to  Antlocb.  .  .  .  And  when  they  were  come, 
and  had  gathered  the  Church  together,  they  rehearsed  all  that  God  had  done. — 

Apostles  and  Crusaders  at  Antioch  :  a  historical  contrast : — If  when  we  contrast  the 
voyage  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  across  the  bay  of  Attalia  with  the  voyage  of  those 
who  sailed  over  the  same  waters  eleven  centuries  later,  our  minds  are  powerfully 
drawn  towards  the  pure  days  of  early  Christianity,  when  the  power  of  faith  made 
human  weakness  irresistibly  strong,  the  same  thoughts  are  not  less  forcibly  pre- 
sented when  we  contrast  the  reception  of  the  Crusaders  at  Antioch  with  the  recep- 
tion of  the  apostles  in  the  same  city.  We  are  told  that  Raymond,  "  Prince  of 
Antioch,"  waited  with  much  expectation  for  the  arrival  of  the  French  king ;  and 
that  when  he  heard  of  his  landing  at  Seleucia  he  gathered  together  all  the  nobles 
and  chief  men  of  the  people  and  went  out  to  meet  bim,  and  brought  him  into 
Antioch  with  much  pomp  and  magnificence,  showing  him  aU  Te>'erence  and 
homage,  in  the  midst  of  a  great  assemblage  of  the  clergy  and  people.  All  that 
Luke  tells  us  of  the  reception  of  the  apostles  after  their  victorious  campaign  is 
what  he  says  in  the  teskt.     Thus  the  kingdom  of  God  came  at  the  first  "  witJtioat 


CHAP.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS.  419 

observation" — with  the  humble  acknowledgment  that  all  power  is  given  from 
above,  and  with  a  thankful  recognition  of  our  Father's  love  to  all  mankind. 
{J.  S.  Howson,  D.D.)  Missionary  enterprises : — I.  Therk  is  great  need  in  thb 
WORLD  FOB  MISSIONARIES.  1.  There  was  great  need  for  them  in  the  days  of  the 
early  Church.    2.  There  is  much  more  need  in  the  present  day.     II.  It  is  thb 

DOTY  OF  the   CHtTRCH  TO  TAKE   UP  the  subject  of  foreign  missions,  because 

1.  The  Church  of  all  earthly  things  is  the  most,  and  indeed  only,  capable.  2.  The 
Church  itself,  having  received  the  glad  tidings,  ought  from  gratitude  to  make  them 
known  to  others.  III.  This  duty,  if  rightly  performed,  will  sdrely  meet 
WITH  SUCCESS.  Not  necessarily  at  first,  but  eventually.  IV.  It  is  the  Saviour's 
COMMAND  that  the  gospel  should  be  preached  in  all  lands.  (T.  Newsome.) 
Missionary  reports: — 1.  It  is  well  that  missionaries  should  occasionally  return. 
Their  return  will  strengthen  them,  and  again  arouse  the  Churches  to  a  new  interest 
in  the  missionary  cause.  2.  The  true  missionary  will  report,  not  what  he  has 
done,  but  what  God  has  done  with  him.  3.  The  true  missionary  will  report  how 
God  has  opened  the  door  of  faith  to  those  to  whom  he  was  sent.  (S.  S.  Times.) 
The  report  of  the  mission : — This  was  the  first  missionary  report  ever  presented. 
Of  late  years  these  rehearsals  have  been  common.  And  it  is  well  that  it  should  be 
so,  provided  that  the  accounts  are  truthfully  given  and  the  results  anxiously  weighed. 
Let  us  observe — I.  The  object  of  the  apostles'  mission.  1.  You  all  know  how  ill 
any  work  must  be  done  which  has  not  a  definite  aim.  What  would  a  carpenter's,  a 
builder's,  a  lawyer's,  or  a  physician's  work  be  without  some  end  set  before  it  ?  Too 
often  in  religious  matters  this  is  left  out  of  sight.  A  clergyman,  as  it  is  said, 
"  performs  duty  " — that  is,  he  has  gone  through  the  public  service,  &c.  But  was 
that  his  end,  or  only  the  means  to  his  end  ?  A  serious  question.  Far  too  often  we 
do  make  tlf.ese  duties  ends :  if  we  can  perform  our  duty  (as  it  is  sometimes  said) 
creditably,  we  are  ready  to  say,  "I  have  done  my  duty;  I  have  gained  my  end." 
But  who  does  not  see  that  no  amount  of  labour  thus  accomplished  necessarily 
implies  the  shghtest  sense  of  the  real  work  of  the  ministry  ?  Where  is  the  end  in 
all  this  ?  No  buUder  would  satisfy  his  employer  by  merely  being  seen  so  many 
honrs  each  day  at  his  work,  if  nothing  came  of  it,  or  nothing  but  crooked  walls, 
leaking  roofs,  &o.  It  is  even  so  in  things  spiritual.  He  is  not  a  good  workman 
who  has  nothing  to  show  for  it  but  his  toil.  True,  in  these  matters,  unlike  the 
other,  men  cannot  by  any  skill  or  any  devotion  secure  his  object :  God  gives,  and 
withholds ;  and  he  who  thinks  that  his  own  labour  or  even  his  own  prayer  can 
guarantee  success  has  not  yet  learned  his  first  lesson  in  the  school  of  Jesus  Christ. 
St.  Paul's  object  is  forcibly  expressed  in  his  own  words,  "  That  ye  should  turn 
from  these  vanities  unto  the  living  God."  Turning,  conversion,  was  and  still  is 
the  end  of  the  ministry.  2.  If  this  is  indeed  the  meaning  of  our  office,  and  its 
responsibility,  can  any  exhortation  be  more  needful  than  that  which  bids  the  con- 
gregation remember  its  object  and  so  aid  its  work  7  If  its  end  is  to  turn  you  to 
God,  yours  surely  will  be  the  chief  loss  and  the  chief  misery  if  it  fails.  II.  Its 
methods.  We  are  struck  by  its  unity,  and  we  are  struck  also  by  its  variety.  1.  St. 
Paul  appears  to  speak  quite  differently  to  the  Jews  at  Antioch  and  to  the  idolaters 
at  Lystra.  With  the  one  he  argues  from  the  Scriptures ;  with  the  other  only  from 
the  book  of  nature.  And  how  can  it  be  otherwise  if  a  man  is  in  earnest  ?  Does 
the  physician  proceed,  without  inquiry,  to  apply  one  mode  of  treatment  everywhere, 
and  expect  the  recovery  of  health,  which  is  his  object,  to  reward  such  unreasoning 
efforts  ?  Even  so  it  is  with  the  physician  of  the  soul.  His  first  business  is  to 
ascertain  where  men  stand,  what  men  know  and  believe.  Till  he  knows  some- 
thing upon  these  points,  he  can  only  employ  the  bow  at  a  venture.  To  speak  to  a 
man  of  salvation  when  he  has  never  been  conscious  of  danger,  to  offer  a  man 
forgiveness  who  has  never  trembled  at  sin,  is  to  cover  up  the  mischief  instead  of 
extirpating  it,  to  comfort  a  man  in  his  sins  instead  of  rescuing  him  from  them. 
Till  the  people  of  Lystra  knew  that  there  was  one  God,  it  was  idle  to  say  to  them, 
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  On  the 
other  hand,  those  who  already  possessed  the  evidence  also  of  a  Divine  revelation, 
those  whose  fault  it  was  to  count  themselves  safe  because  they  had  honoured  God 
with  a  ceremonial  worship,  must  be  instructed  out  of  that  revelation  itself  as  to 
the  sinfulness  of  sin,  as  to  the  need  and  the  promise  and  the  coming  of  a  Sadour, 
in  the  language  of  a  prophet  in  whom  they  believed.  2.  More  than  half  the 
failures  of  our  ministry  arise  from  inappropriate  teaching  and  from  inappropriate 
hearing.  There  is  a  man  here,  as  there  once  was  when  Jesus  Himself  was  tlie 
Preacher,  possessed  by  the  spirit  of  an  unclean  devil.    He  comes  hither,  drawa 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

perhaps  by  custom,  perhaps  by  a  wish  to  gloss  over  his  lost  state,  perhaps  by  ao 
instinctive  longing  to  lull  the  disquietude  of  hia  soul.  This  man  meets  Jesus  here. 
But  too  often  it  is  only  a  hearing  of  the  sound — something  about  guilt,  about 
atonement,  about  the  mercy  of  God — and  the  man  goes  away  as  he  came :  what  he 
has  understood  he  has  misapplied;  the  unclean  spirit  is  still  there,  soothed, 
calmed,  luUed,  like  the  surfeited  snake  till  its  next  fit  of  hunger.  That  man  ought 
to  have  been  told  of  God  in  conscience  before  he  was  told  of  God  in  redemption. 
Till  he  has  trembled  at  judgment  to  come,  till  he  has  cried  out  against  himself  a& 
a  sinner,  he  can  scarcely  profit,  he  may  even  be  fatally  injured,  by  the  offer  of  a 
pardon  which  he  wants  not,  or  of  a  Saviour  whom  he  will  only  crucify  afresh. 
3.  What  cannot  be  done  by  the  preacher  must  be  done  for  himself  by  the  individual 
hearer.  Let  a  man  ask  himself,  "  Is  that  word  for  me  ?  Does  that  suit  my  case  ? 
God  give  me  the  spirit  of  wisdom  in  hearing,  lest  '  that  which  should  be  for  my 
health  be  to  me  the  occasion  of  falling.'  "  III.  It  had  also  a  careful  regard  to 
THE  CARRYING  ON  OF  THAT  WHICH  WAS  WELL  BEGUN.  1.  In  the  form  of  regular 
supervision.  "  They  ordained  elders  in  every  congregation."  He  who  is  turned  to- 
God  still  needs  training.  It  is  a  comfort  to  us  to  believe  that  our  assemblies  for 
worship  and  instruction  had  their  origin  in  the  institutions  of  the  primitive  Church. 
It  is  not  the  one  reception  of  the  one  great  truth  which  wiU  secure  us  from  the  risk 
of  falling  away.  The  minister  has  to  learn ;  and  if  he  do  not  learn,  his  ministry 
will  soon  become  a  vain  repetition,  a  barren  and  a  wearisome  form,  both  to  himself 
and  to  those  who  hear  him.  Even  so  is  it  with  the  congregation.  They  too  have 
need  to  learn  in  the  school  of  God ;  and  the  services  of  this  place  are  designed  to 
help  them  in  learning.  2.  In  the  form  of  well-instructed  expectation  (ver.  22). 
Neither  our  Saviour  nor  His  apostles  ever  misled  men  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
Christian  life  below — that  it  must  be  a  conflict,  and  therefore  a  life  of  tribulation. 
{Dean  Vaughan.)  Apostolic  rehearsal : — I.  What  did  the  apostles  rehearse  m 
THE  EARS  OF  THE  Church  ?  *'  All  that  God  had  done  with  them."  Not  all  that  they  had 
done  of  themselves,  by  dint  of  their  own  efforts,  by  the  power  of  their  own  persuasion. 
Not  how  many  good  sermons  they  had  preached,  what  overflowing  congregations  were 
attracted  to  hear  them,  or  what  unbounded  applause  had  been  bestowed  upon  their 
ministry.  Nor  did  they  make  their  sufferings  the  theme  of  conversation :  yet  they  were 
"destitute,  afflicted,  tormented  "  (Heb.  xi.  37).  "  They  related  all  that  God  had 
done  with  them."  Not  what  the  Almighty  had  performed  by  His  own  immediate 
agency,  independent  of  all  human  instrumentality ;  but  what  He  had  done  by 
their  hands,  as  the  servants  of  His  will.  1.  God  had  by  them  communicated 
instruction  in  Divine  things  to  the  people  whom  they  addressed.  2.  They  not 
only  taught  many  :  they  were  also  made  the  happy  instruments  of  leading  a  great 
multitude  to  believe  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  God  made  tbem 
the  instruments  of  confinning  the  souls  of  the  disciples.  4.  God  had  opened  a 
door  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles.  II.  To  whom  the  apostles  rehearsed  the  things 
which  God  had  done  by  their  instrumentality.  "  They  gathered  the  Church 
together,"  &o.  Let  us  inquire,  what  were  the  discriminating  marks  by  which  the 
primitive  Churches  were  distinguished  ?  1.  By  their  disunion  with  the  world. 
The  primitive  Christians  had  their  "  conversation  in  the  world  "  (2  Cor.  i.  12), 
and  mixed  promiscuously  with  human  society,  "  working  with  their  own  hands  " 
(1  Cor.  iv.  12).  They  were  not  "  slothful  in  business";  but  "  fervent  in  spirit, 
serving  the  Lord "  (Rom.  xii.  11).  Notwithstanding,  they  held  no  unnecessary 
intercourse  with  ungodly  men,  never  selecting  them  as  companions;  for  "the 
friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God  "  (James  iv.  4).  Although  they  were 
in  the  world,  they  were  not  of  it.  2.  The  members  of  the  primitive  Churches 
were  distinguished  by  the  sanctity  of  their  characters,  and  the  consistency  of  their 
conduct.  Each  of  them  could  adopt  the  language  of  St.  Paul  (Gal.  ii.  20).  The 
principles  by  which  they  were  actuated  were  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
love  to  His  holy  name.  III.  What  were  the  motives  that  induced  the  apostles 
TO  REHEARSE  WHAT  GoD  HAD  DONE  WITH  THEM  ?  1.  We  may  couccive  that  it  was 
done  to  express  the  warm  and  grateful  effusions  of  thoir  hearts.  2.  The  apostles 
rehearsed  what  God  had  done  by  their  means,  to  gladden  the  hearts  of  others.  3. 
They  rehearsed  what  God  had  done  by  them,  as  a  public  acknowledgment  of  the 
obligations  under  which  they  were  laid  to  Him.  {R.  Treffry.)  And  how  He  had 
opened  the  door  of  faith  unto  the  Gentiles. — God  opening  doors  : — He  who  has  the 
keys  of  David  can  open  all  doors.  No  preacher  must  assume  these  keys  to  himself, 
but  must  pray  that  God,  who  only  can  use  them  eff(>ctually,  will  do  so.  And  if  any- 
thing is  to  be  effected  for  the  salvation  of  souls,  God  must  cpen  four  doors — the  door 


CHAP.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS,  421 

of  the  preacher's  month,  the  doors  of  the  hearer's  ear  and  heart,  the  door  of  heaven. 
{K.  Gerok.)  The  door  of  faith : — I.  This  metaphor  sets  forth  that  the  simple  act  of 
TBUST  IN  God,  as  bevealed  in  Christ,  is  the  way  by  which  wb  pass  into  the  house  or 
God.  Christ  says,  "  I  am  the  Door,"  and  faith  is  the  means  of  access.  This  faith  is 
the  outer  door,  the  vestibule  which  leads  to  the  real  opening  by  which  we  enter  into 
all  the  mystery  and  the  sweetness  of  the  Divine  home.  It  is  a  very  Uttle,  low  door. 
There  are  a  great  many  much  more  pretentious  ways  to  God  held  out  to  men. 
There  are  the  doors  of  contemplation,  of  asceticism,  of  ceremonial,  of  a  self- 
righteous,  proud,  purity  of  life ;  but  a  man  cannot  get  more  than  a  step  inwards 
if  he  tries  them.  But  there  is  a  narrow  portal  yonder,  and  if  a  man  will  go  down 
upon  his  knees,  and  if  he  will  leave  his  sins  outside,  it  will  be  like  one  of  those 
narrow  passages  with  a  little  tiny  aperture  in  it,  where  a  hunted  race  used  to  take 
np  their  abode,  and  which  widened  out  into  a  broad  apartment  where  a  man  could 
stand  in  safety  and  warmth  and  home.  We  go  through  this  narrow  door  of  trust, 
but  we  come  out  into  the  large  room  of  our  Father's  house.  II.  The  other  side  of 
the  metaphor  suggests  the  means  by  which  God  can  enteb  into  us.  The  door 
into  our  hearts  is  faith.  There  is  no  possibility,  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  for  God  to 
come  with  His  blessings  into  any  man's  heart  except  through  the  door  of  that 
man's  faith.  You  take  a  flask,  seal  it  hermetically,  tie  a  bit  of  canvas  over  the 
mouth  of  it,  pitch  that  with  tar,  and  plunge  it  into  the  Atlantic  ;  and  the  inside  of 
it  will  be  as  dry  as  if  it  was  in  the  midst  of  African  deserts.  And  as  long  as  a 
man's  heart  is  hermetically  sealed,  which  it  is  by  the  absence  of  faith,  it  is  all  one 
to  him,  as  if  there  were  no  mercy.  The  ocean  of  mercy  and  love  is  all  outside  of 
him.  Notice,  in  passing,  how  small  a  thing  a  door  is — just  a  piece  of  timber  worth 
a  few  shillings.  Yes  1  but  if  a  king  comes  in,  there  is  a  dignity  about  it.  Faith 
in  itself  is  nothing ;  it  is  precious  because  it  is  a  means  by  which  we  lay  hold  upon 
precious  things.  III.  This  doob  is  to  be  kept  open  by  ourselves.  We  read  of 
Lydia's  heart  being  opened  by  the  Lord ;  and  we  read  of  Christ  knocking  at  the 
door,  waiting  for  our  opening  of  it  to  Him.  These  are  two  halves  of  a  great  truth. 
Lydia's  heart  would  never  have  been  opened  had  she  not  willed.  You  are 
responsible  for  exercising  and  for  continuing  to  exercise  this  act  of  faith.  This 
is  one  of  those  doors  that  shut  to  in  a  moment  if  not  clasped  back.  Day  by  day 
we  must  get  rid  of  the  world's  rubbish  that  tries  to  choke  up  the  doorway,  by 
prayer,  by  effort  to  expel  the  evil.  The  Lord  stands  before  each  of  us  and  summons 
us,  "  Lift  np  your  heads,  0  ye  gates ;  even  lift  them  up,  ye  everlasting  doors :  and 
the  Eang  of  glory  shall  come  in."  Let  us  answer,  "  Come  in.  Thou  blessed  of  the 
Lord ;  wherefore  standest  Thou  without  1 "  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  open  gate 
of  salvation : — The  trouble  with  many  people  is  that  they  want  to  have  a  hundred 
eurious  questions  about  God  and  heaven  answered  before  they  come  to  Christ  and 
trust  in  Christ.  They  do  not  act  so  in  other  matters.  If  a  man  is  out  in  the 
woods  at  night  and  has  lost  his  way,  he  does  not  sit  down  on  a  log  and  wait  for  the 
fiun  to  rise,  or  for  some  one  to  kindle  a  bonfire  that  shall  illuminate  the  whole 
forest.  No,  no.  If  the  glimmer  of  a  candle  reaches  his  eye,  no  matter  how  faint 
and  far  away,  he  rejoices — he  begins  at  once  to  move  in  that  direction.  The  light 
shows  that  he  can  be  saved  if  he  will  follow  it.  And  it  is  so  with  even  the  feeblest 
shining  of  the  light  of  life  which  reaches  a  man.  Let  him  be  faithful  to  what  it 
reveals,  and  he  is  sure  of  salvation.  Says  Dr.  Parkhurst :  "  Light  is  a  sure  guide, 
because,  nnlike  sound,  it  goes  in  straight  lines.  If  you  were  to  strike  the  tired, 
diminished  end  of  a  sunbeam  a  million  million  miles  from  the  sun,  you  are  on  the 
certain  track  of  the  sun  the  instant  you  begin  treading  upwards  the  glittering  high- 
way that  that  sunbeam  spreads  out  for  yon.  And  wherever  and  howsoever  far  ont 
upon  the  circumference  of  Christ's  character  yon  take  yonr  position  and  begin 
threading  inward  any  one  of  its  radiating  lines,  you  move  by  a  hne  as  straight  as  a 
sunbeam  towards  the  heart  and  centre  of  the  entire  matter.  One  radius  is  as  good 
as  another  for  finding  the  centre.  Each  of  the  twelve  gates  thresholded  a  main 
avenue  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem."  The  gate  of  heaven  is  not  away  up  yonder ; 
it  is  wherever  we  look  to  Christ  as  the  Opener  of  heaven  to  the  penitent  and 
believing  soul.  He  said,  "  I  am  the  door ;  by  Me  if  any  man  enter  in  he  shall  be 
saved."  The  gospel,  whenever  we  study  it  as  earnest  seekers  after  truth,  pre- 
sents to  us  one  of  the  pearly  gates  of  paradise.  God's  open  doors : — There  are 
few  men  who  would  pass  through  a  gold  mine,  having  full  permission  to  carry 
away  with  them  choicest  specimens  of  its  choicest  treasures,  who  would  not  make 
good  use  of  such  an  opportunity.  All  along  the  highway  of  life  God  is  setting 
jbeiore  each  traveller  opportunities  to  be  and  to  do,  which  are  far  more  valuable 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAJ.  xv. 

than  the  richest  treasures  of  gold  or  gems  which  earth  offers.  These  opportunities 
are  so  many  open  doors  which  lead  to  the  treasure  houses  of  God,  prepared  for  all 
who  seek,  and  offered  to  all  who  ask.    (H.  W.  Beecher.) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Yebb.  1-29.  And  certain  men  which  came  down  from  Jadsaa  taught  the  brethren, 
and  said,  Except  ye  toe  circumcised  ...  ye  cannot  be  saved. — Disturbers  of  the 
Church : — I.  Certain  men  came  down  from  Jod^ia.  1.  Probably  they  were  not 
appreciated  at  home.  2.  They  brought  all  their  intolerance  with  them.  3.  And 
the  Church  at  Antioch  had  to  suffer.  4.  One  bigot  inside  a  Church  can  cause  more 
dissension  than  two  sceptics  outside.  11.  When  certain  men  comb  down  from 
JuDiEA.  1.  They  may  sometimes  be  profitably  invited  to  go  back  again.  2.  It  is 
the  wisest  course  to  seek  advice  from  the  great  Head  of  the  Church.  (S.  S.  Times.} 
Controversies  and  contentions : — We  have  had  dissensions  before  with  nnbelieving 
Jews  or  unconverted  Gentiles  ;  but  we  have  now  to  come  to  controversies  within  the 
Church.     There  are  three  of  these  here : — I.  A  controversy  that  besolved  itself 

ULTIMATELY  INTO  ONE  OF  DOCTKINE,  THODGH  IT  BEGAN  WITH  RITUALISM.       1.    In  all  great 

movements  it  is  always  found  that  for  some  time  the  new  and  the  old  overlap  each 
other,  and  that  more  or  less  of  collision  takes  place  between  them.  Men  with 
certain  fixed  habits  of  thought  and  feeling  may  be  compelled  to  accept  some  great 
truth ;  but  they  may  not  be  able  to  accept  it  with  all  its  conditions,  or  with  all  its 
logical  consequences.  This  was  the  case  in  the  Church  with  respect  to  the  rela- 
tions between  Jew  and  Gentile.  Certain  Pharisaic  members  of  the  Church  in 
Jerusalem  accepted  the  Messiah  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world  on  the  condition  of  the 
other  nations  becoming  Jews !  They  could  not  understand  how  that  which  had 
once  been  established  by  Divine  authority  could  pass  away.  Certain  of  these  men 
came  down  to  Antioch  and  began  to  disseminate  their  opinions.  Paul  and  Barna- 
bas met  the  men  by  argument,  but  the  Church  became  so  disturbed,  that  it  was 
judged  expedient  to  get  some  settlement  of  the  question  from  the  apostles.  2. 
Paul  and  Barnabas  accordingly  went  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  former  refers  to  this 
visit  in  Gal.  ii.  1-9.  Nor  is  there  any  discrepancy  between  the  two  accounts.  Paul 
might  be  deputed  by  the  Church,  and  at  the  same  time  be  moved  by  revelation. 
The  deputation  might  liave  been  in  consequence  of  the  Divine  guidance  which  Paul 
had  received,  or  it  might  have  been  in  consequence  of  the  deputation  being  appointed 
that  the  apostle  was  directed  to  avail  himself  of  it  for  a  kindred  object.  This  pro- 
bable double  object  of  the  journey  is  worth  attention.  During  the  journey  from 
which  Paul  had  just  returned,  the  powers  of  an  apostle  had  been  displayed.  When  he 
returns  to  Antioch  he  does  not  put  down  the  controversy  by  authority.  He  felt, 
peihaps,  that,  as  the  elder  apostolic  men  had  not  heard  what  *'  God  had  done  by 
him,"  his  position,  as  the  commissioned  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  had  by  them  yet 
to  be  recognised.  This,  then,  was  a  personal  matter,  which  might  yet  be  important 
to  his  action  and  influence.  It  was  in  relation  to  this,  as  I  apprehend,  that  he  had 
the  "  revelation  "  he  refers  to.  As  deputed  by  the  Church,  he  went  for  the  settle- 
ment of  the  controversy ;  as  Divinely  directed,  he  went  "  privately  to  them  of  repu- 
tation," that  his  authority  might  be  recognised.  3.  But  there  is  another  matter. 
Paul  says  "  he  took  Titus  with  him,"  while  Luke  does  not  mention  Titus.  But 
mere  silence  is  no  argument ;  while  Titus  may  have  been  one  of  the  "  certain 
other  "  (ver.  2).  But,  even  if  not,  the  apostle  may  have  chosen  ••  to  take  Titus  with 
him  "  in  connection  with  his  own  special  object.  He  determined  to  have  what  was 
in  dispute,  not  only  as  a  matter  of  argument,  but  of  fact.  Hence  he  appenred  with 
a  converted  Gentile,  determined,  as  the  apostle  of  such,  to  stand  by  the  side  of  one 
confessedly  uncircumcised,  thus  proclaiming  his  equality  as  a  brother  in  the  Lord. 
4.  The  deputation  was  received  by  "  the  whole  Church  and  the  apostles  and  elders." 
Paul  and  Barnabas  gave  a  general  account  of  their  ministry,  and  immediately  some 
of  the  Pharisees  raised  the  question  (ver.  6).  It  was  then  determined  that  a  day 
should  be  appointed  when  the  elders  and  the  apostles  should  consider  the  matter. 
Now,  my  idea  is,  that  between  this  preliminaiy  meeting  and  the  day  when  they 
came  together  for  the  discussion,  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  that  private  meeting  with 
the  apostles  which  he  mentions  in  Gal.  ii.     It  is  very  likely  that  the  Phaubces  at 


OHAP.  XT.]  THE  ACTS.  42S 

the  first  meeting,  knowing  that  there  was  a  Gentile  with  Paul,  demanded  that  he 
should  submit  to  their  rite  of  initiation.  The  apostle  was  quite  prepared  for  this, 
but  gave  way  to  it,  •'  no,  not  for  an  hour."  He  at  once  consulted  with  those  "  who 
were  of  reputation,"  and  communicated  to  them  the  gospel  that  he  preached  among 
the  Gentiles.  They  received  the  communication,  recognised  Paul's  apostoHo 
character,  and  "gave  to  him  and  Barnabas  the  right  hand  of  fellowship."  5. 
Seeing  how  impossible  it  is  to  do  public  business  in  a  great  assembly  unless  you 
have  the  thing  marked  out  beforehand,  I  think  this  private  interview  was  used  for 
coming  to  such  an  agreement  as  decided  the  leaders  as  to  the  course  to  adopt. 
When  they  "  came  together,''  just  as  in  our  House  of  Commons  a  number  of  com- 
paratively undistinguished  men  are  allowed  to  spend  th«ir  strength  while  the  leaders 
reserve  themselves  to  wind  up  the  argument— a  number  of  unnamed  individuals 
opened  the  controversy.  After  the  matter  had  been  thoroughly  "  ventilated,"  it 
became  the  duty  of  the  leaders  to  interfere.  (1)  Peter  got  up  and  referred  to  a 
matter  of  fact  in  which  he  was  the  principal  actor — the  conversion  of  Cornelius, 
which  he  regarded  as  proving  the  equality  of  Jew  and  Gentile  in  Christ.  "  Then 
all  the  multitude  kept  silence,  and  gave  audience  to  Barnabas  and  Paul."  Just 
notice  how  little  things  may  possess  great  significancy.  On  the  journey  "  Barnabas 
and  Saul  "  was  changed  to  "  Paul  and  Barnabas  "  ;  but  here,  where  Barnabas  was 
so  well  known,  how  natural  it  is  that  he  should  be  made  prominent  I  It  is  a  stroke 
so  fine  that  a  fiction-writer  would  hardly  have  thought  of  it.  (2)  "Barnabas  and 
Paul "  then  rose  up,  and  they,  too,  referred  to  facts.  (3)  Then  James,  the  presi- 
dent, addressed  the  assembly.  As  the  others  had  referred  to  what  God  had  done, 
he  referred  to  what  God  had  said.  He  showed  that  the  old  prophecies  were  the 
basis  of  the  new  facts ;  that  they  had  reference  ultimately  to  the  Gentiles  being 
received  into  the  Church.  He  suggested,  therefore,  that  they  should  not  trouble 
the  Gentile  converts  by  the  impositions  of  the  law,  but  should  recommend  them,  as 
a  matter  of  expediency,  to  abstain  from  certain  things  which  were  necessary  for  the 
preservation  of  social  intercourse  between  them  and  their  brethren.  This  sugges- 
tion was  accepted.  But  something  else  was  also  recommended ;  and  here  you  will 
observe  what  capital  business  men  these  apostles  were.  The  suggestion  of  James 
was  reduced  to  writing,  and  they  elected  some  of  their  own  body  to  go  to  Antioch, 
to  confirm,  by  word  of  mouth,  what  was  said  in  the  letter.  What  an  admirable 
arrangement  this  was  1  The  men  went  down  to  Antioch  and  "  delivered  the 
epistle."      "  The  Gentiles  were  glad,  and  rejoiced  for  the  consolation."     II.  A 

EEBUKE  PROVOKED  BY  AN  OUTWARD  ACT,  BUT  WHICH    SPRANG    FROM    LOYALTY    TO    TRUTH 

(GaL  ii.  11,  &c.).  The  conduct  attributed  to  Peter  was  just  Like  him.  He  was  a 
man  of  impulse,  an  earnest,  sincere  man,  but  wanting  in  moral  courage,  and  sensi- 
tive to  others'  opinion.  Besides,  it  is  quite  in  keeping  with  human  nature,  that 
social  feelings,  custom,  and  prejudice  should  be  practically  stronger  than  a  decision 
of  the  understanding.  You  may  proclaim  by  law  that  the  negro  shall  be  recognised 
as  a  man  and  a  brother ;  and  yet  you  will  find  that  white  men  shrink  from  the 
regro,  though  perfectly  assenting  to  the  rigliteousness  of  the  law  which  would  place 
him  at  their  side.  Some  even  of  your  eloquent  orators,  who  talk  largely  about 
human  equality,  may  be  found  to  bow  to  a  social  prejudice.  It  is  human  nature, 
and  it  is  constantly  to  be  seen  in  respect  to  ecclesiastical  parties.  Peter's  pusil- 
lanimity was  contagious.  Others  "  dissembled  with  him,"  and  even  Barnabas  was 
for  a  season  seduced.  Paul,  who  looked  at  things  in  their  principles  and  issues, 
saw  in  such  conduct  far  more  than  Peter  suspected.  Hence  his  "  withstanding  Lim 
to  the  face,"  <fco.  The  error  of  the  Judaisers  and  the  error  of  Peter  are  the  faults 
of  human  nature.  Few  are  there,  indeed,  in  any  Church  who  do  not  need  to  be 
reminded  that  "  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,"  &c.  III.  A  dispute 
ARISING  OUT  OF  PERSONAL  FEELING  (vers.  36-41).  Bamabas,  when  he  came  back  from 
Jerusalem,  had  most  likely  brought  down  his  nephew  Mark  with  him,  or  he  might 
have  accompanied  Peter ;  and  Barnabas  wished,  when  the  second  journey  was  pro- 
posed, that  he  should  go  with  them.  Paul  would  not  hear  of  it.  There  were  no 
doubt  faults  on  both  sides.  Barnabas  might  have  been  too  lenient ;  Paul  too  severe. 
It  is  no  use  attempting  to  smooth  over  matters.  The  men  were  wrong,  and  evidently 
gave  way  to  bad  temper  and  strong  words.  The  "  paroxysm  was  so  sharp  between 
them,  that  they  departed  asunder  the  one  from  the  other,"  and  the  pious  work  of 
their  joint  apostolic  visitation  of  the  churches  was  given  up  !  From  the  infirrnity 
of  the  men,  and  the  honesty  of  the  historian,  much  may  be  learnt.  In  conclusion, 
take  the  three  things  in  reverse  order.  1.  This  schism  between  Paul  and  Barnabas 
V  as  but  temporary.     We  find  that  afterwards  Mark  was  associated  with  Paul,  and 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  xt. 

served  with  him  in  the  gospel.  Barnabas  and  Paul,  too,  were  brought  into  friendly 
relations  again.  It  was  impossible  for  such  good  men,  alike  servants  of  the  Most 
High  Gocl  and  fellow-workers  with  Him,  "to  keep  their  anger  for  evr."  2.  It  waa 
■the  samt  with  respect  to  Paul  and  Peter.  It  was  just  hke  Peter — with  his  warm, 
loving,  and  honest  soul,  his  tenderness  of  conscience,  and  genuine  humility — to 
refer,  in  one  of  his  Epistles,  to  those  of  his  "  beloved  brother  Paul,"  though  he 
probably  knew  that  one  of  tbem  contained  the  record  of  his  weakness.  3.  In  regard 
to  the  "  council,"  we  learn  the  evil  of  aggravating  sectional  diilerences,  and  insist- 
ing on  them  as  terms  of  communion  and  salvation.  Eitual  peculiarities,  matters 
of  Church  government,  external  and  secondary  things  which  are  not  of  the  essence 
of  that  "  faith  "  which  unites  to  Christ,  and  "  purifies  the  heart,"  are  not  to  be 
raised  into  walls  of  separation.  ••  Circumcision  is  nothing,  and  uncircumcision  is 
nothing,  but  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God."  (T.  Binney,  D.D.) 
■Jhurch  controversy  : — From  this  interesting  chapter  learn  that — I.  Controveesies 
iaE  UNAVOIDABLE,  AND  AKE  A  SIGN  OF  LIFE  AND  ACTIVITY.  They  are  preferable  to  the 
ieace  of  the  graveyard.  It  is  through  controversy  that  truth  is  developed  and  error 
Jefeated.  All  the  great  doctrines,  the  Trinity,  the  Incarnation,  justification,  &c., 
aave  come  out  as  pure  gold  from  the  furnace  of  theological  dispute.  Only,  let 
wontroversy  be  conducted  in  a  Christian  spirit,  and  with  a  single  eye  to  the  cause  of 
iruth.  II.  The  best  way  to  settle  a  conteoveesy  is  by  full  discussion  and 
PERSONAL  conference.  Evcn  inspired  apostles  did  not  decide  the  question  by  mere 
authority,  but  travelled  all  the  way  to  Jerusalem  to  secure  a  general  understanding, 
after  giving  a  full  hearing  to  the  opposition.  It  is  good  for  Christians  to  come 
together,  to  think  and  talk  together.  In  the  multitude  of  counsellors  there  is  safety. 
One  man  may  be  wiser  than  a  whole  multitude,  but  if  he  can  convince  the  multi- 
tude, his  judgment  is  all  the  more  powerful.  III.  Synodical  confeeences  arb 
clearly  sanctioned  by  apostolic  example  and  precedent.  But  the  time  and 
number  are  left  to  expediency.  They  may  be  annual,  triennial,  or  occasional; 
local,  diocesan,  provincial,  national,  or  oecumenical ;  advisory  or  legislative  ;  all 
■depends  upon  the  necessities  of  the  Church,  which  vary  iu  different  periods  and 
•countries.  IV.  The  composition  of  a  synod  should  be  democratic.  The  apostles 
might  have  decided  the  controversy  by  their  own  personal  weight  and  authority  ; 
but  they  preferred  to  confer  with  the  brotherhood,  and  to  allow  a  free  and  open 
discussion.  The  council  of  Jerusalem  consisted  of  "  the  whole  Church  "  (chap.  xv. 
6-22).  It  is  therefore  a  departure  from  apostolic  practice  if  synods  have  become 
purely  clerical  and  hierarchical.  This  is  contrary  to  the  principle  of  the  general 
priesthood  of  the  laity,  which  gives  every  believer  the  right  to  take  an  active  part  in 
the  government  and  all  the  general  interests  of  the  Church.  (P.  Schaff,  D.D.) 
■Controversy,  frequently  the  result  of  vii  sunders  landing : — Some  time  ago  I  went  down 
to  the  Lookout  Mountain,  and  an  old  resident  said  to  me,  "  Our  soldiers  fought 
bravely  up  there  above  the  clouds  ;  but  sometimes  the  mists  were  so  heavy  that  they 
could  not  distinguish  friends  from  foes,  and  struck  at  each  other."  {J.M.Buckley, 
D.D.)  Controversialists : — It's  a  great  pity  we  can't  agree  better.  They  are 
small,  insignificant  beings  who  quarrel  oftenest.  There's  a  magnificent  breed  of 
cattle  in  the  Vale  of  Clwyd — the  most  beautiful  vale  in  Wales.  They  have  scarcely 
any  horns,  but  an  abundance  of  meat ;  yet  if  you  ascend  the  hills  on  every  side, 
there,  on  the  heights,  you  find  a  breed  which  grows  scarcely  anything  but  horns, 
and  from  morning  to  night  all  you  hear  is  the  constant  din  of  clashing  weapons. 
So  there  are  many  Christians  who  Uve  on  the  heights — but  on  very  cold  and  barren 
ones.  Everything  they  eat  grows  into  horns,  the  strength  of  which  tljey  are  con- 
stantly testing.  (J.  Thomas.)  Controversy  among  Christians  : — I  saw  once  a 
little  incident  in  Scottish  history.  It  was  at  the  time  when  conflicts  were  being 
waged  between  two  factions  in  Scotland.  One  of  them  was  represented  by  the 
garrison  in  the  old  castle  at  Edinburgh,  and  the  townspeople  were  on  the  other  side. 
They  fell  into  a  very  serious  fight  about  surrendering  the  town.  It  was  the  easiest 
thing  in  the  world  for  the  castle  to  subdue  whatever  force  was  brought  against  it. 
Those  of  you  who  have  been  there  know  how  commanding  a  position  it  occupied. 
In  a  very  little  while  they  opened  a  terrific  cannonade  on  the  town.  They  were 
soon  subdued.  It  was  an  easy  victory.  But  they  found  that  the  explosions  of  their 
cannon  had  shaken  the  rock  beneath  them  and  opened  the  fissures  so  widely  that 
the  waters  in  the  weUs  that  the  garrison  lived  upon  had  run  away  into  nothing.  I 
don't  believe  we  can  afford  to  be  victorious  over  each  other,  and  that  Christian 
denomination  that  holds  its  own  by  the  destruction  of  any  other  one  will  find  that 
its  fissures  beneath  will  carry  away  the  water  of  piety  and  grace  on  which  it  lives. 


«BAP.  XT.]  THE  ACTS,  425 

{C.  S.  Robinson.)  A  catholic  platform: — ^Dr.  Dnncan  was  in  Leghorn,  Italy, 
when  two  godly  shipmagtera  came  to  the  port — the  one  from  Leith,  the  other  from 
England — the  one  a  Presbyterian,  the  other  a  Wesleyan.  The  Wesleyan  came  and 
asked  him  to  preach  in  his  ship.  •'  Oh,"  said  he,  "  I  could  not  do  that ;  for  you 
Bee  I  am  a  Galviuist  and  you  are  an  Arminian,  and  I  might  say  something  to 
injure  your  feelings."  "  Sir,"  was  the  reply,  "  what  we  wish  you  to  do  is  to  come 
and  preach  against  the  devil."  That  is  certainly  a  cathoUo  platform.  Calvinist 
and  Arminian  should  always  be  agreed  to  preach  against  the  devil,  and  in  the  name 
•of  a  common  Master.  Controversies,  after  effects  of: — "  Old  religious  factions  are 
volcanoes  burned  out,"  says  Burke ;  "  on  the  lava  and  ashes  and  squalid  scoriaB  of 
old  eruptions  grow  the  peaceful  ohve,  the  cheering  vine,  and  the  sustaining  corn." 
Those  who  have  seen  the  sides  of  Vesuvius  can  well  appreciate  the  force  of  this 
image.  There  indeed  may  be  seen  tracts  of  desolation ;  bare,  black,  and  lurid, 
beyond  any  other  which  earth  can  show.  These  are  where  the  sulphur  stUl  lingers 
tind  repels  every  effort  of  vegetation.  But  there  are  also  tracts,  close  adjoining  to 
them,  and  even  in  the  midst  of  them,  where  the  green  vineyard,  the  grey  olive,  the 
golden  orange,  and  the  springing  herb  mark  that,  out  of  the  attrition  and  decompo- 
sition of  the  ancient  streams  of  lava,  the  vital  forces  of  nature  can  assert  themselves 
with  double  vigour,  and  create  a  new  life  under  the  very  ribs  of  death.  So  it  is  with 
extinct  theological  controversies.  So  far,  indeed,  as  they  retain  the  bitterness,  the 
fire  and  brimstone,  of  personal  rancour  and  malignity,  they  are,  and  will  be  to  the 
end  of  time,  the  most  barren  and  profitless  of  aU  the  works  of  man.  But  if  this 
•can  be  eliminated  or  corrected,  it  is  undeniable  not  only  that  truths  of  various  kinds 
take  root  and  spring  up  in  the  soil  thus  formed,  but  that  there  is  a  fruitful  and 
useful  result  produced  by  the  contemplation  of  the  transitory  character  of  the 
volcanic  eruptions  which  once  seemed  to  shake  the  world.  (Dean  Stanley.)  The 
gospel  not  a  matter  for  controversy,  but  for  tite  : — A  huge  fragment  of  rock  from  an 
adjacent  cliff  fell  upon  a  horizontal  part  of  the  hiU  below,  which  was  occupied  by 
the  gardens  and  vineyards  of  two  peasants.  It  covered  part  of  the  property  of  each ; 
nor  could  it  be  easUy  decided  to  whom  the  unexpected  visitor  belonged ;  but  the 
honest  rustics,  instead  of  troubling  the  gentlemen  of  the  long  robe  with  their  dis- 
pute, wisely  resolved  to  end  it  by  each  party  excavating  the  half  of  the  rock  on  his 
own  grounds,  and  converting  the  whole  into  two  useful  cottages,  with  comfortable 
rooms  and  cellars  for  their  little  stock  of  wine,  and  there  they  now  reside  with  their 
families.  After  such  a  sort  wiU  wise  men  deal  with  the  great  doctrines  of  the 
gospel ;  they  will  not  make  them  the  themes  of  angry  controversy,  but  of  profitable 
use.  To  fight  over  a  doctrine  is  sorry  waste  of  time,  but  to  live  in  the  quiet  enjoy- 
ment of  it  is  the  truest  wisdom.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christian  liberty  : — I. 
DiBPOTED.  The  Church  at  Antioch  was  made  up  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  (chap. 
xi.  19-23),  living  in  complete  harmony.  The  Church  was  prosperous.  When  this 
is  the  case  the  devil  tries  to  get  in  and  break  up  its  concord.  Here — 1.  There  were 
those  who  affirmed  that,  "  Except  ye  be  circumcised,"  &c.  Note — (1)  The  doctrine 
which  meant  that  the  law,  with  all  its  requirements  and  penalties,  was  still  in  force. 
{2)  The  advocates  of  the  doctrine.  "  False  brethren  "  (Gal.  ii.  4).  They  assumed 
an  authority  which  they  did  not  possess,  and  which  was  repudiated  by  the  Church 
"(ver.  24).  2.  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  their  opposers  (Gal.  ii.  5).  It  will  be  inte- 
resting to  turn  to  Paul's  indignant  utterances  against  circumcision  as  a  saving 
ordinance  (Gal.  v.  2,  vL  12,  &c.).  And  yet  this  same  Paul  afterwards  circumcised 
Timothy  (chap.  xvi.  3).  But  not  as  necessary  to  salvation,  only  that  he  might 
/preach  salvation  to  the  Jews  more  acceptably.  Here  he  fought  the  doctrine  with- 
out compromise,  because  it  was  declared  to  be  essential  to  salvation.  3.  The  result 
(ver.  2).  Paul  went  up  by  revelation  as  well  (Gal.  ii.  2).  Note — (1)  Those  sent. 
Paul  and  Barnabas,  who  had  the  confidence  of  the  Church,  and  who  had  been  the 
opponents  of  the  doctrine.  Among  the  "  certain  other  of  them  "  was  Titus  (Gal.  ii. 
3),  and  probably  some  who  believed  in  circumcision.  (2)  The  wisdom  of  sending. 
It  sent  the  dispute  where  it  would  receive  an  authoritative  answer.  There  is  no 
-need  of  a  Church  being  torn  asunder  by  any  controversy  when  it  acts  in  the  manner 
and  with  the  spirit  of  the  Church  at  Antioch.  (3)  The  journey.  To  Paul  and 
Barnabas  it  was  almost  a  triumphal  march  (ver.  3).  II.  Denied.  1.  The  recep- 
■tion.  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  accorded,  seemingly,  a  formal  and  cordial  welcome. 
To  men  of  repute,  such  as  James,  Cephas,  and  John,  Paul  privately  explained  the 
gospel  he  had  been  proclaiming  among  the  Gentiles  (Gal.  ii.  2)  ;  and  in  this  public 
gathering  he  and  Barnabas  "  rehearsed  all  things  that  God  had  done  with  them." 
'3.  The  attack  (ver.  5).     In  the  council,  therefore,  the  question  was  sharply  and 


42«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOB.  [CHA».  XT. 

clearly  drawn  as  to  whether  faith  in  Christ  was  alone  sufiGlcient  for  salvation.  HL 
Pboved.  Observe — 1.  The  composition  of  the  council  (ver.  22).  There  was  no 
mere  pontifical  decision.  Peter  only  argued  the  case,  and  voted  like  the  rest.  Nor 
did  the  apostles  alone  give  judgment,  but  "  the  whole  Church."  2.  The  arguments 
before  the  council.  (1)  Peter's,  (a)  God  chose  that  by  his  mouth  the  Gentiles 
should  hear  the  word  of  the  gospel,  and  believe.  It  was  not  Peter  that  moved  in 
the  matter,  but  God.  Peter's  scruples  had  to  be  overcome.  (6)  The  reception  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  was  conclusive  evidence,  for  God  knows  the  heart,  and  He  never 
would  send  the  Holy  Spirit  to  take  possession  of  those  that  were  alien,  (c)  Their 
uncircumcision  did  not  stand  in  the  way  of  the  cleansing  of  their  hearts.  His  exhor- 
tation was  short  and  to  the  point  (ver.  10).  The  difficulty  of  bearing  the  yoke  of 
Moses  is  set  forth  in  Rom.  vii.  7-14.  Christ,  in  contrast,  says,  "  My  yoke  is  easy, 
and  My  burden  is  light."  Peter  ends  by  declaring,  "But  we  believe  that  we  shall 
be  saved  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  like  manner  as  they."  Not  '♦  they 
in  like  manner  with  us,"  but  "  we  as  they  " — without  our  circumcision  1  (2)  Paul 
and  Barnabas's.  They  simply  declared  the  miracles  and  wonders  that  God  had 
vyrought  among  the  Gentiles  by  them.  (3)  James's.  He  makes  it  manifest  that  the 
acceptance  of  the  Gentiles  is  no  new  thought,  but  had  been  pre-imiicated  in  the 
Word  of  God  (Amos  ix.  11,  12).  This  appeal  to  prophecy,  together  with  the  evidence 
that  God  was  moving  in  the  matter,  settled  the  controversy.  The  threatened  schism 
in  the  Church  was  avoided,  and  liberty  in  the  faith  became  a  perpetual  birthright.  So 
was  it  that "  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  "was  vindicated.  (M.  C.  Hazard. ) 
Times  in  Church  history  : — There  is  a  time — I.  To  build  and  a  time  to  break 
DOWN  (Eccles.  iii,  3).  1.  To  build  the  fence  of  the  law  of  the  Old  Covenant.  2.  To 
break  down  that  fence  in  the  New  Testament.  H.  Op  contention  and  of  peace 
(Eccles.  iii.  8).  1.  Brotherly  contention  in  order  to  find  the  right.  2.  Brotherly 
peace  after  it  is  found.  HI.  To  speak  and  to  be  silent  (Eccles.  iii.  7).  1.  To 
speak  boldly  when  it  concerns  convictions.  2.  To  be  silent  when  it  concerns  obedience 
to  God's  will  and  brotherly  unity.  (K.  Gerok.)  The  first  ecclesiastical  council — 
the  nature  of  the  dispute  : — Science  informs  us  that  the  fiercest  hurricanes  revolve 
around  a  perfect  centre  of  calm.  This  chapter  tells  us  of  disturbance  in  the  centre 
of  the  Church.  A  little  examination  of  this  dissension  will  show  that  it  is,  more 
or  less,  a  type  of  aU  Church  disputes.  It  was  a  conflict  between — I.  The  ritualistio 
AND  THE  spiritual  (vcr.  1).  1.  The  names  of  these  breakers  of  Church  peace  are 
not  given,  nor  do  we  require  them.  They  were  not  persons  of  any  authority. 
Their  religion  had  more  to  do  with  the  senses  than  with  the  soul,  with  the  form 
than  with  the  spirit.  I  can  conceive  of  them  urging — (1)  That  the  law  of  Moses 
■was  the  law  of  God,  and  therefore  immutable.  (2)  That  the  religion  of  Messiah 
was  to  develop,  and  not  abrogate,  the  Levitical  economy.  2.  The  new  rehgion  was, 
on  the  other  hand,  pre-eminently  spiritual ;  it  taught  that  "  circumcision  or  uncir- 
cumcision availeth  nothing,"  &c.  II.  The  traditional  and  the  progressive.  1. 
For  many  ages  the  Gentile  who  sought  religious  light  could  only  obtain  it  through 
the  Jew.  These  Judaising  teachers  had  felt  that  what  had  been  must  con- 
tinue. They  were  institutional  conservatives — they  could  not  give  up  the  past. 
2.  On  the  other  hand,  Christianity  was  pre-eminently  progressive ;  it  made  the  old 
a  mere  starting-point.  It  left  Palestine  for  the  world,  the  Jew  for  the  race,  the 
temple  of  Jerusalem  for  the  temple  of  the  universe,  teaching  men  everywhere  that 
•'  God  is  a  Spirit,"  &c.  III.  The  fettering  and  the  free.  To  bind  the  Gentile 
converts  to  this  Jewish  rite  would  be  to  enslave  their  souls ;  hence  Peter  exclaimed, 
"  Why  tempt  ye  God  to  put  a  yoke  en  the  necks  of  the  disciples  ?  "  To  tie  the 
soul  to  a  ceremony  is  to  enslave  it,  and  this  those  bigots  now  sought  to  do.  They 
would  fetter  the  limbs  of  a  new  faith  with  the  trjm.nels  of  old  ceremonies.  Chris- 
tianity is  freedom ;  it  invests  the  soul  with  "  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of 
God."     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  first  ecclesiastical  council — the  settlement  of  the 

dispute : — I.  A  deputation  from  the  Church  at  Antioch,  and  a  fuli/  discussion 
OF  the  subject  at  a  general  assembly  of  the  Church  (vers.  4,  &c.).  (1)  Ii  was 
a  general  synod,  not  a  mere  meeting  of  the  apostles  and  elders.  It  is  not  necessary 
to  b«  heve  that  every  Church  member  was  present,  but  that  all  were  represented. 
(2)  It  was  a  popular  assembly.  Notice — 1.  The  speech  of  Peter.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  there  is  no  assumption  of  superiority  on  Peter's  part.  He  speaks  only  as  one 
of  their  number,  strongly,  but  with  deference  to  the  common  judgment.  He  shows 
that  Jewish  ritualism  was — (1)  Unnecessary.  He  quotes  his  own  experience  in 
proof  of  this,  and  states  that  his  ministry  to  the  Gentiles  was — (a)  By  the  appoint- 
ment of  God.     "  God  made  choice  among  us."     (b)  Divinely  sanctioned.     "  Giving 


CHAP.  XV.]  THE  ACTS.  427 

them  the  Holy  Ghost. "  (c)  Productive  of  the  same  spiritual  results.  "  Put  no 
difference  between  us  and  them,  purifying  their  hearts  by  faith."  This  work  the 
gospel  effects  as  well  without  Jewish  ritualism  as  with  it,  and  achieves  it  in  connec- 
tion with  faith  and  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  Inexpedient  (ver.  10).  (a) 
Bitualism  is  an  intolerable  yoke,  (b)  Men,  by  their  bigoted  conduct,  may  tempt 
God  to  put  this  yoke  upon  people.  Were  England  to  renounce  her  Protestantism, 
she  would  tempt  God  to  put  the  yoke  of  Popery  upon  this  country.  (3)  Contrary 
to  his  faith  (ver.  11).  This  is  the  last  speech  we  have  of  Peter.  Adieu,  great 
apostle  1  2.  The  speech  of  James.  The  speech  of  Peter  produced  such  a  deep  im- 
pression,  that,  amidst  breathless  "  silence,"  Barnabas  and  Paul  arose.  Their 
speeches  are  not  recorded ;  only  so  much  is  said  about  them  as  to  show  that  they 
were  historic.  But  the  speech  of  James  is  given.  He  was  chairman,  summed  up 
the  matter,  and  gave  his  judgment.  He  accepts  the  position  of  Peter,  and  supports 
it  by  a  proplietic  quotation,  which  points  to  a  great  restoration — (1)  Among  the 
Jewish  people.  The  building  up  of  that  which  was  in  ruins.  (2)  That  won  Id  lead 
the  Gentiles  to  seek  after  the  Lord.  (3)  Effected  by  that  God  who  sees  the  end 
from  the  beginning.  3.  The  decision  contained  four  prohibitions.  Against— (1) 
Food  which  had  been  offered  to  idols.  (2)  "  Fornication  " — mentioned  in  connec- 
tion with  idolatry,  because  horrible  licentiousness  mingled  with  the  devotions  of 
those  heathens.  (3)  "  Things  strangled  " — things  held  in  abomination  among  the 
Jews,  and  in  high  esteem  among  the  heathens.  (4)  "Blood  "  (Gen.  ix.  4  ;  Lev.  x. 
14 ;  Deut.  xii.  23  ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  34).  II.  A  depdtatiom  back  to  Antioch  with  the 
RESULTS  OP  THE  DELiBEKATioN  (vcrs.  22,  &c.).  The  apostolic  letter  may  be 
regarded — 1.  As  a  homage  to  the  right  of  private  judgment.  It  is  not  an  en- 
actment enforced  by  penalties,  nor  a  mere  moral  appeal  addressed  to  a  corporate 
body ;  it  is  directed  to  the  judgment  of  every  member  of  the  Church  in  Antioch, 
Syria,  and  Cilicia.  The  questions  at  issue  were  vital  to  every  man,  and  to  every 
man  appeal  is  made.  The  whole  Bible  recognises  this  right.  2.  As  a  condemna- 
tion of  ecclesiastical  decrees.  Its  benign  and  tender  spirit,  touching  references, 
popular  and  advisory  features,  are  in  striking  contrast  to  the  deliverances  of 
later  councils.  Little  men,  who  claim  to  be  the  successors  of  these  apostles,  have 
issued  decrees  whose  arrogance  and  intolerance  insult  the  Christian  name.  3.  As 
a  charter  of  the  Church's  liberties.  With  this  letter  issuing  from  the  great  council 
of  the  mother  Church  at  Jerusalem,  the  result  of  spostoUc  dehberation  and  heavenly 
guidance,  we  claim  a  liberty  from  the  reign  of  ritualism.  HI.  The  assembling 
OF  THE  Church  at  Antioch  to  beceivb  the  communication  from  the  mother 
Church  (ver.  30).  The  whole  Church  is  assembled.  Paul  and  Barnabas,  Barsabas 
and  Silas,  deliver  the  letter,  which  yields  great  "consolation."  The  strangers 
exhort  the  brethren  and  confirm  them,  and  after  a  little  while  return  home.  Con- 
clusion :  Such  was  the  method  of  settling  this  first  discussion  in  the  Christian 
Church.  How  simple,  wise,  and  successful!  Would  that  more  recent  councils 
had  imitated  it.     {Ibid.)  The  assembly  at  Jerusalem: — 1.  Previous  apostoUc 

speeches  were  for  the  most  part  statements  or  vindications  of  the  gospel.  The  only 
one  which  prepares  us  for  the  present  discussion  is  that  of  Peter  in  explanation  of 
his  conduct  towards  Cornelius,  which  for  a  time  silenced  the  murmurers.  But  the 
question  was  not  dead ;  it  only  slept  awhile,  and  awoke  with  energy  when  the 
gospel  was  openly  carried  to  the  Gentiles  in  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.  2.  The  "  apostles 
and  elders  "  were  seated  in  order,  as  constituting  a  Christian  Sanhedrin.  On  the 
earUer  occasion  we  read  of  "  the  apostles  and  the  brethren."  In  the  interval,  pres- 
byters had  been  appointed.  There  is  no  mention  of  an  institution  of  this  order,  as 
there  is  of  that  of  deacons  ;  and  for  this  reason — that  the  latter  was  a  new  order ; 
but  the  Jews  had  alwavs  had  elders,  and,  as  a  matter  of  course,  continued  that 
order  in  the  new  Christian  fellowship.  Along  with  their  acknowledged  leaders  were 
assembled  many  of  the  private  Christians.  3.  As  battles  have  often  begun  with 
the  8kirmisbini<  of  light  troops,  that  could  decide  nothing,  but  could  search  and 
clear  the  ground  for  the  onset  of  the  battalions  that  were  to  decide  the  fortune  of 
the  day,  so  in  this  assembly  there  was  much  informal  discussion  before  the  leaders 
spoke.  At  last  it  was  evident  that  the  "  much  questioning  "  was  not  moving  the 
subject  any  nearer  to  solut.on,  and  so — I.  "  Peteb  rose  up."  It  had  always  been 
his  way  to  take  the  initiative  ;  and  the  illustrious  part  he  had  played  on  and  since 
the  day  of  Pentecost  entitled  him  to  much  honour  and  deference.  He  saw  no  need 
for  lengthened  discussion.  He  was  guided  to  his  conclusion  by  the  knowledge  of 
facts.  The  matter  was  in  his  view  virtually  settb  d  by  the  case  of  Cornelius.  It 
was  not  the  bent  of  this  apostle's  mind  to  plough  his  way  through  a  deep  or  oare- 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xt. 

fnl  argument ;  but  he  knew  how  to  grasp  relevant  facts,  and  make  them  tell.  Whj 
should  the  objectors  "  tempt  God  "  by  assuming  that  He  would  not  save  Gentiles 
elsewhere  as  He  had  saved  them  in  the  house  of  Cornehus  ?  And  for  what  end  did 
they  seek  thus  to  restrict  the  mercy  of  God,  and  limit  the  range  of  the  Christian 
Church  ?  Was  it  to  impose  on  the  Gentiles  a  yoke  which  even  Jews  had  been 
unable  to  bear  ?  One  thing  was  quite  certain,  that  salvation  for  aU  men  was 
"  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  "  ;  and  no  ceremonial  or  traditional  restric- 
tion on  that  grace  could  be  allowed.  We  can  imagine  the  satisfaction  with  which 
St.  Paul,  who  understood  the  question  better  than  any  one,  Ustened  to  this  clear 
evangelical  statement.  He  remembered  it,  and  was  obliged  to  remind  St.  Peter  of 
it  on  a  future  occasion  at  Antioch,  when  that  apostle  acted  in  a  manner  inconsistent 
with  his  speech.  St.  Peter  always  spoke  with  effect,  and  the  whole  assembly  felt 
the  force  of  his  unanswerable  words  and  "  kept  silence."  So  far  truth  and  charity 
had  gained  the  day.  H.  The  silence  was  broken  by  the  missionaeies,  perhaps  by 
pre-arrangement  with  the  leading  apostles,  perhaps  on  the  happy  inspiration  of  the 
moment.  Barnabas  seems  to  have  spoken  first — a  judicious  arrangement,  because  he 
had  a  stronger  hold  on  the  confidence  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem.  Neither  were  likely 
to  surrender  any  just  claim  of  Judaism  without  good  cause.  Barnabas  was  a  Levite, 
and  Paul  a  carefully  educated  Pharisee,  who  even  in  youth  had  been  a  Sanhedrist. 
They  did  not  so  much  argue  as  narrate  what  God  had  wrought,  the  logical  deduc- 
tion from  which  was  that  if  God  has  not  refused  those  Gentile  converts  on  account 
of  their  imcircumcision,  why  should  the  Church  refuse  them  ?  And  if  God  gave  to 
them  His  Holy  Spirit,  why  should  men  hesitate  to  give  them  baptism  ?  III.  St. 
James  then  moved  the  judgment  of  the  court.  This  fell  naturally  to  him  on 
account  of  his  position  as  president.  His  character  gave  great  weight  to  his 
opinion,  and  he  was  not  implicated  in  any  personal  intercourse  with  Gentiles,  as 
Peter  was.  This  is  the  only  speech  of  St.  James  which  has  been  preserved.  It 
consists  of  four  sentences  : — 1.  He  recognised  the  importance  and  relevancy  of  the 
case  referred  to  by  his  colleague,  whom  he  characteristically  styled  in  the  Hebrew 
form  "Symeon."  2.  He  went  to  the  Old  Testament  to  find  prophetic  sanction.  A 
mind  like  his  craved  some  ground  of  Scripture,  as  well  as  of  observation  and 
reason.  He  found  it  in  Amos  (ix.  11,  12 ;  LXX.).  The  prophet  had  foretold  that 
the  fallen  tabernacle  of  David  would  be  rebuilt,  and  that  a  blessing  would  fall  on 
the  Gentiles.  The  erection  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  Son  of  David,  was  a 
restoration  of  the  tabernacle  of  David ;  and  there  came  into  prominent  view  those 
words  which  intimated  that  the  Lord's  name  would  be  "  called  "  on  by  the  Gentiles. 
Was  not  this  being  fulfilled  in  the  conversion  to  Christ  of  a  people  whom  God  was 
now  calling  out  of  the  heathen  world  for  His  name?  And,  if  so,  it  certainly  was 
not  necessary  for  them  to  conform  to  the  separate  rites  of  the  Jews.  S.  In  pur- 
suance of  this  view,  he  proposed  a  decision  of  the  case.  The  Gentile  converts 
should  not  be  harassed  by  the  Jewish  law.  Enough  that  they  should  conform  to 
certain  rules  of  abstention  which  could  not  be  called  irksome,  and  which  might  in 
some  degree  conciliate  those  who  were  apt  to  regard  all  Gentiles  alike  as  unclean. 
4.  In  his  last  sentence  he  touched  with  soothing  hand  the  susceptibilities  of  the 
more  keen  Jevdsh  partisans,  and  his  counsel  became  the  unanimous  resolution  of 
the  whole  conclave.  The  Gentile  liberty  was  secured,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the 
peace  of  the  whole  Church  was  promoted.  Conclusion  :  The  whole  discussion  sug- 
gests— 1.  The  advantage  of  holding  Christian  assemblies  for  the  adjustment  of 
difficulties.  The  narrative  is  fatal  to  the  Popish  system  of  Church  government ; 
far  there  was  open  discussion,  and  the  decision  went  out  with  concurrence  of  the 
whole  Church.  It  is  also  incompatible  with  a  bare  system  of  independency,  which 
leaves  every  local  church  to  steer  its  own  course.  It  is  easy  to  point  the  finger  at 
councils  which  have  been  bigoted  and  superstitious  ;  but  these  were  not  constituted 
like  this.  Give  us  a  council  of  the  elders  of  the  Church,  as  the  trusted  leaders, 
deliberating  in  presence  of  their  brethren,  and  you  furnish  the  best  possible  instru- 
ment for  adjusting  difficulties,  allaying  jealousies,  maintaining  truth  and  peace. 
2.  The  debt  of  gratitude  due  to  those  men  who  settled  what  are  now  to  ns  dead 
controversies.  Tlie  questions  that  tormented  early  Christianity  are  nothing  now 
but  matters  of  remote  history.  Thsinks  to  the  men  who  refuted  these  heresies,  and 
above  all  to  the  Spirit  of  Truth  who  enabled  them  to  maintain  sound  doctrine  I 
The  question  of  circumcision  which  tro-.ibled  the  infancy  of  the  Church  so  much 
is  now  quite  dead.  But  we  should  remember  that  our  liberty  in  Christ  was  won 
only  hy  a  hard  struggle,  and  should  honour  the  men,  who  broke  down  the  claims 
oi  an  arrogant  Judaism.    But  even  this  decision  did  not  settle  the  question.    Bt< 


CHAP,  xv.]  THE  ACTS.  439 

Paul  had  still  to  fight  it  oat  in  almost  every  Church.  Thanks  to  him  most  of  all, 
and  then  to  other  Jewish  brethren  who  championed  our  freedom  from  a  Jewish 
yoke  I  (D.  Fraser,  D.D.)  The  assembly  at  Jerusalem  :  a  model : — I.  Its  occa- 
sion :  a  life  question  of  the  Church  (vers.  5,  11).  1.  Not  of  faith,  for  concerning 
that  there  was  no  dispute,  and  that  no  assembly  can  finally  decide.  2.  But  of  life, 
of  the  practical  application  of  the  incontestable  truths  of  faith  to  ecclesiastical 
ordinance  and  Christian  practice.  II.  Its  spikit — truly  evangelical.  A  spirit  of — 
1,  Truth,  depending  on  the  Word  of  God  and  Christian  experience.  2.  Love,  seek- 
ing not  its  own,  but  the  good  of  the  whole.  III.  Its  result — a  blessing  for  the 
Church.  1.  Progress  by  the  decisive  victory  over  antiquated  external  ordinances ; 
but — 2.  On  the  ground  of  steadfast  Christian  faith  and  love.  {K.  Gerok.)  The 
assembly  at  Jerusalem :  its  importance  : — I.  The  question  that  was  discussed  :  a 
question  concerning  salvation.  II.  The  spibit  in  which  it  was  discussed  :  a  spirit 
of  love  and  truth.  III.  The  rule  according  to  which  it  was  decided :  God's  testi- 
mony in  word  and  deed.  IV.  The  confession  which  lay  at  the  foundation  of  the 
resolution  determined  on  (ver.  11).  {Ibid.)  Law  and  gospel : — God  hath  written 
a  law  and  a  gospel :  the  law  to  humble  us,  and  the  gospel  to  raise  us  up ;  the  law 
to  convince  us  of  our  misery,  and  the  gospel  to  convince  us  of  His  mercy ;  the  law 
to  discover  sin,  and  the  gospel  to  discover  faith  and  Christ  {J.  Mason,  M.A.) 
Essentials  and  non-essentials : — A  gentleman  who  was  in  company  with  the  Rev. 
John  Newton  lamented  the  violent  disputes  that  often  take  place  among  Christiana 
respecting  the  non-essentials  of  Christianity,  and  particularly  Church  government. 
••  Many,"  he  said,  "  seem  to  give  their  chief  attention  to  such  topics,  and  take  more 
pleasure  in  talking  on  these  disputable  points  than  on  spiritual  religion,  the  love  of 
Christ,  and  the  privileges  of  His  people."  "  Sir,"  said  the  venerable  old  man, 
"  did  you  ever  see  a  whale  ship  ?  I  am  told  that  when  the  fish  is  struck  with  the 
harpoon,  and  feels  the  smart  of  the  wound,  it  sometimes  makes  for  the  boat,  and 
would  probably  dash  it  to  pieces.  To  prevent  this,  they  throw  a  cask  overboard, 
and  when  it  is  staved  to  pieces  they  throw  over  another.  Now,  sir,"  added  Mr. 
Newton,  "Church  government  is  the  tub  which  Satan  has  thrown  over  to  the  people 
of  whom  you  speak." 

Vers.  3-6.  They  therefore,  being  brought  on  thetr  way. — Working onthe  road  : — 
1.  For  a  little  time  the  noise  of  controversy  ceases.  Paul  and  Barnabas  might 
have  taken  a  much  shorter  way  to  Jerusalem ;  but  Paul,  like  the  Master,  always 
wished  to  do  some  work  on  the  way.  When  Christ  was  apparently  hastening  to  a 
particular  locality.  He  would  often  on  the  road  stop  to  do  some  intermediate 
miracle.  So  Paul  said,  ♦'  We  will  make  this  a  missionary  journey.  So  they 
passed  through  Phoenicia  and  Samaria — the  district  where  Philip  had  done  his 
wonderful  works.  We  should  aU  leave  footprints  behind  us ;  people  that  come 
afterwards  should  know  that  we  were  there  &:st.  2.  Follow  the  apostles.  They 
find  a  line  of  Churches  aU  the  way,  generally  speaking,  from  Antioch  to  Jerusalem. 
There  were  houses  of  call  on  the  road.  The  pioneer  had,  by  sacred  influence, 
said,  "  Other  and  stronger  men  will  be  coming  this  road  some  day — be  prepared  for 
them."  We,  too,  walk  on  roads  that  have  been  well  trodden  for  us.  We  take  the 
roads  of  a  country  as  a  matter  of  course.  Who  ever  thinks  of  roads,  or  could 
suppose  that  a  poet  could  wax  eloquent  upon  road-making  ?  Yet  even  so  common 
a  thing  as  a  road  is  essential  to  civilisation.  Surely  as  they  passed  along  Paul  and 
Barnabas  would  often  think  of  Philip,  and  would  often  hear  of  him  in  the  homes 
where  they  lodged.  It  is  pleasant  to  see,  in  little  wayside  houses,  the  pictures  of 
Wesley  and  Whitefield,  and  pastors  of  humbler  name,  who  have  lived  in  the 
locality.  These  pictures  are  texts.  Despise  not  your  forerunners.  3.  What  peeps 
we  get  into  the  domestic  life  of  the  time  1  The  two  men  coming  into  a  house 
turned  it  into  an  historical  temple.  There  are  some  visits  that  transfigure  the 
localities  in  which  they  are  paid.  And  the  little  common  feast,  and  the  sort  of 
talk  which  passes  between  men  and  unites  men's  hearts  I  Forget  not  the  little 
idylls  that  help  to  make  up  the  massive  poetry  of  great  histories.  There  were 
little  occasions,  as  well  as  great  ones,  in  the  development  of  the  Christian  story. 
Hand-grips,  and  special  prayers,  and  visits  to  the  sick  chamber,  where  the  tenderest 
of  all  supplications  were  breathed,  and  still  the  men  passed  on,  having  to  maintain 
a  valiant  and  historical  testimony  in  the  face  of  the  first  council  of  the  Christian 
Church.  4.  As  they  went  along  what  did  they  talk  about  ?  "  Declaring  the 
conversion  of  the  Gentiles."  There  ought  to  be  great  joy  when  soldiers  come  from 
the  field  of  war  with  the  latest  news.    We  soon  rough  down,  by  dumb  applause, 


430  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

the  stumbling  missionary  who  tries  to  tell  us  that  the  blood-red  banner  is  floating 
higher  than  ever  in  the  wind !  The  early  Christians  were  full  of  their  subject ;  Wf 
easily  slip  out  of  ours.  They  had  but  one  theme,  only  it  included  all  other  themes. 
They  took  pleasure  in  their  work ;  they  liked  Sunday  better  than  Monday — nay, 
they  made  Sunday  seven  days  long.  5.  In  ver.  4  note  that  the  Church  is  spoken 
of  in  its  unity.  We  have  made  it  into  a  thousand.  I  do  not  object  to  denomina- 
tions any  more  than  I  object  to  regiments ;  but  as  I  expect  all  the  regiments  to 
bow  to  one  throne,  so  I  would  expect  all  denominations  to  have  common  ground 
upon  which  they  can  have  a  common  altar.  Being  received  by  the  Church,  the  two 
speakers  stood  up  to  tell  their  tale.  Have  we  no  tale  to  teU  ?  If  a  thief  broke  into 
your  house,  you  would  teU  everybody  about  it.  If  your  house  was  on  fire,  all  the 
neighbourhood  would  know  it.  A  man  who  has  a  tale  to  tell  tells  it ;  and  he  is 
right  in  doing  so.  We  are  not  unwilling  to  speak,  but  we  have  no  story  to  relate. 
6.  Look  at  ver.  5.  The  contention  was  Pharisaic.  Not  many  of  them  believed, 
and  those  who  did  were  greater  opponents  as  believers  than  as  unbelievers.  There 
are  hinderers  in  the  Church  as  well  as  outside.  This  position  was  not  only 
Pharisaic,  it  was  founded  upon  a  narrow  reading  of  the  letter.  If  Christianity  is  a 
square  with  well-defined  walls,  there  are  men  who  could  stand  in  the  middle  of  it 
and  defend  it  bravely ;  but  if  Christianity  is  a  horizon  which  recedes  as  we 
advance,  and  which  has  room  enough  within  it  for  other  universes  tenfold  larger 
than  our  own,  they  become  bemldered,  the  letter  is  of  Uttle  use  to  them,  and  so 
they  make  four  corners  for  themselves,  and  subside  within  the  prison  of  a  creed. 
It  is  difficult  for  some  men  to  see  the  bud  in  the  seed.  Christianity  has  its  blossom 
as  well  as  its  root,  its  fruit  as  well  as  its  blossom.  The  type  only  lives  by  its  little 
self  until  the  fulfilment  comes,  and  then  it  passes  away.  They  who  upheld  the 
law  of  Moses  were  Pharisees.  How  marvellous  the  providence  that  a  Pharisee  of 
the  Pharisees  was  sent  to  answer  them  1  They  would  have  made  short  work  of 
other  men,  but  there  arose  a  very  prince  of  the  blood,  and  in  his  presence  they 
met  an  unexpected  and  successful  check.  A  man  who  knows  a  smattering  of 
a  language  may  astound  the  villagers  who  never  heard  of  it  ;  but  let  a  man  arise 
who  knows  the  language  perfectly,  and  then  the  blatant  pretender  will  fall  away  in 
shame.  God  grows  His  own  men,  and  will  always  find  His  own  champions.  Let 
us  rest  in  the  God  of  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  never  be  in  want  of  a  man  of 
adequate  capacity  and  needful  eloquence  to  show  its  grandeur  and  enforce  its 
claims.     (J".  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7-11.    And  when  there  had  been  much  disputing-,  Peter  rose  up. — PeterU 

speech  : — Mark — I.  The  time  when  Peter  spoke.  "  When  there  had  been  much 
disputing."  That  was  the  critical  moment.  Speeches  acquire  force  from  the 
time  at  which  they  are  delivered.  Wise  men  keep  back  as  long  as  possible. 
Thus  their  wisdom  goes  for  twice  the  value  which  it  would  be  appraised  at  did 
they  speak  earlier  in  the  discussion.  Many  a  man  who  is  not  of  first-rate 
ability  allows  all  the  ready  tongues  to  talk  first,  to  relieve  their  feelings,  to  show 
their  weak  ability,  and  to  secure  what  noise,  mistakenly  called  applause,  they 
can.  Then  when  the  assembly  has  fatigued  itself,  and  would  be  only  too  thank- 
ful for  a  deliverance  from  the  wordy  confusion,  he  rises,  puts  together  the 
different  opinions,  finds  the  middle  line,  and  invites  the  controversiaUsts  to  join 
along  that  line  of  compromise.  They  hail  him  as  a  Daniel,  though  Daniel  he  is 
nonel  He  came  in  at  the  right  time.  This  is  the  way  in  all  great  assemblies. 
Peter,  then,  is  growing  in  grace  and  knowledge.  There  was  a  time  when  he 
would  have  been  heard  first.  Now  that  he  has  waited  until  there  has  "  been 
much  disputing,"  he  will  make  his  noblest  speech.  II.  Peter  kept  to  facts. 
Over  some  ground  we  walk  very  daintily,  because  we  are  not  quite  sure  of  it; 
but  Peter  walks  upon  solid  rock.  "  Men  and  brethren,  ye  know  this  is  not  a 
question  of  a  speculative  kind ;  I  wiU  ask  you  to  walk  with  me  over  a  road 
macadamised  with  facts."  As  Christian  men,  we  might  have  gone  farther  upon 
our  journey  if  we  had  not  tried  to  cut  it  short  by  crossing  bogs  and  swamps. 
The  longest  way  about  is  often  the  shortest  way  home.  How  does  Peter  come 
to  speak  this  new  language  ?  He  has  been  in  conference  with  Paul.  Privately 
Paul  has  bad  interviews  with  them  "which  were  of  reputation."  There  are 
private  processes  of  education  going  on  in  every  life  and  in  every  house.  We 
feel  that  Peter  has  touched  the  man  to  whom  we  owe  doctrinal  Christianity  t 
He  was  an  apt  scholar.  Keep  company  with  the  wise  if  you  would  grow  in 
wisdom.     III.    In  r£TEB's  speech   ion   have  a   whole  systeu  of  Divwitt.     I 


OHAP.  XT.l  THE  ACTS.  431 

know  of  nothing  outside  this  deliverance.  Here  you  have — 1.  The  Trinity — 
"  God,"  "  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  "  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  Trinity  must 
assert  itself ;  it  does  not  ask  to  be  proved.  2.  Divine  sovereignty.  "  God  made 
choice."  "God  gave  them  the  Holy  Ghost."  "God  put  no  difference  between 
as  and  them."  3.  The  whole  scheme  of  Judaism.  A  yoke  which  could  not  be 
borne,  but  needful  at  the  time.  We  must  have  chafing  before  we  can  have 
rest.  God  must  show  us  what  the  law  really  is  in  all  its  details  and  tyrannous 
demand,  before  we  cry  out  for  mercy,  pity,  and  grace.  4.  Salvation  by  grace 
(ver.  11).  IV.  Petbb  surpasses  himself  in  the  bbeadth  of  his  Cheistian 
PHTLOSOFHY.  1.  He  must  have  in  all  his  thinking  as  its  vital  point  Divine 
action.  In  fact,  he  says,  "  Men  and  brethren,  this  is  a  question  that  involves 
the  Divine  sovereignty  ;  that  being  so,  I  start  with  this  fact,  that  I  went  to 
the  Gentiles  against  my  convictions,  my  prejudice,  my  inchnations ;  but  the  law 
of  gravitation  drew  me;  it  was  God  that  inspired  and  directed  me."  The 
reason  why  we  have  so  many  superficial  theories  of  life  is  that  men  exclude 
Divine  action.  It  is  not  evolution  that  perplexes  me,  but  creation;  and  I  find 
no  fuller  answer  than  "  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth."  And  so  in  the 
evolution  of  circumstances,  the  development  of  spiritual  and  moral  history,  I 
cannot  consent  to  begin  at  some  point  indicated  by  a  creature  as  limited  as  myself. 
Here,  again,  I  say,  "  My  difficulty  is  not  with  evolution,  but  with  creation ;  and  to 
that  difficulty  I  find  no  answer  so  commanding,  so  gracious,  as,  'Men  and 
brethren,  ye  know  that  a  good  while  ago — God.'  "  All  the  chapters  of  the  Bible 
are  hewed  out  of  the  quarry  of  its  first  verse  1  2.  Then  Peter  gives  us  a  doctrine 
which  has  become  commonplace  to  as;  as  uttered  from  his  mouth  it  was  a 
miracle.  "And  put  no  difference  or  distinction  between  us  and  them."  We 
ourselves  being  the  Gentiles  received  into  the  great  Abrahamic  circle,  do  not  feel 
the  value  of  the  inclusion  as  we  ought  to  do ;  but  the  men  who  were  inside  that 
enclosure,  and  thought  they  completed  its  circumference,  when  they  saw  a  rent 
made  in  the  circle  of  the  covenant,  and  hordes  of  ancircumcised  Gentiles  coming 
in,  were  appalled  and  disgusted.  What  could  you  say  to  such  men  ?  Could  you 
propose  a  theory  of  social  evolution  to  them  ?  They  would  have  burned  you  with 
their  angry  glances  I  Peter  went  right  into  the  broken  circle,  and  said,  "  Ye  know 
that  a  good  while  ago — God  1  "  There  are  times  when  we  must  gather  up  our 
whole  enthusiasm  and  reasoning  and  hope  into  the  Divine  name,  and  hurl  it,  like 
an  infinite  thunderbolt,  against  all  the  petty  action  and  conceit  of  a  narrow- 
minded  age.  Think  of  a  Jew  acknowledging  that  God  put  no  distinction  between 
himself  and  a  barbarian!  You  do  not  wonder  that  Peter  should  afterwards 
write :  "  Grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  3.  And 
then  how  broad  again  his  philosophy  becomes  when  he  says,  "  Why  tempt  ye 
God  ?  "  This  urging  of  the  law  beyond  its  intended  province  is  a  temptation  of 
■Qod.  This  is  not  obedience ;  not  homage  ;  it  is  temptation.  Even  Divine 
ordinances  are  not  to  be  thrust  beyond  Divine  boundaries.  Paul  himself  never 
made  a  grander  speech.  How  singularly  and  wondrously  God  trains  one  man 
until  he  is  almost  another  I    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  God,  which  knoweth  the  hearts,  bare  them  witness.  —  Ood'$ 
Bovereignty : — It  is  the  sovereign's  stamp  which  settles  the  question  as  to  the 
right  of  a  coin  to  be  counted  current  among  loyal  subjects  of  that  sovereign. 
When  God  puts  His  stamp  of  approval  on  a  man,  or  on  a  woman,  or  on  a  move- 
ment, that  fact  ought  to  weigh  beyond  any  individual  opinion  as  to  the  original 
propriety  of  such  an  approval.  It  may  seem  to  us  that  the  elder  and  more  im- 
posing Eliab  is  far  better  suited  to  the  kingship  than  the  youthful  rustic  David  ; 
but  when  God  decides  in  favour  of  the  latter,  it  is  time  for  us  to  reverse  our 
opinion  on  this  point.  So,  also,  as  to  preachers  and  methods  of  preaching,  as  to 
denominational  pecuharities  and  modes  of  working,  as  to  special  agents  and 
agencies  in  Christian  endeavour ;  not  what  we  thought  God  would  approve,  but 
what  we  find  God  has  approved,  ought  to  weigh  most  with  us  in  deciding  the 
question  of  our  accepting  or  behttling  that  instrumentality  or  undertaking. 
Gamaliel's  warning  is  as  timely  for  our  day  as  it  was  for  his,  in  many  a  matter  of 
treating  Christian  work  and  Christian  workers.  In  opposing  those  who  claim  to 
stand  for  God,  while  they  differ  with  us,  we  may  "  be  found  to  be  fighting  against 
God."  (fl.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  Puri^sring  their  hearts  by  faixrx.— Purity  of 
heart : — I.  Its  nature.  1.  By  the  "  heart "  we  must  understand  the  inner,  as 
opposed  to  the  outer,  man — the  spirit  and  not  the  flesh.    Circumcision — indeed 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  icKAi.  XT, 

any  external  ceremony,  even  Christian  baptism  can  only  affect  the  outer  man. 
The  text,  therefore,  in  opposition  to  mere  ceremonial  purity  speaks  of  purity  of 
heart.  2.  It  is  implied  that  the  heart  of  man  is  by  nature  impure  (Rom.  i.  28-32). 
Perish  then  the  delusion  that  the  human  heart  is  good  1  8.  It  is  to  the  purification 
of  the  heart  that  the  text  calls  attention.  Things  are  commonly  said  to  be  pure 
when  they  are  simple  and  unmixed ;  and  purity  of  heart  implies  sincerity  and 
simplicity,  as  opposed  to  the  base  mixtures  of  hypocrisy  and  deceit.  The  work  of 
Christian  purity  is  commenced  in  regeneration.  There  is  "  a  new  creation :  old 
things  are  passed  away ;  behold  all  things  are  become  new."  There  are  new 
views,  principles,  feehngs.  But  these  things  are  at  first  immature  (1  John  ii.  13). 
The  law  of  progress  is  stamped  on  the  whole  economy  of  Christianity.  Perfect 
purity  is  the  goal  at  which  it  aims.  This  implies — (1)  A  complete  deliverance 
from  sin — its  pollution  and  power.  This  is  obviously  implied  in  the  word 
"  pure."  And  here  arises  the  difficulty,  whether  a  perfectly  pure  state  of  heart  is 
possible  in  the  present  life.  Many  contend  only  for  the  subjugation  of  sin,  and 
not  for  its  destruction,  affirming  that  whilst  the  spirit  remains  in  the  flesh  sin 
must  remain  in  the  spirit.  But  this  is  to  ascribe  some  moral  power  to  the  flesh 
which  it  does  not  possess  ;  sin  is  spiritual  (Mark  vii.  21,  22).  Now  Divine  grace 
either  can  or  cannot  counteract  this  fearful  state  of  things.  It  it  cannot,  then  the 
work  of  human  redemption,  professedly  effected  by  the  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  was  inadequate.  But  if  the  grace  of  God  can  counteract  the  influence 
of  sin,  the  question  is  settled.  "For  this  purpose  the  Son  of  God  was  mani- 
fested, that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  "  Christ  loved  the  Church 
.  .  .  that  He  might  present  it  to  Himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ;  but  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish.'* 
•'  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  But,  say  some,  the  work 
cannot  be  completed  till  death.  Now,  if  this  mean  by  death,  it  destroys  itself, 
for  death  is  an  enemy  whose  office  is  simply  to  separate  the  soul  from  the  body ;  if 
it  mean  at  death,  it  may  soon  be  exposed — for  if  Divine  grace  can  purify  the  heart 
a  moment  before  death,  why  not  an  hour?  why  not  a  month?  why  not  a  year f 
why  not  twenty,  or  even  fifty  years  ?  why  not  now  ?  (2)  And  because  all  sin  is 
destroyed,  love  fills  the  heart.  Hence  obedience  results  from  purity ;  "  this  is  the 
love  of  God,  that  we  keep  His  commandments."  Every  spring  of  feeUng,  and  all 
the  arcana  of  thought  are  sanctified  by  its  magic  touch.  The  wandering  eye,  the 
listening  ear,  the  loquacious  tongue,  the  busy  bands,  the  willing  feet  are  all  actuated 
by  the  ruling  principle  of  love  to  God.  II.  Its  Adthob.  •'  The  Holy  Ghost,"  as 
Peter  elsewhere  says.  "  Ye  have  purified  your  souls  in  obeying  the  truth  through 
the  Spirit,"  The  Holy  Spirit  first  convinces  of  the  necessity  of  purity  ;  for  it  is  by 
His  inward  illumination  that  we  discover  the  corrupt  state  of  the  heart.  If  we 
welcome  this  discovery  we  shall  sorrow  for  and  hate  this  indwelling  sin.  The 
same  Spirit  will  create  a  strong  desire  for  deUverance,  which  if  cherished  will 
express  itself  in  earnest,  wrestling  prayer.  This  will  be  followed  by  the  encourag- 
ing excitement  of  humble  hope,  and  the  fihal  confidence  that  the  desire  shall  be 
granted.  Whoever  thus  co-operates  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Divine  Author  of 
purity  of  heart,  will  eventually  be  brought  to  the  exercise  of  that  faith  which  casts 
out  sin  and  purifies  the  heart.  The  reason  that  so  few  Christians  obtain  this  great 
salvation  will  now  be  manifest.  They  do  not  obey  the  truth,  whereas  the  law  of 
the  Spirit  is  that  we  are  sanctified  through  the  truth.  "  Ye  have  purified  your 
Bouls,  in  obeying  the  truth  through  the  Spirit."  HI.  Its  sieans.  "  By  faith." 
All  salvation  is  obtained  by  faith.  1.  Its  warrant  is  the  promises  (see  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  25-29 ;  Deut.  xxx.  6 ;  2  Cor,  vi.  16).  These  are  the  behever's  fulcrum. 
They  do  actually  supply  to  him  what  Archimedes  once  boasted  as  his  only 
deficiency  to  rival  Omnipotence.  "  Give  me  a  place  on  which  to  stand  and  I 
will  move  the  world."  But  the  promises  of  God  supply  the  believer  with  a 
fulcrum  by  which  he  may  move  both  earth  and  heaven.  2,  The  object  of 
faith  is  the  "precious  blood"  of  Christ  (Acts  xxvi,  17,  18),  IV.  Its  scope.  It 
is  offered  to  all.  Whatever  differences  or  distinctions  men  may  make,  God  makes 
none.  There  is  no  difference  with  respect  to — 1.  Our  need  of  this  great  change. 
Throughout  the  world  human  nature  is  the  same.  "  There  is  none  righteous,  no, 
not  one."  2.  The  mode  of  purification.  lu  every  case  it  is  by  faith.  (H.  J.  Booth.) 
Faith  purifying  the  heart  from — I.  Pride.  1.  This  is  setting  up  the  honour  of 
self  above  the  honour  of  God,  It  is  self  worship,  and  refuses  to  recognise  any 
rigbteousness  but  self-righteousness.  2.  What  is  the  very  prime  object  of  faith? 
What  do  I  receive  into  my  heart  if  I  realise  Christ's  work  for  me  ?     Is  it  not  this. 


CHAP.  XV.]  .  THE  ACTS,  439 

that  the  mighty  God,  He  who  is  greater  than  the  greatest,  higher  than  the  highest, 
laid  aside  all  His  glory,  and  came  down  into  the  very  depth  of  humiliation  for  me  ? 
If  I  hve  Christ,  how  can  I  worship  self  ?  When  faith  has  once  entered,  what  room 
is  there  for  pride  ?  Where  is  the  boasted  glory  of  man  before  the  Eternal  Word, 
who  became  flesh,  and  by  the  very  hiding  of  His  glory  uNanifested  it — through  His 
humiliation  entered  into  His  exaltation  ?  Where  is  human  merit,  when  once  the 
fulness  of  the  rich  stream  of  God's  unmerited  grace  is  shed  over  the  soul  ?  No  ; 
the  life  of  faith  is  the  death  of  pride.  3.  But  does  faith  substitute  nothing  for  self 
thus  dethroned  ?  Far  from  this.  With  the  sense  of  a  man's  own  worthlessness 
comes  the  sense  of  his  Kedeemer's  worth — comes  love  to  God,  the  true  answer  and 
return  of  God's  love  to  him.  This  last,  faith  apprehends ;  that  other,  faith 
renders.  The  humility  of  those  who  are  born  of  the  Spirit  is  exactly  in  proportion 
to  their  appropriation  of  the  work  of  Christ.  As  He  increases  in  a  man's  esteem, 
self  decreases.  And  thus  humility  is  the  true  work  of  faith.  II.  Covetousness — 
the  inordinate  valuing  of  created  objects — the  esteeming  self  not  by  self  alone,  but 
by  the  things  wherewith  self  is  surrounded  and  enriched.  1.  We  have  in  man  all 
degrees  of  this  sin,  from  the  ambition  which  grasps  empires  to  the  miserly  greed 
which  hoards  the  farthing.  And  the  secret  of  the  sin  is  the  same  throughout  all — 
the  creature,  not  the  Creator ;  my  own  possessions,  not  God's  gifts  ;  my  position, 
my  promotion,  my  increased  income — not  my  stewardship  before  Qod ;  it  is  in 
every  case  a  direct  consequence  of  the  substitution  of  self  for  Hin^i.  2.  And  in 
every  case  faith  in  Christ  is  as  directly  opposed  to  it.  If  my  inoft  regards  are 
really  fixed  on  Him  who  gave  all  He  had,  yea.  Himself,  for  me,  where  is  there  room 
in  me  for  covetous  desires  ?  Will  not  he  whose  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God  be 
laying  up  treasures  in  heaven  rather  than  on  earth — be  enriching  his  home  rather 
than  his  tent  in  the  wilderness  ?  III.  Self-indulgence — the  love  of  pleasure — the 
inordinate  valuing  of  our  own  delights  in  created  objects.  How  does  faith  deal 
with  this  all  but  universal  tendency  ?  Who  is  its  object  ?  Is  it  not  He  who  has 
solemnly  told  us  that  none  can  be  His  disciple  without  daily  self-denial  ?  Can  a 
man  be  justified  by  faith  in  Him  and  disregard  these  His  words?  Understand  me : 
the  Christian  who  lives  by  faith  in  Christ  can  and  does  enjoy  life  in  the  best  and 
highest  sense ;  but  he  cannot  be  a  seeker  of  pleasure — cannot  surrender  his  noble 
privilege  of  self-denial  for  the  bondage  in  which  he  sees  the  children  of  the  world 
fettered.  {Dean  Alford.)  Faith  purifying  the  heart : — Peter  was  enabled  through 
his  experience  to  answer  those  who  said  that  unless  a  man  was  circumcised  he 
could  not  be  saved.  There  is  nothing  like  practical  work  for  Christ  to  teach  us 
Christ's  truth.  For  the  most  part  heretics  are  a  set  of  theorisers.  They  do 
nothing,  and  then  criticise  those  who  are  doing  hard  and  successful  service.  Give 
a  man  practical  work  for  Jesus  and  keep  him  at  it,  and  he  will,  Uke  Peter,  learn  as 
he  goes  on,  and,  Uke  a  river,  filter  as  he  flows.  Peter  could  not  continue  to  believe 
in  restricting  the  gospel  to  the  Jews  after  the  conversion  of  Cornelius.  His  actual 
service  refined  his  theory.  If  those  who  ruled  botanical  science  never  saw  a  flower, 
would  you  wonder  if  they  ran  into  gross  heterodoxies  of  belief  ?  Let  us  consider 
^e  point  upon  which  Peter's  argument  depeuds.  I.  The  agent  of  heaet  purifica- 
tion— faith.  Th-)re  was  nothing  but  faith  in  the  case  of  Cornelius,  faith  born  of 
bearing,  and  res'ing  alone  on  Jesus.  1.  Faith  purified  directly,  not  by  month  after 
month  of  conte' aplation ;  for,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  circumcised  believers,  the 
Holy  Ghost  fe'i  upon  them  there  and  then.  2.  Water  baptism  did  not  aid  therein. 
The  Lord  wiU  not  permit  us  to  mix  up  even  His  own  ordinances  with  the  work  of 
His  Spirit  in  purifying  the  heart  by  faith  alone,  and  God  forbid  we  ever  should  fall 
into  such  an  error.  3.  Do  not,  then,  be  looking  for  pure  hearts  within  yourselves 
before  you  r  ome  to  Christ  by  faith.  Do  not  look  for  the  fruits  before  you  have  the 
roots,  but  look  by  faith  to  the  great  Purifier,  however  impure  you  feel  your  heart  tO' 
be.  II.  The  secret  of  its  power.  Believing  other  things  does  not  purify  the- 
soul;  why  does  believing  the  gospel?  I  answer,  because — 1.  God  works  by  it 
(ver.  8).  You  know  the  old  story  of  the  sword  of  Scanderbeg,  with  which  he  used 
to  cleave  men  in  twain  from  the  crown  of  the  head  downwards.  As  one  looked  at 
it  he  declared  that  he  saw  nothing  ahout  it  to  make  it  so  fatal  a  weapon  ;  but  the 
other  replied,  "  You  should  have  seen  the  arm  which  was  wont  to  wield  it."  Now 
faith  looked  at  of  itself  appears  to  be  contemptible ;  but  who  shall  resist  the  ever- 
lasting Arm  that  wields  it  ?  This  greater  than  Hercules  careth  little  for  the  weak- 
ness of  the  instrument ;  but,  behold.  He  cleanseth  the  Augean  stable  of  our  nature 
with  no  other  agency  than  childlike  faith.  2.  God  is  at  work  in  the  lieart  by  His 
Holy  Spirit.  Now,  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  as  a  heavenly  fire  to  consume  sin,  as  ft 
VOL.  II  28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt- 

flowing  Btream  to  cleanse  away  evil,  and  as  a  rushing  mighty  wind  to  chase  away 
all  that  is  foul  and  polluted  in  the  stagnant  air  of  the  soul.  The  Holy  Spirit  ia 
the  Spirit  of  holiness,  and  as  He  always  dwells  with  faith,  being  itp  Author,  its 
Strengthener  and  Guardian,  where  faith  comes  the  heart  will  speedily  be  purified. 
III.  The  beat  of  its  action — the  heart.  Faith  changes  the  current  of  our  love, 
and  alters  the  motive  which  sways  us :  this  is  what  is  meant  by  purifying  the 
heart.  It  makes  us  love  that  which  is  good  and  right,  and  moves  us  with  motives 
free  from  self  and  sin :  this  is  a  great  work  indeed.  Hence  the  change  which  faith 
produces  is — 1.  Badical  and  deep.  It  is  a  small  matter  to  wash  the  outside  of  the 
cup  and  of  the  platter.  2.  Thorough  and  complete.  "  Eend  your  hearts  and  not 
your  garments."  Faith  lays  the  axe  at  the  root,  and  heals  the  stream  at  the 
fountain  head.  3.  Operative  throughout  the  whole  life.  A  diseased  heart  meana 
a  sickly  man  all  over.  Neither  can  you  have  the  heart  right  without  its  telling 
upon  the  entire  nature.  4.  Permanent.  Restrain  appetites  which  still  remain, 
and  the  dog  returns  to  his  vomit ;  purify  externals  and  leave  the  nature  untouched, 
and  the  sow  that  was  washed  goes  back  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire.  6.  Accept- 
able with  God,  who  searcheth  the  heart.  Man  judgeth  according  to  the  outward 
appearance,  but  God  looketh  at  the  heart.  IV.  Thb  modk  of  its  operation. 
1.  Faith  believes  in  sin  as  sin,  and  sees  the  horror  of  it  as  an  offence  against  a 
holy  and  gracious  God.  2.  Faith  delights  to  set  Christ  before  the  heart  and  to 
make  it  gaze  upon  His  side  pierced  by  sin,  and  therefore  hates  the  sin  which  slew 
its  best  Friend.  3.  Faith  delighteth  much  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  and  therefore 
she  sets  before  the  soul  His  incomparable  loveliness,  as  the  weU-beloved  of  saints. 
Thus  is  enkindled  a  vehement  flame  of  love  to  Him,  and  this  becomes  a  powerful 
purifier,  for  you  cannot  love  Christ  and  love  sin.  4.  Faith  has  a  wonderful  art  of 
realising  her  gracious  privileges.  What  manner  of  persons  then  ought  you  to  be  ? 
6.  Faith  has  yet  further  a  wondrous  power  of  bringing  near  the  things  to  come. 
What  could  more  effectually  purify  the  heart  than  the  vision  of  heaven  which  faith 
presents  to  us  ?  6.  Power  is  gained  by  faith  through  pleading  the  promises  of  God. 
"  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under 
grace. "  7.  Faith  daringly  lays  hold  upon  the  power  of  God  Himself.  How  she 
smites  the  Philistines  thenl  8.  Faith  brings  us  real  power  to  conquer  sin  by 
applying  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  blood  of  Jesus  is  the  life  of  faith  and  the  death 
of  sin.  All  the  saints  overcome  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  9.  Faith  gives  ua 
power  against  sin  by  mixing  herself  with  all  gospel  ordinances — with  hearing,  com- 
munions,  prayer,  Bible  study.  Faith  will  enable  you  to  draw  nourishment  out  of 
ordinances,  and  make  you  vigorous  against  siiu  10.  Faith  rouses  the  new  man  to 
intense  resistance  of  sin.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  11.  We  believe  that  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  shall 

he  saved, — The  Christian's  creed : — A  confession — I.  Of  penitence,  which  rests  on 
a  clear  consciousness  of  sin.  II.  Of  HUMiLin,  which  attests  the  demerits  of  good 
works.  IH.  Of  faith,  which  has  recognised  the  riches  of  God's  love  in  Christ. 
IV.  Of  joy,  which  is  founded  on  the  peace  of  a  pardoned  heart.  {Leonhardi  and 
Spiegelhauer.)  Salvation  by  grace: — Consider — L  The  peouliab  blessing  or 
THE  oosPEL.  Salvation.  This  implies  a  bondage,  in  which  the  whole  human  race 
is  involved.  Not  content  with  its  sway  in  this  world,  sin  pursues  the  sinner  even 
beyond  the  grave.  •'  All  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  In  the 
midst  of  this  universal  corruption,  the  voice  of  the  Eternal,  re-echoed  by  the 
sinner's  conscience,  rolls — •'  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  "  Cursed  is  every 
one  that  continneth  not  in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do 
them."  Is  not  this  a  yoke  from  which  deliverance  is  essential  ?  Yes  1  and  from 
this  the  gospel  proclaims  deliverance:  "  Christ  has  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of 
the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us  " ;  and  His  disciples  are  emancipated,  not  only 
from  the  guilt,  but  also  from  the  power  of  sin.  II.  The  channel  thbodoh  which 
THIS  BLESSiNO  IS  CONVEYED.  "  Thiough  the  gracc  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Salvation  is  not  the  reward  of  merit,  but  the  gift  of  grace ;  not  the  purchase  of 
man's  desert,  but  the  unearned  bounty  of  God's  free  favour.  As  it  is  freely  offered, 
BO  must  it  be  freely  accepted.  No  unbelieving  doubts  and  hesitation  on  account  of 
the  magnitude  of  the  gift  and  our  own  unworthiness  to  receive  it ;  no  Pharisaical 
Btanding-out  upon  conditions  which,  if  required,  could  never  be  fulfilled ;  but  a 
humbling  cause  of  our  own  unworthiness,  coupled  with  a  grateful  sense  of  Gt^'i 
undeserved  mercy.  Free  grace  shines  conspicuous  throughout  the  whole  plan  of 
man's  salvation.    It  was  grace  that  planned  the  remedy  ere  yet  the  diseaae  WM 


•HIP.  XV.]  THE  ACTS.  435 

felt ;  it  is  grace  that  renders  that  remedy  effectual.  The  Church  was  hewn  out  by 
grace,  and  by  grace  aU  its  members  are,  as  lively  stones,  buUt  into  a  spiritual 
temple ;  and  when  the  whole  edifice  shall  be  perfected,  the  Head-stone  thereof  shall 
be  brought  forth  with  shoutings,  crying  "  Grace  1  grace  1 "  unto  it.  Unhumbled 
men  will  doubtless  be  offended  at  this,  and  rejecting  salvation  as  a  gift,  wiU 
endeavour  to  earn  it  as  a  reward  by  seeking  to  establish  some  distinction  between 
themselves  and  more  vulgar  sinners ;  but  this  is  aU  labour  in  vain.  It  has  pleased 
God  to  pronounce,  on  the  one  hand,  that  "  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no 
flesh  be  justified  in  His  sight " ;  and  on  the  other,  that  man  is  "  saved  by  grace 
through  faith."  Salvation  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only 
salvation  recognised  in  the  Bible ;  the  only  salvation  that  will  either  exalt  the 
holiness,  vindicate  the  justice,  and  magnify  the  mercy  of  God,  or  speak  peace  to 
the  sinner's  conscience  and  assure  him  of  acceptance  with  God.  Such,  then,  is  the 
peculiar  blessing  of  the  gospel.  A  salvation  altogether  of  grace,  decreed  by  the 
^ace  of  God  the  Father,  wrought  out  by  the  grace  of  God  the  Son,  and  apphed  and 
rendered  effectual  by  the  grace  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  UI.  The  extent  to  which 
THIS  BLESSED  SALVATION  BEACHES.  "We  shaU  be  savcd,  even  as  they."  There  la 
no  longer  any  distinction  between  Jew  and  GentUe ;  but  "  the  same  Lord  over  all 
is  rich  unto  all  that  caU  upon  Him."  Our  commission,  as  ministers  of  the  gospel, 
is  as  extensive  as  the  globe  on  which  we  hve.  And  this  is  true  also  of  the  various 
degrees  of  affliction  and  of  crime.  {W.  Le  Poer  Trench,  B.D.)  Grace — the  one 
way  of  salvation : — Consider  the  text  as — I.  An  apostolical  confession  of  faith. 
•'  We  believe."  We  wiU  caU  it  the  "  Apostle's  Creed,"  and  it  has  quite  as  clear  a 
right  to  that  title  as  that  which  goes  by  the  name.  1.  The  apostle  did  not  beUeve 
in — (1)  Rituahsm.  All  his  testimony  is  concerning  the  grace  of  Christ.  He  saya 
nothing  whatever  about  ordinances,  ceremonies ;  and  those  are  the  true  successors 
of  the  apostles  who  teach  you  that  you  are  to  be  saved  through  the  free  mercy  of 
<3k>d.  (2)  Self-righteousness.  Peter  did  not  say,  "  We  beUeve  that  through  doing 
our  best  we  shall  be  saved  like  other  people,"  nor  even  "  that  if  we  act  according  to 
our  light,  God  will  accept  that  little  light  for  what  it  was."  If  we  are  ever  saved 
a,t  aU  we  must  be  saved  gratis,  not  by  wages ;  by  God's  love,  not  by  our  own  merits. 
Those  who  preach  mere  moraUty,  or  set  up  any  way  except  this,  preach  another 
gospel,  and  they  shall  be  accursed,  even  though  they  preach  it  with  an  angel's 
eloquence.  (3)  Salvation  by  the  natural  force  of  free  wQl.  He  takes  the  crown 
from  off  the  head  of  man  in  all  respects,  and  gives  aU  glory  to  the  grace  of  God. 
2.  Take  this  creed  to  pieces.  It  implies  the  doctrine  of — (1)  Human  ruin.  Peter 
«aw  this  most  clearly,  or  he  would  not  have  been  so  expUcit  upon  man's  salvation. 
(2)  The  atonement.  What  does  the  apostle  mean  but  the  grace  which  came  from 
the  Cross  of  the  Saviour  ?  What  the  sun  is  to  the  heavens,  that  the  doctrine  of  a 
vicarious  satisfaction  is  to  theology.  Take  away  the  cleansing  blood,  and  what  is 
left  to  the  guilty  ?  H.  The  convebted  moral  man's  statement.  A  company  of 
Jews  have  assembled  to  discuss  a  certain  matter,  and  some  of  them  say,  "  Well, 
perhaps  these  Gentile  dogs  may  be  saved ;  yes,  Christ  told  us  to  go  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature ;  therefore,  no  doubt,  He  must  have  included  them — we  do 
not  like  them,  though,  and  must  keep  them  as  much  under  our  rules  and  regula- 
tions as  we  can ;  we  must  compel  them  to  be  circumcised."  Now,  you  expect  to 
hear  Peter  say,  "  Why,  these  *  Gentile  dogs,'  as  you  call  them,  can  be  saved,  even 
as  you."  No  ;  he  turns  the  tables,  and  says,  "  We  beUeve  that  you  may  be  saved, 
even  as  they."  It  was  just  as  if  you  should  say, "  We  believe  that  a  drunkard,  &c., 
may  be  saved,"  and  I  respond,  *•  You  may  be  saved  even  as  these."  What  a  rebuke 
that  would  be  I  This  is  precisely  what  Peter  meant.  1.  Now,  some  of  us  were 
favoured  with  Christian  parents,  and  consequently  never  did  know  a  great  deal  of 
■the  Bin  into  which  others  have  fallen.  This  is  cause  for  great  thankfulness  ;  but 
if  you  ever  are  saved,  you  wiU  have  to  be  saved  in  the  same  way  as  those  who  have 
been  permitted  to  plunge  into  the  most  outrageous  sin.  In  this  respect  we  are  all 
alike ;  we  are  bom  in  sin,  and  alike  are  we  dead  by  nature  in  trespasses  and  sins, 
heirs  of  wrath,  even  as  others.  2.  Moreover,  the  method  of  pardon  is  the  same  in 
all  cases.  I  never  heard  of  but  one  "  fountain  filled  with  blood,  drawn  from 
Immanuel's  veins."  That  fountain  is  for  the  dying  thief  as  much  as  for  you,  and 
for  you  as  much  as  for  him.  HI.  Thb  confession  of  the  obeat  odtwabd  sinneb 
"WHEN  CONVEBTED.  Now,  I  wiU  speak  for  you.  We  shall  be  saved,  even  as  the  best 
are  saved.  1.  Yonder  sits  a  very  poor  beUever.  Now,  do  you  expect  that  when 
you  get  to  heaven  you  will  be  placed  in  a  comer  as  a  pauper  pensioner  ?  "  Oh, 
no  I  "  you  say,  "  we  shall  leave  our  poverty  when  we  get  lo  glory."    Some  of  our 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tv^ 

friends  sure  rich,  but  we  believe  that  we  shall  be  saved,  even  as  they.  2.  Others  of 
you  are  poor  in  useful  talent.  You  cannot  preach,  or  conduct  a  prayer  meeting,  &c. 
"Well,  do  you  expect  that  the  Lord  Jesus  will  give  you  a  second-hand  robe  to  wear 
at  His  wedding  feast,  and  serve  you  from  cold  and  inferior  dishes?  "Oh,  no  I 
Some  of  our  brethren  have  great  talents,  and  we  are  glad  that  they  have ;  but  we 
believe  that  we  shall  be  saved,  even  as  they."  3.  Most  likely  there  is  some 
doubting  brother  here — Mr.  Much-afraid,  or  Mr.  Little-faith ;  but,  how  is  your 
heart  ?  Do  you  believe  that  you  wiU  be  put  off  with  a  second-rate  salvation — will 
be  admitted  by  the  back  door  into  heaven  ?  ♦♦  Oh,  no  1  "  say  you  ;  "  I  am  the 
weakest  lamb  in  Jesus'  fold  ;  but  I  beUeve  that  I  shall  be  saved,  even  as  they  who 
are  the  strongest  in  grace."  4.  I  wiU  suppose  that  there  has  been  a  work  of  grace 
in  a  prison.  There  are  half  a  dozen  villains  there,  but  the  grace  of  God  has  made 
new  men  of  them ;  and,  if  they  understood  the  text,  as  they  looked  across  the  room 
and  saw  half  a  dozen  apostles,  they  might  say,  "  We  believe  that  through  the 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  shall  be  saved,  even  as  those  apostles  are." 
5.  I  will  select  the  three  Marys  whom  Jesus  loved  and  who  loved  Jesus. 
These  holy  women,  we  believe,  will  be  saved.  But  I  will  suppose  that  I  go 
to  one  of  our  Refuges,  and  there  are  three  girls  there  who  were  once  of  evil 
fame :  the  grace  of  God  has  met  with  them.  These  three  might  say,  humbly, 
but  positively,  "  We  believe  that  through  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
we  three  reclaimed  harlots  shall  be  saved,  even  as  they."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Common  salvation : — I.  An  anticipation  of  an  invaluable  blessing.  "  Salvation  " 
implying  deliverance  from  spiritual  danger,  the  enjoyment  of  spiritual  good,  the 
attainment  of  heaven.  Man's  state  rendered  redemptive  interference  necessary. 
Law  was  followed  by  rebellion :  rebellion  involves  penal  consequences.  1.  The 
Scriptural  statements  of  man's  guilt  and  danger.  2.  Observation  and  experience 
verify  the  Word.  3.  The  individual  involvement  in  guilt  and  danger.  4.  The 
necessary  elements  of  salvation.  Freedom  from  debasement,  defilement,  fear  of 
death  and  judgment  and  what  Hes  beyond.  The  bestowinent  of  life,  immortality, 
heaven.  II.  The  method  by  which  this  blessing  is  to  be  secured.  1.  The 
Incarnation  was  for  the  purpose  of  securing  human  salvation,  Detennined  in  the 
councils  of  the  Father ;  types  prefigured  it ;  prophecy  proclaimed  its  approach  until 
the  fulness  of  the  time  came.  The  necessary  proofs  of  His  appointment  were  the 
voice  from  heaven,  miracles,  witness  of  Scripture  to  His  character  and  mission.  2. 
The  manner  in  which  He  met  the  requisite  conditions  of  human  salvation.  He  was 
a  great  teacher,  but  He  was  more  at  the  last  supper,  in  the  garden,  on  Calvary. 
There  salvation  effected.  The  fire  fell  and  consumed  the  sacrifice  which  must  other- 
wise have  consumed  the  world.  3.  Christ's  sufferings  were  propitiatory,  and  formed 
part  of  a  plan  essential  to  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  mercy.  Apart  from 
Christ's  atonement  there  is  no  salvation,  4.  The  Saviour  rose  from  the  dead, 
ascended  into  heaven,  and  presents  there  the  memorials  of  His  sacrifice.  6.  The 
principle  upon  which  this  salvation  is  bestowed.  Through  grace,  unmerited  mercy. 
Penance  and  merit  are  excluded.  III.  The  types  which  will  be  followed  in  the 
bestowment  of  salvation,  and  the  extent  to  which  it  shall  be  carried. 
"  Saved  even  as  tbey."  The  mistake  of  Jewish  converts  that  they  had  some 
advantage.  Their  attempt  to  impose  circumcision.  1.  This  salvation  is  available 
wherever  the  sovereignty  of  God  applies  it.  (1)  This  is  true  of  the  various  nations. 
Of  all  to  whom  it  has  been  sent  we  can  say  we  shall  be  saved  even  as  they.  (2) 
This  is  true  of  all  the  varieties  and  degrees  of  crime.  (3)  This  salvation  binds  its 
recipients  in  perfect  union,  "  Neither  Jew  nor  Greek."     {James  Farsonn.) 

Ver.  12.  Then  all  the  multitude  kept  silence  and  gave  audience  to  Barnabas  and 
Paul. — Apostulic  teativiony  : — 1.  When  Paul  speaks  we  want  to  know  what  Paul  says. 
But  some  men  must  be  their  own  reporters.  So  we  turn  from  the  Acts  to  the 
opening  verses  of  Galatians.  Where  Luke  contents  himself  with  a  summary,  Paul 
passes  into  detail.  Some  reports  are  too  condensed,  and  tlicrefore  unjust.  The 
minit'ter  "called  and  prayed."  We  do  not  say  that  he  walked  miles,  and  that 
when  he  prayed  his  heart  wept.  2.  Paul  says  he  went  up  to  Jerusalem  "  by  revela- 
tion." If  he  had  gone  up  to  Jerusalem  awed  by  its  position  and  fame,  he  would 
have  picked  out  dainty  inoffensive  words  that  would  win  the  eai*  of  many.  Id 
reality,  Paul  went  from  heaven  to  Jerusalem,  and  withered  its  contcmptibleness 
under  the  majesty  of  the  visions  from  wliich  he  bad  jnst  turned  his  eyes,  W'e  have 
dropped  the  word  "  revelation  "  except  on  the  Sabbath,  when  we  venture  to  say  it 
sometimes.    We  have  meaner  words — such  as  impression,  feeling,  &&.    These  ar& 


CHAP.  XT.]  THE  ACTS.  437 

inoffensive  terms ;  an  atheist  might  use  such  mock  jewellery.  The  apostle  said, 
•'  I  went  up  by  revelation.  I  knew  that  the  truth  was  with  me,  and  I  was  anxious 
only  that  Christ's  Cross  should  be  hfted  up  and  seen  everywhere  as  the  one  way  of 
salvation."  3.  Was  Paul  then  afraid  of  Jerusalem,  and  "piUars,"  and  '*men  of 
reputation"?  Paul  was  anxious  to  let  the  leaders  of  the  Church  know  exactly 
what  he  had  been  preaching,  so  he  had  a  private  interview  with  those  who  were  of 
reputation.  Could  we  have  heard  him  then  !  Speaking  to  a  sympathetic  audience, 
to  men  who  had  seen  the  Lord  !  Paul  had  no  fear  about  his  gospel.  He  said,  "  I 
have  been  preaching  salvation  by  Christ ;  now,  brethren,  what  say  you  ?  "  4.  Paul 
was  not  ashamed  of  his  Gentile  converts.  He  took  Titus  with  him,  and  said,  "  This 
is  a  Gentile  convert.  He  has  begun  in  the  Spirit ;  is  he  to  be  made  perfect  in  the 
flesh  ?  "  Always  vindicate  your  arguments  by  your  converts.  5.  Paul  illustrates 
by  anticipation  the  right  of  private  judgment.  To  those  "  who  were  of  reputation," 
"  who  seemed  to  be  pillars,"  he  "  gave  place  by  subjection,  no,  not  for  an  hour.** 
And  speaking  of  those  "  who  seemed  to  be  somewhat,"  he  said,  "  They  added 
nothing  to  me."  Where,  then,  was  submission  to  papal  authority  ?  Here  is  one 
man  who  stands  up  in  the  Church,  and  says,  "  This  is  the  gospel  which  I  have 
received,  which  I  will  preach,  for  which  I  will  live,  for  which,  and  La  which,  I  will 
die."  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,"  &o.  That  was  the  true  assertion  of  private 
judgment :  not  the  expression  of  an  individual  wiU,  but  the  expression  of  a  personal 
loyalty  to  a  living  Christ.  6.  Paul  showed  the  true  nature  of  real  and  enduring 
unity.  In  effect,  he  said :  We  may  be  one  without  seeming  to  be  united.  There 
are  men  to  whom  circumcision  is  a  hereditary  rite.  There  are  others  to  whom  it 
would  be  an  intolerable  yoke.  Now,  let  us  go,  the  one  to  the  circumcision,  and  the 
other  to  the  uncircumcision ;  for  I  know  that  as  this  gospel  spreads  it  will  be  seen 
at  the  last  that  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything  nor  uncircumcision.  7. 
But  the  council  could  not  break  up  so.  ••  One  thing,"  said  the  council,  "  shall  unite 
as — that  we  remember  the  poor."  The  poor  have  ye  always  with  you.  So  they  all 
— the  circumcision  and  the  uncircumcision — in  philanthropy  showed  their  union 
in  the  Lord,  who  Hved  to  redeem  the  human  race  1  Speculative  theology  divides 
men  ;  practical  philanthropy  unites  them.  Let  ua  unite  where  we  can.  Never 
inquire  into  the  creed  of  a  needy  man.  The  man  is  hungry ;  the  creed  must  be 
bread.  When  he  has  eaten  his  bread  you  may  ask  him  questions.  Begin  where  you 
can ;  wherever  the  heart-door  is  ajar,  go  in  ;  wherever  opportunity  is  offered,  speak 
the  living  word  or  do  the  helpful  deed.  Always  seek  for  the  centre  of  union,  and 
always  avoid  the  cause  of  division  or  distrust.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vera.  13-29.  And  after  they  had  held  their  peace,  James  answered. — The  decision 
of  the  council: — This  was  a  crisis  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  The  greatest 
msasters  might  have  befallen  it  at  this  critical  time.  The  man  who  saved  the 
Church  was  Paul.  There  was  in  him  a  fine  spirit  of  conciliation  as  to  methods  and 
usages ;  but  when  it  came  to  the  liberty  of  Christ,  and  the  independence  of  the 
Church,  he  stiffened  into  inflexibility,  and  he  '*  gave  place  by  subjection,  no,  not 
for  an  hour."  The  little  picture  before  us  enables  us  to  look  into  the  detail  of  early 
Church  life.  Note  here — I.  The  plaob  of  human  thought  and  dtdependencb  in 
TECB  CONSIDERATION  OF  Chbistian  pboblems.  No  man  was  hooted  down  on  either 
side.  In  modem  Christian  controversy  we  have  all  seen  lamentable  spectacles.  It 
makes  one  ashamed  of  the  Christian  cause  when  orthodox  men  employ  a  heterodox 
tone  for  the  purpose  of  putting  down  an  opponent.  Take  care  how  you  maintain  a 
good  cause.  I  have  seen  an  infidel  display  a  nobler  spirit  than  has  been  shown  by 
his  nominally  Christian  antagonist.  Here  the  discussion  was  full,  impartial  and 
thorough ;  due  deference  was  paid  to  the  apostles  and  elders ;  all  things  were  done 
decently  and  in  order.  II.  The  BEOiNNrNG  of  Chbistian  libebty.  A  wrong  step 
here,  and  Christian  liberty  would  have  been  lost.  Paul  was  raised  up  at  the  very 
moment  of  time.  He  who  made  havoc  of  the  Church  now  kept  it  together.  Under 
the  illumination  of  Paul  the  horizon  of  James  widened.  Sometimes  the  Church 
needs  inspiration  more  than  information.  When  the  grate  is  fuU  of  fuel,  what  is 
wanting  is  a  light.  Jamea  began  to  see  that  Christian  liberty  waa  founded  on 
prophecy.  How  did  Jamea  become  so  great  a  man  all  of  a  sudden  ?  Because  he 
had  touched  the  Pauline  spirit.  Great  men  make  great  men.  We  do  not  need  a 
new  Bible ;  we  need  new  readers.  It  was  actually  found  that  in  the  Old  Testament 
this  very  question  had  been  settled.  In  every  synagogue  Moses  was  read,  and 
nobody  understood  him.  III.  The  bioht  way  op  treating  new  converts.  They 
were  to  begin  hj  not  doing  things.    The  trouble  with  our  new  converts  is  that  they 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

are  converted  on  Monday,  and  on  Tuesday  promoted  to  places  of  eminence.    The 
apostles  said,  "Brethren,  you  will  do  well  to  begin  by  not  doing  certain  things." 
That  is  where  we  ought  to  begin.    IV.  The  happier  aspects  of  contbovebsy.     But 
for  this  controversy,  who  knows  when  Paul  and  James  might  have  been  brought 
togeth  er?    And  after  the  controversy  was  over,  the  bishop  writes :  "  Our  beloved 
Barnabas  and  Paul."     James  looked  at  the  question  partly  from  the  characters  of 
the  men,  and  he  called  them  "  men  that  have  hazarded  their  Uves  for  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."     So  judge  in  every  controversy.     This  proof  of  devotion  must  go  for 
something  in  the  exciting  controversy.     It  is  not  enough  to  be  clever ;  we  must  be 
true.     What  have  we  done  for  the  Lord  Jesus  ?     {Ibid.)        Wherefore  my  judgment 
la,  that  ye  trouble  not  them  which  from  among  the  Gentiles  turn  to  God. — A  triumph 
of  spirituality  and  liberty : — A  few  lessons  come  to  us  from  a  study  of  that  first 
Ecclesiastical  Council.     I.  We  see  in  this  conference  the  true  way  of   settling 
difficulties,  both  between  churches  and  between  individuals — rr  is  by  confebeino 
TOGETHER.     That  docs  not  mean  by  writing  letters,  or  making  assertions  at  arm's 
length,  but  by  getting  near  to  one  another  so  that  the  persons  distrusted  may  be 
seen  and  understood.     If  that  letter  had  been  sent  from  the  Church  at  Antioch  to 
the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  and  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  not  been  seen — a  hving  spirit 
can  never  be  put  into  cold  words — the  judgment  of  the  council  might  have  been 
different ;  and  St.  Paul  would  have  continued  on  his  way,  and  there  would  have 
been  a  breach  between  those  who  ought  to  have  been  united.     I  have  come  to  feel 
that  letters  almost  always  make  more  difficulties  than  they  mend.    Let  those  who 
misunderstand  one  another  come  together,  take  each  other  by  the  hand  ;  whUe  one 
says  to  the  other,  •'  Now,  perhaps,  I  do  not  understand  you ;  you  explain  your 
meaning;  let  me  explain  mine,"     Few  enmities  could  withstand  that   process. 
Only  an  egotist  of  the  first  water  ever  beheves  that  he  has  all  the  truth.     The  life 
in  nature  has  one  manifestation  in  a  flower;  another  in  a  tree;  another  in  an 
animal,  another  in  a  man  ;  none  conflict ;  they  are  only  varying  manifestations  of 
the  one  energy  which  pulsates  from  the  sun.     We  have  one  name  for  the  sum  of 
life  and  all  the  manifestations  of  energy,  and  that  is,  the  universe.     The  universe 
of  matter  and  life  is  too  vast  for  any  individual  to  comprehend — how  much  more 
incomprehensible  is  the  spiritual  universe  1     Differences  of  opinion  on  doctrine  and 
ritual  will  arise.     There  is  but  one  right  way  to  adjust  such  differences  between 
individuals  or  in  churches,  and  that  is  for  those  who  feel  themselves  growing  apart 
to  take  the  first  opportunity  to  look  into  each  other's  eyes  and  clasp  each  other's 
hands  as  brothers,  and  then  bring  all  the  things  which  separate  into  light.     IL 
The  Council  at  Jerusalem  makes  very  clear  the  distinction  between  liberty  and 
AUTHORITY  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.     Christians  recognise  only  one  authority,  and 
that  is  God.     Just  so  fa>^t  and  so  far  as  the  will  of  God  concerning  them  can  be 
learned,  they  are  under  obligation  to  obey.     We  are  at  liberty  to  believe  everything 
that  is  true,  and  to  do  whatever  is  right  and  expedient ;  all  encroachments  on  this 
liberty  are  to  be  resisted  ;  and  in  the  last  analysis  we  ourselves  must  decide  what 
is  true,  wise  and  right.    How  easy  it  would  be  if  some  one  <-lse  could  decide  for  us !' 
Men  are  made  strong  by  the  exercise  of  their  faculties.     Those  representatives  of 
the  venerable  Church  in  Jerusalem  came  to  Antioch  with  their  "  Thus  saith  the 
law,"  and  there  the  law  was  written  in  cold  black  letters  as  it  was  supposed  to  have 
been  written  by  Moses  himself,  and  they  said  :  "  Can  you  get  away  from  tliat  ?  " 
If  the  letter  was  to  decide,  the  case  was  already  closed.     But  St.  Paul  believed  that 
there  had  been  another  revelation ;  that  while  law  had  been  best  for  one  time,  it 
was  not  for  all  times ;  that  he  had  a  commission  from  Christ  to  preach  His  gospel 
wherever  there  were  souls  to  be  saved ;  and  so,  turning  away  from  the  letter,  he 
boldly  and  confidently  followed  the  spirit.     But  while  we  emphasise  liberty  and 
individual  responsibility,  we  cannot  fail  also  to  see  that,  if  we  really  desire  to  know 
what  is  true  and  right,  we  must  be  very  careful  about  going  contrary  to  what  is 
generally  believed  to  be  tmth  and  right  by  those  who  we  have  reason  to  believe  are 
Christians.     If,  for  instance,  in  this  Church  of  nearly  seven  hundred  and  fifty 
members,  seven  hundred  believe  that  one  course  of  conduct  is  wrong,  and  one 
believes  that  it  is  right,  that  one  ought  to  be  very  sure  that  he  has  not  been  in- 
fluenced by  prejudice,  conceit,  or  some  evil  motive  before  he  concludes  that  he  il 
right  and  all  the  others  are  wrong.     This  Council  at  Jerusalem  illustrates  the 
proper  relation  of  liberty  and  authority.     When  the  Jewish  party  asked  to  Lave 
Titus  circumcised,  and  so  indicate  that  the  law  was  still  binding,  Paul  indnnantly 
refnsed.     When  the  meddlers  came  from  Jerusalem  and  stirred  up  a  misunder- 
standing, he  said ;  "  Well,  let  as  confer  together  "  ;  in  other  words,  "  I  am  willing 


CHAP.  XV.]  XHE  ACTS.  439 

to  find  all  the  truth  that  there  is  anywhere ;  the  only  authority  is  in  truth  and 
right — that  is  in  the  revealed  will  of  God — and  all  men  are  free  from  all  other 
obligation  except  the  obligation  to  obey  the  true  and  the  right."  To  learn  that,  he 
was  willing  to  go  to  Jerusalem.  So  should  we  be,  or  to  go  anywhere  else.  III. 
This  contest  in  the  eablt  Chttbch  uaees  plain  the  contbast  between  spibitualitx 
AND  formality  IN  BBLiGioN.  Men  are  everlastingly  inclined  to  put  emphasis  on 
things  of  no  importance.  The  Pharisees  who  tithed  mint,  anise,  and  cummin  are 
not  yet  all  dead.  Formality  says :  "  If  you  observe  certain  rites,  you  are  doing  all 
that  is  required  of  you."  Spirituality  says :  "  Have  the  mind  of  Christ ;  wherever 
you  can  do  good,  do  it;  pray  without  ceasing;  no  one  place  alone  is  holy,  but 
all  places  are  equally  holy  because  God  is  everywhere ;  live  the  life  of  love,  and 
open  your  hearts  in  the  day  and  in  the  night  so  that  the  Spirit  of  Truth  may 
lead  you  at  all  times."  'Why  do  we  have  so  many  denominations?  What  is 
it  that  separates  Christians  but  this  everlasting  tendency  to  put  emphasis 
upon  form  rather  than  life  ?  Life  can  always  be  trusted ;  it  will  make  its  own 
form.  All  we  need  to  be  anxious  about  is  to  make  sure  that  our  poor  weak 
human  hearts  are  open  to  the  Divine  Ufe.  No  ceremony  is  of  any  value  except 
so  far  as  it  contributes  to  growth  in  the  spiritual  hfe.  The  apostle  violated 
all  the  traditions  by  which  he  was  surrounded,  but  in  doing  so  he  tore  a  rift 
in  the  world's  darkness,  and  made  it  possible  for  the  sunlight  of  the  grace  of 
God  to  flood  a  struggling  race.  But  the  question  presses,  If  we  are  to  trust  the 
Spirit  rather  than  forms,  how  are  we  to  know  whether  a  man  has  the  Spirit  ?  Well, 
fir^t,  what  difference  does  it  make  whether  we  know  or  not  ?  Who  made  us  judges  ? 
"  To  his  own  master  he  standeth  or  faUeth."  But  we  may  know  whether  men 
have  the  Spirit.  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples,  if  ye  have 
love  one  toward  another."    {A.  R.  Bradford,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23-29.  And  they  wrote  letters. — The  Apostolic  letter : — 1.  A  model  of 
brotherly  love  and  Divine  wisdom.  2.  A  pattern  for  the  modem  Church,  3.  A 
great  standing  deliverance  from  all  ceremonial  and  ritualistic  observances.  Im- 
provement— (1)  Be  not  narrow-minded.  (2)  Trust  in  Christ  and  not  ordinances. 
{J.  Dewse.)  The  yoke  broken : — I.  The  relation  of  Christianity  to  Judaism. 
The  decision  was  an  admission  that  the  Jewish  ordinances  were  not  permanent  or 
essential.  That  old  system  had  only  "  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come."  It 
educated  for  the  gospel,  and  having  accomplished  this  its  work  really  ended.  The 
gospel  succeeded  Christ  was  declared  to  be  the  end  of  the  law  to  every  one  that 
beheveth  ;  and  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  said,  "  He  is  not  a  Jew  which  is  one 
outwardly,"  but  "  We  are  the  circumcision  which  worship  God,"  &o.  To  insist  on 
the  continued  obligation  of  the  Mosaic  customs  would  be  like  drilling  a  reader  in 
the  alphabet.  As  well  might  the  butterfly  keep  up  its  caterpillar  existence — fly  and 
crawl  at  the  same  time.  For  the  Gentiles  to  practise  the  customs  of  the  Old  Law 
would  be  both  irksome  and  also  liable  to  lead  to  the  error  that  salvation  was 
dependent  on  these  observances.  Against  this  danger  Paul  most  carefully  guarded. 
The  epistles  to  the  Romans  and  to  the  Galatians  are  the  strong  ramparts  which 
were  erected  to  oppose  it.  II.  The  tolerant  spirit  of  Christianity.  It  seems 
strange  to  have  such  an  example  in  the  infant  Church,  since  toleration  is  usually 
the  fruit  of  long  experience.  Even  more  surprising  is  it,  when  we  consider  the 
antecedents  of  the  men  who  displayed  it.  They  were  Jews,  of  a  most  bigoted  race. 
One  of  the  hardest  lessons  for  men  to  learn  is  to  unlearn,  and  act  contrary  to  early 
convictions.  Though  they  themselves,  through  force  of  habit,  continued  to  observe 
the  national  customs,  they  would  not  bind  the  Gentiles  to  do  the  same.  It  is 
strange  that  this  decision  should  have  been  ever  forgotten.  The  intolerance  which 
has  resulted  from  losing  sight  of  it  has  been  the  disgrace  of  Christianity.  The 
greatest  names  have  been  in  fault  here.  As  an  old  divine  says,  "Whilst  we 
wrangle  here  in  tbe  dark,  we  are  dying  and  passing  to  that  world  which  will  decide 
all  controversies :  the  safest  passage  thither  is  by  peaceable  righteousness."  III. 
Christianity,  while  tolerant  in  spirit,  has  its  self-denials  (ver.  29).  If,  after 
their  conversion  from  heathenism  to  Christianity,  they  still  continued  to  eat  meat 
offered  to  idols,  and  to  frequent  the  idolatrous  feasts  where  it  was  served,  they  were 
more  likely  to  relapse  into  their  old  heathen  life.  "  Evil  communications  corrupt 
Aood  manners."  The  same  thing  in  effect  has  to  be  perpetually  guarded  against. 
The  Christian  of  to-day  must,  for  his  own  spiritual  good,  beware  of  certain  worldly 
habits  and  indulgences,  lest  he  go  back  to  the  world.  (A.  H.  Currier.)  Saying:, 
ye  must  be  circumcised  and  keep  the  law. — Legal  Christians ; — Thousands  and 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

tens  of  thousands  of  Christians  yet  live  in  the  dreary  shadow  of  legalism.  God  is 
only  Lawgiver  and  Judge  to  them  ;  and  their  experience  is  limited,  first,  to  self-con- 
demnation and  suffering,  then  to  violent  endeavours  of  the  spirit,  or  of  the  body,  or 
of  both  to  throw  off  this  suffering,  with  results,  sometimes  of  exhaustion,  and  some- 
times of  unnatural  peace,  and  then  to  reaction  into  moral  indifference,  arising  from 
a  totally  unsatisfied  heart  and  soul.  There  are  thousands  of  persons  who  think 
*hat  they  are  Christians  because  they  are  endeavouring  to  live  aright,  but 
they  are  Christians  because  they  are  endeavouring  to  live  aright  no  more 
than  a  person  is  at  home  because  he  is  trying  to  go  there,  though  he  does 
not  know  the  way.  A  child  that  has  lost  its  father's  house,  and  that  is  striving  to 
find  it,  is  not  at  home,  but  is  a  wanderer ;  and  the  person  that  is  simply  endeavour- 
ing to  Uve  aright,  and  nothing  more,  and  that  when  he  measures  his  life  by  the  law 
of  God,  as  interpreted  to  him  through  his  own  conscience,  is  conscious  of  daily 
breaking  that  law  in  every  direction,  is  no  more  a  Christian  than  a  wanderer  is  a 
child  at  home.  For  a  Christian  is  one  that  has  found  his  way  home,  and  to  the 
fatherhood  of  God,  and  not  one  that  is  merely  seeking  to  do  his  duty.  A  Christian 
is  a  child  under  the  parental  roof,  saying,  "  Abba,  Father."  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Our  beloved  Barnabas  and  Paul,  men  that  have  hazarded  their  lives  for  the  name 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Two  heroes : — I.  The  principles  by  which  they  were 
ACTUATED.  1.  The  highest  admiration  for  their  Lord  and  Master.  2.  An  entire 
consecration  to  His  service.  We  must  honour  Christ — (1)  From  gratitude.  (2) 
From  duty.  II.  The  work  they  undertook.  "  To  proclaim  the  name,"  &c. 
This  was — 1.  An  arduous  duty.  2.  A  disagreeable  toil.  3.  A  continuous  self-sacrifice. 
III.  The  reward  they  attained.  1.  A  reward  of  their  magnanimity.  2.  The 
approbation  of  God.  3.  An  immortal  crown.  IV.  The  instruction  they  impart. 
1.  That  there  is  something  more  precious  than  life  or  pleasure — Christ.  2.  That 
however  humble  our  sphere  we  may  hope  to  accomplish  something  for  our  Lord 
and  Master.  3.  That  whatever  efforts  we  may  make  for  our  Master's  glory  shall 
be  acknowledged  and  rewarded  by  God.      (Preacher's  Analyst.)  The  motto  of 

Christian  service : — During  the  American  war  with  England,  a  young  midshipman 
named  Joel  Abbot  was  serving  under  the  United  States  flag.  Winning  the  good 
opLnion  of  the  commander,  he  was  put  in  the  way  of  promotion  by  being  com- 
mended to  Macdonough,  then  controlling  the  forces  on  Lake  Champlain.  Beports 
were  received  that  the  Enj^'lish  were  accumulating  a  large  supply  of  spars  at  SoreL 
Could  not  the  spars  be  destroyed  ?  Who  would  undertake  the  task  ?  Joel  Abbot 
was  sent  for.  Grimly  the  commander  asked  him  if  he  were  willing  to  die  for  his 
country.  "  Certainly,  sir :  that  is  what  I  came  into  the  service  for,"  was  the 
prompt  reply.  Entrusted  with  the  dangerous  commission,  Joel  Abbot  fulfilled  it  in 
the  spirit  of  his  words.  The  perils  and  privations  of  his  exploit  were  so  great,  that 
although  he  came  back  alive,  he  was  completely  prostrate  for  a  considerable  time, 
and  his  recovery  was  slow.  Later,  a  sword  of  honour  was  voted  him  for  his 
gallantry.  How  is  it  with  soldiers  of  the  Great  King — workers  for  Christ?  The 
test-word  of  this  service  is  "  Self-surrender  for  Christ."  A  life  hazarded  for 
Christ : — A  touching  story  is  told  as  characteristic  of  the  missionary  spirit  by  a 
friendly  writer  in  the  Contemporary.  Rev.  John  Robinson  was  suddenly  summoned 
one  day  to  the  Leper  asylum  to  baptise  a  dying  convert.  My  friend  went  in  fear 
and  trembling,  baptised  the  dying  man,  consoled  him,  and  then  was  seized  with  a 
throe  of  mental  agony.  It  is  the  custom  of  many  missionaries  on  receiving  a 
neophyte,  especially  if  sick,  to  give  him  the  kiss  of  peace.  Mr.  Eobinson  thought 
this  his  bounden  duty,  but  he  was  himself  a  half-breed,  and  he  was  absolutely  per- 
suaded of  the  Indian  theory  that  leprosy,  though  non-contagious  in  the  case  of  a 
white  man,  is  frigbtfully  contagious  in  the  case  of  one  with  native  blood  in  his 
veins.  He  hesitated,  walked  to  the  door,  and  returned  to  kiss  the  leper  on  the  lips 
and  then  to  lie  for  days  in  his  own  house,  prostrated  with  an  uncontrollable  and  not 
an  unreasonable  nervous  terror.  A  superstitious  fool,  the  doctor  thought  him. 
True  soldier  of  Christ,  say  I,  who,  when  his  duty  called  him,  faced  something  far 
worse  than  shot.  Christian  self-devotion : — For  some  time  after  Mr.  Hunt  settled 
in  Somasoma,  one  of  the  Fejee  Islands,  his  life  was  in  daily  danger  from  the  hostile 
and  cannibal  savages.  But  he  went  on  with  his  Christian  work,  and  when  the  cap- 
tain of  an  American  war-ship  heard  of  their  threats  to  kill  and  eat  the  missionary, 
and  sent  to  offer  him  an  asylum  on  board  his  vessel,  Mr.  Hunt  declined  with  thanks, 
saying  that  he  regarded  the  horrible  depravity  of  the  natives  as  only  an  additional 
reason  for  risking  his  life  to  convert  them.  Life  hazarded  in  Christ's  cause  : — L 
Tujl:  si'uux  WHICH  la  DESciuiiKD  ui  THE  TEXT.     Several   particulars  are  included 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  441 

here.  1.  Their  ardent  love  for  Christ  Jesus.  It  was  not  always  thus  with  these 
men.  Paul's  object  was  to  root  out  the  name  of  the  Saviour.  What  occasioned 
then  this  marvellous  change  ?  In  his  case  they  were  very  extraordinary  means.  In 
other  cases,  the  means  are  ordinary.  The  Spirit  of  God  convinces  them  of  sin, 
shows  them  that  they  have  no  help  in  themselves  ;  but  must  accept  Christ  and  Hia 
cross.  And  then  they  love  Christ.  They  love  Him  (1)  For  dignity  of  His  person. 
<2)  For  the  perfection  of  His  atonement.  They  "  love  Him  because  He  first  loved 
them."  (3)  Because  He  has  taken  their  nature  and  their  cause  to  heaven.  When 
they  see  this,  it  is  impossible  but  their  hearts  should  glow  with  love  to  such  a  Saviour. 
The  life  He  so  dearly  bought  becomes  His,  and  they  "  hazard  it "  willingly  in  His 
service.  2.  Their  high  estimation  of  the  gospel.  Man  is  a  depraved  creature. 
This  depravity  exhibits  itself  in  different  forms ;  in  one  country  in  idolatry,  in 
another  in  blasphemy,  &c.  Philosophers  have  bent  over  the  scene  and  wept,  and 
politicians  have  devised  innumerable  schemes  to  recover  fallen  creatures.  But 
they  have  failed.  Now  God  sent  the  gospel  to  redeem  and  sanctify  man.  Now 
the  men,  that  '•  hazarded  their  Uves  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  believed  that 
there  was  •'  no  other  name  whereby  men  might  be  saved  " ;  and  therefore  they 
published  it.  They  had  the  conviction  of  an  enhghtened  understanding,  and  an 
experimental  enjoyment  of  the  truth.  3.  Their  tender  compassion  for  lost  souls. 
Christ's  value  met  their  enlightened  judgment.  ••  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,"  &c. 
They  saw  millions  of  immortal  spirits,  hurrying  on  to  irremediable  woe.  Now 
when  the  men  had  this  remedy,  and  saw  soiis  in  this  condition,  and  had  their 
hearts  lighted  with  the  heavenly  fire,  you  do  not  wonder  that  they  went  forth  and 
•'hazarded  their  lives  "  to  communicate  it  to  lost  souls.  4.  The  aggressive  spirit 
in  which  they  attempted  to  set  up  Christ's  kingdom.  They  did  not  wait  tUl  a 
petition  came  from  these  miserable  souls,  requesting  them  to  send  the  gospel ;  or 
till  a  door  was  opened  by  some  special  act  of  the  government  of  the  country,  or  a 
change  of  opinion  took  place  among  the  people  ;  but  wherever  they  could  open  their 
lips  for  Jesus  Christ,  there  they  went,  though  edicts  were  issued  against  them,  and 
they  were  imprisoned  and  reviled  and  threatened  with  death.  5.  Their  exalted 
character  in  the  opinion  of  the  Church.  They  selected  them  to  go  on  an  important 
embassy,  as  men  who  copied  most  of  their  Master's  spirit.  It  appeared  to  them, 
that  the  chief  excellency  was  in  "  hazarding  their  lives  for  Him."  Doubtless  many 
in  their  day  considered  them  very  visionary  men,  and  thought  they  had  better  not 
plunge  rashly  into  things;  but  "the  apostles  and  elders,"  those  who  had  love  to 
Christ,  thought  their  zeal  their  glory,  and  held  it  up  to  the  imitation  and  approba- 
tion of  the  Church,  II.  Lessons.  1.  We  see  in  the  text  a  picture  of  fallen  and  of 
regenerated  humanity ;  and  among  which  class  are  you  ?  Here  is  one  class  of  men, 
opposing  those  who  come  to  them  with  the  gospel ;  here  is  another,  ready  to  die  for 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  He  that  is  not  with  Me  is  against  Me."  2.  A 
suitable  apology  for  all  those  who  exhibit  the  same  conduct.  By  many  it  has  been 
npbraided  as  zeal  without  knowledge.  But  here  is  the  answer ;  it  is  done  '*  for  the 
name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  A  soldier  "  hazards  his  Hfe,"  it  may  be,  for  for- 
tune, for  fame,  for  honour.  But  here  are  men  who  "  hazard  their  lives,"  without 
honour,  fame  or  fortune,  '•  for  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ."  3.  One  of  the  modes  by 
which  God  augments  the  number  of  His  servants  and  the  efficiency  of  their  service. 
"  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  It  is  not  the  cold,  calcula- 
ting, cautious  men,  who  carry  measures  either  in  Church  or  in  state ;  but  the  men 
who  "  hazard  their  lives  "  for  the  cause  which  they  undertake.  4.  The  honour 
which  God  puts  upon  us  by  permitting  us  to  send  out  such  men  to  evangelise  the 
world.  6.  A  spirit  worthy  of  imitation.  Who  is  wUhng  to  "  hazard  his  life  for 
the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  ?  "  {J.  Sherman.)  The  true  missionary : — Once,  in 
lifting  from  its  shelf  a  certain  folio,  there  fluttered  oat  from  between  its  leaves  a 
paper  dated  1763.  It  had  evidently  been  mislaid  as  soon  as  it  was  written,  and  one 
hundred  years  after,  just  where  the  writer  left  it,  I  found  it.  It  ran  thus,  "  We  beg 
to  certify  that  the  bearer,  Mr.  John  Wyers,  is  well  known  to  us,  and  we  do  hereby 
commend  him  to  all  Christian  Churches  where,  in  Providence,  he  may  come  as  a 
godly  minister  who  hath  much  devoted  himself  to  the  service  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  This  was  signed  "  David  Fermie,  Thomas  Blackett."  My  text  is  a  line 
out  of  an  old  letter  of  introduction  written  by  the  elders  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem. 
Now,  this  old  certificate  is  not  to  be  torn  up  for  waste  paper  as  a  thing  that  is  now 
dead  and  done  with.  It  is  a  live  thing,  it  is  wanted  now,  to  show  what  kind  of  mis- 
sionaries are  wanted,  and  how  the  armies  of  Christ  in  the  field  of  foreign  service 
are  to  win  the  day.    Just  take  the  words  as  they  stand.    I.  Men.    An  ancient  law- 


449  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  (cha».  xt. 

giyer  said,  that  what  Sparta  wanted  was  not  a  wall  of  bricks  bat  a  wall  of  men. 
"  Men,"  said  a  certain  sarcastic  journalist,  "  are  cheap."  No.  K  "men  "  be  what 
is  meant  by  certain  advocates  of  "muscular  Christianity,"  then  men  are  cheap,  but 
when  I  look  at  Paul  I  remember  that  it  is  not  muscle  that  makes  a  man.  If  yoa 
mean  by  a  "  man,"  an  undesigned  result  of  molecular  forces,  then  men  are  cheap, 
and  they  ought  to  be,  but  a  man  is  not  the  consummation  of  a  tadpole.  If  by 
"  men  "  you  mean  an  average  human  being,  men  ought  to  be  cheap ;  but  many  a 
human  being  passes  for  a  man  who  is  not  so  much  a  person  as  a  thing.  What  I 
mean  by  "man"  is  a  son  of  Adam,  who  has  been  born  again,  and  who  is  therefore 
a  Son  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  of  whom  we  may  say,  "  Like  father,  Uke 
son."  I  want  to  blow  into  infinite  space  the  mean,  false  notion  that  anything  will 
do  for  a  missionary  ;  anything  will  not  do.  Before  you  are  a  missionary  you  must 
be  a  "man."  II.  That  have  hazarded  their  lives.  This,  in  itseLf,  is  not 
matter  for  plaudit.  Most  extreme  must  be  the  case,  when  the  author  of  life  sanc- 
tions the  hazard  of  life.  But,  while  grace  makes  us  understand  the  sanctity  of  life, 
grace  inspires  us  with  a  will  to  give  ourselves  to  the  service  of  something  higher 
than  Ufe.  That  man  is  not  worth  calling  a  "  man  "  who  lives  to  save  himself. 
The  man  who  answers  to  the  standard  we  are  now  looking  at,  is  a  man  who,  being^ 
called  to  the  service  of  Christ,  is  prepared,  if  need  be,  to  hazard  his  life  for  that 
service.  III.  Foe  the  name  of  cub  Lord  Jesds  Christ.  This  means  that  the 
men  hazarded  their  lives — 1.  Out  of  love  to  Christ.  The  name  of  a  person  is  the 
person  to  whom  that  name  belongs.  We  all  know  the  rousing,  or  soothing,  or 
melting  magic  of  a  name.  But  no  name  has  such  power  to  stir  the  hearts  of  mea 
as  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  When  it  was  first  uttered  to  the  Jews,  it  stirred  their 
hearts  to  hatred.  Among  the  most  inexorable  and  deep  haters  was  Paul.  He 
breathed  out  threatenings  and  slaughters  till  Jesus  stopped  him.  After  that,  the 
love  of  Christ  set  his  life  on  fire.  What  have  we  hazarded  for  Christ  ?  Where  iff 
your  love  to  Christ?  Is  that  the  thing  you  call  love?  Then  love  knows  how  tO' 
take  care  of  itself  ;  looks  upon  religion  as  a  question  of  safe  investment  and  social 
respectability  ;  sometimes  joins  the  Church  like  a  traveller  taking  his  ticket  who 
books  himself  quite  through,  wraps  his  rug  around  him,  and  goes  to  sleep- 
till  the  train  stops  ;  hates  originality  like  the  plague.  What  you  call  love  I  call 
prudence.  But  love,  whether  to  God  or  man,  tends  to  scorn  of  consequence,  and  to- 
the  forgetf ulness  of  self.  2.  Out  of  obedience  to  Christ.  "  If  ye  love  Me  keep  My 
commandments."  The  commandment  now  waiting  for  our  obedience  is,  "  Go, 
make  disciples  of  all  nations."  Now  it  is  strange  the  first  thing  men  in  general  do 
is  to  give  their  opinion  about  this.  One  man  is  of  opinion  that  it  is  unnecessary; 
another,  that  it  is  impossible ;  another,  that  we  should  look  at  home ;  another, 
that  we  should  civihse  first ;  another,  that  every  nation  has  already  its  own  religion, 
fitted  to  its  own  nationality.  But  Christ  waits  not  for  our  opinion  but  our  obedi- 
ence. The  question  is  how  we  can  best  obey.  Some  can  best  obey  in  this  way, 
some  in  that.  The  principle  is  not  that  Christians  should  leave  work  at  home  for 
work  abroad,  but  that  all  Christians  are  charged  with  the  evangelisation  of  the 
world  to  do  it  between  them.  Though  the  difficulties  may  be  massive,  they  are  not 
your  concern.  "Charge,"  is  the  captain's  cry.  Say,  as  the  negro  said, '*  Doea^ 
Jesus  Christ  ask  me  to  jump  through  that  stone-wall  ?  Here  I  go  at  it."  3.  In 
the  service  of  their  fellow-men.  It  is  a  great  service  to  save  lives,  and  a  noble  thing 
when  men  do  it  at  the  hazard  of  their  own.  Lady  Edgeworth,  in  the  days  of  King- 
Charles  II.,  had  suddenly  to  defend  the  family  castle  at  Lissom,  in  the  absence  of 
her  husband.  In  doing  so  she  had  to  go  down  and  fetch  powder  from  the  castle 
vaults.  On  her  return  she  said  to  the  woman  who  had  gone  with  her,  "  Where  did 
you  put  the  candle  ?  "  "I  left  it  stuck  in  the  barrel  of  black  salt."  Then  did  that 
glorious  lady  go  down  to  the  spot  where  the  candle  was  burning  into  the  powder, 
and  put  her  hand  round  it  like  a  cup,  and  lift  it  up  and  tuke  it  out,  and  so  at  the 
hazard  of  her  own  life  saved  the  lives  of  others.  Dear,  glorious  lady,  that  was  well 
done.  The  life-boat  with  its  brave  crew  shoots  out  into  the  night  over  the  swaying- 
hills  of  water,  to  snatch  twenty  men  off  from  a  wreck.  On  their  return,  when  the 
cry  comes  on  the  wind,  "  AH  saved,"  my  heart  gives  a  great  bound,  and  I  say, 
*•  There  is  a  noble  service  nobly  done."  "  The  Son  of  Man  came  not  to  destroy 
men's  lives,  but  to  save  them  "  ;  and  if  it  be  a  great  thing  to  save  the  lives  of  bodies 
through  the  hazard  of  our  own  bodily  life,  it  is  a  small  thing  to  hazard  it  to  save 
the  lives  of  souls.  Conclusion:  We  learn  from  these  men — 1.  How  our  faithful  and' 
miglity  Master  through  all  hazards  keeps  His  servants  alive  until  their  work  is  done. 
S.  Only  men  Uke  these  hazard  their  lives,  and  the  men  who  at  Christ's  call  to  servic» 


CHAP.  XV.]  THE  ACTS.  443 

most  totally  give  themselves  np,  most  totally  let  themselves  go,  are  the  men  whom  the 
♦•  King  delighteth  to  honour."  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Who  shall  also  tell  you  the 
same  things  by  mouth. — Preference  for  the  spoken  word : — The  Dean  of  Rochester 
said :  A  woman  said  about  a  certain  preacher,  "  He's  a  very  nice  gentleman,  but 
he  has  no  deliverance."  He  himself  had  been  wont  for  years  to  preach  written 
■ermons.  One  night,  to  his  horror,  the  church  was  so  dark  that  it  was  impossible 
to  read  his  sermon.  He  passed  through  a  brief  period  of  anxiety.  Then,  thinking, 
•*  Have  I  nothing  to  say  to  these  people  ?  Am  I  really  a  servant  of  God  ?  "  he 
threw  himself  on  the  Holy  Spirit's  help,  and  spoke  as  best  he  could.  The  church- 
warden apologetically  told  him  that  the  people  said  "  It  was  the  best  sermon  he 
had  ever  preached,  and  they  hoped  he  would  never  read  another."  "  Nor  did  I," 
said  the  Dean ;  "  and  then  I  awoke  not  to  find  myself  famous,  but  at  any  rate 
more  useful  than  I  had  been  before."  The  spoken  word : — A  preacher  is,  in  some 
degree,  a  reproduction  of  the  truth  in  personal  form.  The  truth  must  exist  in  him 
as  a  living  experience,  a  glowing  enthusiasm,  an  intense  reality.  The  Word  of  God 
in  the  Book  is  a  dead  letter,  it  is  paper,  type,  and  ink.  In  the  preacher  that  Word 
becomes  again  as  it  was  when  first  spoken  by  prophet,  priest,  or  apostle.  It  springs 
np  in  him  as  if  it  were  first  kindled  in  his  heart,  and  he  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  give  it  forth.    He  is  so  moved.    (H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  28-31.  For  It  seemed  good  unto  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to  us. — The  Holy 
Spirit  and  the  Church : — Here  we  have — I.  The  Spibit  guiding  the  Church.  1. 
This  was  in  accordance  with  the  Saviour's  promise.  2.  This  was  demonstrated 
by  the  previous  history.  Pentecost ;  the  mission  of  Philip  to  Samaria,  and  to  the 
Eunuch ;  that  of  Peter  to  Cornelius  ;  that  of  the  disciples  to  Antioch,  and  that  of 
Paul  and  Barnabas  to  Cyprus  and  Asia  Minor.  With  each  of  these  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  was  directly  connected,  and  each  pointed  to  the  widening  of  the  Church's 
boundaries  so  as  to  embrace  the  Gentiles.  3.  This  is  guaranteed  still,  and  may 
be  detected.  (1)  In  the  evangelistic  impulses  of  the  Church.  (2)  In  the  doors  of 
opportunity  opening  to  the  Church — the  second  invariably  following  the  first.  II. 
The  Spirit's  guidance  acknowledged  by  the  Chukch.     "  It  seemed  good,"  &a. 

1.  "  And  to  us  "  is  not  an  assumption  of  co-ordinate  authority,  for  the  Church  is 
a  creature  and  servant  of  the  Spirit.  It  simply  means  acquiescence  in  the  decision 
of  the  Spirit  as  indicated  by  recent  events  and  no  doubt  by  special  inspiration. 

2.  "And  to  us"  gives  weight  to  the  Spirit's  decision,  inasmuch  as — (1)  Part  of  the 
Church  had  been  opposed  to  what  was  now  clearly  the  mind  of  the  Spirit.  (2) 
Part  of  the  Church  h^d  known  the  Spirit's  mind,  but  had  taken  no  further  steps. 
(3)  Part  of  the  Church  had  fully  acted  in  the  disclosures  of  the  mind  of  the  Spirit. 
So  the  divided  Church  was  now  united  upon  the  only  true  basis  of  union.  This  is 
s,  lesson  to  the  Church  in  all  ages.  When  men,  in  spite  of  early  training,  prejudice, 
&c.,  give  themselves  to  the  work  of  God,  what  a  mighty  testimony  to  the  Spirit's 
guidance.  III.  The  Spirit's  guidance  seen  in  the  decision  of  the  Church.  1.  In 
the  liberality  of  its  sentiment,  "  Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  there  is  liberty." 
2.  In  its  sanctified  common  sense.  Certain  things  were  "  nece>8ary  "  in  order 
that  Jews  and  Gentiles  might  work  together.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  The  up- 
shot of  the  first  ecclesiastical  assembly  a  triumph  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost : — 1.  As  a 
Spirit  of  freedom  over  the  yoke  of  external  ordinances.  2.  As  a  Spirit  of  faith 
over  the  Ulusions  of  our  own  wisdom  and  righteousness.  3.  As  a  Spirit  of  love 
over  pride,  obstinacy,  and  narrowmindedness.  {K.  Gerok.)  The  fi.rst  principles  of 
Church  life  and  action : — 1.  In  things  necessary,  unity  (ver.  11).  2.  In  things 
doubtful,  hberty  (ver.  19).     3.  In  all  things,  charity  (vers.  7,  11,  20).     (Irenteus.) 

Ver.  36-Chap.  xvi.  10.  And  some  days  after  Paul  said  unto  Barnabas,  Let  us  go 
r.galn  and  visit  our  brethren  . .  .  and  see  how  they  do. — GJnirchvisitatioJi: — Paul  felt 
that  he  was  not  called  to  spend  a  peaceful  though  laborious  life  at  Antioch,  but  that 
his  true  work  was  "  far  off  among  the  Gentiles  "  (chap.  xxii.  21).  He  knew  that 
his  campaigns  were  not  ended  ;  that  as  a  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  he  must  not  rest 
from  his  warfare,  but  must  endure  hardness,  that  he  might  please  Hira  who  had 
called  him.  As  a  careful  physician  he  remembered  that  they,  whose  recovery 
from  sin  had  begun,  might  be  in  danger  of  relapse,  or  to  use  another  metaphor, 
he  said,  "  Come,  let  us  get  np  early  to  the  vineyards :  let  us  see  if  tiie  vine 
flourish  "  (S.  Song  vii.  12).  We  notice  here  for  the  first  time,  a  trace  of  that 
tender  solicitude  concerning  his  converts,  that  earnest  longing  to  behold  thtnr  f^ices. 
which  appears  in  the  letters  which  he   wrote  afterwards,  as  one  of  the  most 


44a  the  biblical  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

remarkable  and  attractive  features  of  hi8  character.  Paul  was  the  speaker,  not 
Barnabas.  The  latter's  feelings  might  not  be  so  deep, -nor  his  anxiety  so  argent. 
Paul  thought,  doubtless,  of  the  Pisidians  andLycaonians,  as  he  thought  afterwards 
at  Athens  and  Corinth  of  the  Thessalonians,  from  whom  he  had  been  lately  taken 
(2  Thess.  ii.  17,  iii.  10).  He  was  "  not  ignorant  of  Satan's  devices."  He  feared 
"  lest  by  any  means  the  tempter  had  tempted  them,  and  his  labour  had  been  in 
vain  "  (1  Thess.  iii.  5).  He  *'  stood  in  doubt  of  them,"  and  "  desired  to  be  present 
with  them"  once  more  (Sol.  iv.  2).  We  are  here  reminded  of  the  importance  of 
continuing  a  religious  work  when  once  begun.  We  have  had  the  institution  of 
presbyters,  and  of  councils,  and  now  we  have  an  example  of  that  system  of  Church 
visitation,  of  the  happy  effects  of  which  we  have  stiU  some  experience,  when  we 
see  weak  resolutions  strengthened,  and  exj^iring  faith  rekindled,  in  confirmations 
at  home,  or  in  missionary  settlements  abroad.  (J.  S.  Howson.)  The  pastor^s 
visit  to  his  flock  : — Solomon  tells  us  that  "  to  everything  there  is  a  season,"  <fec. 
Among  these  he  specifies  a  time  to  plant  and  a  time  to  build  up.  The  husband- 
man must  not  only  sow,  but  he  must  use  other  arts  of  cultivation,  to  ensure  the 
abundant  crop ;  and  the  architect  must  not  content  himself  with  laying  the 
foundation,  but  must  rear  the  superstructure.  Thus,  too,  it  should  be  with  the 
ministers  of  the  gospel.  There  is  a  season  when  they  are  to  break  up  the  fallow 
ground,  and  one  in  which  they  should  examine  whether  their  labours  have  been 
successful — a  season  when,  having  laid  the  basis,  they  are  to  build  thereon,  and 
raise  to  higher  elevation  that  structure  which  is  to  grow  into  a  holy  temple  of  the 

Lord.       I.    Lex  ME  OFFEK  SOME  PREFATORY  REMARKS  WHICH  BISE  OUT  OP  THE  TEXT.       1. 

Christianity  is  a  religion  of  benevolence.  Those  greatly  mistake  its  character  who 
suppose  that  its  possessors  are  to  become  recluse.  Nor  does  it  merely  refine  and 
direct  our  social  affections,  in  reference  to  the  ordinary  engagements  of  life,  but  it 
renders  their  subject  solicitous  for  the  best  welfare  of  those  by  whom  he  is  sur- 
rounded. It  was  on  the  principle  of  holy  love  giving  birth  to  pious  zeal,  that  Paul 
and  Barnabas  went  among  the  heathen  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom. 
They  were  solicitous  for  the  improvement  of  those  who  had  received  the  truth  in 
the  love  of  it.  Here  is  a  test  by  which  to  try  our  ministry — we  are  not  to  be  content 
with  calling  men  "  out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light,"  but  we  must  be  anxious  for 
their  advancement  in  religion.  2.  Christian  ministers  and  people  should  stir  one 
another  up  to  works  of  usefulness.  Barnabas  was  incited  to  this  particular  part  of 
his  work  by  Paul.  Now  this  teaches  us  to  provoke  one  another,  "  to  love  and  to 
good  works."  This  association  is  important.  It  often  happens  that  one  has 
knowledge  but  no  wisdom,  ardour  but  no  discretion,  and  therefore  his  companion 
may  act  as  a  regulator  to  the  rapid  movements  of  the  watch  or  a  machine,  <feo. 
Besides  which,  "two  are  better  than  one,"  in  counsel,  strength,  courage,  probable 
Buccess,  because,  by  a  combination  of  their  talent  and  energy,  they  may  accomplish 
what  the  solitary  individual  could  never  effect.  3.  Wherever  the  disciples  of  Christ 
travel,  they  should  endeavour  to  do  some  good  on  the  spots  which  they  visit.  4. 
Expectations  of  fruitfulness  in  proportion  to  the  means  of  cultivation  are  justly 
cherished.  Paul  and  Barnabas  visited  the  Churches,  hoping  to  witness  the 
auspicious  results  of  their  missionary  efforts.  II.  Indulqk  in  some  close 
INTERROGATIONS  AS  TO  TOUR  STATE.  1.  Personally.  (1)  Sinners  I  How  is  it  with 
you  ?  Have  you  reaped  any  advantage  from  the  discourses  which  you  have  often 
heaid?  (2)  Believers!  How  do  you  do?  What  of  your  knowledge?  is  it  more 
clear,  extensive,  deep  ?  What  of  your  faith  ?  does  it  embrace  moretirmly  the  testi- 
mony of  Jesus  ?  What  of  your  love  ?  is  it  more  fervent  ?  What  of  your  patience  ? 
does  it  bear  with  more  submission  the  afflictive  dispensations  of  providence  ?  What 
of  your  zeal  ?  (3)  Backsliders  1  How  is  it  with  you  ?  Have  you  seen  your  error 
and  mourned  your  departures  from  God  ?  (4)  Afflicted  Christians  I  How  do  yoa 
do  ?  Are  your  trials  mortifying  your  corruptions  ?  (5)  Young  people  I  How  do 
you  do?  (6)  You  that  are  advanced  in  life  !  how  is  it  with  you?  Are  you  like  old 
trees  stretching  your  fibrous  roots  wider  and  deeper  into  the  earthly  soil  on  which 
you  stand?  2.  Kelative.  My  inquiry  is,  whether  you  whom  God  has  set  in 
families  have  established  an  altar  in  your  houses.  Is  there  a  spirit  and  life  in  your 
sacred  transactions  ?  And  are  you  guarding  against  those  hindrances  to  these 
engagements  which  will  multiply  upon  us  without  great  caution  ?  Do  you, 
mothers,  take  your  little  ones  atone,  and  converse  with  them  about  Him  who  says, 
"  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  Me  "?  Do  you,  fathers,  charge  your  offspring 
to  fear  the  Lord  in  their  youth?  But,  perhaps,  some  will  say,  we  have  no 
families.    Have  you  any  leisure  hours?    Are  you  living  an  idle  and  a  selfish  life? 


CHAP.  XV.]  THE  ACTS.  445 

8.  Collectively.  Suffer  me  to  ask  whether  as  a  (3hristian  society  you  are  constantly 
bearing  one  another  on  your  hearts  before  God  in  prayer — whether  you  are  regular 
in  your  observance  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  are  walking  in  love,  as  Christ  also 
loved  you  and  gave  Himself  for  you  ?  whether  you  are  sustaining  the  several 
institutions  connected  with  your  place  of  worship  ?    III.  Glance  at  the  advantages 

WHICH  AEE  LIKELY   TO  RESULT    FROM  THIS    INQUIRY.       1.    It  wiU  teud  tO  the  lemOVal  of 

obstructions  to  the  prosperity  of  our  Christian  society.  The  artificer  and  the 
engineer  frequently  look  into  the  works  of  the  watch,  or  the  wheels  and  different 
parts  of  the  machine,  that  they  may  remedy  any  defect  which  examination  may 
discover.  The  husbandman  often  walks  along  the  fields  which  he  has  sown,  to 
notice  whether  the  weeds  are  growing  there ;  and  he  cuts  down  the  thistles  and 
nettles,  which  would  hinder  the  growth  of  the  com.  Thus  we  may  discover  and 
correct  those  evils  which  are  apt  to  creep  into  the  best  constituted  communities  on 
earth.  2.  It  sets  the  minds  of  many  at  work.  The  spirit  of  anxiety  on  behalf  of 
yourselves  will  necessarily  produce  a  solicitude  on  behalf  of  your  families,  &c. 
Thus  all  reap  the  benefit.  3.  May  I  be  allowed  to  make  a  reference  to  our  own 
ministerial  encouragement  and  satisfaction  ?  You,  who  are  in  business,  are  not 
content  unless  you  are  making  a  profitable  concern  of  your  avocation,  and  are 
grieved  if  you  are  not  making  a  good  percentage  on  your  capital.  Aud  do  you 
think  that  we  do  not  long  for  success  in  our  occupation  of  saving  souls  from  death, 
and  winning  them  to  Christ  ?  4.  To  all  which  I  will  add,  that  another  result  will 
be  the  extension  of  such  an  aspect  in  the  Church,  as  to  produce  a  favourable  impres- 
sion upon  spectators  without.  They  will  see  that  Christianity  is  not  a  mere  profession, 
but  a  real  and  important  business.  (J.  Clayton,  A.M.)  Revisiting  the  Churches  : — I. 
Eevisitino  THE  Churches.  The  converts'  old  faults  still  clung  to  them  in  part,  and 
their  union  in  the  same  Churches  stirred  up  strifes.  They  were  but  weak  bands  in 
the  midst  of  worldly  and  licentious  communities.  No  wonder  that  their  spiritual 
father  felt  the  necessity  of  confirming  their  faith  (vers.  36,  41).  Brief  report  of  a 
large  work,  parts  of  which  are  more  fully  disclosed  in  the  epistles.  Such  labours 
are  the  main  work  of  every  pastor,  too  commonly  underestimated  in  comparison 
with  revival  effort.  The  evangelist  comes  to  a  people  with  many  advantages,  and 
no  wonder  that  he  succeeds.  But  the  hardest  work  yet  remains — to  lead  the 
new  converts  from  the  excitement  of  revival  scenes  to  the  steady  activity  and  growth 
JO  daily  religion  in  commonplace  surroundings.  U.  The  new  work.  Old  scenes 
arouse  longings  for  new  service.  On  the  edge  of  the  light  the  darkness  is  terribly 
visible.  The  better  to  do  this  new  work,  Paul  finds  a  companion  to  take  Mark's 
place  in  Timothy,  who  had  doubtless  been  converted  with  his  mother  and  grand- 
mother during  the  apostle's  first  visit,  and  had  already  gained  the  confidence  and 
praise  of  the  Church.  He  is  circumcised,  simply  to  avoid  needless  irritation  of 
Jewish  prejudice,  and  then  ordained,  making  a  good  profession  before  many 
witnesses.  The  work  in  Pbrygia  and  Galatia  is  told  in  a  single  sentence,  with  that 
inspired  reticence  which  is  more  surprising  than  speech.  Paul  aud  his  companions 
seem  to  have  been  incUned  to  devote  themselves  to  a  region  so  important  and 
receptive ;  but  God  was  calling  them  another  way.  We  note  in  passing  that  this 
heavenly  control  is  attributed  first  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  then  to  the  Spirit  of  Jesus, 
then  to  God.  So  Ananias  and  Sapphira  are  said  to  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  unto 
God,  and  to  tempt  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  These  unstrained  allusions  show  how 
deeply  fixed  in  the  early  Church  was  the  doctrine  of  the  Divine  Trinity.  Very 
striking,  also,  are  the  disclosures  of  the  Lord's  guidance  of  His  servants.  In 
planning  his  journey  to  this  point,  the  apostle  depended  upon  what  we  may  call 
business  sagacity — his  knowledge  of  the  Churches  and  their  needs.  Now  pushing 
on  to  promising  work,  he  is  suddenly  turned  away  by  direct  supernatural  inter- 
position. Then  comes  the  most  vivid  disclosure,  calling  to  strange  and  overwhelming 
tasks.  How  hke  the  Christian  life  of  to-day  !  At  one  period  our  path  leads  on  in 
common,  uneventful  ways.  We  realise  no  Divine  guidance,  no  special  care  or 
appointed  mission.  Again,  in  the  thick  of  useful  labom-s,  we  are  hindered, 
forbidden.  Sickness,  loss,  failure,  &c.,  sharply  arrest  us,  to  our  wonder  and  grief. 
But  there  are  glorious  hours  when  the  call  comes  divinely  clear,  as  it  did  to  Paul 
at  Troas.  The  blood  of  Trojan  and  Greek  had  stained  the  earth  where  he  stood. 
Xerxes,  Alexander,  and  Caesar  had  lingered  here,  and  crossed  to  their  conquests. 
But  the  grandest  event  which  ever  happened  ou  that  shore  was  the  vision  and  the 
cry  which  led  the  gospel  of  Christ  into  that  continent  which  ruled  for  centuries  the 
mind  aud  the  heart  of  the  world.  Conclusion  :  One  great  truth  breathes  through 
the  whole — the  living  Christ  is  always  present  in  His  Church.     1.  How  else  could 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

He  trust  us  with  such  interests  ?  2.  How  else  could  we  bear  such  responsibilities. 
{Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)  Paul's  second  missionary  journey : — I.  Tna 
woEK  KBSUMED.  1.  Woiking  together.  The  Council  at  Jerusalem  had  been  an 
interruption,  but  was  more  profitable  to  the  Church  than  if  the  apostles  had  kept 
on  with  their  work.  For  the  settling  of  great  principles,  at  times  even  a  revival 
may  well  stop.  And  the  principle  which  they  went  to  settle  was  one  that 
strengthened  the  nerve  of  revival  effort  among  the  Gentiles.  2.  Working  apart. 
(1)  The  cause  of  the  separation,  from  which  we  learn  that  a  quarrel  can  arise — 
(a)  Over  a  very  good  cause.  (&)  Between  very  good  men.  (c)  Between  very  good 
friends.  (2)  The  results  of  separation.  A  division  of  the  field  of  labour.  By  this 
the  whole  field  was  more  quickly  revisited,  and  Mark  made  into  a  good  worker  for 
Christ,  n.  The  work  peospeeed.  1.  The  workers  increased  (chap.  xvi.  1). 
2.  The  Churches  increased.  The  Churches  were  strengthened  by  the  visit,  and  so 
*'  increased  in  number  daily."  Each  day  was  a  birthday  of  souls.  There  were  no 
blank  days  in  their  books  of  record.  III.  The  work  enlarged.  1.  Guided  by  the 
Spirit.  Twice  the  Spirit  did  not  allow  the  missionaries  to  preach  the  Word  where 
they  were  inclined  to  proclaim  it.  He  suffered  them  to  work  in  Galatia  and 
Phrygia.  In  the  latter  region  they  gathered  some  disciples  (cLap.  xviii.  23),  and 
in  the  former  there  grew  up  some  Churches  as  the  fruit  of  their  labours  (Gal.  i.  2). 
But  they  were  forbidden  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  speak  the  word  in  Asia,  and  when 
they  essayed  to  go  into  Bithynia,  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  suffered  them  not.  2.  Called 
by  the  Spirit.  "  Come  over  into  Macedonia,  and  help  as."  Now  they  understood 
why  they  had  not  been  permitted  to  preach  in  Asia,  or  to  go  into  Bithynia.  God 
had  closed  those  doors  that  He  might  open  to  them  a  wider  one.  The  call  of  the 
heathen  to-day  for  the  gospel  is  a  call  of  the  Spirit.  (M.  C.  Hazard.)  PauV$ 
second  missionary  journey  : — I.  A  new  journey  decided  on.  1.  The  reason  for  thia 
decision.  It  shows  Paul's  zeal.  Had  he  not  already  done  his  share  of  this  perilous 
work  ?  It  was  very  pleasant  at  Antioch.  It  needs  a  missionary  fully  to  understand 
tbe  sweetness  of  that  simple  phrase,  "  with  the  disciples."  It  was  not  only  pleasant  to 
abide  at  Antioch ;  certainly  they  were  very  useful  there,  *'  teaching  and  preaching 
the  word  of  the  Lord."  Why  not  let  well  enough  alone?  What  an  appalling 
mass  of  work  yet  remained  to  be  done  at  home  I  But  God  saw  that  the  best  thing 
for  Antioch  herself  was  to  send  forth  her  best  men  to  distant  and  still  darker  fields. 
The  missionary  force  sent  to  Antioch,  and  then  to  Asia  Minor  and  to  Europe,  did 
not  weaken — it  strengthened — the  Church  at  Jerusalem  (chap.  xv.  3,  4).  It  rolled 
back  to  the  Churches  at  home  accumulating  and  mighty  evidence  of  the  power  and 
faithfulness  of  their  Uving  Lord.  2.  The  preparations  for  the  journey.  Who 
shall  form  the  party  ?  Important  question  1  It  is  a  vital  matter,  both  for  their 
happiness  and  their  usefulness,  that  they  should  be  congenial  companions^ 
especially  that  they  should  feel  great  confidence  in  each  other.  Paul  felt  that  ha 
must  be  sure  of  his  comrades.  Still,  it  is  not  strange  that  Barnabas  should  have 
favoured  his  young  relative.  They  could  not  agree,  and  accordingly  they  wisely 
decided  to  divide  the  field.  So,  to  a  great  extent,  our  missionaries  do  to-day.  It 
would  be  somewhat  difficult  for  Methodists  and  Baptists  and  Presbyterians  and 
Episcopalians  all  to  work  together  in  the  same  party  and  on  the  same  ground.  And 
they  need  not.  The  field  is  large  enough  to  give  to  each  body  a  place  of  its  own. 
Yet  their  hearts  are  one.  Paul  chose  Silas,  already  well  known  and  useful,  for  his 
companion,  and  af i  er  a  farewell  meeting  in  which  the  Church  with  prayer  and  worda 
of  love  "  commended  them  to  the  grace  of  God,"  the  two  departed.  H.  The  plan 
OF  their  journey.  1.  The  former  fields  were  revisited.  (1)  What  did  those  fields 
need  ?  (a)  Sympathy.  He  knew  that  the  converts  must  suffer  *'  much  tribulation." 
And  there  are  tens  of  thousands  of  Christian  converts  in  heathen  lands  to-day  in 
equal  need  of  sympathy  from  us.  (b)  Inspection.  "  Let  us  go  again  and  see  how 
they  do."  Read  closely  the  allusions  in  the  Acts  and  Epistles  to  the  first  Churches, 
and  you  will  see  tbat  they  needed  careful  supervision.  These  converts  had  just 
been  plucked  out  of  utter  paganism.  Even  their  elders  and  preacbers  were  in 
many  cases  men  who  had  never  seen  a  Christian  example  except  for  a  few  days  in 
Paul.  It  was  inevitable  that  errors  and  abuses  should  creep  in.  This  necessity  is 
the  same  now.  (c)  Instruction.  A  thousand  questions  plain  to  us  were  new  and 
full  of  perplexity  to  them.  Discussions  about  so  simple  a  thing  as  the  meats  they 
might  eat  arose,  and  there  was  need  of  special  warning  and  teaching  respecting 
some  matters  of  the  most  ordinary  morality  (chap.  xv.  29).  Think  of  Paul  in  the 
fulness  of  his  Christian  knowledge  and  his  power  burying  himself  for  years  in 
remote  provinces  to  teach  these  weak,  dark-minded  people  the  first  begiimings  of 


CHAP.  XV.]  THE  ACTS.  447 

Christian  truth  on  such  points  as  these  I  It  may  well  rebuke  the  folly  and 
fastidiousness  of  any  Christians  who  feel  themselves  too  nicely  educated  to  take  a 
Sunday-school  class,  and  the  vanity  of  any  preachers  who  think  themselves  too 
gifted  to  expend  their  lives  on  the  heathen  or  even  on  a  *•  country  parish  "  in  their 
own  land.  (2)  What  they  gave,  (a)  Multiplying  converts.  Paul  found  that  the 
Churches  he  had  planted  "  increased  in  numbers  daUy."  His  visit  gave  them  a 
new  impulse.  The  parallel  between  missions  then  and  now  is  still  maintained. 
In  no  part  of  Christendom  to-day  is  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  Churches  equal  to 
what  we  see  in  the  Churches  planted  in  heathen  lands,  {b)  Bipening  Christian 
character.  These  converts  were  "  established  in  the  faith."  Notwithstanding  the 
faults  to  be  expected  both  in  Paul's  day  and  ours,  there  has  always  been  witnessed 
^owth  in  knowledge  and  grace,  and  on  every  field  lives  which  have  filled  the  hearts 
of  our  missionaries  with  joy.  (c)  Most  notable  help.  From  the  neighbourhood 
of  Derbe  came  Timothy.  The  annals  of  modern  missions  tell  of  numbers  who, 
without  his  advantages,  have  more  than  equalled  the  devotion  and  courage  of 
Timothy.  Have  you  ever  read  the  life  of  Quala,  the  native  preacher  of  Burma,  or 
of  Papehia,  the  first  fruits  of  Tahiti  ?  2.  New  fields  were  opened.  Phrygia  and 
Galatia,  large  provinces  north  of  Lyeaonia,  are  traversed  by  them.  There  also 
Churches  sprang  up  as  the  result  of  their  labours  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1).  At  a  point  about 
a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  the  coast  Paul  would  stand  with  Bithynia  on  his 
right,  mountainous,  but  wealthy  and  populous,  a  favourite  region  with  the 
emperors  of  Bome ;  on  his  left  Asia,  with  its  great  ports  and  cities,  Ephesus, 
Sardis,  Thyatira,  Laodicea,  Philadelphia,  Smyrna,  with  vast  populations  sunken 
in  idolatry  and  utterly  ignorant  of  the  gospel.  \Vhat  a  field  I  And  it  is  just  at 
hand.  It  seems  a  well-laid  plan,  but  it  is  for  some  unknown  reason  "  forbidden 
by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Paul  then  turns  northward ;  but  again  '*  The  Spirit  suffered 
ibem  not."  Mysia  also,  under  the  same  Divine  intimations,  they  are  compelled 
to  "  pass  by."  It  must  have  seemed  a  strange  providence  1  What  is  this  unknown 
plan  which  God  has  laid  ?  At  length  they  reach  Troas.  It  is  a  great  mercantile 
city.  Is  this  their  destination  ?  No.  Thus  far  all  their  own  plans  are  thwarted, 
although  no  doubt  formed  with  thought  and  prayer.  But  they  need  not  mourn. 
They  are  now  to  see  God's  plan  disclosed.  That  night  there  is  given  to  Paul  a 
vision :  "  There  stood  a  man  of  Macedonia,  and  prayed  him,  saying,  Come  over 
into  Macedonia  and  help  us."  Yes,  to  another  continent  the  seed  of  the  gospel  is 
to  be  bome.  It  is  to  be  planted.  God  shall  watch  over  its  growth  and  spread  in 
those  new  lands.  Then  Paul  may  return  and  preach  in  Asia.  (1)  It  is  a  circum- 
stance useful  for  us  to  notice  that  even  so  good  a  man  as  Paul  is  often  led  by  God 
in  the  dark.  (2)  A  lesson  is  found  in  Paul's  interpretation  of  the  vision.  That 
Macedonian  phantom  called  for  help.  Upon  the  wharf  at  Troas  stood  four  way- 
worn travellers,  unknown,  penniless.  What  succour  had  Greece  to  ask  from  them? 
There  never  had  been  a  civilisation  on  earth  equal  to  hers,  and  yet  there  she  lay, 
wretched  and  guilty  beyond  anything  which  we  are  permitted  to  describe.  What 
wonder  is  it  that  when  Paul  heard  that  prayer  for  help  he  "  gathered  assuredly 
that  the  Lord  had  called  him  to  preach  the  gospel  unto  them  "  1  Give  the  gospel, 
first  of  all,  if  you  would  give  sure  help  to  any  people.  Would  you  help  a  fellow- 
man  7  Tell  him  of  Christ.  Would  you  help  your  country  ?  See  to  it  that  every 
village  and  every  lane  in  her  crowded  cities  is  reached  by  the  gospel.  Would  you 
help  this  unhappy  world  ?  Then  hasten  in  the  spirit  and  the  wisdom  of  Paul  to 
bear  the  gospel  to  every  Macedonian  shore.  {A.  Mitchell,  D.D.)  PauVs  second 
missionary  journey  : — 1.  Christianity  is  essentially  missionary  in  its  purpose.  2. 
God  will  direct  by  hindering  or  helping  His  servants  in  doing  His  work.  3.  God 
wants  the  best  equipped  servants  for  missionaries.  4.  God  will  not  allow  honest 
differences  among  His  servants  to  hinder  the  gospel's  progress.  6.  God  will 
always  give  increase  in  numbers  where  His  people  are  established  in  the  faith. 
6.  The  gospel  will  have  accomplished  its  purpose  only,  when  there  shall  be  none 
to  cry — "  Come  over  and  help  us  1 "    (J.  M.  King,  D.D.) 

Vers.  37-39.  And  Barnabas  determined  to  take  with  them  John. — The  contention 
between  Paul  and  Barnabas : — The  contents  of  this  chapter  are  famous  for  two 
things,  that  had  most  contrary  events.  The  one,  how  a  great  variance  was  con- 
cluded with  a  happy  concord.  The  other,  how  a  small  variance  did  proceed  to  an 
unhappy  discord.  The  great  variance  was,  whether  such  as  were  converted  to 
believe  in  Christ  must  continue  in  the  observation  of  the  law  of  Moses.  For  some 
in  the  first  verse  of  the  chapter  were  bo  rigid  that  they  held,  except  ye  be  oizcum< 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

cised  after  the  manner  of  Moses,  ye  cannot  be  saved.     This  point  was  decided. 
And  they  that  were  Jewish  were  overborne  by  a  moderate  determination  agreed  upon 
by  all  the  apostles  and  elders  that  met  at  Jerusalem.     But  when  matter  of  doctrine 
and  deep  dispute  could  not  divide  the  Church,  Satan  laid  a  smaller  stumbling-block 
in  their  way,  and  the  two  most  holy  servants  of  God,  Paul  and  Barnabas,  dashed 
their  foot  against  it ;  and  they  that  plucked  a  beam  out  of  their  brother's  eye  were 
troubled  with  a  mote  in  their  own.    It  was  not  about  a  point  of  doctrine,  but  upon 
a  circumstance  of  a  person,  no  way  considerable  to  the  main  benefit  of  the  gospel, 
that  begat  a  quarrel  and  a  disjunction  between  them.    Bather  than  Barnabas  would 
suffer  Mark  to  be  discountenanced,  he  would  forsake  Paul.    Bather  than  Paul  would 
consent  to  Mark's  re-admission,  he  would  forsake  Barnabas.    And  the  contention 
was  so  sharp  between  them  that  they  departed  asunder  the  one  from  the  other. 
Upon  the  handling  of  the  text  in  several  points — 1.  We  must  enter  in  at  a  breach. 
Here  was  a  contention.     2.  This  struggling  was  not  between  mean  and  ordinary 
persons,  but  between  the  champions  of  the  holy  cause,  between  Paul  and  Barnabas. 
3.  It  was  not  carried  with  meekness  and  cool  temper,  but  it  swelled  high,  it  was 
Trapo^iiffjuoc;,  a  sharp,  a  fretful  contention.    4.  They  fell  not  out  for  anything  that 
touched  the  life  of  truth,  or  the  honour  of  Christ ;  the  fortunes  of  Greece,  as  the 
proverb  is,  did  not  lie  upon  it ;  it  was  only  about  the  accommodation  of  a  person, 
whether  Mark  were  fit  for  the  present  work  :  that  was  all  the  matter,  and  no  more. 
6.  As  small  a  matter  as  it  was,  it  waxed  to  a  separation,  and  to  disjoin  these  two  in 
body  as  well  as  in  mind.     They  departed  asunder  the  one  from  the  other.     Now  I 
resume  all  this  again.    I.  And  that  which  we  meet  first  of  aU  at  the  door  of  the 
text  is  CONTENTION.    Nouc  of  the  least  sins,  none  of  the  least  punishments.     For  if 
Babel  itself  could  not  be  built  up  among  discord  of  tongues,  how  much  more  can 
Sion  never  be  well  built  up  with  discord  of  hearts  ?    If  the  nets  be  broken,  the 
fishers  of  men  may  catch  a  draught,  but  they  can  keep  nothing.     Cut  a  seed  of 
wheat  in  twain,  and  the  pieces  lose  the  nature  of  fructification.     If  words  be  not 
well  put  together  they  will  make  no  sense;  and  if  men's  senses  do  not  well  join 
together  in  one  profession,  they  will  make  no  Church.     Contention  is  the  devil's 
wedge  to  rive  asunder  the  Cross  of  Christ ;  it  turns  order  into  a  heap,  amity  into 
jangling,  unity  into  schism,  and  truth  into  heresy.     The  work  of  men  is  contention, 
the  way  of  God  is  peace.     We  are  sure  He  is  in  the  still  voice,  and  we  are  sure  that 
He  is  not  in  the  whirlwinds  of  controversies  and  uproars.     Be  it  therefore  pro- 
pounded what  we  should  do  as  well  as  pray,  that  we  may  be  one,  and  that  no 
contention  fall  among  us.     First  bring  a  supple,  a  soft,  a  tractable  mind,  that  hath 
a  good  aiiection  to  agreement,  and  I  wiU  undertake  to  furnish  you  with  rules 
enough,  that  if  you  differ  in  no  greater  things  than  Paul  and  Barnabas  did  (yea, 
what  if  they  were  greater  ?)  you  may  soon  greet  one  another  with  the  kiss  of  peace. 
"  Only  by  pride  cometh  contention,"  says  Solomon  (Prov.  xiii.  19).     He  that  is 
wise  in  his  own  opinions  will  never  want  occasions  to  begin  them,  nor  arguments 
to  maintain  them.     And  he  that  thinks  the  yielding  party  loseth  in  his  honour,  had 
rather  lead  and  perish  than  follow  after  and  be  preserved.     But  humility  is  limper, 
and  will  easily  bend ;  it  is  never  given  to  contradiction ;  it  stands  not  upon  vain 
points  of  reputation,  to  carry  the  sway  in  every  opposition.     For  let  the  wrangler 
get  the  better  in  obstinacy,  the  modest  Christian  shall  overcome  in  charity.    Mortify 
self-love,  and  peace  will  please  you  better  than  victory.     The  best  that  he  can  say 
for  himself  that  continues  in  contention  is.  It  is  unreasonable  that  I  should  yield, 
for  I  am  in  the  right.     It  were  no  hurt  for  a  modest  judgment  to  suspect  itself  in 
that  confidence  of  persuasion.    After  this  which  I  have  required,  that  men  be  not 
rigid,  but  humble  and  flexible,  the  rules  to  be  kept  for  composing  smaller  debates, 
and  my  text  reacheth  to  no  other,  are  these  :  1.  There  is  no  exception  to  be  made 
against  the  sentence  of  the  law  under  which  we  live.    2.  As  the  kingdom  hath 
statute-law,  so  the  Church  hath  canons,  which  served  our  turn,  to  much  benefit,  in 
the  best  ages,  before  imperial  laws  came  forth  to  help  us.    3.  When  some  cases  fall 
out,  for  which  neither  laws  nor  canons  have  provided,  custom  hath  much  force  to 
decide  them.    Long  permission  is  a  tolerable  confirmation.     4.  If  it  fall  out  that 
laws  are  silent,  and  customs  are  contrary  one  to  another,  then,  by  the  piivilege 
which  we  have  above  beasts,  we  must  resort  to  reason.     6.  I  report  me  to  the 
apostles,  how  they  handled  a  discord  in  this  chapter.     Some  would  have  all  the 
ceremonies  of  Moses  kept,  which  would  have  made  the  Gentiles  become  Jews,  and 
not  Christians.    To  prevent  all  schism,  the  apostles  and  elders  fall  upon  that  course, 
which  we  call  media  consilia,  a  middle  temper.     Some  ceremonies  the  Gentile  shall 
conform  unto,  that  will  appease  the  Jew.    Some  ceremonies  the  Jews  shall  forego. 


CSAP.  XT.]  THE  ACTS,  449 

ihat  will  edify  the  Gentile.  6.  What  think  you  of  arbitration  ?  And  the  fewer 
arbiters  the  better.  "When  many  take  the  thing  in  hand,  commonly  it  is  so  long  a 
doing  that  it  is  never  done.  Make  the  appeal  then  to  few.  II.  Though  there  are 
BO  many  remedies  to  stop  contention,  law,  canons,  custom,  reason,  middle  temper, 
arbitration,  yet  my  text  tells  you  they  do  not  always  prevail,  for  the  most  con- 
BiDEBABLB  MEMBERS  OF  Chbist's  BODY  WERE  AT  ODDS,  Paul  and  Bamabas,  which  is 
the  next  point.  Had  they  been  enmities  with  infidels  and  pagans,  with  those  that 
are  without,  they  had  been  natural :  for  "  what  agreement  hath  light  with  darkness  ?  " 
But  this  was  a  jar  at  home,  among  themselves,  a  civil  war.  God  help  us  if  the  right 
hand  fight  against  the  left,  when  both  are  made  to  defend  the  body.  When  the 
rams  of  the  dock  contend,  the  poor  sheep  that  look  on  must  stand  amazed.  But  I 
stand  to  this  doctrine,  that  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  such  good  men  as  they  are, 
may  pursue  a  good  meaning  in  a  contrary  way  one  to  another,  and  be  guiltless. 
For  it  is  the  ignorance  of  good  men,  and  not  their  perverseness,  which  makes  them 
seek  the  true  end  by  multiplicity  of  means,  and  very  opposite.  Cloth  of  the  same 
making  hath  not  always  the  same  dye.  And  they  that  are  prepense  to  glorify  one 
God  in  the  same  Church,  with  the  same  charity,  do  not  always  buUd  with  the  same 
materials.  Paul  loves  the  Church  as  well  as  Bamabas,  but  he  would  not  offend  it 
for  want  of  justice.  Barnabas  loves  the  Church  as  well  as  Paul,  but  he  would  not 
offend  it  for  want  of  clemency  and  compassion.  Here  is  one  wool  and  one  cloth, 
but  dipped  in  two  colours.  Then  I  let  you  see,  that  for  their  part  that  do  equally 
consent  to  maintain  the  true  gospel,  the  inequality  of  their  judgments  may  ba 
inoffensive.  I  would  I  could  say  for  our  own  parts,  that  the  dissensions  of  our 
Reformed  Churches  were  unblamable,  and  that  there  were  no  transgression  against 
charity  in  our  discords.  And  no  wonder  if  there  be  turbulent  opinions  in  the 
congregation  of  malignants ;  for  the  best  of  God's  servants  draw  not  the  same  yoke 
without  a  little  jogging  of  the  ark,  there  was  a  contention  between  Paul  and  Barna- 
bas, ni.  Nay,  to  our  wonder,  it  rested  not  there,  it  exceeded  the  bounds  op 
MEEKNESS,  for  in  the  third  point  my  text  says  it  was  irapo^vtrtjoe,  a  sharp  contention. 
"An  unanimity  of  opinions  is  not  necessary  to  friendship,"  says  Aristotle  very 
well.  Dear  friends  may  retain  the  sweetness  of  love  together,  and  yet  vary  in  some 
conclusions  of  judgment.  The  dissensions  of  them  that  keep  benevolent  minds  are 
not  fallings  out,  but  wranglings.  As  Paul  resisted  Peter  to  his  face  (Gal.  ii.  11) 
boldly,  but  charitably.  His  confidence  for  the  truth  became  him,  and  his  inoffen- 
siveness  commended  him.  It  was  otherwise  at  this  bout  between  him  and  Bar- 
nabas ;  passion  and  provocation  transported  them  both  so  far,  that  it  was  a  sharp 
contention.  The  Greek  word  irapo^vanoQ  hath  a  cursed  meaning  in  it.  When  a 
disease  hath  intermitted  awhile,  and  begins  its  access  and  violence  again,  that  is 
called  a  paroxysm  of  sickness ;  and  when  a  babble  is  worse  and  worse  louder 
and  louder,  that  is  a  paroxysm  of  contention.  These  two,  that  had  been  fellow 
soldiers  under  Christ's  banner,  in  so  many  travails,  in  so  many  perils,  in  so  many 
persecutions,  they  cannot  bear  with  one  another  with  patience  ;  and  they  that  were 
ready  to  die  together  cannot  live  together  ;  they  that  were  the  strongest  confederates 
in  the  world  are  the  strongest  opposites.  Oh  what  a  fickle  and  fallacious  thing  is 
the  concord  of  men  !  Yet  I  must  not  say  that  the  sharpness  between  two  such  sweet 
olive  branches  had  any  taste  of  the  acid  of  reproach,  or  that  they  pierced  one 
another  with  opprobrious  speeches.  I  do  not  onerate  them  with  any  such  accusa- 
tion. Have  they  no  regard  of  their  common  brotherhood  in  Christ,  who  are  not 
satisfied  to  contend,  but  they  must  mix  sharpness  with  it  ?  And  no  small 
quantity.  A  sting  is  a  little  matter ;  they  tear  one  another  in  pieces  as  with  the 
paw  of  a  lion.  Their  pen  drops  nothing  but  gall  and  venom,  as  if  their  quill 
were  plucked  from  the  wing  of  a  cockatrice.  And  who  is  there  of  a  candid 
and  a  clean  soul  that  will  not  sooner  be  gained  with  the  coolness  of  charity 
than  with  the  heat  of  rage.  IV.  Ha\ang  acquainted  you  that  Paul  and  Barnabas 
did  disagree,  and  not  simply  so,  but  with  some  eagerness  and  provocation,  might 
not  a  solid  judgment  suspect  that  some  great  offence  had  thrust  itself  in  between 
them?  You  shall  find  it  otherwise,  that  the  contention  was  m  no  weighty 
CAUSE ;  it  touched  not  the  life  of  truth,  or  the  honour  of  Christ.  The  verse  before  my 
text  will  tell  you  all  in  the  beginning  of  it,  "  Paul  thought  it  not  good  to  take  Mark 
with  him."  And  our  translation  gives  it  more  than  is  due  to  it,  as  I  conceive.  We 
Bay  that  "  Paul  thought  it  not  good,"  as  if  it  were  a  matter  of  good  or  evil.  Much 
better  thus,  as  I  apprehend,  "  Paul  thought  it  not  fit."  It  was  not  what  was  good,  for 
it  was  good  either  way,  but  what  was  more  fit  and  meet  that  made  the  controversy. 
*'  This  is  fit,"  says  one ;  "  'Tis  not  so  fit,"  says  his  partner ;  a  poor  beginning  for 
VOL.  n.  29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

a  sharp  contention.     It  may  be  supposed,  as  I  find  it  in  part  in  a  good  author,  that 
Barnabas  pleaded  on  this  wise  for  Mark.    He  had  shruni:  indeed  from  his  calling, 
and  left  Paul  at  Famphilia ;  but  it  was  not  strange  in  a  novice  to  be  a  little  daunted, 
when  he  was  in  jeopardy  of  his  life.    But  give  him  his  due,  he  had  not  renounced 
the  faith,  but  retired  home  for  fear  of  the  world's  anger.     Yet  he  defended  not  this 
fault,  but  repented,  and  bewailed  it.    Now  he  would  fain  begin  afresh,  for  he  felt 
himself  by  the  grace  of  God  more  strong  and  resolute  than  ever.     Should  not 
indulgence  be  shown  to  his  unfeigned  repentance  ?     Surely  the  son  of  so  good  a 
mother  deserved  some  mildness  and  favour  from  the  presidents  of  the  Church. 
And  what  was  more  proper  to  Christ's  commissioners  than  to  reconcile  offenders 
that  had  gone  astray  ?     These  reasons  prevailing  not  with  Paul,  you  may  imagine 
with  me,  if  you  please,  that  his  sentence  was  to  this  purpose.     That  they  are 
worthy  of  great  reproof  that  make  excuses,  and  follow  not  Christ  when  He  calls 
them.    An  easy  pardon  would  flatter  him  in  his  fault ;  this  repulse  would  make 
him  know  the  magnitude  of  his  sin.     And  why  might  not  Paul  have  remitted  a 
little  of  his  rigour  to  have  gratified  Barnabas  7    And  why  not  Barnabas  have  taken 
the  denial  friendly  to  content  Paul  ?     Sacrifice  small  and  indifferent  things  to  the 
fruition  of  peace.    To  hold  fast  to  oar  conclusions  in  petty  matters  with  all  the 
strength  of  our  will  and  wit  is  not  constancy,  but  a  worse  thing.    Y.  This  is  the 
last  point,  and  the  saddest  word  of  the  text,  this  aTroxoptjoie,  the  dkpabtinq  asumdeb. 
To  come  even  with  the  time  I  will  fall  presently  upon  the  use.     1.  This  is  utterly 
against  our  Saviour's  rule,  '•  Go  and  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother "  (Matt.  v.  24). 
A  wound  will  never  be  healed  but  by  drawing  the  parts  together  that  were  dissolved. 
Affability  and  sweet  conversation  strikes  fire  out  of  a  flint.    But  disjunction  of 
persons  is  an  eclipse  of  friendship,  till  the  hght  of  one  doth  shine  with  a  propitious 
aspect  upon  the  other.    I  know  that  in  the  case  of  these  two  apostles,  though  they 
were  prevented  with  an  error,  yet  shortly  after  their  unkind  farewell  they  returned 
to  their  Christian  temper,  and  afterwards  in  sundry  texts  of  Scripture  Paul  did  put 
himself  in  the  same  scale  with  Barnabas,  as  with  his  sworn  brother,  as  1  Cor.  ix.  6 : 
*'  I  only,  and  Barnabas,  have  not  we  power  to  forbear  working  ?  "    And  Gal.  iL  9 : 
"  James,  Cephas,  and  John  .  .  .  gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  the  right  hands  of 
fellowship."    Here  is  another  thing  worthy  our  consideration.    If  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas had  both  gone  to  Cilicia,  Cyprus  had  wanted  them ;  or  if  both  had  gone  to 
Cyprus,  Cilicia  had  wanted  them.    Now  they  were  singled  they  propagated  the 
faith  of  Christ  both   by  sea  and  land.    Barnabas  sailed  into  Cyprus,  and  Paul 
journeyed  into  CUicia.     This  was  not  like  a  bow-string  snapped  asunder ;  but  they 
were  two  strings  to  one  bow,  and  that  which  was  division  to  themselves  was  multipli- 
cation to  the  gospel  of  Christ.    Finally,  they  performed  what  they  intended,  to 
••  visit  their  brethren  in  every  city,  where  they  had  preached  the  Word  of  God " 
(ver.  32).     All  governments,  in  all  ages,  have  approved  this  to  be  the  best  way  to 
conserve  unity.    It  is  impossible  to  avoid  a  multitude  of  corruptions  in  faith,  and 
not  to  contract  a  prodigious  licentiousness  in  discipline.     Paul  and  Barnabas  super- 
vised the  several  cities  where  they  had  laid  the  foundation  of  evangelical  faith ; 
and,  like  careful  rulers,  interposed  the  power  vrith  which  Christ  had  endued  them, 
to  keep  their  brethren  dispersed  far  and  wide  in  one.     Though  they  were  two  upon 
a  small  disgust,  yet  they  remembered  there  was  but  one  Shepherd  and  one  sheep- 
fold,  whose  peace  they  studied  to  preserve  by  their  pastoral  vigilancy.    (J.  Racket, 
D.D.)        The  disseiision  between  Paul  and  Barnabas : — The  two  men  were  bound 
together  by  early  associations,  perhaps  had  been  schoolmates  at  Tarsus.    When 
Paul  came  to  Jerusalem,  Barnabas  was  the  first  to  trust  and  welcome  him.     They 
were  both  devoted  to  the  work  among  the  Gentiles,  and  had  shared  the  dangers  and 
the  glories  of  the  first  missionary  tour.     This  companionship  ended  with  the  con- 
troversy about  Mark.     However  unfortunate,  it  was  not  strange.    Barnabas  had 
reason  for  his  confidence,  Paul  for  his  distrust.    Both  were  right,  both  were  wrong. 
They  could  agree  only  to  disagree ;  and  the  second  missionary  tour  was  begun  in 
anhappiness.     Many  familiar  suggestions  arise  from  this  scene.     L  Veby  good 
HEN  MAY  HAVE  FAULTS.     Thcse  two  had  coufesscd  at  Lystra  that  they  were  men  of 
like  passions  with  us,  but  now  each  seems  to  have  forgotten  that ;  neither  will  make 
allowance  for  the  other.     We  cannot  expect  always  to  have  our  own  way,  even 
when  we  are  in  the  right.    Were  it  certain  that  onr  opponent  is  wholly  in  the  wrong, 
we  have  no  right  to  forget  that,  notwithstanding  this  error,  he  may  be  a  good  man. 
Trust  his  proved  character.    Do  not  lightly  imperil  a  fellowship  which  has  grown 
up  in  kiri'lly  helpfulness.     A  few  hot  words  may  undo  the  love  of  years,  as  a  few 
biowd  of  the  axe  cuts  down  the  oak  of  a  century's  growth.    The  Master  had  oulj 


«BAr.xv.]  THE  ACTS.  451 

faulty  disciples,  but  He  never  lost  one  real  friend.  What  would  have  become  of 
them,  of  U3,  did  He  dwell  upon  real  faults  as  much  as  upon  possible  virtues  ?    U, 

PeBSONAL    characteristics    and    8UBB0UNDING3  APFEOT    THE    JUDGMENT.      BamabaS 

was  Mark's  uncle ;  he  knew  him  better  than  Pai^l  could,  and  loved  him  better. 
The  trusting  spirit  which  had  welcomed  the  newly-converted  persecutor  now 
received  the  repentant  backslider  ;  yet  this  charity  of  itself  did  not  prove  the  young 
man  was  deserving  of  such  a  trust.  Charitableness  and  affection  become  leniency, 
putting  unfit  men  into  responsible  positions.  Courage  and  self-denial  stiffen  into 
severity  in  judging  weaker  brethren.  III.  One  sin  brings  other  sins  and  many 
SORROWS.  Mark's  weak  shrinking  shamed  himself,  dishonoured  his  Lord,  and 
betrayed  these  true  yoke-fellows  into  a  pitiable  strife.  IV.  Christ  uses  imperfect 
liABOUBERS.  He  has  no  other.  God  must  make  the  folly  and  wrath  of  man  to 
praise  Him,  since  folly  and  wrath  appear  even  in  true  disciples.  V.  True  Chris- 
tians WILL  not  remain  AT  VARIANCE.  How  glad  we  are  for  that  message  from  Paul 
to  Timothy,  ••  Take  Mark  and  bring  him  with  thee,  for  he  is  profitable  to  me  for 
the  ministry  "  ;  and  for  the  commendatory  mention  of  Barnabas  ten  years  later,  in 
writing  to  the  Corinthians.  {Sermoiw  by  the  Monday  Club.)  The  quarrel  of  Bar- 
nabas and  Saul : — The  fact  that  such  a  scene  is  recorded  proves  the  genuineness  of 
the  men.  Had  it  been  their  object  to  impose  upon  mankind,  such  a  scene  as  this 
would  have  been  either  not  mentioned  at  all,  or  would  have  appeared  in  such  a 
form  as  to  conceal  altogether  what  is  morally  offensive.  As  genuine  men,  they 
reveal  themselves  to  us  in  the  costume  of  real  Ufe,  with  all  their  imperfections  about 
them.  Note  here — ^I.  That  probability  is  no  certain  guide  for  us  in  judging 
THE  future.  To  all  who  were  acquainted  with  these  apostles,  nothing  could  have 
appeared  more  improbable  than  that  they  should  ever  quarrel.  They  were  both 
good  men,  they  were  old  friends.  They  had  been  fellow-labourers  for  a  long  time. 
They  were  apostles  too,  acting  under  the  inspiration  and  direction  of  Christ. 
Under  such  circumstances,  could  anything  appear  more  improbable  than  that  such 
men  should  quarrel  ?  Yet  they  did.  We  look  to  the  future,  and  say,  probably 
such  an  event  will  happen  ;  yet  how  often  the  future  falsifies  our  calculations  and 
disappoints  our  hopes.  II.  That  little  things  are  often  more  trying  to  the 
TEMPEB  THAN  GREAT.  These  men  for  years  had  been  in  the  most  trying  circum- 
stances together.  They  had  contended  together  with  the  bigoted  Jew  and  the 
idolatrous  Gentile.  They  had  just  returned  from  Jerusalem,  where  they  had 
engaged  in  a  most  exciting  debate,  and  seem  to  have  gone  through  the 
whole  of  these  things  with  unbroken  equanimity.  But  now  the  mere  question  as 
to  whether  John  should  accompany  them  produces  great  irritation.  Now  this 
seems  to  us  a  small  matter  compared  with  other  things  that  engaged  their  united 
attention ;  and  yet  it  was  this  that  broke  the  harmony  of  their  friendship.  It  is 
often  so.  Call  men  together  to  discuss  small  questions,  and  they  will  quarrel ;  call 
them  to  work  out  a  great  object,  and  they  will  be  cordial  and  unanimous.  The 
best  way  to  promote  Church  union  is  to  engage  in  great  works.  Flies  irritate  the 
noble  steed  more  than  the  roll  of  the  chariot  wheel.  III.  That  Christianity 
ALLOWS  SCOPE  FOB  DISCRETIONARY  ACTION.  Thesc  apostlcs  took  upou  themselves  to 
decide  as  to  whether  John  should  accompany  them  or  not.  No  principle  was 
involved  in  it — it  was  a  mere  question  of  expediency.  We  are  allowed  no  discre- 
tionary action  either  as  to  moral  principles  or  cardinal  truths.  But  there  is  much 
in  connection  with  the  methods  of  extending  Christianity  that  is  left  entirely  with 
our  judgment.  Hence  the  discussion  at  Jerusalem  was  under  the  direction  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  But  here  there  was  no  special  direction.  Many  such  questions  are 
left  for  such  treatment — Church  government,  &c.  IV.  That  the  best  op  men  are 
NOT  ABSOLUTELY  INFALLIBLE.  When  the  a[)Ostles  spoke  and  acted  under  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  Spirit,  they  were  infallible.  But  they  did  not  always  thus  speak  and  act, 
as  the  event  we  are  discussing  shows.  There  is  but  one  perfect  example,  and  thank 
God  there  is  One ;  and  He  is  to  be  followed  through  evil  as  well  as  good  report. 
V.  That  under  the  gracious  role  of  heaven  evil  is  made  subservient  to  the 
PROGRESS  op  good.  1.  An  increased  area  of  usefulness.  Instead  of  one  district  for 
both,  which  was  contemplated,  there  was  one  for  each.  It  led  Paul  into  Europe. 
2.  An  increased  power  of  usefulness.  Instead  of  two  men  there  were  four,  VI. 
That  earnest  work  will  inevitably  rectify  our  tempers.  They  had  not  been 
parted  long,  I  presume,  before  every  particle  of  animosity  went  out.  We  find  Paul 
referring  kindly  to  Mark  (Col.  iv.  10;  2  Tim.  iv.  11;  Philem.  24),  and  also  to 
Barnabas  (1  Cor.  ix.  6).  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  quarrel  about  John  Mark: — 
As  a  general  rule  there  is  nothing  more  miserable  than  to  dwell  upon  others'  short- 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

comings.  I  call  attention  to  the  faults  of  three  disciples  to  see  that  the  old  Adam 
is  not  utterly  killed  in  the  best  of  men.  I.  The  sharp  quarrel  between  Pattii 
AND  Barnabas.  Mark,  fired  perhaps  by  the  zeal  of  Paul,  or  impelled  by  the  roving 
fancy  of  youth,  had  gone  with  the  two  to  Antioch.  They  then  took  him  on  a 
missionary  tour,  but  just  when  most  needed  he  deserted.  By  and  by,  when 
another  tour  was  in  contemplation,  Barnabas  proposes  to  try  him  again.  Paul 
refuses,  and  the  contention  was  sharp.  The  only  wise  thing  about  the  whole 
matter  was  the  separation.  It  is  far  better  for  men  who  cannot  work  comfortably 
together  to  separate.  If  the  contention  had  been  patched  up  neither  could  have 
gone  to  the  work  with  whole-heartedness.  There  were  faults  on  both  sides,  but  it 
would  be  difficult  to  say  on  whom  the  lesser  blame  rested.  On  the  one  hand  there 
was  the  brave  consistency  which  felt  that  a  weak  and  irresolute  man  was  not  to  be 
trusted  with  such  a  perilous  mission ;  on  the  other  there  was  the  honest  convicticn 
that  Mark  was  worth  another  trial.  1.  The  most  godly  men  are  still  liable  to 
sudden  falls.  A  man  never  becomes  so  advanced  in  holiness  as  to  get  beyond  the 
danger  of  old  faults  of  temper.  Let  as  seek  the  grace  that  makes  a  man  the 
conqueror  of  his  own  spirit.  2.  Those  who  are  engaged  in  the  same  work  may 
have  antagonistic  views  on  matters  of  prudence.  It  is  no  use  trying  all  to  see  with 
one  eye.  Meanwhile  we  must  have  the  spirit  of  charity,  and  bear  with  schemes 
which  seem  stupid  and  court  failure.  II.  The  different  stages  of  Mark's  litb 
WHICH  these  verses  REVEAL.  The  unpromising  youth  often  sm-prises  ub  by 
superior  development.  Soldiers  who  have  quailed  before  the  first  fire  have  afterwards 
distinguished  themselves  as  brave  men.  So  with  Mark.  Barnabas*  encouragement, 
combined  with  the  sharp  tonic  administered  by  Paul,  made  a  man  of  him.  Both 
are  needed  to-day.  III.  The  honourable  confession  of  Paul  that  Mark  had 
TURNED  out  BETTER  THAN  HE  HAD  EXPECTED.  {E.  H.  Higgius.)  Paul  and  Bav- 
nabas,  their  contention  and  separation : — I.  The  apostles  were  not  going  forth 

AS    THE    delegates    OF   A   SUPREME    CENTRAL    LEGISLATIVE     ASSEMBLY.       1.    There    WaS 

union  between  the  Churches,  but  that  was  purely  spiritual.  2.  The  visit  was 
perfectly  natural.  3.  Being  a  second  visit,  it  was  calculated  to  show  that  they 
were  not  ashamed  of  their  principles,  nor  afraid  of  their  opponents.     IL  Stability 

OF   CHARACTER  WAS    NECESSARY    TO    USEFULNESS    IN     SUCH  A   MISSION.       1.    Friendship 

is  no  reason  in  itself  why  a  man  should  be  promoted  to  office.  2.  Fickle  men  are 
not  to  be  trusted  in  the  service  of  truth  when  there  is  difficulty  in  the  way.  III.. 
Differences  of  opinion  should  not  lead  to  the  abandonment  of  principle. 
1.  Some  wreak  their  vengeance  on  the  cause  of  truth.  2.  When  two  men  cannot 
agree  to  toil  in  the  same  comer  of  the  vineyard,  let  them  honestly  divide, 
and  betake  them  to  other  departments.  3.  The  hoUest  men  may  have 
ruffled  tempers  sometimes.  4.  The  apostle  afterwards  received  Mark  into 
fellowship.  "  To  err  is  human — to  forgive.  Divine."  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
separation  of  Paul  and  Barnabas : — We  are  now  out  in  the  open  air  again  (ver. 
85).  For  some  days  we  have  been  in  a  stifling  atmosphere,  listening  to  great  men 
debating  the  vexed  question  of  circumcision.  We  feel  our  need  of  rest,  after  the 
passionate  excitement  through  which  we  have  gone.  We  will  now  live  amongst 
friends,  and  be  quiet  and  trustful,  and  grow  in  our  apprehension  of  Divine  purposes. 
Yet  this  is  not  to  be.  We  come  out  of  one  contention  into  another.  This  is  life  all 
through  and  through — namely,  a  series  of  conflicts.  Observe— I.  Paul's  love  of 
WORK — "Let  us  go  again."  Paul  was  bitten  again  with  mission  hunger.  He  him- 
self was  earnest ;  therefore  he  could  not  tolerate  insincerity.  There  was  no  breach 
in  his  all  but  infinite  integrity,  and  therefore  a  flaw  in  other  men  was  not  an 
accident  but  a  crime.  In  his  criticism  of  Mark,  Paul  gave  a  criticism  of  himself. 
Paul  meant  his  work  to  be  solid  and  enduring.  This  was  the  very  purpose  he  had 
in  view — namely,  to  consolidate  young  believers  and  immature  thinkers  and 
students ;  and  to  take  with  him,  on  such  a  mission,  a  man  who  himself  had  turned 
back  from  the  plough,  was  an  irony  which  vexed  his  soul.  His  purpose  was  to 
"  confirm  the  Churches,"  to  make  them  stronger  and  stronger;  and  to  be  working 
with  an  instrument  which  had  already  broken  in  his  hands  was  a  moral  irony,  from 
which  his  very  spirit  recoiled.  Everything  depends  upon  the  kind  of  work  you  are 
going  to  do.  There  is  a  place  in  the  Church  for  every  one,  and  that  is  the  problem 
which  the  Papacy  has  solved.  The  Papacy  can  use  all  sorts  of  men  ;  Protestantism 
can  use  only  one  or  two  kinds.  We  must  learn  to  employ  men  in  proper  depart- 
ments who  do  not  come  up  to  the  Pauline  standard  of  excellence.  Do  not  throw 
away  any  man  for  the  sake  of  one  fault,  or  even  two.  There  may  be  a  great  deal 
of  soundness  in  the  apple  that  has  upon  it  one  patch  of  rottenness.     II.  Barnabas'^ 


OHAP.  XV.]  THE  ACTS,  453 

CHABiTY.    He  is  willing  to  give  a  man  another  chance  in  life.    By  so  much  he  waa 
a  great  man.    From  the  point  of  righteous  discipline,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the 
grandeur  of  Paul ;  but  a  man  who  would  give  a  youth  another  chance  seems  to  me 
to  have  in  him  the  true  spirit  of  the  Cross.      Take  heed  how  you    administer 
discipline.     Thank  God  for  the  few  men  here  and  there  who  are  willing  to  try  U3 
again  I    We  owe  them  our  lives  :  we  ought  to  live  for  them.    We  have  hitherto 
considered  Barnabas  only  a  well-disposed,  loving  man,  who  would  sit  down  or  stand 
up,  go  or  come,  just  as  some  superior  nature  might  suggest  or  require.     Such  are 
often  amongst  the  sternest  men.    Barnabas  said  to  Paul,  "  No  1  "  and  even  Paul 
could  not  change  that  No  into  a  Yes.     Afterwards  the  judgment  of  Barnabas  was 
vindicated.  Barnabas  was  in  this  respect  a  further-sighted  man  than  Paul.     There 
is  only  one  infallible  Person  in  the  Church,  and  he  is  its  Lord.    Paul  was  but  a  man 
at  the  best ;  he  himself  said  so.     •'Who  then  is  Paul  and  who  is  Apollos ? "    In 
this  respect  Barnabas  was  a  greater  man  than  Paul.     He  is  the  true  intellectual 
reader  who  says  about  a  young  man,  "  He  has  the  Spirit  of  God  in  him,  and  the 
indestructible  seed  of  the  kingdom."    And  he  who,  twenty  years  after,  simply  gives 
in  to  facts  is  not  a  man  of  penetration  at  all.    Young  man,  live  in  the  warm  sun- 
shine of  those  who  hope  the  best  about  you.    You  owe  nothing  to  the  men  who 
affirm  your  excellence  when  they  cannot  deny  it.      HI.  There  aee  mitigatino 
CIECOM8TANCE3  IN  THIS  CONTROVEKST.     1.  Both  men  were  honest.    It  is  something 
to  have  to  deal  with  honest  men,  even  when  they  oppose  you.     2.  The  contention 
was  not  about  the  Master.    Paul  and  Barnabas  did  not  take  two  different  views  of 
Christ.    They  are  not  going  to  found  separate  theological  sects.    3.  The  work  was 
not  abandoned,  but  was  doubled.     The  destinations  they  selected  were  revelations 
of  the  spirit  of  the  men.     Barnabas  goes  into  obscurity,  Paul  rises  like  a  sun  into 
a  broader  firmament.     4.  The  parties  afterwards  become  reconciled.    We  have 
already  said  good-bye  to  Peter ;  so  now  we  must  say  good-bye  to  Barnabas  and 
Mark.  At  this  point  they  both  retire  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.    The  withdraw- 
ment  is  in  a  kind  of  thunderstorm.     Surely  this  cannot  be  all.     Such  lifelong 
friends  cannot  part  in  this  way  1     We  must  know  more  about  this.     In  1  Cor.  ix.  6 
we  hear  again  about  Barnabas,  and  in  1  Peter  v.  13 ;  Col.  iv.  10 ;  Philem.  24 ; 
2  Tim.  iv.  11  we  hear  again  about  Mark.     Well  done,  Mark  1     Well  done,  Paul ! 
Few  men  have  moral  courage  to  correct  themselves  openly,  to  repair  wrongs  which, 
however  unconsciously,  they  once  inflicted.     {Ibid. )         Unity  in  disunion : — I.  St. 
Paul's  proposaij  (ver.  86)  to  revisit  the  congregations  was  a  proof  of  his  sense 
OF  THE  preoariousness  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.     Throughout  his  Epistles  we  have 
the  expression  of  the  same  spirit.    He  has  scarcely  left  a  place,  when  his  anxiety 
about  the  weU-being  of  his  converts  becomes  too  painful  for  him  to  bear.    He  sends 
back  his  only  companion,  and  consents  to  be  entirely  solitary  in  a  strange  city,  if 
he  may  but  gain  the  desired  tidings  as  to  the  stability  of  those  whom  he  has  left 
behind.    It  was  so  already  at  this  early  point  in  his  ministry.     It  is  a  good  thing 
to  form  new  plans,  originate  new  machineries,  and  carry  the  ministrations  of  the 
Church  into  homes  and  haunts  which  they  have  not  yet  penetrated.    But  in  all 
this  we  must  take  heed  lest  we  be  chargeable  with  not  well  following  up  a  work 
which  has  been  well  begun.    When  an  impression  is  by  God's  grace  secured,  still 
it  may  fade  and  flag  and  at  last  disappear  if  it  be  not  vigorously  and  earnestly 
and  constantly  renewed.    Oh,  how  precarious  is  the  work  of  grace  in  the  most 
promising  of  us  all  1   What  snares  does  Satan  lay  for  the  young,  the  newly  confirmed, 
the  just  awakened,  the  recently  reformed  1     So  soon  is  the  ground  once  cleared 
again  overgrown  ;  so  soon  is  the  impulse  once  communicated  checked  and  impeded ; 
BO  soon  is  the  seed  once  sown  snatched  away,  or  scorched  in  its  first  budding,  or 
choked  finally  in  its  growth ;  that  there  is  need  to  say  in  the  words  here  before  us, 
"  Let  us  go  again,"  &c.      II.  The  result  of  the  proposal.     Barnabas  shared  St. 
Paul's  feeling.     But  in  settling  the  details  of  the  enterprise  a  grave   difference 
presented  itself.     1.  The  subject  of  this  dissension  was  a  Christian  subject.     They 
were  at  variance  as  to  the  best  way  of  prosecuting  Christ's  work.     It  was  not  a 
quarrel  arising  out  of  this,  that  one  of  the  two  had  gained,  what  both  could  not 
have,  of  the  riches  or  honours  or  pleasures  of  the  world.    It  was  not  that  one  had 
disparaged  the  ability  or  the  probity  or  the  spirituality  of  the  other,  and  that  this 
must  awaken  in  the  natural  mind  a  resentment  to  be  shown  in  retort  or  cherished 
in  malice.    Happy  should  we  be,  if  our  faults  were  only  those  of  an  excess  of  zeal 
and  tenacity  in  reference  to  the  work  of  Christ  and  the  interests  of  souls  1     2.  That 
infirmity  was  redressed  in  the  wisest  and  best  of  ways.     It  was  with  the  dissension 
at  two  af  ostles,  as  with  the  dispute  of  Abram  and  Lot.    Where  no  Divine  lav« 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

compels  coexistence,  separation  is  oftentimes  the  best  cure  for  discord.  "  Live  anci 
let  live."  If  two  of  God's  servants  cannot  see  things  alike,  let  them  agree  to  8e« 
them  differently.  If  they  cannot  act  together,  they  can  at  least  believe  together, 
and  hope  together,  and  together  love.  If  each  has  Christ's  work  and  glory  at  heart, 
they  will  all  be  reconciled  by  the  great  reconciler:  death,  which  is  the  gate  of  heaven, 
•will  make  the  crooked  straight,  and  the  rough  places  plain.  3.  Separation  was  in 
this  case  followed — we  know  it — by  concord.  III.  The  vabious  aspects  of  thb 
HisTOBT.  1.  The  Holy  Scriptures  are  no  flattering  tale.  There  is  no  screening, 
no  palliating,  of  the  infirmities  of  holy  men.  If  men  will  make  mischief  of  this 
they  must.  If  men  will  say  either,  Because  a  saint  did  this,  therefore  it  cannot 
be  sin ;  or  else,  Because  such  a  man  did  this,  therefore  he  cannot  be  a  saint :  they 
are  left  to  do  so.  The  business  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  in  these  respects,  is  with 
facts,  not  with  inferences.  That  Book  which  paints  not  men  as  either  demons  or 
heroes ;  that  Book  which  tells  me  just  what  is  true,  and  teaches  me  how  to  rise 
out  of  this  which  is  truly  the  natural  man  into  this  which  is  as  truly  the  Christian 
man  ;  how  to  mourn  over  myself  without  despairing,  and  how  to  deal  justly  with 
others  and  yet  not  condemn  ;  that  I  call  a  true  Book :  I  see  there  man  as  he  is, 
and  God  as  He  is :  I  see  there  a  light  to  my  steps,  because  it  describes  truly  the 
wilderness  which  I  traverse,  and  because  it  shows  me  how  and  by  what  guidance  I 
can  traverse  it  in  safety.  And  if  I  see  that  the  Book  describes  all  else  truly,  because 
according  to  my  daily  experience  of  man  and  of  man's  world,  then  I  can  believe  it 
when  I  see  that  there  is  one  Person,  just  one,  and  one  only,  whom  it  paints  aa 
indeed  without  sin ;  perfect  Man,  as  much  in  the  blamelessness  of  His  life,  as  in 
the  completeness  of  His  nature.  2.  This  passage  sets  before  us  an  all-working  and 
all-ruhng  and  all-restoring  Providence  of  God.  Out  of  evil  comes  forth  good.  Out 
of  human  infirmity  there  grows  Divine  strength.  The  unity  of  the  work  is  broken, 
but  out  of  the  one  divided  there  has  sprung  a  twofold  completeness.  (Dean 
Vaughan.) 

Ver.  41.-Chap.  xvi.  1-8. — And  he  went  through  Syria  and  Cllicia  confirming 
the  Churches. — Paul  as  a  model  for  all  gospel  ministers  : — He  recognises  the  im- 
portance of — I.  ESTABLISHINO  NEW  CONVERTS  IN  THE  FAITH.      In   this  visit  he    doCS 

not  break  new  ground,  but  goes  over  the  old  scenes.  Who  that  remembers  the 
treatment  which  he  met  with  at  Lystra  can  fail  to  admire  his  magnanimity  and 
dauntless  heroism  in  entering  this  place  again  ?  Note  in  relation  to  his  con- 
firmatory work — 1.  The  method  (ver.  4).  He  carried  with  him  wherever  he  went, 
and  expounded,  the  apostolic  letter  from  Jerusalem  (chap.  xv.  23-29).  2.  The 
success  (ver,  5).  Here  was — (1)  Moral  increase — "  established  in  the  faith." 
Their  views  became  clearer ;  their  principles  struck  a  deeper  root ;  their  attachment 
to  Christ  attained  a  greater  strength.  Their  religion  passed  from  the  region  of 
theories  and  feelings  into  their  heart  and  life.  (2)  Numerical  increase — "  increased 
in  number  daily."  Let  Christians  improve  in  character,  and  converts  will  multiply 
daily.  This  confirmatory  work  is  pre-eminently  the  work  of  Christians  in  this  age 
and  land  of  ours.    A  reconverted  Church  is  essential  to  the  conversion  of  the  world. 

II.  Enlisting  true  coadjutors  in  the  work.  On  the  page  of  history  stands 
there  a  man  more  brave,  mighty,  self-dependent  than  PauL  Yet  he  needs  a 
companion.  He  lost  Barnabas,  and  he  "  chose  Silas,"  and  took  with  him 
Timotheus.  Christ  knew  our  social  needs,  and  hence,  in  sending  out  His  disciples 
and  apostles.  He  sent  them  in  twos.  One  supplements  the  deficiencies  of  the  other ; 
in  the  breast  of  one  there  lies  a  spark  to  rekindle  the  waning  fire  of  the  other's 
zeal.  He  selected  the  best  man  as  his  social  helper.  In  a  great  work,  link  not 
yourselves  to  spiritually  common  men  when  you  may  get  moral  peers  and  princes. 

III.  Accommodating  himself  to  public  sentiment.  The  Jews  believed  in  cir- 
cumcision. Although  the  rite  was  no  longer  binding,  it  was  not  yet  a  moral  wrong ; 
and  hence  Paul,  in  accommodation  to  the  popular  sentiment,  circumcises  Timothy. 
His  fixed  line  of  procedure  was  to  act  on  the  cities  through  the  synagogues.  But 
such  a  course  would  have  been  impossible  had  not  Timothy  been  circumcised  (chap, 
xxi.  29).  The  very  intercourse  of  social  life  would  have  been  almost  impossible, 
for  it  was  still  '*  an  abomination  "  for  the  circumcised  to  eat  with  the  uncircumcised. 
In  all  this  Paul  was  consistent  with  himself,  with  his  own  grand  axiom,  "  I  am  all 
things  to  all  men,  that  I  might  save  some."  IV.  Yielding  to  the  dictates  o» 
THE  Divine  Spirit  (vers.  6-8).  1.  There  is  a  Divine  Spirit,  and  tliat  Spirit  has  access 
to  the  human  spirit.  2.  If  we  are  the  true  ministers  of  Christ,  His  Spirit,  according 
to  Uis  promise,  is  with  as — "Lo,  I  am  with  you  always."    (1)  The  will  of  that 


CHAP.  XTI.I  THE  ACTS,  455 

Spirit  must  be  obeyed :  to  oppose  that  is  sin,  weakness,  rain.  (2)  The  will  of  that 
Spirit  is  knowable :  He  gives  indications  by  impressiona  withiii  and  by  events 
without.    {D,  Thtrnoi,  DJ).) 


CHAPTEB  XVL 


Vbbs.  1-S.  Then  came  he  to  Derbe  and  Lystra :  and  behold  a  certain  disciple 
was  there,  named  Timotheus. — Timotheus : — 1.  The  first  ol  Paul's  missionary 
journeys  reached  its  furthest  limit  at  Lystra — the  most  uncivilised  place  he  ever 
visited.  Even  here,  however,  he  left  a  Church  which  he  now  found  standing 
steadfast,  and  among  its  members  a  youth  of  peculiar  promise,  who  bore  the  now 
famous  name  of  Timothy.  2.  On  the  mother's  side  Timothy  was  a  Jew.  Both 
mother  and  grandmother  were  devout,  and  it  is  therefore  surprising  that  "his 
father  was  a  Greek,"  and  probably  a  heathen.  Mixed  marriages  were  held  in 
horror  by  orthodox  Jews.  At  Lystra,  however,  Jews  were  few,  and  the  rigour  of 
custom  must  have  been  relaxed.  Timothy  had  never  been  circumcised.  But  what 
might  escape  remark  in  Lycaonia,  would  prove  a  scandal  elsewhere ;  and  with  his 
usual  practical  judgment,  Paul  "  took  and  circumcised  him  "  before  he  led  him 
forth  to  work.  3.  The  spiritual  ancestry  of  Timothy  is  as  clearly  marked  as  the 
natural.  Prepared  for  the  willing  reception  of  the  gospel  by  the  godly  education 
of  his  childhood,  he  became  Paul's  *•  own  son  in  the  faith."  In  the  interval 
between  the  two  visits  he  had  advanced  to  a  character  of  marked  ability  and  use- 
fulness. Paul,  always  on  the  watch  for  helpers,  saw  the  materials  lying  ready  for 
a  noble  missionary  life.  "  Him  would  Paul  have  to  go  forth  with  him."  And 
with  this  period  we  connect  the  numerous  allusions  to  his  ordination  service.  The 
Church  appears  gathered  in  solemn  assembly.  He  makes  "  a  good  profession 
before  many  witnesses."  Then  the  apostle  explains  the  labours  and  the  risks  of 
the  Christian  warfare,  and  charges  his  "  son  "  to  be  brave,  patient,  and  believing. 
The  laying  on  of  hands  succeeds ;  and  the  prayer  of  the  Church  rises  to  heaven 
on  his  behalf.  Nor  in  vain ;  for  to  that  moment  is  referred  the  special  anointing 
of  the  Spirit  which  fitted  the  young  man  for  his  future  ministry.  And,  amid 
smiles  and  tears,  we  see  him  going  forth  into  the  great  world,  in  tbe  footsteps  of 
the  Captain  who  had  chosen  him  to  be  a  soldier.  4.  Timothy's  work  constantly 
widened  in  range  and  in  importance.  Very  young  when  he  went  out  with  Paul, 
it  was  fitting  that  he  should  at  first  remain  in  the  background.  But,  from  references 
in  the  epistles,  we  discover  how  usefully  and  industriously  he  was  employed.  From 
Corinth  he  is  sent  to  the  Thessalonians,  "  to  establish  and  comfort  them  in  their 
faith."  From  Ephesus  he  is  sent  to  the  Corinthians  "  to  bring  them  into  re- 
membrance "  of  the  truth  they  seemed  to  have  forgotten.  He  passed  through  his 
apprenticeship  in  a  loyal  and  loving'spirit ;  and  presently  rose  to  be  a  master,  with 
enterprises  of  his  own.  Still  comparatively  young,  he  is  left  at  Ephesus  with  an 
Herculean  task  on  his  hands.  He  becomes  the  recognised  successor  of  the  great 
apostle,  invested  with  an  authority  hardly  inferior  to  his  own.  When  that  apostle's 
end  draws  near,  and  he  seeks  some  one  to  be  his  comforter  and  executor,  it  is  to 
Timothy  that  the  summons  is  sent;  and  we  learn,  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
that  he  was  imprisoned  for  Christ,  and,  if  tradition  is  to  be  trusted,  he  died  at 
last  a  martyr's  death  in  the  streets  of  his  own  turbulent  Ephesus.  5.  With  httle 
beyond  allusions  to  guide  us,  it  is  difficult  to  decide  on  Timothy's  qualities.  His 
bodily  health  was  feeble,  and  required  stimulants  ;  his  natural  disposition  appears 
to  have  been  as  sensitive  as  Paul's,  and  perhaps  deficient  in  forwardness  and 
courage.  The  situation  of  affairs  at  Ephesus  was  at  the  time  extremely  difficult 
and  even  dangerous.  The  bravest  might  easily  have  lost  heart  in  such  an  atmo- 
sphere, and  would  have  needed  to  sustain  him  every  motive  which  an  apostle  could 
supply.  Paul  did  not  think  meanly  of  his  follower.  On  the  contrary,  he  speaks 
of  his  unfeigned  faith,  his  unwearied  service,  his  strict  fidelity.  He  declares  that 
in  all  the  chosen  band  of  his  fellow-labourers  there  ia  none  so  disinterested,  so  full 
of  sympathy,  so  much  after  his  own  heart.  More  dazzling  names  than  his  are  t» 
be  seen  in  the  firmament  of  the  early  Church ;  Apollos  flames  across  the  sky, 
leaving  behind  the  briUiant  sparks  of  his  Alexandrian  rhetoric :  but  the  star  of 
Timotheaa  beams  on  with  a  gentle,  gracious,  and  unfading  lustre,  holding  forth 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  xvi, 

the  word  of  life.  6.  Whatever  the  contrast  between  Timothy's  mission  and  ours, 
his  character  is  one  which,  in  its  strength,  its  modesty,  and  its  devotedness,  may  be 
ours.  Character  is  a  building  of  which  God  is  the  architect,  and  all  the  designs  are 
His.  But  the  building  rises  stone  on  stone,  and  is  the  work  of  many  different 
hands ;  and  it  is  useful  to  inquire  what  influences  we  can  trace  as  helping  to  make 
this  man  what  he  was.  (1)  One  was  the  Bible.  "  From  a  child  "  it  had  been  his 
great  lesson-book.  And  now,  in  this  great  age  of  making  books,  where,  by  common 
confession,  is  there  a  book  that  will  do  for  character  what  the  Bible  does?  (2)  No 
less  helpful  were  personal  influences.  The  Bible  is  the  best  of  books ;  but  the 
character  of  those  who  teach  it  adds  immensely  to  its  power.  Now  the  earliest 
Scripture-lessons  of  Timothy  were  mingled  with  the  happy  associations  of  hours 
spent  at  the  feet  of  his  grandmother  Lois  and  his  mother  Eunice.  When  they  and 
he  were  parted,  the  same  good  work  was  carried  on  by  apostolic  bands.  How 
much  may  be  done  to  impart  interest  and  impressiveuess  to  the  Word  of  God ! 
The  desire  to  see  her  child  become  another  Timothy  lives  in  many  a  Christian 
mother's  heart :  does  not  the  power  to  make  him  so,  under  the  Divine  blessing, 
lie  largely  in  her  hands  ?  The  Bible-class,  wisely  conducted,  becomes  the  very 
garden  of  the  Lord,  where  the  young  plants  are  nourished  to  a  full  stature  and 
Btrength.  (3)  Yet,  after  all,  the  main  human  force  at  work  in  the  formation  of 
Timothy's  character  was  Timothy  himself :  for  the  determining  will  was  his  own. 
(17.  Brock,  jun.)  Timothy;    or  vmternal  goodness: — I.  Timothy's   beauty  of 

CHARACTEB  IS  TRACEABLE  THROUGHOUT  HIS  LIFE.  He  was  not  Converted  from  sin 
and  shame  in  mature  life.  From  a  child  he  knew  the  Holy  Scriptures  experi- 
mentally, as  well  as  being  the  founts  of  doctrine  and  the  rules  of  conduct.  A  young 
man,  just  budding  into  strength  and  freedom,  he  became  a  Christian,  whose 
character  endeared  him  to  the  community  of  which  both  his  grandmother  and 
mother  were  distinguished  ornaments,  and  whose  gifts,  exercised  and  proved, 
commanded  the  Church's  admiration.  Every  way  it  is  important  that  the  young 
should  feel  that  their  youth  belongs  to  Christ.  It  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  and 
intention  of  our  holy  religion  to  treat  them  as  the  subjects  of  a  depravity  which 
must  have  its  way,  and  consign  them  to  years  of  separation  from  God.  A  young 
Boul  may  be  rendered  hopeless  of  spiritual  good  through  misrepresentation  of  the 
actual  facts  of  life.  Children  naturally  fall  into  what  you  say  tbey  are.  The 
Saviour  of  men  is  the  Saviour  of  the  young.  He  who  took  them  in  His  arms  and 
blessed  them,  is  always  longing  for  the  homage  and  affection  of  fresh,  young  hearts. 
He  deprecates  one  hour  spent  in  the  service  of  evil.  The  history  of  Timothy  proves 
the  possibility,  and  shows  the  beauty  of  Divine  life  in  youth.  U.  The  sacred 
INFLUENCE  OF  A  MOTHER'S  PiETT.  Euuice  was  a  Jcwcss — and  to  ••  the  unfeigned 
faith  which  dwelt  in  her  "  is  to  be  traced  the  spiritual  development  of  Timothy. 
How  many  of  the  most  renowned  of  the  Church's  heroes  have  been  born  again 
through  the  prajers  and  example  of  pious  mothers  1  We  think  of  Jochebed,  Hannah, 
Mary,  Salome,  &o.  As  a  mother  is  her  child's  world,  it  is  evident  that  on  her 
must  depend  its  first  impressions.  As  she  is  kind  and  gentle,  graceful  and  sweet, 
pure  and  devout,  or  the  reverse,  so  will  her  child's  hfe  be.  How  mothers  should 
cultivate  their  own  hearts  and  watch  over  their  own  doings  I  III.  The  home  hin- 
drances OF  Timothy's  spiritcaii  life.  "  His  father  was  a  Greek,"  which  indicates 
not  only  the  diversity  between  himself  and  wife,  as  of  different  races,  but  that  his 
wife  believed,  and  he  remained  an  idolater.  This  divergence  had  of  necessity  to 
be  made  manifest  to  the  child.  The  mother  taught  him  the  truths  of  the  religion 
his  father  despised.  It  is  a  picture  on  which,  even  in  these  days,  we  are  often 
called  to  look.  There  was  sometimes  sorrow  in  the  house,  because  there  was  no 
spiritual  sympathy.  The  strength  of  his  mother's  faith  and  love  were  enough  to 
overcome  this  hindrance.  But  it  is  not  always  so.  Sometimes  the  dead  weight 
of  a  godless  husband  or  wife  is  sufficient  to  drag  down  and  crush  the  goodness 
which  is  allied  with  it.  The  waters  wear  the  stones,  and  sometimes  the  marriage 
bells  ring  the  knell  of  the  spiritual  life  and  profession.  {W.  II.  Davison.)  Paul 
and  Timothy : — I.  Paul  took  Silas  with  him,  but  he  could  not  give  up  a  man 
like  Barnabas  and  think  no  more  about  him.  He  who  can  forget  old  friends  is  no 
apostle  of  Jesus  Christ.  Besides,  Paul  was  going  ♦•  again  "  to  the  churches.  The 
people  would  ask  about  Barnabas.  We  ask  questions  that  open  graves  and  heart 
wounds.  The  man  who  has  not  seen  you  for  years  asks  you  how  that  sweet  little 
boy  of  yours  is,  and  it  seems  to  you  incredible  that  a  grief  that  filled  your  house 
with  darkn>^ss  had  not  made  itself  known  to  your  friend.  What  must  Paul's  answer 
bav0  been  t    He  was  a  faithful  man,  true  as  steel :  he  knew  not  the  genius  of 


CHAP.  XTI.J  THE  ACTS,  467 

equivocation  and  ihe  fine  art  of  telling  lies.  We  have  to  account  for  old  associations 
being  ruptured,  we  have  to  explain  new  faces  and  new  relationships.  II.  Paul  came 
to  Derbe  and  Lystra,  and  found  "  a  cebtain  disciple  named  Timotheos."  Long  ago 
we  read  about  a  young  man  whose  name  was  Saul.  We  begin  in  obscurity,  we  are 
pointed  at  as  hardly  to  be  identified.  If  the  foolish  tree  could  be  taking  itself  up  in 
order  to  show  its  antecedents,  it  would  soon  be  killed.  All  that  we  have  to  do  is  so 
to  lift  ourselves  up  in  God's  light  and  rain,  as  to  bring  forth  fruit.  We  may  be 
now  nothing  more  than  "  certain  disciples,"  but  we  may  still  be  disciples.  III. 
Timothy  was  the  son  of  a  Jewess  and  a  Greek.  Happy  man,  to  stand  between 
two  civilisations  1  What  must  the  boy  have  been?  Two  such  fires  meeting  in  his 
hlood ;  two  such  histories  recounting  themselves  in  his  memory  1  How  able  to 
)ook  well  round  him  and  to  understand  the  mystery  of  Law  and  the  mystery  of 
Beautgr  1  His  religion  might  go  up  into  superstition,  his  philosophy  might  develop 
into  scepticism  and  sneering ;  if  he  touched  Christ,  he  touched  One  who  to  the 
Jew  was  a  stumbhng-block  and  to  the  Greek  foolishness,  but  to  the  believing 
Timothy  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  We  ourselves  see  this  double 
relationship  sometimes  in  life.  Your  mother  prayed — your  father  never  prayed. 
You  are  a  chUd  of  the  night  and  of  the  day,  and  you  feel  it,  and  sometimes  you 
are  plunged  in  the  darkness  of  the  one  parentage,  and  sometimes  you  are  away  on 
the  bright  broad  wings  of  the  other  into  the  light.  But  is  it  possible  that  a  Jewess 
could  marry  a  Greek  ?  I  should  have  said,  No,  but  for  what  you  have  done.  IV. 
Timothy  "was  well  eepobted  of."  Character  is  very  subtle.  Timothy  never 
asked  any  man  to  speak  weU  of  him,  and  yet  no  man  could  speak  ill  of  the  youth. 
Do  not  appeal  to  one  another's  charitable  judgment  for  a  character,  but  so  hve 
that  character  will  come.  Live  your  character ;  do  not  be  painted  as  good  men, 
but  paint  your  own  character  in  your  own  blood.     V.  "  Him  would  Padl  have  to 

00  FOBTH  with  HIM."  Paul  could  not  do  without  youth.  A  young  man  can  run, 
and  is  not  burdened  with  a  sense  of  his  own  respectability.  God  bless  the  young  life  I 
There  are  those  who  would  snub  the  youthful  soul,  and  never  permit  him  to  be 
seen  or  heard.  Paul  loved  the  young,  and  would  never  give  them  up  so  long  as 
they  were  true ;  but  if  ever  they  began  to  prove  themselves  fickle,  he  would  give 
them  up  and  their  uncle  Barnabas  with  them.  A  soldier  could  not  do  with  a 
coward ;  only  be  true,  and  Paul  would  be  your  lifelong  friend.  "VI.  He  took  and 
cibctjmcised  Timothy.  This  from  Paul,  who  would  not  circumcise  Titus  1  But 
the  reason  is  given  (ver.  3).  It  was  therefore  no  breach  of  the  apostle's  stern  policy 
that,  under  circumstances  so  peculiar,  he  should  respect  a  temporary  prejudice. 
Now  they  start,  Paul,  and  Silas,  and  Timotheus  (ver.  4).  Do  not  be  afraid  of  the 
word  "  Decrees  "  ;  they  were  decrees  of  liberty.  What  they  signed  was  the  Magna 
Charta  of  the  Church ;  freedom  centred  in  God  and  in  the  Cross.  Christ's  followers 
are  not  lawless ;  they  have  decrees  to  keep.  The  spirit  of  authority  is  the  spirit  of 
rest  when  it  brings  with  it  the  assurance  that  the  authority  is  not  arbitrary  but 
rational,  not  local  but  universal,  not  imperfect  but  Divine.  VII.  "  So  were  thb 
CHURCHES  established,"  &o.  Thcso  are  the  true  results  which  accompany  every  true 
mission — edification  first,  and  evangelisation  second.  (J.Parker,  D.D.)  Trained 
from  childhood : — As  Alexander  the  Great  attained  to  have  such  a  puissant  army, 
whereby  he  conquered  the  world,  by  having  children  born  and  brought  up  in  his 
camp,  whereby  they  became  so  well  acquainted  and  exercised  with  weapons  from  their 
Bwaddling-clothes,  that  they  looked  for  no  other  wealth  or  country  but  to  fight ; 
«ven  so,  if  thou  wouldst  have  thy  childrea  either  to  do  great  matters,  or  to  live 
■honestly  by  their  own  virtuous  endeavours,  thou  must  acquaint  them  with  pains- 
taking in  their  youth,  and  so  bring  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the 
Lord.  (Cawdray.)  Children,  cost  of  training  cheap  in  the  long  run: — An  English- 
man visiting  Sweden,  noticing  their  care  for  educating  children,  who  are  taken 
from  the  streets  and  highways  and  placed  in  special  schools,  inquired  if  it  was  not 
■costly.  He  received  the  suggestive  answer,  "  Yes,  it  is  costly,  but  not  dear.  We 
Swedes  are  not  rich  enough  to  let  a  child  grow  up  in  ignorance,  misery,  and  crime, 
to  become  a  scourge  to  society  as  well  as  a  disgrace  to  himselif."  (The  Lantern.) 
Early  impressions  permanent: — I  stood  in  a  house  in  one  of  the  Long  Island 
villages,  not  long  ago,  and  I  saw  a  beautiful  tree,  and  I  said  to  the  owner :  "  That 
is  a  very  fine  tree ;  but  what  a  curious  crook  there  is  in  it."  "  Yes,"  said  he ;  "I 
planted  that  tree,  and  when  it  was  a  year  old,  I  went  to  New  York,  and  worked  aa 
a  mechanic  for  a  year  or  two,  and  when  I  came  back  I  found  they  had  allowed 
something  to  stand  against  the  tree,  and  so  it  has  always  had  that  crook."  And  so, 

1  thought,  it  was  with  the  influence  upon  children.    If  you  allow  anything  to  stand 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rvi. 

in  the  way  of  moral  influence  against  a  child  on  this  side  or  that  side,  to  the  lateat 
day  of  its  *ife  on  earth  and  through  all  eternity  it  will  show  the  pressure.  No 
wonder  Lord  Byron  was  bad.  Do  you  know  his  mother  said  to  him,  when  she  saw 
him  one  day  limping  across  the  floor  with  his  unsound  foot :  "  Get  out  of  my  way, 
you  lame  brat  1 "  What  chance  for  a  boy  like  that  ?  {T.  De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.) 
Early  piety,  importance  of: — The  most  important  ten  years  of  human  life  are  from 
five  to  fifteen  years  of  age.  The  vast  majority  of  those  who  pass  twenty  irreligious 
are  never  converted  at  all.  Dr.  Spencer  tells  us  that,  out  of  two  hundred  and 
thirty-five  hopeful  converts  in  his  church,  one  hundred  and  thirty-eight  were  under 
twenty  years,  only  four  had  passed  their  fiftieth  year.  I  have  been  permitted 
during  my  ministry  to  receive  nearly  one  thousand  persons  into  the  Church  on 
confession  of  their  faith,  and  not  one  dozen  of  these  had  outgrown  their  fiftieth 
year.  I  did  indeed  once  baptise  a  veteran  of  eighty-five,  but  the  case  was  so 
remarkable  that  it  excited  the  talk  and  wonder  of  the  town.  Such  late  repentances 
are  too  much  like  what  the  blunt,  dying  soldier  called  "  flinging  the  fag-end  of 
one's  life  into  the  face  of  the  Almighty."  (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Children  early 
taught  idolatry: — The  heathen  mother  takes  her  babe  to  the  idol  temple,  and 
teaches  it  to  clasp  its  httle  hands  before  its  forehead,  in  the  attitude  of  prayer, 
long  before  it  can  utter  a  word.  As  soon  as  it  can  walk,  it  is  taught  to  gather  a 
few  flowers  or  fruits,  or  put  a  little  rice  upon  a  banana-leaf,  and  lay  them  upon 
the  altar  before  the  idol  god.  As  soon  as  it  can  utter  the  names  of  its  parents,  so 
soon  it  is  taught  to  offer  up  its  petitions  before  the  images.  Who  ever  saw  a 
heathen  child  that  could  speak,  and  not  pray  ?  Christian  mothers,  why  is  it  that 
BO  many  children  grow  up  in  this  enlightened  land  without  learning  to  pray  ? 
Mother,  influence  of: — The  mother  of  the  Beechers  prayed  during  life  and  in  death, 
*'  that  her  children  might  be  trained  up  for  God."  One  of  her  journals  contains 
this  simple  record — "  This  morning  I  rose  very  early  to  pray  for  my  children,  and 
especially  that  my  sons  may  be  ministers  and  missionaries  of  Jesus  Christ." 
What  has  been  the  result?  That  for  all  her  children  her  prayers  have  been 
answered.  Her  five  sons  are  all  ministers  and  missionaries  of  Christ.  One  of 
them  she  has  welcomed  to  heaven ;  another  is  now  the  most  powerful  preacher  in 
America  ;  and  her  daughter,  Mrs.  Beecher  Stowe,  is,  by  her  writings,  not  less  widely 
or  favourably  known.  (IF.  Landels,  D.D.)  Mother,  influence  of: — Some  one 
asked  a  man  of  wisdom  when  the  education  of  a  child  should  be  commenced? 
"Twenty  years  beforehisbirth,  by  educating  his  mother,"  was  the  reply.  {Christian 
Advocate).  Mother,  influence  of: — Upon  a  tombstone  erected  by  a  family  of 
children  was  the  inscription  "  Our  mother ;  she  always  made  home  happy."  When 
Madame  Campan  asked  Napoleon  what  was  the  great  want  of  the  French  nation, 
his  reply  was  "  Mothers."  Mother,  prayers  of  a  : — Samuel  Budgett  was  about 
nine  years  of  age,  when,  one  day  passing  his  mother's  door,  he  heard  her  engaged 
in  earnest  prayer  for  her  family,  and  for  himself  by  name.  He  thought,  "  My 
mother  is  more  earnest  that  I  should  be  saved  than  I  am  for  my  own  salvation." 
In  that  hour  he  became  decided  to  serve  God,  and  the  impression  thus  made  was 
never  effaced.     (W.  Arthur.) 

Vers.  3-5.  Him  would  Paul  have  to  gfo  forth  with  him. — Using  new  convertg : — 
It  is  good  for  young  converts  to  be  set  at  work ;  it  is  good  for  them.  It  is  good  for 
every  Church  to  set  its  young  converts  at  work ;  it  is  good  for  the  Church.  "  All  at 
it,  and  always  at  it,"  was  the  old  Wesleyan  cry.  And  it  was  in  that  way  that  the 
Methodist  Church  gained  and  grew  so  wonderfully.  It  was  long  ago  said  of  the 
Waldensian  Church,  that  its  peculiar  vitality  was  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  as 
soon  iis  a  new  convert  had  been  seven  days  a  believer,  he  was  set  to  teach  some  one 
who  was  not  so  far  along  as  he  was.  And  that  is  the  way  for  a  Church  to  have 
greatest  activity  and  widest  efficiency  on  the  part  of  its  membership.  Of  course, 
when  it  comes  to  assigning  special  duties  to  young  converts,  there  must  be  wisdom 
shown  in  their  selection.  If  a  man  is  to  be  sent  into  another  field,  he  ought  to  be 
one  who  has  a  good  reputation  in  his  own  field.  He  who  lacks  the  confidence  of 
those  who  know  him,  ought  not  to  be  helped  to  new  acquaintances  by  a  local  church 
or  by  a  foreign  missionary  society.  {H.  C.  Trumbull.)  Paul  and  Timothy 
colleagues  : — I.  The  ideal  ministry  is  that  of  partnership.  "  Two  are  better  than 
one,"  either  as  pastors  or  missionaries.  1.  No  one  man  is  fully  equipped  for  all  the 
duties  of  his  office,  though  two  may  be.  The  one  often  supphes  what  is  lacking  in 
the  other;  and  common  interests  are  promoted  by  the  interchange  of  thought  and 
affection,  and  by  the  division  of  labour.    What  one  may  have  no  adaptability  for 


OBAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS,  469 

the  other  may  have  in  abundance.  Able  preachers  are  not  always  good  pastors. 
Happy  the  Church  which  baa  two  ministers :  one  who  can  visit,  another  who  can 
preach.  2.  Partnership  was  the  plan  of  the  Master  who  sent  His  disciples  out  "  two 
by  two."  It  was  the  plan  of  the  apostles.  How  often  we  find  Peter  and  John  in 
conjunction.  It  was  Paul's  plan,  who  never  laboured  alone  if  he  could  help  it.  11. 
This  pabtnership  most  be  based  on  harmonious  qualities.  Not  necessarily 
identical  qualities.  Persons  of  similar  ideas  and  temperaments  have  not  always 
been  good  colleagues.  Opposites  are  not  necessarily  antagonistic  :  they  are  often 
complementary.  The  most  angular  persons  have  often  worked  well  together, 
because  the  angles  have  been  made  to  fit  laterally  instead  of  pressing  on  the  points. 
Paul  could  not,  under  existing  circumstances,  have  worked  with  Mark,  and  so  far 
he  was  wise  in  refusing  his  companionship ;  and  it  is  doubtful  if  he  could  have 
permanently  worked  with  Barnabas.  We  may  see  a  wise  Providence  in  their  separa- 
tion if  not  in  the  means  by  which  it  was  brought  about.  Paul  could  get  on  better 
with  Timothy,  whom  he  could  train  in  his  own  methods  and  aims.  III.  This 
partnership  was  BEAiiisED  IN  THE  CASE  OF  Paul  AND  TiMOTHY.  What  One  lacked 
the  other  possessed — inexperience  and  experience;  the  desire  to  learn  and  the 
ability  to  teach ;  sedateness  and  energy ;  evangelistic  genius,  and  pastoral  and  govern- 
mental gifts.  (J.  W.  Bum.)  And  as  they  went  through  the  cities  they  delivered 
them  the  decrees  for  to  keep.     The  decrees  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  : — I.  The 

MESSENGERS  WHO   DELIVERED   THESE  DECREES.       II.    To  WHOM  THEY  WERE   DELIVERED. 

ni.  The  end  fob  which  they  were  delivered.  IV.  The  results  of  this  delivery. 
1.  Confirmation.  2.  Augmentation.  (W.  Burkitt.)  And  so  were  the  Churches 
established. — The  establishment  and  increase  of  the  Church  : — The  ultimate  success 
of  any  system  must  depend  upon  its  truth.  A  lie  may  partially  succeed  ;  but  its 
final  doom  is  certain.  It  carries  in  itself  the  elements  of  its  own  destruction. 
Truth,  on  the  contrary,  is  imperishable.  However  persecuted  and  misrepresented, 
it  will  infallibly  vindicate  its  birth  and  greatness.  It  is,  therefore,  a  matter  of  the 
utmost  importance  that  the  truths  of  the  gospel  should  be  maintained  in  their 
entireness  and  purity.  For,  in  proportion  as  error  mingles  with  truth,  its  influence 
will  be  counteracted.  And  when  antiquated  rites  or  modem  conceits  are  substituted 
for  evangelical  doctrine,  the  pernicious  results  of  error  become  still  more  apparent. 
The  facts  on  which  these  observations  are  based  may  be  found  in  this  and  the  pre- 
ceding chapter.  Note  here : — I.  The  establishment  of  Christians  in  the  faith. 
The  term  "  faith  "  is  often  employed  to  signify  Christianity  as  a  religious  system ; 
doubtless,  because  by  believing  we  become  partakers  of  its  blessings  (Acts  vi,  7 ; 
Gal.  i.  23 ;  1  Tim.  v.  8  ;  Titus  i.  13).  This  establishment  of  Christians  in  the  faith 
includes — 1.  Their  confirmation  in  doctrinal  truth.  The  evangelical  writers  con- 
stantly assume  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  an  authoritative  standard  of  truth,  to 
which  reason  and  opinion  are  obliged  to  bow  (Eom.  vi.  17  ;  2  Tim.  i.  13  ;  1  Tim. 
vi.  3  ;  Titus  i.  9  ;  1  John  ii.  21,  24).  And  it  is  assumed  throughout  the  Scriptures 
that  these  truths  are  capable  of  being  understood  by  every  order  of  mind  so  as  to 
exercise  their  influence  over  the  whole  man  (John  viii.  32 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  4).  Now 
that  the  apostles  are  no  longer  on  earth  to  explain  their  own  meaning,  it  becomes 
as  to  be  the  moi^  careful  in  the  use  of  the  means  we  possess,  that  we  may  avoid 
error,  and  arrive  at  the  "  knowledge  of  the  truth."  We  must  ••  search  the  Scrip- 
tures," asking  for  the  "  Spirit  of  truth  to  guide  us  into  all  truth."  2.  Their 
establishment  in  piety  to  God,  and  love  to  one  another.  The  "  faith  "  to  which 
they  were  pledged,  and  of  whose  truth  they  were  now  reassured,  was  a  faith  which 
embraced  in  its  regards  the  entire  economy  of  the  human  spirit,  and  exerted  a 
sovereign  influence  over  all  its  faculties.  When  evangelical  truth  is  received  with 
humble  faith,  certain  saving  results  immediately  ensue.  All  spiritual  graces 
followed  in  due  succession,  sustained  by  faith,  animated  with  love,  and  crowned  by 
the  hope  of  immortal  life.  Now  this  connection  between  the  doctrines  to  be  believed, 
and  blessings  to  be  enjoyed,  is  illustrated  and  confirmed  by  the  passage  under  con- 
sideration. An  unsettled  creed  is  always  unfavourable  to  a  settled  piety.  The 
"dissension  and  disputation"  (chap.  xv.  2)  must  have  been  detrimental  to  their 
spiritual  welfare.  They  were  "  troubled,"  and  their  "  souls  subverted  "  (ver.  24). 
Accordingly,  when  the  disturbing  force  was  removed  they  "  rejoiced  for  the  consola- 
tion "  (ver.  31).  3.  Out  of  our  establishment  in  faith  and  holiness  will  arise  a 
settled  practice  and  a  steady  devotion  to  the  service  of  Christ.  Where  the  prin- 
ciples of  Christianity  are  loosely  held,  and  its  blessings  are  only  known  by  report, 
there  you  may  anticipate  laxity  of  morals,  or  open  violation  of  the  Divine  law.  II. 
The  connection  bbiwben  thb  xbtabiiIbhuent  of  Chbistunb  in  thb  saith  and  isk 


-460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

PROSPEBITY  OF  THE  WORK  OF  GoD.     1.  The  establishment  of  Christians  in  the  faith 
disposes  them  to  overlook  minor  points  of  controversy,  and  to  devote  themselves  to 
the  propagation  of  vital  truth.     It  V7as  on  this  principle  that  the  Apostle  Paul 
refused  to  dispute  on  points  non-essential  to  salvation,  and  exhorted  Christians  to 
liberality  of  sentiment.     So  the  true  Christian  says,  "  If  we  are  to  debate,  let  it  be 
on  matters  worthy  our  character  and  intellect.     If  we  are  to  labour,  let  it  be  in  a 
field  where  our  toil  shall  not  be  wasted."    2.  A  settled  piety  permits  our  attention 
to  be  drawn  off  from  our  personal  anxieties,  and  to  be  fixed  on  the  conversion  of 
others.     We  cannot  be  content  with  our  own  happiness ;  we  want  to  make  others 
happy  also.     3.  Consistency  and  harmony  in  the  Church  have  their  influence  on 
the  minds  of  the  undecided,  and  induce  them  to  join  themselves  to  the  disciples. 
If  the  religion  of  Christ  were  properly  represented  in  the  spirit  and  conduct  of  the 
professing  Church,  the  world  could  hardly  withstand  its  attraction.     4.  God  has 
established  the  connection  between  piety  and  usefulness,  and  therefore  confers  Hia 
special  blessing  on  the  labours  of  established  Christians,  and  the  enterprises  of  pure 
and  devoted  Cliurches.    He  is  not  dependent  upon  any  particular  set  of  instru- 
ments.   But  there  is  one  rule  which  He  never  violates — He  never  employs  unholy 
men  or  fallen  Churches  to  represent  Him  in  the  world,  or  to  fulfil  the  saving  objects 
of  His  redeeming  scheme.     {W.  Williams.)        The  establishment  and  increase  of  the 
Church: — I.  The  Churches  were  established  in  the  faith.     The  phrase  is  used  as 
a  comprehensive  description  of  Christianity.    1.  Primitive  Christian  Churches  were 
composed  exclusively  of  such  as  professed  to  believe  in  Christ,  and  to  conform  their 
lives  to  the  holy  requirements  of  the  gospel.     Their  members  were  consequently 
Christians,  not  in  that  loose  sense  of  the  term  in  which  it  is  now  so  commonly  used, 
but  as  disciples  of  Christ  who  had  been  "  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,"  and  upon 
whom  the  "  unction  of  the  Holy  One  "  rested.     Hence  they  are  variously  denomi- 
nated by  the  apostles  as  the  "  beloved  of  God — saints — faithful  brethren  '* — those 
who  are  "sanctified  by  God  the  Father, preserved  in  Christ  Jesus  and  called  " ;  and 
are  always  addressed  as  persons  who  could  understand  the  sentiments  and  the 
language  of  doctrinal,  vital,  and  experimental  religion.    And  their  piety  being  thus 
sincere  and  vital  it  was  capable  of  increase.    Accordingly,  under  the  instructions  of 
these  inspired  men,  they  made  a  very  observable  progress  in  the  Divine  life.     There 
was  a  manifest  growth  in  grace.      2.  Christianity  as  a  system  is  eminently  social. 
Hence  its  converts  have  from  the  first  been  formed  into  Churches.    This  was  done 
by  collecting  them  together,  and  uniting  them  in  the  joint  observance  of  the  laws 
and  ordinances  of  Jesus  Christ.     Such  societies  have  continued  to  exist  from  that 
time  to  the  present,  and  seem  to  be  the  destined  means,  under  the  Holy  Spirit,  of 
perpetuating  and  extending  the  kingdom  of  the  Redeemer.     II.  They  increased  iw 
NUMBER  DAILY ;  either,  that  is,  these  several  Churches  already  established  increased 
in  the  number  of  their  members,  or  the  Churches  themselves  were  multiplied,  or 
both.     The  increase,  whether  of  members  or  of  Churches,  is  said  to  have  been 
"  daily."    The  expression  seems  to  indicate  both  the  rapidity  and  the  constancy  of 
the  increase.    It  was  not  such  an  increase  as  we  are  accustomed  to  witness,  when 
at  distant  intervals  a  few  individuals  enter  the  fellowship  of  the  Church.     The 
evangelists  seem  never  to  have  preached  but  souls  were  converted  ;  and  the  Churches 
never  to  have  come  together,  but  they  had  the  high  privilege  of  receiving  many  new 
disciples  into  the  communion  of  saints.     Nor  did  this  last  for  a  few  days  merely. 
As  the  increase  was  rapid,  so  it  was  constant.     III.  The  cause  from  which  this 
PROSPEROUS  STATE  OP  THINGS  RESULTED.     The  Holy  Spirit  most  manifestly  attended 
upon  the  labours  of  the  apostles.     Apart  from  His  gracious  influence,  apostolic 
eloquence  and  zeal  would  have  accomplished  nothing.     Not  less  necessary  then  than 
now  was  that  life-giving  energy  which  proceeds  alone  from  Him.     There  were,  how- 
ever, certain  subordinate  and  subsidiary  causes  to  which,  in  the  order  of  means, 
this  prosperity  may  be  traced.     1.  The  apostolic  settlement  of  the  question,  that 
converts  from  among  the  Gentiles  were  not  to  be  subject  to  the  institutions  of  Moses 
(chap.  XV.  31).     Being  delivered  from  a  yoke  of  bondage  which  would  have  fatally 
depressed  their  rising  zeal,  they  were  free  to  throw  all  their  newly  awakened 
energies  into  the  cause  of  the  Redeemer.    The  preachers,  also  liberated  from  all 
trammels,  might  now  come  forward  simply  with  the  doctrine  of  the  cross.     Nothing 
is  80  calculated  to  produce  either  a  vigorous  state  of  personal  piety,  or  a  prosperous 
state  of  Church  fellowship,  as  a  simple,  clear,  and  Scriptural  exhibition  of  the 
••  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."    2.  The  devotional  spirit  of  the  early  Christians,  com- 
bined with  their  fervent  zeal.    3.  There  was  none  of  that  timid  neutrality  respect- 
ing the  profession  of  the  gospel  among  the  first  Chrietians  by  which  modem  Chris* 


•HAP.  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  461 

tianity  is  so  lamentably  distinguished.  When  a  man  was  converted,  the  next  thing 
was  to  join  the  Church.  There  was  consequently  a  line  of  demarcation,  broad  and 
deep,  between  the  Church  and  the  world.  None  were  ashamed  of  Christ,  or  ashamed 
to  avow  their  attachment  to  His  followers,  and  His  cause.  4.  The  spirit  of  union 
and  Christian  love.  Believers  were  of  *'  one  heart  and  one  way."  Separate  Churches 
there  were,  as  now,  but  separate  denominations  there  were  none.  "  The  com- 
munion of  saints  "  was  not  then  what  it  has  since  become — a  cold  article  in  a  formal 
creed,  but  the  practical  and  sweet  experience  of  every  day.  The  uniting  bond  was 
not  an  exact  coincidence  of  opinion  in  every  point  of  doctrine,  or  a  perfect  uniformity 
of  practice  in  matters  of  government  and  discipline  ;  but  it  was  love.  Let  Chris- 
tians of  all  parties  forget  their  differences,  and  approximate  among  themselves  to 
something  like  the  union  subsisting  between  Christ  and  His  Father ;  let  them  be 
one,  as  they  are  one,  and  the  influence  will  be  irresistible.    {E.  Steane,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-10.  Now  when  they  had  gone  throughout  Phrygla  and  the  region  of 
Qalatia. — PauVs  first  visit  to  Galatia,  A.D.  51  or  52; — The  form  of  the  Greek  ex- 
pression implies  that  Phrygia  and  Galatia  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  separate  districts 
— but  the  land  originally  inhabited  by  Phrygians,  but  subsequently  occupied  by 
Gauls.  Paul  does  not  appear  to  have  had  any  intention  of  preaching  -the  gospel 
here.  He  was  perhaps  anxious  at  once  to  bear  his  message  to  the  more  important 
and  promising  district  of  proconsular  Asia.  But  he  was  detained  by  a  return  of  his 
old  malady  "  the  thorn  in  the  flesh  " — some  sharp  and  violent  attack  which  humili- 
ated him  and  prostrated  his  physical  strength.  To  this  the  Galatians  owed  their 
knowledge  of  Christ.  Though  a  homeless,  stricken  wanderer  might  seem  but  a 
feeble  advocate  of  a  cause  so  momentous,  yet  it  was  the  Divine  order  that  in  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  strength  should  be  made  perfect  in  weakness.  The  zeal  of 
the  preacher  and  the  enthusiasm  of  his  hearers  triumphed  over  all  impediments. 
♦•  They  did  not  despise  the  temptation  in  his  flesh.  They  received  him  as  an  angel 
of  God,  even  as  Christ  Jesus.  They  would  have  plucked  out  their  very  eyes  if  they 
could  and  have  given  them  to  him."  It  can  scarcely  have  been  any  predisposing 
religious  sympathy  which  attracted  them  so  powerfully.  The  gospel  as  a  message 
of  mercy  and  a  spiritual  faith  stood  in  direct  contrast  to  the  gross  and  material 
religions  in  which  the  race  had  been  nurtured.  But  if  we  picture  to  ourselves  the 
apostle,  as  he  appeared  before  the  Galatians,  a  friendless  outcast,  writhing  under 
the  tortures  of  a  painful  malady,  yet  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season,  by  turns 
denouncing  and  entreating,  perhaps  also,  as  at  Lystra,  enforcing  his  appeals  by  some 
striking  miracle,  we  shall  be  at  no  loss  to  conceive  how  the  fervid  temperament  of 
the  Gaul  might  have  been  aroused.  In  the  absence  of  aU  direct  testimony  we  may 
conjecture  that  it  was  at  Ancyra,  now  the  capital  of  the  Boman  province,  as  formerly 
of  the  Gaulish  settlement, "  the  most  illustrious  metropolis,"  as  it  is  called  in  formal 
documents ;  at  Pessinus  under  the  shadow  of  Mount  Dindimus,  the  cradle  of  the 
worship  of  Cybele,  and  one  of  the  principal  commercial  towns  of  the  district ;  at 
Tavium,  at  once  a  strong  fortress  and  a  great  emporium,  situated  at  the  point  of 
convergence  of  several  important  roads ;  perhaps  also  at  Juliopolis,  the  ancient 
Gordium,  formerly  the  capital  of  Phrygia,  almost  equidistant  from  the  three  seas, 
and  from  its  central  position  a  busy  mart ;  at  these,  or  some  of  these  places,  that 
Paul  founded  the  earliest  Churches  of  Galatia.  {Bp.  Lightfoot.)  And  were  for- 
1)ldden  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  preach  the  Word  In  Asia. — The  guidance  of  the  Spirit: 
— Who  can  read  this  account  without  being  tempted  to  ask — Why  should  the  Holy 
Ghost  forbid  the  apostles  to  preach  in  Asia  ?  Why  not  suffer  them  to  go  into 
Bithynia  ?  Were  not  the  inhabitants  sitting  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of 
death  ?  And  did  not  Christ  die  for  them  ?  Now  as  God  giveth  no  account  of  His 
matters ;  and  as  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  may  send  forth  labourers  into  whatever 
part  of  His  harvest  He  pleases,  it  might  be  enough  to  answer  that  it  belongs  not  to 
as  to  pry  into  those  reasons  which  it  has  pleased  Him  to  keep  secret.  But  the 
matter  admits  of  a  most  satisfactory  explanation.  No  doubt  the  souls  in  Asia  and 
Bithynia  were  dear  to  God ;  but  Paul  and  Silas  could  not  be  labouring  both  in  Asia 
and  Macedonia  at  the  same  time ;  and  He,  who  knew  the  hearts  of  all,  knew  in 
which  country  the  minds  of  men  were  most  prepared  to  receive  the  gospel.  That 
there  was  such  a  preparation  in  Macedonia  is  intimated  by  the  very  nature  of  the 
vision.  The  whole  may  be  illustrated  by  a  familiar  image.  A  farmer  perceives 
his  fields  white  for  the  harvest,  and  hires  labourers  to  reap  the  com.  They  go  into 
one  field,  and  prepare  to  cut  it  down,  but  he  forbids  them :  they  look  to  another, 
imd  attempt  to  enter  it ;  but  he  suffers  them  not :  he  conducts  them  to  a  third  which' 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xvii 

is  most  fully  ripe,  and  says,  "  This  is  the  field,  work  here."  Would  any  say  that  he 
did  not  care  for  the  com  in  the  other  fields  because  he  passed  them  by  ?  Would 
not  every  one  be  sure  that  he  only  took  the  third  before  them  because  it  was  most 
ready  for  the  sickle,  and  that  he  would  take  the  others  in  due  time  ?  So  when  the 
Lord  forbad  His  servants  to  preach  in  Asia  and  Bithynia  it  was  not  that  He  did 
not  care  for  the  souls  there,  but  that  Macedonia  was  the  most  prepared.  How  well 
prepared  it  was  appears  from  Paul's  epistles  to  the  Churches  in  that  country,  at 
Philippi  and  Thessalonica.  But  were  Asia  and  Bithynia  therefore  neglected?  No. 
We  find  Paul  afterwards  preaching  in  Troas,  the  very  port  of  Asia  whence  he  sailed  to 
Macedonia.  In  Ephesus  also,  the  principal  city  of  that  Asia  where  he  had  been 
forbidden  to  preach  the  Word,  he  abode  two  full  years,  so  that  all  they,  both  Jews 
and  Greeks,  that  dwelt  in  Asia,  heard  the  Word  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  may  observe, 
too,  that  the  first  epistle  of  Peter  is  addressed  to  the  strangers  scattered  throughout 
Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia.  Yes  1  the  same  Lord  over  all  ia 
rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  Him.  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works  :  and 
we  have  the  authority  of  Paul  for  saying  that  He  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved, 
and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  {J.  Fawcett,  M.A.)  Divine  guidance : 
— You  want  to  know  what  to  do,  how  to  act,  where  to  go.  There  is  one  safe  and 
sure  method — and  only  one.  It  is  Paul's.  He  thought,  he  used  his  natural  reason ; 
his  instinct  was  to  travel  on,  his  inclination  was  to  visit  Asia,  then  Bithynia. 
Having  done  his  best  to  choose,  he  submits  his  choice  to  a  higher  guidance.  He 
carries  the  question  in  prayer  to  God,  then  he  feels  he  is  not  to  go — knows  not 
where  to  go,  obeys  this  intuition  which  happens  to  be  opposed  to  his  own  wishes, 
waits,  but  waits  not  long.  The  vision  and  the  voice  follow  speedily.  It  is  at  length 
from  these  that  he  "  assuredly  gathers  " — infers  truly  his  next  step.  It  is  even  so. 
Use  your  faculties,  submit  your  judgment  to  the  highest,  be  true  to  what  seems  to 
you  the  highest  leading,  and  the  Divine  message  will  grow  clearer  and  clearer — the 
intuition,  the  vision,  the  voice — but,  mark  you,  clearer  only  for  the  next  step.  The 
whole  of  Paul's  journey  was  not  mapped  out.  He  could  not  see  far,  but  he  was  not 
left  in  doubt.  He  "  assuredly  gathered  "  the  next  move.  Perhaps  he  thought  he 
was  now  bound  for  Eome — Rome  attracted  him  far  more  powerfully  than  Athens. 
Yet  he  was  not  to  go  to  Rome  that  time,  nor  could  he  have  guessed,  when  he  started 
for  Phihppi,  that  he  was  going  to  Athens  and  preach  there  to  the  scoffing,  subtle 
Greeks.  (H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  Paul  called  to  Europe: — Dull  Asia  had  heard 
the  gospel.  Now  it  was  brought  to  that  Europe  which  has  furnished  to  the  world 
its  civilised  energy.  Probably  in  Paul's  mind  the  European  passage  was  but  one  of 
many  journeys.  But  to  the  eye  of  history,  seeing  before  and  after,  it  was  the 
challenge  of  Christianity  to  civilisation,  to  intellect,  to  world-controlling  energy,  to 
come  and  be  ruled  by  Christ.  Before  this  journey,  however,  there  went — I.  Thb 
TIME  OF  WAITING.  ProcoHSular  Asia  and  Bithynia  were  before  Paul  and  his  com- 
panions ;  they  were  without  the  gospel ;  they  needed  it ;  Paul  was  ready  to  give  it. 
And  yet  the  gospel  was  not  preached.  It  was  not  a  time  to  labour,  but  a  time  to 
wait.  1.  Yet  it  was  a  time  of  endeavour  to  labour.  Paul  did  not  choose  the  wait- 
ing for  himself.  He  honestly  and  earnestly  tried  to  preach  the  gospel.  He  went  to 
the  frontier  of  the  province  of  Asia  Minor  intending  to  enter  and  preach.  Prevented 
there,  he  tried  Bithynia  next.  Preaching  was  the  one  word  that  summed  up  all 
Paul's  life.  Every  Christian  is  called  to  work.  His  mission  in  life  is  to  proclaim 
Jesus  Christ.  2.  Paul's  endeavour  to  do  his  work  was  thwarted.  He  wanted  to 
labour  for  Christ,  and  he  was  prevented  from  doing  so.  He  went  into  many  a  place 
only  to  be  driven  out  with  stones.  He  planned  great  journeys  and  fouud  himself 
in  prison.  It  would  be  a  very  instructive  thing  to  look  over  the  Scriptural  records 
of  Paul's  life  and  tabulate  the  thwarted  plans  recorded.  No  man  makes  every 
Christian  endeavour  he  undertakes  a  success.  As  God  makes  the  flower  cast  many 
a  seed  to  the  ground  that  one  or  two  plants  may  spring  up,  so  He  gives  it  as  a  law 
of  spiritual  accomplishment  that  there  shall  sometimes  be  many  failures  to  one 
success.  And  Paul,  like  a  wise  man,  did  not  quarrel  with  law.  3.  The  strange 
part  of  Paul's  experience  at  this  point  was  that  the  thwarting  of  his  purpose  to 
preach  the  gospel  in  proconsular  Asia  and  Bithynia  was  directly  due  to  God.  Some 
of  Paul's  failures  were  due  to  the  interference  of  Satan  (see  1  Thess.  ii.  18),  who  we 
may  beheve  goes  about  endeavouring  to  hinder  God's  people  in  God's  work.  What 
are  we  to  think  of  this  ?  (1)  God  was  leading  Paul  away  from  the  conversion  ot 
Asia  Minor  to  the  conversion  of  Europe.  Paul,  having  but  one  human  life  and  one 
man's  natural  power,  could  not  do  both.  God  set  before  him  the  larger  work.  To 
Moomplishit  involved  tiie  exclusion  of  the  smaller.  (2)  Asia  Minor  wasundoubtedl/ 


«HAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  463 

approached  more  advantageously  by  the  gospel  from  the  westward,  when  the  weight 
of  European  success  added  a  new  commendation  to  Paul's  teaching,  which  it  lacked 
when  it  came  from  the  eastward.    If  you  want  to  win  a  man  to  anything  it  is  better 
to  await  the  favourable  moment  than  to  rush  in  at  first  sight.    It  was  better  for 
Asia  Minor  and  Bithynia  not  to  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them  just  yet.     (3) 
God's  thwarting  of  Paul's  plans  would  have  been  all  right  even  if  we  could  see  no 
reason  whatever  in  it.     4.  The  Holy  Spirit  was  present  with  Paul,  directing  and 
equipping  him,  quite  as  well  in  the  time  of  waiting  as  in  the  time  of  work.     II. 
The  oAiiih     Paul  had  found  his  intentions  foiled ;  Asia  Minor  and  Bithynia  were 
closed  to  him ;  Europe  remained.     Should  he  seek  those  shores  ?     He  needed 
direction,  and  it  was  given.     The  vision  of  the  Macedonian,  perhaps  authenticated 
as  from  God  in  some  way  unknown  to  us,  showed  Paul  where  his  labour  lay.    1. 
The  vision  was  that  of  a  pleading  man.    The  gospel  is  for  the  world,  and  the  whole 
world.    2.  The  figure  in  the  vision  voiced  the  need  of  help ;  it  did  not  define  just 
what  was  needed.    The  call  that  rises  from  the  human  race  is  a  cry  for  help,  what- 
ever the  help  be.     It  is  not  always  a  cry  for  the  gospel ;  for  many  times  when  the 
gospel  is  offered  it  is  blindly  refused.    It  is  the  function  of  the  gospel  sometimes  to 
create  desire  as  well  as  to  satisfy  it.     When  Paul  landed  in  Macedonia  he  found  no 
crowd  standing  with  outstretched  hands  to  welcome  him.    No,  he  "tarried  certain 
days  "  before  there  was  any  sign  of  the  gospel  being  wanted,  and  then  the  sign 
came  only  to  Paul's  search  for  it.    3.  The  Macedonian  was  a  representative.    He 
said  not  "  Come  over  and  help  me,"  but  "  Come  over  and  help  us."    All  needed 
Christ,  and  not  only  the  few  souls  who  were  already  near  to  the  kingdom — hke 
Lydia,  the  first  convert.    4.  The  request  that  was  made  by  the  pleading  man  of  the 
vision  was  in  Paul's  power  to  grant.    He  could  go  over  and  help  them  if  he  wanted 
to.    So  can  we  help  the  nations  who  seem  to  stand  before  us  in  vision  beseeching 
ns  to  help  them.     III.  The  answbb.    1.  Paul  was  led  to  make  an  answer  by  using 
the  mind  God  had  given  him.    He  and  his  companions  consulted  together  and 
'« concluded  that  God  had  called  them  for  to  preach  the  gospel  unto  them."    The 
supernatural  vision  seems  to  separate  Paul's  experience  from  ours.    We  are  not  so 
led  in  our  work.    But  his  consulting  with  his  friends  and  reasoning  out  as  well  as 
he  could  the  conclusion  which  God  wanted  him  to  make,  brings  his  way  of  being 
led  back  into  similarity  with  our  own.    2.  Having  made  up  his  mind  that  he  ought 
to  go  to  Macedonia,  Paul  "  sought "  to  carry  out  that  purpose.  Assurance  of  success 
and  the  accomplishment  of  success  are  in  God's  hands,  but  we  can  at  least  try.    If 
God  is  wiUing  to  bless,  and  we  are  able  at  least  to  try,  if  Christian  work  sometimes 
does  not  greatly  prosper,  what  is  the  reason  t    3.  Paul's  answer  to  the  meaning  of 
the  vision  was  immediate.    "  Straightway  we  sought  to  go."    The  reaction  of  Paul's 
converted  soul  in  the  presence  of  spiritual  need  was  instant.    If  he  responded 
instantly  to  the  call  of  need  we  can  respond  so  too,  if  we  will.    4.  The  call's  being 
from  God  was  what  made  Paul's  reply  so  quick.    Obedience  was  a  primal  element 
in  Paul's  religious  life,  and  so  he  is  seen  to  be  truly  of  the  company  of  Him  who 
was  ••  an  obedient  Son."    IV.  The  result.    1.  It  was  not  visible  at  once.    Over  in 
Troas  there  was  the  exciting  vision  of  the  pleading  Macedonian.    But  in  Macedonia 
there  was  nothing  but  indifference.     Paul  was  received,  as  the  missionary  of  the 
cross  is  almost  always  received,  with  perfect  indifference.     2.  Paul  used  means  to 
bring  a  result  about.    He  did  not  sit  down  with  folded  hands,  saying  to  himself, 
•'  Macedon  has  cried  to  me  for  help ;  I  have  come  a  long  way  at  great  trouble  in 
order  to  give  help  :  now  if  the  Macedonians  want  me  let  them  speak  out."    Paul 
assumed  that  the  Macedonians  needed  everything  and  acted  as  though  they  desired 
nothing.    He  waited  not  for  them  to  seek  him,  he  sought  them.    Work  is  a  spiri- 
tual as  well  as  a  natural  condition  of  success.    3.  A  small  beginning  was  made. 
Paul  was  not  disheartened  at  its  smallness,  but  content  with  its  being  a  beginning. 
No  heathen  were  allured  to  the  gospel  at  all.     No  men  were  reached.     One  woman, 
and  she  half  converted  already  before  Paul's  appearance,  was  the  harvest  of  Paul's 
effort.    The  beginning  is  not  yet  the  end,  but  it  surely  has  the  end  hidden  in  it,  in 
however  small  circumference.    4.  Fellowship  was  established.    Lydia  brought  her 
household  into  the  faith  and  took  Paul  and  his  friends  into  the  sweet  communion 
of  this  new  Christian  home.  When  that  Christian  fellowship  was  formed  the  success 
of  Paul's  Philippian  mission  was  assured.    A  group  of  real  Christian  friends  can 
leaven  a  city.    Y.  Lessons  concebnino  missionaby  wobe.     1.  The  relation  of  God 
and  man  in  gospelising.    God  calls ;  man's  imperative  and  immediate  duty  is  to 
•obey.    God  sends  the  Holy  Spirit  to  direct  and  empower  in  Christian  work.    "  For 
it  is  God  that  worketh  in  you."    God  sends  as  to  tiy  all  plans  in  the  world  with  Hii 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xti. 

gospel.  He  only  knows  where  we  shall  succeed  in  planting  it.  2.  The  laws  of 
gospeb'sing.  Persuading  for  Christ  is  like  other  persuading.  Paul  did  not  preach 
when  he  made  his  first  European  convert.  What  a  spectacle  he  would  have  made 
if  he  had  proceeded  to  deliver  a  thunderous  oration  like  that  on  Mars'  Hill  to 
these  half-dozen  women !  He  sat  down  and  talked  with  them.  The  gospel  begins 
its  work  in  small  ways.  Europe's  conquest  for  Christ  is  heralded  in  the  saving  of 
one  woman.  The  gospel  uses  the  God-made  relations  of  human  life  for  its  propaga- 
tion. Lydia  brought  her  household  to  Christ.  The  family  is  recognised  and  utilised 
by  the  gospel.  {D.J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Permission  to  preach  the  gospel  strangely 
conveyed : — The  Kev.  John  Thomas,  who  may  be  regarded  as  the  founder  of  the 
Friendly  Islands'  mission,  had  laboured  for  some  time  at  HLhifo,  in  Tonga,  with 
but  little  fruit,  being  continually  thwarted  and  persecuted  by  the  Pagan  chief  Ata : 
when,  having  heard  that  the  paramount  chief  of  Haabai  had  renounced  idolatry,  and 
was  anxious  to  have  a  missionary,  he  made  up  his  mind  to  remove  thither.  But  as 
the  commencement  of  a  new  mission  in  another  group  of  islands  would  involve 
considerable  expense,  he  wished  first  to  hear  from  the  missionary  committee  in 
London,  who  had  some  time  before  been  written  to  on  the  subject.  Whilst  waiting 
at  Nukualofa,  in  a  state  of  considerable  anxiety  and  suspense,  in  the  month  of 
January,  1830,  an  incident  occurred  which  clearly  shows  the  superintending  provi- 
dence of  God  in  the  affairs  of  the  missionary  enterprise.  A  small  box  was  washed 
on  shore,  and  brought  to  Mr.  Turner  by  one  of  the  natives.  On  being  opened  it 
was  found  to  contain  a  letter  from  the  missionary  secretaries,  giving  the  sanction 
of  the  committee  for  the  extension  of  the  mission  in  the  Friendly  Islands,  and  the 
appointment  of  a  missionary  to  Haabai  without  further  delay.  The  vessel  by  which 
this  communication  had  been  sent,  a  schooner  from  Sydney,  had  foundered  at  sea, 
and  all  on  board  were  lost.  It  is  said  that  neither  vessel,  nor  crew,  nor  any  of  the 
goods  with  which  she  had  been  freighted  were  ever  seen  or  heard  of  again.  The 
package  containing  that  letter  alone,  a  messenger  of  mercy  for  a  people  waiting  for 
the  law  of  the  Lord,  guided  by  Him  "  whom  wind  and  seas  obey,"  escaped  the 
general  wreck,  and  was  cast  on  shore  at  the  right  place  and  the  right  time  to  reUeve 
the  minds  of  the  anxious  missionaries,  and  to  enable  them  to  go  forward  and  enter 
the  openings  which  appeared  before  them  for  the  proclamation  of  the  "  glorious 
gospel  of  the  blessed  God."  The  Spirit's  direction : — That  you  may  know  the 
Divine  plan  for  you,  go  to  God  Himself,  and  ask  for  it ;  for  as  certainly  as  He  has 
a  plan  or  calling  for  you.  He  will  somehow  guide  you  into  it.  And  this  is  the 
proper  ofi&ce  and  work  of  His  Spirit.  By  this  private  teaching  He  can  show  us, 
and  will,  into  the  very  plan  that  is  set  for  us.  And  this  is  the  significance  of  what 
is  prescribed  as  our  duty — namely,  living  and  walking  in  the  Spirit ;  for  the  Spirit 
of  God  is  a  kind  of  universal  presence,  or  inspiration,  in  the  world's  bosom  ;  an 
unfaihng  inner  light,  which  if  we  accept  and  live  in,  we  are  guided  thereby  into  a 
consenting  choice,  so  that  what  God  wills  for  us  we  also  will  for  ourselves,  settUng 
into  it  as  the  needle  to  the  pole.  By  this  hidden  union  with  God,  or  intercourse 
with  Him,  we  get  a  wisdom  or  insight  deeper  than  we  know  ourselves ;  a  sympathy, 
a  oneness  with  the  Divine  will  and  love.  We  go  into  the  very  plan  of  God  for  us, 
and  are  led  along  in  it  by  Him,  consenting,  co-operating,  answering  to  Him  we  know 
not  how,  and  working  out,  with  nicest  exactness,  that  good  end  for  which  His 
unseen  counsel  girded  us  and  sent  us  into  the  world.  In  this  manner,  not  neglect- 
ing other  methods,  but  gathering  in  all  their  separate  lights,  to  be  interpreted  in 
the  higher  light  of  the  Spirit,  we  can  never  be  greatly  at  a  loss  to  find  our  way 
into  God's  counsel  and  plan.  The  duties  of  the  present  moment  we  shall  meet 
as  they  rise,  and  these  will  open  a  gate  into  the  next,  and  we  shall  thus  pass  on, 
trusting  and  securely,  almost  never  in  doubt  as  to  what  God  calls  us  to 
do.      {Horace  Bunhnell.)  The   supernatural  element   in   labour: — 1.  Here  is 

the  direct  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  early  Christians  realised  that  they 
were  living  in  the  age  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Why  should  there  be  any  difficulty  iik 
believing  that  spirit  may  affect  spirit  ?  We  believe  that  matter  affects  matter.  It 
is  quite  scientific  to  believe  that;  yet  to  believe  that  mind  can  affect  mind,  that 
spirit  can  touch  spirit,  is  fanaticism  1  I  have  not  so  learned  life.  It  is  easy  for  me, 
having  seen  the  action  of  metal  upon  metal,  to  believe  that  there  may  be  a  kindred 
action  of  soul  upon  soul,  God  upon  man.  2.  The  action  of  the  Spirit  is  as  morally 
mysterious  as  it  is  personally  direct  Why  should  the  Holy  Ghost  forbid  the  apostles 
to  preach  the  Word  anywhere?  That  we  cannot  explain;  but  then  you  cannot 
explain  yourself.  We  are  forbidden  to  do  certain  things.  The  things  themselves 
ftie  good,  but  the  time  ia  wrong,  or  the  place  ia  ill-chosen,  or  another  opportunity  is 


•HAP.  xn.}  TEE  ACTS.  465 

greater  and  ought  to  be  absorbent.  It  is  not  enough  that  you  are  in  a  good  place, 
doing  a  good  work ;  your  object  should  be  to  live  and  move  and  have  your  being  in 
the  Spirit  of  God,  so  that  wherever  He  may  point,  your  heart  may  outrun  your  feet 
in  attaining  the  destination.  Where  Ufe  is  bounded  by  programmes  and  outlines, 
and  purposes  merely  human,  life  will  be  a  succession  of  mistakes  and  stinging  dis- 
appointments. 3.  It  is,  to  our  degenerate  piety,  quite  difficult  to  believe  that  the 
early  apostles — yea,  the  prophets  ages  before  them — could  live  so  familiarly  in  the 
presence  of  the  supernatural.  Everything  depends  upon  the  level  of  your  life.  It 
is  possible  to  live  so  high  up  in  intellectual  and  spiritual  companionship  as  to 
receive  with  grateful  ease  and  friendly  recognition  appearances  and  communications 
which  at  one  time  would  have  affected  us  with  the  surprise  of  a  miracle.  4.  What 
did  Paul  see,  then,  in  his  vision  ?  (1)  A  man.  He  who  truly  sees  a  man  must  ever 
be  moved  by  the  pathetic  sight.  We  do  not  see  one  another  whilst  we  are  in  the 
crowd  performing  the  day's  jugglery.  We  do  not  see  the  man,  but  having  once  seen 
him  under  favouring  lights,  we  must  feel  that  man  is  a  name  high  up  in  the  register 
of  life.  (2)  A  man  in  earnest  prayer,  praying  to  a  fellow-man.  It  was  aU,  perhaps, 
the  Macedonian  suppliant  could  then  do.  We  are  allowed  to  pray  at  such  altars  as 
we  can  find.  If  you  fell  down  before  the  least  flower,  before  your  mother's  old  arm- 
chair, it  would  be  shrine  enough.  And  by  and  by  you  will  want  a  whole  heaven  for 
a  church  and  altar.  Begin  where  you  can.  (3)  A  man  in  earnest,  and  a  man 
seeking  help.  There  are  cowards  that  run  away  when  poor,  ill-used  people  call  for 
**  help."  Christianity  is  "  help  "  or  it  is  nothing.  This  is  a  typical  instance.  If 
the  Church  could  have  its  eyes  opened  to-day,  it  would  see  every  unevangelised 
country  and  every  land  in  sore  strait  or  difficulty  typified  in  this  Macedonian  man. 

5.  "  And  after  he  had  seen  the  vision,  immediately  we  endeavoured "   Luke  here 

joins  the  company.  Up  to  this  time  the  narrative  has  been  written  in  the  third 
person ;  it  will  now  be  written  in  the  first.  The  missionaries  came  "  to  Philippi." 
There  is  a  city  plan  of  evangeUsation ;  the  apostles  followed  that  plan.  They  did 
not  hide  themselves  in  obscure  places ;  we  find  great  names  in  their  record.  What 
is  the  justification  of  these  metropolitan  names?  This — and  higher  there  is  non* 
— "  Beginning  at  Jerusalem."  So  we  shall  find  in  these  missionary  records  Jeru- 
salem, Antioch,  Corinth,  Philippi,  Athens,  Ephesus,  name  upon  name  of  local 
eminence  and  dignity,  yet  all  the  names  put  together  are  not  equal  to  London  I 
Give  us  London,  and  we  have  the  key  of  the  world.  Converted  London  would  seem 
to  mean  converted  England;  and  converted  England  would  be  almost  equal  to  a 
converted  world  I    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vera.  8-12.  And  they  passing  by  Mysla  came  down  to  Troas,  and  a  vision  ap- 
peared to  Paul  in  the  night. — PauVa  vision  at  Troas : — I.  Its  benevolence.  What 
is  the  gospel?  Help  for  man.  It  helps  man — 1.  To  know  God.  2.  To  preach 
Christ.  3.  To  promote  civilisation.  II.  Its  influence.  It  recognises — 1.  The 
independent  capacity  of  man  as  a  moral  agent.  2.  The  weakness  of  man.  III.  Its 
MiNisTBATioN.  The  appeals  of  humanity  to  Christianity  are  various.  1.  By  the 
information  of  history.  2.  By  the  general  operation  of  Christian  principles.  3. 
By  inward  impressions.  (Caleb  Morris.)  Wliat  might  have  happened  had  the 
vision  not  occurred: — That  figure  represented  Europe,  and  its  cry  for  help  Europe  s 
need  of  Christ.  Paul  recognised  in  it  a  Divine  summons ;  and  the  very  next  sunset 
which  bathed  the  Hellespont  in  its  golden  light  shone  upon  his  figure  seated  oa 
the  deck  of  a  ship  whose  prow  was  moving  towards  the  shore  of  Macedonia.  In. 
this  passage  of  Paul,  from  Asia  to  Europe,  a  great  providential  decision  was  taking 
effect,  of  which,  as  children  of  the  Y/est,  we  cannot  think  without  the  profoundest 
thankfulness.  Christianity  arose  in  Asia  and  among  an  Oriental  people ;  and  it 
might  have  been  expected  to  spread  first  among  those  races  to  which  the  Jews  were 
most  akin.  Instead  of  coming  we^t,  it  might  have  gone  eastwards.  It  might  have 
penetrated  into  Arabia  and  taken  possession  of  those  regions  where  the  faith  of  the 
False  Prophet  now  holds  sway.  It  might  have  visited  the  wandering  tribes  of 
Central  Asia,  and,  piercing  its  way  down  through  the  passes  of  the  Himalayas, 
reared  its  temples  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  the  Indus,  and  the  Godavery.  It 
might  have  travelled  farther  east  to  deliver  the  swarming  millions  of  China  from 
the  cold  secularism  of  Confucius.  Had  it  done  so,  missionaries  from  India  and 
Japan  might  have  been  coming  to  England  at  the  present  day  to  tell  the  story  of 
the  cross.  But  Providence  conferred  on  Europe  a  blessed  priority,  and  the  fate  of 
our  Continent  was  decided  when  Paul  crossed  the  Hellespont.  (J.  Stalker,  D.D.) 
Tbere  stood  a  man  of  Macedonia,  and  prayed  him,  saying,  Come  over  Into  Mace- 
TOL.  u.  30 


466  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ;[oha».  xn. 

donla  and  help  ub. — Th^  Macedonian  spectre : — Sometimes  men  hear  better  with 
their  eyes  than  with  their  ears.  Truth  will  get  in  through  the  imagination  when  it 
will  make  no  impression  through  the  intellect.  Hence  Bunyan  was  as  philosophical 
as  he  was  ingenious  in  representing  Mansoul  as  having  Feel-gate,  Nose-gate,  Mouth- 
gate,  as  well  as  the  chief  among  them  all,  Ear-gate  and  Eye-gate.  But  when  the 
grand  attack  of  Diabolos  was  made  it  was  found  that  Captain  Eesistance  was 
established  above  Ear-gate ;  but  Ear-gate  was  much  more  slightly  defended.  In 
Scripture  there  is  constant  recognition  of  this  comparative  ease  of  entering  the 
human  soul  by  the  way  of  the  eyes.  Hence  we  are  sure  to  find  some  splendid 
vision  whenever  a  fresh  messenger  is  appointed  from  God  to  men.  Observe : — I. 
That  this  vision  was  addbessed  to  an  inspired  man.  It  found  him  shaken  with 
uttermost  perplexity,  and  was  the  only  thing  which  availed  to  give  direction  in  his 
present  duty.  Twice  in  succession  their  intentions  were  suddenly  held  in  check 
by  a  power  higher  than  their  own.  The  man  of  those  regions  deepens  the 
impressiveness  of  such  a  strange  discipline.  For  while  the  apostle  was 
urging  his  way  east  the  Holy  Ghost  was  constraining  him  to  go  to  the  west. 
"  Westward  the  star  of  empire  takes  its  way,"  seems  to  be  the  Divine  rule  for 
human  history.  Learn  :  1.  That  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  retains  guidance  of 
every  form  of  Christian  enterprise.  It  was  the  "Spirit  of  Jesiis"  which  stopped 
Paul  now,  just  as  He  did  on  the  road  to  Damascus.  That  we  must  ask  God's 
decision,  when  we  set  about  religious  effort.  We  are  to  invite  Divine  co-operation 
in  selection  of  methods,  as  well  as  in  choice  of  ends,  and  so  to  discern  in 
failure  a  stimulant  to  faith,  and  in  success  a  reason  for  our  giving  new  glory  to 
God.  n.  This  btoey  thbows  light  upon  "  calls  "  to  service.  1.  Any  real  decla- 
ration of  want  is  a  call.  Anything  that  has  a  voice  can  utter  a  call.  Adaptations 
to  usefulness  are  direct  calls  to  usefulness.  2.  The  supreme  necessity  of  a  lost 
human  soul.  The  words  which  the  world  at  large  is  speaking  are  "  Come  over  and 
help  us."  It  does  not  appear  to  have  occurred  that  the  spectre  could  have  possibly 
had  any  meaning  beside  a  religious  one.  All  men  the  world  over  have  one  point  in 
common  at  which  they  need  succour :  they  must  have  pardon  for  sin.  3.  The 
"  calls  "  to  duty  which  one  has  afford  a  safe  exposition  of  his  heart.  A  politician 
would  have  imagined  that  a  struggling  people  were  sending  for  soldiers  to  fight  for 
their  cause.  A  philanthropist  would  find  some  signs  of  a  famine.  Thus  each 
would  discover  his  own.  III.  How  readily  these  messengers  or  Christ  started  out 
ON  a  foreign  mission.  1.  Note  the  intense  form  of  expression :  "  immediately,"  &c. 
2.  The  finest  picture  in  this  world  is  that  of  a  human  wiU  surrendered  in  sublime 
obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  The  beauty  of  the  Troad  is  famous :  think  of  Mount 
Ida,  the  city  of  Priam,  the  tomb  of  Achilles.  But  the  chief  fame  of  that  region 
now  is  found  in  the  remembrance  that  there  four  men  set  out  upon  the  sea  to 
<5onquer  Europe  unto  Christ.     (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)        The  Macedonian  phantom : 

I.  St.  Paul's  need  of  faith  and  Divine  guidance.     The  apostles  differed  from 

ourselves  in  that  they  were  endowed  with  extraordinary  gifts.  1.  It  might  have 
been  thought  that,  possessed  as  they  were  of  superhuman  might,  there  would  have 
been  but  little  opportunity  or  demand  for  that  trust  which  is  required  from  our- 
selves. But  that  the  apostles  were  able  to  work  miracles  did  not  secure  to 
them  the  supply  even  of  their  daily  wants.  It  was  a  strange,  but  an  instructive 
spectacle,  that  of  a  man  who  could  raise  the  dead,  obliged  to  labour  like  a  common 
artisan  in  order  to  procure  a  meal.  But  God,  in  order  to  keep  His  servant  depen- 
dent on  himself,  would  not  allow  him  to  exercise,  on  his  own  behalf,  the  powers 
which  were  so  mighty  in  subjugating  the  world.  2.  The  apostles  had  the  gift  of 
prophecy,  and,  privileged  with  immediate  revelation,  they  knew  far  more  than 
common  men  of  the  wiU  and  purposes  of  the  Almighty.  But  this  was  no  more 
allowed  than  their  power  of  working  miracles,  to  diminish  the  necessity  for  the 
exertion  of  faith.  You  might  have  thought  that  such  men  would  never  have  been 
at  any  loss  with  regard  to  their  own  plans.  Yet  this  was  far  from  being  the  case. 
The  Apostles  appear  to  have  had  just  our  trials  of  faith ;  they  were  called  upon  for 
the  same  patient  waiting  on  God,  the  same  watching  the  leadings  of  His  Providence, 
the  same  studying  the  minute  indications  of  His  will.  If  you  look  at  the  verses 
which  immediately  precede  our  text,  you  will  find  abundant  evidence  that  St.  Paul 
Bnd  his  companions  were  required,  like  ourselves,  to  go  forward  in  faith,  uninformed 
as  to  the  precise  course  which  God  would  have  them  take,  but  acting  on  the 
assurance  that  He  directs  the  steps  of  all  such  as  commit  themselves  to  His  guid- 
ance. 3.  At  last,  there  is  granted  unto  Paul  the  vision  recorded  in  our  text,  from 
vhich  he  is  enabled  assuredly  to  gather  that  the  Lord  designed  him  to  preach  ia 


iCHAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  467 

Macedonia.  We  hear  much  of  the  leadings  of  God's  providence;  and  it  is  our 
business  to  be  always  on  the  watch  for  the  leadings  ;  assured  that,  as  God  taught 
His  people  of  old  by  the  cloud  upon  the  tabernacle,  He  wiU  not  fail  now  to  vouch- 
safe guidance  to  those  who  in  all  their  ways  acknowledge  Him.  But  we  are  not 
to  expect  that  the  leadings  of  Providence  wiU  be  always,  or  even  often,  marked  and 
distinct.  This  would  be  to  change  the  character  of  our  dispensation  ;  for  if  the 
pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  went  visibly  before  us,  it  would  be  by  sight,  and  no  longer  by 
iaith,  that  Christians  were  required  to  walk.  It  is  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to 
imagine  the  leadings  of  Providence,  where  we  have  already  got  the  leadings 
of  inclination.  And  we  may  learn  from  the  instance  of  St.  Paul  that,  even  where 
there  is  prayerfulness  and  entire  submission,  it  may  be  only  by  dark  intimations,  and 
after  many  frustrations,  that  God's  providence  will  mark  out  our  course.  II.  St. 
Paul's  vision.  There  is  not  one  who  does  not  consider  that  sleep  is  a  sort  of  image 
of  death.  The  heathen  spake  of  death  as  a  sleep ;  and  Scripture,  from  the  very 
first,  made  use  of  the  figure.  But  the  metaphor  has  not  been  carried  to  its  proper 
extent.  1.  I  do  indeed  think  that  God  designed  sleep  as  the  standing  image  of 
death.  But  I  think  also  that  God  hereby  meant  to  fix  their  thoughts,  not  only  on 
their  dying,  but  on  their  rising  from  the  dead.  Why,  when  every  morning  calls  ua 
from  our  beds,  strung  with  new  energy,  and,  as  it  were,  freshened  into  a  new  lite- 
why  are  we  to  speak  of  sleep  as  though  it  imaged  our  death,  but  not  also  our 
resurrection  ?  2.  But  our  condition  whilst  asleep  furnishes  notices  of  our  condition 
whilst  we  lie  amongst  the  dead.  (1)  In  sleep  it  is  not  the  whole  man,  it  is  only  the 
earthly  part  that  faJleth  asleep.  The  bodily  senses  and  faculties  are  suspended 
from  their  usual  exercise ;  but  the  mind  is  more  than  commonly  active.  What 
flights  will  the  soul  take  during  sleep.  It  may  be  well  doubted  whether  the  soul  is 
ever  inactive  :  we  do  not  always  remember  our  dreams  ;  but,  probably,  we  always 
dream.  And  what  ought  we  to  gather  from  this  ?  Surely,  that  the  soul  shall  be 
active  while  the  body  lies  dead.  (2)  Neither  is  this  all.  Such  passages  of  Scripture 
as  our  text  teach  us  that  while  the  body  is  asleep  the  soul  may  be  receiving 
instruction.  It  is  every  way  observable  that  God  should  have  made  such  frequent 
use  of  visions  or  dreams  in  the  communicating  intimations  of  His  wiU.  He  might 
have  given  these  intimations  through  many  other  modes ;  for  nothing  can  be  more 
vague  or  uncertain  than  a  dream.  And  it  may  have  been  that  in  thus  frequently 
employing  dreams,  and  employing  them  more  frequently  whilst  there  was  less  dis- 
tinct information  as  to  man's  state  after  death,  God's  purpose  was  to  direct  atten- 
tion to  the  capacity  of  the  soul  for  receiving  instruction,  yet  not  through  the  organs 
of  the  body,  but  whilst  those  organs  might  be  closed  and  unable  to  discharge  their 
ordinary  offices.  The  separate  state  shaU  not  be  a  state  of  dull  inactivity  or  low 
attainment :  that  state  is  imaged  by  sleep  ;  and  as  if  to  tell  me  what  the  righteous 
may  expect  in  that  state,  God  hath  come  to  His  servants  in  visions  of  the  night,  and 
taught  them  in  sleep  what  they  had  vainly  striven  to  discover  when  awake.  And 
now  I  am  not  to  give  room  to  any  fears  that,  whilst  the  flesh  lies  slumbering  in  the 
grave,  the  soul  will  not  be  admitted  into  acquaintance  with  portions  of  God's  AviU 
"which  it  may  vainly  have  endeavoured  to  ascertain  whilst  on  earth  ;  enough  that 
St.  Paul,  whilst  awake,  had  meditated  to  preach  in  Asia,  and  assayed  to  go  into 
Bithynia,  seeking  fruitlessly  to  determine  what  God's  will  might  be,  and  yet  that 
St.  Paul,  in  sleep,  which  is  the  image  of  death,  was  thoroughly  instructed  in  regard 
of  that  will — there  stood  by  him  in  a  vision,  "a  man  of  Macedonia,  and  prayed  him, 
saying.  Come  over  into  Macedonia,  and  help  us. "  III.  St.  Paul's  interpretation 
OF  THE  VISION.  There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  any  further  revelation  was  added  ; 
the  expression,  "  assuredly  gathering,"  implies  that  the  disciples  were  left  to  draw 
the  inference  that  "  the  Lord  had  called  them  for  to  preach  the  gospel  unto  them." 
They  never  seem  to  have  imagined  that  there  might  be  any  other  way  in  which 
they  could  help  the  Macedonians,  that  the  Macedonians  could  want  any  other  sort 
of  help.  Do  you  not,  then,  see  that  St.  Paul  and  his  companions  lived  for  only  one 
object  ?  that  they  acknowledged  but  one  supply  for  all  the  wants  of  the  world  ?  Ah, 
how  very  different  would  it  be  amongst  ourselves  I  Let  the  phantom  be  sent  to  one 
of  our  statesmen  ;  let  the  form  of  the  wild  Indian,  or  of  the  African,  stand  by  his 
bedside  in  the  stillness  of  the  midnight,  and  breathe,  in  accents  compelling  his  atten- 
tion, the  simple  entreaty,  "  Come  over  and  help  us,"  and  how  would  the  politician 
interpret  the  call  ?  He  would  probably  conclude  that  ruthless  foes  were  invading 
the  distant  country  ;  and  his  first,  his  only  thought,  might  be  to  send  an  army  to 
its  succour.  Or  let  the  spectre  go  and  speak  to  one  of  our  merchants — he  would 
f^resently  think  9f  commercial  embarrassments  or  commercial  openings,  and  if  ha 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xwv 

"  assuredly  gathered  "  anything  it  would  be  that  he  must  freight  a  vessel  and  send 
out  a  mercantile  establishment.      Or  if  it  were  even  to  one  of  our   benevolent 
and  philanthropic  men  that  the  phantom  addressed  itself,  the  likelihood  is  ho 
would  think  of  famine,  or  pestilence,  and  he  would  hesitate  as  to  what  help  could 
be  given,  tiU  he  had  made  out  some  particular  and  temporal  evil  under  which  they 
were  labouring.     And  yet,  whatever  our  occupation,  we  are  professed  servants  of 
Christ,  and  all  bound,  by  the  vows  of  our  profession,  to  take  as  our  chief  object  the 
advancing  Christ's  kingdom.     It  was  not  merely  because  St.  Paul's  business  was 
that  of  a  preacher  that  he  interpreted  a  cry  for  help  into  a  cry  for  the  gospel ;  St. 
Paul  was  also  a  tentmaker ;  St.  Luke  was  a  physician ;  but  it  never  occurred  to 
either  the  one  or  the  other  that  assistance  might  be  wanted  to  teach  a  trade  or  heal 
a  disease :  their  ruling  desire  was  that  of  glorifying  Christ ;  they  could  not,  therefore, 
be  invited  into  a  country  and  not  seize  on  the  invitation  as  an  opening  for  Chris- 
tianity.    They  beheved  that  in  carrying  Christianity  to  a  land,  they  were  carrying 
that  which  would  best  rectify  disorders,  alleviate  distresses,  assuage  sorrows,  and 
multiply  happiness.     And,  therefore,  they  never  stopped  to  consider  whether  they 
had  at  their  disposal  the  particular  engine  which,  on  a  human  computation,  might 
be  suited  for  counteracting  a  particular  evil — enough  that  they  had  the  gospel  to 
preach ;  and  they  felt  that  they  had  an  engine  which  could  in  no  case  be  inappro- 
priate and  in  none  inefficient.    Let  us  learn,  from  the  example  of  St.  Paul,  to  set  a 
higher  value  on  the  gospel :  whether  it  be  as  a  nation  or  as  individuals  that  we  are 
called  upon  by  the  Macedonian  for  help  ;  whether  the  cry,  borne  from  heathen  lands, 
be  a  cry  specifically  for  reUgious  instruction,  or  the  cry  generally  of  suffering  and 
degraded  humanity.      IV.  St.   Paul's   obedience   to   the   vision.    Observe  how 
ready  they  were  to  obey  God's  will  the  moment  they  had  ascertained  it.    "  Immedi- 
ately. "     It  had  not  been  into  Macedonia  that  they  had  been  wishing  or  purposing 
to  go,   and  unbelief  might  have  suggested,  Shall  we  let  a  phantom  guide    us? 
ought  we  not  at  least  to  wait  for  some  less  dubious  intimation  ?    But  no ;  there 
was  sufficient  reason  to  think  that  God's  will  was  now  discovered,  and  there  was 
nothing  to  be  done  but  to  hasten  to  the  sea  and  seek  the  means  of  embarking. 
Alas  I  we  are  all  ready  enough  to  follow  the  leadings  of  God's  providence  when 
they  concur  with  our  own  wish ;  bat  how  reluctant  are  we  when  God  points  in  one 
direction  and  inclination  in  another  1     This  is  the  trial — to  set  out  for  Macedonia, 
to  which  duty  calls  us,  in  place  of  staying  at  Troas,  to  which  our  own  wishes  bind 
ns.     But  a  Christian  should  have  no  will  of  his  own — he  is  the  servant  of  a  Master 
in  he-  v«n,  and  the  only  thing  for  him  to  ascertain  is  where  that  Master  would  have 
him  work,  and  what  He  would  have  him  do.     Has  the  phantom  been  at  his  bed- 
side ?     Then  he  ought  not  to  confer  with  flesh  and  blood.     He  is  indeed  to  take 
every  just  means  for  assuring  himself  that  he  is  not  deceived,  that  the  phantom  has 
not  been  woven  from  the  imagining  of  his  own  brain,  but  has  really  been  sent  to 
him  by  his  Master.    But  this  having  been  done,  there  is  no  room  for  hesitation. 
And  are  we  not  summoned  to  Macedonia?  and  is  not  the  voice  for  assistance  more 
thrilling  and  more  plaintive  than  that  which  fell,  in  night  visions,  on  the  ear  of 
St.  Paul  ?     It  is  the  voice,  not  only  of  the  Macedonian,  the  foreigner,  the  heathen ; 
it  is  the  voice  of  our  own  countrymen.      (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)        The  cry  of  the 
Macedonian  to  Paul: — The  cry — I.  Was  human.     1.  A  man — (1)  Not  an  angelio 
intelligence.     (2)  Not  a  member  of  a  class,  but  of  a  race.     It  was  not  a  philosopher, 
artist,  priest,  warrior,  king ;  but  a  man.    2.  It  is  the  humanity  in  heathendom  that 
is  in  moral  distress.     The  aid  that  is  so  deeply  required  is  not  secular,  political, 
educational,  military,  but  moral.     Help  to  the  conscience,  soul ;  help  to  man  as 
man  in  his  spiritual  and  eternal  relationships.      II.  Was  significant.      "  Come 
over  and  help  us."    It  implies — 1.  A  sense  of  need.     Man  everywhere  feels  that 
there  is  something  wanting  to  make  matters  right   between  him  and  his  God. 
"  Wherewithal  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord?"    2.  Conscious  inability  to  supply 
the  need.     The  Macedonian  felt  that  the  Macedonians,  with  all  their  wealth  and 
intelligence,  could  not  supply  the  necessity.     Heathenism  has  no  self-redemptive 
power.    3.  Faith  is  the  power  of  Christians  to  help.     The  Macedonian  took  it  for 
granted  that  Paul  could  help.     Macedonia  represents  the  western  world.     Once  this 
call  sounded  for  help  from  the  heathen  West  to  the  Christian  East;  now  it  sounds 
from  the  heathen  East  to  the  Christian  West.    III.  Was  obeyed.     Paul  attends  at 
once  to  the  call.  {D.Thomas,  D.D.)    The  cry  of  the  heathen : — Consider — I.  The  wants 
OF  THE  HEATHEN.     Think  of  the  millions  of  India  ignorant  of  God,  of  Christ,  and 
of  the  wav  of  salvation ;  destitute  of  hope,  victims  of  the  most  degrading  supersti- 
tioo.     Of  their  rites  we  may  well  say  with  St.  Paul  (Ephes.  t.  12  ;  Bom.  i.  29-32). 


OSAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  469 

II.  The  characteb  of  the  blessing.      1.  It  offers  a  Divine  atonement.     2.  The 
Holy  Spirit  applies  it  and  imparts  the  state  of  mind  essentially  necessary  (Mark 
xvi.  16).    III.  OoB  OBLIGATIONS.     1.  It  is  the  command  of  Christ,  "  Go  ye,"  &c. 
(Mark  xvi.  15).      2.   Common  humanity  demands  it.     IV.  The  motives  which 
UEGE  us.     1.  The  facilities  offered  for  the  propagation  of  the  goSpel.     Multitudes  are 
prepared  for  it.     The  Bible  is  translated  into  their  tongues,  there  is  a  disposition  to 
read  it,  prejudice  is  wearing  away.     God  is  pouring  out  His  blessing  on  the  means 
already  employed.     2.  Our  abundant  means.     We  have  wealth,  piety,  influence, 
talent,  all  at  our  command.     3.  The  magnitude  of  the  work  calls  forth  our  exer- 
tions.    V.  Impbovement.     1.  The  glory  of  the  Redeemer  is  involved  in  the  extension 
of  His  Church.    Has  not  God  given  Him  the  heathen  for  His  inheritance,  Ac. 
Every  soul  saved  adds  one  gem  to  the  Redeemer's  crown.     Is  not  this  the  object  of 
our  daily  prayer,  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  and  can  we  consistently  use  the  worda 
without  employing  the  means  ?     2.  Gratitude,  as  enlightened  Gentiles.    Here  God 
was  once  unknown.    All  the  blessings  we  enjoy  we  owe  to  the  labours  of  those 
holy  men  who  left  their  peaceful  homes  to  preach  among   us    "  the   unsearch- 
able riches  of  Christ."    3.  Compassion  to  their  deplorable  state.     The  temporal 
salvation    of    millions   of   men   is    not   equal  to   that   of   one   soul.       (Pulpit.) 
TJie  vision  and  the  call : — I.  The  vision.     *'  They  came  down  to  Troas  " — that  is,  to 
Troy,  a  modern  city  bearing  the  name,  and  marking  the  region,  if  not  the  site,  of 
Priam's  Troy,  the  City  of  the  Iliad  and  the  blind  singer's  deathless  song.     Such 
places  are  fountains  of  inspiration  in  themselves.     Hill  and  grove,  stream  and  plain, 
are  vocal  with  great  memories ;  and  the  soul  that  is  worthy  of  such  a  scene  hears, 
as  Augustine  heard  voices  in  the  air  saying,  "  Let  us,  too,  conquer  something." 
But  more  depends  upon  the  soul  than  on  the  scene  ;  for  whatever  it  looks  upon  the 
eye  can  only  see  what  the  eye  brings  with  it,  the  means  of  seeing,  for  everything 
wears  the  hue  of  the  spirit.    Xerxes,  Alexander  of  Macedon,  Julius  Cassar,  and  many 
more  came  to  this  famed  region,  and  each  one  saw  and  heard  according  to  the  spirit 
that  was  in  him  visions  of  battles.  But  the  man  who  had  now  come  to  Troy  had  brought 
with  him  another  spirit  and  an  eye  capable  of  nobler  visions.    He  brought  with  him  a 
great  soul,  wide  in  the  range  of  its  sympathies,  sensitive,  impressionable,  and  glowing 
with  the  quenchless  passion  of  love  to  God  and  man.     Never  in  all  its  eventful 
history  had  Troy  an  eye  so  rich  in  the  means  of  seeing  whatever  Troy  could  show. 
And  what  did  Paul  see  upon  the  Trojan  plain?    Behold,  then,  the  new  Troy  that 
God  would  have  besieged  and  conquered,  as  the  spring  besieges,  and  as  the  summer 
conquers  the  land  !    Isaiah  saw  the  Lord  high  and  lifted  up,  and  the  message  that 
moulded  his  life  came  to  him  from  the  very  lips  of  God,  speaking  in  person.     That 
was  the  highest  vision  of  which  the  best  man  in  that  stage  of  the  world's  spiritual 
development  was  capable.    But  Paul  in  that  great  moment,  not  only  of  his  life, 
beheld,  not  the  Lord  high  and  lifted  up,  but  a  man  of  Europe,  one  of  ourselves,  and 
heard  a  human  voice  pleading  in  the  darkness  for  such  help  as  he  could  give.     It 
was  the  vision  rendered  possible  by  the  Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  Gnd,  and  necessary 
by  the  state  of  the  world.     He  beheld  a  man  !     That  is  the  vision  needed  to-day. 
In  all  our  difficulties  in  England,  political,  economic,  social  and  ecclesiastic,  the 
devil's  poUcy  is  stiU  to  raise  such  a  dust  of  controversy  as  to  hide  man  from  man. 
Penetrate  to  the  heart  of  any  question  of  the  day,  and  there  you  find  a  man,  a  man 
asking  for  help.    At  the  heart  of  the  Drink  Question,  at  the  heart  of  the  Labour 
Question,  there  are  men,  not  monsters,  but  men,  flesh  of  our  flesh,  men  with 
difficulties,  crying  to  ns,  calling  to  us,  pleading  with  us.    And  our  only  hope  of 
settling  these  questions  lies  in  laying  the  oloud  of  devil's  dust  of  passion  and  pre- 
judice until  we  can  see  the  man  and  hear  what  he  is  saying.    And  this  great  matter 
of  missions,  what  is  it?    Do  some  of  yoa  young  people  think  that,  after  all, 
it  is  nothing  but  a  war  of  religions?  that  it  is  simply  a  crusade  of  one  creed 
against  another?    Nothing  of  the  sort.    It  is  man's  ministry  to  man.     How 
shall  we  figure  heathenism  to  ourselves  to-night?      Shall  we  call  up  a  vision 
of  idols  and  groves  and  templei  and  mitred  priests  and  garlanded  victims  ?    No  ; 
all  that  is  mere  detail.     If  you  want  to  see  heathenism  in  the  fullest  pathos 
and  tragedy  of  its  fate,  think  of  it  under  the  guise  of  a  man  with  soul  enough  to 
conceive  the  sublime  ideas  of  Brahminism,  with  conscience  enough  to  appreciate 
the  grand  moral  precepts  of  Buddha,  with  brain  enough  to  frame  the  marvellous 
scheme  of  Confucius,  and  spirituality  enough  in  him  to  see  with  Zoroaster  that  the 
difference  between  good  and  evil  is  no  measurable  distance,  but  a  distance  as 
between  day  and  night.    We  have  to  approach  them  rather  in  the  spirit  of  brother- 
liness ;  fox  a  man  stands  before  us,  and  yet  in  a  spirit  oi  compassion  for  this  man. 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ifir 


BO  noble,  so  subtle,  so  mighty  of  intellect,  is  weighed  down,  is  cramped,  he  is  weary 
with  searching  and  cannot  find,  he  is  a  baffled  man,  and  he  asks  us  to  help  him 
with  that  very  thing  in  the  possession  of  which  alone  we  are  superior  to  him,  the 
thing  which,  perhaps,  when  we  have  handed  it  to  him  he  will  be  able  to  make  a, 
very  much  better  use  of  than  we  have  made.  II.  The  call.  Human  need  is 
always  yacred  and  ever  oracular,  for  through  it  God  speaks.  The  will  of  God  is  the 
only  plain  thing  in  this  universe,  the  only  thing  that  is  absolutely  known.  Every- 
thing else  has  darkness  and  mist  about  it,  but  the  will  of  God  is  absolutely  plain. 
The  wiU  of  God  is  gladness,  sunshine,  music,  life.  It  is  everywhere.  Go  forth  into 
the  byways  and  highways  of  London  with  open  eye  and  reverent  heart,  and  you 
shall  see  it  written  upon  every  human  need,  and  you  shall  hear  it  speaking  to  you. 
in  every  human  cry.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  men  be  saved  and  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth  ;  and  God"s  will  be  done  1  The  call  of  God  is  a  call  to  unity.  , 
"  When  he  had  seen  the  vision  we  sought  to  go  forth."  It  is  noticed  that  the  word  \ 
"  we  "  comes  in  here  for  the  first  time.  The  men  felt  that  it  was  a  call  not  only  to-  I 
action,  but  to  united  action.  There  had  been  quarrels  and  partings  at  Antioch.  / 
Paul  and  Barnabas  had  separated  ;  but  this  revelation  of  the  need  of  the  world  came  j 
to  give  compression  and  compactness  and  unity  to  this  little  band.  If  you  want  to  ( 
see  the  quarrel  at  Antioch  in  its  true  nature,  look  at  it  in  the  light  of  Europe's 
need  ;  and  if  you  want  to  see  the  divisions  and  the  jealousies  that  divide  Christian 
people  at  home,  look  at  them  against  the  world's  need  to-day.  God  is  not  calling 
us  simply  to  action,  but  to  united  action,  to  co-operation,  to  Christian  unity. 
Twice  one  man  is  not  simply  two,  but  two  plus  their  unity.  It  does  not  matter  how 
many  they  are.  It  is  not  the  number  of  men  that  work ;  it  is  the  spirit  in  which 
any  number  work ;  their  unity  tells.  III.  The  work.  •'  God  had  called  us  to 
preach  the  gospel  unto  them."  Dr.  Owen,  in  his  sermon  on  this  text,  says :  "  No 
men  want  help  like  the  men  that  want  the  gospel."  But  what  is  the  gospel?  1. 
Preaching  the  gospel ;  what  is  it  ?  It  is  calling  the  righteous  to  repentance.  There 
were  good  folk  in  Philippi,  and  Paul  found  them  engaged  in  a  good  work  on  a  good 
day.  Well,  then,  let  well  alone  ?  No,  for  it  is  not  at  all  well.  Nowhere  in  all 
Philippi  was  Paul  more  needed  than  among  these  good  folk  praying  on  the  Sabbath- 
day  by  the  river's  brim  ;  and  there  is  no  one  in  aU  England  that  needs  a  mission 
more  than  many  a  good,  blameless,  irreproachable,  man.  But  are  there  good 
among  the  heathen  ?  Oh  1  yes.  I  am  no  more  concerned  to  deny  goodness  to 
India  and  China  than  St.  Luke  to  Philippi.  There  is  goodness  among  the  heathen, 
conscientiousness,  aspiration,  prayerfulness.  Why,  then,  send  missions  to  good 
people  ?  Why?  Because  the  goodness  of  the  world,  almost  more  than  its  badness, 
demonstrates  the  absolute  necessity  of  the  gospel.  If  the  badness  of  the  world 
proves  how  far  down  man  can  fall  left  to  himself,  the  goodness  of  the  world  goes 
to  show  what  a  very  little  way,  left  to  himself,  he  can  lift  himself  from  where  he  has 
fallen.  2.  Preaching  the  gospel,  what  is  it  ?  Dehverance  of  the  captives.  As  Paul 
passed  and  repassed  through  the  streets  on  his  way  to  the  place  of  prayer,  to  preach 
to  the  good,  kind  people,  he  saw  another  phase  of  European  life — a  poor  girl,  on 
whose  supposed  powers  of  divination  greedy  men  were  making  a  fat  living.  Well, 
she,  too,  as  well  as  Lydia,  should  be  helped.  Paul  held  a  gospel  in  trust  for  her. 
Oh  I  yes :  but  think  of  the  diihculties  and  the  danger  of  doing  it  I  For  timid  friends 
tell  Paul,  who  had  never  been  in  Europe  before  ;  never  been  face  to  face  with  down- 
right heathenism  before  :  "  She  is  a  property,  a  human  chattel ;  she  belongs  to  the 
men  who  live  upon  her  powers."  Salvation  for  her  means  ruin  for  them  :  good 
money  is  good  in  Europe,  and  what  it  migbt  mean  ultimately  for  Paul  no  one  could 
say.  Then  think  of  the  scandal,  the  interruptions  of  the  good  work  so  nicely  begun 
— all  this  to  be  stopped  and  a  great  scandal  raised,  and  Christianity  itself,  perhaps. 
Yes,  there  were  strong  reasons  for  not  touching  this  matter,  and  Paul  seems  to  have 
shrunk  from  doing  so.  But  God  forced  his  hand.  The  girl  followed  him  day  by 
day,  advertising  the  mission  that  he  had  been  sent  upon,  until,  at  last,  able  to  bear 
it  no  longer,  he  stood  there  in  the  open  street  and,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  opened 
fire  upon  the  devil  in  her,  and  the  more  malignant  devil  in  her  masters.  Yes,  there 
was  a  scandal  and  tumult,  and  much  trouble  came  of  it.  But  it  had  to  be  done,  for 
in  this  matter  peace  is  with  the  devil  and  the  fight  is  with  God.  3.  Preaching  the 
gospel  to  the  heathen  is  preaching  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  lost  men.  Philippi  held 
not  Lydia  only,  not  girls  like  that  poor  lost,  wild  one ;  but  men  like  this  gaoler, 
coarse,  hardened,  sceptical.  What  can  Paul  do  to  help  that  man  J  What  does  that 
man  want  ?  Why,  he  wants  everything ;  he  wants  the  chief  thing.  And  so,  from 
obeying  the  vision  they  saw  and  following  the  call  they  heard,  God  led  these  people 


OHAP.  xn.}  THE  ACTS.  471 

into  a  work  that  toached  the  European  town  at  every  point  of  its  life,  and  stirred  it 
to  its  lowest  depths.  They  left  it  in  a  few  days  a  different  place  from  what  they 
had  found  it.  {J.  M.  Gibbon.)  The  cry  of  the  heathen : — Tliis  was  no  doubt  a 
special  vision  sent  of  God  for  the  direction  of  the  apostle.  And  yet  the  vision  may 
be  very  readily  accounted  for  by  natural  causes.  Men  usually  dream  of  that 
which  is  most  upon  their  minds.  Who  marvels  that  the  miser  dreams  of  gold, 
the  mother  of  her  infant,  the  soldier  of  battle?  No  wonder  that  Paul,  whose 
whole  soul  was  full  of  his  Master's  cause,  should  have  a  vision  concerning 
a  new  field  of  labour.  God  sometimes  tells  men  in  their  sleep  the  secret 
they  could  not  discover  when  they  were  awake.  We  have  heard  of  the 
preacher  who  dreamed  his  sermon  and  then  preached  it.  The  text  suggests 
that — I.  The  greatest  help  that  can  be  given  to  ant  people  is  the  preach- 
ing OF  the  gospel.  Those  who  have  not  the  gospel  stand  in  the  greatest 
need  of  help;  but  when  the  gospel  is  carried,  you  carry  everything  within  it. 
1.  Many  lands  are  stUl  subject  to  despots.  How  is  hberty  to  be  established  in 
these  lands  ?  We  need  something  more  potent  than  steel  to  carve  out  the  liberty 
of  mankind.  If  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity,  the  three  great  words  that  are  the 
world's  heirloom,  are  ever  to  be  fully  known,  it  must  be  by  the  preaching  of  the 
Word  of  Jesus.  2.  See  how  the  nations  are  lying  under  gloomy  superstition. 
How  many  have  their  intellect  blighted,  their  hopes  blasted,  their  progress  stopped, 
by  the  cursed  dominancy  of  priests.  But  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  which  teaches 
that  believers  are  all  priests  and  kings — this,  and  this  only,  is  the  world's  hope  of 
its  deliverance  from  the  slavery  of  the  body  and  the  yet  more  accursed  bondage  of 
the  soul.  3.  There  are  many  places  where  all  social  comforts  and  enjoyments  are  as 
yet  totally  unknown.  Nothing  else  can  make  the  barbarian  into  a  civilised  man  but 
the  cross.  4.  There  are  districts  where  the  ground  is  red  with  blood.  What  shall 
we  do  to  put  an  end  to  war  ?  The  gospel  of  Jesus  shall  yet  break  the  battle-bow  in 
sunder.  6.  But  still,  the  greatest  help  that  the  gospel  brings  is  help  to  the  soul. 
Does  not  your  heart  desire  that  the  blind  eye  should  be  opened,  the  misguided 
directed,  the  vicious  led  to  virtue,  and  the  virtuous  to  righteousness  ?  Ye  must 
send  the  gospel  far  and  wide.  How  can  they  believe  without  a  preacher  ?  How 
can  they  preach  except  they  be  sent  ?  11.  Everi  day  and  hour  the  nations  are 
baying,  "  Come  over  and  help  us.  "  They  do  not  vocally  ask  for  help ;  nay,  if 
you  send  it,  they  wiU  many  of  them  reject  it.  Missionaries  have  been  slain  ;  but 
BtUl  the  nations  are  silently  crying,  "  Come  over  and  help  us."  If  I  saw  a  person 
in  the  street  faint  and  dying,  although  he  spoke  not  to  me,  I  should  think  the 
weakness  of  his  silence  more  potent  than  all  the  power  of  words.  Ay,  and  if  I  saw 
him  like  a  maniac,  pushing  me  from  him,  for  that  very  reason  I  would  give  him 
my  assistance;  and  so  must  you  do.  It  is  ours  to  thrust  our  kindness  upon 
unwilling  men,  because  we  believe  that  their  unwillingness  arises  from  the  mad- 
ness of  their  disease.  Unborn  generations  shall  bless  the  men  that  sent  the  gospel 
which  at  first  their  fathers  did  reject.  III.  What  do  you  mean  to  do  in  answer 
TO  THE  heathen's  CRY  ?  Havo  I  One  man  who  has  a  mind  to  go  and  preach  the 
gospel  in  other  lands  7  Because  if  I  have,  and  if  I  have  ten  others  who  have  a 
mind  to  give  him  ten  pounds  a  year,  I  have  an  opening  for  sending  him  out  at  once. 
Who  can  tell  ? — he  might  be  another  Livingstone.  Have  we  no  young  men  here 
who  are  ready  to  volunteer  ?  And  what  are  you  resolved  to  do  who  cannot  preach  ? 
Says  one,  *'  I  will  pray."  Do  so ;  but  in  doing  that,  recollect  that  is  what  the 
Boman  priest  did  for  the  beggar.  The  priest  said  he  would  not  give  him  a 
sovereign,  nor  a  half-crown,  nor  a  penny.  "Holy  father,"  said  the  beggar,  "will 
you  give  me  your  prayers  ?  "  "  Yes,"  said  the  priest ;  "  kneel  down."  "  No,"  said 
the  beggar ;  "  for  if  your  prayers  had  been  worth  a  penny,  you  would  not  have 
given  them  to  me."  If  you  have  nopght  else  to  give  to  Christ,  ye  need  not  be 
ashamed ;  but  if  you  are  blessed  in  your  substance,  you  will  be  lying  before  Him  if 
you  ask  Him  to  bless  His  cause  and  do  not  give  of  your  means  in  its  support. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Cry  of  tlie  heathen : — One  sunny  evening,  on  Mr.  Mason's 
return  from  a  preaching  excursion  among  the  Burmans,  the  first  object  which 
attracted  his  attention  was  the  fine  form  of  a  Sgare  chief,  who,  seated  hke  a  child 
at  Mrs.  Mason's  feet,  was  earnestly  imploring  her  to  visit  the  karens  in  his  village 
and  neighbourhood.  "  We  have  heard  of  Christianity,  and  it  seems  to  us  some- 
thing wonderful.  We  do  not  vmderstand  it,  and  yet  it  seems  the  very  thing  wo 
want.  Come  to  our  jungle  homes,  and  preach  to  us  on  our  native  streams.  Many 
will  believe.  I  have  a  Burman  wife,  and  I  have  daughters,  and  sons-in-law,  and 
brothers,  and  nephews,  all  of  whom  will  become  Christians,  as  well  as  mjsdf ,  aa 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xti. 

soon  as  we  really  understand."  In  a  few  years  this  man  became  one  of  the  most 
efficient  labourers  in  Merqui  and  Tavoy,  and  under  his  influence  many  were 
baptized.  {J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  A  cry  for  help : — The  form  of  the  petition, 
which  we  may  declare  without  exaggeration  to  be  addressed  to  all  of  us  in  the 
periodical  call  of  Christian  missions,  places  in  a  very  attractive  light  the  work  to 
which  it  refers.  The  gospel  is  designed  by  its  Author,  and  is  felt  by  its  true 
disciples  to  be  the  help  of  man.  -The  Bible  is  full  of  this  aspect  of  the  gospel. 
Man  wants  help,  and  God  alone  offers  him  help.  I.  Instbuction  is  help.  We  all 
speak  of  the  helplessness  of  the  blind.  See  a  blind  man  groping  his  way :  mark 
the  vacillation  of  his  step,  the  uncertainty  of  his  hand ;  see  how  a  little  child,  a 
dumb  animal,  a  lifeless  staff,  is  welcomed  as  the  guide  and  helper.  Now  what  the 
light  of  the  sun  is  to  one  who  has  to  move  among  the  things  of  this  world,  that 
knowledge  is  to  a  man  who  has  to  find  his  way  through  the  mysteries,  perils,  and 
obstructions  of  this  life  into  an  eternal  state.  WeU  can  you  imagine  yourself 
crying,  in  the  words  of  the  text,  "  Come  over  and  help  me  1  Help  me  by  telling 
me  for  certain  what  I  am  and  where ;  who  is  He  above  me,  and  what  the  life 
beyond ;  how  I  can  so  pass  through  things  temporal  that  I  finally  lose  not  the 
things  eternal. "  II.  Comfobt  is  help.  See  how  the  Psalmist  cries  out  for  help  in 
his  hours  of  distress.  "  Shew  me  a  token  for  good :  that  they  who  hate  me  may 
see  it  and  be  ashamed,  because  Thou,  Lord,  hast  holpen  me  and  comforted  me." 
Holpen,  and  comforted.  The  two  things  are  one.  If  I  could  only  feel  that  some 
one  has  cared  for  my  soul,  it  is  help  at  once.  It  is  neglect,  indifference,  alienation, 
which  disheartens  and  makes  me  feel  myself  helpless.  Let  me  know  that  God 
whom  I  have  displeased  yet  loves,  that  God  whom  I  have  neglected  waits  for  me 
with  outstretched  arm,  and  I  can  bear  anything,  I  can  do  anything.  It  is  so  when 
first  the  gospel  is  apprehended  as  indeed  a  message  of  peace  from  God.  And  it  is 
60  again  day  by  day.  The  gospel  is  indeed  help  for  the  helpless  and  life  from  the 
dead.  III.  But  there  are  hearts  of  which  the  inward  thought  is,  "  The  help  I 
need  most  of  all  is,  in  the  simplest  sense,  assistance — aid  against  difficulties, 
enemies,  temptations."  Yes,  here  we  touch  the  vital  point.  What  makes  a  true 
Christian  love  his  gospel  is  that  he  finds  strength  in  it.  (Dean  Vaiighan.) 
A  call  for  help  : — Oriental  in  its  lineage  and  nativity  Christianity  was  destined  to 
become  European  in  its  triumphs.  A  few  centuries  saw  it  wither  in  those  lands 
which  gave  it  birth.  Whereas  transplanted  to  Europe  it  has  struck  here  abiding 
roots  and  borne  ample  fruit.  Nourished  by  the  stronger  soil  of  Western  life,  it  ia 
now  beginning  to  repay  the  East  its  early  obhgations.  The  moment  to  which  the 
text  refers  was  one  of  the  supreme  turning-points  of  history.  It  was  a  moment 
sure  to  come.  Sooner  or  later  the  gospel  was  bouud  to  pass  from  the  continent  ol 
its  infancy  to  that  robuster  continent  which  was  to  prove  the  home  of  its  manhood. 
Yet  it  needed  quite  a  series  of  unusual  providential  indications  to  bring  that  mission 
band  down  to  Troas.  Again  and  again  had  the  unseen  Guide  of  that  enterprise 
stood,  like  the  angel  of  Balaam,  barring  progress.  Bead  widely  the  Macedonians' 
appeal  suggests — ^I.  That  all  human  religions,  governments,  literature,  crviLi- 
BATioN,  HAVE  ENDED  IN  A  CONFESSION  OF  FAILURE.  1.  What  are  human  religions 
but  attempts  to  find  God?  But  they  strive  after  the  unattainable.  The  net  result 
of  them  all  in  Paul's  day  was  a  general  scepticism  respecting  reUgious  truths,  and 
despair  respecting  their  highest  good.  2.  The  end  of  government  and  all  social 
systems  is  the  regeneration  of  society  and  a  reign  of  justice,  peace,  and  happiness; 
and  at  this  problem  men  had  long  been  working.  Government  by  one,  by  a  few, 
by  the  many,  by  the  best — the  world  has  tried  them  all,  and  under  all  of  them  has 
gone  to  corruption.  3.  This  failure  repeats  itself  in  the  individual  soul.  The 
inward  history  of  every  man,  when  the  net  result  of  all  life's  efforts  comes  to  be 
inspected,  does  not  satisfy  even  the  man  himself.  It  is  not  what  it  ought  or  was 
meant  to  be.  II.  To  all  this  incessant,  profound,  pathetic  plaint  of  huhanitt, 
God's  answer  has  been  the  gospel  op  His  Son,  or  ruther  God's  Son  Himself. 
He  is  the  Helper  who  has  come  over  to  us.  He  has  brought  light,  revealing  the 
Father  whom  we  had  ignorantly  worshipped ;  peace  cancelling  guilt  and  atoning 
for  transgression ;  power  to  break  the  bonds  of  evil  habit,  to  renew  the  wasted  moral 
energy,  and  to  build  up  holy  character.  We  believe  in  this  Helper;  to  receive 
Christ  is  to  be  a  Christian.  Come  and  see  if  He  be  not  the  Christ  of  God.  ILL 
Christ  being  God's  response  to  the  cry  for  help,  it  follows  that  Christians 

IN    THEIU    turn    must    LISTKN    TO    THE    GUY    AND    ANSWER    IT.       If    the     gOSpel    haS    DOt 

forgotten    its   own   otitin    it.   can    never  hear   unmoved   the   Macedonian  appeaL 
CuiitiliauiLy  is  notiiiug  if  not  a  mission  ;  and  the  Church's  loyalty  is  tested  by  thk 


CHAB.  XYi.]  THE  ACTS,  473 

degree  of  her  sensitiveness  to  catch  and  her  promptness  to  answer  the  cry  of 
perishing  men.  Not  that  the  Church  must  wait  for  any  formal  invitation.  Paal 
did  not  wait  for  that,  Macedonia  knew  and  cared  nothing  about  Christianity. 
The  cry  came  not  from  Europe,  but  from  God.  What  the  vision  meant  was  that 
Macedonia  needed  and  was  ready  for  the  gospel.  And  no  other  provocation  is 
needed  for  the  Church's  missionary  effort  to-day.  Note  then — 1.  The  need.  The 
study  of  comparative  religion  yields  two  results — (1)  It  brings  to  light  the  seeds  of 
spiritual  truth  which  Ue  buried  beneath  the  great  old  religions,  and  which  testify  to 
the  inextinguishable  cravings  after  God  to  which  Christ  is  God's  reply.  (2)  It  shows 
the  necessity  for  the  Christian  revelation.  To  know  heathenism  thoroughly  is  to 
know  not  only  its  fragments  of  partial  truth,  but  also  their  insufiQciency,  and  their 
\vitnes8  to  man's  abortive  spiritual  struggles.  There  is  great  need  for  a  fuller 
acquaintance  with  heathen  creeds,  and  their  outcome  in  heathen  life.  It  is  most 
difficult  for  men  whose  moral  sense  has  been  refined  by  Christianity  to  fathom  the 
deeps  of  sinfulness  and  cruelty  in  which  men  have  been  plunged  by  unnumbered 
centuries  of  heathenism.  Had  Christians  only  an  exacter  knowledge  of  these 
things,  compassion  for  the  heathen  would  be  vastly  more  keen  and  active  than  it 
is.  2.  The  readiness.  The  Church  literally  staggers  beneath  appeals  for  help. 
You  can  scarcely  name  a  region  that  is  inaccessible  to  the  gospel.  This  is  the 
privilege  and  perplexity  of  aU  our  Churches.  {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)  The 
world's  want,  the  world's  cry : — It  is  only  hearts  burdened  with  Divine  pity,  and 
moved  by  Divine  love,  that  see  such  visions  or  hear  such  voices  as  Paul  saw  and 
heard.  The  cold  and  indifferent  sleep  on ;  never  hear  and  never  see  the  great 
spirit  world  that  wraps  us  close  round.  But  we  must  not  suppose  that  the 
Macedonians  were  actually  hungering  for  the  gospel.  We  know  that  i^ey  did  not 
welcome  Paul.  His  first  sermon  was  preached  to  a  few  women  only,  and  he  was 
beaten  and  disregarded  by  the  Philippians  at  large,  and  driven  from  their  city ;  and 
when  he  went  further  south  to  Thessalonica,  they  assaulted  him  so  furiously  that 
he  had  to  escape  out  of  the  city  by  night.  And  further  south  again  in  Athens  they 
mocked  him  and  said,  "  What  will  this  babbler  say?  "  Alas  1  the  heathen,  as  a  rule, 
do  not  see  their  darkness  or  feel  their  misery.  The  sheep  in  the  wilderness, 
though  utterly  lost  and  in  utmost  peril,  never  seek  the  shepherd ;  it  is  the  shepherd 
who  has  to  seek  the  sheep.  There  was  once  an  old  man,  diseased  and  worn  and 
literally  clothed  in  rags,  who  sat  by  the  wayside  begging,  an  object  of  pity :  yet  he 
never  uttered  a  word,  but  simply  sat  there.  One  day  a  gentleman  passing  by  was 
struck  by  his  abject  misery,  but  as  no  appeal  was  made  he  passed  on.  Yet,  haunted 
by  the  man's  woe-begotten  appearance,  he  came  back  and  said,  "  Are  you  in  want?  " 
^d  the  old  man  replied,  "  Oh,  sir  1  I  am  sick  and  cold  and  hungry."  Then  said 
the  gentleman,  •'  Why  don't  you  beg?  "  And  the  old  man,  stretching  out  his  worn, 
wasted  hands,  and  looking  at  his  rag-covered  body,  said,  •'  Sir,  I  am  begging  with 
a  thousand  tongues."  Yes,  his  misery  was  begging  more  eloquently  than  words. 
And  it  is  thus  that  the  heathen  world  is  begging  at  the  doors  of  the  Church.  It  is 
its  misery  that  begs ;  for  the  heathen  are  without  God,  and  without  hope  in  the 
world.  But  it  is  only  a  Christian's  eye  that  can  see  that  misery,  and  only  a  Christian's 
eax  that  can  hear  the  cry.  But  what  kind  of  help  did  the  Macedonians  want  from 
Paul  ?  and  what  kind  of  help  had  Paul  to  give  them  ?  It  was — 1.  Help  out  of  their 
debasing  idolatries  and  superstitions  to  the  knowledge  of  the  one  true  and  living 
God.  2.  Help  out  of  their  moral  degradation  to  a  higher  and  nobler  life.  3.  Help 
out  of  darkness  and  death  to  Christ  and  life.  (G.  Owen.)  The  beginning  of 
European  missions: — I.  The  dbbah.  It  seems  a  slight  sort  of  thing  to  be  the 
beginning  of  any  enterprise,  for  a  dream  may  arise  from  some  slight  derangement 
of  the  body,  some  uneasy  posture,  some  pre-occupation  of  the  mind.  Sometimes, 
however,  it  may  be  the  effluence  of  another  life.  Just  as  a  telegraph  wire  wiU 
transmit  an  infiuence  that  will  reach  another  wire  quite  detached  from  it  miles 
away — how,  no  man  knows — bo  there  are  souls,  perhaps,  with  so  much  vitality  and 
power  to  propagate  an  impression  that  they  may  waft  their  desire  into  other  hearts 
by  the  subtle  breathing  and  yearning  of  the  soul.  In  such  a  case  a  dream  may  have 
a  meaning.  God  "  fulfils  Himself  in  many  ways,"  and  sometimes,  when  He  cannot 
get  into  our  waking  mind.  He  will  enter  into  the  mind  while  it  sleeps,  and 
convey  His  message  there.  From  the  result  we  see  that  this  dream  was  a  ministering 
angel.  Mark  some  of  the  strange  things  about  him.  1.  It  is  very  strange  that  He 
goes  to  the  hearts  that  He  does.  Truly  there  was  need  of  some  angel  to  be  the 
mouthpiece  of  creation  that  was  groaning.  For  despair  spread  over  the  face  of  tha 
people.     The  power  of  Bome  was  oppressive ;  liberty  was  extinct ;  the  laws  wer« 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xfu 

bitter  and  cruel  in  a  degree  we  cannot  easily  imagine.  But  surely  that  angel  went 
to  the  wrong  house.  Let  him  go  to  the  emperor,  to  the  Eoman  Senate,  to  some 
that  had  power  to  see  to  the  well-being  of  the  people.  But  he  is  gone  to  travel- 
Btained  men  with  no  fitness  for  any  task  like  this.  Angel,  you  have  come  to  th© 
wrong  door.  But  oh !  woe  always  knows  in  what  direction  to  look  for  help  ;  it  has  an 
instinct  unerring  as  the  child's  for  the  mother's  breast.  And  the  dream  angel,  that 
is  the  pleader  for  human  help,  is  always  coming  to  Christian  hearts.  They  may  be 
few  and  poor ;  but  somehow  the  cry  of  distress  is  always  coming  to  the  Church  of 
Christ,  as  if  she  had  some  secret  by  which  to  heal  the  troubles  of  men.  It  may  be 
the  poor  people  of  London ;  the  ignorance  of  little  children ;  orphans  ;  the  hospital ; 
some  nation  struggling  for  liberty ;  womanhood.  All  the  sorrowful  the  world  over 
passing  by  all  others  say  to  us,  "  Come  over  and  help  us."  In  Tokio,  in  Japan,  a 
poor  woman  asked  to  be  led  to  the  Christian  people.  They  asked  her  what  she 
wanted.  She  said  she  understood  that  they  knew  how  to  heal  the  broken  heart,  and 
her  heart  was  broken,  and  she  wanted  to  find  them.  You  cannot  get  out  of  this 
position.  It  is  an  evidence  of  Christianity  little  noticed,  the  expectation  that  the 
world  has  from  us.  Bealise  it.  You  may  learn  what  to  do  in  learning  what  the  world 
expects  you  to  do.  The  first  marvel  about  this  dream-angel  is  the  people  to  whom 
he  goes.  2.  The  next  strange  thing  about  this  dream-angel  is  that  he  gets  into  the 
heart  he  goes  to.  It  was  not  every  heart  that  he  got  into.  There  are  thoughts 
and  feelings  that  cannot  be  got  into  our  minds  and  hearts,  for  they  are  not  big 
enough  for  them.  There  are  some  who  can  look  upon  sorrow  and  never  see  a  claim 
in  it ;  who  can  have  the  gospel  and  never  feel  that  they  have  anything  that  can 
heal  the  woes  of  men.  If  such  an  angel  had  come  to  such,  he  might  have  stood  at 
the  door  and  knocked  the  whole  night  through,  and  he  would  not  have  disturbed 
their  slumber.  We  would  have  told  him  that  the  rich  man  lived  in  the  next  street, 
or  that  somebody  that  was  particularly  interested  in  this  sort  of  work  was  to  be 
found  somewhere  else,  or  of  the  number  of  calls  that  we  had,  or  turned  to  ask  the 
news  from  Macedon  :  what  about  the  crops,  and  the  business,  and  the  state  of  the 
frontier?  The  dream-angel  has  been  trying  to  get  into  some  of  our  hearts  for 
years,  and  we  do  not  heed  him,  and  send  him  away.  Blessed  are  the  souls  that 
are  open  to  let  him  in.  All  Christ-like  hearts  listen  to  such  appeals.  St.  Patrick 
heard  the  dream-voice,  and  the  great  missionaries  of  the  Middle  Ages — Boniface, 
the  missionary  of  Central  Europe  ;  Eaymond  Lully,  who  went  to  Northern  Africa; 
Xavier,  who  went  to  the  furthest  India  and  the  edge  of  China.  He  came  to  our 
own  Carey.  There  are  some  people  that  have  never  seen  this  dream-angel.  God 
pity  them  I  Blessed  are  they  who  have.  II.  What  did  they  do  with  the  dbbam  ? 
What  would  you  have  done  ?  Probably  you  would  have  told  it  as  rather  a  strange, 
curious  dieam,  and  have  forgotten  it.  And  suppose  you  had  been  with  Paul ;  would 
you  have  given  in  to  him,  and  gone  to  Macedonia  on  the  mere  strength  of  this 
dream  ?  I  fancy  Silas  would  be  very  much  tempted  to  say,  '•  Well,  Paul,  that  ia 
you  all  over  ;  your  dream  cometh  of  your  compassions.  When  you  were  at  Antioch 
you  thought  of  Cyprus,  and  when  you  got  to  Cyprus  you  thought  of  Asia  Minor; 
when  you  were  at  Syria  you  wanted  to  go  to  Rome,  and  when  you  get  to  Borne  you 
will  want  to  go  to  Spain — always  '  the  regions  beyond.'  Your  dream  by  night 
just  comes  of  your  thought  by  day."  I  can  fancy  Luke  was  tempted  to  say,  "  Paul, 
you  had  a  very  serious  illness  in  Galatia  a  month  or  two  ago,  ought  you  to  go 
yonder  ?  "  Oh,  if  it  had  been  you  or  I,  we  would  have  wanted  a  month  or  two  to 
consider  it,  and  we  would  have  got  everybody's  opinion  till  we  got  addled  by  the 
multitude  of  opinions  that  we  took,  and  chilled  by  the  cold  water  we  invited. 
What  did  they  do  ?  (ver.  10).  How  long  it  takes  to  convince  us  of  any  duty  1  We 
ask  for  light,  and  when  light  comes  we  look  at  it  as  if  it  had  been  something  sent 
on  approbation,  and  send  it  back,  or  wait  for  God  to  change  His  mind  and  show  us 
something  else;  or  we  consult  with  flesh  and  blood,  with  books,  and  wonder  whether 
we  have  to  do  it,  or  perhaps  we  say,  "  Is  it  necessary?  Is  there  not  somebody  else 
that  can  do  it  ?  "  Happy  are  those  hearts  that  are  easily  oonvincible  of  God's  love 
and  of  their  own  duty.  These  men  were  of  that  make.  They  "  assuredly  gathered 
that  the  Lord  bad  called,"  and  there  was  an  end  of  it.  Four  big  children,  not 
stupid  enough  to  philosophise,  nor  prudent  enough  to  tarry  for  Ught,  but  heroes  as 
well  as  children.  "  Immediately  they  endeavoured  to  go."  Not  lingering.  How 
much  they  gained  by  their  promptness  I  Why,  if  they  had  waited  till  to-morrow- 
the  ship  would  have  been  gone,  and  no  one  knows  how  long  it  would  have  been- 
before  another  vessel  would  sail  in  that  direction.  Besides,  when  you  are  guided* 
by  God's  eye,  the  eye  that  guides  you  smiles  on  you,  and  you  walk  in  the  lights 


CBAP.  znj  TEE  ACTS.  475 

And  they  went  with  its  bloom  upon  them,  and  the  voyage  pleasant,  and  three  days 
do  not  elapse  before  they  are  in  the  capital  of  Macedon  at  their  work.  Brethren, 
this  world  is  too  short  for  us  to  practise  delay.  Tou  are  going  to  give  a  lot  of 
money  to  the  missions  when  your  fortune  is  made.  "  Immediately  they  endeavoured 
to  go  into  Macedonia  " — that  was  Paul's  example.  To-morrow  is  not  yours  or  mine ; 
to-day  is  ours.  Be  like  the  stars,  as  Goethe  said ;  not  hasting,  not  tarrying,  waiting 
till  the  light  is  clear  ;  the  moment  it  is  clear,  go  forth.  III.  The  besult  or  this 
ACTION.  What  was  it  ?  Perhaps  not  very  encouraging  at  first.  Nobody  is  waiting 
for  them.  They  go  out  to  the  little  oratory  by  the  riverside ;  there  is  not  a  man, 
only  a  few  women.  It  is  true  that  one  of  them  is  converted ;  it  is  true  that  another 
is  converted.  And  then,  when  they  have  got  into  prison,  another  low-natured  man 
that  it  took  an  earthquake  to  rouse  is  added  to  the  other  two  ;  and  thus  there  are 
three  to  start  the  Christian  worship  in  Europe.  It  is  a  strange  trio — a  seeker  after 
Grod,  a  poor  demoniac  woman,  and  a  great  sinner.  You  know  that  is  the  way  the  i  / 
Church  is  gathered — seekers,  sufferers,  sinners.  Was  that  all?  Not  quite  all.  U'"^^ 
For  these  three,  with  two"  women  at  the  head,  grew  into  the  noblest  of  all  the 
Apostolic  Churches.  Then  after  Philippi  they  went  to  Thessalonica,  Beroea, 
Athens,  Corinth  ;  and  the  Church  grew  and  grew  till  to-day  European  Christianity 
has  grown  out  of  it.  Brethren,  send  the  baU  rolling,  and  somebody  else  will  keep 
it  up.  Sow  one  seed,  and  a  thousand  years  hence  some  fruit  of  it  may  wave.  Were 
they  repaid  ?  What  says  your  heart  ?  What  would  you  give  to  have  their  reward 
in  heaven  ?  Oh  !  what  overpowering  delight  would  it  be  to  any  one  of  us  to  have 
a  ten  thousandth  part  of  the  reward  that  came  to  them  !  So  aU  are  rewarded  that 
obey  these  heavenly  visions.  (iJ.  Glovtr.)  The  charter  of  Massachiisetts  granted 
by  Charles  I.  contains  an  expression  of  the  hope  that  the  settlers  to  whom  it  is 
granted  "  may  win  and  incite  the  natives  of  the  country  to  the  knowledge  and 
obedience  of  the  only  true  God  and  Saviour  of  mankind  and  the  Christian  faith, 
which,  in  our  royal  intention,  and  the  adventurer's  free  profession,  is  the  principaJ 
end  of  this  plantation."  The  first  seal  of  the  State  represents  an  Indian  giving 
utterance  to  the  words,  "  Come  over  and  help  us."    {W.  F.  Rae.) 

Ver.  12.  And  from  thence  to  FIilIlppL — Philippi : — The  apostle  had  not  paused 
at  Samothrace — an  island  celebrated  for  its  sanctity  and  its  amulets,  its  gods  and 
orgies,  its  Cybele  and  Cobira — a  scene  where  the  mysteries  of  Eastern  and  Western 
superstition  seem  to  have  met  and  blended.  Nor  did  he  stop  at  Neapohs,  the 
harbour  of  the  Thymonic  gulf,  but  he  pressed  on  to  Phihppi ;  and  the  ground  of 
his  preference  was  that  it  was  *'  the  chief  city,"  <fec.  This  cannot  mean  the  chief 
or  capital  city,  for  that  was  Thessalonica ;  and  if  there  existed  at  that  period  a 
minuter  subdivision,  the  principal  town  was  Amphipolis.  It  probably  means  that 
it  was  the  first  city  of  the  province  that  lay  upon  his  journey.  It  was  the  chief 
city  of  that  part,  and  there  was  every  inducement  to  fix  upon  it  as  a  centre  of 
operations.  As  it  was  a  city  and  a  colony,  its  importance  in  itself,  and  in  relation 
to  other  towns  and  districts,  made  it  a  fitting  place  for  present  work  and  subsequent 
enterprise.  You  may  either  say  that  Paul  went  to  Philippi  as  the  first  city  in  his 
path,  for  he  had  been  summoned  into  Macedonia,  and  he  could  never  think  of 
passing  the  first  city  which  he  came  to;  or  that  he  formally  selected  Phihppi 
because  of  its  rank  and  its  privileges  as  a  Roman  colony.  Philippi  was  anciently 
called  Krenides,  or  the  "  Springs,"  on  account  of  its  numerous  fountains,  in  which 
the  Gangites  has  its  sources.  Philip,  about  358  B.C.,  enlarged  the  old  town  and 
fortified  it,  in  order  to  protect  the  frontiers  against  Thracian  invaders,  and  named 
it  after  himself,  to  commemorate  the  addition  of  a  new  province  to  his  empire. 
After  the  famous  battle  fought  and  won  in  its  neighbourhood  by  the  Triumvirs, 
Augustus  conferred  special  honours  on  the  city,  and  made  it  a  Roman  colony.  A 
nuUtary  settlement  had  been  made  in  it,  chiefly  of  the  soldiers  who  had  been 
ranged  under  the  standard  of  Antony,  so  that  it  was  a  protecting  garrison  on  the 
confines  of  Macedonia.  A  colonia  was  a  reproduction  in  miniature  of  the  mother 
city  Rome.  The  Roman  law  ruled,  and  the  Roman  insignia  were  everywhere  seen. 
The  municipal  affairs  were  managed  by  duumvirs,  or  praetors.  Philippi  had  also 
the  Jus  Italicum,  or  quaritarian  ownership  of  the  soil,  its  lands  enjoying  the  same 
freedom  from  taxation  as  did  the  soil  of  Italy.  Highly  favoured  as  Philippi  had 
been,  it  was  in  need  of  "  help."  Political  franchise  and  Roman  rights,  Grecian 
tastes  and  studies,  wide  and  varied  commerce,  could  not  give  it  the  requisite  aid. 
It  was  sunk  in  a  spiritual  gloom,  which  needed  a  higher  light  than  Italian  juris- 
prudence or  Hellenic  culture  could  bring  it.    It  was  helpless  within  itself,  and  the 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

"  man  "  who  represented  it  had  appealed  to  the  sympathies  of  a  Jewish  stranger, 
whose  story  of  the  Cross  could  lift  the  darkness  off  its  position  and  destiny.  The 
spear  and  phalanx  of  Macedonia  had  been  famous,  and  had  carried  conquest  and 
civilisation  through  a  large  portion  of  the  Eastern  world ;  the  sun  of  Greece  had 
not  wholly  set,  and  Epicureans  and  Stoics  yet  mingled  in  speculation,  and  sought 
after  "  wisdom  " ;  the  sovereignty  of  Kome  had  secured  peace  in  all  her  provinces, 
and  her  great  roads  not  only  served  for  the  march  of  the  soldier,  but  for  the  cortege 
of  the  trader ;  art  and  law,  beauty  and  power,  song  and  wealth,  the  statue  and  the 
drama,  survived  and  were  adored ;  but  there  was  in  many  a  heart  a  sense  of  want 
and  powerlessness,  an  indefinite  longing  after  some  higher  good  and  portion,  a 
painless  and  restless  agitation,  which  only  he  of  Tarsus  could  soothe  and  satisfy 
with  his  preaching  of  tiie  God-man — the  life,  hope,  and  centre  of  humanity. 
{Prof.  Eudie.)  The  first  three  Philippian  converts  : — 1.  They  are  representatives 
of  three  different  races — the  one  an  Asiatic,  the  other  a  Greek,  the  third  a  Roman. 
2.  In  the  relations  of  everyday  life  they  have  nothing  in  common :  the  first  is 
engaged  in  an  important  and  lucrative  branch  of  traffic ;  the  second,  treated  by  law 
as  a  mere  chattel  without  any  social  or  political  rights,  is  employed  by  her  masters 
to  trade  on  the  credulous  superstition  of  the  ignorant ;  the  third,  equally  removed 
from  both,  holds  a  subordinate  office  under  government.  3.  In  their  religious 
training  they  stand  no  less  apart.  In  the  one,  the  speculative  mystic  temper  of 
Oriental  devotion  has  at  length  found  deeper  satisfaction  in  the  revealed  truths  of 
the  Old  Testament ;  the  second,  bearing  the  name  of  the  Pythian  god,  the  reputed 
source  of  Greek  inspiration,  represents  an  artistic  and  imaginative  religion,  though 
manifested  in  a  very  low  and  degrading  form ;  while  the  third,  if  he  preserved  the 
characteristic  features  of  his  race,  must  have  exhibited  a  type  of  worship  essentially 
political  in  tone.  The  purple  dealer  and  proselyte  of  Thyatira,  the  native  slave 
girl  with  the  divining  spirit,  the  Roman  jailer,  all  alike  acknowledge  the  supremacy 
of  the  new  faith.  In  the  history  of  the  gospel  at  Phihppi,  as  in  the  history  of  the 
Church  at  large,  is  reflected  the  great  maxim  of  Christianity,  the  central  truth  of 
the  apostle's  preaching — that  here  "  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,"  <fec.  (Gal.  iii.  28). 
4.  The  order  of  these  conversions  is  significant :  first  the  proselyte,  next  the  Greek, 
lastly  the  Roman.  Thus  the  incidents  in  their  sequence,  no  less  than  in  their 
variety,  symbolise  the  progress  of  Christianity  throughout  the  world.  Through 
the  Israelite  dispersion,  through  the  proselytes  whether  of  the  covenant  or  the 
gate,  the  gospel  message  first  reached  the  Greek.  By  the  instrumentality  of  the 
Greek  language,  and  the  diffusion  of  the  Greek  race,  it  finally  established  itself  in 
Rome,  the  citadel  of  power  and  civilisation,  whence  directly  or  indirectly  it  was 
destined  to  spread  over  the  whole  world,  {Bp.  Lightfoot.)  Christianity  in 
Europe: — I.  Accepting  Christ  (vers.  14,15).  It  is  well  to  note — 1.  Who  this 
convert  was.  (1)  She  was  a  woman  of  business.  Her  perceptions  had  been 
sharpened  by  trade.  She  was  free  from  the  bondage  of  local  prejudice.  (2)  She 
was  from  Thyatira,  a  city  of  '*  Asia,"  in  which  district  the  missionaries  had  been 
forbidden  to  speak  the  Word.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  shuts  the  door  in  one  place, 
it  may  be  that  He  intends  to  reach  it  by  the  way  of  another.  (3)  She  was  a  Jewish 
proselyte.  She  bad  learned  to  worship  the  true  God.  Having  made  that  much 
progress,  she  was  prepared  to  go  still  further — much  more  prepared  than  the  Jews 
themselves.  2,  How  she  was  converted.  "Whose  heart  the  Lord  opened,"  &o. 
Paul  spoke  the  Word,  but  the  Lord  gave  the  Word  fmitf  ulness.  "  I  planted,  ApoUos 
watered;  God  gave  the  increase."  8.  How  her  conversion  was  shown.  (1)  Her 
whole  family  was  converted  with  her.  Through  her  faith,  her  servants,  and  her 
children,  if  she  had  children,  were  brought  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  (2)  She 
constrained  the  missionaries  to  abide  with  her,  which  was  no  small  burden.  Paul, 
Timothy,  Silas,  and  Luke  made  quite  a  party  to  take  care  of.  And  note  how  she 
puts  her  request.  She  makes  it  appear  as  though  they  were  doing  her  a  favour, 
rather  than  she  them.  They  had  done  so  much  for  her  soul  that  she  wanted  to  do 
something  for  their  bodies.  II.  Saved  through  Christ.  We  turn  from  one  who 
yi&B  ready  to  accept  Christ  to  one  who  was  in  the  power  of  Satan,  But  the  power 
of  Christ  was  shown  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  The  Lord  opened  the  heart 
of  the  one,  cast  out  the  evil  spirit  from  the  other.  1.  The  evil  spirit  in  possession. 
(1)  Bringing  gain.  The  unfortunate  girl  was  owned  by  a  joint-stock  company. 
Her  owners  speculated  in  the  credulity  of  men.  Her  insane  ravings  were  taken  as 
the  revelation  of  an  oracle.  (2)  Bringing  reproach.  "  The  same  following  after 
Paul  a;id  ns,  cried,"  A'c.  This  she  did  for  many  days.  The  testimony  which  sh* 
bum  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  evil  spirits  to  the  Saviour.    The  witness  was  tmo^ 


CHAP.  XVI.]  THi£  ACTS  477 

but  it  was  not  from  a  good  source.  2.  The  evil  spirit  cast  out.  (1)  Why?  "Paul 
being  sore  troubled,"  &c.  At  what  ?  Presumably  at  the  characteif  of  the  endorse- 
ment he  and  his  friends  were  receiving.  With  this,  however,  there  may  have  been 
a  great  sympathy  for  the  poor  girl.  (2)  How  ?  "1  charge  thee  in  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ  to  come  out  of  her."  The  act  was  done  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  the 
faith  of  Paul  in  Christ,  his  dependence  upon  Christ,  and  as  to  honour  Christ. 
Those  who  witnessed  the  miracle  could  not  have  any  doubt  as  to  the  power  through 
which  the  marvel  was  accomplished.  III.  Suffering  fob  Christ.  1.  The  anger 
of  the  masters.  (1)  How  it  arose.  *'  Her  masters  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  gain 
was  gone."  The  maid  now  spoke  rationally,  instead  of  raving,  or  giving  wild, 
weird  utterances  that  made  people  think  that  they  were  listening  to  something 
supernatural.  Now  no  one  would  pay  anything  to  hear  the  girl  speak  good  sense. 
It  did  not  matter  to  them  that  the  maid  was  released  from  a  most  cruel  thraldom. 
Let  a  drunkard  burst  his  bonds,  and  what  rum-seller  will  rejoice  over  his  deliver- 
ance ?  Let  a  gambler  throw  off  the  terrible  fascination,  and  how  angry  are  those 
whom  he  has  been  enriching.  (2)  How  it  was  manifested,  (a)  "  They  laid  hold 
on  Paul  and  Silas,"  &c.  The  dragging,  we  may  be  sure,  was  not  gently  done. 
(W  "They  said,  These  men,  being  Jews,  do  exceedingly  trouble  our  city,"  &c. 
Tne  formal  complaint  did  not  correspond  to  the  offence.  They  knew  that  the 
magistrates  could  take  no  cognisance  of  such  an  injury  as  they  had  received. 
They  craftily  word  their  complaint.  They  appeal  to  the  Eoman  prejudice  against 
the  Jews.  2.  The  anger  of  the  magistrates.  The  multitude  became  a  mob,  and 
the  magistrates  not  much  better.  No  form  of  a  trial  was  even  pretended.  Against 
these  Jews,  the  accusation  of  such  respectable,  dividend-receiving  citizens  was 
taken  as  conclusive  evidence.  Judgment  and  sentence  were  instantaneous. 
(1)  The  missionaries  were  beaten  "  with  many  stripes,"  more  cruelly  than  if  they 
tad  been  committing  a  crime.  (2)  They  were  cast  into  the  "  inner  prison,"  and 
their  feet  made  fast  in  the  stocks.  What  land  is  there  where  a  similar  heroic 
record  has  not  been  made  ?    {M.  C.  Hazard.) 

Ver.  13.  And  on  the  Sabbath  we  went  out  of  the  dty  by  a  river  Bide  where 
prayer  was  wont  to  be  made. — The  duty  of  Christie  servants  when  from  home : — 
This  may  be  gathered  from  what  the  apostles  did  not  do,  and  what  they  did  when 
they  reached  Philippi.  L  Negativelt.  They  did  not — 1.  Give  up  going  to  prayer- 
meeting  because  they  were  away  from  their  home  church.  2,  Go  to  prayer-meeting 
and  wait  and  wait  for  some  one  else  to  say  something.  3.  Need  a  fifty- thousand- 
dollar  church,  and  the  presence  of  a  fashionable  congregation  to  call  out  their  best 
efforts.  IL  Positively.  1.  They  found  a  few  women  gathered  in  a  little  chapel 
by  the  river  side — then  and  there  they  saw  that  work  for  Christ  was  to  be  done. 
2.  They  did  Christ's  work,  and  forthwith  one  soul  at  least  was  won  for  the  Master. 
8.  Y^en  all  Christ's  servants  do  their  duty  as  unhesitatingly,  what  joy  there  will  be 
among  the  angels  of  God,  over  repentant  souls  turning  heavenward  1  {S.  S.  Times.) 
The  place  of  prayer : — The  place  of  prayer  is  a  place  of  power.  Miracles  are  done 
in  it.  When  the  disciples  were  praying,  the  Holy  Spirit  descended.  When  the 
Church  was  praying  at  John  Mark's  house,  Peter  was  let  out  of  prison  by  an  angel. 
When  the  Church  prays  now,  there  is  answer  in  Ladia  and  China  and  Africa. 
While  Christians  pray  there  is  fresh  anointing  from  on  high ;  they  become  "  strong 
in  the  Lord  and  the  power  of  His  might."  The  hour  we  spend  in  communing  with 
God  is  the  most  strengthening  in  the  week.  More  prayers  and  less  words.  Less 
with  men,  and  more  with  God.  We  get  the  victory  in  the  prayer-room  where  no 
eye  sees  but  God's,  and  all  hearts  are  one  before  Him.  The  prayer  circle  is  a  place 
of  instruction.  Prayer  is  a  great  teacher.  The  word  of  truth  is  unfolded  there  ; 
mysteries  are  explained ;  promises  are  fulfilled ;  deUverances  are  wrought.  What 
God  teaches  in  prayer  is  pure  truth ;  what  we  learn  on  our  knees  we  never  unlearn. 
The  place  of  prayer  is  a  place  of  rest  after  toil,  of  comfort  in  perplexity  and  trouble. 
It  is  good  to  draw  near  to  God.  "  Draw  nigh  unto  Me  and  I  will  draw  nigh  unto 
you."  The  gates  to  the  mercy-seat  are  many,  and,  like  those  to  the  golden  city, 
stand  open  day  and  night,  that  every  soul  may  enter  in.  It  is  a  place  of  fellowship. 
Next  to  the  joy  of  heaven  is  the  gladness  of  hearts  gathered  together  in  prayer.  It 
is  a  place  for  conversion  of  souls.  Of  how  many  it  shall  be  written :  ♦•  They  were  born 
there."  It  is  a  place  for  replenishing  the  daily  losses  of  the  heart,  and  enthroning 
God  again  at  the  seat  of  the  soul.  A  Christian  is  always  helped  in  his  association 
with  other  Christians.  Single  coals  do  not  hold  fire,  but  gathered  together  there 
is  glow.        The  proiewJie  .'—The  names  proseuche  and  synagogue  were  sometimes 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

confounded  ,*  though  at  other  times  the  distinction  between  them  ia  observed.  Thia 
distinction  consists  in  the  first  word  being  used  of  the  place  of  assembly,  and  the 
latter  of  the  assembly  itself.  But  however  frequently  these  names  were  inter- 
changed, they  seem  on  the  whole  to  have  been  used  to  designate  different  buildings, 
the  first  a  temporary  and  tentative  place  of  worship,  the  second  a  regular  and 
acknowledged  edifice,  much  as  among  ourselves  a  mission  chapel  is  distinguished 
from  a  parish  church.  Whereaoever,  from  the  paucity  of  their  numbers,  the  Jews 
were  not  able  to  establish  a  synagogue,  which  required  a  certain  number  of  men 
competent  to  bear  the  offices  necessary  to  constitute  a  synagogue,  there  near  a 
stream,  as  seems  to  have  been  the  almost  invariable  practice  in  heathen  countries, 
a  proseuche  was  established — a  humble  dwelling  partly  covered,  in  part  open  to  the 
sky,  which  in  after  times  might  give  place  to  a  grander  edifice,  and  was  not  exolu' 
sively  devoted  to  worship  as  the  synagogue  was.  Thus  at  Thessalonica  and  Antioch 
and  elsewhere  we  find  synagogues  mentioned ;  at  PhUippi,  where  there  is  no 
appearance  of  any  Jewish  colony,  there  is  only  "  a  place  for  prayer."  (W.  Denton, 
M.A.)  The  gospel  in  Europe : — I.  The  fiest  gospel  pbeachino  in  Eubope. 
1.  The  season — the  "  Sabbath."  On  this  day  the  reUgious  sentiment  would  be  more 
active  than  on  other  days.  Ministers  should  study  mental  moods.  There  are  days 
and  circumstances  suited  for  reUgious  impressions.  There  are  tides  in  the  affairs 
of  spiritual  as  well  as  secular  concerns.  2.  The  scene.  They  retired  from  the  hum 
and  bustle  of  the  city  into  the  solitudes  and  sublimities  of  nature.  "  By  a  river 
side."  Few  objects  in  nature  are  more  beautiful  and  suggestive  thsm  a  river. 
Emblem  of  life,  ever  changing ;  emblem  of  the  universe,  flowing  on  for  ever.  The 
Jews  were  accustomed  to  have  their  proseuche  built  near  water,  that  they  might 
attend  to  the  various  ablutions  connected  with  their  religious  rites.  To  Christianity 
aU  places  are  alike  sacred.  '•  God  is  a  Spirit."  3.  The  style.  They  did  not  stand 
erect  in  the  attitude  of  orators,  they  sat  "  down,"  mingled  with  the  people.  They 
did  not  deliver  set  discourses,  but  "  spake,"  talked.  What  did  they  talk  about  ? 
The  beauties  of  nature  ?  the  immortality  of  the  soul  ?  the  providence  of  the  Eternal  ? 
If  they  referred  to  these,  Christ  and  His  Cross  were,  we  may  rest  assured,  their 
grand  theme.  IT.  The  first  gospel  heabers  in  Europe.  Who  were  they? 
Poets,  statesmen,  philosophers,  heroes,  kings?  No  1  "Women."  Why  women 
and  not  men  ?  Perhaps  because  the  men  came  at  another  hour,  or  because  the 
women  had  a  special  service  for  themselves.  Did  wives  meet  there  to  pray  for  their 
husbands,  and  sisters  for  their  brothers,  &c.  ?  All  we  know  is,  that  women  are 
always  more  religiously  disposed  than  men.  Note — 1.  That  the  gospel  is  universally 
appreciable.  Had  the  apostles  felt  that  the  truth  required  culture,  logic,  philo- 
sophic acumen,  they  would  have  gone  first,  not  only  to  men,  but  to  men  of  the 
higher  type.  But  they  felt  that  the  gospel,  being  a  revelation  of  facts,  character, 
love,  all  that  was  required  was  the  common  intuitions  and  sympathies  of  a  woman's 
nature.  2.  That  the  gospel  honours  the  female  character.  All  religions  but  that 
of  the  Bible  degrade  women ;  and  though,  as  in  the  more  civilised  parts  of  the 
world,  she  may  be  petted,  she  is  still  a  slave  to  man.  The  gospel  honours  woman. 
The  Saviour  was  born  of  a  woman.  Women  were  amongst  His  followers.  He 
showed  Himself  to  women  after  His  resurrection,  and  the  apostles  now  preached  in 
Europe  first  to  women.  Woman  is  under  special  obligation  to  the  gospel.  3.  That 
the  gospel  has  a  regard  to  social  influence.  Woman  has  a  greater  influence  on  the 
race  than  man  has.  When  she  acta  worthily  of  her  nature,  her  influence  as  sister, 
wife,  mother,  is  regal.  IH.  The  first  gospel  convert  in  Europe.  "A  certain 
woman  named  Lydia,"  &g.  Observe — 1.  Her  secular  caUing.  "  A  seller  of  purple." 
Purple  was  a  colour  got  from  a  shell-flsh,  and  of  great  cost  and  richness.  It  was 
chiefly  worn  by  the  wealthy  and  great.  This  woman  was  in  trade.  2.  Her 
religious  character.  "  Which  worshipped  God,"  i.e.,  she  was  a  proselyte  ;  a  formal 
worshipper  of  the  God  of  Abraham.  3.  Her  spiritual  change.  (1)  Its  subject. 
The  "  heart."  This,  notwithstanding  her  religious  profession,  had  been  closed. 
The  spirit  of  truth  had  not  entered  it.    Avarice,  prejudice,  habit,  shut  up  the  heart. 

(2)  Its  cause.  "  The  Lord  opened  "  it.  Not  by  a  miracle,  not  irrespective  of  means, 
but  by  certain  influences.  Sabbath-day  associations,  natural  scenery,  the  presence 
and  speeches  of  the  apostles,  &o.,  disposed  her  to  listen  to  what  Paul  had  to  say. 

(3)  Its  proof,  (a)  Teachableness.  "  She  attended  unto  the  things  which  were 
spoken  of  Paul."  As  a  thirsty  soul  she  drank  in  the  new  truths,  (b)  Profession. 
She  avowed  symbolically  the  necessity  of  a  cleansing  influence  for  herself  and 
household,  (c)  Gratitude.  "If  ye  have  judged  me,"  Ac.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  gospel  in  Europe : — 1.  Here  the  Lord  of  salvation  is  on  His  way  to  as,  bending 


•HAP.  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  479 

His  steps  westward.  Jnst  suppose  that  Paul  and  Silas  had  been  ordered  the  other 
way.  Then  very  Hkely  these  lands  of  ours  would  have  been  the  Asia  and  the  Africa 
that  now  are.  2.  Tbey  had  been  staying  in  Philippi  for  certain  days,  as  you  might 
be  sojourning  in  London.  Paul  was  not  a  devout  worshipper  in  Jerusalem,  but  a 
Fhilippian  in  Philippi.  Had  Paul  been  as  loose  in  his  observance  of  the  Sabbath 
as  some  people,  this  story  would  not  have  been  written.  Forget  not  the  ways  of 
worship  in  which  you  were  brought  up  when  you  are  sojourning  in  London. 
Remember  that  perhaps  you  were  brought  here  to  open  some  door  which,  but  for 
your  arrival,  would  have  remained  shut.  3.  "  Lord,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  I  have 
loved  the  habitation  of  Thy  house,"  &c.  Can  we  say  that  ?  Is  the  love  of  worship 
so  strong  in  us  that  when  the  day  comes  round  our  heart  wakens  up  with  strong 
desire  to  engage  in  the  dear  and  familiar  round  ?  "What  a  scene  is  presented  to  us  ! 
The  city  away  back  there,  with  its  sin,  bustle,  and  gaiety.  They  turn  their  backs 
on  the  city,  and  go  out  here  to  this  quiet  place  by  the  river  side.  What  a  picture 
after  all  of  aU  congregations  1  Where  are  we  to-day  ?  "  Along  the  river  of  time  we 
glide,"  but  on  the  Sabbath  we  reach  a  little  quiet  creek,  and  God's  own  hand 
thrusts  our  boat  in  here ;  and  while  the  river  goes  speeding  away  on  to  the  sea,  we 
disembark,  and  quietly,  for  a  little  time,  while  our  boat  rocks  idly  in  this  little  bay, 
we  rest  ourselves.  We  land,  and  we  sit  down,  and  lo  !  God's  servant  comes  among 
ns,  and  speaks  of  things  that  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  our  hearts 
are  opened  for  us,  so  that  we  attend  to  the  things  that  are  said  to  us,  and  receive 
blessings  thereby.  4.  How  unlike  the  Lord's  "  Forward  "  Movements  are  to  some  of 
which  we  hear.  No  big  bills,  no  beating  of  the  drum.  Maybe  the  Lord  would  Uke 
VLB  to  take  a  leaf  out  of  His  book,  and  whether  we  do  things  in  a  quiet  or  publio 
w^ay,  to  make  sure  that  we  are  aiming  at  individuals.  If  Europe  ever  is  to  be 
saved,  it  is  to  be  saved  man  by  man,  woman  by  woman,  family  by  family.  That  ia 
■God's  programme.  How  quiet.  People,  perhaps,  taking  a  stroll  by  the  river  side 
would  cast  a  wondering  eye  upon  that  little  group,  little  knowing  what  was  there. 
*' Who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things ?  "  No  wise  man;  but  fools  do  it 
continually — and  that  is  a  folly  that  we  London  ministers  and  workers  are  apt  to 
be  guilty  of.  We  come  to  some  meeting,  and  there  are  only  a  few  women,  and  the 
very  look  on  our  face  says,  "  The  meeting  is  a  failure.  None  of  the  men  of  the 
district  1  This  is  not  the  class  of  people  we  wanted  to  get  at."  One  might  have 
said,  "  Paul  you  are  ofE  the  track.  You  are  swinging  about  aimlessly."  Paul  did 
not  think  so,  but  he  sat  down  and  spoke  unto  the  women  who  resorted  thithei.  I 
am  not  saying  a  word  against  big  crowds.  It  is  impossible  to  convert  empty 
benches,  and  I  never  want  to  see  dead  wood.  Often  a  bad  use  is  made  of  Christ 
speaking  to  the  woman  at  the  well,  for  He  so  spoke  that  she  went  and  raised  the 
town  about  Him.  "  God  has  much  people  in  this  city,"  but  He  gets  at  the  multi- 
tude through  quickened  individuals.  God  bless  the  women  who  give  us  meetings  ! 
for  sometimes  if  it  were  not  for  Lydia  we  should  have  no  meeting  at  all.  Do  you 
understand  that,  you  men  ?  It  is  not  that  you  are  engaged.  It  is  simply  that  you 
will  not  come.  It  is  not  that  you  stay  at  home.  You  go  out,  but  you  do  not  come 
this  way.  Still,  accepting  the  situation  as  it  is,  if  there  are  only  a  few  women,  let 
us,  like  Paul,  say  to  ourselves,  "  This  is  God's  opportunity,  and  this  is  my  work." 
5.  Notice  the  condition  of  the  heart  of  this  worshipper.  She  was  a  devout  woman 
according  to  her  light.  She  knew  after  some  dim  and  distant  fashion  the  God  of 
Israel.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  religious  after  the  ordinary  fashion.  Even  Lydia  needs 
to  have  her  shut  heart  opened.  But  still  we  have  to  notice  that  she  was  there,  and 
she  was  using  the  light  which  she  had  ;  and  by  using  the  light  which  she  had  she 
came  to  more.  Notice  how  the  preacher  is  suppressed,  and  the  sermon,  and  how 
the  hearer  is  lifted  up  into  prominence.  6.  Attention,  humanly  speaking,  is  the 
avenue  by  which  Christ  comes  into  the  human  soul.  It  is  a  small  thing,  but  I  am 
afraid  a  rare  thing.  Even  supposing  that  you  had  that  great  apostle,  still  conver- 
sions would  be  scanty  if  the  audience  did  not  attend.  And  it  is  not  so  easy  as  we 
are  apt  to  imagine.  It  needs  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  Paul  to  preach, 
and  it  needs  the  same  power  to  enable  the  hearer  to  hear.  Although  your  face  is 
to  me,  where  is  your  mind  just  now?  Thinking  of  the  state  of  things  at  home,  of 
something  that  was  in  your  business  yesterday,  of  something  that  is  to  be  in  your 
business  to-morrow  ?  Ah,  how  many  of  us  are  like  the  wayside  hearers  !  You  are 
unconverted,  not  because  of  a  poor  preacher  here,  but  because  of  a  mighty  poor 
listener  down  there.  "  Hear,"  says  the  prophet,  "  and  your  soul  shall  livew" 
7.  Then  see  how  this  simple  narrative  brings  out  the  mystery  of  conversion.  Her 
heart  was  opened  by  the  Lord.    I  cannot  explain  it.    I  can  only  point  you  to  tha 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

fact,  but  what  a  blessed  fact  it  is  1  If  my  heart  has  been  opened,  it  was  Divinely 
done.  Oh,  what  a  strange  thing  is  the  heart  of  man  I  Not  long  ago,  in  sport,  a 
man  handed  me  a  purse  with  money  in  it,  and  I  felt  it,  and  I  heard  it  jingle.  He 
said,  "  Open  it " ;  and  in  spite  of  my  doing  my  utmost,  I  could  not,  it  was  too 
cunningly  contrived.  Such  is  the  heart  of  man.  It  is  worth  the  opening.  Hand 
it  up  to  God,  and  say,  "  0  God,  do  for  me  what  Thou  didst  for  Lydia."  He  will. 
I  thank  I  see  the  Lord  Jesus  doing  what  I  did  oat  in  the  country  one  day.  I  came 
to  a  little  cottage,  and  I  went  round,  but  the  shutters  were  up,  and  I  went  round  to 
the  door,  but  the  door  was  fastened.  However,  it  did  open ;  and  you  know  the 
uncertain,  cautious  way  in  which  you  push  open  the  door  of  an  empty  house  and 
peer  into  the  darkness.  But  I  went  in.  So  Christ  to-day  is  coming  to  your  heart, 
and  He  knows  all  the  springs  and  locks  in  it,  and  He  is  opening  it,  and  He 
is  looking  in.  What  a  place  I  everything  dark  and  desolate  and  dirty,  for  it 
has  been  God-forsaken  ever  since  you  were  born.  May  He  come  in — at  whose 
girdle  hang  the  keys  of  all  hearts.  8.  "  And  when  she  was  baptized,  and 
her  household,"  &c.  First  the  heart,  and  then  the  home.  She  kept  them ;  she 
fed  them ;  she  bore  all  charges  for  them  at  the  very  beginning.  Remember 
Lydia  at  once  became  a  contributor  to  the  Sustenation  Fund  1  (J.  McNeill.) 
Missionary  sermon  : — That  simple  account  is  the  first  record  of  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  in  Europe.  "We  are  standing  at  the  well-head  of  a  great  river.  The  little 
silver  thread,  over  which  a  shepherd  might  step  without  asking  it  to  stay  its  pro- 
gress, broadens  out  into  a  great  expanse,  and  the  Christendom  of  a  civilised  world 
is  developed  from  those  simple  words  spoken  that  Saturday  morning.  Thus  gently 
and  unobtrusively  stole  into  Europe  the  great  words  which  were  to  shatter  and 
remould  its  institutions,  and  to  be  the  starting  point  of  its  liberties.    I.  Thb 

APPABENT  INSIGNIFICANCE  AND  REAL  GREATNESS  OF  CHRISTIAN  WORK.     It  WaS  the  biggCSt 

thing  that  was  done  in  the  world  that  day  when  Paul  talked  to  that  handful  of 
women.  Well  now,  the  same  temptation,  to  judge  of  acts  by  their  external  aspect, 
and  to  underrate  their  value,  besets  us  all  in  our  Christian  work.  The  greatness  of 
an  action  depends  on  three  things — its  motive,  its  sphere,  and  its  consequences. 
Anything  that  is  done  for  God  is  great.  You  take  a  pebble  and  plunge  it  into  a 
stream  and  all  the  veins  become  visible,  which  you  failed  to  detect  as  it  lay  on  the 
shore,  and  so  it  is  with  Christian  work,  cast  it  into  the  stream  of  holy  motive — let 
it  be  done  for  God  and  it  is  sanctified  and  ennobled.  And  so  it  is  as  to  the  relative 
greatness  of  the  sphere  of  our  actions ;  what  is  done  for  material  well-being  and 
physical  life  is  distinctly  at  the  bottom.  What  is  done  for  the  understanding  is 
higher,  and  if  the  lightest  word  of  a  great  thinker  is  more  than  all  material  magni- 
ficence, then  decisively,  by  the  Tory  same  reasoning,  we  must  exalt  above  the  mere 
thinker's  words  the  words  and  deeds  which  touch  the  heart,  and  that  sway  the  will, 
that  cleanse  and  invigorate,  and  instruct,  and  invest  with  sovereign  power  the  life 
and  conscience ;  and  the  preaching  of  Christ's  name  is  that  which  does  all  these 
things.  Therefore  high  above  all  other  forms  of  Christian  benevolence  and  muni- 
ficence is  this  setting  forth  of  the  name  that  Paul  spake  by  the  river-side  that 
morning.  But  deeds  are  classified  according  to  their  consequences.  The  longer 
they  last,  the  wider  they  reach,  the  deeper  they  go — the  greater  the  act  which  sets 
them  in  motion.  Go  and  ask  about  the  length  of  time  the  consequences  of  that 
sublime  morning's  discourse  will  endure.  When  all  the  flaring  gas  lamps  and  rush- 
lights are  out,  "  they  that  be  wise  shall  shine  like  the  brightness  of  the  firmament 
and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever."  H.  Thb 
LAW  OP  GROWTH  IN  Christ's  KINGDOM.  The  Seed  sown  at  first  was  but  little,  and 
though  eighteen  centuries  have  passed,  and  it  has  grown  to  a  kingdom,  it  is 
obviously  a  long  way  from  the  term  of  its  growth.  So  I  may  draw  one  or  two 
lessons  upon  which  I  would  touch  for  a  moment  or  two.  First :  That  the  law  of 
Christ's  kingdom  is  found  in  minute  and  unobtrusive  beginnings  —  noise  and 
prominence  are  no  parts  of  its  power,  and  have  little  part  in  accomplishing  the 
great  things  that  are  done  for  Him,  The  noisiest  things  are  generally  the  little 
things,  and  the  quiet  things  are  the  strong  ones.  Look  how  Jesus  Christ  stole  into 
the  world,  into  a  corner  of  a  remote  little  province,  and  went  about  silently  doing 
good,  and  passed  out  of  it  again,  and  "  the  world  knew  Him  not. "  And  so  don't 
let  us  be  ashamed  of  little  beginnings.  They  are  in  the  line  of  God's  way  of  work- 
ing, and  side  by  side  with  that  there  is  the  other  thought,  slow  progress  is  unob- 
trusive and  steadfast.  The  length  which  any  organism  takes  to  come  to  its  maturity 
is  the  measure  of  its  duration,  and  the  man  outlasts  a  million  generations  of  moths, 
and  the  oak  waves  its  auchan^sing  branches  above  many,  many  generations  of  reeds 


QBiv.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  481 

that  spring  ajid  wither  at  its  careless  feet ;  and  if  eighteen  centuries  have  but  begun 
the  development  of  the  forces  which  were  set  loose  in  Europe  for  the  first  time  that 
morning,  how  long  is  it  going  to  be  before  decay  sets  in  upon  that  which  has  taken 
BO  long  to  grow  ?  A  long,  long  duration  must  belong  to  that  kingdom,  the  con- 
solidation of  which  has  been  the  work  of  aU  these  centuries,  and  that  must  be  an 
unsetting  day,  of  which  these  years  are  but  as  a  watch  in  the  morning  twilight. 
God  works  leisurely  and  invisibly.  Treading  most  closely  in  the  footsteps  of  Him 
who  waited  over  a  thousand  years  to  send  His  own  Son  with  that  small  beginning 
and  slow  advance,  they  commenced  their  work  of  the  founding  and  building  of  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  III.  The  simplicity  of  the  forces  to  which  Christ  entrusts 
THE  PROGRESS  OF  His  KINGDOM.  It  Seemed  a  most  unequal  contest  into  which  the 
apostle  and  his  Uttle  band  had  gone,  led  by  the  vision  which  they  interpreted  as  the 
Divine  monition.  Think  of  the  opposition,  the  antagonisms  that  were  ready  against 
them.  There  was  Greece  over  the  hills  with  its  proud  philosophies.  There  was 
Eome  aU  active,  ready  to  change  its  toleration  for  active  persecution.  They  had  to 
meet  storms  of  heathenish  idolatry,  round  which  the  superstitious  dread  of  untold 
centuries  gathered,  and  which  was  ever  menacing  with  consummate  obstinacy. 
They  had  to  confront  ordered  systems  of  able  philosophic  teachers  with  their 
unlettered  message.  Did  Cartes,  landing  on  an  unknown  shore,  with  an  unsubdued 
and  barren  beach  in  front  and  his  burning  ships  behind,  embark  on  a  more 
apparently  desperate  venture  than  these  men  ?  And  what  were  the  weapons  that 
made  them  victorious  ?  First  and  foremost  the  message  that  they  preached,  th» 
plain  gospel — to  which  the  heart  and  conscience  of  men  will  respond,  when  it  is  pa 
before  them  as  Christ  meant  it  to  be — the  message,  "  That  God  was  in  Christ 
reconciling  the  world  to  Himself,  not  imputing  unto  them  their  trespasses."  That 
was  Paul's  gospel,  as  he  tells  us,  and  that  was  the  weapon  with  which  he  fought,. 
which  was,  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  With  this  most  beneficent  inten- 
tion they  fronted  the  universe  with  one  word,  and  with  that  word  they  took  the 
world ;  and  you  and  I  have  it,  and  if  we  will  be  faithful  and  will  use  it,  we  shall 
have  the  same  issues  and  results  as  they.  Their  power  in  the  next  place  came  from 
the  earnestness  vrith  which  they  preached  the  truth.  Convictions  are  contagious. 
You  may  reason  with  a  man  until  Doomsday,  and  if  you  hammer  an  iceberg  to 
powder  it  will  be  ice  still,  but  melt  it,  as  you  can  by  having  your  own  soul  aglow 
with  love  and  loyalty  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  can  turn  it  from  ice  to  sweet  water. 
The  last  element  of  power  is  the  presence  of  the  abiding  and  indwelling  Christ. 
The  Word,  mighty  as  it  is,  is  vain  without  the  mighty  power  and  inspiration  of  the 
Spirit.  As  we  read  that  verse  lower  down,  what  do  we  find?  *•  Whose  heart  the 
Lord  opened,  that  she  should  attend  to  the  things  that  were  spoken  of  Paul."  In 
the  measure  in  which  we  are  true  to  Him,  and  yield  ourselves  in  glad  surrender  to 
His  power  and  presence,  we  carry  Jesus  Christ  with  ns,  and  He  works  through  us,^ 
as  we  read  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  which  are  indeed  the  acts  of  the  risen  Christ 
in  the  apostles.  The  gospel  is  as  much  the  power  of  God  unto  Salvation  to-day  as 
it  ever  was,  and  the  earnestness  of  our  personal  conviction  is  as  deep  as  ever,  and 
the  presence  and  power  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  Christ  is  as  real  as  ever,  and  the 
closer  we  keep  to  Christ  and  the  more  exclusively  and  unreservedly  we  trust  Him 
the  more  assured  will  be  our  results.  God's  Church  has  no  need  of  wealth.  Jewels 
on  the  hilt  of  a  sword  are  often  in  the  way  of  getting  a  good  grip  of  it,  and  the 
gilded  scabbard  adds  nothing  to  the  keenness  of  its  edge.  The  Church  has  no  need 
of  worldly  help.  David  was  almost  throttled  in  Saul's  armour,  he  was  better  with- 
out it.  Let  us  then  get  the  old  proved  weapons  which  have  been  tried  through 
many  generations  ;  we  have  more  reason  to  trust  them  than  Paul  had,  for  we  have 
eighteen  centuries  of  experience  to  fall  back  upon,  which  he  had  not ;  and  if  we 
cleave  to  them,  as  I  pray  God  we  may,  we  shall  find  that  the  weapons  of  our  war- 
fare, not  being  carnal,  but  spiritual,  are  mighty  through  God  to  the  puUing  down  of 
the  strongholds  of  sin  and  Satan.  And  so  I  venture  to  commend  to  your  sympathies 
the  claims  of  the  Foreign  Missionary  enterprise.  I  am  sure  of  this,  that  no  Church 
is  in  a  healthy  condition  that  does  not  lend  a  helping  hand  in  the  great  work  oi 
foreign  missions.  The  lamp  that  is  placed  in  the  window  gives  no  less  light  in  the 
room  because  its  rays  are  illuminating  the  darkness  outside.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  gospel  in  Europe : — 1.  In  ver.  12  we  read  of  "  certain  days  "—days  which  needed 
not  to  be  named — the  ordinary  process  of  time.  But  in  ver.  13  we  read  of  "the  Sabbath" 
— the  day  that  has  a  name  ;  the  one  day  into  which  all  other  days  flow  as  streamlets 
and  rivers  flow  into  the  sea.  There  is  none  like  it.  You  need  not  bolster  up  the 
Sabbath  by  argument.  Its  Divine  authority  is  written  in  the  heart,  and  we  shall  see 
TOL.  n.  si 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

it  to  be  so  when  once  awakened  and  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Sabbath  mast 
be  its  own  argument.  2.  "  And  on  the  Sabbath  we  went  out  of  the  city  by  the  river- 
Bide."  Church-hunting  1  A  journey  that  was  allowed.  To  leave  home  thus  on 
Sunday  is  to  seek  the  greater  home.  You  cannot  stop  at  home  on  the  Sabbath 
day.  That  were  insult  to  the  very  home  you  profess  to  love.  To  leave  it  is  to  seek 
it ;  to  go  from  it  is  to  get  at  it.  We  must  go  out  on  the  Sabbath  day,  if  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  be  in  us,  in  order  to  help  to  complete  the  family  gathering.  Let  us  not 
be  led  away  by  the  foolish  fantasy  that  a  man  can  read  the  Bible  at  home,  or  have 
a  Church  at  home,  in  some  sense  which  dispenses  with  the  common  joy  of  kindred 
sympathy  and  soul.  Christianity  does  not  isolate  men,  but  brings  men  together  in 
sacred,  sympathetic  brotherhood.  We  know  what  it  is  in  strange  places  to  seek  the 
particular  Church  we  know  and  love  on  the  Sabbath  day.  3.  "Where  prayer  was 
wont  to  be  made."  How  singular  is  the  cause  of  reputation  or  famel  There  are 
famous  battle-fields  to  which  men  make  pilgrimages.  How  can  a  man  be  in 
Belgium  without  feeling  some  constraint  towards  Waterloo?  That  is  natural. 
There  are  men  who  would  make  long  pilgrimages  to  see  where  John  Banyan  was 
born.  The  land  through  which  the  apostles  passed  was  full  of  historic  interest,  but 
they  cared  little  for  the  histories  which  have  beginnings  and  endings  ;  they  lived  in 
the  nobler  history  which  continues  through  the  everlasting  duration.  They  sought 
the  place  where  soul-battles  had  been  fought.  Yoa  might  have  known  whither  the 
men  were  moving ;  they  were  praying  as  they  were  going.  We  must  keep  up  the 
spiritual  frame.  4.  "  The  women  which  resorted  thither."  Have  men  forsaken 
religion  and  left  the  women  to  keep  it  ap  ?  Do  "  women  keep  up  the  Church  "  ?  It 
may  be ;  but  it  is  a  fool's  gibe  I  The  woman  does  keep  up  the  Church — God  bless 
her  1  But  she  keeps  up  more.  Oh,  thou  blatant,  mocking  fool,  to  taunt  the  very 
saviour  of  society  I  There  be  those  who  say  that  the  men  have  given  up  Church. 
Yes,  but  only  in  the  same  proportion  in  which  they  have  given  up  love,  purity, 

patience,  home  1     5.  "  And  a  certain  woman  named  Lydia ."    This  is  like  the 

"  days  "  and  "  the  Sabbath."  What  subtle  little  harmonies  there  are  in  this 
inspired  book  1  How  part  balances  part  1  As  there  are  days  that  may  be  mentioned 
in  the  plural  number,  so  there  are  men  and  women  who  may  be  mentioned  in  their 
plurality;  but  as  there  is  one  day  which  is  always  named  alone,  so  there  are 
individuals  who  head  every  catalogue ;  names  which  have  whole  lines  to  themselves. 
Look  at  the  case  of  Lydia.  I.  She  was  a  business  woman — "  a  seller  of  purple." 
6o,  then,  women  of  business  may  be  women  of  prayer.  We  ought  to  have  more 
women  of  business.  It  is  one  thing  for  a  woman  to  be  a  slave,  and  another  for  a 
woman  to  work  and  to  love  her  work.  He,  or  she,  who  loves  work,  makes  all  the 
week  a  kind  of  introductory  Sabbath  to  the  great  religioas  rest.  I  would  that  all 
women  were  Lydias  in  this  respect  of  having  something  definite  to  do  every  day 
and  doing  it,  and  finding  in  industry  a  balance  to  piety.  II.  Shb  was  a  belioious 
WOMAN  ;  she  •'  worshipped  God."  It  is  one  thing  to  be  religious  and  another  to  be 
Christianised.  Keligion  is  a  general  term ;  Christianity  is  a  specific  form  of  religion. 
It  is  not  enough  for  you  and  me  to  be  religious,  we  must  take  upon  us  by  the 
mighty  ministry  of  the  Holy  Ghost  a  particular  form,  and  that  particular  form  ia 
Christianity.  In  this  respect  Christianity  is  a  heart-opening ;  a  heart  enlargement. 
III.  When  she  became  the  subject  op  Christian  influence,  at  onob  she  would 
HAVE  A  Church  in  the  house — "  If  ye  have  judged  me,"  &o.  In  that  suggestion 
there  is  a  whole  philosophy.  That  was  impulse  Divine.  When  the  two  travellers 
felt  their  hearts  burn  within  them,  by  reason  of  the  converse  of  the  third  Man,  they 
said,  "Abide  with  us."  Lydia  would  have  a  fellowship  at  once.  Souls  that  are 
kindred  must  never  leave  one  another.  Christians  must  abide  together.  In  the 
olden  time  "  they  that  feared  God  met  often  one  with  another,"  (fee.  {J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  And  spoke  unto  the  women  that  resorted  thither. — Paul  and  the  women 
of  Philippi : — I.  The  circumstances.  1.  It  was  upon  the  Sabbath  day.  2.  It  was 
by  the  river  side.  A  river  may  remind  us  of  the  Spirit,  by  whose  influence  we  are 
enabled  to  drink  of  the  '-streams  which  make  glad  the  city  of  God."  8.  It  was  a 
place  where  prayer  was  accustomed  to  be  made.  II.  The  position.  "  They  sat 
down."  III.  The  operation  (ver.  14).  1.  Something  implied.  (1)  Ignorance. 
(2)  PrejuiUce.  2.  Something  described.  (1)  Before  conversion,  (a)  Conviction. 
{b)  Perception,  (c)  Willingness.  (2)  After  conversion,  (a)  ConRciousness.  (b) 
Longings,  (c)  EularKement.  {Dr.  Andrews.)  And  a  certain  woman  named 
Lydia,  a  seller  of  purple. — The  conversion  of  Lydia : — I.  The  character  or 
Lydia,  pnEviorsLY  to  the  apostle's  arrival.  This  will,  in  a  considerable  degree, 
accuunt    lor    that    absence   of    intense    feeling  by   which   her    conversion   wai 


«HAP.  zvi.]  THE  ACTS,  483 

distinguished.    Yon  are  not  now  invited  to  look  on  the  rough  Roman  soldier, 
or  the  dissolute  vagrant.    But  Lydia  stands  before  you,  marked  by  the  mild- 
ness of  her  sex,  the  native  pliancy  of  the  Asiatic  character,  and  the  respectability 
of  her  standing  in  society.     For  you  find  that  she  was  a  woman  of  Thyatira,  a 
Lydian  city,  and  a  respectable  householder  in  Philippi.    And  her  employment,  as  a 
seller  of  purple,  was  calculated  to  produce  a  certain  degree  of  morality  and  gentle- 
ness ;  for  trade  has  a  tendency  to  repress  open  profligacy,  and  to  remove  morosenesa 
of  temper.    And  the  peculiar  branch  of  commerce,  which  engaged  Lydia's  atten- 
tion would  tend,  by  bringing  her  into  contact  with  her  superiors,  to  foster  a  sub- 
missive and  obliging  disposition.     But  the  most  important  fact  of  her  early  history 
is  her  proselytism  to  the  Jewish  faith — she  "  worshipped  God."    It  cannot  hence 
be  inferred  that  she  was  really  pious,  for  in  chap.  xiii.  we  find  that  those  indi- 
viduals at  Antioch,  characterised  by  the  same  term,  and  called  in  our  Bibles  "  devout 
women,"  were  among  the  violent  persecutors  of  Paul  and  Barnabas.  Many  of  these 
proselytes  were,  doubtless,  like  the  Jews  themselves,  but  professors  of  the  tenets  of 
Judaism.    Yet  the  religious  profession  of  Lydia  will  prove  that  she  was  to  a  certain 
extent  instructed  in  the  writings  of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  the  narrative  shows 
her  to  have  been  an  attendant  in  assemblies  for  Divine  worship.     And  this  know- 
ledge, and  this  attention  to  the  rites  of  religion,  would  give  an  aspect  to  her  mind, 
very  different  from  that  of  her  depraved  neighbours.  The  ruggedness  of  the  heathen 
character  would  be  thus  worn  away,  and  the  law,  as  the  forerunner  of  the  gospel, 
would  have  "  prepared  the  way  of  the  Lord,  and  made  straight  in  the  desert  a 
highway  for  our  God."    Lydia  then,  at  this  period,  although  unchanged  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  may  be  described  as  moral,  amiable,  industrious,  domestic,  and  in- 
structed in  the  leading  principles  of  religion.     II.  The  scene  of  her  conversion. 
And  in  this  there  is  much  to  harmonise  with  the  characteristic  of  her  conversion 
itself.  Lydia  is  not  roused  beneath  the  strong  arches  of  a  prison,  by  an  earthquake, 
like  the  savage  jailer.  But  time,  and  place,  and  employment,  all  tell  of  tranquillity. 
IIL  The  manner  op  the  Divine  operation.     We  have  not  time  now  to  enlarge 
on  the  sentiment,  that  an  immediate  Divine  influence  is  necessary  for  the  conversion 
of  a  soul,  although  this  is  sufficiently  estabUshed  by  the  present  history.     •'  It  is 
God  which  worketh  in  us,  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure  "  ;  and  then 
listen  to  the  language  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God."    But  we  have  here  to  advert  particularly  to  the  gentle 
manner  in  which  the  Spirit  affected  the  mind  of  Lydia.  This  is  implied  in  the  word 
"opened."     The  hearers  of  Peter,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  were  pricked  to  the 
heart."     The  hearts  of  others  are  represented  as  "  broken."    Indeed,  the  convinced 
soul  sometimes  reminds  us  of  a  city  taken  by  storm :  the  bars  of  iron  are  cut 
asunder — the  gates  are  battered  down — the  assailants  pour  in  like  a  torrent.    But 
the  heart  of  Lydia  was  opened  hke  the  gate  of  Peter's  prison.     Now,  there  are  two 
circumstances  recorded  in  the  narrative  that  will  illustrate  the  mildness  of  the 
Divine  agency.     1.  The  first  is  that  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  was  the  instrument 
of  Lydia's  conversion.    The  Spirit  in  His  saving  influences  always  affects  the  mind 
by  bringing  it  into  contact  with  truth  ;  and,  indeed,  vfith  that  portion  of  truth 
which  He  has  been  pleased  to  communicate  to  man  in  the  Scrp.ures.     "Of  Hia 
own  will  begat  He  us  by  the  word  of  truth."     This  is  the  sun  of  the  moral  world. 
"  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  pure,  enlightening  the  eyes."     But  light  does  not  always 
strike  the  eye  from  the  same  point :  sometimes  the  sun  pours  on  it  his  direct 
effulgence  ;  at  others,  the  rays  reach  it  through  all  the  varieties  of  reflection.    And 
thus  the  truth  is  not  always  communicated  to  the  mind  in  the  same  manner.     It 
impresses  one  man  amid  the  silence  of  meditation ;  another,  while  perusing  the 
Bible ;  it  smites  a  third  in  the  rebuke  of  an  enemy ;  it  came  to  Paul  in  a  voice  from 
heaven.    But  the  more  common  manner  of  conveying  to  the  mind  the  truths  of 
revelation  is  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.     2.  The  other  circumstance  to  which 
we  allude  is  that  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  did  not  interfere  with  the  calm  exercise 
of  Lydiii's  mental  powers.     The  influences  of  the  Spirit,  indeed,  never  supersede 
the  employment  of  the  intellectual  faculties;  for  then  man  would  cease  to  be  re- 
sponsible.    But  in  the  early  stages  of  some  conversions,  there  is  but  little  caluiness 
in  the  employment  of  these.     The  feelings  are  too  much  agitated  to  allow  of  close 
attention  to  the  various  bearings  of  truth.     Imminent  peril  occupies  too  large  a 
space  in  the  field  of  vision  to  permit  the  presence  of  other  objects.     But  such  was 
not  Lydia's  case.     •'  She  attended  unto  the  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul." 
Her  heart  was  engaged  with  his  discourse.     While  Lydia  heard  that  Christ  was 
"  bruised  for  our  transgressions,"  she  felt  that  she  was  a  transgressor.    True,  sha 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap,  xvfc 

had  been  industrious,  amiable,  moral.  But  now  she  perceived  that  religion  reqnirej 
much  more  than  outward  decency.  She  began  to  feel  the  meaning  of  the  Psalmist's 
prayer ;  "  Create  in  me,  0  God,  a  clean  heart."  She  saw  that  the  anxieties  of 
business,  and  the  cares  of  a  family,  had  interfered  with  supreme  love  to  God.  And 
Lydia  received  the  testimony  of  God.  She  saw  its  extent,  embracing  time  and 
eternity ;  the  character  of  man,  and  the  nature  of  God — and  she  received  it  all.  IV. 
The  subsequent  conduct  of  Ltdia,  as  according  with  the  gentleness  which  we  have 
noticed  as  predominant  in  her  history.  She  was  not  called,  like  the  apostle  to 
whose  language  she  had  listened,  to  raise  her  voice  in  the  public  assembly,  or  to 
expose  her  life  in  perilous  journies.  But  there  was  a  little  congregation  to  whom 
she  could  introduce  the  word  of  truth — her  household.  It  is  evident  that  Lydia 
discharged  her  duty  to  her  family,  for  they  too  were  baptized.  And  mild  as  Lydia 
appears  in  the  centre  of  her  family,  regarded  by  its  members  as  the  instrument  of 
their  own  conversion,  she  is  not  seen  in  a  light  less  amiable,  when  performing  to- 
wards the  apostles  the  rites  of  Christian  hospitality.  Mark  with  what  urgency  she 
pleads  with  Paul,  her  father  in  Christ,  to  come,  with  his  companions,  beneath  her 
roof;  till,  constrained  by  her  grateful  importunity,  these  holy  men  became  her 
guests.  And  so  closely  was  Christian  friendship  cemented  by  their  brief  intercourse, 
that  we  find  Paul  and  Silas,  as  soon  as  they  were  released  from  prison,  hastening 
to  the  house  of  Lydia,  to  share  with  their  anxious  hostess  the  joy  of  their  deUver- 
ance.  And  her  considerate  regard  to  the  temporal  wants  of  the  apostles  was  not 
limited  to  the  transient  attentions  of  hospitality.  Bead  the  Epistle  to  the  Church  at 
Philippi  and  you  will  find  that,  at  the  introduction  of  the  gospel  into  Macedonia, 
this  Christian  society  alone  ministered  to  the  necessities  of  the  apostle.  Twice  at 
Thessalonica  and  once  at  Corinth  did  this  Church  aid,  by  its  pecuniary  contribu- 
tions, the  mission  of  Paul  among  the  heathen.  And  from  whom  do  you  suppose 
this  liberality  originated,  but  from  Lydia,  the  first  fruits  and  centre  of  the  Phiilip- 
pian  Church  ?  Such  is  a  rapid  sketch  of  Lydia's  conversion.  And  surely  it  is  not 
less  illustrious  for  being  distinguished  by  a  placidity  which  among  men  would  be 
esteemed  incompatible  with  the  production  of  a  mighty  effect.  The  operations  of 
God  must  not  be  estimated  by  a  human  standard.  Feebleness  is  restless,  omnipo- 
tence is  calm.  Look  on  its  noblest  works.  When  the  sun  was  formed,  was  there 
the  accumulation  of  materials,  or  the  toil  of  labourers,  or  the  clang  of  machinery  T 
No.  "God  said.  Let  there  be  light,"  and  the  glorious  orb  existed,  blazed,  and 
threw  abroad  its  infant  rays  amid  the  songs  of  the  sons  of  God.  And  how  was  that 
more  marvellous  work,  the  spirit  of  man,  produced  ?  God  "  breathed  "  into  the 
beauteous  clay  "  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  became  a  living  pouI  " ;  and  the  eye 
beaming  with  intelligence  opened  upon  the  tranquillity  of  Paradise.  And  then, 
think  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God.  No  earthquake  shakes  the  mountains 
— no  trumpet  summons  the  nations — no  chariot  of  fire  cleaves  the  air ;  but  the  glory 
of  a  single  angelic  messenger  shines  around  a  group  of  shepherds  in  the  fields  of 
Bethlehem.  In  the  application  of  this  subject  we  might  observe — 1.  That  the  con- 
version of  the  moral  and  the  amiable  is  frequently  attended  with  comparatively 
small  degrees  of  mental  excitation.  This  consideration  may  console  those  who  re- 
semble Lydia  in  their  character  and  in  the  manner  of  their  conversion.  2.  That  a 
calm  entrance  upon  the  Christian  life  will  not  necessarily  interfere  with  decision 
and  activity  in  the  Church  of  God.  In  the  full  prospect  of  persecution  Lydia  pro- 
fessed her  faith,  and  identified  herself  with  the  cause  of  Christianity.  3.  That 
attention  to  the  public  ordinances  of  religion  should  ever  accompany  dependence  on 
the  Spirit  of  God ;  nor  should  we  absent  ourselves  from  a  service  because  thinly 
attended,  or  inferior  to  others  in  excitement.  4.  Finally,  we  obsei-ve,  that  natural 
excellence  of  character  will  not  render  conversion  unnecest^ary.  If  it  would,  why 
was  it  needful  that  the  Lord  should  open  the  heart  of  Lydia?  {T.  C.  Everett.) 
Lydia  : — The  ordinary  blessings  of  life  are  distributed  with  great  inequality;  indeed, 
we  often  find  that  the  worst  characters  enjoy  the  largest  portion  of  them.  The 
reason  is  this — they  are  not  essential  to  man's  happiness.  Whatever  is  necessary 
to  the  happiness  of  all  is  placed  within  the  reach  of  all.  True  religion  is,  however, 
necessary  to  our  dignity  and  to  our  happiness ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  placed  within 
the  reach  of  every  person,  and,  especially,  within  the  reach  of  the  poor.  There  are 
many  striking  illustrations  of  this.  One  is  now  before  us.  The  sacred  historian 
makes  no  mention  of  Philip  or  his  warlike  son — he  says  nothing  of  Augustus,  or  of 
Brutus;  but  he  mentions  with  peculiar  honour  an  humble  individual  from  Thyatira. 
Let  us  notice — I.  The  industey  of  Lydia — she  was  "  a  seller  of  purple."  1.  A  dog 
which  had  been  eating  a  Conchilis  or  Purpura,  and  whose  lips  had  been  deeply 


CHAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  485 

tinged  with  a  purple  colour,  gave  occasion  to  the  discovery  of  this  elegant  and  costly 
dye.  At  one  time  it  was  more  valuable  than  gold,  and  articles  of  dress  dyed  by  it 
were  worn  only  by  sovereign  princes  ;  but  in  the  days  of  Boman  luxury  they  were 
used  by  the  noble  and  wealthy  in  general ;  hence  it  is  said  of  the  rich  man  that 
*•  he  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen."  2.  Lydia  was  employed  in  preparing 
and  selling  this.  As  idleness  is  quite  opposed  to  the  virtue  and  happiness  of  man, 
it  is  necessary  that  all  persons  should  follow  some  employment.  Even  those  who 
are  placed  in  independent  circumstances  should  not  be  idle,  but  should  employ 
their  time,  talents,  and  influence  in  doing  good  to  others.  What  a  noble  example 
does  the  life  of  the  benevolent  Howard  furnish  to  persons  placed  in  such  circum- 
stances as  these  I  Such,  however,  as  have,  by  their  own  exertions,  to  provide  for 
their  personal  and  family  wants  should  be  diligent  in  their  calling,  whatever  it  may 
be.  3.  And  whatever  else  we  attend  to  or  neglect,  we  should  attend  to  the  soul. 
••  For  what  is  a  man  profited,"  &c.  There  are  many  persons  who  plead  that  they 
are  placed  in  such  circumstances  that  it  is  out  of  their  power  to  attend  to  the  one 
thing  needful,  but  this  is  a  vain  excuse  ;  for  we  shall  find  that  there  have  been  per- 
sons in  all  ages  distinguished  for  piety,  who  have  been  placed  in  circumstances  the 
most  unfavourable  to  religion.  II.  Lydia's  piett.  1.  '  •  She  worshipped  God  " ; 
that  is,  the  true  God,  according  to  the  practice  of  the  Jews.  2.  Such  was  the  power 
of  principle  with  Lydia,  that  neither  the  fear  of  man,  nor  the  love  of  lucre  would 
lead  her  to  desecrate  the  day  which  the  Lord  had  sanctified.  How  far  does  her 
conduct  surpass  that  of  those  who  enjoy  superior  advantages  1  How  shamefully  is 
the  Sabbath  desecrated.  If,  in  reference  to  an  individual,  drunkenness  be  an  inlet 
to  every  other  crime,  in  reference  to  a  community.  Sabbath-breaking  is  an  inlet  to 
every  other  evil.  3.  Witness  the  advantages  that  resulted  to  Lydia  from  the  course 
of  conduct  which  she  pursued.  She  went  to  the  house  of  prayer,  and  there  received 
the  end  of  her  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  her  soul.  It  is  a  great  principle  in  the 
Divine  administration,  that  God  honours  them  that  honour  Him.  III.  The  chanqb 
WHICH  Lydia  EXPERIENCED.  1.  The  Jews  used  the  term,  "heart,"  to  describe  the 
understanding,  the  will,  and  the  affections.  Now  Lydia  listened  to  the  doctrinal 
statements  of  St.  Paul,  and  she  so  hstened  as  to  understand  them ;  when  under- 
stood they  commended  themselves  so  that  she  embraced  them  with  her  will,  and 
cherished  them  in  her  affections.  Thus  her  heart  was  opened — she  believed  and 
received  the  Saviour  with  all  His  fulness  of  evangelical  blessing.  2.  Now  it  is  not 
to  St.  Paul's  preaching,  but  to  the  influence  of  the  Spirit,  that  this  great  change  is 
attributed.  Paul  might  have  preached  till  the  present  hour,  and  Lydia  would  have 
remained  what  she  was  unless  the  Spirit  had  accompanied  the  ministrations  of  the 
apostle,  and  rendered  the  word  effectual.  3.  It  is  more  difGicult  to  accomplish  the 
redemption  of  a  fallen  human  spirit  than  it  was  to  create  this  vast  universe.  For 
when  God  proceeded  to  employ  His  high  attributes  in  the  work  of  creation  there 
was  nothing  to  impede  the  operations  of  His  hand.  But  when  God  proceeds  to  ac- 
complish the  great  work  of  spiritual  regeneration  in  the  heart  of  man,  his  pride, 
his  passions,  his  prejudices,  hid  deep-rooted  depravity,  oppose  that  influence.  How 
necessary,  then,  that  we  should  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  without  whom  all  human 
means  are  in  vain  1  IV.  Thb  evidence  fttbnished  by  Lydia  of  the  beality  and  ex- 
tent OF  this  OBAOions  OHANOB.  1.  "  She  was  baptized."  Man  is  a  sentient  being, 
and,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  receive  instruction  through  the  medium 
of  his  senses.  Under  every  dispensation  God  has  accommodated  Himself  to  this. 
Although  the  ceremonies  of  the  law  have  been  abrogated,  still  God  condescends  to 
our  weakness  in  the  two  sacraments.  Now,  baptism  is  an  initiatory  and  dedicatory 
ordinance.  By  means  of  this  we  are  introduced  into  the  Christian  Church  and 
devoted  to  the  service  of  God.  It  is  also  emblematical  of  regeneration ;  and  as  we  can 
enter  into  the  visible  Church  only  by  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  so  we  can  enter 
into  the  real  Church  only  by  regeneration.  Now,  Lydia,  having  embraced  the 
■Christian  faith,  manifested  not  merely  confidence  in  Christ  as  her  Saviour — not 
merely  respect  for  Him  as  her  Prophet,  but  subjection  to  His  authority  as  her  King, 
by  submitting  to  the  rite  of  baptism.  2.  "  She  was  baptized  and  her  household  " — 
that  is,  we  apprehend,  all  the  memberg  of  her  household  who  were  under  fourteen 
years  of  age ;  for  this  appears  to  have  been  the  Jewish  practice  in  reference  to  the 
admission  of  proselytes  into  the  Jewish  Church.  8.  She  also  received  the  messengers 
of  mercy  in  her  dweUing.  This  was  a  proof  of  her  gratitude.  But  it  was  also  a 
proof  of  her  sincerity.  At  that  time  a  profession  of  Christianity  exposed  those  who 
made  it  to  various  privations  and  sufferings.  (R.  Alder,  D.D.)  Lydia : — I.  Heb 
SHPLOYMBNi.    She  was  not  "  idle,  wandering  about  from  house  to  house ;  and  nol 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  xvfc 

only  idle,  but  tattlers  also,  and  busybodies,  speaking  things  which  they  ought  not." 
Trade  is  respectable,  and  nothing  is  bo  disgraceful  as  beggary  and  shabby  gentility. 
The  Jews  always  give  their  children  a  caUing ;  and  said  that  "  he  who  brings  up  ■ 
son  without  a  trade  teaches  him  to  steal."    Seneca  declared,  "  I  had  rather  be  sick 
than  be  idle."    And  truly  has  Dr.  Watts  said,  "  Satan  finds  some  mischief  still  for 
idle  hands  to  do."     II.  The  place  of  heb  extraction.    Thyatira  was  a  great  way 
from  Philippi.     How  few  die  where  they  were  born ;  or  even  settle  where  they  were 
brought  up.    The  events  leading  to  their  removal  often  seem  very  casual ;  and  they 
are  so  as  to  the  individuals  themselves ;  but  they  are  Divinely  known  and  arranged. 
The  Lord  fixes  "  the  bounds  of  their  habitation,"  and  with  regard  to  His  own 
people,  the  disposals  of  His  Providence  are  in  subserviency  to  the  designs  of  His 
gi-ace.  The  man  says,  "  I  will  go  into  such  a  city,  and  buy,  and  sell,  and  get  gain  "; 
and  he  goes  ;  and  he  finds  there,  though  he  never  looked  after  it,  "the  pearl  of  great 
price."     Many,  when  they  look  back  on  life,  will  know  that,  had  it  not  been  for 
such  or  such  an  occurrence,  they  would  have  remained  in  places  where  they  might 
have  been  corrupted  and  destroyed.   III.  Heb  chaeacteb.   She  "  worshipped  God." 
She  is,  therefore,  very  distinguishable  from  the  jailer.     The  grace  of  God  is  infi- 
nitely free :  and  accordingly,  we  sometimes  find  it  operating  on  individuals  the  most 
unlikely ;  and  even  publicans  and  harlots  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before 
Scribes  and  Pharisees.     So  when  the  apostle,  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  enumer- 
ates a  dreadful  catalogue  of  sinners,  he  adds,  "and  such  were  some  of  you  "  ;  some, 
but  not  all."    Some  talk  as  if  they  had  a  kind  of  advantage  in  having  been  con- 
verted from  a  state  of  profligacy.    But  sin  is  a  bad  business,  and  it  is  a  mercy  to 
have  been  preserved  from  it :  and  one  pecuhar  advantage  arises  from  having  been 
moral  before  we  became  spiritual,  namely,  the  avoiding  of  the  injuries  which  sin 
does  to  others,  by  influence  and  example.    IV.  Heb  attendance.    She  "  heard  us." 
What  induced  her  to  be  there  we  know  not ;  but  she  could  say,  "I  being  in  the  way, 
the  Lord  led  me."     It  is  well  to  be  at  the  pool,  "  waiting  for  the  troubling  of  the 
water."    Whatever  brings  persons  under  the  preaching  of  the  Word  is  to  be  viewed 
with  thankfulness,  for  "  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God." 
Sin  entered  by  the  ear,  and  so  does  grace.  Listening  to  the  devil  we  fell,  hearkening 
unto  God  we  rise.     "Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."     V.  The  change  she  ex- 
peeienced.     "Whose  heart  the  Lord  opened."     1.  Her  heart  therefore  hud  been 
shut.     Shut,  as  ice  shuts  up  the  water  that  it  cannot  flow — as  the  miser  shuts  up 
his  compassion  from  the  poor — as  a  door  is  shut  to  keep  the  house  from  the 
entrance  of  the  owner.     This  is  our  Saviour's  own  image  :  •'  Behold,  I  stand  at  the 
door  and  knock,"  &c.    2.  The  Lord  opened  her  heart.     Our  state  is  such  as  to  re- 
quire the  Almighty  to  "  work  in  us,  both  to  will  and  to  do."    Every  saved  sinner 
is  "  His  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works."    An  operation  ia 
required,  to  effect  which  is  above   the  power  of  education,  example,  and  moral 
suasion.     But  nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord.     The  heart  is  under  His  dominion 
and  agency;  and  "what  He  has  promised,  He  is  able  also  to  perform."     VI.  The 
EVIDENCES  she  GAVE  OF  THE  REALITY  OF  HEB  CONVERSION.  1.  Her  regard  to  the  Divine 
teachings.     "  She  attended,"  &c.     2.  Her  readiness  to  dedicate  herself  entirely  to 
the  Lord  in  a  profession  of  His  name.     "She  was  baptized,  and  her  household." 
A  profession  of  religion,  without  the  reality,  is  nothing  ;  but  we  are  not  only  to  be 
Christians,  but  to  appear  such.     "  With  the  heart,"  indeed,  "  man  believeth  unto 
righteousness";  but  "with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation."    Ex- 
perience is  necessary ;  but  our  "  light  is  to  shine  before  men,"  &c.     And  you  will 
observe,  she  did  this  immediately,  without  reserve,  and  relatively  as  well  as  person- 
ally ;  devoting  her  whole  family  in  the  same  rite ;  and  thus  saying,  with  Joshua, 
"  As  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord."     3.  The  pressing  solicitation 
she  gave  to  the  apostles.  Evincing — (1)  A  desire  for  spiritual  improvement,  and  to 
have  her  house  further  blessed.     (2)  Liberality.     She  was  willing  to  "  minister  to 
the  necessities  of  the  saints  " ;  and  "  given  to  hospitality."    (3)  Affection  for  God's 
pervants.  Like  begets  like,  and  attracts  like.  "  By  this  we  know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."     (4)  Pious  fortitude.     To  per- 
ceive this  you  must  remember  that  at  this  time  Christians  were  a  "  sect  everywhera 
spoken  against."     (TV.  Jay.)        Lydia  : — I.  Heb  state  and  character  before  oon- 
VKU8I0N.     1.  A  proselyte  who  maintained  in  the  idolatrous  city  of  her  adoption  a 
uevont  attachment  to  the  worship  of  God.     There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  reality  of 
her  devotion,  for  not  only  did  she  observe  the  Sabbath,  but,  having  no  other  oppor- 
tunity for  attending  the  ordinances  of  public  worship,  she  "  went  out  of  the  city," 
Ac     While  engaged  in  prayer  the  blessing  came — a  striking  proof  of  its  efficacy. 


OHAP.  zn.]  THE  ACTS.  487 

God  does  indeed  Bometimes  surprise  a  prayerless  sinner,  as  in  the  case  of  the  jailer, 
but  there  is  no  promise  except  to  prayer,  and  that  promise  is  unlimited  and  sure. 
"  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive,"  Ac.     2.  While  pious  according  to  her  light,  her  heart 
was  nevertheless  closed  against  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.     (1)  Such  is  the  natural 
state  of  every  man.     (a)  The  understanding  is  shut  against  the  light  of  the  gospel. 
{b)  The  conscience  is  seared  as  with  a  hot  iron,    (c)    The  heart  is  hardened.    (2) 
There  are  many  obstacles  to  the  entrance  of  truth.     There  is  the  bar  of — (a) 
Ignorance.      Many  hear  the  Word  but  understand  it  not.      (6)  Unbelief,  which 
rejects  the  testimony  of  God.     (c)  Eimiity,  for  "  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against 
God."    (d)  Presumption  or  pride.     "  The  wicked  through  the  pride  of  his  counte- 
nance will  not  seek  after  God."     (e)  Discouragement  and  despair.     •*  Thou  saidst. 
There  is  no  hope;  for  I  have  loved  strangers,  and  after  them  will  I  go."     (/)  Un- 
willingness.    "  Ye  will  not  come  to  Me  that  ye  might  have  life."     (g)  Worldly- 
mindedness.    ««The  cares  of  the  world  .  .  .  choke  the  Word."     (h)  Sloth,     (i) 
Vicious  passions  and  depraved  habits.    3.  But  how  could  the  heart  of  such  s 
woman   be  closed?      The  answer  is  that  Lydia's  case  is  not  a   solitary  one. 
Devout  and  honourable  women  opposed  Paul,  and  Paul  himself  and  Nicodemua 
were  at  first  proof  against  the  gospel.     II.  The  means  by  which  her  conveksion 
WAS  effected.      1.   There  was   a  direct  Divine  operation  in  her  heart,  which 
consisted  in   opening  —  (1)   The  understanding  to   discern  the  light  of    God's 
truth.      (2)   The  conscience,  to  feel  its  convincing  power.     (3)   The   affections 
to  receive  its  sanctifying  influence.      2.  Means  were  employed.      "  The  Lord 
opened  her  heart  to  attend,"  &c.     It  is  by  the  truth  that  the  great  change  is 
wrought ;  and  hence  we  are  "  born  of  the  Spirit,"  but  also  ••  not  of  corruptible  seed, 
but  of  incorruptible,  even  by  the  Word  of  God."    III.  Lessons.     Note — 1.  The  care 
with  which  God  provided  for  the  instruction  of  sincere  Jewish  inquirers.     2.  The 
efficacy  of  prayer  as  a  means  of  spiritual  advancement.    3.  The  necessity  of  a 
spiritual  change  in  many  sincere  religious  professors.     4.  The  relative  functions  of 
the  Word  and  Spirit,  and  the  duty  of  combining  the  use  of  means  with  dependence 
on  the  Divine  blessing.     5.  The  different  feelings  of  those  whose  heart  the  Lord 
opens  towards  His  ministers,  and  those  of  the  ungodly  multitude.     (/.  Buchanan, 
D.D.)        Lydia's  conversion : — 1.  Phihppi  is  famous  as  the  spot  where  the  world's 
future  trembled  in  the  balance  when  Octavius  met  Brutus  and  Cassias  in  terrible 
conflict.     The  two  republican  generals  here  ended  their  stormy  career,  and  universal 
empire  crouched  at  the  feet  of  Caesar.    As  long  as  time  endures,  Philippi  will  be 
remembered  as  one  of  the  greatest  names  in  history.     But  when  time  shall  have 
passed  away  Philippi  will  still  have  a  name  as  the  place  where  the  first  herald  of 
the  Cross  cried,  '•  Europe  for  Jesus,"  and  won  his  first  victory  in  our  quarter  of 
the  world.     More  fraught  with  blessings  to  the  human  race  was  that  conquest  of  a 
woman's  heart,  than  all  the  laurels  which  Octavius  had  reaped  upon  the  bloody 
field.     2.  The  introduction  of  Christianity  into  Europe  is  a  very  humble  affair.    It 
was  an  open-air  service  by  the  river-side.    Happy  augury  of  the  results  of  open-air 
preaching  in  after  times  !     Let  us  look  at  Lydia's  conversion — I.  In  itself.     1.  It 
was  brought  about  by  providential  circumstances.     (1)  She  was  a  seller  of  purple, 
of  the  city  of  Thyatira,  famous  for  its  dyeing  trade,  which  had  flourished  there  ever 
since  the  days  of  Homer,  and  situated  in  that  part  of  the  country  into  which  Paul 
was  forbidden  to  preach  ;  therefore,  had  Lydia  been  at  home,  she  could  not  have 
heard  the  truth.     But  providence  brings  her  to  Philippi  at  the  right  time.     Here  is 
the  first  link  of  the  chain.     (2)  But  how  is  Paul  to  be  brought  there  ?     He  must  be 
shut  out  of  Bitbynia,  and  he  must  be  silenced  in  his  journey  through  Mysia,  &o. 
In  this  case  God  rules  and  overrules  all  things  to  bring  that  woman  and  that 
apostle  to  the  same  spot,  and  everything  in  God's  providence  is  working  together 
for  the  salvation  of  the  elect.    2.  There  was  not  only  providence,  but  there  was  also 
grace  preparing  the  soul.     The  woman  knew  many  truths  which  were  excellent 
stepping-stones  to  a  knowledge  of  Jesus.     She  was  a  proselyte  of  the  gate,  and 
therefore  weU  acquainted  with  the  oracles  of  God.     As  in  the  case  of  the  Ethiopian 
eunjich,  the  Scriptures  she  had  read  had  prepared  her  mind  :  the  ground  had  been 
ploughed  ready  for  the  good  seed ;  it  was  not  a  hard  rock  as  in  the  jailer's  cuse. 
3.  Her  conversion  took  place  in  the  use  of  the  means.     On  the  Sabbath  she  went 
to  the  gathering  of  her  people.     Although  God  calls  men  when  they  are  not  hearing 
the  Word,  yet  usually  we  must  expect  that  being  in  the  way,  God  will  meet  with 
them.     It  is  somewhat  extraordinary  that  the  first  convert  in  Europe  was  converted 
at  a  very  small  prayer-meeting.     Wherever  we  are,  let  us  not  forget  the  assembling 
of  ourselves  together  as  the  manner  of  some  is.    Do  not  say  "  oi^y  a  prayer-meet- 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rn,' 

ing  I  "     God  loves  to  put  honour  upon  prayer.    4.  It  was  assuredly  a  work  of  grace. 
(1)  She  did  not  open  her  own  heart.     Her  prayers  did  not  do  it ;  Paul  did  not  do 
it.     God  alone  can  put  the  key  into  the  door  and  open  it,  and  get  admittance  for 
Himself.     He  is  the  heart's  master  as  He  is  the  heart's  maker,  and  conversion  in 
every  case  is  the  Lord's  work  alone,     (2)  Yet — for  one  truth  must  always  march 
arm  in  arm  with  another — although  the  Lord  opened  the  heart,  Paul's  words  were 
the  instrument  of  her  conversion.     The  heart  may  be  opened,  and  willing  to  receive, 
but  then  if  truth  enter  not,  what  would  be  the  use  of  an  open  door?     5.  It  was  dis- 
tinctly perceptible  by  the  signs  which  followed.    As  soon  as  she  had  beUeved  in 
Jesus  she  put  on,  together  with  her  household,  the  profession  of  her  faith  in  Christ 
Jesus.    II.  By  way  of  contbast.     1.  In  the  case  of  the  jailer,  we  see  nothing  hke 
a  previous  preparation  for  the  reception  of  the  Word ;  he  was  coarse,  rough,  brutal. 
The  earthquake  comes,  &c.     In  Lydia's  case  there  was  much  which  went  to  prepare 
the  way  for  the  grace  of  God.     2.  She  was  in  the  way  where  the  grace  of  God  was 
likely  to  meet  with  her.    But  the  jailer  is  not  in  a  place  where  the  gospel  is  at  all 
likely  to  come.     His  occupation  was  not  that  which  would  foster  any  religious 
ideas.     But  in  a  moment,  at  God's  voice,  the  current  of  his  thoughts  changes  its 
direction,  and  flows  where  it  had  never  gone  before.     3.  In  Lydia's  case  there 
was  no  earthquake ;  it  was  a  "  still,  small  voice."     The  jailer  sprang  in,  and  came 
trembling ;  but  we  find  nothing  about  Lydia's  being  overwhelmed  with  the  terrors 
^f  conscience ;  she  was  gently  led  by  the  finger  of  the  eternal  Father.     Grace  came 
[to  her  as  the  shower  which  first  begins  as  a  mist,  and  then  thickens  into  a  heavy 
Idew,  and  then  becomes  a  gentle  sprinkling,  aud  afterwards  empties  the  clouds  upon 
ilhe  soil.     To  the  jailer  it  was  like  an  April  storm  beginning  with  big  drops,  and 
dashing  into  a  torrent  in  a  few  moments  :  to  the  jailer  it  was  as  though  the  sua 
ehould  rise    in    an    instant,    and    turn    the   thickest    night   into    full   blaze    of 
noon.      Do    not   expect    all   to    be    converted    in    the    same    way.      Our   God 
is   the    God    of    variety.      III.    The    comparison   between   the    two.     In   both 
cases — 1.  Providence  co-worked  with  grace.     Providence  brings  Lydia  to  Philippi, 
and  shakes  the  prison.     2.  There  was  a  distinct  work  of  God.     3.  The  Word  of 
God  is  essential  for  the  jailer  as  to  Lydia,  "  They  spake  the  Word  of  the  Lord," 
<fec.     4.  The  same  signs  followed.     The  same  love  to  the  brethren,  consecration  of 
the  substance,  obedience  to  the  Divine  command,  "  Arise,  and  be  baptized."    IV. 
As  A  MODEL  OF  MULTITUDES  OF  CONVERSIONS.     We  have  a  summary  of  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  here.      1.   The  Lord  removed   prejudice.      2.   Her  desires  were 
awakened.     3.  Her  understanding  was  enlightened.    4.  Her  affections  were  excited. 
5.  And  then  came  faith ;  she  believed  the  whole  of  the  record.     6.  Faith  being 
given,  all  the  graces  followed.    {C.  H.Spurgeon.)       Lydia's  conversion : — I.  Convee- 
6I0N  IS  HEABT  WORK.     1.  The  subjcct.    "  The  heart  "  is  the  seat  of  spiritual  feeUng, 
conviction,  and  desire  (chap.  ii.  27).     It  is  the  real  test  of  character,  of  what  a  man 
is  in  God's  estimation  (Prov.  xxiii.  7).     It  is  that  part  of  us  in  which  are  bred  all 
the  moral  and  immoral  qualities  which  make  us  good  or  bad  in  the  sight  of  God 
(Prov.  iv.  33).     It  has  the  power  to  exercise  faith  (Bom.  xvi.  10).     2.  The  Agent — 
"  The  Lord."    It  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27).     God  is 
the  chief,  and  to  a  great  extent  the  sole,  active  Agent  in  this  work.    Along  with  this 
there  is  a  converse  truth  (Psa.  xxvii.  8).     The  work  of  conversion  is  coujpleted  by 
God  working,  and  man  working  ;  but  neither  working  apart  from  the  other  effectu- 
ally.    3.  The  instrumental  means  :  whilst  Paul  spake  the  Word,  the  Lord  opened 
Lydia's  heart.      II.   The  immediate  and  permanent  results  of  conversion.     1. 
There  was  a  beautiful  humility  which  manifested  itself  in  a  desire  to  submit  her 
conversion  to  the  test  of  the  judgment  of  others.     "  If  ye  have  judged  me  to  be 
faithful."     Over-confidence  in  a  young  convert  is  neither  pleasing  nor  hopeful 
(1  Cor.  X.  12).     2.  She  exhibited  her  gratitude  to  God  in  kindness  to  His  servants. 
"  Come  into  my  house  and  abide  there."     3.  She  made  a  pubhc  profession  of  her 
faith.     *'  She  was  baptized  and  her  household."    The  family  of  a  believer  should 
be  a  Christian  household.     Personal  decision  is  a  great  matter,  but  the  head  must 
be  alone.     {A.  B.  Gardiner.)        The  first  European  convert: — Honest,  industrioua 
people,  when  converted,  become  noble  and  useful  Christians.     This  first  European 
convert  was  of  such  a  character  as  to  be  especially  susceptible  to  gospel  influences. 
I.  Her  character.     She  was  industrious,  reliable,  conscientious,  generous,  devout. 
Observe — (1)    Her  name— "  Lydia. "     As  no  mention  is  made  of   her    husband, 
probably  she  was  a  widow.    Learn  how  right  relationship  to  Jesus  Christ  gives  im- 
mortality to  the  humblest  name.     2.  Her  native  place — "  Thyatira,"  in  Asia  Minor, 
situated  about  midway  between  Pergamos  and  Sardia ;   it  is  still  a  town  of  soma 


.  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  48» 

size,  though  now  in  the  hands  of  the  Taiks.  She  was  not  a  Jew  but  a  Gentile 
proselyte,  having  given  up  the  worship  of  idols  for  that  of  the  true  God.  Learn 
what  great  blessings  may  grow  out  of  a  Uttle  prayer-meeting,  and  the  wisdom  of 
laying  down  the  yard-stick  and  closing  the  store  in  order  to  be  present.  II.  Her 
CONVERSION.  It  was  brought  about — 1.  By  human  instrumentality,  "us" — Paul 
and  Silas.  Probably,  an  informal  meeting,  and  that  both  preachers  not  only  prayed 
but  conversed  publicly  and  personally  with  those  present.  2.  Contact  with  the 
truth — "Heard  us."  It  is  the  truth  that  saves — "Truth  shall  make  you  free." 
Revelation  brings  life.  The  preacher  can  communicate  power  only  through  His 
message.  Discourses  and  essays  on  ethics,  science,  and  politics  may  interest  and 
instruct,  but  it  is  only  the  Divine  message  that  can  save  from  the  guilt,  dominion, 
and  consequences  of  sin.  "  Heard  us."  It  used  to  be  almost  literally  true  that 
faith  Cometh  only  "  by  hearing."  Books  and  the  ability  to  read  them  were  very 
Bcarce  in  ancient  times,  so  that  much  of  men's  knowledge  of  this  world,  and  especi- 
ally of  the  world  to  come,  was  gathered  through  the  ear.  "  Heard  us."  Even  now 
faith  Cometh  chiefly  by  hearing.  But  in  the  case  of  Lydia  the  message  came 
through  the  ear.  "  Heard  us."  3.  By  prompt  action — "  She  attended  unto  the 
ihings  which  were  spoken."  She  was  an  admirable  hearer.  She  laid  hold  of  the 
truth,  and  thus  the  truth  laid  hold  of  her.  Then  she  at  once  began  to  practise  the 
truth  she  had  just  heard.  She  did  not  modify  it  by  theorising  or  waste  its  force  by 
delay.  ' '  She  attended  to  the  things  spoken."  4.  Through  Divine  interposition. 
"  Whose  heart  the  Lord  opened."  Why  did  He  not  open  her  head?  God  wanted 
this  woman  to  feel  as  well  as  understand.  There  are  some  truths  which  first  enter 
the  intellect  and  then  sink  into  the  heart,  but  the  profound,  life-giving  truths  of 
Christianity  enter  the  heart  first  and  then  rise  to  the  intellect.  They  first  give  life 
and  then  light.  "  In  Him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  Hght  of  men."  Not  the 
light  was  the  life,  but  the  life  was  the  light  of  men.  A  man  must  be  bom  before 
he  can  see ;  he  must  be  aUve  before  he  can  know.  First  life,  then  light.  The 
opening  of  the  heart  was — (1)  Gradual.  Gradual  in  that  she  so  honestly  followed 
the  light  she  had.  God  had  so  opened  her  heart  before  this  that  all  the  idols  of 
heathenism  left  in  it  a  great  "  aching  void."  "  In  common  with  the  best  spirits  of 
her  age  she  felt  paganism  to  be  a  failure  and  a  sham,  and  longed  for  something 
more  solid  and  satisfying."  She  therefore  embraced  Judaism,  and  so  we  find  her 
at  prayer-meeting,  still  going  on  to  know  the  Lord.  (2)  Complete,  in  that  God 
personally  helped  her  to  apprehend  and  personally  appropriate  the  broader,  grander, 
life-giving  truths  of  the  gospel.  {Thomas  Kelly.)  The  conversion  of  Lydia  : — 
I.  Lydia  was  LISTENING.  Great  stress  is  laid  in  the  Bible  on  hearing.  "Faith 
cometh  by  hearing."  Books  and  readers  were  rare,  i'aith  then  came  to  the 
majority  by  hearing  only.  Now  faith  comes  by  reading  as  well  as  by  hearing.  II. 
Lydia  Ustened  attentively.  Some  people  never  apply  what  they  hear,  they  leave 
that  to  the  preacher.  Others  apply  to  other  people,  never  to  themselves.  If  you 
lay  hold  of  the  truth,  the  truth  will  lay  hold  of  you.  Wherefore  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures lay  much  emphasis  on  close  attention.  "  Incline  your  ear,"  "  hear  and  your 
«oul  shall  live."  When  you  feel  deeply  interested  in  a  subject,  you  stretch  the 
neck  and  incline  the  ear  that  you  may  catch  every  syllable.  Without  this  eager 
attention  you  will  not  be  able  to  clearly  discern  the  Divine  Voice.  When  Elijah 
was  hiding  in  the  cave  there  came  a  "great  and  strong  wind,"  &c. ;  "but  the  Lord 
was  not  in  the  wind,"  &c.  And  after  the  fire  "a  voice,"  so  still  and  small  that 
Elijah  was  obliged  to  come  out  of  the  cave  and  listen  with  all  his  might.  And 
what  is  the  gospel?  A  storm  ?  An  earthquake  ?  Fire?  No.  The  "still  small 
voice"  of  Divine  Love.  Love  never  speaks  loud.  III.  She  listened  attentively 
•WITH  her  heart.  The  mmd  is  generally  divided  into  intellect  and  heart.  There 
Are  truths  which  appeal  only  to  the  intellect,  the  truths  of  mathematics,  e.g.  But 
religious  truths  must  be  interpreted  through  the  heart  rather  than  through  the 
head.  We  read  of  the  "  thoughts  of  the  heart."  In  creation  we  see  the  thoughts 
of  God's  intellect ;  in  the  gospel  the  thoughts  of  His  heart.  And  to  properly 
understand  the  great  heart  of  God  we  must  bring  to  the  work  the  little  heart  of 
man.  There  is  a  class  of  truths  which  first  enter  the  intellect  and  then  sink  into 
the  heart ;  but  the  truths  of  Christianity  first  enter  the  heart  and  gradually  rise 
rinto  the  intellect.  IV.  Lydia  was  listening  attentively  with  her  heart  opened. 
Two  things  are  necessary  to  salvation.  1.  An  open  Bible.  Paul  "  expounded  the 
Kingdom  of  God."  The  prophecies  were  tightly  closed  against  the  spiritual  per- 
ception of  the  disciples ;  but  Christ  "  opened  unto  them  the  Scriptures,"  and  they 
were  astonished  at  the  wealth  of  their  meaning.     And  that  is  the  proper  function 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

of  the  ministry.  2.  An  open  heart  to  receive  the  open  Bible.  St.  Paul  was  sowing 
good  seed ;  but  to  secure  a  plentiful  harvest  it  was  necessary  to  open  hearts  to 
receive  the  seed.  The  words  of  the  Old  Testament  which  are  oftenest  quoted  in 
the  New  are,  ♦'  By  hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  understand ;  and  seeing  ye 
shall  see,  and  shall  not  perceive  :  for  this  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross,"  &o.  They 
are  quoted  six  times  in  the  first  six  books  of  the  New  Testament.  Why  ?  To 
teach  us  the  extreme  danger  of  shutting  our  hearts  against  the  "  things  spoken  of 
Paul "  and  other  inspired  writers.  Physicians  often  speak  of  "  The  fatty  degenera- 
tion of  the  heart,"  an  unhealthy  accumulation  of  fat  interfering  with  its  vital 
functions,  and  often  terminating  in  sudden  death.  And  the  Jews  suffered  from  a  like 
spiritual  malady.  They  had  lost  all  sensitiveness  to  spiritual  things ;  and  in  this 
lamentable  grossness  of  the  heart  is  to  be  found  the  ultimate  cause  of  their  rejection 
of  the  Saviour.  And  so  now  "  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God." 
"  0  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe."  It  is  the  fashion  nowaday  to  offer  graceful 
apologies  for  the  infidel ;  but  the  Bible  always  calls  him  a  fool.  His  infidelity 
has  its  origin  in  a  closed  heart.  V.  Lydia  was  listening  attentively  with  her  heart 
opened  wide,  that,  it  appears,  is  the  Uteral  translation,  and  it  implies — 1.  That 
there  was  a  profound  need.  The  young  bird  in  the  nest  in  early  spring,  when 
hunger  sets  in,  opens  its  little  beak  wide.  And  when  the  soul  becomes  vividly  con- 
scious of  its  great  need,  it  opens  its  beak  as  best  it  can — every  faculty  opens  its 
mouth  wide  and  eagerly  cries  to  heaven  for  food.  "  A  man  of  Macedonia  stood 
before  Paul  and  prayed  him,  saying.  Come  over  and  help  us."  There  is  in  the  cry 
a  painful  consciousness  of  deep  want.  Paul  came  ;  and  lo  !  the  first  soul  he  met 
was  wide  open  crying  to  heaven  for  satisfaction.  2.  That  the  Lord  had  made 
ample  provision  to  supply  the  need.  He  would  have  never  opened  Lydia's  heart 
wide  unless  He  had  something  to  put  into  it.  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will 
fill  it."  I  took  my  little  children  to  the  British  Channel.  They  were  very  diligent 
filling  their  little  buckets  ;  but  after  filling  them  over  and  over  again,  the  ocean 
still  remained,  ready  to  fill  a  million  buckets  more.  And  you  are  welcome  to  bring 
the  cups  of  your  nature  and  fill  them  to  overflowing  with  the  "  Water  of  Life;  " 
but  after  filling  you  over  and  over  again,  the  boundless  ocean  of  the  Infinite  God- 
head will  still  remain,  ready  to  fill  millions  more.  VI.  Lydia  listened  attentively 
with  her  heart  opened  wide  by  the  Lord.  This  opening  was — 1.  Gradual.  It 
was  not  a  consequence  of  the  preaching,  but  something  prior  to  and  simultaneous 
with  it.  Lydia  was  in  all  probability  brought  up  in  heatbenism.  But  in  common 
with  many  of  the  best  of  the  age,  she  yearned  for  something  more  satisfying. 
Whilst  yet  in  paganism,  the  Lord  opened  her  heart  too  wide  for  the  idols  of  the 
Gentiles  to  fill.  She  therefore  embraced  Judaism.  The  Judaism  of  that  age,  it  is 
true,  was  very  formal  and  corrupt ;  but  Judaism  at  its  worst  was  imniea?urably 
superior  to  paganism  at  its  best.  And  in  Judaism  Lydia  found  a  kind  of  rest  for 
her  weary  soul.  But  the  Lord  continued  to  work  within  her.  She,  it  seems,  was  a 
widow.  Mention  is  made  of  her  family,  and  of  her  business,  but  none  of  her 
husband.  Deeply  feeling  her  loss,  she  often  groans  under  the  anxiety  of  business, 
and  is  glad  when  the  Sabbath  comes  round  that  she  may  attend  the  Prayer  Meet- 
ing by  the  river-side.  Nevertheless  she  is  acutely  conscious  of  a  great  void,  and 
when  Paul  turned  and  began  to  speak  of  Jesus,  His  tender  sympathy  and  never 
failing  succour,  she  perceived  at  once  that  He  was  what  she  needed — a  Husband  of 
the  soul.  The  heart,  before  opened,  was  now  occupied — the  great  void  was  now 
filled.  2.  Gentle.  Further  on,  we  read  of  the  conversion  of  the  jailer.  His  con- 
version was  tbe  work  of  a  brief  hour;  but  it  was  a  very  terrible  hour.  But  a 
gentler  method  was  adopted  to  convert  Lydia,  This  morning  about  six  o'clock  a 
great  battle  was  fought  in  this  neighbourhood,  more  important  by  far  than  either 
Waterloo  or  Sedan — a  battle  between  the  forces  of  Light  and  the  powers  of  Dark- 
ness. But  did  the  clash  of  weapons  awake  any  of  you?  No ;  not  one.  The  victory 
was  won  gently  and  silently.  That  is  precisely  the  way  in  which  Lydia  was  con- 
verted, it  was  a  victory  not  of  lightnings  but  of  light.  The  prophet  compares  the 
Word  of  God  to  a  hammer  breaking  in  pieces  the  rock.  Such  was  the  case  with 
the  jailer.  But  the  same  prophet  compares  the  Divine  Word  to  fire  melting  the 
wax.  This  is  how  Lydia  was  converted,  by  warmth,  not  by  force.  It  was  only 
right  that  the  swarthy  jailer  should  be  bammered  a  little — he  had  hammered  many 
in  his  day  ;  but  it  would  be  a  great  pity  to  terrify  the  little  widow.  And  those  two 
methods  still  continue.  3.  Thorough,  as  is  evidenced  by  her  subsequent  conduct. 
(1)  "  She  was  baptized."  Christianity  was  the  third  religion  she  had  professed; 
her  neighbours  might  bring  a  charge  of  inconsistency.    But  man's  supreme  dutj  is 


CHAP,  ivi.]  TEE  ACTS.  49 J 

not  to  be  consistent  with  himself,  but  consistent  with  his  God — not  to  be  consistent 
with  his  past,  but  consistent  with  the  light  which  he  at  the  time  enjoys.  Lydia 
repeatedly  changed  her  religion  ;  but  each  change  was  in  the  direction  of  light.  (2) 
*♦  She  was  baptized  and  her  household."  This,  I  believe,  is  the  first  instance  in 
which  it  is  recorded  that  the  baptism  of  the  parent  was  followed  by  the  baptism  of 
the  family.  Why?  Because  family  religion  is  a  characteristic  of  European  as 
compared  with  Asiatic  Christianity.  And  there  is  something  remarkable  that 
Christianity,  on  its  introduction  to  Europe,  was  first  offered  to,  and  beheved  in  by 
a  woman,  a  prophecy  of  the  subsequent  career  of  the  gospel  upon  our  continent.  "  A 
man  "  first  sought  it,  but  a  woman  first  received  it.  How  to  help  the  men  of  Macedonia? 
By  improving  and  refining  the  women  of  Macedonia.  (J.  Cynddylan  Jones,  D.D.) 
The  conversion  of  Lydia : — Though  the  Lord's  people  are  thinly  scattered,  and 
sometimes  throughout  large  cities,  yet  they  have  a  way  of  finding  one  another  out. 
True  religion  is  a  magnet  to  draw  their  hearts  together.  Considering  the  text  as 
descriptive  of  true  conversion,  it  is — I.  A  Divine  work.  It  is  said  of  the  skill  of 
the  husbandman  in  opening  the  clods,  <fcc.,  that  "  his  God  doth  instruct  him." 
How  much  more  in  breaking  up  the  fallow  ground  of  the  sinner's  heart,  and  sow- 
ing the  seed  of  the  kingdom  I  The  heart  is  naturally  shut :  sin  is  shut  in  and 
Christ  shut  out.  Prejudice,  perverseness,  and  enmity  are  the  bars  and  bolts  that 
keep  it  shut.  Ministers  may  knock  at  the  door,  but  it  is  God  alone  that  can  open 
it.  n.  God's  itbst  wobk.  Impressions  and  convictions  are  common,  but  the  open- 
ing of  the  heart  is  the  effect  of  special  grace  and  the  commencement  of  true  re- 
ligion. Previous  to  this  the  soul  is  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  ;  and  now  it  is  that 
the  Lord  passes  by  and  says.  Live  1  Christ  in  the  gospel  lays  the  foundation  of  a 
sinner's  hope  ;  but  it  must  be  Christ  in  you  that  gives  existence  to  the  hope  of 
glory,  ni.  An  instantaneous  work.  In  our  apprehension  it  may  be  gradual,  like 
Christ's  opening  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man,  who  first  saw  men  as  trees  walking, 
and  afterwards,  upon  a  fresh  touch  from  His  hand,  all  things  clearly ;  but  in  itself 
the  change  is  quick.  IV.  A  work  effected  in  a  way  perfectly  consistent  with 
HUMAN  LIBERTY.  God  opeus  the  heart  by  engaging  and  inclining  it  to  that  which 
is  good.  The  power  is  His,  but  the  act  is  our  own.  Men  are  not  driven  but  drawn. 
Divine  influence  is  not  compulsive,  but  attractive.  God  does  not  open  the  heart  as 
man  would  open  a  passage  into  a  strongly-fortified  place,  by  planting  a  battery 
against  it ;  but  by  " putting  in  His  hand  by  the  hole  of  the  door,"  and  then  "our 
bowels  are  moved  for  Him "  (Cant.  1.  4,  v.  6  ;  Hos.  ii.  14 ;  Bom.  iii.  20).  V.  An 
INTEBNAI.  WOBK.  It  is  true,  the  ears  are  opened  to  instruction,  the  mouth  in  prayer 
and  praise,  the  hands  in  acts  of  justice  and  benevolence,  and  the  eyes  to  see 
the  odious  nature  of  sin  and  the  transcendent  glory  of  the  Saviour ;  but  the  open- 
ing of  the  heart  is  previous  to  all  this,  and  is  the  cause  of  all  these  openings. 
Gud's  first  and  principal  work  is  to  win  the  heart :  the  sinner's  first  and  principal 
work  is  to  give  the  heart  to  Him.  VI.  Though  the  work  itself  is  invisible,  yet 
ITS  EFFECTS  ABE  NOT  80.  Grace  caunot  be  seen  but  by  its  fruits.  Where  the 
heart  is  changed  the  conduct  will  be  changed.  New  duties  will  result  from  new 
principles.  Three  blessed  effects  of  God's  opening  the  heart  of  Lydia  are  here 
mentioned.  1.  "  She  attended  unto  the  things  which  were  spoken  of  Paul."  2. 
She  manifested  her  regard  to  the  commands  of  our  Saviour  by  being  immediately 
baptized.  3.  No  sooner  had  she  received  Christ  into  her  heart  than  she  received 
His  friends  into  her  house;  one  door  being  opened,  the  other  did  not  remain 
shut.  VII,  An  abidinq  work.  When  the  heart  is  once  opened  Christ  takes 
possession  of  it,  and  says  in  effect.  This  is  My  rest :  here  will  I  dwell  for  ever,  for 
I  have  desired  it  (Heb.  xiii.  5).  VIII.  A  neoessaby  work.  As  we  cannot  be  saved 
without  the  death  of  Christ,  so  neither  without  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  More  par- 
ticularly— 1.  Satan  ;  that  andean  spirit  had  usurped  the  dominion  of  our  hearts, 
and  it  is  necessary  to  deprive  him  of  his  power.  2.  Our  souls  must  be  cleansed, 
and  this  is  done  by  the  washing  o£  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  3.  The  heart  must  be  opened  in  order  to  its  being  beautified  and  adorned 
with  every  grace.  4.  By  all  these  means  the  Lord  makes  us  a  fit  habitation  for 
Himself.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  hindrances  to  a  cordial  reception  of  gospel 
truth : — We  are  to  inquire — I,  What  webh  the  things  which  webe  spoken  of  Paul  7 
It  will  not  be  uninteresting,  and  I  hope  not  tminstructive,  to  take  a  review  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  may  be  comprised  under  these  three  heads :  the  ruin 
of  all  mankind ;  redemption  and  salvation  by  Christ  Jesus ;  and  regeneration  hj 
the  Holy  Ghost.  IL  What  abe  the  hindbances  to  a  cobdial  beoeption  of  the 
SSDTHB  or  XHB  sospsL  ?    1.  Pilde  in  the  human  heart  is  a  great  obstacle.    This  evil 


492  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

disposition  works  not  only  in  the  vilest  of  mankind,  but  in  those  who  are  in  their 
outward  conduct  blameless,  in  the  moral  and  decent.  2.  Prejudice  is  another  power- 
ful obstacle.  Would  you  not  have  thought  that  the  Jews  of  old  would  have  believed 
in  the  Saviour,  and  have  been  instructed  by  Him  in  the  way  to  heaven,  seeing  He 
performed  so  many  miracles  as  proofs  of  His  mission  before  their  eyes  ?  But  they 
did  not  receive  His  words.  And  why  did  they  not?  They  expected  a  triumphant 
Messiah.  3.  The  love  of  sin  is  another  very  great  obstacle  in  the  way  of  cordially 
receiving  the  truths  of  the  gospel.  4.  Lastly,  the  love  of  the  world  is  another  great 
obstacle.  We  do  not  say  that  Lydia  was  a  lover  of  sin  and  of  the  world; 
because  it  is  said  "  she  worshipped  God";  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  her  heart 
was  full  of  Jewish  prejudices  against  the  religion  of  Christ ;  and  in  that  state  she 
would  have  continued  had  not  her  heart  been  opened  so  that  she  attended  to  the 
things  which  were  spoken  of  Paul.    III.  This  brings  me  to  inquire,  in  the  third 

place,  BY  WHOM  AND  BY  WHAT  MEANS  THESE  HINDRANCES  ARE  REMOVED,  AND  THE  CON- 
SEQUENCE OF  THEIR  REMOVAL  P  Can  man  of  himself  remove  them  ?  No ;  for  the 
Scriptures,  from  one  end  to  another,  declare  that  he  has  no  power  to  do  bo. 
"Whose  heart  the  Lord  opened,  that  she  attended  to  the  things  which  were  spoken 
of  Paul."  The  means  which  the  Lord  uses  are  many.  He  opens  the  heart;  that  is, 
He  instils  into  it  a  longing  desire  to  be  instructed  in  those  Divine  and  saving  trutha 
of  the  gospel.  There  is  one  truth  which  our  text  sets  before  us  that  \  would  wish 
to  impress  upon  your  minds  :  it  is  this— that  we  ought  not  to  forsake  the  assem- 
bling of  ourselves  in  the  house  of  God,  from  an  idea  that  we  can  get  as  much  good 
at  home.  If  Lydia  had  not  gone  to  the  house  of  prayer  on  the  day  she  was  con- 
verted, she  would  not  then,  and  perhaps  never  at  all,  have  heard ;  and  therefore 
would  have  lost  the  inestimable  blessing  which  the  Lord  bestowed  upon  her  in  the 
use  of  the  means  of  grace.  (W.  J.  Eirkness,  M.A.)  The  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  exemplified  in  the  conversion  of  Lydia  : — I.  From  these  words  we  may  infer 
this  truth — that  the  heart  of  man  is  naturally  closed  against  the  gospel.  Not 
only  is  the  understanding  darkened,  not  only  is  the  will  opposed  to  the  truth,  bat 
the  heart  is  shut  against  it.  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,"  &c.  The  gospel  is  addressed  to  our  ears  year  after  year  ;  truths,  in 
the  reception  of  which  our  happiness  both  for  time  and  eternity  is  involved,  are 
brought  before  us  again  and  again  ;  we  may,  perhaps,  go  so  far  as  to  assent  to 
them ;  they  inform  our  understanding,  but  they  go  no  farther ;  the  heart  ia  not 
affected  by  them  ;  and  all  the  power  or  reasoning  of  men  is  utterly  unable  to  cause 
them  to  produce  the  desired  effect.  If  this  were  not  the  case,  how  different  would 
be  the  effect  produced  even  by  a  single  sermon  I  One  consideration  only  of  the 
love  of  Christ  in  dying  for  us  would  have  such  a  constraining  influence  on  our 
lives,  that  we  should  henceforth  most  readily  yield  ourselves  to  His  service.  But, 
though  the  heart  of  man  is  naturally  closed  against  the  gospel,  and  though  no 
human  power  can  open  it,  yet  we  may  observe — U.  That  a  Divine  power  ib  ablh 
TO  OPEN  IT.  It  was  that  which  was  exerted  in  opening  the  heart  of  Lydia,  or  St. 
Paul  had  preached  in  vain.  The  work  of  conversion  depends  not  on  human  elo- 
quence, but  it  is  altogether  the  effect  of  a  Divine  operation  on  the  souL  The  means 
too,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  in  influencing  the  heart,  are  as  various  as  the 
ways  in  which  He  opens  it :  God  is  never  at  a  loss  for  instruments  to  carry  forward 
His  designs  either  of  providence  or  grace.  He  can  make  the  most  unlikely  instru- 
ments effectual  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  plans,  and  out  of  evil  itself  can 
bring  forth  good.  But,  though  He  is  not  limited  to  the  use  of  means,  yet  there  are 
certain  ordinances  which  He  has  appointed  as  the  special  channels  for  conveying 
His  grace  to  the  soul.  Prayer,  either  public  or  private,  is  one  of  these  ordinances. 
But,  though  this  power  be  God's  alone,  it  is  exerted  in  a  way  perfectly  consistent 
with  human  liberty  ;  men  are  not  driven,  but  drawn  ;  not  forced  against  their  will, 
but  made  willing.     Divine  influence  is  not  compulsive,  but  attractive.    III.  Tbm 

EFFECTS    PRODUCED    ON    LyDIA    WHEN    THE    LoRD     HAD     OPENED     HER     HEART.         "  She 

attended  to  the  things  which  were  spoken  of  PauL  "  She  not  only  gave  attendance 
on  his  preaching,  but  gave  attention  to  it.  To  those  whose  hearts  have  been 
opened  by  Divine  grace  to  attend  to  the  things  which  belong  to  their  everlasting 
peace,  I  would  address  the  word  of  exhortation.  Consider,  how  great  a  debt  of 
gratitude  you  owe  to  distinguishing  grace  I  (E.  G.  Wells,  M.A.)  Heard  us. — 
Hearing  and  keeping  the  Word  of  God: — I.  How  we  ought  to  hear  it.  1.  Col- 
lectedly, away  from  the  distractions  of  the  world ;  Lydia  went  out  of  the  city.  2, 
With  a  heart  consecrated  by  prayer  :  Lydia  went  to  prajfer.  3.  With  an  eager  ex- 
pectation of  what  the  Lord  will  give :  the  Lord  opened  her  heart,     11.    How  wa 


CUAB.  X7I.]  THE  ACTS.  49S 

ouoHT  TO  KEEP  IT.    1.  Not  resting  satisfied  with  a  mere  temporary  impression,  but 
walking  with  the  Lord  in  true  fellowship  of  life :  Lydia  was  baptized.    2.  En- 
deavouring to  convey  to  others  our  newly  acquired  faith  :  with  Lydia,  her  house  is 
baptized.     3.  Labouring  to  pay  our  debt  of  gratitude  to  the  Lord  by  self-sacrificing 
love  to  our  neighbour :  Lydia  constrained  her  benefactors  to  come  to  her  house. 
(Litco.)         Whose  heart  the  Lord   opened.  —  Divine    influence  opening   human 
hearts  : — I  stood  one  evening  last  summer  watching  the  pure  white  flowers  on  a 
vine  encircling  the  verandah.     I  had  been  told  that  the  buds  that  hung  with  closed 
petals  all  day,  every  evening  near  sunset  unfolded  and  sent  out  a  peculiar  fragrance. 
The  miracle  was  more  than  I  had  anticipated.    A  feeling  of  silent  awe  possessed 
me  as  I  saw  bud  after  bud,  as  if  under  the  touch  of  invisible  hand,  slowly  fold 
back  its  leaves  until  the  vine  was  filled  with  perfect  blossoms,  most  beautiful  and 
Bweet.    And  I  said,  "  If  the  finger  of  God  laid  upon  these.  His  flowers,  can  do  this 
in  a  way  beyond  the  power  of  human  study  to  explain,  cannot  the  same  Divine 
touch,  in  ways  we  know  not  of,  do  as  much  for  human  hearts  ?    It  was  in  the  quiet 
of  the  evening,  when  the  garish  light  of  the  summer  sun  had  softened  to  twilight, 
when  the  bird  songs  had  ceased,  and  shadows  were  creeping  over  the  fields,  that 
this  miracle  of  the  flowers  was  wrought.     Who  can  tell  why  they  did  not  open 
earlier  in  the  day?     The  shower  of  the  morning  and  the  sunshine  of  the  afternoon 
had  nourished  the  vine  and  made  everything  ready  for  the  consummation,  but  it 
did  not  appear  until  evening,  and  who  can  describe  the  beauty  and  fragrance  then 
of  the  revelation  ?     Shall  the  flowers  teach  us  a  lesson  of  patient  waiting  and  holy 
trust  for  the  coming  blessing  ?    There  are  hearts  for  whom  we  long  have  prayed 
seemingly  closed  as  yet  to  every  influence  of  the  blessed  Spirit.    But  let  us  be 
patient.    Perhaps  we  must  wait  until  evening.    It  may  be  these  hearts  for  whose 
unfolding  we  pray  will  open  late ;  or  they  may  open  in  the  twilight  of  sorrow  and 
disappointment,  when  the  songs  cease  and  shadows  stretch  over  the  path  long  be- 
fore the  day  of  life  is  done.     True,  the  parallel  is  not  perfect.     The  flowers  never 
resisted  the  gentle  influences  of  air  and  sun  and  rain ;  hearts  may  resist  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  remain,  perhaps,  closed  against  Him.     And  yet  from  these  sweet  blos- 
soms we  may  surely  learn  a  lesson  of  patient  faith.     The  silent  forces  are  at  work  ; 
the  God  who  cares  for  the  flowers  of  the  field  is  surely  caring  for  these  for  whose 
perfected  life  in  Him  we  pray.    Let  us  wait  and  watch  with  Him,  nor  be  surprised 
nor  impatient  if  it  requires  years  of  discipline  to  bring  a  sinful  soul,  where  by  the 
Divine  touch  it  can  be  transformed  into  a  glorious,  ransomed  spirit.     {John  Hall, 
D.D.)        Lydia'8  heart  opened: — I.  The  central  eacxiltt  on  which  the  great 
CHANGE  IS  wrought.     1.  The  heart  is  the  generic  term  in  which  we  include  the 
entire  phenomena  of  the  animal  and  spiritual  man.   Metaphysically  it  concentrates 
all  that  belongs  to  the  physical,  emotional,  and  intellectual  nature.     In  its  Scrip- 
tural import  the  heart  is  the  normal  status  that  conditions  man's  relations  to  God. 
What  it  is  that  the  man  is.     "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."    2.  The 
heart,   therefore,  is  the  power  in  man  that  most  needs  to  be  changed.     (1) 
Tendencies,  idiosyncrasies,   and  even    moral    aberrations   may  be   arrested  and 
mastered  by  culture.      The  heart  never  outgrows  its  inherent   depravity.      The 
painted  savage  and  the  erudite  sage  are  scions  of  the  same  stock.     "  Bom  in  sin," 
we  must  bejbom  again.   (2)  Then,  further,  under  a  momentary  or  selfish  motive  man 
will  surrender  to  God  his  most  costly  possessions,  while  he  withholds  his  heart. 
"  Israel  hath  forgotten  his  Maker,  and  buildeth  temples."   (3)  To  change  the  heart, 
then,  is  not  merely  to  amend  the  life ;  for  the  life,  as  in  the  case  of  the  rich  young 
ruler,  may  be  superficially  correct  whUe  the  heart  is  utterly  false.     For  the  same 
reason  it  cannot  be  any  mere  intellectual  change,  such  as  a  new  mode  of  thinking 
about  God,  or  His  claims  ;  nor  yet  in  the  quickened  sensibility  of  the  conscience  in 
its  outward  reverence  for  truth ;  all  of  which  are  perfectly  congruous  with  the 
alienation  of  the  heart  from  God.     3.  The  new  birth  is  the  coming  into  life  of  that 
which  previously  did  not  exist.     Eedemption  through  Christ  is,  potentially,  the 
recreation  of  the  lost  Divine  order  in  the  soul — the  re-entrance  of  God  into  man, 
and  His   enthronement  over  the  will  and  in  the  affections  as  the  one  supreme 
Lord.    4.  All  men  need  this  change,  and  must  experience  it  just  because  they  are 
men.    There  is  no  difference  in  the  sin  which  vitiates  and  condemns,  and  man 
must  plead  no  exemption  on  the  ground  of  birth  or  training,  lest  he  shut  himself 
out  of  the  kingdom  of  God.    II.  The  method  of  this  change.    Note — 1..  Its  super- 
natural source.    Eegeneration  is  a  work  wrought  by  Divine  power  on  the  individual 
soul.    It  may  be  simulated,  but  it  cannot  be  fabricated  by  any  art  of  man.     (1) 
There  are  two  theories  against  which  this  doctrine  is  a  dignified  protest,  viz, — (a) 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

That  man  is  an  embryo  saint  to  begin  with.  A  germ  of  all  goodness  is  folded 
up  within  us  waiting  only  favouring  circumstances  to  bloom  into  a  godly  life.  (6) 
That  religious  life  depends  on  education.  There  is  in  us  all  a  capacity  of  becoming 
good,  and  the  business  of  education  is  to  cultivate  that :  the  fruit-bearing  tree 
may  never  produce  fruit,  but  that  is  an  accident ;  so  a  man  may  be  virtually  good, 
but  never  actually  from  defective  training.  (2)  But  these  theories  deal  with  ideal 
human  nature  and  not  with  human  nature  as  it  is.  (a)  So  far  from  having  the 
germ  of  a  holy  nature,  the  Scriptures  declare  that  we  are  born  in  sin,  a  declara- 
tion corroborated  by  consciousness.  Any  growth,  therefore,  is  a  growth  in  eviL 
Under  the  most  benign  parental  influences  this  noxious  weed  has  sprung  up  as 
if  native  to  the  soil,  (b)  Education  is  a  grand  power,  but  it  cannot  correlate  with 
the  forces  of  Onmipotence.  All  mere  unfolding  of  latent  faculties  deals  with  the 
animal  and  the  intellectual  only ;  it  creates  neither  faculty  nor  disposition.  2.  Its 
various  methods.  The  Lord  "  opened  "  the  heart  of  Lydia.  The  work  was  done 
silently  as  the  young  spring  bud  is  opened  by  the  morning  sun.  In  the  case  of  the 
jailer  the  same  work  is  done  in  tumult.  To  have  dealt  with  his  petrified  sensibilities 
as  with  the  sweet  serenities  of  Lydia's  womanly  nature  would  have  been  to  try  at 
chiselling  the  marble  with  sunbeams.  To  the  masculine  mind  the  gospel  will 
appeal  successfully  chiefly  as  it  appeals  to  the  intellect,  and  so  works  out  its  results 
through  the  logic.  To  the  feminine  and  finer  mind  it  will  appeal  successfully  chiefly 
as  it  appeals  to  the  sympathies,  the  moral  susceptibilities,  the  delicate  aesthetics  of 
human  nature.  3.  Its  immediate  fruits.  Lydia — (1)  "  Attended,"  &c.  If  Ustless, 
or  only  curious  before,  she  is  awake  now.  (2)  Took  upon  herself  and  her  home  the 
profession  of  the  Christian  faith.  A  waste  of  power  meets  us  here.  Not  a  few 
estimable  people  decline  to  embody  their  belief  in  Christian  fellowship.  If  Lydia 
had  gone  back  to  Thyatira  resolved  to  keep  the  matter  secret,  trusting  to  the 
loyalty  of  conscience,  and  the  integrity  of  her  feelings,  the  chances  are  that  she 
would  have  failed.  We  cannot  stand  alone  in  the  perilous  struggle  of  a  religious  career ; 
and  if  we  could,  we  cannot  honour  Christ  if  we  decline  to  take  up  the  Cross.  And  least 
of  all  can  we  help  to  sustain  the  burden  God  has  laid  on  our  fellow-men  as  trustees  for 
the  world's  salvation,  if  we  withhold  from  them  the  sympathy  and  patronage  of  our  pro- 
fessional support.  The  Church  faints,  not  because  bankrupt  in  her  resources,  but 
because  men  refuse  to  consecrate  to  her  service  that  which  is  already  her  own.  {J. 
Burton. )  The  ideal  reformation : — I.  This  is  a  reformation  effected  in  the  oentbe  of 
EXISTENCE.  This  was  not  a  reformation  on  parchment,  but  a  reformation  of  the  springs 
of  activity.  If  the  heart  is  changed  all  the  emotions,  purposes,  and  activities  of 
life  will  be  changed.  11.  This  is  a  reformation  that  originated  in  Divine  agency. 
"  The  Lord  opened."  III.  This  is  a  reformation  that  brought  the  soul  into  the 
HIGHEST  DisciPLESHip.  "  She  attended  unto  the  things  that  were  spoken  of  Paul." 
She  became  a  pupil  in  the  school  of  Christ.  (Homilist.)  Gradual  conversion  : — 
Suppose  it  now  midnight,  and  the  sun  with  the  antipodes :  he  doth  not  presently 
mount  up  to  the  height  of  our  heaven,  and  make  it  noon-day ;  but  first  it  is  twilight, 
then  the  dav  dawns,  and  the  sun  rises,  and  yet  looks  with  weaker  eyes  before  he 
shines  out  in  his  full  glory.  We  do  not  sweat  with  summer  to-day,  and  be  shaken 
with  the  fury  of  the  winter  to-morrow  ;  but  it  comes  on  with  soft  paces.  Now,  it  is 
most  true  tliat  Christ  is  able,  in  a  moment,  of  sinners  on  earth  to  make  men  saints 
in  heaven,  as  He  wrought  upon  the  dying  malefactor.  Some  may  make  sudden 
leaps,  and  of  furious  sinners  become  zealous  professors  in  a  trice.  Of  such  we  may 
be  charitably  jealous ;  holiness  shoots  not  up,  like  Jonah's  gourd,  in  a  night.  God 
is  the  God  of  order,  not  of  confusion ;  and  nature  is  not  suffered  to  run  out  of  one 
extreme  into  another  but  by  a  medium.  That  ordinary  way  whereby  men  walk 
from  the  state  of  sin  to  the  state  of  glory  is  the  state  of  grace.  So  our  conversion 
is  by  soft  and  scarcely  sensible  be^jinnings,  albeit  no  part  after  part,  degree  by 
degree  in  every  part,  by  gentle  soakings  in  of  goodness  in  every  degree,  by  growing 
up  to  maturity  and  ripeness.  {T.  Adarns.)  The  imperceptible  operations  of  grace  : 
— The  grandest  operations  both  in  nature  and  in  grace  are  the  most  silent  and 
imperceptible.  The  shallow  brook  babbles  in  its  passage  and  is  heard  by  every 
one,  but  the  coming  on  of  the  seasons  is  silent  and  unseen.  The  storm  rages  and 
alarms,  but  its  fury  is  soon  exhausted  and  its  effects  are  partial  and  soon  remedied ; 
but  the  dew,  though  gentle  and  unheard,  is  immense  in  quantity  and  the  very  life 
of  large  portions  of  the  earth.  And  these  are  pictures  of  the  operations  of  grace  in 
the  Church  and  in  the  soul.  (B.  Cecil.)  Lydia's  heart  opened : — It  was  opened  like 
the  gates  of  a  canal-lock.  It  is  by  water  coming  in  secretly  below,  and  gradually  swell- 
ing ap  within,  that  at  length  the  folding  doors  allow  Uiemselveg  to  be  opened ;  afl 


OHAV.  ZYi.]  THB  ACTS.  496 

long  as  the  water  presses  from  above  and  without,  the  pressure  tends  to  shat  the  gates 
more  firmly,  rather  than  to  open  them.  The  lock  keeps  itself  empty,  and  resists  the 
offer  of  the  water  to  come  in.  But  when  by  secret  channels  the  interior  is  nearly 
filled,  then  the  resistance  ceases,  and  the  gates  are  thrown  wide.  Ah,  many  an 
empty  heart  resists  the  offer  of  mercy  from  God ;  the  offer  of  that  mercy  rather 
shuts  the  gate  more  firmly  1  But  when,  secretly,  some  grace  finds  its  way  in  and 
more  follows,  and  the  empty  space  gradually  fiUs,  then  the  enmity  disappears,  and 
the  whole  soul  opens  out  to  Christ.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Lydia'a  heart  opened : — 
I.  Open  heabt.  The  Lord  opened  her  heart  in  the  ordinary  way,  no  doubt,  by  the 
unseen  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  had  been  opening  it  all  along,  while  she  had 
been  serving  Him  by  keeping  close  up  to  the  light  as  fast  as  it  was  revealed  to  her. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is  always  in  advance  of  us  when  we  are  trying  to  find  our  way  out 
into  clear  duty.  II.  Open  heart  invariably  brings  open  mind.  The  entrance  of 
the  Divine  Word  gives  light.  So  Lydia  "  attended  unto  "  what  the  apostle  told  her. 
The  Holy  Spirit  continued  His  work.  Lydia  appears  to  have  surrendered  her  con- 
victions instantly  without  cavil.  III.  Open  mind  brought  open  mouth.  Out  of  the 
abundance  of  her  heart  her  mouth  spoke.  Lydia  unhesitatingly  made  public 
acknowledgment  of  the  faith  she  now  accepted.  She  lost  no  time  in  foolish  self- 
searching  after  what  some  call  special  evidences.  She  knew  she  believed  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  she  was  ready  to  say  so.  lY.  Open  hand  bbought  open  hocse.  The 
••Daughter  of  Tyre"  was  there  "with  her  gift."  Hospitality  was  the  form  of 
immediate  usefulness  Lydia  chose.  It  was  not  within  her  reach  perhaps  to  do 
magnificent  things,  but  she  did  "  what  she  could."  Conclusion :  1.  These, 
then,  were  the  evidences  of  grace  which  the  Holy  Spirit  gave  instantly 
to  this  Thyatiran  woman.  There  was  nothing  subtle  or  mysterious  in  them ; 
anybody  could  have  them ;  anybody  could  know  them  if  he  had  them.  2.  And, 
with  these  before  us,  it  is  easy  to  learn  what  growth  in  grace  is — it  is  increase 
in  openness  of  heart,  mind,  mouth,  hand,  and  house — growth  in  the  same 
simple  life  which  is  begun.  And  more  grace  is  just  glory ;  and  more  glory  is 
heaven.      (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  heart  opened : — Though  labouring  from 

his  childhood  under  extreme  shortsightedness,  AmpSre,  the  celebrated  French 
philosopher,  was  unconscious  of  this  defect  till  awakened  to  a  sense  of  it  by  the 
following  circumstance.  When  travelling,  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  in  one  of  the 
most  beautiful  parts  of  France,  he  chanced  to  take  up  the  eyeglass  of  a  fellow 
traveller,  and  he  burst  into  tears  of  wonder  and  delight  at  the  first  discovery  thus 
suddenly  made  to  him  of  the  beauty  and  magnificence  of  nature.  Before,  when  he 
heard  others  speak  with  enthusiasm  of  the  loveliness  of  some  particular  scenery, 
he  could  not  understand  what  they  meant,  and  thought  they  must  be  under  some 
strange  delusion.  But  now  he  felt  as  if  he  had  suddenly  been  endowed  with  a  new 
sense,  and  could  say,  like  the  blind  man  in  the  gospel  narrative  after  he  had  been 
restored  to  sight,  "  One  thing  I  know :  that  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see."  This 
incident  affords  a  striking  illustration  of  the  brief  but  emphatic  description  given  of 
the  conversion  of  Lydia,  "  whose  heart  the  Lord  opened."  The  great  preliminary  : 
— I.  Ltdia's  heabt  was  closed,  which  means  that  there  is  a  natural  indisposition 
to  the  things  of  God.  1.  An  indisposition  not  incompatible  with  much  that  is 
lovely  and  of  good  report.  Not  implying,  as  a  matter  of  course,  habits  of  sin  or  a 
spirit  of  frivolity.  These  things  may  be  or  may  not  be.  Inclinations  vary :  what 
is  one  man's  pleasure  would  be  another's  pain.  Under  the  moral  man's  respecta- 
bility, under  the  amiable  man's  affection,  under  the  outwardly  religious  man's 
worship,  there  may  lurk  a  repugnance  to  God ;  a  fixed  determination  not  to  come 
to  close  quarters  with  that  sword  of  the  Spirit  which  must  pierce  and  wound  before 
it  can  be  safe  to  heal.  Christ  knocks  at  the  door,  but  they  will  not  rise  for  Him, 
nor  let  Him  in.  They  do  not  open  to  Him  because  they  are  enlightened  enough  to 
know  His  terms,  and  honest  enough  with  themselves  to  decide  against  them.  2. 
And  without  this  definite  reason  for  dishking  Christ,  there  are  other  influences  at 
work  in  keeping  the  door  of  the  heart  closed  against  Him.  (1)  In  one  there  is  a 
spirit  of  levity  which  makes  all  serious  reflection  irksome :  he  would  fain  enjoy 
himself  while  he  can  :  "  when  I  have  a  convenient  season,"  in  other  words,  when 
sorrow  comes,  or  sickness,  or  the  near  prospect  of  death,  then  I  will  call  for  Thee. 
(2)  And  without  any  resolution  of  this  kind,  there  is  in  the  heart  a  strength  of 
practical  procrastination  which  is  enough  of  itself  to  keep  the  heart  closed  against 
Christ :  the  very  absence  of  resolution  against  Him  assists  the  practical  exclusion. 
A  man  is  so  nearly  a  Christian  that  he  writes  himself  not  far  from  the  kingdom, 
ftble  at  any  moment  by  a  single  step  to  cross  into  it.    Thus  he  too  has  a  closed 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  xn. 

heart ;  a  heart  closed  by  the  very  idea  of  its  openneBS.  (3)  Then  there  is  the  case 
of  those  who  are  "  ever  learning  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth."  There  are  some  who,  with  a  real  desire  to  be  saved,  can  never  grasp  the 
simpUcity  of  Christ's  salvation.  By  a  medley  of  things  true  and  false,  an  inversion 
of  important  truths,  a  mixture  of  conditions  with  the  gospel  of  free  grace,  they  have 
been  so  perplexed  that  the  work  of  faith  has  been  impossible :  they  stand  afar  off, 
wishing  and  waiting,  instead  of  taking  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  our  Lord  says,  by 
force,  and  pressing  into  it  with  a  resolute  conviction.  Oh  for  a  voice  to  sound  in  the 
depths  of  that  soul — The  gospel  is  this :  not  that  if  you  will  do  something  God  will 
do  the  rest ;  but  that,  even  as  you  are,  God  loves  you,  and  that  the  work  of  your 
salvation  is  already  done  for  you  in  Christ.  Take  God  at  His  word  :  beUeve  Him 
when  He  says  that  He  has  laid  all  your  sins  upon  Christ :  try  the  experiment  of 
coming  to  Him  on  that  basis ;  and  to  you  the  promise  shall  be  fulfilled  in  the  very 
act  of  stretching  out  the  hand,  the  strength  will  be  given :  in  the  reception  of  the 
glad  tidings  the  stony  heart  will  be  taken  away,  and  a  heart  of  flesh  shall  replace 
it :  out  of  the  gospel,  not  before  it,  will  spring  repentance  and  reconcihation  :  and 
the  heart  closed  against  all  else  will  yield  to  the  inward  summons  of  an  atonement 
already  made  and  a  peace  already  purchased.  II.  Lydia's  heabt  was  opened. 
This  opening  is  ascribed  to  the  Lord,  acting  through  the  instrumentality  of  Him 
whom  He  promised  to  send  from  the  Father.  The  methods  of  this  opening  are 
various  as  God's  agencies  and  God's  attributes.  In  the  case  before  us,  the  first 
hearing  sufficed.  And  it  has  been  so  with  others.  More  often,  perhaps,  the 
opening  is  gradual.  These  hearts  are  very  obstinate.  If  God  gave  but  one  chance 
who  could  be  saved  ?  But  He  who  will  do  anything  for  our  salvation,  except  that 
one  thing  which  would  vitiate  it  altogether,  namely,  a  compulsion  of  conversion  ; 
that  God  is  patient  with  us,  and  tries  many  means  :  sometimes  a  sudden  influx  of 
blessing  has  brought  with  it  a  softening  of  the  heart  and  a  turning  of  the  whole 
man  to  give  thanks  and  to  glorify  his  Benefactor :  sometimes  the  discipline  of  life 
in  its  sterner  aspect  has  wrought  reflection,  and  sorrow  for  sin,  and  earnest  calling 
upon  God.  These  things  are  all  various.  But,  amidst  them  all,  one  thing  varies 
not.  There  is  a  Divine  Spirit  who  works  the  great  change  wherever  it  is  wrought ; 
who  alone  touches  the  very  spring  of  being,  and  quickens  the  dead  soul  into 
newness  of  life.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  That  she  attended  to  the  things  which  were 
spoken  of  Paul. — The  attention  demanded  by  the  gospel : — It  must  be — I.  Candid. 
The  preacher  of  the  gospel  should  not  be  prejudged.  Let  him  be  fairly  heard,  and 
let  his  doctrine  be  impartially  weighed  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary.  The  people 
of  Berea  are  commended  on  this  account.  II.  Serious.  The  word  presents  to 
our  minds  the  most  serious  subjects  in  the  world.  Death  and  judgment,  heaven 
and  hell,  are  serious  things.  III.  Devout.  Too  many  persons  in  hearing  look  no 
farther  than  to  men,  and  to  the  words  of  men  ;  and  if  they  are  pleased,  it  is  with 
the  sentiments,  the  voice,  or  the  manner  of  the  preacher  ;  but  we  should  hear  the 
Word  of  God  as  the  Word  of  God,  and  if  we  do  so  it  will  be  with  reverence  of  soul. 
IV.  DrLiGENT.  It  is  not  a  trifling  matter  which  it  represents  to  us ;  it  is  for  our 
life,  and  therefore  should  be  regarded  with  the  utmost  vigour  and  energy  of  our 
Bouls.  V.  Believinq.  It  is  the  testimony  of  Jehovah  and  demands  the  fullest 
credit.  The  Word  cannot  profit  our  souls  unless  it  be  "  mixed  with  faith  "  (Heb. 
iv.  2).  It  is  proposed  "  for  the  obedience  of  faith  "  (Rom.  xvi.  26),  and,  when  it  is 
obeyed,  it  becomes  the  power  of  God  to  our  salvation.  VI.  Jotful.  The  gospel  is 
glad  tidings ;  it  proclaims  pardon ;  and  if  this  be  really  believed,  it  must  excite 
joy.  It  did  so  in  all  the  first  converts  to  Christianity  (chap.  viii.  6-8,  xvi.  84 ; 
1  Thess.  i.  6).  VII.  Pkacticaij.  And  where  it  is  truly  received  it  cannot  fail  of 
working  by  love.  A  true  believer  is  a  doer  of  the  Word  (James  1.  22).    (G.  Btarder.) 

Ver.  15.  She  was  baptized,  and  her  household. — Infant  baptism : — I.  Although 
from  the  earliest  days  infant  baptism  has  been  practised,  therb  abe  bomb  who 
DENY  ITS  ScBiFTUBAL  AUTHORITY.  1.  At  first  sight  their  position  seems  to  be  a 
strong  one,  when  they  say,  "  Where  is  there  any  command  for  it  ?  "  In  reply  to 
this  it  is  only  necessary  to  say  that  Christians  consider  many  things  as  most 
important  for  the  support  of  which  no  such  authority  can  be  claimed.  Where  is 
it  written,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Christians  must  observe  the  day  of  the  Saviour's 
resurrection"?  or,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Women  must  receive  the  Communion"? 
or,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Christian  people  must  have  family  prayer,  and  establish 
Sunday  Schools,  and  support  missionary  societies"?  2.  It  is  also  urged  that  no 
one  ought  to  be  baptized  who  does  not  believe,  and  that  as  infants  are  incapable 


6HAP.  XVL]  THE  ACTS.  497 

of  believing,  bo  also  they  are  improper  subjects  of  baptism  (Mark  xvi.  16).  The 
unfairness  of  such  a  conclusion  may  be  shown  in  various  ways.  (1)  Take  the 
apostle's  injunction,  "  If  any  will  not  work,  neither  shall  he  eat "  (2  Thess.  iii.  10). 
Does  St.  Paul  mean  to  extend  this  to  infants,  or  the  sick  or  the  aged  ?  Plainly 
not.  He  is  only  speaking  of  those  who  are  capable  of  working.  And  so,  too,  our 
Saviour's  language  in  regard  to  the  subjects  of  baptism  should  be  applied  to  none 
but  thosa  who  can  exercise  faith,  and  who  enjoy  the  privilege  of  being  taught 
their  duty.  The  case  of  infants  is  in  no  way  connected  with  these  passages. 
(2)  Again,  if  this  verse  proves  that  infants  ought  not  to  be  baptized,  it  proves  also 
that  they  cannot  be  saved.  I  need  hardly  say  that  the  plain  and  undoubted  sense 
of  the  passage  repels  so  monstrous  a  conclusion.  Our  Lord  was  announcing  that 
the  door  of  entrance  to  His  kingdom  was  now  thrown  open  to  all  who  chose  to 
come  in;  and  He  sets  forth  belief  and  baptism  as  two  distinct  conditions  of 
salvation.  Adults,  who  are  capable  of  belief,  are  expected  to  bring  this  qualifica- 
tion ;  but  it  is  not  looked  for  in  infants,  who  cannot  exercise  faith.  Baptism  is  a 
solemn  form  of  adoption  into  God's  family — the  Church.  So  much  for  the  popular 
objections  against  the  practice  of  infant  baptism.  II.  Let  us  bee,  kow,  what 
CAN  BE  SAID  FOB  IT.  1.  We  claim  that  it  is  right  and  proper  to  baptize  infants, 
because  they  are  naturally  included  in  the  broad  commission  which  our  blessed 
Lord  gave  to  His  apostles  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  Suppose  the  proper  authorities  is 
this  country  should  issue  a  command  that  a  census  be  made:  who  would  be 
included  in  it  ?  Would  it  merely  embrace  the  adults,  or  would  it  give  an  account 
of  the  number  of  children  also?  And  so,  when  our  Saviour  sends  forth  His 
servants  to  bring  aU  nations  into  covenant  with  their  Creator  and  Redeemer,  the 
most  natural  construction  of  the  commission  makes  it  include  both  old  and  young. 
To  expect  that  in  promulgating  His  covenant  He  would  make  mention  of  infancy 
or  adult  years  would  be  an  absurdity.  The  physical  and  the  personal  has  nothing 
at  all  to  do  with  the  spiritual  covenant.  2.  That  our  Lord  regards  with  favour  the 
bringing  of  Uttle  children  into  covenant  with  Him  is  seen  horn  the  fact  that  He 
showed  such  kindness  towards  them  daring  His  sojourn  upon  earth  (Matt.  xix.  13 ; 
Luke  xviii.  15 ;  Mark  x.  13-16).  The  phrase,  "  Kingdom  of  God,"  means  the 
Church.  And  does  not  every  word  in  the  passage  just  quoted  go  to  prove  that  our 
Saviour  regarded  little  children  as  fit  subjects  for  His  kingdom  ?  Hermas,  who 
wrote  during  the  apostolic  age,  remarks :  "  AU  infants  are  valued  by  the  Lord,  and 
esteemed  first  of  all."  3.  We  are  obliged  to  believe  that  children  are  entitled  to 
the  privilege  of  holy  baptism,  because  they  are  distinctly  included  in  the  promises. 
(chap.  ii.  38,  39).  The  Jews  who  heard  these  words  of  St.  Peter's  had  always  been 
accustomed  to  have  their  children  enjoy  the  privileges  of  Church  membership ; 
and  if  it  had  been  his  purpose  to  tell  them  that  this  rule  must  now  be  changed, 
this  was  a  very  carious  way  of  doing  it  I  And  slow  progress  Christianity  would 
have  made  had  it  closed  its  doors  more  completely  than  Judaism  had  done  I 
4.  The  apostles  baptized  whole  households.  Not  long  after  the  baptism  of  Lydia's 
household,  that  of  the  jailor  was  baptized  (vers.  31,  32).  Here  is  an  item  from 
St.  Paul's  own  journal — "I  baptized  the  household  of  Stephanas"  (1  Cor.  i.  16). 
The  Syriao  version  of  the  New  Testament,  which  was  completed  early  in  the 
second  century,  renders  the  verse  concerning  Lydia  and  her  household  as  the 
baptism  of  Lydia  and  her  children.  And  so,  too,  in  the  case  of  the  jailor  and  his 
household,  and  the  household  of  Stephanas.  6.  Even  those  most  opposed  to 
infant  baptism  agree  that  when  these  Httle  innocents  die  they  are  fit  to  be  received 
into  heaven.  And  if  fit  for  the  Church  triumphant,  why  not  for  the  Church 
militant  ?  6.  Note  the  resemblance  which  infant  baptism  bears  to  circumcision. 
By  this  rite,  children,  when  eight  days  old,  all  unconscious  of  what  was  done  for 
them,  were  brought  into  covenant  with  God.  When,  in  the  course  of  Divine 
Providence,  the  seal  of  circumcision  was  changed  to  that  of  baptism,  the  Christian 
sacrament  sanctioned  aU  that  the  Jewish  rite  would  have  secured,  had  it  continued 
to  be  observed.  The  conclusion  follows,  therefore,  most  naturally,  that  as  children 
were  made  members  of  God's  Church  under  the  old  dispensation,  they  are  entitled 
to  the  same  privilege  under  the  new.  7.  We  enter  our  protest  against  those  who 
oppose  infant  baptism,  and  we  insist  that  it  is  a  practice  in  accordance  with  God's 
mil,  because  it  is  nowhere  forbidden.  Does  the  Word  of  God  command  that 
children  shall  be  shut  out  from  His  kingdom?  And  when  we  remember  that 
nineteen-twentieths  of  the  Christian  world  practise  infant  baptism,  is  it  likely 
that  the  one-twentieth  can  be  right  ?  8.  It  was  practised  in  the  Church  from  the 
days  of  the  apostles,  fox  a  period  of  nearly  fifteen  hundred  yeais,  without  a 

VOL.  n.  82 


4^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

dissenting  voice.  The  only  qti<>stion  in  regard  to  infant  baptism  which  ever  arose 
in  the  early  ages  of  Christianity  was  whether,  as  baptism  had  taken  the  place 
of  circumcision,  it  should  be  put  off  to  the  eighth  day.  {J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.) 
Family  religion : — The  gospel  fulfils  its  noblest  mission  in  hallowing  the  general 
relations  of  family  life.  On  the  first  introduction  of  Christianity  to  Europe,  whole 
families  are  gathered  into  the  fold.  Lydia  and  her  household,  the  jailor  and  all 
belonging  to  him,  are  baptized  into  Christ.  Henceforth  the  worship  of  households 
plays  an  important  part  in  the  Divine  economy  of  the  Church.  Aa  in  primeval 
days  the  patriarch  was  the  recognised  priest  of  his  clan,  so  in  the  Christian  Church 
the  father  of  the  house  is  the  Divinely  appointed  centre  of  religious  life  to  his  own 
family.  The  family  religion  is  the  true  starting-point,  the  surest  foundation,  of 
the  religion  of  cities,  nations,  and  empires.  The  Church  in  the  house  of  Philemon 
grows  into  the  Church  of  Colossas  (Philemon  2);  the  Church  in  the  house  of 
Nymphas  becomes  the  Church  of  Laodicea  (Col.  iv.  15) ;  the  Church  in  the  house 
of  AquUa  and  Priscilla  loses  itself  in  the  Churches  of  Ephesus  and  Home  (1  Cor. 
xvi.  19 ;  Eom.  xvi.  5).  {Bp.  Lightfoot.)  Come  Into  my  house  and  abide  there. — 
The  origin  of  Christian  hospitality : — We  have  here  the  first  example  of  that 
Christian  hospitality  which  was  so  emphatically  enjoined  and  so  lovingly  practised 
in  the  apostolic  Church  (Heb.  ziii.  2 ;  1  Tim.  v.  10).  The  frequent  mention  of  the 
•'  hosts  "  who  gave  shelter  to  the  apostles  (Bom.  xvi.  23,  &c.)  reminds  ns  that  they 
led  a  life  of  hardship  and  poverty,  and  were  the  followers  of  Him  for  whom  there 
was  "  no  room  in  the  inn."  The  Lord  had  said  to  His  apostles  that  when  thej 
entered  into  a  city,  they  were  to  seek  out  "  those  who  were  worthy,"  and  with 
them  to  abide.  The  search  at  Philippi  was  not  difSonlt.  Lydia  invited  them,  and 
admitted  of  no  refusal,  and  their  "  peace  was  on  that  house."  Thus  the  gospel 
obtained  a  home  in  Europe.    {Dean  Howson,) 

Vers.  16-25.   A  certain  damsel  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  divination. — The 

Pythoness  : — The  words,  literally,  are  as  in  the  margin,  a  spirit  of  Python,  or,  as 
some  MSS.  give  it,  a  Python  spirit.     The  Python  was  the  serpent  worshipped  at 
Delphi,  as  the  symbol  of  wisdom,  from  which  the  Pythian  priestesses  and  Apollo, 
as  succeeding  to  the  oracular  power  of  the  serpent,  took  their  distinguishing 
appellative.    The  fact  that  St.  Luke,  who  in  his  Gospel  describes  like  phenomena 
as  coming  from  deemonia,  ••  evil  spirits,"  "  unclean  spirits,"  should  here  use  this 
(exceptional  description,  seems  to  imply  either  that  this  was  the  way  in  which  the 
people  of  Philippi  spoke  of  the  maiden,  or  else  that  he  recognised  in  her  state 
phenomena  identical  with  those  of  the  priestesses  of  Delphi,  the  wild  distortions, 
the  shrill  cries,  the  madness  of  an  evil  inspiration.     After  the  manner  of  sibyls, 
and  sorceresses,  and  clairvoyantes  of  other  times,  the  girl,  whom  Augustine  describes 
as  a  fcemina  ventriloqua — the   phrase  probably    expressing   the    peculiar    tones 
characteristic  of  hysteria — was  looked  on  as  having  power  to  divine  find  predict 
("  soothsaying,"  as  distinct  from  '*  prophesying,"  exactly  expresses  the  force  of 
the  Greek  verb),  and  her  wild  cries  were  caught  up  and  received  as  oracles. 
Plutarch  ("  de  Defect.  Orac,"  p.  737)  speaks  of  the  name  Python  as  being  applied 
commonly,  in  his  time,  to  "  ventriloquists  "  of  this  type.     As  she  was  a  slave,  her 
masters  traded  on  her  supposed  inspiration,  and  made  the  girl,  whom  prayer  and 
<]uiet  might  have  restored  to  sanity,  give  Emswers  to  those  who  sought  for  oracular 
guidance  in  the  perplexities  of  their  lives.      {Dean  Plumptre.)        Paul  and  the 
damsel  of  Philippi : — 1.  None  can  bear  such  testimony  to  the  real  nature  of  good- 
ness as  bad  spirits.     How  the  fallen  angels  could  preach !     They  could  speak  of 
goodness  with  all  the  vividness  which  comes  of  conscious  contrast.    Could  not  he 
say  much  of  friendship  who  has  lost  it  ?    Could  not  he  speak  tenderly  of  home 
who  has  abandoned  it  ?     So  the  spirit  that  has  known  God  and  wandered  from 
Him  could  speak  with  soul-toucbing  pathos — of  salvation.    But  Christianity  will 
not  have  such   service.     The  poor  damsel  said  truly,  bat  her  co-operation  was 
declined.    The  devil  can  have  no  part  or  lot  in  Christian  service.    He  is  not  in 
it  I     Though  his  word  be  true,  his  tone  is  wrong.    What  Paul  could  have  done 
with  this  aid!     How  he  could  have  turned  upon  all  those  who  held  in  captivity 
the  infatuated  girl,  and  said  to  them,  •*  She  is  our  ally  ;  sbe  knows  the  truth,  and 
is  not  afraid  to  proclaim  it."     These  temptations  are  not  without  force ;  but  the 
truth  being  devil-spoken,  is  not  to  be  received  npon  such  authority,  because  the 
authority  would   not  stop  there.    Have  nothing  to  do  with  him.      ••  Kesist  the 
devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you."     We  see  from  such  incidents  the  pureness  and 
nobility  of  the  apostolic  mind  and  the  independence  of  truth.    In  the  hands  of  the 


CHAP.  zvL]  THE  ACTS.  499 

■ipostles  the  truth  did  not  go  a-begging  for  patronage.  When  will  the  Church 
refuse  the  bad  man's  money?  The  same  kind  of  aid  was  offered  to  Christ,  but 
He  would  never  accept  it.  2.  The  girl  had  masters  who  made  a  profit  out  of  her. 
It  is  possible  that  some  of  ourselves  may  be  under  the  influence  of  evil  "  masters." 
It  is  in  the  nature  of  selfishness  to  make  slaves.  Older  and  craftier  men  may  be 
making  experiments  upon  your  green  youthfulness.  Christ  would  have  us  all 
free.     "  If  the  Son,  therefore,  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."    3. 

"And  when  her  masters  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  gains  was  gone "      The 

bad  man  has  a  larger  sphere  in  which  to  make  money  than  the  good  man  has. 
Think  what  they  were  doing  1  Living  upon  this  brain-bewildered  damsel.  Such  men 
would  sell  the  very  Church  of  God  and  defile  the  dead  for  money.  Do  not  imagine 
that  this  is  an  ancient  instance ;  it  is  the  work  of  to-day.  There  is  no  stopping- 
place  in  selfishness  short  of  the  very  destruction  of  the  universe.  Begin,  therefore, 
early  to  resist  the  devil.  "  It  is  not  all  gold  that  glitters."  There  are  some  coins 
that  honest  fingers  dare  not  touch.  Do  not  call  yourself  poor  if  you  have  to-day's 
honestly-gotten  dinner  waiting  for  you.  That  is  a  proof  that  you  shall  also  dine 
to-morrow.  "  Seek  ye  first  tiie  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all 
these  things  shall  be  added  unto  yon."  Crafty  masters,  dealers  in  superstition  and 
quackery,  may  have  their  gain-bringing  damsels  taken  away  from  them,  but  they 
who  bank  in  heaven  have  effects  inexhaustible.  4.  Look  at  the  spirit  of  the 
damsel's  masters  (ver.  19,  &c.).  What  liars  they  were!  Not  a  word  did  they  say 
■about  the  "  gains."  Here  is  the  crime  of  to-day,  of  working  from  one  motive  and 
trying  to  get  credit  for  another.  Do  we  not  sometimes  hate  a  man,  and  do  all 
manner  of  evil  to  him,  and  then  say  that  we  have  no  personal  jealousy,  but  are 
concerned  about  some  great  question  or  public  good  ?  And  yet  there  are  persons 
who  quite  disdain  the  idea  of  original  sin !  The  gospel  will  have  no  pretence, 
mental  reservation,  or  moral  obliquity.  It  will  insist  upon  trying  all  our  work  by 
the  square  and  plummet  of  heaven.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  soothsaying  damsel 
at  Philippi : — I.  True  testimony  pbom  a  questionable  quaeter.  This  testimony 
was  as  true  as  if  it  had  been  spoken  by  an  angel.  But  the  testifier  was  under  the 
influence  of  a  devil,  and  God's  servants  need  not  his  praise  either  in  behalf  of 
themselves  or  their  work.  But  what  could  induce  this  woman  to  bear  this  true 
testimony?  1.  Perhaps  the  hope  of  getting  gain.  She  might  think  that  Paul 
would  reward  her  for  her  public  proclamation.  2.  A  wish  to  conciliate.  The  evil 
spirit,  fearing  expulsion,  might  influence  her  to  bear  this  testimony  so  as  to  gain 
favour.  3.  A  desire  to  heighten  her  authority  and  increase  her  success.  She  saw 
«vident  tokens  of  the  Divinity  of  their  cause  ;  and  by  proclaiming  this  she  may 
have  hoped  to  acquire  a  higher  reputation  for  being  inspired.  4.  The  hope  of 
bringing  discredit  on  the  cause  of  God.  The  stratagem  might  lead  the  people  to 
conclude  that  Paul  and  Silas  were  in  league  with  evil  spirits.  (1)  That  there  is  a 
way  of  salvation.  Plain,  safe,  exclusive.  (2)  That  there  is  need  to  show  this  way. 
(3)  That  the  work  of  God's  servants  is  to  show  it.  II.  Effectual  exorcising  bt 
AN  inspired  apostle.  Paul  was  grieved — 1.  To  see  a  human  being  the  victim  of 
demoniacal  power.  Many  similar  saddening  sights  are  still  to  be  seen.  The 
demons  avarice,  ambition,  pride,  envy,  and  sensuality  possess  men's  souls  and  rule 
in  their  hearts.  Who  can  see  them  and  not  be  grieved  ?  2.  To  see  the  malignant 
design  with  which  the  testimony  was  borne.  The  girl  was  only  the  instrument  of 
the  devil,  whose  design  might  be  to  bring  discredit  on  Christianity ;  and  who  might 
also  aim  at  exciting  the  self-complacency  of  Paul.  3.  To  see  the  sordid  motives  of 
the  masters  of  this  girl.  They  cared  not  how  her  nature  was  degraded,  or  how  the 
people  were  imposed  on,  if  only  their  mercenary  ends  were  answered.  Many  are 
stiU  as  unscrupulous.  They  will  lie,  and  cheat,  and  sell  both  body  and  soul  for 
gain.  III.  Malignant  persecution  bi  disappointed  mercenaries  (ver.  20-22). 
If  you  would  not  enrage  a  selfish  man,  do  not  interfere  with  his  gains,  or  he  will 
persecute  you.  Your  enterprise  may  be  of  God,  and  there  may  be  evident  tokens 
of  this,  yet  it  must  not  be  allowed  to  live  if  it  frustrates  his  selfish  purposes.  IV. 
Illegal  measures  bv  civil  authorities.  V.  Midnight  melody  by  incarcerated 
SUFFERERS  (ver.  25).  1.  •'  They  prayed  " — (1)  for  themselves,  that  they  might  be 
supported  and  delivered  ;  (2)  for  their  persecutors,  that  they  might  be  forgiven  and 
saved ;  and  (3)  for  their  new  converts,  that  they  might  be  strengthened  and  estab- 
lished. 2.  "And  sang  praises  unto  God."  A  consciousness  of  having  done  right  makes 
«  man  undaunted  in  danger,  unswerving  in  suffering,  and  triumphant  in  tribulation. 
{John  Elstob.)  The  devil  of  avarice  : — I.  In  the  pursuance  of  its  purpose.  Mer- 
«enarinesa  in  truth  was  the  demon  which  inspired  her.    In  pursuing  its  sordid  aim 


600  JHE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  xn. 

we  discover — 1.  The  prostitution  of  mind.  This  young  woman's  sympathies  and 
talents  were  consecrated  to  the  greed  of  her  masters.  Mammon  ever  hires  the 
genius  of  the  warld  for  its  service.  A  more  terrible  sight  than  this  can  scarcely  be 
witnessed.  2.  The  practice  of  falsehood.  This  woman  pretended  to  withdraw 
the  veil  of  the  future  for  money.  Men  build  up  their  fortunes  by  falsehoods.  Lies 
are  considered  the  life  of  trade.  3.  Beligious  profession.  To  impose  upon  the 
spectators,  she  professed  almost  a  reverence  for  the  apostles.  Perhaps  she  had 
sufficient  prescience  to  see  that  their  mission  would  be  successful,  and  that  her 
declaration  of  their  success  would  heighten  her  reputation  and  increase  her 
authority.  Alas !  avarice  uses  religion  for  its  own  ends,  puts  on  its  garb,  uses  its 
vocabulary,  and  kneels  to  its  heroes.  II.  In  the  fkustration  of  its  pueposb 
(ver.  18).  Does  this  mean  the  exorcising  of  a  personal  spirit  of  evil  who  had  taken 
possession  of  her?  or  does  it  mean  the  expulsion  of  the  spirit  of  evil  from  her? 
I  incline  to  the  latter  opinion,  and  regard  Paul  as  effecting  her  conversion. 
This  he  did,  as  all  conversions  are  accomplished,  "  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ," 
and  at  once — "  in  the  same  hour."  The  change  which  Paul  effected  in  her  now 
interfered  with  the  gains  of  her  masters.  Observe — 1.  The  vindictiveness  of  this 
frustrated  avarice  (ver.  19).  Selfish  men  will  oppose  any  enterprise,  however 
divine,  that  interferes  with  their  gains.  Vested  interests  are  the  great  antagonists 
of  truth  everywhere.  2.  Its  hypocrisy.  Did  they  say,  these  men  have  interfered 
with  our  traffic  ?  This  would  have  been  truth.  No  ;  they  prefer  a  false  accusation. 
These  wounded  grubs  would  be  thought  patriotic  heroes.  3.  Its  power.  These 
rich  men  had  sufficient  power  to  move  the  multitude  in  their  favour,  and  to 
command  the  magistrates  to  do  their  work  (vers.  22,  23).  Such  was  the  power 
which  avarice  bad  in  Philippi  eighteen  centuries  ago,  and  such  is  the  power,  alasl 
which  it  has  ever  wielded,  and  still  wields.  It  can  move  magistrates  and  monarchs. 
*•  Money  answereth  all  things,"  "  and  the  love  of  it  is  the  root  of  all  evil."  (D. 
Thomas,  D.I).)  The  rescue  of  a  slave  : — Some  facts  connected  with — I.  Thb 
BLAVE.  1.  The  power  by  which  she  was  swayed.  2.  The  profession  she  made. 
3.  The  testimony  she  bore.  II.  The  apostles.  1.  Their  tenderness  of  heart. 
2.  Their  great  power.  3.  Their  habitual  prayerfulness.  III.  The  ownebs.  1.  The 
degradation  of  their  nature.  2.  The  vengeance  of  their  hearts.  8.  The  power 
of  their  hate.    (H.  J.  Martyn.) 

Ver.  17.  These  men  are  servants  of  the  Most  High  God  and  show  to  ns  the  way 

of  salvation.— T/ie  confession  of  the  girl : — What  a  strange  thing  have  we  here  1  the 
devil  preaching  the  gospel ;  at  least  confirming  the  word  of  those  who  preached  it. 
How  was  it  that  the  prince  of  darkness  could  thus  suppoi-t  the  men  who  were 
labouring  to  destroy  his  kingdom  ?  How  could  he  give  his  testimony  to  the  truth 
of  that  gospel  by  which  his  throne  was  to  be  subverted  ?  "Was  not  Satan  here 
casting  out  Satan,  and  contributing  to  the  overthrow  of  his  own  dominion?  No: 
his  speaking  truth  was  a  master-stroke  of  devilish  policy.  He  spoke  the  truth  to 
counteract  it ;  to  put  Paul  and  Silas  and  the  possessed  woman  on  the  same  ground, 
as  if  they  all  agreed  :  and  if  Paul  and  Silas  had  been  pleased  with  this  testimony,  and 
appealed  to  it,  and  observed  to  the  people  that  she  who  had  told  them  so  correctly 
many  things  which  they  could  not  have  found  out,  confessed  them  as  the  servants  of 
God  and  the  preachers  of  salvation,  he  would  have  gained  a  great  point.  Let  the 
Pythoness  once  be  identified  with  the  Christian  teachers  and  she  might  teach,  under 
the  name  of  Christianity,  such  things  as  the  devil  has  since  often  taught,  and  called 
them  the  way  of  salvation.  The  devil  confessing  Christ  is  in  fact  more  dangerous  than 
the  devil  denying  Christ :  for  he  only  confesses  to  oppose.  He  confesses,  and  mis- 
represents, so  that  he  makes  the  doctrine  of  Christ  sometimes  one  thing  and  some- 
times another ;  and  anything  but  what  it  really  is.  Sometimes  it  is  salvation  hy  man's 
merit,  heaven  purchased  by  the  performance  of  outward  works.  Thus  he  builds  up 
a  fatal  system  of  self-righteousness.  Yet  there  is  truth  in  what  he  teaches.  The 
works  are  necessary ;  but  he  assigns  to  them  a  wrong  office,  puts  them  in  the  place 
of  Christ,  and  thus  leads  men  to  reject  that  way  of  salvation,  to  which,  by  the 
mouth  of  the  Pythoness,  he  bore  witness.  At  other  times  he  takes  the  dirt^ct  con- 
trary course ;  and  with  the  show  of  honouring  Christ  teaches  men  to  look  for 
salvation  by  a  faith  which  produces  no  works.  Thus  his  doctrine  is — what  it  were 
to  be  wished  his  kingdom  was — divided  against  itself:  sometimes  it  is  Christ 
requiring  what  God  has  not  commanded  ;  sometimes  it  is  Christ  allowing  what  God 
has  forbidden,  or  forbidden  what  God  has  allowed.  Alas  !  this  confession  of  the 
Pythoness,  as  it  was  not  altogether  the  first  instance  of  Satan's  acknowledging 


CHAP.  XTLj  THE  ACTS.  601 

Christ,  80  neither  was  it  the  last  by  many,  many  examples.  And  Christian  teachers 
have  too  often  been  ignorant  of  his  devices,  not  having  received  the  wisdom  to 
detect  him,  when  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light.  Paul  had  this  wisdom.  {J. 
Fawcett,  M.A.)  Serving  God: — ^At  the  very  end  of  the  nave  of  Westminster  Abbey 
there  is  a  monument  erected  to  a  young  philosopher  and  clergyman  who  in  hia 
ehort  space  of  life,  which  lasted  only  twenty-one  years,  made  discoveries  in  science 
of  a  most  surprising  kind.  His  name  was  Jeremiah  Horrox.  There  was  one 
thing  which  he  felt  ever  had  a  higher  claim  upon  him  even  than  science.  It  was 
to  do  his  duty  in  the  humble  sphere  in  which  he  found  himself ;  and  when  he  was 
on  the  eve  of  watching  the  transit  of  the  planet  Venus  across  the  sun,  and  was 
waiting  with  the  utmost  keenness  of  observation  for  this  phenomenon,  he  put  even 
all  these  thoughts  aside,  and  went,  on  the  Sunday  on  which  this  sight  was  to  be 
observed,  to  perform  his  humble  parish  duty  in  the  church  where  he  was  pastor. 
He  mentions  it  in  his  journal,  in  words  which  are  now  written  over  his  monument : 
"  Called  aside  to  greater  things,  which  ought  not  to  be  neglected  for  the  sake  of 
subordinate  pursuits."  Subordinate,  secondary,  in  one  sense,  the  pursuits  could 
not  be,  for  they  were  the  discovery  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  greatest  of  His  works ; 
but  subordinate  in  another  sense  they  were,  for  they  came  across,  in  that  instance, 
the  single-minded  discharge  of  the  task  which  he  owed  to  his  Divine  Master.  {Dean 
Stanley.)  The  exactest  way  of  salvation: — Sir  Thomas  Smith,  the  eminent 
secretary  of  state  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  when  on  his  death-bed,  sent  to  his  friends, 
the  Bishops  of  Winchester  and  Worcester,  and  solemnly  entreated  them  to  draw 
from  the  Word  of  God  the  plainest  and  exactest  way  of  salvation  ;  adding,  "  It  is 
a  matter  of  lamentation  that  men  know  not  to  what  end  they  are  born  into  the 
world  till  they  are  ready  to  get  out  of  it."  The  confession  of  the  slave : — Truth  is 
truth,  by  whomsoever  confessed,  for  whatever  motive,  and  in  whatever  way.  Here  it 
was  confessed  by  a  devil-possessed  girl.  Perhaps  her  better  nature  was  in  the  ascen- 
dant at  the  time.  As  we  know  from  the  Gospels  demoniacal  possession  was  intermit- 
tent, and  the  poor  creatures  had  their  lucid  intervals.  So  this  damsel,  conscious  for 
the  moment  of  her  misery  and  degradation,  may  have  meant  this  as  a  sort  of  appeal 
for  help.  Perhaps,  however,  it  may  have  been  in  mockery.  No  doubt  the  apostles 
had  asserted  their  authority  as  servants  of  the  most  high  God,  and  certainly  '•  the 
way  of  salvation  "  was  their  constant  theme.  And  the  girl  gifted  with  powers  of 
mimicry  may  have  reproduced  their  peculiar  accent  for  the  purpose  of  creating 
amusement.  On  the  former  hypothesis  Paul's  pity  was  excited :  on  the  latter  his 
indignation  and  alarm  lest  the  gospel  should  be  brought  into  contempt.  Anyhow 
the  testimony  is  true  as  a  description  of : — I.  The  chakacteb  of  gospel  ministebs. 
1.  They  are  men  (1)  Not  angels ;  do  not  therefore  expect  angelic  attributes  of  them. 
One  of  the  greatest  hindrances  to  the  work  of  the  Church  is  the  extravagant 
demands  which  are  made  of  the  ministry.  It  discourages  the  men,  and  induces 
indolence  in  the  people.  (2)  They  are  men  having  knowledge  of  human  needs, 
invested  with  human  sympathies,  gifted  with  the  faculty  of  communicating  Divine 
thought  in  human  language.  2.  They  are  servants.  (1)  A  humbling  thought. 
All  magisterial  airs,  aU  pomp  and  show,  are  utterly  inconsistent  with  this  character. 
A  servant  is  a  subordinate  and  has  simply  to  do  what  he  is  told.  (2)  A  suggestion 
of  responsibility  and  labour.  What  is  a  servant  for  but  for  work  ?  And  for  the 
efficient  discharge  of  that  work  he  is  held  responsible.  3.  They  are  servants  of  the 
Most  High  God.  (1)  Their  office  therefore  is  invested  with  the  loftiest  dignity. 
What  greater  honour  than  to  be  the  servant  of  a  sovereign.  Our  Lord  Himself 
gloried  in  this  title.  (2)  Their  persons  are  secure.  God  will  protect  His  servantfl 
till  they  can  say,  "  I  have  finished  my  course."  (3)  Their  reward  is  great ;  as  is  to 
be  expected  from  such  a  Master.  "Be  thou  faithful,"  &c.  11.  Theib  woek.  "To 
show  the  way  of  salvation."  1.  There  is  a  way  of  salvation.  (1)  A  way  to  it — i.e., 
means  whereby  it  may  be  secured,  (a)  Repentance — consciousness  of  being  in  the 
wrong  way,  regret  for  it,  confession  of  it,  and  desire  to  get  out  of  it.  (6)  Faith. 
Acceptance  of  the  right  way ;  of  Him  who  is  the  Way ;  walking  in  that  Way — i.e., 
humble  dependence  on  Chrisi  (2)  Salvation  itself  is  a  way — a  progress  from 
darkness  to  light,  from  misery  to  blessedness,  from  sin  to  holiness,  from  uselessness 
or  injuriousness  to  usefulness,  from  earth  to  heaven,  from  grace  to  glory.  Salvation 
is  a  state,  but  it  is  an  endlessly  progressive  state.  No  matter  however  high  the 
attainment  the  saved  one  is  to  "  forget  the  things  that  are  behind,"  Ac.  So  viewed 
salvation  is  the  right  way,  the  happy  way.  2.  This  way  has  to  be  shown.  (1) 
Hence  the  guide  must  know  it,  and  not  theoretically,  from  books  or  from  what 
others  have  told  him ;  but  from  being  in  it.     Personal  salvation  is  the  essential 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvu 

qualification  for  a  minister,  and  a  guarantee  of  his  competency  for  his  work.  (2) 
Knowing  it  the  guide  must  show  it ;  by  precept  and  example :  simply,  clearly, 
powerfully.      (J.    W.  Burn.)  The  nature  of  the  Christian  ministry : — I.  Thb 

WORK  OF  ALii  MINISTERS  OF  THB  GOSPEL.  1.  They  are  to  show  the  way  of  salvation. 
This  is  the  great  object  they  should  ever  have  in  view.  2.  The  way  of  salvation 
they  are  to  show  is,  by  faith  in  Christ.  3.  They  are  to  show  the  way,  not  the  way» 
of  salvation.  There  never  was,  and  never  will  be,  but  one  way.  This  their  work 
implies — They  ought  to  know  it  themselves.     EC.  The  appellation  here  oivek 

THEM  ;    WITH  the  REASONS   OF  THEIR  BEINO  SELECTED  AND  EMPLOYED   IN  THIS  SERVICE. 

•'  Servants  of  God."  1.  It  denotes  that  they  are  sent  by  Him  to  this  work.  2» 
The  dignity  of  their  office — servants,  not  of  men — of  the  highest  men,  but  of  God — 
of  the  most  high  God.  They  are  employed  as  mortals ;  because  this  method  is 
adapted  to  our  receiving  information  on  the  subject  with  composure.  Learn :  1. 
The  guilt  of  those  who  neglect  a  gospel  ministry.  2.  Be  helpers  of  ministers. 
(The  Evangelist.) 

Vers.  19-26.  And  when  her  masters  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  gains  was  gone. — 
Apostolic  duty  and  vicissitudes : — I.  Christ's  servants  will  use  whatever  powbb 
THEY  POSSESS  TO  SET  THE  SLAVES  OF  Satan  FREE.  Paul  did  HOt  act  from  mere  im- 
pulse, but  upon  the  principle  of  compassion  with  which  all  true  Christians  are 
animated.  He  was  miraculously  endowed,  it  is  true,  while  we  have  only  the  power 
of  influence  and  persuasion.  But  when  a  country  is  invaded,  what  patriot  wiU  draw 
back  because  he  has  not  a  rifle  of  the  most  approved  pattern  ?  Let  us  then  do 
what  we  can  to  exorcise  the  demons  of  intemperance,  &c.  II.  Christ's  servants 
are  not  to  expect  that  their  efforts  will  win  earthly  rewards.  This  ought  to 
be  the  result ;  but  connected  with  all  evils  are  vested  interests  which  resist  all  efforts 
to  diminish  their  gains.  The  owners  of  this  damsel  looked  not  at  her  benefit,  but 
at  their  loss.  For  the  same  reason  all  reformers  have  been  hated  ;  and  they  must 
not  be  surprised  at  it  (John  xv.  19-21).  III.  Christ  secures  for  His  servants  not 
EXEMPTION  from  SORROW,  BUT  A  SUSTAINING  JOY.  All  power  is  given  to  Christ,  and 
He  sometimes  uses  it  to  disappoint  the  enemies  of  His  servants ;  but  more  frequently 
He  leaves  them,  as  here,  to  suffer  for  His  name's  sake.  But  it  is  then  that  He  gives 
them  the  sweetest  assurances  of  His  presence  and  love ;  and  makes  them  more 
than  conquerors  (chap.  v.  41).  IV.  By  their  conduct  towards  teeir  persecutorb 
Christ's  servants  show  that  they  are  His.  That  can  be  no  merely  human  reUgion 
which  enables  men  to  conquer  the  natural  desire  for  revenge,  and  to  do  good  to  those 
by  whom  they  have  been  despitefully  used.     V.  By  their  fidelity  to  conviction 

AND  the  beauty  OF  THEIR   CHARACTER    ChRIST'S    SERVANTS    WILL    ULTIMATELY  WIN    THR 

RESPECT  OF  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  WRONGED  THEM.  The  bchaviour  of  Paul  and  Silas  im- 
pressed the  jaUer  quite  as  much  as  the  earthquake.  That  might  have  been  a 
natural  occurrence,  but  the  cheerfulness  and  kindness  of  the  missionaries  nnder 
the  circumstances  were  obviously  supernatural.  So  it  is  that  "  the  blood  of  the 
martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church. "  VI.  Turning  to  the  jailer,  we  learn — 1.  That 
the  worst  of  men  may  become  the  servants  of  Christ.  2.  That  they  may  become  sa 
instantly.  How  long  does  it  take  to  enlist  a  recruit  ?  The  resolve  may  be  the  fruit 
of  long  consideration,  and  it  may  take  months  of  drill  to  make  him  an  efficient 
soldier ;  but  the  act  of  enlistment  is  instantaneous.  3.  The  proof  that  men  have 
become  servants  of  Christ  consists  not  in  emotion  but  in  conduct.  (R.  A.  Bertram.) 
Paul  at  Philippi : — I.  The  preparation  for  God's  spiritual  work.  The  rebuke  of 
the  evil  spirit  in  the  girl,  the  anger  of  the  crowd,  the  imprisonment,  seemed  to  form 
a  series  of  events  complete  in  itself  and  existing  for  itself,  if  we  may  say  so.  But 
these  things  were  but  the  preparation  for  something  more  important.  1.  The  pre- 
paration for  God's  work  was  by  affliction.  The  disciples  found  themselves  cast 
down,  but  the  sequel  showed  it  was  in  order  that  they  might  be  exalted,  by  being 
used  as  a  means  of  glorying  God.  A  man's  best  work  comes  sometimes  after  he 
has  ceased  to  be  able  to  work  at  all.  God  works  through  our  afflictions  even  when 
we  do  not  know  it.  Well  may  we  then  count  it  joy  when  we  are  honoured  by  falling 
upon  them.  2.  The  affliction  of  the  apostles  was  certain,  sooner  or  later,  because 
of  the  ever  persisting  antagonism  between  the  gospel  and  the  world.  And  is  it  not 
for  ever  so  to  the  end  of  time  ?  Must  not  the  gospel  always  find  opposition  from 
the  world  ?  Surely  this  vile  world  is  not  a  friend  to  grace  to  help  us  on  to  God. 
3.  Paul's  understandiug  of  this  made  him  careless  of  being  unpopular.  He  had 
counted  the  cost  of  his  service  and  was  willing  to  pay  it.  4.  The  affliction  of  the 
apostles  was  relieved  by  faith.     They  trusted  God  to  give  them  strength  to  endur« 


CHAP.  zvL]  THE  ACTS.  508 

it,  to  lead  them  oni  of  it  into  safety,  and  beyond  these,  to  nse  the  affliction  itself  a» 
an  instrument  of  his  own  purposes.     5.  God  is  with  His  children  in  times  of  trial. 
6.  Such  faith  makes  one  thoughtful  for  others.     Paul  was  not  so  absorbed  in  his 
own  rapture  as  to  forget  the  jailer.    "  Do  thyself  no  harm ;  for  we  are  all  here." 
Forgetfulness  of  others  is  no  part  of  the  soul's  deepest  joy.     7.  In  Paul's  joy  in 
God  there  was  iuvolved  forgiveness  to  those  who  injured  him.      II.  The  work  of 
God.    God  by  His  permission  of  the  apostles'  affliction  had  made  ready  for  the  first 
Boul-ingathering  among  the  heathen  of  Europe.    1.  The  first  element  that  appears 
in  the  experience  of  the  Philippian  jailer  is  fear.    He  was  trembling  when  he  sprang 
into  the  cell  (ver.  29).    John  Bunyan  had  an  awful  experience  of  his  own  sinfulness 
before  he  was  converted.    If  all  have  sinned,  aU  are  entitled  to  a  guilty  fearful 
conscience.    2.  This  dread  of  conscience  was  immediately  accompanied  by  a  con- 
sciousness of  the  supernatural.    3.  With  fear  went  desire.     "  Sirs,  what  must  I  do 
to  be  saved  ?  "     What  it  was  to  be  saved  he  knew  in  a  most  undefined  way.     Wants 
do  not  have  to  be  defined  in  order  to  be  genuine.     A  child  knows  that  it  feels  bad 
but  cannot  always  tell  where  or  why,  yet  its  suffering  is  most  real.    And  to  want 
the  gospel  comes  with  complete  satisfaction.    But  it  does  not  come  except  to  the 
want.     4.  The  jailer  was  willing  to  do  anything  necessary  for  salvation.     •'  Sirs,, 
what  must  I  do  ?  "    6.  The  answer  has  well  been  called  classic.    It  sums  up  once 
for  all  the  ages  everything  that  is  required  of  man  in  order  to  be  saved.     (1)  Do 
nothing.    Salvation  is  not  of  works.    (2)  Believe.     (3)  Make  Christ  the  object  of 
faith.    6.  This  faith  has  its  social  bearing.     It  is  recognised  as  an  influential 
element  in  the  family,  which  is  here  shown  to  be  the  God-constituted  unit  of  human 
life.     7.  True  faith  wiU  not  be  ignorant.    It  recognises  its  imperfection  and  is  ever 
seeking  to  learn  more  of  the  truth  of  God,  that  it  may  appropriate  it  by  faith  (ver.  32). 
8.  As  soon  as  faith  had  entered  the  jailer's  heart,  it  emerged  again  in  a  deed  of 
kindness  ;  he  washed  the  apostles'  wounds.      So  by  a  beautiful  spiritual  chemistry 
faith  is  ever  transmuting  the  love  of  God  as  it  comes  into  our  upward-opened  hearts 
into  love  for  our  fellow-men  (1  John  iv.  12).     9.  Immediately  there  came  an  open 
recognition  of  Christian  faith  in  the  form  of  baptism.    Wherever  there  is  faith 
there  should  be  frank,  manly  avowal  of  it.    10.  No  wonder  the  jailer  when  he 
had  brought  them  into  his  house  rejoiced  (ver.  34).     It  was  the  happiest  time  he  had 
ever  known  in  his  life.     No  wonder  the  jailer  rejoiced.    Blessed  beyond  words  are  aU 
those  who  come  to  know  Christ  and  His  salvation.    III.  Lessons  about  conveesion. 
1.  Providence  often  prepares  for  it,  sometimes  by  suffering  and  sorrow.      2.  There 
are  many  ways  of  being  led  to  Christ,  and  all  are  valid.    Lydia  came  one  way,  the 
jailer  another.     No  one  need  try  to  force  himself  into  another's  experience.     3.  Faith 
is  the  same  for  all.    All  are  sinners.  All  need  the  atoning  blood.   AU  must  trust  vrith- 
out  any  merit  of  their  own.     4.  Salvation  is  free  to  all.     What  Paul  said  to  the  jailer 
he  said  to  the  whole  world.   Whosoever  will  may  come.    {D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)       The 
consequences  of  doing  good : — 1.  If  you  destroy  a  man's  hope  of  gain  you  are  very 
apt  to  make  him  your  enemy.     2.  When  you  are  hindering  a  man's  business,  he 
will  charge  you  with  precipitating  a  general  business  panic.     3.  When  you  drive 
prosperity  from  a  bad  man's  door,  you  may  be  inviting  adversity  to  enter  your  own. 
4.  When  you  help  some  afflicted  one,  when  you  free  some  oppressed  one,  the  afflic- 
tion or  the  oppression  may  be  transferred  to  yourself.     5,  When  you  do  a  good 
deed,  and  are  put  in  prison  for  it,  wait  for  God's  deliverance — it  will  come.     6.  The 
night  is  not  all  dark,  nor  the  stocks  hard,  nor  the  imprisonment  bitter,  to  those  who, 
in  the  consciousness  that  they  are  suffering  for  Christ,  wait  for  the  breaking  fetters 
and  the  earthquake    shock.      (S.   S.    Times.)         Antagonism  to  religion  :    how 
aroused  : — So  long  as  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  does  not  interfere  with  bad  men's 
money-making,  bad  men  are  disposed  to  let  it  alone,  as  "none  of  their  business." 
But  when  the  work  of  these  temperance  people  interferes  with  liquor-selling  ;  when 
the  work  of  these  law  and  order  people  stops  the  selling  of  vile  books  and  pictures, 
and  closes  Sunday  concert  saloons ;  when  the  religious  sentiment  of  the  community 
rises  up  against  lotteries  and  raffles ;  when  the  political  reform  movements  propose 
to  stop  stealing  in  the  city  institutions — then  it  is  evident  to  every  servant  of 
the  devil  whose  supply  of  gain  is  thereby  cut  off,  that  "  these  men  do  exceed- 
ingly trouble  our  city,"  and  the  same  feeling  against  the  gospel  is  aroused  in 
them  as  showed  itself  in  the  impoverished  hog-raisers  of  the  Gadarenes.     This  is 
one  of  the  sure  hindrances  in  the  path  of  all  zealous  Christian  workers.     (H.  C. 
Trumbull,   D.D.)  The  effects  of   Christianity  on  ancient   superstitions  : — The 

priesthood  in  all  its  branches,  Flamens,  Augurs,  Hornspices,  contemplated  the 
advance  of  Christianity  with  dismay.    It  emptied  their  temples,  curtailed  theiz 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  ZTL 

Bacrifices,  reduced  their  profits,  exposed  their  frauds.  (J.  J.  Blunt,  D.D.) 
And  when  they  had  laid  many  stripes  upon  them,  they  cast  them  into  prison. — 

The  punishment  of  the  missionaries : — The  words  imply  a  punishment  of  more  than 
usual  severity  such  as  would  leave  their  backs  lacerated  and  bleeding.  So  in 
1  Thess.  ii.  2,  Bt.  Paul  speaks  of  having  been  "  shamefully  entreated"  at  Philippi. 
Those  who  have  seen  anything  of  the  prisons  of  the  Boman  empire,  as  e.g.,  Mamer- 
tine  dungeon  at  Rome  itself,  can  picture  to  themselves  the  darkness  and  foulness  of 
the  den  into  which  St.  Paul  and  his  friend  were  now  thrust :  the  dark  cavern-like 
cell,  below  the  ground,  the  damp  and  reeking  walls,  the  companionship  of  the  vilest 
outcasts.  And,  as  if  this  were  not  enough,  they  were  fastened  in  the  "stocks." 
St.  Luke  used  the  Greek  term  xylon,  the  same  as  is  used  sometimes  for  the  cross 
(chaps.  V.  30;  xiii.  29).  The  technical  Latin  word  was  nervus.  Like  the  English 
etocks,  it  was  a  wooden  frame  with  five  holes,  into  which  head  and  feet  and 
arms  were  thrust,  and  the  prisoner  left  in  an  attitude  of  "  little  ease."  Here, 
however,  it  would  seem,  the  feet  only  were  fastened,  the  rest  of  the  body  being 
left  lying  on  the  ground.  If  the  received  version  of  Job  xiii.  37  ;  xxxiii.  11,  which 
follows  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate,  be  correct,  the  punishment  was  common  at 
a  very  early  period  in  the  East  (compare.  Jer.  xxix.  26).  (Dean  Plumpire.) 
Paul  imprisoned  at  Philippi : — When  Catherine  Evans,  a  Quaker  heroine  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  was  imprisoned  within  the  gloomy  walls  of  the  Inquisition,  in 
the  Island  of  Malta,  for  obeying  what  she  regarded  as  a  call  from  God  to  preach  the 
gospel  in  the  East,  she  was  put  into  an  inner  room  of  the  Inquisition,  which  had 
only  two  little  holes  in  it  for  light  and  air,  and  which  was  so  exceedingly  hot  that 
it  seemed  to  be  the  intention  to  stifle  her.  On  one  occasion  Friar  Malachi  told  her 
unless  she  abandoned  her  religion  she  should  never  go  out  of  that  room  alive.  To 
this  she  fearlessly  replied,  "  The  Lord  is  sufficient  to  deliver  me,  but  whether  He 
will  or  no,  I  will  not  forsake  the  living  fountain  to  drink  at  a  broken  cistern ."  In 
like  manner  Paul  and  Silas,  when  apprehended  and  thrust  into  the  inner  prison  of 
Philippi,  were  not  debarred  thereby  from  praising  and  preaching  Christ.  To  such 
men,  indeed. 

Stone  walls  do  not  a  prison  make, 

Nor  iron  bars  a  cage. 

Christian  preachers  in  prison : — Some  years  ago  three  Primitive  Methodist  preachera 
went  to  mission  a  town  in  Worcestershire,  and  when  they  commenced  the  service,  there 
was  a  magistrate,  a  clergyman,  and  a  constable.  The  constable  was  ordered  to  take 
the  preacher  down,  and  he  took  him  down  and  put  him  in  prison ;  but  there  was 
immediately  a  second  one  up  preaching  away.  The  magistrate  ordered  the  constable 
to  take  the  second  one,  and  then  the  third  one  was  up  preaching  away.  He  had 
orders  to  take  the  third,  and  he  put  all  three  together  into  the  prison  and  they  made 
a  noise  there.  The  magistrate  went  to  the  constable,  and  he  said,  "  What  a  noise 
those  men  are  making  ;  go  and  separate  them,  and  do  not  let  them  make  a  noise 
like  that."  So  the  man  went  in  and  separated  them,  and  he  put  two  of  them  in  a 
cell  with  a  robber,  and  they  preached  the  gospel  to  the  robber.  They  preached  to 
liim,  and  they  prayed  with  him,  and  he  got  converted.  More  noise  than  ever  now. 
The  magistrate  said,  "  I  told  you  to  separate  those  men."  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  I 
have  separated  them."  "Separate  them  again,  then."  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  if  I 
separate  them  again  they  will  all  get  it.  That  robber  is  as  bad  as  they  are  now," 
And  at  midnight  Paul  and  Silas  prayed  and  sang  praises  unto  God. — Devotion 
under  dijiculties : — I.  The  men  engaoisd  were  eminently  good.  "  Paul  and  Silas." 
1.  They  were  employed  in  the  highest  service.  2.  They  were  the  truest  benefactors 
of  society.  3.  They  were  successful  opponents  of  evil.  4.  They  were  martyrs  to 
religiousfidehty.  II.  The  place  was  notoriously  wicked.  "Prison."  1.  Circumstances 
are  no  criterion  of  character.  2.  Doing  good  does  not  necessarily  produce  its  equivalent. 
8.  The  world  is  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  true  religion.  4.  The  good  are  non-resistant 
in  their  method  of  meeting  persecution.  6.  The  ungodly  are  permitted  great  freedom. 
III.  The  time  was  extremely  unusual.  "  Midnight."  It  was  neither  of  the  usual 
"  hours  "  of  devotion.  The  heart  of  man  on  earth  and  the  ear  of  God  in  heaven 
are  not  regulated  by  our  chronometers.  Midnight,  as  well  as  mid-day,  is  the 
"  accepted  "  time.  1.  It  was  sinj^'ular  time.  The  world  asleep.  2.  It  was  sacred 
time.  David  and  other  eminent  servants  of  God  often  worshipped  them.  3.  It 
was  suitable  time.  Silence  reigned.  Quietness  favourable  to  devotion.  IV.  Tea 
BEBTioB  WAS  HARTBLLOUB  IN  ITS  NATURE.  They  had  been  stopped  serving  God  by 
preaching.    In  the  circumstances  they  did  what  they  could.    1.  There  was  suppli- 


CHAP,  zn.]  TEE  ACTS.  80S 

cation.  (IJ  Probably  for  pardon  of  enemies.  (2)  Probably  for  success  of  mission. 
(3)  Probably  for  guidance  in  difficulties.  (4)  Probably  for  preservation  of  converts. 
2.  There  was  song.  (1)  Consciousness  of  Divine  favour.  (2)  Acknowledgment  of 
Divine  favour.  (3)  Enjoyment  of  Divine  favour.  8.  There  was  sublimity.  Such 
conduct  in  such  a  place  was  unique — marvellous.  V.  The  results  were  extra- 
OBDiNARiLT  GREAT.  1.  Shaking  of  the  prison.  (1)  Proof  of  the  Divine  presence. 
(2)  Illustration  of  the  Divine  power.  (3)  Sign  of  the  Divine  indignation.  (4) 
Symbol  of  the  Divine  goodness.  Open  doors  and  broken  chains.  Moral  freedom. 
5.  Conversion  of  the  prison-keeper.  (1)  Fear.  (2)  Inquiry.  (3)  Instruction.  (4) 
Faith.  (5)  Obedience.  (6)  Courtesy.  (7)  Joy.  3.  Liberation  of  the  prisoners. 
(1)  Infringement  of  rights.  (2)  Assertion  of  claims.  (3)  Acknowledgment  of 
wrong.  (4)  Freedom.  Conclusion  :  1.  God  cares  for  the  good.  2.  Fidelity  to  God 
rewarded.  3.  Ultimate  triumph  of  the  gospel.  4.  Worship  God.  (B.  D.  Johns.) 
Paul  and  Silas  sing  praises  at  midnight : — Like  the  nightingale,  which  warbles 
forth  its  beautiful  notes  in  the  night-time,  and  when  other  birds  are  quietly  asleep, 
so  these  two  apostles  sang  praises  to  God  at  unconventional  hours,  for  they  were  in 
unusual  circumstances,  and  in  an  unconventional  place.  Many  people  will  go  some 
distance  to  hear  the  nightingale,  and  do  not  soon  forget  its  notes;  so  all  the 
prisoners  in  the  jail  at  Philippi  heard  the  apostles  sing  that  night,  and,  it  is  hoped, 
they  never  forgot  it.  The  other  day,  when  the  wind  was  furiously  swaying  the 
trees,  when  the  heavy  hailstones  rattled  against  the  window-panes,  and  the  darkened 
skies  poured  down  the  rain  in  torrents  amid  lightning  flashes,  until  our  hearts  were 
quaking  with  fear,  a  beautiful  little  bird  sat  upon  one  of  our  sheltered  rose- 
bushes and  sang  its  clear  and  beautiful  notes,  as  though  it  knew  God  would  not 
suffer  the  storm  to  hurt  it.  So,  when  the  storm  of  persecution  burst  over  the 
apostles  at  Philippi,  though  the  excitement  of  their  situation  and  the  soreness  of 
their  stripes  kept  them  awake,  as  some  think,  yet  they  sang  praises  to  God,  believ- 
ing not  only  that  their  situation  would  be  a  furtherance  to  the  gospel,  but  that  God 
would  not  suffer  them  to  be  hurt.  A  wonderful  nocturnal  service : — I.  The 
tJNUsuAL  HOUR  OF  PRAYER — midnight.  II.  The  srNouLAR  temple — a  prison.  III. 
The  remarkable  conductors  of  the  service — Paul  and  Silas  in  the  stocks.  IV. 
Thb  strange  congregation  —  the  prisoners  in  their  cells.  {K.  Gerok.)  The 
prayer-meeting  in  the  Philippian  jail : — It  is  always  easy  to  have  an  excellent 
prayer-meeting  when  the  heart  is  right.  There  were  three  persons  attending 
this  one  there  in  the  jail.  The  ancient  Jews  had  a  saying,  "  Where  two  persons 
meet,  there  is  ever  a  third."  Paul  and  Silas  and  Jesus  Christ  spent  the  night 
together  (Matt,  xviii.  19,  20).  It  was  a  most  unusual — I.  Time—"  midnight."  The 
Jews  were  strict  as  to  their  stated  seasons  of  supplication  ;  but  this  was  the  hour  of 
neither  the  evening  nor  the  morning  oblation.  But  God  never  slumbers.  He  is  alive 
to  His  children's  wants  even  in  "  the  dead  of  night."  II.  Place.  This  was  the 
first  time  the  voice  of  Christian  devotion  was  heard  in  those  precincts — the  earliest 
dungeon  in  Europe  which  held  a  mercy-seat,  although  it  has  had  many  successors. 
III.  Posture.  It  was  neither  standing,  nor  kneeling,  nor  lying  on  one's  face. 
What  a  poor  time  they  would  have  had,  if  they  had  been  compelled  to  use  a  formula 
or  work  themselves  into  an  attitude.  God  does  not  care  for  attitudes  when  only  the 
heart  is  right,  and  the  spirit  true,  and  the  want  pressing.  IV.  Kind  of  prayer — 
"  Praying,  they  sang."  They  set  their  petitions  to  music.  True  prayer  is  praise, 
and  genuine  praise  is  prayer.  V.  Expression  of  prayer — by  tones  of  old  Hebrew 
melodies  such  as  one  hears  now  in  the  synagogue :  wild,  pathetic,  plaintive,  and 
fascinating.  Match  one  of  David's  psalms  or  Isaiah's  anthems  to  it,  and  it  wUl 
move  one's  heart  Uke  a  strain  from  the  sky.  He  who  has  at  command  psalm  after 
psalm  has  wonderful  resources  of  comfort  in  his  times  of  trouble.  VI.  Eeach  of  prayer. 
No  doubt  God  heard  it,  but  "  the  prisoners  "  also  heard  it.  These  were  the  "  songs  in 
the  night  "  that  Elihu  told  Job  about ;  perhaps  the  psalm  was  that  where  Duvid 
told  of  the  good  his  singing  did  him  (Psa.  xlii.  8).  And  we  can  have  no  sort  of 
doubt  that  the  jailer  heard  everything  that  was  going  on.  VII.  Force  of  prayer. 
The  Lord  sent  the  earthquake  in  answer,  and  converted  the  jailer.  VIII.  Direc- 
tion OP  PRAYER.  Imagine  a  triangle.  The  perpendicular  line  represents  the  direc- 
tion of  a  Christian  man's  petition  :  it  goes  up  straight  towards  God.  The  horizontal 
line  represents  the  level  pressure  of  the  same  force,  going  out  towards  those  within 
range.  That  jailer,  no  doubt,  heard  the  singing  and  the  praying;  it  was  not 
addressed  to  him,  but  it  swept  out  toward  him  with  lateral  force.  It  is  not  safe  to 
fcalcolate  deliberately  upon  affecting  a  bystander  by  our  supplication  ;  preaching  in 
prayers  is  never  to  be  commended  ;  but  a  life  of  prayer,  and  an  unconscious  fervou2 


506  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  XTIr 

of  prayer  in  an  individnal  instance,  may  be  usefal  to  one  who  watches  it.  (C.  8, 
Robinson,  D.D.)  The  power  of  song : — Wondrous  power  of  music  I  When  prayera 
give  out,  when  all  is  dark,  the  mystic  waves  of  sweet  melody  have  still  force  to  lift 
VLB  out  of  ourselves,  and  upon  their  golden  tides  our  souls  seem  to  float  away  and 
leave  far  behind  them  the  sad  life  of  tears  and  strife.  I  note  that  Jesus  is  recorded 
as  singing  but  once.  It  was  when  His  soul  was  exceedingly  sorrowful,  even  unto 
death — when  the  gloom  and  foreboding  was  deepest — when  His  disciples  could  not 
speak  or  pray,  and  hardly  dared  to  think.  Then,  after  supper,  when  they  had  sung 
a  hymn,  they  went  out  into  Getbsemane.  In  our  own  homes,  in  times  of  deep 
trouble — after  the  death  or  burial  of  a  beloved  one — in  the  midst  of  some  great  pain 
or  loss — when  the  children  look  blankly  at  each  other,  and  sit  talking  in  whispers,  and 
father  and  mother  scarce  know  how  to  speak  without  weeping — a  sister  or  friend 
will  go  to  the  piano  or  harmonium,  and  presently  there  shall  arise  such  a  sweet 
hymn  as  shall  draw  the  voices  of  the  sorrowing  httle  company  together,  and  the 
cloud  will  be  lifted,  something  like  a  tender  serenity  and  peace  coming  over  the 
oppressed  and  darkened  hearts  as  the  pulses  of  the  music  rise  and  fall.  Indeed 
there  have  been  times  in  the  history  of  the  Church  when  music,  hymn  singing, 
chanting,  have  done  duty  for  almost  the  whole  of  religion.  What  a  part  did  hymn 
singing  play  in  the  life  of  Luther — in  the  Lollard  movement — in  Wesleyan  prayer- 
meetings — in  the  Salvation  Armies — ^past  and  present.  (H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.) 
Sorrow  producing  song : — The  agonies  of  Germany  in  the  Thirty  Years'  War  and 
other  conflicts  was  productive  of  a  vast  number  of  patriotic  and  Christian  songs.  At 
the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  Councillor  Faankenau  made  a  collection  of 
32,712,  which  he  presented  in  three  hundred  volumes  to  the  University  library  at 
Copenhagen ;  while  in  1718  another  collector,  Wetzel,  reckoned  55,000  printed 
German  hymns.  (J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  Joy  in  trouble,  its  influence  upon  others : — 
A  lamp,  when  lighted,  may  burn  by  day,  but  it  is  only  at  night  that  it  is  seen  by 
the  neighbourhood.  The  darkness  does  not  kindle  or  cause  the  light,  but  the  dark- 
ness reveals  it  and  spreads  it  around.  It  is  thus  that  consistent  joy  in  the  Lord, 
when  believers  attain  it,  in  a  time  of  trouble  becomes  an  effective  testimony  for 
Christ.  Not  a  few  owe  their  conversion  instrumentally  to  the  light  that  streamed 
from  a  saint  in  the  hour  of  his  departure — to  the  song  that  rose  from  the  pilgrim 
when  he  was  traversing  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.} 
Paul  and  Silas  in  prison : — No  man  has  more  religion  than  he  can  show  in  time  of 
adversity.  The  jail  was  a  test  of  the  Christian  character  of  Paul  and  Silas.  The 
way  they  stood  the  test,  not  only  exalts  them  as  Christian  heroes,  but  also  shows 
what  power  there  is  in  the  religion  of  Jesus.  I.  A  great  earthquake,  1.  The 
prisoners  rejoicing  (ver.  25).  They  were  praying — for  they  needed  comfort.  They 
sang  praises— for  comfort  was  given.  Their  hymns  were  imto  God  alone;  but 
"  the  prisoners  were  listening  unto  them."  The  Christian  often  exerts  an  influence 
of  which  he  is  unaware.  What  must  have  been  the  feelings  of  the  listeners  ? 
Probably — (1)  Wonder.  Songs  from  that  inner  prison  was  an  unheard-of  thing. 
From  there  usually  came  groans,  curses,  wails  of  despair.  (2)  A  conviction  that 
the  two  men  were  sustained  by  the  God  whom  they  were  praising.  (3)  A  desire  to 
partake  of  the  same  peace  and  joy.  When  a  disciple  has  sunshine  in  trial,  then 
men  say,  "  If  religion  can  do  that  for  us,  then  we  want  it."  Songs  in  the  night  are 
better  than  sermons  in  the  daytime.  2.  The  prisoners  loosed.  God  now  endorses 
the  singers.  The  earthquake  was  natural  in  its  character ;  but  it  happened  at  a 
time  that  shows  that  God  was  in  it,  using  it,  as  He  can  use  any  force  of  nature,  to- 
accomplish  His  will.  II.  A  great  change.  1.  The  keeper  despairing  (ver.  27).. 
His  life  depended  upon  the  keeping  of  the  prisoners.  Awakened  by  the  shock  his 
first  thought  was  of  fidelity  to  his  office,  and,  when  he  beheld  the  open  doors,  his 
instant  conclusion  was  that  the  prisoners  had  escaped.  2.  The  keeper  saved.  (1) 
From  self-destruction  (ver.  28).  There  are  two  interesting  questions  in  connection 
with  this,  (a)  How  did  Paul  know  that  the  keeper  was  intending  suicide  ?  He 
was  in  the  "  inner"  prison,  where  he  could  have  seen  nothing,  (b)  Why  did  none 
of  the  prisoners  attempt  to  escape?  It  would  seem  as  if  the  songs  of  the  two 
missionaries,  and  the  marvel  which  followed,  had  held  them  spellbound.  (2)  Prom 
eternal  destruction.  Why  did  the  keeper  tremble?  He  was  in  no  danger ;  for  not 
a  prisoner  had  escaped.  He  had  rightly  connected  the  earthquake  with  God  and 
the  presence  of  the  servants  of  Ood.  His  fear  was  of  Him  who  is  the  Judge  of  all. 
How  was  he  saved?  "  Believe,"  &o.  Note  how  much  larger  the  promise  was  than 
the  question — "thou  and  thy  house."  He  had  asked  for  himself  only,  but  he 
obtained  euuorance  for  those  whose  salvation  was  of  as  much  oousequenoe  as  his 


CHAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  807 

own.  3.  The  keeper  changed.  How  was  the  change  shown?  (1)  In  washing 
their  stripes.  His  occupation  had  made  him  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  of  others. 
But  now  that  he  had  learned  to  love  the  Saviour  his  heart  was  touched  with  pity. 
(2)  "  Was  baptized,  he  and  all  his  immediately."  Thus  he  and  they  expressed  at 
once  their  faith  in  Christ.  (3)  •'  Set  meat  before  them."  He  did  not  forget  any  of 
their  physical  wants  in  his  own  great  joy.  Those  who  have  been  fed  with  the  Bread 
of  Life  should  not  be  oblivious  to  the  fact  that  the  minister  by  whom  they  are  fed 
has  a  body  that  needs  to  be  fed  also.  (4)  "  Rejoiced  greatly,"  &c.  Now  he  was  the 
possessor  of  the  same  joy  that  had  caused  those  songs  in  the  night.  HI,  A  great 
hxtmujIation.  1.  The  magistrate's  permission  to  depart.  (1)  Given  (ver.  35).  They 
reahsed  that  they  had  acted  hastily,  and  without  warrant,  and  desired  to  get  rid  of 
the  men  as  quietly  as  possible.  (2)  Eefused.  Paul  did  not  stand  upon  a  point  of 
order  as  a  matter  of  pride.  If  they  departed  without  vindication,  their  influence  as 
preachers  of  the  gospel  would  be  gone.  For  the  honour  of  the  Master,  they  refused 
to  go.  2.  The  magistrates'  humiliation  (ver.  37).  And  the  magistrates  were  made 
to  come.  They  did  not  feel  safe  until  they  had  gone  where  they  would  not  again 
hear  from  them.  The  missionaries  went  out  of  prison  with  their  innocence  as 
publicly  declared  as  their  punishment.  And  thus  they  strengthened  the  hold  of 
the  gospel  in  PhiHppi.  3.  The  missionaries'  departure  (ver.  40).  Having  suffered 
BO  much,  one  would  think  that  they  needed  comforting  by  the  brethren  instead. 
But  God  had  comf oiied  them  with  so  great  a  comfort,  that  they  still  were  the  richer, 
and  could  afford  to  give.  They  went  away,  but  they  left  brethren  behind  them. 
The  Church  was  established  at  Philippi,  and  that  could  not  be  driven  out.  (M.  C. 
Hazard.)  Paul  and  Silas  in  prison ; — The  Christian  looks  beyond  this  world  for 
complete  happiness.  Yet  while  here  on  earth  he  has  something  which  the  world 
can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  Deprive  him  of  all  that  which  ministers  to  the 
happiness  of  worldly  men,  and  still  he  is  happy.  We  have  a  striking  example  of 
this  in  the  text.  What  then  can  make  us  liappy  in  any  condition,  or  under  any 
circumstances  ?  We  answer — that  which  made  Paul  and  Silas  so  happy  in  the 
prison  at  Philippi.  The  same  sources  of  support  and  joy  are  open  to  every  real 
Christian.  Let  us,  then,  examine  them.  I.  Their  comparative  estimate  of  what 
THEY  gained,  WITH  WHAT  THEY  LOST.  It  is  by  such  Comparisons  that  we  form  our 
estimate  of  almost  every  condition  in  human  life.  In  this  world,  that  is  reasonably 
esteemed  an  eligible  condition  in  which  the  good  to  be  enjoyed  far  outweighs  the 
evU  to  be  endured.  What  then  was  the  case  of  these  prisoners  ?  Were  they  in 
prison — it  was  not  the  prison  of  death.  Were  they  in  chains — they  still  possessed 
the  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  Did  they  endure  the  pains  of  the  lash — they  had 
peace  which  passeth  all  understanding.  Had  they  no  hopes  from  the  world — they 
had  the  hope  of  eternal  glory.  Who  that  possessed  milhons  would  grieve  at  the 
loss  of  a  penny  ?  When,  therefore,  we  hear  them  say,  "  As  sorrowful,  yet  always 
rejoicing ;  as  having  nothing,  yet  possessing  all  things,"  their  language  is  inteUigible. 

II.    The    ASSURANCE    THAT    THEIR    SUFERINGS  WERE    THE  MEANS  OF  GREAT   GOOD.       They 

regarded  suffering  not  only  as  inseparably  connected  with  the  crown  of  glory,  but  as 
the  appointed  means  of  the  preparation  to  wear  it.  They,  therefore,  •'  gloried  in 
tribulation  because  tribulation  worketh  patience,"  &c.  They  rejoiced  in  the  dark- 
ness of  the  dungeon,  because  there  every  Christian  grace  shone  purer  and  brighter. 
JIL  Love  to  Him  fob  whom  they  suffered.  Love  is  the  strongest  passion  of  the 
human  heart.  It  is  dehght  in  the  object  loved.  With  what  cheerfulness  and 
pleasure  does  it  lead  us  to  act  or  suffer  1  As  intimately  connected  with  their  love 
to  Christ,  I  ought  to  mention  the  great  object  of  these  men — the  honour  of  Christ. 
Ease,  pleasure,  honour,  interest,  Ufe  were  nothing  in  their  view,  and  Christ  was  all 
in  all.  Conclusion  :  1.  Godliness  hath  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is.  Eeal 
religion  in  its  nature  is  a  rich  source  of  support  and  joy  in  every  condition.  2. 
Eehgion  is  as  good  a  thing  now  as  in  the  days  of  the  apostles.  The  same  sources 
of  enjoyment  are  open  to  us  as  to  them.  Why  then  should  not  religion  bless  the 
Christian  under  the  little  crosses  of  this  tranquil  age,  as  well  as  under  the  terrors 
which  the  annals  of  persecution  record  ?  Alas  1  here  is  the  defect.  They  have  not 
as  much  religion  as  they  ought  to  have  and  might  have.  {N.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
The  supreme  power  of  true  piety  : — We  gather  from  this  narrative — 1.  That  good 
men  are  persecuted  notwithstanding  the  most  evident  signs  that  they  are  the 
gervants  of  God,  The  presumption  of  evildoers,  2.  That  the  beneficent  ministries 
of  good  men  incur  the  hatred  of  unrighteous  traffickers,  3.  That  religious  persecu- 
tions are  generally  promoted  by  men  who  have  the  least  regard  for  religion,  4, 
That  religion  often  has  to  endure  the  blame  of  tumults  raised  by  evildoerg.    I.  Ihb 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

POWEB  OF  TRUE  PIETT  TO  GIVB  MEN  JOT  AMTDST  CIECUMSTANCBS  OP  SORBOW.       Paul    and 

Silas — 1.  Their  patient  endurance.  2.  Their  fervent  devotion.  (1)  Devotion 
superior  to  physical  pain.  They  had  been  beaten.  Song  stronger  than  sorrow. 
(2)  Devotion  superior  to  the  suggestion  of  mental  association.  Prison  a  suggestive 
place.  (3)  Devotion  superior  to  the  habitual  needs  of  human  life.  Midnight — 
time  of  sleep.  3.  Their  unique  conduct.  The  masters  with  gains  lost  were  in 
despair  ;  the  jailer  in  earthquake  was  about  to  commit  suicide.  Paul  and  Silaa 
worshipped.  Piety  is  supreme  judged  by  results.  II.  The  powee  of  true  piety  to 
GIVE  MEN  CALMNESS  IN  PHYSICAL  DISTURBANCE.  1.  God  takcs  care  of  His  persecuted 
servants.  2.  The  moral  significance  of  the  physical  occurrences  on  the  earth. 
Newspapers  can  only  record  the  earthquake,  not  its  hidden  providences.     III.  Thb 

POWER    OF    TRUE    PIETY    TO    ENABLE    MEN  TO  GIVE    GUIDANCE  AMIDST  MORAL  PERPLEXITT. 

See  how  the  providence  of  God  has  in  view  the  awakening  of  the  souls  of  men. 
"Believe,"  &c.  1.  This  advice  was  willing.  2.  Wise.  3.  Practicable.  4.  Inspir- 
ing. 5.  Accepted.  IV.  The  power  of  true  piety  to  give  men  dignity  in  the 
HUMILIATING  EMERGENCIES  OF  LIFE.  "  Let  them  comc,"  &c.  1.  Not  the  language 
of  proud  self-assertion.  2.  The  language  of  self-vindication.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Preachers  in  prison : — I.  The  preachers.  1.  Their  punishment.  (1)  "  Many 
stripes."  (2)  "  In  the  inner  prison."  (3)  "  Their  feet  fast  in  the  stocks."  CeU 
windowless  and  damp ;  stocks  irritating  and  painful.  2.  Their  piety.  "  Prayed 
and  sang."     Only  heroes  of  the  highest  type  could  have  prayed  in  such  a  place. 

3.  Their  noise.  "  The  prisoners  heard  them."  They  will  have  all  the  more  atten- 
tive audience  by  the  place  and  time.  Noise  was  no  new  thing  in  the  old  prison. 
Groans,  curses,  threats  had  often  echoed  through  those  gloomy  corridors  ;  but  never 
until  now  prayer  and  praise.  4.  Their  deliverance.  (1)  It  was  supernatural.  "A 
great  earthquake."  (2)  It  was  instantaneous.  "  Immediately  the  doors  were 
opened."  (3)  It  was  complete.  "Every  man's  bands  were  loosed,"  II.  Thb 
PENITENT.  The  exciting  scenes  of  the  afternoon  and  evening  had  passed,  and  "  at 
midnight  "  the  jailer  is  fast  asleep.  1.  His  surprise  (•' waking  out  of  his  sleep") 
at  the  swaying  of  the  prison,  the  open  doors,  and  the  supernatural  aspect  of  things 
generally.  2.  His  fear.  "  That  the  prisoners  had  fled."  Nothing  was  more 
r  asonable.  Priponers  have  not  much  conscience  when  the  alternative  of  bondage 
o-  freedom  is  before  them.  3.  His  desperation.  "Would  have  killed  himself." 
Believing  his  own  Ufe  to  be  forfeited,  his  first  thought  was  that  of  suicide.  That 
was  the  highest  point  to  which  heathen  culture  could  rise.  The  advice  of  Seneca 
was,  "  If  life  is  pleasant,  live  ;  if  not,  you  have  a  right  to  return  whence  you  came." 

4.  His  instructions.  ♦'  Do  thyself  no  harm."  How  did  Paul  know  he  was  going  to 
do  himself  harm  ?  6.  His  encouragement.  "  We  are  all  here. "  How,  then,  could 
Paul  vouch  for  this ?  6.  His  penitence.  "  Came  trembling."  The  marvels  he  had 
witnessed  had  aroused  his  conscience,  and  smitten  him  with  an  awful  sense  oi 
guilt  and  alarm.  7.  His  humility.  "  Fell  down  before  Paul."  There  are  earth- 
quake crises  in  life  when  God's  despised  people  are  appreciated — crises  when  they 
only  can  allay  the  troubled  spirit,  and  answer  the  momentous  questions  which 
agitate  and  alarm  the  human  heart.  8.  His  inquiry.  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ?  "  The  danger  implied  in  this  question  is  not  that  which  prompted  him  to 
suicide.  The  presence  of  all  the  prisoners  saved  him  from  that.  The  inquiry  in- 
volves a  conviction — (1)  Of  danger.  "  Saved."  (2)  Of  the  importance  ol  action 
or  effort.  "  Must."  (3)  Anxiety  to  do  what  may  be  required.  "  What  must  I 
do  ?  "  (4)  Personal  responsibility.  "  What  must  I  do  ?  "  We  lose  ourselves  in 
the  crowd.  True  penitence  individualises  the  man.  III.  The  pardon.  1.  Its  con- 
dition— "Believe."  2.  Its  object — "  Jesus  Christ."  3.  Its  certainty — "Thou  shalt 
be  saved."  4.  Its  effects,  (1)  Sympathetic — "  Washed  their  stripes."  A  man 
should  doubt  his  conversion  if  he  does  not  seek  to  undo  the  wrongs  of  yesterday. 
(2)  Hospitality — "  Into  his  house."  (3)  Liberality — "  Set  meat  before  them."  (4) 
Public  and  prompt  confession — "Baptised  straightway."  (6)  Influence — "And  all 
his."  One  saved  man  has  a  tendency  to  produce  another.  The  jailer,  though  a 
heathen,  had  some  manhood  and  character  about  him,  or  his  family  would  not 
have  been  so  ready  to  follow  him  with  such  confidence.  (T.  Kelly.)  Good  men  in 
prison : — It  is  a  great  disgrace  to  humanity  that  its  greatest  benefactors  have  been 
ill  treated.  Next  to  the  Saviour,  the  world  has  known  no  truer  benefactor  than 
Paul.  And  yet  he  was  cast  into  prison.  We  feel  ashamed  of  our  complaining  as 
we  think  of  this  God's  true  hero  singing  songs  of  praise  unto  the  Lord.  I,  A 
GOOD  MAN  RADIATES  nis  INFLUENCE.  He  caunot  help  it,  1.  Silas  was  benefited  by 
hia  connection  with  Paul.     SUas  was  a  man  of  mark,  but  he  became  more  remark 


CHAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS,  509 

able  from  his  identification  with  Paul.  We  may  not  get  earthly  greatness  or  riches, 
but  we  must  be  better  in  a  moral  sense  by  allowing  ourselves  to  be  touched  by  a 
good  man's  influence.  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise."  2.  Paul 
and  SUas  together  exerted  a  good  influence — (1)  On  the  prisoners,  who  listened  to 
the  sweet  singing.  (2)  On  the  jailer,  whom  they  rescued  from  death.  It  has  been 
BO  ever  since.  •'  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light."  A  bird  wiU  sing  in 
a  cage ;  a  preacher  has  spoken  through  the  grating  of  his  cell.  II.  A.  good  man's 
OHABACTEB  IS  NOT  DAMAGED  BY  OUTWARD  CONDITIONS.  His  reputation  may  be  affected 
by  them ;  for  a  man  may  have  a  good  character  and  a  bad  reputation.  Paul  and 
Silas  had  a  bad  reputation.  But  a  change  is  soon  brought  about.  The  very  jailer 
acknowledges  them  as  messengers  of  God.  To-day  the  world  delights  to  honour 
those  men  who  sat  in  that  cell.  If  we  suffer  as  evil-doers,  we  have  reason  to  be 
ashamed ;  but  if  we  suffer  as  Christians,  let  us  glorify  God  on  this  behalf.  III. 
Good  men  abb  tbub  to  theib  principles,  though  they  have  been  the  causes 
OF  DisASTEB.  If  the  world  were  morally  right,  correct  principles  would  never  bring 
a  man  into  trouble.  If  the  apostles  had  been  brought  up  in  the  school  of  worldly 
prudence,  and  had  sat  at  the  feet  of  Professors  Pliable  and  Worldly  Wiseman,  they 
would  not  have  had  a  sore  back  that  night,  though  they  might  have  had  the  worse 
evil  of  an  uneasy  conscience.  But  they  were  brought  up  in  the  school  of  Christ. 
The  lesson  impressed  upon  their  mind  was,  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
its  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  It  was  theirs  to 
dare  to  do  the  right,  and  leave  consequences.  Throw  the  mere  professor  iato 
prison,  and  he  soon  recants.  But  when  Paul  and  Silas  are  thrown  into  prison^ 
they  pray  and  sing  praises  unto  God.  They  do  not  change  their  mode  of  pro- 
cedure. IV.  Good  men  akb  sustained  and  encouraged  in  theeb  sufferings.  1. 
The  consciousness  of  having  done  right  is  a  sustaining  power.  Paul  and  Silas  had 
Bongs  given  to  them  in  the  night  time  of  their  confinement,  while  the  poor  jailer 
was  in  agonies,  and  the  magistrates  who  condemned  were  sadly  troubled.  2.  The 
consciousness  of  a  helper  in  heaven  is  a  sustaining  power.  Paul  without  prayer 
would  have  been  Paul  without  his  lofty  heroism.  Prayer  nerved  his  arm  for  the 
conflict,  and  brought  down  heavenly  blessings.  {W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  Good  people 
in  prison : — John  Bunyan,  the  immortal  dreamer,  speaking  on  one  occasion  of  the 
cell  on  Bedford  Bridge,  where  for  twelve  long  years  he  was  confined,  said,  "  So, 
being  again  delivered  up  to  the  jailer's  hands,  I  was  had  home  to  prison."  When 
Madame  Guyon  was  imprisoned  in  the  Castle  of  Vincennes,  in  1695,  she  not  only 
sang,  but  wrote  songs  of  praise  to  her  God.  "  It  sometimes  seemed  to  me,"  she 
said,  "  as  if  I  were  a  little  bird  whom  the  Lord  had  placed  in  a  cage,  and  that  I 
had  nothing  now  to  do  but  to  sing.  The  joy  of  my  heart  gave  a  brightness  to  the 
objects  around  me.  The  stones  of  my  prison  looked  in  my  eyes  like  rubies.  I 
esteemed  them  more  than  all  the  gaudy  briUiancies  of  a  vain  world.  My  heart  was 
full  of  that  joy  which  Thou  givest  to  them  that  love  Thee  in  the  midst  of  their 
greatest  crosses  " — a  sentiment  which  she  embodied,  during  one  of  her  imprison- 
ments, in  a  touching  httle  poem,  which  begins  thus — 

••  A  Uttle  bird  I  am, 

Shut  from  the  fields  of  air ; 
And  in  my  songs  I  sit  and  sing 

To  Him  who  placed  me  there : 
Well  pleased  a  prisoner  to  be, 
Because,  my  God,  it  pleaseth  Thee.** 

Bass  Bock,  a  lonely  island  cliff  in  the  Firth  of  Forth,  oS  Haddingtonshire,  two 
miles  from  land,  was  once  used  by  the  English  Government  as  a  fortress  and  State 
prison.  Here,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  many  good  ministers,  persecuted  for 
conscience'  sake,  suffered  confinement ;  and  one  of  their  number,  Mr.  Fraser,  of 
Brea,  wrote  an  account  of  their  prison  hardships.  They  were  alternately  chilled 
through  with  cold  and  half  suffocated  with  Smoke,  fed  with  unwholesome  food,  and 
scarcely  fed  at  all.  "  Many  contracted  diseases  there  which  embittered  and 
shortened  their  lives.  But  from  within  those  walls  the  voice  of  praise  and  prayer 
might  be  often  heard,  mingled  with  the  laughter,  oaths,  and  songs  of  the  reckless 
sentinels  ;  and  the  souls  of  the  captives  were  borne,  on  the  wings  of  holy  medita- 
tion, far  aloft  and  away  from  the  dreary  rock  within  which  their  bodies  were  pent." 
"  Every  day,"  continues  Fraser,  "  I  read  the  Scriptures,  exhorted  and  taught  there 
from,  did  sing  psalms  and  prayed  with  such  of  our  society  as  our  masters  did  per 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

mit  to  worship  together,  and  this  two  times  a  day.  I  studied  Hebrew  and  Greek, 
and  I  likewise  read  some  divinity,  and  wrote  a  Treatise  on  Faith."  The  miracle 
in  the  prison : — -I,  The  prater  (ver.  25).  It  is  night.  All  are  buried  in  slumber. 
A  dark  building — a  lodging  for  the  night,  a  prison.  But  light  is  in  one  of  the  ceUa 
— internal  light,  the  light  of  faith.  Therefore  prayer  and  praise.  II.  The  shock 
(vers.  26-28).  Not  only  were  the  walls  shaken,  but  the  jailer's  heart.  Certainly  at 
first  a  shock  of  anguish  and  despair.  But  eternal  love  watches  and  prevails.  The 
comforting  word.  "  We  are  all  here."  Hope  returns ;  but  he  wishes  to  see  hia 
fortune  and  to  grasp  it  with  his  hands  (ver.  29).  III.  The  great  question  (vers. 
30-82).  It  is  not  entirely  unpremeditated.  Already  the  praying  apostles  have 
caused  the  presentiment  of  something  higher  to  rise  in  him.  Perhaps  also  earlier 
experiences  in  his  dismal  employment.  The  earthquake  has  ripened  the  slumber- 
ing seed.  The  apostles  have  not  fled.  How  secure  and  happy  they  must  be  ! 
"Whiat  must  I  do  that  I  may  be  the  same  ?  The  great  life  question  finds  also  a  great 
life  answer.  There  is  one  answer.  Without  Christ  no  one  is  saved  ;  through  Him 
all  may  be  saved.  IV.  The  first  love  (vers.  33,  34).  Waht  is  it  ?  The  attempt 
to  make  a  return  for  what  has  been  received — to  do  good  to  Christ  in  His  servants. 
(Lisco.)  What  the  Lord  can  make  of  a  prison : — I.  A  quiet  chapel  of  prater 

(ver.  25).     II.  An  alarming  place  op  judgment  (vers.  26-29).     IH.  A  wholesome 

8CB00L    OF   repentance  (VCrS.  30, 31).      IV.    A    BROTHERLT   HOUSE    OF   CHRISTIAN  LOVB 

AND  COMPASSION  (vers.  32,  33).  V,  A  blessed  birthplace  of  the  new  life  (ver. 
34).      (K.  Gerok.)  Disadvantages  made  useful : — I.    Strange  places  mat  be 

changed  into  churches.  If  in  many  cases  desecration  has  taken  place,  many  sur- 
prising instances  of  consecration  have  also  occurred.  We  might  turn  every  place 
into  a  praying-ground.  The  teaching  of  this  immediate  lesson  is  that  distressing, 
harmful,  and  threatening  circumstances  may  be  turned  into  ladders  up  to  heaven. 
What  are  you  doing  in  your  unusual  circumstances — moaning,  groaning,  complain- 
ing? Paul  and  Silas  "  sang  praises."  Such  men,  therefore,  never  could  be  in  prison. 
Christians  ought  never  to  be  in  any  circumstances  which  they  cannot  turn  into 
sacramental  occasions.  II.  Christian  workers  and  worshippers  mat  have  unex- 
pected observers  and  listeners.  It  is  always  exactly  so.  1.  You  do  not  speak 
without  being  listened  to  ;  you  do  not  go  to  church  without  being  observed.  The 
preacher  speaks  to  his  immediate  congregation,  but  he  knows  not  who  is  listening 
in  the  vestibule.  "  And  the  prisoners  were  listening."  They  never  heard  such 
music  before  1  They  had  been  accustomed  to  profane  language ;  to  violent  and 
complaining  exclamations  ;  but  here  is  a  new  spirit  in  the  house.  It  is  so  at  home. 
Passing  the  room  door,  we  pause  a  moment  to  hear  some  sweet  voice  in  prayer  or 
praise,  and  it  follows  the  life  like  a  pleading  angel.  2.  What  is  true  on  the  one 
side  is  true  on  the  other.  The  unjust  judgment  you  passed  was  listened  to  by  your 
children,  and  they  will  grow  up  to  repeat  your  cynicism.  III.  It  is  possible  qoietlt, 
and  even  thankfullt,  to  accept  all  the  circumstances  of  life.  Nothing  must 
interfere  with  the  religious  sacrifice.  Are  we  in  prison?  We  may  have  to  alter  the 
hour  of  worship,  but  not  the  worship  itself.  Are  we  in  an  uncongenial  atmosphere? 
We  may  have  to  wait  until  the  company  has  broken  up  before  communion  with  the 
Father ;  but  it  is  only  waiting.  Show  me  a  Christian  who  does  not  complain. 
Where  is  the  ancient  joy?  May  the  old  days  come  again  1  When  they  come 
Christians  will  accept  poverty  or  wealth,  life  or  death,  bleak  March  or  warm  June, 
with  thankfulness,  saying,  "  This  is  the  best  for  me ;  I  live  not  in  circumstance,  but 
in  faith."  IV.  This  is  a  full  religious  service.  "  But  there  was  no  preaching," 
you  say.  Yes,  there  was ;  for  we  may  preach  by  singing.  But,  even  in  a  more 
direct  and  literal  sense,  preaching  was  added  to  prayer  and  praise.  The  earthquake 
took  place,  and  the  jailer,  with  his  house,  became  a  congregation  to  which  Paul  and 
Silas  did,  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  term,  preach.  So  that  night  they  had  a  full 
servioe^prayer,  praise,  preaching,  and  conversion.  V.  Look  at  this  conversion 
OF  THE  jailer.  1.  It  took  place  under  circumstances  which  may  well  be  described 
as  "exciting  "  Have  we  not  been  unjust  to  what  is  called  "reUgious  excitement"? 
But  are  the  circumstances  to  blame,  pr  ourselves?  We  like  quietness — deadness  ; 
we  do  not  like  to  be  *'  excited,"  because  the  devil  has  chloroformed  us  into  a  state 
of  insensibility.  Jesus  Christ  did  not  rebuke  the  excitement  which  followed  Hia 
ministry;  when  others  would  have  had  Him  rebuke  them.  He  said,  "I  tell  you  that 
if  these  held  their  peace,  the  very  stones  would  cry  out."  2.  Happily  the  incident 
does  not  end  here.  To  excitement  was  added  the  necessary  element  of  instruction 
(ver.  32).  Tears  in  the  eyes  that  are  not  followed  by  activities  in  the  hand  harden 
the  very  heart  which  for  the  moment  they  softened.    We  shall  be  the  worse  for  every 


4WAP.  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  Wl 

revival  that  ends  in  itself.     Times  of  revival  must  be  fQllowed  by  times  of  study. 

We  might  get  up  such  services  as  these  almost  every  day  in  the  week.    If  we  prayed 

and  praised  in  every  prison  into  which  our  Kf  e  is  thrust,  we  should  be  heard  by  strange 

listeners,  we  should  be  interrogated  by  strange  inquirers,  and  doors  of  usefulness 

would  be  opened  in  the  very  granite  which  apparently  shuts  us  in.     {J.  Parker,  D.D. ) 

The  surpassing  power  of  personal  Christianity  : — Here  we  see  it — I.  Elevating  the 

fiPiEiT  ABOVE  THE  QBBATE8T  TEIAL8  (ver.  25).  What  gives  religion  this  power.  1.  Faith 

in  the  Divine  superintendence.     The  apostles  knew  that  they  were  not  here  by 

SMScident  or  chance,  but  that  the  whole  was  under  the  wise  and  kind  control  of  the 

Eternal  Father.    This  is  consoling.    Job  felt  this.    "  He  knoweth  the  way  that  I 

take,"  &o.     2.  Consciousness  of  God's  approval.    The  "well  done"  of  Heaven 

■echoed  within,  and  set  all  to  music.    "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?  " 

"  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God,"  &o.    3.  The  thought  of 

<!hrist's  trisJs  in    comparison    with    their  own.     4.    Assurance  of    a    glorious 

deliverance.    "  Our  light  afflictions,  which  are  but  for  a  moment,"  &o.     "  I  reckon 

that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared,"  &o.    He 

who  has  this  religion  can  find  a  paradise  in  a  dungeon.      II.  Ensubino  thb 

iNTEBPOsiTioM  OF  GoD  (ver.  26).    While  caring  for  all  God  takes  special  care  of  the 

•good.     1.  Beason  would  suggest  this,  viz.,  that  the  Eternal  Spirit  would  feel  a 

greater  interest  in  mind  than  in  matter ;  that  the  Eternal  Father  in  His  offspring 

than  in  His  mere  workmanship  ;  that  the  Source  of  love  and  holiness  in  those  who 

-participate  in  His  own  moral  attributes  than  in  those  who  do  not.    2.  The  Bible 

teaches  this.    (1)  In  exphcit  declarations.     "  To  that  man  will  I  look,"  &o.     "  As 

a  father  pitieth  his  children,"  &o.     "  Wherefore  if  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the 

field,"  &o.    (2)  In  the  biography  of  the  good.    Did  He  not  specially  interpose  on 

behsJf  of  the  patriarchs,  prophets,  and  apostles  ?    If  necessary  He  will  make  the 

heavens  rain  bread,  and  the  rock  out-pour  refreshing  streams.    He  wUl  divide  the 

Bea,  and  stop  the  mouth  of  lions.    lU.  Cafaoitatino  the  souij  fob  the  hiobest 

DSEFxniNESS.    The  Philippian  jaUer — 1.  Was  prevented  from  self-destruction.  The 

voide  of  Ghristianity  to  man  is,  "  Do  thyself  no  harm  "  of  any  kind.    The  good 

are  ever  aseful  in  preventing  evil.    2.  Was  directed  to  true  safety.    His  question 

indicates  a  complex  state  of  mind.    He  had  regard  not  only  to  material  and  civil 

deliverance,  but  to  spiritual  and  eternal.    The  question  implies  a  sense  of  peril, 

and  a  sense  of  the  necessity  of  individual  effort.    Something  must  be  done.    Paul, 

without  circumlocution  and  delay,  answers,  "  Believe,"  &o.    Believe  on  Him  as  the 

Bepresentative  of  God's  love  for  the  sinner,  as  the  Atoner  to  God's  character,  as 

the  Guide  to  God's  heaven.    8.    Experienced  a  delightful  change  (vers.  33,  84). 

The  ruffian  who  "  thrust  them  into  the  inner  prison,  and  made  their  feet  fast  in 

the  stocks,"  now  tenderly  washes  their  "  stripes,"  and  entertains  them  with  pious 

hospitality.    The  terror-struck  soul  who  sprang  in,  in  utmost  horror,  is  now  full  of 

joy  and  faith  (ver.  34).    IV.  Investing  the  soul  with  the  tbdest  indbpendenot 

^ver.  36,  &o.).    This  is  seen — 1.  In  their  superiority  to  the  fear  of  man.    As  soon 

as  they  were  miraculously  delivered  from  prison,  they  might  have  hurried  away 

from  such  a  scene  of  enemies ;  but  they  remained,  although  the  magistrates  gave 

them  liberty  to  depart.    They  were  not  afraid.    They  could  chant  the  46th  psalm. 

2.  In  refusing  great  benefits,  because  offered  on  improper  grounds.    We  will  not 

accept  as  a  favour  what  we  demand  as  a  right.    A  good  man  will  refuse  liberty, 

social  influence,  wealth,  unless  they  can  be  honourably  and  righteously  obtained. 

8.  In  triumphing  over  their  enemies.    The  tyrants  became  fawning  suppliants  at 

the  feet  of  their  prisoners.     Such  is  Christian  piety  at  first  displayed  in  Europe, 

and  in  a  prison.    Piety  is  not  that  weak,  simpering  thing  which  often  passes  for  it. 

It  is  the  mightiest  force  on  earth.    True  Christians  have  not  received  "  the  spirit 

of  fear,  but  of  love,  power,  and  of  a  sound  mind."    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)      God^$ 

heroes  and  man's: — On  losing  a  battle  in  that  neighbourhood,  Cassius,  "  the  last 

of  the  Bomans,"  hid  himself  in  his  tent,  and  bade  his  freedmen  strike,  while  Brutus, 

in  his  sullen  desperation,  fell  upon  his  sword.    But,  so  far  from  drooping  and 

murmuring,  and  calling  God  to  account,  who  had  beckoned  them  to  Europe,  and 

yet  had  permitted  them  to  be  so  "  shamefully  entreated  " ;  so  far  from  resolving  to 

-desert  a  Master  who  had  not  protected  them,  or  deeming  the  vision  at  Troas  a 

lure  to  draw  them  on  to  stripes  and  a  dungeon,  «  Paul  and  Silas "  prayed,  and 

not  only  poured  out  their  hearts  in  supplication,  but  "  sang  praises  unto  God,"  and 

that  in  no  whispered  melody,  for  "the  prisoners  heard  them."  {Prof.  Eadie.)     And 

the  prisoners  heard  them. — Indirect  means  of  doing  good : — Though  the  speakers 

'Were  bound,  the  Word  was  free ;  not  only  the  Word  that  went  upward  to  the  throne 


619  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  xvu 

of  God,  but  also  the  echo  of  the  Word,  that  pierced  the  gloomy  partition  walla 
and  sank  into  the  startled  ears  of  wretched  prisoners.  It  seemed  a  roundabout  road 
that  the  gospel  took  to  reach  these  Gentiles ;  but  it  did  not  miss  its  way.  There 
was  a  dead  wall  between  the  apostles  and  their  audience,  and  therefore  they 
did  not  preach  that  night.  But  there  was  no  wall  between  them  and  the  Father  of 
their  s-pirits:  praying  they  hymned  God,  and  the  prayer  sent  upward  fell  down 
again  on  the  other  side  of  the  partition,  falling  there  on  listening  ears.  In  this 
circuitous  method  the  gospel  reached  some  needy  souls.  It  is  thua  that  in  modern 
warfare  they  often  overcome  a  fortress  which  is  too  strong  to  be  taken  by  direct 
assault.  The  wall  frowns  thick  and  high  between  the  defenders  and  the  assailants. 
No  missile  sent  in  a  direct  line  can  touch  the  protected  garrison.  The  beseigers  in 
such  a  case  throw  their  balls  high  into  the  heavens  ;  these  fall  within  the  enclosure 
and  do  their  work.  When  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  cannot  by  direct  preaching 
reach  men,  he  may  by  prayer  and  praise.  Christians  traveUing  in  Bomish  or 
otherwise  darkened  districts,  might  in  this  way  scatter  blessings  in  their  track.  And 
BO  might  those  who  live  in  benighted  neighbourhoods.     {W.  Amot,  D.D.) 

Yer.  26.  And  suddenly  there  was  a  great  earthquake. — The  earthquake  eU 

Philippi : — ^A  miraculous  act  of  the  breaker  of  all  bonds.  I.  He  beeaks  trb  Boin>s 
OF  TKiBUiiATiON,  wheu  His  elect  call  to  Him  day  and  night  (Paul  and  Silas).  IL 
He  teabs  asunder  thb  fetters  of  sin,  when  bound  souls  sigh  after  Him  (the 
jailer).  III.  He  makes  a  path  for  His  Word  and  Kingdom  even  when  thb  wobld 
PUTS  fetters  on  them.  "  The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound."  IV.  He  bursts  open 
THE  prison  of  the  GRAVE,  when  the  hour  of  eternal  redemption  strikes.  That  hour 
is  said  to  be  midnight.  {K.  Oerok.)  EarUiquakea : — We  have  all  read  of  the 
earthquake  in  Lisbon,  in  Lima,  in  Aleppo,  and  in  Caraccas ;  but  we  live  in  a 
latitude  where  in  aU  our  memory  there  has  not  been  one  severe  volcanic  disturbance. 
And  yet  we  have  seen  fifty  earthquakes.  Here  is  a  man  who  has  been  building  up 
a  large  fortune.  His  bid  on  the  moaey  market  was  felt  in  all  the  cities.  He  tbinks 
he  has  got  beyond  all  annoying  rivalries  in  trade,  and  he  says  to  himself, "  Now  I  am 
free  and  safe  from  all  possible  perturbation."  But  in  1837,  or  in  1857,  or  in  1873  a 
national  panic  strikes  the  foundations  of  the  commercial  world,  and  crash  I  goes  all 
that  magnificent  business  establishment.  Here  is  a  man  who  has  built  up  a  very  beau- 
tiful home.  His  daughters  have  just  come  home  from  the  seminary  with  diplomas  of 
graduation.  His  sons  have  started  in  Ufe,  honest,  temperate,  and  pure.  When 
the  evening  lights  are  struck,  there  is  a  happy  and  unbroken  family  circle.  But 
there  has  been  an  accident  down  at  Long  Branch.  The  young  man  ventured  too 
tar  out  in  the  surf.  The  telegraph  hurled  the  terror  up  to  the  city.  An  earth- 
^nake  struck  under  the  foundations  of  that  beautiful  home.  The  piano  closed ;  the 
surtains  dropped ;  the  laughter  hushed.  Crash  1  go  aU  those  domestic  hopes,  and 
prospects,  and  expectations.  So,  my  friends,  we  have  all  felt  the  shaking  down  of 
some  great  trouble,  and  there  was  a  time  when  we  were  as  much  excited  as  this 
man  of  the  text,  and  we  cried  out  as  he  did :  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  "  The  midnight 
hour  in  the  prison  of  Philippi,  an  image  of  the  great  hour  of  the  Lord : — 1.  The 
world  sleeps,  but  believers  wait  for  it  with  watchfulness  and  prayer.  2.  The  earth 
quakes,  but  the  Lord  is  near.  3.  The  servants  of  sin  tremble  before  judgment. 
4.  The  children  of  the  kingdom  lift  up  their  heads  with  joy,  because  their  re- 
demption draweth  nigh.  {K.  Gerok.)  God  a  powerful  Ally  : — When  John  G.  Paton, 
upon  his  Uttle  island  of  Anyeitum,  was  almost  giving  up  hope  of  life,  though  still 
trying  to  pacify  the  bloodthirsty  natives,  it  happened  that  upon  the  far  horizon 
line  a  ship's  sails  were  seen  and  a  line  of  smoke  going  up  into  the  sky.  «•  The  fire 
steamer  comes,"  cried  the  natives  in  wild  terror,  and  ran  to  hide  themselves  in  the 
bush.  The  chief,  who  had  been  so  cruel,  came  to  beg  Paton  for  his  life.  It  seemed 
like  the  last  judgment  to  these  poor  ignorant  subjects.  But  what  was  it  to  the 
missionary?  To  him  the  connecting  link  with  his  own  couutry,  the  help  and 
strength  of  new  life.  When  the  ship  came  it  proved  to  be  one  of  Her  Majesty's 
men-of-war,  and  the  sight  of  the  power  of  Paton's  Queen  so  struck  the  native 
imagination  that  they  decided  to  leave  the  man  who  had  such  powerful  friends  to 
do  his  work  unhaimed.  So  behind  the  Christian  there  is  the  Christian's  God,  all- 
powerful,  all-willing. 

Vers.  27,  28.  And  the  keeper  of  the  prison  .  .  .  would  have  killed  himself. — 

Svicide  : — Suicide  is  not  to  fear  death,  but  yet  to  be  afraid  of  life.  It  is  a  brave 
act  of  valour  to  contemn  death ;  but  where  life  is  more  terrible  than  death,  it  is 


CHAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  513- 

then  the  truest  valour  to  dare  to  live  ;  and  herein  religion  has  taught  us  a  noble 
example  ;  for  all  the  valiant  acta  of  Cartius,  SccBvola,  or  Codrus  do  not  parallel  or 
match  that  of  Job.  (Sir  Thomas  Browne.)  Suicide  at  Philippi : — Philippi  is 
famous  in  the  annals  of  suicide.  Here  Cassius,  unable  to  survive  defeat,  covered 
his  face  in  the  empty  tent,  and  ordered  his  freedmen  to  strike  the  blow.  His 
messenger,  Titinius,  held  it  to  be  "  a  Eoman's  part,"  to  follow  the  stern  example. 
Here  Brutus  bade  adieu  to  his  friends,  exclaiming,  "  Certainly  we  must  fly,  yet  not 
with  the  feet,  but  with  the  hands";  and  many  whose  names  have  never  reached 
us,  ended  their  last  struggle  for  the  republic  by  self-inflicted  death.  Here,  too, 
another  despairing  man  would  have  committed  the  same  crime,  had  not  his  hand 
been  arrested  by  an  apostle's  voice.  Instead  of  a  sudden  and  hopeless  death,  the 
jailer  received  at  the  hands  of  his  prisoner  the  gift  both  of  temporal  and 
spiritual  life.  (J.  S.  Howson,  D.D.)  Do  thyself  no  harm. — Religion  a  safe- 
guard : — I.  The  alarm  of  the  keeper  of  the  prison.  The  tokens  of  the  Divine 
presence  were  earthquakes,  the  opening  of  doors,  and  the  loosing  of  bonds.  In 
this  manner  God  bore  a  testimony  to  His  faithful  servants,  and  prepared  the  way 
for  the  jailer's  conversion.  But  the  moral  terror  was  the  most  memorable  thing 
in  his  history.  God  used  terrific  means  with  a  view  to  a  peaceful  and  merciful 
end.  He  was  first  reduced  to  despair  of  himself,  and  next  led  to  hope  in  Christ. 
The  degrees  of  terror  are  different  in  different  minds.  Lydia  was  brought  by  calm 
and  peaceful  means ;  the  jailer  by  solemn  and  arousing  ones.  Some  doubt 
whether  they  are  converted,  because  they  have  not  passed  through  strong  con- 
victims,  agonies  of  terror.  Let  them  look  at  Lydia.  That  man  has  had  terror 
enough,  be  it  much  or  little,  if  he  has  been  brought  to  Christ.  Our  state  is  to  be 
determined,  not  by  our  former  emotions,  but  by  our  present  conduct.  II.  Thb 
LANGUAOE  OF  St.  Paultohim  :  "  Do  thyself  no  harm."  The  text  suggests  three  great 
truths — 1.  That  it  is  the  tendency  of  sin  to  barm  the  sinner.  He  does  not  think  so  in 
the  outset  of  his  career ;  but  he  finds  it  out  very  soon.  We  follow  evil  under  the  forms 
of  good.  The  enemy  of  souls  first  allures,  and  then  destroys.  Sin  wounds  the 
conscience;  blights  the  reputation ;  injures  the  sinner  in  his  worldly  circumstances  ; 
destroys  the  happiness  of  his  family ;  shortens  his  days  ;  ruins  his  soul.  As  the 
shadow  follows  the  body,  so  do  plagues  follow  sin.  2.  That  it  is  the  design  of  religion 
to  be  a  moral  safeguard  and  blessing.  It  is  favourable  to  a  peaceful  conscience  ;  to 
a  good  name ;  to  worldly  prosperity ;  to  family  comfort ;  to  length  of  days  ;  to  a 
peaceful  death ;  and  joyful  eternity.  The  gospel  is  a  preservative  as  well  as  a 
restorative  system.  3.  That  it  is  the  office  of  the  ministry  to  interfere,  by  its 
counsels  and  warnings,  between  man  and  misery.  Paul  cried  with  a  loud  voice. 
III.  The  nrpRovEMENT  it  suggests  to  ourselves.  Believe  and  obey  the  gospel. 
It  is  a  remedy  suited  to  all  times  and  persons.  1.  By  way  of  inquiry.  Have 
we  taken  the  first  step  in  the  road  to  heaven  ?  2.  By  way  of  caution.  Guard 
against  the  beginning  of  sin.  3.  By  way  of  invitation  to  penitents.  "  Turn  to  the 
stronghold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope."  4.  Encouragement  to  Christians  derived  from 
the  ascertained  connection  between  faith  and  salvation.  "Believe  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  (The  Evangelist.)  Self-preservation  : — 
Do  thyself  no  harm.  I.  Phtsicallt.  The  body  is  God's  handiwork,  "fearfully 
and  wonderfully  made."  It  has  been  redeemed  by  Christ,  and  is  a  temple  of  the^ 
Holy  Ghost.  Do  not  harm  it  therefore — 1.  By  overwork.  2.  By  excessive 
exercise.  3.  By  undue  exposure.  4.  By  enervating  indolence  or  pleasure.  5.  By 
neglecting  the  means  of  its  support  in  health  or  its  recovery  in  sickness.  We  shall 
have  to  give  an  account  for  deeds  done  in  the  body  in  more  senses  than  one.  II. 
Mentally.  How  august  the  gift  of  intellect  with  its  faculties  of  memory,  reason, 
imagination,  &c.,  and  how  delicate  and  susceptible  of  injury.  There  are  laws  of 
mind  as  well  of  matter  which  cannot  be  disobeyed  without  severe  retribution.  Do 
thy  mind  no  harm — 1.  By  overstrain.  Some  of  the  highest  in  examination  lists 
have  done  poorly  in  life,  because  their  academic  honours  represent  not  so  much 
useful  and  healthy  knowledge,  but  so  much  cram.  2.  By  neglect.  The  mind  gets 
into  an  otiose  and  diseased  state  for  want  of  exercise.  III.  Emotionally.  How 
rich  a  gift  is  feeling,  and  how  soon  and  easily  is  the  heart  injured  or  broken  I  Da 
thyself  no  harm — 1.  By  over-sensitiveness.  2.  By  deliberate  petrifaction.  3.  By 
anxiety.  Guard  love  against  unworthy  objects  ;  hope  against  unreasonable 
expectations;  joy  against  exhaustible  sources.  Cultivate  the  best  friendships; 
"  Be  content  with  such  things  as  ye  have " ;  never  despair.  IV.  Spibituaiilt. 
Here  the  greatest  harm  can  be  done.  Here  injury  may  be  irreparable.  1.  Com- 
munion with  God,  who  is  the  soul's  life,  may  be  broken  off.  2.  The  soul  may 
VOL.  n.  '63 


-;^- 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rvl. 

die  to  its  richest  inheritance  in  time  and  eternity.  Do  it  no  harm,  therefore,  by 
neglecting  the  means  of  grace,  prayer,  Bible  study,  Christian  fellowship,  &o.,  nor 
by  the  allowance  of  any  known  sin.  V.  Socially.  Under  this  head  may  be  grouped 
a  variety  of  interests  in  which  great  damage  may  be  done.  A  man  may  harm 
himself — 1.  Commercially,  by  unwise  speculations,  wrong  methods,  indolence,  Ac. 
2.  In  his  friendships  by  bad  associations,  want  of  thought,  forbearance,  Ac.  3. 
Politically.  The  Christian  and  unfailing  rule  of  self-preservation  is,  •*  Thou  shalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  .  .  .  and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  (J.  W.  Bum.)  Pro- 
vidential deliverance  : — A  young  gentleman  spent  his  fortune  in  riotous  living  and 
was  reduced  to  poverty.  For  a  time  his  friends  supported  him  ;  but  at  last  they 
aJl  forsook  him.  Wandering  about  as  a  vagabond,  and  having  no  pros}  ect  of  a  further 
Bupply,  he  resolved  to  drown  himself.  Being  then  in  a  strange  place,  he  went  to 
the  river-side ;  but  waiting  till  it  was  dark,  he  saw  a  light  in  a  house  and  went 
to  it.  The  people  there  were  singing  ;  he  listened,  and  after  hearing  a  chapter  from 
the  Bible  and  a  prayer,  he  knocked  at  the  door  and  was  admitted.  In  the  astonish- 
ing kindness  of  Providence  the  passage  for  consideration  was  the  one  before  us. 
After  several  members  had  made  tlieir  remarks  they  concluded,  as  usual,  with 
prayer,  after  which  the  stranger  asked  how  they  came  to  know  his  thoughts,  for  he 
had  not  mentioned  his  purpose  to  any  person  on  earth.  This  equally  surprised  the 
audience,  for  they  had  not  seen  or  heard  of  him  till  now.  Upon  which  the  young 
gentleman  told  them  his  design  and  how  it  had  been  prevented.  This  remarkable 
providence  struck  him  to  such  a  degree  that,  Ly  the  Divine  blessing,  it  was  made 
the  means  of  his  conversion.  He  became  an  eminent  Christian,  regained  the  favour 
of  his  friends,  and  lived  a  useful  and  godly  life.  Timely  advice : — When  Napoleon 
was  defeated  at  Waterloo,  about  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  he  exclaimed,  "  Sauve 
qui  peut,"  and  rode  off  the  field  to  Charleroi.  But  that  was  after  his  campaigns 
had  stained  his  sword  with  the  blood  and  tears  of  millions,  and  when  the  three 
preceding  days  had  been  marked  by  the  fall  of  40,000  French,  16,000  Prussians, 
and  13,000  British  and  Germans.  Paul's  advice,  "  Do  thyself  no  harm,"  was  given 
in  time  to  prevent  mischief,  and  this  is  the  timely  and  standing  counsel  of  the 
gospel  to  the  men  of  all  nationalities  in  all  ages.     {H.  Peach,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  29-34.  Then  he  called  for  a  light,  and  sprang  in,  and  came  tremblliig. — 

The  Philippian  jailer : — I.  The  state  of  his  mind  before  conversion.  1.  He  was 
a  careless  sinner.  This  appears  not  so  much  from  his  official  acts  ;  for  the  guilt 
of  persecution  rested  on  the  people  and  magistrates  :  but  from  his  conduct  aa 
depicted  in  ver.  26,  in  which  we  have  the  picture  of  a  worldly,  careless,  godless  man, 
driven  to  desperation  by  an  unexpected  temporal  calamity.  He  had  no  fear  of  God, 
since  he  was  more  afraid  of  "  them  that  could  kill  the  body,"  <fec. ;  he  had  no  care  for 
his  soul,  since  he  was  ready  to  peril  its  salvation  ;  he  was  utterly  reckless  about 
eternity,  since  to  escape  present  misery  he  was  about  to  rush  unsummoned  into  the 
presence  of  his  Judge.  The  idea  of  suicide  could  not  have  occurred  to  any  man 
unless  he  were  utterly  careless  alike  to  God  aud  His  everlat^ting  prospects.  2.  But 
a  change  was  wrought  before  conversion  ;  from  being  a  careless  he  becomes  a  con- 
vinced sinner.  This  preliminary  change  consisted  in  strong  convictions  of 
conscience  and  lively  apprehensions  of  danger;  and  these,  although  suddenly 
produced,  were  profound  and  sincere  (ver.  29).  Here  is  a  great  change  from  apathy 
to  concern,  from  recklessness  to  anxious  inquiry.  This  conviction  may  be  accounted 
for  by  what  he  had  seen  and  heard;  the  confession  of  the  slave  girl;  the  conduct 
of  the  apostles ;  the  earthquake ;  Paul's  exhortation.  3.  But  while  a  marked 
change  had  been  wrought,  it  was  not  conversion.  Conviction,  while  it  pre- 
cedes conversion,  is  not  always  followed  by  it.  He  had  remorse,  but  remorse  is 
not  repentance;  he  had  fear,  but  fear  is  not  faith;  he  had  an  apprehension  of 
danger,  but  danger  may  be  apprehended  while  the  method  of  deliverance  is  unknown. 
These  convictions  were  useful  as  preparatory  means  ;  they  were  hopeful  symptoms ; 
but  they  may  be,  and  often  are,  stifled,  resisted,  and  overcome.  That  he  was  not 
converted  is  evident  from  his  question,  which  implies  that  as  yet  ho  was  ignorant 
of  the  ground  of  a  sinner's  hope,  and  that  he  was  disposed  to  look  to  something  that 
he  might  himself  do,  rather  than  what  might  be  Divinely  done  for  him.  IL  Thh 
MEANS  BY  WHICH  HIS  CONVERSION  WAS  EFFECTED.  It  matters  Uttlc  by  what  circum- 
Btflnces  a  sinner  is  first  awakened  to  inquire ;  whether  by  the  earthquake,  or  the 
still  small  voice.  But  while  the  circumstances  are  various  the  means  are  the  same 
in  all — the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  the  full  and  free  gospel  of  the  grace  of  Qod.   Th« 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  615 

jailer  was  not  converted  by  the  3arthquake,  on  the  contrary,  the  effect  of  that  waa 
suicidal  terror ;  but  what  the  miraculous  event  could  not  do  was  done  by  the  gospel. 
He  was  directed  to  look  out  of  himseK  to  Christ,  to  relinquish  all  hope  of  salvation 
by  works,  and  to  work  it  by  faith.  The  exhortation  implies — 1.  That  he  should 
believe  the  truth  concerning  Christ — which  is  involved  in  the  names  given  him.  (1) 
Jesus — i.e.,  Saviour.  (2)  Christ,  the  Lord's  anointed.  (3)  Lord.  2.  That  believing 
the  truth  concerning  Christ,  he  should  place  his  own  personal  trust  and  reliance  in 
Christ  alone  as  One  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  The  gospel  thus  proposed  was — 
(1)  A  suitable  means,  as  prescribing  a  remedy  in  all  respects  adapted  to  the  evils  he 
felt  or  feared.  (2)  SufiScient,  as  containing  everything  to  instruct,  encourage,  or 
persuade.  III.  The  natcee  of  the  change.  His  conversion  properly  consisted  in 
believing  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Until  he  believed  he  was  unconverted ;  but  as 
soon  as  he  believed  he  became  a  converted  man.  The  production  of  pure  faith  is 
not  a  mere  change  of  opinion,  but  a  radical  and  thorough  renovation  attested  by 
certain  fruits.  1.  He  thirsted  for  more  instruction  (ver.  32).  2.  He  was  concerned 
for  the  souls  of  his  family.  3.  His  faith  wrought  by  love.  4.  He  had  peace  and 
joy  in  believing.  6.  He  made  an  open  profession  of  his  faith.  Conclusion  :  Learn 
— 1.  That  men  in  their  unconverted  state  are  often  careless,  and  destitute  of  all  fear 
of  God  and  concern  for  their  souls.  2.  While  they  are  thus  careless  God  is  often 
pleased  to  make  use  of  some  solemn  and  awakening  dispensation  to  arouse  and 
alarm  them.  3.  Sometimes  the  trials  and  disappointments  of  sinners  only  serve  to 
exasperate  their  natural  enmity,  as  was  the  case  with  the  jailer,  or  attempted  suicide. 
4.  Convictions  are  only  useful  when  they  produce  an  earnest  spirit  of  thoughtf ulnes3 
and  inquiry.  6.  Conviction  only  ends  in  conversion  when  a  true  sense  of  sin  is 
combined  with  an  apprehension  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ.  {J.  Buchanan,  D.D.) 
The  Philippian  jailer  : — I.  The  awakening  of  the  jaeleb.  The  first  circumstance 
that  appears  powerfully  to  have  affected  his  mind  was,  great  temporal  calamity 
threatening  his  immediate  ruin  and  death.  Great  and  sudden  and  heavy  afilictions 
are  often  sent  by  the  providence  of  God  that  He  may  bring  men  to  recollection  and 
prayer.  There  were  many  things  here,  all  concurring,  which  powerfully  affected  the 
jailer's  mind.  But  these  were  only  outward  circumstances ;  and  it  was  only  by  the 
special  grace  of  God  that  they  were  made  serviceable  to  his  soul.  Many  people 
suffer  huge  afflictions,  but  never  think  of  God  in  them ;  and  so  their  afflictions 
come  to  no  blessed  issue.  It  was  not,  indeed,  till  after  the  jailer  had  come  to  him- 
self that  he  thinks  about  his  soul,  and  sees  the  hand  of  God  in  the  surrounding 
circumstances.  In  the  day  of  God's  conviction  men  are  thankful  for  help  from 
those  whom  they  had  reviled  :  and  in  the  great  day  of  all,  when  the  door  of  repent- 
ance shall  be  for  ever  closed,  the  persecutors  of  the  true  Church  of  Jesus  shaU  fall 
down  before  them,  and  be  as  ashes  under  the  soles  of  their  feet.  II.  The  conse- 
QTJENOEB  or  HIS  AWAKENING,  in  his  camest  inquiry.  Let  me  point  out  to  you  what 
it  is  to  be  saved.  1.  To  be  delivered  from  all  our  sins.  2.  To  be  delivered  from 
all  the  penalty  of  all  these  evil  acts.  3.  To  be  placed  in  a  capacity  to  overcome 
them.  4.  To  be  saved  from  the  practice  of  sin,  as  well  as  from  the  condemnation 
of  it.  5.  To  be  dehvered  from  the  devil.  6.  To  be  delivered  from  the  world.  7. 
To  be  saved  from  the  curse  of  the  Almighty.  8  To  be  delivered  from  hell.  But 
to  be  saved  is  far  more  than  this  :  it  is  to  be  brought  from  sin  to  holiness,  from  the 
curse  to  the  blessing,  from  death  to  life,  from  unquietness  to  peace,  from  Satan  to 
God.  in.  The  answeb  given  to  this  inquiking,  awakening  man.  They  call  away 
his  attention  at  once  from  himself  to  Christ,  to  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world.  He  entered  into  a  new  life  from  that  very  hour.  And  now, 
observe,  the  jailer  has  found  Jesus ;  and  his  terror  is  turned  into  joy.  As  the 
blessed  fruits  of  his  believing,  his  heart  is  filled  with  joy  and  love  to  the  brethren ; 
and  he  attended,  with  swift  obedience,  to  the  Lord's  laws,  and  entered,  by  baptism, 
upon  his  Christian  course.  Conclusion  :  In  the  narrative  observe — 1.  A  remark- 
able instance  of  free  and  rich  mercy  to  a  desperate  sinner  reduced  to  the  last 
extremity.  2.  An  instructive  instance  of  the  mysteriousness  of  God's  ways  in  the 
accomplishment  of  His  purposes  of  mercy.  3.  That  the  salvation  of  God  is  as  free 
as  it  is  vast.  4.  The  simplicity  of  the  gospel.  6.  That  all  the  children  of  God  are 
not  awakened  in  the  same  way.  6.  A  picture  of  the  world.  This  earth  is  a  prison ; 
the  persons  in  it  are  condemned  to  die — yea,  a  thousand  are  led  forth  to  executioiL 
daily.  And  though  the  unconverted  man  may  not  draw  a  sword  to  plunge  it  into  j 
his  own  heart,  the  sword  of  Divine  vengeance  is  unsheathed  against  him,  and  may 
pierce  him  at  any  moment.  And  whereas,  while  Paul  and  Silas  were  praising  God 
for  redemption,  the  earthquake  shook  the  prison,  and  the  fetters  fell  off  tha 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

prisoners,  we  see,  as  it  were,  a  picture  of  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  whereby 
"  the  prisoner  leaps  to  loose  his  chains,"  and  those  who  are  enabled  to  believe  are 
emancipated  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  and  brought  to  the  glorious  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God.  {T.  Snow,  A.M.)  The  conversion  of  the  jailer  : — I.  The  initia- 
TiVB  STAGES  TO  CONVERSION.  1.  A  terrible  sense  of  danger.  The  earthquake,  and 
the  strange,  sublime  conduct  of  the  prisoners,  roused  his  guilty  conscience.  2.  An 
earnest  spirit  of  inquiry.  "  What  must  I  do,"  &o.  3.  A  readiness  to  do  whatever 
is  required.  II.  The  EXCiiUSiVE  means  of  conversion.  Faith  in  Christ  is  indis- 
pensable to  produce  this  moral  change.  1.  A  change  of  character  requires  a  change 
in  beliefs.  We  are  controlled  and  moulded  by  motives :  motives  are  beliefs.  2. 
The  new  beliefs  necessary  to  produce  this  change  must  be  directed  to  Christ. 
Christ  alone  gives  us — (1)  The  true  ideal  of  character.  (2)  The  true  way  of  reaching 
it.  (3)  The  true  aids  to  enable  us  to  do  so.  III.  The  glorious  issue  of  conversion. 
•'  Thou  shalt  be  saved."  What  is  salvation  ?  It  is  not  in  any  sense  a  physical 
change,  nor  merely  an  intellectual  change,  nor  necessarily  a  local  change.  It  is  8 
moral  revolution.  It  is  the  soul  rising  from  sensualism  to  spirituality,  from  selfish- 
ness to  benevolence,  from  the  world  to  God.  This  conversion — 1.  Will  ensure  the 
salvation  of  our  own  souls.  •'  Thou  shalt,"  &c.  2.  Will  lead  to  the  salvation  of 
others.  "  And  thy  house  " — not,  of  course,  that  his  belief  would  save  his  family 
independently  of  theirs ;  but  that  it  would  prompt  him  to  use  such  efforts  as  would, 
under  God,  lead  his  family  to  a  saving  faith.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  man  in  two 
conditions: — I.  What  kind  of  man  before  conversion?  The  jailer  a  remarkable 
instance  of  the  power  of  God's  grace.  He  was  a  stem  Eoman  disciplinarian.  He 
respected  authority.  He  was  probably  an  old  soldier,  who  for  good  service  in  the 
past  was  rewarded  with  this  post.  This  was  creditable  to  him.  We  must  be  faithful 
in  our  daily  work.  I  grant  there  is  a  little  harshness  in  the  execution  of  his  orders  ; 
he  was  not  commanded  to  thrust,  but  to  keep  them  safely,  and  he  tried  his  best  to 
do  so.  He  goes  to  bed.  He  is  asleep.  An  earthquake  comes.  Not  alaiined  about 
his  wife  and  family.  His  one  business  was,  under  the  seal  of  the  Eoman  Emperor, 
to  look  after  the  prison  doors.  Would  that  all  Christians  were  as  faithful  to  their 
office  as  this  unenlightened  man.  He  finds  the  door  open.  He  fears  disgrace.  He 
cannot  combat  the  charge  of  neglected  duty.  He  would  have  kUled  himself.  He 
was  a  man  sternly  upright.  I  am  always  glad  when  such  men  are  saved.  They 
are  not  always  saved.  They  stand  high  in  public  esteem,  and  are  apt  to  forget  their 
Master  in  heaven.  The  jailer  was  a  man  of  few  words.  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ?  "  Men  of  this  kind  are  often  cold.  It  is  hard  to  warm  their  hearts.  He 
was  a  man  of  action  and  decision.  He  says  to  this  man,  "  Go,  and  he  goeth  "  ;  he 
is  prompt  himself.  II.  What  occasioned  his  conversion  ?  He  had  received  some 
instruction  before.  He  had  heard  the  testimony  of  the  girl,  and  possibly  the  words 
of  Paul.  They  did  not  impress  him.  He  slept  afterwards.  He  was  not  made  ta 
tremble  because  the  prisoners  had  escaped  ;  this  fear  had  been  banished  by  Paul. 
What  then,  the  miracle,  that  the  doors  were  opened,  and  yet  that  none  had  escaped  \ 
What  gladness  filled  his  soul  1  No  blame  possible.  He  was  brought  near  to  the 
unseen  world  by  the  danger  he  had  escaped  ;  and  as  the  light  shone  around  he  saw 
his  past  life,  and  the  Eternal  Spirit  unveiled  that  life  and  made  him  to  see  the  evil 
of  it.  Then  his  conversion  grew  out  of  the  further  instruction  of  the  apostle. 
Plain  teaching  and  a  simple  heart  to  receive  it  make  quick  work  of  the  matter.  Let 
ns  thank  God  for  any  circumstances  which  secure  the  conversion  of  a  soul.  Do  not 
complain  because  the  earthquake  is  not  in  the  conversion  ;  no  matter  how  accom- 
plished, or  through  whom.  III.  What  sort  of  a  convert  he  made.  1.  He  was 
a  believing  convert.  He  believed  without  delay  or  doubt.  He  was  told  to  believe, 
and  he  did.  Who  will  not  believe  what  the  experience  of  thousands  promises  to  be 
true  ?  2.  He  was  an  humble  convert.  He  fell  down  at  the  feet  of  the  apostle.  He 
waited  upon  them  in  his  house.  A  convinced  soul  does  not  want  the  highest  seat 
in  the  synagogue.  If  good  people  dispute  at  all,  let  it  be  for  a  place  at  the  feet  of 
Christ.  3.  He  was  a  ready  convert.  Hearing — believing — fellowship — all  in  the 
midnight  hour.  When  we  know  what  Christ  would  have  us  do,  any  moment  of 
delay  is  sin.  4.  He  was  a  practical  convert.  He  washed  their  stripes.  He  set  food 
before  them.  Not  easy  to  get  up  a  feast  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  He  fetched 
them  the  best.  He  is  the  right  sort  of  a  convert  who  wants  to  be  doing  something 
for  Christ ;  he  can  soon  find  something  to  do.  6.  He  was  a  joyful  convert,  fi.  He 
was  an  influential  convert.  All  in  his  house  were  converted.  7.  He  was  a  sensible 
convert.  He  still  kept  on  in  his  position.  He  did  not  give  up  keeping  the  gaol. 
Who  BO  fit  to  be  a  jailer  as  a  man  who  knows  the  Lord  and  will  be  humane  ?    We 


CHAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS,  517 

like  those  who  are  converted  to  keep  to  their  business  and  to  make  money  for  tha 
cause  of  Christ.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  30,  31.  What  must  I  do  to  he  saved?  .  .  .  Believe  on tbe  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved. — The  great  question  and  the  plain  answer : — The  keeper 
of  a  Macedonian  gaol  was  not  likely  to  be  a  very  nervous  or  susceptible  person. 
And  so  the  extraordinary  state  of  agitation  and  panic  into  which  this  rough  jailer 
was  cast  needs  some  kind  of  explanation.  Now  do  you  think  that  the  jailer's 
question  was  a  piece  of  foolish  superstition  ?  I  daresay  some  of  you  do,  or  some  of 
you  may  suppose,  too,  that  it  was  one  very  unnecessary  for  him  or  anybody  to 
ask.  So  I  want,  in  a  very  few  words,  to  deal  with  these  three  things — the  question 
that  we  should  all  ask,  the  answer  that  we  may  all  take,  the  blessing  that  we  may 
all  have.  I.  The  question  that  we  should  all  ask.  I  know  that  it  is  very  un- 
fashionable nowadays  to  talk  about  "  salvation  "  as  man's  need.  What  is  it  to  be 
saved  ?  Two  things ;  to  be  healed  and  to  be  safe.  With  both  aspects  the  ex- 
pression  is  employed  over  and  over  again  in  Scripture.  It  means  either  restoration 
from  sickness  or  deliverance  from  periL  I  venture  to  press  upon  every  one  here 
these  two  considerations — we  all  need  healing  from  sickness ;  we  all  need  safety 
from  peril.  Mind,  I  am  not  talking  about  vices.  I  have  no  doubt  you  are  a 
perfectly  respectable  man,  in  all  the  ordinary  relations  of  life.  Be  honest  with 
yourselves  in  asking  and  answering  the  question  whether  or  no  you  have  this  sick- 
ness of  sin,  its  paralysis  towards  good  or  its  fevered  inclination  to  evil.  If  salva- 
tion means  being  healed  of  a  disease  we  have  aU  got  the  disease ;  and  whether  we 
wish  it  or  no,  we  want  the  healing.  And  what  of  the  other  meaning  of  the  word  ? 
Salvation  means  being  safe  ?  Are  you  safe  ?  Is  anybody  safe  standing  in  front 
of  that  awful  law  that  rules  the  whole  universe,  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that 
shall  he  also  reap  "  ?  Somewhere  and  somehow,  men  will  have  to  Ue  on  the  beds 
that  they  have  made ;  to  drink  as  they  have  brewed.  If  sin  means  separation  from 
God,  and  separation  from  God  means,  as  it  assuredly  does,  death,  then  I  ask  you, 
and  there  is  no  need  for  any  exaggerated  words  about  it.  Are  we  not  in  danger  ? 
and  if  salvation  be  a  state  of  deliverance  from  sickness,  and  a  state  of  deliverance 
from  peril,  do  we  not  need  it  ?  Ah,  I  venture  to  say  we  need  it  more  than  any- 
thing else.  You  will  not  misunderstand  me  as  expressing  the  slightest  depreciation 
of  other  remedies  that  are  being  offered  extensively  now  for  the  various  evils  under 
which  society  and  individuals  groan.  We  are  wrong  in  our  relation  to  God,  and 
that  has  to  be  set  right  before  we  are  fundamentally  and  thoroughly  right.  That 
is  to  say,  salvation  is  our  deepest  need.  Then  how  does  it  come  that  men  go  on, 
as  so  many  of  my  friends  here  this  evening  have  gone  on,  all  their  days  paying  no 
attention  to  that  need  ?  Is  their  any  folly,  amidst  all  the  irrationalities  of  that 
irrational  creature  man,  to  be  matched  with  the  foUy  of  steadily  refusing  to  look 
forward  and  settle  for  ourselves  the  prime  element  in  our  condition — viz.,  our 
relation  to  God  ?  A  man  is  never  so  wise  as  when  he  says  to  himself,  "  Let  ma 
fairly  know  the  whole  facts  of  my  relation  to  the  unseen  world  in  so  far  as  they 
can  be  known  here,  and  if  they  are  wrong,  let  me  set  about  rectifying  them,  if  it 
be  possible."  IL  That  brings  me  to  the  next  point  here — ^viz.,  the  blessed,  olbab 
ANSWER  THAT  WE  MAT  ALL  TAKE.  Paul  and  Silas  wero  not  nonplussed  by  this  question, 
nor  did  they  reply  to  it  in  the  fashion  in  which  many  men  would  have  answered 
it.  Take  a  specimen.  If  anybody  were  to  go  with  this  question  to  some  of 
our  modem  wise  men  and  teachers,  they  would  say,  ♦'Saved?  My  good 
fellow,  there  is  nothing  to  be  saved  from.  Get  rid  of  delusions,  and  clear 
your  mind  of  cant  and  superstition."  Or  they  would  say,  "Saved?  Well, 
if  you  have  gone  wrong,  do  the  best  yon  can  in  the  time  to  come. "  Or  If  you 
went  to  some  of  our  friends  they  would  say,  "  Come  and  be  baptized,  and  receive 
ihe  grace  of  regeneration  in  holy  baptism ;  and  then  come  to  the  sacraments,  and 
be  faithful  and  loyal  members  of  the  Church  which  has  apostolic  succession  in 
it."  And  some  would  say,  "  Set  yourselves  to  work  and  toil  and  labour."  And 
some  would  say,  "  Don't  trouble  yourselves  about  such  whims.  A  short  life  and  a 
merry  one;  make  the  best  of  it,  and  jump  the  life  to  come."  Neither  cold 
morality  nor  godless  philosophy  nor  wild  dissipation  nor  narrow  ecclesiasticism 
prompted  Paul's  answer.  He  said,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved."  What  did  that  poor  heathen  man  know  about  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  ?  Next  to  nothing.  How  could  he  believe  upon  Him  if  he  knew  so  little 
about  Him  ?  Well,  you  hear  in  the  context  that  this  summary  answer  to  tha 
question  was  the  beginning  and  not  the  end  of  a  conversation,  which  G0Uversa> 


S18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xyi. 

tion,  no  doubt,  consisted  largely  in  extending  and  explaining  the  brief  formulary 
with  which  it  had  commenced.  But  it  is  a  grand  thing  that  we  can  put  the  all- 
essential  truth  into  half  a  dozen  simple  words,  and  then  expound  and  explain 
them  as  may  be  necessary.  Mark,  first,  whom  it  is  that  we  are  to  believe  on. 
"  The  Lord,"  that  is  the  Divine  Name ;  "  Jesus,"  that  is  the  name  of  a  man  ; 
"  Christ,"  that  is  the  name  of  an  office.  And  if  you  put  them  all  together,  it  is  this, 
He  on  whom  we  sinful  men  may  put  our  sole  trust,  and  hope  for  our  healing  and 
our  safety,  is  the  Son  of  God,  who  came  down  upon  earth  to  Uve  our  life  and  to 
die  our  death  that  He  might  bear  on  Himself  our  sins,  and  fulfil  all  that  ancient 
prophecy  and  symbol  had  proclaimed  as  needful,  and  therefore  certain  to  be  done, 
for  men.  It  is  not  a  starved  half- Saviour  whose  name  is  only  Jesus,  and  neither 
Lord  nor  Christ,  faith  in  whom  will  save  you.  You  must  grasp  the  whole  revela- 
tion of  His  nature  and  His  power  if  from  Him  there  is  to  flow  the  life  that  you 
need.  And  note  what  it  is  that  we  are  to  do  with  Jesus  Christ.  To  "believe  on 
Him "  is  a  very  different  thing  from  believing  Him.  III.  Lastly,  consider  thb 
BLESSING  WE  MAT  ALL  KECEivE.  This  jailer  about  whom  we  have  been  speaking 
was  a  heathen  when  the  sun  set  and  a  Christian  when  it  rose.  A  sudden  con- 
version, you  say,  and  sudden  conversions  are  always  suspicious.  I  am  not  so  sure 
about  that ;  they  may  be  or  they  may  not  be,  according  to  circumstances.  There 
are  a  great  many  things  in  this  world  that  have  to  be  done  suddenly  if  they  are 
ever  to  be  done  at  all.  And  I,  for  my  part,  would  have  far  more  faith  in  a  man 
who,  in  one  leap,  sprung  from  the  depth  of  the  degradation  of  that  coarse  jailer 
into  the  light  and  joy  of  the  Christian  life,  than  in  a  man  who  tried  to  get  to  it 
by  slow  steps.  You  have  to  do  everything  in  this  world  worth  doing  by  a  sudden 
resolution,  however  long  the  preparation  may  have  been  which  led  up  to  the 
resolution.  The  act  of  resolving  is  always  the  act  of  an  instant.  And  there  is  an 
immense  danger  that  with  some  of  you,  if  that  change  does  not  begin  in  a  moment's 
resolve  to-night,  you  will  be  further  away  from  it  than  ever  you  were.  The  outcast 
jailer  chauged  nationalities  in  a  moment.  You  who  have  dwelt  in  the  suburbs  of 
Christ's  kingdom  all  your  lives — why  cannot  you  go  inside  the  gate  as  quickly  ? 
For  many  of  us  the  gradual  '•  grow'ing  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the 
Lord  "  has  been  the  appointed  way.  For  some  of  us  I  verUy  believe  the  sudden 
change  is  the  best.  Some  of  us  have  a  sunrise  like  the  tropics,  where  the  one 
moment  is  grey  and  cold,  and  next  moment  the  seas  are  lit  with  the  glory. 
Others  of  us  have  a  sunrise  like  the  poles,  where  a  long,  slow-growing  light 
precedes  the  rising,  and  the  rising  itself  is  scarce  observable.  But  it  matters  little 
as  to  how  we  get  to  Christ,  if  we  are  there,  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  \^  The  jailer's 
qticstion  : — I.  The  circumstances  under  which  the  question  was  asked.  1,  Not 
in  response  to  any  direct  teaching.  Paul  and  Silas  had  not  been  preaching  to 
him,  so  far  as  we  know.  The  pulpit  is  a  great  but  not  the  only  instrument  for 
good.  Where  the  prophet  has  preached  in  vain,  God  may  reserve  many  to  Him- 
self. There  is  a  still  small  voice  that  does  a  work  which  the  pulpit  may  fail  to 
do.  2.  But  after  a  time  of  trouble.  It  is  quite  common  to  see  religious  interest 
awakened  in  a  time  of  trouble.  But  it  is  not,  alas  I  so  common,  that  the  interest 
continues  after  the  trouble  is  past.  The  jailer  had  been  assured  of  the  safety  of 
his  piisonert?  before  he  asked  this  question.  3.  After  observation  of  the  power  of 
Christianity  on  others'  lives.  He  had  seen  Paul  and  Silas  scourged,  and  had, 
notwithstanding,  heard  them  singing  praises.  He  had  seen  that,  when  they  had 
opportunity,  they  made  no  attempt  to  escape.  Their  preacluDg  he  might  have 
scoCed  at,  but  their  lives  carried  with  them  a  power  beyond  that  of  words.  II. 
The  question  itself.  What  is  it  to  be  saved  7  1.  To  be  delivered  from  sin's 
punishment.  2.  To  be  delivered  from  sin's  power.  It  was  "  from  their  sius  "  that 
Christ  came  to  save  His  people.  III.  The  answer.  The  question  is  :  "  What 
shall  I  do?"  as  though  anticipating  some  great  requirement.  The  answer,  per- 
plexing many  by  its  simplicity,  is,  "Believe."  And  what  is  it  to  believe?  Well, 
that  depends  on  what  is  to  be  believed.  "  Jesus  Christ  died  to  save  you."  Do  I 
believe  that  ?  Then  emotion  and  action  are  both  called  forth,  I  sorrow  for  sin, 
and  flee  from  sin  ;  His  love  calls  forth  my  love,  and  my  faith  works  by  love.  Let 
the  object  of  faith  be  a  person,  and  trust  is  its  essential  element.  To  the  banker 
whom  I  trust  I  give  up  my  gold.  To  the  physician  whom  I  trust  I  commit  the 
care  of  my  diseased  body,  and  I  take  his  medicines,  though  they  be  poisonous.  To 
the  Saviour  whom  I  trust  I  commit  my  all.  I  lay  my  sins  upon  Him,  and  He 
bears  them ;  I  forsake  sin,  for  He  commands  it ;  I  lay  cheerfully  hold  on  His 
promises  and  He  fulfils  them.     1.  Gospel  faith  is  trustful,  because  its  object  is  a 


CHAP.  XYi.]  THE  ACTS.  519 

Person.  2.  It  is  fruitful  in  good  works,  because  that  Person  calls  to  action. 
(Study  and  Pulpit.)  The  great  question  : — There  are  many  questions  of  great 
importance,  but  there  ie  one  question  that  comes  before  all  others,  and  that  is — 
"What  must  I  do  to  te  saved?"  When  Esther  stood  before  Ahasuerus,  her 
request  was, "  Let  my  life  be  given  to  me  at  my  petition,  and  my  people  at  my  request." 
Had  she  asked  anything  else  than  this  she  might  as  well  not  have  asked  at  all. 
It  is  even  so  with  the  human  soul.  There  are  many  blessings  to  be  enjoyed,  and 
acquisitions  to  be  made,  but  these  are  only  possible  when  this  great  queation  has 
been  set  at  rest.  I.  The  qxtestion.  It  suggests  the  thought  of  present  danger. 
If  I  were  to  exclaim  with  apparent  solicitude,  "  My  friend,  allow  me  to  save  you  1 " 
would  you  not  look  astonished,  and  reply,  "  My  dear  sir,  what  do  you  mean  ?  I 
am  in  no  danger."  But  suppose  I  were  to  offer  the  same  proposal  when  you  were 
in  peril  of  drowning,  you  would  understand  the  proposaL  The  danger  from  which 
Christ  proposes  to  save  the  soul  is  threefold.  1.  There  is  a  moral  danger.  Sin  is  ta 
the  soul  what  disease  is  to  the  body.  We  value  our  natural  life  sufficiently  to  take 
measures  to  counteract  disease  when  we  recognise  its  presence.  Oh,  that  men 
were  equally  wise  about  the  soul !  But  it  is  not  always  the  most  startling  form  of 
disease  that  is  the  most  fatal.  There  is  a  disease  that  sweeps  off  its  victims  by 
hundreds,  where  small-pox  slays  its  tens — consumption.  Some  forms  of  sin  are 
loathsome.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  drunkard  should  be  described  as 
in  danger,  but  all  seems  a  contrast  between  his  life  and  the  very  respectable  life 
you  live.  Yet  though  your  sins  excite  no  fears,  remember  they  are  sins,  and  a 
disease  of  the  soul  aU  the  more  perilous  because  they  excite  so  little  apprehension. 
2.  There  is  a  spiritual  danger.  There  are  certain  mysterious  intelligences  of  evil 
who  waylay  us,  with  the  object  of  compassing  our  ruin.  We  pity  the  man  whoso 
footsteps  are  dogged  by  the  assassin.  Have  we  no  commiseration  for  those  who 
are  exposed  to  a  more  murderous  foe  ?  You  would  tremble  if  you  woke  up  to  find 
your  greatest  enemy  standing  over  your  bed,  dagger  in  hand ;  but  a  more  terrible 
than  any  human  enemy  has  you  at  present  in  his  power.  3.  Judicial  danger. 
Here  is  a  man  in  the  condemned  cell:  no  man  will  say  that  he  is  not  in  terrible 
danger.  Why?  Because  he  is  condemned  already.  Even  so  judgment  has  been 
already  pronounced  upon  every  sinner.  It  used  to  be  fabled  of  the  ostrich  that 
when  pressed  hard  by  the  pursuer,  it  buried  its  head  in  the  sand,  and  endeavoured 
to  persuade  itself  that  it  was  safe  because  it  ceased  to  see  the  danger.  But  the 
bird  of  the  desert  is  too  wise  to  do  anything  of  the  kind ;  yet  sinners  are  not. 
Whether,  however,  they  forget  it  or  not,  it  is  there.  "  He  that  believeth  not  is 
condemned  already."  Now  with  these  thoughts  before  us  we  shall  be  better  able 
to  understand  the  story  from  which  our  text  is  taken.  Why  did  the  jailer 
tremble  ?  He  was  no  coward,  nor  were  earthquakes  unusual  in  that  part  of  the 
world.  He  had  shown  a  moment  before  how  little  he  feared  death.  Paul  and 
Silas  had  created  no  small  stir  in  that  town,  and  the  damsel  had  borne  witness  to 
them  as  "  servants  of  the  most  high  God,"  &o.  The  jailer  must  have  known  all 
about  this,  and  now  when  he  awakes  in  the  darkness  of  night  and  hears  their 
singing  amid  the  terrible  rumble  of  the  earthquake  shock,  and  sees  them  fuU  of 
soUcitude  for  the  man  that  had  bo  cruelly  wronged  them,  the  thought  rushes 
into  his  mind,  •'  They  are  what  they  profess  to  be ;  and  have  come  to  show  us 
the  way  of  salvation."  Another  moment  and  this  mighty  God,  whose  majesty  I 
have  defied  in  the  persons  of  His  servants,  may  hurl  me  to  the  flames  of  Tartarus. 
"  Sirs,  what  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  Now  we  understand  what  the  inquiry  meant. 
The  man  felt  what  it  was  to  be  in  the  hands  of  a  justly  indignant  God.  It  is 
this  that  brings  a  similar  inquiry  to  our  lips,  and  until  you  reach  this  point  nothing 
is  gained.  II.  The  answbe — "  Believe,"  &c.  It  does  not  sound  so  very  much,  does 
it  ?  It  sets  forth  salvation  as  centred  in  a  Person.  That  Person  then  is  repre- 
sented as  in  a  position  to  deliver  us  from  the  forms  of  danger  to  which  we  are 
exposed.  1.  The  last  danger  is  the  greatest  of  all ;  for  what  can  be  more  terrible 
than  to  have  God  against  us?  Here  most  of  all,  I  find  myself  in  need  of  a 
Saviour ;  for  in  this  respect  more  than  any  other  my  case  is  hopeless.  When  I 
contemplate  sin  as  a  moral  disease,  I  may  flatter  myself  with  the  hope  that  I  may 
get  the  better  of  it;  or  I  may  flatter  myself  that  I  may  escape  the  malignant 
influence  of  the  intelligences  of  darkness  by  care,  and  watchfulness,  and  determined 
resistance.  But  how  shall  I  escape  from  the  sentence  of  the  righteous  Judge  ? 
I  am  directed  to  raise  my  eyes  to  the  Cross,  and  there  I  gee  One  who  has  vindicated 
His  Father's  law  in  His  own  person  by  suffering  such  a  penalty  as  sin  has  merited, 
and  by  doing  so  has  rendered  it  no  longer  necessary  that  God's  judgment  should  ba 


520  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xvi. 

vindicated  by  my  doom.    2.  Being  thus  saved  from  the  judgment  of  God,  I  am 
also  saved  from  the  power  of  Satan.     St.  Paul  was  sent  to  the  Gentiles  "  to  turn 
them  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God."    In  forsaking  God  man  turned  his  back 
on  the  only  power  sufficiently  strong  to  enable  him  to  rise  above  the  tyranny  of  the 
destroyer  ;  and  thus  we  came  under  the  yoke  of  Apollyon,     But  "  the  Son  of  God 
has  been  manifested  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."    He  rescues  ua 
from  Satan  by  bringing  us  back  to  God.     The  Son  has  made  us  free,  and  now  are 
we  free  indeed.     3,  From  sin,  as  a  fatal  moral  disease,  Jesus  proves  Himself  our 
Saviour.    In  curing  bodily  diseases  He  illustrated  to  us  His  willingness  and  His 
ability  to  cure  our  spiritual  diseases.      There  is  a  balm  in   Gilead,  there  is  a 
Physician  there,  and  your  "hurt"  may  yet  be  recovered.     "Wilt  thou  be  made 
whole  ?  "     Surely  Jesus  is  passing  through  this  our  Bethsaida  to-night  with  this 
question  on  His  lips.     Which  of  us  shall  be  the  first  to  claim  His  healing  touch? 
III.  The   subjective    condition   upon  which  the  enjoyment  of  these  benefits 
DEPENDS.    What  is  it  to  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?     In  endeavouring  to 
understand  these  words,  we  have  to  guard  against  the  danger  of  making  them  mean 
too  little,  or  too  much.    Those  who  fall  into  the  first  error  would  represent  faith  as 
the  mere  mental  acceptance  of  a  certain  number  of  facts  or  doctrines,  and  those 
who  fall  into  the  latter  would  represent  it  as  something  so  mysterious  and  un- 
intelligible that  none  can  be  assured  that  they  really  possess  it.     This  faith  is — 
1.  An  intellectual  conviction  or  apprehension  by  which  I  take  in  the  object  proposed 
to  me,  assuring  myself   of   its  character  and  trustworthiness.     Many  fail  here, 
because  they  do  not  even  intellectually  apprehend  the  true  character  of  the  provision 
made  in  Christ  to  meet  their  case.     2.  Next  comes  the  decision  of  the  will — the 
moral  act  by  which  I  repose  my  simple  confidence  upon  the  object  so  apprehended. 
Now  it  is  here  that  most  people  are  found  wanting.     The  child  that  you  set  on  a 
tsble  and  Md  spring  into  your  arms  is  as  apt  an  illustration  as  you  could  wish. 
There  it  stands  hesitating,  not  because  it  has  any  real  doubt  in  its  mind  of  its 
parent's  ability  to  catch  it,  but  rather  because  it  allows  its  will  to  be  influenced 
by  its  feelings  instead  of  being  affected  by  its  reasonable  conviction.     Now  you 
believe  with  your  mind  that  Jesus  is  the  sinner's  Saviour,  and  therefore  yours. 
Why  allow  any  feeUng  of  misgiving  to  prevent  you  from  committing  yourself  with 
a  distinct  and  decisive  act  of  will  into  His  arms,  trusting  Him  to  save  you  now  ? 
9.  But  next,  when  the  mind  has  apprehended  the  object,  and  the  will  decides  to 
trust  itself  to  it,  there  will  naturally  follow  a  rest  of  the  soul,  in  the  assurance  that 
all  is  well,  and  this  may  be  described  as  the  emotional  element  in  a  true  faith, 
the  presence  of  which  crowns  and  completes  the  whole,  and  brings  the  inward 
uneasiness  and  disquiet  to  an  end.     One  of  you  is  drowning.     I  swim  out  to  save 
you.    As  I  approach  yon  know  and  believe  that  I  have  the  power  and  the  will  to 
save  you.    Then  comes  the  act  of  will  as  you  trust  yourself  to  me.    But  still,  there 
is  only  one  arm  between  you  and  destruction.     Yet  you  reflect,  "What  have  I  to 
fear  ?  he  is  able  and  willing  to  save  me,  and  I  am  trusted  into  his  hands."    At  once 
the  inward  tumult  begins  to  subside,  and  a  wonderful  reaction  of  relief  and  even 
of  calm  happiness  sets  in,  although  you  have  not  yet  reached  the  shore.     (W.  Hay' 
Aitken,  M.A.)  Method  of  dealing  with  inquirers: — Every  Christian,  especially 

every  minister,  will  have  this  responsible  and  diflicult  work  to  do.  I.  GeneraIi 
PRINCIPLE  SUITED  TO  ALL  CASES.  "The  directious  given  will  be  determined  by  the 
views  we  entertain  of  the  nature  of  religion.  1.  Rationalists  endeavour  to  suppress 
all  concern.  2.  Romanists  teach  men  to  submit  to  the  Church,  and  practise 
religious  duties  and  penance.  3.  Protestants  direct  inquirers  to  come  directly  to 
God  in  the  way  appointed  in  the  gospel.  But  this  general  direction  is  modified 
by  the  peculiar  views  of  those  who  give  it.  (1)  Some  place  the  essence  of  religion 
in  submission  to  God,  and  hence  the  general  directions  to  submit.  (2)  Others  in 
the  choice  of  God  as  a  source  of  happiness,  hence  the  direction  "  Choose  God  as 
your  portion."  (3)  Others  in  a  volition  to  make  the  happiness  of  the  universe  the 
aim  of  our  being.  (4)  Others  in  the  return  of  the  soul  to  God  through  Christ,  and 
by  faith  in  Him.  Hence  the  general  direction  to  "  believe."  This  is  the  proper 
direction,  because — (a)  Faith  is  declared  to  be  the  condition  of  salvation.  Believers 
are  saved :  unbelievers  are  lost,  (b)  This  is  the  apostolic  direction,  (c)  Neither 
pardon  nor  sanctification  is  otherwise  to  be  obtained,  (d)  Christ  is  the  Alpha 
and  Omega  of  the  gospel.  But  what  is  faith  ?  What  is  the  precise  thing  to  be 
done?  The  exercise  of  this  involves  immediate  conviction  of  sin.  H.  Speciai< 
DiBECTioNS.  1.  As  to  sceptical  doubts.  (1)  Do  not  rely  on  speculative  arguments 
mainly.    Their  true  place  is  to  remove  difficulties,  to  show  that  the  truth  is  not 


CHAP.  XYi.]  THE  ACTS,  621 

inconsistent  with  reason  or  fact.  But  they  are  not  to  be  used  to  prove  the  truth 
— i.e.,  to  afford  its  positive  evidence.  (2)  Kely  upon  the  exhibition  of  the  truth, 
and  upon  pressing  it  on  the  conscience,  because — (a)  The  ground  of  faith  is 
the  witness  of  the  Spirit  with  the  truth,  (b)  The  truth  is  self-evidencing,  (c) 
Arguments  are  human,  while  truth  is  Divine.  2.  As  to  fatalists,  who  say  nothing 
can  be  done.  They  plead  the  doctrine  of  election.  (1)  Here  again  moral  con- 
siderations should  direct  our  effort.  The  intellectual  difficulty  is  not  first  to  be 
removed.  (2)  The  sinner  should  be  urged  to  act  as  he  does  in  other  cases.  3. 
As  to  have  those  who  rely  on  the  excuse  of  inability,  or  feel  they  can  do  nothing. 
The  true  method  is  to  admit  the  fact  and  fall  as  the  leper  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  4. 
As  to  those  who  plead  hardness  of  heart,  want  of  conviction  of  sin.  Show  the 
true  place  of  conviction.     (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)        Sin  and  salvation: — I.  To  every 

MAN     IN     HIS    BEBIOUS    MOODS   THE    SENSE    OF    BIN   18  A    GENUINE   HUMAN    EXPEBIENCB 

which  no  reasoning  can  reason  away.  1.  It  is  not  a  remnant  of  savagery,  but 
the  sign  of  a  spiritual  nature ;  growing  with  our  growing  power  of  moral  sympathy 
and  insight.  2.  The  Christian  revelation  quickens  and  deepens  the  consciousness 
of  sin.  In  the  presence  of  Jesus  Christ  all  our  self-complacencies  vanish.  3.  The 
reahty  of  sin  is  increasingly  felt  as  we  realise  its  consequences ;  how  it  darkens  and 
disorders  human  life  and  human  society.  The  sense  of  sin  is  a  pain,  but  in  such 
pain  there  is  hope ;  it  is  the  beginning  of  all  redemption  and  all  progress.  II. 
The  Cheistian  idea  op  salvation  is  a  veby  comprehensive  one.  1.  It  is  a  certain 
severance  from  the  shame  and  guilt  of  transgression.  The  sense  of  dissatisfaction 
with  sin  is  not  healthy  in  its  influence  unless  it  receives  a  hopeful  interpretation 
and  leads  to  hopeful  endeavour.  It  may  also,  according  to  our  training,  assume 
the  form  of  a  fear  of  God  and  the  hereafter.  But  the  removal  of  our  distress 
concerning  ourselves,  and  our  ignorant  and  guilty  dread  of  God  and  fate,  is  only 
clearing  the  ground  for  Christ's  great  salvation.  2.  There  is  evil  working  within, 
and  from  its  presence  and  dominion  in  the  heart  and  life  we  need  to  be  dehvered. 
"  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?  "  is  but  a  poor  and  petty  cry  when  it  only  means 
"  What  must  I  do  to  escape  from  the  discomfort,  the  fear,  the  natural  penalty  of 
sin  ?  "  That  is  the  cry  of  a  man  who  cares  more  for  his  ease  and  happiness  than 
for  eternal  truth  and  good.  We  are  not  to  speak  of  being  saved  if  we  are  not 
being  saved  from  the  sins  we  are  tempted  to  commit  daily.  3.  Salvation  is 
character  and  the  perfection  of  character,  the  realisation  of  the  ideal  life  for  which 
we  were  created.  The  obligation  is  laid  upon  every  one  to  come  to  his  best,  and 
we  are  called  not  to  repress  but  to  cultivate  all  our  human  faculties.  The  saved 
man  is  the  whole  man,  the  full-grown,  healthily  and  harmoniously  developed  man. 
4.  Salvation  means  a  life  lived  not  for  self  but  for  God.  Keligious  selfishness  is 
just  as  bad  as  any  other  kind  of  selfishness.  Man's  chief  end  is  to  save  himself 
that  he  might  glorify  God,  live  for  Divine  ends,  and  give  himself  as  the  Lord  did 
for  the  redemption  of  mankind.  III.  How  believing  in  Jesus  Christ  enables  a 
MAN  TO  EEALisE  THIS  IDEAL  OF  SALVATION.  Christ  saves  not  by  any  single  method, 
but  by  whatever  He  was  and  is,  did  and  does,  by  all  the  influences  of  His  life  and 
Cross,  truth,  and  spirit ;  saves  not  by  any  arbitrary  and  magical  efficacy,  but 
precisely  to  the  extent  in  which  He  is  known  and  understood,  loved  and  obeyed; 
saves  by  inspiring  right  thoughts,  right  feelings,  right  motives ;  saves  by  giving 
new  trusts,  new  hopes,  new  sympathies,  new  affections  ;  saves  by  His  revelation  of 
"the  Divine  mercy  and  by  bringing  men  into  direct  communion  with  the  eternal 
grace  and  power.  1.  To  believe  in  Christ  as  the  revelation  of  God  to  man  is  to 
believe  in  redeeming  mercy  and  grace,  and  to  be  delivered  thereby  from  the  fear 
which  weakens  and  the  despair  which  kiUs.  2.  To  believe  in  Christ  is  to  have 
evil  affections  conquered  and  displaced  by  the  growth  of  a  new  and  holier  and  more 
masterful  love.  3.  In  our  Christian  believing  and  loyalty  are  all  the  elements 
required  for  the  development  of  the  most  complete  and  finished  type  of  human 
excellence.  To  beheve  in  Christ  is  to  believe  in  ourselves,  and  to  see  in  Him  the 
man  we  are  each  called  to  be,  ought  to  be,  and  can  be  ;  His  righteousness  is, 
indeed,  our  righteousness — ours  to  love  and  live.  Faith  in  Christ  is  not  a  substitute 
for  personal  obedience,  but  it  is  vital  with  quickening  power  to  make  us  obey  as 
He  obeyed.  He  changes  character  by  imparting  His  own  character  sympathetically 
to  all  who  enter  into  real  sympathy  with  Him.  4.  To  believe  in  Christ  is  to  be 
brought  out  of  the  circle  of  our  selfish  affections,  aims,  and  interests  into 
communion  with  mankind.  His  spirit  is  a  social  spirit,  drawing  and  binding  men 
together  in  mutual  love  and  helpfulness,  and,  through  individual  influence,  pro- 
>daoing  its  effect  on  the  famihes  and  generations  of  men,  making  possible  and 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xn. 

actual,  as  the  text  suggested,  a  Christian  heredity.  It  is  in  the  way  of  the  spread  and 
triumph  of  the  Christian  spirit  we  are  to  look  for  the  coming  of  the  Christian 
order  of  society,  which  is  the  second  coming  of  Jesus  Christ.  {John  Hunter.) 
Anxiety  for  salvation : — The  reasons  that  justify  this  anxiety  are — I.  The  valub  of 
THAT  object  ON  WHICH  IT  IS  BESTOWED.  We  look  arouud  upon  the  solicitude  which 
men  feel  in  reference  to  earthly  objects ;  and  we  justify  that  solicitude  up  to  a 
certain  point.  What  then  should  be  the  solicitude  which  should  be  cherished 
with  reference  to  the  immortal  soul  ?  Oh,  that  I  had  ability  to  describe  the  mad- 
ness a  thousand  times  multiplied  of  that  man  who  professes  to  believe  that  he  is 
immortal,  and  who  can  find  anything  on  earth  more  important  to  him  as  a  subject 
of  attention  than  the  salvation  of  his  soul  1  II,  The  conceen  which  others  have 
MANIFESTED  ABOUT  OUR  soDLS.  The  whole  moral  universe  has  been  drawn  into  con- 
cern for  the  immortal  soul  of  man.  What  was  it  brought  the  Son  of  God  from 
the  throne  of  heaven  to  the  Cross  ?  For  what  are  all  the  miraculous  agencies  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  granted  ?  For  what  purpose  did  the  finger  of  inspiration  write  the 
Bible,  and  the  arm  of  Providence  defend  it  ?  Why  did  patriarchs  Uve,  and  priests 
minister,  and  prophets  predict,  and  apostles  preach  ?  For  the  salvation  of  man. 
III.  Consider  what  the  salvation  or  the  damnation  of  the  soul  includes.  I 
dwell  for  a  moment  on  that  vast  word — "  salvation,"  The  pardon  of  all  your  sins ; 
the  justification  of  your  person;  your  adoption  into  the  family  of  Jehovah,  and  a 
spirit  of  sonship  connected  with  it ;  the  renovation  of  your  fallen  nature ;  consola- 
tion in  affliction  ;  assurance  that  all  tnings  work  together  for  good  ;  hope  in  death  ; 
the  resurrection  of  the  just ;  life  everlasting ;  a  bUssf  ul  heaven  made  up  of  the 
presence  of  God  in  Christ.  Turn  to  the  opposite  of  this.  What  is  hell?  The 
loss  of  all  happiness  ;  but  it  is  a  state  of  conscious  existence  ;  it  is  a  state  of  pro- 
longed death.  Hell  means  banishment  from  the  presence  of  God,  consignment 
to  the  dark  world  where  hope  never  enters  and  mercy  is  never  seen.  This  ia 
the  question,  What  shall  we  do  to  be  saved,  so  as  to  gain  heaven  and  to  escape 
hell?     IV.  The  soul  of  every  man,  until  he  repents  and  believes  in  Christ, 

IS    ACTUALLY   IN    A   LOST    STATE,    ALTHOUGH    NOT    IRRECOVERABLY   LOST.       YoU    haVO    nO 

need  to  ask  what  will  bring  the  soul  into  a  state  of  death  and  condemnation: 
it  is  done  already.  "All  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God." 
You  are  under  the  terrors  of  the  law  and  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God.  How 
shall  I  be  delivered  from  the  guilt  which  sin  has  brought  on  my  conscience  so  as 
to  avoid  the  dominion  of  sin  here  and  the  punishment  of  sin  in  the  world  that  ia 
to  come  ?  V.  The  multitude  of  souls  that  are  irrecoverably  lost.  Such  is  the 
loss  of  the  soul,  that  if  it  occurred  but  once  in  a  century  it  is  so  tremendous  a 
catastrophe,  that  it  should  awaken  the  solicitude  of  the  whole  world.  And  that 
man  must  be  guilty  of  the  greatest  folly  who  can  go  on  in  reckless  security  even 
under  the  very  possibility  that  he  may  be  that  one  in  a  century  who  might  thus 
perish  eternally.  VI.  The  loss  of  the  soul  may  yet  be  averted  and  this  salva- 
tion secured.  It  were  perfectly  useless  to  talk  to  men  of  miseries  which  cannot 
be  remedied,  or  excite  them  to  the  pursuit  of  benefits  which  never  can  be  ob- 
tained. But  this  is  not  your  case ;  you  are  in  that  world  where  mercy  reigns; 
where  all  the  opportunities  of  salvation  and  the  means  of  grace  are  continued. 
You  ask  the  question,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  And  I  am  commissioned 
to  reply,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  (J.  AngeU 
James.)  The  way  of  salvation: — I.  The  importance  of  the  question.  And  yet  it 
is  lamentable  how  few  ask  it  1  Many  who  have  been  driven  up  to  it  hke  this  }ailer 
would  never  have  thought  it  unless  God  had  sent  some  distress  to  rouse  them. 
This  man  was  asleep  till  the  earthquake  happened,  and  then  his  mind  was 
suddenly  filled  with  a  subject  which  he  had  never  thought  of  before.  If  men  were 
quite  left  to  themselves  the  generality  would  never  concern  themselves  with  this 
subject.  What  is  the  reason  men  do  not  ask  the  question?  Because  they  do  not 
like  the  answer.  And  yet  the  same  persons  who  are  so  slack  about  their  great  con- 
cern are  found  to  be  very  careful  in  lesser  things.  What  must  I  do  to  be  rich  ? 
What  must  I  do  to  be  in  the  fashion  ?  Here  daily  labours  and  nightly  watchings 
are  sustained  without  reluctance.  And  is  it  consistent  with  common  sense  to  toil 
for  the  sake  of  things  which  are  perishing,  and  neglect  the  only  object  that  is  of  any 
real  value  ?  People  take  much  more  pains  to  go  on  in  the  broad  way  of  destruc- 
tion than  would  be  requisite  to  carry  them  to  heaven.  Our  danger  will  be  more 
manifest  if  it  be  considered  that  under  these  circumstances  there  is  one  who  is 
as  careful  as  we  are  careless  about  ourselves.  While  we  sleep  Satan  is  awake.  11. 
Xtfs  ANtiWSB.    This  is  short  and  to  the  purpose.    Salvation  is  what  all  men  az« 


CHAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  623 

equally  interested  in ;  and  thence  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  way  of  salvation 
should  be  so  plain  that  all  may  understand  it.  But  lest  they  should  think  that 
they  believe  when  they  do  not,  it  will  be  necessary  to  show — 1.  That  belief  neces- 
sarily implies  a  knowledge  of  the  object  in  which  we  believe.  This  object  is  our 
Lord  Jesua  Christ,  whose  person,  character,  and  offices  must  be  made  known  to 
us  before  we  can  believe  Him  to  be  what  He  is.  (1)  He  is  the  Lord  ;  and  this 
word  is  expressed  by  two  words,  one  of  which  is  Jehovah,  and  denotes  His  eternal 
exintence ;  the  other  is  a  term  of  authority  and  dominion,  which  bespeaks  Him  the 
Buler  of  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth.  As  such  He  is  to  be  worshipped  by  us  ; 
and  we  find,  in  fact,  that  He  was  frequently  worshipped  upon  earth.  (2)  He  is 
Jesus.  This  name  expresses  that  office  which  He  took  upon  Him  for  our  salvation, 
and  proposes  His  as  the  only  name  given  under  heaven  whereby  we  may  be  saved. 
And  if  it  is  His  office  to  deliver  us  from  sin,  then  we  are  all  under  the  dominion  of 
sin  tUl  He  redeems  us  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God.  (3)  He  is  Christ,  the 
anointed  of  God ;  that  Person  who,  by  the  power  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  is  ordained 
to  be  our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  2.  Our  belief  implies  an  obedience  to  the 
commandments  of  this  Divine  Person;  and  this  obedience  is  the  evidence  He 
expects  of  our  faith.  If  we  call  Him  Lord,  Lord,  we  are  to  do  the  things  which  He 
saith.  And  therefore — 3.  The  belief  of  a  Christian  implies  a  conformity  of  character 
between  the  believer  and  the  person  in  whom  he  believes.  The  likeness  between  the 
Master  and  the  disciple  is  universal  in  all  professions.  If  Jesus  had  been  a  great 
warrior  then  certainly  His  followers  would  have  excelled  in  the  military  art.  If  He 
had  been  a  master  of  worldly  forms,  then  we  should  have  been  all  for  elegance  and 
niceness  of  outward  appearance.  But  as  He  was  none  of  these,  but  a  preacher  of 
righteousness,  a  physician  of  souls,  a  guide  of  the  blind,  and  a  comforter  of  the 
afflicted,  and  a  sufferer  upon  earth  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  men  ; 
the  qualifications  which  show  us  to  be  believers  must  be  of  the  same  sort.  {W. 
Jones,  M.A.)  Conditions  of  being  saved : — I.  What  sinners  must  do  to  be  saved.  1. 
They  must  not  imagine  that  they  have  nothing  to  do.  2.  Not  mistake  what  they  have 
to  do.  3.  Not  say  or  imagine  that  they  cannot  do  what  God  require?.  4.  Not  pro- 
crastinate. 5.  Not  wait  for  God  to  do  what  He  commands  them  to  do.  6.  Not  wait 
for  God  to  do  anything  whatever.  God  has  either  done  all  on  His  part  already,  or  if 
anything  more  remains.  He  is  ready  and  waiting  this  moment  for  you  to  do  your 
duty  that  He  may  impart  all  needful  grace.  7.  Not  flee  to  any  refuge  of  lies.  8. 
Not  seek  for  any  self-indulgent  method  of  salvation.  9.  Not  imagine  you  will  ever 
have  a  more  favourable  time.  10.  Not  suppose  that  you  will  find  another  time  as 
good,  and  one  in  which  you  can  just  as  well  repent  as  now.  11.  Not  wait  to  see 
what  others  will  do  or  say.  12.  Not  indulge  prejudices  against  God,  His  ministers, 
Christians,  or  anything  religious.  II.  What  sinners  must  do  to  be  saved.  You 
must — 1.  Understand  what  you  have  to  do.  2.  Eeturn  and  confess  your  sins  to 
God.  3.  Eenounce  yourself.  In  this  is  implied  that  you  renounce — (1)  Your  own 
righteousness,  for  ever  discarding  the  very  idea  of  having  any  righteousness  in 
yourself.  (2)  The  idea  of  having  done  any  good  which  ought  to  commend  you  to 
God,  or  be  ever  thought  of  as  a  ground  of  your  justification.  (3)  Your  own  will, 
and  be  ever  ready  to  say  not  in  word  only,  but  in  heart — "  Thy  will  be  done  on 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."  (4)  Your  own  way  and  let  God  have  His  own  way  in 
everything.  4.  Come  to  Christ.  You  must  accept  of  Christ  really  and  fully  as  your 
Saviour.  5.  Seek  supremely  to  please  Christ,  and  not  yourself.  6.  Forsake  all  that 
you  have,  or  you  cannot  be  Christ's  disciple.  There  must  be  absolute  and  total  self- 
denial.  7.  Believe  the  record  God  hath  given  of  His  Son.  "  This  is  the  record  that 
God  has  given  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son."  (C.  G.  Finney,  D.D.) 
God's  method  of  saving  men : — Consider  the  question  in  relation — I.  To  human 
THOUGHT.  1.  The  history  of  human  thought  is  to  a  great  extent  a  history  of  the 
manifold  forms  in  which  this  question  has  betrayed  itself,  and  of  the  costly 
expedients  to  which  man  has  had  recourse  in  his  attempts  to  answer  it.  (1)  Four 
thousand  years  ago  confused  and  anxious  whispers  of  this  question  meet  us  in  the 
inquiry  of  the  patriarch — "  How  shall  a  man  be  just  with  God?  "  They  come  up 
in  ♦be  later  question  of  the  prophet,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord  ?  "  &c. 
If  we  consult  the  dusky  records  uf  paganism  we  encounter  everywhere,  in  its  temples 
and  altars,  the  dark  eclipse  of  sin  and  the  uneasy  suspicions  it  has  cast  over  the 
race.  If  we  Usten  to  the  creeds  and  litanies  of  the  best  of  its  teachers  we  hear 
everywhere  the  cry  of  fugitives  from  a  justice  they  have  provoked,  but  which  they 
know  not  how  to  appease.  (2)  In  our  own  age  the  question  thrusts  itself  up  in 
quarters  where  we  least  expect  to  find  it.     Thinkers,  statesmen,  scientists,  cannoi 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

avoid  drifting  into  the  mystery  that  belongs  to  the  religions  question.  The  mind 
grown  weary  of  abstract  speculations  hungers  for  rest.  The  conscience,  chafed  and 
outraged  by  unclean  proclivities,  asks  for  peace.  The  heart  of  the  man  most  en- 
grossed in  worldly  pursuits  wiU  have  its  hours  of  awakening,  of  aching  dread  in 
■which  the  questions — What  am  I,  and  whither  am  I  going  ?  will  make  themselves 
heard.  2.  As  Christian  students  we  have  but  one  answer  to  give,  and  that  is  the 
one  of  the  text.  When  from  surging  to  and  fro  in  aU  kinds  of  dreary  speculation 
a  man  drifts,  and  turns  away  to  the  gospel,  the  gospel  meets  him  with  an  answer 
direct  and  fuU  in  the  Person  of  Christ.  It  says  for  a  man  to  be  saved  is  for  him  to 
be  reconditioned  in  his  moral  relations  with  the  Infinite  Father,  to  *'  be  reconciled," 
to  "  be  at  peace."  Sin  is  disharmony.  It  puts  man  out  of  his  normal  orbit.  To 
be  saved  is  just  to  enter  that  orbit.  The  antecedents  to  this  state  are,  first,  the 
intelligent  conviction  that  we  need  it,  which  is  a  wise  self  knowledge,  begotten  of 
the  truth ;  and  secondly,  an  ingenuous  sorrow  for  sin,  expressed  in  an  amended 
life.  The  conditions  on  which  its  attainment  hinges  are  belief  in  the  promise,  and 
trust  in  the  Person  of  Christ.  The  consequence  instantly  following  is  a  new  life- 
state — salvation  is  its  initial  act.  II.  To  man's  destiny.  1.  Man  is  "  a  yonder-minded 
being,  an  embodied  hereafter."  Every  man  in  the  present  life  is  building  oat  of 
himself  and  for  himself  a  character  which  belongs  to  the  future.  This  little  every- 
day life  is  but  the  prologue  of  a  mighty  drama,  the  sad  plot  out  of  which  the  harvest 
of  the  future  is  to  be  reaped.  The  great  assize  simply  catalogues  results.  Men  are, 
now  and  here,  what  the  Judgment  Day  will  show  them  to  be.  The  supposition  of  a 
change  induced  by  death  in  the  character  and  condition  of  man  must  be  dismissed. 
Death  does  not  change,  it  only  fixes.  It  puts  a  finality  on  the  book  of  life,  and 
hands  it  on  to  be  opened  at  "  the  judgment  of  the  Great  Day."  It  sums  up  two 
columns — for  and  against  the  man — of  right  and  wrong,  good  and  evil,  and  registers 
the  result.  2.  What  then  ?  What  in  view  of  his  eternal  existence  must  a  man  do  to 
be  saved  ?  If  there  were  no  dangers  to  be  encountered  this  question  would  be  use- 
less and  impertinent.  Or  if  all  souls  are  sure  to  enter  heaven,  the  question,  how, 
is  a  matter  of  comparative  indifference.  On  the  other  hand,  if  there  is  a  risk,  and 
if  to  make  the  chance  of  escape  sure  to  all  who  are  earnest  about  it,  a  revelation 
has  been  vouchsafed,  then  we  are  infinitely  concerned  to  know  how  that  revelation 
speaks ;  and  we  hazard  eternal  consequences  if  we  fail  to  listen  to,  and  instantly 
obey  it.  First,  then,  let  us  say  that  there  is  a  beginning  of  the  religious  hfeinman 
which  puts  the  soul  and  God  into  a  fellowship  of  peace.  When  such  a  man,  deUvered 
from  his  old  bondage  to  evil,  yields  himself  to  God,  and  when  amidst  the  perils  of 
the  world  he  maintains  the  sanctities  of  conscience,  he  has  reached  a  second  stage. 
When  at  the  end  of  hfe,  the  man  conquers  gloriously  in  death  and  then  stands 
faultless  in  the  presence  of  His  glory — this  is  the  end  of  his  salvation  :  that  man  is 
saved — saved  because  he  is  safe.  The  everlasting  gates  close  him  in.  III.  To 
Christian  teaching.  Two  things  are  noteworthy  in  Paul's  answer — first  its  sim- 
plicity, and  secondly  its  immediateness.  And  were  we  now  dealing  with  this 
question  within  the  same  limits  we  should  need  only  to  reproduce  the  same  answer. 
But  we  are  dealing  with  the  question  in  its  broader  and  more  exhaustive  significa- 
tion ;  and  the  answer  must  take  in  forgiveness,  sanctification,  and  heaven.  What 
then  must  be  done?  1.  The  wrong  doing,  on  which  the  necessity  of  salvation  is 
founded,  must  be  got  rid  of.  We  must  "  cease  to  do  evil  "  before  we  can  become 
good.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,"  Ac.  There  can  be  no  compromise 
between  the  two  terms  which  enter  into  this  agreement.  We  must  give  up  sinning, 
if  God  is  to  forgive  us  for  having  sinned.  2.  The  remedy  which  God  has  provided 
must  not  only  be  accepted  as  theoretically  true,  but  must  be  personally  applied. 
And  this  shuts  out  all  the  pretentious  rights  of  human  reason  to  determine  in  what 
method  God  should  deal  with  the  sinner.  It  brings  us  squarely  up  with  the  one 
method  in  which  God  will  deal  with  us.  God's  plan  does  not  alternate  between 
open  courses — two  or  more.  3.  The  one  thing  that  a  man  must  do  is  distinctly  put. 
He  must  "  believe  on,"  Ac.  The  apostles  had  nothing  more  simple  to  set  before 
this  rude  pagan.  And  they  had  no  figurative,  fabulous,  or  doctrinal  Christ,  but  the 
Christ  of  Bethlehem  and  Calvary.  And  the  act  on  which  salvation  hinges  is  as 
straightforward  as  its  object  is  definite.  You  are  not  to  think  about  Christ,  or  say 
graud  nothings  about  Him  :  you  are  to  believe  on  Him,  to  submit  to,  to  trust  in  Him 
that  He  may  forgive  and  heal  you.  And  this  act  of  the  soul  putting  itself  out  in  aa 
intelligent  surrender  of  the  whole  personality  of  its  being — mind,  heart,  will — to 
Christ  is  tlie  man's  trust  for  salvation.  IV.  To  the  individual  man.  1.  The  im- 
parlance oi  this  question  is  obvious.    It  is  the  one  question  that  silences  every  othe^ 


CHAP.  XVI.  THE  ACTS.  525 


It  is  the  most  stupendous  question  that  man  in  his  agony  can  ask,  or  that  God  in 
His  mercy  can  answer.  And  it  is  none  the  less  impressive  in  that  nowhere  outside 
this  Book  is  an  answer  to  be  found.  The  universe  has  not  a  whisper  of  it.  Those 
calm,  grand  laws,  know  nothing  of  mercy.  Our  schools  of  philosophy  know  nothing 
of  salvation.  Science  has  not  a  word  of  pity  for  guilty  man.  2.  We  are  not  saying 
that  this  is  the  only  important  question,  but  that  aU  others  are  insignificant  in  com- 
parison. One  hundred  years  hence  and  what  shall  I  know  or  care  about  my  banking 
account,  or  who  is  the  premier  of  the  country  ?  But  one  hundred  years  hence  what 
and  where  shall  I  myself  be  ?  3.  This  question  must  be  answered  by  each  one  for 
himself,  and  at  once.  It  admits  of  no  postponement.  "  To-day  if  ye  wiU  hear  His 
voice,"  &o.  Time  is  on  the  rush,  and  we  are  rushing  with  it  into  a  timeless  future. 
(John  Burton.)  Believe,  and  be  saved  : — I.  What  is  it  to  believe  ?  Believing 
in  this  case  involved — 1.  The  assent  of  the  mind  to  the  testimony  that  Paul  gave 
to  our  Lord.  Now  all  that  is  necessary  in  the  case  of  the  testimony  that  the  worlds 
were  framed  by  the  word  of  God  is  that  we  should  mentally  assent  to  it.  When  we 
have  intellectually  apprehended  it,  we  have  perhaps  done  aU  that  we  can  do  with  it. 
2.  But  there  is  other  testimony  which  requires  the  consent  of  the  heart :  "  By  faith 
Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain."  Our  conviction  is  that 
in  this  case  God  testified  that  He  would  provide  an  atonement,  and  that  blood  should 
be  shed  as  a  symbol  of  that  atonement,  and  in  acknowledgment  of  the  fact  that  a 
personal  appUcation  of  that  atonement  was  required.  Now  Cain,  although  he 
evidently  understood  this  testimony  mentally,  rejected  it  in  his  heart.  He  thought 
it  sufficient  to  acknowledge  God  as  a  Creator :  and  therefore  simply  brought  to  God 
of  the  fruit  of  the  ground,  in  acknowledgment  of  God's  relation  to  him  as  a  Creator, 
and  in  recognition  of  the  bountifulness  of  Divine  Providence.  But  Abel  received 
the  testimony,  adopted  the  symbol,  offered  the  sacrifice,  and  therefore  by  faith 
offered  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain.  3.  There  is  testimony  which  requires 
not  merely  the  assent  of  the  mind,  and  the  consent  of  the  heart,  but  the  response  of 
the  wiU — testimony  which,  if  a  man  receive,  puts  him  immediately  upon  a  certain 
course  of  conduct :  and  we  have  two  illustrations  in  the  cases  of  Noah  and  Abraham. 
You  will  see  by  these  illustrations  what  the  apostle  means  by  "  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  The  first  thing  is,  of  course,  to  understand 
the  meaning  of  the  words,  the  next  to  receive  them  to  the  heart  (Eom.  x.  9) ,  and 
the  next  to  take  personal  advantage  of  them.  For  this  message  is  sent  by  God  to 
us  personally.  II.  The  object  of  this  belief.  1.  Not  God,  as  God,  for  the  devils 
beheve  in  God.  They  go  further — as  the  effect  of  their  faith  they  tremble.  They 
do  more  than  some  of  you  have  done.  2.  Neither  did  Paul  exhibit  the  providence 
of  God :  far  less  the  law  of  God.  Of  what  advantage  would  it  be  to  preach  the  law 
of  God  to  a  transgressor  except  with  the  object  of  convincing  him  of  sin  ?  If  I  were 
to  see  a  fellow-man  drowning,  should  I  help  him  by  pointing  him  to  the  stream  ? 
If  he  was  not  conscious  of  his  danger,  I  should,  but  it  would  be  useless  othervrise. 
Just  so  with  the  law  of  God.  If  I  find  that  you  do  not  feel  that  you  are  sinners,  I 
teach  you  the  law  of  God.  But  if  I  find  you  asking,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  " 
if  I  were  to  preach  God's  law  to  you  I  should  be  cruelly  mocking  you.  I  then  say, 
not  "  The  law  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good  "  ;  but  "  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to 
save  sinners."  3.  Paul  presented  not  a.  mere  doctrine  :  there  is  no  mere  doctrine 
that  will  save  any  man.  If  I  were  to  give  you  a  letter  of  introduction  to  some 
physician  notable  for  the  cure  of  particular  bodily  ailments,  could  you  be  cured  by 
that  letter  ?  Unless  you  took  the  letter  to  the  physician,  and  saw  him,  and  received 
his  remedies,  and  applied  them,  would  the  letter  benefit  you  ?  Just  so  doctrines  are 
intended  to  introduce  you  to  Christ.  4.  And  Paul  was  justified  in  doing  this,  for 
the  following  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  the  object  is  adapted,  and  able  to  save. 
Salvation  is  now  Christ's  one  work.  And  the  act  of  believing  is  appointed  to  save. 
There  is  nothing  in  it  of  efficacy,  as  there  is  in  the  object.  It  is  efficacious  simply 
because  of  God's  arrangement :  and  therefore  no  merit  can  be  attached  to  faith. 
Faith  is  a  simple  receptive  faculty.  Nothing  more  now  is  required.  By  and  by  you 
will  have  to  let  that  faith  work  ;  but  just  now,  for  your  introduction  into  salvation, 
nothing  more  is  required.  But  then,  mark,  nothing  else  will  suffice.  You  must 
believe.  Shall  I  remind  you  why  this  is  so  difficult  ?  Because  it  is  so  simple.  You 
are  juet  like  that  proud  Syrian  Naaman.  If  I  were  to  say  to  you  that  in  order  to 
be  saved,  you  must  visit  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  there  are  some  of  you  who  would  sell 
everything  to  get  to  the  Holy  Sepulchre  ;  and  you  would  start  immediately.  But 
instead  of  that  we  say.  Trust.  This  is  God's  first  and  last  provision  ;  so  that  if  you 
do  not  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  you  never  can  be  saved.    III.  Ths  besult. 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xti. 

*•  Saved  1 "     1.   The  body  saved — from  fresh  inroads  by  sin  ;  from  its  membera 
being  instruments  of  unrighteousness ;  from  the  sting  of  death  ;  from  the  victory 
of  the  grave.     2.  The  soul  saved — from  unholy  affection  ;  from  raging  fear ;  from 
guilt ;  from  despondency  and  despair ;   from  the  discord  of  the  passions ;    from 
ungodly  impulses ;  from  evil  influence.     3.    The  spirit  saved — from   fatal  igno- 
rance ;    from  damnable  folly ;  from  vain  and  evil  imaginations ;   from   ruinous 
error.     Body,   soul,  and  spirit,  all  saved!     Saved!    Saved  from  aU  evil  now  in 
part,  and  hereafter  saved  in  absolute  and  everlasting  perfection.     (S.  Martin.) 
Saving  faith : — I.  What  it  peesupposes.     As  distinguished  from  faith  in  Christ 
historically,  and  from  what  Scripture  affirms  of  Him  doctrinally  (James  ii.  17-20), 
it  presupposes  a  certain  belief  with  respect  to  ourselves — viz.,  that  we  are  sinners, 
and  with  a  sincere  sorrow  because  of  it,  and  a  sincere  desire  to  forgake  sin.     II.  Im 
WHAT  IT  CONSISTS.    1.  Intellectual  assent  to  the  fact  tbat  Christ  is  the  Saviour  of 
men.    Thus  far  saving  faith  is  the  same  as  that  by  which  we  buy,  sell,  eat,  drink, 
and  travel.    Faith  is  not  a  new  element  in  the  soul  life  of  man,  superadded  by  God, 
upon  an  after  thought  to  the  moral  constitution  at  the  time  of  conversion.     What 
is  then  given  is  grace  to  see — (1)  Self  undone.     (2)  Christ  sufficient.     2.  Trustful- 
ness  superadded  to  intellectual  assent.    Heart  belief  must  accompany  head  belief. 
A  drowning  man  cannot  be  saved  by  a  lifeboat  simply  by  believing  in  its  life-saving 
capabihties ;  he  must  trust  himself  to  it.    So  self  is  given  to  Christ  in  every  case 
of  saving  faith.    3.  Faith  in  a  person.     Some  people  trust  in  a  creed  or  a  ritual ; 
because  trust  in  them  flatters  rather  than  interferes  with  self-love.     My  creed  is 
orthodox,  my  service  ornate  is  the  expression  of  some  men's  faith.    Further,  it  is 
faith  in  a  Divine  person.     It  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  be  able  to  theorise 
about  the  Incarnation  or  philosophise  about  the  Atonement ;  but  our  trust  must  be 
in  the  Son  of  God,  in  opposition  to  being  in  human  priests,  whatever  their  claims. 
But  remember  that  we  are  not  saved  by  our  faith  as  something  meritorious,  but  by 
Christ ;  yet  we  cannot  be  saved  without  faith,  because  remaining  in  unbelief — (1) 
We  make  God  a  liar,  and  fail  to  comply  with  His  law  of  love.    (2)  We  cannot  secure 
and  develop  the  character  necessary  to  fit  us  for  heaven,  nor  the  capacity  for  its 
enjoyments.     IH.  The  extent  of  the  salvation  which  faith  seodres.     1.  Salva- 
tion from  the  punishment  due  to  past  transgressions.    2.  DeUverance  from  the 
power  and  principle  of  sin.    {J.  S.  Swan.)       Salvation  through  faith  in  Christ : — I. 
Who  IB  this  Chkist  ?     1.  God ;   2.  Man ;  3.  God  and  Man  in  one  Person.    IL 
What  is  it  to  believe  in  this  Christ  ?     1.  To  know  Him  (1  Cor.  ii.  2  ;  John  xvii. 
3).    2.  Assent  to  Him  (John  xi.  27).     3.  Rely  upon  Him  (Eph.  L  12).     (1)  For  the 
pardon  of  your  sins.     (2)  The  acceptance  of  your  persons.     (3)  The  salvation  of 
your  souls.     III.  How  shall  they  that  believe  in  Christ  be  saved?     1.  From 
what?     (1)  The  guilt  of  sin  (Gal.  iii.  13).     (2)  The  strength  of  sin  (Acts  iii.  26; 
Matt.  i.  21).     (3)  Tlie  prevalency  of  Satan  (Heb.  ii.  14).     (4)  The  wrath  of  God 
(Eph.  ii.  3  ;  Rom.  v.  9).     2,  To  what?     (1)  Justification  (Rom.  v.  1).     (2)  Regene- 
ration (2  Cor.  V.  17).    (3)  Spiritual  consolation  (2  Cor.  L  5).   (4)  Everlasting  salvation 
<John  iii.  16).     Consisting  in — {a)  Our  freedom  from  all  evil.    (6)  Our  enjoyment 
of  all  good — as  appears  from  the  promises  (John  i.  12,  iii.  15 ;  Acts  xiii.  39) ;  from 
the  end  of  Christ's  coming  (John  iii.  16) ;  from  the  nature  of  faith  (Heb.  xi  1).    IV. 
Uses  fob — 1.  Instruction.   Unbelievers  will  be  damned.    2.  Conviction.   (1)  Yoa  do 
not  know  Him ;  for  then  you  could  not  choose  but — (a)  Admire  Him  (1  Tim.  iii.  16). 
(b)  Love  Him  (Eph.  vi.  24).     (c)  Think  frequently  of   Him.     (d)  Make  it  your 
business  to  interest  yourselves  in  Him.     (2)  If  you  do  know,  you  do  not  assent  to 
Him  ;  for  did  you  believe  that  He  died  for  sin — (a)  Would  you  live  in  it  ?   (6)  Would 
you  not  repent  of  it  ?    (3)  You  do  not  rely  on  Christ ;  for— (a)  What  was  it  thou 
tookest  most  comfort  from  upon  thy  last  sick  bed  ?     (b)  What  is  it  that  thou  now 
delightest  thyself  with  in  trouble?     How  seldom  dost  thou  think  of  Christ,     (c) 
How  comest  thou  to  live  in  sin  without  mourning  for  and  turning  from  it  (2  Cor.  v. 
17)?    3.  Examination.    Test  thy  faith  in  Christ  by — (1)  Thy  knowledge  of  Him. 
(2)  Tliy  love  to  Him.     (3)  Thy  longing  after  Him.     (4)  Thy  obedience  to  His  com- 
mand.   (5)  Thy  acting  for  Him  (James  ii.  18).    4.  Exhortation.    Believe  in  Christ ; 
for  consider — (1)  How  miserable  thou  wilt  be  without  Him.    Satan  always  domi- 
neering over,  sin  always  raging  in,  and  God  always  frowning  upon  thee  to  all 
eternity  (Psa.  vii.   11).     (2)  How  happy  thou  wilt  be  with  Him.     (a)  Thy  sins 
pardoned,     (b)  Satan  subdued,    (c)  Corruptions  mortified,     (d)  The  heart  sanctified 
<1  Cor.  i.  2).     (e)  God  pleased  (Heb.  xi.  5).     (/)  The  soul  saved  (Rom.  viii.  1).    V. 
Means— 1.  Prayer;   2.    Reading;  3.   Hearing  (Rom.  x.  17).    4.  Meditation.     (1) 
The  insufficiency  of  all  things  else.    (2)  The  sufficiency  of  Christ.    (3)  Its  end  in 


CHAP,  nn.]  THE  ACTS.  627 

coming  into  the  world.  {Bp.  Beveridge.)  The  great  question  answered: — I. 
What  are  the  antecedents  of  saving  faith,  that  is,  what  precedes  the  act  of 
faith  in  the  experience  of  the  sinner?  I  do  not  doubt  that  there  was, 
previoas  to  this  jailer's  faith  and  essential  to  it,  a  conviction  first  of  his  guilt, 
secondly  of  his  danger,  and  therefore,  thirdly,  of  his  need  of  salvation,  and  of  a 
Saviour.  It  is  on  the  ground  of  these  facts  that  the  gospel  comes  to  men  with 
offers  of  pardon  and  grace;  and  he  who  does  not  realise  them  as  facts  in  his 
personal  history  cannot  receive  the  gospel,  for  he  does  not  feel  his  need  of  the 
gospel.  II.  Let  us  look  at  the  object  of  faith.  "Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  This  which  you  are  ready  to  rely  on  is  nothing  within  you — no  change 
wrought  there,  either  by  your  own  efforts  or  by  any  other  agency,  human  or  Divine. 
Cease,  then,  to  explore  the  recesses  of  your  spirits  in  search  of  something  there 
which  will  constitute  a  ground  of  hope.  You  may  search  there  for  ever  and  find 
no  Saviour  there,  and  nothing  that  will  make  you  more  worthy  to  come  to  Christ. 
III.  Let  us  consider  the  act  of  faith.  What  does  the  sinner  do  when  he  beUeves 
in  Christ?  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  Bible,  while  saying  much  of  the 
necessity,  the  object,  and  the  effects  of  faith,  says  very  little  of  its  nature.  The 
reason  may  be  because  the  act  itself  is  so  simple,  so  easily  understood.  IV.  Let 
us  look  at  the  besults  of  faith.  In  the  text  these  results  are  all  summed  up  in  the 
one  word  saved.  We  find,  by  searching  the  Scriptures,  that  these  results,  thus 
summed  up,  are  resolved  into  two  classes,  one  of  which  takes  place  in  the  mind 
and  purposes  of  God,  and  the  other  in  the  mind  and  destiny  of  the  sinner.  On  the  - 
side  of  God  is  His  justification  of  the  sinner.  It  is  a  judicial  act,  the  act  of  God  as 
a  judge,  freeing  the  sinner  from  the  penalty  of  the  law  which  he  has  incurred,  and 
placing  him  in  the  position,  in  regard  to  the  condemning  sentence,  of  one  who  has 
never  incurred  the  penalty.  On  the  side  of  God  also  is  His  acceptance  of  believing 
sinners,  and  His  adoption  of  them  into  His  family.  •♦  He  hath  made  us  accepted 
in  the  Beloved."  On  the  side  of  God  is  also  His  bestowment  of  His  Spirit  on  the 
believing  sinner.  "  Because  ye  are  sons,  God  has  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son 
into  your  hearts."  But  let  us  look  at  the  results  of  this  faith  in  the  mind  and 
destiny  of  the  believer.  In  his  heart,  one  of  the  first  results  of  believing  is  peace 
or  joy.  Another  result  of  faith  is  obedience.  All  acts  of  holy  obedience  spring 
from  true  faith.  It  brings  the  believer  within  the  sphere  of  new  motives.  It  fills 
his  heart  with  ardent  love.  It  secures  for  him  the  influences  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  So  in  proportion  to  his  faith  will  be  his  faithfulness.  The  final  result  of 
faith  is  eternal  life.  Who  can  tell  its  value?  Who  can  show  us  the  everlasting 
difference  between  a  soul  lost  and  a  soul  saved  ?  In  conclusion,  I  remark — 1.  The 
terms  of  salvation  are  easy  and  simple.  They  could  not  be  more  so.  They  are 
also  exactly  adapted  to  our  necessities.  2.  The  time  for  the  exercise  of  this  faith 
is  now.  Is  not  Christ  now  able  and  willing  to  save  you  ?  Is  He  not  as  worthy  of 
trust  now  as  He  ever  will  be  ?  3.  Finally,  the  results  of  faith  are  most  urgent 
motives  to  its  immediate  exercise.  Do  you  wish  to  be  free  from  condemnation, 
and  stand  justified  before  God  ?  Then  believe.  Do  you  wish  to  be  adopted  into 
the  family  of  God,  and  so  become  an  heir  of  God  and  a  joint  heir  with  Christ  ? 
Then  believe.  Do  you  wish  for  peace  with  God  ?  Then  believe.  Do  you  wish  for 
God's  Spirit  as  a  comforter,  a  guide,  a  strengthener,  a  sanctifier  ?  Then  believe,  y 
{W.    W.    Woodtcorth.)  Believing  on  Jesus : — I  know   of   a   man   who,   being  ^ 

obliged  to  sleep  in  the  upper  story  of  a  lofty  building,  keeps  a  fire-escape  in 
his  room  in  the  shape  of  a  stout  rope-ladder.  He  believes  in  that  ladder.  Tbat 
is,  he  has  perfect  confidence  in  the  stoutness  of  the  hemp,  the  strength  of  the 
wooden  '•  rounds,"  and  the  ability  of  that  ladder  to  bear  his  weight.  But  on  some 
dark  night  let  the  cry  of  "  fire  "  ring  through  that  edifice,  and  let  him  put  the 
grappling-irons  fast  to  the  window  casement,  and  swing  himself  out  into  the  air, 
and  he  will  believe  on  that  rope-ladder.  He  will  trust  himself  to  it.  When  he  has 
done  that,  he  will  have  exercised  saving  faith  in  his  fire-escape.  Not  before. 
Thousands  keep  gospel  truth  coiled  up  in  their  memories  as  my  friend  kept  that 
rope-ladder  coiled  up  in  one  corner  of  his  room.  They  have  heard  and  read  of 
Jesus,  the  Atoner  for  sin ;  they  admire  Him,  they  believe  in  His  Divine  qualities, 
love,  &c.,  and  vaguely  expect,  at  some  future  day,  to  get  to  heaven  by  Him.  But 
they  have  never  for  one  moment  trusted  their  souls  to  Jesus.  They  never  have 
even  attempted  to  escape  out  of  their  guilt  and  danger,  by  resting  their  whole  weight 
on  what  Jesus  has  done  for  the  sinner,  or  on  His  omnipotent  grace.  Perish  they 
must,  if  they  remain  where  they  are.  The  act  of  resting  on  the  crucified  Jesus  sh  vps. 
Saving  faith : — This  answer  has  three  or  four  properties.     1.  It  was  immediate. 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  without  delay.  There  was  no  time  requii'ed,  as  in  the  case  of  Nebuchadnezzar's 
•wise  men,  when  they  had  to  interpret  the  king's  dream.  The  apostles  were  well 
versed  in  such  matters.  2 .  It  was  full  and  comprehensive.  It  meets  the  point  ai 
once,  and  contains  an  epitome  of  the  whole  gospel.  3.  It  is  highly  satisfactory, 
affording  direct  relief  in  the  moment  of  distress,  and  giving  peace.  4.  It  is  the 
same  answer  as  all  God's  ministers  return  to  inquiring  souls,  whatever  be  their 
previous  state  or  character.  L  The  exhortation  The  Scriptures  speak  of  various 
kinds  and  degrees  of  faith,  but  of  one  only  that  accompanies  salvation.  1.  The 
original  source  of  all  true  believing  is  the  free  grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is 
His  gift,  and  the  effect  of  His  good  pleasure.  2.  The  means  of  producing  faith  ia 
the  Divine  testimony.  Faith  comes  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God. 
b.  The  immediate  object  of  faith  is  Christ,  as  revealed  in  the  gospel.  4.  The 
ultimate  end  of  faith  is  our  happiness,  and  the  glory  of  God.  "  Eeceiving  the  end 
of  Your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls."  It  disclaims  all  merit  and 
sufficiency  of  its  own,  and  excludes  all  boasting,  only  in  the  Lord.  H.  Thb 
PEOMisE.  Salvation  comprehends  a  final  and  complete  deliverance  from  all  evil, 
natural  and  moral,  and  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  bliss.  It  includes,  especially,  the 
pardon  of  sin,  the  sanctification  of  our  nature,  a  victory  over  all  our  enemies,  the 
resurrection  of  the  body,  and  life  everlasting.  The  connection  which  this  has  with 
believing,  will  be  seen  in  the  following  particulars.  1.  Though  salvation  is  promised 
to  them  that  believe,  it  is  neither  provided  nor  bestowed  in  the  foresight  of  their 
believing  nor  had  faith  any  influence  on  the  Divine  determination.  The  ground  of 
all  spiritual  blessings  is  the  free  and  unmerited  favour  of  God  (2  Tim.  i.  9).  2. 
Though  salvation  is  promised  to  them  that  believe,  it  is  not  promised  as  a  reward 
for  their  believing,  but  for  His  sake  in  whom  they  believe.  It  receives  a  title  to 
eternal  life,  but  does  not  give  one.  Faith  is  like  the  eye  beholding,  and  the  hand 
receiving  a  gift ;  but  however  necessary  to  its  enjoyment,  the  gift  itself  is  free  and 
nndeserred.  3.  As  faith  receives  a  title  to  eternal  life,  founded  upon  the  promises 
of  the  gospel,  so  it  is  that  which  gives  us  the  actual  enjoyment  of  it.  By  faith  we 
receive  the  atonement,  and  are  led  to  acquiesce  in  the  way  of  acceptance  with  God, 
as  full  of  wisdom,  and  suited  to  our  sinful  and  helpless  condition.  It  is  not  a  medi- 
cine prepared,  but  applied,  that  effects  a  cure.  4.  Faith  produces  those  holy  disposi- 
tions which  form  our  meetness  for  heaven,  though  not  our  title  to  it.  There  can  be 
no  enjoyment  where  there  is  no  congeniality.  But  true  faith  purifies  the  heart,  and 
imbues  it  with  every  principle  of  piety  and  goodness.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  How  to 
be  saved: — The  sinner's  prescription.  It  points  out — I.  A  fact — "  salvation."  H.  A 

CERTAIN  FACT — "  shalt."   III.  A  PERSONAL  FACT — "  ThoU."   IV.  ThE  CAUSE  OF  SAIiVATIOIf 

— "Christ,"  "Jesus,""  Lord."  V.  The  instrument  of  salvation — "BeUeve."  (W.  W. 
Wythe.)  The  all-decisive  step : — There  are  some  documents  of  so  little  importance 
that  you  do  not  care  to  put  any  more  than  your  last  name  under  them,  or  even  your 
initials ;  but  there  are  some  documents  of  so  great  importance  that  you  write  out  your 
full  name.  So  the  Saviour  in  some  parts  of  the  Bible  is  called  "  Lord,"  and  in  others 
"  Jesus,"  and  in  others  "  Christ  "  ;  but  that  there  might  be  no  mistake  about  this 
passage,  all  three  names  come  in  together.  I.  Who  is  this  Being  that  you  wamt 
ME  to  believe  in  ?  Men  sometimes  come  to  me  with  certificates  of  good  character, 
but  I  cannot  trust  them.  There  is  some  dishonesty  in  their  looks.  You  cannot 
put  your  heart's  confidence  in  a  man  until  you  know  what  stuff  he  is  made  of.  No 
man  would  think  of  venturing  his  life  on  a  vessel  going  out  to  sea  that  had  never 
been  inspected.  And  you  cannot  expect  me  to  risk  the  cargo  of  my  immortal  inte- 
rests on  board  any  craft.  Well — 1.  Christ  was  a  very  attractive  person.  Christ 
did  not  tell  the  children  to  come  to  Him.  "  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  Me  " 
was  not  spoken  to  the  children,  but  to  the  disciples.  The  children  came  without 
any  invitation.  Christ  did  not  ask  John  to  put  his  head  down  on  His  bosom ; 
John  could  not  help  but  put  his  head  there.  When  people  saw  Christ  coming  they 
ran  into  their  houses  and  brought  their  invalids  out  that  He  might  look  at  them. 
They  could  not  keep  away  from  Him.  2.  In  addition  to  this  softness  of  character, 
there  was  a  fiery  momentum.  How  tbe  old  hypocrites  trembled  before  Him  I  How 
the  kings  of  the  earth  turned  pale  I  He  was  a  loving  Christ,  but  it  was  not  effemi- 
nacy. Lest  the  world  should  not  realise  His  earnestness,  this  Christ  mounts  the 
Cross.  Oh,  such  a  Christ  as  that — so  loving,  so  self-sacrificing — can  you  not  trust 
Him  ?  II.  Many  s^t,  "  I  will  trust  Him  if  you  will  only  tell  me  how."  Just  as 
you  trust  any  one.  You  trust  your  partner  in  business.  If  a  commercial  house 
give  you  a  note  payable  three  months  hence,  you  expect  the  payment  of  that  note. 
You  go  home  and  expect  there  will  be  food  on  the  table.    Have  the  same  confidence 


CHAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  529 

in  Christ.    He  is  only  waiting  to  get  from  you  -what  yon  give  to  scores  of  people 
every  day.     Confidence.    If  these  people  are  more  worthy,  more  faithful,  if  they 
have  done  more  than  Christ,  then  give  them  the  preference  ;  but  if  Christ  is  as 
trustworthy  as  they  are,  then  deal  with  Him  as  fairly.     "  Oh,"  says  some  one,  "  I 
believe  that  Christ  was  bom  in  Bethlehem,  and  that  He  died  on  the  Cross."     Do 
you  believe  it  with  your  head  or  your  heart  ?    I  will  illustrate  the  difference.     You 
read  in  a  newspaper  how  Captain  Braveheart  on  the  sea  risked  his  life  for  the  sal- 
vation of  his  passengers.    You  say,  "What  a  grand  fellow  he  must  have  been  I  " 
You  fold  the  paper  and,  perhaps,  do  not  think  of  that  incident  again.     That  is 
historical  faith.     But  now  you  are  on  the  sea,  and  asleep,  and  are  awakened  by  the 
shriek  of  "  Fire  1  "    You  rush  out  on  the  deck.     "  Down  with  the  lifeboats  !  "  cries 
the  captain.    People  rush  into  them.     Boom  only  for  one  more  man.    Who  shall 
it  be?    You  or  the  captain  ?    The  captain  says,  "  You."    You  jump  and  are  saved. 
He  stands  there  and  dies.  Now,  you  believe  that  Captain  Braveheart  sacrificed  him- 
self for  his  passengers,  but  you  beheve  it  with  grief  at  his  loss,  and  with  joy  at  your 
deliverance.    That  is  saving  faith.    You  often  go  across  a  bridge  you  know  nothing 
about.  You  do  not  know  who  built  the  bridge,  nor  of  what  material  it  is  made  ;  but 
you  walk  over  it,  and  ask  no  questions.    And  here  is  an  arched  bridge  blasted  from 
the  "  Rock  of  Ages,"  and  built  by  the  Architect  of  the  universe,  spanning  the  dark 
gulf  between  sin  and  righteousness,  and  all  God  asks  you  is  to  walk  across  it ;  and 
you  start,  and  you  come  to  it,  and  you  stop,  and  you  go  a  little  way  on  and  you 
stop,  and  you  fall  back  and  you  experiment.      You  say,  "How  do  I  know  that 
bridge  will  hold  me  ?  "  instead  of  marching  on  with  firm  step,  feeling  that  the 
strength  of  the  eternal  God  is  under  you.    III.  What  is  it  to  be  saved  ?    It  means 
— 1.  A  happy  life.    It  is  a  grand  thing  to  go  to  sleep  at  night,  and  to  get  up  in  the 
morning,  and  to  do  business  all  day  feeling  that  all  is  right  between  my  heart  and 
God.     2.  A  peaceful  death.    Almost  all  the  poets  have  said  handsome  things  about 
death.     There  is  nothing  beautiful  about  it.    Death  is  loathesomeness,  and  mid- 
night, and  the  wringing  of  the  heart  until  the  tendrils  snap  and  curl  in  the  torture 
unless  Christ  be  with  us.      Unless  there  be  some   supernatural  illumination,  I 
shudder  back  from  it.  But  now  this  glorious  lamp  is  lifted  above  the  grave,  and  all 
the  darkness  is  gone,  and  the  way  is  clear.     What  power  is  there  in  anything  to 
chill  me  in  the  last  hour  if  Christ  wraps  around  me  the  skirt  of  His  own  garment  ? 
What  darkness  can  fall  upon  my  eyelids  then,  amid  the  heavenly  daybreak  f     3.  A 
blissful  eternity.    To  be  saved  is  to  wake  up  in  the  presence  of  Christ.     You  know 
when  Jesus  was  upon  earth,  how  happy  He  made  every  house  He  went  into.     {T. 
De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)        The  kiJig's  highway  opened  and  cleared  : — When  the 
children  of  Israel  were  settled  in  Canaan,  God  ordained  that  they  should  set  apart 
certain  Cities  of  Refuge,  that  to  these  the  man-slayer  might  flee  for  security.     We 
are  told  by  the  rabbis  that  once  in  the  year,  or  oftener,  the  magistrates  of  the  dis- 
trict surveyed  the  roads  which  led  to  these  cities :  they  carefully  gathered  up  all  the 
stones,  and  took  the  greatest  possible  precautions  that  there  should  be  no  stumbling- 
blocks  in  the  way.  We  hear,  moreover,  that  aU  along  the  road  there  were  hand-posts, 
with  the  word  "  Refuge  "  written  legibly  upon  them.  Now  God  has  prepared  a  City 
of  Refuge,  and  the  way  to  it  is  by  faith  in  Christ.     I  propose  to  go  along  it,  and  to 
remove  any  impediment  which  Satan  may  have  laid.     There  is — I.  The  kecol- 
LECTioN  OF  THE  PAST  LIFE.     But  all  thy  sins,  be  they  never  so  many,  cannot  destroy 
thee  if  thou  dost  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."    It  is  not  the  greatness  of  the  sinner  that  is 
the  difficulty  ;  it  is  the  hardness  of  the  sinner's  heart.   Remember,  too,  that  all  the 
while  thou  dost  not  believe  in  Christ,  thou  art  adding  to  thy  sin.     II.  Conscious- 
ness OF  HAKDNESS  OF  HEABT  AND  THE  LACE  OF  WHAT  IS  THOUGHT  TO  BE  TEDE  PENITENCE. 

But  dost  thou  read  that  those  who  have  hard  hearts  are  not  commanded  to  believe? 
The  Scripture  says,  "  Whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  not  perish,"  &c.  Now,  if 
thou  believest,  though  thy  heart  be  never  so  hard,  thy  believing  saves  thee ;  and 
what  is  more,  thy  believing  shall  yet  soften  thy  heart.  If  thou  canst  not  feel  thy 
need  of  a  Saviour  as  thou  wouldst,  remember  that  when  thou  hast  a  Saviour 
thou  wilt  soon  find  out  how  great  was  thy  need  of  Him.  Many  persons  find 
out  their  needs  by  receiving  the  supply.  Have  you  never  looked  in  at  a 
shop  window  and  seen  an  article,  and  said,  "  Why,  that  is  just  what  I  want  "  ? 
ILL  Consciousness  of  weak  or  little  faith.  Ah,  there  you  are  again  looking  to 
yourself.  It  is  not  the  strength  of  thy  faith  that  saves  thee,  but  its  reality.  What 
is  more,  it  is  not  even  the  reahty  of  thy  faith  that  saves  thee,  it  is  the  object  of  thy 
faith.  A  grain  of  mustard  seed  is  the  smallest  of  all  seeds,  and  yet  if  thou  hast  but 
voi-  n.  Qi 


S30  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

that  quantity  of  faith,  thoa  art  a  saved  man.  Remember  the  poor  woman  who 
touched  but  the  fringe  of  Christ's  garment,  and  she  was  made  whole.  Bemember  a 
little  child  belongs  to  the  human  race  as  much  as  the  greatest  giant ;  and  so  a  babe 
in  grace  is  as  truly  a  child  of  God  as  is  Mr.  Greax-heart,  who  can  fight  all  the  giants 
on  the  road.  IV.  The  existence  of  many  doubts  and  feaes.  My  answer  is,  "  Ha 
that  believeth  shall  be  saved,"  be  that  faith  intermingled  with  multitudes  of  doubta 
and  fears.  You  remember  that  story  of  our  Saviour  in  the  storm,  and  the  poor 
disciples  were  full  of  fear — "Lord,  sive  us  or  we  perish."  Here  were  doubts. 
jOid  Jesus  say,  0  ye  of  no  faith?  No;  "0  ye  of  little  faith."  So  there  may  be 
little  faith  where  there  are  great  doubts.  At  eventide,  even  though  there  is  a  great 
deal  of  darkness,  yet  there  is  light.  And  if  thy  faith  should  never  come  to  noonday, 
if  it  do  but  come  to  twilight,  nay,  if  thy  faith  is  but  starlight,  nay,  candlelight,  nay, 
a  spark — if  it  be  but  a  glow-worm  spark,  thou  art  saved.  Think  of  John  Knox,  on 
his  dying  bed,  troubled  about  his  interest  in  Christ.  If  such  a  man  have  doubts, 
dost  thou  expect  to  live  without  them  ?  If  Paul  himself  keeps  under  his  body  lest 
he  should  be  a  castaway,  how  canst  thou  expect  to  live  without  clouds  ?  V.  Feab 
OF  death.  There  are  many  of  God's  blessed  ones  who,  through  fear  of  death,  have 
been  much  of  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.  And  this  is  accounted  for,  because 
God  has  stamped  on  nature  that  law,  the  love  of  life  and  self-preservation.  And 
again,  it  is  natural  that  you  should  scarce  like  to  leave  behind  those  that  are  so 
dear.  But  you  are  testing  yourself  by  a  condition  in  which  you  are  not  placed.  You 
don't  want  dying  grace  in  life,  but  you  will  have  it  when  you  want  it.  VI.  Thb 
absence  of  joy.  But  remember  it  is  not  "  he  that  is  joyful  shall  be  saved,"  but 
"  he  that  believeth  shall  be  saved."  Thy  faith  will  make  thee  joyful  by  and  by, 
but  it  is  as  powerful  to  save  thee  even  when  it  does  not  make  thee  rejoice.  VII.  A 
GBiEvous  SENSE  OF  IMPERFECTION.  What,  wiU  you  uot  belicve  in  Christ  until  you  are 
perfect  ?  Then  you  will  never  believe  in  Him.  You  will  not  trust  the  precious 
Jesus  till  you  have  no  sins  to  trust  Him  with  ?  Then  you  will  never  trust  Him  at 
aU.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  32-40.  And  they  spa^e  nnto  him  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  to  all  that 
were  in  his  house. — Household  salvation  : — It  sometimes  happens  that  a  good  man 
has  to  go  alone  to  heaven :  God's  election  has  separated  him  from  the  midst  of  an 
ungodly  family.  But  though  grace  does  not  run  in  the  blood,  yet  it  frequently 
happens  that  God,  by  means  of  one  of  a  household,  draws  the  rest  to  Himself. 
Bunyan,  in  the  first  part  of  his  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  describes  Christian  as  a 
lonely  traveller.  The  second  part,  however,  exhibits  family  piety,  and  many  a 
gentle  spirit  has  found  it  sweeter  than  the  former.  It  is  most  natural  and  proper 
that  your  desire  for  the  salvation  of  others  should,  first  of  all,  rest  upon  your  own 
families.  If  charity  begins  at  home,  so,  assuredly,  piety  will.  Let  Abraham's 
prayer  be  for  Ishmael,  let  Hannah  pray  for  Samuel,  let  Andrew  first  find  his  brother 
Simon,  and  Eunice  train  her  Timothy.  Observe — I.  A  whole  hodsehold  hearino 
THE  Word.  If  we  are  to  have  household  conversion  there  must  be  a  household 
hearing  of  the  Word.  1.  Now  many  fathers  never  hear  the  Word  of  God,  because 
they  regard  the  Sabbath  as  a  day  of  laziness.  2.  The  mothers  must  hear  the  Word 
ac  well  as  the  fathers.  Many  of  them  do,  but  many  are  detained  at  home  with  the 
children.  Now  it  is  the  duty  of  every  father,  if  he  does  not  keep  a  servant,  to  take 
his  turn  with  the  wife  and  let  her  have  her  fair  share  of  opportunity  for  hearing  the 
gospel.  3.  Then  the  children  also  must  be  thought  of.  We  desire  to  see  them 
converted  as  children.  There  is  no  need  that  they  should  wait  until  they  are 
grown  up,  and  have  run  into  sin.  Let  the  little  ones  be  brought  to  hear  the  gospel. 
Let  it  be  said  of  you,  as  of  "  Judah,  who  stood  before  the  Lord,  with  their  little  ones, 
their  wives,  and  their  children."  4.  Then  there  are  the  servants.  You  cannot 
honestly  pray  God  to  save  your  household  unless  you  give  the  whole  household  an 
opportunity  of  being  saved.  II.  A  whole  household  believing  (ver.  34).  1.  They 
were  new  hearers,  and  yet  they  all  believed.  Is  it  not  a  sad  fact  that  many  of  my 
old  hearers  have  not  believed  ?  Oh  !  the  responsibilities  that  are  heaped  up  upon 
gospel -hardened  sinners  1  2.  They  were  most  unlikely  hearers.  In  the  society  and 
associations  of  a  jail  there  was  very  little  that  could  be  likely  to  improve  the 
mother,  to  benefit  the  children,  or  elevate  the  servants.  Yet  how  often  are  the 
most  unlikely  persons  led  to  the  Saviour.  How  true  is  it  still  of  many  who  are  out- 
wardly religious,  that  "  the  publicans  and  harlots  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
before  them."  This  is  an  encouragement  to  you  who  work  in  the  slums  of  this  vast 
•ity.     8.  Tet  they  were  converted,  there  and  then.     I  do  not  know  how  long  Paul's 


«HAP.  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  631 

sermon  was ;  he  was  a  wise  man,  and  I  should  not  think  he  would  preach  a  long 
sermon  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  just  after  an  earthquake.    As  the  lightning  flash 
can  split  the  oak  from  its  loftiest  bough  to  the  earth  in  a  second,  so  the  ever 
blessed  lightning  of  God's  Spirit  can  cleave  the  heart  of  man  in  a  moment.     4.  It 
is  said  particularly  of  them  aU  that  "  they  believed."     Was  that  the  only  thing  ? 
Gould  it  not  be  said  that  they  all  prayed  ?      I  daresay  it  could,  and  many  other 
good  things ;  but  then  faith  was  at  the  root  of  them  all.     5.  Though  converted 
suddenly,  all  of  them  were,  nevertheless,  very  hearty  converts.     They  were  quick 
to  do  all  that  in  them  lay  for  the  apostle,  and  for  the  good  cause.    It  is  delightful 
to  meet  your  hearty  Christian,  who,  when  he  gave  his  heart  to  Jesus,  meant  it,  and 
devoted  his  whole  body,  soul,  and  spirit  to  the  good  Lord  who  had  bought  him  with 
His  blood,      ni.   A  whole   household   baptized.     1.  ♦'  He "  was  baptized — the 
jailer.     Then  •'  all  his  "  followed.     2.  This  was  done  straightway.     There  was  not 
one  who  wished  to  have  it  put  off  till  he  had  tried  himself  a  little.     In  those  days 
no  one  had  any  scruple  or  objection  to  obey.     No  minister  has  any  right  to  refuse 
to  baptize  any  person  who  professes  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  unless  there  be  some 
glaring  fact  to  cast  doubt  upon  the  candidate's  sincerity.    IV.  A  whole  houskhold 
AT  woEZ  FOB  GoD.     They  all  did  something.     The  father  called  for  a  light,  the 
servants  bring  the  torches.    Here  is  work  for  himself,  and  for  gentle  hands  to  do  : 
to  wash  out  the  grit  that  had  come  there  through  their  lying  on  their  backs  on  the 
dungeon  floor,  and  to  mollify  and  bind  up  their  wounds.  There  was  suitable  occupa- 
tion for  the  mother  and  for  the  servants,  for  they  set  meat  before  the  holy  men. 
The  kitchen  was  sanctified  to  supply  the  needs  of  the  ministers  of  Christ.     Even 
our  children  when  they  are  saved  can  do  something  for  the  Master.  The  little  hand 
that  drops  its  halfpence  into  the  offering-box,  out  of  love  to  Jesus,  is  accepted  of  the 
Lord.     The  young  child  trying  to  tell  its  brother  or  sister  of  the  dear  Saviour  who 
has  loved  it  is  a  true  missionary  of  the  Cross.     V.  A  family  all  rejoicing.     1.  If 
the  family  had  been  left  a  fortune  they  would  have  rejoiced,  but  they  had  found 
more  than  all  the  world's  wealth  at  once  in  finding  a  Saviour,  therefore  were  they 
glad.     2.  Though  their  joy  sprang  mainly  from  their  believing,  it  also  arose  from 
their  being  baptized,  for  the  Ethiopian,  after  he  was  baptized,  "  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing."     "  In  keeping  His  commandments  there  is  great  reward."    3.  They 
rejoiced,  no  doubt,  because  they  had  an  opportunity  of  serving  the  Church  in 
waiting  upon  the  apostle.     They  felt  glad  to  think  that  Paul  was  at  their  table. 
And  Christian  people  are  never  so  happy  as  when  they  are  busy  for  Jesus.     4.  I 
have  no  doubt  that  their  joy  was  permanent.     There  would  not  be  any  quarrelling 
in  that  house  now,  no  disobedient  children,  no  short-tempered  father,  no  fretful 
mother,  no  purloining  servants,  no  eye-servers.      Conclusion :  That  household  is 
now  in  glory.     With  some  of  you  the  father  is  in  heaven,  and  the  mother  is  on  the 
road,  but  the  children  1     With  others,  your  little  ones  have  gone  before  you,  and 
your  grandsire  is  also  in  glory ;  but,  ah  1  husband  and  wife,  your  faces  are  turned 
towards  the  ways  of  sin.     There  will  be  broken  households  around  the  throne,  and 
if  it  could  mar  their  joy — if  anything  could — it  would  be  the  thought  thsit  a  son  or 
husband  is  absent  while  the  wife  and  mother  sing  the  endless  song.     This  is  the 
last   question,  "Will  my  family  be   there?"     Will   yours   be   there?      {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)       Belief,  baptism,  blessing  : — The  gospel,  attended  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
is  always  victorious ;  but  it  is  very  pleasant  to  make  notes  of  its  victories.     The 
gospel  came  to  Lydia,  a  devout  woman,  who  worshipped  God,  although  she  did  not 
know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     She  was  a  woman  of  tender  heart,  and  she  was  soon 
won.    "  Well,"  says  one, "  that  is  an  instance  of  what  the  gospel  does  with  delicate, 
tender,  gentle  natures."    Now,  here  is  an  old  soldier  ;  he  has  been  in  the  wars,  he 
has  earned  distinction,  and  has  been  appointed  to  the  ofiBce  of  jailer  at  PhUippi,  an 
ofl&ce  of  some  importance  under  the  Koman  Emperor.     He  is  a  man  who  knows  the 
sight  of  blood ;  he  is  of  a  coarse,  though  apparently  honest,  disposition.     He  keeps 
prisoners,  and  that  is  not  an  office  that  brings  much  gentleness  with  it ;  and  he  is 
under  very  stern  law.    He  is  as  hard  as  a  bit  of  the  lower  millstone.     What  will  the 
gospel  do  with  him  ?   It  triumphed  as  much  in  the  jailer  at  Philippi  as  it  did  in  the 
lady  from  Thyatira.     I  want  specially  to  call  your  attention  to  this  point ;  the 
PhiHppian  jailer  stands  before  us  as  one  who  was  converted  and  baptized,  and  who 
brought  forth  useful  fruit  all  in  the  compass  of  an  hour  or  so.     "  Straightway," 
says  my  text.     It  also  says,  "  The  same  hour  of  the  night."    In  a  great  many  cases 
conversion  may  be  said  to  be  a  slow  work.     I  do  not  think  that  it  really  is  so ;  but 
it  appears  to  be  so.     There  is  the  early  training,  there  is  the  awakening  of  con- 
science, there  is  the  seeking  to  find  Christ     We  have  a  great  many  people  round  us 


533  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

•who  are  very  slow.  Why  it  is,  I  do  not  know  ;  for  this  is  not  a  slow  age.  Peopla 
are  fast  enough  about  the  things  of  this  world.  We  cannot  travel  fast  enough.  I 
have  no  doubt  that  the  work  of  grace  is  very  gradual  in  some  people  ;  it  is  like  the 
Bunrise  in  this  country.  I  am  sure  that  you  cannot  tell,  on  foggy  mornings,  when 
the  sun  does  rise.  A  man  cannot  be  somewhere  between  condemnation  and 
justification ;  there  is  no  land  in  between.  The  man  is  either  condemned  on 
account  of  sin,  or  he  is  justified  through  the  righteousness  of  Christ ;  he  cannot  be 
between  those  two  states ;  so  that,  after  all,  in  its  essence,  salvation  must  be  an 
instantaneous  thing.  L  In  this  Philippian  jailer's  case  everything  is  sharp,  clear, 
distinct.  In  considering  it,  I  will  first  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  hebe  is  a 
PERSON  CONVERTED  AT  ONCE.  1.  There  was  no  previous  thought.  There  is  nothing 
that  I  can  imagine  in  his  previous  Ufe  that  led  up  to  it.  He  had  not  been  plied 
with  sermons,  instructions,  invitations,  entreaties.  Nothing  could  be  a  greater 
contrast  than  the  ethics  of  Kome  and  the  teachings  of  Christ.  What  do  you  think 
impressed  this  man  ?  2.  I  think,  in  part,  it  may  have  been  the  behaviour  of  Paul 
and  Silas.  They  had  no  curses  on  their  lips  when  he  made  their  feet  fast  in  the 
stocks.  He  went  to  bed  that  night  with  many  thoughts  of  a  new  character.  Who 
were  these  men  ?  Who  was  this  Jesus  of  whom  they  spoke  ?  3.  Then,  in  the 
middle  of  the  night,  a  singular  miracle  was  wrought.  The  prison  was  shaken  by  an 
earthquake.  The  idea  of  being  lost  has  come  over  him.  It  is  not  that  he  is 
afraid  to  die,  for  he  is  about  to  put  himself  to  death ;  but  he  is  afraid  of  what  is  to 
follow  after  death.  He  is  a  lost  man,  and  therefore  he  asks,  "  What  must  I  do  to 
be  saved  ?  "  4.  Now  it  is  that  he  is  plainly  told  the  way  of  salvation.  It  was  put 
with  great  brevity,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  and 
thy  house."  Probably  he  did  not  understand  it  when  he  heard  it ;  and  so  "  they 
spake  unto  him  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  to  all  that  were  in  his  house."  It  is  a 
happy  circumstance  that  the  gospel  is  so  simple.  There  are  certain  preachers  who 
seem  as  if  they  must  mystify  it,  like  the  negro,  who  said,  "  Brethren,  I  have  read  you 
a  chapter,  and  now  I  will  confound  it."  No  doubt  there  are  many  who  are  always 
milking  out  the  gospel  to  be  a  very  difScult  thing  to  understand ;  philosophical, 
deep,  and  so  on  ;  but  it  was  meant  for  the  common  people,  and  the  gospel  is  suit- 
able to  be  preached  to  the  poor.  II.  Hebe  is  a  person  confessing  his  faith  at 
ONCE.  "  He  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his,  straightway."  Should  a  person  be 
baptized  as  soon  as  he  believes  ?  As  a  rule,  yes ;  but  there  may  be  good  reasons 
why  he  should  not  be.  1.  There  was  no  good  reason  for  delay  in  this  man's  case, 
for,  in  the  first  place,  his  conversion  was  clear  as  noonday.  2.  In  his  case,  also, 
there  was  no  other  reason  for  delay.  In  the  case  of  many  young  persons,  there  are 
reasons  for  delay.  3.  In  this  man's  case,  note  also,  that  he  was  not  hindered  by 
selfish  considerations.  Had  the  jailer  been  like  some  people  that  I  know  of,  he 
would  have  found  plenty  of  reasons  for  delaying  his  baptism.  First,  he  would  have 
said,  "  Well,  it  is  the  middle  of  the  night.  Would  you  have  me  be  baptized  at  this 
hour?  "  He  would  have  said  that  he  did  not  know  that  there  were  conveniences 
for  baptism,  for  it  is  so  easy  to  find  it  inconvenient  when  you  do  not  like  it.  He 
might  also  have  said,  •'  I  do  not  know  how  the  magistrates  will  like  it."  He  did 
not  care  about  the  magistrates.  Perhaps  he  would  lose  his  situation.  He  did  not 
take  his  situation  into  consideration.  Then,  what  would  the  soldiers  in  the 
Philippian  colony  say  when  they  heard  that  the  jailer  had  been  baptized  into  the 
name  of  Christ  ?  Oh,  the  guffaws  of  the  guard-room,  the  jokes  that  there  would  be 
all  ovjr  Philippi  I  This  brave  man  did  not  take  those  things  into  consideration  ; 
and  if  he  did,  he  dismissed  them  in  a  moment.  4.  The  fact  was,  this  man  was  in 
downright  earnest,  and  therefore  he  would  not  delay  his  baptism.  He  had  enlisted 
in  the  army  of  Christ,  and  he  would  wear  Christ's  regimentals  straightway.  III. 
Now,  here  is  a  person  useful  at  once.  Useful  ?  What  could  he  do  ?  Well,  he 
did  all  he  could.  1.  He  performed  an  act  of  mercy :  "  He  took  them  the  same  hour 
of  the  night,  and  washed  their  stripes."  Dear,  good  men,  they  were  covered  all 
over  with  the  marks  of  the  Koman  rods.  I  do  not  know  that  he  could  have  done 
anything  better  to  show  his  sincere  repentance.  He  washed  their  stripes ;  and 
when  he  had  done  that,  and  had  been  baptized,  we  read  that  he  brought  them  into 
his  house,  and  set  meat  before  them.  2.  Thus  he  exercised  hospitality.  He  used 
his  hands  and  his  bath  in  washing  the  disciples ;  now  he  uses  his  table,  his  larder, 
and  his  dining-room  to  entertain  them.  What  more  could  he  do  ?  Seeing  that  it 
was  the  middle  of  the  night,  I  cannot  think  of  anything  more  that  he  could  do. 
So  now,  if  you  love  the  Lord,  if  you  have  only  just  believed  in  Him,  begin  to  do 
something  for  Him  at  once.     It  is  a  pity  that  we  have  so  many  Christian  people,  so- 


CHAP.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS.  633 

called,  who  do  nothing  for  Christ,  literally  nothing.  They  have  paid  their  pew- 
rent,  perhaps ;  and  that  is  all  Christ  is  to  have  out  of  them  I  We  want  to  have  a 
Church  in  which  all  the  members  do  something,  in  which  all  do  all  they  can,  in 
which  all  are  always  doing  all  they  can,  for  this  is  what  our  Lord  deserves  to  have 
from  a  living,  loving  people  bought  with  His  precious  blood.  IV.  Here  is  a 
PERSON  PERFECTLY  HAPPY  AT  ONCB.  When  the  jailer  had  brought  Paul  and  Silas 
into  his  house,  "  he  set  meat  before  them,  and  rejoiced,  believing  in  God  with  all 
his  house."  Oh,  that  was  a  happy,  happy  time  I  "  He  rejoiced,  believing  in  God 
with  all  his  house."  1.  He  rejoiced  that  he  was  saved.  His  heart  kept  beating, 
*'  Hallelujah  1  hallelujah !  hallelujah  !  "  As  he  sat  at  that  table  with  his  two 
strange  guests,  he  had  indeed  cause  for  joy.  His  sin  was  forgiven  ;  his  nature  was 
changed ;  he  had  found  a  Saviour.  2.  And  then  he  rejoiced  that  all  his  household 
were  saved.  What  a  delight  it  was  to  see  all  his  household  converted  !  There  was 
his  wife.  If  she  had  not  been  converted,  it  would  have  been  a  very  awkward  thing 
for  him  to  have  asked  Paul  and  Silas  in  to  that  midnight  meal.  I  do  not  Hke  it 
when  you  count  up  your  household  and  leave  out  Mary  Ann,  the  little  servant  girl, 
the  last  you  have  had  in.  You  treat  her  as  a  drudge ;  but  if  she  has  come  into  your 
family,  reckon  her  to  be  a  part  of  your  household ;  and  pray  God  that  they  may  all 
be  converted.  3.  The  jailer's  rejoicing  was  also  a  seal  of  the  Spirit  upon  his 
fideUty.      {Ibid.)  Conversion — its    means    and    tests  : — Looking     now    mora 

especially  at  the  human  side  of  this  instance  of  an  immense  moral  and 
spiritual  change  in  the  PhiUppian  jailer,  let  us  think,  under  the  guidance  of  this 
example,  of  conversion,  its  means  and  tests.  Certainly  here  is  an  evident  con- 
version. If  ever  man  were  squarely  turned  about,  this  jailer  was.  He  is  no 
spurious  instance  of  conversion,  like  Mr,  Facing-Both-Ways,  in  Bunyan's 
"  Pilgrim's  Progress. "  I.  Consider  the  means  of  conversion.  It  seems  to  me  we 
can  divide  these  means  into  two  sorts — subsidiary  and  essential.  Means  subsidiary. 
1.  The  prayers  and  songs  of  Paul  and  Silas.  What  I  mean  is  that  I  am  sure  the 
brave  and  beautiful  carriage  of  themselves  by  Paul  and  Silas  under  all  his  unneces- 
sarily harsh  treatment  of  them — for  he  far  exceeded  his  instructions — must  have 
made  some  impression  upon  the  jailer.  And  it  seems  to  me  that  this  must  have 
been  a  kind  of  outlying  and  subsidiary  cause  of  the  jailer's  conversion.  It  is  a  kind 
of  gospel  that  even  such  stupid  and  cruel  eyes  as  this  jailer's  must  read.  And 
something  of  blessing  is  bound  to  come  of  it.  It  is  likely  to  make  a  path  for  some- 
body's conversion.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  even  amid  the  most  painful  circumstances 
we  carry  ourselves  as  Christians  should.  2.  The  shock  of  the  earthquake  and  the 
opened  doora  and  the  unloosed  bonds  of  the  prisoners,  and  Paul's  beautiful  calming 
of  the  jailer's  fear  when  he  would  have  killed  himself,  since,  if  the  prisoners  had 
escaped,  according  to  the  Eoman  law  death  must  have  been  visited  on  him.  This 
jailer  was  stirred  through  his  whole  nature.  In  the  grip  of  the  earthquake  he  was 
convinced  of  his  own  helplessness ;  in  Paul's  calm  bravery  he  felt  himself  con- 
fronted by  the  presence  of  a  strange  moral  power ;  in  the  apostle's  service,  in  pre- 
venting the  escape  of  the  prisoners,  to  him  who  had  been  so  needlessly  cruel,  who 
in  harshness  had  so  far  exceeded  his  instructions,  the  jailer  found  himself  smitten 
by  a  new  sense  of  shame — shock,  I  think  that  is  the  word  for  it.  The  man  was 
thrown  out  of  his  old  bad  routine  into  strange  and  other  thoughts  about  his  cruelty 
and  his  sin.  Well,  I  do  not  think  conversion  possible  unless  it  be  preceded  by 
something  to  which  this  shock  is  parallel.  It  may  be  an  influence  very  steady  and 
gentle.  It  may  be  the  quiet  result  of  the  education  of  a  Christian  home ;  but 
somehow,  in  some  way,  the  man  mast  be,  as  this  jailer  was,  actually  and  squarely 
confronted  by  the  necessity  of  change  in  himself.  Means  essential — Faith.  The 
Greek  for  "  Sirs  "  in  ver.  30,  and  "  Lord  "  in  ver.  31,  is  the  same.  He  addresses  them 
as  "  Sires  "  or  "  Lords  "  ;  they  reply,  "  Trust  in  the  one  and  only  •  Sire  '  or  '  Lord  * 
Jesus  Christ."  Faith  is  the  only  and  lonely  Jesus  Christ :  this  is  the  essential  means 
of  conversion.  IL  The  tests  of  conversion.  1.  Rejoicing  hearing  of  the  Lord's 
word  (ver.  32).  A  man  really  turned  toward  the  Lord  wiU  want  to  know  aU  he 
can  about  Him.  2.  Immediate  change  of  life  (ver.  33).  The  cruel  jailer  becomes 
at  once  the  merciful  man.  3.  Immediate  confession  of  Christ  (ver.  33).  "  And 
was  baptized."  A  thoroughly  converted  man  will  not  attempt  to  be  a  secret 
Christian.  4.  Helpfulness  (ver.  34).  "  And  when  he  had  brought  them  into  his 
house,  he  set  meat  before  them."  That  is  to  say,  there  is  a  quick  instinct  of 
ministry  in  him.  5.  Joy  in  the  new  life  (ver.  34).  •' And  rejoiced."  When  a  man 
turns  towards  God,  God  floods  him,  and  tnat  is  utmost  joy.  6.  The  man's  home  is 
changed  (ver.  34).  BcUeving  in  God  with  all  his  house.  A  conversion  which  does  do4 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xvt 

help  a  man's  home  amounts  to  little.  Mark  also  that  here  is  certainly  a  sudden  con- 
version. The  influences  which  lead  up  to  it  may  be  long,  as  they  are  in  many  cases; 
may  be  quick,  as  in  this  case  ;  but  the  conversion,  the  turning,  is,  in  the  nature 
of  the  case,  sudden.  Do  not  be  afraid  of  sudden  conversions.  (Homiletic  Review.) 
And  he  took  them  the  same  hour  of  the  night  and  washed  their  stripes. — 
Firstfrnits  of  repentance  : — It  was  the  jailer  and  his  wife,  as  Chrysostom  conceits  it, 
whom  by  the  name  of  Euodias  and  Syntiche  St.  Paul  enrols  in  the  book  of  life 
(Phil.  iv.  2).  See  the  meanest  relief  done  to  Christ  and  His  members  hath  a  patent 
of  eternity.  A  little  manna,  but  a  vanishing  meteor,  lay  it  up  in  the  ark,  it  never 
putrifies.  The  cheapest  alms  to  Christ  and  His  Church,  the  memory  of  it  shall 
never  be  abolished.  For  the  purpose  of  the  words,  conceive  them  to  be  an  holy 
action  of  this  convert,  following  upon  and  so  manifesting  and  expressing  the  truth  of 
his  conversion.  A  few  words,  a  small  action  in  appearance,  and  yet  a  powerful 
evidence  of  his  new  birth.  This  small  work,  dipped  and  coloured  in  the  blood  of 
Paul,  appears  like  that  red  thread  on  the  hand  of  the  new-born  child,  as  a  testi- 
mony of  his  birthright ;  and  stands  here  upon  record,  and  hangs,  like  Bahab's 
scarlet  thread,  fastened  on  his  house  as  a  pledge  of  his  salvation.  "  Indeed,"  aa 
Basil  speaks,  "  'tis  his  first  sacrifice  of  thanks  he  offers  for  his  conversion;  a  sacrifice, 
an  whole  burnt-offering,  and  yet  not  by  fire,  but  by  water  kindled  and  enflamed." 
First,  conceive  this  action  of  his,  in  respect  of  his  person,  that  doth  exercise  and 
perform  it,  as  it  arises  from  him  and  is  his  action.  He  washed  them.  Look  first 
upon  him  as  a  man  quickened  and  enlivened  with  a  principle  of  faith,  and  then 
couceive  this  action  of  his,  as  'tis  a  fruit  of  his  faith.  So  soon  as  he  believed, 
presently  the  same  hour  he  washed  their  stripes.  And  the  observation  hence  is 
briefly  thus  much :  That  a  true  believer  is  readily  and  presently  a  religious  worker. 
Faith  is  not  a  frontlet  to  thine  eyes  only  in  illumination,  but  'tis  a  tablet  on  thine 
hands  for  employment  and  action.  The  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love,  St.  Paul 
unites  them,  and  they  are  never  asunder,  and  that  upon  a  threefold  ground.  I 
The  very  life  and  being  of  faith  makes  it  naturally  working.  As  at  the  beginning 
the  Lord  created  trees  with  fruit  on  them,  not  a  trunk  or  a  stock,  but  flourishing 
and  abundant,  so  in  our  new  creation,  the  tree  of  faith,  'tis  presently  furnished 
with  the  fruit  of  piety.  See  how  suddenly  in  this  convert  the  seedtime,  and  the 
spring,  and  harvest  do  follow  each  other.  A  lively  faith,  it  longs  to  be  working, 
like  St.  John's  converts,  seeks  employment  presently.  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  "  Deny 
it  working,  you  deprive  it  of  being  ;  like  the  soul,  it  stays  no  longer  in  the  body 
than  it  may  act  and  quicken  it ;  hinder  the  actions  of  life,  it  forsakes  us  presently. 
O  let  thine  heart  by  faith  be  bathed  and  warmed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  thou 
mayest  as  well  keep  the  fire  from  burning,  and  the  sun  from  shining,  and  the 
heavens  from  moving,  as  true  faith  from  working.  II.  Except  thy  faith  be  lively 
and  working,  'tis  an  unuseful  faith,  altogether  unprofitable.  1.  That  St.  James 
assures  thee  (chap.  ii.  14),  "It  cannot  save  him."  The  working  faith,  though  it 
do  not  purchase  heaven,  yet  it  effectually  procures  it ;  it  abhors  works  as  merits, 
embraces  them  as  means.  2.  'Tis  not  light,  but  heat,  that  purges  and  purifies ; 
not  a  contemplative  notion  swimming  in  the  brain,  but  a  devoted  affection  seated 
in  the  heart.  Nay — 3.  'Tis  only  the  working-faith  that  obtains  thy  pardon  :  in 
this  case,  though  faith  be  actually  destitute,  yet  'tis  such  a  faith  as  will  be 
industrious.  God  gives  grace  unto  it  as  to  a  poor  beggar,  but  not  as  to  a  lazy  one, 
and  faith  receives  it  with  an  empty  hand,  but  not  with  an  idle  one.  III.  Except 
thy  faith  be  active  and  operative  'tis  no  way  acceptable.  In  this  case,  as  thine 
outward  services  without  inward  faith,  like  the  emperor's  sacrifice  that  had  no 
heart  in  it,  are  prodigious  and  loathsome,  so  the  inwards  of  faith,  without  the 
body  and  substance  of  works,  are  offals  and  refuse.  "  God,"  saith  Gregory, 
"  requires  not  only  the  shake-breast  of  faith,  but  the  heave-shoulder  and  arm 
of  obedience.  Before  thou  believest,  God  freely  forgives  thee  even  all  thine  evil 
works,  but  when  thou  believeth  He  strictly  exacts  the  performance  of  good."  Con- 
ceive this  action  of  washing  their  stripes,  secondly,  as  arising  from  a  second 
seed  of  grace  wrought  in  conversion,  the  principle  of  repentance.  The  observation 
from  hence  is  thus  much :  Eepentance,  it  makes  us  undo  all  that  we  did  before. 
It  enforces  us  to  befool  ourselves,  look  back  upon  all  our  actions  with  grief  and 
Borrow ;  make  us  wish  and  desire  we  had  never  committed  them.  How  did  this 
jailer  now  smite  on  his  thigh,  as  the  prophet  speaks  ?  How  did  he  question  with 
himself  and  upbraid  his  folly — "  Wbat  have  I  done?"  Oh  then  I  in  the 
beginning  of  thy  life,  when  thou  first  settest  out,  aim  right  and  advisedly,  lest  at 
the  long  run  thou  befool  thyself.    Learn  this  lesson,  ye  wise  fore-plotters  of  what 


OHAP.  xn.]  THE  ACTS.  535 

you  undertake,  that  account  it  your  wisdom  in  all  other  business  not  to  be  mis- 
taken, that  judge  it  a  point  of  folly  to  excuse  yourselves.  Happy  be  you  that  have 
your  action  in  your  hand,  and  may  take  a  true  level.  This  is  the  fore-counsel  of 
repentance  to  thee.  It  persuades  and  forewarns,  as  St.  Paul  did  the  mariners 
(chap.  xxviL) :  "  Undertake  not  this  desperate  voyage,  it  wiU  be  much  damage  of 
your  goods  and  lives."  But  if  thou  wilt  on  for  all  this  warning,  then  comes 
repentance  with  an  after-counsel,  as  the  same  St.  Paul :  '*  Sirs,  you  should  have 
been  advised  by  me,  and  so  you  should  have  gained  this  harm  and  loss. "  Consider 
this  action  of  the  jailer  in  washing  their  stripes  as  arising  from,  thirdly,  a  third 
principle  of  grace  wrought  in  conversion,  and  that's  as  it  springs  from  a  seed  and 
principle  of  renovation.  And  so  'tis  an  evidence  and  fruit  of  the  changing  and 
reforming  his  former  Ufe,  and  that  in  three  several  considerations.  I.  This  wash- 
ing and  cherishing  the  apostles,  it  evidences  the  renewing  and  changing  of  hia 
nature  and  former  disposition.  And  from  hence  take  notice  of  this  observation : 
That  grace  and  religion  mollifies,  changes,  and  sweetens  the  profanest  natures  and 
most  barbarous  dispositions.  This  jaUer,  before  a  savage  persecutor,  Hke  the 
demoniac  in  the  gospel,  exceeding  fierce,  no  man  could  tame  him,  now  behold 
him  dispossessed  of  his  fury,  he  sits  at  Christ's  feet  peaceable  and  gentle.  Eeligion, 
it  persuades  us  and  woos  us,  in  St.  Paul's  language  (Col.  iii.  12).  Education,  laws, 
magistrates,  may  suppress  for  a  time,  but  'tis  grace  alone  that  can  thoroughly  and 
effectually  transform  us.  Thus  the  primitive  fathers  undertook  the  performance 
of  those  desperate  cures.  'Twas  the  voice  of  religion  in  their  times,  "  Hast  thou 
an  unchaste  wife  ?  Bring  her  to  religion,  'twill  make  her  temperate.  Hast  thou 
an  undutiful  child  ?  Bring  him  to  religion,  'twill  make  him  obedient.  Hast  thou 
an  unfaithful  servant  ?  It  will  teach  him  fidelity."  Monsters  of  sin  by  the  power 
of  this  have  been  converted  into  miracles  of  virtue.  II.  It  arises  from  the  seed 
and  principle  of  renovation  in  respect  of  his  particular  actual  fault,  of  which  he 
was  now  in  present  commission.  He  was  even  now  exercising  his  barbarous 
cruelty  towards  the  apostles  ;  and  in  this  sin  the  hand  of  God  now  finds  him,  and 
the  guilt  of  this  sin  the  mercy  of  God  now  pardons  him  ;  and  therefore  of  all  other 
sins,  he  will  beware  of  this  sin,  presently  puts  himself  into  the  practice  of  the 
contrary  virtue.  Observe,  a  true  convert,  though  he  resolves  of  a  general  reforma- 
tion, yet,  above  all  others,  he  will  have  a  special  eye  at  that  sin  which  was  the 
cause  of  his  greatest  ruin,  and  which  God  made  the  occasion  of  his  rising  and 
conversion.  As  a  man  recovered  from  a  dangerous  sickness,  he  carefully  uses  a 
general  good  diet,  but  especially  desires  preservatives  and  antidotes  against  the 
disease  he  was  lately  cured  of.  I  surfeited  of  this  meat ;  this  proved  my  bane,  and 
he  knows  relapses  to  be  dangerous  and  deadly.  A  captain  is  careful  to  strengthen 
every  corner  of  his  castle,  but  that  place  where  the  enemy  broke  in  before  shall 
have  a  double  watch,  that's  fortified  especially.  III.  'Tis  a  fruit  arising  from  the 
seed  of  renovation  in  respect  of  his  private  calling  and  profession.  He  is  a  jailer, 
and  they,  you  know,  are  usually  merciless,  hard-hearted  men.  Now  he  is  con- 
verted he  reforms  the  abuses  of  his  calling,  uses  his  prisoners  mercifully  and  with 
much  pity.  He  shows  the  truth  and  power  of  his  conversion  in  his  private  personal 
calling  and  profession.  He  is  not  only  a  good  Christian,  but  a  good  jaUer,  hath  care 
of  his  prisoners ;  a  good  father  and  master,  all  his  house  must  be  taught  and  baptized. 
Observe,  the  truth  of  conversion  wiU  evidence  itself  in  the  ordering  and  reforming 
of  our  personal  calling.  Eeligion,  'tis  not  a  matter  merely  of  public  and  common 
profession,  dwells  not  in  churches  and  temples  only,  but  it  wiU  enter  into  thine 
house,  bids  itself  home  to  thee,  as  Christ  to  Zaocheus,  "  Come,  I  must  lodge  in 
thine  house,"  have  access  and  sway  in  all  thine  employments.  Secondly,  take 
notice  of  it,  as  it  respects  and  passes  upon  these  men  to  whom  he  performed  it ; 
he  washed  their  stripes.  And  so  the  divers  considerations  of  the  object  will  specify 
the  nature  of  the  act  and  fruit  of  conversion.  First,  then  generally  and  briefly 
conceive  them  as  proximi,  as  men,  brethren,  and  neighbours,  in  that  common 
reference,  so  'tis  actus  charitatis,  an  act  of  charity.  And  then  observe,  the  truth 
of  conversion  will  express  itself  in  the  works  of  love  to  our  neighbours  and  brethren. 
This  is  the  main  evidence  of  our  new  birth.  I.  'Tis  the  best  sign  and  proof  of  our 
love  if  we  love  our  brethren.  Who  doth  not  boast  of  his  love  to  God  ?  'Tis  every 
man's  profession,  and  we  cannot  convert  them.  Bring  them  to  this  trial,  "  Dost 
thou  love  Him  that  is  begotten  of  God ;  wheresoever  thou  seest  His  image  and 
similitude  ?  "  "  By  this  ye  are  known  to  be  My  disciples,  if  ye  love  one  another."  II. 
God  sets  over  this  love  to  our  brethren  that  they  might  receive  the  fruit  and  im- 
j>rovement  of  it.    The  benefit  of  oar  love  it  cannot  reach  Him ;  His  self-sufficiency 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xtt. 


admits  no  addition  from  our  poor  charity ;  He  makes  our  brethren  the  receivers  ol 
it.  III.  This  love  to  our  brethren  multiplies  and  strengthens  and  increases  out 
loA'e  to  God.  That's  hearty  love  that  rests  not  upon  the  party,  whom  we  chiefly 
affect,  but  enlarges  itself  to  His  children  and  followers  and  all  that  belongs  to  Him. 
And  that's  the  first  consideration  of  it,  as  they  are  proximi,  and  so  this  washing, 
'tis  opus  charitatis,  he  loves  them  as  brethren.  But,  secondly,  conceive  them  as 
they  are  afflicti,  as  Christians  in  misery  and  affliction,  whipped  and  imprisoned ; 
and  then  'tis  actus  misericordice,  an  action  of  mercy.  Before  we  considered  them 
as  members  of  Christ,  and  so  He  loved  them ;  now  behold  them  as  the  afflicted 
members  of  Christ,  and  so  now  He  pities  them.  Observe,  the  naturalest  motion 
of  an  heart  converted  is  to  commiserate  the  poor  saints  of  God,  and  to  show 
mercy  towards  them.  The  works  of  mercy  are  the  most  kindly  returns  of  mercy 
received.  Wert  thou  furnished  with  all  other  graces,  yet  thou  faUest  short  if  thou 
wantest  this  one.  These  fruits  of  piety  and  relief  to  the  poor  saints,  Christ — 1. 
Most  strictly  exacts.  2.  Most  graciously  accepts.  3.  Most  bountifully  rewards. 
Saith  Basil,  "  Liberality  to  the  poor  saints,  'tis  not  liberality,  but  usury  to  God, 
and  that  of  the  highest  increase."  Thirdly,  conceive  them  as  they  are  men 
that  were  wronged  and  oppressed  by  him,  and  so  'tis  an  act  of  satisfaction.  The 
truth  of  conversion  as  it  shows  itself  in  all  duties  of  love  and  commiseration  ;  so 
to  those  we  have  injured  it  will  express  itself  in  a  due  satisfaction.  Without  this, 
saith  St.  Augustine,  all  acts  of  repentance  prove  ineffectual.  Nay,  'tis  no  true 
repentance,  but  a  mere  counterfeit.  Fourthly,  conceive  them  as  they  are  the 
ministers  and  means  of  His  calling ;  and  so  'tis  a  testimony  of  thankfulness. 
These  are  the  servants  of  the  Most  High  God ;  these  have  brought  the  glad  tidings 
of  grace  and  salvation ;  not  only  their  feet,  but  their  wounds  and  stripes  and  sores 
are  beautiful.  He  thankfully  embraces,  refreshes,  and  comforts  them.  And  then 
give  way  to  this  observation  :  That  the  truth  of  this  conversion  will  manifest  itself  in 
all  fruit  of  thankfulness  to  the  ministers  of  salvation.  See  now  this  jailer  draws  out 
the  apostles,  as  Ebed-Melech  did  Jeremy,  from  the  depth  of  the  dungeon ;  makes  his 
prison,  hke  Obadiah's  cave,  to  nourish  these  prophets ;  becomes  a  Lot  and  an  Abraham 
to  entertain  these  angels  and  messengers  of  heaven.  (Bp.  Brownriqg.)  Chris- 
tianity self-illustrated  : — 1.  The  old  cause  produces  the  old  effect.  Here  is  a  man 
converted,  and  he  instantly  seeks  to  make  up  for  the  past.  What  did  it  all  mean  ? 
Exactly  what  our  own  repentance  must  do.  He  tried  to  rub  out  yesterday's  injury. 
Christianity  always  drives  men  back  upon  their  yesterdays.  The  Christian  says, 
"I  must  pay  the  money  that  I  am  owing.  I  know  that  the  Statute  of  Limitations 
would  excuse  me,  but  there  is  no  statute  of  Umitations  in  the  regenerated  heart." 
The  penitent  says,  "  I  must  find  out  the  Life  I  once  bruised,  and  if  that  life  is  no 
longer  on  the  earth  I  must  find  some  descendants,  and  for  David's  sake  I  will 
love  Mephibosheth."  The  religion  that  does  this  proves  its  own  inspiration.  It 
does  not  need  our  eloquence,  nor  ask  for  our  intellectual  patronage.  Any  argu- 
mrnt  in  words  may  provoke  a  retort  in  words ;  but  a  jailer  washing  stripes  un- 
deserved, feeding  hunger  unmerited,  will  carry  the  day.  2.  The  natural  result  of 
receiving  Christ  into  the  heart  is  joy  (ver,  34).  Christianity  never  brings  gloom; 
it  is  a  religion  of  light,  morning,  summer.  There  are  three  possible  views  of  God. 
There  is  the  view  which  afflicts  the  soul  with  a  sense  of  terror.  There  is  the  view 
which  elevates  veneration  without  touching  emotion.  The  third  view  is  the  Chris- 
tian one,  and  that  always  brings  with  it  joy.  We  ought  to  enter  into  joy  now.  3. 
There  are  results  of  Christianity  on  the  other  side ;  hence  we  find  that  the  magis- 
trates were  afraid ;  they  sent  to  announce  their  willingness  that  Saul  and  Silas 
should  leave  the  city.  The  bad  man  has  a  ghost  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left. 
There  are  "  earthquakes  "  representing  all  kinds  of  physical  difficulties,  material 
alarms  and  afflictions.  Following  these  came  the  discovery  that  the  apostles 
claimed  the  protection  of  the  Eoman  law.  The  bad  man  has  no  peace.  The  very 
law  turned  to  a  serpent  in  his  grip  and  stung  his  arm.  The  bad  man  is  always 
getting  hold  of  the  wrong  end  ;  always  mistaking  the  case  ;  always  prosecuting  the 
wrong  party.  Then  add  all  the  fears  which  come  from  spiritual  doctrine,  and  the 
bad  man  has  a  poor  time  of  it.  There  is  no  peace  but  in  goodness ;  no  rest  but  in 
righteousness.  If  thou  hast  turned  away  from  thy  Father  in  heaven,  "acquaint 
now  thyself  with  Him  and  be  at  peace."  4.  This  incident  throws  some  light  upon 
the  character  of  Paul.  He  did  not  tell  at  first  that  he  was  a  Roman  citizen.  He 
kept  it  back  until  he  could  use  it  with  the  happiest  effect.  Paul  was  probably  the 
only  Rotuan  citizen  in  the  little  band,  and  was  Paul  a  man  to  get  off  and  let  the 
others  go  to  prison  ?     Now  that  he  could  smite  the  magistrates  as  with  a  fist  of 


CHAP.  XVL]  THE  ACTS,  M7 

iron,  he  said,  "  They  have  beat  us  .  .  .  being  Bomans,"  &c.  He  knew  how  that 
message  would  bite  all  the  soul  such  men  had  left.  This  is  the  way  we  should 
stand  by  one  another.  Mark  the  dignity  of  his  innocence.  "  As  for  your  sergeants, 
we  are  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  civility,  but  let  the  gentlemen  themselves  put 
on  their  boots  this  cold  morning  and  come  down."  So  the  magistrates,  what  with 
earthquakes,  and  Eoman  citizenships,  and  converted  jailers,  and  one  thing  added  to 
another,  came  down  and  said  in  effect,  "  If  you  will  be  so  kind,  gentlemen,  as  to  go, 
we  shall  be  deeply  obliged  to  you."  In  former  days  they  besought  Christ  Himself 
to  depart  out  of  their  coasts  ;  and  the  bad  world  is  always  asking  Christianity  if  it 
will  be  so  kind  as  to  leave  it.  It  will  interfere  with  the  world's  weights  and 
measures  ;  with  life  at  home  and  Ufe  in  the  market-place ;  with  dress  and  speech, 
and  with  honesty  of  heart ;  so  the  wicked  world  says  to  it,  "  If  you  be  so  kind  as 
to  go  away."  Sooner  would  the  rising  sun  go  at  the  bidding  of  some  poor  insect, 
or  the  rising  tide  retire  before  the  waving  hand  of  some  impotent  Canute.  5. 
Being  liberated,  the  apostles  did  not  take  the  shortest  way  out  of  Philippi ;  "  they 
entered  into  the  house  of  Lydia  "  ;  they  called  the  brethren  together  and  *'  com- 
forted them."  The  sufferer  comforting  those  who  have  not  suffered  1  Then  they 
departed  with  the  ineffable  dignity  of  Christian  uprightness.  6.  So  the  Church  of 
Christ  was  first  established  in  Europe ;  see  what  a  hold  it  has  to-day.  I  am  aware 
of  the  corruptions  of  Christianity,  but  underneath  aU  the  Christian  idea  has  been 
the  mightiest  force  in  European  civilisation  and  progress.  Take  out  of  European 
cities  the  buildings  which  Christianity  has  put  up,  and  those  cities  would  in  many 
instances  lose  their  only  frame.  What  is  Cologne  but  the  foreground  of  its  infi- 
nite cathedral  ?  What  would  Milan  be  but  for  its  august  and  overwhelming  church  ? 
Take  away  St.  Peter's  from  Eome  and  Notre  Dame  from  Paris,  &c.,  and  see  how 
frightful  a  mutilation  would  be  made  in  the  map  of  European  grandeur.  If  you 
tell  me  that  the  great  galleries  of  art  would  still  be  left,  I  would  ask  you  to  take 
©very  Christian  picture  and  statue,  and  then  call  for  your  estimate  of  the  bound- 
less cavity.  If  you  tell  me  that  the  great  centres  of  music  will  still  remain,  I 
would  ask  you  to  take  away  the  productions  of  the  Christian  poets  and  musicians  ; 
and  after  you  have  removed  Beethoven  and  Handel,  Mendelssohn  and  Haydn,  I 
will  ask  you  to  state  in  figures  the  stupendous  and  irreparable  loss.  When  you 
call  these  things  to  mind,  and  then  remember  that  Paul  planted  the  first  Christian 
Church  at  Philippi,  you  will  see  how  important  are  the  incidents  recorded  in  the 
chapter.  We  cannot  tell  what  we  are  doing.  He  who  plants  a  tree  cannot  forecast 
the  issue  of  his  planting.  The  penny  you  gave  to  the  little  poor  boy  may  be  the 
seed  of  great  fortunes.  The  love  grasp  you  gave  the  orphan's  cold  hand  may  be 
the  beginning  of  an  animation  lasting  as  immortality.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  They 
have  beaten  us  openly  \uicondemned,  being  Romans. — The  assertion  or  vindication 
of  rights : — Paul's  bight  as  a  Boman  citizen.  To  Paul  this  was  invaluable.  It 
was  in  itself  an  honour,  and  would  be  everywhere  so  regarded.  It  gave  to  him  who 
enjoyed  it  the  protection  of  the  best  system  of  laws  known  among  men.  In  any 
part  of  the  world,  moreover,  where  the  Boman  power  extended,  it  conceded  that 
right.  A  Boman  citizen  might  not  be  crucified,  nor  scourged.  The  privilege  of 
Boman  citizenship  also  secured  the  right  of  a  public  trial.  This  tended,  in  an 
eminent  degree,  to  maintain  justice.  II.  The  mannee  in  which  these  bights  had 
BEEN  violated.  The  wrong  done  was  a  palpable  injustice,  in  aU  respects,  at  vari- 
ance with  the  requirements  of  the  Boman  law.  They  were  condemned  unheard ; 
and  at  the  demand  of  a  mob  ;  they  were  publicly  whipped ;  they  were  cast  into 
prison.  Every  one  of  these  things  was  contrary  to  Eoman  law.  They  suffered, 
moreover,  further  indignities  at  the  hands  of  the  jailer.  HI.  The  peopbeety  of  the 
DEMAND  THUS  UBGED.  The  principles  of  the  gospel  seem  to  require  that  we  should 
bear  injuries  not  only  with  no  malice,  but  even  with  no  resistance  (Matt.  v.  39-41 ; 
1  Cor.  vi.  6-8).  But  note — 1.  That  the  conduct  of  the  Saviour  interprets  His  own 
■words.  In  the  numerous  injuries  which  He  suffered  at  the  hands  of  individuals, 
He  offered  no  resistance.  Yet,  in  entire  consistency  with  all  this,  when  He  came 
in  contact  with  the  law,  and  when,  nnder  the  forms  of  law,  injustice  was  about  to 
be  done,  He  demanded  that  the  provisions  of  the  law  should  not  be  violated  (John 
zviii.  23).  2.  This  leads  us  to  notice,  then,  the  value  of  law  for  the  protection  of 
rights.  That  value  was  recognised  by  Paul  on  other  occasions  (chap,  xxiii.  2,  8 ; 
XXV.  llj.  The  history  of  the  world,  in  regard  to  law,  has  been  a  little  more  than  a 
•nccession  of  struggles  to  secure  the  rights  of  individuals  against  arbitrary  power ; 
and  the  points  gained  in  that  respect  have  been  the  beginning  of  new  eras  in  the 
history  of  the  world,  each  of  these  epochs  sending  its  influence  far  into  the  future* 


€38  IBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap,  xvn 

Law  itself,  as  we  now  have  it,  has  been  the  slow  growth  of  ages  ;  and  is  the  result 
of  effort  to  save  from  arbitrary  punishment.  Under  wise  provisions,  in  favour  of 
general  liberty  and  individual  rights,  we  are  permitted  to  live  ;  and  the  business  of 
the  world  now  is  to  protect  and  defend  these  principles  as  the  ground  of  security  in 
all  time  to  come.  They  are  of  inestimable  worth,  and  it  is  every  man's  privilege 
and  duty  to  appeal  to  them  and  to  demand  that  they  shall  be  observed  and  en- 
forced. Pym  and  Hampden  are  immortal  as  having  defended  the  great  principles 
of  liberty ;  and  Paul  stands  thus  among  the  great  benefactors  of  mankind  for 
having  asserted  and  maintained  the  right  of  an  appeal  to  the  law.  3.  It  remains  only 
to  remark,  in  the  vindication  of  the  conduct  of  Paul,  that  the  character  of  a  good 
man  belongs  to  the  public,  to  virtue,  to  truth,  to  religion.  Paul  had  not  only  his 
own  individual  rights  to  maintain,  but  he  was  a  representative  man,  entrusted  with 
the  rights  pertaining  to  the  Christian  religion.  All  that  he  had  endured  in  his 
imprisonment,  he  could  privately  and  personally  bear  and  forgive.  But  the  pubUo 
wrong  which  had  been  done  was  a  wrong  to  justice ;  and  not  only  so,  but  a  wrong 
to  religion  ;  a  wrong  to  him  as  the  minister  of  religion ;  a  wrong  which,  if  acknow- 
ledged, might  greatly  hinder  the  success  of  his  future  labours.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.} 
The  selfish  policy  of  magistrates  : — There  is  a  thing  which  passes  for  generosity 
which,  when  analysed,  is  found  to  be  nothing  but  selfish  policy.  Sometimes  a 
flint-hearted  magistrate  makes  a  great  show  of  generous  consideration  for  the  con- 
dition of  the  prisoner,  and  pompously  discharges  him  on  that  ground,  as  he  says. 
Whereas  it  will  often  be  found  that  the  charge  against  the  man  was  one  of  which 
the  Jaw  could  take  no  cognisance,  or  else  which  the  magistrate  felt  himself  unable 
to  grapple  with.  He  gets  great  credit  for  his  elemency.  His  manoeuvre,  however, 
reminds  those  who  see  through  it  of  the  spider's  tricks.  We  well  know  that  the 
moment  an  ill-starred  fly  or  other  insect  comes  in  contact  with  the  net  of  the  spider, 
it  is  sprung  upon  with  the  rapidity  of  lightning,  and  if  the  captured  insect  be  of 
small  size  the  spider  conveys  it  at  once  to  the  place  of  slaughter,  and  having  at  its 
leisure  sucked  all  its  juice,  throws  out  the  carcase.  If  the  insect  be  somewhat 
larger  and  struggles  to  escape,  the  spider  envelops  its  prey  in  a  mesh  of  thread 
passed  round  its  body  in  various  directions,  and  its  wings  and  legs  thus  effectually 
secured,  it  is  conveyed  to  the  den  and  devoured.  But  when  a  bee  or  large  fly,  too 
powerful  to  be  mastered  by  the  spider,  happens  to  get  entangled  in  its  toils,  then 
the  wary  animal,  conscious  of  its  incapacity  to  contend  against  such  fearful  odds, 
makes  no  attempt  to  seize  or  embarrass  the  victim.  On  the  contrary,  it  assists  the 
entangled  captive  in  its  efforts  to  free  itself,  and  often  goes  so  far  as  to  break  oft 
that  part  of  the  web  from  which  it  may  be  suspended.  This  act  has  upon  it  the 
colour  of  seeming  generosity,  but  in  reality  it  is  nothing  more  than  the  performance 
of  selfish  cunning.  The  tyrant,  feeling  himself  incapable  of  doing  an  injury, 
determines  to  have  no  molestation.  To  obtain  this  end  he  performs  an  act  of  manu- 
mission. In  this  policy  he  is  not  unlike  the  magistrate  referred  to.  (Scientific  Illxu' 
trations.)  Vindication  of  rights  : — Thomas  Maynard,  English  consul,  was  thrown 
into  the  prison  of  the  Inquisition  at  Lisbon,  under  pretence  that  he  had  said  or 
done  something  against  the  Roman  religion.  Mr.  Meadows,  who  was  then  Besi- 
dent,  advised  Cromwell  of  the  affair,  and  being  directed  by  him,  demanded  of  the 
King  of  Portugal  the  liberation  of  Maynard.  The  king  told  him  that  he  had  no 
authority  over  the  Inquisition.  The  Resident  sent  this  answer  to  Cromwell,  from 
whom  he  received  instructions  to  tell  the  king  that  since  he  had  no  power  over  the 
Inquisition,  he  was  commanded  by  Cromwell  to  declare  war  against  the  Inquisition 
itself.  This  so  terrified  the  king  and  the  Inquisition  that  they  opened  the  prison 
doors  and  gave  the  consul  liberty  to  go  out.  He,  however,  refused  to  go  oul 
privately,  and  required  that  he  should  be  honourably  brought  forth  by  the  Inquisi- 
tion.   (W,  Baxendale.) 


CHAPTER  xvn. 


Vers.  1-9.  And  when  they  had  passed  through  AmphlpoUfl  and   ApoUonla.— > 

From  Amphipolis  to  Thessalonica :  —  The  beautiful  town  of  Amphipolis  lies  to 
the  south  of  a  splendid  lake  under  sheltering  hills,  three  miles  from  the  se«, 
and  thirty-three  from  PhiUppi,  and  on  the  edge  of  a  plain  of  boundless  fertilitjb 


CHAP,  xvn,]  THE  ACTS.  639 

The  strength  of  its  natural  position,  nearly  encircled  by  a  great  bend  of  a 
river,  the  mines  which  were  near  it,  and  the  neighbouring  forests,  made  it  a 
position  of  high  importance.  If  St.  Paul  had  ever  read  Herodotus,  he  may 
have  thought  with  horror  of  the  sacrifice  of  Xerxes  —  the  burial  ahve  at  this 
place  of  nine  youths  and  nine  maidens ;  and  if  he  had  read  Thucydides,  he 
would  have  gazed  with  peculiar  interest  on  the  sepulchral  mound  of  Brasidas, 
and  the  hollowing  of  the  stones  in  the  wayworn  city  street,  which  showed  the  feet 
of  men  and  horses  under  the  gate,  and  warned  Kleon  that  a  sally  was  intended. 
If  he  could  read  Livy,  he  would  recall  the  fact  that  in  this  town  Paulus  ^EmiUus — 
one  of  the  family  from  which  his  own  may  have  derived  its  name — had  here  pro- 
claimed  that  Macedonia  should  be  free.  But  all  this  was  little  or  nothing  to  the 
Jewish  missionaries.  At  Amphipolis  there  was  no  synagogue,  and  therefore  no 
means  of  addressing  Jews  or  Gentiles.  They  therefore  proceeded  the  next  day 
thirty  miles  further,  through  scenery  of  surpassing  loveliness,  along  the  Strymooio 
Gulf,  through  the  wooded  pass  of  Anion,  when  St.  Paul  may  have  looked  at  the 
tomb  of  Euripides,  and  along  the  shores  of  Lake  Bolbe  to  ApoUonia.  From  thence 
they  proceeded  forty  miles  further  to  the  far-famed  Thessalonica,  the  capital  of  all 
Macedonia,  whose  position  on  the  Egnatian  road,  commanding  the  entrance  to  two 
great  inland  districts,  and  at  the  head  of  the  Thermaic  Gulf,  made  it  an  important 
seat  of  commerce.  Since  the  days  when  Cassander  had  refounded  it,  and  changed 
its  name  from  Therma  to  Thessalonica,  in  honour  of  his  wife,  the  sister  of  Alex- 
ander, it  had  always  been  a  flourishing  city,  with  many  historic  associations.  Here 
Cicero  had  spent  his  days  of  melancholy  exUe.  Here  a  triumphal  arch,  stiU  standing, 
commemorates  the  victory  of  Octavianus  and  Antony  at  Philippi.  From  hence,  as 
with  the  blast  of  a  trumpet,  not  only  in  St.  Paul's  day  (1  Thess.  i.  8),  but  for  centuries 
afterwards,  the  Word  of  God  sounded  forth  among  the  neighbouring  tribes.  Here 
Theodosius  was  guilty  of  that  cruel  massacre  for  which  Ambrose,  with  heroic  faith- 
fulness, kept  him  for  eight  months  from  the  cathedral  of  Milan.  Here  its  good 
and  learned  Bishop  Eustathius  wrote  those  scolia  on  Homer  which  place  him  in 
the  front  rank  of  ancient  commentators.  It  received  the  title  of  "  the  orthodox 
city,"  because  it  was  for  centuries  a  bulwark  of  Christendom ;  but  it  was  taken  by 
Amurath  II.  in  1430.  Saloniki  is  still  a  great  commercial  port  of  seventy  thousand 
inhabitants,  of  whom  nearly  one-third  are  Jews.  At  this  city,  blighted  now  by  the 
curse  of  Islam,  but  still  beautiful  on  the  slopes  of  its  vine-clad  hills,  with  Pelia  and 
Olympus  full  in  view,  the  missionaries  rested  ;  for  here  was  the  one  Jewish  syna- 
gogue which  sufficed  for  the  entire  district.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Paul's  preach- 
ing at  Thessalonica  : — His  preaching — I.  Was  evangelic.  1.  His  grand  theme  waa 
Christ.  (1)  He  showed  the  necessity  of  His  suffering  and  His  resurrection.  He 
exhibited  the  Cross  of  Christ  in  all  its  high  aspects.  (2)  He  showed  that  He  waa 
Messiah.  "  Is  Christ."  2.  His  grand  authority  was  the  Scriptures.  He  did  not 
attempt  to  derive  his  arguments  and  illustrations  from  general  hterature  or  philo- 
sophy. He  would,  perhaps,  quote  the  old  prophecies  (Gen.  xlix.  10  ;  Isa.  xl.  1-10  j 
iiii. ;  Dan.  ix.  24-27;  Micah  v.  6,  &c.),  and  show  that  in  the  life  of  Jesus  those 
wonderful  prophecies  were  fulfilled.  Eeasoning  with  the  Jews,  his  authority  was 
Scripture,  and  with  the  Gentiles,  Nature,  as  at  Athens.  3.  EQs  grand  method  waa 
reasoning.  He  "  reasoned  with  them."  "  Opening  "  means  to  explain,  to  unfold. 
"  Alleging  "  means  laying  down  the  proposition.  He  laid  down  his  propositions, 
and  he  argued  their  truth  from  the  Scriptures.  This  is  model  preaching.  Let 
ministers  give  to  men  now  the  Christ  of  the  Scriptures,  not  the  Christ  of  their 
theology.  II.  Won  conveets  (ver.  4).  The  "  devout  Greeks  "  were  those  who  had 
become  proselytes  to  the  Jewish  religion,  "  proselytes  of  the  gate."  The  '•  chief 
women  "were  rnembers  of  families  of  high  rank.  The  converts  were — 1.  Numerous. 
"A  great  multitude."  2.  Influential.  "Chief  women."  Some  of  the  leading 
women  of  the  city.  3.  Thoroughly  nnited.  They  "consorted  with  Paul  and 
Silas."  Common  beliefs  awaken  common  sympathies.  Christ  gathers  men  of 
different  types  of  character  and  grades  of  life  together,  in.  Awoke  opposition 
(ver.  5).  In  this  we  see — 1.  The  force  of  envy.  This  malignant  passion  of  evil 
natures  had  been  excited  in  the  Jews  by  the  moral  conquest  which  the  apostles  had 
won  in  their  synagogue.  This  passion  has  always  been  the  inspiration  of  all  per- 
secutions. It  shows  itself  now  in  a  thousand  forms.  2.  The  servility  of  mobs. 
These  Jews  took  nnto  them  certain  lewd  fellows  of  the  baser  sort,  unprincipled 
idlers  that  are  found  lounging  about  places  of  public  resort,  the  lazy  rabble 
that  fill  workhouses  with  paupers  and  jails  with  prisoners,  who  are  alwaya 
ready  instruments  to  the  hands  of  evil  men  in  power.      The  demagogue  can 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xvh. 

cajole  them,  and  the  rich  can  purchase  their  eervices  with  cash.  3.  Th« 
revolutionising  power  of  the  gospel  (ver.  6).  These  men  spoke  a  truth,  though 
unintentionally.  The  gospel  does  turn  the  world  upside  down,  for  the  moral  world 
is  in  the  wrong  position.  4.  The  falsehood  of  wickedness  (ver.  4).  The  charge 
they  brought  against  them  was  that  of  sedition  and  rebellion  against  the  Koman 
emperor,  high  treason  against  the  crown.  These  men  covered  their  envy  under 
the  garb  of  patriotism.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Paulin  Thessalonica: — I.  The  man- 
neb  OF  A  PRIMITIVE  PREACHER  (ver.  2).  What  was  the  matter  ?  On  Sabbath  daya 
he  entered  the  synagogue.  In  his  last  letter  to  these  Thessalonians,  he  reminds 
them  that  he  did  not  make  himself  chargeable  to  them  (chap.  ii.  9).  So  on  week- 
days he  was  earning  his  living — improving,  no  doubt,  every  opportunity  for  con- 
versation with  such  as  came  in  his  way ;  but  the  Sabbath  brought  him  leisure,  and 
gave  him  an  audience.  How  did  he  use  these  Sabbath  opportunities?  He 
"  reasoned  "  with  the  people.  The  Christian's  faith  should  not  be  blind.  It  has 
its  true  home  in  both  the  intellect  and  the  heart.  The  Church  of  to-day,  and  of 
all  days,  needs  the  help  of  thinking  men,  ready  to  give  to  every  man  that  asketh  a 
reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in  them.  Whence  did  Paul  draw  his  arguments  ?  "Out 
of  the  Scriptures  "  ;  because  most  of  those  he  addressed  were  either  Jews  or  prose- 
lytes, and  accepted  the  Old  Testament.  It  does  not  follow  that  in  every  case  we 
should  start  just  where  he  did.  At  Lystra  and  Athens  he  came  in  contact  with 
heathen,  who  neither  knew  nor  cared  for  the  Jewish  Scriptures.  With  them  Paul 
himself  began  with  the  book  of  nature.  Thus  we  learn  how  necessary  it  is  to  find 
some  common  ground  on  which  we  and  those  we  would  convince  can  stand  together. 

II.    A   GOOD    SIGN    OP   TRUE    FAITH   IN   A   CHRISTIAN    CONVERT    (vcr.  4).       Nothing   COUld 

be  more  natural  nor  wise.  Loving  the  same  objects,  cherishing  the  same  hopes, 
why  should  they  not  delight  in  each  other's  company  ?  Those  who  are  of  one 
heart  and  aim  need  no  precept  to  bring  them  together.  Each  is  to  the  other  as  a 
magnet  and  a  support.  A  common  religious  faith  may  be  expected  to  lift  above 
minor  differences,  and  draw  men  into  a  common  fold.  In  many  things  the  educated 
and  unlearned,  the  rich  and  poor,  greatly  differ  in  their  tastes.  But  when  Christ 
enters  the  heart,  you  see  them  forgetting  differences  and  becoming  a  single  spiritual 
family.  Michael  Faraday  came  to  be  honoured  as  "  a  prince  in  the  aristocracy  of 
intellect."  And  yet  he  never  lost  his  interest  in  a  little  group  of  obscure  Christians. 
These  believers  at  Thessalonica  consorted  with  Paul  and  Silas  also  for  spiritual 
support  and  safety.  For  both  these  reasons  we  expect  to  see  modern  converts  seek- 
ing membership  in  the  Church.     This  is  a  good  sign,  and  a  good  rule.     III.  Thb 

TOO   COMMON    SPIRIT    AND    ARTS    OF    OPPOSERS    OF    THE     GOSPEL.        The    JeWS    SaW   that 

Paul's  teaching  and  influence  were  undermining  theirs.  Whether  the  teaching  was 
true  and  the  influence  good  they  did  not  consider.  Very  few  keep  in  mind  how 
malignant  envy  can  be.  It  was  for  envy  that  the  Jews  delivered  Jesus  to  be 
crucified,  and  that  Joseph  was  sold  into  bondage.  Then  note  the  arts  of  these 
opposers  of  the  apostle.  They  took  to  themselves  "vile  fellows  of  the  rabble" — 
loungers,  boys  and  men  without  occupation  or  sense  of  responsibility — and  set  them 
on.  There  are  always  ready  tools  of  unscrupulous  leaders.  Just  here  is  the 
greatest  peril  which  now  menaces  society.  Against  them  all  good  citizens  should 
provide  a  safeguard,  by  pushing  forward  Christian  work.  In  self-defence,  if  for 
no  higher  reason,  we  need  to  carry  it  to  the  homes  and  haunts  and  hearts  of  the 
lowest  and  worst.  IV.  A  marked  effect  always  to  be  expected  from  successful 
GOSPEL  work  (ver.  6).  The  words  were  meant  in  a  bad  sense.  But  unwittingly 
they  uttered  a  great  truth ;  paid  the  very  highest  possible  compliment  to  the  gospel. 
The  faithful  utterance  of  the  gospel  does  produce  strife,  and  our  Saviour  predicted 
that  it  would ;  for  the  simple  reason  that  men  are  neither  willing  to  submit  to  its 
claims  nor  to  suffer  others  to  do  it.  The  gospel  was  meant  to  turn  the  world 
upside  down ;  for  in  the  world  there  is  much  that  needs  to  be  overturned.  It  is  to 
the  praise  of  the  gospel  that  it  tends  to  effect  this.  Before  it  vice  slinks  away ; 
virtue  lifts  up  its  head  ;  joy  supplants  sorrow  ;  society  is  purer  and  safer ;  heaven 
begins  here  and  now.  Old  things  pass  away ;  more  and  more  all  things  become 
new.      (Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)  Paul  at  Thessalonica: — 1.  Luke  was 

evidently  left  at  Phihppi,  where  he  might  have  a  good  deal  of  doctor's  work  to  do. 
Paul  and  Silvanus  and  Timotheus  moved  on.  We  wonder  whether  Paul  will  fight 
any  more,  or  whether  he  will  spend  the  remainder  of  his  days  in  pious  reflections ; 
for  a  period  is  occupied  in  passing  through  Araphipolis  and  Apollonia,  where  nothing 
was  attempted.  The  fight  seems  to  be  over,  and  the  smitten  warriors  are  going 
borne  to  anoint  their  wounds  and  wash  their  stripes  in  secret.    But  they  came  to 


CHAP,  xvn.]  TEE  ACTS.  Wl 

Thessalonica,  and,  in  the  synagogue,  Paul  saw  a  battle-field,  and  instantly  he 
stripped  to  the  fight  1  We  see  now  what  he  was  looking  for  at  the  other  places, 
and  why  he  did  not  pause  there.  2.  "  And  Paul,  as  his  manner  was,  went  in." 
Paul  was  not  an  occasional  attendant.  Jesus  Christ  did  not  go  now  and  then  to 
the  synagogue.  It  was  a  dull  time  to  the  early  Christian  when  the  Church  was 
closed.  Paul  is  here,  as  everywhere,  the  very  model  of  a  true  Christian  preacher. 
"  He  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scriptures."  He  did  not  talk  something  which 
he  had  invented ;  he  had  a  Book,  an  authority,  and  he  believed  that  every  word  he 
said  was  written  for  him  by  the  pen  and  ink  of  Heaven.  Once  let  that  thought  go, 
and  preaching  becomes  vain.  A  sermon  is  great  only  as  it  begins,  continues,  and 
ends  in  the  Scriptures.  Then  he  crowns  his  ministry  by  enforcing  a  distinct  per- 
sonal appeal.  "  This  Jesus,  whom  I  preach  unto  you,  is  Christ."  This  was  a 
sword  with  a  point,  a  sermon  with  an  accent.  The  preacher  must  have  an  object 
in  view.  Whatever  Paul  did  was  contributory  to  this  great  end.  The  difficulty 
with  the  Christian  preacher  is  that  nobody  wants  to  hear  his  doctrine,  but  his  par- 
ticular way  of  putting  it.  I  sat  with  reverence  before  the  foremost  judge  of  his  day. 
His  voice  was  feeble  and  indistinct ;  at  times  I  had  great  difficulty  in  hearing  him  ; 
but,  oh,  the  anxiety  not  to  miss  one  word  1  It  was  dry,  it  was  argumentative,  there 
was  not  a  single  flower  of  speech  in  the  whole.  Every  one  was  there  to  hear  what 
the  judge  would  say,  not  how  he  said  it.  When  a  mumbling  speaker  reads  a  will, 
does  any  one  say  anything  about  his  manner?  Each  wants  to  know  what  he  in 
particular  is  to  get.  Oh,  could  I  persuade  my  hearers  that  I  am  reading  the  will 
of  God,  and  that  men  were  wise,  that  they  understood  these  things  1  3.  Note  the 
opposition  which  Christianity  awakens.  You  may  form_  a  tolerable  judgment  as  to 
the  merits  of  a  controversy  by  observing  the  way  in  which  it  is  conducted.  How- 
ever quiet  the  town  when  the  apostles  entered  it,  they  left  it  in  a  serious  uproar. 
They  came  not  to  send  peace  on  the  earth,  but  a  sword.  Look  at  the  opposition. 
It  was — (1)  Little-minded.  Where  is  the  noble  challenge  to  discuss  a  great  ques- 
tion upon  equal  terms  ?  How  is  Paul  moved?  By  love.  How  is  the  opposition 
moved  7  By  envy.  (2)  Unscrupulous.  Any  stick  will  do  to  beat  a  dog  with.  The 
Jews,  who  would  not  nave  spoken  to  those  "  lewd  fellows,"  made  use  of  them  to 
put  down  this  religion  of  the  Cross.  II  they  had  not  been  "  lewd  fellows,"  &c., 
they  would  have  seen  that  they  were  being  made  use  of.  How  Envy  can  stoop  to 
take  up  polluted  weapons,  and  search  in  the  mud  for  stones  to  throw  at  Goodness ! 
There  is  nothing  too  despicable  for  it  to  use  to  express  itself  in  denunciation  and 
contempt  and  penalty.  (3)  Lawless.  Never  mind  the  dignity  of  the  city,  or  the 
politarchs  who  reign  over  it.  Magistrates  caimot  stand  against  an  uprising  city ; 
they  will  either  dismiss  the  case,  or  take  bail,  or  do  something  to  get  out  of  it.  So 
the  opposition  prosecutes  its  mission  to  the  end.  This  is  true  of  all  opposition  to 
the  Christian  cause.  There  may  be  an  honest  opposition  to  some  special  ways  of 
representing  it ;  but  to  its  purity,  its  self-sacrifice,  its  nobleness,  its  purpose,  there 
can  be  no  honest  opposition.  Yet  how  the  Lord  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise 
Him  1  What  said  the  enemy  ?  •'  These  that  have  turned  the  world  upside  down." 
There !  that  is  a  tribute  to  their  power.  Even  the  Jews  did  not  dare  to  caU  it  "  a 
flash  in  the  pan,"  "  a  nine  days'  wonder."  They  saw  in  it  a  world-exciting  force, 
and  we  who  are  Christians  become  fearful  just  in  proportion  as  we  lose  our  con- 
ception of  the  grandeur  of  the  cause  which  we  have  to  handle.  Then  they  become 
themselves  again,  "  saying  that  there  is  another  king. "  That  is  a  lie  I  The 
apostles  never  said  so,  in  the  sense  now  put  upon  that  word  by  their  accusers.  You 
can  use  the  right  words  with  a  wrong  meaning.  We  must  not  only  speak  the  words 
of  the  gospel,  we  must  speak  them  in  gospel  tones.  Then  the  accusers  proceeded 
to  say,  "  one  Jesus."  There  they  were  right.  The  apostles,  then,  had  left  no 
false  or  vague  impression.  Amid  all  the  tumult,  and  uproar,  and  opposition,  they 
had  got  this  word  well  into  the  pubhc  memory — "  Jesus."  4.  Is  this  the  end  ?  It 
is  hardly  the  beginning.  The  very  first  letter  that  Paul  wrote  was  1  Thess. 
What  does  he  say  to  them?  "  For  our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word  only," 
&c.  Paul  spent  at  least  three  weeks  in  Thessalonica  ;  how  did  he  live  during  that 
time  ?  He  had  no  money ;  how  did  he  live  ?  How  we  ought  to  live — by  working  1 
How  are  you  to  live — by  writing  begging  letters  ?  This  is  how  Paul  lived  (1  Thess. 
iL  9).  These  were  not  the  men  to  be  put  down :  they  did  not  live  on  patronage. 
We  now  live  on  "  subscribers,"  and  therefore  we  do  not  live  at  all,  and  we  breed  a 
small  race  of  men.  Paul,  Silvanus,  Timotheus,  fell  to  working,  not  eight  hours  a 
days  and  eight  shillings  for  pay,  but,  according  to  the  time-bill,  "night  and  day.'* 
"  Two  hours  longer,  Silvanus,"  said  Paul,  "  and  this  tent  will  be  done.    If  we  ait 


542  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvn 

op  till  three  o'clock  to-morrow  morning,  we  shall  just  get  bread  enough  to  keep  ua 
going  until  the  synagogue  is  open  again."  These  were  not  the  men  to  be  put 
down  I  6.  When  they  said  good-bye  to  Thessalonica,  was  it  a  final  adieu  ?  Bead 
1  Thess.  ii.  17.  They  wanted  to  go  back  to  the  old  battle-field.  When  anything 
occurs  nowadays,  we  become  suddenly  '*  not  very  well,  and  must  go  down  to  the 
seaside  over  Sunday."  We  think  it  better  to  be  out  of  the  way.  How  did  Paul 
view  the  people  whom  he  had  won  there  ?  Said  he,  "  For  what  is  our  hope,  or 
joy,  or  crown  of  rejoicing?  Are  not  even  ye,"  &c.  These  are  the  relations  which 
Christianity  would  establish  amongst  us  if  we  would  allow  it.  Christianity  would 
make  a  compact  society  of  us — not  hving  under  formal  rules,  but  under  gracious 
inspiration.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        The  Thessalonians  are  types  of  those — I.  Who 

REJECT    TRUTHS    BECAUSE    THEY  ARE  NOVEL   AND    UNPALATABLE.       The  prOpOSitionS  that 

Paul  laid  dowu  (ver.  2)  were  novel  and  unpalatable,  and  therefore  the  Jews  rejected 
them.  How  many  to-day  consider  it  a  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting  a  doctrine 
(whether  of  religion,  politics,  science,  &c.)  because  they  have  never  heard  of  it 
before  !  How  many  reject  truths  because  they  do  not  like  to  believe  them  !  But 
we  cannot  by  unbelief  make  a  truth  vanish,  any  more  than  we  can  put  out  the  sun 
by  winking.  H.  Who  endeavour  to  silence  opponents  by  force.  The  Jews 
could  not  confute  Paul  by  argument,  and  therefore  they  stirred  up  a  riot  against 
him.  This  is  still  a  popular  method,  though  the  force  employed  may  be  the  more 
refined  method  of  ostracism.  A  brickbat  is  not  the  only  method  that  wiU  break  a  head. 
III.  Who  stoop  to  base  alliances  to  ensure  their  triumph.  The  Jews  did  not 
storm  Jason's  house,  but  "  market  loungers,"  whom  they  would  not,  on  ordinary 
occasions,  have  touched  with  a  stick,  were  enlisted.  Not  the  only  occasion  on 
which  professed  defenders  of  religion  have  condescended  to  use  dirty  tools.  IV. 
Who  endeavour  to  overthrow  opponents  by  misrepresentation  (vers.  6,  7). 
How  clever  was  this  misrepresentation,  because  there  was  so  much  truth  in  it. 
V.  Who  pursue  a  controversy  with  embittered  malignity.  {R.  A.  Bertram.) 
The  Thessalonians  and  the  Beroeans  : — I.  Beasoninq  from  the  Scriptures.  From 
the  change  in  the  personal  pronouns,  and  from  1  Thess.  iii.  6,  it  is  evident 
that  Luke  and  Timothy  remained  at  Philippi  to  comfort  and  strengthen  the  new 
converts  in  the  faith.  Let  us  look  at — 1.  Paul's  journey  (ver.  1).  Their  road  lay 
through  a  region  rich  in  historic  associations.  The  birthplace  of  Aristotle  and  the 
tomb  of  Euripides  were  close  to  their  route.  At  one  point,  Xerxes  had  offered  to 
the  river  Strymon  a  sacrifice  of  white  horses,  and  had  buried  aUve  nine  youths  and 
maidens.  At  another  they  had  in  view  the  peaks  of  Ossa  and  Pelion,  often  pointed 
to  with  trembhng  superstition  as  the  home  of  the  gods.  But  the  Christian  heroism 
of  Paul  has  done  more  to  make  the  land  live  in  the  memory  than  all  of  its  connec- 
tion with  famous  classical  names.  2.  Paul's  custom  (ver.  2).  At  Thessalonica  he 
acted  as  though  at  Philippi  he  had  received  no  treatment  except  that  which  was 
kind  and  encouraging.  Paul  counted  his  converts  more  than  he  did  his  stripes. 
All  the  effect  was  to  make  him  "  wax  bold"  in  his  God.  "  This  one  thing  I  do," 
was  Paul's  motto.  3.  Paul's  reasoning  (ver.  3).  After  the  crucifixion,  the  Saviour 
showed  from  the  Scriptures  that  His  sufferings  and  death  were  just  what  had  been 
foretold.  How  did  Paul  show  that  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer  ?  Some  of  the  pas- 
sages must  have  been  Psa.  xxii.  and  Ixix.  and  Isa.  liii.  Possibly  he  may  have  used 
the  argument  to  be  found  in  Hebrews  viii.-x.  To  a  candid  mind,  the  argument  is 
convincing.  4.  Paul's  success.  (1)  With  the  Jews.  Some  became  convinced  that 
their  conception  of  the  Messiah  had  been  wrong.  They  gave  up  their  notion  of  a 
splendid  temporal  king  to  accept  the  lowly  one  of  Nazareth  and  of  Calvary.  When 
any  one  becomes  a  follower  of  the  Saviour,  he  immediately  begins  to  "  consort  " 
with  those  who  are  of  the  same  faith.  He  will  be  found  with  them  in  all  Christian 
efforts.  (2)  With  the  Greeks.  Those  who  had  become  worshippers  of  the  true 
God  were  far  more  ready  than  the  Jews.  They  did  not  have  to  give  up  the  wrong 
conception  of  centuries.  II.  Bejectino  the  Scriptures.  1.  The  assault  (ver.  6). 
(1)  The  cause.  The  Jews  were  jealous  when  they  saw  women  of  rank  joining  the 
new  way.  They  saw  their  own  influence  being  undermined.  (2)  The  attack. 
Envy  is  a  base  passion,  and  does  not  hesitate  to  use  base  means.  It  was  the  same 
sort  of  crowd  that  now  in  a  city  can  easily  be  gathered  to  smash  in  the  windows  of  a 
mission  church  and  maltreat  its  minister.  (3)  The  arrest  (ver.  6).  If  they  could 
not  have  the  principals,  they  would  have  their  abettors.  (4)  The  complaint. 
What  a  testimony  they  incidentally  bore  to  the  work  of  Paul  and  Silas  1  The  world 
bad  been  wrong  side  up  since  sin  had  entered  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  now  they 
were  engaged  in  turning  it  once  more  right  side  up.     (5)   The  result  (ver.  9), 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  548 

Shadowy  as  was  the  support  for  the  complaint,  the  accnsers  succeeded  in  troubling 
the  multitude  and  the  rulers.  But,  as  at  Philippi,  the  action  came  too  late  to  be 
of  any  avail.  The  Church  already  was  planted,  and  the  Epistles  to  the  Thes- 
ealonians  show  how  deeply  it  had  taken  root.  in.  Searching  thb  Scriptcees. 
At  first  it  seems  bard  that  the  missionaries  so  soon  should  have  been  driven  away. 
But  that  was  God's  way  for  the  wider  and  more  expeditious  spreading  of  the  gospel. 
1.  Preaching  the  Word  (ver.  10).  Scourged  in  Philippi,  and  nearly  mobbed  in 
Thessalonica,  but  just  as  ready  to  preach  the  Word  in  Beroea.  2.  Searching  the 
Word  (ver.  11).  At  Beroea  the  missionaries  had  a  glimpse  of  sunshine.  Here  they 
found  the  Jews  ready  to  receive  the  truth,  but  not  without  investigation.  They 
took  hold  of  the  matter  with  zeal  and  thoroughness.  The  result  was  that  many  of 
them  believed,  not  only  Jews,  but  Greeks  of  rank  and  position.  3.  Persecuted  for 
the  Word  (ver.  13).  We  see  in  this  illustrations  of — (1)  The  intensity  of  the  hatred 
of  those  who  oppose  the  gospel.  (2)  The  way  in  which  God  continually  is  using 
His  enemies.  They  thought  that  they  were  stamping  out  the  gospel,  whereas  they 
only  were  spreading  it.     {M.  C.  Hazard.)  A  tale  of  two  cities  : — Thessalonica 

was  a  large  and  powerful  town ;  Bercea  was  a  little  village.  The  inhabitants  of  the 
one  place  were  wealthy  and  educated ;  of  the  other,  comparatively  illiterate  and 
poor.  But  the  contrast  is  altogether  to  the  advantage  of  the  latter.  L  The  city 
THAT  WAS  UPSET.  Philip  of  Macedou  won  a  magnificent  victory  in  Thessaly  on  the 
day  he  heard  of  the  birth  of  his  daughter,  and  instantly  sent  word  that  the  child 
was  to  be  called  "  Thessalonica."  By  and  by  she  was  married  to  Cassandra,  who 
rebuilt  the  old  town  Therma,  and  then  named  it  after  his  bride.  1  (ver.  1).  A  new 
opportunity  creates  a  fresh  duty.  Eight  through  Amphipolis  and  ApoUonia  went 
these  preachers,  and  not  a  sermon  did  they  try  to  preach.  Why'  Because  there 
was  no  synagogue ;  the  synagogue  of  that  region  was  at  Thessalonica.  When  Paul 
reached  so  infinential  a  centre,  he  seemed  again  to  rouse  himself  to  combat  like  an 
old  soldier.  2  (ver.  2).  Everyman  can  do  good  best  after  his  own  "manner." 
What  a  fine  thing  it  is  to  have  a  habit  of  teaching  Christ  so  as  to  have  a  "manner." 
How  foolish  it  is  to  reproduce  the  method  of  others.  3  (ver.  3).  "  Christ  and  Hia 
Cross  is  all  our  theme."  Paul  invariably  showed  that  the  Messiah  must  be  bom 
at  a  particular  time,  of  the  line  of  Judah,  at  a  place  predicted  beforehand ;  that 
He  must  die  and  be  buried,  and  must  rise  again  from  the  dead.  Then  he  set  out 
to  prove  that  Jesus  had  met  all  these  requirements,  and  therefore  must  necessarily 
be  the  true  Hope  of  the  nation,  and  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God.  This  was  his 
"  manner  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  1-5).  4  (ver.  4).  Success  in  preaching  must  be  estimated  not 
by  applause,  but  by  conversions.  On  that  day  was  founded  the  Church  to  which 
afterwards  the  two  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  were  written.  Meantime  Paul 
supported  himself  by  working  at  his  trade  of  tent-making,  preaching  days,  toiling 
nights  (1  Thess.  ii.  9).  5  (ver.  5).  The  wrath  of  man  is  often  forced  to  praise 
God.  Opposition  intensified  the  friendship  of  adherents.  It  was  easy  to  get  up 
the  noisest  crowd ;  but  they  only  advertised  them  and  strengthened  their  friends. 
6  (ver.  6).  A  wicked  man's  lie  frequently  contains  the  Christian  man's  motto. 
When  infidels  exclaimed,  "  Yours  is  only  a  book-religion,"  the  brave  Chillingworth 
answered,  "  The  Bible  is  the  religion  of  Protestants — the  Bible  onlyl"  Thessa- 
lonica was  upset  from  turret  to  foundation-stone  that  day.  H.  The  citt  that  was 
8BT  UP.  Notice — 1  (ver.  10).  The  indefatigable  zeal  of  the  early  Christians. 
2  (ver.  11).  The  promising  character  of  the  fresh  friends  Paul  and  Silas  made.  (1) 
These  people  listened  to  the  Word  attentively.  (2)  They  studied  the  Word 
assiduously.  (3)  They  accepted  the  Word  intelligently.  (4)  They  believed  the 
Word  implicitly.  3  (ver.  12).  The  excellent  results  of  persistent  study  of  the 
Scriptures.  The  word  "  therefore  "  is  intensive  ;  they  were  ennobled  by  their  con- 
version, and  they  were  converted  because  they  studied  and  believed  (John  v.  89). 
4  (ver.  13).  Satan  betrays  the  secret  of  his  special  hate.  His  friends  journeyed  aU 
this  tiresome  distance  merely  because  they  knew  the  Word  of  God  was  going  to  be 
preached  by  those  indefatigable  apostles.  The  devil  hates  nothing  so  much  in  this 
world  as  the  pure  word  of  Divine  truth  in  the  Bible.     (C.  S.  Eobitison,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2-4.  And  Paul,  as  his  manner  was,  went  In  unto  them. — Paul's  ministry: — 
Notice — I.  The  chief  object  of  Christian  faith.  "  Jesus  " — Saviour  from  sin, 
and  fear,  and  hell,  through  the  power  of  His  sacrifice,  and  the  prevalence  of  His 
intercession.  "  Christ,"  anointed  by  the  Eternal  Spirit,  and  set  apart  to  kingly, 
prophetic,  priestly  office  for  ever.  No  redeemer  for  man  can  be  imagined  of  a 
tiobler  type,  of  a  fuller  efficiency.    Granted  that  redemption  is  necessary,  then  we 


BU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xtii. 

have  no  choice  of  persons.  "  There  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among 
men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  When  the  gospel  began,  Jesus  Christ  was  the 
one  object  of  faith,  and  He  is  so  now.  By  no  re-arrangement  of  the  materials  of 
revelation,  can  you  have  a  system  of  Christianity  without  Him.  The  central 
attractive  power  gone,  the  forces  will  strive  with  each  other,  and  the  motions  will 
be  incalculable.  There  is  a  throne ;  some  one  must  sit  on  it.  There  is  a  gate ; 
some  one  must  stand  at  it  to  keep  it  open  into  the  way  that  leadeth  unto  life. 
There  is  a  peril  towering  high  above  all  other  dangers ;  we  need  some  one  to  break 
it  and  roll  it  away,  and  there  is  no  one  but  Christ.  Never  was  demand  more 
reasonable  than  this,  "  BeHeve  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  II.  The  means  used  to 
PRODUCE  FAITH  ABB  NOW  THE  SAME.  Our  apostle  met  them  on  the  Sabbath  day — the 
day  of  rest,  when  they  frequented  the  synagogue,  and  "  he  reasoned  with  them  out 
of  the  Scriptures."  We,  too,  open  the  Scriptures  as  our  book  of  authority.  It  is 
the  duty  of  those  who  set  forth  God's  mind  in  the  Scriptures,  to  "  reason  "  with 
men.  The  Greek  word  originally  means  to  carry  on  an  argument  by  way  of 
dialogue.  That  was  the  apostoUc  method  of  serving  Christ ;  not  at  all  like  that  of 
putting  on  and  off  clothes,  turning  the  back  to  the  people,  going  up  and  down  altar- 
stairs.  Different,  too,  from  that  of  the  strong  doctrinal  dogmatist,  who  asserts  and 
does  not  "  reason."  To  preach  Christ  is  to  "  reason  out  of  the  Scriptures,"  and,  in 
a  secondary  degree,  out  of  the  great  book  of  human  life  and  experience,  and  also 
out  of  the  great  book  of  material  nature  ;  but  in  any  case  it  is  to  "  reason,"  to  lay 
out  the  matter  as  it  seems  to  ourselves,  to  press  it  home  upon  all  whom  it  concerns  ; 
to  remonstrate,  expostulate,  entreat,  and  then  to  leave  the  issue  with  God.  III. 
Along  what  line  the  reasoning  usually  went  towards  proving  that  Jesus  is 
Christ.  Paul  "  opened  "  the  Scriptures,  that  is,  brought  out  the  hidden  yet  real 
meanings  concerning  the  promised  Messiah,  and  then  "  alleged "  that  the  real 
Messiah  must  be  a  sufferer,  and  not  a  splendid  Monarch  attended  with  all  kinds  of 
visible  success.  But  also  a  risen  Lord,  having  power  over  death  and  Ufe  ;  and  from 
all  this  came  the  conclusion  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  Christ.  Each  age  has  its 
own  thoughts  and  doubts  ;  and  the  real  preachers  for  any  age  are  those  who  deal 
with  its  thoughts  fairly,  and  dispel  its  doubts  by  light  of  truth  and  breath  of  love — 
but  all  this  with  a  view  to  the  manifestation  and  exaltation  of  Him  in  whom  God 
is  "  well  pleased,"  and  to  whom,  in  His  "  Ufting  up,"  all  men  will  at  length  be 
drawn.  IV.  The  faith  is  the  same  now  as  then.  The  faith  as  a  feeling,  the 
conviction  that  is  rooted  in  knowledge,  and  yet  goes  deeper  than  knowledge,  that  is 
founded  on  evidence,  but  which  is  itself  evidence;  for  "faith  is  the  substance  of 
things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  "  I  know  whom  I  have 
beUeved."  Faith  is  produced  by  different  means,  but  the  precious  result  is  the 
same  faith — faith  in  Christ,  the  Sufferer,  the  Denth-destroyer,  the  Life-giver,  the 
Bedeemer  of  all  trusting  men.  The  same  feeling.  Is  this  an  objection  or  an 
offence  ?  It  is  a  great  commendation  of  it.  This  common  faith  of  the  common 
heart  is  the  historic  something  that  continues  through  the  ages.  Systems  of 
government  and  thought  have  been  forming  and  vanishing  away  ;  civihsations  have 
arisen  and  have  perished ;  but  here  is  a  secret  something  which  has  been  running 
along  the  ages,  the  line  of  which  has  been  human  hearts,  the  power  of  which  has 
appeared  resurgent,  after  all  calamities,  and  which  seems  destined  to  run  on  to  the 
end  of  time.  "  May  I  share  in  this  feehng?  "  "Tes."  "  Then  by  God's  grace  I 
will!"  V.  The  outward  result  op  this  faith  is  the  same.  "They  were 
persuaded,  and  consorted  with  Paul  and  Silas,"  and  with  the  other  Christian  people 
who  were  all  drawn  together  by  their  common  faith.  Yet  now  there  is  rather  a  large 
escape  from  this.  The  fish  are  in  the  net  and  held  securely  there,  but  somehow 
they  do  not  get  landed.  Believers  are  made,  but  somehow  a  good  many  of  them  do 
not  consort,  rather  take  pains,  some  of  them,  to  let  it  be  known  that  they  do  not. 
Many  who  really  are  believers  in  Christ,  do  not  enter  any  Christian  Church.  But — 
1.  It  must  always  be  good  to  "  consort  "  with  good  men.  2.  It  must  always  be  good 
to  be  associated  as  closely  as  possible  with  a  good  cause,  and  Christianity  is 
unquestionably  the  greatest  cause  in  the  world.  3.  It  must  always  be  good  to  escape 
from  an  equivocal  position.  To  believe  in  One  for  life  and  death,  who  is  not  con- 
fessed, whatever  excuses  and  explanations  may  be  given,  must  be  more  or  less 
equivocal.  4.  It  must  always  be  good  to  remove  a  Uttle  farther  from  danger ;  and 
the  shelter,  the  nourishment,  the  inspiration  of  a  Church  is,  as  far  aa  it  goes,  a  real 
safety ;  it  helps  in  many  ways,  it  ought  to  hinder  in  none.  5.  It  must  always  be  good 
to  obey  Divine  commandment,  and  as  a  Church  is  a  Divine  institution,  connection 
with  a  Church  must  be  the  f  ullilment  of  a  Divine  obUgatiou.    (A,  Raleigh^  DJ).} 


CHAP,  xvn,]  THE  ACTS.  545 

An  ancient  pattern  for  modern  times  : — This  is  quite  an  old  world,  and  it  is  a  long 
time  since  men  and  women  began  to  try  to  find  out  how  the  great  things  in  human 
life  should  be  done,  and  how  to  make  the  best  of  everything.  Many  struggles,  many 
failures,  have,  no  doubt,  been  experienced  ;  but  there  has  been,  after  all,  a  wonder- 
ful survival  of  the  fittest,  the  best,  on  the  whole.  The  result  is,  that  there  are  very 
few  really  new  things  left  for  us  to  discover.  For  the  most  part,  it  is  practically 
old  things  in  a  new  dress — ancient  patterns  wrought  out  in  modern  forms.  What 
wonder,  then,  if  the  modern  Church  of  Christ  should  find  her  best  example  of  work, 
and  faith  in  the  Church,  ministers,  and  people,  in  the  New  Testament  histories  1  I 
desire  to  call  your  attention  now  to  Paul  and  his  hearers,  as  giving  to  us  a  good 
example  in  these  latter  days.  I.  We  have  an  example  of  keeping  the  Sabbath, 
AND  osiNG  IX  FOB  DiviNE  woBSHip.  "  Paul,  as  his  manner  [custom]  was,  went  in 
upon  them,"  and  joined  in  their  worship.  This  worship  of  God  springs  out  of  the 
rehgious  wants  and  instincts  of  the  human  soul ;  develops,  strengthens,  and  perfects 
the  aspirations  of  the  soul  in  its  following  hard  after  God,  things  unseen  and  eternal. 
This  we  all  much  need.  For  six  days  in  the  week,  the  rule  is,  that  our  time  and 
energies  are  centred  in  the  struggle  for  existence  and  well  being,  amid  things 
material  and  transient.  It  is  hard  work,  too,  to  rule  over  the  earth,  and  all  that  is 
therein,  and  have  some  true  dominion  over  it,  as,  indeed,  we  ought  to  have. 
But  when  we  have  done  that  for  six  days,  and  the  seventh  day  comes,  and  we  rest 
from  world  ruling  and  training,  as  God  rested  from  His  world  making — when  this 
Sabbath  of  the  Lord,  this  Sabbath  made  for  man,  has  come,  what  are  we  to  do  with 
it,  how  use  it?  Paul  and  Silas,  and  the  Jews,  give  us  an  example.  Go  to  the 
synagogue,  the  meeting-house,  where  God  meets  with  His  people,  and  they  meet 
with  Him.  Go  to  the  synagogue,  where  God  is,  and  is  worshipped  by  song,  by 
prayer,  by  all  reverent  speech  and  thought,  and  so  shall  we  attain  principles  and 
inspirations  for  godly  living,  which  will  give  high,  noble  meaning,  and  resolute 
purpose  to  our  entire  lives.     II.  We  have  an  example  of  the  general  object,  on 

WHICH    OUB   THOUGHTS   SHOULD   BE    ESPECIALLY   FIXED    IN    OUB     SEASONS     OF    WOBSHIP. 

It  is  God  in  Christ.  God  as  revealed  in  Christ.  Paul  opened  and  alleged  certain 
thing3  concerning  Christ.  To  him,  Jesus  Christ  was  God — God  manifest  in 
the  flesh,  in  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  the  fashion  of  a  man.  In  Christ  God  was 
revealed  in  a  new  and  wonderful  form,  uniting  Himself  with  man  as  man,  and 
lifting  men  up  to  a  blessed  union  and  fellowship  with  Himself.  As  a  name,  "  Jesus 
the  Christ  "  is  the  best  translation  of  what  God  is  to  man,  and  for  man.  "  Jesus  " 
means  "  the  Saviour,"  and  there  is  an  immensity  of  meaning  in  that  when  you 
consider  the  innumerable  evils  to  body  and  soul  for  time,  and  in  the  far-off  eternity, 
to  which  sinful  men  are  deservedly  and  justly  exposed.  *'  The  Christ "  means 
"  the  anointed."  Christ  was  set  apart  as  Prophet  to  interpret  and  reveal  tha 
thoughts  and  love,  and  eternal  purposes  of  God  in  the  forms  of  human  speech,  life, 
suffering,  and  death — the  form  of  a  man,  intelligible  to  all  men  everywhere.  He 
was  anointed — set  apart  as  Priest — to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us,  the 
sinful ;  and  in  the  form  of  a  man,  through  the  Eternal  Spirit,  offer  Himself  in 
sacrifice  for  us,  and  obtain  eternal  redemption  for  os  by  His  own  blood.  He  was 
the  anointed  King,  to  rule  over  the  new  kingdom  of  grace  and  righteousness,  to  rule 
till  all  enemies  to  Him  and  to  us  shall  be  put  under  His  foot.  lU.  We  have  an 
example  of  the  best  means  of  fixing  oub  thoughts  on  Cheist;  securing  clear 
conceptions  concerning  Him,  and  certitude  of  faith  in  Him.  Paul  "reasoned  with 
them  out  of  the  Scriptures."  Eeason  in  man  is  the  apex  of  his  spiritual  nature — 
the  point  at  which  he  touches  the  infinite  in  God,  and  the  infinite  in  God  touches 
and  enters  into  finite  man.  Man  is  rational,  because  he  is  spiritual  in  living 
relation  to  God,  who  is  a  Spirit.  He  reasoned  with  them ;  he  appealed  to  them  by 
facts,  by  illustrations,  by  arguments,  by  principles,  that  they  might  know,  under- 
stand, and  believe  the  truth  which  he  had  to  proclaim  as  a  rational  message  from 
Jesus  Christ  to  them  and  to  all  men.  He  "  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scrip- 
tures." When  we  reason,  we  commence  from  things  which  are  admitted  as  true  in 
fact,  or  in  principle,  on  both  sides,  and  then  proceed  to  show  that  something  elsa 
must  also  be  true,  on  the  ground  of  what  has  been  already  admitted.  Paul  and  his 
hearers  had  things  believed  in  common.  God,  Moses,  the  prophets,  the  Scriptures 
as  the  veracious  history  of  God's  thought  and  purpose  in  the  past  ages.  He  got 
the  premises,  grounds,  foundations  of  his  arguments,  his  syllogisms,  in  the  records 
of  God's  thoughts  and  deeds,  as  he  reasoned  with  them  to  prove  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  and  that  their  instant  duty  was  to  believe  on  Him  and  obey  Him  as  their 
Saviour  King.  So  it  must  be  still,  from  the  sacred  Scriptures,  from  human  expert* 
YOU  u.  35 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tttu 

ence,  that  the  true  preacher  must  reason,  and  by  reason  and  reasoning  convince  the 
gainsayers,  convert  the  careless,  and  lead  the  inquirer  to  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus. 
IV.  We  have  an  example  of  what  the  RESuiiT  should  be  in  those  who  are 
HEARERS  of  THE  gospEL  TESTIMONY,  "  Some  of  them  believed  and  consorted  with 
Paul  and  Silas."  They  believed,  that  is,  they  were  persuailed  by  Paul's  reasonings 
from  Scriptures,  and  from  facts  well  known  and  supported  by  reasonable  evidence. 
In  faith  their  minds  looked  out  and  up  and  saw  the  real  Christ — the  Saviour,  King 
— and  began,  like  Paul,  to  "  count  all  things  but  loss  for  Him."  Precious  faith  I 
for  it  sees  Christ,  embraces  Christ,  and,  as  such,  is  the  root  principle  of  the  new 
life.  But  having  believed,  you  see,  they  consorted  with  Paul  and  Silas.  Man  is 
social.  Our  very  nature  compels  us  to  consort  with  one  another.  The  means  of 
this  are  doubtless  very  various.  But,  this  sorting  out  and  consorting  of  different 
classes  for  different  purposes,  are  the  strongest,  most  lasting,  when  the  assortment 
arises  from  one  faith,  one  love,  one  hope,  one  final  end.  But  those  are  all  found 
in  Christian  men  and  women  whose  one  master-faith  is  God  in  Christ ;  whose  one 
controlling  master-love  is  God  ;  whose  one  master-inspiration  in  the  darkest  hour 
is  the  eternal  hope  of  glory ;  and  whose  final  end  is  "  to  glorify  God,  and  to  enjoy 
Him  for  ever. "  (Prof.  Wm.  Taylor. )  The  force  of  habit : — Our  outward  deportment 
becomes  a  matter  of  habit.  When  a  man  has  become  accustomed  to  any  particular 
course,  he  cannot  avoid  acting  upon  it.  Paul  could  no  more  have  stayed  away  from  the 
synagogue  than  he  could  have  given  up  his  food.  So  there  ought  to  be  a  principle, 
made  our  own  by  custom,  which  shall  absolutely  lead  us  in  the  right  way  with  a  force 
which  cannot  be  resisted.  And  this  fact  should  especially  remind  us  of  the  duty  which 
we  owe  to  those  whom  we  have  in  charge.  Habits  imbibed  in  youth  may  affect  the 
happiness  and  eternal  welfare  of  the  child.  Observe  the  importance  of — I.  The 
habit  of  PERSONAL  DEVOTION.  II.  The  habit  of  practical  almsgivinq.  III.  The 
habit  of  CONTEMPLATIVE  OBSERVATION.  IV.  The  habit  of  self-examination.  V.  The 
habit  of  LOOKING  to  the  future  bather  than  the  present — that  is,  of  weighing 
€very  circumstance,  every  event,  every  trial,  every  sorrow,  every  prosperity,  in  the 
light  of  eternity.  (Homilist.)  Paul's  custom  : — It  was  Paul's  custom — I.  Togo  to 
church.  He  didn't  drop  in  now  au  d  then  "  to  hear  the  new  minister,"  or  remain  away 
because  it  was  "  too  pleasant  to  stay  at  home."  II.  To  do  his  part  when  he  went  to 
church.  There  is  no  record  of  his  declining  to  take  a  class  in  Sunday-school  because 
it  interfered  with  the  hour  of  his  Sunday  dinner.  III.  When  he  went  to  church  to 
TALK  AND  THINK  ABOUT  Chbist — and  he  probably  found  something  more  practical 
to  do  between  services  than  to  stand  around  the  church  doors  and  talk  about  the 
state  of  the  crops.  IV.  To  speak  out — and  he  didn't  wait  until  he  could  find 
exactly  what  style  of  preaching  would  best  suit  the  Church  at  Thessalonica,  and 
shape  his  sermons  accordingly.  V.  To  speak  everywhere  of  a  suffering 
Saviour.  It  was  Paul's  custom  to  suffer  anything  for  that  Saviour ;  it  was 
Paul's  custom  to  make  his  creed  and  his  deeds  correspond.  (S.  S.  Tijnei.) 
Beasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scriptures. — The  use  of  reason  in  religion : — 
There  hath  been  an  opinion  too  hastily  taken  up,  and  too  warmly  maintained 
by  some,  that  reason  is  very  little  to  be  hearkened  to  in  matters  of  religion ; 
that  we  are  to  believe  nothing  but  what  is  expressly  taught  us  in  the  Word 
of  God,  and  that  we  are  not  to  draw  consequences  from  Scripture,  and  to 
make  them  the  articles  of  our  faith,  but  most  strictly  confine  ourselves  to  the 
very  language  of  Holy  Writ,  and  admit  of  no  doctrines  but  what  are  there  in  so 
many  words  and  syllables  delivered.  Now,  true  it  is  that  the  Scriptures  are  the 
adequate  rule  of  our  faith;  but  then  it  is  not  also  true,  nor  by  us  confessed,  that 
nothing  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  taught  us  in  Scripture  but  what  is  there  in  so  many 
words  delivered.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  our  Church  that  "  the  Holy  Scripture  con- 
taineth  all  things  necessary  to  our  salvation  ;  so  that  nothing  is  to  be  required  of 
any  man  to  be  believed  as  an  article  of  faith,  which  is  not  read  therein,  or  which 
may  not  be  proved  thereby."  This  disjunction  would  be  unnecessary  if  there  were 
not  some  things  which,  though  they  are  not  read  therein,  may  yet  be  proved  there- 
by. What  is  rightly  inferred  from  the  Scriptures  doth  as  much  challenge  our 
assent  as  what  is  literally  deUvered  in  the  Scriptures.    I.    I  am  to  prove  this 

DOCTRINE   FROM    THE    AUTHORITY   AND   EXAMPLE    OF    ChRIST  AND  HiS  APOSTLES.       Christ 

and  His  apostles  often  make  use  of  reasoning,  both  for  the  establishment  of  those 
truths  which  they  taught,  and  for  the  confutation  of  those  errors  which  they 
opposed.  When  the  tempter  took  up  our  Saviour  "  into  an  exceeding  high  moun- 
tain and  showed  Him  aU  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them,"  Ao. 
(Matt,  iv.  8,  9;  Deat.  vL  13,  t.  16).     Now  these  reasonings  of  our  Saviour  against 


<3HAP.  xvu.]  THE  ACTS.  547 

His  worshipping  Satan,  and  throwing  Himself  down,  are  inconclusive  if  we  may 
not  argue  from  Scripture,  and  if  we  must  admit  of  nothing  as  taught  therein  which 
13  not  there  set  down  in  express  words,  since  neither  is  it  said  in  the  former  of 
these  texts,  that  Satan  is  not  to  be  worshipped,  nor  in  the  latter  that  Christ  might 
not  throw  Himself  down  from  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple.     When  the  Sadduceea 
put  captious  questions  to  our  Saviour  about  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  He  showed 
the  weakness  of  their  objections  against  it  by  proving  to  them  that  the  doctrine  by 
them  opposed  was  taught  by  Moses,  whose  authority  they  did  not,  and  could  not, 
dispute  (Matt.  xxii.  31,  32).     But  if  those  who  are  against  aU  reasoning  from 
Scripture,  who  wiU  admit  of  nothing  but  what  is  directly  therein  contained,  had 
been  in  the  place  of  the  Sadducees,  they  would  not  so  easily  have  yielded  to  our 
Saviour's  argument ;  they  would  have  rejected  this  testimony  from  Moses  as  not 
direct,  and  would  have  required  a  more  formal  and  plain  proof.     The  apostles,  in 
their  writings,  follow  the  steps  of  their  Lord  and  Master,  and  prove  the  truths  of 
the  gospel  against  the  Jews,  who  gainsayed  them,  not  from  any  passages  in  the  Old 
Testament  in  which  the  gospel  truths  are  expressly  and  in  so  many  words  laid 
down,  but  by  arguments  and  reasons  drawn  from  the  writings  of  Moses  and  the 
prophets.     Thus  St.  Peter  (chap.  iii.  22)  proves  the  coming  of  Christ  from  those 
words  of  Moses  (Deut.  xviii.  15),  and  His  resurrection  (Acts  ii.  27)  from  that  place 
of  the  Psalms  (Psa.  x.  10).    After  the  same  manner   St.  Paul  (Eom.  iv.  7)  proves 
that  we  are  justified,  not  by  the  law,  but  by  grace,  from  those  words  of  the  Psalmist 
(Psa.  xxxii.  1).      He  proves  (Rom.  ix.  33)  the  rejection  of  the  Jews  from   the 
prophecy  of  Isaiah  (Isa.  xxviii.  16),  and  the  vocation  of  the  Gentiles  (R^m.  ix.  25), 
from  Hosea's  having  brought  in  God,  saying  (Hos.  ii.  23).     This  way  of  arguing  he  at 
all  times,  and  in  all  parts  of  his  writings,  makes  use  of ;  from  those  truths  which 
«re  expressly  read  in  Scripture,  by  the  laws  of  reasoning  he  infers  other  doctrines 
which  are  not  there  formerly  read,  but  which  do  from  them  foUow,  and  are  there- 
fore in  them  virtually  contained.     Now  it  is  evident,  and  on  all  hands  acknowledged, 
that  this  assertion,  "  Jesus  is  the  Christ,"  is  nowhere  laid  down  in  these  very  words 
throughout  the  writings  of  the  Old  Testament.     Moses  and  the  Prophets  do  indeed 
-bear    witness   to  Him,   but  in  the  testimony  they  give  they  nowhere    formally 
declare  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.     How,  then,  could  the  apostles  demonstrate  this 
proposition  from  their  writings  ?   Do  they  not  refer  us  to  such  passages  in  the 
prophets  from  whence  this  doctrine,  which  is  not  in  express  words  asserted,  is  by 
right  reasoning  regularly  deduced?    From  the  several  parts  of  the  Old  Testament, 
compared  one  with  another,  they  form  the  character  of  the  Messiah,  and  then  they 
prove  that  this  character  did  truly  belong  to  that  Jesus  whom  they  affirmed  to  be 
the  Messiah.     This  method  of  proving  St.  Luke  has  expressed  in  very  proper  and 
apposite  words,  when  he  tells  us  that  St.   Paul  "  reasoned  out  of  the  Scriptures, 
opening  and  alleging."     The  apostle  first  opened  to  them  the  sense  of  the  prophets, 
explained  their  words,  and  when  he  had  thus  shown  what  their  scope  was,  he  did 
then  apply  the  prophesies  thus  explained  to  the  person,   doctrine,  and  works  of 
Jesus ;  he  compared  the  predictions  with  the  events,  the  shadows  with  the  bodies, 
the  figures  with  the  things  prefigured ;  so  that  by  this  method  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  which  they  preached  was  irrefragably  demonstrated.     Since,  therefore,  this 
way  of  arguing  was  made  use  of  by  Christ  and  His  apostles,  we  must  acknowledge 
that  those  things  are  rightly  proved  out  of  Scripture  which  do  evidently  follow  from 
the  doctrines  taught  in  Scripture,  though  they  are  not  in  so  many  words  anywhere 
to  be  found  in  the  Word  of  God.     And  as  we  have  the  example  of  Christ  and  His 
apostles  warranting  us,  so  we  have  their  commands  enjoining  us  to  make  use  of 
this  method  of  reasoning.     Our  Saviour  bids  the  Jews  (John  v.  39)  to  search  the 
Scriptures,  not  barely  to  consult  them,  but  to  compare  them  ;  not  only  to  tind  what 
they  expressly,  but  what  they  implicitly  taught ;  not  only  to  read  what  was  plainly 
said  in  them,  but  to  discover  what  might  manifestly  be  deduced  from  them.     The 
Holy  Scriptures  would  not  be  so  perfect  a  rule  of  faith  or  manners,  of  what  we 
ought  to  believe  and  do,  as  they  are  if  we  were  left  to  judge  of  either  only  by  what  we 
are  there  in  so  many  words  expressly  taught,  and  might  not  use  our  own  reasons  to 
infer  from  them  some  necessary  truths,  and  some  important  duties  which  are  there, 
though  not  in  terms  delivered.    He  would  be  thought  very  ridiculous  who  should 
plead  his  being  under  no  obligation  from  the  Scripture  to  obey  the  lawful  commands 
of  a  sovereign  princess,  because,  though  he  is  there  required  to  honour  the  king, 
he  nowhere  reads  that  he  is  to  honour  the  queen,  and  that  man  is  equally  absurd 
who  hath  no  better  reason  for  the  denial  of  a  Trinity  than  that  he  nowhere  finds 
the  word  "  Trinity"  in  the  Scriptures,  though  the  doctrine  by  that  word  signified  is 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvn, 

therein  contained.  ,ll.  But  against  what  hath  been  delivered  it  mat  be  ubged 
that  if  we  thus  give  a  firm  assent  to  any  truths  which  are  not  plainly  and  expressly 
taught  in  Scripture,  but  are  only  inferred  from  thence  by  our  own  reason,  then 

WE    MAKE    ODE    FAITH    TO    DEPEND,    NOT    tIPON   THE    WoKD   OF    GOD,  BUT    UPON    OUB   OWN 

REASON.  But  it  might  as  well  be  urged  that  when  St.  Paul  sayeth  (Rom.  x.  17)  that 
"  faith  cometh  by  hearing,"  we  make  our  faith  to  depend,  not  upon  the  testimony 
of  God,  but  upon  the  sense  of  hearing.  The  ear  is  that  organ  or  instrument  by 
which  we  perceive  the  Word  of  God  preached  to  us ;  but  the  authority  of  God  ia 
that  ground  or  reason  upon  which  we  beheve  the  Word  of  God  which  we  hear.  So 
our  reason,  or  our  understanding,  is  that  faculty  by  which  we  perceive  and  know 
what  things  are  taught  us  in  Scripture  :  by  that  we  understand  the  sense  and  mean- 
ing of  what  is  there  revealed  ;  but  it  is  the  authority  of  God,  who  inspired  the  pen- 
men of  Holy  Writ,  and  who  by  the  guidance  of  this  Holy  Spirit  secured  them  from 
error,  upon  which  we  found  our  belief  of  what,  by  the  use  of  our  reason,  we  discover 
to  be  by  them  taught.  Those  who  ascribe  thus  much  and  no  more  than  this  to 
reason  demand  only  the  liberty  of  opening  their  own  eyes,  and  of  seeing  the 
wonderful  things  of  God's  law ;  they  do  not  pretend  that  it  is  given  to  them  to 
reveal  any  new  truths  to  mankind,  nor  do  they  usurp  an  unwarrantable  power  of 
framing  new  articles  of  faith.  All  that  they  demand  or  ask  is,  that  the  right  of 
making  use  of  their  own  faculties,  which  is  given  to  every  one  by  nature,  and  by 
the  God  of  nature,  may  not  be  denied  to  them.  There  is  no  need  thai  «^;ian  should 
be  a  prophet,  or  that  he  should  have  any  extraordinary  capacities  of  mind,  or 
illuminations  of  the  Spirit,  to  understand  that  the  same  Scriptures  which  teach 
him  that  all  men  have  sinned  do  consequentially  teach  him  that  he  is  a  sinner,  or 
that  the  Word  of  God,  which  doth  expressly  deny  that  any  "  shall  perish  who  believe 
in  Christ,"  doth  at  the  same  t  m  j  virtually  pronounce  that  if  he  believes  he  shall 
not  perish.  But  those  who  are  against  all  reasoning  from  Scripture  will  again  ask 
how  can  we  be  sure  that  the  consequences  which  we  draw  from  Scripture  are  just 
and  regular  ?  For  may  not  our  reason  misguide  us  ?  And  may  we  not,  through 
mistake,  infer  such  doctrines  from  Scripture  which  do  by  no  means  follow  from  it  ? 
And  if  we  may  be  mistaken,  why  should  we  venture  to  beheve  anything  which  we 
think  follows  from  Scripture,  but  which  after  all  perhaps  does  not  follow  ?  Now,  il 
this  reasoning  is  good,  there  is  an  end  of  all  certainty,  not  only  in  those  infer- 
ences which  are  made  from  Scripture,  and  which  are  levelled  against  by  thia 
sort  of  arguing,  but  also  in  those  things  which  are  plainly  and  expressly  taught  in 
Scripture.  Men  have  been  mistaken  in  their  judgments  concerning  things  formally 
delivered  in  the  Word  of  God.  But  will  it  not  be  said  that,  if  there  is  any 
occasion  for  our  drawing  inferences  from  Scripture,  then  it  is  plain  that  the  Scrip- 
tures are  not  so  easy  and  clear  as  they  are  by  the  Protestants  generally  said  to 
be?  If  we  must  not  only  believe  what  we  read  in  Scripture,  but  what  can  be 
proved  from  thence,  then  none  will  be  able  to  know  what  is  taught  in  Scripture 
but  such  as  have  skill  in  drawing  consequences;  and  at  this  rate  we  must  be 
skilled  in  logic  before  we  can  pretend  to  "understand  the  Scriptures."  To  this  I 
answer  that  those  are  very  much  mistaken  who  think  that  we,  who  maintain  the 
perspicuity  of  the  Scriptures,  do  assert  them  to  be  so  easy,  as  that  there  should  be 
no  use  of  our  rational  faculties  rightly  to  understand  them.  What  St.  Peter 
(2  Pet.  iii.  16)  saith  of  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  we  believe  of  other  parts  of  Holy 
Writ,  that  "  there  are  some  things  in  them  hard  to  be  understood,"  and  we  do  not 
contend  that  everything  therein  delivered  is  suited  to  the  apprehensions  of  all 
readers,  but  only  that  those  things,  which  all  are  indispensably  bound  to  know  for 
their  soul's  health,  are  by  all,  upon  the  use  of  due  diligence,  intelligible.  And  even 
as  to  those  truths  which  are  necessarily  to  be  known  in  order  to  our  everlasting 
salvation,  we  do  not  affirm  that  wherever  they  are  delivered  in  Scripture  they  are 
expressed  in  such  terms  as  to  leave  no  room  for  a  mistake ;  but  that  somewhere  or 
other  in  Holy  Writ,  they  are  so  expressed  that  it  must  be  our  own  fault  if  we  do 
not  rightly  apprehend  them.  We  beheve,  for  instance,  that  the  incarnation  of 
Christ,  His  passion,  and  resurrection  are  taught  by  the  prophets  as  well  as  by  the 
apostles ;  but  we  do  not  beheve  that  they  are  so  explicitly  and  fully  revealed  by  the 
prophets  as  by  the  apostles.  What  is  obscurely  hinted  in  the  Old  Testament  ia 
manifestly  explained  in  the  New.  And  when  we  afi&rm  that  the  Scriptures  are  in 
some  points  thus  intelligible  by  all  Christians,  we  do  not  pretend  that  they  may  be 
understood  without  attention,  diligence,  and  inquiry;  but  that  we  may  be  capable 
of  knowing  their  sense  with  the  use  of  these,  and  other  proper  methods  of  gaining 
instruction.     Some  truths  indeed  are  written  in  so  large  characters  that  he  that 


CHAP.  XVII.]  THE  ACTS.  549 

runs  may  read  them  ;  but  for  the  discovery  of  other  truths  revealed  in  Scripture, 
the  words  by  which  they  are  conveyed  to  our  understandings  are  to  be  carefully 
weighed,  the  sense  of  them  to  be  nicely  and  accurately  inquired  into  ;  all  passions 
and  prejudices  that  may  any  ways  bias  our  judgments  are  to  be  laid  aside.  In  the 
understanding  of  such  truths  as  these,  there  being  more  room  for  mistake,  there  ia 
more  occasion  for  our  caution,  and  the  way  which  we  are  to  go  being  more  intricate, 
it  will  be  proper  for  us  to  take  in  the  assistance  of  a  guide.  What  of  ourselves  we 
could  not  discover,  we  may  be  able  to  perceive  when  discovered  to  us  by  others,  in 
which  case  we  do  not  implicitly  follow  the  judgment  of  those  whom  we  consult,  but 
have  our  own  judgments  informed  by  theirs  ;  we  do  not  see  with  other  men's  eyes, 
but  those  truths  which  before  were  obscure  to  us,  are  by  others,  of  greater  penetra- 
tion than  ourselves,  placed  in  so  clear  a  hght  that  we  may  now  plainly  perceive  them 
with  our  own  eyes ;  we  do  not  in  such  a  case  f oUow  our  instructors,  as  blind  men 
do  their  guides,  trusting  to  their  guidance  without  seeing  which  way  they  go ;  but 
we  make  such  use  of  them  as  persons  in  the  dark  do  of  those  who  carry  a  hght 
before  them  to  show  them  the  way  and  to  direct  their  paths.  (Bp.  Smalridge.) 
Rational  preaching  : — I.  Paul  usually  proved  the  truth  of  the  doctrines  which  he 
TAUGHT.  He  did  not  desire  his  hearers  to  beheve  without  evidence.  He  commended 
the  Bereans,  for  searching  the  Scriptures,  to  see  whether  his  doctrines  were  agreeable 
to  that  standard.  In  order  to  reason  clearly  upon  the  truth  of  a  proposition,  it 
is  often  necessary  to  explain  it,  to  produce  arguments  in  support  of  it,  to  answer 
objections  against  it.  By  Paul's  proving  the  doctrines  which  he  taught,  we  are 
to  understand  his  reasoning  upon  them  in  this  manner.  This  wiU  appear  in 
respect  to  a  variety  of  subjects  upon  which  he  preached.  He  reasoned  plainly  and 
forcibly  upon— 1.  The  existence  of  God  (vers.  23-29 ;  Kom.  i.  20).  2.  The  Divine 
sovereignty  (Eom.  ix.).  3.  Total  depravity  (Eom.  ii.  3).  4.  Here  it  was  Christ's 
Bufferings,  death,  and  resurrection.  5.  The  resurrection  and  future  state  (1  Cor.  xv.). 
When  Paul  preached  before  Felix,  "he  reasoned"  so  that  "Felix  trembled." 
Immediately  after  he  was  converted  he  preached  Christ,  and  reasoned  so  that  he 
confounded  the  Jews.  After  he  came  to  Corinth  he  "  reasoned  in  the  synagogue 
every  Sabbath,  and  persuaded  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks."  At  length  he  came  to 
Ephesus,  where  he  reasoned  with  the  Jews,  "  disputing  and  persuading  the  things 
concerning  the  kingdom  of  God."  II.  Why  he  made  this  his  common  practice. 
1.  Because  he  meant  to  preach  the  gospel  intelligibly  to  persons  of  all  characters 
and  capacities,  and  he  knew  that  in  order  to  do  this  it  was  necessary  to  explain  its 
doctrines,  to  prove  them  to  be  true,  that  they  might  be  beUeved ;  and  to  answer 
objections,  that  the  mouths  of  gainsayers  might  be  stopped.  2.  Because  he  meant 
to  preach  profitably,  as  well  as  plainly.  It  is  only  through  the  medium  of  the 
understanding  and  the  conscience  that  preachers  can  affect  the  hearts  of  the 
hearers.  Improvement  :  1.  It  appears  from  Paul's  usual  mode  of  preaching  that  he 
was  a  metaphysical  preacher.  For,  in  the  first  place,  he  usually  preached  upon 
metaphysical  subjects,  which  required  the  exercise  of  the  highest  reasoning  powers 
of  man — the  existence,  the  perfections,  the  sovereignty  of  God,  the  free  agency  of 
man  under  a  Divine  agency,  the  divinity  and  atonement  of  Christ,  the  nature  of 
holiness,  &c.,  &c. ;  and  he  preached  upon  them  metapbysically,  that  is,  he  reasoned 
upon  them.  He  did  not  merely  declaim  upon  them ;  but  he  explained  them,  proved 
them,  and  refuted  the  most  plausible  objections  ever  made  against  them.  Let  any 
minister,  at  this  day,  commonly  preach  upon  the  same  subjects,  and  in  the  same 
manner  that  Paul  did,  and  he  will  be  called  a  metaphysical  preacher,  by  those  who 
are  pleased  with  such  a  different  mode  of  preaching.  And  we  must  allow  that 
they  are  perfectly  correct.  2.  If  Paul  preached  in  such  a  manner,  then  none  have 
any  good  reason  to  speak  reproachfully  of  his  manner  of  preaching.  (1)  Some  may 
say  that  Christ  did  not  preach  metaphysically,  but  only  taught  plain,  practical 
doctrines,  without  reasoning  upon  them  ;  and  therefore  ministers  should  follow  his 
example.  Answer :  There  is  reason  to  think  that  Paul  felt  his  obligation  to  follow 
the  example  of  Christ,  as  much  as  any  preacher  ever  did.  And  so  far  as  he  deviated 
from  Christ's  example  in  preaching,  he  acted  from  pure  and  proper  motives.  And 
it  is  easy  to  see  a  good  reason  why  Christ  did  not  Hndertake  to  prove  the  doctrines 
He  taught,  for  He  taught  as  one  having  authority  that  none  ought  to  dispute.  But 
neither  Paul  nor  any  other  human  preacher  is  clothed  with  such  authority.  (2) 
Some  may  say  that  those  who  preach  upon  the  same  subjects  in  the  same  manner 
that  Paul  did,  do  not  preach  plainly  and  practically ;  and  therefore  are  unprofitable 
preachers.  But  if  Paul  was  a  plain  and  profitable  preacher,  why  should  not  those 
be  ?    And  who,  indeed,  generally  preach  the  most  plainly  and  successfully  ?    No 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xyu. 

man  ever  preached  like  metaphysical  Paul.  3.  If  Paul,  for  good  reasons,  adopted 
the  very  best  mode,  then  no  other  reason  can  be  assigned  for  disliking  it,  but  a 
dislike  to  the  doctrines,  which  his  mode  of  preaching  exhibits  in  the  clearest  and 
strongest  light.  4.  If  Paul  preached  plainly,  in  order  to  preach  profitably,  then 
other  ministers  ought  to  preach  plainly,  for  the  same  purpose.  Paul's  plain  preaching 
offended  and  disaffected  many  of  his  hearers.  But  this  did  not  prevent  his  preaching 
plainly ;  for  his  design  in  preaching  was  not  to  please  men,  but  to  profit  them,  and 
please  God  (Gal  i.  6-10).  5.  If  ministers  ought  to  preach  plainly  and  profitably,  as 
Paul  did,  then  people  ought  to  approve  of  their  preaching  in  such  a  manner,  though 
it  be  not  pleasing  to  their  natural  hearts.  People  have  no  right  to  desire  preachers 
to  seek  to  please  them  simply,  but  they  ought  to  desire  them  to  seek  to  save  them. 
(N.  Emmons,  D.I).)  Opening  and  alleging. — Paul's  treatment  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment : — He  treated  it  as  a  nut.  He  broke  the  shell,  opened  out  the  kernel,  and 
presented  it  as  food  to  the  hungry.  The  Jews  were  like  little  children  who  had  a 
fruit  tree  in  their  garden,  their  father's  legacy.  The  children  had  gathered  the  nuts 
as  they  grew,  and  laid  them  up  with  reverence  in  a  storehouse;  but  they  knew  not 
how  to  break  open  the  shell,  and  so  reach  the  kernel  for  food.  Paul  acts  the  part  of 
elder  brother  to  their  Httle  ones.  He  skilfully  pierces  the  crust  and  extracts  the 
fruit,  and  divides  it  among  them.  The  passage,  e.g.,  that  Philip  found  the  Ethiopian 
reading  on  the  road,  or  the  second  psalm,  he  opened,  and  from  it  brought  Christ. 
{W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Devout  Greeks,  .  .  .  chief  women,  .  .  .  Jews  which  believed 
not. — Why  Gentiles  and  women  became  converts  more  easily  than  Jews  : — The 
inveterate  obstinacy  of  the  Jews  contrasted  sadly  with  the  ready  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  especially  of  women,  who  in  all  ages  have  been  more  remarkable  than 
men  for  reUgious  earnestness,  is  a  phenomenon  which  constantly  recurs  in  the 
early  history  of  Christianity.  Nor  is  this  wholly  to  be  wondered  at.  The  Jew  was 
at  least  in  possession  of  a  religion  which  raised  him  to  a  height  of  moral  superiority 
above  his  Gentile  contemporaries ;  but  the  Gentile  of  this  day  had  no  religion  at 
aU  worth  speaking  of.  If  the  Jew  had  more  and  more  mistaken  the  shell  of  cere- 
monialism for  the  precious  truths  of  which  that  ceremonialism  was  but  the  integu- 
ment, he  was  at  least  conscious  that  there  were  deep  truths  which  lay  enshrined 
behind  the  observances  which  he  so  fanatically  cherished.  But  on  what  deep 
truths  could  the  Greek  woman  rest,  if  her  life  were  pure,  and  her  thoughts  elevated 
above  the  ignorant  domesticism  which  was  the  only  recognised  virtue  of  her  sex  ? 
What  comfort  was  there  for  her  in  the  cold  grey  eyes  of  Athene,  or  the  stereotyped 
smile  of  the  voluptuous  Aphrodite?  And  when  the  Thessalonian  Greek  raised  his 
eyes  to  the  dispeopled  heaven  of  the  Olympus,  which  towered  over  the  blue  gulf  on 
which  his  city  stood — when  his  imagination  could  no  longer  place  the  throne  of 
Zeus,  and  the  session  of  his  mighty  deities,  on  that  dazzling  summit  where  Cicero 
had  remarked  with  pathetic  irony  that  he  saw  nothing  but  snow  and  ice — what 
compensation  could  he  find  for  the  void  left  in  his  heart  by  a  dead  religion?  By 
adopting  circumcision  he  might  become,  as  it  were,  a  Helot  of  Judaism  ;  and  to 
such  a  sacrifice  he  was  not  tempted.  But  the  gospel  which  Paul  preached  had  no 
esoteric  doctrines,  and  no  supercilious  exclusions,  and  no  repellent  ceremonials;  it 
came  with  a  Divine  Example,  and  a  free  gift  to  all,  and  that  free  gift  involved  all 
that  was  most  precious  to  the  troubled  and  despondent  souL  No  wonder,  then,  that 
the  Church  at  Thessalonica  was  mainly  Gentile,  as  is  proved  by  1  Thess.  i.  9,  ii.  14, 
and  by  the  total  absence  of  any  Old  Testament  allusion  in  both  Epistles.  {Arch- 
deacon Farrar.)  But  the  Jews  which  believed  not,  moved  with  envy. — The  spirit 
of  envy : — Alas  1  for  this  spirit  of  envy  and  jealousy  coming  down  through  the 
ages.  Cain  and  Abel,  Esau  and  Jacob,  Saul  and  David,  Haman  and  Mordecai, 
Othello  and  lago,  Orlando  and  Angelica,  Caligula  and  Torquatus,  Cffisar  and 
Pompey,  Columbus  and  the  Spanish  courtiers,  Cambyses  and  the  brother  he  slew 
because  he  was  a  better  marksman,  Dionysius  and  Philuxenius  whom  he  slew 
because  he  was  a  better  singer.  Jealousy  among  painters.  Closterman  and  Geoffrey 
KneUer,  Hudson  and  Reynolds.  Francia  anxious  to  see  a  picture  of  Raphael, 
Raphael  sends  him  a  picture.  Francia,  seeing  it,  falls  in  a  fit  of  jealousy,  from 
which  he  dies.  Jealousy  among  authors.  How  seldom  contemporaries  speak  of 
each  other  I  Xenophon  and  Plato  hving  at  the  same  time,  but  from  their  writings 
you  would  never  suppose  they  had  heard  of  each  other.  Religious  jealousies.  The 
Mohammedans  praying  for  rain  during  a  drought,  no  rain  coming.  Then  the 
Christians  began  to  pray  for  rain,  and  the  rain  comes.  Then  the  Mohammedans 
met  together  to  account  for  this,  and  they  resolved  that  God  was  so  weU  pleased 
with  their  prayers  He  kept  the  drought  on  so  as  to  keep  them  praying ;  but  that  th« 


CHip.xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  651 

Christians  began  to  pray,  and  the  Lord  was  so  disgusted  with  their  prayer  that  He 
Bent  rain  right  away,  so  He  would  not  hear  any  more  of  their  supplication  I  Oh  I 
this  accursed  spirit  of  envy  and  jealousy.  Let  us  stamp  it  out  from  all  our  hearts. 
A  wrestler  was  so  envious  of  Theagenes,  the  prince  of  wrestlers,  that  he  could  not 
be  consoled  in  any  way,  and  after  Theagenes  died  and  a  statue  was  lifted  to  him  in 
a  public  place,  his  envious  antagonist  went  out  every  night  and  wrestled  with  th© 
statue,  until,  one  night,  he  threw  it,  and  it  fell  on  him  and  crushed  him  to  death. 
So  jealousy  is  not  only  absurd,  bat  it  is  killing  to  the  body,  and  it  is  killing  to  the 
Boul.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Ver.  6.  These  that  have  turned  the  world  upside  down  are  come  hither  also. — The 
world  turned  upside  down: — This  is  just  an  old  version  of  an  oft-repeated  story. 
It  was  laid  to  the  charge  of  our  Master  that  He  was  a  stirrer  of  sedition,  whereas 
He  had  refused  to  be  a  king,  for  He  said,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  "  ;  yet 
was  He  crucified  under  the  two  false  charges  of  sedition  and  blasphemy.  The  same 
thing  occurred  with  the  apostles.  This  plan  was  followed  afterwards.  There  was 
never  a  calamity  befell  Rome  but  the  multitude  cried,  "  The  Christians  to  the  Uons  I 
The  Christians  have  done  this."  And  to  this  day  the  world  still  lays  its  ills  at  the 
door  of  the  Christians.  Was  it  not  the  fooHsh  cry  that  the  great  massacre  and 
mutiny  in  Lidia  was  caused  by  the  missionaries  ?  But  the  calumny  is  too  idle  to 
need  a  refutation.  Can  it  be  true,  that  He  whose  gospel  is  love  should  be  the 
fomentor  of  disturbance  ?  Did  He  not  Himsslf  pay  tribute,  and  have  not  His 
followers  at  all  times  been  a  peaceful  generation  ? — save  only  and  except  where  the 
liberty  of  their  conscience  was  touched.  But  still,  as  there  is  many  a  true  word 
spoken  in  jest,  so  there  is  many  a  true  word  spoken  in  malice.  Christ's  gospel  does 
turn  the  world  upside  down.  It  was  the  wrong  way  upwards  before,  and  now  that 
the  gospel  is  preached,  and  when  it  shall  prevail,  it  will  just  set  the  world  right  by 
turning  it  upside  down.  See  this — I.  In  the  wobld  at  lakge.  As  regards — 1. 
Character.  In  the  esteem  of  men,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  something  like  this. 
High  there  on  the  summit  sits  the  great  philosopher,  the  immensely  intellectual 
man.  Just  below  him  there  is  a  class — not  quite  so  skilled,  but  still  exceeding  wise 
— who  look  down  at  those  who  stand  at  the  base  as  the  ignoble  multitude  who  know 
nothing  at  all.  A  little  lower  down,  we  come  to  those  who  seldom  will  be  taught, 
because  they  in  their  own  opinion  know  all  there  is  to  be  learned.  Then  after  them 
come  a  still  larger  number,  who  are  exceeding  wise  in  worldly  wisdom.  Lower  still 
are  those  who  have  just  a  respectable  amount  of  knowledge ;  and  then  at  the  very 
basement  are  the  fool  and  the  babe.  How  wide  the  distinction  between  the 
simpleton  who  forms  the  base,  and  the  wise  man  who  stands  resplendent  at  the 
apex  of  the  pyramid  I  Now,  see  how  Christ  turns  the  world  upside  down.  "  Except 
ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,"  <fec.  "  God  hath  chosen  the  poor  of 
this  world,"  &c.  If  you  wish  to  see  the  world  turned  upside  down  to  perfection, 
turn  to  Matt.  v.  (1)  • '  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  Now,  we  like  a  man  who  has  an  ambitious  spirit,  and  also  a  man  who  has 
a  very  fair  opinion  of  himself.  But  Christ  just  turns  that  upside  down.  The  men 
who  have  no  strength  of  their  own,  but  look  for  aU  to  Christ ;  who  seek  not  to  lift 
their  heads  above  their  fellows  ;  who,  if  they  be  great,  have  greatness  thrust  upon 
them,  but  never  seek  it — ^the  world  says  they  are  soft ;  but  Christ  puts  those  on  the 
top  whom  the  world  puts  at  the  bottom.  (2)  There  is  another  lot  who  are  always 
mourning.  They  do  not  let  you  see  it  often,  but  they  mourn  for  their  own  sin,  and 
then  for  the  sin  of  the  times.  The  world  says  they  are  a  moping,  melancholy  set ; 
but  Christ  turns  the  world  upside  down,  and  those  whom  you  think  to  be  sorrowful, 
are  the  very  ones  who  are  to  rejoice.  Yes,  worldhng,  your  joy  is  like  the  crackling 
of  thorns  under  a  pot.  It  blazeth  a  little,  and  maketh  a  great  noise :  it  is  soon 
done  with.  But  "light  is  sown  for  the  righteous,  and  gladness  for  the  upright  in 
heart."  You  cannot  see  the  light  now,  because  it  is  sown.  But  when  Christ  comes 
to  turn  the  world  upside  down,  they  shall  be  comforted.  (3)  Then  there  is  another 
race  called  "the  meek."  I  know  a  man  who  never  feels  happy  unless  he  has  a  law- 
suit. A  slight  affront  he  would  not  easily  forget.  Now  the  meek  are  of  a  very 
different  disposition.  They  do  not  put  themselves  into  a  passion  on  a  slight  affront, 
for  they  know  that  aU  men  are  imperfect,  and  therefore  think  that  perhaps  their 
brother  made  a  mistake.  They  are  quite  content  to  bear  and  forbear,  and  put  up 
with  a  thousand  injuries  rather  than  inflict  one,  though  people  say,  "  Such  a  man 
as  that  will  never  get  on  ;  he -will  always  be  taken  in;  he  has  no  strength  of  mind." 
Ay,  but  Christ  tarub  it  upside  down,  and  He  says,  "Blessed  are  the  meek,  lor  they 


652  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnv 

shall  inherit  the  earth."  Is  not  that  provoking  to  you  graspers,  you  high-spirited 
people  ?  you  do  it  in  order  that  you  may  inherit  the  earth  :  see  how  Clirist  spites 
you,  and  treads  your  wisdom  under  feet.  After  all,  the  best  way  to  get  our  rights  ia 
to  let  them  alone.  The  safest  way  to  defend  your  character  is  never  to  say  a  word 
about  it.  Our  enemies  cannot  htirt  us,  unless  we  hurt  ourselves.  (4)  Do  you  see 
that  gentleman  who  attends  church,  reads  his  Bible,  and  has  family  prayers?  It 
is  true  that  be  is  hard  upon  his  labourers,  and  exacting  at  times  in  his  payments  ; 
but  does  justice  to  all  men.  This  man  is  on  very  good  terms  with  himself ;  and 
compliments  himself  on  being  a  very  excellent  person.  If  you  speak  to  him  about 
his  state  before  God,  he  says,  that  if  he  does  not  go  to  heaven  nobody  will ;  for  he 
pays  twenty  shillings  in  the  pound,  and  no  one  can  find  any  fault  with  his  character. 
Don't  you  envy  him  ?  Well,  now,  do  you  see  standing  at  the  back  of  the  church 
there  a  poor  woman?  She  dares  not  speak  in  the  presence  of  respectable  persons ; 
but  we  gather  thus  much  from  her :  "She  has  lately  found  out  that  she  is  full  of  sin, 
and  she  desires  to  know  what  she  must  do  to  be  saved.  The  man  stands  at  the 
top  of  the  ladder,  and  this  poor  woman  at  the  bottom.  Now  just  see  the  gospel 
process — the  world  turned  upside  down.  "  Blessed  are  they  which  do  hunger  and 
thirst  after  righteousness  :  for  they  shall  be  filled."  (5)  "  Blessed  are  the  merciful : 
for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."  The  merciful  are  not  much  respected  in  this  world; 
the  man  who  forgives  too  much,  or  who  is  too  generous,  is  not  considered  to  be  wise. 
But  Christ  declares  that  he  who  has  been  merciful  shall  obtain  mercy.  (6)  "Blessed 
are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see  God."  The  world  says,  "  Blessed  is  the 
man  who  indulges  in  a  gay  life."  (7)  And  now  look  at  the  ninth  verse.  You  walk 
through  London,  and  there,  upon  the  very  top  of  the  world,  can  be  seen  the  armless 
sleeve  of  a  Nelson ;  and  there,  in  another  place,  a  duke,  a  mighty  man  of  war. 
But  Christ  says,  "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers ;  for  they  shall  be  called  the 
children  of  God."  Here  is  the  world  turned  upside  down.  The  warrior  with  hia 
garment  stained  in  blood  is  put  into  the  ignoble  earth,  to  die  and  rot ;  but  the 
peacemaker  is  lifted  up,  and  God's  crown  of  blessing  is  put  round  about  his  head. 
(8)  We  find  a  race  who  have  always  been  hated,  about  whom  He  says,  "  Blessed 
are  they  who  are  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  The  whole  of  these  beatitudes  are  just  in  conflict  with  the  world's 
opinion.  2.  Maxims.  "  It  was  said  by  them  of  old  time,  eye  for  eye  and 
tooth  for  tooth  ;  but  I  say  unto  you,  resist  not  evil."  "  Whosoever  would  sue 
thee  at  the  law  and  take  thy  cloak,  let  him  take  thy  coat  also."  "  If  any 
man  smite  thee  on  the  one  cheek,  turn  unto  him  the  other  also."  ••  It  has 
been  said  by  them  of  old  time,  love  thy  neighbour  and  hate  thine  enemy " ; 
but  Jesus  Christ  said,  "Let  love  be  unto  all  men."  We  are  told  that  it  is 
good  to  a  man  to  make  himself  rich,  but  Christ  called  a  certain  rich  man  "  Thou 
fool !  "  You  would  have  made  an  Alderman  of  him  or  a  Lord  Mayor.  3.  Religious 
notions.  The  world's  religion  is — "  Do,  and  thou  shalt  Uve  " ;  Christ's  rehgion  is — 
"Believe  and  Uve."  We  will  have  it,  that  if  a  man  be  righteous,  sober,  upright, 
he  shall  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  Christ  says — This  thou  oughtest  to  have 
done;  but  still,  not  this  can  ever  cleanse  thee.  II.  In  the  heabt.  Man  is  a  little 
world,  and  what  God  does  in  the  outer  world.  He  does  in  the  inner.  If  any  of  you 
would  be  saved,  your  hearts  must  be  turned  upside  down.  1.  Your  judgment. 
Cannot  many  of  you  say  that  which  you  now  believe  to  be  the  truth  of  God  is  very 
far  opposed  to  your  former  carnal  notions  ?  2.  Your  hopes.  They  used  to  be  aU 
for  this  world.  If  you  could  but  get  rich,  be  great  and  honoured,  you  would  be 
happy  I  Now  your  hopes  are  not  on  earth ;  for  where  your  treasure  is,  there  must 
your  heart  be  also.  '6.  Your  pleasures.  You  loved  the  tavern  once ;  you  hate  it 
now.  You  hated  God's  house  once ;  it  is  now  your  much-loved  habitation.  The 
Bong,  the  Sunday  newspaper,  the  lewd  novel — all  these  were  sweet  to  your  taste ; 
but  you  have  burned  the  books  that  once  enchanted  you,  and  now  the  Bible  is  read 
and  delighted  in.  The  Sabbath  was  once  the  dullest  day  of  the  week.  There  are 
Bome  of  you  who  once  loved  nothing  better  than  the  theatre.  You  seek  now  the 
gathering  of  the  righteous.  4.  Your  house.  Look  over  the  mantelpiece.  There 
is  a  vile  daub  of  a  picture  there,  and  the  subject  is  worse  than  the  style  of  the 
thing.  But  when  the  man  follows  Jesus  he  takes  that  down,  and  gets  a  print  of 
Bome  good  old  subject  representing  something  Bibhcal.  There  is  a  pack  of  cards 
and  a  cribbage  board  in  the  cupboard ;  he  turns  them  out,  and  instead  he  puts  there 
good  literature.  The  children  say,  "  Father  is  so  altered."  He  used  to  come  home 
drunk,  and  the  children  used  to  run  upstairs ;  and  now  little  John  and  little  Sarah 
Bit  at  the  window  and  watch  till  he  comes  home.     He  used  to  teach  them  to  siog 


tSHAP.  rra.]  THE  ACTS.  663 

••Begone,  dull  care,"  or  something  worse;  now  he  tells  them  of  "Gentle  Jesua^. 
meek  and  mild."  A  jolly  set  of  companions  he  used  to  have  come  to  see  him  on  a 
Sunday  afternoon;  but  that  is  all  done  with.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Revolution  : — 
The  world  is  wrong-side  up,  and  it  needs  to  be  turned  upside-down  in  order  that  it 
may  be  right-side  up.  The  time  was  when  men  wrote  "Apologies  for  Christianity." 
I  hope  that  day  has  passed.  We  want  no  more  apologies  for  Christianity.  We  do 
not  mean  to  make  any  compromise  in  the  matter.  We  do  not  wish  to  hide  the  fact 
that  Christianity  is  revolutionary,  and  that  its  tendency  is  to  turn  the  world  upside- 
down.  Our  religion  has  often  been  misrepresented  as  though  it  were  a  refined 
imbecility ;  a  spiritual  chloroform.  The  Bible,  so  far  from  this,  represents  it  as 
ransacking  and  upsetting  ten  thousand  things  that  now  seem  to  be  settled  on  firm 
foundations.  I  hear  some  man  say :  ••  I  thought  religion  was  peace."  That  is  the 
final  result.  A  man's  arm  is  out  of  place.  Two  men  come,  and  with  great  effort 
put  it  back  in  the  socket.  It  goes  back  with  great  pain.  Then  it  gets  well.  Our 
world  is  horribly  disordered  and  out  of  joint.  It  must  come  under  an  omnipotent 
surgery,  beneath  which  there  will  be  pain  and  anguish  before  there  can  come  perfect 
health  and  quiet.  The  religion  of  the  Bible  will  make  a  revolution — I.  In  the 
FAMIL1.  Those  things  that  are  wrong  will  be  overthrown  by  it,  while  justice  and 
harmony  will  take  their  place.  The  husband  will  be  head  of  the  household  only  when 
he  is  fit  to  be.  If  the  wife  have  more  of  all  that  is  right,  she  shaU  have  the 
supremacy.  There  is  no  human  or  Divine  law  that  makes  a  woman  subordinate  to 
a  man  unworthy  of  her.  As  religion  comes  in  at  the  front  door,  mirth  and  laughter 
will  not  go  out  at  the  back  door.  John  will  laugh  just  as  loud ;  and  George  will 
jump  higher  than  he  ever  did  before.  It  will  establish  a  family  altar.  Hannah 
will  rear  her  Samuel  for  the  temple  ;  a  Mary  and  Martha,  and  Lazurus  wiU  gather 
in  fraternal  and  sisterly  affection  in  a  home  in  which  Jesus  dwells.  The  religion  of 
Jesus  will  overthrow  aU  jealousies,  all  janglings ;  and  peace,  and  order,  aud  holiness 
wiU  take  possession  of  the  home.  II.  In  commercial  circles.  Find  fifty  merchants, 
and  you  find  fifty  standards  of  what  is  right  and  wrong.  You  say  to  some  one 
about  a  merchant,  "Is  he  honest?"  "Oh  yes,  but  he  grinds  the  faces  of  his 
clerks;  or  he  exaggerates  the  value  of  his  goods,"  &o.  Ah  1  there  is  but  one 
standard  of  the  everlastingly  right  and  wrong,  and  that  is  the  Bible;  and  when  that 
principle  shall  get  its  pry  under  our  commercial  houses,  one  half  of  them  will  go 
over.  "  What  is  the  matter  ?  Has  there  been  a  fall  in  gold  ?  "  ••  No."  "  Has  there 
been  a  new  tariff?"  "No."  "Has  there  been  a  failure  in  crops?"  ''No." 
"Has  there  been  an  unaccountable  panic?"  "No."  The  Lord  has  set  up  His 
throne  of  judgment  in  the  exchange.  What  was  1837  ?  What  was  1857?  What 
was  1869  ?  A  day  of  judgment.  Do  you  think  that  God  is  going  to  wait  until  He 
has  burned  the  world  up  before  He  rights  these  wrongs  ?  The  fraudulent  man  piles 
up  his  gains  until  his  property  has  become  a  great  pyramid ;  and  as  he  stands  looking 
at  it  he  thinks  it  can  never  be  destroyed ;  but  the  Lord  pushes  it  all  over.  You 
build  a  house,  and  you  put  into  it  a  rotten  beam.  The  house  is  completed.  Soon 
it  begins  to  rock.  You  caU  in  the  mechanics  and  ask,  "  What  is  the  matter?  " 
Says  the  mechanic,  '•  You  put  a  rotten  beam  into  that  structure,  and  the  whole 
thing  has  got  to  come  down."  Here  is  an  estate  that  seems  to  be  all  right  now. 
It  has  been  building  a  great  many  years.  But  fifteen  years  ago  there  was  a  dishonest 
transaction,  and  that  will  keep  on  working  ruin  until  down  the  estate  wiU  come  in 
wreck  and  ruin  about  the  possessor's  ears.  I  have  seen  it  again  and  again.  The 
time  will  come  when,  through  the  revolutionary  power  of  this  gospel,  a  falsehood, 
instead  of  being  called  exaggeration,  equivocation,  or  evasion,  will  be  branded  a 
lie  1  And  stealings,  that  now  sometimes  go  under  the  head  of  percentages,  and 
commissions,  and  bonuses,  will  be  put  into  the  catalogue  of  state-prison  offences. 
Society  will  be  turned  upside  down,  until  business  dishonesties  shall  come  to  an 
end.  III.  In  oob  churches.  The  non-committal,  do-nothing  policy  will  give  way 
to  a  spirit  of  bravest  conquest.  Fiety  in  this  day  is  salted  down  just  so  as  to  keep. 
The  Church  is  chiefly  anxious  to  take  care  of  itself  ;  and  if  we  hear  of  want,  and 
squalour,  and  heathenism  outside,  we  say,  ••  What  a  pity !  "  and  we  put  our  hands 
in  our  pockets,  and  we  feel  around  for  a  two-cent  piece,  and  with  a  great  flourish 
we  put  it  upon  the  plate,  and  are  amazed  that  the  world  is  not  converted  in  six 
weeks.  Suppose  there  were  a  great  war ;  and  there  were  three  hundred  thousand 
soldiers,  but  all  except  ten  men  were  in  their  tents,  or  scouring  their  muskets,  or 
cooking  rations.  You  would  say,  "  Of  course,  defeat  must  come  in  that  case." 
Millions  of  the  professed  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ  are  cooking  rations,  or  asleep  in 
their  tents,  while  only  one  man  here  and  there  goes  oat  to  do  battle  for  the  Lord. 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rra. 

•'  But,"  says  some  one,  "we  are  establishing  a  great  many  missions."  Yes,  and 
they  are  doing  a  magnificent  work ;  but  every  mission-chapel  is  a  confession  of  the 
disease  and  weakness  of  the  Church.  It  is  saying  to  the  rich,  "  If  you  can  pay 
pew-rents,  come  to  the  main  audience-room."  It  is  saying  to  the  poor,  "  Tour  coat 
is  too  bad,  and  your  shoes  are  not  good  enough.  You  will  have  to  go  by  the  way  of 
the  mission-chapel."  The  mission-chapel  has  become  the  kitchen,  where  the 
Church  does  its  sloppy  work.  There  are  hundreds  of  churches — gorgeously  built 
and  supported — that,  even  on  bright  days,  are  not  half  full ;  and  yet  they  are 
building  mission-chapels,  because  the  great  masses  of  the  people  are  kept  out  of  the 
main  audience -room.  Now  I  say  that  any  place  of  worship  which  is  appropriate 
for  one  class  is  appropriate  for  all  classes.  Let  the  rich  and  the  poor  meet  together 
the  Lord,  the  Maker  of  them  all.  Eevolution  !  The  pride,  the  exclusiveness,  the 
financial  boastings  of  the  Church  must  come  down  1  It  may  be  that,  before  the 
Church  learns  its  duty  to  the  masses,  God  will  scourge  it  and  drive  out  the  money- 
changers. It  may  be  that  there  is  to  be  a  great  day  of  upsetting  before  that  time 
shall  come.  In  that  future  day  of  the  reconstructed  Church  of  Christ,  the  church 
building  will  be  the  most  cheerful  of  all  buildings.  The  pure  atmosphere  of  heaven 
will  sweep  out  the  fetid  atmosphere  that  has  been  kept  in  many  of  our  churches 
boxed  up  from  Sunday  to  Sunday.  The  day  of  which  I  speak  will  be  a  day  of  great 
revivals.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  charge  of  sedition  and  faction 
against  good  men,  especially  faithful  ministers,  considered  and  accounted  for : — 
In  discoursing  upon  this  subject,  it  is  proposed,  through  the  assistance  of 
Divine  grace — I.  By  a  short  historical  deduction  to  show  that  the  chabacteb 
OF   seditious,   teoublesome,   and   disorderly,  hath   been   constantly  given  by 

WICKED    MEN    TO    THE    SERVANTS    OF    GoD.        It    WOUld     HOt     be    diflficult    tO    point    OUt 

something  of  this  spirit  prevailing  in  the  world,  from  the  life  of  almost 
every  good  man  whose  name  stands  upon  record,  however  short  and  general  the 
account  be  that  is  given  of  many  of  them  in  Scripture.  I  shall  content  myself  with 
some  leading  instances,  in  very  different  ages,  from  the  earliest  to  the  latest  times. 
The  first  I  shall  mention  is  1  Kings  xviii.  17.  Another  instance  may  be  found  in 
Jehoshaphat  and  Ahab's  consultation  before  going  out  to  battle  (1  Kings  xxii.  7,  8). 
Here,  you  see,  Micaiah  was  the  object  of  aversion  because  he  denounced  the 
judgment  of  God  against  the  king's  wickedness.  See  an  instance  of  a  general 
accusation  of  this  kind  against  all  the  worshippers  of  the  true  God  by  Haman 
(Esther  iii.  8).  The  prophet  Jeremiah  met  with  the  same  treatment  at  different 
times.  Neither  prince,  nor  priests,  nor  prophets,  were  able  to  bear  without  resent- 
ment the  threatenings  which  he  denounced  in  the  name  of  God  (Jer.  xxvi.  8,  9,  11, 
xxxvii.  13,  xxxviii.  4).  The  prophet  Amos  is  another  instance,  precisely  parallel  to 
the  last.  Because  of  his  fidelity  to  God  he  was  invidiously  represented  as  an  enemy 
to  the  king  (Amos  vii.  10).  Our  Lord  fell  under  the  same  accusation.  How- 
ever plain  and  artless  His  carriage.  He  is  called  a  deceiver  of  the  people  (John  vii. 
12).  His  enemies  endeavoured  to  embroil  Him  with  the  civil  government  by  this 
insidious  question,  "  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to  Caisar  or  not  ?  "  And  that  which 
brought  Him  at  last  to  the  Cross  was  the  same  pretended  crime  (John  xix.  12).  I 
shall  close  this  view  of  the  Scripture  history  with  the  passage  of  which  my  text  is 
a  part.  The  whole  crime  of  the  Apostle  Paul  and  his  companion  was  preaching 
the  doctrine  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  his  great  and  darUng  theme.  Having  produced 
these  instances  from  Scripture,  which  is  liable  to  no  exception,  I  shall  say  but  little 
on  the  subsequent  periods  of  the  Church.  Whoever  will  take  the  pains  to  look 
into  the  history  of  the  Church  before  the  Reformation,  cannot  fail  to  observe,  that 
when  any  one,  either  among  the  clergy  or  laity,  was  bold  enough  to  reprove  the 
errors  in  doctrine,  or  the  ambition,  luxury,  and  worldly  lives  of  his  contemporaries, 
he  was  immediately  branded  as  a  factious  and  disorderly  person,  and  often  severely 
punished  as  an  enemy  to  the  peace  of  the  Church.  H.  We  proceed  now  to  inquire. 
What  it  is  in  true  religion  that  gives  occasion  to  this  charge,  and  makes  thk 
WORLD  prone  to  BELIEVE  IT.  1.  The  example  of  the  servants  of  God  is  a  continual 
and  sensible  reproach  to  the  contrary  conduct  of  the  men  of  the  world.  As  a 
deceived  heart  turns  the  wicked  aside,  so  the  continuance  of  self-deceit  is  necessary 
to  his  tasting  those  pleasures  of  sin  in  which  his  mistaken  happiness  is  placed.  To 
reproach  his  conduct,  therefore,  is  to  disturb  his  dream,  and  to  wound  his  peace. 
And  as  pride,  however  finely  disguised,  has  the  dominion  in  every  unrenewed  heart, 
how  offensive  must  every  species  of  reproof  be  to  men  of  this  character?  Now,  is 
not  the  examjile  of  every  pood  man  a  severe  though  silent  reproof  to  the  wicked? 
And,  as  every  worldly  man's  own  conscience  is  thus  made  troublesome  to  him  by 


CHAP,  xm.]  TEE  ACTS.  £55 

the  example  of  the  children  of  God,  so  it  tends  to  set  sinners  at  variance  with  one 
another,  and  exposes  the  conduct  of  each  to  the  censure  of  the  rest.     Sin,  however 
universally  practised,  is  yet  generally  shameful.     Conscience  though  bribed,  and 
comparatively  blind  in  a  man's  own  case,  is  often  just  and  impartial,  at  least  under 
far  less  bias  in  the  case  of  others.     It  is  in  this  way,  and  in  this  way  alone,  that  the 
public  honour  and  credit  of  religion  is  preserved  amidst  so  great  a  majority  who  are 
enemies  to  it  in  their  hearts.     Must  not,  then,  the  example  of  a  strict  and  con- 
scientious person,  set  in  the  strongest  light  the  faults  of  those  who  act  a  contrary 
part,  so  often  as  they  happen  to  fall  under  observation  together.     Nay,  does  it  not 
open  the  ejes  of  the  world  upon  many  lesser  blemishes  which  would  otherwise 
escape  its  notice  ?     2.  Another  reason  why  the  servants  of  God  are  represented  as 
troublesome  is,  because  they  will  not,  and  dare  not,  comply  with  the  sinful  command- 
ments of  men.     In  matters  merely  civil,  good  men  are  the  most  regular  citizens  and 
the  most  obedient  subjects.    But,  as  they  have  a  Master  in  heaven,  no  earthly 
power  can  constrain  them  to  deny  His  name  or  desert  His  cause  (chap.  iv.  19). 
With  what  invincible  constancy  did  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego  refuse  to 
bow  before  Nebuchadnezzar's  golden  image?     The  case  of  Daniel  was  perfectly 
similar,  whom  even  the  king's  commandment  could  not  restrain  from  prayer  to  God. 
There  is  a  love  of  dominion  natural  to  all  men,  which  is  under  no  control  or  re- 
straint in  those  who  are  void  of  religion.     This  must  naturally  dispose  them  to  carry 
on  their  schemes,  and  to  insist  on  having  them  universally  complied  with.     It  frets 
and  provokes  them,  therefore,  to  find  any  who  will  not  be  subservient  to  their 
pleasures.    How  few  are  able  to  bear  this  with  patience,  the  history  of  the  world 
in  every  age  is  one  continued  proof.     Such  refusals,  also,  do  always  reflect  some 
dishonour  upon  the  measures  to  which  they  stand  in  opposition.     Whatever  any 
person  refuses  to  do,  he,  as  far  as  in  him  Ues,  represents  as  wrong  and  sinful ;  and, 
in  some  respects,  unworthy  or  unfit  to  be  done.     Thus  it  comes  to  be  considered, 
not  only  as  withdrawing  his  own  allegiance,  but  as  corrupting  and  seducing  others. 
3.  One  other  reason  why  the  servants  of  God  are  accused  as  troublesome  is,  because 
they  are,  in  many  instances,  obliged  to  bear  testimony  against  the  sins  of  others, 
and  openly  to  reprove  them  (Lev.  xix.  17).     Some  sins  are  so  flagrant  in  their 
nature,  that  even  to  witness  them  with  silence  would  imply  some  participation  of 
the  guilt.     In  such  cases  it  is  the  glory  of  the  poorest  and  meanest  servant  of  God 
to  resent  the  dishonour  that  is  done  to  His  name,  and  reprove  the  most  exalted 
sinner.      But  this  duty,  and  the  odium  arising  from  it,  falls  most  frequently  to  the 
share  of  the  prophets  and  ministers  of  God,  who  have  received  a  commission  to 
speak  in  His  name  and  to  plead  His  cause.     How  offensive  this  to  human  pride  I 
It  must  certainly  either  convince  or  provoke,  reform  or  inflame.     How  many  martyrs 
to  truth  have  there  been  since  the  world  began  !     But  there  cannot  be  a  better 
example,  or  indeed  a  more  lively  and  weU-drawn  picture  of  the  efi'eot  of  plain  and 
just  reproof,  than  in  the  case  of  Stephen  when  pleading  his  cause  before  the  Jewish 
rulers  (chap.  vii.  51,  52,  54).     It  is  plainly  for  this  reason  that  the  apostles,  in  their 
prayers  for  assistance,  do  almost  constantly  ask  that  they  may  be  endued  with  a 
proper  degree  of  boldness  and  resolution  (chap.  iv.  29 ;  Eph.  viL  19 ;  2  Thess.  iii. 
2).     It  is  very  natural  for  every  one,  at  this  distance,  to  imagine  that  he  could  have 
been  in  no  danger  of  making  such  an  obstinate  resistance  to  the  truth,  or  perse- 
<5Uting,  with  such  implacable  enmity,  those  who  espoused  it.    But  all  worldly  men,  in 
every  age,  have  still  the  same  abhorrence  of  the  faithful  servants  of  God ;  the  same 
impatience  of  reproof  when  it  touches  themselves.    I  have  taken  notice  above  that 
in  every  period  of  the  Church,  the  most  faithful  of  the  servants  and  ministers  of 
God  have,  in  fact,  been  counted  troublesome  by  corrupt  and  worldly  men.     The 
same  passages  of  history  constantly  show  that  this  has  arisen  chiefly  from  their 
attempts  to  stem  the  tide  of  prevailing  vice  ;  from  their  boldness  and  faithfulness 
in  reproving  fashionable  crimes.     In  the  twelfth  century,  Arnulphus,  a  devout  man 
and  excellent  preacher,  speaks  thus  to  the  clergy  :  "  I  know  that  you  seek  my  life, 
and  will  shortly  kill  me.   But  why  ?    I  speak  the  truth  to  you,  I  reprehend  your 
pride  and  haughtiness,  avarice  and  luxury;   therefore  I  please  you  not."     III. 
Practicai,  improvement.     1.  You  may  learn  from  what  has  been  said  upon  this 
subject  the  just  and  proper  answer  to  an  objection  against  the  gospel,  much  insisted 
on  by  its  enemies,  viz.,  That  it  has  introduced  persecution  for  conscience'  sake, 
with  which  the  world  was  in  a  great  measure  unacquainted  before.     There  are  few 
subjects  on  which  infidels  enlarge  with  greater  pleasure,  than  the  cruel  animosity 
that  has  prevailed,  the  savage  and  inhuman  massacres  that  have  been  perpetrated 
on  a  religious  account  since  the  pubhcation  of  the  gospel.    I  think  this  objection  ia 


556  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

but  seldom  answered  as  it  might  be.  It  is  usually  observed  that  whatever  may 
have  been  done  by  those  professing  the  gospel,  there  is  no  countenance  given  in  it 
to  such  a  spirit  and  practice.  But  the  objection  is  not  wholly  removed  while  infidela 
are  allowed  still  to  contend  that  persecution  has  been  its  constant  attendant  and 
inseparable  effect.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  wrest  this  argument  out  of  their  hands, 
and  first  to  produce  this  fact  as  an  accomplishment  of  our  Saviour's  prediction 
(Matt.  X.  34-3G).  Having  gone  thus  far,  we  have  reason  to  contend  that  the 
disciples  of  Christ  have  always  suffered,  and  never  inflicted  the  injury,  though  tbey 
have  often  been  obliged  to  bear  the  blame.  The  multitude  of  heathen  religions, 
though  not  always,  yet  did  generally  agree  together :  and  well  they  might,  for  they 
V7ere  all  from  the  same  author.  None  of  them,  however,  could  agree  with  the 
gospel,  for  this  plain  reason,  that  "  no  lie  is  of  the  truth."  But  from  what  quarter 
did  the  violence  proceed  ?  Did  not  the  dreadful  persecutions  against  the  Christians, 
in  the  three  first  centuries,  proceed  from  the  heathens  ?  Did  the  Christians  commit 
any  other  crime  against  them,  than  pointing  out  the  sin  and  danger  of  their 
idolatrous  worship  and  immoral  practices  ?  Was  not  this  alone  sufficient  to  raise  a 
cry  against  them,  as  turning  the  world  upside  down  ?  And  in  all  the  subsequent 
persecutions  among  professing  Christians,  was  it  anything  else  than  the  proud, 
violent,  and  worldly  spirit  of  those  who  made  a  gain  of  godliness,  oppressing  the 
few  real  believers  of  every  denomination  ?  2.  From  what  hath  been  said  you  may 
see  the  guilt  and  danger  of  those  who  falsely  accuse  the  children  of  God.  Nay,  our 
present  state  as  a  Church  and  nation,  seems  to  render  such  a  warning  peculiarly 
seasonable.  We  have  long  enjoyed  outward  peace.  In  every  other  country  this 
has  introduced  a  worldly  spirit,  ambition,  luxury,  and  sloth.  And  is  there  no  vestige 
of  these  characters  among  us  now  ?  Are  there  not  some  who  cannot  endure  such 
strictness  as  is  inconsistent  with  conformity  to  the  gay  and  fashionable  world ?  Do 
not  all  such  incline  to  charge  every  profession  of  piety  with  hypocrisy  ?  Do  they 
not  consider  every  faithful  reprover  as  an  enemy  to  their  peace  ?  Do  they  not  hear 
with  secret  pleasure,  and  spread  with  apparent  triumph,  every  report  to  the  preju- 
dice of  such  troublers  of  Israel  ?  This,  then,  is  the  character,  and  as  many  of  you  as 
conscience  charges  with  the  guilt  may  see  your  danger.  You  may  see  whose  cause 
you  plead,  and  whose  reward  you  shall  share.  3.  If  this  has  been  the  constant  lot 
of  all  the  servants  of  God,  to  be  accused  as  seditious  and  troublesome,  let  every 
cautious  person  beware  of  being  misled  by  the  persecuting  cry.  4.  Since  the  world 
is  so  prone  to  receive  the  accusation  of  faction  against  the  children  of  God,  let  them 
be  careful  to  give  no  real  ground  for  it.  (1)  Let  all  our  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God  be 
conducted,  not  only  with  steadiness  but  with  meekness,  (2)  Let  ministers  take  care 
to  avoid  officiously  intermeddling  in  civil  matters.  5.  Since  the  charge  of  faction 
and  sedition  has  been  always  brought  against  faithful  ministers,  let  us  learn  to  bear 
it  with  patience  and  never  dissemble  the  truth,  or  depart  in  any  measure  from  our 
duty  in  order  to  avoid  it.     {J.  With rr spoon,  D.D.)  The  icorld  turned  upside 

down  : — We  may  regard  the  words  in  three  points  of  view.     I.  As  an  expression  of 

THE  deep-seated  HOSTILITY  OF  THE  HUMAN  HEART   AGAINST    THE    GOSPEL.       The  lOVB  of 

God — the  service  of  God — the  glory  of  God — the  actual  intercourse  of  the  soul  with 
God,  are  all  in  complete  repugnance  to  the  emotions  and  tastes  of  general  society  : 
therefore  such  a  religion  must  be  opposed  and  decried.  But  how  shall  this  be  done  ? 
It  is  too  palpable  a  thing  to  say  that  we  ought  not  to  love  God,  or  serve  Him 
sincerely ;  but  rather  to  be  satisfied  with  a  mere  dead  form  of  religion.  Such 
language  were  too  palpable  an  insult  to  the  rights  of  Deity.  To  what  delusion,  then, 
must  they  have  recourse  in  this  perplexity  ?  The  difficulty  has  been  met  in  this 
way.  They  affix  a  reproachful  term  to  true  religion,  and  then  they  proceed  to 
decry  it,  under  the  shelter  of  that  term.  Thus  they  soothe  their  conscience  under 
the  sophistical  delusion  that  it  is  error,  rather  than  truth,  which  they  oppose.  11. 
As  A  VERIFICATION  OF  THB  TRUTH  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  "  The  time  wiU  come,"  are  the 
words  of  its  great  Author  to  His  little  band  of  brethren,  "  when  he  that  killeth  you 
will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service."  "  Ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  men  for  My 
name's  sake,"  is  another  of  His  predictions.  "  All  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ 
Jesus,  must  suffer  persecution."  III.  Aa  the  unwitting  testimony  of  enemies  to 
THE  POWER  AND  DESIGN  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  They  Said  that  the  apostles  were  revolu- 
tionists, disturbers  of  the  peace,  preachers  of  another  king — "  one  Jesus,"  Politi- 
cally, this  was  a  gross  falsehood  :  evangelically,  it  was,  and  still  is,  true.  Sin  has 
turned  away  the  heart  of  man,  his  face,  and  feet,  and  hands,  from  God ;  and  the 
gospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  by  which  the  entire  moral  nature  of  man 
is  to  be  changed  and  converted  from  darkness  to  light — from  sin  to  holiness — from 


CHAP,  xvn.)  THE  ACTS.  65T 

alienation  to  friendship — and  from  the  vassalage  of  Satan  nnto  liberty  and  life. 
(American    National   Preacher.)  The    gospel  a   revolution : — I.    The    gospeii 

CBEATES  A  DisTDBBANCE.  1.  Internally — in  men's  hearts.  2.  Externally — in  their 
social  relations.  11.  The  object  of  this  disturbance.  1.  Not  the  subversion,  but 
the  conversion  of  the  world.  2.  Not  its  destruction,  but  its  salvation.  {W.  W. 
Wythe.)  Christianity  a  revolution  : — I.  The  beoadest  the  world  has  ever  seen. 
1.  By  its  breadth,  it  aims  at  the  whole  world.  2.  By  its  depth,  the  territory  of  the 
spirit.  II.  The  most  legitimate.  1.  By  its  aim,  the  salvation  of  the  world.  2. 
By  the  means  employed,  the  weapons  of  the  Spirit.  {K.  Gerok.)  The  revolu- 
tionary spirit  of  Christianity : — I.  The  world  is  wrong  side  up.  U.  It  wants 
turning  upsidb  down.  III.  Wb  abb  the  men  to  do  it.  {Early  Methodist 
Sermon.) 

Ver.  7.  These  do  all  contrary  to  the  decrees  of  Caesar,  saying  that  there  Is  another 
King,  one  Jesus. — Christ  versus  Ccesar : — Thessalonica,  though  a  free  city,  was  yet 
under  imperial  government,  and  the  Jews  therefore  appeal  to  the  emperor's  decree, 
probably  to  the  edict  of  Claudius  (chap,  xviii.  2),  as  at  least  showing  the  drift  of 
the  emperor's  policy,  even  though  it  was  not  strictly  binding  except  in  Eome  and 
the  colonia.  This,  however,  might  prove  an  insufiBcient  weapon  of  attack,  and 
therefore  they  add  another  charge,  to  which  no  magistrate  throughout  the  empire 
could  be  indifferent  (Luke  xxiii.  2  ;  John  xix.  12).  The  preachers  were  not  only 
bringing  in  a  relligio  illicita,  but  were  guilty  of  treason  against  the  majesty  of  the 
empire ;  they  said  there  was  "  another  King."  It  is  clear  from  the  Epistle  to  the 
Thessalonians  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  specially  His  second  coming  as 
King,  had  been  very  prominent  in  the  apostle's  teaching  (1  Thess.  iv.  14,  v.  2,  23  ; 
2  Thess.  i.  7,  8,  ii.  1-12),  and  this  may  have  furnished  materials  for  the  accusation. 
{Dean  Plumptre.)  The  King  of  kings : — I.  His  peesonal  attractions.  "  There 
is  another  King,  one  Jesus,"  who  is  "  fairer  than  the  children  of  men."  Oh,  how 
great  is  His  beauty !  U.  His  begal  gbandextr.  He  is  Lord  of  both  the  dead  and 
the  living.  HI.  The  blessedness  ot  His  subjects.  IV.  His  duration.  "  His 
name  shall  be  continued  as  long  as  the  sun."  {R.  C.  Dillon,  D.D.)  The  King  of 
kings,  contrasted  with  the  kings  of  the  earth : — I.  The  dignity  of  His  pebson.  II. 
The  extent  of  His  empire.  All  created  things  are  His.  HI.  The  blessedness 
AND  SECUBITY  OF  His  SUBJECTS.  Who  are  so — 1.  Safe.  2.  Free.  3.  Eich.  IV. 
The  duration  of  His  beign.  "He  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."  {W,  Jay.) 
Jesus  a  King  (children's  sermon) : — 1.  What  a  blank  would  be  produced  if  all  we 
know  about  kings  and  queens  were  destroyed  I  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  all  have 
been  like  our  own  good  Queen  Victoria.  What  we  know  of  kings  and  queens  ought 
to  make  as  very  grateful  that  we  live  xmder  such  a  reign.  2.  Do  not  suppose  that 
there  are  not  any  kings  or  queens  but  such  as  wear  crowns.  If  a  boy  does  what  is 
right,  serves  and  loves  God,  he  is  a  king.  If  a  girl  is  gentle,  wise,  pure,  dutiful, 
she  has  graces  which  make  her  queenly.  Kingly  qualities  have  often  been  developed 
by  the  ordinary  trades  of  life.  The  walks  of  hterature  also  have  produced  many.  So 
that  in  the  history  of  the  world  we  have  had  more  monarchs  without  crowns  than 
with.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  King — I.  On  the  ground  of  bight.  He  had  the  right 
of  the  Father's  appointment.  We  do  not  question  the  right  of  Moses  to  the  leader- 
ship, or  of  David  to  kingship,  or  of  St.  Paul  to  the  apostleship,  because  they  received 
their  offices  from  God.  And  it  is  quite  as  certain  that  Jesus  received  kingship  from 
the  same  power.  "  Yet  have  I  set  My  King  upon  My  holy  hill  of  Zion."  H. 
Because  of  His  pebfeot  qualifications  fob  the  begal  position.  This  is  a  great 
deal  more  than  can  be  said  about  all  kings.  If  experience  and  knowledge,  if  tender- 
ness and  power,  if  majesty  and  condescension,  if  dignity  and  humility,  if  wisdom 
and  wealth,  and  if  royal  lineage  and  great  personal  virtues,  can  show  qualification 
for  government,  then  Jesus  has  such  qualification  without  limit.  "  It  pleased  the 
Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell."  IIL  Because  He  has  the  hearty 
approval  of  His  subjects.  No  king  ever  yet  had  the  free,  intelligent  good-will  of 
his  people  so  fully  accorded  him.  Convene  a  meeting  of  all  His  subjects,  not  any 
of  the  crowned  heads  of  Europe  would  secure  one  vote  from  the  subjects  of  Jesus, 
in  opposition  to  His  monarchy.  Every  voter  would  say,  "  Jesus  only,  our  King." 
IV.  Because  He  issues  law  to  His  people,  and  maintains  bespect  fob  and  obedi* 
ENCE  to  the  law  He  ISSUES.  What  mighty  contrasts  exist  between  the  laws  of 
earthly  sovereigns  and  those  of  Jesus  I  Human  laws  affect  nations ;  Divine  laws 
af  8  for  and  affect  everybody.  Human  laws  have  to  be  altered  to  suit  altered  circum- 
staaces,  but  "  one  jot  or  one  tittle  of  His  word  shall  not  fail."    Laws  here  have  beea 


558  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

founded  in  error  ;  Christ's  are  founded  in  eternal  truth.  Laws  are  frequently  hard 
to  interpret  correctly,  and  men  of  plain,  simple  minds,  as  well  as  astute  lawyers, 
have  made  mistakes.  Christ's  laws  are  aU  easy,  simple,  and  plain.  V.  Becadsb 
He  has  power  to  enfokoe  His  will.  No  king,  however  large  his  army,  or  how- 
ever great  his  power,  ever  had  the  might  that  Jesus  has.  VI.  Because  Hb  hab  k 
LARGE  RETINUE  OF  ILLUSTRIOUS  PERSONS.  The  retiuue  King  Jesus  has,  and  will  have, 
will  far  surpass  anything  of  the  sort  ever  seen  upon  our  earth — Abel,  Noah,  Abraham, 
David,  &o.  Yes,  patriarchs  looked  forward  to  His  day  ;  prophets  gladly  announced 
His  coming ;  kings  and  poets  wrote  of  Him,  and  angels  ministered  unto  Him. 
And  now,  as  His  chariot  appears,  they  all  say,  "  There  is  another  King,  one  Jesus." 
Look  at  the  chariot.  It  is  called  the  gospel.  Its  wheels  are  capable  of  travelling 
over  any  sort  of  roads,  rough  or  smooth,  hard  or  soft ;  through  woods,  across  seas, 
or  over  deserts.  The  chariot  itself  is  so  strong  that  not  all  the  powers  of  men  and 
devils  can  break  it.  No  time  can  cause  it  to  decay,  nor  can  any  element  impair  its 
beauty.  It  is  lined  within  and  without  with  promises.  It  is  so  full  of  provisions 
that  not  the  supply  of  all  the  wants  of  all  men  can  possibly  produce  deficiency. 
And  then  this  chariot  is  so  large  that  there  is  room  for  all :  and  all  who  ride  do  so 
free  of  charge.  Then,  what  steeds  are  drawing  this  chariot !  The  one  is  called 
"  Love  abounding,"  and  the  other  "  Zeal  undying  "  ;  and  they  never  tire.  But 
neither  chariot  nor  horses  are  half  so  wonderful  as  King  Jesus,  the  occupant  of  this 
chariot  (Rev,  1. 13).  On  the  procession  moves  ;  and  the  illustrious  ones  following  are 
as  grand  and  even  more  numerous  than  such  as  preceded.  Here  come  the  apostles, 
martyrs,  reformers,  Ac,  Ac.  There  is  no  wisdom  so  wise,  no  goodness  bo  great, 
nor  any  act  so  becoming,  as  to  join  whilst  we  are  young  the  retinue  of  King  Jesus. 
This  is  done  by  giving  our  hearts  to  Him.  Joseph  joined  when  but  a  boy.  Samuel 
also,  and  David,  and  Timothy.  VII.  Because  He  takes  a  deep  personal  interest 
IN  the  elevation  and  good  of  all  Hib  subjects.  All  kings  have  not  done  so. 
Some  have  asked  only  how  they  could  increase  their  possessions  or  dignity.  Note 
the  marks  of  the  interest  monarchs  take  in  their  subjects.  1.  The  sacrifices  they 
make  in  their  behalf.  Look  then  at  the  sacrifices  made  by  Jesus  for  all  His  people. 
2.  Their  gladness  when  the  people  are  contented  and  prosperous ;  and  their 
tenderness  and  sympathy  when  calamity  comes  upon  them.  A  king  should  be  the 
reflex,  or  counterpart,  of  his  people.  This,  I  am  sure,  is  what  Jesus  is ;  when  His 
subjects  are  in  suffering.  He  says,  "  Fear  not,  I  will  uphold  thee  "  ;  and  when  He 
has  turned  their  sorrow  into  joy.  He  says,  "  Let  the  children  of  Zion  be  joyful  in 
their  King."  VIII.  Because  He  gives  access  to  His  people.  The  power  of  an 
earthly  king  to  do  this  is  limited  ;  and  those  who  approach  earthly  thrones  can  only 
do  so  at  great  cost.  But  Jesus  allows  all  His  subjects  to  approach  Him  at  all 
times,  and  without  expense.  IX.  Because  He  has  a  large  revenue.  "  As  rich  as 
a  king  "  is  quite  a  proverb.  Boys  and  girls  may  well  wonder  where  the  king  gets 
all  his  money  from.  It  is  from  taxes  1  Jesus  is  by  far  the  richest  king  that  ever 
occupied  a  throne.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof."  But  He 
is  not  dependent  upon  gold  for  the  progress  of  His  kingdom.  In  His  treasury  there 
are  contributions  of  greater  value.  Prayer,  praise,  holy  living,  zeal.  X,  Because 
He  protects  the  rights  and  liberties  op  His  subjects.  Does  He  not  say  to  all, 
"  Touch  not  Mine  anointed,  and  do  My  prophets  no  harm  "  ?  I  know  that  sometimes 
it  looks  as  though  He  gave  them  up  to  the  power  of  their  enemies.  It  looked  as 
though  He  had  forgotten  Joseph,  Daniel,  &c.  ;  but  the  issue  showed  how  well  they 
were  cared  for.  XI.  Because  He  has  royal  favours  to  bestow.  In  all  countries 
kings  have  been  noted  for  this.  Warriors,  legislators,  poets,  philanthropists,  tlie 
great,  the  wealthy,  and  the  learned,  are  they  who  carry  off  royal  honours  ;  and  should 
royal  favours  come  down  to  the  poor  and  indigent  in  any  great  measure,  what  a  stir 
and  to-do  would  be  made  about  it  I  Jesus  carries  oft  the  palm  in  this  department. 
He  restricts  not  His  favours  to  any  privileged  class ;  like  the  sunlight,  they  fall 
with  equal  beauty  and  energy  upon  the  brow  of  the  poor  and  of  the  wealthy ;  like 
the  dew,  they  descend  with  equal  power  upon  the  cottage  and  the  palace  home. 
What  are  the  favoura  of  Eling  Jesus?  1.  Pardon  for  all  Bin.  "He  is  exalted  a 
Prince  and  a  Saviour,"  Ac.  2.  Purity  of  heart  and  life.  8.  Grace,  according  to 
the  wants  of  His  people.  4.  A  valid  title  to  heaven,  and  its  possession  at  death. 
For  these  gifts  the  world's  gold,  valour,  industry,  wisdom,  are  all  in  vain ;  and  so 
for  each  one  we  mast  say,  "  Now,  thanks  be  unto  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift." 

ij.  Ooodacre.)        Jesus,  "  another  King  "  : — As  compared  with  earthly  sovereigns, 
fesuB  is  another  King;  for  He  is  one — I.  Contemplating  bxclubivelt  bpiritual 
SOUiHiOH.    Elarthly  monarohs  aspire  after  territorial  dominion,  and  are  accounted 


CHAP,  rra.]  THE  ACTS.  569 

monarchs  because  they  possess  it.  Christ's  kingdom  has  its  seat  in  the  soul.  IT. 
Claimtnq  rightfully  DNQUALiFtED  OBEDIENCE.  Of  what  earthly  sovereign  can  it  be 
said  that  he  rightfully  claims  unqualified  obedience  ?  He  justly  demands  unquali- 
fied obedience — 1.  In  right  of  His  position.  He  is  King  of  kings  :  obedience  cannot 
be  withheld  from  Him  on  the  plea  that  there  is  a  higher  power  we  must  first  consult. 

2.  In  right  of  the  equity  of  His  government.  His  service  is  always  "  reasonable," 
His  honour  and  our  interests  never  reaUy  clash.  3.  In  right  of  His  grace.  He  ia 
the  Saviour.  Obedience  cannot  be  withheld  from  Him  on  the  plea  that  we  owe 
Him  but  little.  III.  Secdbino  infallibly  heartfelt  homage.  If  admission  be 
granted  to  the  presence  of  an  earthly  sovereign,  how  often  is  the  homage  rendered 
to  him  nothing  more  than  compliance  with  a  state  ceremony !  Jesus  ia  "  another 
King. "  He  rules  by  love,  He  wins  the  heart.  IV.  Expecting  confidently  uifrvERSAL 
EBiPiRE.  {J.  T.  Poulter,  B.A.)  The  risen  Christ  as  King  : — 1.  "  There  is  another 
King."  Alas  I  for  the  world,  alas !  for  us  all,  if  there  be  not.  The  hope  of  the 
world  ia  a  Christendom  in  which  Christ  shall  reign.  A  Christendom  in  which  He 
does  not  reign  we  see,  and  have  seen  enough  of.  Men  are  getting  weary  of  the 
preaching  of  Jesus  and  His  gospel,  while  Christian  races  are  wasted  by  vice,  poverty, 
and  war.  Along  with  all  our  Christianity  we  still  need  men  to  preach  "  another 
King,  one  Jesus  " ;  to  whom  all  the  selfishness  of  our  politics,  the  craft  of  our 
diplomacy,  the  fierce  contention  of  our  industry,  are  hateful ;  a  King  who  has  left 
"A  new  commandment.  That  ye  love  one  another,"  and  in  one  aspiration,  "  That 
they  all  may  be  one,"  the  key  to  His  hope  and  effort  for  mankind.  The  world  has 
yet  to  try  what  Jesus  can  do  for  it.  2.  Christ  foretold  that  His  method  would  try 
the  patience  and  weary  the  hope  of  man.  There  is  nothing  in  England  or  in 
Europe  which  is  sadder  than  the  picture  which  He  Himself  draws  of  the  develop- 
ment of  His  kingdom  in  Matt.  xxiv.  But  He  saw  beyond  that  which  moved  Him 
to  pour  out  His  soul  unto  death.  ♦*  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw 
all  men  unto  Me."  And  this  ia  the  rebuke  of  all  our  faithless  doubts  and  dreads. 
Mark  the  patience  with  which  through  unnumbered  ages  the  Lord  of  the  world  has 
been  elaborating  the  chirping  apparatus  of  a  cricket,  the  feather  of  the  pinion  of  a 
bird,  or  the  spots  on  the  gay  plumage  of  a  butterfly's  wing — and  yet  we  faint  and 
lose  heart  because  in  a  few  centuries  this  great  world  is  not  converted  to  Jesus,  and 
the  harvest,  for  the  sake  of  which  the  whole  creation  has  been  groaning  and 
travailing  through  well-nigh  infinite  ages,  is  not  yet  reaped  and  garnered  on  high, 

3.  The  fundamental  question  is,  Why  should  man  want  another  king?  Why 
should  we  not  leave  the  secular  spirit  to  take  charge  of  the  interests  and  to  guide 
the  progress  of  human  society?  and  I  answer — (1)  That  something  like  the  form  of 
Christ's  kingdom  is  implied  in  and  prophesied  by  the  very  structure  of  human 
society.  When  we  say  that  man  is  a  social  being,  we  mean  something  differing 
entirely  in  kind,  and  not  only  in  degree,  from  what  we  mean  when  we  speak  of  the 
social  instincts  and  habits  of  the  ants  or  the  bees.  The  key  to  man's  life  is  to  be 
sought  in  heaven  and  not  in  the  dust.  In  entering  the  sphere  of  human  society  we 
come  under  a  higher  law  and  enter  a  higher  world.  Consider  the  fact  that  all 
man's  most  exquisite  pleasures  and  griefs  arise  out  of  his  relations  with  others,  out 
of  his  social  habits  and  affections,  of  which  the  richest  elements  connect  them- 
selves with  his  duties  and  ministries  to  the  poor,  the  weak,  the  helpless  ;  can  we 
believe  with  all  this  before  us,  that  man's  life  as  a  social  being  is  still  to  be  but  the 
struggle  for  existence  in  another  form,  of  which  self-seeking  and  not  self-devotion 
must  be  the  law  ?  I  can  see  no  possible  beauty,  joy,  or  hope  in  human  society, 
except  "  bear  ye  one  another's  burdens  "  be  the  law.  And  I  can  see  no  basis  for  that 
law,  and  no  assurance  of  its  supremacy,  but  in  the  contemplation  of  His  life  and 
His  living  energy  who  came  from  heaven  "  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister, 
and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many."  Just  as  a  skilled  naturalist,  looking  at 
the  structure  of  an  animal,  can  forecast  its  habit  and  habitation,  even  so,  as  we  look 
at  the  structure  of  man  as  a  social  being,  we  can  aflSrm  with  certainty  that  the  habit 
of  his  life  was  meant  to  be  obedience  to  the  law  of  Christ,  and  the  home  of  his  life 
and  theatre  of  ita  development  ia  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (2)  And  what  seems  im- 
pUed  in  man's  constitution  is  exemplified  in  hia  history.  Among  all  peoples  there 
are  visions  of  which  this  is  the  substance.  Man's  ideal  of  society  everywhere  takes 
this  form ;  he  seems  to  feel  instinctively  that  only  in  such  a  world  as  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  can  he  truly  and  nobly  live.  All  the  world's  great  thinkers  lead  on  ita 
thoughts  to  a  time  when  that  reign  of  truth,  righteousness,  and  love,  which  the 
Bible  associates  with  Messiah's  kingdom,  shall  be  realised,  and  all  the  woe  and 
waste  and  wrong  of  the  world  shall  be  stayed.    4.  But  then,  it  may  be  said,  if  men 


5«0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  itu 

are  dreaming  about  this  and  are  aiming  at  this,  why  not  leave  them  alone  to  worh 
out  their  idea  ?  The  answer  to  this  is  that  God  did  leave  man  in  the  Gentile  world 
alone,  that  he  might  discover  whither  the  course  of  things  would  drift  him,  and 
might  be  prepared  through  disappointment  and  suffering  to  accept  at  length  the 
helping  Hand  which  would  be  held  out  to  him  from  on  high.  Caesar  was  the 
result  of  man's  development  as  a  social  being.  The  world's  work  for  itself  ends  in 
ruin.  The  march  of  the  ages  resulted  in  a  condition  of  the  Roman  Empire  which, 
but  for  the  restoring  power  brought  to  bear  upon  it  by  Christianity,  nothing  but  a 
second  deluge  could  have  cured.  Let  the  state  of  India  before  the  English  came  to 
it,  let  the  state  of  China  and  Africa  at  this  moment,  exhibit  the  result  which  comes 
inevitably  to  peoples  when  they  try — or  do  not  try,  for  this  is  what  it  ends  in — to 
work  out  their  own  salvation  for  themselves.  We  need  only  look  round  us  at  this 
moment  in  Europe  to  form  some  just  estimate  of  Cassar  and  his  work.  We  have 
had  modern  Caesars  in  our  day,  enthroned  in  the  centres  of  civilisation  ;  and  the 
end  of  their  sway  has  everywhere  been  wreck.  Blessed  be  God  that  there  is  another 
King,  "  one  Jesus  "  ;  for  man's  experiments  in  government  are  failures,  and  must 
be  failures.  But  is  it  not  a  stain  on  God's  righteous  government,  does  it  not  reveal 
a  flaw  in  His  will  or  iu  His  power,  that  things  in  human  society,  thus  left  to  them- 
selves, tend  to  dissolution  ?  Surely  not :  it  was  never  intended  in  the  scheme  of 
Providence  that  man  should  work  out  his  own  salvation  or  the  salvation  of  society. 
6.  What  is  the  relation  of  this  other  King  to  the  kingdoms  of  this  world?  The 
ofiBcers  of  Caesar  were  naturally  alarmed.  This  is  what  perplexed  and  alarmed 
Pilate.  There  was  little  that  was  kinglike  in  Jesus,  in  Pilate's  sense  of  kingship. 
And  yet  he  was  anxious  and  afraid,  though  why  he  could  not  teU.  Men  are  slow 
to  believe  in  a  kingship  which  makes  no  sign  before  the  world.  The  true  kingdom 
is  a  kingdom  which  penetrates  and  purifies  all  other  kingdoms,  just  as  the  electric 
force  pervades  creation,  everywhere  felt,  never  touched  and  seen.  We  do  nothing 
contrary  to  the  decrees  of  Caesar  in  preaching  that  there  is  "  another  Bling,  one 
Jesus."  He  works  entirely  from  within ;  what  of  blessing  can  come  to  the  world 
by  making  men  wiser,  purer,  more  unselfish,  more  brotherly,  that  He  bestows. 
But  this  breaks  up  nothiug  which  the  progress  of  humanity,  however  realised, 
would  not  break  up  ;  it  consolidates  everything  on  earth  which  stands  square  with 
truth,  righteousness,  and  God.  6.  Christ  has  one  way  of  working  out  the  regenera- 
tion of  human  society ;  Cffisar,  under  all  the  various  shapes  and  forms  of  govern- 
ment, has  another.  The  one  works  purely  from  the  inward  outward,  and  heals  and 
cleanses  at  the  spring.  The  other  cleanses  for  awhile  the  outside,  but  finding 
itself  powerless  to  cleanse  the  inward,  finally  gives  up  its  work  in  despair.  How 
many  times  through  the  ages  has  society  been  broken  up,  reconstructed,  reformed, 
redressed,  only  to  fall  back  agaiu  more  hopelessly  into  the  darkness.  Guilt  is 
oppressing,  sin  is  corrupting,  and  selfishness  is  wasting  humanity  everywhere. 
The  King  whom  we  preach  cares  nothing  for  His  Royalty,  save  in  so  far  as  it  can 
lift  that  burden,  heal  that  corruption,  stay  that  waste.  (J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.) 
Chrut  our  deathless  King  : — Christ  is  our  King,  King  of  Zion,  King  of  glory.  King 
of  earth,  King  of  heaven.  He  is  a  King  that  always  lives.  Where  is  Louis  XTV.  ? 
Dead.  Where  is  Richard  III.  ?  Dead.  Where  is  Henry  VIH.  ?  Dead.  Where 
is  Peter  the  Great  ?  Dead.  There  is  a  whole  sheaf  of  sceptres  at  the  door  of  the 
tomb.  Death  is  an  old  monarch,  and  his  palace  is  a  sepulchre,  and  the  kings  of 
the  earth  are  his  cup-bearers ;  and  the  old  blind  monarch,  walking  around  in  the 
palace  of  sepulchres,  ever  and  anon  stumbles  over  a  newly-faUen  coronet.  Charle- 
magne after  death  sat  on  a  throne,  and  a  crown  was  put  upon  his  pulseless  temples 
and  a  sceptre  was  put  in  his  lifeless  hand  ;  but  these  things  did  not  bring  back  his 
kingdom.  But  our  King  always  lives.  He  lived  before  the  world  was  made.  He 
will  Uve  after  the  world  is  burned.  King  immortal  1  (T.  De  Witt  Talmaqe.) 
Jesus  a  sympathetic  King  : — The  Sultan  of  Turkey  arranged  that  whenever  he  rode 
out  on  horseback  his  subjects  might  come  up  to  him  and  tell  their  sorrows  and  tell 
their  wrongs  ;  and  when  the  Sultan  rode  the  crowd  came  up,  and  after  a  while  his 
progress  was  impossible.  But  more  merciful  is  our  King,  for  at  any  hour  of  the 
day  or  night  we  may  come  up  to  Him  and  tell  all  our  wants  and  all  our  sorrows 
and  get  relief.  To  come  to  other  courts,  we  must  have  a  court  dress  rightly  out  and 
rightly  adorned  ;  but  to  come  into  the  presence,  into  the  court  of  our  King,  we  need 
no  such  preparation,  and  the  beggar  m.*y  come  with  his  rags,  and  the  prodigal  from 
the  filth  of  the  swine  trough,  and  be  without  introduction  immediately  ushered. 
Merciful  King  !  Pardoning  King !  Sympathetic  King  1  Oh,  Jesus,  live  for  ever  I 
{Lhid.)         Jesm  a  iwl^j'al  King  : — On  the  first  elevation  of  the  ancient  amphi- 


CHAP,  rra.]  THE  ACTS.  561 

theatre,  on  the  day  of  a  celebration,  sat  Tiberias,  or  Augustus,  or  the  reigning  king. 
So  in  the  great  arena  of  spectators  that  watch  our  struggles,  and  in  the  first  Divine 
gallery,  as  I  shall  call  it,  sits  our  King,  one  Jesus.  The  Roman  emperor  sat,  with 
folded  arms,  indifferent  as  to  whether  the  swordsman  or  the  lion  beat ;  but  our 
King's  sympathies  are  all  with  us.  Nay,  unheard-of  condescension!  I  see  Him 
come  down  from  the  gallery  into  the  arena  to  help  as  in  the  fight,  shouting,  until 
all  up  and  down  His  voice  is  heard :  "  Fear  not !  I  will  help  thee  1  "    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  10-15.  And  the  brethren  Immediately  sent  away  Paul  and  Silas  unto 
Berea  .  .  .  These  were  more  noble  than  those  in  Thessalonica. — From  Tiiessalonica 
to  Berea : — 1.  Paul  and  SUas  were  sent  away  "  by  night."  That  is  the  way  to 
make  the  most  of  time.  Travel  by  night  and  preach  by  day  if  you  would  make  the 
best  of  your  opportunities.  We  sleep  by  night,  and  hardly  get  over  the  slumber  all 
day.  The  enemy  would  say  they  had  driven  Paul  off  the  ground — Paul  himself 
would  say  that  he  was  going  to  make  new  ground,  and  that  he  would  certainly 
come  back  again  to  the  old  place.  We  have  seen  the  tide  go  out,  but  we  have  seen 
it  also  return,  and  in  the  returning  it  seems  to  play  at  going  back  again  ;  but  the 
refluent  wave  increases  in  volume,  and  returns  with  enhanced  force  and  grandeur. 
Paul  will  come  back  again — personally,  or  by  letter — to  Thessalonica.  He  is  fifty 
miles  away,  and  yet  he  is  not  one  inch  off.  He  has  taken  with  him  in  his  heart 
all  that  he  won  at  Thessalonica.  2.  When  Paul  came  to  Berea  he  went  into  the- 
synagogue  of  the  Jews.  How  was  that  ?  Surely  he  had  suffered  enough  in  con- 
nection with  synagogues  1  It  is  one  of  two  things  with  us  all :  either  the  inward 
conquers,  or  the  outward — the  soul  or  the  body,  love  of  God  or  love  of  ease.  3. 
*'  These  were  more  noble  than  those  in  Thessalonica."  Thessalonica  was  a  capital, 
a  metropolis,  and  Berea  was  an  out-of-the-way  place.  Yet  the  Bereans  were  "  more 
noble  "  than  metropolitans.  That  often  happens.  London  is  the  largest  place  in 
England ;  it  is  not,  therefore,  the  greatest.  It  is  quite  possible  that  there  may  bo 
more  reading  of  a  solid  and  instructive  kind  in  a  little  country  town.  Every  locahty 
has  its  advantage.  In  the  metropolis  we  have  continual  motion,  man  sharpening 
man  by  daily  collision,  and  in  the  country  we  have  the  opportunity  of  profound 
cultivation,  because  of  the  time  which  is  at  our  disposal.  Let  as  not  complain  of 
our  circumstances,  but  rule  them,  sanctify  them ;  and  every  sphere  of  Kfe  will  afford 
an  opportunity  for  intellectual  and  spiritual  advancement.  4.  What  is  the  test  of 
••nobleness"?  Good  listening  is  one  trait.  The  hearer  makes  the  preacher. 
Expectation  becomes  inspiration.  To  good  listening  was  added  patient  examination. 
The  model  congregation  is  a  congregation  well  provided  with  Bibles ;  that  looks 
from  the  sermon  to  the  text ;  from  the  text  to  the  sermon ;  from  the  text  to  the 
context ;  and  that  binds  thft  speaking  man  to  keep  within  the  sacred  brief  which 
God  has  given  to  him.  That  would  be  a  congregation  that  would  compel  sublime 
preaching  I  You  have  lost  your  status  as  hearers  1  Where  are  your  Bibles  7  The 
preacher  could  quote  fiity  things  that  are  not  in  the  Bible,  and  if  he  quoted  them 
in  old  Enghsh,  he  could  make  many  people  believe  that  they  really  were  La 
the  Bible.  If  we  would  be  ''noble"  in  the  estimation  of  Heaven,  we  must 
acquaint  ourselves  deeply  and  accurately  with  Heaven's  own  Word.  One 
thing  would  follow  from  the  Biblical  examination — we  should  destroy  the  priest. 
The  priest  is  a  magician  who  lives  upon  the  credulity  of  the  simple.  How 
is  his  influence  to  be  broken  ?  By  the  Bible ;  by  the  people  knowing  the  Bible. 
6.  There  is  a  logical  term  in  the  twelfth  verse — "  Therefore."  That  is  the 
true  rationalism.  Why  did  youbeUeve?  "Because  the  speaker  fascinated  me; 
because  he  laid  a  spell  upon  my  imagination."  You  will  one  day  escape  from  those 
poor  chains — they  are  not  chains  of  iron,  they  are  little  bands  of  straw.  Why  did 
you  believe  ?  "  Because  it  was  shown  to  me  by  the  Living  Word  that  this  is  the 
only  conclusion  that  can  be  estabUshed."  You  will  stand  like  a  rock  amid  troubled 
waves  I  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  Thessalonians  and  the  Bereaiw  : — We  have  here 
— 1.  Points  of  besemblancb.  (1)  The  mode  of  the  preaching,  and  (2)  its  twofold 
result:  "  some  believed  the  things  that  were  spoken,  and  some  believed  not."  2. 
Points  of  contrast ;  a  difference  in  their  way  of  hearing  and  in  their  manner  of 
inquiring  into  truth.  It  is  deeply  interesting  to  be  able  thus  to  individualise  some 
of  Paul's  congregations.  We  sdl  know  that  there  are  such  differences  now.  There 
are  varieties  of  character  and  locality.  Between  one  country  and  smother,  between 
one  part  of  one  country  and  another  part,  there  are  many  noticeable  differences, 
the  result  of  many  various  and  long-working  influences.  Often  the  ministry  has  to 
he  blamed  or  praised  for  them.    A  place  in  which  a  faithful  pastor  has  long  beeo 

VOL.  n.  86 


663  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvifc 

at  work  bears  the  impress  of  his  hand  for  the  next  generation  or  two.  And  the 
absence  of  such  a  ministry  will  leave  an  opposite  stamp.  Who  that  reads  the 
Epistles  of  St.  Paul  could  for  one  moment  confuse  or  interchange  the  spiritual 
characteristics  of  the  churches  of  Corinth,  of  Philippi,  of  Galatia,  of  Thessalonica  ? 
Take  that  of — I.  Thessalonica.  Berea  was  more  noble,  because  it  received  the 
Word  frankly,  and  searched  the  Scriptures.  Thessalonica  was  less  noble  in  this 
respect.  But  there  were  those  even  in  Thessalonica  who  had  all  the  nobleness  of 
Berea.  Look  at  St.  Paul's  Epistles  to  them.  Observe — 1.  How  St.  Paul  had 
treated  them.  (1)  Like  a  father,  "  we  exhorted  and  comforted  and  charged  you,  as 
a  father  does  his  children  " ;  and  like  a  mother  also,  "  we  were  gentle  among 
you,  even  as  a  nursing  mother  cherisheth  her  own  children."  What  a  picture  of 
the  true  pastor  1  not  a  "  lord  over  God's  heritage,"  not  one  "having  dominion  over 
their  faith,  but  a  helper  of  their  joy."  (2)  "  Ye  remember  our  labour  and  travail ; 
for  labouring  night  and  day,  because  we  would  not  be  chargeable  to  any  of  you,  we 
preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God."  If  we,  by  changes  of  times,  and  by  God's 
overruling  goodness,  are  exempted  from  the  necessity  of  working  for  our  bread,  let 
U3  take  heed  that  that  toil  saved  from  the  one  be  given  to  the  other.  2.  His  teach- 
ing.  First  of  all,  it  was  a  gospel,  a  message  of  comfort  and  joy  to  fallen  man. 
It  told  him  that  his  sins  are  forgiven.  But  it  did  not  leave  him  even  there.  What 
is  it  to  me  to  be  told  that  God  forgives,  if  you  cannot  add  that  God  will  give  me 
His  Holy  Spirit  to  live  in  me  and  to  work  in  me  effectually  ?  In  the  strength  of 
this  he  was  not  afraid  to  preach  to  them  of  duty.  "  This  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your 
sanctification  " ;  and  if  it  is  His  will  that  we  should  be  holy,  certainly  He  will  give 
His  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him.  But  St.  Paul  knew  that,  if  you  would 
inspirit  a  man  for  duty,  you  must  inspire  a  man  with  hope.  Therefore  he  fixed 
their  eyes  upon  an  Advent  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  in  which  "  blessed  and  holy  is 
he  who  shall  have  part."  3.  The  rapidity  of  the  work  of  God  there.  A  few  weeks  at 
the  very  utmost  must  have  comprised  it,  and  yet  what  a  work  was  already  wrought 
(1  Thess.  i.  3-10).  It  is  our  own  fault  if  the  gospel  works  in  any  of  us  slowly 
or  indecisively.  A  few  short  weeks  are  enough,  in  God's  hand,  for  a  complete  trans- 
formation of  the  heart  and  life.  Yet  let  us  not  lose  the  force  of  that  solemn 
admonition,  that  he  who  thinketh  he  standeth  must  always  take  heed  lest  he  fall. 
Scarcely  had  St.  Paul  left  Thessalonica  than  he  sends  back  Timotheus  to  see  "  lest 
by  any  means  the  tempter  had  tempted  them,  and  so  his  labour  should  be  in  vain." 
We  are  still  in  an  enemy's  country,  however  armed  ;  in  the  region  of  death,  how- 
ever full  of  life.  Even  from  our  Lord  Himself,  after  His  great  temptation,  the 
devil  departed  but  for  a  season :  let  us  take  heed  lest  confidence  breed  presumption, 
presumption  sin,  and  sin  death  1  II.  Berea.  1.  In  speaking  of  Thessalonica,  we 
have  spoken  of  the  Church  gathered  out  of  the  world.  The  nobleness  of  the 
Bereans  was  shown  not  in  their  way  of  acting  upon  a  gospel  already  beUeved,  but 
in  their  way  of  trying  the  credentials  of  a  gospel  first  heard.  They  did  not  refuse 
the  gospel  because  it  contradicted  their  previous  opinions  ;  neither  did  they,  in  an 
excess  of  credulity,  receive  it  because  it  was  presented  to  them.  They  Ustened  to 
it  with  the  readiness  of  a  candid  spirit,  and  they  daily  examined  their  Scriptures  to 
see  whether  its  language  and  theirs  were  the  same.  "  Many  therefore  of  them 
believed."  2.  If  our  teaching  were  carried  back  by  you  to  your  Bible  ;  if,  when  we 
urge  upon  you  any  particular  duty,  or  any  side  of  the  truth,  you  would  readily 
examine  your  Scriptures  to  see  whether  what  you  have  heard  has  God's  sanction  to 
it  or  no,  how  interesting  would  become  the  work  of  hearing  and  the  work  of 
teaching !  You  would  feel  that  you  were  engaged  in  a  pursuit  of  truth ;  that  it 
was  not  a  question  of  pleasure  or  interest,  but  a  question  of  right  and  wrong,  of  hfe 
and  death ;  you  would  come  hither  not  to  criticise,  but  to  learn,  and  you  would  go 
hence  not  to  discuss,  but  to  digest.  And  we  on  our  part  should  feel  that  we  were 
aiding  you  in  settling  the  most  momentous  questions,  and  that  out  of  such  inquiries 
would  spring  forth  a  full-flowing  stream  of  satisfaction,  strength,  and  peace.  The 
word  denotes  the  examination  of  a  witness,  or  the  trial  of  a  challenged  life.  Let 
ns  thus  put  the  Word  of  God  upon  its  trial.  Let  us  not  treat  it  as  a  dead,  unmean- 
ing, monotonous  thing,  to  be  carried  in  the  hand,  read  at  church,  or  suffered  on 
the  table ;  but  rather  as  a  living  person,  to  be  questioned,  to  be  listened  to  and 
jndged.  So  treated,  the  Bible  will  become  to  ns  a  voice,  not  a  page  only.  So 
treated,  we  shall  at  last  be  able  to  say,  "  Thy  Word  is  tried  to  the  uttermost,  and 
Thy  servant  loveth  it."  {Dean  Vaughan. )  The  reception  of  the  gospel  at  Berea  :— 
I.  Thb  conduct  or  thb  Bereans  in  reference  to  the  preached  Word.  Note— 
1.  A  spirit  of  earnest  inquiry  after  religious  truth.     The  gospel  offered  them  no 


<3HAP.  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  563 

secular  advantages  (chap.  xiv.  22  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  2).  In  the  total  absence,  therefore, 
of  all  worldly  attractions,  what  could  induce  them  to  receive  the  Word  with  all 
readiness  of  mind  but  a  deeply  serious  concern  about  religious  truth  ?  The  origin 
of  this  state  of  mind  may  probably  be  referred  to  that  spiritual  influence  which 
went  forth  a  Uttle  before  this  period — "  to  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the 
Lord."  2.  A  remarkable  superiority  to  the  power  of  prejudice.  They  did  not 
refuse  to  listen  to  these  strangers,  although  they  were  either  unknown,  or  had  been 
preceded  by  unfavourable  rumours  (chap.  xvii.  6,  7).  3.  An  exercise  of  cautious 
investigation  before  they  proceeded  to  make  up  their  minds.  The  Bereans  received 
the  Word  in  a  widely  different  manner  to  those  in  Matt.  xiii.  5,  20,  21,  and,  there 
is  reason  to  believe,  abode  in  it  with  far  greater  stabihty.  4.  As  the  result  of  the 
whole,  note — their  professed  faith  in  the  gospel,  and  their  union  with  the  Church. 
The  Church  thus  founded  appears  to  have  been  numerous :  at  Thessalonica  some 
believed,  at  Berea  many.  And  where  the  good  precedent  of  the  Bereans  has  been 
followed,  a  solid  work  of  God  has  been  perpetuated  ;  but  where  people  have  rushed 
into  religious  profession  under  the  influence  of  novelty  or  angry  sectarianism,  the 
consequence  has  too  often  been  the  erection  of  an  airy  castle,  soon  scattered  to  all 
the  winds  of  heaven.  It  farther  appears,  that  many  of  the  Berean  believers  were 
highly  respectable  in  their  station  and  circumstances;  literally,  persons  of  figure, 
and  the  addition  of  such  to  the  Church  is  a  very  desirable  occurrence ;  for,  to  say 
nothing  of  subordinate  and  extrinsic  advantages,  their  piety,  found  in  connection 
with  knowledge  and  refinement,  is  likely  to  be  instrumental  of  great  good  in  giving 
a  tone  to  the  whole  community.  II.  The  just  distinction  which  attaches  to 
THEM  IN  CONSEQUENCE  OF  THEiB  CONDUCT.  In  Luke's  opiuiou  they  possessed 
nobler  souls,  or  had  a  more  generous  nature  than  the  people  of  Thessalonica. 
Possibly  the  term  may  advert  to  the  genealogical  pride  so  deeply  rooted  amongst 
the  Jews  (John  viii.  31-33).  This  nobleness  of  mind  is  strikingly  apparent. — 1.  la 
=the  candour  with  which  they  received  the  Word  with  all  readiness  of  mind.  Candour 
is  that  quality  of  mind  which  leads  us  not  exclusively  to  look  upon  our  "  own 
things,  but  also  on  the  things  of  others."  How  many  advantages  may  we  have  lost, 
and  to  how  many  inconveniences  may  we  have  been  subjected,  in  consequence  of 
blindly  yielding  to  the  suggestions  of  prejudice  1  2.  In  the  reasonableness  of  their 
proceedings  on  hearing  the  gospel.  The  course  they  pursued  was  equally  removed 
from  the  extremes  of  a  hasty  adoption  of  the  new  system,  and  a  prejudiced 
closing  of  their  understandings  against  evidence.  The  preaching  of  Paul  and  Silas 
related  to  the  Messiah,  and  the  conformity  of  their  announcements  with  the  Scrip- 
tures of  the  prophets  was  the  great  subject  in  the  investigation  of  which  the 
Bereans  employed  their  nobler  powers.  Yet  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  great  mass 
of  modern  hearers  never  properly  bend  the  energies  of  their  minds  to  the  clear 
apprehension  of  Christian  truth,  or  the  just  appreciation  of  scriptural  evidence.  3. 
In  the  noble  resolution  which  they  conceived  and  executed  on  having  made  up 
their  minds  on  the  great  subject  of  Christianity.  They  formed  themselves  into  a 
dhristian  Church  under  the  direction  of  Paul  and  Silas,  and  resolved  to  encounter  aU 
the  evils  then  connected  with  profession  of  faith  in  Christ.  (T.  Galland,  M.A.) 
The  Bereans  are  types  of  those — I.  Whose  minds  abe  open  to  receive  new  tbuths. 
To  the  Berean  Jews  Paul's  propositions  were  as  novel  and  naturally  unpalatable  as 
they  were  to  the  Thessalonians,  but  they  did  not  refuse  to  examine  them.  Such 
openness  of  mind  is  equally  removed  from  the  ignorant  bigotry  that  assumes 
acquaintance  with  all  truth,  and  the  vacillating  uncertainty  which  is  "  always 
learning  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,"  and  consequently  is 
"  tossed  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine."  II.  Who  are  in  no  haste  to  con- 
clude THAT  WHAT  IS  NEW  IS  TRUE.  The  Bereaus  did  not  rashly  and  impulsively 
embrace  Paul's  teaching  ;  they  carefully  considered  it — prepared  to  accept  or  reject 
ii,  according  as  it  stood  the  test  of  examination.  III.  Who  try  all  human  teach - 
INO  BY  THE  declarations  OF  God's  Word.  Lessons :  1.  Doctrines  are  not  to  be 
rejected  merely  because  they  are  unpalatable.  God's  Word  must  be  unpalatable  to 
sinful  hearts,  just  as  sunlight  is  to  diseased  eyes.  2.  In  studying  Scripture  we  must 
carefully  guard  against  prepossessions  and  prejudices.  3.  We  must  steadily  reject 
the  idea  that  we  have  learned  all  that  the  Scriptures  teach.  It  is  possible  to  pass 
an  object  ten  thousand  times  without  really  seeing  it.  God  has  yet  moifc  light 
to  break  forth  from  His  Holy  Word.  4.  A  dUigent  and  candid  study  of  the 
Scriptures  wiU  lead  to  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ.  (R.  A.  Bertram.)  The  nohle 
Bereans : — I.  The  high  honour  by  which  the  Bereaks  are  distinguished. 
This  distinction  is  to  be  valued  because  of — 1.  The  source  whence  it  proceeds.     2. 


664  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xvh, 

The  great  dignity  it  implies.  II.  The  reason  wht  this  dignity  is  assigned  to 
THEM.  1.  Their  conduct.  (1)  Their  favourable  impression  as  to  the  gospel.  (2) 
Their  diligent  inquiry  into  its  truth.  (3)  Their  truly  rational  faith.  2.  The 
principles  which  this  conduct  involved.  (1)  God's  Word  is  the  only  standard  of 
faith.  (2)  We  should  not  reject  truth  whoever  might  proclaim  it.  (3)  The  truth 
when  discovered  is  to  be  professed.  Application :  1.  See  wherein  true  dignity 
consists.  2.  The  means  of  acquiring  solid  faith.  (Evangelical  Preacher.)  Bercan 
nobility  : — There  is  a  heraldry  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  Our  King's  throne  is 
encircled  by  a  high-born  nobility.  In  the  Scriptures  you  will  find  the  record  of 
their  deeds  and  the  patent  of  their  rank.  If  we  could  obtain  a  view  of  this  earth 
from  the  heavens  the  mountains  would  not  be  very  high,  nor  the  valleys  very  deep. 
The  same  law  rules  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  When  any  one  obtains,  spiritually,  a 
great  elevation,  the  differences  of  social  condition  almost  disappear.  All  are  low 
until  grace  raise  them  up.  But  distinctions  there  are,  notwithstanding.  Some  are 
slaves,  and  some  are  free  ;  some  are  rich  in  grace,  while  others  are  poor.  The 
Bereans  were  noble,  high-born.  Two  things  go  to  constitute  nobility — first  the 
sovereign's  choice  in  its  origin  ;  second,  the  actual  birthright  of  each  noble  in  succes- 
sive generations.  It  is  the  same  in  the  heavenly  kingdom.  Abraham  was  of 
plebeian  blood,  and  received  the  patent  of  his  nobility  in  the  specific  promise  of  the 
King  Eternal,  and  large  possessions  were  bestowed  upon  him  for  the  support  of  his 
dignity.  At  a  later  period,  when  the  King's  Son  was  sojourning  in  this  province. 
He  called  other  plebeians,  fishermen,  &o.,  and  conferred  upon  them  the  patent  of 
nobility.  In  Borne  they  call  Peter  a  prince :  the  title  is  not  amiss,  although  they 
apply  it  falsely.  Further,  each  noble  is  born  to  his  title  and  estate.  Nicodemus, 
though  a  son  of  Abraham  by  his  first  birth,  must  himself  be  born  again  ere  he  could 
enjoy  the  privileges  of  a  peer.  Two  characteristic  features  of  Berean  nobility  are 
recorded  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  distinguish  between  the  genuine  and  the 
spuiious.  I.  Their  hearts  were  receptive.  In  this  matter  the  Bereans  were 
fiivourably  distinguished  from  the  Thessalonians.  The  distinction  is  similar  to 
that  which  the  parable  makes  between  the  good  ground  and  the  wayside.  As  more 
depends  on  the  condition  of  the  soil  than  on  the  skill  of  the  sower,  so  more 
depends  on  a  receptive  spirit  in  the  hearers  than  on  the  peculiar  ability  of  the 
preacher.  II.  They  exercised  their  private  judgment.  This  short,  simple 
intimation  puts  to  shame  the  sophistry  with  which  Bome  has  for  ages  striven  to 
conceal  the  Word  of  God  from  the  people.  For  this  noble  act  the  Bomish  hierarchy 
has  persecuted  even  unto  death.  The  term  '•  searched"  indicates  that  tliey  pored 
over  the  page ;  and  after  having  read  a  sentence,  returned  to  traverse  the  line3 
again,  in  order  that  the  truck  of  the  sense  might  be  more  deeply  graven  on  their 
minds.  They  avoided  the  two  extremes  of  easy  credulity  and  hard  unbelief.  It  is 
a  general  law  of  human  nature  that  what  comes  lightly  goes  lightly.  What  we  gain 
by  a  hard  struggle  we  retain  with  a  firmer  grasp,  whether  it  be  our  fortune  or  our 
faith.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Berean  nobility : — I.  The  deportment  of  thesb 
NOBLE  Bereans.  They  manifested — 1.  A  laudable  spirit  of  inquiry  in  reference  to 
the  truths  of  religion.  All  inquiry  is  not  laudable ;  we  may  be  busybodies  in  other 
men's  matters,  but  inquiry  is  laudable  here.  Human  investigation  is  extended  to 
every  other  subject ;  why  should  it  be  excluded  from  this  ?  2.  A  peculiar  deference 
to  tlie  authority  of  the  sacred  writings  ;  they  were  convinced  of  the  inspiration  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  it  was  in  them  they  expected  to  find  the  principles  of  true 
religion.  3.  A  candid  and  ingenuous  temper :  "  readiness  of  mind."  They  did  not 
examine  the  Scriptures  for  the  purpose  of  finding  objections  against  the  doctrines 
of  the  apostles,  or  to  establish  their  own  previous  opinions,  but  for  the  purpose  of 
ascertaining  •'  whether  those  things  were  so."  II.  The  reasons  why  we  should 
IMITATE  this  NOBLE  DEPORTMENT.  1.  We  are  cudowed  with  powers  and  capabilities 
of  engaging  in  this  impnrtant  investigation.  2.  The  Scriptures  are  addressed  to  all 
men;  all  men  are  commanded  to  read  and  examine  them.  ••  Search  the  Scriptures," 
said  our  Lord.  "Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly,"  said  the  apostle. 
3.  All  men  are  deeply  concerned  in  the  important  truths  which  the  Scriptures 
contain — as  men,  as  sinners,  as  inhabitants  of  this  world,  as  heirs  of  immortality. 
III.  The  advantages  which  will  result  from  an  imitation  op  this  noblb 
DEPORTMENT.  1.  We  shall  obtain  accurate  information  respecting  the  doctrines  of 
revealed  truth.  2.  We  shall  derive  strong  consolation  under  the  difficulties  and 
afflictions  of  life.  3.  We  shall  receive  ample  instruction  as  to  the  performance  of 
all  personal,  social,  and  religious  duties.  If  you  ask  in  what  way  should  we 
examine  the  sacred  writings,  in  order  that  we  may  obtain  these  advantages,  I 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  565 

reply,  examine  them  with  impartiality,  with  humility,  with  self -application,  and 
with  prayer.  It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  any  portion  of  the  Christian  Church 
should  ever  have  interdicted  the  use  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  for  this  purpose 
have  prohibited  their  translation  into  the  vernacular  tongue.  But  we  have  not  so 
learned  Christ.  Go,  imitate  the  example  of  the  noble  Bereans — search  the  Scrip- 
tures. (G.  Collinson.)  Spiritual  nobility: — Nobility  is  a  grand  word,  but  does 
not  always  represent  a  noble  thing.  It  is  often  apphed  to  physical  prowess  and 
ancestral  lineage;  but  the  word  in  such  applications  is  more  or  less  degraded. 
There  is  a  mental  and  moral  nobility.  The  latter  is  the  greatest  of  all ;  it  is  God- 
like. The  Bereans — I.  Rendered  a  candid  attention  to  new  doctrines.  They 
did  not  allow  prejudice  to  seal  their  ears  and  close  their  souls  ;  they  were  prepared 
to  listen.  This  conduct  is — 1.  Ever  befitting.  As  there  must  always  be  to  the 
highest  finite  intelhgences  universes  of  truth  of  which  they  know  nothing,  it 
becomes  even  a  seraph  to  be  docile.  How  much  more  man,  who  knows  so  little, 
and  that  little  so  imperfectly  1  2.  Very  rare.  Somehow  or  other  men  for  the  most 
part  grow  up  with  preconceptions  that  close  the  soul  to  all  that  does  not  blend  with 
them.  Their  pre-formed  ideas  they  treat  as  absolute  truths,  and  recoil  with  a 
jealousy  from  all  that  is  new.  Nothing  is  more  repugnant  to  these  men  than  a 
teaching  pulpit.  II.  Gave  a  proper  examination  to  new  doctrines.  They  were 
not  mere  passive  listeners,  receiving  impressions  which  led  to  no  effort,  and  which 
passed  away  in  the  hour.  They  examined — 1.  Independently.  They  searched  the 
Scriptures  for  themselves.  They  were  not  swayed  by  the  authority  of  others,  nor 
did  they  accept  the  statement  of  the  apostles  on  their  own  credit.  There  is  much 
talk  about  the  right  of  private  judgment ;  we  want  more  of  the  duty.  Men  are 
blockheads  in  theology,  and  priest-ridden  in  religion,  because  they  search  not  the 
Scriptures  for  themselves.  2.  Perseveringly,  ♦'  daily."  So  vast  the  area  and  so 
deep  the  mines  of  Scripture,  that  you  can  know  but  little  of  it  by  a  glance  or  two. 
Desultory,  occasional  and  unsystematic  efforts  will  be  useless.  You  must  be  at  it 
daily — walk  some  new  field,  scale  some  new  mountain,  penetrate  some  new  depth 
daily.  III.  Yielded  to  the  evidence  op  new  doctrines  :  "  believed."  They 
bowed  to  the  force  of  evidence.  It  is  childish  to  believe  without  evidence.  It  is 
wicked  to  resist  evidence.  It  is  noble  to  surrender  to  its  force.  Their  faith  was — 
1.  Intelligent.  It  came  as  the  result  of  investigation.  It  was  not  a  blind  prejudice, 
a  traditional  idea ;  it  was  a  living  conviction.  This  is  the  faith  that  is  wanted,  the 
only  faith  of  any  worth.  2.  General :  "  Many  believed."  Influential  women  and 
men  not  a  few.      (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  nobility  of  the  Bereans  : — In  ttiis 

account  of  the  conduct  and  conversion  of  the  Bereans  we  are  struck  with — I.  The 

WELLING   PERMISSION    THEY   GAVE    TO   THE     APOSTLES   TO   DECLARE    THEIB   ERRAND.       FoF 

we  must  remember  how  different  were  their  circumstances  from  those  in  which  we 
ever  have  been,  or  can  possibly  be  found.  They  were  Jews,  who  had  never,  until 
this  moment  when  Paul  and  Silas  entered  their  synagogue,  heard  of  any  other 
system  than  the  law  of  Moses.  They  were  men  in  whose  minds  the  avenues  of 
conviction  lay  open ;  they  were  willing  to  give  a  hearing  to  the  arguments  of  reason. 
Scarcely  any  sacrifice  is  so  costly  to  flesh  and  blood  to  make,  as  that  of  long- 
established  and  deeply-rooted  prejudice.  But  the  Berean  Jews  were  prepared  to 
make  even  this  surrender.  But  their  respect  was  shown  to  the  commission  of  the 
apostles,  not  to  their  persons  only.  Is  not  the  subject  of  the  gospel  of  supreme 
importance?  With  how  many  has  the  gospel  had  no  better  fate  than  those 
unhappy  persons  find  whose  lot  it  is  to  wait  upon  some  proud  patron  or  dilatory 
judge,  who  has  promised  to  grant  an  audience,  but  has  never  yet  done  it,  and  still 
promises,  and  still  postpones  ?  II.  As  they  allowed  the  apostles  to  declare  their 
errand,  so  we  find  that  thet  gave  a  glad  reception  to  the  message  itself.  An 
ingenuous  spirit  opens  the  faireist  door  to  the  entrance  of  truth.  Candour  opened 
their  ears  to  what  Paul  and  Silas  had  to  urge  ;  and  by  that  opening  conviction 
entered.  Such  were  the  earliest  disciples,  and  as  such  they  are  described  :  "  they 
that  gladly  received  the  Word."  A  spirit  this,  differing  altogether  from  that  of 
Hjrod,  who  heard  the  Word  gladly,  having  a  curiosity  to  know  what  kind  of  matters 
it  treated  about,  but  having  no  desire  to  enlarge  his  acquaintance  with  it,  when  he 
found  that  it  laid  the  axe  to  the  root  of  his  sins  ;  but  a  gladness,  going  the  whole 
length  of  the  gospel  itself,  the  glad  receiving,  as  well  as  hearing  of  it.  Who  amongst 
ns  desires  to  know  whether  we  are  Inheritors  of  this  Berean  ' '  readiness  of  mind  " 
towards  the  gospel  of  God  ?  We  are  so,  if  we  yield  ourselves  to  the  fair  influence 
of  truth.  HI.  There  is  yet  one  more  point  of  excellence  in  the  conduct  of  the 
Bereans:  thby  sebioxtsly  examined  the  claims  of  the  gospel.     The  doctrine  of 


566  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvit 

Christ  fears  not  a  scrutiny.    And  now,  after  this  review  of  the  conduct  of  the  Bereans, 
shall  we  hesitate  to  award  to  them  the  title  given  in  our  text,  "  These  were  more  noble 
than  those  in  Thessalonica  "  ?    True  nobility,  then,  is  not  the  spurious  expansivenega 
of  infidelity,  but  the  reverence  of  Scripture  as  the  test  of  truth.     {R.  Eden,  M.A.) 
Searching  the  Scriptures  : — Let  us  mark — I.  The  attention  shown  by  the  Bereans 
TO  THE  MiNisTBY  OF  St.  Paul.     1.  They  '•  received  the  Word  with  all  readiness  of 
mind,"  which  argued  a  simple  teachable  disposition.     Hence  their  attention  was 
prompt,  cordial,  and  submissive.     They  felt  their  helplessness  and  were  willing  to 
be  led.     The  mind  of  the  hearer  was  as  soil  prepared  for  the  word  of  the  preacher. 
Doubtless  St.  Paul  adduced  his  favourite  themes — "  Jesus  and  the  resurrection." 
Paul  might  state  many  things  which  would  be  new  to  the  Bereans,  opposed  to  their 
sentiments  and  ordinary  habits  and  pursuits;  but  such  was  their  docility  that  they 
were  cheerfully  contented  to  be  hearers,  not  teachers.     2.  Ought  not  this  to  be  the 
disposition  of   modern  hearers  ?     But  is  not  rather  the    ministry  of  the  gospel 
usually  attended  with  little  or  no  readiness  of  mind  to  receive  it?     We  preach  the 
fall  of  man,  but  who  feel  themselves  to  be  fallen  ?     We  declare  the  nature  and  the 
consequence  of  sin,  but  who  feels  its  "  exceeding  sinfulness,"  and  "  flees  from  the 
wrath  to  come"?    We  publish  "glad  tidings,"  but  "who  hath  beheved  our  report?" 
And  why  is  this  ?    Because  our  hearers  have  so  Uttle  readiness  of  mind  to  receive 
it.     The  hearts  of  the  generality  are  either  as  soft  as  water,  or  as  hard  as  rock. 
If  you  dip  your  linger  into  water  an  impression  will  easily  be  made ;  the  moment  you 
withdraw  your  finger  the  impression  vanishes.     You  may,  too,  pour  water  upon  a 
rock,  but  it  all  runs  off ;  it  never  penetrates  and  fructifies  the  stone.     3.  Now  it  is 
this  disposition  which  we  wish  to  correct.     As  the  preaching  of  the  Word  is  a 
weighty  and  important  charge,  so  surely  does  the  hearing  of  it  involve  a  very 
solemn  responsibility.     People  too  commonly  imagine  the  delivery  of  a  sermon  to 
be  a  matter  of  course.     "  Judge  your  own  selves."    Do   as  these  noble-minded 
persons  did :   hear  impartially,  teachably ;    with  readiness  to  receive ;   for  your 
edification  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  for  eternity ;  as  those  who  must  one  day  account 
to  the  Master  of  our  Assemblies  for  the  means  of  instruction  so  graciously  vouch- 
safed,   n.  The  conduct  they  were  induced  to  adopt.     1.  They  "  searched  the 
Scriptures  daily,"  &c.     The  Scriptures  which  the  Bereans  possessed  were  merely 
the  Old  Testament.    From  that,  hojvever,  they  had  Itarned  that  "  the  seed  of  the 
woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head  " ;  that  God  would  raise  up  unto  them  a 
Prophet  that  should,  like  Moses,  promulgate  a  new  dispensation  of  grace  and 
mercy;  that  "  in  His  love  and  in  His  pity  He  would  redeem  them,"  and  reign  as 
King  of  Zion,  &c.,  &c.   These  things  the  Bereans  knew,  and  therefore  they  "  searched 
the  Scriptures  "  to  see  how  far  the  statements  of  St.  Paul  accorded  with  the  Word 
of  God.    Nor  did  they  indolently  do  so :  so  cautious  were  they  about  receiving  what 
they  heard,  and  so  desirous  that  whatever  they  received  should  be  strictly  analogous 
to  the  truth,  that  they  searched  the  Scriptures  "  daily."    Using,  with  lowliness  and 
sincerity,  the  only  infallible  means  of  information,  the  promise  was  fulfilled  to 
them — "  The  meek  will  He  guide  in  judgment,  the  meek  will  He  teach  His  way." 
So  true  it  is,  "  They  that  will  do  the  will  of  God  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,"  &c. 
2.  Now  here  I  cannot  but  say,  "  Go  ye  and  do  likewise."    Here  is  an  example  of 
earnest  and  devout  inquiry  worthy  of  our  closest  imitation.     We  can  boast  no 
extraordinary  inspiration,  and  therefore  we  may  err.    Bring,  then,  what  you  hear 
from  us  to  your  Bible.     In  addition  to  the  Old  Testament  you  have  the  New. 
When  we  insist  on  the  necessity  of  repentance,  look  and  see  if  He  in  whose  name 
we  speak  requires  it.    When  we  tell  you  that  Christ  is  "all  in  all" — a  sinner's 
justification  and  salvation — take  not  our  word  for  it:  search  the  Scriptures.    Do 
not  so  reluctantly,  as  though  it  were  a  labour,  but  diligently,  and  that  "  daily," 
and  as  if  your  everlasting  all  depended  on  your  right  apprehension  and  belief  of 
the  truth.    If  you  received  a  letter  from  a  dear  friend,  would  it  lie  long  unopeneu 
by  you  ?     Say  not,  "  We  have  no  time."     Have  you  no  time  to  read  other  books  f 
Bemember,  that  alone  is  truth  which  will  endure  a  Scriptural  test.     It  is  Scr'pture, 
too,  that  will  try  our  principles  and  conduct  in  the  judgment  of  the  great  day. 
"  The  words  which  I  have  spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  you."     {W.  Mudge,  B.A.} 
Searching  the  Scriptures: — I.  Why?     1.   Because   it  contains  the  statutes  and 
judgments  of  God  (Deut.  iv.  14).     2.  It  is  the  Word  of  God  (Jer.  xxxvi.  6).    3. 
Christ  taught  out  of  it  (Luke  xxiv.  27).     4.  It  testifies  of  Christ  (John  xx.  81). 
6.  If  rightly  studied  it  will  lead  to  salvation  (James  i.  21).     6.  It  is  profitable  both 
for  doctrine  and  practice  (2  Tim.  'ii  1^).     7.  Christ  enjoms  its  study  (John  v.  39). 
6.  Without  a  knowledge  of  it  we  go  astray  (Matt.  xxii.  29 ;  Acta  xiii.  27).  II.  How  f 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  66T 

1.  Thinking  of  it  continually  (Deut.  vi.  7).  2.  Beoeiving  it  as  the  Word  of  God, 
Dot  of  man  (1  Thess.  ii.  13).  3.  Receiving  it  with  meekness  (James  i.  21).  4. 
Meditating  upon  it  in  the  night  watches  (Psa.  cxix.  148).  5.  Hiding  it  in  the  heart 
(Psa.  cxix.  11).  6.  Making  it  the  standard  of  teaching  (1  Pet.  iv.  11).  7.  With 
prayer  that  its  truths  may  be  understood  (Psa.  cxix.  12, 18).  8.  Teaching  it  to  the 
children  (2  Tim.  iii.  15).  {S.  S.  Times.)  Searching  the  Scriptures : — "  You 
interpret  tne  Scriptures  in  one  way,"  said  Mary  to  Knox,  "and  the  Pope  and  the 
cardinals  in  another ;  whom  shall  I  believe,  and  who  shall  be  judge  ?  "  "  You 
shall  believe,"  replied  Knox,  •'  God  who  speaketh  plainly  in  His  Word ;  and  further 
than  the  Word  teacheth  you,  you  shall  believe  neither  the  one  nor  the  other — 
neither  the  Pope  nor  the  Reformers,  neither  the  Papists  nor  the  Protestants.  The 
Word  of  God  is  plain  in  itself ;  if  there  be  any  obscurity  in  one  place,  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  is  never  contrary  to  Himself,  explains  it  more  clearly  in  other  places, 
BO  that  there  can  remain  no  doubt  but  unto  such  as  are  obstinately  ignorant." 
{Stewart's  Collectioiw.)  Delight  in  the  Scriptures: — I  use  the  Scriptures  not  as 
an  arsenal  to  be  resorted  to  only  for  arms  and  weapons,  but  as  a  matchless  temple, 
where  I  delight  to  contemplate  the  beauty,  the  symmetry,  and  the  magnificence  of 
the  structure,  and  to  increase  my  awe  and  excite  my  devotion  to  the  Deity  there 
preached  and  adored.  {Hon.  JB.  Boyle.)  Searching  the  Scriptures  as  a  chart : — 
There  is  a  ship  at  sea.  A  heavy  fog  has  come  on :  there  is  nothing  to  be  seen  all 
round  about ;  the  very  stars  are  shut  out  of  view,  and  no  longer  serve  to  guide  the 
vessel's  course;  and  as  the  man  at  the  masthead  hoarsely  cries  out,  "Breakers 
ahead  I "  and  the  crew  furl  the  sails,  and  the  helmsman  turns  the  wheel,  what  is 
the  captain  about,  old  sailor  as  he  is,  now  poring  over  his  charts,  and  now  glancing 
at  the  compass,  and  now  loudly  giving  his  orders?  What  can  he  mean  by  looking, 
BO  often  and  so  eagerly  at  that  map-looking  thing  of  his  ?  That  is  his  chart  by 
which  his  course  is  guided ;  and  he  is  searching  it  to  find  where  he  is,  and  how  he 
may  steer  his  ship  in  safety,  to  keep  clear  of  a  rock  here,  and  a  shallow  there,  and 
make  a  good  passage  through  the  channel,  and  save  his  crew  and  his  cargo,  and  at 
length  gain  the  harbour.  So  says  the  Great  Teacher,  •*  Search  the  Scriptures." 
(J.  H.  Wilson.)  Searching  the  Scriptures,  Love  the  motive  for : — A  blind  giri 
had  been  in  the  habit  of  reading  her  Bible  by  means  of  raised  letters  such  as  are 
prepared  for  the  use  of  the  blind  ;  but  after  a  while,  by  working  in  a  factory,  the 
tips  of  her  fingers  became  so  calloused  that  she  could  no  more  by  her  hands  read 
the  precious  promises.  She  cut  off  the  tips  of  her  fingers  that  her  touch  might  be 
more  sensitive ;  but  still  she  failed  with  her  hands  to  read  the  raised  letters.  In 
her  sorrow  she  took  the  Bible  and  said,  •'  Farewell,  my  dear  Bible.  You  have  been 
the  joy  of  my  heart ! "  Then  she  pressed  the  open  page  to  her  lips  and  kissed  it, 
and  as  she  did  so  she  felt  with  her  mouth  the  letters,  "  The  Gospel  according  to 
St.  Mark."  "  Thank  God  1 "  she  said;  "  if  I  cannot  read  the  Bible  with  my  fingers, 
I  can  read  it  with  my  lips."  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Delving  for  the 
treasures  of  the  Word : — The  Bible  is  a  book  which  requires  working  into,  in  order 
to  get  out  of  it  that  which  is  most  precious  and  profound.  Some  Christians  do  not 
know  anything  like  what  the  Bible  is  really  worth,  because  they  are  not  willing  to 
work  hard  enough  to  find  out.  When  they  read  it,  it  is  in  such  a  prayerless,  lifeless 
sort  of  a  way  that  they  receive  but  very  little  benefit  from  it.  Perhaps  this  is  true 
of  the  great  majority  of  Christians.  Very  likely  if  all  of  the  most  precious  truths 
lay  on  the  mere  surface  of  the  Bible,  and  could  be  as  easily  picked  up  as  one  does 
the  common  pebbles  which  lie  about  the  streets,  there  are  many  who  would  possess 
more  than  they  now  do.  But  then  would  the  great  and  precious  gems  of  Divine 
truth  seem  so  precious  if  they  could  be  had  with  so  httle  effort  ?  We  think  not. 
If  gold  were  lying  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  as  plentifully  as  the  stones  do  in  many 
places,  and  could  be  gathered  as  easily,  its  value  would  not  be  bo  highly  esteemed 
as  it  is,  nor  would  it  be  regarded  as  so  precious.  We  see  God's  wisdom  in  putting 
many  of  His  richest  and  brightest  gems  of  truth  and  promise  down  into  the  depths 
of  His  Word,  so  that,  if  we  would  get  hold  of  them,  we  must  work  our  way  down 
into  the  profound  recesses  of  the  vast  reservoirs  of  inspired  thought  and  revelation. 
A  certain  writer  says :  "  It  is  only  when  our  energies  are  roused  and  our  attention 
awake — when  we  are  acquiring,  or  correcting,  or  improving,  our  knowledge — that 
knowledge  makes  the  requisite  impression  upon  ns.  God  has  not  made  Scripture 
like  a  garden,  where  the  fruits  are  ripe,  and  the  flowers  bloom,  and  all  things  are 
fully  exposed  to  our  view ;  but  like  a  field,  where  we  have  the  ground,  and  seed  of 
all  precious  things,  and  where  nothing  can  be  brought  to  view  without  our  industry 
— nor  then,  without  the  dews  of  heavenly  grace."    If  you  would  increase  the  valut 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xvifc 

of  the  Bible  to  yon,  work  in  its  depths !  Equip  your  energy  by  God's  Spirit,  and 
make  a  profitable  task  of  delving  for  the  pearly  treasures  of  the  Word !  Stored 

up  gold  in  the  Scriptures  : — When  I  was  in  California  an  old  Scotchman  brought  me 
a  piece  of  quartz  in  which  was  imbedded  a  small  piece  of  gold,  saying,  "  Mr.  Scott, 
I  would  like  you  to  see  how  our  heavenly  Father  stores  up  the  gold  for  our  use." 
There  it  was  sparkling  in  the  midst  of  a  bit  of  useless  rock.  (J.  Scott.)  Searching 
Bible  reading : — There  is  a  great  deal  of  listless,  careless  reaiUng.  Coleridge 
divided  readers  into  four  classes.  The  first  class  he  compares  to  an  hour-glass, 
their  reading  being  as  the  sand  ;  it  runs  in  and  runs  out,  and  leases  not  a  vestige 
behind.  A  second  class  resembles  a  sponge,  which  imbibes  everything,  and  returns 
it  in  nearly  the  same  state.  A  third  class  is  like  a  jelly-bag,  which  allows  all  that 
is  pure  to  pass  away,  and  retains  only  the  refuse  and  the  dregs.  The  fourth  class, 
like  the  slave  of  Golconda,  cast  aside  all  that  is  worthless,  preserving  only  the  pure 
gems.  Or  perhaps  we  might  compare  this  fourth  class  to  the  gold-pan,  used  for 
retaining  the  pure  metal,  while  the  refuse  is  washed  out.  The  only  profitable 
reading  of  God's  Word  is  a  searching  reading.  The  word  translated  "  search  "  is 
emphatic  and  intense,  and  literally  means  to  "  look  carefully,"  as  a  wild  animal 
searches  the  sands  to  find  the  footsteps  of  a  stray  cub.  The  Bible  is  full  of  hidden 
treasures,  to  be  sought  as  the  merchant-man  sought  goodly  pearls.  They  are  not 
revealed  to  indifferent  and  superficial  readers.      [A.   T.  Pierson,  D.D.)  The 

Bible  invaluable : — Do  you  love  to  turn  the  pages  of  old  books  ?  None  can  be  found 
that  are  older  than  the  earliest  books  of  our  Bible.  Do  you  find  special  delights  in 
history?  Here  are  records  than  which  none  are  more  ancicTit,  more  trustworthy, 
or  more  important.  Are  you  fond  of  biography  ?  Here  are  the  lives  of  Moses,  the 
lawgiver  and  leader  of  the  Hebrew  race  ;  of  David  the  shepherd-boy,  poet  and  king ; 
and  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  incarnate  Son  of  God.  Is  poetry,  to  you,  a  feast  of  beauty, 
an  intoxicant  of  the  emotions  ?  Here  are  sublimest  songs  and  sweetest  consolations; 
the  oldest  of  all  poems,  the  epic  that  recites  the  fidelity  of  Job  in  unprecedented 
trials ;  the  seraphic  psalms  of  David ;  and  the  lofty  imagery  and  panoramic 
prophecies  of  the  unsurpassed  Isaiah.  Yet  idle  people  tell  us  the  Old  Testament 
is  dry  I  Is  the  ocean  dry  ?  Is  the  sunlight  black  ?  Is  ambrosia  bitter  to  the 
taste  ?  Then  is  the  Bible  an  unattractive  book.  Shallow  sceptics  may  scoff  at  it ; 
but  the  profoundest  scholars  know  its  worth.  For  many  years  John  Quincy  Adams, 
by  reading  one  hour  each  morning,  read  the  whole  Bible  once  a  year.  He  said  that 
in  whatever  light  he  viewed  it,  whether  with  reference  to  revelation,  to  history,  or 
to  morality,  it  was  to  him '•  an  invaluable  and  inexhaustible  mine  of  knowledge 
and  virtue."  Daniel  Webster  said  that  from  the  time  when,  at  his  mother's  feet  or 
on  his  fatlier's  knee,  he  first  learned  to  Usp  verses  from  the  sacred  writings,  they 
had  been  his  daily  study  and  vigilant  contemplation — and  that  if  there  was  any- 
thing in  his  style  or  thoughts  to  be  commended,  the  credit  was  due  to  his  kind 
parents,  who  instilled  into  his  minds  an  early  love  of  the  Scriptures.  Sir  William 
Jones  declared  it  to  be  his  opinion  that  "  the  Bible  contains  more  true  sensibility, 
more  exquisite  beauty,  more  pure  morality,  more  important  history,  and  finer 
strains  of  poetry  and  eloquence  than  can  be  collected  from  all  other  books,  in  what- 
ever language  they  may  be  written."  Eousseau  confessed  that  "the  majesty"  of 
the  Scriptures  astonished  him,  and  that  the  holiness  of  the  Evangelists  spoke  to 
his  heart.  Paul  said,  "  The  Scriptures  are  able  to  make  men  wise  unto  salvation." 
In  proof  of  the  professions  of  no  other  book  or  collection  of  books  can  testimony  so 
abundant,  so  clear,  and  bo  weighty  be  adduced.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 
Practice  in  the  study  of  the  Scriptures : — Have  set  times,  from  which  you  will  allow 
nothing  to  divert  you,  for  reading  and  prayer.  Always  keep  a  promise  in  mind, 
and  try  to  find  a  new  one  each  day — not  in  a  book  made  to  hand,  with  a  promise 
for  every  day  in  the  year  (a  sort  of  crutch  such  a  book  is  for  those  who  expect  to 
remain  spiritual  cripples),  but  in  your  own  reading.  We  know  a  person  who  can 
find  flowers  enough  in  the  woods  every  time  she  goes  out  to  make  a  beautiful 
boucjuet ;  and  she  does  this  when  most  would  see  nothing  but  leaves.  Practice  will 
enable  you  to  learn  the  art  of  finding  a  flower  of  promise  in  every  chapter. 
{Christian  Age.)  The  Bible  lit  up: — A  little  while   ago   I  was   in   the   noble 

cathedral  at  Cologne.  Going  in  the  early  morning,  I  saw  the  eastern  windows  lit 
np  by  the  sun.  Far  away  in  the  great  church  the  other  windows  were  all  obscure 
and  dusky.  We  strolled  in  about  noonday,  and  then  these  windows  in  the  depths 
were  lit  up  with  ruby,  purple,  gold — prophets,  apostles,  saints,  mnrtyrs.  And  then, 
when  the  sun  was  going  down,  we  looked  in  to  find  that  the  great  western  window 
was  magnificentlj  kindled,  like  a  window  that  opened  into  heaven.    As  the  hours 


CHAP,  znx.]  THE  ACTS.  S69 

of  the  day  went  on,  first  one  window  was  illaminated,  then  another,  until  in  the 
end  there  was  not  a  painted  pane  but  had  added  sonae  splendour  to  the  temple.  It 
is  a  great  deal  like  that  with  your  Bible.  There  is  many  a  dark  page  in  the  Bible 
to-day,  but  in  the  process  of  the  suns  they  are  Ut  up  one  after  another.  Successive 
generations  will  find  in  that  Book  the  specific  doctrine  that  is  necessary  to  them, 
their  complexities,  their  perplexities,  their  interests,  their  perils.  Chrysostom, 
Bernard,  Luther,  Wesley,  found  in  the  Bible  the  truth  for  their  day,  and  the  great 
original  preachers  of  to-day  are  giving  to  that  Book  interpretations  that  are 
necessary  to  our  enlightenment  and  disciphne,  and  before  the  world  finishes  there 
will  not  be  a  dark  passage  left.      (W.  L.  Watkhtson.)  The  right  of  private 

judgment  in  religion : — The  primitive  preachers  considered  their  hearers  as  capable 
of  judging  of  the  truth  of  what  they  heard.  They  not  only  taught  the  truth,  but 
exhibited  evidence  to  support  what  they  taught,  and  encouraged  their  hearers  to 
examine  this  evidence.  This  conduct  of  the  Bereans  was  agreeable  to  common 
sense,  and  sanctioned  by  Divine  authority.  Let  us  consider — I.  What  it  is  to 
EXERCISE  THE  BIGHT  OF  PKivATE  JUDGMENT.  It  is  the  right  which  every  man  has 
of  seeing  with  his  own  eyes,  hearing  with  his  own  ears,  and  of  exercising  his  own 
reason.  But  this  imphes — 1.  A  right  to  hear  what  may  be  said  upon  the  subject. 
The  Bereans  had  a  right  to  hear  the  apostle's  reasons  in  favour  of  Christianity 
before  they  received  it  or  rejected  it.  We  have  a  right  to  collect  evidence  upon  any 
subject,  from  any  who  are  able  to  give  us  information  about  it.  And  the  more 
information  men  can  collect,  the  better  they  are  prepared  to  judge  correctly.  2.  A 
right  to  examine  every  subject  for  ourselves.  Though  many  things  may  have  been 
said  and  written  upon  any  rehgious  doctrine,  yet  we  have  a  right  to  reason  upon  it, 
and  to  search  the  Scriptures  to  see  whether  it  be  there  revealed  or  not.  When  we 
come  to  think  seriously  upon  a  subject  which  others  have  treated,  we  may  find  good 
reasons  to  differ  from  them.  They  may  have  overlooked,  and  we  may  have  found 
the  real  truth  in  the  case.  3.  The  right  of  forming  our  opinions  according  to  the 
best  light  we  can  obtain.  We  have  no  more  right  to  judge  without  evidence  than 
we  have  to  judge  contrary  to  evidence.  We  have  no  right  to  keep  ourselves  in  doubt 
when  we  have  sufficient  evidence  to  come  to  a  decision.  "Prove  all  things," 
i.e.,  examine  all  things ;  and  after  examination,  decide  what  is  right.     11.  Men 

OUGHT  TO  EXERCISE  IT   IN    FORMING    THEIR    RELIGIOUS    SENTIMENTS.       1.    God  haS  made 

men  capable  of  judging  for  themselves  in  matters  of  religion.  He  has  made  them 
wiser  than  the  beasts.  He  has  endued  them  with  the  highest  powers  of  reason  and 
conscience,  by  which  they  are  capable  of  judging  what  is  right  and  wrong,  true  and 
false.  As  they  are  capable  of  judging  for  themselves,  so  it  is  their  duty.  Their 
capacity  creates  their  obligation.  As  they  are  rational  creatures,  they  are  bound  to 
act  rationally.  This,  indeed,  is  the  only  power  which  they  have  no  right  ever  to 
resign.  They  may,  when  necessary,  give  up  their  property  or  liberty ;  but  they 
may  never  give  up  their  right  of  forming  their  own  religious  sentiments,  and  of 
serving  God  according  to  the  dictates  of  their  conscience.  They  have  no  right  to 
let  their  own  depraved  hearts,  or  the  false  reasonings  of  others,  warp  their  under- 
standing, and  obscure  the  real  evidence  of  Divine  truth.  2.  God  has  given  men 
not  only  the  proper  powers,  but  the  proper  means  of  forming  their  religious 
sentiments.  The  Bible  contains  sufiBcient  information  in  regard  to  all  the  doctrines 
and  duties  of  religion.  The  Scriptures  are  level  to  every  one's  capacity,  po  that 
wayfaring  men  though  fools  cannot  err  therein,  unless  by  prejudice,  partiahty,  or 
blindness  of  heart.  And  since  men  have  this  ample  source  of  information  in  their 
hands,  they  cannot,  without  great  impropriety  and  danger,  neglect  to  search  the 
Scriptures.  3.  God  has  appointed  none  to  judge  for  any  man  in  respect  to  his 
rehgious  opinions.  It  is  true  God  has  appointed  teachers,  but  not  judges ;  and 
after  all  they  have  done  to  exhibit  and  support  the  truth,  the  hearers  are  to  judge 
for  themselves  whether  those  things  they  have  heard  be  the  truth.  The  Pope  and 
all  his  hierarchy  are  usurpers,  whose  pretensions  to  infallibihty  are  to  be  treated 
with  disdain,  as  vile  impositions.  Christian  churches  have  a  right  to  form  their 
own  creeds  and  exercise  their  own  discipHne,  independently  of  any  superior 
ecclesiastical  power  on  earth.  4.  God  has  forbidden  men  to  take  their  religious 
sentiments  from  others  upon  trust.  His  direction  to  His  ancient  people  was  to 
"the  law  and  to  the  testimony;  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  Word,  it  is 
because  there  is  no  light  in  them."  And  we  are  commanded  to  prove  all  things, 
and  to  hold  fast  that  which  is  good.  And  Paul  tells  the  Galatians  to  reject  any 
false  doctrines,  though  brought  to  them  by  men  or  angels.  5.  Every  man  must 
feel  the  effects  of  his  own  religious  opinions,  and  consequently  ought  to  exercise  hia 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

own  judgment  in  forming  them.  This  is  a  matter  of  too  much  consequence  to  put 
out  of  his  own  hands.  We  must  give  an  account  of  our  faith  as  well  as  of  out 
conduct.  III.  Impeovement.  If  it  be  the  duty  of  men  to  exercise  their  private  judg- 
ment in  the  manner  that  has  been  mentioned,  then — 1.  They  may  always  know  what 
they  ought  to  believe  and  practise.  God  never  places  mankind  in  a  situation  in 
which  they  cannot  know  and  do  their  duty ;  for  then  they  would  not  be  moral 
agents,  nor  proper  subjects  of  moral  government.  Though  God  does  not  require  a 
heathen  to  search  the  Scriptures  to  know  his  duty,  yet  he  is  morally  obliged  to 
consult  his  reason  and  conscience  to  learn  his  duty,  and  to  act  agreeably  to  the 
dictates  of  these  intellectual  powers,  which  he  knows  he  ought  to  obey.  It  is 
absurd  for  Christians,  who  have  the  Bible  in  their  hands,  to  plead  in  excuse  for 
believing  and  doing  wrong  that  they  could  not  know  what  to  believe,  or  what  to  do ; 
for  they  always  may  have  evidence  which  makes  it  their  duty  to  believe  or  not  to 
believe,  and  to  act  or  not  to  act.  2.  They  may  not  only  know  that  they  have  acted 
right  in  forming  their  religious  sentiments,  but  know  that  they  have  formed  them 
according  to  truth.  Many  imagine  because  men  may  err  in  forming  their  religious 
sentiments  that  they  never  can  know  whether  they  have  formed  them  right  in  any 
case  whatever.  But  they  have  no  right  to  draw  this  consequence  from  human 
fallibility ;  for  though  men  may  judge  wrong  in  some  cases,  yet  they  may 
judge  right  in  others.  Paul  first  formed  a  wrong  opinion  of  Christ,  and  verily 
thought  it  was  a  true  opinion  ;  but  after  he  had  formed  another  and  true  opinion 
of  Christ,  he  knew  that  his  present  opinion  was  right,  and  his  former  opinion  was 
wrong.  3.  It  may  be  greatly  abused.  Under  the  pretext  of  this  right,  men  may 
take  the  hberty  of  judging  very  erroneously,  unreasonably,  and  wickedly,  as 
did  the  Jews  at  Thessalonica,  under  the  influence  of  tradition,  education,  and 
prejudice.  Wherever  the  gospel  has  been  preached  it  has  been  opposed,  rejected, 
or  perverted  by  hearers,  under  the  pretext  of  the  right  of  private  judgment.  But 
though  the  right  of  private  judgment  has  been,  and  still  is  so  extensively  and  grossly 
abused,  it  is  far  better  to  tolerate  it  than  to  restrain  it  by  any  other  means  than 
those  which  are  rational  and  spiritual.  4.  We  may  easily  see  how  those  who  judge 
for  themselves  on  religious  subjects,  and  with  the  same  degree  of  light  before  them» 
may  judge  very  differently.  One  may  pay  more  attention  to  the  arguments  on  one 
side  of  the  question,  and  another  may  pay  more  attention  to  the  arguments  on  the 
opposite  side ;  or  one  may  wish  to  find  the  truth  in  the  case,  and  another,  for 
some  sinister  motive,  may  wish  not  to  find  it.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D,)  Stages 
of  a  true  use  of  Scripture : — I.  Willing  reception,  as  opposed  to  frivolous  con- 
tempt (ver.  11).  II.  Diligent  searching,  as  opposed  to  blind  imitation  (ver.  11). 
Living  faith,  as  opposed  to  dead  knowledge  (ver.  12).  (K.  Gerok.)  Docility 
of  temper  in  relation  to  the  truth: — The  self-evidencing  power  of  Christian 
truth  depends  on  the  moral  condition  of  the  man.  A  flash  of  lightning  reveals 
nothing  to  him  whose  eyes  are  closed.  Two  classes  of  people,  both  Jews,  hear  the 
same  gospel,  from  the  same  hps,  under  the  same  circumstances ;  and  they  reach 
opposite  results.  For  every  kind  of  truth  a  special  capacity  is  needed.  The  ey© 
sees  only  what  it  brings  with  it  the  power  of  seeing.  We  shall  see  how  this  faculty 
was  trained  in  the  Bereans.  Note— I.  The  teaching,  the  recognition  of  which 
the  writer  commends.  1.  The  "  Word  "  is  more  fully  expounded  in  ver.  3.  The 
Messiah  of  ancient  promise  had  come.  The  great  photographic  shadows  thrown 
forward  upon  the  sensitive  page  of  prophecy  had  taken  substance.  This  was  a  posi- 
tion which  he  only  would  take  who  was  sure  of  his  ground ;  for  it  was  an  arraign- 
ment of  the  verdict  of  both  the  Jewish  and  Roman  tribunals.  "  This  Jesus  is 
neither  a  blasphemer  nor  a  seditious  intriguer,  but  the  Son,  and  the  Sent  of  God." 
And  not  only  so.  If  this  Jesus  were  the  Messiah,  then  the  death  knell  of  their 
national,  religious  pre-eminence  had  been  sounded.  "  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart 
.  .  .  until  Shiloh  come" — then  it  was  to  depart.  And  then, in  his  insistanceon  the 
mission  of  Christ,  the  apostle  drew  two  conclusions,  both  of  which  warred  against 
the  prejudices  of  his  hearers — the  one  against  the  creed  of  the  Jew,  who  believed 
his  race  exclusively  the  people  of  God,  and  the  other  against  the  pride  of  the  Greek, 
to  whom  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross  was  an  intolerable  offence.  2.  Having  taken  up 
his  main  position,  the  apostle  proceeds  to  estabhsh  it  by  an  appeal  to  the  highest 
authority.  "  He  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scriptures."  (1)  There  were 
prophecies  announcing  the  coming,  character,  and  work  of  the  Messiah.  "  To  Him 
gave  all  the  proi^hets  witness."  (2)  There  were  supernatural  occurrences  in  the 
birth  and  ministry  of  Christ,  each  connecting  His  appearance  -nd  Person  with  these 
prophetic  ioreahadowmgs— particularly  the  resurrection.    But  he  is  not  satisfied 


CHAP.  xTii.]  THE  ACTS.  671 

with  demonstrating  the  historical  validity  of  this  latter  fact.  •'  If  Christ  be  not 
raised  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins."  It  requires  for  its  doctrinal  antecedent  a  sacrificial 
death,  which  postulates  a  Divine  Person.  II.  The  spirit  in  which  this  teachino 
WAS  RECEIVED.  "  They  received  the  Word  with  all  readiness  of  mind."  Here  is — 
1.  The  docility  of  temper  which  belongs  to  a  right  conception  of  the  truth.  They 
were  in  that  balanced  equipoise  of  mind  which,  equally  removed  from  listless 
indifference  and  haughty  presumption,  left  them  at  liberty  to  listen  to  the  apostle's 
reasoning,  to  think  dispassionately  on  it,  and  to  draw  their  own  conclusions.  They 
did  not  surrender  their  honest  convictions  at  the  bidding  of  any  man,  however 
important  his  message  or  high  his  authority.  That  is  a  poor  faith  which  neither 
asks  nor  requires  a  reason  for  its  believing ;  and  it  is  an  equally  poor  scepticism 
which  contents  itself  with  thoughtlessly  denying.  The  Thessalonian  Jews  rejected 
the  Word,  because  they  refused  to  examine  its  evidences.  The  Bereans  more  wisely 
received  the  Word,  and  then  examined  its  evidences.  The  open  eye  went  in  quest 
of  the  teaching  light.  And  as  the  healthy  body  through  its  myriad  open  pores 
drinks  in  the  air  and  sunshine,  and  turns  them  into  a  ministry  of  life,  so  did  the 
ingenaous  candour  of  these  Bereans.  The  one  question  was.  What  is  the  truth  f 
not  What  do  we  wish  to  be  true  ?  2.  The  course  of  inquiry  marks — (1)  Their  fear- 
less honesty.  They  were  not  afraid  to  examine  either  their  old  opinions  or  the  new. 
The  great  question  was  whether  Paul's  statements  were  founded  on  fact  and 
accessible  to  the  ordinary  methods  of  moral  conviction.  To  test  this  question  they 
searched  the  Scriptures  to  which  the  apostle  had  appealed  as  justifying  the  departure 
he  had  sought  to  establish  between  Judaism  and  Christianity.  They  searched  them, 
not  the  apostle's  argument,  but  the  great  spring  and  reason  of  all  that  he  had 
affirmed.  They  searched  with  keen,  inquisitive  eye,  looking  beneath,  and  over,  and 
all  around.  The  question  was  too  grave  for  delay,  too  personal  to  be  honestly 
evaded.  They  were  bound  to  face  the  crisis.  So  they  "  searched  the  Scriptures." 
(2)  Their  manly  independence  of  spirit.  The  child  has  a  safeguard  from  per- 
plexity in  its  ignorance.  Where  it  does  not  know,  it  is  careless  to  inquire. 
With  no  sense  of  danger  there  is  no  fear.  But  the  man  must  interrogate.  To  know 
the  truth  and  to  build  upon  it,  whether  it  throw  up  a  basement  of  rock  or  open  into 
abysses  of  despair,  that  is  the  only  satisfaction  for  a  man.  (3)  Their  rationaUty. 
The  argument  for  Christianity,  if  it  be  true,  must  be  in  its  facts.  The  "  reason  for 
the  hope  that  is  in  us  "  implies  a  reasonableness  of  the  evidences  without  us.  The 
realism  of  Christianity  asks  to  be  examined  with  the  keenest  critical  research,  • 
whether  as  to  its  documents,  authorship,  spirit,  or  effects.  (4)  Their  reverence. 
They  went  directly  to  the  "  Scriptures."  The  problem  was  outside  the  schools: 
why  then  go  to  these  ?  It  was  a  supernatural  question ;  why  then  go  to  nature  ? 
If  I  want  to  map  out  a  diagram  of  the  stars,  I  do  not  go  to  geology.  3.  What 
followed  on  this  procedure.  (1)  Note  the  logical  consequence.  "  Therefore  many 
of  them  believed."  Faith  waiting  on  the  light  of  evidence  is  met  by  the  evidence 
of  light,  and  following  that  is  led  into  the  liberty  of  truth.  "  If  any  man  will  do 
His  will,  he  shall  know,"  &c.  Obedience  is  the  spirit  in  which  to  seek,  knowledge 
its  after  product.  The  old  philosophy  sought  first  to  construct  a  science  of  nature, 
and  then  to  bend  nature  to  its  science,  and  it  failed.  Now,  we  begin  with  what  is 
known  and  advance  to  the  unknown,  and  end  with  a  science  of  things.  It  is  just 
80  in  dealing  with  the  secrets  of  revelation.  A  childlike  docility,  putting  the  mind 
into  sympathy  with  the  truth,  will  get  into  fellowship  with  God.  "  Then  shall  we 
know,  if  we  foUow  on  to  know  the  Lord  "  ;  but  a  seLE-constructed  scheme  of  inter- 
pretation, which  assumes  the  negative  of  revelation,  or  makes  its  teachings  follow 
its  own  sceptical  preconceptions,  is  sure  to  flounder  into  confusion  and  hopeless 
ioubt.  To  the  man  whose  senses  are  all  that.  Omnipotence  itself  is  a  waste  of 
power.  Now  what  the  telescope  does  for  our  knowledge  of  the  stars,  revelation  does 
ior  our  knowledge  of  God ;  it  manifests  what  before  was  unknown,  and  in  both 
cases  tbe  value  of  the  instrument  is  in  its  use.  If  a  man  will  reverently  use  the  one 
■js  he  does  the  other,  "  he  ehall  know."  If  he  will  not,  he  "  cannot  know  the  things 
of  God,  for  they  are  spiritually  discerned."  (2)  The  word  "  therefore  "  is  a  marked 
one.  There  was,  first,  a  clear  presentation  of  the  truth  to  the  mind ;  then  the  actual 
contact  of  the  mind  with  the  truth,  and  reflection  upon  it.  There  was  a  readiness 
to  surrender  old  convictions  to  the  authority  of  evidence,  and  then  the  light  came : 
•'  they  believed."  And  this  belief  was  not  a  soUtary  or  a  miraculous  act ;  it  waa 
an  ordinary  result.  It  was  something  more  than  a  vague  conviction,  a  mere  senti- 
metit  of  wonder.  The  foundation  of  their  religious  beliefs  had  been  torn  away ;  but 
they  were  no  longer  adrift  on  a  sea  of  doubt.    "  They  believed  "  ;  and  faith  is  trust, 


672  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

calmness,  certainty.  It  is  the  eye  of  the  soul  looking  through  and  with  the  eye  of 
reason,  and  resting  on  the  reality  of  things.  And  this  effect  will,  in  all  ordinary 
cases,  be  produced  wherever  the  same  process  of  inquiry  is  pursued.  (3)  Besides 
this  satisfying  conviction  that  comes  from  conscious  experience  of  the  power  of 
truth,  there  are  the  facts  without,  (a)  There  are  the  Jews — a  standing  witness  of 
the  fulfilment  of  prophetic  Scripture,  (b)  The  existence,  history,  and  standing  of 
the  Christian  Chnrcli.  (c)  The  Christ  of  Christianity — the  miracle  of  miracles. 
Conclusion  :  1.  The  fitness  of  the  gospel  to  deal  with  dissimilar  classes  of  men. 
Jews,  Greeks,  "  honourable  "  men  and  women.  2.  The  great  impediment  in  the 
way  of  any  man's  salvation  is  not  in  the  gospel,  nor  in  the  ministration  of  the 
gospel,  but  in  the  indifference  or  pride  with  which  men  deal  with  its  transcendent 
statements.  (John  Burton.)  Ignorance  of  the  Scri])tures  the  cause  of  infidelity  : — 
The  most  prominent  and  invariable  cause  of  infidelity  is  found  in  the  fact  that  men 
will  not  investif^ate  the  Scriptures.  Many  infidels  have  confessed  that  they  had 
never  carefully  read  the  New  Testament.  Thomas  Paine  confessed  that  he  wrote 
the  first  part  of  the  "  Age  of  Beason  "  without  having  a  Bible  at  hand,  and  without 
its  being  possible  to  procure  one  where  he  then  was  (in  Paris).  "  I  had,"  says  he, 
"  neither  Bible  nor  Testament  to  refer  to,  though  I  was  writing  against  both ;  nor 
could  I  procure  any."     (A.  Barnes,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Therefore  many  of  them  believed. — The  gospel  and  the  classes : — 1.  They 
"  beUeved  " — a  little  word,  but  a  great  thing — the  step  by  which  they  passed  from 
condemnation  to  peace ;  from  the  house  un  the  sand  before  it  fell,  to  the  rock.  The 
moment  before  they  were  without  Christ  and  hope  ;  the  moment  after  they  were  in 
Christ,  and  heirs  of  eternal  life.  How  could  interests  so  vast  turn  on  a  point  so 
small  ?  All  decisive  turnings  are  made  on  points.  The  poles  are  mathematical 
points,  yet  how  huge  the  mass  that  spins  round  them  I  2.  '♦  Many  believed."  A 
swelling  of  spiritual  life  sometimes  comes  over  a  city  or  country,  as  the  tidal  wave 
over  the  ocean — hfted  and  led  in  both  cases  by  a  power  in  the  heavens.  The 
symptoms  which  portended  this  revival  were  a  bent  of  mind  towards  the  Word,  and 
a  daily  searching  of  it.  When  we  see  the  same  symptoms  we  may  expect  the  same 
enlargement.  3.  Note  the  classes  who  were  won  to  the  Lord.  I.  Gbeeks.  There 
is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God :  "  neither  Jew  nor  Greek."  Yet  the  conversion 
of  a  Greek  may  give  an  apostle  greater  reason  for  joy,  inasmuch  as  while  of  no 
more  value  intrinsically  than  a  Jew,  a  Greek  could  open  a  door  into  a  wider  field. 
Those  successes  were  sweetest  which  were  promises  of  more.  II.  Men  and  women. 
God  made  both  in  marvellous  wisdom  for  each  other  ;  together  they  have  gone  from 
Him  ;  it  is  a  glad  sight  when  they  return  in  company.  How  sad  when  the  sexes 
are  divided  by  that  partition  which  divides  the  Church  from  the  world  I  As  there  is 
neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  so  there  is  neither  male  nor  female  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
Sometimes  the  husband  or  brother  believes,  while  wife  or  sister  smothers  the 
spiritual  life  by  the  cares  of  this  world.  Sometimes  the  women  of  the  family  are 
devoted  to  Christ,  while  the  men  are  too  philosophic  or  self-indulgent.  Husbands 
and  wives,  &c. ,  be  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life.  HI.  People  of  high  STANDrxo. 
Are  the  upper  ten,  then,  more  precious  ?  No.  But  there  are  times  and  circum- 
stances in  which  their  conversion  is  more  noteworthy.  1.  If  for  nothing  else, 
the  early  disciples  valued  it  as  men  value  certain  gems,  on  account  of  its  rarity. 
The  common  people  heard  the  Master  gladly,  but  the  rulers  held  aloof.  On  that 
account  Jesus  looked  fondly  on  the  rich  young  man  who  came  to  Him.  2.  Their 
influence  is  greater.  3.  Great  temptations  bind  them.  IV.  Not  a  few.  There  is 
a  strange  appetite  in  the  Christian's  heart ;  it  continually  cries,  Give  an  appetite 
inherited  from  Christ.  When  many  came  He  invited  the  rest  as  eagerly.  (W. 
Amot,  D.D.)  Also  of  honourable  women. — Women  and  the  Church  : — Women 
are  first  named,  implying  that  they  were  first  to  believe.  This  is  still  no  common 
occurrence.  I.  Women  EECErvE  the  gospel  more  readily  than  do  men.  Lydia's 
case  is  repeated  in  all  quarters  of  Christendom.  The  sisters  of  Bethany,  the 
women  who  ministered  unto  Christ,  prophesy  the  faith  of  their  sex.  II.  Upon  the 
basis  of  this  fact  it  is  not  flattery  to  say  that  women  abs  more  noble  than  men. 
There  are  qualities  belonging  to  their  sex  fitting  women  above  men  to  appreciate 
the  gospel.  Though  first  in  the  fall,  also  first  in  relations,  qualifications,  and 
promise  to  bring  deliverance.  IIL  Women  have  special  beabons  fob  becoming 
CHBisTLiNS.  Their  aptness  to  receive  it  is  evidence  of  their  need  of  it — 1.  To  satisfy 
their  finer,  qoicker  sense  of  right,  truth,  beauty.  2.  To  fulfil  their  mission  in  life 
not  by  power,  bat  by  influence.    Their  want  of  Cluristian  character  is  a  want  of 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  673 

qualification  for  their  life  work.  IV.  Woman's  obligation  to  Chbistianitt.  Out- 
side of  the  religion  of  revelation  they  were  burdened  and  enslaved.  Their  elevation 
they  owe  to  Christianity.  (S.  Mease,  D.D.)  And  of  men  not  a  few. — Men  and 
the  Church : — Of  the  men  in  Berea,  not  a  few  received  the  gospel.  The  same  is 
true  wherever  the  gospel  has  been  carried.  The  inference,  however,  is  that  th« 
number  of  men  was  not  equal  to  the  number  of  women.  This  inference  is  confirmed 
by  observation  of  modern  churches.  This  unfortunate  phenomenon  is  deserving 
of  discussion.    I.  Men's  need  of  the  gospel  is  as  absolute  as  that  of  women. 

1.  Depravity  is  as  deep  and  real,  effecting  an  equal  estrangement  from  God,  and 
producing  the  same  evil  fruits — disobedience,  perversion  of  life,  unrest,  apprehension 
of  evil,  and  death,  both  in  body  and  soul.  2.  Their  manly  courage,  strength,  and 
capacity  leave  them  helpless  as  women ;  for  spiritual  ends  God's  help  alone  will 
avail.  3.  They  must  find  the  same  one  remedy — tbe  blood  of  Christ.  4.  To  men 
the  gospel  is  as  much  and  all  that  it  is  to  women — the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
to  them  that  beheve.  11.  The  allegiance  and  seevice  of  men  a»e  as  uncon- 
ditionally REQUIRED  AS  THOSE  OF  WOMEN.  1.  The  gospel  is  the  one  instrumentality 
for  the  world's  redemption.  Against  it  are  arrayed  all  the  forces  of  sin  and  Satan. 
Will  men,  strong  and  courageous,  refuse  to  enhst,  while  women  contend  with 
readier  will  and  in  greater  numbers  ?  2.  The  work  of  the  gospel  is  great  above 
every  other,  securing  human  happiness  here  and  hereafter.  Wherever  men  are, 
there  is  a  call  to  labour.  Sin,  crime,  poverty,  and  suffering  are  devouring  multitudes 
by  reason  of  gospel  work  undone,  whilst  men  are  idling  in  the  market-place.  Will 
men,  with  stronger  endowments  and  better  advantages,  look  on,  leaving  the  burden 
to  weaker  but  better  women?    IIL  The  evil  resulting  from  men's  greater 

BELUCTANCE   THAN   WOMEN   TO   ACCEPT   AND   PROMOTE   THE   GOSPEL.      Were  the  men  aS 

ready  to  believe  as  are  women,  the  latter  in  still  greater  numbers  would  be  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus — our  daughters,  wives,  and  mothers.  An  increasing  host  of  both  sexes 
would  flock  to  the  standard  of  the  Cross.  Men  out  of  the  Church  are  hindrances  to 
women  who  would  enter,  and  often  difficulties  to  such  as  have  entered.  The  men 
are  in  the  front  ranks  of  the  world's  battle :  why  should  they  not  be  in  the  front  as 
to  numbers  and  activity  in  the  battle  for  truth,  salvation,  and  God  ?    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  15-36.  And  they  that  conducted  Paul  bronght  Mm  unto  Athens. — Paul  at 
Athens: — I.  The  place  which  the  apostle  visited.  Athens.  II.  The  feelings 
OF  which  he  was  the  subject.  Not  of  admiration  at  the  masterpieces  of  art  by 
which  he  was  surrounded,  but  of — 1.  Holy  indignation.  He  saw  how  God  was  dis- 
honoured ;  how  He  was  robbed  of  the  homage  which  was  His  due.  2.  Christian 
compassion.  He  felt  deeply  at  the  contemplation  of  such  moral  debasement — a 
city  wholly  given  to  idolatry.  3.  Zeal.  It  is  well  to  feel ;  but  what  need  have  we 
to  guard  against  a  mere  fruitless  sentimentality.  III.  The  characters  with  whom 
HE  CAMB  in  contact. — 1.  Jcws.  With  them  he  disputed  daily.  2.  Certain  philoso- 
phers. lY.  The  address  he  delivered.  His  text  was  the  inscriptions  he  wit- 
nessed on  one  of  the  altars :  "  To  the  Unknown  God."  He  at  once  proceeded  with 
his  subject,  saying,  "  Whom,  therefore,  ye  ignorantly  worship.  Him  declare  I  unto 
you."  He  is  declared — 1.  In  reference  to  His  nature.  In  what  he  says  on  this 
subject,  we  are  reminded — (1)  Of  the  apostle's  boldness.  It  is  said  that  the  laws  of 
the  city  denounced  death  upon  those  who  should  introduce  a  foreign  deity.  (2)  His 
decision.  The  philosophers  in  speaking  of  God  had  nothing  but  mer«  guesses  and 
peradventures ;  but  in  no  hesitating  tone  does  Paul  speak.  (3)  His  skill.  This  was 
unlike  his  discourses  to  the  Jews,  where  he  mainly  appealed  to  the  Old  Testament.  ' 

2.  In  reference  to  the  Divine  dispensations.  (1)  The  past  dispensation  of  forbear- 
ance. (2)  The  present  dispensation  of  grace.  (3)  The  coming  dispensation  of 
judgment.  V.  The  effects  produced  by  his  labours.  They  were  threefold.  1. 
Bidicule.  "  Some  mocked."  2.  Procrastination.  "We  will  hear  thee  again  of  this 
matter."  8.  Faith.  "  Howbeit  certain  men  clave  unto  him,  and  believed."  {Ex- 
pository Outlines.)  Paul  at  Athens : — 1.  No  moment  in  the  annals  of  the  Church 
has  larger  significance  than  that  in  which  the  gospel  of  the  Uving  Christ  comes  to 
its  first  contact  with  the  worn  faiths  of  paganism, — its  philosophy  and  its  science. 
2.  The  very  inequalities  in  social  position  of  this  meeting  between  the  Jewish  tent- 
maker — "  whose  bodily  presence  is  weak,  and  whose  speech  is  of  no  account " — and 
the  classic  and  proud  city  of  the  ancient  world,  and  the  contrasted  weapons  of  the 
debate — in  the  warm  personal  faith  of  the  one,  and  the  lifeless  but  cultivated 
ignorance  of  the  other — all  conspire  to  make  this  apostolic  visit  of  historic  signifi- 
cance, and  this  address  a  model  in  the  missionary  records  of  the  Charch.    L  Tsa 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xvn. 

PULPIT.  1.  The  apostle  was  in  that  "  Holy  Land  of  the  Ideal,"  to  which  the  ancient 
world  of  art  and  letters  made  pilgrimage.  Here  was  the  shrine  at  which  "  the  fair 
humanities  "  of  the  pagan  faith  were  worshipped — here  the  gymnasium,  in  which 
the  human  form  came  to  its  most  perfect  development  in  grace  and  beauty.  Here, 
also,  the  human  mind,  the  laws  of  thought,  and  that  language  which  became  the 
chosen  medium  of  God's  truth,  attained  an  almost  ideal  acuteness  and  expansion, 
while  in  the  age  of  Pericles  art,  poetry,  and  philosophy  reached  such  consummate 
excellence  as  to  become  classic  models  of  form  and  style  to  all  the  generations.  It 
was  in  the  market-place  at  Athens  that  Socrates,  "  the  wisest  of  men,"  asked  his 
immortal  questions ;  and  yonder  in  the  olive  groves  by  the  brook  Plato  founded  the 
academy  ;  to  the  east,  under  the  shadow  of  the  mountain,  was  the  lyceum  of  Aris- 
totle, while  near  at  hand,  in  the  agora,  were  the  garden  of  Epicurus  and  the 
painted  porch  of  the  Stoics.  Here  was  the  home  of  the  drama,  and  the  scholar 
speaks  with  pride  the  names  of  iSschylus  and  Sophocles.  Here  spoke  the  orators 
of  Greece,  not  only  to  the  civil  issues  of  that  time,  but  also  to  the  listening  ears  of 
the  future,  and  here  wrote  historians  like  Thucydides  and  Xenophon ;  while  in  her 
temples  was  deified  the  national  spirit  in  the  marble  images  of  her  heroes  and 
soldiers,  in  the  trophies  of  her  victories,  and  the  memory  of  her  defeats,  until  we 
may  say  with  truth  that  no  city  of  like  limits  ever  gathered  to  itself  so  much  of 
history,  so  many  objects  of  interest,  and  such  prestige  as  Athens.  2.  In  the  midst  of 
such  surroundings  Paul  was  waiting  for  the  coming  of  Silas  and  Timothy  from 
Berea.  As  his  eyes  rested  upon  the  images  of  gods  and  goddesses  which  filled  the 
temples  and  lined  the  avenues  of  the  city — where,  the  historian  says,  it  was  easier 
to  find  a  god  than  a  man — "  his  spirit  was  stirred  within  him  as  he  beheld  the  city 
full  of  idols."  The  apostle  was  not  destitute  of  that  fine  sense  of  the  beautiful  which 
belongs  to  all  great  souls,  nor  did  the  mind  of  the  Jewish  scholar  fail  in  quick  re- 
sponse to  real  culture ;  but  the  beautiful  in  art  or  letters  was  subordinate  to  the 
truth  in  Jesus,  which  filled  his  soul.  3.  He  was  not  of  choice  nor  as  a  student  la 
this  university  city,  but  in  the  providence  of  God  he  was  a  delayed  messenger  of  the 
Cross ;  and,  true  to  the  great  mission  which  possessed  him,  he  engages  the  loiterers 
of  the  market-place  in  religious  debate.  For  such  street  colloquies  the  Athenians 
had  particular  liking.  It  was  through  such  that  their  great  philosophers  had  come 
into  prominence ;  and,  having  abundant  leisure  on  their  hands,  the  citizens  gene- 
rally found  both  occupation  and  excitement  in  taking  part  in  them.  4.  We  can 
easily  picture  the  amused  curiosity,  and  the  half-serious,  half-sneering  questions  of 
the  crowd  which  gathered  around  him:  "  What  would  this  babbler  say?"  "He 
seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods."  As  the  circle  grew  larger,  and  hear- 
ing more  difficult,  curiosity  in  the  new  religion  became  more  earnest,  until,  in  the 
spirit  of  mischief  or  half-mirth,  "  they  laid  hold  upon  him,"  and  led  him  up  the 
stone  steps  to  the  top  of  the  Areopagus,  the  ancient  judgment-seat  of  Athens,  where 
in  the  crescent  of  stone  seats  had  sat  the  judges,  who,  three  hundred  years  before, 
had  condemned  Socrates  to  die.  Beyond  the  tribunal,  in  the  cleft  of  tiie  rock,  was 
the  menacing  sanctuary  of  the  Furies,  while  above  was  the  great  temple  of  Mars, 
the  god  of  blood.  Here,  then,  was  the  pulpit  of  the  apostle — such  a  pulpit  as  no 
man,  unless  sent  of  God,  and  filled  with  the  courage  of  the  truth,  would  have  dared 
to  occupy  1  II.  The  audienoe.  Their  temper  and  character  have  exhibition  in  the 
half -earnest,  half-contemptuous,  inquisitive  spirit  with  which  they  placed  the  apostle 
on  "  the  stone  of  impudence" — where  the  accused  were  wont  to  plead  their  cause 
before  the  council — and  with  mocking  judicial  tones  bade  him  speak.  1.  The 
Athenian  was  religious :  the  innumerable  temples,  statues,  and  altars  prove  hia 
"carefulness  in  religion";  but  it  reveals  also  what  his  religion  was.  It  was  one 
which  made  him  a  splendid  animal  with  a  splendid  intellect,  which  had  no  holding 
power  against  profligacy  and  fatalism,  but,  like  the  sun,  while  it  preserves  the  Uving, 
it  hastens  the  decay  of  the  dead.  The  same  temper  of  mind  and  hfe  had  gone  over 
into  philosophy.  (1)  Three  hundred  years  before,  in  his  little  garden  beside  the 
market-place,  Epicurus  had  taught  his  followers  that  happiness  is  the  great  pur- 
pose and  pursuit  of  life.  In  close  alliance  with  this  standard  of  life  was  a  material 
theory  of  the  universe,  which  made  the  world  "  a  fortuitous  combination  of  atoms," 
so  that  Providence  became  accident,  and  chance  the  disposer  of  events.  (2)  The 
Stoics  taught  a  system  of  ethics  radically  at  variance  with  this ;  for,  while  the  Epi- 
curean had  made  the  world  conform  to  self,  the  Stoio  had  made  self  conform  to 
nature ;  thus  self -gratification  became  the  maxim  of  the  one,  and  self-denial  of  the 
other.  And  while  the  Epicurean  avoided  pain,  the  Stoic  welcomed  it  in  order  to 
despise  it,  and  found  the  secret  of  Uf e  in  living  in  conformity  to  nature,  receiving 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  575 

its  bitter  as  sweet,  and  its  sweet  as  bitter,  with  eqaal  composure.  Bat  while  ita 
anstere  morality  commands  our  admiration,  its  theories  of  the  universe  are 
degrading  and  material.  Mind  and  matter  were  not  distinguishable.  God  is  only 
the  reasoning  principle  in  the  universe — one  with  the  material  world.  The  very 
souls  of  men,  like  their  bodies,  were  material.  (3)  One  other  class  of  hearers  were 
represented;  the  gossips  who  spent  their  time  in  hearing  and  telling  some  new 
thing.  This  sect  needs  no  analysis;  their  creed  is  simple  and  their  history  is 
familiar.  Every  community  knows  them,  and  every  successor  of  the  apostle  ad- 
dresses them.  2.  We  have  outlined  the  character  and  creeds  of  the  company  that 
we  may  note  one  or  two  facts.  (1)  That,  while  unbeUef  is  a  revolving  wheel,  it  ia 
not  a  progressive  one ;  for  the  very  phases  of  unbeUef  against  which  the  Church  is 
contending  to-day  Paul  met  on  Mars'  Hill.  Our  materialistic  philosophy  which 
rules  out  God ;  our  advanced  thought  in  natural  science ;  where  do  they  receive 
better  statement  or  definition  than  in  that  old  poem  of  Lucretius  "  On  the  Nature 
of  Things  "  ?  Our  selfish  and  infidel  systems  of  ethics — what  are  they  but  echoes 
of  voices  across  that  line  which  has  divided  the  centuries  ?  Unbelief  always  carries 
its  ball  and  chain ;  it  has  no  progress,  and  it  cannot  build.  (2)  In  the  focused 
light  of  Christianity  in  which  we  live  to-day  it  would  seem  impossible  for  the  worn 
pagan  faiths  of  Epicurus  and  Zeno  to  exist  among  us.  But  such  is  not  the  case. 
For  multitudes  are  living  upon  the  unformulated  theories  and  unspoken  creeds  of 
heathendom  Self  is  the  centre  of  the  universe,  pleasure  the  great  end  of  life  ;  and 
as  regards  conduct  they  have  no  souls ;  there  is  no  hereafter,  and  God  is  a  fiction. 
Or  they  are  austere,  stem  moralists,  complacent  in  their  own  rightness,  conform- 
ing to  the  events  of  life  with  stoical  composure ;  scorning  that  humility  which  comea 
from  repentance,  and  treating  with  disdain  an  atonement  for  its  guilt  and  death. 
3.  Athens  teaches  us  that  culture  cannot  save  a  man  nor  a  city  from  moral  decay. 
Not  commerce  nor  national  era,  not  wealth  nor  taste,  not  even  the  library  nor  the 
ooUege,  convey  the  forces  of  permanent  power  or  real  welfare  to  men ;  but  the  gospel 
is  the  power  of  God  unto  life  to  the  man  and  the  state.  III.  The  sermon.  Note 
the  courteous  prudence  with  which  he  begins  as  he  raises  his  hand  for  silence — 
*•  Men  of  Athens,  in  all  things  I  observe  that  you  are  unusually  religious" — a  com- 
pliment which  carries  the  truth  and  the  attentive  favour  of  his  audience ;  and  yet 
such  conciliation  does  not  compromise  the  man  nor  his  message.  He  continues — 
"  For  as  I  passed  through  your  city,"  &c.  (ver.  23).  Paul  might  have  denounced 
their  idolatry  with  a  sledge-hammer  blow,  for  his  spirit  had  boiled  within  him  as 
he  beheld  it ;  but  alert  to  every  circumstance  which  should  serve  a  Christian  pur- 
pose,  he  uses  the  very  errors  of  heathendom  to  guide  their  feet  and  thought  to  Him 
who  was  the  way  and  the  truth.  And  now  every  sentence  is  packed  with  "  the  deep 
things  of  God  "  as  he  proceeds,  and  every  word  is  a  battle-blow  to  the  false  philo- 
sophy of  his  hearers.  IV.  Its  beception  (ver.  32).  The  same  old  story  wherever 
the_truth  is  taught.  Mockers,  procrastinators,  believers ;  to  which  class  do  we 
VeTong?  (Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)  Paul  at  Athens: — It  is  one  test  of  a 
real  gospel,  that  it  can  overleap  all  barriers  placed  between  man  and  man,  and  find 
its  way  into  that  innermost  heart's  core  which  makes  the  whole  world  kin.  Already 
in  this  one  Book  we  have  seen  it  dealing  with  the  Jew  and  with  the  Gentile :  we 
have  seen  it  in  Palestine,  in  Asia  Minor,  in  Europe.  Everywhere  it  has  found  some 
hearts  into  which  it  entered  as  a  healing  bahn,  some  lives  which  it  penetrated  with 
transforming  power.  Now  we  are  to  see  it  at  Athens.  I.  St.  Paul's  feeling.  He 
was  left  there  for  a  time  alone.  Some  of  us  know  that  sinking  of  the  spirits  which 
is  occasioned  by  loneliness  in  a  strange  city.  He  was  a  man  of  quick  feeling,  lively 
emotion,  and  gentlest  affection  ;  but  even  these  were  not  the  causes  of  his  chief  dis- 
tress. His  life  was  given  to  one  work,  and  his  whole  heart  was  in  it.  Many  a 
so-called  Christian  has  tarried  in  an  idolatrous  place,  and  seen  nothing  in  it  but  the 
antiquity  of  its  associations  or  the  curiosity  of  its  monuments.  At  Athens  the 
traveller  feels  nothing  but  a  thrill  of  historic  and  poetic  interest ;  and  it  would  be 
judged  by  many  a  mere  narrow-mindedness  to  remember  the  gospel.  But  St.  Paul 
could  not  dissever  the  magnificence  of  a  temple  or  the  perfection  of  a  statue  from 
the  remembrance  of  the  idolatry  which  it  served  and  of  the  souls  which  it  debased. 
Yet  his  irritation  was  not  a  merely  vexing  and  annoying  thing,  torturing  to  himself 
and  to  all  about  him,  on  the  contrary.  U.  It  stibbed  him  to  action.  1.  At  Athene, 
as  elsewhere,  there  was  a  Jewish  synagogue :  there  at  all  events  he  might  find  soma 
to  sympathise  with  his  horror  at  idolatry ;  there,  too,  he  might  at  least  argue  from 
the  common  ground  of  Scripture,  and  assume  both  the  unity  of  the  Godhead  and 
the  expectation  of  a  Christ.  2.  But  the  Jews  he  had  with  him  always,  the  Athenians 


576  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

lie  met  but  for  once ;  this  was  their  day,  the  season  of  their  visitation.     Accord- 
ingly we  read  that  in  the  far-famed  Agora  "  he  reasoned  daily  with  those  who  met 
with  him."     St.  Paul  was  not  too  proud,  reserved,  indolent,  or  half-hearted,  to  seize 
opportunities  of  conversing  with  strangers.    A  man  with  a  soul  to  be  saved  or  lost 
must  have,  for  him,  a  ground  of  interest  and  a  point  of  contact.     Thus  there  en- 
countered him  some  of  the  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers.     Strange  meeting 
between  a  man  who  lived  but  for  duty,  yet  found  that  duty  in  love  Divine  and 
human,  and  those  who  either  denied  the  existence  of  a  duty,  or  else  made  duty 
another  name  for  hardness.     Very  brief,  yet  very  graphic,  is  the  account  given  of 
the  treatment  of  the  gospel  by  these  philosophers.     Nothing  could  be  more  con- 
temptuous. They  treated  him  as  a  mere  reporter  of  idle  tales  picked  up  from  others, 
and  as  a  man  incapable  even  of  expressing  the  follies  which  he  has  adopted. 
Others  took  a  more  serious  view  of  the  case,  and  thought  him  a  sort  of  travelling 
missionary  of  false  gods,  desiring  to  add  new  names  to  an  already  overflowing  Pan- 
theon.   Because  the  names  of  Jesus  and  the  Resurrection  occurred  so  frequently 
they  ran  to  the  conclusion  that  they  were  the  names  of  two  deities  whom  he  sought 
to  incorporate  in  the  national  religion.     And  if  this  were  so,  it  was  a  case  requiring 
the  cognisance  of  the  great  religious  court  of  Athens  (vers.  19,  20).     A  brief  word  of 
comment  on  the  Athenian  character  is  here  introduced  (ver.  21).     It  was  the  com- 
plaint of  their  own   orators.      When  they  ought  to  have  been  taking  vigorous 
measures  for  the  welfare  or  protection  of  their  own  state,  still  the  love  of  news  pre- 
dominated over  every  other  principle,  and  they  who  should  have  been  acting  were 
ever  talking  still!     There  are  some  in  every  congregation  to  whom  this  reproof  be- 
longs.    3.  Then  St.  Paul  stood  before  that  famous  court,  of  which  the  poets  and 
orators  of  Greece  tell  such  proud  things.    It  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a  formal 
trial,  nor  that  life  or  death  hung  upon  the  issue.    For  the  present  it  was  a  hearing 
only  foe  information.     Observe  now  the  wisdom  and  the  courage  with  which  he 
spake.  "  Ye  men  of  Athens,  I  observe  that  in  all  things  ye  are  more  religious''  than 
others.     He  would  carry  them  with  him  if  he  could.     And  he  selects  this  one 
characteristic  as  in  itself  hopeful.     And  it  is  better  that  a  man  should  feel  his  de- 
pendence, and  seek  to  be  in  communication  with  One  above  him,  than  that  he 
should  do  neither.    Lest  after  all  their  care  any  one  superior  being  should  at  last 
have  been  overlooked,  they  had  adopted  the  singular  expedient  of  an  anonymous 
altar,  which  might  at  least  deprecate  the  vengeance  of  a  disregarded  and  slighted 
God.   This  altar  St.  Paul,  with  a  wisdom  and  a  skill  above  man's,  takes  as  the  text 
of  his  sermon.     I  am  come,  he  says,  to  give  a  name  to  tbat  anonymous  altar.     I 
am  come  to  you  from  an  unknown  God,  to  enable  you  to  fill  up  that  blank  space  in 
your  devotions.    And  who  then  is  He  ?     The  God  who  made  the  world.    How  then 
can  He  be  hmited  to  one  spot  in  it  ?     He  is  the  Giver  and  Preserver  of  human  life : 
how  can  He  require  material  offerings  as  though  to  support  His  own  ?    He  is  the 
one  Creator  of  all  races,  assigning  to  each  the  duration  of  its  being,  and  the  place 
of  its  habitation,  and  with  what  object?  The  27th  verse  gives  the  answer.  He  quotes 
from  a  Greek  poet  of  Tarsus  in  Cilicia,  his  own  native  city,  as  though  claiming  for 
himself  a  new  link  of  connection  with  his  audience.    If  we  are,  as  your  own  poets 
say,  God's  offspring,  it  is  derogatory  -aven  to  man's  nature  to  represent  God  under 
material  and  inanimate  forms.     Let  the  very  dignity  of  man  cry  out  against  the 
disparagement  of  God.    There  was,  he  continues,  a  long  and  dreary  age,  during 
which  God  seemed  as  it  were  to  acquiesce  in  the  spiritual  ignorance  of  His  creatures. 
But  now  He  has  interposed  with  a  call  to  repentance.    And  that  call  is  backed  by 
a  threatening  as  well  as  a  promise.     There  is  a  day  of  judgment.     And  that  judg- 
ment will  be  conductfid  by  a  Man,  the  proof  of  whose  Judgeship  is  the  fact  of  Hia 
pwn  resurrection.     Well  can  we  understand  that  there  was  that  in  this  address 
which  was  at  once  trifling  and  shocking  in  Grecian  ears  (vers.  32-34).  And  for  this 
time  he  departed  from  among  them.     (Dean  Vaughan.)        Paul  at  Athens: — 1. 
Paul  is  now  "  waiting."    He  needs  rest,  and  so  will  sit  down  and  be  quiet  and  re- 
cover himself,     Paul  waiting  1     The  two  words  do  not  go  happily  together.     He 
cannot  wait.     Life  is  short ;  the  enemy  is  at  hand ;  the  opportunity  enlarges ;  and 
he  who  was  left  in  an  attitude  of  waiting  begins  to  bum.    A  paroxysm  (for  that  is 
the  Uteral  word)  seizes  his  heart  as  he  sees  a  sight  he  had  never  beheld  before— a 
city  whoUy  given  to  idolatry— one,  as  an  historian  tells  us,  in  which  it  wab  easier 
to  find  a  god  than  a  man.     "  Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thyself  any  graven  image  " 
was  ringing  in  Paul's  ears.     2.  Athens  was  wholly  given  to  idolatry.     You  cannot 
stop  at  one  idol.     One  brings  another.     This  law  "has  also  its  force  in  higher  direo- 
tions.    You  cannot  stop  with  one  isolated  excellence.    It  is  not  excellence  it  yoa  M 


OHAP.  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  677 

use  it.  Vices  go  in  groups ;  piety  it  a  whole  excellence  and  not  a  partial  virtue. 
The  Athenians  covered  their  irreligious  lives  by  these  religious  forms.  "  Fill  the 
city  with  gods,  and  let  us  live  as  we  like,"  was  the  Athenian  philosophy — it  is  ours 
too  I  "  Start  another  mission,  and  let  us  play  what  pranks  we  like  under  the  dark- 
ness." •♦  Build  five  hundred  more  churches,  but  let  us  drink  the  devil's  cup  right 
down  to  its  last  hot  drop."  There  are  more  idols  in  London  than  ever  there  were 
in  Athens ;  not  marble  idols,  but  idols  we  can  hide.  Were  Paul  to  come  here  he 
would  see  fashion,  fortune,  ease,  ambition,  self-seeking.  In  mighty,  measureless 
London,  for  every  man  is  his  own  idol  I  Stone  idols  may  be  so  many  marble  steps 
up  to  the  highest  altar ;  but  when  the  heart  is  its  own  idol,  and  its  own  idolater, 
nothing  can  break  up  the  paganism  but  crucifixion.  The  Athenian  pagan  might  be 
led  away  argumentatively  from  stone  deities  to  conceptions  of  deific  being  and  force ; 
but  the  pagan  heart  never  listens  to  intellectual  appeals.  Only  one  thing  can  break 
the  heart-idol — "  the  hammer  of  the  Lord,"  that  can  grind  to  powder  the  stoniest 
heart  that  ever  shut  out  the  clemency  and  love  of  Heaven.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by 
power,"  &c.  3.  Paul  did  a  httle  introductory  work.  He  always  began  just  where 
the  opportunity  permitted  him.  "  He  disputed  in  the  synagogue  with  the  Jews," 
and  he  found  a  custom  in  Athens  of  meeting  in  the  market-place,  which  was  the 
general  school-house  of  the  city ;  and  there  learned  men  were  talking  and  Paul 
Ustened.  Having  hstened,  he  spoke,  as  he  had  a  right  to  do  according  to  Athenian 
custom,  but  he  spoke  so  as  to  bring  upon  himself  a  contemptuous  name.  "  What  will 
this  seed-pecker  say?  He  is  evidently  nibbling  at  something,  poor  little,  small- 
minded,  weak-eyed  Jew."  "He  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods." 
"Strange,  i.e.,  startling  things "(ver.  20).  The  gospel  startles;  it  never  comes 
easily  into  any  civilisation.  Jesus  did  not  come  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword,  not 
quietness,  but  fire  1  4.  The  Athenians  were  interested  in  the  matter  from  an  intel- 
lectual point  of  view  (ver.  18).  That  is  not  religious  inquiry.  If  you  want  to  know 
what  that  is,  recall  the  instance  of  the  jailer  who  said,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ?  "  Are  we  typified  by  the  jailer  or  by  the  stoic  ?  Let  us  be  honest  with  our- 
selves. K  we  are  in  God's  house  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  God's  Word,  all 
heaven  will  be  aflame  with  light,  and  every  guest  at  God's  table  wiU  be  satisfied ; 
but  if  we  are  here  in  the  Athenian  spirit  we  may  be  disappointed  and  mocked.  5. 
Paul  was  always  ready  to  speak.  But  they  were  learned  men,  so  was  he,  but  not  as 
many  men  are  with  unavailable  learning,  but  in  his  gospel.  He  asked  for  no  time 
to  prepare.  Instantly  he  said,  "  Ye  men  of  Athens."  That  was  Demosthenic  ;  the 
great  orator  always  began  his  appeal  thus.  Thus  the  true  preacher  can  alwajs 
begin.  He  cannot  always  say  "  Dear  friends,"  for  there  may  be  none  ;  •'  brethren," 
for  that  may  be  an  unknown  term.  There  is  genius  even  here.  There  is  a  gift  of 
God  in  little  matters  as  well  as  in  great.  Paul  was  never  wanting  in  tact.  Mark 
the  simple  dignity  of  the  salutatory  form.  They  were  "  men  "  ;  they  met  upon  a 
common  platform.  Then  the  next,  "  I  perceive  that  in  aU  things  ye  are  too  re- 
hgiously-minded."  Mark  the  broad  and  generous  recognition.  Do  not  affront  the 
people  you  intend  afterwards  to  persuade.  There  are  two  methods  of  delivering  a 
country  from  idolatry.  The  one  is,  Jehu-like,  to  destroy  Baal  out  of  Israel ;  the 
other  is  to  displace  the  false  by  the  introduction  of  the  true ;  not  to  deride  an  idol, 
but  to  preach  a  Saviour.  So  Paul  recognises  what  he  sees.  "  I  found  an  altar  with 
this  inscription  :  TO  THE  UNKNOWN  GOD.  I  will  begin  where  you  end. 
Whom,  therefore,  ye  ignorantly  worship.  Him  declare  I  unto  you."  What  infinite 
tact  I  That  is  the  true  method  of  preaching  to-day.  You  must  interpret  to  men 
what  they  do  not  interpret  to  themselves.  Endeavour  to  make  the  most  of  a  man. 
Every  man  has  upon  him  this  inscription,  "  To  the  Unknown,"  and  the  Christian 
teacher  has  to  say,  "  Then  I  will  make  it  known  to  you.  Do  you  ever  yearn 
and  desire  7 "  Then  such  aspiration  is  the  beginning  of  prayer.  Do  you 
suffer  for  others?  You  will  sit  up  all  night  that  others  may  sleep.  If 
BO,  that  is  the  beginning  of  sacrifice.  Are  you  dissatisfied  with  earth  and 
time  ?  Are  you  filled  with  discontentment  ?  That  is  the  beginning  of 
immortality.  This  text  of  Paul's  is  in  every  man ;  every  Hfe  furnishes  a  Mars' 
Hill  from  the  top  of  which  Christian  preachers  may  preach.  The  sun  does  not 
plant  the  root,  but  warms  it  into  fulness  of  life.  The  witness  of  God  is  in  every 
one  of  us,  and  answers  to  the  claim  of  the  written  Book.  (J.  Parker,  JD.D.) 
Paul  at  Athens: — Greece  was  the  clime  and  residence  of  the  beautiful.  The  very 
air  was  tempered  to  delight,  and  the  soul  imbibed  the  same  sunny  hues  as  the  land- 
scape. The  passion  for  the  beautiful,  gave  to  the  Greeks  a  more  brilliant  mythology 
than  any  other  nation.  Music  moulded  the  flexible  language  into  its  own  nature, 
TOL.  II.  87 


578  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

and  it  became  so  plastic  that  its  very  swell  and  modulation  were  bat  the  waves  of 
Bong.  The  arts  and  sciences  danced  around  humanity,  and  "  stored  man's  home 
with  comforts,  and  chaimed  his  senses  with  all  kinds  and  forms  of  elegance." 
Athens  was  a  marble  paradise,  filled  with  temples  and  with  gods,  whose  forms  were 
the  very  models  of  symmetry  and  perfection.  What  were  the  feelings  which  Athens 
was  likely  to  produce  in  a  mind  so  accomplished  as  Paul's?  To  the  splendour  of 
its  name,  to  the  charms  of  its  literature,  he  was  no  stranger ;  and  his  mind  was 
peculiarly  alive  to  every  form  of  beauty.  The  streets  were  but  long  galleries  of  god- 
like forms  in  marble.  Athens  was  the  very  focus  of  idolatry,  and  the  apostle 
witnessed  the  living  magnificence  of  their  worship,  the  gorgeous  attire  of  their 
priests — the  solemn  pomp  of  their  processions — the  clouds  of  fragrant  incense  which 
alone  could  obscure  their  transparent  atmosphere,  and  the  majesty  of  their  theatres. 
He  heard  the  surpassing  melody  of  their  music,  and  listened  to  the  discourses  of 
their  orators;  and  "his  spirit  was  stirred  within  him,"  but  only  because  "he 
beheld  the  city  wholly  given  to  idolatry."  Let  me  direct  your  attention  to — I.  The 
PEEACHEB.  He  was  no  ordinary  man.  His  mind,  naturally  strong,  had  been 
strengthened  by  culture ;  he  had  great  energy  and  decision  of  character.  Like  the 
bird  of  heaven,  he  was  at  home  in  the  storm  as  well  as  in  the  sunshine.  He  was 
once  the  greatest  enemy  of  that  truth  of  which  he  was  now  the  foremost  advocate. 
What  a  change  has  taken  place  in  his  views  and  feelings,  since  when  a  young  man 
he  studied  Grecian  literature  1  Just  look  at  him  with  that  volume  of  Greek  poetry 
in  his  hand.  He  is  longing  for  the  hour  when  he  shall  visit  Athens,  and  converse 
with  the  hterati,  and  dxink  in  inspiration  from  the  fountain.  He  visits  Athens ; 
but,  strange  to  tell,  he  visits  that  celebrated  city  as  a  preacher  of  the  Cross  1  He  is 
now  to  contend  with  the  very  master  spirits  of  the  world,  in  the  very  palace  of 
intellect,  and  in  the  very  sanctuary  of  idolatry.  II.  The  place  whebk  Paul 
PEEACHED.  The  spot  where  he  stood  was  a  rock  where  in  earlier  days  the  supreme 
court  of  justice  had  been  held.  Though  the  authority  of  this  court  had  been 
abridged  by  the  Roman  conquest,  still  it  was  reserved  for  the  judges  to  determine 
what  gods  were  to  be  admitted  into  the  temples,  and  to  pronounce  sentence  npon 
any  who  should  be  guilty  of  blaspheming  the  divinities  of  Greece.  If  ever  the 
sincerity  of  the  preacher  was  tried,  it  was  upon  this  occasion ;  and  if  ever  Paul  dis- 
played intrepidity  of  character,  it  was  upon  Mars'  hill.  HI.  The  congregation. 
Around  him,  then,  were  gathered  a  multitude,  acute,  inquisitive,  and  polished. 
Never  did  preacher  have  such  a  congregation.  There  were  the  philosophers  of 
bower  and  porch  ;  orators  with  whom  the  slightest  tinge  of  a  barbarian  accent  would 
break  the  power  of  the  most  persuasive  discourse ;  Epicureans  who  believed  the 
world  was  created  by  accident  or  by  chance — men  who  though  they  professed  to 
believe  in  the  existence  of  a  God,  regarded  Him  as  dwelling  in  the  far-o£f  watch- 
towers  of  some  distant  world,  indifferent  to  His  creatures ;  and  Stoics  who  believe  in 
two  principles,  God  and  matter,  both  eternal,  and  therefore  they  virtually  denied 
that  there  was  any  creation.  There,  too,  was  the  priest,  astonished  at  the  daring 
of  the  preacher  ;  the  young  Roman  who  had  come  to  Athens  to  be  educated;  the 
Jew  looking  on  with  hatred  and  fury  at  the  apostate  from  the  ancient  faith ;  and 
there,  too,  though  afar  off  and  crouching  to  the  ground,  was  the  slave,  drinking  in 
the  doctrine — strange  and  new  to  him,  sweet  as  music  to  his  ears — that  God  ha(f 
"  made  all  men  of  one  blood."  What  must  Paul  have  felt  when  surrounded  by  such 
a  congregation  I  IV.  The  sehmon.  Nobly  did  the  champion  of  truth  perform  his 
part.  He  spoke  worthy  of  himself,  of  his  commission,  and  his  congregation.  Yoa 
cannot  fail  to  be  struck  by  the  adaptation  of  this  discourse  to  the  congregation. 
When  Paul  went  into  a  synagogue  he  reasoned  with  the  Jews  out  of  the  Scriptures. 
But  here  were  men  who  believed  that  the  creation  of  the  world  was  altogether 
fortuitous ;  those  who  did  not  believe  in  an.v  creation  at  all ;  those  who  denied  that 
there  was  any  future  state.  The  apostle  then  set  himself  to  prove  to  them  that 
there  was  a  God,  that  this  God  was  the  Creator  of  all  things,  that  there  was  an 
overruling  Providence,  and  consequently  that  there  was  a  judgment  to  come.  We 
can  only  seize  on  some  of  the  leading  features  of  this  sermon.  How  appropriate 
and  judicious  his  introduction  1  Since  you  are  worshippers  of  an  *•  unknown  God  " 
it  must  be  gratifying  to  you,  who  are  such  religious  people,  to  hear  something  con- 
cerning Him.  From  his  primary  positions  the  apostle  proceeds  to  draw  certain 
inferences,  viz.,  that  God  is  not  confined  to  any  particular  place,  that  God  is  inde- 
pendent ;  and  the  spirituality  of  the  Divine  Being.  With  these  reasonings  the 
apostle  makes  an  assertion  relative  to  the  duty  of  man,  to  seek  an  acquaintance 
with  God  through  the  medium  of  His  works  and  ways ;  and  then  concludes  bj 


«HAi«.  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  679 

observing,  that  though  God  for  ages  had  left  the  Gentiles  to  themselves,  now  He 
"  commanded  all  men  everywhere  to  repent,"  &o,  V.  The  effects  (vers.  32-34). 
Conclusion :  1.  The  great  propriety  of  discourses  being  adapted  to  the  circumstances 
of  the  hearers.  It  is  necessary  that  the  preacher  should  commend  himself  to  every 
man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  but  where  there  is  a  variety  of  character  and 
circumstances,  it  is  a  difficult  thing  for  a  minister  to  adapt  himself.  But  "  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  "  is  adapted  to  all  men's  circumstances.  2.  Paul's  discourse 
is  an  excellent  homily  for  these  times.  There  are  not  a  few  who  are  worshippers  of 
an  "  unknown  God  "  ;  who  attach  sanctity  to  certain  places;  who  suppose  that  God 
takes  delight  in  certain  words,  and  in  certain  postures.  Let  such  study  Paul's 
sermon,  and  they  will  find  that  that  very  sermon  preached  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago  is  peculiarly  adapted  to  their  circumstances.  (H.  J.  Bevis.)  Paul  at  Alliens: 
— The  practical  lessons  are  : — I.  That  a  tbdlt  oood  man  will  be   sensitive  to 

THE    MORAL   EVILS   PREVALENT    IN    THE    COMMUNITY   IN    WHICH   HE    IS    PLACED    (vcr.    16). 

Here  idolatry  was  rampant.     What  are  the  prevailing  evils  in  London  ?     II.  A 

TRULY   GOOD    MAN    WILL   BESTIR   HIMSELF    FOB   THE    REMOVAL   OF    THOSE    EVILS.        There 

are  those  who  feel  and  say  much,  but  do  nothing  (ver.  17).     III.  In  dealing  with 

THESE    evils  A   MAN   WHO   IS   WISE   AS   WELL   A3   GOOD   WILL     STRIKE   AT   THEIR    ROOT 

IGNORANCE  OF  GoD  AND  His  WILL.  There  was  much  vice,  but  Paul  said  nothing  of 
ihat.  Political  and  social  reforms  are  good,  but  what  the  world  needs  is  regenera- 
tion. Make  the  tree  good  and  its  fruit  will  be  good.  IV.  In  dealing  with  thesb 
EVILS  TACT  IS  NEEDED  AS  WELL  AS  ZEAL  (vcr.  22).  Paul  uevcr  Committed  the  gross 
oratorical  blunder  of  accusing  his  audience  of  superstition.  What  he  commended 
and  proved  was  their  religiousness,  and  having  pot  them  in  good  humour  he  pro- 
ceeded to  deliver  his  message.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  the  way  we  take  hold  of 
people.     You  must  conciliate  men  before  you  can  convert  them.     V.  In  dealing 

WITH    THESE    EVILS    YOU    MUST    NOT    EXPECT    UNIFORM    SUCCESS    (verS.    32-34).      (R.    A. 

Bertram.)  Paxil  at  Athens : — The  practical  lessons  which  this  scene  teaches  us 
are — I.  That  the  loftiest  efforts  of  unaided  men,  can  produce  no  higher  reli- 
gion THAN  A  REFINED  POLYTHEISM.  This  is  Confirmed  by  the  records  of  all  heathenism. 
Had  man  been  left  to  himself,  he  never  would  have  known  the  true  God  ;  and  hence 
the  privilege  of  living  in  a  land  where  the  Triune  God  is  known  and  worshipped. 

n.    That  ART  AND  LITERATURE  HAVE  IN  themselves  NO  CONSERVING  MORAL  force.       The 

citizens  of  Athens  had  a  poetry,  which  maintains  its  precedence  to  this  day ;  a 
literature,  unsurpassed  in  eloquence  and  vigour ;  an  art,  developing  itself  in  paint- 
ings, and  statues,  and  architecture,  which  are  even  now  the  proudest  monuments  of 
human  skill :  yet  just  as  in  the  age  of  Louis  XIV.  in  France,  and  in  the  Augustan 
age  at  Eome,  art  and  Hterature  were  not  only  powerless  to  arrest  immorality,  they 
absolutely  ministered  to  it.  The  mind  is  rightly  cultivated  only  when  educated  in 
the  principle  of  personal  accountability  to  God.  Hence  the  danger  of  a  merely 
secular  education.  Hence  the  need  of  a  Christian  leaven  in  our  secular  scho  .Is. 
III.  That  philosophy,  originating  in  human  minds,  can  construct  no  true  system  of 
BELIEF  OB  DUTY.  Philosophy  requires  three  constant  factors  to  its  full  and  tiue 
development,  viz.,  a  first  Cause;  a  full  knowledge  of  this  first  Cause  ;  and  a  fuU 
knowledge  of  man  himself.  But  no  human  mind  can  grasp  these  factors.  We  must 
look  then  above  man  to  get  this  true  philosophy ;  and  we  find  it  in  the  revelation 
of  God.  But  "  no  man  knoweth  the  Father,  but  the  Son,  and  He  to  whom  the  Son 
will  reveal  Him  "  ;  and  Jesus  only  "  needeth  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man  ; 
for  He  knows  what  is  in  man."  So  then  we  reach  the  fact  that  in  Jesus  Christ  are 
"  bid  aU  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  A  philosophy  which  leaves  out 
Christ  is  like  a  planetary  system  without  a  central  sun,  a  mere  series  of  vortices 
without  a  uniting  and  controlling  centre.  Philosophy  has  found  out  many  truths, 
but  not  the  great  foundation  truths  of  God's  existence,  and  attributes,  and  grace ; 
and  man's  fall,  and  helplessness,  and  need  of  a  Saviour.  How,  tben,  should 
we  thank  God,  that  He  has  revealed  all  this  to  us.  IV.  That  eepentance  is 
a  personal  duty,  based  on  pebsonal  responsibility  to  God  for  personal  sins. 
Heathenism  knew  nothing  of  sin,  as  the  alienation  of  the  heart  from  God.  Its  very 
gods  were  but  splendid  embodiments  of  sin ;  and  their  influence  was  only  to  repro- 
duce in  daily  life  the  crimes  which  filled  Olympus.  It  is  the  religion  of  Christ  only 
which  measures  moral  character  with  the  unerring  lines  and  in  the  unerring  balances 
of  the  Divine  law.  It  is  only  as  we  act  upon  the  truth  that  man  is  personally 
responsible  to  God,  and  will  be  judged,  that  we  shall  have  true  views  of  God,  and 
understand  our  need  of  a  Saviour.  {Bp.  Stevens.)  Paul  at  Alliens  ;  Chri'tianity 
in  contact  with  cultivated  mind : — I.  The  subject  on  which  the  minibieb  or  tbs 


6R0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

GOSPEL  ADDRESSES  MEN  IS  WORTHY  OF  THE  ATTENTION  OF  CULTIVATED  MINDS.      1.    ThCM 

ought  to  be  no  occasion  for  arguing  this  point.    Paul  felt  no  necessity  of  showing 
that  the  subject  was  worthy  of  attention.     The  Athenians  had  already  expressed 
their  sense  of  the  importance  of  the  inquiry  by  inviting  him  to  come  to  the  place  where 
he  could  best  address  the  people.    We,  on  the  contrary,  are  obliged  to  awaken  inquiry, 
Bnd  to  show  why  religion  is  worthy  of  profound  thought.     (1)  Among  those  who, 
in  other  respects,  would  be  represented  by  the  Athenian  philosophers,  religion  does 
not  come  within  the  range  of  their  inquiries.     They  are  scientists,  jurists,  editors, 
philosophers,  &c.,  not  theologians.     (2)  The  great  mass  of  men  stop  short  when 
they  approach  the  subject  of  religion  in  their  investigations,  even  when  it  would  appear 
impossible  that  they  should  not  be  led  to  see  and  to  embrace  its  truths.  In  astronomy, 
e.g.,  such  men  seem  almost  to  look  upon  the  throne  of  God ;  but  they  will  not  allow 
their  minds  to  take  the  next  step,  and  many  an  astronomer  remains  ignorant  of 
Him  who  made  the  worlds.     (3)  When  men  do  come  up  to  the  point  they  find  the 
subject  distasteful.     They  have  come  into  a  region  where  the  ideas  of  duty — retribu- 
tion, repentance — are  likely  to  be  predominant ;  and  they  are  not  attracted  by  these 
themes.     2.  It  is  proper,  therefore,  to  show  that  the  subject  of  religion  is  worthy 
the  attention  of  this  class  of  minds.     Observe  therefore — (1)  That  it  is  an  avowed 
principle  with  such  persons,  that  all  subjects  are  to  be  investigated.    It  is  a  maxim 
in  philosophy  that  truth  is  to  be  followed  wherever  it  may  lead  us.     Why,  then, 
should  the  astronomer  refuse  to  follow  out  the  revelation  when  the  throne  of  God 
seems  to  stand  before  him,  and  admit  that  there  is  a  God  ?     Why  should  he  always 
talk  about  "  Nature,"  and  never  about  *'  God  "  ?     (2)  As  mere  abstract  matters,  the 
subjects  of  religion  are  as  worthy  of  attention  as  any  that  can  come  before  the  minds 
of  men.     The  Greeks,  as  a  people,  had  evinced  their  own  convictions  of  this,  far 
more  than  most  other  nations.    When  Grecian  sages  were  thus  leading  a  foreign 
Jew  to  the  Areopagus  to  ask  him  what  he  had  to  say  on  this  subject,  no  man  in 
Athens  would  feel  that  this  was  an  unworthy  act  in  the  city  of  Socrates  and  Plato. 
No  class  of  people,  however  advanced  in  civilisation,  act  contrary  to  the  dictates  of 
the  highest  wisdom,  when  they  give  themselves  to  earnest  thought   about  the 
Creator  of  the  world,  the  methods  of  the  Divine  administration,  <fec.     If  these  great 
subjects  are  not  important  for  man,  what  subjects  can  be  ?    (3)  The  subject  of 
religion  pertains,  as  a  personal  matter,  as  really  to  cultivated  men  as  to  the  rest  of 
mankind.    It  does  not  merely  open  questions  relating  to  the  welfare  of  society ;  but 
it  is  a  subject  of  personal  importance  to  each  individual.    II.  Padl  was  in  posses- 
sion OF  KNOWLEDGE  ON  THESE  SUBJECTS  WHICH  WAS  IN  ADVANCE  OF  WHAT   THESE    PHILO- 
SOPHERS POSSESSED.    In  considering  this,  notice — 1.  The  manner  in  which  Paul  ap- 
proached the  subject  of  his  peculiar  doctrines.    (1 )  He  made  no  direct  attack  on  their 
religion.    He  did  not  awaken  their  prejudices,  as  if  his  mission  was  to  destroy  their 
temples.  (2)  He  commended  their  zeal  in  religion  as  real  zeal  in  a  great  cause  ;  and  be 
referred,  without  any  unkind  reflections,  to  the  evidence  of  that  zeal  exhibited  on  every 
hand.    (3)  He  referred  to  their  acknowledged  difficulties — to  the  avowal  of  their  own 
ignorance  or  uncertainty,  as  recorded  on  the  altar.     (4)  He  proposed  to  reveal  the 
God  whom  they  thus  unconsciously  adored ;  to  lead  them  up  to  the  real  source  of 
every  blessing.     (5)  He  agreed,  as  far  as  possible,  with  the  philosophers  who  heard 
him,  and  reasoned  from  their  admitted  principles.    A  truth  found  in  their  poetry, 
though  it  was  heathen  poetry,  was  not  the  less  a  truth  because  it  bad  had  such  an 
origin,  and  because  it  was  not  found  in  the  inspired  writings  of  the  Jews.     So  far 
he  was  successful.     He  did  not  excite  their  fears.    He  did  not  expose  himself  to 
contempt.     He  secured,  as  he  had  hoped  to  do,  their  profound  attention.     2.  The 
doctrines  which  he  made  known  to  them.     (1)  Those  which  were  based  on  principles 
that  they  themselves  held — though  in  advance  of  their  views,     (a)  The  existence 
of  a  God — to  them  the  "  unknown  God."     {b)  The  fact  that  this  "  unknown  "  God 
was  the  Creator  of  the  world,     (c)  The  immensity  of  God.     (d)  The  independence 
of  God.     (e)  The  unity  of  the  human  race.     (/)  The  grand  purpose  for  which 
certain  arrangements  had  been  made  in  respect  to  the  human  race :  *•  that  they 
should  seek  God,"  Ac.     {g)  The  spirituality  of  God  and  of  religion  (ver.  29).     (2) 
The  doctrines  wliich  were  peculiar  to  the  Christian  system;  the  "strange  things  "in 
reference  to  which  particularly  they  had  asked  an  explanation,     (a)  God  now  com- 
mands universal  repentance,     (b)  God  will  judge  the  world,     (c)  The  resurrection 
of  the  dead ;  as  derived  from  the  fact  that  God  had  raised  from  the  dead  Him  who 
was  tc  judge  the  world.      III.  The  lessons  suggested  by  the   discourse.      I. 
Christianity  does  not  shrink  from  investigation.     Paul  manifested  no  reluctance, 
but  rejoiced  in  the  uppcitunity  of  proclaiming  the  gospel  where  it  would  be  most 


CHAP,  xm.]  THE  ACTS,  681 

likely  to  be  subjected  to  a  thorough  examination.  2.  The  history  of  the  world,  since 
Paui  stood  on  Mars'  Hill,  has  made  no  difference  in  the  relation  of  Christianity  to 
the  world  in  the  matter  under  consideration.  It  claims  to  be  now  not  less  iu 
advance  of  the  world  than  it  was  then.  The  world  has,  indeed,  made  great  pro- 
gress in  arts,  science,  &o.,  but  it  has  made  no  advances  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
great  truths  of  religion  by  the  aid  of  science  or  philosophy.  3.  If  Christianity  was 
then,  and  is  now,  ahead  of  the  world  on  these  subjects,  it  may  be  presumed  that  it 
will  ever  retain  this  advanced  position.  4.  This  furnishes  a  strong  proof  of  the 
Divine  origin  of  Christianity.  System  after  system  of  philosophy  and  religion  has 
disappeared.  But  Christianity  has  lived  through  all  changes.  After  all  the  dis- 
coveries and  developments  of  the  last  eighteen  centuries — after  all  that  has  been 
affirmed  to  be  in  conflict  with  the  Bible — the  hold  of  Christianity  on  the 
world  is  stronger  now,  and  the  beUef  that  the  Bible  is  true  is  more 
widespread  and  deep,  than  in  any  past  age.       {A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  His  spirit 

was  stirred  in  him  when  he  saw  the  city  wholly  given  to  idolatry. — Moral 
wretchednest  of  idolatry : — The  great  argument  for  missionary  exertion,  next 
to  its  being  the  plain  command  of  God,  is  the  spiritual  helplessness  of  those  who 
live  under  the  power  of  idolatry.  This  paroxysm  of  grief  which  the  apostle  felt 
would  be  excited  by — I.  The  dishonoubino  views  op  the  Divine  character  and 

GOVERNMENT    NECESSARILY    ASSOCIATED    WITH    SUCH     A     SYSTEM.        Those   who    think 

lightly  of  idolatry  speak  as  if  it  afforded  the  same  outlet  for  the  religious  affections 
as  true  religion  ;  that  the  religious  element  in  man's  nature  is  as  effectually  culti- 
vated, whether  men  called  the  being  they  worshipped  Vishnu,  or  Juggernaut,  or 
God,  seeing  the  same  honour  in  aU  cases  is  intended  to  the  Great  Author  of  the 
universe.  But  now,  even  if  this  monstrous  impiety  were  conceded,  it  is  sufficient 
to  observe  that  the  attributes  with  which  these  gods  are  commonly  invested  must 
for  ever  forbid  the  acceptableness  of  the  worship.  So  far  otherwise,  God  must 
regard  it  as  worship  by  which  His  character  is  debased,  and  everything  which  could 
inspire  filial  and  reverential  sentiments  is  taken  away.    II.  The  sanctioned  and 

PERMITTED     DISREOARD     OP    THE     FIRST     PRINCIPLES     OP     MORAIITY.      The    religion    of 

Greece  was  chiefly  a  religion  of  festivals ;  and  some  of  these  extended  to  seven  days. 
True,  some  were  simply  absurd ;  but  at  the  majority  things  were  performed  of 
which  it  were  a  shame  even  to  speak.  With  similar  accounts  our  own  missionaries 
are  obliged  to  stain  their  reports  unto  this  day.  Now,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  morality 
can  have  no  existence  under  such  a  state  of  things,  because  all  morals  must  have  as 
their  foundation  the  will  of  God.  "Be  ye  holy,  because  I  am  holy,"  appeals  to  a 
universal  moral  instinct ;  flee  from  iniquity,  because  God  hateth  iniquity — these 
are  the  safeguards  of  all  that  is  pure  in  our  social  system.  In  the  case  of  idolatry, 
however,  this  safeguard  is  removed.  It  were  in  vain  that  the  law  should  forbid  a 
thing  as  unholy  which  religion  has  declared  to  be  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God. 
III.  Tele  utter  absence  of  all  religious  peace  ob  tranquillitt  op  conscience. 
The  consideration  may  address  itself,  first,  to  our  feelings  of  humanity.  In  some 
respects  we  know  that  the  worship  of  the  idolater  must  be  a  miserable  worship. 
His  self-inflicted  torture  must  make  existence  to  be  a  burden  to  him.  But  this 
helongs  less  to  Athenian  than  to  Asiatic  idolatry.  We  may  suppose  the  mind  of 
the  apostle  to  have  been  exercised  by  the  absence  of  religious  peace.  They  know 
not  God ;  they  know  not  the  mercifulness  of  His  nature,  the  wisdom  of  His  ways, 
the  gentleness  of  His  yoke,  the  goodness  of  His  laws.  I  am  speaking  to  men  who 
know  something  of  the  comforts  of  religion.  What  is  the  source  of  it  ?  You  feel 
that  a  propitiation  has  been  found  for  your  offences ;  that  an  exhaustless  fund  of 
holy  influences  is  opened  to  meet  every  remaining  infirmity  ;  and  that  there  is  the 
power  of  a  covenant-keeping  God  to  keep  you  faithful  unto  the  end.  You  have 
troubles ;  but  are  not  these  among  those  things  which  work  together  for  the 
heUever's  good  ?  But  what  knows  the  poor  heathen  of  such  consolations  ?  IV. 
Painful  misgivings  as  to  the  final  salvation  of  these  people.  Our  chief  guide 
upon  such  a  subject  must  be  the  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Bomans.  There 
^oes  not  seem  to  be  an  important  distinction  in  that  chapter ;  for  though  the 
apostle  does  seem  to  leave  some  hope  of  salvation  for  the  mere  heathen  who  is  with- 
out the  knowledge  of  God,  is  it  quite  so  clear  that  it  leaves  a  hope  of  salvation  to 
the  idolater  ?  The  heathen,  it  seems  to  be  supposed,  will  be  a  law  unto  himself,  and 
has  a  power  to  discern  from  the  things  which  are  seen  and  made  the  Almighty's 
«temal  power  and  Godhead.  But  suppose,  instead  of  this,  he  should  change  the 
image  of  the  incorruptible  God  into  the  image  of  corruptible  man,  &c.,  are  we  then 
prepared  to  aay  that  an  idolater  hath  any  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and 


682  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvh 

of  God  t    We  limit  no  mercies  ;  but  everywhere,  as  we  look  on  the  vast  outspread 
of  idolatry,  the  stern  and  withering  sentence  meets  us,  "  Without  God,  without 
hope."     Ohl  must  not  every  heart  be  stirred  up  within  us  at  such  a  spectacle? 
Conclusion :  And  now,  in  applying  my  remarks  to  the  cause  of  missions,  I  must 
remind  you  of  our  three  great  wants  and  your  three  correlative  duties.     First,  we 
want  the  means.     But  not  only  do  we  want  your  money — we  want  your  sons.    And 
then  we  want  your  prayers.     (JD.  Moore,  M.A.)        Paul's  moral  survey  of  Athens : — 
What  did  he  discover  that  so  intensely  distressed  him?    I.  Geeat  genius  peb- 
TEKTED.     He  saw — 1.  Developments  of  great  genius.    What  Jerusalem  has  been  in 
the  true  religious  culture  of  humanity,  Athens  has  been  in  the  culture  of  the 
ffisthetical    and   reasoning  powers  of   mankind.     2.  Perversions  of  great  genius. 
Though  possessing  a  miud  qualified  to  appreciate  the  splendid  works  which  lay 
about  him,  yet  he  was  thrown  into  an  agony  of  grief  at  what  he  beheld.    He  had  a 
standard  of  character  unknown  to  any  Athenian  sage,  and  he  felt  that  the  aesthetic 
glory  of  Greece  was  but  a  gorgeous  covering  which  genius  had  spread  over  a  vast 
cemetery  of  moral  corruption.     Genius  wasted — nay,  worse  than  that,  employed  for 
immoral  and  impious  ends.     There  is  nothing  in  mere  material  civilisation,  even  in 
its  highest  forms,  to  delight  a  truly  enlightened  soul.    H.  The  great  God  dis- 
honoured.    With  all  this  display  the  Athenians  had — 1.  No  grand  moral  purpose 
in  life  (ver.  21).     Empty  theories  and  idle  gossip  occupied  their  chief  attention ; 
since  they  knew  not  the  only  true  God,  they  had  no  grand  purpose  in  life.     The 
deeper  and  diviner  parts  of  their  souls  were  undeveloped.     2.  No  love  for  the  true 
God.     Athens,  by  wisdom,  knew  not  God.     ♦'  It  was  easier,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  to 
find  a  god  than  a  man."    All  history  shows  that  where  the  gospel  has  not  gone, 
man  has  never  reached  the  true  religion,  nor  felt  the  higher  inspirations  of  his 
being  (Kom.  i.).     The  best  of  the  Athenian  gods  were  but  men,  whose  passions  in 
some  cases  were  of  the  most  revolting  kind.     Paul  knew  that  the  destiny  of  the  soul 
depended  upon  its  worship ;    that  if  it  worshipped  any  object  but  God,  it  must 
inevitably  sink  lower  and  lower  for  ever.     There  is  but  one  being  that  has  a  claim 
to  the  worship  of  man — the  Creator.     He  claims  the  supreme  homage  and  service 
of  all  souls.     His  claim  is  just :  no  conscience  can  dispute  it.     Because  the  apostle 
loved  supremely  this  supreme  object  of  worship,  he  felt  intense  pain  at  seeing  His 
righteous   claims   contemned.      "I  beheld   the  ways  of    transgressors,  and   was 
grieved."     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        Paul's  estimate  of  the  Athenians  : — We  are  taught 
by  this  passage — I.  To  be  deeply  affected  by  the  moral  condition  op  the  world. 
1.  Paul's  was  the  excitement  of  fervent  zeal  for  the  honour  of  Christ.    2.  He  felt 
also  the  outrage  done  by  idolatry  to  the  dignity  of  human  nature.     3.  In  this 
excitement  the  love  of  souls  was  not  wanting.     II.  That  such  an  affection  wrLL 
lead  to  the  use  of  active  means  fob  the  world's  salvation.     1.  Paul  was  never 
ashamed  of  Christ's  gospel.     2.  He  laid  aside  all  fears  of  failure.    3.  He  does  not 
remain  inactive  at  Athens  because  he  has  no  particular  mission  there.  (.Evangelical 
Preacher.)        The  moral  versus  the  esthetic : — When  Howard  went  forth,  on  what  a 
great  orator  has  called  his  "  circumnavigation  of  charity,"  he  visited  some  of  the 
noblest  cities,  and  passed  through  some  of  the  most  attractive  scenery  of  modern 
Europe  ;  but  neither  the  splendour  and  wealth  of  the  one,  nor  the  attractions  of  the 
other,  could  engage  his  attention ;  the  dungeon  and  the  hospital,  where  suffering 
humanity  invited  his  aid,  had  an  interest  to  his  mind  which  drew  him  aside  from 
everything  else,  and  made  him  insensible  "to  the  sumptuousness  of  palaces  and  the 
Btateliness  of  temples,"  to  the  curiosity  of  art,  and  even  to  the  sublimities  and 
beauties  of  nature.     Cicero  tells  us  that  for  him  Athens  hud  a  higher  charm  than 
was  derived  from  its  magnificent  buildings  and  exquisite  works  of  art — the  charm 
that  arose  from  the  memory  of  its  illustrious  men,  and  which  made  him  search  out 
the  abodes  and  favourite  haunts  of   each,  and  look  with  intent  gaze   on  their 
sepulchres.     In  all  large  and  earnest  minds  the  moral  will  ever  overtop  and  master 
the  aesthetic;  and,  save  as  the  latter  may  in  some  way  be  made  subservient  to  the 
former,  such  minds  will  be  apt  to  overlook,  if  not  entirely  to  under-estimate  it. 
What  wonder,  then,  that  Paul,  bent  on  a  mission  of  moral  beneficence  to  which  he 
had  consecrated  his  life,  and  penetrated  with  an  aU-absorbing  desire  to  accomplish 
a  result  which  he  knew  to  be  the  noblest  and  worthiest  and  most  enduring  that 
could  be  proposed  to  human  exertion,  should  have  been  content  to  bestow  only  a 
passing  glance  on  the  marble  splendours  of  Athens,  and  should  have  been  more. 
deeply  moved  by  the  gloom  which  rested  on  the  moral  features  of  the  scene,  than 
by  all  the  ftlory  which  lighted  up  its  physical  and  material  asppct?     As  he  moved 
tiiioUt^h  the  city,  be  beheld  how  all  this  wealth  of  genius  was  prostituted  to  the 


eRAP.  XVII.]  THE  ACTS.  683 

service  of  a  vain  and  misleading  superstition.  {W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Chris- 
tian unconcern  explained: — "I  was  speaking  with  a  gentleman  who  had  just 
returned  from  a  visit  to  Niagara,  where  he  hved  in  the  Chiton  Hotel,  which  is  close 
to  the  Falls.  He  asked  a  waiter,  ♦  Are  you  not  annoyed  by  the  noise  of  the  water- 
fall ? '  *  Positively  I  don't  hear  it.  When  I  first  came  here  I  hardly  heard  any- 
thing for  it ;  now  it  is  quite  quiet  to  me.'  Why  is  this  t  Because  he  is  accustomed 
to  it.  That  is  the  reason  Christians  are  content  to  sit  with  folded  hands,  looking 
calmly  on  while  so  many  of  their  fellows  are  gliding  down  the  broad  road  to  eternal 
death.  Rouse  yourselves;  ask  God  for  Christ's  sake  to  give  you  grace  and 
strength  to  '  rescue  the  perishing.' "    {J.  McFarlane.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  Therefore  disputed  lie  in  the  synagogue  .  .  .  and  In  the  market. — 
Paul's  discussions  in  the  synagogue  and  market-place  : — I.  The  pabties  with  whom 
.Paul  seasoned.  These  may  be  looked  on  in  two  aspects : — 1.  Theologically. 
(1)  The  "  Jews  "  were  monotheists.  They  beUeved  in  the  one  true  and  hving  God, 
and  in  Moses  as  His  great  minister.  (2)  The  "  Epicureans  "  were  atheists.  They 
ascribed  the  creation  of  the  world  to  chance ;  they  had  no  faith  in  the  one  infinite 
Creator  of  heaven  and  earth.  (3)  The  Stoics  were  pantheists.  They  confounded 
the  universe  with  God,  or  regarded  it  rather  as  God.  Paul  had  to  deal,  therefore, 
vrith  these  three  great  intellectual  systems.  Each  would  require  a  very  different 
line  of  argument.  2.  Ethically.  These  three  represented  three  great  cardinal 
moral  evUs — (1)  Self-righteousness  in  the  Jew.  (2)  CarnaUty  in  the  Epicurean. 
(3)  Indifferentism  in  the  Stoics.  II.  The  subjects  on  which  he  mscouBSED^ 
"  Jesus  and  the  resurrection."  1.  The  greatest  person  in  the  history  of  the  race. 
2.  The  greatest  fact  in  the  history  of  this  person.  III.  The  effects  op  the  dis- 
cussion. 1.  Contempt.  "What  will  this  babbler  say?"  Paul  was  probably  no 
orator  in  their  sense,  nor  was  he  of  commanding  presence.  2.  Misconception. 
They  thoroughly  misunderstood  him.  "  He  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange 
gods."  3.  Curiosity  (ver.  19).  This  was  so  far  the  most  favourable  result.  The 
apostle's  teaching  succeeded  up  to  this  point  in  generating  in  them  the  desire  to 
know  something  more  about  the  new  doctrine.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  St.  Paul  in 
the  market-place: — 1.  St.  Paul  seems  to  have  had  so  little  thought  of  his  own 
dignity,  and  we  find  his  most  efficient  work  was  accompUshed  when  he  turned  hia 
back  upon  the  synagogue,  and  went  down  into  the  market-place.  Yes,  hither, 
rather  than  to  the  court  or  the  palace.  He  did  not  wait  for  the  people  to  come  to 
him — he  went  to  them.  In  the  history  of  the  new  religion  it  was  always  so.  The 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  of  John  the  Baptist's  day  sought  him,  but  he  never  sought 
them.  Herod  sent  for  John,  but  John  never  hung  about  the  court,  and  when  ha 
was  summoned  to  the  royal  presence,  uttered  unpleasant  truths  with  great  plain- 
ness. Nay,  Christ  Himself  discloses  a  singular  indifference  to  the  reformation  of 
either  the  religious  or  secular  rulers  of  the  time.  And,  when  we  follow  the  history 
of  St  Paul,  we  find  Agrippa,  Felix,  and  Festus  send  for  the  apostle.  So  that  there 
was  no  want  of  opportunity  to  make  an  impression  in  high  places — and  yet,  the 
new  religion  resolutely  sought  the  low  ones.  2.  It  has  been  supposed  that  this  was 
because  the  new  religion  aimed  to  testify  to  its  sympathy  with  the  masses.  It  was 
not  aristocratic,  it  was  democratic.  Its  Founder  was  not  one  of  the  •'  privileged 
classes,"  He  was  a  mechanic.  And  so  it  turned  away  from  courts,  and  went  where 
sorrow  and  need  were  most  surely  to  be  found.  All  which  is  true  enough,  but  by 
no  means  the  whole  truth.  The  new  religion  turned  its  footsteps  to  the  market- 
place, because  it  discerned  that  in  the  transformation  of  the  passions,  hopes,  and 
interests  of  the  market-place  was  to  be  found  the  redemption  of  humanity.  Plato 
had  said  that  "  no  reUef  would  ever  reach  the  ills  of  men  until  either  statesmen 
became  philosophers,  or  philosophers  assumed  the  government  of  states."  To  him 
the  only  hope  of  the  commonwealth  was  in  a  perfect  system  of  government,  perfectly 
administered.  It  is  what  many  of  us  are  thinking  to-day.  But  the  hope  of  a 
nation  really  Ues  in  the  elevation  and  redemption  of  individual  character  among  its 
people;  and  accordinsf  to  the  New  Testament,  without  waiting  to  reconstruct 
governments,  we  mu6»  begin  by  striving  for  the  new-creation  of  individual 
character.  3.  And,  in  just  so  far  as  it  has  won  any  substantial  victories,  it  is  thus 
that  the  religion  of  Christ  has  worked  from  the  beginning.  Meantime  we  cannot 
overlook  the  fact  that  there  have  gone  forward  the  triumphs  of  civilisation.  When 
the  Church  points  to  what  the  faith  of  the  Crucified  has  done  for  the  individual  hie, 
the  apostles  of  learning  and  science  point  to  what  these  have  done  for  society  and 
the  state.    And  who  of  us  can  see  tiua  without  admiration  ?    But  who  of  us  can  se* 


g8l  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn» 

it  without  seeing  something  more  ?  With  the  growth  of  wealth  there  has  come  the 
growth  of  poverty ;  with  the  multiplication  of  the  arts,  the  multiplication  of  evil 
uses  to  which  those  arts  may  be  turned  ;  with  the  birth  of  new  sciences,  there  has 
confronted  us  the  birth  of  new  and  hateful  vices.  Who  of  us  is  not  awed  as  he  sees 
the  splendours  of  London  or  Paris  or  Vienna?  And  yet  within  a  stone's  throw  of 
Bome  tall  palace  or  some  stately  museum,  what  festering  courts ;  what  wretchedness 
and  degradation  1  Is  this  the  product  of  the  highest  civilisation,  and  if  it  is,  how 
is  it  better  than  that  barbarism  on  which,  so  complacently,  it  professes  to  look 
down?  To  such  questions  as  these  there  can  be  but  one  answer.  There  is  not  a 
reform,  a  science,  an  art,  a  single  step  in  the  purification  of  our  forms  of  govern- 
ment, that  is  not  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  But  the  millennium  will  never  come 
by  that  road.  You  may  make  government  as  just  as  was  Aristides.  You  may 
make  the  streams  of  official  patronage  and  power  as  pure  and  as  wholesome  as  the 
sparkling  waters  of  a  mountain  spring.  But  you  cannot  cure  a  cancer  with  spring 
water.  You  cannot  restore  the  lost  reason  by  means  of  a  wholesome  diet  and  a 
padded  cell.  "  There  is  a  spirit  in  man,  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  giveth 
him  understanding."  To  that  spirit,  personally,  something  must  speak  as  with  a 
message  from  God.  4.  And  so  we  find  the  apostle  as  the  messenger  of  that  spirit, 
pleading  and  arguing  in  the  market-place.  How  hopeless  it  must  have  seemed  at 
first !  With  what  a  light  laugh  they  must  have  listened  to  this  "  babbler."  How 
useless,  his  fellow  Israelites  kept  assuring  him,  doubtless,  was  any  attempt  to  get  a 
hearing  there  I  It  is  the  same  cry  now.  What  are  you  going  to  do  about  the  ever- 
increasing  mass  of  people  who  are  growing  up  in  as  genuine  heathenism  as  any  that 
is  to  be  found  in  Dahomey  ?  How  vain  to  attempt  to  gain  an  entrance  or  to  make 
an  impression  there  !  Thank  God  that  the  apostle  was  wiser,  and  knew  better  than 
this.  He  knew  that  in  the  market-place  then,  as  in  the  tenement  now,  there  beat 
the  same  human  hearts  and  ached  the  same  unanswered  wants  that  were  throbbing 
■anywhere  else.  He  knew  that  there  was  no  one  so  degraded,  so  hardened  but  that 
somewhere  in  him  there  was  the  small  crevice  through  which  the  truth  could  find 
its  way.  Above  all,  he  knew  that  the  more  hopeless  was  the  darkness  the  more 
urgent  was  the  need  and  call  for  light.  And  so  he  begins  at  the  bottom — in  the 
market-place — with  the  individual  soul.  5.  This  message  of  the  apostle,  a  personal 
message  to  the  personal  soul,  is  mine  to  you  to-day.  This  reUgion  of  ours,  is  it 
a  pastime  for  Sundays,  or  is  it  a  message  and  a  mandate  for  Sundays  and  week-days 
alike  ?  Will  you  hearken  to  it  only  here,  or  will  you  own  its  authority  in  the  house 
and  in  the  market-place  as  well  ?  If  the  world  is  to  become  better,  it  must  become 
better  because  we  have  consented  to  become  better.  In  urging  such  reform  it  is  my 
business  to  hold  up  before  you  here  a  high  ideal,  and  to  bid  you  at  whatever  cost, 
to  strive  to  realise  it.  Not  unfrequently,  I  am  told,  "  What  is  the  use  of  setting 
up  an  impossible  mark  of  attainment  only  to  daunt  one  by  the  dismal  discrepancy 
of  his  own  endeavours."  And  yet,  who  of  us  would  be  genuinely  contented  with 
any  other  ?  When,  from  those  loftier  levels,  the  Master's  truth  comes  trembling 
down  to  our  souls,  there  is  something  in  us  that  answers  to  it.  Even  so,  I  think, 
at  Athens,  there  were  some  who  were  carrying  heavy  and  unshared  burdens.  With 
what  unspeakable  thankfulness,  when  at  last  they  heard  of  Him  who  had  come  to 
lift  off  those  burdens,  must  they  have  turned  to  Him  and  gladly  laid  them  at  Hia 
feet  1  [Bp.  H.  G.  Potter,  D.D.)  The  Agora  .-—The  Agora,  in  all  Greek  cities  the 
centre  and  focus  of  life,  must  not  be  confounded  with  an  ordinary  *'  market." 
It  was  one  to  a  certain  extent.  In  one  portion  there  were  booths  containing  com- 
mon articles  of  consumption,  as  well  as  bazaars  for  those  of  luxury.  Other  parts 
would  be  more  suggestive  of  our  own  Covent  Garden  ;  shops  for  flowers  and  fruit ; 
vegetables  and  oranges  from  the  surrounding  gardens;  oil  from  the  olive  groves  on 
the  slopes  of  Lycabettus;  honey  from  Hymettus ;  even  fish  from  the  shores  of 
Salamis  and  Euboea.  Mingling  somewhat  incongruously  with  these,  we  have  the 
mention  of  stalls  for  books  and  parchments ;  a  clothes  booth ;  a  dep6t  for  stolen 
goods  ;  and  the  slave-market  called  "  Cyclus."  It  was,  in  this  respect,  a  convenient 
trading  centre  for  the  surrounding  city.  But  its  main  features  and  use  were  very 
different.  Architecturally  it  must  have  been  impressive.  It  is  described  by  a 
writer  as  a  "  natural  amphitheatre."  There  was  the  Altar  of  the  Twelve  Gods, 
from  which  emanated,  in  varied  directions,  the  streets  of  the  city  and  the  roads  of 
Attica.  Here,  in  one  place,  was  the  "  Stoa  Basileios,"  "the  Royal  Porch"  dedi- 
cated to  Aurora;  here,  in  another,  is  a  Stoa  dedicated  to  Zeus,  with  paintings  of 
•varions  deities  by  the  artist  Euphranor.  These  and  similar  ornamental  buildings 
rose  ai  ail  events  on  two  sides,  one  of  which  was  confronted  with  the  Statues  ol 


«HAP.  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  686 

the  Ten  Heroes.  Xenophon  tells  us  that,  at  certain  festivals,  it  was  customary  for 
the  knights  to  make  the  circuit  of  the  Agora  on  horseback,  beginning  at  the  statue 
of  Hermes,  and  paying  homage  to  the  statues  and  temples  around.  That  garrulous 
■throng  whom  Paul  met  here  was  composed  of  philosophers,  artists,  poets,  historians, 
Bupplemented  by  a  still  livelier  contingent  of  gossip -mongers  and  idlers  of  every 
kind  which  gathered  under  alcove  and  colonnade  to  converse  on  "  burning  ques- 
tions." Moreover,  anterior  to  the  art  of  printing,  and  when  journalistic  literature 
was  a  future  revelation,  it  formed  the  only  means  and  opportunity  of  discussing  the 
politics  of  the  hour.  Even  the  varied  colour,  blending  and  contrasted  in  this  babel 
cf  confusion,  must  have  been  striking  and  picturesque,  if  the  dress  of  the  modern 
Greek  is  a  survival  of  classic  ages.  Then  the  Agora  opened  its  gates,  not  to  natives 
only,  but  to  "  strangers  "  (ver.  21).  We  can  think  therefore  of  "excursionists" 
and  merchants,  either  in  pursuit  of  pleasure  or  of  gain,  or  both  combined,  from 
other  towns  and  capitals  near  and  distant.  Noisy  traffickers  from  Corinth  and 
Thessalonica,  Ephesus  and  Smyrna,  Antioch  and  Damascus ;  sailors  and  voyagers 
from  the  Alexandrian  vessel  or  Roman  galley  at  anchor  in  the  Piraeus.  Here  and 
there  a  Jew  with  sandalled  feet,  his  long  robe  girdled  round  the  waist  and  fringed 
with  blue  ribbon.  Here  and  there  some  soldiers  from  the  barracks — now  on  foot, 
now  mounted — the  flash  of  their  helmets  mingling  with  the  red  and  yellow  mantles 
of  the  market-women,  or  with  the  still  rarer  keff§ih  and  fillets  of  the  swarthy 
children  of  the  Arabian  or  Syrian  deserts.  What  a  rare  "  symposium  "  ;  what  a 
singular  whirlpool  of  thought  in  this  "  tumultuous  Agora  1  "  (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.) 
Certain  philosophers  of  the  Epicureans,  aad  of  the  Stoicks,  encountered  him. — Epu 
cureans  and  Stoics : — It  is  a  moment  of  perpetual  and  universal  human  interest, 
this  moment  of  our  text,  when  philosophers  of  the  Epicureans  and  of  the  Stoics 
encountered  Paul,  the  Christian,  with  his  preaching  of  Jesus  and  of  the  Resurrection. 
For  it  was  the  moment  when  the  gospel  met  the  two  sides  of  human  life  together, 
and  spoke  to  them  together,  and  contrasted  its  oneness  with  their  dividedness,  its 
wholeness  with  their  partialness,  and  showed  its  mission  of  reconciliation.  Who 
does  not  know  what  I  mean  when  we  talk  of  the  two  sides  of  life  ?  Who  is  so 
young  that  he  has  not  had  life  come  up  to  him  in  the  form  of  a  question  with  some- 
thing to  be  said  on  both  sides  ?  Who  is  so  old  as  to  have  outgrown  such  questions  t 
What  day  but  presents  one  of  them  ?  Does  not  the  great  earth  itself  give  you  a 
perpetual  parable  of  your  single  hfe,  and  each  single  life  upon  it  ?  How  it  turns 
between  day  and  night  1  I  cannot  think  it  is  wrong  to  illustrate  in  this  way  Christ's 
jsoming  to  the  two  sides  of  hfe,  each  true  in  itself,  but  partial ;  both  truths,  but  half 
truths  ;  each  to  the  other  inconceivable,  except  through  the  coming  of  Christ,  the 
higher  Light  and  the  ReconcUer.  Epicureans  and  Stoics — these  two  classes  of  men 
represented  the  two  opposite  points  of  the  sphere  of  life.  Both  represented  facts, 
but  separated  ones.  One  was  a  class  of  men  and  minds  who  had  started  from  the 
very  high  truth  that  good  was  sure  to  be  the  highest  happiness,  and  had  degenerated 
quickly  into  the  mere  pursuit  of  happiness  and  pleasure,  as  if  they  were  good 
«nd  would  bring  good  of  themselves.  These  were  Epicureans.  And  their  opposites 
"were  Stoics,  a  class  of  men  and  minds  who  had  started  from  the  noble  truth  that 
the  highest  good  involves  and  is  hardship  and  bravery,  and  had  as  quickly  de- 
generated into  mere  proud  endurance — pride  in  their  own  strength  as  the  only  good, 
and  scorn  of  any  gentleness  or  pleasure.  One  said,  "It  is  a  bright  world,  let  aa 
just  enjoy  it " ;  another,  •'  It  is  a  hard  world,  let  us  just  endure  it."  One  would 
oecome  selfish  in  luxury,  the  other  selfish  in  strength  and  denial ;  the  one  was 
caught  in  sweetness,  the  other  in  bitterness ;  the  one  blinded  by  excess  of  light,  the 
other  by  excess  of  darkness.  They  were  the  reverse  sides  of  the  globe  of  hfe.  And 
'yet  could  anything  have  been  truer  or  nobler  than  the  facts  upon  which  they  each 
rested  ?  Is  not  virtue  happiness  ?  Is  not  virtue  hardship  and  endurance  ?  But 
half  truths  must  degenerate  into  error.  One  side  of  human  life  by  itself  must 
deteriorate  and  become  bad  and  selfish,  and  sink  just  as  one  side  of  a  scale  without 
a  corresponding  weight  upon  the  other  side  must  fall.  So  the  happiness  of  virtue, 
and  the  hardness  of  virtue,  had  become  on  either  side  mere  self-enjoyment  and  seU- 
oonfidence.  So  human  life  must  fall  into  error,  however  high  it  begins,  unless  it 
encounters  some  higher  life  and  light.  It  never  has  anything  except  its  own  one 
human  tendency  to  rely  upon,  which  runs  away  with  it  if  not  corrected,  and  the  half 
tmth  becomes  a  whole  error.  The  best  of  lives  at  its  best  is  one-sided,  and  alone, 
jwithout  Christ,  will  degenerate."  Its  noble  tendencies  will  narrow  upon  self.  It  will 
surety  end  in  meanness  and  error.  Panl,  then,  meets  these  degenerate  representatives 
<>f  noble  reverse  sides  of  life.  Epicureans  and  Stoics ;  and  they  are  together  as  they 


586  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm, 

encounter  Paul.  In  their  degenerate  form  they  have  a  common  union — not  anion 
in  a  higher  life,  but  in  a  lower  life,  in  a  common  selfishnesb.  Is  it  a  strange 
alliance  ?  And  yet  your  ovn  single  life  may  show  the  same  thing — the  armour  under 
the  silk.  How  much  you  may  endure  for  pleasure's  sake;  how  you  toil  selfishly  ir^ 
order  to  enjoy  selfishly  ;  and  yet  the  toil  and  enjoyment  are  perfectly  out  of  sym- 
pathy with  each  other.  There  is  nothing  in  common  between  them  but  the  thought 
of  self.  That  hollow  union  is  the  best  the  earthly  life  can  make  between  the  twc 
sides,  which  say,  "  I  eught  to  be  happy  and  I  ought  to  endure."  The  two  ideas  ,ot^ 
enjoyment  and  endurance  go  on  seemingly  as  hopelessly  separate  as  ever,  whether 
in  one  life  or  two  Uves.  Unless  Christ  meet  them,  and  their  union  be  in  what  Paul 
preached,  Jesus  and  the  Eesurrection.  What  happens  then  ?  First,  this,  and  it  is 
the  great  thing  which  the  gospel  was  meant  to  do,  and  I  beg  your  closest  attention 
to  it.     The  gospel  is  bent  on  giving  the  two  Divine  motives,  a  Divine  Person  and  a , 

Divine  future,  Jesus  and  the  Resurrection.     It  does  not  announce  duties;  it  brings 

warm,  stimulating  motives.  It  preaches  Jesus,  who  is  the  deep  love  of  God  for  you. 
Him  whose  love  and  strength  has  come  from  the  high  heaven  for  you,  come  to  the 
deep  sin  for  you,  come  across  the  breadth  of  the  world  to  you,  come  through  the 
long  years  to  you.  Eeturn  His  love,  and  you  are  in  the  happiness  of  virtue  at  once. 
The  happiness  of  His  companionship  is  the  happiness  of  virtue.  In  His  company 
you  reach  that  fulness  of  joy.  And  now  see,  it  is  a  happiness  which  also  includes 
endurance.  It  does  not  depend  on  circumstances.  It  comes  from  the  love  of  a 
Person,  of  Jesus  the Xord.  Am  I  bound  to  Him?  Then  I  am  happy;  notwith- 
standing how  self  is  put  down,  or  how  circumstances  change.  Happiness  is  not  a 
mere  luxury,  not  a  quietness,  not  a  favourable  arrangement  of  circumstances.  But 
it  is  my  friendship  with  Jesus,  which  any  man  can  have,  and  with  which  any  man 
can  endure,  and  be  at  once  both  as  good  an  Epicurean  as  Epicurus,  and  as  good  a 
i  Stoic  as  Zeno.  Now  turn  it  over  and  begin  with  the  other  side  ;  not  how  men  think 
i  of  happiness,  but  how  they  think  of  endurance.  Suppose  that  a  man  says,  "  It  is 
'  hard  for  me  to  do  my  duty,  to  be  dutiful  and  faithful.  I  suppose  I  must  just  nerve 
myself  to  it  and  go  to  it  as  a  necessity."  He  and  you  are  apt  to  think  he  is  very 
brave,  and  is  acting  just  in  the  right  spirit.  You  let  him  go  oflE  in  that  way,  and 
even  give  him  your  encouragement.  But  the  gospel  _never  left  a  man  in  that  way. 
It  never  told  a  man  to  go  and  do  a  thing  because  hie  had  to  do  it,  and  had  better 
make  the  best  of  it  and  go  with  a  good  grace.  But  it  preaches  Jesus  as  Paul 
preached  Him  to  the  Stoics  as  well  as  Epicureans.  "  Do  it,  bear  it,  with  Jesus  and 
for  Jesus.  Go  to  it  out  of  no  necessity,  but  for  the  love  of  the  Lord,  who  sets,  and 
leads  the  toil  or  suffering,  and  has  borne  so  much  for  you.  Can  you  not  deny  self 
for  Him  and  His  commands  ?  "  As  the  gospel  gives  no  effeminate  happiness,  so  now 
it  gives  no  bitter  bravery,  no  dreary  courage,  but  a  joyful  endurance  that  is  happier 
than  any  earthly  delight  in  selfish  pleasures';  and  the  two  sides  of  life  are  one  in 
that  preaching  of  Jesus  which  Paul  brought  to  Stoics  and  Epicureans.  But  Paul 
gave  them  another  teaching — "  the  Resurrection  "  ;  another  motive,  not  only  a 
Divine  Person  to  love,  but  a  Divine  future  to  reach.  Enjoyment  and  endurance 
had  become  simply  different  ways  of  getting  through  the  present  world,  and  they 
knew  nothing  else.  The  Epicurean  said,  "  This  is  all  there  is  ;  let  us  try  to  enjoy  it 
as  we  can."  The  Stoic  said,  "  This  is  all  I  know  of ;  let  us  try  to  bear  it  as  we 
must."  But  enjoyment  and  endurance  are  two  very  different  things  when  the 
Resurrection  is  announced  to  them,  and  the  Epicureans  and  the  Stoics  both 
encounter  Paul.  A  present  opening  into  a  future  changes  both  of  them.  See  what 
.  it  does  for  happiness.  It  makes  it  no  longer  the  happiness  of  present  possession, 
bnt  of  anticipation  and  preparation.  It  makes  it  active  and  brave.  It  is  no  longer 
the  happiness  of  a  man  who  sits  in  the  midst  of  his  gathered  harvest  and  eats  of  his 
fruits  luxuriantly.  It  is  the  happiness  of  one  who  is  enduring  the  care  and  toil  of 
preparation  and  exposure  in  view  of  a  future  harvest.  And  see  on  the  other  side 
,how  Paul's  truth  of  a  resurrection  changed  endurance.  It  is  no  longer  a  bit  of  stern, 
I  proud  resolution  not  to  give  up,  to  laugh  bitterly  and  bear  it  hopelessly,  but  it  is  & 
;  bravery  that  is  happy  also  in  the  great  hope  of  result,  a  crown  laid  up,  a  prize  at  the 
end  of  the  race.  That  alone  sends  cheerful  sunlight  through  the  workshop  of  life, 
the  knowledge  that  it  is  a  preparation  for  a  Divine  future.  Do  you  not  believe  that 
Peter  went  to  his  preaching,  after  he  learnt  that  Ohrist  had  risen,  much  more 
happily  than  he  went  to  his  fishing  when  he  thought  Christ  was  dead,  and  that  he 
had  just  to  go  back  and  win  his  daily  bread  in  the  old  dreary  way  P  One  was 
endurance  with  a  rich  future  of  results,  the  other  was  endurance  umler  a  mere 
present  load  of  necessity.    The  one  was  happiness,  also,  the  other  was  bitterness. 


CHAP.  XVII.]  THE  ACTS.  68? 

So  the  glad  light  of  a  resurrection  makes  the  Christian  Stoic  as  light-hearted  as  tha 
happiest  of  Epicureans.  So  life's  two  sides  help  each  other,  and  it  is  both  sweet 
and  strong.     {Frederick  Brooks.) 

Vers.  21-31.  Then  Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  Mars'  hill. — Novelty  attractive : — 
Yes,  the  people  gathered  in  crowds  round  the  statue,  and  looked  at  it  again  and 
again.  It  was  not  the  finest  work  of  art  in  the  city,  nor  the  most  intrinsically 
attractive.  Why,  then,  did  the  citizens  of  Verona  stand  in  such  clusters  around 
the  effigy  of  Dante  on  that  summer's  evening?  Do  you  guess  the  reason  ?  It  was 
a  /ete  in  honour  of  the  poet.  No,  you  are  mistaken  ;  it  was  but  an  ordinary  evening, 
and  there  was  nothing  peculiar  in  the  date  or  the  events  of  the  day.  You  shall  not 
be  kept  in  suspense  ;  the  reason  was  very  simple ;  the  statue  was  new ;  it  had,  in 
fact,  only  been  unveiled  the  day  before.  Every  one  passes  Dante  now,  having  other 
things  to  think  of  ;  the  citizens  are  well  used  to  his  solemn  visage,  and  scarcely  care 
that  he  stands  among  them.  Is  not  this  the  way  of  men?  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Novelties  and  how  to  regard  them: — "  Did  you  not  say  that  there  was  a  green  rose  in 
this  place  ?  There  are  many  lovely  flowers  here,  but  I  had  rather  see  the  green 
rose  than  anything  else."  So  said  a  visitor  as  he  stood  in  a  garden  where  palms, 
and  aloes,  and  all  manner  of  rare  plants,  from  many  lands,  were  to  be  seen  in  per- 
fection ;  and  we  should  not  be  surprised  if  our  reader,  in  like  case,  were  to  make 
the  same  observation.  Yet,  when  the  green  rose  was  seen,  it  was  at  once  denounced 
as  nothing  at  all  desirable,  not  a  tenth  as  beautiful  as  a  red  or  white  rose.  Just  jo, 
there  are  many  folks  in  this  world  who  must  see  that  which  is  special,  outre, 
unusual ;  yet,  when  they  see  this  freak  of  nature,  or  of  grace,  they  turn  back  to  the 
more  usual  order  of  good  things  with  considerable  relief,  for  they  feel  that "  the  old 
is  better."  It  is  a  pity  when  a  man,  especially  a  preacher,  is  merely  a  green  rose, 
with  a  name  for  being  -something  remarkable,  but  with  no  special  excellence  with 
which  to  maintain  a  reputation.  He  attracts  only  for  a  moment,  but  sustains  no 
permanent  attention,  for  there  is  hardly  as  much  about  him  as  there  is  in  the  ordi- 
nary unpretending  teacher  of  the  gospel.  Those  wanderers  who  are  always  running 
all  over  the  world  after  green  roses,  are  by  no  means  so  wise  as  those  who  are  con- 
tent with  the  perfume  and  colour  of  that  flower  which  grows  over  their  own  porch, 
whether  it  be  red  or  white.  The  affectation  of  the  unusual  is  a  trick  of  the 
charlatan ;  the  craving  after  it  is  the  weakness  of  the  shallow-minded.  Yet,  be  it 
noted,  that  we  do  not  wish  to  depreciate  the  green  rose.  You  see  we  have  almost 
fallen  into  that  unfairness,  but  the  fault  was  not  intentional.  We  are  glad  to  have 
seen  it,  for  as  a  green  rose  it  has  charms  of  its  own.  Yet  this  eagerness  to  see  it, 
this  passing  over  of  lovelier  objects,  this  crying  up  of  one  beauty  above  another, 
inevitably  leads  to  an  undervaluing  of  that  which  has  obtained  undeserved  promi- 
nence. Your  foolish  partiality  has  made  your  favourite  a  target  for  excessive 
criticism ;  but  we  will  not  yield  to  the  temptation.  God  has  made  the  green  rose, 
and  He  makes  nothing  amiss.  Your  remarkable  friend  has  his  excellencies,  and 
God  be  thanked  for  them.  Your  eccentric  preacher  has  his  own  adaptations  for 
usefulness.  Because  you  cry  him  up,  we  are  not  going  to  cry  him  down.  Let  each 
rose  display  its  own  colour,  and  let  each  man  be  himself,  and  let  the  Lord  be  glorified 
in  all.  (Ibid.)  Paul  at  Athens : — I.  The  audience.  I.Jews.  The  place  where 
he  made  his  first  public  appearance  as  a  teacher  was  the  synagogue ;  and  his  first 
audience  was  composed  of  Jews  and  devout  persons.  This  was  in  accordance  with 
the  usual  apostolic  custom  of  visiting  the  Jewish  place  of  worship  first,  and  making 
it  the  starting-point  for  more  extended  labours.  Nothing  is  said  about  the  nature 
or  result  of  his  intercourse  with  his  brethren,  save  that  he  disputed  with  them.  He 
would  remind  them  of  their  splendid  opportunities  of  bearing  witness  for  God  in  the 
pagan  city.  2.  Common  people.  Leaving  the  synagogue,  and  coming  to  the  Agora 
or  market-place,  the  apostle  had  to  mingle  with  a  different  class,  and  the  subject  of 
discussion  would  also  be  different.  The  Agora  of  Athens  must  not  be  associated 
with  what  is  called  the  market-place  of  a  modern  town.  It  was,  indeed,  the  centre 
of  public  life",  where  business  was  transacted,  where  busy  men  moved  to  and  fro, 
and  idlers  loitered  about.  But  it  was  more  than  that,  it  was  a  space  decorated  with 
architectural  beauties,  an  attractive  place  of  resort  for  all  classes  of  the  community 
eager  to  listen  to  instruction  or  hear  the  news.  It  was  a  place  where  orators  and 
statesmen,  poets  and  artists  used  to  meet  for  encouragement  and  stimulus  in  their 
several  callings.  The  appearance  of  a  foreigner  among  such  a  people,  especially  if 
he  seemed  sociable  and  talkative,  would  soon  attract  a  crowd  expecting  to  hear 
lomething  new.     The  daily  visits  of  the  apostle  to  the  Agora  would  afford  him 


588  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvn, 

ample  opportunities  of  proclaiming  new  truths  in  the  idol  city.  8.  Philosophers. 
The  philosophers  who  encountered  him  were  the  Epicureans  and  the  Stoics,  both 
of  whom  had  their  schools  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Agora.  (1)  Epicureans.  This  sect 
took  its  name  from  Epicurus,  who  opened  a  school  for  the  teaching  of  his  philosophy 
in  a  garden  in  Athens ;  hence  his  followers  were  sometimes  styled  the  "  Philosophers 
of  the  Garden."  Epicurus  taught  that  the  chief  end  of  man  was  the  attainment  of 
pleasure  or  happiness ;  and  the  way  to  gain  it  was  the  removal  of  every  cause  of 
pain  or  anxiety.  A  sound  body  and  a  tranquil  mind  constituted  the  ideal  of  Epi- 
curean bliss.  The  main  business  of  life  was  to  raise  the  mind  above  caves.  Such 
was  the  original  aim  of  this  school  of  philosophy ;  but  its  later  disciples  allowed 
grosser  ideas  to  enter,  and  pleasure  degenerated  into  the  gratification  of  the 
appetites.  There  was  no  Creator,  and  no  moral  government.  There  were  indeed 
deities,  but  they  lived  in  undisturbed  tranquillity  :  serene  above  the  turmoil  of  the 
world,  careless  of  mankind.  The  attainment  of  bliss  like  theirs  was  the  main  busi- 
ness of  man's  life  on  earth.  (2)  Stoics.  The  other  sect  that  encountered  Paul  was 
the  Stoics,  so  named  because  Zeno  its  founder  held  his  meetings  in  a  building  called 
the  Stoa  or  porch.  This  system  of  philosophy  is  regarded  as  a  nearer  approxima- 
tion to  Christianity  than  the  Epicurean,  inasmuch  as  it  seems  to  possess  a 
glimmering  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood,  and  forestalls  the  Christian  truth  that  good- 
ness is  indispensable  to  happiness.  But  while  it  recognises  God  as  the  Author  of 
all,  it  does  so  in  a  Pantheistic  sense,  as  if  God  were  everything  and  everything  God. 
The  God  of  the  Stoic  is  not  a  distinct  personality,  but  an  aU-pervading  spirit, 
inseparable  from  the  works  of  his  hands.  And  not  only  so,  but  he,  and  all  his 
works,  are  under  a  pre-ordained  decree  amounting  almost,  if  not  altogether,  to 
fatalism.  Everything,  indeed,  is  the  result  of  Fate,  and  freedom  of  will  consists  in 
bowing  to  Fate.  The  man  who  yields  most  completely  to  this  iron  law  is  the  perfect 
man.  The  aim  of  this  system  was  to  produce  a  passionless  conformity  to  Fate. 
The  pursuit  of  this  end  engendered  apathy  or  indifference  to  everything  alike 
pleasurable  and  painful.  Such  was  the  array  of  diversified  opinion  that  Paul  had 
to  combat,  and  he  nobly  vindicated  his  trust  as  a  Christian  teacher  in  the  face 
of  pagan  enlightenment.  His  experience  of  men,  and  his  knowledge  of  philosophy, 
gave  him  special  fitness  to  discharge  the  mission  that  Providence  had  laid  upon 
him.  4.  Public  meeting  on  Mars'  hill.  To  speak  on  this  venerated  spot  was  a 
distinction  reserved  for  the  foremost  orators,  and  Paul's  promotion  to  that  distinc- 
tion showed  the  profound  impression  he  had  made.  The  summit  of  Mars'  hill  was 
associated  in  the  Athenian  mind  with  solemn  and  venerable  scenes.  There  sat  the 
most  august  of  assemblies,  to  dispense  justice  and  confer  on  religion.  The  Areopagite 
court  was  the  supreme  tribunal  of  Athens  on  social,  political,  and  religious  ques- 
tions. The  judges  sat  in  the  open  air,  and  their  seat  on  the  summit  of  the  rock  was 
reached  by  a  flight  of  steps.  Somewhere  on  this  reserved  and  hallowed  eminence 
the  apostle  took  his  stand ;  and  whether  he  was  there  on  his  defence,  as  some  sup- 
pose, or  simply  for  convenience  in  addressing  a  large  assembly,  no  spot  could  have 
been  more  suitable  for  a  discussion  on  the  mysteries  of  religion.  II.  The  discourse. 
It  was  no  easy  task  adequately  to  address  the  assemblage  that  gathered  to  hear  him. 
What  theme  could  be  chosen  to  suit  all  and  benefit  all  ?  Their  motives  were  mani- 
fold and  their  tastes  diverse.  There  were  the  scofiBng  Jew  and  the  wisdom-loving 
Greek,  the  refined  Athenian  and  the  rude  provincial,  the  sceptical  philosopher  and 
the  unsophisticated  stranger,  the  contented  Epicurean  and  the  passionless  Stoic. 
We  wiU  now  listen  to  the  apostle  as  he  attempts  to  lift  his  heathen  audience  out  of 
their  ignorance  into  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He 
hath  sent.  1.  Creator.  He  begins  by  setting  forth  "  the  unknown  God  "  as  the 
Creator  of  the  world.  "  God  made  the  world  and  all  things  therein."  This  was  an 
idea  entirely  new  to  the  speculative  minds  or  the  ancient  world,  and  the  prominence 
here  given  to  it  shows  that,  in  Paul's  estimation,  it  lay  at  the  foundation  of  every 
true  system  of  rehgion.  It  was  idle  to  talk  of  worship  if  the  Being  worshipped  was 
not  raised  above  the  worshippers  by  such  qualities  and  attributes  as  inspired 
reverence  and  trust.  So  that  Paul's  statement  of  the  fundamental  principle  of 
Theism  dealt  a  fatal  stab  at  the  views  of  ancient  philosophy  on  the  origin  of  the 
world.  There  could  be  no  compromise  between  positions  so  radically  at  variance ; 
and  while  philosophies  change  with  the  changing  generations,  the  Christian  position 
remains  the  same  as  stated  from  apostolic  lips  eighteen  centuries  ago — "  God  made 
the  world  and  all  things  therein."  2.  Governor.  Advancing  a  step,  the  apostla 
announces  the  unknown  God  as  the  Governor  of  the  world :  "  He  hath  made  all 
nations  of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  hath  determined  the 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  589 

times  appointed  and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation."  Here  too  there  was  a  sharp 
contrast  between  revealed  truth  and  the  tenets  of  the  schools.  Chance,  or  Fate, 
said  ancient  philosophy,  appoints  to  each  nation  and  race  its  time  and  place  in  the 
world.  No,  said  Paul,  there  is  one  presiding  Deity,  who  not  only  set  the  world  in 
motion,  and  gave  everything  in  it  life,  but  who  keeps  it  going  and  sustains  all  life, 
assigning  to  each  man  and  nation  the  sphere  they  are  to  fill  and  the  length  of  their 
stay.  The  all-controlling  providence  of  God,  indeed,  follows  from  the  fact  of  creation. 
How  grand  the  conception  1  God  marshalling  the  nations  of  the  earth  one  after 
another  on  the  stage  of  time,  appointing  their  seasons,  their  work,  and  the  bounds 
of  their  habitation,  and  then  withdrawing  them  when  their  work  is  done  1  3.  Judge. 
The  apostle  further  declares  the  unknown  God  to  be  the  Judge  of  all  men.  "  He 
hath  appointed  a  day  in  which  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness. "  Here  is 
another  aspect  of  the  Divine  character  and  work,  which  carries  our  thoughts  forward 
to  the  close  of  the  present  constitution  of  things,  just  as  the  reference  to  creation 
recalled  their  beginning.  4.  Father.  This  is  another  aspect  in  which  the  unknown 
God  is  set  forth.  •'  In  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,  as  certain  also 
of  your  own  poets  have  said.  For  we  also  are  His  offspring."  If  the  ideas  of  creation, 
superintendence,  and  responsibility  were  unknown  to  the  ancients,  much  less  was 
the  Divine  Fatherhood.  The  quotation  referred  to  does  not  prove  that  they  recog- 
nised God  as  Father  save  in  the  Stoical  sense.  Gleanthes,  one  of  the  poets  quoted 
from,  was  a  Stoic,  and  Paul,  in  citing  him,  not  only  showed  his  acquaintance  with 
Greek  literature,  but  his  willingness  to  taie  up  common  ground  with  his  hearers 
whenever  that  was  possible.  In  doing  so,  he  doubtless  gained  for  himself  a  more 
respectfiol  hearing.  He  adopted  the  language  of  the  Stoics,  but  put  upon  it  a 
Christian  meaning.  Taking  our  position,  then,  in  the  world  as  God's  children,  we 
can  view  everything  in  a  different  light,  no  longer  repelled  by  the  unapproachable 
majesty  of  a  Great  Creator,  but  drawn  by  His  parental  love.  The  works  of  His 
hand  also  will  have  an  additional  interest  for  us.  5.  Is  God  knowable  ?  This  is 
the  question  to  which  the  whole  argument  was  leading  up,  and  the  answer  is  in  the 
affirmative.  The  main  purpose  of  Paul's  reasoning  was  to  show  the  Athenians  that 
He  whom  they  styled  the  •'  unknown  God  "  could  be  known  if  they  sought  Him 
aright.  Though  the  Divine  Being  was  for  a  long  time  pleased  to  draw  a  veil  over 
His  character  and  modes  of  working,  it  was  not  intended  that  He  should  for  ever 
remain  unknown.  Indeed,  all  the  arrangements  of  His  providence  were  such  as  to 
lead  men  to  the  knowledge  of  Him.  III.  Thb  application.  The  apostle  did  not 
content  himself  with  laying  down  great  general  principles.  Like  a  practical  man, 
he  applied  them.  And  in  order  to  insure  success  it  will  be  observed  that  throughout 
this  masterly  exposition  there  is  an  evident  desire  to  carry  his  hearers  along  with 
him,  so  that  they  might  be  without  excuse  if  they  continued  ignorant  of  God. 
Having  thus  laid  down  a  few  broad  principles,  he  goes  on  to  apply  them  to  the 
religion  and  life  of  the  people.  1.  Idolatry.  The  first  application  is  to  idol- 
worship,  in  which  the  Athenians  prided  themselves.  It  required  no  small  courage 
and  tact  to  assail  with  effect  such  a  deep-rooted  custom  in  its  very  hot-bed.  The 
inference  was  irresistible.  The  invisible  Godhead  cannot  be  represented  in  visible 
symbols ;  and  even  though  it  could,  every  such  effort  is  here  condemned  because  it 
is  a  dishonour  to  God.  Besides,  we  do  not  need  it  any  more  than  a  ohUd  needs  the 
help  of  an  image  to  love  its  parents ;  and  we  ought  not  to  attempt  it,  because  we 
have  a  personal  God  and  Father,  who  is  near  to  every  soul  that  seeks  Him.  More- 
over all  such  externals  are  not  only  not  helps  to  spiritual  worship,  but  may  become 
a  positive  hindrance.  2.  Eepentance.  The  next  application  which  the  apostle 
makes  of  his  subject  is  to  repentance,  or  the  need  of  an  inward  change,  which  was 
never  contemplated  by  the  ancient  religions.  Their  whole  history  was  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  impotence  to  effect  such  a  change,  or  satisfy  the  burdened  heart.  3. 
Jesus  and  the  resurrection.  One  practical  question  stiU  remained.  How  were  they 
to  find  favour  with  this  just  and  holy  God  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  brings  ua 
to  the  climax  of  this  trenchant  appeal.  There  was  only  one  way  of  return  to  God, 
and  that  not  through  images  of  silver  and  gold,  but  through  Him  who  is  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Father's  glory  and  the  express  image  of  His  Person.  If  they  must  have 
an  image  of  the  invisible  God,  they  had  it  in  the  person  of  His  Incarnate  Son,  who 
was  dead  and  is  alive  again,  and  clothed  with  judicial  authority.  IV.  The  result. 
It  has  often  been  pointed  out  that  the  saving  impression  made  by  Paul  on  this 
occasion  was  disappointingly  small.  Nor  need  this  excite  surprise,  when  we  reflect 
on  the  peculiar  character  of  the  discourse,  and  especially  the  sensuous  habits  of  the 
Greek  mind,  its  philosophic  culture  and  pride  of  intellect.    The  haughty  cultaied 


/ 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvh- 

Greek  would  not  readily  yield  himself  to  the  teaching  of  a  rude  barbarian.  It  la 
seldom  that  we  are  able  to  Bee  the  results  of  our  work  for  Christ  in  this  world,  and 
no  doubt  the  great  apostle  never  saw  on  earth  the  fruits  of  that  day's  work.  1. 
Some  rnocked.  The  philosophic  mind  of  Athens  would  not  bend  to  the  simplicity 
blTEe  gospel.  2.  Others  procrastinated.  They  had  a  passing  gUmpse  of  the 
falseness  and  hollowness  of  the  present,  and  they  thought  the  matter  worthy  of 
more  serious  consideration.  3.  A  few  believed.  We  know  the  names  of  only  two 
— Dionysius,  a  judge  of  the  Areopagite  court,  and  a  woman  named  Damaris,  of 
whom  we  are  told  nothing.  (D.  Merson,  B.D.)  Paul's  sermon  on  Mars'  hill : — 
He  "  declares"  to  them  God — I.  In  relation  to  the  universe  in  general.     As — 

1.  The  Creator  of  the  universe :  "  God  tbat  made  the  world,"  &c.  This  would 
strike  at  once  against  the  Epicureanism  which  regarded  the  universe  as  springing 
from  a  fortuitous  concourse  of  atoms — the  work  of  chance :  and  against  the  Stoicism, 
which  regarded  the  universe  as  existing  from  eternity.  2.  The  Buler  of  the  uni- 
verse :  "  He  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth. "  The  universe  is  not  like  a  great  machine 
built  to  manage  itself,  it  is  an  order  of  things  kept  in  being  and  harmony  by  the 
unremitting  agency  of  the  Creator.  3.  The  Life  of  the  universe  :  "  He  giveth  to  all 
hfe,  and  breath,  and  all  things"  (c/.  ver.  28).  The  deductions  which  the  apostle 
draws  from  this  are  irresistible.  (1)  That  God  is  uulocalised.  "  He  dwelleth  not 
in  temples  made  with  hands."  (2)  That  God  is  independent.  "  Neither  is  wor- 
shipped with  men's  bands  as  though  He  needed  anything."  The  heathens  thought 
their  gods  needed  their  services.  II.  In  relation  to  mankind  in  particolab.  1. 
He  gave  to  all  mankind  a  unity  of  nature.  "  Made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men." 
There  are  immense  diversities  subsisting  between  the  European,  the  Mongolian,  the 
Hottentot  races  that  have  led  many  scientists  to  conclude  that  they  have  descended 
from  various  stocks.  Without  touching  on  arguments  of  a  scientific  kind,  we 
ground  our  belief  chiefly — (1)  On  mental  resemblances.  The  faculties  of  thinking, 
loving,  hating,  fearing,  hoping,  worshipping,  self-commending,  self-condemning,  are 
common  to  the  race.  (2)  On  Scriptural  statements.  There  is  not  a  single  passage 
in  the  Bible  to  suggest  a  doubt  as  to  the  homogenity  of  the  race,  and  the  descent 
from  one  pair.  The  most  brilliant  names  in  science  have  maintained  the  unity  of 
the  race :  Buffon,  Linnaeus,  Soemmering,  and  Cuvier,  in  natural  history ;  Blumen- 
bach,  Miiller,  and  Wagner,  in  anatomy;  Pritchard,  Latham,  Pickering,  among 
ethnologists ;  Adding,  W.  von  Humboldt,  and  Bunsen,  among  philologists ;  and 
Alexander  von  Humboldt,  "  at  whose  feet  all  science  had  laid  down  its  treasures." 

2.  He  appointed  to  all  mankind  their  boundary  in  life.  "  And  hath  determined  the 
times  before  appointed,  and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation."  There  is  a  boundary 
for  every  man  in  relation  to — (1)  The  place  of  his  existence.  The  sphere  which 
individuals  occupy  is  a  sphere  which  God  has  appointed.  Every  man  has  an  orbit 
of  his  own,  and  that  orbit  is  appointed  by  Him.  The  same  with  nations.  Nations 
have  their  geographic  boundary,  and  these  have  been  drawn  by  heaven.  Though 
they  may  proximately  grow  out  of  the  diversity  of  men's  organisations,  customs, 
laws,  habits,  still  God  hath  made  them.  (2)  Time.  Men  and  nations  have  their 
day,  and  the  length  of  that  day  even  to  the  minute  is  determined.  There  is  no 
room  for  chance  in  human  history.  3.  He  requires  from  all  mankind  the  recogni- 
tion of  His  existence.  "  That  they  should  seek  the  Lord,"  &c.  (1)  Man's  distance 
from  God.  This  distance  is  moral,  and  is  to  be  overcome  by  effort  on  man's  part. 
That  they  should  seek  the  Lord.  (2)  God's  nearness  to  man.  This  utterance  is  so 
pregnant  aa  to  require  a  separate  discourse.  4.  He  is  the  Father  of  all  mankind. 
"  We  are  all  His  offspring."  5.  He  demands  repentance  from  all  (ver.  30).  {D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  Paul's  sermon  on  Mars'  hill: — I.  God  the  Creator.  Paul 
shows  this  "  unknown  "  Deity  to  be  "  the  God  that  made  the  world,"  &c.  He  was 
unlike  the  other  gods  in  these  respects — 1.  There  was  no  Umit  to  His  power.  For 
none  of  the  gods  did  the  Athenians  claim  the  power  of  universal  creation.  One 
could  do  one  thing,  and  another  something  else,  but  this  God  was  the  maker  of  the 
world  and  all  things  in  it.  2.  There  was  no  Umit  to  His  dominion.  "  Being  Lord 
of  heaven  and  earth."  Other  deities  were  supreme  only  in  certain  localities,  or 
under  certain  localities,  or  under  certain  circumstances,  but  this  God  was  every- 
where, and  always  Master.  3.  There  was  no  limit  to  His  dwelling-place.  "  Pwelleth 
not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  The  whole  universe  was  His  sanctuary.  II. 
God  the  Giveb.  1.  His  independency.  "  Neither  is  served  by  men's  hands,"  &o. 
Other  deities,  according  to  their  notions,  were  hungry,  and  needed  to  be  fed,  and 
were  therefore  brought  costly  offerings  of  food  and  drink.  2.  His  outgiving. 
**  Seeing  He  Himself  giveth,"  &o.    God  was  the  Giver,  instead  of  being  the 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  «91 

Receiver — like  the  other  deities  that  were  worshipped.  The  Creator  could  not  be 
dependent  upon  the  creature.  III.  God  the  Father.  "  For  we  are  also  His  off- 
Bpring."  1.  The  brotherhood  of  men.  To  the  Athenians  this  was  no  palatable 
thought.  Proud  of  their  culture  and  intellectual  superiority,  they  superciUously 
divided  the  world  into  Greeks  and  "  barbarians."  Paul  set  forth  this  doctrine  by 
showing — (1)  The  unity  of  the  nations.  "  He  made  of  one  every  nation  of  men." 
They  were  not  sprung  from  different  sources,  but  from  one  source.  They  were  not 
made  of  different  blood,  but  of  one  blood.  Having  but  one  Father,  the  human  race 
is  one  family.  (2)  The  cause  of  the  creation  of  nations.  "  That  they  should  seek 
God,"  (fee.  God  created  men  that  they  might  adore  Him.  He  blessed  them  with 
life  that  they  might  bless  Him.  He  hungers  for  their  love  as  a  father  hungers 
for  the  love  of  his  children.  2.  The  Fatherhood  of  God.  (1)  The  fact.  "  For 
we  are  also  His  offspring."  To  a  heathen  audience  Paul  does  not  quote  from 
the  Scriptures,  but  from  one  of  their  own  authorities.  Truth  from  any  source  ia 
truth,  and  it  is  best  to  use  that  which  will  find  the  quickest  acceptance.  (2)  The 
obligation.  "  We  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto  gold,"  &c.  God 
who  made  living,  seeing,  breathing,  speaking  men,  how  could  He  Himself  be  like 
those  lifeless,  sightless,  breathless,  speechless  idols  ?  IV.  God  the  Judge.  1.  The 
time  of  repentance.  The  "  times  of  ignorance  "  are  gone  by.  God  cannot  overlook 
sin  any  longer  on  the  plea  that  one  does  not  know.  2.  The  day  of  judgment.  That 
day  is  surely  coming.  Men  then  will  be  judged  according  to  the  deeds  done  in 
the  body.  It  will  be  a  day  of  terror  to  the  wicked — a  day  of  rejoicing  for  the  - 
righteous.  3.  The  Judge.  The  world  once  judged  Christ — the  time  is  coming 
when  Christ  wiU  judge  the  world.  Christ  is  the  Saviour  now — the  Judge  by  and  by. 
4.  The  people  to  be  judged.  They  were  in  the  audience  before  Paul — they  are  in 
the  audience  of  every  minister  of  the  gospel  now.  How  did  those  act  who  were 
before  Paul  ?  (1)  "  Some  mocked."  Some  now  mock  at  the  preacher,  or  at  sacred 
things,  knowing  their  sacredness.  (2)  Others  did,  as  the  majority  of  hearers  do 
TIDW— they  put  off  deciding  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls.     (3)  But  there  were  a  y 

jew  who  closed  with  the  offer  of  salvation.  In  every  revival  there  are  a  few  who 
get  ready  for  the  day  of  judgment.  But  who  shall  be  able  to  characterise  the  folly 
of  those  who  continue  to  walk  in  the  way  of  destruction  ?  (M.  C.  Hazard.)  Some 
new  thing. — Some  new  thing  : — A  manifest  physical,  intellectual,  and  moral  weak- 
ness was  strangely  blended  with  an  intense  eagerness  for  novelty.  We  ordinarily 
associate  a  desire  for  new  things  with  progress,  but  here  that  desire  is  associated 
with  that  which  is  the  reverse  of  progress.  This  warrants  the  statement  that  a 
desire  for  something  new  is  not  necessarily  indicative  of  progress.  Indeed,  it  may 
be  indicative  of  regress.  It  may  not  be  an  earnest  desire  for  something  better,  but 
a  mere  restless,  uneasy  craving  for  change.  To  seek  the  new  simply  because  it  is 
the  new,  and  apart  from  any  consideration  of  its  intrinsic  worth,  is  to  go  backward 
rather  than  forward.  I  would  not  disparage  legitimate  desire  for  progress.  Only 
an  ignorant  bigot  will  assert  that  "  that  which  is  new  is  not  true,  and  that 
which  is  true  is  not  new."  Some  new  things  are  true,  and  some  old  things 
are  false.  Let  reverent  investigation  go  on.  Let  it  be  accorded  the  widest  liberty. 
To  hinder  it  were  intellectual  and  moral  treason.  But  the  contention  now  is  that 
progress  and  restlessness  are  not  synonymous  terms.  It  is  not  the  seeking  of  "  some 
new  thing  "  which  is  wrong,  but  the  "  doing  nothing  else,  but  either  to  tell,  or  to 
hear  some  new  thing. "  Indeed,  so  far  from  being  good,  it  is  evil.  It  indicates  a 
fevered  condition  of  the  system — an  unhealthy  and  morbid  state.  It  begets  instability 
of  character  and  purpose.  It  leads  to  superficial  ideas  and  modes  of  thinking.  It 
withdraws  attention  from  the  tried  and  settled,  and  directs  it  to  the  flotsam  and 
jetsam  of  daily  happenings,  the  real  importance  of  which  is  hardly  ever  discerned 
tin  time  has  them  in  their  true  perspedtive.  Much  occurred  before  our  time  which 
is  of  inestimable  importance.  Men  need  to-day,  not  less  of  the  new,  but  more  of 
the  old,  a  wiser  perception  of  its  relative  worth.  More  seriously,  this  craving  for 
eomething  new  often  dupes  men  into  the  acceptance  of  old  errors.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  most  new  things  are  comparatively  worthless,  not  all,  but  most.  Originality 
is  rare.  What  we  call  originaJity  is  usually  eccentricity,  and  eccentricity  nearly 
always  means  a  screw  loose  in  the  intellectual  or  moral  machinery.  If  an  alleged 
new  thing  proves  to  be  really  good,  the  presumption  is  that  it  is  not  as  new  as  it 
.was  supposed  to  be.  But  it  not  infrequently  happens  that  the  so-called  new  idea  is 
an  old  error.  We  tire  told  almost  daily  that  modem  thought  has  shown  a  belief  in 
miracles  to  be  unreasonable,  and  yet  there  is  hardly  a  modem  objection  to  miracles 
which  was  not  anticipated  by  Celsus,  who  lived  in  the  second  century.     Conversely,     ' 


592  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

the  presumpton  is  that  the  old  and  established  ideas  are  true.  Not  always,  I  grant. 
I  would  not  fall  into  the  opposite  error.  I  would  not  question  the  reality  or  the 
value  of  the  many  great  achievements  of  the  present  age.  But  it  is  a  fair  presump- 
tion that  the  old  is  the  true.  This  was  so  of  Athens  in  the  time  of  Paul.  The  past 
was  glorious,  but  the  Athenians  of  St.  Paul's  day,  with  all  their  passion  forbearing 
or  telling  some  new  thing,  added  nothing  to  the  stock  of  the  world's  knowledge. 
For  all  that  we  owe  to  Athens,  we  go  centuries  back  of  those  babblers.  All  history 
teaches  us  that  progress  is  as  likely  to  consist  in  getting  back  to  old  standards  as 
in  creating  new  ones.  There  is  real  ground  for  the  apprehension  that  we  may 
become  a  volatile  people,  lacking  in  stability  and  weight  of  character.  We  see  this 
in  literature,  in  tbe  demand  for  new  books,  and  in  the  neglect  of  old  ones  of  tried 
value.  "  Kobert  Elsmere  "  is  a  case  in  point.  The  book  is  simply  a  dressing-up,  in 
popular  narrative  style,  of  the  stalest  and  shallowest  rationalistic  objections  to 
Christianity.  Great  was  the  commotion  which  it  excited  I  Dire  were  the  prophecies 
of  the  ruin  which  it  would  accompUsh  in  the  Church  1  We  see  it  in  science,  in  the 
haste  with  which  new  theories  are  accepted  and  promulgated  as  facts.  Indeed,  no 
matter  how  wild  a  theory  is,  there  are  always  multitudes  who  are  ready  to  seize  it, 
and  to  proclaim  that  all  existing  institutions  must  be  reorganised  in  harmony  with 
it.  We  see  this  same  craving  for  new  things  in  every-day  hfe,  in  the  restless  moving 
of  people  from  place  to  place,  in  the  frequency  of  business  changes,  in  the  small  talk 
of  society,  in  the  rage  of  speculation.  It  seems  to  be  the  great  object  in  life  of 
many  people  to  devise  something  novel,  "  something  we've  never  had  before,"  the 
utility  of  the  thing  devised  being  usually  a  secondary  consideration.  And  we  see  it 
especially  in  religion.  Many  people  do  not  like  the  old  ideas  and  doctrines  which, 
after  all  that  can  be  said,  are  those  that  are  fairly  deducible  from  Holy  Scripture 
and  the  faithful  preaching  of  which  has  wrought  such  glorious  moral  and  religious 
changes  in  the  world.  They  want  something  new,  and  the  minister  who  gratifies 
them  is  sure  to  have  a  large,  though  unsubstantial  following.  Multitudes  are 
hurried  hither  and  thither  by  their  craving  for  change.  Their  religious  convictions 
are  those  of  the  last  book  they  have  read  or  the  last  person  they  have  talked  with. 
Suffer  me  in  conclusion  to  make  two  additional  remarks.  1.  A  disposition  to 
undervalue  established  ideas  or  institutions  is  a  sign  of  a  weak  mind.  A  miscon- 
ception is  prevalent  at  this  point.  There  are  some,  particularly  among  the  young, 
who  say  that  they  will  not  accept  anything  which  they  have  not  personally  investi- 
gated and  found  to  be  true ;  and  they  pride  themselves  upon  that  position,  and 
deem  it  an  evidence  of  intellectual  strength  and  independence.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  it  is  simply  an  evidence  of  intellectual  conceit  or  moral  debility.  Has  the 
world  learned  nothing  in  all  these  thousands  of  years  ?  Has  it  proved  nothing  to 
be  true  ?  Does  the  endorsement  of  ages  create  no  favourable  presumption  ?  A 
sensible  man  will  no  more  refuse  to  become  a  Christian  because  he  has  not  had 
time  to  investigate  for  himself  the  history  and  claims  of  Christianity,  than  he  will 
refuse  to  become  a  citizen  of  the  country  in  which  he  was  born  and  reared  until  he 
has  satisfied  himself  by  years  of  study  that  the  institutions  of  that  country  are 
better  than  the  institutions  of  other  countries.  He  who  declines  to  avail  himself  of 
an  electric  car,  because  he  has  not  yet  learned  what  electricity  is,  is  not  a  wise  man, 
but  a  fool.  2.  In  this  restless  age  we  need  a  progressive  conservatism,  a  willing- 
ness to  accept  the  new  when  it  is  the  true,  but  a  holding  fast  to  the  old,  which  haa 
demonstrated  its  right  to  be.  This  gospel  which  we  preach,  and  in  which  lies  the 
hope  of  the  race,  is  not  a  new  gospel.  And  we  love  it  because  it  is  old,  because 
time  has  not  been  able  to  weaken  it  or  exposure  to  tarnish  it — because  all  the  attacks 
of  earth  and  hell  have  not  been  able  to  overthrow  it.    {A.  J.  Brown.) 

Yer.23.  I  found  an  altar  with  this  inscription.  To  the  unknown  God.  Whom  there- 
fore ye  Ignorantly  worship.  Him  declare  I  unto  you. — Before  the  altar  of  the  unknown 
Qod  : — 1.  What  was  there  in  Athens  to  which  Paul  could  appeal  ?  To  Jewish  pro- 
phecy ?  No  one  held  them  in  esteem.  Should  he  begin  with  repentance,  faith,  Jesus, 
and  judgment  ?  No  one  would  understand  his  message.  Ought  he  now  to  overthrow 
these  altars  ?  But  destruction  is  not  construction.  Ought  the  nothingness  of  the 
gods  to  be  exposed  to  ridicule?  Enlightenment  that  presents  the  stone  of  unbelief 
for  the  husks  of  superstition  may  train  its  subjects  to  doubt,  but  not  to  hope.  To  the 
apostle  the  heathen  world  seemed  the  groping  of  a  man  who  is  bUnd.  But  no  man 
of  feeling  ever  makes  sport  of  a  blind  man's  groping,  or  strikes  the  last  coin  out  of 
a  beggar's  hand.  Paul  sought  through  the  streets  of  Athens  to  see  whether,  some- 
where, he  could  not  still  daecover  a  trace  of  the  footsteps  of  the  living  God,  some 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  693 

pieces  of  the  golden  thread  by  which  to  lead  theie  misled  wanderers  back  into 
communion  with  God — and,  behold,  he  has  found  something :  here  is  an  altar  with 
the  inscription,  To  the  unknown  God :  a  discovery  which  affords  him  as  much  joy 
as  when  he  once  picked  up  the  words  of  the  Greek  poet  we  find  him  quoting  here. 
That  had  seemed  to  him  a  feather  which  the  angel,  flying  through  heaven  with  the 
gospel,  dropped  into  heathen  lands.  To  the  weak  as  weak,  a  Greek  to  the  Greeks, 
the  apostle  explains  this  inscription  to  his  hearers  with  most  becoming  deference. 
2.  This  altar  is  a  testimony  to  a  grave  defection,  a  longing  that  impels  to  seek,  a 
hope  fulfilled  in  Christ.  Let  us  ask — I.  By  what  means  the  living  God  becamb 
UNKNOWN  ?  1.  The  features  have  been  almost  obliterated,  but  whose  image  has  been 
stamped  upon  the  souls  of  men  ? — Not  from  the  clod,  nor  from  the  ape — we  are  also 
of  His  offspring !  •'  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men,"  &o.  One 
blood,  therefore  one  family,  one  origin,  one  conscience,  one  hope :  to  seek  God, 
every  one's  mission ;  to  find  God,  every  one's  goal  1  2.  But  if  we  live,  and  move, 
and  have  our  being  in  Him,  and  if  creation  manifests  His  invisible  power  and 
Divinity — whence  all  this  uncertain  groping,  until,  brought  to  a  stand,  children  of 
men  cling  to  wood  and  stone  ?  Whence  the  blindness  that  changes  the  clear 
mirror  of  nature  into  a  thick  veil,  whence  the  insanity  that  desires  to  imprison  the 
God  over  all  heaven  and  earth  within  temples  and  images  ?  Paul  describes  the 
lamentable  process  in  Eom.  i.  21-24.  Moral  aberration  always  precedes  the  spiritual. 
Sinful  inclinations  in  the  heart  are  the  fruitful  lap  of  error.  Doubt  is  a  tendency 
of  the  character.  Strange  that  amidst  this  jumble  of  rage,  sensuality,  love  of 
money,  &c.,  any  room  should  remain  for  an  altar  dedicated  even  to  the  unknown 
God!  II.  When  is  an  altab  ebectbd  to  the  unknown  God?  Just  as  in  an 
impoverished  family  some  jewel  is  preserved  as  a  reminder  of  better  days,  so,  in 
Athens,  this  one  altar  was  a  testimony  of  impoverishment.  Israel  could  erect  an 
Ebenezer :  but  this  altar  is  only  a  monument,  confessing :  "  Hitherto  have  we  gone 
astray."  Its  erection  indicates  home-sickness.  According  to  a  tradition,  the 
Athenians  built  this  altar  when  a  plague  seemed  to  threaten  never  to  leave  their 
walls : — there  must,  they  concluded,  be  some  other  god  whose  anger  is  dangerous, 
whose  favour  of  importance,  to  whom  therefore  it  was  necessary  to  rear  an  altar. 
1.  It  is  an  hour  of  fatigue  at  midnight,  the  candle  has  burned  down  low,  and  an 
investigator  is  dipping  into  the  depths  and  not  finding  the  goodly  pearl,  and  growing 
more  and  more  weary,  cries,  "  Boundless  Nature,  where  shall  I  comprehend  thee  ? 
Ye  sources  of  all  life,  for  which  my  withered  breast  so  longs — ye  flow,  ye  quench, 
and  yet  I  thirst  in  vain  1  "  Such  imploring,  outstretched  arms — ^what  are  they  but 
an  altar  erected  to  the  unknown  God  ?  2.  Now  enter  yon  brilliant  room.  Surely 
no  sorrow  can  obtrude  here.  Nevertheless  sighs  from  an  inner  chamber  announce 
that  "  Death  has  no  respect  for  riches."  A  child  is  lying  here  sick  unto  death. 
Why  has  the  anxious  father  no  eye  for  the  pictures  that  look  down  from  the  walls  ? 
Why  does  he  not  open  some  of  his  favourite  poets  ?  Why  does  he  avoid  that  book 
which  convinced  him  yesterday  that  there  is  room  for  neither  miracles  nor  prayor  ? 
The  anguish-stricken  father  throws  himself  on  his  knees — before  whom  ?  Which 
god  can  support  him  to  bear  this  threatened  loss  ?  Oh  ye  pictures,  books,  money 
piles,  ye  idols  that  have  eyes  but  no  pupils,  arms  but  no  help  1 — at  this  moment,  an 
altar  rises  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  faintly  traced,  *•  To  the  unknown  God  I  "  3. 
Stranger,  you  have  strayed  into  this  house  of  God — do  you  know  to  what  end  T 
Do  you  know  that  your  wandering  and  your  sojourning,  your  childhood  and  your 
manhood,  your  solitude  and  your  society,  your  sorrows  and  your  joys,  have  aU  been 
working  together  to  lead  you  to  seek  the  Lord  if  haply  you  might  feel  and  find  Him, 
and  to  make  that  dusty  altar  to  the  unknown  God  in  the  corner  of  your  heart  one 
of  reminder  and  of  prophecy?  Ill,  In  whom  does  God  make  Himself  known? 
Who  shall  win  earth  back  to  heaven,  and  reconcile  and  harmonise  divinity  with 
humanity  ?  who  is  the  man  in  whom  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells,  and  whose 
body  is  a  temple,  the  only  one  worthy  of  Divinity  ?  Through  Christ  the  weather- 
beaten  inscription,  "  To  the  unknown  God,"  is  changed  for  "  To  the  God  and  Father 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Tou  are  advancing  to  meet  this  unknown  God  as  a 
revealed  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  How  ?  As  a  Saviour  or  a  Judge  ?  (iJ.  Koegel,  D.D.) 
The  unknown  God : — 1.  Athens  was  a  city  illustrious  for  its  learning.  But  during 
the  century  or  two  preceding  the  Christian  era,  intellectual  decay  had  set  in,  and 
instead  of  investigatiug  the  true,  the  people  were  raving  after  the  new.  The  dis- 
tinction between  true  and  false  philosophy  in  every  age  consists  mainly  in  this — the 
one  loves  the  new  more  than  the  true,  the  other  loves  the  true  more  than  the  new. 
At  this  time  Paul  went  to  Athens,  and  the  everlasting  gospel  with  him :  and  in  ii 
VOL,  u,  88 


£94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xn*. 

there  is  a  perfect  combination  of  the  true  and  the  new.  He  declares  nnto  them  the 
unknown  God: — I.  In  relation  to  nature.  1.  As  Creator  of  the  universe.  Tha 
Greek  mind  had  often  but  ineffectually  grappled  with  the  mysterious  problem  of  the 
origin  of  the  world.  Every  school  of  ancient  thought  beheved  in  the  eternity  of 
matter.  Of  a  creation  out  of  nothing  the  ancient  heathen  had  not  the  crudest  idea. 
Mankind  seemed  to  be  entirely  indebted  to  Divine  revelation  for  it.  God  created — 
(1)  The  matter  of  the  world,  Plato  recognised  God  as  the  "  Arranger  of  the  Hyle." 
But  whence  issued  the  "  Hyle  "  ?  Plato  is  mute.  But  St.  Paul  teaches  that  God  not 
only  built  the  world,  but  made  the  materials  Hkewise.  A  child  may  learn  more  in  five 
minutes  in  the  first  verse  of  the  Bible  than  recondite  sages  in  their  protracted  studies. 
"  Through  faith  we  understand  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God."  (2) 
Its  laws.  Laws  are  so  many  windows  through  which  we  can  glance  at  God.  But 
over  these  windows  infidelity  draws  the  blinds.  Men  praise  each  other  for  discover- 
ing these  laws,  but  are  slack  to  give  glory  to  God  for  making  them.  But  what  is 
the  discovery  of  a  law  compared  with  its  invention  ?  2.  Having  created  the  world, 
God  is  still  present  in  it  as  its  Sovereign  Lord  and  Director.  ♦♦  Seeing  He  giveth  to 
all  life  and  breath  and  all  things."  The  Stoics  did  not  theoretically  deny  the  Divine 
existence,  but  they  did  deny  the  Divine  government.  They  believed  in  fate  ;  hence 
their  reckless  indifference  to  all  the  ills  and  favours  of  life.  In  our  day  also,  law 
does  everything,  God  nothing.  Ancients  and  moderns  alike,  after  putting  the 
extinguisher  on  the  sun,  feel  constrained  to  light  a  candle.  The  Bible  teaching, 
however,  is  clear  and  unambiguous.  Whilst  we  must  insist  upon  the  radical  dis- 
tinction between  God  and  the  world,  we  must  beware  lest  we  make  this  distinction 
separation.  From  these  truths  two  valuable  lessons  are  deduced — (1)  That  "  God 
dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  (2)  That  "  He  is  not  worshipped  or 
served  with  men's  hands  as  though  He  needed  anything."  We  do  not  give  to 
Him,  He  gives  to  us.  "  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift,"  &o.  II.  In  His 
RELATION  TO  MAN.  1.  God  made  man — a  truth  strikingly  new  to  the  Greeks.  The 
Greeks  thought  that  they  had  grown  from  the  soil.  The  idea  of  God  cannot  be 
degraded  without  at  the  same  time  debasing  the  idea  of  man.  The  same  theory 
practically  is  advocated  now.  God  is  involved  in  nature  according  to  the  fashion- 
able Pantheism  of  the  age;  and  man  is  evolved  out  of  nature  according  to  its 
anthropology.  The  apostle  further  proclaims  the  unity  of  the  human  race.  The 
Greeks  viewed  themselves  as  the  aristocracy  of  Ihe  world,  separated  even  in  origin 
from  all  other  nations,  whom  they  contemptuously  treated  as  barbarians.  2.  God 
jules  men.  He  did  not  fling  them  upon  the  world  to  be  the  sport  of  chance,  but 
*'  determined  the  times  before  appointed  and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation."  The 
•one  object,  however,  was  that  men  "  might  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  might  find 
Him."  All  events  were  so  disposed  as  to  be  helpful  to  mankind  in  their  search  after 
God.  We  imagine  that  were  the  circumstances  arranged  a  little  differently,  it  would 
result  in  the  spiritual  advantage  of  the  nations.  But  St.  Paul  declares  otherwise. 
8.  God  is  the  Father  of  man  (ver.  28).  God  is  only  the  Maker  of  nature.  Tha 
white  man  carries  about  him  God's  image  in  ivory,  and  the  coloured  man  in  ebony 
but  none  the  less  an  image  for  that.  How  striking  the  genealogy  in  Luke  iii. :  th| 
Bon  of  David,  .  .  .  the  Son  of  God.  From  this  homogeneity  of  nature  between  m«ir 
and  God  the  apostle  makes  a  practical  inference  (ver.  29).  Athens  abounded  in  idols, 
but  none  of  them  properly  represented  God.  The  Divine  likeness  cannot  be  stamped 
on  gross  matter,  it  must  have  intelligence  for  its  canvas.  Consequently  man's 
fault  has  always  been  in  seeking  God  among  material  objects.  But  inasmuch  as  we 
are  partakers  of  His  nature,  it  cannot  be  that  "  He  is  far  from  any  one  of  us."  (1) 
As  to  place.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  sun  is  over  ninety  millions  of  milea 
distant ;  but  there  is  a  sense  in  which  it  is  nearer  us  than  any  other  created  object. 
Its  beams  pierce  our  frame,  its  light  enters  the  eye,  its  warmth  pervades  the  body. 
"In  it  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being."  In  Uke  manner  God  may  be 
affirmed  to  be  infinitely  removed  from  us ;  but  there  is  a  sense  in  which  He  is 
nearer  every  one  of  us  than  any  other  being  can  possibly  be  (vers.  27,  28).  (2)  As 
to  His  nature.  His  spirituality  and  not  His  omnipresence  is  the  leading  idea.  In 
our  own  spirituality  can  we  best  understand  the  nature  of  the  Deity.  4.  God  is 
the  Eedeemer  of  men.  From  the  Fatherhood  to  the  Redeemership  the  stride  is  not 
BO  very  great.  "And  the  times  of  this  ignorance  God  overlooked" — i.e.,  did  not 
directly  interfere.  Not  that  He  entirely  disregarded  the  heathen  world.  That 
would  be  a  flat  contradiction  of  ver.  26.  God  often  interposed  in  their  geo- 
graphical and  political  history,  but  He  left  them  to  work  out  their  religious 
problems  for  themselves.    The  "  now  "  is  significant  of  a  change  of  policy.     It  is 


CHAP,  xvii.]  THE  ACTS.  695 

not  s  matter  of  no  consequence  whether  you  embrace  Christianity  or  not.     "  He 
commandeth  you."     The  gospel  comes  with  all  the  authority  of  law.     You  have 
broken  other  commandments,  will  you  persist   in  breaking  this   also?     Paul's 
hearers  had  been  all  their  lifetime  endeavouring  to  atone  for  sin  ;  now,  however, 
they  are  bidden  not  to  atone  but  to  repent.     "  Every  man  everywhere."     The 
gospel  embraces  every  human  being.     None  are  too  high  to  need  repentance  ;  none 
are  too  low  to  have  it.     5.  God  is  the  Judge  of  men  (ver.  31).     Paul  was  now  standing 
on  the  site  of  the  most  venerable  court  in  the  whole  world.     Here  Mars  and  Orestes 
were  tried,  and  here  Socrates  was  unjustly  condemned.      What  therefore  more 
natural  than  that  Paul  should  wind  up  his  oration  by  a  solemn  reference  to  the 
judgment  seat  of  Christ  ?     Yes,  there  is  an  awful  hereafter,  notwithstanding  the    , 
creed  of  Epicureans.     Oh,  the  madness  of  those  who  spend  their  day  of  grace  in  i 
reckless  indifference,  saying,  *'  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die  I  "     (J.    \ 
Cynddylan  Jones,  D.D.)         The  unknown  God: — In  this  paragraph  we  have  a 
graphic  though  brief  description  of  the  character  of  the  men  of  Athens.     ♦•  For  all 
the  Athenians  and  strangers  which  were  there,  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else  but 
either  to  tell  or  to  hear  some  new  thing."    And  when  the  love  of  the  new  gains 
ascendancy  over  the  love  of  the  true,  degeneration  is  inevitable.     The  distinction 
between  true  and  false  philosophy,  in  every  age,  consists  mainly  in  this :  the  one 
loves  the  new  more  than  the  true,  the  other  loves  the  true  rather  than  the  new. 
But  the  religious  aspect  of  the  city  is  depicted  in  more  lamentable  colours  still — 
"  the  city  was  wholly  given  to  idolatry  "  (on  the  margin,  "  full  of  idols  ").     Idolatry 
was  also  flourishing  in  this  city ;  but  it  seemed  now  as  though  it  had  received  a 
new  impulse.     Why  ?    Because  their  faith  in  idols  was  stronger  ?    No ;  but  because 
it  was  weaker.    What  if  they  are  only  the  creation  of  my  own  over-heated  imagina- 
tion ?    The  suspicion  was  so  humihating,  so  blasting  in  its  effects,  so  awfully  barren 
and  withering,  that  he  strenuously  attempted  to  conceal  it  from  himself  ;  he  tried 
to  forget  his  religious  bankruptcy  in  spiritual  intoxication.     That  motto  awakes  a 
•distinct  echo  in  the  heart  of  every  unregenerate  man  ;  there  also  is  an  altar  with 
the  inscription  To  the  unknown  God  I    At  this  time  Paul  went  to  Athens,  and  the 
everlasting  gospel  with  him  ;  and  in  it  there  is  a  perfect  combination  of  the  true 
and  the  new.     Glad  tidings,  true  news,  is  its  distinctive  appellation.    He  declares 
nnto  them  the  unknown  God — 1.  In  His  relation  to  nature.     2.  In  His  relation 
to  man.     These  two  relations  exhaust  our  knowledge  of  God ;  we  know  Him  in  uone 
other.     These  were  the  topics  held  in  dispute  by  the  philosophers,  and  to  which  the 
Athenians  now  listen  vidth  abated  breath.     I.  God  in  belation  to  nature.     1.  He 
is  the  Creator  of  nature.     "  God  made  the  world  and  all  things  therein."     On  this 
point  he  directs  his  remarks  more  especially  against  the  Epicureans — they  denied 
<5reation.     "  God  made  the  world."    As  we  look  around  us  we  observe  that  nature 
IB  divisible  into  matter  and  laws,  matter  and  truths.     The  Athenian  mind  had  been 
often  grapphng  with  the  mysterious  problem  touching  the  origin  of  all  things ;  but 
notwithstanding  aU  the  energy  and  time  expended  to  solve  it,  it  continued  to  be 
shrouded  in  as  much  darkness  as  ever.     History,  indeed,  seems  to  testify  that  the 
human  mind,  left  to  its  own  resources,  could  never  grasp  the  idea  of  creation, 
properly  so  called.    The  Epicureans  denied  creation,  and  looked  upon  the  world 
as  the  effect  of  the  fortuitous  concourse  of  atoms,  and  these  atoms  they  believed  to 
be  uncreated  and  eternal.     Of  a  creation  out  of  nothing,  the  ancient  heathens  had 
not  the  crudest  idea.    Indeed,  mankind  are  indebted  to  the  Bible  entirely  for  it. 
Not  only  the  work  but  the  idea  of  creation  is  Divine.     And  the  truth  with  which 
Paul  encountered  the  Epicurean  philosophers  of  old,  in  the  market  and  on  the  hill, 
requires  to  be  reiterated  again  and  again.     There  is  a  theory  afloat,  vindicated  by 
men  of  unquestionable  repute,  that  sets  creation  out  of  nothing  among  the  im- 
possibilities.   According  to  this  theory,  everything  is  born.     The  sun  is  born,  the 
moon  is  born,  the  earth  is  born.     It  is  averred  "  We  cannot  aonceive,  either  on  the 
one  hand,  nothing   becoming   something,  or  on  the  other,  something  becoming 
nothing"  (Sir  W.  Hamilton).     The  world,  therefore,  is  a  Divine  evolution?     No: 
says  the  Bible,  it  is  not  an  evolution,  but  a  creation.     We  cannot  conceive  such  an 
act,  say  they.    Man's  conceptions  are  not  God's  boundary  lines,  says  the  Bible. 
We  cannot  explain  the  process,  say  they.     Then  believe  the  fact,  says  the  Bible. 
"  Through  faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God,  so 
ihat  things  that  are  seen  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear."    "  God  made 
the  world."    It  existed  nowhere  before,  nor  in  God,  nor  in  space ;  it  existed  in  nc 
shape  before,  nor  in  germ,  nor  in  development.     It  is  an  act  of  pure  creation.     As 
already  hinted   laws  form  another  important  division  of  nature.    Not  only  God 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

made  the  matter  of  the  universe,  but  also  its  laws.  2.  He  is  the  Lord  of  nature. 
"He  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth."  This  truth  is  addressed  more  especially  to 
the  Stoics — they  denied  Divine  government.  They  did  not  deny  the  existence  of 
the  gods  ;  "  but  they  held  that  all  human  affairs  were  governed  by  fate.  Neither 
did  they  believe  that  any  good  was  received  from  the  hands  of  their  gods."  This 
atheistic  view  the  apostle  refutes  by  the  heart-inspiring  truth  that  God  is  the  Lord 
of  nature  and  providence.  As  the  servant  is  dependent  on  his  master,  so  is  nature 
on  her  Lord.  What  does  this  imply  ?  That  she  is  not  her  own  governess.  Not 
her  own  will,  but  His  she  follows.  Not  her  own  thoughts,  but  His  she  expresses. 
Everything  in  nature  is  a  manifestation  of  some  thought ;  but  who  is  it  that  thinks  ? 
Nature  herself  ?  No.  Fate?  No.  Who  then?  God.  The  sun  rises  everyday 
to  the  right  moment — who  is  the  thinker  ?  The  sun  ?  No  ;  but  God.  Nature  has 
no  thought,  no  wiU  of  her  own  ;  she  is  entirely  under  the  control  of  God.  Neither 
is  she  her  own  support.  She  lives  on  the  bounty  of  God,  as  a  child  on  the  table  of 
its  father.  Nature  can  originate  nothing ;  she  must  receive  all.  Left  to  her  own 
resources,  she  would  reduce  herself  to  penury  in  one  day.  But  these  truths  had 
a  more  practical  end  in  view  than  the  refutation  of  the  fallacious  theories  of 
philosophers ;  they  were  calculated  to  undermine  the  idolatrous  practices  of  the 
populace.  "  He  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  He  is  the  Creator  and 
Lord  of  nature.  What  is  there  in  a  temple  of  stones  for  Him  to  covet?  Were  He 
a  forlorn  fugitive,  an  impoverished  God,  He  might  be  glad  of  a  shelter  anywhere. 
But  this  is  not  His  condition.  He  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  has  the 
resources  of  both  at  His  command.  "  He  is  not  worshipped  with  men's  hands  aa 
though  He  needed  anything."  The  Athenians,  in  common  with  all  idolaters, 
supposed  religious  rites  to  be  established  and  enacted  for  God  and  not  for  man — for 
His  advantage  and  not  for  our  benefit.  The  mistake  of  the  Stoics  about  God,  in 
respect  to  nature,  was  that  of  all  idolaters  in  respect  to  religion.  They  thought  it 
was  His  prerogative  to  receive;  the  apostle  teaches  it  was  His  property  and 
function  to  give.  "  Neither  is  He  worshipped  with  men's  hands  as  though  He 
needed  anything."  No ;  it  is  not  giving,  but  receiving.  As  a  creature  you  receive  ; 
as  a  worshipper  you  receive  too.  What  is  your  sin  ?  Is  it  giving  too  little  ?  No  ; 
but  receiving  too  little.  H.  God  in  relation  to  man.  1.  "  He  is  the  Father  of 
man."  "  We  are  His  offspring."  God  is  the  Maker  of  nature,  He  is  the  Father  of 
man  ;  He  is  the  Creator  of  the  brute.  He  is  the  Father  of  man.  The  popular  opinion 
among  the  Athenians  was,  that  they  were  the  aboriginals  of  mankind.  But  where 
did  they  come  from  ?  They  grew  from  the  earth.  According  to  one  of  their  own 
writers,  "the  first  men  sprung  up  in  Attica,  like  radishes."  And  some  moderns 
cherish  the  opinion,  forsooth,  that  mankind  are  developed  from  a  tribe  of  monkeys  t 
Our  ancestry  has  its  root  in  Godhead.  Adam  is  not  our  first  nor  our  best  father, 
but  God.  Based  on  man's  Divine  sonship  are  two  very  important  considerations. 
The  first  is  the  universal  brotherhood  of  man.  "  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all 
nations  of  men."  The  second  truth  is  the  nature  of  God.  "  Forasmuch  then  as 
we  are  the  offspring  of  God,  we  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto 
cpld,  or  silver,  or  stone."  There  is  a  certain  resemblance  between  parent  and  child  ; 
merefore  God  must  be  more  like  men,  His  children,  than  any  other  created  object 
whatsoever.  Man  possesses  reason,  will,  and  intelligence ;  therefore  God  must 
have  them  in  infinite  perfection.  2.  God  is  the  Saviour  of  man.  "  And  the  times 
of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at  (overlooked,  passed  by) ;  but  now  commandeth  all 
men  everywhere  to  repent."  3.  He  is  the  judge  of  man.  "  For  He  hath  appointed 
a  day,  in  the  which  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by  that  Man  whom 
He  hath  ordained."  (Ibid.)  The  unknown  God  : — When  he  saw  that  the  city 
was  "  wholly  given  to  idolatry,"  i.e.,  literally  covered  with  idols — KareiSmXov  refer- 
ring to  the  place,  not  to  the  people — his  spirit  was  roused  ;  he  could  no  longer  keep 
silence  and  refrain  from  proclaiming  the  message  he  had  come  to  deliver.  Then  it 
chanced  that  some  of  the  members  of  the  two  great  philosophic  sects,  the 
Epicureans  and  Stoics,  encountered  him.  Part  of  these  called  him  a  babbler 
((Tvepiio\6yoc),  literally  a  picker-up  of  small  seeds,  like  a  bird,  i.e.,  &  collector  and 
retailer  of  insignificant  scraps  of  information  ;  and  others  charged  him  with  setting 
forth  strange  gods,  foreign  divinities.  I.  Thb  unknown  God.  There  is  an  unknown 
God  to-day.  as  certainly  as  there  was  in  Paul's  time  ;  and  it  is  the  business  of  the 
Christian  teacher  to  declare  Him,  or  set  Him  forth.  In  one  sense  God  mast  always 
be  unknown.  The  mind  of  man  is  finite,  and  can  therefore  never  comprehend  the 
Infinite.  1.  The  unknown  god  of  the  ancients.  It  is  by  no  means  cluar  how  this 
altar  came  to  be  erected  at  Athens.    By  some,  it  is  supposed  that  Polytheism  had 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  697 

made  so  many  gods  by  the  deification  of  every  human  passion,  that  no  more  could 
be  thought  of ;  and  hence,  to  cover  the  whole  ground,  an  additional  altar  waa 
erected  to  an  unknown  god,  at  the  shrine  of  which  the  worship  should  ascend  to 
any  possible  deity  that  might  have  been  overlooked.     Others  suppose  that  some 
special  benefits  had  been  received  by  the  people,  which  could  not  be  traced  to  any 
of  the  known  gods — hence  an  altar  to  the  unknown.     More  probably,  however,  it 
arose  from  some  dim  conception  of  a  Supreme  Being  higher  than  all  the  gods 
of  mythology,  who,  while  He  satisfied  a  yearning  want  of  the  heart,  took  no  hold 
on  the  intellect.     This  would  seem  to  be  apparent  from  Paul's  words,  that  he 
would  declare  the  very  God  thus  worshipped.    In  any  case,  that  altar  was  a  tacit 
but  terrible  confession  of  the  failure  of  heathendom.     Nowhere  perhaps  had  the 
intellect  risen  so  high  as  at  Athens.     2.  The  unknown  God  of  the  modems.    Herbert 
Spencer  prates  most  glibly  of  the  Unknowable,  and  Huxley  worships  at  its  shrine. 
Tyndal  calls  religions  "forms  of  force"  which  must  not  be  permitted  to  "  intrude 
on  the  region  of  knowledge."     Matthew  Arnold  terms  God  a  "  stream  of  tendency  by 
which  all  things  fulfil  the  law  of  their  being,"  as  though  there  could  be  a  stream 
without  a  source,  or  things  could  fulfil  any  purpose  where  there  was  no  plan.      II. 
The  relation  of  the   unknown  God  to  man.     It  is  difficult  to  understand  what 
relationship  we  can  sustain  to  the  unknown,  or  at  least  to  learn  what  the  relation- 
ship is,  if  any  such  there  be.    Yet  those  who  teach  that  God  is  unknown  and 
unknowable  recognise  some  sort  of  relationship  to  this   unknown  Being.     The 
possible  relationship  may  be  considered  under  three  distinct  heads.     1.  Worship. 
This,  in  some  form  or  other,  is  universal.    In  all  ages  men  have  worshipped  some- 
thing.    In  fact  it  is  difiicult  to  find  a  stronger  instinct  in  human  nature  than  this 
one.     We  have — (1)  Worship  in  ignorance.     This  is  what  the  Athenians  were  guilty 
of.     They  worshipped  without  ascribing  to  the  object  any  definite  qualities  whatever. 
(2)  Worship  of  nature.      An  atheist  writing  recently  in  one  of  the  Secularistic 
journals  proposed  verbal  prayer  to  nature,  and  says,  "  May  we  not  pray  or  invoke 
the  powers  of  nature  for  aid,  without  any  reference  to  a  personal  God,  calling  that 
power  the  unconditioned,  unknowable  Absolute,  or  what  you  will ;  or  no  name  at 
all  ?     I  think  so."    It  is  difficult  to  see  what  is  the  object  of  this  prayer,  since  it  is 
clear  that  blind  forces  can  neither  hear  nor  answer.    But  it  proves  the  tendency  to 
worship,  even  in  the  atheist.    A  more  mystic  form  of  worship,  of  an  atheistic 
character,  was  proposed  by  the  late  Professor  Clifford,  under  the  name  of  Cosmic 
Emotion.     The  term  originated  with  Mr.  Henry  Sidgwick ;  but  Professor  Clifford 
used  it  as  a  sort  of  substitute  for  religion.    By  it  he  simply  meant  the  emotion 
which  is  called  up  in  the  soul  when  contemplating  itself  and  its  moral  nature  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  mysteries  of  the  universe  on  the  other.    But  such  a  worship  aa 
this — if  worship  it  can  be  called — has  no  cult,  and  therefore  cannot  meet  the  condi- 
tion required.     It  is  a  hollow  semblance,  nothing  more,     (3)  Worship  of  abstractions. 
The  Positivists  profess  to  worship  humanity  in  the  abstract.      What  this  is,  it  is 
difficult  very  clearly  to  understand.    Humanity  in  the  concrete  we  know  something 
of,  and  it  is  neither  exalted  enough  nor  pure  enough  to  satisfy,  as  an  object  of  wor- 
ship,  the  religious  nature  of  man.     This  form  of  worship  professes  to  find  a  cultua 
in  dead  heroes  and  sages.    But,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  this  is  a  miserable  substitute 
for  an  Almighty  and  loving  Father  in  heaven.     The  worship  of  nature,  or  of 
abstractions,  is,  after  all,  but  idolatry.    Men  do  not  now  make  their  idols  of  wood 
or  stone,  but  out  of  their  own  wUd  imaginings.    2.  Eesponsibility.     The  moral  law 
needs  a  personal  God  for  its  basis.     The  unknown  is  no  foundation  on  which  to 
raise  a  superstructure  of  ethics.    3.  Immortality.     Most  of  those,  however,  who 
Assert  that  God  is  unknown  do  not  believe  in  a  personal  immortality  at  all,  but 
speak  of  the  immortality  of  the  race  or  of  a  man's  reputation  that  he  may  leave 
b^ind  him.      There  is  no  guarantee  that  the  race  will  remain  for  ever,  if  God  be 
taken  away ;  and  if  there  were,  such  a  fact  would  not  meet  the  wants  of  humanity.  1 
We  long  for,  and  aspire  after,  an  eternal  personal  conscious  existence,  and  nothing  J 
less  than  that  can  satisfy  the  soul.     III.  The  revelation  ot  the  unknown*  God.  j 
••  Whom  therefore  ye  ignorantly  worship.  Him  declare  I  unto  you,"  or  set  forth  unto 
you.     This  was  Paul's  work,  to  reveal  or  make  known  the  unknown  God.      This  ho 
was  enabled  to  do  by  means  of — 1.  The  Scriptures.     God's  real  character  can  only 
be  learnt  from  the  Bible.     2.  The  Incarnation.    This  is  the  only  means  by  which 
God  can  be  really  and  truly  known.     "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  :  the 
only-begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him." 
He  hath  declared  Him  in  such  a  manner  that  the  simplest  may  understand.     Do 
you  want  to  know  what  God  is  Uke?    I  point  you  to  Christ.    There  is  the  revelation 


698  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xm. 

and  the  Revealer  blended  in  one.  (George  Sexton,  LL.D. )  The  unknown  God  : — 
The  astronomers  Le  Verrier  and  Adams,  in  separate  countries  at  the  same  time, 
observing  certain  motions  among  the  spheres  which  could  not  be  accounted  for  by 
any  known  cause,  concluded  that  there  must  be  abody  not  yet  discovered  somewhere 
in  the  regions  of  space  in  which  the  disturbances  were  observed.  Seeking  in  the  direc- 
tion thus  indicated  they  found  the  far  distant  and  hitherto  unknown  world.  So  Greek 
philosophy  was  able,  from  the  appetites  and  vacancies  of  the  human  mind,  which 
all  the  idols  could  not  satisfy,  to  determine  that  there  must  be  some  God  hitherto 
from  them  concealed,  to  whom  these  appetites  pointed,  and  without  whom  they  could 
not  be  satisfied.  Their  skill  could  discover  in  a  general  way  their  need,  but  they  could 
not  by  their  searching  find  the  missing  portion  for  a  human  soul.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 
The  unknown  God  : — God  is  unknown — 1.  To  those  who  think  themselves  wise.  2. 
To  those  who  perform  the  external  acts  of  worship  without  seeking  God  Himself. 
3.  To  those  who  do  not  live  in  Him,  but  in  the  world  and  its  lusts.  4.  To  those 
who  do  not  desire  to  find  God  in  Christ.  (Langbein.)  The  unknown  God  re- 
vealed : — Observe — I.  That  man,  when  left  to  the  efforts  op  his  own  reason, 
NEVER  discovers  THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  GoD.  The  most  probable  explanation 
of  the  inscription  is  the  carefulness  of  the  Athenians  not  to  exclude  any  God.  1. 
That  there  was  originally  an  adequate  revelation  of  God  is  not  properly  to  be 
doubted  (Eom.  i.  20  ;  Psa.  xix.  1,  2).  In  addition  to  the  silent  testimony  of  nature 
were  direct  and  verbal  communications  to  patriarchs,  &c.  2.  Nevertheless,  the 
knowledge  of  God  became  beclouded,  and  errors  encrouched  with  fearful  rapidity 
and  success.  There  was  a  depraved  principle  in  the  heart  of  man  urging  him  to 
devices,  whereby  God  might  be  banished  from  his  mind,  and  his  passions  set  free 
from  control.  From  this  source  sprang  up  idolatry.  "  They  did  not  like  to  retain 
God,"  &c.  (Eom,  i.  21-23,  25).  3.  This  fatal  principle  which  led  to  the  loss  of  the 
knowledge  of  God,  prevented  it  from  being  restored.  Having  extinguished  the 
light,  it  perpetuated  the  darkness.  There  were  many  centuries  during  which  the 
human  intellect  was  able  to  open  all  its  resources,  and  to  practise  all  its  powers, 
but  none  retraced  their  steps  to  the  Divine  Being.  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew 
not  God  " ;  "  the  age  of  reason  "  was  an  age  of  idolatry,  pollution,  and  despair.  4. 
With  reference  to  subsequent  ages,  and  our  own,  the  fact  and  its  explanation  are 
the  same,  as  India,  China,  Africa,  &c.,  te'itify.  If,  however,  we  are  pointed  to  the 
writings  of  Deistical  philosophers  who  have  professed  to  argue  the  existence  of 
God  from  the  light  of  reason,  we  are  not  to  be  misled  by  the  pretensions  of  un- 
principled plagiarists  who  have  but  borrowed  the  guidance  of  revelation,  without 
having  had  the  honour  to  acknowledge  it.  II.  That  it  is  the  office  of  Chris- 
tianity TO  place  the  character  of  the  true  God  in  full  and  distinct  revelation. 
The  circumstances  just  illustrated  constituted  a  necessity  for  a  revelation.  Pro- 
ceeding on  this  necessity  manifestations  were  given  to  the  patriarchs  of  the  supre- 
macy and  grace  of  the  Most  High.  Then  followed  the  calling  of  the  Jews,  the 
giving  of  their  law,  the  solemn  warnings  against  idolatry,  institutions  designed  to 
preserve  them  from  the  infection  of  surrounding  nations,  and  the  ministry  of  the 
prophets.  At  length,  "  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth 
His  Son,"  and  then  came  the  ministry  of  the  apostles.  Recognising  all  this,  note 
— 1.  That  the  revelations  of  God  in  Christianity  are  furnished  in  connection  with 
B  method  of  redemption,  from  which  their  clearness  and  lustre  are  derived.  The 
purpose  of  the  gospel  is  to  explain  and  apply  a  scheme  of  sovereign  mercy  by  which 
man  is  to  be  redeemed  from  his  apostasy.  The  existence  of  such  a  scheme  had 
been  announced  immediately  after  the  fall,  and  was  shadowed  forth  in  type  and 
prophecy,  and  employed,  harmonised,  and  displayed  the  perfections  of  God. 
Hence  our  Saviour  frequently  spoke  of  His  work  as  "glorifying  the  Father."  In 
the  Cross  Mercy  and  Truth  meet  together.  Righteousness  and  Peace  kiss  each  other, 
and  in  that  Cross  we  see  that  "  God  is  love."  2.  That  these  revelations  are  de- 
Bigned  for  diffusion  through  the  world.  The  earlier  dispensations  were  systems 
rather  of  defence  than  attack,  of  conservation  than  conquest.  But  the  gospel  waa 
"  good  tidings  ...  to  all  people."  Prophecy  announced  it  as  such,  the  "propitia- 
tion for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  "  made  it  snch,  and  the  apostles  were  sent  to 
preach  it  as  such.     III.  That  it  becomes  the  disciples  of  Christianity  to  exert 

THEMSELVES  FOR  THE  PROMULGATION  AND  TRIUMPH    OF   THEIR   RELIGION.       The    COUduct 

of  Paul,  whose  "  spirit  was  stirred  within  him"  not  only  to  indignation  but  to 
service,  is  an  example  to  all.  Consider — 1.  Reasons  which  are  uniform  and  perma- 
nent in  their  appeals.  The  work  of  promulgating  the  truth — (1)  Has  been  com- 
mitted by  Christ  to  His  Church  as  its  specific  duty.     (2)  Vindicates  and  in  th« 


OBAf.  xm.]  TEE  ACTS.  699 

highest  measare  secures  the  Divine  honour.  (3)  Imparts  exalted  happiness  to 
mankind.  2.  Eeasons  which  are  derived  from  the  p  eculiarities  of  our  own  times — 
the  extraordinary  facilities  which  are  now  provided  for  the  dissemination  of  Chris- 
tian truth.  {J.  Parsons. )  Three  books  relating  to  the  knowledge  of  God  : — I. 
The  book  of  the  world  with  its  two  parts — nature  and  history  (vers.  24-26) .  II. 
The  book  of  the  heart  with  its  two  parts — reason  and  conscience  (vers.  27,  28). 
in.  The  book  of  Scripture  with  its  two  parts — reason  and  conscience  (vers.  30, 31). 
(K.  Oerok.)  Revelation  and  nature  :  their  witness  to  God  : — Suppose  a  scholat 
searching  in  some  old  library  were  to  discover  two  MSS.,  which  had  lain  unknown 
for  generations  on  different  shelves.  The  discoverer  examines  their  contents  and 
is  struck  with  certain  peculiarities  in  the  handwriting,  which  are  common  to  both 
documents.  He  also  finds  that  in  both  there  are  words  and  phrases — such  as  seem 
the  expression  of  a  writer's  individuality.  Still  further,  he  discovers  that  many 
ideas  are  common  to  the  two  pamphlets,  and  that  though  different  in  subject,  there 
is  a  substratum  of  thought  identical  in  both.  Could  he  do  other  than  infer  that 
they  were  the  products  of  the  same  author  ?  Mere  coincidence  might  account  for 
one  or  two  of  these  resemblances,  but  could  never  explain  the  great  variety  and 
number  that  are  found  here.  Now  the  object  we  have  in  view  is  somewhat 
similar.  I.  The  same  attrebutes  which  Scripture  ascribes  to  God  are  to 
BE  traced  also  in  NATURE.  1.  The  unity  of  God.  (1)  This  doctrine  runs  through 
the  pages  of  Scripture  like  a  stream  of  light  illumining  all  things  else.  Now — 
(2)  Judging  from  the  many  religions  in  the  world,  one  might  suppose  that  nature 
leads  to  the  conception  of  many  gods.  But  Polytheism  betrays  as  profound 
an  ignorance  of  nature  as  it  does  of  the  Divine  Being.  Let  us  turn  from  pagan 
conceptions  to  the  interpretations  of  science.  All  recent  discovery  is  tending  to 
set  up  one  conception  of  the  universe,  and  that  is  that  one  plan  is  to  be  discovered, 
and  that  one  power  is  working  under  divers  forms,  (a)  See  how  the  two  kingdoms, 
animal  and  vegetable,  correspond,  meet  each  the  other's  needs,  and  are  evidently  parts 
of  one  plan.  With  every  breath  that  we  exhale  we  pour  into  the  atmosphere  a  gas 
destructive  of  animal  life.  With  every  inspiration  we  consume  a  portion  of  that 
element  of  the  atmosphere  which  ia  vital  to  us.  But  then  every  vegetable — tree, 
grass,  flower — is  absorbing  from  the  air^the  poisonous  carbonic  acid  and  breathing 
out  the  vital  oxygen.  (6)  But  not  alone  within  terrestrial  limits  is  this  unity  dis- 
cernible. The  spectrosoopist  has  caught  the  fleeting  rays  of  light  from  stars  and 
suns,  and  has  wrung  from  them  the  confession  that  these  worlds  are  built  up  of 
much  the  same  materials  as  our  own.  (c)  Formerly  the  various  natural  forces 
were  regarded  as  distinct.  But  experiment  has  shown  that  they  are  one,  and 
are  convertible.  Electricity  can  be  converted  into  light,  and  the  light  into  heat, 
and  heat  into  motion,  or  they  can  be  resolved  back  again,  motion  into  heat, 
heat  into  light,  light  into  electricity.  What  a  marvel  is  this !  It  is  the  same  power 
that  works  everywhere  in  nature,  taking  a  thousand  different  shapes ;  and  what  ia 
that  power  but  the  power  of  the  one  God  ?  2.  Every  fresh  discovery  confirms  the 
belief  that  Infinite  Wisdom  conceived,  executed,  and  presides  over  all  created 
things.  And  the  power  manifestly  pervading  the  boundless  universe  is  a  power  so 
vast  that  we  may  well  yield  to  it  the  title  of  Omnipotence.  3.  When  we  consider 
the  moral  attributes  of  God,  nature  yields  a  feebler  testimony  than  revelation. 
Nevertheless,  though  nature  needs  to  be  'supplemented,  its  witness  coincides  with 
that  of  Scripture.  Take,  e.g. ,  the  righteousness  of  God.  (1)  Though  conscience 
has  not  always  power  to  compel  obedience,  it  yet  sits  on  the  seat  of  judgment  un- 
disputed, and  is  a  convincing  evidence  of  the  righteousness  of  God.  For  how 
came  man  to  possess  this  faculty,  which  has  created  a  universally  prevalent  idea  of 
moral  obligation  ?  How  came  man  to  feel  that  good  is  intrinsically  superior  to 
evil  ?  The  secularist  afiSrms  that  expediency  or  the  general  weal  of  society  has 
dictated  certain  courses  of  action  as  the  wisest  and  safest,  and  has  dissuaded  from 
others  as  hurtful  to  the  community.  Thus  by  the  power  of  habit  strengthened 
through  the  generations,  certain  actions  have  come  to  be  regarded  as  right,  others 
as  evil  and  vicious.  And  we  may  grant  to  this  theory  a  measure  of  truth.  But 
there  is  a  question  farther  back.  Why  has  universal  experience  proved  virtue  to  be 
conducive  to  happiness  and  vice  the  opposite  ?  The  only  answer  to  this  must  be, 
that  it  is  in  the  nature  of  things,  impressed  on  them  by  their  Creator.  (2)  And 
man's  inner  nature  accords  with  external  nature.  Wherever  we  look  we  find  evi 
dence  of  "  a  power,  not  ourselves,  making  for  righteousness."  The  fall  of  empires 
through  the  corruption  of  luxury  and  evil ;  the  prosperity  of  states  whose  citizens 
ftre  virtuous,  brave,  and  true ;  every  life  prematurely  closed  by  the  ravages  of  vicious 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

habits,  and  every  good  man's  life  attests  an  eternal  moral  order.  Whence,  then,  thia 
moral  constitution  ?  For  every  effect  there  must  be  a  cause,  and  what  is  in  the 
effect  must  first  have  been  in  the  cause.  Therefore  He  who  made  the  world  is  a 
Moral  Being,  and  has  transferred  to  His  works  this  moral  order,  which  first  existed  in 
Himself.  Whatever  quality  you  discover  in  the  work  must  have  been  first  in  the 
worker.  H.  The  same  modes  of  Divine  operation  are  clearlt  discernible  both  m 
Scripture  and  nature.  There  is  something  in  a  man's  work  distinguishing  it  from 
that  of  all  others,  and  which  is  manifest  more  or  less  in  all  he  does.  "  The  style  is  the 
man."  By  his  style  you  recognise  an  artist's  pictures  or  a  writer's  articles,  though  no 
name  be  appended  to  the  work.  Now  there  is  a  style  about  the  Divine  works,  and  thia 
Btyle  can  be  traced  both  in  nature  and  revelation.  Modern  science  has  clearly 
established  that  in  creation  a  strict  order  has  been  observed.  There  can  be  traced 
a  gradual  development  from  lower  to  higher  types  of  being.  And  the  Bible  presents 
us  with  a  remarkably  similar  process.  In  the  spiritual  education  of  men  a  develop- 
ment can  be  traced.  The  truths  of  religion  were  gradually  disclosed,  and  the  world 
was  led  on  step  by  step  in  spiritual  culture  and  enlightenment.  Here,  then,  we  have 
a  resemblance  of  a  peculiar  kind,  which  stands  out  as  a  distinct  evidence  of  a  com- 
mon origin  for  both  nature  and  revelation.  IH.  Many  of  the  difficulties  with 
which  Scripture  confronts  us  are  met  also  in  nature.  Take  an  illustration.  The 
election  of  the  Jewish  people  to  be  the  recipients  of  Divine  revelation,  while  the 
other  nations  were  left  in  darkness,  has  often  appeared  a  strange  procedure  on 
Ood's  part.  Was  this  consistent  with  justice  and  love  ?  The  reply  to  this  is  that 
the  selection  of  the  Jewish  people  was  not  for  their  own  sakes  alone,  but  that 
through  them  all  families  of  the  earth  might  be  blessed  ;  and  that  men  were  not 
rejected  by  God  simply  because  they  were  not  Jews.  Among  all  peoples  there  was 
light  enough  to  save  sincere  seekers.  A  similar  election  of  nations  has  always 
characterised  God's  government  of  the  world.  He  fixes  the  bounds  of  one  people 
on  a  generous  soil,  and  plants  another  amid  barren  snows.  He  confides  to  one 
people  to  work  out  some  problem  on  which  the  world's  welfare  and  progress  depend. 
And  for  a  time  that  people  stand  out  distinguished  by  Heaven's  favour  above  all 
others.  To  the  ancient  Greek  was  given  the  highest  culture  of  art,  to  the  Boman 
the  highest  development  of  government.  Te  the  English  race  to-day  is  committed 
the  problem  of  combining  the  largest  liberty  with  order  and  security.  (J.  Legge^ 
M.A.) 

Ver.  24.  God. — All  the  Indo-European  equivalents  for  God  are  the  same  in  their 
ultimate  root  as  the  word  "  day,"  and  signify  the  brightness  of  the  sky.  The  Latin 
Deus,  the  Greek  Theos,  the  Sanskrit  Dyaus,  the  Welsh  Duw,  and  even  the  English 
God,  all  come  from  the  same  root,  signifying  the  brightness  of  the  sky.  Thia 
thought  has  been  fixed  in  the  term  Jupiter,  one  of  the  oldest  appellations  by  which 
God  is  known  in  Europe.  Jupiter — what  is  it?  The  first  syllable  Ju  ie  the  same 
as  the  Welsh  Duw,  and  means  the  bright  sky.  The  remaining  two  syllables  mean 
father.  Jupiter  is  the  Latin  synonym  for  the  Saxon  Sky-Father.  As  one  of  our 
Aryan  aiicestors  stood  on  the  open  plain  gazing  upward,  and  meditating  on  the 
Being  behind  all  phenomena,  the  KeaUty  at  the  back  of  all  appearances,  he  gave 
expression  to  the  deepest  instinct  of  his  nature  when  he  pronounced  in  articulate 
language  the  solemn  word  "  Sky-Father."  (J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.)  That  made  the 
■world. — God  and  the  univrrse : — 1.  "  God  that  made  the  world  and  all  thinga 
therein."  Here  is  an  emphatic  denial  of  all  polytheistic  and  dualistic  notions  as  to 
the  origin  and  government  of  the  world.  2.  "  God  made  the  world."  Here  is  an 
emphatic  assertion  that  God  is  distinct  from  Nature  :  it  is  a  product  of  His  plastio 
hand.  3.  God  "  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  " ;  so  that  "  the  lords  many,"  amongst 
^hom  the  Greeks  believed  that  the  presidency  and  control  of  the  universe  are  dis- 
tributed, were  but  the  idle  creations  of  fancy.  By  these  few  words  the  apostle 
boldly  pushed  aside  a  whole  host  of  errors  to  which  the  Athenians  had  given  place 
in  their  minds,  and  by  which  they  had  been  bewildered  and  injured.  (W.  L. 
Alexander,  D.D.)  The  religions  use  of  Nature : — This  must  be  distinguished  from 
— 1.  The  mere  scientific  use,  which  stops  with  nature.  He  who  handles  it  as  so 
much  matter  to  be  torn  apart  with  analysis  and  scrutinised  with  microscope  or 
telescope,  often  makes  the  most  irreligious  use  of  it,  forgetting  the  Artist  in  the  work 
of  art.  2.  The  mere  sentimental  use,  which  makes  nature  a  nose  of  wax  to  be 
twisted  into  a  mirror  of  human  fancies,  feelings,  and  passions.  8.  The  commercial 
use,  which  sees  in  nature  but  so  many  acres  of  woodland,  or  capacities  for  grain  or 
grazing.     Yet  there  ia — (1)  A  true  Bcience,  which  leads  the  way  for  religion  to 


CHAP,  xvn.]  TEE  ACTS.  601 

follow  and  adore.  (2)  A  pure  sentiment,  which  penetrates  the  rare  though  liidden 
analogies  with  which  God  has  crowded  the  natural  and  spiritual  woods;  thore 
religion  enters  to  admire  and  enjoy.  (3)  And  wherever  the  eye  that  measures  value 
pursues  its  calculations  the  grateful  heart  may  follow,  saying,  "  Fruitful  seasons, 
filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness."  The  religious  use  of  Nature,  therefore, 
is  something  beyond  science,  or  sentiment,  or  material  value,  but  utilising  every- 
thing that  is  real  and  true  in  each.  There  is  scarcely  a  greater  need  than  the 
realisation  that  God  is  everywhere.  I.  The  foundation  fob  this  realisation  is 
in  the  teaching  of  the  text  concerning  God's  belation  to  Natuke.  He  is  "  Lord  of 
all  things."  God  is  over  Nature  because  He  was  before  it  and  is  in  it.  You  cannot 
touch  Nature  without  touching  God.  The  right  use  of  Nature  so  related  to  God  must 
be  a  religious  use.  H.  The  duty  and  pbiviuege  of  this  use  is  seen  in  the  fact  that 
the  Scriptures  teach  that  Nature  is  designed  to  be  a  perpetual  witness  to  the 
WISDOM  AND  POWER  OF  GoD.  Nature  is  God's  perpetual  demonstration  of  Himself. 
The  crime  of  idolatry  was  its  first  rejection  of  God  in  Nature  and  then  debasing  His 
character.     III.  This  duty  and  privilege  becomes  plainer  when  we  remember  that 

MAN    WAS    so    CREATED    AS    TO   BE    THE    INTERPRETER    OF  NaTUEE.       For  this  he  WaS 1. 

Placed  at  the  apex  of  the  pyramid,  last  and  greatest  master-work.  2.  Given 
intellectual  faculties  competent  to  understand  Nature  and  its  relations.  3.  En- 
dowed with  a  moral  character  capable  of  resemblance  to  the  God  revealed  in 
Nature.  4.  Made  a  spiritual  being  capable  of  communion  with  God.  5.  It  must 
therefore  be  his  mission  to  be  a  reflecting  surface  for  the  glory  of  God  in  Nature. 
IV.  This  duty,  &c. ,  is  seen  to  be  rational  because  Nature  is  so  much  more  to  us 
WITH  God  than  without  Him,  Without  God  it  is  a  congeries  of  vast  and  uncon- 
trollable forces  before  which  we  shudder;  with  God  an  ordered  system  no  less 
majestic,  but  under  the  control  of  a  beneficent  will.  Without  Him  Nature  is  sense- 
less ;  with  Him  it  has  a  meaning  even  where  we  cannot  fathom  it.  V.  Plainer  yet 
seems  the  duty,  &o.,  when  we  consider  the  appeals  which  God  in  Nature  makes 
TO  ALL  that  is  BEST  IN  US.  1.  To  OUT  levcrence.  Best  ideas  of  omnipotence  are 
from  God's  rule  over  Nature.  2.  God  seeks  to  elevate  us  by  exhibiting  in  Nature 
the  nobler  types  of  life.  Who  can  be  thoughtless  in  a  world  packed  with  thought, 
careless  when  everything  is  replete  with  arrangement,  idle  where  everything  is 
busy,  or  frivolous  where  all  is  serious  ?  3.  God  appeals  to  the  spirit  of  praise  every- 
where in  Nature,  which  is  again  designed  to  fill  us  with  gladness  in  and  by  our 
gratitude.  4.  Even  growth  in  grace  is  possible  by  Nature.  VI.  A  religious  use  of 
Nature  is  essential  to  a  symmetrical  Christian  faith  and  life.  (S.  T.  Scovel, 
D.D.)  Dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands. — GcxVs  temples : — I.  Heaven, 
where  the  spirits  made  perfect  are  before  His  throne,  n.  Tfte  visible  creation,  in 
which  He  has  never  left  Himself  without  a  witness  to  His  power,  wisdom,  and 
goodness.  III.  The  Church,  in  which  the  unknown  G'>d  is  a  revealed  God  in  the 
gospel  of  His  Son.  IV.  My  heart,  in  which  He  desires  to  dwell  by  His  Holy 
Spirit.    (K.  Gerok.) 

Ver.  25.  Neither  Is  worshipped  with  men's  hands. — Contrast  between  God  and 
idols  : — Idols  certainly  require  the  care  of  human  hands.  There  are  still  shops  in 
the  cities  of  India  and  China,  with  this  inscription  on  their  sign-boards,  "  Hera 
old  gods  are  repaired  and  renovated."  {Leonhard.)  As  though  He  needed  any- 
thing.— God  has  no  needs  : — The  idol  was  supposed  to  be  a  needy,  dependent  being, 
fed  by  the  hands  of  man.  God  not  so  (Psa.  1.).  Notice  the  main  points  of  com- 
parison.    I.  Idols  are  dead  ;  God  lives  op  Himself  and  by  Himself.     He  gives — 

1.  Life.  What  a  gift  is  life !  And  what  a  giver  the  Author  of  life !  2.  Breath. 
3.  All  things  necessary  for  the  snstentation  and  continuance  of  both.  It  is  not 
matter  that  lives,  but  God  in  matter.  "  This  living  God  "  is  the  Being  with  whom 
we  have  to  do  ;  there  is  a  living  eye  on  thee,  a  judge  taking  account  now.  II.  God 
IS  the  builder  of  His  own  temple.  The  idol  is  made,  then  a  temple  is  built,  and 
the  idol  is  put  there  and  chained,  that  he  might  not  be  stolen,  God  too  has  a 
temple  ;  but  He  is  the  architect  of  His  own  temple,  erected  it  not  for  Himself  but 
for  us ;  worship  is  for  the  benefit  of  man.  It  is  getting,  not  giving  ;  receiving,  not 
imparting.  Worship  may  be  regarded — 1.  As  the  highest  exercise  of  man's 
nature.  Man  can  never  be  greater  than  when  he  stands  before  God  ;  a  creature 
can  never  perform  a  nobler  oflSce  than  when  thus  holding  communion  with  God. 

2.  As  the  purest  influence  of  man's  nature.  Sin  is  put  down  by  this.  We  must 
look  up,  not  down ;  the  glance  of  the  eye  on  the  infinite  is  worth  all  the  talking  and 
iroublmg  oar  minds  about  non-essentials  in  religion.      But  we  must    get  tha 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.xnt. 

principles  fjom  the  habit  of  looking  up.  3.  As  the  truest  happiness.  Have  yott 
ever  felt  happiness  corresponding  to  the  high  demands  of  your  nature  ?  When  your 
Boul  has  been  v^ith  God,  how  little  did  this  world  appear  then  I  III.  God  is  thb 
PBOPBrETOB  OF  His  OWN  SACRIFICE.  All  dead  matter,  silver  and  gold,  our  body^ 
Boul,  intellect,  affections,  hopes,  fears,  are  God's.  When  we  worship  we  are  teach- 
ing ourselves  a  great  truth,  instructing  ourselves  in  our  own  dependence  on  God. 
IV.  God  is  the  Father  of  His  own  worshippers.  1.  Paul  shows  the  nature  of 
man.  "We  are  also  His  offspring."  The  tree,  the  elephant,  birds,  stars,  &o.,  are 
not  like  God.  They  are  far  from  Him,  they  are  matter  ;  He  is  mind.  They  are 
dead  ;  He  is  living.  But  we  are  like  God.  We  have  power  to  think  as  He  thinks, 
to  love  as  He  loves,  to  be  felicitous  as  He  is  felicitous.  2.  We  have  the  destiny  of 
this  nature.  "  Seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  might  find  Him."  Seek  Him,  so  as  to 
feel  Him  touch  the  soul.  Are  you  in  search  after  God  ?  Whatever  pursuit  fails, 
this  will  not.  It  is  the  only  study  worthy  the  soul  of  man.  (Caleb  Morris.)  God 
has  no  needs : — I.  This  declaration  sheds  considerable  light  on  God  Himself, 
who  is  underived,  unconditioned,  everlasting,  and  the  source  of  all  other  life 
throughout  the  universe.  We  have  to  do  with  a  "  living  God  "  ;  therefore  let  us 
have  no  dead  souls  or  dead  services.  II.  How  may  this  troth  apply  to  the  scheme 
OF  Kedemption  ?  God  is  all  fulness  of  being,  excellency,  and  blessing ;  yet  He  has 
condescended  to  propose  reconciliation  to  men.  The  advantage  here  is  altogether 
on  the  side  of  men.  And  what  an  advantage  it  is  1  It  is  the  fulness,  the  power,  of 
the  rich  God  spreading  Himself  out  through  the  entire  nature  of  man  ;  so  that  he 
feels  he  is  invested  with  every  attribute  God  possesses.  When  man  is  thus 
brought  into  union  with  the  rich  God,  he  receives  two  things  which  constitute  his 
spiritual  life.  1.  A  consciousness  of  his  relationship  to  God.  A  living  conscious- 
ness that  we  are  "  His  offspring,  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being." 
That  feeling  is  worth  the  universe.  Man  is  a  child  of  God,  whether  he  feels  it  or 
not ;  he  has  not  lost  his  relationship  to  God.  What  has  he  lost  by  sin  ?  (1)  The 
filial  character.  All  likeness  to  God's  character.  (2)  Sympathy  to  the  Father.  He 
does  not  love  what  God  loves,  nor  hate  what  God  hates.  (3)  The  knowledge  of 
God  to  a  great  extent.  Not  altogether.  He  is  far  from  God,  as  an  isolated  being. 
Man  has  not  the  sUghtest  formal  knowledge  of  Him  as  his  Father.  (4)  Every 
disposition  to  return  to  God.  2.  But  when  the  poor  sinner  comes  to  the  rich  God 
what  takes  place  ?  (1)  There  is  a  quickening  sense  of  his  relationship.  He  says,. 
"  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  Thy  son."  Then  he  says,  "  Talk  to  me  about  my 
Father."  The  soul  sympathises  with  God  till  it  has  impressed  on  it  God's 
character.  (2)  There  is  a  right  in  all  the  privileges  involved  in  the  relationship 
(Eom.  viii.  17).  Think  how  Christ  is  the  heir  of  God ;  think  of  His  position, 
offices,  glory  ;  then  imagine  yourselves  to  be  in  a  state  of  approximation  to  Him  ; 
and  then  feel  what  it  is  to  be  enriched  with  the  riches  of  God.  III.  God  has  no 
needs.  Then  Hk  is  more  than  adequate  to  finish  the  work  of  redemption. 
If  He  has  all  power,  He  is  able  to  work  out  men's  salvation.  Man  has  not  a  fixed 
purpose.  God  has  a  clear,  definite  conception  of  the  Divine  scheme  of  salvption. 
God  is  so  in  love  with  His  purpose  of  saving  man  there  is  no  fear  of  His  giving  it 
up.  Men  often  fail  in  their  purposes  in  consequence  of  impediments.  God,  who  is 
the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  has  dominion  over  aU  things.  IV.  God  has  mo 
NEEDS.  Then  He  could  have  no  motives  in  redemption  but  generosity.  (Ibid.) 
Seeing  that  He  giveth  to  all  life. — God's  bounty  : — He  giveth— I.  "  Life,  '  and 
none  but  He,  the  Living  One.  It  is  a  rill  from  the  Fountain  of  Life.  Growth  and 
other  qualities  belong  to  plants,  such  as  circulation  of  sap  and  respiration  by  their 
leaves  ;  but  life  characterises  man — with  its  voluntary  and  involuntary  functions, 
its  enjoyments  and  capabilities,  its  appetites  and  instincts,  its  operations  on  the 
world  without  it,  and  its  conscious  possession  of  its  powers  within  it.  Pleasure, 
glory,  and  usefulness  are  bound  up  with  its  prolongation.  So  sweet  is  it  that  few 
choose  to  part  with  it,  and  the  cessation  of  it  was  regarded  by  the  apostle's  hearers 
as  the  direst  of  calamities.  He  who  is  our  life  confers  and  supports  it  in  His 
ineffable  goodness — for  "  man  liveth  not  by  bread  alone."  II.  "Breath,"  which, 
as  the  condition  and  means  of  life,  is,  therefore,  singled  out.  Even  then  the 
atmosphere  was  popularly  valued  as  the  first  of  neoepsary  gifts,  and,  when  scientifi- 
cally examined,  its  preciousness  is  not  only  confirmed,  but  it  becomes  a  powerful- 
proof  of  Divine  unceasing  goodness.  For  the  air  we  breathe  is  endowed  with  many 
qualities,  the  loss  or  disturbance  of  which  must  be  fatal  to  life.  If  it  lose  its 
gravity,  or  if  its  elasticity  be  changed  or  become  changeable;  if  it  thicken,  and 
darken,  and  cease  to  be  an  invisible  medium ;  if  it  be  deprived  of  its  oomp reasi- 


CTAP.  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  603 

bility,  or  if  any  amount  of  cold  could  condense  it ;  if  the  gases  composing  it  were 
to  vary  in  their  proportions ;  or  if  it  were  not  universally  present,  and  what  is 
vitiated  by  respiration  purified  and  restored — animal  existence  would  be  extin- 
guished on  the  face  of  the  earth.  III.  And  His  bounty  is  immense,  for  He  giveth 
"  ALL  THINGS."  Whatever  we  have  He  has  given  us — the  food  on  our  table,  and 
the  raiment  on  our  persons,  with  ability  to  win  them  and  health  to  enjoy  them. 
Nor  let  any  man  boast  of  being  the  architect  of  his  own  fortune ;  for  the  materials 
out  of  which  he  builds  it,  the  skill  with  which  he  constructs  it,  and  the  propitious 
season  which  enables  him  to  rear  it  without  pause  or  discomfiture — are  each  of 
them  the  gift  of  the  one  sovereign  Benefactor,  Discovery,  invention,  science,  art, 
adventure,  commercial  shrewdness,  literary  power,  mechanical  skill,  and  pohtical 
success  ;  the  sharp  eye  that  is  first  to  perceive  the  "  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men" ; 
and  the  wary  enterprise  that  launches  the  vessel  upon  it — are  not  self- originated. 
"Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from  the 
Father  of  Lights."     (Prof.  Eadie.) 

Yer.  26.  And  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  the  nations. — All  of  one  blood : — 1. 
This  is  not  the  gospel,  but  it  is  the  foundation  on  which  the  gospel  builds — that 
humanity  is  one;  that  race  distinctions  are  superficial,  and  not  radical ;  that  there 
is  a  universal  brotherhood,  originating  in  the  universal  Fatherhood  of  God.  This 
is  familiar  enough  to  us,  for  our  common  speech  is  stocked  with  phrases  and  expres- 
sions which  recognise  it.  But  then  no  man  believed  in  it.  Jew  and  Greek,  and 
Roman  and  barbarian  were  alike  in  this.  They  had  their  separate  deities  and  their 
separate  origin.  Every  people  was  proud  of  its  own  birthright,  and  deemed  itself  the 
elect  of  its  own  god,  and  regarded  it  as  a  natural  law  that  they  should  despise  or 
hate  all  others.  Into  this  condition  of  things  the  inspired  message  of  the  apostlea 
came,  flinging  its  Uving  cords  over  the  wide  gaps,  and  binding  human  society  with 
a  new  and  Divine  bond.  2.  And  the  greater  our  knowledge  of  men,  the  more 
irresistibly  is  this  truth  forced  upon  us.  Everywhere  there  are  substantially  the 
same  emotions,  longings,  regrets,  some  sort  of  conscience,  hope ;  everywhere  man 
is  susceptible  to  the  touch  of  love,  moved  by  persuasions  of  kindness,  thrilled  by  the 
voice  of  pity.  Everywhere  man  confesses  that  he  cannot  live  by  bread  alone,  and 
is  everywhere  a  praying  creature.  And  everywhere  there  is  in  man  a  capacity  for 
growth  unlimited.  Even  among  the  lowest  races,  where  science  has  sought,  and 
will  for  ever  seek  in  vain,  for  the  missing  link  between  the  animal  and  man,  proofs 
innumerable  have  been  given  that  one  or  two  generations  are  enough  to  work  a 
transformation  more  than  magical.  Truly  God  hath  made  of  our  blood  all  nations 
of  men,  and  the  Christ  who  can  redeem  any  one  man  is  proved  by  that  very  fact  to 
be  the  possible  Redeemer  of  aU.  3.  How  beautifully,  and  with  what  profound 
wisdom,  does  Paul  here  acknowledge  that  universal  religious  instinct  in  man  which 
makes  humanity  one.  They  have  all  sought  after  God,  if  haply  they  might  find 
Him,  and  He  has  not  been  far  from  any  one  of  them.  In  every  religion  there  has 
been  something  true.  They  have  touched  His  feet  if  they  have  not  seen  His  face. 
Their  shrines  have  been  vestibules  to  His  Temple,  if  they  had  not  been  the  Temple 
itself.  To-day,  in  aU  our  mission  work  we  are  coming  back  to  the  generous  thought 
of  the  apostle.  The  heathen  world  is  becoming  better  known,  its  religions  better 
nnderstood,  its  gross  errors  and  undying  truths  and  aspirations  more  carefully  and 
lovingly  distinguished,  and,  therefore,  the  scope  and  nature  of  our  work  more  clearly 
and  hopefully  defined.  To  understand  the  souls  with  which  we  deal  is  the  first 
essential  of  evangelistic  work.  And  verily  there  is  hardly  a  truth  of  the  Christian 
revelation  which  is  not,  at  least,  foreshadowed  in  the  religious  conceptions  of  the 
great  Eastern  races.  We  know,  alas  1  too  well,  that  all  these  things  have  been 
buried  out  of  sight  under  successive  layers  of  corruption.  Yet,  if  we  have  patience 
to  dig  beneath  the  mass,  we  are  always  stumbling  upon  decayed  forms  of  truth, 
and  it  is  no  little  advantage  to  the  missionary  to  be  able  to  say,  "  I  came  not 
to  destroy  but  to  restore  and  fulfil."  Moreover,  we  are  learning  to  respect  those 
people  and  not  simply  to  despise  them.  We  are  finding  out  not  only  that 
they  are  lost,  but  that  they  are  really  worth  saving.  India  was  the  greatest  of  all 
empires  before  the  names  of  Rome  and  Greece  were  known.  Its  people  belong 
to  the  same  Aryan  stock  as  ourselves.  All  these  races  have  proved  themselves 
capable  of  all  that  we  have  attained,  and  they  have  fallen  from  all  that  because, 
as  Paul  says,  though  they  once  knew  God,  they  became  vain  in  their  imagina- 
tion, &c.  It  is  the  picture  of  Eden  with  a  particular  rendering.  But  whenever 
there  is  a  paradise  lost  Christ  speaks  of  a  paradise  regained.     Our  missionariee 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

go  to  their  work  burning  and  inspired  with  an  infinite  hope,  because  they  go 
where  there  are  memories  of  a  golden  past.     What  has  been  may  yet  be  again. 
They  are  a  people  to  whom  we  can  confidently  say,  •'  If  thou  canst  believe,  all 
things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth."     [J.  G.  Greenhough,  M.A.)         Man- 
kind are    one  family : — I.   The    truth   of   this   doctbine.     That  mankind  are 
one  family ;  that  a  common  origin,  and  common  nature,  belong  to  all  nations.     1. 
We  read  (Gen.  i.  27,  28).     Now  as  we  read  of  no  more  creations  of  man,  but  on  the 
contrary,  that  after  the  formation  of  man,  Jehovah  "  rested  on  the  seventh  day, 
from  all  His  work  which  He  had  made,"  it  is  evident  that  if  we  admit  the  correct- 
ness of  the  Mosaic  account  of  the  creation,  we  must  admit  that  nations  of  every 
colour,  and  of  every  mode  of  life,  are  the  descendants  of  one  pair.     This  I  think 
more  specially  appears  from  another  statement  in  this  early  history  (Gen.  iii.  20). 
2.  There  is  reason  to  believe  from  other  considerations,  as  well  as  from  the  words 
of  our  text,  that  it  was  the  design  of  Almighty  God,  that  the  human  race  should 
spread  over  and  people  the  whole  earth  ;  and  one  cannot  but  admire  how  His  provi- 
dence, by  colonisation,  adventure,  and  other  means,  continues  to  pursue  the  same 
design.     3.  The  sacred  writers  often  express  themselves  in  such  terms  as  can  only 
comport  with  the  identity  of  the  human  species,  for  which  we  contend  (Numb,  xxvii. 
16  ;  Eom.  v.  12  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  22),     4.  Against  this  doctrine,  however,  there  has  been 
advanced  one  olDJection,   whicn,  on  account  of  the   boldness  and  the  frequency 
with  which  it  has  been  put  forth,  it  is  proper  to  notice.  It  is  this — "  the  differeuce  in 
colour,  form,  and  manners  is  so  great  in  different  nations  of  men,  as  to  prove  that 
they  cannot  have  had  a  common  origin."    In  answer  to  this  objection,  it  is  to  be 
remarked — (1)  That  between  the  snowy  whiteness  of  the  most  delicate  European, 
and  the  jet  black  of  the  negro,  there  is,  in  the  varieties  of  the  human  kind,  every 
conceivable,  intermediate  shade  of  colour.    And  does  the  objector  mean  to  say  that 
men  must  have  had  as  many  distinct  originals  as  there  are  distinct  shades  of  colour 
in  the  nations  of  the  globe  ?     (2)  But  perhaps  he  will  choose  to  rest  his  objection 
rather  on  the  conformation  than  on  the  colour  of  the  body.    But  can  the  objector 
be  ignorant  that  the  different  nations  of  Europe  exhibit  striking  characteristic  dis- 
tinctions in  their  personal  structure  and  appearance  ?     Have  we  not  an  example  of 
this  in  the  Germans  and  the  French  ?    (3)  I  might  insist  on  the  erect  stature  of  man 
— on  the  bonal  and  muscular  provisions  by  which  this  stature  is  produced — and  on 
other  anatomical  peculiarities  by  which  man  in  all  his  varieties  is  essentially  dis- 
tinguished from  all  the  lower  animals.     And  I  do  so  far  insist  on  this,  as  to  aflSrm 
that  Rousseau,  and  others,  who  have  intimated  that  the  negi'o  man,  and  the  simia  of 
the  woods,  are  only  varieties  of  the  same  species,  either  wrote  in  utter  ignorance  of 
this  department  of  physiology  and  comparative  anatomy,  or,  what  is  worse,  attempted 
to  impose  upon  the  world  a  wilful,  wicked,  and  most  detestable  falsehood  I     (4) 
With  those  who  seek  truth  on  this  question  it  will  be  enough  to  know  that  all  tne 
great  features  which  identifj'  man  are  found  alike  in  men  of  every  colour  and  of 
every  cUme.    (a)  One  of  these  features  is  reason.    The  powers  of  ratiocination  belong 
to  man  alone,   (h)  Man  is  the  only  creature  on  earth  endowed  with  the  gift  of  speech, 
(c)  I  pass  over  the  institutions  of  law  and  government — the  cultivation  of  science, 
literature,  and  the  arts — the  relations  of  domestic  Ufe — and  the  strength  and 
durability  of  the  natural  affections.  But  there  is  another  peculiarity  of  man  on  which 
I  am  bound  to  insist ;  and  that  is,  his  capacity  for  religion.     I  say  that  man 
possesses   a  power   to  contemplate,  love,    and    worship  the   infinite    Spirit,  hia 
Creator  and  Lord  ;  and  that  he  is  the  only  inhabitant  of  earth  that  has  this  power. 
To  my  judgment  this  is  the  broad,  deep,  indeUble  mark  which  distinguishes  man 
from  the  most  sagacious  of  the  brutes,  more  than  any  other  of  his  characteristics. 
n.  The  essential  consequence  of  this  doctbine  to  a  consistent  and  acceptablb 
Christian  practice.     1.  It  is  indispensable,  in  point  of  fact,  to  the  exercise  of  a 
true  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     To  suppose  that  shade  of  colour  destroyed 
identity  of  species,  were  to  us  a  horrid  thought !  for  there  is  reason  to  believe  that 
the  holy  Jesus  BUmself  had  not  the  European  whiteness,  but  rather  the  Palestinian 
form  and  hue ;  so  that  if  any  nation  must  be  excluded  from  the  blessings  of  redemp- 
tion on  account  of  the  shape  of  their  bodies  or  colour  of  their  skin,  it  is  the  English 
nation,  and  in  the  interdict  we  have  our  share  I     2.  The  doctrine  I  have  laid  before 
you  is  no  less  necessary  to  enable  us  to  feel  and  to  act  in  a  right  manner  in  refer- 
ence to  the  distinctions  of  rank  and  circumstances  among  men.     If  the  father  of  a 
numerous  family  finds  it  expedient  to  appoint  one  child  this  task,  and  another  that ; 
and  to  one  a  task  less  easy  or  less  honourable  than  to  another ;  those  children  will 
not,  surely,  on  this  account,  forget  that  they  are  brothers  and  sisters,  that  they  have 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS,  605 

one  father,  and  are  equally  the  objects  of  his  care  and  love.     The  use  of  this  allusion 
is  easy.    Let  the  most  exalted  by  riches,  rank,  office,  or  fame,  keep  in  mind  that  he 
is  but  man,  and  never  forget  the  kindliness  and  respect  due  from  him  to  the  meanest 
being  partaking  our  common  nature  !    And  if  there  be  men  who  choose  to  play 
the  tyrant  and  oppressor — speaking  and  acting  as  though  more  than  human  blood 
flowed  in  their  veins — let  not  this  degrade  the  poor  in  his  own  eyes ;  let  him  act 
right  in  the  sight  of  his  God,  and  time  shall  show  which  is  the  greatest  man  1     3. 
It  would  be  wrong  were  I  to  omit  this  further  inference  ;  that  if  all  nations  were  of 
one  blood,  it  must  be  in  the  highest  degree  criminal  for  one  nation  to  enslave 
another.      4.  In  fine,  from  the  doctrine  that  mankind   are  one  family  I  might 
deduce  that  whole  course  of  virtuous  Christian  demeanour  which  is  due  from  man 
to  man.     (1)  Justice  and  integrity  to  all.     (2)  Eeparation  where  injury  has  been 
inflicted.     (3)    Forbearance    towards  the    errors    and    infirmities   of    men.      (4) 
Assistance  to  the  weak,  the  distressed,  the  sorrowful,  the  aged,  the  widow,  and 
the  fatherless,   according    to    the    ability  which   God   has   given   us.      (5)    In- 
struction to  the  ignorant;   in   other  words,  the  impartation  of  the   religion   of 
Jesus  to  them  who  have  it  not.    To  those  near  us,  our  own  family,  neighbour- 
hood, and  country,  first  to  be  sure;  but  not  forgetting  the  most  distant  of  our 
brethren.     {Jag.  Bromley.)        The  origin  of  mankind : — I.  The  fact.     The  truth  of 
the  declaration  will  appear,  if  we  consider — 1.  The  great  similarity  which  is  visible 
among  the  various  nations  of  the  earth.   They  all  have  the  same — (1)  Exterior  form. 
(2)  Mode  of  moving.    They  all  walk  erect.     (31  Use  of  speech,  or  power  of  articula- 
tion.    None  of  the  lower  species  have  this.     (4)  Intellectual  faculties.    The  most 
nncultivated  nations  appear  to  possess  the  same  native  powers  of  the  mind  as  the 
most  civilised.     (5)  Moral  dispositions,  •'  they  have  all  gone  out  of  the  way,  there  is 
none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one."    (6)  Birth,  growth,  decay,  and  diss6lution. 
2.  The  ignorance  in  which  they  have  generally  been  involved  for  many  ages  past,  and 
the  slow  progress  they  have  made  in  knowledge,  learning,  and  civilisation.     3.  The 
farther  back  we  trace  their  origin,  the  more  they  become  blended  together  and 
mixed  into  one.     There  is  no  nation  but  the  Jews  that  appears  unmixed.      If 
different  nations  have  originated  from  different  sources,  it  is  very  strange  that  not 
one  of  them  has  been  able  to  retain  the  knowledge  of  their  distinct  origin.    But  if 
they  are  all  of  one  blood  this  is  not  strange.    II.  Objections.     1.  Some  have  said 
it  was  impossible  for  one  family  to  spread  over  all  the  world.     To  this  I  reply — (1) 
That  it  was  easy  for  one  family  to  scatter  into  any  inhabitable  parts  of  the  earth 
where  they  could  travel  by  land.    (2)  As  to  those  nations  who  have  inhabited  Ice- 
land and  America,  we  can  conceive  of  various  ways  by  which  they  came  to  these 
places.    It  has  been  conjectured  that  many  islands  were  once  connected  to  the  main 
land ;  and  that  this  was  the  case  in  respect  to  the  continents.     If  this  be  true,  then 
the  difficulty  is  entirely  removed.    But  if  this  be  not  true,  it  is  easy  to  suppose,  that 
those  on  the  continent  could  devise  means  to  get  to  the  nearest  islands.     And  as 
navigation  was  early  discovered  by  this  means,  they  could  get  to  remote  islands  and 
continents.     2.  Some  nations  presume  to  carry  their  antiquity  several  thousand 
years  higher  than  others,  such  as  the  Babylonians,  Egyptians,  and  Chinese.    But — 
(1)  They  have  no  history  or  monuments  to  prove  their  great  antiquity.     (2)  The 
most  ancient  and  faithful  historians  bear  full  testimony  to  the  contrary.    3.  It  is 
farther  objected  that  the  great  diversity  in  the  customs,  manners  and  complexions 
of  different  nations,  is  inconsistent  with  the  supposition  of  their  common  origin. 
It  is  easy  to  answer  that  all  these  things  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  different 
circumstances  and  climates  in  which  they  have  lived.     III.  Infeeences.     If  it  be 
the  truth  that  all  nations  are  of  one  blood,  then — 1.  We  may  justly  conclude  that   j 
the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God.     It  confirms  the  account  which  the  Bible  gives  of —    I 

(1)  The  Creation,  which  tells  us  that  mankind  sprang  from  the  same  two  parents.    ' 

(2)  The  Fall.  Though  men  have  sought  out  many  inventions  to  account  for  the 
universal  depravity  of  mankind ;  yet  the  Bible  gives  the  only  rational  account  of  it, 
that  by  one  man's  disobedience  all  were  made  sinners.  (3)  The  Deluge.  The 
heathen  have  some  dark  traditions  concerning  this  awful  catastrophe,  but  they 
could  never  give  any  rational  aocoant  of  it.  It  cannot  be  credibly  accounted  for 
but  on  the  supposition  that  all  nations  are  of  one  blood,  universally  depraved,  and 
nniversally  deserve  destruction.  2.  That  notion  of  patriotism  which  is  generally 
imbibed  and  admired,  is  false  and  unscriptural.  One  nation  has  no  more  right  to 
Beek  ;ts  own  interests  exclusively,  or  in  opposition  to  the  interests  of  other  nations, 
than  one  member  of  the  same  family  has  to  seek  his  interest  in  opposition  to  the 
interest  of  the  rest  of  the  family.    All  nations  are  morally  bound  to  seek  each  other's 


€0«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rvn. 

interests,  and  to  refrain  from  doing  anything  which  they  deem  to  be  injurious.  3. 
They  have  no  right  to  enslave  one  another.  All  men  have  natural  and  inalienable 
rights,  which  never  ought  to  be  taken  from  them  by  force  and  violence.  4.  God 
has  manifested  peculiar  care,  wisdom,  and  kindness  in  fixing  the  various  places  of 
their  residence,  in  the  best  manner,  according  to  their  relations  to  and  connections 
with  each  other.  And  as  He  fixed  the  bounds  of  their  habitations,  so  He  fixed 
their  times.  That  is,  the  time  when  every  nation  should  rise  or  faJl,  or  become 
mixed  with  any  other  nation.  It  requires  great  care,  wisdom,  and  kindness  in  a 
parent  to  dispose  of  his  numerous  family  in  the  wisest  and  best  manner  ;  it  requires 
more  in  a  prince ;  but  it  required  far  greater  in  God.  6.  God  has  exercised  His 
absolute  sovereignty  in  a  very  striking  manner.  He  has  made  great  and  innumer- 
able distinctions  among  the  nations  and  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  How  differently 
did  He  treat  the  three  branches  of  Noah's  family,  Isaac  and  Ishmael,  Jacob  and 
Esau  I  He  has  placed  one  nation  in  a  warm  and  another  in  a  cold  country,  one  in 
a  rich,  and  another  in  a  poor.  And  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  of  the  haman 
family  to  be  happy  in  this  world,  or  the  next,  without  seeing  and  loving  His 
sovereignty.  6.  We  have  ground  to  think  that  the  world  will  stand  many  centuries 
longer.  The  earth  is  far  from  being  fully  inhabited.  7.  The  whole  family  of  Adam 
will  be  immensely  numerous.  If  the  seed  of  Abraham  will  be  as  the  stars  of  heaven 
for  multitude,  what  will  be  the  seed  of  Adam?  Their  numbers  will  be  beyond 
human  calculation,  if  not  beyond  human  conception.  This  immense  family  are  to 
have  one  universal  and  solenm  meeting  at  the  Day  of  Judgment.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D. ) 
The  unity  of  the  race : — I.  There  is  precisely  the  same  plan  in  all  the  races — of 
bone,  nerve,  artery,  structure,  &c.  The  great  functions  and  organs  are  the  same. 
If  the  African  had  his  heart  in  his  hver  it  would  be  a  tough  argument ;  but  what 
difference  does  it  make  that  his  hair  is  kinked?  The  surgeon,  the  nurse,  the 
dietician  will  treat  him  and  you  exactly  alike.  Yet  you  hear  men  say,  "Look  at 
his  flat  nose.  Do  you  suppose  that  he  is  one  with  the  man  who  has  a  Grecian  nose  ?  " 
But  is  not  the  sense  of  smell  the  same  in  both  ?  The  variation  of  superficial  form 
does  not  touch  the  question  of  unity  of  function  and  structure.  In  fact  the 
differences  between  one  part  of  the  human  family  and  another  is  no  greater  than 
that  which  exists  in  a  single  household  where  one  child  is  a  genius  and  another 
practical,  one  poetic  and  another  prosaic.  11.  All  the  races  or  men  are  educable. 
It  is  not  so  with  the  lower  animals.  You  can  carry  them  a  very  little  way  in 
education,  and  all  the  rest  is  trick.  But  the  moment  you  strike  humanity  at  its 
very  lowest  you  find  capacity  of  culture.  If  you  take  the  greatest  savages  and  put 
them  in  better  relations  and  conditions  they  show  that  they  belong  to  the  universal 
race  of  man.  III.  All  have  the  sense  of  the  beautiful.  There  is  no  proof  that 
this  exists  to  any  considerable  degree  in  the  animal  kingdom.  But  sometimes, 
as  among  the  Indians,  you  find  this  sense  highly  developed  in  the  most 
uncultured.  IV.  All  have  the  perception  of  wit  and  humour.  Man  is  the  only 
laughing  animal  in  the  world.  V.  Moral  sense  is  common  to  all.  Where  men 
believe  in  kilUng  their  fathers  and  mothers  they  think  it  right,  though  their  under- 
standing is  darkened,  and  they  are  misguided,  just  as  a  mariner  makes  his  way 
towards  a  false  light  believing  it  to  be  true,  and  thus  wrecks  his  vessel.  VI.  The 
whole  world  is  susceptible  op  sympathetic  understanding,  co-operation  and  lies 
SOCIAL  conditions.  It  would  be  impossible  to  herd  together  the  different  races  of 
animals  unless  you  pare  their  nails,  extract  their  teeth,  or  stupefy  them.  But  men 
of  all  nations  can  associate.  Conclusion :  1.  These  thoughts  are  made  emphatic 
by  the  undesigned  tendency  to  unity  which  the  growth  of  the  world's  affairs  is  pro- 
ducing. The  economic  and  scientific  developments  of  the  age  are  working  alike 
for  all  the  nations.  Great  mechanical  and  commercial  improvements  are  bringing 
the  whole  world  together.  The  Turk  is  borrowing  civilisation  from  the  European ; 
and  the  European  is  bringing  more  threads  of  knowledge  from  Chinamen  and 
Japanese.  Mountains  and  oceans  no  longer  divide.  We  tunnel  the  one  and  throw 
a  nerve  through  the  other.  2.  The  Church  proposes,  as  it  long  has  done,  to  move 
out  on  this  tide.  It  has  made  a  great  many  mistakes,  but  there  never  has  been  a 
time  when  it  did  not  set  its  face  towards  human  unity,  and  teach  tbat  God  belonged 
to  all  men  alike.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  unity  of  the  race  consistent  with  its 
diversities  : — At  a  public  meeting  of  the  Anthropological  Society  the  assertion  was 
made  that  the  aborigines  of  Australia,  the  negroes  of  Africa,  and  other  miserable 
outcasts  did  not  belong  to  the  human  family  at  all,  but  were  merely  a  superior  kind 
of  orang-outang,  or  gorilla;  that,  not  possessing  souls,  they  require  none  of  the 
Bympathy  and  oare  the  friends  of  missions  were  so  anzioos  to  extend  to  them. 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  COT 

Immediately  a  young  African  requested  permission  to  address  the  meeting.  All 
«yes  being  fixed  upon  him,  with  a  dignified  mien  and  an  unfaltering  voice,  he  spoke 
as  follows : — "  Mr.  Chairatfan,  ladies,  and  gentleman, — The  speaker  who  has  just 
addressed  the  meeting  thinks  that  I  and  my  brethren  of  the  negro  race  are  not  men 
because  we  have  curly  hair,  our  craniums  are  thick,  and  we  have  a  shuflaing  gait 
when  we  walk.  I  have  lately  been  down  in  Dorsetshire,  where  I  observed  the  farm 
labourers  have  a  shuffling  gait ;  and  I  thought  that  my  countrymen,  who  generally 
walk  much  better,  might  be  tempted  to  laugh  at  them  for  their  awkwardness  if  they 
eaw  them,  but  I  do  not  think  they  would  doubt  their  humanity  on  that  account. 
And  as  to  our  curly  hair,  I  think  that  need  be  no  disparagement  to  us,  as  I  have 
known  persons  of  fair  complexion  try  to  make  theirs  curl  without  success.  With 
regard  to  the  thickness  of  our  skulls,  I  may  observe,  that  I  suppose  our  Almighty 
and  All-wise  Creator  knew  what  He  was  doing  when  he  made  us  so.  Our  home  is 
in  a  very  hot  and  sultry  climate,  where  the  fiery  rays  of  the  sun  have  great  power, 
and  \^ere  the  inner  region  of  the  cranium  no  doubt  requires  such  a  defence.  If, 
by  any  mistake  in  our  conformation,  we  had  been  made  with  skulls  as  frail  as  that 
of  the  learned  gentleman  who  last  spoke,  our  brains,  under  the  influence  of  the 
heat,  might  have  become  as  thin  and  addled  as  his  appears  to  be,  judging  from  the 
foolish  and  unphilosophical  statement  which  he  has  made,  and  then  it  might  have 
been  reasonably  doubted  whether  we  were  men  worth  listening  to."  The  young 
negro  resumed  his  seat  amid  thundering  applause;  and  for  once,  at  least,  it 
appeared  to  be  the  general  opinion  that  the  black  was  as  clever  as  the  white  man. 
Gospel  aspects  of  the  unity  of  the  race  : — I.  The  natural  unity  op  the  back.  This 
is — 1.  Taught  in  the  Bible.  2.  Corroborated  by  tradition.  3.  Confirmed  by 
Bcience.  (1)  A  chemist  can  prove  the  difference  between  the  human  and  anim^ 
blood,  but  finds  no  difference  between  the  blood  of  negro  and  European.  (2) 
Philology  has  reduced  languages  into  a  few  orderly  classes,  and  these  again  into  a 
common  tongue.  This  doctrine  offers  the  only  solution  to  the  problem  of  the 
origin  of — (1)  Universal  depravity  with  its  universal  consciousness  of  guilt.  (2) 
Sacrificial  worship  which  men  have  always  and  everywhere  practised.    II.  Thh 

COMMON   INTEREST    OF   OUR   RACE   IN    THE   PROVISIONS    OF   REDEMPTION.      The   doctriue 

implies — 1.  Our  common  need  of  redemption  as  well  as  a  common  capacity  for 
enjoying  its  benefits.  "  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,"  &o.  2.  That 
salvation  for  Adam  and  his  fallen  posterity  must  have  been  provided  for  all  men. 
The  race  existed  potentially  in  *'the  first  man  Adam  " ;  when,  therefore,  redemption 
was  extended  to  him  it  was  intended  to  benefit  his  offspring.  He  who  has  "  made 
of  one  blood  all  nations  "  has  made  our  Redeemer  a  "  Bansom  for  aU."    III.  The 

BESPONSIBIIiITT    OP   THE    ChORCH  IN  RELATION   TO   THE    RACE.      1.    This  Springs  OUt  of 

ihe  conscious  brotherhood  of  man.  If  we  fully  believe  that  we  share  in  the 
common  evils  of  the  Fall,  and  in  the  love  of  Christ,  how  can  any  who  experience  the 
great  salvation  avoid  all  sense  of  obligation  to  save  others  ?  2.  This  is  set  forth  autho- 
ritatively by  Christ.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  3.  The  successive  openings  for 
missions,  and  the  growing  resources  of  Christian  nations  are  intended  to  quicken  this. 
j{  W.  Hansford.)  Brotherhood  : — This  doctrine  has  three  parts — I.  The  unity  op  thb 
Creator.  1.  Each  nation  in  the  dim  past  had  its  own  gods,  and  the  belief  that  they  were 
euperior  to  those  of  their  neighbours.  2.  But  opposed  to  this  is  the  revelation  o£ 
one  God,  Creator,  Universal  Governor  who  is  over  all,  and  all  in  all.  II.  Thh 
VNiTT  OP  MANKIND.  1.  God  Created  man — male  and  female.  2.  This  was  one  act, 
not  divided  or  repeated  at  intervals  in  different  places.  3.  From  this  one  pair  the 
world  has  been  peopled,  through  the  laws  of  generation  and  dispersion.  This  con- 
tradicts  the  superstition  of  the  heathen  in  reference  to  their  origin,  e.g.,  the 
Athenian  belief  that  they  were  autochthons,  springing  from  the  soil.  III.  Thb 
UNiTT  OF  DESTINY.  1.  Man  has  a  common  nature,  a  mind  that  thinks,  a  heart  that 
feels,  a  will  that  chooses,  a  soul  that  never  dies.  2.  Each  nation  has  the  same 
problems  of  society,  government,  and  religion,  to  discover  and  apply.  3.  Each 
nation  is  subject  to  the  same  diseases,  physical  and  moral,  and  runs  a  like  career 
of  ruin  or  prosperity.  IV.  Eesults.  1.  The  purple  tide  of  related  blood  from 
one  spring  writes  a  common  declaration  of  rights  which  no  Christian  is  at  liberty 
to  disregard.  Simply  to  be  a  man  or  woman  is  to  have  claims  upon  the  whole  race. 
S.  Nations  are  so  bound  together  in  progress  and  privileges,  material,  moral  and 
epiritual,  that  whatever  helps  or  injures  man  in  one  quarter  of  the  globe  is 
ultimately  a  help  or  an  injury  to  aU.  8.  It  is  the  common  duty  of  Christian  nations 
to  labour  for  the  general  diffusion  of  religion  and  civilization,  so  that  peace,  art, 
and  science  may  aniversaUy  prevail,  and  every  human  faoiUty  find  unhindered 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvu, 

liberty  to  develop  itself  to  the  glory  of  God,  individual  weUbeing,  and  the  good 
of  mankind.  (Preacher^s  Monthly.)  And  hath  determined  the  times  before 
appointed,  and  the  bounds  of  their  habitations. — Consequences  flowing  out  of  the 
Divine  Fatherhood  to  the  race : — I.  God,  as  the  Fathee  of  all,  has,  im  a  sovereign 

MANNER,  DISPOSED   OP   THE   DIFFERENT   NATIONS  OF  MEN.      As  a  father  dlspOSeS   of  his 

estate  to  bis  sons,  and  as  his  simple  will  determines  the  allotment  of  each,  so  hag 
God  *•  appointed  men  to  dwell,"  &o.  (Gen.  i.  28).  And  if  it  be  asked,  Why  is  this 
nation  here  or  that  nation  there  ?  the  answer  is,  Not  by  accident,  but  because  God 
so  determined  it.  And  if  it  be  stiU  further  asked.  To  what  is  to  be  ascribed  the 
mutations  of  nations,  the  dying  out  of  some  peoples,  or  their  absorption  into 
others  ?  the  answer  is.  The  will  of  God  hath  determined  the  times  as  well  as  the 
bounds  of  the  habitation  of  each.  This  representation  of  the  apostle — 1.  Supplies 
to  us  a  deeper  and  juster  view  of  the  philosophy  of  human  history  than  is  usually 
suggested.  Whilst,  on  the  one  hand,  we  repudiate  the  doctrine  of  separate  centres 
of  creation,  and  treat  as  a  fantasy  the  doctrine  of  development,  we  are,  on  the 
other  hand,  taught  to  turn  aside  from  the  opinion  that  aU  human  varieties  are  due 
to  mere  differences  of  climate  and  outward  circumstance.  The  persistency  of  races 
— the  retention,  generation  after  generation,  by  whole  communities  of  the  peculiar 
characteristics  of  the  variety  to  which  they  belong;  and  that  under  the  most 
altered  conditions  of  climate,  occupation,  food,  is  against  that.  Look,  e.g.,  at  the 
Jews,  and  at  the  Europeans  settled  in  Africa,  or  the  Africans  in  North  America. 

2.  Enables  us  to  read  and  understand  aright  the  world's  history.  There  are  some 
who  see  in  national  changes  nothing  but  the  results  of  fixed  mechanical  laws. 
Others,  again,  see  nothing  but  the  result  of  either  an  ungoverned  caprice  or  of  the 
ordinary  passions  and  tendencies  of  men.  But  on  neither  of  these  hypotheses  can 
a  real  philosophy  of  history  be  built.  We  can  reach  this  only  by  keeping  fast  hold 
of  the  truth,  that  all  human  operations  are  conducted  under  the  superintendence  of 
an  infinitely  wise  and  poweiful  Being,  who,  without  interfering  with  man's  free 
wiU,  or  interrupting  any  of  the  ordinary  laws  of  nature,  regulates  all  events 
according  to  the  council  of  His  own  will,  and  uses  all  agencies  as  the  instruments 
of  a  vast  world-plan,  of  which  He  alone  knows  the  compass  and  the  details.  On 
these  two  poles  all  true  philosophy  of  history  turns.  If  we  view  man  as  a  mere 
piece  of  organised  mechanism,  we  cannot  bring  the  phenomena  of  his  history  within 
the  range  of  modem  science  at  all ;  if  we  deny  or  overlook  God's  supremacy  we  are 
out  upon  a  wide  sea,  across  which  no  path  is  drawn,  and  over  which  no  light  rests. 

3.  Shows  us  how  contrary  to  the  primary  order  of  the  world,  and  the  will  of  the 
great  Father  of  the  race,  are  all  attempts  to  extirpate  races,  or  to  drive  people  from 
their  native  soil,  or  to  take  forcible  possession  of  it.  God,  no  doubt,  may  overrule 
such  deeds ;  but  the  deeds  themselves  are  impious.  Each  nation  holds  the  country 
it  has  aboriginally  occupied  by  Divine  right — by  the  will  of  the  common  Father. 
Who  can  tell  how  many  of  the  calamities  that  befal  great  nations  are  just  retribu- 
tions for  the  deeds  of  rapine  and  wrong  perpetrated  in  the  day  of  the  nation's  pride 
and  strength  on  some  weaker  or  some  utterly  defenceless  people  ?  IL  Thb  duty 
BINDING  ON  MEN  TO  SEEK  AFTER  GoD.  This  Paul  briugs  in  as  describing  the  purpose 
which  God  had  in  distributing  the  nations,  and  allotting  to  each  its  place  and  time. 
1.  By  being  thus  distributed  over  the  whole  face  of  the  globe,  and  placed  under  the 
constant  superintendence  of  God,  the  nations  had  the  entire  revelation  of  God  in 
nature  and  in  providence  subjected  to  their  study.  2.  That  it  is  man's  duty  to 
search  after  God,  is  one  of  the  primary  truths  of  morals  and  of  natural  religion.  In 
his  present  state  man  neither  knows  God  aright,  nor  are  his  relations  with  God  such 
as  they  originally  were.  Hence  he  needs  to  seek  after  God  that  he  may  enter  into 
right  relations  and  true  communion  with  Him.  These  words  depict  man's  coarse 
in  regard  to  this  great  matter.  Endowed  with  a  religious  principle,  men  feel  them- 
selves constrained  by  the  highest  wants  of  their  nature  to  seek  after  God  ;  and  yet, 
when  left  to  their  own  unaided  efforts,  it  has  ever  been  only  as  one  who  gropes  in 
tlie  dark  and  at  a  peradventure,  that  they  have  pursued  their  search.  To  a  few  of 
the  higher  an4  purer  spirits  there  came,  like  angels'  visits,  ever  and  anon,  brief 
revelations  of  the  hidden  mystery,  just  and  true  thoughts  of  the  Infinite.  Bot  for 
the  mass  of  man  it  was  a  fruitless  groping,  until  at  length,  baffled  and  disheartened, 
they  were  ready  to  carry  their  homage  to  any  altar  that  priestcraft  or  superstition 
might  erect,  or  at  the  best,  to  embody  at  once  their  deathless  longings  and  their 
conscious  impotence  in  an  altar  to  "  An  Unknown  God."  3.  To  what  is  this  melan- 
choly failure  to  be  traced  ?  Not,  the  apostle  reminded  the  Athenians,  to  want  of 
means  and  materials  of  success.    God,  whom  they  thus  haplessly  groped  after,  was» 


CHAF.  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  60S 

all  the  while,  "not  far  from  every  one  of  them."  Not  only  are  the  evidences  of  the 
Divine  existence  and  attributes  presented  in  copious  abundance  on  every  hand,  but 
the  fact  that  man  is  the  offspring  of  God  suppUes  to  him  the  most  natural  help  for 
realising  the  truth  concerning  God.  For,  if  man  be  God's  child,  he  must  have  a 
natural  capacity  for  God.  And  there  is  thus  a  solid  basis  laid  in  the  very  constitu- 
tion of  man's  nature  on  which  a  true  theology  may  be  built ;  and  when  the  page 
of  creation  and  providence  is  opened  before  a  being  so  fitted  and  prepared  to  learn 
the  lessons  they  so  abundantly  teach  concerning  God,  it  can  only  be  through  some 
perversity  of  his  own  mind  that  he  faUs  to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  God  (Bom.  1. 
20-22).  But  sin  had  seduced  them  from  God,  so  it  became  the  great  obstacle  to 
their  receiving  those  right  views  of  God  which  the  phenomena  around  them  so 
clearly  taught.  4.  It  was  thus  that  the  nations  were  betrayed  into  idolatry. 
Nothing  can  be  more  absurd  in  itself  than  to  represent  the  Great  Spirit  under  the 
similitude  of  any  creature ;  and  nothing  can  be  more  inconsistent  than  for  those 
who  call  themselves  God's  offspring  "  to  think  that  the  Godhead  ia  like  unto  gold, 
or  silver,  or  stone  graven  by  art  or  man's  device."  Who  of  us  would  accept  any 
image  that  human  skill  could  produce  as  a  fit  representation  of  that  which  really 
constitutes  us — our  soul  ?  And  this  is  the  true  source  of  aU  those  wrong,  deluding, 
and  debasing  views  of  God,  by  which  men  are  still  led  astray,  even  where  the  light 
of  written  revelation  is  enjoyed.  Would  that  all  who  shudder  at  the  thought  of 
Atheism  were  equally  aUve  to  the  evil  and  danger  of  a  false,  imperfect,  or  fanciful 
Theism  1  {W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.)  God  in  history  : — He  manifests  therein — I. 
His  creative  power,  causing  the  human  spirit  to  be  unfolded  in  the  multiplicity  of 
national  spirits.  II.  His  gracious  goodness,  giving  to  each  nation  time  and  space 
to  develop  its  peculiarity.  III.  His  judicial  bighteousness,  appointing  to  each 
nation,  whether  it  be  Greece  or  Bome  or  Israel,  the  end  and  limit  to  its  power  and 
prosperity.  IV.  His  holt  love — the  whole  history  of  the  world  aiming  at  this 
that  the  kingdom  of  God  may  come  and  that  men  may  seek  and  find  Him.  {K. 
Gerok.)  God  in  history  : — The  doctrine  that  God  "  hath  determined  the  times 
before  appointed,  and  the  bounds  of  their  habitations,"  was  taught  by  Moses — 
"  When  the  Most  High  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance,  when  He  separated 
the  sons  of  Adam,  He  set  the  bounds  of  the  people  according  to  the  number  of  the 
Children  of  Israel."  The  periods  of  their  existence  have  been  defined,  and  its 
limits  mapped  out  by  GodI  By  the  periods  he  means  not  simply  their  natural 
duration,  but  also  the  crisis  or  turning-points  in  their  national  experience.  And 
they  had  many  of  them  in  their  own  history.  Not  to  speak  of  such  epochs  as  the 
return  of  the  Heracleids,  the  religious  mission  of  Epimenides,  the  deeds  of  the 
AlcmsBonids,  the  despotism  of  Pisistratus,  or  the  usurpation  of  the  thirty  tyrants, 
there  had  been  the  battle  of  Marathon,  when  Asiatic  invasion  was  repelled  by  a 
gallant  handful,  and,  ten  years  after,  the  victorious  naval  action  at  Salamis — both 
of  them  hair-breadth  escapes  for  Athens,  ajid  both  securing  against  loss  of  liberty 
and  degradation  into  a  Persian  satrapy.  These  momentous  junctures  were  the  fore- 
appointment  of  an  unrecognised  Protector,  who  settles  the  limits  of  nations ;  for 
there  is  a  boundary  which  they  cannot  pass,  no  matter  what  their  ambition,  and 
what  the  success  of  their  arms.  Their  own  defeats,  and  the  ostracism  of  so  many 
of  their  leaders,  had  shown  this.  Miltiades  the  patriot  of  Marathon,  and  Themis- 
tocles  the  hero  of  Salamis,  had  been  sent  into  exile  for  misadventures  by  which  th& 
ambitious  projects  of  Greece  were  limited,  and  similar  had  been  the  fate  of  Cimon 
and  Alcibiades.  Beyond  certain  termini  Athens  could  not,  with  all  her  skill  and 
valour,  carry  her  arms ;  an  unseen  arm  defined  her  bounds,  and  kept  her  within 
them.  Minerva  could  not  protect :  Xerxes  had  burned  her  dwelling,  and  her  spear 
and  shield  had  neither  repelled  Philip  from  the  north,  nor  beaten  back  the  Boman 
warriors  from  the  west.  She  stood  immovable  on  that  rook,  defenceless  against 
the  invader.  The  sudden  death  of  Alexander  broke  into  four  principaUties  the  huge 
empire  which  he  contemplated.  But  the  Divine  providence  is  all-embracing,  and  all 
history  proclaims  it.  The  battle  of  Zama  relieved  Italy  and  civilisation  from  aU 
fears  of  Carthage.  The  Saracen  power  was  thrown  out  of  central  Europe  at  a  very 
critical  period,  and  the  tide  of  Turkish  fanaticism  was  finally  checked  under  the 
walls  of  Vienna.  He  blew  with  His  winds  and  dispersed  the  Spanish  Armada. 
Borodino,  Leipzig,  Trafalgar,  and  Waterloo  set  bounds  to  France  in  recent  times, 
and  Blenheim  and  Bamillies  in  days  gone  by.  Bunker's  HiU  put  an  end  to  British 
supremacy  in  the  older  American  colonies.  And  the  moral  purpose  of  God  in  the  allo- 
cation and  government  of  the  different  nations  was  a  special  one — "  That  they  should 
seek  theLord,  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  Him,  and  find  Him,  though  He  be  not  far 
VOL.  n.  89- 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvn, 

from  erery  one  of  us."  Why  do  nations  cease  to  be,  and  why  are  their  bounds  invaded 
and  broken  down  ?  Simply  because  they  do  not  own  or  follow  out  this  Divine 
purpose.  They  deify  themselves  and  forget  Him  who  is  above  them — Uve  but  for 
themselves,  and  "  feel  after  "  aggrandisement,  and  not  after  Him.  The  Canaanitea 
were  ripe  for  expulsion  on  the  invasion  of  Joshua,  and  so  were  the  Jews  themselves 
before  the  Roman  Titus.  The  liberties  of  Greece  had  been  struck  down  on  the  fatal 
field  of  Chseronea,  and  many  a  nation  has  been  dispossessed  of  its  soil.  No  people 
have  an  irrevocable  charter  to  it ;  they  possess  it  only  so  long  as  they  are  worthy 
of  it,  and  act  in  harmony  with  Him  who  planted  them  in  it.  And  they  are  displaced 
that  the  new  occupant  may  be  put  upon  its  trial,  too.  In  this  light  may  be  viewed 
those  conquests  which  are  establishing  modern  colonies— the  conqueror  in  turn  ia 
judged,  and  will,  if  God  decrees  it,  be  in  turn  exiled.  The  Anglo-Saxon  has 
driven  back  the  Celt  to  the  verge  of  the  Atlantic,  but  the  Sclave  may  be  com- 
missioned to  exercise  the  same  force  upon  the  Anglo-Saxon  if  he  do  not  service  aa 
God's  tenant  of  His  lands.  And  thus  God  shall  be  for  Britain,  so  long  as  Britain  ia 
for  God.     {Prof.  Eadie.) 

Ver.  27.  That  they  should  seek  the  Lord. — God  the  chief  object  of  search : — I. 
In  what  sense  is  it  tboe  that   God  is   not  fab  from  any  one  of  ds?    He  ia 

nigh 1.  In  the  creation  around  us.     2.  In  the  sense  of  creaturely  dependence 

and  trust.     3.  In  that  He  is  the  Being  towards  whom  the  soul  tends.      II.  In 
what  sense  does  man  feel  aftee  God  ?     1.  In  every  search  for  an  object  of  love 
there  is  a  groping  after  God.     2.  The  intense  longing  after  human  fellowship  ia 
feeling  after  God.    3.  So  there  is  in  the  instinct  of  acquisition.     4.  In  the  awful 
necessity  there  is  in  man  for  worship.     III.  Ant  cebtaintit  that  man  will  find 
Him?     1.  Sin  has  separated  both  man  and  God.     2.  Man  desired  not  to  retain 
God  in  His  knowledge.     3.  But  God  wants  to  find  man.    Witness — (1)  Incarna- 
tion.    (2)  Provision  for  the  new  birth.    IV.  Theee  is  necessity  laid  upon  evebt 
BOUL  TO  FIND  GoD.     No  matter  how  wise  and  cultured,  if  a  man  does  not  find  God, 
he  has  missed  the  object  of  existence.     (B.  M.  Palmer,  D.D.)        The  search  for 
God  and  its  satisfaction : — I.  God  made  man  to  seek  Him.     1.  Man  is  by  nature 
religious     No  one  ever  discovered  hght  or  invented  hearing ;  man  saw  because 
he  had  eyes  and  heard  because  he  had  ears.     And  religion  is  as  natural  as  either, 
because  as  native  and  essential.   Hence  man  gets  into  religion  as  into  other  natural 
things,  spontaneously.    But  to  get  out  of  it  he  has  to  reason  himseK  into  a  strange 
position.    No  man  is  an  atheist  by  nature,  only  by  art ;  and  an  art  that  has  to 
offer  to  nature  ceaseless  resistance.    The  atheist  does  not  escape  from  God,  only 
finds  am  ideal   substitute  for   Him.     2.  Religion  being  thus  native  to    man,  its 
being  is  as  old  as  his,  and — 3.  As  universal.    In  his  multitudinous  faiths  he  haa 
been  blindly  fulfilling  the  Divine  decree  to  seek  God.    From  this  point  of  view  the 
rehgions  of  the   world  have  a  most  touching  import ;   they  show  men  belated, 
stumbling  darkly  on,  impelled  by  his  Divine  home-sickness.     The  reUgions  of  man 
are  Uke  voices  which  say  ♦'  Come  over  and  help  us."     4.  The  nature  that  demands 
reUgion  responds  to  it.     We  know  how  bad  the  world  has  been  with  its  religions, 
but  what  would  it  have  been  without  them  ?    In  spite  of  their  falsities  they  have 
helped  man  to  Uve  his  little  hfe  to  the  measure  of  his  capacity.     It  and  it  alone 
has  been  able  to  hft  man  up  to  the  mountain  peak  of  the  Spirit.    But  if  religion  is 
the  point  where  man  touches  the  highest,  then  it  is  that  which  finds,  vivifies  and 
directs  the  best  that  is  in  him.     It  is  only  as  the  nature  which  has  come  from  God 
returns  to  Him  that  it  thinks  the  wisest,  does  the  noblest  and  becomes  the  best. 
II.  Religion  is   not  only  natobal  and  hecessaby  to  man,  but  also  to  peoples. 
When  a  people  has  the  noblest  conception  of  God  its  spirit  is  in  its  subhmest  and 
most  heroic  mood.    An  EngUsh  ambassador  sat  at  the  table  of  Frederick  the  Great, 
with  infidel  wits  who  were  making  sport  of  religion.     Suddenly  the  talk  changed 
to  war.     Said  the  long-silent  ambassador,  ''England  would  by  the  help  of  God 
stand  by  Prussia."     "  Ah  1  "  said  Frederick,  "  I  did  not  know  you  had  an  ally  of 
that  name."     "  So  please  your  Majesty,"  was  the  swift  retort,  "  He  is  the  only 
ally  to  whom  we  do  not  send   subsidies."      There   stood   the  truth   confessed. 
England's  best  ally  is  God.    A  sceptical  age  is  never  a  great  or  golden  age ;  nor 
an  infidel  people  a  noble  or  creative  people.     For  deed,  politics,  letters,  art,  religion 
is  a  necessity.     In  seeking  for  peoples  who  know  not  God,  our  philosophers  have 
to  go  to  cannibals.    III.  Since  bkligion  is  so  neoessaby,  the  hioheb  and  pcbkb 
the  BBLioioN,  thb  obeater  WILL   BE  ITS  POWEB   FOB  GOOD.     History  unfolds  a 
wonderfal  tale.     In  India  a  few  thousand  Englishmen  hold  empire  over  mor* 


«HAP.  rvn.]  THE  ACTS.  611 

than  two  hundred  millions  of  men.  Wealth  and  culture  came  to  the  Hindoos  ages 
before  they  came  to  us,  yet  how  with  that  long  start  do  they  and  we  now  respectively 
stand  ?  Why  has  the  Hindoo  declined  in  power  as  he  grew  in  multitude,  while 
the  late-bom  Saxon  has  "  widened  with  the  process  of  the  suns  "  ?  Because  the 
faith  of  the  one  grew  like  an  iron  band  round  his  spirit  full  of  consecrated  falsities, 
while  to  the  other  came  a  strong  yet  gentle  faith  which  breathed  into  him  a  purer 
spirit  and  nobler  aims.  So  while  the  Hindoo  feels  as  if  held  in  the  dread  bonds  of 
fate,  the  Saxon  knows  himself  a  son  of  God,  a  brother  of  man,  sent  to  make  earth 
happier  and  hoUer.  IV.  By  what  beligion  can  man  best  find  God  and  bealise 
THE  END  of  HIS  BEING.  Religious  may  be  divided  into  two  classes.  1.  Artificial 
or  fictitious  religions — those  of  the  individual  imagination  or  reason ;  "  ideal 
substitutes  for  religion."  To  this  class  belong — (1)  The  Eeligion  of  Nature,  that 
product  of  the  eighteenth  century,  which,  however,  was  neither  a  religion  nor  a 
thing  of  nature.  It  was  simply  a  speculative  system  so  named  that  it  might  better 
offend  Christianity.  It  never  was  professed  anywhere — save  by  its  makers,  who 
were  not  in  a  state  of  nature,  but  were  cultured  with  the  culture  of  the  Christian 
centuries.  This  attempt  to  give  us  Christianity  without  Christ  failed  utterly.  (2) 
The  attempt  of  Strauss  to  build  on  our  modem  physicism  a  faith  in  which  the 
universe  became  the  only  God.  But  man  can  only  love  the  good  and  trust  the 
right,  and  as  these  are  the  attributes  of  a  person,  Strauss  failed.  (3)  The  Comtist 
apotheosis  of  man.  But  worship  implies  reverence.  The  thinker  in  his  study, 
heir  of  a  splendid  inheritance,  may  well  feel  how  magnificent  are  the  gifts  of 
humanity ;  but  what  has  humanity  done  for  the  convict  or  the  miserable  victim  of 
lust  ?  The  religion  that  man  needs  is  not  one  that  can  delight  the  enlightened 
only,  but  one  that  can  save  the  lost.  2.  Eeal  religions — those  of  history  and  fact. 
These  may  be  divided  into — (1)  The  national  religions  of  the  past.  All  round  us 
lie  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  faiths  of  Egypt,  Phoenicia,  Greece,  Rome.  They  are  all 
dead,  to  revive  no  more :  supplanted  by  the  universal  and  unifying  faith  of  Christ. 
(2)  Turning  from  the  dead  past  to  the  Uving  present  we  have — (a)  Confucianism : 
but  its  prudential  wisdom  is  without  the  enthusiasm  of  humanity.  Look  at  it  as 
realised  in  the  people  so  quick-witted,  yet  so  stationary,  and  then  imagine  what  it 
would  be  were  the  world  an  immense  Chinese  Empire.  (6)  Brahminism — the  most 
awful  tyranny  of  custom  and  caste,  to  which  morality  is  unknown,  and  which  can 
deify  the  basest  as  easily  as  the  best.  Brahminism  universalised  could  only  mean 
man  depraved,  and  sent  wearily  to  wander  through  time  in  search  of  eternal  oblivion 
and  peace,  (c)  Buddhism,  numerically  the  mightiest  religion  in  the  world :  but  in 
spite  of  its  admirable  ethics,  a  religion  without  God  or  hope,  radicaUy  selfish,  and 
as  impotent  as  selfish,  {d)  Islam,  whose  religion  does  not  purify  the  home  and 
therefore  cannot  regenerate  the  race,  (e)  Judaism,  which  was  great  only  as  a 
prophetic  religion,  and  whose  life  for  the  past  eighteen  centuries  hus  been  but  a 
reminiscence.  3.  From  these  imperfect  faiths  let  us  turn  to  that  which  has  created 
the  civiUsation  and  noblest  moral  qualities  of  the  Western  world.  Study  it — (1)  As 
regards  its  ideal  contents.  Take  its  conception — fki)  Of  God.  Such  a  God  as  that 
of  Christianity,  an  eternal  Father  and  Sovereign,  infinite  personalised  love  and 
righteousness,  has  boundless  promise  of  good  and  hope  for  man.  (6)  Of  man.  The 
Christian  doctrines  of  man's  origin,  nature,  privilege  and  destiny  are  elevating  and 
ennobling  as  no  others  are.  (2)  As  regards  its  actual  achievements.  Look  around  ; 
you  confront  a  civilisation  that  in  its  high,  generous,  and  humane  elements  was 
created  by  Christianity ;  that  has,  to  all  its  ignoble  and  pernicious  elements,  in 
Christianity  a  merciless  foe.  It  has  changed  the  sinner  into  a  saint,  freed  the 
slave,  built  the  hospital  and  created  in  every  generation  a  noble  army  of  teachers,  \ 
reformers,  philanthjopists.  Conclusion  :  The  religion  of  Christ  is  the  one  religion  \ 
that  man  needs  ;  it  has  come  from  God  that  it  may  bring  to  God.  Here  lies  the  j 
secret  of  its  pre-eminence.  Others  have  risen  out  of  man's  search  for  God  ;  this  out  I 
of  God's  search  for  man.  {Principal  Fairbairn.)  Religious  nature,  and  religious  j 
character: — 1.  The  expression  "feel  after"  has  reference  to  what  they  as  God's  ' 
blind  offspring  were  doing;  and  "  find  Him,"  to  what  God,  never  afar  off,  wants  to 
have  them  do.  In  one  the  deep  longings  of  a  nature  made  for  God  and  religion  is 
recognised  ;  in  the  other  a  satisfied  state  of  holy  discovery  and  rest  in  God.  2  That 
reUgious  nature  and  character  should  be  distinguished  is  important  in  view  of  a 
great  rehgious  danger.  It  used  to  be  the  common  doctrine  that  sinful  man  had 
no  afiQnity  for  God,  had  only  an  anti-religious  nature,  and  that  nothing  could  be 
done  for  or  by  us  till  a  new  nature  was  given.  Now  piety  is  regarded  as  a  sort  of 
natural  taste,  and  multitudes  congratulate  themselves  on  being  better  Christians 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvn, 

than  there  used  to  be,  on  the  ground  of  mere  natural  sentiment,  because  bettei 
reformers,  &c.  Where  we  shall  be  stranded  in  this  shaUowing  process  is  too  evident. 
Christianity  wiU  be  coming  to  be  more  and  more  nearly  a  lost  fact,  and  a  vapid 
and  soulless  naturalism  wiE  take  its  place.  I.  What  is  it  to  have  a  bbligiodb 
KATUEE  ?  Nothing  more  nor  less  than  to  be  a  man,  a  being  made  for  God  and 
religion.  1.  We  are  so  made  as  to  want  God,  just  as  a  child  wants  father  and 
mother.  Our  nature  may  not  consciously  pine  after  God  as  an  orphan  for  its  lost 
parents  ;  yet  God  is  the  necessary  complement  of  all  its  feelings,  hopes,  satisfac- 
tions and  endeavours.  And  it  hungers  none  the  less  truly  that  it  stays  aloof  from 
Him  and  tries  to  forget  Him,  even  as  the  starving  madman  is  none  the  less 
hungry  that  he  refuses  to  eat.  2.  This  something  in  the  soul,  which  makes  God 
its  principal  and  first  want  includes  nearly  its  natural  everything.  It  feels  the 
beauty  of  God,  and  has  the  feeling  of  admiration  towards  Him.  Eeason  gets  no 
satisfaction  till  it  culminates  in  Him.  Even  fear  wants  to  come  and  hide  in  His 
bosom ;  and  guilt,  withering  under  His  frown,  would  only  frown  upon  Him  if  He 
were  not  exactly  just.  3.  Nor  are  these  things  less  true  under  the  perverting  effects 
of  depravity.  Human  nature  as  created  is  upright ;  as  born  or  propagated  a 
corrupted  or  damaged  nature,  but  however  much  so  it  has  the  original  Divine 
impress  upon  it.  The  religious  nature  stands  a  temple  still  for  God,  only  scarred 
and  blackened  by  the  brimstone  fires  of  evil.  4.  Denying  therefore  that  human 
nature  is  less  really  religious  because  depraved,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  there 
are  times  and  moods  in  which  it  will  be  exasperated  by  the  Divine  perfections — i.e., 
when  tormented  by  guilt  and  resolved  on  a  course  which  God  is  known  to  oppose. 
But  these  are  only  moods.  The  religious  nature  has  more  constant  than  perverse 
moods,  and  is  reaching  after  God  in  a  certain  way  of  natural  desire  aU  the  while. 
II.  What  it  is  to  have  a  eeligiods  chaeacteb.  1.  Mere  natural  desire,  want, 
sentiment  Godward  do  not  make  it.  What  does  it  signify  that  the  nature  is  feel- 
ing after  God  when  the  life  is  utterly  against  Him  ?  If  a  man  has  a  natural  sense 
of  honour  does  it  make  him  an  honourable  man  when  he  betrays  every  trust  ? 
Even  a  thief  may  have  a  good  sentiment  of  justice,  and  be  only  the  more  consciously 
guilty  because  of  it.  2.  To  answer  the  question  two  things  must  be  understood 
beforehand.  (1)  That  religious  character  is  more  than  and  different  from  natural 
character.  It  is  that  which  lies  in  choice,  and  for  which  we  are  thus  responsible. 
(2)  That  souls  are  made  for  God.  They  are  to  know  Him  and  be  conscious  of 
Him.  3.  Assuming  these  points  it  follows  that  man  is  never  in  religious  character 
tin  he  has  found  God,  and  that  he  will  never  find  Him  till  his  whole  voluntary 
nature  abandouing  its  own  ends  goes  after  Him  and  chimes  in  with  His  principles 
and  ends.  God  can  have  no  room  to  spread  Himself  in  the  soul  when  it  is  hug- 
ging itself.  III.  How  EASIIiT,  AND  IN  HOW  MANY  WAYS,  THE  W0EKIN08  OF  THE 
MEEELY   EEL1GI008     NATUBE     MAT   BE     CONFOUNDED    WITH     EELIOIODS     CHAEACTEB.         1. 

The  admiration  of  God's  beauty — what  is  it,  some  will  say,  but  love  ?  Even  the 
soul's  deep  throbs  of  want — what  are  they  but  its  hungerings  after  righteousness  ? 
And  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  religion  is  the  same  thing  as  mere  natural  sentiment ; 
and  the  feeling  after  God  substitutes  the  finding  God.  But  it  will  not  organise  a 
church,  or  raise  a  mission,  or  instigate  a  prayer.  It  is  exactly  the  religion  of  Herod, 
who  heard  John  gladly  and  then  murdered  him.  Pilate  had  the  same  religious 
nature,  felt  the  greatness  of  Jesus,  and  ended  in  giving  Him  up.  Fehx  had  the 
same  religion,  and  Agrippa,  and  Balaam  :  the  world  is  full  of  it — sensibihty  to  God 
and  truth,  coupled  with  a  practical  non-reception  of  all.  2.  It  results  accordingly 
that  there  are  always  two  kinds  of  religion ;  those  which  are  the  product  of  the 
religious  sentiment  more  or  less  blind,  and  those  which  look  to  regeneration  of 
character.  The  religion  of  the  Athenians  was  of  the  former  kind,  as  are  all 
idolatries.  What  an  appalling  proof  of  the  religions  nature  of  feeling  dimly  after 
God,  imagining  that  He  is  in  the  sun,  the  moon,  snakes,  beetlps,  &c.  Look  on 
these  and  see  how  man  feels  after  God  :  does  he  therefore  find  Him  ?  And  what 
but  hills  of  character  are  these  idolatries  ?  3.  Under  the  guise  of  Christianity  too  we 
may  distinguish  at  least  two  kinds  of  religion  corrupted  by  infusions  of  the  same  error. 
One  is  the  rehgion  of  forms,  where  the  soul  is  taken  by  them  as  a  matter  of  taste ; 
loves  to  play  reverence  under  them ;  the  other  is  a  religion  of  sentiment  fed  by 
reason :  feeling  after  God  in  the  beautiful  in  nature,  deUghted  with  Christ's  lessens 
of  natural  virtue ;  and  praising  Him  as  the  finest  of  all  great  men.  4.  Now  the 
true  gospel  is  that  which  brings  regenerative  power,  and  creates  the  soul  anew  in 
God's  image.  Any  religion  that  has  not  this  is,  bo  far,  a  mock  religion.  The  test 
question,  therefore,  is — have  I  found  God  in  my  rehgion  ?   The  life  of  Qod  in  the  sool 


CHAP.  XVII.]  THE  ACTS,  €13 

of  man — that  is  religious  character,  and  beside  that  there  is  none.  (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.) 
If  haply  they  might  feel  after  Him  and  find  Him. — Feeling  after  God. — Hassell, 
in  his  "From  Pole  to  Pole,"  quotes  the  following: — "A  company  of  baptized 
Greenlanders,"  says  Mr.  Crantz,  "  one  day  expressed  their  astonishment  that  they 
had  spent  their  hves  in  a  state  of  such  complete  ignorance  and  thoughtlessness. 
One  of  the  party  immediately  rose  up  and  spoke  as  follows  :  •  It  is  true  we  were 
ignorant  heathens,  and  knew  nothiug  of  God  and  a  Bedeemer  ;  for  who  could  have 
informed  us  of  their  existence  before  you  arrived?  Yet  I  have  often  thought  a 
rajak,  with  the  darts  belonging  to  it,  does  not  exist  of  itself,  but  must  be  made  with 
the  trouble  and  skill  of  men's  hands ;  and  he  who  does  not  understand  the  use  of  it 
easily  spoils  it.  Now  the  least  bird  is  composed  with  greater  art  than  the  best 
rajak,  and  no  man  can  make  a  bird.  Man  is  still  more  exquisitely  made  than  all 
other  animals.  Who  then  has  made  him  ?  He  comes  from  his  parents,  and  they 
came  again  from  their  parents.  But  whence  came  the  first  man  ?  He  must  have 
grown  out  of  the  earth.  But  why  do  men  not  grow  out  of  the  earth  nowadays  ? 
And  from  whence  do  the  earth,  sea,  sun,  and  stars  proceed  ?  There  must  neces- 
sarily be  some  one  who  has  created  everything,  who  has  always  existed,  and  can 
have  no  end.  He  must  be  inconceivably  more  powerful  and  skilful  than  the  wisest 
of  men.  He  must  also  be  very  good,  because  everything  that  He  has  made  is  so 
useful  and  necessary  for  us.  Did  I  but  know  Him,  what  love  and  respect  should  I 
feel  for  Him  1  But  who  has  seen  or  conversed  with  Him  ?  None  of  us  men.  Yet 
there  be  men,  too,  who  know  something  about  Him.  With  such  I  would  willingly 
converse.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  I  heard  from  you  of  this  Great  Being,  I  believed 
you  immediately  and  willingly,  having  for  a  length  of  time  longed  after  such  infor- 
mation.' "  The  parable  of  the  climbing  plants  : — 1.  The  jfirst  pecuharity  of  the 
climbing  plant  to  which  Mr.  Darwin  calls  our  attention  is  "  the  slow  revolution,  in 
a  larger  or  smaller  circle,  of  the  upper  extremities  in  search  of  a  support,"  and 
when  in  their  revolutions  they  are  brought  into  contact  with  some  firm  object,  they 
immediately  press  against  it  and  so  twine  round  it.  The  plant  cannot  stand  alone, 
and  it  begins  to  reach  out  after  support  just  as  soon  as  it  begins  to  grow.  Do  we 
not  witness  in  these  movements  an  analogy  of  the  outreachings  of  the  soul 
after  God  ?  The  soul  knows  that  it  cannot  thrive  alone,  that  it  needs  some  Power 
stronger  than  itself  to  cling  to ;  and  it  feels  after  it  if  haply  it  may  find  it.  Blindly, 
in  the  dark,  the  minds  of  men  grope  after  this  Object  of  their  faith.  It  is  not  the 
heathen  alone  who  have  this  experience.  You  know,  my  friend,  no  matter  how 
irreligious  your  life  may  have  been,  that  your  heart  is  often  yearning  for  a  good  you 
have  not  got ;  that  the  sense  of  helplessness  and  dependence  sometimes  takes 
strong  hold  of  you  and  forces  from  your  heart  the  cry  :  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I 
might  find  Him  and  lay  hold  upon  His  strength  1  "  2.  "  On  another  plant,"  says 
Mr.  Darvrin,  •♦  three  pairs  of  tendrils  were  produced  at  the  same  time  by  three  shoots, 
and  all  happened  to  be  differently  directed.  I  placed  the  pot  in  a  box  open  only  on 
one  side  and  obliquely  facing  the  light ;  in  two  days  aU  six  tendrils  pointed  with 
anerring  truth  to  the  darkest  corner  of  the  box,  though  to  do  this  each  had  to  bend 
in  a  different  manner."  The  tendril  is  seeking  an  object  to  cling  to,  the  Ught 
coming  freely  from  one  side  shows  that  no  object  is  there,  so  the  tendrils  turn  in 
the  other  direction ;  support  is  nearest  on  the  side  where  the  shadow  is.  But  how 
does  this  prefigure  our  spiritual  relation  to  God  ?  God  is  light ;  true,  but  clouds 
and  darkness  are  the  habitation  of  His  throne.  When  it  is  said  that  in  Him  is  no 
darkness  at  aU,  the  darkness  is  moral ;  there  is  in  Him  no  deceit,  insincerity, 
hatred.  His  character  is  light,  but  there  are  many  things  about  His  nature  thai 
are  dark  to  ns.  And  it  is  precisely  His  transcendent  greatness  that  our  trust  lays 
hold  upon.  We  want  a  Power  to  cling  to  whose  greatness  we  cannot  compass  with 
our  thought.  A  God  whom  we  could  comprehend  we  could  not  fully  trust.  And 
80  it  is  that  oar  faith  turns  away  from  the  garish  light  of  human  wisdom  toward 
the  unfathomed  depths  of  Deity.  There  is  another  resemblance  here.  The  dark- 
ness is  a  symbol  of  God's  infinity,  of  the  veiling  of  His  nature  from  our  sight.  But 
it  is  only  by  the  help  of  shadows  that  we  see.  Look  directly  at  the  sun  and  you 
can  see  nothing.  It  ia  when  your  back  is  turned  to  the  sun  that  you  see  most 
clearly.  Our  faith,  like  the  tendrils,  turns  not  only  toward  the  darkness  that  hides 
God's  infinity,  but  also  toward  the  shadow  because  in  that  something  of  His  nature 
is  visible.  The  shadow  not  only  conceals,  it  also  discloses.  You  cannot  conceive 
of  absolute  deity.  Your  mind  is  dazzled  when  you  look  God  in  the  face,  just  as 
your  eyes  are  dazzled  when  you  look  on  the  sun.  And  men  have  always  found  it 
necessary  to  learn  what  God  is  by  looking  toward  the  shadows  and  the  types  which 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

He  has  given  us.  The  Incarnation  is  God  in  the  shadow.  Our  faith  finds  some- 
thing here  that  we  can  take  hold  of  and  cling  to.  3.  "  Knowing,"  says  Mr.  Darwin, 
"  that  the  tendrils  avoided  the  light,  I  gave  them  a  glass  tube  blackened  within, 
and  a  well  blackened  zinc  plate ;  but  they  soon  recoiled  from  these  objects  with 
what  I  can  only  call  disgust,  and  straightened  themselves."  Here  we  have  not  a 
likeness,  but  a  contrast.  Full  often  the  tendrils  of  our  desire  fasten  upon  that 
which  defiles  us ;  and  the  faith  that  ought  to  bind  us  fast  to  God's  righteousness 
and  power  is  entwined  about  some  grovelling  superstition  or  some  ensnaring  sin. 
4.  "  When  a  tendril,"  says  our  teacher  again,  "has  not  succeeded  in  clasping  a 
support,  either  through  its  own  revolving  movement  or  that  of  the  shoot,  or  by 
turning  toward  any  object  that  intercepts  the  light,  it  bends  vertically  downwards 
and  then  toward  its  own  stem,  which  it  seizes,  together  with  the  supporting  stick, 
if  there  be  one."  So  when  our  spiritual  instincts  that  reach  out  naturally  after 
God  and  goodness  do  not  lay  hold  on  their  normal  support,  they,  too,  are  very  apt 
to  turn  downward  and  inward,  and  to  lay  hold  upon  that  self  which  it  was  their 
true  function  to  bind  to  a  firm  support.  And  when  this  is  done  the  affections  are 
apt  to  be  turned  backward  upon  self ;  the  man  comes  to  believe  only  in  himself  and 
to  worship  himself,  aud  the  character  that  is  developed  is  a  most  unlovely  product 
of  egotism  and  selfishness.  5.  "  If  the  tendril  seizes  nothing,"  says  this  naturalist, 
"  it  soon  withers  away  and  drops  off."  It  is  possible  thus,  by  simple  neglect,  to 
destroy  that  part  of  our  nature  by  which  we  take  hold  upon  God.  1  he  extinction 
of  the  faith-faculty  is  a  possible  calamity,  and  it  is  the  direst.  How  can  the  climb- 
ing plant  cling  when  the  tendrils  have  withered  and  dropped  off  ?  It  must  thence- 
forth grovel  in  the  dirt  and  be  trodden  under  foot  of  men.  And  how  can  the  soul 
lift  itself  up,  when  all  the  faculties  by  which  it  takes  hold  on  God  have  fallen  into 
decay  ?  6.  Let  us  hear  Mr.  Darwin  again  :  "  Tendrils,  soon  after  catching  a 
Bupijort,  grow  much  stronger  and  thicker  and  durable,  and  this  shows  how  much 
their  internal  tissues  must  be  changed.  Occasionally  it  is  the  part  which  is  wound 
round  a  support  which  chiefly  becomes  thicker  and  stronger."  Is  not  this,  also, 
true  in  the  higher  realm  ?  The  instincts  of  the  soul  that  feel  after  God  are  wonder- 
fully strengthened  when  they  find  Him,  and  take  bold  of  His  power.  Faith  grows 
by  exercise.  7.  "The  tendril  strikes  some  object,"  Mr.  Darwin  proceeds,  "and 
firmly  grasps  it.  In  the  course  of  some  hours  it  contracts  into  a  spire,  dragging  up 
the  stem  and  forming  an  excellent  spring.  All  movements  now  cease.  By  growth, 
the  tissues  soon  become  wonderfully  strong  and  durable."  The  very  character  and 
quality  of  tbe  tendrils  themselves  are  changed  as  they  thus  fasten  upon  their 
support,  and  perform  the  function  to  which  nature  has  assigned  them.  And  so  it 
is  with  these  spiritual  faculties  of  ours  by  which  we  lay  hold  upon  God.  Our  trust, 
instead  of  being  a  tender  and  fragile  thing,  grows  firm  aud  strong  and  holds  us  fast 
to  the  throne  of  God  with  a  grasp  that  the  shocks  of  change  cannot  break  nor  the 
storms  of  adversity  loosen.  8.  Once  more,  "  The  tendrils  and  internodes  of 
Ampelopsis  have  little  or  no  power  of  revolving ;  the  tendrils  are  but  little  sensitive 
to  contact ;  their  hooked  extremities  cannot  seize  their  objects  ;  they  will  not  even 
clasp  a  stick  unless  in  extreme  need  of  support ;  but  they  turn  from  the  hght  to  the 
dark,  and,  spreading  out  their  branches  in  contact  with  any  nearly  flat  surface, 
develop  discs.  These  adhere  by  the  secretion  of  some  cement  to  a  wall  or  even  to 
a  polished  surface.  The  rapid  development  of  these  adherent  discs  is  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  peculiarities  possessed  by  any  tendril."  I  cannot  help  seeing  in 
this  an  analogy  of  that  phenomenon  of  the  spiritual  hfe  which  we  so  often  witness, 
by  which  those  natures  which  have  but  little  power  of  comprehending  religious 
truth — of  reaching  round  it  and  getting  hold  of  it  by  their  understanding — do  yet 
lay  hold  upon  it  in  a  way  of  their  own,  and  hold  fast  to  it  very  firmly  too.  There 
are  Christians  whose  faith  does  not  seem  to  need  the  leading  strings  of  logic  or 
theology,  but  mounts  right  up  by  its  own  sure-footed  intuition.  And  it  is  a  blessed 
thing  that  those  to  whom  the  paths  of  philosophy  are  thorny,  and  the  steeps  of 
epeculation  hard  to  cHmb,  may  thus,  by  a  simple  and  direct  confidence  in  the  Christ 
Himself,  who  is  to  all  who  receive  Him  the  Way  and  the  Truth  and  the  Life, 
ascend  to  the  serene  and  tranquil  heights  of  virtue.  (Washington  Gladden,  D.D.) 
Though  He  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us. — Not  far  from  any  one  ofxu : — This  is  the 
leading  thought  which  the  gospel  presses  home  upon  us  in  various  ways.  1.  In 
His  Son  Jesus  Christ  God  has  drawn  near  to  the  world.  2.  The  Holy  Spirit's  abode 
in  the  heart  of  the  Christian  brings  God  near.  3.  But  Paul  speaks  of  God's 
presence  in  nature.  I.  Distinguish  between  the  revelation  of  God  thbouoh 
MTDUE  AND  IN  TU£  ScBiPTOBBs.     1.  The  revelatioD  in  nature  is  the  elder  and  more 


«HAP  xrn.]  TEE  ACTS.  615 

direct,  that  in  Scripture  the  later  and  more  mediate.  2.  God  speaks  to  us  by 
nature  in  an  inarticulate ;  by  Scripture  in  an  articulate  voice.  "  Nature  is  very 
beautiful,  but  she  is  so  unresponsive."  3,  Nature  speaks  more  to  our  feelings  and 
imagination.  Scripture  more  to  our  understanding.  II.  Note  some  op  thb 
TOKENS  IN  NATURE  OF  GoD.  1.  Its  effect  upou  the  senses  as  an  evidence  of  Divine 
goodness.  2.  Its  effect  upon  the  emotions  giving  exquisite  pleasure  and  evoking 
gratitude  towards  the  unseen  worker.  3.  Its  effect  upon  the  imagination  producing 
the  consciousness  of  the  presence  of  a  mind  sympathetic  with  our  own.  4.  Its 
effect  upon  the  reason  reveaUng  besides  God  immortality,  and  creating  a  sense  of 
Bin.     III.  But  nature  can  only  suggest  to  us  those   truths   which   we   need 

FOR   OUR   peace   AND   SALVATION,    FOR  THEIR  FULL  EXHIBITION   WE    MUST   TURN   TO   THB 

Bible.  (E.  Johnson,  M. A.)  The  nearness  of  God: — God  is  not  far  from  every 
one  of  us.  I.  In  the  nature  and  aspirations  of  the  soul.  "  We  are  also  His 
offspring."  "  We  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto  gold  or  silver 
or  stone  graven  by  art  and  man's  device."  The  art  of  the  sculptor  may  grave  an 
exact  resemblance  of  the  human  body,  but  cannot  make  a  similitude  of  the  soul. 
And  it  is  in  the  soul  that  our  child  likeness  to  God  is  found.  He  who  is  the  Father 
of  our  spirits  must  be  Himself  a  spirit.  And  that  our  spirits  are  endowed  with 
reason,  affection  and  will,  suggests  the  conception  of  a  supreme  intelligence,  affec- 
tion. The  same  is  true  of  our  moral  endowments.  Our  sense  of  right  and  wrong 
(Eom.  ii.  15)  points  upward  to  a  Being  of  absolute  truth  and  holiness.  And  so  also 
the  desires  of  our  souls  are  indications  of  a  Being  in  whose  love  we  may  find 
absolute  repose,  and  from  whose  resources  all  our  spiritual  wants  may  be  supplied. 
The  offspring  bear  the  hkeness  of  the  universal  Father.  It  is  His  witness,  His  im- 
print and  the  mark  of  our  Divine  paternity  ;  "  in  which  He  is  not  far  from  every 
one  of  us. "  II.  In  His  essential  presence.  He  is  omnipresent  in  His  authority 
and  influence,  as  a  king  in  all  his  dominions.  But  His  presence  is  not  only  influ- 
ential, it  is  actual.  "  In  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being."  He  is  God 
"  above  all  and  through  aU  and  in  you  all."  "  He  fills  heaven  and  earth."  This 
universal  and  actual  presence  of  God  is,  according  to  Scripture,  the  source  of  His 
perfect  knowledge.  There  is  no  doubt  a  sublime  mystery  in  this  conception.  But 
I  can  just  as  readily  conceive  of  an  infinite  spirit  filling  immensity  as  of  a  finite 
spirit  filling  my  own  body.  Nor  is  there  any  kinship  between  this  Divine  omni- 
presence and  Pantheism.  There  is  a  world-wide  difference  between  saying  that 
God  is  everywhere,  and  saying  that  everything  is  part  of  God.  The  one  degrades, 
the  other  exalts  Him.  The  one  is  the  foundation  of  all  idolatry ;  the  other  lies  at 
the  base  of  all  true  worship  and  of  all  true  religion.  Let  a  man  realise  that  he  can 
never  be  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  him,  and  the  sublime  thought  will  restrain 
him  from  sin,  and  just  in  proportion  as  he  apprehends  God's  wisdom,  power  and  love, 
it  will  fill  his  heart  with  confidence  and  his  Ups  with  prayer,  and  undergird  his  whole 
being  with  Divine  strength.  III.  In  the  daily  workings  of  BLis  providence.  He 
has  *•  never  left  Himself  without  a  witness  "  to  His  universal  presence.  His  sun 
shining  alike  upon  the  evil  and  the  good ;  all  the  revolutions  and  order  of  the 
material  universe,  and  all  the  mysterious  influences  which  hold  human  society 
together,  bear  a  perpetual  testimony  to  the  presence  and  goodness  of  God.  It  is 
true  that  men  do  not  always  hear  this  testimony,  and  that  when  they  hear  it  they 
often  misinterpret  and  pervert  it.  It  is  easy  for  us  to  attribute  all  these  things  to 
the  operation  of  second  causes,  and  even  to  worship  the  things  that  are  seen,  and 
it  is  no  less  easy  to  attribute  them  all  to  the  blind  operation  of  natural  law,  and  to 
exclude  all  thought  of  an  intelligent  lawgiver.  But  after  all  there  is  in  the  soul  of 
man  an  intuitive  perception  of  God  and  longing  after  Him.  "  For  He  has  made 
of  one  blood,"  Ac,  i.e.,  He  so  constitutes  their  common  nature  "  that  they  should  seek 
the  Lord,"  &c.  And  it  is  to  this  common  religious  nature  which  feels  after  God 
that  the  Scriptures  constantly  appeal.  IV.  As  our  Judge.  The  incompleteness 
and  the  disorders  of  the  present  life  all  point  forward  to  retribution  beyond  the 
grave.  Conscience  warns  us  of  it.  Hope  aspires  to  it.  Fear  shrinks  back  from  it. 
And  who  shall  determine  that  destiny  for  us  but  the  God  in  whose  hands  our  breath 
is  and  whose  are  all  our  ways  ?  And  how  near  judgment  is  1  There  is  but  a  hand- 
breath  between  us  and  death  and  the  tremendous  realities  which  it  will  reveal  to 
ns.  The  Judge  standeth  at  the  door.  Our  character  will  be  determined,  and  our 
condition  will  be  fixed  by  God  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being.  V. 
In  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  and  in  all  the  means  of  grace  and  salta- 
tion. Here  it  is  that  revealed  religion  comes  in  to  supplement  and  give  efficacy  to 
the  teaching  of  natural  religion.    (H,  J.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.)        Qod'»  nearnest  U 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rra. 

man  : — 1.  In  relation  to  this  truth  our  race  may  be  divided  into  five  classes — 1.  Those 
who  enjoy  His  presence,  like  the  Psalmist,  who  said,  "  When  I  am  awake  I  am  still 
with  Thee."     2.  Those  who  are  stolidly  insensible  of  His  presence,  like  those 
described  by  Paul  in  Eph.  ii.  12  as  being  "without  God  and  without  hope  in  the 
world."    3.  Those  who  are  in  horrific  dread  of  His  presence,  like  those  of  Job  xxi. 
14.   "  Depart !  " — this  is  the  unceasing  cry  of  hell.     4.  Those  who  are  in  earnest 
Bearch  of  His  presence  (Job  xxiii.  3).    This  class  comprehends  all  earnest  inquirers. 
6.   Those  who  theoretically  deny  His  presence  (Job  xxii.  12,  13).      But    these 
different  opinions  and  feelings  do  not  alter,  even  to  the  shadow  of  a  shade,  the  fact 
thai  God  is  near.     The  earth  sweeps  her  majestic  course  around  the  sun,  though 
all  the  priests  of  Eome   deny  the   fact  of    her  motion.      God  is — I.    LociXLT 
NEAK  (Jer.  xxiii.  24).     An  absolute  existent  has  no  relation  to  time  or  place.     No 
metapliysics  can  explain,  no  finite  thought  comprehend,  how  He  can  be  equally 
present  in  all  places  at  the  same  time  ;  but  the  denial  of  it  involves  philosophical 
contradictions,  undeifies   God,  and  contravenes  the  plainest  and  the    sublimest 
teachings  of  inspiration.     Then — 1.  All  men  should  live  under  a  constant  impres- 
sion of  His  presence.     2.  All  attempts  at  secrecy  in  sin  are  to  the  last  degree  futile 
and  absurd.     3.  Death  can  effect  no  local  separation  of  the  soul  from  God.    II. 
Belationallt  neab.     He  is  the  nearest  relation  we  have.     He  is  our  Sovereign, 
overruling  all  things  pertaining  to  us  and  our  history ;  our  Father,  our  Creator, 
who  has  made  every  particle  of  our  being ;  our  Proprietor,  our  Life.     We  cannot 
move  a  muscle,  breathe  a  breath,  think  a  thought,  feel  an  emotion,  without  Him. 
"  In  Him  we  live  and  move,  and  have  our  being."    Two  truths  are  inferable  from 
His  relational  nearness.     1.  That  the  necessity  of  the  Atonement  cannot  be  satis- 
factorily argued,  to  thinking   minds,  on  the  remote  relationship  of  God  as  the 
Governor  of  man.    2.  That  the  preservation  of  man's  perfect  freedom  of  moral 
action  is  very  wonderful.     Whilst  He  moves  us,  we  are  morally  free  in  moving. 
The  how  of  this  is  the  problem  with  which  all  thoughtful  ages  have  wrestled  hard, 
«nd  to  this  hour  it  remains  unsolved.     I  feel  that  1  am  free,  and  no  argument  can 
destroy  this  feeling.     III.  Sympathetically  near.     How  close  is  the  heart  of  a 
mother  to  her  babe  I    But  we  are  nearer  to  the  heart  of  God  than  the  babe  to  the 
heart  of  that  mother.     *'  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,"  &o.     There  are 
three  things  that  show  the  nearness  of  His  heart  to  us.     1.  His  distinguishing 
goodness  in  the  creation  of  our  existence.     He  has  given  us  greater  capacities  for 
happiness  than  He  has  to  any  other  creatures  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge. 
Sensuous,  intellectual,  social,  and  religious  enjoyments  are  ours.     2.  His  wonderful 
forbearance  in  the  preservation  of  our  existence.     We  are    rebels    against   His 
government  as  fallen  creatures,  yet  how  He  forbears  (Hos.  ii.  8).    8.  His  infinite 
mercy  in  the  redemption  of  our  existence.     Here  is  the  climax  of  love.     "  God  so 
loved  the  world,"  &c.     Conclusion  :   It  is  true  that  the  heart-searching  God  is  thus 
near  us?     1.  Then  our  indifference  is  more  anomalous  than  the  conduct  of  him 
who  lies  dowij  to  sleep  upon  the  bosom  of  a  burning  volcano.    2.  Then  how  pre- 
posterous and  wicked  is   hypocrisy.     3.   Then   ceremonialists,    why   be   so   par- 
ticular about  the  rituals,  the  places,  and  the  times  of  worship  ?     "  God  is  a  Spirit." 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         Realising  God's  nearness  : — We  are  said  to  be,  known  to  be, 
nearer  to  the  sun  in  winter  than  in  summer.    But  the  increased  swiftness  of  the 
earth's  motion  in  its  orbit,  together  with  the  inclination  of  the  axis  in  the  same, 
prevents  the  increase  of  heat  that  otherwise  would  be  inevitable.     The  surface  of 
the  earth  on  this  account  is  so  much  less  time  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays,  and  so 
obliquely  that  the  heat  is  diminished  by  the  nearness.    Just  so,  the  world  may  be 
nearer  to  God  in  position,  by  providential  advantages,  opportunities,  and  in  specu- 
lative Divine  knowledge,  nearer,  and  yet  farther  from  God's  love,  less  affected  by 
His  mercy,  less  warmed  and  quickened  by  His  light.     So  it  may  be  with  an  indi- 
vidual heart.     One  man  may  really  be  farther  from  God  in  position  than  another, 
and  yet  have  a  sommer  season  in  his  soul ;  while  the  other,  though  nearer  in 
point  of  every  advantage  and  opportunity,  may  remain  in  the  dead  of  winter.    The 
climate  of  the  soul  does  not  depend  so  much  upon  the  nearness  and  abundance  of 
the  rays,  ii  it  ia  flying  swiftly  through  them,  and  obliquely  turned  from  them,  but 
upon  the  steadiness  and  constancy  with  which  they  are  received  by  a  heart  tamed 
directly  towards  them.    Looking  steadily  to  Christ  is  the  condition  of  light  and  life. 
(W.  Cheever.)         God's  nearness  to  man:  effects  of  tlie  consciousness  of: — Two  men 
are  walking  upon  the  same  plain,  and  each  turns  his  face  towards  the  sky.     The 
light  of  the  sun  is  shining  upon  both,  but  one  sees  no  sun,  while  the  other  sees  not 
only  light,  but  the  face  of  the  sun,  and  his  eye  is  overpowered  with  its  glory.    What 


OTAP.  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  617 

makes  the  difference  between  the  two?  Not  that  one  is  in  darkness,  and  the  other 
in  light ;  not  that  one  is  near  the  sun,  and  the  other  far  away  ;  not  that  one  has  an 
eye  differently  constituted  from  the  other ;  but  simply  that  there  is  a  thin  cloud 
between  heaven  and  the  one,  and  no  cloud  between  it  and  the  other.  The  latter 
can  not  only  trace  evidence  that  there  is  a  sun,  and  that  he  is  up,  but  has  the 
presence  of  that  sun  before  his  face,  and  his  glory  filling  his  eye.  So  two  men 
stand  in  relation  to  the  universal  and  all-present  God.  One  believes,  infers,  intel- 
lectually knows,  that  He  is  ;  ay,  that  He  is  present ;  yet  he  discerns  Him  not :  it  ia 
a  matter  of  inference,  not  of  consciousness  ;  and  though  believing  that  God  is,  and 
that  He  is  present,  he  sins.  Another  spiritually  discerns,  feels  His  presence ;  and 
he  will  "  stand  in  awe,  and  sin  not."    {W.  Arthur,  M.A.) 

Ver.  28.  In  Him  we  live  and  moTe,  and  have  onr  being. — In  Him  we  live  and 
move,  and  have  our  being : — I.  Wbonq  views  of  the  natdeb  of  God  lib  at  the 
FOUNDATION  OF  Aii  FALSE  THEOBiES  OF  EELiGioN. — These  are — 1.  That  He  is  a 
limited  Being,  dwelling  in  temples,  receiving  gifts  from  man.  This  was  the  popular 
notion  here  combated.  2.  That  He  is  an  infinite  Being,  but  removed  from  us ; 
the  Creator,  but  not  the  Moral  Governor.  3.  That  He  is  the  only  Being,  all  that  ia 
being  merely  phenomena  of  Him ;  so  that  there  is  no  separate  existence,  no  self- 
activity,  responsibihty,  sin,  holiness,  or  hereafter.  H.  The  true  doctrine  hebb 
TAUGHT.  1,  That  God  is  a  personal  Being,  distinct  from  the  world ;  its  Creator 
and  Preserver.  2.  That  He  is  not  far  from  any  one  of  us,  but  is  everywhere 
present,  beholding,  directing,  controlling  all  things ;  a  Being  on  whom  we  are 
dependent  and  to  whom  we  are  responsible.  3.  That  our  dependence  upon  Him  ia 
absolute  for  being,  life,  and  activity,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  consistent  with 
separate  existence,  liberty,  and  accountability.  lU.  These  are  the  fixed  points  in 
Paul's  theism.  How  are  these  points  to  be  understood?  1.  By  the  reason. 
The  problem  to  be  solved  is  how  the  omnipresent  agency  of  the  First  Cause  stands 
related  to  the  phenomenal  world.  (1)  The  most  natural  solution  is  the  pantheistic, 
(a)  Because  it  is  the  simplest  and  most  intelligible,  {b)  Because  it  has  been  the 
eolution  most  generally  received.  Brahm  was  the  universal  substance  of  which  all 
things  are  the  manifestation.  This  principle  underlay  the  nature-worship  of  the 
Egyptians,  and  was  the  esoteric  faith  of  the  higher  Greek  philosophers,  and  of  the 
Alexandrian  school.  It  reappears  among  the  schoolmen,  and  is  the  popular  faith 
of  many  modern  teachers.  (2)  The  rebound  from  this  extreme  is  Deism — a  God 
extra  mundane,  but  indifferent  to  any  efficiency  of  His  in  the  events  of  the  world. 
2.  By  the  intuitions  of  our  moral  and  rehgious  nature  as  enlightened  by  the 
Scriptures.  (1)  That  all  existence  is  from  and  in  God.  (2)  That  all  life  is  from 
Him  and  in  Him,  and — (3)  All  activity,  so  far  that  unsustained  by  Him  no  second 
cause  could  act.  IV.  From  all  this  it  follows — 1.  That  we  are  always  most 
near  God.  This  presence  is  one  of  knowledge,  power,  approval,  or  disapprobation. 
2.  That  we  are  thus  dependent  for  natural,  intellectual,  and  spiritual  life,  3,  That 
this  consensus  of  the  human  and  Divine  is  according  to  fixed  laws,  which  are,  how- 
ever,  under  the  control  of  a  personal  God,  who  can  suspend  them  at  wiU.  If  we 
recognise  these  laws,  and  act  according  to  them,  we  experience  their  normal 
working,  we  become  more  and  more  recipients  of  the  life  of  God.  If  we  transgiess 
them  the  opposite  result  is  unavoidable.  4,  That  as  our  whole  being  and  blessed- 
ness is  dependent  on  keeping  the  true  relation  to  God,  we  should  be  ever  on  our 
guard  against  violating  His  laws ;  in  all  things  acting  in  accordance  with  His  will, 
feeling  our  dependence  and  obligation,  rendering  Him  trust,  gratitude,  and  love, 
6.  Under  all  circumstances  we  are  ever  in  contact  vrith  the  infinite  source  of  know- 
ledge, being,  and  blessedness ;  but  the  wicked  are  always  in  contact  with  Him  as  a 
consuming  fire.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  In  Him  we  live  and  move,  and  have  our 
being  : — In  Him — -I.  We  live.  Apart  from  Him  our  life  would  decay,  and  be  ex- 
tinguished aa  a  fame  which  had  been  suddenly  deprived  of  its  sustaining  element. 
II.  We  movb.  Apart  from  Him  we  are  not  only  inert  and  helpless,  but  not  even 
Buch  movement  as  sustains  the  life  of  plants  would  be  possible  for  us.  HI.  Wb 
«AVE  ouB  beinvj.  In  Him  we  are ;  apart  from  Him  we  should  not  only  cease  to  be 
what  we  are,  but  we  should  cease  to  be  at  all ;  it  is  only  the  hand  of  God  that 
interposes  between  us  and  annihilation.  {W.  L.  Alexander.)  In  God: — Let  ua 
apply  Paul's  doctrine  to — I.  The  world  of  matter.  We  are  embosomed  by  mighty 
forces  which  we  regard  merely  as  God's  instruments.  But  science  comes  forward 
-9A  God's  interpreter,  and  indicates  with  Sir  John  Herschel  the  force  of  gravitation, 
e.;.,  aa  the  energy  of  an  omnipresent  will.    Again,  we  speak  of  "  dead  matter,"  but 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

science  takes  the  ultimate  atoms  which  chemistry  deals  with,  so  tiny  that  no 
microscope  can  detect  tbem,  and  gives  them  free  room  to  move  about  in — the  ten 
millionth  part  of  the  twenty-fifth  of  an  inch  apiece,  and  shows  them  jostling  each 
other  with  ceaseless  activity,  even  in  the  block  of  stone  and  the  bar  of  steel ;  and 
according  to  Jevons  each  one  of  these  airy  atoms  is  probably  a  vastly  more  compli- 
cated system  than  that  of  the  planets  and  their  satellites.  But  according  to  Fara- 
day and  Boscovitch  an  atom  is  a  mere  centre  of  force.  When  we  have  analysed  it 
into  its  elementary  constituents  it  is  alive  with  energies  inconceivably  subtle.  And 
all  this  force  is  the  immediate  energy  of  the  omnipresent  Creator.  "  Matter  is  force 
and  force  is  mind,"  says  science.  So  says  Scripture.  "  By  the  Word  of  the  Lord 
were  the  heavens  made."  This  solid  frame  is,  in  its  inmost  essence,  nothing  but  a 
form  of  the  thought  of  God.  II.  The  human  body.  1.  Let  us  see  how  the  same 
Divine  force  holds  our  physical  frame  together.  Five-sixths  of  it  is  water,  a 
creature  of  that  form  of  force  called  chemical  affinity.  Each  molecule  is  a  com- 
pound of  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  and  one  of  oxygen.  But  for  the  constant  action  of 
this  Divine  force  holding  the  gaseous  element  in  unyielding  combination  our  bodies 
would  become  a  form  of  matter  as  invisible  as  air.  Besides  this  the  processes  of 
growth  and  repair  are  carried  on  unrestingly  by  this  same  chemical  energy  of  God 
ever  gluing  atom  to  atom  in  blood,  skin,  and  bone,  &c.,  under  the  direction  of  the 
master  workman  we  call  Life,  in  whose  skill  we  see  the  Divine  intelligence  of  Him 
in  whom  we  live  and  who  renews  our  substance  day  by  day.  2.  And  it  is  wonderful 
how  much  God  does  and  how  Little  we  do.  We  breathe  because  we  cannot  help  it. 
From  a  sort  of  electric  battery  of  cells  in  the  head  there  streams  along  the  nerves  a 
current  of  divine  force,  which  works  the  muscles  of  respiration,  even  in  spite  of  the 
utmost  effort  of  will  to  hold  the  breath.  We  eat  and  drink,  but  it  is  merely  as  the 
servant  who  opens  the  house  door  to  receive  supplies.  The  nerve  current  supplies 
the  digestive  apparatus  with  power  to  convert  food  into  flesh,  and  works  the  central 
force-pump  which  carries  to  every  part  of  the  system  its  due  supply.  What  if  it 
were  dependent  on  us  to  keep  the  heart  beating  ?  And  again,  in  every  movement 
and  utterance  all  we  do  is  by  our  will  to  set  free  the  quasi  electric  force  which  is  in 
us,  but  is  not  ours,  by  which  the  appropriate  muscles  are  contracted  and  our  will 
accomplished.  "In  Him  we  move."  But  a  large  part  of  our  experience  is 
passive.  Hot  and  cold,  bitter  and  sweet,  light  and  dark,  &c.  What  are  we  to  all 
these  phases  of  surrounding  force  but  a  harp  of  so  many  strings  responding  to  the 
lingers  of  God  in  Nature  ?  And  then  these  outward  touches  of  the  Divine  fingers 
woke  other  powers.  The  pain  of  fire  and  the  recoil  of  the  flesh  are  independent  of 
our  will,  and  the  operation  of  a  wiU  not  our  own.  So  again  with  our  instincts ; 
their  automatic  power  is  the  immediate  energy  of  the  God  in  whom  we  live.  III. 
The  mind.  Our  thinking  is  done  by  means  of  the  brain,  as  our  lifting  is  done  by 
means  of  the  muscles.  In  either  case  we  simply  press  the  key.  The  Divine  current 
of  power  flows  according  to  the  measure  of  the  door  we  open,  whether  it  be  narrow 
in  the  case  of  the  peasant  or  wide  in  that  of  the  philosopher.  IV.  The  bodl. 
♦'  We  are  His  offspring."  His  ever-flowing  stream  it  is  which  fills  the  tiny  pools  of 
our  existence.  We  think ;  but  all  the  truth  we  think  is  His.  Our  discoveries  are 
His  revelations.  We  desire  ;  but  our  aspirations  are  God's  inspirations.  We  pray ; 
but  prayer  is  the  circulation  of  His  Spirit  through  us  and  to  Him  again.  Ours  ia 
the  joy  of  doing  good,  but  it  is  one  with  the  joy  of  God  in  goodness ;  ours  the  pain 
of  doing  ill,  but  it  is  the  resistance  of  God  within  us  to  evU.  (J.  M.  Whiton, 
Ph.D.)  Our  being  in  God  : — 1.  Where  is  God  ?  Ye  wiU  answer,  "  In  heaven." 
True.  Our  Lord  teaches  us  to  pray,  "  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven  "  ;  and  what 
child  would  not  long  to  be  where  its  father  was?  Here  on  earth  we  cannot  see 
God.  In  heaven  He  is  seen  in  His  glory.  2.  But  is  God  confined  to  heaven  ? 
Many  think  of  Him  so,  and  many  wish  so,  in  order  that  He  might  give  no  heed  to 
them  and  their  ways.  But  God  says,  "  Do  I  not  fill  heaven  and  earth  T  "  The 
eternity  of  God  contains  all  time ;  the  being  of  God,  all  being  ;  the  infinity  of  God, 
all  space.  If  we  could  see  Him  here  as  fully  as  the  angels,  this  too  would  be 
heaven.  Yet  **  God  is  everywhere  wholly,  and  yet  the  whole  of  Him  is  nowhere." 
For  if  He  were  not  here  wholly,  He  would  be  divided  into  parts ;  which  cannot  be. 
The  air  surrounds  us,  and  we  are  in  it,  although  we  do  not  see  it,  only,  at  times, 
the  moisture  in  it.  God  surrounds  us,  and  we  are  in  Him,  although  we  have  no 
senses  to  see  or  feel  Him.  3.  God  worketh  in  all  things  around  us,  working  at  a 
distance,  or  giving  laws  by  which  all  things  should  be  and  fulfil  their  being.  Wher- 
ever anything  is,  or  can  bo  worked,  there  is  God.  It  is  not  with  God  as  when  we 
build  a  house,  and  part  off  what  is  without  from  what  is  within,  that  so  God  should 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  61» 

be  shut  out  by  the  works  of  His  own  hands.  He  is  above,  beneath,  behind,  before 
them ;  not  a  part  of  them,  not  im mingled  with  them,  nor  confused  with  them ;  nor 
are  they  a  part  of  Him  ;  yet  they  hinder  not  His  presence.  He  is  not  in  one  way 
within  them,  in  another  way  without  them ;  but  one  and  the  same  God  wholly 
averywhere.  4.  But  then,  since  God  is  everywhere,  we  move,  speak,  act,  think,  in 
God.  This  might  be  the  bliss  almost  of  the  blessed  in  heaven.  But  it  has  its  awful 
6i<1e  also.  Since  we  think,  speak,  act  in  God,  then  every  sin  is  committed  in  God. 
It  cannot  be  otherwise.  You  can  no  more  escape  out  of  the  presence  of  God  than 
out  of  the  air  which  you  breathe.  God's  infinite,  unchangeable  holiness  is  sinned 
against  by  every  sin  of  every  creature,  but  cannot  be  injured  by  all  sin.  The  human 
feelings  wiach  God  has  given  us  make  men  shrink  from  doing  deeds  of  shame  even 
in  this  created  light.  But  to  God,  darkness  is  light.  God  not  only  sees  through 
the  darkness,  He  is  in  it.  There  He  is,  where  thou  sinnest.  Thou  canst  not  turn 
away  frum  God,  except  to  meet  God.  Thou  canst  turn  away  from  His  love,  yet 
only  to  meet  Him  in  His  displeasure.  Turn,  then,  in  sorrow  from  thy  sin,  and 
thou  wilt  meet  Him  and  see  Him  forgiving  thee.  5.  Yes  I  so  is  there  a  more 
blessed  presence  than  that  through  which,  in  nature,  "  we  live  and  move,  and  have 
our  being  "  in  God — nearer,  closer,  dearer,  fuller  far,  whereby  the  soul,  through 
grace,  may  be,  or  is,  in  God.  God  willed,  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  to 
make  us  one  with  Himself  in  Christ.  He  did  not  make  us  to  exist  only  through 
Him,  or  to  be  encompassed  by  Him.  He  willed  that  we  should  be  in  the  very 
closest  union  of  love  and  of  being  of  which  created  beings  are  capable.  To  this 
end  God  the  Son,  in  eternal  harmony  with  the  Father's  will,  took  the  manhood 
into  God.  When  men  saw  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  body,  they  saw  Him  who 
was  not  man  only,  but  God ;  they  saw  Him  who  was,  with  the  Father,  one  God. 
And  this  oneness  with  us  He  took,  not  only  to  reconcile  us  to  God  by  putting  away 
the  Father's  wrath,  but  to  unite  us  to  God  in  Himself.  Marvellous  mercy  I  Yet 
since  God  has  vouchsafed  to  do  this,  stranger  were  it  that  God,  who  is  the  life  of 
our  life,  should  form  us  cap  ible  of,  and  yet  not  give  us  His  love,  if  we  will  have  it ; 
that  He  should  make  us  capable  of  being  united  with  Himself,  and  not  unite  us  if  w& 
will.  So  hath  He  not  left  us.  "  Whoso  dwelleth  in  love,  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God 
in  him."  '*  He  who  is  joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one  spirit."  "  The  love  of  God  is 
shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  through  the  Holy  Spirit  who  is  given  to  us."  6.  Since 
then  all  is  of  God,  and  in  God,  since  we,  if  our  souls  are  alive,  are  in  Christ 
and  through  Christ  in  God,  there  is  no  room  to  claim  anything  as  our  own. 
To  do  so  were  to  rob  God.  But  who  could  wish  to?  How  much  more 
blessed  is  it  to  draw  every  breath  of  our  lives  in  Him.  As  in  nature,  even 
the  strength  which  men  abuse  against  God  is  still  continued  by  God,  so, 
in  grace,  each  act  wherewith,  from  the  sacrifice  of  Abel,  God  has  been  weU- 
pleased,  has  been  done  through  the  power  of  His  grace  put  forth  in  men,  and 
by  Him  perfected  in  them.  Where  then  can  be  boasting,  or  any  thought  of  any- 
thing as  our  own,  or  any  pleasure  in  any  works  as  our  own?  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 
The  Omnipresence  of  God  : — I.  Its  nature.  The  simple,  popular  idea  is  that  God 
is  equally  present  everywhere.  The  understanding,  however,  requires  a  more  par- 
ticular statement  to  avoid  our  conceiving  of  God  as  extended.  The  nature  of  time 
and  space  involved  in  this  conception  is  among  the  most  difficult  of  philosophical 
questions.  Happily  some  of  the  most  simple  truths  are  the  most  mysterious.  We 
know  that  our  spirits  are  here  and  not  elsewhere,  and  yet  the  relation  of  our  souls 
to  space  is  inscrutable.  So  we  know  that  God  is  everywhere,  but  His  relation  to 
space  is  past  finding  out.  1.  He  is  everywhere  present  as  to — (1)  His  essence, 
for  He  does  not  admit  of  division.  (2)  His  knowledge,  for  nothing  escapes  Hia 
notice.  (3)  His  power,  as  He  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will. 
2.  This  attribute,  therefore,  includes  the  idea — (1)  That  the  universe  exists  in  God. 
AU  creatures  "  live  and  move,  and  have  their  being  "  in  Him.  (2)  That  all  the 
intelligence  indicated  in  nature  is  the  omnipresent  intelligence  of  God.  Eational 
creatures  He  has  endowed  with  an  intelligence  of  their  own.  (3)  That  all  the 
efficiency  manifested  in  nature  is  the  potestas  ordinata  of  Goi  H.  Its  con- 
sequences. Hence — 1.  The  universe  is  a  manifestation  of  God.  We  see  God  in 
everything.  2.  All  events,  the  falling  of  a  sparrow  or  of  a  kingdom  ;  the  course  of 
history  ;  the  events  of  our  own  life,  are  all  manifestations  of  His  presence.  3.  We 
are  ever  in  God's  presence.  All  our  thoughts,  feeUngs,  acts  are  open  to  His  view. 
4.  An  infinite  Helper  and  Portion  is  ever  near  to  us.  The  fountain  of  aU  blessed- 
ness is  always  at  hand  from  which  we  may  derive  inexhaustible  supplies  of  life. 
6.  All  sin  aui  sinners  are  enveloped,  as  it  were,  with  a  consuming  fire.    They  can 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAr.  xvn. 

no  more  escape  than  we  can  escape  out  of  the  atmosphere.  III.  Reflections.  The 
contemplation  of  this  doctrine  serves — 1.  To  exalt  our  concepticms  of  God  by 
making  all  things  the  manifestation  of  His  glory  and  power.  2.  To  promote  our 
peace  and  security,  because  we  know  that  God  is  everywhere  and  controls  all 
•vents.  3.  To  excite  fear.  4.  To  stimulate  joy  and  confidence.  6.  To  teach 
sinners  the  certainty  and  fearfulness  of  their  doom.  Conclusion :  As  all  religion 
consists  in  communion  with  God,  and  as  all  communion  supposes  His  presence, 
this  doctrine  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  religion.  (G.  Hodge,  D.D.)  As  certain 
also  of  your  own  poets  have  said,  For  we  are  also  His  offspring. — The  quotation 
has  a  special  interest  as  being  taken  from  a  poet  who  was  a  countryman  of  St.  Paul's. 
Aratus,  probably  of  Tarsus  {circ.  b.c.  272),  had  written  a  didactic  poem  under  the 
title  of  "  Phoenomena,"  comprising  the  main  facts  of  astronomical  and  meteoro- 
logical science  as  then  known.  It  opens  with  an  mvocation  to  Zeus,  which 
contains  the  words  that  St.  Paul  quotes.  Like  words  are  found  in  a  hymn  to  Zens 
by  Cleanthes  (b.o.  800).    Both  passages  are  worth  quoting : — 

•*  From  Zeus  begin  we ;  never  let  us  leave 
His  name  unloved.    With  him,  with  Zeus,  are  filled 
All  paths  we  tread,  and  all  the  marts  of  men ; 
Filled,  too,  the  sea,  and  every  creek  and  bay ; 
And  all  in  all  things  need  we  help  of  Zeus, 
For  we,  too,  are  his  offspring" 

Abaius,  *'  Phoenom.,"  1-& 

*  Most  glorious  of  immortals,  many-named, 
Almighty  and  for  ever,  thee,  0  Zeus, 
Sovran  o'er  nature,  guiding  with  thy  hand 
AU  things  that  are,  we  greet  with  praises.    Theff 
'Tis  meet  that  mortals  call  with  one  accord. 
For  we  thine  offspring  are,  and  we  alone 
Of  all  that  live  and  move  upon  this  earth, 
Beceive  the  gift  of  imitative  speech." 

Cleanthes,  "  Hymn  to  Zens.'* — [Dean  Plumptre.) 

Man  tJiB  offspring  of  God: — This  glorious  fact  in  our  nature — I.  Indicates  oon- 
BTiTUTiONAL  RESEMBLANCE  TO  GoD.  It  mcans  Something  more  than  to  be  God's 
creatures,  like  the  earth,  sea,  sky,  &e. ;  but  implies  resemblance  in  essential 
attributes — spiritual  personahty,  intellectual  perception,  moral  sensibility,  loving 
sympathy,  spontaneous  activity.  This  resemblance — 1.  Constitutes  man  the 
highest  natural  revelation  of  God.  Though  a  mere  atom  comparatively,  he  is  the 
brightest  reflector  of  the  Infinite.  As  I  see  the  ocean  in  a  dewdrop,  and  the  sun  in 
a  particle  of  Ught,  I  see  God  in  man.  2.  Accounts  for  our  power  of  forming  ideas 
of  God.  Had  we  no  resembling  attributes,  His  existence  would  be  a  blank  to  us. 
Had  we  no  personality,  love,  &c..  His  perfections  would  be  without  meaning.  The 
eagle  takes  a  vaster  view  of  nature  than  we  can;  yet  it  sees  no  God  because 
not  made,  like  us,  in  the  image  of  the  Creator.  U.  Sdoqests  the  rationale  or 
DmNB  laws.  Why  has  God  given  us  laws  ?  To  restrict  our  freedom  or  curtail  our 
pleasures  ?  Do  His  laws,  like  those  of  human  monarchs,  arise  from  the  policy  of 
selfishness  or  fear?  Is  He  obliged,  hke  mortal  rulers,  to  guard  His  throne  by 
legislation?  No.  His  laws  are  the  considerate  directions  of  a  loving  Father, 
profoundly  desirous  that  His  offspring  shall  escape  all  evils,  and  realise  the  highest 
good.  He  who  has  the  true  spirit  of  a  child  will  always  say  with  the  Psalmist, 
"  0  how  I  love  Thy  law  I  "  If  any  question  this  interpretation  of  the  Divine  code, 
let  him — 1.  Carefully  examine  the  character  of  those  laws,  and  see  if  he  can  find 
one  that  does  not  tend  to  happiness.  2.  Consult  the  experience  of  the  obedient, 
and  see  if  he  can  find  one  who  will  not  say,  "  In  the  keeping  of  Thy  commandments 
there  is  great  reward."  III.  Explains  the  intebi'osition  of  Christ.  What  was 
there  in  insignificant  and  sinful  man  to  enUst  this  ?  Was  it  the  intrinsic  value  of 
the  human  soul  ?  The  soul,  it  is  true,  is  superior  to  the  irrational  universe  ;  but 
it  is  inferior,  perhaps,  to  other  intelligences ;  and  as  compared  with  the  Infinite 
mind,  What  is  it  ?  I  find  the  reason  in  the  soul's  relationship,  as  the  "  offspring 
of  God.  Parental  love  amongst  men,  instead  of  being  cooled  by  the  infirmities  of 
the  child,  is  fired  by  them.  This  principle,  which  is  a  Divine  implantation,  enables 
me  to  uadeistaud,  iu  some  humble  measures,  why  the  Infinite  Father  should  show 


flHAP.  rm.]  THE  ACTS.  621 

all  this  wonderful  compassion  to  men.  IV.  Exposes  the  enormity  of  sin.  What 
laws  are  so  binding — what  authority  so  sacred  as  a  true  Father's  ?  How  heinous 
is  sin — 1.  In  relation  to  God,  when  you  think  of  Him  as  a  Father  !  The  greatest 
ingratitude  is  that  which  overlooks  a  father's  kindness  ;  the  greatest  criminality  la 
that  which  violates  a  father's  precepts ;  the  greatest  rebellion  is  that  which 
contemns  a  father's  authority.  2,  In  relation  to  society.  We  are  all  brothers  and 
sisters.  How  enormously  iniquitous  then  are  slavery,  war,  cruelty,  and  oppression 
of  every  kind  ?  V.  Ams  vs  to  estimate  the  transcendent  blessedness  of  the 
DUTiFXjii.  The  office  of  a  father  is  to  provide  for  his  children.  As  a  guardian,  God 
protects  the  mind  as  well  as  the  body,  and  guards  our  existence  with  all  its  rights 
and  interests.  As  an  educator.  He  develops  all  the  wonderful  powers  of  our 
nature,  trains  us  not  only  for  some  office  in  time,  but  for  the  high  services  of 
eternity.  As  a  nourisher,  He  has  supplies  for  all  wants  now  and  for  ever.  Con- 
clusion :  Man,  reverence  thy  nature !  act  worthy  of  thy  high  relationship ;  thou 
art  a  child  of  the  Infinite.  The  great  universe  is  thy  Father's  house.  Seek 
through  Christ  the  pardon  of  thy  sins,  and  the  true  spirit  of  adoption,  and  thou 
shalt  find  at  last  in  the  great  eternity  a  ' '  mansion  "  prepared  for  thee.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  Man  God's  offspring: — Man,  with  few  exceptions,  has  never 
been  able  to  believe  that  he  stands  alone  in  the  universe,  a  helpless  orphan, 
surrounded  by  blind  and  irresistible  forces,  and  hurried  onward  by  inevitable 
destiny.  Wherever  the  voice  of  man's  nature  is  allowed  to  speak,  it  asserts  that 
he  is  God's  offspring.  This  fact  is  demonstrated  by — I.  Man's  xNTELLECTUAii 
bupebioritt.  In  his  physical  nature  he  is  allied  to  the  lower  animals  ;  but  the 
intellectual  difference  between  the  lowest  savage  and  the  highest  animal  is  so  great 
that  it  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  the  text.  Man's  marvellous  powers  are  seen 
in  his  discovery  of  the  laws  of  the  universe,  in  his  forcing  from  nature  her  secrets, 
and  in  subjecting  her  to  do  him  service,  and  above  all  in  his  capacity  for  knowing 
God.  All  this  raises  him  immeasurably  above  all  other  creatures.  II.  His  moral 
NATURE.  In  all  men  there  is  a  knowledge  of  rural  distinctions,  and  as  arising 
oat  of  them  the  sense  of  obligation.  In  some  communities  this  knowledge  is 
imperfect  and  even  perverted,  but  it  is  there.  It  cannot  be  the  result  of  education, 
but  must  be  part  of  the  constitution  of  our  nature,  because  so  universal.  This 
fact  again  puts  an  Impassable  gulf  between  man  and  all  other  creatures,  and  is 
inexplicable  save  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  text.  IH.  His  belioiotts  nature.  1. 
His  consciousness  of  guilt,  everywhere  demonstrated  by  sacrifice,  shows  his 
alienation  from  a  Being  with  whom  he  was  once  in  harmony.  2.  His  struggles 
after  a  purer  and  higher  life  are  but  the  effort  of  God's  cluld  to  recover  a  lost 
condition  and  relationship.  3.  His  restlessness  and  dissatisfaction  till  he  finds 
rest  in  God  is  the  culminating  proof.  Conclusion  :  Christ  has  come  to  lead  us 
back  to  God,  to  make  us  true  sons  in  Him,  so  that  His  Father  becomes  our  Father. 
(J.  Fraser,  M.A.)  Man  God's  offspring : — What  a  blessed  doctrine  I  How  high  our 
dignity  I  how  rich  our  patrimony  1  Wherever  we  are,  in  whatever  portion  of  Hia 
universe,  we  are  still  in  His  house — our  home.  We  can  never  outstep  our  heritage. 
The  Father  has  fitted  nature  not  merely  to  supply  our  wants,  but  also  to  minister 
to  our  delight — the  glitter  of  the  star  and  of  the  dewdrop,  the  colour  and  scent  of 
the  flower,  freshness  and  beauty  for  the  eye,  and  song  and  melody  for  the  ear.  Our 
Father's  house  is  not  barely  furnished,  but  richly  ornamented.  Eocks  are  piled 
into  hoary  mountains  and  picturesque  heights ;  the  woods  are  budding  forth  into 
life  in  spring,  laden  with  foliage  in  summer,  or  swinging  their  great  boughs  to  the 
tempest  of  winter ;  the  sky  folds  its  curtains  and  trims  its  lamps  ;  the  waters  dance 
in  torrents  and  leap  in  cascades,  as  well  as  fill  the  seas  ;  there  is  gold  as  well  as 
iron,  gems  as  well  as  granites,  the  blush  and  fragrance  of  the  blossom,  as  well  as 
the  sweetness  and  abundance  of  the  fruit.  The  human  frame,  too,  has  symmetry 
as  well  as  strength — possesses  far  more  than  is  merely  essential  to  life  and  work ; 
the  eye,  lip,  and  brow  are  rich  in  expression  and  power.  There  is  not  only  the  power 
of  thought  essential  to  business  and  religion,  but  there  is  the  garniture  of  imagina- 
tion, poetry  as  well  as  science,  music  in  addition  to  speech,  ode  and  oracle  as  well 
as  fact  and  doctrine  in  Scripture,  the  lyre  of  the  bard  no  less  than  the  pen  of  the 
apostle.  Above  sensation  there  rises  the  power  of  discovery — invention  blends 
with  experience.  In  man  and  around  him  there  is  not  mere  provision  for 
necessities ;  there  are  profuse  luxuries.  "  His  offspring  "  walk  in  the  lustre  of  His 
love.  It  rejoices  them  to  know  that  the  power  which  governs  is  no  dark  phantom 
▼eiled  in  mystery ;  no  majestic  and  aU-controUing  force — a  mighty  and  shadowless 
■oeptre ;  no  mere  omniscience — an  eye  that  never  slumbers ;  no  dim  Spirit,  having 


€22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Tvn. 

its  only  consciousness  in  the  consciousness  of  man — but  a  Father  with  a  father'! 
heart  to  love  us,  and  to  the  yearnings  of  which  we  may  ever  appeal — a  father's  ear 
to  listen  to  us,  and  a  father's  hand  to  bless  veith  kind  and  continued  benefactions. 
And,  as  we  have  wandered,  shall  not  each  of  us  say,  "  I  wiU  arise  and  go  to  my 
Father  "  ?  Will  not  He  accept  the  returning  child,  giving  us  the  adoption  of  sons, 
revealing  Himself  graciously  through  Christ  the  Elder  Brother,  who  leads  us  to  cry 
in  true  filial  devotion,  '♦  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven  "  ?  (Prof.  Eadie.)  Man 
God's  offspring: — Man  has  not  ascended  from  the  animal,  say  rather  that  he  has 
descended  from  God.  The  line  of  his  pedigree  points,  not  downward  to  the  dust, 
but  upward  to  the  skies.  "  The  son  of  Seth,  the  son  of  Adam,  the  eon  of  God." 
"For  we  also  are  His  offspring"  ;  not  the  offspring  of  the  chimpanzee.  Compare 
the  head  of  the  most  uncivilised  man  with  the  head  of  the  best-trained  monkey, 
and  the  difference  is  immense.  What  is  the  capacity  of  the  monkey  brain  ? 
Thirty-two  cubic  inches.  What  is  the  capacity  of  the  human  brain  ?  Ninety  cubio 
inches.  You  therefore  see  that  the  brain  of  the  most  undeveloped  man,  who  is 
not  positively  an  idiot,  is  nearly  three  times  the  capacity  of  the  brain  of  the  most 
civilised  monkey  in  this  or  any  other  country.  How  to  account  for  the  difference  ? 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  talking  and  writing  in  the  present  day  about  the  "  missing 
link  " — the  missing  link  between  the  ape  and  the  man.  Missing  link  indeed  I  It 
is  not  a  hnk  that  is  missing,  but  a  whole  chain.  Human  reason  is  not  a  develop- 
ment of  the  monkey  brain ;  rather  is  it  the  immediate  outcome  of  the  Divine  Life. 
{J.  C.  Jones,  D.D.) 

Yet.  29.  Forasmuch  then  . .  .  we  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead  Is  like  unto 
gold. — Paul's  cumulative  argument : — Up  to  this  verse  Paul  has  made  a  general 
statement  respecting  God.  Here  he  lays  down  the  ground-work  of  a  true  and  abiding 
Christian  philosophy.  The  armoury  of  the  Church  is  in  the  word  "  forasmuch."  It 
throws  man  back  on  himself,  and  says,  "  If  you  want  to  know  what  God  is,  know 
yourself."  "  Forasmuch  then  as  we  are  the  offspring  of  God,  we  ought  not  to 
think,"  &c.  He  made  us ;  as  certain  of  your  own  poets  have  said.  Then  judge 
the  Father  by  the  child  ;  the  Creator  by  the  creature  made  in  His  own  image  and 
likeness,  and  rise  from  the  human  to  the  Divine — the  ascent  of  reason  and  the  way 
of  faith.  Now  I  know  of  a  surety  that  the  Bible  representation  of  God  is  true, 
because  it  is  true  of  myself.  My  reasoning  is  now  invincible,  because  it  takes  this 
turn,  namely — I.  Forasmuch,  then,  as  wb  abb  not  entibelt  compeehended,  even 
by  those  who  know  us  best  and  love  us  most,  even  so  is  God  a  mystery.  II.  Foras- 
much, then,  as  we  have  not  been  seen  by  our  dearest  admirers,  we  ought  not  to 
think  that  the  Godhead  can  be  seen.  You  have  never  seen  your  friend  ;  you  have 
never  seen  your  own  self.  Any  mystery  that  we  find  in  God  we  find  initially  and 
typically  in  our  own  nature.  III.  As  we  express  our  thought  and  feeling  through 
body  and  form,  so  does  God.  We  proceed  by  incarnation.  Forasmuch,  then,  as 
ouK  LOVE  MUST  iNCAENATE  and  cmbody  itself,  so  as  to  touch  us,  we  ought  not  to 
think  that  the  Godhead  is  independent  of  the  method  which  amongst  ourselves  He 
has  iDade  essential  to  union  and  happiness.  If  we  have  come  upon  this  doctrine 
through  the  deep  study  of  our  own  nature  and  ways  of  self-revelation,  when  we 
come  to  the  historical  Bethlehem  we  feel  we  have  only  come  home.  That  Bethlehem 
has  been  in  our  hearts,  and  is  the  inner  circle  of  our  sacred  home.  IV.  Foras- 
much, then,  AS  WE  foegive  oub  ohildeen  who  repent  of  their  sins,  we  ought  not  to 
think  that  the  Godhead  is  unwilling  to  forgive.  Forasmuch,  then,  as  that  man 
did  so  to  that  sinning  son,  we  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead  is  a  carved 
statue  in  the  sky.    "  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,"  &o.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  30.  The  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at. — God  and  the  times  of 
ignorance : — 1.  Surrounded  by  the  representatives  of  the  great  philosophic  schools, 
and  with  the  beautiful  objects  of  Pagan  devotion  on  every  side,  Paul  characterises 
the  error  of  idolatry  as  a  mark  of  ignorance.  It  was  a  severe  thing  to  say  to  a 
people  who  cherished  the  past  so  fondly,  and  who  boasted  of  their  culture ;  and 
perhaps  not  the  least  irritating  thing  was  that  Paul  represented  his  own  God — that 
God  so  new  and  strange  to  his  hearers — as  tolerating  their  worship  as  a  matter 
which  in  no  way  concerned  His  own  honour.  2.  This  raises  the  difficult  question 
concerning  certain  things  which  God  has  permitted  to  run  their  course  in  past  ages, 
which  will  not  bear  the  test  of  even  the  lowest  Christian  morality.  8.  As  we  study 
the  Bible  history,  we  see  two  movements  in  progress  simultaneously.  One  the 
natuxal  historic  movement ;  i.e.,  the  progress  of  a  history,  like  that  of  Israel,  e^^ 


«HAP.  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  62S 

according  to  the  natural  laws  under  which  nations  mature,  such  as  climate,  soil, 
migration,  conquest.  There  are  those  who  refuse  to  see  in  Biblical  history  anything 
more  than  this.  But  mothers  detect  another  influence  which  gives  character  and 
direction  to  the  other — the  providential  movement,  the  outworking  of  a  Divine 
purpose.  Thus,  where  the  philosopher  sees  only  the  migration  of  a  tribe  under 
some  physical  pressure,  the  reUgious  historian  hears  the  Lord  say  unto  Abraham, 
*'  Get  thee  out  from  thy  kindred  and  from  thy  father's  house."  4.  Now,  our  diffi- 
culty arises  out  of  the  fact  that  these  two  movements  are  mysteriously  intertwined  ; 
that  God's  design  works  itself  out  through  much  which,  to  an  educated  Christian 
sense,  is  cruel  and  selfish,  and  by  means  of  men  who  fall  below  even  the  lower  types 
of  the  social  morality  of  our  day.  Certainly,  if  we  were  called  on  to  select  types 
of  devout  servants  of  God,  we  should  not  choose  Samson  nor  Barak,  nor  even 
Gideon ;  and  yet  they  are  placed  in  the  New  Testament  among  the  heroes  of  faith. 
Or,  there  is  that  horrible  business  of  the  Canaanites,  which,  in  some  aspects  at 
least,  must,  I  fear,  continue  to  be  a  puzzle.  Take  the  matter  of  genealogy — that 
line  which  we  should  naturally  suppose  would  have  been  kept  absolutely  pure — our 
Lord's  human  descent.  And  yet  it  is  not  so  :  Judah  and  Eahab  are  both  in  it. 
Such  illustrations  show  us  that,  in  the  Bible,  the  natural  and  the  providential 
currents  mingle ;  so  that,  to  human  eyes,  God's  work  in  history  seems  discoloured 
by  human  passion  and  infirmity.  5.  Now  these  facts  involve  difficulties ;  but  we  can 
nevertheless  discover,  running  through  them,  some  straight  tracks  leading  us  to  three 
general  principles.  I.  That  thebe  is  a  progbess  ih  the  Divine  revelation  in  the 
Bible,  from  limited  to  fuUer  revelation,  from  contracted  to  expanded  views  of  God 
and  truth.  Take — 1.  The  Incarnation.  There  is  a  fulness  of  time  which  must 
come  before  the  Redeemer  can  be  revealed ;  until  then  there  are  foreshadowings, 
types,  prophecies.  Now,  after  Christ  has  come,  the  same  law  holds.  He  plainly 
teUs  the  disciples,  "  I  have  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them 
now,"  Ac.  2.  Immortality.  How  imperfect  its  revelation  in  the  earlier  Scriptures  I 
3.  Spirituality  in  Ufe  and  worship.  Is  there  not  a  distinct  progress  from  a  religion 
which  required  the  complicated  apparatus  of  altars,  <fec.,  to  that  which  intelligently 
accepts  the  truth  that  God  is  a  Spirit  ?  So,  too,  there  is  a  progress  from  the 
morality  which  must  be  kept  to  duty  by  minute  precepts,  to  the  freedom  with  which 
Christ  makes  His  disciples  free,  throwing  them  upon  the  guidance  of  the  conscience 
enlightened  by  His  Spirit.  II.  But  this  principle  necessitates  a  second — that  of 
accommodation.  1.  If  we  read  the  Old  Testament  expecting  to  find  New  Testament 
standards  and  principles  in  operation,  we  shall  be  constantly  disappointed  and 
puzzled.  When  you  read  the  Book  of  Judges,  for  instance,  you  cannot  help  saying, 
"  These  characters  are  not  for  my  imitation."  Ton  cannot  help  thinking  that  there 
is  a  terrible  inconsistency  if  you  do  not  recognise  the  facts  of  progress  in  and  accom- 
modation of  revelation  to  the  actual  condition  of  mankind.  You  cannot  expect  the 
full  tide  of  Christian  revelation  to  fit  the  moral  conditions  of  Israel  before  Sinai. 
And  therefore  we  find  that  God  adapts  His  revelation  to  them,  giving  them  symbols 
and  rites.  What  was  the  revelation  of  God  in  human  form  but  an  accommodation  ? 
Man  would  not  understand  God  by  hearing  that  God  was  a  Spirit ;  and  so  the 
Infinite  took  upon  Himself  the  form  of  a  servant.  And  there  is  a  glory  to  be 
revealed  ;  we  might  as  properly  ask  why  God  does  not  fit  us  at  once  to  receive  its 
full  weight  ?  We  know  simply  that  that  is  not  His  way  ;  that  we  could  not  bear  it 
if  it  were  revealed.  2.  But  this  principle  goes  farther.  God  gives  temporary  sanc- 
tion to  certain  things  which  wiU  not  stand  the  test  of  Christian  morality.  There  is 
polygamy,  for  instance,  which  the  New  Testament  refuses  to  recognise.  Slavery 
was  incorporated  into  the  Mosaic  law.  God  might  have  brought  the  ages  of 
Deborah  and  Samson  up  to  the  level  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  but  He  did  npt. 
He  might  have  worked  out  His  purpose  by  new  methods  specially  devised  ;  but  fie 
took  men's  crudity — the  practice  of  war,  &c. — as  they  were,  and  let  them  work 
themselves  out  according  to  the  spirit  and  methods  of  their  age.  3.  Christ  recog- 
nised this  fact  clearly  enough.  "  Moses,  because  of  the  hardness  of  your  hearts, 
suffered  you."  What  was  Christ's  baptism  by  John  but  a  temporary  adaptation  to 
crude  reUgious  conceptions  ?  What  else  did  He  mean  by  "  suffer  it  now  "  ?  Or  do 
not  His  words  point  back  to  a  similar  accommodation?  "Te  have  heard  that  it 
hath  been  said  by  them  of  old  time ;  but  I  say  unto  you  something  better."  IH. 
To  these  we  must  add  a  third  principle,  without  which  the  whole  question  would  be 
left  in  worse  confusion  than  before — viz.,  That  through  this  partiaXi,  growing,  and 

▲OOOHMODATED  BBVEIiATION,  GoD  IB  CONTINCAIiLT  WORKING  TOWARDS  HiS   OWN  PERFECT 

fSBUfa    If  you  onoe  admit  this  fact  of  a  progressive  revelation,  the  character  of  the 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHiP.  irn. 

revelation  must  be  judged  by  its  general  tendency  and  outcome.     Suppose  I  give  a 
peach-stone  to  a  man  who  had  never  seen  a  peach,  and  tell  him  that,  if  he  would 
plant  it,  it  would  yield  a  delicious  fruit ;  and  if,  after  a  few  weeks,  he  should  dig  it 
up,  and  finding  the  seed  just  sprouting,  should  come  jeering,  and  saying,  "  Do  you 
caU  that  a  dehcious  thing  ?  "  you  all  see  what  the  proper  answer  would  be.     Back 
of  the  fruit  is  a  long  process,  and  you  cannot  pronounce  upon  the  meaning  or  the 
quality  of  that  process  until  the  tree  is  grown.     Then  all  becomes  plain.      So  back 
of  the  perfect  law  and  manhood  of  the  gospel  lies  this  slow,  moral  growth  of 
humanity.     When  you  once  perceive  that  the  Bible  means  Christ,  that  the  history 
recorded  in  the  Bible  moves  steadily  toward  Christ,  then  you  may  begin  to  under- 
Btand  that  God's  toleration  and  accommodation  are  simply  parts  of  the  process 
which  is  to  issue  in  the  cheerful  subjection  of  a  man  in  Christ  to  the  perfect  law  of 
the  gospel.     When  you  want  to  form  a  judgment  of  some  great  historic  man,  you 
read  his  life  backward  in  the  light  of  his  glorious  prime.     Do  you  blame  his  father 
because  he  bore  with  the  boy's  childish  foUy,  and  accommodated  his  own  higher 
wisdom  to  the  lad's  ignorance  and  crudity  ?    But,  with  all  its  accommodations, 
God's  economy  is  never  content  to  leave  the  man  or  the  people  in  the  condition  to 
which  it  accommodates  itself.     It  accommodates  itsefi  to  raise.    Its  testimony 
against  sin  is  clear  throughout.     There  is  a  very  significant  passage  at  the  close  of 
Heb.  xi.,  in  which  these  Old  Testament  saints  are  ranked  among  the  heroes  of  faith  : 
•*  God  having  provided  some  better  thing  for  us,  that  they,  apart  from  us,  should 
not  be  made  perfect."    What  does  this  teach  but  that  God's  purpose  in  the  educa- 
tion of  men  does  not  fulfil  itself  in  any  man  or  generation  of  men,  but  in  the  whole 
history  of  mankind.     Finally,  we  must  not  leave  this  subject  without  alluding  to 
the  practical  conclusion  which  Paul  draws  from  God's  forbearance  in  past  ages : 
"But  now  He  commandeth  men  that  they  should  all  everywhere  repent."   In  other 
words,  God's  tolerance  in  the  past  is  a  warning  against  presuming  on  His  forbear- 
ance in  the  present.     God  bore  with  the  crudeness  and  ignorance  of  the  men  of 
olden  time,  in  order  that  men  of  a  later  and  more  enhghtened  day  should  have  no 
excuse  for  claiming  His  forbearance.     A  very  different  conclusion  this  from  that  of 
those  who  make  this  Old  Testament  record  a  ground  of  attack  upon  God's  character, 
and  a  reason  for  rejecting  His  later  revelation  in  Christ.    As  we  in  happier  times 
read  of  those  old  days,  our  proper  sentiment  is  that  of  wonder  at  the  patience  of 
God  through  all  these  agjes,  of  admiration  at  the  wisdom  of  His  forbearance,  of  con- 
gratulation that  He  has  provided  some  better  thing  for  us.     2.  This  history  is 
reproduced,  on  a  smaller  scale,  in  your  individual  life.     You  have  had  your  times 
of  ignorance  ;  and  though  you  have  had  less  excuse  than  they  had,  yet  how  your 
life  has  been  marked  by  the  forbearance  of  God  1      What  is  the  practical  result  of 
this  forbearance  ?     Has  it  led  you  to  a  true  estimate  of  sin  ?   Has  it  led  you  to  the 
Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  sin  ?  or  are  those  terrible  words  of  the  apostle 
verified  in  you,  •'  Or  despisest  thou  the  riches  of  His  goodness  and  forbearance  and 
long-suffering,"  &c.  (Rom.  ii.  4-6).     (M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)      Past  forbearance  and 
present  duty  : — I.  The  exhortation  consists  of  two  parts — 1.  The  censure  of  the  past 
times.     (1)  They  were  times  of  ignorance,  and  that  easily  leadeth  into  error.  _  But 
now  the  light  of  the  gospel  was  brought  to  them,  God  did  more  peremptorily  insist 
upon  His  right,  and  commanded  them  to  repent ;  for  the  practices  of  ignorance  will 
not  become  a  time  of  knowledge  (1  Pet.  i.  14).     There  was  a  time  when  we  knew 
neither  the  terror,  nor  the  sweetness  of  the  Lord,  but  securely  lived  in  sin  ;  what 
we  did  then  will  misbecome  us  now  (Eom.  xiii.  12).     Sins  are  more  aggravated  in 
times  of  more  full  gospel  light  (John  iii.  19).     (2)  God  winked  at  these  times,    (o) 
The  meaning.     Certainly  it  is  not  meant  that  God  allowed  their  idolatries ;  that 
would  entrench  upon  His  honour,  and  hinder  their  repentance.    First.  Some  think 
it  speaketh  indulgence.     God  looked  not  after  them  to  punish  them  for  their 
idolatries.     Ignorance  is  sometimes  made  an  excuse  a  tanto,  though  not  a  toto 
(chap.  iii.  17  ;  1  Tim.  i.  13).   Secondly.   Others  think  it  speaketh  a  judgment.   God 
neglected  those  times,  or  regarded  them  not  (chap.  vi.  1 ;  Heb.  viii.  9).     To  this 
sense  I  incline,  partly  because  it  is  so  explained  in  a  parallel  place  (chap.  xiv.  16, 17), 
because  it  agreeth  with  the  thing  itself  (Psa.  cxlvii.  19,  20),  and  because  God  did 
punish  the  ignorance  and  error  of  the  Gentiles  by  giving  them  up  to  vile  affections 
(Rom.  i.  24).   But  yet  I  do  not  exclude  the  former  sense,  because  though  the  idolatry 
of  the  nations  continued  for  many  years,  yet  God  continued  many  signal  temporal 
mercies  to  tbem.   (b)  The  necessity  and  use  of  this  reflection.  It  is  an  answer  to  their 
cavil  (ver.  18),  and  Paul,  as  much  as  in  him  lieth,  taketh  off  the  prejudice  of  the 
practice  of  former  times  by  a  prudent  and  soft  censure  (1  Cor.  ii.  8),  and  insinuateth 


CHAT,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  625 

that  ignorance  doth  not  wholly  excuse  those  that  err,  but  rather  commendeth  the 
Lord's  patience.  2.  The  duty  of  the  present  time.  The  duty  pressed  is  repentance, 
■which  is  here  represented  not  as  an  indifferent  and  arbitrary  thing,  but  as  expressly 
and  absolutely  commanded,  and  that  universally.  II.  Thb  argument  or  motive. 
1.  As  propounded.  (1)  The  circumstances,  (a)  The  time  appointed  is^ut  for  a 
certain  fixed  space  of  time.  The  work  cannot  well  be  despatched  in  twenty-four 
hours.  When  this  time  will  be  we  cannot  tell,  for  God  hath  not  revealed  it  (Matt. 
xxiv.  36) ;  and  therefore  it  is  curiosity  to  inquire,  and  rashness  to  determine  (chap. 
i.  7).  It  is  enough  for  us  to  believe  the  thing,  which  is  not  strange  to  reason,  that 
God  should  call  His  creatures  to  account,  (b)  The  manner — "  In  righteousness." 
Bat  doth  God  ever  judge  the  world  otherwise  than  in  righteousness  ?    No ;  but 

fGen.  xviii.  25).  He  now  judgeth  the  world  in  patience,  but  then  in  righteousness, 
c)  The  person.  Why  doth  he  call  Christ  man,  rather  than  God  ?  First.  With 
respect  to  the  Gentiles'  incapacity  to  apprehend  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity  or  the 
Incarnation ;  and  it  ooncerneth  us  to  dispense  truths  as  people  are  able  to  bear 
them.  Secondly.  Christ  is  to  discharge  this  office  in  the  visible  appearance  of 
man.  As  the  judgment  was  to  be  visible,  so  the  judge  (Tit.  ii.  13  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  8  ; 
Matt.  xxiv.  30).  Thirdly.  This  power  is  given  to  Christ  as  a  recompense  of  Hi» 
humiliation  (Phil.  ii.  9,  10 ;  cf.  Bom.  xiv.  10,  11).  (2)  The  subsequent  proof  r « 
"  Whereof  He  hath  given  assurance  to  all  men,  in  that  He  hath  raised  Him  from  the-  \ 
dead."  That  is  a  sufficient  testimony  to  convince  the  whole  world.  The  Eesurreo-  ' 
tion  is  a  certain  proof  and  argument  of  the  dignity  of  Christ's  Person  (Rom.  i.  4)^ 
and  His  office  and  doctrine  (John.  v.  27-29).  2.  What  influence  this  hath  upon 
repentance.  (1)  The  very  day  appointed  inferreth  a  necessity  of  change  both  of 
heart  and  life ;  for  how  else  shall  we  stand  in  the  judgment  who  have  broken  God's 
laws,  and  are  obnoxious  to  His  wrath  and  displeasure  (Eccles.  xi.  9)  7  (2)  From 
the  manner  or  strictness  of  that  day's  account ;  He  will  judge  the  world  in 
righteousness  (Eccles.  xii.  14).  What  then  is  our  duty  but  to  exercise  ourselves 
both  in  faith  and  repentance,  that  our  Judge  may  be  our  Saviour,  and  it  may  ga 
well  with  us  when  this  search  is  made  ?  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Past  ignorance  and 
present  responsibility  : — I.  God's  forbearance  in  early  days — "  The  times  of  thi» 
ignorance  God  winked  at."  This  expression  is  pregnant  with  mysteries.  It  implies 
a  holy  God  condoning  sin,  a  just  God  overlooking  iniquity.  Before  we  can  get  at 
the  proper  explanation,  it  wiU  be  necessary  to  examine  briefly  two  points — how  God 
overlooked  and  why.  1.  How  God  winked  at  the  ignorance  of  the  early  inhabitants 
of  the  world.  (1)  He  did  not  give  them  knowledge.  He  left  them  in  their  original 
state  of  ignorance.  All  knowledge  and  Ught  must  come  from  Him,  the  Father  of 
lights.  This  was  not  the  case  with  all,  but  it  was  the  case  with  the  greater  portion 
of  the  world.  (2)  He  did  not  punish  their  ignorance.  The  great  heathen  nations 
had  been  prosperous  and  eminent.  They  were  seats  of  science  and  art  and  luxury. 
And  such  they  were  permitted  to  be.  It  was  only  when  they  came  in  contact  with 
God's  chosen  nation  that  they  were  made  examples  of  judgment.  2.  Why  God 
winked  at  this  ignorance.  (1)  He  desired  to  develop  His  plans  and  schemes  for 
man's  salvation.  This  was  to  be  done  through  human  instrumentality.  This  pro- 
cess had  to  be  carried  on  among  a  simple,  ignorant,  and  rebellious  people,  and 
generations  and  ages  had  to  pass  away  before  it  was  completed.  (2)  He  permitted 
a  proof  to  be  given  to  all  time,  for  ever,  of  the  utter  abandonment  of  the  human 
heart  to  evil  and  sin,  and  to  show  that  no  man  would  ever  turn  from  his  evil  nature 
and  sinful  desires  of  his  own  accord.  The  ages  of  ignorance  conclusively  prove 
that  no  man  by  searching  can  find  out  God.  Thus  we  see  the  principle  of  God's 
forbearance,  which  is  so  much  better  expressed  by  the  words  of  the  text — "  winked 
at."  God  did  not  leave  the  old  world  in  ignorance  from  mercy,  but  for  the  just 
execution  of  His  purposes.  II.  God's  present  command — "  That  all  men,  every- 
where, should  repent."  The  world  went  on  its  way  until  the  advent  of  Christ.  1.. 
The  scheme  of  revelation  was  completed.  2.  The  season  of  discipline  was  ended* 
The  law  delivered  to  a  chosen  few  was  the  discipline  which  had  to  be  endured.  3. 
The  work  of  salvation  was  completed.  When  Christ  died,  the  top  stone  of  th» 
edifice  was  laid.  Thus  the  consummation  of  all  things  having  been  attained,  the 
way  was  opened  for  the  universal  apphcation  of  religion.  And  then  came  forth  the 
"  command  "  that  all  men  should  believe.  The  sun  began  to  arise,  and  the  darkness 
was  henceforth  to  be  dispelled.  And  what  was  the  result  ?  A  terrible  change  in 
the  responsibility  of  man  and  the  policy  of  God.  1.  As  to  the  responsibiUty  of 
man.  There  is  now  no  ezoase  for  darkness  or  ignorance.  If  man  does  not  hear 
and  obey,  the  fault  is  hlB  own.  2.  As  to  the  poUcy  of  God.  He  no  longer  winks 
vox.,  n.  40 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xth.' 

at  ignorance  or  evil.    Having  removed  the  cause,  He  no  longer  accepts  the  excuse. 
With  Him  now  is  stem,  hard  justice.     {Homilist.)         The  gospel  age: — Note— 1. 
God's  relation  to  the  world  before  the  gospel  age.     The  ages  before  the  gospel  were 
»•  times  of  ignorance  "  as  regards  the  grand  subjects  of  religion — "  the  world  by 
wisdom  knew  not  God."     This  wag  a  guilty  ignorance.    Outward  nature,  and  the 
intuitions  of  their  own  souls,  were  sufficient  to  teach  them  the  knowledge  of  God; 
but  the  means  they  neglected.     This  ignorance  "  God  winked  at,"  not  that  He  con- 
nived at  it,  but  overlooked  it.   He  dealt  leniently  with  those  dark  ages.     He  did  not 
interpose  specially,  either  in  vengeance  or  in  grace.    This  is  a  question  which,  it 
proper  to   ask,   is  impossible  to  solve.     We  may  discover  certain   useful  ends 
answered  by  it ;  and  these  ends  will  be  sufficient  to  satisfy  us  that  His  forbearance 
was  worthy  of  Himself.     It  serves  to  show — (1)  The  insufficiency  of  human  reason 
in  matters  of  religion.     God  gave  human  reason  plenty  of  time  to  exhaust  all  its 
resources  in  endeavours  to  find  Him  out.     (2)  The  necessity  of  a  special  revelation. 
Since  God  gave  mankind  so  many  ages  to  endeavour  to  find  Him  out,  and  they 
failed,  men  are  left  without  the  shadow  of  a  foundation  for  supposing  that  they  can 
do  without  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.     2.  God's  relation  to  the  world  in  the  gospel 
age.     God's  conduct  now  towards  the  world  is  changed.     He  who  overlooked  in 
forbearing  mercy  the  wickedness  of  past  times,  now  commands  "  every  man  eve^- 
where  to  repent."    Notice — I.  The  one  great  duty  of  man  in  the  gospel  age.    To 
repent ;  which  means  something  more  than  contrition  or  change  of  opinion,  or 
renunciation  of  a  habit ;  it  means  a  change  in  the  ruling  disposition  of  life.    Every 
man  is  under  some  ruling  disposition,  into  which  you  can  resolve  all  the  actions  of 
his  every-day  life.    This  is  the  heart  of  the  man.    Bepentance  is  a  change  in  this. 
This  reformation  of  the  soul  is  the  one  urgent  duty  of  every  man.     Why?     1. 
Because  it  is  right.    All  men,  everywhere,  are  in  the  wrong,  and  eternal  rectitude 
demands  a  change.    2.  Because  it  is  indispensable.     There  is  no  possibility  of  being 
happy  without  it.    11.  The  one  gband  prospect  of  man  in  the  gospel  age.    The 
lay  of  judgment.     1.  The  period  is  appointed  (Matt.  xxv.).     Who  knows  when? 
No  one.     It  will  come,  perhaps,  as  the  flood  came — whilst  men  are  eating  and 
drinking,  &c. ;  or  as  Christ  came — in  the  deep  hush  of  darkness,  when  men  were 
aU  asleep.     We  know  not  when,  but  we  know  it  is  fixed.    It  is  registered  in  His 
unfulfilled  plans.    His  Providence  is  getting  nearer  to  it  every  hoar.     "  God  hath 
appointed  a  day."    It  must  come.     2.  The  Judge  is  appointed.     "  By  that  man," 
<fec.  This  Man  has  heretofore  ever  dealt  in  mercy.    Now  eternal  rectitude  is  the  rule 
of  His  conduct.    The  grand  thing  that  loomed  before  the  gospel  was  the  gospel  age 
itself ;  the  grand  thing  that  looms  in  the  future  of  humanity  now  is  the  day  of 
judgment.    What  an  argument  for  repentance  is  this  righteous  judgment  1  We  must 
be  made  right  to  be  enabled  to  stand  in  that  day.    III.  The  one  demonstratino 
FACT  FOB  MAN  IN  THE  GOSPEL  AGE  "  whcrcof  He  hath  given  assurance,"  either 
that  there  will  come  a  day  of  judgment,  or  that  Christ  is  the  Divine  Judge.    The 
latter  is  the  most  Ukely  idea.    1.  Any  teacher,  living  a  holy  life,  and  rising  from 
the    dead  according  to  his  own   announcement,   must   be  Divine.      2.    Christ 
as  a  Teacher  did  live  a  holy  life,  and  did  rise  from  the  dead  according  to 
His  own  announcement.    Who  can  escape  the  inference?     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
But  now  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent. — Repentance : — Kepentance 
is  here  urged  as  the  command  of  the  Almighty.    In  other  places  it  is  declared  to  be 
indispensable  to  salvation.    Yet  men  have  many  objections.     At  one  time  they 
allege  that  they  have  done  nothing  which  requires  repentance.     They  have  not 
been  guilty  of  murder,  or  fraud,  or  falsehood.      At  another  time  it  is  said  that 
repentance    is  wholly  beyond    the    power    of    man ;    and  wonder   is  expressed 
that  a  command   should  be  urged  to   do  that  which  will  never  be  done  but 
by  Divine    assistance.      At    another    time  it  is  alleged   that_  the    requirement 
is  wholly  arbitrary.    Why  has  God  chosen  these  mere  emotions  of  the  heart 
in  preference  to   a  correct  moral  character  as   the  conditions  of   His  favour? 
Again  it  is  asked,  why  has  God  made  the  path  to  heaven  a  path  of  sorrow  ?     Such 
Are  some  of  the  feelings  that  spring  up  in  the  mind  when  we  come  to  men  and  urge 
upon  them  the  duty  of  repectance.     My  desire  is  to  convince  you  that  they  are  un- 
founded.    I.  Repentance  is  a  simple  operation  of  mind  understood  and  pbaotised 
BY  ALL.    You  cannot  find  a  person  who  at  some  time  has  not  exercised  repentance 
and  in  the  emotions  of  a  child,  when  he  feels  sorrow  that  he  has  done  wrong,  and 
who  resolves  to  make  confession  of  it  and  to  do  so  no  more,  you  have  the  elements 
of  all  that  God  requires  of  man  as  a  condition  of  salvation.    No  inconsiderable 
portion  of  every  man's  life  is  made  up  of  regrets  for  the  errors  and  follies  of  the 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  627 

past.  They  invade  the  mind  because  we  feel  that  we  have  done  wrong,  and  that  we 
ought  to  have  done  differently.  They  are  not  arbitrary.  They  are  the  operations 
of  the  regular  laws  of  the  mind  ;  and  they  are  operations  which  a  generous  and  a 
noble  heart  would  not  wish  to  check  or  prevent.  If  such  feeUngs  actually  occur  on 
the  recollection  of  the  past,  it  is  natural  to  ask  why  we  should  not  expect  to  find 
ihem  in  religion  ?  Further,  the  mind  nowhere  else  knows  emotions  so  overwhelm- 
ing as  in  the  recollections  of  past  guilt.  And  why,  then,  should  it  be  regarded  as 
lanatical  that  the  soul  should  be  burdened  with  a  sense  of  guilt  when  it  comes  back 
to  God  ?  II.  God  may  appoint  His  own  terms.  This  is  true  in  relation  to  every- 
thing. Health  is  His  gift ;  and  He  has  the  absolute  right — a  right  which  He  is  con- 
stantly exercising — to  state  to  man  on  what  terms  it  may  be  enjoyed  ;  and  if  he 
does  not  choose  to  comply  with  those  terms,  God  will  not  depart  from  His  settled 
laws  to  give  him  health  by  miracle.  In  like  manner,  pardon  is  the  gift  of  God,  and 
He  has  a  right  to  say  on  what  terms  it  may  be  obtained.  God  is  dealing  with  you 
in  this  respect  just  as  you  deal  with  your  feUow-men.  You  will  admit  no  one  to 
your  dwelling  who  does  not  choose  to  comply  with  the  reasonable  conditions  which 
jou  may  choose  to  have  observed.  You  are  a  parent.  A  child  violates  your  com- 
mands. Do  you  not  feel  that  you  have  a  right  to  prescribe  the  terms  on  which  he 
may  obtain  your  forgiveness  ?  Even  if  the  appointment  were  wholly  arbitrary,  God 
has  a  right  to  make  it,  and  man  has  no  right  to  complain.    III.  When  wrong  has 

BEEN  DONE  AMONG   MEN,  THE   ONLY  WAT   TO   OBTAIN   AGAIN   THE   TAVODR   OF  THOSE  WHO 

HAVE  BEEN  INJURED  IS  BY  REPENTANCE.  You  are  a  father.  A  child  does  wrong. 
Towards  that  son  you  cherish  still  all  a  father's  feelings  ;  but  you  refuse  to  admit  him 
to  the  same  degree  of  confidence  and  favour  as  before  without  some  evidence  of  re- 
pentance. You  have  had  a  friend.  But  he  betrayed  you.  I  ask  any  man  whether 
he  -can  receive  such  a  friend  again  to  his  bosom  without  some  evidence  of  regret, 
And  some  proof  that  he  will  not  do  it  again  ?    IV.  In  the  actual  course  of  events 

UNDER  THE  DiVINE  ADMINISTRATION   IT  IS   ONLY  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  REPENTANCE  THAT 

FORFEITED  FAVOURS  CAN  BE  RECOVERED.  I  do  Hot  mean  to  say  that  repentance  will 
always  repair  the  evU  of  the  past,  but  that  if  a  man  who  has  done  wrong  is  ever  re- 
stored to  the  forfeited  favour  of  God,  it  will  be  in  connection  with  repentance.  A 
man  has  wasted  his  health  and  property  by  intemperance.  Is  there  any  way,  now, 
by  which  health,  and  domestic  peace,  and  property,  and  respectability  may  be  le- 
<50vered  ?  There  is.  But  how  ?  By  this  course.  Why  should  it  be  thought  more 
strange  in  religion  than  in  the  actual  course  of  events  ?    V.  The  necessity  of  itu- 

PENTANCE    COULD    NOT    BE   AVOIDED   BY   ANY   Ar.RANGEMENT   WHATEVER.        A  moment's 

reflection  will  satisfy  any  one  of  this.  The  law  of  God  requires  love  to  Him  as  t'ne 
supreme  rule  of  life.  That  law  man  has  violated,  and  the  gospel  requiring  repent- 
ance meets  him  as  a  sinner,  and  requires  him  to  return  to  the  love  of  God.  Nuw 
no  aUenated  man  can  come  back  to  this  love  of  God  without  regret  that  he  wandered 
«way  from  Him.  (A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  Repentance  : — I.  Its  nature.  1.  A  true 
sense  of  sin.  This  is  naturally  the  first  step,  for  until  an  individual  has  been  made 
conscious  of  his  sin,  it  is  utterly  hopeless  to  expect  that  he  will  turn  from  it.  Most 
men  are  willing  to  admit  in  general  terms  the  truth  that  "  all  have  sinned  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God,"  but  few  in  comparison  possess  an  enlightened  and 
sincere  conviction  of  their  personal  guilt  and  impurity  in  the  sight  of  God.  V/hen 
-the  Spirit  enlightens  the  mind  of  the  sinner  to  discern  the  extent,  strictness,  and 
spirituality  of  the  law  of  God,  as  taking  cognizance  of  every  thought,  word,  and 
.action,  and  as  requiring  absolute  perfection  in  aU  things,  his  conscience  is  awakened 
to  a  sense  of  his  transgressions,  so  that  he  is  ready  to  sink  under  the  burden  of  his 
guilt.  2.  Godly  sorrow  on  account  of  sin.  There  is  a  spurious  sorrow  which  does 
not  regard  sin  itself  so  much  as  the  misery  which  is  its  fruit.  It  is  possible,  too, 
that  a  man  may  be  really  sorry  for  particular  sins,  and  yet  he  may  be  an  utter* 
stranger  to  true  repentance.  Of  this  we  have  a  fearful  example  in  the  case  of  Judas 
Iscariot.  But  the  sorrow  of  a  true  penitent  is  for  sin,  as  committed  against  God, 
«8  rebellion  against  His  rightful  authority,  as  a  violation  of  His  holy  law,  and  as  a 
most  base,  ungrateful  return  for  all  his  goodness.  3.  An  apprehension  of  the  mercy 
of  God  in  Christ  to  such  as  are  penitent.  Had  we  no  reason  to  cherish  the  hope 
-that  God  would  pardon  our  sins,  we  could  never  return  to  Him  as  sincere  penitent?, 
but  must  inevitably  sink  into  despair.  4.  A  turning  from  sin  unto  God,  with  a 
sincere  purpose  and  endeavour  to  walk  with  Him  in  all  the  ways  of  His  command- 
ments. This  constitutes  the  grand  distinction  betwixt  true  repentance  and  all  false 
appearances.  Accordingly  St.  Paul  exhorted  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  not  only  that 
4hey  should  "  repent  and  turn  to  God,"  but  also  "  do  works  meet  for  repentance." 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  xm. 

II.  The  motives  which  ought  to  lead  us  to  it.     1.  A  regard  to  the  Divine  author 
ity  and  to  our  own  real  interest.     No  injunction  can  be  more  explicit  than  this 
which  is  binding  upon  all  men  of  every  rank  and  character.    Dare  we  thus  pour 
contempt  on  His  authority,  especially  now  when  "  the  times  of  ignorance  which 
God  winked  at "  are  over,  and  the  Dayspring  from  on  high  hath  risen  over  our 
once  benighted  land.     Consider  what  must  be  the  consequence  of  such  aggravated 
guilt.     Jesus  Christ  hath  declared,  "  Except  ye  repent  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish." 
2.  The  many  encouraging  declarations  and  promises  addressed  to  such  as  are  exer- 
cising repentance.     3.  The  examples  with  which  the  Word  of  God  furnishes  as  of 
sinners,  whose  guilt  was  peculiarly  great,  but  who,  notwithstanding,  on  repentance 
were  pardoned  and  saved.    4.  The  great  day  of  judgment.   This  is  the  grand  reason 
which  the  apostle  assigns  for  God  commanding  men  everywhere  to  repent.     (P. 
Grant. )        Repentance : — I.  Its  natube.  1.  A  deep  seflse  of  unworthiness  to  receive 
the  Divine  forgiveness.    So  felt  Job,  "  Lord,  I  am  vile :  how  shall  I  answer  Thee  ?  " 
So  felt  Isaiah, "  Woe  is  me  !  "  &c.     So  felt  Peter,  "  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sin- 
ful man,  0  Lord."     So  also  did  Paul,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "     2.  Bitter  sorrow  for  past  sin.    When 
Peter  caught  the  reproving  eye  of  his  Lord  his  repentance  was  evidenced  by  his 
"  going  out  and  weeping  bitterly."    Paul  "  was  three  days,  and  neither  did  eat  nor 
drink " ;  so  great  was  his  distress  of  mind.     When  the  jailor  at  Philippi  was 
awakened  he  came  trembling.     3.  Confession  of  sin  before  God,     The  prodigal 
went  to  his  father  and  said  unto  him,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and 
before  thee,"  &o.     "  For,  with  the  heart  man  believeth  onto  righteousness,  and 
with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation."    4.  A  fixed  determination  to 
abandon  henceforth,  by  God's  help,  former  sins.     Herod  heard  John  the  Baptist 
gladly  preach  the  doctrine  of  repentance,  and  he  did  many  things  which  he  enjoined ; 
yet  he  gave  not  up  his  brother  Philip's  wife,  and  so  his  repentance  could  profit  him 
nothing.    Judas,  when  he  saw  that  his  Lord  was  condemned,  is  said  to  have  re- 
pented, but  he  afterwards  went  and  hanged  himself.     6.  Amendment  of  life,  holi- 
ness and  diligence  in  the  service  of  God.     6.  Restitution.     II.  Its  obligations. 
Eepent,  because — 1.  God  commands  it.     2.  Because  of  the  atonement  made  for  sin 
by  Christ.     Repentance  would  be  of  no  avail  in  itself  for  salvation  ;  it  draws  all  ita 
value  from  the  death  of  Jesus.     3.  Because  by  virtue  of  Jesus  Christ's  intercession 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  now  sent  down  to  enable  them  to  obey  the  command.     Repent- 
ance, however  necessary,  is  not  a  feehng  which  any  man  can  produce  when  he 
pleases ;  it  is  not  a  product  of  the  natural  mind.    4.  Because  "  God  hath  appointed 
a  day  in  the  which  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by  that  Man  whom  He 
hath  ordained."  He  who  now  waiteth  to  be  gracious  as  our  merciful  Saviour  in  the 
forgiveness  of  our  sins  shall  then  have  become  our  righteous  Judge.     And  that  the 
certainty  o£  this  awful  event  might  be  strongly  fixed  in  the  minds  of  men.  He  hath 
verified  it  by  the  amazing  miracle  of  the  Resurrection  of  Jesus.  (R.M.  Jonet,M.A.) 
Repentance  : — When  we  think  of  the  prevalence  of  idolatry  and  superstition  we  are 
apt  to  ask.  Where  is  the  wisdom,  justice,  or  mercy  of  suffering  whole  nations  for 
centuries  and  milleniums  to  know  not  the  worship  of  the  true  God  ?    But  all  such 
questions  are  silenced  in  the  text.     God  will  not  call  the  men  who  lived  in  them  to 
such  a  reckoning  as  He  wiU  call  us  :  they  had  not  the  revelation  you  now  have. 
But  though  "  the  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at ;  He  now  oommandeth  all 
men  everywhere  to  repent."    I.  What  God  commands.    All  men  •'  everywhere  to  re- 
pent," nmo.     He  addresses  idolaters  that  they  should  abandon  their  false  gods  and 
become  worshippers  of  the  true  God.     You  and  I  have  not  to  repent  in  that  sense : 
our  forefathers  had.  But  now  there  is  not  an  altar  of  Druidical  worship  to  be  found. 
Yet  idolatry  may  exist  in  the  heart  notwithstanding.     Now,  the  radical  meaning  of 
repentance  is  change.     1.  Of  mind.     (1)  As  to  God.    As  to  the  law  of  God.     (2) 
As  to  sin.  (3)  As  to  Christ.  Some  persons  accuse  preachers  of  disturbing  the  minds 
of  our  hearers.    But  we  do  not  bring  the  things  there  that  are  discovered — it  is  the 
light  that  reveals  them.   2.  Of  disposition  consequent  upon  a  change  of  view.  That 
which  before  was  hated  is  now  loved— the  Bible,  the  Saviour,  religion.    3.  A  change 
of  conduct,  for  if  the  mind  and  disposition  are  changed,  the  behaviour  is  changed. 
Hence  the  Baptist,  when  he  preached  to  tbe  people  in  the  wilderness,  told  them  to 
«'  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance."    God,  then,  commaudeth  men  to  repent. 
He  commandeth  all  men— the  poor  and  the  rich— kings  and  their  subjects— the 
young,  the  middle-aged,  and  the  old.    II.  The  reason  why  the  command  is  given. 
1.  The  certainty  of  a  day  of  judgment  is  taught  by— (1)  Reason.     We  observe  the 
conduct  of  men  around  us  :  we  sometimes  see  that  the  virtuous  are  rewarded  ;  bn* 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  529 

we  often  see  the  reverse  of  that,  and  if  we  believe  in  the  Divine  government  we  must 
suppose  there  is  some  state  after  this  in  which  all  these  discrepancies  will  be  ad- 
justed. (2)  Conscience.  (3)  The  general  belief  of  the  Church  of  God  in  all  ages.  (4) 
The  Word  of  God.  2.  The  period  "  appointed."  The  time  is  fixed  ;  nothing  can 
postpone  it  or  antedate  it.  A  day  is  a  measured  period — so  long,  and  no  longer.  We 
know  not  how  long  this  day  will  be  :  "  One  day  with  the  Lord  is  as  a  thousand  years, 
and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  There  will  be  time  enough  for  a  determinate  ex- 
amination of  every  individual  to  be  judged.  The  actual  arrival  of  this  day  is  unknown 
to  ns.  This  is  wise.  The  wicked,  who  presume  as  it  is,  would  then  presume 
much  more ;  the  good  would  then,  in  all  probability,  relax  in  their  zeal  and  assiduity 
and  painstaking.  "  Watch,  therefore,  for  ye  know  not  the  day  nor  the  hour  when 
the  Son  of  Man  cometh."  In  one  sense,  the  day  of  our  death  will  be  a  sort  of 
rehearsal  of  the  judgment.  But  the  last  day  is  distant,  and  will  take  place  at  the 
end  of  the  world.  If  every  man  were  to  be  judged  on  his  committing  a  single  act 
of  sin,  it  would  throw  everything  into  confusion,  and  society  would  be  disturbed. 
All  nations  of  men  have  certain  fixed  days — assize  days — in  which  the  majesty  of 
law  and  order  are  vindicated.  It  is  so  in  the  government  of  God.  3.  The  Person 
who  is  to  preside  over  the  solemnities  of  that  day.  The  sinner  cannot  object, 
because  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  died  to  save  him  ;  and  if  He  condemns  him,  he  must, 
indeed,  deserve  to  be  condemned.  The  saint  cannot  object  to  that,  because  he  has 
actually  obtained  his  fellowship  with  Christ  on  earth ;  and,  therefore,  he  sees  in 
the  Person  of  the  Judge,  his  Brother,  his  Friend,  his  Eedeemer.  That  is  the  oc- 
casion on  which  the  human  nature  of  Christ  will  be  exalted  ;  that  is  one  part  of 
the  reward  which  the  Father  will  give  to  the  Son  for  His  mediatorial  acts.  "  The 
Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son ;  that  all 
men  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father."  Whoever  presides 
over  the  solemnities  of  the  judgment-day  must  be  omniscient ;  He  must  be  capable 
of  estimating  the  motives  and  principles  which  actuate  us  ;  He  must  be  a  person  of 
perfect  equity  and  absolute  perfection ;  He  must,  in  short,  be  God.  Therefore,  the 
human  nature  that  must  sit  on  the  throne  of  judgment  wiU  be  the  human  nature 
in  connection  with  one  of  the  persons  of  the  Godhead.  4.  The  process — "  in 
righteousness."  There  will  be — (1)  Scrutiny.  Those  eyes  that  are  like  a  flame — 
those  eyes  that  see  into  all  the  depths  of  the  human  heart  will  scrutinise  every 
individual  character.  Oh,  what  an  unfolding  of  history,  character,  and  conduct. 
(2)  Separation — the  good  from  the  bad.  And  the  separation  will  be  so  complete 
that  not  one  sinner  will  be  found  in  the  congregation  of  the  righteous,  nor  one 
righteous  in  the  congregation  of  the  wicked.  (3)  Decision.  The  sentence  upon  the 
righteous  shall  be,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared 
for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  This  intimates  to  you  the  vastness  of  our 
future  felicity.  But  then  the  other  sentence  is  equally  strong,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  It  is  a  solemn  fact  that  the 
sentence  which  will  determine  our  fate  for  ever  and  ever  is  not  unknown ;  we  know  it 
beforehand.  Conclusion  :  We  learn  a  lesson  of — 1.  Confirmation  of  our  faith.  2. 
Self-examination.  Are  we  prepared  for  this  process.  8.  Diligence.  {J.  Beaumont, 
M.D.)  Repentance: — I.  The  nature  or  tkde  kepentance.  It  includes — 1.  A  true 
sense  of  sin.  This  must  be  the  groundwork  of  aU  the  rest,  because  it  is  impossible 
to  hate  what  we  do  not  feel.  2.  The  second  step  of  repentance  is  being  affected  with 
a  grief  and  hatred  of  sin.  The  former  was  a  selfish  feeling ;  this  is  a  generous 
passion.  The  former  respects  sin  as  ruinous  to  the  sinner ;  this  regards  it  aa 
offensive  to  God.  8.  The  third  step  in  repentance  towards  God  is  an  apprehension 
of  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  and  a  forsaking  of  sin.  This  is  properly  an  act  of 
faith.  II.  The  motives  to  bepentance.  1.  The  superior  light  and  information 
derived  to  the  world  by  the  Christian  religion,  concerning  the  rule  of  righteousness 
according  to  which  we  ought  to  conduct  our  lives,  suggests  a  strong  inducement  to 
repentance.  What  signifies  the  superior  excellency  of  your  religion,  unless  its 
superiority  appear  in  your  life  ?  Wliat  avails  the  light  to  you,  if  ye  continue  to 
walk  in  darkness?  Unless  ye  repent,  it  had  been  better  for  you  that  tlie  kingdom - 
of  God  had  never  come  amongst  you.  If  ye  still  walk  in  the  region  and  shadow  of 
death,  it  had  been  better  that  the  Dayspring  from  on  high  had  never  risen  over  your 
benighted  land.  2.  A  second  motive  and  encouragement  to  repentance  is  the  hope 
and  prospect  of  success.  The  gate  of  mercy  is  set  open  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  ;  and 
an  inheritance  that  is  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  is  promised 
•to  all  those  who  sincerely  repent  of  their  sins,  to  all  who  believe  and  obey  the 
gospeL    3.  A  third  motive  to  repentance  is  the  assistance  of  the  Spirit,  which  the 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

gospel  offers.  4.  In  the  fourth  place,  as  an  inducement  to  repentance,  consider  the 
cross  of  Christ,  who  suffered  the  punishment  due  to  our  sins.  How  great  must  be 
the  evil  of  sin,  and  how  strong  the  obligation  for  us  to  repent  of  our  sins,  when  such 
a  sacrifice  was  required  to  expiate  our  guUt.  6.  It  is  another  motive  to  repentance 
that  God  "has  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  He  will  judge  the  world."  (John 
Logan.)  Nature  and  necessity  of  true  repentance  : — I.  It  extends  to  the  heabt 
AS  WELL  AS  TO  THE  PBACTiCK.  Everj  true  penitent  indeed  has  an  affecting  sense  of 
the  many  sins  and  guUty  imperfections  of  his  life ;  but  then  his  repentance  does 
not  stop  there,  but  he  looks  into  the  horrid  arcana,  the  secrets  of  wickedness  within 
He  traces  up  these  corrupt  streams  to  the  more  corrupt  fountain  in  his  heart,  from 
which  they  flow.  David's  repentance  reached  his  heart.  Hence  in  his  penitential 
psalm  (li.)  he  not  only  confesses  his  being  guilty  of  the  blood  of  Uriah,  but  that  he 
was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  conceived  in  sin,  and  earnestly  prays,  "  Create  in  me  a 
clean  heart,  0  God,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me  "  (Psa.  li.  5,  6,  10).  And 
he  is  deeply  sensible  of  the  want  of  truth  or  integrity  in  the  inward  parts.    II.  In 

EVANGELICAL   REPENTANCE    THERE    IS   A   DEEP    SENSE    OF    THE     INTKINSIC    EVIL     OF    SIN, 

AND  A  HEARTY  SORROW  FOR   IT   AS   DONE  AGAINST    GoD.      Sin  appears  to  the  truc 
penitent  as  some  sorts  of  poison  to  us  ;   that  is,  not  only  hateful  because  it  is  deadly 
and  destructive,  but  hateful  and  nauseous  in  itself.    1  do  not  mean  that  the  fear  of 
punishment  is  no  ingredient  in  true  repentance  ;  the  love  of  God  and  self-love  are 
very  consistent,  if  the  latter  is  kept  in  a  due  subordination  to  the  former ;  and 
therefore  the  fear  of  punishment  has  great  weight  even  with  the  evangelical  penitent. 
But  I  mean  the  fear  of  punishment  is  not  the  principal,  much  less  the  only  spring 
and  motive  of  true  repentance :  the  true  penitent  hates  sin,  even  when  he  is  not 
thinking  of  heaven  or  hell,  but  only  viewing  it  in  its  own  nature.     He  is  also  deeply 
sorry  for  sin,  as  against  God,  or  as  contrary  to  Him.    As  rebellion  against  His 
authority,  as  a  contrariety  to  His  holiness,  as  an  opposition  to  His  will  and  pleasure, 
as  a  most  base,  ungrateful  return  for  all  His  goodness,  and  as  the  cause  of  all  the 
agonies  of  the  blessed  Jesus  ;  he  hates  it,  he  mourns  over  it  with  ingenuous  and 
kindly  relentings  of  heart.     Nay,  of  so  generous  a  nature  is  evangelical  repentance, 
that  the  penitent  soul  never  melts  so  freely,  nor  bursts  out  into  such  a  flood  of 
ingenuous  sorrows,  as  when  it  has  reason  to  hope  that  a  gracious.  God  has  freely 
forgiven  it.     Then  it  sees  the  base  ingratitude  and  complicated  vileness  of  sin,  as 
committed  against  so  gracious  a  God.     God's  forgiving  the  penitent  is  a  reason  to 
him  why  he  should  never  forgive  himself.     III.  Tktje  repentance  extends  to  all 
KNOWN   SIN,    WITHOUT   EXCEPTION.      They  are  all  forbidden  by  the    same  Divine 
authority ;  all  contrary  to  the  holy  nature  of  God ;  all  opposite  to  the  obligations 
of  duty  and  gratitude  we  are  under  to  Him ;  and  therefore  they  must  be  aU  repented 
of.     This  was  the  character  of  David — "  that  he  hated  every  false  way  "  (Psa.  cxix. 
128).     IV.   True   repentance    always   includes  reformation.     Remember  that 
maxim  of  the  wise  man,  "  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper  ;  but  whoso 
confesseth  and  forsaketh  them,  shall  have  mercy  "  (Prov.  xxviii.  13).     Observe,  not 
only  confessing,  but  also  forsaking  them,  is  necessary  to  the  obtaining  of  mercy. 
The  same  thing  appears  from  the  various  expressions  used  in  Scripture  to  describe 
repentance.     To  repent,  in  the  language  of  the  Bible,  is  to  depart  from  our  evil 
ways  ;  to  cease  to  do  evil  and  learn  to  do  well ;  to  cleanse  our  hands  and  purify  our 
hearts  :  which  expressions  signify  not  only  sorrow  for  sin,  but  especially  reformation 
from  it.     In  vain,  therefore,  do  you  pretend  you  repent,  if  you  still  go  on  in  the  sins 
you  repent  of.     V.  Evangelical  repentance  implies  a  believing  application  to 
God  for  pardon  only  through  Jesus  Christ.     How  opposite  to  this  is  the  pre- 
vailing spirit  of  the  world  !     If  they  repent,  it  is  to  make  amends  for  their  sins,  and 
procure  the  Divine  favour  by  their  repentance,  and  thus  even  their  repentance 
becomes  a  snare  to  them,  and  one  cause  of  their  destruction.     In  this  sense,  a  bold 
saying  of  one  of  the  fathers  may  be  true :  "  That  more  souls  are  destroyed  by  their 
repentance  than  by  their  sin  " ;  that  is,  sin  is  evidently  evil,  and  they  are  in  no 
danger  of  trusting  in  it  to  recommend  them  to  God.    But  even  their  superficial 
servile  repentance  has  the  appearance  of  goodness,  and  therefore  they  make  a 
righteousness  of  it ;  and  upon  this  quicksand  they  build  their  hopes,  till  they  sink 
into  remediless  ruin.     I  have  only  two  or  three  remarks  more  to  make  for  the  farther 
illustration  of  this  subject.     1.  The  first  is,  that  all  the  principles  of  degenerate 
nature  can  never  produce  this  generous  and  thorough  repentance,  but  that  it  is  the 
peouUar  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     2.  The  second  remark  is,  that  this  generous 
Bupornatnral  repentance  is  not  the  first  repentance  of  an  awakened  sinner.     No ;  he 
is  first  alarmed  with  terror  and  dreadful  apprehensions  of  pimishment ;  and  all  the 


CHAP,  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  681 

Bprings  of  nature  are  pat  in  motion  before  these  nobler  principles  are  infused,  and 
he  is  brought  to  a  genuine  evangelical  repentance.  Therefore — 3.  The  only  way  to 
attain  to  this  supernatural  repentance  is  to  use  all  proper  means  to  excite  the 
springs  of  natural  repentance,  particularly,  to  reflect  upon  your  sins,  upon  their 
number  and  aggravation  and  your  dreadful  danger.  My  subject  is  now  ripe  for  an 
application,  and  this  shall  be  nothing  else  but  a  short  illustration  of  the  other 
parts  of  my  text.  And  to  the  great  God  you  must  answer  for  your  disobedience. 
My  text  tells  you  God  commands  all  men  to  repent — all  men,  of  all  ranks  arid 
characters.  This  command  therefore  is  binding  upon  you  aU.  To  render  the  call 
Btill  more  pointed  and  universal,  it  is  added, "  He  commandeth  all  men,  everywhere, 
to  repent."  Everywhere,  in  city  and  country ;  in  palaces  and  cottages ;  in  Europe, 
Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  wherever  the  trumpet  of  the  gospel  sounds  the  alarm  to 
repent ;  in  this  very  spot,  where  we  now  stand.  Here  the  command  of  God  finds 
you  out,  and  calls  you  to  repent.  Nor  are  you  allowed  to  delay  your  compliance. 
Bepentance  is  your  present  duty :  for  ••  now  He  commandeth  all  men,  everywhere,  to 
repent "  :  now,  when  the  times  of  ignorance  are  over,  and  the  gospels  shed  heavenly 
day  among  you :  now,  when  He  will  no  longer  wink,  or  connive  at  your  impenitence, 
but  takes  strict  notice  of  it  with  just  indignation  :  now,  while  the  day  of  grace  lasts, 
and  there  is  place  left  for  repentance  :  now,  before  you  are  hardened  through  the 
deceitf ulness  of  sin,  and  while  His  Spirit  is  striving  with  you  :  now,  while  you  have 
time,  which  may  be  taken  from  you  the  next  year  :  now,  while  you  enjoy  health  of 
body,  and  the  exercise  of  your  reason  ;  and  your  attention  is  not  tied  down  to  pain 
and  agony :  He  does  not  allow  you  one  hour's  delay ;  and  what  right  have  you  to 
allow  it  to  yourselves  ?    (S.  Davies,  M.A.) 

Ver.  31.  Because  He  hath  appointed  a  day,  In  the  which  He  will  Judge  the  world 

In  righteousness. — The  day  of  judgment : — I.  There  shall  be  a  day  of  judgment. 
1.  "  A  particular  judgment."  At  the  day  of  death  the  soul  hath  a  judgment  passed 
upon  it  (Heb.  ix.  27;  Eccles.  xii.  7).  2.  "A  general  day  of  judgment"  ;  which  is 
the  great  assize,  when  the  world  shall  be  gathered  together  (Eccles.  xii.  14 ;  Matt. 
xii.  36 ;  Psa.  xcvi.  13).  II.  Why  thbbb  must  be  a  day  of  judgment.  1.  That 
God  may  execute  justice  on  the  wicked.  Things  seem  to  be  carried  here  in  the 
world  with  an  unequal  balance  (Job  xxix.  3  ;  Mai.  iii.  15).  Diogenes,  seeing  Har- 
palus,  a  thief,  go  on  prosperously,  said  [that]  surely  God  had  cast  off  the  govern- 
ment of  the  world,  and  minded  not  how  things  went  here  below  (2  Peter  iii.  3,  4). 
Therefore  God  will  have  a  day  of  assize  to  vindicate  His  justice ;  He  will  let  sinners 
know  that  long  forbearance  is  no  forgiveness.  2.  That  God  may  exercise  mercy  to 
the  godly.  Here  piety  was  the  white  which  was  shot  at  (Kom.  viii.  36).  God  will 
therefore  have  a  day  of  judgment,  that  He  may  reward  aU  the  tears  and  sufferings 
of  His  people  (Eev.  vii.  9).  III.  When  the  day  or  judgment  shall  be.  It  ia 
certain  there  shall  be  a  judgment ;  uncertain,  when  (Matt.  xxiv.  36).  And  the 
reason  is — 1.  That  we  may  not  be  curious.  There  are  some  things  which  God 
would  have  us  ignorant  of  (chap.  i.  7).  "  It  is  a  kind  of  sacrUege,"  as  Salvian  speaks, 
**  for  any  man  to  break  into  the  Holy  of  holies,  and  enter  into  God's  secrets."  2. 
That  we  may  not  be  careless.  "  God  would  have  us  live  every  day,"  saith  Austin, 
"  as  if  the  last  day  were  approaching."  This  is  the  use  [which]  our  Saviour  makes 
of  it  (Mark  xiii.  32, 33).  IV.  Who  shall  be  the  judge  ?  The  Man  who  is  God-man. 
We  must  take  heed  of  judging  others ;  this  is  Christ's  work  (John  v.  22)  There  are 
two  things  in  Christ  which  do  eminently  quahfy  Him  for  a  Judge — 1.  Prudence 
and  intelligence,  to  understand  all  causes  that  are  brought  before  Him  (Zech.  iii.  9; 
Heb.  iv.  13).  Christ  is  "a  Heart-searcher";  He  doth  not  only  judge  the  fact,  but 
the  heart,  which  no  angel  can  do.  2.  Strength,  whereby  He  is  able  to  be  revenged 
upon  His  enemies   (Eev.   xx.   10).      V.  The  ordeb   and   method   of  the   tbial. 

1.  The  summons  to  the  court  (1  Thess.  iv.  16).  (1)  The  shrillness  of  the  trumpet. 
It  shall  sound  so  loud,  that  the  dead  shall  hear  it.  (2)  The  efficacy  of  the  trumpet. 
It  shall  not  only  startle  the  dead,  but  raise  them  out  of  their  graves  (Matt.  xxiv.  31). 

2.  The  manner  of  the  Judge's  coming  to  the  bench.  (1)  It  will  be  glorious  to  the 
godly  (Titus  ii.  13).  (a)  Christ's  person  shall  be  glorious.  His  first  coming  in  the 
flesh  was  obscure  (Isa.  liii.  2,  3).  But  His  second  coming  will  be  "  in  the  glory  of 
His  Father"  (Mark  viii.  38).  (6)  Christ's  attendants  shall  be  glorious  (Matt. 
XXV.  31).  (2)  Dreadful  to  the  wicked  (2  Thess.  i.  7,  8).  3.  The  process  or  the  trial 
itself.  (1)  Its  universahty.  It  will  be  a  very  great  assize ;  never  was  the  like 
seen  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  Kings  and  nobles,  councils  and  armies,  those  who  were  above 
all  trial  here,  have  no  charter  of  exemption  granted  them.     They  who  refused  to 


832  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

come  to  "  the  throne  of  grace  "  shall  he  forced  to  come  to  the  bar  of  justice.  And 
the  dead  as  well  as  the  living  must  make  their  appearance  (Rev.  xx.  12)  ;  and  not  only 
men,  but  angels  ( Jude  6).  (2)  Its  formality.  Which  consists  in  the  opening  of  the  hooka 
(Dan.  vii.  10 ;  Rev.  xx.  12).  (a)  The  book  of  God's  omnisciency  (Mai.  iii.  16).  {h)  The 
book  of  conscience.  Men  lave  their  sins  written  in  thf  ir  conscience ;  but  the  book  la 
elaspi'd  (the  searing  of  the  conscience  is  the  clasping  of  the  book);  but  when  thia 
book  of  conscience  shall  be  unclasped  at  the  great  day,  then  all  their  hypocrisy, 
treason,  atheism,  shall  appear  to  the  view  of  men  and  angels  (Luke  xii.  3).  (3)  Its 
circumstances,  (a)  Impartiality.  Jesus  Christ  will  do  every  man  justice.  The 
Th'bans  did  picture  their  judge?  blind,  that  they  might  not  respect  persons; 
without  hands,  that  they  might  take  no  bribes.  Christ's  sceptre  is  "  a  sceptre  of 
righteousness"  (Heb.  i.  8).  He  is  no  "  respecter  of  persons  "  (Acts  x.  34).  (6) 
Exactness  of  the  trial.  It  will  be  very  critical  (Matt.  iii.  12).  Not  a  grace  or  a  sin 
but  His  fan  will  discover,  (c)  Perspicuity.  Sinners  shall  be  so  clearly  convicted, 
that  they  shall  hold  up  their  hand  at  the  bar,  and  cry,  "  guilty  "  (Psa.  U.  4).  The 
sinner  himself  shall  clear  God  of  injustice,  [d)  Supremacy.  Men  can  remove 
their  causes  from  one  place  to  another,  but  from  Christ's  court  there  is  no  appeal ; 
he  who  is  once  doomed  here — his  condition  is  irreversible.  VI.  The  effect  op 
THE  TRIAL.  1.  Segregation.  Christ  will  separate  the  godly  and  the  wicked  as  the 
*an  doth  separate  the  wheat  from  the  chaff,  as  a  furnace  separates  the  gold  from 
the  dross.  2.  The  sentence.  (1)  The  sentence  of  absolution  pronounced  upon  the 
godly  (Matt.  xxv.  34).  (2)  The  sentence  of  condemnation  pronounced  upon  the 
wicked  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  The  wicked  once  said  to  God,  "  Depart  from  us  "  (Job  xxi. 
14) ;  and  now  God  will  say  to  them,  "  Depart  from  Me."  "  Depart  from  Me,  in 
whose  presence  is  fulness  of  joy."  3.  The  execution  (Matt.  xiii.  30).  Christ  will 
say,  "Bundle  up  these  sinners;  here  a  bundle  of  hypocrites;  there  a  bundle  of 
apostates ;  there  a  bundle  of  profane ;  bundle  them  up,  and  throw  them  in  the 
fire."  And  now  no  cries  or  entreaties  will  prevail  with  the  Judge.  Conclusion : 
1.  Let  me  persuade  all  Christians  to  believe  this  truth,  that  there  shall  be  a  day  of 
judgment  (Eccles.  xi.  9).  How  many  hve  as  if  this  article  were  blotted  out  of  their 
Creed  !  Durst  men  swear,  be  unchaste,  live  in  malice,  if  they  did  believe  a  day  of 
judgment  ?  2.  See  here  the  sad  and  deplorable  estate  of  wicked  men.  (T.  Watscn, 
A.M.)  The  righteousness  of  final  judgment: — In  which  words  I  observe  these 
five  particulars.  I.  First,  an  assertion  of  a  judgment  to  come.  He  will  judge 
the  world.  For  the  more  clear  apprehension  of  the  full  importance  of  which  it  ia 
to  be  noted  that  there  are  two  parts  of  Divine  Providence.  The  former,  that  by 
which  He  takes  notice  of  the  actions  of  men  in  this  life  ;  the  latter,  that  by  which 
He  brings  men  to  account  in  the  other  world.  Which  two  branches  of  Providence 
do  mutually  infer  and  prove  each  other.  For  on  the  one  hand  if  there  were  no  such 
thing  as  a  wise  eye  of  God  that  strictly  observes  the  actions  of  men  in  thia 
world,  it  were  impossible  there  should  be  any  judgment  to  come,  at  least  not  a 
judgment  in  righteousness  ;  for  how  shall  He  judge  that  doth  not  discern  ?  And  on 
the  other  hand,  if  there  were  no  judgment  to  come,  it  were  to  no  purpose  for  God 
to  concern  Himself  about  the  affairs  of  mankind  here  below.  Now  this  doctrine  ia 
the  soul  and  spirit  of  all  religion,  and  the  sinew  of  all  government  and  society.  It 
is  the  soul  of  all  religion,  for  what  doth  the  belief  of  a  God  signify  (although  we 
siiould  imagine  Him  to  be  never  so  great,  glorious  and  happy)  if  He  will  not  trouble 
Himself  with  government ;  in  short,  if  He  will  neither  reward  nor  punish ;  virtue  ia 
then  but  an  empty  name.  And  it  is  the  sinew  of  all  government ;  for  it  is  certain 
that  plots  may  sometimes  be  laid  so  deep  that  no  eye  of  man  can  discover  them. 
And  there  may  be  such  a  potent  confederacy  of  wicked  men,  as  that  they  shall  out- 
face human  justice,  in  which  case,  what  shall  keep  the  world  from  running  into 
confusion,  and  becoming  an  hell  upon  earth,  but  the  discerning  eye  and  steady 
hand  of  Providence  ?     II.  The  second  observable  in  my  text  is,  that  there  is  not 

ONLY  A  JUDGMENT  TO  COME,  BUT  THAT  THE  DAY  OF  IT  18  DETERMINED.   *'  He  hath 

appointed  a  day  wherein,"  &c.  To  adjourn  to  no  certain  time  is,  I  think,  to  dissolve 
the  court ;  and  to  appoint  no  day  is  to  disappoint  the  business ;  the  Almighty, 
therefore,  hath  appointed  an  express  and  solemn  time  for  this  great  transaction. 
And  indeed  it  is  worthy  of  observation,  that  in  all  the  great  passages  of  Divine 
Providence  He  hath  passed  such  an  immutable  decree  upon  them,  that  the  time  of 
itheir  event  can  be  no  more  casual  than  the  very  things  themselves.  So  Exod.  xii. 
41,  the  servitude  of  the  children  of  Israel  was  determined  to  four  hundred  and 
thirty  years,  and  the  text  tells  us  "that  when  the  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  were 
£xpired,  even  the  self-aame  day  departed  all  the  host  of  the  Lord  oat  of  the  land  of 


«B&p.  xm.]  THE  ACTS.  638 

Egypt."  Again  2  Ghron.  zxxvi.  21,  God  had  deoreed  to  ptinish  the  nation  of  the 
Jews  with  seventy  years  captivity  in  Babylon,  and  precisely  upon  the  expiration  of 
that  term,  when  the  Word  of  the  Lord  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah  was 
finished,  God  put  it  into  the  heart  of  Cyras  to  proclaim  them  liberty.  III.  The 
third  observable,  namely,  that  as  the  day  of  judgment  is  set,  so  the  pebson  of  thb 
JxTDOB  IS  ALSO  CONSTITUTED  AND  OBDAiNED ;  "  He  will  judge  the  World  by  that  man 
whom  He  hath  ordained,"  &o.  And  as  all  circumstances  of  time,  place,  and 
persons,  are  evidences  of  fact,  and  assurances  of  the  principal  business,  so  doth  this 
particular  designation  of  the  Judge  further  confirm  the  certainty  of  the  judgment. 
And  not  only  so,  but  it  also  opens  to  as  the  great  depth  of  the  Divine  goodness, 
especially  upon  these  two  considerations.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  wonderful 
decorous  and  becoming  the  Divine  Majesty,  and  righteous  towards  the  person  of 
our  Saviour,  that  He  who  humbled  Himself  to  take  our  nature  upon  Him,  and 
therein  to  fulfil  exactly  the  Divine  law,  should  in  reward  of  this  obedience  and 
humiliation  be  exalted  to  be  the  Judge  of  the  world,  which  He  died  for  (Phil.  ii.  9). 
2.  Again,  secondly,  it  wonderfully  displays  the  Divine  goodness  towards  us,  that  He 
should  be  appointed  our  Judge,  that  hath  been,  and  yet  is  in  our  nature,  that  hath 
felt  our  infirmities,  conflicted  with  the  same  temptations,  and  that  withal  had  so 
much  love  to  us  as  to  die  for  us.  That  the  Divine  Majesty  will  not  oppress  us  with 
His  own  glory,  nor  employ  an  archangel  to  pass  judgment  upon  us,  who  as  He 
hath  had  no  commerce  with  a  body  of  flesh  and  blood,  cannot  have  sufficient 
compassion  of  our  infirmities.     IV.  In  the  fourth  particular  of  my  text,  He  hath 

GIVEN   ASSUBANOE     UNTO    ALL   UEN     IN     THAT     He   BAISED   HiM   FBOM   THE   DEAD.      But 

how  doth  that  assure  as  of  this  great  and  comfortable  point  ?  It  is  true  the  resur- 
rection of  our  Saviour  did  denote  Him  to  be  some  great  and  extraordinary  person, 
but  that  is  no  sufficient  argument  that  He  shall  be  Judge  of  the  world ;  the  evidence 
therefore  lies  in  this,  our  Saviour,  Christ  Jesus,  whilst  He  was  in  the  world,  had 
often  declared  that  He  was  appointed  by  God  to  judge  the  quick  and  dead,  and 
appealed  to  His  resurrection  as  the  great  proof  of  this.  V.  There  is  one  particular 
more  in  my  text  that  deserves  especial  consideration,  and  that  is  the  manneb  «f 

THIS  judgment,   OB  EATHEB  THE   MKASUEES    THIS    JuDGB    WILL    PEOCEED  BY  AT   THAT 

«beat  JUDGMENT,  AND  THAT  IS  IN  BiGHTEOUSNESs ',  He  wiU  judgc  the  world  in 
righteousness.  Now  in  order  hereto,  we  must  first  settle  the  Scripture  notion  of  this 
phrase  "  righteousness  "  or  "  in  righteousness."  And  that  which  I  first  observe  to 
this  purpose  is  this :  Nowhere  in  all  the  Scripture  doth  righteousness  signify  rigour. 
I  say  there  is  no  such  use  of  this  word  in  Scripture,  when  applied  to  God's  dealings, 
no,  nor  yet  when  it  is  applied  to  men ;  a  severe,  harsh,  rigorous  man  is  so  far  from 
being  a  righteous  man  in  the  style  of  Scripture,  that  He  is  quite  under  another 
character.  But  to  come  home  to  the  business,  the  full  of  my  observation  touching 
the  Scripture  notion  of  the  phrase  in  my  text  is  this,  that  SiKaioavvti,  or  righteous- 
ness, is  always  used  there  in  a  comprehensive  sense,  so  as  to  take  in  not  only  justice 
4ind  uprightness,  and  impartiality,  and  the  like,  but  also  goodness,  kindness,  equity, 
clemency,  candour,  and  mercy.  "  In  righteousness  shall  He  judge  the  world,  and 
the  people  with  equity  (Psa.  xcviii.  last  verse).  Where,  as  world  and  people  are 
equivalent  expressions,  and  interpret  each  other,  so  are  righteousness  and  equity 
made  to  be  expressive  of  each  other.  Now  agreeably  to  this  notion,  I  will,  by  the 
guidance  of  the  same  holy  Scripture,  endeavour  to  represent  the  measures  of  that 
.great  day.  1.  Christ  Jesus,  the  Judge  of  aU  the  world,  will  not  at  the  last  day 
proceed  arbitrarily  with  men,  but  according  to  known  laws ;  that  is,  He  will  not 
.absolve  and  save  any  merely  because  He  hath  decreed  so  to  do  (Bev.  ii.  23  ;  2  Cor. 
V.  10).  Indeed  in  this  world  God  doth  deal  by  prerogative,  and  dispenses  the  means 
■of  grace  as  well  as  other  favours,  as  He  pleases,  from  whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that 
.greater  advantages  are  conferred  upon  some  people  than  other,  but  this  is  not  the 
case  at  the  end  of  the  world,  when  God  comes  to  demonstrate  His  justice  and 
righteousness.  And  besides,  wherefore  is  the  Judge  said  to  be  the  searcher  of 
hearts,  if  He  proceed  proleptically  upon  bare  resolution  or  determination  ?  Why 
is  He  said  to  separate  the  sheep  from  the  goats,  if  He  make  a  distinction  without  a 
-difference  7  Why  is  it  called  a  fiery  trial  if  there  be  no  discrimination ;  and  in  a 
word,  if  He  save  and  damn  by  prerogative  ?  2.  The  Judge  of  the  world  will  not  be 
partial,  or  ase  any  respect  of  persons ;  that  is,  He  will  neither  acquit  nor  condemn 
any  man  or  men  whatsoever,  in  consideration  of  external  circumstances.  As  for 
kindred  and  family,  the  Jews  were  wont  to  bear  themselves  in  hand  with  their 
lineage  and  descent,  that  they  were  Abraham's  seed.  God  will  sooner  exert  His 
onmipotenoy  in  the  most  improbable  miracle  that  ever  He  wrought,  than  admit  aa 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xm. 

unholy  person  into  heaven  apon  the  pretence  of  kindred  and  consanguinity.  And 
as  for  sect  and  opinion,  it  is  notoriously  evident  that  there  is  no  opinion  so  orthodox, 
nor  party  so  canonical,  but  an  evil  man  may  be  of  it,  and  at  that  day  nothing  'will 
pass  current  for  the  sake  of  the  public  stamp  upon  it,  but  according  to  the  intrinsio 
value  ;  for  all  shall  be  weighed  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary.  To  this  head  X 
refer  also,  that  this  righteous  Judge  is  capable  of  no  fondness  or  indulgence,  will 
be  wrought  upon  by  no  flattery,  will  value  nothing  that  men  can  either  do  or  suffer 
for  Him  without  an  holy  temper,  an  habitually  pious  and  virtuous  life,  and  such 
qualifications  inherent  as  fit  a  man  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  3.  So  just  and 
righteous  will  be  the  proceedings  at  this  great  tribunal,  that  as  no  man  shall  be 
saved  for  the  righteousness  of  another,  so  neither  shall  any  man  be  damned  for  the 
sin  of  another,  but  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden.  Whatever  it  may  please 
the  Divine  Majesty  to  do  in  this  world,  where  His  inflictions  are  not  so  properly 
revenged  or  the  expletion  of  justice,  as  methods  of  mercy  to  reclaim  men  from  sin  ; 
yet  most  certainly  at  that  day  the  sons  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers, 
but  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden,  and  the  soul  only  that  sinneth  shall  die. 

4.  This  Judge  of  all  the  world  will  at  that  great  day  candidly  interpret  men's, 
actions,  and  make  the  very  best  of  things  that  the  case  will  bear.  Now  touching 
this  the  tenor  of  the  whole  gospel  assures  us  that  our  merciful  Judge  will  not  watch 
advantages  against  men,  will  not  insist  upon  punctilios,  but  principally  looks  at 
the  sincerity  of  men's  intentions  (Matt,  xxv.  34).  But  that  which  I  principally 
note  in  this  place  is  the  benignity  of  His  interpretation,  for  when  the  righteous  say, 
"  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  an  hungered,"  He  replies,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done 
it  to  the  least  of  these,"  (fee,  as  if  He  had  said,  I  know  the  sincerity  of  your  inten- 
tions, and  I  take  notice  of  the  virtuous  temper  from  whence  those  actions  of  yours  pro- 
ceeded ;  'tis  the  heart  I  value  more  than  the  thing  done,  or  the  opportunity  of  doing. 

5.  The  admirable  equity  of  the  great  and  final  judgment  is  this.  That  the  glory  and 
happiness  of  good  men  in  the  other  world  shall  be  increased  proportionably  to  the 
measures  of  their  diSieulties,  sufferings,  and  calamities  here  in  this  world.  The 
apostle  tells  us,  "  That  as  one  star  differeth  from  another  in  glory,  so  also  is  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead."  {J.  Goodman,  D.D.)  Judgment  inevitable: — When 
the  buried  city  of  Pompeii  was  unearthed,  there  was  found  in  a  little  stone  room  a 
circle  of  men  lying  dead  around  a  table.  They  had  been  invited  as  watchers  before 
a  funeral,  to  remain  with  the  corpse  through  the  night,  while  the  fatigued  relatives 
rested.  According  to  custom,  a  feast  had  been  prepared  as  an  offering  to  the 
departed  spirit.  These  disinterested  and  honourable  friends  thought  to  help  them- 
selves to  a  moiety  of  the  delicate  provisions,  and  were  led  on  to  eat  the  viands  and 
quaff  the  wine.  Just  in  the  midst  of  their  unholy  revel  the  ashes  began  to  fall,  the 
sulphurous  vapours  poured  in,  and  they  were  strangled  in  the  act.  The  city  was 
soon  covered  deep  under  the  discharge  from  the  burning  mountain — buildings  all 
concealed,  streets  all  filled  up  ;  and  so  two  thousands  of  years  passed  on.  Now  that 
whole  transaction,  in  all  its  dishonesty  and  unutterable  meanness,  has  reached  the 
Ught.  The  bodies  of  the  watchers  and  the  body  of  the  dead  they  pretended  to  watch 
were  lying  together  there  in  the  midst  of  the  excavations.  Ages  rolled  away  before 
men's  eyes  saw  it,  but  God  the  All-seeing  was  aware  of  the  infamous  cheat  from  the 
moment  it  was  perpetrated.  Oh,  how  sober,  and  yet  how  startling,  will  be  the 
disclosures  of  secret  iniquity,  hidden  sins,  Sabbath  hypocrisy,  and  ongenuine 
life,  in  the  great  Ught  of  the  future  judgment,  as  it  comes  to  revetJ  them 
in  the  dawn  of  eternity  I  (G.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  resurrection  a  judg- 
ment : — There  are  two  moments  in  the  history  of  this  world  in  which  the  veil 
is  drawn  off  from  God's  government,  and  it  is  seen,  without  any  doubt  or  confusion, 
how  He  gives  judgment  clearly  and  decisively  on  the  side  of  goodness  and  truth. 
One  of  these  moments  is  of  course  to  come,  the  other  is  past.  God,  indeed,  is  far 
from  leaving  His  judgment  without  witness  in  the  history  of  the  world.  God 
rewards  and  punishes  now.  But  human  life,  as  we  look  at  it  from  the  outside,  is 
etill  full  of  darkness  and  perplexity.  The  perfect  and  final  and  manifest  clearing 
up  of  God's  judgment  on  what  men  think  and  do  is  not  now.  It  is  not  till  the  end 
and  time  of  mortality,  when  the  Judge  sits  upon  the  throne,  that  this  will  be 
pronounced,  so  that  none  can  doubt  it.  And  in  the  course  of  the  world  there  is 
but  one  other  such  occasion  like  it  in  its  awfulness,  like  it  in  its  clearness.  It 
was  when  He  who  had  been  condemned  as  a  sinner  for  the  cause  of  truth  and  good- 
ness, was  raised  again  by  the  glory  of  the  Father  on  the  third  day.  Christ  suffered 
for  righteousness,  and  in  Him  righteousness  was  justified  before  the  world,  and  Id 
anticipation  of  that  great  day  when  righteousness  shall  finally  triumph.    Many  men. 


CHAP,  xvn.]  THE  ACTS.  635 

before  and  after  Him,  have  suffered  for  righteousness,  but  their  righteousness  was 
left  to  the  varying  and  contradictory  judgments  of  men.  It  seemed,  as  far  as 
present  experience  went,  as  if  they  had  found  only  evil,  by  keeping  innocency  and 
cleaving  to  the  thing  that  was  right.  It  was  faith  only  that  dared  to  trust  against 
the  melancholy  resignation  of  experience.  But  in  Christ  the  spectacle  which  had 
in  others  been  only  begun  was  shown  also  finished.  The  world  had  often  looked 
on  the  sight  of  righteousness  defeated  and  overthrown ;  it  had  seen  the  beginning 
of  its  course,  but  not  how  it  was  to  end.  But,  for  once,  in  Christ  there  was  shown 
to  men  on  earth  both  the  beginning  and  the  end.  Never  before  bad  such  righteous- 
ness suffered.  On  the  other  hand,  never  before  had  it  been  so  unanswerably 
justified.  "  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world,"  said  our  Lord,  when  He  was  about 
to  suffer.  The  world  had  doubted  whether  God  did  judge  and  rule  the  course  of 
things  on  earth.  "  Where,"  it  had  asked,  "  was  the  God  of  judgment,"  and  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  representative  of  the  human  race,  the  challenge  was 
answered  ;  the  world  itself  was  to  be  judged.  In  Jesus  Christ  the  boast  of  wicked- 
ness was  made  in  aU  its  insolence.  But  in  Jesus  Christ  the  proof  of  righteousness, 
of  righteousness  in  man's  real  nature,  was  not  put  off  till  the  world  to  come.  In 
that  tremendous  breaking  through  the  laws  of  mortality  and  death,  we  see  the 
answer  to  the  challenge  of  the  world,  and  may  be  sure  that  it  will  be  well  with  the 
righteous.  Of  this  God  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in  that  He  hath  raised 
•'  the  crucified  from  the  dead."  I  am  not  sure  that  we  always  adequately  under- 
stand how  strong  a  faith  it  must  have  needed  before  Christ  rose  to  believe  this  in 
earnest.  Good  men  did  believe  it.  The  Psalms  are  full  of  this  belief ;  but  they  are 
full,  too,  of  its  difficulty.  They  trusted  like  children  to  their  general  confidence  in 
the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  in  spite  of  death  ;  they  were  sure  that,  somehow  or  other, 
they  would  "  see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living."  But  to  ua 
the  proof  has  been  given.  And  I  am  not  sure  that  we  always  understand  how, 
even  still,  that  faith  needs  aU  the  support  which  God  has  given  it.  The  power  of 
sin  is  unabated.  The  righteous  and  the  sinner  seem  left  alike  to  find  their  way 
through  life.  But  when  our  hearts  fail  us,  when  the  world  mocks  us,  let  us  go  back 
as  Christians  did  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  to  the  open,  empty  grave  of  the  Lord- 
let  us  rise  up  in  thought  and  feeling  to  the  unspeakable  preciousness  of  that 
foundation-stone  of  all  human  hopes — "  but  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and 
become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept."  No  triumph  of  evil  now  can  equal  what 
happened  when  He  suffered  for  us  and  was  put  to  shame ;  "  but  now  is  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead" — "now  is  the  judgment  of  the  world."  {Denn  Church.) 
The  day  of  judgment : — The  day  when  Lord  Exeter  was  tried  for  high  treason; 
the  day  when  the  House  of  Commons  moved  for  the  impeachment  of  Lord 
Lovatt ;  the  day  when  Charles  I.  and  Queen  Caroline  were  put  upon  trial ;  the 
day  when  Robert  Emmet  was  arraigned  as  an  insurgent ;  the  day  when  Blenner- 
hasset  was  brought  into  the  court-room  because  he  had  tried  to  overthrow 
the  United  States  Government,  and  all  the  other  great  trials  of  the  world  are 
nothing  compared  with  the  great  trial  in  which  you  and  I  shall  appear,  summoned 
before  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  There  will  be  no  pleading  there  "the  statute 
of  limitation " ;  no  "  turning  State's  evidence,"  trying  to  get  off  ourselves,  while  , 
others  suffer;  no  "  moving  for  a  non-suit."  The  case  will  come  on  inexorably,  and 
we  shall  be  tried.  You,  my  brother,  who  have  so  often  been  advocate  for  others, 
will  then  need  an  advocate  for  yourself.  Have  you  selected  him  ?  The  Lord 
Chancellor  of  the  Universe.  If  any  man  sin  we  have  an  advocate — Jesus  Christ  | 
the  righteous.  It  is  uncertain  when  your  case  will  be  called  on.  "Be  ye  alsoj 
ready."  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Whereof  He  hath  given  assurance  unto ' 
all  men,  In  that  He  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead. — The  doctrine  of  a  future 
judgment  confirmed  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ : — I.  An  expbess  declaration 
OF  God  concerning  a  future  and  general  judgment.  He  hath  appointed  a  dav 
wherein  He  will  judge  the  world.  It  must  be  owned  that  the  natural  proofs 
of  a  judgment  to  come,  had  it  not  been  made  an  article  of  our  faith,  are 
very  strong  and  cogent.  The  promiscuous  distribution  of  the  blessings  and 
evils  of  this  life  to  wicked  and  good  men.  The  triumphs  of  injustice,  and 
notorious  oppression  of  right,  and  that  not  for  a  short  time,  but  for  a  course 
of  many  years,  have  been  all  along  made  an  argument  that  the  Judge  of  all  the 
earth  will  one  day  do  right,  and  justify  the  wise  though  unsearchable  methods 
of  His  providence  in  this  world,  by  rewarding  the  innocent  and  bringing  the  success- 
ful and  presumptuous  sinner  to  condign  punishment.  And  indeed  there  is  nothing 
more  true  or  certain  in  fact  than  what  Solomon  observes  (Eccles.  viii.  14,  (&c.)^ 


€36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ivn. 

But  though  this  and  several  other  proofs,  which  are  drawn  from  natural  religion, 
of  a  iu(1gment  to  come  should  be  allowed  not  only  highly  probable,  but  very  evident, 
it  must  be  owned,  notwithstanding  a  great  happiness  to  mankind  in  general,  that 
God  has  been  pleased  to  make  this  natural  principle  an  article  of  our  Christian 
faith.  For  by  this  means  those  who  are  not  able  to  reason  justly  on  the  nature  of 
things,  or  to  carry  on  a  long  train  of  proofs,  are  convinced  of  the  truth  of  a  future 
judgment  upon  the  authority  of  God.  II.  The  justice  and  eqdity  wherewith 
God  will  pkooeed  in  judging  the  wobld — "He  hath  appointed  a  day  wherein  He 
will  judge  the  world  "  in  righteousness.  The  justice  of  the  proceedings  at  that  day 
will  appear  in  this,  that  God,  in  rewarding  and  punishing  men,  will  make  a  more 
visible  distinction  between  the  wicked  and  the  good  than  He  ordinarily  does  in  this 
life.  Herein  also  lies  the  justice  of  the  great  and  last  court  of  judicature  that  no 
partial  record  shall  be  had  to  any  persons  on  account  of  their  superior  quaHty, 
fortune,  or  other  advantages  in  this  world.  To  show  the  impartial  execution  of  justice 
at  that  day,  we  have  a  particular  enumeration  of  the  men  of  the  earth  who  have 
abused  their  power,  their  authority,  or  wealth  to  sinful  ends,  and  a  very  lively 
image  and  the  horror  of  despair  which  will  then  seize  them  (Rev.  vi.  15-17). 
III.  The  designation  of  the  Person  who  is  to  be  oub  Judge.  "  That  Man  whom 
He  hath  ordained."  It  might  perhaps  have  been  thought  more  suitable  to  the 
awful  solemnity  of  the  last  day,  and  the  dignity  and  glory  wherein  Christ  will  then 
appear,  if  He  had  been  described  in  the  character  of  Judge  as  the  Son  of  God,  the 
brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person,  or  in  those  other 
magnificent  terms  wherein  He  is  so  often  spoken  of  in  the  prophetical  writings. 
But  still  it  is  more  suitable  to  the  state  and  condition  of  mankind,  and  His  tender 
compassion  towards  them,  that  when  He  speaks  of  coming  to  judge  the  world  He 
should  rather  give  us  an  idea  of  His  human  than  His  Divine  nature.  For  indeed, 
when  we  consider  the  infinite  persecutions  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  at  what  an 
infinite  distance  our  sins  have  separated  us  from  it,  had  the  eternal  God  Himself, 
without  the  interposal  of  a  Mediator,  thought  fit  to  convene  the  world  in  judgment 
before  Him.  Alas !  the  best  of  men  would  have  been  so  oppressed  with  the  thoughts 
of  His  glory,  and  their  own  demerits,  that  they  must  of  necessity,  even  under  their 
best  grounded  hopes,  have  sunk  into  great  despondency  of  mind.  He  that  haa 
assumed  our  nature,  and  done  and  suffered  so  much  for  us  in  it,  will  certainly  show 
all  the  lenity  and  tenderness  to  it  which  the  terms  of  evangelical  obedience  will 
admit.  IV.  We  have  here  a  very  particular  and  extraordinary  circumstance  to 
convince  us  of  the  truth  and  certainty  of  Christ's  coming  to  judge  the  world, 
and  that  is  by  His  resurrection  from  the  dead.  The  miracles  which  were  done  by 
our  Saviour  throughout  the  whole  course  of  His  ministry  carried  a  sufl&cient  proof 
and  attestation  along  with  them  of  the  truths  which  He  taught,  for  no  one  could 
have  done  those  things  which  He  did  in  the  most  open  and  public  manner  without 
the  assistance  of  a  Divine  power.  Now  this  being  one  great  article  of  the  religion 
He  came  to  preach  and  establish  that  God  has  appointed  a  day  wherein  He  will 
judge  the  world,  it  may  be  said,  What  need  was  there  of  any  further  witness  to 
confirm  this  article?  Or  why,  when  it  was  sufficiently  confirmed  before,  was  there 
BO  great  stress  laid  on  the  resurrection  of  Christ  for  the  proof  of  it  ?  But  still  there 
was  something  peculiar  in  what  related  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ  which  rendered 
it  an  argument  of  the  truth  of  His  religion  more  proper  to  persuade  the  generality 
of  men  and  to  convince  gainsayers  than  the  rest  of  His  miracles.  For — 1.  He  bad 
Himself  appealed  to  this  testimony  as  one  great  proof  and  characteristic  of  His 
Divine  mission  and  authority  (John  ii.  16).  And  therefore,  besides  that  His  resur- 
rection was  a  miraculous  and  extraordinary  event,  exceeding  the  powers  of  nature, 
it  was  an  argument  of  His  being  inspired  with  a  prophetic  Spirit,  and  that  God, 
who  alone  appropriates  to  Himself  the  knowledge  of  future  events,  was  in  this 
respect  also  with  Him,  2.  The  caution  which  the  Jews  used  to  prevent,  if  possible, 
the  resurrection  of  Christ,  gave  the  greater  force  to  the  arguments  we  draw  in  proof 
of  our  holy  religion  from  it.  So  that  His  very  enemies,  who  would  fasten  so 
chimerical  an  imputation  upon  Him,  must  confess  at  least  that  His  resurrection 
could  not  be  effected  by  it,  but  that  He  was  raised  by  a  power  truly  Divine.  8. 
Again,  whereas  it  might  have  been  objected  that  His  other  miracles  were  done  before 
people  of  obscure  and  mean  circumstances,  before  a  company  of  illiterate  Galileans, 
and  the  credulous  multitude  upon  whom  it  is  no  difficult  matter  for  men  of  parts 
and  dexterity  at  any  time  to  impose ;  though  this  objection  is  easily  answered,  from 
the  public  manner  of  our  Saviour's  working  His  miracles,  and  His  propounding 
them  afterwards  to  the  examination  of  His  greatest  enemies,  the  Pharisees,  yet  in 


CHAP.  ZTn.]  THE  ACTS.  637 

His  resurrection  the  very  ground  of  these  surmises  ia  quite  removed.  There  coold 
be  no  artifice  used  on  so  remarkable  and  extraordinary  an  occasion.  4.  There  is 
something  in  the  very  nature  of  the  thing  itseK  apt  to  persuade  men,  from  the 
resurrection  of  Christ,  that  the  doctrines  which  He  taught  were  true,  and  that  He 
was  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God.  For  though  every  miracle  is  above  the  ordinary 
course  and  powers  of  nature,  and  supposes  certain  changes  of  bodies  which  cannot 
be  accounted  for  according  to  the  established  order  of  things ;  yet  where  all  the 
bodily  powers  of  a  man  are  rendered  incapable  of  acting,  and  all  the  springs  of  Ufa 
are  entirely  broken,  it  still  seems  less  conceivable  how  He  should  either  be  able  to 
work  any  change  upon  other  bodies,  or  to  restore  His  own  body  again  to  life.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  If  God  has  appointed  a  day  wherein  He  will  judge  the  world,  let  ua 
have  it  often  in  our  thoughts,  and  carefully  practise  the  duties  preparative  to  it. 
2.  If  God  has  appointed  a  day  wherein  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness, 
then  it  highly  concerns  us  as  we  expect  to  stand  in  judgment  before  Him,  to  take 
care  that  we  live  and  die  in  a  holy  and  righteous  state.  3.  Since  our  Blessed 
Saviour,  in  speaking  of  the  last  judgment,  is  pleased  more  peouUarly  to  style  Him- 
self the  Son  of  Man.  This  consideration  will  mightily  fortify  aU  true  penitents 
against  those  black  and  desponding  thoughts  which  are  sometimes  apt  to  arise  in 
the  minds  of  very  good  men.  How  great  or  numerous  soever  our  sins  have  been, 
yet  if  we  have  humbled  ourselves  before  God,  and  truly  repented  of  them,  we  know 
that  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  sufficient  to  expiate  their  guilt.  4.  As  by  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  we  have  a  more  fuU  and  express  assurance  of  a  future  judg- 
ment than  we  could  have  had  from  the  mere  light  of  reason,  let  this  considera- 
tion excite  us  to  walk  worthy  of  so  bright  and  glorious  an  evidence.  Let  us  resolve 
to  live,  not  as  persons  that  have  some  probable  notions  and  conjectures  about  such 
a  thing,  but  as  men  who  fully  and  in  earnest  believe  that  we  must  one  day  appear 
before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in 
the  body  according  to  what  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  {B.  FiddeSf 
DJ).) 

Vers.  32-34.  And  vhen  they  beard  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  some 
mocked. — Mocking  at  the  truth : — "  This  has  been  one  of  the  worst  nights,"  says 
Mr.  Bampton,  an  Indian  missionary,  "  I  ever  endured.  Mockery  I  mockery  1  cruel 
mockery,  almost  unbearable !  I  talked  for  a  wMle,  and  was  heard  by  some,  on 
the  blessings  to  be  enjoyed  by  faith  in  Christ,  when  a  man  came  with  a  hell-har- 
dened countenance,  and  that  peculiar  constant  laugh  which  I  can  hardly  bear. 
The  burden  of  his  cry  was  '  Juggernaut  is  the  foundation !  Juggernaut  is  com- 
pletely God  I  Victory  to  Juggernaut  I '  He  clapped  his  hands,  he  shouted,  he 
laughed,  and  induced  the  rest,  or  a  great  part  of  them,  to  do  the  same.  On  the 
ground  of  reason  I  fear  no  one,  and  rage  I  commonly  bear  very  well ;  but  these 
everlasting  laughing  buffoons  are  nearly  too  much  for  me.  It  is  my  own  great 
care,  that  amidst  a  reviling,  laughing  crowd,  I  do  not  seem  abashed."  {Biblical 
Museum.)  Sneering  is  the  natural  fault  of  the  predominance  of  the  mere  intel- 

lect unaccompanied  by  any  corresponding  growth  and  liveliness  of  the  moral  affec- 
tions, particularly  admiration  of  moral  excellence.  (T.  Arnold,  D.D.)  We  will 
hear  thee  again  of  this  matter. — Fatal  procrastination: — In  the  cathedral  at 
Genoa  there  is  an  emerald  vase  which  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  gifts  of  the 
Queen  of  Sheba  to  Solomon.  Its  authentic  history  goes  back  eight  hundred  years. 
The  tradition  is  that  when  King  Solomon  received  it  he  filled  it  with  an  elixir 
which  he  alone  knew  how  to  distil,  and  of  which  a  single  drop  would  prolong 
human  life  to  an  indefinite  extent.  A  miserable  criminal,  dying  of  slow  disease  in 
prison,  besought  the  king  to  give  him  a  drop  of  this  magic  potion.  Solomon  re- 
fused. "  Why  should  I  prolong  so  useless  a  Ufe  ?  "  he  said.  "  I  will  give  it  to 
those  whose  Uves  will  bless  their  fellow-men."  But  when  good  men  begged  for  it 
the  king  was  in  an  iU-humour,  or  too  indolent  to  open  the  vase,  or  he  promised 
and  forgot.  So  the  years  passed  until  he  grew  old,  and  many  of  the  friends  whom 
he  loved  were  dead ;  and  stiU  the  vase  had  never  been  opened.  Then  the  king,  to 
excuse  himself,  threw  doubt  upon  the  virtues  of  the  eUxir.  At  last  he  himself  fell 
ill.  Then  his  servants  brought  the  vase  that  he  might  save  his  own  life.  .  He 
opened  it.  But  it  was  empty.  The  eUxir  had  evaporated  to  the  last  drop.  Did 
not  the  rabbi  or  priest  who  invented  this  story  intend  to  convey  in  it  a  great  truth  t 
Have  we  not  all  within  us  a  vessel  more  precious  than  any  emerald,  into  which  God 
has  put  a  portion  of  the  water  of  life  ?  It  is  for  our  own  healing — for  the  healing 
of  others.    We  hide  it,  we  do  not  use  it — for  false  shamC;  or  idleness,  or  forgetful* 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

nesB.  Presently  we  begin  to  doubt  its  efi&cacy.  When  death  approaches,  we  turn 
to  it  in  desperate  haste.  But  the  neglected  faith  has  left  the  souL  The  vase  is 
empty.  The  effects  of  the  sermon  : — Learn — 1.  That  whatever  might  be  the 

diversity  in  the  positions,  talents,  and  sentiments  of  men,  the  doctrines  of  the  true 
religion  are  important  to  all.  To  the  "  Jews,"  "  Epicureans,"  and  "  Stoics,"  the 
apostle  proclaimed  the  same  doctrines.  2.  That  whatever  might  be  the  power  with 
which  the  great  verities  of  the  true  religion  are  urged,  a  necessary  and  uniform 
result  is  not  to  be  expected.  The  same  tool,  wielded  by  the  same  hand,  and  with 
the  same  force  and  skill,  could  produce  the  same  effect  upon  the  same  species  of 
stone,  metal,  or  timber ;  but  the  same  doctrines  urged  by  the  same  man,  at  the 
same  time  produce  widely  different  results  in  the  same  place  upon  the  same  con- 
gregation. Here  are  three  moral  classes : — Some  amongst  his  audience  heard  him. 
— I.  With  derisive  incredulity.  "  Some  mocked."  The  Epicureans  would 
especially  do  this.  They  denied  a  future  state,  and  regarded  death  as  an  eternal 
sleep.  Three  things  would  probably  induce  them  to  ridicule  this  doctrine.  1.  It 
stood  opposed  to  their  preconceived  notions.  Many  a  sceptic  rejects  Christianity 
on  this  same  ground.  How  foolish,  how  arrogant  is  this !  Are  their  little  notions 
the  measure,  the  sum  of  all  truth?  2.  It  was  apparently  improbable  to  them.  Are 
not  the  generations  of  men  reduced  to  dust  ?  Have  not  the  particles  of  which  their 
bodies  were  composed  been  wrought  into  the  texture  of  every  species  and  form  of 
plant  and  of  animal  life  ?  Where  are  the  symptoms  of  a  resurrection  ?  But  how 
foolish  this  1  The  men  who  saw  the  priests  endeavouring  to  level  the  walla  of 
Jericho,  by  blowing  in  the  rams'  horn,  would  probably  "mock"  them  on  this 
account,  but  the  walls  fell  notwithstanding.  Lot  seemed  as  one  that  "  mocked 
unto  his  sons-in-law,"  when  he  warned  them  of  the  approaching  judgment ;  but 
the  tempest  of  fire  came  albeit,  <fec.  3.  He  who  proclaimed  the  doctrine  to  them 
was  not  a  recognised  teacher.  He  did  not  belong  to  their  school.  He  was  a  poor 
Jew.  What  did  he,  therefore,  know  about  these  things  ?  II.  With  a  procras- 
tinating RESOLVE.  "  Others  said.  We  will  hear  thee  again  of  this  matter."  Pro- 
bably these  were  some  of  the  Stoics,  who  believed  in  a  future  state,  and  who  were 
disposed  to  give  the  subject  a  little  attention  at  some  future  time.  This  procras- 
tinating of  the  subject  of  religion  is  exceedingly  foolish,  because— 1.  It  is,  of  all 
subjects,  the  most  important.  2.  Because  an  important  step  towards  its  reception 
has  been  taken  when  an  interest  has  been  created.  3.  Any  portion  of  future  time 
is  very  uncertain,  and  even  should  it  be  vouchsafed,  the  existing  interest  may  never 
be  renewed.  A  "  more  convenient  season  "  may  never  come.  III.  With  praotical 
faith.  '•  Howbeit  certain  men  clave  unto  him,"  &c.  These  two  names  suggest — 
That  Christianity  is  alike  suited  to  both  sexes.  Let  the  woman  stand  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  intuitional  power,  and  the  man  as  the  logicaL  Or  let  the  woman 
stand  as  the  representative  of  those  who  have  to  attend  to  the  more  private  and 
domestic  duties,  and  the  man  as  the  representative  of  those  who  have  to 
be  out  in  the  open  world — in  the  field,  the  market,  the  shop,  the  senate-house 
— battling  with  difficulties.  Christianity  is  great  enough  for  the  greatest,  and 
simple  enough  for  the  simplest.  Conclusion:  From  the  whole  we  may  learn — (1) 
That  the  gospel  is  moral  in  its  influence  upon  the  world.  It  does  not  bear  man 
down  by  violence  and  force.  (2)  That  the  gospel  is  not  to  be  restricted  to  any 
class.  (8)  That  ministers  should  not  despair  for  want  of  success.  Though  some 
deride  and  some  procrastinate,  some  will  believe.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  So  Paul 

departed  from  among'  them. — Paul's  adieu  to  Athens: — He  leaves  Athens — I. 
Having  considerably  altered  its  spiritual  condition.  1.  He  left  it  a  new 
stimulus  to  thought.  He  gave  to  their  understandings  a  new  theory  of  the  universe, 
a  new  method  to  happiness,  a  new  manifestation  of  God.  2.  He  increased  its 
responsibility.  Responsibihty  is  measured  by  privileges.  Athens  had  been  highly 
favoured ;  but  Paul  gave  more  of  the  Divine  in  thought  to  them  than  all  their 
philosophers.  0  Athens,  better  a  thousand  times  that  Paul  had  never  entered  thee 
than  that  thou  shouldst  fail  in  the  new-imposed  responsibility  1  II.  With  a 
heightened  estimate  or  Christianity.  The  apostle  made  a  great  experiment  in 
taking  the  gospel  to  Athena.  He  had  undoubtedly  heard  about  their  great  sages, 
and  was  perhaps  acquainted  with  their  systems  of  thought.  He  had  no  doubt 
received  a  deep  impression  of  the  inventiveness,  energy,  and  sesthetios  of  their  intel- 
lect in  the  architecture  and  statuary  of  their  city.  How  will  such  men,  he  may 
have  asked,  regard  the  tale  I  have  to  tell  them  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ?  But  after 
his  sermon  on  Mars'  Hill,  all  these  misgivings  would  give  place  to  an  unbounded 
confidence  in  the  glory  of  his  message.    Christianity  has  been  tested  by  every  school 


4IHAP.  xvn.]  THE  ACTS,  6B9 

of  philosophy,  every  grade  of  intelleot,  and  by  every  system  of  religion,  and  it  has 
always  oome  forth  the  triumphant  power.  How  unbounded,  therefore,  should  be 
our  confidence  I  III.  Nevbb  perhaps  to  visit  n  ant  mobb.  There  is  something 
very  affeoting  in  a  parting  of  this  kind.  It  was  affecting  to  see  Moses  leaving 
Pharoah  to  meet  him  no  more  until  the  judgment;  the  young  lawyer  leaving 
Ohrist,  going  away  sorrowful ;  and  now  Paul  leaving  Athens.  Though  he  would 
not  return  to  them  again — 1.  He  had  discharged  his  conscience,  and  was  clear  of 
their  blood.  2.  He  would  be  engaged  in  the  diffusion  of  the  gospeL  He  was  off  to 
Corinth,  and  thence  on,  for  his  gospel  was  a  gospel  for  humanity.  8.  Though  he 
would  not  return  to  them  again,  he  would  anticipate  meeting  them  at  the  retribu- 
tion. He  had  told  them  of  a  day  of  judgment,  and  on  tiiat  day  he  would  meet 
them.    {Ibid.) 

The  worka  of  lh«  late  Beveiend  0.  H.  Bpnrgeon  an  aaed  In  (he  prepantloQ  vt  ihta  voliime  by 
permlarinn  of  Meem.  Pusnune  and  Alabutac 


X. 


1    1012  01127  8084 


Date  Due 

:.r  3  1  '41 

i 

r^fi  ^  -'A"^ 

Ff  23'53 

lf»i«*'>«-* 

^ 

'^'N  1  f; 

Cl^C 

^'1        HI 

i^^^.^>?W 

5^ 

f) 

