THE    CHRISTIAN    RACE 

AND    OTHER   SERMONS 


THE  CHRISTIAN 
RACE 

vtND  OTHSR  SERMONS 
BY  THE  RIGHT  REVEREND 
J^"C.RYLE,  D.D.,  Lord 

^Bishop  of  Liverpool       JP        Jt*        jit* 


LONDON  HODDER  AND 
STOUGHTON  JT  J*  27 

PATERNOSTER     ROW      MCM 


f 5 


Printed  by  Haztll,  Watson,  &  Viney,  Ld.,  London  and  Aylesbury. 


PREFATORY  NOTE 

A  LTHOUGH  the  Bishop  of  Liverpool  has  published 
•**•  many  books — Commentaries,  Biographies,  and 
Theological  Dissertations — he  has  never  published  a 
volume  of  sermons. 

When  his  many  friends  heard  that  he  was  about  to 
resign  the  See  of  Liverpool,  they  urged  him  to  publish  a 
volume  of  his  sermons  as  a  "  memorial "  of  his  sixty 
years'  ministry.  The  Bishop  kindly  consented  to  do  so, 
and  invited  me  to  make  a  selection  from  his  MSS.  and 
to  prepare  the  sermons  for  the  press.  I  need  hardly 
say  that  I  willingly  undertook  the  task  as  a  "  labour 
of  love"  for  my  aged  Bishop.  The  selection  I  have 
made  for  publication  sets  forth  the  great  doctrines  of 
our  Faith — Sin,  Redemption,  Regeneration,  and  Sanctifi- 
cation.  I  have  also  added  sermons  which  call  attention 
to  the  Practical  side  of  Christianity,  and  which  especially 
emphasise  the  "  DUTIES "  of  the  Christian  life.  The 
closing  sermons  proclaim  the  coming  of  our  Lord ;  the 
Reward  of  His  Saints  ;  and  the  Rest  of  Heaven. 

Friends,  who  knew  of  the  preparation  of  these 
sermons  for  the  press,  have  been  praying  that  the 


vi  PREFATORY    NOTE 

"  message  of  God "  which  they  contain  may  bring 
blessing  to  many  thousands.  In  the  sure  and  certain 
hope  that  His  Word  will  not  return  unto  Him  void  I 
have  prepared  this  volume  of  sermons  by  the  first 
Bishop  of  Liverpool—and  in  this  hope  it  is  sent 
forth. 

T.  J.  MADDEN, 

Archdeacon  of  War  ring  ton. 

LIVERPOOL,  March  isf,   1900. 

*#*  The  Bishopric  of  Liverpool  was  declared  vacant 
on  March  3rd,  1900. 


CONTENTS 

i. 

A    BAD    HEART 

Jtremmh  xvii.  9,  10. 

PACE 

The  heart  is  deceitfiil  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked ;  who 
can  know  it  ?  I  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  I  try  the  reins,  even  to  give 
every  man  according  to  his  ways,  and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings  .  i 

II. 

REGENERATION    (i) 
cSt.  John  iii.  3- 

Verily,  -verily  I  say  -unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God  ..... 


Ill 
REGENERATION    (2) 

cSt.  John  Hi.  3- 

Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God       .......... 


IV 
REGENERATION    (3) 

<St.  John  iii.  3. 

Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  ca-nnot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God       .        .        .        .        ......      42 

vii 


viii  CONTENTS 

v 

SAVING    FAITH 

«St.  John  iii.  16. 

PACE 

God  so  loved  the  world,   that   He  gave  His  only  begotten   Son,   that 
whosoever  beliweth  in  Him  should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life        57 


VI 


<St.  .jfflattluto  xi.  28. 

Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour,  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  -will  give 
you  rest 67 


VII 
THE    LORD    OUR    RIGHTEOUSNESS 

Jmmrah  xxiii.  17. 

This  is   the    name  whereby  He   shall   be  called,   THE    LORD    OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS 79 


VIII 

SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS 
<St.  g)tth£  xviii.  9. 

He  spake  this  parable  unto  certain  which  trusted  in  themselves  that  they 
were  righteous,  and  despised  others     ........       97 


IX 
THE    CHARACTER    OF    THE    TRUE    CHRISTIAN 

<St.  John  x.  27,  28. 

My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me.  And 
I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall 
any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand 


CONTENTS  ix 

X 

THE    PRIVILEGES    OF   THE   TRUE    CHRISTIAN 

<St.  John  x.  27,  28. 

PAGE 

My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  1  know  them,  and  they  follow  me.  And 
I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall 
any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand . 126 

XI 
THE    GRACE    OF    GOD    IN    VAIN 

2  Corinthians  vi.  i. 

We  then,  as  workers  together  with  him,  beseech  yon  also  that  ye  receive 
not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain 139 

XII 
THE    CHRISTIAN    RACE 

;p*br*tos  xii.  i,  2. 

Seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  let 
us  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  us,  and  let 
us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  ns.  Looking  unto  Jesus,  the 
author  and  finisher  of  oztr  faith -  154 

XIII 
WHAT    THINK   YE    OF    CHRIST  ? 

«St.  ^attheto  xxii.  42. 

Saying,  What  think  ye  of  Christ  f  whose  son  is  he  ?  They  say  unto 
him,  The  Son  of  David .  168 

XIV 
THE    UNCHANGING    CHRIST 

^buto*  xiii.  8. 

Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever       .        .        .     179 


x  CONTENTS 

XV 
THE    SECOND    ADVENT    (THE    TEN    VIRGINS) 

(St.  dftattluto  xxv.  1-13. 

PAGE 

Then  shall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten  -virgins,  which 
took  their  lamps,  and  went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom.  And  five  of  them 
were  wise,  andfive  were  foolish.  They  that  were  foolish  took  their  lamps, 
and  took  no  oil  with  them  :  but  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  their 
lamps.  While  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  all  slumbered  and  slept. 
And  at  midnight  there  was  a  cry  made,  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh  ; 
go  ye  out  to  meet  him.  Then  all  those  virgins  arose,  and  trimmed  their 
lamps.  And  the  foolish  said  unto  the  wise,  Give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our 
lamps  are  gone  out.  But  the  wise  answered,  saying,  Not  so  ;  lest  there  be 
not  enough  for  us  and  you :  but  go  ye  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy  for 
yourselves.  And  while  they  went  to  buy,  the  bridegroom  came;  and  they 
that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the  marriage  :  and  the  door  was  shut. 
Afterwards  came  also  the  other  virgins,  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us. 
But  lie  answered  and  said,  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  1  know  you  not. 
Watch,  therefore,  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  wherein  the 
Son  of  man  come  I h ige 

XVI 
THE    COMPASSION    OF   JESUS 

.St.  Jftark  vi.  34. 

And  Jesus,  when  he  came  out,  saw  much  people,  and  was  moved  with 
compassion  toward  them,  because  they  were  as  sheep  not  having  a  shepherd: 
and  he  began  to  teach  them  many  things  .  .  .  .  .  .  .219 

XVII 
PROFIT    AND    LOSS 

(St.  Jtark  viii.  36. 

What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own 

231 


XVIII 
ENOCH    WALKING    WITH    GOD 

©nweis  v.  24. 

Enoch  walked  with  God,  and  he  was  not,  for  God  took  him 


CONTENTS  xi 

XIX 
DANIEL    FOUND    FAITHFUL 

jprmiel  vi.  5. 

Then   said  these   men,     We  shall  not  find  any  occasion   against  this 
Daniel,  except  we  find  it  against  him  concerning  the  law  of  his  God .         .     258 


XX 

A    PILLAR    IN    GOD'S    TEMPLE 

iii.  12. 


Him  that  overcometh  will  1  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,  and 
he  shall  go  no  more  out      .         .         ........     269 


XXI 

"  KNOCKING,    KNOCKING  " 


Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock  ;  if  any  man  hear  my  voice  and 
open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he 
with  me  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  280 


XXII 

THE    BLOOD    OF    THE    LAMB 
vii.   14—17. 

These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  have  washed 
their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Therefore  are 
they  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple  : 
and  he  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  among  them.  They  shall 
hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more  ;  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on 
them,  nor  any  heat :  for  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shall 
feed  them,  and  shall  lead  them  unto  living  fountains  of  waters  ;  and  God 
shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes 


xii  CONTENTS 


XXIII 

HEAVEN 

xxi.  27. 

PAGE 

There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  anything  that  defileth,  neither  what 
soever  war  keth  abomination  or  maketh  a  lie;  but  they  which  art  written 
in  the  Lamb'  s  book  of  life  ..........  312 


XXIV 
READY    TO    BE    OFFERED 

2  <fflimoihs  iv.  6,  7,  8. 

For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand. 
I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith  ; 
henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the 
Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day  :  and  not  to  me  only, 
but  unto  all  them  also  that  Iwc  his  appearing  ......  325 


A   BAD  HEART 

"  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked  :  who 
can  know  it  ?  I  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  I  try  the  reins,  even  to 
give  every  man  according  to  his  ways,  and  according  to  the  fruit  of 
his  doings." — JEREMIAH  xvii.  9,  10. 

THE  first  of  these  two  verses  contains  a  very  strong 
saying,  and  one  which  the  world  in  general  is 
not  at  all  disposed  to  believe.  "  The  heart  is  deceitful 
above  all  things,"  says  our  text.  "  I  deny  it,"  says  the 
unconverted  man.  "  To  be  sure,  my  heart  is  very 
careless  and  very  thoughtless,  but  it  is  an  honest  heart 
after  all."  "  The  heart  is  desperately  wicked,"  says  the 
text.  "  Nothing  of  the  sort,"  replies  the  sinner.  "  I 
know  that  I  neglect  the  means  of  grace  very  much, 
and  perhaps  I  do  not  live  as  I  ought  to  do,  but  I 
am  sure  I  have  a  good  heart  at  the  bottom."  "  Who 
can  know  it  ? "  asks  the  text.  "  Know  it !  "  we  arc 
told  :  "  why,  we  do  not  pretend  to  be  such  saints  as 
you  want  men  to  be,  but  at  any  rate  we  do  know  our 
own  hearts,  we  do  know  what  our  faults  are." 

And  so,  beloved,  it  appears  there  are  two  statements, 
and  one  of  them  must  be  false.  The  everlasting  Bible 
is  on  one  side,  and  flesh  and  blood  on  the  other  ; 
God  says  one  thing,  and  man  says  another.  Now, 
I  shall  endeavour  to  persuade  you  this  morning  that 
the  Scripture  account  of  the  heart  is  strictly  and 
literally  true  and  correct ;  it  is  a  faithful  likeness,  a 

i 


2  A   BAD   HEART 

lively  picture,  and  it  must  not  be  softened  down   and 
called   figurative   and   extravagant,   because   it   sounds 
rough  and  plain,  and  leaves  you  no  room  for  boasting. 
O  that  the  Holy  Ghost  may  bring  many  of  you  to  a 
right  understanding  of  your  own  hearts  !     It  is  almost 
impossible   to  say  how   immensely   important  it  is  to 
have  a  clear  view   of  their   natural  state  :    "  with   the 
heart   man   believeth  unto   righteousness,"  "  out  of  the 
heart  are  the  issues  of  life  "  ;  "  man  looketh  on  the  out 
ward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart "  ; 
in  short,  unless  you  really  know  the  character  of  your 
own  heart,   you   will  never   value   the   Gospel   as   you 
ought,  you  will  never   love   the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in 
sincerity,  you  will  never  see  how  absolutely  necessary 
it  was  that   He   should   suffer   death   upon   the   cross, 
in  order  to  deliver  our  souls   from   hell  and  bring  us 
unto   God.      I   wish  therefore,  firstly,  to  prove  to  you 
the  truth  of  the   words   "  the  heart  is  deceitful  above 
all  things,  and  desperately  wicked "  ;   secondly,   I   shall 
say  a  few  words  to  remind  you  that  God  knows  what 
is  within  you,—"  I   the   Lord  search  the  heart "  ;  and, 
thirdly,  I  shall  point  out  shortly  the  only  remedy  that 
can  do  you  any  good,  if  you  would   be   saved.     It   is 
my  earnest  desire  and  prayer  that  you  may  all  come 
unto  Christ  and  be  delivered  from  the  wrath  to  come  ; 
but  this  will  never  be  until  you  are  convinced  of  sin, 
and  you  will  never  be  thoroughly  convinced  until  you 
know  that  the  root  and  source  and  fountain  of  it  all 
is  within  you,  even  in  your  own  hearts. 

I.  Now,  as  to  the  natural  deceit  and  wickedness 
of  every  man,  woman,  and  child  that  is  born  into  the 
world,  first  and  foremost  what  says  the  Scripture? 
How  is  it  written?  What  do  we  read?  Hear  the 
book  of  Genesis:  "God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of 
man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every  imagination 


A   BAD   HEART  3 

of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually "  ; 
"The    imagination    of  man's   heart    is    evil   from    his 
youth."      The    first    book    of    Kings :   "  There     is    no 
man  that  sinneth  not."    The   book    of  Psalms :   "  The 
Lord    looked   down    from    heaven    upon    the    children 
of  men,  to  see  if  there  were  any  that  did  understand 
and    seek    God.      They   are  all  gone  aside,   they   are 
altogether   become   filthy :   there   is    none    that    doeth 
good,  no,  not  one."     "The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart, 
There  is  no  God.      Corrupt  are  they,  they  have  done 
abominable  iniquity,  there    is  none   that  doeth  good." 
The  book  of  Job :  "  How  can  he  be  clean  that  is  born 
of  a  woman  ?  "     "  Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of 
an  unclean  ?  not  one."     The  book  of  Proverbs  :  "  Who 
can  say,  I  have  made  my  heart  clean,  I  am  pure  from 
my  sin  ?  "     The   book    of  Ecclesiastes :    "  There  is  not 
a  just  man  upon   earth,  that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth 
not."     "  The  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in 
them  to  do  evil."     "  The  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  full 
of  evil,  and  madness  is  in  their  heart  while  they  live. 
The  book  of  Isaiah:    "All  we  like   sheep   have  gone 
astray,   we  have   turned  every   one   to    his   own    way 
"  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteous 
nesses  are    as    filthy  rags."     The   words   of  the    Lord 
Jesus  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  :  "  Out  of  the  heart 
proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries,  fornications 
thefts,  false  witness,  blasphemies  :  these  are  the  things 
which  defile  a  man."     The  same  words   more  fully  in 
St.  Mark :     "  From  within,  out  of  the   heart    of  men, 
proceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornications,  murders, 
thefts,  covetousness,  wickedness,   deceit,  lasciviousness, 
an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishness  :  all  these  evil 
things  come  from   within,  and  defile  a  man."     O  this 
pure  heart,  this  good  heart  which  people  speak  of! — 
these  are  not  texts  which  describe  the  character  of  the 


4  A    BAD   HEART 

wicked  only  ;  they  arc  written  generally  of  all  mankind, 
of  you  and  me  and  the  whole  world,  and  they  ought 
to  be  sufficient  proof  of  that  which  Solomon  declares, 
"  He  that  trusteth  his  own  heart  is  a  fool." 

But  perhaps  you  would  like  to  know  what  Bible 
history  teaches  us  upon  this  point  :  it  is  possible  you 
may  flatter  yourselves  these  are  all  single  texts,  and 
probably  do  not  mean  something  quite  so  strong  as 
I  have  made  them  appear.  Be  not  deceived  ;  you 
will  find  nothing  to  encourage  you  to  think  well  of 
yourself;  man's  natural  character  is  everywhere  de 
scribed  in  the  same  colours, — it  is  all  black,  very  black. 
Perhaps  you  sometimes  try  to  think  that  the  Bible  is 
a  book  which  contains  the  history  of  many  good 
men,  and  an  account  of  God's  lovingkindness  to  us, 
and  a  great  store  of  good  advice.  No  doubt  it  does 
contain  all  this,  but  it  contains  something  more  too  : 
it  contains  the  true  description  of  man's  heart,  it  strips 
off  the  flimsy  coverings  which  pride  and  self-conceit 
throw  over  our  natural  dispositions,  and  it  shows  us 
man  as  he  really  is  ;  it  furnishes  continual  proof  from 
first  to  last  of  the  inbred  wickedness  of  our  hearts,  it 
supplies  us  with  countless  examples  of  our  inclination 
towards  sin,  unless  we  are  restrained  and  bent  back 
by  the  grace  of  God. 

O  beloved,  that  you  would  only  search  the  Scripture 
for  yourselves  on  this  matter  !  I  am  not  preaching  my 
own  doctrine  ;  I  am  telling  you  that  plain,  humbling 
truth  which  the  Holy  Ghost  endeavours  in  every  pos 
sible  \vay  to  drive  into  our  hearts,  in  that  blessed 
volume  which  was  written  for  our  warning. 

You  can  hardly  turn  to  a  single  part  of  Bible  history 
in  which  this  doctrine  does  not  come  uppermost.  Look 
at  the  men  before  the  flood  !  who  would  have  thought, 
with  Paradise  as  a  witness  before  their  eyes  (for  until 


A    BAD    HEART  5 

the  flood  Paradise  was  on  earth),  who  would  have 
thought  they  could  have  turned  their  backs  on  God, 
and  given  themselves  up  to  all  manner  of  lusts  and 
sin  ?  And  yet  they  did  so,  in  spite  of  every  warning, 
and  God  was  obliged  to  drown  the  whole  world,  ex 
cepting  eight  persons.  Look  at  men  after  the  flood  ! 
Doubtless  you  would  expect  that  every  one  would  flee 
from  sin  as  if  it  were  a, serpent,  remembering  God's 
wrath  against  iniquity  ;  and  yet,  behold,  the  first  thing 
that  we  meet  with  is  the  calling  of  Abraham  and  his 
family  to  preserve  the  remembrance  of  God  upon  the 
earth  ;  the  whole  world  had  become  so  sinful  and 
idolatrous,  that  the  Lord  Jehovah  was  obliged  to  inter 
fere,  as  it  were,  in  a  special  manner,  and  choose  out 
one  man's  home,  that  he  might  not  be  entirely  forgotten. 
And  lest  you  should  imagine  things  were  not  so  very 
bad,  and  this  calling  of  Abraham  not  so  very  necessary, 
the  next  event  we  meet  with  is  the  destruction  of 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  because  of  their  abominable 
wickedness.  Look  at  the  history  of  Israel,  the  chosen 
family  itself.  They  went  down  into  Egypt  and  dwelt 
there,  and  two  hundred  years  after  they  had  gone  back 
so  far  in  spiritual  things  that  they  had  forgotten  the 
name  of  the  God  of  their  fathers.  They  were  brought 
out  by  miracles  with  a  mighty  hand,  and  yet  they  had 
hardly  got  into  the  wilderness  when  they  murmured 
and  desired  to  return  to  Egypt.  They  were  taken 
into  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  had  the  purest  and  the 
best  of  laws  given  to  them,  and  yet  Joshua  was  scarcely 
buried  when  they  fell  away  after  idols.  Time  after 
time  you  read  of  their  being  in  hard  captivity  for  their 
sins,  time  after  time  you  read  of  God  delivering  them  ; 
and  yet  a  few  short  years  and  it  seems  to  have  been 
all  forgotten.  The  Lord  gave  them  judges  and  kings, 
and  priests  and  prophets  and  ministers,  and  preachings 


6  A   BAD   HEART 

and  warnings  ;  and  yet  their  history,  with  a  few  excep 
tions,  is  a  history  of  unbelief;  and  backsliding  and 
transgression  and  crime  down  to  the  very  day  when 
they  crucified  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  What 
can  you  say  to  these  things?  If  ever  there  was  a 
nation  free  from  outward  temptation  and  inducement 
to  sin,  it  was  the  Jews ;  they  were  hedged  in  and 
fenced  in  on  every  side  by  the1  strictest  rules,  which 
prevented  them  mixing  with  other  nations,  and  never 
theless  you  see  what  they  were.  You  can  only  account 
for  it  by  taking  the  Bible  reason  :  they  had  the  root 
of  all  the  evil  within  them,  they  were  men  like  our 
selves,  and  as  such  they  had  hearts  deceitful  above  all 
things  and  desperately  wicked  ;  and  like  too  many  among 
ourselves  they  would  not  believe  it,  and  so  they  fell. 

But  I  shall  not  leave  the  Bible  here.  I  say  further 
that  you  can  hardly  turn  to  a  single  family,  even  of 
the  best  of  God's  servants,  in  which  the  natural  cor 
ruption  of  our  hearts  does  not  appear  more  or  less  in 
some  one  of  the  branches.  The  firstborn  in  Adam's 
house  was  Cain,  a  murderer.  The  family  of  Noah, 
that  just  man,  contained  Ham,  the  wicked  father  of 
Canaan,  the  accursed  race.  Abraham  was  the  father  of 
Midian,  an  idolatrous  people  who  deceived  Israel  in  the 
wilderness,  as  well  as  of  Isaac.  Isaac  was  the  father  of 
Esau,  that  "  profane  person,"  as  well  as  of  Jacob.  Jacob 
was  the  father  of  Reuben,  who  defiled  his  father's  bed, 
as  well  as  of  Joseph.  Eli,  the  priest  of  the  Lord,  was  the 
father  of  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  who  made  people  abhor 
the  offering  of  God.  David  was  the  father  of  Absalom 
and  Amnon  as  well  as  of  Solomon.  Hezekiah,  that 
good  man,  was  the  father  of  Manasseh,  the  most 
wicked  of  the  kings  of  Judah.  Why  am  I  telling  you 
these  things  ?  I  tell  you  them  to  show  you  that  good 
education  and  good  example  cannot  alone  make  the 


A   BAD   HEART  7 

children  of  the  saints  good,  without  the  grace  of  God, 
to  show  you  how  deeply  rooted  is  the  corruption  of 
our  natural  dispositions. 

But  I  shall  go  even  further.  I  say  that  you  can 
hardly  turn  to  a  single  character,  among  the  holy  men 
described  in  the  Bible,  who  did  not,  to  his  own  horror 
and  dismay,  fall  at  one  time  or  another.  Noah  planted 
a  vineyard,  and  was  one  day  found  drunken.  David 
committed  adultery  with  the  wife  of  Uriah.  Peter 
denied  his  Lord  thrice.  What  does  this  prove  ?  It 
proves  beyond  a  question  that  the  most  excellent  of  the 
earth  have  found  that  the  root  of  all  their  sinfulness 
is  within  them  ;  they  never  boasted  of  the  purity  or 
goodness  of  their  hearts,  they  have  all  placed  upon 
record  the  truth  that,  although  Satan  does  much  and 
the  world  does  much,  still  after  all  the  great  enemy 
is  always  within  us  ;  it  is  a  heart  deceitful  above  all 
things  and  desperately  wicked.  Pause,  beloved,  for  an 
instant,  and  think  of  that :  the  men  who  were  the 
friends  of  God,  who  lived  most  closely  to  Him,  were 
those  whom  we  find  grieving  and  mourning  over  their 
sinful  hearts  most  bitterly.  Surely  the  heart  must  be 
more  treacherous  than  you  supposed. 

Well,  perhaps  you  will  say,  all  this  may  be  very  true  ; 
the  men  we  read  of  in  the  Bible  certainly  sinned  very 
much ;  but  things  are  altered  now  we  live  under  the 
light  of  the  Gospel.  Things  may  be  altered  certainly 
in  some  respects  ;  but  the  heart  is  just  the  same.  I 
cannot  see  the  smallest  proof  of  any  change  there. 
So  long  as  every  .newspaper  contains  accounts  of 
crime  in  one  shape  or  another  of  all  descriptions ;  so 
long  as  gaols  and  prisons  are  full  and  new  ones  are 
continually  building;  so  long  as  hundreds  and  thousands 
are  every  year  tried  and  punished,  and  yet  next  year 
there  are  as  many  more  committed  ;  so  long  as  men 


8  A   BAD   HEART 

make  a  god  and  an  idol  of  money,  and  swear  and  pray 
God  to  damn  their  souls,  and  break  the  Sabbath  day 
in  every  possible  manner,  and  show  an  utter  want  of 
affection  and  kindness  to  their  own  relations,  and  are 
angry  and  passionate  on  the  slightest  occasion,  and 
think  very  lightly  about  fornication,  and  think  it  clever 
and  fair  to  deceive  their  neighbours,  and  do  not  hesitate 
to  say  what  is  not  true  if  it  serves  their  interest,  and 
covet  each  other's  money  and  house  and  land  and 
property  from  morning  till  night,  and  get  drunk,  as  if 
they  gloried  in  ruining  soul  and  body  at  once, — so  long, 
I  say,  as  such  things  go  on  in  England,  which  professes 
to  be  a  Christian  country, — and  you  know  they  do  go 
on,— so  long  as  such  things  go  on  in  the  face  of  God 
who  sees  it  all,  and  the  Bible  which  condemns  it  all, 
and  the  Church  which  witnesses  against  it  all  ;  so  long 
shall  I  declare  that  the  only  possible  reason  which  can 
be  given  for  it  is  the  plain  account  of  my  text :  "  The 
natural  heart  of  every  man  is  deceitful  above  all  things 
and  desperately  wicked."  There  must  be  some  hidden 
cause  and  fountain  within  us,  or  men  would  never  be 
guilty  of  such  enormous  folly. 

But  I  will  not  detain  you  with  proofs  of  this  nature, 
which  you  must  all  know.  1  would  rather  lay  before 
you  a  few  questions  which  perhaps  many  of  you  have 
not  considered. 

What,  then,  is  the  reason  that  men  are  so  active 
and  industrious  in  their  business  and  so  careless  about 
their  souls  ?  They  give  up  their  whole  heart  and  soul 
and  mind  to  their  labouring  and  planting  and  building 
and  gardening  ;  they  rise  early  and  go  to  bed  late  ; 
they  bestir  themselves ;  they  are  in  earnest  ;  they  think 
t  wrong  not  to  be  diligent  and  hardworking ;  but  as 
for  serving  God,  they  seem  to  think  it  their  duty  to  sit 
still  and  do  nothing. 


A   BAD    HEART  9 

What  is  the  reason  jthat  men  have  always  so  many 
excuses  to  make  in  the  service  of  God? — the  most 
ridiculous,  the  most  trifling  seem  to  satisfy  them,  and 
yet  they  know  that  if  they  gave  such  excuses  to  an 
earthly  master,  they  would  be  dismissed  at  once  from 
his  employment. 

What  is  the  reason  that  men  pay  such  respect  to 
those  above  them  upon  earth? — their  landlord,  their 
master,  the  rich  and  the  noble,  are  always  treated  with 
a  proper  reverence  and  deference  ;  and  yet  the  Lord 
God  Almighty,  the  Maker  and  the  Judge  of  all  things, 
is  honoured  when  it  is  convenient,  as  if  it  was  rather 
a  favour  to  attend  His  house  and  hear  His  ministers. 

What  is  the  reason  that  men  can  give  smooth  names 
and  soften  down  practices  which  God  detests,  and  talk 
of  an  adulterer  as  a  gay  man,  and  a  drunkard  as  a 
merry,  cheerful  man,  and  a  riotous  reveller  as  a  wild 
man  ;  while  one  who  is  striving  to  lay  hold  on  Christ 
is  called  mad,  and  one  who  has  a  tender  conscience  is 
called  narrow-minded,  and  one  who  thirsts  after  holiness 
righteous  overmuch? 

What  is  the  reason  that  many  can  talk  much  and 
show  much  knowledge  about  this  world's  matters,  but 
are  grave  and  silent  and  ignorant  about  their  souls — 
can  remember  everything  bad  which  they  meet  with,  but 
forget  the  good— can  hear  of  others  dying,  and  never 
look  at  their  own  state — can  see  death  coming  near 
their  own  doors,  and  yet  neglect  to  make  preparations 
to  receive  him? 

Beloved,  these  things  are  wonderful,  but  are  they  not 
true?  Man,  so  wise,  so  prudent,  so  thoughtful  as  he 
is  about  the  life  that  now  is,  seems  a  fool  in  the  matter  of 
the  world  to  come.  And  why  ?  "  He  has  within  him  a 
heart  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked." 
And  what  is  the  reason  that  men  who  profess  and 


10 


A   BAD   HEART 


call  themselves  Christians  do  often  find  fault  with  the 
doctrines  they  hear  preached,  and  say  they  must  be 
wrong,  they  cannot  be  the  truth  of  God,  they  are  too 
humbling,  too  strict:  and  yet  they  will  not  take  the 
trouble  of  looking  at  their  Bibles,  to  see  whether  these 
things  be  really  so. 

What  is  the  reason  that  so  many  go  on  saying  they 
know  all  these  things,  and  yet  they  never  do  them? 
They  are  almost  ready  to  take  offence  if  we  doubt  their 
acquaintance  with  the  Gospel  ;  but  there  they  stop, 
their  knowledge  does  not  seem  to  make  the  slightest 
difference  in  their  lives. 

What  is  the  reason  that  so  many  use  the  outward 
forms  of  religion  but  never  pray  in  secret, — I  know  that 
certain  of  you  did  not  pray  last  night  nor  yet  this 
morning, — that  so  many  hear  the  Gospel  preached  week 
after  week  and  never  apply  it  to  themselves,  and  go 
away  from  church  as  cold  and  unmoved  as  if  they 
had  gone  to  be  witnesses  of  instruction  given  to  their 
neighbours,  but  not  meant  for  themselves? 

What  is  the  reason  that  so  many  encourage  them 
selves  with  the  idea  it  will  be  all  right  at  the  last,  and 
yet  they  cannot  say  why  ;  and  so  many  make  a  great 
profession,  and  try  to  deceive  ministers,  as  if  God  did 
not  sec  it  all  ;  and  so  many  desire  to  have  the  name 
of  spiritual  Christians  on  earth,  who  clearly  are  not 
bearing  the  Cross  nor  showing  the  mind  that  was  in 
Christ  Jesus  ? 

Verily,  beloved,  there  is  but  one  reason  to  be  given, 
and  I  hat  is  the  Bible  reason.  Conduct  such  as  I  have 
described,— and  you  know  I  have  mentioned  matters 
of  everyday  occurrence,— such  conduct  is  so  utterly 
unlike  the  way  in  which  men  act  about  the  care  of  their 
bodies  and  the  things  of  this  world,  that  there  must 
be  some  hidden  reason,  some  secret  fountain  of  evil 


A    BAD   HEART  n 

within  us.  I  say  it  is  impossible  to  observe  how 
differently  men  generally  live  from  the  plain  precepts 
of  the  Bible  ;  it  is  impossible  to  consider  the  number 
and  the  variety  of  the  ways  in  which  God's  law  is 
continually  broken,  and  not  to  see  the  most  decided 
proof  that  man's  natural  heart  is  indeed  deceitful  above 
all  things  and  desperately  wicked.  Truly  indeed  were 
the  words  added,  "Who  can  know  it?  "  Who  can  ever 
understand  how  men  can  shut  their  eyes  against  such 
light,  and  live  after  such  a  fashion  as  too  many  do? 
Job  thought  he  knew  his  heart,  but  affliction  came  and 
he  found  he  did  not.  David  thought  he  knew  his  heart, 
but  he  learned  by  bitter  experience  how  wofully  he  was 
mistaken.  Peter  thought  he  knew  his  heart,  and  in 
a  short  time  he  was  repenting  in  tears.  Oh,  pray, 
beloved,  if  you  love  your  souls,  for  some  insight  into 
your  own  corruption  ;  the  veriest  saints  of  God  do  never 
quite  discover  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  that  old  man 
which  is  in  them. 

II.  I  promised  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  second 
part  of  my  text,  but  I  shall  not  detain  you  long  over 
it.  We  read,  "  I  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  I  try  the 
reins,  even  to  give  every  man  according  to  his  ways, 
and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings."  There  are 
two  things  written  here :  one  is  that,  although  you  do 
not  know  your  own  hearts,  the  Lord  God  Almighty 
does,  and  keeps  a  close  watch  over  them  ;  the  other 
is  that  He  will  one  day  call  you  to  account,  and 
judge  you  accordingly.  And  do  you  not  observe  here 
what  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  points  to?  Some  men 
might  say,  God  will  not  be  extreme  to  mark  what  is 
amiss,  I  shall  have  peace  though  I  walk  in  the 
imagination  of  mine  heart  ;  but  the  prophet  sweeps 
away  these  refuges  of  lies  by  warning  us  of  searching 
and  of  judgment  immediately  after  he  has  declared  to 


12  A   BAD   HEART 

us  the  dcceitfulncss  of  man's  heart.     Remember,  now, 
O  unconverted  man,  that  God  has  set  your  secret  sins 
in  the  light  of  His  countenance  ;  the  vilest  imaginations 
of  your  wicked  heart,  the  deeds  you  have  so  carefully 
concealed    from    the    sight    of    men,    the    abominable 
thoughts    which   you    would    not    have    your    dearest 
friends    suspect,— all    have    been    seen     through    and 
through  by  that   Pure   and    Holy   One   who   will   one 
day  be  your  Judge.     Remember  that  the  wrath  of  God 
is  revealed  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness 
of  men,  who  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness  ;   that 
the  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  people, 
too,  who  forget  God,  and  neglect  so   great   salvation  ; 
that  hell  is  everlasting  woe  :    ten  thousand  times   ten 
thousand  years   shall   pass   away,  and   the  worm   and 
the  fire  shall  be  just  the  same,  and    this  is   the  place 
to  which  you  are  going.      You  do  not   like  to  believe 
the  ]  account   we    have    given   of  your    natural    heart  ; 
but  look  back  over  your  life  and  tell  us  of  one  single 
day   in    which   you    have  done  all  that    God    required 
and   left   nothing   undone :    you   cannot   find    it ;    and 
what  will  you  do  when  each  of  the  three  hundred  and 
sixty-five   days    in    each    of    the    twenty,   forty,   sixty 
years  you  may  have  lived   shall   come  to  light,  when 
thousands   of    little    things   you   now   forget    shall    all 
appear,  and  God  shall  ask  you,  "  What  hast  thou  got 
to  say,  why  these  things  should  not  condemn  thee  ? " 
Oh,  be  not  deceived,  but  bear  in  mind  that  St.  James 
has  said  one  single  offence  will  make  you  guilty,  that 
Jesus   teaches   that   in    God's  account  a  thought  or  a 
feeling  is  as  bad  as  an  outward  act,  that  one  wanton 
look  is  adultery,  and  that  hatred  is  murder.     Better  be 
humble  now  and  confess  you  did  not  know  your  own 
vileness,  than   flatter  your  vanity  and  self-conceit,  and 
perish  everlastingly. 


A   BAD   HEART  13 

III.  Beloved,  you  are  feeling  disposed  to  say,  "At 
this  rate,  who  can  be  saved?"  and  I  shall  endeavour 
to  give  you  very  shortly  the  Bible  answer  ;  I  shall  try 
to  point  out  the  way.  Truly  on  any  earthly  plan 
salvation  would  be  impossible,  but  with  God  all  things 
are  possible,  and  God  has  laid  before  us  a  path  by 
which  the  vilest  may  get  to  heaven.  You  are  thinking 
that  I  have  gone  too  far,  that  I  have  spoken  too 
strongly  ;  but  you  cannot  say  that  I  have  gone  beyond 
the  Bible,  nor  yet  beyond  the  Prayer-book,  which 
you  have  used  to-day  and  called  yourselves  miserable 
sinners. 

I  say,  then,  O  ye  miserable  sinners,  although  your 
hearts  are  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately 
wicked,  although  there  is  no  health  in  you,  I  say  that 
God  loves  you  exceedingly.  He  has  given  His  only- 
begotten  Son  to  suffer  for  your  sins  ;  and  now  whoso 
ever  believeth  in  Him  shall  not  perish,  shall  not  be 
condemned,  shall  have  everlasting  life.  "  Who  can  be 
saved  ? "  All,  I  answer,  who  give  up  their  iniquities, 
and  grieve  over  them,  and  put  their  whole  trust  in 
Jesus  Christ.  But  these  deceitful  hearts  ?  Repent  and 
believe,  and  God  shall  wash  them  in  the  blood  of  the 
cross,  shall  make  them  as  it  were  new,  shall  create 
them  again  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness  ;  shall  fill 
them  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  shall  put  love  where  there 
was  hatred  or  indifference,  shall  put  peace  where 
there  was  doubt  and  anxiety,  shall  put  strength  where 
there  was  wickedness.  Verily  your  sin  does  indeed 
abound,  but  you  shall  find,  if  you  will  only  try  it,  that 
grace  does  abound  far  more.  O  ye  miserable  sinners, 
who  are  just  now  thinking  well  of  your  own  state,  and 
not  alarmed  about  your  souls,  and  rather  offended  at 
the  picture  I  have  drawn  of  your  hearts — I  ought  to 
say  our  hearts,  for  my  heart  is  naturally  just  as 


I4  A   BAD   HEART 

abominable  as  your  own— O  ye  miserable  sinners,  I 
do  beseech  you  to  pray  God  that  you  may  see  clearly 
the  corruption  of  your  nature  !  I  tell  the  young  among 
you;  your  hearts  are  desperately  wicked,  and ,  so  long 
as  you  put  off  repentance  and  calling  upon  God  you 
are  like  an  infant  trifling  with  a  razor — you  are  like  a 
fool  playing  with  a  tiger.  I  tell  those  among  you 
who  are  getting  on  in  life,  your  hearts  are  desperately 
wicked,  and  so  long  as  you  hold  back  and  talk  of  a 
more  convenient  season  for  coming  unto  Christ,  you 
are  adding  stone  to  stone  and  brick  to  brick  to  that 
great  wall  which  you  have  built  up  between  yourselves 
and  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven. 

Your  hearts  are  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  except 
they  be  changed,  the  Bible  says  you  will  most  surely 
perish.  But  in  the  name  of  my  most  loving  Master 
I  offer  to  you  a  complete  remedy ;  I  proclaim  to  you 
the  freest  salvation.  I  entreat  you  not  to  reject  it. 
Come  unto  Jesus :  He  came  not  to  save  the  wise  in 
their  own  eyes,  but  to  seek  that  which  was  lost.  Come 
unto  the  Lamb  of  God  :  He  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the 
world  ;  and  though  your  hearts  be  full  of  iniquity  they 
shall  be  changed,  "  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  made  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red 
like  crimson,  they  shall  become  as  wool."  But  mark 
my  words  :  God  hath  witnessed  that  except  ye  choose 
this  way,  the  way  of  repentance  and  of  faith,  ye  shall 
have  no  salvation,  and  the  more  free  and  gracious  are 
the  offers  which  ye  reject,  so  much  the  more  heavily 
shall  ye  be  judged  in  the  last  day.  "O  seek  ye  the 
Lord  while  He  may  be  found,  call  upon  Him  while 
He  is  near  :  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the 
unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto 
the  Lord,  and  He  will  have  mercy-  upon  him  ;  and  to 
our  God,  for  He  will  abundantly  pardon." 


II 

REGENERA  TION 

"Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he 
cannot  see  the  Kingdom  of  God." — JOHN  iii.  3. 

IF  the  Bible  be  false,  as  some  proud  men  have 
dared  to  say,  there  is  no  occasion  for  keeping  one 
day  in  the  week  holy,  there  is  no  use  in  honouring 
church  and  making  a  profession  of  religion  ;  we  are  no 
better  than  the  beasts  that  perish,  and  the  best  thing 
a  man  can  do  is  to  eat  and  drink  and  live  as  he 
pleases.  If  the  Bible  be  only  half  true,  as  some  unhappy 
people  strive  to  make  out,  there  is  no  certainty  about 
our  everlasting  souls :  Christianity  is  all  doubt  and 
dimness  and  guesswork,  we  can  never  know  what  we 
are  to  believe  as  necessary  to  salvation,  we  can  never 
be  sure  that  we  have  got  hold  of  the  words  of  eternal 
life.  Give  up  your  Bible,  and  you  have  not  a  square 
inch  of  certainty  and  confidence  to  stand  on  :  you  may 
think  and  you  may  fancy  and  you  may  have  your  own 
opinion,  but  you  cannot  show  me  any  satisfactory  proof 
or  authority  that  you  are  right  ;  you  are  building 
merely  on  your  own  judgment ;  you  have  put  out  your 
own  eyes,  as  it  were,  and,  like  one  in  the  dark,  you 
do  not  really  know  where  you  are  going. 

But  if,  beloved,  the  Bible  be  indeed  the  Word  of  God 
Himself  and  altogether  true,  and  that  it  is  so  can  be 
proved  by  witnesses  without  number ;  if  the  Bible  be 
indeed  true  and  our  only  guide  to  heaven,  and  this  I 

is 


,6  REGENERATION 

trust  you  arc  all  ready  to  allow,  it  surely  must  be  the 
duty  of  every  wise  and  thinking  man  to  lay  to  heart 
each  doctrine  which  it  contains,  and  while  he  adds 
nothing  to  it,  to  be  careful  that  he  takes  nothing 
from  it. 

Now,  I  say  that  on  the  face  of  the  Bible,  when  fairly 
read,  there  stands  out  this  grand  doctrine,  that  we  must 
each  of  us  between  the  cradle  and  grave  go  through 
a  spiritual  change,  a  change  of  heart,  or  in  other  words 
be  born  again  ;  and  in  the  text  you  have  heard  read  the 
Lord  Jesus  declares  positively,  without  it  no  man  shall 
see  the  kingdom  of  God. 

Sinner,  man  or  woman,  mark  that !  no  salvation  with 
out  this  new  birth !  Christ  hath  done  everything  for 
thee ;  He  paid  the  price  of  our  redemption,  lived  for 
us,  died  for  us,  rose  again  for  us  ;  but  all  shall  avail  us 
nothing,  if  there  be  not  this  work  in  us :  we  must  be 

O' 

born  again. 

Now,  beloved,  I  desire  to  speak  to  you  freely  and 
plainly  about  this  new  birth,  in  two  or  three  sermons, 
as  a  thing  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation  ;  and  to-day, 
at  least,  I  shall  try  to  show  you  from  my  text  two 
things :  first,  the  reason  why  we  must  all  be  born 
again,  and  secondly,  what  the  expression  to  be  born 
again  means  ;  and  the  Lord  grant  that  the  subject  to 
which  I  am  going  to  call  your  attention  for  two  or  three 
Sunday  mornings  may  not  be  listened  to  and  soon 
forgotten,  as  a  light  and  indifferent  matter — but  carried 
home  and  thought  over,  and  blessed  to  the  conversion 
of  many  souls  ! 

I.  Why,  then,  is  this  change  of  heart  so  necessary? 
The  answer  is  short  and  simple.  Because  of  the  natural 
sinfulness  of  every  man's  disposition.  We  are  not  born 
into  the  world  with  spotless,  innocent  minds,  but  corrupt 
and  wicked,  and  with  a  will  to  the  thing  which  is  evil 


REGENERATION  17 

as  soon  as  we  have  the  power ;  and  the  Scriptural 
account  is  true  to  the  letter — we  are  all  conceived  in 
sin  and  shapen  in  iniquity.  I  need  not  stop  now  to 
tell  you  how  all  this  came  to  pass  ;  I  need  only  remind 
you  that  in  the  beginning  it  was  not  so.  Our  first 
parents,  Adam  and  Eve,  were  created  holy,  harmless, 
undefiled,  without  spot  or  stain  or  blemish  about  them  ; 
and  when  God  rested  from  His  labour  on  the  seventh 
day,  He  pronounced  them,  like  all  His  other  works, 
to  be  ,very  good.  But,  alas  for  us !  Adam,  by  trans 
gression,  fell,  and  lost  his  first  estate  ;  he  forfeited  the 
likeness  of  God  in  which  he  had  been  made ;  and 
hence  all  we,  who  are  his  children,  come  into  being 
with  a  defiled  and  sinful  nature.  We  are  fallen,  and  we 
must  needs  be  raised ;  we  have  about  us  the  marks  of 
the  old  Adam — Adam  the  first,  earthly  and  carnal — 
and  we  must  needs  be  marked  with  the  marks  of  the 
Second  Adam,  the  Lord  Jesus,  which  are  heavenly 
and  spiritual.  Do  any  of  you  feel  a  doubt  of  this  ? 
Consider  only  what  we  are  by  nature. 

By  nature  we  do  not  see  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom 
upon  earth  ;  it  is  all  hid  from  our  eyes.  Men  may 
be  sharp  and  knowing  in  worldly  matters,  they  may 
be  wise  in  the  things  of  time  ;  but  when  they  come 
to  religion,  their  understandings  seem  blind,  there  is  a 
thick  veil  over  their  hearts,  and  they  see  nothing  as 
they  ought  to  see. 

So  long  as  they  are  in  this  natural  state  it  is  in  vain 
they  are  told  of  God's  holiness  and  God's  unchange 
able  justice,  His  spiritual  law  and  His  judgment  to 
come,  their  own  enormous  deficiencies,  their  own  peril 
of  destruction— it  matters  not  ;  it  all  falls  flat  and  dull 
upon  their  ears  ;  they  neither  feel  it  nor  care  for  it 
nor  consider  it,  and  in  a  few  hours  they  are  as  though 
they  had  never  heard  it.  It  is  to  no  purpose,  while 

2 


,8  REGENERATION 

in  this  condition,  that  Christ  crucified  and  His  precious 
atonement  are  set  before  us  ;  we  can  see  no  form  nor 
beauty  nor  comeliness  about  Him  ;  we  cannot  value 
what  He  has  done,  and,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned, 
the  wisdom  and  the  excellence  of  the  Cross,  which 
Apostles  gloried  in,  seems  all  thrown  away.  And 
why  is  this  ?  Our  hearts  want  changing.  "  The  natural 
man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  for 
they  are  foolishness  unto  him  ;  neither  can  he  know 
them,  for  they  are  spiritually  discerned."  This  is  the 
true  account  of  all  that  weariness  and  lifelessness  and 
carelessness  which  we  so  often  see  in  the  worshippers 
of  God's  house  ;  this  is  the  secret  of  that  awful  indiffer 
ence  about  spiritual  things  which  prevails  so  widely 
both  among  rich  and  poor,  and  makes  the  Gospel 
appear  a  sealed  book.  It  comes  from  the  heart.  Some 
always  fancy  they  want  learning,  some  they  have  no 
time,  some  they  have  very  peculiar  difficulties  which 
no  one  else  in  the  world  has  ;  but  the  truth  lies  far 
deeper.  They  all  want  new  hearts.  Once  give  them 
new  natures,  and  you  would  hear  no  more  about 
learning,  or  time,  or  difficulty.  Every  mountain  would 
be  levelled  and  every  valley  filled  up,  that  the  way  of 
God  might  be  prepared. 

But  again.  By  nature  we  do  not  love  the  laws 
of  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom.  We  do  not  openly 
refuse  to  obey  them,  we  should  be  angry  with  any 
one  who  said  we  had  thrown  them  aside,  but  we  have 
no  love  to  them  and  delight  in  them  ;  it  is  not  our 
meat  and  drink  to  do  our  Father's  will.  Oh  no  !  by 
nature  we  love  our  own  way  and  our  own  inclina 
tions,  and  that  is  our  only  law.  We  bring  forth  fruit 
unto  ourselves,  but  not  unto  God.  Our  own  pleasure 
and  our  own  profit  take  up  all  our  attention,  and 
as  for  Him  who  made  us  and  redeemed  us,  too  many 


REGENERATION  19 

do  not  give  Him  the  very  leavings  of  their  time. 
By  nature  we  do  not  measure  ourselves  by  God's 
standard  :  who  ever  takes  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
as  his  rule  of  character  ?  who  ever  admires  the  poor 
in  spirit,  the  mourners,  the  meek,  the  hungerers  and 
thirsters  after  righteousness,  the  merciful,  the  pure  in 
heart,  the  peacemakers,  the  men  who  are  persecuted 
for  righteousness'  sake  ?  These  are  all  people  whom  the 
world  despises,  they  are  as  nothing  by  the  side  of  the 
jovial  and  light-hearted,  the  men  who  love  strong  drink 
and  are  held  to  sing  good  songs  ;  and  yet  these  are 
the  persons  whom  Jesus  calls  blessed.  What  natural 
man  judges  of  sin  as  Jesus  teaches  us  to  judge?  how 
few  look  on  drunkenness  and  fornication  as  damnable 
sins ! — yet  the  Bible  says  they  are.  How  few  consider 
anger  without  cause  as  bad  as  murder,  and  wanton  looks 
as  bad  as  adultery! — yet  Jesus  says  they  are.  Where 
are  the  men  who  strive  to  love  their  enemies,  who 
bless  those  that  hate  them,  and  pray  for  those  who 
despitefully  use  them  ? — yet  this  is  the  rule  that  Jesus 
has  laid  down.  And  why  is  all  this?  You  see  there 
must  be  something  radically  wrong.  By  nature  we 
do  not  lay  ourselves  out  to  glorify  God  with  our 
bodies  and  spirits,  we  take  no  pleasure  in  speaking 
to  each  other  about  Him,  the  concerns  of  this  world 
have  a  hundred  times  more  of  our  thoughts  ;  and  few 
indeed  are  the  parties  where  the  mention  of  Christ 
and  heaven  would  not  stop  many  mouths,  and  make 
nearly  all  look  as  if  the  subject  was  very  uncomfort 
able.  And  why  is  all  this?  Some  talk  of  bad 
example  having  done  them  harm,  and  some  say  they 
have  had  a  bad  education,  but  the  evil  is  far  more 
deeply  seated  ;  that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is 
flesh,  it  comes  from  the  carnal  unrenewed  mind,  and 
the  remedy  wanted  is  change  of  nature.  A  corrupt 


20 


REGENERATION 


tree  can  only  bring  forth  corrupt  fruit  ;  the  root  of  the 
mischief  is  the  natural  heart. 

Once  more.  By  nature  we  are  altogether  unfit  for 
Christ's  kingdom  in  glory.  The  lives  which  we  are  in 
the  habit  of  leading,  and  the  practices  we  are  fond 
of  indulging,  and  the  tastes  we  are  always  seeking  to 
please,  and  the  opinions  we  hold,  are  all  such  as 
prove  we  have  no  natural  meetness  for  the  inheritance 
of  the  saints  in  light.  They  do  not  follow  after  holiness 
in  all  their  walk  and  conversation.  Then  what  place 
can  they  occupy  in  that  blessed  abode  where  there 
shall  enter  in  nothing  that  defileth,  nor  whatsoever 
worketh  abomination  ?— how  shall  they  stand  in  His 
presence,  who  chargeth  even  His  angels  with  folly, 
and  in  whose  sight  the  very  heavens  are  not  pure ! 
They  do  not  take  pleasure  in  the  exercise  of  prayer 
and  praise  on  earth  ;  and  how  could  they  enjoy  the 
employments  of  that  glorious  habitation,  where  they 
rest  not  day  nor  night  worshipping  and  crying  "  Holy, 
holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is, 
and  is  to  come."  They  do  not  count  it  a  privilege  to 
draw  nigh  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  to  walk  with 
Him,  to  seek  close  acquaintance  with  Him  ;  and  where 
would  be  the  comfort  to  them  of  dwelling  for  ever 
in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God  and  the  Lamb  ? 
They  do  not  strive  to  walk  in  the  steps  of  holy  men  of 
old,  they  do  not  take  example  from  the  faith  and 
patience  of  the  saints  ;  and  with  what  face  then  would 
they  join  the  society  of  just  men  made  perfect  ? — with 
what  salutation,  after  a  life  spent  in  pleasing  the  devil 
and  the  world,  would  they  greet  Abraham  and  David 
and  the  Apostles  and  all  that  blessed  company  who 
have  fought  the  good  fight  ?  Alas  !  beloved,  a  natural 
man  in  heaven  would  be  a  miserable  creature, — there 
would  be  something  in  the  air  he  could  not  breathe, 


REGENERATION 


21 


the  joys,  the  affections,  the  employments  would  be  all 
wearisome  to  him,  he  would  find  himself  unfitted  for  the 
company  of  the  saints,  as  a  beast  is  unfitted  on  earth  for 
the  company  of  man  ;  he  would  be  carnally  minded, 
they  would  be  spiritually  minded,  there  would  be  no 
thing-  in  common.  I  know  there  are  vain  dreamers 
who  fancy  death  will  work  an  alteration,  that  they  may 
die  sinners  and  rise  again  saints  ;  but  it  is  all  a  delusion, 
there  is  no  work  nor  device  nor  knowledge  in  the 
grave ;  if  we  die  spiritual  we  shall  rise  spiritual,  if 
we  die  carnal  we  shall  rise  carnal,  and  if  we  are  to 
be  made  fit  for  heaven  our  natural  hearts  must  be 
changed  now  on  earth. 

In  short,  beloved,  the  plain  truth  is,  that  by  nature 
men  are  all  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  aliens  from 
the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  strangers  to  the  covenant 
of  promise,  having  no  hope  and  without  God  in  the 
world,  prisoners  in  the  hand  of  Satan,  in  a  state  of 
miserable  condemnation,  spiritually  dark,  blind,  and 
sleeping  ;  and,  worst  of  all,  they  neither  know  nor  feel 
it.  The  cold  corpse  in  the  grave  does  not  feel  the 
worms  that  crawl  over  it  ;  the  sleeping  wretch  who 
has  unawares  drunk  poison  does  not  know  that  he 
shall  wake  no  more  ;  and  so  also  the  unhappy  man 
who  is  still  unconverted  cannot  understand  that  he 
is  in  need  of  anything.  But  still,  every  natural  man  in 
the  sight  of  God  is  dead  while  he  liveth  ;  his  body, 
soul,  and  mind  are  all  turned  aside  from  their  proper 
use,  which  is  to  glorify  God,  and  so  he  is  looked  upon 
as  dead.  And  this  either  is  the  state  of  every  single 
soul  among  us  at  this  minute,  or  else  it  used  to  be. 
There  is  no  middle  state ;  we  cannot  be  half-way, 
neither  dead  nor  alive  ;  we  were  dead  and  have  been 
brought  to  life,  or  we  are  now  dead,  and  the  work  is  yet 
to  be  done.  Nor  yet  is  this  doctrine  for  publicans  and 


22  REGENERATION 

harlots  only  :  it  is  for  all  without  exception  ;  it  touches 
high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  learned  and  unlearned,  old 
and  young,  gentle  and  simple  ;  all  arc  by  nature  sinful 
and  corrupt,  and  because  they  are  so  Jesus  tells  us 
solemnly  not  one  shall  enter  into  the  heavenly  rest 
without  being  born  again. 

Beloved,  this  sounds  strong  ;  it  seems  a  hard  saying, 
perhaps.  That  is  not  my  affair ;  I  am  set  to  preach 
Christ's  Gospel  and  not  my  own.  Search  the  Scriptures, 
and  you  will  see  it  is  true. 

II.  The  second  thing  for  your  consideration  is  the 
exact  signification  and  force  of  that  peculiar  expression 
"  to  be  born  again."  It  is  a  change  by  which  we  once 
more  recover  something  of  the  divine  nature,  and  are 
renewed  after  the  image  of  God.  It  is  a  complete 
transforming  and  altering  of  all  the  inner  man  ;  and 
nothing  can  more  fully  show  its  completeness  and 
importance  than  the  strong  figure  under  which  Jesus 
describes  it :  He  calls  it  a  NEW  BIRTH.  We  have  all 
been  born  once  as  men,  but  we  must  see  to  it  we  are 
born  again  as  true  Christians.  We  have  been  born  once 
of  the  seed  of  Adam  ;  woe  to  us  if  we  are  not  born  the 
second  time  of  the  seed  of  God !  We  have  been  born 
of  the  flesh,  we  must  also  be  born  of  the  Spirit.  We 
are  born  earthly,  we  must  also  be  born  heavenly  ;  we 
are  born  corruptible,  we  must  also  be  born  incorruptible, 
for  our  natural  birth  is  not  a  whit  more  necessary  to 
the  life  of  the  body  than  is  our  spiritual  birth  necessary 
to  the  life  of  the  soul. 

To  be  born  again  is  as  it  were  to  enter  upon  a  new 
existence,  to  have  a  new  mind  and  a  new  heart,  new  views, 
new  principles,  new  tastes,  new  affections,  new  likings 
and  new  dislikings,  new  fears,  new  joys,  new  sorrows, 
new  love  to  things  once  hated,  new  hatred  to  things 
once  loved,  new  thoughts  of  God  and  ourselves  and  the 


REGENERATION  23 

world  and  the  life  to  come  and  the  means  whereby  that 
life  is  attained.  And  it  is  indeed  a  true  saying  that  he 
who  has  gone  through  it  is  a  new  man,  a  new  creature, 
for  old  things  are  passed  away, — behold,  he  can  say, 
all  things  are  become  new!  It  is  not  so  much  that 
our  natural  powers  and  faculties  are  taken  away  and 
destroyed  ;  I  would  rather  say  that  they  receive  an 
utterly  new  bias  and  direction.  It  is  not  that  the  old 
metal  is  cast  aside,  but  it  is  melted  down  and  refined 
and  remoulded,  and  has  a  new  stamp  impressed  upon 
it,  and  thus,  so  to  speak,  becomes  a  new  coin. 

This  is  no  outward  change,  like  that  of  Herod,  who 
did  many  things  and  then  stopped,  or  of  Ahab,  who 
humbled  himself  and  went  in  sackcloth  and  walked 
softly ;  nor  is  it  a  change  which  can  neither  be  seen 
nor  felt.  It  is  not  merely  a  new  name  and  a  new 
notion,  but  the  implanting  of  a  new  principle  which 
will  surely  bear  good  fruit.  It  is  opening  the  eyes  of 
the  blind  and  unstopping  the  ears  of  the  deaf;  it  is 
loosing  the  tongue  of  the  dumb,  and  giving  hands  and 
feet  to  the  maimed  and  lame, — for  he  that  is  born 
again  no  longer  allows  his  members  to  be  instruments 
and  servants  of  unrighteousness,  but  he  gives  them  unto 
God,  and  then  only  are  they  properly  employed. 

To  be  born  again  is  to  become  a  member  of  a  new 
family  by  adoption,  even  the  family  of  God  ;  it  is  to 
feel  that  God  is  indeed  our  Father,  and  that  we  are 
made  the  very  sons  and  daughters  of  the  Almighty  ; 
it  is  to  become  the  citizen  of  a  new  state,  to  cast 
aside  the  bondage  of  Satan  and  live  as  free  men  in 
the  glorious  liberty  of  Christ's  kingdom,  giving  our 
King  the  tribute  of  our  best  affection,  and  believing 
that  He  will  keep  us  from  all  evil.  To  be  born  again 
is  a  spiritual  resurrection,  a  faint  likeness  indeed 
of  the  great  change  at  last,  but  still  a  likeness  ;  for 


24  REGENERATION 

the  new  birth  of  a  man  is  a  passage  from  death  to 
life  ;  it  is  a  passage  from  ignorance  of  God  to  a  full 
knowledge  of  Him,  from  slavish  fear  to  childlike  love, 
from  sleepy  carelessness  about  Him  to  fervent  desire 
to  please  Him,  from  lazy  indifference  about  salvation 
to  burning,  earnest  zeal  ;  it  is  a  passage  from  strange 
ness  towards  God  to  heartfelt  confidence,  from  a  state 
of  enmity  to  a  state  of  peace,  from  worldliness  to 
holiness,  from  an  earthly,  sensual,  man-pleasing  state 
of  mind  to  the  single-eyed  mind  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 
And  this  it  is  to  be  born  of  the  Spirit. 

Beloved,  time  will  not  allow  me  to  go  further  with 
this  subject  to-day.  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  you 
generally  why  we  must  all  be  born  again,  and  what  the 
new  birth  means  ;  and  on  Sunday  next,  if  the  Lord  will, 
I  purpose  to  show  you  the  manner  and  means  by  which 
this  new  birth  usually  comes. 

It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  commend  this  matter 
most  solemnly  to  your  consciences.  Were  it  a  doctrine 
of  only  second-rate  importance, — were  it  a  point  a  man 
might  leave  uncertain  and  yet  be  saved,  like  Church 
government  or  election, —  I  would  not  press  it  on  you 
so  strongly  ;  but  it  is  one  of  the  two  great  pillars  of  the 
gospel.  On  the  one  hand  stands  salvation  by  free  grace 
for  Christ's  sake  ;  but  on  the  other  stands  renewal  of 
the  carnal  heart  by  the  Spirit.  We  must  be  changed 
as  well  as  forgiven  ;  we  must  be  renewed  as  well  as 
redeemed. 

And  I  commend  this  to  you  all  the  more  because 
of  the  times  you  live  in.  Men  swallow  down  sermons 
about  Christ's  willingness  and  Christ's  power  to  save, 
and  yet  continue  in  their  sins  :  they  seem  to  forget 
there  must  be  the  Spirit's  work  within  us,  as  well  as 
Christ's  work  for  us— there  must  be  something  written 
on  the  table  of  our  hearts.  The  strong  man,  Satan, 


REGENERATION  25 

must  be  cast  out  of  our  house,  and  Jesus  must  take 
possession  ;  and  we  must  begin  to  know  the  saints' 
character  experimentally  on  earth,  or  we  shall  never 
be  numbered  with  them  in  heaven.  Christ  is  indeed 
a  full  and  sufficient  title  to  heaven  ;  but  we  must  have 
about  us  some  meetness  and  fitness  for  that  blessed 
abode. 

I  will  not  shrink  from  telling  you  that  this  doctrine 
cuts  every  congregation  in  two ;  it  is  the  line  of 
separation  between  the  good  fish  and  the  bad,  the 
wheat  and  the  tares.  There  is  a  natural  part  in  every 
congregation,  and  there  is  a  spiritual  part ;  and  few 
indeed  are  the  churches  where  we  should  not  be 
constrained  to  cry,  Lord,  here  are  many  called,  but 
very  few  chosen.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  no  mere 
matter  of  lips  and  knees  and  outward  service — it  must 
be  within  a  man,  seated  in  the  best  place  of  heart ;  and 
I  will  not  hesitate  to  tell  you  I  fear  there  are  many 
living  members  of  churches  who  are  exceedingly  dead 
Christians. 

Examine  yourselves,  then,  I  pray  you,  whether  you 
are  born  again.  Have  you  good  solid  reasons  for 
thinking  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man  which  is 
corrupt,  and  put  on  the  new  man  which  is  created 
after  God  in  holiness  ?  Are  ye  renewed  in  the  spirit 
of  your  minds?  Are  ye  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of 
the  flesh  or  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit?  Are  ye  carnally 
minded  or  heavenly  minded  ?  Are  your  affections  with 
the  world  or  with  God?  Are  ye  natural  men  or  are 
ye  spiritual  men  ?  Oh !  but  it  were  no  charity  in 
me  to  keep  back  this  weighty  truth  ;  and  it  will  be 
no  wisdom  in  you  to  put  off  and  delay  considering  it. 

Are  ye  born  again  ?  Without  it  no  salvation !  It 
is  not  written  that  you  may  not,  or  yet  that  you  will 
have  some  difficulty,  but  it  is  written  that  you  cannot 


26  REGENERATION 

without  it  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  Consider  with 
yourselves  how  fearful  it  will  be  to  be  shut  out ;  to  see 
God's  kingdom  afar  off,  like  the  rich  man  in  the  parable, 
and  a  great  gulf  between  ;  how  terrible  to  go  down  to 
the  pit  from  under  the  very  pulpit,  well  satisfied  with 
your  own  condition,  but  still  not  born  again.  There  are 
truly  many  roads  to  perdition,  but  none  so  melancholy 
as  that  which  is  travelled  on  by  professing  Christians — 
by  men  and  women  who  have  light  and  knowledge 
and  warning  and  means  and  opportunity  and  yet  go 
smiling  on  as  if  sermons  and  religion  were  not  meant 
for  them,  or  as  if  hell  was  a  bed  of  roses,  or  as  if 
God  was  a  liar  and  would  not  keep  His  word. 

Are  ye  born  again  ?  I  do  not  want  to  fill  your  heads, 
but  to  move  your  hearts  ;  it  is  not  a  matter  of  course 
that  all  who  go  to  church  shall  be  saved  ;  churches 
and  ministers  are  meant  to  rouse  you  to  self-inquiry, 
to  awaken  you  to  a  sense  of  your  condition  ;  and  next 
to  that  grand  question,  "  Have  you  taken  Christ  for 
your  Saviour  ?  "  there  comes  the  second  point,  "  Are 
you  born  again  ?  " 

Beloved,  if  you  love  life,  search  and  see  what  is  your 
condition.  What  though  you  find  no  tokens  for  good  : 
better  a  thousand  times  to  know  it  now  and  live,  than 
to  know  it  too  late  and  die  eternally,! 

Praised  be  God,  it  is  a  doctrine  bound  round  with 
gracious  promises :  no  heart  so  hard  but  the  Holy 
Ghost  can  move  it ;  many  a  one  could  set  his  seal  to 
that,  and  tell  you  that  he  was  darkness,  darkness  that 
could  be  felt,  but  is  now  light  in  the  Lord.  Many  of 
the  Corinthians  were  bad  as  the  worst  among  you, 
but  they  were  washed,  they  were  sanctified,  they  were 
justified,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  by  the 
Spirit  of  our  God.  Many  of  the  Ephesians  were  as 
completely  dead  in  sins  as  any  of  you,  but  God 


REGENERATION  27 

quickened  them,  and  raised  them  up,  and  created  them 
anew  unto  good  works.  Examine  yourselves  and  draw 
nigh  to  God  with  prayer,  and  He  shall  draw  nigh  to 
you  ;  but  if  ye  ask  not,  ye  shall  not  have. 

As  for  me,  I  make  my  supplication  unto  God,  who 
can  make  all  things  new,  that  His  Spirit  may  touch 
your  hearts  with  a  deep  sense  of  this  truth,  for  withont 
it  my  preaching  is  vain  ;  that  there  may  be  a  mighty 
shaking  and  revival  among  the  dry  bones;  that  you 
may  never  rest  until  you  are  indeed  new  men  and  can 
say,  Verily  we  were  dead  but  we  are  now  alive,  we 
were  lost  but  we  are  now  found. 


Ill 

REGENERATION  (If} 

"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be  burn  again,  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God."— JOHN  iii.  3. 

ABOUT  this  new  birth — without  which  no  man  or 
woman  can  be  saved !  You  may  remember  I 
began  to  speak  of  it  last  Sunday  morning,  and  I 
endeavoured  to  establish  in  your  minds  two  main  points, 
which  it  may  be  well  to  recall  to  your  recollection  now. 
[  First,  then,  I  showed  you  the  reason  why  this  new  birth 
^  is  so  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation :  it  is  because 
of  our  sinful  hearts,  our  inbred  corruption  ;  we  are  born 
from  the  very  first  with  a  disposition  towards  that  which 
is  bad  ;  we  have  no  natural  readiness  to  serve  God, — 
it  is  all  against  the  grain  ;  we  have  no  natural  insight 
into  the  excellence  of  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom,  no 
natural  love  towards  His  holy  laws  or  desire  to  obey 
them,  no  natural  fitness  for  heaven ;  an  unrenewed 
man  would  be  miserable  in  the  company  of  Jesus  and 
the  saints.  In  short,  I  said,  it  is  not  enough  that  we 
are  born  of  the  flesh  once,  natural  men  ;  we  must  needs 
be  born  the  second  time  of  God  and  become  spiritual 
men,  or  else  we  shall  never  taste  eternal  life.  I  then 
reminded  you  of  the  awful  carelessness  and  indifference 
and  deadness  and  lukewarmness  and  coldness  and  sloth- 
fulness  about  religion  which  doth  so  widely  prevail ; 
and  I  observed  that  people  were  always  ingenious  in 

28 


REGENERATION   (II)  20 

framing  reasons  and  making  excuses  for  their  own 
particular  neglect  of  God,  always  supposing  they  had 
some  special  difficulty  to  contend  with,  which  none  else 
had — business,  or  poverty,  trouble,  or  family,  or  want 
of  time,  or  want  of  learning,  and  the  like — always 
fancying  if  these  difficulties  were  taken  out  of  the  way 
they  should  be  such  good  Christians  ;  and  I  then  told 
you  to  mark  that  the  root  of  all  these  difficulties  is 
the  natural  old  heart,  and  the  thing  wanted  is  not 
leisure  and  ease  and  money  and  learning,  but  a  new 
heart  and  a  new  principle  within.  Secondly,  I  went 
on  to  set  before  you  the  nature  and  character  of  this 
new  birth.  I  showed  that  it  was  a  change  not  outward 
only,  but  inward, — not  in  name  only,  but  in  spirit  and 
in  truth, — a  change  so  thorough,  so  searching,  so  radical, 
so  complete,  that  he  who  has  gone  through  it  may  be 
called  born  again,  for  he  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
a  new  man  :  he  was  darkness,  but  he  is  now  light ;  he 
was  blind,  but  he  can  now  see  ;  he  was  sleeping,  but 
he  is  now  awake  ;  he  was  dead,  but  he  now  lives  ;  he 
was  earthly-minded,  but  he  is  now  heavenly-minded  ; 
he  was  carnal,  but  he  is  now  spiritual  ;  he  was  worldly, 
but  he  is  now  godly  ;  he  once  loved  most  the  things 
corruptible,  he  now  loves  the  things  incorruptible  ;  he 
did  set  his  chief  affections  on  that  which  is  mortal,  he 
now  sets  them  on  immortality. 

Lastly,  I  pressed  upon  you  all  the  immense,  the  sur 
passing  importance  of  this  doctrine,  and  I  do  so  now 
again.  I  urged  you,  every  one,  to  remember, — and  I 
repeat  it  now, — it  shall  avail  us  nothing  that  Christ 
Jesus  has  brought  in  righteousness  for  us,  if  there  be 
not  also  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  within  us  ;  that 
it  shall  profit  us  nothing  to  say  we  are  redeemed,  if 
there  is  not  also  good  evidence  that  we  have  been 
indeed  renewed. 


3o  REGENERATION   (II) 

I  shall  now  go  on,  according  to  my  promise,  to  set 
before  you  the  first  great  cause  of  this  new  birth,  and 
the  means  and  the  manner  in  which  it  comes ;  and 
I  once  more  pray  God  that  the  subject  may  not  be 
carelessly  put  aside,  but  thought  over  and  made  useful 
to  all  your  souls. 

I.  This  new  birth,  then,  this  great  spiritual  change, 
whence  comes  it,  and  how  does  it  begin  ?  Can  any 
man  give  it  to  himself  when  he  pleases  ?  Can  any 
change  his  own  heart  ?  No  !  the  thing  is  impossible. 
We  can  no  more  quicken  and  impart  life  to  our  souls 
than  we  can  to  our  bodies  ;  we  can  no  more  rise  and 
become  new  men  in  our  own  strength  than  wash  away 
sins  by  our  own  performances.  It  is  impossible  •  The 
natural  man  is  as  helpless  as  Lazarus  was  when  he 
lay  still  and  cold  and  motionless  in  the  tomb.  We 
may  remove  the  stone,  as  it  were,  and  expose  the  sad 
work  of  death,  but  we  can  do  no  more.  There  must 
be  a  power  far  mightier  than  any  power  of  earth  in 
exercise  before  the  natural  man  can  awake  and  arise 
and  come  forth  as  a  new  creature.  And  to  do  all  this 
is  the  special  office  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  the  Holy 
Ghost,  whom  Jesus  promised  to  send.  It  is  He  that 
quickeneth  ;  it  is  He  that  giveth  life.  The  Spirit 
alone  can  make  the  seed  we  scatter  bear  fruit ;  the 
Spirit  alone  can  lay  the  first  foundation  of  that  holy 
kingdom  we  want  to  see  established  in  your  hearts. 
It  is  the  Spirit  must  move  over  these  waste  and  barren 
souls  before  they  can  become  the  garden  of  the  Lord  ; 
it  is  the  Spirit  must  open  the  darkened  windows  of 
our  conscience  before  the  true  light  can  shine  in  upon 
those  chambers  within  us.  And  so,  he  that  is  born 
again  is  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh, 
nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God  ;  for  the  Spirit  is 
very  God. 


REGENERATION   (II)  31 

Beloved,  this  is  a  very  humbling  and  awful  truth. 
The  conversion  of  a  sinner  can  never  be  that  light, 
off-hand  affair  that  some  do  seem  to  think  it.  This 
great  change  which  must  come  over  us  can  never  be 
a  thing  so  entirely  within  our  reach  and  grasp  that  we 
may  put  off  the  old  Adam  like  a  cloak,  and  put  on 
the  new  man,  just  when  and  where  we  please.  Oh,  but 
it  is  a  work  that  cannot  possibly  be  done  without  the 
hand  of  God  !  The  same  Power  which  first  created 
heaven  and  earth,  and  called  the  fair  world  around  us 
into  being, — the  same  Power  alone  can  create  in  us 
new  hearts,  and  renew  in  us  right  minds — the  same 
Power  alone  can  convert  the  natural  man  into  the 
spiritual. 

Yes !  you  may  dream  of  death-bed  repentance,  and 
say,  By-and-by  we  will  turn  and  become  Christians  ; 
but  you  know  not  what  you  arc  saying  :  the  softening 
of  the  hard  heart,  and  the  entrance  upon  new  ways, 
and  the  taking  up  of  new  principles,  is  no  such  easy 
matter  as  you  seem  to  fancy — it  is  work  that  can  only 
be  begun  by  power  divine,  and  who  shall  say  you  may 
not  put  it  off  too  long  ? 

It  is  not  the  plainest  and  clearest  preaching,  however 
lovely  it  may  sound,  which  can  cause  men  to  be  born 
again,  without  the  Spirit :  you  may  set  Paul  to  plant 
and  Apollos  to  water,  but  the  Spirit  alone  can  give 
the  increase  ;  we  may  raise  up  congregations  fair  and 
formal,  and  sinews  and  flesh  and  skin  may  cover  the 
dry  bones, — but  until  the  Spirit  breathes  upon  them 
they  are  no  better  than  dead.  Not  all  the  wisdom 
of  Solomon,  not  all  the  faith  of  Abraham,  not  all  the 
prophecies  of  Isaiah,  not  all  the  eloquence  of  Apostles, 
could  avail  to  convert  one  single  soul  without  the  opera 
tion  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power, 
but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  And  there- 


32  REGENERATION    (II) 

fore  I  call  this  an  awful  truth.  I  know  the  Spirit  is 
promised  to  all  who  ask  it;  but  I  tremble  lest  men 
should  loiter  and  put  off  their  souls'  concerns  so  long 
that  the  Spirit  may  be  grieved  and  leave  them  in 
their  sins. 

And  still,  beloved,  awful  as  this  truth  may  be  to 
sinners,  it  is  full  of  consolation  to  believers  ;  it  is  full 
of  sweet  and  unspeakable  comfort  to  all  who  feel  in 
themselves  the  holy  workings  of  a  new  and  spiritual 
nature.  These  can  say  with  rejoicing,  "It  is  not  our 
right  hand  nor  our  arm  which  hath  brought  us  on 
the  way  towards  Zion ;  the  Lord  Himself  was  on 
our  side  ;  it  was  He  who  raised  us  from  the  death  of 
sin  to  the  life  of  righteousness,  and  surely  He  will 
never  let  us  go.  Once  we  were  sleeping  and  dead  in 
trespasses,  but  the  Spirit  awakened  us  and  opened  our 
eyes.  We  caught  a  sight  of  the  punishment  prepared 
for  the  ungodly  ;  we  heard  a  voice  saying,  '  Come  unto 
Me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest/  and  we  could  sleep 
no  longer.  And  surely  we  may  hope  that  He,  who 
graciously  began  the  work  of  grace,  will  also  carry  it 
forward  ;  He  laid  the  foundation,  and  He  will  not  let 
it  decay;  He  began,  and  He  will  bring  His  handiwork 
to  perfection." 

So  much  for  the  great  Cause  and  Giver  of  the  New 
Birth — the  Holy  Spirit.  It  only  remains  for  us  to 
consider  the  means  through  which  it  is  ordinarily 
conveyed,  and  comes,  and  the  different  ways  and 
manners  in  which  it  generally  shows  itself  and  produces 
its  wonderful  effects. 

Now,  with  respect  to  the  means  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  doth  ordinarily  use,  I  would  not  have  you  for 
one  minute  suppose  that  I  wish  to  limit  or  set  bounds 
to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  I  do  not  for  an  instant 
deny  that  some  have  been  born  again  without  any 


REGENERATION   (II)  33 

outward  visible  machinery  having  been  used — by  a  sort 
of  secret  impulse  which  cannot  be  well  explained  ;  but 
I  do  say  that,  generally  speaking,  the  Holy  Ghost,  in 
giving  to  a  man  that  blessed  thing  the  new  birth,  is 
pleased  to  work  upon  his  heart  more  or  less  by  means 
which  our  eyes  can  see  and  which  our  minds  can 
understand.  I  would  not,  then,  have  you  ignorant  that 
a  man  is  seldom  born  again  of  the  Spirit,  without  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel  having  something  to  do  in 
the  change.  This  is  a  special  instrument  for  turning 
men  from  darkness  to  light,  and  many  a  one  can  testify 
that  it  was  through  sermons  he  was  first  touched,  and 
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  It  was  Peter's 
preaching  which  first  touched  the  men  of  Jerusalem 
after  our  Lord's  death,  insomuch  that  they  were  pricked 
to  the  heart  and  said,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall 
we  do?"  It  was  the  command  which  Jesus  gave  to 
the  apostles  before  his  ascension,  they  were  "  to  preach 
unto  the  people  and  to  testify."  It  was  a  cause  of  joy 
to  Paul  that  Christ  was  preached  at  Rome :  "  I  therein 
rejoice,"  he  says,  "and  will  rejoice."  It  was  his  own 
declaration  about  himself,  "  Christ  Jesus  sent  me  not 
to  baptise,  but  to  preach  the  Gospel."  No  means  is  so 
blessed  in  all  the  experience  of  Christ's  Church  as  the 
plain  preaching  of  the  Gospel ;  no  sign  so  sure  of 
decay  and  rottenness  in  a  Church  as  the  neglect 
of  preaching  ;  for  there  is  no  ordinance  in  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  so  particularly  present,  none  by  which 
sinners  are  so  often  converted  and  brought  back  to 
God.  Faith  cometh  by  hearing  ;  and  how  shall  men 
believe  except  they  hear  ?  Therefore  it  is  that  we  press 
upon  you  so  continually  to  be  diligent  in  hearing  Christ 
preached  ;  for  none  are  so  unlikely  to  be  born  again 
as  those  who  will  not  listen  to  the  truth. 

And  seldom  too  is  a  man  born  of  the  Spirit  without 

3 


34  REGENERATION   (II) 

the  Bible  having  something  to  do  in  the  work.  The 
Bible  was  written  by  men  who  spake  as  they  were 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  he  who  reads  it 
seriously  and  attentively,  or  hears  it  read,  is  seeking 
acquaintance  with  God  in  God's  own  way.  You  would 
find  few  indeed  among  the  Lord's  true  people  who 
would  not  tell  you  that  the  starting-point  in  their 
spiritual  life  was  some  saying  or  doctrine  in  Scripture  ; 
some  part  or  portion,  pressed  home  upon  their  con 
sciences  by  an  unseen,  secret  power,  was  among  the 
first  things  which  stirred  them  up  to  think  and  examine 
their  ways  ;  some  plain  declaration  flashed  across  their 
minds  and  made  them  say,  "  If  this  be  true  I  shall 
certainly  be  lost."  Therefore  it  is  we  tell  you  over 
and  over  again,  Search  the  Scriptures,  search  the 
Scriptures ;  they  are  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  they  are 
the  weapon  by  which  the  devil  is  often  driven  out  ;  and 
he  who  leaves  his  Bible  unread  doth  plainly  not  wish 
to  be  born  again. 

Once  more.  Never  arc  men  born  of  the  Spirit  without 
Prayer.  I  believe  there  would  not  be  found  a  single 
case  of  a  person  who  had  been  quickened  and  made 
a  nc\v  creature  without  God  having  been  entreated  of 
and  inquired  of  before.  Either  he  has  prayed  for 
himself,  or  some  one  has  prayed  for  him  :  so  Stephen 
died  praying  for  his  murderers,  and  by-and-by  Saul 
was  converted.  The  Lord  loves  to  be  sought  after 
by  His  guilty  creatures;  and  they  who  will  not  ask 
for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  come  down  upon  them  have 
no  right  to  expect  in  themselves  any  real  change. 

Such,  then,  beloved,  are  the  means  through  which 
this  new  birth  is  generally  given.  I  say  generally, 
because  it  is  not  for  me  to  set  bounds  to  the  operations 
of  God  ;  I  know  men  may  be  startled  by  sicknesses  and 
accidents  and  the  like,  but  still  I  repeat  that  preach- 


REGENERATION   (II)  35 

ing,  the  Bible  and  prayer  are  the  channels  through 
which  the  Spirit  ordinarily  works.  And  I  say  further 
that  in  all  my  life  and  reading  I  never  heard  of  a 
man  who  diligently,  humbly,  heartily  and  earnestly 
made  use  of  these  means,  who  did  not  sooner  or  later 
find  within  himself  new  habits  and  principles  ;  I  never 
heard  of  a  man  steadily  persevering  in  their  use  who 
did  not  sooner  or  later  feel  that  sin  and  he  must  part 
company — who  did  not,  in  short,  become  a  real  child 
of  God,  a  new  creature. 

III.  So  much  for  the  means  through  which  the 
Spirit  generally  conveys  this  new  birth.  There  is  yet 
one  point  to  be  considered  this  morning  ;  and  that 
is  the  particular  manner  in  which  this  mighty  spiritual 
change  doth  first  touch  a  person  and  begin. 

Now,  on  this  point  I  remark,  there  are  great  diversities 
of  operations  ;  there  is  a  vast  variety  in  the  methods 
by  which  the  Spirit  works,  and  hence  it  is  that  we 
can  never  say  He  is  tied  down  to  show  himself  in  one 
particular  way  ;  we  must  never  condemn  a  person  and 
tell  him  he  is  a  graceless  unconverted  sinner  because 
his  experience  may  happen  to  differ  widely  from  our 
own. 

I  would  have  you  note,  then,  there  is  great  diversity 
in  the  time  and  age  at  which  this  change  begins.  Some 
few  have  the  grace  of  God  in  them  from  their  very 
infancy  ;  they  are,  as  it  were,  sanctified  and  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  from  their  mother's  womb ;  they 
cannot  so  much  as  remember  the  time  when  they  were 
without  a  deep  sense  of  their  natural  corruption  and 
a  lively  faith  in  Christ,  and  an  earnest  desire  and 
endeavour  to  live  close  to  God  :  such  were  Isaac  and 
Samuel  and  Josiah  and  Jeremiah,  and  John  the  Baptist 
and  Timothy.  Blessed  and  happy  are  these  souls ; 
their  memories  are  not  saddened  by  the  recollection 


36  REGENERATION    (II) 

of  years  wasted  in  carelessness  and  sin  ;  their  imagina 
tions  are  not  defiled  and  stained  with  the  remembrance 
of  youthful  wickedness.  But  few  indeed  arc  to  be 
found  of  this  sort.  There  would  be  far  more,  I  am 
persuaded,  if  infant  baptism  were  not  so  inconsiderately 
and  lightly  regarded  (as  it  too  often  is) — so  scrambled 
over  ;  but  we  have  no  reason  to  expect  the  children 
of  unbelieving  parents  can  turn  out  anything  else  but 
unclean  and  unholy  ;  and  when  children  are  brought 
to  the  font  without  real  faith  and  real  prayer  we 
have  no  warrant  for  supposing  the  baptism  of  water 
is  accompanied  by  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
And  let  me  also  add  that  much  depends  on  the  edu 
cation  which  parents  give ;  and  many  a  one  could 
tell  you  he  got  his  first  impressions  of  religion  from 
the  teaching  and  example  of  a  father  and  mother 
who  really  feared  God. 

But  again.  Many,  perhaps  the  greater  part  of  true 
Christians  in  our  day,  are  never  born  of  the  Spirit 
till  they  come  to  age  and  have  reached  years  of 
maturity.  These  were  once  walking  after  the  course  of 
this  world,  perhaps  serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures, 
perhaps  decent  outwardly  and  yet  only  regarding 
religion  as  a  thing  for  Sundays,  not  as  a  concern  of 
the  hearts.  But  by  some  means  or  other  God  stops 
them  in  their  career  and  turns  their  hearts  back  again, 
and  they  take  up  the  cross.  And  bitter  indeed  is  their 
repentance,  and  great  is  their  wonder  that  they  could 
have  lived  so  long  in  such  a  fashion,  and  warm  is  the 
love  they  feel  towards  Him  who  has  so  graciously  for 
given  them  all  iniquity. 

Once  more.  Some  few,  some  very  few,  are  first 
brought  unto  God  and  born  again  in  the  advance  and 
in  the  decline  of  life.  Oh  !  but  it  is  fearful  to  see  how 
few.  There  are  not  many  who  ever  arrive  at  what  is 


REGENERATION   (II)  37 

called  old  age  ;  and  of  these  I  believe  a  very  insignifi 
cant  part  indeed  are  ever  brought  to  a  saving  change, 
if  they  have  not  been  changed.  And  little  wonder 
if  we  consider  how  deeply  rooted  a  thing  is  habit, 
how  hard  it  is  for  those  who  are  accustomed  to  do 
evil  to  learn  to  do  good.  O  brethren  beloved,  youth 
is  the  time  to  seek  the  Lord  !  I  know  that  with  God 
nothing  is  impossible  ;  I  know  that  He  can  touch  the 
rock  that  has  long  been  unmoved,  if  He  pleases,  and 
make  the  water  flow ;  but  still  we  very  seldom  hear 
of  old  men  or  women  being  converted  :  grey  hairs  are 
the  time  for  burning  the  oil  of  grace  and  not  for 
buying  it,  and  therefore  I  say,  pray  ye  that  your 
flight  be  not  in  the  winter  of  life. 

IV.  The  next  thing  I  would  have  you  note  is  the 
great  diversity  in  the  ways  by  which  the  Spirit,  so  to 
speak,  doth  strike  the  first  blow  in  producing  this 
new  birth. 

Some  are  awakened  suddenly,  by  mighty  providences 
and  interpositions  of  God  ;  they  despise  other  warnings, 
and  then  the  Lord  comes  in  and  violently  shakes  them 
out  of  sleep,  and  plucks  them  like  brands  from  the 
burning.  And  this  is  often  done  by  unexpected 
mercies, — by  extraordinary  afflictions  and  troubles,  by 
sicknesses,  by  accidents,  by  placing  a  man  in  some  great 
danger  and  peril  ;  and  thousands,  I  am  certain,  will  tell 
us  in  heaven,  "  It  is  good  for  us  that  we  were  tried 
and  distressed  ;  '  before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray, 
but  now  have  I  kept  Thy  word.'  "  This  was  the  case 
with  Paul :  he  \vas  struck  to  the  earth  blinded,  while 
going  to  Damascus  to  persecute,  and  he  rose  up  an 
humbled  and  a  wiser  man.  This  was  the  case  with 
Jonah :  when  he  fled  from  the  Lord's  command,  he 
was  awakened  by  a  storm  while  sleeping  on  board 
the  ship.  This  was  the  case  with  Manasseh,  king  of 


38  REGENERATION    (II) 

Judah :  he  was  taken  prisoner  and  laid  in  chains  at 
Babylon,  and  in  his  affliction  he  sought  the  Lord. 
This  was  the  case  with  the  jailer  at  Philippi  :  he  was 
roused  by  the  earthquake,  and  came  and  fell  down  say 
ing,  '•  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  This  is  the  case 
spoken  of  by  Elihu  in  the  thirty-third  of  Job.  And 
here  is  the  reason  why  we  ought  to  feel  so  anxious 
about  a  man,  when  God  has  laid  His  hand  upon  him 
and  afflicted  him.  I  always  feel  about  such  a  person, 
"  There  is  one  whom  the  Lord  is  trying  to  convert :  will 
it  or  will  it  not  be  all  in  vain  ?  " 

Again.  Some  are  awakened  suddenly,  by  very  little 
and  trifling  things.  God  often  raises  up  Christ's 
kingdom  in  a  man's  heart  by  a  seed  so  small  and 
insignificant,  that  all  who  see  it  are  obliged  to  confess, 
"  This  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our 
eyes."  A  single  text  of  Scripture  sometimes  ;  a  few 
lines  in  a  book  taken  up  by  accident  ;  a  chance  ex 
pression  or  word  dropped  in  conversation,  and  never 
perhaps  meant  by  him  who  spoke  it  to  do  so  much : 
each  of  these  seeming  trifles  has  been  known  to  pierce 
men's  hearts  like  an  arrow,  after  sermons  and  ordinances 
have  been  used  without  appearing  to  avail.  I  have 
heard  of  one  who  could  trace  up  the  beginning  of  his 
conversion  to  the  saying  of  a  perfect  stranger :  he  was 
profanely  asking  God  to  damn  his  soul,  when  the 
stranger  stopped  him  and  said  it  were  better  to  pray 
that  it  might  be  blessed  than  damned  ;  and  that  little 
word  found  its  way  to  his  heart.  Oh,  how  careful 
should  we  be  over  our  lips  !  Who  knows  what  good 
might  be  done  if  we  only  strove  more  to  speak  a  word 
in  season  ? 

Once  more.  Some  arc  born  of  the  Spirit  gradually 
and  insensibly.  They  hardly  know  at  the  period  what 
is  going  on  within  them  ;  they  can  hardly  recollect 


REGENERATION   (II)  39 

any  particular  circumstances  attending  their  conver 
sion,  or  fix  any  particular  time  ;  but  they  do  know 
this,  that  somehow  or  other  they  have  gone  through 
a  great  change,  they  do  know  that  once  they  were 
careless  about  religion,  and  now  they  hold  it  chiefest 
in  their  affections :  once  they  were  blind  and  now  they 
see.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  case  with  Lydia  at 
Philippi  ;  the  Lord  gently  opened  her  heart,  so  that  she 
attended  to  the  things  spoken  by  Paul.  This  is  what 
Elijah  saw  in  the  wilderness  ;  there  was  the  whirlwind 
and  the  earthquake  and  the  fire,  and  after  all  there  was 
something  else — a  still  small  voice.  And  here  is  one 
reason  why  we  sometimes  hope  and  trust  that  many 
amongst  the  hearers  in  our  congregations  may  still 
prove  children  of  God.  We  try  to  think  that  some  of 
you  feel  more  than  you  seem  to  do,  and  that  the  time 
is  near  when  you  will  indeed  come  out  and  be  separate, 
and  not  be  ashamed  to  confess  Christ  before  men. 

There  is  one  more  diversity  I  would  very  shortly 
notice.  Remember  there  is  diversity  in  the  feelings 
which  the  Spirit  first  excites :  each  feeling  is  moved 
sooner  or  later,  but  they  are  not  moved  always  in  the 
same  order.  The  new  birth  shows  itself  in  some  by 
causing  exceeding  fear — they  are  filled  with  a  strong 
sense  of  God's  holiness,  and  they  tremble  because  they 
have  broken  His  law  continually ;  others  begin  with 
sorrow — they  can  never  mourn  enough  over  their  past 
wickedness  and  ingratitude  ;  others  begin  with  love — 
they  are  full  of  affection  towards  Him  who  died  for 
them,  and  no  sacrifice  seems  too  great  to  make  for  His 
sake.  But  all  these  worketh  one  and  the  same  Spirit ; 
in  this  man  He  touches  one  string,  and  in  that  another  ; 
but  sooner  or  later  all  are  blended  in  harmony  together, 
and  when  the  new  creation  has  fully  taken  place,  fear 
and  sorrow  and  love  may  all  be  found  at  once. 


40  REGENERATION    (II) 

Beloved,  time  will  not  allow  me  to  go  further  with  this 
subject  to-day.  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  you  this 
morning  who  is  the  Worker,  the  Cause  of  the  new 
birth  :  it  is  not  man,  but  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  What 
are  the  means  through  which  He  generally  conveys 
it  :  preaching,  the  Bible,  and  prayer.  And  lastly  I  have 
shown  you  there  are  many  diversities  in  His  operations : 
with  some  He  begins  in  infancy,  with  some  in  full  years, 
with  some  few  in  old  age.  On  some  He  comes  down 
suddenly  and  on  some  gradually,  in  some  He  first  moves 
one  sort  of  feelings  and  in  some  another  ;  but  whatever 
be  His  operation,  without  the  Spirit  none  can  be  born 
again. 

And  now,  in  conclusion,  tell  me  not  you  mean  to 
wait  lazily  and  idly,  and  if  the  Lord  gives  you  this 
blessed  change,  well,  and  if  not  you  cannot  help  it. 
God  does  not  deal  with  you  as  if  you  were  machines 
or  stones  ;  He  deals  with  you  as  those  who  can  read 
and  hear  and  pray,  and  this  is  the  way  in  which  He 
would  have  you  wait  upon  Him.  Never  was  doctrine 
so  surrounded  with  promises  and  encouragements  and 
invitations  as  this.  Hear  what  Jeremiah  says  :  "  I  will 
put  my  law  in  their  inward  parts,  and  write  it  in 
their  hearts  ;  and  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be 
my  people."  Again  :  "  They  shall  be  my  people,  and 
I  will  be  their  God  :  and  I  will  give  them  one  heart, 
and  one  way,  that  they  may  fear  me  for  ever,  for  the 
good  of  them,  and  of  their  children  after  them."  Then 
what  Ezekiel  says  :  "  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you, 
and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you  :  and  I  will  take 
away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give 
you  an  heart  of  flesh.  And  I  will  put  my  Spirit  within 
you,  and  cause  you  to  walk  in  my  statutes."  Then  lastly 
what  the  Lord  Jesus  says  :  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive  ; 
seek,  and  ye  shall  find  :  every  one  that  asketh  receiveth  : 


REGENERATION   (II)  41 

your  Heavenly  Father  shall  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them 
that  ask  Him."  And  this  is  what  we  want  you  to  do  : 
until  you  pray  for  yourselves  in  earnest,  we  know  there 
will  be  little  good  done  ;  and  if  any  prayerless  man 
shall  say  in  the  day  of  judgment  "  I  could  not  come 
to  Christ,"  the  answer  will  be,  "You  did  not  try." 

Then  quench  not  the  Spirit,  grieve  not  the  Spirit, 
resist  not  the  Spirit  ;  His  grace  has  been  purchased  for 
you  :  strive  and  labour  and  pray  that  you  may  indeed 
receive  it.  And  then  God  has  covenanted  and  engaged 
that  He  shall  come  down  like  rain  on  the  dry  ground — 
like  water  to  wash  away  your  soul's  defilement,  like 
fire  to  burn  away  the  dross  and  filth  of  sin,  and  the 
hardest  heart  among  you  shall  become  soft  and  willing 
as  a  weaned  child. 


IV 
REGENERATION  (III) 

"  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  Cod."— JOHN  iii.  3. 

WE  have  reached  the  last  point  in  our  inquiry 
about  the  new  Birth— I  mean  the  marks  and 
evidence  by  which  it  may  be  known  ;  the  notes  by 
which  a  man  may  find  out  whether  he  has  himself 
been  born  again  or  no.  To  set  before  you  the  character 
of  those  who  are  indeed  new  creatures, — to  warn 
you  against  certain  common  mistakes  respecting  this 
doctrine, — to  wind  up  the  whole  subject  by  appealing 
to  your  consciences, — this  is  the  work  which  I  propose 
to  take  in  hand  this  morning. 

Now  this  point  may  be  last  in  order,  but  it  certainly 
is  not  least  in  importance.  It  is  the  touchstone  of  our 
condition  ;  it  decides  whether  we  are  natural  men  or 
spiritual  men,  whether  we  are  yet  dead  in  trespasses, 
or  have  been  quickened  and  brought  to  see  the  kingdom 
of  God. 

Many  there  are  who  take  it  for  granted  they  have 
been  born  again, — they  do  not  exactly  know  why,  but 
it  is  a  sort  of  thing  they  never  doubted  ;  others  there 
are  who  despise  all  such  sifting  inquiry, — they  are  sure 
they  are  in  the  right  way,  they  are  confident  they  shall 
be  saved,  and  as  for  marks,  it  is  low  and  legal  to  talk 
about  them,  it  is  bringing  men  into  bondage.  But, 
beloved,  whatever  men  may  say,  you  may  be  certain 


REGENERATION    (III)  43 

Christ's  people  arc  a  peculiar  people,  not  only  peculiar 
in  their  talk  but  peculiar  in  their  life  and  conduct, 
and  they  may  be  distinguished  from  the  unconverted 
around  them  ;  you  may  be  certain  there  are  stamps 
and  marks  and  characters  about  God's  handiwork  by 
which  it  may  always  be  known  ;  and  he  who  has  got  no 
evidences  to  show  may  well  suspect  that  he  is  not  in  the 
right  way. 

Now,  about  these  marks  I  can  of  course  only  speak 
very  shortly  and  very  generally,  for  time  will  not  allow 
me  to  do  more  ;  but  I  would  first  say  one  word  by  way 
of  caution.  Remember,  then,  I  would  not  have  you 
suppose  that  all  children  of  God  do  feel  alike,  or  that 
these  marks  should  be  equally  strong  and  plain  in 
every  case.  The  work  of  grace  on  man's  heart  is 
gradual :  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full 
corn  in  the  ear.  It  is  like  leaven  :  the  whole  lump  is 
not  leavened  at  once.  It  is  as  in  the  birth  of  an  infant 
into  the  world  :  first  it  feels,  then  moves  and  cries, 
and  sees  and  hears  and  knows,  and  thinks  and  loves, 
and  walks  and  talks  and  acts  for  itself.  Each  of  these 
things  comes  gradually,  and  in  order  ;  but  we  do  not 
wait  for  all  before  we  say  this  is  a  living  soul.  And 
just  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit.  He 
may  not,  at  first,  find  in  himself  all  the  marks  of  God, 
but  he  has  the  seed  of  them  all  about  him  ;  and  some 
he  knows  by  experience,  and  all,  in  the  course  of  time, 
shall  be  known  distinctly.  But  this  at  least  you  may 
be  sure  of:  wherever  there  is  no  fruit  of  the  Spirit, 
there  is  no  work  of  the  Spirit ;  and  if  any  man  have 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His.  O  that 
this  question  might  stir  up  every  one  of  you  to  search 
and  try  his  ways  !  God  is  not  a  man  that  he  should 
lie  ;  He  would  not  have  given  you  the  Bible  if  you 
could  be  saved  without  it ;  and  here  is  a  doctrine  on 


44  REGENERATION   (III) 

which  eternal  life  depends  :  "  No  salvation  without  the 
new  birth." 

I.  First,  then,  and  foremost,  I  would  have  you  write 
down  in  your  memories  a  mark  which  St.  John  mentions 
in  his  first  epistle  :  "  Whosoever  is  born  of  God,  doth 
not  commit  sin  "  ;  "  whosoever  is  born  of  God,  sinneth 
not "  ;  "  whosoever  abideth  in  Him  sinneth  not :  whoso 
ever  sinneth  hath  not  seen  Him,  neither  known  Him." 

Observe,  I  would  not  for  one  minute  have  you 
suppose  that  God's  children  are  perfect,  and  without 
spot  or  stain  or  defilement  in  themselves.  Do  not  go 
away  and  say  I  told  you  they  were  pure  as  angels 
and  never  made  a  slip  or  stumble.  The  same  St.  John 
in  the  same  Epistle  declares  :  "  If  we  say  that  we  have 
no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in 
us.  .  .  .  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make 
Him  a  liar,  and  His  word  is  not  in  us." 

But  I  do  say  that  in  the  matter  of  breaking  God's 
commandments,  every  one  that  is  born  again  is  quite 
a  new  man.  He  no  longer  takes  a  light  and  cool 
and  easy  view  of  sin  ;  he  no  longer  judges  of  it  with 
the  world's  judgment  ;  he  no  longer  thinks  a  little 
swearing,  or  a  little  Sabbath-breaking,  or  a  little  forni 
cation,  or  a  little  drinking,  or  a  little  covetousness, 
small  and  trifling  matters  ;  but  he  looks  on  every  sort 
of  sin  against  God  or  man  as  exceeding  abominable 
and  damnable  in  the  Lord's  sight,  and,  as  far  as  in 
him  lies,  he  hates  it  and  abhors  it,  and  desires  to  be 
quit  of  it  root  and  branch,  with  his  whole  heart  and 
mind  and  soul  and  strength. 

He  that  is  born  again  has  had  the  eyes  of  his  under 
standing  opened,  and  the  Ten  Commandments  appear 
to  him  in  an  entirely  new  light.  He  feels  amazed  that 
he  can  have  lived  so  long  careless  and  indifferent  about 
transgressions,  and  he  looks  back  on  the  days  gone 


REGENERATION   (III)  45 

by  with  shame  and  sorrow  and  grief.  As  for  his 
daily  conduct,  he  allows  himself  in  no  known  sin  ;  he 
makes  no  compromise  with  his  old  habits  and  his  old 
principles  ;  he  gives  them  up  unsparingly,  though  it 
cost  him  pain,  though  the  world  think  him  over-precise 
and  a  fool  ;  but  he  is  a  new  man,  and  will  have  nothing 
more  to  do  with  the  accursed  thing.  I  do  not  say 
but  that  he  comes  short,  and  finds  his  old  nature  con 
tinually  opposing  him — and  this,  too,  when  no  eye 
can  see  it  but  his  own  ;  but  then  he  mourns  and 
repents  bitterly  over  his  own  weakness.  And  this  at 
least  he  has  about  him  :  he  is  at  war,  in  reality,  with 
the  devil  and  all  his  works,  and  strives  constantly  to 
be  free. 

And  do  you  call  that  no  change  ?  Look  abroad 
on  this  world,  this  evildoing  world  :  mark  how  little 
men  generally  think  about  sin  ;  how  seldom  they  judge 
of  it  as  the  Bible  does ;  how  easy  they  suppose  the 
way  to  heaven, — and  judge  ye  whether  this  mark  be 
not  exceeding  rare.  But  for  all  this  God  will  not  be 
mocked,  and  men  may  rest  assured  that  until  they 
are  convinced  of  the  awful  guilt  and  the  awful  power 
and  the  awful  consequences  of  sin,  and,  being  con 
vinced,  flee  from  it  and  give  it  up,  they  are  most 
certainly  not  born  again. 

II.  The  second  mark  I  would  have  you  note  is  "  faith 
in  Christ,"  and  here  again  I  speak  in  the  words  of 
St.  John  in  his  first  epistle :  "  Whosoever  believeth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God." 

I  do  not  mean  by  this  a  general  vague  sort  of  belief 
that  Jesus  Christ  once  lived  on  earth  and  died — a  sort 
of  faith  which  the  very  devils  possess  ;  I  mean,  rather, 
that  feeling  which  comes  over  a  man  when  he  is  really 
convinced  of  his  own  guilt  and  unworthiness,  and  sees 
that  Christ  alone  can  be  his  Saviour  ;  when  he  becomes 


46  REGENERATION    (III) 

convinced  he  is  in  a  way  to  be  lost,  and  must  have 
some  righteousness  better  than  his  own,  and  joyfully 
embraces  that  righteousness  which  Jesus  holds  out  to 
all  who  will  believe.  He  that  has  got  this  faith  dis 
covers  a  fitness  and  suitableness  and  comfort  in  the 
doctrine  of  Christ  crucified  for  sinners  which  once  he 
never  knew  ;  he  is  no  longer  ashamed  to  confess 
himself  by  nature  poor  and  blind  and  naked,  and  to 
take  Christ  for  his  only  hope  of  salvation. 

Before  a  man  is  born  of  the  Spirit  there  seems  no 
particular  form  nor  comeliness  about  the  Redeemer,  but 
after  that  blessed  change  has  taken  place  He  appears 
the  very  chiefest  in  ten  thousand  :  no  honour  so  great 
but  Jesus  is  worthy  of  it  ;  no  love  so  strong  but  on 
Jesus  it  is  well  bestowed ;  no  spiritual  necessity  so 
great  but  Jesus  can  relieve  it ;  no  sin  so  black  but 
Jesus'  blood  can  wash  it  away.  Before  the  new  birth 
a  man  can  bow  at  Christ's  name,  and  sometimes 
wonder  at  Christ's  miracles,  but  that  is  all  ;  once  born 
again,  a  man  sees  a  fulness  and  a  completeness  and  a 
sufficiency  in  Christ  of  things  necessary  to  salvation, 
so  that  he  feels  as  if  he  could  never  think  upon  Him 
enough.  To  cast  the  burden  of  sin  on  Jesus,  to  glory 
in  the  cross  on  which  He  died,  to  keep  continually  in 
sight  His  blood,  His  righteousness,  His  intercession,  His 
mediation  ;  to  go  continually  to  Him  for  peace  and 
forgiveness,  to  rest  entirely  on  Him  for  full  and  free 
salvation,  to  make  Jesus,  in  short,  all  in  all  in  their 
hopes  of  heaven— this  is  the  most  notable  mark  of  all 
true  children  of  God— they  live  by  faith  in  Christ,  in 
Christ  their  happiness  is  bound  up. 

It  is  the  spiritual  law  of  God  which  brings  them  to 
this:  time  was  when  they  were  ready  to  think  well 
of  themselves  ;  the  law  strips  off  their  miserable  gar 
ments  of  self-righteousness,  exposes  their  exceeding  guilt 


REGENERATION   (III)  47 

and  rottenness,  cuts  down  to  the  ground  their  fancied 
notions  of  justification  by  their  own  works,  and  so  leads 
them  to  Christ  as  their  only  wisdom  and  redemption  ; 
and  then,  when  they  have  laid  hold  on  Christ  and 
taken  Him  for  their  Saviour,  they  begin  to  find  that 
rest  which  before  they  had  sought  in  vain. 

Such  are  two  first  marks  of  the  Spirit's  work — a  deep 
conviction  of  sin  and  forsaking  of  it,  and  a  lively  faith 
in  Christ  crucified  as  the  only  hope  of  forgiveness — 
marks  which  the  world  perhaps  may  not  see,  but  marks 
without  which  no  man  or  woman  was  ever  yet  made 
a  new  creature.  These  are  the  two  foundations  of  the 
Christian's  character,  the  pillars,  as  it  were,  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  ;  they  are  hidden  roots  which  others 
can  only  judge  of  by  the  fruit ;  but  they  who  have 
them  do  generally  know  it,  and  can  feel  the  witness 
in  themselves. 

III.  The  third  mark  of  the  new  birth  is  "holiness." 
What  says  the  apostle  John  again  ? — "  Every  one 
that  doeth  righteousness  is  born  of  God "  ;  "  he  that 
is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  himself." 

The  true  children  of  God  delight  in  making  the  law 
their  rule  of  life  ;  it  dwells  in  their  minds,  and  is 
written  upon  their  hearts,  and  it  is  their  meat  and 
drink  to  do  their  Father's  will.  They  know  nothing  of 
that  spirit  of  bondage  which  false  Christians  complain 
of ;  it  is  their  pleasure  to  glorify  God  with  their  bodies 
and  souls,  which  are  His  ;  they  hunger  and  thirst  after 
tempers  and  dispositions  like  their  Lord's.  They  do 
not  rest  content  with  sleepy  wishing  and  hoping,  but 
they  strive  to  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation — 
in  thought,  in  word,  and  in  deed  ;  it  is  their  daily  heart's 
prayer,  "  Lord  what  wilt  Thou  have  us  to  do  ?  "  and  it 
is  their  daily  grief  and  lamentation  that  they  come 
so  short  and  are  such  unprofitable  servants.  Beloved, 


48  REGENERATION    (III) 

remember  where  there  is  no  holiness  of  life  there  cannot 
be  much  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

IV.  The  fourth  mark  of  the  new  birth  is  spiritual- 
mindedness.  We  learn  this  from  St.  Paul's  words  to 
the  Colossians  :  "  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek 
those  things  which  are  above  ....  set  your  affection 
on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth." 

He  that  is  born  again  thinks  first  about  the  things 
which  are  eternal  ;  he  no  longer  gives  up  the  best  of 
liis  heart  to  this  perishable  world's  concerns  :  he  looks 
on  earth  as  a  place  of  pilgrimage,  he  looks  on  heaven 
as  his  home  ;  and  even  as  a  child  remembers  with 
delight  its  absent  parents,  and  hopes  to  be  one  day 
with  them,  so  does  the  Christian  think  of  his  God  and 
long  for  that  day  when  he  shall  stand  in  His  presence 
and  go  no  more  out.  He  cares  not  for  the  pleasures 
and  amusements  of  the  world  around  him  ;  he  minds 
not  the  things  of  the  flesh,  but  the  things  of  the  Spirit  ; 
he  feels  that  he  has  a  house  not  made  with  hands  eternal 
in  the  heavens,  and  he  earnestly  desires  to  be  there. 
"Lord,"  he  says,  "whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee? 
and  there  is  none  on  earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee." 

V.  The  fifth  mark  of  the  new  birth  is  victory  over 
the  world.  Hear  what  St.  John  says :  "  Whosoever  is 
born  of  God  overcomcth  the  world :  and  this  is  the 
victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith." 

What  is  the  natural  man  ? — a  wretched  slave  to 
the  opinion  of  this  world.  What  the  world  says  is 
right  he  follows  and  approves  ;  what  the  world  says 
is  wrong  he  renounces  and  condemns  also.  How  shall 
I  do  what  my  neighbours  do  not  do  ?  What  will  men 
say  of  me  if  I  become  more  strict  than  they?  This 
is  the  natural  man's  argument.  But  from  all  this  he 
that  is  born  again  is  free.  He  no  longer  is  led  by 
the  praise  or  the  blame,  the  laughter  or  the  frown,  of 


REGENERATION   (III)  49 

children  of  Adam  like  himself.  He  no  longer  thinks 
that  the  sort  of  religion  which  everybody  about  him 
professes  must  necessarily  be  right.  He  no  longer 
considers  "  What  will  the  world  say  ? "  but  "  What 
does  God  command  ? "  Oh,  it  is  a  glorious  change 
when  a  man  thinks  nothing  of  the  difficulty  of  con 
fessing  Christ  before  men,  in  the  hope  that  Christ  will 
confess  him  and  own  him  before  the  holy  angels  !  That 
fear  of  the  world  is  a  terrible  snare  ;  with  many 
thousands  it  far  outweighs  the  fear  of  God.  There 
are  men  who  would  care  more  for  the  laughter  of  a 
company  of  friends  than  they  would  for  the  testimony 
of  half  the  Bible.  From  all  this  the  spiritual  man  is 
free.  He  is  no  longer  like  a  dead  fish  floating  with 
the  stream  of  earthly  opinion  ;  he  is  ever  pressing 
upwards,  looking  unto  Jesus  in  spite  of  all  opposition 
He  has  overcome  the  world. 

VI.  The  sixth  mark  of  the  new  birth  is  "  meekness.' 
This  is  what  David  meant  when  he  said,  in  Psalm 
cxxxi. :  "  My  soul  is  even  as  a  weaned  child."  This 
is  what  our  Lord  has  in  view  when  He  tells  us  we 
"must  be  converted  and  become  as  little  children." 

Pride  is  the  besetting  sin  of  all  natural  men,  and  it 
comes  out  in  a  hundred  different  fashions.  It  was 
pride  by  which  the  angels  fell  and  became  devils.  It 
is  pride  which  brings  many  a  sinner  to  the  pit, — he 
knows  he  is  in  the  wrong  about  religion,  but  he  is  too 
proud  to  bend  his  neck  and  act  up  to  what  he  knows. 
It  is  pride  which  may  always  be  seen  about  false 
professors :  they  are  always  saying,  W7e  are  the  men, 
and  we  are  alone  in  the  right,  and  ours  is  the  sure 
way  to  heaven  ;  and  by-and-by  they  fall  and  go  to 
their  own  place  and  are  heard  no  more  of.  But  he 
that  is  born  again  is  clothed  with  humility  ;  he  has  a 
very  child-like  and  contrite  and  broken  spirit  ;  he  has 

4 


5o  REGENERATION  (III) 

a  deep  sense  of  his  own  weakness  and  sinfulness,  and 
great  fear  of  a  fall.  You  never  hear  him  professing 
confidence  in  himself  and  boasting  of  his  own  attain 
ments, — he  is  far  more  ready  to  doubt  about  his  own 
salvation  altogether  and  call  himself  "  chief  of  sinners." 
He  has  no  time  to  find  fault  with  others,  or  be  a 
busybody  about  his  neighbours, — enough  for  him  to 
keep  up  the  conflict  with  his  own  deceitful  heart,  the 
old  Adam  within.  No  enemy  so  bitter  to  him  as  his 
own  inbred  corruption.  Whenever  I  see  a  man  passing 
his  time  in  picking  holes  in  other  Churches,  and  talking 
about  every  one's  soul  except  his  own,  I  always  feel 
in  my  own  mind,  "  There  is  no  work  of  the  Spirit 
there."  And  it  is  just  this  humility  and  sense  of 
weakness  which  makes  God's  children  men  of  prayer. 
They  feel  their  own  wants  and  their  danger,  and  they 
are  constrained  to  go  continually  with  supplication  to 
Him  who  has  given  them  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  crying, 
Abba  Father,  help  us  and  deliver  us  from  evil. 

VII.  The  seventh  mark  of  the  new  birth  is  a  great 
delight  in  all  means  of  grace.  This  is  what  Peter 
speaks  of  in  his  first  Epistle  :  "  As  new-born  babes, 
desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  that  yc  may  grow." 
This  was  the  mind  of  David  when  he  said,  "  A  day 
in  Thy  courts  is  better  than  a  thousand  :  I  had  rather 
be  a  doorkeeper  in  the  house  of  my  God,  than  to  dwell 
in  the  tents  of  wickedness." 

And  oh,  what  a  difference  there  is  between  nature 
and  grace  in  this  matter !  The  natural  man  has  often 
a  form  of  godliness  :  he  does  not  neglect  the  ordinances 
of  religion,  but  somehow  or  other  the  weather,  or  his 
health,  or  the  distance,  contrives  to  be  a  great  hindrance 
to  him,  and  far  too  often  it  happens  that  the  hours  he 
spends  in  church  or  over  his  Bible  are  the  dullest  in 
his  life. 


REGENERATION  (III)  51 

But  when  a  man  is  born  again,  he  begins  to  find  a 
reality  about  means  which  once  he  did  not  feel  :  the 
Sabbath  no  longer  seems  a  dull,  wearisome  day,  in 
which  he  knows  not  how  to  spend  his  time  decently  ; 
he  now  calls  it  a  delight  and  a  privilege,  holy  of  the 
Lord  and  honourable.  The  difficulties  which  once  kept 
him  from  God's  house  now  seem  to  have  vanished  away  : 
dinner  and  weather  and  the  like  never  detain  him  at 
home,  and  he  is  no  longer  glad  of  an  excuse  not  to  go. 
Sermons  appear  a  thousand  times  more  interesting  than 
they  used  to  do  ;  and  he  would  no  more  be  inattentive 
or  willingly  go  to  sleep  under  them,  than  a  prisoner  would 
upon  his  trial.  And,  above  all,  the  Bible  looks  to  him 
like  a  new  book.  Time  was  when  it  was  very  dry 
reading  to  his  mind — perhaps  it  lay  in  a  corner  dusty 
and  seldom  read — but  now  it  is  searched  and  examined 
as  the  very  bread  of  life  ;  many  are  the  texts  and 
passages  which  seem  just  written  for  his  own  case  ;  and 
many  are  the  days  that  he  feels  disposed  to  say  with 
David,  "  The  law  of  Thy  mouth  is  better  to  me  than 
thousands  of  gold  and  silver." 

VIII.  The  eighth  and  last  mark  of  the  new  birth  is 
"  love  towards  others."  "  Every  one,"  says  St.  John, 
"  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God.  He 
that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God  ;  for  God  is  love." 

He  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit  loves  his  neighbour 
as  himself;  he  knows  nothing  of  the  selfishness  and 
uncharitableness  and  ill-nature  of  this  world  ;  he  loves 
his  neighbour's  property  as  his  own ;  he  would  not 
injure  it,  nor  stand  by  and  see  it  injured  ;  he  loves  his 
neighbour's  person  as  his  own,  and  he  would  count  no 
trouble  ill  bestowed  if  he  could  help  or  assist  him  ;  he 
loves  his  neighbour's  character  as  his  o\vn,  and  you  will 
not  hear  him  speak  a  word  against  it,  or  allow  it  to  be 
blackened  by  falsehoods  if  he  can  defend  it  ;  and  then 


52  REGENERATION  (III) 

he  loves  his  neighbour's  soul  as  his  own,  and  he  will 
not  suffer  him  to  turn  his  back  on  God  without  en 
deavouring  to  stop  him  by  saying,  "  Oh,  do  not  so ! " 
Oh  what  a  happy  place  \vould  earth  be  if  there  was 
more  love !  Oh  that  men  would  only  believe  that  the 
gospel  secures  the  greatest  comfort  in  the  life  that  now 
is,  as  well  as  in  the  life  to  come  ! 

And  such,  beloved,  are  the  marks  by  which  the  new 
birth  in  a  man's  soul  may  generally  be  discovered. 
I  have  been  obliged  to  speak  of  them  very  shortly, 
although  each  one  of  them  deserves  a  sermon.  I  com 
mend  to  your  especial  attention  the  two  first :  conviction 
and  forsaking  of  sin,  and  faith  in  Christ ;  they  are  marks 
on  which  each  must  be  his  own  judge.  "  Have  I  ever 
truly  repented  ?  Have  I  really  closed  with  Christ  and 
taken  Him  for  my  only  Saviour  and  Lord  ?  "  Let  these 
questions  be  uppermost  in  your  mind  if  you  would 
know  whether  you  are  born  again  or  not.  The  six 
last  marks — viz.  holiness,  spiritual-mindedness,  victory 
over  the  world,  meekness,  delight  in  means,  and  love — 
have  this  peculiarity  about  them,  that  a  man's  family 
and  neighbours  do  often  see  more  clearly  whether  he 
has  got  them  than  he  does  himself;  but  they  all  flow 
out  of  the  two  first,  and  therefore  I  once  more  urge 
the  two  first  on  your  especial  notice. 

And  now,  brethren  beloved,  in  concluding  this  course 
of  sermons,  I  desire  to  speak  one  word  to  the  con 
sciences  of  all  who  have  heard  them :  old  or  young, 
rich  or  poor,  careless  or  thoughtful,  you  are  all  equally 
concerned. 

For  three  Sunday  mornings  you  have  heard  this 
new  birth  set  before  you  according  to  my  ability,  and 
have  you  ever  thought  upon  your  own  state  and  looked 
within?  What  of  your  own  hearts?  Are  you  living 
or  dead,  natural  or  spiritual,  born  again  or  not  ?  Are 


REGENERATION  (III)  53 

your  bodies  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost?  Are  your 
habits  and  characters  the  habits  and  characters  of 
renewed  creatures  ?  Oh,  search  and  see  what  there  is 
within  you  :  the  language  of  the  text  is  plain, — no  new 
birth,  no  kingdom  of  God. 

I  know  there  is  nothing  popular  or  agreeable  about 
this  doctrine  ;  it  strikes  at  the  root  of  all  compromising 
half-and-half  religion,  and  still  it  is  true.  Many  would 
like  much  to  escape  the  punishment  of  sin,  who  will 
not  strive  to  be  free  from  its  power  ;  they  wish  to  be 
justified  but  not  to  be  sanctified  ;  they  desire  much  to 
have  God's  favour,  but  they  care  little  for  God's  image 
and  likeness  ;  their  talk  is  of  pardon,  but  not  of  purity  ; 
they  think  much  about  God's  willingness  to  forgive, 
but  little  about  His  warning  that  we  be  renewed.  But 
this  is  leaving  out  of  sight  half  the  work  which  Christ 
died  to  perform  :  He  died  that  we  might  become  holy 
as  well  as  happy,  He  purchased  grace  to  sanctify  as 
well  as  grace  to  redeem  ;  and  now  forgiveness  of  sin 
and  change  of  heart  must  never  be  separated.  "  What 
God  hath  joined  together,  let  no  man  presume  to  put 
asunder."  The  foundation  of  God  stands  firm:  "If 
any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none 
of  His." 

Beloved,  it  is  easy  work  to  live  unto  ourselves  and 
take  no  trouble  about  religion  ;  the  world  approves  it, 
and  says  we  shall  probably  do  well  at  last ;  but  if  ever 
we  are  to  be  saved  there  is  another  life,  and  that  too 
on  this  side  the  grave,  we  must  live  unto  God.  It  is 
easy  to  be  natural  men, — we  give  no  offence,  and  the 
devil  comforts  us  by  saying,  as  he  did  to  Eve,  "  Ye  shall 
not  surely  die  "  :  but  the  devil  was  a  liar  from  the  be 
ginning.  So  long  as  we  are  natural  men,  we  are  dead 
already,  and  we  must  rise  to  newness  of  life.  And  what 
know  ye  of  the  movements  of  the  Spirit  ?  I  ask  not 


54  REGENERATION  (III) 

so  much  whether  yc  can  say  which  way  He  came  into 
your  hearts,  but  I  do  ask  whether  ye  can  find  any  real 
footsteps  or  traces  or  tokens  of  His  presence — for  "  if 
any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none 
of  His." 

Be  not  deceived  and  led  away  by  false  opinions. 
Head-knowledge  is  not  the  new  birth :  a  man  may 
know  all  mysteries  like  Balaam,  and  think  his  eyes 
are  opened  ;  or  preach  and  work  miracles  and  be  an 
Apostle  like  Judas  Iscariot,  yet  never  be  born  again. 
Church-membership  is  not  the  new  birth  ;  many  do 
sit  in  churches  and  chapels  who  shall  have  no  seat 
in  Christ's  kingdom  ;  they  are  not  Israel  who  have  the 
circumcision  of  the  flesh  outwardly,  they  are  the  true 
Israel  who  have  the  circumcision  of  the  heart,  which  is 
inward. 

There  were  many  Jews  in  the  New  Testament  days 
who  said,  "  We  have  Abraham  for  our  father,  and  we 
have  the  temple  among  us  and  that  is  enough,"  but 
Jesus  showed  them  that  they  only  are  Abraham's 
children  who  have  the  faith  of  Abraham  and  do 
Abraham's  works.  And  then  water-baptism  alone  is 
not  the  new  birth  :  it  is  the  sign  and  seal,  and  when 
used  with  faith  and  prayer  we  have  a  right  to  look 
also  for  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  to  say 
that  every  man  who  has  been  baptised  has  been  born 
again  is  contrary  to  Scripture  and  plain  fact.  Was  not 
Simon  Magus  baptised  ?  Yes,  but  Peter  told  him  after 
his  baptism  that  he  was  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and 
bond  of  iniquity,  his  heart  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God. 
"  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant,"  says  Paul  to  the 
Corinthians,  that  all  our  Fathers  were  baptised, ....  but 
with  many  of  them  God  was  not  well  pleased.  "  Bap 
tism,"  writes  Peter,  "doth  indeed  save  us";  but  what 
baptism?  "not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  body, 


REGENERATION  (III)  55 

not  the  washing  of  water,  but  the  answer  of  a  pure 
conscience,"  a  conscience  made  pure  by  the  baptism  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

Beloved,  let  no  man  lead  you  astray  in  this  matter  ; 
let  no  man  make  you  believe  that  a  baptised  drunkard 
or  fornicator  or  blasphemer  or  worldling  has  been 
born  of  the  Spirit ;  he  has  not  the  marks  of  the  new 
birth,  and  he  cannot  have  been  born  again  ;  he  is  living 
in  sin  and  carelessness,  and  St.  John  has  given  us  his 
character—''  he  that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil." 
Remember,  the  out\vard  seal  is  nothing  without  the 
inward  writing  on  the  heart.  No  evidence  can  be 
depended  on  excepting  a  new  life  and  a  new  character 
and  a  new  creature  ;  and  to  say  that  men  who  want 
their  evidences  are  born  again  is  an  unreasonable  and 
unscriptural  stretch  of  charity. 

And  now,  in  conclusion,  if  any  one  of  you  has  reason 
to  think  that  he  still  lacks  this  one  thing  needful,  I 
entreat  that  man  not  to  stifle  his  convictions  or  nip 
them  in  the  bud.  Do  not  go  away  like  Cain  and 
silence  the  voice  of  conscience  by  rushing  into  the 
vanities  of  the  world,  nor  dream,  like  Felix,  that  you 
will  have  a  more  convenient  season  than  the  present  ; 
but  remember  I  tell  you  this  day  there  are  two  things 
which  make  a  death-bed  specially  uncomfortable  :  first, 
purposes  and  promises  not  performed ;  and  second, 
convictions  slighted  and  not  improved.  And  if  any 
of  you  has  satisfactory  grounds  for  thinking  that 
he  has  really  tasted  something  of  that  saving  and 
necessary  change  we  have  considered,  I  charge  that 
man  not  to  stand  still,  not  to  loiter,  not  to  linger,  not 
to  look  behind  him  ;  I  warn  him  that  none  are  in  so 
dangerous  a  way  as  those  who  have  become  cool  and 
cold  and  indifferent  after  real  and  warm  concern  about 
salvation  ;  I  urge  him  to  press  forward  more  and  more 


56  REGENERATION  (III) 

towards  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  to  remember  it 
is  a  special  mark  of  God's  children  that  as  they 
grow  in  age  they  grow  in  grace,  and  feel  their  sins 
more  deeply  and  love  their  Lord  and  Saviour  more 
sincerely. 


V 
SAVING    FAITH 

"  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."- 
JOIIN  iii.  16. 

IN  this  verse,  beloved,  we  have  one  of  those  "  heavenly 
things,"  which  our  Lord  had  just  spoken  of  to 
Nicodemus.  Blessed  indeed  are  the  lips  which  spake 
it,  and  blessed  are  the  hearts  which  can  receive  it ! 
In  this  verse  we  find  a  treasury  of  the  most  precious 
truth,  a  mine  of  inexhaustible  matter,  a  well  of  ever- 
flowing  waters  ;  and  when  we  consider  the  simple  words 
in  which  our  Lord  has  here  brought  together  the  whole 
body  of  divinity,  we  must  willingly  confess,  with  those 
who  heard  Him  preach,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this 
man."  Listen,  I  pray  you,  once  more — "  God  so  loved 
the  world,  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have 
everlasting  life."  There  is  hardly  an  expression  that 
a  child  could  not  easily  explain,  and  yet  there  are 
doctrines  here  which  the  wisest  upon  earth  must  humbly 
receive,  if  they  would  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
and  sit  down  at  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb. 
We  learn  in  it,  what  philosophers  of  old  could  never 
clear  up — the  history  of  God's  dealing  with  mankind,  and 
the  terms  which  He  offers  for  their  acceptance.  Here 
is  life,  and  here  is  death  ;  here  you  have  the  deserts 

57 


53  SAVING  FAITH 

of  man,  and  here  you  have  the  free  grace  of  God  ;  here 
you  see  what  all  may  expect  who  follow  their  own 
course,  and  here  also  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life 
is  directly  pointed  out. 

And  at  this  particular  season  of  the  year,  when  we 
arc  about  so  soon  to  commemorate  the  mysterious  birth 
of  Him  who  in  mercy  to  our  sins  consented  to  take 
our  nature  on  Him  and  be  born  of  a  virgin,  even  Christ 
Jesus,  we  cannot,  I  think,  do  better  than  examine  the 
things  which  arc  herein  contained.  May  the  Eternal 
Spirit,  through  whom  He  offered  Himself,  the  great 
Teacher  whom  He  promised  to  send,  be  amongst  us  : 
may  He  rouse  the  careless,  fix  the  inattentive,  and  make 
the  subject  profitable  to  all. 

Now  I  conceive  the  chief  things  to  be  noticed  in  this 
verse  are : 

I.  The  state  of  the  world,  that  is,  of  all  mankind. 
II.  The  love  of  God. 

III.  The  gift  of  His  Son. 

IV.  The  means  whereby  we  enjoy  this  gift. 

V.  And  the  promise  attached  to  those  who  believe. 
I.  First,  then,  let  us  inquire  what  the  word  of  God 
has  taught  us  respecting  the  world  and  the  world's 
diameter.  Now,  the  testimony  of  Scripture  upon  this 
head  is  so  clear  and  explicit,  that  he  who  runs  may  read, 
"The whole  world,"  says  St.  John,  "lieth  in  wickedness." 
Our  first  father,  Adam,  was  indeed  created  in  the  image 
of  God,  pure  and  sinless ;  but  in  one  day  he  fell  from 
his  high  estate  by  eating  the  forbidden  fruit,  he  broke 
God's  express  command  and  became  at  once  a  sinful 
creature  ;  and  now  all  we  his  children  have  by  in 
heritance  from  him  a  wicked  and  a  corrupt  nature,  a 
nature  which  clings  to  us  from  the  moment  of  our  birth, 
and  which  we  show  daily  in  our  lives  and  conversation. 
In  a  word,  we  learn  that  from  the  hour  of  the  fall  our 


SAVING  FAITH  59 

character  has  been  established,  that  we  are  a  sinful,  a 
very  sinful  world. 

Beloved,  does  this  appear  a  hard  saying?  do  you 
think  such  a  statement  too  strong  ?  Away  with  the 
flattering  thought ! — We  see  it  proved  in  Scripture, 
for  every  book  of  the  Old  Testament  history  tells  the 
melancholy  story  of  man's  disobedience  and  man's 
unbelief  in  things  pertaining  to  God.  We  read  there 
of  fearful  judgments,  such  as  the  flood  and  the 
destruction  of  Sodom,  yet  men  disregarded  them, — 
of  gracious  mercies,  such  as  the  calling  and  protection 
of  Israel,  but  men  soon  forgot  them, — of  inspired 
teachers  and  revelations  from  heaven,  such  as  the  law 
of  Moses,  and  men  did  not  obey  them, — of  special 
warnings,  such  as  the  voice  of  the  prophets,  and  yet 
men  did  not  believe  them.  Yes,  beloved,  we  are  a 
sinful  world  !  Think  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  "It 
may  be  so,  but  this  happened  in  days  of  old  ;  the  world 
is  better  now."  It  will  not  avail  you.  We  have  read 
it  in  Scripture,  but  we  see  it  also  around  us,  and  you 
will  find  at  this  time,  even  under  your  own  eyes,  con 
vincing  proof  that  the  charge  is  literally  true.  Let  any, 
for  instance,  examine  the  columns  of  a  county  news 
paper,  and  he  will  see  there  within  a  month  enough 
to  make  his  ears  tingle.  I  speak  as  unto  wise  men, — 
judge  ye  what  I  say  :  will  he  not  see  accounts  of  nearly 
every  sin  which  is  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God? 
Will  he  not  read  of  anger,  wrath,  malice,  blasphemy, 
theft,  adultery,  fornication,  uncleanness,  lasciviousness, 
emulations,  variance,  strife,  seditions,  envyings,  murders, 
drunkenness,  revellings,  and  such  like  :  "  of  the  which," 
says  the  apostle  (Gal.  v.  21),  "I  tell  you  before,  as  I 
have  also  told  you  in  time  past,  that  they  which  do  such 
things  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  And 
if  such  things  take  place  in  a  land  which  is  blessed  with 


6o  SAVING  FAITH 

so  much  light  and  knowledge  as  our  own,  how  much 
more  should  we  find  in  countries  where  there  is  neither 
one  nor  the  other  !  If  men  do  these  things  in  a  green 
tree,  oh,  what  shall  they  do  in  a  dry  ? 

Can  you  still  doubt  ?  I  will  go  further.  We  see  proof  in 
ourselves.  Let  the  best  among  you  search  his  own  heart  ; 
let  him  honestly  cast  up  the  number  of  evil  thoughts  and 
unholy  ideas  which  pass  through  his  imagination  even 
in  one  single  day — thoughts,  I  mean,  which  are  known 
only  to  himself  and  the  all-seeing  God — and  let  him  tell 
us  whether  it  be  not  a  most  humiliating  and  soul-con 
demning  calculation.  Yes,  dear  friends,  whether  you 
will  receive  it  or  no,  we  are  indeed  a  sinful  world.  It 
may  be  an  humbling  truth,  but  Scripture  says  it,  and 
experience  confirms  it  ;  and  therefore  we  tell  you  that 
the  world  spoken  of  in  our  text  is  a  world  which  lieth 
in  wickedness,  a  corrupt  world,  a  world  which  our  great 
Maker  and  Preserver  might  have  left  to  deserved  des 
truction,  and  in  so  doing  would  have  acted  with  perfect 
justice,  because  He  has  given  us  laws  and  they  have 
been  broken,  promises  and  they  have  been  despised, 
warnings  and  they  have  not  been  believed. 

II.  Such  is  the  world  of  which  we  form  a  part,  and 
such  is  its  character.  And  now  let  us  hear  what  the 
feeling  is  with  which  God  has  been  pleased  to  regard 
His  guilty  creatures.  We  were  all  under  condemnation, 
without  hope,  without  excuse  ;  and  what  could  stay 
the  execution  of  the  sentence  ?  //  cuas  the  love  of  God. 
"  God,"  says  our  text,  "  so  loved  the  world."  He  might 
have  poured  on  us  the  vials  of  His  wrath,  as  He  did 
on  the  angels  who  kept  not  their  first  estate  ;  but  no  ! 
He  spared  us,  "God  loved  the  world."  Justice  de 
manded  our  punishment,  holiness  required  we  should 
be  swept  off  the  earth  ;  but  "  God  loved  the  world." 
Praised  be  His  name,  we  had  not  to  do  with  man's 


SAVING  FAITH  61 

judgment,  which  may  not  show  mercy,  when  a  crime 
is  proved  ;  we  were  in  the  hands  of  One  whose  ways 
are  not  as  our  ways  and  whose  thoughts  are  not  as 
our  thoughts,  and  hence,  "  God  so  loved  the  world." 
May  we  not  well  say  with  the  Apostle,  "  O  the  depth 
of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  ! " 
(Rom.  xi.  33).  Consider,  I  pray  you,  this  incompre 
hensible  goodness !  Do  not  many  in  this  world  think 
it  no  harm  to  remember  injuries,  and  sometimes  to 
resent  them  ?  Do  we  not  find  it  hard  to  love  those 
who  have  given  us  some  slight  offence?  or  if  we  do 
profess  to  love  them,  do  we  make  any  endeavour  to 
promote  their  happiness  ?  Such,  alas  !  is  too  seldom 
our  practice  ;  there  is  but  little  real  affection  in  these 
hard  hearts  ;  but  we  are  not  dealt  with  according  to 
our  own  ways,  for  the  God  of  holiness  has  loved  the 
sinful  world,  which  has  continually  dishonoured  and 
denied  Him.  Oh  !  beloved,  let  us  dwell  much  on  such 
expressions  as  these,  for  they  are  more  precious  than 
rubies  ;  let  us  bear  them  continually  in  mind,  for  they 
will  not  fail  us  in  the  day  of  trial,  when  temptation  is 
strong  and  faith  weak  ;  let  us  write  them  on  our  hearts 
and  in  our  memories,  and  we  shall  find  them  a  strong 
consolation  in  the  hour  of  death  and  on  the  bed  of  sick 
ness.  God  is  indeed  love,  and  God  loved  the  world. 

III.  Let  us  next  inquire  in  what  way  it  pleased  God 
to  manifest  this  love.  We  had  all  sinned.  Who  then 
could  put  away  this  sin  and  present  us  clean  and 
spotless  before  His  throne  ?  We  had  all  failed  utterly 
of  keeping  His  holy  laws.  Wherewithal  then  could 
we  be  clothed  for  the  wedding-feast  of  our  Master  ? 
Beloved,  here  is  wisdom !  This  is  the  very  point 
which  the  learned  of  this  world  could  never  understand. 
How,  they  have  asked,  can  perfect  justice  and  perfect 
mercy  be  reconciled?  How  can  God  justify  His 


62  SAVING  FAITH 

sinful  creature,  and  yet  be  that  Holy  One  whose  law 
must  needs  be  fulfilled?  But  all  is  explained  in  this 
simple  verse,  if  ye  can  receive  it  ;  and  thus  it  was 
"  He  gave  His  only -begotten  Son."  Observe  the  mag 
nitude  of  this  gift — "His  only-begotten  Son."  Can 
anything  give  you  a  more  tender  idea  of  God's  love  ? 
Observe  again  the  expression  "  He  gave  "  :  not  because 
we  had  merited  anything,  for  it  was  a  free  gift ;  not  for 
our  deservings,  for  it  was  all  of  grace.  "  By  grace  are 
ye  saved,"  says  Paul  to  the  Ephesians.  "  The  gift  of  God 
is  eternal  life,"  says  the  same  apostle  to  the  Romans. 

And  for  what  purpose  was  His  Son  given  ?  Beloved, 
He  was  given  to  atone  for  our  guilt,  by  the  sacrifice 
and  death  of  Himself,  as  a  lamb  without  spot  and 
blemish  ;  and  by  so  doing  He  made  a  full,  perfect, 
and  sufficient  oblation  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of 
the  whole  world.  He  was  given  to  bear  our  iniquities 
and  carry  our  transgressions  upon  the  accursed  tree, 
the  cross ;  for  being  innocent  Himself  He  was  for  our 
sakes  accounted  guilty,  that  we  for  His  sake  might  be 
accounted  pure.  Nor  is  this  all :  He  was  given  to  fulfil 
the  demands  of  that  law  which  we  have  broken  ;  and 
He  did  fulfil  them.  He  "  was  tempted  in  all  points," 
says  St.  Paul,  "  like  as  we  are,  and  yet  without  sin  "  :  the 
prince  of  this  world  had  nothing  in  Him,  and  thus  He 
brought  in  an  everlasting  righteousness,  which  like  a 
pure  white  raiment  is  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that 
believe.  (2  Cor.  v.  21.) 

IV.  It  would  be  easy  to  dwell  upon  this  delightful 
branch  of  our  subject,  beloved,  but  we  must  pass  on. 
How  then  are1  the  benefits  of  this  gift  made  our  own  ? 
What  are  the  means  through  which  it  is  applied  to  our 
souls?  What  is  the  hand  by  which  we  lay  hold  on 
this  remedy  ? 

Here    again    our   text   supplies   an    answer.       It    is 


SAVING  FAITH  63 

FAITH.  Whosoever  believeth  (not  with  the  head, 
remember :  but  with  the  heart),  and  believing  comes 
to  Christ  with  a  confession  of  his  own  unrighteous 
ness,  and  accepts  Him  as  his  only  hope  of  salvation — 
is  saved  by  Faith. 

Consider  now  the  beautiful  simplicity  of  this  way  of 
life  :  we  do  not  see  written  on  the  gate,  Whosoever  has 
prepared  himself  by  long  repentance — whosoever  has 
begun  to  lead  a  new  life — whosoever  has  done  so  many 
good  works — whosoever  has  attended  church  so  many 
times — whosoever  has  given  so  much  in  charity — these 
shall  enter  in  here,  and  none  else.  No,  dear  friends  ; 
such  announcements  would  frighten  many  a  weary 
sinner,  and  these  are  fruits  you  will  thankfully  bring 
forth  a  hundredfold  after  you  have  entered  :  the  only 
thing  required  of  those  who  seek  admission  is  faith, 
and  he  that  approaches  in  simple  childlike  faith  shall 
never  be  rejected.  Hear  how  St.  Paul  speaks  on  this 
point  (Rom.  x.  5  to  10).  And,  lest  any  one  should 
suppose  that  God  is  a  respecter  of  persons,  that  there 
is  one  way  for  the  rich  and  another  for  the  poor,  one 
for  the  learned,  another  for  the  unlearned,  he  adds 
these  comfortable  words :  "  For  there  is  no  difference 
between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek  :  for  the  same  Lord 
over  all  is  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  Him.  For 
whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  saved."  But  remember  also — and  I  solemnly 
warn  every  one  of  this — there  is  no  other  way  than 
the  way  of  faith.  God  has  not  left  each  man  to 
choose  his  own  road  to  heaven,  or  his  own  path  for 
coming  unto  Christ,  but  He  has  appointed  one  and 
no  more,  and  no  man  shall  enter  into  life  except  by 
this. 

"  If  ye  will  not  believe,"  says  Isaiah,  "surely  ye  shall 
not  be  established."     "  If  ye  believe  not,"  says  our  Lord, 


r,j  SAVING  FAITH 

"  that  I  am  He,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."  And  hence 
we  may  learn  this  most  important  lesson,  that  although 
God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  for  it  His  only- 
begotten  Son,  still  the  benefits  of  that  gift  can  never"  be 
obtained  by  those  who  will  not  believe. 

V.  It  remains  for  us  in  the  last  place  to  consider 
the  promises  and  consequences  which  our  text  holds 
forth  to  the  faithful.  We  read  that  "whosoever  be- 
lievcth  shall  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life." 

And  is  not  this  a  promise  the  most  acceptable  to 
our  nature  that  a  gracious  God  could  have  devised  ? 
We  know  there  is  nothing  the  unconverted  fear  so 
much  as  death  :  people  of  the  highest  animal  courage, 
who  would  shrink  from  no  danger  and  encounter  any 
difficulty,  have  been  seen  to  tremble  and  turn  pale 
at  the  approach  of  some  pain  or  complaint  which  seems 
likely  to  bring  their  frail  bodies  to  the  grave.  And 
why  should  this  be  so  ? — pain  is  not  very  bitter,  and 
life  with  its  cares  and  anxieties  is  not  so  very  sweet 
as  to  account  for  it !  No,  beloved,  the  reason  is  this. 
Conscience  tells  every  unconverted  person,  whether  he 
likes  to  confess  it  or  not,  that  after  death  shall  come 
the  judgment ;  conscience  tells  him  that  all  shall  be 
judged  according  to  their  works, — that  he  cannot  abide 
this  fiery  trial,  because  he  has  sinned  and  not  sought 
reconciliation,  and  he  feels  that  he  may  one  day  have 
his  part  in  the  lake  which  burns  with  fire  and  brimstone. 
Hence  it  is  that  he  thinks  death  a  most  unpleasant 
subject,  and  with  all  his  pride  of  life  stands  in  cowardly 
fear  of  his  last  day ;  and  hence  you  may  (understand 
how  blessed  these  words  should  be  to  a  sinner's  ear, 
that  "Whosoever  believeth  on  Him  shall  not  perish 
but  have  everlasting  life." 

Observe  now  the  contents  of  this  promise ;  look 
narrowly  into  it,  for  it  will  stand  a  close  examination. 


SAVING   FAITH  65 

The  believer  shall  not  perish  ;  this  earthly  tabernacle 
may  indeed  be  dissolved,  and  laid  in  the  grave  and 
see  corruption,  but  the  true  sting  of  that  death  is  sin, 
and  this  his  Saviour  has  taken  on  Him  and  put  away. 
He  shall  not  perish  in  the  day  of  judgment  ;  the  second 
death  can  have  no  power  over  him  ;  hell  has  no  claims 
upon  him,  and  then  the  words  of  our  blessed  Master 
shall  be  found  a  truth.  "  This  is  the  will  of  Him  that 
sent  Me,  that  every  one  which  seeth  the  Son,  and 
believeth  on  Him,  may  have  everlasting  life :  and  I 
will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day  "  (John  vi.  40).  "  I 
am  the  resurrection  and  the  life :  he  that  believeth 
on  Me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live  :  and 
whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die  " 
(xi.  25,  26). 

And  more  than  this :  the  believer  shall  have  ever 
lasting  life.  He  shall  be  raised  body  and  soul  at 
our  Lord's  second  coming.  He  shall  have  part  in 
that  first  resurrection,  which  belongs  only  to  the  saints, 
and  finally  shall  dwell  for  ever  in  that  blessed  place 
where  "there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow, 
nor  crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain  :  for 
the  former  things  are  passed  away  "  (Rev.  xxi.  4). 

And  now,  beloved,  judge  for  yourselves  whether  it 
be  not  true,  that  our  text  contains  a  treasury  of  precious 
and  most  consoling  doctrines,  and  he  that  can  hear  it 
without  feeling  its  value  may  indeed  tremble  for  the 
safety  of  his  immortal  soul.  Believer,  let  it  be  thy 
care  to  carry  home  these  comfortable  words  on  which 
we  have  dwelt,  and  meditate  upon  them  as  thy  daily 
food  throughout  the  week  which  is  now  before  thee. 
Let  them  be  ever  in  thy  mind,  and  prepare  thee  for 
that  holy  sacrament  which  Jesus  has  mercifully  ordained  ; 
let  them  add  strength  to  thy  faith  and  growth  to  thy 
sanctification  ;  let  them  increase  thy  humility  and  thy 

5 


66  SAVING    FAITH 

thankfulness,  thy  zeal  for  God's  glory,  and  thy  desire 
to  show  forth  His  praise,  thy  love  towards  Christ  and 
thy  love  towards  thy  brethren  ;  for  surely,  dear  friends, 
if  God  so  loved  us,  it  is  a  small  matter  if  we  love  our 
fellow-sinners. 

And  you  too,  dear  brethren,  who  have  dared  hitherto, 
like  Gallic,  to  care  for  none  of  these  things,  you  also 
are  appealed  to  in  this  text.  Learn  then  now,  if  you 
have  not  learned  it  yet,  that  this  single  verse,  if  there 
were  no  other,  would  be  sufficient  to  condemn  you  in 
the  last  day,  because  it  leaves  you  without  excuse  for 
remaining  in  your  sins.  You  have  deserved  nothing  but 
wrath  ;  and  yet,  behold,  here  is  God  willing  to  save, 
loving,  giving,  promising  all  things.  Oh !  remember 
how  great  must  be  your  guilt  if  you  reject  so  great 
salvation.  You  are  the  very  world  that  God  has  so 
loved  ;  for  your  sakes  He  gave  His  only -begotten  Son, 
and  even  now,  at  this  minute,  He  is  inviting  you,  by 
me,  His  minister,  to  accept  the  mercy  which  He  freely 
offers,  to  be  reconciled  with  Him  who  will  one  day  be 
the  Judge  of  all.  (Isaiah  Iv.  I,  2|;  i.  18  ;  Acts  xvi.  31.) 

Come  then,  I  entreat  you,  to  your  Father,  in  the 
name  of  Christ,  for  through  Him  we  have  boldness  and 
access  with  confidence.  Resist  the  attempts  of  the 
world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil  to  detain  you  ;  resist 
even  your  best  friend,  if  he  would  keep  you  back  from 
God  and  tell  you  there  will  be  a  more  convenient  season 
than  to-day.  "As  though  God  did  beseech  you  by 
us  :  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to 
God.  For  He  hath  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who 
knew  no  sin  ;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  Him  "  (2  Cor.  v.  20,  21). 

May  God  the  Holy  Ghost  bless  the  words  which 
we  have  spoken  to  the  everlasting  benefit  of  all  your 
souls. 


VI 
"  COME    UNTO   ME  " 

"Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will 
give  you  rest."  —  MATT.  xi.  28. 


are  few  texts  more  striking  than  this  in 
_     all   the    Bible  —  few    that   contain    so    wide    and 
sweeping  an  invitation  —  few  that  hold  out  so  full  and 
comfortable  a  promise. 
Let  us  consider  — 

I.    Who  it  is  that  speaks. 
II.    Who  they  are  that  are  spoken  to. 

III.  What  is  the  invitation. 

IV.  What  is  the  promise. 

I.  WHO  SPEAKS?  —  That  is  a  most  important  ques 
tion,  and  it  is  right  to  have  it  answered. 

You  live  in  a  world  of  promise.  "  Come  with  us," 
says  one  party,  and  you  will  be  rich.  "  Come  with  us," 
says  another,  and  you  will  be  happy. 

The  devil  can  promise.  "  Eat  the  forbidden  fruit," 
he  said  to  Eve,  "and  you  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing 
good  and  evil.  You  shall  never  die."  But  he  lied 
to  her. 

The  world  can  promise.  "  Sell  all  and  embark  for 
California,"  says  one  man,  "  and  you  will  soon  roll  in 
wealth."  "  Invest  all  your  money  in  railways,"  says 
another,  "  and  you  will  soon  make  your  fortune."  I 
never  take  up  a  newspaper  without  seeing  many  alluring 

.67 


68  "COME    UNTO   ME" 

invitations.  I  see  page  after  page  of  advertisements,  all 
full  of  high-sounding  promises.  I  read  of  short  ways  to 
health,  wealth,  and  happiness,  of  all  descriptions.  But 
it  is  all  words  and  nothing  more,  and  so  many  a  man 
finds. 

But  He  that  promises  in  our  text  is  One  who  can 
be  depended  on.  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  God's 
own  Son. 

He  is  ABLE  to  do  what  He  promises.  He  has  all 
power  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  He  has  the  keys  of 
death  and  hell.  The  government  is  given  to  Him 
in  time,  and  all  judgment  committed  to  Him  in 
eternity. 

He  is  FAITHFUL  to  do  what  He  promises.  He  will 
not  lie,  nor  deceive,  nor  break  His  promise.  What  He 
speaks  that  He  will  do,  and  what  He  undertakes 
that  He  will  perform.  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass 
away,  but  His  word  shall  not  pass  away. 

He  is  WILLING  to  do  what  He  promises.  He  has 
long  since  proved  this  by  the  love  He  has  shown  to 
man,  and  the  sacrifice  He  has  made  for  man's  soul. 
For  man  He  came  into  the  world  ;  for  man  He  suffered 
and  died  ;  for  man  He  endured  the  cross  and  the 
shame.  Surely  He  has  a  right  to  be  believed. 

Beloved  brethren,  see  that  you  refuse  not  Him  that 
speaketh  to  you  this  day.  If  a  letter  came  to  you 
from  the  ruler  of  this  country  you  would  not  despise 
it.  If  you  were  sick,  and  advice  came  from  a  wise 
physician,  you  would  not  reject  it.  If  you  were  in 
danger,  and  counsel  came  from  your  best  and  truest 
friend,  you  would  not  make  light  of  it.  Then  hear  the 
words  that  Jesus  sends  to  you  this  day.  Listen  to  the 
King  of  kings.  Then  body  and  soul  shall  be  His. 

II.  WHO  ARE  THEY  THAT  ARE  SPOKEN  TO?— 
Jesus  addresses  the  "labouring  and  heavy  laden": 


"COME   UNTO   ME"  69 

"  Come    unto   Me   all   ye   that   labour   and    are  heavy 
laden."     Now,  whom  does  this  mean  ? 

You  must  not  fancy  it  describes  the  poor  in  this 
world.  That  would  be  a  great  mistake.  It  is  possible 
to  be  poor  in  time  and  even  poorer  in  eternity. 

Nor  yet  must  you  fancy  it  describes  the  sick  arid 
the  afflicted.  That  also  is  a  great  mistake.  It  is  very 
possible  to  have  trouble  in  this  life  and  trouble  in 
that  to  come — and  this  some  of  you  may  find. 

The  "  labouring  and  heavy  laden  "  describes  all  who 
are  pressed  down  and  burdened  by  a  feeling  of  sin. 
It  describes  all  whose  consciences  are  set  at  work,  and 
who  are  brought  to  concern  about  their  soul — all  who 
are  anxious  about  salvation,  and  desire  to  have  it — 
all  who  tremble  at  the  thought  of  judgment,  and  know 
not  how  to  get  through  it,  and  of  hell,  and  are 
afraid  of  falling  into  it ;  and  long  for  heaven,  and 
dread  not  getting  to  it ;  and  are  distressed  at  the 
thought  of  their  own  badness,  and  want  deliverance. 
All  such  persons  appear  to  be  the  labouring  and  heavy 
laden  to  whom  Jesus  speaks. 

This  was  the  state  of  mind  in  which  the  Jews  were  to 
whom  Peter  preached  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Their 
consciences  were  awakened  ;  they  felt  convinced  and 
condemned  ;  and  when  he  had  finished,  we  are  told 
they  said,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ? " 
This  was  the  state  of  mind  in  which  Saul  was  when 
Jesus  met  him  going  to  Damascus,  and  smote  him 
to  the  ground.  A  light  seemed  to  break  in  on  his 
mind.  He  got  a  sight  of  his  one  enormous  sin  and 
danger  ;  and  we  read  that,  trembling  and  astonished, 
he  said,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? " 
This  was  the  state  of  mind  in  which  we  see  the 
jailer  at  Philippi.  He  was  roused  from  sleep  by  an 
earthquake.  His  fear  brought  his  sin  to  his  remem- 


7o  "COME    UNTO   ME" 

brancc,  and   he  came   and  fell   down   before  Paul  and 
Silas,  and  said,  "  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  " 

This  is  the  state  of  mind  I  desire  to  see  in  each  of 
you,  for  the  beginning  of  all  saving  religion.  You  will 
never  come  to  Christ  till  you  feel  your  need. 

You  ought>  every  one,  to  feel  labouring  and  heavy 
laden.  Truly  it  is  a  marvellous  proof  of  man's  cor 
ruption,  that  men  can  be  so  careless  as  they  are. 
Many,  I  do  believe,  feel  something  of  it,  but  never 
allow  it.  There  are  many  aching  hearts  under  silk 
and  satin.  There  arc  many  merry  faces  which  only 
hide  an  uneasy  conscience.  All  is  not  gold  that 
glitters  in  happiness  that  seems  like  it.  Few,  I  believe, 
are  to  be  found  who  do  not  feel  something  of  it 
some  time  in  tJieir  lives.  Halyburton  said,  not  a  soul 
in  his  parish,  but  once  had  conviction. 

But  to  all  labouring  and  heavy  laden  souls,  whoever 
they  may  be,  to  you  Jesus  speaks — to  you  is  this  word 
of  salvation  sent.  Take  heed  that  it  is  not  in  vain. 

Jesus  speaks  to  ALL  such :  none  are  left  out.  Though 
you  have  been  a  persecutor  like  Saul,  though  a  mur 
derer  like  Manasseh,  though  a  cheating  extortioner 
like  Zacchaeus,  though  unclean  and  profligate  like  the 
Magdalen,  it  matters  nothing.  Are  you  labouring  and 
heavy-laden  ? — then  Jesus  speaks  to  you.  You  may 
tell  me,  "  I  am  such  a  sinner,  Jesus  never  speaks  to 
me."  I  answer,  "It  may  be  so ;  but  are  you  labouring 
and  heavy-laden  ? — then  Jesus  speaks  to  you.  You  may 
say,  "  I  am  not  fit."  I  see  nothing  said  of  fitness  ;  I 
only  see  Jesus  calling  the  labouring  and  heavy  laden  : 
if  this  is  your  case,  He  calls  you.  You  may  say,  "  I 
am  not  this — I  am  not  converted."  You  do  not  know, 
perhaps  ;  but  are  you  labouring  and  heavy  laden  ? — 
then  Jesus  is  speaking  to  you. 

Ah  !    brethren,   I    fear   many   of  you  know  nothing 


"COME    UNTO   ME"  71 

of  the  state  of  the  soul  here  spoken  of.  Your  sins 
never  cut  you  to  the  heart,  or  give  you  a  moment's 
sorrow.  You  never  really  felt  the  confession  of  the 
Church  this  day — "  no  health  in  us."  You  know  no 
thing  of  communion  with  Christ.  The  remembrance 
of  grievous  burdens  is  not  intolerable.  You  are  satisfied 
with  your  present  state :  like  Laodicea,  "  rich  and  in 
creased  with  goods,"  comfortable  and  content.  And 
what  shall  I  say  ?  I  will  say  plainly,  there  is  no  hope  for 
your  soul  while  in  such  a  state.  I  say  if  your  soul  is 
in  such  a  state,  better  never  have  been  born.  Your 
hard  heart  must  be  broken.  You  must  be  brought 
to  see  your  own  guilt  and  danger,  your  eyes  must  be 
opened  to  understand  your  sinfulness.  All  who  have 
entered  heaven  were  once  labouring  and  heavy  laden  ; 
and  except  you  are,  you  will  never  get  there. 

III.  WHAT  is  THE  INVITATION  TO  THE  LABOUR 
ING  AND  HEAVY  LADEN?  JESUS  SAYS,  "COME  UNTO 
ME." 

I  love  that  word  "  Come."  To  me  it  seems  full  of 
grace,  mercy  and  encouragement.  "  Come  now,"  says 
the  Lord  in  Isaiah,  "  and  let  us  reason  together  : 
though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  white  as 
snow." 

Come  is  the  word  put  in  the  mouth  of  the  king's 
messenger  in  the  parable  of  the  guest-supper :  "  All  is 
now  ready  ;  come  unto  the  marriage." 

Come  is  the  last  word  in  the  Bible  to  sinners.  "  The 
Spirit  and  the  Bride  say,  Come." 

Jesus  does  not  say,  "  Go  and  get  ready."  This  is  the 
word  of  the  Pharisee  and  self-righteous.  "  Go  and  work 
out  a  righteousness.  Do  this  and  that  and  be  saved." 
Jesus  says,  Come. 

Jesus  does  not  say  "  Send."  This  is  the  poor  Roman 
Catholic's  word.  "  Put  your  soul  in  the  hand  of  the 


72  "COME   UNTO   ME" 

priest.  Commit  your  affairs  to  saints  and  angels,  and 
not  to  Christ."  Jesus  says  Come. 

Jesus  does  not  say  "  Wait."  This  is  the  word  of  the 
enthusiast  and  the  fanatic.  "  You  can  do  nothing.  You 
must  not  ask  ;  you  cannot  pray ;  you  must  sit  still." 
Cold  comfort  for  troubled  souls.  Jesus  says  come. 

Come  is  a  word  of  merciful  invitation.  It  seems  to 
say,  "  I  want  you  to  escape  the  wrath  to  come.  I  am 
not  willing  that  any  should  perish.  I  have  no  pleasure 
in  death.  I  would  fain  have  all  men  saved,  and  I  offer 
all  the  water  of  life  freely.  So  come  to  Me." 

Come  is  a  word  of  gracious  expectation.  It  seems 
to  say,  "  I  am  here  waiting  for  you.  I  sit  on  my 
mercy-seat  expecting  you  to  come.  I  wait  to  be 
gracious.  I  wait  for  more  sinners  to  come  in  before  I 
close  the  door.  I  want  more  names  written  down  in  the 
book  of  life  before  it  is  closed  for  ever.  So  come  to  Me." 

Come  is  a  word  of  kind  encouragement.  It  seems  to 
say,  I  have  got  treasures  to  bestow  if  you  will  only 
receive  them.  I  have  that  to  give  which  makes  it 
worth  while  to  come  :  a  free  pardon,  a  robe  of  righteous 
ness,  a  new  heart,  a  star  of  peace.  So  come  to  Me. 

Brethren,  I  ask  you  to  hear  these  words  and  lay  them 
to  heart.  I  plead  for  my  Master ;  I  stand  here  an 
ambassador ;  I  ask  you  to  come  and  be  reconciled 
to  God. 

I  ask  you  to  come  witli  all  your  sz'ns,  however  many 
chey  may  be.  If  you  come  to  Him  they  will  be  taken 
away.  I  ask  you  to  come  as  you  are.  You  feel  unfit ; 
you  say  you  are  not  good  enough.  The  worse  you  think 
yourself,  the  better  prepared  you  are.  Christ  is  not  a 
Saviour  of  the  FIT,  but  of  sinners.  I  ask  you  to  come 
now.  No  other  time  is  your  own.  The  opportunity 
past,  the  door  will  be  shut,  and  yourself  dead.  Come 
now.  Come  to  Christ. 


"COME   UNTO   ME"  73 

Ah  !  brethren,  I  fear  that  many  of  you  will  not  take 
one  saving  step — will  not  come  to  Christ.  You  go  on 
content  with  your  own  devices,  like  Balaam  ;  like  Felix, 
you  never  finally  come  to  Christ. 

I  warn  you  plainly  that  you  may  come  to  church, 
and  come  to  the  table,  and  come  to  the  minister,  and  yet 
never  be  saved.  The  one  thing  needed  is  actual  coming 
to  the  Saviour,  actual  coming  to  the  Fountain,  actual 
washing  in  the  blood  of  atonement.  Except  you  do 
this,  you  will  die  in  your  sins. 

Gird  up  your  loins  like  a  man,  and  resolve  that  you 
will  come.  Do  you  feel  vile  and  unworthy  to  come  ? 
Tell  it  to  Jesus.  Do  you  feel  as  if  you  know  not  what 
to  say  and  do  when  you  come  ?  Tell  it  to  Jesus.  Tell 
Him  you  are  all  sins  ;  tell  Him  you  are  all  weakness  ; 
tell  Him  you  feel  as  if  you  had  no  faith  and  no  power, 
no  grace  and  no  strength,  no  goodness  and  no  love ; 
but  come  to  Him,  and  commit  your  soul  to  His  charge. 
Let  nothing  keep  you  back  from  Christ. 

Tell  Him  you  have  heard  that  He  receiveth  sinners  ; 
that  you  are  such  an  one,  and  you  want  to  be  saved. 
Tell  Him  you  have  nothing  to  plead  but  His  own 
word  ;  but  He  said  Come,  and  therefore  you  come  to 
Him. 

IV.  LET  us  CONSIDER  THE  PROMISE  HELD  OUT  : 

"  I    WILL   GIVE   YOU    REST." 

Rest  is  a  pleasant  thing,  and  a  thing  that  all  seek 
after.  The  merchant,  the  banker,  the  tradesman,  the 
soldier,  the  lawyer,  the  farmer,  all  look  forward  to  the 
day  when  they  shall  be  able  to  rest.  But  how  few  can 
find  rest  in  this  world  !  How  many  pass  their  lives  in 
seeking  it,  and  never  seem  able  to  reach  it!  It  seems 
very  near  sometimes,  and  they  fancy  it  will  soon  be 
their  own.  Some  new  event  happens,  and  they  are  as 
far  off  rest  as  ever. 


74  "COME   UNTO   ME" 

The  whole  world  is  full  of  restlessness  and  disappoint 
ment,  weariness  and  emptiness.  The  very  faces  of 
worldly  men  let  out  the  secret ;  their  countenances 
give  evidence  that  the  Bible  is  true ;  they  find  no  rest. 
"  Vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit "  is  the  true  report  of 
all  here  below.  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  "  the 
bitter  confession  of  many  now,  just  as  in  David's  time. 

Take  warning,  young  men  and  women.  Think  not 
that  happiness  is  to  be  found  in  any  earthly  thing. 
Do  not  have  to  learn  this  by  bitter  experience.  Realise 
it  while  young,  and  do  not  waste  your  time  in  hewing 
out  "  cisterns,  broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  water." 

But  Jesus  offers  rest  to  all  who  will  come  to  Him. 
"  Come  unto  Me,"  he  says,  "  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
He  will  give  it.  He  will  not  SELL  it,  as  the  Pharisee 
supposes — so  much  rest  and  peace  in  return  for  so  many 
good  works.  He  gives  it  freely  to  every  coming  sinner, 
without  money  and  without  price.  He  will  not  LEND, 
as  the  Arminian  supposes,  so  much  peace  and  rest, 
all  to  be  taken  away  by-and-by  if  we  do  not  please 
Him  ;  He  gives  it  for  ever  and  for  aye.  His  gifts  arc 
"  without  repentance." 

"  But  what  kind  of  rest  will  Jesus  give  me  ?  "  some 
men  will  say.  "  He  will  not  give  me  freedom  from  labour 
and  trouble.  What  kind  of  rest  will  He  give  ?  "  Listen 
a  few  minutes,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

He  will  give  you  rest  from  fear  of  sin.  The  sins  of 
the  man  who  comes  to  Christ  are  completely  taken 
away ;  they  are  forgiven,  pardoned,  removed,  blotted 
out.  They  can  no  longer  appear  in  condemnation 
against  him.  They  are  sunk  in  the  depths  of  the  sea. 
Ah !  brethren,  that  is  rest. 

He  will  give  you  rest  from  fear  of  law.  The  law 
has  no  further  claim  on  the  man  who  has  come  to  Christ. 
Its  debts  are  all  paid  ;  its  requirements  are  all  satisfied. 


"COME   UNTO   ME"  75 

Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness.  Christ 
has  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  law.  "  Who  shall 
lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  in  the  day 
of  Judgment?"  No  believer  can  run  his  eye  over  the 
fifth  chapter  of  Matthew,  and  not  feel  comforted.  And 
that  is  rest. 

He  will  give  you  rest  from  fear  of  'hell.  Hell  cannot 
touch  the  man  who  has  come  to  Christ  The  punish 
ment  has  been  borne,  the  pain  and  suffering  have  been 
undergone  by  another,  and  he  is  free.  And  that,  too, 
is  rest. 

He  will  give  you  rest  from  fear  of  the  devil.  The 
devil  is  mighty,  but  he  cannot  touch  those  who  have 
come  to  Christ.  Their  Redeemer  is  strong.  He  will 
set  a  hedge  around  them  that  Satan  cannot  overthrow. 
He  may  sift  and  buffet  and  vex,  but  he  cannot  destroy 
such.  And  that,  too,  is  rest. 

He  will  give  you  rest  from  fear  of  deatJi.  The  sting 
of  death  is  taken  away  when  a  man  comes  to  Christ. 
Jesus  has  overcome  death,  and  it  is  a  conquered  enemy. 
The  grave  loses  half  its  terrors  when  we  think  it  is  "  the 
place  where  the  Lord  lay."  The  believer's  soul  is  safe 
whatever  happens  to  his  body.  His  flesh  rests  in  hope. 
This  also  is  rest. 

He  will  give  you  rest  in  the  storm  of  affliction.  He 
will  comfort  you  with  comfort  the  world  knows  nothing 
of.  He  will  cheer  your  heart,  and  sustain  your  fainting 
spirit.  He  will  enable  you  to  bear  loss  patiently,  and 
to  hold  your  peace  in  the  day  of  wrath.  Oh !  this  is 
rest  indeed. 

I  know  well,  brethren,  that  believers  do  not  enjoy 
so  much  rest  as  they  might.  I  know  well  that  they 
"  bring  a  bad  report  of  the  land,"  and  live  below  their 
privileges.  It  is  their  unbelief;  it  is  their  indwelling 
sin.  There  was  a  well  near  Hagar,  but  she  never  saw 


76  "COME   UNTO   ME" 

it.  There  was  safety  for  Peter  on  the  water,  but  he  did 
not  look  to  Jesus,  and  was  afraid.  And  just  so  it  is 
with  many  believers  :  they  give  way  to  needless  fear- 
are  straitened  in  themselves. 

But  still  there  is  a  real  rest  and  peace  in  Christ  for 
all  who  come  to  Him.  The  man  that  fled  to  the  city 
of  refuge  was  safe  when  once  within  the  walls,  though 
perhaps  at  first  he  hardly  believed  it ;  and  so  it  is 
with  the  believer. 

And,  after  all,  the  most  downcast  and  complaining 
child  of  God  has  got  a  something  within  him  he  would 
not  exchange  for  all  the  world.  I  never  met  with  one, 
however  low  and  desponding,  who  would  consent  to 
part  with  the  rest  and  peace  he  had,  however  small. 
Like  Naboth  he  prizes  his  little  vineyard  like  a  kingdom. 
And  this  shows  me  that  coming  to  Christ  can  give  rest. 

Be  advised,  every  one  of  you  who  is  now  seeking  rest 
in  the  world.  Be  advised,  and  come  and  seek  rest  in 
Christ.  You  have  no  home,  no  refuge,  no  hiding- 
place,  no  portion.  Sickness  and  death  will  soon  be 
upon  you,  and  you  are  unprepared.  Be  advised,  and 
seek  rest  in  Christ.  There  is  enough  in  Him  and  to 
spare.  Who  has  tried  and  did  not  find  ?  A  dying 
Welsh  boy  said,  in  broken  English,  "  Jesus  Christ 
plenty  for  everybody."  Know  your  privileges,  all  you 
who  have  come  to  Christ.  You  have  something  solid 
under  foot  and  something  firm  under  hand.  You  have 
a  rest  even  now,  and  you  shall  have  more  abundantly. 

Let  me  speak  to  those  who  have  not  yet  come  to 
Christ. 

Why  do  you  not  come  ?  What  possible  reason  can 
you  give  ?  What  excuse  can  you  show  for  your 
present  conduct  ? 

Will  you  tell  me  you  have  no  need  ?  What ! 
no  sin  to  be  pardoned— no  iniquity  to  be  covered 


"COME   UNTO   ME"  77 

over  !  There  is  no  state  so  bad  as  that  of  utter  in 
sensibility.  Beware,  lest  you  only  awake  to  hear  the 
word  "  Depart." 

Will  you  tell  me  you  are  happy  without  Christ? 
I  do  not  believe  you.  I  know  you  are  not.  You 
dare  not  look  into  your  heart, — you  dare  not  search 
your  conscience.  It  is  the  happiness  of  a  tradesman 
who  is  bankrupt  and  does  not  look  at  his  books.  There 
is  no  happiness  out  of  Christ. 

Take  heed.  Every  morning  you  are  in  awful  danger. 
You  stand  on  the  brink  of  hell.  Let  a  fever,  an 
accident,  an  attack  of  disease  carry  you  off,  and  you 
are  lost  for  ever.  Oh  !  take  the  warning.  Escape  for 
your  life.  Flee,  flee  to  Christ  ! 

Let  me  speak  to  those  who  have  not  come  to  Christ, 
but  mean  to  some  day.  I  marvel  at  your  presumption. 
Who  are  you,  that  talk  of  meaning  ?  You  may  be  dead 
in  a  week.  Who  are  you  that  talk  of  meaning  ?  You 
may  never  have  the  will  or  opportunity,  if  not  to-day. 
How  long  will  you  go  on  halting  between  two  opinions  ? 
You  must  come  to  Christ  some  time — some  day  ;  why 
not  now  ?  The  longer  you  stay  away,  the  less  chance 
there  is  of  your  coming  at  all ;  and  the  less  happiness 
will  you  have  in  the  world. 

"  Take  heed,  therefore,  lest,  a  promise  being  left  us 
of  entering  into  His  rest,  any  of  you  should  seem  to 
come  short  of  it." 

Many  meant  to  have  come  in  the  robes,  but  put  it 
off  till  too  late.  If  like  the  Levite  you  put  off  your 
journey  till  late  in  the  day,  you  must  not  wonder  if 
the  sun  has  gone  down  when  you  are  far  from  home. 
Come  now. 

Let  me  speak  to  those  who  have  come  to  Christ  indeed. 

You  are  often  cast  down  and  disquieted  within  you. 

And  why  ?     Just  because  you  do   not  abide  in  Christ 


78  "COME   UNTO   ME" 

and  seek  all  rest  and  peace  in  Him.  You  wander  from 
the  fold  :  no  wonder  you  return  weary,  footsore,  and 
tired.  Come  again  to  the  Lord  Jesus  and  renew  the 
covenant.  Believe  me,  if  you  live  to  be  as  old  as 
Methuselah,  you  will  never  get  beyond  this  :  a  sinner 
saved  by  the  grace  of  Christ.  And  think  of  the 
sinner's  end. 

Rest  in  Christ,  and  so  rest  indeed. 


VII 
THE  LORD   OUR  RIGHTEOUSNESS 

"  This  is  His  name  whereby  He  shall  be  called,  THE  LORD  OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS." — JER.  xxiii.  6. 

THE  time  is  short  It  is  but  a  little  while,  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  shall  come  in  His  glory.  The 
judgment  shall  be  set  and  the  books  shall  be  opened. 
"Before  Him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations,"  "that  every 
one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body,  according 
to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad."  The 
inmost  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  revealed  ;  "  and  the 
kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  great  men,  and  the  rich 
men,  and  the  chief  captains,  and  the  mighty  men,  and 
every  bondman,  and  every  freeman,"  will  stand  together 
on  a  level  at  the  bar,  and  will  see  each  other  face  to 
face,  and  one  by  one  will  have  to  give  account  of 
themselves  to  God  before  the  whole  world.  Thus  it 
is  written,  and  therefore  it  is  true  and  sure  to  come 
to  pass. 

And  what  does  each  of  you  intend  to  say  in  that 
hour  ?  What  is  the  defence  you  are  prepared  to  set 
up  ?  What  is  the  answer  you  propose  to  give  ?  What 
is  the  cause  you  mean  to  show  why  sentence  should 
not  be  pronounced  against  you  ? 

Verily,  beloved,  I  do  fear  that  some  amongst  you 
do  not  know.  You  have  not  thought  about  it  yet — 
you  have  resolved  to  think  about  it  some  day  soon  ; 

79 


8o      THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS 

or  you  are  not  quite  clear  about  it  at  present ;  or  you 
have  made  out  some  ingenious,  plausible  scheme  which 
will  not  stand  the  touchstone  of  the  Bible.  Oh,  what 
a  fearful  case  is  yours  !  Life  is  indeed  uncertain  ;  the 
fairest  or  the  strongest  here  may  perchance  be  taken 
next — you  cannot  make  an  agreement  with  death — and 
yet  you  cannot  tell  us  what  you  are  resting  upon  for 
comfort.  You  do  not  know  how  soon  the  last  trumpet 
may  sound,  and  yet  you  are  uncertain  as  to  the  ground 
of  your  hope.  Surely  these  things  ought  not  so  to  be. 

Did  any  of  you  ever  happen  to  visit  a  court  of  justice 
just  before  the  prisoners  are  tried?  Have  you  not 
remarked  how  anxiously  each  one  is  consulting  with 
his  friends  and  his  lawyers  as  to  the  defence  he  shall 
make— how  earnest  they  are,  how  careful  to  leave  no 
stone  unturned  that  may  help  to  prove  their  innocence  ? 
And  yet  the  greater  part  of  them  are  liable  to  no  more 
than  a  few  months'  imprisonment,  or  a  few  years' 
transportation  ;  perhaps  they  may  get  off  altogether 
by  a  quibble  of  the  law,  or  through  want  of  evidence. 
See  now  how  differently  you  act  in  the  matter  of 
your  souls.  In  the  great  day  there  will  be  no  want 
of  witnesses ;  your  thoughts  and  words  and  actions 
will  appear  written  in  the  book  one  after  another. 
Your  Judge  is  a  searcher  of  hearts.  And  yet,  in  spite 
of  all  these  facts,  too  many  of  you  sleep  on  as  if 
the  Bible  were  not  true  ;  too  many  of  you  know  not 
how  or  why  you  are  to  escape  God's  wrath  and  con 
demnation. 

Hearken  then,  if  you  love  life,  while  I  endeavour 
to  give  you  some  instruction  from  the  words  of  my 
text.  The  great  question  to  be  made  known  is,  "  How 
shall  man  be  just  with  God  ?  wherewithal  can  I  come 
before  the  Lord  ? "  and  I  wish  this  morning,  if  the 
Lord  will,  to  make  you  understand  :  I.  That  you  must 


THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS      Si 

have  some  righteousness,  or  you  will  not  be  saved. 
II.  That  you  have  no  righteousness  of  your  own  of 
any  sort,  and  therefore  by  yourself  you  cannot  be 
saved.  III.  That  the  Lord  Himself  must  be  your 
Righteousness,  and  so  you  shall  be  saved.  May  God 
the  Holy  Ghost,  who  can  convert  the  most  aged,  the 
most  careless,  the  most  sinful  (I  speak  that  which  I 
do  know  myself),  accompany  the  words  I  am  about 
to  speak,  and  .make  them  seasonable  to  all  your  souls  ! 

I.  First,  then,  I  am  to  show  you  you  must  have 
some  righteousness.  The  Bible  says  plainly,  "The 
wrath  of  God  is  revealed  against  all  ungodliness  and 
unrighteousness  of  men."  "  The  unrighteous  shall  not 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  "  Let  me  die  the  death 
of  the  righteous,"  says  Balaam,  "  and  let  my  last  end 
be  like  his."  "  The  Lord  loveth  the  righteous,  but  the 
way  of  the  wicked  He  turneth  upside  down."  "  The 
righteous  hath  hope  in  His  death."  Thy  people," 
says  Isaiah  to  his  God,  "shall  be  all  righteous."  "The 
cursed  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment, 
but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."  "  Have  on  the 
breastplate  of  righteousness,"  says  Paul  to  the  Ephe- 
sians.  And  how  shall  any  one  presume  to  say  that 
he  can  enter  into  heaven  without  it ! 

But  I  wish  here  to  expose  the  folly  of  all  those  who 
talk  in  a  loose  and  general  way  about  God's  mercy. 
Men  will  often  say,  when  urged  to  think  about  their 
salvation, "  Indeed  I  know  I  am  not  what  I  should  be  ; 
I  have  broken  God's  law  very  often,  but  He  is  very 
merciful,  and  I  hope  I  shall  be  forgiven."  Truly,  I 
do  believe  that  the  religion  of  many  goes  no  further 
than  this.  This  is  the  only  point  they  can  lay  hold 
of ;  this  is  the  only  rock  on  which  they  build  :  press 
them  for  a  reason  of  their  hope,  and  there  is  no  answer  ; 
ask  them  to  explain  the  ground  of  their  confidence, 

6 


82      THE   LORD    OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS 

and  they  cannot  do  it.  "  God  is  merciful  "  is  the  Alpha 
and  the  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first 
and  the  last,  of  all  their  Christianity.  No\v,  I  am  bold 
to  say,  beloved,  this  is  an  immense  delusion  ;  a  refuge 
of  lies  that  will  not  stand  being  compared  with  Scrip 
ture,  and,  more  than  this,  it  will  not  last  one  instant 
in  the  fire  of  trial  and  affliction. 

Have  you  not  ever  heard  that  God  is  a  God  of  perfect 
holiness — holy  in  His  character,  holy  in  His  laws,  holy 
in  His  dwelling-place  ?  "  Speak  unto  the  children 
of  Israel,"  says  the  Book  of  Leviticus,  and  say  unto 
them,  "  Ye  shall  be  holy  ;  for  I  the  Lord  your  God 
am  holy."  "  He  is  a  holy  God,"  says  Joshua  ;  "  He 
is  a  jealous  God  ;  He  will  not  forgive  your  transgres 
sions  nor  your  sins."  "Thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than 
to  behold  evils,  and  canst  not  look  on  iniquity,"  says 
Habakkuk.  "Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord."  And  the  book  of  Revelation,  speaking  of 
heaven,  says,  "  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it 
anything  that  defileth."  "  It  shall  be  called  the  way 
of  holiness,"  says  Isaiah  ;  "  the  unclean  shall  not  pass 
over  it."  And  will  you  tell  us,  in  the  face  of  all  these 
texts,  that  man,  corrupt,  impure,  defiled — as  the  best  of 
us  most  surely  is — shall  pass  the  fiery  judgment  of  our 
God  and  enter  into  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  by  simply 
trusting  in  the  mercy  of  his  Maker,  without  one  single 
rag  to  cover  his  iniquities  and  hide  his  natural  un- 
clcanness.  It  cannot  be :  God's  mercy  and  God's 
holiness  must  needs  be  reconciled,  and  you  have  not 
done  this  yet. 

And  have  you  never  heard  that  God  is  a  God  of 
perfect  justice,  whose  laws  may  not  be  broken  without 
punishment,  whose  commandments  must  be  fulfilled 
on  pain  of  death  ?  "  All  His  ways  are  judgment,"  says 
the  book  of  Deuteronomy;  "a  God  of  truth  and 


THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS      83 

without  iniquity,  just  and  right  is  He."  "  Justice  and 
judgment  are  the  habitation  of  Thy  throne,"  says  David. 
"  The  just  Lord  is  in  the  midst,"  says  Zephaniah  ;  "  He 
will  not  do  iniquity :  every  morning  doth  He  bring 
His  judgment  to  light ;  He  faileth  not."  "  Think  not 
that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  law  or  the  prophets," 
said  Jesus  :  "I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil. 
For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass, 
one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law 
till  all  be  fulfilled."  I  cannot  find  that  these  verses 
have  ever  been  declared  useless ;  I  cannot  discover 
any  place  which  says  the  law  is  now  let  down,  and 
need  not  be  fulfilled  ;  and  how,  then,  can  I  teach  you 
that  it  is  enough  to  look  to  God's  mercy?  I  read  of 
only  two  ways  in  the  Bible :  One  is,  to  do  the  whole  law 
yourself ;  the  other  is,  to  do  it  by  another.  Show  me, 
if  you  can,  one  single  text  which  teaches  that  a  man 
may  be  saved  without  the  claims  of  the  law  having 
been  satisfied.  An  earthly  prince,  indeed,  may  forgive 
and  pass  over  men's  transgressions  ;  but  God  never 
changes.  "  Hath  He  spoken,  and  shall  He  not  make  it 
good  ?  "  I  tell  you,  then,  God's  mercy  and  God's  justice 
must  be  reconciled  ;  and  this  you  have  not  done  yet. 

You  must  have  something  to  appear  in  at  the 
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  You  would  not  say  a 
murderer  should  be  acquitted,  because  he  said  he  was 
sorry  and  hoped  to  be  forgiven  ;  you  must  make  some 
amends  to  justice  and  to  holiness  ;  you  cannot  shut 
your  eyes  against  the  plain  declarations  of  the  Bible. 
You  must  have  some  good  reason  to  give,  why  you 
should  not  be  judged  for  all  your  sins  and  backslidings  ; 
you  must  show  some  cause  why  the  punishment 
threatened  for  breaking  God's  law  is  not  to  fall  upon 
you  ;  there  must  be  satisfaction  for  your  sins,  or  you 
will  perish  everlastingly. 


84      THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS 

You  tell  us  fairly  you  are  not  what  you  should  be, 
but  you  say  that  God  is  merciful.  I  answer  you  this 
will  not  stand  before  the  Bible  :  the  wages  of  sin  is 
death,  he  that  offendeth  in  one  point  is  guilty  of  all. 
God  loves  you,  but  He  will  have  His  demands  paid  in 
full :  your  debt  must  be  discharged  by  yourself  or  by 
some  one  else  ;  choose  which  you  please,  but  one  thing  at 
least  is  certain— payment  must  be  made.  God  is  indeed 
all  love :  He  willeth  not  the  death  of  any  sinner ;  but, 
however  small  your  iniquities  may  be,  they  cannot 
possibly  be  put  away  until  the  claims  of  His  law  have 
been  satisfied  to  the  uttermost  farthing.  By  some 
means,  then,  you  must  have  righteousness,  or  else  it  is 
clear  you  cannot  be  saved. 

II.  I  promised  in  the  second  place  to  show  you  that 
we  have  no  righteousness  of  our  own,  and  therefore  by 
ourselves  we  cannot  be  saved.  I  trust  I  need  not  dwell 
upon  this  point  long,  and  therefore  I  shall  only  say  a 
few  words  to  enforce  it  on  your  notice. 

Look  at  the  law  of  God,  and  measure  its  require 
ments.  Does  it  not  ask  of  every  man  a  perfect, 
unsinning  obedience  from  first  to  last,  in  thought  and 
word  and  deed,  without  one  single  failure  in  the  slightest 
jot  or  tittle  ?  And  where  is  the  son  or  daughter  of  Adam 
who  can  say,  "  All  this  I  have  performed "  ?  Who  is 
not  conscious  of  a  daily  falling  short  in  everything  he 
does  ?  I  do  not  speak  so  much  of  thieves  and  liars  and 
adulterers  and  drunkards  and  the  like,  for  these  arc 
walking  towards  their  own  place,  leaning  on  Satan's 
arm.  I  speak  rather  of  those  who  do  not  live  in 
gross  vices  ;  I  would  even  take  the  case  of  the  best 
Christian  among  ourselves,  and  ask  him  if  he  can  name 
a  single  day  on  which  he  has  not  sinned  in  many 
things.  Oh,  how  much  he  would  tell  you  of  wandering 
in  his  prayers,  of  defilement  in  his  thoughts,  of  coldness 


THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS      85 

toward  God,  of  want  of  love,  of  pride,  of  evil  tempers, 
of  vanity,  of  worldly-mindedness ! — and  all,  remember, 
in  the  heart  of  one  of  those  few  who  are  travelling  in 
the  narrow  way  which  leadeth  unto  life.  And  how  shall 
we  then  believe,  though  all  the  world  persuade  us  to 
the  contrary,  that  man  can  ever  purchase  his  acceptance 
in  the  sight  of  God  ?  So  true  are  the  words  of  that 
clear-sighted  witness  the  apostle  Paul,  "  By  the  deeds 
of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  living  be  justified." 

But  here  I  take  occasion  to  answer  the  reasoning  of 
those  Pharisees,  who  would  have  men  believe  they  can 
assist  in  the  work  of  salvation  by  their  own  performances. 
They  cannot  submit  to  the  idea  that  we  are  naturally 
so  helpless,  and  so  they  go  about  to  establish  their 
own  righteousness,  and  this  in  a  variety  of  ways. 

Some  tell  us  that  repentance  and  amendment  will 
enable  us  to  stand  in  the  great  day,  but  the  Bible  does 
not  warrant  it.  No  doubt,  without  them  none  of  you 
will  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  they  cannot 
put  away  your  sins  nor  endure  the  severity  of  God's 
judgment ;  they  cannot  open  that  strait  gate  which 
must  be  passed  before  you  get  into  the  narrow  way, 
although  they  may  lead  you  up  to  it  ;  they  cannot  blot 
out  one  single  page  of  that  black  book  in  which  your 
iniquities  are  written.  John  Baptist  preached  repent 
ance,  but  he  never  told  his  hearers  it  would  save  them. 

Some  say  they  put  their  trust  in  well-spent  lives : 
they  never  did  anybody  any  harm  ;  they  have  always 
done  their  best,  and  so  they  hope  they  shall  be  accounted 
righteous.  Beloved,  this  is  miserable  trifling.  Let  them 
tell  us  of  a  single  day  in  which  they  have  not  broken 
that  spiritual  law  laid  down  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. 

k/Vhat !  never  thought  an  unkind  thought  ?  never  looked 
.n  unchaste  look  ?  never  said  an  uncharitable  thing  ? 
lever  coveted  ?  Oh,  that  tenth  commandment :  how 


86 


THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS 


utterly  it  seems  neglected !— and  yet  it  goes  along  with 
murder  and  adultery.  Or  let  them  tell  us  of  a  single 
hour  in  which  they  have  not  left  undone  something 
it  was  in  their  power  to  do  ;  and  this  must  be  accounted 
for.  They  cannot  do  it ;  they  are  silent  ;  and  yet  these 
things  are  written  plainly  in  the  Bible.  Is  it  not  clear, 
then,  that  they  do  not  read  the  Scriptures,  or  neglect 
their  precepts  if  they  do,  and  so,  at  any  rate,  they  are 
not  doing  their  best  ? 

Some  tell  us  that  they  hope  sincerity  will  carry  them 
safe  through  their  trial.  They  may  not  perhaps  have 
quite  clear  views,  but  still  they  have  always  meant  well, 
and  so  they  hope  to  be  accepted.  I  cannot  find  there 
is  any  place  for  them  in  heaven.  I  read  in  the  book 
of  Kings  that  the  priests  of  Baal  called  on  their  God 
for  half  a  day,  and  cut  themselves  after  their  manner 
with  knives,  until  the  blood  gushed  out  upon  them. 
That  was  sincerity  at  any  rate,  and  yet,  a  few  hours  after, 
Elijah  commanded  them  to  be  put  to  death  as  soul- 
destroying  idolaters.  I  read  that  Paul  himself,  before 
conversion,  was  zealous  toward  God  :  he  thought  within 
himself  he  ought  to  clo  many  things  contrary  to  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  and  shut  up  many  of  the  saints  in  prison, 
and  was  exceedingly  mad  against  them.  Here  was 
sincerity  and  earnestness ;  and  yet  we  find  him  saying, 
when  his  eyes  were  opened  :  "  I  was  a  blasphemer  and 
a  persecutor,  and  injurious.  .  .  «  I  am  the  least  of  the 
apostles,  the  chief  of  sinners  ...  I  am  not  meet  to  be 
called  an  apostle,  because  I  persecuted  the  Church  of 
God."  And  so  it  seems  a  man  may  be  in  earnest,  and 
yet  going  towards  the  place  of  torment. 

Lastly,  some  tell  us  that  they  go  through  all  the 
forms  and  ordinances  of  religion,  and  build  their  claim 
to  righteousness  on  that.  "  Hath  not  God  commanded 
us,"  they  say,  "  to  honour  His  word,  His  house,  His 


THE   LORD    OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS      87 

ministers,  His  sacraments  ?  "     All  this  we  do,  and  surely 
He  will  accept  us.     I  cannot  find  it  written.    But  I  do 
remember  that  the  Jews  had  ceremonies  and  observances 
in  abundance  ;  and  I  have  found  many  passages  which 
seem   to   show   that  men    may  pay  attention  to  these 
things,    and    yet   be   abominable   in  the  sight  of   God. 
Hear   the   judgment   of  Samuel :  "  Hath   the  Lord   as 
great   delight  in    burnt   offerings    and    sacrifices    as    in 
obeying   the   voice  of  the   Lord  ?     Behold,  to  obey  is 
better   than    sacrifice,  and    to    hearken  than  the  fat  of 
rams.     For   rebellion    is  as  the  sin   of  witchcraft,  and 
stubbornness    is   as    iniquity  and    idolatry."     Listen  to 
the  voice  of  Isaiah  :  "  To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude 
of  your  sacrifices  unto  me  ?  saith  the  Lord  :  I  am  full 
of  the  burnt  offerings  of  rams,  and  the  fat  of  fed  beasts  ; 
and  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  bullocks  or  of  lambs 
or   he-goats.      When    ye   come    to    appear   before    me, 
who   hath    required    this    at    your   hand,   to    tread    my 
courts?     Bring  no  more  vain  oblations  ;  incense  is  an 
abomination   unto  me  ;    the   new  moons   and  sabbaths, 
the  calling  of  assemblies,   1    cannot  away  with  ;    it  is 
iniquity,  even   the  solemn  meeting.     Your  new  moons 
and  your  appointed  feasts,  my  soul  hateth  ;   they  arc 
a  trouble  unto   me  ;    I   am  weary  to  bear  them.     And 
when  ye  spread  forth  your  hands  I  will  hide  mine  eyes  : 
yea,   when    ye    make    many    prayers    I   will   not  hear : 
your   hands   are  full  of  blood.     Wash  you,  make  you 
clean  ;    put   away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before 
mine  eyes  ;   cease  to  do  evil ;   learn  to  do  well  ;  seek 
judgment."     "I    spake    not    to    your  fathers,"   says  the 
Lord    by    Jeremiah,    "  concerning    burnt    offerings    or 
sacrifices:    but  this  thing  commanded   I    them,  saying, 
Obey  my  voice,  and  I  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall 
be  my  people  :  and  walk  ye  in  all  the  ways  that  I  have 
commanded  you,  that  it  may  be  well  with  you." 


88      THE   LORD    OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS 

I  trust  it  will  not  seem  to  you  unprofitable  to  have 
taken  up  so  much  time  in  exposing  these  delusions. 
In  one  way  it  is  very  useful.  They  all  show  that 
conscience  tells  every  man  he  must  have  something 
wherewith  to  appear  before  God.  Now,  I  wish  to  show 
you  plainly  that  we  have  nothing  of  our  own  ;  the 
doctrine  may  seem  hard  and  disagreeable,  and  yet 
there  are  few  who  do  not  allow  it  at  one  important 
period  in  their  lives,  if  they  never  did  before.  I  mean 
the  hour  of  death.  Mark  then  how  anxious  almost 
every  one  becomes,  whom  God  permits  to  keep 
possession  of  his  senses.  The  judgment  day  appears 
then  in  its  true  light.  Man  feels  naked  and  empty. 
He  knows  he  is  about  to  be  asked  that  awful  question, 
"  What  hast  thou  to  say,  why  thou  shouldst  not  perish 
for  this  long  list  of  sins  ?  "  and  if  he  has  not  furnished 
himself  with  the  only  answer  that  can  be  given,  the 
view  before  his  eyes  cannot  possibly  look  anything 
else  than  dreary,  black,  and  hopeless.  Ask  those  who 
have  been  brought  to  death's  door  by  sickness,  whether 
this  be  not  true,  and  they  will  tell  you.  In  short,  both 
Scripture  and  your  own  experience  prove  most  fully 
that  nothing  we  can  do  will  stand  God's  examination  ; 
repentance,  works  and  services,  all  necessary  and  useful 
in  themselves,  are  so  tainted,  so  infected  and  imperfect, 
that  they  cannot  justify  us.  We  have  no  righteousness 
of  our  own,  and  therefore  by  ourselves  we  cannot  be 
saved.  (<  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,"  says  Isaiah, 
"  and  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags  ;  and  we 
all  do  fade  as  a  leaf;  and  our  iniquities,  like  the  wind, 
have  taken  us  away." 

III.  "But  what  are  we  to  do?"  perhaps  you  will  ask. 
"  You  seem  to  have  shut  us  up  without  hope.  You  told 
us  first  that  we  must  have  some  righteousness,  and  now 
you  have  told  us  further  that  we  have  not  any  of  our 


THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS     89 

own.  What  are  we  to  do?  Which  way  are  we  to 
turn  ?  What  would  you  have  us  say  ?  To  whom  are 
are  we  to  look  ? "  Praised  be  God,  beloved,  I  am  not 
obliged  to  leave  you  here.  I  will  not  lead  you  into 
the  wilderness  and  terrify  you,  and  then  point  out  no 
path  towards  the  heavenly  Canaan.  I  promised  in 
the  third  place  to  tell  you  how  God  can  be  a  just  God 
and  yet  show  mercy  and  justify  the  most  ungodly : 
and  this  is  all  contained  in  the  words  of  my  text — 
"The  Lord"  must  be  "our  RIGHTEOUSNESS." 

I  show  you  here  a  mystery  of  wisdom  and  of  love. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  done  what  we  ought  to 
have  done,  and  suffered  what  we  ought  to  have  suffered  ; 
He  has  taken  our  place  and  become  our  substitute 
both  in  life  and  death,  and  all  for  the  sake  of  miser 
able,  corrupt,  ungrateful  beings  like  ourselves.  Oh,  is 
not  His  name  then  rightly  called,  "  The  Lord  our 
1x!ghteousness  "? 

Beloved,  I  ought  to  dwell  upon  this  point.  It  is  so 
.lighly  important  to  have  a  clear  view  of  it,  and  Satan 
does  so  much  to  prevent  your  seeing  it  distinctly,  that 
I  must  try  to  unfold  it  before  your  eyes,  that  all  of 
you  may  be  able  to  understand  what  a  minister  means 
when  he  urges  you  to  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  as  your 
righteousness. 

Consider  now  :  there  were  two  things  to  be  done 
before  guilty  man  could  be  saved.  The  law  was  to 
be  fulfilled,  for  we  had  all  come  short  of  it  ;  justice 
was  to  be  satisfied,  for  we  had  all  deserved  punishment. 
And  how  was  this  effected  ?  Hearken !  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  pitying  our  lost  estate,  covenanted  and 
engaged  to  become  our  surety  and  substitute ;  and 
when  the  fulness  of  time  \vas  come,  He  left  the  bosom 
of  His  Father  and  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a 
servant  here  on  earth,  being  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 


yo      THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS 

In  that  form,  by  a  sinless  obedience  to  the  whole  law, 
He  wrought  out  and  brought  in  a  perfect  and  ever 
lasting  righteousness,  and  this  He  is  both  willing  and 
rcady^to  bestow  on  all  who  will  put  their  trust  in  Him. 
And  more  than  this:  to  complete  the  mighty  work- 
He  consented  to  offer  up  Himself  in  our  place  as  a 
victim  to  the  wrath  of  God,  to  suffer  instead  of  us, 
to  bear  that  punishment  which  we  had  deserved, — and 
this  He  did  by  dying  on  the  cross.  It  was  there  He 
satisfied  the  claims  of  justice.  It  was  there  He  paid 
the  heavy  debt  written  against  our  names.  It  was 
there  that  God  the  Father  laid  upon  Him  the  iniquity 
of  us  all,  and  made  His  soul  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  It 
was  there  that  He  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the 
law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us.  Here,  then,  you  see 
the  plan  of  salvation  which  is  offered  to  all  the  world. 
The  believing  sinner's  guilt  is  taken  away  and  laid 
upon  Christ,  for  He  has  carried  our  transgressions, 
and  all  the  merit  of  Christ's  life  and  death,  and  all 
the  value  of  His  sufferings,  are  then  made  over  to  the 
sinner. 

But  see  how  great  and  glorious  is  this  exchange 
between  Jesus  and  our  souls  :  the  Father  sees  us  now 
as  members  of  His  dear  Son,  in  whom  He  is  well 
pleased  ;  He  deals  with  us  as  if  we  had  never  sinned, 
as  if  we  had  ourselves  fulfilled  all  righteousness  ;  He 
looks  on  us  as  one  with  Christ,  and  acknowledges  us 
as  dear  children  and  heirs  of  eternal  glory.  Do  I  say 
more  than  Scripture  warrants  ?  I  think  not.  Listen 
to  St.  Paul :  "  God  hath  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us 
who  knew  no  sin  ;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteous 
ness  of  God  in  Him."  Are  not  these  words  strong? 
But  so  it  is.  "  Christ  was  accounted  as  a  sinner,  and 
therefore  punished  for  us  :  we  are  accounted  as  righteous, 
and  therefore  glorified  in  Him.  He  was  accounted  as 


THE   LORD    OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS     91 

a  sinner,  and  therefore  He  was  condemned  ;  we  are 
accounted  as  righteous  in  Him,  and  therefore  justified."  * 
God's  law  has  been  satisfied,  and  now  we  may  be  saved. 
Sin  has  been  punished,  and  now  sinners  may  go  free. 
God  has  shown  Himself  a  just  God,  and  yet  He  can 
be  the  Saviour  of  guilty  men. 

Beloved,  are  not  these  things  wonderful?  Are  not  these 
glad  tidings  to  the  labouring  and  heavy  laden  ?  The 
Lord  Himself  is  our  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  Who  is  there 
among  you  that  is  groaning  under  the  burden  of  sin, 
trembling  under  a  sense  of  innumerable  transgressions  ? 
Fear  not,  but  come  to  Jesus  ;  He  has  paid  your  debt 
in  full  ;  believe,  and  you  shall  be  free.  Who  is  there 
among  you  that  is  tried  with  manifold  temptations — 
slipping,  stumbling,  walking  in  darkness  and  seeing  no 
light,  and  often  ready  to  say  with  David,  "  I  shall  one 
day  perish"?  Fear  not,  but  look  to  Jesus;  He  has 
secured  your  entrance  into  heaven  ;  He  has  fought  and 
won  the  battle  for  you.  The  Lord  is  our  righteousness. 
This  shall  be  our  defence  and  plea,  when  earth  and  its 
works  are  burned  up,  and  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and 
the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and  the  Chief 
Shepherd  shall  appear  to  judge  the  sons  of  men.  Who 
shall  lay  anything  then  to  the  charge  of  those  who 
have  laid  hold  on  Christ  ?  Shall  any  one  presume  to 
say  they  have  not  done  everything  required  ?  The 
Lord,  we  will  answer,  is  our  righteousness  ;  He  is  our 
substitute  ;  we  have  done  nothing,  but  He  hath  done 
everything  ;  He  is  our  all  in  all.  And  who  is  he  that 
can  condemn  us?  shall  death  or  hell  or  Satan  lay  a 
finger  on  us,  and  dare  to  say  that  justice  has  not  been 
satisfied  ?  The  Lord,  we  will  answer,  is  our  righteous 
ness  ;  we  have  indeed  sinned,  but  Christ  hath  suffered  ; 
we  have  deserved  wrath,  but  Jesus  hath  died  and  shed 
*  Beveridge. 


92      THE   LORD    OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS 

His  blood  to  make  atonement  in  our  stead.  "  Blessed," 
says  holy  David,  "  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will 
not  impute  sin."  "  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord," 
says  Isaiah  ;  "  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God  ;  for 
He  hath  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of  salvation,  He 
hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness,  as  a 
bridegroom  decketh  himself  with  ornaments,  and  as  a 
bride  adorneth  herself  with  her  jewels." 

Now,  I  have  preached  to  very  little  purpose,  beloved, 
if  you  do  not  this  very  morning  ask  yourselves,  "Is  the 
Lord  my  righteousness,  or  is  He  not  ?  "  Remember  this 
mighty  gift  is  offered  unto  all,  but  it  is  only  placed 
upon  them  that  believe.  "  Faith  is  the  only  hand  which 
putteth  on  Christ  to  justification.  Christ  is  the  only 
garment  which  can  cover  your  defiled  nature,  and 
present  you  blameless  in  the  sight  of  God.  Without 
this  faith  it  is  clear  you  have  neither  part  nor  portion 
in  this  righteousness."  *  I  know  not  that  I  can  put  into 
your  heads  a  more  important  inquiry  ;  and  yet,  I  sadly 
fear  too  many  of  you  will  not  think  I  am  in  earnest, 
or  else  you  will  suppose  the  question  may  be  useful 
to  your  neighbours,  but  not  so  very  necessary  for 
yourself. 

Indeed,  1  am  persuaded  there  are  many  persons  in 
every  congregation  who  flatter  themselves  they  are 
in  a  kind  of  middle  path.  They  do  not,  to  be  sure, 
pretend  they  are  in  the  number  of  the  very  good  people, 
but  they  would  be  very  sorry  to  be  thought  ungodly. 
They  have  a  great  respect  for  religion,  and  some  time 
or  other  they  intend  to  take  it  up  more  seriously— 
perhaps  when  they  are  married  and  have  got  a  home 
of  their  own  (so  the  young  say),  or  when  they  have 
not  so  many  cares  or  so  much  trouble  about  their 
families  and  their  relations,  or  when  they  get  on  in 
*  Hooker. 


THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS      93 

years  (so  the  middle-aged  say),  or  by-and-by,  or  when 
they  become  ill  (so  the  old  and  grey-headed  say). 
But  in  the  meantime,  they  live  on  and  move  forward 
in  a  comfortable  state  of  mind,  take  all  the  promises 
of  God  and  all  the  smooth  parts  of  a  sermon  to  them 
selves,  and  leave  the  addresses  to  the  unconverted 
and  the  careless  for  others. 

But,  once  for  all,  I  say  to  such  persons,  if  there  arc 
any  such  here,  your  middle  path  seems  right  in  your 
own  eyes ;  but  I  have  searched  the  Scriptures,  and 
I  cannot  find  it.  I  cannot  meet  with  more  than  two 
descriptions  of  character  :  I  read  of  a  broad  way,  and 
I  read  of  a  narrow  way  ;  I  read  of  converted  men, 
and  unconverted  men  ;  I  read  of  heaven,  and  I  read 
of  hell  ;  I  read  of  those  that  are  in  Christ,  and  I  read 
of  those  that  are  not  in  Christ ;  but  nowhere  can 
I  find  that  road  in  which  you  put  your  trust, — and  I 
do  not  hesitate  to  say  you  will  find  it  in  the  end  to 
be  nothing  better  than  a  piece  of  that  broad  way  that 
leadeth  to  destruction.  Think  not  I  wish  to  hurt  your 
feelings  ;  but  I  do  wish  to  awaken  you,  to  convince 
you  of  the  folly  of  this  sleepy,  half-and-half  religion, 
and  to  show  you  the  necessity  of  being  decided  and 
in  earnest  on  the  side  of  Christ,  if  you  would  not  be 
lost  for  ever. 

I  say  this  much  by  way  of  warning,  and  I  now  repeat 
to  every  man,  woman  and  child  here  present,  the  plain 
question  :  "  Is  the  Lord  your  righteousness,  or  is  He 
not  ?  "  I  know  that  there  are  here,  two  parties.  One 
would  reply,  if  honest,  "  I  fear  He  is  not "  ;  and  the 
other  would  answer,  "  I  trust  He  is."  I  purpose,  there 
fore,  to  conclude  this  sermon  by  a  few  words  to  each 
of  these  two  classes. 

First,  then,  I  shall  offer  some  counsel  to  those  among 
you  who  are  prepared  to  say :  "  The  Lord  Jesus  is, 


94      THE   LORD    OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS 

\ve  trust,  our  righteousness."  I  say  then,  and  I  think 
it  safe  to  do  so,  You  have  made  a  good  profession  ;  but 
I  would  have  you  daily  search  and  see  that  you  arc 
not  deceiving  yourselves.  Sec  that  your  tongue  does 
not  lay  claim  to  more  than  your  heart  has  received 
and  knows  of;  sec  that  your  life  and  lips  are  thoroughly 
agreed.  Show  all  the  world  that  He  in  whom  you 
trust  is  your  example  no  less  than  your  righteousness, 
and  while  you  wait  for  His  second  appearing  endeavour 
daily  to  become  more  like  Him.  Study  to  be  holy, 
even  as  He  who  has  called  you  and  washed  you  in  His 
own  blood  is  holy.  Let  not  the  righteousness  of  the 
Lord  be  evil-spoken  of  through  you  ;  let  not  Jesus  be 
wounded  in  the  house  of  His  friends.  Think  of  His 
love  ;  let  that  constrain  you  to  obedience — having  much 
forgiven,  love  much.  Beware  that  you  give  the  Lord's 
enemies  no  occasion  to  blaspheme.  They  are  watching 
you  much  ;  you  cannot  be  hid.  Be  always  saying  to 
yourself,  "  What  shall  I  do,  and  how  shall  I  behave, 
to  show  my  gratitude  to  Him  who  hath  carried  my 
sins  and  given  me  His  righteousness?"  But  know  ye 
for  a  certainty,  if  the  world  says  "  What  do  these 
persons  more  than  others  ?  "  if  those  who  live  with  you 
cannot  take  knowledge  of  you  that  you  are  much  with 
Jesus  ;  if  you  have  no  fruit  to  show  of  any  sort  ;  if  you 
arc  not  habitually  and  daily  sober,  just,  holy,  temperate, 
humble,  meek,  loving,  watchful,  fervent  in  spirit,  serving 
the  Lord,  hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness  ; 
if  you  have  none  of  these  things,  you  are  little  better 
than  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal,  you  are 
ruining  your  own  soul,  and  in  the  day  of  Judgment  you 
will  plead  in  vain  the  name  of  Jesus.  The  Lord  will 
say,  "  I  know  you  not ;  you  never  really  came  to  me  ; 
I  cannot  see  my  seal  upon  your  forehead,  of  which  my 
servant  Paul  spake—'  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the 


THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS     95 

name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity.' "  "  There  shall 
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth." 

It  only  remains  now  to  speak  to  all  among  you 
who  cannot  say  "  The  Lord  is  our  righteousness." 
Indeed,  beloved,  I  am  distressed  for  your  condition. 
I  cannot  understand,  I  never  can,  what  arguments  you 
use  to  quench  the  striving  of  God's  Spirit,  to  stop  the 
prickings  of  your  own  conscience.  In  truth,  I  do  suspect 
you  never  argue,  you  never  reason  ;  you  shut  your  eyes 
and  try  to  forget  your  own  perishing  souls.  But  know 
ye  not  that  verse  of  the  Bible  which  declares  "  the 
wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  people  that 
forget  God," — not  ridicule,  or  insult,  but  simply  all  who 
forget.  And  know  ye  not  the  verse  "  How  shall  we 
escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  It  does  not 
say  abuse,  or  disbelieve,  or  deny,  but  simply  "  neglect," 
and  this,  I  fear,  is  a  charge  you  cannot  turn  aside.  Oh, 
think  of  death ;  it  may  be  near  at  hand.  Your  careless 
indifference  will  alter  then,  but  without  Christ  you 
will  find  a  sting  in  that  hour  which  no  power  of  your 
own  will  ever  remove.  Think  of  eternity  in  hell :  no 
merry  companions,  no  comfortable  gossiping,  no  noisy 
revelling  at  night,  nothing  but  unchanging  misery, 
unceasing  torment,  and  unutterable  woe.  Think  of 
thy  judgment :  your  name  will  be  called  in  turn,  and 
you  will  stand  in  the  sight  of  assembled  millions  — 
ministers,  father,  mother,  wife,  children,  relations,  all 
will  see  you — you  will  have  to  give  account  of  your 
actions,  and  you  know  you  will  be  condemned.  But 
who  will  then  pass  sentence  ?  Not  an  angel,  not  even 
God  the  Father  ;  but  the  Lord  Himself  (Oh !  cutting 
and  heartrending  thought) — the  Lord  Jesus,  whose  blood 
and  righteousness  you  now  refuse,  will  pronounce  your 
condemnation. 

These  things  perhaps  sound  terrible  ;   perhaps  they 


96      THE   LORD    OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS 

may  be  treated  with  ridicule  ;  but  the  day  is  at  hand 
which  will  bring  every  one  to  their  senses,  and  make 
everybody  sober,  and  you  will  then  find  that  they  are 
true.  Knowing,  therefore,  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  let 
me  persuade  you  to  close  with  the  gracious  invitation 
of  your  Saviour,  and  never  rest  until  you  can  say  from 
your  hearts,  "  The  Lord  is  my  righteousness." 

I  know  not  anything  that  should  prevent  your 
salvation  if  you  are  willing  and  obedient.  I  cannot  see 
in  what  respect  your  happiness  on  earth  would  be 
diminished.  You  are  discontented  with  yourself,  and  I 
offer  in  the  name  of  Christ,  joy,  pardon,  and  peace  ; 
you  are  poor,  and  I  offer  unsearchable  riches  ;  you  are 
naked,  and  I  offer  you  a  spotless  robe  in  which  you 
shall  sit  down  at  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb, 
and  none  shall  cast  you  out. 

But  mark,  I  will  not  promise  you  anything  beyond 
to-day.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time."  Thus  far  I  can  go, 
but  one  step  further  I  cannot  proceed  upon  sure  ground. 
If  you  reject  the  counsel  of  God  now,  I  cannot  promise 
even  the  youngest  of  you  another  opportunity.  Before 
to-morrow  your  last  home  may  be  fixed  unalterably  ; 
to-morrow  death  may  interfere,  or  Jesus  may  return 
to  judgment,  and  it  would  be  too  late. 

Go  home,  then,  if  you  value  your  soul,  and  turn  the 
words  of  the  text  into  a  prayer,  and  entreat  the  Lord 
to  receive  you  and  become  your  righteousness. 

Even  so,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly  into  every  heart. 
Amen  and  Amen. 


VIII 

SELF-RIGHTEO  USNESS. 

"  He  spake  this  parable  unto  certain  which  trusted  in  themselves  that 
they  were  righteous,  and  despised  others." — LUKE  xviii.  9. 

ARE  there  none  to  whom  this  parable  is  applicable 
in  the  present  day?  Truly,  if  it  were  so,  the 
ministers  of  Jesus  would  have  comparatively  a  light 
employment  and  an  idle  post.  We  do  not  often  meet 
with  men  who  deny  the  divinity  of  Christ,  or  the 
personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  disbelieve  the  Bible, 
or  doubt  the  existence  of  a  God,  and  so  bring  upon 
themselves  swift  destruction  ;  but,  alas !  we  have  daily 
proof  that  the  disease  spoken  of  in  our  text  is  as 
deep-seated  and  hard  to  cure  as  ever,  and  of  all  the 
mischievous  delusions  that  keep  men  out  of  heaven, 
of  all  the  soul-destroying  snares  that  Satan  employs 
to  oppose  Christ's  Gospel,  there  is  none  we  find  so 
dangerous,  none  so  successful,  as  self-righteousness. 

Perhaps  you  think  this  strange,  and  I  daresay  there 
are  few  who  would  not  say,  if  asked  the  ground  of 
their  hopes,  and  how  they  expect  to  be  saved,  "  We 
trust  in  the  merits  of  Christ "  ;  but  I  fear  that  too  many 
of  you  are  making  the  Lord  Jesus  but  half  your  Saviour, 
and  could  never  stand  the  sifting  of  an  inquiry  which 
would  draw  out  into  daylight  the  secrets  of  your  hearts. 
How  much  would  then  come  out  by  degrees  about 
doing  as  well  as  you  could,  and  being  no  worse  than 

97  7 


9s  SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS 

others,  and  having  been  sober  and  industrious  and  well- 
behaved,  and  having  attended  church  regularly,  and 
having  had  a  Bible  and  a  Prayer  book  of  your  own 
ever  since  you  can  remember,  and  the  like ;  besides 
many  other  self-approving  thoughts,  which  often  never 
appear  until  a  death-bed,  and  all  prove  the  root  of  all 
evil,  which  is  pride,  to  be  still  vigorous  and  flourishing 
within. 

Oh  this  pride  of  heart,  beloved  !— it  is  fearful  to  see 
the  harm  that  it  does,  and  the  carelessness  with  which 
it  is  regarded  :  it  is  melancholy  indeed  to  think  of  a 
man,  weak  frail  man,  the  descendant  of  fallen  Adam, 
the  inheritor  of  a  corrupt  nature,  forgetting  his  own 
countless  shortcomings  and  backslidings,  trusting  in 
himself,  and  despising  those  who  are  his  brethren 
according  to  the  flesh  ;  and  wisely  has  our  Lord  spoken 
the  parable  immediately  following  my  text,  which  I 
propose  to  bring  under  your  notice  this  afternoon. 

"  Two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray  ;  the  one 
a  Pharisee,  and  the  other  a  publican.  The  Pharisee 
stood  and  prayed  thus  with  himself:  God,  I  thank  Thee 
that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,  extortioners,  unjust, 
adulterers,  or  even  as  this  publican.  I  fast  twice  in 
the  week,  I  give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess.  And  the 
publican,  standing  afar  off,  would  not  lift  up  so  much 
as  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote  upon  his  breast, 
saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.  I  tell  you, 
this  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified  rather  than 
the  other:  for  every  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall 
be  abased  ;  and  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be 
exalted  (Luke  xviii.  10-14). 

Observe  now  how  much  more  striking  the  lesson 
sounds  when  conveyed  to  us  in  the  form  of  an  example. 
How  little  many  persons  would  have  been  affected  if 
our  Lord  had  given  a  general  discourse  about  the  evil 


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS  99 

of  pride  and  the  excellence  of  humility,  about  the  danger 
of  formality  and  the  importance  of  a  truly  penitent 
frame  of  mind,  if  he  had  merely  said,  "  Be  not  self- 
righteous  in  your  dealings  with  God,  but  be  lowly  and 
self-abased  "  ! — and  how  much  more  are  our  hard  hearts 
likely  to  be  moved  when  we  see,  as  it  were,  living 
specimens  of  two  sorts  of  worshippers,  placed  vividly 
before  our  eyes  ! 

May  God  the  Holy  Ghost  direct  the  instruction  here 
contained  to  the  awakening  of  the  self-righteous,  to 
the  comfort  of  those  who  labour  and  are  heavy-laden, 
and  to  the  edification  of  all ! 

Now,  before  entering  closely  into  the  parable,  I 
would  have  you  mark,  that  the  first  verse  tells  us 
there  was  one  point  on  which  the  Pharisee  and  the 
publican  were  agreed — one  point  which  they  had 
in  common,  and  one  only — and  this  was,  "They  both 
went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray."  They  both  set 
their  faces  the  same  way,  they  walked  in  the  same 
path,  they  entered  the  same  house,  and  so  far  we  can 
discover  no  difference  whatever  between  them,  in  their 
outward  behaviour  at  least  ;  but  we  shall  soon  find 
that  their  hearts  were  far  asunder,  and  like  the  first 
worshippers  recorded  in  the  Bible,  even  Cain  and  Abel, 
there  was  a  mighty  gulf  between  them — for  God,  we 
shall  see,  accepted  the  sacrifice  of  the  one,  but  rejected 
that  of  the  other. 

Oh,  beloved,  this  passage  suggests  very  awful  re 
flections,  and  for  our  sakes  no  doubt  it  was  written. 
Both  these  men,  it  appears,  "went  up  to  the  temple 
to  pray,"  and  yet  how  fearfully  the  narrative  ends ! 
Jesus  had  just  been  speaking  of  the  necessity  of  constant 
prayer,  in  the  parable  of  the  unjust  judge,  and  imme 
diately,  without  anything  happening  to  break  the  thread 
of  his  discourse,  he  adds  the  parable  we  are  now  con- 


100 


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS 


sidcring.  Surely,  then,  this  must  be  meant  to  remind 
us,  as  a  thing  we  are  liable  to  forget,  that,  however 
important  prayer  may  be,  we  are  not  to  suppose  all 
\vho  pray  have  a  prayerful  spirit,  and  that  outward 
service  is  often  given  where  there  is  no  real  dedication 
of  the  heart  to  God. 

Truly  it  is  cheerful  and  encouraging  to  see  a 
multitude  going  up  to  the  house  of  God,  but  still 
it  is  painful  to  remember  that  too  many  go  in  the 
spirit  of  the  Pharisee  and  far  too  few  in  that  of  the 
Publican.  They  all  use  the  same  prayers,  they  bow 
the  knee,  they  move  the  lips  together,  and  yet  they 
arc  as  widely  different  as  gold  and  base  metal.  All 
arc  not  Israel,  who  are  called  Israel  ;  all  are  not 
Christians  who  name  the  name  of  Christ  ;  all  are  not 
acceptable  worhippers  who  are  found  in  the  temples 
of  the  Most  High  ;  and  what  is  the  line  of  distinc 
tion  ?  We  learn  this  in  the  parable.  Some  .come 
as  Pharisees,  and  some  as  publicans  ;  some  appear 
with  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  such  as  the  Lord 
will  not  despise,  and  others  with  an  unhumbled  and 
self-exalting  spirit,  wise  in  their  own  eyes  and  pure 
in  their  own  sight,  and  the  sacrifice  of  all  such  is 
abominable  in  the  sight  of  God.  Oh  that  you  would 
try  to  bear  in  mind  more  constantly,  that  "the  Lord 
secth  not  as  man  seeth,  for  man  looketh  on  the  outward 
appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart "  ;  that 
to  Him  "all  hearts  arc  open,  all  desires  known,  and 
from  Him  no  secrets  are  hid"! — and  if  you  felt  this 
more,  you  would  be  more  careful  about  the  spirit  in 
which  you  draw  near  to  His  throne,  you  would  avoid 
anything  like  vain  or  trifling  conversation  both  before 
and  after  service,  and  so  observe  the  advice  of  Solomon, 
"  to  keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the  house  of  God." 

Let  us,  however,  return  to  the  parable  from  which 


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS  IOT 

I  have  been  led  to  turn  aside.  I  have  shown  you 
that  there  was  one  point  in  common  between  the 
publican  and  the  Pharisee  ;  and  I  shall  now  proceed 
to  call  your  attention  to  the  main  object  of  the  parable, 
by  tracing  out  distinctly  the  four  great  points  of 
difference  which  we  perceive  existed  between  these 
fellow-worshippers.  I  observe,  then, — 

I.  There  was  a  difference  in  their  character. 
II.  There  was  a  difference  in  their  behaviour. 

III.  There  was  a  difference  in  their  prayers. 

IV.  And,    lastly,    there    was    a    difference    in     the 
reception  their  prayers  met  with. 

I.  With  respect  to  their  characters,  the  parable, — 
or  rather  narrative,  for  it  is  probably  a  true  story, 
adapted  by  our  Lord  to  the  purpose  of  the  moment — 
begins  by  stating  that  "  One  was  a  Pharisee,  the  other 
a  publican."  Now,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  imagine 
a  more  striking  contrast,  in  the  opinion  of  a  Jewish 
congregation.  The  Pharisees  were  the  strictest  sect 
among  the  Jews  :  "  I  was  of  the  strictest  sect  of  the 
Pharisees,"  says  St.  Paul.  They  prayed  often — which 
was  very  right ;  but  they  also  made  long  prayers  for  a 
pretence,  and  they  would  pray  at  the  corners  of  the 
streets  where  two  roads  met,  that  they  might  be  seen 
by  people  going  and  coming  both  ways  and  so  get  a 
name  for  uncommon  sanctity.  There  is  no  reason  for 
supposing  they  were  generally  anything  but  moral  men, 
but  their  grand  fault  was  that  they  relied  on  their 
outward  performance  of  the  things  written  in  the  law 
as  a  ground  of  acceptance  before  God.  They  seem  to 
have  been  indifferent  as  to  the  real  state  of  their  hearts, 
and  to  have  cared  only  for  keeping  up  a  fair  appearance 
before  men,  for  they  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than 
the  praise  of  God.  We  may  get  some  idea  of  their 
real  character  from  our  Lord's  saying,  that  they  gave 


102 


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS 


tithe  of  mint,  anise,  and  cummin,  while  they  neglected 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy  and 
truth,  and  from  His  comparison  of  them  to  whitened 
sepulchres,  which  indeed  appear  beautiful  before  men, 
but  inwardly  arc  filled  with  dead  men's  bones  and  all 
corruption.  They  "  made  broad  the  borders  of  their 
phylacteries,"  they  had  pieces  of  parchment  sewed  to 
the  edge  of  their  long  robes,  on  which  some  texts  of 
Scripture  were  written,  that  people  might  see  them 
and  infer  therefrom  that  they  were  great  lovers  of 
the  law  of  God.  They  were  very  strict  about  outward 
purifications,  and  set  great  value  on  the  washing  of  pots, 
brazen  vessels  and  tables,  and  many  other  such-like 
things  that  they  did.  They  were  particularly  zealous 
for  the  traditions  of  the  fathers,  and  for  the  observation 
of  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church,  and  yet  they 
often  made  the  law  of  God  void  by  their  traditions. 
They  were  exceeding  exact  in  the  outward  observation 
of  the  Sabbath  so  much  so  that  they  called  our  Lord 
a  sinner,  and  said  he  was  not  of  God,  because  upon  the 
Sabbath  day  He  had  healed  a  man  who  was  born  blind. 
And  for  all  these  reasons  they  were  held  in  high 
esteem  by  the  people  ;  for  men  always  prefer  the  things 
of  sight  to  the  things  of  faith,  and  think  more  of 
outward  service  than  of  heart  ;  they  had  the  uppermost 
places  in  the  synagogues  and  greetings  in  the  market 
places,  and  were  called  of  men  Rabbi  ;  and,  in  short, 
they  got  such  a  reputation  for  piety,  that  it  became  a 
proverb  among  the  Jews,  that  if  there  were  but  two 
men  saved,  one  of  them  must  be  a  Pharisee. 

Such  were  the  Pharisees.  But  what  was  the  character 
given  to  the  publicans,?  It  was  very  different  in  every 
respect.  They  were  generally  Jews  who  were  employed 
to  collect  the  Roman  taxes  ;  and  as  the  Jews  always 
disliked  to  pay  tribute  to  the  Gentiles,  their  office  as 


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS  103 

collectors  was  looked  upon  as  disgraceful  and  dis 
reputable.  Besides  this  it  is  pretty  clear  that  they  used 
to  exact  much  more  than  their  due,  and  to  amass  much 
wealth  by  false  accusations,  to  the  great  disgust  of 
their  fellow-countrymen.  On  these  accounts  they  were 
so  universally  infamous,  that  our  Lord  Himself  tells 
His  disciples  that  if  any  man  would  not  hear  the 
church,  he  must  be  to  them  as  a  heathen  man  and 
a  publican.  The  enemies  of  Jesus  thought  it  a  heavy 
charge  against  Him  that  He  was  a  friend  of  publicans 
and  sinners  ;  and  in  one  place  we  find  the  publicans 
and  harlots  mentioned  together,  as  people  of  like  repu 
tation.  On  the  whole,  then,  we  may  fairly  conclude 
that  in  teaching  the  nature  of  acceptable  worship,  our 
Lord  could  not  have  chosen  two  examples  more  unlike 
each  other  than  a  Pharisee  and  a  publican.  One  is  of 
great  repute  with  his  fellow-creatures,  while  the  other 
is  peculiarly  offensive  ;  but  which  will  God  respect  ? 
We  shall  soon  see. 

II.  Let  us  in  the  second  place  consider  the  different 
behaviour  of  these  two  worshippers.  Behold  the 
Pharisee.  "  He  stood  and  prayed  thus  with  himself." 
Observe  this  :  he  went  to  some  conspicuous  part  of  the 
temple,  where  he  could  stand  alone  near  the  altar, 
separate  from  the  rest  of  men,  that  all  might  see  what 
a  devout  man  he  was,  and  not  lose  sight  of  him  in 
the  crowd.  He  stood  "  with  himself,"  not  among  the 
congregation,  lest  he  should  be  defiled  by  touching 
them  ;  he  was  too  good  for  them.  We  do  not  read  of 
anything  like  humility  here  ;  we  do  not  learn  that  he 
even  bowed  his  head,  as  a  mark  of  respect  to  his 
Creator  ;  but  there  he  stood  erect,  like  one  who  felt 
that  he  had  done  all  that  God  required  of  him,  that  he 
had  no  sin  to  repent  of,  that  he  had  a  right  to  expect 
a  blessing  as  a  profitable  servant. 


1 04  SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS 

Turn  now  to  the  publican.  "  Standing  afar  off,  he 
would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but 
smote  upon  his  breast."  He  stood  afar  off— probably 
in  the  outward  court,  as  one  who  did  not  feel  himself 
worthy  to  come  beyond  the  threshold  of  Him  whose 
name  is  Holy.  "  He  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his 
eyes  to  heaven."  He  felt  the  remembrance  of  his  sins 
so  grievous,  and  the  burden  of  them  so  intolerable,  that, 
like  a  child  who  has  offended  its  father,  he  dare  not 
look  his  Almighty  Maker  in  the  face.  "  He  smote  upon 
his  breast."  He  could  not  control  the  feelings  that  arose 
in  his  mind :  he  recollected  the  mercies  he  had  received 
and  his  own  neglect  of  them,  the  life  he  had  led  and 
the  God  he  had  despised,  and,  like  those  who  saw  Jesus 
hanging  on  the  cross,  "  he  smote  his  breast,"  in  sorrow, 
self-abasement  and  godly  fear.  Beloved,  the  posture 
of  the  body  and  the  expression  of  the  face  are  certainly 
not  always  sure  signs  of  the  state  of  a  man's  heart,  but 
you  may  rest  assured  that  a  truly  humble  and  devout 
worshipper  will  generally  be  distinguished  by  his  conduct 
in  the  house  of  God. 

He  that  is  duly  sensible  of  his  own  guilt,  and  is  ever 
coming  to  Jesus  as  his  Advocate  ;  he  that  is  acquainted 
with  the  sinfulness  of  sin  and  the  devices  of  Satan,  and 
the  value  of  the  means  of  grace  and  the  necessity  of 
using  them  if  he  would  save  his  soul, — such  a  one  will 
never  show  any  want  of  reverence,  any  levity  or  care 
lessness  of  manner,  when  he  has  entered  any  place 
where  prayer  is  wont  to  be  made  and  the  gospel 
preached,  and  Christ  Himself  is  standing  in  the  midst. 
But  if  a  person  comes  to  church  with  an  air  of  indiffer 
ence,  as  if  he  did  the  minister  a  favour  by  coming  and 
cared  not  if  he  never  came  again,  and  does  not  join  in 
the  prayers,  and  looks  as  if  he  would  be  ashamed  if 
any  one  thought  he  did,  and  does  not  listen  to  the 


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS  105 

word  of  God,  and  does  not  pay  attention  to  the  sermon  ; 
if  he  employs  himself  with  looking  at  other  people's 
dress,  or  deliberately  goes  to  sleep,  or  talks  to  his 
neighbours,  or  makes  plans  for  the  next  week — he  may 
have  his  own  reasons  for  coming  here,  but  it  is  pretty 
clear  to  me  that  he  does  not  come  in  the  way  that 
Jesus  loves,  as  a  miserable  sinner  who  sees  nothing  but 
evil  in  himself,  nor  in  the  spirit  that  Jesus  loves,  that 
is  in  the  spirit  of  the  publican. 

III.  In  the  third  place  let  us  attend  to  the  difference 
in  the  prayers  of  these  two  characters.  Hear  the 
Pharisee  :  "  God,  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other 
men  are,  extortioners,  unjust,  adulterers,  or  even  as 
this  publican.  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes 
of  all  I  possess."  Mark  these  words  :  there  is  no  expres 
sion  of  any  want  here  ;  he  seems  perfectly  self-satisfied  ; 
he  recites  complacently  what  he  is  not,  and  he  proudly 
brings  forward  what  he  is.  Remember,  beloved,  there 
is  ground  for  much  thankfulness  if  God  enables  us  to 
resist  gross  sins,  but  then  there  is  no  excuse  for  boasting  ; 
none  of  us  have  anything  which  we  did  not  receive, 
and  we  cannot  do  better  than  follow  the  example  of 
St.  Paul,  who  said,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what 
I  am."  But  the  Pharisee  had  none  of  this  spirit.  He 
was  wrong  on  every  point.  He  was  wrong  in  supposing, 
as  he  evidently  did,  that  his  own  power  and  strength  had 
kept  him  from  these  vices  ;  he  was  wrong  in  believing 
that  he  could  lay  any  claim  to  the  title  of  a  perfect 
observer  of  the  law  on  these  points.  It  is  one  thing 
to  keep  God's  commandments  in  the  letter,  and  another 
to  keep  them  in  the  spirit ;  the  one  may  think  they 
do,  like  this  Pharisee,  but  the  other  no  man  ever 
did  but  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  In  many  things  we 
offend  all,"  says  St.  James.  "Who  can  tell  how  oft 
he  offendeth?  O  cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults," 


1 06  SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS 

is  the  language  of  the  psalmist.  Lastly,  he  was  wrong 
in  supposing  that  this  literal  fulfilment  of  the  law  would 
give  him  a  title  to  justification  in  the  sight  of  God. 
Salvation  is  all  of  grace,  not  of  works,  lest  any  man 
should  boast.  "  By  the  deeds  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh 
living  be  justified." 

But  the  Pharisee,  besides  this,  was  especially  wrong 
in  going  out  of  his  way  to  make  unnecessary  and  un 
charitable  remarks  upon  the  publican.  He  talks  like 
one  who  had  no  account  to  settle  about  his  own  soul ; 
he  assumes  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the  publican 
was  more  vile  in  God's  sight  than  himself,  and  he 
proves  himself  a  child  of  the  devil  by  usurping  Satan's 
office — he  becomes  an  accuser  of  his  brethren.  "  I  am 
not  as  other  men  are,  or  even  as  this  publican."  Beloved, 
I  must  call  your  particular  attention  to  this  language, 
for  I  declare  unto  you  with  grief  that  I  have  heard 
people  say  things,  which  in  effect  are  very  much  the 
same  about  themselves,  who  yet  profess  and  call  them 
selves  Christians.  Many  say,  if  they  are  urged  about 
their  own  sinfulness  in  God's  sight,  "  Well,  at  any  rate 
I  am  no  worse  than  my  neighbours :  I  am  thankful  I 
do  not  drink,  like  such  a  one  next  door  ;  I  am  no 
fornicator,  like  such  a  one  over  the  \vay  ;  I  do  not  miss 
church  altogether,  like  such  a  one  who  lives  down  the 
road."  Listen  to  me,  I  beseech  you  :  is  not  this  the 
very  mind  of  the  Pharisee  ?  You  arc  not  to  be  judged 
by  the  standard  of  those  around  you  ;  it  will  be  no 
excuse  before  God  to  talk  about  your  neighbours — sin 
is  sin  whether  you  live  in  it  in  company  or  alone  ;  and 
be  sure  it  will  not  diminish  your  misery  in  hell,  to  find 
that  all  your  neighbours  are  there  as  well  as  yourself. 
Oh,  beloved,  beware  of  this  delusion  ;  not  a  few  allow 
such  thoughts  to  dwell  within  them,  who  never  express 
them  with  their  lips,  and  even  in  the  presence  of  God 


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS  107 

they  flatter  themselves  they  are  acceptable  to  Him, 
because  they  are  free  from  open  and  gross  vices,  and 
perform  certain  known  duties.  All  such  are  Pharisees  ; 
they  use  the  Pharisee's  prayer,  and  they  will  meet  with 
the  Pharisee's  reception  at  the  hand  of  God. 

Hearken  now  to  the  publican.  "  He  smote  upon  his 
breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  He 
does  not  say  "  Be  merciful  to  all  sinners,"  thus  leaving 
it  doubtful  whether  he  means  himself  or  not,  but  "  Be 
merciful  to  vie"  a  sinner  in  whom  there  is  no  health, 
in  whom  there  is  no  good  thing — a  sinner  in  thought, 
word  and  deed  ;  and  he  gives  the  ground  of  his  hope 
too,  not  like  some  among  you,  who  hope  to  be  forgiven 
without  exactly  knowing  how  or  why.  The  words  trans 
lated  "  be  merciful,"  go  further.  They  mean,  "  make 
a  propitiation  for  me,  offer  an  atonement  for  me,  be 
reconciled  unto  me,  through  the  sacrifice  Thou  hast 
appointed."  Do  you  think  he  would  have  been  offended, 
as  some  are  now,  if  he  had  been  called  a  child  of  the 
devil,  utterly  corrupt,  full  of  iniquity  and  worthy  of 
nothing  but  wrath  ?  Far  from  it :  he  knew  he  was  a 
sinner,  he  felt  his  lost  condition,  he  made  no  excuses, 
he  offered  no  justification,  he  did  not  talk  about  his 
temptations,  he  did  not  make  great  professions  of 
amendment,  as  if  that  could  make  up  for  the  past  ;  he 
presented  himself  at  the  throne  of  grace,  as  he  was, 
weary  and  heavy  laden,  casting  himself  on  the  long- 
suffering  of  God  with  all  his  iniquities,  and  pleading 
the  blood  of  the  atonement :  "  God  be  merciful  to  me 
a  sinner."  Blessed  indeed  are  all  among  you  who  have 
done  likewise  ! 

IV.  Lastly,  it  remains  to  consider  briefly  tJie  reception 
the  worshippers  respectively  met  with.  "  I  tell  you," 
says  Jesus,  "  this  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified 
rather  than  the  other."  The  publican  came  poor  in 


1 08  SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS 

spirit,  and  he  was  filled  ;  the  Pharisee,  rich  in  merits 
and  self-esteem,  went  empty  away.  The  penitent  was 
not  only  pardoned,  but  justified  ;  he  had  left  his  house 
heavy  and  afflicted  by  a  sense  of  sin,  he  returned  with 
joy  and  peace  ;  he  had  asked  mercy  and  received  it, 
he  had  sought  grace  and  found  it,  he  had  come  hunger 
ing  and  thirsting  after  righteousness  and  he  had  been 
satisfied:  "he  went  down  to  his  house  justified."  But 
the  proud  Pharisee,  not  feeling  his  own  wants,  not 
acquainted  with  his  own  sinfulness,  had  sought  no  mercy, 
and  had  found  none,  and  he  departed  unblessed  and 
unheard ;  and  from  the  saying  the  "  publican  went 
down  to  his  house  justified  rather  than  the  other," 
we  may  fairly  suppose  this  man  of  self-righteousness 
and  self-dependence  had  none  of  that  sense  of  favour 
and  acceptance  which  the  repenting  sinner  enjoyed. 

Sec  now  the  general  application  which  our  Lord  makes : 
"  Every  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased,  but 
he  that  abaseth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  Mark  these 
words — "  every  one  that  exalteth  himself."  High  or 
low,  rich  or  poor,  young  or  old,  it  matters  not ;  for  God 
is  no  respecter  of  persons,  "  every  one  that  exalteth  him 
self"  and  not  free  grace,  that  trusts  either  in  whole  or  in 
part  in  his  own  righteousness  and  performance  and  not 
entirely  in  Jesus  Christ — though  he  go  to  church  twice 
a  day,  though  he  keep  the  letter  of  the  Ten  Command 
ments,  though  he  pay  everything  he  owes,  though  he  be 
sober  and  moral  and  decently  behaved — every  one 
that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased  and  condemned 
when  Jesus  Christ  shall  come  to  judgment. 

But  on  the  other  hand  remember,  "  he  that  humbleth 
himself"  as  a  sinner  before  God  and  comes  unto  Christ, 
though  he  may  have  been  the  most  wicked  of  trans 
gressors,  though  he  may  have  broken  all  the  command 
ments,  though  he  may  have  been  a  Sabbath-breaker, 


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS  109 

a  drunkard,  a  thief,  an  adulterer,  an  extortioner — 
whatever  his  sin  may  have  been,  if  he  act  as  the 
publican  did,  "he  shall  be  exalted,"  he  shall  be 
pardoned,  and  washed  and  sanctified  and  justified 
for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  shall  have  his  place 
with  David  and  Manasseh  and  Mary  Magdalen  and 
the  thief  upon  the  cross  in  the  everlasting  kingdom  of 
our  God  and  of  the  Lamb. 

And  now,  beloved,  in  conclusion  let  me  urge  upon 
all  the  lesson  conveyed  in  this  parable.  It  is  a  picture 
of  a  very  large  portion  of  professing  Christians  ;  some, 
to  be  -sure,  are  called  by  that  name,  but  they  never 
think  at  all  about  Christ  or  their  own  souls — it  would 
make  no  difference  if  all  the  Bibles  in  the  \vorld  were 
burned  to-day — and  of  course  they  are  going  straight 
to  destruction  ;  but  all  others,  rich  or  poor  (there  is  no 
distinction),  are  either  Pharisees  or  publicans.  There 
is  no  half-way  house :  they  either  trust  to  themselves 
wholly,  or  in  part,  which  is  much  the  same,  or  else  they 
are  always  self-condemned  and  have  no  confidence  in 
anything  they  can  do  for  justification. 

You  cannot  search  your  heart  too  diligently,  for 
this  is  the  subtlest  enemy  of  all.  Beware  of  thinking, 
as  the  devil  would  have  you,  that  the  parable  is  a 
very  good  one  for  everybody  else,  but  does  not  exactly 
touch  your  case.  Be  sure  in  this  way  you  will  lose 
your  own  souls.  The  faithful  Church  of  England  has 
provided  you  with  an  admirable  Prayer-book,  which 
you  use,  and  using  it  call  yourselves  "  miserable  sinners  " 
every  Sunday  of  your  lives.  Do  you  really  feel  this  ? 
Know  for  a  certainty,  if  you  never  groan  under  the 
burthen  of  sin  and  never  make  the  publican's  prayer 
your  own,  you  cannot  be  saved.  And  if  you  feel  this 
minute  any  doubt  about  your  salvation,  it  were  far 
better  to  give  your  soul  the  benefit  of  it,  and  re-lay 


1 1  o  SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS 

the  foundation  of  your  faith.  But  let  none  forget  the 
point  of  the  parable  :  the  Pharisee  was  not  rejected 
because  he  was  a  moral  man,  but  because  he  was 
proud  and  self-righteous  ;  the  publican  was  not  accepted 
because  he  was  a  sinner,  but  because  he  was  eminently 
penitent.  True  repentance  is  necessary  for  all,  what 
ever  be  their  lives  and  outward  conduct :  it  is  not  your 
morality  and  your  virtues,  O  ye  Pharisees,  which  hinder 
your  salvation,  but  that  proud  feeling  of  something 
worthy  in  yourselves,  which  prevents  you  from  cling 
ing  simply  and  entirely  to  the  cross  and  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

Carry  home,  then,  I  entreat  you,  all  of  you,  that 
as  there  is  no  way  to  salvation  but  Jesus  Christ,  so 
there  is  no  character  for  entering  that  way  but  that 
of  the  publican,  and  no  prayer  so  acceptable  in  the 
sight  of  your  Redeemer  and  your  Judge  as  "  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 


IX 
THE   CHARACTER   OF  THE   TRUE   CHRISTIAN 

"My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me! 
and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither 
shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." — JOHN  x.  27,  28. 

THAT  is  a  glorious  saying,  a  perfect  and  complete 
text  ;  containing  all  I  need  to  know  for  my 
soul's  comfort,  full  of  privileges  and  mercies  for  true 
believers  and  penitent  sinners,  and  at  the  same  time 
shutting  the  door  effectually  against  self-righteous 
Pharisees  and  whitened  sepulchres  and  painted  hypo 
crites.  It » shows  us  two  things:  the  character  of  real 
Christians,  and  the  spiritual  treasures  they  possess ; 
or,  in  other  words,  what  they  are  to  their  Saviour,  and 
what  their  Saviour  is  to  them.  I  propose  this  morning 
to  consider  these  two  things  in  order,  and  I  pray  God 
you  may  all  be  led  to  examine  yourselves  by  the  light 
which  the  text  affords. 

I.  First,  then,  with  respect  to  true  Christians — their 
names,  their  marks,  their  character  :  what  does  the  text 
say  about  them  ?  "  My  sheep,"  we  read,  "  hear  my 
voice  and  follow  me."  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  likens 
them  to  sheep  ;  and  He  declares  "  they  are  mine,  and 
they  hear  me  and  follow  me."  There  is  matter  we  shall 
do  well  to  consider  in  each  of  these  expressions. 

True  Christians,  then,  are  compared  to  sheep,  and  we 
shall  find  a  great  depth  of  meaning  in  the  comparison  if 


12 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 


\ve  look  into  it.     Sheep  are  the  most  harmless,  quiet, 
inoffensive  creatures  that  God  has  made.     So  should  it 
be  with    Christians :    they  should  be  very  humble  and 
lowly-minded,  as  disciples  of  Him  who  said,  "  Learn  of 
me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."     They  should 
be  known  as  persons  of  a  very  gentle  and  loving  spirit, 
who  desire  to  do  good  to  all  around  them,  who  would 
not  injure  any  one  by  word  or  deed  ;  who  do  not  seek 
the  great  things  of  this  world,  but   are  content  to  go 
straightforward  on  the  path  of  duty  and  take  whatever 
it  shall  please  God  to  send  them.     They  ought  to  show 
forth  in  their  lives  and  outward  conversation  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  given  them  a  new  nature,  has  taken 
away  their  old  corrupt  disposition  and  planted  in  them 
godly  thoughts  and  purposes  and  desires.     When,  there 
fore,  we  see  people  biting  and  devouring  one  another, 
saying  and  doing  uncharitable    things   to   their   neigh 
bours,   fierce,   and    passionate   and    evil-tempered    and 
angry  on  the  slightest  occasion  ;  full  of  envy  and  strife 
and  bitter  speaking, — surely  we  arc  justified  in  saying, 
"  Ye  do  not  belong  to  Christ's  flock  ;   ye  have  yet  to 
be  born  again  and  made  new  creatures  ;  there  must  be 
a  mighty  change.     Profess  what  you  please,  at  present 
we  can  only  see  in  you  the  mind  of  the  old  man,  even 
Adam  the  first,  but  nothing  of  the  Second  Adam,  even 
Christ  Jesus   the    Lord  ;    we   can  discern   the  spirit  of 
the  wolf,  however  fair  your  clothing,  and  we  want  instead 
to  discover  in  you  the  spirit  of  the  lamb." 

But  again,  sheep  are  of  all  animals  the  most  useful  ; 
none  are  so  serviceable  to  man,  none  so  necessary  in 
every  way  for  his  comforts  and  conveniences  ;  and 
such  should  be  the  character  of  a  true  Christian.  We 
must  study  to  do  good  in  our  day  and  generation,  and 
lay  ourselves  out  for  the  spiritual  and  temporal  ad 
vantage  of  our  brethren.  All  can  do  much:  it  is  not 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN  113 

the  rich  alone,  and  the  great,  who  are  able  to  be  useful ; 
there  are  a  hundred  ways  of  conferring  benefits  beside 
the  form  of  giving  gold  and  silver ;  and  each  in  his 
respective  station  can  do  good  if  he  will.  Has  not 
a  poor  man  a  tongue  ?  Then  surely,  if  he  is  a  sheep 
of  Christ's  flock,  he  will  use  it  for  his  neighbours'  profit, 
when  occasion  is  afforded  ;  he  will  warn  and  entreat 
and  counsel  and  persuade  ;  he  will  reason  and  argue, 
as  a  witness  and  servant  of  God,  against  sin  and  careless 
ness  in  every  shape  ;  he  will  show  himself  an  affectionate 
lover  of  men's  souls,  who  would  fain  impart  to  others 
the  knowledge  he  has  found  valuable  to  himself.  He 
will  never  suffer  wickedness  to  pass  unnoticed  if,  by 
saying  a  quiet  word  on  the  Lord's  side,  he  may  per 
chance  restrain  it.  He  will  never  allow  anger  and  strife 
to  continue,  if  he  can  be  the  means  of  making  peace. 
And  then  has  not  a  poor  man  a  feeling  heart?  Then 
surely,  if  he  is  a  true  sheep  of  Christ's  flock,  he  will 
remember  them  that  are  in  adversity,  as  being  himself  in 
the  body ;  he  will  not  shun  the  house  of  mourning,  but 
strive  to  be  a  comforter,  bearing  in  mind  the  proverb 
"  A  word  spoken  in  season,  how  good  is  it "  ;  he  will 
weep  with  them  that  weep,  as  well  as  rejoice  with  them 
that  rejoice  ;  he  will  let  men  see  that  he  is  a  real  child 
of  his  Father  in  heaven,  who  doeth  good  to  the  just 
and  the  unjust  too,  and  is  kind  even  to  the  unthankful 
and  the  evil.  And  cannot  a  poor  man  pray  ?  Yes  !  and 
effectual  fervent  prayer  availeth  much,  and  if  he  prays 
for  the  souls  of  others,  who  knows  but  he  may  draw 
down  benefits  on  all  around  him  ?  Oh !  but  a  real 
praying  Christian,  a  man  who  is  constantly  asking  for 
the  Spirit  to  come  down  on  the  place  in  which  he  dwells 
and  convert  the  sleepers,  that  man  is  a  mighty  bene 
factor  ;  he  is  working  a  powerful  engine,  and  if  he  is 
the  cause  of  one  single  person  being  converted,  he  has 

8 


U4    CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 

done  something  that  makes  all  heaven  rejoice.  Brethren, 
let  it  be  written  on  our  minds  that  all  can  do  much,  and 
they  that  belong  to  Christ's  flock  will  strive  to  do  much. 
No  man  is  so  really  useful  in  a  parish  as  a  true  Christian, 
and  no  one  can  have  much  real  Christianity  about  him 
who  does  not  endeavour  to  do  good  either  by  his  advice 
or  by  his  example  or  by  his  prayers.  Are  we  indeed 
the  sheep  of  Christ?  Let  us  never  forget  this  point 
of  our  character. 

A  genuine  Gospel-faith  has  nothing  selfish  about  it — 
it  never  makes  a  man  think  only  of  his  own  salvation  ; 
it  stirs  him  up,  on  the  contrary,  to  anxiety  about  the 
souls  of  others.  '  I  always  suspect  that  those  who  care 
nothing  whether  their  brethren  are  saved  or  not, 
must  in  reality  be  ignorant  or  thoughtless  about  their 
own  state. 

Again.  Sheep  love  to  be  together ;  they  do  not 
like  being  alone  ;  there  are  no  animals  which  seem  to 
take  such  pleasure  in  being  in  a  flock,  and  cling  to  each 
other's  company  so  faithfully.  And  so  is  it  with  true 
Christians  :  it  is  their  delight  to  meet  each  other  and 
be  together,  if  possible.  It  is  their  continual  sorrow 
and  complaint  that  far  too  often  they  have  to  journey 
on  alone,  without  any  that  are  like-minded  to  commune 
with  about  the  things  which  their  souls  love  most ;  and 
this  is  a  very  sore  trial.  Friends  and  relations  may  be 
kind  and  affectionate,  they  may  have  everything  to 
make  this  world  enjoyable,  but  what  they  sigh  and 
crave  after  is  to  have  with  them  persons  who  can  enter 
into  their  secret  feelings,  who  understand  the  unseen 
workings  of  their  inward  man,  who  can  comprehend 
the  hidden  warfare  which  goes  on  in  their  hearts, — persons 
with  whom  they  can  take  sweet  counsel  about  their 
souls'  health  and  souls'  trials,  with  whom  they  can 
converse  freely  and  unreservedly  about  their  Lord  and 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN  115 

Master  and  their  hopes  of  forgiveness  through  His 
name.  Who,  indeed,  can  describe  the  pleasure  with 
which  the  members  of  Christ's  flock  do  meet  each  other 
face  to  face  ?  They  may  have  been  strangers  before  ; 
they  may  have  lived  apart,  and  never  been  in  company  ; 
but  it  is  wonderful  to  observe  how  soon  they  seem  to 
understand  each  other,  there  seems  a  thorough  oneness 
of  opinion,  and  taste  and  judgment,  so  that  a  man  would 
think  they  had  known  each  other  for  years  ;  they  seem, 
indeed,  to  feel  they  are  servants  of  one  and  the  same 
Master,  members  of  the  same  family,  and  have  been 
converted  by  one  and  the  same  Spirit ;  they  have  one 
Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism  ;  they  have  the  same 
trials,  the  same  fears,  the  same  doubts,  the  same  tempta 
tions,  the  same  faintings  of  heart,  the  same  dread  of 
sin,  the  same  sense  of  unworthiness,  the  same  love 
of  their  Saviour.  Oh,  but  there  is  a  mystical  union 
between  true  believers,  which  they  only  know  \vho  have 
experienced  it ;  the  world  cannot  understand  it — it  is 
all  foolishness  to  them.  "  Whatever  can  you  find,"  they 
say,  "  to  make  you  take  such  interest  in  each  other's 
society  ?  "  But  that  union  does  really  exist,  and  a  most 
blessed  thing  it  is  ;  for  it  is  like  a  little  foretaste  of 
heaven. 

Beloved,  this  loving  to  be  together  is  a  special  mark 
of  Christ's  flock, — nor  is  it  strange  if  we  consider  they 
are  walking  in  the  same  narrow  way,  and  fighting 
against  the  same  deadly  enemies,— and  never  are  they 
so  happy  as  when  they  are  in  company.  The  uncon 
verted  know  nothing  of  such  happiness  ;  they  meet 
each  other,  and  are  civil  and  polite,  and  even  kind  in 
their  way  ;  but  how  seldom  do  they  open  their  whole 
hearts,  how  much  of  jealousy  and  cold  suspicion  there 
is  about  their  very  friendships,  how  much  they  conceal 
from  their  nearest  acquaintances  !  The  sheep  of  Christ 


n6    CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 

know  nothing  of  all  this  ;  it  is  their  hearts'  desire  to  be 
together,  and  when  together  they  have  all  their  thoughts 
in  common,  there  is  no  reserve,  no  keeping  back.  No 
doubt  there  are  false  professors  in  the  world,  who 
have  a  form  of  godliness  without  the  power — tinkling 
cymbals  whose  religion  consists  only  in  talk,  all  sound 
and  no  substance  ;  but  notwithstanding  the  number  of 
these  hypocrites,  I  still  say  that  true  believers  are 
remarkable  for  their  love  of  communion  and  intercourse 
with  each  other;  they  are  ready  to  pine  away  with 
heaviness  when  separate  ;  it  is  the  very  life-breath  of 
their  nostrils  to  be  together. 

The  last  thing  I  would  remark  about  sheep  is  this  : 
they  are  of  all  animals  most  helpless,  most  ready  to 
stray,  most  likely  to  lose  themselves  and  wander  out 
of  their  pasture  ;  and  so  it  is  with  Christ's  people. 
They  are  far  too  ready  to  turn  aside  and  go  in  ways 
that  are  not  good  ;  in  vain  they  are  warned  and  advised 
to  be  watchful  and  take  heed  to  their  path  ;  they  often 
get  into  a  drowsy,  sleepy  frame,  and  fancy  there  is  no 
danger,  and  so  they  wander  down  some  bypath,  and 
are  only  wakened  by  some  merciful  chastisement  or 
heavy  fall.  They  will  have  it  they  are  strong  enough 
to  get  on  without  this  constant  vigilance,  and  so  they 
take  their  eye  off  the  Chief  Shepherd,  and  wander  on 
from  this  field  to  that,  after  their  own  desires,  until 
they  find  themselves  at  last  in  darkness  and  doubt. 
And  Christ's  sheep,  too,  like  other  sheep,  do  seldom 
return  to  the  fold  without  some  damage  and  loss,  for 
it  is  far  more  easy  to  get  out  of  the  right  way  when 
you  are  in,  than  to  get  into  it  when  you  are  out. 

There  are  some  people  who  fancy  Christians  are  perfect 
and  faultless  creatures,  but  this  is  indeed  an  opinion  far 
wide  of  the  truth.  No  doubt  they  aim  at  perfection,  but 
the  very  best  come  far  short  of  it ;  they  would  tell  you 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN  117 

that  in  many  things  they  offend  daily,  that  they  are 
continually  erring  and  straying  and  backsliding,  that 
the  most  fitting  prayer  they  could  offer  up  would  be 
this  :  "  Lord,  we  are  no  better  than  wandering  sheep. 
God  be  merciful  to  us  unworthy  sinners ! " 

And  then,  too,  like  sheep,  true  Christians  are  easily 
frightened.  It  takes  very  little  to  alarm  them  and  make 
them  fearful  about  their  own  condition  ;  they  are  jealous 
and  suspicious  of  danger  from  every  quarter,  and,  like 
creatures  who  know  their  own  weakness  and  the  number 
of  their  enemies,  they  will  often  imagine  there  is  some 
thing  to  be  feared  where  no  fear  really  is.  But  still 
this  godly  fear  is  an  eminent  sign  of  Christ's  flock — it 
proves  that  they  feel  their  own  helplessness  ;  and  when 
a  man  knows  nothing  of  it,  and  is  full  of  presumptuous 
confidence,  there  is  but  too  much  reason  to  suspect  he 
knows  little  of  Christianity  as  he  ought  to  know  it. 

Such  appear  to  be  the  reasons  why  true  believers 
are  compared  to  sheep.  They  may  not  always  be 
discerned  in  this  corrupt  and  naughty  world  ;  you  may 
often  see  no  great  difference  between  them  and  the 
unbelievers,  but  still  they  have  a  nature  of  their  own, 
and  sooner  or  later  if  you  observe  you  will  see  it.  You 
may  put  a  flock  of  sheep  and  a  flock  of  swine  together 
in  a  broad  green  meadow,  and  an  ignorant  man  might 
say  at  first  their  natures  were  the  same  ;  but  drive 
them  together  in  a  narrow  road,  with  a  puddle  at  one 
side,  and  the  mind  of  the  animal  will  soon  come  out. 
The  swine  may  have  looked  clean  in  the  meadow,  but 
as  soon  as  they  have  the  opportunity  they  will  wallow 
in  the  mud.  The  sheep  were  clean  in  the  meadow,  and 
when  they  come  to  the  dirt  they  will  keep  clean  there 
too  if  they  possibly  can.  Just  so  is  the  case  of  the 
Christian  and  the  world :  when  things  run  smoothly, 
and  there  is  no  particular  inducement  to  sin,  there 


ii8    CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 

seems  no  mighty  difference  between  them  ;  but  when 
there  comes  a  temptation,  and  self-denial  is  required, 
immediately  the  disposition  of  the  heart  comes  upper 
most—the  Christian  holds  on  his  way,  however  narrow 
it  may  be,  the  worldly-minded  turns  down  that  broad 
lane  which  leads  to  destruction,  and  the  real  character 
of  each  is  revealed. 

II.  The  second  thing  to  be  considered  in  our  text 
is  that  word  "  My."  Our  Lord  does  not  simply  call 
His  people  sheep,  but  He  says  also  "  My  sheep."  It 
is  as  though  He  would  have  us  understand  He  looks 
upon  them  as  His  property;  they  are,  as  it  were, 
stamped  and  sealed  and  marked  as  the  possession  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  and  it  is  a  blessed, 
comfortable  thought  that  even  as  men  are  careful  and 
tender  about  their  earthly  belongings,  and  will  not 
willingly  allow  them  to  be  lost  and  damaged,  so  is 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  careful  of  the  souls  that  belong 
to  Him. 

But  why  are  Christ's  people  called  Mine,  in  this 
particular  manner  ?  There  are  many  sufficient  reasons. 
We  are  "His"  by  election.  We  were  chosen  and 
given  to  Him  by  the  Father  before  the  foundations 
of  the  world  were  laid  ;  our  names  were  written  in  the 
covenant  of  salvation  before  we  were  born,  we  were 
predestined  or  fore-ordained  to  be  His  people  from 
all  eternity.  That  is  a  glorious,  a  soul-comforting 
doctrine,  however  some  abuse  it :  a  man  may  doubtless 
get  to  heaven  and  never  feel  sure  that  he  was  a  true 
sheep  of  Christ's  flock  until  he  gets  there  ;  he  may  walk 
in  much  darkness  and  uncertainty  all  his  days  ;  but  to 
all  who  really  feel  in  themselves  the  working  of  Christ's 
Spirit,  the  doctrine  that  we  are  His  by  everlasting 
election,  is  full  of  sweet,  pleasant  and  unspeakable 
consolation. 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN  119 

But  again:  Christ's  people  are  "His"  by  purchase. 
Death  and  hell  had  claims  upon  every  one  of  them, 
they  had  all  broken  the  law  and  forfeited  eternal  life, 
but  Christ  has  redeemed  them.  Christ  paid  the  heavy 
price  of  their  salvation,  even  His  own  most  precious 
blood,  and  well  may  He  call  them  "  Mine,"  for  He  has 
bought  them  off  from  captivity  and  Satan  at  the  cost 
of  His  own  life.  He  can  say  "  They  are  Mine  by  fair 
purchase  in  time  as  well  as  Mine  by  free  election  in 
eternity." 

And  lastly,  Christ's  people  are  "  His "  by  adoption. 
He  has  put  His  Spirit  in  them,  and  overturned  the  power 
of  sin  in  their  hearts  ;  He  has  given  them  a  child-like 
frame  of  mind,  so  that  they  cry  Abba  Father  ;  they  are 
become  part  of  His  family,  the  very  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  Almighty  ;  He  looks  upon  them  as  a  portion  of 
Himself,  as  members  of  His  body  and  flesh  and  bones, 
and  loves  them  and  cherishes  them  accordingly.  See 
then,  beloved,  what  great  things  that  little  word  "  My  " 
contains  :  "  My  sheep "  is  the  name  that  Jesus  gives 
to  Christians — "Mine"  by  election,  by  purchase,  by 
adoption.  Oh,  believe :  you  may  sometimes  be  cast 
down  and  faint-hearted,  but  if  you  have  any  real  interest 
in  that  blessed  title,  if  you  are  really  in  the  number  of 
Christ's  sheep,  you  have  indeed  good  reason  to  rejoice. 

III.  But  I  must  hasten  on  to  the  third  point  which 
our  text  lays  down  in  the  character  of  true  believers : 
"My  sheep,"  says  Jesus,  "hear  My  voice."  This  hearing 
of  Christ's  voice,  what  is  it?  It  cannot  be  the  mere 
hearing  of  the  ears,  for  many  do  that  who  die  in  their 
sins  ;  it  must  be  the  hearing  with  the  heart,  the  listening 
with  attention  ;  the  believing  what  is  heard,— the  acting 
manfully  on  what  is  believed.  And  where  may  Christ's 
voice  be  heard?  It  sometimes  whispers  in  a  sinner's 
conscience,  saying,  Oh,  do  not  these  abominable  things : 


120 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 


turn,  turn,  why  will  you  die?  it  sometimes  speaks 
solemnly,  in  a  visitation  of  providence,  as  a  sickness 
or  an  accident  or  an  affliction  or  a  death,  saying 
slowly  but  clearly,  "  Stop  and  think  ;  consider  your 
ways :  are  you  ready  to  die  and  be  judged  ?  "  But  it 
generally  is  to  be  heard  in  the  reading  of  Scripture 
or  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  ;  then  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  may  be  heard  plain  and  distinct.  One  day 
it  is  sharp  and  piercing :  "  Except  ye  repent  ye  shall 
all  likewise  perish  "  ;  "Ye  must  be  born  again  "  ;  "  Awake, 
thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead."  Another 
day  it  is  gentle,  winning,  entreating  :  "  Come  unto  me, 
O  weary  and  heavy-laden  one,  and  I  will  give  thee 
rest"  ;  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and 
drink  ; "  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life 
freely."  In  all  these  ways  and  manners  the  voice  of 
Jesus  may  be  heard.  And  here  comes  in  the  distinction 
between  the  converted  and  the  unconverted  :  they  that 
are  converted  hear  Christ's  voice,  but  they  that  are 
unconverted  hear  it  not.  The  true  sheep  of  Christ 
were  once  foolish  and  disobedient,  serving  divers  lusts 
and  pleasures,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  ;  but  they 
heard  their  Redeemer's  voice  at  last,  and  when  they 
heard  they  lived  ;  they  knew  not  at  first  who  called 
them,  but  they  heard  a  voice  they  could  not  disobey, 
and  now  they  can  tell  you  they  are  sure  it  was  the 
Lord's.  They  heard  His  voice,  they  listened  to  His 
invitation,  they  believed  His  promises,  they  confessed 
themselves  sinners,  and  in  Him  they  found  peace.  And 
now  without  His  voice  they  will  do  nothing  ;  His  word, 
His  saying,  His  command,  His  will  is  their  rule  of 
life, — to  be  taught  of  Him  by  His  Spirit  and  His 
Bible  is  their  hearts'  desire  and  prayer,  to  hear  about 
Him  from  His  ministers  is  the  meat  and  drink  of 
their  souls  Their  ears  are  like  a  dry  soil,  ever  thirsting 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN  121 

to  drink  in  the  water  of  life.  Sometimes  they  may 
be  tempted  to  turn  aside  to  hear  what  the  world  can 
offer,  but  they  soon  go  back  again  to  sit  at  Jesus' 
feet  and  hear  His  voice,  with  sorrow  and  shame  and 
wonder  for  their  own  backslidings.  The  world  cannot 
see  that  Christ's  voice  is  such  a  joyful  sound  ;  they 
dislike  it — it  offends  them  ;  to  be  told  they  are  sinners, 
and  must  repent  and  believe  or  perish,  is  a  stumbling- 
block.  But  Christ's  sheep  are  never  offended  ;  day 
after  day  they  listen  diligently  to  their  Shepherd's 
teaching ;  no  music  is  so  sweet  to  their  ears  as  Jesus' 
voice,  and  whether  preached  or  written  there  is  nothing 
they  love  so  much.  It  seems  as  if  it  were  spoken  for 
their  own  particular  case,  and  they  cannot,  they  dare 
not,  they  would  not  for  all  the  world  disregard  it. 

IV.  I  must  go  on  to  the  fourth  and  last  mark  of  a 
true  believer.  "  My  sheep,"  says  the  text  in  St.  John, 
"  hear  my  voice  and  follow  me."  To  follow  Christ, 
that  is  the  grand  mark  of  Christians.  No  man  shall 
ever  say  of  them,  they  profess  and  do  not  practise,  they 
say  and  do  nothing  for  their  Master's  sake  ;  they  must 
not  only  hear  their  Master's  voice,  but  follow  Him.  To 
follow  Christ  is  to  place  implicit  trust  in  Him  as  our 
Redeemer,  Saviour,  Prophet,  Priest,  King,  Leader, 
Commander  and  Shepherd,  and  to  walk  in  His  ways, 
straightforwards.  It  is  to  take  up  our  cross  and 
subscribe  our  name  among  His  people,  to  look  to  the 
Lamb  as  our  Guide  and  follow  Him  wheresoever  He 
goes.  We  are  not  to  follow  our  own  devices  and  trust 
in  ourselves  for  salvation  ;  we  are  not  to  follow  that 
vain  shadow  of  a  hope,  our  own  doings  and  perform 
ances,  but  we  are  to  fix  our  eyes  and  hearts  on  Christ ; 
on  Him  we  are  to  rest  our  faith  for  free  and  full 
forgiveness,  to  Him  we  are  to  pray  for  grace  to  help  in 
time  of  need,  after  Him  we  are  to  walk,  as  the  best, 


122 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 


the  brightest,  the  purest  example.  The  way  may  be 
narrow  and  steep,  we  must  press  forward,  not  turning 
to  the  right  hand  or  the  left  ;  the  way  may  be  dark, 
we  must  keep  on,— there  will  be  light  enough  in  heaven. 
O  that  Christians,  the  very  best  of  them,  were  not  so 
slack  in  following !  Some  stop  to  trifle  with  the 
perishable  things  of  earth  ;  some  stop  to  pick  up  the 
gaudy,  scentless  flowers  by  the  wayside  ;  some  stop  to 
sleep,  forgetting  this  is  not  our  rest,  it  is  enchanted 
ground  ;  some  stop  to  pick  holes  and  find  fault  with 
their  fellow-travellers  ;  few  even  of  Christ's  sheep  do 
hold  on  their  way  as  steadily  as  they  might.  But  still, 
compared  with  the  world,  they  are  following  Christ 
Jesus  (Oh  that  they  would  only  remember,  those  who 
follow  Him  most  fully  shall  follow  Him  most  com 
fortably  !) ;  they  are  following  Christ  Jesus,  and  they 
know  where  they  are  going ;  and  even  in  the  dark 
river,  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  they  feel 
a  confidence  that  their  Shepherd  will  be  with  them, 
and  His  rod  and  His  staff  will  comfort  them.  They 
would  all  tell  you  they  are  poor  wandering  sheep, 
less  than  the  least  of  all  God's  mercies,  ashamed  of  the 
little  fruit  they  bear  ;  but  still,  weak  as  they  are,  they  are 
determined  to  follow  on  to  the  end,  and  to  say,  "  None 
but  Christ,  in  life  and  in  death,  in  time  and  in  eternity." 
Such  is  the  character  which  the  text  gives  of  true 
Christians.  They  are  compared  to  sheep  ;  they  are 
called  Christ's  property  ;  they  hear  His  voice,  and  they 
follow  Him.  To  go  further  at  this  time  would  be 
plainly  impossible,  and  I  therefore  purpose,  if  the  Lord 
will,  to  speak  to  you  about  the  other  branch  of  the 
text — the  privileges  of  Christians — this  evening.  By 
God's  blessing  you  shall  then  hear  what  their  Saviour 
is  to  His  people.  It  only  remains  to  wind  up  what  has 
been  already  said  by  personal  application. 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN  123 

I  told  you  this  was  a  text  for  self-inquiry  ;  and  in 
that  light  I  press  upon  each  of  you  now.  I  call  upon 
thee,  O  man  or  O  woman,  to  put  thy  hand  upon  thy 
heart  and  ask  that  little  question,  "  Am  I  a  sheep  of 
Christ's  flock,  or  am  I  not  ?  Do  I  hear  His  voice  or  do 
I  not  ?  Do  I  follow  Him  or  do  I  not  ?  "  Does  not  thy 
Redeemer  and  thy  Judge  say  plainly,  "This  is  the 
character  of  my  people  ?  "  Does  He  not  give  thee  the 
most  certain  marks  by  which  to  try  thy  state  ?  and  if 
thou  canst  not  see  in  thyself  these  marks,  where  and 
what  are  thy  claims  to  eternal  life  ?  without  them  thou 
art,  for  the  present,  no  better  than  a  lost  soul.  Dost 
thou  not  know  there  are  only  to  be  two  sorts  of  characters 
before  the  judgment-seat — sheep  on  the  right  hand  in 
honour,  and  goats  on  the  left  hand  in  disgrace  ?  And 
dost  thou  not  know  it  is  just  the  same  even  now  ? 
There  are  only  two  classes  of  characters  upon  earth — 
men  who  hear  Christ  and  follow  Christ  and  are  in  a 
way  to  be  saved,  and  men  who  neither  hear  nor  follow 
Him  and  are  in  a  way  to  be  lost?  And  which  flock 
dost  thou  belong  to  ?  There  is  no  middle  state.  Examine 
thyself  and  be  wise  in  time. 

Think  not  to  put  off  this  question  by  saying,  "  I  shall 
do  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  world," — that  well  may 
be  doing  very  badly.  The  way  of  the  world,  indeed  ! 
Bring  the  world  to  the  bar,  and  try  it  by  the  text, 
"  Does  the  world  hear  Christ  ?  "  Who  will  stand  forth 
and  say  it  docs  ?  Christ's  promises  and  invitations  and 
warnings  and  threatenings  and  instructions  and  exhorta 
tions  are  all  alike  disregarded  and  despised  ;  the  world 
is  deaf  to  them  ;  they  might  never  have  been  spoken. 
"  Oh,"  says  the  world,  "  we  shall  do  very  well  without 
minding  all  that  ;  it  was  not  meant  for  us."  And  who 
was  it  meant  for,  then  ? 

But  again,  does  the  world  follow  Christ?     Who  will 


i24    CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 

stand  up  and  say  Yes  to  that  ?  No,  indeed  !  Christ's 
ways  and  Christ's  example,  holiness  and  love  and  meek 
ness  and  temperance  and  self-denial,  are  the  exceptions— 
the  rare,  scarce  things  in  the  world  ;  and  the  things  most 
frequent  are  anger,  wrath,  malice,  blasphemy,  adultery, 
fornication,  uncleanness,  lasciviousness,  hatred,  variance, 
emulations,  wrath,  strife,  seditions,  heresies,  envyings, 
drunkenness,  revellings,  wantonness,  pride,  vanity,  idle 
ness,  spiritual  sloth,  Bible-despising,  prayer-neglecting, 
church-forgetting,  worldliness,  and  the  like.  "  Oh,  never 
mind,"  says  the  world  ;  "  we  shall  do  very  well  without 
being  so  strict."  Very  well  in  the  devil's  opinion,  who 
would  love  to  ruin  every  living  soul,  but  not  very  well 
in  God's.  No ;  indeed  the  world  will  neither  follow 
Christ  nor  hear  Christ,  anything  else  sooner — and  yet 
remember  it  is  the  character  of  those  who  are  to  have 
eternal  life  that  they  hear  Christ's  voice  and  follow 
Him.  Sinner,  remember,  to-day  I  have  told  you. 

And  think  not,  O  man,  to  put  me  off  by  saying,  "  At 
this  rate  very  few  will  be  saved."  Thou  sayest  very 
truly,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  foretold  it  ; 
but  let  me  tell  thee  a  secret :  Why  is  it  so  few  are  likely 
to  be  saved  ?  God  would  have  all  men  brought  unto 
the  knowledge  of  the  truth  :  why  do  so  many,  so  very 
many,  come  short  and  take  the  broad  way  ?  Simply 
because  they  will  not  believe  what  God  has  told  them 
in  His  word  ;  simply  because  they  will  have  it  God 
will  not  stand  to  what  He  has  written  in  His  Bible  ; 
they  will  fancy  heaven  is  to  be  entered  without  being 
Christ's  sheep — will  have  their  own  way  and  not  God's. 

Remember,  then,  this  day,  I  tell  thee,  that  God  is 
willing  to  receive  thee  if  thou  wilt  only  turn  to  Him  : 
if  thou  wilt  only  resolve  to  think  for  thyself  and  never 
mind  the  world,  if  thou  wilt  only  hear  the  voice  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  follow  Him,  if  thou  wilt 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN   125 

only  be  in  earnest  and  come  unto  Him  for  forgiveness 
and  His  Holy  Spirit,  He  shall  grant  thee  thy  heart's 
desire,  and  thou  shalt  never  perish  but  have  eternal 
life.  But  whether  thou  wilt  hear  or  whether  thou  wilt 
forbear,  Christ  and  Christ  only  is  the  way,  the  truth, 
and  the  life,  and  whatever  the  world  may  tell  thee,  no 
man  shall  ever  come  unto  the  Father  but  by  Him. 


X 

THE    PRIVILEGES   OF  THE   TRUE   CHRISTIAN 

"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me  : 
and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither 
shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." — JOHN  x.  27,  28. 

ABOUT  the  first  part  of  this  text,  beloved,  I  spoke 
to  you  this  morning.  I  told  you  then  that  this 
passage  contains  two  things — first  the  character  of  true 
Christians,  and  secondly  their  privileges — first  what 
they  are  to  their  Saviour,  and  secondly  what  their 
Saviour  is  to  them. 

Let  me,  then,  remind  you  what  the  text  says  of 
their  character.  We  found  on  examination  that  God's 
children,  His  real  believing  people,  are  compared  to 
sheep,  because  they  are  gentle,  quiet,  harmless  and 
inoffensive  ;  because  they  are  useful  and  do  good  to 
all  around  them  ;  because  they  love  to  be  together, 
and  dislike  separation  ;  and  lastly  because  they  are  very 
helpless  and  wandering  and  liable  to  stray. 

We  next  found  that  Jesus  calls  them  "  My  sheep," 
as  if  they  were  His  peculiar  property  ;  "Mine,"  He  would 
have  us  know,  by  election,  "Mine"  by  purchase,  and 
"  Mine  "  by  adoption.  We  found  in  the  third  place  that 
Christ's  sheep  hear  His  voice,  they  listen  humbly  to  His 
teaching,  they  take  His  word  for  their  rule  and  guide. 
Lastly  we  found  that  they  follow  Him,  they  walk 
in  the  narrow  path  He  has  marked  out,  they  do  not 
126 


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN    127 

refuse  because  it  is  sometimes  steep  and  narrow,  but 
wherever  the  line  of  duty  lies  they  go  forward  without 
doubting. 

It  only  remains  for  us  now  to  consider  the  other  part 
of  my  text,  which  respects  the  blessing's  and  privileges 
which  Jesus  the  Good  Shepherd  bestows  upon  His 
people.  The  Lord  grant  that  none  of  you  may  take 
to  yourselves  promises  which  do  not  belong  to  you, 
— that  none  may  take  liberty  from  God's  exceeding 
mercy  to  continue  sleeping  in  sin.  Glorious  and  com 
fortable  things  are  written  in  this  passage,  but  remember 
they  are  given  to  Christ's  flock  only  ;  I  fence  it  out 
against  all  that  are  unbelieving  and  impenitent  and 
profane.  I  warn  you  plainly,  except  you  will  hear  the 
voice  of  Christ  and  follow  Him,  you  have  no  right  or 
portion  in  this  blessed  fountain  of  consolations. 

Hear  now  what  Jesus  says  of  His  believing  people  : 
"  I  know  them.  ...  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  they 
shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them 
out  of  my  hand." 

Before  we  look  into  the  meaning  of  these  words  more 
closely,  I  wish  to  answer  two  questions  which  may  arise 
in  the  minds  of  some  before  me.  Of  whom  is  the 
Lord  Jesus  speaking?  Are  we  to  suppose  He  only  has 
in  view  patriarchs  and  prophets  and  apostles — men 
like  Abraham  and  David  and  Job  and  Daniel,  men  who 
through  faith  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness, 
stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the  violence  of 
fire,  worked  signs  and  miracles,  and  shed  their  blood 
for  the  kingdom  of  God's  sake  ?  Are  these  the  sort  of 
persons  who  alone  can  take  comfort  from  those  blessed 
words — "  I  know  them  ....  they  shall  never  perish  ?  " 
Is  every  one  else  to  go  on  doubting  to  his  life's  end  ? 
God  forbid  that  I  should  tell  you  so  !  it  were  doing 
Satan's  work  to  preach  such  doctrine.  This  text  may 


i28    PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 

become  the  property  of  the  worst  of  sinners,  if  he  only 
will :  scribes  and  Pharisees,  Sadducees  and  Herodians, 
publicans  and  harlots,  drunkards  and  fornicators, 
murderers,  thieves  and  adulterers,  liars  and  blasphemers, 
worldly-minded  and  covetous  ones,— all  and  each  of 
them  may  lay  firm  hold  on  this  text,  and  inherit  its 
precious  treasures,  if  they  will  only  hear  Christ's  voice 
and  follow  Him.  It  is  for  all  who  repent  and  believe 
the  Gospel  ;  it  is  for  all  who  mourn  over  their  past 
sins  with  a  true  godly  sorrow,  and  flee  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  with  faith  and  prayer  as  their  only  hope, 
their  all-sufficient  Saviour,  their  all  in  all ;  there  is  not 
one  single  man  or  woman  of  whom  it  shall  not  be 
written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life,  "  This  is  one  known 
of  God,  this  is  an  heir  of  eternal  life,  this  is  a  man  or 
a  woman  that  is  never  to  perish,  never  to  be  plucked 
out  of  the  Lord's  hand,"  if  you  will  only  give  up 
your  sins  and  take  Christ  Jesus  for  your  Shepherd  and 
Redeemer.  Your  repentance  may  seem  very  faint,  your 
faith  may  appear  weak  as  water,  but  if  there  be  so 
much  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  if  there  be  enough 
to  lead  you  a  penitent  to  the  foot  of  the  cross,  you  shall 
find  yourself  one  day  numbered  with  the  saints  in 
glory  everlasting. 

The  other  question  I  wish  to  answer  is  this :  why 
did  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  give  us  this  full  and  complete 
promise  ?  Because  He  knew  that  true  Christians  would 
always  be  a  very  doubting,  fearful,  faint-hearted  genera 
tion,  always  ready  to  believe  they  shall  not  be  saved, 
always  afraid  they  shall  never  see  the  New  Jerusalem, 
because  of  the  inbred  corruption  which  they  find  con 
tinually  in  their  hearts.  He  saw  they  would  require  the 
strong  wine  of  assurance  like  this,  and  so  He  has  pro 
vided  this  and  like  texts,  as  a  reviving  cordial  to  cheer 
and  enliven  their  hearts,  whenever  they  feel  desponding 


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN    129 

and  feeble-minded  and  ready  to  halt,  in  their  pilgrimage 
through  this  weary  world. 

We  will  now  look  narrowly  into  the  parts  of  this 
promise.  First,  says  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  of  His 
sheep  who  hear  His  voice  and  follow  Him — "  I  know 
them."  I  know  their  number,  their  names,  their  parti 
cular  characters,  their  besetting  sins,  their  troubles,  their 
trials,  their  temptations,  their  doubts,  their  prayers, 
their  private  meditations  ;  I  know  everything  about 
every  one  of  them.  Think  what  a  comfortable  saying 
that  is  !  The  world  knows  nothing  about  Christ's  sheep  ; 
to  be  sure,  the  world  remarks  there  are  a  few  people, 
here  one  and  there  one,  who  live  differently  to  others, 
who  seem  to  be  more  serious  in  their  deportment,  who 
appear  to  be  taken  up  with  some  important  considera 
tion  or  other  ;  but  the  world  only  wonders  they  can  be 
so  particular  about  little  sins,  and  when  their  ways  run 
counter  to  the  world,  the  world  is  vastly  offended.  But 
as  for  their  fear  of  sin,  and  their  carefulness  about  souls, 
the  world  neither  knows  nor  understands  what  they  are 
about ;  the  secret  springs  of  their  conduct  are  all  hidden. 

Again,  a  Christian's  friends  do  often  know  him  not. 
They  may  possibly  respect  him  and  allow  him  to  hold 
on  his  way  unopposed — though  this,  alas  !  is  not  always 
the  case — but  as  for  his  pleasures  and  his  pains,  his 
constant  warfare  with  the  flesh,  the  world  and  the  devil, 
his  dread  of  falling  into  temptation,  his  delight  in  all 
means  of  grace,  they  can  neither  explain  nor  compre 
hend  it  ;  there  is  a  something  hidden  in  his  character 
of  which  they  know  nothing. 

Be  ye  comforted,  all  you  who  are  tried  and  buffeted 
with  difficulties  in  your  way  towards  heaven,  diffi 
culties  from  without  and  difficulties  from  within, 
difficulties  abroad  and  difficulties  at  home,  grief  for 
your  own  sins  and  grief  for  the  sins  of  others : 

9 


1 30   PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 

the  Good  Shepherd  Jesus  knows  you  well,  though  you 
may  not  think  it.  You  never  shed  a  secret  tear  over 
your  own  corruption,  you  never  breathed  a  single  prayer 
for  forgiveness  and  helping  grace,  you  never  made  a 
single  struggle  against  wickedness,  which  He  did  not 
remark  and  note  down  in  the  book  of  His  remembrance. 
You  need  not  fear  His  not  understanding  your  wants, 
you  need  not  be  afraid  your  prayers  are  too  poor  and 
unlearned  to  be  attended  to  ;  He  knows  your  particular 
necessities  far  better  than  you  do  yourselves,  and  your 
humble  supplications  are  no  sooner  offered  up  than 
heard.  You  may  sometimes  sigh  and  mourn  for  want 
of  Christian  brethren,  you  may  sometimes  lament  that 
you  have  not  more  around  you  with  whom  you  might 
take  sweet  converse  about  salvation ;  but  remember 
there  is  a  Good  Shepherd,  who  is  ever  about  your  path 
and  about  your  bed,  His  eyes  are  on  all  your  move 
ments,  and  no  husband,  brother,  father,  mother,  sister, 
friend,  could  take  more  tender  interest  in  your  soul's 
welfare  than  He  does.  If  you  transgress  He  will  grieve, 
but  He  will  chasten  and  bring  you  back  ;  if  you  bear 
good  fruit,  He  will  rejoice  and  give  more  grace  ;  if  you 
sorrow  He  will  bind  up  your  broken  heart  and  pour  in 
balm  ;  He  is  ever  watching  and  observing  and  listening  ; 
none  so  humble  and  lowly  but  He  is  acquainted  with 
all  their  ways. 

And  does  not  Jesus  know  the  men  of  this  world, 
the  faithless  and  ungodly?  Unquestionably  He  does. 
He  knows  their  proceedings  ;  there  is  not  a  single  sin 
they  have  committed  but  will  appear  written  down 
in  full  in  the  great  book  ;  but  He  only  knows  them 
as  His  enemies— as  careless,  thoughtless  ones,  who 
will  not  take  the  trouble  to  hear  His  voice  and  follow 
Him— and  in  the  last  day,  when  all  shall  stand  before 
Him,  He  will  say,  "  I  know  you  not :  you  would  not 


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN    131 

seek  to  know  me  on  earth,  and  I  know  nothing  of 
you  in  heaven  ;  depart,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire, 
prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  No  doubt  there 
will  be  many  a  Balaam  there,  many  a  barren  fig-tree, 
many  a  foolish  virgin,  many  a  fruitless  vine,  many  a 
loud-talking  hypocrite,  who  will  say,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open 
to  us :  have  we  not  taught  in  Thy  name,  and  in  Thy 
name  quoted  many  texts,  and  in  Thy  name  made  a 
great  profession  ?  "  but  still  the  answer  will  be,  "  I  never 
knew  you  .  .  .  depart  from  Me,  ye  that  work  iniquity." 

Oh,  what  a  blessed  and  comfortable  thing  to  be 
known  of  Christ,  known  and  marked  as  His  friends, 
His  relations,  His  dear  children,  His  beloved  family, 
His  purchased  possession  !  Here  we  are  often  cast 
down,  often  discouraged,  often  persecuted,  often  spoken 
against,  often  misunderstood, — but  let  us  take  courage, 
our  Lord  and  Master  knows  all.  A  day  shall  come 
when  we  shall  no  longer  see  through  a  glass  darkly, 
but  face  to  face — a  day  when  we  shall  know  even 
as  we  are  now  known  ;  for  the  union  between  us  and 
our  Redeemer,  which  we  so  often  feel  disposed  to 
doubt,  shall  then  be  clearly  seen,  and  we  shall  no 
more  go  out  to  battle. 

II.  What  is  the  next  part  of  my  text?  The  Lord 
Jesus  says  of  His  sheep,  "  I  give  unto  them  eternal 
life."  What  is  the  portion  which  Jesus  gives  His 
people  ?  "  ETERNAL  LIFE  " — a  perfect,  never-ending 
happiness  for  that  which  is  the  most  important  part  of  a 
man,  his  immortal  soul.  They  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the 
second  death,  which  alone  is  to  be  really  feared.  What 
greater  things  could  our  Lord  bestow  upon  His  people  ? 
Health  and  riches  and  honour  and  pleasures,  houses  and 
lands,  and  wives  and  children,  what  are  they  ?  how 
long  do  they  last  ? — it  is  but  threescore  years  and  ten, 
and  we  must  leave  them  all,  and  six  paces  of  the 


1 32    PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 

vilest  earth  is  room  enough  for  us.  Naked  came  we 
into  the  world,  and  naked  must  we  return  unto  the 
dust,  and  carry  nothing  with  us.  Where  is  the  differ 
ence  between  the  rich  and  the  poor  in  death?  They 
both  go  unto  one  and  the  same  place ;  the  worm 
feeds  sweetly  on  them  both  ;  it  is  but  a  short  time, 
and  you  would  not  be  able  to  distinguish  between 
their  bones.  But  if  the  poor  man  sleeps  in  Jesus, 
while  the  rich  man  dies  in  his  sins,  oh,  what  a  mighty 
gulf  then  is  between  them  !  The  rich  will  take  up  his 
abode  in  that  fire  which  is  never  quenched  ;  the  poor 
will  awake  to  find  he  has  an  everlasting  treasure  in 
heaven,  even  eternal  life.  Eternal  life !  compared  to 
which  this  world's  concerns,  weighty  and  important  as 
they  seem,  are  like  a  drop  of  water.  Wonderful  indeed 
that  men  should  disquiet  themselves  about  the  things 
of  earth,  and  sweat  and  toil  after  a  little  more  gold 
and  silver,  and  spend  their  strength  upon  these  frail, 
sickly  bodies  of  ours,  to  get  enjoyment  for  them,  and 
yet  remain  careless  and  dead  and  frozen  about  the 
life  of  that  precious  talent  the  soul  ! 

But  about  eternal  life  ?  "  I,"  says  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  "  do  give  it  to  my  people."  Who  says  this  ? 
He  says  it  who  bought  and  paid  the  full  price;  He 
who  has  in  His  hands  the  keys  of  death  and  hell ;  He 
who  opens  and  no  man  shuts,  He  who  shuts  and  no 
man  opens ;  He  says  it  who  is  the  Amen,  the  faithful 
and  true  Witness,  who  is  not  a  man  that  He  should 
lie,  who  never  breaks  His  promise ;  He  says  it  who 
has  a  right  to  say  it,  for  He  came  down  to  do  His 
Father's  will  and  die  in  our  stead  to  obtain  redemption 
for  us,  and  when  He  declares  "  I  give  eternal  life,"  death 
and  hell  must  be  silent,  none  can  gainsay  Him. 

"  I  give,"  He  declares,  "  eternal  life."  He  does  not 
speak  after  the  fashion  of  the  world  ;  this  world  is  cold, 


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN    133 

and  calculating  and  heartless;  there'js  little  giving,— it  is 
all  bargaining  and  selling  and  paying  what  is  the  value 
of  things.  Blessed  be  God,  the  Lord  Jesus  does  not 
deal  with  sinners  as  they  deal  with  each  other.  He 
gives  eternal  life  freely,  and  of  grace,  and  for  nothing, 
without  money  and  without  price  ;  He  does  not  give 
it  because  we  are  worthy  or  deserving,  nor  yet  because 
we  shall  show  ourselves  worthy  and  deserving ;  but 
He  gives  it  as  a  free  gift,  because  He  loves  us  and 
has  set  His  affection  upon  us. 

Consider  with  yourselves  how  glorious  that  doctrine 
is  ;  how  thoroughly  it  takes  away  all  excuse  from  the 
impenitent :  pardon  and  forgiveness  are  here  uncon 
ditionally  bestowed  ;  we  are  not  told  that  we  must  pay 
off  so  much  every  day,  and  then  shall  be  saved — that 
would  drive  us  to  doubt  and  despair — but  if  a  man  will 
only  hear  Christ's  voice  and  follow  Him,  "  Behold  "  says 
Jesus,  "  I  give  unto  him  eternal  life,  there  remaineth 
no  condemnation  for  him." 

III.  The  third  promise  in  my  text  is  as  follows  : 
Jesus  says  of  His  sheep,  "  They  shall  never  perish," 
—they  shall  never  be  finally  cast  away,  if  they  have 
once  been  sealed  and  numbered  in  my  flock.  They 
may  have  many  a  slip  and  many  a  fall,  they  may 
experience  many  a  shortcoming  and  many  a  back 
sliding,  but  they  shall  never  be  lost  eternally,  they 
shall  be  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto 
salvation.  Where  are  those  fearful  Christians,  who  will 
have  it  they  may  be  Christ's  sheep  and  yet  come  short 
at  last  ?  behold  the  assurance  of  Him  who  cannot  lie, — 
"  they  shall  never  perish." 

Yes  ;  true  Christians  shall  never  perish !  Is  not 
that  great  work  begun  within  their  hearts  by  the 
Holy  Ghost?  has  not  the  power  of  God  Himself  been 
employed  in  converting  them  from  darkness  to  light? 


'34 


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 


and  shall  we  dare  say  that  God  will  take  in  hand  the 
smallest  thing,  and  yet  leave  it  unfinished  and  not 
bring  it  to  perfection  ?  Have  they  not  been  born  again 
of  incorruptible  seed,  and  shall  this  seed  be  choked 
and  bear  no  fruit?  Have  they  not  been  made  by 
grace  new  creatures,  and  is  it  possible  that  grace  can 
have  raised  them  to  newness  of  life  in  vain  ?  Where 
in  the  whole  world  can  you  find  a  work  which  the  Lord 
has  attempted,  and  yet  been  obliged  to  give  up  and 
leave  all  incomplete  ?  Then  far  be  it  from  us  to  suppose 
that  a  true  believer  can  ever  be  cast  away  !  If  man  had 
any  share  in  his  conversion  one  might  reasonably  doubt  ; 
but  it  is  not  so,  it  is  the  work  of  God,  and  what  He 
does  shall  always  be  brought  to  perfection.  The 
building  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  founded  shall 
never  be  suffered  to  decay,  it  shall  never  be  left  half 
finished,  and  the  top  stone  shall  certainly  be  one  day 
laid  on  with  shouting. 

True  Christians  shall  never  perish.  Are  they  not 
Christ's  special  property,  the  servants  of  His  house,  the 
members  of  His  family,  the  children  of  His  adoption  ? 
Then  surely  He  will  never  let  them  be  overthrown,  He 
will  watch  them  as  tenderly  as  we  watch  over  our 
own  flesh  and  blood,  He  will  guard  them  as  we  guard 
our  valuable  and  precious  possessions,  He  will  cherish 
them  as  we  cherish  that  which  is  most  dear  to  our 
hearts ;  He  never  would  have  laid  down  His  life  for 
their  sakes  if  He  had  intended  to  give  them  up. 

"  Never  perish " !  Kings  of  the  earth  and  mighty 
men  shall  depart  and  be  no  more  seen  ;  thrones  and 
dominions  and  principalities,  rich  men  and  honourable 
men  shall  be  swept  into  the  tomb,  but  the  humblest 
Christian  cottager  shall  never  see  death  everlasting, 
and  when  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  as  a  scroll,  and 
earth  with  all  its  fair  clothing  shall  be  burned  up,  that 


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN   135 

man  shall  be  found  to  have  a  house  not  made  with 
hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  That  man  may  be  poor 
in  this  world  and  lightly  esteemed,  but  I  see  in  him 
one  who  shall  be  a  glorious  saint,  when  those  who 
perchance  had  more  of  this  life's  good  things  shall  be 
in  torment  ;  I  am  confident  that  nothing  shall  ever 
separate  him  from  the  love  of  Christ.  He  may  have  his 
doubts,  but  I  know  he  is  provided  for,  he  shall  never 
be  lost. 

IV.  There  remains  one  thing  more.  Jesus  adds, 
"  Neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." 
There  is  assurance  upon  assurance,  that  none  may  have 
an  excuse  for  doubting.  There  is  always  something 
plucking  at  Christ's  sheep  :  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust 
of  the  eyes,  the  pride  of  life,  the  devil,  and  the  world 
are  ever  striving  hard  to  destroy  them  ;  but  they  shall 
not  succeed.  Think  you  the  devil  will  give  up  his 
kingdom  without  a  mighty  struggle?  Oh  no,  he  goes 
about  as  a  roaring  lion  seeking  whom  he  may  devour ; 
he  wars  a  constant  warfare  with  all  who  keep  the 
commandments  of  God  and  have  the  testimony  of 
Jesus  Christ,  but  the  word  of  God  is  pledged  that  he 
shall  never  prevail.  Not  all  the  powers  of  darkness 
shall  avail  to  quench  one  single  spark  of  real  gospel 
faith. 

And  now,  beloved,  in  conclusion,  let  me  speak  a  word 
of  exhortation  to  all  among  you  who  hear  Christ's  voice 
and  follow  Him.  O  that  the  Spirit  may  come  down 
among  you,  and  add  to  your  number  a  hundredfold  ! 
Are  ye  indeed  Christ's  sheep?  Can  you  feel  within 
yourselves  the  working  of  His  blessed  Spirit,  mortifying 
the  works  of  the  flesh  and  drawing  up  your  minds 
to  heavenly  things  ?  have  you  the  witness  in  yourselves 
that  you  have  gone  through  a  real  spiritual  change,  that 
you  hate  the  sins  which  once  you  loved,  and  love  the 


,36   PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  (CHRISTIAN 

things  which  once  you  despised  ?  have  you  good  reason 
to  believe  that  you  have  indeed  put  off  the  old  man 
with  his  deeds,  and  put  on  the  new  man  with  the  lamb 
like  nature  of  your  blessed  Master?  Then,  oh,  rejoice 
with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  ;  pray  that  you 
may  not  stand  still,  but  go  on  from  grace  to  grace  and 
strength  to  strength  ;  pray  that  you  may  bear  much 
spiritual  fruit,  for  thus  is  your  Father  glorified,  and  then 
will  you  make  your  own  calling  and  election  sure 
to  yourselves. 

Are  ye  indeed  Christ's  sheep  ?  Then  beware  of  ever 
trusting  to  yourselves ;  nothing  offends  the  Good 
Shepherd  more  than  to  see  the  members  of  His  flock, 
forgetting  that  in  Him  alone  is  all  their  safety,  and 
glorying  in  their  own  attainments  and  performances. 
Think  not  of  your  weak  endeavours ;  think  not  to  say, 
"  I  do  very  little,  and  therefore  have  very  little  hope, — 
by-and-by  I  trust  I  shall  do  much,  and  then  I  shall 
have  much  hope  "  ;  your  best  performances  and  attempts 
towards  heaven  are  in  themselves  but  broken  reeds, 
and  can  bear  no  weight ;  they  are  precious  as  evidences 
of  spiritual  life,  but  they  cannot  justify.  Think  only  of 
your  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  trust  Him  entirely,  love  Him 
affectionately,  look  to  Him  continually  :  as  long  as  you 
lean  on  Him  you  are  strong  and  none  can  touch  you, 
without  Him  and  in  your  own  might  you  are  weak  and 
unstable  as  water. 

Are  ye  indeed  Christ's  sheep  ?  TJien  beware  of 
wandering  from  the  pasture  He  has  provided.  The 
devil  and  the  old  Adam  would  often  persuade  you  there 
is  no  need  for  this  diligence  in  using  means  of  grace  : 
"  Surely,"  they  will  say,  "  you  are  not  such  a  babe  but 
you  can  leave  these  fields  for  a  short  season  ;  surely 
you  need  not  keep  so  closely  in  your  Shepherd's  sight." 
Christian,  take  heed  and  beware  of  the  charmer,  charm 


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN    137 

he  never  so  wisely :  diligent  private  prayer,  diligent 
Scripture  searching,  diligent  gospel  hearing, — these  are 
the  pastures  in  which  Jesus  feeds  His  flock,  and  if  you 
turn  aside,  if  you  become  slack  in  using  them,  be  sure 
your  soul  will  soon  starve  for  want  of  its  accustomed 
nourishment,  and  you  will  return  to  the  fold  weak  and 
lame  and  lean  and  diseased. 

Once  more,  and  I  have  done.  Are  ye  indeed  Christ's 
sheep  ?  then  be  sure  you  will  have  many  a  trial ;  where 
indeed  would  be  the  value  of  a  Saviour,  if  there  were 
not  enemies  to  be  saved  from  ?  Yes  !  you  will  have 
many  a  trial  ;  Satan  has  great  wrath  with  all  who 
have  escaped  his  snares,  and  he  will  bring  every  engine 
to  bear  against  your  peace  ;  he  will  start  many  a  doubt 
within  your  mind,  he  will  stir  up  many  a  vile  and 
blasphemous  imagination  within  the  chambers  of  your 
heart,  many  a  horrid  thought  you  once  would  have  be 
lieved  impossible  ;  but  still  remember  those  words,  "never 
perish."  Yes !  you  will  have  many  a  trial  :  when  did 
the  world  ever  patronise  and  encourage  a  true  Christian  ? 
Oh  no,  the  world  will  mock  and  despise,  and  laugh  and 
frighten,  and  misrepresent  you,  and  spread  false  reports, 
and  throw  traps  in  your  way,  and  if  it  dares  it  will 
persecute  you  ;  and  then  there  is  the  flesh,  sleepy  and 
drowsy  and  fond  of  excuses,  always  trying  to  make 
you  believe  you  have  more  difficulties  than  anybody 
else,  deceitful,  treacherous,  needing  constant  watchful 
ness  ;  but  still  the  world  and  the  flesh  can  never  turn 
you  back,  except  you  are  a  graceless  traitor  ;  remember 
those  blessed  words  "  never  perish."  Christian,  you 
may  be  perplexed,  but  you  never  need  despair  ;  you  may 
be  persecuted  but  you  are  not  forsaken,  cast  down  but 
not  destroyed ;  you  may  have  tribulation,  but  you  shall 
not  have  condemnation  ;  you  shall  be  saved  from  your 
enemies  and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  you.  Fear 


1 33   PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  TRUE  CHRISTIAN 

none  of  these  things  which  ye  shall  suffer  ;  be  faithful 
unto  death,  and  your  Good  Shepherd  shall  give  you  a 
crown  of  life.  Verily  He  is  gone  before  to  prepare 
a  place  for  those  whom  He  knows,  and  where  He  is  in 
glory  there  they  shall  be  also. 

"  For  I  am  persuaded,"  says  Paul,  "  that  neither  death 
nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor 
things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor 
depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate 
us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord." 


XI 

THE    GRACE   OF  GOD  IN   VAIN 

"We  then,  as  workers  together  with  him,  beseech  you  also  that  ye 
receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain." — 2  COR.  vi.  I. 

A  LTHOUGH  the  Church  of  Corinth,  to  which  these 
£\.  words  were  written,  was  certainly  not  a  body 
without  spot  and  blemish  ;  although  we  learn  by  Paul's 
first  Epistle  that  in  many  things  its  members  were 
to  be  blamed  ;  still,  with  all  its  faults,  it  is  plain  this 
Church  was  very  different  from  the  churches  of  our 
own  day  ;  there  was  less  profession  without  practice, 
more  fruit  in  proportion  to  the  branches,  a  stronger 
leaven  of  faith  and  holiness  and  love,  a  more  abundant 
crop  of  wheat  in  proportion  to  the  tares.  And  yet 
you  see  by  the  text  how  solemnly  the  apostle  warns 
them  of  danger,  how  earnestly  he  entreats  them  not 
to  hear  the  gospel  only  to  their  condemnation ;  he 
would  not  have  them  rest  upon  their  outward  privileges 
and  opportunities,  he  would  not  have  them  soothe  their 
consciences  with  the  idea  that  all  was  safe  because  they 
were  baptised  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  but  as  a  faithful 
labourer  in  God's  vineyard  he  calls  on  them  to  examine 
themselves,  and  beware  lest  they  receive  the  grace  of 
God  in  vain.  And  are  we  better  than  they  ?  Can  we 
produce  a  greater  list  of  evidences  that  God  is  in  us 
of  a  truth  ?  I  speak  as  unto  wise  men,  judge  ye  what 
I  say.  Verily,  beloved,  we  are  guilty  in  this  matter. 

"139 


i4o       THE  GRACE   OF   GOD   IN  VAIN 

Let  us  rather  confess  that  we  have  nothing  whereof 
to  glory,  and  as  a  shortcoming  generation  let  us  humbly 
consider  what  this  text  contains  for  our  particular 
instruction.  It  is  an  easy  matter  to  say,  "  one  minister 
is  too  sharp,  we  do  not  like  him,  and  another  is  too 
high,  we  cannot  understand  him,  and  another  makes 
the  way  so  narrow  that  no  one  can  be  saved,  and 
another  is  so  dull  that  we  do  not  care  to  hear  him  "  ; 
but  consider,  O  ye  men  and  women  who  are  so 
difficult  to  please,  consider,  O  ye  who  are  so  backward 
to  search  the  Scriptures  for  yourselves,  ye  have  a  great 
work  to  do,  the  time  is  short,  the  fashion  of  this  world 
passeth  away,  and  tremble  lest  ye  go  on  doubting 
and  trifling  and  fault-finding  till  the  end,  and  so  be 
found  among  that  wretched  company  who  have  received 
the  grace  of  God  in  vain. 

Now,  there  are  three  points  to  be  considered  in  our  text. 
I.  What  you  are  to  understand  by  the  grace  of  God. 
II.  What  it  is  to  receive  it  in  vain. 

III.  The  reasons  why  we  beseech  you  so  earnestly 
not  to  receive  it  in  vain. 

I.  First,  then,  what  is  this  grace  of  God,  which  the 
apostle  here  speaks  of?  It  is  an  expression  which  has 
different  meanings  in  Scripture  ;  sometimes  it  signifies 
the  free  favour  of  God,  as  when  we  read,  "  By  grace  arc 
ye  saved,  not  of  works"  ;  sometimes  it  means  the  opera 
tion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  a  man's  conversion,  as  when 
St.  Paul  tells  the  Galatians,  it  was  "God  who  called 
me  by  His  grace"  ;  but  in  our  text  I  conceive  it  has 
a  wider,  broader  signification.  I  take  it  to  mean  that 
gracious  offer  of  free  salvation  for  the  worst  of  sinners 
which  is  commonly  called  the  gospel,  and  so  called 
because  it  is  in  every  way  good  tidings,  that  free  gift 
of  righteousness,  peace  and  pardon,  which  is  provided 
fur  all  who  will  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  Now,  what 


THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN       141 

is  it  that  makes  this  offer  so  important  and  so  precious  ? 
It  is  simply  this,  that  we  are  all  by  nature  sinful  and 
corrupt.  We  are  born  into  the  world  with  a  disposition 
inclined  to  evil  and  not  to  good  ;  we  show  it  in  our 
infancy  by  angry  tempers,  by  jealousy,  by  selfishness  ; 
we  show  it  in  our  youth  by  deceit,  by  idleness,  by 
unwillingness  to  learn,  by  disobedience  to  parents,  by 
unthankfulness,  by  self-conceit  ;  and  when  we  come 
to  man's  estate  we  show  it  in  a  hundred  fashions, — by 
giving  way  to  our  lusts  and  passions  whenever  we 
dare,  by  loving  pleasure  more  than  God,  by  Sabbath- 
breaking,  and  swearing,  and  drinking  and  fornication, 
by  uncharitable  conduct  to  our  neighbours,  by  pride 
and  vanity,  by  neglecting  God's  Bible,  by  staying  away 
from  His  church,  by  despising  His  sacraments,  by  dis 
honouring  His  ministers,  by  worldly-mindedness,  by 
living  on  from  year  to  year  without  a  spark  of  love 
to  Him  who  gave  us  life  and  breath  and  all  things 
that  we  enjoy.  This  is  the  manner  in  which  we  naturally 
like  to  pass  our  time ;  and  thus  it  is  that  one  way  or 
another  we  prove  our  hearts  to  be  "  deceitful  above  all 
things  and  desperately  wicked."  No  doubt  it  was  not 
so  in  the  beginning :  man  was  created  upright,  and  his 
Maker  pronounced  him,  like  His  other  works,  to  be 
very  good  in  the  day  when  everything  was  finished  ; 
but  Adam  did  not  keep  his  first  estate,  he  ate  the 
forbidden  fruit  and  fell ;  and  in  that  hour  there  came 
an  awful  change  over  his  nature  :  he  lost  the  holy  image 
and  likeness  of  God,  and  from  that  time  the  imagina 
tion  of  man  has  had  a  continual  bent  towards  evil. 
And  yet  the  God  with  whom  we  have  to  do  is  holy  : 
He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity,  the  least 
speck  of  sin  is  an  abomination  in  His  sight  ;  the  heaven 
that  He  dwells  in  is  a  holy  place,  and  the  general 
judgment  which  he  hath  appointed  as  the  end  of  all 


142 


THE   GRACE   OF    GOD    IN   VAIN 


things  will  be  a  judgment  of  holiness  and  a  judgment 
of  righteousness.  And  how  can  we  expect  to  face  this 
fiery^trial  ?  wherewith  can  we  come  into  our  Maker's 
presence  ?  The  laws  we  have  insulted,  and  the  mercies 
we  have  lightly  esteemed,  would  all  rise  up  against  us  ; 
by  nature  we  are  all  shut  up  unto  condemnation,  there 
remains  nothing  for  us  to  look  forward  to,  but  the  worm 
that  never  dies  and  the  fire  that  shall  not  be  quenched. 

But  here,  in  this  deplorable  case,  the  grace  of  God  has 
come  in  :  the  Lord  of  all,  out  of  pure  love  and  mercy 
for  we  deserve  nothing  but  wrath  and  condemnation — 
out  of  pure  love  and  mercy,  for  He  was  not  obliged  to 
redeem  us — the  Lord  of  all  has  sent  His  beloved  Son 
Jesus  Christ  to  take  our  nature  upon  Him,  and  suffer 
death  upon  the  cross,  "  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  It  is  the 
grace  of  God  that,  when  we  were  all  without  hope, 
Christ  came  into  the  world,  to  do  the  things  we  never 
could  have  done,  to  fulfil  that  holy  and  just  and  good 
law  which  brings  us  all  in  guilty,  and  He  did  fulfil  it 
to  the  last  jot  and  tittle  ;  to  suffer  the  punishment 
which  we  deserved,  and  He  did  suffer  it  upon  the 
cross,  and  drank  the  bitter  cup  to  the  very  dregs  ;  and 
by  the  things  He  did  and  the  things  He  suffered  He 
provided  a  perfect  righteousness  for  every  one  that 
is  willing  to  believe. 

It  is  the  grace  of  God  that  He  came  to  do  His 
Father's  will,  and  to  satisfy  His  Father's  justice,  by 
standing  in  our  place  and  taking  upon  Himself  the 
sins  of  the  whole  world  ;  and  though  the  burden  was 
so  heavy  that  He  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  yet  He 
proved  "  mighty  to  save,"  and  won  a  victory  over  our 
great  enemies  upon  the  cross — here  is  the  grace  of 
God,  of  which  the  apostle  spake  ;  here  is  the  message 
we  are  charged  to  deliver.  We  offer  to  you  Christ 


THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN       143 

and  a  free  pardon,  Christ  and  everlasting  life  ;  you  may 
have  been  fornicators  and  adulterers,  and  thieves  and 
covetous  and  drunkards,  and  revilers  and  extortioners, 
and  yet  you  are  not  shut  out  from  this  salvation  ;  only 
believe — all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth. 
You  tell  me  you  have  been  a  sinner  before  God  exceed 
ingly — I  answer  the  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  from  all 
sin  ;  you  tell  me  you  have  broken  God's  laws  a  million 
times — I  answer  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteous 
ness  to  everyone  that  believeth  ;  you  tell  me  you  have 
no  righteousness,  you  will  never  be  fit  for  heaven — I 
offer  you  the  perfect  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Himself,  all  that  He  hath  done  shall  be  accounted  yours. 
I  repeat,  the  complete  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
shall  be  placed  upon  you  as  a  pure  white  garment,  which 
shall  cover  all  your  iniquities,  and  who  shall  dare  to  raise 
his  voice  against  you  ?  But  you  tell  me  you  have  such 
a  cold,  dead,  wicked  heart, — I  answer,  if  you  come  at 
once  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  He  shall  pour  the  Holy 
Ghost  upon  you  arid  give  you  a  new  one,  and  you 
shall  become  a  new  creature. 

This  very  day  I  set  before  the  worst  among  you 
pardon  and  peace  and  immortality,  without  money 
and  without  price  :  I  do  not  tell  you  to  go  and  become 
saints,  to  go  and  live  a  new  life  before  you  can  receive 
these  blessings ;  I  call  upon  to  return  at  once,  with  all 
your  sins  upon  you,  and  lay  them  at  your  Saviour's 
feet,  and  they  shall  be  forgiven.  I  know  nothing  of 
conditions  ;  I  am  not  sent  to  one  and  not  to  another. 
I  am  commissioned  to  invite  you  all  to  my  Master's 
banquet,  and  whatever  your  character  may  have  been 
in  time  past,  however  thoughtless  and  profane  you 
may  have  been,  I  am  charged  to  offer  you  the  gospel 
of  the  grace  of  God,  to  tell  you  all  shall  be  pardoned 
and  forgotten  if  you  trust  in  Jesus'  name.  Here  is 


i44       THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN 

bread  for  the  hungry  and  water  for  the  thirsty— healing 
balm  for  the  wounded  and  rest  for  the  weary — light 
for  those  that  are  in  darkness  and  life  for  those  that 
are  dead— riches  for  those  that  are  poor,  and  joy  for 
those  that  mourn  ;  Christ's  precious  blood  shall  wash 
away  every  single  sin,  Christ's  everlasting  righteousness 
shall  be  all  your  own.  Return  unto  Jesus  all  ye  that 
are  far  off  in  this  congregation,  old  or  young,  high 
or  low,  rich  or  poor — whether  ye  be  now  sleeping  in 
utter  carelessness,  whether  ye  be  godless  blasphemers 
of  the  truth,  whether  ye  be  talking,  self-deceiving 
hypocrites,  whether  ye  be  self-righteous,  formal  Pharisees, 
whether  ye  be  cold,  heartless  listeners  to  truth,  whether 
ye  be  wretched  backsliders  from  the  narrow  way — 
return  unto  Jesus,  I  beseech  you,  for  He  hath  redeemed 
you. 

What  fruit  have  ye  in  the  life  ye  now  live  ?  Ye  are 
not  really  happy  ;  ye  tremble  at  the  thought  of  judg 
ment  :  return  unto  Jesus  and  ye  shall  be  welcome ; 
all  things  shall  be  yours,  the  world  or  life  or  death,  or 
things  present  or  things  to  come,  all  shall  be  yours, 
for  ye  shall  be  Christ's  and  Christ  is  God's.  Come  to 
your  Father's  house  ;  the  price  of  your  redemption  has 
been  paid,  and  He  prays  you  to  enter  in  ;  He  tells  the 
very  guiltiest  of  you  all  that  if  you  will  only  come 
to  Him  through  the  appointed  Mediator,  He  will 
blot  out  as  with  a  thick  cloud  your  transgressions, 
and  as  if  carried  into  a  land  that  is  not  inhabited 
He  will  make  mention  of  them  no  more. 

Such,  then,  beloved,  is  the  mighty  doctrine  which 
Paul  had  in  view  when  he  spoke  of  "  the  grace  of  God  " 
in  our  text.  He  did  not  merely  mean  that  spiritual 
help  is  promised  to  those  who  want  to  set  up  a 
righteousness  of  their  own  ;  he  had  before  his  mind 
that  grand  offer  of  full  reconciliation  which  is  made  by 


THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN       MS 

our  Heavenly  Father  to  His  rebellious  children  through 
Christ's  atonement  ;  he  meant  that  new  and  living  way 
which  Jesus  hath  opened  for  disobedient  man  to  draw 
near  his  holy  Maker ;  that  mystery  of  undeserved  love 
and  mercy  which  angels  desire  to  look  into  ;  and  so 
deeply  does  he  dread  the  corruption  of  man's  heart, 
that  he  seems  to  tremble  lest  the  Corinthians  should 
hear  of  this  grace  of  God  and  go  no  further,  should 
listen  to  the  report  of  the  gospel  and  yet  perish  in 
their  sins. 

II.  Let  us,  then,  next  inquire  how  and  when  it  may 
be  said  that  a  man  receives  the  grace  of  God  in  vain. 
Now,  I  have  nothing  to  do  in  this  matter  with  the 
open  unbeliever,  the  man  who  deliberately  forsakes 
the  house  of  God,  and  turns  his  back  upon  the  simplest 
elements,  the  first  principles  of  Scriptural  religion.  Of 
such  a  one  I  can  only  say  that  he  is  not  receiving  the 
grace  of  God  at  all  ;  he  will  not  even  listen  to  our 
message  ;  he  has  not  even  an  outward  form  of 
Christianity,  and  to  all  intents  and  purposes  he  is 
living  without  God  in  the  world.  The  persons  whom 
I  wish  to  deal  with  are  those  who  profess  and  call 
themselves  Christians,  the  men  and  women  who 
generally  make  up  our  congregations.  You  must  know 
well  that  a  vast  proportion  of  them  hear  the  gospel 
and  yet  are  never  the  better  for  it ;  they  receive  the 
grace  of  God  into  their  ears  and  their  mouths  and  their 
heads,  aye,  sometimes  even  into  their  houses,  and  yet 
they  do  not  receive  it  into  their  own  hearts,  and 
therefore  they  are  said  to  receive  it  in  vain,  unprofitably, 
to  no  purpose  ;  and  the  point  I  want  to  establish  in 
your  minds  at  present  is  how  and  why  and  when  these 
things  are  so.  And  be  ye  very  sure  there  never  was 
a  time  when  such  inquiry  was  so  necessary  :  you  live 
in  days  which  prophets  and  kings  of  old  did  wish  to 

10 


r46       THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN 

sec  and  never  saw,  days  when  many  run  to  and  fro, 
and  light  and  knowledge  is  marvellously  increased, 
days  when  there  are  opportunities  for  getting  spiritual 
wisdom  which  your  grandfathers  never  enjoyed,  but 
days,  alas!  when  there  is  much  profession  without 
practice,  and  there  is  need  for  much  self-examination, 
lest  perchance  we  deceive  ourselves. 

Now,  I  say  that  all  are  receiving  the  grace  of  God  in 
vain  who  have  never  been  convinced  of  the  guilt  and 
corruption  of  their  own  hearts,  who  have  never  found 
out  that  they  are  sinners  and  must  be  born  again  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  who  are  altogether  at  ease  about 
their  own  souls,  and  cannot  see  the  need  for  such 
anxiety  as  Christ's  people  show,  and  wonder  at 
people  who  think  much  about  religion  ;  who  cannot 
believe  themselves  to  be  so  desperately  wicked,  and 
cannot  think  that  God  will  be  so  particular.  These 
are  the  men  who  in  their  own  opinion  are  rich  and 
increased  with  goods  and  have  need  of  nothing,  and  to 
this  hour  know  not  that  they  are  wretched  and 
miserable  and  poor  and  blind  and  naked  ;  all  such 
have  hitherto  received  the  grace  of  God  in  vain.  I  say 
in  vain,  for  how  can  a  man  know  the  value  of  a  remedy 
until  he  has  felt  his  disease?  how  can  you  love  the 
light  if  you  never  discovered  yourself  to  be  in  darkness  ? 
how  can  you  see  the  excellence  of  the  gospel  if  you 
never  found  yourself  condemned  by  the  law?  how 
can  you  understand  your  need  of  a  Saviour  if  you 
never  groaned  under  the  burden  of  sin  ?  Oh  no ! 
beloved,  if  your  spirit  has  never  witnessed  within  you 
that  you  have  really  erred  and  strayed  from  God's  ways 
like  a  lost  sheep,  that  you  have  really  followed  too 
much  the  devices  and  desires  of  your  own  hearts,  that 
you  have  really  offended  against  God's  holy  laws, 
that  there  really  is  no  health  in  you, — if  you  have 


THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN       147 

never  mourned  over  your  transgressions  with  a  true 
godly  sorrow,  and  hated  them  with  a  true  godly  hatred, 
— if  you  are  hitherto  a  stranger  to  these  feelings, 
it  is  impossible  you  can  regard  Christ  crucified  as  the 
one  thing  needful  ;  you  may  have  heard  of  the  grace  of 
God,  but  you  know  nothing  of  it  as  you  ought  to  know. 

But  again,  there  are  many  who  are  convinced  of 
sin,  and  yet  will  not  come  to  Christ  and  the  hope  set 
before  them  in  the  gospel.  Some  are  so  melted  under 
the  word  that  rivers  of  tears  run  down  their  eyes, 
they  cannot  speak  bad  enough  of  their  past  lives,  they 
will  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  the  accursed  thing  ; 
and  yet  the  first  temptation  carries  all  before  it,  and 
their  goodness  proves  no  better  than  the  morning  dew 
and  the  cloud  which  passeth  away — and  all  because 
they  made  resolutions  in  their  own  strength,  they 
did  not  build  upon  the  sure  corner-stone,  even  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  without  whom  nothing  is  strong, 
nothing  is  holy.  Others,  perhaps,  appear  to  make  surer 
work :  they  put  away  the  evil  of  their  doings ;  they 
give  up  outward  vices,  they  put  on  a  whitewashed 
garment,  and  are  beautiful  in  the  eyes  of  men,  and 
they  are  regular  and  decent  in  the  formal  duties  of 
religion — but  there  they  stop.  They  flatter  themselves 
that  all  is  safe  ;  that  they  have  whereof  to  boast  before 
God  ;  and  that  persons  so  sober,  so  honest,  so  just, 
so  reformed,  cannot  miss  of  attaining  everlasting  life. 
But  if  the  word  of  God  be  true,  their  hopes  are  false  ; 
they  are  looking  to  themselves  while  Scripture  says, 
"  By  the  deeds  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  living  be  justi 
fied  "  ;  they  are  building  on  the  sand. 

"  I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,"  saith 
Jesus  ;  "  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me." 
A  simple  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ  is  the  very 
alphabet  in  the  school  of  Christianity  ;  and  if  your 


1 48       THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN 

conviction  never  bring  you  to  it,  it  is  plain  you  have 
something  at  the  bottom  which  you  have  not  given 
Up_and  that  is  pride. 

There  can  be  no  true  repentance  without  faith.  You 
may  cast  away  your  old  habits,  as  the  serpent  casts 
his  skin  ;  but  if  you  are  not  resting  all  upon  the  Lamb 
of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  and 
looking  to  be  saved  by  simple  faith  in  Him,  you  may 
be  wise  in  your  own  eyes,  but  you  are  just  ignorant 
of  the  root  and  fountain,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega, 
the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first  and  the  last,  in 
all  true  gospel  religion.  You  may  tell  us  you  have 
repented  ;  but  if  you  have  not  at  the  same  time  laid 
hold  on  Christ,  you  have  hitherto  received  the  grace 
of  God  in  vain. 

Lastly,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  who  do  not 
follow  after  holiness,  who  do  not  strive  to  glorify  their 
Lord  with  their  bodies  and  spirits,  have  received  the 
grace  of  God  in  vain.  About  all  other  men  we  may 
not  be  able  to  decide  with  certainty  ;  but  about  them 
the  rule  is  laid  down  clearly. 

"  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  The  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness, 
goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance.  "And  they 
that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affec 
tions  and  lusts."  They  that  are  true  believers  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  do  love  to  tread  in  their  Master's  steps 
and  learn  of  Him,  and  endeavour  to  be  as  like  Him 
as  possible  in  all  their  habits  and  tempers.  I  never 
can  believe  that  men  and  women  who  name  the  name 
of  Christ  and  yet  neglect  His  will,  and  speak  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  while  they  resist  Him,  and  talk  of  faith 
while  they  plainly  do  not  believe,  and  of  repentance 
while  they  continue  impenitent,  and  of  a  heavenly  life 
while  they  continue  carnal — I  never  can  believe  that 


THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN       149 

such,  for  all  their  fine  words,  have  any  portion  or  lot 
in  the  kingdom  of  God.  These  are  like  sign-posts : 
they  point  the  way  towards  Zion,  but  they  never 
get  one  yard  nearer  to  it  themselves.  Such  people 
build  with  their  lips,  but  pull  down  with  their  lives  ; 
they  warn  others  of  hell,  and  yet  are  on  the  high  road 
to  it.  I  read  that  Christ  redeems  His  flock  from  all 
iniquity,  that  He  may  purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar 
people,  zealous  of  good  works  ;  and  therefore,  when 
I  see  men  or  women  walking  in  the  counsel  of  the 
ungodly  and  standing  in  the  way  of  sinners  and 
sitting  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful,  making  provision 
for  the  flesh  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof,  conforming  to 
the  world  in  its  vain  and  idle  customs — I  am  at  no 
loss  about  their  character.  They  may  often  look  like 
saints  and  talk  like  angels — they  may  be  acquainted 
with  all  mysteries  and  all  knowledge  ;  but  if  sin  reign 
in  their  mortal  bodies  that  they  can  obey  it  in  the 
lusts  thereof  without  a  struggle  to  be  free,  I  hesitate 
not  to  tell  them  to  their  face— whoever  they  may 
be— "You  have,  so  far,  received  the  grace  of  God  in 
vain." 

But  I  may  not  go  further  on  this  point.  Indeed, 
I  tremble  to  think  how  many  of  you  may  come  under 
the  three  classes  that  I  have  named.  All  who  have 
never  been  truly  penitent  for  sin, — all  who  have  never 
rightly  closed  with  Christ,— and  all  who  do  not  strive 
to  walk  worthy  of  their  high  calling, — all  those  have 
received  the  grace  of  God  in  vain.  And  if  He  whose 
fan  is  in  His  hand  were  now  to  come  amongst  you,  an 
thoroughly  purge  His  floor  and  cast  out  all  the  un 
profitable  hearers,  oh,  what  a  poor  little  handful  might 
possibly  be  left ! 

III.  I  promised  in  the  third  place  to  say  a  few  words 
about  the  reasons  why  ministers  are  so  anxious  that 


T  50       THE    GRACE   OF   GOD    IN   VAIN 

you  should  not  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain.  Oh ! 
it  is  a  strange  thing  we  should  have  to  beseech  at  all ; 
you  would  not  need  it  if  we  every  Sunday  had  a  purse 
of  gold  to  divide  amongst  a  congregation,  but  when  we 
have  to  set  before  you  the  kingdom  of  God,  righteous 
ness,  peace  and  everlasting  life,  alas !  it  is  a  great 
matter  if  we  can  get  you  to  give  your  attention  to  our 
invitations,  it  is  a  great  matter  if  you  can  be  brought 
to  listen  patiently  to  the  messengers  and  ambassadors 
of  your  Maker,  your  Redeemer,  and  your  Judge. 

Know,  then,  that  we  beseech  you  earnestly  that  ye 
receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain,  because  the  time 
is  short,  and  every  day  that  you  continue  lingering  and 
undecided  doth  shorten  your  opportunity  for  repentance 
and  make  your  heart  more  dull  and  harder  to  be 
moved.  The  time  you  have  is  short  for  praying,  short 
for  Bible  reading,  short  for  breaking  loose  from  this 
deceitful  world,  short  for  preparing  for  the  world  to 
come  ;  those  fevers  and  diseases,  which  God  doth  shake 
over  the  heads  of  many,  might  easily  cut  off  twenty  or 
thirty  of  the  strongest  of  you,  and  where  would  your 
souls  be  ?  We  beseech  you  because  you  have  a  battle 
to  fight ;  the  world,  the  flesh,  the  devil  have  all  to  be 
opposed  ;  you  have  to  put  on  the  whole  armour  of 
God,  to  strive,  to  wrestle  manfully  against  temptation ; 
and  if  you  really  love  the  crown  of  glory,  you  cannot 
too  soon  come  out  from  sinful  ways  and  take  your 
stand  among  the  valiant  for  the  truth  upon  the  earth. 
But  if  there  were  no  other  reason,  we  beseech  you 
because  of  death  and  judgment.  I  urge  upon  you  that 
an  hour  is  meeting  each  of  you  like  an  armed  man, 
when  this  body  shall  become  the  food  of  creeping  things 
and  the  soul  shall  be  called  to  its  last  account ;  I  see 
in  my  mind's  eye  the  business  of  that  awful  day — the 
great  white  throne,  the  assembled  millions,  the  open 


THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN       151 

books,  the  heavens  departing  as  a  scroll,  the  earth  and 
the  works  that  are  therein  melting  with  fervent  heat  ; 
I  hear  the  archangel's  trump  summoning  the  dead  from 
north  and  south  and  east  and  west,  and  I  tremble 
to  think  how  those  will  fare  who  have  received  the 
grace  of  God  in  -vain.  I  tremble  to  think  how  they 
will  be  dealt  with,  who  have  a  long  account  of  Bibles 
unread  and  prayer  neglected,  churches  despised  and 
sacraments  dishonoured,  ministers  disregarded  and 
sermons  scorned,  all  standing  in  full  array  against  their 
names.  I  tremble  to  find  it  plainly  declared  by  Christ 
Himself,  Christ  the  compassionate  and  tender-hearted, 
that  even  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  shall  be  mercifully 
treated,  compared  with  those  who  have  been  called 
upon  to  repent  and  have  not  repented,  who  have  been 
invited  to  believe  in  Jesus  and  have  not  believed.  And 
for  all  these  causes,  and  for  many  more  of  which  we 
cannot  speak  particularly,  we  do  beseech  you  and 
implore  you  to  beware  lest  ye  receive  the  grace  of  God 
in  vain,  to  beware  of  hearing  without  improving,  to 
beware  of  professing  while  you  are  not  growing,  to 
beware  of  giving  your  ears  to  God  but  not  your  heart. 

See,  now,  most  dearly  beloved,  does  not  this  text 
divide  you  all  in  twain  ?  Does  it  not  separate  the  good 
fish  from  the  bad  ?  You  know  in  your  own  consciences 
it  does.  And  where  are  the  few  among  you  who  humbly 
trust  that  they  have  not  altogether  heard  the  gospel 
in  vain  ?  Hearken,  O  ye  that  are  really  followers  of 
Christ.  Can  you  see  in  yourselves  a  feeling  of  hatred 
towards  sin  that  once  you  never  knew,  a  dependence  on 
the  blood  of  Jesus  only  to  which  ye  were  once  strangers, 
a  thirsting  after  holiness  with  which  ye  were  once 
unacquainted  ?  Then  O  rejoice  with  humble  fear,  and 
go  forward  in  faith  and  hope  ;  and  though  iniquity 
abounds,  let  not  your  love  wax  cold  ;  but  grow  in  grace 


T 52       THE   GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN 

and  every  day  bring  forth  more  fruit,  and  unto  the  God 
of  gods  ye  shall  every  one  of  you  appear  in  Zion. 

But  are  there  not  many  of  you  who  have  all  your  lives 
received  the  grace  of  God  to  no  purpose,  and  sided  with 
the  world?  You  know  there  are.  I  speak  not  these 
things  to  shame  you,  but  as  beloved  to  warn  you,  for 
it  is  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  that  every  soul 
among  you  may  be  saved  ;  and  I  ask  all  such  to  listen 
to  a  word  of  exhortation.  Consider,  I  beseech  you,  O 
ye  thoughtless  ones,  consider  the  madness,  the  folly  of 
your  conduct.  Surely  you  must  feel  that  in  the  ways 
of  worldly-mindedness  and  sin  there  is  no  real  satisfac 
tion,  and  you  must  know  the  end  of  these  things  is 
death.  Surely  your  Father's  offer  of  forgiveness  is  a 
gracious  and  a  loving  one.  Oh,  do  not  sell  your  souls  for 
such  miserable  rewards  as  this  world  can  give,  and  let 
it  not  be  written  of  you  this  day  that  you  were  asked 
to  turn  and  refused.  You  cannot  really  suppose  that 
God's  beloved  Son  was  crucified  and  put  to  open 
shame,  while  heaven  became  black  and  the  earth 
quaked  and  the  veil  was  rent  at  the  fearful  sight,  that 
you  might  be  careless  and  live  as  you  please,  and 
yet  be  saved.  Oh,  but  you  must  have  a  low  view  of 
heaven  if  you  think  it  can  be  won  so  cheaply^  Let 
me  plead  with  you,  let  me  plead  the  cause  of  your 
everlasting  souls.  I  do  not  want  to  make  you 
wretched,  melancholy  beings ;  the  devil,  who  was  a 
murderer  and  a  liar  from  the  beginning,  tries  to  make 
you  believe  this,  but  it  is  not  so  ;  I.  want  to  provide 
you  with  a  solid  peace,  such  as  this  perishable  world 
can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  Why  will  you  cleave 
so  closely  to  the  lust  of  the  flesh  and  the  lust  of  the 
eye  and  the  pride  of  life  ? — they  cannot  comfort  you  in 
the  days  of  trial  which  you  must  go  through.  Why 
is  the  everlasting  gospel,  which  alone  is  good  for  every 


THE    GRACE   OF   GOD   IN   VAIN       153 

season,  good  for  time  and  good  for  eternity,  good  for 
sorrow  and  good  for  joy,  good  for  youth  and  good  for 
age,  good  for  life  and  good  for  death, — why  is  the  gospel 
to  be  treated  as  a  thing  that  will  do  you  harm  and  poison 
the  springs  of  your  happiness  ?  You  cannot  answer 
me  ;  you  know  that  I  am  speaking  the  words  of  sober 
ness  and  truth.  This  very  day  I  call  upon  you  to 
begin  a  change — to  forsake  your  sins,  to  care  nothing 
for  the  opinion  of  the  world,  to  receive  your  Father's 
invitation  readily  and  willingly,  meekly  and  honestly  ; 
I  beseech  you  to  turn  and  live,  to  repent  and  be 
converted,  to  believe  and  be  saved. 

Let  not  another  harvest  ripen  on  this  earth  and 
find  you  still  among  the  number  of  those  who  are 
called  the  tares,  still  spiritually  dark,  sleeping  and  dead, 
still  unprepared  and  unforgiven ;  sow  to  yourselves 
in  righteousness,  break  up  your  fallow  ground  with 
the  plough  of  repentance,  seek  your  loving  Redeemer 
with  the  publican's  prayer,  "  Jesus,  have  mercy  on  me 
a  sinner," — and  thus,  and  thus  only,  when  the  mighty 
harvest  of  the  earth  is  reaped,  the  angels  shall  gather 
you  as  precious  wheat  into  the  treasure-house  of  God, 
and  you  shall  not  be  burned  up  as  worthless  chaff  with 
unquenchable  fire. 


XII 
THE    CHRISTIAN  RACE 

"  Seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses, 
let  us  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  us, 
and  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,  looking  unto 
Jesus  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith." — HEBREWS  xii.  I,  2. 

BELOVED,    I    have    lately   spoken    to    you    much 
about     the     character    and    experience    of    true 
believers  in  the   Lord   Jesus    Christ,  the  men   who  are 
sowing  for  everlasting  life. 

Before,  however,  we  continue  this  inquiry,  I  wish  to 
warn  you  against  forgetting  the  sure  foundation  ;  I  wish 
to  caution  you  most  strongly  against  losing  sight  of  the 
root  of  the  whole  matter — a  simple  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  You  must  not  stumble  at  the  outset  by 
supposing  I  want  you  to  set  up  a  righteousness  of  your 
own.  Some  think  their  own  endeavours  after  holiness 
arc  to  make  up  their  title  to  salvation  ;  some  think 
that  when  they  come  to  Christ,  their  sins  past  alone 
arc  forgiven,  and  for  the  time  to  come  they  must 
depend  upon  themselves.  Alas !  there  always  have 
been  mistakes  upon  this  point:  men  toil  and  labour 
after  peace  with  God  as  if  their  own  exertions  would 
give  them  a  right  to  lay  hold  on  Christ,  and  when 
they  find  themselves  far  short  of  the  Bible  standard 
they  mourn  and  grieve  and  will  not  be  comforted ; 
and  all  because  they  will  not  see  that  in  the  matter 
of  forgiveness,  in  the  matter  of  justification  in  the  sight 

154 


THE   CHRISTIAN   RACE  155 

of  God,  it  is  not  doing  which  is  required,  but  believ 
ing  ;  'it  is  not  working,  but  trusting  ;  it  is  not  perfect 
obedience,  but  humble  faith.  Now,  once  for  all,  let 
us  understand,  that  all  who  have  really  fled  for  mercy 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are,  as  Paul  assures  the 
Colossians,  complete  in  Him  !  In  themselves  they  may 
be  poor  shortcoming  sinners,  but  seeing  they  have 
laid  hold  on  Christ,  God  looks  upon  them  as  complete — 
completely  pardoned,  completely  righteous,  completely 
pure — no  jot  or  tittle  of  condemnation  can  be  laid  to 
their  charge. 

They  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  the  law  as 
a  covenant  of  works,  as  a  condition  they  must  fulfil 
or  die  :  the  Lord  does  not  say,  "  Be  perfect  and  then 
you  shall  live,"  but  "Christ  has  given  you  life,  and 
for  His  sake  strive  to  be  perfect."  But  you  will  ask 
me,  "Why  do  they  hunger  and  thirst  so  much  after 
holiness,  since  all  their  debt  has  been  paid  ?  "  I  answer, 
They  work  for  love's  sake — for  gratitude  ;  they  do  not 
work  and  strive  after  holiness  in  order  that  they  may 
be  forgiven,  but  because  they  are  forgiven  already, 
chosen  and  sealed  and  saved  and  redeemed  and 
bought  with  a  price,  and  they  cannot  help  desiring 
to  glorify  Him  with  their  bodies  and  spirits  who 
loved  them  and  gave  Himself  for  them.  They  thirst 
after  holiness  because  their  Father  loves  holiness  ; 
they  thirst  after  purity  because  their  Master  loves 
purity ;  they  strive  to  be  like  Jesus  because  they 
hope  to  be  one  day  for  ever  with  Him. 

But  seeing  they  have  many  a  difficulty  in  doing  the 
things  that  they  would,  and  are  continually  warring  with 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  and  sometimes  are 
so  ready  to  faint  that  they  doubt  whether  they  really  are 
of  Christ's  family  or  not, — seeing  these  things  are  so, 
I  have  tried  to  give  you  a  faint  outline  of  their  experience 


T56  THE   CHRISTIAN   RACE 

on  late  occasions,  and  I  purpose  this  afternoon  to  lay 
before  you  shortly  the  advice  which  the  apostle  gives 
them  in  my  text. 

Now,  I  say  that  the  text  contains  five  points  : 
I.  We  have  all  a  race  to  run. 

II.  Many  have  gone  before  us. 

III.  We  must  lay  aside  every  weight. 

IV.  We  must  run  with  patience. 

V.  We  must  be  continually  looking  unto  Jesus.  The 
Lord  pour  down  His  Spirit  upon  each  of  you,  and 
bow  the  hearts  of  all  here  present,  as  the  heart  of 
one  man,  that  you  may  seek  the  Lord  while  there  is 
yet  time,  and  set  your  faces  towards  Jerusalem,  and 
not  die  the  death  of  the  faithless  and  unbelieving. 

I.  First,  then,  we  have  a  race  to  run.  By  this  you  are 
not  to  understand  that  our  own  right  arm  and  our  own 
strength  can  ever  open  for  us  the  gates  of  everlasting 
life,  and  win  us  a  place  in  heaven.  Far  from  it :  that 
is  all  of  grace — it  is  another  question.  It  simply  means 
that  all  who  take  up  the  cross  and  follow  Christ  must 
make  up  their  minds  to  meet  with  many  a  difficulty, 
they  must  calculate  on  labour  and  toil  and  trouble,  they 
have  a  mighty  work  to  do,  and  there  is  need  for  all  their 
attention.  Without  there  will  be  fightings,  within  there 
will  be  fears  ;  there  will  be  snares  to  be  avoided,  and 
temptations  to  be  resisted  ;  there  will  be  your  own 
treacherous  hearts,  often  cold  and  dead  and  dry  and 
dull ;  there  will  be  friends  who  will  give  you  unscriptural 
advice,  and  relations  who  will  even  war  against  your 
soul  ;  in  [short,  there  will  be  stumbling-blocks  on  every 
side,  there  will  be  occasion  for  all  your  diligence  and 
watchfulness  and  godly  jealousy  and  prayer, — you  will 
soon  find  that  to  be  a  real  Christian  is  no  light  matter. 

Oh  what  a  condemnation  there  is  here  for  all  those 
easy-going  persons  who  seem  to  think  they  may  pass 


THE   CHRISTIAN    RACE  157 

their  time  as  they  please,  and  yet  be  numbered  with  the 
saints  in  glory  everlasting  !  Are  those  who  show  less 
earnestness  about  their  souls  than  about  their  earthly 
amusements,  and  those  who  have  much  to  tell  you 
about  this  world's  business  but  nothing  about  heaven, 
and  those  who  think  nothing  of  neglecting  the  com 
monest  helps  towards  Zion,  and  count  it  much  to 
give  religion  a  few  Sunday  thoughts, — are  these  men 
running  the  Christian  race,  and  straining  every  nerve 
after  the  prize  ?  I  leave  the  answer  with  yourselves : 
judge  ye  what  I  say. 

And  those  who  profess  to  have  entered  the  course, 
and  yet  find  time  to  rest  by  the  wayside  and  trifle 
with  temptation,  and  find  fault  with  the  anxiety  of 
others, — and  those  who  stop  to  take  breath  and  boast 
of  their  attainments,  and  look  behind  them, — are  such 
running  the  race  set  before  them  as  if  it  was  a  matter 
of  life  and  death  ?  Oh  no  !  They  may  get  the  name 
of  Christians,  but  they  are  not  so  running  that  they 
shall  obtain.  But  they,  who  are  taught  and  called  of 
God  may  soon  be  distinguished  from  the  sleeping 
children  of  this  world.  These  have  no  leisure  for  vain 
amusements  ;  their  eyes  are  fixed  and  their  thoughts 
are  engaged  upon  the  narrow  path  they  have  to  tread 
and  the  crown  they  hope  to  receive  ;  they  have  counted 
the  cost,  and  come  out  from  the  world  ;  and  their  only 
wish  is  that  they  may  finish  their  course  with  joy. 

II.  The  second  thing  you  may  learn  from  the  text 
is  this :  "  Many  have  gone  before  us  ;  we  are  encom 
passed  with  a  great  cloud  of  witnesses"  The  witnesses 
here  spoken  of  are  those  patriarchs  and  prophets  who 
are  mentioned  in  the  eleventh  chapter,  and  the  apostle 
calls  upon  us  to  remember  them  and  their  troubles 
and  take  courage.  Are  we  frail  earthen  vessels  ?  so 
were  they.  Are  we  weak  and  encompassed  with  in- 


i58  THE   CHRISTIAN    RACE 

firmities?  so  were  they.  Are  we  exposed  to  tempta 
tion  and  burdened  with  this  body  of  corruption?  so 
were  they.  Are  we  afflicted  ?  so  were  they.  Are  we 
alone  in  our  generation,  the  scorn  of  all  our  neighbours  ? 
so  were  they.  Have  we  trials  of  cruel  mockings  ?  so 
had  they.  What  can  we  possibly  be  called  upon  to 
suffer  which  they  have  not  endured  ?  What  consola 
tions  did  they  receive  which  we  may  not  enjoy  ?  You 
may  talk  of  your  cares  and  business  and  families,  but 
their  portion  was  just  like  yours  ;  they  were  men  of 
like  passions  ;  they  did  not  neglect  business,  and  yet 
they  gave  their  hearts  to  God.  They  show  the  race 
can  always  be  run  by  those  who  have  the  will.  Yes, 
they  were  all  flesh  and  blood  like  ourselves,  and  yet 
by  grace  they  became  new  creatures  ;  and  so  by  faith 
they  "  obtained  a  good  report ;  "  by  faith  they  confessed 
themselves  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth  ;  through 
faith  they  "  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness, 
obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  quenched 
the  violence  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  out 
of  weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant  in  fight, 
turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens  :  women  received 
their  dead  raised  to  life  again  ;  and  others  were  tortured 
not  accepting  deliverance,  that  they  might  obtain  a  better 
resurrection  ;  and  others  had  trial  of  bonds  and  im 
prisonment  :  they  were  stoned,  they  were  sawn  asunder, 
were  tempted,  were  slain  with  the  sword  ;  they  wandered 
about  in  sheepskins  and  goatskins,  being  destitute, 
afflicted,  tormented."  But  grace  exceedingly  abounded, 
and  all  fought  a  good  fight  arid  finished  their  course 
and  kept  the  faith,  and  to  the  God  of  gods  appeared 
every  one  of  them  in  Zion.  Take  courage,  fainting 
Christians  :  you  are  encompassed  with  a  great  cloud  of 
witnesses  ;  the  race  that  you  are  running  has  been 
run  by  millions  before  ;  you  think  that  no  one  ever  had 


THE   CHRISTIAN   RACE  159 

such  trials  as  yourself,  but  every  step  that  you  are 
journeying  has  been  safely  trod  by  others  ;  the  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death  has  been  securely  passed  by  a 
cloud  of  trembling,  doubting  ones  like  yourself;  they 
had  their  fears  and  anxieties,  like  you,  but  they  were 
not  cast  away ;  the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil  can 
never  overwhelm  the  weakest  woman  who  will  set  her 
face  towards  God  ;  these  millions  journeyed  on  in 
bitterness  and  tears  like  your  own,  and  yet  not  one 
did  perish — they  all  reached  home. 

III.  The  third  point  to  be  considered  is  the  apostle's 
advice,  to  "  lay  aside  every  weight"  By  this  he  means 
that  we  must  give  up  everything  which  is  really  hurtful 
to  our  souls.  We  must  act  like  men  who  throw  off 
all  their  long  and  flowing  garments,  as  an  encumbrance, 
when  about  to  try  their  speed  in  running.  We  must 
cast  away  everything  which  hinders  us  upon  our  road 
towards  heaven — the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the 
eye,  and  the  pride  of  life  ;  the  love  of  riches,  pleasures, 
and  honours,  the  spirit  of  lukewarmness  and  carelessness 
and  indifference  about  the  things  of  God,  all  must  be 
rooted  out  and  forsaken  if  we  are  anxious  for  the  prize. 
We  must  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  we  must  crucify 
our  affection  for  this  world  ;  we  must  look  well  to  our 
habits  and  inclinations  and  employments,  and  if  we 
find  anything  coming  in  as  a  stumbling-block  between 
ourselves  and  salvation,  we  must  be  ready  to  lay  it 
aside  as  if  it  were  a  millstone  about  our  necks,  although 
it  cost  us  as  much  pain  as  cutting  off  a  hand  or  plucking 
out  a  right  eye.  Away  with  everything  which  keeps 
us  back  ;  our  feet  are  slow  at  the  very  best,  we  have 
a  long  course  to  run,  we  cannot  afford  to  carry  weight, 
if  we  are  really  contending  for  everlasting  life. 

But  above  all  we  must  take  heed  that  we  lay  aside 
the  sin  which  doth  most  easily  beset  us,  the  sin  which 


160  THE    CHRISTIAN    RACE 

from  our  age,  or  habit,  or  taste,  or  disposition,  or  feelings, 
possesses  the  greatest  power  over  us.  I  know  of  two 
which  are  always  at  our  elbows,  two  sins  which  try 
the  most  advanced  Christians  even  to  the  end,  and 
these  arc  pride  and  unbelief— pride  in  our  own  differ 
ence  from  others,  pride  in  our  reputation  as  Christians, 
pride  in  our  spiritual  attainments  :  unbelief  about  our 
own  sinfulness,  unbelief  about  God's  wisdom,  unbelief 
about  God's  mercy.  Oh,  they  are  heavy  burdens,  and 
sorely  do  they  keep  us  back,  and  few  really  know  they 
are  carrying  them,  and  few  indeed  are  those  who  will 
not  discover  them  at  the  very  bottom  of  the  chamber 
of  their  hearts,  waiting  an  opportunity  to  come  out. 

But  there  are  particular  besetting  sins,  of  which 
each  separate  Christian  can  alone  furnish  an  account; 
each  single  one  of  us  has  some  weak  point,  each 
one  has  got  a  thin,  shaking  spot  in  his  wall  of 
defence  against  the  devil,  each  one  has  a  traitor  in 
his  camp  ready  to  open  the  gates  to  Satan,  and  he 
that  is  wise  will  never  rest  until  he  has  discovered 
where  this  weak  point  is.  This  is  that  special  sin 
which  you  are  here  exhorted  to  watch  against,  to  over 
come,  to  cast  forth,  to  spare  no  means  in  keeping 
it  under  and  bringing  it  into  subjection,  that  it  may 
not  entangle  you  in  your  race  towards  Zion.  One 
man  is  beset  with  lust,  another  with  a  love  of  drink 
ing,  another  with  evil  temper,  another  with  malice, 
another  with  covetousness,  another  with  worldly-minded- 
ness,  another  with  idleness  ;  but  each  of  us  has  got 
about  him  some  besetting  infirmity,  which  is  able  to 
hinder  him  far  more  than  others,  and  with  which  he 
must  keep  an  unceasing  warfare,  or  else  he  will  never  so 
run  as  to  obtain  the  prize.  Oh  these  bitter  besetting 
sins  !  How  many  have  fallen  in  their  full  course,  and 
given  occasion  to  God's  enemies  to  blaspheme,  from 


THE   CHRISTIAN   RACE  161 

thinking  lightly  of  them,  from  not  continually  guarding 
against  them,  from  a  vain  notion  that  they  were 
altogether  cut  off ! — they  have  been  over-confident  and 
presumptuous  ;  they  have  said  "  We  are  the  temple  of 
the  Lord,  and  we  cannot  greatly  stumble,"  and  they 
have  forgotten  that  hidden  root,  that  branch  of  the 
old  Adam  ;  and  so  day  after  day,  little  by  little,  shoot 
after  shoot,  it  grew,  it  strengthened,  it  filled  their 
heart,  it  blighted  their  few  graces  ;  and  suddenly,  without 
time  to  think,  they  have  slipped  and  fallen  headlong 
in  the  race,  and  now  they  are  hurrying  down  stream 
amidst  that  miserable  party,  the  backsliders,  and  who 
can  tell  what  their  end  may  be?  But  what  was  the 
simple  cause?  They  disregarded  some  besetting  sin. 
Go,  child  of  God,  and  search  the  chamber  of  thine 
imagination  :  see  whether  thou  canst  find  there  some 
seed  of  evil,  some  darling  thing  which  thou  hast 
tenderly  spared  hitherto,  because  it  was  a  little  one ; 
away  with  it — there  must  be  no  mercy,  no  compromise  ; 
no  reserve  :  it  must  be  laid  aside,  plucked  up,  torn  up  by 
the  roots,  or  it  will  one  day  trip  thee  up,  and  prevent 
thee  running  thy  race  towards  Zion.  The  gates  of  heaven 
are  broad  enough  to  receive  the  worst  of  sinners,  but  too 
narrow  to  admit  the  smallest  grain  of  unforsaken  sin. 

IV.  The  fourth  point  to  be  noticed  in  the  text  is 
the  frame  of  mind  in  which  we  are  to  run  :  "  let  us  run 
with  patience'.'  I  take  this  patience  to  mean  that  meek, 
contented  spirit,  which  is  the  child  of  real  living  faith, 
which  flows  from  a  confidence  that  all  things  are 
working  together  for  our  good.  Oh,  it  is  a  most 
necessary  and  useful  grace  !  There  are  so  many  crosses 
to  be  borne  when  we  have  entered  the  course,  so  many 
disappointments  and  trials  and  fatigues,  that,  except 
we  are  enabled  to  possess  our  souls  in  patience,  we 
shall  never  persevere  unto  the  end.  But  we  must  not 

II 


,62  THE   CHRISTIAN   RACE 

turn  back  to  Egypt,  because  some  bring  up  an  evil 
report  of  the  promised  land  ;  we  must  not  faint  because 
the  journey  is  long  and  the  way  lies  through  a  wilder 
ness,  we  must  press  forward  without  flagging,  not 
murmuring  when  we  are  chastened,  but  saying,  with 
Eli,  "  It  is  the  Lord  let  Him  do  that  which  seemeth 
Him  good."  Look  at  Moses,  in  Hebrews  xi. :  "When 
he  was  come  to  years,  he  refused  to  be  called  the 
son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter;  choosing  rather  to  suffer 
affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the 
pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season  ;  esteeming  the  reproach 
of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt : 
for  he  had  respect  unto  the  recompence  of  the  reward  ; 
he  endured  as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible."  Look  at 
Job,  when  God  permitted  Satan  to  afflict  him:  "Naked," 
he  says,  "  came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked 
shall  I  return  thither :  the  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord 
hath  taken  away  ;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord." 
"  What  ?  shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God, 
and  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ? "  Look  at  David,  the 
man  after  God's  own  heart,  how  many  waves  of  trouble 
passed  over  that  honoured  head  ;  how  many  years  he 
fled  from  the  hand  of  Saul,  how  much  tribulation  did 
he  suffer  from  his  own  family  ;  and  hear  what  he  says 
when  he  is  fleeing  from  his  own  son  Absalom,  and  a 
certain  Benjamite  came  forth  and  cursed  him.  "  Behold, 
my  son,  which  came  forth  of  my  bowels,  seeketh  my 
life  :  how  much  more  may  this  Benjamite  do  it  ?  Let 
him  alone,  and  let  him  curse  ;  for  the  Lord  hath  bidden 
him.  It  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  look  on  mine 
affliction,  and  that  the  Lord  will  requite  me  good  for 
his  cursing  this  day."  Mark  too,  as  you  read  his  Psalms, 
how  often  you  come  on  that  expression,  "  waiting 
upon  God "  :  it  seems  as  if  he  thought  it  the  highest 
grace  a  Christian  can  attain  to, 


THE   CHRISTIAN   RACE  163 

Look  lastly  at  your  blessed  Lord  Himself.  St.  Peter 
says,  "  He  left  us  an  example,  that  we  should  walk 
in  His  steps :  who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 
in  His  mouth :  who  when  He  was  reviled,  reviled 
not  again  ;  when  He  suffered,  He  threatened  not ; 
but  committed  Himself  to  Him  that  judgeth  right 
eously."  Paul  says :  "  For  consider  Him  that  endured 
such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself,  lest  ye 
be  wearied  and  faint  in  your  minds.  Ye  have  not 
yet  resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin.  And  ye 
have  forgotten  the  exhortation  which  speaketh  unto 
you  as  unto  children,  My  son,  despise  not  thou  the 
chastening,  of  the  Lord,  nor  faint  when  thou  art 
rebuked  of  Him :  for  whom  the  Lord  loveth  He 
chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  He  re- 
ceiveth."  O  yes,  beloved,  we  must  run  with  patience, 
or  we  shall  never  obtain.  There  may  be  many  things 
we  cannot  understand,  much  that  the  flesh  could 
perhaps  wish  otherwise  ;  but  let  us  endure  unto  the 
end,  and  all  shall  be  made  clear,  and  God's  arrange 
ments  shall  be  proved  best.  Think  not  to  have  your 
reward  on  earth,  do  not  draw  back  because  your 
good  things  are  all  yet  to  come:  to-day  is  the  cross, 
but  to-morrow  is  the  crown ;  to-day  is  the  labour, 
to-morrow  is  the  wages ;  to-day  is  the  sowing,  but 
to-morrow  is  the  harvest ;  to-day  is  the  battle,  but  to 
morrow  is  the  rest ;  to-day  is  the  weeping,  but  to-morrow 
is  the  joy  ;  and  what  is  to-day  compared  to  to-morrow  ? 
to-day  is  at  most  but  threescore  years  and  ten,  but  to 
morrow  is  eternity.  Be  patient  and  hope  unto  the  end. 

V.  The  last  point  is  the  most  important  in  the 
text.  It  is  the  object  on  which  our  eyes  are  to  be 
fixed :  we  are  to  run  our  race  "  looking  unto  Jesus." 
We  are  to  run,  depending  on  Him  for  salvation, 
renouncing  all  trust  in  our  own  poor  frail  exertions, 


1 64  THE   CHRISTIAN   RACE 

and  counting  our  own  performances  no  better  than 
filthy  rags,  and  resting  wholly  and  entirely,  simply 
and  completely,  upon  that  perfect  righteousness  which 
He  worked  out  for  us  upon  the  cross.  We  need  not 
run  uncertain  of  the  end,  we  need  not  fight  in  igno 
rance  of  what  shall  follow  ;  we  have  only  to  behold 
the  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world,  and  believe  that  He  hath  borne  our  griefs  and 
carried  our  sorrows,  and  will  soon  present  us  spotless 
and  unblameable  in  His  Father's  sight.  And  then  we 
are  to  run,  making  Jesus  our  Example,  taking  no  lower 
pattern  than  the  Son  of  God  Himself,  endeavouring 
to  copy  His  meekness,  His  humility,  His  love,  His 
zeal  for  souls,  His  self-denial,  His  purity,  His  faith, 
His  patience,  His  prayerfulness,  and  as  we  look  we 
shall  daily  become  more  like  Him.  And  then  we  are 
to  run,  looking  for  our  blessed  Lord's  appearing,  pray 
ing  always  with  all  prayer  and  supplication  that  He 
will  hasten  His  coming  and  kingdom  and  accomplish 
the  number  of  His  elect.  Unto  them  that  look  for 
Him  shall  He  appear  the  second  time  without  sin 
unto  salvation,  and  their  vile  bodies  in  a  moment,  in 
the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  shall  be  made  like  unto  His 
glorious  body,  and  they  shall  be  for  ever  with  their  Lord. 

Oh,  this  looking  unto  Jesus  !  here  is  the  secret  cause 
which  kept  that  cloud  of  witnesses  steadfast  and  un- 
moveable  in  this  narrow  way  !  here  is  the  simple  rule 
for  all  who  wish  to  enter  on  the  course  which  lands 
a  man  in  Paradise  !  Look  not  to  earth :  it  is  a  sinful, 
perishable  place,  and  they  that  build  upon  it  shall  find 
their  foundation  of  the  earth  earthy  ;  they  will  not  stand 
the  fire.  Set  not  your  affections  upon  it,  or  else  you 
will  perish  together  ;  the  earth  shall  be  burned  up,  and 
if  you  cling  to  it  in  death  you  shall  not  be  divided  ! 

Look  not  to  yourselves !  you  are  by  nature  wretched 


THE  CHRISTIAN  RACE  165 

and  miserable,  and  poor  and  blind  and  naked  ;  you 
cannot  make  atonement  for  your  past  transgressions, 
you  cannot  wipe  out  a  single  page  in  that  long  black 
list,  and  when  the  King  shall  ask  you  for  your  wedding- 
garment  you  will  be  speechless.  Look  simply  unto 
Jesus,  and  then  the  weight  shall  fall  from  off  your 
shoulders,  and  the  course  shall  be  clear  and  plain,  and 
you  shall  run  the  race  which  is  set  before  you.  Truly 
a  man  may  be  mistaken  for  a  season,  and  walk  in 
darkness  for  a  time,  but  if  he  once  determine  to  look 
to  Jesus  he  shall  not  greatly  err. 

Who  now  are  the  men  and  women  in  this  congrega 
tion  who  have  not  entered  on  the  grand  struggle  for  life  ? 
This  day,  ye  Christless,  sleeping  ones,  this  day  I  charge 
you  to  be  honest  and  merciful  to  your  souls.  Turn 
ye,  O  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways,  turn  ye  from 
your  self-pleasing  and  self-indulging  ;  seek  ye  the  Lord 
while  He  may  be  found,  call  upon  Him  while  He  is 
near ;  cry  mightily  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  before 
the  night  cometh  and  you  sleep  for  evermore.  I  know 
the  thoughts  that  are  in  the  hearts  of  those  among 
you  who  ever  think,  (for  many  come  and  go  without 
thinking) :  I  know  your  thoughts  ;  you  cannot  make  up 
your  mind  to  lay  aside  every  weight,  you  cannot  throw 
overboard  the  sin  that  doth  so  easily  beset  you.  Alas  ! 
like  Herod  you  would  do  many  things,  but  not  all :  you 
will  not  give  up  that  Herodias,  that  darling  bosom-sin — • 
the  world,  the  business,  the  drink,  the  pleasure — you 
cannot  give  it  up,  it  must  have  the  first  place  in  your 
heart.  I  testify,  I  warn  you,  I  take  you  to  record, 
that  God  hath  declared  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter 
into  heaven  anything  that  defileth,  and  if  you  are 
determined  not  to  give  up  your  sins,  your  sins  will 
cleave  to  you  like  lead  and  sink  you  in  the  pit  of 
destruction.  You  need  not  wait :  you  must  show  some 


1 66  THE   CHRISTIAN   RACE 

inclination  ;  God  will  not  convert  you  against  your  will  ; 
except  you  show  the  desire,  how  can  you  expect  He 
will  give  you  the  grace  ? 

But  where  are  the  men  and  women  who  are  running 
the  race  and  struggling  towards  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  ? 
Think  not  that  you  have  anything  which  makes  your 
journey  more  difficult  than  others'  ;  the  saints  at  God's 
right  hand  were  perfected  through  sufferings  ;  and 
you  must  run  with  patience  ;  millions  have  gone  safe 
through,  and  so  shall  you. 

Beware  of  cumbering  yourselves  with  any  weight  of 
earthly  chances ;  examine  your  hearts  most  closely, 
and  purge  out  each  besetting  sin  with  a  godly  prayerful 
jealousy.  Remember  that  blessed  rule,  "  looking  unto 
Jesus."  Peter  did  run  well  for  a  time,  when  he  left 
the  ship  to  walk  upon  the  sea  to  Jesus  ;  but  when  he 
saw  the  waves  and  the  storm  he  was  afraid  and  began 
to  sink.  Thus  many  a  one  sets  out  courageously  ;  but 
after  a  while  corruptions  rise  high  within,  corruptions  are 
strong  without,  the  eye  is  drawn  off  Jesus,  the  devil 
gets  an  advantage,  and  the  soul  begins  to  sink.  Oh, 
keep  your  eye  steadily  fixed  on  Christ,  and  you  shall 
go  through  fire  and  water  and  they  shall  not  hurt  you. 
Arc  you  tempted  ?  look  unto  Jesus.  Are  you  afflicted  ? 
look  unto  Jesus.  Do  all  speak  evil  of  you  ?  look  unto 
Jesus.  Do  you  feel  cold,  dull,  backsliding  ?  look  unto 
Jesus.  Never  say,  "  I  will  heal  myself  and  then  look 
unto  Jesus,  I  will  get  into  a  good  frame  and  then 
take  comfort  in  my  Beloved."  It  is  the  very  delusion 
of  Satan.  But  whether  you  are  weak  or  strong,  in  the 
valley  or  on  the  mount,  in  sickness  or  in  health,  in 
sorrow  or  in  joy,  in  going  out  or  in  coming  in,  in  youth 
or  in  age,  in  richness  or  in  poverty,  in  life  or  in  death, 
let  this  be  your  motto  and  your  guide — "LOOKING 
UNTO  JESUS." 


THE  CHRISTIAN   RACE  167 

Why  those  fears?  behold,  'tis  Jesus 
Holds  the  helm  and  guides  the  ship: 

Spread  the  sails,  and  catch  the  breezes 
Sent  to  waft  us  o'er  the  deep 
To  the  regions 

Where  the  mourners  cease  to  weep. 

Could  we  stay  when  death  was  hov'ring, 

Could  we  rest  on  such  a  shore  ? 
No,  the  awful  truth  discov'ring, 

We  could  linger  there  no  more ; 

We  forsake  it, 
Leaving  all  we  loved  before. 

Though  the  shore  we  hope  to  land  on 

Only  by  report  is  known, 
Yet  we  freely  all  abandon 

Led  by  that  report  alone: 

And  with  Jesus 
Through  the  trackless  deep  move  on. 

Render'd  safe  by  His  protection, 

We  shall  pass  the  wat'ry  waste ; 
Trusting  to  His  wise  direction, 

We  shall  gain  the  port  at  last, 

And  with  wonder 
Think  on  toils  and  dangers  past. 


XIII 
"WHAT   THINK    YE    OF   CHRIST  1" 

"What  think  ye  of  Christ?  whose  son  is  he?  They  say  unto  him, 
The  Son  of  David."— MATT.  xxii.  42. 

BELOVED,  I  have  told  you  more  than  once,  and 
I  tell  you  now  again,  that  since  I  have  had  the 
charge  of  this  House  and  district  it  has  been  my  heart's 
desire  and  prayer  to  promote  your  salvation.  Morning 
and  night  I  make  my  petition  to  my  Father  which  is 
in  heaven,  that  it  will  please  Him  to  pour  out  the  Holy 
Ghost  upon  you  all,  and  bring  you  unto  Christ  Hath 
riot  He  said  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive "  ?  and  shall 
I  not  bring  your  case  before  Him? 

But  you  little  know  what  an  anxious  situation  a 
minister  of  the  Church  is  placed  in  at  all  times,  and 
never  more  so  than  when  preparing  for  the  pulpit. 
Perhaps  you  may  think  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  open 
my  Bible,  take  the  first  text  that  meets  my  eye,  and 
write  off  a  sermon  in  two  or  three  hours.  But  it  is 
far  otherwise.  I  have  to  watch  for  your  souls,  as  one 
that  would  give  account ;  and  if  you  will  not  think 
about  them  yourselves,  I  must  try  to  persuade  you  to 
it.  Now,  I  search  the  Scriptures  and  compare  them 
with  what  I  see  and  observe  and  hear  of  those  who  live 
about  me  ;  and  I  declare  to  you,  with  grief  and  sorrow, 
in  many  many  cases  I  cannot  make  the  two  agree. 
I  find  there  are  some  persons  ruining  body  and  soul 

168 


"WHAT  THINK  YE  OF  CHRIST?"      169 

by  drunkenness  and  immorality  ;  some  who  only  come 
to  church  once,  and  that  without  any  conceivable  reason 
that  I  can  discover  ;  others  who  do  so  very  irregularly, 
and  on  some  Sundays  do  not  come  at  all.  Oh,  beloved, 
I  tell  you  again,  as  I  have  told  many  from  house  to 
house,  if  it  is  worth  while  to  come  at  all,  it  is  worth 
while  to  come  regularly.  One  person  told  me  the  other 
day  he  never  went  anywhere,  either  to  church  or  chapel, 
he  had  given  it  up  ;  and  I  fear  there  are  others  like 
him.  Believe  me,  when  I  see  all  this,  it  becomes  a  very 
difficult  matter  to  make  up  my  mind  what  texts  will 
do  you  the  most  good. 

What,  I  say  to  myself,  will  most  awaken  this  people  ? 
What  will  most  startle  them  ?  What  will  arouse  them 
and  make  them  think?  What  will  most  likely  lead 
them  to  see  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  the  danger  of  trifling 
with  their  Maker  and  their  Judge,  the  real  value  of 
their  own  souls,  the  exceeding  mercy  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus  ?  Such  were  some  of  the  reflections  that  passed 
through  my  mind  when  I  chose  the  text  you  have 
heard:  "What  think  ye  of  Christ?" 

Beloved,  the  present  state  of  your  souls  depends  on 
the  nature  of  the  answer  your  conscience  gives  :  "  What 
think  ye  of  Christ  ? "  You  cannot  answer  this  satis 
factorily  unless  you  arc  true  members  of  His  body- 
really  united  to  Him  by  a  living  faith,  really  renewed 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  is  no  middle  path  here. 
You  cannot  make  it  a  matter  of  indifference  whether 
you  think  rightly  of  Christ  or  not ;  the  question  is  very 
short,  very  simple,  but  the  answer  to  it  involves  life 
or  death.  The  book  of  Judges  tells  us  that  the  Gileaditcs 
slew  forty-two  thousand  men  of  Ephraim,  because  they 
could  not  pronounce  a  word  aright ;  but  the  pronun 
ciation  of  that  single  word  was  the  proof  whether  they 
were  enemies  or  not.  And  just  so  stands  the  case 


1 70    "WHAT   THINK   YE   OF   CHRIST?** 

between  you  and  God  in  the  matter  of  my  text.  I 
ask  you  a  little,  plain  question  ;  but  if  you  cannot 
give  the  answer  God  requires,  I  warn  you,  in  love  and 
tenderness,  you  are  travelling  on  the  broad  way  that 
leadeth  to  destruction. 

There  are  some,  I  know,  who  would  fain  believe 
that  to  think  and  preach  so  much  about  Christ  is  no 
true  religion,  that  it  would  be  better  if  I  spoke  more 
about  plain  practical  duties,  that  it  does  not  signify 
so  much  what  men  think  about  Christ ;  but  I  trust 
they  are  so  few,  that  I  shall  say  nothing  to  them. 
Plain  practical  duties  are  very  well,  but  they  cannot 
put  away  sin,  or  give  men  new  hearts,  or  save  souls  : 
all  that  is  Christ's  office  ;  Christ  is  the  mainspring 
and  subject  of  all  Scripture  ;  Christ,  we  read,  is  the 
Bishop  of  souls,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  faith,  the 
Bread  of  life,  the  Captain  of  salvation,  the  Corner-stone, 
the  Door,  the  Mediator,  the  Prince  of  life,  the  Prince 
of  peace,  the  Rock,  the  Shepherd,  the  Sun  of  righteous 
ness,  the  Light  of  the  world  ;  and  surely,  then,  I  may 
fairly  tell  you  that  to  think  rightly  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  sum  and  substance  of  religion. 

I.  Let  us  then  inquire,  beloved,  what  it  is  to  think 
rightly  of  Christ.  First,  then,  with  respect  to  His 
Person,  we  must  think  that  He  is  perfect  God,  equal 
with  the  Father,  and  together  with  Him  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  making  up  the  ever-blessed  Trinity.  If  we  do 
not  think  this  we  contradict  the  words  of  Scripture. 
If  we  do  not  think  of  Christ  as  God,  we  cannot 
explain  how  He  can  be  so  mighty  to  save,  or  why 
His  fulfilment  of  the  law  and  crucifixion  can  have 
been  so  meritorious,  so  complete  a  sacrifice  for  sins 
in  the  sight  of  His  Father.  If  Christ  had  been  at 
all  inferior  to  God,  the  work  that  He  worked  upon 
earth  for  our  sakes  would  have  been  the  act  of  a 


"WHAT  THINK  YE  OF  CHRISTY     171 

servant,  performing  the  commands  of  his  master  and 
doing  no  more  than  his  duty.  Nothing  less  than  God 
could  have  made  atonement  for  this  guilty  world. 

2.  We  must   think   of   Him  as  perfect   man,  of  like 
nature  with  ourselves  in  everything,  sin  only  excepted. 
If  Christ  had  not  been  man  He  could  not  have  suffered 
the  punishment  of  our  iniquities  by  dying  on  the  cross  ; 
if   He  had   not  taken  on   Him   a  body   and    a    nature 
liable  to  temptation  like  our  own,  He  could  never  have 
fulfilled  the  law  for  us  and  in  our  stead  ;  and  we  could  not 
have  looked  upon  Him  with  a  brotherly  confidence,  as  one 
who  can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities. 

3.  We  must   think  of  Him    as   the  great   Redeemer 
and  Saviour,  who  by  the  voluntary  sacrifice  and  death 
of  Himself  made  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world,  provided  a  means  of  reconciliation  between  His 
Father   and   mankind,  and    brought   in    an    everlasting 
righteousness   which    is   unto   all   and    upon   all   them 
that  believe. 

4.  We  must   think  of  Him  as  a  King-.    He  is  the 
great  head   of  a  spiritual  dominion   over   the  heart  of 
all  whom  He  chooses  and  calls  out  of  the  world  ;  the 
chief    of  a   spiritual    kingdom    which   confers    peculiar 
blessings    and    privileges    on    all  who    become  subjects 
of  it — a  kingdom  which  is  unseen,  invisible  at  present, 
but  shall  be  known  and  acknowledged  by  all  at  Christ's 
second  coming. 

5.  We  must  think  of  Him  as  the  great  High  Priest, 
who,  like  the  Jewish  high  priest  of  old,  has  gone  alone 
before  us  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  that  is  Heaven,  to 
make  satisfaction  for  the  sin  of  His  people  with  blood, 
even   the   blood   of   Himself,  who   ever   stands  at   the 
right  hand  of  God  to  make  intercession  for  them  ;  and 
can   always  feel  for   and   pity  them,  because   as   man 
He  was  tempted  like  as  they  are. 


172 


"WHAT  THINK  YE   OF   CHRIST?" 


6.  We    must    think    of    Him    as    the    Prophet    that 
should   come,   foretold    by   Moses   shortly   before    His 
death,  who  has  shown  to  mankind  the  way  of  salvation, 
who  has  clearly  explained  how  God's  mercy  and  God's 
justice   can   be  reconciled  when  sinners  are  accounted 
righteous,   who   has   taught   us   how   God  would   have 
men  to  live,  and  has  placed  duties  and  morality  upon 
their  right  foundation,  and  these  are  the  inward  motives 
and  the  heart. 

7.  Lastly,   we    must    think   of    Him    as    the    great 
Example,  who  has  left  men  a  pattern  that  they  should 
walk  in  His  steps,  who  has  given  them,  in   His   own 
person   and    behaviour,  a  model   of   conduct   in  nearly 
every  department  of  life  which  they  cannot  strive  too 
much  to  imitate. 

Now,  I  doubt  not  the  greater  part  of  you  will  feel 
disposed  to  say,  "  Do  we  not  certainly  know  all  these 
things  ?  We  have  learned  them  long  ago  ;  we  have  heard 
them  continually  in  church  ;  if  this  is  all  you  mean 
by  thinking  rightly  of  Christ,  none  may  feel  more 
comfortable  than  we  do  in  answering  the  question  of 
your  text." 

Yes,  beloved,  but  this  is  not  all :  there  is  the  point 
at  which  so  many  members  of  the  Church  of  England 
stop  short ;  here  lies  the  snare  into  which  so  many  of 
you  fall  ;  hitherto  the  devil  himself  will  accompany  you, 
and  perhaps  go  further,  for  he  believes,  he  trembles, 
he  confesses  Jesus  to  be  the  Holy  One  of  God. 
Hearken,  therefore,  I  beseech  you,  and  understand  that 
there  are  two  ways  of  thinking  about  Christ ;  both 
indeed  are  necessary  to  salvation,  but  one,  alas,  is  very 
often  found  to  exist  without  the  other.  It  is  one  thing 
to  think  of  Him  with  the  head,  and  another  to  think 
of  Him  with  the  heart  ;  it  is  one  to  think  about  His 
offices  as  a  matter  of  opinion,  it  is  another  to  rejoice 


"WHAT  THINK  YE   OF  CHRIST >"     173 

in  them  as  infinitely  important  to  your  own  soul  ;  it 
is  one  to  know  these  things  correctly,  it  is  another 
to  live  as  if  you  felt  them  ;  it  is  one  to  acknowledge 
that  Christ  is  a  mighty  gift  to  ruined  man,  it  is  quite 
another  to  apply  this  healing  medicine  to  your  own 
case. 

Indeed  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant  that  this  error 
is  a  most  poisonous  one,  it  is  the  very  seat  of  Satan  ; 
and  in  charity  to  your  souls  I  beseech  you,  if  you  love 
life,  to  take  heed  to  your  ways,  to  search  your  hearts, 
and  come  out  from  it.  The  Church  of  England  has 
many  privileges  and  advantages — there  is  no  communion 
on  earth  has  near  so  many  to  offer— but,  like  every 
other  Church,  she  is  liable  to  be  abused  by  her  unworthy 
members.  She  has  placed  in  your  hands  a  Prayer-book 
of  unequalled  beauty,  propriety  and  spirituality ;  but 
many  of  you  turn  it  to  a  bad  account,  and  because  you 
join  in  prayers  which  speak  of  Christ  as  our  Redeemer, 
our  Mediator,  our  Advocate,  you  flatter  yourselves  that 
you  are  in  a  fair  way  to  be  saved,  that  you  are  accepted 
in  the  Beloved.  But  know  ye,  each  one,  for  a  certainty, 
however  suitable  these  prayers  may  be  to  those  who 
can  say  Amen  in  faith,  they  will  be  found  to  have 
profited  you  very  little  if  your  conscience  cannot  also 
say,  "He  is  my  Redeemer,  my  Mediator,  my  Advocate." 
To  attend  the  services  of  this  house  is  indeed  a  privilege, 
and  one  too  that  may  not  be  lightly  disregarded  ;  but 
it  is  very  possible  to  draw  near  with  the  lips  and  not 
with  the  heart,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the  form  of 
godliness  without  the  power,  and  all  the  prayer-books 
in  England  will  never  save  your  soul  if  you  will  not 
give  your  whole  heart  to  God.  Be  not  deceived :  I 
want  each  one  of  you  to  make  his  salvation  his  own 
personal  concern,  and  for  a  time  to  forget  there  is  any 
but  himself  in  the  world  to  be  saved, — to  ask  his  con- 


i74     "WHAT   THINK   YE   OF   CHRIST?*' 

science  "  What  do  /  think  of  Christ  ?  "  not  What  do  we 
think  ?  "  Is  Jesus  my  Saviour  ?  "  not  Is  He  our  Saviour  ; 
for  men  will  not  be  judged  in  congregations,  but  separ 
ately,  each  standing  by  himself,  and  each  in  succession 
will  be  condemned  who  cannot  say  "The  life  that  / 
have  lived  I  have  lived  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God, 
who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me" 

Beloved,  this  doctrine  may  seem  to  make  the  way 
to  heaven  narrow  ;  but  did  not  Jesus  say  it  was  so, 
and  would  not  your  profession  be  all  useless,  all  un 
meaning,  without  it  ? 

You  say  you  think  that  Christ  is  perfect  God  ?  But 
how  can  His  ministers  suppose  you  really  feel  and 
believe  this,  when  they  see  you  show  so  little  anxiety 
to  worship  Him,  to  give  Him  thanks,  to  put  your  whole 
trust  in  Him,  to  cast  all  your  burden  on  Him,  to  fear 
Him,  and  to  love  Him — while  you  appear  to  meditate 
so  seldom  on  the  mighty  work  He  alone  could  perform 
for  you,  on  the  righteousness  He  alone  could  bring — 
while  you  do  not  obey  His  expressed  will — while  He 
says  one  thing  and  you  do  another?  Surely,  when 
these  things  are  so,  He  cannot  be  your  God. 

You  say  you  think  that  Christ  is  a  great  Redeemer. 
But  how  can  we  suppose  you  feel  this,  while  you  appear 
so  careless  about  the  souls  which  He  purchased  with 
His  own  blood — while  you  think  so  lightly  of  the  sins, 
which  could  only  be  atoned  for  by  His  death  and 
sufferings  upon  the  cross — while  you  show  so  little 
humiliation,  so  little  sense  of  your  own  unworthiness 
and  desperate  state  without  Him — while  you  do  not 
use  every  means  of  strengthening  and  refreshing  your 
weak  spirits,  that  you  may  be  meet  for  the  inheritance 
of  His  saints  in  light — while  you  live  so  much  for  this 
perishable  world,  from  the  snares  of  which  He  died 
to  deliver  you?  Surely,  whatever  you  may  choose  to 


"WHAT  THINK  YE  OF  CHRIST?"      175 

think,  when   these   things   are  so   He   cannot    be  your 
Redeemer. 

You  say  you  think  that  Christ  is  a  great  Example. 
But  how  can  we  imagine  you  believe  it,  while  you  do 
not  frame  your  own  lives  according  to  the  pattern  He 
has  left — while  you  evidently  do  not  struggle  to  imitate 
His  faith,  His  love,  His  humility,  His  purity,  His  self- 
denial,  His  meekness,  His  gentleness,  His  unwearied 
zeal  for  the  good  of  souls  ?  Surely,  whatever  you  may 
think  and  say,  He  cannot  be  your  Example. 

0  beloved,   this   cold,  lifeless  acknowledgment,   this 
dead   belief  of  truths   because    you   know   nothing   to 
the  contrary,  can  never  be  thinking  rightly  of  Christ! 
This  cannot  be  that  saving  faith  which  works  by  love, 
overcomes  the  world,  and  purifies   the  heart.     If  this 
is  all,  you  cannot  be  aware  of  your  own  sinfulness,  you 
cannot  be  aware  of  the  mighty  remedy  required  ;  you 
must  be  dead  alike  to  your  own  necessities,  and  the 
mercy   of  God    who  has   provided   so   great  salvation. 
If  the  plague  or  the  typhus  fever  were  in  this  church, 
and   there  stood  amongst  you  some  sure  and  healing 
cordial,  and  none  of  you  did  more  than  look  at  it,  and 
say   you   believed    it   was   an   infallible  cure,  but  none 
stretched  out  a  hand  to  lay  hold  upon  it  and  use  it,  could 
any  one  suppose  that  you  either  believed  the  remedy  to 
be  certain,  or  the  disease  to  be  a  dangerous  one  ?     But 
just  such  is  your  case,  if  you  profess  to  believe  in  Christ 
and  yet  cannot  call  Him  your  own  ;  for  you  may  depend 
upon  it,  that  as  far  as  your  salvation  is  concerned  Christ 
unapplied  is  no  Christ  at  all. 

1  am  at  a  loss  whether  it  would  be  more  fitting  to 
call  such  thinking   of  your  great  Redeemer  ungrateful 
or  unreasonable.      Judge   now   for   yourselves.      If  an 
inhabitant  of  another  world  were  to  be  told  there  was 
a  certain  place  called  earth,  where    God   once   placed 


i76    "WHAT   THINK   YE   OF   CHRIST?" 

a  man  and  woman,  gave  them  everything   they   could 
desire,    and    made    them    rulers    over    all,    he    would 
probably  say :  "  What  goodness  !  how  great  must  have 
been   their   love !   what   pleasure  they    must   have   felt 
in  doing  His  will !  "    Suppose  then  I  went  on  to  tell  him 
this  man  and  woman   would   not  believe  God's  word, 
they  thought  themselves  wiser  than   their  Maker,  and 
broke   the   only  small  command    imposed    upon  them, 
he  would  say,  perhaps,   "  What  miraculous    ingratitude, 
folly    and    unbelief!    doubtless    they    were     punished 
deservedly."    Suppose  then  I  proceeded  to  tell  him  that, 
on    the  contrary,   God   spared   them,   provided    means 
of  reconciliation,  and  in   due  time   made   manifest  His 
mercy    by   sending    His    only-begotten    Son    to    take 
guilty  man's  nature,  fulfil  the  law  and  suffer  punishment 
in  his  stead — declaring  that  whosoever  throughout  the 
world  confessed   his  sins  and  put  all  his  trust  in  this 
Almighty    Saviour   should   be   saved    from   wrath   and 
accounted  righteous  as  if  he  had  never  broken  the  law, 
— do  you  not  think  that,  on  hearing  this,  he  would  say, 
"  Wonderful !  of  course  there  must  be  very  few  who  do 
not  seek  this  Saviour,  make  Him  the  chief  subject  of 
their   thoughts   and    object   of  their   love,  the   resting- 
place  of  their  hope,   their  refuge    in   trial,   the  rock  of 
their  salvation  ;  there  must  be  few  who  do  not  delight 
to  hear  of  Him,  read  about  Him,  talk  of  Him,  meditate 
upon  Him,  pray  to  Him,  honour  His  word,  His  house 
and  His  services."     Beloved,  what  could  I   say  next? 
I  have  stated  the  case  fairly  so  far,  and  would  not  this 
be   my   only  honest   reply  ?     "  Many,   alas,  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen.     Many  name  the  name  of  Christ, 
but  few  depart  from  iniquity  or  believe  in  Him  to  the 
saving  of  their  souls." 

Suffer  me  once  more  to  plead  with  you  for  your  eternal 
good.     Do  not,  I  entreat  you,  leave  this  place  in  a  state 


"WHAT  THINK  YE  OF   CHRIST  >"     177 

of  lukewarm  uncertainty  as  to  whether  ye  think  rightly 
of  Christ  or  not.  If  the  thought  of  Christ  has  never 
weaned  you  from  the  world,  made  a  difference  in  your 
lives,  and  sanctified  your  hearts,  it  has  hitherto  profited 
you  nothing.  If  the  thought  of  Him  dying  for  sin  has 
not  shown  you  how  sinful  sin  is,  how  hateful  in  the 
sight  of  God,  has  never  brought  you  on  your  knees 
grieving  for  your  iniquity  with  heartfelt  repentance, 
has  never  led  you  to  that  Bible  which  testifies  of  Him, 
believe  me  it  has  hitherto  profited  you  nothing,  it  will 
only  increase  your  condemnation.  Remember,  however 
lightly  you  may  esteem  your  souls,  God  has  set  an 
untold  value  on  them,  for  He  gave  His  only  Son  for 
their  redemption,  but  they  cannot  be  saved,  unless 
Christ  dwells  in  your  heart  by  faith.  Awake,  then,  and 
cast  away  this  icy  garment  of  indifference,  which  is 
now  your  pride.  Dare  to  go  further  than  the  world 
around  you,  and  to  think  of  Christ  as  a  true  Christian, 
as  one  who  has  sins  to  be  atoned  for,  and  rejoices  to 
find  a  complete  atonement. 

I  solemnly  declare  unto  you,  if  you  are  content  with 
a  mere  head-knowledge  of  these  things  and  can  be  at 
ease  without  coming  unto  Jesus  as  your  Saviour  and 
your  God,  you  are  ruining  your  own  souls,  and  you 
shall  find  that  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  will  rise  up  in 
judgment  against  you  and  condemn  you,  for  if  they 
had  known  them  they  would  have  repented  long  ago 
in  dust  and  ashes. 

Come,  then,  unto  Jesus  ;  think  that  He  is  ready  to 
receive  you,  willing  and  mighty  to  save.  You  cannot 
say  I  wish  you  to  do  what  is  impossible  ;  you  cannot 
say  I  tell  you  to  fulfil  the  law  and  then  come  ;  I  do 
not  ask  you  to  make  brick  without  straw,  to  make 
yourselves  saints  and  then  come.  In  my  Master's  name 
I  offer  you  complete  salvation  if  you  will  believe,  free 

12 


1 78    "WHAT   THINK   YE   OF    CHRIST?1' 

salvation  if  you  will  believe  ;  everlasting  life  if  you  will 
believe.  All  things  are  yours  if  you  will  think  rightly 
of  Christ. 

Christians,  one  word  for  you.  What  think  you  of 
Christ  ?  Do  you  regret  that  you  have  made  Him  your 
Redeemer  and  your  Friend  ?  Is  His  service  wearisome  ? 
Is  not  your  blessed  Lord  as  good  as  His  word,  "  I  will 
give  you  rest"?  Are  not  His  ways  ways  of  pleasant 
ness  and  paths  of  peace?  Can  you  not  say  of  Him 
what  was  said  of  Solomon  by  the  Queen  of  Sheba  : 
"It  was  a  true  report  that  I  heard  in  mine  own  land 
of  thy  acts  and  of  thy  wisdom.  Howbeit  I  believed 
not  the  words,  until  I  came,  and  mine  eyes  had  seen 
it :  and,  behold,  the  half  was  not  told  me  :  thy  wisdom 
and  prosperity  exceedeth  the  fame  which  I  heard. 
Happy  are  thy  men,  happy  are  these  thy  servants, 
which  stand  continually  before  thee,  and  that  hear 
thy  wisdom"  (i  Kings  x.  6)? 

Press  forward,  then,  I  beseech  you,  toward  the  mark 
for  the  prize  of  your  high  calling.  Show  forth  the 
praises  of  Him  that  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness 
into  this  marvellous  light.  Let  nothing  tempt  you 
to  cast  aside  your  confidence,  which  hath  great  hope 
of  reward.  "  Be  not  weary  in  well  doing,  for  in  due 
time  ye  shall  reap,  if  you  faint  not." 


XIV 

THE    UNCHANGING    CHRIST 

"Jesus  Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever." — HEB.  xiii.  8. 

ALWAYS    the    same !    unchanging !— that    is    a 
glorious  character  ;  a  character  which  belongs  to 
nothing  that  is  of  the  earth  earthy  ;  a  character  which 
He  alone  deserves  who  is  the  Lord  from  heaven. 

What  of  this  very  world  in  which  we  live  and  move 
and  have  our  being  ?  It  has  stamped  upon  it  the 
marks  of  a  tremendous  change  ;  it  is  no  longer  the 
same  as  it  was  in  the  beginning,  it  cannot  be  that 
fair  creation  of  which  God  pronounced  every  part  and 
portion  to  be  very  good.  Doubtless  we  are  not 
ignorant  it  is  still  a  beautiful  world,  clothed  with  all 
that  is  lovely  to  the  eye,  furnished  with  all  that  is 
necessary  to  our  comfort,  stored  with  everything  that 
can  make  life  enjoyable :  you  may  see  everywhere  the 
traces  of  a  Father's  hand.  But  still,  we  repeat,  this 
world  is  not  what  it  once  was  :  it  is  no  longer  the 
same — no  more  the  same  than  the  gallant  ship  which 
yesterday  did  walk  the  waters  like  a  thing  of  life,  and 
to-day  is  dashed  high  on  the  beach  and  lies  there  a 
wreck,  dismasted,  shattered,  and  forsaken — no  more  the 
same  than  the  ruin  of  some  ancient  house  of  God, 
which  in  days  gone  by  was  set  apart  and  hallowed 
for  religious  services,  and  now  stands  desolate  and 
silent  and  alone,  with  weeds  and  briars  creeping  over 

179 


i  So          THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST 

its  floor,  and  ivy  hanging  about  its  broken  walls  like 
a  widow's  garment.  Just  so  this  world  has  gone 
through  a  blighting,  withering  change  ;  and  therefore 
it  is  we  see  so  much  of  lusts  unbridled  and  tempers 
ungoverned  and  passions  unrestrained  and  intellects 
degraded  and  affections  misplaced  and  powers  mis 
applied,  and  God  neglected,  dishonoured  and  lightly 
esteemed.  And  the  sicknesses  which  devour  their 
thousands,  and  the  wars  which  cut  off  their  tens  of 
thousands,  and  the  graves  of  infants  snatched  away 
in  the  spring-time  of  life,  and  the  tears  and  distresses 
and  troubles  and  sorrows  and  afflictions  which  God 
never  placed  in  Eden,  but  of  which  we  now  hear 
continually, — all  these  tell  you  the  same  tale,  the 
world  is  no  longer  the  same.  All  these  are  the  hand 
writing  on  the  wall,  to  remind  us  that  man,  like  an 
unfaithful  steward,  hath  marred  and  spoiled  his  Maker's 
handiwork  by  his  own  sin,  and  so  put  the  creation 
out  of  order  and  course. 

But  we  have  not  time,  beloved,  to  compare  earth  as 
it  is  with  earth  as  it  was  before  Adam  fell :  it  is  enough 
to  know  that  by  his  transgression  all  things  suffered, 
for  after  his  transgression  all  things  were  altered.  We 
would  rather  go  on  to  set  before  you  proofs  which 
are  more  under  your  own  eyes  and  come  within  your 
own  observation.  We  wish  you  to  feel  the  full  force 
and  blessedness  of  the  character  St.  Paul  has  given 
to  your  Lord  and  Saviour  in  our  text ;  and  in  order 
to  this  we  think  it  of  first  importance  to  establish  in 
your  minds  this  grand  point — that  there  is  nothing  on 
earth  of  which  you  can  say  it  is  unchangeable,  it  is 
always  the  same,  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever, 
c^/ First,  then,  we  ask  you  to  mark  that  the  empires 
and  kingdoms  of  this  world  continue  not  the  same  : 
not  all  the  victories  which  mighty  conquerors  have  won> 


THE   UNCHANGING  CHRIST  181 

not  all  the  blood  which  they  have  spilt  to  cement  and 
make  firm  their  thrones,  not  all  the  gold  and  treasure 
they  have  heaped  together,  not  all  the  territory  they 
have  brought  under  their  authority,  not  all  the  laws 
they  have  carefully  framed  for  their  subjects,  have 
ever  availed  to  build  up  one  single  kingdom  that  has 
stood  firm  and  undestroyed. 

Some  have  endured  for  a  longer  space  than  others, — 
some  have  appeared  likely  to  remain  until  the  end  of 
time, — but  sooner  or  later  all  have  wasted  away,  their 
strength  has  gone  from  them,  they  have  decayed  and 
passed  by,  and  their  place  is  no  more  found. 

Where  are  the  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel,  whose 
power  and  magnificence  we  read  of  in  the  books  of 
Kings  and  Chronicles?  Armies  like  the  sand  of  the 
sea  for  multitude,  gold  and  silver  abundant  beyond 
even  our  conceptions, — who  would  have  thought  such 
greatness  would  come  to  nothing  ?  But  Judah  and 
Israel  could  not  bear  prosperity ;  they  did  not  live 
up  to  their  privileges,  they  provoked  God  by  their 
wickedness  ;  and  so  the  chosen  land  became  a  desert, 
and  Jerusalem  itself  was  given  to  be  burned,  and, 
notwithstanding  all  their  wealth  and  power,  no  sooner 
did  the  Lord  touch  them  than  they  fell. 

And  where,  too,  are  those  mighty  nations  whose  -names 
so  often  meet  our  eyes  in  searching  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures — Nineveh  and  Babylon  and  Egypt?  Time 
was  when  they  had  all  the  world  at  their  feet,  they 
ruled  over  countless  people  and  tongues,  and  none 
could  stand  before  them  ;  and  yet  one  after  the  other 
they  were  overthrown  and  melted  away.  God  used 
them  as  instruments  to  punish  and  chastise  His  faithless 
people,  but  after  they  had  done  His  work  He  did  not 
forget  to  reckon  with  them  for  their  own  sins.  And, 
with  all  their  pomp,  and  splendour,  and  majesty, 


1 82  THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST 

no  sooner  did  He  put  forth  His  hand  and  touch  them 
than  they  too  consumed  away  and  fell.  The  very  cities 
where  their  kings  did  reign  are  no  more,  their  palaces 
are  levelled  with  the  dust,  their  lofty  walls  which  were 
their  pride  are  utterly  broken  down :  Nineveh,  that 
exceeding  great  city,  has  been  so  completely  destroyed 
that  the  exact  spot  where  she  once  stood  is  no  longer 
known  ;  and  Babylon,  the  wonder  of  the  world,  the 
hammer  of  the  whole  earth,  has  become,  as  Jeremiah 
foretold,  a  desolation,  a  dry  land,  a  wilderness,  a  land 
wherein  no  man  dwelleth,  neither  doth  any  son  of  man 
pass  thereby. 

O  beloved,  man  in  his  best  estate  is  altogether  vanity  ; 
the  works  of  his  hands  are,  like  himself,  frail  and  short 
lived  and  perishable  and  ready  to  fade  away  ;  with 
all  his  boasted  wisdom  he  can  make  nothing  lasting, 
he  cannot  secure  his  handiwork  against  change.  The 
oldest  dominion  in  Europe,  is  so  to  speak,  only  of 
yesterday ;  and  who  knows  but  there  may  be  a  worm 
at  the  heart  of  the  strongest  empire  on  earth,  and  a 
few  short  years  and  she  too  may  be  gone  ? 

But  again,  we  ask  you  to  mark  that  even  churches 
continue  not  the  same.  Alas  !  there  is  only  too  much 
evidence  that  they  too  may  fall  to  pieces  and  decay. 
Where  are  the  churches  whose  faith  and  patience  and 
love  and  zeal  shine  forth  so  brightly  in  the  Acts  and 
Epistles  of  the  New  Testament  ?  Where  is  the  church 
of  Antioch  and  the  church  of  Ephesus,  the  church 
of  Philippi  and  the  church  of  Berea,  the  church  of 
Thessalonica  and  the  church  of  Corinth — those  holy 
communions  which  once  brought  such  glory  and  praise 
to  God,  whose  obedience  was  spoken  of  throughout 
the  world,  whose  children  were  ready  to  shed  their 
blood  for  the  Gospel's  sake  ?  They  are  gone,  they  are 
dead,  they  are  fallen  ;  they  kept  not  their  first  estate, 


THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST  183 

they  became  high-minded  and  puffed  up  with  self- 
conceit  ;  they  did  not  persevere  in  well-doing,  they 
did  not  abound  in  the  fruits  of  righteousness,  and  so 
the  Lord  who  had  grafted  them  in,  did  also  cut  them 
off  like  withered  and  useless  branches, — and  if  anything 
can  be  said  to  remain  of  them,  it  is  but  the  wreck  and 
remnant  of  what  they  once  were.  Doubtless,  beloved, 
there  are  promises  belonging  to  Christ's  Church 
generally, — the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it ; 
the  Lord  will  never  leave  Himself  without  a  witness, — 
but  there  is  no  assurance  that  the  church  of  any 
particular  place  or  nation  shall  abide  unchanged,  except 
she  continue  faithful.  Take  any  church  on  earth,  the 
most  renowned  for  wisdom,  the  most  famous  for  age, 
the  most  apostolic  in  her  government  ;  and  we  are  bold 
to  tell  you  if  that  church  is  unfaithful  to  the  Bridegroom 
Christ  Jesus,  if  she  does  not  hold  forth  the  light  of  the 
pure  gospel,  if  she  leaves  her  first  love,  if  she  suffers 
false  prophets  to  teach  and  seduce,  if  she  becomes 
lukewarm,  and  says  "  I  am  rich  and  increased  with  goods," 
if  she  rests  content  with  having  a  name  to  live  while 
she  is  dead,  and  plumes  herself  on  keeping  hold  of  the 
truth  while  she  does  not  witness  to  it, — we  are  bold  to 
tell  you,  however  long  God's  mercy  may  spare  her,  her 
candlestick  shall  sooner  or  later  be  removed,  for  we 
know  this  fearful  threat  has  been  over  and  over  again 
made  good. 

f  Yes!  even  we  have  reason  to  watch  and  to  pray 
and  to  be  humble  and  fear  :  the  fine  gold  may  be 
come  dim  ;  no  home  so  strong  but  if  the  servants 
sleep  it  may  be  broken  up  ;  no  church  so  well  ordered 
but  through  the  sin  and  faithlessness  of  her  members 
she  may  be  overturned.  The  Lord  Himself  once  gave 
the  pattern  of  His  temple,  but  when  the  Jews  who 
kept  it  turned  their  own  way  and  repented  not,  when 


,84          THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST 

they  thought  only  of  a  form  of  godliness  and  despised 
the  power,  that  very  temple  was  delivered  over  to  be 
destroyed,  and  of  all  His  beautiful  stones  not  one 
was  left  upon  another. 

But  we  desire  to  bring  this  matter  nearer  home  to 
yourselves.  Have  you  not  ever  observed  that  men's 
circumstances  are  always  changing— they  are  never 
long  the  same  ?  Few  indeed  are  those  who  have  not 
learned  this  by  bitter  experience.  Some  begin  life 
with  every  prospect  of  earthly  prosperity,  and  before 
they  have  reached  their  prime  their  riches  seem  to 
have  melted  away,  and  are  scattered  like  the  leaves 
in  autumn,  and  they  find  themselves  stripped  of  their 
possession  ;  others,  who  know  not  what  it  is  to  want, 
arc  smitten  with  some  sore  disease,  they  have  no 
power  to  enjoy  the  fortune  God  has  given  them,  and 
often,  when  ready  to  cry  in  the  evening  "  Would  God 
it  were  morning,"  and  in  .the  morning  "  Would  God  it 
were  evening,"  often  when  faint  and  weary  and  cast 
down  with  pain,  often  would  they  give  all  their  riches 
for  a  little  health  and  think  it  cheaply  purchased  ; 
others  with  bodily  strength  and  store  of  worldly 
goods  are  bereaved  of  friends  by  death  or  separation  : 
the  advisers  of  their  youth,  the  comforters  of  their 
sorrows,  the  companions  of  their  joys  are  one  after 
the  other  taken  from  them ;  year  after  year  their 
beloved  ones,  with  whom  they  have  taken  sweet 
counsel,  and  who  were  as  their  own  souls,  are  all  cut 
down  or  removed,  until  at  length  they  stand,  like  the 
last  tree  of  the  forest,  all  single  and  alone. 

Remember,  I  say  not  but  that  this  is  good  :  well  for 
us  that  we  are  constrained  to  drink  the  bitter  cup  of 
affliction  ;  it  is  the  rod  by  which  many  are  brought 
home  to  Christ, — none  are  in  such  fearful  peril  as  those 
who  have  never  known  a  cross.  But  judge  ye  whether 


THE   UNCHANGING  CHRIST  185 

it  be  not  true  that  our  own  life  is  full  of  changes  ; 
that  man  is  a  poor,  frail,  perishable  creature,  and  never 
continueth  long  in  one  stay  ;  there  is  nothing  about 
his  earthly  condition  certain  and  fixed  and  immovable 
and  sure.  We  never  know,  when  we  part  from  those 
that  are  dear  to  us,  that  we  shall  meet  again  :  we  know 
not  what  alterations  time  may  work  before  we  once 
more  meet  face  to  face,  before  hand  grasps  hand  and 
we  again  take  sweet  counsel  about  our  common  faith 
and  our  hopes  of  heaven.  We  may  part  rejoicing  and 
meet  sorrowing,  part  with  laughter  and  meet  with 
tears,  part  with  many  around  us  and  meet  with  few  : 
strange  if  we  part  and  meet  the  same  ! 

Oh,  changing,  changing  world  ! — miserable  indeed  are 
they  who  look  upon  it  as  an  abiding  habitation,  who 
think  themselves  anything  but  strangers,  who  give  to 
anything  but  heaven  the  name  of  home. 

Look  at  men's  minds.  They  arc  not  always  the  same. 
The  intellect  of  the  prudent  statesman,  the  talent  of  the 
eloquent  orator, — these  are  not  proof  against  decay. 
It  is  a  beautiful  thing,  is  the  mind  of  man,  by  nature, 
when  trained  and  educated  and  polished  as  it  may  be. 
But  often  we  sec  that  mind  become  a  mere  wreck, 
the  eye  become  dim  and  the  natural  force  abated  ;  the 
memory  fails,  the  senses  are  deadened.  We  see  all 
the  weakness  of  childhood  without  its  playfulness  and 
light  heart.  This  is  a  grief,  and  one  more  proof  that 
we  are  not  always  the  same. 

Look  at  men's  affections.  They  are  not  always  the 
same :  They  may  be  warm  and  strong  for  a  season, 
but  even  they  cool.  Often  time  and  absence  and  the 
world  cause  strangeness  and  coldness  between  spirit 
and  spirit,  bitter  and  painful  to  bear  but  it  must  be 
borne.  Business  and  new  ties  and  new  residence  and 
new  relations  nip  off  old  friendships.  Our  changing 


186          THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST 

affections  are  one  more  proof  that  nothing  remains 
always  the  same. 

Onwards,  onwards  we  are  all  moving  :  there  is  no 
standing  still.  The  infant  will  soon  be  a  boy,  and  the  boy 
a  man,  and  the  man  will  find  gray  hairs  upon  him  long 
before  he  expects,  and  the  grave  will  be  ready  for  him 
probably  before  he  is  ready  for  it.  And  men  plant  and 
build  and  labour  and  toil  and  plan  and  contrive,  and 
often  never  see  their  schemes  completed.  For  we 
never  know  what  is  before  us— what  to-morrow  may 
bring  forth  ;  it  may  be,  as  the  marriage  service 
beautifully  teaches,  better  or  worse,  richer  or  poorer, 
sickness  or  health  ;  we  may  find  in  our  path  towards 
Zion  sweet  flowers,  but  far  more  likely  thistles  and 
thorns  ;  we  may  have  some  season  of  sunshine,  but  far 
more  often  darkness  and  clouds  ;  but  still,  whatever 
happens,  we  are  rolling  onward  towards  the  end,  and 
this  we  may  be  sure  of— we  shall  never  be  long  with 
out  some  change,  we  shall  never  find  our  state  is  long 
the  sarnc,  to-morrow  and  yesterday  may  be  widely 
different. 

Once  more.  The  holiest  saints  of  God  are  not 
always  the  same.  We  have  no  fear  that  their  names 
will  ever  be  blotted  from  the  Lamb's  book  of  life  ;  but 
we  believe  their  hearts  are  often  filled  with  shame  and 
confusion  because  of  their  own  shortcomings  and  un 
steady  walk  with  God.  Show  me  one  single  servant 
of  the  Lord  in  Scripture  who  did  not  at  some  time 
err  and  stumble  in  his  course,  who  did  not  by  his 
inconsistency  or  sin  give  occasion  to  the  Lord's  enemies 
to  blaspheme.  Oh,  but  the  best  of  men  have  given 
melancholy  proof  that  so  long  as  we  are  in  the  body 
we  are  liable  to  change.  We  venture  to  assert  there 
is  not  one  in  the  white-robed  company  of  the  redeemed 
who  would  tell  you  he  had  always  held  on  his  way 


THE   UNCHANGING  CHRIST  187 

without  wavering,  always  fought  an  equally  good 
fight ;  not  one  but  could  remember  that  at  his  best 
there  wrere  days  of  spiritual  sloth  and  drowsiness, 
days  of  unholy  and  unchristlike  tempers,  days  of 
vanity  and  self-conceit,  days  of  self-indulgence  and 
conformity  to  this  world,  days  of  coldness  and  want 
of  love — and  each  the  cause  of  pain  and  sorrow  and 
self-abasement. 

Away  with  the  idea  of  a  sinless  perfection  on  earth  ! 
We  are  bound  to  aim  at  it,  we  are  sworn  to  strive 
after  it  ;  that  man  is  no  true  Christian  who  sits  down 
lazily  and  thinks  to  be  saved  without  striking  a  blow, 
who  does  not  wish  to  be  holy  as  God  is  holy  and 
perfect  as  God  is  perfect ;  but  still  we  are  confident 
the  dearest  children  of  God  do  never  lay  claim  to 
any  personal  sinlessness  and  perfection  ;  their  hearts' 
confession  is,  Lord,  "  we  are  exceedingly  unprofitable 
servants,  in  many  things  we  offend  daily,"  and  their 
hearts'  prayer,  "  Jesus,  Master,  bear  with  our  sins  and 
pardon  our  iniquities." 

No,  beloved,  there  is  nothing  unchangeable  and  the 
same  here  below.  Kingdoms,  churches,  human  con 
ditions,  holy  Christians,  all  are  alike  in  this  respect, — 
they  are  liable  to  alter,  they  are  never  long  the  same. 
There  is  but  one  account  of  everything  we  see  around 
us :  it  is  all  fleeting,  perishing,  passing  away.  The  sun, 
which  has  shone  on  so  many  births  and  lighted  so  many 
graves,  shall  one  day  be  darkened  ;  the  solid  hills, 
which  have  looked  down  on  generation  after  generation 
and  been  trampled  on  by  one  short-lived  owner  after 
another,  shall  melt  away ;  the  glorious  heaven  above 
us  shall  pass  away  like  a  scroll  ;  all  speak  with  one 
voice, — "  We  shall  soon  be  changed,  we  shall  not  always 
be  the  same." 

And  where,  beloved,  are  we  to  look  for  comfort  and 


1 88          THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST 

rest  to  our  souls  ?  We  want  a  sure  and  lasting  founda 
tion  ;  \vc  want  a  hope  in  which  there  is  no  variableness 
nor  shadow  of  turning  :  and  mark  ye,  every  one,  this 
cannot  be  on  earth -they  who  search  for  it  here  will 
search  in  vain — a  sure  hope  for  the  soul  is  not  to  be 
found  in  the  land  of  the  living:  "The  depth  saith,  It 
is  not  in  me  :  and  the  sea  saith,  It  is  not  with  me. 
It  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold,  neither  shall  silver  be 
weighed  for  the  price  thereof.  .  .  ."  But  "  God  undcr- 
standeth  the  way  thereof,  and  He  knoweth  the  place  " 
where  peace  may  be  found,  and  in  the  text  He  sets 
it  openly  before  our  eyes :  "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same 
yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Now,  of  this 
sameness  we  desire  to  speak  fully  and  freely,  and  to 
show  you  the  comfortable  things  which  it  contains. 

We  would  remind  you,  then,  that  Jesus  has  ever  been 
the  same  in  His  office,  person  and  nature.  In  these 
latter  days  He  has  graciously  made  plain  to  our  eyes 
the  way  of  salvation,  by  coming  upon  earth  to  teach, 
to  suffer  and  to  die  ;  He  has  proved  Himself  the  Son 
of  God  with  power  by  rising  again  from  the  dead.  But 
still  we  would  not  have  you  forget  He  was  always  the 
same — yesterday  as  well  as  to-day. 

Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  or  the  earth 
and  world  were  formed,  from  everlasting  Jesus  Christ 
was,  like  the  Father,  very  God.  From  the  beginning 
He  was  foreordained  to  be  the  Saviour  of  sinners ;  He 
was  always  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  without  whose  blood  there  could  be  no  remission. 
The  same  Jesus,  to  whom  alone  we  may  look  for  salva 
tion,  that  same  Jesus  was  the  only  hope  of  Abel  and 
Enoch  and  Noah  and  Abraham  and  all  the  patriarchs  ; 
what  we  are  privileged  to  see  distinctly  they  doubtless 
saw  indistinctly,  but  the  Saviour  both  we  and  they  rest 
upon  is  one.  It  was  Christ  Jesus  who  was  foretold  in 


THE  UNCHANGING   CHRIST  189 

all  the  prophets,  and  foreshadowed  and  represented 
in  all  the  law :  the  daily  sacrifice  of  the  lamb,  the 
cities  of  refuge,  the  brazen  serpent,  all  these  were  so 
many  emblems  to  Israel  of  that  Redeemer  who  was  yet 
to  come,  and  without  whom  no  man  could  be  saved. 
There  never  was  but  one  road  to  heaven  :  Jesus  Christ 
was  the  way,  the  truth  and  the  life  yesterday  as  well 
as  to-day. 

But  we  must  pass  on  to  another  point  of  even  greater 
interest  than  this.  We  remind  you  that  the  character 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  always  the  same — in  this  too  He 
is  unchangeable.  What  He  was  in  the  New  Testament 
days  He  continues  now,  and  will  be  even  to  the  end. 
Consider  now,  I  pray  you,  what  a  mine  of  comfort  and 
consolation  lies  in  that  single  thought. 
y  Always  the  same  in  love  towards  men's  souls.  It 
was  love  towards  a  fallen  world  which  made  Him  lay 
aside  for  a  season  His  glorious  majesty  and  honour, 
and  take  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant  upon  earth  ; 
it  was  love  that  constrained  Him  to  endure  the  cross 
and  despise  the  shame,  and  lay  down  His  life  for 
us  the  ungrateful  and  the  ungodly  ;  it  was  love  that 
moved  Him  to  shed  tears  over  bloody-minded,  un 
believing  Jerusalem,  because  she  would  not  know  the 
things  belonging  to  her  peace  ;  and  it  is  just  the  same 
love  which  He  feels  towards  sinners  now — He  never 
changes. 

Again  :  Jesus  is  always  the  same  in  His  power  to  save. 
It  was  He  that  cast  forth  seven  devils  from  Mary 
Magdalen  and  raised  her  up  to  newness  of  life.  It 
was  He  that  poured  comfort  on  that  weeping  penitent 
sinner  in  the  Pharisee's  house,  and  pronounced  those 
blessed  words,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,  go  in 
peace."  It  was  He  that  entered  the  house  of  Zacchaeus, 
chief  of  the  publicans,  and  declared  that  salvation  was 


1 9o          THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST 

come  unto  him,  that  he  was  a  true  son  of  Abraham. 
It  was  He  that  gave  that  blessed  assurance  to  the 
dying  thief  who  prayed  to  be  remembered,  "  This  day 
thou  shalt  be  with  me  in  Paradise."  It  was  He  that 
met  the  persecuting  Saul  on  his  way  to  Damascus,  and 
cast  him  down  to  the  ground  with  all  his  pride,  and 
put  in  him  a  new  heart,  and  sent  him  forth  to  preach 
the  faith  he  had  once  destroyed.  And,  O  brethren 
beloved,  who  need  despair?  Christ  Jesus  is  still  just 
the  same — able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  those  that 
come  to  God  by  him. 

/  But  again  :  Jesus  Christ  is  always  the  same  in  His 
willingness  to  receive  the  penitent.  We  never  read  of 
any  who  sought  Him  in  sincerity  and  sought  Him  in 
vain,  who  came  poor  in  spirit  and  were  sent  away  empty. 
Oh,  no  !  far  otherwise  ;  there  is  everything  to  encourage, 
to  invite,  to  lead  us  on.  Who  was  it  that  used  those 
comforting  words,  "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour  and 
are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest;"  "Him  that 
cometh  unto  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out ; "  "  The  Son 
of  man  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost ; " 
"  Every  one  who  seeth  the  Son  and  believeth  on  Him 
may  have  everlasting  life?"  Who  was  it  but  Jesus 
Christ — ever  the  same  ?  He  will  not  go  back  from  one 
jot  or  tittle  of  His  words,  and  what  He  hath  spoken 
He  will  still  make  good.  "  Heaven  and  earth,"  He 
says,  "  shall  pass  away,  but  my  word  shall  not  pass 
away." 

Once  more  "Jesus  Christ  is  always  the  same  in 
His  power  to  preserve.  He  will  not  begin  the  work 
of  grace  and  leave  it  uncompleted  ;  for  it  is  His  own 
word,  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them, 
and  they  follow  me,  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life, 
and  no  man  shall  ever  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." 
It  was  He  that  raised  the  apostles  after  they  had  shame- 


THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST          191 

fully  forsaken  Him  and  fled  ;  it  was  He  that  turned 
the  heart  of  even  Peter  back  again,  though  he  had 
denied  Him  before  His  face.  And  what  He  did  then, 
beloved,  He  will  do  now  also,  for  every  believer ;  it 
shall  never  be  said  that  any  trusted  in  Jesus  and  were 
confounded,  for  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith 
never  changes. 

Always  the  same!  It  is  this  which  gives  such  value 
to  the  Gospels  in  which  our  Lord's  history  is  told. 
We  are  not  reading  there  the  life  and  sayings  of  one 
fickle  and  changeable  like  ourselves,  but  the  life  and 
sayings  of  a  Redeemer  who  is  now  what  He  was  then. 
We  tell  you  confidently  that  all  that  love  and  gentle 
ness  and  compassion  and  long-suffering  and  tender 
heartedness  which  you  may  there  see  in  your  Lord 
and  Saviour's  character  are  placed  before  you  that  you 
may  understand  the  character  of  Him  from  whom  alone 
we  receive  forgiveness  and  to  whom  alone  your  prayer 
must  be  made,  and  we  say  this  because  we  know  He 
is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever. 

Always  the  same  !  It  is  this  which  makes  the  gospel 
so  excellent  and  precious.  We  do  not  bid  you  depend 
on  anything  less  than  the  tried  corner-stone,  the  foun 
tain  whose  water  shall  never  fail— the  city  of  refuge 
whose  walls  shall  never  be  broken  down — the  sure 
Rock  of  Ages.  Churches  may  decay  and  perish ; 
riches  may  make  themselves  wings  and  fly  away  ;  but 
he  that  builds  his  happiness  on  Christ  crucified  and 
union  with  Him  by  faith,  that  man  is  standing  on  a 
foundation  which  shall  never  be  moved,  and  will  know 
something  of  true  peace. 

There  are  men  and  women  in  the  world  who  rest 
all  upon  their  personal  amendment,  or  upon  an  un 
wearied  round  of  services  and  regular  attendance  upon 
holy  ordinances  ;  and  they  fancy  their  spiritual  disease 


I92 


THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST 


is  healed  and  all  is  peace.  But  we  believe  it  is  the 
peace  of  those  who  never  found  out  their  enemy,  the 
cure  of  those  who  have  never  really  felt  their  hearts' 
ailments. 

Oh  no !  we  believe  when  a  man  is  once  aroused 
to  see  the  extent  of  his  soul's  danger,  when  he  has 
felt  the  burden  of  his  sins  indeed  grievous  and  intoler 
able,  when  he  has  found  out  his  debt  and  his  own 
inability  to  pay, — we  are  confident  that  man  will  never 
get  peace  till  he  has  sought  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
till  he  has  taken  for  a  Friend  and  Advocate  Him  that 
is  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever.  That 
man  will  not  be  put  off  with  the  ornaments  and  trappings 
of  the  Church  which  is  the  bride,  he  will  never  rest 
content  till  he  has  laid  hold  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Bride 
groom,  and  has  become  one  with  Christ  and  Christ 
with  him. 

One  word  in  conclusion.  Are  there  not  some  among 
you  who  in  one  sense  have  always  been  the  same — 
thoughtless,  careless  about  your  eternal  interests, 
always  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God, 
always  more  anxious  about  the  life  that  now  is  than 
the  life  which  is  to  come,  always  disposed  to  give 
your  best  things  to  the  world  and  the  leavings  of  your 
time  and  talent  to  God  ?  We  warn  you  plainly  there 
must  be  a  change,  a  deep  foundation-searching  change, 
a  change  of  heart.  We  call  on  you  to  remember  the 
words  of  Him  who  never  goes  back  from  what  He  says 
"  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish." 
"  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children, 
ye  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

Oh  !  but  it  does  not  need  a  prophet's  eye  to  see 
changes  and  trials  before  you  all  !  The  breaking  up 
of  family  circles,  the  separation  from  those  you  love 
best,  the  loss  of  health,  friends,  earthly  possessions  : 


THE   UNCHANGING   CHRIST          193 

who  knows  but  they  may  be  very  near?  and  alas  for 
those  among  you  who  have  got  no  sure  resting-place 
for  your  weary  souls,  who  are  building  your  happiness 
on  the  frail  and  perishable  things  of  earth,  for  when 
ye  look  for  solid  consolations  ye  shall  find  none  !  O 
man,  the  time  is  flying,  death  and  judgment  are  at 
hand ;  and  what  wilt  thou  do  if  thou  hast  to  seek 
thy  spiritual  comforts  at  the  eleventh  hour?  Of  all 
thy  riches  thou  canst  carry  nought  away :  naked  thou 
didst  come  into  the  world,  and  naked  thou  must 
return  ;  of  all  thy  dear  friends,  who  now  weep  when 
thou  dost  weep  and  rejoice  when  thou  dost  rejoice, 
not  one  can  go  with  thee  beyond  the  tomb  ;  they  may 
sit  beside  thee  in  thy  last  hours,  they  may  watch  thy 
spirit's  flight,  they  may  follow  thy  body  to  its  long 
home  with  measured  pace  and  slow,  but  there  earthly 
friendship  must  stop, — it  can  go  no  farther  than  the 
brink  of  thy  narrow  bed, — they  will  turn  away  each  to 
his  own  duties,  and  thou  shalt  be  left  alone. 

O  man,  be  wise  in  time  ;  learn  to  lay  up  treasures 
in  heaven,  think  first  of  a  house  not  made  with  hands, 
look  to  that  precious  Friend  who  never  faileth  :  away 
with  thy  cold  and  sleeping  shadow  of  religion  ;  cease 
to  be  a  Christian  in  name  and  form  only,  become  a 
man  of  God  in  deed  and  in  truth  ;  come  to  thy  eternal 
Father  as  a  little  child,  with  confession  and  prayer  ; 
take  all  thy  sins  to  the  Saviour  who  died  upon  the 
cross  ;  let  nothing  satisfy  thee  till  thou  art  a  living 
member  of  Jesus  Christ,  one  with  Christ  and  Christ 
with  thee ;  in  Him  I  can  warrant  thee  a  hope  that 
never  changes,  a  title  to  happiness  that  shall  never 
be  overthrown. 

But  are  there  any  among  you  who  have  tasted  of  this 
blessed  change — who  have  put  off  the  old  man  which  is 
corrupt,  and  put  on  the  new  man  which  after  God  is 

13 


.  .,4          THE   UNCHANGING    CHRIST 

created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness — who  mourn 
over  your  own  daily  shortcomings,  and  sigh  after  more 
holiness,  more  self-denial,  more  mortification  of  the  flesh 
with  all  its  lusts?  We  bid  you  take  comfort,  and 
remember  that  Christ  is  still  the  same  :  He  called  you 
and  gave  you  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  and  He  will 
not  forsake  you.  You  may  waver  and  tremble :  go 
forward  in  faith,  and  He  will  still  support  you.  There 
is  but  one  more  change  before  you  :  the  changing  of  this 
vile  body  that  it  may  be  made  a  spiritual  body,  the 
putting  off  the  corruptible  to  put  on  the  incorruptible, 
the  giving  up  what  is  mortal  to  receive  what  is  im 
mortal,  the  laying  aside  the  earthly  tabernacle,  the 
entering  on  a  heavenly  one.  Watch,  then,  and  pray,  and 
He  that  gave  you  the  first  change  shall  give  you  the 
second  also ;  and  then  ye  shall  go  no  more  out :  no 
more  weariness,  no  more  weakness,  no  more  fainting  ; 
ye  shall  see  your  Saviour  as  He  is  and  love  Him  as 
yc  ought,  and  like  Him  at  last  be  unchanged  and  the 
same  for  evermore. 


XV 
THE    SECOND    ADVENT  (THE    TEN    VIRGINS] 

"Then  shall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins,  which 
took  their  lamps,  and  went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom.  And  five  of 
them  were  wise,  and  five  were  foolish.  They  that  were  foolish  took 
their  lamps,  and  took  no  oil  with  them  :  but  the  wise  took  oil  in  their 
vessels  with  their  lamps.  While  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  all  slumbered 
and  slept.  And  at  midnight  there  was  a  cry  made,  Behold,  the  bride 
groom  cometh  ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  him  Then  all  those  virgins  arose, 
and  trimmed  their  lamps.  And  the  foolish  said  unto  the  wise,  Give  us 
of  your  oil;  for  our  lamps  are  gone  out.  But  the  wise  answered,  saying, 
Not  so  ;  lest  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  you  :  but  go  ye  rather  to 
them  that  sell,  and  buy  for  yourselves.  And  while  they  went  to  buy,  the 
bridegroom  came  ;  and  they  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the 
marriage  :  and  the  door  was  shut.  Afterward  came  also  the  other 
virgins,  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us.  But  he  answered  and  said, 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not.  Watch  therefore,  for  ye  know 
neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of  man  cometh."— 
MATT.  xxv.  1-13. 

THIS    is    one    of  the    most   solemn    parables   that 
the  Lord  Jesus  ever  spoke  :  partly  because  of  the 
time  at  which  it  was  spoken  ;  partly   because   of  the 
matter  which  it  contains. 

As  to  the  time,  it  was  but  a  few  days  before  our 
Lord's  death.  It  was  spoken  within  view  of  Geth- 
semane  and  Calvary,  the  cross  and  the  grave. 

As  to  the  matter,  it  stands  as  a  beacon  to  the  Church 
in  all  ages.  It  is  a  witness  against  carelessness  and 
slothfulness,  against  apathy  and  indifference,  and  a 
witness  of  no  uncertain  sound.  It  cries  to  sinners, 
"  Awake,"  and  it  cries  to  saints  "  Watch." 

195 


T96  THE   SECOND   ADVENT 

Now,  I  must  necessarily  pass  over  many  points  that 
might  be  spoken  of  in  handling  this  parable.  I  have 
no  time  to  follow  out  many  trains  of  thought  which  it 
opens  up.  I  stand  here  not  to  make  a  book,  but  to 
preach  a  single  sermon  ;  and,  this  being  the  case,  I 
shall  keep  to  those  points  which  it  most  concerns  you 
and  me  to  know. 

The  marriage  customs  of  the  country  where  the 
parable  was  spoken  call  for  a  word  of  explanation. 
Marriages  generally  took  place  there  in  the  evening. 
The  bridegroom  and  his  friends  came  in  procession 
to  the  bride's  house  after  nightfall.  The  young  women 
who  were  the  bride's  friends  were  assembled  at  the 
bride's  house  to  wait  for  them.  As  soon  as  the  lamps 
or  torches  of  the  bridegroom's  party  were  seen  in  the 
distance,  these  young  women  lighted  their  lamps  and 
went  forth  to  meet  him  ;  then,  having  formed  one  united 
party,  they  all  returned  together  to  the  bride's  house. 
As  soon  as  they  entered  it,  the  door  was  shut,  and 
the  marriage  ceremony  took  place ;  and  after  that 
no  one  was  admitted.  All  these  were  familiar  things 
to  those  who  heard  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  it  is  right 
and  proper  that  you  should  understand  them. 

The  figures  used  in  the  parable  also  call  for  a  word  of 
explanation.  I  give  you|my  own  view  of  their  meaning. 
I  may  be  wrong ;  but  you  have  a  right  to  know  what 
I  think,  and  I  will  tell  you  shortly,  but  decidedly — I 
have  no  time  to  do  more. 

I  believe  the  TIME  spoken  of  in  this  parable  means 
the  time  when  Christ  shall  return  in  person  to  the 
world.  The  word  "  then  "  compared  with  the  end  of 
the  twenty-fourth  chapter  appears  to  me  to  settle  the 
question. 

I  believe  the  virgins  carrying  lamps  represent  pro 
fessing  Christians,  the  visible  Church  of  Christ. 


THE   SECOND  ADVENT  197 

I  believe  the  bridegroom  represents  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  Himself. 

I  take  the  wise  virgins  to  be  the  true  believers,  the 
converted  part  of  the  visible  Church.  I  take  the  foolish 
to  be  the  mere  nominal  Christians — the  unconverted. 

I  take  the  oil,  which  some  had  and  others  had 
not,  to  be  the  grace  of  the  Spirit,  the  unction  of  the 
Holy  One. 

I  consider  the  midnight  cry  to  mean  the  second 
coming  or  advent  of  Christ  into  the  world. 

I  consider  the  going  in  to  the  marriage  of  the  wise 
to  mean  the  reward  of  the  believers.  I  consider  the 
shutting  out  of  the  foolish  to  mean  the  final  exclusion 
from  heaven  of  the  unbelieving. 

Arid  now,  without  saying  anything  more  of  preface, 
let  me  go  on  to  point  out  the  great  practical  lessons 
which  this  parable  is  meant  to  teach. 

I.  Learn  first  that  the  visible  Church  of  Christ  will 
always  be  a  mixed  body  till  Christ  comes  again. 

II.  Learn  secondly  that  this  visible  church  is  always 
in  danger  of  neglecting  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  second 
advent 

III.  Learn  thirdly  that  whenever  Christ   does   come 
again,  it  will  be  a  very  sudden  event. 

IV.  Learn  fourthly  that  Christ's  second  advent  will 
make  an  immense  change  to  all   members  of  Christ's 
Church,  both  good  and  bad. 

Let  me  try  to  set  each  of  these  truths  before  you. 

1.  Learn  firstly  that  the  Church  of  Christ  will  always 
be  a  mixed  body  till  Christ  comes  again. 

I  can  gather  no  other  meaning  from  the  beginning 
of  the  parable.  I  see  wise  and  foolish  virgins  mingled 
in  one  company — virgins  with  oil  and  virgins  with  no 
oil  all  side  by  side.  And  I  see  this  state  of  things  going 


i98  THE   SECOND   ADVENT 

on  till  the  very  moment  the  bridegroom  appears.  I  sec 
all  this,  and  I  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion  that  the 
visible  Church  will  always  be  a  mixed  body  till  Jesus 
comes  again.  Its  members  will  never  be  all  unbelievers; 
Christ  will  always  have  His  witnesses.  Its  members  will 
never  be  all  believers  ;  there  will  always  be  imperfection, 
hypocrisy,  and  false  profession. 

1  frankly  say  that  I  can  find  no  standing  ground 
for  the  common  notion  that  the  Church  will  gradually 
advance  towards  perfection,  and  that  it  will  become 
better  and  better,  holier  and  holier  up  to  the  very 
end.  I  sec  no  warrant  of  Scripture  for  believing  that 
sin  will  gradually  dwindle  away  in  the  earth,  consume, 
melt  and  disappear  by  inches,  like  the  last  snowdrift  in 
spring;  nor  yet  for  believing  that  holiness  will  gradually 
increase  like  the  banyan  tree,  blossom,  bloom,  and  fill 
the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit. 

I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  true  gospel  religion 
admits  of  ebbs  and  flows  in  its  progress,  of  spring  tides 
and  of  neaps  ;  and  that,  like  the  moon,  Christ's  bride 
is  sometimes  full  and  walking  in  brightness,  and  like 
the  same  moon  is  sometimes  under  an  eclipse  and 
scarcely  seen  at  all.  That  there  will  always  be  a  vast 
amount  of  evil  in  the  world  until  the  second  advent, 
I  am  fully  persuaded.  Evil  men  and  seducers  shall 
wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiving  and  being  deceived. 
The  tares  and  the  wheat  shall  grow  together  till  the 
harvest.  I  fully  expect  that  the  earth  will  one  day 
be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord, 
but  I  believe  that  day  will  be  in  an  entirely  new  dis 
pensation — will  not  be  till  after  the  Lord's  return.  Till 
the  Bridegroom  comes  there  will  always  be  wise  and 
foolish  in  the  Church. 

The  wise  are  those  who  have  that  wisdom  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  alone  can  give.  They  know  their 


THE    SECOND   ADVENT  199 

sins,  they  know  Christ,  they  know  how  to  walk  and 
please  God,  and  they  act  upon  their  knowledge.  They 
look  on  life  as  a  season  of  preparation  for  eternity, 
not  as  an  end  but  as  a  way,  not  as  a  harbour  but  a 
voyage,  not  as  a  home  but  a  journey,  not  as  full  age 
but  a  school.  Happy  are  those  who  know  this  ! 

The  foolish  are  those  who  are  without  spiritual  know 
ledge.  They  neither  know  God,  nor  Christ,  nor  their 
own  hearts,  nor  sin,  nor  the  world,  nor  heaven,  nor  hell, 
as  they  ought.  There  is  no  folly  like  soul-folly.  To 
expect  wages  after  no  work,  or  prosperity  after  no 
pains,  or  learning  after  no  diligent  reading — all  this  is 
folly.  But  to  expect  heaven  without  faith  in  Christ, 
or  the  kingdom  of  God  without  being  born  again,  or 
the  crown  without  the  cross — all  this  is  greater  folly 
and  yet  more  common. 

Till  the  Bridegroom  comes  there  will  always  be  some 
who  have  grace  and  some  who  have  not  grace  in  the 
visible  Church.  Some  will  have  nothing  but  the  name 
of  Christian,  others  will  have  the  reality  ;  some  will 
have  the  profession  of  religion,  others  will  have  the 
possession  also.  Some  will  be  content  to  belong  to 
the  church,  others  will  never  be  content  unless  they 
also  belong  to  Christ.  Some  will  be  satisfied  if  they 
have  only  the  baptism  of  water,  others  will  never  be 
satisfied  unless  they  also  feel  within  the  baptism  of  the 
Spirit.  Some  will  stop  short  in  the  form  of  Christianity, 
others  will  never  rest  unless  they  have  also  the  substance. 

Brethren,  the  visible  Church  of  Christ  is  made  up 
of  these  two  classes.  There  always  have  been  such  ; 
there  always  will  be  such  until  the  end.  Borderers 
and  undecided  ones,  whom  man's  eyes  cannot  make 
out,  there  must  needs  be.  But  gracious  and  graceless, 
wise  and  foolish,  make  up  the  whole  Church  of  Christ. 
You  are  all  written  down  in  this  parable  yourselves. 


200 


THE   SECOND   ADVENT 


You  arc  all  cither  wise  virgins  or  foolish  virgins  ;  you 
have  all  oil  of  grace,  or  you  have  none  ;  you  are  all 
either  members  of  Christ,  or  not ;  you  are  all  either 
travelling  towards  heaven  or  towards  hell. 

See  now  how  important  it  is  that  we  ministers  should 
divide  our  congregations  in  preaching  to  them.  See 
how  we  ought  to  address  you  as  an  assembly  in  which 
some  are  converted  and  some  unconverted,  some  are 
regenerate  and  some  unregenerate,  and  some  have  grace 
and  some  have  no  grace  at  all.  I  know  well  that 
some  do  not  like  it ;  I  know  that  some  fancy  that 
we  should  address  you  all  as  good  Christian  people. 
I  for  one  will  never  do  so,  and  I  know  not  how  any 
one  can  do  it  with  the  Bible  in  his  hands. 

There  is  a  notion  abroad  that  all  have  grace  who 
have  been  baptised,  and  that  all  congregations  of 
baptised  people  should  be  addressed  as  regenerate.  I 
protest  against  such  a  notion  as  a  dangerous  contra 
diction  of  Scripture  ;  I  protest  against  it  as  calculated 
to  confound  the  minds  of  people  as  to  what  real  grace 
is.  I  protest  against  the  idea  of  grace  which  nobody 
can  see,  of  grace  which  a  man  may  have  in  his  heart 
and  yet  no  one  be  aware  of  its  existence.  I  know  of 
no  such  grace  in  Scripture.  Grace  or  no  grace,  oil  or 
no  oil,  living  or  dead,  having  the  Spirit  or  not  having 
the  Spirit, — these  are  the  only  distinctions  that  I  can 
find.  These  are  the  old  paths,  and  in  them  I  advise  you 
to  walk.  Beware  of  false  prophets  !  From  ministers 
who  do  not  draw  a  broad  line  between  having  the  lamp 
of  profession  and  having  the  oil  of  grace,  may  the  good 
Lord  ever  deliver  you  ! 

II.  Learn,  secondly,  that  the  Church  of  Christ  is 
always  in  danger  of  neglecting  the  doctrine  of  Christ's 
second  personal  advent. 

I   draw  that  truth  from   the  solemn    words  "While 


THE   SECOND   ADVENT  201 

the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  all  slumbered  and  slept." 
I  am  quite  aware  that  men  explain  that  verse  in 
different  ways.  I  stand  here  to  call  no  man  master. 
I  am  set  for  the  proclamation  of  that  which  I  believe 
in  my  conscience  to  be  true,  and  I  cannot  be  bound 
by  the  opinion  of  others. 

I  do  not  believe  that  the  words  "they  all  slumbered 
and  slept "  mean  the  death  of  all  ;  though  many  think 
so.  To  my  mind  such  an  interpretation  involves  a 
simple  untruth.  All  the  professing  Church  will  not  be 
dead  when  Christ  comes.  St.  Paul  says,  "  We  which 
are  alive  remain  (not  '  all  sleep ' )  unto  the  coming  of 
the  Lord." 

I  do  not  believe  that  the  words  mean  that  all  the 
professing  Church  got  into  a  slumbering  and  sleeping 
state  of  soul,  though  many  think  so.  Such  a  view 
appears  to  me  to  wipe  away  the  distinction  between 
believers  and  unbelievers  far  too  much.  Sleep  is  one 
of  the  emblems  which  the  Spirit  has  chosen  to  signify 
unconversion.  "  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,"  etc. 

I  believe  that  the  words  are  to  be  explained  with  a 
special  regard  to  the  great  event  on  which  the  whole 
parable  chiefly  runs — the  second  advent  of  Christ ;  and 
I  believe  that  our  Lord's  meaning  in  this  verse  of  the 
parable  was  simply  this :  that  during  the  interval 
between  His  first  and  second  advent  the  whole  Church, 
both  believers  and  unbelievers,  would  get  into  a  dull 
and  dim-sighted  state  of  soul  about  the  blessed  doctrine 
of  His  own  personal  return. 

And  I  say  deliberately  that,  so  far  as  my  own  judg 
ment  goes,  there  never  was  a  saying  of  our  Lord's  more 
thoroughly  verified  by  the  event.  I  say  that,  of  all 
doctrines  of  the  gospel,  the  one  in  which  we  are  most 
unlike  the  first  Christians  in  our  sense  of  its  true  value 
is  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  second  advent.  In  our  view 


202 


THE    SECOND    ADVENT 


of  man's  corruption,  of  justification  by  faith,  of  our  need 
of  the  sanctifying  Spirit,  upon  these  matters  I  believe 
we  should  find  that  English  Christians  were  much  of 
one  mind  with  believers  at  Corinth,  Ephesus,  Philippi, 
or  Rome  in  olden  times  ;  but  in  our  view  of  the 
second  advent  I  believe  we  should  find  there  was  a 
mighty  difference  if  we  could  but  compare  our  experi 
ence.  We  should  find  that  we  fell  wofully  short  of 
them  in  our  estimate  of  its  importance  and  realisation 
of  its  nature.  We  should  discover,  in  one  word,  that 
we  slumber  and  sleep  about  it. 

I  must  speak  my  mind  on  this  subject,  now  that  I 
am  upon  it.  I  do  so  at  the  risk  of  giving  offence  and 
rubbing  against  prejudices.  But  speak  I  must. 

I  submit,  then,  that  the  Church  of  Christ  has  gone 
too  long  not  seeing  that  there  arc  two  personal  advents 
of  Christ  spoken  of  in  the  Old  Testament — an  advent 
in  humiliation  and  an  advent  in  glory  too,  an  advent 
to  suffer  and  an  advent  to  reign.  We  have  got  into 
a  vicious  way  of  taking  all  the  promises  spiritually 
and  all  the  curses  and  denunciations  literally.  The 
curses  on  Jews  and  Babylon  and  Kdom  and  Egypt 
we  have  been  content  to  take  literally  ;  the  blessings 
on  Zion,  Jerusalem,  Jacob,  Israel,  and  so  forth,  we  have 
taken  spiritually  and  comfortably  applied  to  the  Church 
of  Christ.  No  man  can  read  sermons  or  commentaries 
and  not  be  aware  of  this.  I  believe  it  has  been  a  wrong 
system  of  interpreting  Scripture.  I  believe  that  pro 
phetical  denunciations  and  prophetical  promises  in  their 
primary  sense  are  always  to  be  taken  literally.  That 
primary  sense  we  have  sadly  lost  sight  of,  and  by  so 
doing  I  think  \ve  have  got  into  a  slumbering  and  sleeping 
state  about  the  second  advent  of  Christ. 

But  I  say  further,  that  the  Church  of  Christ  has 
gone  on  too  long  putting  a  strange  sense  on  the  passage 


THE    SECOND   ADVENT  203 

which  speaks  of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  in  the 
New  Testament.  Some  tell  us  that  this  expression 
always  means  death.  No  man  can  read  the  thousands 
of  epitaphs  on  tombstones  in  which  the  Son  of  man's 
coming  is  thrust  in,  and  not  observe  how  widespread 
this  view  is.  Some  tell  us  it  means  the  conversion  of 
the  world.  Some  tell  us  it  means  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem.  That  also  is  a  very  common  way  of  inter 
preting  the  expression  with  many.  They  find  Jerusalem 
everywhere  in  the  New  Testament  prophecies,  and,  like 
Aaron's  rod,  they  make  it  swallow  up  everything  else. 
Now,  I  have  no  desire  to  underrate  the  importance  of 
death,  the  conversion  of  the  world,  or  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  ;  but  I  must  express  my  own  firm  belief 
that  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  is  an  entirely 
distinct  subject  from  any  of  the  three  I  have  mentioned. 
And  the  acceptance  they  have  met  with  I  hold  to  be 
one  more  proof  that  in  the  matter  of  Christ's  second 
advent  the  Church  has  slumbered  and  slept. 

The  plain  truth  of  Scripture,  I  believe,  is  as  follows. 
When  the  number  of  the  elect  is  accomplished,  Christ 
shall  come  again  to  this  world,  with  power  and  great 
glory.  As  He  came  the  first  time  in  person,  so  He 
shall  come  the  second  time  in  person  ;  as  He  went 
away  visibly,  so  He  shall  return  visibly.  Then  shall 
be  fulfilled  those  words  of  Acts  i.  :  "  This  same  Jesus, 
which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come 
in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go  into  heaven  "  ; 
and  the  words  of  Zechariah  xiv.  :  "  The  Lord  my  God 
shall  come,  and  all  the  saints  with  Thee  "  ;  and  the  words 
of  Enoch  in  Jude  :  "  Behold,  the  Lord  cometh  with 
ten  thousand  of  His  saints."  And  the  grand  short 
coming  of  the  Church  in  these  days  has  been  and  is 
this  :  that  we  ministers  do  not  preach  enough  about 
this  second  advent,  and  private  believers  do  not  think 


204  THE   SECOND   ADVENT 

enough  about  it.  There  are  a  few,  but  what  are  they  ? 
Many  do  not.  We  none  of  us  live  on  it,  feed  on  it, 
act  on  it,  work  from  it,  take  comfort  in  it,  as  God 
intended  us  to  do.  In  short,  the  Bridegroom  tarries, 
and  we  all  slumber  and  sleep. 

It  proves  nothing  against  the  true  doctrine  that 
it  has  sometimes  been  fearfully  abused.  I  should 
like  to  know  what  doctrine  has  not.  Salvation  by 
grace  has  been  made  a  pretext  for  licentiousness ; 
election  an  excuse  for  all  manner  of  unclean  living  ; 
and  justification  by  faith  a  warrant  for  antinomianism. 
But  if  men  will  draw  wrong  conclusions  we  are  not 
obliged  to  throw  up  good  principles.  We  do  not  give 
up  the  gospel  because  of  the  extravagancies  of  Saltmarsh 
and  William  Huntington,  of  Jumpers  and  Shakers; 
and  we  need  not  give  up  the  second  advent  because 
of  the  Fifth  Monarchy  men  of  the  Commonwealth  or 
Irvingites  of  our  own  time. 

Nor  yet  does  it  prove  anything  against  the  doctrine 
that  it  is  attended  with  many  difficulties.  I  do  not 
think  there  arc  half  so  many  difficulties  as  those 
connected  with  the  first  coming,  and  yet  those  diffi 
culties  were  all  overcome.  I  am  satisfied  there  are  far 
more  difficulties  upon  any  other  system  of  interpretation, 
whatever  it  may  be.  And  after  all,  what  have  we  to 
do  with  the  "  how  "  and  "  in  what  manner  "  prophecies 
are  to  be  fulfilled  ?  Our  only  question  is,  "  Has 
God  said  a  thing  ?  "  If  He  has,  no  doubt  it  will  be 
done. 

For  myself,  I  can  only  give  my  individual  testimony  ; 
but  the  little  I  know  experimentally  of  the  doctrine 
makes  me  regard  it  as  most  practical  and  precious, 
and  makes  me  long  to  see  it  more  generally  received. 

I  find  it  a  powerful  spring  to  holy  living  ;  a  motive 
for  patience,  for  moderation,  for  spiritual-mindedness  ; 


THE    SECOND   ADVENT  205 

a  test  for  employment  of  time — "  would  I  like  my  Lord 
to  find  me  so  doing?" 

I  find  it  the  strongest  argument  for  missionary  work. 
The  time  is  short  The  Lord  is  at  hand.  The  gather 
ing  out  from  all  nations  of  a  witnessing  people  will 
soon  be  accomplished,  and  then  the  King  shall  come. 

I  find  it  the  best  answer  to  infidels.  I  tell  them 
it  proves  nothing  that  all  the  world  is  not  holy  after 
eighteen  hundred  years  ;  that  it  was  never  said  it 
would  be  in  the  present  order  of  things ;  that  the 
King  will  come  one  day  and  then  make  all  bow  before 
Him. 

I  find  it  the  best  argument  with  the  Jew.  If  I  do 
not  take  all  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  literally,  I  know 
not  how  I  can  persuade  him  that  the  fifty-third  chapter 
is  fulfilled.  But  if  I  do,  I  have  a  resting-place  for  my 
lever  which  he  cannot  shake. 

Who  is  there  that  cannot  yet  receive  the  doctrine 
of  Christ's  second  personal  advent?  I  invite  you  to 
consider  the  subject  calmly.  Dismiss  from  your  mind 
traditional  interpretation  ;  separate  the  doctrine  from 
the  mistakes  and  blunders  of  many  who  have  held  it  ; 
do  not  reject  the  foundations  because  of  the  wood, 
hay  and  stubble ;  do  not  condemn  it  because  of  in 
judicious  friends.  Only  examine  the  texts  which  speak 
of  it  in  the  same  calm  way  that  you  weigh  texts  in  the 
Romish  and  Socinian  controversy,  and  I  am  hopeful 
as  to  the  result  on  your  mind. 

Who  is  there  here  that  receives  the  doctrine  ?  Try 
to  realise  it  more.  Alas  !  how  little  do  we  feel  it  at 
the  very  best !  Be  gentle  in  argument  with  those  that 
differ.  Remember  that  a  man  may  be  mistaken  on 
this  subject  and  yet  be  a  bright  child  of  God.  It  is 
not  the  slumbering  on  this  subject  that  ruins  souls, 
but  the  want  of  grace.  Above  all  avoid  dogmatism  and 


THE   SECOND   ADVENT 

positivcness,  and  specially  about  symbolical  prophecy. 
It  is  a  sad  truth,  but  a  truth  never  to  be  forgotten,  that 
none  have  injured  the  doctrine  of  the  second  advent 
so  much  as  over-zealous  friends 

III.  Learn,  thirdly,  that  whenever  Christ  does  come 
again  it  will  be  a  very  sudden  event.  I  draw  that  from 
the  verse  in  the  parable  :  "  At  midnight  there  was  a 
cry  made,  Behold  the  Bridegroom  cometh,  go  ye  forth 
to  meet  Him." 

I  do  not  know  when  Christ  will  come.  I  am  no 
prophet,  though  I  love  the  subject  of  prophecy.  I 
dislike  date-fixing,  and  I  think  it  has  done  great  harm. 
I  only  assert  positively  that  Christ  will  come  again 
one  day  in  person  to  set  up  His  kingdom,  and  that 
whether  the  day  be  near,  or  whether  it  be  far  off,  it 
will  take  the  Church  and  world  exceedingly  by  surprise. 

It  will  come  on  men  suddenly.  It  will  break  on 
the  world  all  at  once.  It  will  not  have  been  talked 
over,  prepared  for  and  looked  forward  to  by  everybody. 
It  will  awaken  men's  minds  like  a  cry  of  fire  at  midnight. 
It  will  startle  men's  hearts  like  a  trumpet  blown  by 
their  bedsides  in  their  first  sleep.  Like  Pharaoh  and 
his  host,  men  will  know  nothing  till  the  very  waters 
arc  upon  them.  Before  they  can  recover  their  breath 
and  know  where  they  are,  they  shall  find  that  the 
Lord  is  come. 

I  suspect  there  is  a  vague  notion  floating  in  men's 
minds  that  the  present  order  of  things  will  not  end 
quite  so  suddenly.  I  suspect  men  cling  to  the  idea 
that  there  will  be  a  kind  of  Saturday  night  in  the  world 
—a  time  when  all  will  know  the  Lord's  day  is  near,  a 
time  when  all  will  be  able  to  cleanse  their  consciences, 
look  up  their  best  garment,  shake  off  their  earthly 
business,  and  prepare  to  meet  the  Lord.  If  any  one 
here  has  got  such  a  notion  I  charge  him  to  give  it  up 


THE   SECOND  ADVENT  207 

for  ever.  If  anything  is  clear  in  unfulfilled  prophecy, 
this  one  fact  seems  clear,  that  the  Lord's  coming  will 
be  sudden,  and  take  men  by  surprise  ;  and  any  view 
of  prophecy  which  destroys  the  possibility  of  its  being 
a  sudden  event,  appears  to  carry  about  with  it  a  fatal 
defect. 

Everything  which  is  written  in  Scripture  on  this  point 
confirms  the  truth  that  Christ's  second  coming  will  be 
sudden.  "  As  a  snare  shall  it  come  on  the  face  of  all 
them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,"  says  one  place :  "  As 
a  thief  in  the  night,"  says  another ;  "  As  the  lightning," 
says  a  third  ;  "  In  an  hour  when  no  man  thinketh,"  says 
a  fourth  ;  "  At  a  time  when  they  shall  be  saying  Peace 
and  safety,"  says  a  fifth. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  uses  two  most  striking 
comparisons  when  dwelling  on  this  point.  He  says  in 
one,  that  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot,  so  shall  it  be 
in  the  days  when  the  Son  of  man  is  revealed.  Do 
you  remember  how  it  was  ?  In  the  days  when  Lot 
went  out  of  Sodom  the  men  of  Sodom  \vere  eating  and 
drinking,  planting  and  building,  marrying  and  giving 
in  marriage.  The  sun  rose  as  usual.  They  thought 
of  nothing  but  worldly  things  ;  they  saw  no  sign  of 
danger.  But  all  at  once  the  fire  of  God  fell  upon  them 
and  destroyed  them. 

He  says  in  another  place,  "  As  it  was  in  the  days  of 
Noe,  so  shall  it  be  also  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man." 
Do  you  remember  how  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah? 
Stay  a  little,  and  let  me  remind  you. 

When  the  flood  came  on  the  earth  there  was  no 
appearance  beforehand  of  anything  so  awful  being  near. 
The  sun  rose  and  set  as  usual ;  the  day  and  night 
followed  each  other  in  regular  succession.  The  grass 
and  trees  and  crops  were  growing  ;  the  business  of  the 
world  was  going  on  ;  and  though  Noah  preached  con- 


208  THE    SECOND    ADVENT 

tinually  and  warned  men  of  coming  danger,  no  one 
believed  him. 

But  at  last  one  day  the  rain  began  and  did  not  cease  ; 
the  waters  ran  and  did  not  stop.  The  flood  came  and 
the  flood  swelled  ;  the  flood  went  on  and  covered  one 
thing  after  another,  and  all  were  drowned  who  were 
not  in  the  ark.  Everything  in  which  was  the  breath 
of  life  perished. 

Now,  as  the  flood  took  the  world  by  surprise,  just 
so  will  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man.  It  will  come 
on  men  like  a  thunderclap.  In  the  midst  of  the  world's 
business,  when  everything  Is  going  on  just  as  usual, 
in  such  an  hour  as  this  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will 
return. 

See  here  what  solemn  thoughts  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's 
return  should  raise  in  every  mind.  Think  for  a  moment 
how  little  prepared  the  world  is  for  such  an  event. 
Look  at  the  towns  and  cities  of  the  earth,  and  think 
of  them.  Mark  how  absorbed  are  men  in  the  business 
of  their  callings.  Banks,  shops,  law,  medicine,  commerce, 
railways,  banquets,  balls,  theatres, — all  and  each  are 
drinking  up  hearts  and  souls,  and  thrusting  out  the 
things  of  God.  Think  what  a  fearful  shock  would  be 
the  stoppage  of  all  these  things, — the  sudden  stoppage 
which  will  be  in  the  day  of  Christ's  appearing.  Yet  one 
day  it  shall  be. 

Look  at  the  rural  parishes  of  such  a  land  as  ours, 
and  think  of  them.  See  how  the  minds  of  the  majority 
are  buried  in  farms  and  allotments,  in  cattle  and  corn, 
in  rent  and  wages,  in  digging  and  sowing,  in  buying 
and  selling  ;  and  then  fancy  the  awful  effect  of  a  sudden 
cessation  of  all  these  things, — the  final  cessation  which 
must  be  when  Christ  comes  again  to  finish  all  things. 
Yet  remember  one  day  it  shall  be.  Picture  these  things 
to  your  mind's  eye  ;  picture  your  own  home,  your  own 


THE   SECOND   ADVENT  209 

family,  your  own  fireside, — picture,  above  all,  your  own 
feelings,  your  own  state  of  mind.  And  then  remember 
that  this  is  the  end  to  which  the  world  is  hastening  ; 
this  is  the  way  in  which  the  world's  affairs  will  be  wound 
up.  This  is  an  event  which  might  possibly  happen  in 
your  own  time  ;  and  surely  you  cannot  avoid  the  con 
clusion  that  this  second  coming  of  Christ  is  no  mere 
curious  speculation,  but  is  of  vast  moment  to  your  soul. 

Ah  !  some  will  say,  I  have  no  doubt  :  "  This  is  all 
mere  cant  and  nonsense.  This  is  all  extravagant 
fanaticism.  Where  is  the  likelihood,  where  is  the 
probability  of  all  this?" 

Do  not  say  so.  Men  said  the  same  in  the  day  of 
Noah  and  Lot ;  but  they  found  to  their  cost  that  Noah 
and  Lot  were  right.  Do  not  say  so.  The  apostle 
Peter  foretold  that  men  would  talk  so  in  the  latter 
days.  Do  not  fulfil  his  prophecy  by  your  unbelief. 

Where  is  the  cant  and  fanaticism  of  that  which  I 
have  been  saying?  I  calmly  say  the  present  state  of 
things  will  come  to  an  end  one  day.  Will  any  one 
deny  that  ?  Will  any  one  say  we  are  to  go  on  as  we 
do  now  for  ever?  I  calmly  say  that  Christ's  coming 
will  be  the  ending  of  the  present  state  of  things.  I 
have  said  so  because  the  Bible  says  it.  I  have  calmly 
said  that  Christ's  coming  will  be  a  sudden  event, 
whenever  it  may  be,  and  might  possibly  be  in  our  own 
time.  I  have  said  so  because  thus  and  thus  I  find  it 
written.  If  you  do  not  like  it,  I  am  sorry  for  it.  One 
thing  only  you  must  remember  :  you  are  finding  fault 
with  the  Bible,  not  with  me. 

IV.  Learn,  in  the  last  place,  that  Christ's  coming 
will  make  an  immense  change  to  all  members  of 
Christ's  Church,  both  good  and  bad. 

I  draw  that  from  the  concluding  portion  of  the 
parable,  from  the  discovery  of  the  foolish  virgins  that 

14 


210 


THE    SECOND    ADVENT 


their  lamps  were  gone  out,  from  their  anxious  address 
to  the  wise,  "  Give  us  of  your  oil,"  from  their  vain 
knocking  at  the  door  when  shut,  crying,  «  Lord,  Lord, 
open  to  us,"  from  the  happy  admission  of  the  wise  who 
were  ready  to  the  marriage  supper,  in  company  with 
the  bridegroom.  All  these  points  are  food  for  thought. 
But  I  have  no  time  to  dwell  on  them  particularly.  I 
can  only  take  one  single  broad  view  of  all.  To  all 
who  have  been  baptised  in  the  name  of  Christ, — con 
verted  or  unconverted,  believer  or  unbeliever,  holy  or 
unholy,  godly  or  ungodly,  wise  or  foolish,  gracious 
or  graceless,— to  all,  the  second  coming  of  Christ  shall 
be  an  immense  change. 

It  shall  be  an  immense  change  to  the  ungodly,  to 
the  mere  nominal  Christian. 

They  will  see  the  value  of  real  heart-religion  if  they 
never  saw  it  before  ; — "  Give  us  of  your  oil,"  they  will 
cry  to  the  godly,  "  for  our  lamps  are  gone  out." 

Who  does  not  know  that  spiritual  religion  never 
brings  a  man  the  world's  praise?  It  never  has  done, 
and  it  never  does.  It  entails  the  world's  disapprobation, 
the  world's  persecution,  the  world's  ridicule,  the  world's 
sneers.  The  world  will  let  a  man  go  to  hell  quietly, 
and  never  try  to  stop  him.  The  world  will  never  let  a 
man  go  to  heaven  quietly — they  will  do  all  they  can 
to  turn  him  back.  Who  has  not  heard  of  nicknames  in 
plenty  bestowed  on  all  who  faithfully  follow  Christ  ? — 
Pietist,  Methodist,  saint,  fanatic,  enthusiast,  righteous 
overmuch,  and  many  more  ?  W'ho  does  not  know 
the  petty  family  persecution  which  often  goes  on  in 
private  society  in  our  own  day.  Let  a  young  person 
go  to  every  ball  and  theatre  and  racecourse,  and  utterly 
neglect  his  soul,  and  no  one  interferes  ;  no  one  says 
"  Spare  thyself,"  no  one  says  "  Be  moderate — remember 
your  soul."  But  let  him  begin  to  read  his  Bible  and 


THE    SECOND   ADVENT  211 

be  diligent  in  prayers,  let  him  decline  worldly  amuse 
ment  and  be  particular  in  his  employment  of  time,  let 
him  seek  an  evangelical  ministry  and  live  as  if  he  had 
an  immortal  soul,— let  him  do  this,  and  the  probability 
is  all  his  relations  and  friends  will  be  up  in  arms. 
"  You  are  going  too  far,"  "  You  need  not  be  so  very 
good,"  "  You  are  taking  up  extreme  lines," — this  is  the 
least  that  he  will  hear.  Alas  that  it  should  be  so,  but 
so  it  is.  These  are  ancient  things.  As  it  was  in  the 
days  of  Cain  and  Abel,  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Isaac 
and  Ishmael,  even  so  it  is  now.  They  that  are  born 
after  the  flesh  will  persecute  those  that  are  born  after 
the  Spirit.  The  cross  of  Christ  will  always  bring 
reproach  with  it.  If  a  man  will  become  a  decided 
evangelical  Christian  he  must  make  up  his  mind 
to  lose  the  world's  favours ;  he  must  be  content  to 
be  thought  by  many  a  perfect  fool. 

But,  brethren,  all  this  will  be  at  an  end  when  Christ 
returns.  The  light  of  that  day  will  show  everything 
in  its  true  colours  ;  the  scales  will  fall  from  the  poor 
worldling's  eyes.  The  value  of  the  soul  will  flash  on 
his  astonished  mind  ;  the  utter  uselessness  of  a  mere 
nominal  Christianity  will  burst  upon  him  like  a  thunder 
storm.  The  blessedness  of  regeneration  and  faith  in 
Christ  and  a  holy  walk  will  shine  before  him  like 
"  Mene,  Mene,  Tekel,  Peres "  on  the  wall.  The 
veil  will  fall  from  his  face ;  he  will  discover  that  the 
godly  have  been  the  wise,  and  that  he  has  played 
the  fool  exceedingly  ;  and  just  as  Saul  wanted  Samuel 
when  it  was  too  late,  and  Belshazzar  sent  for  Daniel 
when  the  kingdom  was  departing  from  him,  so  will 
the  ungodly  turn  to  the  very  men  they  once  mocked 
and  despised,  and  cry,  "  Give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our 
lamps  have  gone  out." 

But  again  :  the  ungodly  will  seek  salvation  earnestly 


212  THE   SECOND   ADVENT 

when  Christ  returns,  but  not  find  it.  They  will  find 
that  opportunities  once  let  slip  shall  never  be  regained. 
They  will  seek  the  oil  of  grace,  they  will  knock  at  the 
door  for  admission,  they  will  cry,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open  to 
us,"  but  all  in  vain. 

Who  does  not  know  that  thousands  are  urged  to 
pray  now,  who  never  attempt  it  ?  They  mean  to  do  so 
one  day,  perhaps  ;  they  fancy  it  will  never  be  too  late 
to  seek  the  Lord. 

But  there  is  a  time  coming  when  prayer  shall  be 
heard  no  longer.  There  is  a  time  when  the  door 
by  which  Saul  of  Tarsus  and  Magdalen  entered  in 
shall  be  shut  for  ever.  There  is  a  time  when  men 
shall  know  the  folly  of  sin,  but,  like  Judas,  too  late  for 
repentance  ;  when  they  shall  desire  to  enter  into  the 
promised  land,  but,  like  Israel  at  Kadesh,  not  be  able  ; 
when  they  shall  see  the  value  of  God's  favour  and 
covenant  blessing,  but  like  Esau,  when  they  can  no 
longer  procure  it  ;  when  they  shall  believe  every  jot 
and  tittle  of  God's  revealed  word,  but,  like  the  miserable 
devils,  only  to  tremble.  Yes  !  beloved  brethren,  many 
come  to  this,  and  many  will  come  to  this  in  the 
day  of  Christ's  reappearing.  They  will  ask  and  not 
receive,  they  will  seek  and  not  find,  they  will  knock 
and  the  door  shall  not  be  opened  to  them.  Alas, 
indeed,  that  it  should  be  so !  Woe  to  the  man  who 
puts  off  seeking  his  manna  till  the  Lord's  day  of  return  ! 
Like  Israel  of  old,  he  will  find  none.  Woe  to  the  man 
who  goes  to  buy  oil  when  he  ought  to  be  burning  it ! 
Like  the  foolish  virgins,  he  will  find  himself  shut  out 
from  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb. 

But  as  Christ's  coming  will  be  a  mighty  change  to 
the  ungodly,  so  also  will  it  be  a  mighty  change  to  the 
godly. 

They  shall  be  placed  in  a  position  of  perfect  safety. 


THE   SECOND   ADVENT  213 

"The  door  shall  be  shut."  They  shall  no  longer  be 
vexed  by  temptations,  persecuted  by  the  world,  warred 
against  by  the  devil.  Their  conflicts  shall  all  be  over. 
Their  strife  with  the  flesh  shall  for  ever  cease.  They 
shall  be  where  there  is  no  Satan,  no  world,  and  no  sin. 
Ah !  brethren,  the  second  Eden  shall  be  better  far  than 
the  first.  In  the  first  Eden  the  door  was  not  shut  ; 
but  in  the  second  the  Lord  shall  shut  us  in. 

Furthermore  the  godly  shall  be  placed  in  a  position 
of  perfect  blessedness.  They  shall  go  in  with  the 
Bridegroom  to  the  marriage  ;  they  shall  be  with  Christ. 
Faith  shall  be  swallowed  up  in  sight,  hope  shall  become 
certainty,  knowledge  shall  at  length  be  perfect,  prayer 
shall  be  turned  into  praise,  desires  shall  receive  their 
full  accomplishment,  fears  and  doubtings  shall  not  rise 
to  mar  their  comforts,  the  thought  of  parting  shall  not 
spoil  the  pleasure  of  meeting  ;  the  company  of  saints 
shall  be  enjoyed  without  hurry  and  distraction,  and 
weariness  shall  be  all  unknown.  Thus  shall  they 
understand  the  meaning  of  the  text,  "In  Thy  presence 
is  fulness  of  joy,  and  at  Thy  right  hand  are  pleasures 
for  evermore."  Then  shall  they  experience  the  truth 
of  that  beautiful  hyrnn  which  says  : 

"  Let  me  be  with  Thee  where  Thou  art, 

My  Saviour,  My  eternal  rest ; 
Then  only  shall  this  longing  heart 
Be  fully  and  for  ever  blest. 

"  Let  me  be  with  Thee  where  Thou  art, 

Thy  unveiled  glory  to  behold; 
Then  only  will  this  wand'ring  heart 
Cease  to  be  false  to  Thee  and  cold. 

"  Let  me  be  with  Thee  where  Thou  art, 

Where  none  can  die,  where  none  remove, 
Then  neither  death  nor  life  shall  part 
Me  from  Thy  presence  and  Thy  love." 


214 


THE   SECOND   ADVENT 


Is  there  a  single  man  or  woman  here  that  can  laugh 
at  true  vital  religion  ?  Is  there  any  one  who  persecutes 
and  ridicules  true  godliness,  and  talks  of  people  being 
over-particular  and  righteous  overmuch  ?  Beware  what 
you  are  doing  !  Again  I  say  beware.  You  may  live 
to  think  differently ;  you  may  live  to  alter  your 
opinion,— but  perhaps  too  late.  Ah!  there  is  a  day 
coming  when  there  will  be  no  infidels,— no,  not  one! 
"  Before  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  will  bow,  and 
every  tongue  confess  that  He  is  Lord."  Remember 
that  day,  and  beware. 

Is  there  any  dear  child  of  God  here  who  is  mocked 
and  despised  for  the  gospel's  sake,  and  feels  as  if  he 
stood  alone  ?  Take  comfort ;  be  patient :  wait  a  little— 
your  turn  shall  come.  When  the  spies  returned  from 
searching  Canaan,  men  talked  of  stoning  Caleb  and 
Joshua.  A  few  days  passed  away,  and  all  the  assembly 
confessed  that  they  alone  had  been  right.  Strive  to 
be  like  them.  Follow  the  Lord  fully,  and  sooner  or 
later  all  men  shall  confess  that  you  did  well.  Men 
seem  to  be  afraid  of  going  too  far,  men  seem  to  be  afraid 
of  being  too  holy.  Millions  will  lament  in  the  day  of 
Christ's  return  that  they  had  not  religion  enough ;  not 
one  will  be  heard  to  say  that  he  had  too  much. 

And  now,  brethren,  it  only  remains  for  me  to  close 
this  sermon  by  three  words  of  application,  which  seem 
to  me  to  arise  naturally  out  of  the  parable  of  which 
I  have  been  speaking.  I  heartily  pray  God  to  bless 
them  to  your  souls,  and  to  make  them  words  in  season 
at  the  beginning  of  a  new  year. 

i.  My  first  word  of  application  shall  be  a  question. 
I  take  the  parable  of  the  ten  virgins  in  my  hands,  and 
I  address  that  question  to  everybody  here  present.  I 
ask,  "  Are  you  ready  ?  "  Remember  the  words  of  the 
Lord  Jesus:  "they  that  were  ready  went  in  with  the 


THE   SECOND   ADVENT  215 

bridegroom  to  the  marriage," — they  that  were  ready  and 
none  else.  Now  here,  in  the  sight  of  God,  I  ask  you 
every  one,  "  Is  this  your  case  ?  "  "  Are  you  ready  ?  " 

I  do  not  ask  whether  you  are  a  Churchman  and  make 
a  profession  of  religion  ;  I  do  not  ask  whether  you  sit 
under  an  evangelical  ministry,  and  like  evangelical  people, 
and  can  talk  of  evangelical  things.  All  this  is  the  surface 
of  Christianity,  and  may  be  easily  attained.  I  want 
to  search  your  heart  more  deeply  by  far.  I  want  to 
know  whether  grace  is  in  your  heart,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost.  I  want  to  know  whether  you  are  ready  to  meet 
the  Bridegroom,  ready  for  Christ's  return.  I  want  to 
know,  if  the  Lord  should  come  this  week,  whether  you 
could  lift  up  your  head  with  joy,  and  say,  "  This  is  our 
God  ;  we  have  waited  for  Him  ;  let  us  be  glad  and 
rejoice  in  His  salvation." 

Ah !  some  will  be  saying,  "  This  is  far  too  high  a 
standard.  This  is  requiring  far  too  much.  This  is 
extravagance.  This  is  a  hard  saying  :  who  can  bear 
it?"  I  cannot  help  it.  1  believe  it  is  the  standard 
of  the  Bible  ;  I  believe  it  is  the  standard  St.  Peter 
sets  before  us  when  he  tells  us  to  be  "  looking  for  and 
hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God " ;  I 
believe  it  is  the  mark  at  which  every  believer  should 
be  continually  aiming,  to  be  found  ready  to  meet 
Christ. 

I  want  no  man  to  become  a  hermit  and  cease  to  do 
his  duty  in  the  world  ;  I  call  on  no  one  to  leave  his 
lawful  calling  or  neglect  his  earthly  affairs.  But  I  do 
call  on  every  one  to  live  like  one  who  expects  Christ 
to  return,  to  live  like  a  pilgrim  and  stranger,  to  live  ever 
looking  unto  Jesus  and  leaning  on  Jesus,  to  live  like 
a  good  servant  with  his  loins  girded  and  his  lamp 
burning,  to  live  like  one  whose  treasure  is  in  heaven 
and  best  things  yet  to  come,  with  his  heart  packed  up 


2,6  THE   SECOND    ADVENT 

and  ready  to  be  gone.     Now,  is  this  too  much  to  ask  ? 
I  say  decidedly  that  it  is  not. 

Now,  are  you  ready  in  this  way?  If  not,  I  would 
like  to  know  what  good  your  religion  does  you.  A 
religion  that  does  not  make  a  man  ready  for  anything 
is  a  religion  that  may  well  be  looked  on  with  suspicion. 
If  your  religion  does  not  make  you  ready,  its  source  is 
not  derived  from  the  Bible. 

2.  My  second  word  of  application  shall  be  an 
invitation.  I  address  it  to  every  one  who  feels  in  his 
conscience  that  he  has  no  grace  in  his  heart, — to  every 
one  who  feels  that  the  character  of  the  foolish  virgin 
is  his  own.  To  all  such  I  give  an  invitation  this  day  : 
I  invite  you  to  " awake" 

You  know,  many  of  you,  that  your  hearts  are  not 
right  in  the  sight  of  God.  In  the  broadest,  fullest  sense 
you  are  asleep — not  merely  asleep  about  the  doctrine 
of  Christ's  second  advent,  but  asleep  about  everything 
that  concerns  your  souls.  You  are  wide-awake  perhaps 
about  temporal  things ;  you  read  the  newspapers,  it 
may  be,  and  have  your  head  stored  with  earthly  wisdom 
and  useful  knowledge.  But  you  have  no  heart-felt 
sense  of  sin,  no  peace  and  friendship  with  God,  no 
experimental  acquaintance  with  Christ,  no  delight  in 
the  Bible  and  prayer  ;  and  what  is  all  this  but  being 
asleep  ? 

How  long  is  this  to  go  on?  When  do  you  mean 
to  arise  and  live  as  if  you  had  a  soul  ?  When  will 
you  cease  to  hear  as  those  who  hear  not  ?  When  will 
you  give  up  running  after  shadows  and  seek  something 
substantial  ?  When  will  you  throw  up  the  mockery  of 
a  religion  that  cannot  satisfy,  cannot  comfort,  cannot 
sanctify,  cannot  save,  and  will  not  bear  a  calm  examina 
tion  ?  When  will  you  give  up  having  a  faith  which 
does  not  influence  your  practice — having  a  book  which 


THE   SECOND   ADVENT  217 

you  say  is  God's  word,  but  do  not  use — having  the 
name  of  Christian,  but  knowing  nothing  of  Christ  ?  Oh  ! 
when  shall  it  once  be  ? 

Why  not  this  very  new  year  ?  Why  not  this  very 
night?  Why  not  awake  and  call  upon  your  God,  and 
resolve  that  you  will  sleep  no  longer  ?  I  set  before 
you  an  open  door.  I  set  before  you  Jesus  the  Saviour 
who  died  for  sinners  on  the  cross,  Jesus  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost,  Jesus  willing  to  receive.  Go  to  Him 
first  and  foremost  if  you  would  know  what  step  to 
take.  Go  to  Him  in  prayer  and  cry,  "  Lord,  save  me 
or  I  perish ;  I  am  weary  of  sleeping — I  would  fain 
sleep  no  longer."  Oh  !  "  awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and 
arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light." 

Sun  and  moon  and  stars  are  all  witnessing  against 
you  ;  they  fill  their  place  in  creation,  and  you  do  not. 
Sabbaths  and  ordinances  are  witnessing  against'you :  they 
are  all  proclaiming  there  is  a  God,  there  is  a  judgment, 
and  you  are  living  as  if  there  were  none.  The  tears 
and  prayers  of  godly  relations  are  witnessing  against 
you  :  others  are  sorrowfully  thinking  you  have  a  soul, 
though  you  seem  to  forget  it.  The  very  gravestones 
you  walk  past  this  night  are  witnessing  against  you  ; 
they  are  silently  whispering,  "  Life  is  short  and  death  is 
near,"  all,  all  are  saying,  "  Awake !  awake  !  awake !  " 
Oh,  brethren,  the  time  past  may  surely  suffice  you  to 
have  slept.  Awake  to  be  wise,  awake  to  be  safe,  awake 
to  be  happy.  Awake,  and  sleep  no  more. 

3.  My  last  word  of  application  shall  be  an  exhorta 
tion  to  all  who  have  the  oil  of  grace  in  their  hearts.  I 
draw  it  from  the  words  of  our  Lord  at  the  end  of  the 
parable.  I  exhort  you  to  "  watch." 

I  exhort  you  to  watch  against  everything  which 
might  interfere  with  a  readiness  for  Christ's  appearing. 
Watch  against  inconsistencies  of  walk,  watch  against 


2,8  THE    SECOND   ADVENT 

besetting  sins,  watch  against  the  harm  of  false  doctrine, 
watch  against  formality  in  the  use  of  spiritual  things, 
watch  against  slothfulness  about  the  Bible  and  private 
prayer.  Backsliding  begins  from  within.  Watch 
against  bitterness  and  uncharitableness  :  a  little  love 
weighs  more  than  many  gifts.  Watch  against  pride 
and  self-conceit :  Peter  said,  "  Though  all  men  deny 
Thee,  yet  will  not  I "  ;  and  presently  fell.  Watch 
against  the  sin  of  Galatia,  Ephesus,  and  Laodicea : 
believers  may  run  well  for  a  season,  then  lose  their 
first  love,  and  then  become  lukewarm.  Watch  against 
the  sin  of  Jehu  :  a  man  may  have  great  zeal  from  false 
motives.  It  is  a  much  easier  thing  to  oppose  anti 
christ  than  to  follow  Christ. 

Brethren,  believers,  let  us  all  watch,  and  watch  more 
every  year  we  live. 

Let  us  watch  for  the  world's  sake.  We  are  the  book 
they  chiefly  read  ;  they  watch  our  ways.  Oh  !  let 
us  strive  to  be  plain  epistles  of  Christ. 

Let  us  watch  for  our  own  sakes.  As  our  walk  is, 
so  will  be  our  peace  ;  as  our  conformity  to  Christ's 
mind,  so  will  be  our  sense  of  Christ's  atoning  blood. 
If  a  man  will  not  walk  in  the  full  light  of  the  sun, 
how  can  he  expect  to  be  warm  ? 

And,  not  least,  let  us  watch  for  our  Lord's  sake. 
Let  us  live  as  if  His  honour  was  concerned  in  our 
behaviour ;  let  us  live  as  if  every  slip  and  fall  was  a 
wound  to  our  Head.  Oh !  let  us  exercise  a  godly 
jealousy  for  thought,  word,  and  action — motive,  manner, 
and  walk.  Never  never  let  us  fear  being  too  strict. 
u  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much 
fruit ;  so  shall  ye  be  my  disciples." 


XVI 
THE   COMPASSION  OF  JESUS 

"Jesus,  when  He  came  out,  saw  much  people,  and  was  moved  with 
compassion  toward  them,  because  they  were  as  sheep  not  having  a 
shepherd  ;  and  He  began  to  teach  them  many  things." — MARK  vi.  34. 

THERE  is  a  certain  island  called  Madeira,  lying 
many  hundred  miles  to  the  south-west  of  this 
country,  where  the  climate  is  said  to  be  the  most 
healthy  and  delightful  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  In 
Madeira  they  know  nothing  of  those  sudden  changes 
from  heat  to  cold  which  we  sometimes  experience  in 
England  ;  they  seldom  see  anything  of  frost  and  snow 
during  the  winter,  the  air  is  always  mild  and  soft,  and 
particularly  well  suited  for  those  whom  God  thinks  fit 
to  afflict  with  diseases  of  the  chest  and  lungs.  Such 
being  the  climate,  you  will  not  be  surprised  to  hear 
that  great  numbers  of  sick  and  consumptive  persons 
are  in  the  habit  of  visiting  Madeira  from  this  country, 
to  restore  their  failing  health,  to  prolong  their  lives  as 
much  as  possible,  to  obtain  a  short  relief  from  pain 
which  cannot  be  overcome  at  home,  to  catch  at  the 
last  chance  of  recovery  which  a  physician  holds  out, — 
aye,  and  often  they  only  arrive  in  time  to  be  gathered 
to  their  last  home,  to  lay  their  bodies  in  the  dust  even 
as  their  fathers,  and  be  carried  to  their  graves  by  foreign 
attendants  in  a  foreign  land.  Oh !  what  pain  and 
trouble  men  will  undergo  to  get  a  few  years'  health ! 
how  many  hundred  miles  of  sea  and  land  they  will 

219 


220 


THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS 


cross  to  secure  a  short-lived  peace  of  body!  and  yet 
they  will  not  understand  us  when  we  call  upon  them  to 
strive  and  labour  after  eternal  life— to  care  for  nothing, 
to  count  all  things  loss  until  they  have  won  Christ  and 
obtained  peace  for  their  everlasting  souls,  such  as  the 
world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away. 

But  the  point  I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  is  this : 
It  is  said  that  these  unhappy  persons,  who  meet  in  this 
island  of  Madeira,  as  it  were,  upon  the  edge  of  the 
grave,  do  show  towards  each  other  a  degree  of  affection 
and  tenderness  and  sympathy,  and  kindness  and  love 
and  attention  and  interest,  such  as  we  hardly  ever  sec 
among  ourselves.  And  why  is  it  so  ?— Because  they  are 
obliged  to  live  in  the  constant  prospect  of  death — 
because  they  cannot  put  the  subject  from  them  as  an 
unpleasant  one,  like  too  many  among  ourselves — because 
they  feel  their  thread  is  so  slender  it  may  snap  any  day 
—because  they  see  before  their  eyes  death  and  the 
tomb  and  judgment  and  eternity — because  they  really 
believe  their  time  is  short  and  their  end  at  hand  ;  and 
under  all  these  feelings,  and  many  more  too,  they  have 
a  strong  compassion  for  others,  and  a  strong  compassion 
for  themselves — they  feel  the  need  of  comforters,  and 
so  they  do  as  they  would  be  done  by. 

Now,  wherefore  have  I  told  you  all  this?  I  would 
fain  see  in  you  the  same  spirit  of  faith  ;  I  wish,  before 
I  speak  to  you  of  millions  of  souls  in  distant  parts  of 
the  world  fast  going  towards  destruction,  before  I  lay 
before  you  the  immediate  subject  of  this  afternoon's 
sermon,  I  wish,  I  say,  to  remind  you  that  the  great 
spiritual  disease  which  is  carrying  these  millions 
towards  hell  is  naturally  your  own  too.  I  desire,  if 
possible,  to  lift  the  veil  from  off  your  eyes,  and  press 
upon  you  that  their  case  may  be  your  own  :  are  they 
sinners  ?— so  by  nature  are  you  ;  are  they  perishing  ? — 


THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS         221 

so  by  nature  are  you  ;  are  they  ignorant  of  Christ  ? — so 
by  nature  are  you  ;  and  if  you  really  know  the  danger 
of  sin,  and  the  excellence  of  the  gospel-remedy,  you 
will  not  require  much  persuasion  on  my  part,  you  will 
rejoice  to  give  assistance  to  your  brethren  according 
to  the  flesh,  you  will  count  it  a  labour  of  love  to 
contribute  according  to  your  means  for  the  souls  of 
all  who  are  still  without  God  in  the  world. 

Now,  I  wish  to  bring  under  your  notice  two  points, 
and  these  are  :  I.  The  example  that  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  has  set  us  in  our  text ;  and  II.  The  case  of  the 
unfortunate  people  whom  you  have  an  opportunity  of 
assisting. 

I.  First,  then,  I  will  say  a  few  words  upon  our  Lord's 
example.  We  read  that  "  He  saw  much  people  as 
sheep  not  having  a  shepherd."  He  beheld  a  mighty 
multitude  collected  together — not  altogether  disposed 
to  receive  instruction,  but  ready  to  listen  to  the  voice 
and  direction  of  any  one  who  would  take  them  in  hand, 
and  still  in  utter  ignorance  about  the  way  of  life.  The 
scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  ought  to  have  been  their 
natural  teachers,  had  done  nothing  for  them  ;  they  had 
sought  their  own  advantage,  and  not  the  advantage 
of  the  flock,  and  as  for  the  little  doctrine  they  did 
preach,  it  was  ruinous  to  men's  souls,  because  contrary 
to  the  Bible,  it  was  not  agreeable  to  the  law  and  the 
testimony.  And  thus  deserted,  these  poor  sheep,  these 
Jews,  were  perishing  in  the  barren  wilderness  of  this 
world,  scattered,  wandering,  and  ready  to  faint  for 
lack  of  the  bread  of  life  and  the  water  of  life.  They 
were  starving  in  places  where  there  was  no  pasture, 
carried  about  by  every  kind  of  doctrine,  unable  to 
defend  themselves  against  that  roaring  lion  the  devil, 
without  a  friend  to  guide  their  feet  into  the  paths  of 
peace,  without  a  hope  to  comfort  them  in  the  hour  of 


222         THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS 

death  and  on  the  bed  of  sickness,  without  a  counsellor 
to  say,  "Here  is  life  and  light  and  love— this  is  the 
good  way,  walk  ye  in  it." 

But  \ve  are  told  the  Lord  Jesus  "  saw  them,  and  was 
moved  with  compassion."  See  what  a  merciful  and 
loving  Saviour  we  have  to  do  with ;  wonderful  indeed 
must  be  the  hardness  and  unbelief  of  men's  hearts, 
when  such  a  one  stands  knocking  at  the  door  and 
is  only  rejected  and  refused. 

"  He  saw,  and  was  moved  with  compassion."  He 
saw  §a  mighty  crowd  of  persons  in  the  dark  about  the 
way  of  salvation,  He  saw  that  in  a  few  years  all  would 
be  lying  in  their  graves,  He  saw  them  unprepared  for 
that  great  day  when  the  books  shall  be  opened  and 
every  one  shall  be  judged  according  to  his  works,  and 
"  He  was  moved  with  compassion."  He  felt  a  deep 
affection  towards  their  souls,  a  tender  pity  and  concern 
because  of  their  spiritual  necessities  ;  He  felt  that  each 
before  Him  would  soon  be  for  ever  and  for  ever  in 
heaven  or  hell,  and  we  may  well  suppose  that  He 
whose  gentle  and  loving  spirit  was  moved  to  tears 
over  Jerusalem,  that  cruel  unbelieving  city,  He  who 
wept  at  the  grave  of  a  chosen  friend — we  may  well 
suppose  that  such  a  one  as  Jesus  was  touched  at  this 
moving  sight.  O  Christless  sinners!  O  careless,  un 
converted  men  and  women,  you  little  know  the  depth 
of  that  affection  which  your  Lord  and  Master  feels 
towards  you  ;  you  little  think  how  great  a  value  He 
doth  set  upon  those  neglected  souls  of  yours  ;  you 
little  consider  how  much  He  grieves  and  wonders  at 
your  sleepiness  and  unbelief. 

But  think  you,  He  was  content  with  pity  and 
compassion.  Oh  no!  His  was  no  empty  feeling,  such 
as  many  now  profess  :  He  acted  on  it ;  He  knew  that 
ignorance  would  never  excuse  any  one  in  the  day  of 


THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS          223 

judgment,  and  He  would  not  leave  this  great  people 
to  perish  in  it.  "  He  began  to  teach  them  many  things." 
Although  He  was  fatigued  and  weary,  hungry  and 
thirsty,  although  He  had  gone  apart  to  rest  awhile, 
although  He  knew  that  nearly  all  would  go  away 
without  faith,  without  inquiry,  without  consideration, 
still  He  would  set  before  them  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ; 
He  was  always  ready  to  work  for  the  good  of  souls,  it 
was  His  meat  and  drink  to  do  His  Father's  will,  and 
so  "  He  began  to  teach  them  many  things." 

The  wickedness  of  their  own  hearts,  the  danger  of 
hell,  the  value  of  the  soul,  the  happiness  of  heaven, 
the  free  grace  of  God,  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  need  of  some  righteousness — these  are  some  of  the 
matters  which  no  doubt  He  taught — for  many  indeed 
are  the  things  we  are  naturally  ignorant  of,  and  many 
are  the  things  the  gospel  of  Christ  contains.  O,  be 
loved,  we  all  need  much  teaching,  much  instruction,  line 
upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept  ;  we  are  naturally 
all  in  darkness,  knowing  nothing  of  ourselves  and  our 
sins  and  the  gospel  ;  we  must  call  upon  the  Lord  Jesus, 
if  we  would  be  saved  :  He  shall  enlighten,  He  shall  teach 
us  great  things  that  we  know  not,  for  unless  we  arc 
taught  of  Him  we  shall  most  assuredly  perish. 

Such  was  the  conduct  of  our  blessed  Lord,  and  if  you 
are  sincere  in  making  Him  your  example,  if  you  really 
desire  to  be  like  Him,  if  you  wish  to  be  conformed 
to  His  image  and  follow  in  His  blessed  steps,  you  will 
be  moved  with  deep  compassion  towards  the  people 
of  whom  I  am  about  to  speak,  you  will  do  what  lies 
in  your  power  to  teach  them  many  things  and  deliver 
their  souls,  you  will  look  to  Jesus  and  say,  "  Lord  we 
would  do  likewise." 

II.  I  have  to  tell  you  now  that  there  are  multitudes 
throughout  the  world  who  are  truly  and  literally  as 


994 


THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS 


sheep  without   a   shepherd,  and  it   is   on    their   behalf 
you  are  now  invited  to  contribute  to  this  Missionary 

Society. 

There  are  the  heathen  :  I  mean  the  men  who  know 
nothing  of  the  Bible  and  its  contents,  who  never  heard 
of  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  have  not  even  a  head-knowledge  of  the 
gospel,  who  worship  idols  or  nothing  at  all,  who  live 
in  ignorance  of  either  heaven  or  hell,  or  die  as  --the  very 
beasts  that  perish.  It  has  been  calculated  that  upon 
this  earth  there  live  and  move  about  eight  hundred 
millions  of  men  and  women,  and  out  of  these  it  has 
been  ascertained  there  are  at  this  moment  at  least  six 
hundred  millions  of  idolaters,  that  is  no  less  than  three- 
fourths  of  the  whole  world,  who  do  not  make  the 
smallest  profession  of  Christianity :  out  of  every  four 
of  the  inhabitants  of  this  earth,  God  looketh  down  and 
seeth  three  who  do  not  know  the  name  of  Jesus.  Oh, 
what  a  fearful,  what  a  soul-chilling  thought  is  this ! 
After  all  that  Christ  hath  done  and  taught,  after  all  the 
miracles  and  labours  of  the  apostles  and  preachers  of 
the  gospel,  behold  we  are  living  in  the  last  days,  and 
there  still  exist  no  less  than  six  hundred  millions 
of  immortal  souls  who  are  every  one  strangers  to 
the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the 
world. 

Away  with  the  delusion  that  may  come  across  your 
minds  that  these  unhappy  men  are  doing  well  enough 
without  the  Bible,  and  are  pleasing  God  after  their 
own  fashion.  I  tell  you  it  would  be  easy  to  fill  books 
with  the  accounts  of  the  cruelty  and  the  lust  and 
the  pride  and  the  blasphemy  which  prevails  among 
these  miserable  multitudes,  and  above  all  in  the  religious 
worship  of  their  idols,  their  gods  made  with  hands. 
Alas !  there  is  not  one  word  of  that  fearful  description 


THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS         225 

given  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Romans,  there  is  not 
one  word,  I  say,  which  is  not  being  daily  fulfilled  in 
those  dark  places  of  the  earth  where  Christ  is  not 
known.  "  They  do  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their 
knowledge,  and  so  God  has  given  them  over  to  a 
reprobate  mind,  to  do  those  things  which  are  not  con 
venient.  They  are  filled  with  all  unrighteousness,  for 
nications,  wickedness,  covetousness,  maliciousness  ;  full 
of  envy,  murders,  debate,  deceit,  malignity ;  whisperers, 
backbiters,  haters  of  God,  despiteful,  proud,  boasters, 
inventors  of  evil  things,  disobedient  to  parents,  with 
out  understanding,  covenant-breakers,  without  natural 
affection,  implacable,  unmerciful ;  who  knowing  the 
judgment  of  God,  that  they  which  commit  such  things 
are  worthy  of  death,  not  only  do  the  same,  but  have 
pleasure  in  them  that  do  them."  These  words  were 
written  of  the  heathen  eighteen  hundred  years  ago, 
but  they  are  a  most  accurate  description  of  the  state 
of  things  in  the  present  day.  So  true  it  is  that  with 
out  the  Bible  man's  natural  heart  is  always  the  same  ; 
that  without  Christianity  there  is  no  real  morality ; 
so  true  that  without  true  religion  the  corruption  which 
is  within  us  comes  to  the  surface,  and  we  are  fully 
shown  to  be  little  better  than  a  mixture  of  the  beast 
and  the  devil. 

These  are  the  heathen  whom  this  great  Missionary 
Society  desires  to  bring  unto  Christ,  these  are  the 
heathen  who  are  dying  in  their  sins  at  the  rate  of 
two  thousand  every  hour  and  thirty  every  minute, 
without  hope  and  without  God  in  the  world  ;  these 
are  the  sheep  without  a  shepherd  whose  wretched  state 
should  move  you  Christians  to  compassion,  and  make 
you  give  all  you  can  to  help  to  send  them  ministers 
to  teach  them  the  way  to  heaven. 

But   I   would    not  have   you   ignorant,  beloved,  that 

15 


226         THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS 

there  are  others  whose  case  is  quite  as  pitiable  as  that 
of  the  heathen,  who  have  quite  as  strong  a  claim  upon 
the  compassion  of  all  who  follow  Jesus.  There  are 
those  thousands  of  Englishmen  who  live  in  our  colonies 
abroad— in  India,  Canada,  Australia— those  bold  and 
industrious  men  who  have  gone  forth  as  emigrants  to 
settle  in  a  new  country,  and  are  gradually  clearing  and 
civilising  wild  districts  which  no  Christian  ever  trod 
before.  And  I  tell  you  that  these  settlers  are  indeed 
in  every  sense  too  often  sheep  without  a  shepherd. 
They  find  themselves  in  a  land  that  is  very  thinly 
populated.  It  often  happens  that  a  man  is  thirty, 
forty,  fifty  miles  from  any  place  of  worship  ;  he  never 
has  the  opportunity  of  going  with  a  multitude  to  the 
house  of  God  ;  he  never  hears  the  joyful  sound  of  the 
preaching  of 'the  gospel  ;  he  has  no  minister  to  consult 
if  he  is  in  difficulties  ;  he  has  none  other  than  the 
private  means  of  grace,  the  Bible,  and  private  prayer. 
Oh,  when  it  comes  to  this,  it  is  indeed  a  fiery  trial 
of  a  man's  foundations  :  to  be  alone  with  your  own 
family  in  a  howling  wilderness,  to  have  no  witness  of 
your  dealings  but  the  Lord,  to  have  no  bell  to  summon 
you,  to  have  no  minister  to  invite  you,  to  see  no  church 
to  remind  you,  to  find  no  neighbours  to  encourage  or 
shame  you,— I  say  that  this  doth  put  a  man's  religion 
to  the  proof,  this  soon  brings  out  his  real  character, 
this  soon  discovers  whether  he  has  had  a  form  of 
godliness  without  the  power,  or  whether  he  has  in 
deed  the  root  of  the  matter  in  him,  and  is  one  of 
that  little  flock  which  will  follow  Jesus,  yea,  even  in 
the  dark.  Truly  you  little  know  the  value  of  regular 
means  of  grace,  so  long  as  you  are  familiar  with  them. 
But  go  into  a  wilderness,  place  yourself  where  there 
is  no  church  and  no  minister,  and  no  public  prayers 
and  no  preaching  and  no  sacraments,  nothing  but 


' 


THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS         227 

yourself,  your  Bible  and  your  God,  and  you  would 
soon  feel  a  mighty  difference — you  would  discover  that 
without  these  helps  the  road  towards  Zion  is  a  weary 
pilgrimage.  Think  you  there  would  be  much  religion 
in  Exbury,  if  all  the  places  of  worship  were  pulled 
down,  if  ail  the  ministers  were  withdrawn,  and  each 
was  left  to  the  care  of  his  own  soul  ?  There  may 
be  lewd  men  of  the  baser  sort  who  think  it  would 
make  no  difference  ;  but  I  do  sadly  fear  that  in  a  very 
few  years  sin  would  abound,  and  God  would  be  almost 
forgotten,  and  true  religion  would  be  starved  and  frozen 
into  the  smallest  possible  space. 

But  such  is  just  the  condition  of  a  large  part  of 
those  colonies  where  many  of  your  fellow-countrymen 
dwell.  Oh,  have  compassion  on  them,  and  let  them 
not  famish  for  lack  of  the  bread  of  life ! 

And  then  consider  the  miseries  to  which  a  man  is 
liable  who  lives  beyond  the  reach  of  any  of  God's 
messengers.  People  may  think  they  get  on  well 
enough,  when  everything  in  this  world  appears  favour 
able,  while  health  and  strength  and  temporal  prosperity 
is  given  them  ;  and  "  What  good  we  should  get  from  a 
minister  ?  "  is  their  thought.  But  when  the  evening  of 
life  draws  on,  when  sorrow  and  sickness  break  in  like 
an  armed  man,  when  death  and  hell  begin  to  stare 
them  in  the  face,  when  one  is  taken  and  another 
taken  from  the  family  circle,  and  conscience  reminds 
them  of  forgetfulness  of  God,  and  Bibles  are  taken 
down  from  shelves  where  they  had  long  been  neglected, 
and  prayer  is  found  a  more  difficult  matter  than  they 
had  thought — I  say  that  then  the  want  of  God's 
appointed  ordinance  is  deeply  felt,  and  many  a  secret 
wish  comes  out,  "  Oh,  that  we  had  some  minister  of 
Jesus  close  at  hand  ! "  But  this  is  just  a  picture  of  many 
thousand  families  of  our  own  flesh  and  blood  in  foreign 


228         THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS 

part<     The  Lord  incline  your  hearts  to  have  compas 
sion  on  them,  and  help  to  send  them  teachers  of  the 

way  of  life. 

III.  And  now,  beloved,  I  have  fulfilled  the  promise 
that  I  made,  to  show  you  a  mighty  multitude  of  sheep 
which  have  no  shepherd,  and  it  only  remains  for  me 
to  press  home  upon  you  all  the  duty  and  the  privilege 
of  giving  according  to  your  power  in  aid  of  Foreign 
Missions. 

Behold,  I  set  before  you  the  great  machine  by  which 
Christ  crucified  may  be  preached  to  the  hearts  of  those 
who  are  now  sitting  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of 
death.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  said  Jesus,  "and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  Oh,  how  un 
worthily  and  coldly  are  we  listening  to  His  voice  !  There 
is  not  more  than  one  missionary  to  a  million  of  souls 
in  the  present  day,  and  shall  not  God  visit  such  a  nation 
as  this?  Shall  He  not  punish  us  if  we  stand  calmly 
by,  and  fold  our  arms  and  never  lift  a  finger,  while 
thousands  are  dying  without  having  seen  the  Lord's 
Christ. 

I  do  beseech  you  all,  if  you  have  one  spark  of  the 
mind  that  was  in  Jesus,  if  you  have  any  value  for 
the  everlasting  gospel,  if  you  know  anything  of  the 
guilt  of  sin,  if  you  have  ever  felt  anything  of  the  grace 
of  God,  if  you  are  not  utterly  dead  to  all  spiritual 
things, — I  do  beseech  you  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  your 
profession  by  contributing  liberally  to  the  support  of 
this  missionary  society.  Oh  that  the  money  which  will 
be  spent  in  so  many  places  this  week  in  drinking, 
idleness,  and  sin  could  only  be  applied  to  spreading 
Christ's  Gospel ! 

I  say,  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  know  the  truth 
and  not  to  burn  with  anxiety  to  bring  all  men  to  the 
knowledge  of  it.  He  that  has  no  zeal  about  the  souls 


THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS         229 

of  others  can  have  but  little  about  his  own.  He  that 
is  not  with  Jesus  in  this  work  is  indeed  against  Him. 
Where  is  the  use  of  a  man  praying  "  Thy  kingdom 
come,"  if  he  has  no  mind  to  help  it  forward  ?  It  is  as 
bad  as  saying  to  your  brethren,  "  Be  ye  warmed  and 
filled,  notwithstanding  ye  give  them  not  those  things 
which  are  needful."  "  Whoso  hath  this  world's  goods, 
and  seeth  his  brother  have  need,  and  shutteth  up  his 
compassion  from  him,  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God 
in  him?" 

Say  not  "  We  are  very  sorry  for  these  people,  but  we 
can  do  no  more ;  we  are  too  poor,  we  have  other  uses 
for  our  money."  What !  do  you  forget  the  widow 
who  gave  two  mites  which  made  a  farthing  out  of 
her  poverty,  and  cannot  ye  do  anything?  The  Lord 
Jesus  saw  her,  and  He  sees  you  and  knows  the  worth 
of  your  excuse.  And  have  ye  never  read  that  it  was 
thought  a  solemn  duty  in  the  New  Testament  churches 
to  give  to  the  necessities  of  others  ?  They  were  afflicted, 
persecuted,  tormented.  Many  of  you  would  have  said, 
"  Better  keep  our  money  at  home,"  but  this  deep  poverty 
abounded, <4  and  to  their  power,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  yea,  and 
beyond  their  power,  they  were  willing  of  themselves, 
praying  us  with  much  entreaty  that  we  would  receive 
the  gift.'5  And  who  were  ever  poorer  in  the  end  for 
giving  anything  to  God?  He  that  watereth  shall  be 
watered  himself.  He  that  hath  pity  on  the  poor  lendeth 
to  the  Lord  ;  and  look,  what  he  layeth  out,  it  shall  be 
paid  him  again. 

Say  not,  "  We  are  no  keepers  of  other  men's  souls : 
every  man  for  himself,"  Oh,  but  this  will  not  avail  you 
at  the  bar  of  Christ.  "  The  King  shall  say  to  them  on 
the  left  hand,  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting 
fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  For  I  was 
an  hungred,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat:  I  was  thirsty, 


230 


THE   COMPASSION   OF  JESUS 


and  ye  gave  me  no  drink:  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye 
took  me  not  in  :  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  not :  sick, 
and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited  me  not.  Then  shall  they 
also  answer  Him,  saying,  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  an 
hungred,  or  athirst,  or  a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick, 
or  in  prison,  and  did  not  minister  unto  Thee  ?  Then 
shall  He  answer  them,  saying,  Verily  I  say  unto  you, 
Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  to  one  of  the  least  of  these, 
ye  did  it  not  to  me." 

And  what  should  you  think  of  one  in  time  of  plague 
who  had  a  special  remedy  and  took  no  pains  to  give 
it  to  his  neighbours?  Be  sure  you  will  never  sit  in 
Abraham's  bosom  if  any  damned  soul  shall  be  able  to 
say,  "  Father  Abraham,  that  man  might  have  cared 
for  my  salvation  ;  he  might  have  sent  me  help,  and  he 
would  not." 

But  oh,  remember  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  how 
He  said,  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  and 
small  as  the  contributions  of  Exbury  may  seem,  who 
knows  but  they  may  be  the  means  of  saving  precious 
souls  ?  who  knows  but  you  will  give  cause  to  heaven 
itself  to  rejoice  ? — "  for  there  IS  joy  in  the  presence 
of  the  angels  of  God  over  ONE  sinner  that  repenteth." 


XVII 
PROFIT  AND    LOSS 

"  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his 
own  soul  ? " — MARK  viii.  36. 

IT  is  a  sad  proof,  beloved,  of  our  evil  and  corrupt 
nature,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  should  have 
thought  it  necessary  to  use  such  language  and  to  ask 
such  a  question.  He  was  preaching  to  His  own  people 
— to  the  children  of  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  to  the 
nation  which  for  fifteen  hundred  years  had  alone  enjoyed 
the  privilege  of  knowing  the  true  God  ;  He  was  not 
instructing  ignorant  heathen,  but  Israelites,  to  whom  per 
tained  the  adoption  and  the  glory  and  the  covenant,  and 
the  giving  of  the  law  and  the  service  of  God  and  the 
promises  ;  and  yet  behold  He  deals  with  them  as  if  they 
had  still  to  learn  the  first  principles  of  religious  know 
ledge — "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  But  it  is  far  more  sad, 
beloved,  and  far  more  deplorable,  that  at  the  present 
hour,  eighteen  hundred  years  after  Jesus  died  for  men,  it 
should  still  be  necessary  for  a  minister  of  the  gospel  to 
urge  upon  you  the  very  same  words.  Who,  indeed,  would 
have  thought  it  possible  that  we  should  be  obliged  to 
remind  you  that  the  care  of  the  soul  is  the  one  thing 
needful — needful  for  all :  for  the  rich,  because  of  their 
temptations  ;  for  the  poor,  because  of  their  trials  ;  for 
the  old,  because  death  is  close  at  hand  ;  for  the  young, 

231 


232  PROFIT   AND   LOSS 

because  life  with  all  its  intoxicating  follies  is  before 
them,  and  they  can  never  have  a  more  convenient  season  ? 
—to 'remind  you  that,  although  men  have  different 
abilities  and  fill  different  stations  here  on  earth,  they 
have  one  thing  at  least  in  common,  they  have  ALL 
immortal  souls,  they  must  all  give  account  of  themselves 
at  the  day  of  judgment.  And  yet, "  hear,  O  heavens,  and 
give  ear,  O  earth,"  we  are  obliged  to  tell  you,  professing 
Christians,  all  this.  I  say  obliged,  and  is  there  not  a 
cause  ?  Mark  now  what  I  am  about  to  say,  and  listen 
to  my  proofs. 

I  appeal,  then,  to  your  consciences,  whether  I  do  not 
say  the  truth  in  Christ,  when  I  declare  my  belief  that 
the  greater  number  of  baptised  persons  are  living  just 
as  if  this  world  was  their  abiding  home  and  resting 
place,  and  the  things  of  this  world  their  only  object 
— as  if  there  was  no  such  text  as  "  It  is  appointed 
unto  men  once  to  die,  but  after  this  the  judgment." 
As  if  Jesus  had  never  come  down  on  earth,  preached, 
suffered,  died  and  risen  again  for  human  guilt ;  as  if  the 
Bible  was  a  beautiful  book,  but  a  thing  to  be  admired 
and  respected  more  than  studied  ;  as  if  churches  and 
ministers  were  convenient  enough  for  keeping  people 
in  order,  but  not  witnesses  of  truth  and  messengers 
of  glad  tidings  to  a  lost  and  ruined  creation.  I  often 
observe,  when  persons  meet,  they  ask  each  other  a  great 
deal  about  their  bodily  health  ("  Are  you  quite  well  ?  " 
they  say, "  Have  you  got  over  that  cold,  or  that  fever,  or 
that  rheumatism  ?  " )  but  I  never  yet  met  with  any  one 
who  made  a  point  of  inquiring  about  his  friend's  soul ;  and 
yet  we  are  told  plainly  in  the  Bible,  that  the  body  (com 
paratively  speaking)  is  vile  and  perishable,  but  the  soul 
precious  and  eternal.  Men  seem  to  go  blindly  forward, 
intent  upon  the  earth  they  walk  on,  and  confining  all 
their  anxiety  to  the  life  that  now  is  ;  one  generation 


PROFIT   AND   LOSS  233 

after  another  is  struggling  to  get  on  in  this  world,  but 
few  indeed  appear  to  care  where  they  shall  be  found 
in  the  next. 

Seeing  then,  beloved,  that  these  things  cannot  be 
spoken  against,  for  who  shall  gainsay  them  ? — seeing  that, 
even  in  this  .parish,  I  have  found  already,  to  my  deep 
sorrow,  there  are  some  persons  quite  careless  and  in 
different  about  religion,  some  who  drink,  some  who  live 
immoral  lives,  some  who  without  good  reasons  attend 
church  only  once  a  day,  some  who  only  attend  now 
and  then  when  it  is  convenient,  (think  what  a  profanation 
for  a  sinful  creature  to  talk  of  honouring  his  Maker  and 
Redeemer  and  Judge  when  it  is  convenient),  some  who 
never  attend  at  all,  and  go  nowhere,  some  who'  appear 
to  think  it  no  sin  to  go  to  sleep  and  some  to  talk  in 
God's  own  house,  before  the  very  eyes  of  Christ  who 
is  now  in  the  midst  of  you, — seeing  that  these  things 
are  so,  I  feel  it  my  solemn  duty,  in  love  and  charity  to 
wards  you,  to  begin  the  year  by  laying  open  the  first 
foundations  of  religious  belief.  I  shall  place  side  by 
side  the  world  and  the  soul,  and  shortly  compare  their 
respective  value ;  and  if  after  that  you  choose  to  lose 
your  own  souls  (which  God  forbid),  you  shall  not  say 
that  I  did  not  at  least  attempt  to  give  you  warning. 
May  the  Holy  Ghost  convince  you  all  of  the  importance 
of  the  subject,  and  give  you  new  hearts,  for  Christ's  sake. 

I.  What  then  shall  I  say  of  the  things  of  this  world, 
which  men  appear  to  think  so  valuable — money,  houses, 
land,  clothes,  food,  drink,  learning,  honours,  titles, 
pleasures,  and  the  like  ?  Beloved,  I  shall  say  two  things. 
First,  they  are  all  really  worthless  :  capable,  no  doubt, 
of  being  turned  to  a  good  use  (every  creature  of  God, 
says  the  Bible,  is  good  if  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God 
and  prayer),  but  I  mean  this,  that  if  you  suppose  they 
are  in  themselves  able  to  make  you  really  happy,  you 


234 


PROFIT   AND   LOSS 


arc  \vofully  deceived.  If  any  unconverted  person  in  this 
parish  could  have  just  as  much  as  he  wished  of  every 
earthly  good  thing,  he  would  still  find  in  a  very  short 
time  that  he  was  not  one  whit  happier  than  before. 
They  are  all  comfortless  without  a  new  heart  and  a 
living  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  I  dare  say  you  think  I  am 
mistaken,  but  let  me  tell  (you  many  a  rich  man  has  tried 
the  experiment,  and  can  bear  witness  that  the  case  is  so. 
Many  a  one  could  tell  you  that  he  seeks  out  everything 
which  money  can  purchase,  he  passes  his  life  in  a  con 
stant  round  of  amusement  and  excitement,  going  from 
one  pleasure  to  another,  and  yet  he  must  confess  that 
peace  of  mind  has  been  like  a  shadow  or  will-o'-the-wisp, 
always  before  his  eyes  but  never  within  his  grasp.  And  if 
this  does  not  convince  you,  read 'the  book  of  Ecclesiastcs, 
and  there  you  will  find  the  deliberate  opinion  of  the 
wisest  man  that  ever  lived — I  mean  Solomon — and  you 
will  see  that  he  put  the  question  to  the  proof  in  his  own 
case  ;  and  what  was  the  result  ?  "  Vanity  of  vanities," 
saith  the  preacher,  "  all  is  vanity."  "  I  was  great,"  he 
says,  "  and  increased  more  than  all  that  were  before  me 
in  Jerusalem  :  also  my  wisdom  remained  with  me.  And 
whatsoever  my  eyes  desired  I  kept  not  from  them,  I 
withheld  not  my  heart  from  any  joy  ;  for  my  heart 
rejoiced  in  all  my  labour :  and  this  was  my  portion  of 
all  my  labour.  Then  I  looked  on  all  the  works  that 
my  hands  had  wrought,  and  on  the  labour  that  I  had 
laboured  to  do  :  and,  behold,  all  was  vanity  and  vexation 
of  spirit,  and  there  was  no  profit  under  the  sun." 

Secondly,  I  say  that  all  the  things  of  the  world  are 
perishable.  Surely,  dear  friends,  this  cannot  require 
any  evidence.  You  must  have  seen  with  your  own 
eyes  that  none  of  the  things  I  have  mentioned  are 
sure,  lasting,  permanent,  incorruptible,  and  to  be 
depended  on.  Money  and  property  may  be  lost; 


PROFIT  AND   LOSS  235 

health  may  fail ;  friends  may  be  deceitful  ;  and  unless 
we  can  make  a  covenant  with  death  and  hell,  we 
ourselves  may  suddenly  be  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  our 
days  and  hurried  to  our  last  account.  Oh,  remember 
the  parable  in  Luke  xii.  16.  We  do  not  read  that  he 
was  immoral  or  an  evil-liver  in  any  way,  yet  see  the 
conclusion  our  Lord  draws.  There  may  be  times  when 
everything  looks  bright  and  sunshiny,  but  let  us  not 
forget  the  days  of  darkness,  for  they  shall  be  many — 
the  days  when  you  shall  say  in  the  morning  "Would 
God  it  were  evening,"  and  in  the  evening  (i  Would  God 
it  were  morning,"  for  the  longer  you  live  the  more  will 
you  feel  the  truth  of  Job's  words,  "  Man  that  is  born 
of  a  woman  is  of  few  days,  and  full  of  trouble.  He 
cometh  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  cut  down  ;  he  fleeth 
also  as  a  shadow,  and  continueth  not"  (xiv.  I,  2). 
There  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  down,  that  it  will 
sprout  again  ;  but  "  man  dieth  and  wasteth  away,  yea, 
man  giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where  is  he  ? " 

II.  Such  is  the  world  ;  and  now  what  shall  I  say  of 
the  soul,  which  people  appear  to  hold  so  cheap? 

First,  then,  let  me  tell  you  it  is  the  most  valuable 
part  of  man,  because  it  is  the  part  in  which  we  differ 
from  the  brute  creation.  It  is  that  wonderful  principle 
by  which  God  made  a  distinction  between  ourselves 
and  the  other  works  of  His  hand,  for  we  read  that 
"God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and 
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,"  and  then 
what  was  the  grand  conclusion  ? — "  man  became  a  living 
soul."  It  was  the  soul  for  which  Christ  was  content 
to  take  our  nature  on  Him,  and  suffer  death  upon  the 
cross  ;  the  soul,  of  whose  interests  you  are  so  careless, 
was  the  cause  which  brought  Him  down  from  the  right 
hand  of  God,  to  give  His  own  blood  as  the  price  of 
its  redemption.  Think,  beloved,  I  beseech  you,  what  a 


236  PROFIT   AND   LOSS 

privilege  it  must  be  to  have  a  soul.  I  once  heard  an 
anecdote  of  a  gentleman  who  was  visiting  a  large  lunatic 
asylum  or  madhouse  near  London,  when  he  met  with 
a  patient  who  was  only  out  of  his  mind  upon  certain 
subjects,  as  I  daresay  you  know  is  sometimes  the  case  ; 
and  this  poor  creature  asked  him  a  startling,  a  most 
wonderful  question.  "Sir,"  he  said,  "did  you  say  your 
prayers  this  morning?"  "Yes,"  was  the  answer. 
"Then,  sir,  I  trust  you  thanked  God  that  you  have 
the  use  of  your  reason."  Beloved,  I  wish  you  to  apply 
this  to  your  own  case.  Have  you  ever  thanked  God 
that  you  have  got  a  soul  capable  of  renewal,  of  regenera 
tion,  capable  of  eternal  life  ?  Oh,  if  you  have  not,  go 
down  upon  your  knees  this  day,  and  acknowledge  the 
mercies  you  have  received,  and  your  own  ingratitude 
and  unworthiness. 

This  leads  me  to  the  second  thing  I  have  to  say 
about  the  soul.  It  is  eternal.  This  frail  body  of  ours 
shall  one  day  perish  ;  the  worm  shall  feed  sweetly  on 
it  ;  "  ashes  to  ashes,  and  dust  to  dust,"  will  probably  be 
read  over  the  fairest  and  strongest  in  this  church ;  but 
the  soul  shall  never  perish,  and  when  the  earth  and  all 
that  it  contains  are  burning  up,  the  soul  shall  enter 
upon  a  new  state  of  existence,  which  shall  never  change, 
and  that  state  shall  be  everlasting  life  or  everlasting  fire. 

Such  is  the  soul,  and  such  is  the  world  ;  and  may 
we  not  wonder,  with  such  undeniable  facts  before  us, 
that  any  can  be  found  so  foolish  as  to  think  of  the  last 
more  than  of  the  first,  to  cleave  to  earth  and  disregard 
heaven  ?  This  is  indeed  to  come  down  to  the  level  of 
the  beasts  that  perish,  to  call  the  sword  less  valuable 
than  the  sheath  which  contains  it,  and  the  jewel  less 
precious  than  the  case  in  which  it  is  enclosed.  "Where 
fore,"  asks  the  prophet  Isaiah,  "do  ye  spend  your 
money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  ?  and  your  labour  for 


PROFIT  AND  LOSS  237 

that  which  satisfieth  not?  Hearken  diligently  unto  me, 
and  eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight 
itself  in  fatness." 

Now,  if  the  heart  of  man  were  less  deceitful  than 
it  is,  such  general  argument  might  be  enough  :  but  I 
dare  not  stop  here,  for  it  is  no  light  matter — it  is  your 
life  ;  and  therefore  I  will  bring  before  your  notice  the 
testimony  of  two  most  unexceptionable  witnesses,  the 
dying  and  the  dead.  Ask  them  for  an  answer  to 
the  question  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the 
whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ? "  and  I  would  be 
content  to  leave  the  decision  of  our  text  in  their  hands. 

Ask  the  dying  sinner  ;  stand  by  his  bedside,  and 
inquire  of  him,  whether  it  proves  a  comfortable  and 
supporting  thought  that  he  has  cared  more  for  the 
world  than  for  his  soul.  Perhaps  you  never  saw  the 
deathbed  of  one  who  had  not  got  his  feet  upon  the  rock. 
Oh !  it  is  a  fearful,  an  instructive,  a  soul-moving  sight ! 
When  the  heart  begins  to  beat  faintly  and  the  eyes 
to  grow  dim,  when  friends  are  weeping  around  and 
human  medicines  avail  no  longer,  when  all  the  in 
toxication  of  worldly  pleasure  or  business  is  past  and 
far  away,  when  each  lies  in  his  own  silent  chamber, 
with  nothing  apparently  between  himself  and  God, 
when  something  whispers  "  Thou  shalt  not  come  down 
from  that  bed  on  which  thou  art  gone  up,  but  shalt 
surely  die,"  in  that  solemn  hour,  beloved,  we  have  little 
idea  how  small  appears  this  earth  and  how  broad 
eternity  ;  how-  much  the  memory  of  sin  improves  ;  how 
deeply  a  guilty  conscience  darkens.  You  would  then 
hear  him  acknowledge  that  his  life  had  been  a  grand 
mistake  ;  you  would  hear  him  confess  that  the  care  of 
the  soul  was  indeed  the  one  thing  needful,  and  bitterly 
repent  the  time  he  had  lost,  the  opportunities  he  had 
neglected,  and  the  instruction  he  had  despised.  God 


238  PROFIT   AND  LOSS 

grant  I  may  be  spared  the  pain  of  seeing  any  of  you 
in  such  a  plight ! 

And  then,  beloved,  turn  to  the  bedside  of  one  of 
God's  own  children  in  his  last  moments  :  you  might 
perhaps  observe  some  few  doubts  and  fears,  from  a 
strong  sense  of  his  own  unworthiness,  and  a  knowledge 
of  his  own  sinfulness— for  Satan  is  strong  and  the  flesh 
weak_though  it  is  far  more  probable  you  would  hear 
him  say,  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  at 
the  latter  day  He  shall  stand  upon  the  earth,  and 
though  after  my  skin  worms  devour  this  body,  yet  in 
my  flesh  shall  I  see  God "  ;  « Though  I  walk  through 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil, 
for  Thou  art  with  me  ;  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  they 
comfort  me."  But  this  at  least  is  most  certain  :  you 
never  would  hear  one  single  member  of  Christ  declare 
that  he  only  regretted  he  had  not  cared  enough  about 
the  world,  that  he  had  paid  too  much  attention  to  the 
welfare  of  his  own  soul. 

Let  us  now  examine  the  witness  of  the  dead  upon 
this  momentous  question.  Think  not  that  I  am  going 
to  incur  the  charge  of  intruding  into  things  which  I 
have  not  seen :  I  shall  simply  lay  before  you  one  of 
the  most  remarkable  passages  in  the  New  Testament, 
the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus.  (Luke  xvi.) 
The  words  are  so  simple  that  I  should  only  weaken 
their  force  if  I  were  to  add  any  comment  ;  I  only 
ask  you  to  remark  that  little  is  said  about  Lazarus, 
excepting  that  he  was  poor,  yet  we  see  he  was  rich 
in  faith  and  had  treasure  in  heaven.  Nothing  is  said 
against  the  rich  man  :  we  do  not  learn  that  he  was 
immoral  or  cruel,  and  yet  it  is  clear  he  had  laid  up  all 
his  treasure  upon  earth.  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear, 
let  him  hear." 

Beloved,  are  not  these  things  written  for  our  learning  ? 


PROFIT  AND   LOSS  239 

Are  not  these  the  words  of  Him  who  spake  to  the 
world  the  things  which  He  had  heard  of  His  Father? 
Is  it  not  then  a  wonderful  and  a  horrible  thing  that 
so  many  of  you  can  live  on  in  utter  carelessness  about 
your  soul,  setting  your  affections  upon  things  below, 
giving  God  your  spare  time  and  the  season  when  you 
have  nothing  to  do,  but  giving  all  your  hearts  to  that 
which  cannot  profit  you  in  this  life  and  will  not  deliver 
you  from  condemnation  in  the  life  to  come.  "  Oh  that 
mine  head  were  water  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of 
tears,  that  I  might  weep  night  and  day  for  the  slain 
of  the  daughter  of  my  people  ! "  for  unbelief  such 
as  this  is  marvellous,  inexplicable,  unaccountable, 
incomprehensible. 

I  trust,  beloved,  I  have  now  proved  to  you  how 
false  and  unworthy  is  the  estimate  men  usually  place 
upon  the  world  and  upon  the  soul.  I  have  endeavoured 
to  show  you  a  more  excellent  way ;  but  I  cannot 
conclude  without  supplying  a  few  hints,  which  may 
assist  each  of  you  in  finding  out  whether  he  is  loving 
his  own  soul  at  this  minute  or  not. 

Many  a  one,  I  daresay,  is  disposed  to  think  that  all 
this  may  be  very  true — you  knew  it  long  ago — but  it 
does  not  apply  to  yourself:  you  wish  your  soul  to  be 
saved. 

You  wish  to  be  saved.  There  are  few  that  do  not ; 
but  unfortunately  men  generally  want  to  be  saved  in 
their  own  way,  and  not  according  to  the  Bible  ;  they  love 
the  crown,  although  they  will  seldom  take  up  the  cross. 
Friend,  you  need  not  be  in  any  uncertainty  about  it ; 
you  may  soon  know  what  your  state  is  ;  it  is  all  to  be 
found  in  this  little  Book  ;  the  marks,  the  signs,  the 
tokens,  the  evidences  are  so  clearly  recorded,  that  he 
who  runs  may  read.  And  what  are  they?  Listen, 
I  beseech  you. 


24o  PROFIT   AND   LOSS 

It  is  written  here,  "All  have  sinned,  and  come  short 
of  the  glory  of  God  ; "  "  There  is  not  a  just  man  upon 
earth  that  doeth  good  and  sinneth  not."  Do  you  know 
this  ?  Have  you  been  brought  to  the  wholesome  con 
clusion  that  you  are  no  better  than  a  lost  sinner  by 
nature,  wretched  and  miserable  and  poor  and  blind 
and  naked,  without  one  spark  of  natural  goodness, 
deserving  of  nothing  but  God's  wrath  and  condemna 
tion  ?  Oh !  if  you  have  not,  tremble  for  yourself  and 
repent :  be  very  sure  you  are  losing  your  own  soul. 

Again,  it  is  written  :  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again, 
he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God " ;  "  Ye  must  be 
born  again."  Have  you  gone  through  that  mighty 
change  ?  Do  you  feel  an  abhorrence  of  former  care 
lessness  and  indifference,  a  desire  to  serve  God  from 
the  heart,  a  putting  away  of  old  things  and  a  putting 
on  of  new?  Has  godly  sorrow  wrought  in  you  re 
pentance  unto  salvation  not  to  be  repented  of?  Oh,  if 
it  has  not,  tremble  for  yourself:  know  for  a  certainty 
you  are  losing  your  own  soul. 

Again  it  is  written,  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall 
be  damned."  "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please 
Him."  Have  you  any  of  this  faith?  Have  you  been 
convinced  of  the  utter  insufficiency  of  your  own  right 
eousness,  of  the  wretched  poverty  of  your  own  best 
works?  Have  you  come  in  humility  and  lowly-minded- 
ncss,  renouncing  all  confidence  in  yourself,  to  the  Lamb 
of  God  which  takcth  away  the  sin  of  the  world, 
trusting  simply  in  His  blood  and  righteousness,  resting 
solely  on  His  merits  and  intercession?  Oh!  if  you 
have  not,  tremble  for  yourself  and  repent.  Be  not 
deceived:  you  are  losing  your  own  soul. 

Lastly,  it  is  written  :  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy." 
"  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  What 
do  you  know  of  this  holiness  ?  Can  you  say  that  God 


PROFIT   AND   LOSS  241 

the  Holy  Ghost  has  actually  begun  the  blessed  and 
never-dying  work  of  sanctification  within  you  ?  Do 
you  feel  any  pure  love  towards  God  and  your  neigh 
bours?  Is  it  your  supreme  desire  to  advance  God's 
glory?  Have  you  any  zeal  for  the  extension  of  His 
kingdom  ?  Do  you  strive  not  to  be  conformed  to  this 
world  ?  Do  you  profess  to  regulate  every  thought 
and  word  and  action  by  the  Holy  Scriptures  ?  Do  you 
hunger  and  thirst  after  a  complete  mortification  of  sin, 
and  look  forward  with  longing  to  the  time  when  Satan 
shall  be  bound,  and  there  shall  be  no  more  struggle 
between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  ?  Are  you  meek  and 
gentle  towards  all  men  ?  Do  you  redeem  the  time 
daily,  looking  on  every  minute  as  a  talent  for  which 
you  are  accountable,  and  aiming  to  be  employed  as 
far  as  possible  in  the  things  which  are  just  and  honour 
able  and  lovely  and  of  good  report?  Are  the  ordi 
nances  of  Christ's  Church  sweet  and  precious  to  your 
soul?  Are  prayer  and  praise  a  delight — in  public,  in 
your  family,  in  private?  Is  your  Bible  your  daily 
food,  a  light  to  your  feet  and  a  lantern  to  your  path? 
Are  you  above  the  fear  of  men,  and  can  you  think 
lightly  of  their  praise  in  comparison  with  that  which 
is  of  God  ?  Do  you  count  all  things  but  loss  if  you 
can  but  win  Christ,  and  the  life  that  now  is  as  nothing 
compared  with  that  which  is  to  come  ?  Oh  !  if  you 
know  not  something,  however  little,  of  these  things, 
tremble  for  yourself  and  repent :  rest  assured  you 
are  losing  your  own  soul. 

O  beloved,  be  merciful  to  yourselves.  Cease  to  think 
so  much  about  this  vile  body,  this  perishable  world  ; 
think  more  about  those  precious  souls  which  Jesus 
purchased  with  His  own  blood — about  that  eternal 
resting-place  where  your  Saviour  sitteth  at  the  right 
hand  of  God.  "  Labour  not  for  the  meat  that  perisheth, 

16 


242 


PROFIT  AND  LOSS 


but  for  that  meat  which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life, 
which  the  Son  of  man  shall  give  you." 

True  Christian,  a  word  for  you.  You  know  these 
things  ;  you  can  say,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  have 
been  brought  to  see  the  emptiness  of  this  world,  and 
the  value  of  my  soul ;  by  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what 
I  am."  Oh,  remember  then,  to  make  full  proof  that 
you  are  one  of  Christ's  flock,  by  your  daily  conduct, 
your  habits,  your  temper. 

Let  your  life  throughout  the  coming  year  be  a  silent 
witness  to  the  Gospel.  Strive  to  assist  Christ's  ministers, 
in  your  families  and  among  your  friends  and  acquaint 
ances,  by  speaking  to  them  of  the  things  pertaining  to 
the  kingdom  of  God,  by  showing  them  what  great  things 
your  heavenly  Father  has  done  for  you.  Let  all  take 
knowledge  that  to  have  been  with  Jesus  has  made  you 
happier,  holier,  better  in  every  relation  of  life  ;  and  so 
perchance  it  may  please  God  to  give  some  repentance 
to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth,  and  thus  their  souls 
may  be  delivered  from  the  snare  of  the  devil,  and  saved 
in  the  great  day  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall 
be  revealed. 


XVIII 
ENOCH 

"  Enoch  walked  with  God,  and  he  was  not :  for  God  took  him." 

GEN.  v.  24. 

YOU  all  wish  to  go  to  heaven.  I  know  it.  I  am 
fully  persuaded  of  it  ;  I  am  certain  of  it.  There 
is  not  one  of  you,  however  false  may  be  his  views  of 
what  he  must  believe  and  what  he  must  do,  however 
unscriptural  the  ground  of  his  hope,  however  worldly- 
minded  he  may  be  during  the  week,  however  careless 
when  he  gets  outside  that  door — there  is  not  one  of  you, 
I  say,  who  does  not  wish  to  go  to  heaven.  But  I  do 
sadly  fear  that  many  of  you,  without  a  mighty  change, 
will  never  get  there.  You  would  like  the  crown,  but 
you  do  not  like  the  cross  ;  you  would  like  the  glory, 
but  not  the  grace  ;  the  happiness,  but  not  the  holiness ; 
the  peace,  but  not  the  truth  ;  the  victory,  but  not  the 
fight ;  the  reward,  but  not  the  labour  ;  you  would  like 
the  harvest,  but  not  the  ploughing  ;  you  would  like 
the  reaping,  but  not  the  sowing  ;  and  so  I  fear  that 
many  of  you  will  never  get  to  heaven. 

Well,  you  may  say,  these  are  sharp  words,  this  is 
hard  measure  ;  but  we  should  like  to  know  what  sort 
of  people  they  are  who  will  be  saved.  I  shall  give 
you  a  short  and  very  general  answer.  They  who  have 
the  same  faith  as  those  holy  men  whose  names  are 
recorded  in  the  Bible— they  who  walk  in  that  same 

243 


244 


ENOCH 


narrow  path  which  all  the  saints  of  God  have  trodden 

such  persons  and  such  only  shall  have  eternal  life 

and  never  enter  into  condemnation. 

Indeed,  beloved,  there  is  but  one  way  to  heaven  ; 
and  in  this  way  every  redeemed  soul  that  is  now  in 
Paradise  has  walked.  This  is  the  way  you  must  your 
selves  be  content  to  follow  ;  and  if  you  are  really 
wise,  if  you  really  love  life,  as  you  profess  to  do,  you 
will  take  every  opportunity  of  examining  the  characters 
of  those  who  have  gone  before  you,  you  will  mark 
the  principles  on  which  they  acted,  you  will  note  the 
end  they  had  in  view,  you  will  try  to  profit  by  their 
experience,  you  will  follow  them  so  far  as  they  followed 
Christ. 

Now,  I  purpose  this  morning  to  speak  to  you  about 
the  history  of  Enoch,  who  was  one  of  the  first  among 
those  who  by  faith  and  patience  have  inherited  the 
promises  ;  and  I  shall  divide  what  I  have  to  say  upon 
the  subject  into  four  parts. 

I.  What  was  the  character  of  the  age  in   which  he 
lived  ? 

II.  What  was  his  own  character  ? 

III.  What  was  the  leading  motive  or  principle  which 
influenced  him  ? 

IV.  What  was  his  end  ? 

God  grant  that  you  may  all  be  stirred  up  to  a 
diligent  inquiry  into  your  own  state  ;  may  many  of  you, 
hearing  how  Enoch  walked  with  God,  be  led  to  pray, 
"  Lord,  I  would  walk  with  Thee  (I  have  sinned,  but  I 
repent  in  dust  and  ashes),  Lord  Jesus,  I  would  be  Thine, 
create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  guide  me  with  Thy  counsel, 
and  afterward  bring  me  unto  glory." 

Now,  respecting  the  age  when  Enoch  lived  we 
know  little,  but  that  little  is  very  bad.  He  was  the 
seventh  from  Adam,  and  lived  in  the  time  before  the 


ENOCH  245 

flood.  In  those  days,  we  are  told,  the  earth  was 
corrupt  before  God,  and  filled  with  violence.  Every 
sort  of  wickedness  seems  to  have  prevailed  ;  men  walked 
after  the  vile  lusts  of  their  hearts,  and  did  that  which 
appeared  good  to  them  without  fear  and  without  shame. 
The  children  of  Cain,  after  he  murdered  Abel,  as  far 
as  we  can  learn,  made  no  attempt  whatever  to  keep 
God  in  their  thoughts, — like  the  prodigal  son,  they 
went  afar  off  from  Him  and  gave  themselves  up  to 
worldly  employments,  as  if  they  would  keep  the  Lord 
out  of  their  minds  as  much  as  possible.  They  got  a 
name  as  founders  of  cities,  like  men  who  looked  upon 
this  earth  as  their  home,  and  set  all  their  affection  on 
things  below  and  had  no  desire  after  the  new  Jerusalem 
above,  the  city  of  the  Lord  God  and  of  the  Lamb. 
They  became  famous  and  skilful  in  all  the  works  of 
this  life :  one  was  called  the  father  of  shepherds,  and 
another  the  father  of  musicians  ;  but  we  read  of  none 
that  was  a  father  of  faithful  lambs  in  Christ's  flock, 
of  none  that  was  a  father  of  children  who  made  God's 
statutes  their  song  in  the  house  of  their  pilgrimage. 
And  another  was  a  teacher  of  artificers  in  brass  and 
iron  ;  but  we  do  not  hear  of  any  who  taught  the  good 
knowledge  of  the  Lord.  In  short,  they  were  all  clever 
in  finding  out  how  to  be  rich  and  how  to  be  merry 
and  how  to  be  powerful  ;  but  they  were  not  wise  unto 
salvation,  there  was  nothing  of  God  and  His  fear  and 
His  service  among  them. 

Such  were  the  children  of  Cain  ;  and  they  seem  to 
have  been  such  pleasant  company,  so  little  disposed  to 
trouble  other  people  by  talking  about  the  soul  and 
heaven  and  hell,  that  nearly  everybody  took  after  them, 
and  the  world  was  tainted  and  infected  with  their 
manners  ;  insomuch  that  the  few  who  still  clung  to  the 
true  God  became  separated  from  the  rest  by  a  line  of 


246  ENOCH 

distinction  :  they  began  to  be  called  by  the  name  of 
the  Lord. 

But  even  this  separation  did  not  last  long.  We  arc 
next  told,  that  they  who  professed  to  be  the  sons  of 
God  began  to  think  there  was  no  harm  in  marrying 
persons  who  cared  nothing  about  religion  ;  they  chose 
wives  who  were  unbelievers,— beautiful  and  agreeable, 
no  doubt,  but  still  enemies  of  God, — and  (as  it  has  almost 
always  proved  when  a  Christian  has  been  united  to 
one  that  is  not  a  Christian),  the  bad  soon  corrupted  the 
good,  or  else  the  good  did  not  convert  the  bad,  and 
the  families  that  were  born  of  these  unions  proved 
earthly,  sensual,  and  devilish,  and  in  a  short  time  the 
whole  world  was  full  of  sin. 

Consider,  beloved,  what  a  fearful  proof  you  have  here 
of  the  natural  bent  of  man's  heart  towards  wickedness  ! 
They  had  the  recollection  of  God's  anger  against  trans 
gression  fresh  upon  their  minds  ;  they  had  Paradise 
before  their  eyes,  they  had  the  angels  of  God  keeping 
the  way  of  the  tree  of  life  with  flaming  swords  ;  and 
yet,  in  spite  of  all  this,  they  sinned  with  a  high  hand. 
They  went  on  much  as  the  world  likes  to  do  now  : 
they  ate,  they  drank,  they  planted,  they  builded,  they 
bought,  they  sold,  they  made  light  of  warnings.  "  What 
have  we  do  with  the  Lord  ?  "  they  thought  ;  "  let  us  enjoy 
ourselves  while  we  can."  But  God  will  not  be  mocked, 
and  though  He  bore  with  them  long  and  exhorted  them 
by  His  servants,  He  dealt  with  them  at  last  according 
to  their  works  ;  and  just  as  He  will  one  day  send  the 
fire  upon  this  earth,  so  did  He  send  the  waters  of 
the  deep  :  the  flood  came  and  cut  them  off  in  the 
middle  of  their  revellings,  and  drowned  the  whole  world 
excepting  eight  persons. 

Such  was  the  character  of  the  men  before  the  flood  ; 
and  in  the  middle  of  this  age  of  wickedness  Enoch 


ENOCH  247 

lived,  and  Enoch  walked  with  God.  There  were  no 
Bibles  then,  no  prayer-books,  no  religious  tracts,  no 
churches,  no  ministers,  no  sacraments :  Christ  had  never 
been  seen ;  the  way  of  salvation  had  never  been  clearly 
made  known  ;  the  gospel  was  only  seen  dimly  in  the 
distance  ;  it  was  not  fashionable  to  think  about  religion, 
it  was  not  fashionable  to  worship  God  at  all,  there 
was  nothing  to  encourage  people  to  make  a  profession. 
Yet  in  the  middle  of  this  wicked  and  adulterous  genera 
tion  this  saint  of  the  Most  High  did  live;  Enoch  walked 
with  God.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  imagine  a  more 
splendid  proof  of  what  grace  can  do  for  a  weak,  sinful 
man  than  is  to  be  found  in  these  words  ;  in  the  world 
before  the  flood  "  Enoch  walked  with  God." 

II.  I  promised  in  the  second  place  to  tell  you  some 
thing  about  Enoch's  character.  You  have  heard  he 
walked  with  God,  and  you  know,  perhaps,  it  is  an 
expression  of  great  praise  ;  but  I  may  not  leave  you 
here  without  trying  to  give  you  a  clear  notion  of  its 
meaning.  People  often  get  a  habit  of  using  words  with 
out  exactly  knowing  what  they  mean,  and  a  very  bad 
habit  it  is.  Now,  I  say  that  this  walking  with  God  has 
many  different  senses  ;  it  is  an  expression  full  of  matter. 

A  man  that  walks  with  God  is  one  of  God's  friends 
That  unhappy  enmity  and  dislike  which  men  naturally 
feel  towards  their  Maker  has  been  removed  ;  he  feels 
perfectly  reconciled  and  at  peace.  How  indeed  can 
two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ?  He  does 
riot  hide  himself  from  the  Lord,  like  Adam  in  the 
trees  of  the  garden,  but  he  seeks  to  be  in  constant 
communion  with  Him  ;  he  is  not  as  many  who  are 
uncomfortable  at  the  idea  of  being  alone  with  God 
for  he  is  never  perfectly  happy  excepting  in  His  com 
pany  ;  he  feels  that  he  cannot  be  too  much  with  Him, 
because  he  desires  to  be  of  the  same  mind,  to  think 


248 


ENOCH 


like  Him,  to  act  like  Him,  to  be  conformed  to  His  image. 
Such  a  one  was  Enoch. 

.  Again,  he  that  walks  with  God  is  one  of  God's  dear 
children.  He  looks  upon  Him  as  his  Father,  and  as 
such  he  loves  Him,  he  reveres  Him,  he  rejoices  in  Him, 
he  trusts  Him  in  everything.  He  makes  it  his  constant 
study  to  please  Him,  and  whenever  he  has  offended, 
he  sorrows  over  his  offence  with  a  true  childlike  sorrow. 
He  thinks  that  God  knows  better  than  himself  what 
is  good  for  him,  and  so  in  everything  that  happens — 
sickness  or  health,  sorrow  or  joy,  riches  or  poverty — he 
says  to  himself,  "  It  is  well :  my  Father  sends  this." 
Such  a  one  was  Enoch. 

Again,  he  that  walks  with  God  is  one  of  God's 
witnesses.  He  never  hesitates  to  stand  forward  on 
the  Lord's  side.  He  is  not  content  with  giving  his 
own  heart  to  God,  but  he  is  also  ready  and  willing 
to  bear  his  testimony  in  public  on  behalf  of  the  cause 
of  righteousness  and  truth.  He  is  not  ashamed  to 
let  men  know  whose  servant  he  is ;  he  will  not  be 
turned  aside  from  raising  his  voice  against  sin  for  fear 
of  giving  offence.  Such  a  one  was  Enoch.  His  lot 
was  cast  in  evil  days  ;  but  did  he  join  the  multitude  ? 
Did  he  walk  in  the  way  of  sinners  ?  Did  he  hold  his 
peace  and  say,  I  can  do  nothing  ?  Far  from  it  !  He 
thought  riot  what  his  neighbours  liked,  but  what  his 
Lord  required.  He  sought  not  to  please  the  world, 
but  to  please  God  ;  and  therefore,  living  in  the  midst 
of  sin  and  corruption,  he  was  separate  from  it.  He 
was  a  witness  against  it ;  he  was  as  the  salt  of  the 
earth  ;  he  was  as  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place. 

Ay,  and  he  was  a  plain  speaker,  too.  He  made 
no  excuse  about  youth  and  temptation  ;  he  did  not 
let  men  go  to  hell  for  fear  of  being  thought  unchari 
table,  but  he  told  them  openly  of  their  danger ;  and 


ENOCH  249 

when  they  were  living  wickedly  and  carelessly,  as  if 
there  was  no  God  and  no  devil,  he  said,  as  the  apostle 
Jude  relates,  "The  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousand 
of  His  saints,  to  execute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to 
convince  all  that  are  ungodly  of  their  ungodly  deeds." 
No  doubt  he  was  thought  a  troubler  of  the  people, 
and  a  disagreeable  man  ;  but  he  was  a  witness,  and 
so  he  declared  continually :  "  The  Lord  cometh " ; 
whether  ye  will  hear  or  whether  ye  will  forbear,  there 
shall  be  a  day  of  account,  sin  shall  not  always  go 
unpunished — repent,  for  the  Lord  cometh.  This  was 
the  burden  of  his  testimony.  He  walked  with  God, 
and  so  he  was  a  faithful  witness. 

But  I  say  further,  to  walk  with  God  is  to  walk  in 
God's  ways,  to  follow  the  laws  He  has  given  for  our 
guidance,  to  look  on  His  precepts  as  our  rule  and 
our  counsellor,  to  esteem  all  His  commandments  con 
cerning  all  things  to  be  right ;  to  fear  turning  aside 
from  the  narrow  path  He  has  set  before  us  for  one 
single  instant  ;  to  go  straightforward,  though  all  things 
seem  against  us,  remembering  the  word  on  which  He 
has  caused  us  to  hope. 

And  to  walk  with  God  is  to  walk  in  the  light  of 
God's  countenance ;  to  live  as  men  who  remember 
that  all  things  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes 
of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do,  that  the  darkness 
is  no  darkness  with  Him,  and  remembering  this,  to 
aim  at  never  thinking  or  saying  or  doing  anything 
we  should  be  ashamed  of  in  the  presence  of  the  great 
Searcher  of  hearts. 

And  to  walk  with  God  is  to  walk  after  the  Spirit — 
to  look  to  the  Holy  Ghost  as  our  Teacher,  to  lean  on 
Him  for  strength,  to  put  no  confidence  in  the  flesh,  to 
set  our  affections  on  things  above,  to  wean  them  from 
things  on  earth,  to  be  spiritually-minded. 


250  ENOCH 

But  truly,  beloved,  I  might  keep  you  here  all  day, 
and  yet  the  half  would  not  be  told  of  the  things  which 
are  contained  in  walking  with  God.  To  walk  with 
God  is  to  walk  humbly  confessing  ourselves  unworthy 
of  the  least  of  all  His  mercies,  acknowledging  that 
we  have  no  power  of  ourselves  to  help  ourselves,  that 
we  are  constantly  coming  short  and  backsliding,  that 
we  are  unprofitable  servants,  and  without  His  grace 
are  sure  to  fall.  It  is  to  walk  circumspectly,  bearing  in 
mind  our  besetting  sins  and  temptations,  and  avoiding 
all  places  and  companies  and  employments  in  which 
we  arc  likely  to  be  assailed  by  them.  It  is  to  walk  in 
love  towards  all,  both  God  and  man,  full  of  the  mind 
that  is  in  our  heavenly  Father,  kind  and  affectionate 
and  gentle  to  every  one,  yea,  even  to  the  unthankful 
and  the  evil.  To  walk  with  God  is  to  serve  Him  as  a 
habit,  continually  ;  we  are  not  to  walk  with  Him  on 
a  Sunday  and  forget  Him  on  a  weekday  ;  we  are  not 
to  walk  with  Him  in  public  but  not  in  private  ;  we 
are  not  to  walk  with  Him  before  ministers  and  good 
men  only,  but  in  our  own  families  and  before  our  own 
household. 

And  lastly,  to  walk  with  God  is  to  be  always  going 
forward,  always  pressing  on,  never  standing  still  and 
flattering  ourselves  that  we  are  the  men  and  have  borne 
much  fruit ;  but  to  grow  in  grace,  to  go  on  from  strength 
to  strength,  to  forget  the  things  behind,  and  if  by  grace 
\vc  have  attained  unto  anything,  to  abound  yet  more 
and  more. 

Beloved,  this  is  a  very  faint  picture  of  a  walk  with 
God,  but  time  will  not  allow  me  to  draw  another  stroke. 
This  was  some  part  of  Enoch's  character  ;  this  was  in 
some  degree  the  meaning  of  the  record  God  has  given 
us  about  him. 

Oh,  it  is  a  simple  but  a  weighty  record  !     No  doubt 


ENOCH  251 

there  were  many  great  and  many  wise  and  many  noble 
in  those  days  ;  but  all  we  know  of  them  is  that  they 
lived  and  they  died  and  they  begat  sons  and  daughters. 
Of  Enoch  only  is  it  written  that  he  walked  with  God. 
Oh,  this  walk  with  God,  beloved  !  It  is  the  only  talent 
which  will  never  fail  us,  the  only  treasure  which  will 
prove  eternal,  the  only  character  which  will  serve  us 
beyond  the  grave  ;  and  in  the  day  when  names  and 
titles  and  honours  shall  sink  to  nothing,  and  all  shall 
stand  upon  a  level,  the  poorest  and  the  humblest  in 
the  land  shall  be  more  highly  honoured  than  the  mighty 
and  the  rich,  if  he  has  walked  with  God  and  they  have 
not ;  the  first  shall  be  last  and  the  last  first. 

Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye,  all  that  belong  to  Christ's 
little  flock  ;  comfort  ye,  all  that  are  thinking  first  about 
your  souls  ;  others  may  live  in  courts  and  palaces  and 
have  the  praise  of  this  world,  but  of  you  it  shall  be 
written  in  the  books  of  heaven,  "  They  walked  with 
God  "  ;  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  was  their 
Shepherd,  their  Guide,  their  Companion,  their  familiar 
Friend,  and  your  joy  shall  no  man  take  away. 

III.  I  must  now  say  a  few  words  about  Enoch's 
motive.  He  walked  with  God  ;  and  you  will  ask  me, 
"  What  was  the  secret  cause  of  it,  what  was  the  hidden 
spring  and  principle  which  influenced  him,  that  we  may 
go  forth  and  do  likewise  ?  "  Beloved,  God  has  told  us 
plainly  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews — it  was  faith. 
Faith  was  the  seed  which  bore  such  goodly  fruit ;  faith 
was  the  root  of  his  holiness  and  decision  on  the  Lord's 
side — faith  without  which  there  has  never  been  any 
salvation,  faith  without  which  not  one  of  you  will  ever 
enter  into  the  kinglom  of  heaven. 

Now  this  faith  is  no  mystery  ;  it  is  neither  more  nor 
less  than  a  thorough  belief  of  the  heart. 

Enoch   believed    that   as   a    child    of  Adam   he   was 


2S2  ENOCH 

himself  born  a  sinner  and  deserving  of  nothing  but 
wrath  and  condemnation  ;  he  believed  that  his  first 
parents  had  forfeited  all  right  to  eternal  life,  and  that 
he  as  one  of  their  descendants  had  inherited  a  heart 
deceitful  above  all  things  and  desperately  wicked.  He 
did  not  merely  look  upon  himself  as  naturally  very 
thoughtless  and  liable  to  be  led  away  by  bad  company, 
and  the  like,  as  many  of  you  are  content  to  do,  but 
he  went  further,  he  looked  within  and  laid  the  blame 
on  the  old  Adam,  the  corrupt  fountain  of  his  own  heart ; 
he  really  believed  himself  to  be  a  miserable  sinner. 

But  Enoch  believed  that  God  had  graciously  provided 
a  way  of  salvation,  that  He  had  appointed  a  great 
Redeemer  to  bear  our  sins  and  carry  our  transgressions 
and  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  He  saw  clearly  that 
without  this  he  had  not  the  slightest  chance  of  being 
saved,  whatever  he  might  do  ;  he  looked  far  forward, 
and  in  his  mind's  eye  he  saw  a  long  way  off  the  Messiah 
that  was  yet  to  come  to  pay  the  ransom  of  the  world, 
and  he  built  all  his  hopes  on  Him.  Enoch  believed 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

And  Enoch  believed  that  God  was  a  God  of  perfect 
holiness,  "of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity."  He 
never  held  with  those  who  said,  "  You  are  righteous 
overmuch,  the  Lord  will  not  be  so  very  particular,  we 
need  not  be  so  very  strict,  men  cannot  be  always  keep 
ing  watch  over  themselves  ; "  for  he  trembled  at  the 
thought  of  allowing  himself  in  any  shadow  of  impurity 
or  unrighteousness  ;  and  though  he  never  dreamed  of 
setting  up  his  own  works  as  anything  worth,  though 
he  rejoiced  in  the  hope  of  salvation  by  free  grace,  still 
he  believed  that  he  who  walks  with  God  and  would 
have  eternal  life  must  be  holy  even  as  He  is  holy. 

And  Enoch  believed  that  God  would  one  day  come 
to  judge  the  world  and  give  to  all  men  according  to 


ENOCH  253 

their  works.  Though  iniquity  abounded  and  the  love 
of  many  waxed  cold,  and  all  things  seemed  to  go  on 
as  if  God  took  no  notice  of  this  earth,  he  still  believed 
the  Lord  would  come  to  take  account  in  such  an  hour 
as  no  one  expected  Him  ;  in  faith  he  saw  the  judgment 
close  at  hand,  and  he  walked  with  God  as  one  waiting 
for  it.  He  lived  as  if  he  felt  this  was  not  his  rest  ;  he 
looked  beyond  the  things  which  are  seen  to  that  abiding 
city  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God ;  by  faith 
he  saw  that  heaven  was  his  only  home  and  in  the 
Lord's  presence  alone  was  fulness  of  joy.  Such  was 
the  ruling  principle  which  possessed  this  holy  man  of 
old.  Oh  that  you  would  pray  earnestly  for  a  like 
precious  faith !  Without  it  you  will  never  walk  in 
Enoch's  way,  and  so  you  will  never  come  to  Enoch's 
end. 

IV.  And  this  leads  me,  in  the  last  place,  to  speak 
about  Enoch's  end.  We  are  simply  informed  in  the 
text  that  "  He  was  not,  for  God  took  him."  The  inter 
pretation  of  this  is,  that  God  was  pleased  to  interfere 
in  a  special  manner  on  His  servant's  behalf,  and  so  He 
suddenly  removed  him  from  this  world  without  the 
pains  of  death,  and  took  him  to  that  blessed  place 
where  all  the  saints  are  waiting  in  joyful  expectation 
for  the  end  of  all  things,  where  sin  and  pain  and  sorrow 
are  no  more. 

And  this,  no  doubt,  was  done  for  several  reasons.  It 
was  done  to  convince  a  hard-hearted,  unbelieving  world 
that  God  does  observe  the  lives  of  men  and  will  honour 
those  who  honour  Him.  It  was  done  to  show  every 
living  soul  that  Satan  had  not  won  a  complete  victory 
when  he  deceived  Eve  ;  that  men  may  yet  get  to  heaven 
by  the  way  of  faith,  and  although  in  Adam  all  die,  still 
in  Christ  all  may  be  made  alive.  Yes,  beloved,  Enoch 
walked  with  God,  and  so  God  took  him.  Here  was  a 


254  ENOCH 

splendid  and  a  comforting  assurance  that  the  Lord's 
eye  is  upon  all  His  children,  that  there  is  a  heaven 
and  a  life  to  come,  that  there  is  a  reward  for  the 
righteous,  though  men  may  laugh  at  them,  and  their 
walk  is  not  fashionable,  and  their  way  is  spoken  against 
and  their  seriousness  is  despised.  Oh,  cast  not  away 
your  confidence,  ye  that  walk  with  God  :  it  is  but  a 
little  season  and  He  that  shall  come  will  come  and 
take  you  to  an  everlasting  rest. 

And  now,  beloved,  I  do  beseech  you  all,  if  you  care 
about  your  souls, — if  you  really  desire  to  go  to  heaven, 
— if  you  really  have  the  slightest  wish  to  die  in  peace, 
and  rise  in  glory,  and  join  the  company  of  the  just, — 
I  do  beseech  you  ask  yourselves  the  question,  "  Am  I 
walking  with  God  ?  am  I  in  that  way  which  Enoch  and 
all  the  saints  have  walked  in  ?  How  many  among  you 
have  one  grain  of  that  living  faith  which  guided  this  holy 
man's  feet  into  the  way  of  peace? 

Would  you  have  me  suppose  they  are  walking  with 
God  who  live  in  any  known  sin  which  the  Bible 
condemns?  Are  they  walking  with  God  who  regard 
Him  and  His  service  in  the  second  place  and  the  care 
of  this  world's  matters  in  the  first?  Are  they  who 
never  think,  and  say  to  each  other  "  Never  mind  this 
anxiety— I  dare  say  we  shall  be  right  at  last  "  ?  Are  they 
who  neglect  any  means  of  grace  which  God  has  placed 
within  their  reach,  or  let  the  most  trifling  excuse  prevent 
their  using  it  ?  Are  they  who  profess  to  know  the  Lord 
and  believe  in  Jesus,  but  do  not  make  Jesus  their 
example?  Oh!  no,  no!  It  is  impossible;  all  such 
must  be  walking  away  from  God  ;  day  after  day  they 
get  farther  from  Him,  and  at  last,  unless  they  turn, 
they  will  walk  into  hell. 

And  when  I  see  men  going  towards  this  place  of 
torment— for  all  must  be  who  are  not  walking  with 


ENOCH  255 

God — when  I  see  the  loving  and  tender-hearted  Lord 
Jesus  holding  out  His  hands  and  saying,  "  Come  unto 
me  :  why  will  ye  die  ?  I  can  and  will  cleanse  you  from 
all  sin  !  " — when  I  sec  all  this,  and  find  you  cold  and 
undecided,  and  flattering  yourselves  you  are  in  a  middle 
path  and  tolerably  safe,  I  must  cry  aloud  and  spare 
not,  and  run  the  risk  of  being  thought  uncharitable,  if 
by  any  means  I  may  awaken  you  and  deliver  you  from 
the  power  of  Satan  and  guide  you  unto  Christ.  Oh 
that  your  hearts  may  be  stirred  within  you,  that  you 
may  never  rest  till  you  are  in  Enoch's  way  and  have 
some  portion  of  Enoch's  faith  ! 

Think  not  to  put  off  the  question  by  saying  these 
things  cannot  be  true.  Go  to  your  Bibles  and  see  what 
they  testify.  They  that  are  utterly  deceived  and  blind 
may  tell  you  that  punishment  is  not  eternal,  and  hell 
is  a  delusion,  and  the  devil  a  lie ;  but  they  will  find  to 
their  cost  they  are  all  true,  most  fearfully  true,  and  so 
long  as  you  attend  the  worship  of  the  Church  of 
England,  which  only  appeals  to  Scripture,  you  must 
not  expect  to  hear  of  any  other  way  than  that  which 
Enoch  took. 

Think  not  to  say,  "  We  cannot  walk  with  God  :  we 
mean  well  in  church,  but  when  we  get  outside  the 
world  lays  hold  upon  us,  and  acquaintances  and  evil 
company  turn  us  aside."  Oh,  be  honest  with  yourselves  ! 
This  is  as  much  as  saying  "  If  all  the  world  be  religious 
we  will  be  religious  too,  and  not  till  then  "  ;  in  the  mean 
while  you  do  not  like  to  be  singular,  you  cannot  make 
up  your  minds  to  be  in  earnest,  you  think  I  may  be 
mistaken,  you  will  go  with  the  stream,  you  will  walk 
according  to  the  course  of  this  world.  But  look  at 
Enoch :  his  heart  was  naturally  like  yours  ;  the  same 
grace  which  strengthened  him  can  strengthen  you, — the 
Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened  ;  by  grace  he  walked  with 


256  ENOCH 

God  three  hundred  years,  and  surely  you  may  trust  the 
power  of  God  will  keep  you  also  through  faith  unto 
salvation  for  threescore  years  and  ten.  But  know  that 
if  you  cannot  be  saints  on  earth  you  never  can  be  saints 
in  heaven. 

Think  not  I  am  shutting  you  up  without  hope. 
What  though  it  be  true  that  few  are  saved  and  the 
way  is  narrow  ? — there  is  nothing  to  prevent  any  of  you 
entering  it,  except  your  own  unwillingness,  your  own 
unbelieving  hearts,  your  own  indifference.  Oh,  begin  to 
walk  as  Enoch  did !  Come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ! 
He  that  cometh  to  Him  shall  never  hunger,  he  that 
believeth  on  Him  shall  never  thirst :  though  your  past 
life  may  have  been  that  of  Esau  or  Manasseh  or  Judas 
or  Mary  Magdalen,  come  to  Him  repenting  of  everything, 
and  He  will  never  cast  you  out.  Take  with  you  words  ; 
and  say,  "  Lord  Jesus,  I  have  sinned  ;  I  do  repent,  I  put 
all  my  trust  in  thee  :  Lord  receive  me,  Lord  increase 
my  faith,"  and  then  the  word  of  God  is  my  warrant 
for  saying  He  shall  give  you  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  you 
shall  walk  with  Him  and  before  Him  and  after  Him, 
and  rest  with  Him. 

Are  you  old !— then  walk  with  God  ;  and  be  in  haste  : 
your  next  step  may  be  in  hell ;  thank  the  Lord  you 
are  not  there  yet.  You  have  but  a  short  time  ;  you  hang 
by  a  slender  thread  ;  Jordan  is  before  you,  and  you 
will  never  cross  in  safety  unless  the  ark  is  with  you,  and 
the  ark  is  only  with  those  who  walk  with  God. 

Are  you  young  ?— then  walk  with  God,  and  be  in  haste. 
Do  not  put  it  off  a  single  day.  Young  people  die  as 
well  as  old.  Young  people  have  precious  souls  to  save 
as  well  as  others.  The  devil,  who  rejoices  to  see  so 
many  of  you  neglecting  private  prayers  and  private 
reading  of  the  Bible,  has  an  especial  eye  to  you :  he 
knows  if  he  can  only  prevent  you  thinking  while  you 


ENOCH  257 

are  young,  he  has  a  better  chance  of  making  you  his 
own  forever. 

O  let  it  not  be  written  of  you  in  the  books  of  God 
that  on  this  Sabbath  day  you  came  together  not  for  the 
better  but  for  the  worse ;  you  were  invited  to  walk 
with  God,  and  would  not :  let  it  not  be  in  vain  you  have 
heard  this  history  of  one  of  the  Lord's  elect  ;  but  cast 
aside  your  old  habits,  arise  to  newness  of  life,  even  as 
the  face  of  the  fair  country  around  you  is  renewed  at 
this  season  of  the  year  ;  and  be  ye  followers  of  Enoch 
even  as  he  followed  God. 

Remember,  all  of  you,  the  prophecy  he  spake  :  "  the 
Lord  cometh,  to  execute  judgment"  This  earth,  lovely 
and  fair  and  shining  as  it  seems,  shall  be  burned  up  ;  but 
your  soul  shall  live  for  ever,  either  in  heaven  or  in  hell : 
this  very  Church  shall  crumble  into  dust,  but  they  that 
sleep  around  it  shall  rise  again,  bone  shall  come  together 
unto  bone,  and  all  stand  before  the  throne  and  be  judged 
according  to  their  lives.  The  Lord  grant  you  may 
all  find  mercy  in  that  day  ;  but  if  you  would  find  it,  you 
must  walk  with  God,  and  then  indeed  you  shall  live 
by  faith  and  sleep  in  Jesus  and  have  your  portion  with 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect. 


XIX 

DANIEL 

"Then  said  these  men,  We  shall  not  find  any  occasion  against  this 
Daniel  except  we  find  it  against  him  concerning  the  law  of  his  God."- 
DANIEL  vi.  5. 

IT  would  be  impossible,  I  think,  to  imagine  a  higher 
testimony  to  a  man's  character  than  you  have  heard 
in  these  words.  You  know  how  ready  the  world  is 
to  find  fault  with  a  Christian — how  closely  his  conduct 
is  watched,  how  eagerly  his  shortcomings  are  pro 
claimed — and  happy  indeed  are  those  who  by  grace 
arc  so  enabled  to  live,  that  the  godless  and  profane 
can  find  no  occasion  against  them. 

In  order,  however,  that  you  may  fully  understand 
the  peculiar  value  of  the  testimony  in  my  text,  you 
ought  to  know  something  of  the  time  and  circumstances 
in  which  it  was  given. 

Daniel,  who  was  a  prince  of  the  royal  family  of 
Judah,  and  descended  directly  from  David,  had  been 
carried  to  Babylon  as  a  prisoner,  with  many  other  Jews, 
when  Jerusalem  was  destroyed.  While  there,  it  pleased 
God  to  bring  him  into  favour  with  the  heathen  kings 
of  Babylon,  and  he  was  advanced  to  great  dignity  and 
honour.  Nor  was  his  honour  ever  taken  from  him ; 
for  when  Belshazzar  was  overthrown,  and  the  kingdom 
of  Babylon  was  taken  by  the  Medes  and  Persians, 
the  Lord  inclined  the  heart  of  Darius  the  Mede  to 

258 


DANIEL  259 

make  Daniel  the  first  among  his  counsellors,  who 
ordered  all  things  under  the  king.  But  the  wicked 
followers  of  Darius  became  jealous  of  Daniel.  They 
made  a  conspiracy  against  him,  and  for  a  while  they 
succeeded  ;  for  they  obtained  a  decree  that  Daniel  should 
be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions.  But  God,  whom  he  served, 
here  came  to  his  assistance :  he  was  miraculously  pre 
served  ;  his  enemies  were  condemned,  and  perished  in 
his  stead  ;  and  King  Darius  gave  glory  to  God. 

Such  is  a  short  account  of  the  interesting  history 
which  you  will  find  in  the  chapter  from  which  my 
text  is  taken — a  chapter  which  I  take  occasion  to 
recommend  to  your  particular  attention. 

I  purpose  this  afternoon  to  speak  on  two  points  only 
in  this  history.  One  is  the  character  of  Daniel,  which 
here  came  out  like  gold  from  the  fire,  as  an  example 
for  your  imitation.  The  other  is  the  mysterious  deal 
ings  of  God  with  him,  as  a  ground  for  our  instruction 
and  comfort.  May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  apply  the 
subject  to  all  your  consciences  ;  may  none  of  you  be 
content  with  admiring  the  faith  and  patience  of  the 
saints,  but  may  you  he  led  to  pray  for  the  grace  of 
God,  that  you  may  follow  in  their  steps. 

I.  First,  then,  with  respect  to  Daniel's  character,  I  would 
observe  there  are  three  points  to  be  especially  noticed. 

(a)  There  is  his  steady  walk  with  God.  He  was 
now  ninety  years  of  age ;  he  had  spent  more  than 
the  ordinary  life  of  man  in  the  very  heart  of  a  wicked 
city  and  a  corrupt  court.  He  had  riches  and  honours 
and  everything  to  make  this  world  enjoyable  ;  but  he 
never  turned  aside  from  the  narrow  way,  either  to  the 
right  hand  or  the  left.  The  eyes  of  all  were  fixed  upon 
him  ;  many  envied  and  hated  him.  They  examined 
his  public  conduct ;  they  inquired  into  his  private 
character ;  they  sifted  his  words  and  actions  ;  but  they 


26o  DANIEL 

sought  in  vain  for  any  ground  of  accusation.  He  was 
so  steady,  so  upright,  so  conscientious,  that  they  could 
find  no  occasion  or  fault  in  him— they  could  not  touch 
him  except  as  concerning  the  law  of  his  God.  Oh, 
what  an  unanswerable  argument  is  a  believer's  life ! 
Oh,  what  an  epistle  of  Christ  is  the  daily  conduct 
of  a  child  of  God  !  Men  cannot  see  your  hearts,  nor 
understand  your  principles,  but  they  can  see  your  lives  ; 
and  if  they  find  that  pious  masters,  servants,  brothers, 
friends,  sisters,  husbands,  wives,  do  far  exceed  all  others 
in  their  several  positions,  then  you  are  bringing  glory 
to  God  and  honour  to  your  Redeemer.  Think  not 
that  your  profession  is  worth  anything,  if  it  is  not 
known  of  others  by  its  fruit ;  without  this  it  is  little 
better  than  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal. 
We  do  not  find  that  Daniel  blew  his  trumpet  before 
him,  and  talked  everywhere  about  his  own  experience  ; 
but  he  walked  close  to  God,  and  his  life  spoke  for 
him,  and  his  character  became  known  in  Babylon,  and 
even  his  enemies  were  obliged  to  confess,  The  hand 
of  God  is  here,  the  Lord  is  with  this  man  of  a  truth. 

(b)  Another  point  which  I  would  have  you  notice  is 
Daniel's  habit  of  private  prayer.  This  was  the  hidden 
cause  of  all  his  steadiness,  and  it  was  discovered  acci 
dentally  on  this  occasion.  It  seems  that  his  enemies 
had  obtained  a  decree  of  the  king,  that  whosoever 
should  ask  a  petition  of  any  God  or  man  for  thirty 
days  should  be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions.  And  having 
laid  this  snare  for  this  holy  man,  we  read  that  they 
assembled  and  found  Daniel  praying  and  making 
supplication  before  God. 

We  are  also  told  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  kneeling 
upon  his  knees  and  praying  three  times  a  day;  this 
was  the  practice  of  holy  David,  as  we  read  in  the 
Psalms,  ai  d  this  was  the  spirit  of  the  centurion  in  the 


DANIEL  261 

Acts,  who  prayed  to  God  alway.  So  Paul  exhorts 
the  Ephesians  to  pray  always  with  all  prayer  and 
supplications,  and  the  Thessalonians  to  pray  without 
ceasing  ;  and  such  has  been  the  habit  of  all  the  most 
eminent  saints  of  God  :  they  have  not  been  content 
with  a  few  cold  heartless  words  every  morning  and 
every  night,  they  have  lived  in  the  spirit  of  prayer, 
and  sent  up  many  a  short  earnest  petition  throughout 
the  day. 

Moreover,  we  are  told  that  Daniel  prayed  with  his 
windows  open  towards  Jerusalem,  and  this  is  a  most 
important  circumstance.  He  did  this,  and  so  did  every 
pious  Jew,  not  only  because  it  was  the  land  of  his 
fathers  and  the  land  of  promise,  not  simply  because 
God  would  be  worshipped  there  and  there  only,  but 
chiefly  because  all  the  types  and  emblems  of  the 
Messiah,  the  one  way  of  salvation,  the  altar,  the 
sacrifice,  and  the  high  priest,  were  to  be  found  there. 
And  so  also  we,  if  we  would  have  our  prayers  heard, 
must  pray  towards  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  true 
Temple,  our  Altar,  our  High  Priest  and  our  Sacrifice. 
These  are  the  prayers  which  God  will  answer  ;  this  is 
the  only  way  by  which  we  can  draw  near  with  con 
fidence,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.  Mark 
well,  beloved,  the  habit  of  private  prayer  :  here  is  the 
secret  of  that  steadiness  which  Daniel  showed  in 
Babylon— here  was  the  staff  which  preserved  him  up 
right  in  the  middle  of  temptations. 

We  know  that  he  had  all  the  cares  of  government 
upon  his  shoulders  ;  he  must  have  been  surrounded 
with  the  business  and  affairs  of  nations, — but  none  of 
these  things  prevented  him  from  drawing  near  to  God. 

Nor  was  he  a  man  to  say  "  I  am  a  chosen  servant 
of  God,  I  need  not  be  so  anxious  about  means  "  ;  he 
knew  that  God  would  keep  him,  but  not  unless  he 


262  DANIEL 

showed  anxiety  to  have  protection,  not  without  diligence 
in  using  all  the  means  of  grace.  Oh,  he  will  rise  in 
judgment  and  condemn  many  a  one,  who  dares  to  think 
that  he  will  find  mercy  while  he  lives  in  the  neglect 
of  regular  heartfelt  private  devotion  ! 

(c)  The  last  point  to  be  observed  in  Daniel's  character 
is  his  faith,  his  confidence  in  God.  The  decree  appeared, 
forbidding  all  sorts  of  worship  for  thirty  days  on  pain 
of  death  ;  and  oh,  how  many  professors  of  our  generation 
would  have  held  their  peace  !  how  many  would  have 
said,  "  It  is  but  a  short  time,  we  need  not  give  offence  ; 
the  Lord  doth  not  require  us  to  lose  our  lives  in  His 
service  "  ?  But  look  at  Daniel :  he  knew  that  the  writing 
was  signed, — he  knew  that  he  was  watched, — he  knew 
that  his  life  was  at  stake, — and  yet  he  went  to  his 
house  and  kneeled  on  his  knees  and  prayed  as  he 
did  aforetime.  He  did  not  on  the  one  hand  run  into 
danger,  nor  did  he  on  the  other  flinch  from  it :  here 
was  no  carnal  policy,  no  time-serving,  no  crooked 
contrivance,  no  love  of  expediency.  He  made  a 
straight  path  for  his  feet  ;  he  did  as  usual,  neither  more 
nor  less  ;  and  why  ?  Look  at  the  twenty-third  verse  :  he 
believed  in  his  God.  Mark  here  the  fruits  of  daily 
communion  with  God  ;  sec  how  a  habit  of  prayer  will 
produce  quietness  and  assurance  in  the  hour  of  trial 
and  difficulty. 

There  never  have  been  wanting  lewd  men  of  the 
baser  sort,  who  say,  Where  is  the  use  of  your  praying  ? 
what  good  will  it  do  you?  But  wait  till  the  days  of 
affliction  come  upon  you,  and  the  Lord  will  provide 
you  with  an  answer.  A  habit  of  prayer  will  impart 
special  reliance  upon  God  in  time  of  danger  ;  it  will 
give  a  special  boldness  ;  it  will  secure  a  special  deliver 
ance,  for  them  that  honour  God  He  will  honour. 
Happy  indeed  are  those  who,  like  Daniel,  pray  without 


DANIEL  263 

ceasing  :  they  will  find  within  them  the  same  spirit  of 
faith,  they  never  need  fear  being  surprised,  they  are 
like  him,  always  the  same  and  always  ready. 

II.  Let  us  now  consider  the  other  branch  of  our 
subject :  I  mean  the  mysterious  dealings  of  God  with 
His  faithful  and  holy  servant. 

(a)  Observe,  then,  there  was  first  a  season  of  darkness. 
Who  would  have  supposed  that  God  would  have  allowed 
iniquity  so  far  to  triumph  as  to  leave  Daniel  in  the 
hands  of  enemies  !  Who  would  have  thought  that  this 
pious  old  man  would  be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions.  But 
God's  ways -"are  not  as  our  ways  ;  and  wonderful  as  it 
may  appear,  the  wicked  were  permitted  to  work  their 
will  for  a  season  :  he  was  accused  of  breaking  the  laws  ; 
he  was  pronounced  guilty  ;  he  was  condemned  to  death ; 
the  king  laboured  to  deliver  him,  but  he  could  not ;  the 
decree  could  not  be  altered — Daniel  must  die.  He  was 
let  down  into  this  pit — the  den  of  savage  beasts,  and  a 
stone  was  laid  upon  the  mouth  of  the  den.  And  then, 
no  doubt,  he  was  looked  upon  as  one  dead  ;  sin  appeared 
to  have  prevailed,  the  wicked  rejoiced  at  their  success, 
and  the  righteous,  the  little  flock  at  Babylon,  wept  and 
mourned  to  think  that  a  brother,  a  faithful  witness,  had 
been  taken  from  the  earth. 

Pause  here,  beloved,  for  an  instant.  This  hour  of 
darkness  seems  to  you  a  mystery.  But  is  it  not  agree 
able  to  all  the  dealings  of  God  with  man  ?  Do  you  not 
often  see  things  hard  to  be  understood  in  the  world 
around  you  ?  How  often  the  wicked  prosper,  and  have 
all  that  man  could  desire  ;  how  often  iniquity  abounds 
and  the  love  of  God  waxes  cold — and  the  righteous  are 
oppressed  and  silenced  and  afraid  ;  how  often  it  seems 
as  if  the  Lord  has  forgotten  this  earth,  and  cares  not 
though  His  servants  are  persecuted  and  His  name 
blasphemed ;  how  often  we  feel  disposed  to  cry,  how 


264  DANIEL 

long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  Thou  not  judge  and 
avenge  Thyself  on  the  ungodly  ! 

And  does  not  the  Christian  often  sec  things  hard  to 
be  explained  in  his  own  heart  ?  Is  he  not  often  tried 
with  seasons  of  darkness  and  sorrow  ?  Yes  :  many  a 
believer  can  testify  that  sometimes  he  has  felt  like  Paul 
before  his  shipwreck  ;  neither  sun  nor  stars  have  appeared 
for  many  days,  and  almost  every  hope  of  being  saved 
has  been  taken  away,— many  a  one  could  tell  you  that 
the  enemy  has  sometimes  come  in  upon  him  like  a  flood, 
he  has  been  overwhelmed  with  afflictions  and  tempta 
tions,  he  has  been  ready  to  cry  out  of  the  deep,  as 
it  were,  "  Lord  I  am  sinking,-  my  soul  is  among  lions, 
I  am  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented,  deserted,  forlorn, 
forsaken." 

Yes :  God's  ways  are  often  difficult  and  mysterious 
to  His  people  ;  we  cannot  see  the  meaning  of  many 
things  which  happen  around  us,  we  think  them  hard, 
we  almost  quarrel  with  the  Lord's  arrangements  ;  but 
they  that  are  really  wise  will  be  patient,  they  will  wait 
to  see  the  end,  and  lay  to  heart  the  words  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now  ;  but  thou 
shalt  know  hereafter." 

(b)  Come  now  and  hear  how  the  darkness  was  scattered 
and  the  light  returned.  Heaviness  may  endure  for  a 
night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning.  Daniel,  you 
have  seen,  was  allowed  to  go  through  the  furnace  of 
tribulation,  but  the  time  came  at  last  when  Gocl 
interfered  on  his  servant's  behalf,  and  made  his  dealings 
clear  and  plain.  Daniel  was  cast  into  the  lions'  den, 
but  the  Lord  was  with  him  and  therefore  he  was  safe. 
We  read  that  the  king,  Darius,  came  very  early  in  the 
morning  to  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  and  cried  with  an 
anxious  and  lamentable  voice,  "  O  Daniel  ...  is  thy  God 
.  .  .  able  to  deliver  thee."  And  oh,  how  joyful  must  his 


DANIEL  265 

feelings  have  been  when  he  heard  the  holy  man's 
reply  :  "  O  King,  live  for  ever  ;  my  God  hath  sent  His 
angel  and  shut  the  lions'  mouths,  that  they  have  not  hurt 
me :  forasmuch  as  before  him  innocency  was  found  in 
me !  " 

And  need  I  tell  you  that  Daniel  was  brought  forth, 
and  honoured  and  exalted  ;  while  his  enemies,  in  their 
turn,  were  cast  into  the  den  and  the  lions  destroyed 
them  all  ?  So  true  it  is  that  light  is  sown  for  the 
righteous,  that  God  will  keep  them  in  perfect  peace 
whose  minds  are  stayed  on  Him.  So  true  are  the 
words  of  Psalm  xci."  "  He  that  dwelleth  in  the  secret 
place  of  the  Most  High  shall  abide  under  the  shadow 
of  the  Almighty,  He  shall  cover  thee  with  His 
feathers,  and  under  His  wings  shalt  thou  trust.  ...  His 
truth  shall  be  thy  shield  and  buckler.  .  .  .  There  shall  no 
evil  befall  thee,  neither  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy 
dwelling.  For  He  shall  give  His  angels  charge  over 
thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways.  .  .  .  Because  he  hath 
set  his  love  upon  Me,  therefore  will  I  deliver  him  :  I  wrill 
set  him  on  high,  because  he  hath  known  My  Name." 

(c)  Consider  now,  beloved,  what  showers  of  good 
descended  from  this  dark  cloud  which  at  one  time 
seemed  so  threatening.  Think  what  a  blessed  effect 
this  deliverance  would  have  on  Daniel !  What  deep 
views  of  God's  love  and  power  and  goodness  and  wisdom 
he  would  obtain  !  What  strength  it  would  add  to  his 
faith,  what  warmth  to  his  prayers  !  How  every  grace 
within  his  bosom  would  shoot  forth  with  renewed 
vigour.  Think,  too,  what  an  impression  would  be  made 
upon  the  godless  and  profane  ;  what  shame  would  cover 
the  faces  of  those  who  had  thought  Daniel  went  too 
far  and  was  righteous  overmuch ;  how  many  would 
be  brought  to  tremble  and  fear  before  a  God  who 
could  deliver  after  such  a  fashion. 


266  DANIEL 

(J)  Think,  lastly,  what  mighty  good  would  come  to 
the  people  and  cause  of  God,  how  much  they  would  be 
comforted  by  such  a  miracle,  how  much  they  would  be 
encouraged  to  go  forward  :  the  very  thing  which  once 
appeared  so  untoward,  which  threatened  the  destruction 
of  Israel  and  the  dishonour  of  God,  would  bring  glory 
to  the  Lord,  and  set  forward  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

And  so,  beloved,  it  has  always  been.  God's  dealings 
may  seem  mysterious  ;  but  wait  awhile,  and  the  darkness 
shall  disappear  and  the  light  shall  shine  and  the  crooked 
shall  appear  straight,  and  the  rough  places  shall  become 
smooth. 

Satan  doth  often  seem  to  have  his  own  way  in  the 
world,  but  still  there  are  many  proofs  that  the  prosperity 
of  the  wicked  is  short,  and  the  lying  lips  are  but  for  a 
moment,  and  there  arc  seasons  when  many  a  hardened 
sinner  is  forced  to  confess,  "  Verily  there  is  a  God  that 
judgeth  the  earth."  Many  a  Christian  would  tell  you 
that  the  trials  and  chastisements  which  appeared  so 
bitter  have  borne  most  blessed  fruit  to  his  soul  ;  he  has 
sown  in  tears,  but  he  has  reaped  in  joy  ;  and  there  arc 
few  who  shall  not  find  in  the  world  to  come  that  afflictions 
which  bowed  them  to  the  dust,  and  were  grievous  at 
the  time,  were  nothing  less  than  mercies  ;  they  were  the 
very  medicines  which  healed  their  sin-diseased  souls, 
and  purified  their  hearts  for  heaven. 

Who  is  there  among  you  that  is  timid  and  undecided 
and  inconsistent — afraid  to  do  anything  to  displease 
men  and  yet  not  satisfied  if  he  does  not  give  his  heart 
to  God — conscious  that  he  ought  to  bear  the  cross  and 
follow  Christ,  but  fearful  of  giving  offence  to  the  world  ? 
Go,  study  the  character  of  Daniel,  and  make  it  your 
example.  Behold  a  child  of  Adam  like  yourself  follow 
ing  the  Lord  fully,  not  only  when  all  were  with  him,  but 
when  all  were  against  him  ;  ready  to  lose  his  life  in 


DANIEL  267 

this  world  if  so  he  might  attain  to  life  eternal.  Are 
you  flesh  and  blood  ?  so  was  he  ;  are  you  by  nature 
sinful  ?  so  was  he.  The  grace  of  God  did  make  him  what 
he  was,  and  the  grace  of  God  can  make  you  like  him, 
if  you  are  only  willing.  But  go,  confess  your  faith  as 
he  did  :  if  you  are  ashamed  of  Christ,  most  surely  Christ 
will  be  ashamed  of  you.  The  double-minded  and  the 
unstable  shall  never  gain  the  heavenly  crown. 

Where  are  the  men  who  say  "  We  cannot  do  the  things 
which  you  require ;  we  cannot  come  to  Christ  upon 
your  terms?  There  would  be  no  living  in  the  world, 
no  caring  for  our  families,  if  we  took  your  advice.  We 
have  no  time  for  such  religion  ;  we  cannot  altogether 
give  up  the  world."  Oh,  look  at  holy  Daniel  !  He 
had  the  charge  of  millions  upon  his  hands,  he  was  the 
chief  among  the  presidents  of  an  empire,  he  had  the 
management  of  kingdoms  and  their  affairs  ;  and  yet — 
mark  this,  O  ye  despisers  and  lazy  ones — and  yet  he 
found  time  to  be  a  faithful  servant  of  God,  he  found 
time  to  cultivate  the  vineyard  of  his  soul  most  closely, 
he  contrived  to  walk  with  God  as  few  have  ever  walked. 
Are  you  wiser  than  he  ?  Are  your  leisure  hours  more 
entirely  taken  up  ?  Oh,  be  ashamed  of  vain  excuses, 
and  take  this  man  of  business  for  your  pattern,  and 
do  not  tell  us  you  cannot  come  to  Christ,  until  you  have 
followed  Daniel's  steps  and  prayed  without  ceasing. 

Is  there  an  humble-minded  follower  of  Jesus  among 
you  ?  Set  Daniel  before  your  eyes.  Be  bold,  be 
faithful,  be  meek,  be  persevering ;  endeavour  to  walk 
so  uprightly  that  all  may  glorify  God  on  your  behalf, 
that  none  may  find  occasion  against  you  except  as 
concerning  the  law  of  your  God. 

Fear  not  because  you  sometimes  walk  in  darkness 
and  have  no  light.  Remember  that  you  cannot  under 
stand  the  mind  of  the  Lord  nor  the  meaning  of  His 


268  DANIEL 

dealings.  But  when  the  clouds  do  compass  you  about, 
believe  in  God  as  Daniel  did  ;  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
at  all  times  ;  sing  to  Him  in  the  dungeon,  as  Paul 
and  Silas  ;  sing  to  Him  even  in  the  fire,  as  the  three 
children  did  ;  be  sure,  be  very  sure,  he  who  believeth 
shall  never  be  ashamed. 

I  will  add  for   your   comfort  the  words    of  a   very 
Christian  poet,  a  sweet  singer  in  Israel : — 

"God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way, 

His  wonders  to  perform ; 
He  plants  His  footsteps  in  the  sea, 
And  rides  upon  the  storm. 

Deep  in  unfathomable  mines 

Of  never-failing  skill, 
He  treasures  up  His  bright  designs, 

And  works  His  sovereign  will. 

Ye  fearful  saints,  fresh  courage  take, 

The  clouds  ye  so  much  dread 
Are  big  with  mercy,  and  shall  break 

In  blessings  on  your  head. 

Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense, 

But  trust  Him  for  His  grace  ; 
Behind  a  frowning  Providence 

He  hides  a  smiling  face. 

His  purposes  will  ripen  fast, 

Unfolding  every  hour ; 
The  bud  may  have  a  bitter  taste, 

But  sweet  will  be  the  flower. 

Blind  unbelief  is  sure  to  err, 

And  scan  His  work  in  vain. 
God  is  His  own  interpreter, 

And  He  will  make  it  plain." 


XX 

A  PILLAR  IJV   GOD'S   TEMPLE 

"  Him  that  overcometh  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God, 
and  he  shall  go  no  more  out." — REV.  iii.  12. 

"ORETHREN,  the  Christian  who  does  not  turn  to 
JD  the  book  of  Revelation  in  his  hours  of  trial  is  one 
who  misses  a  great  privilege.  Glorious  things  are  written 
there  for  the  people  of  God  :  there  is  the  strong  wine  of 
consolation  for  the  heavy  in  heart ;  tJiere  are  distant 
views  of  the  good  things  prepared  for  true  believers. 
We  seem  as  we  dwell  upon  it  to  catch  a  glimpse  of 
the  New  Jerusalem  ;  we  seem  to  hear  something  of  that 
blessed  Song  of  Angels  in  which  the  redeemed  shall 
one  day  join  ;  and  little  can  there  be  of  reality  about 
our  religion,  if  the  reading  of  that  book  doth  not  make 
us  more  earnest  and  more  spiritual  Christians. 

Let  us  try  to  draw  away  our  minds  for  a  season  from 
earth  and  fix  them  on  heaven  ;  let  us  look  into  the  matter 
of  the  passage  now  before  us,  and  consider  the  eternal 
rest  that  remaineth  for  the  children  of  God. 

Now  the  words  of  our  text  were  spoken  by  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  to  the  Church  of  Philadelphia,  which  was 
one  of  the  seven  famous  churches  in  Asia.  To  each 
of  these  seven  we  find  our  great  Chief  Shepherd  sending 
a  word  of  warning  and  a  word  of  encouragement ;  and 
in  each  of  these  seven  messages  a  believer  will  find 
something  useful  to  his  own  soul  ;  seven  times  over  they 

269 


2 7o         A   PILLAR   IN   GOD'S   TEMPLE 

arc  commended  to  our  especial  notice  in  the  second  and 
third  chapters,  in  this  solemn  manner  :  "  He  that  hath  an 
car  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  churches." 

Now  I  see  in  our  text  two  things— a  character  and 
a  promise  :  the  character  is,  "the  man  that  overcometh," 
the  promise,  "  I  will  make  him  a  pillar  in  the  temple 
of  my  God  and  he  shall  go  no  more  out "  ;  and  these 
two  things  by  the  blessing  of  God  I  shall  endeavour  to 
set  before  you  in  order.  Characters  and  promises  arc 
always  linked  together  in  Scripture  ;  they  must  never 
be  separated.  Who  are  those  of  whom  Jesus  says , "  I 
will  in  no  wise  cast  them  out "  ? — they  that  come  unto 
Him  ;  who  are  those  of  whom  He  declares,  "  I  will  give 
them  the  water  of  life  "  ? — they  that  are  athirst ;  who  are 
those  of  whom  He  proclaims,  "  I  will  give  them  rest "  ? 
—they  that  labour  and  are  heavy-laden.  And  so  also 
it  is  here :  it  is  the  man  that  overcomes  who  shall  be 
made  a  pillar  in  His  temple  and  no  more  go  out.  We 
press  this  point  upon  you,  because  there  are  carnal 
persons  who  often  take  to  themselves  promises  to  which 
they  have  no  claim  ;  they  feed  on  Christ's  sweet  sayings, 
but  they  will  not  touch  Christ's  commands  ;  they  forget 
that  characters  and  promises  are  like  lock  and  key,  they 
fit  one  into  the  other,  he  that  has  not  got  the  character 
has  no  part  or  portion  in  the  promises,  for  what  God  has 
joined  together  must  never  be  put  asunder. 

1.  First,  then,  what  is  the  character  under  which  Jesus 
speaks  of  a  true  believer,  and  gives  him  encouragement 
in  our  text  :  he  is  one  "  that  overcometh." 

Overcometh  !  that  is  a  strong  expression,  a  searching 
expression,  an  expression  that  ought  to  teach  us  many 
things.  There  must  be  work  to  be  done,  enemies  to 
be  conquered,  a  battle  to  be  fought,  a  warfare  to  carry 
on  ;  all  these  things  must  be,  or  else  the  Lord  Jesus 
would  never  tell  us  that  we  must  overcome. 


A   PILLAR   IN   GOD'S   TEMPLE          271 

And,  brethren,  if  ever  you  would  have  your  souls 
saved,  we  tell  you  plainly  there  are  many  adversaries  ; 
you  must  remember  you  have  to  contend  with  bitter 
foes.  There  is  the  old  man — your  own  natural  heart ; 
you  have  a  disposition  which  grows  and  bends  of  it 
self  towards  evil ;  in  your  flesh  there  is  no  spiritual  good 
thing ;  the  service  of  God  is  all  against  the  grain  of 
your  mind  ;  you  carry  that  within  you  which  in  religion 
is  wicked  and  deceitful  and  corrupt.  That  old  man 
must  be  fought  against ;  these  desires  of  the  flesh  must 
be  crushed  down  ;  this  carnal  heart  must  be  changed 
and  made  new.  But  even  when  changed  this  heart 
will  need  continual  mortifying  and  keeping  under ;  so 
cold  will  it  sometimes  feel,  so  careless,  so  dead  to 
heavenly  things,  so  full  of  vain  thoughts,  so  sleepy 
and  forgetful  of  God  ;  be  sure  it  will  cause  you 
many  a  painful  struggle.  No  enemy  requires  such 
watchfulness  as  your  own  heart  ;  one  traitor  within 
the  camp  is  more  dangerous  than  an  army  without  ; 
and  well  does  the  wise  man  counsel  when  he  says, 
"  Keep  thine  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  that  arc 
the  issues  of  life."  Christian,  watch  and  remember  ;  do 
not  give  in  to  the  old  Adam,  the  flesh  must  be  resisted, 
battled  with,  and  overcome. 

And  then  there  is  the  world.  You  live  in  the  midst 
of  unconverted  persons,  and  how  can  there  be  concord 
and  agreement  between  you  and  them  ?  Think  not 
that  all  men  will  speak  well  of  you,  and  encourage  you 
if  you  become  Christ's  disciple  ;  you  will  find  at  once 
that  you  have  to  swim  against  the  stream.  The  world's 
ways ,  you  will  discover,  are  not  your  ways,  nor  the 
world's  thoughts  your  thoughts.  You  may  try  hard  to 
keep  in  with  the  world  and  yet  be  a  Christian,  but 
it  will  not  do  ;  the  friendship  of  this  world,  saith 
Scripture,  is  enmity  with  God.  You  are  to  be  the  light 


272         A   PILLAR   IN   GOD'S   TEMPLE 

in  the  midst  of  darkness  ;  you  are  to  be  as  salt  in  the 
midst  of  corruption  ;  you  are  to  be  a  witness  for  Christ 
and  the  gospel ;  and  so  long  as  you  dwell  among  the 
ungodly  it  is  impossible,  if  you  are  faithful,  that  there 
can  be  entire  oneness  and  peace.  Alas  !  how  many  are 
the  occasions  on  which  you  must  be  ready  to  contend  : 
the  fear  of  this  world  ;  the  mockery  of  this  world  ;  the 
vanities  of  this  world  ;  the  over-carefulness  of  this 
world  ;  the  flattery  of  this  world  ;  the  persecution  of 
this  world  :  all  these  are  things  against  which  you  must 
be  prepared  to  fight  Christian,  watch  and  remember — 
the  world  must  be  resisted,  battled  with,  and  overcome. 

And  then  there  is  the  devil.  He  is  that  liar  and 
murderer  from  the  beginning  ;  there  is  no  end  to  his 
devices.  He  has  a  snare  for  every  age,  a  pitfall  for 
every  circumstance,  a  trap  for  every  place :  snares 
for  the  learned  and  snares  for  the  unlearned ;  snares 
for  the  godly,  snares  for  the  profane  ;  rich,  poor,  master, 
servant,  old,  young,  he  can  fit  you  with  every  possible 
temptation  —for  the  head,  for  the  heart,  for  the  temper, 
for  the  belly,  for  the  tongue.  Think  not  he  will  always 
meet  you  as  a  roaring  lion  :  he  can  transform  himself 
into  an  angel  of  light  ;  lead  you  on  as  he  did  Eve, 
little  by  little,  gently  and  softly,  a  step  at  a  time,  and 
make  you  captive  unawares  if  off  your  guard.  Christian, 
watch  and  remember  ;  give  Satan  no  vantage-ground 
for  an  instant ;  the  devil  must  be  resisted,  battled  with, 
and  overcome. 

Such,  then,  are  our  three  great  enemies— the  world, 
the  flesh  and  the  devil ;  one  of  two  things  must  happen  : 
they  will  overcome  us,  or  we  must  overcome  them. 

Brethren,  we  desire  to  urge  this  point  on  your 
attention.  We  would  not  have  you  for  a  moment 
suppose  that  Christ's  people  have  no  work  to  do,  that 
once  converted  they  may  live  as  they  please  and  sleep 


A   PILLAR   IN   GOD'S   TEMPLE         273 

their  way  towards  heaven.  'No  !  far  from  it  Sleep 
and  carelessness  are  the  marks  of  impenitence  and  sin  ; 
to  be  labouring,  striving,  contending,  that  is  the  stamp 
of  a  true  Christian,  that  is  the  proof  that  you  are  dead 
in  trespasses  no  longer.  We  warn  you,  therefore,  if 
you  would  be  saved,  you  must  be  content  to  endure 
hardship  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ ;  you  must 
fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  or  you  will  never  lay  hold 
on  eternal  life.  You  must  make  up  your  mind  to  a 
conflict  and  struggle  if  you  would  win  heaven  ;  yes, 
and  it  is  a  daily  struggle  that  must  be  carried  on, 
never  will  sin  be  so  dead  in  your  members  but  it  will 
need  crucifying  and  subduing  ;  never  will  Satan,  the 
prince  of  this  world,  let  a  subject  leave  him  without 
throwing  every  possible  obstacle  and  hindrance  in  his 
way.  And  well  does  John  Bunyan  say  in  his  Pilgrim's 
Progress,  there  is  need  to  cry  to  the  Strong  for  strength, 
and  when  you  have  got  it  there  is  need  to  use  it  too. 

Think  not  that  we  would  discourage  you,  as  if  this 
warfare  was  a  burden  that  none  could  bear  ;  we  only  wish 
you  to  consider  well  what  you  are  doing,  lest  perchance 
you  set  forth  towards  Zion  unprepared,  and  by-and- 
by  turn  back  offended.  We  have  to  tell  you  of 
armour,  weapons  and  provision  which  the  great  Captain 
of  your  salvation  will  furnish  if  you  will  only  use  them  ; 
and  we  know  that'  they  who  use  them  shall  go  forward 
conquering  and  to  conquer.  I  read  of  the  shield  of 
faith,  the  helmet  of  hope,  the  breastplate  of  righteous 
ness,  the  girdle  of  truth,  the  sword  of  the  word  ;  and 
these  the  Holy  Spirit  will  give  to  all  who  ask  Him.  I 
read  of  the  bread  and  water  of  life :  he  that  eats  of 
that  bread  shall  never  hunger,  and  he  that  drinks 
of  that  water  shall  never  thirst ;  and  these  the  Son  of 
God  offers  freely  to  all  who  will  come  unto  Him.  And 
above  all  I  read  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  the 

18 


274         A   PILLAR   IN   GOD'S   TEMPLE 

Lamb  of  God,  in  which  the  worst  of  sinners  arc  invited 
to  wash  and  be  clean,  and  before  which  not  all  the 
powers  of  darkness  can  stand.  This  is  that  blessed 
means  through  which  all  the  saints  of  the  most  Highest 
have  had  victory  and  triumph  ;  they  overcame,  I  am 
told  in  Revelation,  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  This 
blood  has  been  the  strength  and  confidence  of  all  the 
company  of  the  redeemed.  This  is  the  sure  title  to 
eternal  life  which  nothing  can  overthrow;  and  this 
title,  if  you  will  only  believe,  shall  be  your  own. 

And,  brethren,  who  with  all  these  aids  and  helps 
need  shrink  from  the  battle  ?  Greater  indeed  is  He 
that  is  with  you  than  they  that  are  against  you  ;  mighty 
are  your  adversaries,  but  the  Captain  of  your  salvation 
is  mightier  still :  His  army,  His  grace,  His  Spirit  shall 
bear  you  up.  No  man  so  ungodly  in  time  past  but 
grace  can  make  him  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  ; 
no  woman  so  weak  but  faith  in  her  Redeemer  shall 
carry  her  through  to  the  end.  Doubtless  you  may  lose 
a  battle  or  two,  but  you  shall  not  lose  all ;  you  may 
faint,  but  you  shall  irot  be  quite  cast  down  :  watch 
against  sin  and  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you  ; 
resist  the  devil  and  he  shall  flee  from  you  ;  come  out 
from  the  world,  and  the  world  shall  be  obliged  to  let 
you  go,  and  you  shall  find  yourself  in  the  end  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  you. 

Brethren,  we  would  have  you  pause  and  consider 
how  much  of  this  warning  character  belongs  to  you  ? 
We  would  say  to  each,  Dost  thou  know  anything  of 
this  strife  against  iniquity  ?  Art  thou  familiar  with  the 
shield,  the  sword,  and  the  battle  ?  Oh  !  that  we  could 
only  see  more  of  you  engaged  in  this  holy  warfare, 
fighting  upwards  towards  Zion  ;  leaving  the  vain  and 
unprofitable  jangling  of  talk  and  controversy  ;  setting 
your  faces  steadily  towards  Jerusalem.  Surely  there 


A   PILLAR   IN   GOD'S   TEMPLE          275 

must  be  something  more  in  religion  than  a  mere  pro 
fession  and  a  name ;  there  must  be  actual  warfare 
against  sin.  There  may  be  short  roads  to  heaven 
invented  by  sect  and  parties  ;  but  ancient  Christianity, 
the  good  old  way,  is  the  way  of  the  cross,  the  way  of 
conflict :  no  conflict,  no  victory  ;  no  victory,  no  reward. 

Brethren,  how  are  we  straitened  till  we  see  this 
decided  character  in  you !  how  can  you  suppose  without 
it  that  the  promises  of  God  can  be  your  own  ? 

II.  Now  what  is  the  special  promise  of  our  text: 
"  Him  that  overcometh  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the 
temple  of  my  God,  and  he  shall  go  no  more  out" 

I  shall  not  delay  you  by  dwelling  on  the  first  portion 
of  these  words — "  will  I  make  him  a  pillar."  The  mean 
ing  of  it  is  plain.  The  conquering  Christian  shall  have 
in  heaven  an  abiding  habitation  ;  he  shall  no  more 
be  wavering  and  tossed  on  doubt  and  uncertainties  ;  he 
shall  have  a  mansion  that  shall  never  be  taken  down, 
a  dwelling  that  shall  be  firm  and  unshaken  when  the 
world  shall  be  burned  up.  And  he  shall  have  an 
honourable  place  too  ;  fashioned  and  fitted  by  the  Spirit 
while  on  earth,  he  shall  shine  as  a  polished  stone  in 
that  heavenly  temple  whose  walls  are  salvation  and 
whose  gates  are  praise.  But  I  pass  on  to  the  last  part 
of  the  promise,  because  of  its  exceeding  sweetness  and 
consolation.  In  heaven,  we  are  told,  the  .believer  shall 
go  no  more  out. 

(a)  No  more  shall  he  go  out  from  the  presence  of 
his  Lord.  Now  are  the  days  of  weakness  and  short 
coming  ;  the  best  of  believers  are  frail  and  backsliding 
compared  to  what  they  ought  to  be.  How  cold  are 
their  prayers,  how  faint  their  praises,  how  dull  their 
affections ;  how  heavy  their  hands  in  doing  the  Lord's 
work,  how  slow  their  feet  in  walking  in  the  Lord's 
way ;  how  poor  is  their  zeal  in  fighting  the  Lord's 


276         A   PILLAR   IN   GOD'S    TEMPLE 

battle !  Alas  !  there  is  not  one  child  of  God  but  could 
tell  you  he  often  finds  his  sin  separating  between 
himself  and  God  ;  his  corruptions  seem  to  rise  up  as 
a  cloud  between  him  and  heaven,  and  hide  the  Sun 
of  Righteousness  from  his  eyes.  Many  is  the  time 
that  he  could  say,  "O  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death? — many 
the  time  that  he  humbles  himself  before  his  Maker  and 
says  with  holy  David,  "  I  acknowledge  my  transgression, 
and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me  ;  cast  me  not  away  from 
Thy  presence,  take  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me : 
restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  Thy  salvation,  and  uphold 
me  with  Thy  free  Spirit." 

But  all  this  shall  be  at  an  end  in  heaven.  God  Him 
self  shall  be  there  with  His  people  and  be  their  God  ; 
and  sin  and  the  devil  shall  be  without.  And  there  shall 
be  no  more  trembling  and  fear  of  falling  ;  for  tempta 
tion  shall  cease,  and  the  former  things  shall  all  pass 
away.  Then  shall  the  believer  see  his  Saviour  face  to 
face,  and  know  Him  at  last,  even  as  He  has  been 
known  ;  and  in  His  presence  there  shall  be  fulness  of 
joy  without  anything  to  break  it  off,  and  at  his  right 
hand  shall  be  pleasures  for  evermore. 

(b)  But  again.  In  heaven  the  believer  shall  go  no 
more  out  from  the  company  of  his  Christian  brethren. 
Here  in  this  world  we  have  often  to  walk  with  God 
alone  ;  we  seem  to  have  none  like-minded  with  whom 
to  take  sweet  counsel  together;  we  feel  cut  off  and 
separated  from  the  excellent  of  the  earth  in  whom  we 
delight ;  and  oh  !  it  is  a  hard  trial  to  bear— a  trial 
which  none  but  a  Christian  can  understand.  We 
know,  indeed,  it  is  for  our  good  ;  we  are  naturally 
selfish,  we  love  to  nestle  down  amidst  friends  and  think 
only  of  our  private  comfort,  and  this  is  wrong  ;  we 
know  that  God  would  rather  plant  us  singly  up  and 


A   PILLAR   IN   GOD'S   TEMPLE         277 

down  in  the  world  as  witnesses  of  the  truth,  in  order 
that  our  light  may  shine  before  men  and  make  them 
think.  But  still,  these  partings  and  separations,  these 
rendings  asunder  and  divisions,  are  a  painful  thing  to 
flesh  and  blood,  and  cost  the  Christian  many  a  tear. 
We  are  journeying  the  same  road,  but  how  little  do 
we  see  of  each  other  ;  we  are  fighting  the  same  battle, 
but  how  seldom  do  we  commune  with  each  other  to 
our  hearts'  full  content.  But  in  heaven  all  this  shall 
be  at  an  end.  We  shall  meet  all  them  that  have  slept 
in  Jesus,  and  never  be  obliged  to  leave  them  any  more  ; 
we  shall  enjoy  the  blessed  society  of  all  God's  children 
without  that  bitter  thought,  "  I  must  soon  leave  you 
and  go  back  to  my  post."  We  shall  sit  down  with 
Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of  God  ; 
we  shall  have  all  our  dear  brethren  in  the  Lord  around 
us,  not  one  shall  be  wanting  ;  and  none  shall  hurry  us 
away  or  make  us  afraid — for  time  shall  be  swallowed 
up  in  eternity — and  nothing  shall  be  wanting  to  make 
our  happiness  complete. 

(c)  Once  more.  In  heaven  the  believer  shall  no  more 
go  out  to  battle.  Here  we  are  continually  watching 
and  warring  :  the  flesh  lusting  against  the  spirit,  and 
the  spirit  against  the  flesh.  Here  we  cannot  put  off 
our  armour  for  a  day  with  safety  ;  we  can  never  say 
to  the  sword,  "rest  and  be  still."  Here  we  have  to 
keep  up  a  perpetual  struggling  against  sin  in  every 
shape  ;  it  may  be  against  our  neighbour  ;  it  may  be 
against  those  who  are  near  and  dear  to  us  ;  it  may  be 
against  some  whom  we  naturally  love  as  our  own  souls. 
But  there  shall  be  an  end  of  this,  too,  in  heaven  ;  there 
at  length  the  wicked  shall  cease  from  troubling,  and 
there  the  weary  shall  at  last  be  at  rest. 

And,  brethren,  what  can  we  say  to  you  in  conclusion  ? 
If  there  be  any  among  you  who  have  friends  that  died 


278         A   PILLAR   IN    GOD'S   TEMPLE 

in  faith,  if  you  can  really  feel  the  departed  ones  whom 
you  love  are  with  Christ,  we  bid  you  to  look  at  the 
promise  of  this  text,  and  not  to  sorrow  for  them  but 
for  yourselves.  Their  battle  is  fought,  their  strife  is 
over';  they  have  passed  though  that  gloomy  valley  we 
must  one  day  tread,  they  have  gone  over  that  dark 
river  we  must  one  day  cross.  They  have  drunk  that 
last  bitter  cup  which  sin  hath  mingled  for  us  ;  they  have 
reached  the  land  of  everlasting  life,  where  sorrow  and 
sighing  are  no  more.  Oh  !  weep  not,  then,  for  them, 
but  for  yourselves.  We  are  warring  still,  but  they  are 
at  peace  ;  we  are  labouring,  but  they  have  entered  into 
rest ;  we  are  watching,  but  they  are  sleeping  ;  we  are 
wearing  our  spiritual  harness,  but  they  have  put  it  off ; 
we  are  still  at  sea,  but  they  are  safe  in  harbour  ;  we 
are  sowing,  but  they  are  reaping  ;  we  have  tears,  but 
they  have  joy  ;  we  are  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon 
earth,  but  as  for  them  they  are  at  home.  Oh  !  better 
are  the  dead  in  Christ  than  the  living,  and  therefore 
we  bid  you  weep  not  for  them  but  for  yourselves. 

Brethren  they  are  gone  before  ;  it  is  ours  to  follow 
after.  It  is  ours  to  walk  in  their  steps,  to  show  the 
same  faith  and  patience,  to  bless  God  for  their  good 
example.  But  still  if  you  would  be  with  them  you 
must  do  as  all  Christ's  people  have  done,  you  must 
overcome.  "  To  him  that  overcometh,"  said  Jesus,  "  will 
I  give  to  cat  of  the  Tree  of  Life  " — "  He  that  overcometh 
shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  second  death " — to  him  that 
overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna  " — 
"  He  that  overcometh  to  him  will  I  give  power  over  the 
nations " — "  he  that  overcometh  the  same  shall  be 
clothed  in  white  raiment " — "  To  him  that  overcometh 
will  1  grant  to  sit  with  Me  in  My  throne."  Brethren, 
we  would  have  you  bear  this  in  mind  :  you  must  over 
come.  There  must  be  nothing  sleepy,  easygoing,  care- 


A   PILLAR   IN   GOD'S   TEMPLE         279 

less,  about  your  Christianity  ;  you  must  be  active,  bold, 
decided  on  the  Lord's  side.  It  is  not  enough  to  eat 
the  king's  bread  and  wear  the  king's  livery ;  you 
must  also  fight  the  king's  battles.  "  Watch  ye,"  there 
fore,  "  stand  fast,  quit  you  like  men,"  be  strong ; 
"  lay  aside  every  weight  and  the  sin  which  doth 
most  easily  beset  you  ;  and  run  with  patience  the  race 
set  before  you  ;  looking  unto  Jesus  the  author  and 
finisher  of  your  faith,"  and  to  the  joy  He  has  prepared 
for  all  who  love  Him.  "  It  is  a  faithful  saying,  If  we  be 
dead  with  Him,  we  shall  also  live  with  Him  ;  if  we 
suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him  ;  if  we  deny  Him, 
He  also  will  deny  us." 


XXI 
KNOCKING!  KNOCKING! 

"  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock  :  if  any  man  hear  My  voice, 
and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  Him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he 
with  Me." — REV.  iii.  20. 

IT  is  one  of  the  marks  of  an  unconverted  man  that  he 
does  not  like  thelplain  doctrines  of  Scripture — if  we 
offer  to  him  salvation  by  free  grace,  tell  him  he  is  a 
miserable  sinner  and  can  do  nothing  for  himself,  and 
must  be  saved  only  by  the  blood  of  Christ  together  with 
the  publicans  and  harlots, — immediately  he  is  offended  : 
u  No,  no,"  he  says,  "  this  is  all  cant  and  enthusiasm  :  I  am 
not  quite  so  bad  as  all  that  ;  I  am  not  perhaps  what 
I  ought  to  be,  but  I  can  do  something,  I  am  sure,  when 
ever  I  think  seriously."  If  we  preach  the  necessity  of 
holiness,  show  him  what  a  true  believer  really  is,  and 
how  much  purity  and  spiritual-mindedness  the  law  of 
Christ  requires,  again  he  is  offended — he  cannot  receive 
it.  "  No,  no,"  he  says,  "  you  are  wrong  now  the  other 
way  :  you  are  righteous  overmuch,  you  are  too  strict  ; 
there  would  be  no  living  in  the  world  on  your  plan.  I 
wish  to  do  my  duty,  I  do  not  wish  to  be  a  saint."  It 
is  in  vain  we  reply,  "  But  will  you  not  just  look  at  your 
Bible,  and  sec  whether  a  faithful  minister  can  teach 
you  any  other  doctrine ;  is  it  not  all  written  there,  as 
clear  as  the  sun  at  noonday  ?  "  No  !  he  has  not  time,  or 
he  will  not  take  the  trouble  to  do  that  ;  but  it  matters 

280 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING!  281 

not,  our  preaching  displeases  him,  and  he  is  satisfied  in 
his  own  mind  we  must  be  wrong. 

Now,  I  always  wonder  what  such  persons  can  make 
of  the  text  you  have  heard  read,  if  ever  it  falls  in  their 
way.  To  me  it  docs  appear  the  most  extraordinary 
verse  in  the  whole  Bible.  Consider  who  is  the  Speaker. 
It  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  King  of  kings,  the  Light 
of  the  world,  the  Lord  of  all,  the  mighty  God,  the 
Prince  of  peace,  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  the  Resur 
rection  and  the  Life,  of  whom  St.  John  says,  "  I  fell  at 
His  feet  as  dead  ;  and  He  laid  His  right  hand  upon  me, 
saying  unto  me,  Fear  not  ;  I  am  the  first  and  the  last : 
I  am  He  that  liveth,  and  was  dead,  and  behold  I  am 
alive  for  evermore :  Amen,  and  have  the  keys  of  hell 
and  of  death."  Consider  also  the  tone  of  His  speech. 
You  have  heard  sometimes  His  gracious  invitations, 
such  as,  "  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden  ; "  "  Whosoever  will  let  him  take  the  water 
of  life  freely,"  and  pointed  out  how  inexcusable  are 
those  who  will  refuse  them ;  but  here,  behold,  the 
scene  changes :  we  read,  "  I  stand  at  the  door  and 
knock,"  we  see  Jesus  coming  Himself  to  the  heart  of 
every  unconverted  man  in  person,  we  find  the  Creator 
entreating  the  creature !  God  beseeching  man  !  the 
Saviour  supplicating  the  sinner ;  and  all  for  what  ? 
simply  that  you  will  accept  the  friendship  of  your 
Creator,  that  you  will  consent  to  admit  God  into 
your  hearts,  that  you  will  welcome  your  Saviour  as  your 
guide,  your  companion,  and  your  familiar  friend.  "  If 
any  man  hear  My  voice,"  says  Jesus,  "and  open  the 
door,  I  will  come  in  to  him  and  sup  with  him  and  he 
with  Me." 

Truly  this  is  wonderful  language !  God  has  set 
before  us  many  figures  in  the  Bible  to  convince  us  of 
His  tender  love,  but  none  that  can  be  compared  with 


282  KNOCKING!   KNOCKING! 

this,  none  which  seems  so  unanswerable,  none  which 
seems  so  well  calculated  to  make  a  careless,  thoughtless, 
cold-hearted  member  of  a  church  consider  his  ways, 
and  bring  him  to  his  senses,  and  show  him  the  full 
value  of  that  soul  which  he  is  neglecting.  Jesus 
appeared  on  earth,  suffered  and  died  for  a  wicked 
world  ;  and  was  not  this  enough  ?  Docs  not  this  leave 
all  without  excuse  who  are  so  ungrateful  as  to  forget 
Him?  No  doubt  it  docs;  and  yet  behold  grace  still 
abounds :  here  is  the  Son  of  God  Himself  again 
descending  from  above,  and  trying  to  prevail  on  un 
believing  man  to  forsake  destruction,  and  become  an 
heir  of  everlasting  life.  What  think  you,  beloved? 
How  can  any  one  dare  to  neglect  this  verse?  How 
can  any  one  shut  his  eyes  against  its  meaning  ? 
Indeed,  I  know  not  any  stronger  proof  that  God  is 
most  willing  and  anxious  to  save  men,  and  that  men 
arc  naturally  unwilling  to  be  saved,  than  you  will  find 
contained  in  these  words. 

Let  us  then  consider  them,  remembering  that  our 
Lord  is  not  speaking  to  heathens,  but  to  the  church 
of  Laodicea,  to  men  who  were  called  Christians,  to 
baptised  persons  who  were  not  walking  worthy  of 
their  high  calling.  God  grant  that  this  address  may 
awaken  some  sleeping  one  among  yourselves  ;  may 
the  startling  earnestness  of  the  language  rouse  some 
of  you  to  think  of  your  own  state,  that  you  may  not 
in  the  last  day  open  your  eyes  too  late,  and  find  that 
you  have  got  your  portion  with  the  unbelievers. 

I.  Let  us  in  the  first  place  examine  our  Lord's 
declaration  :  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock." 
What  is  this  door?  It  is  the  entrance  into  the  heart 
of  man,  it  is  the  way  into  that  house  of  which  the 
strong  man  Satan  loves  to  keep  possession,  and  which 
he  often  finds  swept  and  garnished  for  his  abode.  And 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING!  283 

Jesus  stands  waiting  at  this  door,  and  asking  every 
unconverted  man  to  let  Him  in.  It  shall  not  profit 
you,  O  man,  to  say  the  door  has  never  yet  been  opened, 
and  I  do  not  know  how  to  do  it,  for  I  shall  show  you 
this  is  not  the  case,  I  shall  prove  that  you  have  always 
admitted  other  guests  most  readily.  Have  not  your 
own  relations  knocked  ?  parents,  wife,  and  children  ; 
yes,  and  the  door  was  at  once  opened,  and  they  entered 
in  and  took  up  a  large  place  in  your  affections.  Has 
not  the  world  knocked  ?  Yes,  and  the  door  was  at 
once  opened,  and  in  there  came  cares  about  the  things 
of  this  life,  and  anxieties  about  earthly  matters,  and 
love  of  money,  and  excessive  attention  to  business, 
and  desire  to  have  treasure  here  below,  and  hopes 
built  on  temporal  foundations,  and  a  great  love  for  the 
good  opinion  of  men,  and  a  long  train  of  lying  vanities 
and  cheating  promises  and  unsatisfying  pleasures,  and 
they  have  dwelt  there,  and  taken  up  another  large 
portion  of  your  heart.  Has  not  sin  knocked  ?  Yes, 
long  ago  ;  and  the  door  was  at  once  opened,  and  there 
entered  evil  tempers,  and  polluted  thoughts,  and 
abominable  lusts,  and  all  those  fleshly  dispositions 
which  make  men  drunkards  and  revellers  and  noisy 
rioters  and  unclean  livers,  and  they  have  dwelt  there, 
and  filled  up  many  chambers  in  your  imagination. 
And  lastly,  Satan  knocked,  and  told  you  it  was  a 
mistake  to  think  sin  so  very  sinful  :  God  would  not  be 
so  very  strict,  ministers  were  far  too  particular,  it  was 
not  so  very  necessary  to  think  of  Christ,  and  be 
watchful,  and  attend  church  regularly,  and  search  the 
Scriptures,  and  pray  without  ceasing  ;  only  let  him  in 
and  he  would  show  you  a  more  excellent  way.  And  at 
once  the  door  was  opened,  and  he  entered  in  and  dwelt 
there,  and  took  possession  of  your  goods  ;  and  then  your 
house  was  filled,  and  you  have  dared  to  be  at  peace. 


284  KNOCKING!   KNOCKING! 

But  all  this  time,  while  these  things  have  been  taking 
place,  Jesus  has  been  standing,  knocking,  waiting, 
asking  to  be  admitted,  and  so  far  it  has  been  all  in 
vain.  Think  what  an  insufferable  insult!  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  comes  offering  freely  righteousness,  peace 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  door  is  not  opened  ; 
he  brings  white  raiment  to  cover  your  uncleanness,  and 
the  water  of  life,  which  He  purchased  with  His  own 
blood,  and  the  door  is  not  opened  ;  day  after  day  He 
stands  there  patiently  waiting  and  knocking  ;  He  sees 
every  other  guest  from  earth  or  hell  admitted,  but  to 
Him  the  door  is  never  opened,  and  He  is  left  there 
standing  and  knocking  in  vain.  Truly,  beloved,  it 
has  been  well  said  that  the  heart  of  the  natural  man 
is  like  the  inn  of  Bethlehem,  where  Jesus  was  born,  in 
which  every  guest  could  find  room  and  every  guest 
was  welcome  except  the  Saviour  of  mankind.  To 
think  that  men  can  be  grateful  to  each  other,  but 
feel  no  gratitude  to  Jesus  ;  can  love  frail  changeable 
creatures  like  themselves,  but  will  not  love  Jesus ;  can 
be  warm  in  their  affections  towards  their  brethren 
according  to  the  flesh,  but  cold  as  death  towards 
Christ  ;  can  be  anxious  to  obtain  the  favour  of  the 
great  of  this  world,  but  indifferent  about  their  Re 
deemer  ;  can  delight  in  the  company  of  the  children  of 
Satan  himself,  but  reject  Him  who  died  for  our  sins ! 
Surely,  I  say,  there  is  in  this  so  much  of  corruption  and 
iniquity  that  it  is  impossible  to  understand  how  any 
one  can  doubt  that  the  "heart  is  deceitful  above  all 
things  and  desperately  wicked." 

But  we  must  not  pass  over  the  other  expression" — I 
knock."  Perhaps  some  one  of  you  may  say  :  "  I  never 
heard  this  knocking.  Jesus  has  never  knocked  at  my 
heart,  as  far  as  I  can  recollect,  or  doubtless  I  would 
have  let  him  in.  I  may  have  been  careless,  but  I 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING!  285 

never  willingly  insulted  God."  O  unconverted  man  or 
woman,  this  cannot  avail  you  ;  I  must  try  to  convince 
you  you  are  wrong,  Look  back,  I  pray  you,  for  an 
instant,  on  the  life  you  have  spent,  and  sift  and  examine 
the  days  that  are  past.  Cannot  you  remember  some 
occasion  when  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  has  said 
something  which  startled  you  more  than  usual,  when 
he  has  so  preached  about  man's  wickedness,  and  God's 
love,  or  death,  or  judgment,  or  eternity  that  you  have 
felt  very  uncomfortable  and  rather  alarmed  ?  Heard 
you  then  no  knocking  at  the  door  of  your  heart  ? 
Was  there  not  a  voice  within  speaking  to  you  of 
your  folly  and  ingratitude  in  slighting  Christ  and 
putting  off  the  one  thing  needful  ?  Cannot  you  call 
to  mind  some  verse  in  the  Bible  which  has  struck 
you  on  hearing  it  read,  and  made  you  think,  "  If  this 
be  true  I  am  neglecting  the  care  of  my  soul "  ?  Has 
not  the  thought,  "  I  am  not  living  as  the  Bible  commands, 
though  I  profess  to  believe  it,"  come  across  your  mind 
at  some  worldly  feast  or  dwelling,  and  made  you  grave 
in  the  midst  of  your  festivity,  like  the  handwriting  on 
the  wall  of  which  Daniel  speaks  ?  Have  you  not  ever 
in  the  middle  of  the  night,  when  all  around  were  sleep 
ing,  and  you  alone  lay  awake,  felt  as  if  there  was  an 
eye  looking  down  upon  you  which  pierced  your  inmost 
thoughts  ?  Know  for  a  certainty  your  Saviour  was 
then  knocking  at  the  door  of  your  heart.  Or  have 
you  been  graciously  placed  in  the  furnace  of  affliction  ? 
has  it  pleased  God  to  take  away  your  worldly  goods 
and  blight  your  earthly  expectations  ?  has  He  thought 
fit  to  send  upon  you  sickness  and  disease,  to  chasten 
you  by  nights  of  weariness,  and  days  of  pain  ?  Surely 
you  must  have  heard  sometimes  at  such  seasons  :  "  I 
stand  at  the  door  and  knock  ;  I  have  sent  these  trials 
in  mercy  to  your  soul ;  they  are  My  remembrancers  and 


286  KNOCKING!    KNOCKING! 

messengers  to  prepare  My  way  ;  they  arc  to  remind 
you  man  is  of  few  days,  and  full  of  misery  ;  they  are 
to  teach  you  things  you  are  too  ready  to  forget  :  will 
you  not  now  admit  me  ?  " 

Or  have  you  sat  beside  the  bed  of  one  who  was 
the  desire  of  your  eyes,  whom  you  loved  as  your  own 
soul,  and  watched  that  daily  change  of  countenance 
which  speaks  of  dissolution,  and  traced  the  footsteps 
of  him  whom  Job  calls  the  king  of  terrors  drawing 
nearer  and  nearer,  and  observed  those  many  different 
feelings  which  come  uppermost  in  last  hours,  till  the 
last  struggle  was  over,  and  all  was  silent,  still — very 
still  ?  Or  have  you  ever  gone  as  a  mourner  to  accom 
pany  some  one  you  knew  in  life  to  his  long  home, 
and  stood  beside  the  grave,  and  looked  into  that  narrow 
bed,  where  "  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the 
weary  are  at  rest,"  and  seen  the  chilling  preparations 
for  burying  the  dead  out  of  sight,  and  heard  that  cold, 
hard  sound,  which  announces  the  return  of  earth  to 
earth,  ashes  to  ashes,  dust  to  dust.  I  never  can  believe 
you  felt  no  voice  within  on  such  occasions.  I  never 
can  believe  you  did  not  find  the  questions  rising  in 
your  mind  :  "  Where  am  I  now  ?  What  am  I  doing  ? 
Whither  am  I  going  ?  Where  shall  I  be  found  on 
the  morning  of  the  resurrection  ? "  Be  sure  it  was 
your  Saviour  himself,  saying,  "  I  stand  at  the  door 
and  knock  :  open  to  Me  now,  and  I  am  ready  to  come 
in."  Alas !  that  any  one  should  harden  his  heart, 
while  Christ  himself  is  speaking.  Think  on  these 
things,  beloved,  before  it  be  too  late,  or  else  you  will 
not  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  your  last  end 
will  not  be  like  his. 

II.  Let  us,  in  the  second  place,  look  shortly  at  the 
manner  of  the  invitation  and  request :  "If  any  man 
hear  My  voice  and  open  the  door."  See  now  how  wide 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING!  287 

and  general  is  the  form  of  this  address.  There  is  no 
limit,  no  reserve,  no  condition  here  ;  it  is  not  confined 
to  particular  classes  ;  it  is  not  for  the  rich  more  than 
the  poor,  for  the  learned  more  than  the  unlearned  ;  for 
the  moral  Pharisee  rather  than  the  despised  publican  : 
it  is  for  all  without  exception.  "If  any  man  hear  ;  " 
however  sinful,  however  unworthy,  however  abominable 
he  may  have  been  it  matters  not,  any  one  may  become 
a  partaker  of  the  privileges  of  the  gospel,  and  have  right 
to  that  tree  of  life  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  Paradise 
of  God. 

Let  us,  however,  go  on  to  the  contents  and  substance 
of  the  invitation.  Jesus  calls  on  you  "  to  hear  His  voice 
and  open  the  door."  Truly  this  is  a  simple  demand, 
it  is  a  small  condition,  a  moderate  requirement,  and  one 
entirely  in  keeping  with  the  whole  tone  of  the  gospel. 
He  does  not  say,  "  Go  make  yourselves  fit  for  my 
presence  by  acting  up  to  what  you  know  ;  become  holy, 
become  perfect,  fulfil  every  duty  without  a  single  failing, 
and  then  I  will  become  your  Saviour  "  ;  but  He  brings 
to  our  door  pardon,  grace  and  merit  ;  sufficient  to  put 
away  every  sin,  and  present  us  faultless  in  the  sight 
of  God  ;  and  then  He  invites  us  to  listen  to  His  counsel, 
to  believe,  to  throw  open  our  hearts  and  affections  to 
Him,  and  so  He  declares  we  shall  live  ;  we  shall  be 
saved.  "Hear  my  voice,"  says  Jesus,  "and  open  the 
door."  There  is  little  consolation  here  for  those  who  are 
content  with  hearing  only,  and  never  seem  to  go  beyond 
that  point.  No  doubt  it  is  the  first  duty  of  every  man 
to  hear  the  gospel  ;  but  woe  to  him  whose  notions  of 
religion  go  no  further !  he  has  forgotten  the  exhortation 
of  St.  James,  "  Be  ye  doers  of  the  word  and  not  hearers 
only,  deceiving  your  own  selves  "  ;  and  he  has  yet  to 
learn  that  we  must  believe  and  love  as  well  as  hear. 
Our  lives  must  show  that  Christ  has  really  entered  in 


288  KNOCKING!   KNOCKING! 

our  hearts  by  faith.  «  Hear  my  voice,"  says  Jesus,  «  and 
open  the  door."  How  truly  this  describes  the  experience 
of  true  believers  in  every  age  !  There  was  a  time, 
probably,  when,  like  Gallic,  they  cared  for  none  of  these 
things  ;  they  lived  as  others  did,  laying  up  treasure  on 
the  earth,  and  little  heeding  Jesus  and  the  resurrection. 
At  last  there  came  a  day,  a  season  when  their  hearts 
were  touched.  They  heard  a  knocking,  and  a  voice  to 
which  they  felt  obliged  to  listen.  Perhaps  it  was  a  voice 
of  terror  which  drove  them  to  their  knees  in  fear  and 
trembling  and  brought  their  sins  to  remembrance,  and 
made  them,  like  the  jailer  of  Philippi,  cry  out,  "  What 
must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  Perhaps  it  was  a  still  small 
voice,  which  gently  spoke  of  peace,  and  rest,  and  good 
will,  and  drew  them  by  the  cords  of  love,  until  they  felt 
they  could  deny  nothing  to  Him  who  promised  such 
comfort-«to  their  souls.  At  any  rate,  they  would  tell  us, 
it  was  a  voice  of  power,  a  voice  which  humbled  all  their 
pride,  and  made  them  willing  and  obedient, — a  voice 
which  turned  their  inclinations  like  the  waters  of  the 
south,  until  they  said,  "  Come  in,  Lord  Jesus,  come 
quickly  :  blessed  Lord,  why  standest  Thou  without,  let 
my  beloved  come  into  His  garden  and  eat  His  pleasant 
fruits."  Happy  indeed  are  all  who  hear  His  voice  and 
know  the  joyful  sound,  and  open  to  Him  quickly. 

III.  Let  us,  in  the  third  place,  consider  the  privileges 
which  are  here  held  out  and  promised — "  I  will  come  in 
to  Him,"  says  our  Lord,  "  and  will  sup  with  him  and 
he  with  Me."  By  this  you  are  to  understand  that 
perfect  and  close  union  which  exists  between  Christ  and 
a  true  believer.  The  Lord  Jesus  enters  into  the  heart 
of  every  converted  man,  and  makes  it  His  dwelling- 
place,  as  a  king  to  rule  and  govern  it ;  as  a  teacher  to 
guide  and  instruct,  saying,  This  is  the  good  way,  walk*  in 
it ;  as  a  friend  to  comfort  and  encourage,  who  can  feel  for 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING!  289 

all  our  infirmities,  in  that  He  has  been  tempted  Himself. 
This  is  that  thing  of  which  our  Lord  spoke  in  the 
Gospel  of  St.  John,  "  If  a  man  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My 
words,  and  My  Father  will  love  him,  and  We  will  come 
unto  him,  and  make  Our  abode  with  him."  This  is  that 
of  which  St.  Paul  spoke,  when  he  told  the  Ephesians, 
"  Ye  also  are  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God 
through  the  Spirit"  This  is  that  which  St.  John  has 
in  view  when  he  says  in  his  first  Epistle,  "  Truly  our 
fellowship  is  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ."  This  is  that  thing  of  which  our  Church  speaks  in 
her  Communion  Service,  saying, "  The  benefit  is  great,  if 
with  a  true  penitent  heart  and  lively  faith  we  receive  the 
Holy  Sacrament,  for  then  we  spiritually  eat  the  flesh  of 
Christ,  and  drink  His  blood  ;  then  we  dwell  in  Christ 
and  Christ  in  us,  we  are  one  with  Christ  and  Christ 
with  us." 

Mark  here  how  great,  how  astonishing,  how  in 
comprehensible  is  our  Redeemer's  love  towards  men. 
"  Lord,  what  is  man,"  says  David,  "  that  Thou  art  mindful 
of  him,  or  the  son  of  man  that  Thou  visitest  him  !  "  Too 
many  of  you  are  disposed  to  look  on  God  as  a  hard 
master,  as  one  whom  it  is  their  duty  to  serve,  and  that 
is  all  ;  they  seem  to  live  in  fear  of  His  displeasure, 
and  to  have  no  feeling  towards  Him  excepting  as  a 
taskmaster,  whose  demands  must  be  satisfied.  But 
how  unworthy  such  a  feeling  is  you  may  learn  from 
these  words  :  "  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup 
with  him,  and  he  with  Me." 

If  there  be  any  tenderness  in  earthly  unions,  if  there 
be  any  love,  if  there  be  any  affection,  if  there  be  any 
sympathy,  if  there  be  any  oneness  of  spirit,  all  is 
contained  in  this  connection  between  Jesus  and  the 
souls  of  His  believing  people  ;  and  every  support  and 
comfort,  and  consolation  and  assistance  and  counsel 

19 


290 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING! 


that  \vc  expect  from  earthly  friends  we  are  fully 
warranted  in  expecting  from  our  Redeemer,  and  if 
we  trust  Him  we  shall  surely  find  it,  in  life  and  in  death, 
in  sorrow  and  in  joy,  in  sickness  and  in  health.  He 
that  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us  is  not  ashamed  to 
be  called  our  God  and  to  look  upon  us  as  dear  brethren. 
We  read  that  it  was  often  said  of  Him  during  His 
ministry,  "  He  is  gone  to  be  a  guest  with  a  man  that 
is  a  sinner";  let  us  remember  He  is  still  the  same; 
He  never  changes,  there  is  not  one  amongst  you  Jesus 
would  not  visit  if  you  would  only  unbar  those  hard 
hearts  and  willingly  receive  Him. 

Mark  now  how  well  this  proves  who  arc  God's 
children  and  who  are  not  ;  how  plain  is  the  evidence  it 
furnishes,  for  which  we  are  to  look,  if  we  would  discover 
who  are  the  pilgrims  of  the  narrow  way.  It  is  not 
simply  hearing  the  gospel  preached,  it  is  not  only 
talking  much  about  religion,  it  is  not  merely  the  out 
ward  attendance  upon  services — it  is  the  indwelling  of 
Christ  in  the  heart,  it  is  the  constant  presence  of  your 
Saviour  within,  showing  itself  by  tempers  and  words 
and  behaviour  like  His  own.  If  you  are  really  on  the 
road  towards  Zion,  if  Jesus  be  within  you,  your  life  will 
show  it,  it  will  speak  for  itself ;  as  a  member  of  His 
body,  you  will  daily  study  more  and  more  to  resemble 
Him,  you  will  purify  yourself  even  as  He  is  pure. 

Remember,  in  the  last  place,  if  you  desire  to  have 
your  Saviour  as  your  guest,  you  must  give  Him  un 
divided  possession  of  your  house — you  must  renounce 
and  cast  forth  those  old  inhabitants,  the  world,  the  lust 
of  the  flesh  and  the  devil.  Jesus  must  reign  alone  ; 
He  has  stooped  low  for  your  sakes,  He  has  endured 
shame  and  contempt  and  death  for  an  ungrateful 
world  ;  He  has  stood  long  knocking  at  your  door,  but 
He  can  stoop  no  farther,  He  will  not  have  less  than 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING!  291 

your  whole  heart.  Think  you,  He  will  consent  to  dwell 
in  a  heart  divided  between  Himself  and  the  world  ? 
think  you  He  will  bear  the  insult  of  sitting  down  as 
a  guest  at  your  table  together  with  unclean  spirits, 
corrupt  affections,  evil  passions,  earthly  desires  ?  Will 
you  ask  Him  to  come  in  and  take  a  portion  of  your 
goods  together  with  them  ?  He  will  not  do  it :  He 
loves  you  much,  but  He  will  not  be  mocked.  They 
are  His  enemies — either  He  or  they  must  depart — you 
must  either  drive  them  out  with  His  assistance,  praying 
much  that  He  will  help  you,  or  else  He  will  withdraw. 
He  will  never  share  the  throne  of  your  heart  with 
Satan,  or  hold  fellowship  with  one  who  takes  pleasure 
in  the  fellowship  of  sin. 

And  now,  beloved,  it  remains  for  me,  in  conclusion, 
to  apply  this  text  to  your  souls.  We  are  the  ministers 
of  peace,  and  happy  should  we  be  if  we  could  always 
speak  to  you  smooth  things  ;  but  we  should  not  be 
charitable  if  we  forgot  the  truth,  if  we  did  not  reprove 
and  rebuke  as  well  as  exhort,  if  we  did  not  endeavour 
to  give  every  man  his  portion  in  due  season.  I  say, 
then,  that  our  text  contains  a  word  for  three  classes 
of  hearers :  for  the  really  unconverted,  for  the  inquirer^ 
and  for  the  true  Christian.  God  grant  that  each  of 
you  may  have  the  eyes  of  his  understanding  opened, 
and  not  take  anything  to  himself  which  is  not  his  own. 

i.  First,  then,  I  speak  to  those  whose  hearts  have 
never  yet  been  changed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  whatever 
their  lives  may  have  been,  whether  they  have  made 
any  profession  hitherto  or  not.  Beloved,  I  beseech 
you  by  the  mercies  of  God,  consider  what  you  are 
doing.  Jesus  says  to  you,  "  I  stand  at  the  door  and 
knock."  How  long  do  you  intend  to  keep  Him  waiting? 
How  long  will  you  insult  Him  by  allowing  everything 
else  to  go  out  and  come  in  freely,  while  to  Him,  the 


2Q2  KNOCKING!   KNOCKING! 

only  lawful  owner,  your  heart  is  barred  and  bolted  ? 
How  can  you  defend  the  course  you  are  now  pursuing  ? 
Have  you  found  a  new  Bible  ?  Can  you  show  us  that 
the  doctrine  we  preach  is  not  true?  Can  you  prove 
that  this  text  does  not  mean  everything  I  have  said? 

You  will  not  tell  us  that  Christ  is  now  within  you  ; 
your  life,  your  conversation,  your  habits  all  deny  that. 
And  if  He  is  not  within  you  at  this  minute,  you  actually 
are  keeping  Him  standing  without  Laugh  if  you 
choose,  despise  the  doctrine  if  you  please  ;  it  is  written, 
and  therefore  true  ;  you  cannot  overthrow  it  or  blot 
it  out. 

Listen !  Hearken  !  What  is  Jesus  saying  now  to 
each  of  you  ?  "I  stand  these  many  years  knocking 
at  thy  door :  why  is  it  not  opened  to  me  ?  Why  am 
1  thus  shut  out  from  your  affections?  What  have  I 
done  to  deserve  such  scorn  and  ingratitude  ?  For  your 
sake  I  left  my  Father's  bosom  and  endured  hardships 
in  the  form  of  a  servant.  For  your  sake  I  was  num 
bered  among  the  transgressors  and  shed  My  blood 
upon  the  cross.  I  came  to  offer  you  abundance  of 
happiness  and  life  and  peace :  why  is  your  heart  con 
tinually  closed  against  me  ?  Why  am  I  counted 
unworthy  of  a  place  in  your  thoughts  ?  Why  is  a 
traitor  and  a  rebel,  the  prince  of  this  world,  preferred 
before  Me  ?  " 

O  unconverted  man,  your  Lord  and  Master  is  saying 
this,  and  what  can  you  plead  by  way  of  excuse  ? 
Perhaps  you  tell  us  it  is  all  true, — you  mean  some 
time  or  other  to  turn  to  God  and  repent,  you  hope 
to  have  a  more  convenient  season.  A  more  convenient 
season  ! 

Jesus,  remember,  is  waiting  for  an  answer  ;  He  does 
not  look  to  what  you  say  ;  your  life  speaks  more  plainly 
than  your  lips,  and  let  me  tell  you  what  the  answer  of 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING!  293 

your  life  is  :  "I  know,"  you  say,  "  I  am  insulting  God, 
but  I  am  willing  to  go  on  doing  so  for  the  present  ; 
I  love  my  sins  more  than  Him  at  present  ;  I  love  my 
business  more  than  His  favour ;  I  love  my  fleshly 
pleasure  more  than  His  blessing  ;  I  love  this  earth 
more  than  heaven.  When  I  have  had  enough  of 
enjoyment  here,  and  am  tired  of  it,  I  shall  think  of 
listening  to  Christ, — when  my  bodily  strength  and  the 
power  of  my  mind  is  wasted,  I  may  perhaps  become 
the  servant  of  God  ;  but  at  present  the  Lord  Jesus 
may  wait  ;  let  the  Lord  Jesus  wait  my  convenience." 
Think  not  I  mean  you  dare  say  this  with  your  lips, 
but  I  do  mean  you  are  plainly  saying  it  by  your  actions 
as  long  as  you  put  off  repentance  and  calling  upon 
God  ;  and  I  would  simply  ask  you,  Is  it  wise  ?  is  it  reason 
able  ?  is  it  prudent  ?  is  it  safe  ?  Hath  not  God  written 
in  the  book  of  Proverbs,  "  Because  I  called  and  ye  refused, 
I  stretched  out  my  hands  and  no  man  regarded,  I  also 
will  laugh  at  your  calamity,  I  will  mock  when  your  fear 
cometh.  Then  shall  they  call  upon  me,  but  I  will  not 
answer  ;  they  shall  seek  Me  early,  but  they  shall  not  find 
Me  "  ?  Oh,  fearful  words  and  fearful  thought !  A  time 
is  coming,  and  may  be  very  near,  when  the  Lord  Jesus 
will  laugh,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  wrill  mock, — when  you 
shall  call  on  the  Lord  Jesus  and  He  will  not  answer, 
when  you  shall  seek  the  Lord  Jesus  early  and  shall 
not  find  Him.  Tremble  sinner,  and  repent  ;  aw^ake 
while  it  is  called  to-day,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and 
Christ  shall  yet  give  thce  light. 

2.  Secondly,  I  speak  to  those  who  are  inclined  to 
inquire  about  the  things  they  hear,  but  have  not  yet 
decidedly  made  up  their  minds  to  follow  the  Lord  fully. 
You  are  beginning  to  think  there  is  some  truth  in  the 
gospel,  and  to  see  some  necessity  for  being  in  earnest ; 
but  you  are  doubting  whether  you  will  be  able  to  act 


2()4 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING! 


up  to  your  profession  ;  and  you  see  so  many  careless 
about  their  souls,  that  you  are  holding  back,  you  do  not 
feel  quite  certain  what  to  do.  To  all  such  Jesus  says, 
"  Hear  My  voice,  and  open  the  door."  Go  forward  ; 
do  not  hesitate  ;  be  not  faithless,  but  believing  ;  think 
not  of  others  ;  look  to  your  own  salvation  ;  do  not  resist 
the  leadings  of  your  conscience,  quench  not  the  Spirit ; 
follow  the  Lamb  of  God  whithersoever  He  goes,  and 
trust  Him  with  the  consequences.  Open  wide  the  door 
of  your  heart  ;  let  Jesus  enter  in,  and  make  Him  Lord 
of  all.  Do  not  reject  His  counsel.  He  will  say,  "  I 
want  to  enrich  thee  "  :  do  not  answer,  "  I  am  rich  and 
increased  with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing."  He 
will  say,  "  I  want  to  purify  thee  "  :  do  not  answer,  "  I 
have  a  few  failings,  but  I  can  soon  get  rid  of  them  ;  I 
do  not  want  so  much  cleansing."  He  will  say,  u  I  come 
to  clothe  thee  "  :  do  not  answer,  "  I  have  no  need  of 
raiment,  I  am  not  naked."  But  if  you  are  at  present 
ignorant  of  everything  else,  do  this  at  least :  hear  the 
voice  of  Him  who  calls  ;  open  to  Him  the  door  of  your 
heart  ;  let  His  kingdom  be  set  up  within  you  ;  and  be 
sure  you  will  never  repent,  though  all  things  seem 
against  you. 

3.  Lastly,  I  have  a  word  for  those  who  have  admitted 
Christ,  into  their  hearts  by  faith.  Let  your  light  so 
shine  before  men,  that  all  may  take  knowledge  Jesus 
is  within  you,  when  they  find  you  daily  striving  to 
please  Him  who  has  become  your  guest.  See  that  you 
do  not  grieve  Him  by  any  inconsistent  habits  in  your 
lives.  Do  not  be  ashamed  of  your  guest  :  you  must 
confess  Christ  before  the  world,  or  He  will  not  confess 
you  before  His  Father  and  the  angels.  Fear  not  that 
anything  shall  separate  you  from  the  love  of  God  ; 
take  heed  that  you  despise  not  any  of  the  means  of 
grace  ;  live  fully  up  to  the  privilege  to  which  you  have 


KNOCKING!   KNOCKING!  295 

been  called  ;  walk  by  faith,  and  remember  your  ex 
ceeding  great  and  precious  promises  ;  be  humble,  be 
watchful,  be  diligent  to  cleanse  out  the  old  leaven  ;  be 
much  in  prayer  and  self-examination  ;  for  so  an 
entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into 
the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 
Your  union  with  Christ  on  earth  shall  only  be  a  fore 
taste  of  good  things  to  come,  for  all  with  whom  He 
has  supped  on  earth  shall  sit  down  with  Him  at  the 
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  ;  "  and  there  shall  be  no 
more  death,  neither  sorrow  nor  crying,  neither  shall 
there  be  any  more  pain,  for  the  former  things  arc 
passed  away."  "  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall 
dwell  among  them.  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither 
thirst  any  more,  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them, 
nor  any  heat.  For  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of 
the  throne  shall  feed  them,  and  shall  lead  them  unto 
living  fountains  of  water,  and  God  shall  wipe  away  all 
tears  from  their  eyes"  (Rev.  vii.  15-17). 


XXII 
THE  BLOOD    OF  THE  LAMB 

"  These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  have  washed 
their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Therefore 
are  they  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His 
temple :  and  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  among  them.  They 
shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more  ;  neither  shall  the  sun  light 
on  them,  nor  any  heat.  For  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne 
shall  feed  them,  and  shall  lead  them  unto  living  fountains  of  waters :  and 
God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes." — REV.  vii.  14,  15,  16,  17. 

THIS  is  a  very  glorious  account,  and  yet  we  need 
not  wonder,  for  it  was  a  vision  of  heavenly  things  : 
you  may  call  it  a  short  glimpse  within  the  vail  which 
separated  this  world  from  the  world  to  come.  We  read 
in  the  verses  before  our  text,  that  the  apostle  John  saw 
in  the  spirit  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  could 
number,  clothed  with  white  robes,  and  bearing  palms 
in  their  hands,  standing  before  the  throne  and  before 
the  Lamb  :  and  not  knowing  himself  who  or  what  these 
might  be,  he  received  information  from  one  of  the  elders 
or  chief  angels,  and  was  told  in  the  words  you  have 
heard,  that  these  were  the  blessed  company  of  all 
faithful  people,  the  redeemed  out  of  every  nation  and 
kindred  and  tongue,  the  true  children  of  God,  the  heirs 
of  everlasting  salvation. 

I  propose  this  morning  to  consider  fully  the  account 
which  this  elder  gave.  I  counsel  you,  beloved,  to  search 
and  sec  what  you  know  of  it  in  your  own  selves.  The 

296 


THE   BLOOD    OF   THE   LAMB  297 

day  shall  come  when  the  sun  shall  become  black  as 
sackcloth  of  hair,  and  the  moon  shall  become  as  blood, 
and  the  stars  of  heaven  shall  fall  unto  the  earth,  and 
they  who  are  strangers  to  the  character  described  in  our 
text  shall  find  it  had  been  better  for  them  if  they  had 
never  been  born.  Blessed  are  they  who  are  not 
ashamed  to  confess  that  they  seek  a  more  abiding  city 
than  this  world,  even  a  heavenly  one,  and  count  all 
things  loss  if  they  can  only  win  Christ  and  be  found 
in  Him. 

Xow  there  are  three  points  to  be  examined  in  our 
text. 

I.  First,  where   did    these   saints   come   from    whom 
St.  John  saw. 

II.  Second,   how    they    had    been  able  to  reach  the 
place  where  he  saw  them. 

III.  Third  and  last,  what  was  their  reward. 

I.  First,  then,  we  learn  that  God's  saints  have  come 
out  of  great  tribulation — that  is,  they  have  come  out 
of  a  world  full  of  sin  and  danger,  a  world'  in  which  they 
have  so  much  to  encounter  which  is  hurtful  to  their 
souls  that  you  may  truly  call  it  a  place  of  great  tribula 
tion.  How  strange  that  seems  !  this  earth  so  fair  and 
lovely  as  it  appears,  so  full  of  everything  to  make  life 
enjoyable,  this  earth  on  which  millions  do  set  all  their 
affections  and  have  not  a  thought  beyond  it,  is  a 
wilderness  beset  with  trials  and  difficulties  to  every 
true  believer.  Write  this  down  on  the  tablet  of  your 
memory,  that  if  you  make  up  your  mind  to  follow 
Christ  and  have  your  soul  saved,  you  will  sooner  or 
later  have  to  go  through  great  tribulation. 

Brethren,  why  are  these  things  so  ?  Because  the 
world  you  live  in  is  a  fallen  world,  the  devil  is  the  prince 
of  it,  and  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  men  and  women 
on  it  have  shut  their  eyes  and  given  themselves  up  to 


298          THE    BLOOD    OF   THE   LAMB 

his  service.  Once  become  a  follower  of  Christ,  you 
will  sec  iniquity  abounding  on  every  side,  you  will  sec 
your  blessed  Saviour's  laws  trampled  under  foot,  you 
will  find  the  immense  majority  of  those  around  you  to 
be  spiritually  dark,  sleeping  and  dead— some  altogether 
thoughtless,  some  resting  on  a  form  of  godliness  without 
the  power  ;  and  if  you  love  the  Lord  Jesus  in  sincerity, 
to  see  your  Redeemer  thus  despised  will  make  the  world 
a  place  of  tribulation. 

But  this  is  not  all.  The  earthly-minded,  the  thought 
less,  will  never  let  you  hold  on  your  way  in  peace.  Oh 
no  !  you  are  condemning  their  practices  and  fashions, 
you  arc  a  witness  against  their  deadness  and  neglect  of 
religion  ;  and  so  if  you  set  your  face  toward^  Zion  they 
will  try  to  turn  you  back.  Perhaps  it  will  be  laughter, 
perhaps  it  will  be  hard  words  ;  one  day  they  will  accuse 
you  of  pride,  another  of  self-conceit  ;  sometimes  they 
will  annoy  you  with  arguments,  sometimes  they  will 
avoid  your  company  ;  but,  one  way  or  another,  you  will 
soon  discover  that  the  worldly-minded  will  never  let 
you  go  quietly  to  heaven.  You  cannot  please  them. 
You  may  exercise  yourself  like  Paul  to  have  a  conscience 
void  of  offence  towards  all  men  ;  it  matters  not,  you 
cannot  serve  the  Lord  and  Mammon,  and  if  you  walk 
with  God,  you  will  find  your  way  is  spoken  against  by 
nearly  all. 

And  then  there  is  your  own  heart— deceitful,  treache 
rous,  and  cold — the  flesh  lusting  against  the  spirit 
and  the  spirit  warring  with  the  flesh  ;  your  readiness 
to  make  excuses,  your  deadness  in  the  use  of  means, 
your  wandering  thought  in  prayer,  your  lack  of  faith 
in  sorrow,  your  presumptuous  self-confidence  in  joy. 
O  Christian,  you  have  an  enemy  within  which  needs 
your  constant  watchfulness  ;  you  have  a  fountain 
of  trials  in  your  own  breast ;  you  will  have  daily 


THE    BLOOD    OF   THE   LAMB  299 

occasion  to  crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and 
lusts.  And  add  to  this  those  cares  which  you  have 
in  common  with  all  children  of  Adam— sickness,  disease 
and  pain,  the  loss  of  property,  the  unkindness  of  friends, 
the  daily  toil  for  a  livelihood,  the  fear  of  want,  the 
many  nameless  causes  of  anxiety  which  every  week 
almost  brings  round,  and  say  whether  it  be  not  true 
that  all  God's  people  come  out  of  great  tribulation. 
They  must  deny  themselves,  they  must  take  up  the 
cross,  they  must  reckon  on  many  a  trial,  if  they  would 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

Mark  well,  beloved,  this  truth — the  path  to  glory 
has  been  always  filled  with  thorns  ;  it  is  the  experience 
of  all  those  holy  men  who  have  left  us  an  example 
that  we  should  walk  in  their  steps  :  Abraham,  and 
Jacob,  and  Moses,  and  David,  and  Job,  and  Daniel,  there 
was  not  one  of  them  who  was  not  perfected  through 
sufferings. 

We  are  all  too  much  disposed  to  think  a  time  may 
come  when  we  shall  have  a  season  of  repose  and  not 
be  harassed  with  these  vexations  and  disappointments. 
Almost  every  one  supposes  he  is  tried  more  than  his 
neighbours  ;  but  let  us  not  be  deceived — this  earth  is 
not  our  rest ;  it  is  a  place  for  working,  not  for  sleeping. 
Here  is  the  reason  that  so  many  run  well  for  a  time, 
and  seem  to  have  the  love  of  Christ  in  their  hearts, 
and  yet,  when  persecution  or  affliction  ariseth  for  the 
word's  sake,  they  are  offended.  They  had  not  counted 
the  cost ;  they  had  reckoned  on  the  reward  without 
the  labour  ;  they  had  forgotten  this  most  important 
point  in  the  character  of  God's  saints — "  they  are  men 
who  have  come  out  of  great  tribulation." 

This  seems  a  hard  saying,  but  I  would  have  you 
know  these  trials  are  laid  on  us  for  the  most  wise  and 
merciful  purposes.  We  live  in  such  a  fair  and  pleasant 


3oo 


THE   BLOOD   OF   THE   LAMB 


world,  \vc  arc  so  surrounded  with  so  much  that  is 
smiling  and  gay,  that  if  we  were  not  often  obliged 
to  taste  of  sickness  and  trial  or  disappointments,  we 
should  forget  our  heavenly  home,  and  pitch  our  tents 
over  against  this  Sodom.  Therefore  it  is  that  God's 
people  pass  through  great  tribulations  ;  therefore  it  is 
they  are  often  called  upon  to  suffer  the  sting  of  affliction 
and  anxiety,  or  weep  over  the  grave  of  those  whom 
they  have  loved  as  their  own  soul.  It  is  their  Father's 
hand  which  chastens  them  ;  it  is  thus  He  weans  their 
affection  from  things  below  and  fixes  them  on  Himself ; 
it  is  thus  He  trains  them  for  eternity,  and  cuts  the 
threads  one  by  one  which  bind  their  wavering  hearts 
to  earth.  No  doubt  such  chastening  is  grievous  for 
the  time,  but  still  it  brings  many  a  hidden  grace  to 
light,  and  cuts  down  many  a  secret  seed  of  evil ;  and 
we  shall  see  those  who  have  suffered  most  shining 
among  the  brightest  stars  in  the  assembly  of  heaven. 
The  purest  gold  is  that  which  has  been  longest  in  the 
refiner's  furnace.  The  brightest  diamond  is  often  that 
which  has  required  the  most  grinding  and  polishing. 
But  our  light  affliction  endureth  but  for  a  moment,  and 
it  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory  ;  the  saints  arc  men  who  have  come  out 
of  great  tribulation,  they  are  never  left  to  perish  in  it  ; 
the  last  night  of  weeping  will  soon  be  spent,  the  last 
wave  of  trouble  will  have  rolled  over  us,  and  then  we 
shall  have  a  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding  ; 
we  shall  be  at  home  for  ever  with  the  Lord. 

I  repeat,  this  seems  at  first  sight  a  hard  saying  ;  and 
yet  it  is  a  true  one.  Count  up  the  enemies  which 
encompass  the  children  of  God,— the  world  with  its 
unkindnesses  or  its  snares  and  seductions,  the  flesh 
with  its  unceasing  backwardness  and  indifference  to 
the  Lord's  service,  the  devil  with  his  arts  and  devices,— 


THE   BLOOD    OF   THE   LAMB  301 

and  sec  whether  you  could  give  a  more  correct  picture 
of  the  saints'  experience  than  may  be  found  in  the 
words,  "  these  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribu 
lation."  An  unconverted  man  may  not  understand 
this,  and  a  thoughtless  man  may  not  consider  it ;  they 
neither  know  nor  care  about  this  spiritual  conflict  ; 
it  is  foolishness  to  them  ;  but  they  that  are  born  again, 
and  have  learned  the  value  of  their  own  souls,  can 
set  to  their  seals  that  it  is  all  true. 

II.  The  second  question  rising  out  of  the  text  is 
this:  "  How  did  these  shining  ones  reach  that  blessed 
place  where  John  saw  them  ?  "  Think  not  it  was  their 
own  righteousness  which  brought  salvation,  and  their 
own  strength  which  upheld  them  :  the  cross  will  surely 
lead  to  the  crown,  but  the  cross  will  never  deserve 
it ;  not  all  the  tears  which  they  have  shed,  not  all  the 
patience  they  have  shown  in  tribulation,  could  ever 
avail  to  make  atonement  for  transgression,  or  wash 
away  one  single  sin.  What  says  the  apostle  ?  "  They 
have  washed  their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb."  They  have  not  been  ashamed 
to  acknowledge  their  iniquities,  and  they  have  laid 
them  all  before  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  for  His 
cross  and  passion,  and  for  His  righteousness'  sake  they 
have  sought  a  free  forgiveness,  and  they  have  found 
it.  Lay  this  to  heart,  all  ye  that  are  wise  in  your 
own  eyes  and  holy  in  your  own  sight.  No  doubt 
there  were  prophets  and  righteous  men  of  old,  men 
who  had  wrought  miracles  and  given  their  bodies  to 
be  burned,  men  who  had  been  valiant  for  the  truth 
even  unto  death,  in  that  great  multitude  which  John 
beheld  ;  but  none  came  boasting  of  his  o\vn  attainments 
and  clothed  in  his  own  apparel, — they  were  all  washed 
and  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 

And   lay  this  well  to  heart,  all  ye  that  are    pressed 


302          THE   BLOOD   OF   THE   LAMB 

down  with  the   burden  of  your  sins,  if  any  such  there 
be,   and    dare    not    lift   up   your  eyes   to    heaven.     No 
doubt  there   were  sinners    before    God    exceedingly    in 
that   company,    many   who   had    been    publicans   and 
harlots,   the   very    filth    of    the    earth    and    offscouring 
of  all  things,  and  yet  they  found  a  place  of  forgiveness 
and,  behold,  they  arc  washed,  and  white  as  the  driven 
snow.     They  were  in  a  world  of  tribulation  like  your 
selves,  but   they  found  time  to  listen  to  the  report  of 
God's  ministers,  and  when  they  listened  they  believed  ; 
they  did  not  think  scorn   of  the   goodly    land   before 
them ;    they   did    not    make    light   of    their    Master's 
invitations,  but  they  loathed  themselves  for  their  past 
transgressions     and     forgetfulness,     and     with     earnest 
supplication   and  prayer  sought  to  the   Lamb  of  God 
which  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  and  no  sooner 
did  they  knock  than  the  door  was  opened.     They  were 
not  content  with  hearing  of  this  fountain  for  sin   and 
uncleanness,  like  many  of  yourselves,  and  talking  of  it 
as  a  thing  to  be  admired,  and  very  useful  for  others  ; 
they  did   not  sit  beside  the  pool  of  Bethesda  without 
endeavouring  to  step   in.   but  they  cried,  "  Lord,  have 
mercy,  wash  me,  even  me  also,"  and  so  they  were  washed 
they  were  sanctified,  they  were  justified,  in  the  name  of 
the   Lord  Jesus  and   by  the  Spirit  of  our    God  ;  they 
obtained    a  free    pardon,  and   their  iniquities   were  all 
taken  out  of  the  way.     By  nature  they  were  as  weak 
and  timid  and   sinful  and  shortcoming   as   any  among 
yourselves, — there  is  not  a  danger  or  an  obstacle  or  a 
doubt  or  a  discouragement  in  any  of  your  minds  with 
which  they  were  not  familiar, — and  yet  they  were  all 
saved  by  the  free  grace  of  God,  they  were  washed  and 
made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  they  were  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  them.    Around 
that  throne  you  would  find  many  who  used  to  be  the 


THE   BLOOD   OF   THE   LAMB  303 

vilest  of  the  vile.  Go  up,  and  ask  them,  every  one, 
"  How  did  you  come  hither  ?  whence  got  you  that  white 
robe  ? "  They  will  answer  you,  "  We  were  once  a 
generation  without  God  in  the  world,  without  light  and 
without  hope,  we  cared  for  nothing  but  fulfilling  the 
desires  of  the  flesh  and  the  mind,  we  were  known  as 
drunkards  and  revilers  and  fornicators  ;  many  a  time 
we  hardened  our  hearts  against  advice  ;  many  a  careless 
neighbour  did  we  follow  to  the  grave,  and  tempted  God 
to  cut  us  off  by  continued  impenitence  ;  but  at  last 
our  conscience  spoke  so  loudly  that  we  dared  no  longer 
delay  ;  we  tried  to  keep  God's  law,  but  we  could  not 
answer  it  one  in  a  thousand,  it  brought  us  to  flat 
despair  ;  we  made  a  great  profession,  and  men  said  we 
were  converted  ;  but  it  would  not  do — sin  lay  upon  us 
like  a  mountain,  all  unatoned  for,  and  we  were  miserable. 
But  we  heard  a  voice,  saying,  '  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him 
come  unto  Me  and  drink,' — He  that  believeth  on  Me, 
though  he  were  dead  yet  shall  he  live,'  '  Come  unto 
Me  and  I  will  give  you  rest,'  and  when  we  heard  it, 
we  went  at  once  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  waited 
for  nothing,  we  laid  all  our  sorrows  and  all  our 
wickedness  before  Him,  and,  behold,  that  very  day  we 
were  healed  and  made  whole',  not  having  spot  or 
wrinkle  or  any  such  thing."  Such  is  the  answer  you 
would  get  from  many  in  that  company  which  the 
apostle  saw. 

This  is  the  way  you  must  walk  in,  if  you  would  ever 
stand  with  them  in  glory.  You  must  lay  aside  all 
pride  and  self-dependence,  you  must  use  the  publican's 
prayer,  you  must  believe  yourself  a  miserable  unde 
serving  sinner,  you  must  lay  hold  on  the  cross  of  Christ 
with  a  simple  childlike  faith,  and  pray  that  you  may  be 
washed  in  His  blood  and  pardoned  for  His  name's  sake. 
Show  me  another  way  of  salvation  which  will  bring 


3o4  THE   BLOOD    OF    THE    LAMB 

you  peace  at  the  last  ;  I  cannot  find  one  in  the  Bible. 
I  hear  of  men  who  live  on  many  a  long  year  without  a 
thought  about  this  precious  washing  in  Christ's  blood, 
this  precious  garment  of  Christ's  righteousness,  and  yet 
can  tell  us  they  trust  it  will  be  all  right  with  them  at 
last ;  but  I  never  hear  that  it  is  right,  and  if  the  Bible 
be  true  it  is  impossible.  I  see  many  who  profess  a 
belief  in  their  need  of  this  fountain  for  sin  and  unclean- 
ness,  but  I  fear  they  do  no  more  than  talk  about  it, 
they  do  not  count  all  things  loss  until  they  are 
forgiven.  But  whether  men  will  receive  the  doctrine 
or  not,  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,  and  though 
the  saints  of  God  do  form  a  multitude  which  none  can 
number,  I  cannot  read  of  one  who  had  not  washed  his 
robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 

III.  The  third  and  last  part  of  my  text  is  that 
which  describes  the  reward  of  the  redeemed  :  "  they 
are  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  serve  Him  day  and 
night  in  His  temple  :  and  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne 
shall  dwell  among  them.  They  shall  hunger  no  more, 
neither  thirst  any  more,  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on 
them,  nor  any  heat.  For  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne  shall  feed  them,  and  shall  lead  them 
unto  living  fountains  of  waters,  and  God  shall  wipe 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes."  Here  is  a  list  of 
privileges  ;  you  have  heard  of  tribulation,  but  it  leads, 
you  see,  to  comfort  ;  you  have  heard  of  the  cross,  but 
the  end  is  indeed  a  crown. 

Now  we  can  tell  you  something  of  the  affliction  of 
God's  children,  for  we  are  able  to  speak  that  we  know  ; 
but  when  we  have  to  treat  of  the  glory  which  shall  be 
revealed,  we  are  on  ground  which  human  eye  hath  not 
seen,  and  we  must  be  careful  not  to  go  beyond  what 
is  written. 

The  saints  "  shall  serve  God  day  and  night."     There 


THE   BLOOD   OF   THE   LAMB  305 

shall  be  no  weariness  in  heaven ;  there  shall  be  no 
earthly  labours  to  distract  our  attention.  Here,  alas  ! 
the  cares  of  the  world  arc  continually  breaking  in, 
and  these  poor  frail  bodies  of  ours  do  often  tie  us 
down  to  the  earth  by  their  weakness,  even  when  the 
spirit  is  willing.  We  may  be  on  the  mount  for  a  short 
season  sometimes,  but  our  powers  are  soon  exhausted  ; 
but  there  we  shall  have  no  wandering  thoughts,  no 
distractions,  no  bodily  wants,  we  shall  never  faint. 
How  little  indeed  do  we  worship  God  in  spirit  and 
in  truth  ;  at  our  very  best  moments,  how  cold  and  dull 
we  feel  towards  our  blessed  Redeemer,  how  willing  to 
allow  any  excuse  for  shortening  our  prayers  and 
diminishing  our  communion  with  our  Father  which  is 
in  heaven  ;  but  they  that  stand  before  the  throne  of 
God  shall  feel  no  fatigue,  they  will  require  no  repose, 
they  will  count  it  their  highest  privilege  to  be  con 
tinually  singing  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb, 
and  saying,  "  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and 
power,  be  unto  Him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and 
unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever." 

But  let  us  read  on.  "  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne 
shall  dwell  among  them."  They  shall  no  longer  walk 
by  faith,  and  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  they  shall 
see  face  to  face  the  God  in  whom  they  have  believed, 
and  behold  His  countenance  as  that  of  a  familiar  friend. 
They  shall  have  no  more  dark  seasons,  they  shall 
never  feel  that  their  beloved  Lord  is  at  a  distance, 
they  shall  never  tremble  lest  they  compel  Him  to 
withdraw  Himself  by  their  lack  of  service,  but  they 
shall  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  be  for  ever  at  His  side. 
And  if,  while  groaning  in  their  body  of  sin,  the  Christian 
finds  such  peace  and  comfort  in  drawing  nigh  to  God 
in  prayer — if  even  in  the  flesh  he  has  tasted  that 
it  is  a  joyful  thing  to  pour  out  his  heart  before  the 

20 


306          THE   BLOOD   OF   THE   LAMB 

throne  of  mercy— oh  !  who  shall  describe  his  blessedness 
when  he  shall  find  himself  for  ever  in  his  Redeemer's 
presence,  and  shall  be  told,  It  is  finished,  thou  shalt 
no  more  go  out?  It  is  a  pleasant  thing  to  have  the 
company  of  those  we  love  :  our  very  earthly  happiness 
is  incomplete  while  those  who  have  the  keys  of  our 
affection,  the  husband,  the  wife,  the  brother,  the  sister, 
the  friends  who  are  as  our  own  souls,  are  far  away  ; 
but  there  shall  be  no  such  incompleteness  in  heaven  ; 
there  we  shall  have  the  presence  of  our  glorious  Lord 
before  our  eyes,  who  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for 
us,  and  paid  the  price  of  our  salvation,  even  His  own 
blood,  and  the  Scripture  shall  be  fulfilled  which  saith, 
"  In  Thy  presence  there  is  fulness  of  joy,  and  at  Thy 
right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore." 

But  we  may  not  linger  here.  We  read,  "  They  shall 
hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more."  They 
shall  have  no  more  wants  and  necessities  ;  they  shall 
no  longer  stand  in  need  of  daily  application  for  the 
bread  of  life,  and  find  their  souls  starving  in  the  wilder 
ness  of  this  world  ;  they  shall  not  walk  as  pilgrims 
trembling  lest  their  spiritual  food  should  not  support 
them,  and  thirsting  after  a  fuller  draught  of  the  water 
of  life  ;  but  they  shall  find  that  prophecy  made  good, 
"  When  I  awake  up  after  Thy  likeness,  I  shall  be 
satisfied."  But  again,  "  the  sun  shall  not  light  on  them, 
nor  any  heat."  There  shall  be  no  more  trial  and 
persecution.  There  shall  not  be  one  reviling  tongue 
nor  one  ensnaring  temptation.  The  mockers  and  the 
flatterers  and  the  scoffers  shall  be  silent  for  even 
the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  will  all  be  quenched  ; 
there  will  be  nothing  to  mar  and  disturb  the  Christian's 
peace.  The  time  will  have  come  at  last  when  he  may 
rest  ;  he  will  be  far  above  the  scene  of  his  old  conflicts, 
and  the  strife  shall  never  be  renewed. 


THE   BLOOD    OF   THE   LAMB  307 

But  what  is  the  crowning  privilege  ?  "  The  Lamb, 
which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  shall  feed  them, 
and  shall  lead  them  unto  living  fountains  of  water : 
and  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes." 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  shall  minister  to  their 
comforts  ;  the  same  kind  hand  which  raised  them  from 
the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  righteousness,  which 
healed  their  spiritual  diseases,  and  brought  them  health 
and  peace,  and  made  them  new  creatures  upon  earth, 
the  same  hand  shall  welcome  them  in  heaven,  and 
conduct  them  as  highly  favoured  guests  to  a  banquet 
of  happiness,  such  as  eye  hath  not  seen,  neither  can 
it  enter  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive.  Time  was 
when  He  sought  them  out  as  wandering  sheep  in  the 
wilderness  of  this  world,  and  made  them  members  of 
His  little  flock  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  refreshed  their  weary,  heavy  laden  souls  with  the 
water  of  life.  And  the  same  Jesus  who  began  the 
good  work  in  the  days  of  their  tribulation  upon  earth, 
the  same  Good  Shepherd  shall  complete  the  work 
in  heaven.  Here  they  have  tasted  something  of  the 
streams,  a  little  trembling  company,  from  north  and 
south,  east  and  west,  but  there  they  will  be  gathered 
round  the  fountain  itself,  and  there  will  be  one  fold 
and  one  shepherd,  one  heart  and  one  mind,  and  none 
shall  make  them  afraid.  And  then  there  shall  be  no 
more  weeping,  for  "  God  Himself  shall  wipe  away  all 
tears."  A  dwelling-place  in  which  there  shall  be  no 
weeping !  I  know  no  part  of  heaven  more  difficult 
to  imagine.  We  live  in  a  world  of  sorrow,  a  very 
vale  of  tears  ;  tears  for  ourselves  and  tears  for  others, 
tears  over  our  own  shortcomings,  tears  over  the  un 
belief  of  those  we  love,  tears  over  disappointed  hopes, 
tears  over  the  graves  of  those  on  whom  our  affections 
are  set,  and  all  because  of  sin  :  there  would  have  been 


308          THE   BLOOD   OF   THE   LAMB 

no   sorrow   if  Adam    had    never   fallen,   but   our   very 
weeping  is  a  proof  of  sin. 

Yet  it  shall  not  always  be  so  :  a  day  is  still  to  come 
when  sadness  shall  flee  away,  and  God  Himself  shall 
say,  Refrain  thy  voice  from  weeping,  for  the  former  things 
are  passed  away.  There  shall  be  no  sadness  in  heaven, 
for  there  shall  be  no  sin  ;  the  days  of  our  tribulation 
shall  be  forgotten  ;  we  shall  be  able  at  last  to  love  our 
God  without  coldness,  to  reverence  His  holiness  without 
torment,  to  trust  Him  without  despair,  to  serve  Him 
without  weariness,  without  interruption,  without  distrac 
tion  ;  the  days  of  weakness  and  corruption  will  be  past, 
and  we  shall  be  like  unto  our  Lord  in  holiness  as  well 
as  happiness,  in  purity  as  well  as  immortality. 

And  now,  beloved,  let  me  ask  you  what  is  the  purpose 
for  which  the  Church  of  God  has  been  established  upon 
earth,  and  ministers  have  been  appointed  to  watch  for 
your  souls  ?  What  is  the  object  of  Bibles  and  Sacra 
ments,  and  prayer  and  preaching?  Is  it  not  simply 
this,  that  you  may  be  numbered  with  the  saints  in  glory 
everlasting,  that  you  may  enjoy  those  blessings  you 
have  heard  described  ? 

Then  search  and  see  what  solemn  questions  spring 
out  of  my  text.  Have  you  taken  up  the  cross?  are 
you  denying  yourself?  do  you  know  anything  of  this 
spiritual  tribulation  ?  Be  very  sure  except  you  will 
declare  yourself  decidedly  on  the  Lord's  side,  and  fight 
His  battle  with  the  fashion  of  the  world,  and  the  lusts 
of  the  flesh,  and  the  wiles  of  the  devil ;  you  will  never 
stand  before  the  throne  in  robes  of  white  and  carry 
the  palm  of  victory  in  your  hand. 

That  carelessness  about  sin,  that  trifling  with  tempta 
tion,  that  earnestness  about  the  things  of  time,  that 
forgetfulness  about  eternity,  that  readiness  to  swim 
with  the  tide  about  religion,  that  unwillingness  to 


THE    BLOOD   OF   THE   LAMB  309 

become  more  serious  than  your  neighbours,  that  fear  of 
being  thought  righteous  overmuch,  that  love  of  the 
world's  good  opinion, — is  this  what  you  call  coming  out 
of  great  tribulation  ?  Is  this  sowing  to  the  Spirit  ?  Is 
this  striving  and  labouring  after  eternal  life?  Oh, 
look  to  your  foundations,  set  your  house  in  order.  No 
empty  trust  in  God's  mercy  will  ever  save  you.  You 
were  not  baptised  unto  idleness  and  indifference. 
Without  a  real  hatred  of  sin,  and  a  real  forsaking  of  sin, 
Christ  can  profit  you  nothing.  You  never  can  be  made 
white  with  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  except  you  desire 
to  have  this  earth's  defilements  really  washed  away. 

And  then  consider,  lastly,  O  unhappy  children  of  this 
world,  could  you  be  happy  in  the  heaven  you  have  heard 
described  ?  Know  ye  not  all,  that  sickness  and  death 
do  seldom  work  a  change  of  heart,  they  seldom  plant 
in  man  new  taste  and  new  desires  ? — and  do  you  think 
that  men  who  count  it  a  great  matter  to  come  to  church, 
and  find  the  services  a  weariness  and  rejoice  when 
they  are  over,  will  such  be  ready  to  serve  God  day 
and  night  in  His  temple  ?  Will  those  who  take  no 
pleasure  in  drawing  nigh  to  Jesus  in  prayer,  delight  to 
be  for  ever  in  His  presence  and  dwell  with  Him  ?  Are 
you  who  never  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness, 
are  you  to  be  satisfied  with  the  living  fountains  of  water  ? 
Are  you  who  never  know  what  it  is  to  weep  over  sin 
and  corruption,  who  never  grieve  over  the  wickedness 
of  this  world,  are  you  likely  to  understand  the  privilege 
of  that  rest  when  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  ?  Oh, 
no,  it  cannot  be,  it  cannot  be  !  Whatever  a  man  sows 
he  shall  also  reap  ;  whatever  we  love  in  time  we  shall 
love  in  eternity ;  whatever  we  think  wearisome  now 
we  shall  think  wearisome  then.  Yc  must  be  born 
again,  or  heaven  itself  would  be  a  miserable  abode  ; 
there  is  no  place  there  for  the  worldly-minded  and 


3IO          THE   BLOOD   OF   THE   LAMB 

profane.  Yc  must  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your 
minds,  or  ye  will  hear  that  dreadful  voice,  Friend,  how 
earnest  thou  in  hither  without  a  wedding-garment  Yc 
must  become  new  creatures;  and  how  long  will  you 
insult  your  Redeemer  by  putting  it  off?  Oh!  pray 
yc  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  while  it  is  called  to-day, 
to  send  His  Holy  Spirit  on  you  ;  go  to  the  fountain 
while  the  door  of  mercy  is  yet  open,  wash  and  be 

clean.  .    , 

But  blessed  arc   all  ye  that  mourn,   for  ye  shall  be 
comforted  ;    blessed    are   ye   that    are    persecuted    for 
righteousness'  sake,  for  great  is  your  reward  m  heaven. 
Ye  have  wept  with  them  that  weep,  but  ye  shall  soon 
rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  and  your  joy  shall  no 
man  take  away.     It  is  but  a  single  step,  and  you  shall 
be   for   ever  with   the    Lord,  where   the  wicked    cease 
from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest.     The  worm 
may  destroy  these  bodies,  and  yet  in  the  flesh  ye  shall 
see  God,  and  your  own  eyes  shall  behold  Him,  and  your 
own  ears  shall  hear  Him  say,  «  Come,  yc  blessed  of  my 
Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world."     The  saints  whose  faith  and 
patience   you   have   so   often  admired  ;   the   holy   men 
and  women  of  whom  you  have  so  often  said,  "  Oh,  that 
I  were  like  them  "  ;  the  ministers  who  have  shown  you 
the  way  of  life,  and  implored  you  to  be  steadfast  and 
immoveable  ;  the  friends  who  advised  you  to  come  out 
of  the  world,  and   took  sweet  counsel  with  you  about 
the  kingdom  of  God  ;  the  beloved  ones  of  your  own 
house,  who  slept  in  Jesus  and  went  home  before  you  : 
all  are  there,  all  waiting  to  receive  you,  and  there  shall 
be  no  more  parting,  no  more  weeping,  no  more  separa 
tion  ;  and  you,  even  you,  this  vile  body  being  changed, 
shall   sing   the   song   of    the   redeemed  :    "  Unto    Him 
that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own 


THE    BLOOD   OF   THE   LAMB          311 

blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God 
and  His  Father,  to  Him  be  glory  and  dominion  for 
ever  and  ever." 

In  this  world  ye  may  have  tribulation,  but  be  of 
good  cheer :  your  Lord  and  Saviour  hath  overcome 
the  world. 


XXIII 
HE  A  VEN 

"There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing  that  defileth,  neither 
whatsoever  worketh  abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie  :  but  they  which  are 
written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life."— REV.  xxi.  27. 

BRETHREN,  there  can  be  no  question  about  the 
place  described   in  our  text :    it    is    heaven    itself, 
that  holy  city,  the  new  Jerusalem,  which  is  yet  to  be 
revealed. 

I  would  fain  begin  this  my  last  Sunday  among  you 
by  speaking  of  heaven.  Before  I  depart  and  leave 
you  in  the  wilderness  of  this  world,  I  would  dwell  a 
little  on  that  Canaan  God  has  promised  to  them  that 
love  Him  ;  there  it  is  the  last  and  best  wish  of  my  heart 
you  may  all  go  ;  there  it  is  my  consolation  to  believe 
I  shall  at  all  events  meet  some  of  you  again. 

Brethren,  you  all  hope  to  go  to  heaven  yourselves. 
There  is  not  one  of  you  but  wishes  to  be  in  happiness 
after  death.  But  on  what  are  your  hopes  founded  ? 
Heaven  is  a  prepared  place  ;  they  that  shall  dwell 
there  are  all  of  one  character,  the  entrance  into  it  is 
only  by  one  door.  Brethren,  remember  that.  And 
then,  too,  I  read  of  two  sorts  of  hope  :  a  good  hope 
and  a  bad  hope  ;  a  true  hope  and  a  false  hope  ;  a  lively 
hope  and  a  dead  hope  ;  the  hope  of  the  righteous  and 
the  hope  of  the  wicked,  of  the  believer  and  of  the 
hypocrite.  I  read  of  some  who  have  hope  through 
grace,  a  hope  that  maketh  not  ashamed,  and  of 

312 


HEAVEN  313 

others  who  have  no  hope  and  are  without  God  in  the 
world.  Brethren,  remember  that.  Surely  it  were  wise 
and  prudent  and  safe  to  find  out  what  the  Bible  tells 
you  on  the  subject,  to  discover  whether  your  confidence 
is  indeed  \vell  founded  ;  and  to  this  end  I  call  your 
attention  to  the  doctrine  of  my  text.  There  you  will 
find  three  things  : 

I.  There  is  mention  of  the  place  itself. 

II.  We   are   told   the   character    of   those   who    will 
certainly  not  be  there  ;  and 

III.  Who  alone  will. 

The  Lord  grant  you  may  consider  well  your  own  fitness 
for  heaven.  There  must  be  a  certain  meetness  for  that 
blessed  place  in  our  minds  and  characters.  It  is  sense 
less,  vain,  and  absurd  to  suppose  that  all  shall  go  there, 
whatever  their  lives  have  been.  May  God  the  Holy 
Ghost  incline  you  to  examine  yourselves  faithfully  while 
you  have  time,  before  that  great  day  cometh  when  the 
unconverted  shall  be  past  all  hope  and  the  saints  past 
all  fear. 

I.  First  of  the  place  itself.  There  is  such  a  place 
as  heaven.  No  truth  is  more  certain  in  the  whole  of 
Scripture  than  this,  there  remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people 
of  God.  This  earth  is  not  our  rest  ;  it  cannot  be  ;  there 
breathes  not  man  or  woman  who  ever  found  it  so.  Go, 
build  your  happiness  on  earth,  if  you  are  so  disposed  ; 
choose  everything  you  can  fancy  would  make  life  enjoy 
able, — take  money,  house,  and  lands  ;  take  learning, 
health,  and  beauty  ;  take  honour,  rank,  obedience,  troops 
of  friends  ;  take  everything  your  mind  can  picture  to 
itself  or  your  eye  desire, — take  all,  and  yet  I  dare  to 
tell  you  even  then  you  would  not  find  rest.  I  know 
well  that  a  few  short  years,  and  your  heart's  confession 
would  be,  it  is  all  hollow,  empty,  and  unsatisfying  ;  it 
is  all  weariness  and  disappointment  ;  it  is  all  vanity 


3M  HEAVEN 

and  vexation  of  spirit.  I  know  well  you  would  feel 
within  a  hungering  and  famine,  a  leanness  and  barren 
ness  of  soul  ;  and  ready  indeed  would  you  be  to  bear 
your  testimony  to  the  mighty  truth,  "This  earth  is 
not  our  rest" 

O  brethren,  how  faithful  is  that  saying,  "  If  in  this 
life  only  we  have  hope,  we  are  indeed  most  miserable." 
This  life,  so  full  of  trouble  and  sorrow  and  care,  of 
anxiety  and  labour  and  toil  ;  this  life  of  losses  and 
bereavements,  of  partings  and  separations,  of  mourning 
and  woe,  of  sickness  and  pain  ;  this  life  of  which  even 
Elijah  got  so  tired  that  he  requested  he  might  die  ; 
truly  I  should  be  crushed  to  the  very  earth  with  misery, 
if  I  felt  this  life  were  all.  If  I  thought  there  was 
nothing  for  me  beyond  the  dark,  cold,  silent,  lonely 
grave,  I  should  indeed  say,  Better  never  have  been 
born.  Thanks  be  to  God  this  life  is  not  all.  I  know 
and  am  persuaded  there  is  a  glorious  rest  beyond  the 
tomb  ;  this  earth  is  only  the  training-school  for  eternity, 
these  graves  are  but  the  stepping-stone  and  half-way 
house  to  heaven.  I  feel  assured  this  my  poor  body 
shall  rise  again  ;  this  corruptible  shall  yet  put  on  in- 
corruption,  and  this  mortal  immortality,  and  be  with 
Christ  for  ever.  Yes,  heaven  is  truth  and  no  lie.  I 
will  not  doubt  it.  I  am  not  more  certain  of  my  own 
existence  than  I  am  of  this,  there  does  remain  a  rest 
for  the  people  of  God. 

And,  brethren,  what  sort  of  a  place  shall  heaven  be  ? 
Before  we  pass  on  and  consider  its  inhabitants,  let  us 
just  pause  an  instant  and  think  on  this.  What  sort  of 
a  place  shall  heaven  be?  Heaven  shall  be  a  place 
of  perfect  rest  and  peace.  They  that  dwell  there  have 
no  more  conflict  with  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil ;  their  warfare  is  accomplished,  and  their  fight  is 
fought  ;  at  length  they  may  lay  aside  the  armour  of 


HEAVEN  315 

God3  at  last  they  may  say  to  the  sword  of  the  Spirit, 
Rest  and  be  still.  They  watch  no  longer,  for  they  have 
no  spiritual  enemies  to  fear ;  they  fast  and  mortify  the 
flesh  no  longer,  for  they  have  no  vile  earthy  body  to 
keep  under  ;  they  pray  no  more,  for  they  have  no  evil 
to  pray  against.  TJiere  the  wicked  must  cease  from 
troubling  ;  there  sin  and  temptation  are  for  ever  shut 
out ;  the  gates  are  better  barred  than  those  of  Eden, 
and  the  devil  shall  enter  in  no  more.  O  Christian 
brethren,  rouse  ye  and  take  comfort ;  surely  this  shall 
be  indeed  a  blessed  rest.  There  shall  be  no  need  of 
means  of  grace,  for  we  shall  have  the  end  to  which 
they  are  meant  to  lead  ;  there  shall  be  no  need  of 
sacraments,  we  shall  have  the  substance  they  are 
appointed  to  keep  in  mind  ;  there  faith  shall  be 
swallowed  up  in  sight,  and  hope  in  certainty,  and 
prayer  in  praise,  and  sorrow  in  joy.  Now  is  the 
school-time,  the  season  of  the  lesson  and  the  rod,  then 
will  be  the  eternal  holiday.  Now  we  must  endure 
hardness  and  press  on  faint  yet  pursuing,  then  we 
shall  sit  down  at  ease,  for  the  Canaanite  shall  be 
expelled  for  ever  from  the  land.  Now  we  are  tossed 
upon  a  stormy  sea,  then  we  shall  be  safe  in  harbour. 
Now  we  have  to  plough  and  sow,  there  we  shall  reap 
the  harvest  ;  now  we  have  the  labour,  but  then  the 
wages  ;  now  we  have  the  battle,  but  then  the  victory 
and  reward.  Now  we  must  needs  bear  the  cross,  but 
then  we  shall  receive  the  crown.  Now  we  are  journey 
ing  through  the  wilderness,  but  then  we  shall  be  at 
home.  O  Christian  brethren,  well  may  the  Bible 
tell  you,  "  Blessed  arc  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord, 
for  they  rest  from  their  labour."  Surely  you  must  feel 
that  witness  is  true. 

But  again.     Heaven  shall  be  a  place  of  perfect  and 
unbroken  happiness.     Mark  what  your  Bible  tells  you 


3,6  HEAVEN 

in  the  very  chapter  which  contains  my  text,  "God 
shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  the  eyes  of  His  people  ; 
and  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor 
crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain  :  for  the 
former  things  are  passed  away."  Hear  what  the  prophet 
Isaiah  says  in  the  twenty-fifth  chapter :  "  The  Lord  God 
will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all  faces  ;  and  the  rebuke 
of  His  people  shall  He  take  away  from  off  all  the 
earth.  And  it  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  Lo,  this  is 
our  God  ;  we  have  waited  for  Him  and  He  will  save 
us :  this  is  the  Lord  ;  we  have  waited  for  Him,  we  will 
be  glad  and  rejoice  in  His  salvation."  Brethren,  think 
of  an  eternal  habitation  in  which  there  is  no  sorrow. 
Who  is  there  here  below  that  is  not  acquainted  with 
sorrow  ?  it  came  in  with  thorns  and  thistles  at  Adam's 
fall,  it  is  the  bitter  cup  that  all  must  drink,  it  is  before 
us  and  behind  us,  it  is  on  the  right  hand  and  the  left, 
it  is  mingled  with  the  very  air  we  breathe.  Our  bodies 
are  racked  with  pain,  and  we  have  sorrow  ;  our  worldly 
goods  are  taken  from  us,  and  we  have  sorrow ;  we  are 
encompassed  with  difficulties  and  troubles,  and  we 
have  sorrow  ;  our  friends  forsake  us  and  look  coldly 
on  us,  and  we  have  sorrow ;  we  are  separated  from 
those  we  love,  and  we  have  sorrow  ;  those  on  whom 
our  hearts'  affections  are  set  go  down  to  the  grave  and 
leave  us  alone,  and  we  have  sorrow.  And  then,  too, 
we  find  our  own  hearts  frail  and  full  of  corruption,  and 
that  brings  sorrow  ;  We  are  persecuted  and  opposed 
for  the  Gospel's  sake,  and  that  brings  sorrow  ;  we  see 
those  who  are  near  and  dear  to  us  refusing  to  walk 
with  God,  and  that  brings  sorrow.  Oh,  what  a 
sorrowing,  grieving  world  we  live  in  ! 

Blessed  be  God  !  there  shall  be  no  sorrow  in  heaven. 
There  shall  not  be  one  single  tear  shed  within  the 
courts  above.  There  shall  be  no  more  disease  and 


HEAVEN  317 

weakness  and  decay  ;  the  coffin,  and  the  funeral,  and 
the  grave,  and  the  dark-black  mourning  shall  be  things 
unknown.  Our  faces  shall  no  more  be  pale  and  sad  ; 
no  more  shall  we  go  out  from  the  company  of  those 
we  love  and  be  parted  asunder — that  word,  farewell,  shall 
never  be  heard  again.  There  shall  be  no  anxious 
thought  about  to-morrow  to  mar  and  spoil  our  enjoy 
ment,  no  sharp  and  cutting  words  to  wound  our  souls  ; 
our  wants  will  have  come  to  a  perpetual  end,  and  all 
around  us  shall  be  harmony  and  love.  O  Christian 
brethren,  what  is  our  light  affliction  when  compared 
to  such  an  eternity  as  this  ?  shame  on  us  if  we  murmur 
and  complain  and  turn  back,  with  such  a  heaven  before 
our  eyes !  What  can  this  vain  and  passing  world  give 
us  better  than  this  ?  this  is  the  city  of  our  God  Himself, 
when  He  will  dwell  among  us  Himself.  The  glory  of 
God  shall  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof. 
Truly  we  may  say,  as  Mephibosheth  did  to  David, 
"  Let  the  world  take  all,  forasmuch  as  our  Lord  will 
come  in  peace."  Such  is  the  Bible  heaven,  there  is  none 
other ;  these  sayings  are  faithful  and  true,  not  any  of 
them  shall  fail.  Surely,  brethren  it  is  worth  a  little 
pain,  a  little  labouring,  a  little  toil,  if  only  we  may  have 
the  lowest  place  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 

II.  Let  us  now  pass  on  and  see  that  great  thing 
which  is  revealed  in  the  second  part  of  our  text.  You 
have  heard  of  heaven  ;  but  all  shall  not  enter  it :  and 
who  are  the  persons  who  shall  not  enter  in  ? 

Brethren,  this  is  a  sad  and  painful  inquiry,  and  yet 
it  is  one  that  must  be  made.  I  can  do  no  more  than 
declare  to  you  Scripture  truth :  it  is  not  my  fault 
if  it  is  cutting  and  gives  offence.  I  must  deliver  my 
Master's  message  and  diminish  nothing  ;  the  line  I  have 
to  draw  is  not  mine,  but  God's  :  the  blame,  if  you  will 
lay  it,  falls  on  the  Bible  not  on  me.  "  There  shall  in 


3,8  HEAVEN 

no  wise  enter  into  heaven  any  thing  that  dcfileth,  neither 
whatsoever  workcth  abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie." 
Verily  these  arc  solemn  words;  they  ought  to  make  you 
think. 

41  Nothing  that  dcfileth."  This  touches  the  case  of 
all  who  arc  defiled  with  sins  of  heart,  and  yet  feel  it  not, 
and  refuse  to  be  made  clean.  These  may  be  decent 
persons  outwardly,  but  they  are  vile  and  polluted  within. 
These  are  the  worldly-minded.  They  live  to  this 
world  only,  and  they  have  no  thought  of  anything 
beyond  it.  The  care  of  this  world,  the  money,  the 
politics  of  this  world,  the  business  of  this  world,  the 
pleasures  of  this  world,  these  things  swallow  up  their 
whole  attention  and  as  for  St.  James'  advice  to  keep 
ourselves  unspotted  from  the  world,  they  know  not 
what  it  means. 

These  are  the  men  who  set  their  affections  on  earthly 
things  ;  they  have  each  their  idol  in  the  chamber  of  their 
imagination,  and  they  worship  and  serve  it  more  than 
(iod.  These  are  the  proud  and  self-righteous,  the  self- 
honouring  and  the  self-conceited  ;  they  love  the  praise 
of  men,  they  like  the  good  opinion  of  this  world,  and 
as  for  the  glorious  Lord  who  made  them,  11  is  honour, 
His  glory,  His  house,  His  word,  His  service — these 
arc  all  things  which  in  their  judgment  must  go 
down,  and  take  the  second  place.  These  know  not  what 
sorrow  for  sin  means.  They  are  strangers  to  spiritual 
anxiety  ;  they  arc  self-satisfied  and  content  with  their 
condition,  and  if  you  attempt  to  stir  them  up  to  /cat 
and  repentance  it  is  more  than  probable  they  are 
offended.  Hrethren,  you  know  well  there  are  such 
people  ;  they  are  not  uncommon  ;  they  may  be  honour 
able  in  the  eyes  of  men,  they  may  be  wise  ami  knou  in- 
in  this  generation,  admirable  men  of  business,  they 
may  be  first  and  foremost  in  their  respective  callings, 


HEAVEN  319 

hul    still   there  is  hut   one  account  of  them  ;  they  hiim; 

no  glory  to  their  Maker,  thev  are  lovers  of  thcmseive-, 

more  than  of  (iod,  ami  theieioie  they  .IK-  counted  a  . 
ill-filed  in  His  sit'Jit  and  nothing  that  is  defiled  shall 
enter  heaven. 

Hut  again:  "Nolhiiu;  that  worketh  ahoinination." 
Tin-,  touches  the  case  of  all  who  practise  those  sin-,  of 
life  \\hiih  (iod  ha-,  pioiii.inu  ed  ahominahle,  and  take 
pleasure  in  them,  and  countenance  those  who  piactisc 
them.  These  are  the  men  \\lio  work  the  works  of  the 
llesh,  each  as  his  heart  inclines  him.  These  .nc  the 
adulteiers,  lornicators,  and  unclean  livers;  these  aie 
the  drunkards,  revellers,  and  iduttons  ;  these  are  the 
hlasphemei  -,  Swearers,  and  liars.  These  aie  the  men 
who  count  it  no  shame  to  li\e  in  hatred,  variance, 

wrath,  strife,  envyings,  quarrelHngs  and  the  like.    They 

throw  the  reins  On  the  neck  of  their  lusts;  they  follow 
their  passions  wherever  the\  may  leiid  them;  their 

oill\'    ol)je»  t     is    to    please    themsek'eS. 

Hrethren,  you  kiiou  \\ell  theie  are  such  people.  The 
\\  (»rld  may  give  --moot  h  names  to  their  c'onduct,  the  world 
may  talk  of  them  as  li|;ht  and  ;;.i\  ,  and  loose  and  wild, 
hut  it  will  not  d<>  l'he\  .ire  all  ahominahle  in  the 
••ij'.ht  of  (lod.and  except  the\-  he  eonverted  and  horn 
again,  lhe\  shall  in  no  \\ise  enter  heaven. 

<  MK  e  more:  "  Nothing  that  maketh  a  lie."  This 
loin  he-,  the  case  of  lix'poi'rites.  These  are  the  false 
pi  o  lessors;  the  lip  -,ei  \  ant  ••  ;  the\-  say  that  they  know 
(iod,  hut  in  woik-.  they  den\  Him;  they  are  like  barren 
li;1.  Inc.,  all  leaves  and  no  hint  ;  they  are  like  tinkling 
Cymbals,  all  sound,  hut  hollow,  empty  and  without 
•-ul> -.tain  e  ;  these  have  a  name  to  live  while  they  aie 
dead,  and  a  form  of  godliness  without  the  power. 
They  profess  what  they  do  not  practise,  they  speak 
what  they  do  not  think,  they  say  much  and  do  little. 


HEAVEN 

%j  ** 

their  words  arc  most  amazing,  their  actions  are  most 
poor.  These  men  can  talk  most  bravely  of  themselves  ; 
no  better  Christians  than  they  are,  if  you  will  take 
them  at  their  own  valuation.  They  can  talk  to  you  of 
grace,  and  yet  they  show  none  of  it  in  their  lives  ;  they 
can  talk  to  you  of  saving  faith,  and  yet  they  possess 
not  that  charity  which  is  faith's  companion.  They  can 
declaim  against  forms  most  strongly,  and  yet  their  own 
Christianity  is  a  form  and  no  more  ;  they  can  cry  out 
loudly  against  Pharisees,  and  yet  no  greater  Pharisees 
than  they  are  themselves. 

Oh,  no  ;  this  religion  is  of  a  sort  that  is  public,  and 
not  private  ;  plenty  abroad,  but  none  at  home  ;  plenty 
without,  but  none  within  ;  plenty  in  the  tongue,  but  none 
in  the  heart.  They  arc  altogether  unprofitable,  good 
for  nothing,  they  bear  no  fruit. 

Brethren,  you  must  know  well  there  are  such  miser 
able  persons ;  alas  !  the  world  is  full  of  them  in  these 
latter  days.  They  may  deceive  ministers,  they  may 
deceive  their  neighbours,  they  may  even  deceive  their 
friends  and  family,  they  may  try  hard  to  deceive 
themselves  ;  but  they  arc  no  better  than  liars  in  God's 
sight,  and  except  they  repent,  they  shall  in  no  wise 
enter  heaven. 

Brethren,  consider  well  these  things  :  "  the  sin-defiled, 
the  abominable,  the  hypocrite,  shall  in  no  wise  enter 
into  heaven."  Look  well  to  your  own  souls  ;  judge 
yourselves  that  ye  be  not  judged  of  the  Lord  ;  I  call 
heaven  and  earth  to  witness  this  day,  they  that  will 
live  these  bad  lives,  whether  they  be  Churchmen  or 
dissenters,  old  or  young,  rich  or  poor,  they  shall  in  no 
wise  enter  in.  Go,  cleave  to  the  ways  of  the  world  if 
you  are  so  determined,  stick  to  your  sins  if  you  must 
needs  keep  them,  but  I  warn  you  solemnly  this  hour, 
they  that  will  have  these  things  shall  in  no  wise  enter 


HEAVEN  321 

in.  Go,  blame  me  now  for  speaking  sharply  to  you — 
think  I  am  too  particular  if  you  like  it — but,  oh  ! 
remember  if  you  ever  stand  without  the  gates,  crying, 
"  Lord,  open  to  us,"  in  vain,  remember  there  was  a  time 
when  I  told  you,  the  worldly-minded  and  the  evil  livers 
shall  in  no  wise  enter  in.  Brethren,  I  have  told  you 
before,  and  I  tell  you  now  again  for  the  last  time,  if 
you  will  cling  to  the  things  that  God  hates,  you  shall 
in  no  wise  enter  into  heaven. 

III.  Brethren,  we  must  pass  on.  The  text  has  told 
you  who  shall  not  enter  heaven.  Oh !  what  a  mighty 
crowd  those  words  shut  out !  But  it  tells  you  something 
more:  who  are  they  that  shall.  Short  is  the  account  and 
simple;:  "They  only  that  are  written  in  the  Lamb's 
book  of  life."  What  is  this  book  of  life  ?  There  is  a 
book,  a  little  book,  a  book  prepared  from  all  eternity, 
which  God  the  Father  keeps  sealed — the  book  of  His 
election  ;  of  that  book  man  knows  nothing,  excepting 
this  blessed  truth  that  there  is  such  a  book.  With  that 
book  man  has  little  or  nothing  to  do.  But  there  is 
another  book,  a  little  book,  a  book  belonging  specially 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  a  book  still  unfinished,  though 
year  after  year  there  are  more  names  written  in  it ;  a 
book  still  open,  still  ready  to  receive  the  names  of 
believing  penitents :  there  are  still  some  blank  pages  left 
for  you  ;  and  this  is  the  Lamb's  book  of  life.  And  who 
are  written  in  this  precious  book  ?  I  do  not  know  their 
names,  but  I  do  know  their  characters,  and  what  those 
characters  are  I  will  endeavour  to  tell  you  shortly,  for 
the  last  time. 

They  are  all  true  penitents.  They  have  been  con 
vinced  of  their  own  unworthiness  in  God's  sight ;  they 
have  felt  themselves  to  be  sinners  in  deed  and  in  truth  ; 
they  have  mourned  over  their  sins,  hated  their  sins, 
forsaken  their  sins  ;  the  remembrance  of  them  is  grievous, 

21 


322  HEAVEN 

the  burden  of  them  intolerable  ;  they  have  ceased  to 
think  well  of  their  own  condition  and  count  themselves 
fit  to  be  saved  ;  they  have  confessed  with  their  whole 
heart :  "  Lord,  we  are  really  chief  of  sinners— Lord,  we 
are  indeed  unclean." 

Again  :  they  are  all  believers  in  Christ  Jesus.  They 
have  found  out  the  excellency  of  the  work  He  did  to 
save  them,  and  cast  on  Him  the  burden  of  their  souls. 
They  have  taken  Christ  for  their  all  in  all :  their  wisdom, 
their  righteousness,  their  justification,  their  forgiveness, 
their  redemption.  Other  payment  of  their  spiritual  debts 
they  have  seen  none  ;  other  deliverances  from  the  devil 
they  have  not  been  able  to  find.  But  they  have  believed 
on  Christ,  and  come  to  Christ  for  salvation  ;  they  are 
confident  that  what  they  cannot  do  Christ  can  do  for 
them,  and  having  Jesus  Christ  to  lean  on,  they  feel 
perfect  peace. 

Once  more :  they  are  all  born  of  the  Spirit  and 
sanctified.  They  have  all  put  off  the  old  man  with  his 
deeds,  and  put  on  the  new  man  which  is  after  God. 
They  have  all  been  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds ; 
a  new  heart  and  a  new  nature  has  been  given  to  them. 
They  have  brought  forth  those  fruits  which  only  are  the 
proof  of  the  Spirit  being  in  them.  They  may  have 
slipped  and  come  short  in  many  things ;  they  may  have 
mourned  over  their  own  deficiencies  full  often  ;  but  still, 
the  general  bent  and  bias  of  their  lives  has  always  been 
towards  holiness, —  more  holiness,  more  holiness,  has 
always  been  their  hearts'  desire.  They  love  God,  and 
they  must  live  to  Him.  Such  is  the  character  of  them 
that  arc  written  in  heaven.  These,ithen,  are  the  men 
whose  names  are  to  be  found  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life. 

Once  they  may  have  been  as  bad  as  the  very  worst- 
defiled,  abominable,  liars  :  what  matter  ?  they  have  re 
pented  and  believed,  and  now  they  are  written  in  the 


HEAVEN  323 

book  of  life.  They  may  have  been  despised  and  rejected 
of  this  world,  poor  and  mean  and  lowly  in  the  judgment 
of  their  neighbours  :  what  matter  ?  they  had  repentance 
and  faith  and  new  hearts,  and  now  they  are  written 
in  the  glorious  book  of  life.  They  may  have  been  of 
different  ranks  and  nations  ;  they  may  have  lived  at 
different  ages,  and  never  seen  each  other's  faces  :  what 
matter  ?  they  have  one  thing  at  least  in  common,  they 
have  repented  and  believed,  and  .been  born  again,  and 
therefore  they  stand  all  together  in  the  Lamb's  book 
of  life. 

Yes,  brethren,  these  are  the  men  and  women  that 
enter  heaven  ;  nothing  can  keep  them  out.  Tell  me 
not  of  deathbed  evidences,  and  visions  and  dreams  of 
dying  people  ;  there  is  no  evidence  like  that  of  Christ's 
followers— repentance,  faith,  and  holiness  ;  this  is  a 
character  against  which  the  gates  shall  never  be  closed. 
Repent  and  believe  in  Christ  and  be  converted,  and 
then,  whatever  happens  to  others,  you,  at  least,  shall 
enter  heaven  ;  you  shall  in  no  wise  be  cast  out. 

And  now,  men  and  brethren,  in  conclusion,  let  me 
press  upon  you  my  old  question.  How  is  it  with  your 
selves  ?  What,  no  answer  !  Are  you  ready  to  depart  ? 
Again,  no  answer !  Is  your  name  written  in  the  book 
of  life?  Once  more,  have  you  no  answer? 

Oh,  think,  think,  unhappy  man  or  woman,  whoever 
thou  art,  think  what  a  miserable  thing  it  is  to  be 
uncertain  about  eternity.  And  then  consider,  if  thou 
canst  not  give  thy  heart  to  God  now,  how  is  it  possible 
thou  couldest  enjoy  God's  heaven  hereafter.  Heaven 
is  unceasing  godliness  ;  it  is  to  be  in  the  presence  of 
God  and  His  Christ  for  evermore.  God  is  the  light, 
the  food,  the  air  of  heaven.  It  is  an  eternal  sabbath. 
To  serve  God  is  heaven's  employment,  to  talk  with 
God  is  heaven's  occupation. 


324  HEAVEN 

O  sinners,  sinners,  could  ye  be  happy  there  ?  to  which 
of  all  the  saints  would  ye  join  yourselves,  by  whose 
side  would  ye  go  and  sit  down,  with  whom  of  all 
the  prophets  and  apostles  would  ye  love  to  converse? 
Surely  it  would  be  a  wearisome  thing  to  you  ;  surely 
you  would  soon  want  to  go  forth  and  join  your  friends 
outside.  Oh,  turn  ye,  turn  ye  while  it  is  called  to-day  ! 
God  will  not  alter  heaven  merely  to  please  you  ;  better 
a  thousand  times  to  conform  to  His  ways  while  ye  can. 
Ye  must  love  the  things  of  heaven  before  your  death, 
or  else  ye  cannot  enter  heaven  when  ye  die. 

Christian,  look  up  and  take  comfort.  Jesus  has  pre 
pared  a  place  for  you,  and  they  that  follow  Him  shall 
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of 
His  hands.  Look  forward  to  that  glorious  abode  He 
has  provided  ;  look  forward  in  faith,  for  it  is  thine. 
O  Christian  brethren,  think  what  a  glorious  meeting 
that  shall  be.  There  we  shall  see  the  saints  of  old,  of 
whom  we  have  so  often  read  ;  there  we  shall  see  those 
holy  ministers  whose  faith  and  patience  we  have  admired  ; 
there  we  shall  see  one  another  round  the  throne  of  our 
common  Saviour,  and  be  parted  and  separated  no  more. 
There  we  shall  labour  and  toil  no  more,  for  the  days 
of  mourning  shall  be  ended.  Oh,  but  my  heart  will 
leap  within  me,  if  I  see  there  faces  I  have  known  among 
you  ;  if  I  hear  the  names  of  any  of  yourselves !  The 
Lord  grant  it,  the  Lord  bring  it  to  pass.  The  Lord 
grant  we  may  some  of  us,  at  least,  come  together  in 
that  day,  when  there  shall  be  one  fold  and  one  Shepherd, 
and  with  one  heart  and  voice  join  that  glorious  song, 
"  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  ;  blessing  and 
honour  and  glory  and  power  be  unto  the  Lamb  for 
ever  and  ever." 


XXIV 

"READY  TO  BE   OFFERED" 

"  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at 
hand.  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept 
the  faith  :  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness, 
which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day  :  and 
not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  them  also  that  love  His  appearing." — 
2  TIM.  iv.  6-8. 

IN  these  words  you  see  the  apostle  Paul  looking 
three  ways, — downwards ;  backwards,  forward  ; 
downwards  to  the  grave,  backwards  to  his  own  ministry, 
forward  to  that  great  day,  the  day  of  judgment.  Let 
us  stand  by  his  side  a  few  minutes,  and  mark  the 
words  he  uses.  Happy  is  that  soul  among  us  who 
can  look  where  Paul  looked,  and  then  speak  as  Paul 
spoke.  He  looks  downwards  to  the  grave,  and  he 
does  it  without  fear.  Hear  what  he  says. 

"  I  am  ready  to  be  offered."  I  am  like  an  animal 
brought  to  the  place  of  sacrifice,  and  bound  with  cords 
to  the  horns  of  the  altar.  The  wine  and  oil  have  been 
poured  on  my  head.  The  last  ceremonies  have  been 
gone  through.  Every  preparation  has  been  made.  It 
only  remains  to  receive  the  death-blow,  and  then  all  is 
over. 

"  The  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand."  I  am  like 
a  ship  about  to  unmoor  and  put  to  sea.  All  on 
board  is  ready.  I  only  wait  to  have  the  moorings  cast 
off  that  fasten  me  to  the  shore,  and  I  shall  begin  my 
voyage. 

325 


326 


"READY   TO   BE   OFFERED'' 


Brethren,  these  are  glorious  words  to  come  from 
the  lips  of  a  child  of  Adam  like  ourselves.  Death  is 
a  solemn  thing,  and  never  so  much  so  as  when  we 
draw  near  to  it  ourselves.  The  grave  is  a  chilling, 
heart-sickening  idea,  and  it  is  vain  to  pretend  it  is  not  ; 
yet  here  is  a  mortal  man,  who  can  look  calmly  into 
the  narrow  house  appointed  for  all  living,  and  say,  while 
he  stands  upon  the  brink,  "  I  see  it  all,  and  am  not 
afraid." 

Let  us  listen  to  him  again.  He  looks  backwards,  to  his 
ministerial  life,  and  he  does  it  without  shame.  Hear 
what  he  says. 

"  I  have  fought  a  good  fight."  There  he  speaks  as 
a  soldier.  I  have  fought  that  good  battle  with  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  from  which  so  many 
shrink  and  draw  back. 

"  I  have  finished  my  course."  There  he  speaks  as  one 
who  has  run  for  a  prize.  I  have  run  the  race  marked 
out  for  me.  I  have  gone  over  the  ground  staked  out 
for  me,  however  rough  and  steep.  I  have  not  turned 
aside  because  of  difficulties,  and  have  at  length  reached 
the  goal. 

"  I  have  kept  the  faith."  There  he  speaks  as  a 
steward.  I  have  held  fast  that  glorious  gospel  which 
was  committed  to  my  trust.  I  have  not  mingled  it 
with  man's  traditions,  nor  spoiled  its  simplicity  by 
adding  my  own  notions,  nor  allowed  others  to  adulterate 
it  without  withstanding  them  to  the  face.  As  a  soldier, 
a  runner,  a  steward,  he  seems  to  say,  I  am  not  ashamed. 

Brethren,  that  Christian  is  happy  who,  as  he  quits  this 
world,  can  leave  such  testimony  behind  him.  A  good 
conscience  will  save  no  man,  wash  away  no  sin,  lift  us 
not  one  inch  towards  heaven.  Yet  a  good  conscience 
will  be  found  a  pleasant  visitor  at  our  bedsides  in  a 
dying  hour.  Do  you  remember  that  place  in  Pilgrim's 


" READY   TO   BE   OFFERED"  327 

Progress,  which  describes  old  Honest's  passage  over 
the  river  of  death  ?  "  The  river,"  says  Bunyan,  "  at 
that  time  overflowed  its  banks  in  some  places ;  but 
Mr.  Honest  in  his  lifetime  had  spoken  to  one,  Good 
Conscience,  to  meet  him  there,  the  which  he  also  did, 
and  lent  him  his  hand,  and  so  helped  him  over." 
Believe  me,  there  is  a  mine  of  truth  in  that  passage. 

Let  us  hear  the  apostle  once  more.  He  looks 
forward  to  the  great  day  of  reckoning,  and  he  does  it 
without  doubt.  Mark  his  words :  "  Henceforth  there 
is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which 
the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  shall  give  me  at  that 
day :  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  them  also 
that  love  His  appearing."  A  glorious  reward,  he  seems 
to  say,  is  ready  and  laid  up  in  store  for  me,  even  that 
crown  which  is  only  given  to  the  righteous.  In  the 
great  day  of  judgment  the  Lord  shall  give  this  crown 
to  me,  and  to  all  besides  me  who  have  loved  Him  as 
an  unseen  Saviour,  and  longed  to  see  Him  face  to 
face.  My  work  is  over.  This  one  thing  now  remains 
for  me  to  look  forward  to,  and  nothing  more. 

You  see,  brethren,  he  speaks  without  any  hesitation 
or  distrust.  He  regards  the  crown  as  a  sure  thing, 
as  his  own  already.  He  declares  his  belief  that  the 
righteous  Judge  will  give  it  to  him,  with  an  unfaltering 
confidence.  Paul  was  no  stranger  to  all  the  circum 
stances  and  accompaniments  of  that  great  day  to  which 
he  referred.  The  great  white  throne,  the  assembled 
world,  the  opened  books,  the  revealing  of  all  secrets, 
the  listening  angels,  the  awful  sentence,  the  eternal 
separation,  all  these  were  things  with  which  he  was 
well  acquainted.  But  none  of  these  things  moved  him. 
His  faith  overleaped  them  all,  and  only  saw  Christ, 
his  all-prevailing  Advocate,  and  the  blood  of  sprinkling, 
and  sin  washed  away.  "  A  crown,"  says  he,  "  IS  laid 


328          "  READY  TO   BE   OFFERED  " 

up  for  me.  The  Lord  Himself  SHALL  give  it  me." 
He  speaks  as  if  he  saw  it  all  with  his  own  eyes. 

Such  are  the  main  things  which  these  verses  contain. 
Of  most  of  them  I  cannot  pretend  to  speak.  I  shall 
therefore  only  try  to  set  before  you  one  point  in  the 
passage,  and  that  is  the  "  assured  hope "  with  which 
the  apostle  looks  forward  to  his  own  prospects  in  the 
day  of  judgment.  I  shall  do  this  the  more  readily 
because  of  the  great  importance  which,  I  feel,  attaches 
to  the  subject,  and  the  great  neglect  with  which,  I 
humbly  conceive,  it  is  often  treated  in  this  day.  But 
I  shall  do  it  at  the  same  time  with  fear  and  trembling. 
I  feel  that  I  am  treading  on  very  delicate  ground, 
and  that  it  is  easy  to  speak  rashly  and  unscripturally 
in  this  matter.  The  road  between  truth  and  error 
is  here  especially  a  narrow  pass,  and  if  I  shall  be 
enabled  to  do  good  to  some,  without  doing  harm  to 
others,  I  shall  be  very  thankful. 

Now,  there  are  just  four  things  which  I  wish  to  bring 
before  you,  and  it  may  perhaps  clear  our  way  if  I  name 
them  to  you  at  once  : 

I.  First,  then,  I  will  try  to  show  you  that  an  assured 
hope,   such   as    Paul    here    expresses,    is    a    true    and 
Scriptural  thing. 

II.  Secondly,  I  will  make  this  broad  concession,  that 
a  man  may  never  arrive  at  this  assured  hope,  and  yet 
be  saved. 

III.  Thirdly,  I   will  give  you  some  reasons  why  an 
assured  hope  is  exceedingly  to  be  desired. 

IV.  Lastly,  I  will  try  to  point  out  some  causes  why 
an  assured  hope  is  so  seldom  attained. 

I.  First,  then,  I  said,  an  assured  hope  is  a  true  and 
Scriptural  thing. 

Assurance,  such  as  Paul  here  expresses,  is  not  a 
mere  fancy  or  feeling.  It  is  not  the  result  of  high 


"READY   TO   BE   OFFERED"  329 

animal  spirits  or  a  lively  temperament  of  body.  It  is 
a  positive  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  bestowed  without 
reference  to  men's  bodily  frames  or  constitutions,  and 
a  gift  which  every  believer  in  Christ  should  aim  at  and 
seek  after. 

The  word  of  God  appears  to  me  to  teach,  that  a 
believer  may  arrive  at  an  assured  confidence  with  regard 
to  his  own  salvation. 

I  lay  it  down  deliberately  that  a  true  Christian  or 
converted  man  may  reach  that  comfortable  degree  of 
faith,  that  in  general  he  shall  feel  confident  as  to  the 
safety  and  forgiveness  of  his  own  soul,  shall  seldom 
be  troubled  with  doubts,  seldom  be  distracted  with 
hesitations,  seldom  be  distressed  with  anxious  question 
ings,  seldom  be  alarmed  about  his  own  state  ;  he  may 
have  many  an  inward  conflict  with  sin,  but  he  shall 
look  forward  to  death,  like  Paul,  without  trembling,  and 
to  judgment  without  dismay. 

Such  is  my  account  of  assurance.  Mark  it  well.  I 
say  neither  less  nor  more. 

Now  such  a  statement  as  this  is  often  disputed  and 
denied.  Many  cannot  see  it  at  all. 

The  Church  of  Rome  denounces  assurance  in  the 
most  unmeasured  tones.  The  Council  of  Trent  declares 
roundly  that  "  a  believer's  assurance  of  the  pardon  of 
his  sin  is  a  vain  and  ungodly  confidence  "  ;  and  Cardinal 
Bellarmine,  their  well-known  champion,  calls  it  a  "  prime 
error  of  heretics." 

The  great  majority  of  the  worldly  among  ourselves 
oppose  the  doctrine  of  assurance.  It  offends  and 
annoys  them.  They  do  not  like  others  to  feel  comfort 
able  and  sure,  because  they  never  feel  so  themselves. 
That  they  cannot  receive  it  is  certainly  no  marvel. 

But  there  are  also  some  true  believers  who  reject 
assurance.  They  shrink  from  it  as  a  notion  fraught 


330 


44  READY   TO   BE   OFFERED " 


with  danger.  They  consider  it  borders  on  presumption. 
They  seem  to  think  it  a  proper  humility  to  live  in  a 
certain  degree  of  doubt.  This  is  to  be  regretted,  and 
does  much  harm. 

I  frankly  allow  there  are  some  presumptuous  fools 
who  profess  to  feel  |a  confidence  for  which  they  have 
no  Scripture  warrant.  There  always  are  some  who 
think  well  of  themselves  when  God  thinks  ill,  just  as 
there  are  some  who  think  ill  of  their  own  case  when 
God  thinks  well.  There  always  will  be  such.  There 
never  yet  was  a  Scriptural  truth  without  abuses, 
impositions  and  counterfeits.  Weeds  will  grow  as 
well  as  wheat  in  rich  ground.  There  will  be  fanatics 
as  long  as  the  world  stands.  But  for  all  this,  an  assured 
hope  is  a  real  and  true  thing.  My  answer  to  all  who 
deny  the  existence  of  real  well-grounded  assurance  is 
simply  this,  "  Look  at  Scripture."  If  assurance  be  not 
there  I  have  not  another  word  to  say. 

But  does  not  Job  say,  "  I  KNOW  that  my  Redeemer 
liveth,  and  that  He  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon 
the  earth  :  and  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy 
this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God " 
(Job  xix.  25,  26)? 

Does  not  David  say,  "Though  I  walk  through  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil :  for 
Thou  art  with  me  ;  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  they  comfort 
me  "  (Psalm  xxiii.  4)? 

Does  not  Isaiah  say,  «  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect 
peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee,  because  he 
trusteth  in  Thee"  (Isaiah  xxvi.  3)?  and  again,  "The 
work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace  ;  and  the  effect  of 
righteousness  quietness  and  assurance  for  ever " 
(xxxii.  17)? 

Does  not  Paul  say  to  the  Romans,  "The  Spirit 
beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  the  children 


"READY   TO   BE   OFFERED"  331 

)f  God"  (Romans  viii.   16)?     and   to  the  Corinthians, 

1  We  know  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle 
vere      dissolved      we      have     a     building     of    God " 

2  Cor.  v.  i)?  and  to  Timothy,  "  I  know  whom  I  have 
relieved,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that 
vhich    I    have   committed    to    Him"   (2    Tim.    i.    12)? 
\nd  does  He  not  speak  to  the  Colossians  of  the  "  full 
issurance    of  understanding "    (Col.    ii.    2),    and   to  the 
Hebrews  of  the  "  full  assurance  of  faith  and  of  hope  " 
Heb.  vi.   11,  x.  22)  ? 

Does  not  Peter  expressly  say,  "  Give  diligence  to 
nake  your  calling  and  election  sure  "  (2  Peter  i.  10)? 

Does  not  John  say,  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed 
rom  death  unto  life"  (i  John  iii.  14)?  and  "These 
;hings  have  I  written  unto  you  that  believe  on  the 
lame  of  the  Son  of  God  :  that  ye  may  know  that 
7Q  have  eternal  life"  (i  John  v.  13),  "We  know  that 
ve  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness  " 
i  John  v.  19)? 

Brethren,  I  desire  to  speak  with  all  humility  on  every 
:ontroverted  point.  I  feel  that  I  am  only  a  poor  fallible 
:hild  of  Adam  myself.  But  I  must  say  that  in  the 
Dassages  I  have  quoted  I  see  something  far  higher  than 
:he  mere  "  hopes,"  and  "  trusts,"  where  so  many  appear 
xmtent  to  stop.  I  see  the  language  of  persuasion, 
:onfidence,  knowledge,  nay,  I  might  almost  say  of 
:ertainty — and  I  feel  for  my  own  part,  if  I  may  take 
:he  Scriptures  in  their  plain  obvious  meaning,  assurance 
s  true. 

But  my  answer  furthermore  to  all  who  dislike  the 
ioctrine  of  assurance,  as  bordering  on  presumption,  is 
:his.  It  cannot  be  presumption  to  tread  in  the  steps 
3f  Peter  and  Paul,  of  John  and  of  Job.  They  were  all 
eminently  humble  and  lowly-minded  men,  if  ever  any 
were,  and  yet  they  all  speak  of  their  own  state  with  an 


332 


"READY   TO   BE   OFFERED'* 


assured  hope.  Surely  this  should  teach  us  that  deep 
humility  and  strong  assurance  are  by  no  means  incom 
patible,  and  for  this  simple  reason,  if  for  no  other,  the 
charge  of  presumption  falls  to  the  ground. 

My  answer  furthermore  is,  that  many  have  attained 
to  such  an  assured  hope  as  our  text  expresses,  even  in 
modern  days.  Many  have  appeared  to  walk  in  almost 
uninterrupted  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
have  seemed  to  enjoy  an  almost  unceasing  sense  of 
the  light  of  God's  reconciled  countenance  shining  down 
upon  them,  and  have  left  on  record  their  experience. 
I  could  mention  well-known  names  in  proof  of  this, 
if  time  permitted.  The  thing  has  been,  and  is,  and 
that  is  enough. 

My  answer  lastly  is,  it  cannot  be  wrong  to  feel  con 
fident  in  a  matter  where  God  speaks  unconditionally, 
to  believe  decidedly  when  God  speaks  decidedly,  to 
have  a  sure  persuasion  of  pardon  and  peace  when  one 
rests  on  the  word  and  oath  of  Him  that  never  changes. 
It  is  an  utter  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  believer  who 
feels  assurance  is  resting  on  anything  he  sees  in  him 
self.  He  simply  leans  on  the  Scriptures  of  truth,  and 
on  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant.  He  believes 
the  Lord  Jesus  means  what  He  says,  and  takes  Him 
at  His  word.  Assurance  is,  after  all,  no  more  than  a 
full-grown  faith  ;  a  masculine  faith  that  grasps  Christ's 
promise  with  both  hands  ;  a  faith  that  argues  like  the 
good  centurion,  If  the  Lord  speak  the  word  only,  I 
am  healed. 

'Depend  on  it,  Paul  was  the  last  man  in  the  world  to 
build  his  assured  hope  on  anything  of  his  own.  He, 
who  wrote  himself  down  chief  of  sinners,  had  a  deep 
sense  of  his  own  guilt  and  corruption,  but  then  he 
had  a  still  deeper  sense  of  the  length  and  breadth  of 
Christ's  righteousness.  He  had  a  clear  view  of  the 


" READY   TO   BE   OFFERED"  333 

fountain  of  evil  within  him,  but  then  he  had  a  still 
clearer  view  of  that  other  fountain  which  removes  all 
uncleanness.  He  had  a  lively  feeling  of  his  own  weak 
ness,  but  he  had  a  still  livelier  feeling  that  Christ's 
promise,  "  They  shall  never  perish,"  would  never  be 
broken.  He  knew,  if  ever  man  did,  that  he  was  a  poor 
frail  bark  traversing  a  stormy  ocean.  He  saw,  if  any 
did,  the  rolling  waves  and  roaring  tempest  by  which 
he  was  surrounded  ;  but  then  he  looked  away  from 
self  to  Jesus,  and  so  had  hope.  He  remembered  that 
anchor  within  the  veil,  sure  and  steadfast.  He  remem 
bered  the  word  and  work  and  intercession  of  Him  that 
loved  him  and  gave  Himself  for  him.  And  this  it  was 
that  enabled  him  to  say  so  boldly,  "  A  crown  is  laid  up 
for  me  ;  the  Lord  shall  give  it  to  me ;  the  Lord  will 
preserve  me  ;  I  shall  never  be  confounded." 

II.  I  pass  on  to  the  second  thing  I  spoke  of.  I  said 
a  believer  may  never  arrive  at  this  assured  hope,  which 
Paul  expresses,  and  yet  be  saved, 

I  grant  this  most  fully.  I  do  not  dispute  it  for  a 
moment.  I  would  not  desire  to  make  one  contrite 
heart  sad  that  God  has  not  made  sad,  or  to  discourage 
one  fainting  child  of  God,  or  to  leave  the  impression 
that  you  have  no  part  or  lot  in  Christ  except  you  feel 
assurance.  To  have  saving  faith  is  one  thing :  to  have 
an  assured  hope  like  the  apostle  Paul's  is  quite  another. 
I  think  this  ought  never  to  be  forgotten. 

I  know  some  great  and  good  men  have  held  a  different 
view.  I  believe  that  excellent  man,  Henry,  of  Weston 
Favel,  the  author  of  T heron  and  Aspasia,  was  one  who 
did  not  allow  the  distinction  I  have  stated.  But  I 
desire  to  call  no  man  master.  For  my  own  part,  I 
should  think  any  other  view  than  that  I  have  given,  a 
most  uncomfortable  gospel  to  preach,  and  one  very  likely 
to  keep  men  back  a  long  time  from  the  gate  of  life. 


334 


"  READY   TO   BE   OFFERED " 


I  shrink  not  from  saying,  that  by  grace  a  man  may 
have  sufficient  faith  to  flee  to  Christ,  really  to  lay  hold 
on  Him,  really  to  trust  in  Him,  really  to  be  a  child  of 
God,  really  to  be  saved  ;  and  yet  never,  to  his  last  day, 
be  free  from  much  anxiety,  doubt,  and  fear. 

"  A  letter,"  says  old  Watson,  <c  may  be  written,  which 
is  not  scaled  ;  so  grace  may  be  written  in  the  heart, 
yet  the  Spirit  may  not  set  the  seal  of  assurance  to  it." 

A  child  may  be  born  heir  to  a  great  fortune,  and  yet 
never  be  aware  of  his  riches, — live  childish,  die  childish, 
and  never  know  the  fulness  of  his  possession.  And 
so  also  a  man  may  be  a  babe  in  Christ's  family, 
think  as  a  babe,  speak  as  a  babe,  and  though  saved 
never  enjoy  a  lively  hope,  never  know  the  real  privilege 
of  his  inheritance. 

Do  not  therefore,  my  brethren,  mistake  my  meaning. 
Do  not  do  me  the  injustice  to  say  I  told  you  none 
were  saved  except  such  as  could  say,  like  Paul,  "  I  know 
and  I  am  persuaded,  there  is  a  crown  laid  up  for  me." 

I  do  not  say  so.  I  tell  you  nothing  of  the  kind. 
Faith  in  Christ  a  man  must  have.  This  is  the  one 
door.  Without  faith  no  man  can  be  saved — that  is 
certain.  A  man  must  feel  his  sins  and  lost  estate, 
must  come  to  Christ  for  salvation,  must  rest  his  hope 
on  this  alone.  But  if  he  have  only  faith  to  do  this, 
however  weak  that  faith  may  be,  I  will  engage  he  will 
not  miss  heaven.  Yes !  though  his  faith  be  no  bigger 
than  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  if  it  only  bring  him  to 
Christ  and  enable  him  to  touch  the  hem  of  His  garment, 
he  shall  be  saved,  saved  as  surely  as  the  oldest  saint  in 
Paradise,  saved  as  completely  and  eternally  as  Peter  or 
John  or  Paul.  There  are  degrees  in  our  sanctification. 
In  justification  there  are  none. 

But  all  this  time,  I  would  have  you  take  notice,  the 
poor  soul  may  have  no  assurance  of  his  acceptance  with 


"READY   TO   BE   OFFERED"  335 

God.  He  may  have  fear  upon  fear,  and  doubt  upon 
doubt,  many  a  question  and  many  an  anxiety,  many 
a  struggle  and  many  a  misgiving,  clouds  and  darkness, 
storm  and  tempest  to  the  very  end. 

I  will  engage,  I  repeat,  that  bare,  simple  faith  in 
Christ  shall  save  a  man,  though  he  never  attain  to 
assurance  ;  but  I  will  not  engage  it  shall  bring  him 
to  heaven  with  strong  and  abounding  consolations.  I 
will  engage  it  shall  land  him  safe  in  harbour,  but  I  will 
not  engage  he  does  not  reach  the  shore  weather-beaten 
and  tempest-tossed,  scarce  knowing  himself  that  he  is 
safe. 

Brethren,  I  believe  it  is  of  great  importance  to  keep 
in  view  this  distinction  between  faith  and  assurance.  It 
explains  things  which  an  inquirer  in  religion  sometimes 
finds  it  hard  to  understand.  Faith,  let  us  remember,  is 
the  root,  and  assurance  is  the  flower.  Doubtless  you 
can  never  have  the  flower  without  the  root ;  but  it  is 
no  less  certain  you  may  have  the  root  and  never  have 
the  flower.  Faith  is  that  poor  trembling  woman,  who 
came  behind  Jesus  in  the  press,  and  touched  the  hem 
of  His  garment ;  assurance  is  Stephen  standing  calmly 
in  the  midst  of  his  murderers,  and  saying,  "  I  see  the 
heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the 
right  hand  of  God."  Faith  is  the  penitent  thief  crying, 
"  Lord,  remember  me "  ;  assurance  is  Job,  sitting  in 
the  dust,  covered  with  sores,  and  saying,  "  I  know  that 
my  Redeemer  liveth."  Faith  is  Peter's  drowning  cry, 
as  he  began  to  sink,  "  Lord,  save  me  "  ;  assurance  is 
that  same  Peter  declaring  before  the  council  in  after 
time,  "  There  is  none  other  name  given  under  heaven 
whereby  we  can  be  saved  ;  we  cannot  but  speak  the 
things  we  have  seen  and  heard."  Faith  is  the  still 
small  voice,  "  Lord,  I  believe,  help  Thou  mine  un 
belief ";  assurance  is  the  confident  challenge,  "Who 


336  -READY   TO   BE   OFFERED" 

shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  who 
is  he  that  condemneth  ? "  Faith  is  Saul  praying  in 
the  house  of  Judas  at  Damascus,  sorrowful,  blind,  and 
alone  ;  assurance  is  Paul  the  aged  prisoner  looking 
calmly  into  the  grave,  and  saying,  "  I  know  whom  I 
have  believed  ;  there  is  a  crown  laid  up  for  me." 

Faith  is  life.  How  great  the  blessing  !  Who  can 
tell  the  gulf  between  life  and  death  ?  Yet  life  may  be 
weak,  sickly,  unhealthy,  painful,  trying,  anxious,  worn, 
burdensome,  joyless,  smileless,  to  the  last  Assurance 
is  more  than  life.  It  is  health,  strength,  power,  vigour, 
activity,  energy,  manliness,  beauty. 

Brethren,  it  is  not  a  question  of  saved  or  not  saved, 
but  of  privilege  or  no  privilege  ;  it  is  not  a  question  of 
peace  or  no  peace,  but  of  great  peace  or  little  peace ; 
it  is  not  a  question  between  the  wanderers  of  this 
world  and  the  school  of  Christ,  it  is  one  that  belongs 
only  to  the  school,  it  is  between  the  first  form  and  the 
last.  He  that  has  faith  does  well.  Happy  should  I 
feel,  if  I  thought  you  all  had  it.  Blessed,  thrice  blessed, 
arc  they  that  believe :  they  are  safe ;  they  are  washed  ; 
they  are  justified  ;  they  are  beyond  the  power  of  hell. 
But  he  that  has  assurance  does  far  better,  sees  more, 
feels  more,  knows  more,  enjoys  more,  has  more  days 
like  those  spoken  of  in  Deuteronomy,  the  days  of 
heaven  upon  earth.1 

III.  I  pass  on  to  the  third  thing  of  which  I  spoke.  I 
will  give  you  some  reasons  why  an  assured  hope  is 
exceedingly  to  be  desired. 

I  ask  your  attention  to  this  point  especially.  I 
heartily  wish  that  assurance  was  more  sought  after  than 
it  is.  Too  many  among  us  begin  doubting  and  go  on 
doubting,  live  doubting,  die  doubting,  and  go  to  heaven 
in  a  kind  of  mist.  It  would  ill  become  me, to  speak 
slightingly  of  "hopes"  and  "trusts,"  but  I  fear  many 


"READY   TO   BE   OFFERED"  337 

of  us  sit  down  content  with  them  and  go  no  further. 
I  would  like  to  see  fewer  "  peradventures  "  in  the  Lord's 
family,  and  more  who  could  say  "  I  know,  and  am 
persuaded."  Oh !  that  you  would  all  covet  the  best 
gifts,  and  not  be  content  with  less.  You  miss  the  full 
tide  of  blessedness  the  gospel  was  meant  to  convey. 
You  keep  yourselves  in  a  low  and  starved  condition 
of  soul,  while  your  Lord  is  saying,  "  Eat  and  drink, 
O  beloved,  that  your  joy  may  be  full." 

i.  Know  then,  for  one  thing,  that  assurance  is  a  thing 
to  be  desired,  because  of  the  present  joy  and  peace  it 
affords.  Doubts  and  fears  have  great  power  to  mar  the 
comfort  of  a  true  believer.  Uncertainty  and  suspense 
are  bad  enough  in  any  condition — in  the  matter  of  our 
health,  our  property,  our  families,  our  affections,  our 
earthly  Callings — but  never  so  bad  as  in  the  affairs  of  our 
souls.  Now  so  long  as  a  believer  cannot  get  beyond  "  I 
hope  and  I  trust,"  he  manifestly  feels  a  certain  degree 
of  uncertainty  about  his  spiritual  state.  The  very  words 
imply  as  much :  he  says  "  I  hope  "  because  he  dare  not 
say  "  I  know." 

Assurance,  my  brethren,  goes  far  to  set  a  child  of 
God  free  from  this  painful  kind  of  bondage,  and  mightily 
ministers  to  comfort.  It  gives  him  joy  and  peace  in 
believing.  It  makes  him  patient  in  tribulation,  contented 
in  trial,  calm  in  affliction,  unmoved  in  sorrow,  not 
afraid  of  evil  tidings.  It  sweetens  his  bitter  cups,  it 
lessens  the  burden  of  his  crosses,  it  smooths  the  rough 
places  on  which  he  travels,  it  lightens  the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death.  It  makes  him  feel  as  if  he  had 
something  solid  beneath  his  feet  and  something  firm 
under  his  hand,  a  sure  Friend  by  the  way  and  a  sure 
home  in  the  end.  He  feels  that  the  great  business  of 
life  is  a  settled  business — debt,  disaster,  work,  and  all 
other  business  is  by  comparison  small.  Assurance 

22 


338 


READY   TO   BE   OFFERED'* 


will  help  a  man  to  bear  poverty  and  loss,  it  will  teach  him 
to  say,  "  I  know  that  I  have  in  heaven  a  better  and  more 
enduring -.substance.  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none,  but 
grace  and  glory  are  mine  andean  never  be  taken  away." 
Assurance  will  support  a  man  in  sickness,  make  all  his 
bed,  smooth  his  pillow.  It  will  enable  him  to  say,  "  If 
my  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  fail,  I  have  a  build 
ing  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in 
the  heaven.  ...  I  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ. 
My  flesh  and  my  heart  may  fail,  but  God  is  the  strength 
of  my  heart  and  my  portion  for  ever." 

He  that  has  assured  hope  can  sing  in  prison,  like 
Paul  and  Silas  at  Philippi.  Assurance  can  give  songs 
in  the  night.  He  can  sleep  with  the  full  prospect  of 
execution  on  the  morrow,  like  Peter  in  Herod's  dungeon. 
Assurance  says,  "  I  will  lay  me  down  and  take  my  rest, 
for  thou,  Lord,  makest  me  dwell  in  safety."  He  can 
rejoice  to  suffer  shame  for  Christ's  sake,  as  the  apostles 
did.  Assurance  says,  "Rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad 
—  there  is  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory."  He  can  meet  a  violent  and  painful  death  with 
out  fear,  as  Stephen  did  in  olden  time,  and  Cranmer, 
Ridley,  Latimer  and  Taylor  in  our  own  land.  Assurance 
says — "  Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body,  and  after  that 
have  no  more  they  can  do.  Lord  Jesus,  into  Thy  hand 
I  commend  my  spirit." 

Ah,  brethren,  the  comfort  assurance  can  give  in  the 
hour  of  death  is  a  great  point,  depend  upon  it,  and  never 
will  you  think  it  so  great  as  when  your  turn  comes  to 
die.  In  that  awful  hour  there  are  few  believers  who 
do  not  find  out  the  value  and  privilege  of  assurance, 
whatever  they  may  have  thought  about  it  in  their  lives  ; 
general  hopes  and  trusts  are  all  very  well  to  live  upon, 
but  when  you  come  to  die  you  will  want  to  be  able  to 
say,  "  I  know  and  I  feel"  Believe  me,  Jordan  is  a  cold 


44  READY  TO   BE   OFFERED "  339 

stream  to  cross  alone.  The  last  enemy,  even  death, 
is  a  strong  foe.  When  our  souls  are  in  departing,  there 
is  no  cordial  like  the  strong  wine  of  assurance. 

There  is  a  beautiful  expression  in  the  Prayer-book's 
Visitation  of  the  Sick.  "The  Almighty  Lord,  who  is 
a  most  strong  tower  to  all  them  that  put  their  trust  in 
Him,  be  now  and  evermore  thy  defence,  and  make 
thee  know  and  feel  that  there  is  none  other  name  under 
heaven  through  whom  thou  mayest  receive  health  and 
salvation,  but  only  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
The  compilers  of  that  Service  showed  great  wisdom 
there  :  they  saw  that  when  the  eyes  grow  dim  and  the 
heart  grows  faint,  there  must  be  knowing  and  feeling 
what  Christ  has  done  for  us  if  there  is  to  be  perfect 
peace. 

2.  Let  me  name  another  thing.  Assurance  is  to  be 
desired,  because  it  tends  to  make  a  Christian  an  active, 
useful  Christian.  None,  generally  speaking,  do  so  much 
for  Christ  on  earth  as  those  who  enjoy  the  fullest  con 
fidence  of  a  free  entrance  into  heaven.  That  sounds 
wonderful,  I  daresay,  but  it  is  true. 

A  believer  who  lacks  an  assured  hope  will  spend 
much  of  his  time  in  inward  searchings  of  heart  about  his 
own  state.  He  will  be  full  of  his  own  doubtings  and 
questionings,  his  own  conflicts  and  corruptions.  In 
short,  you  will  often  find  that  he  is  so  taken  up  with 
tnis  internal  warfare  that  he  has  little  leisure  for  other 
things,  little  time  to  work  for  God. 

Now  a  believer  who  has,  like  Paul,  an  assured  hope 
is  free  from  these  harassing  distractions.  He  does  not 
vex  his  soul  with  doubts  about  his  own  pardon  and 
acceptance.  He  looks  at  the  covenant  sealed  with  blood, 
at  the  finished  work  and  never-broken  word  of  his 
Lord  and  Saviour,  and  therefore  counts  his  salvation  a 
settled  thing.  And  thus  he  is  able  to  give  an  undivided 


34° 


44  READY  TO  BE   OFFERED " 


attention  to  the  Lord's  work,  and  so  in  the  long  run  to 
do  more. 

Take,  for  an  illustration  of  this,  two  English 
emigrants,  and  suppose  them  set  down  side  by  side 
in  Australia  or  New  Zealand.  Give  each  of  them 
a  piece  of  land  to  clear  and  cultivate.  Secure  that 
land  to  them  by  every  needful  legal  instrument,  let  it 
be  conveyed  as  freehold  to  them  and  theirs  for  ever, 
let  the  conveyance  be  publicly  registered,  and  the 
property  made  sure  to  them  by  every  deed  and  security 
that  man's  ingenuity  can  devise.  Suppose,  then,  that 
one  of  them  shall  set  to  work  to  bring  his  land  into 
cultivation,  and  labour  at  it  day  after  day  without 
intermission  or  cessation.  Suppose,  in  the  meanwhile, 
that  the  other  shall  be  continually  leaving  his  work, 
and  repeatedly  going  to  the  public  registry  to  ask 
whether  the  land  really  is  his  own — whether  there  is 
not  some  mistake — whether  after  all  there  is  not 
some  flaw  in  the  legal  instruments  which  conveyed  it 
to  him.  The  one  shall  never  doubt  his  title,  but  just 
diligently  work  on  ;  the  other  shall  never  feel  sure  of 
his  title,  and  spend  half  his  time  in  going  to  Sydney 
or  Auckland  with  needless  inquiries  about  it.  Which, 
now,  of  these  two  men  will  have  made  most  progress 
in  a  year's  time?  Who  will  have  done  the  most  for 
his  land,  got  the  greatest  breadth  under  tillage,  have 
the  best  crops  to  show  ?  You  all  know  as  well  as  I 
do — I  need  not  supply  an  answer.  There  can  only  be 
one  reply. 

Brethren,  so  will  it  be  in  the  matter  of  our  title  to 
"  mansions  in  the  skies."  None  will  do  so  much  for 
the  Lord  who  bought  them  as  the  believer  who  sees 
that  title  clear.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  will  be  that  man's 
strength.  "Restore  unto  me,"  says  David,  "the  joy 
of  Thy  salvation  ;  .  .  .  then  will  I  teach  transgressors  Thy 


"READY  TO   BE  OFFERED"  341 

ways."  Never  were  there  such  working  Christians  as 
the  apostles.  They  seemed  to  live  to  labour :  Christ's 
work  was  their  meat  and  drink.  They  counted  not 
their  lives  dear  ;  they  spent  and  ]  were  spent ;  they 
laid  down  health,  ease,  worldly  comfort  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross.  And  one  cause  of  this,  I  believe,  was  their 
assured  hope.  They  were  men  that  said,  "  We  know 
that  we  are  of  God," 

3.  Let  me  name  another  thing.  Assurance  is  to  be 
desired,  because  it  •  tends  to  make  a  Christian  a  decided 
Christian.  Indecision  and  doubt  about  our  own  state 
in  God's  sight  is  a  grievous  disease,  and  the  mother 
of  many  evils.  It  often  produces  a  wavering  and  an 
unstable  walk  in  following  the  Lord.  Assurance  helps 
to  cut  many  a  knot,  and  to  make  the  path  of  Christian 
duty  clear  and  plain.  Many,  of  whom  we  feel  a  hope 
that  they  are  God's  children,  and  have  grace,  however 
weak,  are  continually  perplexed  with  doubts  on  points 
of  practice.  "  Should  we  do  such  and  such  a  thing  ? 
Shall  we  give  up  this  family  custom  ?  Ought  we  to 
go  to  that  place?  How  shall  we  draw  the  line  about 
visiting  ?  What  is  to  be  the  measure  of  our  dressing 
and  entertainments  ?  Are  we  never  to  dance,  never 
to  play  at  cards,  never  to  attend  pleasure  parties?" 
These  are  questions  which  seem  to  give  them  constant 
trouble.  And  often,  very  often,  the  simple  root  of 
this  perplexity  is  that  they  do  not  feel  assured  that 
they  themselves  are  children  of  God.  They  have  not 
yet  settled  the  point  which  side  of  the  gate  they  are 
on.  They  do  not  know  whether  they  are  inside  the 
ark  or  not 

That  a  child  of  God  ought  to  act  in  a  certain  decided 
way  they  quite  feel,  but  the  grand  question  is,  "  Are 
they  children  of  God  themselves  ?  "  If  they  only  felt 
they  were  so,  they  would  go  straightforward  and  take 


342 


READY   TO   BE  OFFERED" 


a  decided  line;  but  not  feeling  sure  about  it,  their 
conscience  is  for  ever  coming  to  a  dead-lock.  The  devil 
whispers,  "  Perhaps,  after  all,  you  are  only  a  hypocrite  ; 
what  right  have  you  to  take  a  decided  course  ?  wait  till 
you  are  really  a  Christian."  And  this  whisper  too  often 
just  turns  the  scale,  and  leads  on  to  some  wretched 
conformity  to  the  world. 

Brethren,  I  verily  believe  you  have  here  one  reason 
why  so  many  are  inconsistent,  unsatisfactory,  and  half 
hearted  in  their  conduct  about  the  world.  They  feel 
no  assurance  that  they  are  Christ's,  and  so  they  feel 
a  hesitancy  about  breaking  with  the  world.  They 
shrink  from  laying  aside  all  the  ways  of  the  old  man, 
because  they  are  not  confident  they  have  put  on  the 
new.  Depend  upon  it,  one  secret  of  halting  between 
two  opinions  is  want  of  assurance. 

4.  Let  me  name  one  thing  more.  Assurance  is  to  be 
desired  because  it  tends  to  make  the  holiest  Christians. 

This,  too,  sounds  wonderful  and  strange,  and  yet  it 
is  true.  It  is  one  of  the  paradoxes  of  the  Gospel,  con 
trary,  at  first  sight,  to  reason  and  common-sense,  and 
yet  it  is  a  fact.  Bellarmine  was  seldom  more  wide  of 
the  truth  than  when  he  said,  "  Assurance  tends  to  care 
lessness  and  sloth."  He  that  is  freely  forgiven  by 
Christ  will  always  do  much  for  Christ's  glory,  and  he 
that  has  the  fullest  assurance  of  this  forgiveness  will 
ordinarily  keep  up  the  closest  walk  with  God.  It  is 
a  faithful  saying  in  the  first  Epistle  of  John,  "  Every 
man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even 
as  He  is  pure." 

None  are  so  likely  to  maintain  a  watchful  guard  over 
their  heart  and  life,  as  those  who  know  the  comfort  of 
living  in  near  communion  with  God.  They  feel  their 
privilege,  and  will  fear  losing  it.  They  will  dread 
falling  from  their  high  estate  and  marring  their  own 


"READY  TO    BE  OFFERED"  343 

comforts  by  inconsistencies.  He  that  goes  a  journey 
and  has  little  money  to  lose,  takes  little  thought  of 
danger,  and  cares  not  how  late  he  travels  in  a  dangerous 
country.  He  that  carries  gold  and  jewels,  on  the  con 
trary,  will  be  a  cautious  traveller  :  he  will  look  well 
to  his  road,  his  house,  and  his  company,  and  run  no 
risks.  The  fixed  stars  are  those  that  tremble  most. 
The  man  that  most  fully  enjoys  the  light  of  God's 
reconciled  countenance  will  be  a  man  tremblingly  afraid 
of  losing  its  blessed  comfort,  and  jealously  fearful  of 
doing  anything  to  grieve  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Beloved  brethren,  would  you  have  great  peace  ? 
Would  you  like  to  feel  the  everlasting  arms  around  you, 
and  to  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus  drawing  nigh  to  your 
soul,  and  saying,  "  I  am  thy  salvation  "  ?  Would  you 
be  useful  in  your  day  and  generation  ?  Would  you  be 
known  of  all  as  bold,  firm,  decided,  single-eyed  followers 
of  Christ  ?  Would  you  be  eminently  spiritually-minded 
and  holy  ?  "  Ah ! "  you  will  some  of  you  say,  "  these 
are  the  very  things  we  desire  :  we  long  for  them,  we 
pant  after  them,  but  they  seem  far  from  us." 

Then  take  my  advice  this  day.  Seek  an  assured  hope, 
like  Paul's.  Seek  to  obtain  a  simple,  childlike  confidence 
in  God's  promises.  Seek  to  be  able  to  say  with  the 
apostle,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed  ;  I  am  persuaded 
that  He  is  mine  and  I  am  His." 

You  have  many  of  you  tried  the  ways  and  methods, 
and  completely  failed.  Change  your  plan.  Go  upon 
another  tack.  Begin  with  assurance.  Lay  aside  your 
doubts.  CPP<  aside  your  faithless  backwardness  to  take 
the  Lord  at  His  word.  Come  and  roll  yourself,  your 
soul  and  your  sins  upon  your  gracious  Saviour.  Begin 
with  simple  believing,  and  all  other  things  shall  soon 
be  added  to  you. 

IV.  I   come  to  the  last  thing  of  which  I  spoke.     I 


344 


READY   TO  BE   OFFERED 


promised  to  point  out  some  probable  causes  why  an 
assured  hope  is  so  seldom  attained.  I  will  do  so 
very  shortly. 

This,  brethren,  is  a  very  serious  question,  and  ought 
to  raise  in  us  all  great  searchings  of  heart.  Few 
certainly  of  all  the  sheep  of  Christ  ever  seem  to  reach 
this  blessed  spirit  of  assurance.  Many,  comparatively, 
believe,  but  few  are  persuaded.  Many,  comparatively, 
have  saving  faith,  but  few  that  glorious  confidence  which 
shines  forth  in  our  text. 

Now,  why  is  this  so  ?  Why  is  a  thing  which  Peter 
enjoins  as  a  positive  duty  a  thing  of  which  few  believers 
have  an  experimental  knowledge  ?  Why  is  an  assured 
hope  so  rare  ? 

I  desire  to  offer  a  few  suggestions  on  this  point  with 
all  humility.  I  know  that  many  have  never  attained 
assurance,  at  whose  feet  I  would  gladly  sit  both  in 
earth  and  heaven.  Perhaps  the  Lord  sees  something 
in  some  men's  natural  temperament  which  makes 
assurance  not  good  for  them.  Perhaps  to  be  kept  in 
spiritual  health  they  need  to  be  kept  very  low.  God 
only  knows.  Still,  after  every  allowance,  I  fear  there 
arc  many  believers  without  an  assured  hope,  whose 
case  may  too  often  be  explained  by  causes  such  as 
these. 

I.  One  common  cause,  I  suspect,  is  a  defective  view 
of  the  doctrine  of  justification.  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  justification  and  sanctification  are  in  many  minds 
insensibly  confused  together.  They  receive  the  gospel 
truth  that  there  must  ,be  something  done  in  us,  as  well 
as  something  done  for  us,  if  we  are  true  believers  ;  and 
so  far  they  are  right.  But  then,  without  being  aware 
of  it  perhaps,  they  seem  to  imbibe  the  idea,  that  this 
justification  is  in  some  degree  affected  by  something 
within  themselves.  They  do  not  clearly  see  that 


"READY  TO   BE   OFFERED"  345 

Christ's  work  and  not  their  own  work,  either  in  whole 
or  in  part,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  alone  is  the 
ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God  ;  that  justification 
is  a  thing  entirely  without  us,  and  nothing  is  needful 
on  our  part  but  simple  faith,  and  that  the  weakest 
believer  is  as  fully  justified  as  the  strongest.  They 
appear  to  forget  sometimes  that  we  are  saved  and 
justified  as  sinners,  and  only  as  sinners,  and  that  we 
never  can  attain  to  anything  higher  if  we  live  to  the 
age  of  Methuselah.  Redeemed  sinners,  justified  sinners, 
and  renewed  sinners  doubtless  we  must  be,  but  sinners, 
sinners  always  to  the  very  last.  They  seem,  too,  to 
expect  that  a  believer  may  some  time  in  his  life  be  in  a 
measure  free  from  corruption,  and  attain  to  a  kind  of 
inward  perfection.  And  not  finding  this  angelical  state 
of  things  in  their  own  hearts,  they  at  once  conclude 
there  must  be  something  wrong,  go  mourning  all  their 
days,  and  are  oppressed  with  fears  that  they  have  no 
part  or  lot  in  Christ. 

My  dear  brethren,  if  you  or  any  believing  soul  here 
desires  assurance  and  has  not  got  it,  go  and  ask  yourself 
first  of  all  if  you  are  sound  in  the  faith,  if  your  loins 
are  thoroughly  girt  about  with  truth  and  your  eyes 
thoroughly  clear  in  the  matter  of  justification. 

2.  Another  common  cause,  I  am  afraid,  is  slothfulness 
about  growth  in  grace.  I  suspect  many  believers  hold 
dangerous  and  unscriptural  views  on  this  point.  Many 
appear  to  me  to  think  that,  once  converted,  they  have 
little  more  to  attend  to — that  a  state  of  salvation  is  a 
kind  of  easy-chair,  in  which  they  may  just  sit  still,  lie 
back,  and  be  happy.  They  seem  to  fancy  that  grace 
is  given  them  that  they  may  enjoy  it,  and  they  forget 
that  it  is  given  to  be  used  and  employed,  like  a  talent. 
Such  persons  lose  sight  of  the  many  direct  injunctions 
to  increase,  to  grow,  to  abound  more  and  more,  to  add 


346 


"READY  TO   BE   OFFERED" 


to  our  faith  and  the  like  ;  and  in  this  do-little  condition 
of  mind  I  never  marvel  that  they  miss  assurance. 

Brethren,  you  must  always  remember  there  is  an 
inseparable  connection  between  assurance  and  diligence. 
"Give  diligence,"  says  Peter,  "to  make  your  calling 
and  election  sure."  "  I  desire,"  says  Paul,  « that  every 
one  of  you  do  show  the  same  diligence  to  the  full 
assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end."  "  It  is  the  diligent 
soul,"  says  the  Proverb,  "that  shall  be  made  fat." 
There  is  much  truth  in  the  maxim  of  the  Puritans, 
"  Faith  of  adherence  comes  by  hearing,  but  faith  of 
assurance  comes  not  without  doing." 

3.  Another  common  cause  is  an  inconsistent  walk  in 
life.  With  grief  and  sorrow  I  feel  constrained  to  say, 
I  fear  nothing  in  this  day  more  frequently  prevents 
men  attaining  an  assured  hope  than  this.  Incon 
sistency  of  life  is  utterly  destructive  of  great  peace  of 
heart.  The  two  things  are  incompatible.  They  cannot 
go  together.  If  you  will  have  your  besetting  sins,  and 
cannot  make  up  your  minds  to  give  them  up,  if  you 
shrink  from  cutting  off  the  right  hand  and  plucking 
out  the  right  eye  when  required,  I  will  engage  you 
shall  have  no  assurance.  A  vacillating  walk,  a  back 
wardness  to  take  a  bold  and  decided  line,  a  readiness  to 
conform  to  the  world,  a  hesitating  witness  for  Christ,  a 
lingering  tone  of  profession,  all  these  make  up  a  sure 
recipe  for  bringing  a  blight  upon  the  garden  of  your 
soul.  It  is  vain  to  suppose  you  will  feel  assured  and 
persuaded  of  your  pardon  and  peace,  unless  you  count 
all  God's  commandments  concerning  all  things  to  be 
right,  and  hate  every  sin  whether  great  or  small.  One 
Achan  allowed  in  the  camp  of  your  heart  will  poison 
all  your  springs  of  comfort. 

I  bless  God  our  salvation  in  no  sense  depends  on  our 
own  works.  "  By  grace  are  we  saved  ;  "  not  by  works 


"READY   TO   BE   OFFERED"  347 

of  righteousness  that  we  have  done,  through  faith, 
without  the  deed  of  the  law.  But  I  never  would  have 
any  believer  for  a  moment  forget  that  our  sense  of 
salvation  depends  much  on  the  manner  of  our  living. 
Inconsistency  will  dim  your  eyes  and  bring  clouds 
between  you  and  the  sun.  The  sun  is  the  same,  but 
you  will  not  be  able  to  see  its  brightness  and  enjoy 
its  warmth.  It  is  in  the  path  of  well-doing  that 
assurance  will  come  down  and  meet  you.  "  The  secret 
of  the  Lord,"  says  David,  "  is  with  them  that  fear 
Him."  "  Great  peace  have  they  that  love  thy  law  :  and 
nothing  shall  offend  them."  "  To  him  that  ordereth  his 
conversation  aright  will  I  show  the  salvation  of  God." 
Paul  was  a  man  who  exercised  himself  to  have  a 
conscience  void  of  offence  toward  God  and  toward  man  ; 
he  could  say  boldly,  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  .... 
I  have  kept  the  faith."  I  do  not  wonder  that  the 
Lord  enabled  him  to  add  confidently,  "  Henceforth 
there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness, 
which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  shall  give  me  at 
that  day." 

Brethren,  I  commend  the  three  points  I  have  just 
named  to  your  own  private  consideration.  I  am  sure 
they  are  worth  thinking  over,  and  I  advise  every 
believer  present  who  lacks  assurance  to  do  it.  And 
may  the  Lord  give  him  understanding  in  this  and  all 
things. 

And  now,  brethren,  in  closing  this  sermon,  let  me 
speak  first  to  those  among  you  who  have  not  yet 
believed,  have  not  yet  come  out  from  the  world,  chosen 
the  good  part  and  followed  Christ.  See,  then,  my 
dear  friends,  from  this  subject  the  real  privilege  of 
a  true  Christian.  Judge  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by 
His  people.  Judge  not  the  comforts  of  His  kingdom 
by  the  measure  to  which  many  of  His  subjects  attain. 


348  " READY  TO   BE   OFFERED" 

Alas!  we  arc  many  of  us  poor  creatures.  We  come 
short,  very  short  of  the  blessedness  we  might  enjoy. 
But  depend  upon  it  there  are  glorious  things  in  the 
city  of  our  God,  which  they  who  have  an  assured 
hope  taste  even  in  their  lifetime.  There  is  bread 
enough  and  to  spare  in  our  Father's  house,  though 
many  of  us,  alas  !  eat  but  little  of  it,  and  continue 
weak. 

And  why  should  not  you  enter  in  and  share  our 
privileges?  Why  should  not  you  come  with  us  and 
sit  down  by  our  side  ?  What  can  the  world  give  you, 
after  all,  which  will  bear  comparison  with  the  hope  of 
the  least  member  of  the  family  of  Christ  ?  Verily  the 
weakest  child  of  God  has  got  more  durable  riches  in 
his  hand  than  the  wealthiest  man  of  the  world  that  ever 
breathed.  Oh !  but  I  feel  deeply  for  you  in  these  days, 
if  ever  I  did.  I  feel  deeply  for  those  whose  treasure 
is  all  on  earth  and  whose  hopes  are  this  side  the  grave. 
Yes !  when  I  see  old  kingdoms  and  dynasties  shaking 
to  the  very  foundations  ;  when  I  see  property  dependent 
on  public  confidence  melting  like  snow  in  spring,  when 
I  see  stocks  and  shares  and  funds  losing  their  value,  I 
do  feel  deeply  for  those  who  have  no  better  portion,  no 
place  in  a  kingdom  that  cannot  be  removed. 

Take  the  advice  of  a  minister  of  Christ.  Seek  a 
treasure  that  cannot  be  taken  from  you  ;  seek  a  city 
which  hath  lasting  foundations.  Do  as  the  apostle 
Paul  did.  Give  yourself  to  Christ,  and  seek  an  in 
corruptible  crown  that  fadeth  not  away.  Come  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  lowly  sinners,  and  He  will 
receive  you,  pardon  you,  give  you  His  renewing  Spirit, 
fill  you  with  peace.  This  shall  give  you  more  real 
comfort  than  this  world  has  ever  done.  There  is  a 
gulf  in  your  heart  which  nothing  but  Christ  can  fill. 

Lastly,  let  me  turn  to  all  believers  here  present  and 


" READY  TO   BE  OFFERED"  349 

speak  to  them  a  few  words  of  brotherly  counsel.  For 
one  thing,  resolve  this  day  to  seek  after  an  assured 
hope,  if  you  do  not  feel  you  have  got  it.  Believe, 
me,  believe  me,  it  is  worth  the  seeking.  If  it  is  good 
to  be  sure  in  earthly  things,  how  much  better  is  it  to 
be  sure  in  heavenly  things !  Seek  to  know  that  you 
have  a  title,  good  and  solid  and  not  to  be  overthrown. 
Your  salvation  is  a  fixed  and  certain  thing.  God 
knows  it.  Why  should  not  you  seek  to  know  it  too  ? 
Paul  never  saw  the  bookj  of  life  ;  and  yet  Paul  says 
"  I  know  and  am  persuaded."  Go  home  and  pray  for 
an  increase  of  faith.  Cultivate  that  blessed  root 
more,  and  then  by  God's  blessing  you  shall  have  the 
flower. 

For  another  thing,  be  not  surprised  if  you  do  not 
attain  assurance  all  at  once.  It  is  good  sometimes  to 
be  kept  waiting.  We  do  not  value  things  which  we 
get  without  trouble.  Joseph  waited  long  for  deliver 
ance  from  prison,  but  it  came  at  length.  For  another 
thing,  be  not  surprised  at  occasional  doubts  after  you 
have  got  assurance.  No  morning  sun  lasts  all  the  day. 
There  is  a  devil,  and  a  strong  devil  too,  and  he  will  take 
care  you  know  it  You  must  not  forget  you  are  on 
earth  and  not  in  heaven.  Some  doubt  there  always 
will  be.  He  that  never  doubts  has  nothing  to  lose. 
He  that  never  fears  possesses  nothing  truly  valuable. 
He  that  is  never  jealous  knows  little  of  deep  love. 

And  finally  do  not  forget  that  assurance  is  a  thing 
that  may  be  lost.  Oh  !  it  is  a  most  delicate  plant. 
It  needs  daily,  hourly  watching,  watering,  tending, 
cherishing.  So  take  care.  David  lost  it.  Peter  lost 
it.  Each  found  it  again,  but  not  till  after  bitter  tears. 
Quench  not  the  Spirit ;  grieve  Him  not ;  vex  Him 
not.  Drive  Him  not  to  a  distance  by  tampering  with 
small  bad  habits  and  little  sins.  Little  jarrings  make 


35° 


READY   TO   BE   OFFERED" 


unhappy  homes,  and  petty  inconsistencies  will  bring  in 
a  strangeness  between  you  and  the  Spirit. 

Hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  The 
nearest  walker  with  God  will  generally  be  kept  in  the 
greatest  peace.  The  believer  who  follows  the  Lord 
most  fully  will  ordinarily  enjoy  the  most  assured  hope. 


Printtdby  Hate/I,  Watson ,  &  Viney  Ld.t  London  and  Ayltsbury. 


