oi  tl«  »'"%.«,  . 


^»%,. 


PRINCETON,     N.    J. 


% 


3? 


Divmoft4J.i^..  1 .  .0,  Q.. 

.,XiBS. 


S/ie//.. 


Section  > 


Ntmiber C.O 


jKy..l..: 


THE    REVISION    REVISED. 


1-0  N  DON: 
IMIINTKI)    BY   \1-1LI,IAM    Cl.OWKS    AND    PONS,    I,imitkd, 
STASH  oitii  siiti.Ki   A.M>  i;iiAJ:l\(i  ci;o,-a. 


THE  EEVISION  REVISED. 

THREE  ARTICLES 

REPRINTED  FROM  THE  '  QUARTERLY  REVIEW. 


I.   THE  NEW  GREEK  TEXT. 

II.    THE  NEW  ENGLISH  VERSION. 

III.   WESTCOTT  AND  HORT'S  NEW  TEXTUAL  THEORY. 


TO    WHICH    IS    ADDED     A 

REPLY  TO  BISHOP  ELLICOTT'S  PAMPHLET 

IN   DEFENCE   OF 

THE  REVISERS  AND  THEIR  GREEK  TEXT  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT 

INCLUDING  A  VINDICATION  OF  THE  TRADITIONAL  READING 
OF  1  TIMOTHY  III.  16. 


By  JOHN  WILLIAM  BURGON,  B.D. 

DEAN   OF   CHICHESTER. 


"It  is  happened  unto  them  according  to  the  true  proverlj,  Kuaji-  en-t- 
a-Tpi^a.%  en-l  to  iSioi'  e^epana  •  and,  'Ys  Kovaafkiini)  eis  KiiAtcTjiia  ^opjSopou." 
— 2  Peter  ii.  22. 

"  Little  children, — Keep  yourselves  from  idols." — I  John  v.  21. 


LONDON: 
JOHN    MURRAY,    ALBEMARLE    STREET. 

1883. 


The  followiiifi  is  Prebexdary  Schivexer's  recently  pnUishcd 
estimate  of  the  Si/stem  on  which  Drs.  Westcott  axd  Hort 
have  constructed  their  '  Eevised  Greek  Text  of  the  Xew 
Testament'  (1881).  —  That  System,  the  Chairman  of  the 
Revising  Body  (Bishop  Ellicott)  has  entirely  adopted  {see 
below,  ]3p.  391  to  397),  and  made  the  basis  of  his  Defence  of 
THE  IiEViSERS  and  their  '  New  Greek  Text.' 

(1.)  "There  is  little  hope  for  the  stability  of  their  imposing 
structure,  if  its  foundations  have  been  laid  on  the  sandi/ 
(fvound  of  ingenious  conjecture.  And,  since  barely  the 
smallest  vestige  of  historical  evidence  has  ever  been 
alleged  in  support  of  the  views  of  these  accomplished 
Editors,  their  teaching  must  either  be  received  as  in- 
tuitively true,  or  dismissed  from  our  consideration  as 
precarious  and  even  visionary" 

(2.)  "  1)r.  Hort's  System  is  entirely  destitute  of  historical 
foundation.'^ 

(3.)  "  We  are  compelled  to  repeat  as  emphatically  as  ever  our 
strong  conviction  that  the  Hypothesis  to  whose  proof  he 
has  devoted  so  many  laborious  years,  is  destitute  not  only 
of  historical  foundation,  but  of  cdl  probability,  resulting  from 
the  internal  goodness  of  the  Text  which  its  adoption  icoidd 
force  upon  us." 

(4.)  '"We  cannot  doubt'  (says  Dr.  Hort)  'that  S.  Luke 
xxiii.  34  comes  from  an  extraneoiis  source.'  [Notes, 
p.  68.] — Nor  can  we,  on  our  part,  doubt,"  (rejoins  Dr, 
ScRiVKNKR,)  "  that  the  System  which  entails  such  conse- 
quences is  hopelessly  self  condemned." 

Scrivknkr's  'Plain  Introduction,'  S^v.  [ed.  1883]: 
1»1).  .'.31,  .")37,  542,  004. 


TO   THE 

IllGHT   HON.    VISCOUNT   CRANBROOK,    G.C.S.T., 

&c.,  &c.,  &c. 


Mr  DEAR  Lord  Cranbrook, 

Allow   me  the  gratification   of  dedicating   the  iwesent 
Volume  to  yourself ;  hut  for  whom — {1  reserve  the  explanation 
for  another  day) — it  woidd  never  have  been  written. 

TJiis  is  not,  (as  you  will  perceive  at  a  glance,)  the  Treatise 
which  a  few  years  ago  I  told  you  I  had  in  hand  ;  and  ivhich, 
hut  for  the  present  hindrance,  might  hy  this  time  have  heen 
completed.  It  has  however  grown  out  of  that  other  ivorh  in 
the  manner  explained  at  the  beginning  of  my  Preface.  More- 
over it  contains  not  a  few  specimens  of  the  argumentation  of 
which  the  ivorh  in  question,  when  at  last  it  sees  the  light,  will 
he  discovered  to  he  full. 

My  one  object  has  been  to  defeat  the  mischievous  attempt 
which  was  made  in  1881  to  thrust  upon  this  Church  and 
Realm  a  Revision  of  the  Sacred  Text,  which — recommended 
though  it  be  by  eminent  7iames — I  am  thoroughly  convinced, 
and  am  able  to  prove,  is  untrustworthy  from  beginning  to  end. 


VI  DEDICATION. 

The  reason  is  i)lain.  It  haa  been  constructed  throughout  on 
an  utterly  erroneous  hypothesis.  And  I  inserihe  this  Volume 
to  you,  my  friend,  as  a  conspicuous  member  of  that  body  of 
faithful  ami  learned  Laity  by  whose  deliberate  verdict,  wJien 
the  whole  of  the  evidence  has  been  produced  and  the  case 
has  been  fidly  argued  out,  I  shall  be  quite  willing  that  my 
contention  may  stand  or  fall. 

The  English  {as  well  as  the  Greek)  of  the  newly  "  Revised 
Version "  is  hopelessly  at  faidt.  It  is  to  me  simply  unintel- 
ligible hoiv  a  company  of  Scholars  can  have  spent  ten  years  in 
elahorating  such  a  very  unsatisfactory  production.  Their 
uncouth  phraseology  and  tlieir  jerhy  sentences,  their  pedantic 
obscurity  and  their  unidiomatic  English,  contrast  painfully 
with  "  the  happy  turns  of  expression,  the  music  of  the  cadences, 
the  felicities  of  the  rhythrn  "  of  our  Authorized  Version.  The 
transition  from  one  to  the  other,  as  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln 
retnarks,  is  like  exchanging  a  well-built  carriage  for  a  vehicle 
without  springs,  in  which  you  get  jolted  to  death  on  a  neivly- 
mended  and  rarely-traversed  road.  But  the  "  Bevised  Ver- 
sion "  is  inaccurate  as  well ;  exhibits  defective  scholarship,  I 
mean,  in  countless  places. 

It  is,  however,  the  systematic  depravation  of  the  underlying- 
Greek  which  does  so  grievously  offend  me:  for  this  is  nothing 
else  but  a  poisoning  of  the  Biver  of  Life  at  its  sacred  source. 
Our  Bevisers,  (witJi  the  best  and  p>urest  intentions,  no  douht,) 
stand   convicted  of  having  deliberately  rejected  the  worda  of 


DEDICATION.  Vll 

Inspiration  in  every  page,  mid  of  having  substituted  for  them 
fabricated  Readings  ivhich  the  Church  has  long  since  refused  to 
acknowledge,  or  else  has  rejected  with  abhorrence ;  and  ivhich 
only  survive  at  this  time  in  a  little  handful  of  documents  of 
the  most  dejyraved  type. 

As  Critics  they  have  had  abundant  warning.  Twelve  years 
ago  (1871)  a  volume  appeared  on  'the  last  Twelve  Verses  of 
the  Gospel  according  to  S.  Mark,' — of  which  the  declared 
object  was  to  vindicate  those  Verses  against  certain  critical 
objectors,  and  to  establish  them  by  an  exhaustive  argumentative 
process.  Up  to  this  hour,  for  a  very  obvious  reason,  no  answer 
to  that  volume  has  been  attempted.  And  yet,  at  the  end  of  ten 
years  (1881), — not  only  in  the  Revised  English  but  also  in  the 
volume  which  professes  to  exhibit  the  underlying  Greeh,  (which 
at  least  is  indefensible,) — the  Revisers  are  observed  to  separate 
of  those  Twelve  precious  Verses  from  their  context,  in  toJceti  that 
they  are  no  part  of  the  genuine  Gosp)el.  Such  a  deliberate  pre- 
ference of  '  muDipsimus '  to  '  sumpsimus '  is  by  no  means  calcu- 
lated to  conciliate  favour,  or  even  to  win  respect.  The  Revisers 
have  in  fact  been  the  dtipes  of  an  ingenious  Theorist,  concerning 
whose  extraordinary  views  you,  are  invited  to  read  what  Dr. 
Scrivener  lias  recently  put  forth.  The  ivords  of  the  last-named 
writer  (who  is  facile  princeps  in  Textual  Criticism)  ivill  be 
found  facing  the  beginning  of  the  present  Dedication. 

If,  therefore,  any  do  complain  that  I  have  sometimes  hit  my 
opponents  rather  hard,  I  tahe  leave  to  point  out  that  "  to  every- 


Vni  DEDICATION. 

thing  there  is  a  aeason,  and  a  time  to  evtnj  jjurpose  muler  the 
sun "  :  "  a  time  to  embrace,  and  a  time  to  he  far  from  em- 
bracing " :  a  time  for  speaking  smoothly,  and  a  time  for 
speaking  sharphj.  And  that  when  the  words  of  Inspiration  are 
seriously  imperilled,  as  now  they  are,  it  is  scarcely  possible  for 
one  who  is  determined  effectually  to  preserve  the  Deposit  in  its 
integrity,  to  hit  either  too  straight  or  too  hard.  In  handling 
certain  recent  idterances  of  Bishop  Ellicott,  I  considered 
throughout  that  it  tvas  the  '  Textual  Critic,' — not  the  Successor 
of  the  Apostles, — with  whan  I  had  to  do. 

And  thus  I  commend  my  Volume,  the  fruit  of  many  years 
of  incessant  anxious  toil,  to  your  indulgence :  requesting  that 
you  will  receive  it  as  a  token  of  my  sincere  respect  and  ad- 
miration;  and  desiring  to  be  remembered,  my  dear  Lord 
Cranbrook,  as 

Your  gratefid  and  affectionate 

Friend  and  Servant, 

JOHN  W.  BURGON. 

DsAysnr,  CnicHESTtj!, 
All  Saixts'  Dav.   1888. 


Ik 

^  .  ,, .,.,.  Jill'  -^ 


r 


_,^,^^^r.,^^-- 


PREFACE. 

The  ensuing  three  Articles  from  the  '  Quarterly  Eeview,' 
— (wrung  out  of  me  by  the  publication  [May  17th,  1881] 
of  the  '  Eevision '  of  our  '  Authorized  Version  of  the  New 
Testament,') — appear  in  their  present  form  in  compliance 
with  an  amount  of  continuous  solicitation  that  they  should 
be  separately  published,  wliich  it  would  have  been  alike  un- 
reasonable and  ungracious  to  disregard.  I  was  not  prepared 
for  it.  It  has  caused  me — as  letter  after  letter  has  reached 
my  hands — mixed  feelings ;  has  revived  all  my  original 
disinclination  and  regret.  For,  gratified  as  I  cannot  but  feel 
by  the  reception  my  labours  have  met  with, — (and  only  the 
Author  of  my  being  knows  what  an  amount  of  antecedent 
toil  is  represented  by  the  ensuing  pages,)—  I  yet  deplore 
more  heartily  than  I  am  able  to  express,  the  injustice  done 
to  the  cause  of  Truth  by  handling  the  subject  in  this  frag- 
mentary way,  and  by  exhibiting  the  evidence  for  what  is 
most  certainly  true,  in  such  a  very  incomplete  form.  A 
systematic  Treatise  is  the  indispensable  condition  for  securing 
cordial  assent  to  the  view  for  which  I  mainly  contend.  The 
cogency  of  the  argument  lies  entirely  in  the  cumulative 
character  of  the  proof.  It  rerpiires  to  be  demonstrated  by 
induction  from  a  large  collection  of  particular  instances,  as 
well  as  by  the  complex  exhibition  of  many  converging  lines 
of  evidence,  that  the  testimony  of  one  small  group  of 
documents,  or  rather,  of  one  particular  manuscript, — (namely 


X  PREFACE. 

the  Vatican  Codex  b,  wliicli,  for  some  unexplained  reason,  it 
is  just  now  the  fashion  to  regard  with  superstitious  deference,) 
— is  the  reverse  of  trustworthy.  Nothing  in  fact  hut  a 
considerable  Treatise  will  ever  effectually  break  the  yoke  of 
that  iron  tyranny  to  wdiich  the  excellent  Bishop  of  Gloucester 
and  Bristol  and  his  colleagues  have  recently  bowed  their 
necks ;  and  are  now  for  imposing  on  all  English-speaking 
men.  In  brief,  if  I  were  not,  on  the  one  hand,  thoroughly 
convinced  of  the  strength  of  my  position, — (and  I  know  it 
to  be  absolutely  impregnable) ; — yet  more,  if  on  the  other 
hand,  I  did  not  cherish  entire  confidence  in  the  practical 
good  sense  and  fairness  of  the  English  mind ;— I  could 
not  have  brought  myself  to  come  before  the  public  in  the 
unsystematic  way  which  alone  is  possible  in  tlie  pages  of 
a  Eeview.  I  must  have  waited,  at  all  hazards,  till  I  liad 
finished  '  my  Book.' 

But  then,  delay  would  have  been  fatal.  I  saw  plainly 
that  unless  a  sharp  blow  was  delivered  immediately,  the 
Citadel  would  be  in  the  enemy's  hands.  I  knew  also  that  it 
was  just  possible  to  condense  into  60  or  70  closely-printed 
pages  what  must  logically  prove  fatal  to  the  '  lievision.'  So 
I  set  to  work ;  and  during  the  long  summer  days  of  1881 
(June  to  September)  the  foremost  of  these  three  Articles  was 
elaborated.  When  the  October  number  of  '  the  Quarterly  ' 
appeared,  I  comforted  myself  with  the  secret  consciousness 
that  enough  was  by  this  time  on  record,  even  had  my  life 
been  suddenly  brought  to  a  close,  to  secure  the  ultimate  re- 
jection of  the  '  Pievisi(,)n '  of  1881.  I  knew  that  the  '  New 
Cireok  Text,'  (and  therefore  the    '  New  English  Version  '), 


PREFACE.  xi 

had  received  its  death-blow.  It  might  for  a  few  years  drag 
out  a  maimed  existence ;  eagerly  defended  by  some, — timidly 
pleaded  for  by  others.  But  such  efforts  could  be  of  no  avail. 
Its  days  were  already  numbered.  The  effect  of  more  and 
yet  more  learned  investigation, — of  more  elaborate  and  more 
extended  inquiry, — Tiiust  be  to  convince  mankind  more  and 
yet  more  thoroughly  that  the  principles  on  which  it  had  been 
constructed  were  radically  unsound.  In  the  end,  when  parti- 
sanship had  cooled  down,  and  passion  had  evaporated,  and 
prejudice  had  ceased  to  find  an  auditory,  the  '  Eevision '  of 
1881  must  come  to  be  universally  regarded  as — what  it  most 
certainly  is, — the  most  astonishing,  as  well  as  the  most  calamitous 
literary  hlunder  of  the  Age. 

I.  I  pointed  out  that  '  the  New  Greek  Text,' — which,  in 
defiance  of  their  instructions,^  the  Revisionists  of  '  the 
Authorized  English  Version  '  had  been  so  ill-advised  as  to 
spend  ten  years  in  elaborating, — was  a  wholly  untrustworthy 
performance :  was  full  of  the  gravest  errors  from  beginning 
to  end :  had  been  constructed  throughout  on  an  entirely 
mistaken  Theory.  Availing  myself  of  the  published  confes- 
sion of  one  of  the  Eevisionists,^  I  explained  the  nature  of 
the  calamity  which  had  befallen  the  Eevision.  I  traced  the 
mischief  home  to  its  true  authors, — Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort ; 
a  copy  of  whose  unpublished  Text  of  the  N.  T.  (the  most 
vicious  in  existence)  had  been  confidentially,  and  under 
pledges  of  the  strictest  secrecy,  placed  in  the  hands  of  everv 


^  Any  one  who  desires  to  see  this  charge  established,  is  invited  to  rend 
from  page  399  to  page  413  of  what  follows. 
'  Dr.  Newth.     See  pp.  37-9. 


Xll  riJEFACE. 

member  of  the  revising  Body.^  I  called  attention  to  the 
fact  that,  unacquainted  with  the  difficult  and  delicate  science 
of  Textual  Criticism,  the  Eevisionists  had,  in  an  evil  hour, 
surrendered  themselves  to  Dr.  Hort's  guidance :  had  preferred 
his  counsels  to  those  of  Prebendary  Scrivener,  (an  infinitely 
more  trustworthy  guide):  and  that  the  work  before  the 
public  was  the  piteous — but  inevitahle — result.  All  this  I 
explained  in  the  October  number  of  the  '  Quarterly  Eeview ' 
for  1881.2 

II.  In  thus  demonstrating  the  worthlessncss  of  the  '  New 
Greek  Text '  of  the  Eevisionists,  I  considered  that  I  had 
destroyed  the  key  of  their  position.  And  so  perforce  I 
had :  for  if  the  underlying  Greek  Text  be  mistaken,  what 
else  but  incorrect  must  the  English  Translation  be  ?  But  on 
examining  the  so-called  '  Eevision  of  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion,' I  speedily  made  the  further  discovery  that  the  Eevised 
English  would  have  been  in  itself  intolerable,  even  had  the 
Greek  been  let  alone.  In  the  fii-st  place,  to  my  surprise  and 
annoyance,  it  proved  to  be  a  New  Translation  (rather  than  a 
Eevision  of  the  Old)  which  had  been  attempted.  Painfully 
apparent  were  the  tokens  which  met  me  on  every  side 
that  the  Eevisionists  had  been  supremely  eager  not  so  much 
to  correct  none  but  "  plain  and  clear  eiTors," — as  to  introduce 
as  many  changes  into  the  English  of  the  New  Testament 
Scriptures  as  tlicy  conveniently  could.^  A  skittish  impatience 
of  the  admirable  work  before  them,  and  a  strange  inability 


>  See  pp.  24-9  :  97,  &c.  '  See  below,  i)p.  I  to  110. 

^  This  will  be  found  more  fully  explained  from  pp.  127  to  130:  ]ip.  154 
to  1(54 :  also  pp.  400  to  403.     See  also  the  quotations  on  pp.  112  and  368. 


PREFACE.  Xlll 

to  appreciate  its  manifold  excellences  : — a  singular  imagina- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  promiscuous  Company  which  met  in 
the  Jerusalem  Chamber  that  they  were  competent  to  improve 
the  Authorized  Version  in  every  part,  and  an  unaccountable 
forgetfulness  that  the  fundamental  condition  under  which 
the  task  of  Eevision  had  been  by  themselves  undertaken, 
was  that  they  should  abstain  from  all  but  ''necessary" 
changes : — this  proved  to  be  only  part  of  the  offence  which 
the  Eevisionists  had  committed.  It  was  found  that  they  had 
erred  through  defective  Scholcirsliip  to  an  extent,  and  with  a 
frequency,  which  to  me  is  simply  inexplicable.  I  accordingly 
made  it  my  business  to  demonstrate  all  this  in  a  second 
Article  which  appeared  in  the  next  (the  January)  number 
of  the  '  Quarterly  Review,'  and  was  entitled  '  The  New 
English  Translation.'  ^ 

III.  Thereupon,  a  pretence  was  set  up  in  many  quarters, 
{hut  only  by  the  Revisionists  and  their  friends,)  that  all  my 
labour  hitherto  had  been  thrown  away,  because  I  had  omitted 
to  disprove  the  principles  on  which  this  '  New  Greek  Text ' 
is  founded.  I  flattered  myself  indeed  that  quite  enough  had 
been  said  to  make  it  logically  certain  that  the  underlying 
'  Textual  Theory  '  must  he  worthless.  But  I  was  not  suffered 
to  cherish  this  conviction  in  quiet.  It  was  again  and  again 
cast  in  my  teeth  that  I  had  not  yet  grappled  with  Drs.  West- 
cott  and  Hort's  '  arguments,'  "  Instead  of  condemning  their 
Text,  why  do  you  not  disprove  their  Theory  ?"  It  was  taunt- 
ingly insinuated  that  I  knew  better  than  to  cross  swords 


^  See  below,  pp.  113  to  232. 


XIV  PREFACE. 

with  the  two  Cambridge  Professors.  Tliis  reduced  me  to  the 
necessity  of  either  leaving  it  to  be  inferred  from  my  silence 
tliat  I  had  found  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort's  '  arguments ' 
unanswerable ;  or  else  of  coming  forward  with  tlieir  book  in 
my  hand,  and  demonstrating  that  in  their  solemn  pages  an 
attentive  reader  finds  himself  encountered  by  nothing  but  a 
series  of  unsupported  assumptions  :  that  their  (so  called) 
'  Theory '  is  in  reality  nothing  else  but  a  weak  effort  of  the 
Imagination  :  that  the  tissue  which  these  accomplished 
scholars  have  been  thirty  years  in  elaborating,  proves  on 
inspection  to  be  as  flimsy  and  as  worthless  as  any  spider's 
web. 

I  made  it  my  business  in  consequence  to  expose,  some- 
what in  detail,  (in  a  third  Article,  which  appeared  in  the 
'  Quarterly  Review  '  for  April  1882),  the  absolute  absurdity, 
— (I  use  the  word  advisedly) — of '  Westcott  and  Hort's 
New  Textual  Theory  ; '  ^  and  I  now  respectfully  commend 
those  130  pages  to  the  attention  of  candid  and  unprejudiced 
readers.  It  were  idle  to  expect  to  convince  any  others.  AVe 
have  it  on  good  authority  (Dr.  Westcott's)  that  "  he  who  has 
long  pondered  over  a  train  of  Reasoning,  becomes  unaUc  to 
detect  its  vjecck  j^oints.'' "^  A  yet  stranger  phenomenon  is,  that 
those  who  have  once  committed  themselves  to  an  erroneous 
Theory,  seem  to  be  incapable  of  opening  their  eyes  to  the 
untrustworthiness  of  tlie  fabric  they  have  erected,  even  when 
it  comes  down  in  their  sight,  like  a  child's  house  built  with 
playing-cards, — and  presents  to  every  eye  but  their  own  the 
appearance  of  a  shapeless  ruin. 


'  Sec  bcluw,  pp.  235  to  36G.  ^  Gospel  of  the  Jiesurredion,  p.  viii. 


PREFACE.  XV 

§  1.  Two  full  years  have  elapsed  since  the  first  of  these 
Essays  was  published  ;  and  my  Criticism — for  the  best  of 
reasons  —  remains  to  this  hour  unanswered.  The  public 
has  been  assured  indeed,  (in  the  course  of  some  hysterical 
remarks  by  Canon  Farrar^),  that  "the  'Quarterly  Ee viewer  ' 
can  be  refuted  as  fully  as  he  desires  as  soon  as  any  scholar 
has  the  leisure  to  answer  him."  The  '  Quarterly  Eeviewer  ' 
can  afford  to  wait, — if  the  Eevisers  can.  But  they  are 
reminded  that  it  is  no  answer  to  one  who  has  demolished 
tlieir  master's  '  Tlieory,'  for  the  pupils  to  keep  on  reproducing 
fragments  of  it ;  and  by  their  mistakes  and  exaggerations,  to 
make  both  themselves  and  him,  ridiculous. 


^  Reference  is  made  to  a  vulgar  effu.sion  in  the  '  Contemporary  Eevicio' 
for  March  1882  :  from  which  it  chiefly  appears  that  Canon  (now  Arch- 
deacon) Farrar  is  nnable  to  forgive  S.  Mark  the  Evangelist  for  having 
written  the  16th  verse  of  his  concluding  chapter.  The  Venerable  writer 
is  in  consequence  for  ever  denouncing  those  "?as<  Twelve  Verses."  In 
March  1882,  (pretending  to  review  my  Articles  in  the  *  Quarterly,')  he 
says: — "In  spite  of  Dean  Burgon's  Essay  on  the  subject,  the  minds  of 
most  scholars  are  quite  unalterably  made  up  on  such  questions  as  the 
authenticity  of  the  last  twelve  verses  of  S.  Mark."  \_Co7itemporary  Re- 
view, vol.  xli.  p,  365.]  And  in  the  ensuing  October, — "  If,  among  jyositive 
results,  any  one  should  set  down  such  facts  as  that  .  .  .  Mark  xvi.  9-20 . .  . 
formed  no  part  of  the  original  apostolic  autograp>h  .  .  .  He,  I  say,  who 
should  enumerate  these  points  as  being  beyond  the  reach  of  serious  dispute 
.  .  .  would  be  expressing  the  views  which  are  regarded  as  indisputable  by 
the  vast  majority  of  such  recent  critics  as  have  estabhshed  any  claim  to 
serious  attention."     \_Exposifor,  p.  173.] 

It  may  not  be  without  use  to  the  Venerable  writer  that  he  should  be 
reminded  that  critical  questions,  instead  of  being  disposed  of  by  such  lan- 
guage as  the  foregoing,  are  not  even  touched  thereby.  One  is  surprised  to 
have  to  tell  a  "  fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,"  so  obvious  a  truth 
as  that  by  such  writing  he  does  but  effectually  put  himself  out  of  court. 
By  proclaiming  that  his  mind  is  "  quite  unalterably  made  up "  that  the 
end  of  S.  Mark's  Gospel  is  not  authentic,  he  admits  that  he  is  impervious 
to  argument  and  therefore  incapable  of  understanding  proof.  It  is  a  mere 
waste  of  time  to  reason  with  an  unfortunate  who  announces  that  he 
is  beyond  the  reach  of  conviction. 


xvi  PREFACE, 

§  2.  Thus,  a  writer  in  the  '  Church  Quarterly  '  for  January 
1882,  (wliosc  knowledge  of  the  subject  is  entirely  derived 
from  what  Dr.  Hort  has  taught  him,) — being  evidently 
much  exercised  by  the  first  of  my  three  Articles  in  the 
'  Quarterly  Eeview,' — gravely  informs  the  public  that  "it  is 
useless  to  parade  such  an  array  of  venerable  witnesses," 
(meaning  the  enumerations  of  Fathers  of  the  iiird,  ivth,  and 
Ytli  centuries  which  are  given  below,  at  pp.  42-4:  80-1  : 
84  :  133  :  212-3  :. 359-60  :  421  :  423  :  486-90  ■)—" for  tluy 
have  absolutely  nothing  to  say  vhich,  deserves  a  moment's  hcar- 
i7iy."^ — What  a  pity  it  is,  (while  lie  was  about  it),  that 
the  learned  gentleman  did  not  go  on  to  explain  tliat  the 
moon  is  made  of  green  cheese  ! 

§  3.  Dr.  Sanday,^  in  a  kindred  spirit,  delivers  it  as  his 
opinion,  that  "  the  one  thing "  I  lack  "  is  a  grasp  on  the 
central  condition  of  the  i)rob]em :  " — that  I  do  "  not  seem  to 
have  the  faintest  glimmering  of  the  principle  of  'Genealogy:'" 
— tliat  I  am  "  all  at  sea :  " — that  my  "  heaviest  batteries  are 
discharged  at  random  : " — and  a  great  deal  more  to  the  same 
effect.  The  learned  Professor  is  quite  welcome  to  tliink  sucli 
things  of  me,  if  he  pleases.     Ov  <^povTL<i  'iTnroKXecSi]. 

§  4.  At  the  end  of  a  year,  a  Iieviewer  of  ({uite  a  different 
calibre  made  his  appearance  in  tlie  January  number  (1883) 
of  the  '  Church  Quarterly  : '  in  return  for  whose  not  very 


*  No,  xxviii.,  pa^c  43*).  If  any  one  cares  to  know  what  the  teaching 
was  which  the  writer  in  tlic  'Church  Quarterly'  was  intending  to  r(>])ro* 
<liice,  he  is  invited  to  read  from  p.  21)0  to  p.  300  of  the  present  vohmie. 

^  ('oitti:iiq)orari/  Itcvicw,  (Dec.  1881), —  p.  985  scq. 


PREFACE.  XVll 

encouraging  estimate  of  my  labours,  I  gladly  record  my 
conviction  that  if  he  will  seriously  apply  his  powerful  and 
accurate  mind  to  the  department  of  Textual  Criticism,  lie 
will  probably  produce  a  work  which  will  help  materially  to 
establish  the  study  in  which  he  takes  such  an  intelligent 
interest,  on  a  scientific  basis.  But  then,  he  is  invited  to 
accept  the  friendly  assurance  that  the  indispensable  condi- 
tion of  success  in  this  department  is,  that  a  man  should  give 
to  the  subject,  (which  is  a  very  intricate  one  and  abounds  in 
unexplored  problems),  his  undivided  attention  for  an  extended 
period.  I  trust  there  is  nothing  unreasonable  in  the  suggestion 
that  one  who  has  not  done  this,  should  be  very  circumspect 
when  he  sits  in  judgment  on  a  neighbour  of  his  who,  for 
very  many  years  past,  has  given  to  Textual  Criticism  the 
whole  of  his  time; — has  freely  sacrificed  health,  ease,  re- 
laxation, even  necessary  rest,  to  this  one  object ; — has  made 
it  his  one  business  to  acquire  such  an  independent  mastery 
of  the  subject  as  shall  qualify  him  to  do  battle  successfully 
for  the  imperilled  letter  of  God's  Word.  My  friend  however 
thinks  differently.     He  says  of  me, — 

"  In  his  first  Article  there  was  something  amusing  in  the 
simplicity  with  which  'Lloyd's  Greek  Testament'  (which  is 
only  a  convenient  little  Oxford  edition  of  the  ordinary  kind) 
was  put  forth  as  the  final  standard  of  appeal.  It  recalled  to 
our  recollection  Bentley's  sarcasm  upon  the  text  of  Stephanus, 
which  '  your  learned  Wbitbyus '  takes  for  the  sacred  original  in 
every  s}^^llable."     (P.  354.) 

§  5.  On  referring  to  the  passage  where  my  'simplicity ' 
has  afforded  amusement  to  a  friend  whose  brilliant  conver- 
sation is  always  a  delight  to  mc,  I  read  as  follows, — 

b 


xviii  PREFACE. 

"It  is  discovered  that  in  the  111  (out  of  320)  pages  of  a  copy 
of  Lloyd's  Greek  Testament,  in  which  alone  these  five  manu- 
scripts are  collectively  available  for  comparison  in  the  Gospels, 
— the  serious  deflections  of  A  from  the  Textus  Receptus  amount 
in  all  to  only  842  :  whereas  in  c  they  amount  to  1798  :  in  b,  to 
2370 :  in  n,  to  3392 :  in  D,  to  4697.  The  readings  iKculiar  to  A 
within  the  same  limits  are  133  :  those  peculiar  to  c  are  170.  But 
those  of  B  amount  to  107  :  while  x  exhibits  443  :  and  the  read- 
ings peculiar  to  d  (within  the  same  limits),  are  no  fewer  than 
1829  ....  We  submit  that  these  facts  are  not  altogether 
calculated  to  inspire  confidence  in  codices  b  x  c  d."  ^ 

§  6.  But  how  (let  me  ask)  does  it  appear  from  this,  that 
I  have  "  put  forth  Lloyd's  Greek  Testament  as  the  final 
standard  of  Appeal "  ?  True,  that,  in  order  to  exhibit  clearly 
their  respective  divergences,  I  have  referred  five  famous 
codices  (a  B  x  c  d) — certain  of  which  are  found  to  have 
turned  the  brain  of  Critics  of  the  new  school — to  one  and  the 
same  familiar  exhihition  of  the  commonly  received  Text  of  the 
New  Testament :  but  by  so  doing  I  have  not  by  any  means 
assumed  the  Textual  purity  of  that  common  standard.  In 
other  words  I  have  not  made  it  "  the  final  standard  of 
Appeal."  All  Critics, — wherever  found, — at  all  times,  have 
collated  with  the  commonly  received  Text :  but  only  as  the 
most  convenient  standard  of  Comparison  ;  not,  surely,  as  the 


'  Q.  R.  (No.  304,)  p.  313. — The  passage  referred  to  will  be  found  below 
(at  p.  14), — slightly  modified,  in  order  to  protect  niyself  against  the  risk 
oi future  inisconception.  My  Reviewer  refers  to  four  other  places.  He  will 
find  that  my  only  object  in  them  all  was  to  prove  that  codices  a  b  K  c  d 
yield  divergent  testimony ;  and  therefore,  so  habitually  contradict  one 
another,  as  effectually  to  invalidate  their  own  evidence  througliout.  This 
has  never  been  proved  before.  It  can  only  be  proved,  in  fact,  by  one  who 
has  laboriously  collated  the  codices  in  question,  and  submitted  to  the 
drudgery  of  exactly  tubulating  the  result. 


PREFACE.  xix 

absolute  standard  of  Excellence.  The  result  of  the  experiment 
already  referred  to, — (and,  I  beg  to  say,  it  was  an  exceed- 
ingly laborious  experiment,) — has  lieen,  to  demonstrate  that 
the  five  Manuscripts  in  question  stand  apart  from  one  another 
in  the  following  proportions  : — 

842  (a)  :  1798  (c)  :  2370  (b)  :  3392  («)  :  4697  (d). 

But  would  not  the  same  result  have  been  obtained  if  the 
'  five  old  uncials '  had  been  referred  to  any  other  common 
standard  ivhich  can  he  named  ?  In  the  meantime,  what  else 
is  the  inevitable  inference  from  this  phenomenon  but  that 
four  out  of  the  five  must  be — while  all  the  five  may  be — 
outrageously  depraved  documents  ?  instead  of  being  fit  to  be 
made  our  exclusive  guides  to  the  Truth  of  Scripture, — as 
Critics  of  the  school  of  Tischendorf  and  Tregelles  would  have 
us  believe  that  they  are  ? 

§  7.  I  cited  a  book  which  is  in  the  hands  of  every  school- 
boy, (Lloyd's  '  Greek  Testament,')  only  in  order  to  facilitate 
reference,  and  to  make  sure  that  my  statements  would  be 
at  once  understood  by  the  least  learned  person  who  could 
be  supposed  to  have  access  to  the  '  Quarterly.'  I  presumed 
every  scholar  to  be  aware  that  Bp.  Lloyd  (1827)  professes  to 
reproduce  Mill's  text ;  and  that  Mill  (1707)  reproduces  the 
text  of  Stephens;^  and  that  Stephens  (1550)  exhibits  with 
sufficient  accuracy  the  Traditional  text, — which  is  confessedly 


^  "  Damus  tibi  in  inanus  Novum  Testamentiim  idem  profecto,  quod  ad 
textum  attinet,  cum  ed.  Milliana," — are  the  well  known  opening  words 
of  the  'Monitum'  prefixed  to  Lloyd's  N.  T. — And  Mill,  according  to 
Scrivener,  \_Introduction,  p.  399,]  "  only  aims  at  reproducing  Stephens' 
text  of  1550,  though  in  a  few  places  he  departs  from  it,  whether  by  accident 
or  design."     Such  places  are  found  to  amount  in  all  to  twenty-nine. 


XX  PREFACE. 

at  least  1530  years  old.^  Now,  if  a  tolerable  approximation 
to  the  text  of  a.d.  350  may  not  be  accepted  as  a  standard  of 
Comjjarison, — will  the  writer  in  the  'Church  Quarterly'  be 
so  obliging  as  to  inform  us  n-hich  exhilntion  of  the  sacred 
Text  matj  ? 

§  8.  A  pamphlet  by  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester  and  Bristol,^ 
which  appeared  in  April  1882,  remains  to  be  considered. 
Written  expressly  in  defence  of  the  Ptevisers  and  their  New 
Greek  Text,  this  composition  displays  a  slenderness  of 
acquaintance  with  the  subject  now  under  discussion,  for 
which  I  was  little  prepared.  Inasmuch  however  as  it  is  the 
production  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Eevisionist  body,  and 
professes  to  be  a  reply  to  my  first  two  Articles,  I  have 
bestowed  upon  it  an  elaborate  and  particular  rejoinder 
extending  to  an  liuiuh-ed-and-fifty  pages.^  I  shall  in 
consequence  be  very  jirief  concerning  it  in  this  place. 

§  9.  The  respected  writer  does  nothing  else  but  reproduce 
Westcott  and  Hort's  theory  i?i  Wcstcott  and  Horfs  words. 
He  contributes  nothing  of  his  own.  The  singular  infelicity 
which  attended  his  complaint  that  the  '  Quarterly  Reviewer ' 
"  censures  their  [Westcott  and  Hort's]  Text,"  but,  "  has  not 
attempted  a  serious  examination  of  the  arguments  which  they 
allege  in  its  support,"  I  have  sufficiently  dwelt  upon  else- 
where.*    The  rest  of  the  Bishop's  contention  may  be  summed 


•  See  below,  pp.  257-8  :  also  p.  390. 

'  The  lievisers  and  the  Greek  Text  of  the  New  Testament,  &c. — Mac- 
millfin,  l)p.  7f). 

»  Si;c  Iwli.w,  ])p.  .'U;n  to  520.  *  Pages  371-2. 


PREFACE.  XXI 

up  in  two  propositions  :■ — -The  first,  (I.)  That  if  the  Revision- 
ists are  wrong  in  their  '  New  Greek  Text,'  then  (not  only 
Westcott  and  Hort,  but)  Lachmann,  Tischendorf  and  Tregelles 
must  be  wrong  also, — a  statement  which  I  hold  to  be  incon- 
trovertible.— The  Bishop's  other  position  is  also  undeniable  : 
viz.  (II.)  That  in  order  to  pass  an  equitable  judgment  on 
ancient  documents,  they  are  to  be  carefully  studied,  closely 
compared,  and  tested  by  a  more  scientific  process  than  rough 
comparison  with  the  Textus  Receptiis}  .  .  .  Thus,  on  both 
heads,  I  find  myself  entirely  at  one  with  Bp.  Ellicott. 

§  10.  And  yet, — as  the  last  150  pages  of  the  present 
volume  show, — I  have  the  misfortune  to  be  at  issue  with  the 
learned  writer  on  almost  every  particular  which  he  proposes 
for  discussion.     Thus, 

§  11.  At  page  64  of  his  pamphlet,  he  fastens  resolutely 
upon  the  famous  problem  whether  '  God  '  (©eo?),  or  '  who ' 
(09),  is  to  be  read  in  1  Timothy  iii.  16.  I  had  upheld 
the  former  reading  in  eight  pages.  He  contends  for  the 
latter,  with  something  like  acrimony,  in  twelve.^  I  have 
been  at  the  pains,  in  consequence,  to  write  a  '  Dissertation  ' 
of  seventy-six  pages  on  this  important  subject,^ — the  prepar- 
ation of  which  (may  I  be  allowed  to  record  the  circumstance 
in  passing  ?)  occupied  me  closely  for  six  months,*  and  taxed 
me  severely.  Thus,  the  only  point  which  Bishop  Ellicott 
has  condescended  to  discuss  argumentatively  with  me,  will 
be  found  to  enjoy  full  half  of  my  letter  to  him  in  reply. 


'  Pamphlet,  pp.  77  :  39,  40,  41.  ^  See  below,  p.  425. 

»  Pages  424-501.  '  From  January  till  June  1883. 

C  2 


XX 11  PREFACE. 

The  '  Dissertation '  referred  to,  I  submit  with  humljle  conii- 
dence  to  the  judgment  of  educated  Englishmen.  It  requires 
no  learning  to  understand  the  case.  And  I  have  particularly 
to  request  that  those  who  will  be  at  the  pains  to  look  into 
this  question,  will  remember, — (1)  That  the  place  of  Scrip- 
ture discussed  (viz.  1  Tim.  iii.  16)  was  deliberately  selected 
for  a  trial  of  strength  by  the  Bishop :  (I  should  not  have 
chosen  it  myself): — (2)  That  on  the  issue  of  the  conten- 
tion which  he  has  thus  himself  invited,  we  have  respectively 
staked  our  critical  reputation.  The  discussion  exhibits  very 
fairly  our  two  methods, — his  and  mine ;  and  "  is  of  great 
importance  as  an  example,"  "  illustrating  in  a  striking 
manner"  our  respective  positions, — as  tlie  Bishop  himself 
has  been  careful  to  remind  his  readers.^ 

§  12.  One  merely  desirous  of  taking  a  general  survey  of 
tliis  question,  is  invited  to  read  from  page  485  to  496  of  the 
present  volume.  To  understand  the  case  thoroughly,  he 
must  submit  to  the  labour  of  beginning  at  p.  424  and  reading 
down  to  p.  501. 

§  13.  A  thoughtful  person  who  has  been  at  the  pains  to  do 
this,  will  be  apt  on  laying  down  the  Ixtok  to  ask, — "But  is 
it  not  very  remarkable  that  so  many  as  five  of  the  ancient 
Versions  should  favour  the  reading  '  which,'  (fjivar^ptov '  o 
i^avepoidr),)  instead  of  '  GoD  '  (©eo?)  "  ? — "  Yes,  it  is  very 
reiiuirkiil)le,"  I  answer.  "For  though  the  Old  Latin  and  the 
two  Egyptian  Versions  are  constantly  observed  to  conspire 

'  I'uinp?i/<jt,  |).  7G. 


PREFACE.  XXlll 

in  error,  they  rarely  find  allies  in  the  Peschito  and  the 
^thiopic.  On  the  other  hand,  you  are  to  remember  that 
besides  Versions,  the  Fathers  have  to  be  inquired  after : 
while  more  important  than  either  is  the  testimony  of  the 
Copies.  Now,  the  combined  witness  to  '  God  '  (©eo?), — so 
multitudinous,  so  respectable,  so  varied,  so  unequivocal, — of 
the  Copies  and  of  the  Fathers  (in  addition  to  three  of  the 
Versions)  is  simply  overwhelming.  It  becomes  undeniable 
tliat  %e6<i  is  by  far  the  best  supported  reading  of  the  present 
place." 

§  14.  When,  however,  such  an  one  as  Tischendorf  or 
Tregelles, — Hort  or  EUicott, — would  put  me  down  by  re- 
minding me  that  half-a-dozen  of  the  oldest  Versions  are 
against  me, — "  That  argument "  (I  reply)  "  is  not  allowable 
on  your  lips.  For  if  the  united  testimony  of  Jive  of  the 
Versions  really  be,  in  your  account,  decisive, — Why  do  you 
deny  the  genuineness  of  the  '  last  Twelve  Verses  of  S.  Mark's 
Gospel,  wJiich  are  recognized  hy  every  one  of  the  Versions  ? 
Those  Verses  are  besides  attested  hy  every  kyiown  Copy,  except 
two  of  bad  character :  hy  a  mighty  chorus  of  Fathers :  hy  the 
unfaltering  Tradition  of  the  Church  universal.  First  remove 
from  S.  Mark  xvi.  20,  your  brand  of  suspicion,  and  then 
come  back  to  me  in  order  that  we  may  discuss  together  how 
1  Tim.  iii.  16  is  to  be  read.  And  yet,  when  you  come  back, 
it  must  not  be  to  plead  in  favour  of  '  who '  (09),  in  place  of 
'God'  (0609).  For  not  'who'  (09),  remember,  but  'which'  (o) 
is  the  reading  advocated  by  those  five  earliest  Versions."  .  .  . 
In  other  words, — the  reading  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16,  which  the 
Eevisers  have  adopted,  enjoys,  (as  I  have  shown  from  page 
428  to  page  501),    the  feehlest   attestation  of  any;    besides 


xxiv  PREFACE. 

being  condemned  by  internal  considerations  and  the  universal 
Tradition  of  the  Eastern  Church. 

§  15.  I  pass  on,  after  modestly  asking, — Is  it  too  much  to 
hope,  (I  covet  no  other  guerdon  for  my  labour!)  that  we 
shall  hear  no  more  about  substituting  "  who  "  for  "  God  "  in 
1  Tim.  iii.  16  ?  We  may  not  go  on  disputing  for  ever :  and 
surely,  until  men  are  able  to  produce  some  more  cogent 
evidence  than  has  yet  come  to  light  in  support  of  "  the 
mystery  of  godliness,  wlio "  (to  tt)*?  €vae^ela<;  fivartjpiov ' 
6'?), — all  sincere  inquirers  after  Truth  are  bound  to  accept 
that  reading  which  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  by  far  the 
liest  attested.     Enough  however  on  this  head. 

§  IG.  It  was  said  just  now  that  I  cordially  concur  with 
Bp.  Ellicott  in  the  second  of  his  two  propositions, — viz.  That 
"  no  equitable  judgment  can  be  passed  on  ancient  documents 
until  they  are  carefully  studied,  and  closely  compared  with 
each  other,  and  tested  by  a  more  scientific  process  than  rough 
comparison  with  "  the  Textus  Eeceptus.  I  wish  to  add  a  few 
words  on  this  subject :  the  rather,  because  what  I  am  about 
to  say  will  be  found  as  applicable  to  my  Eeviewer  in  the 
'  Church  Quarterly '  as  to  the  Bishop.  Both  have  misappre- 
hended this  matter,  and  in  exactly  the  same  way.  Where 
such  accomplished  Scholars  have  erred,  -wliat  wonder  if 
ordinary  readers  sliouhl  find  themselves  all  a-field  ? 

§  17.  In  Textual  Criticism  then,  "rough  comparison"  can 
seldom,  if  ever,  be  of  any  real  use.  On  the  other  liand,  the 
exact  Collation  of  documents  whether  anricnt  or  niddcrn  with 


PREFACE.  XXV 

the  received  Text,  is  the  necessary  foundation  of  all  scientific 
Criticism.  I  employ  that  Text, — (as  Mill,  Bentley,  Wetstein ; 
Griesbacli,  Mattha^i,  Scholz  ;  Tischendorf,  Tregelles,  Scrivener, 
employed  it  before  me,) — not  as  a  criterion  of  Excellence,  but 
as  a  standard  of  Comjjarison.  All  this  will  be  found  fully 
explained  below,  from  page  383  to  page  391.  Whenever  I 
would  judge  of  the  authenticity  of  any  particular  reading,  I 
insist  on  bringing  it,  wherever  found, — whether  in  Justin 
Martyr  and  Irenseus,  on  the  one  hand ;  or  in  Stephens  and 
Elzevir,  on  the  other; — to  the  test  of  Catholic  Antiquity.  If 
that  witness  is  consentient,  or  very  nearly  so,  whether  for  or 
against  any  given  reading,  I  hold  it  to  be  decisive.  To  no 
other  system  of  arbitration  will  I  submit  myself  I  decline 
to  recognise  any  other  criterion  of  Truth. 

§  18.  What  compels  me  to  repeat  this  so  iften,  is  the 
impatient  self-sufliciency  of  these  last  days,  which  is  for 
breaking  away  from  the  old  restraints ;  and  for  erecting  the 
individual  conscience  into  an  authority  from  which  there 
shall  be  no  appeal.  I  know  but  too  well  how  laborious  is 
the  scientific  method  which  /  advocate.  A  long  summer  day 
disappears,  while  the  student — with  all  his  appliances  about 
him — is  resolutely  threshing  out  some  minute  textual  problem. 
Another,  and  yet  another  bright  day  vanishes.  Comes  Saturday 
evening  at  last,  and  a  page  of  illegible  manuscript  is  all  that 
he  has  to  show  for  a  week's  heavy  toil.  Quousque  tandem  ? 
And  yet,  it  is  the  indispensable  condition  of  progress  in  an 
unexplored  region,  that  a  few  should  thus  labour,  until  a 
path  has  been  cut  through  the  forest, — a  road  laid  down, — 
huts  built, — a  modus  vivendi  established.    In  this  department 


xxvi  PREFACE. 

of  sacred  Science,  men  have  been  going  on  too  long  inventing 
their  facts,  and  delivering  themselves  of  oracular  decrees,  on 
the  sole  responsibility  of  their  own  inner  consciousness. 
There  is  great  convenience  in  such  a  method  certainly, — a 
charming  simplicity  which  is  in  a  high  degree  attractive  to 
flesh  and  blood.  It  dispenses  with  proof.  It  furnishes  no 
evidence.  It  asserts  when  it  ought  to  argue.^  It  reiterates 
when  it  is  called  upon  to  explain.^  "  I  am  sir  Oracle."  .  .  . 
This, — which  I  venture  to  style  the  unscientific  method, — 
reached  its  culminating  point  when  Professors  Westcott  and 
Hort  recently  put  forth  their  Eecension  of  the  Greek  Text. 
Their  work  is  indeed  quite  a  psychological  curiosity. 
Incomprehensible  to  me  is  it  how  two  able  men  of 
disciplined  understandings  can  have  seriously  put  forth 
the  volume  which  they  call  "  Introduction — Appendix." 
It  is  the  very  Reductio  ad  ahsurdum  of  the  uncritical 
method  of  the  last  fifty  years.  And  it  is  especially  in 
opposition  to  this  new  method  of  theirs  that  I  so  strenuously 
insist  that  the  consentient  voice  of  Catholic  Antiquity  is  to  be 
diligently  inquired  after  and  submissively  listened  to;  for 
that  this,  in  the  end,  will  prove  our  only  safe  guide. 

§  19.  Let  this  be  a  sufficient  reply  to  my  Eeviewer  in 
the  '  Church  Quarterly,' — who,  I  observe,  notes,  as  a  funda- 
mental defect  in  my  Articles,  "  the  want  of  a  consistent  work- 
ing Theory,  such  as  would  enable  us  to  weigh,  as  well  as 
count,  the  suffrages  of  MSS.,  Versions,  and  Fathers."  ^  He  is 
reiuinded  that  it  was  no  part  of  my  business  to  propound  a 


'  E.-.  pa^cs  L'52-'J0H  :  2G0-277  ;  305-308.         ""  E.g.  pigcs  30L'-30G. 
^  I'agc  o54. 


PREFACE.  XXVU 

'  Theory.'  My  method  I  have  explained  often  and  fully  enough. 
My  business  was  to  prove  that  the  theory  of  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort, — which  (as  Bp.  Ellicott's  pamphlet  proves)  has 
been  mainly  adopted  by  the  Eevisionists, — is  not  only  a 
worthless,  but  an  utterly  absurd  one.  And  I  have  proved 
it.  The  method  I  persistently  advocate  in  every  case  of  a 
supposed  doubtful  Reading,  (I  say  it  for  the  last  time,  and 
request  that  I  may  be  no  more  misrepresented,)  is,  that 
an  appeal  shall  he  unreservedly  made  to  Catholic  Antiquity; 
and  that  the  combined  verdict  of  Manuscripts,  Versions, 
Fathers,  shall  be  regarded  as  decisive. 

§  20.  I  find  myself,  in  the  mean  time,  met  by  the  scoffs, 
jeers,  misrepresentations  of  the  disciples  of  this  new  School ; 
who,  instead  of  producing  historical  facts  and  intelligible 
arguments,  appeal  to  the  decrees  of  their  teachers, — which  / 
disallow,  and  which  they  are  unable  to  substantiate.  They 
delight  in  announcing  that  Textual  Criticism  made  "  a  fresh 
departure  "  with  the  edition  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort :  that 
the  work  of  those  scholars  "  marks  an  era,"  and  is  spoken  of 
in  Germany  as  "  epoch-making."  My  own  belief  is,  that  the 
Edition  in  question,  if  it  be  epoch-making  at  all,  marks  that 
epoch  at  which  the  current  of  critical  thought,  reversing 
its  wayward  course,  began  once  more  to  flow  in  its  ancient 
healthy  channel.  '  Cloud-land  '  having  been  duly  sighted  on 
the  14th  September  1881,^  "  a  fresh  departure  "  was  insisted 
upon  by  public  opinion, — and  a  deliberate  return  was  made, 
— to  teri^a  firma,  and  tc7Ta  cognita,  and  common  sense.     So 


^  On  that  day  appeared  Dr.  Hurt's  '  Introduction  and  Appendix'  to  the 
J^'.  T.  as  edited  by  himself  and  Dr.  AVestcott. 


xxviii  PEEFACE. 

far  from  "  its  paramount  claim  to  the  respect  of  futiTre 
o-enerations,"  being  "the  restitution  of  a  more  ancient  and 
a  purer  Text," — I  venture  to  predict  that  the  edition  of  the 
two  Cambridge  Professors  will  be  hereafter  remembered  as 
indicating  the  furthest  point  ever  reached  by  the  self-evolved 
imaginations  of  English  disciples  of  the  school  of  Lachmann, 
Tischendorf,  Tregelles.  The  recoil  promises  to  be  complete. 
English  good  sense  is  ever  observed  to  prevail  in  the  long 
run  ;  although  for  a  few  years  a  foreign  fashion  may  acquire 
the  ascendant,  and  beguile  a  few  unstable  wits. 

§  21.  It  only  remains  to  state  that  in  republishing  these 
Essays  I  have  availed  myself  of  the  opportunity  to  make 
several  corrections  and  additions ;  as  well  as  here  and  there 
to  expand  what  before  had  been  too  briefly  delivered.  My 
learned  friend  and  kind  neighbour,  the  Rev.  E.  Cowley 
Powles,  has  ably  helped  me  to  correct  the  sheets.  Much 
valuable  assistance  has  been  zealously  rendered  me  through- 
out by  my  nephew,  the  Ptcv.  William  F.  Rose,  Vicar  of 
Worle,  Somersetshire.  But  the  unwearied  patience  and  con- 
summate skill  of  my  Secretary  (M.  W.)  passes  praise.  Every 
syllable  of  the  present  volume  has  been  transcribed  by  her 
for  the  press ;  and  to  her  I  am  indebted  for  two  of  my  In- 
dices.— The  obligations  under  which  many  learned  men,  both 
at  home  and  abroad,  have  laid  me,  will  be  found  faithfully 
acknowledged,  in  the  proper  place,  at  the  foot  of  the  page.  I 
am  sincerely  grateful  to  them  all. 

§  22.  It  will  be  readily  believed  tliat  I  have  been  sorely 
tempted  to  recast  the  whole  and  to  strengthen  my  position 


PEEFACE.  xxix 

ill  every  part :  but  then,  the  work  would  have  no  longer  been, 
— "  Three  Articles  reprinted  from  the  Quarterly  Eeview." 
Earnestly  have  I  desired,  for  many  years  past,  to  produce 
a  systematic  Treatise  on  tliis  great  subject.  My  aspiration 
all  along  has  been,  and  still  is,  in  place  of  the  absolute 
Empiricism  which  has  hitherto  prevailed  in  Textual  inquiry 
to  exhibit  the  logical  outlines  of  what,  I  am  persuaded,  is 
destined  to  become  a  truly  delightful  Science.  But  I  more 
than  long, — I  fairly  aclie  to  have  done  with  Controversy,  and 
to  be  free  to  devote  myself  to  the  work  of  Interpretation. 
My  apology  for  bestowing  so  large  a  portion  of  my  time  on 
Textual  Criticism,  is  David's  when  he  was  reproached  by  his 
brethren  for  appearing  on  the  field  of  battle, — "  Is  there  not 
a  cause  ? " 

§  23.  For, — let  it  clearly  be  noted, — it  is  no  longer  the 
case  that  critical  doubts  concerning  the  sacred  Text  are 
confined  to  critical  Editions  of  the  Greek.  So  long  as  scholars 
were  content  to  ventilate  their  crotchets  in  a  little  arena  of 
their  own, — however  mistaken  they  might  be,  and  even 
though  they  changed  their  opinions  once  in  every  ten  years, — 
no  great  harm  was  likely  to  come  of  it.  Students  of  the 
Greek  Testament  were  sure  to  have  their  attention  called 
to  the  subject, — which  must  always  be  in  the  highest  degree 
desirable  ;  and  it  was  to  be  expected  that  in  this,  as  in  every 
other  department  of  learning,  the  progress  of  Inquiry  would 
result  in  gradual  accessions  of  certain  Knowledge.  After 
many  years  it  might  be  found  practicable  to  put  forth  b}' 
authority  a  carefully  considered  Eevision  of  the  commonly 
received  Greek  Text. 


XXX  PREFACE. 

§  24.  But  instead  of  all  this,  a  Eevision  of  the  English 
Authorised  Version  having  been  sanctioned  by  the  Convocation 
of  the  Southern  Province  in  1871,  the  o^jportunity  was 
eagerly  snatched  at  by  two  irresponsible  scholars  of  the 
University  of  Cambridge  for  ol)taining  the  general  sanction 
of  the  Eevising  body,  and  thus  indirectly  of  Convocation,  for 
a  private  venture  of  their  own, — their  own  privately  de\'ised 
Eevision  of  the  Greek  Text.  On  that  Greek  Text  of  theirs, 
(which  I  hold  to  be  the  most  depraved  which  has  ever 
appeared  in  print),  with  some  slight  modifications,  our 
Authorised  English  Version  has  been  silently  revised :  silently, 
I  say,  for  in  the  margin  of  the  English  no  record  is  preserved 
of  the  underlying  Textual  changes  which  have  been  introduced 
by  the  Eevisionists.  On  the  contrary.  Use  has  been  made 
of  that  margin  to  insinuate  suspicion  and  distrust  in  count- 
less particulars  as  to  the  authenticity  of  the  Text  which 
has  been  suffered  to  remain  unaltered.  In  the  meantime, 
the  country  has  been  flooded  with  two  editions  of  the  New 
Greek  Text ;  and  thus  the  door  has  been  set  wide  open  for 
universal  mistrust  of  the  Truth  of  Scripture  to  enter. 

§  25.  Even  schoolboys,  it  seems,  are  to  have  these  crude 
views  thrust  upon  them.  Witness  the  '  Cambridge  Greek 
Testament  for  Schools,'  edited  by  Dean  Perowne, — who  in- 
forms us  at  the  outset  that  'the  Syndics  of  the  Camhridge 
University  Press  have  not  thought  it  desirable  to  reprmt  the 
text  in  common  use.'  A  consensus  of  Drs.  Tischendorf  and 
TregcUes, — who  confessedly  employed  the  selfsame  mistalcen 
major  p'cwiis-.s  in  remodelling  the  Sacred  Text, — seems,  in  a 
general    way,   to  represent  those  Syndics'  notion  of  Textual 


PREFACE.  XXxi 

purity.  By  this  means  every  most  serious  deformity  in  the 
edition  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort,  becomes  promoted  to 
honour,  and  is  being  thrust  on  the  unsuspecting  youth  of 
England  as  the  genuine  utterance  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Would  it  not  have  been  the  fairer,  the  more  faithful  as  well 
as  the  more  judicious  course, — seeing  that  in  respect  of  this 
abstruse  and  important  question  adhuc  sub  jtidice  lis  est, — 
to  wait  patiently  awhile  ?  Certainly  not  to  snatch  an  oppor- 
tunity "  while  men  slept,"  and  in  this  way  indirectly  to  pre- 
judge the  solemn  issue !  Not  by  such  methods  is  the  cause 
of  God's  Truth  on  earth  to  be  promoted.  Even  this  however 
is  not  all.  Bishop  Lightfoot  has  been  informed  that  "the 
Bible  Society  has  permitted  its  Translators  to  adopt  the  Text 
of  the  Eevised  Version  where  it  commends  itself  to  their 
judgment"  ^  In  other  words,  persons  wholly  unacquainted 
with  the  dangers  which  beset  this  delicate  and  difficult 
problem  are  invited  to  determine,  by  the  light  of  Nature 
and  on  the  '  solvere  amhulando '  principle,  what  is  inspired 
Scripture,  what  not :  and  as  a  necessary  consequence  are  en- 
couraged to  disseminate  in  heathen  lands  Eeadings  which,  a 
few  years  hence, — (so  at  least  I  venture  to  predict,) — will 
be  universally  recognized  as  worthless. 

§  26.  If  all  this  does  not  constitute  a  valid  reason  for 
descending  into  the  arena  of  controversy,  it  would  in  my 
judgment  be  impossible  to  indicate  an  occasion  when  the 
Christian  soldier  is  called  upon  to  do  so  : — the  rather,  because 
certain  of  those  who,  from  their  rank  and  station   in   the 


1  '  Ghanje'  published  in  the  Giiardian,  Dec.  20,  1882,  p.  1818. 


xxxu 


GENERAL   SUMMARY   OF   CONTENTS. 


Church,  ought  to  be  the  cham])ion.s  of  the  Truth,  are  at  this 
time  found  to  be  among  its  most  vigorous  assailants. 

§  27.  Let  me, — (and  with  this  I  conchide), — in  giving  the 
present  Volume  to  the  world,  be  allowed  to  request  that  it  may 
be  accepted  as  a  sample  of  how  Deans  employ  their  time, — 
the  use  they  make  of  their  opportunities.  Nowhere  but 
under  the  shadow  of  a  Cathedral,  (or  in  a  College,)  can  such 
laborious  endeavours  as  the  present  ^:)ro  Ecdesid  Dj:i  be 
successfully  prosecuted. 


J.  W.  B. 


Deanery,  Chichester, 
All  Saints'  Day,  1883. 


GENERAL  SUMMARY  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGB 

Dedication        ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  .,  ..  .,         v 

PkKFACE  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  IX 

Tahle  of  Contents     ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  xxxiii 

Art.  I.      The  New  Greek  Text      ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  1 

„    II.    The  New  English  Version          ..          ..          ..          ..  113 

„    III.  Westcott  and  Hort's  New  Textual  Theory            ..  235 

Letter  to  Bishop  Ellicott              ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  3G9 

Dissertation  on  1  Timothy  iii.  16     ..          ..          ..     424  to  501 

Appendix  of  Additional  Sacred  Codices..          ..          ..          ..  521 

Postscript,  showing  that  the  traditional  Reading  of  1  Timothy  iii.  Iti, 

is  fomid  in  300  Codices 528 

Index  I.       Texts  of   Scripture  quoted,   discussed,   or  only  re- 
ferred to 529 

II.  Fathers  Quoted  ..          ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  538 

III.  Genkrai,  Index     ..          ..           ..          ..          ..           ..  541 


(     xxxiii     ) 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS, 

Article  I. — The  New  Greek  Text. 

PAO  K 

(a.)  Gravity  of  the  issue  raised  by  the  '  Revision '  of  1881  . .          . .  1 

in  consequence  of  the  course  adopted  by  the  Revisers       ,.  3 

'  Bethesda,' '  Bethsaida,' and  '  Bethzatha '  ..          ..          .,  5 

The  Reconstruction  of  the  Greek  Text,  was  a  fatal  mistake     ..  6 

as  we  shall  presently  show : —          ..           ..          ..          ..  7 

but  a  few  elementary  textual  facts  must  first  be  stated     . .  8 
(b.)  The  oldest  copies  of  the  N.  T.  (b  and  ^),  which  are  among  the 

most  depraved  extant,  are  just  now  blindly  followed        ..  9 

Codex  D  exhibits  the  wildest  Text  of  all      ..          ..          .,  12 

The  five  '  old  Uncials '  characterized  by  Bp.  EUicott         . .  14 

Codices  N  B  c  D  demonstrably  corrupt  in  a  high  degree     . ,  16 
The  merit  or  demerit  of  the  '  Received  Text '  is  a  matter 

wholly  beside  the  question            ..           ..           ..          ..  17 

(c.)  Manuscripts,  Versions,  and  Fathers, — our  three  great  helps  18 

Erroneous  systems  of  Lachmann,  Tregelles,  Tischendorf           ..  21 

Treatment  of  S.  John,  xxi,  25,  by  the  last-named  editor  . .  23 

^Vestcott  and  Hort's  printed  Text,  the  most  vicious  which  has 

hitherto  appeared           . .           . .           . .          . .           . .          . .  24 

Their  Theory  briefly  examined         . .          . .          . .          . .  26 

The  popular  estimate  of  the  five  oldest  MSS.  shown  to  be 

erroneous             ,.          ..          ..          ..          ..          ..           ,.  29 

by  analysis  of  their  handling  of  S.  Mark,  ii.  1-12              ..  30 

and  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  (S.  Luke  xi.  2-4)            ..          ..  34 

'  Last  Twelve  Verses  '  of  S.  Mark's  Gospel         ..           ..          ..  36 

A  new  way  of  '  settling '  the  Text  of  the  N.  T,              ..          ..  37 

The  Traditional  Reading  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14,  established  against 

Codices  x  a  b  d              ..           ..          ..          ,.          ..          ..  41 

(d.)  '  Various  Readings '  are  frequently  the  result  of  Accident         . .  50 
as   in   Acts   xxvii.    37:     xviii.    7. — S.   Matth.    xi,   23. — 

S.  Luke  X.  15         ..          ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  51 

(e.)  (v.)  '  Various  Readings''  &xeoit%n  ih.Q  xqsmH  oi  Design             ..  56 

as  in  S.  Mark  xi.  3  (noKiv)  : — S.  AJk.  xi.  8 :— S.  Luke  xxiii.  45  58 

Assimilation,  a  fertile  cause  of  '  Various  Readings  '    . .          . .  65 

as  in  S.  Mark,  xi.  20  (^Tropet)            ..           ..           ..           ..  gg 

Mutilation,  another  cause ; — as  in  S.  Mark  xi.  24 : — St.  Matth. 
xiv,  30 :— S.  Mark  xv.   39  :— S.  Luke  xxiii.  42  :— S.  John 

xiv.  4  : — and  in  S.  Luke  vi.  1  (SfUTfpoTrpwToj/)          ,.          ..  69 

Omissions  in  S.  Luke  xxii.,  xxiii.,  xxiv. — for  which  Cod.  d      , .  75 

is  chiefly  responsible : — xxii.  19,  20  : — xxii.  43,  44           . .  77 


XXXIV 


TABLE   OF  CONTENTS. 


Our  Lord's  '  Agony  in  tlie  Garden,'— His  '  Bloody  Sweat '  and 

the  Ministering  Angel  (S.  Luke  xxii.  43,  44), — together  with       79 
His  prayer  for  His  murderers  (S.  Luke  xxiii.  34), — vindicated 

against  Westcott  and  Hort  and  the  Revisers  ,.  ..  ..        82 

'i'he  Inscription  on  His  Cross  (S,  Luke  xxiii.  38)  established    . .        85 
Seven  precious  places  in  the  Gospel  (viz.  S.  Luke  xxiv.  1 ; — 

xxiv.  12  :— xxiv.  36  :— xxiv.  40  88 

S.  Matthew  xvii.  21 : — xviii.  11  :^S.  Luke  ix.  55-6)  defended 
and  established  against  Westcott  and  Hort  and  the  Revisers       91 
Transposition  of  words,  as  in  S.  Luke  xxiv.  41  ..  ..        93 

also  in  S.  Luke  vi.  1.     Other  instances  of  '  Transposition  '       95 
S.  Luke  xxiv.  7,  a  fair  sample  of  unauthorized  transposition       96 
(/.)  Two  grounds  of  complaint  against  the  Revisers ..  ,.  ..        97 

(g.)  Discussion  of  1  Timothy  iii.  16,  the  crux  Critieorum, — (more 

largely  discussed  from  p.  424  to  p.  501)         ..  ..  ..       98 

The  foregoing  are  samples  only  of  about  6000  departures  for 
the  worse  from  the  traditional  Text     ..  ..  ..  ..      106 

An  '  Eddystone  lighthouse '  built  on  the  '  Goodwin  sands '  no 

unapt  image  of  the  '  Revised  Version  '  before  us    ..  ..      110 


Article  IL — The  New  English  Version. 

(a.)  The  tremendous  risk  incurred  by  Biblical  Revision      ..  ..  113 

And  yet,  ivlio  was  to  have  foreseen  the  mischief  which  actually 

has  come  to  pass  ?  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  114 

(&.)  Unfairness  of  the  Revisers,  illustrated  by  their  treatment  of 

S.Luke  iii.  22 115 

as  compared  with  their  treatment  of  S.  Luke  x.  41,  42     ..  116 
Their  one  anxiety  seems  to  have  been  to  impose  Westcott  and 

Hort's  vicious  Recension  on  the  public  ..  ..  ..  117 

'J'he  Revisers'  Greek  text  calamitously  depraved  throughout    ..  118 

e.g.  in  S.  Matthew  i.  18  :  and  in  S.  Matthew  i.  25  ..  119 

(c..)  Bp.  Ellicott  and  Dr.  Westcott  had  already  declared  [see  jiage  xlii] 

that  a  Revised  Greek  Text  would  be  as  yet  premature         ..  124 
(ri.)  Proof  that  the  Rules  laid  down  at  the  outset  for  the  Revision 

of  the  Authorized   Version        ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  126 

and  of  the  underlying  Greek  Text, — have  been  disregarded  130 

(e.)   Unfairness  of  the  Revisers  in  stating  the  evidence         ..  ,.  131 

notably  in  respect  of  S.  John  iii.  13  ..  ..  ..  132 

and  of  the  '  number  of  the  Beast '  (Rev.  xiii.  18)  .,  ..  135 

Unfair  suppression  systematically  practised  by  them ;  e.g.,  in 

respectofS.Markvi.il  ..  ..  ..  ..  .,  137 

Revisers'  notion  of  making  '  as  few  alterations  as  possible '       . .  138 

Novel  expressions  which  they  have  introduced  ..  .,  ..  147 

Mistranslation  of  Acts  xxi.  37,  and  of  S.  Matth.  xxvi.  15         .,  149 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS. 


XXXV 


PAGE 

Unwarrantable  change  iu  Acts  xxvi.  28,  29        ..          ..          ..  151 

(/.)  Mechanical  uniformity  of  rendering,  a  grievous  mistake           ..  152 
((/.)  Vicious  system  of  rendering  the  Greek  Tenses  and  representing 

the  Greek  Article           ..          ..          ..          ..          ..          ,.  154 

Specimens  of  infelicitous  and  unidiomatic  rendering       . .          . .  155 

Pedantry  of  the  Eevisers  in  respect  of  the  Greek  Aorist          ..  157 

and  of  THE  Tenses  generally           ..          ..          ..          ..  161 

The  Greek  Article  misunderstood  by  the  Revisers       ..          ..  164 

Pronouns  and  Particles  tastelessly  and  inaccurately  rendered  165 

Unidiomatic  rendering  of  Prepositions  ..          ..          ..          ..  170 

A  specimen  (2  S.  Peter  i.  5-7)      ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  171 

Violated  proprieties  of  the  English  language       ..          ..          ..  172 

(h.)  The  Margin  of  the  Revision  is  encumbered  with  Textual  Errors  175 

Take  two  specimen  blunders :           ..          ..          ..          ..  176 

also,  some   sorry   alternative   Renderings  : — some   useless 

marginal  glosses      ..          ..          ..           ..          ..          ..  178 

some  erroneous  '  Explanatory  Notes '           ..          ..          ..  180 

some  foolish  mistakes  resulting  from  slender  acquaintance 

with  Hellenistic  Greek      ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  182 

Specimens  of  '  Marginal  Notes '  desiderated        ..          ..          ..  184 

Absurd  note  on  S.  Mark  xiv.  3     .,          ..          ..          ..          ..  185 

Marginal  inconsistency  in  respect  of  proper  Names        . .          . .  186 

(/.)   Mistaken  principle  of  Translation            ..          ..          ..          ..  187 

~       Theory  of  the  Translators  of  1611            188 

The  work  of  1881  inferior  to  that  of  1611           190 

(y.)  The  same  word  must  sometimes  be  diversely  rendered : — as  alrelv  191 

aipiivai,  Tvaihi(T<r].     And  certain  renderings : —        ..           ..  193 

as  '  Sepulchre,'  '  Doctrine,'  '  Vials,'  '  Charity,'  '  Miracles ' ..  197 

and  '  Holy  Ghost  ' — may,  on  no  account,  be  interfered  with  204 

'  Epileptic '  (S.  Matth.  xvii.  15),  a  sorry  gloss,  not  a  translation  205 

(Jc.)  '  Everlasting '  unfairly  excluded  as  the  rendering  of  alu)vios     . .  206 

^Inspiration': — (Bp.  Middleton  ue^'SMS  Bp.  Ellicott)    ,.          ..  208 

Discreditable  handling  of  S.  Mark  xiii.  32          209 

Socinian  gloss  on  Romans  ix.  5,  patronized  by  the  Revisers      ..  210 

(I.)   '  The  Evil  One '  improperly  introduced  into  '  the  Lord's  Prayer '  214 

Other  changes  for  the  worse  in  the  Revision  of  1881      . .          . .  217 

The  Revisers  prefer  '  mumpsimus  '  to  '  sumpsimus ' : —             . ,  218 

and  have  corrupted  the  text  of  S.  John  x.  14         ..          ..  220 

(to.)  The  Authorized  Version  is  better  than  the  Revision     . .          . .  221 

Sir  Edmund  Beckett. — Novel  Phraseology       ..          ..          ..  222 

(n.)  Where  are  our  '  Headings '  and  our  '  Marginal  References  ?'      . .  223 

The  '  New  English  Version '  characterized         , ,          . .          . .  225 

The  Book  has  been  made  umeadable       . .          . .          . .          . .  226 

(o.)  Case  of  '  the  Revision '  hopeless  ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  227 

d 


XXXVl  TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Certain  of  the  Revisers  at  least  are  free  from  blame       ,.  ..     228 

Consolatinii  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ,.  ..      232 

Article  III. — Westcott  and  Hobt's  New  Textual  Theory. 

(a.)  The  general  disappointment  occasioned  by  '  the  Revision  '        . .      235 
having  been  proclaimed  by  the  Reviewer  in  Oct.  1881      . .      237 
he  found  himself  taunted  with  not  having  grappled  with 

Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort's  '  New  Textual  Theory  '         ..240 
iAa<  omission  he  proposes  to  repair  effectually  «ow  ..     241 

(b.)  He  begins  by  rehearsing  the  method  of  their  predecessors  : —  ..     242 
(Lachmann,   Tregelles,   Tischendorf)  :    and   pointing    out 

what  had  been  the  underlying  fallacy  of  them  all  . .      243 

The  Edition  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort,  unlike  the  rest, 

proves  to  be  destitute  of  Critical  apparatus         . ,  . .     245 

which  makes  its  oracular  tone  peculiarly  unbecoming     ..     247 
(c.)   Dr.  Hort  takes  no  account  of  gross  Textual  errors  which  have 

been  the  result  of  Z)esi5'?i  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..     248 

and  which  prevail  in  his  favourite  Codices  b  and  d  . .      249 

His  account  of  his  own  Edition  inspires  distrust  and  dismay   . .     250 
for  he  claims  that  Readings  [by  himself]  "  strongly  pre- 
ferred "  shall  be  accepted  as  the  Truth  of  Scripture       ..     252 
thereby  setting  up  ^mse?/"  as  the  supreme  authority         ..      253 
(d.)  He  vaunts  the  ^factor  of  Genealogy '  (a  term  to  be  explained 

further  on)  as  the  great  instrument  of  Textual  progress       . .     254 
and    identifies    the    Traditional    Greek    Text    with    the 
dominant '  ;S2/*'*«'^  ^^^^ '  of  A.D.  350-400  ..  ..     257 

(e.)  His  ^  Theory  of  Conflation^  cntically  examined...  ..  ..     258 

and  ascertained  to  be  visionary        .,  ..  ..  ..     264 

On  it,  nevertheless,  Dr.  Hort  proceeds  to  build  . .  . .  . .      265 

frequently  asserting  (never  proving)  that  'Syrian  readings  ' 
are  posterior  to  all  other    ..  ..  ..  ..  ..     266 

and  that  '  Praz-Syrian  '  readings  must  be  Apostolic  ..     268 

The  '  Traditional  Greek  Text^  Dr.  Hort  chooses  to  call  '  Syrian '    269 
and   readings  peculiar  to  b  and  N,  he  arbitrarily  Aes\g- 
nates  '  Prse- Syrian^  and  '  NeutraV         ..  ..  ..     271 

By   an   effort  of  the   Imagination,   he  assumes  (a)  that   the 
*  Syrian '  Text  was  the  result  of  a  deliberate  and  autho- 
ritative Recension, —  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..      272 

of  which  he  invents  (1)  the  Occasion  (2)  the  History,  and 

(3)  the  Date  (namely,  between  a.d.  250  and  a.d.  350) ..     273 
He  further  assumes  (/3)  that  the  Syriac  Version  underwent 

a  similar  fantastic  process  of  Recension  at  the  same  time     275 
Dr.  Hort's  fabulous  account  of  the  origin  of  the  Traditional 
Greek  Text 278 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS.  XXXvii 

PAGE 

which  recoils  inconveniently  on  himself      ..  ..  ..      284 

For  (by  the  hypothesis)  that  Text  was  the  direct  product 

of  the  collective  wisdom  of  the  Church  in  her  best  days  286 
Dr.  Hort's  estimate  of  the  result  of  the  (imaginary)  labours 

of  the  Church  a.d.  250-a.d.  350  :  which  (he  says) —  ..  289 
resulted  in  a  fabricated  Text  which,  in  some  unexplained 

way  instantly  established  itself  all  over  the  world  ..  290 
and— (unrecorded  by  a  single  writer  of  Antiquity) —  ..  293 
became  the  direct  lineal  Ancestor  of  every  copy  of  the 

N.  T.  in  existence 297 

insinuating  itself  into  the  writings  of  all  the  Greek  Fathers     298 
and  thus   establishing  the    importance  of  the  ''factor  of 
(?e«ea?or/?/' [vaimted  at  p.  254]    ..  ..  ..  ..      299 

(/.)  The  one  object  of  all  this  wild  writing  shown  to  be  the  glorifi- 
cation of  '  Codices  b  and  X ' —       . .  . .  . .  . .      300 

for  the  lost  original  of  which  two  Codices,  '  general  immu- 
nity from  substantive  error '  is  claimed  by  Dr.  Hort     ..     304 
{(J.)  The  Reviewer  remonstrates  with  the  Professor  ..  ..  ,.      305 

who  insists  that  the  readings  of  '  codex  b  '  have  the  '  ring 
of  genuineness '       . .  . .  . .  , ,  . .  . .      306 

but  is  reminded  that  his  own  '  inner  consciousness '  is  an 
unsafe  guide  in  this  respect  . .  . .  . .  . .      308 

Moreover,  his  proposed  test  is  proved  to  be  inapplicable  . .      310 

{h.)  Dr.  Hort  is  for  shutting  us  up  for  ever  within  '  Codices  b  and  N  '     312 

but  we  decline  to  submit  to  the  proposed  bondage  ..      313 

for  the  bad  character  of  those  two  Codices  is  a  fact  ..     315 

their  very  preservation  being  probably  attributable  solely 

to  the  patent  foulness  of  the  Text  they  exliibit  ..  ..     319 

(i.)  And  thus  we  part  company  from  our  learned,  and  accomplished 

but  certainly  most  incompetent  and  mistaken  Guide    ..      320 

(j.)  Dialogue  of  the  Reviewer  with  a  Supposed  Objector,  in  proof 

that    the    most    ancient    document    accessible    is    not  of 

necessiY?/ the  purest  also             ..          ..          ..          ..  ..  321 

Fragment  of  the  *  Medea''  written  B.C.  200              ..  ..  321 

Caius  (a.d.  175)  on  heretical  depravations  of  the  Text  ..  323 

Case  of  the  Codices  '  B  K  c '  ..          ..          ..          ..  ..  325 

Visit  to  the  library  of  Clemens  Alexandiinus  (a.d.  183)  ..  326 

(A-.)  Dialogue   of  the  Reviewer  with  a  Friendly   Critic, — who 
remonstrates  with  him  on  the  (supposed)  dangerous  tendency 
of  the  foregoing  remarks  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .      328 

The  Reviewer  in  reply,  explains  what  is  meant  by  appealing 

to  '  Antiquity ' 329 

Endeavours   to    account   for    the    deformity    occasionally 
exhibited  by  certain  of  the  earliest  documents    .,  ..      334 


xxxviii  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

VAGE 

and  describes  liis  own  liumble  method  of  procedure  when 

he  would  liimself  ascertain  the  Truth  of  Scripture         ..  336 
(/.)  God  hath  made  ample  provision  for  the  security  of  His  own 

written  Word  ..          ..          ..          ..          ..          ..          ••  338 

(»i.)The  only  trustworthy  method  of  Textual  Criticism  explained  ..  339 
That  must  be  held  to  be  the  true  Text  which  enjoys  the 

fullest  and  most  varied  attestation            ..           ..          ..  340 

Whereas  Dr.  Hort's  '  Theory,'  (founded  on  the  hypothesis 
that  Codex  b  is  almost  immaculate),  suggests  the  image 

of  a  pyramid  balanced  on  its  apex             ..           ..           ..  342 

And  the  Revisers  by  adopting  his  preposterous  method,  have 
done  their  best  to  make  the  Church  of  England  as  well 

as  themselves,  ridiculous    ..          ..          ..          ..          ..  344 

(«.)  The  case  of  the  Codex  Alexandrinus  (a)  stated  ..          ..          ..  345 

1  S.  John  V.  18  discussed  by  the  Keviewer             . .          . .  347 
and  projiosed  as  a  specimen  of  his  own  '  innocent  ignorance '  349 

(o.)  The  Nemesis  of  Superstition  and  Idolatry           . .          . .          . .  350 

Dr.  Hort  on  '  Conjectural  Emendation:' — 2  Tim.  i.  13     ..  351 

S.  Johnvi.  4: — Acts  xx.  28             ..          ..          ..          ..  353 

'  Conjectural  Emendation  '  can  be  allowed  no  place           ..  354 

2  S.  Peter  iii.  10  vindicated  against  Dr.  Hort         ..          ..  356 
also  iIkt]  ('  loithout  a  cause'')  in  S.  Matthew  v.  22              ..  358 

(p.)  Westcott  and  Hort's  method  of  dealing  with  the  Inspired  Text 

shown  to  be  wholly  indefensible          ..          ..          ..          ..  362 

((/.)  The  subject  of  '  Textual  Criticism  '  may  no  longer  sleep       . .  364 
But  the  great  underlying  problem  will  have  now  to  be 

fairly  threshed  out :  and, — '  Gor>  dkfknd  the  Right  !'  365 

Letteu  to  the  Right  Rev.  C.  J.  Ellicott,  D.D.,  Bishop  of 
Gloucester  and  Bristol,  in  reply  to  his  pamphlet  in 
Defence  of  the  Revisers,  and  their  new  Greek  Text  of 
the  New  Testament. 

(a.)  Bishop  Ellicott's  reply  to  our  first  two  Articles..          ..          ..  369 

scarcely  deserves  serious  attention   .,          ..          ,.          ..  370 

and  was  anticipated  by  our  own  third  Article        ..          ..  371 

The  unfairness  of  his  procedure  pointed  out       ..          ..          ..  372 

and  a  question  proposed  to  him  in  passing . .          ..          ..  374 

7/e  appeals  to  '  Modern  Opinion ':  ivc,  to  '  Ancient  Authority'' ..  375 

The  Bishop  in  May  1870,  and  in  May  1882       378 

His  estimate  of  '  the  fabric  of  Modern  Textual  Criticism'        ..  379 

proved  to  be  incorrect,  by  an  ajipcal  to  historical  facts      ..  380 
He  confuses  the  standard  of   ComjKirison   witli   the  standard 

oi  Kjrccllenrc        ..           ..           ..           ..           ..           ..           ..  383 

and  misrei)rescnts  the  Ixeviewcr  in  consequence    ..          ..  387 

But  why  does  he  prejudice  the  question              ..          ..          ..  388 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 


XXXIX 


by  pouring  contempt  on  the  '  first  edition  of  Erasmus  ?'    . . 
since  he  admits  that  the  Traditional  Text  (which  is  not 
the  '  first  edition  of  Erasmus ')  is  at  least  1550  years  old 
And  since  he  has  nothing  to  urge  against  it 
except  Dr.  Hort's  fantastic  hypothesis 
(Ik)  Nothing  (says  the  Bishop)  can  be  more  unjust  on  the  part  of 
the  Reviewer  than  to  suggest  that  the  Revisers  exceeded  their 
Instructions 
But  the  Reviewer  demonstrates  that,  both  in  respect  of  the  '  New 
English  Version ' 

and  in  respect  of  the  *  New  Greek  Test,'  the  Revisers  have 

outrageously  exceeded  their  Instructions 
not  even  suffering  a  trace  to  survive  in  their  Margin  of 

the  mischief  they  have  effected  in  the  Text 
e.g.  at  S.  John  iv.  15  :— S.  Mark  vi.  11 :— S.  Matth.  v.  44 
On   the   other   hand,   they   encumber  their  Margin  with  the 
readings  they  deliberately  reject 

and  omit  the  'Headings,'  and  the  'Marginal  References'.. 
(c.)  Suggested  Allocution, — B]).  Ellicott  to  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort 
(rf.)  Examination  of  the  16  Places  in  which  the  Bishop  proposes 
to  defend  his  '  New  Greek  Text ' 

Viz.  S.  Matth.  i.  25  :— xvii.  21 :— xviii.  11 :— S.  Mark  vi. 
20  :— xi.  3 :— xi.  8  :— xvi.  9-20  :— S.  Luke  ix.  55,  6  :— 
X.  15 : — xi.  2-4  : — xxiii.  38 : — xxiii.  45 : — S.  John  xiv. 

4  : — Acts  xviii.  7  : — 1  Tim.  iii.  16  

(e.)  Three  of  these  Readings  singled  out  for  special  laborious  study, 
viz.  (a)  S.  Luke  ii.  14 :— O)  S.  Mark  xvi.  9-20      .. 

(for  it   is  the  Reviewer, — not  the  Bishop,^ — who  makes, 
and  insists  on  making,  his  appeal  to  Catholic  Antiquity) 
(/.)  Lastly  (7)  1  Timothy  iii.  16.— 

A  iSi^^crtation  follows,  in    proof    that   "  GOD    WAS   MANI- 
FESTED IN  THE  FLESH"  15  the  correct  Reading. 
Preliminary  remarks  in  explanation     .. 

Evidence  in  favour  of  fiva-Trjpiov '  oj,  as  stated  by  Bp.  Ellicott 
shown  to  be  in  every  respect  mistaken 

[1]  Testimony  of  the  Copies  to  1  Timothy  iii.  16.    Of  Cod.  a 
next,  of  Cod.  c 

next,  of  Codd.  f  and  g.  of  S.  Paul     .. 
next,  of  the  Cursive  Copies, — '  Paul  17,'  *  73  '  and  '  181 ' 
[2]  Testimony  of  the  Versions  concerning  1  Tim.  iii.  16.     The 
old  Latin, — 

the  Vulgate, — the  Peschito, — the  Harkleian, — the  Egy2> 
tian, — the  Gothic, — the  Ethiopic, — the  Armenian, — the 
Arabic  version 


PAGE 

389 

390 
391 
394 


399 

400 

403 

407 
407 

411 
412 
413 

415 


417 


420 


423 


424 
429 
430 

431 
437 
438 

443 

448 


449 


xl  TABLE   OF   CONTENTS, 


PACK 


457 


Up  to  this  poiut,  the  sanction  obtained  for  fxva-Tj]{>iov  ■  os  is 

wondrous  slender    . .  , .  . .  . .  . .  . .  454 

[3]  Testimony  of  the  Fathers  concerning  1  Tim.  iii.  16         ..  455 

Gregory  of  Nyssa, — Didymus, — Theodoret . ,  . .  . .  456 

Chrysostom,^ — Gregory   of   Nazianzus, — the    title    "  Iltpl 

6(ias  (rapKa>(T((i)s'     .. 

Severus  of  Antioch, — Diodorus  of  Tarsus    ..  ..  ..  458 

(Bp.  EUicott  as  a  Controversialist.)     The  case  of  Euthalius  459 

ps.-Dionysius  Alexandrinus  . .  ..  ..  .,  ,.  461 

Ignatius, — Barnabas, — Hippolytus, — Gregory  Thaumatur- 

gus, — the  Apostolical  Constitutions, — Basil        . .  . ,  462 

Cyril  of  Alexandria    ..  ,.  ..  ..  ..  ..  464 

The  argument  e  s«7en<('o  considered  ..  ..  .,  ,,  469 

The  story  about  Macedonius  examined,  and  disposed  of  ..  470 

Anonymus, — Epiphanius  (a.d.  787),— Theodoras  Studita, 
^Scholiasts,  —  (Ecumenius, — Theophylact, — Euthymius, 

— Ecclesiastical  Tradition, — the  '  Apostolus '         .,  ..  475 

(I.)  Sum  of  the  evidence  in  favour  of  fivarrripiov  •  5  in  1  Tim. 

iii.  16,  shown  to  be  insufficient, — Theodore  of  Mopsuestia    ,.  479 

(II.)  Sum  of  the  evidence  in  favour  of  fivarTjpiov  •  os  in  1  Tim, 

iii,  16,  shown  to  be  vastly  inferior  to  the  preceding  ,.  .,  482 

Bp.  Ellicott  is  reminded  that  not  '  Modern  Opinion,'  but 
*  Ancient  Authority '  (i.e.  Fact  not  Fiction)  is  to  settle 

this,  and  every  other  Textual  question    ..  .,  ..  483 

(III.)  Sum  of  the  evidence  in  favour  of  9e6j   effyavepoidt]  in 

1  Tim.  iii,  16,  shown  to  be  overwhelming  and  decisive         , .  485 

Testimony  of  20  Fathers,  3  Versions,  4  Uncial  Codices  . .  487 

and  252  (out  of  254)  cursive  Copies — [or  rather,  260  out  of 

262,  for  see  the  Postscript  at  page  528]  ..  ..  491 

also  of  33  Lectionaries — [or  rather,  of  3'6]  .,  ,.  ..  495 

Internal  evidence  for  reading  6eos  tcfyavepwdr]  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16, 

shown  to  be  the  strongest  possible        ..  ..  ..  .,  497 

Close  of  the  J9l£i^CVtati0U  (which  began  at  ]),  421)       ..  ..  501 

(;/.)  Comi)()sition  of  the  Revising  Body  a  breach  of  Churcli  Order    ..  501 

An  Unitarian  lieviser  intolerable  ..  ..  ..  ..  503 

The  '  Westminster  Abbey  scandal '  (22nd  June  1870)  ..  .,  507 

(//..)  Forecast  of  the  probable  Future  of  the  llevision  of  1881  ..  508 

which  differs  essentially  from  that  of  1611      ..  ..  ..  509 

Mutilation  of  S,  Mark  x,  21 :  S,  Luke  ix.  54-6  :  xxii.  64  :  xxiii, 

38:  xxiv.  42  510 

(?■.)   Review  of  the  entire  subject,  and  of  our  respective  ixjsititms     ..  514 

The  nature  of  the  present  contention  explained  ,.  ,.  .,  516 

Parting  counsels. — T])rcc  convenient  Teat  places  mdknicd        ,.  519 

The  subject  dismissed        ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  520 


ARTICLE  I. 
THE  NEW  GREEK  TEXT. 


(      xlii     ) 


"Oue  question  in  connexion  with  the  Authorized  Version  I  have  pui'- 
posely  neglected.  It  seemed  useless  to  discuss  its  Eevision.  The  Bevision 
of  the  orifjinal  Texts  mtist  precede  the  Revision  of  the  Translation :  and 
tlte  time  for  this,  even  in  the  Neiu  Testament,  has  not  yet  fully  come." — 
Dr.  Westcott.^ 

"  It  is  my  honest  conviction  that  for  any  authoritative  Eevision,  we 
are  not  yet  mature;  either  in  Biblical  learning  or  nellenistic  scholarship. 
There  is  good  scholarship  in  this  country,  ....  but  it  has  certainly  not 
yet  heen  sufficiently  directed  to  the  study  of  the  New  Testament.  .  .  .  to 
render  any  national  attempt  at  Revision  either  hopeful  or  lastingly  profit- 
able."— Bishop  Ellicott.^ 

"  I  am  persuaded  that  a  Revision  ought  to  come  :  I  am  convinced  that 
it  will  come.  Not  however,  I  would  trust,  as  yet ;  for  we  are  not  as  yet 
in  any  resj^ect  prepared  for  it.  The  Greek  and  the  English  which  shoukl 
enable  us  to  bring  this  to  a  successful  end,  might,  it  is  feared,  he  icanting 
alike." — Archbishop  Trench.* 


>  Preface  to  TTiMory  of  the  Englii<h  Bible  (p.  ix.),— 18GS. 

2   Profacc  to  Padnral  Epistles  (p.  xi  v.),— 18(51. 

'  T/ir.  Anthorized  Version  of  the  N.  T.  (p.  3),— ISf.S. 


THE 

EEVISION    REVISED 


Article  I.— THE  NEW  GEEEK  TEXT. 


"  It  is  happened  unto  them  according  to  the  true  proverb,  Kvav  eVi- 
(TTp4\j/as  eVi  TO  tdiov  e^epa^a  •  and,  'Yy  ^ovaafievi]  els  KiiXiafia  ^op^opov." 
—2  Peteb  11.  22. 

"  Little  children, — Keep  j^ourselves  from  idols." — 1  John  v.  21. 

At  a  period  of  extraordinary  intellectual  activity  like  the 
present,  it  can  occasion  no  surprise — although  it  may 
reasonably  create  anxiety — if  the  most  sacred  and  cherished 
of  our  Institutions  are  constrained  each  in  turn  to  submit  to 
the  ordeal  of  hostile  scrutiny ;  sometimes  even  to  bear  the 
brunt  of  actual  attack.  Wlien  however  at  last  the  very 
citadel  of  revealed  Truth  is  observed  to  have  been  reached, 
and  to  be  undergoing  systematic  assault  and  battery, 
lookers-on  may  be  excused  if  they  show  themselves  more 
than  usually  solicitous,  '  ne  quid  detrimenti  Civitas  Dei 
capiat.'  A  Eevision  of  the  Authorized  Version  of  the  New 
Testament,^  purporting  to  have  been  executed  by  authority 
of  the  Convocation  of  the  Southern  Province,  and  declaring 
itself  the  exclusive  property  of  our  two  ancient  Universities, 
has  recently  (17th  May,  1881)  appeared ;  of  which  the 
essential   feature   proves   to   be,  that   it   is   founded  on  aii 


^  TJie  Nevj  Testament  of  Our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  translated 
out  of  the  Greeh:  heing  the  Version  set  forth  A.D.  1611,  compared  with  the 
most  ancient  Authorities,  and  Revised  a.d.  1881.'  Printed  for  tlie  Univer- 
sities of  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  1881. 


2  THE   REVISIONISTS   HAVE   NOT   COMPLIED  [Art. 

entirely  New  Recension  of  the  Ch^eck  Text}  A  claim  is  at 
the  same  time  set  up  on  behalf  of  the  last-named  production 
that  it  exhibits  a  closer  approximation  to  the  inspired  Auto- 
graphs than  the  world  has  hitherto  seen.  Not  unreasonable 
therefore  is  the  expectation  entertained  by  its  Authors  that 
the  '  New  English  Version '  founded  on  this  '  New  Greek 
Text ''  is  destined  to  supersede  the  '  Authorized  Version '  of 
1611.  Qnse  cum  ita  sint,  it  is  clearly  high  time  that  every 
faithful  man  among  us  should  bestir  himself:  and  in 
particular  that  such  as  have  made  Greek  Textual  Criticism 
in  any  degree  their  study  should  address  themselves  to  the 
investigation  of  the  claims  of  this,  the  latest  product  of  the 
combined  Biblical  learning  of  the  Church  and  of  the  sects. 

For  it  must  be  plain  to  all,  that  the  issue  which  has  been 
thus  at  last  raised,  is  of  the  most  serious  character.  Tlie 
Authors  of  this  new  Eevision  of  the  Greek  have  either  entitled 
themselves  to  the  Church's  profound  reverence  and  abiding 
gratitude;  or  else  they  have  laid  themselves  open  to  her 
gravest  censure,  and  must  experience  at  her  hands  nothing 
short  of  stern  and  w^ell-merited  rebuke.  No  middle  course 
presents  itself ;  since  assuredly  to  constritct  a  new  Greek  Text 
formed  no  part  of  the  Instructions  which  the  Eevisionists 
received  at  the  hands  of  the  Convocation  of  the  Southern 
Province.  Eatlier  were  they  warned  against  venturing  on 
such  an  experiment ;  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  entire 
undertaking  having  been  declared  at  the  outset  to  be — That 


^  Tht  New  Testament  in  the  Original  Greek,  according  to  the  Text 
foUovjed  in  the  Authorized  Version,  together  with  the  1  ariations  adopted 
in  the  lievised  Version.  Edited  for  the  Syndics  of  the  Cambridge 
University  Press,  by  F.  H.  A.  Scrivener,  M.A.,  D.CLL.,  LL.I).,  Prebendary 
of  Exeter  arid  Vicar  of  Hendon.     Cambridge,  1881. 

'H  KAINH  AIA0HKH.  The  OreeJc  Testament,  nuih  the  Headings 
adopted  hy  the  Bevisers  of  the  Authorized  Version.  [Edited  by  the  Ven. 
Archdeacon  Palmer,  D.P).]     Oxford,  1881. 


I.]  WITH   THE   CONDITIONS   IMPOSED   UPON   THEM.  3 

'  a  Eevision  of  the  Autlwrized  Version '  is  desirable  ;  and  the 
terms  of  the  original  Eesolution  of  Feb.  10th,  1870,  being, 
that  the  removal  of  '  plain  and  clear  errors  '  was  alone  con- 
templated,— 'whether  in  the  Greek  Text  originally  adopted 
by  the  Translators,  or  in  the  Translation  made  from  the 
same.'  Such  were  in  fact  the  limits  formally  imposed  hy  Con- 
vocation, (10th  Feb.  and  3rd,  5th  May,  1870,)  on  the  work  of 
Bevision.  Only  necessary  changes  were  to  be  made.  The 
first  Piule  of  the  Committee  (25th  May)  was  similar  in 
character :  viz. — '  To  inti'oduce  as  few  alterations  as  possible 
into  the  Text  of  the  Authorized  Version,  consistently  with  faith- 
fulness.' 

But  further,  we  were  reconciled  to  the  prospect  of  a 
Eevised  Greek  Text,  by  noting  that  a  limit  was  prescribed  to 
the  amount  of  licence  which  could  by  possibility  result,  by 
the  insertion  of  a  proviso,  which  however  is  now  discovered 
to  have  been  entirely  disregarded  by  the  Eevisionists.  The 
condition  was  enjoined  upon  them  that  whenever  '  decidedly 
prepo7iderating  evidence '  constrained  their  adoption  of  some 
change  in  '  the  Text  from  which  the  Authorized  Version  was 
made,'  they  should  indicate  such  alteration  in  the  margin. 
Will  it  be  believed  that,  this  notwithstanding,  not  one  of  the 
many  alterations  which  have  been  introduced  into  the 
original  Text  is  so  commemorated  ?  On  the  contrary  :  sin- 
gular to  relate,  the  Margin  is  disfigured  throughout  with 
ominous  liints  that,  had  '  Some  ancient  authorities,'  '  Many 
ancient  authorities,'  '  Many  very  ancient  authorities,'  been 
attended  to,  a  vast  many  more  changes  might,  could,  would, 
or  should  have  been  introduced  into  the  Greek  Text  than 
have  been  actually  adopted.  And  yet,  this  is  precisely  the 
kind  of  record  which  we  ought  to  have  been  spared  : — 

(1)  First, — Because  it  was  plainly  external  to  the  province 
of  the  Eevisionists  to  introduce  any  such  details  into  their 
margin  at  all :  their  very  function  being,  on  the  contrary,  to 

p  o 


4  MISCHIEF   OF   ENCUMBERING   THE  [Akt. 

investigate  Textual  questions  in  conclave,  and  to  present  the 
ordinary  Eeader  with  the  result  of  their  deliberations.  Tlieir 
business  was  to  correct  "plain  and  clear  errors;''  not, 
certainly,  to  invent  a  fresh  crop  of  unheard-of  doul)ts  and 
difficulties.     This  first. — Now, 

(2)  That  a  diversity  of  opinion  would  sometimes  be  found 
to  exist  in  the  revising  body  was  to  have  been  expected  ;  but 
when  once  two-thirds  of  their  number  had  finally  "  settled  " 
any  (question,  it  is  plainly  unreasonable  that  the  discomfited 
minority  should  claim  the  privilege  of  evermore  parading 
their  grievance  before  the  public ;  and  in  effect  should  be 
allowed  to  represent  that  as  a  corporate  doubt,  which  was  in 
reality  the  result  of  individual  idiosyncrasy.  It  is  not 
reasonable  that  the  echoes  of  a  forgotten  strife  should  be 
thus  prolonged  for  ever;  least  of  all  in  the  margin  of  'the 
Gospel  of  peace.' 

(3)  In  fact,  the  privilege  of  figuring  in  the  margin  of 
the  N.  T.,  (instead  of  standing  in  the  Text,)  is  even  attended 
liy  a  fatal  result :  for,  (as  Bp.  Ellicott  remarks,)  '  the  judg- 
ment commonly  entertained  in  reference  to  our  present 
margin,'  {I.e.  the  margin  of  the  A.  V.)  is,  that  its  contents  are 
'  exegetically  or  critically  sujjcrior  to  the  Text.''  ^  It  will 
certainly  be  long  befiire  this  popular  estimate  is  uncondi- 
tionally abandoned.     But, 

(4)  Especially  do  we  deprecate  the  introduction  into  tlic 
margin  of  all  this  strange  lore,  because  we  insist  on  behalf 
of  unlearned  persons  that  they  ought  not  to  be  molested 
with  information  which  cannot,  by  possibility,  be  of  the 
slightest  service  to  them :  with  vague  statements  about 
"  ancient  authorities," — -of  the  importance,  or  unimportance, 
of  wlii(;h  they  know  absolutely  nothing,  nor  indeed  ever  can 
know.  Unlearned  readers  on  taking  the  Eo\isi(tn  into  tlicir 
hands,  (i.e.  at  least  UU9  readers  out  of  10(M),)  will  'ncrcr  be 


'   On  lievisiov, — pp.  215-6. 


I.]  MARGIN   WITH   REJECTED   READINGS.  5 

aware  whether  these  (so-called)  '  Various  Eeadings '  are  to  be 
scornfully  scouted,  as  nothing  else  but  ancient  perversions 
of  the  Truth ;  or  else  are  to  be  lovingly  cherished,  as  '  alter- 
native' [see  the  Eevisers'  Preface  (iii.  1.)]  exhibitions  of  the 
inspired  Verity, — to  their  own  abiding  perplexity  and  infinite 
distress. 

Undeniable  at  all  events  it  is,  that  the  effect  which  these 
ever-recurring  announcements  produce  on  the  devout  reader 
of  Scripture  is  the  reverse  of  edifying :  is  never  helpful :  is 
always  bewildering.  A  man  of  ordinary  acuteness  can  but 
exclaim, — '  Yes,  very  likely.  But  lohat  of  it  ?  My  eye 
happens  to  alight  on  "Bethesda"  (in  S.  John  v.  2)  ;  against 
which  I  find  in  the  margin, — "  Some  ancient  authorities  read 
Bethsaida,  others  Bctlizatha."  Am  I  then  to  understand  that 
in  the  judgment  of  the  Eevisionists  it  is  uncertain  ivJiicJi  of 
those  three  names  is  right  ? ' .  .  N'ot  so  the  expert,  wlio  is 
overheard  to  moralize  concerning  the  phenomena  of  the  case 
after  a  less  ceremonious  fashion  : — '  "  Bethsaida  "  I  Yes,  the 
old  Latin  ^  and  the  Vulgate,^  countenanced  by  one  manuscript 
of  bad  character,  so  reads.  "  Bethzatha  "  !  Yes,  the  blunder 
is  found  in  two  manuscripts,  both  of  bad  character.  Why  do 
you  not  go  on  to  tell  us  that  aiiothcr  manuscript  exliibits 
"  Belzetha  "  ? — another  (supported  by  Eusebius  ^  and  [in  one 
place]  by  Cyril  ^),  "  Bezatha  "  ?  Nay,  why  not  say  plainly  that 
there  are  found  to  exist  uioivards  of  thirty  blundering  repre- 
sentations of  this  same  word  ;  but  that  "  Bethesda  " — (the 
readmg  of  sixteen  uncials  and  the  whole  body  of  the  cursives, 
besides  the  Peschito  and  Cureton's  Syriac,  the  Armenian, 
Georgian  and  Slavonic  Versions, — Didymus,^  Chrysostom,'* 
and  Cyril  ^), — is  the  only  reasonable  way  of  exhiljiting  it  ?    To 

'  Tertullian,  lis.  ^  Hieron.  0pp.  ii.  177  c  (see  the  note). 

^  Apud  Hierou.  iii.  121.  *  iv.  617  c  (ed.  Pusey). 

^  P.  272.  «  i.  548  c  ;  viii.  207  a.  ^  iv.  205. 


6  A  NEW  GREEK   TEXT   HAS  BEEN  [Art. 

speak  plainly,  Why  encumher  your  margin  with  such  a  note  at 
all  V  .  .  But  we  are  moving  forward  too  fast. 

It  can  never  be  any  question  among  scholars,  that  a  fatal 
error  was  committed  when  a  body  of  Divines,  appointed  to 
revise  the  Authorized  English  Version  of  the  New  Testament 
Scriptures,  addressed  themselves  to  the  solution  of  an  entirely 
different  and  far  more  intricate  problem,  namely  the  re-con- 
struction of  the  Greek  Text.  We  are  content  to  pass  over 
much  that  is  distressing  in  the  antecedent  history  of  their 
enterprise.  We  forbear  at  this  time  of  day  to  investigate,  by 
an  appeal  to  documents  and  dates,  certain  proceedings  in  and 
out  of  Convocation,  on  which  it  is  known  that  the  gravest 
diversity  of  sentiment  still  prevails  among  Churchmen.^ 
This  we  do,  not  by  any  means  as  ourselves  '  halting  between 
two  opinions,'  but  only  as  sincerely  desirous  that  the  work 
before  us  may  stand  or  fall,  judged  by  its  own  intrinsic 
merits.  Whether  or  no  Convocation, — when  it  '  nominated 
certain  of  its  own  members  to  undertake  the  work  of  Revi- 
sion,' and  authorized  them  '  to  refer  when  they  considered  it 
desirable  to  Divines,  Scholars,  and  Literary  men,  at  home  or 
abroad,  for  their  02nnion ; ' — whether  Convocation  intended 
thereby  to  sanction  the  actual  co-optation  into  the  Company 
appointed  by  themselves,  of  members  of  the  Presbyterian, 
the  Wesleyan,  the  Baptist,  the  Congregationalist,  the  Socinian 
body ;  this  we  venture  to  think  may  fairly  be  doubted. — 
Whether  again  Convocation  can  have  foreseen  that  of  the 
ninety-nine  Scholars  in  all  who  have  taken  part  in  this  work 
of  Revision,  only  forty-nine  would  be  Cliurchmen,  while  the 
remaining  fifty  would  belong  to  the  sects :  ^ — this  also  we 


•  A  reference  to  the  Journal  of  Coiivocation,  for  a  twelvemontli  after  the 
proposal  for  a  Revision  of  the  Authorized  Version  was  seriously  entertained, 
will  reveal  more  than  it  would  be  convenient  in  t]ns])lace  even  to  allude  to. 

2  Wc  derive  our  information  from  the  learned  Congregationalist,  Dr. 
Ncwth, — Lectures  on  Bible  Revision  (1881),  p.  11(5. 


I.]  THE   UNFOEESEEN  KESULT  OF  '  REVISION/  7 

venture  to  think  may  be  reasonably  called  in  question. — 
Whether  lastly,  the  Canterbury  Convocation,  had  it  been 
appealed  to  with  reference  to  '  the  Westminster- Abbey 
scandal'  (June  22nd,  1870),  would  not  have  cleared  itself  of 
the  suspicion  of  complicity,  by  an  unequivocal  resolution, — 
we  entertain  no  manner  of  doubt. — But  we  decline  to  enter 
uj)on  these,  or  any  other  like  matters.  Our  business  is  exclu- 
sively with  the  result  at  which  the  Revisionists  of  the  New 
Testament  have  arrived  :  and  it  is  to  this  that  we  now 
address  ourselves  ;  with  the  mere  avowal  of  our  grave  anxiety 
at  the  spectacle  of  an  assembly  of  scholars,  appointed  to 
revise  an  English  Translation,  finding  themselves  called 
upon,  as  every  fresh  difficulty  emerged,  to  develop  the  skill 
requisite  for  criticallii  revising  the  original  Greek  Text.  What 
else  is  implied  by  the  very  endeavour,  but  a  singular  ex- 
pectation that  experts  in  one  Science  may,  at  a  moment's 
notice,  show  themselves  proficients  in  another, — and  that  one 
of  the  most  difficult  and  delicate  imaginable  ? 

Enough  has  been  said  to  make  it  plain  why,  in  the  ensuing 
pages,  we  propose  to  pursue  a  different  course  from  that 
which  has  been  adopted  by  Eeviewers  generally,  since  the 
memorable  day  (May  17th,  1881)  when  the  work  of  the 
Eevisionists  was  for  the  first  time  submitted  to  public 
scrutiny.  The  one  point  which,  with  rare  exceptions,  has 
ever  since  monopolized  attention,  has  been  the  merits  or 
demerits  of  their  English  rendering  of  certain  Greek  words 
and  expressions.  But  there  is  clearly  a  question  of  prior 
interest  and  infinitely  greater  imjDortance,  which  has  to  be 
settled  first :  namely,  the  merits  or  demerits  of  the  changes 
which  the  same  Scholars  have  taken  upon  themselves  to  intro- 
duce into  the  Greek  Text.  Until  it  has  been  ascertained  that 
the  result  of  their  labours  exhibits  a  decided  improvement 
upon  what  before  was  read,  it  is  clearly  a  mere  waste  of  time 
to  enquire  into  the  merits  of  their  work  as  Revisers  of  a 


8  ELEMENTARY  OUTLINES  : — THE  [Art. 

Translation.  But  in  fact  it  has  to  be  proved  that  the 
Eevisionists  have  restricted  themselves  to  the  removal  of 
"  plain  and  clear  errors  "  from  the  connnonly  received  Text. 
We  are  distressed  to  discover  that,  on  the  contrary,  they 
have  done  something  quite  different.  The  treatment  -which 
the  N.  T.  lias  experienced  at  the  hands  of  the  Eevisionists 
recals  the  fate  of  some  ancient  edifice  which  confessedly 
required  to  he  painted,  papered,  scoured, — with  a  mininnim 
of  masons'  and  carpenters'  work, — in  order  to  1)0  inhabited 
with  comfort  for  the  next  hundred  years  :  but  those  entrusted 
with  the  job  were  so  ill-advised  as  to  persuade  themselves  that 
it  required  to  be  to  a  great  extent  rebuilt.  Accordingly,  in  an 
evil  hour  they  set  about  removing  foundations,  and  did  so 
much  structural  mischief  that  in  the  end  it  became  necessary 
to  proceed  against  them  for  damages. 

Without  the  remotest  intention  of  imposing  views  of  our 
own  on  the  general  Eeader,  Ijut  only  to  enable  him  to  give 
his  intelligent  assent  to  much  that  is  to  follow,  we  find  our- 
selves constrained  in  the  first  instance, — before  conducting 
him  over  any  part  of  the  domain  which  the  Eevisionists  have 
ventured  uninvited  to  occupy, — to  premise  a  few  ordinary 
facts  which  lie  on  the  threshold  of  the  science  of  Textual 
Criticism.  Until  these  have  l)een  clearly  apprehended,  no 
progress  whatever  is  possible. 

(1)  The  provision,  then,  which  tlie  Divine  Autliur  ui 
Scripture  is  found  to  have  made  for  the  preservation  in  its 
integrity  of  His  written  Word,  is  of  a  peculiarly  varied  and 
liigldy  complex  description.  First,— By  causing  that  a  vast 
multiplication  of  Copies  should  be  required  all  down  the  ages, 
— beginning  at  the  earliest  period,  and  continuing  in  an  ever- 
increasing  ratio  until  the  actual  invention  of  Printing, — He 
provided  the  most  effectual  security  imaginable  against  fraud. 
True,  that  millions  of  the  copies  so  produced  have  long  since 


I.]  MATEKIALS   FOE   TEXTUAL   CRITICISM.  9 

perished :  but  it  is  nevertheless  a  plain  fact  that  .  there 
survive  of  the  Gospels  alone  upwards  of  one  thousand  copies 
to  the  present  day, 

(2)  Next,  Versions.  The  necessity  of  translating  the  Scrip- 
tures into  divers  languages  for  the  use  of  different  branches 
of  the  early  Church,  procured  that  many  an  authentic  record 
has  been  preserved  of  the  New  Testament  as  it  existed  in  the 
first  few  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  Thus,  the  Peschito 
Syriac  and  the  old  Latin  version  are  believed  to  have  been 
executed  in  the  Ilnd  century.  "  It  is  no  stretch  of  imagina- 
tion "  (wrote  Bp.  EUicott  in  1870,)  "  to  suppose  that  portions 
of  the  Peschito  might  have  been  in  the  hands  of  S.  John,  or 
that  the  Old  Latin  represented  the  current  views  of  the 
Eoman  Christians  of  the  Ilnd  century."^  The  two  Egyptian 
translations  are  referred  to  the  Ilird  and  IVth.  The  Vulgate 
(or  revised  Latin)  and  the  Gothic  are  also  claimed  for  the 
IVth :  the  Armenian,  and  possibly  the  ^thiopic,  belong  to 
the  Vth. 

(3)  Lastly,  the  requirements  of  assailants  and  apologists 
alike,  the  business  of  Commentators,  the  needs  of  contro- 
versialists and  teachers  in  every  age,  have  resulted  in  a  vast 
accumulation  of  additional  evidence,  of  which  it  is  scarcely 
possible  to  over-estimate  the  importance.  For  in  this  way  it 
has  come  to  pass  that  every  famous  Doctor  of  the  Church  in 
turn  has  quoted  more  or  less  largely  from  the  sacred  writings, 
and  thus  has  borne  testimony  to  the  contents  of  the  codices 
with  which  he  was  individually  familiar.  Patristic  Cita- 
tions accordingly  are  a  third  mighty  safeguard  of  the  integrity 
of  the  deposit. 

To  weigh  these  three  instruments  of  Criticism — Copies, 
Versions,  Fathers — one  against  another,  is  obviously  im- 

^   On  Revision,  pp.  26-7. 


10  SOME   ACCOUNT  OF   THE   OLDEST  [Art. 

possible  on  the  present  occasion.  Sucli  a  discussion  would 
grow  at  once  into  a  treatise.^  Certain  explanatory  details, 
together  with  a  few  words  of  caution,  are  as  much  as  may  be 
attempted. 

I.  And,  first  of  all,  the  reader  has  need  to  be  apprised 
(with  reference  to  the  first-named  class  of  evidence)  that  most 
of  our  extant  copies  of  the  N.  T.  Scriptures  are  comparatively 
of  recent  date,  ranging  from  the  Xth  to  the  XlVth  century  of 
our  era.  That  these  are  in  every  instance  copies  of  yet  older 
manuscripts,  is  self-evident;  and  that  in  the  main  they 
represent  faithfully  the  sacred  autographs  themselves,  no 
reasonable    person    doubts.^       Still,    it   is   undeniable   tliat 


^  Dr.  Scrivener's  Plain  Introduction  to  the  Criticism  of  the  Ketv 
Testa7ncnt,  2nd  edition,  ISTi  (pp.  607),  may  be  confidently  recommended 
to  any  one  who  desires  to  master  the  outlines  of  Textual  Criticism  under 
the  guidance  of  a  judicious,  impartial,  and  thoroughly  competent  guide.  A 
new  and  revised  edition  of  this  excellent  treatise  will  appear  shortly. 

^  Studious  readers  are  invited  to  enquire  for  Dr.  Scrivener's  FuU  and 
exact  Collation  of  about  Twenty  Greek  Manuscripts  of  the  Holy  Gospels 
(hitherto  unexamined),  deposited  in  the  British  Museum,  the  Archiepis- 
copul  Library  at  Lambeth,  &c.,  with  a  Critical  Introduction.  (Pp. 
Ixxiv.  and  178.)  1853.  The  introductory  matter  deserves  very 
attentive  perusal. — With  equal  confidence  we  beg  to  recommend  his 
Exact  Transcript  of  the  Codex  Augiensis,  a  Grseco-Latin  Manuscript 
of  S.  PwuVs  Epistles,  deposited  in  the  Library  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge;  to  tvhich  is  added  a  full  Collation  of  Fifty  Manuscripts, 
containing  various  portions  of  the  Greek  Nevj  Testament,  in  the  Libraries 
of  Cambridge,  Parham,  Leicester,  Oxford,  Lambeth,  the  British  Museum, 
(fr.  With  a  Critical  Introduction  (which  must  also  be  carefully  studied). 
(Pp-  Ixxx.  and  563.)  1859. — Learned  readers  can  scarcely  require  to 
be  told  of  the  same  learned  scholar's  Novum  Testamentum  TtxtCts 
^teiJianici,  A.D.  1550.  Accedunt  varix  Lcctiones  Editionnm  Bezx,  Elzeviri, 
Lachmanni,  Tischendorfii,  Tregellesii.  Curante  F.  IL  A.  Scrivener, 
A.M.  D.C.L.,  LL.D.  [I860.]  Editio  auctior  et  emeudatior.  1877. — 
Those  who  merely  wish  for  a  short  popular  Introduction  to  the  subject 
may  be  grateful  to  be  told  of  Dr.  Scrivener's  Six  Lectures  on  the  Text  of 
the  N.  T.  and  the  Ancient  MSS.  which  contain  it,  chiefly  addressed  to 
those  who  do  not  read  Greek.     1875. 


I.]  COPIES   OF   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT.  11 

they  are  thus  separated  by  about  a  thousand  years  from  their 
inspired  archetypes.  Eeaders  are  reminded,  in  passing,  that 
the  little  handful  of  copies  on  which  we  rely  for  the  texts  of 
Herodotus  and  Thucydides.  of  ^schylus  and  Sophocles,  are 
removed  from  their  originals  by  full  500  years  more:  and 
that,  instead  of  a  thousand,  or  half  a  thousand  copies,  we  are 
dependent  for  the  text  of  certain  of  these  authors  on  as  many 
copies  as  may  be  counted  on  the  fingers  of  one  hand.  In 
truth,  the  security  which  the  Text  of  the  New  Testament 
enjoys  is  altogether  unique  and  extraordinary.  To  specify 
one  single  consideration,  which  has  never  yet  attracted  nearly 
the  amount  of  attention  it  deserves, — '  Lectionaries '  abound, 
which  establish  the  Text  which  has  been  publicly  read  in  the 
churches  of  the  East,  from  at  least  a.d.  400  until  the  time  of 
the  invention  of  printing. 

But  here  an  important  consideration  claims  special  atten- 
tion. We  allude  to  the  result  of  increased  acquaintance  with 
certain  of  the  oldest  extant  codices  of  the  N.  T.  Two  of 
these, — viz.  a  copy  in  the  Vatican  technically  indicated  by 
the  letter  b,  and  the  recently-discovered  Sinaitic  codex,  styled 
after  the  first  letter  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet  X, — are  thought 
to  belong  to  the  IVth  century.  Two  are  assigned  to  the  Vth, 
viz.  the  Alexandrian  (a)  in  the  British  Museum,  and  the 
rescript  codex  preserved  at  Paris,  designated  c.  One  is  j^ro- 
bably  of  the  Vlth,  viz.  the  codex  Bezse  (d)  preserved  at 
Cambridge.  Singular  to  relate,  the  first,  second,  fourth,  and 
fifth  of  these  codices  (b  n  c  d),  but  especially  b  and  K,  have 
within  the  last  twenty  years  established  a  tyrannical  ascend- 
ency over  the  imagination  of  the  Critics,  which  can  only  be 
fitly  spoken  of  as  a  blind  superstition.  It  matters  nothing 
that  all  four  are  discovered  on  careful  scrutiny  to  differ 
essentially,  not  only  from  ninety-nine  out  of  a  Imndred  of 


12  THE   VATICAN   (B)   AND   THE   SINAITIC   (N)         [Aut. 

the  whole  body  of  extant  MSS.  besides,  but  even  from  one 
another.  This  Last  circumstance,  obviously  fatal  to  their 
corporate  pretensions,  is  unaccountably  overlooked.  And 
yet  it  admits  of  only  one  satisfactory  explanation  :  viz.  that 
in  different  degrees  they  all  five  exhibit  a  fabricated  text. 
Between  the  first  two  (b  and  k)  there  subsists  an  amount  of 
sinister  resemblance,  which  proves  that  they  must  have  been 
derived  at  no  very  remote  period  from  the  same  corrupt 
original.  Tischendorf  insists  that  they  were  partly  ^vlitten 
by  the  same  scribe.  Yet  do  they  stand  asunder  in  every 
page;  as  well  as  differ  widely  from  the  commonly  received 
Text,  with  which  they  have  been  carefully  collated.  On 
being  referred  to  this  standard,  in  the  Gospels  alone,  b  is 
found  to  omit  at  least  2877  words :  to  add,  536 :  to  suljsti- 
tute,  935  :  to  transpose,  2098  :  to  modify,  1132  (in  aU  7578)  : 
— the  corresponding  figures  for  &?  being  severally  3455,  839, 
1114,  2299,  1265  (in  all  8972).  And  be  it  remembered  that 
the  omissions,  additions,  substitutions,  transpositions,  and 
modifications,  are  hy  no  means  the  same  in  both.  It  is  in 
fact  easier  to  find  two  eonsecutive  verses  in  wliich  these  two 
MSS.  differ  the  one  from  the  other,  than  two  conseciitivc  verses 
in  whieh  they  entirely  agree. 

But  by  far  the  most  depraved  text  is  that  exhibited 
by  codex  d.  '  No  known  manuscript  contains  so  many 
l)old  and  extensive  interpolations.  Its  variations  from 
the  sacred  Text  are  beyond  all  other  example.'^  This, 
however,  is  not  the  result  of  its  being  the  most  recent  of 
the  five,  but  (singular  to  relate)  is  due  to  quite  an  o])])()site 
cause.  It  is  thought  (not  without  reason)  to  exhibit  a 
Ilnd-ccntury  text.      '  When  we   turn   to   the  Acts  of  the 


'  Scrivcucr'.s  Flain  Introduction, — p.  US. 


I.]  CODEX-  THE   CODEX   BEZ.E   (D).  13 

Apostles,'  (says  the  learned  editor  of  the  codex  in  question, 
Dr.  Scrivener,^) — 

'  We  find  ourselves  confronted  with  a  text,  the  like  to  which  we 
have  no  experience  of  elsewhere.  It  is  hardly  an  exaggeration 
to  assert  that  codex  d  reproduces  the  Textus  receptiis  much  in 
the  same  wa}'  that  one  of  the  best  Chaldee  Targuras  does  the 
Hebrew  of  the  Old  Testament :  so  wide  are  the  variations  in 
the  diction,  so  constant  and  inveterate  the  practice  of  expound- 
ing the  narrative  by  means  of  interpolations  which  seldom 
recommend  themselves  as  genuine  by  even  a  semblance  of 
internal  probability.' 

'  Vix  did  potest '  (says  ]\lill)  '  quam  sujjra  omncni  onoduvi 
liccnter  se  gcsscrit,  ac  plane  lasciverit  Interpolator.'  Though 
a  large  portion  of  the  Gospels  is  missing,  in  what  remains 
(tested  by  the  same  standard)  we  find  3704:  words  omitted : 
no  less  than  2213  added,  and  2121  substituted.  The  words 
transposed  amount  to  3471  :  and  1772  have  been  modified: 
the  deflections  from  the  Eeceived  Text  thus  amounting  in  all 
to  13,281. — -ISrext  to  d,  the  most  untrustworthy  codex  is  X, 
which  bears  on  its  front  a  memorable  note  of  the  evil  repute 
under  which  it  has  always  laboured  :  viz.  it  is  found  that  at 
least  ten  revisers  between  the  IVth  and  the  Xllth  centuries 
busied  themselves  with  the  task  of  correcting  its  many  and 
extraordinary  perversions  of  the  truth  of  Scripture.^ — Next  in 


^  Bezae  Codex  Cantabrigiensis  :  being  an  exact  Copy,  in  ordinary  Type, 
of  the  celebrated  Uncial  Grxco-Latin  Manuscript  of  the  Four  Gospels  and 
^cts  of  the  Ajjostles,  written  early  in  the  Sixth  Century,  and  presented  to 
the  University  of  Cambridge  by  Theodore  Beza,  a.d.  1581.  Edited,  with 
a  Critical  Introduction,  Annotations,  and  Facsimiles,  by  Frederick  H. 
Scrivener,  M.A.,  Rector  of  S.  Gerrans,  Cornwall.  (Pp.  Ixiv.  and  453.) 
Cambridge,  1864.  No  one  who  aspires  to  a  competent  acquaintance  with 
Textual  Criticism  can  afford  to  be  without  this  book. 

^  On  the  subject  of  codex  K  we  beg  (once  for  all)  to  refer  scholars  to 
Scrivener's  Full  Collation  of  the  Codex  Sinaiticus  with  the  Eeceived  Text 
of  the  New  Testament.  To  ivhich  is  prefixed  a  Critical  Introduction. 
[1803.]     2nd  Edition,  revised.     (Pp.  Ixxii.  and  163.)     1867. 


14  THE   FIVE   'OLD  UNCIALS,'  AS  [Art. 

impurity  comes  B : — then,  the  fragmentary  codex  c  :  our  own 
A  being,  beyond  all  doubt,  disfigured  by  the  fewest  blemishes 
of  any. 

What  precedes  admits  to  some  extent  of  further  numerical 
illustration.  It  is  discovered  that  in  the  111  (out  of  320) 
pages  of  an  ordinary  copy  of  the  Greek  Testament,  in  which 
alone  these  five  manuscripts  are  collectively  available  for 
comparison  in  the  Gospels, — the  serious  deflections  of  A  from 
the  Tcxtiis  rcceptiis  amount  in  all  to  only  842  :  whereas  in  c 
they  amount  to  1798  :  in  B,  to  2370  :  in  N,  to  3392  :  in  d,  to 
4697.  The  readings  peculiar  to  A  within  the  same  limits  are 
133  :  those  peculiar  to  c  are  170.  But  those  of  b  amount  to 
197  :  while  N  exhibits  443  :  and  the  readings  peculiar  to  d 
(wdthin  the  same  limits),  are  no  fewer  than  1829.  .  .  .  We 
submit  that  these  facts — ivhich  result  from  merely  referring 
five  manuscripts  to  one  and  the  same  common  standard — are 
by  no  means  calculated  to  inspire  confidence  in  codices 
B  K  c  D  : — codices,  be  it  remembered,  which  come  to  us  with- 
out a  character,  without  a  history,  in  fact  without  antece- 
dents of  any  kind. 

But  let  the  learned  chairman  of  the  New  Testament  com- 
pany of  Eevisionists  (Bp.  Ellicott)  be  heard  on  this  subject. 
He  is  characterizing  these  same  '  old  uncials,'  which  it  is  just 
now  the  fashion — or  rather,  the  craze — to  hold  up  as  oracular, 
and  to  which  his  lordship  is  as  devotedly  and  l)lindly  attached 
as  any  of  his  neighbours  : — 

'  The  simplicity  and  dignified  conciseness '  (he  says)  '  of  the 
Vatican  manuscript  (b)  :  the  greater  exjpansiveness  of  our  own 
Alexandrian  (a)  :  the  partialh/  mixed  characteristics  of  the  Sinaitic 
(x) :  i\\o  paraphrastic  tone  of  the  singular  codex  Beza3  (d),  are  now 
brought  home  to  the  student.' ' 

Could  ingenuity  have  devised  severer  satire  tlian  such  a 


^  Bishop  EUicott's  Considerations  on  Etvision,  &:c.  (1870),  p.  40, 


I.]  CHAEACTEEIZED   BY   BP.   ELLICOTT.  15 

description  of  four  professing  transcripts  of  a  book ;  and  that 
book,  the  everlasting  Gospel  itself  ?  —  transcripts,  be  it 
observed  in  passing,  on  which  it  is  just  now  the  fashion  to 
rely  implicitly  for  the  very  orthography  of  proper  names, — 
the  spelling  of  common  words, — the  minutite  of  grammar. 
What  (we  ask)  would  be  thought  of  four  such  '  copies '  of 
Thucydides  or  of  Shakspeare  ?  Imagine  it  gravely  proposed, 
by  the  aid  of  four  such  conflicting  documents,  to  re-adjust 
the  text  of  the  funeral  oration  of  Pericles,  or  to  re-edit 
'  Hamlet.'  Pdsum  tencatis  amid?  Why,  some  of  the  poet's 
most  familiar  lines  would  cease  to  be  recognizable  :  e.g.  A, — 
'  Tohy  or  not  Tohy ;  that  is  the  question : '  B, — •'  Toh  or  not, 
is  the  question  : '  N, — '  To  he  a  tub,  or  not  to  he  a  tuh  ;  the  ques- 
tion is  that : '  c, — '  The  question  is,  to  heat,  or  not  to  heat 
Tohy  V  \  D  (the  '  singular  codex '), — '  The  only  question  is 
this :  to  heat  that  Tohy,  or  to  he  a  tuh  ? ' 

And  yet — without  by  any  means  subscribing  to  the  precise 
terms  in  which  the  judicious  Prelate  characterizes  those  ignes 
fatui  which  have  so  persistently  and  egregiously  led  his  lord- 
ship and  his  colleagues  astray — (for  indeed  one  seems  rather 
to  be  reading  a  description  of  four  styles  of  composition,  or 
of  as  many  fashions  in  ladies'  dress,  than  of  four  copies  of 
the  Gospel) — we  have  already  furnished  indirect  proof  that 
his  estimate  of  the  codices  in  question  is  in  the  main  correct. 
Further  acquaintance  with  them  does  but  intensify  the  bad 
character  which  he  has  given  them.  Let  no  one  suppose 
that  we  deny  their  extraordinary  value, — their  unrivalled 
critical  interest, — nay,  their  actual  tise  in  helping  to  settle 
the  truth  of  Scripture.  What  we  are  just  now  insisting  upon 
is  only  the  dejjraved  text  of  codices  X  A  B  c  D, — especially  of 
N  B  D.  And  because  this  is  a  matter  which  lies  at  the  root  of 
the  whole  controversy,  and  because  we  cannot  afford  that 
there  shall  exist  in  our  reader's  mind  the  slightest  doubt  on 


16  X  B  C  D   SHOWED   TO   BE   FOUR    OF   THE   MOST        [Art. 

this  part  of  the  suhject,  \vc  shall  be  constrained  once  and 
again  to  trouble  him  with  detailed  specimens  of  the  contents 
of  N  B,  &c.,  in  proof  of  the  justice  of  what  we  have  been 
alleging.  We  venture  to  assure  him,  without  a  particle  of 
hesitation,  tliat  x  b  d  are  tJirrc  of  the  most  scandaloushj 
corrupt  copies  extant : — exhibit  the  most  shamefully  mutilated 
texts  which  are  anywhere  to  be  met  with : — have  become,  by 
whatever  process  (for  their  history  is  wholly  unknown),  the 
depositories  of  the  largest  amount  of  fahricated  readings, 
ancient  blunders,  and  intentional  p'^^^'^'^'^^^'^ons  of  Truth, — 
which  are  discoverable  in  any  known  copies  of  the  Word  of 
God. 

But  in  fact  take  a  single  page  of  any  ordinary  copy  of  the 
Greek  Testament, — Bp.  Lloyd's  edition,  suppose.  Turn  to  page 
184.  It  contains  ten  verses  of  S,  Luke's  Gospel,  ch.  viii.  35  to 
44.  Now,  proceed  to  collate  those  ten  verses.  You  will  make 
the  notable  discovery  that,  within  those  narrow  limits,  by  codex 
D  alone  the  text  has  been  depraved  53  times,  resulting  in  no 
less  than  103  corrupt  readings,  93  o/  which  are  found  only  in 
D.  The  words  omitted  by  D  are  40  :  the  words  added  are  4. 
Twenty-five  words  have  been  substituted  for  others,  and  14 
transposed.  Variations  of  case,  tense,  &c.,  amount  to  16  ;  and 
the  phrase  of  the  Evangelist  has  been  departed  from  11  times. 
Happily,  the  other  four  '  old  uncials '  are  here  available.  And 
it  is  found  that  (within  the  same  limits,  and  referred  to  the 
same  test,)  A  exhibits  3  omissions,  2  of  which  are  peculiar  to 
A. — B  omits  12  words,  6  of  which  are  p)ectdiar  to  B :  substi- 
tutes 3  words  :  transposes  4 :  and  exhibits  6  lesser  changes 
— 2  of  them  being  its  own  peculiar  property. —  N  has  5  read- 
ings (affecting  8  words)  2Jcculiar  to  itself  Its  omissions  are  7  : 
its  additions,  2  :  its  substitutions,  4 :  2  words  are  transposed  ; 
and  it  exhibits  4  lesser  discrepancies. — c  has  7  readings 
(affecting  15  words)  7)cc?///«r  to  itself.     Its  omissions  are  4: 


I.]  CORRUPT   CODICES   IN   EXISTENCE.  17 

its  additions,  7 :  its  substitutions,  7  :  its  words  transposed,  7. 
It  has  2  lesser  discrepancies,  and  it  alters  the  Evangelist's 
phrase  4  times. 

But  (we  shall  be  asked)  what  amount  of  agreement,  in 
respect  of '  Various  Eeadings,'  is  discovered  to  subsist  between 
these  5  codices  ?  for  that,  after  all,  is  the  practical  question. 
We  answer, — a  has  been  already  shown  to  stand  alone 
twice  :  B,  6  times  :  N,  8  times  :  c,  15  times  ;  D,  93  times. — 
We  have  further  to  state  that  A  b  stand  together  by  them- 
selves once:  b  n,  4  times :  B  c,  1 :  b d,  1 :  R  c,  1 :  c  d,  1. — 
A  X  c  conspire  1 :  b  N  c,  1 :  b  x  d,  1  :  x\.  b  n  c,  once  (viz.  in 
reading  epMrr^crev,  which  Tischendorf  admits  to  be  a  corrupt 
reading) :  b  N  c  D,  also  once. — The  5  '  old  uncials  '  therefore 
(a  B  N  c  d)  combine,  and  again  stand  apart,  with  singular 
impartiality. — Lastly,  they  are  never  onee  found  to  l^e  in 
accord  in  respect  of  any  single  '  various  Reading.' — Will  any 
one,  after  a  candid  survey  of  the  premisses,  deem  us  un- 
reasonable, if  w^e  avow  that  such  a  specimen  of  the  concordia 
discors  which  everywhere  prevails  between  the  oldest 
uncials,  but  which  especially  characterizes  N  b  d,  indisposes 
us  greatly  to  suffer  their  unsupported  authority  to  determine 
for  us  the  Text  of  Scripture  ? 

Let  no  one  at  all  events  obscure  the  one  question  at 
issue,  by  asking, — '  Whether  we  consider  the  Textus  Receptus 
infallible  ? '  The  merit  or  demerit  of  the  Eeceived  Text  has 
absolutely  nothing  whatever  to  do  vnth  the  question.  We  care 
nothing  about  it.  Any  Text  would  equally  suit  our  present 
purpose.  Any  Text  w^ould  show  the  '  old  uncials '  per- 
petually at  discord  among  themselves.  To  raise  an  irrelevant 
discussion,  at  the  outset,  concerning  the  Textus  Receptus : — 
to  describe  the  haste  with  which  Erasmus  produced  the  first 
published  edition  of  the  N.  T. : — to  make  sport  about  the 


18  MATEIUALS   FOR  ASCERTATXTNTI    TTTE  [Art. 

copies  which  he  employed : — all  tliis  kind  of  thing  is  the 
proceeding  of  one  who  seeks  to  mislead  his  readers  : — to  throw 
dust  into  their  eyes  : — to  divert  their  attention  from  the  pro- 
blem actually  Ijefore  them  : — not — (as  we  confidently  expect 
when  we  have  to  do  with  such  writers  as  these) — tlie  method 
of  a  sincere  lover  of  Truth.     To  proceed,  however. 

II.  and  III.  Nothing  has  been  said  as  yet  concerning  the 
Text  exhibited  by  the  earliest  of  the  Versions  and  by  the 
most  ancient  of  the  Fathers.  But,  for  the  purpose  we  have 
just  now  in  hand,  neither  are  such  details  necessary.  We 
desire  to  hasten  forward.  A  somewhat  fuller  review  of 
certain  of  our  oldest  available  materials  might  prove  even 
more  discouraging.  But  that  would  only  be  because  it  is 
impossible,  within  such  narrow  limits  as  the  present,  to  give 
the  reader  any  idea  at  all  of  the  w^ealth  of  our  actual 
resources ;  and  to  convince  him  of  the  extent  to  which  the 
least  trustworthy  of  our  guides  prove  in  turn  invaluable 
helps  in  correcting  the  exorbitances  of  their  fellows.  The 
practical  result  in  fact  of  what  has  been  hitherto  offered  is 
after  all  but  this,  that  we  have  to  be  on  our  guard  against 
pinning  our  faith  exclusively  on  two  or  three,— least  of  all 
on  one  or  two  ancient  documents  ;  and  of  adopting  them 
exclusively  for  our  guides.  We  are  sliown,  in  other  words, 
that  it  is  utterly  out  of  the  rpiestion  to  rely  on  any  single 
set  or  group  of  authorities,  much  less  on  any  single  docu- 
ment, for  the  determination  of  the  Text  of  Scripture. 
Happily,  our  Manuscripts  are  numerous:  most  of  tliem  are 
in  the  main  trustworthy :  all  of  them  represent  far  older 
documents  than  themselves.  Our  Versions  (two  of  which 
are  more  ancient  by  a  couple  of  centuries  than  any  sacred 
codex  extant)  severally  correct  and  eluick  one;  another. 
Lastly,  in  the  writings  of  a  host  of  Fathers, — the  principal 
being  Eusebius,  Athanasius,  Basil,  the  Gregories,  Didymus, 


T.]  TRTE   TF.XT   OF   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT,  19 

Epiplianiiis,  Chrysostom,  the  Cyrils,  Theocloret, — we  are  pro- 
vided with  contemporaneous  evidence  which,  whenever  it 
can  be  had,  becomes  an  effectual  safeguard  against  the  un- 
supported decrees  of  our  oldest  codices,  a  b  n  c  d,  as  well  as 
the  occasional  vagaries  of  the  Versions.  In  the  writings  of 
Irenfieus,  Clemens  Alex.,  Origen,  Dionysius  Alex.,  Hippo- 
lytus,  we  meet  with  older  evidence  still.  No  more  precarious 
foundation  for  a  reading,  in  fact,  can  be  named,  than  the 
unsupported  advocacy  of  a  single  Manuscript,  or  Version,  or 
Father ;  or  even  of  two  or  three  of  these  combined. 

But  indeed  the  principle  involved  in  the  foregoing  remarks 
admits  of  being  far  more  broadly  stated.  It  even  stands 
to  reason  that  we  may  safely  reject  any  reading  which,  out 
of  the  whole  body  of  availal^le  authorities, — Manuscripts, 
Versions,  Fathers, — finds  support  nowhere  save  in  one  and 
the  same  little  handful  of  suspicious  documents.  For  we 
resolutely  maintain,  that  external  Evidence  must  after  all  be 
our  best,  our  only  safe  guide ;  and  (to  come  to  the  point)  we 
refuse  to  throw  in  our  lot  with  those  who,  disregarding  the 
witness  of  every  other  known  Codex — every  other  Version — 
every  other  available  Ecclesiastical  Writer, — insist  on  following 
the  dictates  of  a  little  group  of  authorities,  of  which  nothing 
whatever  is  known  with  so  much  certainty  as  that  often, 
Mdien  they  concur  exclusively,  it  is  to  mislead.  We  speak  of 
codices  B  or  n  or  d  ;  the  IXth-century  codex  l,  and  such 
cursives^  as  13  or  33 ;  a  few  copies  of  the  old  Latin  and 
one  of  the  Egyptian  versions :  perhaps  Origen. — Not  theory 


^  The  epithet  '  cAirsive,"  is  used  to  denote  manuscripts  written  in 
'  running-hand,'  of  which  the  oldest  known  specimens  belong  to  the  IXth 
century.  '  Uncial''  manuscripts  are  those  which  are  written  in  capital 
letters.  A  '  codex '  populai'ly  signifies  a  manuscrijjt.  A  '  version '  is  a 
translation.  A  'recension'  is  a  revision.  (We  have  been  requested  to 
explain  these  terms.) 

C   2 


20  PRELIMINARY   AVORDS   OF  [Anr. 

therefore  : — not  prejudice  : — not  conjecture  : — not  unproved 
assertion : — not  any  single  codex,  and  certainly  not  codex  b  : 
— not  an  imaginary  '  Antiochene  Recension '  of  another 
imaginary  '  Pre-Syrian  Text :  '^ — not  antecedent  fancies  about 
the  affinity  of  documents  : — neither  '  the  [purely  arbitrary] 
method  of  genealogy,' — nor  one  man's  notions  {which  may  he 
reversed  by  another  man's  notions)  of  '  Transcriptional  Proba- 
bility :  '—not  '  instinctive  processes  of  Criticism,' — least  of 
all  '  the  individual  mind,'  with  its  '  supposed  power  of 
divining  the  Original  Text ' — of  which  no  intelligible  account 
can  be  rendered  : — nothing  of  this  sort, — (however  specious 
and  plausible  it  may  sound,  especially  when  set  forth  in 
confident  language  ;  advocated  with  a  great  show  of  unin- 
telligible learning ;  supported  by  a  formidable  array  of 
cabalistic  symbols  and  mysterious  contractions ;  above  all 
when  recommended  by  justly  respected  names,) — nothing  of 
this  sort,  we  say,  must  be  allowed  to  determine  for  us  the 
Text  of  Scriytture.  The  very  proposal  should  set  us  on  our 
guard  against  the  certainty  of  imposition. 

We  deem  it  even  axiomatic,  that,  in  every  case  of  doubt 
or  difficulty — supposed  or  real  —  our  critical  metliod  must 
be  the  same :  namely,  after  patiently  collecting  all  the 
available  evidence,  then,  without  partiality  or  prejudice,  to 
adjudicate  between  the  conflicting  authorities,  and  loyally  to 
accept  that  verdict  for  which  there  is  clearly  the  ])reponder- 
ating  evidence.  The  best  supported  Beading,  in  other  words, 
must  always  be  held  to  be  the  true  lieadiny :  and  nothing 
may  be  rejected  from  the  commonly  received  Text,  except  on 
evidence  which  shall  clearly  outweigli  the  evidence  for 
retaining  it.  We  are  glad  to  know  that,  so  far  at  least,  we 
once  had  Bp.  Ellicott  with  us.  He  announced  (in  1870)  that 
the  best  way  of  proceeding  with  tlie  woik  of  Pevision  is,  "to 
tiiakc  the   T'cxtus  llccepius  the  standard, — departing  from  it 


I.]  WARNING. — LA  CHM ANN'S   TEXT.  '       21 

only  2vhcn  critical  or  grammatical  considerations  shoiv  that  it 
is  clearly  necessary."  ^  We  ourselves  mean  no  more.  When- 
ever the  evidence  is  about  evenly  balanced,  few  it  is  hoped 
will  deny  that  the  Text  which  has  been  '  in  possession '  for 
three  centuries  and  a  half,  and  which  rests  on  infinitely 
better  manuscript  evidence  than  that  of  any  ancient  work 
which  can  be  named, — should,  for  every  reason,  be  let 
alone.  ^ 

But,  (we  shall  perhaps  be  asked,)  has  any  critical  Editor 
of  the  IST.  T.  seriously  taught  the  reverse  of  all  this  ?  Yes 
indeed,  we  answer.  Lachmann,  Tregelles,  Tischendorf,— the 
most  recent  and  most  famous  of  modern  editors, — have  all 
three  adopted  a  directly  opposite  theory  of  textual  revision. 
With  the  first-named,  fifty  years  ago  (1831),  virtually  origi- 
nated the  principle  of  recurring  exclusively  to  a  few  ancient 
documents  to  the  exclusion  of  the  many.  '  Lachmann's  text 
seldom  rests  on  more  than  four  Greek  codices,  very  often  on 
three,  not  unfrequently  on  two,  sometimes  on  only  onc.'^ 
Bishop  Ellicott  speaks  of  it  as  "  a  text  composed  on  the 
7iarrowcst  and   most   exclusive  principles."*      Of  the   Greek 


^  Considerations  on  Eevision,  p.  30. 

^  Once  for  all,  we  request  it  may  be  clearly  understood  that  we  do  not, 
by  any  means,  claim  'perfection  for  the  Eeceived  Text.  We  entertain  no 
extravagant  notions  on  this  subject.  Again  and  again  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  point  out  (e.  g.  at  page  107)  that  the  Ttxtus  Receptus  needs 
correction.  We  do  but  insist,  (1)  That  it  is  an  incomparably  better  text 
than  that  which  either  Lachmann,  or  Tischendorf,  or  Tregelles  has  pro- 
duced :  infinitely  preferable  to  the  '  New  Greek  Text '  of  the  Eevisionists. 
And,  (2)  That  to  be  improved,  the  Textus  Receptus  will  have  to  be  revised 
on  entirely  different  *  principles '  from  those  which  are  just  now  in  fashion. 
Men  must  begin  by  unlearning  the  German  prejudices  of  the  last  fifty 
years  ;  and  address  themselves,  instead,  to  the  stern  logic  of  facts. 

^  Scrivener's  Introduction,  pp.  342-1. 

*  Ut  supra,  p.  46.  We  prefer  to  quote  the  indictment  against  Lachmann, 
Tischendorf,  Tregelles,  from  the  pages  of  Revisionists. 


22  ERKONEOUS   SYSTEM   OF   TREGELLES,  [Aui. 

Fatliers  (Lacliiii;iini  says)  lie  oiu})loyed  o/////  Orijcn}  Paying 
extraordinary  deference  to  the  Latin  Version,  lie  entirely 
disregarded  the  coeval  Syriac  translation.  The  result  of  such 
a  system  nnist  needs  prove  satisfactory  to  no  one  except  its 
author. 

Lachmann's  leading  fallacy  has  perforce  proved  fatal  to 
the  value  of  the  text  put  forth  by  Dk.  Tkegelles.  Of  the 
scrupulous  accuracy,  the  indefatigable  industry,  the  pious 
zeal  of  that  estimable  and  devoted  scholar,  we  speak  not. 
All  honour  to  his  memory  !  As  a  specimen  of  conscientious 
labour,  his  edition  of  the  N.  T.  (1857-72)  passes  praise,  and 
will  never  lose  its  value.  But  it  has  only  to  be  stated,  that 
Tregelles  effectually  persuaded  himself  that  '  cif/hty-nine 
ninetieths'  of  our  extant  manuscripts  and  other  authorities 
may  safely  be  rejected  and  lost  sight  of  when  we  come  to 
amend  the  text  and  try  to  restore  it  to  its  primitive  purity,- 
— to  make  it  plain  that  in  Textual  Criticism  he  must  needs 
be  regarded  as  an  untrustworthy  teacher.  Whij  he  should 
have  condescended  to  employ  no  patristic  authority  later 
than  Eusebius  [11.  a.d.  320],  he  does  not  explain.  "  His 
critical  principles,"  (says  Bishop  Ellicott,)  "  especially  his 
general  principles  of  estimating  and  regarding  modern  manu- 
scripts, are  now  perhaps  justly  called  in  question."  ^ 

"  The  case  of  Dk.  Tischendorf  "  (proceeds  Bp.  Ellicott)  "  is 
still  more  easily  disposed  of.  Which  of  this  most  inconstant 
Critic's  texts  are  we  to  select  ?  Surely  not  the  last,  in  w  liicli 
an  exaggerated  ])reference  for  a  single  Manuscript  which  he 
has  had  the  ^ood  fortune  to  discover,  has  betraved  liini  into 


'  'Ex  scrijttoribus  Gnucis  Uintlspcr  Ori<jene  solo  \\>A  suinus.' — Prnfulio, 
1).  xxi. 

'^  ycrivi'iicr's  Philii  Juliod.  y.  .'11)7.  ■'   Vt  t^upru,  p.  4<S. 


I.]  AND   OF   TISCHENDORF.— S.   JOHN   XXI.    25.  23 

an  almost  child-like  infirmity  of  critical  judgment.  Surely 
also  not  his  seventh  edition,  which  .  .  .  exhibits  all  the 
instability  which  a  comparatively  recent  recognition  of  the 
authority  of  cursive  manuscripts  might  be  supposed  likely  to 
introduce."  ^  With  Dr.  Tischendorf, — (whom  one  vastly  his 
superior  in  learning,  accuracy,  and  judgment,  has  generously 
styled  '  the  first  Biblical  Critic  in  Europe '  ^) — "  the  evidence 
of  codex  N,  supported  or  even  unsupported  by  one  or  two 
other  authorities  of  any  description,  is  sufficient  to  outweigh 
any  other  witnesses, — whether  Manuscripts,  Versions,  or 
ecclesiastical  Writers."  ^  We  need  say  no  more.  Until  the 
foregoing  charge  has  been  disproved.  Dr.  Tischendorf's  last 
edition  of  the  N.  T.,  however  precious  as  a  vast  storehouse  of 
materials  for  criticism, — however  admirable  as  a  specimen 
of  unwearied  labour,  critical  learning,  and  first-rate  ability, 
— must  be  admitted  to  be  an  utterly  unsatisfactory  exhi- 
bition of  the  inspired  Text.  It  has  been  ascertained  that 
his  discovery  of  codex  n  caused  his  8th  edition  (1865-72) 
to  differ  from  his  7th  in  no  less  than  3505  places, — "  to  the 
scandal  of  the  science  of  Comparative  Criticism,  as  well  as  to 
his  own  grave  discredit  for  discernment  and  consistency."  * 
But,  in  fact,  what  is  to  be  thought  of  a  Critic  who, — because 
the  last  verse  of  S.  John's  Gospel,  in  N,  seemed  to  himself  to 
be  written  with  a  different  pen  from  the  rest, — has  actually 
omitted  that  verse  (xxi.  25)  entirely,  in  defiance  of  every 
known  Copy,  every  known  Version,  and  the  explicit  testimony 
of  a  host  of  Fathers?  Such  are  Origen  (in  11  places), — 
Eusebius  (in  3), — Gregory  Nyss.  (in  2), — Gregory  ISTazian., — 
ps.-Dionys.  Alex.,^  — Nonnus, — Chrysostom  (in  6  places), — 
Theodoras  Mops,  (in  2), — Isidorus, — Cyril  Alex,  (in  2), — 
Victor  Ant., — Ammonius,  —  Severus,  —  Maximus, — Andreas 


^  Ut  supra,  p.  47.        ^  Prebendary  Scriveuer,  ibid.  (ed.  1874),  p.  429. 
3  Hid.  p.  470.  '  Ihid.  "  Concilia,  i,  852, 


24  WESTCOTT   AND   HOKT'S   TEXT,   THE  [Aut. 

Cretensis, — Ambrose, — Gaudeiitius, — Pliilastrius,  —  Sedulius, 
— Jerome, — Augustine  (in  6  places).  That  Tischendorf  was 
a  critic  of  amazing  research,  singuhir  shrewdness,  indefatig- 
able industry  ;  and  tliat  he  enjoyed  an  unrivalled  familiarity 
with  ancient  documents  ;  no  fair  person  will  deny.  But  (in 
the  words  of  Bishop  Ellicott,^  whom  we  quote  so  perseveringly 
for  a  reason  not  hard  to  divine,)  his  '  great  inconstancy,' — his 
'  natural  want  of  sobriety  of  critical  jutlgment,' — and  his 
'  unreasonable  deference  to  the  readings  found  in  his  own 
codex  Sinaiticus ; ' — to  which  should  be  added  '  tlte  utter 
absence  in  him  of  any  intelligible  fixed  critical  pHnciples  ;  ' — 
all  this  makes  Tischendorf  one  of  the  worst  of  guides  to 
the  true  Text  of  Scripture. 

The  last  to  enter  the  field  are  Dks.  Westcott  and  Hoet, 
whose  beautifully-printed  edition  of  '  the  New  Testament  in 
the  original  Greek '  ^  was  published  ivitJiin  five  days  of  the 
'Revised  Authorized  Version '  itself;  a  "confidential"  copy  of 
their  work  having  been  already  entrusted  to  every  member 
of  the  New  Test,  company  of  Revisionists  to  guide  them  in 
their  labours, — under  pledge  that  they  should  neitlier  show 
nor  communicate  its  contents  to  any  one  else. — The  leiirned 
Editors  candidly  avow,  that  they  '  have  deliberately  chosen 
on  the  whole  to  rely  for  documentary  evidenci;  on  the  stores 
accumulated  by  their  predecessors,  and  to  confine  themsehes 
to  their  proper  work  of  editing  the  text  itself.'^  Nothing 
therefore  has  to  be  enquired  after,  except  the  critical  ])rin- 
cii)les  on   which  they  have  proceeded.     And,  after  assuring 


'    Ut  svpra,  p.  47. 

^  The  New  'Jesiament  in  the  Orujinal  Clneh.  'J'lic  Text  revised  by 
Brooke  Foss  Westcott,  D.D.,  and  Fenton  Joliii  Aiitlmny  Hort,  D.D. 
Cambridge  and  Londmi,  IHHl. 

'  From  tlie  rrel'acc  prefixed  to  tlic  '  liniiled  and  juivale  issue'  of  .1.S70, 

vi. 


I.]  MOST   VICIOUS   TKINTED   TEXT   EXTANT.  25 

lis  that  'the  study  of  Grouping  is  the  foundation  of  all 
enduring  Criticism,'  ^  they  produce  their  secret :  viz.  That  in 
'  every  one  of  our  witnesses '  except  codex  B,  the  '  corruptions 
are  innumerable  ; '  ^  and  that,  in  the  Gospels,  the  one  '  group 
of  witnesses  '  of  '  incomparable  value,'  is  codex  B  in  '  combina- 
tion with  another  primary  Greek  manuscript,  as  N  b,  B  l,  b  c, 
BT,  bd,  bh,  ab,  bz,  b33,  and  in  S.Mark  ba.'^  This  is 
'  Textual  Criticism  made  easy,'  certainly.  Well  aware  of  the 
preposterous  results  to  which  such  a  major  premiss  must 
inevitably  lead,  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  a  plea  straight- 
way put  in  for  '  instinctive  processes  of  Criticism,'  of  which  the 
foundation  '  needs  perpetual  correction  and.  recorrection.'  But 
our  confidence  fairly  gives  way  when,  in  the  same  breath,  the 
accomplished  Editors  proceed  as  follows : — *  But  lue  are 
obliged  to  come  to  the  individttal  7nind  at  last ;  and  canons  of 
Criticism  are  useful  only  as  warnings  against  natural  ilho- 
sions,  and  aids  to  circumspect  consideration,  not  as  absolute 
rules  to  prescribe  the  final  decision.  It  is  true  that  no  indi- 
vidual  mind  can  ever  work  with  perfect  uniformity,  or  free 
itself  completely  from  its  own  idiosyncrasies.  Yet  a  clear 
sense  of  the  danger  of  unconscious  caprice  may  do  much 
towards  excluding  it.  We  trust  also  that  the  present  Text 
has  escaped  some  risks  of  this  kind  by  being  the  joint  pro- 
duction of  two  Editors  of  different  habits  of  mind  '  *  .  .  .  A 
somewhat  insecure  safeguard  surely  !  May  we  be  permitted 
without  offence  to  point  out  that  the  '  idiosyncrasies '  of  an 
'  individual  mind  '  (to  which  we  learn  with  astonishment  '  we 
are  obliged  to  come  at  last')  are  probably  the  very  worst 
foundation  possilile  on  which  to  build  the  recension  of  an 
inspired  writing  ?  With  regret  we  record  our  conviction, 
that  these  accomplished  scholars  have  succeeded  in  producing 
a  Text  vastly  more  remote  from  the  inspired  autographs  of 


^  Ut  stq>m,\).x\.      ^  7i/f/.  p.  xviii.      ^7&u?.  p.  xvi.      ^ //>iV?.  pp.  xviii.,  xix. 


26  WESTCOTT   AND   HORT'S   THEORY   OF  [Aut. 

the  Evangelists  tluui  any  "which  has  appeared  since  the 
invention  of  printing.  When  full  Prolegomena  have  been 
furnished   we  shall  know  more  al)0ut  the  matter ;  ^  but  to 


^  \_Note, — that  I  have  thought  it  best,  for  many  reasons,  to  retain  the 
ensuing  note  as  it  originally  appeared  ;  merely  restoring  [_within  lirachets\ 
those  printed  portions  of  it  for  which  there  really  luas  no  room.  The  third 
Article  in  the  present  volume  tvill  he  found  to  supply  an  ample  exposure 
of  the  shallowness  of  Drs .  Westcott  and  Horfs  Textual  TlieoryJ] 

While  these  sheets  are  passing  through  the  press,  a  copy  of  the  long- 
expected  volume  reaches  us.  The  theory  of  the  respected  authors  proves 
to  be  the  shallowest  imaginable.  It  is  briefly  this : — Fastening  on  the  two 
oldest  codices  extant  (b  and  X ,  both  of  the  TVth  century),  they  invent  the 
following  hypothesis : — '  That  the  ancestries  of  those  two  manuscripts 
diverged  from  a  point  near  the  autographs,  and  never  came  into  contact 
subsequently.''     [No  reason  is  produced  for  this  opinion.] 

Having  thus  secured  two  independent  witnesses  of  what  was  in  the 
sacred  autographs,  the  Editors  claim  that  the  coincidence  of  J^  and  B  must 
'  mark  those  portions  of  text  in  which  two  primitive  and  entirely  separate 
lines  of  transmission  had  not  come  to  differ  from  each  other  through 
independent  corruption  :'  and  therefore  that,  '  in  the  absence  of  specially 
strong  internal  evidence  to  the  contrary,'  '  the  readings  of  N  and  b  com- 
bined may  safely  he  accepdcd  as  genuine.'' 

But  what  is  to  be  done  when  the  same  two  codices  diverge  one  from  the 
otjipr  f — In  all  such  cases  (we  are  assured)  the  readings  of  any  '  binary 
combination '  of  b  are  to  be  preferred ;  because  '  on  the  closest  scrutiny,' 
they  generally  '  have  the  ring  of  genuineness ;'  hardly  ever  '  look  suspi- 
cious after  full  consideration.'  'Even  when  b  stands  quite  alone,  its 
readings  must  never  be  lightly  rejected.'     [We  are  not  told  why. 

15ut,  (rejoins  the  student  who,  after  careful  collation  of  codex  b,  has 
arrived  at  a  vastly  different  estimate  of  its  character,) — What  is  to  be 
done  when  internal  and  external  evidence  alike  condemn  a  reading  of  b? 
How  is  'mumpsimus'  for  example  to  be  treated? — ^  Mumps imus'  (the 
Editors  solemnly  reply)  as  '  the  better  attested  reading' — (by  which  they 
mean  the  reading  attested  by  B,) — we  place  in  our  margin.  '  Snmpsinms,' 
apparently  the  right  reading,  we  place  in  the  text  within  ff  ;  in  token  that 
it  is  probably  '  a  successful  ancient  conjecture.' 

We  smile,  and  resume : — But  how  is  the  fact  to  be  accounted  for  that 
the  text  of  Chrysostom  and  (in  the  main)  of  the  rest  of  the  IVth-century 
Fathers,  to  whom  we  are  so  largely  indebted  for  our  critical  materials,  and 
who  must  havo  euiiiloyed  codices  fully  as  oM  ;is  n  and  N:  how  is  il,  wo 


I.]  TEXTUAL   CRITICISM   BRIEFLY   EXA]MINED.  27 

judge  from  the  Eemarks  (in  pp.  541-62)  wliicli  the  learned 
Editors  (Revisionists  themselves)  have  subjoined  to  their 
elegantly-printed  volume,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  fabric 


ask,  tliat  the  text  of  all  these,  including  codex  a,  differs  essentially  from 
the  text  exhibited  by  codices  b  and  X  ? — The  editors  reply, — The  text  of 
Chrysostom  and  the  rest,  we  designate  '  Syrian,'  and  assume  to  have  been 
the  result  of  an  '  editorial  Kevision,'  which  we  conjecturally  assign  to  the 
second  half  of  the  Ilird  century.  It  is  the  '  Pre-Syrian '  text  that  we  are 
in  search  of;  and  we  recognize  the  object  of  our  search  in  codex  b. 

We  stare,  and  smile  again.  But  how  then  does  it  come  to  pass  (we 
rejoin)  that  the  Peschito,  or  primitive  Syriac,  which  is  older  by  full  a 
century  and  a  half  than  the  last-named  date,  is  practically  still  the  same 
text  ? — This  fatal  circumstance  (not  overlooked  by  the  learned  Editors) 
they  encounter  with  another  conjectural  assumjition.  '  A  Revision '  (say 
they)  '  of  the  Old  Syriac  version  appears  to  have  taken  place  early  in  the 
IVth  century,  or  sooner ;  and  doulitless  in  some  connexion  with  the 
Syrian  revision  of  the  Greek  text,  the  readings  being  to  a  very  great 
extent  coincident.' 

And  pray,  where  is  '  the  Old  Syriac  version '  of  which  you  speak  ? — It 
is  (reply  the  Editors)  our  way  of  designating  the  fragmentary  Syriac  MS. 
commonly  known  as  '  Cureton's.' — ^Your  way  (we  rejoin)  of  manipulating 
facts,  and  disposing  of  evidence  is  certainly  the  most  convenient,  as  it  is 
the  most  extraordinary,  imaginable :  yet  is  it  altogether  inadmissible  in  a 
grave  enquiry  like  the  present.  Syriac  scholars  are  of  a  widely  different 
opinion  from  yourselves.  Do  you  not  perceive  that  you  have  been  draw- 
ing upon  your  imagination  for  every  one  of  your  facts  ? 

We  decline  in  short  on  the  mere  conjectural  ipse  dixit  of  these  two 
respected  scholars  to  admit  either  that  the  Peschito  is  a  Revision  of 
Cureton's  Syriac  Version ; — or  that  it  was  executed  about  a.d.  325  ; — or 
that  the  text  of  Chrysostom  and  the  other  principal  IVth-century  Fathers 
is  the  result  of  an  unrecorded  '  Antiochian  Revision '  which  took  i)lace 
about  the  year  a.d.  275. 

But  instead  of  troubling  ourselves  with  removing  the  upper  story  of 
the  visionary  structure  before  us,^ — which  reminds  us  painfully  of  a  house 
which  we  once  remember  building  with  jalaying-cards, — we  begin  by 
removing  the  basement-story,  which  brings  the  entire  superstructure  in 
an  instant  to  the  ground.] 

For  we  decline  to  admit  that  the  texts  exhibited  by  b  S  can  have 
'  diverged  from  a  point  near  the  sacred  autographs,  and  never  come  into 
contact  subsc^piently.'     We  are  able  to  show,  on  the  contrary,  that  the 


28      WESTCOTT   AND   HORT'S   EDITION   OF   THE   N.  T.      [Aut. 

will  l)c  fduud  to  rest  too  exclusively  on  vague  assumption 
and  unproved  hypothesis.  In  other  words,  a  painful  appre- 
hension is  created  that  their  edition  of  '  The  New  Testament 
in   the   original   Greek '   will   be   found   to   partake   incon- 


readinj^s  they  jointly  emlxxly  uffonl  the  strongest  presumption  that  the 
MSS.  which  contain  them  are  nothing  else  but  specimens  of  those  '  cor- 
rected,' i.e.  corrupted  copies,  which  are  known  to  have  abounded  in  tlie 
earliest  ages  of  the  Church.  From  the  prevalence  of  identical  depravations 
in  either,  we  infer  that  they  are,  on  the  contrary,  derived  from  the  same 
not  very  remote  de})raved  original :  and  therefore,  that  their  coincidence, 
when  they  differ  from  all  (or  nearly  all)  other  MSS.,  so  far  from  marking 
*  two  primitive  and  entirely  separate  lines  of  transmission '  of  the  inspired 
autographs,  does  but  mark  what  was  derived  from  the  same  corrupt 
common  ancestor ;  whereby  the  supposed  two  independent  witnesses  to  the 
Evangelic  verity  become  resolved  into  a  single  witness  to  a  fahricated  text 
of  the  Ilird  century. 

It  is  impossible  in  the  meantime  to  withhold  from  these  learned  and 
excellent  men  (who  are  infinitely  better  than  their  theory)  the  tribute  of 
our  sympathy  and  concern  at  the  evident  perplexity  and  constant  distress 
to  which  their  own  fatal  major  premiss  has  reduced  them.  The  Nemesis 
of  Superstition  and  Idolatry  is  ever  the  same.  Doubt, — unbelief, — 
credulity,— general  mistrust  of  all  evidence,  is  the  inevitable  sequel  and 
penalty.  In  1870,  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  solemnly  assured  their  Ijrother 
Ilevisionists  that  '  the  prevalent  assumption,  that  throughout  the  N.  T.  the 
true  text  is  to  be  found  someivhere  among  recorded  readings,  does  not  stand 
the  test  of  exjjerience : ' "  and  they  are  evidently  still  haunted  by  the  same 
spectral  suspicion.  They  see  a  ghost  to  be  exorcised  in  every  dark  corner. 
'  The  Art  of  Conjectural  Emendation '  (says  Dr.  Hort)  '  depends  for  its 
success  so  much  on  personal  endowments,  fertility  of  resource  in  the  first 
instance,  and  even  more  an  ajipreciation  of  language  too  delicate  to  acquiesce 
in  merely  plausible  corrections,  that  it  is  easy  to  forget  its  true  character 
us  a  critical  operation  founded  on  knowledge  and  method.' "  Specimens  of 
tlie  writer's  skill  in  this  department  abound.  One  occurs  at  p.  135  {App.) 
wliere,  in  defiance  of  every  knoivn  docmncnt,  he  seeks  to  evacuate  S.  Paul's 
memorable  injunction  to  Timothy  (2  Tim.  i.  18)  of  all  its  significance. 
[A  fuller  exposure  of  Dr.  Hort's  liandling  of  this  imjjortant  text  will  be 
found  later  in  the  present  volume.]  May  we  be  allowed  to  assure  the 
accomplished  writer  that  in  Biblical  Textual  Ckiticism,  '  Conjkctural 
Emendation  '  has  no  place  ? 

"  r.  xxi.  ^  InUod.  p.  71. 


I.]  CORRUPT   COPIES   ANCIENTLY    PREVALENT.  .   29 

veniently  of  the  nature  of  a  work  of  the  Imagination.  As 
codex  X  proved  fatal  to  Dr.  Tischendorf,  so  is  codex  b  evi- 
dently the  rock  on  which  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  have  split. 
Did  it  ever  occur  to  those  learned  men  to  enquire  how  the 
Septuagint  Version  of  the  Old  Testament  has  fared  at  the 
hands  of  codex  B  ?  They  are  respectfully  invited  to  address 
themselves  to  this  very  damaging  enquiry. 

But  surely  (rejoins  the  intelligent  Eeader,  coming  fresh  to 
these  studies),  the  oldest  extant  Manuscripts  (b  n  a  c  d)  must 
exhil^it  the  purest  text !     Is  it  not  so  ? 

It  ought  to  be  so,  no  doubt  (we  answer) ;  l;)ut  it  certainly 
need  not  be  the  case. 

We  know  that  Origen  in  Palestine,  Lucian  at  Antioch, 
Hesychius  in  Egypt,  '  revised '  the  text  of  the  N.  T.  Unfor- 
tunately, they  did  their  work  in  an  age  when  such  fatal  mis- 
apprehension prevailed  on  the  subject,  that  each  in  turn  will 
have  inevitably  imported  a  fresh  assortment  of  monstra  into 
the  sacred  writings.  Add,  the  baneful  influence  of  such 
spirits  as  Theophilus  (sixth  Bishop  of  Antioch,  a.d.  168), 
Tatian,  Ammonius,  &c.,  of  whom  we  know  there  were  very 
many  in  the  primitive  age,  —  some  of  whose  productions, 
we  further  know,  were  freely  multiplied  in  every  quarter 
of  ancient  Christendom : — add,  the  fabricated  Gospels  which 
anciently  abounded;  notably  the  Gosjycl  of  the  Hcbreivs, 
about  which  Jerome  is  so  communicative,  and  which  (he 
says)  he  had  translated  into  Greek  and  Latin : — lastly,  freely 
grant  that  here  and  there,  with  well-meant  assiduity,  the 
orthodox  themselves  may  have  sought  to  prop  up  truths 
which  the  early  heretics  (Basilides,  a.d.  134,  Valentinus,  a.d. 
140,  with  his  disciple  Heracleon,  Marcion,  a.d.  150,  and  the 
rest,)  most  perseveringly  assailed  ; — and  we  have  sufficiently 
explained  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  not  a  few  of  the  codices 
of  primitive  Christendom  must  have  exhibited  Texts  which 


30  CODD.    S  p.  c  n   SHOWX    TO   BK   ITOPKLESST-Y        [Airr. 

were  even  scandalously  corrupt.  '  It  is  no  less  true  to  fact 
tlian  paradoxical  in  sound,'  \vrites  tlie  most  learned  of  llic 
Revisionist  ))ody, 

'  that  the  worst  corruptions,  to  which  the  New  Testament  has 
ever  been  subjected,  originated  within  a  hundred  years  after  it 
was  composed  :  that  Irenaius  [a.d.  150]  and  the  African  Fathers, 
and  the  whole  Western,  with  a  portion  of  the  Syrian  Church, 
used  far  inferior  manuscripts  to  those  employed  by  Stunic;i,  or 
Erasmus,  or  Stephens  thirteen  centuries  later,  when  moulding 
the  Textus  Receptus.'^ 

And  what  else  are  codices  X  B  C  d  but  sjjccimcns — in  vastly 
different  degrees — of  the  class  thus  characterized,  by  Prebendary 
Scrivener?  Nay,  wdio  will  venture  to  deny  that  those 
codices  are  indebted  for  their  preservation  solely  to  tlie  cir- 
cumstance, that  they  were  long  since  recognized  as  the 
depositories  of  Readings  which  rendered  them  utterly  un- 
trustworthy ? 

Only  l)y  singling  out  some  definite  portion  of  the  Gospels, 
and  attending  closely  to  the  handling  it  has  experienced  at 
the  hands  of  a  x  b  c  D, — to  the  last  four  of  which  it  is  just 
now  the  fashion  to  bow  down  as.  to  an  oracular  voice  from 
which  there  shall  l)e  no  appeal,— can  the  stu(k'nt  liecome 
aware  of  the  hopelessness  of  any  attempt  to  construct  the  Text 
of  the  N.  T.  out  of  the  materials  which  those  codices  ex- 
clusively sujjply.  Let  us  this  time  take  S.  Mark's  account  of 
the  healing  of  ' the  paralytic  jxa-nc  of  four' (ch.  ii.  1-12), — 
and  confront  their  exhibition  of  it,  with  that  of  tlie  commonly 
received  Text.  In  the  course  of  those  12  verses,  (not  reck- 
oning 4  blunders  and  certain  peculiarities  of  spelling,) 
there  will  be  found  to  be  GO  variations  of  reading, — of  wliicli 


'  Scrivener,  Introduction,  p.  453. — Stunica,  it  will  be  rcnieniliored,  was 
the  chief  editor  of  tlic  Compluteiisian,  or  Jin^t  jiriniM  cditinu  nf  tlio  New 
Testament,  (1514). 


I.]  AT   STRIFE   AMOXG    TIIE]\ISELA"ES.  ?.l 

55  are  nothing  else  but  depravations  of  the  text,  the  result 
of  inattention  or  licentiousness.  Westcott  and  Hort  adopt 
23  of  these : — (18,  in  which  x  B  conspire  to  vouch  for  a 
reading :  2,  where  s  is  unsupported  hj  B :  2,  where  b 
is  unsupported  by  N  :  1,  where  C  D  are  supported  by 
neither  x  nor  b).  Now,  in  the  present  instance,  the  'five 
old  uncials '  cannot  he  the  depositories  of  a  tradition, — 
whether  Western  or  Eastern, — -because  they  render  inconsis- 
tent testimony  in  every  verse.  It  must  further  be  admitted, 
(for  this  is  really  not  a  question  of  opinion,  but  a  plain 
matter  of  fact,)  that  it  is  unreasonable  to  place  confidence  in 
such  documents.  What  would  be  thouQ;ht  in  a  Court  of  Law 
of  five  witnesses,  called  up  47  times  for  examination,  who 
should  be  observed  to  bear  contradictory  testimony  every  time  ? 
But  the  whole  of  the  problem  does  not  by  any  means  lie 
on  the  surface.  All  that  appears  is  that  the  five  oldest 
uncials  are  not  trustworthy  witnesses ;  which  singly,  in  the 
course  of  12  verses  separate  themselves  from  their  fellows 
33  times  :  viz.  A,  twice  ;— S,  5  times ; — b,  6  times  ; — c,  thrice  ; 
— D,  17  times:  and  which  also  enter  into  tlie  11  following 
combinations  with  one  another  in  opposition  to  the  ordinary 
Text : — A  c,  twice  ; — s  B,  10  times ; — s  D,  once  ; — c  D,  3  times ; 
•— N  B  c,  once  ; — N  b  d,  5  times  ; — n  g  d,  once ; —  BCD,  once  ; 
• — A  N  c  D,  once ; — A  B  c  D,  once ; — A  K  B  c  D,  once.  (Note,  that 
on  this  last  occasion,  which  is  the  only  time  when  they  all  5 
agree,  they  are  ecrtainly  all  5  wrong.)  But  this,  as  was  observed 
before,  lies  on  the  surface.  On  closer  critical  inspection,  it  is 
further  discovered  that  their  testimony  betrays  the  baseness  of 
their  origin  by  its  intrinsic  worthlessness.  Thus,  in  Mk.  ii.  1, 
the  delicate  precision  of  the  announcement  7]KovarQr]  on  ei's 
of  KO'N  'E2TI  (that  'He  has  gone  in '),  disappears  from  n  b  d  : — 
as  well  as  (in  ver.  2)  the  circumstance  tliat  it  became  the 
signal  for  many  '  immediately '  ( N  b)  to  assemble  about  the 
door. — In  ver.  4,  S.  Mark  explains  his  predecessor's  concise 


32  BASENESS   OF   THE   TEXT   OF   S*  V,  D.   WHICH         [Art. 

statement  that  tlie  paralytic  was  '  l)rouglit  to'  our  Saviour,^ 
by  remarking  that  the  thing  was  '  imjwssible '  by  the  ordinary 
method  of  approach.  Accordingly,  his  account  of  the  ex- 
pedient resorted  to  by  the  bearers  fills  one  entire  verse  (ver.  4) 
of  his  Gospel.  In  the  mean  time,  N  b  by  exhibiting  (in 
S.  Mark  ii.  3,)  '  bringing  unto  Him  one  sick  of  the  palsy ' 
((/jepoi/Te?  7rpo9  avrov  irapaXvTtKov, — which  is  but  a  senseless 
transposition  of  irpo'i  avrov,  TrapaXvTiKov  (^epofxe?),  do  their 
best  to  obliterate  the  exquisite  significance  of  the  second 
Evangelist's  method. — In  the  next  verse,  the  perplexity  of 
tlie  bearers,  who,  because  they  could  not  '  come  nigh  Him ' 
(TTpoaeyyLo-aL  avrw),  unroofed  the  house,  is  lost  in  8<  B, — whose 
irpoaeveyKai  has  been  obtained  either  from  Matt.  ix.  2,  or  else 
from  Luke  v.  18,  19  (elaeveyKetv,  elaeveyKcocnv).  'The  bed 
WHERE  WAS  the  paralytic '  (rov  Kpd^/darov  "onOT  'hn  o  irapa- 
\vti,k6<;,  in  imitation  of  '  the  roof  where  was  '  Jesus  {rrjv 
(7Te<yr]v  "onoT  'hn  [o  'I^^croti?],  which  had  immediately  pre- 
ceded), is  just  one  of  those  tasteless  depravations,  for  which 
X  B,  and  especially  D,  are  conspicuous  among  manuscripts. — 
In  the  last  verse,  the  instantaneous  rising  of  the  paralytic, 
noticed  by  S.  Mark  (riyepdr)  evOewi),  and  insisted  upon  l)y 
S.  Luke  ('  and  immediately  he  rose  vp  l)efore  them,' — koX 
'7rapa')(^pr]fia  dvaara<;  ivco'Tnov  avrcov),  is  obliterated  Ijy 
shifting  ev9e(i)<i  in  N  B  and  C  to  a  place  where  evOico'i  is  not 
wanted,  and  where  its  significancy  disappears. 

Other  instances  of  Assimilation  are  conspicuous.  All  must 
see  that,  in  ver.  5,  koI  IBcov  (x  b  c)  is  derived  from  Matt.  ix.  2 
and  Luke  v.  20  :  as  well  as  that  '  Son,  he  of  good  cheer  '  (c)  is 
impfjrted  liither  from  Matt.  ix.  2.  '  Mg  son,'  on  the  other  hand 
(x),  is  a  mere  effort  of  the  imagination.  In  the  same  verse, 
aov  a'l  dfiaprlai  (x  B  d)  is  either  from  Matt.  ix.  5  (sic) ;  or 


'   Tri}na((f)fpnv  nvTW, — S.  Matt.  ix.  2. 


I.]  HAS   FATALLY   MISLED   OUR   REVISIONISTS.  o3 

else  from  ver.  9,  lower  down  in  S.  Mark's  narrative.  AeyovTef;, 
in  ver.  G  (d),  is  from  S.  Luke  v.  21.  "TTraye  (x)  in  ver.  9,  and 
viraye  et?  rbv  oIkov  aov  (i»),  are  clearly  importations  from 
ver  11.  The  strange  confusion  in  ver.  7, — 'Because  this  mem 
thus  spceilceth,  he  Ueisi^hcmeth  '  (b), — and  '  Why  eloth  this  iiiein 
thus  s2Jeak  ?  He  Uasphemeth '  (k  d), — is  due  solely  to  Mtt.  ix.  3  : 
— wliile  the  appendix  proposed  by  n  as  a  substitute  for  '  We 
never  saw  it  on  this  fashion '  (ovSeiroTe  ovtco'?  etSo/xep),  in 
ver  12  (viz.  '  It  was  never  so  seen  in  Israel,'  ovBiiroTe  ovrw<; 
i(f)dvr)  iv  ru)  "'laparjX),  has  been  transplanted  hither  from 
S.  Matt.  ix.  33. 

We  shall  perhaps  be  told  that,  scandalously  corrupt  as  the 
text  of  N  B  c  D  hereabouts  may  be,  no  reason  has  been  shown 
as  yet  for  suspecting  that  hcrcticed  depravation  ever  had 
anything  to  do  with  such  phenomena.  Theit  (we  answer)  is 
only  because  the  writings  of  the  early  depravers  and  fabri- 
cators of  Gospels  have  universally  perished.  From  the 
slender  relics  of  their  iniquitous  performances  which  have 
survived  to  our  time,  we  are  sometimes  able  to  lay  our  finger 
on  a  foul  blot  and  to  say,  '  This  came  from  Tatian's  Diates- 
saron ;  and  thect  from  Marcion's  mutilated  recension  of  the 
Gospel  according  to  S.  Luke.'  The  piercing  of  our  Saviour's 
side,  transplanted  by  codices  s*  b  c  from  S.  John  xix.  34  into 
S.  Matt,  xxvii.  49,  is  an  instance  of  the  former, — which  it 
may  reasonably  create  astonishment  to  find  that  Drs.  West- 
cott  and  Hort  (edone  etmong  Eelitors)  have  nevertheless 
admitted  into  their  text,  as  equally  trustworthy  with  the  last 
12  verses  of  S.  Mark's  Gospel.  But  it  occasions  a  stronger 
sentiment  than  surprise  to  discover  that  this,  '  the  gravest 
interpolation  yet  laid  to  the  charge  of  B,' — this  '  sentence 
which  neither  they  nor  any  other  competent  scholar  can 
possibly  Ijelieve  that  the  Evangelist  ever  wrote,'  ^ — has  been 

^  Scrivener,  Plain  In  f rod.  p.  472. 


;U  THE  LORD'S   PKAYEll  (S.   LUKE  XI.   2-4)  [Art 

actually  foisted  into  tlie  margin  of  the  licviscd  Version  of 
S.  Matthew  xxvii.  49.  Were  not  the  Picvisionists  aware  that 
such  a  disfigurement  must  ])rove  fatal  to  their  work  ?  For 
tuhosc  benefit  is  the  information  volunteered  that  '  many 
ancient  authorities  '  are  thus  grossly  interpolated  ? 

An  instructive  specimen  of  depravation  follows,  which  can 
be  traced  to  Marcion's  mutilated  recension  of  S.  Luke's 
Gospel.  We  venture  to  entreat  the  favour  of  tlie  reader's 
sustained  attention  to  the  license  with  which  the  Lokd's 
Prayer  as  given  in  S.  Luke's  Gospel  (xi.  2-4),  is  exhibited  by 
codices  n  a  B  c  D.  For  every  reason  one  would  have  expected 
that  so  precious  a  formula  would  have  been  found  enshrined 
in  tlie  'old  uncials'  in  peculiar  safety;  handled  by  copyists 
of  the  IVth,  Vth,  and  Vlth  centuries  with  peculiar  reverence. 
Let  us  ascertain  exactly  what  has  befallen  it : — 

{a)  I)  introduces  the  Loud'h  Prayer  by  interpolating  the 
following  paraphrase  of  S.  Matt.  vi.  7 : — '  Use  not  vain 
repetitions  as  the  rest :  for  some  sup2Mse  that  they  shall  he 
heard  hy  their  much  sjjeakiny.  But  ivhcn  ye  pray '  .  .  .  After 
which  portentous  exordium, 

(h)  BS  omit  the  5  words, '  Our  ' '  ivhich  art  in  heaven,'  Then, 

(c)  D  omits  the  article  {ro)  before  '  name : '  and  supple- 
ments the  first  petition  with  the  words  '  upon  us  '  (e^'  ^y/ia?). 
It  nmst  needs  also  transpose  the  words  '  TJiy  Kingdom'  (^ 
jBaaiXeia  gov). 

(d)  B  in  turn  omits  the  third  ])ctition, — '  77///  icill  J>c  done, 
as  in  heaven,  also  on  the  earth ; '  M'liicli  1 1  words  N  retains,  l)ut 
a^lds  '  so'  bel'ore  '  also,'  and  omits  the  article  (t>)v)  ;  finding  for 
once  an  ally  in  A  c  i). 

(c)  K  D  for  BiBov  write  86?  (from  ]\Litt.). 
(/)  S  omits  the  article  {to)  before  '  day  hy  day.'     And, 
(cy)  ]),  instead  of  tlie  3  last-named  words,  writes  '  f/iis  day' 
(from  Matt.)  :  siil»stitutes  Ulehts'  {ja  6<^€iXi]ixara)  for '.s///.s'  (ja 


I.]  LICENTIOUSLY   EXHIBITED   BY   N    A   B   C   D.  35 

dfjLapTTj/jbara, — also  from  Matt.)  :  and  in  place  of  'for  [wc] 
02irsdvcs '  (koI  yap  avroi)  writes  '  as  also  wc '  (w?  koI  r}/ji€i<;, 
again  from  Matt.). — But, 

(h)  a  shows  its  sympathy  with  D  by  accepting  two-thirds 
of  this  last  blunder  :  exhibiting  '  as  also  [we^  ourselves  '  (ax?  koI 
avTOi). 

(i)  D  consistently  reads  '  ourdcMors'  (toU  6(f)6iXeTaL<;  tj/hwv) 
in  place  of  '  every  one  that  is  indebted  to  us  '  {iravrl  o^elXopTt 
7][uv). — Finally, 

{j)  B  N  omit  the  last  petition, —  'hut  deliver  us  from.  cviV 
{uXka  pvaat  rjfxci'i  citto  tov  irovripov) — unsupported  by  A  C  or  D. 
Of  lesser  discrepancies  we  decline  to  take  account. 

So  then,  these  five  '  first-class  authorities '  are  found  to 
throw  themselves  into  six  different  combinations  in  their 
departures  from  S.  Luke's  way  of  exhibiting  the  Lord's 
Prayer, — which,  among  them,  they  contrive  to  falsify  in 
respect  of  no  less  than  45  words ;  and  yet  they  arc  never  ahlc 
to  agree  among  themselves  as  to  any  single  various  reading : 
while  only  once  are  more  than  two  of  them  observed  to  stand 
together, — viz.  in  the  unauthorized  omission  of  the  article. 
In  respect  of  32  (out  of  the  45)  words,  they  bear  in  turn  soli- 
tary evidence.  What  need  to  declare  that  it  is  certainly  false 
in  every  instance  ?  Such  however  is  the  infatuation  of  the 
Critics,  that  the  vagaries  of  B  are  all  taken  for  gospel.  Besides 
omitting  the  11  words  which  B  omits  jointly  with  k,  Drs.  West- 
cott  and  Hort  erase  from  the  Book  of  Life  those  other  11 
precious  words  which  are  omitted  by  b  only.  And  in  this 
way  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  mutilated  condition  to  which 
the  scalpel  of  Marcion  the  heretic  reduced  the  Load's  Prayer 
some  1730  years  ago,^  (for  the  mischief  can  all  be  traced  back 


^  The  words  omitted  are  therefore  the  following  22 : — r^fiatv,  6  iv  roZs 
ovpavois  .   .   •   yevrjBrjTO)  to  OeKrjfid  crov,  ws  ev  ovpai/S,  koi  inl  Trjs  -yns  .   . 
aWii  pv(Tai  fjixas  OTTO  tov  novrjpov, 

D    2 


36  THE   LA8T   TWELVE   VERSES   OF   S.   MAKK.  [Art. 

to  him!),  is  palmed  olT  on  tlic  Cliurcli  of  England  by  the 
llevisionists  as  the  work  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost! 

(a)  We  may  now  proceed  with  our  examination  of  their 
work,  beginning — as  Dr.  Eoberts  (one  of  the  Eevisionists) 
does,  wheii  explaining  the  method  and  results  of  tlieir  labours — 
with  what  we  liold  to  be  the  gravest  blot  of  all,  viz.  the  marks 
of  serious  suspicion  which  we  find  set  against  the  last  Twelve 
verses  of  S.  Mark's  Gospel.  Well  may  the  learned  Presby- 
terian anticipate  that — 

'  The  reader  will  be  struck  by  the  appearance  which  this  long 
paragraph  presents  in  the  Revised  Veision.  Although  inserted, 
it  is  marked  off  by  a  considerable  space  from  the  rest  of  the 
Gospel.  A  note  is  also  placed  in  the  margin  containing  a  brief 
explanation  of  this." 

A  rcrij  brief  '  explanation '  certainly  :  for  the  note  explains 
nothing.     Allusion  is  made  to  the  following  words — 

'  The  two  oldest  Greek  manuscripts,  and  some  other  autho- 
rities, omit  from  ver.  9  to  the  end.  Some  other  authorities  have 
a  different  ending  to  the  Gospel.' 

But  now, —  For  the  use  of  lohom  has  this  piece  of  infor- 
mation l)cen  volunteered  ?  Not  for  learned  readers  certainly: 
it  being  familiarly  known  to  all,  that  codices  B  and  s  alone  of 
manuscri2)ts  (to  tlieir  own  effectual  condemnation)  omit  these 
12  verses.  But  tlien  scholars  know  something  more  about 
the  matter.  They  also  know  that  these  12  verses  have  been 
made  the  subject  of  a  separate  treatise  extending  to  upwards 
of  300  pages, — whicli  treatise  has  m)w  been  before  the  world 
for  a  full  decade  of  years,  and  for  the  best  of  reasons  lias 
never  yet  been  answered.  Its  object,  stated  on  its  title-page, 
was  to  vindicate  against   recent   critical   objectors,   and   to 


'   Vompunion  to  the  Ticvined  Vn'sion,  \).  (U. 


I.]  A   NEW   WAY   OF   'SETTLING'   THE   TEXT.  37 

establish  '  the  last  Twelve  Verses '  of  S.  Mark's  Gospel.^ 
Moreover,  competent  judges  at  once  admitted  that  the  author 
had  succeeded  in  doing  wliat  he  undertook  to  do,^  Can  it 
then  be  right  (we  respectfully  enquire)  still  to  insinuate  into 
unlearned  minds  distrust  of  twelve  consecutive  verses  of  the 
everlasting  Gospel,  which  yet  have  been  demonstrated  to  be 
as  trustworthy  as  any  other  verses  which  can  be  named  ? 

The  question  arises, — But  how  did  it  come  to  pass  that 
such  evil  counsels  were  allowed  to  prevail  in  the  Jerusalem 
Chamber  ?  Light  has  been  thrown  on  the  subject  by  two 
of  the  New  Test,  company.  And  first  by  the  learned  Con- 
gregationalist,  Dr.  JSTewth,  who  has  been  at  the  pains  to 
describe  the  method  which  was  pursued  on  every  occasion. 
The  practice  (he  informs  us)  was  as  follows.  The  Bishop  of 
Gloucester  and  Bristol,  as  chairman,  asks  — 

'  Whether  any  Textual  Changes  are  proposed  ?  The  evidence 
for  and  against  is  briefly  stated,  and  the  proposal  considered. 
The  duty  of  stating  this  evidence  is  by  tacit  consent  devolved 
upon  (sic)  two  members  of  the  Company,  who  from  their  pre- 
vious studies  are  specially  entitled  to  speak  with  authority  upon 
such  questions, — Dr.  Scrivener  and  Dr.  Mort, — and  who  come 
prepared  to  enumerate  particidarly  the  authorities  on  either 
side.  Dr.  Scrivener  opens  up  the  matter  by  stating  the  facts  of 
the  case,  and  by  giving  his  judgment  on  the  bearings  of  the 
evidence.  Dr.  Hort  follows,  and  mentions  any  additional 
matters  that  may  call  for  notice ;  and,  if  differing  from  Dr. 
Scrivener's  estimate  of  the  weight  of  the  evidence,  gives  his 


^  The  last  Twelve  Verses  of  the  Guspel  a-cording  to  S.  Mark,  vindicated 
against  recent  critical  Objectors  and  estahl ished,  by  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Burgon, — 
pp.  334,  published  by  Parker,  Oxford,  1871. 

^  As  Dr.  Jacobson  and  Dr.  Chr.  Wordsworth, — the  learned  Bishops  of 
Chester  and  Lincoln.  It  is  right  to  state  that  Bp.  EUicott  '  considers  tlie 
passage  dovhtfuV  {On  Revision,  p.  36.)  Dr.  Scrivener  (it  is  well  known) 
differs  entirely  from  Bp.  EUicott  on  this  important  point. 


38  A   NEW   WAY   OF   '  SETTLING '   THE   TEXT.  [Art. 

reasons  and  states  his  own  view.  After  discnssion,  the  vote  of 
the  Company  is  taken,  and  the  ])ro])osed  Reading  accepted  or 
rejected.  The  Text  being  this  settled,  the  Chairman  asks  for 
proposals  on  the  Rendering." 

And  thus,  the  men  who  were  appointed  to  improve  the 
English  Ti^anslation  are  exhibited  to  us  remodelling  the 
original  Greek.  At  a  moment's  notice,  as  if  by  intuition, — 
by  an  act  which  can  only  be  described  as  the  exercise  of 
instinct, — these  eminent  Divines  undertake  to  decide  which 
shall  1)6  deemed  the  genuine  utterances  of  the  Holy  Ghost,^ 
— which  not.  Each  is  called  upon  to  give  his  vote,  and  he 
gives  it.  '  The  Text  Icing  thus  settled,'  they  proceed  to  do  the 
only  thing  they  were  originally  appointed  to  do ;  viz.  to  try 
their  hands  at  improving  our  Authorized  Version.  But  we 
venture  respectfully  to  suggest,  that  Ijy  no  such  '  rough  and 
ready'  process  is  that  most  delicate  and  difficult  of  all  critical 
problems — the  truth  of  Scripture — to  be  '  settled.' 

Sir  Edmund  Beckett  remarks  that  if  the  description  alcove 
given  "  of  the  process  by  which  the  Revisionists  '  settled '  the 
Greek  alterations,  is  not  a  kind  of  joke,  it  is  quite  enough  to 
'settle'  this  Revised  Greek  Testament  in  a  very  different 
sense."^  And  so,  in  truth,  it  clearly  is. — "  Such  a  |)roceeding 
appeared  to  me  so  strange,"  (writes  the  learned  and  judicious 
Editor  of  the  Speakers  Commentary,)  "  that  T  fully  expected 
that  the  account  would  be  corrected,  or  that  some  explanation 
would  be  given  which  might  remove  the  very  unpleasant 
impression."*     We  have  since  heard  on  the  best  autlujrity. 


'  Lectures  on  Bible  Revision,  pp.  119-20. 

2  Til?  oKriOfls  pr](Tfis  llvevfiaros  tov  'Ayiov. — Cloiiicns  Jiom.,  c.  45. 

3  Hlivuld  Uie  Jieviseil  New  Testament  be  unthoiized  f — p.  42. 

*  Revised    Version   (if  ttic  first  t/ine   Gosixis,   considered, — l)y    Cauon 
Cook —pp.  221-2. 


T.]  DK.   ROBERTS  ON   S.   MARK  XVI.   9-20.  39 

that  namely  of  Bishop  Ellicott  himself/  that  Dr.  Newth's 
account  of  the  method  of  '  settling '  the  text  of  the  N.  T., 
pursued  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber,  is  correct. 

But  in  fact,  it  proves  to  have  been,  from  the  very  first, 
a  definite  part  of  the  Programme.  The  chairman  of  the 
Eevisionist  body,  Bishop  Ellicott, — when  he  had  "  to  consider 
the  practical  question," — whether  "(1),  to  construct  a  critical 
Text  first :  or  (2),  to  use  preferentially,  though  not  exclusively, 
some  current  Text :  or  (3),  simidy  to  irrocccd  onward  with  the 
work  of  Eevision,  whether  of  Text  or  Translation,  making  the 
current  Textus  Reccjytus  the  standard,  and  departing  from  it 
only  when  critical  or  grammatical  considerations  show  that 
it  is  clearly  necessary, — in  fact,  solvere  aonhulando;"  announces, 
at  the  end  of  19  pages, — "We  are  driven  then  to  the  third 
alternative."^ 

We  naturally  cast  about  for  some  evidence  that  the 
members  of  the  New  Testament  company  possess  that  mas- 
tery of  the  subject  which  alone  could  justify  one  of  their 
number  (Dr.  Milligan)  in  asserting  roundly  that  these  12 
verses  are  '  not  from  the  pen  of  S.  Mark  himself  f^  and  another 
(Dr.  Eoberts)  in  maintaining  that  '  the  passage  is  not  the 
immediate  production  of  S.  Mark.'^  Dr.  Eoberts  assures  us 
that — 

'  Eusebius,  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  Victor  of  Antioch,  Severus  of 
Antioch,  Jeronie,  as  well  as  other  writers,  especially  Greeks, 
testify  that  these  verses  were  not  written  by  S.  Mark,  or  not 
found  in  the  best  copies.'^ 

Will  the  learned  writer  permit  us  to  assure  him  in 
return  that  he  is  entirely  mistaken  ?  He  is  requested  to 
believe  that  Gregory  of  Nyssa  says  nothing  of  the  sort — says 


^  At  p.  34  of  his  pamphlet  in  reply  to  the  first  two  of  the   present 
Articles. 

2  On  Revision,  pp.  30  and  49.  ^    Words  of  the  N.  T.  p.  193. 

*  Companion  to  the  Revised  Version,  p.  63.  ^  Jhid.  p.  62. 


40  DR.   IIOBEETS'S   STATEMENT   CORRECTED.  [Art. 

notliing  at  all  concerning  these  verses :  that  Victor  of  Antioch 
vouches  emphatically  for  i\\G\v  [jaiuincncss:  that  Severus  does 
but  copy,  while  Jerome  does  but  translate,  a  few  random 
expressions  of  Eusebiiis  :  and  that  Eusebius  himself  novlicre 
'  testifies  that  these  verses  were  not  written  by  S.  Mark.'  So 
far  from  it,  Eusebius  actually  quotes  the  verses,  quotes  them 
as  genuine.  ])r.  lloberts  is  furtlier  assured  that  there  are  no 
'  other  writers,'  whether  Greek  or  Latin,  who  insinuate  (l()iil)t 
concerning  these  verses.  On  the  contrary,  besides  both  the  Latin 
and  all  the  Syriac — besides  the  Gothic  and  the  two  Egyptian 
versions — there  exist  four  authorities  of  the  Ilnd  century ; — 
as  many  of  the  Ilird ; — five  of  the  Vth ; — four  of  the  YItli ; — 
as  many  of  the  Vllth  ; — together  with  cd  least  ten  of  the  IV th^ 
{eontemj)oraries  therefore  of  coelices  B  and  X )  ; — wliicli  actually 
reeognizc  the  verses  in  question.  Now,  when  to  everg  knoivn 
Manuscript  hut  two  of  bad  character,  l)esides  every  ancient 
Version,  some  one-ancl-thirty  Fathers  have  been  added,  18  of 
whom  must  have  used  copies  at  least  as  old  as  either  b  or  N , 
— IJr.  Iloberts  is  assured  that  an  amount  of  external  autho- 
rity has  been  accumulated  which  is  simply  oveiwhelmiiig  in 
discussions  of  this  nature. 

But  the  significance  of  a  single  feature  of  the  Lectionary, 
of  which  up  to  this  point  nothing  has  been  said,  is  alone 
sutlicieiit  to  determine  tlie  controversy.  We  refer  to  tlie  fact 
that '///  every  ^wr;!  of  Eastern  Christcndont  these  same  12  verses 
—  neither  more  nor  less — have  been  from  the  earliest  recorded 
])eriod,  and  still  are,  a  projier  lesson  both  for  the  Easter  seeison 
Olid  for  Ascension  Day. 


'  Vi/,.  Kiisebiiis,  —  Macarius  Magnes,  —  A])hraiitc.s,  —  Didymus, —  tlio 
Syriivc  Ads  of  tlie  App., —  Epi])lianius,  —  Ambro.se,  —  Clirysostdin, — 
Jerome, — Augustine.  It  liappens  that  tlic  dis]>u(a(i(>ii  of  ]\Iacarius  IMagncs 
(a.d.  300-850)  with  a  heathen  philosoivlicr,  whicli  lias  recently  cnnn'  to 
light,  contains  an  elaborate  discussion  of  S.  lM;iik  wi.  17,  18.  Add  the 
ciiriiius  stdi-y  related  by  the  author  of  (he  /'iinr/m/  Clironldc  (a.D.  (528) 
(■(.ncerniug  Leontius,  IJislm])  ..f  Antioch  (a.d.  ;!]8),  -  p. '_'8!l.  'J'his  luis 
been  hitherto  overlooked. 


I.]       THE  TRUE  READING  OF  S.  LUKE  II.  14.       41 

We  pass  on. 

(b)  a  more  grievous  perversion  of  the  truth  of  Scripture 
is  scarcely  to  be  found  than  occurs  in  the  proposed  revised 
exhibition  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14,  in  the  Greek  and  English  alike ; 
for  indeed  not  only  is  the  proposed  Greek  text  (eV  av6poi7roL<i 
€v8oKia<;)  impossible,  but  the  English  of  the  Revisionists 
('peace  among  men  in  whom  he  is  well  idcascd ')  '  cqjx  be 
arrived  at '  (as  one  of  themselves  has  justly  remarked)  '  only 
through  some  process  which  would  make  any  phrase  bear 
almost  any  meaning  the  translator  might  like  to  put  upon 
it.'^  More  than  that :  the  harmony  of  the  exquisite  three- 
part  hymn,  which  the  Angels  sang  on  the  night  of  tlie 
Nativity,  becomes  hopelessly  marred,  and  its  structural  sym- 
metry destroyed,  by  the  welding  of  the  second  and  third 
members  of  the  sentence  into  one.  Singular  to  relate,  the 
addition  of  a  single  final  letter  (?)  has  done  all  this  mischief. 
Quite  as  singular  is  it  that  we  should  be  able  at  the  end 
of  upwards  of  1700  years  to  discover  what  occasioned  its 
calamitous  insertion.  From  the  archetypal  copy,  by  the  aid 
of  which  the  old  Latin  translation  was  made,  (for  the  Latin 
copies  all  read  '  'pax  hominihus  honte  voluntatis,')  the  preposi- 
tion ev  was  evidently  away, — absorl)ed  apparently  by  the  av 
which  immediately  follows.  In  order  therefore  to  make  a 
sentence  of  some  sort  out  of  words  which,  without  eV,  are 
simply  unintelligible,  evSoKca  was  turned  into  evhoKia'^.  It 
is  accordingly  a  significant  circumstance  that,  whereas  there 
exists  no  Greek  copy  of  the  Gospels  which  omits  tlie  ev,  there 
is  scarcely  a  Latin  exhibition  of  the  place  to  be  found  which 
contains  it.^  To  return  however  to  the  genuine  clause, — 
'  Good-will  towards  men  '  {ev  avOpdnTroi'^  evSoKio). 


aiK 


'  Scrivener's  Introduction,  p.  515. 

^  Tisch.  specifies  7  Latin  copies.     Origeu  (iii.  94G  /.),  Jcnmic  (vii.  282), 

A  Leo  (ap.  yabatier)  are  the  only  patristic  ipiotations  discoveraLle. 


42  THE  RECEIVED  TEXT  OF  S.  LUKE   II.    14  [Art. 

Absolutely  decisive  of  the  true  reading  of  the  passage 
— irrespectively  of  internal  considerations — ought  to  be  the 
consideration  that  it  is  vouched  for  hij  every  hioivn  copy  of 
the  Gospels  of  whatever  sort,  excepting  only  n  a  b  d  :  tlie 
first  and  third  of  which,  however,  were  anciently  corrected 
and  brought  into  conformity  with  the  Received  Text ;  while 
the  second  (a)  is  observed  to  be  so  inconstant  in  its  testi- 
mony, that  in  the  primitive  '  Morning-hymn '  (given  in 
another  page  of  the  same  codex,  and  containing  a  quotation 
of  S.  Luke  ii.  14),  the  correct  reading  of  the  place  is  found. 
d's  complicity  in  error  is  the  less  important,  because  of  the 
ascertained  sympathy  between  that  codex  and  the  Latin. 
In  the  meantime  the  two  Syriac  Versions  are  a  full  set-off 
against  the  Latin  copies ;  while  the  hostile  evidence  of  the 
Gothic  (which  this  time  sides  with  the  Latin)  is  more  than 
neutralized  by  the  unexpected  desertion  of  the  Coptic  version 
from  the  opposite  camp.  The  Armenian,  Georgian,  iEthio})ic, 
Slavonic  and  Arabian  versions,  are  besides  all  with  the 
Eeceived  Text.  It  therefore  comes  to  this : — We  are  invited 
to  make  our  election  Ijetween  every  other  copy  of  the 
Gospels, — every  known  Lectionary, — and  (not  least  of  all) 
the  ascertained  ecclesiastical  usage  of  the  Eastern  Church 
from  the  beginning, — on  the  one  hand  :  and  the  testimony  of 
four  Codices  without  a  history  or  a  character,  which  concur 
in  upholding  a  patent  mistake,  on  the  other.  Will  any  one 
hesitate  as  to  which  of  these  two  parties  has  the  stronger 
claim  on  his  allegiance  ? 

Could  doubt  be  supposed  to  be  entertained  in  any  quarter, 
it  must  at  all  events  be  borne  away  by  the  torrent  of  Pat- 
ristic authority  whicli  is  available  on  the  present  occasion: — 

In  tlie  Ilnd  century, — we  hnw.  the  testimony  of  (1) 
Irena'us.^  

'  i.  459. 


I.]  PEOVED  TO  BE  THE  TRUE  TEXT.  43 

In  the  III?d, — that  of  (2)  Origen  ^  in  3  places, — and  of  (3) 
the  AjJostolical  Constitutions  ^  in  2. 

In  tlie  IVth, — (4)  Eiisebius,^ — (5)  Aphraates  the  Persian,* 
— (6)  Titus  of  Bostra,  ^  each  twice; — (7)  Didymus^  in  3 
places  ; — (8)  Gregory  of  Nazianzus,'' — (9)  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,^ 
— (10)  Epiphanius^  twice; — (11)  Gregory  of  Nyssa^"  4 
times, — (12)  Ephraem  Syrus,^^ — (13)  Philo  bishop  of  Car- 
pasus,^^ — (14)  Chrysostom,^^  in  9  places, — and  (15)  a  name- 
less preacher  at  Antioch,^*  —  all  these,  contcmpoi-arics  (ho 
it  remembered)  of  B  and  n,  are  found  to  bear  concurrent 
testimony  in  favour  of  the  commonly  received  text. 

In  the  Vth  century, — (16)  Cyril  of  Alexandria,^^  on  no 
less  than  14  occasions,  vouches  for  it  also; — (17)  Theodoret^" 
on  4 ; — (18)  Theodotus  of  Ancyra  ^^  on  5  (once  ^^  in  a  homily 
preached  before  the  Council  of  Ephesus  on  Christmas-day, 
A.D.  431); — (19)  Proclus  ^^  archbishop  of  Constantinople; — 
(20)  Paulus  ^"  bishop  of  Emesa  (in  a  sermon  preached  before 
Cyril  of  Alexandria  on  Christmas-day,  A.D.  431)  ; — (21)  the 
Eastern  bishops  ^^  at  Ephesus  collectively,  a.d.  431  (an 
unusually  weighty  piece  of  evidence) ; — and  lastly,  (22)  Basil 


1  i.  374;  ii.  714;  iv.  15.  2  ^jj_  47.  ^ijj^  13^ 

3  Dem.  Ev.  pp.  163,  342.  *  i.  180,  385. 

^  In  loc.     Also  in  Luc.  xix.  29  {Cat.  Ox.  141). 

«  De  Trin.  p.  84 ;  Cord.  Cat  in  Fs.  ii.  450,  745. 

''  i.  845, — which  is  reproduced  in  the  Paschal  Chronicle,  p.  374. 

8  P.  180 ;  of.  p.  162.  9  i.  154, 1047.     i»  i.  355,  696,  6  ;97  iii.  346. 

"  Gr.  iii.  434.  '^  ^p_  Galland.  ix.  754. 

1*  i.  587  ;  ii.  453,  454 ;  vi.  393  ;  vii.  311,  674;  viii.  85  ;  xi.  347.  Also 
Cat.  in  Fs.  iii.  139.  "  Ap.  Chrys.  vi.  424;  of.  p.  417. 

15  In  Luc.  pp.  12, 16,  502  (=Mai,  ii.  128).  Also  Mai,  ii.  343,  Horn,  de 
Imam.  p.  109.  0pp.  ii.  593 ;  v.^  681,  30,  128,  380,  402,  154 ;  vi.  398. 
Maii,  iii.2  286.  '«  i.  290,  1298 ;  ii.  18 ;  iii.  480. 

"  Ap.  Galland.  ix.  446,  476.     Concil.  iii.  1001,  1023. 

18  Concil.  iii.  1002.  '*  Ap.  Galland.  ix.  629. 

20  Concil.  iii.  1095.  -'   Concil.  iii.  829  =  Cyr.  0pp.  vi.  159. 


44  PATRISTIC   TESTIMONY   DECISIVE  [Aut. 

of  Seleucia.^     Now,  let  it  be  remarked  that  these  wei'e  contciii- 
poraries  of  codex  A. 

In  the  Vlth  century, — the  Patristic  witnesses  are  (23) 
Cosmas,  the  voyager,^  5  times, — (24)  Anastasius  Sinaita,^  — 
(25)  Eulogius*  archbishop  of  Alexandria:  contemporaries, 
he  it  rcmoiibercd,  of  codex  D. 

In  the  Vllth, — (26)  Andreas  of  Crete  ^  twice. 

And  in  the  Vlllth, — (27)  Cosmas  "^  bishop  of  IMaiiima 
near  Gaza, — and  his  pupil  (28)  John  Damascene,^  — and 
(29)  Germanus  ^  archbishop  of  Constantinople. 

To  these  29  illustrious  names  are  to  be  added  unknown 
writers  of  uncertain  date,  but  all  of  considerable  antiquity ; 
and  some  ^  are  proved  by  internal  evidence  to  Ijclong  to 
the  lA^th  or  Vth  century, — in  short,  to  be  of  the  date  of 
the  Fathers  whose  names  16  of  them  severally  bear,  but 
among  whose  genuine  works  their  productions  are  probably 
not  to  be  reck(jned.  One  of  these  was  anciently  mistaken 
for  (30)  Gregory  Thaumaturgus :  ^"  a  second,  for  (31)  Metho- 
dius :  ^^  a  third,  for  (32)  Basil.^'-^  Three  others,  with  different 
degrees  of  reasonableness,  have  been  supposed  to  be  (33,  34, 
35)  Athanasius.^^  One  has  passed  for  (36)  Gregory  of 
Nyssa ;  ^*  another  for  (37)  Epiphanius  ;  ^^  while  no  less  than 
eight  (38  to  45)  have  been  mistaken  for  Chrysostom,^®  some 
of  them  being  certainly  his  contemporaries.  Add  (46)  one 
anonymous  Father,^^  and  (47)  the  author  of  the  apocryphal 


'  Nov.  Audar.  i.  fjOfi.  -  Montf.  ii.  152,  KiO,  217,  209. 

^  Jiexaem.  cd.  Migne,  vul.  SO,  ]..  <S<)<J.  ^  Ap.  Gallaud.  xii.  308. 

s  Ell.  Coiiibetis,  14,  54  ;  ap.  (.iallaua.  xiii.  100,  12:5. 

'•  Ap.  Gallaud.  xiii,  235.  ^  ii.  S'.'Al 

8  Ap.  Galland.  xiii.  212.  '■'  E.g.  Chrys.  Opp.  viii. ;  Append.  214. 

1"  r.  G  u.  "  Ap.  Ciallaiid.  ill.  80!l.  '-  ii.  G02. 

'■I  ii.  lUl,  122,  107.  "  iii.  4  17.  '''  ii.  2'J8, 

'«  ii.  801  ;  iii.  783;  v.  038,  070,  788;  viii.  211,  285;  x.  751,  821. 

"  Cord.  Cat.  in  Vs.  ii.  UGO. 


I.]  AS   TO   THE   TEXT   OF   S.   LUKE   II.    14.  45 

Acta  Pilati, — and  it  will  be  perceived  that  18  ancient 
authorities  have  been  added  to  the  list,  every  whit  as  compe- 
tent to  witness  what  was  the  text  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14  at  the  time 
when  A  B  X  D  were  written,  as  Basil  or  Athanasius,  Epi- 
phanius  or  Chrysostom  themselves.^  For  our  iwesent  jpurjjose 
they  are  Codices  of  the  IVth,  A^th,  and  Vlth  centuries.  In 
tliis  way  then,  far  more  than  forty-seven  ancient  witnesses 
have  come  back  to  testify  to  the  men  of  this  generation  that 
the  commonly  received  reading  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14  is  tlie  true 
reading,  and  that  the  text  which  the  Eevisionists  are  seeking 
to  palm  off  upon  us  is  a  fahrication  and  a  hhnder.  Will 
any  one  be  found  to  maintain  that  the  authority  of  b  and  N 
is  appreciable,  when  confronted  by  the  first  15  contemporary 
Ecclesiastical  Writers  above  enumerated  ?  or  that  A  can  stand 
against  the  7  which  follow  ? 

This  is  not  all  however.  Survey  the  preceding  enume- 
ration geographically,  and  note  that,  besides  1  name  from 
Gaul, — at  least  2  stand  for  Constantinople,- — while  5  are 
dotted  over  Asia  Minor: — 10  at  least  represent  Antioch;  and 
— 6,  other  parts  of  Syria: — 3  stand  for  l*alestine,  and  12  for 
other  Churches  of  tlie  East : — at  least  5  are  Alexandrian, — 
2  are  men  of  Cyprus,  and — 1  is  from  Crete.  If  the  articulate 
voices  of  so  many  illustrious  Bishops,  coming  back  to  us  in 
this  way  from  every  part  of  ancient  Christendom  and  all 
delivering  the  same  unfaltering  message,  —  if  this  be  not 
allowed  to  be  decisive  on  a  point  of  the  kind  just  now  before 
us,  then  pray  let  us  have  it  explained  to  us, — What  amount 
of  evidence  will  men  accept  as  final  ?  It  is  high  time  that 
this  were  known  .  .  .  The  plain  truth  is,  that  a  case  has 


'  Of  the  ninety-two  places  above  quoted,  Tischendorf  knew  of  only 
eleven,  Tregelles  adduces  only  six. — Neither  critic  seems  to  have  been 
aware  that  '  Gregory  Thaum.'  is  not  the  author  of  the  citation  they 
ascribe  to  him.  And  why  does  Tischendorf  quote  as  Basil's  what  is  known 
not  to  have  been  his  ? 


4G       THE  TESTIMONY  OF  N    A   B  C  D  CONCERNING      [Art. 

been  established  against  N  A  B  D  and  the  Latin  version,  which 
amounts  to  proof  that  those  documents,  even  when  they  con- 
spire to  yiekl  the  self-same  evidence,  are  not  to  be  depended 
on  as  witnesses  to  the  text  of  Scripture.  The  history  of 
the  readinif  advocated  1»y  the  Eevisionists  is  briefly  this  : — It 
emerges  into  notice  in  the  l\nd  century  ;  and  in  the  \ih,  dis- 
appears from  sight  entirely. 

Enough  and  to  spare  has  now  been  offered  concerning 
the  true  reading  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14,  But  because  we  propose 
to  ourselves  that  no  uncertainty  ivhatever  shall  remain  on 
this  subject,  it  will  not  be  wasted  labour  if  at  parting  we 
pour  into  the  ruined  citadel  just  enougli  of  shot  and  shell  to 
leave  no  dark  corner  standing  for  the  ghost  of  a  respectable 
doubt  hereafter  to  hide  in.  Now,  it  is  confessedly  nothing 
else  but  the  high  estimate  which  Critics  have  conceived  of 
the  value  of  the  testimony  of  the  old  uncials  (n  A  b  c  d), 
which  has  occasioned  any  doubt  at  all  to  exist  in  this  behalf. 
Let  the  learned  Eeader  then  ascertain  for  himself  the 
character  of  codices  «  a  b  c  d  hereabouts,  by  collating  the 
context  in  ivhich  S.  Luhe  ii.  14  is  found,  viz.  tlie  13  verses 
which  precede  and  the  one  verse  (ver.  15)  which  immediately 
follows.  If  tlie  ohl  uncials  are  observed  all  to  sing  in  tune 
tln-oughout,  hereabouts,  well  and  good :  but  if  on  the  con- 
trary, their  voices  prove  utterly  discordant,  who  sees  not  that 
the  last  pretence  has  been  taken  away  for  placing  any  con- 
fidence at  all  in  their  testimony  concerning  the  text  of 
ver.  14,  turning  as  it  does  on  the  presence  or  absence  of  a 
single  letter  ?  .  .  .  He  will  find,  as  the  result  of  his  analysis, 
that  witliin  the  space  of  those  14  verses,  the  old  uncials  are 
responsiltle  for  50  'various  readings'  (so-called):  singly,  for 
41;  in  combination  with  one  another,  for  15.  So  diverse, 
however,  is  the  testimony  they  respectively  render,  tliat  they 
are  found  severally  to  differ  from  the  Text  of  the  cursives  no 


I.]   S.  LUKE  II.  14,  PKOVED  TO  BE  UNTRUSTWORTHY.  47 

less  than  70  times.  Among  them,  besides  twice  varying  the 
phrase, — they  contrive  to  omit  19  words: — to  add  4: — to 
substitute  17  : — to  alter  10  : — to  transpose  24. — Lastly,  these 
five  codices  are  observed  (within  the  same  narrow  limits)  to 
fall  into  ten  different  combinations :  viz.  B  K,  for  5  readings  ; 

— B  D,  for  2  ; — S  C,  K  D,  A  C,  N   B  D,  A  K  D,  A  B  X  D,  B  N  C  D, 

A  B  X  CD,  for  1  each,  a  therefore,  which  stands  alone  twice, 
is  found  in  combination  4  times; — c,  which  stands  alone 
once,  is  found  in  combination  4  times  ;^ — B,  which  stands 
alone  5  times,  is  found  in  combination  6  times  ; — N ,  which 
stands  alone  11  times,  is  found  in  combination  8  times; — D, 
which  stands  alone  22  times,  is  found  in  combination  7 
times.  .  .  .  And  now, — for  the  last  time  we  ask  the  question, 
— With  what  show  of  reason  can  the  unintelligible  ev8oKia<; 
(of  S  A  B  d)  be  upheld  as  genuine,  in  defiance  of  the  wJiole 
body  of  Manuscripts,  uncial  and  cursive, — the  great  bulk  of 
tlie  Versions, —  and  the  mighty  array  of  (upwards  of  fifty) 
Fathers  exliibited  above  ? 

(c)  We  are  at  last  able  to  proceed,  with  a  promise  that 
we  shall  rarely  prove  so  tedious  again.  But  it  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  begin  by  clearing  the  ground.  We  may  not 
go  on  doubting  for  ever.  The  '  Angelic  hymn,'  and  '  The 
last  12  Verses'  of  S.  Mark's  Gospel,  are  convenient  places 
for  a  trial  of  strength.  It  has  now  been  proved  that  the  com- 
monly received  text  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14  is  the  true  text, — the 
Eevisionists'  emendation  of  the  place,  a  palpable  mistake. 
On  behalf  of  the  second  Gospel,  we  claim  to  have  also 
established  that  an  important  portion  of  the  sacred  narrative 
has  been  unjustly  branded  with  a  note  of  ignominy  ;  from 
which  we  solemnly  call  upon  the  Eevisionists  to  set  the 
Evangelist  free.     The  pretence  that  no  harm  has  been  done 

'  But  then,  note  that  c  is  only  available  for  comparison  down  to  the  end 
of  ver.  5.  In  the  9  verses  which  have  been  lost,  who  shall  say  how  many 
more  eccentricities  would  have  been  discoverable  ? 


48  S.   MARK  XYI.   0-20,  AND  S.   LUKE  II.    14  [Aijt. 

him  by  the  mere  statement  of  what  is  an  undeniable  fact, — 
(viz.  that  '  the  two  oldest  Greek  manuscripts,  and  some  other 
authorities,  omit  from  verse  9  to  the  end ; '  and  that  '  some 
other  authorities  have  a  different  ending  to  the  Gospel,') — 
will  not  stand  examination.  Pin  to  the  shoulder  of  an 
honourable  man  a  hearsay  libel  on  his  character,  and  sec 
what  lie  will  have  to  say  to  you !  Besides, —  Wliy  have  the 
12  verses  hceii  furtlier  se2mrafc(l  off  from  the  rest  of  the  Gosprll 
This  at  least  is  unjustifial)le. 

Those  who,  with  Drs.  lioberts  and  Milligan,^  have  been 
taught  to  maintain  '  that  the  passage  is  not  the  immediate 
production  of  8.  Mark,' — '  can  hardly  he  regarded  as  a.  part 
of  the  original  Gospel ;  but  is  rather  an  addition  made  to 
it  at  a  very  early  age,  whether  in  the  lifetime  of  the 
Evangelist  or  not,  it  is  impossible  to  say:' — such  Critics  are 
informed  that  tliey  stultify  themselves  when  they  proceed 
in  the  same  breath  to  assure  the  offended  reader  that  the 
passage  '  is  nevertheless  possessed  of  full  cemonical  anthoriti/.'^ 
Men  who  so  write  show  that  they  do  not  understand  the 
(question.  For  if  these  12  verses  are  '  canonical  Scripture,' — 
as  much  inspired  as  the  12  verses  which  precede  them,  and 
as  worthy  of  undoul)ting  confidence, — then,  wliethcr  they  be 
'  the  production  of  S.  Mark,'  or  of  some  other,  is  a  jjurel}^ 
irrelevant  circumstance.  The  Authorship  of  the  passage,  as 
every  one  must  see,  is  not  the  question.  Tlie  last  12  verses 
of  Deuteronomy,  for  instance,  were  probably  not  written  by 
Moses.  Do  we  therefore  separate  them  off  from  tlie  rest  of 
Deuteronomy,  and  fncinnlicr  tlie  margin  with  ;i  note  ('X]tres- 
sive  of  our  opinion  ?  Our  licvisionists,  so  far  from  liolding 
what  follows  to  be  '  canonical  Scripture,'  are  careful  to  state 
that  a  rival  ending  to  be  found  elsewhere  merits  serious 
attention.     S.  ]\Iark  x\  i.  ".)-2(),  tberi'fore  {according  to  thou), 


'  Companion  to  the  Revised  Version,  pp.  62,  63.     Wonls  of  f/ie  N.  T. 
y.  V.r.\.  -    Wor<hof  Hie  N.  T.  ]>.  IH.'I. 


I.]  MAY  NO  LONGER  BE  MOI;ESTED.  49 

is  not  certainly  a  genuine  part  of  the  Gospel ;  may,  after  all, 
be  nothing  else  but  a  spurious  accretion  to  the  text.  And  as 
long  as  such  doubts  are  put  forth  by  our  Revisionists,  they 
publish  to  the  world  that,  in  their  account  at  all  events, 
these  verses  are  not  '  possessed  of  full  canonical  authority.' 
If  '  the  two  oldest  Greek  manuscripts  '  justly  '  omit  from 
verse  9  to  the  end  '  (as  stated  in  the  margin),  will  any  one 
deny  that  our  printed  Text  ought  to  omit  them  also  ?  ^  On 
the  other  hand,  if  the  circumstance  is  a  mere  literary 
curiosity,  will  any  one  maintain  that  it  is  entitled  to 
abiding  record  in  the  margin  of  the  English  Version  of  the 
everlasting  page  ? — affords  any  warrant  whatever  for  sepa- 
rating '  the  last  Twelve  Verses '  from  their  context  ? 

[ 

(d)  We  can  probably  render  ordinary  readers  no  more 
effectual  service,  than  by  offering  now  to  guide  them  over 
a  few  select  places,  concerning  the  true  reading  of  M'hich 
the  Eevisionists  either  entertain  such  serious  doubts  that 
they  have  recorded  their  uncertainty  in  the  margin  of  their 
work ;  or  else,  entertaining  no  doubts  at  all,  liave  delibe- 
rately thrust  a  new  reading  into  the  body  of  their  text,  and 
tltrit,  without  explanation,  apology,  or  indeed  record  of  any 
kind.^     One  remark  should  l^e  premised,  viz.  that  '  various 


^  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  (consistently  enough)  pvit  tliem  on  the  self- 
same footing  with  the  evidently  spurious  ending  found  in  L. 

^  True,  that  a  separate  volume  of  Greek  Text  has  been  put  forth,  show- 
ing every  change  which  has  been  either  actually  accepted,  or  else  suggested 
for  future  possible  acceptance.  But  (in  the  words  of  the  accomplished 
editor),  '  the  lleuisers  are  not  responsible  for  its  iJitblication.''  Moreover, 
(and  this  is  the  chief  point,)  it  is  a  sealed  book  to  all  but  Scholars. 

It  were  unhandsome,  however,  to  take  leave  of  the  learned  labours  of 
Prebendary  Scrivener  and  Archdeacon  Palmer,  without  a  few  words  of 
sympathy  and  admiratinn.  Their  volumes  (mentioned  at  the  beginning 
of  the  present  Article)  are  all  that  was  to  have  been  expected  from  the 
exquisite  scholarship  of  their  respective  editors,  and  will  be  of  abiding 
interest  and   value.     Both   volumes   should   be   in   the   hands  of  every 

E 


50  CAUSES   WHICH   HAVK   OCCASIONED  [Art. 

Eeadings '  as  they  are  (often  most  unreasonably)  called,  are 
seldom  if  ever  tlie  result  of  conscious  fraud.  An  immense 
number  are  to  l)c  ascribed  to  sheer  accident.  It  was  through 
erroneous  judgment,  we  repeat,  not  with  evil  intent,  that 
men  took  liberties  with  the  deposit.  They  imported  into 
their  copies  whatever  readings  they  considered  highly  recom- 
mended. By  some  of  these  ancient  Critics  it  seems  to  have 
been  thouglit  allowaljle  to  ahhreviatc,  by  simply  leaving  out 
whatever  did  not  appear  to  tliemselves  strictly  necessary : 
by  others,  to  transpose  the  words — even  the  members — of  a 
sentence,  almost  to  any  extent :  by  others,  to  svJjstitutc  easy 
expressions  for  difficult  ones.  In  this  way  it  comes  to  pass 
that  we  are  often  presented,  and  in  the  oldest  documents  of 
all,  with  Eeadings  which  stand  self-condemned ;  are  clearly 
falirications.  That  it  was  held  allowable  to  assimilate  one 
Gospel  to  another,  is  quite  certain.  Add,  that  as  early  as 
the  Ilnd  century  there  abounded  in  the  Church  documents, — 
'  Diatessarons '  they  were  sometimes  called, — of  which  the 
avowed  object  was  to  weave  one  continuous  and  connected 
narrative  '  out  of  the  four  ; ' — and  we  shall  find  that  as  many 
lieads  have  been  provided,  as  will  suffice  for  the  classification 
of  almost  every  various  reading  which  we  are  likely  to 
encounter  in  our  study  of  the  (iospels. 

I.  To  Accidental  Cacsks  then  we  give  tlie  foreniost  place. 


scholar,  for  neither  of  them  supersedes  the  other.  Dr.  Scrivener  has  (witli 
rare  ability  and  immense  laliour)  set  before  the  Church, /or  thejirst  time, 
till-  (i reck  Text  which  van  followed  hy  the  lievisem  of  1011,  viz.  Beza's 
>.'. '1\  of  1598,  supplemented  in  above  190  places  from  otlier  .sources; 
every  one  of  wliich  the  editor  traces  out  in  his  Appendix,  pp.  048-5(5. 
At  the  foot  of  each  page,  he  shows  what  clianges  liave  been  introduced  into 
the  Text  by  the  Revisers  of  1881.— Dr.  1 'aimer,  taking  the  Text  of  Stephens 
(1550)  as  his  basis,  presents  us  Avitli  tlic  Headings  adojjted  by  the  Revisers 
of  the  '  Authorized  Version,'  and  relegates  the  displaced  Headings  (of  101 1) 
to  the  foot  of  each  page.^ — We  cordially  congratulate  them  both,  and  thank 
them  for  the  good  service  tliey  liavc  rendered. 


I.]  VAKTOUS  READINGS. — ACTS   XXVII.   37.  51 

and  (if  these  we  have  already  furnished  the  reader  with  two 
iiotalile  and  altogether  dissimilar  specimens.  The  first  (viz. 
the  omission  of  S.  Mark  xvi.  9-20  from  certain  ancient  copies 
of  the  Grospel)  seems  to  have  originated  in  an  unique  circum- 
stance. According  to  the  AYestern  order  of  the  four,  S.  Mark 
occupies  the  last  place.  From  the  earliest  period  it  had  been 
customary  to  write  reXo?  ("  EXD ")  after  the  8th  verse  of 
his  last  chapter,  in  token  that  tlurc  a  famous  ecclesiastical 
lection  comes  to  a  close.  Let  the  last  lcc(f  of  one  very  ancient 
archetypal  copy  have  heyun  at  ver.  9  ;  eind  let  that  leist  leaf 
have  perished; — aiul  all  is  plain.  A  faithful  copyist  will 
have  ended  the  Gospel  perforce  —  as  B  and  ^5  have  done — 
at  S.  Mark  xvi.  8.  .  .  .  Our  other  example  (S.  Luke  ii.  14) 
will  have  resulted  from  an  accident  of  the  most  ordinary 
description, — as  was  explained  at  the  outset. — To  the  fore- 
going, a  few  other  specimens  of  erroneous  readings  resulting 
from  Accident  shall  now  be  added. 

(«)  Always  instructive,  it  is  sometimes  even  entertaining 
to  trace  the  history  of  a  mistake  wliich,  dating  from  the  Ilnd 
or  Ilird  century,  has  remained  without  a  patron  all  down  the 
subsequent  ages,  until  at  last  it  has  been  suddenly  taken 
up  in  our  own  times  liy  an  Editor  of  the  sacred  Text,  and 
straightway  palmed  off  upon  an  unlearned  generation  as 
the  genuine  work  of  the  Holy  CriiosT.  Thus,  whereas  the 
Church  has  hitherto  supposed  that  8.  Paul's  company  '  were 
in  all  in  the  ship  tu'o  hundred  threescore  and  sixteen  soids' 
(Acts  xxvii.  37),  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  (relying  on  the 
authority  of  b  and  the  .Sahidic  version)  insist  that  what  8. 
Luke  actually  wrote  was  '  about  seventy-six.'  In  other  words, 
instead  of  BiaKoatai  ejShojXTjKovTae^,  we  are  invited  hence- 
forth to  read  'U)C  i^So/xi^Kovrae^.  Wliat  can  have  given  rise 
to  so  formidable  a  discrepancy  ?  Mere  accident,  we  answer. 
First,  whereas  S.  Luke  certainly  wrote  ^jfiev  Be  ev  tw  ttAo/w 

E  -1 


52  HOW  ACTS   XXVII.   37   HAS  BEEN  [Art. 

al  Trda-ai  ■>^v)(ai,  his  last  six  words  at  some  very  early  period 
underwent  the  familiar  process  of  Transposition,  and  became, 
al  iracrai  -ylrv^al  iv  rw  irXoiw ;  where1)y  the  word  ifkoiw  and 
the  numbers  hiaKoauat  e^oo/iijKovrai^  were  brought  into 
close  proximity.  (It  is  thus  that  Lachmann,  Tischendorf, 
Tregelles,  &c.,  wrongly  exhibit  the  place.)  But  since  '  276 ' 
when  represented  in  Greek  numerals  is  co?,  the  inevitable 
consequence  was  that  the  words  (written  in  uncials)  ran 
thus  :  ii^YXAIGNTCjOnAOIUJCO?-  Behold,  the  secret  is  out !  Who 
sees  not  what  has  happened  ?  There  has  been  no  intentional 
falsification  of  the  text.  There  has  been  no  critical  disin- 
clination to  believe  that  '  a  corn-ship,  presumably  heavily 
laden,  would  contain  so  many  souls,' — as  an  excellent  judge 
supposes.^  The  discrepancy  has  been  the  result  of  sheer 
accident :  is  the  merest  blunder.  Some  Ilnd-century  copyist 
connected  the  last  letter  of  riAOiCx)  with  the  next  ensuing 
numeral,  which  stands  for  200  (viz.  c) ;  and  made  an  inde- 
2)cndent  ivord  of  it,  viz.  w? — i.e.  '  about.'  But  when  c  (i.e. 
200)  has  been  taken  away  from  co?  (i.e.  276),  76  is  per- 
force all  that  remains.  In  other  words,  the  result  of  so 
slight  a  blunder  has  been  that  instead  of  '  two  hundred  and 
seventy-six '  (co?),  some  one  wrote  to?  09'  —  i.e.  '  ahont 
seventy-six.'  His  blunder  would  have  been  diverting  had 
it  been  confined  to  the  pages  of  a  codex  which  is  full  of 
blunders.  When  however  it  is  adopted  by  the  latest  Editors 
of  the  N.  T.  (Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort), — and  by  their  influ- 
ence has  been  foisted  into  the  margin  of  our  revised  English 
Version  —  it  becomes  high  time  that  we  should  reclaim 
against  such  a  gratuitous  depravation  of  Scripture. 

All    this    ought    not    to    have    retjuired    exjtlaining:    the 
blunder  is  so  gross, — its  history  so  patent.     But  surely,  had 


'  Tho  iiiiiubcr  is  not  excessive.     There  were  al)(iut,  (iOO  persdiis  aljoard 
the  slii|>  in  which  Joseplius  traversed  tlie  same  watery.     (/'//'■,  c.  ui.) 


I.]  BLUNDERED  BY   COD.   B. — ACTS  XVIII.   7.  53 

its  origin  been  ever  so  obscure,  the  most  elementary  critical 
knowledge  joined  to  a  little  mother-wit  ought  to  convince 
a  man  that  the  reading  co?  e/BSofnjKovrai^  cannot  be  trust- 
worthy. A  reading  discoverable  only  in  codex  B  and  one 
Egyptian  version  (which  was  evidently  executed  from  codices 
of  the  same  corrupt  type  as  codex  b)  mai/  always  he  dismissed 
as  certainly  spurious.  But  further, — Although  a  man  might 
of  course  say  '  about  seventy  '  or  *  about  eighty  I  (which  is  how 
Epiphanius  ^  quotes  the  place,)  lolio  sees  not  that  '  about 
seventy-sio; '  is  an  impossible  expression  ?  Lastly,  the  two 
false  witnesses  give  divergent  testimony  even  while  they 
seem  to  be  at  one :  for  the  Sahidic  (or  Thebaic)  version 
arranges  the  words  in  an  order  jJcadiar  to  itself. 

(b)  Another  corruption  of  the  text,  with  which  it  is 
proposed  henceforth  to  disfigure  our  Authorized  Version, 
(originating  like  the  last  in  sheer  accident,)  occurs  in  Acts 
xviii.  7.  It  is  related  concerning  S.  Paul,  at  Corinth,  that 
having  forsaken  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews,  '  he  entered  into 
a  certain  man's  house  named  Justus '  {ovofjLart  'lovarov). 
That  this  is  what  S.  Luke  wrote,  is  to  be  inferred  from  the 
fact  that  it  is  found  in  almost  every  known  copy  of  the  Acts, 
beginning  with  A  D  G  H  L  p.  Chrysostom — the  only  ancient 
Greek  Father  who  quotes  the  place — so  quotes  it.  This  is, 
in  consequence,  the  reading  of  Lachmann,  Tregelles,  and 
Tischendorf  in  his  7th  edition.  But  then,  the  last  syllable 
of  '  name  '  (oNOMATi)  and  the  first  three  letters  of  '  Justus  ' 
(ioyctoy),  in  an  uncial  copy,  may  easily  get  mistaken  for 
an  independent  word.  Indeed  it  only  wants  a  horizontal 
stroke  (at  the  summit  of  the  second  i  in  tiioy)  to  produce 
'  Titus '  (titoy).  In  the  Syriac  and  Sahidic  versions  accord- 
ingly, '  Titus '  actually  stands  i7i  iilace  of  '  Justus,' — a  reading 


1  ii.  61  and  SS. 


54      IMAGIXARY   STRANGERS.— S.  MATTH.  XI.  23   AND     [Art. 

no  loiiuer  discoverable  ill  any  extant  codex.  Asa  matter  of 
fact,  tlie  error  resulted  not  in  t\\id  substitution  of  'Titus'  for 
'  Justus,'  but  in  the  introduction  of  loth  names  where 
S.  Luke  MTote  but  one.  N  and  e,  the  Vulgate,  and  the 
Coptic  version,  exhibit  '  Titvs  Justvs.'  And  that  the  fore- 
ffoinff  is  a  true  account  of  the  birth  and  7)arentaiie  of  '  Titus ' 
is  proved  ])y  the  tell-tale  circumstance,  that  in  is  the  letters 
Tl  and  lOY  are  all  religiously  retained,  and  a  supernumerary 
letter  (t)  has  been  thrust  in  between, — the  result  of  which 
is  to  give  us  one  more  imaginary  gentleman,  viz.  '  Titius 
Justus ;'  with  whose  appearance, — (and  he  is  found  noiahere 
l)ut  in  codex  B,) — Tischendorf  in  his  8th  ed.,  v/itli  Westcott 
and  Hort  in  theirs,  are  so  captivated,  that  they  actually  give 
him  a  place  in  their  text.  It  was  out  of  compassion  (we 
presume)  for  the  friendless  stranger  '  Titus  Justus  '  that  our 
Kevisionists  have,  in  preference,  promoted  hivi  to  honour  :  in 
whicli  act  of  humanity  they  stand  alone.  Tlieir  'new  Greek 
Text '  is  the  only  one  in  existence  in  which  the  imaginary 
foreigner  has  been  advanced  to  citizenship,  and  assigned  '  a 
local  habitation  and  a  name.'  ....  Those  must  have  been 
Wdiididus  drowsy  days  in  the  -Jerusalem  Chamber  when 
such  mauijiulations  of  the  in8]>ired  text  were  possible  ! 

{(■)  The  two  foregoing  de]»ravations  grew  out  of  the 
ancient  i»ractice  of  writing  the  Scri])tures  in  uncial  cha- 
racters (i.e.  in  capital  letters),  no  space  being  inter])osed 
between  the  words.  Another  striking  instance  is  snp])lied 
l)y  S.  Matthew  xi.  23  and  S.  Luke  x.  L"),  wliciv  howcvci-  (lie 
(■nor  is  so  transparent  that  the  wonder  is  how  it  can  e\er 
have  imposed  u})on  any  one.  What  makes  the  matter 
seri(ms  is,  that  it  gives  a  turn  to  a  certain  Divine  saying, 
of  which  it  is  incrcdiltk'  that  I'ither  our  Savioii;  or  Jiis 
Evangelists  knew  anything.  AVe  ha\c  liillicito  bclicNcd  thai 
tli(!  solciini  words  lau   as  follows: — 'And   lliou,  ( "apci  iniuiii. 


I.]        S.  LUKE  X.  15,  HOW   BLUNDERED   BY   S    B   C   D   L.        55 

which  art  exalted  (^  .  .  .  vyJr(o9eicra)  unto  heaven,  shalt  be 
brought  down  (KaTa^t^aad7]o-r])  to  hell.'  For  this,  our  Ee- 
visionists  invite  us  to  substitute,  in  S.  Luke  as  well  as  in 
S.  Matthew, — 'And  thou,  Capernaum,  shalt  thou  be  exalted 
(firj  .  .  .  vylrcoBijar] ;)  unto  liea\'en  ? '  And  then,  in  S.  Mat- 
thew, (but  not  in  S.  Luke,) — '  Thou  shalt  go  down  {Kara^i'jcrr]) 
into  Hades.'  Now,  what  can  have  happened  to  occasion 
such  a  curious  perversion  of  our  Loed's  true  utterance,  and 
to  cause  Him  to  ask  an  unmeaning  question  about  the  future, 
when  He  was  clearly  announcing  a  fact,  founded  on  the 
history  of  the  past  ? 

A  stupid  blunder  has  been  made  (we  answer),  of  which 
traces  survive  (as  usual)  only  in  the  same  little  handful  of 
suspicious  documents.    The  final  letter  of  Capernaum  (m)  by 
cleaving  to  the  next  ensuing  letter  (H)  has  made  an  inde- 
pendent word  (mh)  ;  which  new  w^ord  necessitates  a  change 
in  the  construction,  and  causes  the  sentence  to  become  inter- 
rogative. And  yet,  fourteen  of  the  uncial  manuscripts  and  the 
whole  body  of  the  cursives  know  nothing  of  tliis :  neither  does 
the  Peschito — nor  the  Gothic  version :  no,-^nor  Chrysostom, — 
nor    Cyril, — nor    ps.-Ccesarius,— nor    Theodoret, — the    only 
Fathers  who  quote  either  place.     The  sole  witnesses  for  firj 
.  .  .  v^\r(odr]ar)  in  hoth  Gospels  are  X  B,  copies  of  the  old  Latin, 
Cureton's  Syriac,  the  Coptic,  and  the  ^thiopic  versions, — a 
consensus  of  authorities  which  ought  to  be  held  fatal  to  any 
reading,     c  joins  the  conspiracy  in  Matthew  xi.  23,  but  not 
in  Luke  x.  15 :  D  L  consent  in  Luke,  but  not  in  Matthew. 
The  Vulgate,  which  sided  with  n  b  in  S.  Matthew,  forsakes 
them  in  S.  Luke.     In  writing  hotli,  times  Kara^rjar)  ('thou 
shalt  go  down"),  codex  B  (forsaken  this  time  by  n)  is  sup- 
ported  by  a   single   manuscript,  viz.  d.      But   because,  in 
Matthew  xi.  23,  b  obtains  the  sanction  of  the  Latin  copies, 
Kara^rjarj  is  actually  introduced  into  the  Revised  Text,  and 
we  are  quietly  informed  in  the  margin  that  '  Many  ancient 


5G      INTENTIONAL  DEPKAVATION  OF  S.  MARK  XI.  3,       [Akt. 

authorities  read  he  hroiu/hf  down : '  tlie  truth  ])eing  (as  tlic  reader 
lias  been  made  aware)  that  there  are  onli/  tiro  manuscripts 
ill  existence  icliich  read  anything  else.  And  (what  deserves 
attention)  those  two  manuscripts  are  convicted  of  havinff 
borrowed  their  quotation  from  the  Septtiagint,^  and  therefore 
stand  self-condemned.  .  .  .  Were  the  occupants  of  the  Jeru- 
salem Chamber  all — savin"'  the  two  who  in  their  published 
edition  insist  on  reading  (with  b  and  d)  KaTa^i]arj  in  botli 
places — all  fast  asleep  when  they  became  consenting  parties 
to  this  sad  mistake  ? 

II.  It  is  time  to  exi)lain  tliat,  if  the  most  serious  depra- 
vations of  Scripture  are  due  to  Accident,  a  vast  nundjer  are 
unmistakaldy  the  result  of  Dekkin,  and  are  very  clumsily 
executed  too.  The  enumeration  of  a  few  of  these  may  ])rove 
instructive :  and  we  shall  l)egin  with  something  which  is 
found  in  S.  Mark  xi.  3.  With  nothing  perhaps  \\'i\\  each 
several  instance  so  much  impress  the  devout  studt»,nt  of 
Scripture,  as  with  the  ex(piisite  structure  of  a  narrative  in 
which  corrupt  readings  stand  self-revealed  and  self-condemned, 
the  instant  they  are  ordered  to  come  to  the  front  atid  show 
themselves,  liut  the  point  to  which  we  especially  invite  his 
attention  is,  the  sufficiency  of  the  external  evidence  which 
Divine  Wisdom  is  observed  to  have  invariably  provided  for 
the  establishment  of  the  truth  of  His  written  Word. 

(a)  AVhen  our  LoiU)  was  about  to  enter  His  capital  in 
lowly  triumph.  He  is  observed  to  have  given  to  'two  of  His 
disciples'  directions  well  calculated  to  suggest  tlie  myste- 
rious nature  of  the  incident  which  was  to  follow.  They 
were  commanded  to  ])roceed  to  Ihe  entrance  of  a  certain 
village, — to   unloose  a  certain   rt>\i  wliich   they  would   find 

'  Tsaiali  xiv.  15. 


I.]  HAS  IMPOSED  UPON  THE   KEVISIONISTS.  57 

tied  there, — -and  to  bring  the  creature  straightway  to  Jesus. 
Any  obstacle  which  they  might  encounter  would  at  once 
disappear  before  the  simple  announcement  that  '  the  Lord 
hath  need  of  him.'  ^  But,  singular  to  relate,  this  transaction 
is  found  to  have  struck  some  third-rate  Illrd-century  Critic 
as  not  altogether  correct.  The  good  man  was  evidently  of 
opinion  that  the  colt, — as  soon  as  the  purpose  had  been 
accomplished  for  which  it  had  been  obtained, — ought  in 
common  fairness  to  have  been  returned  to  '  the  owners 
thereof.'  (S.  Luke  xix.  33.)  Availing  himself  therefore  of 
there  being  no  nominative  before  '  will  send '  (in  S.  Mark 
xi.  3),  he  assumed  that  it  was  of  Himself  that  our  Lord  was 
still  speaking :  feigned  that  tlie  sentence  is  to  be  explained 
thus : — '  say  ye,  "  that  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him  and 
will  straighhvay  send  liim  hither." '  According  to  this  view 
of  the  case,  our  Saviour  instructed  His  two  Disciples  to 
convey  to  the  owner  of  the  colt  an  undertaking  from  Him- 
self that  He  ivould  send,  the  creature  hack  as  soon  as  He  had 
done  with  it:  would  treat  the  colt,  in  short,  as  a  loan.  A 
more  stupid  imagination  one  has  seldom  had  to  deal  with. 
But  in  the  meantime,  l)y  way  of  clenching  the  matter,  the 
Critic  proceeded  on  his  own  responsibility  to  thrust  into  the 
text  the  word  '  again '  {ttuXlv).  The  fate  of  such  an  unau- 
thorized accretion  might  have  been  confidently  predicted. 
After  skipping  about  in  quest  of  a  fixed  resting-place  for  a 
few  centuries  (see  the  note  at  foot  ^),  'rrdXtv  has  shared  the 
invariable  fate  of  all  such  spurious  adjuncts  to  the  truth  of 
Scripture,  viz. :  It  has  been  effectually  eliminated  from  tlie 
copies.  Traces  of  it  linger  on  only  in  tliose  untrustworthy 
witnesses   N  b  o  d  l  a,    and   about  twice   as   many   cursive 


'  S.  Matthew  xxi.  1-3.     S.  Mark  xi.  1-6.     S.  Luke  xix.  29-34, 

■^  N  D  L  read — avrov  cnroaTeWei  IIAAIN   wSt ;  C*, — avrov  IIAAIN  dno- 

fTTfXXet  co8(  :   B, — dnnaTeWei  IIAAIN  avrov  aide  ;   A, — dTroareXXei  IIAAIN 

u)8f  :   y*" — avTov  HTrooreXAft  IIAAIN, 


68  S.  MARK   XI.   8,  CORRUPTED:  THE  [Aut. 

coi)ies,  also  of  depraved  type.  So  transparent  a  fabrication 
ouf>lit  in  fact  to  have  been  long  since  forgotten.  Yet  have 
our  Ilevisionists  not  been  afraid  to  revive  it.  In  S.  Mark 
xi.  3,  they  invite  us  henceforth  to  read,  '  And  if  any  one  say 
nnto  yon,  Why  do  ye  this  ?  say  ye,  The  Loud  hath  need  of 
him,  and  straightway  He  (i.e.  the  Lokd)  loill  send  Jdm  BACK 
hither.' ....  Of  what  can  they  have  been  dreaming  ?  They 
cannot  pretend  that  they  have  Antiquity  on  their  side :  for, 
besides  the  whole  mass  of  copies  with  A  at  their  head,  hoth 
the  Syriac,  loth  the  Latin,  and  loth  the  Egyptian  versions, 
the  Gothic,  the  Ai-menian, — all  in  fact  except  the  ^thiopic, 
— are  against  them.  Even  Origen,  wdio  twice  inserts  ttoXlv,^ 
twice  leaves  it  oiit.^     Quid  ijlura  ? 

(/>)  No  need  to  look  elsewhere  for  our  next  instance.  A 
novel  statement  arrests  attention  five  ^•erses  lower  tlown  : 
viz.  that  'Many  spread  their  garments  ui)on  the  way'  [and 
why  not  '  in  the  way '  ?  el<i  does  not  mean  '  upon ']  ;  '  and 
others,  branches  -which  they  had  cut  from  the  fields '  (S.  Mark 
xi.  8).  But  how  in  the  world  could  they  have  done  that  ? 
They  must  liave  been  clever  people  certainly  if  they  '  cut 
branches  i'rom '  anything  except  trees.  "Was  it  because  our 
llevisionists  felt  this,  that  in  the  margin  they  volunteer  the 
information,  that  the  Greek  for  'l)ranches'  is  in  strictness 
*  layers  of  leaves '  ?  But  wliat  are  '  layers  of  leaves  '  ?  and 
what  ^9ro'/  is  there  that  aroL^dha  has  tliat  meaning  ?  and 
liow  could  'layers  of  leaves'  have  been  suddenly  procured 
from  such  a  (piarter?  We  turn  to  our  Authorized  Version, 
and  are  refreshed  by  the  familiar  and  intelligible  words: 
'  And  others  cut  down  In'anches  off  the  trees  and  strawed 
them  in  the  way.'  Why  then  has  tins  been  changeil  ?  \\\ 
an  ordinary  sentence,  consisting  of  12  words,  wi;  find  that  2 

'  iii.  7iiL',  710.  2  iii_  7-7^  j^._  |yi_ 


I.]  EVANGELIST'S  MEANING  EXPLAINED.  59 

words  liave  been  substituted  for  other  2  ;  that  1  has  under- 
gone modification ;  that  5  have  been  ejected.  JVh)/  is  all 
this  ?  asks  the  unlearned  Eeader.     He  shall  be  told. 

An  instance  is  furnished  us  of  the  perplexity  which  a 
difficult  word  sometimes  occasioned  the  ancients,  as  well 
as  of  the  serious  consequences  which  have  sometimes  re- 
sulted therefrom  to  the  text  of  Scripture  itself.  S.  Matthew, 
after  narrating  that  '  a  very  great  multitude  spread  their 
garments  in  the  way,'  adds,  '  others  cut  branches  (kXclSov^;) 
from  the  trees  and  strawed  them  in  the  way.'  ^  But  M^ould 
not  branches  of  any  considerable  size  have  impeded  pro- 
gress, inconveniently  encumbering  the  road  ?  No  doubt  they 
would.  Accordingly,  as  S.  Mark  (with  S.  Matthew's  Gospel 
before  him)  is  careful  to  explain,  they  were  not  'branches 
of  any  considerable  size,'  but  '  leafy  twigs ' — 'foliage,'  in  fact 
it  was — '  cut  from  the  trees  and  strawed  in  the  way.'  The 
word,  however,  which  he  employs  (o-Tot/3a8a<?)  is  an  unique 
word — very  like  another  of  similar  sound  {ari^dha^),  yet 
distinct  from  it  in  sense,  if  not  in  origin.  Unfortunately, 
all  this  was  not  understood  in  a  highly  uncritical  and  most 
licentious  age.  With  the  best  intentions,  (for  the  good  man 
was  only  seeking  to  reconcile  two  inconvenient  parallel 
statements,)  some  Revisionist  of  the  Ilnd  century,  having 
convinced  himself  that  the  latter  word  (ari^dBa<;)  might  with 
advantage  take  the  place  of  S.  Mark's  word  (o-Tot/3aSa<f), 
substituted  this  for  that.  In  consequence,  it  survives  to  this 
day  in  nine  uncial  copies  headed  by  K  B.  But  then,  o-Tt/3a<? 
does  not  mean  'a  branch'  at  all;  no,  nor  a  'layer  of  leaves' 
either ;  but  a  ixdlct — a-  jloor-hcdy  in  fact,  of  tlie  humblest 
type,  constructed  of  grass,  rushes,  straw,  brushwood,  leaves, 
or  any  similar  substance.  On  the  other  hand,  because  such 
materials  are  not  obtainable  from  trees  exactly,  the  ancient 


1  S.  Matt.  xxi.  8. 


60  THE  CRITICS  HAVE  ALL  BEEN  [Art. 

Critic  judged  it  expedient  furtlier  to  change  BivBpwv  into 
dypMv  ('fields').  Even  this  was  not  altogether  satisfactory. 
XTt^d<i,  as  explained  already,  in  strictness  means  a  '  bed.' 
Only  by  a  certain  amount  of  license  can  it  be  supposed  to 
denote  the  materials  of  which  a  bed  is  composed ;  whereas 
the  Evangelist  speaks  of  something  "  strawn."  The  self -same 
copies,  therefore,  which  exhibit  'fields '  (in  lieu  of  '  trees '), 
by  introducing  a  slight  change  in  the  construction  (Koylravret 
for  eKOTTTov),  and  omitting  the  words  '  and  strawed  them  in 
the  way,'  are  observed — after  a  summary  fashion  of  their  own, 
(with  which,  however,  readers  of  B  N  D  are  only  too  fami-  . 
liar) — to  dispose  of  this  difficulty  by  putting  it  nearly  out 
of  sight.  The  only  result  of  all  this  misplaced  officiousness 
is  a  miserable  travestie  of  the  sacred  words  : — oXKol  he  cttl- 
/3dSa^,  Koyjravre'i  e/c  tmu  dypMV  :  7  words  in  place  of  12  ! 

But  the  calamitous  circumstance  is  that  the  Critics  have  all 
to  a  man  fallen  into  tlie  trap.  True,  that  Origen  (who  once 
writes  (noi^dhm  and  once  am^dha^),  as  well  as  the  two 
Egy])tian  versions,  side  with  N  v,  c  L  a  in  reading  e/c  rwy 
dypoiv :  but  then  both  versions  (with  c)  decline  to  cdter  the 
construction  of  the  sentence  ;  and  (with  Origen)  decline  to 
omit  the  clause  iarpMvvvov  et?  rrjv  oSov :  while,  against  this 
little  band  of  disunited  witnesses,  are  marslialled  all  the 
remaining  fourteen  uncials,  headed  l)y  ad — the  Peschito  and 
the  rhiloxenian  Syriac ;  the  Italic,  the  Vulgate,  the  Gothic, 
the  Armenian,  the  Georgian,  and  the  yEthiopic  as  well  as  the 
Slavonic  versions,  besides  the  whole  body  of  the  cursives. 
Whether  therefore  Antiquity,  Variety,  Kespectability  of  wit- 
nesses, numbers,  or  the  reason  of  the  thing  be  appealed  to, 
the  case  of  our  opponents  breaks  hopelessly  down.  Does 
any  one  seriously  suppose  that,  if  S.  Mark  had  written  the 
commcju  word  rjri^dha^,  so  vast  a  majority  of  the  copies  at 
this  day  would  exhibit  the  improbable  crroi/SaSa?  ?  Had  the 
saujc  S.  Mark  cx] tressed  nothing  else  but  ko'^'Antes  in  rwv 


1.]  CAUGHT   IN   THE   TRAP. — S.   LUKE   XXIII.   45.  61 

'AFP  fiTN,  will  any  one  persuade  us  that  every  copy  in  existence 
hut  five  would  present  us  with  "'EKonroN  e/c  tmv  ak'naphn, 
Kal  'ESTPn'NNTON  Ei'2  TH'N  'OAO'N  ?  And  let  us  not  be  told  that 
there  has  been  Assimilation  here.  There  has  been  none. 
S.  Matthew  (xxi.  8)  writes  'Ano'  twv  SevBpwv  ....  'en  ry  68m  : 

S.  Mark  (xi.  8),  "ek  tmv  BevBpwv Ers  rr]v  oSov.     The 

types  are  distinct,  and  have  been  faithfully  retained  all 
down  the  ages.  The  common  reading  is  certainly  correct. 
The  Critics  are  certainly  in  error.  And  we  exclaim  (surely 
not  without  good  reason)  against  the  hardship  of  thus  having 
an  exploded  corruption  of  the  text  of  Scripture  furbished  up 
afresh  and  thrust  upon  us,  after  lying  deservedly  forgotten 
for  upwards  of  a  thousand  years. 

(c)  Take  a  yet  grosser  specimen,  which  has  nevertheless 
imposed  just  as  completely  upon  our  Revisionists.  It  is 
found  in  S.  Luke's  Gospel  (xxiii.  45),  and  belongs  to  the 
history  of  the  Crucifixion.  All  are  aware  that  as,  at  the 
typical  redemption  out  of  Egypt,  there  had  been  a  preter- 
natural darkness  over  the  land  for  three  days,^  so,  pre- 
liminary to  the  actual  Exodus  of  '  the  Israel  of  God,'  '  there 
was  darkness  over  all  the  land  '  for  three  hours.^  S.  Luke 
adds  the  further  statement, — '  And  the  sun  was  clarhencd ' 
{koI  iaKorlaOrj  6  7]\io<;).  Now  the  proof  that  this  is  what 
S.  Luke  actually  wrote,  is  the  most  obvious  and  conclusive 
possible.  'Ea/coTLadr)  is  found  in  all  the  most  ancient  docu- 
ments. Marcion  ^  (whose  date  is  a.d.  130-50)  so  exhibits 
the  place  : — besides  the  old  Latin  *  and  the  Vulgate  : — the 
Peschito,  Cureton's,  and  the  Philoxenian  Syriac  versions : — 
the  Armenian,  —  the  ^Etliiopic,  —  the  Georgian,  —  and   the 


'  Exod.  X.  21-23. 

^  S.  Matth.  xxvii.  45 ;  S.  Mark  xv.  33  ;  S.  Lu.  xxiii.  44. 

3  Ap.  Epiphan.  i.  317  aud  347. 

*  Intenebricatus  est  sol — a:  ohscnratus  est  sol — b:  tenelricavit  sol — c. 


62  THE   SUN   'DATJKEXETV — NOT  [Art. 

Slavonic.  —  Hippolytus  ^  (a.d.  190-227),  —  Atlianasius,^  — 
Epliraeni  Syr.,^ — (lre<iory  Naz.,^* — Theodore  Mops.,* — Nilus 
the  iiionk,^ — Severianus,  (in  a  homily  preserved  in  Armenian, 
p.  439,) — Cyril  of  Alexandria,*^  —  the  apocryphal  Gospel  of 
Nicodemiis  —  and  the  Anapliora  Pilati,'''  —  are  all  witnesses 
to  the  same  effect.  Add  the  Acta  Pilatl^  —  and  tlie  Syriac 
Acts  of  the  Apostles.^  —  Let  it  suffice  of  the  Latins  to  (j^uote 
Tertullian.^°  —  But  the  most  striking  evidence  is  the  con- 
sentient testimony  of  the  manuscripts,  viz.  all  the  tincials  l)ut 
3  and-a-half,  and  cveri/  known  Evangelivm. 

That  the  darkness  spoken  of  was  a  divine  portent — not  an 
eclipse  of  the  sun,  but  an  incident  wholly  out  of  the  course 
of  nature — the  ancients  clearly  recognize.  Origen,^^ — Julius 
Africanus^^^  (a.d.  220),— Macarius  Magnes^^  (a.d.  330),— are 
even  eloquent  on  the  subject.  Chrysostom's  evidence  is  un- 
equivocal.^* It  is,  nevertheless,  well  known  that  tins  place  of 
S.  Luke's  Gospel  was  tampered  w^th  from  a  very  early  period  ; 
and  that  Origen  ^^  (a.d.  18G-253),  and  perliaps  Eusebius,^^ 


'  Ap.  liouth,  OpiiKC.  i.  79.  ^  j_  qq^  g^;.  .  .^j,_  jrpipii   i_  loQfj^ 

•'*  Syr.  ii.  4.S.     So  also  Evan.  Cone.  pj).  245,  256,  257.        ■'*  i.  8U7. 

■*  Mai,  HcripU.  Vrtt.  vi.  (34.  «  i.  805. 

*=  Ap.  Mai,  ii.  !."/!  ;  iii.  895.     Alsn  I.uc.  "rl'l.  "'  i.  28H,  417. 

»  P.  233.  ^  E<1.  i.y  Wri-lit,  p.  Di. 

'"  '  Sdl  media  tlie  tenthvlravit.^     A</v.  J/i(t.  c.  xiii. 

"  iii.  922-4.  liead  the  wliole  ol'  cap.  l.'M.  See  also  aj).  (Jallainl.  xiv. 
82,  append.,  wliicli  liy  tlie  way  deserves  to  lie  compared  with  Clii-ys.  vii. 
825  a. 

'"  dXA'  J]v  (rK(')T(>>;  dfOTToirjTov,  buWi  top  Kvpiou  (rvi'e,3r]  TvaOflv. — Iicnilh,  ii. 
298. 

'^  fir  e^(ii<j)v>]s  Knnvixdtv  '^rjXdfjjijToi'  (tkutos,  I'jXiov  tiju  niKilav  iivyijv 
(iTroKpii'^avTos,  \<.  29. 

^*  OTi  yap  ovK  rjv  eKXff^LS  [sc.  to  (tkotos  tKe'ifo^  ovk  ipT(v6(v  pn'ivov  ^?]\nu 
rjv,  aWh  Kui  iItto  tov  Kcupou.  rpfls  yap  Copas  T7ap(p.iiv(v  •  i)  de  (KXeiyj/is  ev 
p.ia  Kaipov  yivfrai  poTTtj. — vii.  82;j  a. 

'">  i.  411,  115;  iii.  50. 

'"  A]).  Mai,  iv.  20<i.  lint  I'urllicr  nii  lir  says:  avriKa  yovv  eVl  rci  iraOd 
/>vx  rjXim  pi'iviiv  ((TKtWaiTfv  k.  t.  X.-~  Cyril   oi'  Jerusalem   (jtji.  57,  1  1(1,  11)9, 


1.]  'ECLIPSED,' — AT   THE   CRUCIFIXION.  Go 

employed  copies  which  had  been  depraved.  In  some  copies, 
writes  Origen,  instead  of  '  and  the  sun  was  darkened '  {kuI 
iaKOTiadr]  6  tjXlos:),  is  found  '  the  sun  having  become  eclipsed ' 
(tov  rjXiov  iKXiiroPTo^).  He  points  out  with  truth  that  the 
thing  spoken  of  is  a  physical  impossibility,  and  delivers  it  as 
his  opinion  that  the  corruption  of  the  text  was  due  either  to 
some  friendly  hand  in  order  to  account  fm^  the  darkness ;  or 
else,  (which  he,^  and  Jerome  ^  after  him,  thought  more 
likely,)  to  the  enemies  of  Eevelation,  who  sought  in  this  way 
to  provide  themselves  with  a  pretext  for  cavil.  Either  way, 
Origen  and  Jerome  elaborately  assert  that  iaKoriaOT]  is  the 
only  true  reading  of  8.  Luke  xxiii.  45.  Will  it  be  believed 
that  this  gross  fabrication — for  no  other  reason  but  because 
it  is  found  in  n  b  l,  and  'prohahly  once  existed  in  c  ^ — has 
been  resuscitated  in  1881,  and  foisted  into  the  sacred  Text 
by  our  lievisionists  ? 

It  would  be  interesting  to  have  this  proceeding  of  theirs 
explained.  Why  should  the  truth  dwell  exclusively*  with 
K  B  L  ?  It  cannot  be  pretended  that  between  the  I Vth  and  A^th 
centuries,  when  the  copies  x  b  were  made,  and  the  Yth  and 
Vlth  centuries,  when  the  copies  A  Q  D  K  were  executed,  tliis 


201,  202)  and  Cusmas  (ap.  Montf.  ii.  177  Vis)  were  apparently  acquainted 
with  the  same  reatling,  but  neither  of  them  actually  quotes  Luke  xxiii.  -15. 

^  '  In  quibusdam  exemplaribus  non  habetur  tenebrie  fadx  sunt,  ef  ob- 
scuratus  est  sol:  sed  ita,  tenehrx  factx  sunt  super  omnem  terram,  sole 
deficiente.  Et  forsitan  ausus  est  aliquis  quasi  manifestius  aliquid  dicere 
volens,  pro,  et  obscurutus  est  sol,  i)onere  deficiente  sole,  existimans  quod  non 
aliter  potuissent  fieri  tenebraj,  nisi  sole  deficiente.  Puto  autem  magis  quod 
insidiatores  ecclesiaj  Christi  mutaverunt  hoc  verbum,  quoniam  tenehrx  fact,-e 
sunt  sole  deficiente,  ut  verisimiliter  evangelia  argui  possiut  secundum  adin- 
ventiones  volentium  arguere  ilia.'     (iii.  923  f.  a.) 

^  vii.  235.  '  QtU  scrijjserunt  contra  Evangelia,  suspicantur  deliquium 
solis,'  &c. 

^  This  rests  on  little  more  than  conjecture.  Tisch.  Cod.  Ephr.  Syr.  p. 
327. 

■*  'EKXeiVovToj  is  only  found  besides  in  eleven  lectionaries. 


64  DEPRAVED   TEXT   ADOPTED   BY  [Aut. 

corruption  of  the  text  arose :  for  (as  was  explained  at  the 
ontset)  the  reading  in  question  (koI  iaKOTLadr]  6  i]Xio<i)  is  found 
in  all  tlie  oldest  and  most  famous  documents.  Our  lievi- 
sionists  cannot  take  their  stand  on  '  Antiquity/ — for  as  we 
have  seen,  all  the  Versions  (with  the  single  exception  of  the 
Coptic  ^), — and  the  oldest  Church  writers,  (Marcion,  Origen, 
Julius  Africanus,  Hippolytus,  Athanasius,  Gregory  Naz., 
Ephraem,  &c.,)  are  all  against  them.- — They  cannot  advance 
the  claim  of  '  clearly  preponderating  evidence  ;  '  for  they  have 
but  a  single  Version, — not  a  single  Father,— and  but  three- 
and-a-half  Evangelia  to  appeal  to,  out  of  perhaps  three 
hundred  and  fifty  times  that  numljer. — They  cannot  pretend 
that  essential  probability  is  in  favour  of  the  reading  of  x  b  ; 
seeing  that  the  thing  stated  is  astronomically  impossible. — 
They  will  not  tell  us  that  critical  opinion  is  M'itli  them :  for 
their  judgment  is  opposed  to  that  of  every  Critic  ancient  and 
modern,  except  Tischendorf  since  his  discovery  of  codex  n. — 
Of  what  nature  then  will  be  their  proof?  .  .  .  Nothing 
results  from  the  discovery  that  K  reads  rov  Tfkiov  iKXnrovro^, 
B  e/tXetTTo/'To?, — except  that  those  two  codices  are  of  the  same 
corrupt  type  as  those  which  Origen  deliberately  condemned 
1050  years  ago.  In  the  meantime,  with  more  of  ingenuity 
than  of  ingenuousness,  our  lievisionists  attempt  to  conceal 
the  foolishness  of  the  text  of  their  choice  by  translating  it 


1  The  Thehaic  represents  '  the  snn  setting  ,•'  wliicli,  (like  the  mention  of 
'  eclij^se,'')  is  only  another  interpretation  of  the  darkness, — derived  from  Jer, 
XV.  9  or  Amos  viii.  9  ('  occidit  sol  meridie  ').  Compare  Treuanis  iv.  33.  12, 
(p.  273,)  who  says  that  these  two  proi)hecies  found  fulfilmeut  in  'eum 
occasum  soils  (|ui,  (uucilixo  eo,  fuit  ah  hora  sextd.'  He  alludes  to  the  same 
places  in  iv.  34.  3  (p.  27.5).  ?o  does  Jerome  (on  Matt,  xxvii.  45), — "  Efc 
lioc  factum  reor,  ut  compleatur  prophetia,"  and  then  he  quotes  Amos  and 
Jeremiah ;  finely  adding  (from  some  ancient  source),—"  Videturque  mihi 
clarissimum  lumen  mumli,  hoc  est  luminnre  majus,  retraxisse  radios  suos, 
lie  aut  pcndenteui  vidcret  Duiuinum;  aut.  impii  hlasphcmantes  sua  luce 
IVucreutur." 


I.]  THE   REVISIONISTS   IN   S.    LUKE   XXIII.    45.  65 

unfairly.  They  present  us  with,  '  the  sun's  light  failing.'  But 
this  is  a  gloss  of  their  own.  There  is  no  mention  of  '  the 
sun's  light '  in  the  Greek.  Nor  perhaps,  if  the  rationale  of 
the  original  expression  were  accurately  ascertained,  would 
such  a  paraphrase  of  it  prove  correct.^  But,  in  fact,  the 
phrase  e/cXeti/ri?  r/Xiov  means  '  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,'  and  no 
other  thing.  In  like  manner,  rov  rfKiov  iKkeiiTovTO'i  ^  (as  our 
Eevisionists  are  perfectly  well  aware)  means  '  the  sun  becom- 
ing eclipsed,'  or  '  suffering  eclipse'  It  is  easy  for  Eevisionists 
to  "  emphatically  deny  that  there  is  anything  in  the  Greek 
word  eKkeCiretv,  when  associated  with  the  sun,  which  involves 
necessarily  the  notion  of  an  eclipse."^  The  fact  referred  to 
may  not  be  so  disposed  of.  It  lies  outside  the  province  of 
'  emphatic  denial.'  Let  them  ask  any  Scholar  in  Europe  what 
rov  ifKiov  eKXiirovTO'i  means ;  and  see  if  he  does  not  tell 
them  that  it  can  only  mean,  '  the  sun  having  become  eclipsed ' ! 
They  know  this  every  bit  as  well  as  their  Eeviewer.  And 
they  ought  either  to  have  had  the  manliness  to  render  the 
words  faithfully,  or  else  the  good  sense  to  let  the  Greek 
alone, — which  they  are  respectfully  assured  was  their  only 
proper  course.  Kal  iaKOTiadr]  6  ?/Xi09  is,  in  fact,  clearly 
above  suspicion.  ToO  rjXiov  eKXeLirovro';,  which  these  learned 
men  (with  the  best  intentions)  have  put  in  its  place,  is,  to 
speak  plainly,  a  transparent  fabrication.  That  it  enjoys 
'  clearly  pt'^'cpondcrating  evidence,'  is  what  no  person,  fair  or 
unfair,  will  for  an  instant  venture  to  pretend. 

III.  Next,  let  us  produce  an  instance  of  depravation  of 
Scripture  resulting  from  the  practice  of  Assimilation,  which 


^  Our  old  friend  of  Halicarnassus  (vii.  37),  speaking  of  an  ecli2>se  which 
happened  b.o.  481,  remarks :  6  rjXios  eKXmcov  ttjv  ck  tov  ovpavov  ebpr^v. 

^  For  it  will  be  perceived  that  our  Revisionists  have  adopted  the  reading 
vouched  for  only  hy  codex  r.  Wliat  c*  once  read  is  as  uncertain  as  it  is 
unimportant.  ^  Bp.  Ellicott's  pamphlet,  p.  60. 

F 


^6  DEPRAVED   TEXT   ADOPTED   BY  [Akt. 

prevailed   anciently  to  an  extent  wliich  baffles  aritlimetic. 
We  choose  the  most  famous  instance  that  presents  itself. 

(a)  It  occurs  in  S.  Mark  vi.  20,  and  is  more  than  un- 
suspected. The  substitution  (on  the  authority  of  s  B  l  and 
the  Coptic)  of  rjiropet  for  iirolei  in  that  verse,  (i.e.  the  state- 
ment that  Herod  'was  much  perplexed' — instead  of  Herod 
^  did  many  things,')  is  even  vaunted  by  the  Critics  as  the 
recovery  of  the  true  reading  of  the  place — long  obscured  by 
the  '  very  singular  expression '  eVo/et.  To  ourselves  the  only 
"very  singular'  thing  is,  how  men  of  first-rate  ability  can 
fail  to  see  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  proposed  substitute  is 
simply  fatal  to  the  Spirit's  teaching  in  this  place.  "  Common 
sense  is  staggered  by  such  a  rendering,"  (remarks  the  learned 
Bishop  of  Lincoln).  "People  are  not  wont  to  hear  gladly 
those  by  whom  they  are  much  perplexed."  ^  But  in  fact,  the 
sacred  writer's  object  clearly  is,  to  record  the  striking  cir- 
cumstance that  Herod  was  so  moved  by  the  discourses  of 
John,  (whom  he  used  to  '  listen  to  with  pleasure,')  that  he 
even  '  did  many  tliiwjs '  {iroXKa  eiroUi)  in  conformity  with 
the  Baiytisfs  teaching?  .  .  .  And  yet,  if  this  be  so,  liow  (we 
shall  be  asked)  has  '  he  was  much  perplexed '  {iroKka  r^iropeL) 
contrived  to  effect  a  lodgment  in  so  many  as  three  copies  of 
the  second  Gospel  ? 

It  has  resulted  from  nothing  else,  we  reply,  but  tlie  deter- 
mination to  assimilate  a  statement  of  S.  Mark  (vi.  20)  con- 
cerning Herod  and  John  the  Baptist,  with  another  and  a  dis- 
tinct statement  of  S.  Luke  (ix.  7),  having  reference  to  Herod 


^   On  the  Ileciscd  Version,  p.  14. 

^  TToXXa  KiiTo.  yvu)fir)v  avToii  6te7rpurrfTo,  as  (probal)ly)  Victor  of  Aiitioch 
(Cai.  p.  128),  exi)lains  the  place.  He  cites  some  oue  else  (]>.  129)  who 
exhibits  fjTroptt. ;  aud  who  explaius  it  of  Herod's  diniculty  about  yrttiny  rid 
of  Herodias. 


I.]  THE   REVISIONISTS   IN   S.   MARK   VT.    20.  07 

and  our  Lord.  S.  Luke,  speaking  of  the  fame  of  our 
Saviour's  miracles  at  a  period  subsequent  to  the  Baptist's 
murder,  declares  that  when  Herod  '  heard  all  things  that  were 
done  BY  Him  '  {ijKovae  ra  ycvofjieva  vir  avrov  TrdvTo),  '  he  was 
much  poylexed  '  (StT/Tropet). — Statements  so  entirely  distinct 
and  diverse  from  one  another  as  this  of  S.  Luke,  and  that 
(given  above)  of  S.  Mark,  might  surely  (one  would  think) 
have  been  let  alone.  On  the  contrary.  A  glance  at  the 
foot  of  the  page  will  show  that  in  the  Ilnd  century  S.  Mark's 
words  were  solicited  in  all  sorts  of  ways.  A  persistent  deter- 
mination existed  to  make  him  say  that  Herod  having  '  heard 
of  mauT/  things  which  the  Baptist  did,'  &c} — a  strange  per- 
version of  the  Evangelist's  meaning,  truly,  and  only  to  be 
accounted  for  in  one  way.^ 


^  Koi  aKoixras  avrov  noWa  a  eVot'ei,  Koi  i]8e(os  avrov  rJKOviv,  will  hare 
been  the  reading  of  that  lost  venerable  codex  of  the  Gospels  which  is 
chiefly  represented  at  this  day  by  Evann.  13-69-124-346, — as  explained 
by  Professor  Abbott  in  his  Introduction  to  Prof.  Ferrar's  Collation  of  fotir 
important  MSS.,  etc.  (Dublin  1877).  The  same  reading  is  also  found  iu 
Evann.  28  :  122  :  541  :  572,  and  Evst.  196. 

Different  must  have  been  the  reading  of  that  other  venerable  exemplar 
which  supplied  the  Latin  Church  with  its  earliest  Text.  But  of  this  let 
the  reader  judge: — ^ Et  cum,  audisset  ilium  multa  facere,  lihenter,^  &c.  (c: 
also  '  Codex  Aureus '  and  y,  both  at  Stockholm) :  '  et  audito  eo  quod  multa 
faciebat,  et  libenter,^  &:c.  (g^q):  ^  et  audiens  ilium  quia  midta  faciehat,  et 
lihenter,'  &c.  (b).  The  Anglo-Saxon,  ('  and  he  heard  that  he  many  -wonders 
tvrought,  and  he  gladly  heard  him')  approaches  nearest  to  the  last  two. 

The  Peschito  Syriac  (which  is  without  variety  of  reading  here)  in  strict- 
ness exhibits  : — '  And  many  things  he  ims  hearing  [from]  him  and  doing; 
and  gladly  he  ivas  hearing  him.'  But  this,  by  competent  Syriac  scholars, 
is  considered  to  represent, — Ka\  iroWa  aKovav  avrov,  eirolef  kuI  T}8f(os 
rJKoviv  aiiTov. — Cod.  A  is  peculiar  in  exhibiting  K.a\  aKovcras  avrov  noXXa, 
fjBftas  avTov  fJKovev, — omitting  inoifi,  Kai. — The  Coptic  also  renders,  'ci 
audiehat  multa  ah  eo,  et  anxio  erat  corde.'  From  all  this,  it  becomes  clear 
that  the  actual  intention  of  the  blundering  author  of  the  text  exhibited  by 
N  B  L  was,  to  connect  jroXXa,  not  with  ^jropet,  but  with  oKovaas.  So  the 
Arabian  version  :  but  not  the  Gothic,  Armenian,  Sclavonic,  or  Georgian,— 
as  Dr.  S.  C.  Malan  informs  the  Reviewer. 

^  Note,  that  tokens  abound  of  a  determination  anciently  to  assimilate 

F   2 


68  DEPRAVED  TEXT  ADOPTED  BY  [Art. 

Had  this  been  all,  however,  the  matter  would  have 
attracted  no  attention.  One  snch  fabrication  more  or  less 
in  the  Latin  version,  which  abounds  in  fabricated  readings, 
is  of  little  moment.  But  then,  the  Greek  scribes  had  recourse 
to  a  more  subtle  device  for  assimilating  Mark  vi.  20  to  Luke 
ix.  7.  They  perceived  that  S.  Mark's  eVo/et  might  be  almost 
identified  with  S.  Luke's  Birjiropei,  by  7ncrcly  cluinging  two  of 
the  letters,  viz.  by  substituting  7}  for  e  and  p  for  t.  From  tliis, 
there  results  in  S.  Mk.  vi.  20  :  '  and  having  heard  many  things 
of  him,  he  was  perplexed ;'    which  is  very  nearly  identical 


the  Gospels  hereabouts.  Thus,  because  the  first  half  of  Luke  ix.  10  (  ,,  ) 
and  the  whole  of  Mk.  vi.  30  Qf)  are  bracketed  together  by  Eusebius,  the 
former  place  in  codex  a  is  found  brought  into  conformity  with  the  latter 
by  the  unauthorized  insertion  of  the  clause  kol  oaa  f8i8a^av.  —  The 
parallelism  of  Mtt.  xiv.  13  and  Lu.  ix.  10  is  the  reason  why  d  exhibits  in 
the  latter  place  dv-  (instead  of  viT)exo3pr]ae. — In  like  manner,  in  Lu.  ix. 
10,  codex  A  exhibits  els  eprjfiov  ronov,  instead  of  els  tottop  i'prifiov,  only 
because  (prjfiop  tottov  is  the  order  of  Mtt.  xiv.  13  and  Mk.  vi.  32. — So 
again,  codex  K,  ii>  the  same  verse  of  S.  Luke,  entirely  omits  the  final  clause 
TrdXecof  KaXovfif'vrjs  Bijdaa'idd,  only  in  order  to  assimilate  its  text  to  that  of 
the  two  earlier  Gospels, — But  there  is  no  need  to  look  beyond  the  limits  of 
S.  Mark  vi.  14-16,  for  proofs  of  Assimilation.  Instead  of  eV  veKp&v  Tj-yepdrj 
(in  ver.  14),  b  and  X  exhibit  iyrj-ytprai  ck  vfKpiav — only  because  those  words 
are  found  in  Lu.  ix.  7.  A  substitutes  dviar-q  (fur  rj-yepdrj) — only  because  that 
word  is  found  in  Lu.  ix.  8.  For  rjyfpQrj  ck  v(Kpo>v,  c  substitutes  r^yipOr)  Cnrb 
rS)v  v(Kp(ov—on\y  because  S.  Matth.  so  writes  in  ch.  xiv.  2.  i)  inserts  Kai 
f^aXev  fls  (/)iiXa(C77i/  into  ver.  17 — only  because  of  Mtt.  xiv.  3  and  Lu.  iii. 
20.  In  X  1!  h  A,  liaTTTiCovTos  (for  (^airTia-Tov)  stands  in  ver.  24 — only  by 
Assimilation  with  ver.  14.  (l  is  for  assimilating  ver.  25  likewise).  K  A  11, 
tiie  Syr.,  and  copies  of  the  old  Latin,  transpose  (vepyoixriv  ai  bwdpeis  (in 
ver.  14) — only  because  those  words  arc  transposed  in  Mtt.  xiv.  2.  .  .  .  If 
facts  like  these  do  not  open  men's  eyes  to  the  danger  of  following  the 
fashionable  guides,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  nothing  ever  will.  The  foulest 
blot  of  all  remains  to  be  noticed.  Will  it  be  believed  that  in  ver.  22, 
codices  s  b  d  l  A  conspire  in  representing  the  dancer  (whose  name  is 
kncnrn  to  have  been  'Balome')  as  another  '  Ilcrodiits' — TkroiVs  oivn 
(laaffhkrf  Tliis  gross  perversion  of  the  truth,  alike  of  Scrij)ture  and  of 
histury — a  reading  as  preposterous  as  it  is  revolting,  and  therefore  rejected 
hitherto  by  all  the  editors  and  all  the  critics — finds  undoubting  favour 
with  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort.  Calanutous  to  relate,  it  also  disfigures  the 
margin  of  our  Revised  Version  of  S.  Mark  vi.  22,  in  consci/nence. 


I.]  THE   REVISIONISTS  IN  S.  MARK   VI.   20.  69 

with  what  is  found  in  S.  Lii.  ix.  7.  This  fatal  substitution  (of 
rJTTopei  for  iiroiei,)  survives  happily  only  in  codices  K  b  L  and 
the  Coptic  version — all  of  bad  character.  But  (calamitous  to 
relate)  the  Critics,  having  disinterred  this  long-since-forgotten 
fabrication,  are  making  vigorous  efforts  to  galvanize  it,  at  the 
end  of  fifteen  centuries,  into  ghastly  life  and  activity.  We 
venture  to  assure  them  that  they  will  not  succeed.  Herod's 
'  perplexity '  did  not  begin  until  John  had  been  beheaded, 
and  the  fame  reached  Herod  of  the  miracles  wdiich  our 
Saviour  wrought.  The  apocryphal  statement,  now  for  the 
first  time  thrust  into  an  English  copy  of  the  New  Testament, 
may  be  summarily  dismissed.  But  the  marvel  will  for  ever 
remain  that  a  company  of  distinguished  Scholars  (a.d.  1881) 
could  so  effectually  persuade  themselves  that  eVo/et  (in 
S.  Mark  vi.  20)  is  a  "plain,  and  clear  error,"  and  that  there  is 
"  decidedly  preponderating  evidence  "  in  favour  of  rjiropei,, — as  to 
venture  to  substitute  the  latter  ivord  for  the  former.  This 
will  for  ever  remain  a  marvel,  we  say;  seeing  that  all  the 
uncials  except  three  of  bad  character,  together  with  every 
hnoivn  cursive  ivithout  exception ; — the  old  Latin  and  the 
Vulgate,  the  Peschito  and  the  Philoxenian  Syriac,  the  Arme- 
nian, ^thiopic,  Slavonian  and  Georgian  versions, — are  with 
the  traditional  Text.  (The  Thebaic,  the  Gothic,  and  Cureton's 
Syriac  are  defective  here.     The  ancient  Fathers  are  silent.) 

IV.  More  serious  in  its  consequences,  however,  than  any 
other  source  of  mischief  which  can  be  named,  is  the  process 
of  Mutilation,  to  which,  from  the  beginning,  the  Text  of 
Scripture  has  been  subjected.  By  the  '  Mutilation '  of  Scrip- 
ture we  do  but  mean  the  intentional  Omission — -/rom  whatever 
cause  proceeding — of  genuine  portions.  And  the  causes  of  it 
have  been  numerous  as  well  as  diverse.  Often,  indeed, 
there  seems  to  have  been  at  work  nothing  else  but  a 
strange  passion  for  getting  rid  of  whatever  portions  of  the 


70  THE   SACRED   TEXT   MUTILATED   IN  [Art. 

inspired  Text  liave  seemed  to  ;iny1)ody  supei'iluous,-— or  at 
all  events  have  ajjpeared  capable  of  being  removed  without 
manifest  injury  to  the  sense.  But  the  estimate  of  the 
tasteless  Ilnd-century  Critic  will  never  be  that  of  the  well- 
informed  Header,  furnished  with  the  ordinary  instincts  of 
piety  and  reverence.  This  barbarous  mutilation  of  the 
Gospel,  by  the  unceremonious  excision  of  a  multitude  of 
little  words,  is  often  attended  by  no  worse  consequence  than 
that  thereby  an  extraordinary  baldness  is  imparted  to  the 
Evangelical  narrative.  The  removal  of  so  many  of  the 
coupling-hooks  is  apt  to  cause  the  curtains  of  the  Tabernacle 
to  hang  wondrous  ungracefully ;  but  often  that  is  all.  Some- 
times, however,  (as  might  have  been  confidently  anticipated,) 
the  result  is  calamitous  in  a  high  degree.  Not  only  is  the 
beauty  of  the  narrative  effectually  marred,  (as  e.g.  by  the 
barbarous  excision  of  Kai  —  ev6iQ)<i  —  /jbera  hatcpvwv  —  Kv/ote, 
from  S.  Mark  ix.  24) :  ^ — the  doctrinal  teaching  of  our 
Saviour's  discourses  in  countless  places,  damaged,  (as  e.g. 
by  the  omission  of  koX  vrjarela  from  verse  29) :— absurd  ex- 
pressions attributed  to  the  Holy  One  which  He  certainly 
never  uttered,  (as  e.g.  by  truncating  of  its  last  word  the 
phrase  to,  Et  hvvacrai  iriarevcrai  in  verse  23) : — but  (i.)  The 
narrative  is  often  rendered  in  a  manner  unintelligible;  or 
else  (ii.),  The  entire  point  of  a  precious  incident  is  made  to 
disappear  from  sight;  or  else  (ill.).  An  imaginary  incident 
is  fabricated:  or  lastly  (iv.),  Some  precious  saying  of  our 
Divine   Lord   is   turned  into   absolute   nonsense.     Take   a 


'  i.e.  '  And '  is  omitted  by  u  l  A :  '  immediately^  by  N  c :  '  with  tears' 
by  N  A  R  c  I.  A  :  '  Lord '  by  N  a  b  c  d  l. — In  S.  Mark  vi.  16 — (viz.  '  But 
wheu  Ilcrod  heard  thereof,  ho  said  [Tliis  is]  John  whom  I  beheaded.  He 
is  risen  [from  the  dead],') — the  five  words  in  brackets  arc  omitted  by  our 
Revisers  on  the  authority  of  k  b  (d)  l  a.  But  K  n  further  omit  'itcuuvrjv: 
c  D  omit  o  :  j?  b  d  l  omit  on.  To  enumerate  and  explain  the  effects  of  all 
the  barbarous  Mutilations  which  the  Gospels  alone  have  sustained  at  the 
hands  of  S ,  of  b,  and  of  d — would  Jill  many  volumes  like  the  present. 


L]  S.   MATTHEW  XIV.   30,  AND  S.   MARK  XV.   39.  71 

single  short  example  of  what  has  last  been  offered,  from  each 
of  the  Gospels  in  turn. 


(i.)  In  S.  Matthew  xiv.  30,  we  are  invited  henceforth  to 
submit  to  the  information  concerning  Simon  Peter,  that 
'  when  he  saw  the  wind,  he  was  afraid,'  The  sight  must  have 
been  peculiar,  certainly.  So,  indeed,  is  the  expression.  But 
Simon  Peter  was  as  unconscious  of  the  one  as  S.  Matthew  of 
the  other.  Such  curiosities  are  the  peculiar  property  of 
codices  n  b — the  Coptic  version — and  the  Eevisionists.  The 
predicate  of  the  proposition  (viz.  '  that  it  was  strong,'  con- 
tained in  the  single  word  la'^vpov)  has  been  wantonly  excised. 
That  is  all ! — although  Dr.  Hort  succeeded  in  persuading  his 
colleagues  to  the  contrary.  A  more  solemn — a  far  sadder 
instance,  awaits  us  in  the  next  Gospel. 

(ii.)  The  first  three  Evangelists  are  careful  to  note  'the 
loud  cry  '  with  which  the  Eedeemer  of  the  World  expired. 
But  it  was  reserved  for  S.  Mark  (as  Chrysostom  pointed  out 
long  since)  to  record  (xv.  39)  the  memorable  circumstance 
that  this  particular  portent  it  was,  which  wrought  conviction 
in  the  soul  of  the  Eoman  soldier  whose  office  it  was  to  be 
present  on  that  terrible  occasion.  The  man  had  often  wit- 
nessed death  by  Crucifixion,  and  must  have  been  well 
acquainted  with  its  ordinary  phenomena.  Never  before  had 
he  witnessed  anything  like  this.  He  was  stationed  where  he 
could  see  and  hear  all  that  happened  :  '  standing  '  (S.  Mark 
says)  '  near '  our  Saviour, — '  over  against  Him.''  '  Now,  wdien 
the  Centurion  saw  that  it  was  after  so  erying  out  (Kpd^a'i), 
that  He  expired '  (xv.  39)  he  uttered  the  memorable  words, 
'  Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of  God  !  '  '  What  chiefly 
moved  him  to  make  that  confession  of  his  faith  was  that  our 
Saviour  evidently  died  with  potver!'^  "  The  miracle  "  (says 
Bp.  Pearson)  "  was  not  in  the  death,  but  m  the  voice.     The 


Chrysostom,  vii.  825. 


72  THE   SACRED   TEXT   MUTILATED   IN  [Akt. 

strangeness  was  not  that  He  should  die,  but  that  at  the  point 
of  death  He  shoukl  cry  out  so  loud.  He  died  not  by,  but 
with  a  Miracle."^  .  .  .  All  this  however  is  lost  in  n  b  l,  wliich 
literally  sta7id  alonc"^  in  leaving  out  the  central  and  only 
important  word,  Kpd^a<;.  Calamitous  to  relate,  they  are  fol- 
lowed herein  by  our  Eevisionists :  who  (misled  by  Dr.  Hort) 
invite  us  henceforth  to  read, — '  Now  when  the  Centurion  saw 
that  He  so  gave  up  the  ghost.' 

(ill.)  In  S.  Luke  xxiii.  42,  by  leaving  out  two  little  words 
(to)  and  kg),  the  same  blind  guides,  under  the  same  blind 
guidance,  effectually  misrepresent  the  record  concerning  the 
repentant  malefactor.  Henceforth  they  would  have  us  be- 
lieve that  '  he  said,  "  Jesus,  remember  me  when  thou  comest 
in  thy  Kingdom."  '  (Dr.  Hort  was  fortunately  unable  to  per- 
suade the  Eevisionists  to  follow  him  in  further  substituting 
'  into  thy  kingdom  '  for  '  in  thy  kingdom ; '  and  so  converting 
what,  in  the  A.  V.,  is  nothing  worse  than  a  palpable  mis- 
translation,^ into  what  would  have  been  an  indelible  blot. 
The  record  of  his  discomfiture  survives  in  the  margin). 
Whereas  none  of  the  Churches  of  Christendom  have  ever  yet 
doubted  that  S.  Luke's  record  is,  that  the  dying  man  '  said 
unto  Jesus,  Lokd,  remember  me/  &c. 

(iv.)  In  S.  John  xiv.  4,  l)y  eliminating  the  second  kul  and 
the  second  otBare,  our  Saviour  is  now  made  to  say,  'And 
whither  I  go,  ye  know  the  way ; '  which  is  really  almost  non- 
sense. What  He  actually  said  was,  *  And  whitlier  I  go  ye 
know,  and  the  way  ye  know  ; '  in  consequenee  of  which  (as  we 
all   renieniber)  '  Thomas  saith  unto   Him,   LoiU),   we   know 


^   On  the  Creed,  Art.  iv.  '  Dead :'  about  half-way  through. 

^  Tlie  Coptic  rcj)resents  on  f^fTrvevat. 

■'  Namely,  of'EN  rrj  /Sao-,  aov,  which  is  tlie  reading  of  every  /aiowu  ro/)>/ 
hut  two ;  besides  Origen,  Euscbius,  Cyril  Jcr.,  Chrysostom,  &c.  Ouly  d  i. 
read  El's, — which  Westcott  and  Hort  adt)i>t. 


I.]      S.  LUKE  XXIII.  42  :   S.  JOHN  XIV.  4  :   S.  LUKE  VI.  1.       73 

not  "  whither "  Thou  goest,  and  how  can  we  know  "  the 
way  "?'...  Let  these  four  samples  suffice  of  a  style  of  depra- 
vation with  which,  at  the  end  of  1800  years,  it  is  deliberately 
proposed  to  disfigure  every  page  of  the  everlasting  Gospel ; 
and  for  which,  were  it  tolerated,  the  Church  would  have 
to  thank  no  one  so  much  as  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort. 

We  cannot  afford,  however,  so  to  dismiss  the  phenomena 
already  opened  up  to  the  Reader's  notice.  For  indeed,  this 
astonishing  taste  for  mutilating  and  maiming  the  Sacred 
Deposit,  is  perhaps  the  strangest  phenomenon  in  the  history 
of  Textual  Criticism. 

It  is  in  this  way  that  a  famous  expression  in  S.  Luke  vi.  1 
has  disappeared  from  codices  X  b  l.  The  reader  may  not  be 
displeased  to  listen  to  an  anecdote  wliich  has  hitherto  escaped 
the  vigilance  of  the  Critics  : — 

'I  once  asked  my  teacher,  Gregory  of  Nazianzus,' — (the 
words  are  Jerome's  in  a  letter  to  ISTepotianus), — '  to  explain  to 
me  the  meaning  of  S.  Luke's  expression  ad/B^arov  Sevrepo- 
irpoiTov,  literally  the  "  second-first  sabbath."  "  I  will  tell  you 
all  about  it  in  church,"  he  replied.  "  The  congregation 
shall  shout  applause,  and  you  shall  have  your  choice, — either 
to  stand  silent  and  look  like  a  fool,  or  else  to  pretend  you 
understand  what  you  do  not."  '  But  '  dcganter  lusit,'  says 
Jerome.^  The  point  of  the  joke  was  this :  Gregory,  being 
a  great  rhetorician  and  orator,  would  have  descanted  so 
elegantly  on  the  signification  of  the  word  Sevrepoirpcorov  that 
the  congregation  would  have  been  borne  away  by  his  melli- 
fluous periods,  quite  regardless  of  the  sense.  In  other  words, 
Gregory  of  Nazianzus  [a.d.  360]  is  found  to  have  no  more 
understood  the  word  than  Jerome  did  [370]. 

Anibrose^  of  Milan  [370]   attempts  to  explain  the  diffi- 


'  i.  261.  2  i.  03(j,  1363. 


74  S.   LUKE  VI.   1,  MUTILATED.  [Art. 

cult  expression,  but  with  indifferent  success.  Epiphanius^  of 
Cyprus  [370]  does  the  same ; — and  so,  Isidorus^  [400]  called 
'  Pelusiota  '  after  the  place  of  his  residence  in  Lower  Egypt. — 
Ps.-Cffisarius^  also  volunteers  remarks  on  the  word  [a.d.  400  ?]. 
— It  is  further  explained  in  the  Paschal  Chronicle,^ — and  by 
Chrysostom^  [370]  at  Antioch. — '  Sahhaticm  secundo-jjrimwn'  is 
found  in  the  old  Latin,  and  is  retained  by  the  Vulgate.  Earlier 
evidence  on  the  subject  does  not  exist.  We  venture  to  assume 
that  a  word  so  attested  must  at  least  be  entitled  to  its  |^?ace  in 
the  Gospel.  Such  a  body  of  first-rate  positive  IVth-century 
testimony,  coming  from  every  part  of  ancient  Christendom, 
added  to  the  significant  fact  that  BevrepoTrpcoTov  is  found  in 
every  codex  extant  except  N  B  L,  and  half  a  dozen  cursives  of 
suspicious  character,  ought  surely  to  be  regarded  as  decisive. 
That  an  unintelligible  word  should  have  got  omitted  from  a 
few  copies,  requires  no  explanation.  Every  one  who  has 
attended  to  the  matter  is  aware  that  the  negative  evidence  of 
certain  of  the  Versions  also  is  of  little  weight  on  such  occa- 
sions as  the  present.  They  are  observed  constantly  to  leave 
out  what  they  either  failed  quite  to  understand,  or  else 
found  untranslateable.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  inex- 
plicable indeed,  that  an  unique  expression  like  the  present 
should  have  established  itself  univei^salli/,  if  it  were  actually 
spurious.  This  is  precisely  an  occasion  for  calling  to  mind 
the  precept  joroclivi  scriptioni  prsestat  ardiia.  Apart  from 
external  evidence,  it  is  a  thousand  times  more  likely  that 
such  a  peculiar  word  as  this  should  l)e  genuine,  than  the  re- 
verse. Tischendorf  accordingly  retains  it,  moved  by  this  very 
consideration.^  It  got  excised,  how^ever,  here  and  there  from 
manuscripts  at  a  very  early  date.  And,  incredible  as  it  may 
appear,  it  is  a  fact,  that  in  consequence  of  its  absence  from 


1  i.  158.  2  P.  301.  8  Ap.  Galland.  vi.  53. 

4  P.  396.  '  vii.  431. 

"  '  Ut  ab  udditaiiicnti  ratione  alienum  est,  ita  cur  uiiiiscriiit  iu  proni])tu 
est.' 


I.]  OMISSIONS   IN   S.   LUKE   XXII.,   XXIII.,   XXIV.  75 

the  mutilated  codices  above  referred  to,  S.  Luke's  famous 
'  second-first  Sabbath  '  has  been  thrust  out  of  his  Gospel  hy  our 
Revisionists. 

But  indeed,  Mutilation  has  been  practised  throughout. 
By  codex  b  (collated  with  the  traditional  Text),  no  less  than 
2877  words  have  been  excised  from  the  four  Gospels  alone : 
by  codex  N, — 3455  words  :  by  codex  d, — 3704  words.^ 

As  interesting  a  set  of  instances  of  this,  as  are  to  be 
anywhere  met  with,  occurs  within  the  compass  of  the  last 
three  chapters  of  S.  Luke's  Gospel,  from  which  about  200 
words  have  been  either  forcibly  ejected  by  our  Eevisionists, 
or  else  served  with  '  notice  to  quit,'  "We  proceed  to  specify 
the  chief  of  these  : — 

(1)  S.  Luke  xxii.  19,  20.  (Account  of  the  Institution  of 
the  Sacrament  of  the  Lokd's  Supper, — from  "  which  is  given 
for  you  "  to  the  end, — 32  words.) 

(2)  ibid.  43,  44.  (Our  Saviour's  Agony  in  the  garden, — 
26  words.) 

(3)  xxiii.  17.  (The  custom  of  releasing  one  at  the  Passover, 
— 8  words.) 

(4)  ibid.  34.  (Our  Lord's  prayer  on  behalf  of  His  murderers, 
— 12  words.) 

(5)  ibid.  38.  (The  record  that  the  title  on  the  Cross  was 
written  in  Greek,  Latin,  and  Hebrew, — 7  words.) 


'  But  then,  25  (out  of  320)  pages  of  d  are  lost :  d's  omissions  in  the 
Gospels  may  therefore  be  estimated  at  4000.  Codex  a  does  not  admit  of 
comparison,  the  first  2t  chapters  of  S.  Matthew  having  perished ;  but,  from 
examining  the  way  it  exhibits  the  other  three  Gospels,  it  is  found  that  650 
would  about  represent  the  number  of  words  omitted  from  its  text. — The 
discrepancy  between  the  texts  of  b  N  i>>  thus /or  the  first  time  brought  dis- 
tinctly into  notice,  let  it  be  distinctly  borne  in  mind,  is  a  matter  wholly 
irrespective  of  the  merits  or  demerits  of  the  Textus  Eeceptus, — which,  for 
convenience  only,  is  adopted  as  a  standard :  not,  of  course,  of  Excellence 
but  only  of  Comparison. 


7G  OMISSIONS  IN  S.   LUKE'S  GOSPEL. —FATAL         [Art. 

(('))  xxiv.  1,     ("  and  certain  with  them," — 4  words.) 

(7)  ibid.  3.  ("  of  the  Lord  Jesus," — 3  words.) 

(8)  ibid.  6.  ("  He  is  not  here,  but  He  is  risen," — 5  words.) 

(9)  ibid.  9.  ("  from  the  sepulchre," — 3  words.) 

(10)  ibid.  12.  (The  mention  of  S.  Peter's  visit  to  the 
sepulchre, — 22  words.) 

(11)  ihid.  36.  ("  and  saith  unto  them.  Peace  be  unto  you  !" 
— 5  words.) 

(12)  ibid.  40.  ("  and  when  He  had  thus  spoken,  He  showed 
them  His  hands  and  His  feet," — 10  words.) 

(13)  ibid.  42.     ("  and  of  an  honeycomb," — 4  words.) 

(14)  ibid.  51.     ("  and  was  carried  up  into  Heaven," — 5.) 

(15)  ibid.  52,     ("  worshipped  Him," — 2  words.) 
(IC)  ibid.  53.     ("j)raising  and," — 2  words.) 

On  an  attentive  survey  of  the  foregoing  sixteen  instances 
of  unauthorized  Omission,  it  will  be  perceived  that  the  1st 
passage  (S.  Luke  xxii.  19,  20)  must  have  been  eliminated 
from  the  Text  because  the  mention  of  two  Cups  seemed  to 
create  a  difficulty. — The  2ud  has  been  suppressed  because 
(see  p.  82)  the  incident  was  deemed  derogatory  to  the  majesty 
of  God  Incarnate. — The  3rd  and  5th  were  held  to  be  super- 
fluous, because  the  information  which  they  contain  has  been 
already  conveyed  by  the  parallel  passages. — The  10th  will 
have  been  omitted  as  apparently  inconsistent  with  the  strict 
letter  of  S.  John  xx.  1-10. — The  Otli  and  13th  are  certainly 
instances  of  enforced  Harmony.  —  Most  of  the  others  (the 
4th,  7th,  8th,  9th,  11th,  12th,  14th,  15th,  16th)  seem  to 
have  been  excised  through  mere  wantonness, — the  veriest 
licentiousness. — In  the  meantime,  so  far  are  Drs.  Westeott 
and  Hort  from  accepting  the  foregoing  account  of  the  matter, 
that  they  even  style  the  1st  '  a  j^crvcrse  interpoJation :'  in 
which  view  of  the  subject,  however,  they  enjoy  the  distinc- 
tion of  standing  entirely  alone.  Willi  the  same  'luoral  cer- 
tainly,'   tbcy    I'urtlicr    ]»r<icceil    In    shul    up    williiii     double 


I.]  SYMPATHY   AVITH   WESTCOTT   AND   HORT.  77 

brackets  the  2nd,  4th,  7th,  10th,  11th,  12th,  14th,  15th: 
while  the  3rd,  5th,  6th,  13th,  and  16th,  they  exclude  from 
their  Text  as  indisputably  spurious  matter. 

Now,  we  are  not  about  to  abuse  our  Eeaders'  patience  1iy 
an  investigation  of  the  several  points  raised  by  the  foregoing 
statement.  In  fact,  all  should  have  been  passed  by  in  silence, 
but  that  unhappily  the  '  Kevision '  of  our  Authorized  Ver- 
sion is  touched  thereby  very  nearly  indeed.  So  intimate 
(may  we  not  say,  so  fatal'})  proves  to  be  the  sympathy 
between  the  labours  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  and  those  of 
our  Eevisionists,  that  whatever  the  former  have  shut  up  within 
douhle  brackets,  the  latter  are  diseovered  to  have  branded  with  a 
note  of  suspicion,  conceived  invariably  in  the  same  terms: 
viz.,  '  Some  ancient  authorities  omit.'  And  further,  whatever 
those  Editors  have  rejected  from  their  Text,  these  Bevisionists 
have  rejected  also.  It  becomes  necessary,  therefore,  briefly  to 
enquire  after  the  precise  amount  of  manuscript  authority 
which  underlies  certain  of  the  foregoing  changes.  And 
happily  this  may  be  done  in  a  few  words. 

The  sole  authority  for  just  half  of  the  places  above  enume- 
rated ^  is  a  single  Greek  codex, — and  that,  the  most  depraved 
of  all, — viz.  Beza's  D.^  It  should  further  be  stated  that  the 
only  allies  discoverable  for  D  are  a  few  copies  of  the  old 
Latin.  What  we  are  saying  will  seem  scarcely  credible :  but 
it  is  a  plain  fact,  of  which  any  one  may  convince  himself  who 
will  be  at  the  pains  to  inspect  the  critical  apparatus  at  the 
foot  of  the  pages  of  Tischendorfs  last  (8th)  edition.  Our 
Eevisionists'  notion,  therefore,  of  what  constitutes  '  weighty 
evidence '  is  now  before  the  Eeader.  If,  in  his  judgment,  the 
testimony  of  one  single  manuscript,  (and  that  manuscript  the 


^  Viz.  the  1st,  the  7th  to  12th  inclusive,  and  the  15th. 
^  Concerning  '  the  singular  codex  D,' — as  Bp.  Ellicott  phrases  it, — see 
baclv,  jjages  14  and  15. 


78  COMPLICITY    IN   ERROR   CONCERNING  [AitT. 

Codex  Bezse  (d),) — does  really  invalidate  that  of  all  other 
Manuscripts  and  all  other  Versions  in  the  world, — then  of 
course,  the  Greek  Text  of  the  Revisionists  will  in  his  judg- 
ment be  a  thing  to  be  rejoiced  over.  But  what  if  he  should 
be  of  opinion  that  such  testimony,  in  and  by  itself,  is  simply 
worthless  ?  We  shrewdly  suspect  that  the  Eevisionists'  view 
of  what  constitutes  '  weighty  Evidence  '  will  be  found  to  end 
where  it  began,  viz.  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber. 

For,  when  we  reach  down  codex  D  from  the  shelf,  we  are 
reminded  that,  within  the  space  of  the  three  chapters  of  S. 
Luke's  Gospel  now  under  consideration,  there  are  in  all  no 
less  than  354  words  omitted ;  of  which,  250  arc  omitted  hy  d 
(done.  May  we  have  it  explained  to  us  why,  of  those  354 
words,  only  25  are  singled  out  by  Drs.  Westcott  and  Ilort 
for  permanent  excision  from  the  sacred  Text  1  Witliin  the 
same  compass,  no  less  than  173  words  have  been  added  by 
D  to  the  commonly  Eeceived  Text, — 146,  substituted, — 243, 
transposed.  May  we  ask  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  of  those 
562  words  7iot  one  has  been  promoted  to  their  margin  by 
the  Revisionists  ?  .  .  .  Return  we,  however,  to  our  list  of  the 
changes  which  they  actually  have  effected. 

(1)  Now,  that  ecclesiastical  usage  and  the  parallel  places 
would  seriously  affect  such  precious  words  as  are  found  in  S. 
Luke  xxii.  19,  20, — was  to  have  been  expected.  Yet  has  the 
type  been  preserved  all  along,  from  the  beginning,  with 
singular  exactness  ;  except  in  one  little  liaiidful  of  singularly 
licentious  documents,  viz.  in  D  a  i'F  i  1,  which  leave  all  out ; 
— in  be,  which  substitute  verses  17  and  18; — and  in  'the 
singular  and  sometimes  rather  wild  Curetonian  Syriac  Ver- 
sion,'^ which,  retaining  the  10  words  of  ver.  19,  substitutes 


^  Bp.  Ellicott  On  Revision, — p.  42.  Concerning  tlic  value  of  the  last- 
named  authority,  it  is  a  satisfaction  to  enjoy  the  deliberate  testimony 
of  the  Chairman  of  the  Revisionist  body.      Bee  below,  p.  85. 


I.]  S.  LUKE  XXII.    19,  20   AND  XXII.   43,  44.  79 

verses  17,  18  for  ver.  20.  Enough  for  the  condemnation  of 
D  survives  in  Justin,^ — Basil,^ — Epiphanius,^ — Theodoret,* — 
Cyril,^ — Maximus,® — Jerome.^  But  why  delay  ourselves  con- 
cerning a  place  vouched  for  hy  every  known  copy  of  the  Gospels 
except  D  ?  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  entertain  *  no  moral 
doubt  that  the  [32]  words  [given  at  foot  ^]  were  absent  from 
the  original  text  of  S.  Luke ; '  in  which  opinion,  happily, 
they  stand  alone.  But  why  did  our  Eevisionists  suffer  them- 
selves to  be  led  astray  by  such  blind  guidance  ? 

The  next  place  is  entitled  to  far  graver  attention,  and  may 
on  no  account  be  lightly  dismissed,  seeing  that  these  two 
verses  contain  the  sole  record  of  that  '  Agony  in  the  Garden ' 
which  the  universal  Church  has  almost  erected  into  an 
article  of  the  Faith. 

(2)  That  the  incident  of  the  ministering  Angel,  the  Agony 
and  bloody  sweat  of  the  world's  Eedeemer  (S.  Luke  xxii.  43, 
44),  was  anciently  absent  from  certain  copies  of  the  Gospels, 
is  expressly  recorded  by  Hilary,^  by  Jerome,^"  and  others. 
Only  necessary  is  it  to  read  the  apologetic  remarks  wliich 
Ambrose  introduces  when  he  reaches  S.  Luke  xxii.  43,^^  to 
understand  what  has  evidently  led  to  this  serious  mutilation 
of  Scripture, — traces  of  which  survive  at  this  day  exclusively 
in  four  codices,  viz.  A  B  R  T.  Singular  to  relate,  in  the 
Gospel  which  was  read  on  Maundy-Thursday  these  two 
verses  of  S.  Luke's  Gospel  are  thrust  in  between  the  39th 


1  i.  156.  2  ii.  254.  ^  i.  344.  *  iv.  220,  1218. 

5  In  Luc.  664  (Mai,  iv.  1105).  "  ii.  653. 

■^  '  In  Luca  legimus  dtios  calices,  quibus  discipulis  propinavit,'  vii.  216. 

^  To  virep  Vjj-cav  8i86fxevov  •  tovto  TTOielre  ih  rrjv  ifir^v  avdfxvrjatv.  tixrav- 
Tw?  Kai  TO  TTOTrjpiov  fi€Tu  TO  ^eiTrvrjcTai,  Ae'ycoi/,  Tovto  to  iroTijpiov,  i]  Kaivf] 
8ia$r]KT]  ev  rw  a'ijxaTi  fiov,  to  inep  vp,SiV  eKxvvopevov. 

^  P.  1062.  ^^  ii.  747.  "  i.  1516.    See  below,  p.  82. 


80  THE   'AGONY  IN  THE   GARDEN'   DISALLOWED      [Art. 

and  the  40tli  verses  of  S.  Matthew  xxvi.  Hence,  4  cursive 
copies,  viz.  13-69-124-346 — (confessedly  derived  from  a 
common  ancient  archetype,^  and  therefore  not  four  wit- 
nesses but  only  one), — actually  exhibit  these  two  Verses 
in  that  place.  But  will  any  unprejudiced  person  of  sound 
mind  entertain  a  doubt  concerning  the  genuineness  of  these 
two  verses,  witnessed  to  as  they  are  by  the  wliolc  hody  of  the 
Manuscripts,  uncial  as  well  as  cursive,  and  hy  every  aneicnt 
Version .?....  If  such  a  thing  were  possible,  it  is  hoped 
that  the  following  enumeration  of  ancient  Fathers,  who 
distinctly  recognize  the  place  under  discussion,  must  at  least 
be  held  to  be  decisive : — viz. 

Justin  M.,^ — Irenseus  ^  in  the  Ilnd  ceiitury  : — 

Hippolytus,*  —  Dionysius  Alex.,^ — ps.  Tatian,^  in  the 
Ilird  :— 

Arius,'  —  Eusebius,^  —  Athanasius,^  —  Ephraem  Syr.,^" — 
Didymus," — Gregory  Naz.,  ^^ — Epiphanius,  ^^ — Chrysostom, ^* 
— ps.-Dionysius  Areop.,^^  in  the  IVth  : — 

Julian  the  heretic,^^ — Theodoras  Mops.,"' — Nestorius,^^ — 
Cyril  Alex.,^^ — Paulus,  bishop  of  Emesa,^" — Gennadius,^^ — 
Theodoret,^^— and  several  Oriental  Bishops  (a.d.  431),-^  in 
the  Vth : — besides 


*  Abbott's  Collation  of  four  important  Manuscripts,  &c.,  1877. 

2  ii.  354.  3  pp,  543  j^j^fi  (5gi  (_ea.  Mass.  219  and  277). 

*  Contra  Noet.  c.  18;  also  ap.  Theodoret  iv.  132-3. 
^  Ap.  Galland.  xix. ;  Append.  11(5,  117. 

8  Evan,  Cone.  pp.  55,  235.  ^  Ap.  Epipli.  i.  742,  785. 

*  It  is  §  283  in  his  sectional  system.  "  V.  1121. 

'«  ii.  43;  v.  392  ;  vi.  604.   Also  Evan.  Cone.  235.    And  see  below,  \\  82. 

"  Pj).  394,  402.  '2  i.  551, 

13  [i.  742,  785;]  ii.  36,  42.  "  v.  263;  vii.  791 ;  viii.  .".77. 

15  ii.  39.  '"  Ap.  Theod.  Mops. 

"  In  loo.  bis ;  ap.  Galland.  xii.  693  ;  an.l  Mai,  Scriptt.  Vdt.  vi.  306. 

>«  Concilia,  iii.  327  a.  '*  Ap.  Mai,  iii.  389. 

20  Concilia,  iii.  1101  d.  ^i  gchol.  34. 

22  i.  692  ;  iv.  271,  429  ;  v.  23.    Cove.  iii.  907  c.         23  Concilia,  iii.  740  d. 


I.]         BY   WESTCOTT   AND   HORT,  AND   THE   REVISERS.         81 

Ps.-Csesarius/ — Theodosius  Alex.,^ — John  Damascene,^ — 
Maximus,* — Theodorus  hseret.,^ — Leontius  Byz.,^  —  Anasta- 
siiis  Sin.,' — Photius  :^  and  of  the  Latins,  Hilary,^ — Jerome,^" — 
Augiistine,^^ — Cassian,^^ — Paulinus,^^ — Facundus.^* 

It  will  be  seen  that  we  have  been  enumerating  upwards  of 
forty  famous  personages  from  every  part  of  ancient  Christen- 
dom, who  recognize  these  verses  as  genuine ;  fourteen  of  them 
being  as  old, — some  of  them,  a  great  deal  older, — than  our 
oldest  MSS. —  JVliy  therefore  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  should 
insist  on  shutting  up  these  26  precious  words — this  article 
of  the  Faith — in  double  brackets,  in  token  that  it  is  '  morally 
certain '  that  verses  43  and  44  are  of  spurious  origin,  we  are 
at  a  loss  to  divine.^^  We  can  but  ejaculate  (in  the  very 
.  words  they  proceed  to  disallow), — '  Fathek,  forgive  them ;  for 
they  know  not  what  they  do.'  But  our  especial  concern  is 
with  our  Revisionists;  and  we  do  not  exceed  our  province 
when  we  come  forward  to  reproach  them  sternly  for  having 
succumbed  to  such  evil  counsels,  and  deliberately  branded 
these  Verses  with  their  own  corporate  expression  of  doubt. 
For  unless  that  be  the  purpose  of  the  marginal  Note  which 
they  have  set  against  these  verses,  we  fail  to  understand  the 
Revisers'  language  and  are  wholly  at  a  loss  to  divine  what 
purpose  that  note  of  theirs  can  be  meant  to  serve.     It  is  pre- 


'  Ap.  Galland.  vi.  16,  17,  19.  ^  ^p_  Cosmam,  ii.  331. 

3  i.  544.  *  In  Dionys.  ii.  18,  30. 

"  Ap.  Galland.  xii.  693.  «  Ihid.  688. 

^  Pp.  108,  1028,  1048.  «  Epist.  138. 

«  P.  1061.  1"  ii.  747.  "  iv.  901,  902,  1013,  1564. 

>2  p.  373.  13  _^p_  Galland.  ix.  40.  "  Ihid.  xi.  693. 

'^  Let  their  own  account  of  the  matter  be  heard : — '  The  documentary 
evidence  clearly  designates  [these  verses]  as  an  earhj  Western  interpolation, 
adopted  in  eclectic  texts.' — '  They  can  only  be  a  fragment  from  the 
Traditions,  written  or  oral,  which  were  for  a  while  at  least  locally  current ;' 
— an  '  evangelic  Tradition,'  therefore,  '  rescued  from  oblivion  hy  the  Scribes 
of  the  second  century.'' 

G 


82  OUR   LORD'S   PRAYER   FOR   HIS   MURDERERS,        [Art. 

faced  by  a  formula  which,  (as  we  learn  from  their  own 
Preface,)  offers  to  the  reader  the  "  alternative  "  of  omitting  the 
Verses  in  question :  implies  that  "  it  would  not  he  safe  "  any 
longer  to  accept  them,— as  the  Churcli  has  hitherto  done, — 
with  undoubting  confidence.    In  a  word, — it  brands  them  with 

snsjncion We  have  been  so  full  on  this  subject, — (not 

half  of  our  references  were  known  to  Tischendorf,) — because 
of  the  unspeakable  preciousness  of  the  record;  and  because 
we  desire  to  see  an  end  at  last  to  expressions  of  doubt  and 
uncertainty  on  points  which  really  afford  not  a  shadow  of 
pretence  for  either.  These  two  Verses  were  excised  through 
mistaken  piety  by  certain  of  the  orthodox, — ^jealous  for  the 
honour  of  their  Lord,  and  alarmed  by  the  use  which  the 
impugners  of  His  GoDhead  freely  made  of  them.^  Hence 
Ephraem  [Carmina  Nisihcna,  p.  145]  puts  the  following  words 
into  the  mouth  of  Satan,  addressing  the  host  of  Hell : — "  One 
thing  I  witnessed  in  Him  which  especially  comforts  me.  I 
saw  Him  praying  ;  and  I  rejoiced,  for  His  countenance 
changed  and  He  was  afraid.  His  sivcat  was  drops  of  blood, 
for  He  had  a  presentiment  that  His  day  had  come.  This  was 
the  fairest  sight  of  all, — unless,  to  be  sure,  He  was  practising 
deception  on  me.  For  verily  if  He  hath  deceived  me,  tlien  it 
is  all  over, — both  with  me,  and  with  you,  my  servants  ! " 

(4)  Next  in  importance  after  the  preceding,  comes  the 
I'rayer  which  the  Saviour  of  the  World  breathed  from  the 
Cross  on  behalf  of  His  murderers  (S.  Luke  xxiii.  34).  These 
twelve  precious  words, — ('  Then  said  Jesus,  Father,  forgive 
them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do,') — like  those 
twenty-six  words  in  S.  Luke  xxii.  43,  44  which  we  have  been 
considering  already,  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  enclose  within 
double  brackets  in  token  of  llic  '  moral  certainty  '  tliey  enter- 


^  CoBsider  the  places  referred  to  in  Epiphuuius. 


I.]  DISALLOWED   BY   WESTCOTT   AND   HORT.  83 

tain  that  the  words  are  spurious.^  And  yet  these  words  are 
found  in  every  hnoivn  uncial  and  in  every  known  cursive  Copy, 
except  four;  besides  being  found  in  every  ancient  Version.  And 
what, — (we  ask  the  question  with  sincere  simplicity,) — 
what  amount  of  evidence  is  calculated  to  inspire  undoubting 
confidence  in  any  existing  Eeading,  if  not  such  a  concurrence 
of  Authorities  as  this  ? .  .  .  We  forbear  to  insist  upon  the  pro- 
babilities of  the  case.  The  Divine  power  and  sweetness  of  the 
incident  shall  not  be  enlarged  upon.  We  introduce  no 
considerations  resulting  from  Internal  Evidence.  True,  that 
"  few  verses  of  the  Gospels  bear  in  themselves  a  surer  witness 
to  the  Truth  of  what  they  record,  than  this."  (It  is  the 
admission  of  the  very  man  ^  wlio  has  nevertheless  dared  to 
brand  it  with  suspicion.)  But  we  reject  his  loathsome  patron- 
age with  indignation.  "Internal  Evidence," — " Transcriptional 
Probability," — and  all  such  ''  chaff  and  draff,'  with  which  he 
fills  his  pages  ad  naitseam,  and  mystifies  nobody  but  himself, 
— shall  be  allowed  no  place  in  the  present  discussion.  Let 
this  verse  of  Scripture  stand  or  fall  as  it  meets  with  sufficient 
external  testimony,  or  is  forsaken  therel)y.  How  then  about 
the  Patristic  evidence, — for  this  is  all  that  remains  unex- 
plored ? 

Only  a  fraction  of  it  was  known  to  Tischendorf  We 
find  our  Saviour's  Prayer  attested, — 

'  The  Editors  shall  speak  for  themselves  concerning  this,  the  first  of  the 
'  Seven  last  Words  :' — 'We  cannot  doubt  that  it  comes  from  an  extraneous 
source ;' — '  need  not  have  belonged  originally  to  the  hook  in  tohich  it  ^  now 
included:''- — is  'a  Western  interpolation.^ 

Dr.  Hort, — unconscious  apparently  that  he  is  at  the  bar,  not  on  the  bench, 
— passes  sentence  (in  his  usual  imperial  style) — "Text,  Western  and 
Syrian"  (p.  67). — But  then,  (1st)  It  hap^x^ns  that  our  Lord's  intercession 
on  behalf  of  His  murderers  is  attested  bj^  upwards  of  forty  Patristic 
witnesses /row  every  part  of  ancient  Christendom :  while,  (2ndly)  On  the 
contrary,  the  places  in  which  it  is  not  found  are  certain  copies  of  the  old 
Latin,  and  codex  d,  which  is  supposed  to  be  our  great  '  Western '  witness. 

2  Dr.  Hrirt's  N.  T.  vol.  ii.    Note,  p.  68. 

a  '2 


84  ANCIENT  WITNESSES   TO   S.   LUKE   XXIII.  34.       [Art. 

In  the  Ilnd  century  by  Hegesippus/ — and  by  Irenseiis  :  '^ — 

In   the    Ilird,    by    Hippolytus,^ — by    Origen,* — by    the 

Apostolic    Constitutions,^ — by  the   Clementine  Homilies,^ — by 

ps.-Tatian/ — and    by    the    disputation    of    Archelaus   with 

Manes  :^ — 

In  the  IVth,  by  Eusebius,^ — by  Athanasius/" — by  Gregory 
Nyss.," — by  Theodoras  Herac./^ — by  Basil/^ — by  Chryso- 
stom/* — by  Ephraem  Syr.,^^ — by  ps.-Ephraim/^ — by  ps.- 
Dionysius  Areop./^ — by  the  Apocryphal  Acta  Tilati}'^ — by 
the  Acta  Pldlippi,^^ — and  by  the  Syriac  Acts  of  the  Ap)p.,'^^ 
— by  ps.-Ignatius,^^ — and  ps. -Justin  -P — 

In  the  Vth,  by  Theodoret,^^— l^y  Cyril,^*— by  Eutherius  P 
In  the  Vlth,  by  Anastasius  Sin.,^^ — by  Hesychius  P — 
In  the  Vllth,  by  Antiochus  mon.,^^ — by  Maximus,^^ — by 
Andreas  Cret. :  ^" — 


1  Ap.  Eus.  Hist.  Ecd.  ii.  23.        »  V.  521  and  .  .  .  [Mass.  210  and  277.] 

'  Ed.  Lagarde,  p.  G5  line  3.  *  ii.  188.     User.  iii.  18  p.  5. 

«  Ap.  Gall.  iii.  38,  127.  «  lUd.  ii.  714.     {Horn.  si.  20.) 

'  Evan.  Cone.  275.  ^  Ap.  Ilouth,  v.  IGl. 

9  He  places  the  verses  in  Can.  x.        ^"  i.  1120.  "  iii.  289. 

"  Cat.  in  Ps.  iii.  219.  "  i.  290.  "  15  times. 

1°  ii.  48,  321,  428 ;  ii.  {sijr.)  233.         i»  Evan.  Cone.  117,  256. 

"  i.  607.  '^  Tp.  232,  286.  ^^  V.  85. 

*"  Pp.  11,  16.     Dr.  AVright  assigns  them  to  the  IVth  century. 

21  Eph.  c.  X.  22  ii_  1(3(3^  1(38^  226.  ^  6  times. 

"^^  Ap.  Mill,  ii.  197  (  =  Cramer  52);  iii.  392. — Dr.  Hort's  strenuous 
pleading  for  the  authority  of  Cyril  on  this  occasion  (who  however  is  plainly 
against  him)  is  amusing.  So  is  his  claim  to  have  the  cursive  "  82  "  on  his 
side.  He  is  certainly  reduced  to  terrible  straits  tliroughout  his  ingenious 
volume.  Yet  are  we  scarcely  prepared  to  find  an  upright  and  honourable 
man  contending  so  hotly,  and  almost  on  any  pretext,  for  the  support  of 
those  very  Fathers  which,  when  they  are  against  him,  (as,  99  times  out  of 
100,  they  are,)  he  treats  with  utter  contumely.  lie  is  observed  to  ]mt  up 
xnt\\  any  ally,  however  insignificant,  who  even  seems  to  be  on  his  side. 

25  Ap.  Theod.  v.  1152.  ^.i  Pp.  423,  457. 

^  Cat.  in  Ps.  i.  768;  ii.  603.  ^8  i>p_  1109^  n^^^ 

29  i.  374.  ^°  P.  93. 


I.]  THE  INSCRIPTION   ON  THE  CROSS.  85 

In  the  Vlllth,  by  John  Damascene/ — besides  ps.-Chry- 
sostom,^ — ps.  Amphilochius,^— and  the  02nis  wiijcrf} 

Add  to  this,  (since  Latin  authorities  have  been  brought  to 
the  front), — Ambrose,^ — Hilary,® — Jerome,^ — Augustine,^ — 
and  other  earher  writers.^ 

We  have  thus  again  enumerated  upivards  of  forty  ancient 
Fathers.  And  again  we  ask.  With  what  show  of  reason  is 
the  Ijrand  set  upon  these  12  words  ?  Gravely  to  cite,  as 
if  there  were  anything  in  it,  such  counter-evidence  as  the 
following,  to  the  foregoing  torrent  of  Testunony  from  every 
part  of  ancient  Christendom : — viz  :  '  B  d,  38,  435,  a  b  d  and 
one  Egyptian  version  ' — might  really  have  been  mistaken  for 
a  mauvaise  plaisantcric,  were  it  not  that  the  gravity  of  the 
occasion  effectually  precludes  the  supposition.  How  could 
our   Eevisionists   dare   to   insinuate   doubts    into   waverins 

CD 

hearts  and  unlearned  heads,  where  (as  here)  they  were  hound 
to  know,  there  exists  no  manner  of  doubt  at  all  ? 

(5)  The  record  of  the  same  Evangelist  (S.  Luke  xxiii.  38) 
that  the  Inscription  over  our  Saviour's  Cross  was  '  written 
...  in  letters  of  Greek,  and  Latm,  and  Hebrew,'  disappears 
entirely  from  our  '  Kevised '  version  ;  and  this,  for  no  other 
reason,  but  because  the  incident  is  omitted  by  B  c  L,  the 
corrupt  Egyptian  versions,  and  Cureton's  depraved  Syriac : 
the  text  of  which  (according  to  Bp.  Ellicott^^)  "is  of  a 
very  composite  nature, — sometimes  inclining  to  the  sliortness 
and  simplicity  of  the  Vatican  inanuscript "  (b)  :  e.g.  on  the 
present  occasion.  But  surely  the  negative  testimony  of  this 
little  band  of  disreputable  witnesses  is  entirely  outweighed 
by  the  positive  evidence  of  N  a  d  Q  R  with  13  other  uncials, — 

1  ii.  67,  747.  2  i,  814-  ji.  819;  v.  735.  ^  P.  88. 

*  Ap.  Chrys.  vi.  191.  ^  11  times.         «  P.  782  f.  ^  ^2  times. 

*  More  than  60  times.        ^  Ap.  Cypr.  (ed.  Baluze),  &c.  &c. 
^^  On  Revision, — p.  42  note.     See  above,  p.  78  note. 


86  S.  LUKE'S   INSCRIPTION   ON   THE   CROSS,  [AuT. 

the  evidence  of  the  entire  hochj  of  the  cursives, — the  sanction 
of  the  Latin, — the  Peschito  and  Philoxenian  Syriac, — the 
Armenian, — ^thiopic, — and  Georgian  versions ;  besides  Euse- 
\y\x\9> — whose  testimony  (which  is  express)  has  been  hitherto 
strangely  overlooked,^ — and  Cyril.^  Against  the  threefold 
plea  of  Antiquity,  Eespectability  of  witnesses.  Universality 
of  testimony, — what  have  our  Eevisionists  to  show  ?  («)  They 
cannot  pretend  that  there  has  been  Assimilation  here  ;  for 
the  type  of  S.  John  xix.  20  is  essentially  different,  and  has 
retained  its  distinctive  character  all  down  the  ages,  {h)  Nor  can 
they  pretend  that  the  condition  of  the  Text  hereabouts  bears 
traces  of  having  been  jealously  guarded.  We  ask  the  Eeader's 
attention  to  this  matter  just  for  a  moment.  There  may  be 
some  of  the  occupants  of  the  Jerusalem  Chamber  even,  to 
whom  what  we  are  aljout  to  offer  may  not  be  altogether 
without  the  grace  of  novelty : — 

That  the  Title  on  the  Cross  is  diversely  set  down  by  each 
of  the  four  Evangelists, — all  men  are  aware.  But  perhaps 
all  are  not  aware  that  S.  Lukes  record  of  the  Title  (in 
ch.  xxiii.  38)  is  exhibited  in  four  differejit  ways  by  codices 
A  B  c  D  : — 

A  exhibits— OYTOC  GCTIN  O  BACIA6YC  TCjJN  IOYAAIOJN 

B  (with  S  i>  and  a)  exhibits-— O  BACIA€YC  TCjJN   10YAAICx)N 

OYTOC 
C    exhibits— O    BACIAeYC    TWN    IOYAAICjJN    (which    is    Mk. 

XV.  26). 
D  (with  e   and  ff'')  exhibits— O  BACIA6YC  TOON   lOYAAIGJN 
OYTOC  eCTIN  (which  is  the  words  of  the   Evangelist 
transposed). 

We  propose  to  recur  to  the  foregoing  specimens  of  licen- 
tiousness 1jy-and-by.^     For  the  moment,  let  it  be  added  that 

J  Edou.  Proph.  p.  80.  '   ^"  -/-"t'-  ^-'^  and  718. 

'  See  pages  03  to  07. 


I.]       DIVERSELY  REPRESENTED  BY  N*  B  C  D.       87 

codex  X  and  the  Sahidic  version  conspire  in  a  fifth  variety, 
viz.,     OYTOC    €CTIN    IHCOYC    O    BACIA€YC    TCjON    IOYAAIWN 
(which  is   S.   Matt,  xxvii.  37) ;  while  Ambrose  ^  is  found  to 
have  used  a  Latin  copy  which  represented  IHCOYC  O  NAZW- 
PAIOC  O  BACIAGYC  TWN  lOYAAlCON  (which  is  S.  John  xix.  18). 
We  spare  the  reader  any  remarks  of  our  own  on  all  tliis.     He 
is  competent  to  draw  his  own  painful  inferences,  and  will  not 
fail  to  make  his  own  damaging  reflections.     He  shall  only  be 
further  informed  that  14  uncials  and  the  whole  body  of  the 
cursive  copies  side  with  codex  a  in  upholding  the  Traditional 
Text ;  that  the  Vulgate,^ — the  Peschito, — Cureton's  Syriac, — 
the  Philoxenian;  —  besides   the  Coptic, — Armenian,  —  and 
-^thiopic  versions — are  all  on  the  same  side :   lastly,  that 
Origen,^ — Eusebius, — and  Gregory  of  Nyssa  *  are  in  addition 
consentient  witnesses ; — and  we  can  hardly  be  mistaken  if 
we  venture  to  anticipate  (1st),— That  the  Eeader  will  agree 
with  us  that  the  Text  with  which  we  are  best  acquainted 
(as  usual)  is  here  deserving  of  all  confidence ;  and  (2ndly), 
— That  the  Eevisionists  who  assure  us  '  that  they  did  not 
esteem  it  within  their  province  to  construct  a  continuous  and 
complete  Greek  Text;'  (and  who  were  never  authorized  to 
construct  a  new  Greek  Text  at  all ;)  were  not  justified  in  the 
course  they  have  pursued  with  regard  to  S.  Luke  xxiii.  38. 
'  This  is  the  King  of  the  Jews  '  is  the  only  idiomatic  way 
of  rendering  into  English  the  title  according   to    S.    Luke, 
whether  the  reading  of  A  or  of  B  be  adopted ;  but,  in  order  to 
make  it  plain  that  they  reject  the  Greek  of  A  in  favour  of  B, 
the  Eevisionists  have  gone  out  of  their  way.      They  have 
instructed  the  two  Editors  of  '  TJie  Greek  Testament  with  the 


1  i.  1528. 

'  So  Sedulius  Paschalis,  ap.  Galland.  ix.  595.  ^  iii.  2. 

*  Euseb.  Ed.  Proph.  p.  89 :  Greg.  Nyss.  i.  570. — These  last  two  places 
have  hitherto  escaped  observation. 


88  TEXT   OF   S.  LUKE   XXIV.  1,    FALSIFIED  [Art. 

Readings  adopted  by  the  Revisers  of  the  Authorized  Version '  ^ 
to  exhibit  S.  Luke  xxiii.  38  as  it  stands  in  the  mutilated 
recension  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort?  And  if  this  procedure, 
repeated  many  hundreds  of  times,  be  not  constructing  a  '  new 
Greek  Text '  of  the  N.  T.,  we  have  yet  to  learn  what  is. 

(6)  From  the  first  verse  of  the  concluding  chapter  of 
S.  Luke's  Gospel,  is  excluded  the  familiar  clause — '  and  certain 
others  with  them'  (kul  rive^  avv  avral<i).  And  pray,  why? 
For  no  other  reason  but  because  x  B  c  l,  with  some  Latin 
authorities,  omit  the  clause ; — and  our  Eevisionists  do  the 
like,  on  the  plea  that  they  have  only  been  getting  rid  of  a 
*  harmonistic  insertion.'  ^  But  it  is  notliing  of  the  sort,  as  we 
proceed  to  explain. 

Ammonius,  or  some  predecessor  of  his  early  in  the  Ilnd 
century,  saw  fit  (with  perverse  ingenuity)  to  seek  to  force 
S.  Luke  xxiii.  55  into  agreement  with  S.  Matt,  xxvii.  61  and 
S.  Mark  xv.  47,  by  turning  KaraKoXovdTjaaaaL  Be  koI  <yvvaLKe<i, 
— into  KaTTjKoXovdrjaav  Be  at'o  yvvalKe^.  This  done,  in  order 
to  produce  '  harmonistic '  agreement  and  to  be  thorough,  the 
same  misguided  individual  proceeded  to  run  his  pen  through 
the  words  *  and  certain  with  them '  (/cat  rtz/e?  avv  avrah)  as 
inopportune ;  and  his  work  was  ended.  1750  years  have 
rolled  by  since  then,  and — What  traces  remain  of  the  man's 
foolishness  ?  Of  Ms  first  feat  (we  answer),  Eusebius,*  d  and 
Evan.  29,  besides  five  copies  of  the  old  Latin  (a  h  e  ff^  q),  arc 


'  Sec  above,  pp.  49-50,  note  ^. 

^  Viz.,  tlius  : — rjv  h(  Ka\  fTTiypaipfj  tV  avT(0,  'O  [SaatXevs  tu>v  lovfiaiwj/ 
ovros.  ^  Y>fdn  Alfurd,  nt  /oc. 

'  6  AovKcis  nia  Xe'yet  Ta>v  craj^j^uTav  opdpov  fiaBios  (jiepeiv  dpo)fMTa  yvvalKus 
AY'O  Tay  dKo\ov6r](ra.(Tas  avra,  at  Tives  tjaav  dno  t^s  FaXiXatas  avvaKoiXov- 
6r)(Taaai,  ore  edanrov  avrov  eXdovaai  en't  to  fivrifxa-  uiriufs  AY'O,  k.t.X., — 
ad  Marinum,  ap.  Mai,  iv.  2GG. 


I.]  BY   THE   REVISIONISTS. — S.   LUKE   XXIV.    12.  89 

the  sole  surviving  Witnesses.  Of  his  second  achievement, 
S  B  c  L,  33,  124,  have  preserved  a  record  ;  besides  seven  copies 
of  the  old  Latin  (a  b  c  e  ff^  g'^  1),  together  with  the  Vulgate, 
the  Coptic,  and  Eusebius  in  one  place^  though  not  in  another.^ 
The  Header  is  therefore  invited  to  notice  that  the  tables  have 
been  unexpectedly  turned  upon  our  opponents.  S.  Luke 
introduced  the  words  '  and  certain  with  them,'  in  order  to 
prepare  us  for  what  he  will  have  to  say  in  xxiv.  10, — viz.  '  It 
was  Mary  Magdalene,  and  Joanna,  and  Mary  the  mother  of 
James,  and  other  women  with  them,  which  told  these  things 
unto  the  Apostles.'  Some  stupid  harmonizer  in  the  Ilnd 
century  omitted  the  words,  because  they  were  in  his  way. 
Calamitous  however  it  is  that  a  clause  which  the  Church  has 
long  since  deliberately  reinstated  should,  in  the  year  1881,  be 
as  deliberately  banished  for  the  second  time  from  the  sacred 
page  by  our  Revisionists ;  who  under  the  plea  of  amending 
our  English  Authorized  Version  have  (with  the  best  inten- 
tions) falsified  the  Greek  Text  of  the  Gospels  in  countless 
places, — often,  as  here,  without  notice  and  without  apology. 

(10)  We  find  it  impossible  to  pass  by  in  silence  the  treat- 
ment which  S.  Luke  xxiv.  12  has  experienced  at  their  hands. 
They  have  branded  with  doubt  S.  Luke's  memorable  account 
of  S.  Peter's  visit  to  the  sepulchre.  And  why  ?  Let  the 
evidence  for  this  precious  portion  of  the  narrative  be  first 
rehearsed.  Nineteen  uncials  then,  with  N  a  B  at  their  head, 
supported  by  every  known  cursive  copy, — all  these  vouch  for 
the  genuineness  of  the  verse  in  question.  The  Latin, — the 
Syriac, — and  the  Egyptian  versions  also  contain  it.  Euse- 
bius,^— Gregory  of  Nyssa,* — Cyril,^ — Severus,^ — Ammonius,^ 


Ps.  i.  79.  2  2)em.  492. 

Ap.  Mai,  iv.  287,  293.  ^  i.  364.         ^  Aj^.  Mai,  ii.  439. 

Ap.  Galland.  xi.  224,  '^  Gat.  m  Joaun,  p.  453. 


90        S.  LUKE   XXIV.  36   AND  40;   S.  MATTH.  XVII.  21,     [Art. 

and  others  ^  refer  to  it :  while  no  aiicient  tvriter  is  found  to 
impugn  it.  Then,  whi/  the  double  brackets  of  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort  ?  and  ivhi/  the  correlative  marginal  note  of  our  Revi- 
sionists ? — Simply  because  d  and  5  copies  of  the  old  Latin 
(a  b  e  1  fu)  leave  these  22  words  out. 

(11)  On  the  same  sorry  evidence — (viz.  D  and  5  copies  of 
the  old  Latin) — it  is  proposed  henceforth  to  omit  our 
Saviouk's  greeting  to  His  disciples  when  He  appeared  among 
them  in  the  upper  chamber  on  the  evening  of  the  first  Easter 
Day.  And  yet  the  precious  words  ('and  saith  u7ito  them, 
Peace  he  unto  you^  [Lu.  xxiv.  36],)  are  vouched  for  by  18 
uncials  (with  j<  A  B  at  their  head),  and  every  known  cursive 
copy  of  the  Gospels  :  by  all  the  Versions  :  and  (as  before)  by 
Eusebius,^ — and  Ambrose,^ — by  Chrysostom,* — and  Cyril,^ — 
and  Augustine.^ 

(12)  The  same  remarks  suggest  themselves  on  a  survey  of 
the  evidence  for  S.  Luke  xxiv.  40: — 'And  ivhen  He  had 
thus  spohen,  He  shoived  them  His  hands  and  His  feet.'  The 
words  are  found  in  18  uncials  (beginning  with  N  a  b),  and  in 
every  known  cursive :  in  the  Latin,'  —  the  Syiiac, — the 
Egyptian, — in  short,  in  all  the  aricient  Versions.  Besides 
these,  ps.- Justin,^ — Eusebius,^ — Athanasius,^" — Ambrose  (in 
Greek),"  —  Epiphanius,^^  —  Chrysostom,^^  —  Cyril,"— Theo- 


'  Ps.-Chrys.  viii.  161-2.     Johannes  Thesial.  ap.  Galland.  xiii.  189. 

»  Ap.  Mai,  iv.  293  his ;  29-i  diserte.  ^  i.  506, 1541.  ■♦  jii.  91. 

^  iv.  1108,  and  Luc.  728  (=  Mai,  ii.  441).  "  iii.^  142 ;  viii.  472. 

'  So  Tertullian: — '  Manuset  pales  suos  inspicievdos  off  erf  {Cam.  c.  5). 
'  Inspectui  eorum  manus  ct  pedes  stios  offert '  {Marc.  iv.  c.  43).  Also 
Jerome  i.  712. 

*  Dc  Rcsiir.  240  ((quoted  by  J.  Damascene,  ii.  762). 

»  Ap.  Mai,  iv.  294.  ''>  i.  906,  quoted  by  Epiph.  i.  1003. 

"  Ap.  Theodoret,  iv.  141.        '^  i.  49.        '^  j_  510  .  jj^  40^^  .jjg  .  jjj  .j^^ 

"  iv.  1108 ;  vi.  23  {Trin.).     Ap.  Mai,  ii.  442  icr. 


I.]  FALSIFIED   BY   THE   REVISIONISTS.  91 

doret/ — Ammonius,^ — and  John  Damascene  ^ — quote  them. 
What  but  the  veriest  trifling  is  it,  in  the  face  of  such  a 
body  of  evidence,  to  bring  forward  the  fact  that  D  and  5 
copies  of  the  ohl  Latin,  with  Cureton's  Syriac  (of  which 
we  have  had  the  character  already  *),  omit  the  words  in 
question  ? 

The  foregoing  enumeration  of  instances  of  Mutilation 
might  be  enlarged  to  almost  any  extent.  Take  only  three 
more  short  but  striking  specimens,  before  we  pass  on : — 

(a)  Thus,  the  precious  verse  (S.  Matthew  xvii.  21)  which 
declares  that  '  this  kind  [of  evil  spirit]  goeth  not  out  hut  hy 
prayer  and  fasting,'  is  expunged  by  our  Eevisionists ; 
although  it  is  vouched  for  by  every  known  uncial  hut  two 
(b  n),  every  known  cursive  hut  one  (Evan.  33)  ;  is  witnessed 
to  by  the  Old  Latin  and  the  Vulgate, — the  Syriac,  Coptic, 
Armenian,  Georgian,  ^thiopic,  and  Slavonic  versions ;  by 
Origen,® — Athanasius,^ —  Basil,'' — Chrysostom,^  —  the  Opus 
imperf.,^ — the  Syriac  Clement,^'' — and  John  Damascene ;  ^^ — 
by  TertuUian, — Ambrose, — Hilary, — Juvencus, — Augustine, 
— Maximus  Taur., — and  by  the  Syriac  version  of  the  Canons 
of  EiLsehius  :  above  all  by  the  Universal  East, — having  been 
read  in  all  the  churches  of  Oriental  Christendom  on  the  10th 
Sunday  after  Pentecost,  from  the  earliest  period.  Wliy,  in 
the  world,  then  (our  readers  will  ask)  have  the  Eevisionists 
left  those  words  out  ?  .  .  .  For  no  other  reason,  we  answer, 
but  because  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  place  them  among  the 
interpolations  which  they  consider  unworthy  of  being  even 


1  iv.  272.  2  Q^f^  in  Joan.  462,  3. 

'  i.  303.  *  See  above,  pp.  78  and  85. 

s  iii.  579.  «  ii.  114  (ed.  1698). 

^  ii.  9,  362,  622.  »  ii.  309 ;  iv.  30  ;  v.  531 ;  vii.  581. 

«  vi.  79.  1"  Ep.  i.  (ap.  Gall.  i.  p.  xii.)  "  ii.  464. 


92  S.   MATTH.  XVIII,  11   AND  S.  LUKE  IX.  55,  5G,     [Art. 

'  exceptionally  retained  in  association  witli  the  true  Text.'  ^ 
'  Western  and  Syrian '  is  their  oracular  sentence.^ 

(b)  The  blessed  declaration,  '  The  Son  of  Man  is  come  to 
save  that  which  was  lost,' — has  in  like  manner  been  expunged 
by  our  Eevisionists  from  S.  Matth.  xviii.  11 ;  although  it  is 
attested  by  every  known  uncial  except  b  N  L,  and  every 
known  cursive  except  three :  by  the  old  Latin  and  the  Vul- 
gate :  by  the  Peschito,  Cureton's  and  the  Philoxenian  Syriac : 
by  the  Coptic,  Armenian,  /Ethiopic,  Georgian  and  Slavonic 
versions  :  ^  —  by  Origen,*  —  Theodorus  Heracl.,^  —  Chryso- 
stom*^ — and  Jovius''  the  monk  ; — by  TertuUian,^ — Ambrose,^ — 
Hilary,^" — Jerome/^ — pope  Damasus  ^^ — and  Augustine  :^^ — 
above  all,  by  the  Universal  Eastern  Church, — for  it  has  been 
read  in  all  assemblies  of  the  faithful  on  the  morrow  of  Pente- 
cost, from  the  beginning.  Why  tlien  (the  reader  will  again 
ask)  have  the  Eevisionists  expunged  this  verse  ?  We  can 
only  answer  as  before, — because  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort 
consign  it  to  the  linibus  of  their  Appendix;  class  it  among 
their  'Eejected  Eeadings'  of  the  most  hopeless  type.^*  As 
before,  all  their  sentence  is  '.Western  and  Syrian.'  They 
add,  '  Interpolated  either  from  Lu.  xix.  10,  or  from  an  in- 
dependent source,  written  or  oral.'^^  .  .  .  Will  the  English 
Church  suffer  herself  to  be  in  this  way  defrauded  of  lier 
priceless  inlieritance, — through  tlic  irreverent  bungling  of 
well-intentioned,  but  utterly  misguided  men  ? 


'   Text,  pp.  505  and  571.  *  Append,  p.  14. 
'  We  depend  for  our  Versions  on  Dr.  S.  C.  Malan :  pp.  31,  14. 

^  ii.  147.     Com.  v.  G75.  ^  Cord.  Cat.  i.  37G. 

«  vii.  599,  600  diserte.  '  Ap.  Photium,  p.  G44. 

8  Three  times.  »  i.  GG3,  1  IGl,  ii.  1137. 

10  Pp.  367,  699.  "  vii.  139. 

12  Ap.  Galland.  vi.  324.  "    iii.  P.  i.  760. 

"  Text,\\bn.  ">  Append,  p.  1!. 


I.]  FALSIFIED. — ABSURD  TRANSPOSITIONS.  93 

(c)  In  the  same  way,  our  Lord's  important  saying, — '  Ye 
know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of :  for  the  Son  of  man 
is  not  come  to  destroy  men's  lives,  hut  to  save  them '  (S.  Lnke 
ix.  55,  56),  has.  disappeared  from  our  '  Ee vised '  Version  ; 
although  Manuscripts,  Versions,  Fathers  from  the  secorid 
century  downwards,  (as  Tischendorf  admits,)  witness  elo- 
quently in  its  favour. 

V.  In  conclusion,  we  propose  to  advert,  just  for  a  moment, 
to  those  five  several  mis-representations  of  S.  Luke's  '  Title 
on  the  Cross,'  which  were  rehearsed  above,  viz.  in  page  86. 
At  so  gross  an  exhibition  of  licentiousness,  it  is  the  mere 
instinct  of  Natural  Piety  to  exclaim, — But  then,  could  not 
those  men  even  set  down  so  sacred  a  record  as  that,  correctly  ? 
They  could,  had  they  been  so  minded,  no  doubt,  (we  answer)  : 
but,  marvellous  to  relate,  the  Transposition  of  words, — no 
matter  how  signific^ant,  sacred,  solemn  ; — of  short  clauses, — 
even  of  whole  sentences  of  Scripture ;  —  was  anciently 
accounted  an  allowable,  even  a  graceful  exercise  of  the  critical 
faculty. 

The  thing  alluded  to  is  incredible  at  first  sight ;  being  so 
often  done,  apparently,  without  any  reason  whatever, — or 
rather  in  defiance  of  all  reason.  Let  candidus  lector  be  the 
judge  whether  we  speak  truly  or  not.  Whereas  S.  Luke 
(xxiv.  41)  says,  '  And  while  they  yet  believed  Twt  for  joy, 
and  wondered,'  the  scribe  of  codex  A  (by  way  of  improving 
upon  the  Evangelist)  transposes  his  sentence-  into  this,  '  And 
while  they  yet  disbelieved  Him,  and  wondered  for  joy : '  ^ 
which  is  almost  nonsense,  or  quite. 

But  take  a  less  solemn  example.     Instead  of, — '  And  His 


^   ert  Se  (iTncTTovvTmv  avT^,  KOi  davfia^uvTcov  dno  Trjg  vapas. 


94  TRANSPOSITIONS  IN   S.  T.UKE  XIX.  AND  XX.        [Art. 

disciples  plucked  the  ears  of  corn,  and  ate  them,  {rov<i 
a-Tii'^va'i,  Kol  ijaOiov,)  rubbing  them  in  their  hands '  (S.  Luke 
vi.  1), — BCLii,  by  transposing  four  Greek  words,  present  us 
with,  'And  His  disciples  plucked,  and  ate  tJie  cars  of  cor7i, 
(koI  ijaOiov  Tov<;  (TTdyva<i,)  rubbing  them,'  &c.  Now  this 
might  have  been  an  agreeable  occupation  for  horses  and  for 
another  quadruped,  no  doubt;  but  hardly  for  men.  This 
curiosity,  which  (happily)  proved  indigestible  to  our  Ee^d- 
sionists,  is  nevertheless  swallowed  whole  by  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort  as  genuine  and  wholesome  Gospel.  (0  dura 
Doctorum  ilia!) — But  to  proceed. 

Then  further,  these  preposterous  Transpositions  are  of 
such  perpetual  recurrence, — are  so  utterly  useless  or  else  so 
exceedingly  mischievous,  always  so  tasteless, — that  familiarity 
with  the  phenomenon  rather  increases  than  lessens  our 
astonishment.  What  docs  astonish  us,  however,  is  to  find 
learned  men  in  the  year  of  grace  1881,  freely  resuscitating 
these  long-since-forgotten  hetises  of  long-since-forgotten 
Critics,  and  seeking  to  palm  them  oft'  up(m  a  l)usy  and  a 
careless  age,  as  so  many  new  revelations.  That  we  may  not 
be  thought  to  have  shown  undue  partiality  for  the  xxiind, 
xxiiird,  and  xxivth  chapters  of  S.  Luke's  Gospel  by  selecting 
our  instances  of  Mutilation  from  those  tliree  chapters,  we 
will  now  look  for  specimens  of  Transposition  in  the  xixth 
and  xxth  chapters  of  the  same  Gospel.  The  reader  is 
invited  to  collate  the  Text  of  the  oldest  uncials,  throughout 
these  two  chapters,  with  the  commonly  Received  Text.  He 
will  find  that  within  the  compass  of  88  consecutive  verses,^ 
codices  N  A  B  c  D  Q  exhibit  no  less  than  74  in.stances  of  Trans- 
position : — for  39  of  which,  d  is  responsible  : — s  b,  ft»r  14: — 
X  iiiid  X  H  D,  for  4  each  : — A  B   and  s  a  b,  for  3  each: — A,  for 


^  Viz.  from  ch.  xix.  7  tu  xx.  16. 


I.]  THE   REVISIONISTS'   VERIFYING   FACULTY.  95 

2  : — B,  c,  Q,  K  A,  and  A  D,  each  for  1. — In  other  words,  he  will 
find  that  in  no  less  than  44  of  these  instances  of  Transposi- 
tion, D  is  implicated  : — X,  in  26  : — B,  in  25  : — a,  in  10  : — while 

c  and  Q  are  concerned  in  only  one  a-piece It  should 

be  added  that  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  have  adopted  everij  one 
of  the  25  in  which  codex  b  is  concerned — a  significant  indica- 
tion of  the  superstitious  reverence  in  which  they  hold  that 
demonstrably  corrupt  and  most  untrustworthy  document.^ 
Every  other  case  of  Transposition  they  have  rejected.  By 
their  own  confession,  therefore,  49  out  of  the  74  (i.e.  two- 
thirds  of  the  entire  number)  are  instances  of  depravation. 
We  turn  with  curiosity  to  the  Eevised  Version  ;  and  discover 
that  out  of  the  25  so  retained,  the  Editors  in  question  were 
only  able  to  persuade  the  Eevisionists  to  adopt  8.  So  that, 
in  the  judgment  of  the  Revisionists,  QQ  out  of  74,  or  clcven- 


^  We  take  leave  to  point  out  that,  however  favourable  the  estimate  Drs. 
Westcott  and  Hort  may  have  personally  formed  of  the  value  and  imjjort- 
ance  of  the  Vatican  Codex  (b),  nothing  can  excuse  their  summary  handling, 
not  to  say  their  contemptuous  disregard,  of  all  evidence  adverse  to  that  of 
their  own  favourite  guide.  They  pass  by  whatever  makes  against  the 
reading  they  adopt,  with  the  oracular  announcement  that  the  rival  readins; 
is  '  Syrian,^  '  Westeni,'  '  Western  and  Syrian,''  as  the  case  may  be. 

But  we  respectfully  submit  that  '  Syrian,'  'Western,'  'Western  and 
Syrian,'  as  Critical  expressions,  are  absolutely  without  meaning,  as  well  as 
•without  use  to  a  student  in  this  difficult  department  of  sacred  Science. 
They  supply  no  information.  They  are  never  supported  by  a  particle  of 
intelligible  evidence.  They  are  often  demonstrably  wrong,  and  always 
unreasonable.  They  are  Dictation,  not  Criticism.  When  at  last  it  is 
discovered  that  they  do  but  signify  that  certain  words  are  not  found  in 
codex  B, — they  are  perceived  to  be  the  veriest  foolishness  also. 

Progress  is  impossible  while  this  method  is  permitted  to  prevail.  If 
these  distinguished  Professors  have  enjoyed  a  Eevelation  as  to  what  the 
Evangelists  actually  wrote,  they  would  do  well  to  acquaint  the  world  with 
the  fact  at  the  earliest  possible  moment.  If,  on  the  contrary,  they  are 
merely  relying  on  their  own  inner  consciousness  for  the  power  of  divinino^ 
the  truth  of  Scripture  at  a  glance, — they  must  be  prepareil  to  find  their 
decrees  treated  with  the  contumely  which  is  due  to  imposture,  of  whatever 
kind. 


96  TRANSPOSITION   IN   S.  LUKE   XXIV.  7.  [Art. 

twelfths,   are   instances    of    licentious   tamperinj:;   ^\dth    the 

deposit 0  to  participate  in  the  verifying  faculty  which 

guided  the  teachers  to  discern  in  25  cases  of  Transposition 
out  of  74,  the  genuine  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  !  0,  far 
more,  to  have  been  born  with  that  loftier  instinct  which 
enabled  the  pupils  (Doctors  Eoberts  and  Milligan,  Newth 
and  Moulton,  Vance  Smith  and  Brown,  Angus  and  Eadie)  to 
winnow  out  from  the  entire  lot  exactly  8,  and  to  reject  the 
remaining  66  as  nothing  worth  ! 

According  to  our  own  best  judgment,  (and  we  have  care- 
fully examined  them  all,)  every  one  of  the  74  is  worthless. 
But  then  we  make  it  our  fundamental  rule  to  reason  always 
from  grounds  of  external  Evidence, — never  from  postulates  of 
the  Imagination.     Moreover,  in  the  application  of  our  rule, 
we  begrudge  no  amount  of  labour  :  reckoning  a  long  summer's 
day  well  spent  if  it  has  enabled  us  to  ascertain  the  truth 
concerning  one  single  controverted  word  of  Scripture.     Tlius, 
when  we  find  tliat  our  Revisionists,  at   the   suggestion   of 
Dr.  Hort,  have  transposed  the  familiar  Angelic  utterance  (in 
S.  Luke  xxiv.  7),  Xeywv  on  hel  tov  vlov  tov  avOpuiirov  irapa- 
hodrjvai, — into  this,  Xiyoov  tov  v'lov  tov  uvOpcoirov  otl  hel,  &c., 
we  at  once  enquire  for  the  evidence.     And  when  we  find  that 
no  single  Father,  no  single  Version,  and  no  Codex — except 
the  notorious  n  B  c  L — advocates  the  proposed  transposition  ; 
but  on  the  contrary  that  every  Father  (from  a.d.  150  down- 
wards) who  quotes  the  place,  quotes  it  as  it  stands  in  the 
Textus   receptus ;  ^  —  we   have   no    hesitation   whatever  in 
rejecting  it.     It  is  found  in  the  midst  of  a  very  thicket  of 
fabricated  readings.     It  has  nothing  whatever  to  recommend 
it.     It  is  condemned  by  the  consentient  voice  of  Antiquity. 


1  Marcion  (Epiph.  i.  317) ;  — Eusebius  (Mai,  iv.  206) ;  — Epiiilianius 
(j.  .348);— Cyril  (Mai,  ii.  438);— John  Thessul.  (Gallaud.  xiii.  188). 


I.]        TEXT  OF  DRS.  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT.        97 

It  is  advocated  only  by  four  copies, — which  never  combine 
exchisively,  except  to  misrepresent  the  truth  of  Scripture 
and  to  seduce  the  simple. 

But  the  foregoing,  which  is  a  fair  typical  sample  of  count- 
less other  instances  of  unauthorized  Transposition,  may  not 
be  dismissed  without  a  few  words  of  serious  remonstrance. 
Our  contention  is  that,  inasmuch  as  the  effect  of  such  transposi- 
tion is  incapable  of  being  idiomatically  represented  in  the  Eng- 
lish language, — (for,  in  all  such  cases,  the  Eevised  Version 
retains  the  rendering  of  the  Authorized,) — our  Eevisionists 
have  violated  the  spirit  as  well  as  the  letter  of  their  instruc- 
tions, in  putting  forth  a  nevj  Greek  Text,  and  silently  intro- 
ducing into  it  a  countless  number  of  these  and  similar 
depravations  of  Scripture.  These  Textual  curiosities  (for 
they  are  nothing  more)  are  absolutely  out  of  place  in  a 
Revision  of  the  English  Version :  achieve  no  lawful  purpose : 
are  sure  to  mislead  the  unwary.  This  first. — Secondly,  we 
submit  that, — strong  as,  no  doubt,  the  temptation  must  have 
been,  to  secure  the  sanction  of  the  N.  T.  Eevisionists  for  their 
own  private  Eecension  of  the  Greek,  (printed  long  since,  but 
published  simultaneously  with  the  '  Eevised  Version ') — it  is 
to  be  regretted  that  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  should  have 
yielded  thereto.  Man's  impatience  never  promotes  God's 
Truth.  The  interests  of  Textual  Criticism  would  rather  have 
suggested,  that  the  Eecension  of  that  accomplished  pair  of 
Professors  should  have  been  submitted  to  public  inspection 
in  the  first  instance.  The  astonishing  Text  which  it  advocates 
might  have  been  left  with  comparative  safety  to  take  its 
chance  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber,  after  it  had  undergone 
the  searching  ordeal  of  competent  Criticism,  and  been  freely 
ventilated  at  home  and  abroad  for  a  decade  of  years.  But 
on  the  contrary.  It  was  kept  close.  It  might  be  seen  only 
by  the  Eevisers  :  and  even  they  were  tied  down  to  secrecy  as 

H 


98  DK.   ROBERTH   ON    1    TIM.    III.    1(5.  [Aut. 

to  the  let'ter-press  by  which  it  was  accompanied.  .  .  .  All 
tliis  strikes  us  as  painful  in  a  high  degree. 

VI.  Hitherto  we  have  referred  almost  exclusively  to  the 
Gospels.  In  conclusion,  we  invite  attention  to  our  Eevi- 
sionists'  treatment  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16 — -the  crux  critieorum, 
as  Prebendary  Scrivener  styles  it.^  We  cannot  act  more 
i'airly  than  by  inviting  a  learned  member  of  the  revising 
body  to  speak  on  behalf  of  his  brethren.  We  shall  in  this 
way  ascertain  the  amount  of  acquaintance  with  the  subject 
enjoyed  by  some  of  those  who  have  been  so  ol)liging  as  to 
furnish  the  Church  with  a  new  liecension  of  the  Greek  of 
the  iSTew  Testament.     Dr.  Roberts  says : — 

'  The  English  reader  will  probably  be  startled  to  find  that 
the  familiar  text, — "  And  without  controversy  great  is  the  mystery  of 
godliness :  God  loas  manifest  in  the  flesh"  has  been  exchanged  in 
the  Revised  Version  for  the  following, — "  And  without  controversy 
great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness ;  He  who  was  manifested  in  the 
flesh."  A  note  on  the  margin  states  that  "the  word  GOD,  in 
place  of  He  loho,  rests  on  no  sufficient  ancient  evidence ; "  and 
it  may  be  well  that,  in  a  passage  of  so  great  importance,  the 
reader  should  bo  convinced  that  such  is  the  case. 

'  What,  then,  let  us  en(piire,  is  the  amount  of  evidence  which 
can  be  produced  in  support  of  the  reading  "God"?  This  is 
soon  stated.  Not  one  of  the  early  Fatliers  can  be  certainly 
(pioted  for  it.  None  of  the  very  ancient  versions  support  it. 
No  uncial  witnesses  to  it,  with  the  doubtful  exception  of  a  ... . 
But  even  granting  that  the  weighty  suiFnigc  of  the  Alexandrian 
manuscript  is  in  favour  of  "  God,"  far  more  evidence  can  be 
produced  in  support  of  "  who."  N  and  probably  c  witness  to  this 
reading,  and  it  has  also  powerful  testimony  from  the  versions 
and  Fathers.  Moreover,  the  relative  "  who  "  is  a  far  more  diffi- 
cult reading  than  "  God,"  and  could  hardly  have  been  substituted 
fur  the  latter.     On  every  ground,  therefore,  we  conclude  that 


-  [The  discussion  of  this  text  has  been  left  very  nearly  as  it  originally 
stood, — the  ratl)er,  because  the  reading  of  1  Tim.  iii.  10  will  be  found 
fully  discussed  at  the  end  of  the  present  volmnc.     See  Indrx  of  Texts."] 


I.]  THE   CORRUPTION   ACCOUNTED   FOR.  99 

this  interesting  and  important  passage  must  stand  as  it  has  been 
given  in  the  Ke vised  Version.'  ^ 

And  now,  having  heard  the  learned  Presbyterian  on  behalf 
of  his  brother-Eevisionists,  we  request  that  we  may  be  our- 
selves listened  to  in  reply. 

The  place  of  Scripture  before  us,  the  Eeader  is  assured, 
presents  a  memorable  instance  of  the  mischief  which  occa- 
sionally resulted  to  the  inspired  Text  from  the  ancient 
practice  of  executing  copies  of  the  Scriptures  in  uncial 
characters.  S.  Paul  certainly  wrote  yue^a  earl  to  t?}?  evae- 
/Seta?  /xvaryjptov  •  ®e6<i  icf^avepcoOr}  ev  crapKi,  ('  Great  is  the 
mystery  of  godliness :  God  was  manifested  in  the  flesh.')  But 
it  requires  to  be  explained  at  the  outset,  that  the  holy  Name 
when  abbreviated  (which  it  always  was),  thus, —  ec  ('  God  '), 
is  only  distinguishable  from  the  relative  pronoun  '  who '  (oc), 
by  two  horizontal  strokes, — which,  in  manuscripts  of  early 
date,  it  was  often  the  practice  to  trace  so  faintly  that  at 
present  they  can  scarcely  be  discerned.^  Need  we  go  on  ? 
An  archetypal  copy  in  which  one  or  both  of  these  sli<Tht 
strokes  had  vanished  from  the  word  ec  ('  God  '),  gave  rise 
to  the  reading  oc  ('who  '), — of  which  nonsensical  substitute, 
traces  survive  in  only  two^  manuscripts, — N  and  17  :  not,  for 
certain,  in  one  single  ancient  Father, — no,  nor  for  certain  in 
07ie  single  ancient  Version.  So  transparent,  in  fact,  is  the 
absurdity  of  writing  to  ixva-TrjpLov  09  ('  the  mystery  who '), 
that  copyists  promptly  sulxstituted  6  ('  ^vhieh ') :  thus  fur- 
nishing another  illustration  of  the  well-known  property  of 


^  Companion  to  the  Revised  Version,  &c.,  by  Alex.  Eoberts,  D.D.  (2nd 
edit.),  pp.  66-8. 

^  Of  this,  any  one  may  convince  himself  by  merely  inspecting  the 
2  pages  of  codex  a  which  are  exposed  to  view  at  the  British  Museum. 

^  For,  of  the  3  cursives  usually  cited  for  the  same  reading  (17,  73, 181), 
the  second  proves  (on  enquiry  at  Upsala)  to  be  merely  an  al.irido-ment  of 
Gicumenius,  who  certainly  read  eeor ;  and  the  last  is  non-existent. 

H   2 


100        fc>C   NOT   OC   THE   EEADING   OF    1    TIM.  III.  16.       [Art. 

a  fabricated  reading,  viz.  sooner  or  later  inevitably  to  become 
the  parent  of  a  second.  Happily,  to  this  second  mistake 
the  sole  surviving  witness  is  the  Codex  Claromontanus,  of 
the  Vlth  century  (d)  :  the  only  Patristic  evidence  in  its 
favour  being  Gelasius  of  Cyzicus,^  (whose  date  is  a.d.  476)  : 
and  the  unknown  author  of  a  homily  in  the  appendix  to 
Chrysostom.^  The  Versions — all  but  the  Georgian  and  the 
Slavonic,  which  agree  with  the  Received  Text — favour  it 
unquestionably ;  for  they  are  observed  invariably  to  make 
the  relative  pronoun  agree  in  gender  with  the  word  which 
represents  fivarrjpiov  ('mystery')  which  immediately  pre- 
cedes it.  Thus,  in  the  Syriac  Versions,  o?  ('  ivho ')  is  found, 
— but  only  because  the  Syriac  equivalent  for  /j,vaT7]piov  is 
of  the  masculine  gender  :  in  the  Latin,  quod  ('  wh  ich  ') — but 
only  because  mystermm  in  Latin  (like  fjbvarijpcov  in  Greek) 
is  neuter.  Over  this  latter  reading,  however,  we  need  not 
linger;  seeing  that  o  does  not  find  a  single  patron  at  the 
present  day.  And  yet,  this  was  the  reading  which  was  eagerly 
upheld  during  the  last  century:  Wetstein  and  Sir  Isaac 
Newton  being  its  most  strenuous  advocates. 

It  is  time  to  pass  under  hasty  review  the  direct  evi- 
dence for  the  true  reading.  a  and  c  exhibited  ec  until 
ink,  thumbing,  and  the  injurious  use  of  chemicals,  obliterated 
what  once  was  patent.  It  is  too  late,  by  full  150  years,  to 
contend  on  the  negative  side  of  this  question. — F  and  G, 
which  exhibit  6c  ^^^'^  Oc  respectively,  \vere  confessedly 
derived  from  a  common  archetype :  in  which  archetype,  it  is 
evident  that  the  horizontal  stroke  which  distinguishes  e 
from  o  must  have  been  so  fiiintly  traced  as  to  be  scarcely 
discernible.  The  supposition  that,  in  tliis  place,  the  stroke 
in  question  represents  the  aspirate,  is  scarcely  admissible. 
There  is  no  single  example  of  o<i  icrittcn  6c  in  any  part  of 


1  Concilia,  ii.  217  c.  '''  viii.  L'l  I  L. 


I.]  APPEAL   TO   ANTIQUITY.  101 

either  Cod.  f  or  Cod.  G.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  only  place 
where  oc  represents  ec,  it  is  written  oc  in  both.  Pre- 
judice herself  may  be  safely  called  upon  to  accept  the  obvious 
and  only  lawful  inference. 

To  come  to  the  point, — ©609  is  the  reading  of  all  the 
uncial  copies  extant  hut  two  (viz.  K  which  exhibits  09,  and 
D  which  exhibits  o),  and  of  all  the  cursives  hut  one  (viz.  17). 
The  universal  consent  of  the  Lectionaries  proves  that  ©eo? 
has  been  read  in  all  the  assemblies  of  the  faithful  from  the 
IVth  or  Vth  century  of  our  era.  At  what  earlier  period  of 
her  existence  is  it  supposed  then  that  the  Church  ('the 
witness  and  keeper  of  Holy  Writ,')  availed  herself  of  her 
privilege  to  substitute  0e6?  for  09  or  o, — whether  in  error 
or  in  fraud  ?  Nothing  short  of  a  conspiracy,  to  which  every 
region  of  the  Eastern  Church  must  have  been  a  party,  would 
account  for  the  phenomenon. 

We  enquire  next  for  the  testimony  of  the  Fathers;  and 
we  discover  that — (1)  Gregory  of  Nyssa  quotes  ©eo9  twenty- 
two  times :  ^ — that  ©eo9  is  also  recognized  by  (2)  his  name- 
sake of  Nazianzus  in  tw^o  places  ;  ^ — as  well  as  by  (3)  Didy- 
mus  of  Alexandria ;  ^ — (4)  by  ps.-Dionysius  Alex.  ;* — and  (5) 
by  Diodorus  of  Tarsus.^ — (6)  Chrysostom  cj^uotes  1  Tim.  iii. 
16  in  conformity  with  the  received  text  at  least  three  times  ;^ 


^  A  single  quotation  is  better  than  many  references.  Among  a  multi- 
tude of  proofs  that  Christ  is  God,  Gregory  says : — Tuiodia  be  diapprjSvv 
/3oa  •  oTi  6  Qfos  ecpavepoidr]  fv  crapKi,  ebiKaioidrj  iv  Trvevpari.      ii.  693. 

"  TovTO  T)piu  TO  piya  pv(JTi]piov  .  .  6  evavfipcoTrrjcras  St'  I'jpas  Kal 
TTTuixfvcras  Qeos,  iva  dvacTTTjar]  rrju  aapKa.  (i.  215  a.) — Tt  to  aiya  pvcTT^j- 
ptov  ;   .  .   Seo?  avdpcoTros  yiveTai.      (i.  085  b.) 

^  De  Trin.  p.  83 — where  the  testimony  is  express. 

*  Geo?  yap  i^avepcoOrf  iv  (rapKi. —  Concilia,  i.  853  d. 
^  Cramer's  Cat.  in  Rom.  p.  124. 

*  One  quotation  may  suffice : — To  Se  Qeov  ovtu,  avOpconov  df'Krja-ai 
yeveadai  koi  dveaxfcrdai  KaTa^rjvac  toctovtov  .  .  .  tovto  ecrTi  to  f/c7rX/';^6coff 
ye/xov.  o  8rj  koi  TlavXos  Oavpa^cov  eXeyev  •  Kat  opoXoyovpevms  peya  e'crri 
TO  TTJi  eu(re/3ei'as  pvdTijpiov  •  nolov  peya  ;  Geos    icpavspaffri   iv  rrapKi  •  k(u 


102  TESTIMONY   OF   THE   FATHERS  [Art. 

— and  (7)  Cyril  Al.  as  often  :  ^ — (8)  Tlieodoret,  four  times  :  ^ — 
(9)  an  unknown  author  of  the  age  of  Nestorius  (a.d.  430), 
once  :  ^ — (10)  Severus,  Bp.  of  Antioch  (a.d.  512),  once.'* — 
(11)  Macedonius  (xV.D.  50G)  patriarch  of  CP.,^  of  whom  it 
has  l>een  absurdly  related  that  he  invented  the  reading,  is  a 
witness  for  ©eo?  perftu'ce  ;  so  is — (12)  Euthalius,  and — (13) 
John  Damascene  on  two  occasions.*^— (14)  An  unknown 
writer  who  has  been  mistaken  for  Athanasius/ — (15)  besides 
not  a  few  ancient  scholiasts,  close  the  list:  for  we  pass  by 
the  testimony  of — (16)  Epiphanius  at  the  7th  jSTicene  Council 
(A.D.  787),— of  (17)  a:cumenius,— of  (18)  Theophylact. 

It  w^ill  be  observed  that  neither  has  anything  b^en  said 
about  the  many  indirect  allusions  of  earlier  Fathers  to  this 
place  of  Scripture ;  and  yet  some  of  these  are  too  striking 
to  be  overlooked :  as  when — (19)  Basil,  writing  of  our 
Saviour,  says  avTo<i  k^avepoiOt)  iv  aapKt:^ — and  (20)  Gre- 
gory Thaum.,  koI  ecrri  ©eo?  akrjdivo<;  6  acrapKO';  ev  crapKi 
^avepodek-.^—iind  before  him,  (21)  Hippolytus,  ovTo>i 
TrpoeXdoav  et?  Kocrfxov,  ©eo?  iv  ao)fiaTi  icpavepoodr)  ■.^'^ — and 
(22)  Theodotus    the    Gnostic,    6    ^.coryp    co(f)6r]    Kartoov   roL<i 


ndXiv  uX\n)(oii  •  ov  yfip  ayye'Xcoi^  eViXa^/^iii/erai  6  Of 6s,  k.  t.  X.  i.  197. 
=  Gallan.l.  xiv.  141. 

^  Tlie  following  may  SufTice  : — fieya  yap  nWe  r-qs  (vaffidas  ij.V(TTi]piav  ' 
■n-ecfiai'ipoi'rai  yap  iv  aapKi  Qeos  (ov  kiu  6  Atiyoy  •  (^tKaiodOi)  8e  Ka\  iv  irvev- 
p,ari.  V.  p.  ii. ;  p.  154  c  d. — lu  a  newly-rccovercd  treatise  of  Cyril,  1  Tim. 
iii.  16  is  ciuotod  at  length  with  Ofiis,  followed  by  a  remark  on  the  iv  aira 
^avfpadds  6€os.  This  at  least  is  decisive.  The  place  has  been  hitherto 
overiooked.  '  i.  92  ;  iii.  G57 ;  iv.  19,  23. 

3  Apiid  Athanasium,  Ojq^.  ii.  33,  where  see  Garnier's  prefatory  note. 

*  K(i^'  o  yap  vnrjpxf  Ofos  [sc.  o  Xpiaroi]  tovtov  fjTei  tov  vofio6fTt}v 
^odrjvai  TTiicn  to'is  fdvetri  .  .  .  Toiynpovv  KUi  df^dpeva  tu  f6vr]  tov  vnpodfrrjv, 
TOV  iv  aupKi  (})avfp(odevTu  Qfov.  Cramer's  ('(tl.  iii.  (ii*.  The  quotation 
is  from  the  lost  work  of  Severus  against  Julian  of  Ilalicarnassus. 

''  Oalland.  xii.  152  e,  153  e,  with  the  notes  both  of  Gamier  and 
Gallandius. 

**  i.  313  ;  ii.  2G3.  '  Ap.  Athanas.  i.  TOO. 

»  iii.  401-2.  =  Ap.  Phot.  230.  '''  Cvidru  Ihtr.  Xod.  c.  17. 


I.]  FATAL   TO   OC   IN   1    TIM.   III.    16.  103 

dyyiXoi^i :  ^ — and  (23)  Barnabas,  'Irjaov'i  .  .  .  .  6  v/o?  rov 
&60V  TUTTO)  Kol  €v  (lapKl  (puvepwOel^  :  ^ — and  earlier  still  (24) 
Ignatius  :  ©eoO  dv0pcii7rLvco<i  (f)avepov/u,evov : — ev  aapKi  <yev6- 
fjbevo<;  ©609  : — eh  ©eo?  eariv  6  (f}av€poi)(Ta<i  eavrov  Sea  'Irjaov 
XpcaTov  Tov  vlov  avTov? — Are  we  to  suppose  that  none  of 
these  primitive  writers  read  the  place  as  ivc  do  ? 

Against  this  array  of  Testimony,  the  only  evidence  which  the 
unwearied  industry  of  150  years  has  succeeded  in  eliciting, 
is  as  follows : — (1)  The  exploded  Latin  fable  that  Mace- 
donius  (a.d.  506)  invented  the  reading:* — (2)  the  fact  that 
Epiphanius, — ijrofessing  to  transcribe^  from  an  earlier  trea- 
tise of  his  own  ®  (in  which  icfiuvepcoOv  stands  without  a  nomi- 
native), prefixes  o? : — (3)  the  statement  of  an  unknown 
scholiast,  that  in  one  particular  place  of  Cyril's  writings 
where  the  Greek  is  lost,  Cyril  wrote  09, — (which  seems  to 
be  an  entire  mistake  ;  but  which,  even  if  it  were  a  fact,  would 
be  sufficiently  explained  by  the  discovery  that  in  two  other 
places  of  Cyril's  Avritings  the  evidence  fiuctuettes  between  09 
and  ©€69)  : — (4)  a  quotation  in  an  epistle  of  Eutherius  of 
Tyana  (it  exists  only  in  Latin)  where  '  qui '  is  found : — (5) 
a  casual  reference  (in  Jerome's  commentary  on  Isaiah)  to 
our  LoKD,  as  One  '  qui  apparuit  in  carne,  justificatus  est  in 
spiritu,' — which  Bp.  Pearson  might  have  written. — Lastly,  (6) 
a  passage  of  Theodorus  Mopsuest.  (quoted  at  the  Council 
of  Constantinople,  a.d.  553),  where  the  reading  is  'qui,' — 
which  is  balanced  by  the  discovery  that  in  another  place 
of  his  writings  quoted  at  the  same  Council,  the  original  is 
translated  '  quod.'  And  this  closes  the  evidence.  Will  any 
unprejudiced  person,  on  reviewing  the  premisses,  seriously 
declare  that  09  is  the  better  sustained  reading  of  the  two  ? 


1  Ap.  Clem,  Al.  973.      ^  Cap.  xii.       ^  Ad  Eph.  c.  19,  7 ;  ad  Magn.  c.  8, 

*  See  Scrivener's  Plain  Introd.  pp.  555-6,  and  Berriman's  Dissertation, 

VV.  22y-2Go.     Also  the  end  of  this  volume.  ^  i.  887  c.         '^  ii.  74  b. 


104  THE   EVIDENCE   FOR   0600   IN  [Aut. 

For  ourselves,  we  venture  to  deem  it  incredible  that  a 
Reading  which — (a)  Is  not  to  be  found  in  more  than  tivo 
copies  (k  and  17)  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles  :  which — (b)  Is  not 
certainly  supported  by  a  single  Version  : — (c)  Nor  is  clearly 
advocated  by  a  single  Father, — caii  be  genuine.  It  does  not  at 
all  events  admit  of  question,  that  until  far  stronger  evidence 
can  be  produced  in  its  favour,  09  ('  who ')  may  on  no  account 
be  permitted  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  commonly  received 
©609  ('  God  ')  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  But  the  present  exhibits  in  a 
striking  and  instructive  way  all  the  characteristic  tokens  of 
a  depravation  of  the  text.  (1st)  At  an  exceedingly  early 
period  it  resulted  in  another  deflection.  (2nd)  It  is  without 
the  note  of  Continuity;  having  died  out  of  the  Church's 
memory  well-nigh  1400  years  ago.  (3rd)  It  is  deficient  in 
Universality  ;  having  been  all  along  denied  the  Church's  cor- 
porate sanction.  As  a  necessary  consequence,  (4th)  It  rests 
at  this  day  on  wholly  insvfficicnt  Evidence:  Manuscripts, 
Versions,  Fathers  being  all  against  it.  (5th)  It  carries  on 
its  front  its  own  refutation.  For,  as  all  must  see,  ec  might 
easily  be  mistaken  for  oc :  but  in  order  to  make  oc  into 
ec,  tivo  horizontal  lines  must  of  set  'p^nyosc  he  added  to  the 
cofy.  It  is  therefore  a  vast  deal  more  likely  that  ec  became 
oc,  tlian  that  oc  became  ec.  (6th)  Lastly,  it  is  condemned 
by  internal  considerations.  "O9  is  in  truth  so  grossly  im- 
l)robable — rather,  so  impossihle — a  reading,  that  under  any 
circumstances  we  must  have  anxiously  enquired  whether  no 
escape  from  it  was  discoverable  :  whether  there  exists  no 
way  of  explaining  how  so  patent  an  absurdity  as  fMvartj- 
piov  6<i  may  have  arisen?  And  on  l)eing  reminded  that  the 
disappearance  of  two  faint  horizontal  strokes,  or  even  of  one, 
would  fully  account  for  the  impossil)le  reading,— (and  thus 
much,  at  least,  all  admit,) — sliould  \\r  not  liave  felt  that  it 
required  an  overwhelming  coiischhus  of  authorities  in  favour 
of  09    i<»   render   such   an   altcrnati^e    deserving    of   serious 


I.]      1  TIM.  III.  16  'CLEARLY  PREPONDERATING.'    105 

attention  ?  It  is  a  mere  abuse  of  Bengel's  famous  axiom 
to  recal  it  on  occasions  like  the  present.  We  shall  be  landed 
in  a  bathos  indeed  if  we  allow  gross  imjjrohahiliti/  to  become  a 
constraining  motive  with  us  in  revising  the  sacred  Text. 

And  thus  much  for  the  true  reading  of  1  Tim.  iii,  16.  We 
invite  the  reader  to  refer  back  ^  to  a  Eeviser's  estimate  of 
the  evidence  in  favour  of  ©eo?  and  o?  respectively,  and  to 
contrast  it  with  our  own.  If  he  is  impressed  with  the 
strength  of  the  cause  of  our  opponents, — their  mastery  of  the 
subject, — and  the  reasonableness  of  their  contention, — we 
shall  be  surprised.  And  yet  that  is  not  the  question  just 
now  before  us.  The  onh/  question  (be  it  clearly  remem- 
bered) which  has  to  be  considered,  is  tJiis: — Can  it  be  said 
with  truth  that  the  "  evidence "  for  09  (as  against  ©eo?) 
in  1  Tim.  iii.  16  is  "clearly  preponderating"!  Can  it  be 
maintained  that  ©eo?  is  a  'plain  and  clear  error'  1  Unless 
this  can  be  affirmed — cadit  qusestio.  The  traditional  reading 
of  the  place  ought  to  have  been  let  alone.  May  we  be 
permitted  to  say  without  offence  that,  in  our  humble  judg- 
ment, if  the  Church  of  England,  at  the  Revisers'  bidding, 
were  to  adopt  this  and  thousands  of  other  depravations  of 
the  sacred  page,^ — with  which  the  Church  Universal  was  once 
well  acquainted,  l)ut  which  in  her  corporate  character  she  has 
long  since  unconditionally  condemned  and  abandoned, — she 
would  deserve  to  be  pointed  at  with  scorn  by  the  rest  of 
Christendom  ?      Yes,  and  to  have  that  openly  said  of  her 


'  See  above,  p.  98. 

^  As,  that  stupid  fabrication,  Tt  ^e  e paras  rrepl  roii  dyadov  ;  (in  S.  Matth. 
xix.  17)  : — the  new  incidents  and  sayings  proposed  for  adoption,  as  in  S. 
Mark  i.  27  (in  the  Synagogue  of  Capernaum)  :  in  S.  John  xiii.  21-6  (at  the 
last  supper) :  in  S.  Luke  xxiv.  17  (on  the  way  to  Emmaus) : — the  many 
proposed  omissions,  as  in  S.  Matth.  vi.  13  (the  Doxology) :  in  xvi.  2,  3 
(the  signs  of  the  weatlier)  :  in  S.  Mark  ix.  44  &  46  (the  words  of  woe) :  in 
S.  John  V.  3,  4  (the  Angel  troubling  the  pool),  &c.  Sec.  &c. 


!<)(>  NEW    liEADIXGS  'JT)   BE   DISCUSSED  [Akt. 

Miiicli  S.  Peter  openly  said  of  llie  false  teachers  of  his  day 
who  fell  back  into  the  very  errors  \vhich  they  had  already 
abjured.  The  place  will  be  found  in  2  S.  Peter  ii.  22.  So  singu- 
larly applicable  is  it  to  the  matter  in  hand,  that  sve  can  but 
invite  attention  to  the  quotation  on  our  title-page  and  p.  1. 

And  here  we  make  an  end. 

1,  Those  who  may  have  taken  up  the  present  Article  in 
expectation  of  being  entertained  with  another  of  those  dis- 
cussions (of  which  we  suspect  the  public  must  be  already 
getting  somewhat  weary),  concerning  the  degree  of  ability 
which  the  New  Testament  Ptevisionists  have  displayed  in 
their  rendering  into  English  of  the  Greek,  will  at  first  experi- 
ence disappointment.  Eeaders  of  intelligence,  however,  who 
have  been  at  the  pains  to  follow  us  through  the  foregoing 
pages,  will  be  constrained  to  admit  that  we  have  done  more 
faithful  service  to  the  cause  of  Sacred  Truth  by  the  course 
we  have  been  pursuing,  than  if  we  had  merely  multiplied 
instances  of  incorrect  and  unsatisfactory  Translation.  There 
is  (and  this  we  endeavoured  to  explain  at  the  outset)  a  ques- 
tion of  prior  interest  and  far  graver  importance  which  has  to 
be  settled  ^7'.S'^,  viz.  the  degree  of  confidence  which  is  due  to 
the  underlying  new  Greek  text  which  our  Povisionists  have 
constructed.  In  other  words,  before  discussing  their  7iew 
licnderings,  we  have  to  examine  their  ncv)  Bcadi/if/x}  The 
silence  which  Scholars  have  hitherto  maintained  on  this  part 


^  It  cannot  be  too  plainly  or  too  often  stated  that  learned  rrebendary 
Scrivener  is  luhoUy  ffuiltless  of  the  many  spurious  'Kcadin<4s'  with  wliiili 
a  majority  of  his  co-Kevisionists  have  corrupted  the  Word  of  God.  He 
pleaded  faithfully,— but  he  pleailed  in  vain.— It  is  right  also  to  state 
that  the  scholarlike  Bp.  of  S.  Andrews  (Dr.  Charles  Wordsworth)  has 
fully  purged  himself  of  the  suspicion  of  complicity,  by  his  printed  (not 
])ub]is]icd)  remonstrances  with  his  colleagues. — The  excellent  Bp.  of 
Salisbury  (Dr.  Moberly)  attended  only  121  of  their  407  meetings;  and 
that  judicious  scholar,  the  Abp.  of  Dublin  (Dr.  Trench)  only  G3.  Tlic 
reader  will  find  more  on  this  sul)icct  at  the  close  of  Art.  II.,— pp.  228-150. 


I.]  BEFORE   NEW  RENDERINGS.  107 

of  the  subject  is  to  ourselves  scarcely  intelligible.  But  it  makes 
us  the  more  anxious  to  invite  attention  to  this  neglected  aspect 
of  the  problem ;  the  rather,  because  we  have  thoroughly  con- 
vinced ourselves  that  the  '  new  Greek  Text '  put  forth  by  the 
Eevisionists  of  our  Authorized  Version  is  uttcrhj  inadmis- 
sible. The  traditional  Text  has  been  departed  from  by  them 
nearly  6000  times, — almost  invariably /or  the  ivorsc. 

2.  Fully  to  dispose  of  all  these  multitudinous  corruptions 
would  require  a  bulky  Treatise.  But  the  reader  is  requested 
to  observe  that,  if  we  are  right  in  the  few  instances  we 
have  culled  out  from  the  mass, — then  ive  are  right  in  all.  If 
we  have  succeeded  in  proving  that  the  little  handful  of 
authorities  on  which  the  '  new  Greek  Text '  depends,  are  the 
reverse  of  trustworthy, — are  absolutely  misleading, — then, 
we  have  cut  away  from  under  the  Eevisionists  the  very 
ground  on  which  they  have  hitherto  been  standing.  And  in 
that  case,  the  structure  which  they  have  built  up  throughout 
a  decade  of  years,  with  such  evident  self-complacency,  col- 
lapses '  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  vision.' 

3.  For  no  one  may  flatter  himself  that,  by  undergoing 
a  further  process  of  '  Kevision,'  the  '  Revised  Version '  may 
after  all  be  rendered  trustworthy.  The  eloquent  and  excel- 
lent Bishop  of  Deny  is  '  convinced  that,  with  all  its  undeni- 
able merits,  it  will  have  to  be  somewhat  extensively  revised.' 
And  so  perhaps  are  we.  But  (what  is  a  far  more  important 
circumstance)  we  are  further  convinced  that  a  prior  act  of 
penance  to  be  sul)mitted  to  by  the  Eevisers  would  be  the 
restoration  of  the  underlying  Greek  Text  to  very  nearly — not 
quite — the  state  in  which  they  found  it  when  they  entered 
upon  their  ill-advised  undertaking.  '  Very  nearly  —  not 
quite : '  for,  in  not  a  few  particulars,  the  '  Textus  receptus ' 
does  call  for  Eevision,  certainly ;  although  Eevision  on 
entirely  different  principles  from  those  which  arc  found  to 
have  prevailed  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamljer.     To  mention  a 


108  INDISPENSABLE   CONDITION   OF  A  [Art. 

single  instance  : — When  our  Lord  first  sent  forth  His  Twelve 
Apostles,  it  was  certainly  no  part  of  His  ministerial  com- 
mission to  them  to  '  raise  the  dead '  (veKpov^  iyeipere,  S. 
Matthew  x.  8).  This  is  easily  demonstrable.  Yet  is  the 
spurious  clause  retained  by  our  Eevisionists ;  because  it  is 
found  in  those  corrupt  witnesses — n  b  c  d,  and  the  Latin 
copies.^  When  will  men  learn  unconditionally  to  put  away 
from  themselves  the  weak  superstition  which  is  fur  investing 
with  oracular  authority  the  foregoing  quaternion  of  demon- 
strably depraved  Codices  ? 

4.  '  It  may  be  said ' — (to  quote  again  from  Bp.  Alexander's 
recent  Charge), — '  that  there  is  a  want  of  modesty  in  dissent- 
ing from  the  conclusions  of  a  two-thirds  majority  of  a  body 
so  learned.  But  the  rough  process  of  counting  heads  imposes 
unduly  on  the  imagination.  One  could  easily  name  ei(/ht 
in  that  assembly,  whose  unanimity  would  be  practically 
almost  decisive ;  but  we  have  no  means  of  knowing  that 
these  did  not  form  the  minority  in  resisting  the  changes 
which  we  most  regret.'  The  Bishop  is  speaking  of  the 
English  llevision.  Having  regard  to  the  Greek  Text  exclu- 
sively, loe  also  (strange  to  relate)  had  singled  out  exactly  eight 
from  the  members  of  the  New  Testament  company — Divines 
of  undoubted  orthodoxy,  who  for  their  splendid  scholarship 
and  proficiency  in  the  best  learning,  or  else  for  their  refined 
taste  and  admirable  judgment,  might  (as  we  humbly  think), 
under  certain  safeguards,  have  been  safely  entrusted  even  with 
the  responsibility  of  revising  the  Sacred  Text.  Under  the 
guidance  of  Prebendary  Scrivener  (who  among  living  English- 
men is  facile  princcps  in  these  pvirsuits)  it  is  scarcely  to  be 
anticipated  that,  when  unanimous,  such  Divines  would  ever 


*  Euscbiu.s, — Basil, — Chrysostom  (in  loc), — Jerome, — Juvcucus, — omit 
the  words.  P.  E.  Pusey  found  tliem  in  no  Syriac  copy.  But  the  conclusive 
evidence  is  supplied  by  the  Manuscripts;  not  more  than  1  out  of  20  of 
which  contain  this  clause. 


I:]  TEUSTWOKTHY   EECENSION   OF   THE   TEXT.  109 

have  materially  erred.  But  then,  of  course,  a  previous  life- 
long familiarity  with  the  Science  of  Textual  Criticism,  or  at 
least  leisure  for  prosecuting  it  now,  for  ten  or  twenty  years, 
with  absolutely  undivided  attention, — would  be  the  indispen- 
sable requisite  for  the  success  of  such  an  undertaking ;  and 
this,  undeniably,  is  a  qualification  rather  to  be  desiderated 
than  looked  for  at  the  hands  of  English  Divines  of  note  at 
the  present  day.  On  the  other  hand,  (loyalty  to  our  Master 
constrains  us  to  make  the  avowal,)  the  motley  assortment  of 
names,  twenty-eight  in  all,  specified  by  Dr.  Newth,  at  p.  125 
of  his  interesting  little  volume,  joined  to  the  fact  that  the 
average  attendance  ivas  not  so  many  as  sixteen, — concerning 
whom,  moreover,  the  fact  has  transpired  that  some  of  the 
most  judicious  of  their  number  often  declined  to  give  amj 
vote  at  all, — is  by  no  means  calculated  to  inspire  any  sort  of 
confidence.  But,  in  truth,  considerable  familiarity  with  these 
pursuits  may  easily  co-exist  with  a  natural  inaptitude  for 
their  successful  cultivation,  which  shall  prove  simply  fatal. 
In  support  of  this  remark,  one  has  but  to  refer  to  the 
instance  supplied  by  Dr.  Hort.  The  Sacred  Text  has  none 
to  fear  so  much  as  those  who  feel  rather  than  think :  who 
imagine  rather  than  reason :  who  rely  on  a  supposed  verify- 
ing faculty  of  their  own,  of  which  they  are  able  to  render 
no  intelligible  account;  and  who,  (to  use  Bishop  Ellicott's 
phrase,)  have  the  misfortune  to  conceive  themselves  possessed 
of  a  "■  ipowcr  of  divining  the  Original  Text," — which  would 
be  even  diverting,  if  the  practical  result  of  their  self-decep- 
tion were  not  so  exceedingly  serious. 

5.  In  a  future  number,  we  may  perhaps  enquire  into  the 
measure  of  success  which  has  attended  the  Eevisers'  Revision 
of  the  English  of  our  Authorized  Version  of  1611.  We  have 
occupied  ourselves  at  this  time  exclusively  with  a  survey 
of  the  seriously  mutilated  and  otherwise  grossly  depraved 
NEW  Gkeek  Text,  on  which  their  edifice  has  been  reared. 


110  A   LIGHTHOUSE   ON   THE   GOODWIN   SANDS.     [Akt.  I. 

And  the  circumstance  which,  in  conclusion,  we  desire  to 
impress  upon  our  Readers,  is  this, — that  the  insecurity 
of  that  foundation  is  so  alarming,  that,  except  as  a  con- 
cession due  to  the  solemnity  of  the  undertakinn;  just  now 
under  review,  further  Criticism  might  very  well  be  dis- 
pensed with,  as  a  thing  superfluous.  Even  could  it  be  proved 
concerning  the  superstructure,  that  '  it  had  been  \ever  s6\  vjell 
huildcd,'  ^  (to  adopt  another  of  our  Eevisionists'  unhappy  per- 
versions of  Scripture,)  the  fatal  objection  would  remain,  viz. 
that  it  is  not  'founded  ujwn  the  rock.'  ^  It  has  been  the  ruin 
of  the  present  undertaking — as  far  as  the  Sacred  Text  is  con- 
cerned— that  the  majority  of  the  Eevisionist  body  have  been 
misled  throughout  by  the  oracular  decrees  and  impetuous 
advocacy  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort ;  wlio,  with  the  purest 
intentions  and  most  laudable  industry,  have  constructed  a 
Text  demonstrably  more  remote  from  the  Evangelic  verity, 
than  any  which  has  ever  yet  seen  the  light.  '  The  old  is 
good,'^  say  the  Revisionists :  but  we  venture  solemnly  to 
assure  them  that  '  the  old  is  letter  ;'*  and  that  this  remark 
holds  every  Ijit  as  true  of  their  Revision  of  the  Greek 
throughout,  as  of  their  infelicitous  exhiljition  of  S.  Luke  v.  39. 
To  attempt,  as  they  have  done,  to  build  the  Text  of  the  New 
Testament  on  a  tissue  of  unproved  assertions  and  the  eccen- 
tricities of  a  single  codex  of  bud  character,  is  about  as  hopeful 
a  proceeding  as  would  be  the  attempt  to  erect  an  Eddystone 
li'dithouse  on  the  Goodwin  Sands. 


^  '  Revised  Text '  of  S.  Luke  vi.  48. 

2  'Authorized  Version,'  supported  by  a  c  d  and  12  other  uncials,  the 
whole  body  of  the  cursives,  the  Syriac,  Latin,  and  Gotliic  versions. 

3  '  Revised  Text '  of  S.  Luke  v.  39. 

*  'Authorized  Version,'  supported  liy  a  cand  1  !  otlicr  uncials,  thewlitile 
body  of  the  cursives,  and  idl  the  versions  except  the  Teschito  and  the 
Coptic. 


ARTICLE   II. 
THE   NEW  ENGLISH   VERSION. 


"  Such  is  the  time-honoured  Version  which  we  have  heen  called  upon 
to  revise !  We  have  had  to  study  this  great  Version  carefully  and 
minutely,  line  by  line ;  and  the  longer  we  have  been  engaged  upon  it  the 
more  we  have  learned  to  admire  its  simplicity,  its  dignity,  its  power,  its 
Itappy  turns  of  expression,  its  general  accuracy,  and  we  must  not  fail  to 
aild,  the  music  of  its  cadences,  and  the  felicities  of  its  rhythm.  To  render 
a  work  that  had  reached  this  high  standard  of  excellence,  still  more 
excellent ;  to  increase  its  fidelity,  without  destroying  its  charm ;  was  the 
task  committed  to  us." — Preface  to  the  Kevised  Version. 

"  To  pass  from  the  one  to  the  other,  is,  as  it  were,  to  alight  from  a 
well-built  and  well-hung  carriage  which  elides  easily  over  a  macadamized 
road, — and  to  get  into  one  ivhich  has  bad  springs  or  none  at  all,  and  in 
which  you  are  jolted  in  ruts  with  aching  bones  over  the  stones  of  a  newly- 
mended  and  rarely  traversed  road,  like  some  of  the  roads  in  our  North 
Lincolnshire  villages." — Bishop  Wordsworth.' 

"  No  Revision  at  the  present  day  could  hope  to  meet  with  an  hour's 
acceptance  if  it  failed  to  preserve  the  tone,  rhythm,  and  diction  of  the 
present  Authorized  Version." — Bishop  Ellicott.^ 


'  Address  at  Lincoln  Diocesan  Conference, — p.  1(5. 
-  On  Revision, — p.  99. 


THE 

EEVISION    REVISED. 


Article   II.— THE   NEW   ENGLISH   VERSION. 


"  I  testify  unto  every  man  that  heareth  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of 
this  Book, — If  any  man  shall  add  unto  these  things,  God  shall  add  unto 
him  the  plagues  that  are  written  in  this  Book. 

"  And  if  any  man  shall  take  away  from  the  words  of  the  Book  of 
this  prophecy,  God  shall  take  away  his  part  out  of  the  Book  of  Life,  and 
out  of  the  holy  City,  and  from  the  things  which  are  written  in  this  Book." 
— Eevelation  xxii.  18,  19. 

Whatever  may  be  urged  in  favour  of  Biblical  Eevision,  it 
is  at  least  undeniable  that  the  undertaking  involves  a  tre- 
mendous risk.  Our  Authorized  Version  is  the  one  religious 
link  which  at  present  binds  together  ninety  millions  of 
English-speaking  men  scattered  over  the  earth's  surface.  Is 
it  reasonable  that  so  unutterably  precious,  so  sacred  a  bond 
should  be  endangered,  for  the  sake  of  representing  certain 
words  more  accurately, — here  and  there  translating  a  tense 
with  greater  precision, — getting  rid  of  a  few  archaisms  ?  It 
may  be  confidently  assumed  that  no  '  Eevision '  of  our 
Authorized  Version,  however  judiciously  executed,  will  ever 
occupy  the  place  in  public  esteem  which  is  actually  enjoyed 
by  the  work  of  the  Translators  of  1611, — the  noblest  literary 
work  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  language.  We  shall  in  fact  never 
have  another  '  Authorized  Version.'  And  this  single  con- 
sideration may  be  thought  absolutely  fatal  to  the  project, 
except  in  a  greatly  modified  form.  To  be  brief, — As  a 
companion  in  the  study  and  for  private  edification :  as  a 
book  of  reference  for  critical  purposes,  especially  in  respect 

I 


114  DISASTROUS   RESULTS   OF   REVISION.  [Art. 

of  difficult  and  controverted  passages  : — we  hold  tliat  a 
revised  edition  of  tlie  Authorized  Version  of  our  English 
Bible,  (if  executed  with  consummate  ability  and  learning,) 
would  at  any  time  be  a  work  of  inestimable  value.  The 
method  of  such  a  performance,  whether  by  marginal  Notes 
or  in  some  other  way,  we  forbear  to  determine.  But 
certainly  only  as  a  handmaid  is  it  to  be  desired.  As  some- 
thing intended  to  sujjerscde  our  present  English  Bible,  we  are 
thoroughly  convinced  that  the  j)roject  of  a  rival  Translation 
is  not  to  be  entertained  for  a  moment.  For  ourselves,  we 
deprecate  it  entirely. 

On  the  other  hand,  ivJw  could  have  possibly  foreseen  what 
has  actually  come  to  pass  since  the  Convocation  of  the 
Southern  Province  (in  Feb.  1870)  declared  itself  favourable 
to  '  a  Eevision  of  the  Authorized  Version,'  and  appointed  a 
Committee  of  Divines  to  undertake  the  work  ?  Who  was 
to  suppose  that  the  Instructions  given  to  the  Eevisionists 
would  be  by  them  systematically  disregarded  ?  Who  was 
to  imagine  that  an  utterly  untrustworthy  '  new  Greek  Text,' 
constructed  on  mistaken  principles,  —  (say  rather,  on  no 
jirinciplcs  at  all,) — would  be  the  fatal  result  ?  To  speak 
more  truly, —  Who  could  liave  anticipated  that  the  o])por- 
tunity  would  have  been  adroitly  seized  to  inflict  upon  the 
Church  the  text  of  Drs.  Wcstcott  and  Hort,  in  all  its 
essential  features, — a  text  whicli,  as  will  be  found  elsewhere 
largely  explained,  we  hold  to  l)e  the  most  virious  Ecccnsion  of 
the  original  Greek  in  existence  ?  Above  all, —  Who  was  to 
foresee  that  instead  of  removing  'plain  and  clear  errors' 
from  our  Version,  the  Itevisionists, — (besides  systematically 
removing  out  of  sight  so  many  of  the  genuine  utterances  of 
the  Spirit,) — would  themselves  introduce  a  countless  number 
of  blemishes,  unknown  to  it  before  ?  Lastly,  how  was  it  to 
have  been  believed  that  the  Ifevisionists  wouhl  show  them- 


II.]  BLUNDEES   RECORDED   IN   THE   MARGIN.  115 

selves  industrious  in  sowing  broadcast  over  four  continents 
doubts  as  to  the  Truth  of  Scripture,  which  it  will  never 
be  in  their  power  either  to  remove  or  to  recal  ?  Ncscit  vox 
missa  rcccrti. 

For,  tlie  ill-advised  practice  of  recording,  in  the  margin  of 
an  English  Bible,  certain  of  the  blunders — (such  things 
cannot  by  any  stretch  of  courtesy  be  styled  '  Various  Eead- 
ings  ') — which  disfigure  '  some  '  or  '  many '  '  ancient  authori- 
ties,' can  only  result  in  hopelessly  unsettling  the  faith  of 
millions.  It  cannot  be  defended  on  the  plea  of  candour, — 
the  candour  wliich  is  determined  that  men  shall  '  know  the 
worst.'  '  The  tvorst '  has  NOT  been  told :  and  it  were  dishonesty 
to  insinuate  that  it  has.  If  all  the  cases  were  faitlifully 
exhibited  where  '  a  few,'  '  some,'  or  '  many  ancient  authori- 
ties '  read  differently  from  what  is  exhibited  in  the  actual 
Text,  not  only  would  tlie  margin  prove  insufficient  to  contain 
the  record,  but  the  very  page  itself  would  not  nearly  suffice. 
Take  a  single  instance  (the  first  which  comes  to  mind),  of 
the  thing  referred  to.  Such  illustrations  might  be  multiplied 
to  any  extent : — 

In  S.  Luke  iii.  22,  (in  place  of  '  Thou  art  my  beloved  Son ; 
in  Thcc  I  am  well  pleased,')  tlie  following  authorities  of 
the  Ilnd,  Ilird  and  IVth  centuries,  read, — '  this  day  have  I 
hcgotten  Thee ;'  viz. — codex  D  and  the  most  ancient  copies  of 
the  old  Latin  (a,  b,  c,  ff-^,  1),— Justin  Martyr  in  three  places  ^ 
(a.d.  140),— Clemens  Alex.^  (a.d.  190),— and  Methodius^ 
(a.d.  290)  among  the  Greeks.  Lactantius^  (a.d.  300), — Hilary^ 
(a.d.  350),— Juvencus «  (a.d.  330),— Faustus '  (a.d.400),  and— 


'  Dial.  capp.  88  and  103  (pp.  306,  310,  352). 

2  P.  113.  ^  Ap.  Galland.  iii.  719,  c  d. 

*  iv.  1.5  (ap.  Gall.  iv.  296  b).  =  42  b,  961  e,  1094  a. 

''  Ap.  GaJlaiul.  iv.  60.5  (ver.  365-6).  ''  Ap.  Aug.  viii.  423  e. 

I  2 


UG  UNFAIRNESS   OF    rilF,   TEXTUAL  [Art. 

Augustine '  amongst  the  Latins.  Tlie  reading  in  question 
was  doubtless  derived  from  the  Ehionitc  Gospel  ^  (Ilnd  cent.). 
Now,  we  desire  to  have  it  explained  to  us  u-hy  an  exhibition 
of  t]i6  Text  suj^ported  by  such  an  amount  of  first-rate 
primitive  testimony  as  the  preceding,  obtains  no  notice  what- 
ever in  our  Eevisionists'  margin, — if  indeed  it  was  the  object 
of  their  perpetually  recurring  marginal  annotations,  to  put 
the  unlearned  reader  on  a  level  with  the  critical  Scholar; 
to  keep  nothing  back  from  liim ;  and  so  forth?  ...  It 
is  the  gross  one-sidedness,  the  patent  uvfalriicss,  in  a  critical 
point  of  view,  of  this  work,  (which  professes  to  be  nothing 
else  but  a  Revision  of  the  English  Version  of  1611,) — which 
chiefly  shocks  and  offends  us. 

For,  on  the  (jtlier  hand,  of  what  possible  use  can  it  be 
to  encumber  the  margin  of  S.  Luke  x.  41,  42  (for  example), 
M'ith  tlie  announcement  that  '  A  few  ancient  authorities  read 
Martha,  Martha,  thou  art  tronbled :  Mary  hath  ehosen  &c.'  (the 
fact  being,  that  D  alone  of  MSS.  omits  '  careful  and '  .  .  . 
'  about  niayiy  things.  But  one  thing  is  needful,  and '...)? 
With  the  record  of  this  circumstance,  is  it  reasonable  (we 
ask)  to  choke  up  our  English  margin, — to  create  perplexity 
and   to   insinuate   doubt?      The    author   of    the    foresoini; 


'  "Vox  ilia  Patris,  qua'  siqicr  baptizatum  facta  est  E(jo  hodie  gcnui  tc," 
(Knchind.  c.  49  [Ojip.  vi.  215  a]):— 

"  lUud  vero  quod  nonnulli  codices  habent  secundum  Lucani,  hoc  ilia 
voce  sonuisse  quod  ia  Psalmo  scriptum  est,  Films  mens  es  tu :  ego  hodie 
genui  te,  quanquam  in  antiquioribus  codicibus  Grjccis  non  inveniri  j^erhi- 
beatur,  tamen  si  aliquibus  fide  dignis  cxemplaribus  confinuari  possit, 
quid  aliud  quani  utrumque  intelligendum  est  quolibct  verborum  ordine 
dc  cajlo  sonuisse  ?"'  (De  Cons.  Ev.  ii.  c.  11  [OpjK  iii.  P.  ii.  K!  d  e]).  Augus- 
tine seems  to  allude  to  what  is  found  to  have  existed  in  the  Ehionite 
Gospel. 

^  Fipiphnnius  (i.  138  b)  quotes  the  pas.sagc  whicli  contains  tlie  state- 
ment. 


II.]  ANNOTATIONS   IN   THE   MARGIN.  117 

marginal  Annotation  was  of  course  aware  that  the  same 
'  singular  codex '  (as  Bp.  EUicott  styles  cod.  d)  omits,  in 
S.  Luke's  Gospel  alone,  no  less  than  1552  words :  and  he  will 
of  coui>se  have  ascertained  (by  counting)  that  the  words  in 
S.  Luke's  Gospel  amount  to  19,941.  Wliy  then  did  he  not 
tell  the  whole  truth  ;  and  instead  of  '  &c.'  proceed  as  follows  ? 
— '  But  inasmuch  as  cod.  D  is  so  scandalously  corrupt  that 
about  one  word  in  thirteen  is  missing  throughout,  the  absence 
of  nine  words  in  this  place  is  of  no  manner  of  importance  or 
significancy.  The  precious  saying  omitted  is  above  suspi- 
cion, and  the  first  half  of  the  present  Annotation  might  have 
been  sj)ared.'  .  .  .  We  submit  that  a  Note  like  that,  although 
rather  'singular'  in  style,  really  would  have  been  to  some 
extent  helpful, — if  not  to  the  learned,  at  least  to  the  un- 
learned reader. 

In  the  meantime,  unlearned  and  learned  readers  alike 
are  competent  to  see  that  the  foregoing  perturbation  of 
S.  Luke  X.  41,  42  rests  on  the  same  manuscript  authority 
as  the  perturbation  of  cli.  iii.  22,  which  immediately  preceded 
it.  The  Patristic  attestation,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  reading 
which  has  been  promoted  to  the  margin,  is  almost  nil: 
whereas  that  of  the  neglected  place  has  been  shown  to  be 
considerable,  very  ancient,  and  of  high  respectability. 

But  in  fact, — (let  the  Truth  be  plainly  stated;  for,  when 
God's  Word  is  at  stake,  circumlocution  is  contemptiljle, 
while  concealment  would  be  a  crime ;)  — '  Faithfulness ' 
towards  the  public,  a  stern  resolve  that  the  English  reader 
'shall  know  the  worst,'  and  all  that  kind  of  thing, — such 
considerations  have  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the 
matter.  A  vastly  different  principle  has  prevailed  witii  the 
Revisionists.  Themselves  the  dupes  of  an  utterly  mistaken 
Theory  of  Textual  Criticism,  their  supreme   solicitude  has 


118  UNFAIR   SUPPRESSION   OF  SCRIPTURE.  [Art. 

been  to  im^fose  thai  same  Tlicory, — {which  is  Wcstcott  and 
Hart's,) — witli  all  its  Litter  consequences,  on  the  unlearned 
and  nnsuspicioiis  public. 

We  shall  of  course  be  indignantly  called  upon  to  explain 
•what  we  mean  by  so  injurious — so  damning — an  imputation  ? 
For  all  reply,  we  are  content  to  refer  to  the  sample  of  our 
meaning  which  will  be  found  below,  in  pp.  137-8.  The  expo- 
sure of  what  has  there  been  shown  to  be  the  method  of  the 
Eevisionists  in  respect  of  S.  Mark  vi.  11,  might  be  repeated 
hundreds  of  times.  It  would  in  fact  Jill  a  volume.  We  shall 
therefore  pass  on,  when  we  have  asked  the  Eevisionists  in 
turn — How  then  have  deircd  so  effectually  to  blot  out  those 
many  precious  words  from  the  Book  of  Life,  that  no  mere 
English  reader,  depending  on  the  llevised  Version  for  his 
knowledge  of  the  Gospels,  can  by  possibility  suspect  their 
existence  ?  .  .  .  Supposing  even  that  it  luas  the  calamitous 
result  of  their  mistaken  principles  that  they  found  them- 
selves constrained  on  countless  occasions,  to  omit  from  their 
Text  precious  sayings  of  our  Lord  and  His  Apostles, — what 
possible  excuse  will  they  offer  for  not  having  preserved  a 
record  of  words  so  amply  attested,  ett  least  in  their  margin  ? 

Even  so,  however,  the  whole  amount  of  the  mischief  which 
has  been  effected  by  our  Pievisionists  has  not  been  stated. 
Eor  the  Greek  Text  which  they  have  invented  proves  to  be 
so  hoj)elessly  depraved  throughout,  that  if  it  Avere  to  be 
tlirust  upon  the  Church's  acceptance,  we  should  be  a  tliou- 
sand  times  worse  off  than  we  were  with  the  Text  which 
Erasnnis  and  the  Complutensian, — Stephens,  and  Beza,  and 
the  Elzevirs, — bequeathed  to  us  upwards  of  three  centuries 
ago.  On  this  part  of  the  subject  "we  have  remarked  at  length 
already  []ip.  1-1  U>] :  yet  shall  we  be  constrained  to  recur  once 
and  again  to  the  underlying  Greek  Text  of  the  IJevisionists, 


II.]  TEXT   OF   S.    IMATTII.    I.    18,   DEPRAVED.  119 

inasmuch  as  it  is  impossible  to  stir  in  any  direction  with  the 
task  before  us,  without  being  painfully  reminded  of  its  exist- 
ence. Not  only  do  the  familiar  Parables,  Miracles,  Discourses 
of  our  Lord,  trip  us  up  at  every  step,  but  we  cannot  open 
the  first  page  of  the  Gospel — no,  nor  indeed  read  the  first  line 
— without  being  brought  to  a  standstill.     Thus, 

1.  S.  Matthew  begins, — '  The  book  of  the  generation  of 
Jesus  Christ  '  (ver.  1). — Good.  But  here  the  margin  volun- 
teers two  pieces  of  information :  first, — '  Or,  hirth :  as  in 
ver.  18.'  We  refer  to  ver.  18,  and  read — '  Now  the  birth  of 
Jesus  Christ  was  on  this  wise.'  Good  again ;  but  the 
margin  says, — '  Ov,  generation:  as  in  ver.  1.'  Are  we  then 
to  understand  tliat  the  same  Greek  word,  diversely  rendered 
in  English,  occurs  in  both  places  ?  We  refer  to  the  '  new 
Greek  Text : '  and  there  it  stands, — <yev€aL<;  in  either  verse. 
But  if  the  word  be  the  same,  why  (on  the  Eevisers'  theory) 
is  it  diversely  rendered  ? 

In  the  meantime,  who  knows  not  that  there  is  all  the 
difference  in  the  world  between  S.  Matthew's  jeneo'd,  in 
ver.  1, — and  the  same  S.  Matthew's  Yt'NNHo-i?,  in  ver.  18? 
The  latter,  the  Evangelist's  announcement  of  the  circum- 
stances of  the  human  Nativity  of  Christ  :  the  former,  the 
Evangelist's  unobtrusive  way  of  recalling  the  Septuagintal 
rendering  of  Gen.  ii,  4  and  v.  1 :  ^  the  same  Evangelist's 
calm  method  of  guiding  the  devout  and  thoughtful  student 
to  discern  in  the  Gospel  the  History  of  the  '  new  Creation,' — 
by  thus  providing  that  when  first  the  Gospel  opens  its  lips,  it 
shall  syllable  the  name  of  the  first  book  of  the  elder  Cove- 
nant ?  We  are  pointing  out  that  it  more  than  startles — it 
supremely  offends — one   who  is  even   slenderly  acquainted 


^   AvTT]  T]  /^I'/^Xos  yfvi'aeois — ovfuwov  kuI  yrjy  :  also — di^Opwnoiv. 


120  TENNHZIZ    \(yr    TENEZIZ  THE  [Art. 

with  the  treasures  of  wisddiu  liid  in  the  very  diction  of  the 
N.  T.  Scriptures,  to  discover  that  a  deliberate  eftbrt  has  ])een 
made  to  get  rid  of  the  very  foremost  of  those  notes  of  Divine 
intelligence,  hy  confounding  two  words  which  all  down  the 
ages  have  been  carefully  kept  distinct ;  and  that  this  effort 
is  the  result  of  an  exaggerated  estimate  of  a  few  codices 
which  happen  to  he  written  in  the  uncial  character,  viz. 
two  of  the  IVth  century  (bn);  one  of  the  Vth  (c) ;  two  of 
the  Vlth  (r  z)  ;  one  of  the  IXth  (a)  ;  one  of  the  Xth  (s). 

The  Versions  ^—(Avhicli  are  our  uldcd  witnesses) — are 
perforce  only  partially  helpful  here.  Note  however,  that  tJie 
only  one  which  favours  yeveai^  is  the  heretical  Harkleian 
Syriac,  executed  in  the  Vllth  century.  The  Peschito  and 
Cureton's  Syriac  distinguish  l)etween  lytvea-a  in  ver.  1  and 
'yei'vrja-L<i  in  ver.  18:  as  do  the  Slavonic  and  the  Aral)ian 
Versions.  The  Egyptian,  Armenian,  iEthioi)ic  and  Georgian, 
have  only  one  word  for  both.  Let  no  one  suppose  however 
that  therefore  their  testimony  is  amlnguous.  It  is  'yevi>7](TL<i 
{not  jev€aL<;)  which  they  exhibit,  both  in  ver.  1  and  in  ver.  18.^ 
The  Latin  {' (jeneratio')  'm  an  e(|uivocal  rendering  certainly: 
but  the  earliest  Latin  writer  who  cpiotes  the  two  places, 
(viz.  Tertullian)  employs  the  word  '  f/enitnra'  in  S.  Matth. 
i.  1, — but  '  nativitcis'  in  ver.  18, — wliicli  no  one  seems  to 
have    noticed.^     Now,    Tertullian,    (as    one    wlio    sometimes 


^  For  my  information  on  this  subject,  I  am  entirely  indebted  to  one 
wlio  is  always  liberal  in  communicating  the  lore  of  which  he  is  perhaps  the 
sole  living  depositary  in  England, — the  Rev.  Dr.  S.  C.  Malan.  See  his 
Seven  VJiapters  of  the  Revision  of  1881,  revised, — p.  3.  But  especially 
sliould  the  reader  be  referred  to  Dr.  Malan's  learned  dissertation  on  this  very 
subject  in  his  Select  Headings  in  Westcott  and  Jlorfs  Or.  Text  of  S. 
Afatth.,—\)Y>.  1  to  22. 

2  So  Dr.  Malan  in  his  Select  licadiuys  (soc  above  note  '), — ))]>.  15, 17,  l;i. 

^  "Liber  gtniturx  Jesu  Christ!  filii  I 'avid,  lilii  Abraham"  .  .  .  "Gra- 
datim  ordo  dodu(.'ifiu'  ad  Cliristi  nafivita/cm.'" — J)t  Canit  Christi,  c.  '11. 


II.]  TRUE   READING   OF   S.   MATTH.   I.    18.  121 

Avrote  in  Greek,)  is  known  to  have  been  conversant  with 
the  Greek  copies  of  his  day;  and  'his  day,'  be  it  remem- 
bered, is  A.D.  190.  He  evidently  recognized  the  parallelism 
between  S.  Matt.  i.  1  and  Gen.  ii.  4, — where  the  old  Latin 
exhibits  'liber  crcaturie'  or  ' facturse,'  as  the  rendering  of 
^i^Xo<i  7ei^eo-e&)9.  And  so  much  for  the  testimony  of  the 
Versions. 

But  on  reference  to  Manuscript  and  to  Patristic  authority  ^ 
Ave  are  encountered  by  an  overwhelming  amount  of  testi- 
mony for  yevvTja-i'i  in  ver.  18  :  and  this,  considering  the 
nature  of  the  case,  is  an  extraordinary  circumstance.  Quite 
plain  is  it  that  the  Ancients  were  wide  awake  to  the  differ- 
ence between  spelling  the  word  with  one  N  or  with  two, — 
as  the  little  dissertation  of  the  heretic  ISTestorius  ^  in  itself 
would  be  enough  to  prove.  T€vvr]cn<;,  in  the  meantime,  is 
the  word  employed  by  Justin  M.,^ — by  Clemens  Alex.,* — ])y 
Athanasius,^ — by  Gregory  of  Nazianzus,^ — by  Cyril  Alex.,^ 
— by  ISTestorius,^  —  by  Chrysostom,*  —  l^y  Theodorus    Mop- 


^  A  friendly  critic  complains  that  we  do  not  specify  which  editions  of  the 
Fathers  we  quote.  Our  reply  is — This  [was]  a  Review,  not  a  Treatise.  We 
are  constrained  to  omit  such  details.  Briefly,  we  alwaj's  quote  the  best 
Edition.  Critical  readers  can  experience  no  difficulty  in  verifying  our 
references.  A  few  details  shall  however  be  added :  Justin  (  Otto) :  Irenteus 
{Slier en):  Clemens  Al.  {Potter):  TertuUian  {Oehler):  Cyprian  {Baluzi-): 
Eusebius  {Gais/ord):  Athanas.  (1698):  Greg.  Nj^ss.  (1638):  Epiphan. 
(1622):  Didymus  (1769):  Ephraem  Syr.  (1732):  Jerome  {Vallarsi) : 
Nilus  (1668-73) :  Chrysostom  {Montfaucon) :  Cyril  {Aubert) :  Isidorus 
(1638):  Tlieodoret  {Schidze):  Maximus  (1675):  John  Damascene  (Le- 
quien) :  Photius  (1653).  Most  of  tlie  others  (as  Origen,  Greg.  Nazianz., 
Basil,  Cyril  of  Jer.,  Ambrose,  Hilary,  Augustine),  are  quoted  from  the 
Benedictine  editions.  When  we  say  '  Mai,'  we  always  mean  his  Nova 
Biblioth.  PP.  1852-71.  By  '  Montfaucon,'  we  mean  the  Nov.  Coll.  PP. 
1 707.     It  is  necessity  that  makes  us  so  brief. 

2  Concilia,  iii.  521  a  to  d.  ^  i_2  340^  i  p_  339  j^^^  gy  (^y^j^^j^^^y 

'  1.  943  c.  «  i.  735.  ^  v.'  363,  676. 

8  ConciL  iii.  325  (=  Cyril  v.-  28  a).  «  vii.  48  ;  viii.  314. 


122  FIKST   TJIilEE   TEXTUAL   ANNOTATIOxNS  [Akt. 

suest./ — and  by  tliree  other  ancients.^  Even  mure  deserving 
of  attention  is  it  that  Irenanis  '  (a.D.  170) — (Avhom  Ger- 
nianus  *  copies  at  tlie  end  of  550  years) — calls  attention  to 
the  difference  between  the  spelling  of  ver.  1  and  ver.  18. 
fSo  does  Didyinus  :  ^ — so  does  Basil :  ® — so  does  Epiphanius.' 
— Origen^  (a.d.  210)  is  even  eloquent  on  the  subject. — Ter- 
tullian  (a.d.  190)  we  have  heard  already. — It  is  a  significant 
circumstance,  that  the  only  Patristic  authorities  discoverable 
on  the  other  side  are  Eusebius,  Theodoret,  and  the  authors 
of  an  heretical  Creed  ^ — whom  Athanasius  holds  up  to  scorn. ^" 
. , .  "Will  the  Kevisionists  still  pretend  to  tell  us  that  yivvrja-a 
in  verse  18  is  a  ' iilain  and  clear  error'  ? 

2.  This,  however,  is  not  all.  Against  the  words  '  of  Jesus 
Christ,'  a  further  critical  annotation  is  volunteered ;  to  the 
effect  that  '  Some  ancient  authorities  read  of  the  Christ.'  In 
reply  to  which,  we  assert  that  not  one  single  known  MS. 
omits  the  word  '  Jesus  : '  whilst  its  presence  is  vouched  for 
by  ps.-Tatian," — Irenteus, — Origen, — Eusebius, — Didymus, — 
Epiphanius, —  Chrysostom,  —  Cyril,  —  in  addition  to  every 
known  Greek  eopy  of  the  Gosjyels,  and  not  a  few  of  the  Ver- 
sions, including  the  Peschito  and  both  the  Egyptian.  What  else 
but  nugatory  therefore  is  such  a  piece  of  information  as  this  ? 

3.  And  so  much  for  the  first,  second,  and  third  Critical 
annotations,  with  which  the  margin  of  the  revised  N.  T.  is 


1  In  Matth.  ii.  IG, 

2  Ps.-Athanas.  ii.  306  and  700 :  ps.-Clirysost.  xii.  r>94. 
'  P.  470.  ••  Gall.  ix.  215. 

5  Trin.  188.  «  i.  250  b.  ^  i.  42G  a  {yivr^a-ii). 

*  Aiacf)(i)fi,  yev€(ns  Koi  ytwrjais  •  yeveais  fiev  yup  (an  Trapa  6)foC 
TVputTJ]  irKatTi^,  ytwrjais  8i  17  eV  Kar<iSiVr;y  rnii  duvarov  8ia  ti)v  Trapdl^aaiv  (^ 
d\\r)Xo}i'  ^tn^o^r). — Cxallaiul.  xiv.  Appoid.  ])p.  73,  74. 

»  [dated  22  :\Iay  a.i).  359]  ap.  Atlian.  i.  721  d.  "  i.  722  c. 

^^  r.  20  of  the  newly-recovered  Diatessaron,  translated  frum  the  Armenian. 
The  Expobitiun  is  claimed  for  Ephracm  Syrus. 


II.]  INCOREECT. — TEXT   OF   S.   MATTH.   I.   25.  123 

disfigured.  Hoping  that  the  worst  is  now  over,  we  read  on 
till  we  reach  ver.  25,  where  we  encounter  a  statement 
which  fairly  trips  us  up :  viz., — '  And  knew  her  not  till  she 
had  hrmight  forth  a  son.'  No  intimation  is  afforded  of  wliat 
has  been  liere  effected ;  but  in  the  meantime  every  one's 
memory  supplies  the  epithet  ('her  first-born')  which  has 
been  ejected.  Whether  something  very  like  indignation  is 
not  excited  by  the  discovery  that  these  important  words 
have  been  surreptitiously  withdrawn  from  their  place,  let 
others  say.  For  ourselves,  when  we  find  that  only  n  B  z 
and  two  cursive  copies  can  be  produced  for  the  omission, 
we  are  at  a  loss  to  understand  of  what  the  Eevisionists  can 
have  been  dreaming.  Did  they  know^  that, — besides  the 
Vulgate,  the  Peschito  and  Philoxenian  Syriac,  the  ^thiopic, 
Armenian,  Georgian,  and  Slavonian  Versions,^ — a  whole 
torrent  of  Fathers  are  at  hand  to  vouch  for  the  genuineness 
of  the  epithet  they  were  so  unceremoniously  excising  ? 
They  are  invited  to  refer  to  ps.-Tatian,^ — to  Athanasius,* — 
to  Didymus,^ — to  Cyril  of  Jer.,^ — to  Basil,' — to  Greg.  Nyss.,^ 
— to  Ephraem  Syr.,^ — to  Epiphanius,^" — to  Chrysostom," — 
to  Proclus,^^ — to  Isidorus  Pelus.,^^ — to  John  Damasc.,^* — to 
Photius,^^ — to  Nicetas :  ^^ — besides,  of  the  Latins,  Ambrose," 
— the  Opus  imp., — Augustine, — and  not  least  to  Jerome  ^^ — 
eighteen  Fathers  in  all.     And  how  is  it  possible,  (we  ask,) 


^  Dr.  Malan,  Seven  Chapters  of  the  Revision,  revised,  p.  7. 
2  See  below,  note  ".  ^  See  p.  122,  note  ", 

*  i.  938,  952.     Also  ps.-Athan.  ii.  409,  excellently, 
s  Trin.  349.  «  P.  116.  '^  i.  392 ;  ii.  599,  600.  »  ii.  229. 

9   See  p.  122,  note  ".  i"  i.  426, 1049  (5  times),  1052-3. 

"  vii.  76.  12  Gallant!,  ix.  636. 

1'  P.  6  (jov  vlbv  avTrjs :  which  is  also  the  reading  of  Syr'"  and  of  the 
Sahidic.     The  Memphitic  version  represents  t6u  vl6v.) 

"  i.  276.  IS  Gal.  xiii.  662.  ''^  In  Cat.  "  ii.  462. 

1^  '  Ex  hoc  loco  quidam  perversissime  siisjJicantur  et  alios  filios  hubuisse 
Mariara,  dicentes  j^rimogenitum  non  did  nisi  qui  haheut  etf nitres '  (vii.  1  i\ 
He  refers  to  his  treatise  against  Helvidius,  ii.  210. 


124        BP.   ELLICOTT   AND   DR.   WESTCOTT   DECLARE      [Aut. 

that  two  copies  of  the  IVtli  century  (b  x)  and  one  of  the 
Vlth  (z) — all  three  without  a  character — backed  by  a  few 
copies  of  the  old  Latin,  should  be  supposed  to  be  any 
counterpoise  at  all  for  sucli  an  array  of  first-rate  con- 
temporary evidence  as  the  foregoing  ? 

Enough  has  been  offered  by  this  time  to  prove  that  an 
authoritative  Revision  of  the  Greek  Text  will  have  to  pre- 
cede any  future  Revision  of  the  English  of  tlie  New  Testa- 
ment. Ecpially  certain  is  it  that  for  such  an  undertaking 
the  time  has  not  yet  come.  "  It  is  my  honest  conviction," — - 
(remarks  Bp.  Ellicott,  the  Chairman  of  the  Revisionists,) — 
"  that  for  any  authoritative  Revision,  we  are  not  yet  mature : 
either  in  Biblical  learning  or  Hellenistic  scliolarship.'"  ^ 
The  same  opinion  precisely  is  found  to  have  been  cherished 
l)y  Dr.  Westcott  till  witldn  ahout  a  ycar-and-a-halj"^  of  the 
first  assembling  of  the  New  Testament  Company  in  the 
Jerusalem  Chamber,  22nd  June,  1870.  True,  that  we  enjoy 
access  to — suppose  from  1000  to  2000 — more  manusceipts 
than  were  available  when  the  Textus  Recept.  was  formed.  1  hit 
nineteen-twentieths  of  those  documents,  for  any  use  whicli 
lias  been  made  of  them,  might  just  as  well  be  still  lying  in 
the  monastic  libraries  from  which  they  were  obtained. — True, 
tliat  four  out  of  our  five  oldest  uncials  have  come  to  light 
since  the  year  1628  ;  but,  ivlio  hiotos  lioio  to  iise  them  ? — True, 
that  we  have  made  accpiaintance  with  certain  ancient 
Veesions,  about  whicli  little  or  nothing  was  known  2(M) 
years  ago :  but, — (with  the  solitary  exception  of  the  Rev. 
Solomon  Caesar  Malan,  the  learned  Yicar  of  I'roadwindsor, — 
who,  by  the  way,  is  always  ready  to  lend  a  loirli  to  his 
benighted  brethren,) — what  living  Knglisinnan  is  al>le  to  tell 


'  Preface  to  Pastoral  Epistles, — more  fully  quoted  facinu  ]>.  1. 
^  The  Preface  ((luotcil  above  facing  p.  1,)  is  dated  urd  Nov.  1808. 


II.]  REVISION   TO   BE   PREMATURE.  125 

US  what  they  all  contain  ?  A  smattering  acquaintance  with 
the  languages  of  ancient  Egypt, — the  Gothic,  ^thiopic,  Ar- 
menian, Georgian  and  Slavonian  Versions, — is  of  no  manner 
of  avail.  In  no  department,  probably,  is  '  a  little  learning ' 
more  sure  to  prove  '  a  dangerous  thing.' — True,  lastly,  that 
the  Fathers  have  been  better  edited  within  the  last  250 
years :  during  which  period  some  fresh  Patristic  writings 
have  also  come  to  light.  But,  with  the  exception  of  Theo- 
doret  among  the  Greeks  and  Tertullian  among  the  Latins, 
which  of  the  Fathers  has  hcen  satisfactorily  indexed  ? 

Even  what  precedes  is  not  nearly  all.  The  fundayncntal 
Principles  of  the  Science  of  Textual  Criticism  are  not  yet 
apprehended.  In  proof  of  this  assertion,  we  appeal  to  the 
new  Greek  Text  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort,- — which,  beyond 
all  controversy,  is  more  hopelessly  remote  from  the  inspired 
Original  than  any  which  has  yet  appeared.  Let  a  generation 
of  Students  give  themselves  entirely  up  to  this  neglected 
branch  of  sacred  Science.  Let  500  more  Copies  of  the 
Gospels,  Acts,  and  Epistles,  be  diligently  collated.  Let  at 
least  100  of  the  ancient  Lcctionaries  be  very  exactly  collated 
also.  Let  the  most  important  of  the  ancient  Versions  be 
edited  afresh,  and  let  the  languages  in  which  these  are 
written  be  for  the  first  time  really  mastered  by  Englishmen. 
Above  all,  let  the  Fathers  he  called  upon  to  give  up  their 
precious  secrets.  Let  their  writings  be  ransacked  and  indexed, 
and  (where  needful)  let  the  MSS.  of  their  works  be  dili- 
gently inspected,  in  order  that  we  may  know  what  actually 
is  the  evidence  which  they  afford.  Only  so  will  it  ever  l)e 
possible  to  obtain  a  Greek  Text  on  which  absolute  reliance 
may  be  placed,  and  which  may  serve  as  the  basis  for  a 
satisfactory  Revision  of  our  Authorized  Version.  Nay,  let 
whatever  unpublished  works  of  the  ancient  Greek  Fathers  are 
anywhere  known  to  exist, — (and  not  a  few  precious  remains 


12C>         TEXTUAL   CRITICISM   NOT    YET    UNDERSTOOD.      [Aut. 

of  theirs  are  lying  hid  in  great  national  Ii])rarie,s,  both  at 
lionie  and  abroad,) — let  these  be  printed.  The  men  conld 
easily  be  found  :  the  money,  far  more  easily. — When  all  this 
has  been  done, — not  Icforc — then  in  God's  Xame,  let  tJie 
Church  address  herself  to  the  gi-eat  undertaking.  Do  but 
revive  the  arrangements  which  were  adopted  in  King  James's 
days :  and  we  venture  to  predict  that  less  than  a  third  part 
of  ten  years  will  be  found  abundantly  to  suffice  for  tlie  Mork, 
How  the  coming  men  will  smile  at  the  picture  Dr.  Newth  ^ 
lias  drawn  of  what  was  the  method  of  procedure  in  the  reign 
of  Queen  Victoria!  Will  they  not  peruse  with  downright 
merriment  Bp.  Ellicott's  jaunty  proposal  "  simphj  to  iiroceed 
onward  vjith  the  woi'k," — [to  wit,  of  constructing  a  new  Greek 
Text,] — "in  fact,  solvere  amliidando"  [iiccnon,  in  laquemii 
cadendo]  ?  ^ 

I.  We  cannot,  it  is  presumed,  act  more  fairly  by  the 
Eevisers'  work,^  than  by  folloM'ing  them  over  some  of  the 
ground  wliich  they  claim  to  liave  made  their  own,  and 
which,    at   the    conclusion    of   their    labours,    their    Eight 


'  Lectures  on  Biblical  Bevision,  (1881)  p}>.  110  seqq.  See  above,  pp.  37-0. 

*  On  Bevision,  pp.  30  and  49. 

^  The  New  Testament  of  Our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Cuuist,  translated 
out  of  the  Greek:  being  the  Version  set  forth  a.d.  1611,  compared  with 
the  most  ancient  Authorities,  and  Bevised  a.d.  1881.  Priote!.!  for  the 
Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  1881. 

Tlie  Nero  Testament  in  the  Oriffinal  Oreek,  according  to  the  Text 
followed  in  the  Authorized  Version,  together  ivith  the  Variations  adopted  in 
the  Bevised  Version.  Edited  for  tlie  Syndics  of  tlie  Cambridge  University 
Press,  ])y  F.  H.  A.  Scrivener,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Prebendary  of  Exeter 
and  Vicar  of  Ilendon.     Cajiibridge,  1881. 

'H  KAINH  AIA0HKH.  The  Greek  Testament,  with  the  Beadings 
adopted  by  the  Bevisers  of  the  Authorized  Version.  [Editetl  by  the  Ven. 
Archdeacon  Palmer,  D.D.]     Oxford,  1H81. 

The  Neil!  Testament  in  the  Original  Greek.  'I'lic  '\\'\t  revised  l)y 
P.rooke  Foss  Wcstcott,  D.D.,  and  Fciifon  .Inhu  Aiitliniiy  Hurt,  D.D. 
CamVjridge  and  London,  1881. 


II.]  LICENTIOUSNESS   OF   THE   REVISIONISTS.  127 

Reverend  Chairman  evidently  surveys  with  self-complacency. 
First,  he  invites  attention  to  the  Principle  and  Eule  for 
their  guidance  agreed  to  by  the  Committee  of  Convocation 
(25th  May,  1870),  viz.  '  To  introduce  as  few  alterations 

AS   POSSIBLE    INTO    THE    TeXT    OF    THE    AUTHOEIZED    VERSION, 

CONSISTENTLY  WITH  FAITHFULNESS.'  Words  could  not  be  more 
empliatic.  '  Plain  and  clear  errors  '  were  to  be  corrected. 
'Necessary  emendations'  were  to  be  made.  But  (in  the 
words  of  the  Southern  Convocation)  '  We  do  not  contemplate 
any  new  Translation,  or  any  alteration  of  the  language, 
EXCEPT  WHERE,  in  the  judgment  of  the  most  competent 
Scholars,  such  change  is  necessary.'  The  watchword, 
therefore,  given  to  the  company  of  Ptevisionists  was, — 
'  Necessity.'  Neccssitij  M'as  to  determine  whether  tliey  were 
to  depart  from  the  language  of  the  Authorized  Version,  or 
not ;  for  the  alterations  were  to  be  as  few  as  possible. 

(a)  Now  it  is  idle  to  deny  that  this  fundamental  Principle 
has  been  utterly  set  at  defiance.  To  such  an  extent  is 
this  the  case,  that  even  an  unlettered  Eeader  is  competent  to 
judge  them.  When  we  find  '  to '  substituted  for  *  unto ' 
{passim)  : — '  hcrchy '  for  '  by  this '  (1  Jo.'v.  2)  : — '  all  that  are' 
for  '  all  that  be '  (Rom.  i.  7) : — '  alway '  for  '  always '  (2  Tliess. 
i.  3)  : — '  we  that,'  '  them  that'  for  '  we  which,'  '  them  which ' 
(1  Thess.  iv.  15);  and  yet  'every  spirit  v)hich,'  for  'every 
spirit  that'  (1  Jo.  iv.  3),  and  '  he  who  is  not  of  God,'  for  'he 
that  is  not  of  God  '  (ver.  6, — although  '  he  that  knoweth  God  ' 
had  preceded,  in  the  same  verse) : — '  my  host '  for  '  mine  host  * 
(Rom.  xvi.  23);  and  'underneath'  for  'under'  (Rev.  vi.  9): 
— it  becomes  clear  that  the  Revisers'  notion  of  necessity 
is  not  that  of  the  rest  of  mankind.  But  let  the  plain  Truth 
be  stated.  Certain  of  them,  when  remonstrated  with  by  their 
fellows  for  the  manifest  disregard  they  were  showing  to  the 
Instructions  subject  to  which  they  had  undertaken  the  work 


128  CHANGES   WANTONLY   INTRODUCED.  [Aut. 

of  Revision,  are  reported  to  have  even  gloried  in  their 
shame.  The  majority,  it  is  clear,  have  even  ostentatiously 
set  those  Instructions  at  defiance. 

Was  tlie  course  they  pursued, — (we  ask  the  question 
respectfully,) — strictly  honest  ?  To  decline  the  work  entirely 
.under  the  prescribed  Conditions,  was  always  in  their  power. 
But,  first  to  accept  the  Conditions,  and  straightway  to 
act  in  defiance  of  them, — tJiis  strikes  us  as  a  method  of 
proceeding  which  it  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  high 
character  of  the  occupants  of  the  Jel'usalem  Cliamber.  To 
proceed  however. 

'  Nevertheless  '  and  '  notwithstanding  '  have  had  a  sad 
time  of  it.  One  or  other  of  tliem  has  been  turned  out  in 
favour,  of  '  Jwivheit '  (S.  Lu.  x.  11,  20),— of  '  onli/'  (Phil.  iii.  IG), 
—of  '  onlij  that '  (i.  18),— of  '  yet '  (S.  Matth.  xi.  11),— of  '  ltd  ' 
(xvii.  27), — of  '  mul  yet '  (James  ii.  16). . . .  We  find  '  take  heed ' 
substituted  for  '  beware  '  (Col.  ii.  8) : — '  custom  '  for  '  manner ' 
(S.  Jo.  xix.  40) : — '  he  was  a'laazcd,'  for  '  he  was  astonished  : ' 
(S.  Lu.  V.  9)  :— '  Is  it  I,  Lord  ? '  for  '  Lord,  is  it  I  ? '  (S.  Matth. 
xxvi.  22)  : — '  straightway  the  cock  crew,'  for  '  immediately 
tlie  cock  crew'  (S.  Jo.  xviii.  27) : — '  Then  therefore  he  delivered 
Him,'  for  'Then  delivered  he  Him  therefore'  (xix.  IG) : — 
*  hroufjht  it  to  His  mouth,'  for  '  put  it  to  His  mouth '  (ver.  29)  : 

'He  manifested  Himself  on  this  ivise'  for  '  on  this  wise 

shewed  He  Himself  (xxi.  1) : — '  So  when  they  yot  oiii  U2ion  the 
land,'  for  '  As  soon  then  as  they  were  come  to  land '  (ver.  9) : 

. '  the  things  concerninrj,'  for  '  the  things  pertaining  to  the 

kingdom  of  (5oD '  (Acts  i.  3)  : — '  as  Goirs  stcvmrd,'  for  '  as 
the  steward  of  Goit '  (Tit.  i.  7) :  but  '  tlie  hclly  of  the  uihnle' 
lor  '  tbii  whale's  belly '  (S.  Matth.  xii.  40),  and  '  device  of  man  ' 
for  'man's  device'  in  Acts  xvii.  29. — These,  and  JiiiiKlrcds  of 
similai'    alterations   have    been    evidently  made    oui    of   (In- 


ir.]  SENSELESS  ALTERATIONS.  129 

merest  wantonness.  After  substituting  '  tlierefore  '  for  '  then  ' 
(as  the  rendering  of  ovv)  a  score  of  times, — the  Eevisionists 
quite  needlessly  substitute  '  then'  for  'therefore'  in  S.  Jo.  xix. 
42. — And  why  has  the  singularly  beautiful  greeting  of  '  the 
elder  unto  the  well-beloved  Gains,'  been  exchanged  for  '  unto 
Gaius  the  beloved '  ?  (3  John,  ver.  1). 

(b)  We  turn  a  few  pages,  and  find  '  he  that  doeth  sin,' 
substituted  for  '  he  that  committeth  sin  ; '  and  '  To  this  end '  put 
in  the  place  of '  For  this  purpose '  (1  Jo.  iii.  8)  : — '  have  beheld 
and  bear  luitness,'  for  '  have  seen  and  do  testify '  (iv.  14)  : — 
'  hereby  '  for  '  by  this  '  (v.  2)  : — '  Judas '  for  '  Jude '  (Jude 
ver.  1),  although  'Mark'  was  substituted  for  'Marcus'  (in 
1  Pet.  V.  13),  and  '  Timothy'  iov  '  Timotheus'  (in  Phil.  i.  1) : 
— '  how  that  they  said  to  you,'  for  '  how  that  they  told  you ' 
(Jude  ver.  18). — But  why  go  on  ?  The  substitution  of  '  exceed- 
ingly '  for  '  greatly  '  in  Acts  vi.  7  : — '  the  birds '  for  '  the  fowls,' 
in  Eev.  xix.  21: — 'Almighty'  for  'Omnipotent'  in  ver.  6 : 
— 'throw  down'  for  'cast  down,'  in  S.  Luke  iv.  29: — 'inner 
chamber '    for   '  closet,'   in  vi.  6  : — these   are  not  '  necessary ' 

changes We  will  give  but  three  instances  more : — In 

1  S.  Pet.  V.  9,  '  whom  resist,  stedfast  in  the  faith,'  has  been 
altered  into  '  whom  withstand.'  But  how  is  '  withstand '  a 
better  rendering  for  avricrrrire,  than  '  resist '  ?  '  Eesist,'  at 
all  events,  was  the  Revisionists'  word  in  S.  Matth.  v.  39 
and  S.  James  iv.  7. — Why  also  substitute  '  the  race '  (for  '  the 
kindred ')  'of  Joseph  '  in  Acts  vii.  13,  although  7erov  was 
rendered  '  kindred  '  in  iv.  6  ? — Do  the  Eevisionists  think 
that  'fastening  their  eyes  on  him '  is  a  better  rendering  of 
arevlaavre^  ek  avrov  (Acts  vi.  15)  than  '  looking  stedfastly  on 
him '  ?  They  certainly  did  not  think  so  when  they  got  to 
xxiii.  1.  There,  because  they  found  '  cxtrncstly  beholding  the 
council,'  they  must  needs  alter  the  phrase  into  'looking 
stedfastly.'     It  is  clear  therefore  that  Caprice,  not  Necessity, — • 

K 


130  UNFAIRNESS   OF   THE   REVISIONISTS   IN  [Akt. 

an  itcliing  imiMtience  to  introduce  changes  into  the  A.V.,  not 
the  discovery  of  ' jjlctin  and  clear  errors' — has  determined 
the  great  bulk  of  the  alterations  which  molest  us  in  every 
part  of  tlie  present  unlearned  and  tasteless  performance. 

II.  The  next  point  to  which  the  Eevisionists  direct  our 
attention  is  their  new  Greek  text, — '  the  necessary  foundation 
of  their  work.  And  here  we  must  renew  our  protest  against 
the  wrong  which  has  been  done  to  English  readers  by  the 
Eevisionists'  disregard  of  the  IVth  Ptule  laid  down  for  their 
guidance,  viz.  that,  whenever  they  adopted  a  new  Textual 
reading,  such  alteration  was  to  be  '  indicated  in  the  margin! 
This  'proved  inconvenient,'  say  the  Eevisionists.  Yes,  we 
reply :  but  only  because  you  saw  fit,  in  preference,  to  choke 
up  your  margin  with  a  record  of  the  preposterous  readings 
you  did  not  admit.  Even  so,  however,  the  thing  might  to 
some  extent  have  been  done,  if  only  by  a  system  of  signs 
in  the  margin  wherever  a  change  in  the  Text  had  been  by 
yourselves  effected.  And,  at  Avhatever  '  inconvenience,'  you 
were  bound  to  do  this, — partly  because  the  Eule  before  you 
was  express :  but  chiefly  in  fairness  to  the  English  Eeader. 
How  comes  it  to  pass  that  you  have  never  furnished  him 
with  the  information  you  stood  pledged  to  furnish  ;  but  have 
instead,  volunteered  in  every  page  information,  worthless 
in  itself,  Avhich  can  only  serve  to  unsettle  the  faith  of  un- 
lettered millions,  and  to  suggest  unreasonable  as  well  as 
miserable  douljts  to  tlie  minds  of  all  ? 

For  no  one  may  for  an  instant  iuiiigiiic  tliat  the  marginal 
statements  of  which  we  speak  an'  a  kind  of  equivalent  for 
the  Apj)aratus  Criticus  which  is  found  in  e\i'ry  i)rincipal 
edition  of  the  Greek  Testament — excepting  always  that  of 
I)rs.  Westcott  and  Hort.  So  far  are  we  from  deprecating 
(with  Daniel  Whitby)  the  multii)licati(»n  of '  Various  Eead- 


II.]  RESPECT   OF   THEIR   MARGINAL   READINGS.  131 

ings,'  that  we  rejoice  in  them  exceedingly;  knowing  that 
they  are  the  very  foundation  of  our  confidence  and  the  secret 
of  our  strength.  For  this  reason  we  consider  Dr.  Tischen- 
dorf's  last  (8th)  edition  to  be  furnished  with  not  nearly 
enough  of  them,  though  he  left  all  his  predecessors  (and 
himself  in  his  7th  edition)  far  behind.  Our  quarrel  with  the 
Revisionists  is  not  by  any  means  that  they  have  commemo- 
rated a.ctual  '  alternative  Headings '  in  their  margin :  but 
tliat,  while  they  have  given  prominence  throughout  to  patent 
Errors,  they  have  unfairly  excluded  all  mention  of, — have  not 
made  the  slightest  allusion  to, — hundreds  of  Readings  which 
ought  in  fact  ratJier  to  liave  stood,  in  tlie  Text. 

The  marginal  readings,  which  our  Revisers  have  been  so 
ill-advised  as  to  put  prominently  forward,  and  to  introduce 
to  the  Reader's  notice  with  the  vague  statement  that  they  are 
sanctioned  by  '  Some '  (or  by  '  Many ')  '  ancient  authorities,' — 
are  specimens  arhitrarily  selected  out  of  an  immense  mass ; 
are  magisterially  recommended  to  public  attention  and 
favour ;  seem  to  be  invested  with  the  sanction  and  authority 
of  Convocation  itself.  And  this  becomes  a  very  serious 
matter  indeed.  No  hint  is  given  tvhich  be  the  '  ancient 
Authorities '  so  referred  to  : — nor  what  proportion  they  bear 
to  the  '  ancient  Authorities '  producible  on  the  opposite  side : 
— nor  whether  they  are  the  most  '  ancient  Authorities '  obtain- 
able : — nor  what  amount  of  attention  their  testimony  may 
reasonably  claim.  But  in  the  meantime  a  fatal  assertion  is 
hazarded  in  the  Preface  (iii.  1.),  to  the  effect  that  in  cases 
where  '  it  ivould,  not  he  safe  to  accept  one  Reading  to  the  absolute 
exclusion  of  others,'  '  alternative  Readings '  ha^e  been  given  '  in 
the  margin.'  So  that  the  '  Agony  and  bloody  sweat '  of  the 
World's  Redeemer  (Lu.  xxii.  43,  44), — and  His  Prayer  for  His 
murderers  (xxiii.  34), — and  much  beside  of  transcendent 
importance  and  inestimable  value,  may,  aecordi7ig  to  our 
Revisionists,   prove   to   rest   upon   Jio   foundation    whatever. 

K  2 


132  S.   MARK   I.    1  :    S.   JOHN    I.    3,    AND   III.    13.  [Aut. 

At  all  events,  '  it  v:oulcl  not  he  safe'  (i.e.  it  is  not  safe) to  place 
absolute  reliance  on  them.  Alas,  how  many  a  deadly  blow 
at  Eevealed  Trutli  hath  been  in  this  way  aimed  with  fatal 
adroitness,  which  no  amount  of  orthodox  learnino;  -will  ever 
be  iilAe  hereafter  to  heal,  much  less  to  undo !     Thus, — 

(a)  From  the  first  verse  of  S.  Mark's  Gospel  we  are 
informed  that  '  Some  ancient  authorities  omit  the  Son  of 
God!  Why  are  we  not  informed  that  every  known  uncial 
Copy  cxcei^t  one  of  had  eharaeter, — every  cursive  hut  two, — 
ei'^erij  Version, — and  the  following  Fathers, — all  contain  the 
precious  clause:  viz.  Irenieus, — Porphyry, — Severianus  of 
Gabala, — Cyril  Alex., — Victor  Ant., — and  others, — besides 
Ambrose  and  Augustine  among  the  Latins : — while  the  sup- 
posed adverse  testimony  of  Serapion  and  Titus,  Basil  and 
Victorinus,  Cyril  of  Jer.  and  Epiphanius,  proves  to  be  all 
a  mistake  ?  To  speak  plainly,  since  the  clause  is  above 
suspicion,  Why  are  we  not  rather  told  so  ? 

(h)  In  the  3rd  verse  of  the  first  chapter  of  S.  John's 
Gospel,  we  are  left  to  take  our  choice  between,—'  without 
Him  was  not  anything  made  that  hath  been  made.  In  him 
was  life;  and  the  life,'  &c., — and  the  following  absurd  alter- 
native,—'  Witli  out  him  was  not  anything  made.  That  which 
hath  heen  made  was  life  in  him  ;  and  the  life,'  &c.  But  we 
are  not  informed  that  this  latter  monstrous  figment  is  known 
to  have  been  the  importation  of  the  Gnostic  heretics  in  tlie 
Ilnd  century,  and  to  be  as  destitute  of  authority  as  it  is  of 
sense.      Why  is  i^romincnce  given  only  to  tlie  lie  ? 

(c)  At  S.  John  iii.  1;>,  we  arc  informed  tliat  the  last  clause 
of  that  famous  verse  (' No  man  hath  ascended  u]i  (o  licaven, 
but  He  that  came  down  IVoiii  hca\cii,  e\cii  the  Son  of  Man — 
which  is  in   heaven'),  is  not  I'oiuid   in  'many    ancient   autho- 


II.]  THE    TEXT   OF   S.   JOHN   III.    13    ESTABLISHED.       133 

rities.'  But  why,  in  the  name  of  common  fairness,  are  we  not 
also  reminded  that  this,  (as  will  be  found  more  fully  explained 
in  the  note  overleaf,)  is  a  circumsfMnce  of  no  Textual  signi- 
ficanc.y  'whatever  ? 

Why,  above  all,  are  we  not  assured  that  the  precious  clause 
in  question  (o  mv  iv  tm  ovpavw)  is  found  in  every  MS.  in 
the  world,  except  five  of  bad  character  ? — is  recognized  by 
all  the  Latin  and  all  the  Syriac  versions  ;  as  well  as  l)y  the 
Coptic, — .iEthiopic, — Georgian, — and  Armenian  ?  ^ — is  either 
quoted  or  insisted  upon  by  Origen,^ — Hippolytus,^ — Athana- 
sius,*  —  Didymus,^  —  Aphraates  the  Persian,^  — ■  Basil  the 
Great,^  —  Epiphanius,^  —  JSTonnus,  —  ps.-Dionysius  Alex.,^ — 
Eustathius ;  ^^ — by  Chrysostom," — Theodoret,^^ — and  Cyril,^^ 
each  4  times  ; — by  Paulus,  Bishop  of  Emesa  ^*  (in  a  sermon 
on  Christmas  Day,  a.d.  431) ; — by  Theodorus  Mops.,^^ — 
Amphilochius,^'' — Severus,^'^ — -Theodorus  Heracl.,^^ — Basilius 
Cil.,^^ — Cosmas,^" — John  Damascene,  in  3  places,^^ — and  4 
other  ancient  Greek  writers  ;  ^^  —  besides  Ambrose,^^  — 
Novatian,^*  —  Hilary,^^  —  Lucifer,"*^  — ^  Victorinus, — Jerome,^^ 
—  Cassian,  ■ — •  Vigilius,^^  — ■  Zeno,^*  —  Marius,^"  —  Maximus 
Taur.,^^ — Capreolus,^'^ — Augustine,  &c. : — is  acknowledged  by 
Lachmann,  Tregelles,  Tischendorf:  in  short,  is  quite  above 
suspieion  :  why  are  we  not  told  that  ?     Those  10  Versions, 


^  Malan's  Oospel  of  S.  John  translated  from  the  Eleven  oldest  Versions. 

2  Int.  ii.  72 ;  iv.  622  dis.  ^  q^  ^^et.  §  4.  M.  1275.  ^  Trin.  363. 
«  Ap.  Gall.  V.  67.  ^  i.  282.  »  i.  486. 

3  Ep.  ad  Paul.  ^am.  Condi,  i.  872  e ;  889  e.        ^^  Ap.  Galland.  iv.  583. 
"  vii.  546;  viii.  153,  154,  277.  '^  iii.  570;  iv.  226,  1049, 1153. 

^»  iv.  150  (text)  ;  vi.  30,  169.     Mai,  ii.  69.  "  Concilia,  iii.  1102  d. 

^5  Quoted  by  Leontius  (Gall.  xii.  693).  ^^  In  Cat.  Cord.  96. 

"  Ibid.  p.  94.         '«  Cat.  in  Ps.  ii.  323  aud  343.     '»  ^p^  Photium,  p.  281. 
20  Montf.  ii.  286.  '^  i.  288,  559,  507. 

22  Ps.-Athan.  ii.  464.  Another,  625.  Another,  630.    Ps.-Epiphan.  ii,  287. 

23  i.  863,  903,  1428.  ^  Gall.  iii.  296.  25  32  dis. ;  514;  1045  dis. 
26  Gall.  vi.  192.  27  j^.  G79.  28  ^p.  Athan.  ii.  646.  ^  Gall.  v.  124. 
3"  Ihid.  iii.  628,  675.  ="  Ibid.  ix.  367.  ^2  yj^-^^^  j^.,  493, 


134         A   PRECIOUS   CLAUSE   IN   S.  JOHN   III.    13,   TO       [Art. 

those  38  Fathers,  that  host  of  Copies  in  the  proportion  of 
995  to  5, — 'iohy,  concerning  all  these  is  there  not  so  much 
as  a  hint  let  fall  that  such  a  mass  of  counter-evidence 
exists  ?  ^  .  .  .  Shame, — yes,  shame  on  the  learning  M'hicli 
comes  abroad  only  to  perplex  the  weak,  and  to  unsettle  the 


*  Let  the  Reader,  with  a  map  spread  before  him,  survey  the  whereabouts 
of  the  several  Versions  above  enumerated,  and  mentally  assign  each 
Father  to  his  own  approximate  locality :  then  let  him  bear  in  mind  that 
995  out  of  1000  of  the  extant  Manuscripts  agree  with  those  Fathers  and 
Versions;  and  let  him  further  recognize  that  those  MSS.  (executed  at 
difl'erent  dates  in  different  countries)  must  severally  represent  independent 
remote  originals,  inasmuch  as  no  tiuo  of  them  are  found  to  he  quite  alike. 
— Next,  let  him  consider  that,  in  all  the  Churches  of  the  East,  these  words 
from  the  earliest  period  were  read  &^furt  of  the  Gospel  for  the  llmrsday 
in  Easter  week. — This  done,  let  him  decide  whether  it  is  reasonable  that 
two  worshippers  of  codex  B — a.d.  1881 — should  attempt  to  thrust  all  this 
mass  of  ancient  evidence  clean  out  of  sight  by  their  peremptory  sentence 
of  exclusion, — '  Western  and  Syrian.' 

Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  inform  us  that  '  the  character  of  the  attestation 
marks '  the  clause  (6  tov  (v  tw  ovpava), '  as  a  Western  gloss.'  But  the 
'  attestation '  for  retaining  that  clause — («)  Comes  demonstrably  from 
every  quarter  of  ancient  Christendom  : — (b)  Is  more  ancient  (by  200  years) 
than  the  evidence  for  omitting  it : — (c)  Is  more  numerous,  in  the  propor- 
tion of  99  to  1 : — ('/)  In  point  of  respectability,  stands  absolutely  alone. 
For  since  we  have  j^rovecZ  that  Origen  and  Didymus,  Epiphanius  and  Cyril, 
Ambrose  and  Jerome,  recognize  the  words  in  dispute,  of  what  possible 
Textual  significancy  can  it  be  if  presently  (because  it  is  sufficient  for  their 
purpose)  the  same  Fathers  are  observed  to  quote  S.  John  iii.  13  no  further 
than  doivn  to  the  words  '  Son  of  Man  "i  No  person,  (least  of  all  a  \)\\\- 
fessed  Critic,)  who  adds  to  his  learning  a  few  grains  of  common  sense  and  a 
little  candour,  can  be  misled  by  such  a  circumstance.  Origen,  Eusebius, 
Proclus,  Ephraim  Syrus,  Jerome,  Marius,  when  they  are  only  insisting 
on  the  doctrinal  significancy  of  the  earlier  words,  naturally  end  their 
quotation  at  this  place.  The  two  Gregories  (Naz.  [ii.  87,  168] :  Nyss. 
[Galland.  vi.  522]),  writing  against  the  Apolinarian  heresy,  of  course 
quoted  the  verse  no  further  than  Apolinaris  himself  was  accustomed  (for 
his  heresy)  to  adduce  it.  .  .  .  About  the  internal  evidence  for  the  clause, 
nothing  has  been  said ;  but  this  is  simply  overwhelming.  We  make  our 
appeal  to  Catholic  Antiquity ;  and  are  content  to  rest  our  cause  on 
E'ternal  Evideme  ; — on  Copies,  on  Versions,  on  Fathers. 


II.]         BE   KE-INSTATED. — 'NUMBER   OF   THE   BEAST.'       135 

doubting,  and  to  mislead  the  blind  !  Shame, — yes,  sharne 
on  that  two-thirds  majority  of  well-intentioned  but  most 
incompetent  men,  who, — finding  themselves  (in  an  evil  hour) 
appointed  to  correct  "plain  and  clear  errors"  in  the  English 
'  Authorized  Version,'  —  occupied  themselves  instead  with 
falsifning  the  inspired  Gi^eek  Text  in  countless  places,  and 
branding  with  suspicion  some  of  the  most  precious  utterances 
of  the  Spirit  !     Shame, — yes,  shame  upon  them ! 

Why  then,  (it  will  of  course  be  asked,)  is  the  margin — 
(«)  of  S.  Mark  i.  1  and— (&)  of  S.  John  i.  3,  and— (c)  of  S. 
John  iii.  13,  encumbered  after  this  discreditable  fashion  ? 
It  is  (we  answer)  only  because  the  Text  of  Drs.  Wcstcott  and 
Hart  is  thus  depraved  in  all  three  places.  Those  Scholars 
enjoy  the  unenviable  distinction  of  having  dared  to  expel 
from  S.  John  iii.  13  the  words  o  wv  iv  rm  ovpavw,  wdiich 
Lachmann,  Tregelles  and  Tischendorf  were  afraid  to  touch. 
Well  may  Dean  Stanley  have  bestowed  upon  Dr.  Hort  the 
epithet  of  "fearless" !  ...  If  report  speaks  truly,  it  is  by  the 
merest  accident  that  the  clause  in  question  still  retains  its 
place  in  the  Revised  Text. 

(d)  Only  once  more.  And  this  time  we  will  turn  to  the 
very  end  of  the  blessed  volume.     Against  Eev.  xiii.  18 — 

"  Here  is  wisdom.  He  that  hath  understanding,  let  him 
"  count  the  number  of  the  Beast ;  for  it  is  the  number  of  a 
"  Man  :  and  his  number  is  six  hundred  and  sixty  and  six." 

Against  this,  we  find  noted, — '  Some  ancient  authorities 
read  six  hundred  and  sixteen.' 

But  why  is  not  the  tvhole  Truth  told  ?  viz.  why  are  we  not 
informed  that  onlg  one  corrupt  uncial  (c) : — o?ily  one  cursive 
copy  (11)  : — only  one  Father  (Tichonius)  :  and  not  one  ancient 
Version — advocates  this  reading  ? — which,  on  the  contrary. 


136  'NUMBER   OF   THE   BEAST.'  [Aur. 

Irenaeus  (a.d.  170)  knew,  but  rejected;  remarking  that  GC6, 
which  is  '  found  in  all  the  best  and  oldest  copies  and  is 
attested  Ijy  men  who  saw  John  face  to  face,'  is  unquestion- 
ably the  true  reading.^  Why  is  not  the  ordinary  Eeader 
1'urther  informed  that  the  same  number  (GOG)  is  expressly 
vouched  for  by  Origen,^ — by  Hippolytus,^ — by  Eusebius:* — 
as  well  as  by  Victorinus — and  I'rimasius, — not  to  mention 
Andreas  and  Arethas  ?  To  come  to  the  moderns,  as  a  matter 
of  fact  the  established  reading  is  accepted  by  Lachmann, 
Tiscliendorf,  Tregelles, — even  by  Westcott  and  Hort.  Why 
therefore — for  what  possible  reason — at  the  end  of  1700 
years  and  upwards,  is  this,  which  is  so  clearly  nothing  else 
l)Ut  an  ancient  slip  of  the  pen,  to  be  forced  upon  the  attention 
of  90  millions  of  English-speaking  people  ? 

Will  Bishop  Ellicott  and  his  friends  venture  to  tell  us  tliat 
it  has  been  done  because  "  it  would  not  be  safe  to  accept " 
666,  "to  the  absolute  exclusion  of  "  616?  .  .  .  "We  have 
given  alternative  Readings  in  the  margin,"  (say  they,) 
"  wherever  tliey  seem  to  be  of  sufficient  importance  or 
interest  to  deserve  notice."  Will  they  venture  to  claim 
either  '  interest '  or  '  importance '  for  this  ?  or  pretend  that  it 
is  an  'alternative  Eeading'  at  all?  Has  it  been  rescued  from 
oblivion  and  ]iaraded  l)ef(n'e  universal  Christendom  in  oi'der 
to  perplex,  mystify,  and  discourage  '  those  that  have  under- 
standing,' and  would  fain  '  count  the  number  of  the  Beast,' 
il"  they  were  able  ?  Or  was  the  intention  only  to  insinuate 
one  more  wretched  doubt — one  more  miserable  suspicion — 
into  minds  which  have  been  taught  {and  rightly)  to  place 
absolute  reliance  in  the  textual  accuracy  of  all  the  gravest 
utterances  of  the  Sfikit  :  minds  which  are  utterly  incapable 


'  Pp.  79H,  799.  iii.  III. 

^  Ant.  c.  50;  Conmm.  c,  28.  ■"  Hid.  Ecd.  v.  8. 


II.]  UNFAIR   SUPPRESSION   OF  SCRIPTURE.  137 

of  dealing  with  the  subtleties  of  Textual  Criticism ;  and, 
from  a  one-sided  statement  like  the  present,  will  carry  away 
none  but  entirely  mistaken  inferences,  and  the  most  un- 
reasonable distrust  ?  .  .  .  Or,  lastly,  was  it  only  because,  in 
their  opinion,  the  margin  of  every  Englishman's  N.  T.  is  the 
fittest  place  for  reviving  the  memory  of  obsolete  blunders, 
and  ventilating  forgotten  perversions  of  tlie  Truth  ?  .  .  .  We 
really  pause  for  an  answer. 

{e)  But  serious  as  this  is,  more  serious  (if  possible)  is  the 
unfair  Suppression  systematically  practised  throughout  the 
work  before  us.  "  We  have  given  alternative  Readings  in 
the  margin," — (says  Bishop  Ellicott  on  behalf  of  his  brother- 
Eevisionists,) — "  wherever  they  seem  to  he  of  sufficient  impiort- 
anee  or  interest  to  deserve  notice."  [iii.  1.]  From  which  state- 
ment, readers  have  a  right  to  infer  that  whenever  "  alterna- 
tive Readings  "  are  not  "  given  in  the  margin,"  it  is  because 
such  Readings  do  not  "  seem  to  be  of  sufficient  importance  or 
interest  to  deserve  notice."  Will  the  Revisionists  venture  to 
tell  us  that, — (to  take  the  first  instance  of  unfair  Suppression 
which  presents  itself,) — our  Lokd's  saying  in  S.  Mark  vi.  11 
is  not  "  of  sufficient  importance  or  interest  to  deserve 
notice  "  ?  We  allude  to  the  famous  words, — "  Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
in  the  day  of  judgment,  than  for  that  city : " — words  which 
are  not  only  omitted  from  the  ''  ISTew  English  Version,"  but 
are  not  suffered  to  leave  so  much  as  a  trace  of  themselves 
in  the  margin.  And  yet,  the  saying  in  question  is  attested 
by  the  Pescliito  and  the  Philoxenian  Syriac  Versions  :  by  the 
Old  Latin  :  by  the  Coptic,  ^thiopic  and  Gothic  Versions : — 
by  11  uncials  and  by  the  whole  bulk  of  the  cursives: — by 
Irenteus  and  by  Victor  of  Antioch.  So  that  whether 
Antiquity,  or  A^ariety  of  Attestation  is  considered, — whether 
we  look  for  Xuml^ers  or  for  Respectability, — the  genuineness 


138  REVISIONISTS'   NOTION   OF   MAKING  [Art. 

of  the  passage  may  be  regarded  as  certain.  Our  coinj^laint 
however  is  not  that  the  Eevisionists  entertain  a  different 
opinion  on  this  head  from  ourselves  :  hut  that  they  give 
the  reader  to  understand  that  tlie  state  of  the  Evidence  is 
such,  that  it  is  quite  "safe  to  accept"  the  shorter  reading, 
— "  to  the  absolute  exclusion  of  the  other."  —  So  vast  is 
the  field  before  us,  that  this  single  specimen  of  what  we 
venture  to  call  '  unfair  Suppression,'  must  suffice.  (Some 
will  not  hesitate  to  bestow  upon  it  a  harsher  epithet.)  It 
is  in  truth  by  far  the  most  damaging  feature  of  the  work 
before  us,  that  its  Authors  should  have  so  largely  and  so 
seriowslj  falsijied  the  Deposit;  and  yet,  (in  clear  viohilion 
of  the  IVth  Principle  or  Eule  laid  down  for  their  guidance 
at  the  outset,)  have  suffered  no  trace  to  survive  in  the  margin 
of  the  deadly  mischief  which  they  have  effected. 

III.  From  the  Text,  the  Revisionists  pass  on  to  the 
Translation  ;  and  surprise  us  by  the  avowal,  that  '  the 
character  of  the  Revision  was  determined  for  us  from  the 
outset  by  the  first  Rule, — "to  introduce  as  few  alterations 
as  possible,  consistently  with  faithfulness."  Our  task  was 
Revision,  not  Re  translation.'  (This  is  7iaive  certainly.)  They 
proceed, — 

'  If  the  meaning  was  fairly  expressed  by  the  word  or  phrase 
that  was  before  us  in  the  Authorized  Version,  wc  made  no 
change,  even  where  rigid  adherence  to  the  rule  of  Translating,  as 
far  as  jiossihle,  the  same  Greek  word  hy  the  same  Emjlish  word  might 
have  prescribed  some  modification.' — [iii.  2  init.']  (The  italics 
are  our  own.) 

To  the  'rule'  thus  introduced  to  our  notice,  we  shall  recur 
by  and  by  [pp.  152-4:  also  pp.  187-2U2].  We  proceed 
to  remark  on  each  of  the  live  princi[)al  Classes  of  altera- 
tions indicated  by  the  Revisionists  :  and  iirst, — '  Alterations 


II.]  'AS  FEW   ALTEKATIONS  AS  POSSIBLE.'  139 

positively  required  by  change  of  reading  in  the  Greek  Text ' 
{lUd.). 

(1)  Thus,  in  S.  John  xii.  7,  we  find  '  Suffer  her  to  keep  it 
against  the  day  of  my  burying ; '  and  in  the  margin  (as  an 
alternative),  '  Let  her  alone  :  it  urns  that  she  might  heeji  it.' — 
Instead  of  '  as  soon  as  Jesus  heard  the  word,' — ^we  are  invited 
to  choose  between  '  not  heeding,'  and  '  overhearing  the  word  ' 
(S.  Mk.  V.  36)  :  these  being  intended  for  renderings  of  irap- 
aKov(7a<i, — an  expression  which  S.  Mark  certainly  never  em- 
ployed.— '  On  earth,  peace  among  men  in  tahom  he  is  well 
pleased '  (S.  Lu.  ii.  14) :  where  the  margin  informs  us  that 
'  many  ancient  authorities  read,  good  pleasure  among  men.' 
(And  why  not  'good  will,' — the  rendering  adopted  in  Phil.  i. 
15  ?)  .  .  .  Take  some  more  of  the  alterations  which  have 
resulted  from  the  adoption  of  a  corrupt  Text : — '  Why  ashest 
thou  me  concerning  that  tvhieh  is  good  ?  '  (Matth.  xix.  17, — an 
absurd  fabrication). — '  He  would  fain  have  been  filled  with  tlie 
husks,'  &c.  .  .  .  '  and  I  perish  here  with  hunger  I '  ('^opTaa- 
Orjvai,  borrowed  from  Lu.  xvi.  21  :  and  eyixJAecoSe,  a  trans- 
parent error:  S.  Luke  xv.  16,  17). — 'When  it  shall  fail,  they 
may  receive  you  into  the  eternal  tabernacles '  (xvi.  9). — 
— Elizabeth  '  lifted  up  her  voice  with  a  loiid  cry '  (Kpavyj] — 
the  private  property  of  three  bad  MSS.  and  Origen :  Lu.  i. 
42). — '  And  they  stood  still  looking  sad  '  (xxiv.  17, — a  foolish 
transcriptional  blunder). — '  The  multitude  weiit  tip  and  began 
to  ask  him,'  &c.  {avajSd'i  for  aval3or]aa<i,  Mk.  xv.  8). — '  But  is 
guilty  0^  an  eternal  sin'  (iii.  29). — 'And  the  officers  received 
Him  with  blows  of  their  hands,' — inarg.  '  or  strokes  of  rods  : ' 
GAABON  for  GBAAON  (xiv.  65). — 'Else,  that  which  should  fill 
it  up  taketh  from  it,  the  new  from  the  old  '  (ii.  21)  :  and  '  No 
man  rcndeth  a  piece  from  a  new  garment  and  putteth  it  u]3on 
an  old  garment ;  else  he  vjill  rend  the  nciu,'  &c.  (Lu.  v.  36). — 
'What  is  this?  a  new  teaching!'  (Mk.  i.  27). — 'Jesus  saith 
unto  him,  If  thov  canst  !  '  (Mk.  ix.  23). — '  Because  of  your  little 


140        THE   ENOLISH   SUFFERS   WITH   THE   GREEK.         [Anr 

faith'  (Matth.  x\ii.  20). — '  Wc  must  work  the  works  of  Him 
that  sent  Me,  while  it  is  day  '  (Jo.  ix.  4). — '  TJic  man  that  is 
called  Jesus  made  day  '  (ver.  11).—'  If  ye  shall  ask  3Ie  any- 
thing in  My  name '  (xiv.  14). — '  The  Father  abiding  in  Me 
doeth  His  ivorhs  '  (xiv.  10). — '  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  of  the 
Father,  JIc  will  give  it  yon  in  My  name '  (xvi.  23). — '  I  glorified 
Thee  on  the  earth,  having  aecomplished  the  ivork  which  Tliou 
hast  given  Me  to  do  '  (xvii.  4). — '  Holy  Father,  keep  them  in 
Thy  Name  which  Thou  hast  given  Me  ...  I  kept  them  in 
Thy  Name  which  Thou  hast  given  me'  (ver.  11,  12). — 'She 
.  .  .  saith  unto  Him  in  Helrcw,  Eabboni'  (xx.  16). — 'These 
things  said  Isaiah,  because  he  saw  his  glory '  (xii.  41, — OTI  for 
OTG,  a  conmion  itacism). — '  In  tallies  that  are  hearts  of  flesh  ' 
(iv  irXa^l  KapBlaa  aapKivai'i,  a  '  perfectly  absurd  reading,'  as 
Scrivener  remarks,  p.  442  :  2  Cor.  iii.  3). — 'Now  if  we  put  the 
horses'  bridles  [and  pray,  why  not  '  the  horses'  hits '  ?]  into 
their  mouths'  (eiAG,  an  ordinary  itacism  for  1A6,  James  iii.  3). 
— '  Unto  the  sick  were  carried  atvay  from  his  hody  handker- 
chiefs,' &c.  (Acts  xix.  12). — 'Ye  knoio  cdl  things  once  for  all' 
(Jude  ver.  5). — '  We  love  because  he  first  loved  us '  (1  Jo.  iv.  19). 
— 'I  have  found  no  work  of  thine  fulfilled  before  my  God  '  (Eev. 
iii.  2). — '  Seven  Angels  arrayed  with  \^2Jrceious'\  stone '  (xv.  6), 
instead  of  '  clothed  in  linen,'  \i6ov  for  Xivov.  (Fancy  the 
An'^als  '  clothed  in  sto7ie' I  '  Precious  '  is  an  interpolation  of 
the  Revisers). — '  Dwelling  in  the  things  M'hich  he  hath  seen  : ' 
for  which  the  margin  offers  as  an  alternative,  '  taking  his  stand 
upon'  (Colossians  ii.  18).  But  ifxfSaTevoov  (the  word  here 
('ni])l(>yed)  clcavl}'  nieaiis  ucillicr  the  one  nor  the  dtlier. 
S.  Paul  is  delivering  a  warning  against  unduly  ' 2)rying  into 
the  tilings  not  seen.'  ^  A  few  MSS.  of  bad  character  omit  the 
'  not.'     That  is  all  !  .  .  .  These  then  are  a  handful  of  the  less 


II.]    REMEDYING   'INCORRECTNESS'   AND   'OBSCURITY.'    141 

conspicuous  instances  of  a  change  in  the  English  '  positively 
required  by  a  change  of  reading  in  the  Greek  Text : '  every 
one  of  them  being  either  a  pitiful  blunder  or  else  a  gross 
fabrication. — Take  only  two  more :  '  I  neither  know,  nor 
understand  :  thou,  what  say  est  thou  ?  '  (Mk.  xiv.  68  margin) : — 
'  And  whither  I  go,  ye  know  the  way '  (Jo.  xiv.  4).  .  .  .  The 
A.  V.  is  better  in  every  instance. 

(2)  and  (3)  Next,  alterations  made  because  the  A.  V. 
'  appeared  to  be  incorrect '  or  else  '  obscure.'  They  must 
needs  be  such  as  the  following  : — '  He  that  is  bathed  needeth 
not  save  to  wash  his  feet'  (S.  John  xiii.  10).—'  Lord,  if  he  is 
fallen  asleep  he  will  recover'  (acoOtjaerai,  xi.  12). — 'Go  ye 
therefore  into  the  partings  of  the  higMoays  '  (Matth.  xxii.  9). — 
'  Being  grieved  at  the  hardening  of  their  heart '  (Mk.  iii.  5). — 
'  Light  a  lamp  and  put  it  on  the  stand '  (Matt.  v.  15). — '  Sitting 
at  the  place  of  toll'  (ix.  9). — 'The  supplication  of  a  righteous 
man  availeth  much  in  its  working'  (James  v.  16). — 'Awake 
up  righteously '  (1  Cor.  xv.  34). — '  Guarded  through  faith  unto 
a  salvation  '  (1  Pet.  i.  5). — '  Wandering  in  .  .  .  the  holes  of 
the  earth'  (Heb.  xi.  38 — very  queer  places  certainly  to  be 
'  wandering '  in). — ■'  She  that  is  in  Bahylon,  elect  together 
with  you,  saluteth  you'  (1  Pet.  v.  13).- -'Therefore  do  these 
foivers  work  in  Him '  (Matth.  xiv.  2). — '  In  danger  of  the 
hell  of  fire  '  (v.  22).- — '  Put  out  into  the  deep  '  (Luke  v.  4). — 
'  The  tomb  that  Aljraham  bought  for  a  price  in  silver  '  (Acts 
vii.  16). 

With  reference  to  every  one  of  these  places,  (and  they  are 
but  samples  of  what  is  to  be  met  with  in  every  page,)  we  ven- 
ture to  assert  that  they  are  either  less  intelligible,  or  else  more 
inaccurate,  than  the  expressions  which  they  are  severally  in- 
tended to  supersede ;  while,  in  some  instances,  they  are  loth. 
Will  any  one  seriously  contend  that  '  the  hire  of  wrong-doing ' 


142      CASES  OF  '  INCORRECTNESS  '  AND  '  OBSCURITY,'      [Aut. 

is  bettor  than  'the  ukkjcs  of  unriglitcousncss'  (2  Pet.  ii.  15)? 
or,  will  he  venture  to  deny  that,  '  Come  and  dine,' — '  so  when 
they  had  dined,' — is  a  hundred  times  better  than  '  Come  and 
hreak  your  fast,' — '  so  when  they  had  broken  their  fast '  (Jo. 
xxi.  12,  15)  ? — expressions  which  are  only  introduced  because 
the  Revisionists  were  ashamed  (as  well  they  miglit  be)  to 
write  '  breakfast '  and  '  breakfasted.'  The  seven  had  not  been 
'fasting.'  Then,  wliy  introduce  so  incongruous  a  notion  here, 
— any  more  than  into  S.  Luke  xi.  37,  38,  and  xiv.  12  ? 

Has  the  reader  any  appetite  for  more  specimens  of  '  in- 
correctness '  remedied  and  '  obscurity '  removed  ?  Rather,  as 
it  seems,  have  hath  been  largely  imported  into  a  Translation 
which  was  singularly  intelligible  before.  Why  darken  Rom. 
vii.  1  and  xi.  2  by  introducing  the  interrogative  particle, 
and  then,  by  mistranslating  it  '  Or '  ? — Also,  why  translate 
76^09  '  r((ce  '  ?  ('  a  man  of  Cyprus  hi/  race,'  '  a  man  of  Pontus 
h]/  race,'  '  an  Alexandrian  hi/  race,'  Acts  iv.  36 :  xviii.  2,  24). 
— '  If  there  is  a  natural  body,  there  is  also  a  spiritual  body,' 
say  the  Revisionists  :  '  0  death,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  0  death 
wliere  is  thy  sting  ? '  (Could  they  not  let  even  1  Cor.  xv.  44 
and  55  alone  ?) — Why  alter  '  For  the  Ijread  of  God  is  He,'  into 
'  For  the  bread  of  God  is  that  which  cometh  down  from 
Heaven  '  ?  (Jo.  vi.  33). — '  As  long  as  I  am  in  the  world,'  was 
surely  better  than  '  When  I  am  in  the  world,  I  am  the  light 
of  the  world '  (ix.  5). — Is  '  He  icent  forth  out  of  their  hand  ' 
supposed  to  be  an  improvement  upon  '  He  escaped  out  of  tlieir 
hand'  ?  (x.  39)  :  and  is  '  Tliey  loved  the  glorg  of  men  more 
than  iJic  (jlory  oi  God'  an  improvement  upon  '  the  praise' "i 
(xii.  43). — 'Judas  saith  unto  Him,  Lord,  what  is  come  to  pass 
that  Thou  wilt  manifest  Tliyself  to  us '  ?  Is  that  su])posed  to 
))e  an  iini)n»venient"  upon  xiv.  22? — How  is  '  Jf  then'  an 
improvement  on  '  Forasmuch  then  '  in  Acts  xi.  17  I — or  how 
is  lliis  eiiduialdc  in   Rom.   vii.   15,— 'For  tlint   wliicli  I  do,  I 


II.]  HOW   REMEDIED   BY   THE   REVISIONISTS.  143 

hiow  not :  for  not  what  I  would,  tliat  do  I  fvactuc: ' — or  this, 
in  xvi.  25,  '  The  mystery  which  hath  been  hcjit  in  silence 
through  times  eteinial,  but  now  is  manifested,'  &c.^ — 'Thou 
therefore,  my  child,' — addressing  the  Bishop  of  Ephesus 
(2  Tim.  ii.  1):  and  'Titus,  my  true  child,' — addressing  the 
Bishop  of  Crete  (Tit.  i.  4). 

Are  the  following  deemed  improvements  ?  '  Every  one 
tliat  docth  sin  doeth  also  lawlessness :  and  sin  is  laiolessness ' 
(1  Jo.  iii.  4)  :  '  I  will  move  thy  candlestick  out  of  its  place ' 
(Rev.  ii.  5)  : — '  a  glassy  sea  '  (iv.  6)  : — '  a  great  voice  '  (v.  12)  : 
— '  Verily,  not  of  Angels  doth  He  take  hold,  but  He  taketh  hold 
of  the  seed  of  Abraham  : ' — '  He  took  hold  o/the  blind  man  by 
the  hand  : ' — '  They  took  hold  of  him  and  brought  hmi  unto  the 
Areopagus'  (Heb.  ii.  16  :  S.  Mk.  viii.  23  :  Acts  xvii.  19)  : — 
'  wherefore  GoD  is  not  ashamed  of  them,  to  be  called  their 
God'  (Acts  xi.  16): — 'Counted  it  not  a  jn^ize  to  be  on  an 
equality  with  God  '  (Phil.  ii.  6). — Why  are  we  to  substitute 
'  court'  for  'palace  '  in  Matth.  xxvi.  3  and  Lu.  xi.  21  ?  (Con- 
sider Matth.  xii.  29  and  Mk.  iii.  27). — '  Women  received 
their  dead  hy  a  resurrection '  (Heb.  xi.  35)  : — '  If  ye  forgive 
not  every  one  his  brother  from  their  hearts  '"(Matth.  xviii.  35)  : 
— '  If  hecaiise  of  meat  thy  brother  is  grieved,  thou  walkest  no 
longer  in  love'  (Rom.  xiv.  15): — 'which  God,  who  cannot 
lie,  promised  hefore  times  eteimal ;  but  in  his  oivn  seasoiis 
manifested  his  word  in  the  message '  (Tit.  i.  2,  3)  :• — '  Your 
•pleasures  [and  why  not  '  lusts '  ?]  that  war  in  your  members  ' 
(James  iv.  1)  : — '  Behold  how  much  wood  is  kindled  by  how 
small  a  fire!'  (iii.  5).— Are  these  really  supposed  to  be  less 
'  obscure  '  than  the  passages  they  are  intended  to  supersede  ? 

(a)  Not  a  few  of  the  mistaken  renderings  of  the  Revision- 
ists can  only  be  established  by  an  amount  of  illustration  which 
is  at  once  inconvenient  to  the  Reviewer  and  unwelcome  pro- 


144  S.  TJ^vE    TT.   38   AXD   X.   40  :    AT.SO  [Aut. 

l)ablyt()  tlie  n'ciieral  Iveader.  Thus,  we  take  leave  to  point  out 
that, — '  And  coming  up  at  tliat  very  hour '  (in  Lu.  ii.  38), — 
as  well  as  '  she  came  up  to  Him '  (in  Ln.  x.  40),  are  inexact 
renderings  of  the  original.  The  verl)  i(f)iardvai,  whicli 
etymologically  signifies  "  to  stand  upon,"  or  "  over,"  or  "  by," — 
(but  which  retains  its  literal  signification  on  only  four  out  of 
the  eighteen  occasions  ^  when  the  word  occurs  in  the  Gospels 
and  Acts,) — is  found  almost  invariably  to  denote  the  "  coming 
suddenly  upon  "  a  person.  Hence,  it  is  observed  to  l)e  used 
five  times  to  denote  the  sudden  appearance  of  friendly 
visitants  from  the  unseen  world  :^  and  seven  times,  the 
sudden  hostile  approach  of  ^\•hat  is  formidable.^  On  the 
two  remaining  occasions,  which  are  those  before  us, — 
(namely,  the  sudden  coming  of  Anna  into  the  Temple  *  and 
of  Martha  into  the  presence  of  our  Lord,^) — "  coming  sud- 
dcnly  in "  would  probably  represent  S.  Luke's  eTricrraaa 
exactly.  And  yet,  one  would  hesitate  to  import  the  word 
"  suddenly  "  into  the  narrative.  So  that  "  coming  in  "  would 
after  all  have  to  stand  in  the  text,  although  the  attentive 
student  of  Scripture  would  enjoy  the  knowledge  that  some- 
thing more  is  implied.  In  other  words, — the  Eevisionists 
would  have  done  better  if  they  had  left  both  places  alone.  .  . 
These  are  many  words ;  yet  is  it  impossible  to  explain 
such  matters  at  once  satisfactorily  and  l)riefly. 

(h)  But   more   painful   by   far   it   is   to   discover   that   a 
morbid    striving   after   etymological   accuracy, — added  to  a 


'  Vi/..  S.  I.uke  iv.  39:  Acts  x.  17:  xi.  11 :  xxii.  20. 

-  S.  lAike  ii.  9  (where  ''came  upon''  is  bettor  thuu  ' atuod  by  tliem,'  and 
sliduld  liave  been  left):   xxiv.  4:   Acts  xii.  7:  xxii.  i;5:  xxiii.  11. 

«  «,  Luke  XX.  1:  xxi.  34  (last  Day):  Acts  iv.  1:  vi.  12:  xvii.  5 
("assault"):  xxiii.  27:  xxviii.  2  (a  rain-storm, — which,  liy  tiic  wny, 
suggests  for  rbv  ((^(aTtbra  a  ililTercnt  rendering  from  *  the  j^i'a^ent '). 

^  S.  T.id<e  ii.  38.  •"'  S.  buko  x.  -10. 


IL]  S.  JOHN  XIII.    12, — MISTKANSLATED.  145 

calamitous  preference  for  a  depraved  Text, — has  proved  the 
ruin  of  one  of  the  most  affecting  scenes  in  S.  John's  Gospel. 
'  Simon  Peter  beckoneth  to  him,  and  saith  unto  Mm,  Tell  us 
wJio  it  is  of  whom  He  spcakcth,'  [a  fabulous  statement  evi- 
dently ;  for  Peter  beckoned,  because  he  might  not  speak]. 
'  He  leaning  hack,  as  he  was,' — [a  very  bad  rendering  of  ovtco<?, 
by  the  way ;  and  sure  to  recal  inopportunely  the  rendering 
of  ft)?  rjv  in  S.  Mark  iv.  36,  instead  of  suggesting  (as  it 
obviously  ought)  the  original  of  S.  John  iv.  6  :] — '  on  Jesus' 
breast,  saith  unto  Him,  Loed  who  is  it  ? '  (S.  John  xiii.  24—5). 
Now,  S.  John's  word  concerning  himself  in  this  place  is 
certainly  iirLirea-cov.  He  'just  sank,' — let  his  head  'fall ' — on 
his  Master's  breast,  and  whispered  his  question.  For  this,  a 
few  corrupt  copies  substitute  avaTreacov.  But  avaireaddv  never 
means  '  leaning  haek.'  It  is  descriptive  of  the  posture  of  one 
recli7iing  at  a  meal  (S.  Jo.  xiii.  12).  Accordingly,  it  is  10  times 
rendered  by  the  Eevisionists  to  '  sit  down!  Why,  in  this 
place,  and  in  chapter  xxi.  20,  «  neio  meaning  is  thrust  upon 
the  word,  it  is  for  the  Eevisionists  to  explain.  But  they 
must  explain  the  matter  a  vast  deal  better  than  Bp.  Lightfoot 
has  done  in  his  interesting  little  work  on  Eevision  (pp.  72-3), 
or  they  will  fail  to  persuade  any, — except  one  another. 

(c)  Thus  it  happens  that  we  never  spend  half-an-hour 
over  the  unfortunate  production  before  us  without  exclaiming 
(with  one  in  the  Gospel),  '  The  old  is  hettcr.'  Changes  of  an// 
sort  are  rmwelcome  in  such  a  book  as  the  Bible;  but  the 
discovery  that  changes  have  been  made  fo?'  the  worse,  offends 
greatly.  To  take  instances  at  random  : — '  0  wXetaTO'^  6')(\.o<^ 
(in  Matth.  xxi.  8)  is  rightly  rendered  in  our  A.V.  '  a  very  great 
multitude.'  ^    Why  then  has  it  been  altered  by  the  E.  V.  into 


^  Cf.  ch.  xi.  20.     So  in  Latin,  lUa  plurima  sacrifida.     (Cic.  De  Fin.  2. 
20.  63.) 

L 


140  INJUDrCTOUS   OR   ERRONEOUS   CHANGES.  [Art. 

'  the  most  paH  of  the  multitude  '  ? — '  O  7roA,u<?  o%\o9  (Mk.  xii. 
37),  in  like  manner,  is  rightly  rendered  '  the  common  pcopUl 
and  ought  not  to  have  been  glossed  in  the  margin  '  the  great 
multitude! — In  the  K.  V.  of  Acts  x.  15,  we  find  '  Make  thou 
not  common,'  introduced  as  an  improvement  on,  '  That  call 
not  thou  common.'  But  '  the  old  is  better : '  for,  besides  its 
idiomatic  and  helpful  '  That' — the  old  alone  states  the  case 
truly.  Peter  did  not  '  make,'  he  only  '  called^  something 
'  common.' — '  All  the  male  children,'  as  a  translation  of  7rdvra<i 
Toi>9  iratSa^i  (in  Matth.  ii.  16)  is  an  unauthorized  statement. 
There  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  the  female  infants  of 
Bethlehem  were  spared  in  the  general  massacre :  and  the 
Greek  certainly  conveys  no  such  information. — 'When  he 
came  into  the  house,  Jesus  spake  first  to  him  ' — is  really  an 
incorrect  rendering  of  Matth.  xvii.  25  :  at  least,  it  imports 
into  the  narrative  a  notion  which  is  not  found  in  the  Greek, 
and  does  not  exhibit  faithfully  what  the  Evangelist  actually 
says.  '  Anticipated'  in  modern  English, — 'prevented,'  in 
ancient  phraseology, — '  vms  hcforchand  with  him '  in  language 
neither  new  nor  old, — conveys  the  sense  of  the  original 
exactly. — In  S.  Lu.  vi.  35,  '  Love  your  enemies,  .  .  .  and  lend, 
never  despairing'  is  simply  a  mistaken  translation  of  aireXiri- 
^ovT€<;,  as  the  context  sufficiently  proves.  The  old  rendering 
is  the  true  one.^  And  so,  learnedly,  the  Vulgate, — nihil  inde 
sj)erantcs.  (Consider  the  use  of  airo^Xeireiv  [Heb.  xi.  26]  : 
a^o/3ay'[Phil.  ii.  23  :  Heb.  xii.  2]  :  ahutor,  as  used  by  Jerome 
for utor,  &c.) — '  Go  with  them  making  no  distinction'  is  not  the 
meaning  of  Acts  xi.  12  :  which,  however,  was  correctly  trans- 
lated before,  viz.  '  nothing  doubting.' — The  mischievous  change 
('save'  in  place  of  'hut')  in  Gal.  ii.  16  has  been  ably  and 
faithfully  exposed  by  Bp.  Ollivant.     In    the   words  of  the 


'  "Tlic  context"  (says  learned  Dr.  Field)  "is  luo  strong  f(ir  i>liilulogical 
(|uil)l)le.s."  The  words  "run  hy  no  poasihUity  hcdr  any  other  maining" — 
Utiiim  Norviccnae,  p.  40. 


n.]  INJUDICIOUS   OR   EKRONEOUS   CHANGES.  147 

learned  and  pious  Bp.  of  Lincoln, '  it  is  illogical  and  erroneous, 
and  contradicts  the  whole  drift  of  S.  Paul's  Argument  in  that 
Epistle,  and  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.' 

[d)  We  should  be  dealing  insincerely  with  our  Readers  were 
we  to  conceal  our  grave  dissatisfaction  at  not  a  few  of  the 
novel  expressions  which  the  Revisionists  have  sought  to 
introduce  into  the  English  New  Testament.  That  the 
malefactors  between  whom  '  the  Lord  of  glory '  was  crucified 
were  not  ordinary  '  thieves,'  is  obvious ;  yet  would  it  have 
been  wiser,  we  think,  to  leave  the  old  designation  undis- 
turbed. We  shall  never  learn  to  call  them  '  rohhers.'—'  The 
king  sent  forth  a  soldier  of  his  guard '  is  a  gloss — not  a 
translation  of  S.  Mark  vi.  27.  '  An  executioner'  surely  is  far 
preferable  as  the  equivalent  for  cnreKovXaroip  !  ^ — '  Assassins ' 
(as  the  rendering  of  atKapioi)  is  an  objectionable  substitute 
for  '  murderers.'  A  word  which  "  belongs  probably  to  a 
romantic  chapter  in  the  history  of  the  Crusades "  ^  has 
no  business  in  the  N.  T. — And  what  did  tliese  learned  men 
suppose  they  should  gain  by  suljstituting  '  the  ttuin  brothers ' 
for  'Castor  and  Pollux'  in  Acts  xxviii.  11?  The  Greek 
(AioaKovpoi)  is  neither  the  one  nor  the  other. — In  the  same 
spirit,  instead  of,  '  they  that  received  trihute-money '  (in 
S.  Matth.  xvii.  24),  we  are  now  presented  with  'they  that 
received  the  half -shekel : '  and  in  verse  27, — instead  of 
'  when  thou  hast  opened  his  mouth,  thou  shalt  find  a 
piece  of  money'  we  are  favoured  with  '  thou  shalt  find  a 
shekel.'  But  why  the  change  has  been  made,  we  fail  to  see. 
The  margin  is  still  obliged  to  explain  that  not  one  of  these 
four  words  is  found  in  the  original :  the  Greek  in  the  former 
place  being    ra   SlSpwy^jna, — in   the  latter,  ararrip. — '  Flute- 

^  ^TparicjTrjs  os  npoi  to  cjiovtvfiu  reraKTai, — Theophylact,  i.  201  e. 
Boys  quotes  Seneca  De  Tree: — Tunc  centurio  sujypUcio  propositus  con- 
dere  gladium  speculatoremyf tssiY.  ^  Trench,  Study  of  Words,  p.  106. 

L   2 


148  CHANGES  FOE   THE  WORSE.  [Art. 

flayers '  (f(n"  '  minstrels  ')  in  S,  Matthew  ix.  23,  is  a  mis- 
take. An  avK7)Tri<i  played  the  2^2)6  {av\6<;,  1  Cor.  xiv.  7), — 
hence  *  pipers '  in  Eev.  xviii.  22  ;  (where  by  the  way  /jLovaiKoi 
['  musicians ']  is  perversely  and  less  accurately  rendered  '  mm- 
strels'). —  Once  more.  'Undressed  cloth  '  (Mk.  ii.  21),  because 
it  is  an  expression  popularly  understood  only  in  certain 
districts  of  England,  and  a  vox  artis,  ought  not  to  have  been 
introduced  into  the  Gospels.  '  Nciv  '  is  preferable. — '  Wine- 
skins' (Mtt.  ix.  17:  Mk.  ii.  22:  Lu.  v.  37)  is  a  term  unin- 
telligible to  the  generality ;  as  the  Eevisionists  confess,  for 
they  explain  it  by  a  note, — '  That  is,  skins  used  as  bottles.' 
What  else  is  this  but  substituting  a  new  difficulty  for  an  old 
one  ? — '  Silver,'  now  for  the  first  time  thrust  into  Acts  viii. 
20,  is  unreasonable.  Like  'argent,'  in  French,  dpyvpiov  as 
much  means  'money,'  here  as  in  S.  Matthew  xxv.  18,  27, 
&c. — In  S.  James  ii.  19,  we  should  like  to  know  what  is 
o-ained  by  the  introduction  of  the  '  shuddering  '  devils. — To 
take  an  example  from  a  different  class  of  words, — Who 
will  say  that  '  Thou  mindest  not  the  things  of  God  '  is  a  bet- 
ter rendering  of  ov  4>povei<i,  than  the  old  '  Thou  savourest  not,' 
— which  at  least  had  no  ambiguity  about  it  ?  ...  A  friend 
points  out  that  Dr.  Field  (a  '  master  in  Israel ')  has  examined 
104  of  the  changes  made  in  the  Ee vised  Version  ;  and  finds 
8  questionable:  13  unnecessary:  19  faulty  (i.e.  cases  in 
which  the  A.  V.  required  amendment,  but  which  the  E.  V. 
has  not  succeeded  in  amending)  :  64:  ehanr/es  for  the  worse}  .  .  . 
This  is  surely  a  terrible  indictment  for  such  an  one  as  Dr. 
Field  to  bring  against  the  Eevisers, — tvho  were  directed  only 
to  correct  '  rLAiN  and  clear  errors.' 

(c)  We    really    fail    to    understand    luiw   it    has    come    to 
pass  that,  notwithstanding  tlie  amount  of  scliolarship  which 


'   Othim  Norviccnse,  pars  tortia,  1S81,  ])j).  1.5.5. 


II.]  ACTS   XXI.   37,  MISTRANSLATED.  149 

sometimes  sat  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber,  so  many  novelties 
are  found  in  the  present  Eevision  which  betoken  a  want 
of  familiarity  with  the  refinements  of  the  Greek  language 
on  the  one  hand ;  and  (what  is  even  more  inexcusable)  only 
a  slender  acquaintance  with  the  resources  and  proprieties 
of  English  speech,  on  the  other.  A  fair  average  instance 
of  this  occurs  in  Acts  xxi.  37,  where  (instead  of  '  Canst 
thou  speak  Greek  ? ')  '^Xkr^viaTl  ycv(oaKet<i ;  is  rendered  '  Dost 
thou  hioio  Greek  ? '  That  yivoxTKecv  means  '  to  know  '  (and 
not  '  to  speak ')  is  undeniable :  and  yet,  in  the  account  of 
all,  except  the  driest  and  stupidest  of  pedagogues,  'EXXr^viaTi 
<ycva)aK€L<; ;  must  be  translated  '  Canst  thou  speak  Greek  ? ' 
For  (as  every  schoolboy  is  aware)  'KWrjviart  is  an  adverb, 
and  signifies  '  i7i  Greek  fashion : '  so  that  something  has  to  be 
supplied :  and  the  full  expression,  if  it  must  needs  be  given, 
would  be,  '  Dost  thou  know  [how  to  talk]  in  Greek  ? '  But 
then,  this  condensation  of  phrase  proves  to  be  the  established 
idiom  of  the  language :  ^  so  that  the  rejection  of  the  learned 
rendering  of  Tyndale,  Cranmer,  the  Geneva,  the  Eheims, 
and  the  Translators  of  1611  ('  Canst  thou  speak  Greek  ? ') — 
the  rejection  of  this,  at  the  end  of  270  years,  in  favour  of 
'  Dost  thou  know  Greek  ? '  really  betrays  ignorance.  It  is  worse 
than  bad  Taste.     It  is  a  stupid  and  deliberate  hhmder. 

(/)  The  substitution  of  '  they  weiejhed  unto  hiin '  (in  place 
of  '  they  covenanted  ivith  him  for ')  '  thirty  pieces  of  silver ' 
(S.  Matth.  xxvi.  15)  is  another  of  those  plausible  mistakes, 
into  which  a  little  learning  (proverbially  'a  dangerous  thing') 
is  for  ever  conducting  its  unfortunate  possessor;  but  from 
which   it  was  to  have  .been    expected  that   tlie   undoubted 


^  Compare  Xenophon  {Cyrop.  vii.  6.  8),  rovs  "Evpiari  eTnarafie'vovs.  The 
plena  locutio  is  found  in  Neliem.  xiii.  24, — ol  viol  cwroiv  rjfiia-v  AaJioCi/res 
'Afcorio-Tt,  Koi  ovK  elaiv  iniyivto<TKovTes  XoXeii/  ^lovbdiaTl  (quoted  bv 
Wetstein). 


150      S.   MATTHEW   XXVI.    15,   NOW   MISTRANSLATED.      [Akt. 

attainments  of  some  who  frequented  the  Jerusalem  Chamber 
would  have  effectually  preserved  the  Eevisionists.  That 
€<TTr}(rav  is  intended  to  recal  Zech.  xi.  12,  is  obvious;  as 
well  as  that  there  it  refers  to  the  ancient  practice  of  vjcigh- 
imj  uncoined  money.  It  does  not,  however,  by  any  means 
follow,  that  it  was  customary  to  v)d(jh  shekels  in  the  days 
of  the  Gospel.  Coined  money,  in  fact,  was  never  weighed, 
but  always  counted ;  and  these  were  shekels,  i.e.  didraclims 
(Matth.  xvii.  24).  The  truth  (it  lies  on  the  surface)  is,  that 
there  exists  a  happy  ambiguity  about  the  word  earrjaav, 
of  which  the  Evangelist  has  not  been  slow  to  avail  himself. 
In  the  particular  case  before  us,  it  is  expressly  recorded  that 
in  the  first  instance  money  did  not  pass, — only  a  bargain  was 
made,  and  a  certain  sum  promised.  S.  Mark's  record  is  that 
the  chief  priests  were  glad  at  the  proposal  of  Judas,  '  a7id 
promised  to  give  him  money'  (xiv.  11) :  S.  Luke's,  that  '  thci/ 
covenanted '  to  do  so  (xxii.  5,  6).  And  with  this,  the  state- 
ment of  the  first  Evangelist  is  found  to  be  in  strictest 
agreement.  The  chief  Priests  '  set '  or  '  appointed '  ^  him 
a  certain  sum.  The  perfectly  accurate  rendering  of  S.  Matth. 
xxvi.  15,  therefore,  exhibited  by  our  Authorized  Version,  has 
been  set  aside  to  make  way  for  a  misrcjwesentation  of  flic 
Evauf/elist's  meaning.  '  In  the  judgment  of  the  most  com- 
petent scholars,'  was  '  such  change  necessary'  ? 

((/)  We  respectfully  think  tliat  it  would  have  been  more 
becoming  in  such  a  company  as  that  which  assenililfd  in  tlie 
Jerusalem  Chamber,  as  well  as  more  consistent  with  their 
Instructions,  if  in  doubtful  eases  they  had  abstained  from 
touching  the  Authorized  Version,  but  had  recorded  their  own 
conjectural  emendations  in  the  margin.     How  rash  and  in- 


^  Cf.  Acts  i.  23;  xvii.  31.  The  Latin  is  '  statuerunt'  or  '  const  it  (lerm)t.' 
The  Revisionists  give  ' appointed' in  the  second  of  tliese  jilaces,  and  'put 
forward  '  in  the  first.     In  botli, — What  becomes  of  tlicir  uniformity? 


II.]      UNWARRANTABLE  CHANGE  IN  ACTS  XXVI.  2S.  29.     151 

felicitous,  for  example,  is  the  following  rendering  of  the 
famous  words  in  Acts  xxvi.  28,  29,  which  we  find  thrust 
upon  us  without  apology  or  explanation ;  without,  in  fact, 
any  marginal  note  at  all : — '  And  Agrippa  said  unto  Paul, 
With  hut  little  persuasion  thou  wouldest  fain  nuikc  me  a 
Christian.  And  Paul  said,  I  would  to  God,  that  whether 
ivith  little  or  ivith  much,'  &c.  Now  this  is  indefensible.  For, 
in  the  first  place,  to  get  any  such  meaning  out  of  the  words, 
our  Eevisionists  have  been  obliged  to  substitute  the  fabri- 
cated 'jroii)aaL  (the  peculiar  property  of  t«  a  B  and  a  few 
cursives)  for  'yeveaOat  in  ver.  28.  Moreover,  even  so,  the 
words  do  not  yield  the  required  sense.  We  venture  to  point 
out,  that  this  is  precisely  one  of  the  occasions  where  the 
opinion  of  a  first-rate  Greek  Father  is  of  paramount  import- 
ance. The  moderns  confess  themselves  unable  to  discover 
a  single  instance  of  the  phrase  ev  oXcyo)  in  the  sense  of  '  ivithin 
a  little.'  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  (a.d.  350)  and  Chrysostom 
(a.d.  400),  on  the  contrary,  evidently  considered  that  here 
the  expression  can  mean  nothing  else ;  and  they  were  com- 
petent judges,  seeing  that  Greek  was  their  native  language  : 
far  better  judges  (be  it  remarked  in  passing)  on  a  point  of 
this  kind  than  the  whole  body  of  Eevisionists  put  together. 
*  Such  an  amount  of  victorious  grace  and  wisdom  did  Paul 
derive  from  the  Holy  Spirit  '  (says  Cyril),  '  that  even  King 
Agrippa  at  last  exclaimed,'  ^  &c.  From  which  it  is  evident 
that  Cyril  regarded  Agrippa's  words  as  an  avowal  that  he 
was  well-nigh  overcome  by  the  Apostle's  argument.  And 'so 
Chrysostom,^  who  says  plainly  that  ev  oXiyo)  means  '  within 
a   little,'  ^  and  assumes  that  '  within  a  little '  S.  Paul  had 


1  P.  279. 

^  Ko).  Tov  SiKacTTrjv  elXev  6  rews  KaTd8iKos  fiVoi  vojjii^u^fvns  Kcn  t))i>  viktjv 
avTos  6  xeipa)6e\s  o/xoXoyet  Xa/XTrpa  tj]  (pair'jj  TvapovTuiv  imdvTOiv  kiyuiv,  ev 
oXi'yo)  K.  T.  X.  X.  307  b.  (  =  xii.  433  a). 

^  iv  oXiycp  •   Tovreari  napii  piKpuv.      ix.  391  a, 


152  MEANING  OF  ACTS  XXVI.   28,   29.  [Art. 

persuaded  his  judge.^  He  even  puts  Trap  okvyov  into  Agrippa's 
moutli.^  So  also,  in  effect,  Theodoret.^  From  all  which  it  is 
reasonable,  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to  the  contrary,  to 
infer  that  our  A.  V.  reflects  faithfully  what  was  the  Church's 
traditionary  interpretation  of  Acts  xxvi.  28  in  the  first  half 
of  the  fourth  century.  Let  it  only  be  added  that  a  better 
judge  of  such  matters  than  any  who  frequented  the  Jerusalem 
Chamber — the  late  President  of  Magdalen,  Dr.  Routh, — 
writes :  '  Vcrtendum  esse  sequentia  suadent,  Me  fere  Christi- 
anuni  fieri  suades.  Interp.  Vtdgata  hahet,  In  modico  suades 
me  Christianum  fieri'  ^  Yes,  the  Apostle's  rejoinder  fixes  the 
meaning  of  what  Agrippa  had  said  l)efore. — And  this  shall 
sufl&ce.  We  pass  on,  only  repeating  our  devout  wish  that 
what  the  Revisionists  failed  to  understand,  or  were  unable 
materially  and  ecrtainly  to  improve,  they  would  have  been 
so  obliging  as  to  let  alone.  In  the  present  instance  the  A.  V. 
is  probably  right ;  the  R.  V.,  probably  wrong.  No  one,  at  all 
events,  can  pretend  that  the  rendering  with  which  we  are  all 
familiar  is  "  a  plain  and  clear  error."  And  confessedly,  unless 
it  was,  it  should  have  been  left  unmolested.     But  to  proceed. 

(4)  and  (5)  There  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  absolute 
duty  of  rendering  identical  expressions  in  strictly  imrallel 
places  of  the  Gospels  by  strictly  identical  language.  So  far  we 
are  wholly  at  one  with  tlie  Revisionists.  But  'alterations 
[supposed  to  be]  rendered  necessary  hy  conseqiience '  (Preface, 
iii.  2.),  are  quite  a  different  matter :  and  we  venture  to  think 
that  it  is  precisely  in  their  pursuit  of  a  mechanical  uniformity 
of  rendering,  that  our  Revisionists  have  most  often  as  well  as 
most  grievously  lost  their  way.  We  differ  from  them  in  fact 
in  limine.    '  When  a  particular  word '  (say  they)  '  is  found  to 


'   Ka\  Tov  8iK(i^ovTU  jXiKfjov  fifTaTTflirai,  o)j  Koi   avrov   eKelvov   Xe-yeiJ',    fv 
,)\[yu,  K.  T.  X.  ii.  nif;  a.  2  iii_  399  (j_ 

^  V.  '.i.".0  (mij)'  uK'iyov).  *  MS,  Note  in  his  copy  of  the  N.  T. 


II.]  TE'KNON:— SnAA'rXNA  :— ET'QE'nS.  153 

recur  with  characteristic  frequency  in  any  one  of  the  Sacred 
Writers,  it  is  obviously  desirable  to  adopt  for  it  some  uniform 
rendering '  (iii.  2).  '  Desirable ' !  Yes,  but  in  what  sense  ? 
It  is  much  to  be  desired,  no  doubt,  that  the  English  language 
always  contained  the  exact  counterparts  of  Greek  words :  and 
of  course,  if  it  did,  it  would  be  in  the  highest  degree  '  desirable ' 
that  a  Translator  should  always  employ  those  words  and 
no  other.  But  then  it  happens  unfortunately  that  precisely 
equivalent  v.-ords  do  not  exist.  TeKvov,  nine  times  out  of  ten 
signifies  nothing  else  but  'child.'  On  the  tenth  occasion, 
however,  (e.g.  where  Abraham  is  addressing  the  rich  man 
in  Hades,)  it  would  be  absurd  so  to  render  it.  We  translate 
*  Son.'  We  are  in  fact  without  choice. — Take  another  ordinary 
Greek  term,  cnT\d'y)(ya,  which  occurs  11  times  in  the  N.  T., 
and  which  the  A.  V.  uniformly  renders  '  bowels.'  Well,  and 
'  bowels  '  confessedly  crirKar^yya  are.  Yet  have  our  Eevision- 
ists  felt  themselves  under  the  'necessity'  of  rendering  the 
word  'heart'  in  Col.  iii.  12, — 'very  hearty  in  Philemon, 
ver.  12, — 'affections'  in  2  Cor.  vi.  12, — ■' inioard  affection' 
in  vii.  15, — 'tender  7nercies'  in  Phil.  i.  8, — '  compassion'  in 
1  Jo.  iii.  17, — -'bowels'  only  in  Acts  i.  18. — These  learned 
men,  however,  put  forward  in  illustration  of  their  own  jDrinciple 
of  translation,  the  word  ey^eeo?,— which  occurs  about  80 
times  in  the  N.  T. :  nearly  half  the  instances  being  found  in 
S.  Mark's  Gospel.  We  accept  their  challenge;  and  assert 
that  it  is  tasteless  barljarism  to  seek  to  imj^ose  upon  evdico^;, — 
no  matter  what  the  context  in  which  it  stands, — the  sense  of 
'straightway,' — only  because  ev6u<i,  the  adjective,  generally 
(not  always)  means  '  straight.'  Where  a  miracle  of  healing 
is  described  (as  in  S.  Matth.  viii.  3  :  xx.  34.  S.  Lu.  v.  13),  since 
the  benefit  was  no  douljt  instantaneous,  it  is  surely  the  mere 
instinct  of  'faithfulness'  to  translate  €vdeo)<;  'immediately.' 
So,  in  respect  of  the  sudden  act  which  saved  Peter  from 
sinking  (S.  Matth.  xiv,  31) ;  and  that   punctual  cock-crow 


154  IJENDERING   OF   THE   GREEK   TENSES,   AND        [Aur. 

(xxvi.  74),  wliich  (S.  Luke  says)  did  not  so  inucli  follow, 
as  accomiiany  his  denial  (xxii.  GO).  ]]ut  surely  not  so,  when 
the  groi'jth  of  a  seed  is  the  thing  spoken  of  (Matth.  xiii.  5) ! 
Acts  again,  which  must  needs  have  occupied  some  little  time 
in  the  doing,  reasonably  suggest  some  such  rendering  as 
'forthwith  '  or  '  straightway,' — (e.g.  S.  Matth.  xiv.  22  :  xxi.  2  : 
and  S.  John  vi.  21)  :  wdiile,  in  3  John  ver.  14,  the  meaning 
(as  the  Revisionists  confess)  can  only  he  '  shortly.'  ...  So  jjlain 
a  matter  really  ought  not  to  require  so  many  words.  We 
repeat,  that  the  Revisionists  set  out  with  a  mistaken 
Principle.     They  clearly  do  not  understand  their  Trade. 

They  invite  our  attention  to  their  rendering  of  certain 
of  the  Greek  Tenses,  and  of  the  definite  Article.  We 
regret  to  discover  that,  in  both  respects,  their  work  is 
disfigured  throughout  by  changes  wdiich  convict  a  majority 
of  their  body  alike  of  an  imperfect  acquaintance  with 
the  genius  of  the  Greek  language,  and  of  scarcely  a  mode- 
rate appreciation  of  the  idiomatic  proprieties  of  their  own. 
Such  a  charge  must  of  necessity,  when  it  has  lieen  sub- 
stantiated, press  heavily  upon  such  a  work  as  the  present ; 
for  it  is  not  as  when  a  solitary  error  has  been  detected, 
which  may  be  rectified.  A  vicious  system  of  rendering 
Tenses,  and  rcprescmting  the  Greek  Article,  is  sure  to  crop 
up  in  every  part  of  the  undertaking,  and  must  occasionally 
be  attended  by  consecjuences  of  a  serious  nature. 

1.  Now,  that  we  may  not  be  ndsunderstood,  we  admit 
at  once  that,  in  teaching  hoys  how  to  turn  Greek  into  English, 
we  insist  that  every  tense  shall  be  marked  by  its  own  a])pro- 
priate  sign.  There  is  no  telling  how  helpful  it  will  prove 
in  tlie  end,  that  every  word  sliall  at  first  have  been  rendered 
with  painful  accuracy.  Let  the  Article  be  [mis-]represented 
— the   l'r('])(tsitions   caricatured — the   Particles  magnified, — 


II.]  OF   THE  GREEK   ARTICLE,   INTO   ENGLISH.  155 

let  the  very  order  of  the  words  at  first,  (however  impossible,) 
be  religiously  retained.  Merciless  accuracy  having  been  in 
this  way  acquired,  a  youth  has  to  be  untQ.ug\\t  these  servile 
habits.  He  has  to  be  reminded  of  the  requirements  of  the 
English  idiom,  and  speedily  becomes  aware  that  the  idiomatic 
rendering  of  a  Greek  author  into  English,  is  a  higher  achieve- 
ment by  far,  than  his  former  slavish  endeavour  always  to 
render  the  same  word  and  tense  in  the  same  slavish  way. 

2.  But  what  supremely  annoys  us  in  the  work  just  now 
under  review  is,  that  the  schoolboy  method  of  translation 
already  noticed  is  therein  exhibited  in  constant  operation 
throughout.  It  becomes  oppressive.  We  are  never  per- 
mitted to  believe  that  we  are  in  the  company  of  Scholars 
who  are  altogether  njasters  of  their  own  language.  Their 
solicitude  ever  seems  to  be  twofold : — (1)  To  exhibit  a  singular 
indifference  to  the  proprieties  of  English  speech,  while  they 
maintain  a  servile  adherence  (etymological  or  idiomatic,  as 
the  case  may  be)  to  the  Greek  : — (2)  Eight  or  wrong,  to  part 
company  fnim  William  Tyndale  and  the  giants  M'ho  gave  us 
our  '  Authorized  Version.' 

Take  a  few  illustrations  of  what  precedes  from  the  second 
chapter  of  S.  Matthew's  Gospel : — 

(1.)  Thus,  in  ver.  2,  the  correct  English  rendering  '  wc 
have  seen'  is  made  to  give  place  to  the  incorrect  'we  saw 
his  star  in  the  east.' — In  ver.  9,  the  idiomatic  'when  they 
had  heard  the  king,  they  departed/  is  rejected  for  the  un- 
idiomatic  '  And  they,  having  heard  the  king,  went  their  way.' 
— In  ver.  15,  we  are  treated  to  '  that  it  might  be  fulfilled 
which  was  spoken  by  the  Loed  through  the  prophet,  saying, 
Out  of  Egypt  did  I  eall  my  son.'  And  yet  who  sees  not, 
that  in  both  instances  the  old  rendering  is  better  ?     Impor- 


156  SPECIMENS   OF   INFELICITOUS  [Akt. 

tant  as  it  may  be,  in  the  Icdure-roum,  to  insist  on  what  is 
implied  by  ro  prjdev  'Tno'  toO  Kvplov  aia'  rov  7rpo<f)i]Tov,  it  is 
simply  preposterous  to  come  ahroad  with  such  refinements. 
It  is  to  stultify  oneself  and  to  render  one's  author  unintel- 
ligible. Moreover,  the  attempt  to  be  so  wondrous  literal 
is  safe  to  break  down  at  the  end  of  a  few  verses.  Thus,  if 
hui  is  'through'  in  verse  15, — why  not  in  verse  17  and  in 
verse  23  ? 

(2.)  Note  how  infelicitously,  in  S.  Matth,  ii.  1,  '  there  came 
wise  men  from  the  east '  is  changed  into  '  wise  men  from  the 
east  came.' — In  ver.  4,  the  accurate,  '  And  when  [Herod]  had 
gathered  together'  (avvayaycov)  &c.,  is  displaced  for  the 
inaccurate,  'And  gathfving  together'  &c. — In  ver.  6,  we  are 
presented  with  the  unintelligil)le,  *  And  thou  Bethlehem,  land 
of  Judah : '  while  in  ver.  7,  '  Then  Herod  privily  called  the 
wise  men,  and  learned  of  them  carefully,'  is  improperly  put 
in  the  place  of  'Then  Herod,  when  he  had  privily  called 
the  wise  men,  enquired  of  them  diligently '  {i^Kpl^wcre  trap' 
avrwv). — In  ver.  11,  the  familiar  'And  when  they  were  come 
into  the  house,  they  saw'  &c.,  is  needlessly  changed  into 
'  They  came  into  the  house,  and  saw : '  while  '  and  when  they 
had  opened  {avoL^avTe<i)  their  treasures,'  is  also  needlessly 
altered  into  '  and  opening  their  treasures.' — In  ver.  12,  the 
R.  V.  is  careful  to  print  '  of  God  '  in  italics,  where  italics  are 
not  necessary :  seeing  that  n^pTy/iaTtcr^eWe?  imjjlies  '  being 
warned  of  God'  (as  the  translators  of  1611  were  well 
aware  ^):  whereas  in  countless  oilier  })hi('i's  tlu'  same  Revi- 
sionists reject  the  use  of  italics  where  italics  are  absolutely 
required. — Their  'until  I  tell  thee'  (in  ver.  13)  is  a  most 
unwortliy  sid)stitute  for  '  until  I  bring  thee  loord.' — And  will 
they  pretend  that  they  liavc  inq)nive(l  tlie  rench-riug  of  the 


^  And  the  Revisitmists :  fur  sec  Rom.  xi.  4. 


II.]  AND   UNIDIOMATIC  RENDERING.  157 

concluding  words  of  the  chapter  ?  If  Na^copaio?  KXrjOi'jaerat 
does  not  mean  '  He  shall  be  called  a  Nazarene,'  what  in  the 
world  does  it  mean  ?  The  ort  of  quotation  they  elsewhere 
omit.  Then  why,  here, — '  That  it  might  be  fulfilled  .  .  .  that '  ? 
— Surely,  every  one  of  these  is  an  alteration  made  for  altera- 
tion's sake,  and  in  every  instance  fo7'  the  worse. 

We  began  by  surveying  the  Greek  of  the  first  chapter  of 
S.  Matthew's  Gospel.  We  have  now  surveyed  the  English  of 
the  second  chapter.  What  does  the  Reader  think  of  the  result  ? 

IV.  Next,  the  Eevisionists  invite  attention  to  certain 
points  of  detail :  and  first,  to  their  rendering  of  the  Tenses 
OF  THE  Veeb.  They  begin  with  the  Greek  Aorist, — (in 
their  account)  '  perhaps  the  most  important '  detail  of  all : — 

'  We  have  not  attempted  to  violate  the  idiom  of  our  language 
by  forms  of  expression  which  it  would  not  bear.  But  we  have 
often  ventured  to  represent  the  Greek  aorist  by  the  English 
preterite,  even  when  the  reader  may  find  some  passing  difficulty 
in  such  a  rendering,  because  we  have  felt  convinced  that  the 
true  meaning  of  the  original  was  obscured  by  the  presence  of 
the  familiar  auxiliary.  A  remarkable  illustration  may  be 
found  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  S.  John's  Gospel.'— 
Preface,  iii.  2, — {latter  part). 

(a)  We  turn  to  the  place  indicated,  and  are  constrained 
to  assure  these  well-intentioned  men,  that  the  phenomenon 
we  there  witness  is  absolutely  fatal  to  their  pretensions 
as  '  Revisers '  of  our  Authorized  Version.  Were  it  only  '  some 
passing  difficulty'  which  their  method  occasions  us,  we 
might  have  hoped  that  time  would  enable  us  to  overcome 
it.  But  since  it  is  the  genius  of  the  English  language  to 
which  we  find  they  have  offered  violence;  the  fixed  and 
universally-understood  idiom  of  our  native  tongue  which 
they  have  systematically  set  at  defiance ;  the  matter  is 
absolutely  without  remedy.  The  difference  between  the 
A.  V.  and  the  R.  V.  seems  to  ourselves  to  be  simply  this, — 


158  PEDANTRY   OF   THE   REYISIOXISTS   IN  [Aut. 

that  the  renderings  in  the  former  are  the  idiomatic  English 
representations  of  certain  well-nnderstood  Greek  tenses : 
wliile  the  proposed  substitutes  are  nothing  else  but  the 
pedantic  efforts  of  mere  grammarians  to  reproduce  in  an- 
otlier  language  idioms  which  it  abhors.  But  the  Header 
shall  judge  for  himself:  for  this  at  least  is  a  point  on  which 
every  educated  Englishman  is  fully  competent  to  pass 
sentence. 

When  our  Divine  Lord,  at  the  close  of  His  Ministry, — 
(He  had  in  fact  reached  the  very  last  night  of  His  earthly 
life,  and  it  wanted  but  a  few  hours  of  His  Passion,) — when 
He,  at  such  a  moment,  addressing  the  Eternal  Eatiiek,  says, 
67(6    ae    iSo^aaa    eVl    t^9    77}?  •    ro    epyov    ireXeioicra  .... 
i(f)av€pcoad  aov  ro  ovo/xa  tol^  dvdpcoTToi^,  &c.  [Jo.  xvii.  4,  GJ, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that,  had  He  pronounced 
those  words  in  English,  He  would  have  said  (with  our  A.  V.) 
'  I   have  glorified   Thee   on  the   earth :  I  have  finished  the 
work : '  '  I  have  manifested  Thy  Name.'     The  pedantry  which 
(on  the  plea  that  the  Evangelist  employs  the  aorist,  not  the 
perfect  tense,)  would  twist  all  this  into  the  indefinite  past, — '  I 
glorified  '  .  .  .  '  I  finished  '  .  .  .  '  I  manifested,' — we  pronounce 
altogether  insufferable.     We  absolutely  refuse  it  a  hearing. 
Presently  (in  ver.  14)  He  says, — 'I  have  given  them  Tliy 
word  ;  and  the  world  hatli  hated  them.'     And  in  ver.  25, — 
'  O  righteous  Father,  the  world  hath  not  knoion  Thee ;  but 
I  have  known  Thee,  and  these  have  knotvn  that  Thou   hast 
sent  Me.'      lllio  would  consent  to  substitute  for  these  ex- 
pressions,— '  the  world  hated  them  : '  and  '  the  world  knew 
Thee  not,  but  I  knew  Thee  ;  and  these  knew  that  Thou  didst 
send  Me '  ? — Or  turn  to  another  Gospel.      Which  is  better, — 
'Some  one  hath  touched  Me:  for  1   ixTceive  that  virtue  is 
gone  out  of  Me,'  (S.  Lu.  viii.  46) : — or, — '  Some  one  did  touch 
Me  :  for  /  im-ceived  that  power  had  gone  forth  from  Me '  ? 


II.]  KENDERING   THE   GREEK   AORIST.  159 

When  the  reference  is  tx)  an  act  so  extremely  recent,  v^ho  is 
not  aware  that  the  second  of  these  renderings  is  abhorrent  to 
the  genius  of  the  English  language  ?  As  for  ejvoov,  it  is 
(like  novi  in  Latin)  present  in  sense  thongh  past  in  form, — 
here  as  in  S.  Lu.  xvi.  3. — But  turn  to  yet  another  Gospel. 
Which  is  better  in  S.  Matth.  xvi.  7  : — '  we  took  no  bread,'  or 
'  It  is  because  ive  have  taken  no  bread '  ?— Again.  When  Simon 
Peter  (in  reply  to  the  command  that  he  should  thrust  out 
into  deep  water  and  let  down  his  net  for  a  draught,)  is  heard 
to  exclaim, — '  Master,  we  have  toiled  all  the  night,  and  have 
taken  nothing:  nevertheless  at  Thy  word  I  will  let  down 
the  net '  (Lu.  v.  5), — ivho  would  tolerate  the  proposal  to  put 
in  the  place  of  it, — '  Master,  we  toiled  all  night,  and  took 
nothing:  but  at  Thy  word,'  &c.  It  is  not  too  much  to 
declare  that  tlie  idiom  of  the  English  language  refuses 
peremptorily  to  submit  to  such  handling.  Quite  in  vain 
is  it  to  encounter  us  with  reminder  that  KoirLaaavref;  and 
iXd^o/xev  are  aorists.  The  answer  is, — We  know  it :  but  we 
deny  that  it  follows  that  the  words  are  to  be  rendered  '  we 
toiled  all  night,  and  took  nothing.'  There  are  laws  of 
English  Idiom  as  well  as  laws  of  Greek  Grammar :  and  when 
these  clash  in  what  is  meant  to  be  a  translation  into  English 
out  of  Greek,  the  latter  must  perforce  give  way  to  the  former, 
— or  we  make  ourselves  ridiculous,  and  misrepresent  what  we 
propose  to  translate. 

All  this  is  so  undeniable  that  it  ought  not  to  require  to  be 
insisted  upon.  But  in  fact  our  Ptcvisionists  by  their  occa- 
sional practice  show  that  they  fully  admit  the  Principle  we 
are  contending  for.  Thus,  rjpav  (in  S.  Jo.  xx.  2  and  13)  is 
by  them  translated  '  they  have  taken : ' — IvaTL  fie  eyKareXLire^ ; 
(S.  Matt,  xxvii.  46)  'Why  hast  Thmi  forsaken  Me  ?'^ :— eSetfa 


^  Yet  even  here  they  caunot  abstain  from  putting  in  the  margin  the 
peculiarly  iufelicitous  alternative, — '  Why  didst  thou  forsake  Me  f 


IGO  OFFENSIVE  FEDANTRY  OF  THE  [Art. 

(S.  Jo.  X.  32)  'have  I  showed  :' — aTrearetXe  (vi.  29)  'lie  hath 
sent : '  —  '^Tt/xdaaTe  (James  ii.  6)  '  ye  have  dishonoured : ' — 
eKaOdpiae  (Acts  x.  15)  'hath  cleansed:' — ea-rrja-ev  (xvii.  31) 
'  He  hath  appointed.'  But  indeed  instances  abound  every- 
where. In  fact,  the  requirements  of  the  case  are  often  observed 
to  force  them  to  be  idiomatic.  T/  eiroLT^cra^ ;  (in  Jo.  xviii.  35), 
they  rightly  render  "  What  hast  thou  done  ?  "  : — and  eypayp-a 
(in  1  Jo.  ii.  14,  21),  "I  have  wi'itten;" — and  TjKovaa  (in  Acts 
ix.  13),  "  I  have  heard." — On  the  other  hand,  by  translating  ovk 
eiaaev  (in  Acts  xxviii.  4),  "  hath  not  suffered,"  they  may  be 
thought  to  have  overshot  the  mark.  They  seem  to  have 
overlooked  the  fact  that,  when  once  S.  Paul  had  Ijeen  l)itten 
by  the  viper,  "  the  barbarians  "  looked  upon  him  as  a  dead 
man ;  and  therefore  discoursed  about  what  Justice  "  did  not 
suffer,"  as  about  an  entirely  past  transaction. 

But  now,  Who  sees  not  that  the  admission,  once  and 
again  deliberately  made,  that  sometimes  it  is  not  only 
lawful,  but  even  necessary,  to  accommodate  the  Greek  aorist 
(when  translated  into  English)  with  the  sign  of  the  perfect, — 
reduces  the  whole  matter  (of  the  signs  of  the  tenses)  to  a 
mere  question  of  Taste?  In  view  of  such  instances  as  the 
foregoing,  where  severe  logical  necessity  has  compelled  the 
Eevisionists  to  abandon  their  position  and  fly,  it  is  plain  that 
their  contention  is  at  an  end, — so  far  as  rifjlU  and  wrong  are 
concerned.  They  virtually  admit  that  they  have  been  all 
along  unjustly  forcing  on  an  independent  language  an  alien 
yoke.^  Henceforth,  it  sini})ly  becomes  a  question  to  be 
repeated,  as  every  fresh  emergency  arises, — Which  then  is 
the  more  idiomatic  of  these  two  English  renderings  ?  .  .  .  . 
Conversely,  twice  at  least  (Heb.  xi.  17  and  28),  the  Revi- 


^  As  in  Eom.  vi.  2:  ix.  13.     1  Cur.  i.  27:  vi.  20:  ix.  11.     Ephcs.  iv. 
20,  &c.  &c. 


II.]  EEVISIONISTS,   EXPOSED.  161 

sionists  have  represented  the  Greek  perfect  by  the  English 
indefinite  preterite. 

{h)  Besides  this  offensive  pedantry  in  respect  of  the 
Aorist,  we  are  often  annoyed  by  an  unidiomatic  rendering  of 
the  Imperfect.  True  enough  it  is  that  '  the  servants  and  the 
officers  were  standing  ....  and  7ve7X  warming  themselves  : ' 
Peter  also  '  was  standing  with  them  and  luas  warming  him- 
self (S.  Jo.  xviii.  18).  But  we  do  not  so  express  ourselves  in 
English,  unless  we  are  about  to  add  something  which  shall 
account  for  our  particularity  and  precision.  Any  one,  for 
example,  desirous  of  stating  what  had  been  for  years  his 
daily  practice,  would  say — '  /  left  my  house.'  Only  when  he 
wanted  to  explain  that,  on  leaving  it  for  the  1000th  time,  he 
met  a  friend  coming  up  the  steps  to  pay  him  a  visit, 
would  an  Englishman  think  of  saying,  '  /  was  leaving  the 
house.'  A  Greek  writer,  on  the  other  hand,  would  not  trust 
this  to  the  imperfect.  He  would  use  the  present  participle 
in  the  dative  case,  ('  To  me,  leaving  viy  house,'  ^  &c.).  One  is 
astonished  to  have  to  explain  such  things  .  .  .  .  '  If  there- 
fore thou  art  offering  thy  gift  at  the  altar '  (Matt.  v.  23),  may 
seem  to  some  a  clever  translation.  To  ourselves,  it  reads 
like  a  senseless  exaggeration  of  the  original.^  It  sounds 
(and  is)  as  unnatuial  as  to  say  (in  S.  Lu.  ii.  33)  'And  His 
father  [a  depravation  of  the  text]  and  His  mother  were  mar- 
velli7ig  at  the  things  which  were  spoken  concerning  Him : ' — 
or  (m  Heb.  xi.  17)  'yea,  he  that  had  received  the  promises 
was  offering  wp  his  only-begotten  son  : ' — or,  of  the  cripple  at 
Lystra  (Acts  xiv.  9),  '  the  same  heard  Paul  speaking.' 

(c)  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  occasions  confessedly 
when  the  Greek  Aorist  absolutely  demands  to  be  rendered 


1  Comp.  S.  Matth.  viii.  1,  5,  23,  28 ;  ix.  27,  28 ;  xxi.  23. 
Eai/  nvv  nfjoacfiepr]^. 

M 


102  'J'HE   GREEK   TENSES,   MISREPRESENTED  [Art. 

into  English  by  the  sign  of  the  Pluiwrfcd.  An  instance 
meets  us  wliile  we  write :  w?  he  eiravaaro  XaXwv  (S.  Lii.  v.  4), 
— where  our  llevisiouists  are  found  to  letain  the  idiomatic 
rendering  of  our  Authorized  Version, — 'When  He  liad  left 
speaking.'  Of  what  possible  avail  could  it  be,  on  such  an 
occasion,  to  insist  that,  because  eiravaaro  is  not  in  the 
pluperfect  tense,  it  may  not  be  accommodated  with  the  sign 
of  the  pluperfect  when  it  is  being  translated  into  English  ? — 
The  1\.  V.  has  sliown  less  consideration  in  S.  Jo.  xviii.  24, — 
where  '  Now  Annas  had  sent  Him  bound  unto  Caiaphas  the 
high  priest,'  is  right,  and  wanted  no  revision. — Such  places  as 
Matth.  xxvii.  60,  Jo.  xxi.  15,  Acts  xii.  17,  and  Heb.  iv.  8, 
on  the  other  hand,  simply  defy  the  Revisionists.  For  per- 
force Joseph  '  had  hcivn  out '  (iXaTOfirjae)  the  new  tomb 
which  became  our  Lord's  :  and  the  seven  Apostles,  confessedly, 
'  had  dined '  {rjpicrrricrav) :  and  S.  Peter,  of  course,  '  declared 
unto  them  how  the  Lord  had  hroi'fjht  him  out  of  the  prison  ' 
{e^/jr-^ayev) :  and  it  is  impossible  to  substitute  anything  for 
'If  Jesus  [Joshua]  had  given  them  rest'  (KaTeiravaev). — 
Then  of  course  there  are  occasions,  (not  a  few,)  where  the 
Aorist  (often  an  indefinite  present  in  (Ireek)  claims  to  be 
Englished  by  the  sign  of  the  present  tense  :  as  where  S.  John 
says  (Rev.  xix.  6),  '  The  Lord  God  Omnipotent  reigneth ' 
(i/3a(TL\€vae).  There  is  no  striving  against  such  instances. 
They  insist  on  being  rendered  according  to  the  genius  of  the 
language  into  which  it  is  proposed  to  render  them  : — as  when 
cKeiTo  (in  S.  Jo.  xx.  12)  exacts  for  its  rendering  '  heid  lain.' 

(d)  It  sliall  only  be  pointed  out  here  in  addition,  for  the 
student's  l)enent,  that  there  is  one  highly  interesting  place 
(viz.  S.  Matth.  xxviii.  2),  which  in  every  age  has  misled 
Critics  and  Divines  (as  Origen  and  luisebius)  ;  Poets  (as 
Rogers);  Painters  (as  West); — yes,  and  will  continue  to  mis- 
lead readers  for  many  a  voar  to  conu'  :-  and  all  bccaust'  men 


II.]  THROTIGIIOUT   BY   THE   REVISIONISTS.  163 

liave  failed  to  perceive  that  the  aorist  is  used  there  for  the 
phiperfect.  Translate, — '  There  had  been  a  great  earthquake : ' 
[and  so  (1611-1881)  our  margin, — until  in  short  'the  Revi- 
sionists' interfered:]  'for  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  had  de- 
scended from  heaven,  and  come  and  rolled  away  {anre.KvKiae) 
the  stone  from  the  door,  and  sat  upon  it.'  Strange,  that  for 
1800  years  Commentators  should  have  failed  to  perceive  that 
the  Evangelist  is  describing  what  terrified  '  the  keepers.'  '  The 
women '  saw  no  Angel  sitting  upon  the  stone !  —  though 
Origen,^  —  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,^  —  Eusebius,^  —  ps.- 
Gregory  ISTaz.,* — Cyril  Alex.,^ — Hesychius,*' — and  so  many 
others — have  taken  it  for  granted  that  they  did. 

{c)  Then  further,  (to  dismiss  the  subject  and  pass  on,) — 
There  are  occasions  where  the  Greek  ferfect  exacts  the  sign 
of  the  present  at  the  hands  of  the  English  translator :  as 
when  Martha  says, — '  Yea  Lord,  /  believe  that  Thou  art  the 
Christ  '  (S.  Jo.  xi.  27).'  What  else  but  the  veriest  pedantry 
is  it  to  thrust  in  there  '  /  have  believed,'  as  the  English  equi- 
valent for  ireiridTevKa  ? — Just  as  intolerable  is  the  officious- 
ness  which  would  thrust  into  the  Lord's  prayer  (Matt.  vi.  12), 
"as  we  also  have  forgiven  (a(f))]KafMei>)  our  debtors."^ — On  the 
other  hand,  there  are  Greek  presents  (whatever  the  Eevi- 
sionists  may  think)  which  are  just  as  peremptory  in  requiring 
the  sign  of  the  future,  at  the  hands  of  the  idiomatic  trans- 
lator into  English.  Three  such  cases  are  found  in  S.  Jo.  xvi. 
16,  17,  19.  Surely,  the  future  is  inherent  in  the  present 
€pxo/J.ai !  In  Jo.  xiv.  18  (and  many  similar  places),  ivho  can 
endure,  '  I  will  not  leave  you  desolate  :  /  coine  unto  you '  ? 


1  ii.  155.  2  Routh,  BeJl  iii.  226  ad  culc.  ^  Ap.  Mai,  iv.  2GG. 

*  ii.  1324.  ^  ii.  380.  *  Ap.  Greg.  Nyss.  iii.  403. 

■^  So  also  Heb.  xi.  17,  28.     And  see  the  Revision  of  S.  James  i.  11. 

^  Comp.  d(f)Ufi€v  in  S.  Lu.  xi.  4.  In  the  case  of  certaiu  Greek  verl is,  the 
preterite  in  form  is  invariably  present  in  signification.  See  Dr.  Field's 
delightful  Otmm  Norvic.ense,  p.  65. 

M   2 


164  THE   GREEK   ARTICLE,   MISUNDERSTOOD  [Art. 

(/)  But  instances  abound.  How  does  it  happen  that  the 
inaccurate  rendering  of  eKKOTrreraL — iK/3d\X€Tat — has  been 
retained  in  S.  Matth.  iii.  10,  S.  Lu.  iii.  9  ? 

Y.  Next,  concerning  the  definite  Akticle  ;  in  the  case 
of  which,  (say  the  Ecvisionists,) 

'  many  changes  have  been  made.'  '  We  have  been  careful  to 
observe  the  use  of  the  Article  wherever  it  seemed  to  be 
idiomatically  possible:  where  it  did  not  seem  to  be  possible, 
we  have  yielded  to  necessity.' — (^Preface,  iii.  2, — ad  Jin.) 

In  reply,  instead  of  offering  counter-statements  of  our  own 
we  content  ourselves  with  submitting  a  few  specimens  to  tlie 
Header's  judgment ;  and  invite  him  to  decide  between  the 
Reviewer  and  tlie  Reviewed  .  .  .  '  The  sower  went  fortli  to  sow  ' 
(Matth.  xiii.  3). — '  It  is  greater  than  the  herbs '  (ver.  32). — 
'  Let  him  be  to  thee  as  the  Gentile  and  the  publican '  (xviii. 
17). — 'The  unclean  spirit,  when  he  is  gone  out  of  the  man' 
(xii.  43).—'  Did  I  not  choose  you  the  twelve  ? '  (Jo.  vi.  70). 
— '  If  I  then,  the  Lord  and  the  master '  (xiii.  14). — '  For  the 
joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world'  (xvi.  21). — '  But  as 
touching  Apollos  the  brother'  (1  Cor.  xvi.  12). — '  The  Bishop 
must  be  blameless  .  .  .  able  to  exhort  in  the  sound  doctrine ' 
(Titus  i.  7,  9). — '  The  lust  when  it  hath  conceived,  beareth 
sin  :  and  the  sin,  when  it  is  full  grown '  &c.  (James  i.  15). — 
'  Doth  the  fountain  send  forth  from  tlie  same  opening  sweet 
water  and  bitter?'  (iii.  11). — 'Speak  thou  the  things  which 
beht  the  sound  doctrine'  (Titus  ii.  1). — 'The  time  will  come 
when  they  will  not  endure  the  sound  doctrine'  (2  Tim. 
iv.  3). — 'We  had  tJu-  fathers  of  our  flesh  to  chasten  us' 
(Ileb.  xii.  9). — '  Follow  after  peace  with  all  men,  and  the 
sanctihcation'  (ver.  14). — 'Who  is  the  liar  but  he  that 
dciiicth  that  Jksus  is  the  CliKlsT  ?'  (1  do.  ii.  22). — 'Not 
with  the  wiiter  only,  but  with  the  water  and  with  i/ic  blood' 
(v.  (')). — '  He  that  hath  the  Son,  hath  the  life :  he  tliat 
hath  not  the  SoN  of  GoD  hath  not  the  hfe'  (ver.  12). 


II.]  BY   THE   REVISIONISTS.— THE    PRONOUNS.  165 

To  rejoin,  as  if  it  were  a  sufficient  answer,  that  the  detinitt; 
Article  is  found  in  all  these  places  in  the  original  Greek, — 
is  preposterous.  In  French  also  we  say  '  Telle  est  la  vie  : ' 
but,  in  translating  from  the  French,  we  do  not  therefore  say 
'  Such  is  the  life.'  May  we,  without  offence,  suggest  the 
study  of  Middleton  On  the  Doctrine  of  the  Greek  Article  to 
those  members  of  the  Kevisionists'  body  who  have  favoured 
us  with  the  foregoing  crop  of  mistaken  renderings  I 

vSo,  in  respect  of  the  indefinite  article,  we  are  presented 
with, — '  J^?i  eternal'  (for  'the  everlasting')  'gospel  to  pro- 
claim '  (Rev.  xiv.  6) : — and  '  one  like  unto  a  son  of  man,'  for 
'  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man '  in  ver.  .14. — Why  '  a  Saviour  ' 
in  Phil.  iii.  20?  There  is  but  one!  (Acts  iv.  12).— On  the 
other  hand,  Kpavlov  is  rendered  '  The  skull '  in  S.  Lu.  xxiii. 
33.  It  is  hard  to  see  why. — These  instances  taken  at  random 
must  suffice.  They  might  be  multiplied  to  any  extent.  If 
the  Header  considers  that  the  idiomatic  use  of  the  Englisli 
Article  is  understood  by  the  authors  of  these  specimen  cases, 
we  shall  be  surprised,  and  sorry— /or  hi7n, 

VI.  The  Revisionists  announce  that  they  '  have  been  parti- 
cularly careful '  as  to  THE  Pkonouns  [iii.  2  ad  fin. \  We  recal 
with  regret  that  this  is  also  a  particular  wherein  we  have  been 
specially  annoyed  and  offended.  Annoyed — at  their  practice 
of  repeating  the  nominative  (e.g.  in  Mk.  i.  13 :  Jo.  xx.  12)  to 
an  extent  unknown,  abhorrent  even,  to  our  language,  except 
indeed  when  a  fresh  substantive  statement  is  made :  offended 
— at  their  license  of  translation,  vjhcn  it  suits  them  to  be  licen- 
tious.— Thus,  (as  the  Bp.  of  S.  Andrews  has  well  pointed  out,) 
'  it  is  He  that '  is  an  incorrect  translation  of  avTO'i  in  S.  Matth. 
i.  21, — a  famous  passage.  Even  worse,  because  it  is  unfair,  is 
*  He  who '  as  the  rendering  of  o?  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16, — another 
famous  passage,  which  we  have  discussed  elsewhere.^ 


^  See  above,  pp.  08-106.     Also  iii/ra,  towards  the  end. 


166  THE   PARTICLES,   TASTELESSLY  [Art. 

VII.  '  In  the  case  of  the  I'auticles  '  (say  the  Revisionists), 

'  wc  have  been  able  to  maintain  a  reasonable  amount  of  con- 
sistency. The  Particles  in  the  Greek  Testament  are,  as  is  well 
knowD,  comparatively  few,  and  the.y  are  commonly  used  with 
precision.  It  has  therefore  been  the  more  necessary  here  to 
preserve  a  general  uniformity  of  rendering.' — (iii.  2  ad  fin.) 

Such    an    announcement,    we    suljmit,   is    calculated    to 
occasion  nothing  so  much  as  uneasiness  and  astonishment. 
Of  all  the  parts  of  speech,  the  Greek  Particles, — (especially 
throughout  the  period  when  the  Language  w^as  in  its  deca- 
dence,)— are  the  least  capable  of  being  drilled  into  '  a  general 
uniformity  of  rendering ; '  and  he  who  tries  the  experiment 
ought  to  be  the  first  to  be  aware  of  the  fact.     The  refinement 
and  delicacy  which  they  impart  to  a  narrative  or  a  senti- 
ment, are  not  to  be  told.     But  then,  from  the  very  nature  of 
the  case,  'uniformity  of  rcndcrhuj'   is   precisely  the  thing 
they  will  not  submit  to.     They  take  their  colour  from  their 
context :  often  mean  two  cpiite  different  things  in  the  course 
of  two  successive  verses :  sometimes  are  best  rendered  by  a 
long  and  formidable  word  ;  ^    sometimes  cannot  (without  a 
certain  amount  of  impropriety  or  inconvenience)  be  rendered 
at  all.'^      Let   us   illustrate  what  we  have  been  saying  by 
actual  a])peals  to  Scripture. 

(I)  And   iirst,  we    will    derive    ouv    in'ddl's    iVom   the  use 
which    the    sacred  Writers    make    of   the    ])article    of   most 


'  As  ill  S.  Matth.  xi.  11  and  2  Tim.  iv.  17,  where  be  is  rendered  "  not- 
withstanding: " — Phil.  i.  24  and  Heb.  xii.  11,  where  it  is  "nevertheless." 

2  Eiyht  times  in  succession  in  1  Cor.  xii.  8-10,  6e  is  not  represented  in 
the  A.  V.  Tlie  ancicuts/e?i  so  keenly  what  Tyndale,  Cranmer,  tlie  Geneva, 
the  Plieims,  and  the  A.  V.  ventured  to  exhibit,  tliat  as  often  as  not  they 
leave  out  the  be, — in  which  our  Revisit)nists  twice  follow  thcni.  The 
reader  of  taste  is  invited  to  note  the  precious  result  of  insert ini:^;  'iind,'  as 
the  Revisionists  have  done  six  times,  where  according  to  the  genius  nf  tin! 
lOnglish  language  it  is  not  wanted  at  all. 


II.]  OR   INACCURATELY   RENDERED.  107 

frequent  recurrence — Se.  It  is  said  to  be  empLjyed  in  the 
N.  T,  3115  times.  As  for  its  meaning,  we  have  the  unim- 
peachable authority  of  the  Eevisionists  themselves  for  saying 
that  it  may  be  represented  by  any  of  the  following  words  :  — 
'  but/ — '  and,'  ^ — '  yea,'  ^ — '  what,'  ^ — '  now,'  * — '  and  that,'  ^ — 
'  howbeit,'  ^  — '  even,'  "^ — '  therefore,'  ^ — '  I  say,'  ^ — '  also,'  ^'' — 
'yet,'^^ — '  for.' ^^  To  which  12  renderings.  King  James's 
translators  (mostly  following  Tyndale)  are  observed  to  add  at 
least  these  other  12  : — '  wherefore,'  ^^ — '  so,'  ^* — '  moreover,'  ^^ 
— '  yea  and,'  ^^  — '  furthermore,'  ^''  — '  nevertheless,'  ^^  — '  not- 
withstanding,' i»— '  yet  but,'  2*'—'  truly,'  ^^—'  or,'  ^^—'  as  for,'  ^^ 
— '  then,'  ^* — '  and  yet.'  ^^  It  shall  suffice  to  add  that,  by  the 
pitiful  substitution  of  '  but '  or  '  and '  on  most  of  the  fore- 
going occasions,  the  freshness  and  freedom  of  almost  every 
passage  has  been  made  to  disappear :  the  plain  fact  being 
that  the  men  of  1611 — above  all,  that  William  Tyndale  77 
years  before  them — produced  a  work  of  real  genius ;  seizing 
with  generous  warmth  the  meaning  and  intention  of  the 
sacred  Writers,  and  perpetually  varying  the  phrase,  as  they 
felt  or  fancied  that  Evangelists  and  Apostles  would  have 
varied  it,  had  they  had  to  express  themselves  in  English : 
whereas  the  men  of  1881  have  fulfilled  their  task  in  what 
can  only  be  described  as  a  siyirit  of  servile  -pedantry.  The 
Grammarian  (pure  and  simple)  crops  up  everywhere.  We 
seem  never  to  rise  above  the  atmosphere  of  the  lecture-room, 
— the  startling  fact  that  fxiv  means  '  indeed,'  and  Se  '  Init.' 


^  38  times  in  the  Genealogy,  S.  Matth.  i.         ^  Roj^_  xiv.  4  :  xv.  20. 

3  Rom.  ix.  22.  *  1  Cor.  xii.  27.  ^  Gal.  ii.  4. 

«  Acts  xxvii.  26.  "^  Rom.  iii.  22.  ^  Ephes.  iv.  1. 

»  2  Cor.  V.  8.  ^"^  S.  Mark  xv.  31.  "  S.  Mark  vi.  29. 

12 1  Cor.  X.  1.  "  S.  Matth.  vi.  30.  "  S.  John  xx.  4. 

IS  2  Cor.  i.  23.  ^^  2  Cor.  vii.  13.  "  2  Cor.  ii.  12. 

'8  2  Pet.  iii.  13.  ^^  S.  Matth.  ii.  22.  20  ^  ^or.  xii.  20. 

21  1  S.  John  i.  3.  ^2  §_  Matth.  xxv.  39.  23  ^^ts  viii.  3. 

2^  Rom.  xii.  6.  ^5  g_  Matth.  vi.  29. 


168  TASTELESS   OR   INACCURATE  [Akt. 

We  subjoin  a  single  specimen  of  the  countless  changes 
introduced  in  the  rendering  of  Particles,  and  then  hasten  on. 
In  1  Cor,  xii.  20,  for  three  centuries  and  a  half,  Englishmen 
have  been  contented  to  read  (with  William  Tyndale),  '  But 
now  are  they  many  members,  yet  but  one  body.'  Our 
Revisionists,  (overcome  by  the  knowledge  that  Si  means 
'  but,'  and  yielding  to  the  supposed  '  necessity  for  preserving 
a  general  uniformity  of  rendering,')  sulistitute, — 'But  now 
they  are  many  members,  hut  one  body.'  Comment  ought  to 
be  superfluous.  We  neither  overlook  the  fact  that  Si  occurs 
here  twice,  nor  deny  that  it  is  fairly  represented  by  '  but '  in 
the  first  instance.  We  assert  nevertheless  that,  on  the 
second  occasion,  'yet  but'  ought  to  have  been  let  alone. 
And  this  is  a  fair  sample  of  the  changes  which  have  been 
effected  mawj  times  in  every  page.     To  proceed  however. 

(2)  The  interrogative  particle  y  occurs  at  tlie  beginning 
of  a  sentence  at  least  8  or  10  times  in  the  N.  T. ;  first,  in 
S.  Matth.  vii.  9.  It  is  often  scarcely  translateable, — being 
apparently  invested  with  no  more  emphasis  than  belongs  to 
our  colloquial  interrogative  '  Wi  ? '  But  sometimes  it  would 
evidently  bear  to  be  represented  by  '  Pray,'  ^ — being  at  least 
equivalent  to  ^epe  in  Greek  or  age  in  Latin.  Once  only 
(viz.  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  30)  does  this  interrogative  particle  so 
eloquently  plead  for  recognition  in  the  text,  that  both  our 
A.  V.  and  the  L'.  V.  have  rendered  it  'What?' — by  wliich 
word,  l)y  the  way,  it  might  very  fairly  ha\e  l)cen  representetl 
in  S.  Matth.  xxvi.  53  and  Rom.  vi.  3 :  vii.  1.  In  five  of  the 
places  where  the  particle  occurs.  King  James's  Translators  are 
observed  to  liave  given  it  up  in  despair."  r)Ut  wliat  is  to  be 
thought  of  the  adventurous  dulness  wliich  (with  the  single 
exception  already  indicated)  has  invariahltj  rendered  -i]  by 


1  As  ill  H.  Matth.  vii.  9 :  xii.  29:  xx.  15.     1\om.  iii.  !.'!». 

2  S.  Matth.  XX.  15:  xxvi.  53.     Horn.  iii.  29:  vi.  3:  vii.  1. 


II.]  EENDERING   OF   PARTICLES.  169 

the  conjunction  '  or '  ?  The  bhmder  is  the  more  inexcusable, 
because  the  intrusion  of  such  an  irrelevant  conjunction  into 
places  where  it  is  without  either  use  or  meaning  cannot  have 
failed  to  attract  the  notice  of  every  member  of  the  Ilevising 
body. 

(3)  At  the  risk  of  being  wearisome,  we  must  add  a  few 
words. — Kat,  though  no  particle  but  a  conjunction,  may  for 
our  present  purpose  be  reasonably  spoken  of  under  the  same 
head ;  being  diversely  rendered  '  and,' — '  and  yet,'  ^ — '  then,'  ^ 
— '  or/  3—'  neither,'  *— '  though,'  ^—'  so,'  ^— '  but,'  ^—'  for,'  «— 
'  that,'  ^ — in  conformity  with  what  may  be  called  the  genius 
of  the  Eno'lish  language.  The  last  six  of  these  renderinf;js, 
however,  our  Eevisionists  disallow ;  everywhere  thrusting 
out  the  word  which  the  argument  seems  rather  to  require, 
and  with  mechanical  precision  thrusting  into  its  place  every 
time  the  (perfectly  safe,  but  often  palpably  inappropriate) 
word,  '  and.'  With  what  amount  of  benefit  this  has  been 
effected,  one  or  two  samples  will  sufficiently  illustrate : — 

{a)  The  Revisionists  inform  us  that  when  "  the  high  priest 
Ananias  commanded  them  that  stood  by  him  to  smite  him 
on  the  mouth," — S.  Paul  exclaimed,  "  God  shall  smite  thee, 
thou  whited  wall :  and  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  after  the 
law,  and  commandest  me  to  be  smitten  contrary  to  the 
law  ? "  ^"  .  .  .  Do  these  learned  men  really  imagine  that  they 
have  improved  upon  the  A.  V.  by  their  officiousness  in 
altering  '  for  '  into  '  axd  '  ? 

ih)  The  same  Apostle,  having  ended  his  argument  to  the 
Hebrews,  remarks, — '  So  we  see  that  they  could  not  enter  in 
because  of  unbelief  (Heb.  iii.  19) :  for  which,  our  Eevisionists 


'  S.  John  xvi.  32.  -  S.  Luke  xix.  23.  ^  2  Cor.  xiii.  1. 

^  S.  Luke  xii.  2.  ^  S.  Luke  xviii.  7.  «  S.  Luke  xiv.  21. 

''  1  S.  John  ii.  27.  ^  1  S.  Jolm  i.  2.  »  S.  Mark  ix.  89. 

"^  Acts  xxiii,  3. 


17U  UNIDIOMATIC   RENDERING   OF  [Art. 

again  substitute  '  And.'  Begin  the  sentence  with  '  And,' 
(instead  of  '  So,')  and,  in  compensation  for  what  you  have 
clearly  lod,  wliat  have  you  gained  ?  .  .  .  Once  more : — 

(c)  Consider  what  S.  Paul  writes  concerning  Apollos 
(in  1  Cor.  xvi.  12),  and  then  say  what  possible  advantage 
is  obtained  l)y  writing  '  AND  '  (instead  of  '  but)  his  will  was 
not  at  all  to  come  at  this  time '.  .  .  .  Yet  once  more  ;  and  on 
this  occasion,  scholarship  is  to  some  extent  involved  :— 

(d)  When  S.  James  (i.  11)  says  avereiXe  jap  6  i]Xio<i  .  .  . 
Koi  e^Tjpave  rov  ^(opTov, — who  knows  not  that  M'hat  his 
language  strictly  means  in  idiomatic  English,  is, — '  No  sooner 
does  the  sun  arise,'  '  than  it  withereth  the  grass  '  ?  And  so 
in  effect  our  Translators  of  1611.  What  possible  improve- 
ment on  this  can  it  be  to  substitute,  '  For  the  sun  ariseth  .  .  . 
AND  withereth  the  grass '  ? — Only  once  more  : — 

{e)  Though  Kai  undeniably  means  '  and,'  and  ttw?,  '  how,' 
' — who  knows  not  that  koX  ttw?  means  *  Hotu  then  1 '  And 
yet,  (as  if  a  stupid  little  boy  had  been  at  work,)  in  two 
places, — (namely,  in  S.  Mark  iv.  13  and  S.  Luke  xx.  44,) — 
'  AND  HOW '  is  found  mercilessly  thrust  in,  to  the  great  detri- 
ment of  the  discourse ;  while  in  other  two, — (namely,  in 
S.  John  xiv.  5  and  9,) — the  text  itself  has  been  mercilessly 
deprived  of  its  characteristic  /cat  by  the  Kevisionists. — Let 
this  suffice.  One  might  fdl  many  cpiires  of  paper  willi  sucli 
instances  of  tasteless,  senseless,  vexatious,  and  'inost  un- 
seholurUhe  innovation. 

YIIL  'Many  changes'  (we  are  infonncd)  '  liavc  ItiHMi  intro- 
duced in  the  rendering  of  tlie  ['KErosiTioNS.'  [I'rcface,  iii. 
2,  ad  fin^  : — and  we  are  speedily  reminded  of  the  truth  of  the 
statement,  for  (as  was  shown  above  [pp.  155-6])  the  second 
chapter  of  S.  Matthew's  Gospel  exhil)its  the  Eevisionists 
'all  a-field'  in  respect  of  hui.  'We  have  rarely  made  any 
cliange'  (they  add)  'where  the  true  meaning  of  the  original 
would  be  :i])i>arent  to  a  Bcadcr  of  ordinary  intelligence'     It 


II.]  THE  PREPOSITIONS. — 2   PETER   I.   5-7.  171 

would  of  course  ill  become  such  an  one  as  the  present 
Reviewer  to  lay  claim  to  the  foregoing  flattering  designation : 
but  really,  when  he  now  for  the  first  time  reads  (in  Acts 
ix.  25)  tliat  the  disciples  of  Damascus  let  S.  Paul  down 
'  through  the  wall'  he  must  be  pardoned  for  regretting  the 
absence  of  a  marginal  reference  to  the  history  of  Pyramus 
and  Thisbe  in  order  to  suggest  how  the  operation  was  effected  : 
for,  as  it  stands,  the  R.  V.  is  to  him  simply  unintelligible. 
Inasmuch  as  the  basket  {a-irvpis:)  in  which  the  Apostle 
effected  his  escape  was  of  considerable  size,  do  but  think 
what  an  extravagantly  large  hole  it  must  have  been  to  enable 
them  both  to  get  through !  .  .  .  But  let  us  look  further. 

Was  it  then  in  order  to  bring  Scripture  within  the  captus 
of  '  a  Reader  of  ordinary  intelligence '  that  the  Revisers  have 
introduced  no  less  than  thirty  changes  into  c/ight-and-thirty 
ivords  of  S.  Peter's  2nd  Epistle  ?  Particular  attention  is 
invited  to  the  following  interesting  specimen  of  'Revision.'' 
It  is  the  only  one  we  shall  offer  of  the  many  contrasts  we 
had  marked  for  insertion.  We  venture  also  to  enquire, 
whether  the  Revisers  will  consent  to  al)ide  by  it  as  a 
specimen  of  their  skill  in  dealing  with  the  Preposition  iv  ? 

A.V.  R.V. 

1  2  3  4 

'  And  beside  all  this,  giving  '  Yea,  and  for  this  very  cause 

all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith      ^^^^^^g  J^  y^^^.  ^J^^  ^jj  ^^jj-, 

virtue ;    and    to  virtue  know-  .»  '•» 

,    ,  1.1         1    1       J.  gence,    in    your    taitn    supplv 

ledge ;  and  to  knowledge  tern-      °  ''      lo       n 

perance ;    and   to   temperance  virtue  ;    and   in  ^  yoiir    virtue 

patience  ;  and  to  patience  god-  knowledge;  and  in  your  know- 

liness;   and  to  godliness  bro-  ledge  temperance ;  and  in  yoSir 

therly  kindness;    and   to   bro-  ,  ,.  ,    .is 

,,/,.,  1      -.,    J     ro  temperance   patience ;    and  m 

therly   kindness    chanty. — [2  n 

Pet  i   5-7  1  yoyxY  patience  godliness ;    and 

"J  18  I'J  20         21        22 

in  your  godliness  love  of  the 

23  24  2S  26        27 

brethren ;  and  in  your  love  of 

28  29  30 

the  brethren  love.' 


172  no   CHANGES   IN    38   WORDS. — VIOLATED  [Art. 

The  foregoing  strikes  us  as  a  singular  illustration  of 
the  lievisionists'  statement  {Preface,  iii.  2), — '  We  made  7io 
change  if  the  meaning  was  fairly  cxfrcsscd  by  the  word  or 
phrase  that  was  l)efore  us  in  the  Autliorized  Version.'  To 
ourselves  it  appears  that  every  one  of  those  30  changes  is  a 
change  for  the  coarse ;  and  that  one  of  the  most  exquisite 
passages  in  the  N.  T.  has  been  hopelessly  spoiled, — rendered 
in  fact  well-nigh  unintelligil)le, — by  the  pedantic  officious- 
ness  of  the  Kevisers.  Were  they — (if  the  question  be  allow- 
able)— bent  on  removing  none  but  'plain  and  clear  errors,' 
when  they  substituted  those  30  words  ?  Was  it  in  token  of 
their  stern  resolve  '  to  introduce  into  the  Text  as  few  altera- 
tions as  ]i(^ssihle'  that  they  spared  the  eight  words  which 
remain  out  of  the  eight-and-thirty  ? 

As  for  their  ivoodcn  rendering  of  eV,  it  ought  to  suffice 
to  refer  them  to  S.  ]\Ik.  i.  23,  S.  Lu.  xiv.  31,  to  prove  that  some- 
times iv  can  only  be  rendered  '  with : ' — and  to  S.  Luke  vii.  17, 
to  show  them  that  iv  sometimes  means  '  thronghout : ' — and  to 
Col.  i.  16,  and  Heb.  i.  1,  2,  in  proof  that  sometimes  it  means 
'  hy.' — On  the  other  hand,  their  suggestion  that  iv  may  be 
rendered  'hy'  in  S.  Luke  i.  51,  convicts  them  of  not  being 
aware  that  'the  proud-in-the-imagination-of-their-hearts'  is 
a 'phrase — in  which  perforce  *  &y '  has  no  business  whatever. 
One  is  surprised  to  have  to  teach  professed  Critics  and 
Scliolars  an  elementary  fact  like  this. 

In  brief,  these  learned  men  are  respectfully  assured  tliat 
there  is  not  one  of  tlie  '  Parts  of  Speech'  which  will  consent 
to  be  handled  after  the  inhumane  fashion  which  seems  to  be 
to  themselves  congenial.  Whatever  they  may  think  of  the 
matter,  it  is  nolliing  else  1>ut  absurd  to  speak  of  an  Angel 
'  casting  his  sickle  into  the  earth  '  (Eev.  xiv.  19). — As  for  his 
'  ]K)uring  out  his  ])owl  ttpon  the  air'  (xvi.  17), — we  really 
lail  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  operation. — And  pray. 


II.]  PROPRIETIES   OF   THE   ENGLISH   LANGUAGE.  173 

What  is  supposed  to   be  the  meaning  of  '  the  things  uijon 
the  heavens  '—in  Ephesians  i.  10  ? 

Returning  to  the  preposition  Zid  followed  by  the  genitive, 
— (in  respect  of  which  the  Revisionists  challenge  Criticism  by 
complaining  in  their  Preface  [iii.  3  ad  jin.'\  that  in  the  A.  V. 
'  ideas  of  instrumentality  or  of  mediate  agency,  distinctly 
marked  in  the  original,  have  been  confused  or  obscured  in  the 
Translation,') — we  have  to  point  out : — 

(1st)  That  these  distinguished  individuals  seem  not  to  be 
aware  that  the  proprieties  of  English  speech  forbid  the  use  of 
'  through '  (as  a  substitute  for  '  hy ')  in  certain  expressions 
where  instrumentality  is  concerned.  Thus, '  the  Son  of  man ' 
was  not  betrayed  'through'  Judas,  but  'hy'  him  (Matt.  xxvi. 
24 :  Luke  xxii.  22). — Still  less  is  it  allowable  to  say  that  a 
prophecy  was  *  spoken,'  nay  '  ivritten,'  '  through  the  Prophet ' 
(Matth.  i.  22  and  margin  of  ii.  5).  '  Who  spake  by  the  Pro- 
2)hcts,'  is  even  an  article  of  the  Faith. 

And  (2ndly), — That  these  scholars  have  in  consequence 
adopted  a  see-saw  method  of  rendering  hid, — sometimes  in 
one  way,  sometimes  in  the  other.  First,  they  give  us  '  wonders 
and  signs  done  hy  the  Apostles '  (Acts  ii.  43  ;  but  in  the 
margin,  '  Or,  through ') :  presently,  '  a  notable  miracle  hath 
been  wrought  through  them '  (iv.  16  :  and  this  time,  the 
margin  withholds  the  alternative,  '  Or,  hy ').  Is  then  '  the 
true  meaning '  of  '  hy,'  in  the  former  place,  '  apparent  to  a 
Reader  of  ordinary  intelligence  '  ?  but  so  obscure  in  the  latter 
as  to  render  necessary  the  alteration  to  '  through '  ?  Or  {sit 
venia  verho), — Was  it  a  mere  '  toss-up  '  with  the  Revisionists 
tohat  is  the  proper  rendering  of  Bid  ? 

(3rdly),  In  an  earlier  place  (ii.  22),  we  read  of  '  miracles, 
wonders,  and  signs '  which  '  God  did  hy '  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 
Was  it  reverence,  which,  on  that  occasion,  forbad  the  use  of 


174  VIOLATED   PR0PRIP:TIES   of   the  [Art. 

'  through' — even  in  the  margin  ?     We  hope  so  :  hut   the  pre- 
position is  still  the  same — hLa  not  viro. 

Lastly  (4thly), — The  doctrine  that  Creation  is  tlie  work  of 
the  Divine  WoiiD,  all  Scripture  attests.  'All  tilings  were 
made  hy  Him '  (S.  Jo.  i.  3)  : — '  the  world  was  made  hy  Him  ' 
(ver.  10). — Why  then,  in  Col.  i.  16,  where  the  same  state- 
ment is  repeated, — ('  all  things  were  created  hy  Him  and  for 
Him,') — do  we  find  '  throuyh, '  suhstituted  for  '  %  '  ?  And  Nvhy 
is  the  same  offence  repeated  in  1  Cor.  vifl.  6, — (where  we 
ought  to  read,  —  '  one  God,  the  Father,  of  whom  are  all 
things  .  .  .  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  hy  whom  are  all 
things')? — Why,  especially,  in  Heb.  i.  2,  in  place  of  'hy 
whom  also  [viz.  by  the  Son]  He  made  the  worlds,'  do  we 
find  substituted  '  through  whom '?....  And  why  add  to 
this  glaring  inconsistency  the  wretched  vacillation  of  giving 
us  the  choice  of  '  through'  (in  place  of  '  hy ')  in  the  margin  of 
S.  John  i.  3  and  10,  and  not  even  offering  us  the  alternatixe 
of  'hy'  (in  place  of  '  tJi  rough')  in  any  of  the  other  places, — 
although  the  preposition  is  Sid  on  every  occasion  ? 

Ami  thus  much  for  the  Eevisers'  handling  of  the  Preposi- 
tions. We  shall  have  said  all  that  we  can  find  room  for, 
wlien  we  have  further  directed  attention  to  the  uncritical 
and  unscholarlike  Note  wnth  wdiich  they  have  disfigured  the 
margin  of  S.  Mark  i.  9.  AVe  are  there  informed  that, 
according  to  the  Greek,  our  Saviour  '  was  baj)tized  into  the 
Jordan,' — an  unintelligible  statement  to  Englisli  readers,  as 
well  as  a  misleading  one.  Especially  on  their  guard  should 
the  Revisers  have  been  hereabouts, — seeing  that,  in  a  place 
of  vital  importance  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  open  page 
(viz.  in  S.  Matth.  xxviii.  19),  tliey  liad  already  substituted 
'  into '  for  '  in.'  This  latter  alteration,  one  of  the  Revisers 
(Dr.  Yancc  Smith)  rejoices  over,  liecause  it  obliterates  (in  his 
account)    tlie    evidence   for  Trinitaiian  doctrine.     That    tlie 


Tl.]  ENGLISH   LANGUAGPl — MARGINAL   NOTES.  175 

Revisionists,  as  a  body,  intended  nothing  less,  —  ^vlio  can 
donbt  ?  But  then,  if  they  really  deemed  it  necessary  to 
append  a  note  to  S.  Mark  i.  9  in  order  to  explain  to  the  public 
that  the  preposition  eh  signifies  ' into '  rather  than  '  in' — 
why  did  they  not  at  least  go  on  to  record  the  elementary 
fact  that  eU  has  here  (what  grammarians  call)  a  '  pregnant 
signification  '  ?  that  it  implies — (every  schoolboy  knows  it !) — 
and  that  it  is  used  in  order  to  inijjlt/ — that  the  Holy  One 
'  toent  douni  INTO,'  and  so,  '  was  baptized  m  the  Jordan  '  ?  ^  .  .  . 
But  tvhy,  in  the  name  of  common  sense,  did  not  the  Revisionists 
let  the  Preposition  cdone  ? 

IX.  The  Margin  of  the  Revision  is  the  last  point  to  which 
our  attention  is  invited,  and  in  the  following  terms : — 

'  The  subject  of  the  Marginal  Notes  deserves  special  attention. 
They  represent  the  results  of  a  large  amount  of  careful  and 
elaborate  discussion,  and  will,  perhaps,  by  their  very  presence, 
indicate  to  some  extent  the  intricacy  of  many  of  the  questions 
that  have  almost  daily  come  before  us  for  decision.  Theise 
Notes  fall  into  four  main  groups: — First,  Notes  specifying  such 
differences  of  reading  as  were  judged  to  be  of  sufficient  import- 
ance to  require  a  particular  notice; — Secondly,  Notes  indicating 
the  exact  rendering  of  words  to  which,  for  the  sake  of  Eisgliish 
idiom,  we  were  obliged  to  give  a  less  exact  rendering  in  the 
text; — Thirdly,  Notes,  very  few  in  number,  affording  some  ex- 
planation which  the  original  appeared  to  requiie  ; — Fourthly, 
Alternative  Eenderings  in  difficult  or  debateable  passages.  The 
Notes  of  this  last  group  are  niimerous,  and  largely  in  excess  of 
those  which  were  admitted  by  our  predecessors.  In  the  270 
years  that  have  passed  away  since  their  labours  were  concluded, 
the  Sacred  Text  has  been  minutely  examined,  discussed  in  every 
detail,  and  analysed  with  a  grammatical  precision  unknown  in 
the  days  of  the  last  Eevision.     There  has  thus  been  accumu- 


^  Consider  S.  Matth.  iii.  W,—civ€(ir]  (ino  tov  v8aTo<i :  aud  vcr.  6, — ejBan- 


17G   ^MARGIN    ENCUMBERED    WITH   TEXTUAT.   ERRORS.   [Akt. 

lated  a  large  amount  of  materials  that  have  prepared  the  way 
for  different  renderings,  which  necessarily  came  under  discus- 
sion.'— (Preface,  iii.  4.) 

When  a  body  of  distinguished  Scholars  bespeak  attention 
to  a  certain  part  of  their  work  in  such  terms  as  these,  it  is 
painful  for  a  Critic  to  be  obliged  to  declare  that  he  has 
surveyed  this  department  of  their  undertaking  with  even  less 
satisfaction  than  any  other.  So  long,  however,  as  he  assigns 
the  grounds  of  his  dissatisfaction,  the  Reviewed  cannot  com- 
plain. The  Eeviewer  puts  himself  into  their  power.  If  he  is 
mistaken  in  his  censure,  his  credit  is  gone.  Let  us  take  the 
groups  in  order  : — 

(1)  Having  already  stated  our  objections  against  the  many 
Notes  which  specify  Textual  errors  which  the  Revisionists 
declined  to  adopt, — we  shall  here  furnish  only  two  instances 
of  the  mischief  we  deplore  : — 

(a)  Against  the  words,  '  And  wliile  they  abode  in  Galilee ' 
(S.  Matthew  xvii.  22),  we  find  it  stated,—'  Some  ancient 
authorities  read  7vere  t/athcrinf/  themselves  togetlier.'  The  plain 
English  of  which  queer  piece  of  information  is  that  x  and  b 
exhibit  in  this  place  an  impossible  and  untranslatable  Read- 
ing,— the  substitution  of  which  for  avaa-rpe^oixevwv  Se  avrcov 
can  only  have  proceeded  from  some  Western  critic,  who  was 
sufficiently  unacquainted  with  the  Greek  language  to  suppose 
that  z\N-o'Tpe(j)o/jiev(ov  Be  avroiv,  might  possibly  be  the  exact 
equivalent  for  CoN-versantihus  autem  illis.  This  is  not  the 
place  for  discussing  a  kind  of  hallucination  which  j)revailcd 
largely  in  the  earliest  age,  especially  in  regions  Avhere  Greek 
was  habitually  read  through  Latin  spectacles.  (Thus  it  was, 
obviously,  that  the  preposterous  substitution  of  EuRAQUiLO 
for  '  Euroclydon,'  in  Acts  xxvii.  14,  took  its  rise.)  Such 
blunders  would  be  laughable  if  encountered  anywhere  except 
on  holy  ground.     Apart,  however,  from  the  lamentable  lack 


II.]  TWO   SPECIMENS   OF   BLUNDERS.  177 

of  critical  judgment  which  a  marginal  note  like  the  present 
displays,  what  is  to  be  thought  of  the  scholarship  which 
elicits  '  While  they  were  gathering  themselves  together''  out  of 
(TvaTpe^ofievcov  Be  avrwv  ?  Are  we  to  suppose  that  the  clue 
to  the  Eevisers'  rendering  is  to  be  found  in  {crvarpey^avTo^) 
Acts  xxviii.  3  ?  We  should  h&  sorry  to  think  it.  They  are 
assured  that  the  source  of  the  Textual  blunder  which  they 
mistranslate  is  to  be  found,  instead,  in  Baruch  iii.  38.^ 

(h)  For  what  conceivable  reason  is  the  world  now  informed 
that,  instead  of  Mclita, — '  some  ancient  authorities  read 
Melitene,'  in  Acts  xxviii.  1  ?  Is  every  pitiful  blunder  of  cod. 
B  to  live  on  in  the  margin  of  every  Englishman's  copy  of  the 
New  Testament,  for  ever  ?  Why,  all  other  MSS. — the  Syriac 
and  the  Latin  versions, — Pamphilus  of  Csesarea  ^  (a.d.  294), 
the  friend  of  Eusebius, — Cyril  of  Jerusalem,^ — Chryso- 
stoni,  * — John  Damascene,  ^ —  all  the  Fathers  in  short  who 
quote  the  place  ;  —  the  coins,  the  ancient  geographers  ; — 
all  read  MeXtxT/ ;  which  has  also  been  acquiesced  in  by  every 
critical  Editor  of  tlie  N.  T. — {exeepting  always  Drs.  Wcsteott 
and  Hort),  from  the  invention  of  Printing  till  now.  But 
because  these  two  misguided  men,  without  apology,  ex- 
planation, note  or  comment  of  any  kind,  have  adopted 
*  Melitene '  into  their  text,  is  the  Church  of  England  to  be 
dragged  through  the  mire  also,  and  made  ridiculous  in  the 
eyes  of  Christendom  ?  This  blunder  moreover  is  '  gross  as  a 
mountain,  open,  palpable.'  One  glance  at  the  place,  written 
in  uncials,  explains  how  it  arose  : — MeA,tT77HNHcro(7«aX,etTa6. 
Some  stupid  scribe  (as  the  reader  sees)  has  connected  the 
first  syllable  of  yr)cro9  with  the  last  syllable  of  MeXtV?;.'^    Tltrd 


'  iv  Tot?  av6pa)nois  (TwavedTpaX^rj.  ^  Galland.  iv.  6  b  his. 

3  P.  279,  "  ix.  400.  s  ii.  707. 

''  The  circumstance  is  noticed  and  explained  in  the  same  way  l)y  Pr. 
Field  in  his  deli,<j;htful  Otium  Norvicense. 


N 


178  SORRY   'ALTERNATIVE  EENDERINGS:  [Art. 

is  all !  The  blunder — (for  a  blunder  it  most  certainly  is) — 
l)clongs  to  the  age  and  country  in  which '  Melitene '  was  by 
far  the  more  familiar  word,  being  the  name  of  the  metropolitan 
see  of  Armenia ;  ^  mention  of  which  crops  up  in  the  Concilia 
repeatedly.^ 

(2)  and  (4)  The  second  and  the  fourth  group  may  be  con- 
sidered togetlier.  The  former  comprises  those  words  of  which 
the  less  exact  rendering  finds  place  in  the  Text : — the  latter, 
'  Alternative  renderings  in  difficult  and  debateable  passages.' 

We  presume  that  here  our  attention  is  specially  invited  to 
such  notes  as  the  following.  Against  1  Cor.  xv.  34, — '  Awake 
out  of  drunkenness  righteously : ' — against  S.  John  i.  14, — '  an 
only  begotten  from  a  father : ' — against  1  Pet.  iii.  20, — '  into 
which  few,  that  is,  eight  soids,  were  brought  safely  through 
water:' — against  2  Pet.  iii.  7, — 'stored  vnth  fire  :' — against 
S.  John  xviii.  37, — '  Th,ou  sayest  it,  because  I  am  a  king  : ' — 
against  Ephes.  iii.  21, — '  All  the  generations  of  the  age  of  the 
ages:' — against  Jude  ver.  14, — 'His  holy  myriads:' — against 
Heb.  xii.  18, — '  a  imliJable  and  kiiidlcd  fire : ' — against  Lu.  xv. 
31, — '  Child,  thou  art  ever  with  me  :' — against  Matth.  xxi.  28, 
— '  Child,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard  : ' — against  xxiv. 
3, — '  What  shall  be  the  sign  of  Thy  presence,  and  of  the  con- 
summation of  the  age  ?'  —  against  Tit.  i.  2,  — '  before  times 
eternal : '  against  Mk.  iv.  29, — '  When  the  fruit  allourth  [and 
why  not  ' yieldeth  itself'?],  straightway  he  sendeth  furth  the 
sickle:' — against  Ephes.  iv.  11 ,—'  throvglt.  every  joint  of  the 
svpyly  :' — against  ver.  29, — 'the  building  u^)  of  the  need:' — 
against  Lu.  ii.  29, — 'Master,  now  lettest  thou  Tliy  bond- 
servant (h!])art  in  peace:' — against  Acts  iv.  24, — '  0  Master, 
thou  that  didst  make  the  heaven   and  the  earth  : ' — against 


'  Concilia,  iv.  79  e. 

'^  Thus  Cyril  addrcs.scs  ono  of  liis  Kiiistles  to  Acacius  \\\\  of  Melik>nc, — 
Concili'i,  iii.  1111. 


II.]  USELESS  MARGINAL  GLOSSES.  179 

Lii.  i.  78, — '  Because  of  the  heart  of  mercy  of  our  God.'  Con- 
cerning all  such  renderings  we  will  but  say,  that  although 
they  are  unquestionably  better  in  tlie  Margin  than  in  the 
Text;  it  also  admits  no  manner  of  doul)t  that  they  would 
have  been  best  of  all  in  neither.  Were  the  Revisionists 
serious  when  they  suggested  as  the  more  '  exact '  rendering  of 
2  Pet.  i.  20, — '  No  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  of  special  inter- 
pretation '  ?  And  what  did  they  mean  (1  Pet.  ii.  2)  by  '  the 
spiritual  milk  vjhich  is  vnthout  guile '  ? 

Not  a  few  marginal  glosses  might  have  been  dispensed 
with.  Thus,  against  ScSdaKoXo^,  upwards  of  50  times  stands 
the  Annotation,  '  Or,  teacher.' — "ApTo<;,  (another  word  of  per- 
petual recurrence,)  is  every  time  explained  to  mean  '  a  loaf.' 
But  is  this  reasonaljle  ?  seeing  that  <^a<yelv  aprov  (Luke  xiv.  1) 
can  mean  nothing  else  but  '  to  eat  bread : '  not  to  mention 
the  petition  for  '  claili/  hreacl '  in  the  Lord's  prayer.  These 
learned  men,  however,  do  not  spare  us  even  when  mention  is 
made  of  '  taking  the  children's  bread  and  casting  it  to  the 
dogs '  (Mk.  vii.  27) :  while  in  the  enquiry, — '  If  a  son  shall 
ask  bread  of  any  of  you  that  is  a  father '  (Lu.  xi.  11),  '  locf  is 
actually  thrust  into  the  text.— We  cannot  understand  why 
such  marked  favour  has  been  shown  to  similar  easy  words. 
AoOXo?,  occurring  upwards  of  100  times  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, is  invariably  honoured  (sometimes  [as  in  Jo.  xv.  15] 
twice  in  the  course  of  the  same  verse)  with  2  lines  to  itself,  to 
explain  that  in  Greek  it  is  '  bondservant.' — About  60  times, 
BacfMovtov  is  explained  in  the  margin  to  be  '  demon '  in  the 
Greek. — It  has  been  deemed  necessary  15  times  to  devote 
three  lines  to  explain  the  value  of  '  a  penny.' — Whenever 
reKvov  is  rendered  '  Son,'  we  are  molested  with  a  marginal 
annotation,  to  the  effect  that  the  Greek  word  means  '  child.' 
Had  the  Eevisionists  been  consistent,  the  margins  would  not 
nearly  have  sufficed  for  the  many  interesting  details  of  this 

x\  2 


180  MISTAKEN   OR   FOOLISH  'EXPLANATORY  [Aut. 

nature  with  which  their  knowledge  of   Gh-eek  woukl   have 
furnished  them. 

May  we  be  allowed  to  suggest,  that  it  would  have  been 
better  worth  while  to  explain  to  the  unlearned  that  apxat 
in  S.  Peter's  vision  (Acts  x.  11 ;  xi.  5)  in  strictness  means 
not  'corners,'  but  'beginnings'  [cf.  Gen.  ii.  10]: — that  ttjv 
TTpcoT'qv  (in  Lu.  XV.  22)  is  literally  '  the  first '  [cf.  Gen.  iii.  7] 
(not  '  the  best')  'robe  :' — that  a\v6cv6<i  (e.g.  in  Lu.  xvi.  11  : 
Jo.  i.  9 :  vi.  32  ;  and  especially  in  xv.  1  and  Heb.  viii.  2  and 
ix.  24)  means  '  very  '  or  '  real,'  rather  than  '  true  '  ? — And 
when  two  different  words  are  employed  in  Greek  (as  in  S.  Jo. 
xxi.  15,  16,  17  :— S.  Mk.  vii.  33,  35,  &c.  &c.),  would  it  not 
have  been  as  well  to  try  to  rciirescnt  them  in  English  ?  For 
want  of  such  assistance,  no  unlearned  reader  of  S.  Matth.  iv. 
18,  20,  21 :  S.  Mk.  i.  16,  18,  19  :  S.  Lu.  v.  2,— will  ever  be 
able  to  understand  the  precise  circumstances  under  which 
the  first  four  Apostles  left  their  '  nets' 

(3)  The  third  group  consists  of  Exi)lanatory  Notes  re(|uired 
by  the  obscurity  of  the  original.  Such  must  be  the  anno- 
tation against  S.  Luke  i.  15  (explanatory  of  '  strong  drink '), — 
'  Gr.  sihera.'  And  yet,  the  word  {a-Uepa)  happens  to  be  not 
Greek,  but  Hebrew. — On  the  other  hand,  such  must  be  the 
annotation  against  p^wpi,  in  S.  Matth.  v.  22  : — '  Or,  Moreh,  a 
Hebrew  expression  of  condemnation  ; '  which  statement  is 
incorrect.  The  word  proves  to  be  not  Hebrew,  but  Greek. — 
And  this,  against  '  Maran  atha '  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  22, — '  That  is, 
Our  Lord  cometh : '  which  also  ])roves  to  be  a  mistake.  The 
phrase  means  'Our  Loud  is  come' — which  represents  a  widely 
different  notion.^ — Surely  a  room-lull  of  learned  men,  volun- 
teering to  put  the  K  T.  to-rights,  ought  to  have  nuulc  more 

'  Sec  T)r.  Field's  delightful  Otiitm  Norvicemc  (Pars  tertia),  1881,  pp. 
1-1  and  1 10,  1 1 1.  Thi.s  masterly  contribution  to  Sacred  Criticism  might  to 
be  iu  the  liunds  of  every  student  of  Scripture. 


II.]  NOTES'  INFEST  THE  MARGIN.  181 

sure  of  their  elementary  facts  before  they  ventured  to  com- 
promise the  Church  of  England  after  this  fashion  ! — Against 
'  the  husks  which  the  swine  did  eat '  (Lu.  xv.  16),  we  find, '  Gr. 
the  pods  of  the  caroh  tree,' — which  is  really  not  true.  The  Greek 
word  is  Kepdria, — which  only  signifies  '  the  pods  of  the  carob 
tree/  as  '  French  beans '  signifies  '  the  pods  of  the  Phascolus 
vulgaris.' — By  the  way,  is  it  quite  certain  that  fjiv\o<;  6vlk6<; 
[in  Matth.  xviii.  6  and  Lu.  xvii.  2  (not  Mk.  ix.  42)]  signifies 
'  a  mill-stone  turned  hy  an  ass '  ?  Hilary  certainly  thought  so  : 
but  is  the  thing  at  all  likely  ?  What  if  it  should  appear  that 
fiuXof;  6vLK6<i  merely  denotes  the  uiipcr  mill-stone  (X.lOo'i 
fj,v\tK6<i,  as  S.  Mark  calls  it, — the  stone  that  grinds),  and  which 
we  know  was  called  ovo'^  by  the  ancients  ?  ^ — Why  is  '  the 
brook  Cedron'  (Jo.  xviii.  1)  first  spelt  'Kidron,'  and  then 
explained  to  mean  '  ravine  of  the  cedars '  ?  which  '  Kidron '  no 
more  means  than  '  Kishon '  means  ' of  the  ivies' — (though  the 
Septuagintal  usage  [Judges  iv.  13  :  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  9]  shows  that 
roiv  Kiaawv  was  its  common  Hellenistic  designation).  As 
for  calling  the  Kidron  '  a  ravine'  you  might  as  well  call 
'  Mercury '  in  '  Tom  quad  '  '  a  lake.'  '  Infelicitous '  is  the 
mildest  epithet  we  can  bestow  upon  marginal  annotations 
crude,  questionable, — even  inaccurate  as  these. 

Then  further,  '  Simon,  the  son  of  Jona '  (in  S.  John  i.  42 
and  xxi.  15),  is  for  the  first  time  introduced  to  our  notice 
by  the  Eevisionists  as  '  the  son  of  John : '  with  an  oificious 
marginal  annotation  that  in  Greek  the  name  is  written 
'  loanes.'  But  is  it  fair  in  the  Ee\dsers  (we  modestly  ask) 
to  thrust  in  this  way  the  hetises  of  their  favourite  codex  b 
upon  us  ?  In  no  codex  in  the  world  cxcejjt  the  Vatican  codex 
B,  is  '  loannes '  spelt  '  loanes '  in  this  place.  Besides,  the 
name  of  Simon  Peter's  father  was  oiot  'John'  at  all,  but 
'  Jona,' — as  appears  from  S.  Matth.  xvi,  17,  and  the  present 


See  Hesychius,  and  the  notes  on  the  place. 


182  MISTAKES   RESULTING   FROM   WANT   OF  [Art. 

two  places  in  S.  Jolm's  Gospel ;  where  the  evidence  against 
'  loannes '  is  overwhelming.  This  is  in  fact  the  handy-work  of 
Dr.  Hort.  But  surely  the  office  of  marginal  notes  ought  to  be 
to  assist,  not  to  mislead  plain  readers  :  honestly,  to  state  facts, 
— not,  by  a  side-wind,  to  commit  the  Church  of  England  to  a 
nevj  (and  absurd)  Textual  theory  !  The  actual  Truth,  we  insist, 
should  be  stated  in  the  margin,  whenever  unnecessary  infor- 
mation is  gratuitously  thrust  upon  unlearned  and  unsuspicious 
read(irs.  .  .  .  Thus,  we  avow  that  we  are  offended  at  reading 
(against  S.  John  i.  18) — '  Many  very  ancient  authorities  read 
'  God  only  begotten : '  whereas  the  '  authorities '  alluded  to 
read  fiovoyevij^;  ©eo«?, — (whether  with  or  without  the  article 
[6]  prefixed,) — which  (as  the  Revisionists  are  perfectly  well 
aware)  means  '  the  only-begotten  God,'  and  no  other  thing. 
Why  then  did  they  not  say  so  ?  Because  (we  answer) — they 
were  ashamed  of  the  expression.  But  to  proceed. — The  in- 
formation is  volunteered  (against  Matth.  xxvi.  36  and  Mk. 
xiv.  32)  that  '^((opiov  means  '  an  enclosed  piece  of  ground^ — 
which  is  not  true.  The  statement  seems  to  have  proceeded 
from  the  individual  who  translated  dfx(f)oSov  (in  Mk.  xi.  4) 
the  '  02)eii  street : '  wliereas  the  word  merely  denotes  the  '  high- 
way,'— literally  the  '  thoroughfccre.' 

A  very  little  real  familiarity  with  the  Septuagint  would 
have  secured  these  Eevisers  against  the  perpetual  exposure 
wliich  they  make  of  tliemselves  in  their  marginal  Notes. — 
(a)  Hdcra^  ra?  ^//xepa?,  for  instance,  is  (piite  an  ordiiinry 
expression  lor  'always,'  and  therefore  should  not  be  I'xhiliiU'd 
(in  the  margin  of  8.  Matth.  xxviii.  20)  as  a  curiosity, — '  (ii'. 
all  /he  days.'-'  So  (//)  with  rcs|)cct  to  the  word  auov,  wliicli 
seems  to  have  greatly  exercised  tlic  Revisionists,  AVlial  need, 
every  time  it  occurs,  to  explain  that  eh  roix;  aiMva<;  tmv 
alr'oi'wv  means  lilerallv  '  inilx  lln  '"/'>  ';/  ///''  cgi'^'  '.  Siiiclv 
(as  in  I's.  \1\.  <i,  ipi<<ir<[  H''lv  i.  -vj  I  he  csLablished  icnderin;j. 


II.]  P^AMILIARITY   WITH    HP^LLENISTIC   GREEK.  18o 

('  for  ever  and  ever ')  is  plain  enough  and  needs  no  gloss  ! — 
Again,  (c)  the  numeral  eU,  representing  the  Hebrew  substitute 
for  the  indefinite  article,  prevails  throughout  the  Septuagint. 
Examples  of  its  use  occur  in  the  N".  T.  in  S.  Matth.  viii.  19 
and  ix.  18  ; — xxvi.  69  (yu,ta  iraihlaKri),  Mk.  xii.  42  :  and  in 
Eev.  viii.  13:  ix.  13:  xviii.  21  and  xix.  17; — where  'one 
scribe,'  '  one  ruler,'  '  one  widow,'  '  one  eagle,'  '  one  voice,'  '  one 
angel,'  are  really  nothing  else  but  mistranslations.  True,  that 
ei<f  is  found  in  tlie  original  Greek  :  but  what  then  ?  Because 
'  une '  means  '  one, '  will  it  be  pretended  that  '  Tii  es  une  hete ' 
would  be  properly  rendered  '  Thou  art  one  beast '  ? 

(d)  Far  more  serious  is  the  substitution  of  '  having  a  rjreat 
priest  over  the  house  of  God'  (Heb.  x.  21),  for  'having  an 
high  priest : '  inasmuch  as  this  obscures  '  the  pointed  reference 
to  our  Lord  as  the  antitype  of  the  Jewish  high  priest,' — who 
(except  in  Lev.  iv.  3)  is  designated,  not  ap-^tepev'^,  but  either 
0  tepeu?  6  fieya'i,  or  else  6  lepeix;  only, — as  in  Acts  v.  24  ^  .  . 
And  (e)  why  are  we  presented  with  '  Por  oio  ivord  from  God 
shall  he  void  of  power '  (in  S.  Luke  i.  37)  ?  Seeing  that  the 
Greek  of  that  place  has  been  fashioned  on  the  Septuagintal 
rendering  of  Gen.  xviii.  14  {'Is  anything  too  hard  for  the 
LordV^),  we  venture  to  think  that  the  A.  V.  {'for  with  God 
nothing  shall  he  impossible '  ^)  ought  to  have  been  let  alone. 
It  cannot  be  mended.  One  is  surprised  to  discover  that 
among  so  many  respectable  Divines  there  seems  not  to  have 
been  one  sufficiently  familiar  with  the  Septuagint  to  preserve 
his  brethren  from  perpetually  falling  into  such  mistakes  as 
the  foregoing.      We  really  had  no  idea  that  the  Hellenistic 


'  Notes  designed  to  ilhistrate  noine  expressions  in  the  Gk.  Test,  hy  a 
reference  to  the  lxx.,  &c.  By  C.  F.  B.  Wood,  Prteceutor  of  Llaadaff, — 
liivingtons,  1SS'2,  (pji.  L'l,) — p.  17  : — mi  ndiniiMlili'  iicrrnniiaiice,  only  f;,]-  tuo 
brief. 

-   Ml)   a^vvaTi]crii  nujm  t^  O^m  /j7/x(i  ; 

^   OvK  nfivvnTi](T(i  rrnpa  rw  flfol  ttiu'  /J'//"<- 


184  SPECIMENS  OF  '  ^OTES'    DESIDERATED.  [Art. 

scholarship  of  those  who  represented  the   Cliurch  and   the 
Sects  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber,  was  so  inconsiderable. 

Two  or  three  of  the  foregoing  examples  refer  to  matters  of 
a  recondite  nature.  Not  so  the  majority  of  the  Annotations 
which  belong  to  this  third  group ;  which  we  have  examined 
witli  real  astonishment — and  in  fact  have  remarked  upon 
already.  Shall  we  be  thought  hard  to  please  if  we  avow 
that  we  rather  desiderate  '  Explanatory  Notes '  on  matters 
which  really  do  call  for  explanation  ?  as,  to  be  reminded  of 
Avhat  kind  was  the  'net'  (dfi(f)lj3\r]aTpov)  mentioned  in  Matth. 
iv.  18  {7iot  20),  and  Mk.  i.  16  (not  18): — to  see  it  explained 
(against  Matth.  ii.  23)  that  netsei^  (the  root  of  'Nazareth') 
denotes  '  Branch : ' — and  against  Matth.  iii.  5  ;  Lu.  iii.  3,  that 
i)  7repi-)(U)po<;  rov  'lopSdvov,  signifies  'the  depressed  valley  of 
the  Jordan',  as  the  usage  of  the  LXX.  proves.^  We  should 
have  been  glad  to  see,  against  S.  Lu.  ix.  31, — 'Gr.  Exodus.' — 
At  least  in  the  margin,  we  might  have  been  told  that  '  Olivet ' 
is  the  true  rendering  of  Lu.  xix.  29  and  xxi.  37 :  (or  were  the 
lievisionists  not  aware  of  the  fact  ?  They  are  respectfully  re- 
ferred to  the  Bp.  of  Lincoln's  note  on  the  place  last  quoted.) 
— Nay,  why  not  tell  us  (against  Matth.  i.  21)  that  '  Jesus  ' 
means  [not  '  Saviour,'  Init]  '  Jkhovah  is  Salvation '  ? 

But  a])ove  all,  surely  so  many  learned  men  ought  to  have 
s})ared  us  the  absurd  Annotation  set  against  '  ointment  of 
spikenai'd '  (ydpSov  Trto-TLKr]^;,)  in  S.  Mark  xiv.  3  and  in  S.  John 
xii.  3.     Their  marginal  Note  is  as  follows : — 

'  Gr.  2>istic  nard,  pistic  being  pcrliaps  a  local  name.  Others 
take  it  to  mean  genuine;  others  liquid.' 

Can  Scholars  require  to  be  told  that '  liquid '  is  an  impossible 


'  [Pointed  out  to  me  by  Professor  Gandcll, — whose  exquisite  familiarity 
witli  Scripture  is  only  etjualled  by  his  readiness  to  communicate  his 
kno\vled,t,'e  to  others.] 


II.]  ABSUKD  NOTE   ON   S.   MARK  XIV.   3.  185 

sense  of  irtaTLKr]  in  this  place  ?  The  epithet  so  interpreted 
must  be  derived  (like  inaTo^i  [Pro7n.  V.  v.  489])  from  ttIvw,  and 
would  mean  ch-inkaUe :  but  since  ointment  cannot  be  drunk, 
it  is  certain  that  we  must  seek  the  etymology  of  the  word 
elsewhere.  And  why  should  the  weak  ancient  conjecture 
be  retained  that  it  is  '  perhaps  a  local  name '  ?  Do  Divines 
require  to  have  it  explained  to  them  that  the  one  '  locality ' 
which  effectually  fixes  the  word's  meaning,  is  its  ^jlace  in  the 
cveidasting  Gospel .?  .  .  .  Be  silent  on  such  lofty  matters  if 
you  will,  by  all  means ;  ])ut  '  who  are  these  that  darken 
counsel  by  words  without  knowledge  ? '  S.  Mark  and  S. 
John  (whose  narratives  by  the  way  never  touch  exclusively 
except  in  this  place  ^)  are  observed  here  to  employ  an  ordinary 
word  with  lofty  spiritual  purpose.  The  pure  faith  (7rL(TTL<i) 
in  which  that  offering  of  the  ointment  was  made,  determines 
the  choice  of  an  unusual  epithet  (Trto-rt/cof)  which  shall 
signify  '  faithful '  rather  than  '  genuine,' — shall  suggest  a 
moral  rather  than  a  commercial  quality  :  just  as,  presently, 
Mary's  '  breaking '  the  box  {avvTpiy^acra)  is  designated  by 
a  word  which  has  reference  to  a  broken  heart.^  She  '  con- 
trited '  it,  S.  Mark  says ;  and  S.  John  adds  a  statement 
which  implies  that  the  Church  has  been  rendered  fragrant  by 
her  act  for  ever.^  (We  trust  to  be  forgiven  for  having  said 
a  little  more  than  the  occasion  absolutely  requires.) 

(5)  Under  which  of  the  four   previous  '  groups '  certain 
Annotations  which  disfigure  the  margin  of  the  first  chapter  of 


^  fivpov  vdp^ov  Tna-TiKrjs  and  ePTa(f)ia(Tfi6s, — S.  Mark  xiv.  3  and  8  :  S.  John 
xii.  3  and  7.  Hear  Origen  (apud  Hieron.  iii.  517) : — '  Non  de  nardo  pro- 
positum  est  nunc  Spiritui  Sancto  dicere,  neque  de  hoc  quod  oculis  intue- 
mur,  Evangelista  scribit,  unguento ;  sed  de  nardo  spirituali.''  And  so 
Jerome  himself,  vii.  212. 

^  Ps.  xxxiii.  18  (^eyyiis  Kvpios  roi?  crvvTerpiiifievoii  ttjv  Kaph'iav')  :  Is. 
Ivii.  15. 

^  Consider  Ignatius,  ad  Eplies.  c.  xvii.  Also,  the  exquisite  remark  of 
Theod.  Heracl.  in  Cramer's  Cat. 


18G  MARGINAL   INCONSISTENCY.  [Art. 

S.  Matthew's  Gospel,  should  fall, — we  know  not.     Let  them 
be  briefly  considered  by  theniseh'cs. 

So  dull  of  comprehension  are  we,  that  we  fail  to  see 
on  what  principle  it  is  stated  that — '  Earn,'  '  Asa,'  '  Anion,' 
'  Shealtiel,'  are  in  Greek  (' Gr.')  'Aram'  '  Asaph'  '  Amos,' 
*  SalathicL'  For  (1), — Surely  it  was  just  as  needful  (or  just 
as  needless)  to  explain  that  '  Perez,'  '  Zarali,'  '  Hezron,' 
'  Nahson,'  are  in  Greek  '  Pharcs'  '  Zara'  'Esrom'  'Naasson.' — 
But  (2),  Through  what  '  necessity '  are  the  names,  which  we 
have  been  hitherto  contented  to  read  as  the  Evangelist  wTote 
them,  now  exhibited  on  the  first  page  of  the  Gospel  in  any 
other  way  ?  ^ — (3)  Assuming,  however,  the  0.  T.  spelling 
is  to  be  adopted,  then  let  us  have  it  cxidained  to  us  why  '  Jeco- 
niah '  in  vcr.  1 1  is  not  written  '  Jehoiakim '  ?  (As  for  '  Jeco- 
niah  '  in  ver.  12, — it  was  for  the  Eevisionists  to  settle  whether 
they  would  call  him  '  Jehoiachin,'  'Jeconiali,'  or  '  Coniah.' 
[By  the  way, —  Is  it  lawful  to  suppose  that  thc[/  did  not  knoio 
that  '  Jeclionias  '  here  represents  two  different  persons  ?]) — 
On  the  other  hand,  (4)  'A'liios '  proljably, — 'Asaph '  certainly, — 
are  corrupt  exhiljitions  of  '  Anion  '  and  '  Asa  : '  and,  if  noticed 
at  all,  should  have  been  introduced  to  the  reader's  notice 
with  the  customary  formula, '  some  ancient  authorities,'  &c. — 
To  proceed — (5),  Why  substitute  '  Immanuel '  (for  '  Emma- 
nuel ')  in  ver.  23, — only  to  have  to  state  in  the  margin  that 
S.  Matthew  writes  it  '  Emmanvcl '  ?  By  strict  parity  of 
reasoning,  against  '  Naphtali '  (in  cli.  iv.  13,  15),  the  lie- 
visionists  ought  to  have  written  '  Gr.  Nephthaleim.' — And 
(T)),  If  this  is  to  l)e  tlie  rule,  then  why  are  we  not  told   that 


^  We  prefer  that  readers  should  be  reminded,  by  tlie  varied  form,  of  the 
Greek  original.  In  tlie  extreme  ease  (Acts  vii.  b") :  Hebr.  iv.  8),  is  it  not 
liir  more  edifviuj;  that  attention  sliould  be  in  this  way  directed  to  tlie 
idcnfitv  of  the  names  'Jo.sJum'  ■,\\\i\   •./..-/'n,'  than   that   the  latter   word 

^liiMilil  he  cnrnclv  iiMilciKird  Ky  llic  l.'iinci- ;  ;iuil  tlii>,  miiy  loi'  tlic  sake 
<il  ninni>takcalily  iHoflainiiiiLi,  (wlial  yet  niii>l  needs  be  I'crl'cclly  manire.'-t. 
viz.)  thai,  ''7w/(!'(t'  is  the  )>crMiiia:ic  >|"'kcu  ol  y 


II.]  MISTAKEN   PRINCIPLE   OF   TRANSLATION.  187 

'  Mary  is  in  "  Gr.  Mariam  " '  ?  and  why  is  not  Zacharias 
written  '  Zachariali '  ?  .  .  .  But  (to  conclude), — What  is  the 
object  of  all  this  officiousness  ?  and  (its  unavoidable  adjunct) 
all  this  inconsistency  ?  Has  the  spelling  of  the  42  names 
been  revolutionized,  in  order  to  sever  with  the  Past  and 
to  make  '  a  fresh  departure '  ?  Or  were  the  four  marginal 
notes  added  only  for  the  sake  of  obtaining,  hi/  a  side-wind,  the 
(apparent)  sanction  of  the  Chureh  to  the  preposterous  notion 
that  '  Asa '  was  written  /  Asajjh  '  by  the  Evangelist — in  con- 
formity with  six  MSS.  of  bad  character,  but  in  defiance  of 
History,  documentary  Evidence,  and  internal  Probability  ? 
Canon  Cook  [pp.  23-2-4]  has  some  important  remarks  on 
this. 

X.  We  must  needs  advert  again  to  the  ominous  admission 
made  in  the  Eevisionists'  Preface  (iii.  2  iiiit.),  that  to  some 
extent  they  recognized  tlie  duty  of  a  '  rigid  adherence  to  the 
rule  of  translating,  as  far  as  possible,  the  same  Greek  word  hg 
the  same  English  word'  Tliis  mistaken  principle  of  theirs  lies 
at  the  root  of  so  much  of  the  mischief  which  has  befallen  the 
Authorized  Version,  that  it  calls  for  fuller  consideration  at  our 
hands  than  it  has  hitherto  (viz.  at  pp.  138  and  152)  received. 

The  '  Translators  '  of  1611,  towards  the  close  of  their  long 
and  quaint  Address  '  to  the  Reader,'  offer  tlie  following 
statement  concerning  what  had  been  their  own  practice : — 
'  We  have  not  tied  ourselves '  (say  they)  '  to  an  uniformity  of 
phrasing,  or  to  an  identity  of  words,  as  some  peradventure 
would  wisli  that  we  had  done.'  On  this,  they  presently 
enlarge.  We  have  been  'especially  careful,'  have  even 
'  made  a  conscience,'  '  not  to  vary  from  the  sense  of  that 
which  we  had  translated  before,  if  the  word  signified  the 
same  thing  in  lioth  ]ila<'cs.'  r.iit  then,  (as  they  shrewdly 
point  out  in  passing,)  '  (hxrc  be  aomc  icords  iltal  be  not  vj  Uuj 


188  THE   TRANSLATORS    OF    1611: —  [Art. 

same  sense  emrywlurc!  And  had  this  been  the  sum  of  their 
avowal,  no  one  with  a  spark  of  Taste,  or  with  the  least 
appreciation  of  what  constitutes  real  Scholarship,  would 
have  been  found  to  differ  from  them.  Nay,  even  when 
they  go  on  to  explain  that  they  have  not  thought  it  desirable 
to  insist  on  invariably  expressing  '  the  same  notion '  by  em- 
ploying '  the  same  particular  word  ; ' — (which  they  illustrate 
by  instancing  terms  which,  in  their  account,  may  with 
advantage  be  diversely  rendered  in  different  places ;) — we 
are  still  disposed  to  avow  ourselves  of  their  mind.  '  If '  (say 
they,)  '  we  translate  the  Hebrew  or  Greek  word  once  ijurpose, 
never  to  call  it  intent ;  if  one  where  journeying,  never  travel- 
ling ;  if  one  where  tliinh,  never  suppose ;  if  one  where  ^wm, 
never  ache  ;  if  one  where  joy,  never  gladness ; — thus  to  mince 
the  matter,  we  thought  to  savour  more  of  curiosity  than 
of  wisdom.'  And  yet  it  is  plain  that  a  different  principle 
is  here  indicated  from  that  wliicli  went  before.  The  remark 
'  that  niceness  in  words  was  always  counted  the  next  step  to 
trifling,'  suggests  that,  in  the  Translators'  opinion,  it  matters 
little  ivldclh  word,  in  the  several  pairs  of  words  they  instance, 
is  employed ;  and  that,  for  their  own  parts,  they  rather 
rejoice  in  the  ease  and  freedom  which  an  ample  vocabulary 
supplies  to  a  Translator  of  Holy  Scripture.  Here  also  how- 
ever, as  already  hinted,  we  are  disposed  to  go  along  witli 
tliem.  Illiythm,  sulitle  associations  of  thought,  proprieties 
of  diction  which  are  rather  to  be  felt  than  analysed, — any  of 
such  causes  may  reasonably  determine  a  Translator  to  reject 
'purpose,'  'journey,'  'think,'  'pain,'  'joy,' — in  favour  of 
'  intent,'  '  travel,'  '  suppose,'  '  ache,'  '  gladness.' 

But  then  it  speedily  Ijecomes  evident  that,  at  the 
bottom  of  all  this,  there  e.xisted  in  the  minds  of  the 
Revisionists  of  lt)ll  a  jn-ofound  (shall  we  not  rather  say 
a  prophetic  ?)  consciousness,  that   the   fate   of  the   English 


II.]         THEIR  THEORY  OF  TRANSLATION.         189 

Language  itself  was  bound  up  with  the  fate  of  their  Trans- 
lation. Hence  their  reluctance  to  incur  the  responsibility  of 
tying  themselves  '  to  an  uniformity  of  phrasing,  or  to  an 
identity  of  words.'  We  should  be  liable  to  censure  (such  is 
their  plain  avowal),  '  if  we  should  say,  as  it  were,  unto  certain 
words,  Stand  up  higlier,  have  a  place  in  the  Bible  always  ; 
and  to  others  of  like  quality.  Get  you  hence,  be  banished  for 
ever.'  But  this,  to  say  the  least,  is  to  introduce  a  distinct  and 
a  somewhat  novel  consideration.  We  would  not  be  thought 
to  deny  that  there  is  some — perhaps  a  great  deal— of  trutli 
in  it :  but  by  this  time  we  seem  to  have  entirely  shifted  our 
ground.  And  we  more  than  suspect  that,  if  a  jury  of  English 
scholars  of  the  highest  mark  could  be  impanelled  to  declare 
their  mind  on  the  subject  thus  submitted  to  their  judgment, 
there  would  be  practical  unanimity  among  them  in  declaring, 
that  these  learned  men, — with  whom  all  would  avow  hearty 
sympathy,  and  whose  taste  and  skill  all  would  eagerly 
acknowledge, — -have  occasionally  pushed  the  license  they 
enunciate  so  vigorously,  a  little — perhaps  a  great  deal — too 
far.  For  ourselves,  we  are  glad  to  be  able  to  subscribe 
cordially  to  the  sentiment  on  this  head  expressed  l:)y  the 
author  of  the  Preface  of  1881 : 

'  They  seem  ' — (he  says,  speaking  of  the  Eevisioiiists  of  1611) 
— '  to  have  been  guided  by  the  feeling  that  their  Version  would 
secure  for  the  words  they  used  a  lasting  place  in  the  language  ; 
and  they  express  a  fear  lest  they  should  "  be  charged  (by  scoffers) 
with  some  xmequal  dealing  towards  a  great  number  of  good 
English  words,"  which,  without  this  liberty  on  their  part,  would 
not  have  a  place  in  the  pages  of  the  English  Bible.  Still  it  can- 
not be  doubted  that  their  studied  avoidance  of  uniformity  in  the 
rendering  of  the  same  words,  even  when  occurring  in  the  same 
context,  is  one  of  the  blemishes  in  their  work.' — Preface,  (i.  2). 

Yes,  it  cannot  be  doubted.  When  S.  Paul,  in  a  long  and 
familiar  passage  (2   Cor.  i.  3-7),  is  observed  studiously  to 


190  THE   WORK   OF    1881,   INFERIOR   TO   THE  [Aut. 

linger  over  the  same  word  {irapdKK'qo-iq  namely,  which  is 
generally  rendered  '  comfort ')  ; — to  harp  upon  it ; — to  repro- 
duce it  ten  times  in  the  course  of  those  five  verses ; — it 
seems  unreasonable  that  a  Translator,  as  if  in  defiance  of  the 
Apostle,  should  on  four  occasions  (viz.  when  the  word  comes 
back  for  the  Gth,  7th,  9th,  and  10th  times),  for  '  comfort ' 
substitute  '  consolation.'  And  this  one  example  may  serve  as 
well  as  a  hundred.  It  would  really  seem  as  if  the  Revisionists 
of  1611  had  considered  it  a  graceful  achievement  to  vary  the 
English  phrase  even  on  occasions  where  a  marked  identity  of 
expression  characterizes  the  original  Greek.  When  we  find 
them  turning  '  goodly  apparel,'  (in  S.  James  ii.  2,)  into  '  gay 
clothing,'  (in  ver.  3,) — we  can  but  conjecture  that  they  con- 
ceived themselves  at  liberty  to  act  exactly  as  S.  James 
himself  would  (possibly)  have  acted  had  he  been  writing 
English. 

But  if  the  learned  men  who  gave  us  our  A.  V.  may 
be  thought  to  have  erred  on  the  side  of  excess,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  whatever,  (at  least  among  competent  judges,)  that 
our  Revisionists  have  sinned  far  more  grievously  and  with 
greater  injury  to  the  Deposit,  by  their  slavish  proclivity  to 
the  opposite  form  of  error.  We  must  needs  speak  out 
})lainly :  for  the  question  before  us  is  not,  What  defects  are 
discoverable  in  our  Authorized  Version  ? — but,  What  amount 
of  gain  would  Ije  likely  to  accrue  to  the  Church  if  the 
present  Revision  were  accepted  as  a  substitute  ?  And  we 
assert  without  hesitation,  that  the  amount  of  certain  loss 
would  so  largely  outweigh  the  amount  of  possil)lc  gain, 
that  the  proposal  may  not  be  seriously  entertained  for  a 
moment.  As  well  on  grounds  of  Scholarsliij)  and  'I'aste,  as 
of  Textual  Criticism  (as  explained  at  large  in  our  former 
Article),  the  work  before  us  is  inmicnsely  inferior.  To 
speak  plainly,  it  is  an  utter  failuie. 


II.]  WORK    OF    1611.— THE   VERB    AI'TErN.  191 

XI.  For  the  respected  Authors  of  it  practically  deny  the 
truth  of  the  principle  enunciated  by  their  predecessors  of 
1611,  viz.  that  '  there  he  some  vjords  that  he  not  of  the  same 
sense  everywhere.'  On  such  a  fundamental  truism  we  are 
ashamed  to  enlarge :  but  it  becomes  necessary  that  we  should 
do  so.  We  proceed  to  illustrate,  by  two  familiar  instances, — 
the  first  which  come  to  hand, — the  mischievous  result  which 
is  inevitable  to  an  enforced  uniformity  of  rendering. 

(a)  The  verb  aheiv  confessedly  means  'to  ask.'  And 
perhaps  no  better  general  English  equivalent  could  be 
suggested  for  it.  But  then,  in  a  certain  cotitext,  '  ask  '  would 
be  an  inadequate  rendering:  in  another,  it  would  be  im- 
proper :  in  a  third,  it  would  be  simply  intolerable.  Of  all 
this,  the  great  Scholars  of  1611  showed  themselves  profoundly 
conscious.  Accordingly,  when  this  same  verb  (in  the  middle 
voice)  is  employed  to  descrilje  how  the  clamorous  rabble, 
besieging  Pilate,  claimed  their  accustomed  privilege,  (viz.  to 
have  the  prisoner  of  their  choice  released  unto  them,)  those 
ancient  men,  with  a  fine  instinct,  retain  Tyndale's  rendering 
'  desired  '  Mn  S.  Mark  (xv.  8), — and  his  '  required  '  in  S.  Luke 
(xxiii.  23). — When,  however,  the  humble  entreaty,  which 
Joseph  of  Arimathea  addressed  to  the  same  Pilate  (viz.  that 
he  might  be  allowed  to  take  away  the  Body  of  Jesus),  is  in 
question,  then  the  same  Scholars  (following  Tyndale  and 
Cranmer),  with  the  same  propriety  exhibit  '  hccjged! — King 
David,  inasmuch  as  he  only  '  desired  to  find  a  habitation  for 
the  God  of  Jacob,'  of  course  may  not  be  said  to  have  '  asked ' 
to  do  so ;  and  yet  S.  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  46)  does  not  hesitate 
to  employ  the  verb  rirrja-aro. — So  again,  when  they  of  Tyre 
and  Sidon  approached  Herod  whom  they  had  offended :  they 


^  So,  in  S.  Luke  xxiii.  25,  and  Acts  iii.  14;  xiii.  28, — still  following 
Tyndale. 


192  THE   SAME   WORD   MUST   BE   DIVERSELY  [Art. 

did  but  '  desire '  peace. ^ — S.  Paul,  in  like  manner,  addressing 
the  Ephesians  :  '  I  desi7'c  that  ye  faint  not  at  my  tribulations 
for  you.'  2 

But  our  Revisionists, — possessed  with  the  single  idea 
that  alreiv  means  '  to  ask  '  and  aiTeia-dat  '  to  ash  for,' — have 
proceeded  mechanically  to  inflict  that  rendering  on  every  one 
of  tlie  foregoing  passages.  In  defiance  of  propriety, — of 
reason, — even  (in  David's  case)  of  historical  truth,^ — they 
have  thrust  in  '  asked '  everywhere.  At  last,  however,  they 
are  encountered  by  two  places  wliich  absolutely  refuse  to 
submit  to  such  iron  bondage.  The  terror-stricken  jailer  of 
Philippi,  when  he  '  asked '  for  lights,  must  needs  have  done 
so  after  a  truly  imperious  fashion.  Accordingly,  the  '  called 
for '  *  of  Tyndale  and  all  subsequent  translators,  is  pro  hdc 
vice  allowed  by  our  Revisionists  to  stand.  And  to  conclude, 
— When  S.  Paul,  speaking  of  his  supplications  on  lielialf  of 
the  Christians  at  Colosse,  uses  this  same  verb  (alTov/xevoL)  in 
a  context  where  '  to  ask  '  would  be  intolerable,  our  Revisionists 
render  the  word  '  to  make  request ; '  ^ — though  they  might 
just  as  well  have  let  alone  the  rendering  of  all  their  prede- 
cessors,— viz.  '  to  dcsirej' 

These  are  many  words,  Init  wo  know  not  how  to  make 
them  few^er.  Let  this  one  example,  (only  because  it  is  the 
first  which  presented  itself,)  stand  for  a  thousand  others. 
Apart  from  the  grievous  lack  of  Taste  (not  to  say  of  Scholar- 
sliijt)  which  such  a  method  betrays, — ivho  sees  not  that  the 
only  excuse  which   could   have   been   invented    for   it   has 


'  Acts  xii.  20.  2  Eph.  iii.  13. 

^  For,  as  the  story  plainly  shows  (2  Sam.  vii.  2,  3 ;  1  Chron.  xvii.  1,  2), 
it  was  only  '  m  A/s  Amrr  to  build  God  an  house  (1  Kings  viii.  17,  18). 
Hence  Cranmer's  ^he  vmnhl  fain  '  have  done  .so. 

*  Acts  xvi.  29.  *  Col.  i.  9. 


II.]  EENDERED   IN    DIFFERENT   PLACES.  193 

disappeared  by  the  time  we  reach  the  end  of  our  investiga- 
tion ?  If  ahio),  alrovfiai  had  been  invariahhj  translated  '  ask,' 
'  ask  for,'  it  might  at  least  have  been  pretended  that  '  the 
English  Eeader  is  in  this  way  put  entirely  on  a  level  with  the 
Greek  Scholar ; ' — though  it  would  have  been  a  vain  pretence, 
as  all  must  admit  who  understand  the  power  of  language. 
Once  make  it  apparent  that  just  in  a  single  place,  perhaps  in 
two,  the  Translator  found  himself  forced  to  break  through 
his  rigid  uniformity  of  rendering, — and  v-liat  remains  but  an 
uneasy  suspicion  that  then  there  must  have  been  a  strain 
put  on  the  Evangelists'  meaning  in  a  vast  proportion  of  the 
other  seventy  places  where  alrecv  occurs  ?  An  unlearned 
reader's  confidence  in  his  guide  vanishes  ;  and  he  finds  that 
he  has  had  not  a  few  deflections  from  the  Authorized  Version 
thrust  upon  him,  of  which  he  reasonably  questions  alike  the 
taste  and  the  necessity, — e.g.  at  S.  Matth.  xx.  20. 

(b)  But  take  a  more  interesting  example.  In  S.  Mark 
i.  18,  the  A.  V.  has,  'and  straightway  they  for sool '  (which 
the  Revisionists  alter  into  '  left ')  '  their  nets.'  Why  ? 
Because  in  verse  20,  the  same  word  a<f)evT€<i  will  recur ;  and 
because  the  Eevisionists  propose  to  let  the  statement  ('  they 
left  their  father  Zebedee ')  stand.  They  '  level  up '  accord- 
ingly ;  and  plume  themselves  on  their  consistency. 

We  venture  to  point  out,  however,  that  the  verb 
a(j>ievac  is  one  of  a  large  family  of  verbs  which, — always 
retaining  their  own  essential  signification, — yet  depend  for 
their  English  rendering  entirely  on  the  context  in  which 
they  occur.  Thus,  cK^cevat  is  rightly  rendered  '  to  suffer'  in 
S.  Matth.  iii.  15  ; — '  to  leave'  in  iv.  11 ; — '  to  let  have'  in  v.  40  ; 
— '  to  forgive'  in  vi.  12,  14,  15  ; — '  to  let'  in  vii.  4 ; — ''  to  yield 
vp'  in  xxvii.  50  ; — *  to  let  go^  in  S.  Mark  xi.  6  ; — '  to  let  aloyie,' 
in  xiv.  6.      Here  then,  by  the  admission  of  the  Eevisionists, 

u 


194  THE    SAINIK    WOIII)   I\IUST   BE   DIVERSEEY  [Art. 

are  eight  diversities  of  meaning  in  the  same  word.  But  they 
make  the  admission  grudgingly;  and,  in  order  to  render 
u(f)L€uai  as  often  as  possible  '  leave,''  they  do  violence  to  many 
a  place  of  Scripture  where  some  other  word  would  have  been 
more  appropriate.  Thus  '  laying  aside '  might  have  stood 
in  S.  Mark  vii.  8.  '  Suffered  '  (or  '  let ')  was  preferable  in 
S.  Luke  xii.  39.  And,  (to  return  to  the  place  from  which  we 
started,)  in  S.  Mark  i.  18,  'forsook'  was  better  than  'left.' 
And  why  ?  Because  men  '  leave  their  father,'  (as  the  Collect 
for  S.  James's  Day  bears  witness) ;  but  'forsake  all  covetous 
desires  '  (as  the  Collect  for  S.  Matthew's  Day  aptly  attests). 
For  which  reason, — '  And  they  all  forsook  Him  '  was  infinitely 
preferable  to  '  and  they  all  left  Him,  and  fled,'  in  S.  Mark 
xiv.  50.  We  insist  that  a  vast  deal  more  is  lost  by  this 
perpetual  disregard  of  the  idiomatic  proprieties  of  the  English 
language,  than  is  gained  by  a  pedantic  striving  after  unifor- 
mity of  rendering,  only  because  the  Greek  word  happens  to 
be  the  same. 

For  it  is  sure  sometimes  to  happen  tliat  what  seems 
mere  licentiousness  proves  on  closer  inspection  to  be  unob- 
trusive Scholarship  of  the  best  kind.  An  illustration  presents 
itself  in  connection  with  the  word  just  now  before  us.  It  is 
found  to  have  been  our  Saviour's  practice  to  '  send  au-ay ' 
the  multitude  whom  He  had  been  feeding  or  teaching,  in 
some  formal  manner, — whether  with  an  act  of  solemn  bene- 
diction, or  words  of  commendatory  prayer,  or  both.  Accord- 
inf'ly,  on  the  memoraljle  occasion  when,  at  the  close  of  a 
long  day  of  superhuman  exertion,  His  bo(Hly  jiowers  suc- 
cumbed, and  the  Disciples  were  lain  to  take  Him 'as  He 
was '  in  the  sliip,  and  at  once  He  '  fell  asleep ; ' — on  that 
solitary  occasion,  the  Disciples  are  related  to  have  '  sent  away 
the  multitudes,' — i.e.  to  have  formally  dismissed  them  on 
His    lifliidr,  as   they   had   often  seen  their  Master  do.     The 


II.]  IlENDERED   IN   DIFFERENT   PLACES.  195 

word  employed  to  designate  this  practice  on  two  memorable 
occasions  is  aTroXveiv :  ^  on  tlie  other  two,  acfuevat,."  This 
proves  to  have  been  perfectly  well  understood  as  well  by  the 
learned  authors  of  the  Latin  Version  of  the  N".  T.,  as  l^y  the 
scholars  who  translated  the  Gospels  into  the  vernacular  of 
Palestine.  It  has  l:)een  reserved  for  the  boasted  learning  of 
the  XlXtli  century  to  misunderstand  this  little  circumstance 
entirely.  TheJi  V.  renders  S.  Matth.  xiii.  36, — not 'Then 
Jesus  sent  the  multitude  mvay,'  ('  climissis  turhis '  in  every 
Latin  copy,)  but — '  Then  He  left  the  multitudes.'  Also 
S.  Mark  iv.  36, — not  '  And  when  they  had  sent  away  the 
7nultit'ude,'  (which  the  Latin  always  renders  '  et  elimittentes 
turham,')  but — 'And  leaving  the  multitude.'  Would  it  be 
altogether  creditable,  we  respectfully  ask,  if  at  the  end  of 
1800  years  the  Church  of  England  were  to  put  forth  with 
authority  such  specimens  of  '  Eevision  '  as  these  ? 

(c)  We  will  trouble  our  Readers  with  yet  another  illus- 
tration of  the  principle  for  wliich  we  are  contending.— We 
are  soon  made  conscious  that  tliere  has  been  a  fidgetty 
anxiety  on  the  part  of  the  Revisionists,  everywhere  to  sub- 
stitute '  maiel '  for  '  damsel '  as  the  rendering  of  iraihiaKT).  It 
offends  us.  '  A  damsel  named  Rhoda,'  ^ — and  the  '  damsel 
possessed  w^ith  a  spirit  of  divination,'  * — might  (we  think) 
have  been  let  alone.  But  out  of  curiosity  we  look  further,  to 
see  what  these  gentlemen  will  do  when  they  come  to  S.  Luke 
xii.  45.  Here,  because  7rai8a<i  has  been  (properly)  rendered 
'  menservants,'  irathia-Ka'^,  they  (not  unreasonably)  render 
'  maiel-servants,' — whereby  thet/  break  their  rule.     The  crucial 


1  S.  Matth.  xiv.  15,  22,  23  (  =  S.  ]\Iark  vi.  36,  45,  [and  note  the  substi- 
tution of  anoTu^dfiivo':  in  ver.  46]  :  S.  Luke  ix.  12)  :  and  xv.  32,  39  (  =  S. 
Mark  viii.  9).  2  g^  j^^tt.  xiii.  36  :  and  S.  Mark  iv.  36. 

^  Acts  xii.  13.  *  Acts  xvi.  16. 

o  2 


196  nAlAl'2KH,   now   handled  in    1611    and  [Art. 

place  is  behind.  What  will  they  do  with  the  Divine 
'Allegory  '  in  Galatians,  (iv.  21  to  31,) — where  all  turns  on 
the  contrast  Mietween  the  iraiSiaKi]  and  tlie  ekevOepa, — the 
fact  that  Hagar  was  a  '  bondmaid,'  whereas  Sarah  was  a  'free 
woman '  ?  '  Maid '  clearly  could  not  stand  here.  '  Maid- 
servant '  would  be  intolerable.  What  is  to  be  done  ?  The 
Eevisionists  adopt  a  third  variety  of  reading, — thus  surren- 
dering their  principle  entirely.  And  what  reader  \\\i\\  a 
spark  of  taste,  (we  confidently  ask  the  question,)  does  not 
resent  their  substitution  of  '  handmaid '  for  '  bondmaid ' 
throughout  these  verses  ?  Who  will  deny  that  the  mention 
of  '  bondage  '  in  verses  24  and  25  claims,  at  the  hands  of  an 
intelligent  English  translator,  that  he  shall  avail  himself  of 
the  admirable  and  helpful  equivalent  for  TratStV/c?;  which,  as 
it  happens,  the  English  language  possesses  ?  More  than 
that.  Who — (except  one  who  is  himself  '  in  bondage — with 
his  children  ')  — who  does  not  respond  gratefully  to  the  exqui- 
site taste  and  tact  with  which  '  bondmaid '  itself  has  been 
exchanged  for  '  hondivoman'  by  our  translators  of  lOll,  in 
verses  23,  30  and  31  ?  .  .  .  A'erily,  those  men  understood 
their  craft !  '  There  were  giants  in  those  days.'  As  little 
would  they  submit  to  be  bound  by  the  new  cords  of  the 
Philistines  as  by  their  green  withes.  Upon  occasion,  they 
could  shake  themselves  free  from  either.  And  why  ?  For 
the  selfsame  reason :  viz.  because  the  Spirit  of  their  God 
was  mightily  upon  them. 

Our  contention,  so  far,  has  been  but  this, — that  it  does 
not  by  any  means  follow  that  identical  Greek  words  and 
expressions,  wherever  occurring,  are  to  be  rendered  by  identi- 
cal words  and  expressions  in  English.  We  desire  to  pass  on 
to  something  of  more  importance. 


'  Veities  22,  23,  24,  25,  2G,  30,  31. 


II.]  IN   1881. — MYSTERIES  OF  LANGUAGE.  197 

Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  we  make  light  of  the  difficul- 
ties which  our  Eevisionists  have  had  to  encounter;  or  are 
wanting  in  generous  appreciation  of  the  conscientious  toil 
of  many  men  for  many  years ;  or  that  we  overlook  the  perils 
of  the  enterprise  in  which  they  have  seen  fit  to  adventure 
their  reputation.  If  ever  a  severe  expression  escapes  us,  it 
is  because  our  Eevisionists  themselves  seem  to  have  so  very 
imperfectly  realized  the  responsibility  of  their  undertaking, 
and  the  peculiar  difficulties  by  which  it  is  unavoidably  beset. 
The  truth  is, — as  all  who  have  given  real  thought  to  the 
subject  must  be  aware, — the  phenomena  of  Language  are 
among  the  most  subtle  and  delicate  imaginable  :  the  prol)lem 
of  Translation,  one  of  the  most  manysided  and  difficult  that 
can  be  named.  And  if  this  holds  universally,  in  how  much 
greater  a  deijree  when  the  book  to  be  translated  is  the  Bible  ! 
Here,  anything  like  a  mechanical  levelling  u}^  of  terms,  every 
attempt  to  impose  a  pre-arranged  system  of  uniform  render- 
ing on  words, — every  one  of  which  has  a  history  and  (so  to 
speak)  a  ivill  of  its  own, — is  inevitably  destined  to  result  in 
discomfiture  and  disappointment.  But  what  makes  this  so 
very  serious  a  matter  is  that,  because  Holy  Scripture  is  the 
Book  experimented  upon,  the  loftiest  interests  that  can  be 
named  become  imperilled ;  and  it  will  constantly  happen 
tliat  what  is  not  perhaps  in  itself  a  very  serious  mistake  may 
yet  inflict  irreparable  injury.  We  subjoin  an  humble  illus- 
tration of  our  meaning — the  rather,  because  it  will  afford  us 
an  opportunity  for  penetrating  a  little  deeper  into  the  pro- 
prieties of  Scriptural  Translation  : — 

{d)  The  place  of  our  Lord's  Burial,  which  is  mentioned 
upwards  of  30  times  in  the  Gospels,  is  styled  in  the  original, 
fivijfielov.  This  appellation  is  applied  to  it  three  times  by 
S.    Matthew ; —  six   times   by    S.    Mark  ;  —  eight   times    by 


198  THE  HOLY   'SEPULCHRE:  [Aur. 

S.  Luke;^ — eleven  times  by  S.  -Idhii.  Only  on  four  occa- 
sions, in  close  succession,  does  the  first  Evangelist  call  it  ])y 
another  name,  viz.  rd^o'^.'^  King  James's  translators  (fol- 
lowing Tyndale  and  Cranmcr)  decline  to  notice  this  diversity, 
and  uniformly  style  it  the  '  sepulcln'e'  So  long  as  it  belonged 
to  Joseph  of  Arinuxthea,  they  call  it  a  '  tomb  '  (Matth.  xxvii. 
60) :  when  once  it  has  been  appropriated  by  '  the  Lord  of 
Glory,'  in  the  same  verse  they  give  it  a  different  English 
appellation.  But  our  Eevisionists  of  1881,  as  if  Ijeiit  on 
'  making  a  fresh  departure,'  everyivhcre  substitute  '  tuinb'  for 
'  sepulchre  '  as  the  rendering  of  fxvrj/xeiov. 

Does    any   one    ask, — And    why  should    they  not  ?      We 

answer,  Because,  in  connection  Avith  '  the  Scpidchre '  of  our 

Lord,  there  has  grown  up  such  an  ample  literature  and  such 

a  famous  history,  that  we  are  no  longer  aUc  to  sever  ourselves 

from  those  environments  of  the  prol)lem,  even  if  we  desired 

to  do  so.     In  all  such   cases  as   the   present,  we  have   to 

balance  the  Loss  against  the  Gain.     Quite  idle  is  it  for  the 

pedant  of   1881  to  insist  that  ra^o?  and  fxvq^elov  are  two 

different  words.     We  do  not  dispute  the  fact.     (Tlicn,  if  he 

must,   let    him    represent   Td(f)o<;   in    some    other   way.)      It 

remains    true,   notwithstanding,   that   the  receptacle  of  our 

Saviour's  Body  after  His  dissolution  will  have  to  be  spoken 

of  as  'the  Holy  Sejmlchre'  till  the   end  of  tinu' ;    and  it  is 

idtogether  to  be  desired  that  its  familiar  designation  should 

he  suffered  to  survive  unmolested  on    the   eternal  page,  in 

consequence.       There    are,  after  all,    miglitier    laws    in    the 

Universe  than  those  of  gi-ammar.     In  the;  iiiniiiit  Inuguagt'.  of 

our  Translators  of  IGll  :  'For  is  (lie  Kingdom  (»r(  ion  become 

words  or  syllables  ?  Why  shoukl  we  be  in  bondage  to  them 


'I'wue  he  calls  it  ijv>]fin.  '^  Cli.  .\xvii.  (il,  (11,  (id  ;  x.wiii.  1. 


II.]  '  DOCTRINE.'— '  VIALS'   NOT   'BOWLS.'  199 

if  we  may  be  free  ? '  .  .  .  As  for  considerations  of  etymo- 
logical propriety,  the  nearest  English  equivalent  for  /juvq/xeiov 
(be  it  remembered)  is  not  '  tomb,'  but  '  niomwient.' 

(e)  Our  Eevisionists  seem  not  to  be  aware  that  270  years 
of  undisturbed  possession  have  given  to  certain  words  rights 
to  which  they  could  not  else  have  pretended,  but  of  which 
it  is  impossible  any  more  to  dispossess  them.     It  savours  of 
folly  as  well  as  of  pedantry   even   to   make  the   attempt. 
AiBaxv    occurs    30, — hihaaKaXta    21    times, — in    the    N.    T. 
Etymologically,  both  words  alike  mean  "  tcacliing ; "  and  are 
therefore  indifferently  rendered  '  dodrina '  in  the  Vulgate,^ — 
for  which  reason, '  doctrine '  represents  both  words  indifferently 
in  our  A.  V.^     But  the  Eevisers  have  well-nigh  extirpated 
'DOCTRINE'  from  the  N.  T. :  (1st),  By  making  '  tcachiwj,'  the 
rendering  of  8tSa;\;>7,^ — (reserving  '  doctrine '  for  hihaaKoXla^) : 
and  (2ndly),  By  6  times  substituting  '  teaching '  (once, '  learn- 
ing ')  for  '  doctrine,'  in  places  where  BiSaaKoXla  occurs.^    This 
is  to  be  lamented  every  way.     The  word  cannot  be  spared  so 
often.     The  '  teachings '  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Apostles  were 
the  '  doctrines '  of  Christianity.     When  S.  Paul  speaks  of  '  the 
doctrine  of  baptisms  '  (Heb.  vi.  2),  it  is  simply  incomprehen- 
sible to  us  why  '  the  teaching  of  Ijaptisms '  should  be  deemed 
a  preferable  expression.    And  if  the  warning  against  being 
'  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,'  may  stand  in 
Ephes.  iv.  14,  why  may  it  not  Ije  left  standing  in  Heb.  xiii.  9  ? 


^  Except  in  2  Tim.  iii.  16, — where  ivpos  SiSaaKa^iau  is  rendered  ad 
docendum. 

^  Except  in  Eom.  xii.  7, — where  iv  ttj  hihaa-naXia  is  rendered  'on 
teaching.'' 

^  Except  in  Rom.  xvi.  17,  where  they  render  it  '  doctrine.' 

*  And  yet,  since  upwards  of  50  times  we  are  molested  with  a  marginal 
note  to  inform  us  that  8L8daKa\os  means  '  TeacJier,' — 8i8aa-Ka\ia  (rather 
than  bibaxTj)  might  have  claimed  to  be  rendered  '  teaching.'' 

5  Viz.  Eom.  xii.  7  :  1  Tim.  iv.  13,  16  :  v.  17 :  2  Tim.  iii.  10,  16.— 
Rom.  XV.  4. 


200  'Vial.'—'Box.—'CUUSe:  [akt. 

(/)  In  the  same  spirit,  we  can  but  wonder  at  the  extravao-ant 
bad  taste  which,  at  the  end  of  500  years,  has  ventured  to 
substitute  '  boivls '  for  '  vials  '  in  the  Book  t)f  Revehition.^  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  we  venture  to  point  out  that  cfjuiXij  no  more 
means  '  a  howl '  than  '  saucer '  means  '  a  cup.'  But,  waiving 
tliis,  we  are  confident  that  our  lievisers  would  have  shown 
more  wisdom  if  they  had  Id  alone  a  \yu\d  wliich,  having  no 
English  equivalent,  has  passed  into  the  sacred  vocabulary  of 
the  language,  and  has  acquired  a  conventional  signification 
which  will  cleave  to  it  for  ever.  '  Vials  of  ivrath '  are  under- 
stood to  signify  the  outpouring  of  God's  wrathful  visitations 
on  mankind  :  whereas  '  bowls '  really  conveys  no  meaning  at 
all,  excej)t  a  mean  and  unworthy,  not  to  say  an  inconve- 
niently ambiguous  one.  What  must  be  the  impression  made 
on  persons  of  very  humljle  station, — labouring-men,^ — when 
they  hear  of  '  tlie  seven  Angels  that  had  the  seven  hoivls '  ? 
(Jiev.  xvii.  1.)  The  cfyiakr], — if  we  must  needs  talk  like 
Anti(|uaries — is  a  circular,  almost  flat  and  very  shallow 
vessel, — of  wliich  the  contents  can  be  discharged  in  an 
instant.  It  was  used  in  pouring  out  libations.  There  is,  at 
the  back  of  it,  in  tlie  centre,  a  hollow  for  the  first  joint  of 
the  forefinger  to  rest  in.  Fatcra  the  Latins  called  it. 
Specimens  are  to  be  seen   in  abundance. 

The  same  Revisionists  have  also  fallen  foul  of  the 
'  alabaster  6rw;  of  ointment,' — for  which  they  have  substituteil 
'an  alabaster  cruse  of  ointment.'^  But  what  16- a 'cruse'? 
Tlieir  marginal  note  says,  'Or,  'a  Jlask:'  but  once  more, 
what  is  '  ;i  tlask  '  ?  Certainly,  the  receptacles  to  wliich  tliat 
name  is  now  commonly  applied,  (e.g.  a  powder-flask,  a 
Florence  ilask,  a  flask  of  wine,  &c.)  bear  no  resemblance 
whatever  to  the  vase  called  dXd/SaaTpov.     The  [)robability  is 


'  FA'^ht  times  in  Rev.  xvi. 

'  S.  IMiittii.  xxvi.  7.     B.  Mark  xiv.  o.     S.  Luke  \ii.  .57. 


II.]  'CHARITY'  EXPELLED   FROM   THE   N.  T.  201 

that  the  receptacle  for  the  precious  ointment  with  which  the 
sister  of  Lazarus  provided  herself,  was  likest  of  all  to  a  small 
medicine-bottle  {lecythus  the  ancients  called  it),  made  how- 
ever of  alabaster.  Specimens  of  it  abound.  But  why  not 
let  such  words  alone  ?  The  same  Critics  have  had  the  good 
sense  to  leave  standing  '  the  bag,'  for  what  was  confessedly 
a  hox^  (S.  John  xii.  6  :  xiii.  29) ;  and  'your  purses'  for  what 
in  the  Greek  is  unmistakably  '  your  girdles '  ^  (S.  Matth.  x.  9). 
AVe  can  but  repeat  that  possession  for  five  centuries  conveys 
rights  which  it  is  always  useless,  and  sometimes  dangerous, 
to  dispute.  '  Vials  '  will  certainly  have  to  be  put  back  into 
the  Apocalypse. 

{(/)  Having  said  so  much  about  the  proposed  rendering 
of  such  unpromising  vocables  as  /jbvrjfxelov — BiSaxv — (j)idXr), 
it  is  time  to  invite  the  Reader's  attention  to  the  calamitous 
fate  which  has  befallen  certain  other  words  of  infinitely 
greater  importance. 

And  first  for  'Aydirr) — a  substantive  noun  unknown  to 
the  heathen,  even  as  the  sentiment  which  the  word  expresses 
proves  to  be  a  grace  of  purely  Christian  growth.  What  else  . 
but  a  real  calamity  would  be  the  sentence  of  perpetual 
banishment  passed  by  our  Revisionists  on  '  that  most  excel- 
lent gift,  the  gift  of  Charity,'  and  the  general  substitution 
of  '  Love '  in  its  place  ?  Do  not  these  learned  men  perceive 
that  '  Love '  is  not  an  equivalent  term  ?  Can  they  require 
to  be  told  that,  because  of  S.  Paul's  exquisite  and  life-like 
portrait  of  '  Chakity,'  and  the  use  which  has  been  made  of 
the  word  in  sacred  literature  in  consequence,  it  has  come  to 
pass  that  the  word  '  Charity '  connotes  many  ideas  to  whicli 
the  word  '  Love '  is  an  entire  stranger  ?  that  '  Love,'  on  the 
contrary,  has  come  to  connote  many  unworthy  notions 
which  in   '  Charity '  find  no  place  at  all  ?     And  if  tliis  lie 


'  yXwo-croKo/^oi/,     Consider  the  Lxx.  nt  L'  Chiun.  xxiv.  H,  10,  IL 


202  'MIRACLES'  RESOLUTELY    EJECTED  [Aut. 

SO,  liow  can  our  lievisionists  expect  that  we  shall  endure 
the  loss  of  the  name  of  the  very  choicest  of  the  Christian 
graces, — and  which,  if  it  is  nowhere  to  be  found  in  Scripture, 
will  presently  come  to  he  only  traditionally  known  among 
mankind,  and  will  in  the  end  cease  to  be  a  term  clearly 
understood  ?  Have  the  Eevisionists  of  1881  considered  how 
firmly  this  word  '  Charitij '  has  established  itself  in  the 
phraseology  of  the  Church, — ancient,  mediaival,  modern, — 
as  well  as  in  our  Book  of  Common  Prayer  ?  how  thoroughly 
it  has  vindicated  for  itself  the  right  of  citizenship  in  the 
English  language  ?  how  it  has  entered  into  our  common 
vocabulary,  and  become  one  of  the  best  understood  of 
'  household  words '  ?  Of  what  can  they  have  been  thinking 
when  they  deliberately  obliterated  from  the  thirteenth 
chapter  of  S.  Paul's  1st  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  the  nine- 
fold recurrence  of  the  name  of  '  that  most  excellent  gift,  the 
gift  of  Chauity  '  ? 

(It)  With  equal  displeasure,  but  witli  even  sadder  feel- 
ings, we  recognize  in  the  present  Ivevision  a  resolute 
elimination  of  '  Miracles  '  from  the  N.  T. — Not  so,  (we  shall 
be  eagerly  reminded,)  but  only  of  their  Name.  True,  but  the 
two  perforce  go  together,  as  every  thoughtful  man  knows. 
At  all  events,  the  getting  rid  of  the  Name, — (except  in  the 
few  instances  which  are  enumerated  below,) — will  in  the 
account  of  millions  be  regarded  as  the  getting  rid  of  the 
tJiiiKj.  And  in  the  esteem  of  all,  learned  and  unlearned 
alike,  the  systematic  obliteration  of  the  signifying  word 
from  the  j)ages  of  that  Book  to  whicli  we  refer  exclusively 
for  our  knowledge  of  the  remarkable  thing  signified, — cannot 
but  be  looked  upon  as  a  memorable  and  momentous  circum- 
stance. Some,  it  may  be,  will  be  chiefly  struck  by  the 
foolishness  of  the  proceeding:  for  at  the  end  of  centuries 
of  familiarity  with  such  a  word,  we  are  no  longer  able  to 
])art  com[>any  with  it,  even  if  A\e  were  inclined.     The  term 


II.]  FROM   THE    NEW   TESTAMENT.  203 

has  struck  root  (irmly  in  our  Literature :  has  established 
itself  in  the  terminology  of  Divines:  has  groM'n  into  our 
common  speech.  But  further,  even  were  it  possible  to  get 
rid  of  tlie  words  '  Miracle '  and  '  Miraculous,'  what  else  but 
abiding  inconvenience  would  be  the  result?  for  we  must 
still  desire  to  speak  about  tlue  tJtrn/js ;  and  it  is  a  truism  to 
remark  that  there  are  no  other  words  in  the  language  which 
connote  the  same  ideas.  What  therefore  has  been  gained 
by  substituting  ' si'jn'  for  ' niirade'  on  some  19  or  20  occa- 
sions— ('  this  beginning  of  his  signs  did  Jesus,' — '  this  is 
again  the  smmd  sifjn  tliat  Jesus  did ') — we  really  fail  to  see. 

That  the  word  in  the  original  is  crrjfieiov,  and  that  cnjfielop 
means  '  a  sign,'  we  are  aware,  liut  what  then  ?  Because 
ciyyeXo^;,  in  strictness,  means  '  a  messenger,' — ypa<prj,  '  a 
writing,' — viroKpnri'i,  '  an  actor,' — tKKkr^aia,  '  an  assembly,' 
— evayyekiov,  '  good  tidings,' — i7rlaK07ro<i,  '  an  overseer,' — 
iSaTTTio-Tq'i,  '  one  that  dijjs,'  —  7rapaSetcro9,  '  a  garden,'  — 
/jLadrjTrj^,  ' a  learner,' — X"-P''^'  '  f^^'^ur : ' — are  we  to  forego 
the  established  English  equivalents  for  these  words,  and 
never  more  to  hear  of  *  grace,'  '  disciple,'  '  Paradise,'  '  Bap- 
tist,' '  Bishop,'  '  Gospel,'  '  Church,'  '  hypocrite,'  '  Scripture,' 
'  Angel '  ?  Is  it  then  desired  to  revolutionize  our  sacred 
terminology  ?  or  at  all  events  to  sever  with  the  Past,  and 
to  translate  the  Scriptures  into  English  on  etymological 
principles  ?  We  are  amazed  that  the  first  i)roposal  to 
resort  to  such  a  preposterous  method  was  not  instantly 
scouted  by  a  large  majority  of  those  mIjo  frequented  the 
Jerusalem  Chamber. 

The  words  under  consideration  are  not  only  not  equiva- 
lent, but  they  are  quite  dissimilar.  All  'signs'  are  not 
'Miracles,'^    though   all    'Miracles'   are  undeniably    'signs' 


!•:.?;.  S.  Matth.  xxvi.  48.     S.  Luke  ii.  12. 


204  NOTE   CONCERNING  'i/OLF  GifO-Sr.'  [Art. 

Would  not  a  marginal  annotation  concerning  the  original 
word,  as  at  S.  Luke  xxiii.  8,  have  sufficed  ?  And  ivhy  was 
the  term  '  Miracle '  as  the  rendering  of  arjfjbelov  ^  spared  only 
on  that  occasion  in  the  Gospels ;  and  onli/  in  connection  with 
S.  Peter's  miracle  of  healing  the  impotent  man,  in  the  Acts  ?^ 
We  ask  the  question  not  caring  for  an  answer.  We  are 
merely  bent  on  submitting  to  our  Eeaders,  whether, — espe- 
cially in  an  age  like  the  present  of  wide-spread  unbelief  in 
the  Miraculous, — it  was  a  judicious  proceeding  in  our  Eevi- 
sionists  almost  everywhere  to  substitute  '  Sign '  for  '  Miracle ' 
as  the  rendering  of  a-Tjfjbetov. 

(i)  Every  bit  as  offensive,  in  its  way,  is  a  marginal 
note  respecting  the  Third  Person  in  the  Trinity,  which  does 
duty  at  S.  Matth.  i.  18  :  S.  Mark  i.  8 :  S.  Luke  i.  15 :  Acts 
i.  2  :  Eom.  v.  5  :  Heb.  ii.  4.  As  a  rule,  in  short,  against 
every  fresh  first  mention  of  '  the  Holy  Ghost,'  five  lines  are 
punctually  devoted  to  the  remark, — '  Of\  Holy  Spirit :  and 
so  throughout  this  hooL'  JSTow,  as  Canon  Cook  very  fairly 
])uts  the  case, — 

"Does  this  imply  tliut  the  marginists  object  to  the  word 
'Ghost'?  If  so,  it  must  be  asked,  On  what  groimds?  Cer- 
tainly not  as  an  archaism.  The  word  is  in  every  Churchman's 
mouth  continually.  For  the  sake  of  consistency  ?  But  Dr. 
Vance  Smith  complains  bitterly  of  the  inconsistency  of  his 
colleagues  in  reference  to  this  very  question, — see  his  Texts 
and  Margins,  pp.  7,  8,  45.  I  would  not  suggest  a  doctrinal 
bias :  but  to  prove  that  it  had  no  influence,  a  strong,  if  not 
unanimous,  declaration  on  the  part  of  the  Eevisers  is  called  for. 
Dr.  Vance  Smith  alleges  this  notice  as  one  of  the  clearest  proofs 


'  Avvofiis  is  rendered  'miracle'  in  the  R.  V.  about  lialf-a-dozen  times, 
^  Acts  iv.  Ifi,  22.— Ou  the  other  hand,  'sign'  was  allowed  to  represent 

rrrjfjLeiov  repeatedly  in  the  A.  V.,  as  in  S.  Mattli.  xii.  38,  i^'c,  and  the  parallel 

jilaces:  S.  Mark  xvi.  17,  20:  S.  Jolm  xx.  oO. 


II.]  'Epileptic;  a  sorry  gloss.  205 

that  the  Revisers  ought  in  consistency  to  discard  the  word  as 
'  a  poor  and  almost  obsolete  equivalent  for  Spirit.'  "  ^ 

But  in  fact  when  one  of  the  Eevisionists  openly  claims, 
on  behalf  of  the  Eevision,  that  "  in  the  most  substantial 
sense,"  (whatever  that  may  happen  to  mean,)  it  is  "  contrary 
to  fact "  "  that  the  doctrines  of  popular  Theology  remain 
unaffected,  untouched  by  the  results  of  the  Eevision,"  ^ — 
Charity  itself  is  constrained  to  use  language  which  by  a 
certain  school  will  be  deemed  uncharitable.  If  doctrinal 
prepossession  had  no  share  in  the  production  under  review, 
— why  is  no  protest  publicly  put  forth  against  such  language 
as  the  foregoing,  when  employed  by  a  conspicuous  Member 
of  the  Eevisionist  body  ? 

{j)  In  a  similar  spirit  to  that  which  dictated  our  remarks 
on  the  attempted  elimination  of  '  Miracles '  from  the  N.  T.  of 
the  future, — we  altogether  disaj^prove  of  the  attempt  to 
introduce  '  is  Ujnlc^Mc,'  as  the  rendering  of  aeXTjvid^erai,  in 
S.  Matth.  xvii.  15.  The  miracle  performed  on  '  the  lunatic 
child '  may  never  more  come  abroad  under  a  different  name. 
In  a  matter  like  this,  500  years  of  occupation,  (or  rather 
1700,  for  '  limaticus '  is  the  reading  of  all  the  Latin  copies,) 
constitute  a  title  which  may  not  be  disputed.  '  Epileptic  ' 
is  a  sorry  gloss — not  a  translation.  Even  were  it  demon- 
strable that  Epilepsy  exclusively  exhibits  every  feature  re- 
lated in  connection  with  the  present  case ;  ^  and  that  sufferers 
from  Epilepsy  are  specially  affected  by  the  moon's  changes, 
(neither  of  which  things  are  certainly  true) :  even  so,  the 
Eevisionists  would  be  wholly  unwarranted  in  doing  violence 
to  the  Evangelist's  language,  in  order  to  bring  into  promi- 


^  Canon  Cook's  Revised  Version  of  the  first  three  Gospels  considered,  &c. 
-p.  26  :  an  admirable  performance, — unanswered,  because  unansrverahle. 
^  Dr.  Vance  Smith's  Revised  Texts  and  Margins, — p.  45. 
3  S.  Matth.  xvii.  15 ;  S.  Mk.  ix.  18,  20,  22,  26  :  S.  Lu.  ix.  39,  42. 


206  'EPILEPTIC  WHY   INADMISSIBLE.  [Art. 

iience  their  own  private  opinion  that  what  is  called  '  Lunaci/ ' 
here  (and  in  ch.  iv.  24)  is  to  be  identified  with  the  ordinary 
malady  called  'Epilepsy.'  This  was  confessedly  an  extra- 
ordinary case  of  demoniacal  ^possession  ^  besides.  The  Revi- 
sionists have  in  fact  gone  out  of  their  w^ay  in  order  to 
introduce  us  to  a  set  of  difficulties  with  which  before  we 
liad  no  acquaintance.  And  after  all,  the  English  reader 
desires  to  know — not,  by  any  means,  what  two-thirds  of  the 
Eevisionists  conjecture  was  the  matter  with  the  child,  but — 
what  the  child's  Father  actually  said  was  the  matter  with  him. 
Now,  the  Father  undeniably  did  not  say  that  the  child  was 
'  Epileptic,'  but  that  he  was  ' Lunatic'  The  man  employed  a 
term  which  (singular  to  relate)  has  its  own  precise  English 
equivalent ; — a  term  which  embodies  to  this  hour  (as  it  did 
anciently)  the  popular  belief  that  the  moon  influences  cer- 
tain forms  of  disease.  With  the  advance  of  Science,  civilized 
nations  surrender  such  Beliefs ;  but  they  do  not  therefore 
revolutionize  their  Terminology.  '  The  advance  of  Science,' 
however,  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  M'ith  tlie  'Translation  of 
the  word  before  us.  The  Author  of  this  particular  rendering 
(begging  his  pardon)  is  open  to  a  process  'de  luncUico  in- 
quirendo '  for  having  imagined  the  contrary. 

(A;)  The  foregoing  instances  suggest  tlu>  remark,  that  the 
Ecclesiastical  Historian  of  future  years  will  }.niiit  witli  concern 


'  Consider  our  Lord's  solemn  words  in  Mtt.  xvii.  21,—'  P>ut  fhis  l-lud 
f/of'th  iiot  out  save  by  prayer  and  fasting,'' — 12  words  left  out  l)y  the  IL  V., 
though  witnessed  to  by  all  the  Copies  but  3  :  by  the  Latin,  Syriac,  Coptic, 
and  Armenian  Versions:  and  by  the  following  Fathers  :— (1)  Origen,  (2) 
Tertullian,  (:■()  the  Syriac  Clement,  (4)  the  Syriac  Canoi^s  of  Eusebius,  (5) 
Atlianasius,  («])  15asil,  (7)  Ambrose,  (8)  Juvencus,  (9)  Chrysostom,  (10) 
Opus  imp.,  (11)  Hilary,  (12)  Augustine,  (13)  J.  Damascene,  and  others. 
Then  (it  will  be  asked),  why  have  the  Revisionists  left  them  out  ?  Because 
(we  answer)  they  have  been  misled  by  »  and  X,  Cureton's  Syiiac;  and  the 
Sahidic,— as  untrustworthy  a  quatcrnimi  of  witnesses  to  the  text  <.l 
Scripture  as  could  be  named. 


II.]         'EVERLASTING'     EXPELLED   FROM   THE   N.  T.  207 

to  the  sad  evidences  that  the  Church  had  fallen  on  evil  days 
when  the  present  Eevision  was  undertaken.  Witli  fatal 
fidelity  does  it,  every  here  and  there,  reflect  the  sickly  hues 
of  '  modern  Thought,'  which  is  too  often  but  another  name 
for  the  latest  phase  of  Unfaithfulness.  Thus,  in  view  of 
the  present  controversy  about  the  Eternity  of  Future  Punish- 
ment, which  has  brought  into  prominence  a  supposed  dis- 
tinction between  the  import  of  the  epithets  '  eteenal  '  and 
'  EVERLASTING,' — liow  painful  is  it  to  discover  that  the  latter 
epithet,  (wliich  is  the  one  objected  to  by  the  unbelieving 
school,)  has  been  by  our  Eevisionists  diligently  excluded^ 
cvcrj/  time  it  occurs  as  the  translation  of  alcovco'?,  in  favour  of 
the  more  palatable  epithet  '  eternal ' !  King  James's  Trans- 
lators showed  themselves  impartial  to  a  fault.  As  if  to  mark 
that,  in  their  account,  the  words  are  of  identical  import,  they 
even  introduced  hofh  words  into  the  same  versc^  of  Scripture. 
Is  it  fair  that  such  a  body  of  men  as  the  Eevisionists  of 
1881,  claiming  the  sanction  of  the  Convocation  of  the 
Southern  Province,  should,  in  a  matter  like  the  present, 
throw  all  their  weight  into  the  scale  of  Misbelief  ?  They 
were  authorized  only  to  remove  '  plain  and  clear  errors' 
They  were  instructed  to  introduce  '  as  few  changes  as  pos- 
sible.' Why  have  they  needlessly  gone  out  of  their  way, 
on  the  contrary,  indirectly  to  show  their  sympathy  with 
those  who  deny  what  has  been  the  Church's  teaching  for 
1800  years  ?  Our  Creeds,  Te  Deum,  Litany,  Offices,  Articles, 
— our  whole  Prayer  Book,  breathes  a  different  spirit  and 
speaks  a  different  language.  .  .  .  Have  our  Eevisionists  per- 
suaded the  Old  Testament  company  to  follow  their  example  ? 
It  will  be  calamitous  if  they  have.     There  will  be  serious 


^  The  word  is  only  not  banished  entirely  from  the  N.  T.  It  occurs 
twice  (viz.  in  Rom.  i.  20,  and  Jude  ver.  6),  but  only  as  tlie  rendering  of 
aibioi.  2  g  Matth.  xxv.  46. 


208  ETERNITY.— INSriRATION.  [Art. 

discrepancy   of  teaching    between    the    Ohl    and    tlie    New 
Testament  if  they  have  not. 

(/)  Wliat  means  also  the  fidgetty  anxiety  manifested 
throughout  these  pages  to  explain  away,  or  at  least  to 
evacuate,  expressions  which  have  to  do  with  Eternity  ? 
JVhy,  for  example,  is  '  the  world  (alcov)  to  come,'  invariably 
glossed  '  the  ar/e  to  come '  ?  and  ek  rov:?  alo)va<;  so  persistently 
explained  in  the  margin  to  mean,  '  unio  the  ages '  ?  (See  the 
margin  of  IJom.  ix.  5.  Are  we  to  read  '  God  blessed  unto  tlic 
ages '  ?)  Also  et?  rot/?  aloiva^  rdv  aldivwv,  '  unto  the  ages  of 
the  ages '  ?  Surely  we,  whose  language  furnishes  expressions 
of  precisely  similar  character  (viz.  '  for  ever,'  and  '  for  ever 
and  ever'),  might  dispense  with  information  hazy  and  un- 
profitable as  this  ! 

{m)  Again.  At  a  period  of  prevailing  unbelief  in  the 
Inspiration  of  Scripture,  nothing  l)ut  real  necessity  could 
warrant  any  meddling  with  such  a  testimony  on  the  sul)ject 
as  is  found  in  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  We  have  hitherto  l)oen  taught 
to  believe  that  'All  Serijdurc  is  given  hy  insjnnUioji  of  GOD, 
and  is  profitable,' &c.  The  ancients^  clearly  so  understood 
S.  Paul's  words :  and  so  do  the  most  learned  and  thouglitful 
of  the  moderns.  Ildaa  ypa(f)i],  even  if  it  be  interju'eted 
'every  Scripture,'  can  only  mean  every  portion  of  those 
lepa  •ypdfifjiaTa  oi  which  the  Apostle  had  been  speaking  in 
the  previous  verse ;  and  therefore  must  needs  signify  the 
tvhole  of  Scrqiture."^     So  that  the  expression  '  all  Scripture ' 


^  Clemens  Al.  (p.  71)  says  : — ros  ypa^hs  6  'ATrooroXof  dfoirvtvarovi 
KoKel,  o)c})(\ifxovs  ovcrav.  Tertallian, — Lcrjimiis  omnein  Script  unim 
nvlifindionl  ha.hilcm,  divlnitus  inspirari.  Origen  (ii.  443), — nacra  ypa<pf} 
6(('>Tri>(V(TTos  niiaa  wcfifXifjios  icrri.  Gregory  Nyss.  (ii.  605), — ttuctu  ypac^ij 
6fi')Tvvev(TTns  Xe-yfrnt.  Dial.  (ap.  Orig.  i.  808), — naaa  ypa<{)f)  6(6nv(V(TTOS 
XfytTui  irapa  rnv  'AttootoXoi;.     So  Basil,  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Theodoret,  &c. 

^  See  Arclideacoii  Lee  o«  Inai^iration,  pp.  2G1-3,  reading  his  notes. 


II.]  Br.   MIDDLETON   versus   BP.   ELLICOTT.  209 

expresses  S.  Paul's  meaiiinrv  exactly,  and  should  not  liave 
been  disturbed. 

But — '  It  is  very  difficult '  (so  at  least  thinks  tlie  Ivijjjht 
Eev,  Chairman  of  the  Revisers)  '  to  decide  whether  6e67rveu(TTo<; 
is  a  part  of  the  predicate,  kui  being  the  simple  copula ;  or 
whether  it  is  a  part  of  the  subject.  Lexicography  and 
grammar  contribute  but  little  towards  a  decision.'  Not  so 
thought  Bishop  Middleton.     '  I  do  not  recollect '  (he  says) 

*  any  passage  in  the  N.  T.  in  which  two  Adjectives,  apparently 
connected  by  the  copulative,  were  intended  by  the  writer  to 
be  so  unnaturally  disjoined.  He  who  can  produce  such  an 
instance,  will  do  much  towards  establishing  the  plausibility 
of  a  translation,  which  otherwise  must  appear,  to  say  the 
least  of  it,  to  be  forced  and  improbable.' — And  yet  it  is 
proposed  to  thrust  this  '  forced  and  improbable '  translation 
on  the  acceptance  of  all  English-speaking  people,  wherever 
found,  on  the  plea  of  necessity  !     Our  Revisionists  translate, 

*  Every  Scripture  inspired  of  God  is  also  'profitable'  &c., — 
which  of  course  may  be  plausibly  declared  to  imply  that 
a  distinction  is  drawn  by  the  Apostle  himself  between  in- 
spired and  uninspired  Scripture.  And  pray,  (we  should  be 
presently  asked,)  is  not  many  a  Scripture  (or  writing)  '  pro- 
fitable for  teaching,'  &c.  which  is  not  commonly  held  to  be  '  in- 
spired of  God  '  ?  .  .  .  But  in  fact  the  proposed  rendering  is 
inadmissible,  being  without  logical  coherence  and  consistency. 
The  utmost  that  could  be  pretended  would  be  that  S.  Paul's 
assertion  is  that  '  every  portion  of  Scripture  hcincj  ins^nrcd ' 
(i.e.  inasmuch  as  it  is — because  it  is — inspired) ;  '  is  also 
profitable,'  &c.  Else  there  would  be  no  meaning  in  the  kuL 
But,  in  the  name  of  common  sense,  if  this  be  so,  ivhi/  have 
the  blessed  words  been  meddled  with  ? 

(n)  All   are   unhappily   familiar   with   the   avidity   with 
wdiicli  the  disciples  of  a  certain  School  fasten  upon  a  myste- 

p 


210  THE   ETERNAL  SON'S  KNOWLEDGE.  [Art. 

rious  expression  in  S.  Mark's  Gospel  (xiii.  32),  wliich  seems 
to  predicate  concerning  the  Eternal  Son,  limitation  in  respect 
of  Ivnowledge.  This  is  not  the  place  for  vindicating  the 
Catholic  Doctrine  of  the  Son's  '  equality  with  the  Father  as 
touching  His  GoDhead ; '  or  for  explaining  that,  in  conse- 
quence, all  things  that  the  Father  hath,  {the  knmclcdf/e  of 
'  that  Day  and  Hour '  included,)  the  Son  hath  likewise.^  But 
this  is  the  place  for  calling  attention  to  the  deplorable 
circumstance  that  the  clause  '  neither  the  Son/  wliich  has  an 
indisputable  right  to  its  place  in  S.  Mark's  Gospel,  has  on 
insufficient  authority  by  our  Eevisionists  been  thrust  into 
S.  Matth.  xxvi.  36,  where  it  has  no  business  whatever,  and 
from  which  the  word  'only'  effectually  excludes  it.^  We 
call  attention  to  this  circumstance  with  sincere  sorrow :  but 
it  is  sorrow  largely  mixed  with  indignation.  What  else  but 
the  betrayal  of  a  sacred  trust  is  it  when  Divines  appointed 
to  correct  manifest  errors  in  the  English  of  the  N.  T.  go  out 
of  their  way  to  introduce  an  error  like  this  into  the  Greek 
Text  which  Catholic  Antiquity  would  have  reimdiated  with 
indignation,  and  for  which  certainly  the  jtlca  of  '  necessity  ' 
cannot  l)e  pretended  ? 

{o)  A  MARGINAL  ANNOTATION  Set  over  against  Romans  ix.  5 
is  the  last  thing  of  tliis  kind  to  which  we  shall  invite  atten- 
tion. S.  I*aul  declares  it  to  be  Israel's  highest  boast  and 
glory  that  of  them,  '  as  concerning  the  flesh  [came]  Christ, 


'  S.  John  xvi.  15. 

^  Study  by  all  means  lia.sil's  k'ttor  td  Ainiiliiluchiiis,  (vol.  iii.  p.  360  to 
362.)^ —  E.(TTLv  oiiv  (t  vovs  o  niipu  T<a  MdpKco  toiovtos  •  TlefU  ^e  Trjs  i]^(pas 
fKfii/rjs  tj  capas,  (w^els  oi8ev,  ovTt  ol  ayy(\oi  tov  OfoC,  «XX'  ouS'  tiv  u  Y'lus 
tyvio,  el  fir]  6  IIaT>;p  •  (k  yap  tov  TlaTpos  avTM  vnijpxf  8f8ofifvT]  t)  yucocris  .  •  • 
T0VTi(TTiv,  T]  alrui  Toii  ettevai  rov  Y'lov  mtpu  roii  Ilurpos  '  Kui  djStdirrdy  eVri 
Tta  fvyvcofifivas  (ikovovti  rj  e^i]yf)(ris  avrr).  enfidrj  ov  TrpucrKfiTui  tu  pdvos  ■ 
o)S  Ka\  napu  rw  MrtrAu'w. —  (p.  302  c.)  Baisil  says  of  lliis  iiilcriHctalion — 
a  Toivvv  (K  TTHtSor  napu  rutv  narepwu  rjKovaafjLfv. 


II.]  SOCINIAN  GLOSS   ON   ROMANS   IX.   5.  211 

vjIio  is  over  all  [things],  Gud  blessed  for  ever  !  Amen.'  A 
grander  or  more  unequivocal  testimony  to  our  Lord's  eternal 
GoDliead  is  nowhere  to  be  found  in  Scripture.  Accordingly, 
these  words  have  been  as  confidently  appealed  to  by  faithful 
Doctors  of  the  Church  in  every  age,  as  they  have  been  un- 
sparingly assailed  by  unbelievers.  The  dishonest  shifts  by 
which  the  latter  seek  to  evacuate  the  record  which  they  are 
powerless  to  refute  or  deny,  are  paraded  by  our  ill-starred 
Revisionists  in  the  following  terms  : — 

'  Some  modern  Interpreters  place  a  full  stop  after  jicsli,  and 
translate,  He  who  is  God  over  all  be  (jis)  blessed  for  ever  :  or,  He 
ivho  is  over  all  is  God,  blessed  for  ever.  Others  punctuate,  flesli, 
wJio  is  over  all.     God  be  (is)  blessed  for  ever.'' 

Now  this  is  a  matter, — let  it  be  clearly  observed, — whicli, 
(as  Dr.  Hort  is  aware,)  "  belongs  to  Inter iw elation, — and  not 
to  TexMial  Criticism!'  ^  What  business  then  has  it  in  these 
pages  at  all  ?  Is  it  then  the  function  of  Divines  appointed 
to  revise  the  AutJiorizcd  Version,  to  give  information  to  the 
90  millions  of  English-speaking  Christians  scattered  through- 
out the  world  as  to  the  unfaithfulness  of  'some  modern 
Interpreters '  ?  ^  We  have  hitherto  supposed  that  it  was 
'  Aneient  authorities  '  exclusively,  —  (whether  '  a  few,'  or 
'  some,'  or  '  many,') — to  which  we  are  invited  to  submit  our 
judgment.  How  does  it  come  to  pass  that  the  Sociniem  gloss 
on  this  grand  text  (Rom.  ix.  5)  has  been  brought  into  such 
extraordinary  prominence  ?  Did  our  Revisionists  consider 
that  their  marginal  note  would  travel  to  earth's  remotest 
verge, — give  universal  currency  to  the  view  of  '  some  modern 
Interpreters,' — and  in  the  end  '  tell  it  out  among  the  heathen ' 
also  ?  We  refer  to  Manuscripts, — Versions, — Fathers  :  and 
what  do  we  find  ?      (1)  It  is  demonstrable    that  the  oldest 


1  Notes,  p.  109. 

2  Cclebre  ejfugium,  (as  Dr.  Routli  calls  it,)  quod  ex  falsa  verho)"nm  cnn- 
strucJione  Critici  qnidam  lnvreticl?,  imniymit.     Iic/iqq.  iii.  322-3. 

p  2 


212  ROMANS  IX.   5,   HOW   UNDERSTOOD  [Art. 

Codicca,  hcsiJcH  tlw  irlwlc  Inxhi  of  (lie  curaivcs,  kiidw  iiotliing 
about  the  method  of  '  some  modern  Interpreters.'  '■ —  (2) 
'  There  is  absolutely  not  a  shadow,  oiut  a  tittle  of  evidence,  in 
any  of  the  ancient  Versions,  to  warrant  what  they  do,'  ^ — (3) 
How  then,  about  the  old  Fatliers  ?  for  tlie  sentiments  of  our 
best  modern  Divines,  as  I'earson  and  Bull,  we  know  by 
heart.  We  find  that  the  expression  '  icho  is  over  all  [things], 
God  blessed  for  ever '  is  expressly  acknowledged  to  refer  to 
our  Saviouk  by  the  following  GO  illustrious  names : — 

IrensBUS,^ — Hippolytus  in  3  places,* — Origen,^ — Malchion, 
in  the  name  of  six  of  the  Bishops  at  the  Council  of  Antioch, 
A.D.  2G9,^ — ps.-Dionysius  Alex.,  twice,^ — the  Constt.  Apj).,^ — 
Athanasius  in  G  places,^  — Basil  in  2  places,^" —  Didymus  in 
5  places,^^ — Greg.  Nyssen.  in  5  places,^^ — Epiphanius  in  5 
places,^^ — Theodorus  Mops.,^* — Methodius,^^ — Eustathius,^® — 
Eulogius,  twice," — Ctesarius,  3  times,^^ — Thcophilus  Alex., 
twice,^^  —  Nestorius,  ^° —  Theodotus  of  Ancyra,-^  —  Troclus, 
twice,^^ — Severianus  Bp.  of  Gabala,^^— Chrysostom,  8  times,^* 


'  c;  .alone  lias  a  point  between  o  wv  eVt  ■navrmv  and  Oeos  fvXnyrjrui  *if 
Tovy  atwj'as.  But  this  is  an  entirely  different  thing  from  what  is  noted  in 
the  margin.  ''  MS.  connnunieation  from  the  Rev.  S.  C.  Malan. 

»  i.  506.  *   Opusc.  i.  52,  5S  ;  rhil  3;!!).  «  iv.  612. 

«  Routh,  IieU<](j.  Sue.  iii.  292,  and  287.     (Concil.  i.  845  b.  c.) 

''  Concilia,  i.  873  d :  876  a.  **  vi.  c.  26. 

»  i.  414,  415,  429,  617,  684,  908.  '"  i.  282.     And  in  Cat.  317. 

"  Trin.  21,  29,  327,  392.     Mai,  vii.  30;{. 

'^  ii.  596  a,  (quoted  by  the  Emp.  Justinian  [_ConciL  v.  697]  and  the 
Chronicon  Paschah,  355),  693,  697  ;  iii.  287.     Galland.  vi.  575. 

'3  i.  481,  487,  894,  978 ;  ii.  74.  i'  Ap.  Cyril  (ed,  Pusey),  v.  534. 

^»  A  p.  Gall.  iii.  805.  "=  A  p.  Gall.  iv.  576. 

"  Ap.  rhot.  col.  761,  853.  '"  Ap.  Gall.  vi.  8,  9,  80. 

1"  Ap.  Gall.  vii.  618,  and  ap.  Ilicron.  i.  560. 

20  Concilia,  iii.  522  e  (=  iv.  297  d  =  aj).  (iall.  vili.  (;67).  Also,  Co7i- 
cilia  (Ilarduin),  i.  1413  a.  -'  Ap.  Gall.  ix.  47  1. 

2*  Ap.  Gall.  ix.  690,  691  (=  Condi  iii.  1230,  1231). 

''^  Ilomilla  (Arm.),  p.  165  and  249. 

2'  i.  461,  483  ;  vi.  534;  vii.  51 ;  viii.  191  ;  ix.  601,  653  ;  x.  172. 


II.]  BY   THE   ANCIENT   FATHERS.  213 

— Cyril  Alex.,  15  times,^ — Paiilus  Bp.  of  Emesa,^ — Theodoret, 
12  times,^ — Gennadins,  Abp.  of  C.  P.,* — Severus,  Abp.  of 
Antioch,^  —  Ampliilochius,^  —  Gelasius  Cyz./  —  Anastasius 
Ant.,^  —  Leontius  Byz.,  3  times,^ — Maximus/"  —  J.  Damas- 
cene, 3  times."  Besides  of  the  Latins,  TertuUian,  twice,^^ — 
Cyprian,^^ — Novatian,  twice,^* — Ambrose,  5  times/^ — Palla- 
diiis  the  Arian  at  the  Council  of  Aquileia,^® — Hilary,  7 
times," — Jerome,  twice,^^ — Augustine,  about  30  times, — 
Victorinus,^" — the  Brcviarimn,  twice,^" — Marius  Mercator,^* 
— Cassian,  twice,^^ — Alcimus  Avit.,^^ — Fulgentius,  twice,^* — 
Leo,  Bp.  of  Rome,  twice,^^ — Ferrandus,  twice,^^ — Facundus  :  -^ 
— to  whom  must  be  added  6  ancient  writers,  of  whom  3  ^^ 
have  been  mistaken  for  Athanasius, — and  3  -^  for  Chrysostom. 
All  these  see  in  Ptom.  ix.  5,  a  glorious  assertion  of  the  eternal 
GoDhead  of  Christ. 

Against  such  an  overwhelming  torrent  of  Patristic  testi- 
mony,— for  we  have  enumerated  ujnoards  of  sixty  ancient 
Fathers — it  will  not  surely  be  pretended  that  the  Sociniau 
interpretation,   to  which  our  Eevisionists  give  such  promi- 


1  w}  20,  503,  765,  792  ;  v.^  58,  105,  118,  148;  vi.  328.  Ap.  Mai,  ii.  70, 
86,  96,  101 ;  iii.  81  in  Luc.  26. 

2  Concilia,  iii.  1099  b. 

3  i.  103  ;  ii.  1355  ;  iii.  215,  470 ;  iv.  17,  433, 1148, 1264, 1295,  1309  ;  v. 
G7,  1093.  *  Cramer's  Cat.  160.  ^  Tbid.  in  Act.  40. 

«  P.  166.  T  Concilia,  ii.  195.  «  Ap.  Gall.  xii.  251. 

3  Ap.  Gall.  xii.  682.  i«  ii.  64.  "  i.  557 ;  ii.  35,  88. 

'^  Prax.  13,  15 — '  Christum  autem  et  ipse  Deum  cognominavit.  Quorum 
l)atres,  et  ex  quihus  Christies  secundum  carnem,  qui  est  super  omnia  Deus 
hencdictus  in  mvum:  ^^  P.  287.  "  Ap.  Gall.  iii.  296,  313. 

'*  i.  1470 ;  ii.  457,  546,  609,  790.  ^^  Concilia,  ii,  982  c. 

"  78,  155,  393,  850,  970,  1125,  1232.  ^^  i.  870,  872. 

'"  Ap.  Gall.  viii.  157.  ^  Ap.  Gall.  vii.  589,  590. 

21  Ap.  Gall.  viii.  627.        22  799,  711.  23  ^p_  q,^^  ^^  792. 

2'  Ap.  Gall.  xi.  233,  237.  ^s  Concilia,  iii.  1364,  1382. 

'^  Ap.  Gall.  352,  357.  27  j^^i^  (374^^ 

^  ii.  16,  215,  413.  29  ^  ^39 .  v.  769 ;  xii.  421. 


214  THE    DEVIL   HAS   BEEN   IMPEOPERLY  [Art. 

nence,  can  stand.  V>\\t  wliy  lias  it  been  introduced  at  all  ?  We 
shall  have  every  Christian  reader  with  us  in  our  contention, 
that  such  perverse  imaginations  of  '  modern  Interpreters '  are 
not  entitled  to  a  place  in  the  margin  of  the  N.  T.  For  our 
Revisionists  to  have  even  given  them  currency,  and  thereby  a 
species  of  sanction,  constitutes  in  our  view  a  very  grave  offence.^ 
A  public  retractation  and  a  very  humble  Apology  we  claim  at 
their  hands.  Indifferent  Scholarship,  and  mistaken  views  of 
Textual  Criticism,  are  at  least  venial  matters.  But  a  Socinian 
gloss  gratuitously  thrust  into  the  margin  of  cvcrg  English- 
mans  N.  T.  admits  of  no  excuse — is  not  to  be  tolerated  on 
any  terms.  It  would  by  itself,  in  our  account,  have  been 
sufficient  to  determine  the  fate  of  the  present  Eevision. 

XII.  Are  we  to  regard  it  as  a  kind  of  set-off  against  all 
that  goes  before,  that  in  an  age  when  the  personality  of 
Satan  is  freely  called  in  question,  *  the  evil  one  '  has  been 
actually  thrust  into  the  Lm\Vs  Prayer  .^  A  more  injudicious 
and  unwarrantaljle  innovation  it  would  be  impossible  to 
indicate  in  any  part  of  the  present  unhappy  volume.  The 
case  has  been  argued  out  with  nuich  learning  and  ability 
by  two  eminent  Divines,  Bp.  Lightfoot  and  Canon  Cook. 
The  Canon  remains  master  of  the  field.  That  tlic  change 
ought  never  to  have  hcen  made  is  demonstrahle.  The  grounds 
of  this  assertion  are  soon  stated.  To  begin,  (1)  It  is  admitted 
on  all  hands  that  it  must  for  ever  remain  a  matter  of  opinion 
only  whether  in  the  expression  airo  tov  Trovrjpov,  the  nomina- 
tive case  is  to  irovrjpov  (as  in  S.  Mattli.  v.  37,  o'J :  liom. 
xii.  D),  or  6  Tropijpu^  (as   in  S.  Matth.  xiii.   19,  38:  Eph.  vi. 


'  Tlidso  of  our  readers  who  wish  to  pursue  this  subject  riirllicr  may 
eonsult  with  advantage  Dr.  Giflbrd's  learned  note  on  the  passage  in  tlic 
Spcuhcr's  Commentary.  Dr.  Giilbrd  justly  remarks  that  '  it  is  llie 
natural  and  simple  construction,  which  every  Greek  scholar  would  adopt 
without  hcsitatitm,  if  no  question  of  doctrine  wore  involvo<l.' 


II.]  THRUST   INTO   THE   LORD'S   PRAYER.  215 

16), — either  of  which  yields  a  good  sense.  But  then— (2) 
The  Church  of  England  in  her  formularies  having  emphati- 
cally declared  that,  for  her  part,  she  adheres  to  the  former 
alternative,  it  was  in  a  very  high  degree  unbecoming  for  the 
Revisionists  to  pretend  to  the  enjoyment  of  certain  know- 
ledge that  the  Church  of  England  in  so  doing  was  mistaken  : 
and  unless  '  from  evil '  be  "  a  clear  and  plain  error','  the  Re- 
visionists were  bound  to  let  it  alone.  Next — (3),  It  can 
never  be  right  to  impose  the  narrower  interpretation  on 
words  which  have  always  been  understood  to  bear  the  larger 
sense :  especially  when  (as  in  the  present  instance)  the 
larger  meaning  distinctly  includes  and  covers  the  lesser : 
witness  the  paraphrase  in  our  Church  Catechism, — '  and  tliat 
He  will  keep  us  («)  from  all  sin  and  wickedness,  and  {li) 
from  our  (jliosthj  encniij,  and  (t;)  from  everlasting  death.' — (4) 
But  indeed  Catholic  Tradition  claims  to  be  heard  in  this 
behalf.  Every  Christian  at  his  Baptism  renounces  not  only 
'  the  Devil,'  but  also  '  all  Ms  vjorks,  the  vain  pomp  and  glory 
of  the  world,  with  all  covetous  desires  of  the  same,  and  the 
carnal  desires  of  the  flesh.'  ^  And  at  this  point — (5),  The 
voice  of  an  inspired  Apostle  interposes  in  attestation  tliat 
this  is  indeed  the  true  acceptation  of  the  last  petition  in  the 
Lord's  Prayer :  for  when  S.  Paul  says — '  the  Lord  will 
deliver  me  fro7n  every  evil  ivork  and  will  preserve  me  unto 
His  heavenly  kingdom  ;  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen,'  ^ — what  else  is  he  referring  to  but  to  the  words  just 


^  Note,  that  this  has  been  the  language  of  the  Church  from  the 
beginning.  Thus  TertuUian, — '  Aquam  adituri  .  .  .  contestaniur  nos  re- 
nuntiare  diabolo,  et  pomjjm  et  avcjelis  ejus '  (i.  421)  :  and  Ambrose, — ■ 
'  Quando  te  interrogavit,  Abrenuntias  diabolo  et  o/ierifms  ejus,  quid  re- 
spondisti  ?  Abrenuntio.  Abrenuntias  sxculo  et  voluptatlhus  ejivs,  quid 
res^wndisti ?  Abrenuntio'  (ii.  350c)  :  and  Kphraem  Syrus, — 'ATrordo-cro/xai 
r«  2aram  Kai  naa-Lv  tois  epyois  nvrov  (ii.  195  and  iii.  399).  And  CtBsarius 
of  Aries, — '  Abrenuntias  diabolo,  ^o'Pjhs  et  operibus  ejus  .  .  .  Abrenuntio  ' 
(Gallaud.  xi.  18  e).  ^  2  Tim.  iv.  IS. 


21G         UNWAREANTABLE   CIIAXriE   T\   THE  I.ORD'S         [Aut. 

now  iiiulcr  consideration  ?  He  explains  that  in  tlic  Lord's 
Traycr  it  is  ' fmm  cvcrij  evil  worh''  tliat  we  pray  to  be 
'  delivered.'  (Note  also,  that  he  retains  the  Duxolojij.)  Com- 
pare the  places  : — 

S.  Matth,  vi.  13. — aXka  -py-sai  'hma-^  ■Ano-Toy-  noNHPOY".  'oti 

20Y-  'E2TIN  "H  BASIAEIA  .  .  .  KoX  'H  AO'HA  VXS.  TOY'2  AI'n'NAS.     'AMH'N. 

2  Tim.  iv.  18. — /cal  ■py'setai- me  6  Is.vpiO'i  -Ano- hanto's  "epeoy 
noNHPOY"  Kol  aoicret  e/?  tun  basiaeian  aytoy"  .  .  .  .  m'u  ao'ha  Ers 

TOY  2  AI'n"NA2  ....  'AMH'N. 

Tlien  further — (6),  What  more  unlikely  than  that  our 
Lord  \vould  end  with  giving  such  prominence  to  that  rebel 
Angel  whom  by  dying  He  is  declared  to  have  *  destroyed '  ? 
(Heb.  ii.  14 :  1  John  iii.  8.)  For,  take  away  the  Doxology 
(as  our  Eevisionists  i)ropose),  and  we  shall  begin  the  Lord's 
Prayer  with  '  Our  Fatiiek,'  and  literally  end  it  with — the 
Devil! — But  above  all, — (7)  Let  it  never  be  forgotten  tliat 
this  is  the  ^w^^erTi  Prayer,  a  portion  of  every  Christian 
child's  daily  utterance, — the  most  sacred  of  all  our  fornui- 
laries,  and  by  far  the  most  often  repeated, — into  which  it  is 
attempted  in  this  way  to  introduce  a  startling  novelty. 
I^astly — (8),  When  it  is  called  to  mind  that  nothing  short  of 
neeessity  has  warranted  the  Eevisionists  in  introducing  a 
single  change  into  the  A.  V., — "  clear  and  i^lain  errors  " — and 
that  no  such  plea  can  be  feigned  on  the  present  occasion,  tlie 
liberty  which  they  have  taken  in  this  phice  must  be  admitted 
to  be  absolutely  without  excuse.  .  .  .  Sucli  at  least  are  the 
grounds  on  which,  for  our  own  part,  we  refuse  to  entertain 
the  proposed  introduction  of  the  I)e\il  into  the  Lord's 
I'rayer.  From  the  position  we  have  taken  uj),  it  will  be 
found  utterly  impossiljle  to  dislodge  us. 

XIII.  It  is  often  urged  on  IxOialf  of  tlie  Revisionists 
that  over  not  a  few  dark  places  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles  tlieir 
hibours  have  thrown  important  b'ght.     Let  it  not  be  supposed 


II.]        PEAYER— OTHER  CHANGES  FOE   THE   WORSE.       217 

tliat  we  deny  this.  Many  a  Scriptural  difficulty  vanishes 
the  instant  a  place  is  accurately  translated :  a  far  greater 
number,  when  the  rendering  is  idiomatic.  It  would  be 
strange  indeed  if,  at  the  end  of  ten  years,  the  combined 
labours  of  upwards  of  twenty  Scholars,  whose  raison  d'etre  as 
Eevisionists  was  to  do  this  very  thing,  had  not  resulted  in 
the  removal  of  many  an  obscurity  in  the  A.  V,  of  Gospels 
and  Epistles  alike.  What  offends  us  is  the  discovery  that, 
for  every  obscurity  which  has  been  removed,  at  least  half  a 
dozen  others  have  been  introduced :  in  other  words,  that  the 
result  of  this  Eevision  has  been  the  planting  in  of  a  fresh 
crop  of  difficulties,  before  undreamed  of ;  so  that  a  perpetual 
wrestling  with  these  is  what  hereafter  awaits  the  diligent 
student  of  the  New  Testament, 

We  speak  not  now  of  passages  which  have  been  merely 
altered  for  the  worse :  as  when,  (in  S.  James  i,  17,  18,)  we 
are  invited  to  read, — *  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  boon 
is  from  above,  coming  down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with 
whom  can  be  no  variation,  neither  shadmv  that  is  cast  by 
turning.  Of  his  own  will  he  brought  us  forth!  Grievous  as 
such  blemishes  are,  it  is  seen  at  a  glance  that  they  must  be 
set  down  to  nothing  worse  than  tasteless  assiduity.  What  we 
complain  of  is  that,  misled  by  a  depraved  Text,  our  Eevisers 
have  often  made  nonsense  of  what  before  was  perfectly  clear : 
and  have  not  only  thrust  many  of  our  Lokd's  precious  utter- 
ances out  of  sight,  (e.g.  Matt.  xvii.  21 :  Mark  x.  21  and  xi.  26  : 
Luke  ix.  55,  56)  ;  but  have  attributed  to  Him  absurd  sayings 
which  He  certainly  never  uttered,  (e.g.  Matt.  xix.  17)  ;  or  else, 
given  such  a  twist  to  what  He  actually  said,  that  His 
blessed  words  are  no  longer  recognizable,  (as  in  S.  Matt.  xi.  23  : 
S.  Mark  ix.  23  :  xi.  3).     Take  a  sample  :— 

(1.)  The  Church  has  always  understood  her  LoED  to  say, 
— '  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me, 


218  '  MUMPSIMUS  '   IIABITUAT.LY   rREFERPxED  [Art. 

be  with  Me  where  I  am;  that  tliey  may  ])chohl  My  glory.'* 
We  reject  with  downright  indignation  the  proposal  hence- 
forth to  read  instead, — '  Father,  that  which  Thou  hast  given 
Me  I  will  that,  where  I  am,  they  also  maij  he  with  Me,'  &c. 
We  suspect  a  misprint.  The  passage  reads  like  nonsense. 
Yes,  and  nonsense  it  is, — in  Greek  as  well  as  in  English  : 
(o  has  been  written  for  ou? — one  of  the  countless  hetises  h)r 
wliich  X  B  D  are  exclusively  responsible  ;  and  which  the 
weak  superstition  of  these  last  days  is  for  erecting  into  a 
new  Eevelation).  We  appeal  to  the  old  Latin  and  to  the 
Vulgate,  —  to  the  better  Egyptian  and  to  all  the  Syriac 
versions  :  to  eveiy  known  Lectionary  :  to .  Clemens  Alex.,^ — 
to  Eusebius,^ — to  Nonnus,* — to  Basil,^ — to  Chrysostom,'' — to 
Cyril,'' — to  Ca4estinus,^ — to  Theodoret :  ^  not  to  mention 
Cyprian,^" — Ambrose,^* — Hilary,*^  &c.  :^^  and  above  all,  1() 
uncials,  beginning  with  A  and  C, — and  the  Avliole  body  of 
the  cursives.  So  many  words  ought  not  to  be  re(][uired.  If 
men  prefer  their  '  mumpsimus '  to  our  '  sumpsimus,'  let  them 
by  all  means  have  it :  but  jiray  let  them  keep  their  ruljl jisli  to 
themselves, — and  at  least  leave  our  Saviour's  words  alone. 

(2.)  We  shall  be  told  that  the  foregoing  is  an  outrageous 
instance.  It  is.  Then  take  a  few  milder  cases.  They  abound, 
turn  whichever  way  we  will.  Thus,  we  are  invited  to  believe 
that  S.  Luke  relates  concerning  our  Saviouk  that  He  'was 
led  hy  the  Sinrit  in  the  wilderness  during  forty  days'  (iv.  1). 
We  stare  at  this  new  revelation,  and  refer  to  the  familiar 
(!)'eek.     It  proves  to  be  the  Greek  of  all  the  eopies  in  the 


'  S.  ,).)lni  xvii.  24.  ^  p_  ^  jq,  a  Mairoll.  p.  192. 

■'  In  luc.  diserte.  ^  Etii.  ii.  2il7.  "^  viii.  -185. 

'   Text,  iv.  1003  ;   Comm.  1007,  wliicli  urc  tivo  distinct  author  it  ia^,  as 

learned  readers  uf  Cyril  are  aware.  "  Concilia,  iii.  |]5G  d. 

"  iv.  450.  ^"  Pp.  235,  321.  ''  i.  412;  ii.  500,  049. 

12  Pp.  1017,  1033. 

'^  ViLLricius  ap.  Gall.  viii.  230.     Alyu  p.-.-Clirys.  v.  080. 


II.]  TO  'SUMPSIMUS'   BY   THE   REVISIONISTS.  219 

world  hid  four ;  the  Greek  which  supplied  the  Latin,  the 
Syrian,  the  Coptic  Churches,  with  the  text  of  their  re- 
spective Versions  ;  the  Greek  which  was  familiar  to 
Origen,^  —  to  Eusebius,^  —  to  Basil,^  —  to  Didymus,  *  —  to 
Theodoret,^  —  to  Maximus,^  —  and  to  two  other  ancient 
writers,  one  of  wdiom  has  been  mistaken  for  Chrysostom,^  the 
other  for  Basil.^  It  is  therefore  quite  above  suspicion.  And 
it  informs  us  that  Jesus  'was  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the 
wilderness ; '  and  there  was  'forty  days  tempted  of  the  Devil.' 
What  then  has  happened  to  obscure  so  plain  a  statement  ? 
Nothing  more  serious  than  that — (1)  Four  copies  of  bad 
character  (n  b  d  l)  exhibit  '  in '  instead  of  '  into  : '  and  that 
— (2)  Our  Eevisionists  have  been  persuaded  to  believe  that 
therefore  S.  Luke  must  needs  have  done  the  same.  Accord- 
ingly they  invite  us  to  share  their  conviction  that  it  was  the 
leading  ahoict  of  our  Lord,  (and  not  His  Temptation,)  which 
lasted  for  40  days.  And  this  sorry  misconception  is  to  be 
thrust  upon  the  90  millions  of  English-speaking  Christians 
throughout  the  world, — under  the  plea  of  '  necessity '!.... 
But  let  us  turn  to  a  more  interesting  specimen  of  the  mis- 
chievous consequences  which  would  ensue  from  the  acceptance 
of  the  present  so-called  '  Eevision.' 

(3.)  What  is  to  be  thought  of  this,  as  a  substitute  for  the 
familiar  language  of  2  Cor.  xii.  7  ? — 'And  hy  reason  of  the 
exceeding  greatness  of  the  revelations — lolierefore,  that  I  shoidd 
not  he  exalted  overjnuch,  there  was  given  to  me  a  thorn  in  the 
llesh.'  The  word  '  wherefore '  (Sto),  which  occasions  all  the 
difficulty — (breaking  the  back  of  the  sentence  and  neces- 
sitating the  hypothesis  of  a  change  of  construction) — is  due 
solely  to  the  influence  of  n  A  B.     The  ordinary  Text  is  recog- 


iii.  966  dis.  ^  j^^^^  92.  s  j^  o^g^  i    jr^.^-.^^^  -^,jq_ 

V.  1039,  1069.  ^  ii.  460.-  ^  v.  615. 

ii.  584.     Cyril  read  tlic  place  both  ways : — v.'^  156,  and  in  Luc.  p.  52. 


220       TEXT   OF   S.   JOHN    X.   U,   CORRUPTED.— THE       [Art. 

nized  ])y  ulinost  every  other  copy ;  ])y  the  Latin, — Syriac, — 
Gothic, — Armenian  Versions ; — as  well  as  by  Irena^us,^ — 
Origen,^  —  Macarius,^  — Athanasius,*  —  Chrysostom,^ — Theo- 
doret,® — John  Damascene.^  Even  Tischendorf  here  makes 
a  stand  and  refuses  to  follow  his  accustomed  guides.^  In 
plain  terms,  the  text  of  2  Cor.  xii.  7  is  beyond  the  reach  of 
suspicion.  Scarcely  intelligible  is  the  infatuation  of  which 
our  Eevisers  have  been  the  dupes. — Qumtsquc  tandem  ? 

(4.)  Now  this  is  the  method  of  the  Eevising  body  through- 
out :  viz.  so  seriously  to  maim  the  Text  of  many  a  ftmiiliar 
passage  of  Holy  Writ  as  effectually  to  mar  it.  Even  where 
they  remedy  an  inaccuracy  in  the  rendering  of  the  A.  V., 
they  often  inflict  a  more  grievous  injury  than  mistranslation 
on  the  inspired  Text.  An  instance  occurs  at  S.  John  x.  14, 
where  the  good  Shepherd  says, — '  I  know  Mine  own  and  am 
known  of  Mine,  even  as  the  Father  knoweth  Me  and  I  know 
the  Father.'  By  thrusting  in  here  the  Manicluean  deprava- 
tion ('  and  Mine  ovm  know  Mc '),  our  lievisionists  have 
obliterated  the  exquisite  diversity  of  expression  in  the 
original, — which  implies  that  whereas  the  knowledge  which 
subsists  between  the  Fathek  and  the  Sox  is  identical  on 
either  side,  not  such  is  the  knowledge  which  subsists  between 
the  creature  and  the  Creator.  The  refinement  in  question 
lias  been  faithfully  retained  all  down  the  ages  by  every  copy 
in  existence  except  four  of  bad  character, — n  b  d  l.  It  is 
witnessed  to  ])y  the  Syriac, — by  Macarius,^ — Gregory  Naz.,^° 
—  Chrysostom,^^ — Cyril    Alex.,^^ — Theodoret," — Maxinius.^* 


I  i.  720.  2  ji.  381 ;  iii.  OO'J ;  iv.  (lOl.  ^  Aj..  (lallaii.l.  vii.  183. 

'  Aj).  Montf.  ii.  G7.  ^  iii.  333;  v.  Ill  ;  x.  198,  (120 ;  xii.  329. 

«  ii.  77  ;  iii.  3-19.  ^  ii.  252. 

"  '  Deseruimus   fere    quos  sequi  solemus  codices.' 

"  r.  38  (=  Gall.  vii.  26).  '°  i.  298,  G13. 

"  viii.  351,  352.  '"  iv.  052  c,  G53  a,  G5 1  d. 

'^  i.  718;  iv.  271,  550.  "   In  Dionys.  Ar.  ii.  192. 


II.]  AUTHORIZED  VERSION  BETTER  THAN  THE  REVISION.  221 

But  wliy  go  on  ?  Docs  any  one  in  his  sober  senses  suppose 
that  if  S.  John  had  written  '  Mine  ovm  knovj  Mc,'  996  manu- 
scripts out  of  1000,  at  the  end  of  1800  years,  would  be  found 
to  exhibit  '  /  am  known  of  Mine  '  ? 

(5.)  The  foregoing  instances  must  suffice.  A  brief  enu- 
meration of  many  more  has  been  given  already,  at  pp.  144(i)- 
152. 

Now,  in  view  of  the  phenomenon  just  discovered  to  us, 
— (viz.  for  one  crop  of  deformities  weeded  out,  an  infinitely 
Larger  crop  of  far  grosser  deformities  as  industriously 
planted  in,) — we  confess  to  a  feeling  of  distress  and  an- 
noyance which  altogether  indisposes  us  to  accord  to  the 
Revisionists  that  language  of  congratulation  with  which  it 
would  have  been  so  agreeable  to  receive  their  well-meant 
endeavours.  The  serious  question  at  once  arises, — Is  it  to 
be  thought  that  upon  the  whole  we  are  gainers,  or  losers,  by 
the  Eevised  Version  ?  And  there  seems  to  be  no  certain 
way  of  resolving  this  doubt,  but  by  opening  a  '  Profit  and 
Loss  account '  with  the  Eevisers, — crediting  them  with  every 
item  of  f/ai7i,  and  debiting  them  with  every  item  of  loss. 
But  then, — (and  we  ask  the  question  with  sanguine  sim- 
plicity,)— Why  should  it  not  be  all  gain  and  no  loss,  when, 
at  the  end  of  270  years,  a  confessedly  noble  work,  a  truly 
unique  specimen  of  genius,  taste  and  learning,  is  submitted 
to  a  body  of  Scholars,  equipped  with  every  external  advan- 
tage, only  in  order  that  they  may  improve  upon  it — if  they 
are  able  ?  These  learned  individuals  have  had  upwards  of 
ten  years  wherein  to  do  their  work.  They  have  enjoyed  the 
benefit  of  the  tentative  labours  of  a  host  of  predecessors, — 
some  for  their  warning,  some  for  their  help  and  guidance. 
They  have  all  along  had  before  their  eyes  the  solenni  in- 
junction that,  whatever  they  were  not  able  eertainly  to 
improve,  they  were  to   be   supremely   careful    to    let   alone. 


222  SIR   EDMUND   BECKETT.  [Art. 

Tliey  wore  warned  at  tlic  outset  against  any  but  '  necessary ' 
clianges.  Their  sole  business  was  to  remove  'plain  and  clear 
errors.^  They  had  pledged  themselves  to  introduce  '  as  fcv) 
alterations  as  p^ossihleJ  Why  then,  we  again  ask, —  ^Vhy 
should  not  every  single  innovation  which  they  introduced 
into  the  grand  old  exemplar  before  them,  prove  to  be  a 
manifest,  an  undeniable  change  for  the  better  ?  ^ 

XIV.  The  more  we  ponder  over  this  unfortunate  pro- 
duction, the  more  cordially  do  we  regret  that  it  was  ever 
undertaken.  Verily,  the  Northern  Convocation  displayed  a 
far-sighted  wisdom  when  it  pronounced  against  the  project 
from  the  first.  We  are  constrained  to  declare  that  could  we 
have  conceived  it  possible  that  the  persons  originally  ap- 
pointed l)y  the  Southern  I*rovince  would  have  co-opted  into 
their  body  persons  capable  of  executing  their  work  with 
such  extravagant  licentiousness  as  well  as  such  conspicuous 
bad  taste,  we  should  never  have  entertained  one  hopeful 
thought  on  the  sul)ject.  For  indeed  every  characteristic 
feature  of  the  work  of  the  Eevisionists  offends  us, — as  well 


^  As  tliese  sheets  are  passing  through  tlic  press,  we  have  received  a  hook 
by  Sir  Edmund  Beckett,  entitled,  Should  the  lievised  Nciu  Testament  he 
Authorized  ?  In  four  Chapters,  the  autlior  discusses  witli  characteristic 
vigour,  first,  the  principles  and  method  of  the  Bievisers,  and  then  the 
Gospel  of  S.  Matthew,  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and  the  Ajwcalypse,  as 
fair  samples  of  their  work,  with  a  union  of  sound  sense,  forensic  skill,  and 
scholarship  more  skilful  than  to  deserve  his  cautious  disclaimer.  Amidst 
details  ojten,  of  course,  to  discussion,  abundant  proofs  are  set  forth,  in  a 
most  telling  style,  that  the  plea  of  'necessity'  and  '  foithfulness '  utterly 
fails,  in  justification  of  a  mass  of  alterations,  which,  in  jwiut  of  English 
composition,  carry  their  condemnation  on  their  face,  and,  to  sum  up  the 
great  distinction  between  the  two  Versions,  illustrate  '  the  difference  be- 
tween working  by  discretion  and  by  rules — by  which  no  great  thing  was  ever 
done  or  ever  will  be.'  Sir  Edmund  Beckett  is  very  happy  in  his  exposure 
of  the  abuse  of  the  famous  canon  of  preferring  the  stranger  reading  to  the 
more  obvious,  as  if  cojiyists  never  made  stui)id  blunders  or  perpetrated 
wilful  absurdities.     The  work  deserves  the  notice  of  all  English  readers. 


II.]  NEW   PHEASEOLOGY   INTRODUCED.  223 

in  respect  of  what  they  have  left  undone,  as  of  wliat  they 
have  been  the  first  to  venture  to  do : — 

(a)  Charged  '  to  introduce  as  few  alterations  as  possible  into 
the  Text  of  the  Authorized  Version,'  they  have  on  the  contrary 
evidently  acted  throughout  on  the  principle  of  making  as 
many  changes  in  it  as  they  conveniently  could. 

(h)  Directed  '  to  limit,  as  far  as  possible,  the  expression  of 
such  alterations  to  the  language  of  the  Authorized  and 
earlier  English  Versions,' — they  have  introduced  such  terms 
as  '  assassin,'  '  apparition,'  '  boon,'  '  disparagement,'  '  divinity,' 
'  effulgence,'  '  epilex^tic,'  '  fickleness,'  '  gratulation,'  '  irksome,' 
'  interpose,'  '  pitiable,'  '  sluggish,'  *  stupor,'  '  surpass,'  '  tran- 
quil : '  siich  compounds  as  '  self-control,'  '  world-ruler  : '  such 
phrases  as  '  draw  up  a  narrative : '  '  the  ijnpulse  of  the 
steersman  :'  '  in  lack  of  daily  food  : '  '  exercising  oversight.' 
These  are  but  a  very  few  samples  of  the  offence  committed 
by  our  Eevisionists,  of  which  we  complain. 

(c)  Whereas  they  were  required  '  to  revise  the  Headings  of 
the  Chapters,'  they  have  not  even  retained  them.  We 
demand  at  least  to  have  our  excellent  '  Headings '  back. 

(d)  And  what  has  become  of  our  time-honoured  '  Marginal 
Eeferences,' — the  very  best  Commentary  on  the  Bilde,  as  we 
believe, — certainly  the  very  best  help  for  the  right  under- 
standing of  Scripture, — which  the  wit  of  man  hath  ever  yet 
devised  ?  The  '  Marginal  Eeferences  '  would  be  lost  to  the 
Church  for  ever,  if  the  work  of  the  Eevisionists  were  allowed 
to  stand :  the  space  required  for  their  insertion  having  been 
completely  swallowed  up  by  the  senseless,  and  worse  than 
senseless.  Textual  Annotations  which  at  present  infest  the 
margin  of  every  sacred  page.  We  are  beyond  measure 
amazed  that  the  Eevisionists  have  even  deprived  the  reader 
of  the  essential  aid  of  references  to  the  places  of  the  Old 
Testament  which  are  quoted  in  the  New. 

{(•)  Let  the  remark  l)e  added  in  passing,  that  we  greatly 


224  CJHOUNDS   OF   rOMrLAINT   ENUMERATED.  [Aut. 

dislike  the  affectation  of  printing  certain  quotations  from 
the  Old  Testament  after  the  strange  method  adopted  by  our 
Eevisers  from  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort. 

(/)  The  further  external  assimilation  of  the  Sacred  Volume 
to  an  ordinary  hook  by  getting  rid  of  the  division  into  Verses, 
we  also  hold  to  be  a  great  mistake.  In  the  Greek,  l>y  all 
means  let  the  verses  be  merely  noted  in  the  margin  :  but, 
for  more  than  one  weighty  reason,  in  the  English  Bible  let 
the  esta])lished  and  peculiar  method  of  printing  the  Word  of 
God,  tide  what  tide,  be  scrupulously  retained. 

(g)  But  incomparably  the  gravest  offence  is  behind.  By 
far  the  most  serious  of  all  is  that  Error  to  the  considera- 
tion of  which  we  devoted  our  former  Article.  The  New 
Geeek  Text  which,  in  defiance  of  their  Instructions,^  our 
Revisionists  have  constructed,  has  been  proved  to  be  utterly 
undeserving  of  confidence.    Built  up  on  a  fallacy  which  since 

'  It  has  been  objected  by  certain  of  the  Revisionists  that  it  is  not  fair  to 
say  that 'they  were  appointed  to  do  one  thing,  and  have  done  another.' 
We  are  glad  of  this  opportunity  to  explain. 

That  some  corrections  of  the  Text  were  necessary,  we  are  well  aware :  and 
had  those  necessary  changes  been  made,  we  should  only  have  had  words  of 
commendation  and  thanks  to  offer.  But  it  is  found  that  by  Dr.  Hort's 
ea-^er  advocacy  two-thirds  of  the  Revisionists  have  made  a  vast  number 
of  perfectly  needless  changes : — (1)  Changes  whicli  are  incapahle  of  being 
represented  in  a  Translation :  as  ffiov  for  ^ou, — nnvres  for  iinavrfs, — ore 
for  oTTOT-f.  Again,  since  yevirqais,  at  least  as  much  as  jivems,  means 
'  hirth,''  why  yeveais  in  S.  Matth.  i.  18  ?  Why,  also,  inform  us  that  instead 
of  fv  T<5  d/iTrfXwi/t  avTov  TrfcPvTtvfieprjv,  they  prefer  necfivTfvufvtjv  iv  tw 
i\inTi\(>ivL  avTov7  and  instead  of  KUfmov  C^jrioif, — (tjtwv  Kapnov'i  Now  this 
they  have  done  throughout, — at  least  3-11  times  in  S.  Luke  alone.  But 
(what  is  far  worse),  (2)  They  suggest  in  the  margin  changes  which  yet 
they  do  not  adopt.  These  numerous  changes  are,  by  their  otvn  confession, 
not '  necessary  :'  and  yet  they  are  of  a  most  serious  character.  In  fact,  it 
is  of  these  we  chiefly  complain. — But,  indeed  (;!),  How  many  of  their  other 
alterations  of  the  Text  will  the  Revisinnists  undertake  U<  defend  publicly 
on  the  plea  of  '  Necessity  ' '.-' 

[A  vast  deal  more  will  be  found  on  this  subject  towards  the  close  of  the 
present  volume.     In  the  meantime,  sec  above,  pages  b7-b8.] 


n.]  'THE  NEW  ENGLTSn  VEnSTON'  BEiiCRIBED.  22r> 

1831  lias  been  dominant  in  Germany,  and  which  has  lately 
found  but  too  much  favour  among  ourselves,  it  is  in  the 
main  a  reproduction  of  the  recent  labours  of  Doctors  West- 
cott  and  Hort.  But  we  have  already  recorded  our  conviction, 
that  the  results  at  wdiich  those  eminent  Scholars  have  arrived 
are  wholly  inadmissible.  It  follow^s  that,  in  our  account,  the 
'  New  English  Version,'  has  been  all  along  a  foredoomed  thing. 
If  the  'New  Greek  Text'  be  indeed  a  tissue  of  fabricated 
Eeadinsrs,  the  translation  of  these  into  English  must  needs 
prove  lost  labour.  It  is  superfluous  to  enquire  into  the 
merits  of  the  English  rendering  of  words  which  Evangelists 
and  Apostles  demonstrably  never  wrote. 

(h)  Even  this,  however,  is  not  nearly  all.  As  Translators, 
full  two-thirds  of  the  Revisionists  have  shown  themselves 
singularly  deficient, — alike  in  their  critical  acquaintance 
with  the  language  out  of  which  they  had  to  translate,  and 
in  their  familiarity  with  the  idiomatic  requirements  of  their 
own  tongue.  They  had  a  noble  Version  before  them,  which 
they  have  contrived  to  spoil  in  every  part.  Its  dignified 
simplicity  and  essential  faithfulness,  its  manly  grace  and 
its  delightful  rhythm,  they  have  shown  themselves  alike 
unable  to  imitate  and  unwilling  to  retain.  Their  queer 
uncouth  phraseology  and  their  jerky  sentences  : — their 
pedantic  obscurity  and  their  stiff,  constrained  manner : — 
their  fidgetty  affectation  of  accuracy, — and  their  habitual 
achievement  of  English  which  fails  to  exhibit  the  spirit  of 
the  original  Greek ; — are  sorry  substitutes  for  the  living 
freshness,  and  elastic  freedom,  and  habitual  fidelity  of  the 
srand  old  Version  which  we  inherited  from  our  Fathers,  and 
which  has  sustained  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Church  of 
England,  and  of  all  English-speaking  Christians,  for  350 
years.  Linked  with  all  our  holiest,  happiest  memories,  and 
bound  up  with  all  our  purest  aspirations:  part  and  parcel  of 


226  THE   BOOK   HAS   BEEN   MADE   UNREADABLE.        [Art. 

whatever  there  is  of  good  about  us :  fraught  with  men's  hopes 
of  a  blessed  Eternity  and  many  a  bright  vision  of  the  never- 
ending  Life ; — the  Authorized  Version,  wherever  it  was  pos- 
sible, should  have  hccn  jealously  retained.  But  on  the  contrary. 
Every  familiar  cadence  has  been  dislocated  :  the  congenial 
flow  of  almost  every  verse  of  Scripture  has  been  hopelessly 
marred :  so  many  of  those  little  connecting  words,  which 
give  life  and  continuity  to  a  narrative,  have  been  vexatiously 
displaced,  that  a  perpetual  sense  of  annoyance  is  created. 
The  countless  minute  alterations  which  have  been  needlessly 
introduced  into  every  familiar  page  prove  at  last  as  tor- 
menting as  a  swarm  of  flies  to  the  weary  traveller  on  a 
summer's  day.^  To  speak  plainly,  the  book  has  been  made 
unrcadahle. 

But  in  fact  the  distinguished  Chairman  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment Company  (Bishop  Ellicott,)  has  delivered  himself  on 
this  subject  in  language  which  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired, 
and  which  we  willingly  make  our  own.  "  No  Eevision " 
(he  says)  ''  in  the  present  day  couUl  hope  to  meet  with  an 
hour's  acceptance  if  it  failed  to  preserve  the  tone,  rhythm,  and 
diction  of  the  present  Authorizcid  Version."  ^— "What  else  is 
this  but  a  vaticination, — of  which  the  uninspired  Author,  by 
his  own  act  and  deed,  has  ensured  the  punctual  fulfilment  ? 

We  lay  the  Eevisers'  volume  down  convinced  that  the 
case  of  their  work  is  simply  hopeless.  Non  ego  paucis 
offendar  maculis.  Had  the  blemishes  been  capable  of  being 
reckoned  up,  it  might  have  been  worth  Avhile  to  try  to 
remedy  some  of  them.     But  when,  instead  of  l)eing  disfigured 


'  "  We  meet  in  every  page  "  (says  Dr.  Wordsworth,  the  learned  Bisliop 
of  Lincoln,)  "  with  small  changes  which  are  vexatious,  teasing,  and 
irritating;  even  the  more  so  because  they  are  small  (as  small  insects  sting 
most  sharply),  vjJuch  seem  almost  to  be  made  mertly  for  the  sake  of 
change." — p.  25. 

'   On  the  Revision  of  the  EiKjiish  IVrs/oH,  &c.  (1870),  p.  'JO. 


II.]  THE   CASE  OF   THE   REVISION,  HOPELESS.  227 

by  a  few  weeds  scattered  here  and  there,  the  whole  fiehl 
proves  to  be  sown  over  in  every  direction  with  thorns  and 
briars ;  above  all  when,  deep  beneath  the  surface,  roots  of 
bitterness  to  be  counted  by  thousands,  are  found  to  have 
been  silently  planted  in,  which  are  sure  to  produce  poisonous 
fruit  after  many  days : — under  such  circumstances  only  one 
course  can  be  prescribed.  Let  the  entire  area  be  ploughed 
up, — ploughed  deep  ;  and  let  the  ground  be  left  for  a  decent 
space  of  time  without  cultivation.  It  is  idle — worse  than 
idle — to  dream  of  revising,  vjith  a  view  to  retaining,  this 
Eevision.  Another  generation  of  students  must  be  suffered 
to  arise.  Time  must  be  given  for  Passion  and  Prejudice 
to  cool  effectually  down.  Partizanship,  (which  at  present 
prevails  to  an  extraordinary  extent,  but  which  is  wondrously 
out  of  place  in  this  department  of  Sacred  Learning,) — 
Fartizanship  must  be  completely  outlived,  —  before  the 
Church  can  venture,  with  the  remotest  prospect  of  a  success- 
ful issue,  to  organize  another  attempt  at  revising  the 
Authorized  Version  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures. 

Yes,  and  in  the  meantime — (let  it  in  all  faithfulness  be 
added) — the  Science  of  Textual  Criticism  will  have  to  be 
prosecuted, /or  the  first  time,  in  a  scholarlike  manner.  Fun- 
damental Pkinciples,  —  sufficiently  axiomatic  to  ensure 
general  acceptance, — will  have  to  be  laid  down  for  men's 
guidance.  The  time  has  quite  gone  by  for  vaunting  '  the 
now  established  Principles  of  Textual  Criticism,'^ — as  if  they 
had  an  actual  existence.  Let  us  be  shown,  instead,  which 
those  Principles  he.  As  for  the  weak  superstition  of  these 
last  days,  which — withoiU  proof  of  any  hind — would  erect  two 
IVth-century  Copies  of  the  New  Testament,  (demonstrably 
derived  from  one  and  the  same  utterly  depraved  archetype,) 


1  P.p.  Ellicott,  Diocesav  Progress,  Jan.  1882,— p.  19. 

0   2 


228  CONDITiaNS  OF   FUTURE  SUCCESS.  [Art. 

into  an  autliority  from  whicli  thoro  shall  he  no  appeal, — it 
cannot  be  too  soon  or  too  unconditionally  abandoned.  And, 
perhaps  beyond  all  things,  men  must  be  invited  to  disabuse 
their  minds  of  the  singular  imagination  that  it  is  in  their 
power,  when  addressing  themselves  to  that  most  difficult  and 
delicate  of  problems, — the  imin'ovcmcnt  of  the  Traditional 
Text, — '  solvere  ambulando.'  ^  They  are  assured  that  they 
may  not  take  to  Textual  Criticism  as  ducks  take  to  the 
water.  They  will  1)0  drowned  inevitably  if  they  are  so  ill- 
advised  as  to  make  tlie  attempt. 

Then  further,  those  who  would  interpret  the  New  Testa- 
ment Scriptures,  are  reminded  that  a  thorough  ac(|uaintance 
with  the  Septuagiutal  Version  of  the  Old  Testament  is  one 
indispensable  condition  of  success.^  And  finally,  the  Eevi- 
sionists  of  the  future  (if  they  desire  that  their  labours  should 
be  crowned),  will  find  it  their  wisdom  to  practise  a  severe 
self-denial ;  to  confine  themselves  to  the  correction  of  " 2^lain 
and  clear  errors;"  and  in  fact  to  "  introduce  into  the  Text  as 
few  alterations  as  2^ossible." 

(3n  a  review  of  all  that  has  ha])pencd,  from  first  to  last, 
we  can  but  feel  greatly  concerned  :  greatly  surprised  :  most  of 
all,  disappointed.  We  had  expected  a  vastly  different  result. 
It  is  partly  (not  quite)  accounted  for,  by  the  rare  attendance 
in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber  of  some  of  the  names  on  wliich 
we  had  chiefly  relied.     ]jishop  Moberly  (of  8ulisl)ury)  was 


^  B]).  Ellicott,  On  Bevision, — p.  49. 

'■^  '  Qui  LXX  interpretes  non  legit,  aut  nu'nna  legit  accurate,  is  sciat  $e 
own  adeo  idoneiim,  qui  Scripta  Evavgelica  Apostolica  de  Grxco  in 
Latinum,  aut  alium  aliquem  sermonem  tranrfcrat,  ut  ut  in  aliis  Orxcis 
scriptorihus  multum  diuquefuerit  versatus.''  (John  Boi.s,  1 619.) — '  Grsecum 
N.  T.  context um  rite  intellecturo  nihil  est  utilius  quam  diligentcr  versasse 
Alexandrinam  a^itiqui  Fcederis  interprttationem,  E  qua  una  plus  peti 

POTERIT    AUXnjI,    QUAM     EX     VETERIBUS     ScRIl'TOIUBUS     Gu.ECIS     SIMUL 

suMTis.    Centena  reperientur  in  N.  T.  nnsquam  dbvia  in  scrijitis  Gnccorum 
veternin,  sed/'reqncntata  in  Alexandrind  vcrsione.''    (Yalcknaer,  1715-85.) 


IIJ  CERTAIN   OF   THE   REVISERS,   BLAMELESS.  229 

present  on  only  121  occasions :  Bishop  Wordsworth  (of  S. 
Andrews)  on  only  109  :  Archbishop  Trench  (of  Dublin)  on  only 
63  :  Bishop  Wilberforce  on  only  one.  The  Archbishop,  in  his 
Charge,  adverts  to  '  the  not  unfrequent  sacrifice  of  grace  and 
ease  to  the  rigorous  requirements  of  a  literal  accuracy ; '  and 
regards  them  '  as  pushed  to  a  faulty  excess '  (p.  22).  Eleven 
years  before  the  scheme  for  the  present  '  Eevision  '  had  been 
matured,  the  same  distinguished  and  judicious  Prelate,  (then 
Dean  of  Westminster,)  persuaded  as  he  was  that  a  Eevision 
ought  to  come,  and  convinced  that  in  time  it  would  come, 
deprecated  its  being  attempted  yd.  His  words  were, — "  JSTot 
however,  I  would  trust,  as  yet :  for  we  are  not  as  yet  in  any 
respect  prepared  for  it.  The  Chrek,  and  the  English  which 
should  enable  us  to  bring  this  to  a  successful  end  might,  it  is 
to  be  feared,  be  wanting  alike."  ^  Archbishop  Trench,  with 
wise  after-thought,  in  a  second  edition,  explained  himself 
to  mean  "  that  special  Hellenistic  Greek,  here  required." 

The  Bp.  of  S.  Andrews  has  long  since,  in  the  fullest  manner, 
cleared  himself  from  the  suspicion  of  complicity  in  the  errors 
of  the  work  before  us, — as  well  in  respect  of  the  '  New  Greek 
Text '  as  of  the  '  New  English  Version.'  In  the  Charge 
which  he  delivered  at  his  Diocesan  Synod,  (22nd  Sept. 
1880,)  he  openly  stated  that  two  years  before  the  work  was 
finally  completed,  he  had  felt  obliged  to  address  a  printed 
circular  to  each  member  of  the  Company,  in  which  he 
strongly  remonstrated  against  the  excess  to  which  changes 
had  been  carried ;  and  that  the  remonstrance  had  been,  for 
the  most  part,  unheeded.  Had  this  been  otherwise,  there 
is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  reception  wliich  the 
Eevision  has  met  with  would  have  been  far  less  unfavour- 
able, and  that  many  a  controversy  which  it  has  stirred  up, 
would  have  been  avoided.     We  have  been  assured  that  the 


'  On  the  Authorized  Version, — p.  3. 


230  CERTAIN   OF  THE  REVISERS,  BLAMELESS.  [Akt. 

Bp.  of  S.  Andrews  would  have  actually  resigned  his  place  in 
the  Company  at  that  time,  if  he  had  not  been  led  to  expect 
that  some  opportunity  would  have  been  taken  by  the 
Minority,  when  the  work  was  finished,  to  express  their 
formal  dissent  from  tlie  course  wliich  liad  Ijeen  followed, 
and  many  of  the  conclusions  which  had  been  adopted. 

Were  certain  other  excellent  personages,  (Scholars  and 
Divines  of  the  best  type)  who  were  often  present,  disposed 
at  this  late  hour  to  come  forward,  they  too  w^ould  doubtless 
tell  us  that  they  heartily  regretted  what  was  done,  but  were 
powerless  to  prevent  it.  It  is  no  secret  that  Dr.  Lee, — 
the  learned  Archdeacon  of  Dublin, — (one  of  the  few  really 
competent  members  of  the  Eevising  body,) — found  himself 
perpetually  in  the  minority. 

The  same  is  to  be  recorded  concerning  Dr.  Roberts,  whose 
work  on  the  Gospels  (published  in  1864)  shows  that  he  is 
not  by  any  means  so  entirely  a  novice  in  the  mysteries  of 
Textual  Criticism  as  certain  of  his  colleagues. — One  famous 
Scholar  and  excellent  Divine, — a  Dean  whom  we  forbear  to 
name, — with  the  modesty  of  real  learning,  often  withheld 
what  (had  he  given  it)  would  have  been  an  adverse  vote. — 
Another  learned  jind  accomplished  Dean  (Dr.  Merivale),  after 
attending  19  meetings  of  the  Revising  body,  withdrew  in 
disgust  from  them  entirely.  He  disapproved  the  metJwd  of 
his  colleagues,  and  was  determined  to  incur  no  share  of  re- 
sponsibility for  the  probable  result  of  their  deliberations. — 
By  the  w\ay, — What  about  a  certain  solemn  Protest,  by 
means  of  which  the  Minority  had  resolved  liherare  animas 
suas  concerning  the  open  disregard  slujwn  l)y  the  Majority 
for  the  conditions  under  which  they  had  l)een  entrusted  with 
the  work  of  Revision,  but  which  was  withheld  at  the  last 
moment  ?  Inasmuch  as  their  reasons  I'or  the  course  they 
eventually  adopted  seemed  sufficient  In  iliose  hi-h-niinded  and 


II.J  PREBENDARY  SCRIVENER.  231 

honourable  men,  we  forbear  to  challenge  it.  Nothing  however 
shall  deter  us  from  plainly  avowing  our  own  opinion  that 
human  regards  scarcely  deserve  a  hearing  when  God's 
Truth  is  imperilled.  And  that  the  Truth  of  God's  Word  in 
countless  instances  has  been  ignorantly  sacrificed  by  a  majo- 
rity of  the  Eevisionists — (out  of  deference  to  a  worthless 
Theory,  newly  invented  and  passionately  advocated  by  two 
of  their  body), — has  been  already  demonstrated ;  as  far,  that 
is,  as  demonstration  is  possible  in  this  subject  matter. 

As  for  Prebendary  Scrivener, — the  only  really  competent 
Textual  Critic  of  the  whole  party, — it  is  well  known 
that  he  found  himself  perpetually  outvoted  by  two-thirds 
of  those  present.  We  look  forward  to  the  forthcoming 
new  edition  of  his  Plain  Introduction,  in  the  confident 
belief  that  he  will  there  make  it  abundantly  plain  that  he  is 
in  no  degree  responsible  for  the  monstrous  Text  which  it 
became  his  painful  duty  to  conduct  through  the  Press  on 
behalf  of  the  entire  body,  of  which  he  continued  to  the 
last  to  be  a  member.  It  is  no  secret  that,  throughout,  Dr. 
Scrivener  pleaded  in  vain  for  the  general  view  we  have 
ourselves  advocated  in  this  and  the  preceding  Article. 

All  alike  may  at  least  enjoy  the  real  satisfaction  of 
knowing  that,  besides  having  stimulated,  to  an  extraordi- 
nary extent,  public  attention  to  the  contents  of  the  Book 
of  Life,  they  have  been  instrumental  in  awakening  a  living 
interest  in  one  important  but  neglected  department  of 
Sacred  Science,  which  will  not  easily  be  again  put  to  sleep. 
It  may  reasonably  prove  a  solace  to  them  to  reflect  that 
they  have  besides,  although  perhaps  in  ways  they  did  not 
anticipate,  rendered  excellent  service  to  mankind.  A  monu- 
ment they  have  certainly  erected  to  themselves, — though 
neither  of  their  Taste  nor  yet  of  their  Learning.  Their  well- 
meant  endeavours  have  provided  an  admirable  text-book  for 


232  CONSOLATION.  [Am:  II. 

Tciichers  of  Divinity, — who  will  henceforth  instruct  their 
pu])il.s  to  beware  of  the  Textual  errors  of  the  Revisionists  of 
1881,  as  well  as  of  their  tasteless,  injudicious,  and  unsatis- 
factory essays  in  Translation.  This  work  of  theirs  will  dis- 
charge the  office  of  a  warning  beacon  to  as  many  as  shall 
hereafter  embark  on  the  same  perilous  enterprise  with  them- 
selves. It  will  convince  men  of  the  danger  of  pursuing  the 
same  ill-omened  course :  trusting  to  the  same  unskilful 
guidance :  venturing  too  near  the  same  wreck-strew^n  shore. 

Its  effect  will  be  to  open   men's   eyes,  as   nothing  else 
could  possibly  have  done,  to  the  dangers  wliich  beset  the 
Revision  of  Scripture.     It  will  teach  faithful  hearts  to  cling 
the  closer  to  the  priceless  treasure  whicli  was  be(|ueathed 
to  them  by  the  piety  and  wisdom  of  their  fathers.     It  will 
dispel  for  ever  the  drenni  of  those  who  have  secretly  ima- 
gined that    a    more    exact    Version,    undertaken   with   the 
boasted    hel})S  of  this    nineteentli    century    of   ours,    would 
bring  to  light  something  which  has  been  hitlierto  unfairly 
kept    concealed    or    else    misrepresented.       Not   the    least 
service   which   the   Revisionists   have   rendered    has    been 
the    proof    their    work     affords,     how     very    seldom     our 
Authorized  Version  is  materially  wrong :  how  faithful  and 
trustworthy,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  throughout.     Let  it  be 
also  candidly  admitted  that,  even  where  (in  our  judgment) 
tlie  Revisionists  have  erred,  they  have  never  had  the  mis- 
fortune scrioudjj  to  obscure  a  single  feature  of  I)i\ine  Truth  ; 
nor  have  they  in  any  (quarter  (as  we  hope)  inllictcd  wounds 
which  will  be  attended  with  worse  results  than  to  leave  a 
hideous  scar  behind  them.     It  is  but  fair  to  add  that  their 
work   bears  marks  of  an  amount  of  conscientious  (though 
mis<lirectcd)   laljour,   whicli  those  only  can  fully  appreciate 
who  liav«j  made  the  same  province  of  stuily  to  some  extent 
their  own. 


AETICLE   III. 

WESTCOTT   AND  HOET'S   NEW 
TEXTUAL  THEORY. 


"  In  the  determination  of  disputed  readings,  these  Critics  avail  them- 
selves of  so  small  a  portion  of  existing  materials,  or  allow  so  little  weight 
to  others,  that  the  Student  who  follows  them  has  positively  less  grotnid 
for  his  convictions  than  former  Scholars  had  at  any  period  in  the  history 
of  modern  Criticism.^'' — Canon  Cook,  p.  16. 

"  We  have  no  right,  doubtless,  to  assume  that  our  Princi])les  are  in- 
fallible :  but  we  have  a  right  to  claim  that  any  one  who  rejects  them 

should  confute  the  Arguments  and  rebut  the  Evidence  on  which  the 
opposite  conclusion  has  been  founded.  Strong  expressions  of  Individual 
Opinion  are  not  Arguments.'''' — Bp.  Ellicott's  Pamphlet,  (1882,)  p.  40. 

Our  "  method  involves  vast  research,  unwearied  patience  ...     It  will 

therefore  find  but  little  favour  with  those  who  adopt  the  easy  method 

of  using  some  favourite  Mamiscript,  or  some  supposed  power  of  divining 
the  Original  Text.^'' — Bp.  Ellicott,  Ihid.  p.  19. 

"Non  enim  sumus  sicut  plurimi,  aduUerantes  (/caTrT^Xeuoi/rfs)  verbum 
Dei."— 2  Cor.  ii.  17. 


THE 


EE  VISION     REVISED. 


Article  III.— WESTCOTT  AND   HOKT'S  NEW 
TEXTUAL  THEOEY. 


"  Who  is  this  that  darkeneth  counsel  by  words  without  knowledge  ?" 
— Job  xxxviii.  2. 

"  Can  the  blind  lead  the  blind  ?  shall  they  not  both  fall  into  the 
ditch?"— S.Luke  vi.  39. 

Peoposing  to  ourselves  (May  17tli,  1881)  to  enquire  into 
the  merits  of  the  recent  Eevision  of  the  Authorized  Version 
of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures,  we  speedily  became  aware 
that  an  entirely  different  problem  awaited  us  and  demanded 
preliminary  investigation.  We  made  the  distressing  discovery, 
that  the  underlying  Greek  Text  had  been  completely  re- 
fashioned throughout.  It  was  accordingly  not  so  much  a 
'  Revised  English  Version  '  as  a  '  Neio  Greek  Text'  which  was 
challenging  public  acceptance.  Premature  therefore, — not  to 
say  preposterous, — would  have  been  any  enquiry  into  the 
degree  of  ability  with  which  the  original  Greek  had  been 
rendered  into  English  by  our  Eevisiouists,  until  we  had  first 
satisfied  ourselves  that  it  was  still  '  the  original  Greek '  with 
which  we  had  to  deal :  or  whether  it  had  been  the  supreme 
infelicity  of  a  body  of  Scholars  claiming  to  act  by  the 
authority  of  the  sacred  Synod  of  Canterbury,  to  put  them- 
selves into  the  hands  of  some  ingenious  theory-monger,  and 
to  become  the  dupes  of  any  of  the  strange  delusions  which 


236        THE  REVISION,  A  GREAT  DISAPPOINTMENT.        [Art. 

are  found  unhappily  still  to  prevail  in  certain  (juarters,  on 
the  subject  of  Textual  Criticism. 

The  correction  of  known  Textual  errors  of  course  we 
eagerly  expected :  and  on  every  occasion  when  the  Tradi- 
tional Text  was  altered,  we  as  confidently  depended  on 
finding  a  record  of  the  circumstance  inserted  with  religious 
fidelity  into  the  margin, — as  agreed  upon  by  the  Eevisionists 
at  the  outset.  In  both  of  these  expectations  however  we 
found  ourselves  sadly  disappointed.  The  Eevisionists  have 
7wt  corrected  the  'known  Textual  errors.'  On  the  other 
hand,  besides  silently  adopting  most  of  those  wretched  fabri- 
cations which  are  just  now  in  fiivour  witli  the  German  school, 
they  have  encumbered  their  margin  with  those  other  Readings 
which,  after  due  examination,  tltcy  had  themselves  deliberately 
rejected.  For  why?  Because,  in  their  collective  judgment, 
'  for  the  present,  it  would  not  be  safe  to  accept  one  Reading 
to  the  absolute  exclusion  of  others.'  ^  A  fatal  admission 
truly !  What  are  found  in  the  margin  are  therefore  '  alter- 
native Readings,' — in  the  opinion  of  these  seK-constituted 
representatives  of  the  Church  and  of  the  Sects. 

It  becomes  evident  that,  by  this  ill-advised  proceeding, 
our  Revisionists  would  convert  every  Englishman's  copy 
of  tlie  New  Testament  into  a  one-sided  Introduction  to 
the  C'ritical  difficulties  of  the  Greek  Text ;  a  labyrinth, 
out  of  wliicli  they  have  not  been  at  the  pains  to  supply 
him  with  a  single  hint  as  to  how  he  may  find  his  way. 
On  the  contrary.  By  candidly  avowing  that  they  find  them- 
selves enveloped  in  the  same  Stygian  darkness  with  the 
ordinary  English  Reader,  they  give  him  to  understand  that 

^  Frcfacc,  p.  xiv. 


III.]  OBJECT   OF   OUR   FORMER   ARTICLES.  237 

there  is  absolutely  no  escape  from  the  difficulty.  What 
else  must  be  the  result  of  all  tliis  but  general  uncertainty, 
confusion,  distress  ?  A  hazy  mistrust  of  all  Scripture  has 
been  insinuated  into  the  hearts  and  minds  of  countless 
millions,  who  in  this  way  have  \}Q&i\  forced  to  become  doubt- 
ers,— yes,  doubters  in  the  Truth  of  Revelation  itself.  One 
recals  sorrowfully  the  terrible  woe  denounced  by  the  Author 
of  Scripture  on  tliose  who  minister  occasions  of  falling  to 
others  : — '  It  must  needs  be  that  offences  come ;  but  woe  to 
that  man  by  whom  the  offence  cometh ! ' 

For  ourselves,  shocked  and  offended  at  the  unfaithfulness 
which  could  so  deal  with  the  sacred  Deposit,  we  made  it  our 
business  to  expose,  somewhat  in  detail,  what  had  been  the 
method  of  our  Eevisionists.  In  our  October  number  ^  we  de- 
monstrated, (as  far  as  was  possible  within  such  narrow  limits,) 
the  utterly  untrustworthy  character  of  not  a  few  of  the 
results  at  which,  after  ten  years  of  careful  study,  these 
distinguished  Scholars  proclaim  to  the  civilized  world  that 
they  have  deliberately  arrived.  In  our  January  number^ 
also,  we  found  it  impossible  to  avoid  extending  our  enume- 
ration of  Textual  errors  and  multiplying  our  proofs,  while 
we  were  making  it  our  business  to  show  that,  even  had  their 
Text  been  faultless,  their  Translation  must  needs  be  rejected 
as  intolerable,  on  grounds  of  defective  Scholarship  and 
egregious  bad  Taste.  The  popular  verdict  has  in  the  mean- 
time been  pronounced  unmistakably.  It  is  already  admitted 
on  all  hands  that  the  Eevision  has  been  a  prodigious  blunder. 
How  it  came  about  that,  with  such  a  first-rate  textual  Critic 
among  them  as  Prebendary  Scrivener,^  the  Revisers  of  1881 


^   Quarterly  lieview,  No.  30 i.  ^  Quarterly  Beview,  No.  305. 

^  At  the  head  of  the  present  Article,  as  it  originally  appeared,  will  be 
ftiund  enumerated  Dr.  Scrivener's  principal  works.     It  shall  hut  be  said  of 


238  THE  REVISION,  CHARACTERIZED.  [Art. 

should  have  deliberately  gone  back  to  those  vile  fabrications 
from  which  the  good  Providence  of  God  preserved  Erasmus 
and  Stiinica, — Stephens  and  Beza  and  the  Elzevirs, — three 
centuries  ago : — how  it  happened  that,  with  so  many  splendid 
Scholars  sitting  round  their  tal)le,  they  should  liavc  produced 
a  Translation  which,  for  the  most  part,  reads  like  a  first-rate 
school-boy's  crib, — tasteless,  unlovely,  harsh,  unidiomatic ; — 
servile  without  being  really  faithful, — pedantic  without  being 
really  learned ; — an  unreadable  Translation,  in  short ;  the 
result  of  a  vast  amount  of  labour  indeed,  but  of  wondrous 
little  skill : — how  all  this  has  come  about,  it  were  utterly 
useless  at  this  time  of  day  to  enquire. 


them,  tliat  they  are  wholly  unrivalled,  or  rather  unapproached,  in  their 
particular  department.  Himself  an  exact  and  elegant  Scholar, — a  most 
patient  and  accurate  observer  of  Textual  phenomena,  as  well  as  an 
interesting  and  judicious  expositor  of  their  significance  and  value ; — 
guarded  in  his  statements,  temperate  in  his  language,  fair  and  impartial 
(even  kind)  to  all  who  come  in  his  way  : — Dr.  Scrivener  is  the  very  best 
teacher  and  guide  to  whom  a  beginner  can  resort,  who  desires  to  be  led  by 
the  hand,  as  it  were,  through  the  intricate  mazes  of  Textual  Criticism, 
His  Plain  Introduction  to  the  Criticism  of  the  New  Testament  for  the  use  of 
Biblical  Students,  (of  which  a  third  edition  is  now  in  the  press,)  is  perforce 
the  most  generally  useful,  because  the  most  comprehensive,  of  his  works  ; 
but  we  strenuously  recommend  the  three  prefatory  chapters  of  his  Full  and 
Exact  Collation  of  about  twenty  Greek  Manuscripts  of  the  Gospels  [pp. 
Ixxiv.  and  178, — 1853],  and  the  two  prefatory  chapters  of  his  Exact 
Transcript  of  the  Codex  Augiensis,  &c.,  to  which  is  added  a  full  Collation 
of  Fifty  Manuscripts,  [pp.  Ixxx.  and  563, — 1859,]  to  the  attention  of 
students.  His  Collation  of  Codex  Bezm  (d)  is  perhaps  the  greatest  of  his 
works  :  but  whatever  he  has  done,  he  has  done  best.  It  is  instructive  to 
compare  his  collation  of  Cod.  X  with  Tischendorfs.  Nt)  reader  of  the 
Greek  Testament  can  afford  to  be  without  his  reprint  of  Stephens'  ed.  of 
1550 :  and  English  readers  are  reminded  that  Dr.  Scrivener's  is  the  only 
class irxil  edition  of  the  English  Bible, — The  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible, 
&c.,  1870-3.  His  Preface  or  '  Introduction '  (pp.  ix.-cxx.)  passes  praise. 
Ordinary  English  readers  should  enquire  for  his  Six  Lectures  on  the  Text 
of  the  N.  T.,  Sec,  1875, — which  is  in  fact  an  attempt  to  popularize  the 
Plain  Introiluction.  The  reader  is  referred  to  nutc  (')  at  the  foot 
of  page  213. 


TIL]  THE  KEVIEWER'S   SUPPOSED  MISFORTUNE.  239 

Unable  to  disprove  the  correctness  of  our  Criticism  on 
the  Eevised  Greek  Text,  even  in  a  single  instance,  certain 
partizans  of  the  Eevision, — singular  to  relate, — have  been 
ever  since  industriously  promulgating  the  notion,  that  the 
Reviewer's  great  misfortune  and  fatal  disadvantage  all  along 
has  been,  that  he  wrote  his  first  Article  before  the  pub- 
lication of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort's  Critical  'Introduction.' 
Had  he  but  been  so  happy  as  to  have  been  made  aware  by 
those  eminent  Scholars  of  the  critical  principles  which  have 
guided  them  in  the  construction  of  their  Text,  how  differently 
must  he  have  expressed  himself  throughout,  and  to  what 
widely  different  conclusions  must  he  have  inevitably  arrived ! 
This  is  what  has  been  once  and  again  either  openly  declared, 
or  else  privately  intimated,  in  many  quarters.  Some,  in  the 
warmth  of  their  partizanship,  have  been  so  ill-advised  as  to 
insinuate  that  it  argues  either  a  deficiency  of  moral  courage, 
or  else  of  intellectual  perception,  in  the  Reviewer,  that  he  has 
not  long  since  grappled  definitely  with  the  Theory  of  Drs. 
Westcott  and  Hort, — and  either  published  an  Answer  to  it, 
or  else  frankly  admitted  that  he  finds  it  unanswerable. 

{a)  All  of  which  strikes  us  as  queer  in  a  high  degree. 
First,  because  as  a  matter  of  fact  we  were  careful  to  make  it 
plain  that  the  Introduction  in  question  had  duly  reached  us 
before  the  first  sheet  of  our  earlier  Article  had  left  our  hands. 
To  be  brief, — we  made  it  our  business  to  procure  a  copy  and 
read  it  through,  the  instant  we  heard  of  its  publication  :  and 
on  our  fourteenth  page  (see  above,  pp.  26-8)  w^e  endeavoured 
to  compress  into  a  long  foot-note  some  account  of  a  Theory 
which  (we  take  leave  to  say)  can  appear  formidable  only  to 
one  who  either  lacks  the  patience  to  study  it,  or  else  the 
knowledge  requisite  to  understand  it.  We  found  tliat,  from 
a  diligent  perusal  of  the  Preface  prefixed  to  the  '  limited 
and  private  issue'  of  1870,  we  had  formed  a  perfectly  correct 


240  WESTCOTT   AND   IIORT'S   THEORY   AND  [Art. 

estimate  of  the  contents  of  tlie  Introduction  ;  anil  had  ah-eady 
characterized  it  with  entire  accuracy  at  pp.  24  to  29  of  our 
first  Article.  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort's  New  Testament  in 
the  original  Greek  was  discovered  to  '  partake  inconveniently 
of  the  nature  of  a  work  of  the  Imagination,' — as  we  had 
anticipated.  We  became  easily  convinced  that  'those  ac- 
complished Scholars  had  succeeded  in  producing  a  Text 
vastly  more  remote  from  the  inspired  autographs  (jf  the 
Evangelists  and  Apostles  of  our  Lord,  than  any  which  has 
appeared  since  the  invention  of  Printing.' 

{h)  But  the  queerest  circumstance  is  behind.  How  is  it 
supposed  that  any  amount  of  study  of  the  last  neiv  Theory  of 
Textual  Revision  can  seriously  affect  a  Reviewer's  estimate 
of  the  evidential  value  of  the  historical  faets  on  which  he 
relies  for  his  proof  tliat  a  certain  exhibition  of  the  Greek 
Text  is  untrustworthy  ?  The  onus  prolandi  rests  clearly  not 
with  /am,  but  with  those  who  call  those  proofs  of  his  in 
question.  More  of  this,  however,  by  and  by.  We  are  im- 
patient to  get  on. 

(c)  And  then,  lastly, — What  have  we  to  do  with  the  Theory/ 
of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  ?  or  indeed  with  the  Theory  of 
any  other  person  who  can  he  named  ?  We  have  l)een  examin- 
ing the  new  Greek  Text  of  the  Revisionists.  We  have  con- 
demned, after  furnishing  detailed  proof,  the  results  at  which — 
by  whatever  means — that  distinguished  body  of  Scholars  has 
arrived.  Surely  it  is  competent  to  us  to  ujiset  their  eon- 
elusion,  without  being  constrained  also  to  investigate  in  detail 
the  illicit  logical  processes  by  which  two  of  their  number  in 
a  separate  pul)lication  have  arrived  at  far  graver  results,  and 
often  even  stand  hopelessly  apart,  the  one  from  the  dlhcr! 
We  say  it  in  no  boastful  spirit,  but  we  have  an  undoubted 
right  to  assume,  that  uidess  the  Revisionists  are  able  by  a 


III.]  TEXT,   NOW   TO   BE   EXAMINED.  241 

stronger  array  of  authorities  to  set  aside  the  evidence  we 
have  already  brought  forward,  the  calamitous  destiny  of  their 
'  Eevision,'  so  far  as  the  New  Testament  is  concerned,  is 
simply  a  thing  inevitable. 

Let  it  not  be  imagined,  however,  from  what  goes  before, 
that  we  desire  to  shirk  the  proposed  encounter  with  the 
advocates  of  this  last  new  Text,  or  that  we  entertain  the 
slightest  intention  of  doing  so.  We  willingly  accept  the 
assurance,  that  it  is  only  because  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  are 
virtually  responsible  for  the  Eevisers'  Greek  Text,  that  it  is 
so  imperiously  demanded  by  the  Eevisers  and  their  partizans, 
that  the  Theory  of  the  two  Cambridge  Professors  may  be 
critically  examined.  We  can  sympathize  also  with  the  secret 
distress  of  certain  of  the  body,  who  now,  when  it  is  all 
too  late  to  remedy  the  mischief,  begin  to  suspect  that  they 
have  been  led  away  by  the  hardihood  of  self-assertion ; — 
overpowered  by  the  facundia  'prseccps  of  one  who  is  at  least  a 
thorough  believer  in  his  own  self-evolved  opinions  ; — imposed 
upon  by  the  seemingly  consentient  pages  of  Tischendorf  and 
Tregelles,  Westcott  and  Hort. — Without  further  preface  we 
begin. 

It  is  presumed  that  we  shall  be  rendering  acceptable 
service  in  certain  quarters  if, — before  investigating  the  par- 
ticular Theory  which  has  been  proposed  for  consideration, — we 
endeavour  to  give  the  unlearned  English  Eeader  some  general 
notion,  (it  must  perforce  be  a  very  imperfect  one,)  of  the 
nature  of  the  controversy  to  which  the  Theory  now  to  be 
considered  belongs,  and  out  of  which  it  has  sprung.  Claim- 
ing to  be  an  attempt  to  determine  the  Truth  of  Scripture  on 
scientific  principles,  the  work  before  us  may  be  regarded  as 
the  latest  outcome  of  that  violent  recoil  from  the  Traditional 
Greek  Text, — that   strange    impatience  of  its  authority,  or 

K 


242  MISREPRESENTATIONS. — METHODS   OF  [Art. 

rather  denial  that  it  possesses  any  authority  at  all, — which 
began  with  Lachmann  just  50  years  ago  (viz.  in  1831),  and 
lias  prevailed  ever  since ;  its  most  conspicuous  promoters 
being  Tregelles  (1857-72)  and  Tischendorf  (1865-72). 

The  true  nature  of  the  Principles  which  respectively 
animate  the  two  parties  in  this  controversy  is  at  this  time  as 
much  as  ever, — perhaps  more  than  ever, — popularly  misunder- 
stood. The  common  view  of  the  contention  in  which  they 
are  engaged,  is  certainly  the  reverse  of  complimentary  to  the 
school  of  which  Dr.  Scrivener  is  the  most  accomplished  li\'ing 
exponent.  We  hear  it  confidently  asserted  that  the  conten- 
tion is  nothing  else  but  an  irrational  endeavour  on  the  one 
part  to  set  up  the  many  modern  against  the  few  ancient 
Witnesses  ; — the  later  cursive  copies  against  the  '  old  Uncials ;' 
—inveterate  traditional  Error  against  undoubted  primitive 
Truth.  The  disciples  of  the  new  popular  school,  on  the  con- 
trary, are  represented  as  relying  exclusively  on  Antiquity. 
We  respectfully  assure  as  many  as  require  the  assurance, 
that  the  actual  contention  is  of  an  entirely  different  nature. 
But,  before  we  offer  a  single  word  in  tlie  way  of  explanation, 
let  the  position  of  our  assailants  at  least  be  correctly  ascer- 
tained and  clearly  established.  We  have  already  been  con- 
strained to  some  extent  to  go  over  this  ground :  l)ut  we  will 
not  repeat  o\irselves.  The  Keader  is  referred  back,  in  tlie 
meantime,  to  pp.  21-24. 

Lachmann's  ruling  i)rineiple  tlien,  was  exclusive  reliance 
on  a  veiy  few  ancient  authorities — hccausc  they  are  'ancient.' 
He  constructed  liis  Text  on  three  or  four, — not  unfrequently 
on  one  or  two, — Greek  codices.  Of  the  Greek  Fathers,  he 
relied  ou  Origeii.  Of  the  oldest  Versions,  he  cared  only  for 
the  Latin.  To  the  Syriac  (concerning  which,  see  above,  p.  9), 
he   paid   no   attention.     We   venture   to   think  his  method 


III.]  LACHMANN,   TREGELLES,   TISCHENDORF.  243 

irrational.  But  this  is  really  a  point  on  which  the  thought- 
ful reader  is  competent  to  judge  for  himself  He  is  invited 
to  read  the  note  at  foot  of  the  page/ 

Teegelles  adopted  the  same  strange  method.  He  resorted 
to  a  very  few  out  of  the  entire  mass  of  '  ancient  Authorities ' 
for  the  construction  of  his  Text.  His  proceeding  is  exactly 
that  of  a  man,  who — in  order  that  he  may  the  better  explore 
a  comparatively  unknown  region — begins  by  putting  out  both 
his  eyes ;  and  resolutely  refuses  the  help  of  the  natives 
to  show  him  the  way.  Why  he  rejected  the  testimony  of 
every  Father  of  the  IVth  century,  exxept  Euschius, — it  were 
unprofitable  to  enquire. 

TiscHENDORF,  the  last  and  by  far  the  ablest  Critic  of  the 
three,  knew  better  than  to  reject  '  eighty -nine  ninetieths '  of 
the  extant  witnesses.  He  had  recourse  to  the  ingenious  expe- 
dient of  addueing  all  the  available  evidence,  but  adopting 
just  as  little  of  it  as  he  chose :  and  he  chose  to  adopt  those 
readings  only,  which  are  vouched  for  by  the  same  little  band 
of  authorities  whose  partial  testimony  had  already  proved 
fatal  to  the  decrees  of  Lachmann  and  Tregelles.  Happy  in 
having  discovered  (in  1859)  an  uncial  codex  (n)  second  in 
antiquity  only  to  the  oldest  before  known  (b),  and  strongly 


^  '  Agmen  ducit  Carolus  Lachmannus  {N.  T.  Berolini  1842-50),  ingenii 
viribus  et  elegantia  doctriiige  hand  pluribus  impar  ;  editor  N.  T.  audacior 
quam  limatior :  cujus  textum,  a  recepto  longe  decedentem,  tautopere 
judicibus  quibusdam  subtilioribus  placuisse  jamdudum  miramur :  quippe 
qui,  abjecta  tot  cajterorum  codicum  Grfficorum  ope,  perpaucis  antiquis- 
simis  (nee  iis  integris,  nee  per  eum  satis  accurate  collatis)  innixus,  libros 
sacros  ad  sajculi  post  Christum  quarti  normam  restituisse  sibi  videatur  ; 
versionum  porro  (cujuslibet  codicis  a?tatem  facile  superantium)  Syriacje 
atque  -iEgyptiacarum  contemptor,  neutrius  lingua  peritus;  Latinarum 
contra  nimius  fautor,  prje  Bentleio  ipso  Bentleianus.' — Scrivener's  Preface 
to  Nov.  Test,  textus  IStephanici,  &c.     See  above,  p.  238,  note. 

R   2 


244        UNDERLYING  FALLACY  OF  EECENT       [Art. 

resembling  tliat  famous  IVth-century  codex  in  tlie  character 
of  its  contents,  he  suffered  his  judgment  to  be  overpowered 
by  the  circumstance.  He  at  once  (1865-72)  remodelled  his 
7tli  edition  (1856-9)  in  3505  places, — '  to  the  scandal  of  the 
science  of  Comparativ^e  Criticism,  as  well  as  to  his  own  grave 
discredit  for  discernment  and  consistency.'  ^  And  yet  he 
knew  concerning  Cod.  n,  that  at  least  ten  different  Eevisers 
from  the  Vth  century  downwards  had  laboured  to  remedy 
the  scandalously  corrupt  condition  of  a  text  which,  '  as  it 
proceeded  from  the  first  scribe,'  even  Tregelles  describes  as 
'  very  rough.'  ^  But  in  fact  the  infatuation  which  prevails  to 
this  hour  in  this  department  of  sacred  Science  can  only  be 
spoken  of  as  incredible.  Enough  has  been  said  to  show — 
(the  only  point  we  are  bent  on  establishing) — that  the  one 
distinctive  tenet  of  the  three  most  famous  Critics  since  1831 
has  been  a  superstitious  reverence  for  whatever  is  found  in 
the  same  little  handfid  of  early, — but  not  the  earliest, — nor 
yet  of  necessity  the  purest, — documents. 

Against  this  arbitrary  mcthoil  of  tlicirs  we  solenmly,  stiffly 
remonstrate.  '  Strange,'  we  venture  to  exclaim,  (address- 
ing the  living  representatives  of  tlie  school  of  Lachmann, 
and  Tregelles,  and  Tischendorf)  : — '  Strange,  that  you  should 
not  perceive  that  you  are  the  dupes  of  a  fallacy  which 
is  even  transparent.  You  tall:  of  "  Antiquity."  But  ycni  must 
know  very  well  that  you  actually  mean  something  different. 
You  fasten  upon  three,  or  perhaps  four, — on  two,  or  per- 
haps three, — on  one,  or  perhaps  two, — documents  of  the  IVtli 
or  Vth  century.  But  then,  confessedly,  these  are  one,  two, 
three,  or  four  specimens  only  of  Antiquity, — not  "  Antiquity  " 
itself.  And  what  if  they  should  even  prove  to  be  unfair 
samples  of  Antiquity  ?     Thus,  you  are  observed  always  to 


Scrivener's  Introduction,  \\  429.  -  N.  T.  Part  II.  p.  2 


III.]  EDITOES  OF  THE   SACRED  TEXT.  245 

quote  cod.  b  or  at  least  cod,  x.  Pray,  why  may  not  the  Truth 
reside  instead  with  a,  or  c,  or  D  ? — You  quote  the  okl  Latin 
or  the  Coptic.  Why  may  not  the  Peschito  or  the  Sahidic 
be  riglit  rather  ? — You  quote  either  Origen  or  else  Euseliius, 
— but  why  not  Didymus  and  Athanasius,  Epiphanius  and 
Basil,  Chrysostom  and  Theodoret,  the  Gregcries  and  the 
Cyrils  ?  ....  It  will  appear  therefore  that  we  are  every  bit 
as  strongly  convinced  as  you  can  be  of  the  paramount  claims 
of  '  Antiquity  : '  but  that,  eschewing  prejudice  and  partiality, 
we  differ  from  you  only  in  tliis,  viz.  that  we  absolutely  refuse 
to  bow  down  before  the  'particidar  sj^ecimens  of  Antiquity 
which  you  have  arbitrarily  selected  as  the  objects  of  your 
superstition.  You  are  illogical  enough  to  propose  to  include 
within  your  list  of  "  ancient  Authorities,"  codd.  1,  33  and  69, 
—which  are  severally  MSS.  of  the  Xth,  Xlth,  and  XlVth 
centuries.  And  why  ?  Only  because  the  Text  of  those  3 
copies  is  observed  to  bear  a  sinister  resemblance  to  that  of 
codex  B.  But  then  why,  in  the  name  of  common  sense,  do  you 
not  show  corresponding  favour  to  the  remaining  997  cursive 
Copies  of  the  N.T., — seeing  that  these  are  observed  to  bear 
the  same  general  resemblance  to  codex  A  ?  .  .  .  You  are  for  ever 
talking  about  "  old  Eeadings."  Have  you  not  yet  discovered 
that  ALL  "  Eeadings  "  are  "  old  "  ? ' 

The  last  contribution  to  this  department  of  sacred  Science 
is  a  critical  edition  of  the  New  Testament  by  Drs.  Westcott 
and  HoRT.     About  this,  we  proceed  to  offer  a  few  remarks. 

I.  The  first  thing  here  which  unfavourably  arrests  atten- 
tion is  the  circumstance  that  this  proves  to  be  the  only 
Critical  Edition  of  the  New  Testament  since  the  days  of  Mill, 
which  does  not  even  pretend  to  contribute  something  to  our 
previous  critical  knowledge  of  the  subject.  Mill  it  was 
(1707)  who  gave  us  the  great  bulk  of  our  various  Eeadings ; 


246     WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  RELY  ON  THE  EVIDENCE     [Art. 

Avliich  Beiigel  (1734)  slightly,  and  Wetstein  (1751-2)  very 
considerably,  enlarged. — The  accurate  Matthaei  (1782-8)  ac- 
quainted us  with  the  contents  of  about  100  codices  more  ;  and 
was  followed  by  Griesbach  (179G-180G)  with  important  addi- 
tional materials. — Birch  had  in  the  meantime  (1788)  culled 
from  the  principal  libraries  of  Europe  a  large  assortment  of 
new  Readings  :  while  truly  marvellous  was  the  accession  of 
evidence  which  Scholz  brought  to  light  in  1830. — And 
though  Lachmann  (1842-50)  did  wondrous  little  in  this 
department,  he  yet  furnished  the  critical  authority  (such  as 
it  is)  for  his  own  unsatisfactory  Text. — Tregelles  (1857-72), 
by  his  exact  collations  of  MSS.  and  examination  of  the 
earliest  Fathers,  has  laid  the  Church  under  an  abiding 
obligation  :  and  what  is  to  be  said  of  Tischendorf  (1856-72), 
who  has  contributed  more  to  our  knowledge  than  any  other 
editor  of  the  N.  T.  since  the  days  of  Mill  ? — Dr.  Scrivener, 
though  lie  has  not  independently  edited  the  original  Text,  is 
clearly  to  be  reckoned  among  those  who  have,  by  reason  of 
his  large,  important,  and  accurate  contributions  to  our  know- 
ledge of  ancient  documents.  Transfer  his  collections  of 
various  Readings  to  the  foot  of  the  page  of  a  copy  of  the 
commonly  Received  Text, — and  ' Scriveners  New  Testament '^ 
might  stand  between  the  editions  of  Mill  and  of  Wetstein. 
Let  the  truth  be  told.  C.  F.  Matthrei  and  he  are  the  only 
ttt'O  Scholars  who  have  collated  any  considerable  numher  of 
sacred  Codices  with  the  needftd  amount  of  accuracy?' 


^  No  one  who  attends  ever  so  little  to  tlie  Kubject  can  require  to  lie 
assured  that  '  The  ISlew  Testament  in  the  Onyinul  Ureek,  according  to  the 
text  Jollowed  in  the  Authorized  Version,  together  ivith  the  variatioits  adopted 
in  the  Bevised  Version,^  edited  by  Dr.  Scrivener  for  the  Syndics  of  the 
Cambridge  University  Press,  1881,  does  not  by  any  means  represent  his 
own  views.  The  learned  Prebendary  merely  edited  the  decisions  of  the 
two-thirds  majority  of  the  Revisionists, — which  ivcre  not  his  oivn. 

^  Those  who  have  never  tried  the  experiment,  can  have  no  idea  of  the 
strain  i>n  tlie  attonlidn  whifh   such  works  as  those  enumerated  in  p.  238 


III.]  COLLECTED   BY   THEIR   PREDECESSORS.  247 

Now,  we  trust  we  shall  be  forgiven  if,  at  the  close  of  the 
preceding  enumeration,  we  confess  to  something  like  dis- 
pleasure at  the  oracular  tone  assumed  by  Drs.  Westcott  and 
Hort  in  dealing  with  the  Text  of  Scripture,  though  they 
admit  (page  90)  that  they  '  rely  for  documentary  evidence  on 
the  stores  accumulated  by  their  predecessors.'  Confident  as 
those  distinguished  Professors  may  reasonably  feel  of  their 
ability  to  dispense  with  the  ordinary  appliances  of  Textual 
Criticism ;  and  proud  (as  they  must  naturally  be)  of  a  verify- 
ing faculty  which  (although  they  are  able  to  give  no  account 
of  it)  yet  enables  them  infallibly  to  discriminate  between  the 
false  and  the  true,  as  well  as  to  assign  '  a  local  habitation  and 
a  name'  to  every  word, — inspired  or  uninspired, — which 
purports  to  belong  to  the  N.  T. : — they  must  not  be  offended 
with  us  if  we  freely  assure  them  at  the  outset  that  we  shall 
decline  to  accept  a  single  argumentative  assertion  of  theirs 
for  which  they  fail  to  offer  sufficient  proof.  Their  wholly 
unsupported  decrees,  at  the  risk  of  being  thought  uncivil,  we 
shall  unceremoniously  reject,  as  soon  as  we  have  allowed 
them  a  hearing. 

This  resolve  bodes  ill,  we  freely  admit,  to  harmonious 
progress.  But  it  is  inevitable.  For,  to  speak  plainly,  we 
never  before  met  with  such  a  singular  tissue  of  magisterial 
statements,  unsupported  by  a  particle  of  rational  evidence,  as 
we  meet  with  here.  The  abstruse  gravity,  the  long-winded 
earnestness  of  the  writer's  manner,  contrast  whimsically 
with  the  utterly  inconsequential  character  of  his  antecedents 


{note)  occasion.  At  the  same  time,  it  cannot  be  too  clearly  understood 
that  it  is  chiefly  by  the  multiplication  of  exact  collations  of  MSS.  that 
an  abiding  foundation  will  some  day  be  laid  on  which  to  build  up  the 
Science  of  Textual  Criticism.  We  may  safely  keep  our  *  Theories '  back 
till  we  have  collated  our  MSS., — re-edited  our  Versions, — indexed  our 
Fathers.     They  will  be  abundantly  in  time  then. 


248  DR.   HOKT's   strange   method.  [Akt. 

jind  liis  consequents  thronghout.  Professor  Hort — (for  '  the 
writing  of  the  volume  and  the  other  accompaniments  of  the 
Text  devolved'  on  him,^) — Dr.  Hort  seems  to  mistake  his 
Opinions  for  facts, — his  Assertions  for  arguments, — and  a 
Reiteration  of  either  for  an  accession  of  evidence.  There  is 
throughout  the  volume,  apparently,  a  dread  of  Facts  which  is 
even  extraordinary.  An  actual  illustration  of  the  learned 
Author's  meaning, — a  concrete  case, — seems  as  if  it  were 
never  forthcoming.  At  last  it  comes :  but  the  phenomenon 
is  straightway  discovered  to  admit  of  at  least  two  interpre- 
tations, and  therefore  never  to  prove  the  thing  intended. 
In  a  person  of  high  education, — in  one  accustomed  to  exact 

reasoning, — we  should  have  supposed  all  this  impossible 

But  it  is  high  time  to  unfold  the  Introduction  at  the  first 
page,  and  to  begin  to  read. 

II.  It  opens  (p.  1-11)  with  some  unsatisfactory  Remarks 
on  '  Transmission  by  Writing  ; '  vague  and  inaccurate, — ^unsup- 
ported by  one  single  Textual  reference, — and  labouring  imder 
the  grave  defect  of  leaving  the  most  instructive  phenomena 
of  the  problem  wholly  untouched.  For,  inasmuch  as  '  Trans- 
mission by  writing '  involves  two  distinct  classes  of  errors, 
(1st)  Those  which  are  the  result  of  Accident, — and  (2ndly) 
Those  which  are  the  result  of  Design, — it  is  to  use  a  Reader 
l)adly  not  to  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  explaining  to 
him  that  what  makes  codd.  B  x  D  such  utterly  untrustworthy 
guides,  (except  when  supported  by  a  large  amount  of  ex- 
traneous evidence,)  is  the  circumstance  that  Dcmjn  had 
evidently  so  nnich  to  do  with  a  vast  proportion  of  the  peculiar 
errors  in  which  they  severally  abound.  In  other  words, 
each  of  those  codices  clearly  exhibits  a  fabricated  Text, — 
is  the  result  of  arbitrary  and  reckless  Recension. 


^  Jntrodudivtt,  p.  18. 


III.]  SOMETHING   ABOUT   CODICES   B,   D,— A,   C.  249 

Now,  this  is  not  a  matter  of  opinion,  but  of  fact.  In 
S.  Lnke's  Gospel  alone  (collated  with  the  traditional  Text) 
the  transpositions  in  codex  b  amount  to  228, — affecting  654 
words  :  in  codex  D,  to  464, — affecting  1401  words.  Proceed- 
ing with  our  examination  of  the  same  Gospel  according  to 
S.  Luke,  we  find  that  the  words  omitted  in  B  are  757,^ — in  D, 
1552.  The  words  substituted  in  B  amount  to  309, — in  D,  to 
1006.  The  readings  i^'^^^'^'^^'^'^^"  to  B  are  138,  and  affect  215 
words;  —  those  peculiar  to  d,  are  1731,  and  affect  4090 
words.  Wondrous  few  of  these  can  have  been  due  to  acci- 
dental causes.  The  Text  of  one  or  of  both  codices  must 
needs  be  depraved.  (As  for  n,  it  is  so  frequently  found  in 
accord  with  B,  that  out  of  consideration  for  our  Eeaders,  we 
omit  the  corresponding  figures.)    . 

We  turn  to  codd.  a  and  c — (executed,  suppose,  a  hundred 
years  after  b,  and  a  hundred  years  hefore  d) — and  the  figures 
are  found  to  be  as  follows  : — 

The  transpositions  are 

affecting 

The  words  omitted  are 
The  words  substituted 
The  peculiar  readings 

affecting 

Now,  (as  we  had  occasion  to  explain  in  a  previous  page,^) 
it  is  entirely  to  misunderstand  the  question,  to  object  that 
the  preceding  Collation  has  been  made  with  the  Text  of 
Stephanus  open  before  us.  Robert  Etienne  in  the  XVIth 
century  was  not  the  cause  why  cod.  B  in  the  IVth,  and  cod.  D 
in  the  Vlth,  are  so  widely  discordant  from  one  another ; 
A  and  c,  so  utterly  at  variance  with  both.     The   simplest 


In  A. 

In  c. 

75     

67 

199  words    .. 

197 

208     

175 

Ill     

115 

90     

87 

131  words    .. 

127 

in  in  a  previou 

s  page 

See  lower  part  of  page  17.     Also  note  at  p.  75  and  middle  of  p.  262, 


250  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT'S  BOOK  [Art. 

explanation  of  the  plienonieua  is  the  truest ;  namely,  that  B 
and  D  exhibit  grossly  depraved  Texts; — a  circumstance  of 
which  it  is  impossible  that  the  ordinary  Keader  should  be  too 
soon  or  too  often  reminded.     But  to  proceed. 

III.  Some  remarks  follow,  on  what  is  strangely  styled 
'  Transmission  by  printed  Editions  : '  in  the  course  of  which 
Dr.  Hort  informs  us  that  Lachmann's  Text  of  1831  was 
'  the  first  founded  on  documentary  authority.'  ^  ....  On 
what  then,  pray,  does  the  learned  Professor  imagine  that 
the  Texts  of  Erasmus  (1516)  and  of  Stunica  (1522)  were 
founded  ?  His  statement  is  incorrect.  The  actual  difference 
lietween  Lachmann's  Text  and  those  of  tlie  earlier  Editors  is, 
that  Ids  '  documentary  authority '  is  partial,  narrow,  self- 
contradictory  ;  and  is  proved  to  be  untrustworthy  by  a  free 
appeal  to  Antiquity.  Their  documentary  authority,  derived 
from  independent  sources, — though  partial  and  narrow  as 
that  on  which  Lachmann  relied, — exhibits  {under  the  good 
Providence  of  God,)  a  Traditional  Text,  the  general  purity 
of  which  is  demonstrated  by  all  the  evidence  which  350 
years  of  subsequent  research  have  succeeded  in  accumu- 
lating ;  and  which  is  confessedly  the  Text  of  a.d.  375. 

IV.  We  are  favoured,  in  the  third  place,  witli  tlie  'History 
of  this  Edition : '  in  wliich  tlie  point  that  chiefly  arrests 
attention  is  the  explanation  afforded  of  the  many  and  serious 
occasions  on  which  Dr.  Westcott  ('  W.')  and  Dr.  Hort  ('  H.'), 
finding  it  impossible  to  agree,  have  set  down  their  respective 
notions  separately  and  subscribed  them  with  their  respective 
initial.  We  are  reminded  of  Avhat  was  wittily  said  con- 
cerning llichard  Baxter :  viz.  that  even  if  no  one  but  himself 
existed  in  the  Church,  '  Richard '  would  still  be  found  to 

1  r.  13,  cf.  i>.  viii. 


111.]  EXAMINED   WITH   DISMAY.  251 

disagree  with  '  Baxter,' — and  '  Baxter  '  with  '  Richard  '  .  .  .  . 
We  read  with  uneasiness  that 

'  no  individual  mind  can  ever  act  with  perfect  uniformity,  or 
free  itself  completely  from  its  own  Idiosyncrasies ;'  and  that 
'  the  danger  of  unconscious  Caprice  is  inseparable  from  personal 
judgment.' — (p.  17.) 

All  tliis  reminds  us  painfully  of  certain  statements  made 
by  the  same  Editors  in  1870  : — 

'  We  are  obliged  to  come  to  the  individual  mind  at  last ;  and 
Canons  of  Criticism  are  useful  only  as  warnings  against  natural 
illusions,  and  aids  to  circumspect  consideration,  not  as  absolute 
rules  to  prescribe  the  final  decision.' — (pp.  xviii.,  xix.) 

May  we  be  permitted  without  offence  to  point  out  (not  for 
the  first  time)  that  '  idiosyncrasies  '  and  '  unconscious  caprice,' 
and  the  fancies  of  the  '  individual  mind,'  can  be  allowed  no 
place  vjJiateve?'  in  a  problem  of  such  gravity  and  importance 
as  the  present  ?  Once  admit  such  elements,  and  we  are 
safe  to  find  ourselves  in  cloud-land  to-morrow.  A  weaker 
foundation  on  which  to  build,  is  not  to  be  named.  And 
when  we  find  that  the  learned  Professors  '  venture  to  hope 
that  the  present  Text  has  escaped  some  risks  of  this  kind  by 
being  the  production  of  two  Editors  of  different  habits  of 
mind,  working  independently  and  to  a  great  extent  on 
different  plans,' — we  can  but  avow  our  conviction  that  the 
safeguard  is  altogether  inadequate.  When  two  men,  devoted 
to  the  same  pursuit,  are  in  daily  confidential  intercourse  on 
such  a  subject,  the  '  natu7'al  illusions '  of  either  have  a 
marvellous  tendency  to  communicate  themselves.  Their 
Reader's  only  protection  is  rigidly  to  insist  on  the  production 
of  Proof  for  everything  which  these  authors  say. 

V.  The  dissertation  on  '  Intrinsic '  and  '  Transcriptional 
Probability '  which  follows  (pp.  20-30), — being  unsuj^ported 
hy  07ie  single  instance  or'  illustration, — we  pass  by.    It  ignores 


252  DR.   HORT'S  PREPOSTEROUS  METHOD  [Art. 

throughout  tlie  fact,  that  the  most  serious  corruptions  of 
MSS.  are  due,  not  to  '  Scribes '  or  '  Copyists,'  (of  whom,  by 
the  way,  we  find  perpetual  mention  every  time  we  open  the 
page ;)  but  to  the  persons  who  employed  them.  So  far  from 
thinking  with  Dr.  Hort  that  '  the  value  of  the  evidence 
obtained  from  Transcriptional  Probability  is  incontestable,' 
— for  that,  'without  its  aid,  Textual  Criticism  could  rarely 
obtain  a  high  degree  of  security,'  (p.  24,) — we  venture  to 
declare  that  inasmuch  as  one  expert's  notions  of  what  is 
'  transcriptionally  probable  '  prove  to  be  the  diametrical 
reverse  of  another  expert's  notions,  the  supposed  evidence 
to  be  derived  from  this  source  may,  with  advantage,  be 
neglected  altogether.  Let  the  study  of  Documentary  Evidence 
be  allowed  to  take  its  place.  Notions  of  '  Probability '  are 
the  very  pest  of  those  departments  of  Science  which  admit 
of  an  appeal  to  Fact. 

VI.  A  signal  proof  of  the  justice  of  our  last  remark  is 
furnished  by  the  plea  which  is  straightway  put  in  (pp.  30-1) 
for  the  superior  necessity  of  attending  to  '  the  relative  ante- 
cedent credibility  of  Witnesses.'  In  other  words,  '  The  com- 
parative trustworthiness  of  documentary  Authorities '  is 
proposed  as  a  far  weightier  consideration  than  'Intrinsic' 
and  '  Transcriptional  Probability.'  Accordingly  we  are 
assured  (in  capital  letters)  that  '  Knowledge  of  Documents 
should  precede  final  judgment  upon  readings '  (p.  31). 

'Knowledge'!  Yes,  but  hcnv  acquired?  Suppose  two 
rival  documents, — cod.  A  and  cod.  B.  May  we  be  informed 
how  you  would  proceed  witli  respect  to  them  ? 

'  Where  one  of  tlio  documents  is  found  habitually  to  contain 
morally  certain,  or  at  least  strongly  'preferred,  Headings, — and  the 
other  habitually  to  contain  their  rejected  rivals,— we  [i.e.  Dr. 
Hort]  can  have  no  doubt  that  tlie  Text  of  tlie  first  has  been 


III.]  OF   CONDUCTING   THE   PRESENT   ENQUIRY.  253 

transmitted  in  comparative  purity  ;  and   that   the  Text  of  the 
second  has  suffered  comparatively  large  corruption.' — (p.  32.) 

But  can  such  words  have  been  written  seriously  ?  Is 
it  gravely  pretended  that  Headings  become  '  morally  certain,' 
because  they  are  '  strongl//  prcferrccVl  Are  we  (in  other 
words)  seriously  invited  to  admit  that  the  'strong  peefe- 
EENCE '  of  '  the  individual  mind '  is  to  be°  the  ultimate 
standard  of  appeal  ?  If  so,  tliough  you  (Dr.  Hort)  may 
'  have  no  douht '  as  to  which  is  the  purer  manuscript, — see 
you  not  plainly  that  a  man  of  different  '  idiosyncrasy '  from 
yourself,  may  just  as  reasonably  claim  to  'have  no  doubt' 
— that  you  arc  mistaken  ?  .  .  .  One  is  reminded  of  a  passage 
in  p.  61 :  viz. — 

'  If  we  find  in  any  group  of  documents  a  succession  of 
Headings  exhibiting  an  exceptional  purity  of  text,  tliat  i^, — 
Headings  which  the  fullest  consideration  of  Internal  Evidence 
pronounces  to  he  right,  in  opposition  to  formidable  arrays  of 
Documentary  Evidence;  the  cause  must  be  that,  as  far  at  least  as 
these  Keadings  aie  concerned,  some  one  exceptionally  pure  MS. 
was  the  common  ancestor  of  all  the  members  of  the  grouji.' 

But  how  does  that  appear  ?  '  The  cause  '  7nay  be  the  erro- 
neous judgment  of  the  Critic, — may  it  not  ?  .  .  .  Dr.  Hort  is 
for  setting  up  what  his  own  inner  consciousness  '  pronounces 
to  be  right,'  against  '  Documentary  Evidence,'  however  mul- 
titudinous. He  claims  that  his  own  verifying  faculty  sliall  be 
supreme, — shall  settle  every  question.    Can  he  be  in  earnest  ? 

YII.  We  are  next  introduced  to  the  subject  of  '  Genea- 
logical Evidence '  (p.  39) ;  and  are  made  attentive :  for  we 
speedily  find  ourselves  challenged  to  admit  that  a  'total 
change  in  the  bearing  of  the  evidence '  is  '  made  by  tlie  intro- 
duction of  the  factor  of  Genealogy'  (p.  43).  Presuming 
that  the  meaning  of  the  learned  Writer  must  rather  be  that 
if  we  did  hut  know  the  genealogy  of  MSS.,  we  should  be  in  a 
position  to  reason  more  confidently  concerning  their  Texts, — 


254  DR.    IIORT   AND   TIIK   'METHOD  [Art. 

we  read  on :  and  speedily  come  to  a  second  axiom  (which  is 
again  printed  in  capital  letters),  viz.  that  '  All  trustworthy 
restoration  of  corrupted  Texts  is  founded  on  the  study  of 
their  History '  (p.  40).  We  really  read  and  wonder.  Are 
we  then  engaged  in  the  '  restoration  of  corrupted  Texts '  ?  If 
so, — which  be  they?  We  require — (1)  To  be  shown  the 
'  corrupted  Texts'  referred  to  :  and  then — (2)  To  be  con\inced 
that  'the  study  of  their  Historij' — (as  distinguished  from  an 
examination  of  the  evidence  for  or  against  tluur  Bcadings) — 
is  a  thing  feasible. 

'  A  simple  instance '  (says  Dr.  Hort)  '  will  show  at  once  the 
practical  bearing  '  of  '  the  principle  here  laid  down.'— (p.  40.) 

But  (as  usual)  Dr.  Hort  produces  no  instance.  He  merely 
proceeds  to  'supi)ose'  a  case  (§  50),  which  he  confesses  (§  53) 
does  not  exist.  So  that  we  are  moving  in  a  land  of  shadows. 
And  this,  he  straightway  follows  up  by  the  assertion  that 

'  it  would  be  difficult  to  insist  too  strongly  on  the  transforma- 
tion of  the  superficial  aspects  of  numerical  authority  efiected  by 
recognition  of  Genealogy.' — (p.  4:3.) 

Presently,  he  assures  us  that 

'  a  few  documents  are  not,  by  reason  of  their  mere  paucity, 
appreciably  less  likely  to  be  right  than  a  multitude  opposed  to 
them.'  (p.  45.) 

On  this  liead,  we  take  leave  to  entertain  a  somewhat 
different  opinion.  Apart  from  the  character  of  the  Witnesses, 
when  5  men  say  one  thing,  and  995  say  the  exact  contra- 
dictory, we  are  apt  to  regard  it  even  as  axiomatic  that,  '  by 
reason  of  their  mere  paucity,'  the  few  'are  appreciably  far 
less  likely  to  be  right  than  the  multitude  opposed  to  them.' 
Dr.  Hort  seems  to  share  our  opinion ;  for  he  renuirks, — 

'  A  presumption  indeed  remains  that  a  majority  of  extant 
documents  is  more  likely  to  represent  a  majority  of  ancestral 
(lucunienls,  than  vice  verm.'' 


III.]  OF  GENEALOGY:— GOmGlE.S   B   AND   N.  255 

Exactly  so !  We  meant,  and  we  mean  that,  and  no  other 
tiling.  But  then,  we  venture  to  point  out,  that  the  learned 
Professor  considerably  understates  the  case :  seeing  that  the 
'  vice  versa  presumption  '  is  absolutely  non-existent.  On  the 
other  hand,  apart  from  Proof  to  the  contrary,  we  are  disposed 
to  maintain  that  '  a  majority  of  extant  documents '  in  the 
proportion  of  995  to  5, — and  sometimes  of  1999  to  1, — 
creates  more  than  '  a  presumption.'  It  amounts  to  Proof  of  '  a 
majority  of  ancestral  documents' 

Not  so  thinks  Dr.  Hort.  '  This  presumption,'  (he  seems  to 
have  persuaded  himself,)  may  be  disposed  of  by  his  mere 
assertion  that  it  '  is  too  minute  to  weigh  against  the  smallest 
tangible  evidence  of  other  kinds '  (Ibid.).  As  usual,  how- 
ever, he  furnishes  us  with  no  evidence  at  all, — '  tangil)le  '  or 
'  intangible.'  Can  he  w^onder  if  we  smile  at  his  unsupported 
dictum,  and  pass  on  ?  .  .  .  The  argumentative  import  of  his 
twenty  weary  pages  on  'Genealogical  Evidence'  (pp.  39-59), 
appears  to  be  resolvable  into  the  following  barren  truism  : 
viz.  That  if,  out  of  10  copies  of  Scripture,  9  could  he  proved 
to  have  been  executed  from  one  and  the  same  common 
original  (p.  41),  those  9  would  cease  to  be  regarded  as  9 
independent  witnesses.  But  does  the  learned  Critic  really 
require  to  be  told  that  we  want  no  diagram  of  an  imaginary 
case  (p.  54)  to  convince  us  of  that  ? 

The  one  thing  here  which  moves  our  astonishment,  is,  that 
Dr.  Hort  does  not  seem  to  reflect  that  therefore  (indeed  hy 
his  own  shoiving)  codices  b  and  N,  having  been  demonstrably 
"  executed  from  one  and  the  same  common  original,"  are  not 
to  be  reckoned  as  two  independent  witnesses  to  the  Text  of 
the  New  Testament,  but  as  little  more  than  one.  (See  p.  257.) 

High  time  however  is  it  to  declare  that,  in  strictness, 
all  this  talk  about  '  Genealogical  evidence,'  when  applied  to 


256  '  THE   FACTOR   OF   GENEALO(iY.'  [Art. 

Manuscripts,  is — 'moonshine.  The  expression  is  metaphorical, 
and  assumes  that  it  has  fared  with  MSS.  as  it  fares  with  the 
successive  generations  of  a  family  ;  and  so,  to  a  remarkable 
extent,  no  doubt,  it  has.  But  then,  it  happens,  unfortunately, 
that  we  are  unacquainted  with  one  simjle  instance  of  a  known 
MS.  copied  from  another  known  MS.  And  perforce  all  talk 
about  '  Genealogical  evidence,'  where  no  single  step  in  the 
descent  can  be  produced, — in  other  words,  where  no  Gencalo- 
fjical  evidence  exists,— is  absurd.  The  living  inhabitants 
of  a  village,  congregated  in  the  churchyard  where  the 
bodies  of  their  forgotten  progenitors  for  1000  years  repose 
without  memorials  of  any  kind, — is  a  faint  image  of  the 
relation  which  subsists  between  extant  copies  of  the  Gospels 
and  the  sources  from  which  they  were  derived.  That,  in 
either  case,  there  has  been  repeated  mixture,  is  undeniable  ; 
l)ut  since  the  Parish-register  is  lost,  and  not  a  vestige  of 
Tradition  survives,  it  is  idle  to  pretend  to  argue  on  that  part 
of  the  subject.  It  may  be  reasonably  assumed  however 
that  those  50  yeomen,  bearing  as  many  Saxon  surnames, 
indicate  as  many  remote  ancestors  of  some  sort.  That  they 
re})resent  as  many  families,  is  at  least  a  fact.  Further  we 
cannot  go. 

But  the  illustration  is  misleading,  because  inadequate. 
Assemble  rather  an  Englishman,  an  Irishman,  a  Scot;  a 
Frenchman,  a  German,  a  Spaniard ;  a  liussian,  a  Pole,  an 
Hungarian ;  an  Italian,  a  Greek,  a  Turk.  From  Noah  these 
12  are  all  confessedly  descended;  lait  if  tlnji  are  silent,  and 
you  know  nothing  whatever  about  their  antecedents, — your 
remarks  about  their  respective  '  genealogies '  must  needs 
prove  as  barren — as  Dr.  Hort's  about  the  '  genealogies '  of 
copies  of  Scripture.  '  The  factor  of  Gcncalotpj'  in  .short,  in 
this  discussion,  represents  a  mere  phantom  of  the  brain  :  is 
the  name  of  an  imaoination — not  of  a  fact. 


III.]  RESULTS  OF  'GENEALOGY:  257 

The  nearest  approximation  to  the  phenomenon  about  which 
Dr.  Hort  writes  so  glibly,  is  supplied — (1)  by  Codd.  F  and  G 
of  S.  Paul,  which  are  found  to  be  independent  transcripts  of 
the  same  venerable  lost  original : — (2)  by  Codd.  13,  69,  124 
and  346,  which  were  confessedly  derived  from  one  and  the 
same  queer  archetype  :  and  especially — (3)  by  Codd.  B  and  n. 
These  two  famous  manuscripts,  because  they  are  disfigured 
exclusively  by  the  self-same  mistakes,  are  convicted  of  being 
descended  (and  not  very  remotely)  from  the  self-same  very 
corrupt  original.  By  consequence,  the  combined  evidence 
of  F  and  G  is  but  that  of  a  single  codex.  Evan.  13,  69,  124, 
346,  when  they  agree,  would  be  conveniently  designated  by 
a  symbol,  or  a  single  capital  letter.  Codd.  B  and  N,  as  already 
hinted  (p.  255),  are  not  to  be  reckoned  as  two  witnesses. 
Certainly,  they  have  not  nearly  the  Textual  significancy  and 
importance  of  B  in  conjunction  with  A,  or  of  A  in  conjunction 
with  c.  At  best,  they  do  but  equal  1^  copies.  Nothing  of 
this  kind  however  is  what  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  intend 
to  convey, — or  indeed  seem  to  understand. 

VIII.  It  is  not  until  we  reach  p.  94,  that  these  learned  men 
favour  us  with  a  single  actual  appeal  to  Scripture.  At  p.  90, 
Dr.  Hort, — who  has  hitherto  been  skirmishing  over  the 
ground,  and  leaving  us  to  wonder  what  in  the  world  it  can 
be  that  he  is  driving  at, — announces  a  chapter  on  the 
'  Eesults  of  Genealogical  evidence  proper ; '  and  proposes  to 
'  determine  the  Genealogical  relations  of  the  chief  ancient 
Texts.'  Impatient  for  argument,  (at  page  92,)  we  read  as 
follow^s : — 

'  The  fundamental  Text  of  late  extant  Greek  MSS.  generally 
is  beyond  all  question  identical  with  the  dominant  Antiochian 
or  Gr^eco-Syrian  Text  of  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century.'' 

We  request,  in  passing,  that  the  foregoing  statement  may 
be  carefully  noted.     The  Traditional  Greek  Text  of  the  New 

s 


258  DATE   OF   THE   '  TEXTUS   BECEPTUS:  [Art. 

Testament, — the  Textus  Receptus,  in  short, — is,  according  to 
Dr.  Hort,  '  beyond  all  question  '  the  '  Text  of  the  second 
HALF  OF  the  FOURTH  CENTURY.'  We  shall  gratefully  avail 
ourselves  of  his  candid  admission,  by  and  by. 

Having  thus  assumed  a  '  dominant  Antiochian  or  Grteco- 
Syrian  text  of  the  second  half  of  the  IVtli  century,'  Dr.  H. 
attempts,  by  an  analysis  of  what  he  is  pleased  to  call  '  co7i- 
flate  Readings,'  to  prove  the  '  posteriority  of  "  Syrian "  to 
"  Western "  and  other  "  Neutral "  readings.'  .  .  .  Strange 
method  of  procedure !  seeing  that,  of  those  second  and  third 
classes  of  readings,  we  have  not  as  yet  so  much  as  heard 
the  names.  Let  us  however  without  more  delay  be  shown 
those  specimens  of  '  Conflation '  which,  in  Dr.  Hort's  judg- 
ment, supply  '  the  clearest  evidence '  (p.  94)  that  '  Syrian ' 
are  posterior  alike  to  '  Western '  and  to  '  Neutral  readings.' 
Of  these,  after  30  years  of  laborious  research.  Dr.  Westcott 
and  he  flatter  themselves  that  they  have  succeeded  in  de- 
tecting eight. 

IX.  Now  because,  on  the  one  hand,  it  would  be  unreason- 
able to  fill  up  the  space  at  our  disposal  with  details  which 
none  but  professed  students  will  care  to  read ; — and  because, 
on  the  other,  we  cannot  afford  to  pass  by  anything  in  these 
pages  which  pretends  to  be  of  the  nature  of  proof ; — we  have 
consigned  our  account  of  Dr.  Hort's  8  instances  of  Confla- 
tion (which  prove  to  be  less  than  7)  to  the  foot  of  the  page.^ 


'  They  are  as  follows : — 

[1st]  S.  Mark  (vi.  33)  relates  that  on  a  certain  occasion  the  multitude, 
when  they  beheld  our  Saviour  and  His  Disciples  departing  in  order  to 
cross  over  unto  the  other  side  of  the  lake,  ran  on  foot  thither, — (a)  '  and 
outwent  them — (/3)  and  came  together  unto  Ilim '  (i.e.  on  His  stepping  out 
of  the  boat :  not,  as  Dr.  Hort  strangely  imagines  [p.  99],  on  His  emerging 
from  the  scene  of  His  '  retirement '  in  '  some  sequestered  nook '). 

Now  here,  a  substitutes  a-webpayiov  [sic]  for  (rvvi)\6ov. — ^^  B  with  the 
Coptic  and  the  Vujg.  omit  clause  (/3). — d  omits  clause  (a),  but  substitutes 
'  there '   {avrov)   for    '  unto   Him '   in   clause   (3),— exhibits   therefore  a 


III.]  EIGHT   SPECIMENS  OF   'CONFLATION:  259 

And,  after  an  attentive  survey  of  the  Textual  phenomena 
connected  with   these    7  specimens,  we   are  constrained  to 


fabricated  text. — The  Syriac  condenses  tlie  two  clauses  thus  : — '  got  there 
hefore  Him: — l.  A,  69,  and  4  or  5  of  the  old  Latin  copies,  read  diversely 
from  all  the  rest  and  from  one  another.  The  preseat  is,  in  fact,  one  of 
those  many  places  in  S.  Mark's  Gospel  where  all  is  contradiction  in  those 
depraved  witnesses  which  Lachmann  made  it  his  business  to  bring  into 
fashion.  Of  Confusiun  there  is  plenty.  'Conflation' — as  the  Reader 
sees — there  is  none. 

[2nd]  In  S.  Mark  viii.  26,  our  Saviour  (after  restoring  sight  to  the 
blind  man  of  Bethsaida)  is  related  to  have  said,— (u)  '  Neither  enter  into  the 
village ' — (/3)  '  nor  tell  it  to  any  one — (y)  in  the  village.'  (And  let  it  be 
noted  that  the  trustworthiness  of  this  way  of  exhibiting  the  text  is 
vouched  for  by  A  c  n  A  and  12  other  uncials  :  by  the  whole  body  of  the 
cursives :  by  the  Peschito  and  Harklensian,  the  Gothic,  Armenian,  and 
.iEthiopic  Versions  :  and  by  the  only  Father  who  quotes  the  place — Victor 
of  Antioch.*) 

But  it  is  found  that  the  '  two  Mse  witnesses '  (x  b)  omit  clauses  (i3)  and 
(y),  retaining  only  clause  (a).  One  of  these  two  however  (n),  aware  that 
under  such  circumstances  fir}bi  is  intolerable,!  substitutes  /aij.  As  for  d 
and  the  Vulg.,  they  substitute  and  parajjhrase,  importing  from  Matt.  ix.  6 
(or  Mk.  ii.  11),  '  Dejxirt  unto  thine  house:  D  proceeds,— '  a?ic?  tell  it  to 
no  one  [/xT/Sei/t  eiVj/s,  from  Matth.  viii.  4,]  in  the  village:  Six  copies  of 
the  old  Latin  (b  f  ff"^  g'^"^  1),  with  the  Vulgate,  exhibit  the  following 
paraphrase  of  the  entire  place: — '■Depart  unto  thine  house,  and  if  thou 
enterest  into  the  village,  tell  it  to  no  one:  The  same  reading  exactly 
is  found  in  Evan.  13-69-346 :  28,  61,  473,  and  i,  (except  that  28,  61, 
346  exhibit  '  say  nothing  [from  Mk.  i.  44]  to  no  one:)  All  six  however 
add  at  the  end, — '  not  even  in  the  village:  Evan.  124  and  a  stand  alone  in 
exhibiting, — -'  Depart  unto  thine  house  ;  and  enter  not  into  the  village  ; 
neither  tell  it  to  any  one,'' — to  which  124  [not  a]  adds, — '  in  the 
village:  .  .  .  Why  all  this  contradiction  and  confusion  is  now  to  be 
called  '  Conflation,' — and  what  '  clear  evidence '  is  to  be  elicited  therefrom 
that  '  Syrian  '  are  posterior  alike  to  '  Western '  and  to  '  neutral '  readings, — 
passes  our  powers  of  comprehension. 

We  shall  be  content  to  hasten  forward  when  we  have  further  informed 
our  Readers  that  while  Lachmann  and  Tregelles  abide  by  the  Received 
Text  in  this  place ;  Tischendorf,  alone  of  Editors,  adopts  the  reading  of 
K  (fiT]  «ts  Trjv  Kcofirjv  ei(T€X6r]s) :  while  Westcott  and  Hort,  alone  of  Editors, 

*  Cramer's  Cat.  p.  345,  lines  3  and  8. 

f  Dr.  Hort,  on  the  contrary,  (only  because  he  finds  it  in  b,)  considers  larjSe  'simple  and 
vigorous '  as  well  as  '  unique  *  and  '  peculiar '  (p.  100). 

s  2 


260  WESTCOTT   AND  HOET'S   EIGHT  [Aut. 

assert  that  the  interpretation  put  upon  them  by  Drs.  West- 
cott  and  Hort,  is  purely  arbitrary  :  a  baseless  imagination, — 


adopt  the  reading  of  b  (/x»;8e  fis  rqv  KcofiTjv  (laeXdrjs), — so  ending  the 
sentence.  What  else  however  hut  calamitous  is  it  to  find  that  Westcott 
and  Hort  have  persuaded  their  fellow  Eevisers  to  adopt  the  same  mutilated 
exhibition  of  the  Sacred  Text?  The  consequence  is,  that  henceforth, — 
instead  of  '  Neither  go  into  the  toiun,  nor  tell  it  to  any  in  the  toivn^ — 
we  are  invited  to  read,  '  Do  not  even  enter  into  the  village.^ 

[.'?rd]  In  S.  Mk.  ix.  38, — S.  John,  speaking  of  one  who  cast  out  devils  in 
C'ikist's  Name,  says — (a)  *■  luho  followeth  not  us,  and  we  forbad  him — O) 
because  he  followeth  not  ?<s.' 

Here,  K  b  c  l  A  the  Syriac,  Coptic,  and  JlIthioj)ic,  omit  clause  (a),  retain- 
ing (j3).  D  with  the  old  Latin  and  the  Vulg.  omit  clause  O),  but  retain 
(a). — -Both  clauses  are  found  in  an  with  11  other  uncials  and  the  whole 
body  of  the  cursives,  besides  the  Gothic,  and  the  only  Father  who  quotes 
the  place, — Basil  [ii.  252]. — Whj^  should  the  pretence  be  set  up  that  there 
has  been  '  Conflation '  here  ?  Two  Omissions  do  not  make  one  Conflation. 
[4th]  In  Mk.  ix.  49, — our  Saviour  says, — '  For  (a)  every  one  shall  be 
salted  with  fire — and  O)  every  sacrifice  shall  he  salted  with  salt.^ 

Here,  clause  (a)  is  omitted  by  D  and  a  few  copies  of  the  old  Latin  ; 
clause  (/3)  by  k  B  l  A. 

But  such  an  ordinary  circumstance  as  the  omission  of  half-a-dozen 
words  by  Cod.  d  is  so  nearly  without  textual  significancy,  as  scarcely  to 
merit  commemoration.  And  do  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  really  propose 
to  build  their  huge  and  unwieldy  hypothesis  on  so  flimsy  a  circumstance 
as  the  concurrence  in  error  of  S  B  L  A, — especially  in  S.  Mark's  Gospel, 
which  those  codices  exhibit  more  unfaithfully  than  any  other  codices  that 
can  be  named  ?  Against  them,  are  to  be  set  on  the  present  occasion  a  c  d  n 
with  12  other  uncials  and  the  whole  body  of  the  cursives :  the  Ital.  and 
Vulgate ;  both  Syriac ;  the  Coptic,  Gothic,  Armenian,  and  iEthiopic 
Versions;  besides  the  only  Father  who  quotes  the  place, — Victor  of 
Antioch.     [Also  '  Anon.'  p.  206 :  and  see  Cramer's  Cat.  p.  3G8.] 

[nth]  S.  Luke  (ix.  10)  relates  how,  on  a  certain  occasion,  our  Saviour 
'  vnthdrew  to  a  desert  2^lace  belonging  to  the  city  called  Jiethsaida  :'  which 
S.  Luke  expresses  in  six  words :  viz.  [1]  els  [2]  tuttov  [3]  fj)rifj.ov  [  I]  TrdXfcos 
[5]  KuKovix€vr]s  [G]  BrjOa-aibii :  of  which  six  words, — 
(«) — N  and  Syr°"  retain  but  three, — 1,  2,  3. 
(b) — The  Peschito  retains  but  four, — 1,  2,  3,  6. 
(c) — B  L  X  S  D  and  the  2  Egyptian  versions  retain  other  four, — 1,  4, 
5,  G :  but  for  TroXewy  KciXovfiti/rji  u  exhibits  kw^tjv  Xfyofxevrjv. 
((Z) — Tlie  old  Latin  aud  Vulg.  retain  flvc,^ — 1,  2,  3,  5,  (! :  but  for 
'  qui  (or  quod)  vocuhatur,'  the  Vulg.  b  aud  c  exhibit  '  (/tii  (or 
quod)  est.' 


III.]  SPECIMENS  OF  'CONFLATION,'   EXAMINED.  261 

a  dream  and  nothing  more.     Something  has  been  attempted 
analogous  to  the  familiar  fallacy,  in  Divinity,  of  building  a 


(e) — 3  cursives  retain  other  five,  viz.  1,  2,  4,  5,  6 :  while, 
(/)— A  c  A  E,  with  9  more  uncials  and  the  great  bulk  of  the  cursives, 
— the    Harklensian,    Gothic,     Armenian,    and     ^Ethiopic 
Versions,- — retain  all  the  six  words. 

In  view  of  which  facts,  it  probably  never  occurred  to  any  one  before  to 
suggest  that  the  best  attested  reading  of  all  is  the  result  of  '  conflation,' 
i.e.  of  spurious  mixture.  Note,  that  N  and  d  have,  this  time,  changed 
sides. 

[6th]  S.  Luke  (xi.  54)  speaks  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  as  (a)  '  lying 
in  wait  for  Him,^  (/3)  seeking  (y)  to  catch  something  out  of  Bis  mouth  (S) 
that  they  might  accuse  Hirii.^  This  is  the  reading  of  14  uncials  headed  by 
A  c,  and  of  the  whole  body  of  the  cursives :  the  reading  of  the  Vulgate  also 
and  of  the  Syriac.     What  is  to  be  said  against  it  ? 

It  is  found  that  X  b  l  with  the  Coptic  and  JEthiopic  Versions  omit 
clauses  (^)  and  (S),  but  retain  clauses  (a)  and  (y). — Cod.  d,  in  conjunction 
with  Cureton's  Syriac  and  the  old  Latin,  retains  clause  (^3),  audi  paraphrases 
all  the  rest  of  the  sentence.  How  then  can  it  be  pretended  that  there  has 
been  any  *  Conflation  '  here? 

In  the  meantime,  how  unreasonable  is  the  excision  from  the  Revised  Text 
of  clauses  O)  and  (S) — {^r)TovvT€s  .  .  .  Iva  Karriyoprjacoaiv  avTov) — which  are 
attested  by  a  c  d  and  12  other  uncials,  together  with  the  wliole  body  of 
the  cursives ;  by  all  the  Syriac  and  by  all  the  Latin  copies !  .  .  .  Are  we 
then  to  understand  that  N  b,  and  the  Coptic  Version,  outweigh  every  other 
authority  which  can  be  named  ? 

[7th]  The  '  rich  fool '  in  the  parable  (S.  Lu.  xii.  18),  speaks  of  (a)  irdfTa 
TCI  yfvT]fj.aTd  fiov,  Koi  (/3)  ra  dyadci  fiov.  (So  A  Q  and  13  other  uncials, 
besides  the  whole  body  of  the  cursives ;  the  Vulgate,  Basil,  and  Cyril.) 

But  N  D  (with  the  old  Latin  and  Cureton's  Syriac  [which  however  drops 
the  ncivTci]),  retaining  clause  (a),  omit  clause  (j3). — On  the  other  hand,  b  t, 
(with  the  Egyptian  Versions,  the  Syriac,  the  Armenian,  and  .ffithiopic,) 
retaining  clause  (/3),  substitute  t6v  a'lrov  (a  gloss)  for  rd  yevf^ixara  in  clause 
(a).  Lachmann,  Tisch.,  and  Alford,  accordingly  retain  the  traditional 
text  in  this  place.  So  does  Tregelles,  and  so  do  Westcott  and  Hort, — 
only  substituting  tov  ctItov  for  rd  yevfjfiara.  Confessedly  therefore  there 
has  been  no  '  Syrian  conflation '  /tere :  for  all  that  has  happened  has  been 
the  substitution  by  B  of  tov  o-Itov  for  tA  yevfjixuTa ;  and  the  omission  of  4 
words  by  X  d.  This  instance  must  therefore  have  been  an  oversight. — 
Only  once  more. 

[8th]  S.  Luke's  Gospel  ends  (xxiv.  53)  with  the  record  that  the  Apostles 
were  continually  in  the  Temple,  *  (a)  praising  and  (/3)  blessing  Gob.''     Such. 


262  THE   HYPOTHESIS  OF  'CONFLATION'  [Art. 

false  and  hitherto  unheard-of  doctrine  on  a  few  isolated 
places  of  Scripture,  divorced  from  their  context.  The  actual 
facts  of  the  case  shall  be  submitted  to  the  judgment  of 
learned  and  unlearned  Readers  alike :  and  we  promise 
beforehand  to  abide  by  the  unprejudiced  verdict  of  either : — 

(a)  S.  Mark's  Gospel  is  found  to  contain  in  all  11,646 
words :  of  which  (collated  with  the  Traditional  Text)  a  omits 
138  :  B,  762  :  n,  870 :  D,  900.— S.  Luke  contains  19,941 
words :  of  which  A  omits  208  :  B,  757 ;  n,  816  :  D,  no  less 
than  1552.  (Let  us  not  be  told  that  the  traditional  Text  is 
itself  not  altogether  trustworthy.  That  is  a  matter  entirely 
beside  the  question  just  now  before  the  Eeader, — as  we  have 
already,  over  and  again,  had  occasion  to  explain.''  Codices 
must  needs  all  alike  be  compared  tvith  something, — must  per- 
force all  alike  be  referred  to  some  one  common  standard :  and 
we,  for  our  part,  are  content  to  employ  (as  every  Critic  has 
been  content  Ijefore  us)  the  traditional  Text,  as  the  most  con- 
venient standard  that  can  be  named.  So  employed,  (viz.  as 
a  standard  of  comparison,  not  of  excellence,)  the  commonly 
Eeceived  Text,  more  conveniently  than  any  other,  reveals 
—  certainly  does  not  occasion  —  different  degrees  of  dis- 
crepancy.    And  now,  to  proceed.) 

is  the  reading  of  13  uncials  headed  by  a  and  every  known  cursive  :  a  few 
copies  of  the  old  Lat.,  the  Vulg.,  Syriac,  Pliilox.,  .(Ethiopic,  and  Armenian 
Versions.  But  it  is  found  that  S  13  c  omit  clause  (a)  :  while  d  and  seven 
copies  of  the  old  Latin  omit  clause  O). 

And  this  completes  the  evidence  for  '  Conflation.'  We  have  displayed 
it  thus  minutely,  lest  we  should  be  suspected  of  unfairness  towards  the 
esteemed  writers  on  the  only  occasion  on  which  they  have  attempted  argu- 
mentative proof.  Their  theory  has  at  last  forctd  them  to  make  an  apjieal 
to  Scripture,  and  to  produce  some  actual  specimens  of  their  meaning. 
After  ransacking  the  Gospels  for  30  years,  they  have  at  last  fastened  upon 
ei'iht :  uf  which  (as  we  have  seen),  several  have  really  no  business  to  be 
cited, — as  not  fulfilling  the  necessary  conditions  of  the  jjrobleni.  To 
prevent  cavil  however,  let  all  but  one,  the  [7th],  pass  unchallenged. 

*  Tlie  lieader  is  referred  to  pp.  17,  75,  '24'J. 


III.]  FOUND  TO  BE  VISIONARY.  263 

(h)  Dr.  Hort  has  detected  foitr  instances  in  S.  Mark's 
Gospel,  only  three  in  S.  Luke's — seven  in  all — where  Codices 
B  fc  and  D  happen  to  concur  in  making  an  omission  at  the 
same  place,  but  not  of  the  same  words.  We  shall  probably 
be  best  understood  if  we  produce  an  instance  of  the  thing 
spoken  of:  and  no  fairer  example  can  be  imagined  than  tlie 
last  of  the  eight,  of  which  Dr.  Hort  says, — '  Tliis  simple  instance 
needs  no  explanation '  (p.  104).  Instead  of  alvovvTe<;  kuI 
eiiXoyovvTe'i, — (which  is  the  reading  of  every  known  copy  of 
the  Gospels  except  Jive,) — n  b  c  l  exliibit  only  evXoyovvTe<; : 
D,  only  alvovvre<i.  (To  speak  quite  accurately,  «  B  c  L  omit 
alvovvTe<i  Kai  and  are  followed  by  Westcott  and  Hort :  D 
omits  KoX  evXayovvre';,  and  is  followed  by  Tischendorf. 
Lachmann  declines  to  follow  either.     Tregelles  doubts.) 

(c)  Now,  upon  tliis  (and  the  six  other  instances,  which 
however  prove  to  be  a  vast  deal  less  apt  for  their  purpose 
than  the  present),  these  learned  men  have  gratuitously  built 
up  the  followmg  extravagant  and  astonishing  theory : — 

(d)  They  assume, — (they  do  not  attempt  to  prove :  in  fact 
they  never  prove  anything:) — (1)  That  alvovvT€<i  Kai — and 
Kal  €v\oyovvTe<i — are  respectively  fragments  of  two  inde- 
pendent Primitive  Texts,  which  they  arbitrarily  designate  as 
'  Western '  and  '  Neutral,'  respectively : — (2)  That  the  latter 
of  the  two,  [only  however  because  it  is  vouched  for  by  b 
and  N,]  must  needs  exhibit  what  the  Evangelist  actually 
wrote :  [though  why  it  must,  these  learned  men  forget  to 
explain :] — (3)  That  in  the  middle  of  the  Ilird  and  of  the 
IVth  century  the  two  Texts  referred  to  were  with  design 
and  by  authority  welded  together,  and  became  (what  the 
same  irresponsible  Critics  are  pleased  to  call)  the  '  Syrian 
text.' — (4)  That  alvovvTe<i  Kal  €v\oyovvTe<i,  being  thus  shown  [?] 
to  be  '  a  Syrian  Conflation,'  may  be  rejected  at  once.  {Notes, 
p.  73.) 


264  THE  THEORY  OF  'CONFLATION'  [Art. 

X.  But  we  demur  to  this  weak  imagination,  (which  only 
by  courtesy  can  be  called  '  a  Theory,')  on  every  ground,  and 
are  constrained  to  remonstrate  with  our  would-be  Guides  at 
every  step.  They  assume  everything.  They  prove  nothing. 
And  the  facts  of  the  case  lend  them  no  favour  at  all. 
For  first, — "We  only  find  ev\oyovvT€<;  standing  alone,  in  two 
documents  of  the  IVth  century,  in  two  of  the  Vth,  and  in 
one  of  the  Vlllth :  while,  for  alvovvTe<i  standing  alone,  the 
only  Greek  voucher  producible  is  a  notoriously  corrupt  copy 
of  the  Vlth  century.  True,  that  here  a  few  copies  of  the 
old  Latin  side  with  d  :  but  then  a  few  copies  also  side  with 
the  traditional  Text :  and  Jerome  is  found  to  have  adjudi- 
cated between  their  rival  claims  in  favour  of  the  latter.  Tlie 
probabilities  of  the  case  are  in  fact  simply  overwhelming ; 
for,  since  D  omits  1552  words  out  of  19,941  (i.e.  about  one 
word  in  13),  why  may  not  koI  €v\oyovvT€<;  he  two  of  the  ivords 
it  omits, — in  which  case  there  has  been  no  '  Conflation  '  ? 

Nay,  look  into  the  matter  a  little  more  closely : — (for  surely, 
before  we  put  up  with  this  queer  illusion,  it  is  our  duty  to 
look  it  very  steadily  in  the  face:) — and  note,  that  in  this 
last  chapter  of  S.  Luke's  Gospel,  which  consists  of  837 
words,  no  less  than  121  are  omitted  by  cod.  D.  To  state  the 
case  differently, — d  is  observed  to  leave  out  one  loord  in  seven 
in  the  very  chapter  of  S.  Luke  which  supplies  the  instance  of 
'  Conflation  '  under  review.  Wliat  possible  significance  there- 
fore can  be  supposed  to  attach  to  its  omission  of  the  clause 
KoX  €v\oyovvr6<i  ?  And  since,  mutatis  mutandis,  the  same  re- 
marks apply  to  the  6  remaining  cases,— (for  one,  viz.  the  [7th], 
is  clearly  an  oversight,)— will  any  Eeader  of  onlinary  fairness 
and  intelligence  be  surprised  to  hear  that  we  reject  the 
assumed  'Conflation'  uuconditioiially,  as  a  silly  dream? 
It  is  founded  entirely  upon  the  omission  of  21  (or  at  most 
42)  words  out  of  a  total  of  31,587  from  Codd.  j;  n  i'.     And 


III.]  SHOWN  TO  BE  BASELESS.  265 

yet  it  is  demonstrable  that  out  of  that  total,  B  omits  1519  : 
N,  1686 :  D,  2452.  The  occasional  coincidence  in  Omission  of 
B  +  K  and  D,  was  in  a  manner  inevitable,  and  is  undeserving 
of  notice.  If, — (which  is  as  likely  as  not,) — on  six  occasions, 
B  4-  N  and  D  have  but  omitted  dijferent  luords  in  the  same 
sentence,  then  there  has  been  no  '  Confiation  ;  '  and  the  (so-called) 
'  Theory,'  which  was  to  have  revolutionized  the  Text  of  the 
N.  T.,  is  discovered  to  rest  absolutely  upon  nothing.  It 
bursts,  like  a  very  thin  bubble :  floats  away  like  a  film  of 
gossamer,  and  disappears  from  sight.  ^ 

But  further,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  at  least  five  out  of  the 
eight  instances  cited, — viz.  the  [1st],  [2nd],  [5th],  [6th],  [7th], 
— -fail  to  exhibit  the  alleged  phenomena :  conspicuously  ought 
never  to  have  been  adduced.  For,  in  the  [1st],  D  merely 
abridges  the  sentence:  in  the  [2nd],  it  paraphrases  11  words 
by  11 ;  and  in  the  [6th],  \t  p)araphrascs  12  words  by  9.  In  the 
[5th],  B  D  merely  abridge.  The  utmost  residuum  of  fact  which 
survives,  is  therefore  as  follows : — 

[3rd].  In  a  sentence  of  11  words,  B  n  omit  4 :  D  other  4. 
[4th].         „  „  9  words,  B  n  omit  5  :  D  other  5. 

[8th].         „  „  5  words,  B  x  omit  2  :  D  other  2. 

But  if  this  be  '  the  clearest  Evidence '  (p.  94)  producible 
for  '  the  Theory  of  Conflation,' — then,  the  less  said  about  the 
'  Theory,'  the  better  for  the  credit  of  its  distinguished  Inven- 
tors. How  any  rational  Textual  Theory  is  to  be  constructed 
out  of  the  foregoing  Omissions,  we  fail  to  divine.  But  indeed 
the  whole  matter  is  demonstrably  a  weak  imagination, — a 
dream,  and  nothing  more. 

XI.  In  the  meantime,  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort,  instead  of 
realizing  the  insecurity  of  the  ground  under  their  feet,  pro- 
ceed gravely  to  build  upon  it,  and  to  treat  their  hypothetical 


266  ASTONISHING   METHOD   OF  [Art. 

assumptions  as  well-ascertained  facts.  They  imagine  that  they 
have  already  l^een  led  by  '  independent  Evidence '  to  regard 
'  tlie  longer  readings  as  conflate  each  from  the  two  earlier 
readings  : ' — whereas,  up  to  p.  105  (where  the  statement 
occurs),  they  have  really  failed  to  produce  a  single  particle 
of  evidence,  direct  or  indirect,  for  their  opinion.  '  We  have 
found  reason  to  believe '  the  Headings  of  n  b  l,  (say  they,) 
'  to  be  the  original  Eeadings.' — But  why,  if  this  is  the  case, 
have  they  kept  their  '  finding  '  so  entirely  to  themselves  ? — 
No  reason  whatever  have  they  assigned  for  their  belief.  The 
Eeader  is  presently  assured  (p.  106)  that  'it  is  certain'  that 
the  Eeadings  exhibited  by  the  traditional  Text  in  the  eight 
supposed  cases  of  '  Conflation '  are  all  posterior  in  date  to 
the  fragmentary  readings  exliibited  by  b  and  D.  But,  once 
more.  What  is  the  ground  of  this  '  certainty '  ? — Presently  (viz. 
in  p.  107),  the  Eeader  meets  with  the  further  assurance  that 

'  the  proved  actual  use  of  [shorter]  documents  in  the  conflate 
Readings  renders  their  use  elsewhere  a  vera  causa  in  the  New- 
tonian sense.' 

But,  once  more, —  Where  and  lohat  is  the  *  proof '  referred 
to  ?  May  a  plain  man,  sincerely  in  search  of  Truth, — after 
wasting  many  precious  hours  over  these  barren  pages — be 
permitted  to  declare  that  he  resents  such  solemn  trifling  ? 
(He  craves  to  be  forgiven  if  he  avows  that  '  Piclcwichian ' 
— not  '  Newtonian ' — was  the  epithet  which  solicited  him, 
when  he  had  to  transcribe  for  the  Printer  the  passage  which 
iiiunediately  precedes.) 

XII.  Next  come  8  pages  (pp.  107-15)  headed — 'Posterio- 
rity of  "  Syrian  "  to  "  Western  "  and  other  (neutral  and  "  Alex- 
andrian ")  Eeadings,  shown  by  Ante-Nicene  Patristic  evidence.' 

In  whicli  however  we  are  really  '  shown  '  nothing  of  the 
.sort.     Bold  Assertions  abound,  (as  usual  witli  this  respected 


III.]  DES.   WESTCOTT   AND   HOKT.  267 

writer,)  but  Proof  he  never  attempts  any.  Not  a  particle  of 
'  Evidence  '  is  adduced. — Next  come  5  pages  headed, — '  Pos- 
teriority of  Syrian  to  Western,  Alexandrian,  and  other 
(neutral)  Headings,  shown  by  Internal  evidence  of  Syrian 
readings'  (p.  115). 

But  again  we  are  '  sJioian '  absolutely  nothing :  although 
we  are  treated  to  the  assurance  that  we  have  been  shown 
many  wonders.  Thus,  '  the  Syrian  conflate  Eeadings  have 
shown  the  Syrian  text  to  be  posterior  to  at  least  two  ancient 
forms  still  extant'  (p.  115):  which  is  the  very  thing  they 
have  signally  failed  to  do.     Next, 

'  Patristic  evidence  has  shown  that  these  two  ancient  Texts, 
and  also  a  third,  must  have  already  existed  early  in  the  third 
century,  and  suggested  very  strong  grounds  for  believing  that 
in  the  middle  of  the  century  the  Syrian  Text  had  not  yet  been 
formed.' 

Wliereas  no  single  appeal  has  been  made  to  the  evidence 
supplied  l3y  one  single  ancient  Father  ! — 

'  Another  step  is  gained  by  a  close  examination  of  all  Eeadings 
distinctively  Syrian,' — (Ibid?) 

And  yet  we  are  never  told  which  the  '  Eeadings  distinctively 
Syrian'  are, — although  they  are  henceforth  referred  to  in 
every  page.  Neither  are  we  instructed  how  to  recognize 
them  when  we  see  them ;  which  is  unfortunate,  since  '  it 
follows,' — (though  we  entirely  fail  to  see  from  what,) — '  that 
all  distinctively  Syrian  Eeadings  may  be  set  aside  at  once  as 
certainly  originating  after  the  middle  of  the  third  century.' 
(p.  117)  .  .  .  Let  us  hear  a  little  more  on  the  subject : — 

'  The  same  Facts ' — (though  Dr.  Hort  has  not  hitherto  favoured 
us  with  any) — 'lead  to  another  conclusion  of  equal  or  even 
greater  importance  respecting  non-distinctive  Syrian  Eeadings 
.  .  .  Since  the  Syrian  Text  is  only  a  modified  eclectic  combina- 
tion of  earlier  Texts  independently  attested,' — 

(for  it  is  in  this  confident  style  that  these  eminent  Scholars 


268  DR.   HORT'S  INCONSEQUENTIAL  METHOD.  [Art. 

handle  the   problem  tliey  undertook   to   solve,  but   as   yet 
have  failed  even  to  touch), — 

'  existing  documents  descended  from  it  can  attest  nothing  but 
itself.'— (p.  118.) 

Presently,  we  are  informed  that  '  it  follows  from  what  has 
been  said  above,' — (though  how  it  follows,  we  fail  to  see,) — 
'  that  all  Readings  in  which  the  Pre-Syrian  texts  concur,  must 
he  accepted  at  once  as  the  Apostolic  Headings : '  and  that  '  all 
distinctively  Syrian  Readings  7nust  he  at  once  rejected.' — 
(p.  119.) 

Trenchant  decrees  of  this  kind  at  last  arrest  attention. 
It  becomes  apparent  that  we  have  to  do  with  a  Writer  who 
has  discovered  a  summary  way  of  dealing  with  the  Text  of 
Scripture,  and  who  is  prepared  to  impart  his  secret  to  any 
who  care  to  accept — without  questioning — his  views.  We 
look  back  to  see  where  this  accession  of  confidence  began, 
and  are  reminded  that  at  p.  108  Dr.  Hort  announced  that  for 
convenience  he  should  henceforth  speak  of  certain  '  groups  of 
documents,'  by  the  conventional  names  '  Western ' — '  Pre- 
Syrian  ' — '  Alexandrian ' — and  so  forth.  Accordingly,  ever 
since,  (sometimes  eight  or  ten  times  in  the  course  of  a  single 
page,^)  we  have  encountered  this  arbitrary  terminology :  have 
been  required  to  accept  it  as  the  expression  of  ascertained 
facts  in  Textual  Science.  Not  till  we  find  ourselves  flounder- 
ing in  the  deep  mire,  do  we  become  fully  aware  of  the 
absurdity  of  our  position.  Then  at  last,  (and  high  time  too !), 
we  insist  on  knowing  what  on  earth  our  Guide  is  about, 
and  wliither  he  is  proposing  to  lead  us  ?  .  .  .  .  More  con- 
siderate to  our  Readers  than  lie  has  l)ecn  to  us,  we  propose 
before  going  any  further,  (instead  of  mystifying  the  subject 
as  Dr.  Hort  has  done,)  to  state  in  a  few  plain  words  what 


'  E.g.  pp.  115,  nn,  117,  118,  Sec. 


III.]  HIS   DIFFICULTY   EXPLAINED.  2G9 

the  present  Theory,  divested  of  pedantry  and  circumlocution, 
proves  to  be ;  and  what  is  Dr.  Hort's  actual  contention. 

XIII.  The  one  great  Fact,  which  especially  troubles  him 
and  his  joint  Editor,^ — (as  well  it  may) — is  The  Traditional 
Greek  Text  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures.  Call  this  Text 
Erasmian  or  Complutensian, — the  Text  of  Stephens,  or  of 
Beza,  or  of  the  Elzevirs, — call  it  the  '  Eeceived,'  or  the 
Traditional  Greek  Text,  or  whatever  other  name  you  please ; 
— the  fact  remains,  that  a  Text  has  come  down  to  us  which 
is  attested  by  a  general  consensus  of  ancient  Copies,  ancient 
Fathers,  ancient  Versions.  This,  at  all  events,  is  a  point  on 
which,  (happily,)  there  exists  entire  conformity  of  opinion 
between  Dr.  Hort  and  ourselves.  Our  Eeaders  cannot  have 
yet  forgotten  his  virtual  admission  that, — Beyond  all  question 
the  Textus  Reccptns  is  the  dominant  Grseco-Syrian  Text  of 
A.D.  350  to  A.D.  400.2 

Obtained  from  a  variety  of  sources,  this  Text  proves  to  be 
essentially  the  same  in  all.  That  it  requires  Eevision  in 
respect  of  many  of  its  lesser  details,  is  undeniable :  but  it  is 
at  least  as  certain  that  it  is  an  excellent  Text  as  it  stands,  and 
that  the  use  of  it  will  never  lead  critical  students  of  Scripture 
seriously  astray, — which  is  what  no  one  will  venture  to  pre- 
dicate concerning  any  single  Critical  Edition  of  the  IST.  T.  which 
has  been  published  since  the  days  of  Griesbach,  by  the 
disciples  of  Griesbach's  school. 

XIV.  In  marked  contrast  to  the  Text  we  speak  of, — (which 
is  identical  with  the  Text  of  every  extant  Lectionary  of  the 
Greek  Church,  and  may  therefore  reasonably  claim  to  be 
spoken  of  as  the  Traditional  Text,) — is  that  contained  in  a 


^  Referred  to  below,  p.  29G. 

^  See  above,  pages  257  (bottoiu)  uud  258  (top). 


270  IMAGINAKY  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  [Art. 

little  handful  of  documents  of  which  the  most  famous  are 
codices  b  n,  and  the  Coptic  Version  (as  far  as  it  is  known),  on 
the  one  hand, — cod.  d  and  the  old  Latin  copies,  on  the  other. 
To  magnify  the  merits  of  these,  as  helps  and  guides,  and 
to  ignore  their  many  patent  and  scandalous  defects  and 
blemishes  : — fer  fas  et  nefas  to  vindicate  their  paramount 
authority  wherever  it  is  in  any  way  possible  to  do  so ;  and 
when  that  is  clearly  impossible,  then  to  treat  their  errors  as 
the  ancient  Egyptians  treated  their  cats,  dogs,  monkeys,  and 
other  vermin, — namely,  to  embalm  them,  and  pay  them 
Divine  honours  : — such  for  the  last  50  years  has  been  the 
practice  of  the  dominant  school  of  Textual  Criticism  among 
ourselves.  The  natural  and  even  necessary  correlative  of 
this,  has  been  the  disparagement  of  the  merits  of  the  com- 
monly Eeceived  Text :  which  has  come  to  be  spoken  of,  (we 
know  not  why,)  as  contemptuously,  almost  as  bitterly,  as  if 
it  had  been  at  last  ascertained  to  be  untrustworthy  in  every 
respect :  a  thing  undeserving  alike  of  a  place  and  of  a  name 
anion  <:{  the  monuments  of  the  Past.  Even  to  have  '  used  the 
Received  Text  as  a  basis  for  correction'  (p.  184)  is  stigmatized 
by  Dr.  Hort  as  one  '  great  cause '  why  Gricsbach  went  astray. 

XV,  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  have  in  fact  outstripped  their 
predecessors  in  this  singular  race.  Their  absolute  contempt  for 
the  Traditional  Text, — their  superstitious  veneration  for  a  few 
ancient  documents ;  (which  documents  however  they  freely 
confess  are  not  more  ancient  than  the  '  Traditional  Text '  which 
they  despise  ;) — knows  no  bounds.  But  the  thing  just  now  to 
be  attended  to  is  the  argumentative  process  whereby  they 
seek  to  justify  their  preference. — Laciimann  avowedly  took 
his  stand  on  a  very  few  of  the  oldest  known  documents :  and 
though  TiiEGELLES  slightly  enlarged  the  area  of  his  prede- 
cessor's observations,  his  method  was  practically  identical 
with  that  of  Lachmann. — Tisciiendokf,  appealing  to  every 


III.]  ORIGIN   OF   THE    TEXTUS  BECEPTUS.  271 

known  authority,  invariably  shows  himself  regardless  of  the 
evidence  he  has  himself  accumulated.  AVIiere  certain  of  the 
uncials  are, — there  his  verdict  is  sure  also  to  be  ...  .  Any- 
thing more  unscientific,  more  unphilosophical,  more  trans- 
parently foolish  than  such  a  method,  can  scarcely  be  con- 
ceived :  but  it  has  prevailed  for  50  years,  and  is  now  at  last 
more  hotly  than  ever  advocated  by  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hoet. 
Only,  (to  their  credit  be  it  recorded,)  they  have  had  the  sense 
to  perceive  that  it  must  needs  be  recommended  by  Arguinents 
of  some  sort,  or  else  it  will  inevitably  fall  to  pieces  the 
first  fine  day  any  one  is  found  to  charge  it,  with  the  neces- 
sary knowledge  of  the  subject,  and  with  sulficient  resoluteness 
of  purpose,  to  make  him  a  formidable  foe. 

XVI.  Their  expedient  has  been  as  follows. — Aware  that 
the  Eeceived  or  Traditional  Greek  Text  (to  quote  their  own 
words,)  '  is  virtually  identical  with  that  used  hy  Ohrysostom  and 
other  Antiochian  Fathers  in  the  latter  part  of  the  IVth  cen- 
tury : '  and  fully  alive  to  the  fact  that  it  '  must  therefore  have 
been  represented  hy  Manuscripts  as  old  as  any  which  are 
now  surviving'  {Text,  p.  547), — they  have  invented  an  extra- 
ordinary Hypothesis  in  order  to  account  for  its  existence : — 

They  assume  that  the  writings  of  Origen  '  establish  the  prior 
existence  of  at  least  three  types  of  Text : ' — the  most  clearly 
marked  of  which,  they  call  the'  '  Western : ' — another,  less 
promment,  they  designate  as  '  Alexandrian  : ' — the  third  holds 
(they  say)  a  middle  or  '  Neutral '  position.  (That  all  this  is 
mere  moonshine, — a  day-dream  and  no  more, — we  shall  insist, 
until  some  proofs  have  been  produced  that  the  respected 
Authors  are  moving  amid  material  forms, — not  discoursing 
with  the  creations  of  their  own  brain.)  '  The  priority  of  two 
at  least  of  these  three  Texts  just  noticed  to  the  Syrian  Text,' 
they  are  confident  has  been  established  l^y  the  eight  '  conflate ' 


272  THE   DREAM  CONTINUED.  [Art. 

Syrian  Eeadings  which  they  flatter  themselves  they  have 
already  resolved  into  their  '  Western  '  and  '  Neutral '  elements 
{Text,  p.  547).  This,  however,  is  a  part  of  the  subject  on 
which  we  venture  to  hope  that  our  Readers  by  this  time  have 
formed  a  tolerably  clear  opinion  fur  themselves.  The  ground 
has  been  cleared  of  the  flimsy  superstructure  which  these 
Critics  have  been  30  years  in  raising,  ever  since  we  blew 
away  (pp.  258-65)  the  airy  foundation  on  which  it  rested. 

At  the  end  of  some  confident  yet  singularly  hazy  statements 
concerning  the  characteristics  of  'Western'  (pp.  120-6),  of 
'Neutral'  (126-30),  and  of  '  Alexandrian '  Eeadings  (130-2), 
Dr.  Hort  favours  us  W'ith  the  assurance  that — 

'  The  Syrian  Text,  to  which  the  order  of  time  now  brings  us,' 
'  is  the  chief  monument  of  a  new  period  of  textual  history.' — 
(p.  132.) 

'  Now,  the  three  great  lines  were  brought  together,  and  made 
to  contribute  to  the  formation  of  a  new  Text  different  from 
all.'— (p.  133.) 

Let  it  only  be  carefully  remembered  that  it  is  of  something 
virtually  identical  with  the  Textus  Ecccptus  that  we  are  just 
now  reading  an  imaginary  history,  and  it  is  presumed  that 
the  most  careless  will  be  made  attentive. 

'The  Syrian  Text  must  in  fact  be  the  result  of  a  "  iJece?Js«on," 
.  .  .  performed  deliberately  by  Editors,  and  not  merely  by 
Scribes.'— (J^/(Z.) 

But  v:]iy  'must'  it?  Instead  of  '  rnvnt  in  fact,'  we  are 
disposed  to  read  '  may — in  fiction.'  The  learned  Critic  can 
but  mean  that,  on  comparing  the  Text  of  Fathers  of  the  IVth 
century  with  the  Text  of  cod.  B,  it  becomes  to  liimself  self- 
evident  that  one  of  the  two  has  been  fal)ricated.  Granted. 
Then, — Why  should  not  the  solitanj  Codex  be  the  offending 
party  ?  For  what  imaginable  reason  should  cod.  B, — which 
comes  to  us  without  a  character,  and  winch,  when  Ivied  Ijy 


Ill]  DR.   HOET'S   fantastic   METHOD.  273 

the  test  of  primitive  Antiquity,  stands  convicted  of  '  universa 
vitiositas,'  (to  use  Tischendorf's  expression) ; — ivhy  (we  ask) 
should  codex  B  be  uphehl  '  contra  niundum '  ?  .  .  .  Dr.  Hort 
proceeds — (still  speaking  of  '  the  [imaginary]  Si/rian  Text '), — 

'  It  was  probably  initiated  by  the  distracting  and  incon- 
venient currency  of  at  least  three  conflicting  Texts  in  the  same 
region.'— (p.  133.) 

Well  but, — Would  it  not  have  been  more  methodical  if 
'  the  currency  of  at  least  three  conflicting  Texts  in  the  same 
region,'  had  been  first  demonstrated  ?  or,  at  least,  shown 
to  be  a  thing  probaljle  ?  Till  this  '  distracting '  phenomenon 
has  been  to  some  extent  proved  to  have  any  existence  in  fecct, 
what  possible  '  probaljility '  can  be  claimed  for  the  history  of 
a  '  Eecension,' — which  very  Eecension,  up  to  this  point,  has  not 
been  2^T0ved  to  have  ever  taken  j^^cice  at  all  t 

'  Each  Text  may  j^erhaps  have  found  a  Patron  in  some  leading 
personage  or  see,  and  thus  have  seemed  to  call  for  a  conciliation 
of  rival  claims.' — (p.  134.) 

Why  yes,  to  be  sure, — '  each  Text  \if  it  existed']  may  per- 
haps [or  perhaps  may  not]  have  found  a  Patron  in  some  leading 
personage  [as  Dr.  Hort  or  Dr.  Scrivener  in  our  own  days] : ' 
but  then,  be  it  remembered,  this  will  only  have  been  possible, 
— {a)  If  the  Eecension  ever  took  place :  and — (&)  If  it  was 
conducted  after  the  extraordinary  fashion  which  prevailed  in 
the  Jerusalem  Chamber  from  1870  to  1881 :  for  which  we 
have  the  unimpeachable  testimony  of  an  eye-witness ;  ^  con- 
firmed by  the  Chairman  of  the  Eevisionist  body, — by  whom 
in  fact  it  was  deliberately  invented.^ 

But  then,  since  not  a  shadow  of  proof  is  forthcoming 
that  ani/  such  Recension  as  Dr.  Hort  imagines  ever  took 
place  at  all, — what  else  but  a  purely  gratuitous  exercise  of 


^  Sec  above,  pp.  37  to  38.  ^  Ihid.  p.  39. 

T 


274  ASSUMED   RECENSION   OF   THE   GREEK,  [Art. 

the  imaginative  faculty  is  it,  that  Dr.  Hort  sliould  proceed 
further  to  invent  tlie  method  which  might,  or  coidd,  or  wuidd, 
or  shoidd  liave  ])een  pursued,  if  it  had  taken  place  ? 

Having  however  in  tliis  way  (1)  Assumed  a  '  Syrian  Recen- 
sion,'— (2)  Invented  the  cause  of  it, — and  (.'5)  I  )reamed  the 
process  by  whicli  it  was  carried  into  execution, — tlie  Critic 
hastens,  oiwrc  sv.o,  to  characterize  the  hidorical  result  iji  the 
following  terms : — 

'  The  qualities  which  the  Authors  of  thk  Syuian  text  seem 
to  have  most  desired  to  impret-s  on  it  are  lucidity  and  coiu- 
pleteness.  ^I'hey  were  evidently  anxious  to  remove  all 
stumbling-blocks  out  of  the  way  of  the  ordinary  reader,  so 
far  as  this  could  be  done  without  recourse  to  violent  measures. 
They  were  apparently  equally  desirous  that  he  should  have  the 
benefit  of  instructive  matter  contained  in  all  the  existnig  Texts, 
provided  it  did  not  confuse  the  context  or  introduce  seeuiing 
contradictions.  New  Omissions  accordingl}^  are  rare,  and  where 
they  occur  are  usually  found  to  contribute  to  apparent  sim- 
plicity. New  Interpolations,  on  the  other  hand,  are  abuiulant, 
must  of  them  being  due  to  harmonistic  or  other  assimilation, 
fortunately  capricious  and  incomplete.  Both  in  matter  and  in 
diction  THE  Sykian  Text  is  conspicuously  a  full  Text.  It  delights 
in  Pronouns,  (Junjunctions,  and  Expletives  and  supplied  links 
of  all  kinds,  as  well  as  in  more  considerable  Additions.  As 
distinguished  from  the  hold  vigour  of  the  "Western"  scribes, 
and  the  refined  scholarsliip  of  the"  Alexandrians,"  the  spirit  of  its 
own  corrections  is  at  once  sensible  and  feeble.  Entirely  blame- 
loss,  on  either  literal y  or  religious  grounds,  as  regards  vulgaiized 
or  unworthy  diction,  yet  sheichuj  no  marks  of  either  Critieal  or 
Spiritual  infiyht,  it  ^^rcsents  the  New  Tedament  in  a  form  smooth  and 
fittractive,  hut  apyreeiahhj  impoverished  in  sense  and  force ;  more 
fitted  for  cursory  perusal  or  recitation  than  for  repeated  and  diligent 
study.'' — (pp.  134-5.) 

XVII.  We  forbear  to  offer  any  remarks  on  this.  Wc 
should  be  thought  uncivil  were  we  to  declare  our  own  candid 
estinuite  of  •  tiie  critical  and  spiritual '  perception  of  the  man 
who  could  permit  lumself  so  to  write.     We  prefer  to  proceed 


Ill]  AND   OF   THE   SYRIAC   VERSION— A.D.   350.  275 

with  our  sketch  of  the  Theory,  (of  the  Dream  ratlier,)  which 
is  intended  to  account  for  the  existence  of  the  Traditional 
Text' of  the  N.T. :  only  venturing  again  to  submit  that  surely 
it  would  have  been  liigh  time  to  discuss  the  characteristics 
which  '  the  Authors  of  the  Syrian  Text '  impressed  upon  their 
\\-ork,  when  it  had  been  first  established — or  at  least  rendered 
probable — that  the  supposed  Operators  and  that  the  assumed 
Operation  have  any  existence  except  in  the  fertile  brain 
of  this  distinguished  and  highly  imaginative  writer. 

XVIII.  Now,  the  first  consideration  which  strikes  us  as 
fatal  to  Dr.  Hort's  unsupported  conjecture  concerning  the 
date  of  the  Text  he  calls  '  Syrian '  or  '  Antiochian,'  is  the  fact 
that  what  he  so  designates  bears  a  most  inconvenient  resem- 
blance to  the  Peschito  or  ancient  Syriac  Version ;  which,  like 
the  old  Latin,  is  (by  consent  of  the  Critics)  generally  assigned 
to  the  second  century  of  our  era.  '  It  is  at  any  rate  no 
stretch  of  imagination,'  (according  to  Bp.  Ellicott,)  '  to  suppose 
that  portions  of  it  might  have  been  in  the  hands  of  S.  John.' 
[p.  26.]     Accordingly,  these  Editors  assure  us  that — 

'  the  only  way  of  explaining  the  whole  body  of  facts  is  to  suppose 
that  the  S^a-iac,  like  the  Latin  Version,  underwent  Revision 
long  after  its  origin  ;  and  that  onr  ordinary  Syriac  MSS. 
represent  not  the  primitive  but  the  altered  Syriac  Text.' — 
(p.  130.) 

'  A  Revision  of  the  old  Syriac  Version  appears  to  have  taken 
place  in  the  IVth  century,  or  sooner ;  and  doubtless  in  some 
connexion  wiili  the  Syrian  Hevision  of  the  Greek  Text,  the  readings 
being  to  a  very  great  extent  coincident.' — (Text,  552.) 

'  Till  recently,  the  Peschito  has  been  known  only  in  the 
form  which  it  finally  received  by  an  evidently  authoritative  Revi- 
sion,'— a  Syriac  'Vulgate'  answering  to  the  Latin  'Vulgate.' — (p.  84.) 

'Histoiical  antecedents  render  it  tolerably  certain  that  the 
locality  of  such  an  authoritative  Revision ' — (which  Revision 
however,  be  it  observed,  still  rests  wholly  on  unsupported 
conjecture) — '  would  be  either  Edessa  or  Nisibis.' — (p.  136.) 

T  2 


27n  DRS.   WESTCOTT   AND   HORT'S  [Akt. 

In  the  meantime,  the  abominabl}'  corrupt  document  known 
as  '  Cureton's  Syriac,'  is,  by  anotlier  bold  hypothesis,  assumed 
to  be  tlie  only  surviving  specimen  of  the  unrevised  Version, 
and  is  henceforth  invariaUy  designated  by  these  authors  as 
'  the  old  Syriac  ; '  and  referred  to,  as  '  syr.  vt.,' — (in  imitation 
of  the  Latin  '  vctus ') :  the  venerable  Peschito  being  referred 
to  as  the  '  Vulgate  Syriac,' — '  syr.  vg.' 

'  When  therefore  we  find  large  and  peculiar  coincidences 
between  the  revised  Syriac  Text  and  the  Text  of  the  Antiochian 
Fathers  of  the  latter  part  of  the  IVth  century,' — [of  which 
coincidences,  (be  it  remarked  in  passing,)  the  obvious  explana- 
tion is,  that  the  Texts  leferred  to  are  faithful  traditional 
representations  of  the  inspired  autograjjhs  ;] — 'and  strong  indi- 
cations that  the  Revision  teas  deliberate  and  in  some  way  authorita- 
tive in  both  cases, — it  becomes  natural  to  suppose  tliat  the  two 
operations  had  some  historical  connexion.' — (pp.  136-7.) 

XIX.  But  how  does  it  happen — (let  the  question  be  asked 
without  offence) — that  a  man  of  good  abilities,  bred  in  a 
University  which  is  supposed  to  cultivate  especially  the 
Science  of  exact  reasoning,  should  habitually  allow  himself 
in  such  slipshod  writing  as  this?  The  very  fact  of  a  'Eevi- 
sion '  of  the  Syriac  has  all  to  be  proved ;  and  until  it  has 
been  demonstrated,  cannot  of  course  be  reasoned  upon  as  a 
fact.  Instead  of  demonstration,  we  find  i»urselves  invited  (1) 
— '  To  suppose '  that  such  a  Eevision  took  place  :  and  (2) — '  To 
suppose '  that  all  our  existing  Manuscripts  represent  it.  But 
(as  we  have  said)  not  a  shadow  of  reason  is  produced  whi/ 
we  should  be  so  complaisant  as  '  to  suppose '  either  the  one 
thinf  or  the  other.  In  tlie  meantime,  the  accomplished  Critic 
liastens  to  assure  us  that  there  exist  '  strong  indications ' — 
(why  are  we  not  shown  them  ?) — that  the  Eevision  he  speaks 
of  was  'deliberate,  and  in  S(jnie  way  authoritative.' 

Out  of  this  grows  a  'natural  su])position '  that  "two 
[piiicly    imaginavvj    (i]K'i;itions,"   "had    .some    Jiis/urical    con- 


III.]  FANTASTIC  THEORY,  EXAMINED.  277 

ncxion."  Already  therefore  has  the  shadow  thickened  into  a 
substance.  "  The  Revised  Syriac  Text "  has  by  this  time  come 
to  be  spoken  of  as  an  admitted  fact.  The  process  whereby  it 
came  into  being  is  even  assumed  to  have  been  "  deliberate 
and  authoritative."  These  Editors  henceforth  style  the 
Peschito  the  '  Si/riac  Vulgate,' — as  confidently  as  Jerome's 
Eevision  of  the  old  Latin  is  styled  the  'Latin  Vulgate.'  They 
even  assure  us  that  '  Cureton's  Syriac  '  '  renders  the  compara- 
tively late  and  "  revised  "  character  of  the  Syriac  Vulgate  a 
matter  of  certainty '  (p.  84).  The  very  city  in  which  the 
latter  underwent  Eevision,  can,  it  seems,  be  fixed  with 
'  tolerable  certainty'  (p.  136).  .  .  .  Can  Dr.  Hort  be  serious  ? 

At  the  end  of  a  series  of  conjectures,  (the  foundation  of 
which  is  the  hypothesis  of  an  Antiochian  Recension  of  the 
Greek,)  the  learned  wi-iter  announces  that — '  The  textual 
elements  of  each  principal  document  having  been  thus  ascer- 
tained, it  now  becomes  possible  to  determine  the  Genealogy  of 
a  much  larger  nionbcr  of  individual  readings  than  before ' 
(Text,  p.  552). — We  read  and  marvel. 

So  then,  in  Inief,  the  Theory  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  is 
this  : — that,  somewhere  between  a.d.  250  and  a.d.  350, 

'  ( 1 )  The  growing  diversity  and  confusion  of  Greek  Texts  led 
to  an  authoritative  Revision  at  Antioch : — which  (2)  was  then 
taken  as  a  standard  for  a  similar  authoritative  Eevision  of  the 
Syriac  text : — and  (3)  was  it.-elf  at  a  later  time  subjected  to  a 
second  authoritative  Eevision  ' — this  '  final  process  '  having  been 
'apparently  completed  by  [a.d.]  350  or  thereabouts.' — (p.  137.) 

XX.  Now,  instead  of  insisting  that  tliis  entire  Theory 
is  made  up  of  a  series  of  purely  gratuitous  assumptions, — 
destitute  alike  of  attestation  and  of  probability :  and  that,  as 
a  mere  effort  of  the  Imagination,  it  is  entitled  to  no  manner 
of  consideration  or  respect  at  our  hands  : — instead  of  dealing 
thus  with  what  precedes,  we  propose  to  be  most  kind  and 


278  DES.   WESTCOTT  AND   IIORT'S  [Aut. 

accomiiiodatiii;.;'  to  Dr.  Hurt.  We  proceed  to  accept  his 
Tlieory  in  its  entirety.  We  will,  with  the  Header's  permission, 
assume  that  all  he  tells  us  is  historically  true :  is  an 
authentic  narrative  of  what  actually  did  take  place.  "VVe 
shall  in  the  end  invite  the  same  Eeader  to  recognize  the 
inevital)le  consequences  of  our  admission  :  to  which  we  shall 
inexorably  pin  the  learned  Editors — bind  them  hand  and 
foot ; — of  course  reserving  to  ourselves  the  right  of  disallowing 
for  ourselves  as  much  of  the  matter  as  we  please. 

Somewhere  between  a.d.  250  and  350  therefore, — ('  it  is 
impossible  to  say  with  confidence'  [p.  137]  what  was  the 
actual  date,  but  these  Editors  evidently  incline  to  the  latter 
half  of  the  Ilird  century,  i.e.  aVc«  a.d.  275) ; — we  are  to 
believe  that  the  Ecclesiastical  heads  of  the  four  great  Patri- 
archates of  Eastern  Christendom, — Alexandria,  Antioch, 
Jerusalem,  Constantinople, — had  become  so  troubled  at 
witnessing  the  prevalence  of  depraved  copies  of  Holy 
Scripture  in  their  respective  churches,  that  they  resolved  by 
common  consent  on  achieving  an  authoritative  Revision 
which  should  henceforth  become  the  standard  Text  of  all  the 
I'atriarchatos  of  the  East.  The  same  sentiment  of  distress — 
(by  the  hypothesis)  penetrated  into  Syria  proper ;  and  the 
Bishops  of  Edessa  or  Nisibis,  ('great  centres  of  life  and 
culture  to  the  Churches  whose  language  was  Syriac,'  [j).  130,]) 
lent  themselves  so  effectually  to  the  project,  that  a  single 
fragmentary  document  is,  at  the  present  day,  the  only  ves- 
tige remaining  of  the  Text  which  before  had  been  universally 
prevalent  in  tlie  Syriac-speaking  Churches  of  antiquity.  '  The 
almost  total  extinction  of  Old  Syriac  MSS.,  contrasted  with  the 
oreat  number  of  extant  Vnhjate  Syriac  MSS.' — (for  it  is  thus 
that  Dr.  Hort  habitually  exhibits  evidence  !), — is  to  be  attri- 
1  lilted,  it  seems,  to  the  power  and  iuihicMK c  dl'  llit>  Authors 
of  the   iiiia'aiuavy  Syrini;    Ilevisiou.  \ihi(l.\      lip.  EUicotl,  by 


III.]  FABULOUS   NARRATIVE.  279 

the  way  (an  unexceptionable  witness),  characterizes  Cureton's 

Syriac  as  '  singular  and  sometimes  rather  zvild.'  '  The  text,  of 
a  venj  comjwsite  nature ;  sometimes  inclining  to  the  shoi^tness 
and  sim])lieitg  of  the  Vatican  manuscj^ijJt,  hit  more  commonly 
presenting  the  same  paraphrastic  character  of  text  as  the  Codex 
Bezse.'  [p.  42.]  (It  is,  in  fact,  an  utterly  depraved  and  fabri- 
cated document.) 

We  venture  to  remark  in  passing  that  Textual  matters 
must  have  everywhere  reached  a  very  alarming  pass  indeed 
to  render  intelligible  the  resort  to  so  extraordinary  a  step  as 
a  representative  Conference  of  the  '  leading  Personages  or 
Sees '  (p.  134)  of  Eastern  Christendom.  The  inference  is  at 
least  inevitable,  that  men  in  high  place  at  that  time  deemed 
themselves  competent  to  grapple  with  the  problem.  Enough 
was  familiarly  known  about  the  character  and  the  sources  of 
these  corrupt  Texts  to  make  it  certain  that  they  would  be 
recognizable  when  produced ;  and  that,  when  condemned  by 
authority,  they  would  no  longer  be  propagated,  and  in  tlie 
end  would  cease  to  molest  the  Church.  Thus  much,  at  all 
events,  is  legitimately  to  l)e  inferred  from  the  hypothesis. 

XXI.  Behold  then  from  every  principal  Diocese  of  ancient 
Christendom,  and  in  the  Church's  palmiest  days,  the  most 
famous  of  the  ante-Xicene  Fathers  repair  to  Antioch.  They 
go  up  by  authority,  and  are  attended  l;)y  skilled  Ecclesiastics 
of  the  highest  theological  attainment.  Bearers  are  they 
perforce  of  a  vast  number  of  Copies  of  the  Scriptures :  and 
(by  the  hypothesis)  the  latest  iJOSsiUc  dates  of  any  of  these 
Copies  must  range  between  a.d.  250  and  350.  But  the 
Delegates  of  so  many  ancient  Sees  will  have  been  supremely 
careful,  before  starting  on  so  important  and  solenni  an 
errand,  to  make  diligent  search  for  the  oldest  Copies  any- 
wliere  discoverable :  and  when  they  reach  the  scene  of  their 
deliberations,  we  may  be  certain  that  they  are  able  to  appeal 


280  DRS.   WESTCOTT  AND  HORT'S  FABULOUS  [Art. 

to  not  a  few  codices  u-ritten  within  a  hundred  years  of  the 
date  of  the  insjnrcd  Autographs  themselves.  Copies  of  the 
Scriptures  authenticated  as  havinjr  belonged  to  the  most 
famous  of  their  predecessors, — and  held  by  them  in  high 
repute  for  the  presumed  purity  of  their  Texts — will  have  been 
freely  produced :  while,  in  select  receptacles,  will  have  been 
stowed  away — for  purposes  of  comparison  and  avoidance — 
specimens  of  those  dreaded  Texts  wliose  existence  has  been 
the  sole  cause  why  (by  the  hypothesis)  this  extraordinary 
concourse  of  learned  Ecclesiastics  has  taken  place. 

After  solenmly  invoking  the  Divine  blessing,  tliese  men 
address  themselves  assiduously  to  their  task ;  and  (by  the 
hypothesis)  they  proceed  to  condemn  every  codex  which 
exhiljits  a  '  strictly  Western/  or  a  '  strictly  Alexandrian,'  or  a 
'  strictly  Neutral '  type.  In  plain  English,  if  codices  b,  n, 
and  D  had  been  before  them,  they  would  have  uncere- 
moniously rejected  all  three ;  but  then,  (by  the  hypothesis) 
neither  of  the  two  first-named  had  yet  come  into  being: 
while  200  years  at  least  must  roll  out  ])efore  Cod.  d  would 
see  the  light.  In  the  meantime,  the  immediate  ancestor's  of 
I?  X  and  1)  will  perforce  have  come  under  judicial  scrutiny; 
and,  (by  the  hypothesis,)  they  will  have  been  scornfully 
rejected  by  the  general  consent  of  the  Judges. 

XXII.  Pass  an  interval — (are  we  to  suppose  of  fifty 
years  ?) — and  the  work  referred  to  is  '  svhjected  to  a  second 
authoritative  Eevision.'  Af/aiii,  tlicrclbrc,  lichold  llu;  piety 
and  learning  of  the  four  great  I'atriarcliates  of  tlie  East, 
formally  represented  at  Antioch !  The  Church  is  now  in  her 
palmiest  days.  Some  of  her  greatest  men  l)elong  to  the 
period  (if  wliicli  we  are  sjjeaking.  Eiiseliius  (a.d.  308- 
340)  is  in  his  glory.  One  whole  generation  has  come  and 
gone  since  the  last  Textual  Coiderence  was  held,  at  Antioch. 


III.]  HISTOEY  OF  THE  RECEIVED  TEXT.  281 

Yet  is  no  inclination  manifested  to  reverse  the  decrees  of  the 
earlier  Conference.  This  second  Kecension  of  the  Text  of 
Scripture  does  but  '  carry  out  more  completely  the  purposes 
of  the  first ; '  and  '  the  final  process  was  apparently  com- 
pleted by  A.D,  350 '  (p.  137). — So  far  the  Cambridge  Professor. 

XXIII.  But  the  one  important  fact  implied  by  this 
august  deliberation  concerning  the  Text  of  Scripture  has 
1)een  conveniently  passed  over  by  Dr.  Hort  in  profound 
silence.  We  take  leave  to  repair  his  omission  by  inviting 
the  Reader's  particular  attention  to  it. 

We  request  him  to  note  that,  hy  the  hypothesis,  there  will 
have  been  submitted  to  the  scrutiny  of  these  many  ancient 
Ecclesiastics  not  a  feiu  codices  of  exactly  the  same  type  as 
codices  B  and  X :  especially  as  codex  B.  We  are  able  even 
to  specify  with  precision  certain  "features  which  the  codices 
in  question  will  have  all  concurred  in  exhibiting.     Thus, — 

(1)  From  S.  Mark's  Gospel,  those  depraved  copies  will 
have  omitted  the  last  Twelve  Verses  (xvi.  9-20). 

(2)  From  S.  Luke's  Gospel  the  same  corrupt  copies  will 
have  omitted  our  Saviour's  Agony  in  the  Garden  (xxii. 
43,  44). 

(3)  His  Prayer  on  behalf  of  His  murderers  (xxiii.  34), 
will  have  also  been  away. 

(4)  The  Inscription  on  the  Cross,  in  Greek,  Latin,  and 
Hebrew  (xxiii.  38),  will  have  been  partly,  misrepresented, — 
partly,  away. 

(5)  And  there  will  have  been  no  account  discoverable  of 
S.  Peter's  visit  to  the  Sepulchre  (xxiv.  12). 

(6)  Absent  will  have  been  also  the  record  of  our  Lord's 
Ascension  into  Heaven  {ibid.  51). 

(7)  Also,  from  S.  John's  Gospel,  the  codices  in  question 


282  DR.   HOIIT   BEFORE   THE   FATHERS  [Art. 

will  have  omitted  the  incident  of  the   troubling  of  the 
TOOL  or  Betiiesda  (v.  3,  4). 

Now,  we  request  tliat  it  may  be  clearly  noted  that, 
according  to  Dr.  Hurt,  against  every  copy  of  the  Gospels  so 
maimed  and  mutilated,  (i.e.  against  every  copy  of  the  Gosjjcls 
of  the  same  type  as  codices  B  and  N,) — the  many  illustrious 
Bishops  who,  (still  according  to  Dr.  Hort,)  assembled  at 
Antioch,  first  in  A.D.  250  and  tlien  in  a.d.  350, — by  common 
consent  set  a  mark  of  condemnation.  We  are  assured  that 
those  famous  men, — those  Fathers  of  the  Church, — were 
emphatic  in  their  sanction,  instead,  of  codices  of  the  type 
of  Cod.  A, — in  which  all  these  seven  omitted  passages  (and 
many  hundreds  Ijesides)  are  duly  found  in  their  proper 
places. 

When,  therefore,  at  the  end  of  a  thousand  and  lialf  a 
thousand  years,  Dr.  Hort  (guided  by  his  inner  consciousness, 
and  depending  on  an  intellectual  illumination  of  which  he  is 
able  to  give  no  intelligible  account)  proposes  to  reverse  the 
delil)erate  sentence  of  Antiquity, — his  position  strikes  us  as 
bordering  on  the  ludicrous.  Concerning  the  seven  places  abo\'e 
referred  to,  which  the  assembled  Fathers  pronounce  to  be 
genuine  Scripture,  and  declare  to  be  worthy  of  all  accepta- 
tion,— ^I)r.  Hort  expresses  himself  in  terms  wiiicli — could 
they  have  l)ecn  heard  at  Antioch — must,  it  is  thought,  have 
brought  down  upon  his  head  tokens  of  displeasure  which 
might  have  even  proved  inconvenient.  But  let  the  respected 
gentlciiiaii  by  all  means  be  allowed  to  speak  for  himself: — 

(1)  The  last  Twelve  Vehses  of  S.  .Mark  (he  would  have 
been  heard  to  say)  are  a  'very  (iarly  iiil('ri)olation.'  'Its 
authorship  and  jivccise  date  must  rt'iiiaiii  iud<iiown.'  '  It 
manifestly  cannot  claim    any    Apostolic    authority.'     '  It    is 


III.]  OF   THE   IIIRD   AND    IVTH   CENTURIES.  283 

doubtle.ss  founded  on  some  tradition  of  the  Apostolic  age.' — 
{Notes,  pp.  46  and  51.) 

(2)  The  Agony  in  the  garden  (he  would  have  told  them) 
is  '  an  early  Western  interpolation/  and  '  can  only  be  a 
fragment  from  traditions,  written  or  oral,' — 'rescued  from 
oblivion  by  the  scribes  of  the  second  century,' — (pp.  66-7.) 

(3)  The  peayer  of  our  Lord  for  His  murderers  (Dr. 
Hort  would  have  said), — '  I  cannot  doubt  comes  from  an 
extraneous  source.'     It  is  '  a  Western  interpolation.'— (p.68.) 

(4)  To  the  Inscription  on  the  Cross,  in  Greek,  Latin, 
and  Hebrew  [S.  Luke  xxiii.  38],  he  would  not  have  allowed 
so  much  as  a  hearing. 

(5)  The  spuriousness  of  the  narrative  of  S.  Peter's  Visit 
to  the  Sepulchre  [S.  Luke  xxiv.  12]  (the  same  Ante-Nicene 
Fathers  would  have  learned)  he  regards  as  a '  moral  certainty.' 
He  would  have  assured  them  that  it  is  '  a  Western  non-in- 
terpolation.'— (p.  71.) 

(6)  They  would  have  learned  that,  in  the  account  of  the 
same  Critic,  S.  Luke  xxiv.  51  is  another  spurious  addition  to 
the  inspired  Text :  another  '  Western  non-interpolation.' 
Dr.  Hort  would  have  tried  to  persuade  them  that  our  Lord's 
Ascension  into  Heaven  'ukis  evidently  inserted  from  an 
assumption  that  a  separation  from  the  disciples  at  the  close 
of  a  Gospel  7mcst  he  the  Ascension,'  (Notes,  p.  73).  .  .  .  (What 
the  Ante-Mcene  Fathers  would  have  thought  of  their  teacher 
we  forbear  to  conjecture.)- — (p.  71.) 

(7)  The  troubling  of  the  pool  of  Bethesda  [S.  John  v. 
3,  4]  is  not  even  allowed  a  bracketed  place  in  Dr.  Hort's 
Text.  How  the  accomplished  Critic  would  have  set  about 
persuading  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers  that  they  were  in  error 
for  holding  it  to  be  genuine  Scripture,  it  is  hard  to  imagine. 

XXIV.  It  is  plain  therefore  tliat  Dr.  Hort  is  in  direct 
antagonism  with  the  collective  mind  of  Patristic  Antiquity. 


284  DR.  IIORT  versus  THE  FATHERS  [Art. 

Will/,  when  it  suits  him,  lie  .should  np])eal  to  the  same 
Ancients  for  support, — avc  fail  to  understand.  '  If  Baal  he 
God,  then  follow  him  ! '  Dr.  Hort  has  his  codex  B  and  his 
codex  X  to  guide  him.  He  informs  us  (p.  27G)  that  '  the  fullest 
consideration  does  but  increase  the  conviction  that  the  pre- 
eminent relative  2nirit//'  of  those  two  codices  'is  approximately 
absolute, — a  true  aioiyroximate  reproduction  of  the  Text  of  the 
Autographs!  On  the  other  hand,  he  has  discovered  that 
the  Eeceived  Text  is  virtually  the  production  of  the  Fathers 
of  the  Nicene  Age  (a.d.  250-a.d.  350), — exhibits  a  Text 
fabricated  throughout  by  the  united  efforts  of  those  well- 
intentioned  but  thoroughly  misguided  men.  What  is  it  to 
him,  henceforth,  how  Athanasius,  or  Didymus,  or  Cyril  ex- 
hibits a  place  ? 

Yes,  we  repeat  it,— Dr.  Hort  is  in  direct  antagonism  with 
the  Fathers  of  the  Illrd  and  the  IVth  Century.  His  own 
fantastic  hy})othesis  of  a  '  Syrian  Text,' — the  solemn  ex- 
pression of  the  collective  wisdom  and  deliberate  judgment 
of  the  Fathers  of  the  Nicene  Age  (/V.d.  2r)0-A.i).  350), — is  the 
best  answer  which  can  by  possibility  be  invented  to  his  own 
pages, — is,  in  our  account,  the  one  sufficient  and  coiu^lusive 
refutati(jn  of  his  own  Text. 

Thus,  his  prolix  and  perverse  discussion  of  S.  Mark  xvi, 
9-20  (viz.  from  p.  28  to  p.  51  of  his  A^o^cs), — which,  carefully 
analysed,  is  found  merely  to  amount  to  '  Thank  you  for  shoM- 
ing  us  our  mistake ;  but  we  mean  to  stick  to  our  Jlfumpsi- 
mus!':  —  those  many  inferences  as  wi'll  from  what  the 
Fathers  do  not  say,  as  from  what  they  do ; — are  all  effectually 
dis])osed  of  by  his  own  theory  of  a  '  Syrian  text.'  A  mighty 
ari-ay  of  forgotten  ])isho])S,  Fathers,  Doctors  of  the  Nicene 
period,  come  back  and  calmly  assure  the  accomplished  Pro- 
f<3SSor  tlial  t1i(!  e\  ideiice  on  wliicli  he  relies  is  but  an  insigni- 


III.]  OF   THE   IIIRD   AND   IVTH   CENTURIES.  285 

ficant  fraction  of  the  evidence  which  was  before  themselves 
when  they  delivered  their  judgment.  '  Had  you  know^n  but 
the  thousandth  part  of  what  w^e  knew  familiarly,'  say  they, 
'  you  would  have  spared  yourself  this  exposure.  You  seem 
to  have  forgotten  that  Eusebius  was  one  of  the  chief  persons 
in  our  assembly ;  that  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  and  Athanasius, 
Basil  and  Gregory  of  Nazianzus,  as  well  as  his  namesake 
of  Nyssa, — were  all  living  when  we  held  our  Textual  Con- 
ference, and  some  of  them,  though  young  men,  were  even 
parties  to  our  decree.'  .  .  .  Now,  as  an  cmjumentiim  ad 
liominem,  this,  be  it  observed,  is  decisive  and  admits  of  no 
rejoinder. 

XXV.  How  then  about  those  '  Syrian  Conflations '  con- 
cerning wliich  a  few  pages  back  we  heard  so  much,  and  for 
which  Dr.  Hort  considers  the  august  tribunal  of  which  we 
are  now  speaking  to  be  responsiljle  ?  He  is  convinced  that 
the  (so-called)  Syrian  Text  (which  he  regards  as  the  product 
of  their  deliberations),  is  '  an  eclectic  text  comUning  Readings 
from  the  three  iwineiiJal  Texts '  (p.  145)  :  which  Readings  in 
consequence  he  calls  '  conflate!  How  then  is  it  to  l)e  sup- 
posed that  these  '  Conflations  '  arose  ?  The  answer  is  obvious. 
As  '  Conflations,'  they  have  no  existence, — save  in  the  fertile 
brain  of  Dr.  Hort.  Could  the  ante-Xicene  fathers  who 
never  met  at  Antioch  have  been  interrogated  by  him  con- 
cerning this  matter,  —  (let  the  Hibernian  supposition  be 
allowed  for  argument  sake  !)— they  would  perforce  have  made 
answer, — '  You  quite  mistake  the  purpose  for  which  we  came 
together,  learned  sir !  You  are  evidently  thinking  of  your 
Jerusalem  Chamber  and  of  the  unheard-of  method  devised  by 
your  Bishop '  [see  pp.  37  to  39  :  also  p.  273]  '  for  ascertaining 
the  Truth  of  Scripture.  Well  may  the  resuscitation  of  so  many 
forgotten  blunders  have  occupied  you  and  your  colleagues 
for  as  long  a  period  as  was  expended  on  the  Siege  of  Troy ! 


280  THE    TEXTUS  llECEPTUS  THE   WORK   OF  [Aut. 

Our  business  was  not  to  invent  readings  whether  by  "  Con- 
flation "  or  otherwise,  but  only  to  distinguish  between 
spurious  Texts  and  genuine, — families  of  fabricated  MSS., 
and  those  which  we  knew  to  be  trustworthy, — mutilated  and 
unmutilated  Copies.  Every  one  of  what  you  are  pleased  to 
call  "  Conflate  Eeadings,"  learned  sir,  we  found — ^just  as  yo7i 
find  them — in  99  out  of  100  of  our  copies :  and  we  gave 
them  our  deliberate  approval,  and  left  them  standing  in  the 
Text  in  consequence.  We  believed  them  to  be, — we  are 
confident  that  they  are, — the  very  words  of  the  Evangelists 
and  Apostles  of  the  Lord  :  the  ijmssima  verba  of  the  Spirit  : 
"  the  triLC  sayings  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  '     [See  p.  38,  note  ^.] 

All  this  however  by  the  way.  The  essential  thing  to  be 
borne  in  mind  is  that,  according  to  Dr.  Hort, — on  ttvo  distinct 
occasions  hetwcen  A.D.  250  and  350 — the  whole  Eastern  Churcli, 
meeting  by  representation  in  her  palmiest  days,  deliberately 
})ut  forth  that  Traditional  Text  of  the  N.T.  with  which  we  at 
this  day  are  chiefly  familiar.  That  this  is  indeed  his  view  of 
the  matter,  there  can  at  least  be  no  doubt.     He  says : — 

'  An  autliontntice  Revision  at  Autioch  ....  was  itself  subjected 
to  a  second  cmthoritathe  Bcvision  carrying  out  more  completely 
the  purposes  of  tbc  first.'  '  At  what  date  between  a.d.  250  and 
350  tlie  first  p-ocess  took  place,  it  is  impussible  to  t-ay  with  confi- 
dence.' '  The  fined  proeess  was  apparently  completed  by  a.d.  350 
or  thereabouts.' — (p.  137.) 

'  The  fundamental  text  of  late  extant  Greek  MSS.  generally 
is  hnjond  all  question  identical  with  the  dominant  Antiochian  or 
Graaco-Syrian  text  of /Ac  seeond  hedf  of  the  IVth  cenfuri/.' — (p.  92.) 

r>e  it  so.  It  follows  that  the  Text  exhibited  by  such 
codices  as  p.  and  x  ivas  deliher eddy  condemned  by  the  assembled 
piety,  learning,  and  judgment  of  the  four  great  I'atriarcliates 
of  Eastern  Christendom.  At  a  period  wjien  tliere  existed 
nothiw)  more  modern  than  Codices  h  and  x,  —  nothing  so 
modern  as  A  and  c, — all  specimens  of  the  rnnncr  chiss  were 


in.]       THE   ASSEMBLED   FATHEES,  A.D.  250-A.D.  350.  287 

rejected :  while  such  codices  as  bore  a  general  resemblance  to 
A  were  by  common  consent  pointed  out  as  deserving  of 
confidence  and  recommended  for  repeated  Transeription. 

XXVI.  Pass  fifteen  hundred  years,  and  the  Eeader  is  invited 
to  note  attentively  what  has  come  to  pass.  Time  has  made 
a  clean  sweep,  it  may  be,  of  every  Greek  codex  belonging  to 
either  of  the  two  dates  above  indicated.  Every  tradition 
belonging  to  the  period  has  also  long  since  utterly  perished. 
When  lo,  in  a.d.  1831,  under  the  auspices  of  Dr.  Lachmann, 
'  a  new  departure '  is  made.  Up  springs  what  may  be  called 
the  new  German  school  of  Textual  Criticism, — of  which  the 
fundamental  principle  is  a  superstitious  deference  to  the 
decrees  of  cod.  B.  The  heresy  prevails  for  fifty  years  (1831- 
81)  and  obtains  many  adherents.  The  practical  result  is, 
tliat  its  chief  promoters  make  it  their  business  to  throw  dis- 
credit on  the  result  of  the  two  great  Antiochian  Eevisions 
already  spoken  of !  The  (so-called)  '  Syrian  Text ' — although 
assumed  by  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  to  be  the  product  of  the 
combined  wisdom,  piety,  and  learning  of  the  great  Patriar- 
chates of  the  East  from  a.d.  250  to  a.d.  350;  'a  "Eecension" 
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word ;  a  work  of  attempted  Criti- 
cism, performed  deliberately  by  Editors  and  not  merely  by 
Scril:)es  '  (p.  133)  : — this  '  Syrian  Text,'  Doctors  Westcott  and 
Hort  denounce  as  '  shoiuing  no  marl's  of  either  critical  or  sjn- 
ritucd  insight : ' — 

It  '  presents '  (say  they)  '  the  New  Testament  in  a  form 
smooth  and  attractive,  but  appreciahly  impoverislied  in  sense  and 
force ;  more  fitted  for  cursory  perusal  or  recitation  than  fur 
repeated  and  diligent  study.' — (p.  135.) 

XXVII.  We  are  content  to  leave  this  matter  to  the 
Eeader's  judgment.  For  ourselves,  we  make  no  secret  of 
the  grotesqueness  of  the  contrast  thus,  for  the  second  time, 
presented  to  the  imagination.     On  that  side,  by  the  hypo- 


288  DR.   HORT'S   ESTIMATE   OF   THE   CHURCH'S  [Art. 

thesis,  sit  the  greatest  Doctors  of  primitive  Christendom, 
assembled  in  solemn  conclave.  Every  most  illustrious  name 
is  there.  By  ingeniously  drawing  a  purely  arl)itrary  liard- 
and-fast  line  at  the  year  a.d.  350,  and  so  anticipating  many 
a  '  Jiorait''  by  something  between  five  and  five-and-twenty 
years.  Dr.  Hort's  intention  is  plain :  l)ut  the  expedient  will 
not  serve  his  turn.  Quite  content  are  we  with  the  names 
secured  to  us  within  the  proposed  limits  of  time.  On  that 
side  then,  we  behold  congregated  choice  representatives 
of  the  wisdom,  the  piety,  the  learning  of  the  Eastern 
Church,  from  a.d.  250  to  a.d.  350.— On  this  side  sits — 
Dr.  Hort!  .  .  .  An  interval  of  1532  years  separates  these 
two  parties. 

XXVIII.  And  first, — How  may  the  former  assemblage  be 
supposed  to  have  been  occupying  themselves  ?  The  object 
with  which  those  distinguislied  personages  came  together  was 
the  loftiest,  the  purest,  the  holiest  imaginable :  viz.  to  purge 
out  from  the  sacred  Text  the  many  corruptions  Ijy  wliich,  in 
their  judgments,  it  had  become  depraved  (hiring  the  250  (or 
at  the  utmost  300)  years  which  have  elapsed  since  it  first 
came  into  existence ;  to  detect  the  counterfeit  and  to  eliminate 
the  spurious.  Not  unaware  by  any  means  are  they  of  the 
carelessness  of  Scribes,  nor  yet  of  the  corruptions  which  have 
been  brought  in  through  the  officiousness  of  critical  'Correc- 
tors '  of  the  Text.  To  what  has  resulted  from  the  misdirected 
piety  of  the  Orthodox,  they  are  every  bit  as  fully  alive  as  to 
what  has  crept  in  through  the  malignity  of  Heretical  Teachers. 
Moreover,  while  the  memory  survives  in  all  its  freshness  of 
the  depravations  which  the  ins])ired  Text  has  experienced 
from  these  and  other  similar  corrupting  influences,  the  iiicans 
iibound  and  arc  at  hand  of  tcstinr/  every  suspected  place  of 
Scrijjture.  Well,  and  next, — How  ]ia\c  tliese  holy  men 
prospered  in  their  holy  ejiterprise  ? 


IIL]  CORPORATE   WORK,— A.D.   250   TO   A.D.    350.  289 

XXIX.  According  to  Dr.  Hort,  by  a  strange  fatality, — a 
most  unaccountable  and  truly  disastrous  proclivity  to  error, 
— -these  illustrious  Fathers  of  the  Church  have  been  at  every 
instant  substituting  the  spurious  for  the  genuine, — -a  fabri- 
cated Text  in  place  of  the  Evangelical  Verity.  Miserable 
men !  In  the  Gospels  alone  they  have  interpolated  about 
3100  words :  have  omitted  about  700  :  have  substituted  about 
1000 ;  have  transposed  about  2200  :  have  altered  (in  respect 
of  number,  case,  mood,  tense,  person,  &c.)  about  1200.^  This 
done,  they  have  amused  themselves  with  the  give-and-take 
process  of  mutual  accommodation  which  we  are  taught  to  call 
'  Conflation : '  in  plain  terms,  thei/  have  been  'inanvfacturing 
Scripture.    The  Text,  as  it  comes  forth  from  their  hands, — 

(rt)  "  Slicv.is  no  marks  of  cither  critical  or  sjnritval  insif/ht :" — 

(b)  "  Presents  the  New  Testament  in  a  form  smooth  and 
attractive,  but  appreciahly  impoverished  in  sense  and  force :" — 

(c)  "  Is  more  fitted  for  cursory  perusal  or  recitation,  than  for 
repeated  and  diligent  study." 

Moreover,  the  mischief  has  proved  infectious, — has  spread. 
In  Syria  also,  at  Edessa  or  Nisibis, — (for  it  is  as  well  to  be 
circumstantial  in  such  matters,) — the  self-same  iniquity  is 
about  to  be  perpetrated ;  of  which  the  Peschito  will  be  the 
abiding  monument :  one  solitary  witness  only  to  the  pure  Text 
being  suffered  to  escape.     Cureton's  fragmentary  Syriac  will 


^  To  speak  with  entire  accuracy,  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  require  us  to 
believe  that  the  Authors  of  the  [imaginary]  Syrian  Revisions  of  a.d,  250 
and  A.D.  350,  interpolated  the  genuine  Text  of  the  Gospels,  with  between 
2877  (b)  and  3455  (s)  spurious  words;  mutilated  the  genuine  Text  in 
respect  of  between  536  (b)  and  839  (X  )  words  : — substituted  for  as  many 
genuine  words,  between  935  (b)  and  1114  (x)  uninspired  words: — licen- 
tiously transposed  between  2098  (b)  and  2299  (x): — and  in  respect  of 
number,  case,  mood,  tense,  person,  &c.,  altered  without  authority  between 
1132  (b)  and  1265  (k)  words. 

U 


290  DK.  HORT'S  FANTASTIC  THEORY.  [Art. 

alone  remain  to  exhibit  to  mankind  the  outlines  of  primitive 
Truth.  (The  reader  is  reminded  of  the  character  already 
given  of  the  document  in  question  at  the  summit  of  page 
279.  Its  extravagance  can  only  be  fully  appreciated  by  one 
wlu)  will  be  at  the  pains  to  read  it  steadily  through.) 

XXX.  And  pray,  (we  ask,) —  Who  says  all  this  ?  WJio  is  it 
who  gravely  puts  forth  all  this  egregious  nonsense  ?  ...  It  is 
Dr.  Hort,  (we  answer,)  at  pp.  134-5  of  the  volume  now  under 
review.  In  fact,  according  to  hivi,  those  primitive  Tathers 
have  been  the  great  falsifiers  of  Scripture ;  have  proved  the 
worst  enemies  of  the  pure  "Word  of  God  ;  have  shamefully 
betrayed  their  sacred  trust ;  have  done  the  diametrical  reverse 
of  what  (by  the  hypothesis)  they  came  together  for  the  sole 
purpose  of  doing.  They  have  depraved  and  corrupted  that 
sacred  Text  which  it  was  their  aim,  their  duty,  and  their  pro- 
fessed object  to  purge  from  its  errors.  And  (by  the  hypo- 
thesis) Dr.  Hort,  at  the  end  of  1532  years, — aided  by  codex  B 
and  his  own  self-evolved  powers  of  divination, — has  found 
them  out,  and  now  holds  them  up  to  the  contempt  and  scorn 
of  the  British  public. 

XXXI.  In  the  meantime  the  illustrious  Professor  in\dtes 
us  to  believe  that  the  mistaken  textual  judgment  pronounced 
at  Antioch  in  a.d.  350  had  an  innnediate  effect  on  the  Text 
of  Scripture  throughout  the  world.  "VVe  are  requested  to  sup- 
pose that  it  resulted  in  the  instantaneous  extinction  of  codices 
the  like  of  B  n,  wherever  found ;  and  caused  codices  of  the  A  type 
to  spring  up  like  mushrooms  in  their  })lace,  and  that,  in  every 
lilmiry  of  ancient  Christciidoin.  We  are  further  required  to 
assume  that  this  extraordinary  sulistitution  of  new  evidence 
for  old — the  false  for  th.e  true — fidly  explains  why  Iren;eus 
and    Hippolytus,    Athanasius    and   Didymus,    Gregory    of 


III.]  ITS  INCONVENIENT   CONSEQUENCES.  291 

N"azianziis  and  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  Basil  and  Ephraem,  Epipha- 
nius  and  Chrysostom,  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  and  Isidore 
of  Pelusium,  Nilus  and  Nonnus,  Proclus  and  Severianus, 
the  two  Cyrils  and  Theodoret — 07ic  mid  all — show  them- 
selves strangers  to  the  text  of  b  and  N.  .  .  .  We  read  and 
marvel. 

XXXII.  For,  (it  is  time  to  enquire,) — Does  not  the  learned 
Professor  see  that,  by  thus  getting  rid  of  the  testimony  of 
the  whole  body  of  the  Fathers,  he  leaves  the  Science  which  he  is 
so  good  as  to  patronize  in  a  most  destitute  condition, — besides 
placing  himself  in  a  most  inconvenient  state  of  isolation  ?    If 
clear  and  consentient  Patristic  testimony  to  the  Text  of  Scrip- 
ture is  not  to  be  deemed  forcible  witness  to  its   Truth, — 
whither  shall  a  man  betake  himself  for  constraining  Evidence  ? 
Dr.  Hort  has  already  set  aside  the  Traditional  Text  as  a  thin" 
of  no  manner  of  importance.     The  venerable  Syriac  Version 
he  has  also  insisted  on  reducing  very  nearly  to  the  level  of 
the  despised  cursives.     As  for  the  copies  of  the  old  Latin, 
they  had  confessedly  become  so  untrustworthy,  at  the  time  of 
which  he  speaks,  that  a  modest  Eevision  of  the  Text  they 
embody,   (the  '  Vulgate '  namely,)  became  at  last  a  measure 
of  necessity.     What   remains    to   him   therefore  ?     Can   he 
seriously  suppose  that  the  world  will  put  up  with  the  •'  idio- 
syncrasy' of  a  living  Doctor — his  'personal  instincts'  (p.  xi.) — 
his  '  personal  discernment '  (p.  65), — his  '  instinctive  processes 
of  Criticism '  (p.  66), — his  '  individual  mind,' — in  preference 
to  articulate  voices  coming  to  us  across  the  gulf  of  Time  from 
every  part  of  ancient  Christendom  ?     How — with  the  faintest 
chance  of  success — does   Dr.  Hort  propose   to  remedy  the 
absence  of  External  Testimony  ?     If  mankind  can  afford  to 
do  without  either  consent  of  Copies  or  of  Fathers,  why  does 
mankind  any  longer  adhere  to  the  ancient  methods  of  proof? 
Why  do  Critics  of  every  school  still  accumulate  references  to 

u  2 


292  WE   DEVOUTLY  WISH  THAT   THE  [Anr. 

MSS.,  explore  the  ancient  Versions,  and  ransack  tlie  Patristic 
WTitings  in  search  of  neglected  citations  of  Scripture  ?  That 
the  ancients  were  indifferent  Textual  Critics,  is  true  enough. 
The  mischief  done  by  Origen  in  this  department, — through 
his  fondness  for  a  branch  of  Learning  in  which  his  remarks 
show  that  he  was  all  unskilled, — is  not  to  be  told.  But  then, 
these  men  lived  within  a  very  few  hundred  years  of  the 
Apostles  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  :  and  when  they  witness 
to  the  reading  of  their  own  copies,  their  testimony  on  the  point, 
to  say  the  least,  is  worthy  of  our  most  respectful  attention. 
Dated  codices,  in  fact  are  they,  to  all  intents  and  purposes, 
as  often  as  they  bear  clear  witness  to  the  Text  of  Scripture : 
— a  fact,  (we  take  leave  to  throw  out  the  remark  in  passing,) 
which  has  not  yet  nearly  attracted  the  degree  of  attention 
which  it  deserves. 

XXXIII.  For  ourselves,  having  said  so  much  on  this  sub- 
ject, it  is  fair  that  we  should  add, — We  devoutly  wish  that 
Dr.  Hort's  hypothesis  of  an  authoritative  and  deliberate  Eecen- 
sion  of  the  Text  of  the  New  Testament  achieved  at  Antioch 
first,  about  a.d.  250,  and  next,  about  a.d.  350,  were  indeed  an 
historical  fact.  We  desire  no  firmer  basis  on  which  to  rest 
our  confidence  in  the  Traditional  Text  of  Scripture  than 
the  deliberate  verdict  of  Antiquity, — the  ascertained  sanction 
of  the  collective  Church,  in  the  Nicene  age.  The  Latin 
'  Vulgate '  [a.d.  385]  is  the  work  of  a  single  man — Jerome.  The 
Si/riac  'Vulgate'  [a.d.  616]  was  also  the  work  of  a  single 
man — Thomas  of  Harkel.  But  this  Gj'ceic  '  Vulgate '  was  (by 
the  hypothesis)  the  product  of  the  Church  Catholic,  [a.d.  250- 
A.D.  350,]  in  her  corporate  capacity.  Not  only  should  we  hail 
such  a  monument  of  the  collective  piety  and  learning  of  the 
Church  in  her  best  days  with  unmingled  reverence  and  joy, 
were  it  introduced  to  our  notice;  liut  we  should  insist  that 
no  important  deviation  from  such  a  '  Tcxtus  Eccc2)tv.s '  as  that 


III.]     '  TEXTUS  BECEPTU8'  HAD   ANY   SUCH  HISTORY.      293 

would  deserve  to  be  listened  to.  In  other  words,  if  Dr. 
Hort's  theory  about  the  origin  of  the  Tcxtus  Bcceptus  have 
any  foundation  at  all  in  fact,  it  is  '  all  up '  with  Dr.  Hort. 
He  is  absolutely  nowhere.  He  has  most  ingeniously  placed 
himself  on  the  horns  of  a  fatal  dilemma. 

For, — (let  it  be  carefully  noted,) — the  entire  discussion 
becomes,  in  this  way,  brought  (so  to  speak)  within  the  com- 
pass of  a  nutshell.  To  state  the  case  briefly, — We  are  invited 
to  make  our  election  between  the  Fathers  of  the  Church, 
A.D.  250  and  .\.d.  350, — and  Dr.  Hort,  a.d.  1881.  The  issue  is 
really  reduced  to  that.  The  general  question  of  the  Text  of 
Scripture  being  the  matter  at  stake ;  (not  any  particular 
passage,  remember,  but  the  Text  of  Scripture  as  a  lohole ;) — and 
the  conjiicting  ^mrties  being  but  two; — Which  are  we  to 
believe  ?  the  consentient  Voice  of  Antiquity, — or  the  solitary 
modern  Professor  ?  Shall  we  accept  the  august  Testimony 
of  the  whole  body  of  the  Fathers  ?  or  shall  we  prefer  to  be 
guided  by  the  self-evolved  imaginations  of  one  who  con- 
fessedly has  nothing  to  offer  but  conjecture  ?  The  question 
before  us  is  reduced  to  that  single  issue.  But  in  fact  the 
alternative  admits  of  being  yet  more  concisely  stated.  We  are 
invited  to  make  our  election  between  fact  and — fiction  .  .  . 
All  this,  of  course,  on  the  supposition  tliat  there  is  any  truth 
at  all  in  Dr.  Hort's  '  New  Textual  Theory.' 

XXXIV.  Apart  however  from  the  gross  intrinsic  impro- 
bability of  the  supposed  Recension, — the  utter  absence  of 
one  particle  of  evidence,  traditional  or  otherwise,  that  it  ever 
did  take  place,  must  be  held  to  be  fatal  to  the  hypothesis 
that  it  did.  It  is  simply  incredible  that  an  incident  of  such 
magnitude  and  interest  would  leave  no  trace  of  itself  in  his- 
tory. As  a  conjecture — (and  it  only  professes  to  be  a  conjec- 
ture)— Dr.  Hort's  notion  of  how  the  Text  of  the  Fathers  of 


294  DR.   IIORT'S   TEXT   COLLAPSES  [Akt. 

the  Ilird,  lYth,  and  Vtli  centuries, — which,  as  he  truly 
remarks,  is  in  the  main  identical  with  our  own  Received  Text, 
— came  into  being,  must  be  unconditionally  abandoned.  In  the 
words  of  a  learned  living  Prelate, — "  the  snjyjjositmi "  on  which 
Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  have  staked  their  critical  reputation, 
"is  a  manifest  absurditi/."^ 

XXXV.  We  have  been  so  full  on  the  subject  of  this  ima- 
ginary '  Antiochian  '  or '  Syrian  text,'  not  (the  reader  may  be 
sure)  without  sufficient  reason.  Scant  satisfaction  truly  is 
there  in  scattering  to  the  winds  an  airy  tissue  which  its 
ingenious  authors  have  been  industriously  weaving  for 
30  years.  But  it  is  clear  that  with  this  hypothesis  of  a 
'  Syrian  '  text, — the  immediate  source  and  actual  prototype  of 
the  commonly  received  Text  of  the  N.  T., — stands  or  falls 
their  entire  Textual  theory.  Eeject  it,  and  the  entire  fabric  is 
observed  to  collapse,  and  subside  into  a  shapeless  ruin.  And 
with  it,  of  necessity,  goes  the  '  New  Greek  Text,' — and  there- 
fore the  '  New  Miglish  Version '  of  our  Eevisionists,  which  in 
the  main  has  been  founded  on  it. 

XXXVI.  In  the  meantime  the  phenomena  upon  which  this 
phantom  has  been  based,  remain  unchanged ;  and  fairly  in- 
terpreted, will  be  found  to  conduct  us  to  the  diametrically 
opposite  result  to  that  which  has  been  arrived  at  by  Drs. 
Westcott  and  Hort.  With  perfect  truth  has  the  latter 
remarked  on  the  practical  '  identity  of  tlie  Text,  more  espe- 
cially in  the  Gospels  and  Pauline  Epistles,  in  all  the  known 
cursive  MSS.,  except  a  few'  (p.  143).  Wa  fully  admit  the 
truth  of  his  statement  tliat — 

'  Before  the  dose  of  the  IVfh  century,  a  Greek  Text  not  inaterially 
dififering  from  the  almost  universal  Text  of  the  IXtli,' — [and 


'  (^nnfc(l  1)y  Canon  Cook,  llcviscd  Version  Considered, — p.  202. 


III.]  WITH  HIS  FANTASTIC  THEORY.  295 

why  not  of  the  Vlth  ?  of  the  Vllth  ?  of  the  Vlllth  ?  or  again 
of  the  Xth?  of  the  Xlth?  of  the  Xllth?]—' century,  was 
dominant  at  Antioch.' — (p.  142.) 

And  why  not  throughout  the  whole  of  Eastern  Christendom  ? 
Why  this  continual  mention  of  'Antioch,' — this  perpetual 
introduction  of  the  epithet  '  Syrian '  ?  Neither  designation 
applies  to  Irenseus  or  to  Hippolytus, — to  Athanasius  or  to 
Didymus, — to  Gregory  of  Nazianzus  or  to  his  namesake  of 
Nyssa, — to  Basil  or  to  Epiphanius, — to  ISTonnus  or  to  Maca- 
rius, — to  Proclus  or  to  Theodorus  Mops., — to  the  earlier  or 
to  the  later  Cyril. — In  brief, 

'  The  fundamental  text  of  the  late  extant  Greek  MSS.  gene- 
rally is,  beyond  all  question,  identical  with  [what  Dr.  Hort 
chooses  to  call]  the  dominant  Antiochian  or  Grseco-Syrian  text 
of  the  secondhalfof  the  IVthcentur3%  .  .  .  The  Antiochian  [and 
other]  Fathers,  and  the  bulk  of  extant  MSS.  written  from 
about  three  or  four,  to  ten  or  eleven  centuries  later,  must 
have  had,  in  the  greater  number  of  extant  variations,  a  common 
original  either  contemporary  loith,  or  older  than,  our  oldest  extant 
MSS:—i^.  92.) 

XXXVII.  So  far  then,  happily,  we  are  entirely  agreed.  The 
only  question  is, — How  is  this  resemblance  to  be  accounted 
for  ?  Not,  we  answer, — not,  certainly,  by  putting  forward  so 
violent  and  improbable — so  irrational  a  conjecture  as  that, 
first,  abovit  a.d.  250,— and  then  again  about  a.d.  350, — 
an  authoritative  standard  Text  was  fabricated  at  Antioch  ;  of 
which  all  other  known  MSS.  (except  a  very  little  handful) 
are  nothing  else  but  transcripts  : — but  rather,  by  loyally 
recognizing,  in  the  practical  identity  of  the  Text  exhibited 
by  99  out  of  100  of  our  extant  MSS.,  the  probable  general 
fidelity  of  those  many  transcripts  to  the  inspired  exemplars 
themselves  from  lohich  remotely  they  are  confessedly  descended. 
And  surely,  if  it  be  allowable  to  assume  (with  Dr.  Hort) 
that  for  1532  years,  (viz.  from  a.d.  350  to  a.d.  1882)  the 


296  THE   TRADITIONAL   TEXT,   A   TROUBLE  [Art. 

Antiochian  standard  has  been  faithfully  retained  and  trans- 
mitted,— it  will  be  impossible  to  assign  any  valid  reason 
why  the  inspirt^d  Original  itself,  the  Apostolic  standard, 
should  not  have  been  as  faithfully  transmitted  and  retained 
from  the  Apostolic  age  to  the  Antiochian,^ — i.e.  throughout 
an  interval  of  less  than  250  years,  or  one-sixth  of  the  period. 

XXXVIII.  Here,  it  will  obviously  occur  to  enquire, — But 
what  has  been  l)rs.  Westcott  and  Hort's  motive  for  inventing 
such   an  improbable  hypothesis  ?    and  why  is  Dr.  Hort  so 

strenuous  in  maintaining  it  ? We  reply  by  remind- 

inf  the  Reader  of  certain  remarks  which  we  made  at  the 
outset.^  The  Traditional  Text  of  the  N.  T.  is  a  phenomenon 
which  sorely  exercises  Critics  of  the  new  school.  To  depre- 
ciate it,  is  easy :  to  deny  its  critical  authority,  is  easier  still : 
to  cast  ridicule  on  the  circumstances  under  which  Erasmus 
produced  his  first  (very  faulty)  edition  of  it  (1516),  is  easiest 
of  all.  But  to  ignore  the  'Traditional  Text,'  is  impossible. 
Equally  impossible  is  it  to  overlook  its  practical  identity 
with  the  Text  of  Chrysostom,  who  lived  and  taught  at  An- 
tioch  till  A.D.  398,  when  he  became  Abp.  of  Constantinople. 
Now  this  is  a  very  awkward  circumstance,  and  must  in  some 
way  be  got  over ;  for  it  transports  us,  at  a  bound,  from  the 
stifling  atmosphere  of  Basle  and  Alcala, — from  Erasmus  and 
Stunica,  Stephens  and  Beza  and  the  Elzevirs, — to  Antioch 
and  Constantinople  in  the  latter  part  of  the  IVtli  century. 
What  is  to  be  done  ? 

XXXIX.  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  assume  that  this  'Anti- 
ochian text ' — found  in  the  later  cursives  and  tlie  Fathers  of 
the  latter  half  of  the  IVtli  century— must  be  an  arflfieial, 
an  arbitrarily  invented  standard ;    a  text  fabricated  between 


'  i.e.  say  fmrn  a.d.  90  to  a.d.  250-350.  "^  Sec  above,  p.  269. 


III.]  TC   DES.    WESTCOTT   AND   HORT.  297 

A.D.  250  and  a.d.  350.  And  if  they  may  but  be  so  fortunate 
as  to  persuade  the  world  to  adopt  their  hypothesis,  then  all 
will  be  easy ;  for  they  will  have  reduced  the  supposed  '  con- 
sent of  Fathers '  to  the  reproduction  of  one  and  the  same 
single  '  primary  documentary  witness  : '  ^ — and  '  it  is  hardly 
necessary  to  point  out  the  total  change  in  the  bearing 
of  the  evidence  by  the  introduction  of  the  factor  of  Gene- 
alogy '  (p.  43)  at  this  particular  juncture.  Upset  the 
hypothesis  on  the  other  hand,  and  all  is  reversed  in  a 
moment.  Every  attesting  Father  is  perceived  to  be  a  dated 
MS.  and  an  independent  authority ;  and  the  combined  evi- 
dence of  several  of  these  becomes  simply  unmanageable. 
In  like  manner,  "  the  approximate  consent  of  the  cursives " 
(see  the  foot-note),  is  perceived  to  be  equivalent  not  to  "  A 

PEIMARY  DOCUMENTARY  WITNESS," — not  to  "  ONE  AnTIOCHIAN 

ORIGINAL," — but  to  be  tantamount  to  the  articulate  speech  of 
many  witnesses  of  high  character,  coming  to  us  froin  every 
quarter  of  primitive  Christendom. 

XL.  But — (the  further  enquiry  is  sure  to  be  made)  — 
In  favour  of  which  document,  or  set  of  documents,  have  all 
these  fantastic  efforts  been  made  to  disparage  the  commonly 
received  standards  of  excellence  ?  The  ordinary  English 
Eeader  may  require  to  be  reminded  that,  prior  to  the  IVth 
century,  our  Textual  helps  are  few,  fragmentary,  and — to 
speak  plainly — insufficient.  As  for  sacred  Codices  of  that 
date,  we  possess  not  one.     Of  our  two  primitive  Versions, 


'  *  If,'  says  Dr.  Hort,  '  an  editor  were  for  any  purpose  to  make  it  his  aim 
to  restore  as  completely  as  possible  the  New  Testament  of  Antioch  in  a.d. 
350,  he  could  not  help  taking  the  approximate  consent  of  the  cursives  as 
equivalent  to  a  primary  documentary  ivitiiess.  And  he  would  not  be  the 
less  justified  in  so  doing  for  being  unable  to  say  precisely  by  what  historical 
agencies  the  one  Antiochian  original  '■ — [note  the  fallacy !] — '  was  mul- 
tiplied into  the  cursive  hosts  of  the  later  ages." — Pp.  143-4, 


298  DR.   IIORT   REJECTS   THE   TEXT   OF  [Art. 

'  the  Syriac  and  the  old  Latin/  the  second  is  grossly  corrupt ; 
owing  (says  Dr.  Hort)  '  to  a  perilous  confusion  between 
transcription  and  reproduction ; '  '  the  preservation  of  a 
record  and  its  supposed  improvement'  (p.  121).  'Further 
acquaintance  with  it  only  increases  our  distrust'  {ibid.).  In 
plainer  English,  '  the  earliest  readings  which  can  be  fixed 
chronologically '  (p.  120)  belong  to  a  Aversion  which  is  licen- 
tious and  corrupt  to  an  incredible  extent.  And  though 
'  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  Peschito  [or  ancient 
Syriac]  is  at  least  as  old  as  the  Latin  Version '  (p.  84),  yet 
(according  to  Dr.  Hort)  it  is  '  impossible ' — (he  is  nowhere  so 
good  as  to  explain  to  us  wherein  this  supposed  '  impossi- 
bility '  consists), — to  regard  '  the  present  form  of  the  Version 
as  a  true  representation  of  the  original  Syriac  text.'  The 
date  of  it  (according  to  him)  may  be  as  late  as  a.d.  350. 
Anyhow,  we  are  assured  (but  only  by  Dr.  Hort)  that  impor- 
tant '  evidence  for  the  Greek  text  is  hardly  to  l)e  luuked  fur 
from  this  source '  (p.  85). — The  Fathers  of  the  Ilird  century 
wdio  have  left  behind  them  considerable  remains  in  Greek 
are  but  two, — Clemens  Alex,  and  Origen  :  and  there  are 
considerations  attending  the  citations  of  either,  which  greatly 
detract  from  their  value. 

XLI.  Tlie  question  therefore  recurs  with  redoubled  em- 
phasis,— Li  favour  of  irJiich  document,  or  set  of  documents, 
does  Dr.  Hort  disparage  the  more  considerable  portion  of 
that  early  evidence, — so  much  of  it,  namely,  as  belongs  to 
the  IVth  century, — on  which  the  Church  has  been  hitherto 
accustomed  conlidcntly  to  rely?     He  asserts  that, — 

'  Almost  all  Greek  Fathers  after  Eusebius  have  texts  so 
deeply  affected  by  mixture  that '  they  '  cannot  at  most  count 
for  more  than  so  many  secondary  Greek  uncial  MSS.,  inferior 
in  most  cases  to  the  better  sort  of  secondary  uncial  MSS.  now  cx- 
istinij:—{\\.  202.) 


III.]  THE   GREEK   FATHEES   AFTER   EUSEBIUS.  299 

And  thus,  at  a  stroke,  behold,  '  almost  all  Greek  Fathers 
after  Uuschius'  —  (who  died  a.d.  340)  —  are  disposed  of! 
washed  overboard !  put  clean  out  of  sight !  Athanasius  and 
Didymus — the  2  Basils  and  the  2  Gregories — the  2  Cyrils 
and  the  2  Theodores  —  Epiphanius  and  Macarius  and 
Ephraem — Chrysostom  and  Severianus  and  Proclus — Nilus 
and  Nonnus — Isidore  of  Pelusium  and  Theodoret :  not  to 
mention  at  least  as  many  more  who  have  left  scanty, 
yet  most  precious,  remains  behind  them : — all  these  are 
pronounced  inferior  in  authority  to  as  many  IXth-  or  Xth- 
century  copies !  .  .  .  We  commend,  in  passing,  the  fore- 
going dictum  of  these  accomplished  Editors  to  the  critical 
judgment  of  all  candid  and  intelligent  Eeaders.  Not  as 
dated  manuscripts,  therefore,  at  least  equal  in  Antiquity  to 
the  oldest  which  we  now  possess  : — not  as  the  authentic 
utterances  of  famous  Doctors  and  Fathers  of  the  Church, 
(instead  of  being  the  work  of  unknown  and  irresj)onsible 
Scribes): — not  as  sure  witnesses  of  what  was  accounted 
Scripture  in  a  known  region,  by  a  famous  personage,  at  a 
well-ascertained  period,  (instead  of  coming  to  us,  as  our 
codices  universally  do,  without  a  history  and  without  a 
character) : — in  no  such  light  are  we  henceforth  to  regard 
Patristic  citations  of  Scripture : — but  only  '  as  so  many 
secondary  MSS.,  inferior  to  the  hcttcr  sort  of  secondary  uncials 
7101V  existing^ 

XLII.  That  the  Testimony  of  the  Fathers,  in  the  lump, 
must  perforce  in  some  such  way  either  be  ignored  or  else 
flouted,  if  the  Text  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  is  to  stand, — 
we  were  perfectly  well  aware.  It  is  simply  fatal  to  them : 
and  they  knoio  it.  But  we  were  hardly  prepared  for  such  a 
demonstration  as  this.  Let  it  all  pass  however.  The  ques- 
tion we  propose  is  only  the  following, — If  the  Text  '  used  by 
great  Antiochian  theologians  not  long  after  the  middle  of  the 


300  THE  SECEET  OUT  AT  LAST.  [Art. 

IVtli  century '  (p.  146)  is  undeserving  of  our  confidence : — 
if  we  are  to  believe  that  a  systematic  depravation  of  Scrip- 
ture was  universally  going  on  till  about  the  end  of  the  Ilird 
century;  and  if  at  that  time,  an  authoritative  and  deliberate 
recension  of  it — conducted  on  utterly  erroneous  principles — 
took  place  at  Antioch,  and  resulted  in  the  vicious  'tradi- 
tional Constantinopolitan '  (p.  143),  or  (as  Dr.  Hort  prefers 
to  call  it)  the  '  eclectic  Syrian  Text : ' —  What  remains  to  us  ? 
Are  we  henceforth  to  rely  on  our  own  '  inner  consciousness ' 
for  illumination  ?  Or  is  it  seriously  expected  that  for  the 
restoration  of  the  inspired  Verity  we  shall  be  content  to 
surrender  ourselves  blindfold  to  the  ipse  dixit  of  an  unknown 
and  irresponsible  nineteenth-century  guide  ?  If  neither  of 
these  courses  is  expected  of  us,  will  these  Editors  be  so  good 
as  to  give  us  the  names  of  the  documents  on  which,  in  their 
judgment,  we  may  rely  ? 

XLIII.  We  are  not  suffered  to  remain  long  in  a  state 
of  suspense.  The  assurance  awaits  us  (at  p.  150),  that  the 
Vatican  codex, 

'b — is  found  to  hold  a  unique  position.  Its  text  is  through- 
out Pre-Syrian,  perhaps  purely  P}-c-Syrian.  .  .  .  From  distinc- 
tively Western  readings  it  seems  to  be  all  but  entirely  free. 
.  .  .  We  have  not  been  able  to  recognize  as  Alexandrian  any 

readings  of  b  in  any  book  of  the  New  Testament So 

that  .  .  .  neither  of  the  early  streams  of  innovation  has  touched 
it  to  any  appreciable  extent.' — (p.  150.) 

'  The  text  of  the  Sinaitic  codex  (x)  '  also  '  seems  to  be  entirely, 
or  all  but  entirely,  Pre-Syrian.  A  very  large  part  of  the 
text  is  in  like  manner  free  from  Western  or  Alexandrian  ele- 
ments.'— (p.  151.) 

'  Every  other  known  Greek  maunscript  has  either  a  mixed  or  a 
Syrian  text.' — (p.  151.) 

Thus  then,  at  last,  at  the  end  of  exactly  150  weary  pages, 
tlie  secret  comes  out!     The  one  ])oint  which  the  respected 


III.]  CODEX   B   AND   CODEX   NV  301 

Editors  are  found  to  have  been  all  along  driving  at : — the 
one  aim  of  those  many  hazy  disquisitions  of  theirs  about 
*  Intrinsic  and  Transcriptional  Probability,' — '  Genealogical 
evidence,  simple  and  divergent,' — and  '  the  study  of  Groups  : ' 
— the  one  reason  of  all  their  vague  terminology, — and  of 
their  baseless  theory  of  '  Conflation,' — and  of  their  disparage- 
ment of  the  Fathers  : — the  one  liaison  d'etre  of  their  fiction 
of  a  '  Syrian  '  and  a  '  Pre-Syrian '  and  a  '  Neutral '  text : — 
the  secret  of  it  all  comes  out  at  last !  A  delightful,  a  truly 
Newtonian  simplicity  characterizes  the  final  announcement. 
All  is  summed  up  in  the  curt  formula — Codex  b  ! 

Behold  then  the  altar  at  which  Copies,  Fathers,  Versions, 
are  all  to  be  ruthlessly  sacrificed  : — the  tribunal  from  which 
there  shall  be  absolutely  no  appeal : — the  Oracle  which  is  to 
silence  every  doubt,  resolve  every  riddle,  smooth  away  every 
difficulty.  All  has  been  stated,  where  the  name  has  been 
pronounced  of — codex  B.  One  is  reminded  of  an  enigmatical 
epitaph  on  the  floor  of  the  Chapel  of  S.  John's  College, 
'  Vcrhum  non  amplius — Fisher ' !  To  codex  B  all  the  Greek 
Fathers  after  Eusebius  must  give  way.  Even  Patristic 
evidence  of  the  ante-Nicene  period  '  requires  critical  sifting ' 
(p.  202), — must  be  distrusted,  may  be  denied  (pp.  202-5), 
— if  it  shall  be  found  to  contradict  Cod.  B !  '  b  very  far 
exceeds  all  other  documents  in  neutrality  of  Text.' — (p.  171.) 

XLIV.  '  At  a  long  interval  after  B,  but  hardly  a  less 
interval  before  all  other  MSS.,  stands  n'  (p.  171). — Such  is 
the  sum  of  the  matter !  ....  A  coarser, — a  clumsier, — a 
more  unscientific, — a  more  stiqml  expedient  for  settling  the 
true  Text  of  Scripture  was  surely  never  invented !  BtU  for  the 
many  foggy,  or  rather  unreadable  disquisitions  with  which 
the  Introduction  is  encumbered,  "  Textual  Criticism  made 
easy,"   might   very  well   have   been  the   title  of  the   little 


302  DRS.   WESTOOTT   AND   HORT'S  [Art. 

volume  now  under  Eeview  ;  of  which  at  last  it  is  discovered 
that  tlic  general  Infallibility  of  Codex  B  is  the  fundamental 
principle.     Let  us  however  hear  these  learned  men  out. 

XLV.  They  begin  by  offering  us  a  chapter  on  the  '  General 
relations  of  b  and  n  to  other  documents  : '  wherein  we  are 
assured  that, — 

'  Two  striking  fads  successively  come  out  with  especial  clear- 
ness. Every  group  containing  both  n  and  B,  is  found  ...  to 
have  an  apparently  more  original  Text  than  every  opposed  group 
containing  neither ;  and  every  group  containing  b  .  .  .  is  found 
in  a  large  preponderance  of  cases  ...  to  have  an  aj^parently 
more  original  Text  than  every  opposed  group  containing  k-' — 
(p.  210.) 

'  Is  found ' !  but  pray, — By  whom  1-  And  '  aiiparcnily ' !  but 
pray, — To  wliom  ?  and  On  what  grounds  of  Evidence  ?  For 
unless  it  be  on  certain  grounds  of  Evidence,  how  can  it 
be  pretended  that  we  have  before  us  '  two  striking/ac^s'  ? 

Again,  with  what  show  of  reason  can  it  possibly  be  asserted 
that  these  "  two  striking  facts  "  "  come  out  with  especial  clear- 
ness "  ?  so  long  as  their  very  existence  remains  in  nuhihus, — 
has  never  been  established,  and  is  in  fact  emphatically 
denied  ?  Expressions  like  the  foregoing  then  only  begin  to 
be  tolerable  when  it  has  been  made  plain  that  the  Teacher 
has  some  solid  foundation  on  which  to  build.  Else,  he 
occasions  nothing  but  impatience  and  displeasure.  Eeaders 
at  first  are  simply  annoyed  at  being  trifled  with  :  presently 
they  grow  restive:  at  last  they  become  clamorous  for 
demonstration,  and  will  accept  of  nothing  less.  Let  us  go 
on  however.     We  are  still  at  ]\  210  : — 

'  We  found  N  and  b  to  stand  alone  in  their  almosst  complete 
immunity  from  distinctive  Syriac  readings  ....  and  n  to  stand 
far  above  fc<  in  its  apparent  freedom  from  either  Western  or 
Alexandrian  readings.' — (p.  210.) 


III.]  EXTRAORDINARY   METHOD   OF   REASONING.  303 

But  pray,  gentlemen, —  Where  and  token  did  '  we  find  ' 
either  of  tliese  two  tilings  ?  We  liave  '  found '  nothing  of 
the  sort  hitherto.  The  Keviewer  is  disposed  to  reproduce 
the  Duke  of  "Wellington's  courteous  reply  to  the  Prince 
Eegent,  when  the  latter  claimed  the  arrangements  which 
resulted  in  the  victory  of  Waterloo : — '  /  Jiave  heard  your 
Royal  Highness  say  so.'  ....  At  the  end  of  a  few  pages, 

'  Having  found  n  b  the  constant  element  in  groups  of  every 
size,  distinguished  by  internal  excellence  of  readings,  we  found 
no  less  excellence  in  the  readings  in  which  they  concur  with- 
out other  attestations  of  Greek  MSS.,  or  even  of  Versions  or 
Fathers.'— (p.  219.) 

What !  again  ?  Why,  we  '  have  found '  nothing  as  yet  l")ut 
Eeiteration.  Up  to  this  point  we  have  not  been  favoured 
with  one  particle  of  Evidence !  ...  In  the  meantime,  the 
convictions  of  these  accomplished  Critics, — (but  not,  unfortu- 
nately, those  of  their  Eeaders,) — are  observed  to  strengthen 
as  they  proceed.     On  reaching  p.  224,  w^e  are  assured  that, 

'  The  independence  [of  b  and  n]  can  be  carried  back  so  far,' — 
(not  a  hint  is  given  liow,) — '  that  their  concordant  testimony  may 
be  treated  as  equivalent  to  that  of  a  MS.  older  than  n  and  b 
themselves  by  at  least  two  centuries, — prohahly  by  a  generation 
or  two  more.' 

How  that  '  independence '  was  established,  and  how  this 
'  probability '  has  been  arrived  at,  we  cannot  even  imagine. 
The  point  to  be  attended  to  however,  is,  that  by  the  process 
indicated,  some  such  early  epoch  as  a.d.  100  has  been  reached. 
So  that  now  we  are  not  surprised  to  hear  that, 

'  The  respective  ancestries  of  x  and  b  must  have  diverged 
from  a  common  parent  extremely  near  the  Apostolic  autographs.^ — 
(p.  220.     See  top  of  p.  221.) 

Or  that, — '  The  close  approach  to  the  time  of  the  autographs  raises 
the  presumption  of  purity  to  an  unusual  strength.' — (p.  224.) 


304  EFFORTS   OF   THE   IMAGINATION.  [Akt. 

And  lo,  before  we  turn  the  leaf,  this  '  presumption '  is 
found  to  have  ripened  into  certainty  : — 

*  This  general  immunity  from  substantive  error  ....  in  the 
common  original  of  N  b,  in  conjunction  with  its  very  high 
antiquity,  provides  in  a  multitude  of  cases  a  safe  criterion  of 
genuineness,  not  to  be  distrusted  except  on  very  clear  internal 
evidence.  Accordingly  ...  it  is  our  belief,  (1)  That  Headings 
of  K  B  should  he  accepted  as  the  true  Headings  until  strong  internal 
evidence  is  found  to  the  contrary  ;  and  (2),  That  no  Readings 
of  a  B  can  he  safely  rejected  absolutely.'' — (p.  225.) 

XLVI.  And  thus,  by  an  unscrupulous  use  of  the  process 
of  Eeiteration,  accompanied  by  a  boundless  exercise  of  the 
Imaginative  faculty,  we  have  reached  the  goal  to  which  all 
that  went  before  has  been  steadily  tending :  viz.  the  absolute 
supremacy  of  codices  b  and  n  above  all  other  codices, — and, 
when  they  differ,  then  of  codex  b. 

And  yet,  the  '  immunity  from  substantive  error '  of  a  lost 
Codex  of  imayinary  date  and  unknown  history,  cannot  but 
be  a  pure  imagination, — (a  mistaken  one,  as  we  shall 
presently  show,) — of  these  respected  Critics :  while  their 
proposed  practical  inference  from  it, — (viz.  to  regard  two 
remote  and  confessedly  depraved  Copies  of  that  original,  as 
'  a  safe  criterion  of  genuineness,') — this,  at  all  events,  is  the 
reverse  of  logical.  In  the  meantime,  the  presumed  proximity 
of  the  Text  of  n  and  b  to  the  Apostolic  age  is  henceforth  dis- 
coursed of  as  if  it  were  no  longer  matter  of  conjecture  : — 

'  The  ancestries  (if  both  MSS.  having  started  from  a  common 
source  not  much  later  than  the  Autographs,'  &c.~  (p.  2-i7.) 

And  again  : — 

'  Near  as  the  divergence  of  the  respective  ancestries  of  v.  and  x 
must  have  been  to  the  Autoijraphs,^  &c. — (p.  273.) 


III.]  A  BEMONSTKANCE.  305 

Until  at  last,  we  find  it  announced  as  a  '  moral  certainty  : ' — 

'  It  is  morally  certain  that  the  ancestries  of  b  and  n  diverged, 
from  a  point  near  the  Autographs,  and  never  came  into  contact 
subsequently.' — {Text,  p.  556.) 

After  which,  of  course,  we  have  no  right  to  complain  if  we 
are  assured  that : — 

'  The  fullest  comparison  does  but  increase  the  conviction  that 
their  pre-eminent  relative  purity  is  approximately  absolute, — a 
true  approximate  reproduction  of  the  Text  of  the  Autographs.'' — 
(p,  296.) 

XLVII.  But  how  does  it  happen — (we  must  needs  repeat 
the  enquiry,  which  however  we  make  with  unfeigned 
astonishment,) — How  does  it  come  to  pass  that  a  man  of 
practised  intellect,  addressing  persons  as  cultivated  and  per- 
haps as  acute  as  himself,  can  handle  a  confessedly  obscure 
problem  like  the  present  after  this  strangely  incoherent,  this 
foolish  and  wholly  inconclusive  fashion  ?  One  would  have 
supposed  that  Dr.  Hort's  mathematical  training  would  have 
made  him  an  exact  reasoner.  But  he  writes  as  if  he  had  no 
idea  at  all  of  the  nature  of  demonstration,  and  of  the  process 
necessary  in  order  to  carry  conviction  home  to  a  Eeader's 
mind.  Surely,  (one  tells  oneself,)  a  minimum  of  '  pass '  Logic 
would  have  effectually  protected  so  accomplished  a  gentle- 
man from  making  such  a  damaging  exhibition  of  himself! 
For  surely  he  must  be  aware  that,  as  yet,  he  has  produced 
not  one  ^particle  of  evidence  that  his  opinion  concerning  B  and  i< 
is  well  founded.  And  yet,  how  can  he  possibly  overlook  the 
circumstance  that,  unless  he  is  able  to  demonstrate  that 
those  two  codices,  and  especially  the  former  of  them,  has 
'  preserved  not  only  a  very  ancient  Text,  but  a  very  pure  line 
of  ancient  Text '  also  (p.  251),  his  entire  work,  (inasmuch  as  it 
reposes  on  that  one  assumption,)  on  being  critically  handled, 
crumbles  to  its  base ;  or  rather  melts  into  thin  air  before  the 

X 


306  THE   METHOD   OF   REITERATION.  [Akt. 

first  puff  of  >\iiul  ?  He  cannot,  surely,  require  telling  that 
those  who  look  for  Demonstration  will  refuse  to  put  up  with 
Ehetoric : — that,  with  no  thouglitful  person  will  Assertion 
pass  for  Argument : — nor  mere  Reiteration,  however  long 
persevered  in,  ever  be  mistaken  for  accumulated  Proof. 

"When  I  am  taking  a  ride  with  Eouser," — (quietly  re- 
marked Professor  Saville  to  Bodley  Coxe,) — "  I  ol)serve  that, 
if  I  ever  demur  to  any  of  his  views,  Eouser's  practice  always 
is,  to  repeat  the  same  thing  over  again  in  the  same  words, — 
only  in  a  louder  tone  of  voice  "...  The  delicate  rhetorical 
device  thus  indicated  proves  to  be  not  peculiar  to  Professors 
of  the  University  of  Oxford ;  but  to  be  familiarly  recognized 
as  an  instrument  of  conviction  by  the  learned  men  who  dwell 
on  the  banks  of  the  Cam.  To  be  serious  however. — Dr.  Hort 
has  evidently  failed  to  see  that  nothing  short  of  a  careful 
induction  of  particular  instances, — a  system  of  laborious 
footnotes,  or  an  '  Appendix '  bristling  with  impregnable  facts, 
— could  sustain  the  portentous  weight  of  his  fundamental 
position,  viz.  that  Codex  b  is  so  exceptionally  pure  a  docu- 
ment as  to  deserve  to  be  taken  as  a  chief  guide  in  deter- 
mining the  Truth  of  Scripture. 

It  is  related  of  the  illustrious  architect,  Sir  Gilbert  Scott, 
— when  he  had  to  rebuild  tlie  massive  central  tower  of  a 
southern  Cathedral,  and  to  rear  up  thereon  a  lofty  spire  of 
stone, — that  he  made  preparations  for  the  work  which 
astonished  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  tlie  day.  He  caused 
the  entire  area  to  be  excavated  to  what  seemed  a  most 
unnecessary  depth,  and  proceeded  to  lay  a  bed  of  concrete  of 
fabulous  solidity.  The  '  wise  master-builder '  was  determined 
that  his  work  should  last  for  ever.  Not  so  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort.  They  are  either  InniMt'd  willi  no  similar  anxieties, 
or  else  too  clear-sighted  to  cherish  any  similar  hope.  They 
are  evidently  of  opinion  that  a  cloud  or  a  quagmire  will  serve 


III.]  'RING  OF  genuineness:  307 

their  turn  every  bit  as  well  as  granite  or  Portland-stone. 
Dr.  H(jrt  (as  we  have  seen  already,  namely  in  p.  252,) 
considers  that  his  individual  '  steong  prefeeence'  of  one 
set  of  Eeadings  above  another,  is  sufficient  to  determine 
whether  the  Manuscript  which  contains  those  Eeadings  is 
pure  or  the  contrary.  '  FormidaUe  arrays  of  [hostile]  Docu- 
mcntary  evidence',  he  disregards  and  sets  at  defiance,  when 
once  his  own  'fullest  consideration  of  Internal  Evidence '  has 
'pronounced  certain  Eeadings  to  be  right'  [p.  61]. 

The  only  indication  we  anywhere  meet  with  of  the  actual 
ground  of  Dr.  Hort's  certainty,  and  reason  of  his  preference, 
is  contained  in  his  claim  that, — 

'  Every  binary  group  [of  MSS.]  containing  b  is  found  to  offer 
a  large  proportion  of  Readings,  which,  on  the  closest  scrutiny, 
have  THE  RING  OF  GENUINENESS  :  whllc  it  is  difficult  to  find  any 
Eeadings  so  attested  which  look  suspicious  after  full  considera- 
tion.'— (p.  227.    Also  vol.  i.  557 — where  the  dictum  is  repeated.) 

XL VIII.  And  thus  we  have,  at  last,  an  honest  confession 
of  the  ultimate  principle  which  has  determined  the  Text  of 
the  present  edition  of  the  N.  T.  '  The  ring  of  genuineness ' ! 
This  it  must  be  which  was  referred  to  when  'instinctive 
processes  of  Criticism '  were  vaunted  ;  and  the  candid  avowal 
made  that  '  the  experience  which  is  their  foundation  needs 
perpetual  correction  and  recorrection.'^ 

'  We  are  obliged  '  (say  these  accomplished  writers)  '  to  come  to 
the  individual  mind  at  lastP 

And  thus,  behold, '  at  last '  we  have  reached  the  goal !  .  .  . 
Individual  idiosyncrasy, — not  external  Evidence  : — Eeadings 
'  strongly  preferred,' — not  Eeadings  strongly  attested  : — '  per- 
sonal discernment '  (self !  still  self!)  conscientiously  exercising 


^  Preface  to  the  '  limited  ciud  private  issue '  of  1870,  p.  xviii. :  reprinted 
ill  the  Introduction  (1881),  p.  60.  ^  Ihid. 

X  2 


308  DR.   HORT'S  INNER  CONSCIOUSNESS,  [Art. 

itself  vjjon  Codex  B ; — this  is  a  true  account  of  the  Critical 
method  pursued  Ly  these  accomplished  Scholars.  They 
deliberately  claim  '  personal  discernment '  as  '  the  surest 
ground  for  confidence.'^  Accordingly,  they  judge  of  Headings 
by  their  looks  and  by  their  sound.  When,  in  tluir  opinion, 
words  'look  suspicious/  words  are  to  be  rejected.  If  a  word 
has  '  the  ring  of  genuineness/ — (i.e.  if  it  seems  to  them  to  have 
it,) — they  claim  that  the  word  shall  pass  unchallenged. 

XLIX.  But  it  must  be  obvious  that  such  a  method  is 
wholly  inadmissible.  It  practically  dispenses  with  Critical 
aids  altogether ;  substituting  individual  caprice  for  external 
guidance.  It  can  lead  to  no  tangible  result:  for  Eeadings 
which  '  look  suspicious '  to  one  expert,  may  easily  not  '  look ' 
so  to  another.  A  man's  '  inner  consciousness  '  cannot  possibly 
furnish  trustworthy  guidance  in  this  subject  matter.  Justly 
does  Bp.  Ellicott  ridicule  '  the  easy  method  of  ...  ,  using  a 
favourite  Manuscript,'  combined  with  '  some  supposed  pourr  of 
divining  the  Original  Text ;  '^ — unconscious  apparently  that  he 
is  thereby  aiming  a  cruel  blow  at  certain  of  his  friends. 

As  for  the  proposed  test  of  Truth, — (the  enquiry,  namely, 
whether  or  no  a  reading  has  '  the  ring  of  genuineness ') — it  is 
founded  on  a  transparent  mistake.  The  coarse  operation 
albuled  to  may  be  described  as  a  'rougli  uiid  ready' 
expedient  practised  by  receivers  of  money  in  the  way  of  self- 
defence,  and  only  for  their  own  protection,  lest  base  metal 
should  be  palmed  off  upon  them  unawares.  But  Dr.  Hort 
is  proposing  an  analogous  test  for  the  exclusive  satisfaction 
of  him  who  litters  the  suspected  article.  IWe  therefore  dis- 
allow the  proposal  entirely:  not,  of  course,  because  we 
suppose  that  so  excellent  and  honourable  a  man  as  Dr.  Hort 


1  P.  G5  (§  84).     In  the  Table  of  Contents  (ji.  xi.),  '  Personal  instincts' 
are  substituted  for  '  Personal  discernment.'' 
^  The  Pevisers  and  the  Oreek  Text, — p.  11). 


III.]  AN   UNSAFE   TEXTUAL   GUIDE.  309 

would  attempt  to  pass  off  as  genuine  what  he  suspects  to 
be  fabricated;  but  because  we  are  fully  convinced — (for 
reasons  '  plenty  as  blackberries  ') — that  through  some  natural 
defect,  or  constitutional  inaptitude,  he  is  not  a  competent 
judge._  The  man  who  finds  '  7io  marks  of  either  Critical  or 
Spiritual  insight '  (p.  135)  in  the  only  Greek  Text  which  was 
known  to  scholars  till  a.d.  1831, — (although  he  confesses 
that  '  the  text  of  Chrysostom  and  other  Syrian  Fathers  of 
the  IVth  century  is  substantially  identical  with  it '  ^)  ;  and 
vaunts  in  preference  '  the  hold  vigour '  and  '  refined  scholar- 
ship '  wdiich  is  exclusively  met  with  in  certain  depraved 
uncials  of  the  same  or  later  date : — the  man  who  thinks  it  not 
unlikely  that  the  incident  of  the  piercing  of  our  Saviour's 
side  (aA,Xo9  he  XajSoov  X6y)(7]v  k.  t.  X.)  was  actually  found  in 
the  genuine  Text  of  S.  Matt,  xxvii.  49,  as  well  as  in  S.  John 
xix.  34 : 2 — the  man  who  is  of  opinion  that  the  incident  of 
the  Woman  taken  in  Adultery  (filling  12  verses),  '  presents 
serious  differences  from  the  diction  of  S.  John's  Gospel,' — 
treats  it  as  'an  insertion  in  a  comparatively  late  Western 
text '  ^  and  declines  to  retain  it  even  w^ithin  brackets,  on  the 
ground  that  it  '  would  fatally  interrupt '  the  course  of  the 
narrative  if  suffered  to  stand  : — the  man  who  can  deliberately 
separate  off  from  the  end  of  S.  Mark's  Gospel,  and  print 
separately,  S.  Mark's  last  12  verses,  (on  the  plea  that  they 
'manifestly  cannot  claim  any  apostolic  authority;  but  are 
doubtless  founded  on  some  tradition  of  the  Apostolic  age ;'  *) — • 
yet  who  straightway  proceeds  to  annex,  as  an  alternative 
Conclusion  (dWa^),  '  the  wretched  supplement  derived  from 
codex  L : '  ^ — the  man  (lastly)  who,  in  defiance  of  '  solid  reason 
and  pure  taste,'  finds  music  in  the  '  utterly  marred  '  '  rhyth- 
mical arrangement '  of  the  Angels'  Hymn  on  the  night  of  the 


^  Introduction, — p.  xiii.  ^  Notes,  p.  22.  ^  Notes,  p.  88. 

■*  Notes, — p.  51.  ^  Scrivener's  Plain  Introduction, — pp.  507-8. 


310  '  THE  RING  OF  GENUINENESS,'   NOT  [Art 

Nativity  •} — such  an  one  is  not  entitled  to  a  hearing  when 
he  talks  about  '  the  ring  of  gcnuineMcss.'  He  has  already 
effectually  put  himself  out  of  Court.  He  has  convicted 
himself  of  a  natural  infirmity  of  judgment, — has  given  proof 
tliat  lie  labours  under  a  peculiar  Critical  inaptitude  for  tliis 
department  of  enquiry,— which  renders  his  decrees  nugatory, 
and  his  opinions  worthless. 

L.  But  apart  from  all  this,  the  Reader's  attention  is  invited 
to  a  little  circumstance  which  Dr.  Hort  has  unaccountably 
overlooked :  but  which,  the  instant  it  has  been  stated,  is 
observed  to  cause  his  picturesque  theory  to  melt  away — like 
a  snow-wreath  in  tlie  sunshine. 

On  reflexion,  it  will  be  perceived  that  the  most  signal 
deformities  of  codices  B  n  d  l  are  instances  of  Omission.  In 
the  Gospels  alone,  B  omits  2877  words. 

How, — (we  beg  to  enquire,) — How  will  you  apply  your 
proposed  test  to  a  Non-entity  ?  How  will  you  ascertain 
whether  something  which  docs  not  exist  in  the  Text  has  '  the 
ring  of  genuineness '  or  not  ?  There  can  be  no  '  ring  of 
genunieness,'  clearly,  where  there  is  nothing  to  ring  with  ! 
Will  any  one  pretend  that  the  omission  of  the  incident  of  the 
troubling  of  the  pool  has  in  it  any  '  ring  of  genuineness  '  ? — 
or  dare  to  assert  that  '  the  ring  of  genuineness '  is  imparted 
to  the  liistory  of  our  Saviouu'r  l?assion,  by  the  omission  of 
His  Agony  in  the  Garden  ? — or  that  the  narrative  of  His 
Crucifixion  becomes  more  musical,  when  our  Lord's  Prayer 
for  His  murderers  has  been  omitted  ? — or  that  e^o^ovvro  yap 
{'  for  they  were  alVaid  '),  has  'the  ring  of  griiuiueness '  as  tlie 
conclusion  of  tbi'  hist  cbiii-jtcr  (if  the  Gospel  according  to 
S.  Mark  ? 

But  the  stranuest  circumstance  is  bcbiiid.      IL  is  uoloridus 


^  Scrivener's  '  Introdudivii,''  pp.  513-1. 


III.]  APPLICABLE   AS   A   TEST.  311 

that,  on  the  contrary,  Dr.  Hort  is  frequently  constrained 
to  admit  that  the  omitted  words  actually  have  'the  ring  of 
genuineness.'  The  words  which  he  insists  on  thrusting  out 
of  the  Text  are  often  conspicuous  for  the  very  quality  which 
(by  the  hypothesis)  was  the  warrant  for  their  exclusion.  Of 
this,  the  Reader  may  convince  himself  by  referring  to  the 
note  at  foot  of  the  present   page.^     In  the  meantime,  the 


^  In  S.  Matth.  i.  25, — the  omission  of  '  her  Jirst-horn : ' — in  vi.  13,  the 
omission  of  the  Doxology  : — in  xii.  47,  the  omission  of  tlie  whole  verse  : — 
in  xvi.  2,  3,  the  omission  of  our  Lord's  memorable  words  concerning  tlie 
signs  of  the  iveather : — in  xvii.  21,  the  omission  of  the  mysterious  state- 
ment, '  But  this  kind  goeth  not  out  save  hy  prayer  and  fasting  : ' — in  xviii. 
11,  the  omission  of  the  precious  words  '  For  the  Son  of  7nan  came  to  save 
that  ivhich  was  lost.'' 

In  S.  Mark  xvi.  9-20,  the  omission  of  the  '  last  Tiuelve  Verses,^ — ('  tlie 
C(jnteuts  of  which  are  not  such  as  could  have  been  -invented  by  any  scribe 
or  editor  of  the  Gospel,' — W.  and  H.  p.  57),  All  admit  that  ecf)oj3ovvTo 
yap  is  an  impossible  ending. 

In  S.  Luke  vi.  1,  the  suppression  of  the  unique  SeurepoTrpcorw ;  ('  the 
very  obscin-ity  of  the  expression  attesting  strongly  to  its  genuineness,' — 
Scrivener,  p.  516,  and  so  W.  and  H.  p.  58) : — ix.  54-56,  the  omitted 
rebuke  to  the  '  disciples  James  and  John : ' — in  x.  41,  42,  the  omitted 
tvords  concerning  Martha  and  Mary : — in  xxii.  43,  44,  the  omission  of  the 
Agony  in  the  Garden, — (which  nevertheless,  '  it  would  be  impossible  to 
regard  as  a  product  of  the  inventiveness  of  scribes,' — W.  and  H.  p.  67) : — 
in  xxiii.  17,  a  memorable  clause  omitted : — in  xxiii.  34,  the  omission  of 
our  Lord's  prayer  for  His  murderers, — (concerning  which  Westcott  and 
Hort  remark  that  'few  verses  of  the  Oospels  bear  in  themselves  a  surer 
witness  to  the  truth  of  luhat  they  record  than  this'' — p.  68) : — in  xxiii,  38, 
the  statement  that  the  Inscription  on  the  Cross  was  '  in  letters  of  Oreek,  and 
Latin,  and  Hebrew:'' — in  xxiv.  12,  the  visit  of  S.  Feter  to  the  Sepulchre. 
Bishop  Lightfoot  remarks  concerning  S,  Luke  ix,  56 :  xxii.  43,  44 :  and 
xxiii.  34, — '  It  seems  impossible  to  believe  that  these  incidents  are  other 
than  authentic,^ — (p.  28.) 

In  S.  John  iii.  13,  the  solemn  clause  '  ivhich  is  in  heaven : ' — in  v.  3,  4, 
the  omitted  incident  of  the  troubling  of  the  pool : — in  vii.  53  to  viii.  11, 
the  narrative  concerning  the  woman  taken  in  adultery  omitted, — concern- 
ing which  Drs,  W.  and  H,  remark  that  'the  argument  which  has  always 
told  riost  in  its  favour  in  modern  times  is  its  oiun  internal  character.  The 
story  itself  has  justly  seemed  to  vouch  for  its  own  substantial  trnt/i,  mh\ 


312  DR.   HOIIT'S   TROPOSAL   TO   SHUT   US   UP  [Akt. 

matter  discoursed  of  may  be  conveniently  illustrated  by  a 
short  apologue : — 

Somewhere  in  the  fens  of  Ely  diocese,  stood  a  crazy  old 
church  (dedicated  to  S.  Bee,  of  course,)  the  bells  of  which — 
according  to  a  learned  Cambridge  Doctor — were  the  most 
musical  in  the  world.  "  I  have  listened  to  those  bells,"  (he 
was  accustomed  to  say,)  "  for  30  years.  All  other  bells  are 
cracked,  harsh,  out  of  tune.  Commend  me,  for  music,  to  the 
bells  of  S.  Bee's !  They  alone  have  the  ring  of  genuineness." 
....  Accordingly,  he  published  a  treatise  on  Campanology, 
founding  his  theory  on  the  musical  properties  of  the  bells  of 
S.  Bee's. — At  this  juncture,  provokingly  enough,  some  one 
directed  attention  to  the  singular  fact  that  S.  Bee's  is  one 
of  the  few  churches  in  that  district  ivWiout  bells  :  a  discovery 
which,  it  is  needless  to  add,  pressed  inconveniently  on  the 
learned  Doctor's  theory. 

LI.  But  enough  of  this.  We  really  have  at  last,  (be  it 
observed,)  reached  the  end  of  our  enquiry.  Nothing  comes 
after  Dr.  Hort's  extravagant  and  unsupported  estimate  of 
Codices  B  and  j^.  On  the  contrary.  Those  two  documents 
are  caused  to  cast  their  sombre  shadows  a  long  way  ahead, 
and  to  darken  all  our  future.  Dr.  llort  takes  leave  of  the 
sul)ject  with  the  announcement  that,  whatever  uncertainty 
may  attach  to  the  evidence  for  particular  readings, 

'  The  ijeneral  course  of  future  Criticism  viust  he  sliaped  ht/  the 
happy  circumstance  that  the  fourth  ccnturij  has  bequeathed  to  ns  two 
MSS.  [b  and  n],  of  which  oven  the  less  ineornipt  [n]  uiust  have 
been  of  exceptional  purity  among  its  contemporaries:  and 
which  rise  into  greater  pre-eminence  of  character  the  better 
the  early  history  of  the  Text  becon^es  known.'— (p.  287.) 


the  words  in  wliich  it  is  clothed  to  hannouize  with  those  of  dtiier  (ihsjh'I 
narratives' — (j).  87).  Bishop  Liglitfoot  remarks  that  '  the  varrutivc  hears 
on  its  face  the  highest  crtdeiiliuls  vf  uutlieniic  hislvry  ' — (p.  28). 


III.]  WITHIN   CODICES   B   AND  N.  313 

In  other  words,  our  guide  assures  us  that  in  a  dutiful  sub- 
mission to  codices  B  and  «, — (which,  he  naively  remarks, 
'  hcip])cn  likeivise  to  he  the  oldest  extant  Greek  MSS.  of  the  New 
Testament'  [p.  212],) — lies  all  our  hope  of  future  progress. 
(Just  as  if  we  should  ever  have  heard  of  these  two  codices, 
had  their  contents  come  down  to  us  written  in  the  ordinary 
cursive  character, — in  a  dated  MS.  (suppose)  of  the  XVth 
century !)  .  .  .  Moreover,  Dr.  Hort  '  must  not  hesitate  to 
express  '  his  own  robust  conviction, 

'  That  no  trustworthy  improvement  can  be  efifected,  except  in 
accordance  loith  the  leading  Principles  of  method  which  we  have 
endeavoured  to  explain.' — (p.  285.) 

LII.  And  this  is  the  end  of  the  matter.  Behold  our  fate 
therefore : — (1)  Codices  b  and  a,  with — (2)  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort's  Introduction  and  Notes  on  Select  Headings  in 
vindication  of  their  contents !  It  is  proposed  to  shut  us 
up  within  those  limits  !  ,  ,  .  An  uneasy  suspicion  however 
secretly  suggests  itself  that  perhaps,  as  the  years  roll  out, 
something  may  come  to  light  which  w^ill  effectually  dispel 
every  dream  of  the  new  School,  and  reduce  even  prejudice 
itself  to  silence.     So  Dr.  Hort  liastens  to  frown  it  down : — 

*  It  would  be  an  illusion  to  anticiiTate  important  changes  of 
Text  [i.e.  of  the  Text  advocated  by  Drs.  Westcott  and  Ilort] 
from  any  acquisition  of  new  Evidence.' — (p.  285.) 

And  yet,  ivhy  the  anticipation  of  important  help  from  the 
acquisition  of  fresh  documentary  Evidence  'would  be  an 
illusion,' — does  not  appear.  That  the  recovery  of  certain  of 
the  exegetical  w^orks  of  Origen, — better  still,  of  Tatian's 
Diatessaron, — best  of  all,  of  a  couple  of  MSS.  of  the  date  of 
Codices  b  and  ^< ;  but  not,  (like  those  two  corrupt  docu- 
ments) derived  from  one  and  the  same  depraved  archetype ; — 
That  any  such  windfall,  (and  it  will  come,  some  of  these 
days,)    would   infalhbly   disturb   Drs.   Westcott  and   Hort's 


314  WESTCOTT  AND  nORT'S  THEORY  [Art. 

equanimity,  as  well  as  scatter  to  the  winds  not  a  few  of  their 
most  confident  conclusions, — we  are  well  aware.  So  imlced 
are  they.  Hence,  what  those  Critics  earnestly  deprecate,  ive 
as  earnestly  desire.  We  are  therefore  by  no  means  inclined 
to  admit,  that 

'  Greater  possibilities  of  improvement  lie  in  a  more  exact 
study  of  the  relations  between  the  documents  that  we  alieady 
possess  ;  ' — (^Ihid.) 

knowing  well  that  '  the  documents '  referred  to  are  chiefly,  (if 
not  solely,)  Codices  B  and  n  :  knowing  also,  that  it  is  further 
meant,  that  in  estimating  other  evidence,  of  whatever  kind, 
the  only  thing  to  be  enquired  after  is  whether  or  no  the 
attesting  document  is  generally  in  agreement  icith  codex  B. 

For,  according  to  these  writers, — tide  what  tide, — codex  is 
is  to  be  the  standard:  itself  not  al)Solutely  recjuiring  confir- 
mation from  aiiy  extraneous  quarter.  Dr.  Hort  asserts,  (l)ut 
it  is,  as  usual,  mere  assertion,)  that, 

'  Even  when  b  stands  quite  alone,  its  readings  must  never  be 
lightly  rejected.' — (p.  557.) 

And  yet, —  Why  a  reading  found  only  in  eodex  B  should 
experience  greater  indulgence  than  another  reading  found 
only  in  codex  A,  we  entirely  fail  to  see. 

On  the  other  hand,  '  an  unique  criterion  is  sup[)lied  by  the 
concord  of  the  independent  attestation  of  li  and  N.' — (^Notes, 
p.  46.) 

But  pray,  liow  does  that  appear?  Since  i!  and  n  arc  de- 
ri\('d  from  one  and  tlic  same  original— Why  slioidd  not  'the 
concord '  spoken  of  be  rather  '  an  unique  criterion '  of  the 
utter  depravity  of  the  archetyjye  ? 

LIII.  To  conclude.  We  have  already  listened  to  Dr.  Hort 
long  enougli.      And   now,  since   confessedly,  a  chain  is  no 


III.]  REJECTED,  AS  WORTHLESS.  315 

stronger  than  it  is  at  its  weakest  link  ;  nor  an  edifice  more 
secure  than  the  basis  whereon  it  stands  ; — we  must  be  allowed 
to  point  out  that  we  have  been  dealing  throughout  with  a 
dream,  pure  and  simple ;  from  which  it  is  high  time  that  we 
should  wake  up,  now  that  we  have  been  plainly  shown  on 
what  an  unsubstantial  foundation  these  Editors  have  been  all 
along  building.  A  child's  house,  several  stories  high,  con- 
structed out  of  playing-cards, — is  no  unapt  image  of  the 
frail  erection  before  us.  We  began  by  carefully  lifting  off 
the  topmost  story ;  and  then,  the  next :  but  we  might  as  well 
have  saved  ourselves  the  trouble.  The  basement-story  has 
to  be  removed  bodily,  which  must  bring  the  whole  edifice 
down  with  a  rush.  In  reply  to  the  fantastic  tissue  of  un- 
proved assertions  which  go  before,  we  assert  as  follows  : — 

(1)  The  impurity  of  the  Texts  exhibited  by  Codices  b  and 
N  is  not  a  matter  of  opinion,  but  a  matter  of  fact.^    These  are 


^  To  some  extent,  even  tlie  unlearned  Eeader  may  easily  convince  him- 
self of  this,  by  examining  the  rejected  '  alternative  '  Eeadings  in  the  margin 
of  the  '  Revised  Version.'  The  '  Many '  and  the  '  Some  ancient  authorities,' 
there  spoken  of,  almost  invar iahly  include — sometimes  denote — codd. 
B  N,  one  or  both  of  them.  These  constitute  the  merest  fraction  of  the 
entire  amount  of  corrupt  readings  exhibited  by  b  n;  but  they  will  give 
English  readers  some  notion  of  the  problem  just  now  under  consideration. 

Besides  the  details  already  supplied  [see  above,  pages  16  and  17 : — 30 
and  31 :— 46  and  47  :— 75 :— 249 :— 262 :— 289 :— 316  to  319]  concerning  b 
and  N , — (the  result  of  laborious  collation,) — some  particulars  shall  now  be 
added.  The  piercing  of  our  Saviour's  side,  thrust  in  after  Matt,  xxvii. 
49 : — the  eclipse  of  the  sun  when  the  moon  was  full,  in  Lu.  xxiii.  45  : — 
the  monstrous  figment  concerning  Herod's  daughter,  thrust  into  Mk. 
vi.  22 : — the  precious  clauses  omitted  in  Matt.  i.  25  and  xviii.  11 : — in 
Lu.  ix.  54-6,  and  in  Jo.  iii.  13 : — the  wretched  glosses  in  Lu.  vi.  48 : 
X,  42 :  XV.  21 :  Jo.  x.  14  and  Mk.  vi.  20  : — the  substitution  of  oivov  (for 
o^os)  in  Matt,  xxvii.  34, — of  6eos  (for  ujo?)  in  Jo.  i.  18, — of  avBpconov  (for 
Qeov)  in  ix.  35,- — of  ov  (for  w)  in  Eom.  iv.  8 ; — the  geographical  blunder  in 
Mk.  vii.  31  :  in  Lu.  iv.  44  : — the  omission  in  Matt.  xii.  47, — and  of  two 


316  CODICES  B  AND   X, — TWO   OF  THE  MOST  [Aim 

two  of  the  least  trustworthy  documents  in  existence.  So  fur 
from  allowing  Dr.  Hort's  position  that — *  A  Text  formed  '  by 
'  taking  Codex  B  as  the  sole  authority,'  '  would  be  incom- 
parably nearer  the  Truth  than  a  Text  similarly  taken  from 

any  other  Greek  or  other  single  ducuiuent'  (p.  251), — we 
venture  to  assert  that  it  would  be,  on  the  contrary,  ly  far 
the  foulest  Text  that  had  ever  seen  the  light :  worse,  that  is 
to  say,  even  than  the  Text  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort.  And 
that  is  saying  a  great  deal.     In  the  brave  and  faithful  wortls 


important  verses  in  Matt.  xvi.  2,  3  :■ — of  t6ta  in  Acts  i.  19  : — of  eyetpat  km 
in  iii.  6  ;■ — and  of  bevTtponpuiTw  in  Lu.  vi.  1  : — the  two  spurious  clauses 
in  Mk.  iii.  14,  16 : — the  obvious  blunders  in  Jo.  ix.  4  and  11 : — in  Acts 
xii.  25 — besides  the  impossible  reading  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  3, — make  up  a 
heavy  indictment  against  b  and  N  jointly — -which  are  here  found  in 
company  with  just  a  very  few  disreputable  allies.  Add,  the  plain  error  at 
Lu.  ii.  14  : — the  gloss  at  Mk.  v.  36 : — the  mere  fabrication  at  Matt.  xix. 
17 : — the  omissions  at  Matt.  vi.  13  :  Jo.  v.  3,  4. 

B  (in  company  with  others,  but  apart  from  N  )  by  exhibiting  fianTia-av- 
res  in  Matt,  xxviii.  19  : — wSe  tmv  in  Mk.  ix.  1 : — '  seventy-two,^  in  Lu.  x. 
1 : — the  blunder  in  Lu.  xvi.  12  : — and  the  grievous  omissions  in  Lu.  xxii. 
43,  44  (Chkist's  Agony  in  the  Garden), — and  xxiii.  34  (His  prayer  for  His 
murderers), — -enjoys  unenviable  distinction. — B,  singly,  is  remarkable  for 
an  obvious  blunder  in  Matt.  xxi.  31 : — Lu.  xxi.  24 : — Jo.  xviii.  5  : — Acts 
X.  19 — and  xvii.  28 : — xxvii.  37  : — not  to  mention  the  insertioia  of 
Sfdofjifvov  in  Jo.  vii.  39. 

N  (in  company  with  others,  but  apart  from  b)  is  conspicuous  for  its 
.sorry  interpolation  of  Matt.  viii.  13: — its  substitution  of  eixTiv  (for  rjv)  in 
tS.  John  i.  4: — its  geographical  blunder  in  S.  Luke  xxiv.  13: — its  tex- 
tual blunder  at  1  Fet.  i.  23. — 1{,  singly,  is  remarkable  for  its  sorry  para- 
phrase in  Ji».  ii.  3: — its  addition  to  i.  34: — its  omissions  in  Matt,  xxiii. 
35  : — Mk.  i.  1 : — ^Jo.  ix.  38  : — its  insertion  of  Ha-aiov  in  Matt.  xiii.  35  : — 
its  geographical  blunders  in  Mk.  i.  28  : — Lu.  i.  26  : — Acts  viii.  5  : — besides 
the  lilunders  in  Jo.  vi.  51 — and  xiii.  10  : — 1  Tim.  iii.  16 : — Acts  xxv.  13 : — 
and  the  clearly  fabricated  narrative  of  Jo.  xiii.  24.  Add  the  fabricated 
text  at  Mk.  xiv.  30,  68,  72 ;  of  which  the  object  was  '  so  far  to  assimilate 
the  narrative  of  Peter's  denials  with  those  of  tlie  otlier  Evangelists,  as 
to  supiiress  the  fact,  vouched  for  by  S.  Mark  only,  tliat  the  cock  crowed 
twice.' 


III.]  UNTRUSTWOKTHY  COriES  IN   EXISTENCE.  317 

of  Prebendary  Scrivener  (Introdtiction,  p.  453), — words  which 
deserve  to  become  famous, — 

'  It  is  no  less  true  to  fact  than  paradoxical  in  sound,  that  the 
worst  corruptions  to  which  the  New  Testament  has  ever  been 
subjected,  originated  within  a  hundred  years  after  it  was  com- 
posed :  that  Irena3us  [a.d.  150],  and  the  African  Fathers,  and 
the  whole  Western,  with  a  portion  of  the  Syrian  Church,  used 
far  inferior  manuscripts  to  those  employed  by  Stunica,  or 
Erasmus,  or  Stephens  thirteen  centuries  later,  when  moulding 
the  Textus  Receptus.' 

And  Codices    B   and   N  are,  demonstrably,  nothing  else  but 
specimens  of  the  depraved  class  thus  characterized. 

Next — (2),  We  assert  that,  so  manifest  are  the  disfigure- 
ments jointly  and  exclusivchj  exhibited  by  codices  B  and  n,^ 


^  Characteristic,  and  fatal  beyond  anything  that  can  be  named  are,  (1) 
The  exclusive  omission  by  B  and  N  of  Mark  xvi.  9-20  : — (2)  The  omission 
of  ev  Ecfyeacp,  from  Ephes.  i.  1 : — (3)  The  blunder,  airoarKiaa-iiaTo^,  in 
James  i.  17 : — (4)  The  nonsensical  crvaTpecpofxeviDv  in  Matt.  xvii.  22 : — 
(5)  That  '  vile  error,'  (as  Scrivener  calls  it,)  nepieXovres,  in  Acts  xxviii.  13  : 
— (6)  The  impossible  order  of  words  in  Lu.  xxiii.  32 ;  and  (7)  The  extra- 
ordinary order  in  Acts  i.  5  : — (8)  The  omission  of  the  last  clause  of  the 
Lord's  prayer,  in  Lu.  xi.  4  ;  and  (9)  Of  that  solemn  verse,  Matt.  xvii.  21 ; 
and  (10)  Of  laxvpov  in  Matt.  xiv.  30  : — (11)  The  substitution  of  epycov  (for 
TeKvcov)  in  Matt.  xi.  29  : — (12)  Of  eXty/xa  (for  piypa)  in  Jo.  xix.  39, — and 
(13)  of  r]v  redfipevos  (for  eredrj)  in  John  xix.  41.  Then,  (14)  The  thrusting  of 
Xpi<TTos  into  Matt.  xvi.  21, — and  (15)  Of  6  Qeos  into  vi.  8 : — besides  (16)  So 
minute  a  peculiarity  as  Bee^e^ovX  in  Matt.  x.  35 :  xii.  24,  27 :  Lu.  xi.  15, 
18,  19.  (17)  Add,  the  gloss  at  Matt.  xvii.  20,  and  (18)  The  omissions  at 
Matt.  V.  22 :  xvii.  21. — It  must  be  admitted  that  such  peculiar  blemishes, 
taken  collectively,  constitute  a  proof  of  affinity  of  origin,- — community  of 
descent  from  one  and  the  same  disreputable  ancestor.     But  space  fails  us. 

The  Reader  will  be  interested  to  learn  that  although,  in  the  Gospels,  b 
combines  exclusively  with  a,  but  11  times ;  and  with  c,  but  38  times  : 
with  D,  it  combines  exclusively  141  times,  and  with  N,  239  times :  (viz. 
in  Matt.  121,— in  Mk.  26,— in  Lu.  51,— in  Jo.  41  times). 

Contrast  it  with  a: — -which  combines  exclusively  with  d,  21  times: 
with  N  13  times :  with  b,  11  times  :  with  c,  4  times. 


318  ESTIMATE   OF   CODD.   B   AXD   X.  [Art. 

that  instead  of  accepting  these  codices  as  two  '  independent ' 
Witnesses  to  the  inspired  Original,  we  are  constrained  to 
regard  them  as  little  more  than  a  single  reproduction  of  one 
and  the  same  scandalously  corrupt  and  (comjJcarUiveb/)  late 
Copy.  By  consequence,  we  consider  their  joint  and  exclusive 
attestation  of  any  particular  reading,  '  an  unique  criterion ' 
of  its  worthlessness ;  a  sufficient  reason — not  for  adopting, 
but — for  unceremoniously  rejecting  it. 

Then — (3),  As  for  the  origin  of  these  two  curiosities,  it  can 
perforce  only  be  divined  from  their  contents.  That  they 
exhibit  fabricated  Texts  is  demonstrable.  No  amount  of 
honest  cojoying, — persevered  in  for  any  number  of  centuries, 
— could  by  possibility  have  resulted  in  two  such  documents. 
Separated  from  one  another  in  actual  date  by  50,  perhaps  by 
too  years,^  they  must  needs  have  branched  off"  from  a 
common  corrupt  ancestor,  and  straightway  become  exposed 
continuously  to  fresh  depraving  influences.  The  result  is, 
that  codex  n,  (which  evidently  has  gone  through  more  ad- 
ventures and  fallen  into  worse  company  than  his  rival,)  has 
been  corrupted  to  a  far  graver  extent  than  codex  B,  and  is 


^  The  Eeviewer  speaks  from  actual  inspectiou  of  both  documents.  They 
are  essentially  dissimilar.  The  learned  Ccriaui  assured  the  Reviewer  (in 
1872)  that  whereas  the  Vatican  Codex  must  certainly  have  been  written 
in  Italy, — the  birthplace  of  the  Sinaitic  was  \iiot  Egypt,  but]  either 
Palestine  or  Syria.  Thus,  considerations  of  time  and  place  effectually 
dispose  of  Tischendorf  s  preposterous  notion  that  the  Scribe  of  Codex  b 
wrote  six  leaves  of  {<  :  an  imagination  which  solely  resulted  from  the 
anxiety  of  the  Critic  to  secure  for  his  own  cod.  x  the  same  antiquity 
which  is  claimed  for  the  vaunted  cod.  b. 

This  opinion  of  Dr.  Tischendorf s  rests  on  tlic  same  fanciful  basis  as  liis 
notion  that  the  last  verse  of  S.  John's  Gospel  in  n  was  not  written  by  the 
same  hand  which  wrote  the  rest  of  the  Gospel.  Tliere  is  no  manner  of 
difference :  though  of  course  it  is  possible  that  the  scribe  took  a  new  ])en, 
preliminary  to  writing  that  last  verse,  and  executing  tlie  curious  and 
delicate  ornament  wliich  follows.  (Joiiccrning  S.  Jo.  xxi.  2.'),  see  al)ove, 
pp.  23-4. 


III.]  ESTIMATE   OF   CODD.   B   AND   K.  319 

even  more  untrustworthy.  Thus,  whereas  (in  the  Gospels 
alone)  B  has  589  Readings  quite  jJceuUar  to  itself,  affecting 
858  words, — n  has  1460  such  Readings,  aiTecting  2640  words. 

One  solid  fact  like  the  preceding,  (let  it  be  pointed  out 
in  passing,)  is  more  helpful  by  far  to  one  who  would  form 
a  correct  estimate  of  the  value  of  a  Codex,  than  any  number 
of  such  '  reckless  and  unverified  assertions,'  not  to  say 
peremptory  and  baseless  decrees,  as  abound  in  the  highly 
imaginative  pages  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort. 

(4)  Lastly, — We  suspect  that  these  two  Manuscripts  are 
indebted  for  their  preservation,  soleli/  to  their  ascertained  evil 
character ;  which  has  occasioned  that  tlie  one  eventually 
found  its  way,  four  centuries  ago,  to  a  forgotten  shelf  in  the 
Vatican  library  :  while  the  other,  after  exercising  the  inge- 
nuity of  several  generations  of  critical  Correctors,  eventually 
(viz.  in  A.D.  1844^)  got  deposited  in  the  waste-paper  basket 
of  the  Convent  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai.  Had  b  and  n 
been  copies  of  average  purity,  they  must  long  since  have 
shared  the  inevitable  fate  of  books  which  are  freely  used  and 
highly  prized ;  namely,  they  would  Iiave  fallen  into  decadence 
and  disappeared  from  sight.  But  in  the  meantime,  behold, 
their  very  Antiquity  has  come  to  be  reckoned  to  their  advan- 
tage ;  and  (strange  to  relate)  is  even  considered  to  constitiite 
a  sufficient  reason  why  they  should  enjoy  not  merely  extra- 
ordinary consideration,  but  the  actual  surrender  of  the 
critical  judgment.  Since  1831,  Editors  have  vied  with  one 
another  in  the  fulsomeness  of  the  homage  they  have  paid  to 
these  '  two  false  Witnesses,' — for  such  B  and  n  arc,  as  the 
concurrent  testimony  of  Copies,  Fathers  and  Versions  abun- 
dantly proves.    Even  superstitious  reverence  has  been  claimed 


^  Tiscliendorfs  narrative  of  the  discovery  of  the  Sinaitic  manuscript 
('  When  ivere  our  Gof^pels  ivritten  ?'),  [180*),]  p.  23. 


820  DIALOGUE   OF   THE   REVIEWER  [Art. 

for  these  two  codices :  and  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  are  so  far 
in  advance  of  their  predecessors  in  the  servility  of  their 
blind  adulation,  that  they  must  be  allowed  to  have  easily 
won  the  race. 

LIV.  With  this, — so  far  as  the  Greek  Text  under  review  is 
concerned, — we  might,  were  we  so  minded,  reasonably  make 
an  end.  We  undertook  to  show  that  Drs.  Westcott  and 
Hort,  in  the  volumes  before  us,  have  built  up  an  utterly 
worthless  Textual  fabric ;  and  we  consider  that  we  have 
already  sufficiently  shown  it.  The  Theory, — the  Hypothesis 
rather,  on  which  their  Text  is  founded,  we  have  demonstrated 
to  be  simply  absurd.  Eemove  that  hypothesis,  and  a  heap 
of  unsightly  ruins  is  all  that  is  left  behind, — except  indeed 
astonishment  (not  unmingled  with  concern)  at  the  sim- 
plicity of  its  accomplished  Authors. 

Here  then,  we  might  leave  off".  But  we  are  unwilling 
so  to  leave  the  matter.  Large  consideration  is  due  to 
ordinary  English  Readers ;  who  must  perforce  look  on  Mitli 
utter  perplexity — not  to  say  distress — at  the  strange  spectacle 
presented  by  that  Text  (which  is  in  the  main  the  Text  of  the 
Revised  English  Version)  on  the  one  hand, — and  this  Keview 
of  it,  on  the  other : — 

(1)  "  And  pray,  which  of  you  am  I  to  believe  ? " — will 
inevitably  be,  in  homely  English,  the  exclamation  with  which 
not  a  few  will  lay  down  the  ])rcsent  nuiul)er  of  the  '  Qiiar- 
tcrli/.'  "  I  pretend  to  no  learning.  I  am  not  prepared  to 
argue  the  question  with  you.  But  surely,  the  oldest  Manu- 
script omist  be  the  purest !  It  even  stands  to  reason :  does 
it  not  ? — Then  further,  I  admit  lliat  you  seem  to  have  the 
best  of  the  argument  so  far ;  yet,  since  the  three  most  fomous 
Editors   of    modern   times    are    against    you,  —  Lachmann, 


Iir.]  WITH   A   SUPrOSED   OBJECTOR.  321 

Tregelles,  Tiscliendorf, — excuse   me   if    I  suspect   that   you 
must  be  in  the  wrong,  after  alL" 

LV.  With  unfeigned  humility,  the  Eeviewer  \_Q.  R.'\  pro- 
ceeds to  explain  the  matter  to  his  supposed  Objector  [>S'.  0.\ 
in  briefest  outline,  as  follows : — 

Q.  B.  "  You  are  perfectly  right.  The  oldest  Manuscript 
must  exhibit  the  purest  text :  must  be  the  most  trustworthy. 
But  then,  unfortunately,  it  happens  that  ive  do  not  possess  it. 
'  The  oldest  Manuscript '  is  lost.  You  speak,  of  course,  of 
the  inspired  Autographs.  These,  I  say,  have  long  since 
disappeared." 

(2)  S.  0.  "  No,  I  meant  to  say  that  the  oldest  Manuscri])t 
we  possess,  if  it  be  but  a  very  ancient  one,  must  needs  be 
the  purest." 

Q.  R.  "  0,  but  that  is  an  entirely  different  proposition.  Well, 
apart  from  experience,  the  probability  that  the  oldest  copy 
extant  will  prove  the  purest  is,  if  you  please,  considerable. 
Reflection  will  convince  you  however  that  it  is  hut  a  pro- 
bability, at  the  utmost :  a  probability  based  upon  more  than 
one  false  assumption, — with  which  nevertheless  you  shall  not 
be  troubled.  But  in  fact  it  clearly  does  not  by  any  means 
follow  that,  hecause  a  MS.  is  very  ancient,  therefore  the  Text, 
which  it  exhibits  will  be  very  pure.  That  you  may  be 
thoroughly  convinced  of  this, — (and  it  is  really  impossible 
for  your  mind  to  be  too  effectually  disabused  of  a  preposses- 
sion which  has  fatally  misled  so  many,) — you  are  invited  to 
enquire  for  a  recent  contribution  to  the  learned  French 
publication  indicated  at  the  foot  of  this  page,^  in  which  is 


^  '  Papyrus  Inedit  de  la  Bibliotheque  de  M.  Ambroise  Firmin-Didot. 
Nouveaux  fragments  d'Euripide  et  d'autres  Poetes  Grecs,  publics  par  M. 
Henri  Weil.  (Extrait  des  Monumens  Grecs  publies  par  V Association  pour 
r encouragement  des  Etudes  Grecques  en  France.     Annee  1879.) '     Pp.  36. 

Y 


322  FRAfiMENT   OK    THK   •  MEDEA,'— B.C.    200.  [Art. 

exhibited  a  fac-siniile  of  8  lines  of  the  Medea  of  Euripides 
(ver.  5-12),  written  about  B.C.  200  in  small  uncials  (at 
Alexandria  probably,)  on  papyrus.  Collated  with  any  printed 
copy,  the  verses,  you  will  find,  have  been  penned  with 
scandalous,  with  incredible  inaccuracy.  But  on  this  head  let 
the  learned  Editor  of  the  document  in  question  be  listened  to, 
rather  than  the  present  Eeviewer  : — 

'  On  voit  que  le  texts  du  papyrus  est  herisse  des  fautes  les 
plus  graves.  Le  plus  recent  et  le  plus  mauvais  de  nos  mamiscrits 
d'Euripide  vaut  infiniment  mieux  que  cette  copie, — faite,  il  y  a  deux 
mille  ans,  dans  le  pays  ou  florissaient  Verudition  hellenique  et  la 
Critique  des  textes.^^ — (p.  17.) 


^  The  rest  of  the  passage  may  not  be  without  interest  to  classical 
readers  : — '  Ce  n'est  pas  a  dire  qu'elle  soit  tout  d  fait  sans  interet,  sans  im- 
portance pour  la  constitution  du  texte.  Elle  nous  apprend  que,  au  vers  5, 
dfyiaTwv,  pour  apiartatv  (correction  de  Wakefield)  etait  d^ji  I'ancienne 
vulgate ;  et  que  les  vers  11  et  12,  s'ils  sont  alterds,  comme  I'assurent 
quelques  dditeurs  d'Euripide,  I'e'taient  deja  dans  I'antiquite. 

'  L'homme  .  .  .  etait  aussi  ignorant  que  negligent.  Je  le  prends  pour 
im  Egyptien  n'ayant  qu'une  connoissance  tres  imparfaite  de  la  langue 
grecque,  et  ne  possedant  aucune  notion  ni  sur  I'orthographe,  ni  sur  les 
regies  les  plus  elementaires  du  trimetre  iambique.  Le  plus  singulier  est 
qu'il  commence  sa  copie  au  milieu  d'un  vers  et  qu'il  la  finisse  de  raeme.  II 
oublie  des  lettres  necessaires,  il  en  ajoute  de  parasites,  il  les  met  les  unes 
pour  les  autres,  il  tronque  les  mots  ou  il  les  altere,  au  point  de  detruire 
(juelquefois  la  suite  de  la  construction  et  le  sens  du  passage.'  A  faithful 
copy  of  the  verses  in  minuscule  characters  is  subjoined  for  the  gratifica- 
tion of  Scholars.     We  have  but  divided  the  words  and  inserted  capital 

letters : — 

'  avhfXidv  af)i(TT(ov  ot  8f  irapxpvaov  Sepns  5 

IlfXeta  y.(Trik6ov  nv  ycif)  tov  dtanova  ffiTjv 

Mr}8ui  TTii/jyovs  yrji  (nXevat  EioXKias 

ff)Q)Ti  dvficod  fynXayis  loi/ocroi/of 

or  av  KTuvd  TTtaas  HfXeiaSas  Kovpcn 

miT([)a  KciTOiKT)  Trjvdf  yqv  KnpLvdinv  10 

(Tvv  aj/Spi  Kcu  T€Kv(n(jiv  apbavouTa  ^(u 

cj)vyr]  TToiXiTCOv  (ov  a(])T)KeTO  xdovos.' 

An  excellent  scholar  (R.  C.  P.)  remarks, — '  The  fragment  must  have 
been  written  from  dictation  (of  small  parts,  as  it  seems  to  me) ;  and  by  an 
illiterate  scribe.  It  is  just  such  a  result  as  one  might  expect  from  a  half- 
educated  reader  enunciating  Milton  for  a  half-educated  writer.' 


III.]       CAIUS   (A.I).    175)   ON   TEXTUAL   DEPRAVATION.       323 

"Why,  the  author  of  the  foregoing  remarks  might  have 
been  writing  concerning  Codex  b  !" 

(3)  S.  0.  "  Yes :  but  I  want  Christidn  evidence.  The 
author  of  that  scrap  of  papyrus  may  have  been  an  illiterate 
slave.  Wliat  if  it  should  be  a  school-hoy's  exercise  which  has 
come  down  to  us  ?     The  thing  is  not  impossible." 

Q.  B.  "  Not  '  impossible  '  certainly  :  but  surely  highly  im- 
probable. However,  let  it  drop.  You  insist  on  Christian 
evidence.  You  shall  have  it.  What  think  you  then  of  the 
following  statement  of  a  very  ancient  Father  (Caius^)  writing 
against  the  heresy  of  Theodotus  and  others  who  denied  the 
Divinity  of  Cheist  ?  He  is  bearing  his  testimony  to  the 
liberties  which  had  been  freely  taken  with  the  Text  of  the 
New  Testament  in  his  own  time,  viz.  about  a.d.  175-200 : — 

'  The  Divine  Scriptures,'  he  says,  '  these  heretics  have  auda- 
ciously corrupted ;  .  .  .  laying  violent  hands  upon  them  under 
pretence  of  correcting  them.  That  I  bring  no  false  accusation, 
any  one  who  is  disposed  may  easily  convince  himself.  He  has 
but  to  collect  the  copies  belonging  to  these  persons  severally  ; 
then,  to  compare  one  with  another ;  and  he  will  discover  that 
their  discrepancy  is  extraordinary.  Those  of  Asclepiades,  at  all 
events,  will  be  found  discordant  from  those  of  Theodotus.  Now, 
plenty  of  specimens  of  either  sort  are  obtainable,  inasmuch  as 
these  men's  disciples  have  industriously  multiplied  the  (so- 
called)  "  corrected  "  copies  of  their  resj)ective  teachers,  which 
are  in  reality  nothing  else  but  "  corrupted  "  copies.  With  the 
foregoing  copies  again,  those  of  Hermophilus  will  be  found 
entirely  at  variance.  As  for  the  copies  of  Apollonides,  they 
even  contradict  one  another.  Nay,  let  any  one  compare  the 
fabricated  text  which  these  persons  put  forth  in  the  first 
instance,  with  that  which  exhibits  their  latest  perversions  of  the 
Truth,  and  he  will  discover  that  the  disagreement  between  them 
is  even  excessive. 


^  See   p.  324  note  Q). — Photius  [cod.   48]  says  that  '  Gaius '  was  a 
presbyter  of  Kome,  and  e6va>v  fTria-KOTros.     See  Routh's  Reliqq.  ii.  125. 

Y    2 


324  THE   TEXT   DEl'ltAVED   BY   HEEETICR.  [Akt. 

'Of  the  enormity  of  the  offence  of  wliich  these  men  have  heen 
guilty,  they  must  needs  themselves  he  fully  aware.  Either  they 
do  not  believe  that  the  Divine  Scriptures  are  the  utterance  of 
the  Holy  Ghost, — in  which  case  they  are  to  be  regarded  as 
unbelievers  :  or  else,  they  account  themselves  wiser  than  the 
Holy  Ghost, — and  what  is  that,  but  to  have  the  faith  of  devils  ? 
As  for  their  denjdng  their  guilt,  the  thing  is  impossible,  seeing 
that  the  copies  under  discussion  are  their  own  actual  handy  work  ; 
and  they  know  full  well  that  not  such  as  these  are  the  Scriptures 
which  they  received  at  the  hands  of  their  catechetical  teachers. 
Else,  let  them  produce  the  originals  from  which  they  made 
their  transcripts.  Certain  of  them  indeed  have  not  even 
condescended  to  falsify  Scripture,  but  entirely  reject  Law  and 
Prophets  alike.'^ 

"  Now,  the  foregoing  statement  is  in  a  high  decree  sugges- 
tive. For  here  is  an  orthodox  Father  of  the  Unci  century 
invitins  attention  to  four  well-known  families  of  falsified 
manuscripts  of  the  Sacred  Writings ; — complaining  of  the 
hopeless  divergences  which  they  exhibit  (being  not  only 
inconsistent  with  one  another,  but  with  tliemselves) ; — and 
insisting  that  such  coi^rectccl,  are  nothing  else  but  shamefully 
corru]}ted  copies.  He  speaks  of  the  phenomenon  as  being  in 
his  day  notorious  :  and  appeals  to  Eecensions,  the  very  names 
of  whose  authors — Theodotus,  Asclepiades,  Hermophilus, 
Apollonides — have  (all  but  the  first)  long  since  died  out  of 
the  Church's  memory.  You  will  allow  therefore,  (will  you 
not  ?),  that  by  this  time  the  claim  of  tlie  oldest  existing  copies 
of  Scripture  to  be  the  purest,  has  been  effectually  disposed  of. 
For  since  there  once  prevailed  such  a  multitude  of  corrujjted 
copies,  we  have  no  security  whatever  that  the  oldest  of  our 
extant  MSS.  are  not  derived — remotely  if  not  directly — from 
some  of  tlicm." 

(4)  *S'.  0.  "  But  at  all  events  the  chances  are  even.  Are 
they  not  ?" 

1  EuscV)ius,  Ilist.  Eccl.  v.  28  (ap.  Tiouth's  Bpliqq.  ii.  i;52-4). 


III.]  CASE   OF   THE   CODICES   B  N  C.  325 

Q.  JR.  "  By  no  means.  A  copy  like  codex  b,  once  recognized 
as  belonging  to  a  corrupt  family, — once  knovm  to  contain  a 
depraved  exhibition  of  the  Sacred  Text, — was  more  likely  by 
far  to  remain  unused,  and  so  to  escape  destruction,  than  a 
copy  highly  prized  and  in  daily  use. — As  for  Codex  n,  it 
carries  on  its  face  its  own  effectual  condemnation  ;  aptly 
illustrating  the  precept  fiat  cxjjerimentum  in  corporc  vili.  It 
exhibits  the  efforts  of  many  generations  of  men  to  restore 
its  Text, — (which,  '  as  proceeding  from  the  first  scribe/  is 
admitted  by  one  of  its  chief  admirers  to  be  '  ve?'i/  rough,^ ') — 
to  something  like  purity.  'At  least  ten  different  Revisers,' 
from  the  IVth  to  the  Xllth  century,  are  found  to  have  tried 
their  hands  upon  it.^ — Codex  c,  after  having  had  '  at  least 
three  correctors  very  busily  at  work  upon  it '  ^  (in  the  Vltli 
and  IXth  centuries),  finally  (in  the  Xllth)  was  fairly 
ohliteratcd,  —  literally  scrajjcd  out,  —  to  make  room  for  the 
writings  of  a  Syrian  Father. — I  am  therefore  led  by  a  priori 
considerations  to  augur  ill  of  the  contents  of  b  n  c.  But 
when  I  find  them  hopelessly  at  variance  among  themselves: 
above  all,  when  I  find  (1)  all  other  Mann  scripts  of  whatever 
date, —  (2)  the  most  ancient  Versions, — and  (3),  the  whole 
body  of  the  jyrimitive  Fathers,  decidedly  opposed  to  them, — I 
am  (to  speak  plainly)  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  any  man 
of  sound  understanding,  acquainted  with  all  the  facts  of  the 
case  and  accustomed  to  exact  reasoning,  can  hesitate  to 
regard  the  unsupported  (or  the  slenderly  supported)  testi- 
mony of  one  or  other  of  them  as  simply  worthless.  The 
craven  homage  which  the  foremost  of  the  three  habitually 
receives  at  the  hands  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort,  I  can  only 
describe  as  a  weak  superstition.  It  is  something  more  than  un- 
reasonable. It  becomes  even  ridiculous. — Tischendorf  s  pre- 
ference (in  his  last  edition)  for  the  Mtises  of  his  own  codex  x, 

^  TregcUes,  Part  ii.  p.  2. 

^  Scrivcucr's  prefatory  lulrudactiun, — p.  xix.  ^  IhUl.  p.  iii. 


326  IMAGINARY   VISIT   TO   CLKIVIKNS,  [Art. 

can  only  be  defended  on  the  plea  of  parental  partiality. 
But  it  is  not  on  that  account  the  less  foolish.  His  '  ex- 
aggerated preference  for  the  single  manuscript  which  he  had 
the  good  fortune  to  discover,  has  betrayed  him' — (in  the 
opinion  of  Bishop  Ellicott)  —  '  ijito  an  almost  child-like 
infirmity  of  critical  judgment.'  "  ^ 

(5)  0.  S.  "  Well  but, — be  all  that  as  it  may, — Caius,  re- 
member, is  speaking  of  heretical  writers.  When  I  said  '  I 
want  Christian  evidence,'  I  meant  orthodox  evidence,  of 
course.  You  would  not  assert  (would  you  ?)  that  b  and  n 
exhibit  traces  of  heretical  depravation  ?" 

Q.  R.  "  Keserving  my  opinion  on  that  last  head,  good  Sir, 
and  determined  to  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  your  company  on 
any  reasonable  terms, — (for  convince  you,  I  both  can  and 
will,  though  you  prolong  the  present  discussion  till  to- 
morrow morning,) — I  have  to  ask  a  little  favour  of  you : 
viz.  that  you  will  bear  me  company  in  an  imaginary  ex- 
pedition. 

"  I  request  that  the  clock  of  history  may  be  put  back  seven- 
teen hundred  years.  This  is  a.d.  183,  if  you  please  :  and — 
(indulge  me  in  the  supposition !) — you  and  I  are  walking 
in  Alexandria.  We  have  reached  the  house  of  one  Clemens, 
— a  learned  Athenian,  who  has  long  been  a  resident  here. 
Let  us  step  into  his  library, — he  is  from  home.  What  a 
queer  place !  See,  he  has  been  reading  his  Bible,  which  is 
open  at  S.  Mark  x.  Is  it  not  a  well-used  copy  ?  It  must  be 
at  least  50  or  60  years  old.  Well,  but  suppose  only  30  or  40. 
It  was  executed  therefore  ivithin  fifty  years  of  the  death  of 
S.  John  the  Evangelist.      Come,  let  us  transcribe  two  of  the 


^   On  Jievisioii,—i\  47. 


Ill]  AT   ALEXANDKIA,   A.D.    183.  327 

columns  ^  (creXt'Se?)  as  faithfully  as  we  possibly  can,  and  be 
off.  .  .  .  We  are  back  in  England  again,  and  the  clock  has 
been  put  right.  Now  let  us  sit  down  and  examine  our 
curiosity  at  leisure.^  ...  It  proves  on  inspection  to  be  a 
transcript  of  the  15  verses  (ver.  17  to  ver.  31  ^)  which  relate 
to  the  coming  of  the  rich  young  Ruler  to  our  Lord. 

"  We  make  a  surprising  discovery.  There  are  but  297 
words  in  those  15  verses, — according  to  the  traditional  Text : 
of  which,  in  the  copy  which  belonged  to  Clemens  Alexan- 
drinus,  39  prove  to  have  been  left  out :  11  words  are  added  : 
22,  substituted:  27,  transposed:  13,  varied;  and  the  phrase 
has  been  altered  at  least  8  times.  Now,  112  words  out  of  a 
total  of  297,  is  38  per  cent.     What  do  you  think  of  that .?" 

(6)  *S'.  0.  "  Think  ?  0  but,  I  disallow  your  entire  proceed- 
ing !  You  have  no  business  to  collate  with  '  a  text  of  late 
and  degenerate  type,  such  as  is  the  Received  Text  of  the 
New  Testament.'  When  this  'is  taken  as  a  standard,  any 
document  belonging  to  a  purer  stage  of  the  Text  must  by  the 
nature  of  the  case  have  the  appearance  of  being  guilty  of 
omissions  :  and  the  nearer  the  document  stands  to  the  auto- 
graph, the  more  numerous  must  be  the  omissions  laid  to  its 
charge.'  I  learnt  that  from  Westcott  and  Hort.  See  page 
235  of  their  luminous  Introduction." 

Q.  R.  "  Be  it  so  !  Collate  the  passage  then  for  yourself 
with  the  Text  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort :  which,  (re- 
member !)  aspires  to  reproduce  '  the  autographs  themselves ' 
*  with   the    utmost   exactness   which  the  evidence  permits ' 


^  Singular  to  relate,  S.  Mark  x.  17  to  31  exactly  fills  two  columns  of 
cod.  N .     (See  Tischendorf  s  reprint,  4to,  p.  24*.) 

2  Clemens  Al.  (ed.  Potter), — pp.  937-8.  .  .  .  Note,  how  Clemens  begins 
§  V.  (p.  938,  line  30).  This  will  be  found  noticed  below,  viz.  at  p.  336, 
note  '. 


328  CLEMENS'   COPY   OF   S.  MARK   X.  17-31.  [Art. 

(pp.  288  and  289). ^  You  will  find  that  tliis  time  the  words 
omitted  amount  to  44.  The  words  added  are  13  :  the  words 
substituted,  23  :  the  words  transposed,  34  :  the  words  varied 
16.  And  the  phrase  has  been  altered  9  times  at  least.  But, 
130  on  a  total  of  297,  is  44  per  cent.  You  will  also  bear  in 
mind  that  Clement  of  Alexandria  is  one  of  our  principal 
authorities  for  the  Text  of  the  Ante-Nicene  period.^ 

"  And  thus,  I  venture  to  presume,  the  imagination  has  been 
at  last  effectually  disposed  of,  that  hecausc  Codices  b  and  x 
are  the  two  oldest  Greek  copies  in  existence,  the  Text 
exhibited  l)y  either  must  therefore  be  the  purest  Text  which 
is  anywhere  to  be  met  with.  It  is  impossible  to  produce  a 
fouler  exhibition  of  S.  Mark  x.  17-31  than  is  contained  in 
a  document  full  two  centuries  older  than  either  B  or  a, — itself 
the  iJToperty  of  one  of  the  most  famous  of  the  ante-Nicene 
Fathers." 

LVI. — (7)  At  this  stage  of  the  argument,  the  Keviewer 
finds  himself  taken  aside  by  a  friendly  Critic  [F.  C],  and 
privately  remonstrated  with  somewhat  as  follows : — 

F.  C.  "  Do  you  consider.  Sir,  what  it  is  you  are  about  ? 
Surely,  you  have  been  proving  a  vast  deal  too  much !  If 
the  foregoing  be  a  fair  sample  of  the  Text  of  the  N.  T.  with 
which  Clemens  Alex,  was  best  acquainted,  it  is  plain  that 
the  testimony  to  the  Truth  of  Scripture  borne  by  one  of  tlie 
most  ancient  and  most  famous  of  the  Fathers,  is  absolutely 
worthless.     Is  that  your  own  deliberate  conviction  or  not  ?  " 

Q.  B.  "  Finish  what  you  have  to  say.  Sir.  After  that,  you 
shall  liave  a  full  reply." 


^  '  This  Text'  (say  tho  Editors)  'is  an  attempt  to  reproduce  at  once  the 
autograph  Text.'' — Introduction,  p.  xxviii. 

-  AVcstcutt  and  Ilort's  Introduction,  ]i]i.  112-u. 


III.]  A   SUPPOSED  REMONSTEANOE.  329 

(8)  F.  C.  "  Well  then.  Pray  understand,  I  nothing  doubt 
that  in  your  main  contention  you  are  right ;  but  I  yet 
cannot  help  thinking  that  this  bringing  in  of  a  famous 
ancient  Father  —  ohitcr  —  is  a  very  damaging  proceeding. 
What  else  is  such  an  elaborate  exposure  of  tlie  badness  of 
the  Text  which  Clemens  (a.d.  150)  employed,  but  the  hope- 
less perplexing  of  a  question  which  was  already  sufficiently 
thorny  and  difficult  ?  You  have,  as  it  seems  to  me,  imported 
into  these  15  verses  an  entirely  fresh  crop  of  'Various  Eead- 
ings.'  Do  you  seriously  propose  them  as  a  contribution 
towards  ascertaining  the  ipsissima  verba  of  the  Evangelist, — 
the  true  text  of  S.  Mark  x.  17-31  ?  " 

Q.  B.  "  Come  back,  if  you  please,  Sir,  to  the  company. 
Fully  appreciating  the  friendly  spirit  in  which  you  just  now 
drew  me  aside,  I  yet  insist  on  so  making  my  reply  that  all 
the  world  shall  hear  it.  Forgive  my  plainness  :  but  you  are 
evidently  profoundly  unacquainted  with  the  problem  before 
you, — in  which  however  you  do  not  by  any  means  enjoy  the 
distinction  of  standing  alone. 

"  The  foulness  of  a  Text  which  must  have  been  penned 
within  70  or  80  years  of  the  death  of  the  last  of  the  Evan- 
gelists, is  a  matter  of  fact — which  must  be  loyally  accepted, 
and  made  the  best  of.  The  phenomenon  is  surprising  cer- 
tainly; and  may  well  be  a  warning  to  all  who  (like  Dr. 
Tregelles)  regard  as  oracular  the  solitary  unsupported  dicta 
of  a  Writer,— provided  only  he  can  claim  to  have  lived  in 
the  Ilnd  or  Ilird  century.  To  myself  it  occasions  no 
sort  of  inconvenience.  You  are  to  be  told  that  the  exorbi- 
tances of  a  single  Father, — as  Clemens :  a  single  Version, — 
as  the  Egyptian  :  a  single  Copy, — as  cod.  B,  are  of  no  manner 
of  significancy  or  use,  except  as  warnings  :  are  of  no  manner 
of  interest,  except  as  illustrating  the  depravation  which 
systematically  assailed  the  written  Word  in  the  age  which 
immediately  succeeded   the  Apostolic  :    arc,   in  fact,  of  no 


330  TESTIMONY   OF   CLEMENS   ALEXANDRINUS  [Art. 

importance  whatever.  To  make  them  the  basis  of  an  induction 
is  preposterous.  It  is  not  allowable  to  infer  the  universal 
from  the  particular.  If  the  bones  of  Goliath  were  to  be 
discovered  to-morrow,  would  you  propose  as  an  induction 
therefrom  that  it  was  the  fashion  to  wear  four-and-twenty 
fingers  and  toes  on  one's  hands  and  feet  in  the  days  of  the 
giant  of  Gath  ?  All  the  wild  readings  of  the  lost  Codex 
before  us  may  be  unceremoniously  dismissed.  The  critical 
importance  and  value  of  this  stray  leaf  from  a  long-since- 
vanished  Copy  is  entirely  different,  and  remains  to  be 
explained. 

"You  are  to  remember  then, — perhaps  you  have  yet  to 
learn, — that  there  are  but  25  occasions  in  the  course  of  these 
15  verses,  on  which  either  Lachmann  (L.),  or  Tischendorf 
(T.),  or  TregeUes  (Tr.),  or  Westcott  and  Hort  (W.  H.),  or  our 
Eevisionists  (E.  T.),  advocate  a  departure  from  the  Tradi- 
tional Text.  To  those  25  places  therefore  our  attention  is 
now  to  be  directed, — on  them,  our  eyes  are  to  be  riveted, — 
exclusively.  And  the  first  thing  which  strikes  us  as  worthy 
of  notice  is,  that  the  5  authorities  above  specified  fall  into  no 
fewer  than  twelve  distinct  combinations  in  their  advocacy  of 
certain  of  those  25  readings :  holding  all  5  together  onhj  4 
times}     The  one  question  of  interest  therefore  which  arises, 


'  Besides, — All  but  L.      conspire  5  times. 

All  but  T.  „  ;5  „ 

All  but  Tr.  „  1  „ 

Then,— T.  Tr.  WII.      combine  2  „ 

T.  WH.  RT.  „  1  „ 

Tr.  WH.  KT.  „  1  „ 

L.  Tr.  WII.  „  I  „ 

Then, — L.  T.  stand  Ity  themselves  1  „ 

L.  Tr.  „  1  „ 

T.  WH.     „  „  1  „ 

Lastly, — L.  stands  alone    .     .     .  4  „ 


III.]  TO   THE   TEXT   OF   S.   MARK   X.    17-31.  331 

is  this, — What  amount  of  sanction  do  any  of  them  expe- 
rience at  the  hands  of  Clemens  Alexandrinus  ? 

"  I  answer, — Only  on  3  occasions  docs  he  agree  with  any  of 
them}  The  result  of  a  careful  analysis  shows  further  that  he 
sides  with  the  Traditional  Text  17  times: — witnessing  against 
Lachmann,  9  times :  against  Tischendorf,  10  times :  against 
Tregelles,  11  times  :  against  Westcott  and  Hort,  12  times. '^ 

"  So  far  therefore  from  admitting  that  '  the  Testimony  of 
Clemens  Al. — one  of  the  most  ancient  and  most  famous  of 
the  Fathers — is  absolutely  worthless/ — I  have  proved  it  to 
be  of  very  great  value.  Instead  of  '  hopelessly  perplexing 
the  question,'  his  Evidence  is  found  to  have  simplified 
matters  considerably.  So  far  from  '  importing  into  these 
15  verses  a  fresh  crop  of  Various  Headings,'  he  has  helped 
us  to  get  rid  of  no  less  than  17  of  the  existing  ones.  .  .  . 
'  Damaging '  his  evidence  has  certainly  proved  :  but  only  to 
Lachmann,  Tischendorf,  Tregelles,  Westcott  and  Hort  and  onr 
ill-starred  Revisionists.  And  yet  it  remains  undeniably  true, 
that  '  it  is  impossible  to  produce  a  fouler  exhibition  of 
S.  Mark  x.  17-31  than  is  met  with  in  a  document  full  two 
centuries  older  than  either  b  or  n, — the  property  of  one  of 
the  most  famous  of  the  Fathers.'  ^  .  .  .  .  Have  you  anything 
further  to  ask  ?  " 

(9)  F.  G.  "  I  should  certainly  like,  in  conclusion,  to  be  in- 
formed whether  we  are  to  infer  that  the  nearer  we  approach 
to  the  date  of  the  sacred  Autographs,  the  more  corrupt  we 


^  Twice  he  agrees  with  all  5  :  viz.  omitting  npas  tov  a-ravpov  in  ver.  21 ; 
and  in  omitting  ^  yvvaiKa  (in  ver.  29): — Once  he  agrees  with  only 
Lachmann :  viz.  in  transposing  ravra  travja  (in  ver.  20). 

2  On  the  remaining  5  occasions  (17  +  3  +  5  =  25),  Clemens  exhibits 
peculiar  readings  of  his  own, — sides  with  no  one. 

3  Q.  R.  p.  360. 


332  'ANTIQUITY'   MUST   15E   OUR   GUIDE,—  [Akt. 

sliall  liud  tlie  copies.     For,  if  so,  pray — Where  uiul  when  did 
purity  of  Text  begin  ?  " 

Q.  B.  "  You  are  not  at  liberty,  logically,  to  draw  any  such 
inference  from  the  premisses.  The  purest  documents  of  all 
existed  perforce  in  the  first  century :  must  have  then  existed. 
The  spring  is  perforce  purest  at  its  source.  My  whole  con- 
tention has  been,  and  is, — That  there  is  nothing  at  all 
unreasonable  in  the  supposition  that  two  stray  copies  of  the 
IVth  century, — coming  down  to  our  own  times  without  a 
history  and  without  a  character, — maij  exhibit  a  thoroughly 
depraved  text.  Moix  than  this  does  not  follow  lawfully 
from  the  premisses.  At  the  outset,  remember,  you  delivered 
it  as  your  opinion  that  '  the  oldest  Manuscript  we  p)Osscss,  if  it 
he  hut  a  very  ancient  one,  must  needs  he  the  purest.'  I  asserted, 
in  reply,  that  '  it  does  not  by  any  means  follow,  hccausc  a 
manuscript  is  very  ancient,  that  therefore  its  text  will  be 
very  pure '  (p.  321) ;  and  all  that  I  have  been  since  saying, 
has  but  had  for  its  object  to  prove  the  truth  of  my  assertion. 
Facts  have  been  incidentally  elicited,  I  admit,  calculated  to 
inspire  distrust,  rather  than  confidence,  in  very  ancient  docu- 
ments generally.  But  I  am  neither  responsible  for  these 
facts  ;  nor  for  the  inferences  suggested  by  them. 

"  At  all  events,  I  have  to  request  that  you  will  not  carry 
away  so  entirely  erroneous  a  notion  as  that  I  am  the 
advocate  for  Recent,  in  preference  to  Ancient,  Evidence  con- 
cerning the  Text  of  Scripture.  Be  so  obliging  as  not  to 
say  concerning  me  that  I  '  count '  instead  of  '  iveighing '  my 
witnes.ses.  If  you  have  attended  to  the  foregoing  pages,  and 
have  understood  them,  you  must  by  tliis  time  be  aware  that 
in  every  instance  it  is  to  ANTi(»rrrv  that  1  persisU'iitly  make 
my  a])])i.'al.  I  abide  liy  its  scnteiict',  ami  1  rnpiire  that  you 
shall  do  the  same. 


Ill]  NOT   CODICES  B  N  D  L,   1,   33,   69.  333 

"  You  and  your  friends,  on  the  contrary,  reject  the  Testi- 
mony of  Antiquity.  You  set  up,  instead,  some  idol  of  your 
own.  Thus,  Tregelles  worshipped  '  codex  B.'  But  '  codex  B  ' 
is  not  '  Antiquity '  ! — Tischendorf  assigned  the  place  of 
lionour  to  '  codex  N.'  But  once  more,  '  codex  K '  is  not 
'  Antiquity ' ! — You  rejoice  in  the  decrees  of  the  Vlth-century- 
codex  D, — and  of  the  Vlllth-century-codex  L, — and  of  the 
Xth,  Xlth,  and  XlVth  century  codices,  1,  33,  69.  But  will 
you  venture  to  tell  me  that  any  of  these  are  '  Antiquity '  ? 
Samples  of  Antiquity,  at  best,  are  any  of  these.  No  more  ! 
But  then,  it  is  demonstrable  that  they  are  unfair  samples. 
Why  are  you  regardless  of  all  other  Copies  ? — So,  with  respect 
to  Veksions,  and  Fathers.  You  single  out  one  or  two, — the 
one  or  two  which  suit  your  purpose ;  and  you  are  for 
rejecting  all  the  rest.  But,  once  more, — The  Coptic  version 
is  not  '  Antiquity,' — neither  is  Origen  '  Antiquity.'  The 
Syriac  Version  is  a  full  set-off  against  the  former, — Irenseus 
more  than  counterbalances  the  latter.  Whatever  is  found  in 
one  of  these  ancient  authorities  must  confessedly  be  an 
*  ancient  Readino; : '  but  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  it  is 
THE  ancient  Beading  of  the  place.  Now,  it  is  the  ancient 
Reading,  of  which  we  are  always  in  search.  And  he  who 
sincerely  desires  to  ascertain  what  actually  is  the  Witness  of 
Antiquity, — {i.e.,  what  is  the  prevailing  testimony  of  all 
the  oldest  documents,) — will  begin  by  casting  his  prejudices 
and  his  predilections  to  the  winds,  and  will  devote  himself 
conscientiously  to  an  impartial  survey  of  the  whole  field 
of  Evidence." 

F.  C.  "  Well  but, — you  have  once  and  again  admitted  that 
the  phenomena  before  us  are  extraordinary.  Are  you  able  to 
explain  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  such  an  one  as  Clemens 
Alexandrinus  employed  such  a  scandalously  corrupt  copy  of 
the  Gospels  as  we  have  been  considering  ? " 


334  EARLIEST   CORRUPTIONS   OF   THE   N.  T.,  [Akt. 

Q.  li.  "  You  are  quite  at  liberty  to  ask  me  any  question  you 
choose.  And  I,  for  my  own  part,  am  willing  to  return  you 
the  best  answer  I  am  able.  You  will  please  to  remember 
however,  that  the  phenomena  will  remain, — however  infeli- 
citous my  attempts  to  explain  them  may  seem  to  yourself. 
My  view  of  the  matter  then — (think  what  you  will  about 
it !) — is  as  follows  : — 

LVII.  "  Vanquished  by  THE  WORD  Incarnate,  Satan  next 
directed  his  subtle  malice  against  the  Word  written.  Hence, 
as  I  think, — hence  the  extraordinary  fate  which  befel  certain 
early  transcripts  of  the  Gospel.  First,  heretical  assailants  of 
Christianity, — then,  orthodox  defenders  of  the  Truth, — 
lastly  and  above  all,  self-constituted  Critics,  who  (like 
Dr.  Hort)  imagined  themselves  at  liberty  to  resort  to 
'  instinctive  processes '  of  Criticism ;  and  who,  at  first  as 
well  as  'at  last,'  freely  made  their  appeal  'to  the  indi- 
vidual mind :' — such  were  the  corrupting  influences  which 
were  actively  at  work  throughout  the  first  hundred  and  fifty 
years  after  the  death  of  S.  John  the  Divine.  Profane  litera- 
ture has  never  known  anything  approaching  to  it, — can 
show  nothing  at  all  like  it.  Satan's  arts  were  defeated 
indeed  through  the  Church's  faithfulness,  because, — (the 
good  Providence  of  God  had  so  willed  it,) — the  perpetual 
multiplication,  in  every  quarter,  of  copies  required  for 
Ecclesiastical  use, — not  to  say  the  solicitude  of  faithful  men 
in  diverse  regions  of  ancient  Christendom  to  retain  for 
themselves  unadulterated  specimens  of  the  inspired  Text, — 
proved  a  sufficient  safeguard  against  the  grosser  forms  of 
corruption.     Ihit  this  was  not  all. 

"  The  Church,  remember,  hath  been  from  the  beginning 
the  '  Witness  and  Keeper  of  Holy  Writ.'  ^  Did  not  her 
Divine  Author  pour  out  upon  her,  in  largest  measure,  '  the 

'  Artirlc  XX.  §  1. 


III.]  CONJECTURAI>LY   ACCOUNTED   FOR.  335 

Spirit  of  Truth  ; '  and  pledge  Himself  that  it  should  be  that 
Spirit's  special  function  to  '  guide '  her  cJiildren  '  into  all  the 
Truth '  M  . . .  That  by  a  perpetual  miracle,  Sacred  Manuscripts 
would  be  protected  all  down  the  ages  against  depraving 
influences  of  whatever  sort, — was  not  to  have  been  expected  ; 
certainly,  was  never  promised.  But  the  Church,  in  her 
collective  capacity,  hath  nevertheless — as  a  matter  of  fact — 
been  perpetually  purging  herself  of  those  shamefully  de- 
praved copies  which  once  everywhere  abounded  within  her 
pale :  retaining  only  such  an  amount  of  discrepancy  in  her 
Text  as  might  serve  to  remind  her  children  that  they  carry 
their  '  treasure  in  earthen  vessels,' — as  well  as  to  stimulate 
them  to  perpetual  watchfulness  and  solicitude  for  the  purity 
and  integrity  of  the  Deposit.  Never,  however,  up  to  the 
present  hour,  hath  there  been  any  complete  eradication  of 
all  traces  of  the  attempted  mischief, — any  absolute  getting 
rid  of  every  depraved  copy  extant.  These  are  found  to  have 
lingered  on  anciently  in  many  quarters.  A  feio  such  copies 
linger  on  to  the  present  day.  The  wounds  were  healed,  but 
the  scars  remained, — nay,  the  scars  are  discernible  still. 

"  What,  in  the  meantime,  is  to  be  thought  of  those  blind 
guides— those  deluded  ones — who  would  now,  if  they  could, 
persuade  us  to  go  back  to  those  same  codices  of  which  the 
Church  hath  already  purged  herself  ?  to  go  back  in  quest  of 
those  very  Headings  which,  15  or  1600  years  ago,  the  Church 
in  all  lands  is  found  to  have  rejected  with  loathing  ?  Verily, 
it  is  '  happening  unto  them  according  to  the  true  proverb  ' — 
which  S.  Peter  sets  down  in  his  2nd  Epistle, — chapter  ii. 
verse  22.     To  proceed  however. 

"As  for  Clemens, — he  lived  at  the  very  time  and  in  the 
very  country  where  the  mischief  referred  to  was  most  rife. 
For  full  two  centuries  after  his  era,  heretical  works  were  so 


^   E(S  nacrav  ttjv  dXrjdeiav. — S.  John  xvi.  13. 


336  SCRIPTURE   DEI'RAVED   BY   HERETICS.  [Akt. 

industriously  multiplied,  that  in  a  diocese  consisting  of  800 
parishes  (viz.  Cyrus  in  Syria),  the  Bishop  (viz.  Theodorct, 
who  was  appointed  in  a.d.  423,)  complains  that  he  found 
no  less  than  200  copies  of  the  Diatcssaron  of  Tatian  the 
heretic, — (Tatian's  date  being  a.d.  173,) — honourably  pre- 
served in  the  Churches  of  his  (Theodoret's)  diocese,  and 
mistaken  by  the  orthodox  for  an  authentic  performance.^ 
Clemens  moreover  would  seem  to  have  been  a  trifle  too 
familiar  with  the  works  of  Basilides,  Marcion,  Valentinus, 
Heracleon,  and  the  rest  of  the  Gnostic  crew.  He  habitually 
mistakes  apocryphal  writings  for  inspired  Scripture :  ^  and 
— with  corrupted  copies  always  at  hand  and  before  him — he 
is  just  the  man  to  present  us  with  a  quotation  like  the 
present,  and  straightway  to  volunteer  the  assurance  that  he 
found  it  '  so  written  in  the  Gospel  according  to  S.  Mark.'^ 
The  archetype  of  Codices  b  and  n, — especially  the  archetype 
from  which  Cod.  D  was  copied, — is  discovered  to  have  ex- 
perienced adulteration  largely  from  the  same  pestilential  source 
which  must  have  corrupted  the  copies  with  which  Clement 
(and  his  pupil  Origen  after  him)  were  most  familiar. — And 
thus  you  have  explained  to  you  the  reason  of  the  disgust  and 
indignation  with  which  I  behold  in  these  last  days  a  resolute 
attempt  made  to  revive  and  to  palm  off  upon  an  unlearned 
veneration  the  old  exploded  errors,  under  the  pretence  that 
they  are  the  inspired  Verity  itself, — providentially  recovered 
from  a  neglected  shelf  in  the  Vatican, — rescued  from  destruc- 
tion 1  )y  a  chance  visitor  to  Mount  Sinai." 

F.  C.  "Will  you  then,  in  conclusion,  tell  us  how  you 
would  have  us  proceed  in  order  to  ascertain  the  Truth  of 
Scripture  ? " 

'  Theodoret,  O/jp.  iv.  208. — Comp.  Clinton,  F.  li.  ii.  A^ypendlx,  p.  473. 

"^  The  reader  is  invited  to  enquire  for  Bp.  Kaj^e  (of  Lincoln)'s  Arcnvid 
of  the  writings  of  Chinent  of  Alexandria, — and  to  read  thcvith  and  viiitli 
chapters. 

^  'Wivrn  \i.iv  iv  rw  kutu  ^\aj)K<w  (vnyy(\ioi  yiy jxitttch.      (§  v.), — p.  'J38. 


III.]       RESULT  OF  ACQUAINTANCE  WITH  DOCUMENTS.       337 

Q.  B.  "  To  answer  that  question  fully  would  require  a 
considerable  Treatise.  I  will  not,  however,  withhold  a 
slight  outline  of  what  I  conceive  to  be  the  only  safe 
method  of  procedure.  I  could  but  Jill  up  that  outline,  and 
illustrate  that  method,  even  if  I  had  500  pages  at  my 
disposal. 

LVIII.  "  On  first  seriously  applying  ourselves  to  these 
studies,  many  years  ago,  we  found  it  wondrous  difficult  to 
divest  ourselves  of  prepossessions  very  like  your  own.  Turn 
which  way  we  would,  we  were  encountered  by  the  same 
confident  terminology  : — '  the  best  documents,'  — '  primary 
manuscripts,' — '  first-rate  authorities,' — '  primitive  evidence,' 
— '  ancient  readings,'— and  so  forth :  and  we  found  that  thereby 
cod.  A  or  B, — cod.  C  or  d — laere  invariahly  and  exclusively  meant. 
It  was  not  until  we  had  laboriously  collated  these  documents 
(including  x)  for  ourselves,  that  we  became  aware  of  their 
true  character.  Long  before  coming  to  the  end  of  our  task 
(and  it  occupied  us,  off  and  on,  for  eight  years)  we  had 
become  convinced  that  the  supposed  '  best  documents '  and 
'  first-rate  authorities  '  are  in  reality  among  tlu  ivorst : — that 
these  Copies  deserve  to  be  called  '  primary,'  only  because  in 
any  enumeration  of  manuscripts,  they  stand  foremost ; — and 
that  their  '  Evidence,'  whether  '  primitive '  or  not,  is  contrct- 
dictory  throughout. — All  Readings,  lastly,  we  discovered  are 
'  ancient.' 

"  A  diligent  inspection  of  a  vast  number  of  later  Copies 
scattered  throughout  the  principal  libraries  of  Europe,  and 
the  exact  Collation  of  a  few,  further  convinced  us  that  the 
deference  generally  claimed  for  B,  x,  c,  D  is  nothing  else  but 
a  weak  superstition  and  a  vulgar  error : — that  the  date  of  a 
MS.  is  not  of  its  essence,  but  is  a  mere  accident  of  the 
problem : — and  that  later  Copies,  so  far  from  '  crumbling 
down    salient    points,    softening    irregularities,    conformiug 

z 


338  GOD  HATH  JIADE  AMPLE  PROVISION  [Art. 

differences,'  *  and  so  forth, — on  countless  occasions,  and  as  a 
rule, — preserve  those  delicate  lineaments  and  minute  refine- 
ments which  the  '  old  uncials '  are  constantly  observed  to 
obliterate.  And  so,  rising  to  a  systematic  survey  of  the 
entire  field  of  Evidence,  we  found  reason  to  suspect  more  and 
more  the  soundness  of  the  conclusions  at  which  Lachmann, 
Tregelles,  and  Tischendorf  had  arrived:  while  we  seemed 
led,  as  if  by  the  hand,  to  discern  plain  indications  of  the 
existence  for  ourselves  of  a  far  '  more  excellent  way.' 

LIX.  "  For,  let  the  ample  and  highly  complex  provision 
which  Divine  Wisdom  hath  made  for  the  effectual  conserva- 
tion of  that  crowning  master-piece  of  His  own  creative  skill, — 
The  WitiTTEN  Word, — be  duly  considered ;  and  surely  a 
recoil  is  inevitable  from  the  strange  perversity  which  in 
these  last  days  would  shut  us  up  within  the  limits  of  a  very 
few  documents  to  the  neglect  of  all  the  rest, — as  though  a 
revelation  from  Heaven  had  proclaimed  that  the  Truth  is  to 
be  found  exclusively  in  them.  The  good  Providence  of»the 
Author  of  Scripture  is  discovered  to  have  furnished  His 
household,  the  Church,  with  (speaking  roughly)  1000  copies 
of  the  Gospels : — with  twenty  Versions — two  of  which  go 
back  to  the  beginning  of  Christianity  :  and  with  the  writings 
of  a  host  of  ancient  Fathers.  JVhij  out  of  those  1000  M8S. 
two  should  be  singled  out  by  l)rs.  Westcott  and  Hort  for 
special  favour, — to  the  practical  disregard  of  all  the  rest: 
why  Versions  and  Fathers  should  by  them  be  similarly  dealt 
with, — should  be  practically  set  aside  in  fact  in  the  lump, — 
we  fail  to  discover.  Certainly  the  pleas  urged  by  the  learned 
Editors'^  can  appear  satisfactory  to  no  one  but  to  themselves. 

LX.  "  For  our  method  then, — It  is  the  direct  contradictory 
to  that  adopted  by  the  two  Cambridge  Professors.    Moreover, 

'  Alf(jrirs  N.  T.  vol.  i.  j^rohfj.  p.  92. 

2  See  p.  107  (§  269)  :  aud  p.  201  (§  275-9)  :— aud  p.  205  (§  280). 


III.]  FOR  THE  SAFETY  OF  HIS   WORD.  339 

it  conducts  us  throughout  to  directly  opposite  results.  We 
hold  it  to  be  even  axiomatic  that  a  Reading  which  is  sup- 
ported by  only  one  document, — out  of  the  1100  (more  or 
less)  already  specified,  —  whether  that  solitary  unit  be  a 
Father,  a  Version,  or  a  Copy,  —  stands  self-condemned ; 
may  be  dismissed  at  once,  without  concern  or  enquiry. 

"  Nor  is  the  case  materially  altered  if  (as  generally  happens) 
a  few  colleagues  of  bad  character  are  observed  to  side  with 
the  else  solitary  document.  Associated  with  the  corrupt  b, 
is  often  found  the  more  corrupt  n.  Nay,  six  leaves  of  n  are 
confidently  declared  by  Tischendorf  to  have  been  written  by 
the  scribe  of  b.  The  sympathy  between  these  two,  and  the 
Version  of  Lower  Egypt,  is  even  notorious.  That  Origen 
should  sometimes  join  the  conspiracy, — and  that  the  same 
Reading  should  find  allies  in  certain  copies  of  the  unrevised 
Latin,  or  perhaps  in  Cureton's  Syriac : — all  this  we  deem  the 
reverse  of  encouraging.  The  attesting  witnesses  are,  in  our 
account,  of  so  suspicious  a  character,  that  the  Reading  cannot 
be  allowed.  On  such  occasions,  we  are  reminded  that  there 
is  truth  in  Dr.  Hort's  dictum  concerning  the  importance 
of  noting  the  tendency  of  certain  documents  to  fall  into 
'  groups : '  though  his  assertion  that  '  it  cannot  be  too  often 
repeated  that  the  study  of  grouping  is  the  foundation  of  all 
enduring  Criticism,'  ^  we  hold  to  be  as  absurd  as  it  is  untrue. 

LXL  "  So  far  negatively. — A  safer,  the  only  trustworthy 
method,  in  fact,  of  ascertaining  the  Truth  of  Scripture,  we  hold 
to  be  the  method  which, — without  prejudice  or  partiality, — 
simply   ascertains  which   form   of   the   text  enjoys  the 

EARLIEST,  THE  FULLEST,  THE  WIDEST,  THE  MOST  RESPECTABLE, 

AND — above  all  things — the  most  varied  attestation.  That 
a  Reading  should  be  freely  recognized  alike  by  the  earliest 


^  Frefacc  (1870),  p.  xv. 

z  2 


340  THE  TRUE  TEXT,  THAT  WHICH  ENJOYS  THE         [Aht. 

and  by  the  latest  available  evidence, — we  hold  to  be  a  prime 
circumstance  in  its  favour.  That  Copies,  Versions,  and  Fathers, 
should  all  three  concur  in  sanctioning  it, — we  hold  to  be  even 
more  conclusive.  If  several  Fathers,  living  in  dillerent  parts 
of  ancient  Christendom,  are  all  observed  to  recognize  the 
words,  or  to  quote  them  in  the  same  way, — we  have  met  with 
all  the  additional  confirmation  we  ordinarily  require.  Let 
it  only  be  further  discoverable  liow  or  ivhy  the  rival  Reading 
came  into  existence,  and  our  confidence  becomes  absolute. 

LXII.  "  An  instance  wdiich  we  furnished  in  detail  in  a 
former  article/  may  be  conveniently  appealed  to  in  illustra- 
tion of  what  goes  before.  Our  Lord's  '  Agony  and  bloody 
sweat,' — first  mentioned  by  Justin  Martyr  (a.d.  150),  is 
found  set  doivn  in  every  MS.  in  the  world  except  four.  It  is 
duly  exhibited  hy  every  hioum  Version.  It  is  recognized  by 
uptocirds  of  forty  famous  Fathers  writing  ^^ithout  concert 
in  remote  parts  of  ancient  Christendom.  Whetlier  there- 
fore Antiquity, — Variety  of  testimony,  —  Picspectability  of 
witnesses,  —  or  Number,  —  is  considered,  the  evidence  in 
favour  of  S.  Luke  xxii.  43,  44  is  simply  overwhelming. 
And  yet  out  of  superstitious  deference  to  two  Copies  of 
bad  character,  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  (followed  by  the 
Revisionists)  set  the  brand  of  spuriousness  on  those  26 
precious  words  ;  professing  themselves  '  morally  certain ' 
that  this  is  nothing  else  but  a  '  Western  Interpolation : ' 
wliereas,  mistaken  zeal  for  the  honour  of  Incarnate  Jehovah 
alone  occasioned  the  suppression  of  these  two  verses  in  a 
few  early  manuscripts.  This  has  been  explained  already, — 
namely,  in  the  middle  of  page  82. 

LXITT.  "  Oidy  one  other  instance  shall  be  cited.  The 
traditional  reading  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14  is  vouched  for  by  ever 


'  See  above,  pp.  79  to  85. 


III.]  FULLEST  AND  MOST  VARIED  ATTESTATION.  341 

hioion  coijy  of  the  Gospels  hut  four — 3  of  which  are  of  extremely 
bad  character,  viz,  n  b  d.  The  Versions  are  divided :  but  not 
the  Fathers  :  of  whom  more  than  forty-seven  from  every  part 
of  ancient  Christendom, — (Syria,  Palestine,  Alexandria,  Asia 
Minor,  Cyprus,  Crete,  Gaul,) — come  back  to  attest  that  the 
traditional  reading  (as  usual)  is  the  true  one.  Yet  such  is 
the  infatuation  of  the  new  school,  that  Drs.  Westcott  and 
Hort  are  content  to  make  nonsense  of  the  Angelic  Hymn  on 
the  night  of  the  Xativity,  rather  than  admit  the  possibility 
of  complicity  in  error  in  N  B  D  :  error  in  respect  of  a  siiigle 
letter !  .  .  .  .  The  Eeader  is  invited  to  refer  to  what  has 
already  been  offered  on  this  subject,  from  p.  41  to  p.  47. 

LXIV.  "It  will  be  perceived  therefore  that  the  method 
we  plead  for  consists  merely  in  a  loyal  recognition  of  the  whole 
of  the  Evidence :  setting  off  one  authority  against  another, 
laboriously  and  impartially ;  and  adjudicating  fairly  between 
them  all.  Even  so  hopelessly  corrupt  a  document  as  Clement 
of  Alexandria's  copy  of  the  Gospels  proves  to  have  been— 
(described  at  pp.  326-31) — is  by  no  means  without  critical 
value.  Servilely  followed,  it  M'ould  confessedly  land  us  in 
hopeless  error  :  but,  judiciously  employed,  as  a  set-off  against 
other  evidence ;  regarded  rather  as  a  check  upon  the  exorbi- 
tances of  other  foul  documents,  {e.g.  B  n  C  and  especially  d)  ; 
resorted  to  as  a  protection  against  the  prejudice  and  caprice  of 
modern  Critics  ; — that  venerable  document,  with  all  its  faults, 
proves  invaluable.  Thus,  in  spite  of  its  own  aberrations,  it 
witnesses  to  the  truth  of  the  Traditional  Text  of  S.  Mark  x. 
17-31 — (the  place  of  Scripture  above  referred  to^) — in  several 
important  particulars ;  siding  with  it  against  Lachmann, 
9  times  ; — against  Tischendorf,  10  times  ; — against  Tregelles, 
11  times; — against  Westcott  and  Hort,  12  times. 

1  Pp.  350-60. 


342  A  PYRAMID,  BALANCED  ON  ITS  APEX,  [Art. 

"  We  deem  this  laborious  method  the  only  true  method, 
in  our  present  state  of  imperfect  knowledge:  the  method, 
namely,  of  adopting  that  Reading  which  has  the  fullest,  the 
ividcst,  aiid  the  most  varied  attestation.  Antiquity,  and  Bespec- 
tahility  of  Witnesses,  are  thus  secured.  How  men  can  per- 
suade themselves  that  19  Copies  out  of  every  20  may 
be  safely  disregarded,  if  they  be  but  written  in  minuscule 
characters, — we  fail  to  understand.  To  ourselves  it  seems 
simply  an  irrational  proceeding.  But  indeed  we  hold  this  to 
be  no  seeming  truth.  The  fact  is  absolutely  demonstrable. 
As  for  building  up  a  Text,  (as  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  have 
done,)  with  special  superstitious  deference  to  a  single  codex, — 
we  deem  it  about  as  reasonable  as  would  be  the  attempt  to 
build  up  a  pyramid  from  its  apex  ;  in  the  expectation  that 
it  would  stand  firm  on  its  extremity,  and  remain  horizontal 
for  ever." 

And  thus  much  in  reply  to  our  supposed  Questioner.  We 
have  now  reached  the  end  of  a  prolonged  discussion,  which 
began  at  page  320 ;  more  immediately,  at  page  337. 

LXV.  In  the  meantime,  a  pjjramid  balanced  on  its  apex 
proves  to  be  no  unapt  image  of  the  Textual  theory  of  Drs.  West- 
cott and  Hort.  When  we  reach  the  end  of  their  Introduction 
we  find  we  have  reached  the  point  to  wliich  all  that  went 
before  has  been  evidently  converging  :  but  we  make  the  fur- 
ther awkward  discovery  that  it  is  the  point  on  which  all  that 
went  before  absolutely  depends  also.  Ajxcrt  from  codex  b, 
the  present  theory  could  have  no  existence.  But  for  codex  B, 
it  would  never  have  been  excogitated.  On  codex  b,  it 
entirely  rests.     Out  of  codex  b,  it  has  entirely  sp'ung. 

Take  away  this  one  codex,  and  Dr.  Hort's  volume  becomes 
absolutely  without  coherence,  purpose,  meaning.     Onc-fifth 


III.]  APTLY  REPRESENTS  DR.  HORT'S  THEORY.  343 

of  it^  is  devoted  to  remarks  on  B  and  N.  The  fable  of  '  the 
Syrian  text '  is  invented  solely  for  the  glorification  of  B  and 
Nj^which  are  claimed,  of  course,  to  be  '  Prc-Syrian.'  This 
fills  40  pages  more.^  And  thus  it  would  appear  that  the 
Truth  of  Scripture  has  run  a  very  narrow  risk  of  being  lost 
for  ever  to  mankind.  Dr.  Hort  contends  that  it  more  than 
half  lay  perdu  on  a  forgotten  shelf  in  the  Vatican  Library  ; — 
Dr.  Tischendorf,  that  it  had  been  deposited  in  a  waste-paper 
basket^  in  the  convent  of  S.  Catharine  at  the  foot  of  Mount 
Sinai, — from  which  he  rescued  it  on  the  4tli  February,  1859  : 
— neither,  we  venture  to  think,  a  very  likely  circumstance. 
We  incline  to  believe  that  the  Author  of  Scripture  hath  not 
by  any  means  shown  Himself  so  unmindful  of  the  safety  of 
the  Deposit,  as  these  distinguished  gentlemen  imagine. 

Are  we  asked  for  the  ground  of  our  opinion  ?  We  point 
without  hesitation  to  the  998  Copies  which  remain  :  to  the 
many  ancient  Versions  :  to  the  many  venerable  Fathers, — 
any  one  of  whom  we  hold  to  be  a  more  trustworthy  authm^ity 
for  the  Text  of  Scripture,  when  he  speaks  out  plainly,  than 
either  Codex  b  or  Codex  «, — aye,  or  than  both  of  them  put 
together.  Behold,  (we  say,)  the  abundant  provision  which 
the  All- wise  One  hath  made  for  the  safety  of  the  Deposit : 
the  '  threefold  cord '  which  '  is  not  quickly  broken  ' !  We  hope 
to  be  forgiven  if  we  add,  (not  without  a  little  warmth,)  that 
we  altogether  wonder  at  the  perversity,  the  infatuation,  the 
blindness, — which  is  prepared  to  make  light  of  all  these  pre- 
cious helps,  in  order  to  magnify  two  of  the  most  corrupt 


^  P.  210  to  p.  287.     See  the  Contents,  pp.  xxiii.-xxviii. 

2  Pp.  91-119  and  pp.  133-146. 

^  "  I  perceived  a  large  and  luide  basket  full  of  old  parchments  ;  and  the 
librarian  told  me  that  two  heaps  like  this  had  been  already  committed  to 
the  flames.  What  was  my  surprise  to  find  amid  this  heap  of  papers,"  &c. — 
(Narrative  of  the  discovery  of  the  Sinaitic  Manuscript,  p.  23.) 


344  UNFAIR  THAT  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND  [Art. 

codices  in  existence ;  and  that,  for  no  other  reason  but  because, 
(ns  Dr.  Hort  expresses  it,)  they  'happen  likewise  to  be  the 
oldest  extant  Greek  MSS.  of  the  New  Testament.'  (p.  212.) 

LXVI.  And  yet,  had  what  precedes  been  the  sum  of  the 
matter,  we  should  for  our  own  parts  have  been  perfectly  well 
content  to  pass  it  by  without  a  syllal  )le  of  comment.  So  long- 
as  nothing  more  is  endangered  than  the  personal  reputation  of 
a  couple  of  Scholars — at  home  or  abroad — we  can  afford  to 
look  on  with  indifference.  Their  private  ventures  are  their 
private  concern.  What  excites  our  indignation  is  the  spec- 
tacle of  the  Church  of  England  becoming  to  some  extent 
involved  in  their  discomfiture,  because  implicated  in  their 
mistakes :  dragged  through  the  mire,  to  speak  plainly,  at  the 
chariot- wheels  of  these  two  infelicitous  Doctors,  and  exposed 
with  them  to  the  ridicule  of  educated  Christendom.  Our 
Church  has  boasted  till  now  of  learned  sons  in  abundance 
within  her  pale,  ready  at  a  moment's  notice  to  do  her  right : 
to  expose  shallow  sciolism,  and  to  vindicate  that  precious 
thing  which  hath  been  committed  to  her  trust.^  Where  are 
the  men  noiv  ?  What  has  come  to  her,  that,  on  the  contrary, 
certain  of  her  own  Bishops  and  Doctors  have  not  scrupled  to 
enter  into  an  irregular  alliance  with  Sectarians, — yes,  have 
even  taken  into  partnership  witli  themselves  one  who  openly 
denies  the  eternal  Godhead  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, — in 
order,  as  it  would  seem,  to  give  proof  to  the  world  of  the  low 
obl>  to  which  Taste,  Scholarship,  and  Sacred  Learning  have 
sunk  among  us  ? 

LXVII.  Worse  yet.  We  are  so  distressed,  because  the  true 
sufferers  after  all  by  this  ill-advised  proceeding,  are  the 
90  millions  of  English-speaking  Christian  folk  scattered  over 


'   rlji/  naixiKUTdOr'jKr^v. — 1  Tim.  vi.  20. 


III.]  SHOULD  BE  DEAGGED  THROUGH  THE  MIEE.  345 

the  surface  of  the  globe.  These  have  had  the  title-deeds  by 
which  they  hold  their  priceless  birthright,  shamefully  tam- 
pered with.  WJio  will  venture  to  predict  the  amount  of 
mischief  which  must  follow,  if  the  '  New  Greek  Text '  wliich 
has  been  put  forth  by  the  men  who  were  appointed  to  revise 
the  English  Authorized  Version,  should  become  used  in  our 
Schools  and  in  our  Colleges,- — ^should  impose  largely  on  the 
Clergy  of  the  Church  of  England  ?  ,  .  .  But  to  return  from 
this,  which  however  will  scarcely  be  called  a  digression. 

A  pyramid  poised  on  its  apex  then,  we  hold  to  be  a  fair 
emblem  of  the  Theory  just  now  under  review.  Only,  unfor- 
tunately, its  apex  is  found  to  be  constructed  of  brick  without 
straw :  say  rather  of  strata — tvithout  trick. 

LXVIII.  Why  such  partiality  has  been  evinced  latterly 
for  Cod.  B-,  none  of  the  Critics  have  yet  been  so  good  as  to 
explain ;  nor  is  it  to  be  expected  that,  satisfactorily,  any  of 
them  ever  will.  Why  again  Tischendorf  should  have  sud- 
denly transferred  his  allegiance  from  Cod.  B  to  Cod.  k, — 
unless,  to  be  sure,  he  was  the  sport  of  parental  partiality, — 
must  also  remain  a  riddle.  If  one  of  the  '  old  uncials  '  must 
needs  be  taken  as  a  guide, — (though  we  see  no  sufficient 
reason  why  one  should  be  appointed  to  lord  it  over  the  rest,) 
— we  should  rather  have  expected  that  Cod.  A  would  have  been 
selected,^ — the  text  of  which 

*  Stands  in  broad  contrast  to  those  of  either  b  or  K,  though  the 
interval   of  years   [between   it  and  them]  is  probably  small.' 


'  [While  this  sheet  is  passing  through  the  press,  I  find  among  my 
papers  a  note  (written  in  1876)  by  the  learned,  loved,  and  lamented 
Editor  of  Cyril, — Philip  E.  Pusey, — with  whom  I  used  to  be  in  constant 
communication  : — "  It  is  not  obvious  to  me,  looking  at  the  subject  from 
outside,  why  b  c  l,  constituting  a  class  of  MSS.  allied  to  each  other,  and 
therefore  nearly  =  IJ  MSS.,  are  to  be  held  to  be  superior  to  a.  It  is 
still  less  obvious  to  me  why  ***,  showing  up  (as  he  does)  very  many  grave 
faults  of  B,  should  yet  consider  u  superior  in  character  to  A."] 


346   COD.  A  MOKE  TRUSTWORTHY  THAN  COD.  B  :— BUT   [Art. 

(p.  152.)  '  By  a  curious  and  apparently  unnoticed  coincidence,' 
(proceeds  Dr,  Ilort,)  '  its  Text  in  several  books  agrees  with  the 
Latin  Vulgate  in  so  many  peculiar  readings  devoid  of  old  Latin 
attestation,  as  to  leave  little  doubt  that  a  Greek  MS.  largely 
employed  by  Jerome ' — [and  -why  not  '  thj;  Greek  copies  employed 
by  Jerome'?] — '  in  his  Kevision  of  the  Latin  version  must  have 
had  to  a  great  extent  a  common  original  with  a.'  (^Ibid.) 

Behold  a  further  claim  of  this  copy  on  the  respectful  con- 
sideration of  the  Critics  !  What  would  be  thought  of  the 
Alexandrian  Codex,  if  some  attestation  were  discoveraljle  in 
its  pages  tliat  it  actually  had  hdongcd  to  the  learned  Palesti- 
nian father  ?     According  to  Dr.  Hort, 

'  Apart  from  this  individual  affinity,  a — both  in  the  Gospels 
and  elsewhere — may  serve  as  a  fair  example  of  the  Mayimcripts 
that,  to  judge  by  Patristic  quotations,  loere  commonest  in  the  IVth 
century.' — (p.  152.) 

0  but,  the  evidence  in  favour  of  Codex  a  thickens  apace  ! 
Suppose  then, — (for,  after  this  admission,  the  supposition  is 
at  least  allowable,) — suppose  the  discovery  were  made  to- 
morrow of  half-a-score  of  codices  of  the  same  date  as  Cod.  B, 
but  exhibiting  the  same  Text  as  Cod.  A.  What  a  complete 
revolution  would  be  thereby  effected  in  men's  minds  on 
Textual  matters !  How  impossible  would  it  bu,  henceforth, 
for  B  and  its  henchman  n,  to  obtain  so  much  as  a  hearing ! 
Such  '  an  eleven '  would  safely  defy  the  world  !  And  yet, 
according  to  Dr.  Hort,  the  supposition  may  any  day  become 
a  fact ;  for  he  informs  us, — (and  we  are  glad  to  Ijc  able  for 
once  to  declare  that  what  he  says  is  perfectly  correct,)— 
that  such  manuscripts  once  abounded  or  rather  prevailed; — 
'  locrc  commonest  in  the  IVth  century,'  when  codices  B  and  « 
w^ere  written.  We  presume  that  then,  as  now,  sucli  codices 
prevailed  universally,  in  the  proportion  of  99  to  1. 

LXIX.  P>ut — what  need  to  say  it  ?— we  entirely  disallow 
any  such  narrowing  of  the  ]ilallnrm  Avhicli  Divine  Wisdom 


III.]        BOTH  CONSPIRE  IN  ERROR  AT  1  S.  JOHN  V.  18.       347 

hath  willed  sliould  be  at  once  very  varied  and  very  ample. 
Cod.  A  is  sometimes  in  error:  sometimes  even  conspires  in 
error  exclusively  vjith  Cod.  b.  An  instance  occurs  in  1  S.  John 
v.  18, — a  difficult  passage,  which  we  the  more  willingly  pro- 
ceed to  remark  upon,  because  the  fact  has  transpired  that  it 
is  one  of  the  few  places  in  which  entire  unanim,ity  prevailed 
among  the  Revisionists, — who  yet  (as  we  shall  show)  have 
been,  one  and  all,  mistaken  in  substituting  '  him '  (avrov)  for 
'himself  (eavTov)  .  .  .  We  venture  to  bespeak  the  Header's 
attention  while  we  produce  the  passage  in  question,  and  briefly 
examine  it.  He  is  assured  that  it  exhibits  a  fair  average 
specimen  of  what  has  been  the  Revisionists'  fatal  method 
in  every  page : — 

LXX.  S.  John  in  his  first  Epistle  (v.  18)  is  distinguishing 
between  the  mere  recipient  of  the  new  birth  (6  rENNHOErs 
e/c  Tov  OeoO), — and  the  man  who  retains  the  sanctifying 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  he  received  when  he 
became  regenerate  (6  rErENNHME'Nos  eV  tov  ©eoO).  The 
latter  (he  says)  '  sirmeth  not : '  the  former,  (he  says,)  '  kcepeth 
himself,  and  the  Evil  One  toucheth  him  not.'  So  far,  all  is 
intelligible.  The  nominative  is  the  same  in  both  cases. 
Substitute  however  '  keepeth  hiin  {avrov)'  for  '  keepeth  him- 
self (iavTov),'  and  (as  Dr.  Scrivener  admits  ^),  6  yevvrjOeU  i/c 
TOV  @€ov  can  be  none  other  than  the  Only  Begotten  Son  of 
God.  And  yet  our  Lord  is  noivhere  in  the  New  Testament 
designated  as  6  'yevvrjdeU  e'/c  tov  Seov."^  Alford  accordingly 
prefers  to  make  nonsense  of  the  place ;  which  he  translates, — 
'  he  that  hath  been  begotten  of  God,  it  keepeth  him.' 


'  Introduction,  p.  567. 

^  Let  the  following  places  be  considered  :  S.  Jo.  i.  13  ;  iii.  3,  5,  6,  7,  8  ; 
1  Jo.  ii.  29  ;  iii.  9  his,  iv.  7  ;  v.  1  his,  4,  18  his.  Why  is  it  to  be  supposed 
that  on  this  last  occasion  the  Eternal  Son  should  be  intended  ? 


348  THE  TRUE  READING  OF  1   S.  JOHN  V.  18.  [Akt. 

LXXI.  Now,  on  every  occasion  like  the  present, — (instead 
of  tampering  with  the  text,  as  Dr.  Hort  and  our  Revisionists 
have  done  vjitJiout  explanation  or  apologij,) — our  safety  will  be 
found  to  consist  in  enquiring, — But  (1)  What  have  the 
Copies  to  say  to  tliis  ?  (2)  "What  liave  the  Versions  ?  and 
(3)  "Wliat,  the  Fatliers  ?  .  .  .  The  answer  proves  to  be — (1) 
All  the  copies  except  three}  read  '  himself.' — (2)  So  do  the 
Syriac  and  the  Latin  ;  ^ — so  do  the  Coptic,  Sahidic,  Georgian, 
Armenian,  and  ^thiopic  versions.^ — (3)  So,  Origen  clearly 
thrice,* — Didymus  clearly  4  times,^ — Ephraem  Syrus  clearly 
twice,® — Severus  also  twice,'' — Theophylact  expressly,^ — and 
(Ecumenius.^ — So,  indeed,  Cod.  a  ;  for  the  original  Scribe  is 
found  to  have  corrected  himself}^  The  sum  of  the  adverse 
attestation  therefore  which  prevailed  with  the  Revisionists, 
is  found  to  have  been — Codex  B  and  a  single  cursive  copy  at 
Moscow. 

This  does  not  certainly  seem  to  tlie  Reviewer,  (as  it  seemed 
to  the  Revisionists,)  'decidedly  preponderating  evidence.' 
In  his  account,  '  plain  and  clear  error '  dwells  with  their 
Bevision.  But  this  may  be  because, — (to  quote  words  recently 
addressed  by  the  President  of  the  Revising  body  to  the  Clergy 


'  A»,  B,  105. 

^  The  paraphrase  is  interestinf;;.  Tlie  Viil^ato,  Jerome  [ii.  321,  691], 
Cassian  [p.  409], — '  ISed  gcntratio  Dei  conservat  eum : '  Chromatins  [Gall, 
viii.  347],  and  Vigilius  Taps.  [aj).  Atlianas.  ii.  64G], — '  Q^t,ia  ((jiioniaiu) 
nativitds  Dei  custodit  (^strvat)  ilium.''  In  a  letter  of  5  Bishops  to  Inno- 
centius  I.  (a.d.  410)  [Gallaud.  viii.  598  b],  it  is, — '  Nativitas  qux  ex  Deo 
es<.'  Such  a  rendering  (viz.  '  his  having  bee7i  born  of  God  ')  amounts  to  an 
iiiterprdation  of  the  })lace. 

3  From  the  Ilev.  S.  C.  Malan,  D.U.  ■•  iv.  32f;  1)  c. 

•*  Gall.  viii.  347, — of  whii-h  the  Greek  is  to  be  seen  in  Cramer's  Cat.  pp. 
143-4.  Many  portions  of  the  lost  Text  of  this  Father,  (the  present  passage 
included  [p.  231])  are  to  be  found  in  the  Scholia  published  by  C.  F. 
Mattha;i  [N.  T.  xi.  181  to  245-7]. 

«  i.  94,  97.  ■'  In  Cat.  y.  124,  rc]icatcd  p.  11-1.  «  iii.  433  c. 

*  ii.  GOl  d.  '"  r>y  jiutting  a  small  uncial  6  above  the  A. 


HI.]         '  INNOCENT  IGNORANCE'  OF  THE  KEVIEWEE.         349 

and  Laity  of  the  Diocese  of  Crloucester  and  Bristol,) — 
the  '  Quarterly  Eeviewer '  is  '  innocently/  ignorant  of  the  now 
established  p^^iriciples  of  Textual  Criticism.'  ^ 

LXXII.  '  It  is  easy/ — (says  the  learned  Prelate,  speaking 
on  his  own  behalf  and  that  of  his  co-Eevisionists,) — '  to  put 
forth  to  the  world  a  sweeping  condemnation  of  many  of 
our  changes  of  reading  ;  and  yet  all  the  while  to  be  innocently 
ignorant  of  the  now  established  principles  of  Textual  Criticism.' 

May  we  venture  to  point  out,  that  it  is  easier  still  to 
denounce  adverse  Criticism  in  the  lump,  instead  of  trying  to 
refute  it  in  any  one  particular : — to  refer  vaguely  to  '  esta- 
blished principles  of  Textual  Criticism,'  instead  of  stating 
which  they  be  : — to  sneer  contemptuously  at  endeavours, 
(which,  even  if  unsuccessful,  one  is  apt  to  suppose  are 
entitled  to  sympathy  at  the  hands  of  a  successor  of  the 
Apostles,)  instead  of  showing  wherein  such  efforts  are  repre- 
hensible ?  We  are  content  to  put  the  following  question  to 
any  fair-minded  man : — Whether  of  these  two  is  the  more 
facile  and  culpable  proceeding ; — (1)  Lightly  to  blot  out  an 
inspired  word  from  the  Book  of  Life,  and  to  ionpose  a  wron^ 
sense  on  Scripture,  as  in  this  place  the  Bishop  and  his  col- 
leagues are  found  to  have  done : — or,  (2)  To  fetch  the  same 
word  industriously  back :  to  establish  its  meaning  by 
diligent  and  laborious  enquiry :  to  restore  both  to  their 
rightful  honours  :  and  to  set  them  on  a  basis  of  {hitherto 
unobserved)  evidence,  from  which  (faxit  DEUS !)  it  will  be 
found  impossible  henceforth  to  dislodge  them  ? 

This  only  will  the  Eeviewer  add, — That  if  it  be  indeed 
one  of  the  '  now  established  principles  of  Textual  Criticism,' 


Diocesan  Progress,  Jan.  1882. — [pp.  20]  p.  19, 


350  NEMESIS  OF  SUPERSTITION  AND  IDOLATRY.         [Art. 

that  the  evidence  of  hvo  manuscnpts  and-a-half  outweighs 
the  evidence  of  (1)  All  the  remaining  997^, — (2)  The  whole 
body  of  the  Versions, — (3)  Every  Father  who  quotes  the  place, 
from  A.D.  210  to  a.u.  1070, — and  (4)  The  strongest  iJOssiUc 
internal  Evidence : — if  all  this  indeed  be  so, — he  devoutly 
trusts  that  he  may  be  permitted  to  retain  his  '  Innocence ' 
to  the  last ;  and  in  his  '  Ignorance,'  when  the  days  of  his 
warfare  are  ended,  to  close  his  eyes  in  death. — And  now 
to  proceed. 

LXXIII.  The  Nemesis  of  Superstition  and  Idolatry  is  ever 
the  same.  Phantoms  of  the  imagination  henceforth  usurp  the 
place  of  substantial  forms.  Interminable  doubt, — wretched 
misbelief, — childish  credulity, — judicial  blindness, — are  the 
inevitable  sequel  and  penalty.  The  mind  that  has  long 
allowed  itself  in  a  systematic  trifling  with  Evidence,  is 
observed  to  fall  the  easiest  prey  to  Imposture.  It  has  doubted 
what  is  demonstraUy  true :  has  rejected  what  is  induhitablg 
Divine.  Henceforth,  it  is  observed  to  mistake  its  own 
fantastic  creations  for  historical  facts :  to  believe  things 
which  rest  on  insufficient  evidence,  or  on  no  evidence  at  all. 
Thus,  these  learned  Professors, — who  condemn  the  '  last 
Twelve  Verses  of  the  Gospel  according  to  S.  Mark  ; '  which 
have  been  accounted  veritable  Scripture  by  the  Church  Uni- 
versal for  more  tlian  1800  years ; — nevertheless  accept  as 
the  genuine  ' Diatessaron  of  Tatian'  [a.d.  170],  a  production 
which  was  discovered  yesterday,  and  which  does  not  even  clai^n 
to  he  the  work  of  that  primitive  writer.^ 

Yes,  the  Nemesis  of  Superstition  and  Idolatry  is  ever  the 
same.  General  mistrust  of  all  evidence  is  the  sure  result. 
In  1870,  Drs.  Westcott  and   Hort   solemnly  assured  their 


'  Jnlroduction,  p.  283.     Notes,  pp.  3,  22,  aud  iiaasim.  \ 

I 


III.]  DR.  HORT  ON  '  CONJECTURAL  EMENDATION:  351 

brother-Revisionists  thcat  '  the  prevalent  assumption  that 
throiisrhont  the  N.  T.  the  true  Text  is  to  be  found  somewhere 
among  recorded  Readings,  does  not  stand  the  test  of  experience.' 
They  are  evidently  still  haunted  by  the  same  spectral  sus- 
picion. They  invent  a  ghost  to  be  exorcised  in  every  dark 
corner.  Accordingly,  Dr.  Hort  favours  us  with  a  chapter  on 
the  Art  of  '  removing  Corruptions  of  the  sacred  Text  ante- 
cedent to  extant  documents '  (p.  71).  We  are  not  surprised 
(thougli  we  are  a  little  amused)  to  hear  that, — 

'  The  Art  of  Conjectural  Emendation  depends  for  its  success 
so  much  on  personal  endowments,  fertility  of  resource  in  the 
first  instance,  and  even  more  an  appreciation  of  language  too 
delicate  to  acquiesce  in  merely  plausible  corrections,  that  it  is 
easy  to  forget  its  true  character  as  a  critical  operation  founded 
on  knowledge  and  method.' — (p.  71.) 

LXXIV.  Very  '  easy,'  certainly.  One  sample  of  Dr.  Hort's 
skill  in  this  department,  (it  occurs  at  page  135  of  his  Notes 
on  Select  Readings,)  shall  be  cited  in  illustration.  We  venture 
to  commend  it  to  the  attention  of  our  Readers : — 

{a)  S.  Paul  [2  Tim.  i.  13]  exhorts  Timothy,  (whom  he  had 
set  as  Bp.  over  the  Church  of  Ephesus,)  to  '  hold  fast '  a 
certain  'form '  or  '  pattern '  (vTrorvTrcoaiv)  '  of  sound  words, 
which '  (said  he)  '  thou  hast  heard  of  me!  The  flexibility  and 
delicate  precision  of  the  Greek  language  enables  the  Apostle 
to  indicate  exactly  what  was  the  prime  object  of  his  solicitude. 
It  proves  to  have  been  the  safety  of  the  very  words  which  he 
had  syllabled,  (v<yiai,v6vTcov  Xoycov  'Qn  Trap"  ifiov  rjKovcras:). 
As  learned  Bp.  Beveridge  well  points  out, — '  ivhieh  words,  not 
tvhich  form,  thou  hast  heard  of  me.  So  that  it  is  not  so  much 
the  form,  as  the  tcords  themselves,  which  the  Apostle  would 
have  him  to  hold  fast.'  ^ 


^  Sermons,  vol.   i.   132, — QA  form   of  sound    words   to   he   used    l»j 
Ministers^) 


352  TEXT  OF  2  TIM.  I.  13,  VINDICATED:  [Akt. 

All  this  however  proves  ahhorrent  to  Dr.  Hort.  'This 
sense  '  (says  the  learned  Professor)  '  cannot  be  obtained  from 
the  text  except  by  treating  a)v  as  put  in  the  genitive  by  an 
ttnusual  and  inexplicable  attraction.  It  seems  more  probable 
that  Mv  is  a  primitive  comiption  of  6v  after  Trdvrcov' 

Now,  this  is  quite  impossible,  since  neither  6v  nor  irdprcov 
occurs  anywhere  in  the  neighbourhood.  And  as  for  the  sup- 
posed '  unusual  and  inexplicable  attraction,'  it  happens  to  be 
one  of  even  common  occurrence, — as  every  attentive  reader 
of  the  New  Testament  is  aware.  Examples  of  it  may  be 
seen  at  2  Cor.  i.  4  and  Ephes.  iv.  1, — also  (in  Dr.  Hort's  text 
of)  Ephes.  i.  6  (^9  in  all  3  places).  Again,  in  S.  Luke  v.  9 
(whether  y  or  mv  is  read)  :  and  vi.  38  (w)  : — in  S.  Jo.  xv.  20 
(ov)  : — and  xvii.  11  (to) :  in  Acts  ii.  22  (oh)  :  vii.  17  (179)  and 
45  (mv)  :  in  xxii,  15  (wv),  &c.  .  .  .  But  why  entertain  the 
question  ?  There  is  absolutely  no  room  for  such  Criticism  in 
respect  of  a  reading  which  is  found  in  every  knoicn  MS., — in 
every  knoivn  Version, — in  every  Father  tvJio  quotes  the  place  :  a 
reading  which  Divines,  and  Scholars  who  were  not  Divines, — 
Critics  of  the  Text,  and  grammarians  who  were  without 
prepossessions  concerning  Scripture, — Editors  of  the  Greek 
and  Translators  of  the  Greek  into  other  languages,^ — all  alike 
have  acquiesced  in,  from  the  beginning  until  now. 

We  venture  to  assert  that  it  is  absolutely  unlawful,  in 
the  entire  absence  of  evidence,  to  call  such  a  reading  as  the 
present  in  question.  There  is  absolutely  no  safeguard  for 
Scripture — no  limit  to  Controversy — if  a  ]ilace  like  this  may 
be  solicited  at  the  mere  suggestion  of  individual  caprice. 
(For  it  is  worth  observing  that  on  this,  and  similar  occasions. 
Dr.  Hort  is  forsaken  hy  Dr.  Wcstcott.  Such  notes  are  enclosed 
in  brackets,  and  subscribed  '  H.')  In  the  meantime,  who 
can  forbear  smiling  at  the  self-complacency  of  a  Critic  who 


III.]         ALSO,  OF  S.  JOHN  VI.  4,  AND  OF  ACTS  XX.  28.         353 

puts  forth  remarks  like  those  which  precede ;  and  yet  congra- 
tiihites  himself  on  'personal  endoivments,  fertility  of  resource, 
and  a  too  delicate  ajpyreciation  of  language  '  ? 

{h)  Another  specimen  of  conjectural  extravagance  occurs 
at  S.  John  vi.  4,  where  Dr.  Hort  labours  to  throw  suspicion 
on  '  the  Passover '  {to  7rda-^a), — in  defiance  of  every  known 
Manuscript, — every  hiaivn  Version, — and  every  Father  who 
quotes  or  recognizes  the  place}  We  find  nine  columns  devoted 
to  his  vindication  of  this  weak  imagination;  although  so 
partial  are  his  Notes,  that  countless  '  various  Headings '  of 
great  interest  and  importance  are  left  wholly  undiscussed. 
Nay,  sometimes  entire  Epistles  are  dismissed  with  a  single 
weak  annotation  (e.g.  1  and  2  Thessalonians), — ar  with  none, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians. 

(c)  We  charitably  presume  that  it  is  in  order  to  make 
amends  for  having  conjecturally  thrust  out  to  Trda'^a  from  S. 
John  vi.  4, — that  Dr.  Hort  is  for  conjecturally  thrusting  into 
Acts  XX.  28,  Tiov  (after  tov  ISlov), — an  imagination  to  which 
he  devotes  a  column  and-a-half,  but  for  which  he  is  not  able  to 
produce  a  particle  of  evidence.  It  would  result  in  our  read- 
ing, '  to  feed  the  Church  of  God,  which  He  purchased ' — (not 
'with  His  oivn  blood,'  but) — 'with  the  hlood  of  His  own 
Son  : '  which  has  evidently  been  suggested  by  nothing  so 
much  as  by  the  supposed  necessity  of  getting  rid  of  a  text 
which  unequivocally  asserts  that  Christ  is  God.^ 


'  Quoted  by  ps.-Ephraem  Evan.  Cone.  p.  135  1.  2  : — Nonnus : — Chrys. 
viii.  248:— Cyril  iv.  269  e,  270  a,  273 :— Cramer's  Cai.  p.  242  1.25  (which 
is  not  from  Chrys.): — CJiron.  Paschah  217a  (diserte). — Recognized  by 
Melito  (a.d.  170)  : — Irenasus  (a.d.  177) : — Hiiipolytus  (a.d.  190) : — 
Origen  : — Eusebius  : — Apollinarius  Laod.,  &c. 

2  This  is  the  true  reason  of  the  eagerness  which  has  been  displayed  in 
certain  quarters  to  find  os,  (not  0f ds-)  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16 ; — ^just  as  nothing 

2   A 


354      .     'CONJECTURAL  EMENDATION'  IS  AhhOWED         [Art. 

LXXV,  Some  will  be  chiefly  struck  by  the  conceit  and 
presumption  of  such  suggestions  as  the  foregoing.  A  yet 
larger  number,  as  we  believe,  will  be  astonished  by  their 
essential  foolishness.  For  ourselves,  what  surprises  us  most 
is  the  fatal  misapprehension  they  evince  of  the  true  office 
of  Textual  Criticism  as  applied  to  the  New  Testament.  It 
never  is  to  invent  neio  Readings,  but  only  to  adjudicate 
between  existing  and  conflicting  ones.  He  who  seeks  to 
thrust  out  '  THE  Passovek  '  from  S.  John  vi.  4,  (where  it  may 
on  no  account  be  dispensed  with  ^) ;  and  to  thrust  '  the  Son  ' 
into  Acts  XX.  28,  (where  His  Name  cannot  stand  without 
evacuating  a  grand  Theological  statement) ; — will  do  well  to 
consider  whether  he  does  not  bring  himself  directly  under 
the  awful  malediction  with  which  the  beloved  Disciple  con- 
cludes and  seals  up  the  Canon  of  Scripture : — "  I  testify  unto 
every  man  that  heareth  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this 
Book, — If  any  man  shall  add  unto  these  things,  God  shall 
add  unto  him  the  plagues  that  are  written  in  this  Book. 
And  if  any  man  shall  take  aumy  from  the  words  of  the 
Book  of  this  prophecy,  God  shall  take  away  his  part  out  of 
the  Book  of  Life,  and  out  of  the  holy  City,  and  from  tlie 
things  which  are  written  in  this  Book."^ 

May  we  be  allowed  to  assure  Dr.  Hort  that '  Conjectural 
Emendation  '  can  be  allowed  no  place  whatever  in  the 
Textual  Criticism  of  the  New  Testament  ?  He  will  no 
doubt   disregard    our    counsel.      May   Dr.    Scrivener   then 


else  but  a  determination  that  Christ  shall  not  he  spoken  of  as  6  Syv  eVl 
TrdvTi3iv  9eos,  has  occasioned  the  supposed  doubt  as  to  the  construction  of 
Rom.  ix.  5, — in  which  we  rejoice  to  find  that  Dr.  Westcott  refuses  to 
concur  with  Dr.  Hort. 

*  Sec  Dr.  W.  H.  Mill's  University  Sermons  (1845),— pp.  301-2  and 
305  : — a  vf)lurae  whicli  should  be  found  in  every  clergyman's  library. 

2  Rev.  xxii.  18,  19. 


III.]  NO  PLACE  IN  EDITING  THE  INSriRED  TEXT.  355 

[p.  433]  be  permitted  to  remind  him  that  "  it  is  now  agreed 
among  competent  judges  that  Conjectural  emendation  must 
never  be  resorted  to, — even  in  passages  of  acknowledged 
difficulty  "  ? 

There  is  in  fact  no  need  for  it, — nor  can  be  :  so  very 
ample,  as  well  as  so  very  varied,  is  the  evidence  for  the 
words  of  the  New  Testament. 

LXXVI.  Here  however  we  regret  to  find  we  have  both 
Editors  against  us.     They  propose  '  the  definite  question,' — 

' "  Are  there,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  places  in  which  wo  are 
constrained  by  overwhelming  evidence  to  recognize  the  existence  of 
Textual  error  in  all  extant  documents?"  To  this  question 
we  have  no  hesitation  in  replying  in  the  affirmative.' — (p.  279.) 

Behold  then  the  deliberate  sentence  of  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort.  They  flatter  themselves  that  they  are  able  to 
produce  'overwhelming  evidence'  in  proof  that  there  are 
places  where  every  extant  document  is  in  error.  The  instance 
on  which  they  both  rely,  is  S,  Peter's  prophetic  announce- 
ment (2  Pet.  iii.  10),  that  in  'the  day  of  the  Lord,' ''the 
earth  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  he  burned  up' 
{KaraKa^aerai,). 

This  statement  is  found  to  have  been  glossed  or  para- 
phrased in  an  age  when  men  knew  no  better.  Thus,  Cod.  c 
substitutes  —  '  shall  vanish  away : '  ^  the  Syriac  and  one 
Egyptian  version, — '  shall  not  be  foimd,'  (apparently  in  imi- 
tation of  Eev.  xvi.  20).  But,  either  because  the  '  not '  was 
accidentally   omitted  ^   in   some  very  ancient   exemplar ; 

*  d(f)avi(r6r](TovTai. 

2  This  happens  not  unfrequently  in  codices  of  the  type  of  }<  and  b.  A 
famous  instance  occurs  at  Col.  ii.  18,  (a  fir]  iapaKev  ey^areicov,—' prying 
into  the  things  he  hath  not  seen ') ;  where  N  '  a  b  d  *  and  a  little  handful  of 
suspicious  documents  leave  out  the  '  not.'      Our  Editors,  rather  than  re- 

2  A  2 


356  TEXT  OF  2  PETER  III.  10,  VINDICATED.  [Art. 

or  else  because  it  was  deemed  a  superfluity  by  some  Occi- 
dental critic  who  in  his  simplicity  supposed  that  evpeOijaeTat 
might  well  represent  the  Latin  ^trercntur, — (somewhat  as 
Mrs.  Quickly  warranted  '  Jiawj  hog  '  to  be  Latin  for  '  bacon,') 
— codices  K  and  B  (with  four  others  of  later  date)  exhibit 
'  shall  he  fouoid,''^ — wliich  obviously  makes  utter  nonsense  of 
the  place.  (Evpedtjaerai  appears,  nevertheless,  in  Dr.  Hort's 
text :  in  consequence  of  which,  the  margin  of  our  '  Eevised 
Version '  is  disfigured  with  the  statement  that  '  The  most 
ancient  manuscripts  read  discovered.')  But  what  is  there  in 
all  this  to  make  one  distrust  the  Traditional  reading  ? — sup- 
ported as  it  is  by  the  whole  mass  of  Copies  :  by  the  Latin,^ 
— the  Coptic, — the  Harkleian, — and  the  ^Ethiopic  Versions  : 
— besides  the  only  Fathers  who  quote  the  place ;  viz.  Cyril 
seven  times,^  and  John  Damascene  *  once  ? ...  As  for  pretend- 
ing, at  the  end  of  the  foregoing  enquiry,  that  '  we  are  con- 
strained hy  overwlielriiing  evidence  to  recognize  the  existence 
of  textual  error  in  all  extant  documents', — it  is  evidently  a 
mistake.     Notliing  else  is  it  but  a  misstatement  of  facts. 


cognize  this  blunder  (so  obvious  aud  ordinary  !),  are  for  conjecturing  a 
€OPAKeN  eMBATeYOJN  into  AC  PA  KGNGMBATGYaJN  ;  which  (if 
it  means  anything  at  all)  may  as  well  mean, — 'proceeding  on  an  airy 
foundation  to  offer  an  empty  conjecture.'  Dismissing  that  conjecture  as 
worthless,  we  have  to  set  off  the  whole  mass  of  the  copies — against  some 
6  or  7 : — Irena3us  (i.  847),  Theodorus  Mops,  (in  Zoc),  Chrys.  (xi.  372), 
Theodoret  (iii.  489,  490),  John  Damascene  (ii,  211) — against  no  Fathers 
at  all  (for  Origen  once  has  ]i.i]  [iv.  665] ;  once,  has  it  not  [iii.  63] ;  and 
once  is  doubtful  [i.  583]).  Jerome  and  Augustine  both  take  notice  of  the 
diversity  of  reading,  hut  only  to  reject  it. — The  Syriac  versions,  the  Vulgate, 
Gothic,  Georgian,  Sclavonic,  ^thio})ic,  Aral)ic  and  Armenian — (we  owe  tlic 
information,  as  usual,  to  Dr.  Malan) — are  to  be  set  against  the  suspicious 
Coptic.  All  these  then  are  with  the  Traditional  Text:  which  cannot 
seriously  be  suspected  of  error. 

^  fvpe6r](TfTai.  '^  Augustin.  vii.  595. 

3  ii.  467  :  iii.  865  :— ii.  707  :  iii.  800  :— ii.  901.     Jn  Luc.  pp.  428,  654, 

*  ii.  347. 


III.]  DR.  HORT'S  SINGULAR  SELF-DELUSION.  357 

LXXVII.  And  thus,  in  the  entire  absence  of  proof,  Dr. 
Hort's  view  of  '  the  existence  of  corruptions '  of  tlie  Text 
'  antecedent  to  all  existing  authority,'^ — falls  to  the  ground. 
llis  confident  prediction,  that  such  corruptions  '  will  sooner 
or  later  have  to  be  acknowledged,'  may  be  dismissed  with 
a  smile.  So  indifferent  an  interpreter  of  the  Past  may  not 
presume  to  forecast  the  Future. 

The  one  'matter  of  fact,'  which  at  every  step  more  and 
more  impresses  an  attentive  student  of  the  Text  of  Scripture, 
is, — (1st),  The  utterly  depraved  character  of  Codices  b  and 
N :  and  (2nd),  The  singular  infatuation  of  Drs.  Westcott  and 
Hort  in  insisting  that  those  2  Codices  '  stand  alone  in  their 
almost  complete  immunity  from  error  : '  ^ — that  '  the  fullest 
comparison  does  but  increase  the  conviction  that  tJieir  jsre- 
cmincnt  relative  inirity  is  apiwoximately  absolute.'^ 

LXXVIII.  Whence  is  it, — (we  have  often  asked  ourselves 
the  question,  while  studying  these  laborious  pages,) — How 
does  it  happen  that  a  scholar  like  Dr.  Hort,  evidently 
accomplished  and  able,  should  habitually  mistake  the 
creations  of  his  own  brain  for  material  forms  ?  the  echoes 
of  his  own  voice  while  holding  colloquy  with  himself,  for 
oracular  responses  ?  We  have  not  hitherto  expressed  our 
astonishment, — but  must  do  so  now  before  we  make  an  end, 
— that  a  writer  who  desires  to  convince,  can  suppose  that 
his  own  arbitrary  use  of  such  expressions  as  '  Pre-Syrian ' 
and  '  Neutral,'  —  '  Western  '  and  '  Alexandrian,'  —  '  Non- 
Western  '  and  '  Non-Alexandrian,' — '  Non- Alexandrian  Pre- 
Syrian  '  and  '  Pre-Syrian  Non-Western,' — will  produce  any 
(except  an  irritating)  effect  on  the  mind  of  an  intelligent  reader. 

The  delusion  of  supposing  that  by  the  free  use  of  such  a 
vocabulary  a  Critic  may  dispense  with  the  ordinary  processes 


^  Preface  to  '  Provisional  issue,'  p.  xxi. 

^  Introduction  p.  210.  ^  Ibid.  p.  276. 


358  DR.  HORT'S  EXTRAORDINARY  METHOD.  [Art. 

of  logical  proof,  might  possibly  have  its  beginning  in  the 
retirement  of  the  cloister,  where  there  are  few  to  listen  and 
none  to  contradict:  but  it  can  only  prove  abiding  if  there 
has  been  no  free  ventilation  of  the  individual  fancy.  Greatly 
is  it  to  be  regretted  that  instead  of  keeping  his  Text  a 
profound  secret  for  30  years,  Dr.  Hort  did  not  freely  impart 
it  to  the  public,  and  solicit  the  favour  of  candid  criticism. 

Has  no  friend  ever  reminded  him  that  assertions  concern- 
ing the  presence  or  absence  of  a  '  Syrian '  or  a  '  Pre-Syrian,' 
a  '  Western '  or  a  '  Non-Western  element,'  are  but  mnd, — 
the  merest  cliaff  and  draff, — apart  from  'proof  1  Repeated  ad, 
nauseam,  and  employed  with  as  much  peremptory  precision 
as  if  they  were  recognized  terms  connoting  distinct  classes 
of  Headings, — (whereas  they  are  absolutely  without  signifi- 
cancy,  except,  let  us  charitably  hope,  to  Mm  who  employs 
them) ; — such  expressions  would  only  be  allowable  on  the 
part  of  the  Critic,  if  he  had  first  been  at  the  pains  to  index 
every  imncipal  Father, — and  to  reduce  Texts  to  families  by  a 
laborious  process  of  Induction.  Else,  they  are  worse  than 
foolish.  More  than  an  impertinence  are  they.  They  bewilder, 
and  mislead,  and  for  a  while  encumber  and  block  the  way. 

LXXIX.  This  is  not  all  however.  Even  when  these 
Editors  notice  hostile  evidence,  they  do  so  after  a  fashion 
wliicli  can  satisfy  no  one  but  themselves.  Take  for  exam})le 
their  note  on  the  word  et/cr}  ('  'irUJiont  a  cause ')  in  S.  Matthew 
v.  22  ('  But  I  say  unto  you,  that  whosoever  is  angry  with  liis 
Ijrother  ivithout  a  cause ').  The  Eeader's  attention  is  specially 
invited  to  the  treatment  wliich  this  place  has  experienced  at 
the  hands  of  Drs,  Westcott  and  Hort : — 

{a)  They  unceremoniously  eject  the  word  from  S.  Mat- 
thew's Gospel  with  tlieir  oracular  sentence,  '  Western  and 
S>/rian.' — Aware  that  etV?"}  is  recognized  l)y  '  Iron,  lat"^  ;  Eus. 
JJ.  E.  Gyp.,'  they  yet  claim  for  (.miitting  it  the  authority  of 


in.]  ErKH",  IN  S.  MATT.  V.  22,  VINDICATED.  359 

'  Just.  Ptolem.  (  ?  Iren.  242  fin.),  Tert. ;  and  certainly '  (they 
proceed)  '  Orig.  on  Eph.  iv.  31,  noticing  both  readings,  and 
similarly  Hier.  loc,  who  probably  follows  Origen :  also  Ath. 
Pasch.  Syr.  11  :  Ps.-Ath.  Cast.  ii.  4;  and  others'  ....  Such 
is  their  '  Note '  on  S.  Matthew  v.  22.  It  is  found  at  p.  8  of 
their  volume.  In  consequence,  eiKrj  ('  ivithout  a  cause ')  dis- 
appears from  their  Text  entirely. 

{h)  But  these  learned  men  are  respectfully  imformed  that 
neither  Justin  Martyr,  nor  Ptolemteus  the  Gnostic,  nor 
Irenseus,  no,  nor  TertuUian  either, — that  not  one  of  these  four 
writers, — supplies  the  wished-for  evidence.  As  for  Origen, — 
they  are  assured  that/tc — not  'probably'  but  certainly — is  the 
cause  of  all  the  trouble.  They  are  reminded  that  Athanasius  ^ 
quotes  {not  S.  Matt.  v.  22,  but)  1  Jo.  iii.  15.  They  are  shown 
that  what  they  call  'ps.-Ath.  Cast.'  is  nothing  else  but  a 
paraphrastic  translation  (by  Grseculus  quidam)  of  John  Cas- 
sian's  Institutes, — '  ii.  4 '  in  the  Greek  representing  viii.  20  in 
the  Latin.  .  ,  .  And  now,  how  much  of  the  adverse  Evidence 
remains  ? 

(c)  Only  this : — Jerome's  three  books  of  Commentary  on 
the  Ephesians,  are,  in  the  main,  a  translation  of  Origen's 
lost  3  books  on  the  same  Epistle.^  Commenting  on  iv.  31, 
Origen  says  that  ecKrj  has  been  improperly  added  to  the 
Text,^ — ivhicJi  shoivs  that  in  Origens  copy  eiKrj  ivas  found 
there.  A  few  ancient  writers  in  consequence  (but  only  in 
consequence)  of  what  Jerome  (or  rather  Origen)  thus  delivers, 
are  observed  to  omit  ei/cj}.*     That  is  all ! 

(d)  May  we  however  respectfully  ask  these  learned 
Editors  why,  besides  Irenaeus,^ — Eusebius,'' — and  Cyprian,^ — 


^  Apud  Mai,  vi.  105.  ^  Qi^i^.  vii.  543.     Comp.  369. 

3  Ap.  Cramer,  Cat.  vi.  187.  *  So,  Nilus,  i.  270. 

^  Interp.  595 :  607.  «  Dem.  Evan.  p.  444.  ^  P.  306. 


360  THE  TEXT  OF  S.  MATTHEW  V.  22,  [Aut. 

they  do  not  mention  that  eUij  is  also  the  reading  of  Justin 
Martyr,^ — of  Origen  himself,^ — of  the  Constitutioncs  Airp.,^ — 
of  Basil  three  times/ — of  Gregory  of  Nyssa,^ — of  Epi- 
plianius,^ — of  Ephraem  Syrus  twice/ — of  Isidorus  twice/ — 
of  Theodore  of  Mops.,  —  of  Chrysostom  18  times, — of  the 
Opus  imp.  twice,^ — of  CyriP" — and  of  Theodoret^^ — (each  in 
3  places).  It  was  also  the  reading  of  Severus,  Abp.  of 
Antioch :  ^^ — as  well  as  of  Hilary,^^ — Lucifer,^* — Salvian,^^ — 
Philastrius,^^ — Augustine,  and — Jerome," — (although,  when 
translating  from  Origen,  he  j)ronounces  against  elKrf  ^**)  : — not 
to  mention  Antiochus  mon.,^^ — J.  Damascene,^" — Maximus,^^ 

— Photius,^^ — Euthymius, — Theophylact, — and  others  ?  ^^ 

We  have  adduced  no  less  than  thirty  ancient  witnesses. 

(c)  Our  present  contention  however  is  but  this, — that  a 
Eeading  which  is  attested  by  every  uncial  Copy  of  the  Gospels 
except  B  and  n  ;  by  a  whole  torrent  of  Fathers ;  by  every 
known  copy  of  the  old  Latin, — by  all  the  Syriac,  (for  the 
Peschito   inserts  [not  translates]    the   word   et/c?),) — by   the 


^  Epist.  ml  Zen.  iii.  1.  78.  Note,  that  our  learued  Cave  consiilerctl  tliis 
to  be  a  genuine  work  of  Justin  M.  (a.d.  150). 

^  Cantic.  (an  early  work)  interp.  iii.  39, — thougli  elsewhere  (i.  112,  181 
[y] :  ii.  305  int.  [but  not  ii.  419])  he  is  for  leaving  out  {Iktj. 

^  Gall.  iii.  72  and  161. 

*  ii.  89  b  and  e  (partly  quoted  in  the  Cat.  of  Nicetas)  expressly :  205. 

^  i.  818  expressly. 

•^  ii.  312  (preserved  in  Jerome's  Latin  translation,  i.  2 10). 

'  i.  132 ;  iii.  442.  »  472,  634.  »  Ap.  Chrys. 

'»  iii.  768  :  apud  Mai,  ii.  6  and  iii.  268. 

"  i.  48,  664 ;  iv.  940.  "  Cramer's  Cat.  viii.  12,  line  14. 

'''  128,  625.         "  Gall.  vi.  181.         »'  Gall.  x.  14.         i«  Gall.  vii.  509. 

"  i.  27,  written  when  he  was  42 ;  and  ii.  733,  739,  written  when  he 
was  84. 

'^  vii.  26, — '  Jiadendum  est  ergo  sine  causa.'     And  so,  at  p.  030. 

'»  1064.  20  ii^  261.  '''  ii.  592. 

'^  Amphilochia,  (Athens,  1858,) — p.  317.     Also  in  Cat. 

^  Apophthegm.  PP.  [ap.  Cotel.    Ecd.  (Jr.  Mon.  i.  622]. 


III.]  VINDICATED  AGAINST  DR.  HORT.  361 

Coptic, — as  well  as  by  the  Gothic — and  Armenian  versions  ; 
— that  such  a  reading  is  not  to  be  set  aside  by  the  stupid 
dictum,  '  Western  and  Syrian.'  By  no  such  methods  will  the 
study  of  Textual  Criticism  be  promoted,  or  any  progress  ever 
be  made  in  determining  the  Truth  of  Scripture.  There  really 
can  be  no  doubt  whatever, — (that  is  to  say,  if  we  are  to  be 
guided  by  ancient  Evidence,) — that  elKrj  ('  without  a  cause ')  was 
our  Saviour's  actual  word ;  and  that  our  Eevisers  have  been 
here,  as  in  so  many  hundred  other  places,  led  astray  by  Dr. 
Hort.  So  true  is  that  saying  of  the  ancient  poet, — '  Evil 
company  doth  corrupt  good  manners.'  'And  if  the  blind 
lead  the  blind,' — (a  greater  than  Menander  hath  said  it,) — 
*  hoth  shall  fall  into  the  ditch.'  ^ 

(/)  In  the  meantime,  we  have  exhibited  somewhat  in  de- 
tail, Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort's  Annotation  on  et/c^,  [S.  Matth. 
V.  22,]  in  order  to  furnish  our  Eeaders  with  at  least  one  defi- 
nite specimen  of  the  Editorial  skill  and  Critical  ability  of 
these  two  accomplished  Professors.  Their  general  practice, 
as  exhibited  in  the  case  of  1  Jo.  v.  18,  [see  above,  pp.  347-9,] 
is  to  tamper  with  the  sacred  Text,  without  assigning  their 
authority, — indeed,  without  offering  apology  of  any  kind. 

{g)  The  sww  of  the  matter  proves  to  be  as  follows :  Codd. 
B  and  N  (the  '  two  false  Witnesses  '), — B  and  x,  alone  of  MSS. 
— omit  €lKrf.  On  the  strength  of  this.  Dr.  Hort  persuaded 
his  fellow  Eevisers  to  omit  '  without  a  cause '  from  their 
Eevised  Version:  and  it  is  proposed,  in  consequence,  that 
every  Englishman's  copy  of  S.  Matthew  v.  22  shall  be  muti- 
lated in  the  same  way  for  ever,  ,  .  ,  Delirant  reges,  plec- 
tuntur  Achivi. 

(h)  But  the  question  arises — Will  the  Church  of  England 
submit  to  have  her  immemorial  heritage  thus  filched  from 


1  S.  Matth.  XV.  14. 


3G2        WESTCOTT  AND  HORT'S  METHOD  OF  DEALING      [Art. 

her  ?     "We  shall  be  astonished  indeed  if  she  proves  so  regard- 
less of  her  birthright. 

LXXX.  Lastly,  the  intellectual  habits  of  these  Editors 
have  led  them  so  to  handle  evidence,  that  the  sense  of  pro- 
portion seems  to  have  forsaken  them.  "  He  who  has  long 
pondered  over  a  train  of  Reasoning," — (remarks  the  elder 
Critic,) — "becomes  unable  to  detect  its  iveak  points."^  Yes, 
the  '  idols  of  the  den '  exercise  at  last  a  terrible  ascendency- 
over  the  Critical  judgment.  It  argues  an  utter  want  of 
mental  perspective,  when  we  find  '  the  Man  working  on  the 
Sabbath,'  put  on  the  same  footing  with  '  the  Woman  taken 
in  Adultery,'  and  conjectured  to  have  '  come  from  the  same 
source  : ' — the  incident  of  '  the  Angel  troubling  the  pool  of 
Bethesda'  dismissed,  as  having  '  tw  claim  to  any  kind  of 
association  with  the  true  Text : '  ^ — and  '  the  two  Supplements  ' 
to  S.  Mark's  Gospel  declared  to  'stand  on  equal  terms  as 
independent  attempts  to  fill  up  a  gap;'  and  allowed  to  be 
possibly  '  of  equal  antiquity!  ^  How  can  we  wonder,  after 
this,  to  find  anything  omitted, — anything  inserted, — anything 
branded  with  suspicion  ?  And  the  brand  is  very  freely  ap- 
plied by  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort.  Their  notion  of  the  Text 
of  the  New  Testament,  is  certainly  the  most  extraordinary 
ever  ventilated.  It  has  at  least  the  merit  of  entire  originality. 
Wliile  they  eagerly  insist  that  many  a  passage  is  but  '  a 
Western  interpolation '  after  all ;  is  but  an  '  Evangelic  Tradi- 
tion/ 'rescued  from  oblivion  by  the  Scribes  of  the  second 
century ; '  —  they  yet  incorporate  those  passages  with  the 
Gospel.  Careful  enough  to  clap  them  into  fetters  first,  they 
then,  (to  use  their  own  queer  phrase,)  —  'provisionally 
associate  them  with  the  Text! 


*  Gospel  of  the  Resurrection, — p.  vii.         ^  Introduction,  pp.  300-2. 
»  Ihid.  p.  2')y. 


III.]  WITH  THE  INSPIRED  TEXT,  INDEFENSIBLE.  363 

LXXXI,  We  submit,  on  the  contrary,  that  Editors  who 
'  cannot  douht '  that  a  certain  verse  '  comes  from  an  extraneous 
source,' — 'do  not  believe  that  it  belonged  originally  to  the 
Book  in  which  it  is  now  included,' — are  unreasonable  if  they 
proceed  to  assign  to  it  any  actual  place  there  at  all.  AVlien 
men  have  once  thoroughly  convinced  themselves  that  two 
Verses  of  S.  Luke's  Gospel  are  not  Scripture,  but  '  only  a 
fragment  from  the  Traditions,  written  or  oral,  which  were 
for  a  while  locally  current ; '  ^ — what  else  is  it  but  the 
merest  trifling  with  sacred  Truth,  to  promote  those  two 
verses  to  a  place  in  the  inspired  context  ?  Is  it  not  to  be 
feared,  that  the  conscious  introduction  of  human  Tradition 
into  God's  written  Word  will  in  the  end  destroy  the  soul's 
confidence  in  Scripture  itself?  opening  the  door  for  per- 
plexity, and  doubt,  and  presently  for  Unbelief  itself  to  enter. 

LXXXII.  And  let  us  not  be  told  that  the  Verses  stand 
there  '  provisionally '  only ;  and  for  that  reason  are  '  enclosed 
within  double  brackets.'  Suspected  felons  are  '  provisionally  ' 
locked  up,  it  is  true :  but  after  trial,  they  are  either  con- 
victed and  removed  out  of  sight ;  or  else  they  are  acquitted 
and  suffered  to  come  abroad  like  other  men.  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort  have  no  right  at  the  end  of  thirty  years  of  investi- 
gation, still  to  encumber  the  Evangelists  with  '  provisional ' 
fetters.  Those  fetters  either  signify  that  the  Judge  is  afraid 
to  carry  out  his  own  righteous  sentence :  or  else,  that  he  enter- 
tains a  secret  suspicion  that  he  has  made  a  teiTihle  mistake 
after  all, — has  condemned  the  innocent.  Let  these  esteemed 
Scholars  at  least  have  '  the  courage  of  their  own  convictions,' 
and  be  throughout  as  consistent  as,  in  two  famous  instances 
(viz.  at  pages  113  and  241),  they  have  been.  Else,  in  God's 
Name,  let  them  have  the  manliness  to  avow  themselves  in 


*  Appendix,  p.  C6. 


364  THE  SCIENCE  OF  '  TEXTUAL  CRITICISM '  [Art. 

error :  abjure  their  Trpdrov  i|re{)8o9 ;  and  cast  the  fantastic 
Theory,  which  they  have  so  industriously  reared  upon  it, 
unreservedly,  to  the  winds  ! 

LXXXIII.  To  conclude. — It  will  be  the  abiding  distinction 
of  the  Eevised  Version  {thanks  to  Dr.  Hort,)  that  it  brought 
to  the  front  a  question  which  has  slept  for  about  100  years ; 
but  which  may  not  be  suffered  now  to  rest  undisturbed  any 
longer.  It  might  have  slumbered  on  for  another  half- 
century, — a  subject  of  deep  interest  to  a  very  little  band  of 
Divines  and  Scholars ;  of  perplexity  and  distrust  to  all  the 
World  besides ; — hut  for  the  incident  which  will  make  the 
17th  of  May,  1881,  for  ever  memorable  in  the  Annals  of  the 
Church  of  England. 

LXXXIV.  The  Publication  on  that  day  of  the  '  Eevised 
English  Version  of  the  New  Testament'  instantly  concen- 
trated public  attention  on  the  neglected  problem  ;  for  men 
saw  at  a  glance  that  the  Traditional  Text  of  1530  years' 
standing, — (the  exact  number  is  Dr.  Hort's,  not  ours,) — had 
been  unceremoniously  set  aside  in  favour  of  an  entirely  different 
Recension.  The  true  Authors  of  the  mischief  were  not  far  to 
seek.  Just  five  days  before, — under  the  editorship  of  Drs. 
Westcott  and  Hort,  (Eevisionists  themselves,) — had  appeared 
the  most  extravagant  Text  which  has  seen  the  light  since  the 
invention  of  Printing.  No  secret  was  made  of  the  fact  that, 
under  pledges  of  strictest  secrecy,^  a  copy  of  this  wild  per- 
formance (marked  '  Confidential ')  had  been  entrusted  to 
every  member  of  the  Ee vising  body :  and  it  has  since  trans- 
pired that  Dr.  Hort  advocated  his  own  peculiar  views  in  the 
Jerusalem  Chamber  with  so  much  volubility,  eagerness,  per- 
tinacity, and  plausibility,  that  in  the  end — notwithstanding 


'  Sec  Scrivener's  Inlroduction,  p.  432. 


III.]  MAY  NO  MORE  BE  SUFFERED  TO  SLEEP.  365 

the  warnings,  remonstrances,  entreaties  of  Dr.  Scrivener, — 
his  counsels  prevailed ;  and — the  utter  shipwreck  of  the 
'  Revised  Version  '  has  been,  (as  might  have  been  confidently 
predicted,)  the  disastrous  consequence.  Dr.  Hort  is  calcu- 
lated to  have  talked  for  three  years  out  of  the  ten. 

But  in  the  meantime  there  has  arisen  tJiis  good  out  of  the 
calamity, — namely,  that  men  will  at  last  require  that  the 
Textual  problem  shall  be  fairly  threshed  out.  They  will 
insist  on  having  it  proved  to  their  satisfaction, — (1)  That 
Codices  b  and  n  are  indeed  the  oracular  documents  which 
their  admirers  pretend ;  and — (2)  That  a  narrow  selection 
of  ancient  documents  is  a  secure  foundation  on  which  to 
build  the  Text  of  Scripture.  Failing  this, — (and  the  onus 
pi'ohandi  rests  wholly  with  those  who  are  for  setting  aside 
the  Traditional  Text  in  favour  of  another,  entirely  dissimilar 
in  character,) — failing  this,  we  say,  it  is  reasonable  to  hope 
that  the  counsels  of  the  '  Quarterly  Bcvieiv '  will  be  suffered 
to  prevail.  In  the  meantime,  we  repeat  that  this  question 
has  now  to  be  fought  out :  for  to  ignore  it  any  longer  is 
impossible.  Compromise  of  any  sort  between  the  two  con- 
flicting parties,  is  impossible  also  ;  for  they  simply  contra- 
dict one  another.  Codd.  b  and  n  are  either  among  the  purest 
of  manuscripts, — or  else  they  are  among  the  very  foulest. 
The  Text  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  is  either  the  very  best 
which  has  ever  appeared, — or  else  it  is  the  very  worst ;  the 
nearest  to  the  sacred  Autographs, — or  the  furthest  from  them. 
There  is  no  room  for  hoth  opinions ;  and  there  cannot  exist 
any  middle  view. 

The  question  will  have  to  be  fought  out ;  and  it  must  be 
fought  out  fairly.  It  may  not  be  magisterially  settled  ;  but 
must  be  advocated,  on  either  side,  by  the  old  logical  method. 
If  Continental  Scholars  join  in  tlie  fray,  England, — which 


3GG  '  GOD  DEFEND  THE  RIGHT.'  [Aut.  III. 

in  the  last  century  took  the  lead  in  these  studies, — will,  it 
is  to  be  hoped,  maintain  her  ancient  reputation  and  again 
occupy  the  front  rank.  The  combatants  may  be  sure  that, 
in  consequence  of  all  that  has  happened,  the  public  will  be 
no  longer  indifferent  spectators  of  the  fray;  for  the  issue 
concerns  the  inner  life  of  the  whole  community, — touches 
men's  very  lieart  of  hearts.  Certain  it  is  that — '  God  defend 
tlic  Bight  ! '  will  be  the  one  aspiration  of  every  faithful  spirit 
among  us.  The  Truth, — (we  avow  it  on  behalf  of  Drs. 
Westcott  and  Hort  as  eagerly  as  on  our  own  behalf,) — God's 
Tkuth  will  be,  as  it  has  been  throughout,  the  one  object  of 
all  our  striving.     AcXivov  atXivov  elite,  to  B'  ev  vckutw. 


1  HAVE  BEEN  VEKY  JEALOUS  FOR  THE  LORD  GOD  OF  HOSTS. 


LETTER  TO 

BISHOP      ELLICOTT, 

IN    REPLY    TO    HIS    PAMPHLET. 


"  Nothing  is  more  satisfactory  at  the  present  time  than  the  evident 
feelings  of  veneration  for  our  Authorized  Version,  and  the  very  generally- 
felt  desire  for  as  Utile  change  as  possible^ — Bishop  Elijcott.^ 

"  We  may  be  satisfied  with  the  attempt  to  correct  ^5?am  and  clear 
errors,  but  there  it  is  our  duty  to  stop." — Bishop  Ellicott.'^ 

"  We  have  now,  at  all  events,  no  fear  of  an  over-corrected  Version." — 
Bishop  Ellicott.^ 


"  I  fear  we  must  say  in  candour  that  in  the  Revised  Version  we  meet 
in  every  page  with  small  changes,  ivhich  are  vexatious,  teasing,  and  irri- 
tating, even  the  more  so  becaiise  they  are  smaU ;  which  seem  almost  to  be 
made  for  the  sake  of  change." — Bishop  Wordsworth.* 

[The  question  arises,] — "  Whether  the  Church  of  England, — which  in 
her  Synod,  so  far  as  this  Province  is  concerned,  sanctioned  a  Revision  of 
her  Authorized  Version  under  the  express  condition,  which  she  most  wisely 
imposed,  that  no  Changes  should  be  made  in  it  except  ivhat  laere  absolutely 
necessary, — could  consistently  accept  a  Version  in  which  3G,000  changes 
have  been  made ;  not  a  fiftieth  of  which  can  be  shown  to  be  needed,  or  even 
desirable." — Bishop  Wordsworth.'^ 


On  Revision, — p.  99. 

Speech  in  Convocation,  Feb.  1870,  (p.  83.) 

On  llevinon, — p.  205. 

Addrei^s  to  Lincoln  Dioceean  Conference, — p.  25. 

Ihid.—Y,.  27. 


LETTER  TO 

THE  RIGHT  REV.  CHARLES  JOHN  ELLIGOTT,  D.D„ 

BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL, 
IN  REPLY  TO  HIS  PAMPHLET  IN  DEFENCE  OF 

THE    REVISERS    AND    THEIR    GREEK    TEXT    OF 
THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

"  What  course  would  Revisers  have  us  to  follow  ?  .  .  .  Would 

IT   BE   well    for   them   TO    AGREE    ON    A    CRITICAL     GrEEK     TeXT  ?        TO 

this  question  we  venture  to  answer  very  unhesitatingly  in  the 
negative. 
"  Though   we   have   much  critical   material,   and   a   very   fair 

amount    of    critical     knowledge,     we    have    CERTAINLY    NOT    YET   AC- 
QUIRED    SUFFICIENT    CRITICAL    JUDGMENT    FOR    ANY   BODY    OF    EeVISERS 

hopefully  to  undertake  such  a  work  as  this." 

Bishop  Ellicott.* 

My  Lord  Bishop, 

Last  May,  you  published  a  pamphlet  of  seventy-nine 
pages  ^  in  vindication  of  the  Greek  Text  recently  put  forth  by 


^  Considerations  on  Bevision, — p.  44.     The  Preface  is  dated  23rd  May, 
1870.     The  Revisers  met  on  the  22nd  of  June. 

We  learn  from  Dr.  Newtli's  Lectures  on  BihJe  Bevision  (1881), 
that, — •"  As  the  general  Rules  under  which  the  Revision  was  to  be  carried 
out  had  been  carefully  prepared,  no  need  existed  for  any  lengthened 
discussion  of  preliminary  arrangements,  and  the  Company  upon  its  first 
meeting  was  able  to  enter  at  once  upon  its  work  "  (p.  118)  ...  "  The 
portion  prescribed  for  the  first  session  was  Matt.  i.  to  iv."  (p.  119). 
"  The  question  of  the  spelling  of  proper  names  .  .  .  being  settled,  the 
Company  proceeded  to  the  actual  details  of  the  Revision,  and  in  a 
surprisingly  short  time  settled  down  to  an  established  method  of  pro- 
cedure."— "  All  proposals  made  at  the  first  Revision  were  decided  by 
simple  majorities  "  (p.  122)  ..."  The  questions  ivhich  co7icerned  the  Greek 
Text  tnere  decided  for  the  most  part  at  the  First  Bevision."  (Bp.  Ellicott's 
Bamphlet,  p.  34.) 

^   The  Bevisers    and    the  Uretk   Text  of    the  New   Testament,  ly  tivo 

2    B 


370  PKELIMINARY. — BISHOP  ELLICOTT'S       [Reply  to 

the  New  Testament  Company  of  Eevisers.  It  was  (yon  said) 
your  Answer  to  the  first  and  second  of  my  Articles  in  the 
Quarterly  Bevieio:^  —  all  three  of  which,  corrected  and 
enlarged,  are  now  submitted  to  the  ])uljlic  for  the  second 
time.     See  above,  from  page  1  to  page  307. 

[1]  Prdvminai'y  Statement. 

You  may  l)e  quite  sure  tliat  I  examined  your  pamphlet  as 
soon  as  it  appeared,  with  attention.  I  have  since  read  it 
through  several  times :  and — I  must  add — with  ever-increasing 
astonishment.  First,  because  it  is  so  evidently  the  production 
of  one  who  has  never  made  Textual  Criticism  seriously  his 
study.  Next,  because  your  pamphlet  is  no  refutation  whatever 
of  my  two  Articles.  You  flout  me  :  you  scold  me  :  you  lecture 
me.  But  I  do  not  find  that  you  ever  a7is^ver  me.  You  re- 
produce the  theory  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort, — which  I 
claim  to  have  demolished.^  You  seek  to  put  me  down  by 
flourishing  in  my  face  the  decrees  of  Lachmann,  Tischendorf 
and  Tregelles, — which,  as  you  are  well  aware,  I  entirely  dis- 
allow. Denunciation,  my  lord  Bishop,  is  not  Argument ; 
neither  is  Eeiteration,  Proof.  And  then, — Wliy  do  you  impute 
to  me  opinions  which  I  do  not  hold  ?  and  charge  me  with  a 
method  of  procedure  of  which  I  have  never  been  guilty  ? 
Above  all,  why  do  you  seek  to  jircjudice  the  (jucstiini  at 
issue  between  us  by  importing  irrelevant  matter  which  can 
only  impose  upon  the  ignorant  and  mislead  the  unwary  ? 
Forgive  my  plainness,  but  really  you  are  so  conspicuously 
unfair, — and  at  the  same  time  so  manifestly  unac(|uainted. 


MewhevB  of  the  New  Testament  Comfciny, — 1882.  Macniilkn,  ]ip.  70, 
j)rice  two  sliillings  and  sixpence. 

*  "To  these  two  articles — so  far,  at  least,  as  they  are  concerned  with 
the  Greek  Text  adopted  l)y  the  Revisers — our  Essay  is  intended  for  an 
answer." — p.  79. 

"  Sec  alxjvc,  j«ges  235  to  3CG. 


Bi'.  Elligott.]      pamphlet   WAS   ANTICIPATED.  371 

(except  at  second-hand  and  only  in  an  elementary  way,) 
with  the  points  actually  under  discussion, — that,  were  it  not 
for  the  adventitious  importance  attaching  to  any  utterance  of 
yours,  deliberately  put  forth  at  this  time  as  Chairman  of  the 
New  Testament  body  of  Eevisers,  I  should  have  taken  no 
notice  of  your  pamphlet. 


[2]  The  Bishops immphlct  vms  anticiimtcd  and  effectually  dis- 
posed of,  three  weeks  before  it  appeared,  hy  the  Reviewer's 
Third  Article. 

I  am  bound,  at  the  same  time,  to  acknowledge  that  you 
have  been  singularly  unlucky.  While  you  were  penning 
your  Defence,  (namely,  throughout  the  first  four  months  of 
1882,)  /was  making  a  fatal  inroad  into  your  position,  by 
showing  how  utterly  without  foundation  is  the  ''Textual 
Theory "  to  which  you  and  your  co-Kevisers  have  been  so 
rash  as  to  commit  yourselves.^  This  fact  I  find  duly  recog- 
nized in  your  '  Postscript.'  "  Since  the  foregoing  pages  were 
in  print "  (you  say,)  "  a  third  article  has  appeared  in  the 
Quarterly  Review,  entitled  'Westcott  and  Hort's  Textual 
Theory.'"^  Yes.  /  came  before  the  public  on  the  16th  of 
April ;  yoii  on  the  4th  of  May,  1882.  In  this  way,  your  pam- 
phlet was  anticipated, — had  in  fact  been  fully  disposed  of, 
three  weeks  before  it  appeared.  "  The  Ee viewer,"  (you  com- 
plain at  page  4,)  "  censures  their  [Westcott  and  Hort's]  Text : 
ill  neither  Article  has  he  attemp)ted  a  serious  examination  of 
the  arguments  vjhich  they  allege  in  its  support."  But,  (as 
explained,)  the  "serious  examination"  which  you  reproach 
me  with  having  hitherto  failed  to  produce,— had  l)een  already 
three  weeks  in  the  hands  of  readers  of  the  Quarterly  before 
your  pamphlet  saw  the  light.     You  would,  in  conse({uence, 


1  Article  III., — see  last  note.  ^  Pamphlet,  p.  79. 

2   B   2 


372  BISHOP   ELLICOTT'S   UNFAIR  [Reply  to 

have  best  corstiIUhI  your  own  reiiutation,  I  am  persuaded, 
had  you  instantly  recalled  and  suppressed  your  printed 
sheets.  What,  at  all  events,  you  can  have  possibly  meant, 
while  pu])lisliing  them,  by  adding  (in  your  'Postscript'  at 
page  79,) — "  I71  this  controversy  it  is  not  for  us  to  interpose : "  and 
again, — "  We  find  nothing  in  the  Rcvietvers  third  article  to 
require  further  ansiccr  from  us  ;" — passes  my  comprehension  ; 
seeing  that  your  pamphlet  (page  11  to  page  29)  is  an 
elaborate  avowal  that  you  have  made  Westcott  and  Hort's 
theory  entirely  your  own.  The  Editor  of  the  Speaker  s 
Commentary,  I  observe,  takes  precisely  the  same  view  of 
your  position.  "  The  two  Eevisers "  (says  Canon  Cook) 
"  actually  add  a  Postscript  to  their  pamphlet  of  a  single 
sliort  j'lage  noticing  their  unexpected  anticipation  l)y  the 
third  Quarterly  Rcvicv)  article;  with  the  remark  that  'in 
this  controversy  (between  Westcott  and  Hort  and  the 
Eeviewer)  it  is  not  for  us  to  interfere : ' — as  if  Westcott  and 
Hort's  theory  of  Greek  Revision  could  Ije  refuted,  or  seriously 
damaged,  without  cutting  the yround  from  under  the  Committee, 
of  Revisers  on  tlie  whole  of  this  suhject^  ^ 

[3]  Bp.  Ellieott  remonstrated  unth  for  his    unfair  method  of 

procedure. 

I  should  enter  at  once  on  an  examination  of  your  Pe])ly, 
but  that  1  am  constrained  at  the  outset  to  remonstrate  with  you 
on  the  exceeding  unfairness  of  your  entire  method  of  procedure. 
Your  business  was  to  make  it  plain  to  tlie  public  that  you 
have  dealt  faithfully  with  the  Deposit:  have  strictly  fulfdled 
the  covenant  into  wdiich  you  entered  twelve  years  ago  with 


^  The  Revised  Vemion  of  the  fird  three  Goapels,  considered  in  Us  hcar- 
iiif/s  uj)on  the  record  of  our  Lord's  Words  and  of  incidents  in  His  Life, — 
(18S2.  pp.  250.  Murray,) — p.  232.  Caium  Cook's  temperate  and  very 
interesting  volume  will  be  found  simjily  unanswcnilile. 


Br.  Ellicott.]  METHOD   OF   PROCEDURE.  373 

the  Convocation  of  the  Southern  Province :  liave  corrected 
only  " plain  and  clear  errors."  Instead  of  tliis,  you  labour  to 
enlist  vulgar  prejudice  against  me  : — partly,  by  insisting  that 
I  am  for  determining  disputed  Eeadings  hj  an  ajDpeal  to  the 
'  Textus  Eeceptus,' — which  (according  to  you)  I  look  upon  as 
faultless : — partly,  by  exhibiting  me  in  disagreement  with 
Lachmann,  Tischendorf  and  Tregelles.  The  irrelevancy  of 
this  latter  contention, — the  groundlessness  of  the  former, — 
may  not  be  passed  over  without  a  few  words  of  serious  remon- 
strance. For  I  claim  that,  in  discussing  the  Greek  Text, 
I  have  invariably  filled  my  pages  as  full  of  Authorities 
for  the  opinions  I  advocate,  as  the  limits  of  the  page  would 
allow.  I  may  have  been  tediously  demonstrative  sometimes : 
but  no  one  can  fairly  tax  me  with  having  shrunk  from  the 
severest  method  of  evidential  proof.  To  find  myself  there- 
fore charged  with  "mere  denunciation,"^ — with  substituting 
"strong  expressions  of  individual  opinion"  for  "arguments,"^ 
— and  with  "  attempting  to  cut  the  cord  by  reckless  and  un- 
verified assertions,"  (p.  25,) — astonishes  me.  Such  language 
is  in  fact  even  ridiculously  unfair. 

The  misrepresentation  of  which  I  complain  is  not  only 
conspicuous,  but  systematic.  It  runs  through  your  whole 
pamphlet :  is  admitted  l)y  yourself  at  the  close, — (viz.  at 
p.  77,) — to  be  half  the  sum  of  your  entire  contention.  Besides 
cropping  up  repeatedly,^  it  finds  deliberate  and  detailed 
expression  when  you  reach  the  middle  of  your  essay, — viz.  at 
p.  41  :  where,  with  reference  to  certain  charges  which  I  not 
only  bring  against  codices  x  b  c  L,  but  laboriously  substantiate 
by  a  free  appeal  to  the  contemporary  evidence  of  Copies, 
Versions,  and  Fathers, — you  venture  to  express  yourself  con- 
cerninfjj  me  as  follows : — 


^  P.  40.  2  21^1^^ 

^  As  at  p.  4,  and  p.  12,  and  p.  13,  and  p.  19,  and  p.  40. 


374  AVIIICH    7?7;  "THE   RECOGNIZED  [Ri-rLY  to 

"To  attempt  to  sustain  such  charges  by  a  rough  comparison 
of  these  ancient  authorities  with  the  Textus  Eeceptus,  and  to 
meiRtire  the  degree  of  their  depravation  l^y  the  amount  of  their 
divergence  from  such  a  text  as  toe  have  shown  this  Received  Text 
rraUii  to  he,  is  to  trifle  with  the  subject  of  sacred  Ciiticism." — 
p.  41. 

You  add  : — 

"  Until  the  depravation  of  these  ancient  Manuscripts  has  been 
demonstrated  in  a  manner  more  consistent  with  tlic  recognized 
principles  of  Criticism,  such  charges  as  those  to  which  we  allude 
must  be  regarded  as  expressions  of  passion,  or  prejudice,  and  set 
aside  by  every  impartial  reader  as  assertions  for  which  no 
adequate  evidence  has  yet  been  produced." — pp.  41-2. 

[4]  (  Uldch  he  '  the  recognized  ^rinciijlcs  of  Textual  Criticism  '  ? 
— a  question  asked  in  passing.) 

But  give  me  leave  to  ask  in  passing, —  IF// /r/^,  pray,  are 
"  tlie  recognized  principles  of  Criticism  "  to  which  you  refer  ? 
I  profess  I  have  never  met  with  tliem  yet ;  and  I  am  sure  it 
lias  not  been  for  want  of  diligent  enquiry.  You  have  publicly 
charged  me  before  your  Diocese  with  Ijeing  "  innocently  igno- 
rant of  the  noio  cstahlished  princiijles  of  Textual  Criticism."^ 
But  why  do  you  not  state  which  those  principles  arc  ?  I 
am  surprised.  You  are  for  ever  vaunting  " priiieijjles  mIucIi 
have  been  established  by  the  investigations  and  reasonings"  of 
Lachmann,  Tischendorf  and  Tregelles  :^ — "  the  princi2}lcs  of 
Textual  Criticism  which  are  accepted  and  recognized  by  the 
great  majority  of  modern  Textual  Critics  :  "^ — "  the  2T}'incipIes 
on  wliich  the  Textual  Criticism  oftlie  last  hftyyearshas  l)een 
based  :  "* — but  you  never  condescend  to  ex])lain  vldcli  he  the 
'  ])rinciples '  you  refer  to.  For  the  last  time, —  Who  estab- 
lished those  "  Principles  "  ?  and,  Where  are  they  to  be  seen 
"  established  "  ? 

1  Sfcaliovc,  11)..  ;!lH-350.  '   1'.  10.  ''  P.   10.  '   I'.  77. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]     PKINCIPLES  of  textual  CRITICISM"?      375 

I  will  be  so  candid  with  you  as  frankly  to  avow  that  the 
only  two  "  principles  "  with  which  I  am  acquainted  as  held, 
with  anything  like  consent,  by  "  the  modern  Textual  Critics  " 
to  whom  you  have  surrendered  your  judgment,  are — (1st) 
A  rol)ust  confidence  in  the  revelations  of  their  own  inner 
consciousness  :  and  (2ndly)  A  superstitious  partiality  for 
two  codices  written  in  the  uncial  character, — for  which  par- 
tiality they  are  able  to  assign  no  intelligible  reason.  You  put 
the  matter  as  neatly  as  I  could  desire  at  page  19  of  your 
Essay, — where  you  condemn,  with  excusable  warmth,  "  those 
who  adopt  the  easy  method  of  using  some  favourite  Manu- 
script,"— or  of  exercising  "  some  supposed  poiver  of  divining  the 
original  Text ;  "  — •  as  if  those  were  "  the  only  necessary 
agents  for  correcting  the  Eeceived  Text."  Wliy  the  evidence 
of  codices  b  and  N,  —  and  perhaps  the  evidence  of  the 
Vlth-century  codex  d, — ('  the  singular  codex '  as  you  call  it ; 
and  it  is  certainly  a  very  singular  codex  indeed  :) — why,  I 
say,  the  evidence  of  these  two  or  three  codices  should  be 
thought  to  outweigh  the  evidence  of  all  other  documents  in 
existence, — whether  Copies,  Versions,  or  Fathers, — I  have 
never  been  able  to  discover,  nor  have  their  admirers  ever 
been  able  to  tell  me. 

[5]  Bp.  Ellicott's  and  the  Eevietocr's  respective   methods,  con- 
trasted. 

Waiving  this  however,  (for  it  is  beside  the  point,)  I  ven- 
ture to  ask, — With  what  show  of  reason  can  you  pretend 
that  I  "  sustain  my  charges "  against  codices  N  B  c  L,  "  &?/  a 
rough  comparison  of  these  ancient  authorities  with  the  Textus 
Eeceptus  "  ?  ^  .  .  .  Will  you  deny  that  it  is  a  mere  misrepre- 
sentation of  the  plain  facts  of  the  case,  to  say  so  ?  Have  I 
not,  on  the  contrary,  on  every  occasion  referred  Eeadino-s  in 


^  P.  41,  and  so  at  p.  77. 


376  ANCIENT  AUTUOBITY  [Rkply  to 

dispute, — the  reading  of  x  b  c  L  on  tlie  one  hand,  tlie  reading 
of  the  Textus  Receptus  on  the  other, — simultaneously  to  one 
and  the  same  external  standard  ?  Have  I  not  persistently 
enquired  for  the  verdict — so  far  as  it  has  been  obtainable — of 
CONSENTIENT  ANTIQUITY  ?  If  I  have  Sometimes  spoken  of 
certain  famous  manuscripts  (x  B  c  d  namely,)  as  exhibiting 
fabricated  Texts,  have  I  not  been  at  the  pains  to  establish  the 
reasonableness  of  my  assertion  by  showing  that  they  yield 
divergent, — that  is  contradictor i/,  testimony  ? 

The  task  of  laboriously  collating  the  five  '  old  uncials ' 
throughout  the  Gospels,  occupied  me  for  five-and-a-half  years, 
and  taxed  me  severely.  But  I  was  rewarded.  I  rose  from  the 
investigation  profoundly  convinced  that,  liowever  important 
they  may  be  as  instruments  of  Criticism,  codices  N  B  c  D  are 
among  the  most  corrupt  documents  extant.  It  was  a  con- 
viction derived  from  exact  Kiiowledgc  and  based  on  solid 
grounds  of  Bcason.  You,  my  lord  Bishop,  who  have  never 
gone  deeply  into  the  subject,  repose  simply  on  Prejudice. 
Never  having  at  any  time  collated  codices  N  a  b  c  D  for  your- 
self, you  are  unable  to  gainsay  a  single  statement  of  mine 
by  a  counter-appeal  to  facts.  Your  textual  learning  proves 
to  have  been  all  obtained  at  second-hand, — taken  on  trust. 
And  so,  instead  of  marshalling  against  me  a  corresponding 
array  of  Ancient  Authorities, — you  invariably  attempt  to 
put  me  down  by  an  appeal  to  Modern  Opinion.  "Tlie 
majority  of  modern  Critics "  (you  say)  liavc  declared  the 
manuscripts  in  question  "not  only  to  lie  wholly  undeserving 
(if  sucli  charges,  but,  on  tlie  contrary,  to  exhibit  a  text  of 
comparative  })urity."  ^ 

The  sum  of  the  difference  therefore  between  our  respec- 
ti\(!    iiu'.tliod.s,    my    lord    Bishop,   proves   to  be   this: — that 

'  I'.   II. 


Bp.  Elltcott.]  versus   MODERN  OPINION.  377 

whereas  I  endeavour  by  a  laborious  accumulation  of 
ancient  Evidence  to  demonstrate  tliat  the  decrees  of  Lach- 
mann,  of  Tischendorf  and  of  Tregelles,  arc  imtrustwarthy  ; 
your  way  of  reducing  me  to  silence,  is  to  cast  Lachmann, 
Tregelles  and  Tischendorf  at  every  instant  in  my  teeth.  Yon 
make  your  appeal  exclusively  to  them.  "  It  would  be  diffi- 
cult "  (you  say)  "  to  find  a  recent  English  Commentator  of 
any  considerable  reputation  who  has  not  been  influenced,  more 
or  less  consistently,  by  one  or  the  other  of  these  thrc^  Editors :  "  * 
(as  if  that  were  any  reason  why  I  should  do  the  same  I) 
BecaUvSe  I  pronounce  the  Eevised  reading  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14, 
"  a  grievous  perversion  of  the  truth  of  Scripture,"  you  bid  me 
consider  "  that  in  so  speaking  I  am  censuring  Lachmann, 
Tischendorf  and  Tor  (/ell  es."  You  seem  in  fact  to  have  utterly 
missed  the  point  of  my  contention :  which  is,  that  the 
ancient  Fathers  collectively  (a.d.  150  to  a.d.  450), — inasmuch 
as  they  must  needs  have  known  far  better  than  Lachmann, 
Tregelles,  or  Tischendorf,  (a.d.  1830  to  a.d.  1880,)  what  was 
the  Text  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  earliest  ages, — are 
perforce  far  more  trustworthy  guides  than  they.  And  further, 
that  whenever  it  can  be  clearly  shown  that  the  Ancients  as  a 
body  say  one  thing,  and  the  Moderns  another,  the  opinion  of 
the  Moderns  may  be  safely  disregarded. 

When  therefore  I  open  your  pamphlet  at  the  first  page, 
and  read  as  follows : — "  A  bold  assault  has  been  made  in 
recent  numbers  of  the  Qiuirferlf/  lievicw  upon  the  whole 
fabric  of  Criticism  which  has  been  built  up  during  the  last 
fifty  years  by  the  patient  labour  of  successive  editors  of  the 
New  Testament,"  ^ — I  fail  to  discover  that  any  practical 
inconvenience  results  to  myself  from  your  announcement. 
The  same  plaintive  strain  reappears  at  p.  39 ;  where,  having 

^  P.  5.  2  p^  3^ 


378  THE   FABRIC   OF   EECENT  [Reply  to 

pointed  out  "  that  the  text  of  the  Eevisers  is,  in  all  essential 
features,  the  same  as  that  text  in  which  the  best  critical 
editors,  during  the  past  fifty  years,  are  generally  agreed," — 
you  insist  "  that  tlius,  any  attack  made  on  the  text  of  the 
Eevisers  is  really  an  attack  on  the  critical  princi])les  that 
have  heen  carefully  and  laboriously  established  duriny  the 
last  half -century."  With  the  self-same  pathetic  remonstrance 
you  conclude  your  labours.  "  If,"  (you  say)  "  the  Eevisers 
are  wrong  in  the  principles  which  they  have  applied  to 
the  determination  of  the  Text,  the  princi2)les  on  which  the 
Textual  Criticism  of  the  last  fifty  years  has  lieen  based,  are 
wrong  also."^. .  .Are  you  then  not  yet  aware  that  the  alterna- 
tive which  seems  to  you  so  alarming  is  in  fact  my  wliole  con- 
tention ?  Wliat  else  do  you  imagine  it  is  that  I  am  pro- 
posing to  myself  throughout,  Ijut  etfectually  to  dispel  tlie 
vulgar  prejudice, — say  rather,  to  plant  my  heel  upon  the 
weak  superstition, — which  "for  the  last  fifty  years  "  has  proved 
fatal  to  progress  in  this  department  of  learning;  and  wluch, 
if  it  1)6  suffered  to  prevail,  will  make  a  science  of  Textual 
Criticism  impossible  ?  A  shallow  empiricism  has  been  the 
prevailing  result,  up  to  this  hour,  of  the  teaching  of 
Lachmann,  and  Tischendorf,  and  Tregelles. 

[(•)]  J}p.  EUlcott  in  May  1870,  and  in  May  1882. 

A  word  in  your  juivato  car,  (by  your  leave)  in  passing. 
You  seem  to  have  forgotten  that,  at  the  time  when  you 
entered  on  the  work  of  Eevision,  your  own  estimate  of  the 
Texts  put  ftirth  by  these  Editors  was  the  reverse  of  favour- 
able; i.e.  was  scarcely  distinguislialde  from  that  of  your 
present  correspondent.  Laclimann's  you  described  as  "  a 
text  composed  on  the  narrowest  and  most  exclusive  ]iriii- 
ciples," — "really  based  on  little  more  than  four  7nanuscripts." 

'  P.  77. 


Bp.  Elucott.]      textual   CRITICISM,  INSECURE.  379 

— "The  case  of  Tischendorf "  (you  said)  "is  still  more  easily 
disposed  of.  Wliicli  of  this  most  inconstant  Critic's  texts  are 
we  to  select  ?  Surely  not  the  last,  in  which  an  exaggerated 
preference  for  a  single  manuscript  has  betrayed  him  into  an 
almost  cMldlike  infii^tnity  of  jud{jment.  Surely  also  not  the 
seventh  edition,  which  exhibits  all  the  instability  which  a 
comparatively  recent  recognition  of  the  authority  of  cursive 
manuscripts  might  be  supposed  likely  to  introduce." — As  for 
poor  Tregelles,  you  said  : — "  His  critical  principles  ....  are 
now,  perhaps  justly,  called  in  question."  His  text  "  is  rigid  and 
mechanical,  and  sometimes  fails  to  disclose  that  critical  instinct 
and  peculiar  scliolarly  sagacity  which  "^  have  since  evidently 
disclosed  themselves  in  perfection  in  those  Members  of  the 
Revising  body  who,  with  Bp.  Ellicott  at  their  head,  syste- 
matically outvoted  Preljendary  Scrivener  in  the  Jerusalem 
Chamber.  But  with  what  consistency,  my  lord  Bishop,  do 
you  to-day  vaunt  "  the  principles  "  of  the  very  men  whom 
yesterday  you  vilipended  precisely  because  their  "  piinciijlcs  " 
then  seemed  to  yourself  so  utterly  unsatisfactory  ? 

[7]    "  The  fahric   of  modern    Tcxtucd   Criticism"  (1831-81) 
oxsts  on  an  insecure  basis. 

I  have  been  guilty  of  little  else  than  sacrilege,  it  seems, 
because  I  have  ventured  to  send  a  shower  of  shot  and  shell 
into  the  flimsy  decrees  of  these  three  Critics  which  now  you 
are  pleased  grandiloquently  to  designate  and  describe  as 
"  the  whole  fabric  of  Criticisin  which  has  been  built  np  within 
the  last  fifty  years."  Permit  me  to  remind  you  that  the 
"  fabric  "  you  speak  of, — (confessedly  a  creation  of  yesterday,) 
— rests  upon  a  foundation  of  sand  ;  and  has  been  already  so 
formidably  assailed,  or  else  so  gravely  condemned  by  a  suc- 
cession   of    famous    Critics,    that    as    "  a  fabric,"   its   very 


^   On  Iicvlsion,  pp.  47-8. 


380  CONTRADICTORY   ESTIMATES   OF  [Rkply  to 

existence  may  be  reasonably  called  in  question.  Tiscliendorf 
insists  on  the  general  depravity  ("  universa  vitiositas ")  of 
codex  B ;  on  which  codex  nevertheless  Drs.  Westcott  and 
Hort  chiefly  rely, — regarding  it  as  unique  in  its  pre-eminent 
purity.  The  same  pair  of  Critics  depreciate  the  Traditional 
Text  as  "  beyond  all  question  identical  with  the  dominant 
[Greek]  Text  of  the  second  ludf  of  the  fourth  century :  " — 
whereas,  "  to  bring  the  sacred  text  hack  to  the  condition  in  which 
it  existed  during  the  fourth  century,"  ^  was  Lachmann's  one 
object ;  the  sum  and  substance  of  his  striving.  "  The  fancy 
of  a  Constantinopolitan  text,  and  every  inference  that  has 
been  grounded  on  its  presumed  existence,"  ^  Tregelles 
declares  to  have  been  "  swept  away  at  once  and  for  ever,"  by 
Scrivener's  published  Collations.  And  yet,  what  else  but 
this  is  "  the  fancy,"  (as  already  exphdned,)  on  which  Drs. 
Westcott  and  Hort  have  been  for  thirty  years  building 
up  their  visionary  Theory  of  Textual  Criticism  ?- — What 
Griesbach  attempted  [1774-1805],  was  denounced  [1782- 
1805]  by  C.  F.  Mattha^i ;  —  disapproved  Ijy  Scholz  ;  — 
demonstrated  to  be  untenable  by  Abp.  Laurence.  Finally, 
in  1847,  the  learned  J.  G.  Eeiche,  in  some  Observations 
prefixed  to  liis  Collations  of  MSS.  in  the  Paris  Library, 
eloquently  and  ably  exposed  the  unreasonableness  of  any 
theory  of  '  Recension,' — properly  so  called  f  thereby  effectu- 


^  Scrivener's  Introduction,- — p.  423.  ^  Ibid.  \\  421. 

^  "  Non  tantum  totius  Antiquitatis  altiim  de  tali  opere  siiscepto  si- 
lentium,— sed  etiam  frequentes  Patrum,  usque  ad  quartum  seculum 
viventium,  de  textu  N.  T.  liberius  tractato,  impuneque  corrupto,  deque 
summa  Codicum  dissonantia  querela),  nee  non  ipsa)  corruptiones  inde  a 
primis  temporibus  contiuuo  propagata;, — satis  sunt  documento,  neminem 
opus  tarn  arduum,  scrupulorum  plenum,  atque  invidia;  et  calumniis 
obuoxitim,  aggressum  fuisse ;  etiamsi  doctiorum  Patrum  de  singulis  loois 
dis])utati(ines  ostendant,  eos  non  prorsus  rudes  in  rebus  criticis  fuisse." — 
Coda.  MSS.  N.  T.  GnEc.ornm  &c.  nova  dcucriptio,  et  cum  tcxlu  vuhjo 
rcceplo  Colluiio,  S:c.     4to.  Guttinga',  IS  17.    (p.  1.) 


Br.  Ellicott.]       RECENT   TEXTUAL   CRITICISM.  881 

ally  anticipating  Westcott  and  Hort's  weak  imagination 
of  a  '  Syrian  Text,'  while  he  was  demolishing  the  airy 
speculations  of  Griesl)ach  and  Hug.  'There  is  no  royal 
road '  (he  said)  '  to  the  Criticism  of  the  N.  T. :  no  plain  and 
easy  method,  at  once  reposing  on  a  firm  foundation,  and 
conducting  securely  to  the  wished  for  goal.''^  ....  Scarcely 
therefore  in  Germany  had  the  basement-story  been  laid 
of  that  '  fabric  of  Criticism  which  has  been  built  up  during 
the  last  fifty  years,'  and  which  you  superstitiously  admire, — 
when  a  famous  German  scholar  was  heard  denouncing  the 
fabric  as  insecure.  He  foretold  that  the  '  rcgia  via '  of 
codices  B  and  x  would  prove  a  deceit  and  a  snare  :  which 
thing,  at  the  end  of  four-and-thirty  years,  has  punctually 
come  to  pass. 

Seven  years  after,  Lachmann's  method  was  solemnly 
appealed  from  by  the  same  J.  G.  Eeiche :  ^  whose  words  of 
warning  to  his  countrymen  deserve  the  attention  of  every 
thoughtful  scholar  among  ourselves  at  this  day.  Of  the 
same  general  tenor  and  purport  as  Eeiche's,  are  the  utter- 
ances of  those  giants  in  Textual  Criticism,  Vercellone  of 
Eome  and  Ceriani  of  Milan.  Quite  unmistakable  is  the 
verdict  of  our  own  Scrivener  concerning  the  views  of 
Lachmann,  Tischendorf  and  Tregelles,  and  the  results  to 
which  their  system  has  severally  conducted  them. — If  Alford 
adopted  the  prejudices  of  his  three  immediate  predecessors, 


^  He  proceeds : — "  Hucusque  nemini  contigit,  nee  in.  postenim,  puto, 
continget,  moniunentorum  nostrorum,  tanquam  totidem  testium  singu- 
lorum,  ingens  agmen  ad  tres  quatuorve,  e  quibus  omnium  testimonium 
pendeat,  testes  referre ;  aut  e  testium  grege  inuumero  aliquot  duces 
auctoresque  secernere,  quorum  testimonium  tam  plenum,  certum  firmum- 
que  sit,  ut  sine  damno  ceterorum  testimonio  careamus." — Ibid.  (p.  19.) 

2  Commentarius  Criticus^  in  N.  T.  (in  his  Preface  to  the  Ep.  to  the 
Hebrews).  We  are  indebted  to  Canon  Cook  for  calling  attention  to  this. 
See  by  all  means  his  L'evisd  Text  of  thr  first  three  Gospels, — pp.  4-8. 


:)S2  RECENT  CRITICISM.— BISHOP  [Reply  to 

his  authority  lias  been  neutralized  l)y  the  far  different  teach- 
ing of  one  infinitely  his  superior  in  judgment  and  learning, 
— the  present  illustrious  Bishop  of  Lincoln. — On  the  same 
side  with  the  last  named  are  found  the  late  Philip  E.  Pusey 
and  Archd.  Lee, — Canon  Cook  and  Dr.  Field, — the  Bishop  of 
S.  Andrews  and  Dr.  S.  C.  Malan.  Lastly,  at  the  end  of 
fifty-one  years,  (viz.  in  1881,)  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  have 
revived  Lachmann's  unsatisfactory  method, — superadding 
thereto  not  a  few  extravagances  of  their'  own.  That  their 
views  have  been  received  with  expressions  of  the  gravest 
disapprobation,  no  one  will  deny.  Indispensable  to  their 
contention  is  the  grossly  improbable  hypothesis  that  the 
Peschito  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  '  Vulgate '  (i.e.  the  Hevised) 
Syriac  ;  Cureton's,  as  the  '  A^etus '  or  original  Syriac  version. 
And  yet,  while  I  write,  the  Abbe  Martin  at  Paris  is  giving  it 
as  the  result  of  his  labours  on  this  su])ject,  that  Cureton's 
Version  cannot  be  anything  of  the  sort.^  "Whether  Westcott 
and  Hort's  theory  of  a  '  Si/rian '  Text  has  not  received  an 
effectual  c|uietus,  let  posterity  decide,  '\fxepai  S'  eTrlXocTroi 
[jidpTvpe<i  ao(f)(jOTaToi. 

From  which  it  becomes  apparent  that,  at  all  events,  "  the 
fabric  of  Criticism  which  has  been  built  up  within  the  last 
fifty  years "  has  not  arisen  without  solemn  and  repeated 
protest, — as  well  from  within  as  from  without.  It  may  not 
therefore  be  spoken  of  by  you  as  something  which  men  are 
bound  to  maintain  inviolate, — like  an  Article  of  the  Creed. 
It  is  quite  competent,  I  mean,  for  any  one  to  denounce  the 
entire  system  of  Lachmann,  Tischendorf  and  Tregelles, — as  I 
do  7101V, — as  an  egregious  blunder ;   if  he  will  but  be  at  the 

'  It  requires  to  be  stated,  tliat,  (as  explainetl  by  the  Alibc  to  the 
present  writer,)  tlie  '  Post-scriptum '  of  his  Fascic.  IV.,  (viz.  from  p.  23-1  to 
p.  23G,)  is  a  jcu  d'csjjrit  only, — intended  to  enliven  a  dry  subject,  and  to 
entertain  his  pupils. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]    ELLICOTT  AND  THE  'TEXTUS  RECEPTUS.'     SSd 

pains  to  establish  on  a  severe  logical  basis  the  contradictory 
of  not  a  few  of  their  most  important  decrees.  And  you,  my 
lord  Bishop,  are  respectfully  reminded  that  your  defence  of 
their  system,  —  if  you  must  needs  defend  what  I  deem 
worthless, — must  be  conducted,  not  by  sneers  and  an  affecta- 
tion of  superior  enlightenment ;  still  less  by  intimidation, 
scornful  language,  and  all  those  other  bad  methods  whereby 
it  has  been  the  way  of  Superstition  in  every  age  to  rivet  the 
fetters  of  intellectual  bondage :  but  by  severe  reasoning,  and 
calm  discussion,  and  a  free  appeal  to  ancient  Authority,  and 
a  patient  investigation  of  all  the  external  evidence  accessible. 
I  request  therefore  that  we  may  hear  no  more  of  this  form 
of  argument.  The  Text  of  Lachmann  and  Tischendorf  and 
Tregelles, — of  Westcott  and  Hort  and  Ellicott,  (i.e.  of  the 
Beoisers,)—m  just  now  on  its  trial  before  the  world. ^ 

[8]  BjJ.  Mlicott's  strange  notions  ahout  the  '  Textus  Beccptus.' 

Your  strangest  mistakes  and  misrepresentations  however 
are  connected  with  the  '  Textus  lieceptus.'  It  evidently 
exercises  you  sorely  that  "  with  the  Quarterly  Eeviewer,  the 
Eeceived  Text  is  a  standard,  by  comparison  with  which  all 
extant  documents,  hoivevcr  indisjnctahlc  their  autiquit)/,  are 
measured."^     But  pray, — 

(1)  By  comparison  with  what  other  standard,  if  not  l)y 
the  Eeceived  Text,  would  you  yourself  obtain  the  measure 


^  It  seems  to  have  escaped  Bishop  Ellicott's  notice,  (ami  yet  the  fact 
well  deserves  commemoration)  that  the  claims  of  Tischendorf  and 
Tregelles  on  the  Church's  gratitude,  are  not  by  any  means  founded  on 
the  Texts  which  they  severally  put  forth.  As  in  the  case  of  Mill, 
Wetstein  and  Birch,  tlieir  merit  is  that  ihei/  patiently  accumulated 
evidence.  "  Tischendorf  s  reputation  as  a  Biblical  scholar  rests  less  on 
his  critical  editions  of  the  N.  T.,  than  on  the  texts  of  the  chief  uncial 
authorities  which  in  rapid  succession  he  gave  to  the  world."  (Scrivener's 
Introduction, — p.  427-)  ^  P.  12. 


384  BISHOP  ELLICOTT'S   (JUEEK    NOTIONS        [Rei'LY  to 

of   "  all   extant  documents,"  however   ancient  ?  .  .  .  .  This 
first.     And  next, 

(2)  Why  should  the  "  indispntahlc  antiquity  "  of  a  docu- 
ment be  supposed  to  disqualify  it  from  being  measured  by 
the  same  standard  to  which  {hut  only  for  convc?iiencc)  docu- 
ments of  whatever  date, — by  common  consent  of  scholars,  at 
home  and  abroad, — are  invariably  referred  ?     And  next, 

(3)  Surely,  you  cannot  require  to  have  it  explained  to 
you  that  a  standard  of  compahiso^x,  is  not  therefore  of  necessity 
a  standard  of  excellence.  Did  you  ever  take  the  troul)le  to 
collate  a  sacred  manuscript?  If  you  ever  did,  pray  witli 
v)h.at  did  you  make  your  collation  ?  In  other  words,  what 
'  standard  '  did  you  employ  ? . . .  Like  Walton  and  Ussher, — like 
Fell  and  Mill, — like  Bentley,  and  Bengel,  and  Wetstein, — like 
Birch,  and  Matthrei,  and  Griesl)ach,  and  Scholz, — like  Lacli- 
mann,  and  Tregelles,  and  Tischendorf,  and  Scrivener, — I 
venture  to  assume  tliat  you  collated  your  manuscript, — 
whether  it  was  of  "disputable"  or  of  "indisputable  anti(|uity," 
— with  an  ordinary  copy  of  the  Received  Text.  If  you  did  not, 
your  collation  is  of  no  manner  of  use.     But,  above  all, 

(4)  How  does  it  come  to  pass  that  you  speak  so  scornfully 
of  the  Eeceived  Text,  seeing  that  (at  p.  12  of  your  pamphlet) 
you  assure  your  readers  that  its  pedigree  may  he  traced,  hack  to 
a  period  ^JcrArtjJs  antecedent  to  the  oldest  of  our  extant  manu- 
scripts t  Surely,  a  traditional  Text  wliich  {cteeordinrj  to  you) 
dates  from  about  A.i>.  300,  is  good  enougli  for  the  pur})ose  of 
Collation  ! 

(5)  At  last  you  say, — 

"If  theic  were  reason  to  suppose  tliat  tlio  Ixcccivcil  Text 
jeprc.s(,'nted  verhatim  et  literatim  the  text  wliich  was  cnrreut  at 
Antioch  in  tlic  days  (»f  (Jhrysostoiiij  it  would  t-till  bo  inipossiblo 
to  regard  it  as  a  standard  from  wliich  there  was  no  appeal."  ^ 

'  P.  13. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]        concerning  THE  RECEIVED  TEXT.  385 

Eeally,  my  lord  Bishop,  you  must  excuse  mo  if  I  declare 
plainly  that  the  more  I  attend  to  your  critical  utterances,  the 
more  I  am  astonished.  From  the  confident  style  in  which 
you  deliver  yourself  upon  such  matters,  and'  especially  from 
your  having  undertaken  to  preside  over  a  Eevision  of  tlie 
Sacred  Text,  one  would  suppose  that  at  some  period  of  your 
life  you  must  have  given  the  subject  a  considerable  amount" 
of  time  and  attention.  But  indeed  the  foregoing  sentence 
virtually  contains  two  propositions  neither  of  which  could 
possibly  have  been  penned  by  one  even  moderately 
acquainted  with  the  facts  of  Textual  Criticism.     For  first, 

(a)  You  speak  of  "representing  verbatim  ct  literatim  the 
Text  which  was  current  at  Antioch  in  the  days  of  Chryso- 
stom."  Do  you  then  really  suppose  that  there  existed  at 
Antioch,  at  any  period  between  a.d.  354  and  a.d.  407,  some 
one  definite  Text  of  the  N.  T.  capable  of  being  so  represented  ? — 
If  you  do,  pray  will  you  indulge  us  with  the  grounds  for 
such  an  extraordinary  supposition  ?  Your  "  acquaintance  " 
(Dr.  Tregelles)  will  tell  you  that  such  a  fancy  has  long  since 
been  swept  away  "  at  once  and  for  ever."     And  secondly, 

(b)  You  say  that,  even  if  there  were  reason  to  suppose  that 
the  "  Eeceived  Text  "  were  such-and-such  a  thing, — "  it  would 
still  be  impossil)le  to  regard  it  as  a  standard  from  lohich  there 
was  no  appeal." 

But  pray,  who  in  his  senses,— what  sane  man  in  Great 
Britain, — ever  dreamed  of  regarding  the  "  Eeceived," — aye,  or 
any  other  known  "  Tex,t" — as  "  a  standard/rowi  which  there  shall 
be  no  appeal "  ?  Have  /  ever  done  so  ?  Have  I  ever  implied 
as  much  ?  If  I  have,  show  me  where.  You  refer  your 
readers  to  the  following  passage  in  my  first  Article : — 

"  What  precedes  admits  to  some  extent  of  further  numerical 
illustration.     It  is  discovered  that,  in  111  pages,  .  .  .  the  serious 

2  c 


386        THE  STANDARD  OF  COMPARISON  IS  NOT  [Reply  to 

deflections  of  a  from  the  Textus  Ilecejytm  aiuoniit  in  all  to  only 
842 :  whereas  in  c  they  amount  to  1708  :  in  b,  to  2370  ;  in  n,  to 
3392  :  in  D,  to  4697.  The  readings  peculiar  to  A  within  the  same 
limits  are  133:  those  peculiar  to  c  are  170.  But  those  of  b 
amount  to  197  :  while  n  exhibits  443 :  and  the  readings  peculiar 
to  D  (within  the  same  limits),  are  no  fewer  than  1829  ....  We 
submit  that  these  facts  are  not  altogether  calculated  to  inspire 
confidence  in  codices  b  n  c  d." — p.  14. 

But,  do  you  really  require  to  have  it  explained  to  you  that 
it  is  entirely  to  misunderstand  the  question  to  object  to  such 
a  comparison  of  codices  as  is  found  above,  (viz.  in  pages  14 
and  17,)  on  the  ground  that  it  was  made  with  the  text  of 
Stephanus  lying  open  before  me  ?  Would  not  the  self -same 
phenomenon  have  been  evolved  by  collation  with  anij  other 
text  ?  If  you  doubt  it,  sit  down  and  try  the  experiment  for 
yourself.  Believe  me,  Eobert  Etienne  in  the  XVItli  century 
was  not  the  cause  why  cod.  B  in  the  IVth  and  cod.  D  in  the 
Vlth  are  so  widely  discordant  and  divergent  from  one  another  : 
A  and  c  so  utterly  at  variance  with  both.^  We  must  have  some 
standard  whereby  to  test, — wherewith  to  compare, — Manu- 
scripts. What  is  more,  (give  me  leave  to  assure  you,)  to  the 
end  of  time  it  will  probably  be  the  practice  of  scholars  to  com- 
pare MSS.  of  the  N.  T.  with  the  '  Keceived  Text.'  The  liopeless 
discrepancies  between  our  five  "old  uncials,"  can  in  no  more 
convenient  way  be  exhibited,  than  by  referring  each  of  them  in 
turn  to  one  and  the  same  common  standard.  And, —  What 
standard  more  reasonable  and  more  convenient  than  the  Text 
which,  by  the  good  Providence  of  God,  was  universally 
em])loy(Ml  througliout  Euroj^e  for  tlie  first  300  years  after  the 
invention  of  printing  ?  being  practically  identical  with  tlie 
Text  which  (as  you  yourself  admit)  was  in  popular  use  at  tlie 
end  of  three  centuries  from  the  date  of  tlie  sacred  autographs 
themselves  :  in  other  words,  being  more  tlnin  ir>00  years  old. 


1  Sec  above,  pp.  12  :  30-3  :  31-5  :  46-7  :  7r.  :  !i  l-(!  :  219  :  262  :  289  :  319. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]    TIIEllEFORE  THAT   OP   EXCELLENCE.  387 

[9]  The  Rcvicioer  vindicates  himself  against  B]).  Ellicott' s  mis- 
conceptions. 

But  you  are  quite  determined  that  I  shall  mean  something 
essentially  different.  The  Quarterly  Reviewer,  (you  say,)  is 
one  who  "  contends  that  the  Eeceived  Text  needs  but  little 
emendation ;  and  may  he  used  witJwut  emendation  as  a 
stayiidard."^  I  am,  (you  say,)  one  of  "  those  who  adopt  tlie 
easy  method  of  making  the  Eeceived  Text  a  standard."^ 
My  "  Criticism,"  (it  seems,)  "  often  rests  ultimately  upon  the 
notion  that  it  is  little  else  but  sacrilege  to  impugn  the 
tradition  of  the  last  three  hundred  years."  ^  ("  The  last  three 
hundred  years :"  as  if  the  Traditional  Text  of  the  IST.  Testament 
dated  from  the  25th  of  Queen  Elizabeth !) — I  regard  the 
'  Textus  Eeceptus  '  therefore,  according  to  you,  as  the  Ephe- 
sians  regarded  the  image  of  the  great  goddess  Diana ;  namely, 
as  a  thing  which,  one  fine  morning,  "  fell  down  from  Jupiter."  * 
I  mistake  the  Eeceived  Text,  (you  imply,)  for  the  Divine 
Original,  the  Sacred  Autographs, — and  erect  it  into  "a  standard 
from  which  there  shall  be  no  appeal," — "  a  tradition  which  it 
is  little  else  Ijut  sacrilege  to  impugn."  That  is  how  you  state 
my  case  and  condition  :  hopelessly  confusing  the  standard  of 
ComjKirison  with  the  standard  of  Excellence. 

By  this  time,  however,  enough  has  been  said  to  convince 
any  fair  person  that  you  are  without  warrant  in  your  present 
contention.  Let  any  candid  scholar  cast  an  impartial  eye 
over  the  preceding  three  hundred  and  fifty  pages, — open  the 
volume  where  he  will,  and  read  steadily  on  to  the  end  of  any 
textual  discussion, — and  then  say  whether,  on  the  contrary, 
my  criticism  does  not  invariably  rest  on  the  principle  that 
the  Truth  of  Scripture  is  to  be  sought  in  that  form  of  the 
Sacred  Text  which  has  the  fullest,  the  loidest,  and  the  most 
varied  attestation.^     Do  I  not  invariably  make  the  consentient 


1  P.  40.       ^  P.  19.       =*  P.  4.       *  Acts  xix.  35.       ''  Supra,  pp.  339-41. 

2  G   2 


388  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  PAMPHLET.  [Rkply  to 

voim  of  Antiquity  my  standard  ?  If  I  do  iwt, — if,  on  the  con- 
trary, I  have  ever  once  appealed  to  the  '  Eeceivcd  Text,'  and 
made  it  my  standard, — wliy  do  yon  not  prove  the  trntli  of 
yonr  allegation  by  adducing  in  evidence  that  one  particnhir 
instance  ?  instead  of  bringing  against  me  a  charge  which 
is  utterly  without  foundation,  and  which  can  have  no  other 
effect  but  to  impose  upon  tlie  ignorant;  to  mish'ad  the 
unwary;  and  to  prejudice  the  great  Textual  question  which 
hopelessly  divides  you  and  me  ?  .  .  .  I  trust  that  at  least  you 
will  not  again  confound  the  standard  of  Comparison  with  the 
standard  of  Truth. 

[10]  Analysis  of  contents  of  B'p.  UUicott's  pamphlet. 
You  state  at  page  6,  that  what  you   propose  to  yourself 
by  your  pamphlet,  is, — 

"  First,  to  supply  accurate  information,  in  a  popular  foriii, 
concerning  the  Greek  text  of  the  New  Tesf anient : 

"  Secondly,  to  establish,  by  means  of  the  information  so  sup- 
plied, the  soimdness  of  the  principles  on  which  the  Eovisers  have 
a(!ted  in  their  choice  of  readings  ;  and  by  consequence,  the  im- 
portance of  the  '  New  Greek  Text :  '  " — [or,  as  you  phrase  it  atp, 
29,] — "  to  enable  the  reader  to  form  a  fair  judgment  on  the  ques- 
tion of  the  trustworthiness  of  the  readings  adopted  l>y  the  Bevisers." 

To  the  former  of  these  endeavours  you  devote  twenty- 
three  pages  :  (viz.  p.  7  to  p.  29)  : — to  the  latter,  you  devote 
forty-two  ;  (viz.  p.  37  to  p.  78).  The  intervening  eight  pages 
are  dedicated, — (a)  To  the  coustitutidu  of  the  Revisionist 
body:  and  next,  (h)  To  the  amount  of  good  faith  with  which 
you  and  your  colleagues  observed  the  conditions  imposed  upon 
you  by  the  Southern  Houses  of  Convocation.  1  propose  to 
follow  you  over  the  gj-onnd  in  mIu'cIi  you  li;i\'c  thus  entrenched 
yourself,  and  to  drive  you  out  of  e\'eiy  position  in  turn. 

[11]  Jlp.  Ullicott's  account  of  the  '  Textus  Receptus.' 
First  then,  for  your  strenuous  envlea^■our  (i>p.   7-10)  to 


I3r.  Ellicott.]  THE  BISHOP  ON  THE  '  TEXTUS  KECEPTUS.'   389 

prejudice  the  question  by  pouring  contempt  on  the  humblest 
ancestor  of  tlie  Textus  Rcccptus — namely,  the  first  edition  of 
Erasmus.  You  know  very  well  that  the  '  Textus  Receptus  ' 
is  not  the  first  edition  of  Erasmus.  Why  then  do  you  so 
describe  its  origin  as  to  imply  that  it  is  ?  You  ridicule  the 
circumstances  under  which  a  certain  ancestor  of  the  family 
first  saw  the  light.  You  reproduce  with  e^ident  satisfaction 
a  silly  witticism  of  Micliaelis,  \az.  that,  in  his  judgment,  the 
Evangelium  on  which  Erasmus  chiefly  relied  was  not  worth 
tlie  two  florins  which  the  monks  of  Basle  gave  for  it. 
Equally  contemptible  (according  to  you)  were  the  copies  of 
the  Acts,  the  Epistles,  and  tlie  Apocalypse  which  the  same 
scholar  employed  for  the  rest  of  his  first  edition.  Having 
in  this  way  done  your  best  to  blacken  a  noble  house  by 
dilating  on  the  low  ebb  to  which  its  fortunes  were  reduced 
at  a  critical  period  of  its  history,  some  three  centuries  and  a 
half  ago, — you  pause  to  make  your  own  comment  on  the 
spectacle  thus  exhibited  to  the  eyes  of  unlearned  readers,  lest 
any  should  fail  to  draw  therefrom  the  injurious  inference 
which  is  indispensable  for  your  argmuent : — 

"  We  have  entered  into  these  details,  because  wo  desire  that 
the  general  reader  should  know  fully  the  true  pedigree  of  that 
printed  text  of  the  Greek  Testament  which  has  been  in  common 
use  lor  the  last  three  centuries.  It  will  be  observed  that  its 
documentary  origin  is  not  calculated  to  inspire  any  great  confi- 
dence. Its  parents,  as  we  have  seen,  wore  two  or  three  late 
manuscripts  of  little  critical  value,  which  accident  seems  to 
have  brought  into  the  hands  of  their  first  editor." — p.  10. 

Now,  your  account  of  the  origin  of  the  '  Textus  Receptus ' 
shall  be  suffered  to  stand  uncontradicted.  But  the  important 
inference  which  you  intend  that  inattentive  or  incompetent 
readers  should  draw  therefrom,  shall  be  scattered  to  the 
winds  by  the  unequivocal  testimony  of  no  less  distinguished 
a  witness  than  vourself.     Notwithstanding  all  that  has  uune 


390  THE   BISHOFS   BORROWED   NOTIONS         [Ricily  to 

before,  you  are  constrained  to  confess  in  the  very  next  ipaije 
that : — 

"  The  manuscripts  which  Erasmus  used  differ,  for  the  most 
part,  only  in  small  and  insignificant  details  from  the  hulk  of  the 
cursive  manuscripts.  The  general  character  of  their  text  is  the 
same.  By  this  observation  the  pedigree  of  the  Eeceived  Text 
is  carried  up  beyond  the  individual  manuscripts  used  by 
Erasmus  ....  That  pedigree  stretches  back  to  a  remote  an- 
tiquity. The  first  ancestor  of  the  lieceived  Text  was  at  least 
contemporary  ivith  the  oldest  of  our  extant  manuscripts,  if  nut  older 
than  any  one  of  them." — pp.  11,  12. 

By  your  own  showing  therefore,  tlie  Textus  Eeceptus  is,  '  at 
least,'  1550  years  old.  Nay,  we  will  have  the  fact  over  again, 
in  words  which  you  adopt  from  p.  92  of  Westcott  and 
Hort's  Intruduction  [see  above,  p.  257],  and  clearly  make 
your  own  : — 

"The  fundamental  text  of  hxte  extant  Greek  MSS.  generally 
is  heyond  all  question  identical  with  the  dominant  Antiochian  or 
Gra3C0-Syrian  Text  of  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century." 
—p.  12. 

But,  if  this  be  so, — (and  I  am  not  concerned  to  dispute 
your  statement  in  a  single  particular,) — of  what  ])o.s,sible 
significancy  can  it  be  to  your  present  contention,  tli;it  the 
ancestry  of  the  written  Word  (like  the  ancestors  ol'  the 
Word  incarnate)  had  at  one  time  declined  to  the  womhous 
low  estate  on  which  you  enlarged  at  first  with  such  evident 
satisfaction  ^  Tliongli  the  fact  be  admitted  that  J()sei)h  "  the 
carpenter"  was  "the  husband  of  Mary,  of  whom  was  l)orn 
Jesus,  who  is  called  Christ," — what  ])ossiljle  inconvenience 
residts  from  that  circumstance  so  long  as  the  oidy  thing  con- 
tended for  lie  loyally  conceded, — nanioly,  dial  tlu!  descent  of 
Messiah  is  lineally  traceable  back  to  the  jiatrianh  Aluahain, 
through  I)avid  the  King?  And  llie  genealogy  <it'  the 
written,  no  less  than  the  genealogy  ol'  tin'  Incarnate  WoKD, 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  concerning   THE   '  TEXTUS  RECEPTUS.'       391 

is  traceable  back  by  tiuo  distinct  lines  of  descent,  remember : 
for  the  '  Complutensian,'  which  was  printed  in  1514,  exhibits 
the  '  Traditional  Text '  with  the  same  general  fidelity  as  the 
*  Erasmian,'  which  did  not  see  the  light  till  two  years  later. 

[12]  Bj:).  Ellicott  derives  his  estimate  of  the  '  Textus  Eeceptus' 
from  Westcott  and  Hart's  faUe  of  a  'Syrian  Text.' 

Let  us  hear  what  comes  next : — 

"At  this  point  a  question  suggests  itself  which  we  cannot 
refuse  to  consider.  If  the  pedigree  of  the  Received  Text  may 
be  traced  back  to  so  early  a  period,  does  it  not  deserve  the 
honour  which  is  given  to  it  by  the  Quarterly  Reviewer  ? " 
—p.  12. 

A  very  pertinent  question  truly.  We  are  made  attentive : 
the  more  so,  because  you  announce  that  your  reply  to  this 
question  shall  "  go  to  the  bottom  of  the  controversy  with 
which  we  are  concerned."  ^     That  reply  is  as  follows : — 

"  If  there  were  reason  to  suppose  that  the  Received  Text 
represented  verbatim  et  literatim  the  text  which  was  current  at 
Antioch  in  the  days  of  Chrysostom,  it  would  still  be  impossible 
to  regard  it  as  a  standard  from  which  there  was  no,  appeal.  The 
reason  why  this  would  be  impossible  may  be  stated  briefly  as 
follows.  In  the  ancient  documents  which  have  come  down  to 
us, — amongst  which,  as  is  well  known,  are  manuscripts  written 
in  the  fourth  century, — we  possess  evidence  that  other  texts  of 
the  Greek  Testament  existed  in  the  age  of  Chrysostom,  materially 
different  from  the  text  wj^ich  he  and  the  Antiochian  writers 
generally  employed.  Moreover,  a  rigorous  examination  of 
extant  documents  shows  that  the  Antiochian  or  (as  we  shall 
henceforth  call  it  with  Dr.  Hort)  the  Syrian  text  did  not 
represent  an  earlier  tradition  than  those  other  texts,  but  was 
in  fact  of  later  origin  than  the  rest.  We  cannot  accept  it 
therefore  as  a  final  standard." — pp.  13,  14. 

1  ?.  1.3. 


392  BISHOP  ELLICOTT   IN   A.D.    1870.  [Reply  to 

"  A  final  standard  "  !  .  .  .  Nay  but,  why  do  yuu  suddenly 
introduce  this  unheard-of  characteristic  ?  Who,  pray,  since 
the  invention  of  Printing  was  ever  known  to  put  forward  ^o/// 
existing  Text  as  "  a  final  standard  "  ?  Not  the  Quarterly 
Eeviewer  certainly.  "The  honour  which  is  given  to  the 
Textus  Beceptus  by  the  Quarterly  Eeviewer  "  is  no  other  than 
the  honour  which  it  has  enjoyed  at  the  hands  of  scholars,  by 
universal  consent,  for  the  last  three  centuries.  That  is  to  say, 
he  uses  it  as  a  standard  of  comparison,  and  employs  it  for 
habitual  reference.  So  do  you.  You  did  so,  at  least,  in  the 
year  1870.  You  did  more;  for  you  proposed  "to  proceed 
with  the  work  of  Kevision,  whether  of  text  or  translation, 
making  the  current  '  Te^ctus  Reccptus '  the  standard."  ^  We 
are  perfectly  agreed  therefore.  For  my  own  part,  being  fidly 
convinced,  like  yourself,  that  essentially  the  Keceived  Text  is 
full  1550  years  old, — (yes,  and  a  vast  deal  older,) — I  esteem  it 
quite  good  enougli  for  all  ordinary  purposes.  And  yet,  so 
far  am  I  from  pinning  my  faith  to  it,  that  I  eagerly  make  my 
appeal  from  it  to  the  threefold  witness  of  Copies,  Versions, 
Fathers,  whenever  I  find  its  testimony  challenged. — And 
with  this  renewed  explanation  of  my  sentiments, — (which  ene 
would  have  thought  that  no  competent  person  could  re(|uire,) 
— I  proceed  to  consider  the  reply  which  you  promise  shall  "  go 
to  the  bottom  of  the  controversy  with  which  we  are  con- 
cerned." I  beg  that  you  will  not  again  seek  to  divert  atten- 
tion from  that  which  is  tlie  real  matter  of  dispute  betwixt 
you  and  me. 

What  kind  of  argumentation  then  is  this  beibre  us  ?     You 
assure  us  that, — 

(a)  "  A    rigorous    examination   of  extant   documents,"^ 
"  shows  "  Dr.  Hort— "  that  the  Syrian  text"— [which  for  all 


Jjp.  Ellict'lt,  On  luvisiuit,  &f. — p.  30. 


Br.  Ellicott.]      BISHOP  ELLICOTT   IN   A.D.    1881.  393 

practical  purposes  may  l)e  considered  as  only  another  name 
for  the  "  Textus  Eeceptus  "] — was  of  later  origin  than  "  other 
texts  of  the  Greek  Testament "  which  "  existed  in  the  age  of 
Chrysostom." 

(b)  "  We  cannot  accept  it  therefore  as  a  final  standard." 

But, — Of  what  nature  is  the  logical  process  by  which  you 
have  succeeded  in  convincing  yourself  that  this  consequent 
can  be  got  out  of  that  antecedent  ?  Put  a  parallel  case  : — "  A 
careful  analysis  of  herbs  '  shows '  Dr.  Short  that  the  only  safe 
diet  for  Man  is  a  particular  kind  of  rank  grass  which  grows 
in  the  Ely  fens.  We  must  therefore  leave  off  eating  butcher's 
meat."- — Does  that  seem  to  you  altogether  a  satisfactory 
argument  ?  To  me,  it  is  a  mere  non  sequitur.  Do  but  con- 
sider the  matter  for  a  moment.  "  A  rigorous  examination  of 
extant  documents  shows  "  Dr.  Hort — such  and  such  things. 
"  A  rigorous  examination  of  the  "  same  "  documents  shows  " 
me — that  Dr.  Hort  is  mistaken.  A  careful  study  of  his  book 
convinces  me  that  his  theory  of  a  Syrian  Recension,  manu- 
factured between  a.d.  250  and  a.d.  350,  is  a  dream,  pure  and 
simple — a  mere  phantom  of  the  hrain.  Dr.  Hort's  course  is 
obvious.  Let  him  first  make  his  processes  of  proof  intelligible, 
and  then  public.  You  cannot  possibly  suppose  that  the  fable 
of  "  a  Syrian  text,"  though  it  has  evidently  satisfied  you, 
will  be  accepted  by  thoughtful  Englishmen  without  proof. 
Wliat  prospect  do  you  suppose  you  have  of  convincing  the 
world  that  Dr.  Hort  is  competent  to  assign  a  date  to  this 
creature  of  his  own  imagination ;  of  which  he  has  hitherto 
failed  to  demonstrate  so  much  as  the  probable  existence  ? 

I  have,  for  my  own  part,  established  by  abundant  refer- 
ences to  his  writings  that  he  is  one  of  those  who,  (through 
some  intellectual  peculiarity,)  are  for  ever  mistaking 
conjectures  for  facts, — assertions  for  arguments, — and  reite- 


394  HIS   SERVILE   REPRODUCTION   OF  [Reply  to 

i\ated  asseveration  for  accumulated  proof.  He  deserves 
sympathy,  certainly :  for, — (like  the  man  who  passed  his  life 
in  trying  to  count  how  many  grains  of  sand  will  exactly  fill 
a  quart  pot ; — or  like  his  unfortunate  brother,  who  made  it 
his  business  to  prove  that  nothing,  multiplied  ]jy  a  sufficient 
number  of  figures,  amounts  to  something  ;) — he  has  evidently 
taken  a  prodigious  deal  of  useless  trouble.  The  spectacle 
of  an  able  and  estimable  man  exhibiting  such  singular  inap- 
titude for  a  province  of  study  which,  beyond  all  others, 
demands  a  clear  head  and  a  calm,  dispassionate  judgment, — 
creates  distress. 

[lo]  Bp.  Ellicott  has  comjdctdy  adopted  Wcstcott  and  Hort's 

Theory. 

But  in  the  meantime,  so  confident  are  you  of  the  existence 
of  a  '  Syrian  text,' — {only  however  Iteeause  Dr.  Hort  is,) — that 
you  inflict  upon  your  readers  all  the  consequences  which 
'  the  Syrian  text '  is  supposed  to  carry  with  it.  Your  method 
is  certainly  characterized  by  humility  :  for  it  consists  in 
merely  serving  up  to  the  British  public  a  rechauffe  of  West- 
cott  and  Hort's  Textual  Theory.  I  cannot  discover  that  you 
contrilnite  anything  of  your  own  to  the  meagre  outline  you 
furnish  of  it.  Everything  is  assumed — as  before.  Nothing- 
is  proved — as  l)efore.  And  we  are  referred  to  Dr.  Hort  lor 
tlie  resolution  of  every  difficulty  which  Dr.  Hort  has  created. 
"According  to  Dr.  Hort," — "as  Dr.  Hort  observes," — "to 
use  Dr.  Hort's  language," — "  stated  by  Dr.  Hort," — "  as  Dr. 
Hort  notices," — "says  Dr.  Hort:"  yes,  from  p.  14  of  your 
pamphlet  to  p.  29  you  do  nothing  else  Imt  reproduce — Dr. 
Hort ! 

First  comes  the  lUltulous  account  of  the  contents  of  tlic 
bulk   of  tlie  cui'sives :  ^ — tlicii,  the  imaginary  history  of  the 


P.  15. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]         WESTCOTT   AND   IIORT'S   THEORY.  395 

'  Syriac  Vulgate ; '  which  (it  seems)  bears  '  indisputable 
traces '  of  being  a  revision,  of  which  you  have  learned  from 
Dr.  Hort  the  date  :  ^ — then  comes  the  same  disparagement  of 
the  ancient  Greek  Fathers, — "  for  reasons  wliich  have  been 
stated  hij  Dr.  Hort  with  great  clearness  and  cogency : "  ^ — 
then,  the  same  depreciatory  estimate  of  writers  subsequent 
to  Eusebius, — whose  evidence  is  declared  to  "  stand  at  best 
on  no  higher  level  than  the  evidence  of  inferior  manuscripts 
in  the  uncial  class  : "  ^  but  only  because  it  is  discovered  to  be 
destructive  of  the  theory  of  Dr.  Hort. 

Next  comes  "the  Method  of  Genealogy," — which  you 
declare  is  the  result  of  "  vast  research,  unwearied  patience, 
great  critical  sagacity  ;  "  *  but  which  I  am  prepared  to  prove 
is,  on  the  contrary,  a  shallow  expedient  for  dispensing  with 
scientific  Induction  and  the  laborious  accumulation  of  evi- 
dence. This  same  "  Method  of  Genealogy,"  you  are  not 
ashamed  to  announce  as  "  the  great  contribution  of  our  own 
times  to  a  mastery  over  materials."  "  For  the  full  explana- 
tion of  it,  you  must  refer  your  reader  to  Dr.  Hort's  Introduc- 
tion.'" ^     Can  you  be  serious  ? 

Then  come  the  results  to  which  "  the  application  of  this 
method  has  eonductcd  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort."  ^  And  first, 
the  fable  of  the  '  Syrian  Text ' — which  '  Dr.  Hort  considers  to 
have  been  the  result  of  a  deliberate  Eecension,'  conducted 
on  erroneous  principles.  This  fabricated  product  of  the  Ilird 
and  IVth  centuries,  (you  say,)  rose  to  supremacy, — liecame 
dominant  at  Antioch, — passed  thence  to  Constantinople, — 
and  once  established  there,  soon  vindicated  its  claim  to  be 
the  N".  T.  of  the  East :  whence  it  overran  the  "West,  and  for 
300  years   as  the  '  Textus  Eeceptus,'  has   held   undisputed 


'  V.  l(j. 

2  r.  17. 

=*  r.  IS. 

^  r.  10. 

^  r.  lu. 

«  p.  20. 

39G  Br.   ELLICOTT   HAS   ENTIRELY   ADOPTED      [Rei-ly  to 

sway.''  Eeally,  my  lord  Bisliop,  you  describe  iinapnary 
events  in  truly  Oriental  style.  One  seems  to  be  reading  not 
so  much  of  the  "  Syrian  Text "  as  of  the  Syrian  Impostor. 
One  expects  every  moment  to  hear  of  some  feat  of  this 
fa])ulous  Recension  corresponding  with  the  surrender  of 
the  Britisli  troops  and  Arabi's  triumpliant  entry  into  Cairo 
with  the  head  of  Sir  Beauchamp  Seymour  in  his  hand ! 

All  this  is  f(dlowed,  of  course,  by  tlie  weak  fable  of  the 
'  Neutral '  Text,  and  of  the  absolute  supremacy  of  Codex  i>, 
— which  is  "  stated  in  Dr.  Horfs  oion  words :"  ^ — viz.  "  b  very 
far  exceeds  all  other  documents  in  neutrality  of  text,  being 
in  fact  always,  or  nearly  always,  neutral."  (The  fact  being 
tliat  codex  b  is  demonstrably  one  of  the  most  corrupt  docu- 
ments in  existence.)  The  posteriority  of  the  (imaginary) 
"  Syrian,"  to  the  (imaginary)  "  Neutral,"  is  insisted  upon 
next  in  order,  as  a  matter  of  course :  and  declared  to  rest 
upon  three  other  considerations,— each  one  of  wliicli  is  found 
to  be  pure  fable  :  \dz.  (1)  On  the  fable  of  '  Conflation,'  wliich 
"  seems  to  supply  a  proof  "  that  Syrian  readings  are  posterior 
both  to  Western  and  to  Neutral  readings — but,  (as  I  liave 
elsewhere  ^  shown,  at  considerable  length,)  most  certainly  <focs 
not : — (2)  On  Ante-Nicene  Patristic  evidence, — of  which 
however  not  a  syllable  is  produced: — (3)  On  'Transcrip- 
tional p^'o'ba'bility ' — which  is  about  as  useful  a  substitute  for 
])roof  as  a  sweet-pea  for  a  walking-stick. 

Widely  dissindlar  of  course  is  your  own  view  of  the 
importance  of  the  foregoing  instruments  of  conviction.  To 
you,  "these  three  reasons  taken  together  seem  to  make  up 
an  argument  for  the  posteriority  of  the  Syrian  Text,  which  it 
is  impossible  to  resist.  They  form  "  (you  say)  "  a  tlireefold 
cord  of  evidence  which   [you]  lielieve  will  l)ear  any  amount 


r.  L'J.  2     ]'p.  23-4.  3  gyJ,y^^^  j,p_  258-2GG. 


Bp.  Ellioott.]  WESTOOTT  AND  HORT'S  TEXTUAL  THEORY.   397 

of  argumcntativo  strain."  You  rise  with  your  subject,  and  at 
last  break  out  into  eloquence  and  vituperation  : — '  Writers 
like  the  Eeviewer  may  attempt  to  cut  the  cord  hy  rccJdcss 
and  unverified  assertions  :  but  the  knife  has  not  yet  heen  fabri- 
cated that  can  eqnitahly  separate  any  one  of  its  strands.'  ^  .  .  . 
So  effectually,  as  well  as  so  deliberately,  have  you  laslied 
yourself— for  better  or  for  worse — to  Westcott  and  Hort's 
New  Textual  Theory,  that  you  must  now  of  necessity  either 
sliare  its  future  triumphs,  or  else  be  a  partaker  in  its  coming 
humiliation.     Am  I  to  congratulate  you  on  your  prospects  ? 

For  my  part,  I  make  no  secret  of  the  fact  that  I  look 
upon  the  entire  speculation  al)out  which  you  are  so  enthu- 
siastic, as  an  excursion  into  cloud-land  :  a  dream  and  nothimr 
more.  My  contention  is, — n^t  that  the  Theory  of  Drs.  West- 
cott and  Hort  rests  on  an  insecure  foundation,  but,  that  it 
rests  on  no  foundation  at  cdl.  Moreover,  I  am  greatly  mis- 
taken if  this  has  not  been  demonstrated  in  the  foresroina' 
pages.^  On  one  point,  at  all  events,  there  cannot  exist  a 
particle  of  doubt ;  namely,  that  so  far  from  its  "  7wt  leing  fm- 
you  to  interpose  in  this  controversy," — you  are  without  alterna- 
tive. You  must  either  come  forward  at  once,  and  bring  it  to 
a  successful  issue  :  or  else,  you  must  submit  to  be  told  tliat 
you  have  suffered  defeat,  inasmuch  as  you  are  inextricably 
involved  in  Westcott  and  Hort's  discomfiture.  You  are  simply 
without  remedy.  Yoii  may  "find  nothing  in  the  Reviewer's 
third  article  to  require  a  further  answer : "  but  readers  of 
intelligence  will  tell  you  that  your  finding,  since  it  does  not 
proceed  from  stupidity,  can  only  result  from  your  conscious- 
ness that  you  have  made  a  serious  blunder :  and  that  now, 
the  less  you  say  about  "Westcott  and  Hort's  new  textual 
Theory,"  the  better. 


1  Pp.  25-7.  2  gee  ^,.^_  III.,— viz.  from  p.  235  to  p.  3GG. 


•^^^  "  CONSPIRACY."— DISREGAKD  [Reply  to 


[14]  The  Question  modestli/  jmijwscd, —  Whether  Bi^.  Ellicott's 
adoption  of  Wedcott  and  Hort's  '  neio  Textual  Theerry  '  docs 
not  eimount  to  {vliat  lawyers  call)  '  CONSPIKACY '  ? 

But,  my  lord  Bishop,  when  I  reach  the  end  of  your 
laborious  avowal  that  you  entirely  accept  "  Westcott  and 
Hort's  new  Textual  Theory," — I  find  it  impossible  to  withhold 
the  respectful  encpiiry, — Is  such  a  proceeding  on  your  part 
altogether  allowable  ?  I  frankly  confess  that  to  me  the 
wholesale  adoption  Ijy  the  Chairman  of  the  Revising  body,  of 
the  theory  of  two  of  the  Revisers, — and  then,  his  exclusive 
reproduction  and  vindication  of  that  theory,  when  he  under- 
takes, 

"to  supply  the  reader  with  a  few  broad  outlines  of  Textual 
Criticism,  so  as  to  enable  liim  to  form  a  fair  jnd<jment  on  the 
question  of  the  trustworthiness  of  the  readings  adopted  hy  the 
Bevisers," — p.  29, 

all  this,  my  lord  Bishop,  I  frankly  avow,  to  mc,  looks  very 
much  indeed  like  what,  in  the  language  of  lawyers,  is  called 
"  Conspiracy."  It  appears  then  that  instead  of  presiding 
over  the  deliberations  of  the  Revisionists  as  an  impartial 
arbiter,  you  have  been  throughout,  heart  and  soul,  an  eager 
partizan.  You  have  learned  to  employ  freely  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort's  peculiar  terminology.  You  adopt  their  scarcely- 
intelligible  phrases :  their  wild  hypotheses :  their  arbitrary 
notions  about  '  Intrinsic '  and  '  Transcriptional  Probability : ' 
their  l)aseless  theory  of  '  Conflation  : '  their  shallow  '  Method 
of  Genealogy.'  You  have,  in  short,  evidently  swallowed 
their  novel  invention  whole.  I  can  no  huigcr  wonder  at 
the  result  arrived  at  by  the  body  of  Revisionists.  Well 
may  Dr.  Scrivener  have  pleaded  in  vain  !  He  found  Drs. 
Ellicott  and  Westcott  and  Hort  too  many  for  liim  .  .  ,  But 
it  is  high  time  that  I  should  pass  on. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]       of  instructions  OF   CONVOCATION.         399 

[15]  Proofs  that  the  Revisers  have  outrageously  exceeded  the 
Instriietions  they  received  from  the  Convocation  of  the  Southern 
Province. 

It  follows  next  to  enquire  whether  your  work  as  Eevisers 
was  conducted  in  conformity  with  the  conditions  imposed 
upon  you  by  the  Southern  House  of  Convocation,  or  not. 
"  Nothing  "  (you  say) — 

^'■can  he  more  unjust  on  the  part  of  the  Eeviewerthan  to  suggest, 
as  he  has  suggested  in  more  than  one  passage/  that  the  Eeviseis 
exceeded  their  Instructions  in  the  course  which  they  adopted  with 
regard  to  the  Greek  Text.  On  the  contrary,  as  we  shall  show, 
they  adhered  most  closely  to  their  Instructions  ;  and  did  neither 
more  nor  less  than  they  were  required  to  do." — (p.  32.) 

'  The  Eeviewer,'  my  lord  Bishop,  proceeds  to  demonstrate 
that  you  'exceeded  your  Instructions,'  even  to  an  extra- 
ordinary extent.  But  it  will  be  convenient  first  to  hear  you 
out.    You  proceed, — ■ 

"  Let  us  turn  to  the  Eule.  It  is  simply  as  follows  : — '  That 
the  text  to  be  adopted  be  that  for  which  the  Evidence  is 
decidedly  lyreponderatimj :  and  that  when  the  text  so  adopted 
differs  from  that  from  which  the  Authorized  Version  was  made, 
the  alteration  be  indicated  in  the  margin.'  " — (J6^VI.) 

But  you  seem  to  have  forgotten  that  the  '  Eule '  which 
you  quote  formed  no  part  of  the  '  Instructions '  which  were 
imposed  upon  you  by  Convocation.  It  was  one  of  the 
'  Principles  agreed  to  hy  the  Committee '  (25  May,  1870), — a 
Eule  of  your  own  making  therefore, — for  which  Convocation 
neither  was  nor  is  responsible.  The  '  fundamental  Eesolu- 
tions  adopted  by  the  Convocation  of  Canterbury '  (3rd  and 
5th  May,  1870),  five  in  number,  contain  no  authorization 
whatever  for  making  changes  in  the  Greek  Text.    They  have 


^  You  refer  to  such  jilaces  as  pp.  87-8  and  224,  where  see  the  Notes. 


400  DISREGARDED  INSTRUCTIONS.  [Reii.y  to 

reference  only  to  the  work  of  revising  '  the  Atithorized  Ver- 
sion : '  an  undertaking  which  the  first  liesohition  declares  to 
be  '  desirable.'  In  order  to  ascertain  what  were  the  Kevisers' 
'  Instructions  with  regard  to  the  Greek  Text,'  %ve  must  refer 
to  the  original  Resolution  of  Feb.  10th,  1870  :  in  which  the 
removal  of  '  2)lnin  and  clear  errors,  whether  in  the  Greek 
Text  originally  adopted  by  the  Translators,  or  in  the  Trans- 
lation made  from  the  same,' — is  for  the  first  and  last  time 
mentioned.  That  you  yourself  accepted  this  as  the  limit  of 
your  authority,  is  proved  by  your  Speech  in  Convocation. 
"We  may  be  satisfied"  (you  said)  "with  the  attempt  to 
correct  plain  and  clear  error's:  but  there,  it  is  our  duty  to 
stop"  ^ 

Now  I  venture  to  assert  that  not  one  in  a  hundred  of 
the  alterations  you  have  actually  made,  '  whether  in  the 
Greek  Text  originally  adopted  by  the  Translators,  or  in  the 
Translation  made  from  the  same,'  are  corrections  of  'j^/awi 
and  clear  errors.''  Eather, — (to  adopt  the  words  of  the  learned 
Bishop  of  Lincoln,) — "  I  fear  we  must  say  in  candour  that  in 
the  Revised  Version  we  meet  in  every  page  with  changes 
which  seem  almost  to  he  made  for  the  sake  of  change!'"^  May  I 
trouble  you  to  refer  back  to  p.  112  of  the  present  volume  for 
a  few  words  more  on  this  subject  from  the  pen  of  the  same 
judicicnis  Prelate  ? 

{a)  And  first, — In  respect  of  the  New  English  Version. 
For  my  own  part,  (see  above,  pp.  171-2,)  I  tliouglit  tlu;  l)est 
tiling  I  could  do  would  Ije  to  illustrate  the  nature  of  my 
complaint,  by  citing  and  commenting  on  an  actual  instance 
of  your  method.  I  showed  how,  in  revising  eight-and-thirty 
words  (2  Pet.  i.  5-7),  you  had  conti'ived  to  introduce  no 
I'ewer  than  thirty  changes, — every  one  of  them  being  clearly 


Chronicle  of  Convocation,  Feb.  1K70,  p.  83.         ^  See  above,  p.  3G8. 


Br.  Ellicott.]      TREATMENT   OF   S.   LUKE  VIII.   45-6.  401 

a  change  for  the  worse.  You  will  perhaps  say, — Find  me 
another  such  case !  I  find  it,  my  lord  Bishop,  in  S.  Luke  viii. 
45,  46, — where  you  have  made  nineteen  changes  in  revising 
the  translation  of  four-and-thirty  words.  I  proceed  to 
transcribe  the  passage ;  requesting  you  to  bear  in  mind  your 
own  emphatic  protestation, — "We  made  no  change  if  the 
meaning  was  fairly  expressed  by  the  word  or  phrase  before 

us." 

A.V.  R.V. 

1 

'  Peter  and  they  that  were  '  Peter   said,  and  they  that 

with    him    said,    Master,   the      ^^^.^   ^ith    him.   Master    the 

multitude    throng    thee     and  ,  .^    i  ^  ,  , 

,1  1  ,    ,1  multitudes     press     thee     and 

press   thee,   and    sayest   thou,  4  ^ 

Who  touched  me  ?  And  Jesus  crush  thee  [5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10^.] 
said,  Somebody  hath   touched      But  Jesus  said.  Some  one  did 

me :  for  I  perceive  that  virtue      ,'*i  n     -c        '^.     jj.ix 

^    -        ,  touch  me :  tor  1  perceived  that 


is  gone  out  of  me.' 


power   had   gone    forth    from 


me. 


Now  pray, — Was  not "  the  vaQ?a\mg  fairly  cxjyressed  "  before  ? 
Will  you  tell  me  that  in  revising  S.  Luke  viii.  45-6,  you 
"  made  as  few  alterations  as  iJossiUe "  ?  or  will  you  ven- 
ture to  assert  that  you  have  removed  none  but  "plain  and 
clear  erro7's  "  ?  On  the  contrary.  I  challenge  any  competent 
scholar  in  Great  Britain  to  say  whether  every  one  of  these 
changes  be  not  either  absolutely  useless,  or  else  decidedly  a 
change  for  the  worse :  six  of  them  being  downright  errors. 

The  transposition  in  the  opening  sentence  is  infelicitous, 
to  say  the  least.  (The  English  language  will  not  bear  such 
handling.  Literally,  no  doubt,  the  words  mean,  "  said  Peter, 
and  they  that  were  with  him."  But  you  may  not  so  trans- 
late.)— The  omission  of  the  six  mteresting  words,  indicated 
within  square  brackets,  is  a  serious  blunder.^     The  words  are 


^  The  clause  ('  and  sayest  thou.  Who  touched  me  ?')  is  witnessed  to 
by  ACDPKxrAAsn  and  every   other   hiovm  uncial  except  three  of 

2    D 


402  THE  REVISED  ENGLISH.  [Reply  to 

umloubtcdhj  genuine.  I  wonder  how  you  can  have  ventured 
thus  to  mutilate  the  Book  of  Life.  And  why  did  you 
not,  out  of  common  decency  and  reverence,  at  least  in  the 
margin,  preserve  a  record  of  the  striking  chiuse  which 
you  thus,  —  with  well-meant  assiduity,  but  certainly  with 
deplorable  rashness,  —  forcibly  ejected  from  the  text  ? 
To  proceed  however. — '  Multitudes,' — '  but,' — '  one,' — '  did,' — 
'  power,' — '  forth,' — '  from :' — are  all  seven  eitlier  needless 
changes,  or  improper,  or  undesirable.  'Did  touchy — 'j;cr- 
ceived,' — '  had  gone  forth' — are  unidiomatic  and  incorrect 
expressions.  I  have  already  explained  this  elsewhere.^  The 
aorist  (■tjylraTo)  has  here  a  perfect  signification,  as  in  countless 
other  places : — eyvcov,  (like  '  novi,')  is  frerpiently  (as  here)  to 
be  Englished  l)y  the  present  ('  /  jierceive ')  :  and  '  is  gone  out 
of  me'    is   the    nearest  rendering   of  e^ekOovaav'^  air''   ifxov 


had  character :  hy  every  known  cursive  but  four : — by  the  Old  Latin  and 
Vulgate :  by  all  the  four  Syriac  :  by  the  Gothic  and  the  iEthiopic  Versiou.s  ; 
as  well  as  by  ps.-Tatian  {Evan.  Concord,  p.  77)  and  Chrysostom  (vii. 
359  a).  It  cannot  be  pretended  that  the  words  are  derived  from  S.  Mark's 
Gospel  (as  Tischendorf  coarsely  imagined)  ; — for  the  sufficient  reason  that 
the  words  are  not  found  there.  In  S.  Mark  (v.  31)  it  is, — Ka\  Xeyeis,  Ti's 
fiov  i7\|/'aro  ;  in  S.  Luke  (viii.  45),  koi  Xfyeis,  Ti?  o  u\j/dfifv6s  /xow.  More- 
over, this  delicate  distinction  has  been  maintained  all  down  the  ages. 

1  Page  154  to  p.  164. 

^  You  will  perhaps  remind  me  that  you  do  not  read  e^fXdoixrav.  I  am 
aware  that  you  have  tacitly  substituted  t^e'KrjXvdv'iav, — which  is  only 
supported  by  four  manuscripts  of  bad  character :  being  disallowed  by 
eighteen  uncials,  (with  a  c  d  at  their  head,)  and  every  Icnoum  cursive  hut 
one;  besides  the  following  Fathers :—Marcion'  (a.d.  150), — Origen,^ — the 
author  of  the  Dialogus^  (a.d.  325), — Epiphanius,'' — Didymus,''  in  two 
places, — Basil," — Chrysostom,'' — Cyril  ^  in  two  places, — ps.-Athanasius ' 
(a.d.  400), — ps.-Chrysostom  ^°  .  .  .  Is  it  tolerable  that  the  Sacred  Text 
should  be  put  to  wrongs  after  this  fashion,  by  a  body  of  men  who  are 
avowedly  (for  see  page  369)  unskilled  in  Textual  Criticism,  and  who 
were  appointed  only  to  revise  the  authorized  Knylish  Version  ? 


'  Kpiph.i.  313  a,  327  a.         ■■'iii.466e.        3  Qrig.  i.  853  d.         M.  327  b.        5  pp.  124,  41.3. 
«  iii.  8  c.        '  vii.  .')32  a.        "  Opp.  vi.  99  e.    Mai,  ii.  226.        "  ii.  14  c.        >o  xiil.  212  e  f. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  the   revised  GREEK.  403 

which  our  language  will  bear. — Lastly,  'press'  and  'crush,' 
as  renderings  of  avvexovat  and  airoBXi^ova-L,  are  inexact  and 
unscholarlike.  Xwi'^eLV,  (literally  '  to  encompass  '  or  '  hem 
in/)  is  here  to  '  throng '  or  '  crowd :'  a-irodXl^eLv,  (literally 
'  to  squeeze,')  is  here  to  '  press.'  But  in  fact  the  words  were 
perfectly  well  rendered  by  our  Translators  of  1611,  and 
ought  to  have  been  let  alone. — This  specimen  may  suffice, 
(and  it  is  a  very  fair  specimen,)  of  what  has  been  your 
calamitous  method  of  revising  the  A.  V.  throughout. 

So  much  then  for  the  Eevised  English.  The  fate  of  the 
Eevised  Greek  is  even  more  extraordinary.  I  proceed  to 
explain  myself  by  instancing  what  has  happened  in  respect 
of  the  Gospel  according  to  S.  Luke. 

{h)  Next, — In  respect  of  the  Neio  Chxck  Text. 

On  examining  the  836^  Greek  Textual  corrections  which 
you  have  introduced  into  those  1151  verses,  I  find  that  at  least 
356  of  them  do  not  affect  the  English  rendering  at  all.  I  mean 
to  say  that  those  356  (supposed)  emendations  are  either 
incapable  of  being  represented  in  a  Translation,  or  at  least 
are  not  represented.  Thus,  in  S.  Luke  iv.  3,  whether  etTre 
he  or  Ka\  elirev  is  read  : — in  ver.  7,  whether  ifjuov  or  fxov : — in 
ver.  8,  whether  K.vpLov  tov  %e6v  aov  TrpoaKWijaeLf;,  or  Upoa- 
Kvvi](r€c<;  K.  rov  S.  crov  ;  whether  'l^yaye  Se  or  Kal  ijyayev ; 
whether  vl6<;  or  6  vl6<; : — in  ver.  17,  whether  tov  irpo^j^rov 
'Hcraiovor 'H.  rov  7rpo(f)/]TOv  ;  whether  ayoi^a<?  or  dva7rTv^a<i: 
— in  ver.  18,  whether  evayyeXiaaadac  or  euayyeXl^eaOac: — in 
ver.  20,  whether  ol  6(j)6a\/Mol  iv  rfj  away  coy  ^  or  iv  rfj  crvvaycoyrj 
ol  6(f)da\fioL : — in  ver.  23,  whether  et?  tijv  or  iv  rfj : — in  ver.  27, 
whether  iv  tm  'YaparjX  iTrl  'KXccrcraiov  tov  7rpo(f}/]Tov  or  eVl 
'EXtcrcr.,  rov  ir.  iv  tm  'I. : — in  ver.  29,  whether  6(f)pvo<i  or  t^? 
6<^pvo<i ;  whether  wcrre  or  et?  to  : — in  ver.  35,  whether  air  or 


*  This  I  make  the  actual  sum,  after  deducting  for  marginal  notes  and 
variations  in  stops. 

2  D  2 


404    ABOUT  3590  NEEDLESS  CHANGES  HAVE  BEEN     [Keily  to 

ef : — in  ver.  38,  whether  airo  or  e/c ;  whether  irevOepd  or 
T)  Trevdepd :  —  in  ver.  43,  whether  eVt  or  et<? ;  whether 
ciTrecTTdXrjv  or  direaraK^ai : — in  ver.  44,  whether  eU  Ta<? 
crvvayco'yd'i  or  iv  ral^  avvayco'yal'i  :-^in  every  one  of  these 
cases,  the  English  remains  the  same,  whichever  of  the 
alternative  readings  is  adopted.  At  least  19  therefore  out 
of  tlie  33  changes  which  you  introdviced  into  the  Greek  Text 
of  S.  Luke  iv.  are  plainly  gratuitous. 

TJiirtcen  of  those  19,  (or  about  two-thirds,)  are  also  in  my 
opinion  changes  for  the  worse :  are  nothing  else,  I  mean,  but 
substitutions  of  vjrong  for  right  Eeadings.  But  tliat  is  not 
my  present  contention.  The  point  I  am  just  now  contend- 
ing for  is  this : — That,  since  it  certainly  was  no  part  of  your 
'  Instructions,'  '  Eules,'  or  '  Principles '  to  invent  a  oicw  Greek 
Text, — or  indeed  to  meddle  with  the  original  Greek  at  all, 
exeept  so  far  as  was  ahsolutehj  necessary  for  tlie  Revision  of  tlic 
English  Version, — it  is  surely  a  very  grave  form  of  inaccuracy 
to  assert  (as  you  now  do)  that  you  "  adhered  most  closely  to 
your  Instructions,  and  did  neither  more  nor  less  than  you 
were  required." — You  know  that  you  did  a  vast  deal  more 
than  you  had  any  authority  or  right  to  do :  a  vast  deal  more 
than  you  had  the  shadow  of  a  pretext  for  doing.  Worse  tlian 
that.  You  deliberately  forsook  the  province  to  wliich  you 
had  been  exclusively  appointed  by  the  Southern  Convoca- 
tion,— and  you  ostentatiously  invaded  another  and  a  distinct 
province ;  viz.  That  of  the  critical  Editorship  of  the  Greek 
Text :  for  which,  hg  your  oum  confession, — (I  take  leave  to 
remind  you  of  your  own  honest  avowal,  quoted  above  at 
page  369,) — you  and  your  colleagues  hiew  yourselves  to  be 
incompetent. 

For,  when  those  356  wholly  gratuitous  and  uncalled-for 
changes  in  the  Greek  of  S.  Luke's  (Jospel  come  to  be 
examined  in  detail,  they  are  found  to  affect  far  more  than 


Br.  Ellicott.]    INTRODUCED  INTO  THE  GREEK  TEXT.  405 

356  words.  By  the  result,  92  words  have  been  omitted; 
and  33  added.  No  less  than  129  words  have  been  substituted 
for  others  which  stood  in  the  text  before ;  and  there  are  66 
instances  of  Transposition,  involving  the  dislocation  of  185 
words.  The  changes  of  case,'  mood,  tense,  &c.,  amount  in 
addition  to  123.^  The  sum  of  the  words  which  you  have 
nccdlcsly  meddled  with  in  the  Greek  Text  of  the  third 
Gospel  proves  therefore  to  be  562. 

At  this  rate,  —  (since,  [excluding  marginal  notes  and 
variations  in  stops,]  Scrivener^  counts  5337  various  readings 
in  his  Notes,) — the  number  of  alterations  gratuitously  and 
uselessly  introduced  hy  you  into  the  Greek  Text  of  the  entire 
N.  T.,  is  to  be  estimated  at  3590. 

And  if, — (as  seems  probable,) — the  same  general  proportion 
prevails  throughout  your  entire  work, — it  will  appear  that 
the  words  which,  without  a  shadow  of  excuse,  you  have 
omitted  from  the  Greek  Text  of  the  N.  T.,  must  amount  to 
about  590 :  while  you  have  added  in  the  same  gratuitous 
way  about  210 ;  and  have  needlessly  suhstituted  about  820. 
Your  instances  of  uncalled-for  transposition,  (about  420  in 
number,)  will  have  involved  the  gratuitous  dislocation  of  full 
1190  words: — while  the  occasions  on  which,  at  the  bidding 
of  Drs,  Westcott  and  Hort,  you  have  altered  case,  mood, 
tense,  &c.,  must  amount  to  about  780.  In  this  way,  the 
sum  of  the  changes  you  have  effected  in  the  Greek  Text  of 
the  N.  T.  in  clear  defiance  of  your  Instructions, — would 
amount,  as  already  stated,  to  3590. 

Now,  when  it  is  considered  that  not  one  of  those  3590 


^  I  mean  such  changes  as  rj-yipdr]  for  eyrjyeprai  (ix.  7), — ^epere  for  eWy- 
KavTfs  (xv.  23),  &c.  These  are  generally  the  result  of  a  change  of  con- 
struction. 

2  Mk3.  communication  from  my  friend,  the  Editor. 


406  PROOF   THAT   THE   llEVISEES   HAVE  [Reply  to 

changes  in  the  least  degree  affects  the  English  Revision, — it  is 
undeniable,  not  only  that  you  and  your  friends  did  wliat  you 
were  without  authority  for  doing : — but  also  that  you  violated 
as  well  the  spirit  as  the  letter  of  your  Instructions.  As  for 
your  present  assertion  (at  j).  32)  that  you  "adhered  most 
closely  to  the  Instructions  you  received,  and  did  neither  more 
nor  less  than  you  toere  reqtdred  to  do," — you  must  submit  to 
be  reminded  that  it  savours  strongly  of  the  nature  of  pure 
fable.  The  history  of  the  new  Greek  Text  is  briefly  this : — 
A  majority  of  the  Kevisers — induding  yourself,  their  Chair- 
man,— are  found  to  have  put  yourselves  almost  unreservedly 
into  the  hands  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort.  The  result  was 
obvious.  When  the  minority,  headed  by  Dr.  Scrivener, 
api^ealed  to  the  chair,  they  found  tliemselves  confronted  by  a 
prejudiced  Advocate.  They  ought  to  have  been  listened  to 
by  an  impartial  Judge.  You,  my  lord  Bishop,  are  in  con- 
sequence (I  regret  to  say)  responsible  for  all  the  mischief 
which  has  occurred.     The  blame  of  it  rests  at  your  door. 

And  pray  disabuse  yourself  of  the  imagination  tliat  in 
what  precedes  I  have  been  stretching  the  numljers  in  order 
to  make  out  a  case  against  you.  It  would  1)0  easy  to 
show  that  in  estimating  the  amount  of  needless  changes  at 
356  out  of  830,  I  am  greatly  under  the  mark.  I  liave  not 
included  such  cases,  for  instance,  as  your  substitution  of  ?} 
fxva  aov,  Kypte  for  K.vpie,  ?;  /mva  aov  (in  xix.  18),  and  of  Tolvvv 
uTToSoTe  for  'AvroSore  roivvv  (in  xx.  25)\ — only  lest  yow 
should  pretend  that  the  transposition  affects  the  Englisli, 
and  tlierefore  vxis  necessary.  Had  I  desired  to  swell  tlie 
number   I   could    liave   easily   sliown    that    I'ully   Imlf  the 


^  1  desire  to  keep  out  of  sight  the  critical  impropriety  of  sucli  cor- 
rections of  tlie  text.  Aud  yet,  it  is  worth  stating  tliat  N  b  l  are  the  only 
witnesses  discovcrdhh  for  the  former,  and  almost  the  only  witnesses  to  be 
found  for  the  hitler  of  these  two  utterly  uuuieauing  clianges. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]      DISREGAEDED  THEIR  INSTRUCTIONS.  407 

changes  you  effected  in  the  Greek  Text  were  wholly  super- 
fluous for  the  Eevision  of  the  English  Translation,  and  there- 
fore were  entirely  without  excuse. 

This,  in  fact, — (give  me  leave  to  remind  you  in  passing,) — 
is  the  true  reason  why,  at  an  early  stage  of  your  proceedings, 
you  resolved  that  none  of  the  changes  you  introduced  into 
the  Greek  Text  should  find  a  record  in  your  English  margin. 
Had  any  been  recorded,  all  must  have  appeared.  And  had 
this  been  done,  you  would  have  stood  openly  convicted  of 
having  utterly  disregarded  the '  Instructions '  you  had  received 
from  Convocation.  With  what  face,  for  example,  could  you, 
(in  the  margin  of  S.  Luke  xv.  17,)  against  the  words  "  he 
said," — have  printed  "  e(^r]  not  etTre  "  ?  or,  (at  xxiv.  44,)  against- 
the  words  "  unto  them," — must  you  not  have  been  ashamed 
to  encumber  the  already  overcrowded  margin  with  such  an 
irrelevant  statement  as, — "  tt/jo?  avTov<i  not  avrol<i  "  ? 

Now,  if  this  were  all,  you  might  reply  that  by  my  own 
showing  the  Textual  changes  complained  of,  if  they  do 
no  good,  at  least  do  no  harm.  But  then,  unhappily,  you 
and  your  friends  have  not  confined  yourselves  to  colourless 
readings,  when  silently  up  and  down  every  part  of  the  IST,  T. 
you  have  introduced  innovations.  I  open  your  New  English 
Version  at  random  (S.  John  iv.  15),  and  invite  your  atten- 
tion to  the  first  instance  which  catches  my  eye. 

You  have  made  the  Woman  of  Samaria  complain  of  the 
length  of  the  walk  from  Sychar  to  Jacob's  well : — "  Sir,  give 
me  this  water,  that  I  thirst  not,  neither  come  all  the  loay 
hither  to  draw." — What  has  happened?  For  epxaiixai,  I 
discover  that  you  have  silently  substituted  Aiep-^cD/xai. 
(Even  Stepxojjbac  has  no  such  meaning :  but  let  that  pass.) 
What  then  was  your  authority  for  thrusting  Stip'^^co/jbat  (which 
by  tlie  way  is  a  patent  absurdity)  into  the  Text  ?     The  word 


408  CORRUl'TION   OF   S.   JOHN   IV.    15.  [Reply  to 

is  found  (I  discover)  in  onhj  two  Greek  MSS.  of  had  character  ^ 
(b  n),  wliich,  being  derived  from  a  common  corrupt  original, 
can  only  reckon  for  one :  and  the  7^easoning  whicli  is  supposed 
to  justify  this  change  is  thus  supplied  by  Tischendorf : — "If 
the  Evangelist  had  written  ep^-,  "^vho  would  ever  have 
dreamed  of  turning  it  into  St-ep^^to/iat  ?"  .  .  .  No  one, 
of  course,  (is  the  obvious  answer,)  except  the  inveterate 
blunderer  who,  some  1700  years  ago,  seeing  MHAeePXCjOMAi 
before  him,  red^iplicatecl  the  antecedent  AG.  The  sum  of  the 
matter  is  that !  .  .  .  Pass  1700  years,  and  the  long-since- 
forgotten  blunder  is  furbished  up  afresh  by  Drs.  Westcott  and 
Hort, — is  urged  upon  the  wondering  body  of  Eevisers  as  the 
undoubted  utterance  of  the  Spirit, — is  accepted  by  yourself ; 
— finally,  (in  spite  of  many  a  remonstrance  from  Dr.  ScriA^ener 
and  his  friends,)  is  thrust  upon  the  acceptance  of  90  millions 
of  English-speaking  men  throughout  the  world,  as  the  long- 
lost-sight-of,  but  at  last  happily  recovered,  utterance  of  the 
'  Woman  of  Samaria !'  .  .  .  "Airaye. 

Ordinary  readers,  in  the  meantime,  will  of  course  assume 
that  the  change  results  from  the  Eevisers'  skill  in  translating, 
— the  advances  which  have  been  made  in  the  study  of  Greek  ; 
for  no  trace  of  the  textual  vagary  before  us  survives  in  the 
English  margin. 

And  thus  I  am  reminded  of  what  I  hold  to  be  your  gravest 
fault  of  all.  The  rule  of  Committee  subject  to  "whicli  you 
commenced  operations,  —  tlie  Ilule  which  re-assured  tlie 
public  and  reconciled  the  Clmrcli  to  the  ])rospectof  a  llevised 


^  Charactcri.stic  of  these  two  false-witnesses  is  it,  tliat  tlioj'  are  not  al>lo 
to  convey  even  this  short  message  correctly.  In  rejwrting  the  two  wcnils 
epxcofiai  (vOdBe,  they  contrive  to  make  two  blunders,  b  suli.stitutos 
8tf/J;^o/L^at  for  dUpxtof-iai  :  N,  S)8f  for  (vdiidf, — wliicli  latter  eccentricity 
Tischendorf  (characteristically)  (Iocs  not  allude  to  in  his  note  .  :  .  "  1'hese 
he  thy  gods,  0  Israel!  " 


Br.  Ellicott.]  MISTAKEN  OFFICIOUSNESS. — S.  MARK  VI.  11.  409 

New  Testament,  —  expressly  provided  that,  whenever  the 
underlying  Greek  Text  was  altered,  such  alteration  sJioidd  he 
indicated  in  the  margin.  This  provision  you  entirely  set  at 
defiance  from  the  very  first.  You  have  never  indicated  in 
the  margin  the  alterations  you  introduced  into  the  Greek 
Text.  In  fact,  you  made  so  many  changes, — in  other  words, 
you  seem  to  have  so  entirely  lost  sight  of  your  pledge  and 
your  compact, — that  compliance  with  this  condition  would 
have  been  simply  impossible.  I  see  not  how  your  body  is  to 
be  acquitted  of  a  deliberate  breach  of  faith. 

(c)  Fatal  consequences  of  this  mistaken  ojiciousness. 

How  serious,  in  the  meantime,  the  coiiscqucnces  have  been, 
they  only  know  wdio  have  been  at  the  pains  to  examine  your 
work  with  close  attention.  Not  only  have  you,  on  countless 
occasions,  thrust  out  words,  clauses,  entire  sentences  of 
genuine  Scripture, — but  you  have  been  careful  that  no  trace 
shall  survive  of  the  fatal  injury  whicli  you  have  inflicted.  I 
wonder  you  were  not  afraid.  Can  I  be  wrong  in  deeming  such 
a  proceeding  in  a  high  degree  sinful  1  Has  not  the  Spirit 
pronounced  a  tremendous  doom^  against  those  who  do  such 
things  ?  Were  you  not  afraid,  for  instance,  to  leave  out 
(from  S.  Mark  vi.  11)  those  solemn  words  of  our  Saviour, — • 
"  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom 
and  Gomorrha  in  the  day  of  judgment,  than  for  that  city  "  ? 
Surely  you  will  not  pretend  to  tell  me  that  those  fifteen 
precious  words,  witnessed  to  as  they  are  by  all  the  knoivn 
copies  hut  nine, — by  the  Old  Latin,  the  Peschito  and  the 
Philoxenian  Syriac,  the  Coptic,  the  Gothic  and  the  ^Ethiopic 
Versions, — besides  IrenaBus^  and  Victor^  of  Antioch: — you 
will  not  venture  to  say  (will  you  ?)  that  words  so  attested  are 


1  Eev.  xxii.  19. 

2  iv.  28,  c.  1  (p.  655  =  Mass.  265).     Note  that  the  reference  is  not 
to  S.  Matt.  X.  15.  3  p_  ]_23. 


410  MUTILxVTION   OF   S.   MATTHEW   V.   44.        [Reply  to 

SO  evidently  a  "  plain  and  clear  error,"  as  not  to  deserve  even 
a  marginal  note  to  attest  to  posterity  '  that  such  things 
were '  !  I  say  nothing  of  the  witness  of  the  Liturgical  usage 
of  the  Eastern  Church, — which  appointed  these  verses  to  be 
read  on  S.  Mark's  Day :  ^  nor  of  Theophylact,^  nor  of 
Euthyniius.^  I  appeal  to  the  consentient  tcdiinony  of  Catholic 
antiquity.  Find  me  older  witnesses,  if  you  can,  tlian  the 
'  Elders  '  with  whom  Irenseus  held  converse, — men  who  must 
have  been  contemporaries  of  S.  John  the  Divine :  or  again, 
than  the  old  Latin,  the  Peschito,  and  the  Coptic  Versions. 
Then,  for  the  MSS.,— Have  you  studied  S.  Mark's  Text  to  so 
little  purpose  as  not  to  have  discovered  that  the  six  uncials 
on  which  you  rely  are  the  depositories  of  an  abominably 
corrupt  Recension  of  the  second  Gospel  ? 

But  you  committed  a  yet  more  deplorable  error  when, — 
without  leaving  behind  ^ther  note  or  comment  of  any  sort, 
— you  obliterated  from  S.  Matth.  v.  44,  the  solemn  words 
which  I  proceed  to  underline : — "  Bless  them  that  curse  you, 
do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them  which  dcspite- 
fully  use  you  and  persecute  you."  You  relied  almost  exclu- 
sively on  those  two  false  witnesses,  of  which  you  are  so 
superstitiou,sly  fond,  b  and  n*  :  regardless  of  the  testimony  of 
almost  all  the  other  Copies  besides: — of  almost  all  the 
Versions  :  —  and  of  a  host  of  primitive  Fathers  :  for  the 
missing  clauses  are  more  or  less  recognized  by  Justin  Mart. 
(a.d.  140), — by  Theophilus  Ant.  (a.d.  168), — by  Athenagoras 
(a.u.  177), — by  Clemens  Alexan.  (a.d.  192), — by  Origen 
(a.d.  210),— by  the  Apostolic  Constt.  (Ilird  cent.), — l)y 
Eusebius, — by  Gregory  Nyss., — by  Chrysostom, — by  Isidorus, 
■ — by  Nilus, — by  Cyril, — by  Theodoret,  and  certain  others. 
Besides,   of   the   Latins,   by  Tertullian,  —  by  Lucifer,  —  by 


»  Viz.  vi.  7-13.  -  i.  100  aud  200.  ^  In  he. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]      REVISERS'  TREATMENT  OF   SCRIPTURE.      411 

Ambrose,  —  by  Hilary,  —  by  Pacian, — by  Augustine,  —  by 
Cassian,  and  many  more  ....  Verily,  my  lord  Bishop,  your 
notion  of  what  constitutes  "  dearly  jjrc/pondcrating  Evidence  " 
must  be  freely  admitted  to  be  at  once  original  and  peculiar. 
I  will  but  respectfully  declare  that  if  it  be  indeed  one  of  "  the 
now  established  Princiijles  of  Textual  Critieism  "  that  a  bishop 
is  at  liberty  to  blot  out  from  the  Gospel  such  precepts  of 
the  Incarnate  Wokd,  as  these  :  to  reject,  on  the  plea  that  they 
are  '  plain  and  clear  errors,'  sayings  attested  by  twelve  primi- 
tive Fathers, — half  of  whom  lived  and  died  before  our  two 
oldest  manuscripts  (b  and  n)  came  into  being  : — If  all  this  be 
so  indeed,  permit  me  to  declare  that  I  would  not  exchange 
MY  "  innocent  ignorance  "  ^  of  those  '  Principles  '  for  Yovn  guilty 
knowledge  of  them, — no,  not  for  anything  in  the  wide  world 
which  yonder  sun  shines  down  upon. 

As  if  what  goes  before  had  not  Ijeen  injury  enough,  you 
are  found  to  have  adopted  the  extraordinary  practice  of  en- 
cumbering your  margin  with  doubts  as  to  the  Eeadings 
which  after  due  deliberation  you  had,  as  a  body,  retahied. 
Strange  perversity!  You  could  not  find  room  to  retain  a 
record  in  your  margin  of  the  many  genuine  words  of  our 
Divine  Lord, — His  Evangelists  and  Apostles, — to  which 
Copies,  Versions,  Fathers  lend  the  fullest  attestation;  but 
you  coidd  find  room  for  an  insinuation  that  His  'Agony  and 
bloody  sweat,' — together  with  His  '  Prayer  on  behalf  of  His 
murderers,' — may  after  all  prove  to  be  nothing  else  but 
spurious  accretions  to  the  Text.  And  yet,  the  pretence  for 
so  regarding  either  S.  Luke  xxii.  43,  44,  or  xxiii.  34,  is  con- 
fessedly founded  on  a  minimum  of  documentary  evidence  : 
while,  as  has  been  already  shown  elsewhere,^  an  overwhelm- 
ing amount  of  ancient  testimony  renders  it  certain  that  not  a 


'  Sec  above,  pp.  347-9.  ^  See  above,  pp.  79-85. 


412      HEADINGS   AND   MARGINAL   REFERENCES.        [Reply  to 

particle  of  doubt  attaches  to  tlie  Divine  record  of  either  of 
those  stupendous  incidents  ....  Eoom  couhl  not  be  found, 
it  seems,  for  a  liint  in  the  margin  that  such  gliastly  wounds 
as  those  above  specified  had  been  inflicted  on  S.  Mark  vi.  11 
and  S.  Matth.  v.  44 ;  ^  but  hventy-Uvo  lines  could  be  spared 
against  Eom.  ix.  5  for  the  free  ventilation  of  the  vile 
Socinian  gloss  with  which  unbelievers  in  every  age  have 
sought  to  evacuate  one  of  the  grandest  assertions  of  our 
Saviour's  Godhead.  May  I  be  permitted,  without  offence, 
to  avow  myself  utterly  astonished  ? 

Even  this  however  is  not  all.  The  7th  of  the  Ivules  under 
which  you  undertook  the  work  of  Eevision,  was,  that  '  the 
Headings  of  Chcqjters  should  he  revised.'  This  Rule  you  have 
not  only  failed  to  comply  with ;  but  you  have  actually 
deprived  us  of  those  headings  entirely.  You  have  thereby 
done  us  a  grievous  wrong.  We  demand  to  have  the  headings 
of  our  chapters  back. 

You  have  further,  without  warrant  of  any  sort,  deprived 
us  of  our  Marginal  Ecferenccs.  These  we  cannot  afford  to  be 
without.  We  claim  that  they  also  may  be  restored.  The 
very  best  Commentary  on  Holy  Scripture  are  they,  Mitli 
which  I  am  acquainted.  They  call  for  learned  and  judicious 
Eevision,  certainly ;  and  they  might  be  profitably  enlarged. 
But  they  may  never  be  taken  away. 

And  now,  my  lord  Bishoj),  if  I  have  not  succeeded  in 
convincing  you  that  the  Eevisers  not  only  "  exceeded  their  In- 
structions in  the  course  which  they  adopted  with  regard  to 
the  Greek  Text,"  but  even  acted  in  open  defiance  of  their 
Instructions;  did  both  a  vast  deal  more  than  they  were 
authorized  to  do,  and  also  a  vast  deal  less ; — it  has  certainly 
been  no  fault  of  mine.     As  for  your  original  contention^  that 


1  Sec  above,  \>\\  -109-411.  '^  See  above,  p.  \Wd. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  a  SUGGJESTED   ALLOCUTION.  413 

"nothing  can  he  more  unjust"  than  the  charge  brought 
against  the  Eevisers  of  having  exceeded  their  Instructions, 
— I  venture  to  ask,  on  the  contrary,  whether  anything  can 
be  more  unreasonable  (to  give  it  no  harsher  name)  than  the 

DENIAL  ? 

[16]  The   calamity   of  the   'New    Chxek  Text'  traced   to   its 

source. 

There  is  no  difficulty  in  accounting  for  the  most  serious 
of  the  foregoing  phenomena.  They  are  the  inevital)le  con- 
sequence of  your  having  so  far  succumbed  at  the  outset  to 
Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  as  to  permit  them  to  communicate 
bit  by  bit,  under  promise  of  secrecy,  their  own  outrageous 
Eevised  Text  of  the  N.  T.  to  their  colleagues,  accompanied 
by  a  printed  disquisition  in  advocacy  of  their  own  peculiar 
critical  views.  One  would  have  expected  in  the  Chairman 
of  the  Eevising  body,  that  the  instant  he  became  aware  of 
any  such  manceuvre  on  the  part  of  two  of  the  society,  lie 
would  have  remonstrated  with  them  somewhat  as  follows,  or 
at  least  to  this  effect : — 

"  This  cannot  be  permitted,  Gentlemen,  on  any  terms.  We 
have  not  been  appointed  to  revise  the  G^reek  Text  of  the  N.  T. 
Our  one  business  is  to  revise  the  Autlwrized  English  Version, 
— introducing  such  changes  only  as  are  absolutely  necessary. 
The  Eesolutions  of  Convocation  are  express  on  this  head : 
and  it  is  my  duty  to  see  that  they  are  faithfully  carried  out. 
True,  that  we  shall  be  obliged  to  avail  ourselves  of  our  skill 
in  Textual  Criticism — (such  as  it  is) — to  correct  '  'plai7i  and 
clear  errors '  in  the  Greek :  but  there  we  shall  be  obliged  to 
stop.  I  stand  pledged  to  Convocation  on  this  point  by  my 
own  recent  utterances.  That  two  of  our  members  should  be 
solicitous  (by  a  side-wind)  to  obtain  for  their  own  singular 
Eevision  of  the  Greek  Text  the  sanction  of  our  united  body, 


414  A  SUGGESTED  ALLOCUTION.  [Reply  to 

— is  intelligible  enough  :  but  I  should  consider  myself  guilty 
of  a  breach  of  Trust  were  I  to  lend  myself  to  the  promotion 
of  their  object.  Let  me  hope  tliat  I  have  you  all  with  me 
when  I  point  out  that  on  every  occasion  when  Dr.  Scrivener, 
on  the  one  hand,  (who  in  matters  of  Textual  Criticism  is 
facile  princejjs  among  us,)  and  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  on  the 
other,  prove  to  be  irreconcileal)ly  opposed  in  their  views, — 
there  the  Received  Greek  Text  must  by  all  means  be  let 
alone.  We  have  agreed,  you  will  remember,  to  '  make  the 
current  Textus  Piec&ptus  the  standard  ;  departing  from  it  only 
when  critical  or  grammatical  considerations  shotv  that  it  is 
clearly  necessary.'  ^  It  would  be  unreasonable,  in  my  judg- 
ment, that  anything  in  the  Eeceived  Text  should  be  claimed  to 
be  '  a  clear  and  plain  error,'  on  wliich  those  who  represent  the 
two  antagonistic  schools  of  Criticism  find  themselves  utterly 
unable  to  come  to  any  accord.  In  the  meantime,  Drs.  West- 
cott and  Hort  are  earnestly  recommended  to  submit  to  public 
inspection  that  Text  which  they  have  been  for  twenty  years 
elaborating,  and  which  for  some  time  past  has  been  in  print. 
Their  labours  cannot  be  too  freely  ventilated,  too  searchingly 
examined,  too  generally  known :  but  I  strongly  deprecate 
their  furtive  production  heo^e.  All  too  eager  advocacy  of  the 
novel  Theory  of  the  two  accomplished  Professors,  I  shall 
think  it  my  duty  to  discourage,  and  if  need  be  to  repress.  A 
printed  volume,  enforced  by  the  suasive  rhetoric  of  its  two 
producers,  gives  to  one  side  an  unfair  advantage.  But  indeed 
I  must  end  as  I  began,  by  respectfully  inviting  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort  to  remember  that  we  meet  here,  oiot  in  order  to 
fabricate  a  new  Greek  Text,  but  in  order  to  revise  our  '  Author- 
ized English  Version.'  "  .  .  .  .  Such,  in  substance,  is  tlio  kind 
of  Allocution  which  it  was  to  have  been  expected  that  the 
Episcopal  Chairman  of   a  Kevising  body  would  address  to 


'  Bp.  Ellicott  on  Jicvision,  i\  30. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]      bishop  ELLICOTT   A  PARTIZAN.  415 

his  fellow-labourers  the  first  time  he  saw  them  enter  the 
Jerusalem  chamber  furnished  with  the  sheets  of  Westcott 
and  Hort's  N.  T. ;  especially  if  he  was  aware  that  those 
Eevisers  had  been  individually  talked  over  by  the  Editors  of 
the  work  in  question,  (themselves  Eevisionists) ;  and  per- 
ceived that  the  result  of  the  deliberations  of  the  entire  body 
was  in  consequence,  in  a  fair  way  of  becoming  a  foregone 
conclusion,  —  unless  indeed,  by  earnest  remonstrance,  he 
might  be  yet  in  time  to  stave  off  the  threatened  danger. 

But  instead  of  saying  anything  of  this  kind,  my  lord 
Bishop,  it  is  clear  from  your  pamphlet  that  you  made  the 
Theory  of  Drs. Westcott  and  Hort  ijour  own  Theory  ;  and  their 
Text,  by  necessary  consequence,  in  the  main  your  own  Text. 
You  lost  sight  of  all  the  pledges  you  had  given  in  Convoca- 
tion. You  suddenly  became  a  partizan.  Having  secured  the 
precious  advocacy  of  Bp.  Wilberforce, — whose  sentiments  on 
the  subject  you  had  before  adopted, — you  at  once  threw  him 
and  them  overboard.'^  ....  I  can  scarcely  imagine,  in  a  good 
man  like  yourself,  conduct  more  reckless, — more  disappoint- 
ing,— more  unintelligible.     But  I  must  hasten  on. 

[17]  Bp.  Ellicott' s  defence  of  the  'New  Greek  Text,'  in  sixteen 
loarticulars,  examined. 
It  follows  to  consider  the  strangest  feature  of  your 
pamphlet :  viz.  those  two-and-thirty  pages  (p.  43  to  p.  75)  in 
which,  descending  from  generals,  you  venture  to  dispute  in 
sixteen  particulars  the  sentence  passed  upon  your  new  Greek 
Text  by  the  Quarterly  Bcview.  I  call  this  part  of  your 
pamphlet  "  strange,"  because  it  displays  such  singular  in- 
aptitude to  appreciate  the  force  of  Evidence.  But  in  fact, 
(sit  venia  verho)  your  entire  method  is  quite  unworthy  of  you. 
Whereas  /  appeal  throughout  to  Ancient  Testimony,  you  seek 


^  The  Bp.  attended  only  one  meeting  of  the  Revisers.  (Newth,  p.  125.) 


41 G        PROrOSED  METHOD  OF  DEALING  WITH  THE     [Reply  to 

to  put  me  down  by  flauuting  in  my  face  Modern  Opinion. 
This,  with  a  great  deal  of  Eeiteration,  proves  to  be  literally 
the  sum  of  your  contention.  Thus,  concerning  S.  Matth.  i.  25, 
the  Quarterly  Eeviewer  pointed  (jut  {supra  pp.  123-4)  that 
the  testimony  of  b  n,  together  with  that  of  the  Vlth-century 
fragment  z,  and  two  cursive  copies  of  bad  character, — cannot 
possibly  stand  against  the  testimony  of  all  other  copies. 
You  plead  in  reply  that  on  "  those  two  oldest  manuscripts 
the  vast  majority  of  Critics  set  a  high  value."  Very  likely :  but 
for  all  that,  you  are  I  suppose  aware  that  B  and  N  are  two  of 
the  most  corrupt  documents  in  existence  ?  And,  inasmucli 
as  they  are  confessedly  derived  from  one  and  the  same 
depraved  original,  you  will  I  presume  allow  that  they  may 
not  be  adduced  as  two  independent  authorities  ?  At  all  events, 
when  I  further  show  you  that  almost  all  the  Versions,  and 
literally  every  one  of  the  Fathers  who  quote  the  place,  (they 
are  eighteen  in  number,)  are  against  you, — how  can  you  pos- 
sibly think  there  is  any  force  or  relevancy  whatever  in  your 
seK-complacent  announcement, — "We  cannot  hesitate  to 
express  oiir  agreement  with  Tischendorf  and  Tregclles  who  see 
in  these  words  an  interpolation  derived  from  S.  Luke.  The 
same  appears  to  have  been  the  judgment  of  Laehviann."  Do 
you  desire  that  that  should  pass  for  argument  ? 

To  prolong  a  discussion  of  this  nature  with  you,  were 
plainly  futile.  Instead  of  repeating  what  I  have  already 
delivered — briefly  indeed,  yet  sufficiently  in  detail, — I  will 
content  myself  with  humbly  imitating  what,  if  I  remember 
rightly,  was  Nelson's  plan  when  he  fought  the  battle  of  the 
Nile.  He  brought  his  frigates,  one  by  one,  alongside  those 
of  the  enemy  ; — lashed  himself  to  the  foe ; — and  poured  in 
his  broadsides.  We  remember  with  what  result.  The  six- 
teen instances  which  you  have  yourself  selected,  shall  now 
be  indicated.      First,  on  every  occasion,   reference  shall  be 


Bp.  Elltcott.]    16  PJ.ACIIS  DEFENDED  IN  THE  PAMPHLET.  417 

made  to  the  place  in  tlie  present  volume  where  my  own  Cri- 
ticism on  your  Greek  Text  is  to  be  found  in  detail.  Eeaders 
of  your  pamphlet  are  invited  next  to  refer  to  your  own  seve- 
ral attempts  at  refutation,  which  shall  also  be  indicated  by  a 
reference  to  your  pages.  I  am  quite  contented  to  abide  by 
the  verdict  of  any  unprejudiced  person  of  average  under- 
standing and  fair  education  : — 

(1)  Four  words  omitted  in  S.  Matth.  i.  25, — complained  of, 
above,  pp.  122-4. — You  defend  the  omission  in  your  pam- 
phlet at  pages  43-4, — falling  back  on  Tiscliendorf,  Tregelles 
and  Lachmann,  as  explained  on  the  opposite  page.     (p.  416.) 

(2)  The  omission  of  S.  Matth.  xvii.  21, — proved  to  be  in- 
defensible, above,  pp.  91-2.— The  omission  is  defended  by 
you  at  pp.  44-5, —  on  the  ground,  that  although  Lachmann 
retains  the  verse,  and  Tregelles  only  places  it  in  brackets, 
(Tiscliendorf  alone  of  the  three  omitting  it  entirely,) — "  it 
must  be  remembered  that  here  Lachmann  and  Tregelles  were 
not  acquainted  with  n*." 

(3)  Tlw  omission  of  S.  Matth.  xviii.  11, — shown  to  be 
unreasonable,  above,  p.  92. — You  defend  the  omission  in  your 
pp.  45-7, — remarking  that  "  here  there  is  even  less  room  for 
doubt  than  in  the  preceding  cases.  The  three  critical  editors 
are  all  agreed  in  rejecting  this  verse." 

(4)  Tlie  substitution  of  rjiropet  for  eTroiei,  in  S.  Mark  vi.  20, 
— strongly  complained  of,  above,  pp.  66-9. — Your  defence  is 
at  pp.  47-8.  You  urge  that  "  in  this  case  again  the  Revisers 
have  Tiscliendorf  only  on  their  side,  and  not  Lachmann  nor 
Tregelles :  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  these  critics  had 
not  the  reading  of  N*  before  them," 

(5)  The  ihrustinej  of  irc'ikiv  (after  diroareXel)  into  S.  Mark 
xi.  3, — objected  against,  above,  pp.  56-8. — You  defend  your- 

2   E 


4XS  THE   SIXTEEX   riiAOES   DEFENDED  [Uevly  to 

self  at  pp.  48-9, — and  "cannot  doubt  tliat  tlie  licvisers  were 
perfectly  justified  "  in  doing  "  as  Tischcndorf  and  Tregelles 
had  done  before  them," — \\z.  invcntinf/  a  new  Gospel  incident. 

(n)  2'hc  mess  you  lucvc  made  of  S.  ]\Iark  xi.  <S, — exposed  ])y 
the  Quarterly  Ee viewer,  above,  pp.  58-01, — you  defend  at 
pp.  49-52.  You  have  "  preferred  to  read  with  Tischcndorf  and 
Tregelles."     About, 

(7)  S.  Mark  xvi.  9-20,— and  (8)  S.  Luke  ii.  14,-1  shall 
have  a  few  serious  words  to  say  immediately.     About, 

(9)  the  20  certainly  genuine  words  you  have  omitted  from 
S.  Luke  ix.  55,  56, — I  promise  to  give  you  at  no  distant  date 
an  elaborate  lecture.  "Are  we  to  understand"  (you  ask) 
"that  the  Eeviewer  honestly  believes  the  added  words  to 
have  formed  part  of  the  Sacred  Autograph  ?"  ('  The  omitted 
words,'  you  mean.)     To  be  sure  you  are  ! — I  answer. 

(10)  The  amazing  hlunder  endorsed  by  the  Revisers  in 
S.  Luke  X.  15 ;  which  I  have  exposed  above,  at  pp.  54-6. — 
You  defend  the  blunder  (as  usual)  at  pp.  55-6,  remarking 
that  the  Eevisers,  "  with  Lachmann,  Tischcndeyrf,  and.  Tre- 
gelles, adopt  the  interrogative  form."  (This  seems  to  be  a  part 
of  your  style.) 

(11)  Tlie  depraved  exhihUion  of  tlie  L<»iiu-s  Prayer  (S.  Luke 
xi.  2-4)  which  I  liave  commented  on  above,  at  pp.  34-6, — 
you  a])phnid  (as  usual)  at  pp.  56-8  of  yom-  ])amj)hlet,  "witli 
Tischcndorf  and  Tregelles." 

(12)  The  omission  of  7  important  words  in  S.  Luke  xxiii. 
38,  I  have  commented  on,  above,  at  pp.  85-8. — You  defend 
the  omission,  and  "  the  texts  of  Tischcndorf  and  Tregelles," 
at  pp.  58-9. 


Bp.  Ellioott.]         in   Br.    ETJ>TCOTT'8   FAMPTILET.  419 

(13)  The  gross  fnhrication  in  S.  Luke  xxiii,  45,  I  have 
exposed,  above,  at  pp.  Gl-5. — You  defend  it,  at  pp.  59-61. 

(14)  A  jilnin  omission  in  S.  John  xiv.  4,  I  have  pointed 
out,  above,  at  pp.  72-3. — You  defend  it,  at  pp.  61-2  of  your 
pamphlet. 

(15)  '  Titus  Justus,'  thrust  by  the  Revisers  into  Acts  xviii. 
7,  I  have  shown  to  be  an  imaginary  personage,  above,  at 
pp.  53-4. — You  stand  up  for  tlie  interesting  stranger  at  pp. 
62-4  of  your  pamphlet.     Lastly, 

(16)  My  discussion  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16  (.wp-rt  pp.  98-106), — 
you  contend  against  from  p.  64  to  p.  76. — The  true  reading  of 
this  important  place,  (which  is  not  your  reading,)  you  will 
find  fully  discussed  from  p.  424  to  p.  501. 

I  have  already  stated  why  I  dismiss  thirteen  out  of  your 
sixteen  instances  in  this  summary  manner.  The  remaining 
three  I  have  reserved  for  further  discussion  for  a  reason  I 
proceed  to  explain. 

[18]  BiJ.  Ellieott's  claim  that  the  Revisers  were  guided  hg  '  the 
consentient  testimony  of  the  most  ancient  Authorities' — dis- 
proved hy  an  a^jpcal  to  their  handling  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14  and 
of  S.  Mark  xvi.  9-20.  The  selfsame  claim, — {namely,  of 
abiding  hy  the  verdict  of  Catholic  Antiquity,) — imulicated, 
on  the  contrary,  for  the  '  Quarterly  Reviewer.' 

You  labour  hard  throughout  your  pamphlet  to  make  it 
appear  that  the  point  at  which  our  methods,  (yours  and  mine,) 
respectively  diverge, — is,  that  /  insist  on  making  my  appeal 
to  the  '  Textiis  Rceeptus ; '  you,  to  Ancient  Authority.  But 
happily,  my  lord  Bishop,  this  is  a  point  which  admits  of 
being  brought  to  issue  by  an  appeal  to  fact.      You  shall  first 

2  E  2 


420  THE  TEST   OF   CATHOLIC  ANTIQUITY       [Reply  to 

be  heard :  and  you  are  observed  to  express  yourself  on  behalf 
of  the  Eevising  l)ody,  as  follows  : 

"It  was  impossible  to  mistake  the  conviction  npon  which  its 
Textual  decisions  were  b  ised. 

"  It  was  a  conviction  tliat  (1)  The  tuue  Text  was  not  to  be 
SOUGHT  IN  THE  Textus  KECErTus  :  Or  (2)  In  tlio  bulk  of  the 
Cursive  Manuscripts;  or  (3)  In  the  Uncials  (Aviih  or  M-ilhont 
the  suppf)rt  of  the  Codex  Alexandrinns ;)  or  (4)  In  the  Fathers 
who  lived  after  Chrysustom  ;  or  (5)  In  Chr^sostom  himself  and 
his  con  temporal  ies  ;  but  (G)  In  the  consentient  testimony  of 

THE  MOSr  ANCIENT  AUTHORITIES." (p.  28.) 

In  such  terms  you  venture  to  contrast  our  respective 
methods.  You  want  the  public  to  believe  that  /  make  the 
*  Textus  Eeceptus '  "  a  standard  from  which  there  shall  he  no 
cqipcal" — entertain  "  the  notion  that  it  is  little  else  than  sacri- 
lege to  imjmgn  the  traditimi  of  the  last  300  years"  ^ — and  so 
forth  ; — while  you  and  your  colleagues  act  upon  the  convic- 
tion that  the  Truth  is  rather  to  be  sought  "  in  the  consentient 
testimony  of  the  most  ancient  Authorities."  I  proceed  to  show 
you,  by  appealing  to  an  actnal  instance,  that  neither  of  these 
statements  is  correct. 

{a)  And  first,  permit  me  to  spenk  for  myself.  Finding 
that  you  challenge  the  Eeceived  reading  of  S.  Luke  ii.  14, 
('  good  will  towards  men ')  ; — and  that,  (on  the  authority  of  4 
Greek  Codices  [x  A  B  d],  all  Latin  documents,  nnd  the  Gothic 
Version,)  you  contend  that  '  i^eaee  among  men  in  whom  he  is 
well  jileased '  ought  to  be  read,  instead  ; — I  make  my  appeal 
unreservedly  to  Antiquity.'^  I  request  the  Ancients  to  adju- 
dicate between  you  and  me  by  favouring  us  with  their 
verdict.     Accordingly,  I  itnd  as  follows : 

That,  in  the  Ilnd  century,  —  the  Syriac  Versions  and 
Irenaius  support  tlic  Bcccired  Text  : 


^  Page  4.  ^  See  above,  pp.  41  to  47. 


Bi'.  Ellicott.]         applied   TO   S.    LUKl<]   11.    14.  421 

That,  ill  the  Ilird  cotitury,— the  Coptic  Version, —Origcu 
ill  3  places,  and — the  Apostolical  Constitutions  in  2,  do  the 
same : 

That,  in  the  IVth  century,  {to  ivhich  centuri/,  you  are 
invited  to  remember,  codices  b  and  x  belong,) — Eusebius, — 
Aphraates  the  Persian, — Titus  of  Bostra, — each  in  2  places  : — 
Didymus  in  3  : — Gregory  of  Nazianzus, — Cyril  of  Jer., — 
Epiphanius  2 — and  Gregory  of  Nyssa — 4  times  :  Ephraem 
Syr., — Philo  bp.  of  Carpasus, — Chrysostom  9  times,— and  an 
unknown  Antiochian  contemporary  of  his  : — these  eleven,  I 
once  more  find,  are  ever//  one  aijainst  you : 

That,  in  the  Vth  century, — besides  the  Armenian  Version, 
Cyril  of  Alex,  in  14  places : — Theodoret  in  4  : — Theodotus  of 
Ancyra  in  5  : — Proclus  : — Paulus  of  Emesa : — the  Eastern 
bishops  of  Ephesus  collectively,  a.d.  431 ; — and  Basil  of 
Seleucia : — these  contemporaries  of  cod.  A  I  find  are  all  c'ujht 
against  you : 

That,  in  the  Vlth  century, — besides  the  Georgian — and 
zEtliiopic  Versions, — Cosmas,  5  times  :— Anastasius  Sinait. 
and  Eulogius,  {contemijorarics  of  cod.  d,)  are  all  three  with  tlic 
Traditional  Text : 

That,  in  the  Vllth  and  Vlllth  centuries, — Andreas  of 
Crete,  2  : — pope  Martinus  at  the  Lat.  Council :— Cosmas,  bp. 
of  Maiume  near  Gaza,— and  his  pupil  John  Damascene; — 
together  with  Germanus,  abp.  of  Constantinople  : — are  again 
all  five  'With  tlie   Traditional  Text. 

To  these  35,  must  be  added  18  other  ancient  authorities 
with  which  the  reader  has  been  already  made  acquainted 
(viz.  at  })p.  44-5)  :  all  of  which  bear  the  self-same  evidence. 

Thus  I  have  enumerated  fifty-three  ancient  Greek  authori- 
ties,— of  which  sixteen  belong  to  tlie  Ilnd,  Ilird,  and  IVth 
centuries  :  and  thirty-seven  to  the  Vth,  Vlth,  Vllth,  and 
Vlllth. 


422  'I'JIE   TE8T   OF   (JATIIOLIO   ANTIQUnV       [Ueily  to 

And  nuvN.,  wliich  of  us  two  is  found  to  have  made  the 
fairer  and  the  fuller  appeal  to  '  the  consentient  testimony  of 
the  most  ancient  authorities  : '  you  ov  I  ?  .  .  .  This  first. 

And  next,  since  the  foregoing  53  names  belong  to  some 
of  the  most  famous  personages  in  Ecclesiastical  antiquity  : 
are  dotted  over  every  region  of  ancient  Christendom  :  in 
many  instances  are  far  more  ancient  than  codices  b  and  N : — 
with  what  show  of  reason  will  you  pretend  that  the  evidence 
concerning  S.  Luke  ii.  14  "  clearhj  i^rcponder cites  "  in  favour 
of  the  reading  which  you  and  your  friends  prefer  ? 

I  claim  at  all  events  to  have  demonstrated  that  hotlo  your 
statements  are  unfounded  :  viz.  (1)  That  /  seek  for  the  truth 
of  Scripture  in  the  '  Textus  Eeceptus : '  and  (2)  That  you 
seek  it  in  '  the  consentient  testimony  of  the  'most  ancient 
authorities.' — (Why  not  frankly  avow  that  you  believe  the 
Tiutli  of  Scripture  is  to  be  sought  for,  and  found,  in  "  the 
consentient  testhiiony  of  ceuliecs  x  a-nd  b  "  ?) 

{h)  Similarly,  concerning  the  last  12  Verses  of  S.  Mark, 
which  you  brand  with  suspicion  and  separate  off  from 
the  rest  of  the  Gospel,  in  token  that,  in  your  opinion, 
there  is  "  a  breach  of  continuity  "  (p.  53),  (whatever  tJutt  may 
mean,)  between  verses  8  and  9.  Your  ground  for  thus 
disallowing  the  last  12  Verses  of  the  second  Gospel,  is,  that 
B  andN  omit  them: — that  a  few  late  MSS.  exhibit  a  wretched 
alternative  for  them: — and  that  Eusebius  says  they  were 
ol'ten  away.  Now,  my  methotl  on  the  contrary  is  to  refer  all 
sucii  questions  to  "  the  con-seuticnt  tcMluwiiy  of  the  must 
ancient  authorUies."  And  I  invite  you  to  note  the  result  of 
such  an  appeal  in  the  present  instance.  The  Verses  in 
(juestioJi  1  find  are  recognized, 


Bi>.  Ellicott.]    applied   TO   S.   MARK   XVI.   0-20.  423 

In  the  Ilnd  century, — By  the  Old  Latin — and  Syriac 
Verss. :  — by  Papias ; — Justin  M. ; — Irenreus  ; — Tertullian. 

In  the  Ilird  century, — By  the  Coptic — and  the  Sahidic 
Versions  : — by  Hippolytus ; — by  Vincentius  at  the  seventh 
Council  of  Carthage ; — by  the  '  Acta  Pilati ;' — and  by  the 
'  Apostolical  Constitutions '  in  two  places. 

In  the  IVth  century, — By  Cureton's  Syr.  and  the  Gothic 
Verss. : — besides  the  Syriac  Table  of  Canons ; — Eusebius ; — 
Macarius  Magnes  ; — Aphraates  ;  —  Didymus  ;  —  the  Syriac 
'  Acts  of  the  Ap. ;' — Epiphanius ;— Leontius  ; — ps.-Ephraeni ; 
— Ambrose ; — Chrysostom  ; — Jerome ; — Augustine. 

In  the  Vtli  century, — Besides  the  Armenian  Vers., — by 
codices  A  and  c  ; — by  Leo  ; — Nestorius  ; — Cyril  of  Alex- 
andria ; — Victor  of  Antioch ; — Patricius  ; — Marius  Mercator. 

In  the  Vlth  and  Vllth  centuries, — Besides  cod.  d, — the 
Georgian  and  ^Ethiopic  Verss. :- — by  Hesychius  ; — Gregentius  ; 
— Prosper ;  —  Jolm,  abp.  of  Thessalonica ;  —  and  Modestus, 
bishop  of  Jerusalem.  .  .  .  (See  above,  pages  3(3-40.) 

And  now,  once  more,  my  lord  Bishop, — Pray  which  of  us 
is  it, — yoii  or  /, — who  seeks  for  the  truth  of  Scripture  "  in 
the  consentient  testimony  of  tlw  most  ancient  authorities  "  ?  On 
my  side  there  have  been  adduced  in  evidence  six  witnesses  of 
the  Ilnd  century  : — six  of  the  Ilird  : — fifteen  of  the  IVth : 
—nine  of  the  Vth  :— eight  of  the  Vlth  and  Vllth,— (44  in  all)  : 
while  you  are  found  to  rely  on  codices  B  and  s*  (as  before), 
supported  by  a  single  ohiter  dictum  of  Eusebius.  I  have 
said  nothing  as  yet  about  tlu  wlwlc  hody  of  tlie  Co2)ies : 
nothing  about  univcrscd,  inmiemoricd,  Liturgical  itse.  Do  you 
seriously  imagine  that  the  testimony  on  your  side  is  'de- 
cidedly preponderating '  i  Above  all,  will  you  venture 
again  to  exhibit  our  respective  methods  as  in  your  pamphlet 
you  have  done  ?  I  protest  solemnly  that,  in  your  pages,  1 
recognize  neither  myself  nor  you. 


424  TREATMENT  OF  S.  MXUK   XVI,  9-20.       [Reply  to 

Permit  me  to  declare  that  I  hold  your  disallowance  of 
S.  Mark  xvi.  9-20  to  be  the  gravest  and  most  damaging  of 
all  the  many  mistakes  which  you  and  your  friends  have 
committed.  "  The  textual  facts,"  (say  you,  speaking  of  the 
last  12  Verses,) — "  have  been  placed  before  the  reader, 
because  Truth  itself  demanded  it."  This  (with  Canon  Cook^) 
I  entirely  deny.  It  is  because  "  the  textual  facts  have  "  not 
"  been  placed  before  the  reader,"  that  I  am  offended.  As 
usual,  you  present  your  readers  with  a  one-sided  statement, 
— a  partial,  and  therefore  inadmissible,  exhibition  of  the  facts, 
— facts  which,  fully  stated  and  fairly  explained,  would,  (as  you 
cannot  fail  to  be  aware,)  be  fatal  to  your  contention. 

But,  I  forbear  to  state  so  mucli  as  ojie  of  them.  The  evidence 
has  already  filled  a  volume.^  Even  if  I  were  to  allow  that  in 
your  marginal  note,  "  the  textual  facts  have  been  [fully  and 
fairly]  placed  before  the  reader," — what  possible  pretence  do 
you  suppose  they  afford  for  severing  the  last  12  A^erses  from 
the  rest  of  S.  Mark,  in  token  that  they  form  no  part  of 
the  genuine  Gospel  ?  .  .  .  This,  however,  is  only  by  the  way. 
I  have  proved  to  you  that  it  is  I — not  yon — who  rest  my 
case  on  an  appeal  to  Catholic  Antiquity  :  and  this  is  the 
only  thing  I  am  concerned  just  now  to  establish. 

I  proceed  to  contribute  something  to  the  Textual  Criticism 
of  a  famous  place  in  S.  Paul's  first  E]_)istle  to  Timothy,— on 
which  you  have  challenged  me  to  a  trial  of  strength. 

[19]  ^^aDD  loas  manifcstcD  in  tf)c  flcsb*' 

SlKnVN    TO   liK   THE   TKUE   KKADING   OF    1    TLMOTIIY   III.    10. 

A  DISSERTATION. 
In  conclusion,  you  insist   on  ripping  uj)  the  discussion 
concerning  1  Tim.  iii.  10.    I  had  already  devoted  eight  pages 


'  I'ligcs  17,  18.  ^  See  above,  p.  37,  note  ('). 


Bp.  Ellicott.]    dissertation  ON  1  TIMOTHY  III    IG-  425 

to  this  subject.^  You  reply  in  twelve.^  That  I  may  not  be 
thought  wanting  in  courtesy,  the  present  rejoinder  shall 
extend  to  seventy-six.  I  propose,  without  repeating  myself, 
to  follow  you  over  the  ground  you  have  re-opened.  But  it 
will  be  convenient  that  I  should  define  at  the  outset  what  is 
precisely  the  point  in  dispute  between  you  and  me.  I  presume 
it  to  be  undeniably  this: — That  whereas  the  Easterns  from 
time  immemorial,  (and  we  with  them,  since  Tyndale  in  1534 
gave  us  our  English  Version  of  the  IST.  T.,)  have  read  the 
place  thus  : — (I  set  the  words  down  in  plain  English,  because 
the  issue  admits  of  being  every  bit  as  clearly  exhibited  in 
the  vernacular,  as  in  Greek  :  and  because  I  am  determined 
that  all  who  are  at  the  pains  to  read  the  present  Dissertation 
shall  understand  it  also :) — Whereas,  I  say,  we  have  hitherto 
read  the  place  thus, 

"  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness  : — God  was  mani- 
fest IN  the  flesh,  justified  in  the  Spirit,  seen  of  Angels, 

PRExVCHED  UNTO  THE  GeNTILES,  BELIEVED  ON  IN  THE  WORLD, 
RECEIVED  UP  INTO  GLORY  :" 

You  insist  that  this  is  a  ''  idain  and  clear  error."  You 
contend  that  there  is  "  dcckledlij  prepoiuleratiiuj  evidence  "  for 
reading  instead, 

"  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness,  who  was  mani- 
fested IN  THE  FLESH,  JUSTIFIED  IN  THE  SPIRIT,"  &C.  : 

WMch  contention  of  yours  I  hold  to  be  demonstrably  incor- 
rect, and  proceed  to  prove  is  a  complete  misconception. 

{A)  Preliminary  explanations  aiul  cautions. 

But  English  readers  will  require  to  have  it  explained  to 
them  at  the  outset,  that  inasmuch  as  GGOC  (God)  is  invariably 


^  ?u-es  98-106.  ^  Pages  04-76. 


426  DISSERTATION   OX   THE   TRUE  [Reply  to 

written  ^C  in  manuscripts,  the  only  difference  between  the 
word  '  God  '  and  the  word  '  wJio '  (oc)  consists  of  two  hori- 
zontal strokes, — one,  which  distinguishes  e  from  o ;  and 
another  similar  stroke  (above  the  letters  ec)  which  indicates 
that  a  word  has  been  contracted.  And  further,  that  it  Mas 
the  custom  to  trace  these  two  horizontal  lines  so  wondrous 
faintly  tliat  they  sometimes  actually  elude  observation. 
Throughout  cod.  A,  in  fact,  the  letter  e  is  often  scarcely 
distinguishable  from  the  letter  o. 

It  requires  also  to  be  explained  for  the  benefit  of  the  same 
English  reader, — (and  it  will  do  learned  readers  no  harm  to 
be  reminded,) — that  "  mystcnj  "  (fivar/jptov)  being  a  neuter 
noun,  cannot  be  followed  by  the  masculine  pronoun  (09), — 
"  wlio."  Such  an  expression  is  abhorrent  alike  to  Grammar 
and  to  Logic, — is  intolerable,  in  Greek  as  in  English.  By 
consequence,  09  ("  v)]io ")  is  found  to  have  been  early  ex- 
changed for  0  ("  ivhwh").  From  a  copy  so  depraved,  the 
Latin  Version  was  executed  in  the  second  century.  Accord- 
ingly, every  known  copy  or  quotation  ^  of  the  Latin  exhibits 
"  quod."  Greek  authorities  for  this  reading  (0)  are  few 
enough.  They  have  been  specified  already,  viz.  at  page  100. 
And  with  this  brief  statement,  the  reading  in  question  might 
have  been  dismissed,  seeing  that  it  has  found  no  patron  since 
Griesbach  declared  against  it.  It  was  however  very  hotly 
contended  for  during  the  last  century, — Sir  Isaac  Newton 
and  Wetstein  Ijeing  its  most  strenuous  advocates ;  and  it 
would  be  unfair  entirely  to  lose  sight  of  it  now. 

The  two  rival  readings,  however,  in  1  Tim.  iii,  16,  are, — 
Weo<f  6(f>avep(od7)  ('  GoD  7cas  manifested '),  on  the  one  hand ; 
and  TO  r7]<;  euae/Sela^  fj^var/jpiov,  09  ("  tJic  mystcrij  of  (jodlincss, 
v/io"),   (111   llie  (ilher.     These  are  the   two  readings,  I  say, 

'  The  cxccpliuns  arc  uot  wurlli  imliviiii;  /arc. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]     reading   OF   1    TIMOTHY   III.    IG.  427 

between  whose  conflicting  claims  we  are  to  adjudicate.  For 
I  request  that  it  may  be  loyally  admitted  at  the  outset, — • 
(though  it  has  been  conveniently  overlooked  by  the  Critics 
whom  you  follow,) — that  the  expression  09  i<f)at^epQ)6r]  in 
Patristic  quotations,  sinless  it  he  immediately  j^rcccdcd  hy  the 
word  jjbvari'jpiov,  is  nothing  to  the  purpose  ;  at  all  events,  does 
not  prove  the  thing  which  you  are  bent  on  proving.  English 
readers  will  see  this  at  a  glance.  An  Anglican  divine, — 
with  reference  to  1  Timothy  iii.  16, — may  surely  speak  of  our 
Saviour  as  One  "  loho  was  manifested  in  the  flesh," — without 
risk  of  being  straightway  suspected  of  employing  a  copy  of 
the  English  Version  which  exhibits  "  the  mystery  of  godliness 
wlio."  "  Ex  hujusmodi  locis  "  (as  Mattha?i  truly  remarks) 
"  nemo,  nisi  mente  captus,  in  contextu  sacro  probabit  09."  ^ 

When  Epiphanius  therefore, — professing  to  transcribe  ^  from 
an  earlier  treatise  of  his  own^  where  i^avepoiOi]  stands 
loithout  a  nomincttive,*'  writes  (if  he  really  does  write)  09 
€(f)avepco6ri,^ — we  are  not  at  liberty  to  infer  therefrom  that 
Epiphanius  is  opposed  to  the  reading  0eo9.— Still  less  is  it 
lawful  to  draw  the  same  inference  from  the  Latin  Version  of 
a  letter  of  Eutherius  [a.d.  431]  in  which  the  expression  'qui 
manifestatus  est  in  came,'  '^  occurs. — Least  of  all  should  we  be 
warranted  in  citing  Jerome  as  a  witness  for  reading  09  in 


1  N.  T.  ed.  'ida.  1807,  iii.  4i2-3.  ^  ^  337  ^^ 

^  Called  Ancoratus,  written  in  Pampliylia,  a.d.  373.  The  extract  in 
Adv.  Hxr.  extends  from  p.  887  to  p.  89'J  (=  Ancor.  ii.  07-70), 

*  ii.  74:  b.  Note,  that  to  begin  the  quotation  at  the  word  i(f)avfp(i}dr]  was 
a  frequent  practice  with  the  ancients,  especially  when  enough  had  been 
said  already  to  make  it  plain  that  it  was  of  the  Son  they  were  speaking, 
or  when  it  would  have  been  nothing  to  the  purpose  to  begin  with  Qeos. 
Thus  Origen,  iv.  465  0:— Didyraus  on  1  John  aj^ud  Galland.  vi.  301  a: 
— Nestorius,  apud  Cyn\,  vi.  103  e; — ps-Chrysost.  x.  703  c,  704  c: — and 
the  Latin  of  Cyril  v,^  785.     So  indeed  ps-Epiphauius,  ii.  307  c. 

■''  i.  894:  c.  ''  Ajiud  Theodoret,  v.  719. 


428  Br.   ELLICOTT'S   STATEMENT   OF   THE        [Reply  to 

this  place,  because  (in  his  Ci)iiiinentary  on  Isaiah)  he  si)eaks 
of  our  Saviour  as  One  who  '  was  manifested  in  the  flesli, 
justified  in  the  Spirit.'^ 

As  for  reasoning  thus  concerning  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  it  is 
demonstral  )ly  inadmissible :  seeing  that  at  the  least  on  two 
distinct  occasions,  this  Father  exhibits  0eo9  i<pavepa)6i].  1  am 
not  unaware  that  in  a  certain  place,  apostrophizing  tlic 
Doceta3,  he  says, — "  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  Scriptures, 
nor  indeed  the  ffreat  tnystery  of  godliness,  that  is  CliKiST,  who 
(09)  ivas  manifested  in  tlic  flesh,  justified  in  the  Spirit,"  ^ 
&c.  &c.  And  presently,  "  I  consider  the  mystery  of  godliness 
to  be  no  other  thing  but  the  Word  of  God  the  Father,  who 
(09)  Himself  ivas  manifested  in  the  flesh."  ^  But  tliere  is 
nothing  whatever  in  this  to  invalidate  the  testimony  of  those 
other  places  in  which  ©eo?  actually  occurs.  It  is  logically  in- 
admissible, I  mean,  to  set  aside  the  places  where  Cyril  is  found 
actually  to  write  (^eo?  e^avepwCrj,  because  in  otlier  places  he 
employs  1  Tim.  iii.  IG  less  precisely  ;  leaving  it  to  be  inferred 
— (which  indeed  is  abundantly  plain) — that  Beo?  is  always 
his  reading,  from  the  course  of  his  argument  and  from  the 
nature  of  the  matter  in  hand.     But  to  proceed. 

(Z>')  Bp.  Ellieott  invited  to  state  the  evidence  for  reading  6<; 

in  1  Tim.  iii.  16. 
[a]  '  7'he  state  of  t/ie  evidence,'  as  declared  hy  Bjh  Ellieott. 

Wlicn  last  the  evidence  for  this  question  came  before  us,  I 
iutnjduced  it  by  inviting  a  member  of  the  Bevisiug  body 
(Dr.  Roberts)  to  l)e  spokesman  on  behalf  of  his  l)retliren.'* 
This  time,  I  sliall  call  upon  a  more  distinguislied,  a  wliolly 
unexcej)tional)le  witness,  viz.  yourself, — who  are,   of  course, 


*  iv.  G2^  a, — (jiti  uppai'uit  in  carne,  j'usti/icatus  est  in  spirUu. 

^  Da  incarn.  Uniij.  v.  part  i.  G80de  =  7>e  recta  fide,  v.  [uirt  ii.  be, 

'^  Ibid.  (JHl  u  =  ibid.  G  d  e.  *  I'a^c  'J8. 


Bp.  Ellic!Ott.]      evidence  CONCERNING  1  TIM.  III.  10.  429 

greatly  in  advance  of  your  fellow-Kevisers  in  respect  of 
critical  attainments.  The  extent  of  your  individual  fami- 
liarity with  the  subject  when  (in  1870  namely)  you  proposed 
to  revise  the  Greek  Text  of  the  N.  T.  for  the  Church  of 
England  on  the  solvere- ambulando  principle, — may  I  presume 
be  lawfully  inferred  from  tlie  following  annotation  in  your 
"  Critical  and  Ghrirnmatical  Gommciitary  on  the  Pastoral 
Epistles."  I  quote  from  the  last  Edition  of  1869  ;  only 
taking  the  liberty — (1)  To  break  it  up  into  short  paragraphs  : 
and — (2)  To  give  in  cxtcnso  the  proper  names  which  you 
abbreviate.  Thus,  instead  of  "  Theod."  (which  I  take  leave  to 
point  out  to  you  might  mean  either  Theodore  of  Heraclea  or 
his  namesake  of  Mopsuestia, — either  Theodotus  the  Gnostic 
or  his  namesake  of  Ancyra,)  "  Euthal.,"  I  write  "  Theodoret, 
Euthalius."  And  now  for  the  external  testimony,  as  you  give 
it,  concerning  1  Timothy  iii.  16.  You  inform  your  readers 
that,— 

"  The  state  of  the  evidence  is  briefly  as  follows : — 

(1)  "Os  is  read  with  A^  [indisputably ;  after  minute  personal 
inspection;  see  note,  p.  lOi.]  c^  [Tischendorf  Prol.  Cod. 
Ephraemi,  §  7,  p.  39.]  F  Cx  N  (see  below);  17,  73,  181  ;  Syr.- 
riiiloxenian,  Coptic,  Sahidic,  Gothic ;  also  (os  or  o)  Syriac, 
Arabic  (Erpenius),  iEthiopic,  Armenian ;  C3'ril,  Theodorus 
Mopsuest.,  Epiphanius,  Gelasius,  Hieronymus  in  Esaiam  liii.  11. 

(2)  o,  with  D^  (Claromontanus),  Vulgate ;  nearly  all  Latin 
Fathers. 

(3)  0eos,  with  D^  K  L  ;  nearly  all  MSS. ;  Arabic  (Polyglott), 
Slavonic ;  Didymus,  Chr3'sostom  (?  see  Tregelles,  p.  227  note), 
Theodoret,  Euthalius,  Damascene,  Theophylact,  fficumenius, — 
Ignatius  Epkcs.  29,  (but  very  doubtful).  A  hand  of  the  12th 
century  has  prefixed  Be  to  os,  the  reading  of  n  ;  see  Tischendorf 
edit,  major,  Plate  xvii.  of  Scrivener's  Collation  of  n,  fac- 
simile (13). 

On  reviewing  this  evidence,  as  not  only  the  most  important 
uncial  MSS.,  but  all  the  Versions  older  than  the  7th  century 
are  distinctly  in  favour  of  a  relative, — as  6'  seems  only  a  Latin- 


A'AO  THE  BISIIOr's  STATEMENT  OF  THE  EVIDENCE.     [Reply  to 

izing  variufion  of  «?, —  and  lastly,  as  os  ib  the  more  difficult, 
tliongh  really  the  more  intelligible,  reading  (llofmann,  Schrifth. 
Vol.  I.  p.  143),  and  on  every  reason  more  likely  to  have  been 
changed  into  0€os  (Macedonins  is  actually  ^aid  to  have  been 
expelled  for  making  the  change,  Libcrati  Diaconi  Breviarium 
cap.  19)  than  vice  versa,  we  unhesitatingly  decide  in  favour  of  os." 
—{Pastoral  Epistles,  ed.  1869,  pp.  51-2.) 

Such  then  is  your  own  statement  of  tlic  evidence  on  this 
subject.  I  proceed  to  demonstrate  to  you  that  you  are 
completely  mistaken :  —  mistaken  as  to  what  you  say 
about  09,  —  mistaken  as  to  6,  —  mistaken  as  to  Geo? : — 
mistaken  in  respect  of  Codices, — mistaken  in  respect  of 
Versions, — mistaken  in  respect  of  Fathers.  Your  slipshod, 
inaccurate  statements,  (all  obtained  at  second-hand,)  will 
occasion  me,  I  foresee,  a  vast  deal  of  trouble ;  but  I  am 
determined,  now^  at  last,  if  the  thing  be  possible,  to  set  this 
(juestion  at  rest.  And  that  I  may  not  be  misunderstood,  I 
beg  to  repeat  tliat  all  I  propose  to  myself  is  to  2^'>^ove — 
beyond  the  possil)ility  of  denial — that  the  evidence  for  Beo? 
(in  1  Timothy  iii.  IG)  vastly  iwciKindcratcs  over  the  evidence  for 
either  09  or  6.  It  will  be  for  you,  afterwardf,  to  come  forward 
and  prove  that,  on  the  contrary,  Be69  is  a  '  2^1  a  in  and  elear 
error : '  so  plain  and  so  clear  that  you  and  your  fellow- 
Eevisers  felt  yourselves  constrained  to  thrust  it  out  from  the 
place  it  has  confessedly  occupied  in  the  New  Testament  for 
at  least  1530  years. 

You  are  further  reminded,  my  lord  Bishop,  that  unless 
you  do  this,  you  will  be  considered  by  the  whole  Church  to 
have  dealt  unfaithfully  with  the  Word  of  God.  For,  (as  I 
shall  remind  you  in  the  sequel,)  it  is  yourself  who  have 
invited  and  provoked  this  enquiry.  You  devote  twelve  pages 
to  it  (pp.  G4  to  76), — "  compelled  to  do  so  by  the  Eeviewer." 
"  Moreover "  (you  announce)  "  this  case  is  of  great  impor- 
tance as  an  example.     It  illustrates  in  a  striking  manner  tlie 


Bp.  Eltjoott]  testimony   OF   CiODEX   A.  431 

complete  isolation  of  tlio  Eeviewcr's  position.  If  he  is  right 
all  other  Critics  arc  wrong,"  &c.,  &c.,  &c. — Permit  me  to 
remind  you  of  the  warning — "  Let  not  him  that  girdeth  on 
his  harness  boast  himself  as  he  that  putteth  it  off." 

[  b  ]   Testimony  of  the  Manuscripts  concerning  1  Tim.  iii.  16  : 
and  first  as  to  the  testimony  of  Codex  a. 

You  begin  then  with  the  Manuscript  evidence  ;  and  you 
venture  to  assert  that  OC  is  "  indisputably "  the  reading  of 
Codex  A.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  a  "  professed 
Critic," — (who  must  be  presumed  to  be  acquainted  with  the 
facts  of  the  case,  and  who  is  a  lover  of  Truth,) — can  permit 
himself  to  make  such  an  assertion.  Your  certainty  is  based, 
you  say,  on  "  minute  personal  inspection."  In  other  words, 
you  are  so  good  as  to  explain  that  you  once  tried  a  coarse 
experiment,^  by  which  you  succeeded  in  convincing  yourself 
that  the  suspected  diameter  of  the  o  is  exactly  coincident  with 
the  sagitta  of  an  cpsilon  (e)  which  happens  to  stand  on  the 
hack  of  the  page.  But  do  you  not  see  that  unless  you  start 
with  this  for  your  major  premiss, — '  Thcta  cannot  exist  on 
one  side  of  a  page  if  cpsilon  stands  immediately  behind  it  on 
the  other  side,' — your  experiment  is  nihil  ad  rem,  and  proves 
absolutely  nothing  ? 

Your  "  inspection  "  happens  however  to  be  inaccurate  be- 
sides. You  performed  your  experiment  unskilfully.  A  man 
need  only  hold  up  the  leaf  to  the  light  on  a  very  brilliant 
day, — as  Tregelles,  Scrivener,  and  many  besides  (including 
your  present  correspondent)  have  done, — to  be  aware  that 
the  sagitta  of  the  cpsilon  on  fol.  145&  does  not  cover  much 
more  than  a  third  of  the  area  of  the  theta  on  fol.  145«. 
Dr.  Scrivener  further  points  out  that  it  cuts  the  circle  too 


^  Note  a,t  the  end  of  Bishop  Ellicott's  Commentary  on  1  Timothy. 


432  TROOF  THAT   GGOC   IS   THE   READING  [Reply  to 

high  to  liavG  been  reasoiialjly  mistaken  by  a  careful  o])server 
for  the  diameter  of  the  thda  (e).  The  experiment  wliich  you 
describe  with  such  circumstantial  gravity  was  simply 
nugatory  therefore. 

How  is  it,  my  lord  Bishop,  that  you  do  not  perceive  that 
the  way  to  ascertain  the  reading  of  Codex  A  at  1  Tim.  iii.  If), 
is, — (1)  To  investigate  not  what  is  found  at  the  hack  of  the  leaf, 
but  what  is  written  on  the  front  of  it  ?  and  (2),  Not  so  much 
to  enquire  what  can  be  deciphered  of  the  original  writing  by 
the  aid  of  a  powerful  lens  now,  as  to  ascertain  what  was 
apparent  to  the  eye  of  competent  observers  when  the  Codex 
was  first  brought  into  this  country,  viz.  250  years  ago  ?  That 
Patrick  Young,  the  first  custodian  and  collator  of  the  Codex 
[1628-1652],  read  ©C,  is  certain. — Young  communicated  the 
'  various  Headings  '  of  a  to  Abp.  Ussher : — and  the  latter, 
prior  to  1653,  communicated  them  to  Hammond,  who  clearly 
knew  nothing  of  OC. — It  is  plain  that  ec  was  the  reading 
seen  by  Huish — when  he  sent  his  collation  of  the  Codex 
(made,  according  to  Bentley,  with  great  exactness,^)  to  Brian 
Walton,  wdio  published  the  fifth  volume  of  his  Polyglott  in 
1657. — Bp.  Pearson,  who  was  very  curious  in  such  matters, 
says  "  we  find  not  09  in  any  copj" — a  sufficient  proof  how  he 
read  the  place  in  1659. — Bp.  Fell,  who  publislied  an  edition 
of  the  N.  T.  in  1675,  certainly  considered  Ge  the  reading  of 
Cod.  a. — Mill,  who  was  at  work  on  the  Text  of  the  IST.  T. 
from  1677  to  1707,  expressly  declares  that  ho  saw  the 
remains   of  0C  in  this   place.'^     Bentley,  who  had  himself 


'  Berrinian's  MS.  Note  in  the  British  Museum  cojiy  of  his  Disftrrfaiion, 
— p.  154.     Another  annotated  copy  is  in  the  Bodleian. 

^  "Certe  quidem  in  cxcmplari  Alexandrine  nostro,  linca  ilia  transversa 
quam  loquor,  adeo  exilis  ac  plane  evanida  est,  ut  primo  intuitu  hand 
dubitarim  ipse  scrijitum  oC>  quod  proinde  in  variantes  lectioncs  con- 
jeceram  ....  Verum  posleapcM-lustrato  attentius  loco,  liucohv,  qua>  priniam 
acicni  fugcrat,  ductus  qucrsdani  ac  vestigia  satis  certa  dcprehondi,  pra^scrtiin 
ad  partem  siuistram,  qua^  periphcriam  litera^  pertingit,"  &c. — In  loco. 


Br.  Ellicott.]    OF   TPIE   CODEX   ALEXANDRINUS,   A.  433 

(171G)  collated  the  MS.  with  tlie  utmost  accuracy  ("  accura- 
tissime  ipse  contuli  "),  knew  nothing  of  any  other  reading. — 
Emphatic  testimony  on  the  subject  is  borne  by  Wotton  in 
1718  :— "  There  can  be  no  doubt  "  (he  says)  "that  this  MS. 
always   exhibited  ©C.     Of  this,  ant/  one  may  easily  convince 
himself  inJio  vjill  be  at  the  pains  to  examine  the  place  ivith  atten- 
tion."'^— Two  years  earlier,— (we  have  it  on  the  testimony  of  Mr. 
John  Creyk,  of  S.  John's  Coll.,  Cambridge,) — "  the  old  line  in 
the  letter  e  was  plainly  to  be  seen."^ — It  was  "  much  about 
the   same    time,"    also,    (viz.    about    1716)    that    Wetstein 
acknowledged  to  the  Eev.  John  Kippax, — "  who  took  it  down 
in  writing  from  his  own  mouth, —  that  though  the  middle 
stroke  of  tlic  e  has  been  evidently  retouched,  yet  the  fine 
stroke  which  was  originally  in  the  body  of  tlie  e  is  discover- 
able at  each  end  of  the  fuller  stroke  of  the  corrector."^ — -And 
Berriman  himself,  (who  delivered  a  course  of  Lectures  on  the 
true  reading  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16,  in  1737-8,)  attests  emphatically 
that  he  had  seen  it  also.      "  If  therefore  "  (he  adds)  "  at  any 
time  hereafter  the  old  line  should  become  altogether  imdiseover- 
able,  tliere  will  never  be  just  caitse  to  doubt  but  that  the  yenuine, 
andj  original  reading  of  the  MS.  was  ©C  :  and  that  the  new 
strokes,  added  at  the  top  and  in  the  middle  liy  the  corrector 
were  not  designed  to  corrupt  and  falsify,  but  to  preserve  and 
perpetuate  the  true  reading,  which  was  in  danger  of  being 
lost   by   the   decay   of  Time."  * — Those    memorable   words 
(which  I  respectfully  commend  to  your  notice)  were  written 
in  A.D.  1741.     How  you  (a.d.  1882),  after  surveying  all  this 


^  Clem.  Rom.  ed.  Wotton,  p.  27.  ^  Berriman,  pp.  l.'>4-5. 

^  Ihid.     (MS.  Note.)    Berriman  adds  other  important  testimony,  p.  156. 

*  Dissertation,  p.  156.  Berriman  refers  to  the  fact  that  some  one  in 
recent  times,  with  a  view  apparently  to  establish  the  actual  reading  of  the 
place,  has  clumsily  thickened  the  superior  stroke  with  common  black  ink, 
and  introduced  a  rude  dot  into  the  uuddle  of  the  0.  There  has  been  no 
attempt  at  fraud.     Such  a  line  and  such  a  dot  could  deceive  no  one. 

2   F 


434  IT    18   'J'OO   LATE,    BY    150    YEARS,   TO       [Reply  to 

accumulated  and  consistent  testimony  (borne  A.D.  1G28  to  a.d. 
1741)  by  eye-witnesses  as  competent  to  observe  a  fact  of  this 
kind  as  yourself ;  and  fully  as  deserving  of  credit,  when  they 
solemnly  declare  what  they  have  seen  : — how  you,  I  say,  after 
a  survey  of  this  evidence,  can  gravely  sit  down  and  inform 
the  world  that  "  there  is  no  siifflcient  evidence  that  there  ivas 
ever  a  tiine  ivhcn  this  reading  was  patent  as  the  reading  ivhieh 
came  from  the  original  seribe  "  (p.  72)  : — this  passes  my  com- 
prehension.— It  shall  only  be  added  that  Bengel,  who  was  a 
very  careful  enquirer,  had  already  cited  the  Codex  Alex- 
andrinus  as  a  witness  for  ©eo?  in  1734  ■} — and  that  Woide,  the 
learned  and  conscientious  editor  of  the  Codex,  declares  that 
so  late  as  1765  he  had  seen  traces  of  the  Q  which  twenty 
years  later  (viz.  in  1785)  were  visible  to  him  no  longer.^ 

That  Wetstein  subsequently  changed  his  mind,  I  am  not 
unaware.  He  w^as  one  of  those  miserable  men  whose  visual 
organs  return  a  false  report  to  their  possessor  whenever  they 
are  shown  a  text  which  witnesses  inconveniently  to  the  God- 
head  of  Jesus  Cueist.^  I  know  too  that  Griesbach  in  1785 
announced  himself  of  Wetstein's  opinion.     It  is  suggestive 


1  "Quanquam  lineola,  quze  Geo?  compendiose  scriptuiii  ab  vs  ilis- 
tiiisuitur,  sublesta  videtur  nonnuUis." — N.  T.  p.  710. 

2  Griesbach  in  1785  makes  the  same  report: — "Manibus  bominuni 
iueiite  curiosorum  ea  folii  pars  qua3  dictum  controvcrsvmi  continct,  adco 
detrita  est,  ut  nemo  mortalium  liodie  ccrti  quidcpiam  disccrncre  jxissit  .  .  . 
Non  oculos  tantum  sed  digitos  etiam  adhibuissc  videntur,  ut  primitivam 
illius  loci  lectionem  eruerent  et  velut  exsculperent."  {Syrnb.  Crit.  i.  p.  x.) 
'I'lic  MS.  was  evidently  in  precisely  the  same  state  when  the  llcv.  J.  C. 
Velthusen  (Observations  on  Various  Subjects,  pp.  74-87)  inspected   it  in 

1773. 

3  As  C.  F.  Mattlu-ei  [N.  T.  m.  xi.  I'rxfat.  pp.  lii.-iii.]  remarks: — "cum 
de  Divinitate  Ciiristi  agitur,  ibi  frofecto  sui  dissimiUor  dcprehenditur" 
Woide  instances  it  as  an  example  of  the  force  of  prejudice,  that  Wetstein 
"aiiparitionem  lineola.1  alii  caus;w  adscripsisse,  quia  earn  abcsse  vulcbat." 
\_l'rxfat.  p.  xxxi.] 


Bp.  Ellicott.]      dispute   THE   TESTIMONY   OF   COD.    A.         435 

however  that  ten  years  before,  (N.T.  ed.  1775,)  he  had  rested 
the  fact  not  on  the  testimony  borne  by  the  MS.  itself,  but  on 
'  the  consent  of  Versions,  Copies,  and  Fathers  which  exhibit  the 
Alexandrian  Eecension.'  ^ — Since  Griesbach's  time,  Davidson, 
Tregelles,  Tischendorf,  Westcott  and  Hort,  and  Ellicott  have 
announced  their  opinion  that  ©C  was  never  written  at  1  Tim. 
iii.  16 :  confessedly  only  because  ec  is  to  them  invisible  one 
hundred  years  after  GC  has  disappeared  from  sight.  The  fact 
remains  for  all  that,  that  the  original  reading  of  a  is  attested 
so  amply,  that  no  sincere  lover  of  Tiuth  can  ever  hereafter 
pretend  to  doubt  it.  "  Omnia  testimonia,"  (my  lord  Bishop,) 
"  omnemque  historicam  veritatem  in  suspicionem  adducere 
non  licet ;  nee  mirum  est  nos  ea  nunc  non  discernere,  qute, 
antequam  nos  Codicem  vidissemus,  evanuerant."^ 

The  sum  of  the  matter,  (as  I  pointed  out  to  you  on  a 
former  occasion,^)  is  this,— That  it  is  too  late  by  150  years  to 
contend  on  the  negative  side  of  this  question.  Nay,  a  famous 
living  Critic  (long  may  he  live  !)  assures  us  that  when  his 
eyes  were  20  years  younger  (Feb.  7,  1861)  he  actually  dis- 
cerned, still  lingering,  a  faint  trace  of  the  diameter  of  the  e 
which  Berriman  in  1741  had  seen  so  plainly.  "  I  have 
examined  Codex  a  at  least  twenty  times  within  as  many 
years"  (wrote  Prebendary  Scrivener  in  1874*),  "and  .... 
seeing  (as  every  one  must)  witli  my  own  eyes,  I  have  always 
felt  convinced  that  it  reads  ©c  "  .  .  .  .  For  you  to  assert,  in 
reply  to  all  this  mass  of  positive  evidence,  that  the  reading  is 
"  indisputably  "  OC, — and  to  contend  that  what  makes  this 
indisputable,  is  the  fact  that  behind  part  of  the  thcta  (e),  [but 
too  high  to  mislead  a  skilful  oliserver,]  an  epsilon  stands  on 
the  reverse  side  of  the  page ;  —  strikes  me  as  bordering 
inconveniently  on  the  ridiculous.     If  this  be  your  notion  of 


1  '  Patet,  ut  alia  raittamus,  e  consensu  Versionum,'  &c.  — ii.  149. 
^  Woide,  ihid.  ^  Sujn'a,  p.  100.  ^  Introduction,  p.  553. 

2  F  2 


4:30  COD.   A   HEADS  (00.   i,.)   GGOC.  [Reply  to 

what  Joes  constitute  "  sufficient  evidence,"  well  may  the 
testimony  of  so  many  testes  oculati  seem  to  you  to  lack  suffi- 
ciency. Your  notions  on  these  subjects  are,  I  should  think, 
peculiar  to  yourself.  You  even  fail  to  see  that  your  state- 
ment (in  Scrivener's  words)  is  "  not  relevant  to  the  i^int  at 
issuer  ^  The  plain  fact  concerning  cod.  A  is  this : — That  at 
1  Tim.  iii.  16,  two  delicate  horizontal  strokes  in  GC  which 
were  thoroughly  patent  in  1028,  —  whicli  could  be  seen 
plainly  down  to  1737, — and  which  were  discernible  by  an 
expert  (Dr.  Woide)  so  late  as  a.d.  1705,^  —  have  for  the 
last  hundred  years  entirely  disappeared ;  which  is  precisely 
what  Berriman  (in  1741)  predicted  would  be  the  case.  More- 
over, he  solemnly  warned  men  against  drawing  from  this 
circumstance  the  mistaken  inference  which  yo^i,  my  lord 
Bishop,  nevertheless  insist  on  drawing,  and  representing  as 
an  "  indisputal)le  "  fact. 

I  have  treated  so  largely  of  the  reading  of  the  Codex 
Alexandrinus,  not  because  I  consider  the  testimony  of  a 
solitary  copy,  whether  uncial  or  cursive,  a  matter  of  much 
importance, — certainly  not  the  testimony  of  Codex  A,  wliich 
(in  defiance  of  every  otlier  authority  extant)  exldbits  "  the 
hod//  of  God  "  in  S.  John  xix.  40 : — but  because  yow  insist 
that  A  is  a  witness  on  your  side :  whereas  it  is  demonstrable. 


'  Itdrod.  1).  553. 

*  Any  one  desirous  of  uudcrstandiuf^  this  ([ucstiuii  fully,  should 
(besides  Berrimau's  admirable  Dissertation)  read  Woide's  Pnvfatio  to 
his  edition  of  Codex  A,  pp.  xxx.  to  xxxii.  (§  87).—"  Eruut  fortasse 
(luiilani"  (he  writes  in  conclusion)  "([ui  susjiicabuntur,  iioiinuHos  lianc 
liueolam  (.Uauietraleni  in  medio  0  vidisse,  (^uoniam  earn  viilcre  volebant. 
Nee  negari  potest  praisuniptarum  opinioimm  esse  vim  permagnam.  Sed 
idem  etiam  Wetstenio,  nee  imraerito,  objici  ix)test,  cam  apparitionem 
lineolai  alii  causa)  adscripsisse,  quia  earn  abesse  volebat.  Et  eruditissinns 
placere  aliquando,  quas  vitiosa  sunt,  scio :  sed  omnia  te.stimonia,  om- 
nenique  historicam  veritatem  in  suspicionem  adducere  non  licet:  nee 
mirum  est  nos  ea  nunc  non  di.scernero,  qua',  antociuam  nos  Codicem 
vidissemus,  evanuerant." 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  the   case   OF   CODEX   C.  437 

(and  I  claim  to  have  demonstrated,)  tliat  you  cannot  honestly 
do  so ;  and  (I  trust)  you  will  never  do  so  any  more. 

[c]  Testimony  of  Codices  x  and  c  concerning  1  Tim.  iii.  16, 
That  X  reads  OC  is  admitted.— Not  so  Codex  c,  which  the 
excessive  application  of  chemicals  has  rendered  no  longer 
decipherable  in  this  place.  Tischendorf  (of  course)  insists, 
that  the  original  reading  was  oc.^  Wetstein  and  Griesbach 
(just  as  we  should  expect,)  avow  the  same  opinion, — Woide, 
Mill,  Weber  and  Parquoi  being  just  as  confident  that  the 
original  reading  was  GC.  As  in  the  case  of  cod.  A,  it  is  too 
late  by  full  100  years  to  re-open  this  question.  Observable 
it  is  that  the  witnesses  yield  contradictory  evidence.  Wet- 
stein, writing  150  years  ago,  before  the  original  writing  had 
become  so  greatly  defaced, — (and  Wetstein,  inasmuch  as  he 
collated  the  MS.  for  Bentley  [1716],  must  have  been 
thoroughly  familiar  with  its  contents,) — only  '  thought '  that 
he  read  oc ;  '  because  the  delicate  horizontal  stroke  which 
makes  e  out  of  O,'  was  to  him  '  not  apparent.''^  Woide  on  the 
contrary  was  convinced  that  GC  had  been  written  by  the  first 
hand :  '  for '  (said  he)  '  though  there  exists  no  vestige  of  the 
delicate  stroke  which  out  of  o  makes  e,  the  stroke  written  above 
the  letters  is  by  the  first  hand.'  What  however  to  Wetstein 
and  to  Woide  was  not  apparent,  was  visible  enough  to 
Weber,  Wetstein's  contemporary.  And  Tischendorf,  so  late 
as  1843,  expressed  his  astonishment  that  the  stroke  in 
question  had  hitherto  escaped  the  eyes  of  every  one ;  having 
been  repeatedly  seen  by  himself.^     He  attributes  it,  (just  as  we 


^  Prolegomena  to  his  ed.  of  Cod.  c, — pp.  39-42. 

^  "  Os  habet  codex  c,  ut  puto ;  nam  lineola  ilia  tenuis,  qua3  ex  O  facit 
0,  non  apparet."  {In  loc.)  And  so  Griesbach,  Symb.  Grit.  i.  p.  viii. 
(1785). 

^  "  Quotiescunque  locum  inspiciebam  (inspexi  autem  per  hoc  bienuium 
sajpissime)  mihi  prorsus  apparebat."  "  Quam  [lineolam]  miror  hucusquo 
omnium  oculos  fugisse."     \_Prol<gfj.  p.  41].  ,  .  .  Equidem  miror  sane. 


438  THE  READING  OF   CODEX  C,  [Reply  to 

should  expect)  to  a  corrector  of  the  MS. ;  partly,  because  of 
its  colour,  ('  snhnigra ')  ;  partly,  because  of  its  inclining  up- 
wards to  the  right.  And  yet,  who  sees  not  that  an  argument 
derived  from  the  colour  of  a  line  which  is  already  well-nigh 
invisible,  must  needs  be  in  a  high  degree  precarious  ?  while 
Scrivener  aptly  points  out  that  the  cross  line  in  ©, — the 
ninth  letter  further  on,  (wliich  has  never  been  questioned,) — 
also  'ascends  towards  the  right.'  The  hostile  evidence 
collapses  therefore.  In  the  meantime,  what  at  least  is 
certain  is,  that  the  subscribed  musical  notation  indicates  that 
a  thousand  years  ago,  a  ivord  of  two  syllables  was  read  here. 
From  a  review  of  all  of  which,  it  is  clear  that  the  utmost 
which  can  be  pretended  is  that  some  degree  of  uncertainty 
attaches  to  the  testimony  of  cod.  c.  Yet,  v:hy  such  a  plea 
should  be  either  set  up  or  allowed,  I  really  see  not — except 
indeed  by  men  who  have  made  up  their  minds  beforehand 
that  OC  shall  he  the  reading  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  Let  the  sign  of 
uncertainty  however  follow  the  notation  of  c  for  this 
text,  if  you  wall.  That  cod.  c  is  an  indubitalile  witness  for  oc, 
I  venture  at  least  to  think  that  no  fair  person  will  ever 
any  more  pretend. 

[d]  Testimo7iy  of  Codices  f  and  g  of  S.  Paul,  concerning 
1  Tim.  iii.  16. 

The  next  dispute  is  about  the  reading  of  the  two  IXth- 
century  codices,  f  and  G, — concerning  which  I  propose  to 
trouble  you  with  a  few  words  in  addition  to  what  has  been 
already  offered  on  this  subject  at  pp.  100-1 :  tlie  ratlier, 
because  you  have  yourself  devoted  one  entire  page  of  your 
pamphlet  to  the  testimony  yielded  by  these  two  codices  ;  and 
because  you  therein  have  recourse  to  wliat  (if  it  proceeded 
from  any  one  but  a  Bishop,)  I  sliould  designate  tlie  insolent 
method  oi'  trying  to  put  me  down  by  authority, — instead  of 
seeking  to  convince  me  of  my  error  by  producing  some  good 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  and   op  CODD.   F   AND  G.  439 

reasons  for  your  opinion.  You  seem  to  think  it  enough  to 
hurl  Wetstein,  Griesbach,  Lachmann,  Tregelles,  Tischendorf, 
and  (cruellest  of  all)  my  friend  Scrivener,  at  my  head.  Permit 
me  to  point  out  that  this,  as  an  argument,  is  the  feeblest  to 
which  a  Critic  can  have  recourse.  He  shouts  so  lustily  for 
help  only  because  he  is  unable  to  take  care  of  himself. 

F  and  G  then  are  confessedly  independent  copies  of  one 
and  the  same  archetype :  and  "  both  f  and  g  "  (you  say) 
"  exhibit  OC."  ^  Be  it  so.  The  question  arises, — What  does 
the  stroke  above  the  OC  signify  ?  I  venture  to  believe  that 
these  two  codices  represent  a  copy  which  originally  exhibited 
©c,  but  from  which  the  diameter  of  the  e  had  disappeared — 
(as  very  often  is  the  case  in  codex  a) — through  tract  of  time. 
The  effect  of  this  would  be  that  f  and  g  are  in  reality 
witnesses  for  ©eo?.  Not  so,  you  say.  That  slanting  stroke 
represents  the  aspirate,  and  proves  that  these  two  codices  are 
witnesses  for  6'?.^  Let  us  look  a  little  more  closely  into  this 
matter. 

Here  are  two  documents,  of  which  it  has  been  said  that 
they  "were  separately  derived  from  some  early  codex,  in 
which  there  was  probably  no  interval  between  the  words."  ^ 
They  were  not  immediately  derived  from  such  a  codex,  I 
remark :  it  being  quite  incredible  that  two  independent 
copyists  could  have  hit  on  the  same  extravagantly  absurd 
way  of  dividing  the  uncial  letters.*      The  common  archetype 


1  Page  75. 

2  Pages  64,  G9,  71,  75. — Some  have  pointed  out  that  opposite  OC  in  f 
— above  oc  in  G, — is  written  *  quod.'  Yes,  but  not  '  quV  The  Latin 
version,  is  independent  of  the  Greek.  In  S.  Mark  xi.  8,  above  ATPCjJN  is 
written ' arJon&Ms  ;'  and  in  1  Tim.  iv.  10,  ATCjONIZOMEGA  is  translated 
by  F  *  maledicimur,^ — by  g,  '  exprobramur  vel  maledicimur.'' 

3  Introduction  to  Cod.  Augiensis,  p.  xxviij. 

■»  E.g.  Out  of  OMENTOICTGPGOC  [13  Tim.  ii.  19],  they  both  make 
O  •  ixev  ■  TO  •  i(T  ■  Tfpaiof.     For  vyiaivw(7iv  [Tit.  i.  13],  both  write  vyn  • 


440  MEANING   OF   OC,   WHICH  IS  [Reply  to 

which  botli  employed  must  have  been  the  work  of  a  late 
Western  scribe  every  bit  as  licentious  and  as  unacquainted 
with  Greek  as  themselves.^  That  archetype  liowever  may 
very  w^ell  have  been  obtained  from  a  primitive  codex  of  the 
kind  first  supposed,  in  which  the  words  were  written  con- 
tinuously, as  in  codex  b.  Such  Manuscripts  were  furnislied 
M'ith  neither  breathings  nor  accents :  accordingly,  "  of  the 
ordinary  breathings  or  accents  there  are  no  traces  "'^  in  either 
F  or  G. 

But  then,  cod.  F  occasionally, —  g  much  oftener, — exhibits 
a  little  straight  stroke,  nearly  horizontal,  over  the  initial 
vowel  of  certain  words.  Some  have  supposed  that  this  was 
designed  to  represent  the  aspirate  :  but  it  is  not  so.  The 
proof  is,  that  it  is  found  condstcntly  introduced  over  the  same 
vowels  in  the  interlinear  Latin.  Thus,  the  Latin  preposition 
*a'  ahvayfi  has  the  slanting  stroke  above  it:^  and  the  Latin 
interjection  *  o '  is  furnished  with  the  same  appendage, — 
alike  in  tlie  Gospels  and  in  the  Epistles.*     This  observation 


f  j/corrtii/ : — f(ir  Kiiun)  ktlctis  [2  Cor.  v.  17]  botli  i^ive  kiu  •  i/tjKTiais: — lur 
avfyKKr]Toi  opTfs  [1  Tim.  in.  10],  both  exliibit  ai/ev  •  KKrjroiov  •  fxnvTes 
(' nullum  crimen  habcntes'): — for  ws  yayypaiva  vnfxj]v  f'^ei  [2  Tim.  ii. 
17],  both  exhibit  cos  •  yavypa  '  iva  '  (f o)  voiirjve^ei  ((i,  who  writes  above 
tlie  words  '  sicut  cancer  ut  serjiat'). 

^  He  must  be  held  responsible  for  hYFIOKPICI  in  jilnce  of  vTroKpicrfi 
[1  Tim.  iv.  2]:  ACTIZOMGNOC  instead  of  XoyiCofievos  [2  Cor.  v.  10]: 
nPlXOTHTI  instead  of  njxioTrjTi  [2  Tim.  ii.  25].  And  he  was  the  autlior 
(if  r6PMAN6  in  Phih  iv.  3  :   as  well  as  of  O  (if  -nvevfia  in  1  Tim.  iv.  1. 

But  the  scribes  of  F  and  g  also  were  ciuriously  innocent  of  Greek. 
V.  suggests  that  ywai^eiv  (in  1  Tim.  ii.  10)  may  be  '  infinitivus  ' — (of  course 
from  yvvaiKui). 

2  Introduction,  p.  lo5. 

3  Thirteen  times  between  Rom.  i.  7  and  xiii.  1. 

*  E.g.  Gal.  iii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  55 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  11  (its  and  o).  Those  who 
have  MattliEci's  reprint  of  g  at  hand  are  invited  to  refer  to  the  last  line  of 
lol.  01  .    (i  Tim.  vi.  20)  where  'Q    Ti/xu^te    is  exhibited    thus; — O  qj 

TiMoeee. 


Br.  Ellicott.]    THE   READING   OF   CODD.   F   AND   G.  441 

evacuates  the  supposed  significance  of  the  few  instances 
where  a  is  written  a  :^  as  well  as  of  the  much  fewer  places 
where  6  or  o  are  written  O  ■}  especially  when  account  is  taken 
of  the  many  hundred  occasions,  (often  in  rapid  succession,) 
when  nothing  at  all  is  to  be  seen  above  the  '  o.'^  As  for  the 
fact  that  iva  is  always  written  fNA  (or  IN  a),— let  it  only  be 
noted  that  besides  iSco/xev,  l^^v^,  la-'^vpo'i,  &c.,  laK(o^o<i, 
laavvr}^,  louSa?,  &c.,  (which  are  all  distinguished  in  the 
same  way,) — Latin  words  also  beginning  ivitli  an  '  I '  are 
similarly  adorned, — and  we  become  convinced  that  the  little 
stroke  in  question  is  to  be  explained  on  some  entirely 
different  principle.  At  last,  we  discover  (from  the  example 
of  '  si,'  '  sic,'  '  etsi,'  '  servitus,'  '  saeculis,'  '  idolis,'  &c.)  that  the 
supposed  sign  of  the  rough  breathing  is  nothing  else  but 
an  ancient  substitute  for  the  moderri  dot  over  the  'I.' — We  may 
now  return  to  the  case  actually  before  us. 

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  line  above  the  oc  in  both 
F  and  G  "is  not  horizontal,  but  rises  a  little  towards  the 
right."  I  beg  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  are  38 
instances  of  the  slight  super-imposed '  line  '  here  spoken  of,  in 
the  page  of  cod.  F  where  the  reading  under  discussion 
appears :  7  in  the  Greek,  31  in  the  Latin.  In  the  corre- 
sponding page  of  cod.  g,  the  instances  are  44 :  8  in  the 
Greek,  36  in  the    Latin.*     These   sliort  horizontal  strokes 


1  Col.  ii.  22,  23  :  iii.  2. 

2  As  1  Tim.  iii.  1 :  iv.  14 :  vi.  15.  Consider  the  i^ractice  of  i;-  in 
1  Thess.  i.  9  (6.  nOIAN) :  in  2  Cor.  viii.  11,  14  (O.  nCOC). 

^  Earest  of  all  are  instances  of  this  mark  over  the  Latin  '  e  ' :  but  we 
meet  with  'sjye'  (Col,  i.  23):  *se'  (ii.  18):  rejjentes  (2  Tim.  iii.  6),  &c. 
So,  in  the  Greek,  17  or  §  written  pj"  are  most  miusual. — A  few  instances 
are  found  of  '  u '  with  this  api^endage,  as  '  dormls '  (1  Tim.  v.  13) :  '  spiritu  ' 
(1  Cor.  iv.  21),  &c. 

••  This  information  is  obtained  from  a  photograph  of  the  page  pro- 
cured from  Dresden  through  the  kindness  of  the  librarian,  Counsellor 
Dr.  Forstemann. 


442  OC.   THE   KKADING    OF   F   AND   G,  [Keply  to 

(they  can  hardly  be  called  lines)  generally  —  not  by  any 
means  always — slant  upwards ;  and  they  arc  invariably  the 
sign  of  conti'action. 

The  problem  before  us  has  in  this  way  been  divested  of  a 
needless  encumbrance.  The  svispicion  that  the  horizontal 
line  above  the  word  oc  may  possibly  represent  the  aspirate, 
has  been  disposed  of.  It  has  been  demonstrated  that 
throughout  these  two  codices  a  horizontal  line  slanting  up- 
wards, set  over  a  vowel,  is  either — (1)  The  sign  of  contrac- 
tion ;  or  else — (2)  A  clerical  peculiarity.  In  the  place 
before  us,  then,  ivhich  of  the  two  is  it  ? 

The  dgn  of  contraction,  I  answer  :  seeing  that  whereas 
there  are,  in  the  page  before  us,  9  aspirated,  and  (including 
oc)  8  contracted  Greek  words,  not  one  of  those  7ii)ic  aspirated 
words  has  any  mark  at  all  above  its  initial  letter ;  while 
every  one  of  the  eight  contracted  words  is  duly  furnished 
with  the  symbol  of  contraction.  I  further  submit  that  inas- 
much as  09  is  nowhere  else  written  OC  in  either  codex,  it  is  un- 
reasonable to  assume  that  it  is  so  written  in  this  place.  Now, 
that  almost  every  codex  in  the  world  reads  ec  in  1  Tim.  iii. 
IG, — is  a  plain  fact ;  and  that  OC  (in  verse  10)  would  he  C«)eo9 
if  the  delicate  horizontal  stroke  which  distinguishes  e  from 
O,  were  not  away, — no  one  denies.  Surely,  therefore,  the 
only  thing  which  remains  to  be  enquired  after,  is, — Are  there 
any  other  such  substitutions  of  one  letter  for  another  dis- 
coverable in  these  two  codices  ?  And  it  is  notorious  that 
instances  of  the  phenomenon  abound.  The  letters  c.  e,  O,  e 
arc  confused  througliout.^  And  what  else  are  neNOOYNTec 
for  irevOovvre'i  (Matth.  v.  4), — eKPlZCjOOHTl  for  €Kpi^(od')]Ti 
(Luc.    xvii.    10), — KATABHOl    for    KaTa/3i]0t  (xix.    0), — but 


^  Sec  Eettig's  Prohgg.  pp.  xxiv.-T. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]        PKOBABLY   REPRESENTS   GO.  443 

instances  of  the  selfsame  7iiistake  which  (as  I  contend)  has 
in  this  place  turned  GO  into  oc  ? 

My  lord  Bishop,  I  have  submitted  to  all  this  painful 
drudgery,  not,  you  may  be  sure,  without  a  sufficient  reason. 
Never  any  more  must  we  hear  of  '  breathings  '  in  connexio7i  with 
codices  F  and  G.  The  stroke  above  the  OC  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16 
has  been  proved  to  be  prohaUy  the  sign  of  contraction.  I 
forbear,  of  course,  to  insist  that  the  two  codices  are  witnesses 
on  my  side.  I  require  that  you,  in  the  same  spirit  of  fairness, 
will  abstain  from  claiming  them  as  certainly  witnessing  on 
yours.  The  Vth-century  codex  c,  and  the  IXth-century 
codex  F-G  must  be  regarded  as  equivocal  in  the  testimony 
they  render,  and  are  therefore  not  to  be  reckoned  to  either 
of  the  contending  parties. 

These  are  many  words  about  the  two  singularly  corrupt 
IXth-century  documents,  concerning  which  so  much  has 
been  written  already.  But  I  sincerely  desire, — (and  so  I 
trust  do  you,  as  a  Christian  Bishop,) — to  see  the  end  of  a 
controversy  wMch  those  only  have  any  right  to  re-oj)en  {jpacc 
tud  dixerim)  who  have  somctliing  new  to  offer  on  the  subject : 
and  certain  it  is  that  the  bearing  of  F  and  G  on  this  matter 
has  never  before  been  fully  stated.  I  dismiss  those  two 
codices  with  the  trite  remark  that  they  are,  at  all  events,  but 
one  codex  :  and  that  against  them  are  to  be  set  K  L  P, — the 
only  uncials  ivhich  remain ;  for  D  (of  '  Paul ')  exhibits  o,  and 
the  Vatican  codex  b  no  longer  serves  us. 

[e]  Testimony  of  the  cursive  copies  :    and  siieeially  of 
'  Paul  17/  '  73 '  and  '  181,'  conceriiing  1  Tim.  iii.  16. 

Next,  for  the  cursive  Copies.  You  claim  without  enquiry, 
— and  only  because  you  find  that  men  have  claimed  them  before 
you, — Nos.  17,  73,  181,  as  witnesses  for  09.  Will  you  permit 
me  to  point  out  that  no  progress  will  ever  be  made  in  these 


444  THE   CASE   OF   THE   THREE   CURSIVE        [Rei'LY  tu 

studies  so  long  as  "  professed  Critics  "  will  persevere  in  the 
evil  practice  of  transcribing  one  another's  references,  and  thus 
appropriating  one  another's  blunders  ? 

About  the  reading  of  '  Paul  17,'  (the  notorious  '  33  '  of  the 
Gospels,)  there  is  indeed  no  doubt. — Mindful  however  of 
President  Eouth's  advice  to  me  always  '  to  verify  my  refer- 
ences,'— concerning  '  Paul  73  '  I  wrote  a  letter  of  enquiry  to 
Upsala  (July  28,  1879),  and  for  all  answer  (Sept.  6th) 
received  a  beautiful  tracing  of  what  my  correspondent  called 
the  '  1  Thim.  iii.  16  parcq^hc'  It  proved  to  be  an  abridged 
exhibition  of  21  lines  of  (Ecumenius.  I  instantly  wrote  to 
enquire  whether  tliis  was  really  all  that  the  codex  in  question 
has  to  say  to  1  Tim.  iii.  16  ?  but  to  this  I  received  no  reply. 
I  presumed  therefore  that  I  had  got  to  the  bottom  of  the 
business.  But  in  July  1882,  I  addressed  a  fresh  enquiry  to 
Dr.  Belsheim  of  Christiania,  and  got  his  answer  last  Octol  ler. 
By  that  time  he  had  visited  Upsala :  had  verified  for  me 
readings  in  other  MSS.,  and  reported  that  the  reading  here  is 
09.  I  instantly  wrote  to  enquire  whether  he  had  seen  the 
word  ^\'ith  his  own  eyes  ?  He  replied  that  he  desired  to 
look  further  into  tlds  matter  on  some  future  occasion, — the 
MS.  in  question  being  (he  says)  a  difficult  one  to  handle. 
I  am  still  awaiting  his  final  report,  which  he  promises  to 
send  me  when  next  he  visits  U])sala.  (' Aurivillius'  says 
nothing  about  it.)  Let  '  Paul  73  '  in  the  meantime  stand 
with  a  note  of  interrogation,  or  how  you  will. 

About  '  Paul  181,'  (which  Scholz  describes  as  "vi.  36"  in 
the  Laurentian  library  at  Florence,)!  take  leave  to  repeat  (in 
a  foot-note)  what  (in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Scrivener)  I  explained 
in  the  '  Guardian  '  ten  years  ago.^      In  consequence  however 

*  "You  will  iieiccive  that  I  have  now  succeeded  in  identifying  every 
Evangclium  hitherto  t;pokcu  of  as  exiating  in  Florence,  with  the  cxccj[ition 


Bp.  Ellicott.J      copies,— '  PAUL    17,'   '73,'   '181.'  445 

of  your  discourteous  remarks  (which  you  will  be  gratified  to 
find  quoted  at  foot,^)  I  have  written  (not  for  the  first  time)  to 
the  learned  custos  of  the  Laurentian  liljrary  on  the  suljjcct ; 
stating  the  entire  case  and  reminding  him  of  my  pertinacity 
in  1871.  He  replies, — "  Scholz  fallitur  huic  bibliotheca? 
tribuendo  codicem  sign.  '  pint.  vi.  n.  36.'  Nee  est  in  pra^senti, 
nee  fuit  antea,  neque  exstat  in  alia  bibliotheca  apud  nos." 
.  .  .  On  a  review  of  what  goes  before,  I  submit  that  one 
who  has  taken  so  much  pains  with  the  subject  does  not 
deserve  to  be  flouted  as  I  find  myself  flouted  by  the  Bp.  of 
Gloucester  and  Bristol, — who  has  not  been  at  the  pains  to 
verify  one  single  point  in  this  entire  controversy  for  himself. 

Every  other  known  copy  of  S.  Paul's  Einstlcs,  (written  in 
the  cursive  character,)  I  have  ascertained  (by  laborious 
correspondence  with  the  chiefs  of  foreign  libraries)  concurs  in 
exhibiting  ^€o<i  i^avepcoOr]  ev  aapKL.     The  importance  of  this 


of  Evan  365  [Act.  145,  Paul  181]  (Laurent  vi.  30),  e^'c,  which  is  said  to 
'contain  also  the  Psalms.'  I  assure  you  no  such  Cudex  exists  in  the 
Laurentian  Library ;  no,  nor  ever  did  exist  there.  Dr.  Anziani  devoted 
full  an  hour  to  the  enquiry,  allowing  me  [for  I  was  very  incredulous]  to 
see  the  process  whereby  he  convinced  himself  that  Scholz  is  in  error.  It 
was  just  such  an  intelligent  and  exhaustive  process  as  Coxe  of  the 
Bodleian,  or  dear  old  Dr.  Bandinel  before  him,  would  have  gone  through 
under  similar  circumstances.  Pray  strike  that  Codex  off  your  list ;  and 
with  it  '  Acts  145 '  and  '  Paul  181.'  I  need  hardly  say  that  Bandini's 
Catalogue  knows  nothing  of  it.  It  annoys  me  to  be  obliged  to  add  that 
I  cannot  even  find  out  the  history  of  Scholz's  mistake." — Guardian, 
August  27,  1873. 

'  "  Whose  word  on  such  matters  is  entitled  to  most  credit, — the  word 
of  the  Reviewer,  or  the  word  of  the  most  famous  manuscript  collators 
of  this  century  ?  .  .  .  Those  who  have  had  occasion  to  seek  in  public 
libraries  for  manuscripts  which  are  not  famous  for  antiquity  or  beauty  or 
completeness  (si'c),  know  that  the  answer  '  «o?i  e&t  inventus''  is  no  con- 
clusive reason  for  believing  that  the  object  of  their  quest  has  not  been 
seen  and  collated  in  former  years  by  those  who  profess  to  have  actually 
seen  and  collated  it.  That  181  '  is  non-existent '  must  be  considered 
unproven." — Bp.  Ellicott's  PamjihUt,  p.  72. 


446  TWO   COPIES  OF   TIIK   'APOSTOLUS'    IX      [llErLY  to 

testimony  ought  to  be  supremely  evident  to  yourself  who 
contend  so  strenuously  for  the  support  of  r.ml  73  and  181. 
But  because,  'in  my  judgment,  tliis  practical  unanimity  of 
the  manuscripts  is  not  only  '  important '  but  conclusive,  I 
shall  presently  recur  to  it  (viz.  at  pages  494-5,)  more  in  detail. 
For  do  but  consider  that  these  copies  were  one  and  all  de- 
rived from  yet  older  MSS.  than  themselves ;  and  that  the 
remote  originals  of  those  older  MSS.  were  perforce  of  higher 
antiquity  still,  and  were  executed  in  every  part  of  primitive 
Christendom.  How  is  it  credible  that  they  should,  one  and 
all,  conspire  to  mislead  ?  I  cannot  in  fact  express  better 
than  Dr.  Berriman  did  140  years  ago,  the  logical  result  of 
such  a  concord  of  the  copies  : — "  From  whence  can  it  be 
supposed  tliat  this  general,  I  may  say  this  universal  consent 
of  the  Greek  MSS.  should  arise,  but  from  hence, — That 
@e6?  is  the  genuine  original  reading  of  tliis  Text  ?  "    (p.  325.) 

In  tlie  meantime,  you  owe  me  a  debt  of  gratitude :  for,  in 
the  course  of  an  enquiry  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  make 
exhaustive,  I  have  discovered  three  specimens  of  the  book 
called  "  Apostolus,"  or  "  Praxapostohts "  (i.e.  Lections  from 
the  Epistles  and  Acts)  which  also  exhibit  09  in  this  place. 
One  of  these  is  Eeg.  375  (our  '  Apost.  12 ')  in  the  French 
collection,  a  Western  codex,  dated  a.d.  1022.^  The  story  of 
the  discovery  of  the  other  two  (to  be  numbered  '  Braxapost.' 
85,  86,)  is  interesting,  and  will  enliven  this  dull  page. 

At  Tusculum,   near   Eome, — (the   locality    wliich   Cicero 


^  The  learned  AbLc  Martin,  who  has  obligingly  inspected  for  nic  tlie 
18  copies  of  the  '  Praxapostolus '  in  the  Paris  library,  reports  as  follows 
concerning  '  Apost.  12'(=  Eeg.  375), — 'A  very  foul  MS.  of  small  value, 
1  believe:  but  a  curious  siiecimen  of  bad  Occidental  scholarsliip.  It  was 
copied  for  the  monks  of  S.  Denys,  and  exhibits  many  Latin  words ;  having 
been  apparently  revised  on  the  Latin.  Tiie  lection  is  assigned  to 
2(j^^nr6)  X'  (not  X6')  in  this  codex.' 


Bi'.  Ellicott.]   the    library    OF    CRYBTA    FERRATA.  447 

rendered  illustrious,  and  where  he  loved  to  reside  surrounded 
by  his  books,) — was  founded  early  in  the  Xlth  century  a 
Christian  library  wdiich  in  process  of  time  became  exceed- 
ingly famous.  It  retains,  in  fact,  its  ancient  reputation  to  this 
day.  Nilus  '  Kossanensis '  it  was,  wdio,  driven  with  his  monks 
from  Calabria  by  invading  hordes,  established  in  a.d.  1004  a 
monastery  at  Tusculum,  to  which  either  he,  or  his  successors, 
gave  the  name  of  'Crypta  Ferrata.'  It  became  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Basilian  monks  in  the  XVIIth  century. 
Hither  habitually  resorted  those  illustrious  men,  Sirletus, 
Mabillon,  Zacagni,  Ciampini,  Montfaucon, — and  more  lately 
Mai  and  Dom  Pitra.  To  Signor  Cozza-Luzi,  the  present  learned 
and  enlightened  chief  of  the  Vatican  library,  (who  is  himself 
'  Abbas  Monachorum  Basiliensium  Cryptn3  Ferratte,')  I  am 
indebted  for  my  copy  of  the  Catalogue  (now  in  process  of 
publication  ^)  of  the  extraordinary  collection  of  MSS.  be- 
longing to  the  society  over  which  he  presides. 

In  consequence  of  the  information  which  the  Abbate  Cozza- 
Luzi  sent  me,  I  put  myself  in  communication  with  the 
learned  librarian  of  the  monastery,  the  '  Hieromonachus ' 
D.  Antonio  Rocchi,  (author  of  the  Catalogue  in  question,) 
whom  I  cannot  sufficiently  thank  for  his  courtesy  and  kind- 
ness. The  sum  of  the  matter  is  briefly  this : — There  are 
still  preserved  in  the  library  of  the  Basilian  monks  of  Crypta 
Ferrata, — (notwithstanding  that  many  of  its  ancient  treasures 
have  found  their  way  into  other  repositories,^) — 4  manu- 
scripts of  S.  Paul's  Epistles,  which  I  number  290,  -1,  -2,  -3  : 
and  7  copies  of  the  book  called  '  Praxapostolus,'   which  I 


'  '  Codices  Crypttnses  seu  Abbatix  Cryptx  Ferratai  in  Ttisculario, 
digesti  et  illustrati  cura  et  studio  D.  Antonii  Rocchi,  Hieromonachi 
Basiliani  BibliotliecEe  custodis,' — Tusculani,  fol.  1882. — I  have  received 
,424  pages  (1  May,  1883). 

^  Not  a  few  of  the  Basiliau  Codices  have  been  transferred  to  the  Vatican . 


448  TESTIMONY   OF   THE   LATIN,  [Reply  to 

miml)cr  83,  -4,  -5,  -6,  -7,  -8,  -9.  Of  tlicsc  eleven,  3  are  de- 
fective hereal^outs :  5  read  Beo9 :  2  (Traxapost.)  exhil)it  o? ; 
and  1  (Apost.  83)  contains  an  only  not  iini(iue  reading,  to  be 
mentioned  at  p.  478.  Hieromonaclius  llocchi  furnishes  me 
with  references  besides  to  3  Liturgical  Codices  out  of  a 
total  of  22,  C'ATroo-roXoevaj'yiXia),  which  also  exhibit  ©eo9.^ 
I  number  them  Apost.  106,  108,  110. 

And  now,  we  may  proceed  to  consider  the  Versions. 

[f]  Testimony  of  the  Versions  to  the  reading  of  1  Tim.  iii.  IG. 

"  Turning  to  the  ancient  Versions  "  (you  assert)  "  we  find 
them  almost  unanimous  against  ©eo? "  (p.  G5).  But  your 
business,  my  lord  Bishop,  was  to  show  that  some  of  them 
witness  in  favour  of  6'?.  If  you  cannot  show  that  several 
ancient  Versions, — besides  a  fair  proportion  of  ancient  Fatliers, 
— are  clearly  on  your  side,  your  contention  is  unreasonable 
as  well  as  hopeless.     What  then  do  the  Versions  say  ? 

[a)  Now,  it  is  allowed  on  all  hands  that  the  Latin  Version 
was  made  from  copies  which  nmst  have  exliibited  fjivo-rr^piov 
o  i^avepcodT].  The  agreement  of  the  Latin  copies  is 
aljsolute.  The  Latin  Fathers  also  conspire  in  reading 
'  iiiijdcriuiii  quod:'  though  some  of  them  seem  to  have 
regarded  '  quod '  as  a  conjunction.  Occasionally,  (as  by  the 
Translator  of  Origen,^)  we  even  find  '  quia '  substituted  for 
'  ([uod.'  Estius  conjectures  that  'quod'  is  a  conjunction  in 
this  place.  But  in  fact  the  reasoning  of  the  Latin  Fathers  is 
observed  invariably  to  proceed  as  if  they  liad  found  nothing 
else  Imt  "  Deus  "  in  the  text  before  them.  They  bravely 
assume  that  the  Paternal  Word,  the  second  Person  in  tlu; 


^  In  an  Aiticndix  to  the  present  volume,  I  will  give  fuller  infonua- 
tion.  I  am  still  (3r(l  May,  1883)  awaiting  replies  to  my  troublesome 
interrogatories  addressed  to  the  heads  of  not  a  few  continental  libraries. 

2  Rufmus,  namely  (,//.  a.d.  .'395^     0pp.  iv.  105. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]      and  of  THE   PESCHITO   SYRIAC.  449 

Trinity,  is  designated  by  the  expression   '  magnum  pidatis 
sacramcnhim.' 

[h)  It  is,  I  admit,  a  striking  circumstance  that  such  a 
mistake  as  this  in  the  old  Latin  should  have  been  retained  in 
tlie  Vulgate.  But  if  you  ever  study  tliis  suliject  with  attention, 
you  will  find  that  Jerome, — although  no  doubt  he  "  pro- 
fessedly corrected  the  old  Latin  Version  by  the  help  of 
ancient  Greek  manuscripts,"  (p.  69,) — on  many  occasions 
retains  readings  which  it  is  nevertheless  demonstrable  that 
he  individually  disapproved.  No  certain  inference  therefore 
as  to  what  Jerome  found  in  ancient  Greek  MSS.  can  be 
safely  drawn  from  the  text  of  the  Vulgate. 

(c)  Next,  for  the  Syriac  (Peschito)  Version.  I  beg  to 
subjoin  the  view  of  the  late  loved  and  lamented  P.  E.  Pusey, 
— the  editor  of  Cyril,  and  who  at  the  time  of  his  death  was 
engaged  in  re-editing  the  Peschito.  He  says, — "  In  1  Tim. 
iii.  16,  the  Syriac  has  '  qui  manifcstatits  est.'  The  relative  is 
indeterminate,  but  the  verb  is  not.  In  Syriac  however 
fMV(TT7]p(,ov  is  masculine ;  and  thus,  the  natural  way  would  be 
to  take  ixvcTTripLov  as  the  antecedent,  and  translate  '  quod 
manifestatum  est.'  No  one  loould  have  thought  of  any  other 
way  of  translating  the  Syriae — but  for  the  existence  of  the 
various  reading  o?  in  the  Greek,  and  the  possiUlity  of  its 
affecting  the  translation  into  Syriac.  But  the  Peschito  is  so 
really  a  translation  into  good  Syriac,  (not  into  word-for-word 
Syriac,)  that  if  the  translator  had  wanted  to  express  the 
Greek  09,  in  so  difficult  a  passage,  he  would  have  turned  it 
differently y  ^  —  The  I'eschito  therefore  yields  the  same 
testimony  as  the  Latin  ;  and  may  not  be  declared  (as  you 
declare  it)  to  be  indeterminate.  Still  less  may  it  be 
represented  as  witnessing  to  09. 


1  MS.  letter  to  myself,  August  11,  1879. 

2   G 


450  THE   PUILOXENIAN   OK   IIAKKLEIAN,       [Reply  to 

(d)  It  follows  to  cn(|iiiro  concerning  the  rendering  of 
1  Tim.  iii.  16  in  the  riiiLOXENiAN,  or  rather  the  Hahkleian 
Version  (Vllth  cent.),  concerning  which  I  have  had  recourse 
to  the  learned  Editor  of  that  Version.  He  writes  : — "  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  authors  of  this  Version  had  either 
0e6<?  or  ©eoO  before  them  :  while  their  marginal  note  shows 
that  they  were  aware  of  the  reading  09.  They  exhibit, — 
'  Gi'eat  is  the  mystery  of  the  (joodness  of  the  fear  (feminine) 
of  God,  tvho-was-ma7iifcstcd  (masculine)  in  the  flesh.'  The 
marginal  addition  [OOl  before  ^.iZlj]  makes  the  reference 
to  God  all  the  plainer."  ^     See  more  below,  at  p.  489. 

Now  this  introduction  of  the  word  ©eo?  into  the  text, 
however  inartistic  it  may  seem  to  you  and  to  me,  is  a  fatal 
circumstance  to  those  who  would  contend  on  your  side.  It 
shows  translators  divided  between  two  rival  and  conflicting 
readings :  but  determined  to  give  prominence  to  the  circum- 
stance which  constituted  the  greatness  of  the  mystery  :  viz. 
God  incarnate.  "  May  I  suggest "  (adds  the  witty  scliolar 
in  his  Post-script)  "  that  there  would  be  no  mystery  in  '  a 
man  being  manifested  in  the  flesh  '  ? " 

The  facts  concerning  the  Harkleian  Version  being  such, 
you  will  not  be  surprised  to  hear  me  say  that  I  am  at  a  loss 
to  understand  how,  without  a  syllable  expressive  of  doubt, 
you  should  claim  this  version  (the '  I'hiloxenian  '  you  call  it — 
but  it  is  rather  the  Harkleian),  as  a  witness  on  your  side, — 
a  witness  for  6<i.'^  It  not  only  witnesses  against  you,  (for 
the  Latin  and  the  Teschito  do  thai,)  ])nt,  as  1  have  shown 
you,  it  is  a  witness  on  my  side. 

(c)  and  (/).  Next,  for  the  Versions  of  Lower  and  Upper 

Egypt.  .___^ ^_ 

'  MS.  letter  from  the  Kev.  Henry  Deane,  of  S.  Johu's  College,  Uxfonl. 

«  St'c  iibnvc,  i«;j;c  129. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]      and  the  TWO  EGYPTIAN   VERSIONS.         451 

"We  are  content"  (you  say)  to  "refer  our  readers  to 
Tischendorf  and  Tregelles,  who  unhesitatingly  claim  the 
Meniphitic  [or  Coptic]  and  the  Thebaic  [or  Sahidic]  for  09."^ 
But  surely,  in  a  matter  of  this  kind,  my  lord  Bishop — (I 
mean,  when  we  are  discussing  some  nicety  of  a  language  of 
which  personally  we  know  absolutely  nothing,) — we  may 
never  "  be  content  to  refer  our  readers  "  to  individuals  who 
are  every  bit  as  ignorant  of  the  matter  as  ourselves.  Piather 
should  we  be  at  the  pains  to  obtain  for  those  whom  we  pro- 
pose to  instruct  the  deliberate  verdict  of  those  who  have 
made  the  subject  their  special  study.  Dr.  Malan  (who  must 
be  heartily  sick  of  me  by  this  time),  in  reply  to  my  repeated 
enquiries,  assures  me  that  in  Coptic  and  in  Sahidic  alike, 
"  the  relative  pronoun  always  takes  the  gender  of  the  Greek 
antecedent.  But,  inasmuch  as  there  is  properly  speakinn- 
no  neuter  in  either  language,  the  masculine  does  duty/07' 
the  neuter;  the  gender  of  the  definite  article  and  relative 
pronoun  being  determined  by  the  gender  of  the  word 
referred  to.  Thus,  in  S.  John  xv.  26,  the  Coptic  ' jjV  and 
' plie'  respectively  represent  the  definite  article  and  the 
relative,  alike  in  the  expression  0  UapaKXijro^i  6v,  and  in  the 
expression  to  Ylvevfxa  0 :  and  so  throughout.  In  1  Tim.  iii. 
16,  theve^OTe/ pi  oriusterion  2)he,'  must  perforce  be  rendered,  to 
/j,var7]piov  6  : — not,  surely,  6  fjbV(TT7]pcov  0?.  And  yet,  if  the  re- 
lative may  be  masculine,  why  not  the  article  also  ?  But  in  fact, 
we  have  no  more  right  to  render  the  Coptic  (or  the  Sahidic) 
relative  by  09  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16,  than  in  any  other  similar  pas- 
sage where  a  neuter  noun  (e.g.  Trvevfia  or  aMfia)  has  gone 
before.  In  this  imrticular  case,  of  course  a  pretence  may  be 
set  up  that  the  gender  of  the  relative  shall  be  regarded  as 
an  open  question :  but  in  strictness  of  grammar,  it  is  far 
otherwise.  No  Coptic  or  Sahidic  scholar,  in  fact,  liavino- 
to    translate    the    Coptic    or    Sahidic    back    into     Greek, 

1  Page  71,     And  so  p.  65  and  69. 

2   G   2 


452  THE   GOTHIC,   THE   ^THIOPIC,   THE  [Iii;i-LY  to 

would  ever  dream  of  writing  anything  else  but  to  /juva-Trj- 

piou  o."  ^ And  now  I  trust  I  have  made  it  plain  to  you 

that  f/o}',  arc  midakcn  in  your  statement  (p.  GO), — that  ""0<? 
is  supported  hy  the  two  Egijidian  Vei'sions."  It  is  supported 
by  neither.  You  have  been  shown  that  they  both  witness 
against  you.  You  will  therefore  not  be  astonished  to  hear 
me  again  declare  that  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  you 
can  cite  the  '  Philoxenian,  Coptic  awl  Sahidic,'^ — as  witnesses 
on  your  side.  It  is  not  in  this  way,  my  lord  Bishop,  that 
God's  Truth  is  to  be  established. 

(g)  As  for  the  Gothic  Version, — dissatisfied  with  the  ver- 
dict of  De  Gabelentz  and  Loebe,^  I  addressed  myself  to 
Dr.  Ceriani  of  Milan,  the  learned  and  most  helpful  chief  of 
the  Ambrosian  Library  :  in  wliich  by  the  way  is  preserved  the 
only  known  copy  of  Ulphilas  for  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  He  inclines 
to  the  opinion  that  '  saei '  is  to  1  )e  read, — the  rather,  because 
Andreas  Uppstrom,  the  recent  editor  of  the  codex,  a  diligent 
and  able  scholar,  has  decided  in  favour  of  that  *  obscure' 
reading.*      The    Gothic   therefore    must    be    considered   to 


*  MS.  letter  to  myself.  *  See  above,  page  429. 

'  Utfilas.  Veteris  et  Novi  Test.  Versionis  Goth,  fragmenta  qux  super- 
sunt,  &c.     4to.     18-43. 

*  "Si  tamen  Upi).strom  'obscurum^  dixit,  non  ^  iiirertum,''  fides  illi 
ndliiberi  potest,  quia  diligentissime  apices  omnes  invcstigabat ;  me  en i in 
pra'seiite  in  aula  codicem  tractabat." — (Private  letter  to  myself.) 

Ceriani  proceeds, — "  Quajris  quomodo  couipouatur  cum  textu  1  Tim. 
iii.  16,  nota  "  Proleg.  Gabelentz  Gotliicam  versionem  legens  Qeos.  Putarem 
ex  loco  Castillionaei  in  notis  ad  Philip,  ii.  6,  locutos  fuisse  doctos  illos 
Germanos,  oblitos  illius  Routh  pra^cepti  '  Let  me  recommend  to  you  the 
prdctice  of  always  verifying  your  references,  sir. 

The  reader  will  be  interested  to  be  informed  that  Castiglionc,  the 
former  editor  of  the  codex,  was  in  favour  of  '  God  '  in  1835,  and  of  'soei^ 
(fjuse  1=  o],  to  agree  with  '■  runa,^  i.e.  'mystery,'  which  is  feminine  in 
Gothic)  in  1839.  Gabelentz,  in  1813,  ventured  to  print  ^saei^  =  or. 
"  Et  *  saei '  legit  etiam  diligentissimus  Andreas  Uppstrom  nuperus  codicis 
Ambrosiani  investigatt)r  et  editor,  iu  opere  Codicis  Gothici  Amhrosiani 
give  Epist.  Fauli,  &c.     HolraiaB  et  Lipsiaj,  18G8." 


Bp.  Ellicott.]    ARMENIAN   AND  THE   ARABIC  VERSIONS.  453 

witness   to  the   (more  than)    extraordinary  combination ; — 
fiiyA^  .  .  .  iMva-Ti^pLov  .  .  .  "o2.     (See  tlie  footnote  (*)  p.  452.) 

I  obtain  at  the  same  time,  the  same  verdict,  and  on  the 
same  grounds,  from  that  distinguished  and  obliging  scholar, 
Dr.  John  Belsheim  of  Christiania.  "But"  (he  adds)  "the 
reading  is  a  little  dubious.  H.  F.  Massmann,  in  the  notes  to 
his  edition,^  at  page  657,  says, — '  saei  [qui]  is  altogether 
obliterated.'  " — In  claiming  the  Gothic  therefore  as  a  witness 
for  09,  you  will  (I  trust)  agree  with  me  that  a  single  scarcely 
legible  co^nj  of  a  Version  is  not  altogether  satisfactory  testi- 
mony : — while  certainly  '  mar/nus  est  pietatis  sacramentum, 
qui  manifestatws  est  in  corpore  ' — is  not  a  rendering  of  1  Tim. 
iii.  16  which  you  are  prepared  to  accept. 

(h)  For  the  iETHiOPic  Version, — Dr.  Hoerning,  (of  the 
British  Museum,)  has  at  my  request  consulted  six  copies  of 
1  Timothy,  and  informs  me  that  they  present  no  variety  of 
text.  Tlie  antecedent,  as  well  as  the  relative,  is  inasculine  in 
all.  The  iEthiopic  must  therefore  be  considered  to  favour 
the  reading  fivaTrjpLov  o  icfiavepcodr],  and  to  represent  the 
same  Greek  text  which  underlies  the  Latin  and  the  Peschito 
Versions.     The  ^Ethiopic  therefore  is  against  you. 

(i)  "  The  Armenian  Version,"  (writes  Dr.  Malan)  "  from 
the  very  nature  of  the  language,  is  indeterminate.  There  is 
no  grammatical  distinction  of  genders  in  Armenian." 

{j)  The  Arabic  Version,  (so  Dr.  Ch.  Eieu  ^  informs  me,) 


'  Stuttgard,  1857. 

*  Of  the  department  of  Oriental  MSS.  in  the  Brit.  Miis.,  who  derives 
his  text  from  "  the  three  Museum  MSS.  wliicli  contain  the  Arabic  Version 
of  the  Epistles :  viz.  Ilarl.  5474  (dated  A.n.  1332)  '.—Oriental  1328  (Xth 
cent.)  •.—Arundel  Orient.  19  (dated  a.d.  1616)." — Walton's  Polyglott,  he 


454  THE   GEORGIAN  AND  THE   SLAVONIC.       [Reply  to 

exliibits, — "  In  truth  the  mystery  of  this  justice  is  great.  It  is 
thcit  he  "  (or  "  it,"  for  the  Arabic  lias  no  distinction  between 
masculine  and  neuter)  "  was  manifested  in  the  hody,  and  was 
jiistified  in  the  spirit"  &c. — This  version  therefore  witnesses 
for  neither  *  who,'  '  which,'  nor  '  God.' 

[k)  and  (/).  There  only  remain  the  Georgian  Version, 
which  is  of  the  Vlth  century, — and  the  Slavonic,  which  is 
of  the  IXth.  Now,  both  of  these  (Dr.  Malan  informs  me) 
unequivocally  u^tness  to  ©eo?. 

Thus  far  then  for  the  testimony  yielded  by  ancient 
Manuscripts  and  Versions  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles. 

[g]  Ecvieiv  of  the  2^fogress  whieh  has  been  hitherto  made  in 
tJie  2yrcsent  Enquiry. 

Up  to  this  point,  you  must  admit  that  wondrous  little 
sanction  has  been  obtained  for  the  reading  for  which  you, 
contend,  (viz.  fivarijpiov  •  o?  icpavepcodT],)  as  the  true  reading 
of  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  Undisturbed  in  your  enjoyment  of  the 
testimony  borne  by  Cod.  x,  you  cannot  but  feel  that  such 
testimony  is  fully  counterbalanced  ])y  the  witness  of  Cod.  A : 
and  further,  that  the  conjoined  evidence  of  the  Harkleian, 
the  Georgian,  and  the  Slavonic  Versions  outweighs  the 
single  evidence  of  the  Gothic. 

But  what  is  to  be  said  about  the  consent  of  the  manu- 
scripts of  S.  Paul's  Epistles  for  reading  ©eo9  in  this  place, 
in  the  proj)ortion  of  125  to  1  ?  You  must  surely  see  that, 
(as  I  explained  above  at  pp.  445-6,)  sucli  multitudinous  testi- 
mony is  absolutely  decisive  of  the  (question  before  us.     At 

says,  exhibits  "  a  garbled  version,  quite  distinct  from  the  genuine  Arabic : 
viz.  '  77j''.se  (jluricfi  comntononite  thnii  in  the  ijrealnvsn  of  tlie  inyslcry  of 
fair  l>id)j.     God  appeared  in  the  Jlcsh^  "  &c. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]      EEVIEW  OF  PROGRESS,  SO  FAR.  455 

p.  30  of  your  pamphlet,  you  announce  it  as  a  "  lesson  of 
primary  importance,  often  reiterated  but  often  forgotten, 
ponder ari  dcbcrc  testes,  'iuni  numerari."  You  might  have 
added  with  advantage, — "  and  oftcncst  of  all,  misunderstood." 
For  are  you  not  aware  that,  generally  speaking,  *  Number ' 
constitutes  '  Weight '  ?  If  you  have  discovered  some  '  regia 
via'  which  renders  the  general  consent  of  Copies,— the 
general  consent  of  Versions,  —  the  general  consent  of 
Fathers,  a  consideration  of  secondary  importance,  why  do 
you  not  at  once  communicate  the  precious  secret  to  man- 
kind, and  thereby  save  us  all  a  world  of  trouble  ? 

You  will  perhaps  propose  to  fall  back  on  Hort's  wild 
theory  of  a  '  SyrioM  Text,' — executed  by  authority  at  Antioch 
somewhere  between  a.d.  250  and  a.d.  350.^  Be  it  so.  Let 
tliat  fable  be  argued  upon  as  if  it  were  a  fact.  And  what 
follows  ?  That  at  a  period  antecedent  to  the  date  of  any  exist- 
ing copy  of  the  Epistle  l^efore  us,  the  Church  in  her  corporate 
capacity  declared  ©eo?  (not  09)  to  be  the  true  reading  of 
1  Tim.  iii.  16. 

Only  one  other  head  of  Evidence  (the  Patristic)  remains 
to  be  explored ;  after  which,  we  shall  be  able  to  sum  up, 
and  to  conclude  the  present  Dissertation. 

[h]  Testimony  of  tlie  Fathers  concerning  tlie  true,  reading  of 
1  Tim.  iii.  16  : — Gregory  of  Nyssa, — Didymus, — Theo- 
DORET, — John  Damascene, — Chrysostom, — Gregory  Naz., 
— Severus  of  Antioch, — Diodorus  of  Tarsus. 

It  only  remains  to  ascertain  what  the  Fathers  have  to 
say  on  this  subject.  And  when  we  turn  our  eyes  in  this  direc- 
tion, we  are  encountered  by  a  mass  of  evidence  which  effec- 


Sec  above,  pp.  271  to  294. 


456  GREf40RY  NYSS.,   DIDYMUS,  THEODORET.      [Reply  to 

tually  closes  this  discussion.  You  contended  just  now  as 
eagerly  for  the  Vth-century  Codex  a,  as  if  its  witness  were 
a  point  of  vital  importance  to  you.  But  I  am  prc'])ared  to 
show  that  Gregory  of  Nyssa  (a  full  century  bef(jre  Codex  a 
was  produced),  in  at  least  22  places,  knew  of  no  other  read- 
ing but  0609.^  Of  his  weighty  testimony  you  appear  to  have 
l)een  wholly  unaware  in  1809,  for  you  did  not  even  mention 
Gregory  l)y  name  (see  p.  429).  Since  however  you  now  admit 
that  his  evidence  is  unequivocally  against  you,  I  am  willing 
to  hasten  forward, — only  supplying  you  (at  foot)  with  the 
means  of  verifying  what  I  have  stated  above  concerning 
the  testimony  of  this  illustrious  Father. 

You  are  besides  aware  that  Didymus,^  another  illustrious 
witness,  is  against  you  ;  and  that  he  delivers  unquestionable 
testimony. 

You  are  also  aware  that  Tiieodoret,^  in  four  places,  is 
certainly  to  be  reckoned  on  the  same  side : 


1  i.  387  a  :  551  a  :  663  a  his.—n.  430  a  :  536  c :  581  c  :  594 a,  595  b 
(these  two,  of  the  2nd  pagination):  693d  [=  ii.  265,  ed.  1615,  from 
which  Tisch.  quotes  it.  The  place  may  be  seen  in  full,  supra,  p.  101.] 
— iii.  39  b  Us:  67  a  b.—^^).  (?aZZa?ic?.  vi.  518  c  :  519  d:  520  b:  526  d  : 
532  a:  562  b:  566  d :  571a,  All  but  five  of  these  places,  I  believe, 
exhibit  6  Getir, — which  seenia  to  have  been  the  reading  of  this  Father. 
The  article  is  seldom  seen  in  MSS.  Ouly  four  instances  of  it, — (they  will 
be  found  distinctly  specified  below,  page  493,  note  P]),— are  known  to 
exist.    More  places  must  have  been  overlooked. 

Note,  that  Griesbach  only  mentions  Gregory  of  Nyssa  (whose  name 
Tre<'-elles  omits  entirely)  to  remark  that  he  is  not  to  be  cited  for  Geo? ; 
seeing  that,  according  to  him,  1  Tim.  iii.  16  is  to  be  read  thus : — to 
^va-Tijpiov  fv  (TupKi  ecfinvfpadr].  Griesbach  borrowed  that  quotation  and 
tliat  blunder  from  Wetsteiu  ;  to  be  blindly  followed  iu  turn  by  Scholz 
and  Alford.  And  yet,  the  words  in  question  are  vot  the  words  of  Qregory 
Nyss.  at  all;  but  of  Apolinaris,  against  whom  Gregory  is  writing, — as 
Gregory  himself  explains.     [Antirrh.  adv.  Apol.  apud  Galland.  vi.  522  d.] 

'•^  De  Trin.  p.  83.     The  testimony  is  express. 

^  i,  92 :  iii.  657.— iv.  19,  2'.',. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]      CHRYSOSTOM    AND   GEEOOKY   NAZIANZ.       457 

And  further,  that  John  Damascene^  twice  adds  his 
famous  evidence  to  the  rest, — and  is  also  against  you. 

Chrysostom^  again,  whose  testimony  you  called  in  ques- 
tion in  1869,  you  now  admit  is  another  of  your  opponents. 
I  will  not  linger  over  his  name  therefore, — except  to  remark, 
that  how  you  can  witness  a  gathering  host  of  ancient  Fathers 
illustrious  as  these,  without  misgiving,  passes  my  compre- 
hension.    Chrysostom  is  three  times  a  witness. 

Next  come  two  quotations  from  Gregory  of  Nazianzus, 
— which  I  observe  you  treat  as  "inconclusive."  I  retain 
them  all  the  same.^  You  are  reminded  that  this  most 
rhetorical  of  Fathers  is  seldom  more  precise  in  quoting 
Scripture. 

And  to  the  same  century  which  Gregory  of  Nazianzus 
adorned,  is  probably  to  he,  referred, — (it  cannot  possibly  lie 
later  than  a.d.  350,  though  it  may  be  a  vast  deal  more 
ancient,) — the  title  bestowed,  in  the  way  of  summary,  on 
that  portion  of  S.  Paul's  first  Epistle  to  Timothy  which  is 
contained  between  chap.  iii.  16  and  chap.  iv.  7, — viz.,  Xlepl 


^  i.  313  :— ii.  263. 

*  i.  497cde.— viii.  85  e:  86  a.— xi.  605  f:  606  a  b  d  e.— (The  first  of 
these  places  occurs  in  the  Homily  de  Beato  Fhilogonio,  which  Matthaji  in 
the  main  [viz.  from  p.  497,  line  20,  to  the  end]  edited  from  an  independent 
source  {_Lectt.  Mosqq.  1779].  Gallandius  [xiv.  Append.  141-4]  reprints 
Matthaei's  labours). — Concerning  this  place  of  Chrysostom  (vide  supra,  jj. 
101),  Bp.  Ellicott  says  (p.  66),  — "  The  passage  which  he  [the  Quarterly 
Reviewer]  does  allege,  deserves  to  be  placed  before  our  readers  in  full,  as 
an  illustration  of  the  precarious  character  of  patristic  evidence.  If  this 
passage  attests  the  reading  deos  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16,  does  it  not  also  attest  the 
reading  6  6e6s  in  Heb.  ii.  16,  where  no  copyist  or  translator  has  introduced 
it  ?"  ...  I  can  but  say,  in  reply, — •'  No,  certainly  not.'  May  I  be  per- 
mitted to  add,  that  it  is  to  me  simply  unintelligible  how  Bp,  Ellicott  can 
show  himself  so  plane  hospes  in  this  department  of  sacred  Science  as  to  be 
capable  of  gravely  asking  such  a  very  foolish  question  ? 

^  i.  215  a  :  685  b.     The  places  may  be  seen  quoted  supra,  p.  101. 


458       THE   '  TITT.E.' — SEVERUS,   DTODORUS   TAES.      [Reply  to 

0Ei'A2  SAPKcoo-eco?.  We  commonly  speak  of  this  as  the  seventh 
of  the  'Euthcdian '  KecpaXata  or  chapters :  but  Euthalius  himself 
declares  that  those  18  titles  were  "  devised  by  a  certain  very 
wise  and  pious  Father ;"  ^  and  this  particular  title  (Ylepl  0€ia<i 
(TapK(oaeco<;)  is  freely  employed  and  discussed  in  Gregory  of 
Nyssa's  treatise  against  Apolinaris,^ — which  latter  had,  in 
fact,  made  it  part  of  the  title  of  his  own  heretical  treatise.^ 
That  the  present  is  a  very  weighty  attestation  of  the  reading, 
GEO'S  i(f)avepco6'r]  iu  2APKi'  no  one  probably  will  deny :  a 
memorable  proof  moreover  that  ©eo?  *  must  have  been  univer- 
sally read  in  1  Tim.  iii.  IG  throughout  the  century  which 
witnessed  the  production  of  codices  B  and  x. 

Severus,  bp.  of  Antiocii,  you  also  consider  a  "  not  unam- 
biguous "  witness.  I  venture  to  point  out  to  you  that  when 
a  Father  of  the  Church,  who  has  been  already  insisting  on 
the  Gouhead  of  Cueist  («a^'  o  yap  vTrijpxe  Beo?,)  goes  on  to 
vSpeak  of  Him  as  t6v  ev  aapKi  (pavepwdevra  ^eov,  there  is 
no  'ambiguity'  whatever  aljout  the  fact  that  he  is  quoting 
from  1  Tim.  iii.  10.^ 

And  why  are  we  only  "perhcqifi"  to  adtl  tlie  testimony  of 
DiODOKUS  OF  Taksus  ;  seeing  that  Diodorus  adduces  S.  I'aul's 


1  Tlic  place  is  quoted  in  Scrivener's  Introdttctioii,  \\  51). 

"''  Antirrheticiis,  ap.  Gallaml.  vi.  517-77. 

^  Tiie  full  title  was, — '\n68ei^i,s  Ttep'i  rrjs  Odas  aapKuxTfcos  Tijs  kuO' 
o/ioicowti/  dv6po>TTov.     Ibid.  5l8h, a:  519 a. 

'  Apolinaris  did  not  deny  that  Christ  was  very  God.  Ills  heresy  (like 
that  of  Arius)  turned  upon  the  nature  of  the  conjunction  of  the  Godhead 
with  the  Manhood.  Hear  Theodoret : — A.  0eof  A(iyos  o-np/cl  tviodfh 
(ivOpwnov  untTiXea-ep  Ofov.  O.  ToiiTo  ovv  Xt'yeis  Otiav  e'/x^^X'""  '*  ■'^• 
Kill  7!-«i/u.  O,  'Ai/rl  "^vx^s  ovv  6  Aoyoy ;  A.  N(u'.  Dial.  vi.  adv.  Apol. 
{02>2>.  V.  1080  =  Athanas.  ii.  525  d.) 

*  Cramer's  Cat.  in  Actus,  iii.  (>\K  It  is  also  met  with  in  tlie  Catena  on 
the  Acts  which  J.  C.  Wolf  pubHslied  in  his  Anccdola  Urxca,  iii.  137-8. 
The  place  is  quoted  above,  p.  101'. 


Br.  Ellicott.]    Br.   ELLICOTT   AS   A   CONTROVERSIALIST.     459 

actual  words  (0eo9  ecj^avepcoOr]  iv  aapKi),  and  expressly  says 
.that  lie  finds  them  in  >S'.  Paul's  Ujnstlc  to  Timothy  ?  ^  How — 
may  I  be  permitted  to  ask — would  you  have  a  quotation 
made  plainer  ? 

[i]  Bp.  Ellicott  as  a  controversialist.     The  case  of  Euthalius. 

Forgive  me,  my  lord  Bishop,  if  I  declare  that  the  animus 
you  display  in  conducting  the  present  critical  disquisition 
not  only  astonishes,  but  even  shocks  me.  You  seem  to  say, — 
Non  ijcrsuadchis,  ctiamsi  ])crsuascris.  The  plainest  testimony 
you  reckon  doubtful,  if  it  goes  against  you :  an  unsatisfactory 
quotation,  if  it  makes  for  your  side,  you  roundly  declare  to 
be  "  evidence  "  which  "  stands  the  test  of  examination."  ^  .  .  . 
"  We  have  examined  his  references  carefully "  (you  say). 
"  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  Didymus  of  Alexandria,  Theodoret  and 
John  Damascene  {who  died  severally  about  394,  396,  457  and 
756  A.D.)  seem  unquestionably  to  have  read  ©eo?."^  Excuse 
me  for  telling  you  that  this  is  not  the  language  of  a  candid 
enquirer  after  Truth.  Your  grudging  admission  of  the  un- 
equivocal evidence  borne  by  these  four  illustrious  Fathers : — 
your  attempt  to  detract  from  the  importance  of  their  testi- 
mony by  screwing  down  their  date  '  to  the  sticking  place : ' — 
your  assertion  that  the  testimony  of  a  fifth  Father  "  is  not 
nnamhiguous  : " — your  insinuation  that  the  emphatic  witness 
of  a  sixth  may  "jJcrhajJS  "  be  inadmissible  : — all  this  kind  of 
thing  is  not  only  quite  unworthy  of  a  Bishop  when  he  turns 
disputant,  but  eftectually  indisposes  his  opponent  to  receive 
his  argumentation  with  that  respectful  deference  which  else 
would  have  been  undoubtedly  its  due. 

Need  I  remind  you  that  men  do  not  write  their  books  when 
they  are  in  artieulo  mortis  ?     Didymus  died  in  A.D.  394,  to  be 


^  Cramer's  Cat.  in  Rom.  p.  124.  ^  P.  G7.  ^  p.  65. 


460  THE   CASE   OF   EUTHALIUS.  [Reply  to 

sure:  Imt  lie  was  then  85  years  of  age.  He  was  therefore 
born  in  A.D,  309,  and  is  said  to  have  flourished  in  347.  How 
old  do  you  suppose  were  the  sacred  codices  he  had  employed 
till  then  1  See  you  not  that  sucli  testimony  as  his  to  the  Text 
of  Scrij)ture  must  in  fairness  be  held  to  belong  to  the  first 
quarter  of  the  YVtli  century  / — is  more  ancient  in  short  (and 
infinitely  more  important)  than  that  of  any  written  codex 
with  which  we  are  acquainted  ? 

Pressed  by  my  "  cloud  of  witnesses,"  you  seek  to  get  rid  of 
tliemi  by  insulting  me.  "We  pass  over"  (you  say)"'/;rtmcs 
hroiujht  in  to  sivell  the  numher,  such  as  Euthalius, — for  ivho/n 
no  reference  is  given."^  Do  you  then  suspect  me  of  the  base- 
ness,— nay,  do  you  mean  seriously  to  impute  it  to  me, — of 
introducing  '  names '  '  to  swell  the  number '  of  witnesses  on 
my  side  ?  Do  you  mean  further  to  insinuate  that  I  i)rudently 
gave  no  reference  in  the  case  of  '  Euthalius,'  because  I  was 
unable  to  specify  any  place  wliere  his  testimony  is  found  ?  .  .  . 
I  should  really  pause  for  an  answer,  but  that  a  trifling  cir- 
cumstance solicits  me,  which,  if  it  does  not  entertain  the 
Bp.  of  Gloucester  and  Bristol,  will  certainly  entertain  every 
one  else  who  takes  the  trouble  to  read  these  pages. 

'  Such  as  Eutludius ' !  You  had  evidently  forgotten  wlien 
you  penned  that  offensive  sentence,  that  Euthalius  is  one  of 
tlie  few  Fathers  acldueed  by  yourself^  (but  for  wliom  you 
'gave  no  reference,')  in  1869, — when  you  were  setting  d(jwn 
the  Patristic  evidence  in  favour  of  Beo<?.  .  .  .  This  little  inci- 
dent is  really  in  a  high  degree  suggestive.  Your  practice 
has  evidently  been  to  appropriate  Patristic  references^  witliout 
thought  or  verification, — prudently  to  abstain  irom  dropping 


1  1*.  Of).  2  See  above,  p.  420. 

^  15('iitloy,  Scholz,  'risclicndorf,  Alfonl  and  utliiTs  iuUiiito  '  Kntlndim.'' 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  the   case   OF   EUTHALIU8.  461 

a  hint  how  you  came  by  them, — but  to  use  them  like 
dummies,  for  sliow.  At  the  end  of  a  few  years,  (naturally 
enough,)  you  entirely  forget  the  circumstance, — and  proceed 
vigorously  to  box  the  ears  of  the  first  unlucky  Dean  who 
comes  in  your  way,  whom  you  suspect  of  having  come  by 
his  learning  (such  as  it  is)  in  the  same  slovenly  manner. 
Forgive  me  for  declaring  (while  my  ears  are  yet  tingling) 
that  if  you  were  even  moderately  acquainted  with  this  depart- 
ment of  Sacred  Science,  you  would  see  at  a  glance  that  my 
Patristic  references  are  never  obtained  at  second  hand :  for 
the  sufficient  reason  that  elsewhere  they  are  not  to  be  met 
with.  But  waiving  this,  you  have  made  it  luce  clarius  to  all 
the  world  that  so  late  as  the  year  1882,  to  you  'Euthalius' 
was  notliing  else  but  '  a  name.'  And  this  really  does  astonish 
me :  for  not  only  was  he  a  famous  Ecclesiastical  personage, 
(a  Bishop  like  yourself,)  l)ut  his  work  (the  date  of  which  is 
A.D.  458,)  is  one  with  which  no  Author  of  a  "  Critical  Com- 
mentary "  on  S.  Paul's  Epistles  can  afford  to  be  unacquainted. 
Pray  read  what  Berriman  has  written  concerning  Euthalius 
(pp.  217  to  222)  in  his  admirable  "Dissertation  on  1  Tim.  iii. 
16."  Turn  also,  if  you  please,  to  the  BiUiotheca  of  Gallan- 
dius  (vol.  X.  197-323),  and  you  will  recognize  the  plain  fact 
that  the  onli/  reason  why,  in  the  '  Quarterly  Eeview,'  "  no 
reference  is  given  for  Euthalius,"  is  because  the  only  reference 
possible  is — 1  Tim.  iii.  16. 

[j]  The  testimony  of  the  letter  ascribed  to  Dionysius  of 
Alexandria.  Six  other  j^imitive  witnesses  to  1  Tim.  iii. 
16,  specified. 

Then  further,  you  absolutely  take  no  notice  of  the  remark- 
able testimony  which  I  adduced  (p.  101)  from  a  famous  Epistle 
purporting  to  have  been  addressed  by  Dionysius  of  Alex- 
andria (a.d.  264)  to  Paul  of  Samosata.     That  the  long  and 


4G2  rS.-DIONYSIUS  OF   ALEXANDRIA.  [Reply  to 

interesting  composition  in  question  ^  was  not  actually  the 
work  of  the  great  Dionysius,  is  inferred — (whether  rightly  or 
wrongly  1  am  not  concerned  to  enquire) — from  the  fact  that 
the  Antiochian  Fathers  say  expressly  that  Dionysius  did  not 
deign  to  address  Paul  personally.  But  you  are  recjucsted  to 
rememljer  that  the  epistle  must  needs  have  been  written  by 
somebody :  ^  that  it  may  safely  Ije  referred  to  the  Ilird  cen- 
tury ;  and  that  it  certainly  witnesses  to  0eo9  i<f)avepco6r],^ — 
which  is  the  only  matter  of  any  real  importance  to  my  argu- 
ment. Its  testimony  is,  in  fact,  as  express  and  emphatic  as 
words  can  make  it. 

And  here,  let  me  call  your  attention  to  the  circumstance 
that  there  are  at  least  six  other  primitive  witnesses, 
some  of  whom  must  needs  have  recognized  the  reading  for 
which  I  am  here  contending,  (viz.  ®eo9  e(f)avep(o$7]  iv  aapKi,) 
though  not  one  of  them  quotes  the  place  in  cxtcnso,  nor  indeed 
refers  to  it  in  such  a  way  as  effectually  to  bar  the  door  against 
reasonable  dispute.  The  present  is  in  fact  just  the  kind  of 
text  which,  from  its  undeniable  grandeur,  —  its  striking 
rhythm, — and  yet  more  its  dogmatic  importance, — was  sure 
to  attract  the  attention  of  the  earliest,  no  less  than  the  latest 
of  the  Fathers.  Accordingly,  the  author  of  the  Epistle  ad 
Diognctum'^  clearly  refers  to  it  early  in  the  Ilnd  century ; 


^  Concilia,  i.  849-893.     The  place  is  quoted  below  in  note  (^). 

*  "  Verum  ex  illis  verbis  illud  tantum  inferri  debet  false  earn  epistolam 
Dionysio  Alexandrine  attribui:,non  autem  scriptum  non  fuissc  ab  aliquo 
ex  Episcopis  qui  Synodis  adversus  rauluni  Antiochenum  celcbratis  in- 
terfuerunt.  Innumeris  enim  exeniplis  constat  indubitata)  antiquitatis 
Epistolas  ex  Scriptorum  errore  falsos  titulos  praiferrt." — (Pagi  ad  a.d.  2G4, 
apud  Mansi,  Concil.  i.  1039.) 

^  el?  ((TTiv  o  Xpiaros,  6  i)v  (v  rw  Harpl  avvai^ios  Xoyoy,  (v  airov 
TTpofrtoTToi/,  (lo/jaros  Qeus,  (cat  oparos  yfvi'ififpoi  •  GKO~:i  1\V>  P  'li<l'ANErn'0II 
"EN  SAPKl',  yfi/fl/ifi/os  eK  yvuaiKOi,  6  (k  Qeuv  IluTfjoi  yivvri6(\s  tK  yairrpos 
irpb  (io(T(j)('>p(jv. —  Concilia,  i.  853  a. 

*  Cap.  xi. 


Bp.  ellicott.]    six  other  trimitive  witnesses.  463 

though   not  in  a  way  to    be  helpful  to  us  in  our  present 
enquiry.     I  cannot  feel  surprised  at  the  circumstance. 

The  yet  earlier  references  in  the  epistles  of  (1)  Igxatius 
(three  in  number)  are  helpful,  and  may  not  be  overlooked. 
They  are  as  follows  : — 0eoi)  avdpcdTrivw^  cjiavepovfjuevov  : — iv 
aapKt  <yev6ixevo(;  0eo9  : — et?  ©eo^  eariv  o  cfyavepoocrwi  eavrov  Boa 
'Ir](TOv  ^picrrov  rod  v'lov  avrov,  09  icrrcv  avrov  A6709  atSio';.^ 
It  is  to  be  wished,  no  doubt,  that  these  references  had  been  a 
little  more  full  and  explicit :  but  the  very  early  Fathers  -are 
ever  observed  to  quote  Scripture  thus  partially, — allusively, 
— elliptically. 

(2)  BxVRXABAS  has  just  such  another  allusive  reference  to 
the  words  in  dispute,  which  seems  to  show  that  he  nnist  have 
read  0eo9  icpavepcodT]  iv  aapKi:  viz.  ^\riaov<i  ....  6  u/o?  rov 
%6ov  TUTTft)  KoX  iv  aapKL  (f)av€p(odei<;.'^ — (3)  HiPPOLYTUS,  on  two 
occasions,  even  more  unequivocally  refers  to  this  reading. 
Once,  while  engaged  in  proving  that  Christ  is  God,  he 
says : — Outo?  irpoeXBoou  et<?  Koafiov  ©eo?  iv  adiixan  i^ave- 
pdiOrj  •? — and  again,  in  a  very  similar  passage  which  Tlieo- 
doret  quotes  from  the  same  Father's  lost  work  on  the 
Psalms : — Ouro?  0  irpoeXOoiv  eh  rov  Kocrfiov,  ©eo9  Kol  avOpoiiro^ 
i^av€p(odr]^—{4:)  GREGORY  Thaumaturgus,  (if  it  really  be  he,) 
seems  also  to  refer  directly  to  this  place  when  he  says  (in  a 
passage  quoted  by  Photius^), — koI  eari  0eo9  aXr]Oivo<;  6  daap- 
«09  iv  a-apKL  c^avepcoOeh. — Further,  (5)  in  the  Apostolical 
Constitutions,  we  meet  with  the  expression, — 0eo9  Ky/3to9 
o  eTTLcfiavei'i  rjfuv  iv  aapKU^ 


^  Ad  Ephes.  c.  19  :  c.  7.     Ad  Magnes.  c.  8.  ^  Cap.  xii. 

^  Contra  Hseresim  Noeti,  c,  xvii.     (Routh's  Opuscula,  i.  76.)     Read  the 
antecedeut  chapters. 

*  Dialog,  ii.  ^  Inconfusus.'' — Opj)'  iv.  132. 

°  Cod.  230,— p.  845,  line  40.  "^  vii.  26,  ap.  Galland.  iii.  182  a. 


404  CYIUL   OF   AI.KXANDL'TA.    IS    A  [Reply  to 

And  when  (0)  Basil  the  (}i!KAT  [a.d.  377],  writiD<,f  to  tlie 
men  of  Sozopolis  whose  faith  the  Arians  had  assailed,  remarks 
that  such  teaching  "  subverts  the  saving  dispensation  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Ciikist  ; "  and,  blending  Eom.  xvi.  25,  26  with 
"the  great  mystery"  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16, — (in  order  to  afford 
himself  an  opportunity  of  passing  in  review  our  Saviour's 
work  for  His  Church  in  ancient  days,) — viz.  "  After  all  these, 
at  the  end  of  the  day,  avro<i  iff^avepoodTj  iv  crapKi,  yevofievo'i  e'/c 
yvvaLK6<; :"  ^ — vho  will  deny  that  such  an  one  probably  found 
neither  09  nor  6,  but  ©eo?,  in  the  copy  before  him  ? 

I  have  thought  it  due  to  the  enquiry  I  have  in  hand  to  give 
a  distinct  place  to  the  foregoing  evidence — such  as  it  is — of 
Ignatius,  Barnabas,  Hippolytus,  Gregory  ThauniatTirgus,  the 
Apostolical  Constitutions,  and  Basil.  But  I  shall  not  hiiild 
upon  such  foundations.  Let  me  go  on  with  what  is  indis- 
putable. 

[k]  The  testimony/  of  Cyril  of  Alexandria. 

Next,  for  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  Mhom  you  decline  to 
accept  as  a  witness  for  ©eof.  You  are  prepared,  I  trust,  to 
submit  to  the  logic  oi  facts  ? 

In  a  treatise  addressed  to  the  Empresses  Arcadia  and 
Marina,  Cyril  is  undertaking  to  prove  that  our  Lord  is  very 
and  eternal  God.^  His  method  is  to  establish  several  short 
theses  all  tending  to  this  one  object,  by  citing  from  the 
several  books  of  the  N.  T.,  in  turn,  the  principal  texts  which 
make  for  his  purpose.  Presently,  (viz.  at  page  117,)  he 
announces  as  his  thesis,  —  "  Faith  in  Christ  as  God  ; " 
and  when  he  comes  to  1  Timothy,  he  quotes  iii.  10  at  length ; 


^  iii.  401-2,  Kpist.  261  (  =  65).     A  quotation  from  Gal.  iv.  4  follows. 
*  UdOijcreTui    yap    on  (j)V(Tei.  fifv   kul  iiXjjdiiu   Of 6s  eiTTiv  6  'E/x/iai/ovijX, 
ddiTuKos  fie    St'    (WTov   Ka\    i)  TfKovcra  Tnijtdfvos. — Vol.  V.  I'art  ii.  48  e. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]      witness   FOE   0EO'2   IN    1    TIM.   III.   16.        465 

reasons  upon  it,  and  points  out  that  0eo9  eV  aapKi  is  liere 
spoken  of.^  There  can  be  no  doubt  about  this  quotation, 
which  exliibits  no  essential  variety  of  reading ; — a  quotation 
which  Euthymius  Zigabenus  reproduces  in  his, '  Panoplia,' — 
and  which  C.  F.  Matthasi  has  with  painful  accuracy  edited 
from  that  source.^ — Once  more.  In  a  newly  recovered  trea- 
tise of  Cyril,  1  Tim.  iii.  16  is  again  quoted  at  length  with 
©eo«f, — followed  by  the  remark  that  "  our  Nature  was  justi- 
fied, by  God  manifested  in  Him."  ^  I  really  see  not  how  you 
would  have  Cyril  more  distinctly  recognize  0eo9  i^avepcoOt] 
iv  aapKL  as  the  reading  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16.* 

You  are  requested  to  observe  that  in  order  to  prevent  cavil,  I 
forbear  to  build  on  two  other  famous  places  in  Cyril's  writings 
where  the  evidence  for  reading  @eo9  is  about  balanced  by  a 
corresponding  amount  of  evidence  which  has  been  discovered 
for  reading  6'?.  Not  but  what  the  context  renders  it  plain 
that  ©e6<?  must  have  been  Cyril's  word  on  both  occasions. 
Of  this  let  the  reader  himself  be  judge : — 

(1)  In  a  treatise,  addressed  to  the  Empresses  Eudocia  and 
Pulcheria,  Cyril  quotes  1  Tim.  iii.  16  in  cxtenso}  "If"  (he 
begins) — "the  Word,  being  God,  could  be  said  to  inhabit 


KOL  ovTi  Tvov  (fiafiev  ort  Kad'  rj^ai  avdpconoi  dnXcbs,  dXX'  as  Qeos 
iv  (TapKi  Ka\  Kad'  rjiids  yeyovas. — O]^}^.  V.  Part  2,  p.  124  c  d.  (—  Concilia, 
iii.  221  c  d.) 

'  N.  T.  vol.  xi.     Prcefat.  p.  xli. 

^  8ia  Tov  iv  avra  (j^avepadevTos  Qeov. — De  Incarnatione  Domini,  Mai, 
Nov.  PP.  BiUiotheca,  ii.  68. 

*  Earlier  in  the  same  Treatise,  Cyril  thus  grandly  paraphrases  1  Tim. 
iii.  16  : — Tore  817  rdrt  to  fxlya  kol  appqrov  yiverai  rfj?  oiKOvopias  fJ-varT]- 
piov  avTos  yap  6  Aoyos  tov  Qeov,  6  8i]fXLOvpy6s  aTrdcnjs  ttjs  ktlct f cos,  6 
a)(u>prjTos,  o  aTTepiypaiTTOS,  6  avaWoicoTOs,  rj  Trrjyr]  ttJs  C^rjs,  to  €k  tov 
(pcoTos  (pas,  1)  ^oicra  tov  UuTpos  elKotv,  to  aTravyaafiu  Tijs  do^rjs,  6  vapaK- 
TTjp  TTjs  vnotTTacTfas,   tvjv  avdpaneluv  (pvaiv  dvaXafxlSdvei. — Ibid.  p.  37. 

^  P.  153  d.  (=  Concilia,  iii.  264  c  d.) 

2   H 


4<i(i  THE   EVIDENCE   OF   CYRIL  [Kei'LY  to 

Man's  nature  {eiravO pwirr^aai)  without  yet  ceasing  to  be  GOD, 
but  remained  for  ever  what  He  was  Itefore, — then,  great 
indeed  is  the  mystery  of  Godliness."  ^  He  proceeds  in  the 
same  strain  at  much  length.^  Next  (2)  the  same  place  of. 
Timothy  is  just  as  fully  quoted  in  Cyril's  Explanatio  xii.  capi- 
tum :  where  not  only  the  Thesis,^  l)ut  also  the  context  con- 
strains belief  that  Cyril  wrote  @eo<? : — "  What  then  means 
'  was  manifested  in  the  flesh '  ?  It  means  that  the  Word  of 
God  the  Fathee  was  made  flesh  ...  In  this  way  therefore 
we  say  that  He  was  both  God  and  Man  .  .  Thus  "  (Cyiil  con- 
cludes) "  is  He  God  and  Lokd  of  all."  ^ 

But,  as  aforesaid,  I  do  not  propose  to  rest  my  case  on  either 
of  these  passages ;  but  on  those  two  other  places  concerning 
which  there  exists  no  variety  of  tradition  as  to  the  reading. 
Whether  the  passages  in  which  the  reading  is  certain  ought 
not  to  be  held  to  determine  the  reading  of  the  passages  con- 
cerning which  the  evidence  is  about  evenly  balanced ; — whether 
in  doubtful  cases,  the  requirements  of  the  context  should  not 
be  allowed  to  turn  the  scale ;— I  forbear  to  enquire.  I  take 
my  stand  on  what  is  clear  and  undeniable.  On  the  other 
hand  you  are  challenged  to  produce  a  single  instance  in  Cyril 
of  fiv(ny]piov'  o?  i^avepdodr],  where  the  reading  is  not  equally 


1    lln<L  d  f. 

^  fl  uev  yhp  a)S  eVa  tojv  Kaff'  rjl^us,  livOpunrov  an\<i)s,  /cat  ov^i  8t) 
/xdAXof  Beoi/  evT]vdi)(0Tn]K6Ta  ^ifKjJiw^ap  oi  fiadtjrai  k.t.X.  Presently, — 
ueya  yap  roTf  to  ti]s  fvaf^fias  earl  nvaTTjpiov,  necpavepcorai  yap  (V 
aapKi  Qfos  wi/  6  At'ryos.  p.  154  a  be. — In  a  subsequent  Ji^ge, — o  ye  fxrjv 
fvav6po)7rT](ras  Gfcis,  Kairoi  vopi(Td(\s  ovfiei'  (repov  tlvai  TrXrjv  on  povov 
('ivdpo)7Tns  ■  ■  •  fK-qpvxdi]  iv  (6vi(jiv,  (TTiaTfvdr]  iv  Koapa),  TfTiprjTai  8e  Ka\ 
0)9  Ylos  d\r}6ci}S  Toi  Qfov  /cat  Ilarpoy  .  .  .  Qfiis  flvai  7reni(TT(vpfVos. — 
Ibid.  p.  170  d  e. 

^  ' Avadtuariapos  /3'. — El'  th  ovx  opoXoye'i  aapKt  Ka6^  vnoa-Taaii'  tjuuxrOuL 
rov  «/c  SfoO  Ylarpoi  hi'yyov,  tva  re  etVai  XpiaTov  pera  t}]s  18ias  crapKos, 
Tov  avTov  hriXovtWi.  Qeov   re  opov  /c«t  avdpMTrov,  amdfpa  eorco. — vi.  148  a. 

•    Ihi'/.  h,  c,  down  to  MO  a.  (=  C(mrill,i,  iii.  815  b-e.) 


Bp.  Ellicott]      of   ALEXANDRIA,   CONSIDERED.  467 

balanced  by  /jbvo-rrjptov'  ©eo?.  And  (as  already  explained)  of 
course  it  makes  nothing  for  o?  that  Cyril  should  sometimes 
say  that  '  the  mystery '  here  spoken  of  is  Christ  who  '  was 
manifested  in  the  flesh/  &c.  A  man  with  nothing  else  but 
the  A.  V.  of  "the  '  Textus  Eeceptus '  before  him  might  equally 
well  say  that.     See  above,  pages  427-8. 

Not  unaware  am  I  of  a  certain  brief  Scholium^  which  the 
Critics  freely  allege  in  proof  that  Cyril  wrote  o?  (not  0eo<f), 
and  which  as  they  quote  it,  (viz.  so  mutilated  as  effectually  to 
conceal  its  meaning,)  certainly  seems  to  be  express  in  its  tes- 
timony. But  the  thing  is  all  a  mistake.  Rightly  understood, 
the  Scholium  in  question  renders  no  testimony  at  all ; — as  I 
proceed  to  explain.  The  only  wonder  is  that  such  critics  as 
Bentley,^  Wetstein,^  Birch,*  Tischendorf,  ^  or  even  Tregelles,® 
should  not  have  seen  this  for  themselves. 

The  author,  (whether  Photius,  or  some  other,)  is  insisting 
on  our  Lord's  absolute  exemption  from  sin,  although  for  our 
sakes  He  became  very  Man.  In  support  of  this,  he  quotes 
Is.  liii.  9,  (or  rather,  1  Pet.  ii.  22) — "  Who  did  no  sin,  neither 
was  guile  found  in  His  niouthT  "  S.  Cyril  "  (he  proceeds)  "in 
the  12th  ch.  of  his  Scholia  says, — 'Who  vkls  manifested  in  the 
flesh,  justified  in  the  Sinrit ;'  for  He  was  in  no  way  subject  to 
our  infirmities,"  and  so  on.  Now,  every  one  must  see  at  a  glance 
that  it  is  entirely  to  misapprehend  the  matter  to  suppose 
that  it  is  any  part  of  the  Scholiast's  object,  in  what  precedes, 
to  invite  attention  to  so  irrelevant  a  circumstance  as  that 
Cyril  began  his  quotation  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16,  with  o<f  instead  of 


'  Preserved  by  Qilcumenius  in  his  Catena,  1631,  ii.  228. 
2  Ellis,  p.  67.  ^  In  loc. 

•*    Variai  Led.  ii.  232.     He  enumerates  ten  MSS.  in  which  he  found  it, 
-but  he  only  quotes  down  to  ((paveprndr). 
"  In  loc.  "  P.  227  note. 

2  H  2 


4G8  A  SCHOLIUM  MISUNDERSTOOD.  [Reply  to 

©eo9.^  As  Waterland  remarked  to  Berriman  150  years  ago,^ 
the  Scholiast's  one  object  was  to  show  how  Cyril  interpreted 
the  expression  'justified  in  the  Spirit.'  Altogether  misleading 
is  it  to  qnote  onbj  the  first  line,  beginning  at  09  and  ending  at 
TTvevfjiarL,  as  the  Critics  invariahlij  do.  The  point  to  wliicli  in 
this  way  prominence  is  exclusively  given,  was  clearly,  to  the 
Commentator,  a  matter  of  no  concern  at  all.  He  quotes  from 
Cyril's  '  Scholia  de  Iiiearnatione  Unif/cniti,'^  in  preference  to  any 
other  of  Cyril's  writings,  for  a  vastly  different  reason.*  And 
yet  this — (viz.  Cyril's  supposed  substitution  of  09  for  ©609) — 
is,  in  the  account  of  the  Critics,  the  one  thing  which  the 
Scholiast  was  desirous  of  putting  on  record. 

In  the  meanwhile,  on  referring  to  the  place  in  Cyril,  we 
make  an  important  discovery.  The  Greek  of  the  Scholium 
in  question  being  lost,  we  depend  for  our  knowledge  of  its 
contents  on  the  Latin  translation  of  Marius  Mercator,  Cyril's 
contemporary.  And  in  that  translation,  no  trace  is  discover- 
able of  either  09  or  0.^  The  quotation  from  Timothy  begins 
abru]jtly  at  ecfiavepciodr].  The  Latin  is  as  follows : — '  Divinus 
Paulus  mar/num  qiiidem  ait  esse  mjjsteri'mn pietatis.  Et  vere  ita 
se  res  habet :  manifestatus  est  enim  in  came,  cum  sit  Deus 
Verbum.'  ^  The  supposed  hostile  evidence  from  this  (j^uartcr 
proves  therefore  to  be  non-existent.     I  pass  on. 

1  Pointed  out  long  since  by  Matthfei,  N.  T.  vol.  xi.  Praefat.  p.  xlviii. 
Also  in  his  ed.  of  1807, — iii.  443-4.  "  Nee  ideo  laudatus  est,  ut  doceret 
Cyrilluin  loco  6e6s  legisse  os,  sed  ideo,  ne  quis  si  Deum  fectiim  legeret 
liomineni,  humanis  peccatis  etiam  obuoxium  esse  crederet." 

2  See  Berriman's  Dissertation,  p.  189. — (MS.  note  of  the  Author.) 

^  Not  from  the  2nd  article  oi'  his  Ea.}>lanatio  xii.  capitwn,  as  Tischen- 
dorf  supposes. 

*  See  how  P.  E,  Puscy  characterizes  the  '  Scholia,'  in  his  rnfuce  to 
voh  vi.  of  his  edition, — pp.  xii.  xiii. 

'^  Cyril's  Greek,  (to  judge  from  Mercator's  Latin,)  must  have  run  some- 
what as  follows: — 'O  dfa-nta-ios  IlaOXos  ofxo'Koyovnevojs  /nf'yn  cjnjalv  etVai  to 
T^s  fv<T€^fias  fjLV(TTr]pLov.  Kai  ovrccs  oilrcoy  6;^6f  e({)avfi)codi]  ■yw/j  eV  (TcipKi, 
Qeos  ^v  6  Auyos. 

*  0pp.  vol.v.  P.  i.  p.  785  d.— The  original  scholium  (of  which  the  extant 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  the   argument   E  SILENTIO.  469 

[1]  The  argument  e  silentio  considered. 

The  argument  e  silentio,  —  (of  all  arguments  the  most 
precarious,)  —  has  not  been  neglected.  —  '  But  we  can- 
not stop  here,'  you  say :  ^  '  Wetstein  observed  long  ago 
that  Cyril  does  not  produce  this  text  when  he  does  pro- 
duce Eom.  ix.  5  in  answer  to  the  allegation  which  he 
quotes  from  Julian  that  S.  Paul  never  employed  the  word 
©€09  of  our  Lord.'  ^  Well  but,  neither  does  Gregory  of  JSTyssa 
produce  this  text  when  he  is  writing  a  Treatise  expressly  to 
prove  the  GoDhead  of  the  Sox  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
'  Grave  est,' — says  Tischendorf.^  No,  not  '  grave  '  at  all,  I 
answer:  but  whether  'grave'  or  not,  that  Gregory  of  Nyssa 
read  ©eo?  in  this  place,  is  at  least  certain.  As  for  Wetstein, 
you  have  been  reminded  already,  that  '  ubi  de  Divinitate 
Cheisti  agitur,  ibi  iirofeeto  sui  dissimilior  deprehendittcr.'^ 
Examine  the  place  in  Cyril  Alex,  for  yourself,  reading 
steadily  on  from  p.  327  a  to  p.  333  b.  Better  still,  read — 
paying  special  attention  to  his  Scriptural  proofs — Cyril's  two 
Treatises  '  De  recta  Fidc.'^  But  in  fact  attend  to  the  method 
of  Athanasius,  of  Basil,  or  of  whomsoever  else  you  will ;  ^ 
and  you  will  speedily  convince  yourself  that  the  argument 
e  silentio  is  next  to  valueless  on  occasions  like  the  present. 

Greek  proves  to  be  only  a  garbled  fragment,  [see  Pnsey's  ed.  vi.  p.  520,]  ) 
abounds  in  expressions  which  imi^ly,  (if  they  do  not  require,)  that  Qe6s 
went  before  :  e.  g.  '  qiKisi  Deus  homo  /actus : ' — '  erant  ergo  gentes  in 
mundo  sine  Deo,  cum  absque  Christo  essent : ' — '  Beus  enim  erat  incur- 
iiatus:^ — 'in  liumanitate  tamen  Deus  remansit  :  Deus  enim  Verbum, 
came  assumftd,  nan  deposuit  quod  erat ;  intelligitur  tamen  idem  Deus 
simul  et  homo,^  &c. 

^  P.  67.  2  Q^,p_  vi_  327.  3  ji_  852, 

*  Matthsei,  N.  T.  xi.     Prxfat.  pp.  lii.-iii. 
e  Vol.  V.  P.  ii.  pp.  55-180. 

*  '  How  is  the  Godhead  of  Christ  proved  ?  '  (asks  Ussher  in  his  Body  of 
Divinity,  ed.  1653,  p.  161).   And  he  adduces  out  of  the  N.  T,  only  Jo.  i.  1 
XX.  28  ;  Rom.  ix.  5  ;  1  Jo.  v.  20. — He  liad  quoted  1  Tim.  iii.  16  in  p.  160 
(with  Eom.  ix.  5)  to  prove  the  union  of  the  two  natures. 


470  THE  ARGUMENT  E  SILENTIO.  [Reply  to 

Certain  of  the  Critics  have  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
other  Cyril  cannot  have  been  acquainted  with  8.  Markxvi.  19 
(and  therefore  with  the  '  last  Twelve  Verses '  of  his  Gospel), 
because  when,  in  his  Catechetical  Lectures,  he  comes  to  the 
'  Eesurrection,'  '  Ascension,'  and  '  Session  at  the  Right  Hand,' 
— he  does  not  quote  S.  Mark  xvi.  19.  And  yet, — (as  it  has 
been  elsewhere^  ft^Hy  shown,  and  in  fact  the  reason  is  assigned 
by  Cyril  himself,) — this  is  only  because,  on  the  previous 
day,  being  Sunday,  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  had  enlarged  upon  the 
Scriptural  evidence  for  those  august  verities,  (viz.  S.  Mark 
xvi.  19, — S.  Luke  xxiv.  51, — Acts  i.  9)  ;  and  therefore  was 
unwilling  to  say  over  again  before  the  same  auditory  what 
he  had  so  recently  delivered.  « 

But  indeed, — (the  remark  is  worth  making  in  passing,) — 
many  of  our  modern  Critics  seem  to  forget  that  the  heretics 
with  whom  Athanasius,  Basil,  the  Gregories,  &c.,  were  chiefly 
in  conflict,  did  not  by  any  means  deny  the  Godhead  of  our 
Lord.  Arians  and  Apolinarians  alike  admitted  that  Christ 
ivas  God.  This,  in  fact,  has  been  pointed  out  already.  Very 
diff'erently  indeed  would  the  ancient  Fathers  have  expressed 
themselves,  could  they  have  imagined  the  calamitous  use 
which,  at  the  end  of  1500  years,  perverse  wits  would  make  of 
their  writings, — the  astonishing  inferences  they  would  pro- 
pose to  extract  from  their  very  silence.  I  may  not  go  further 
into  the  subject  in  this  place. 

[m]  The  story  about  Macedonius.     His  testimony. 

It  follows  to  say  a  few  words  concerning  Macedonius  IL, 

patriarch  of  Constantinople  [a.d.  496-511],  of  whom  it  has 

been  absurdly  declared  that  he  was  the  inventor  of  the  reading 

for  which  I  contend.     I  pointed  out  on  a  former  occasion 


^  Burgon's  Lad  Tivelve  Verses,  &c.,  p.  195  and  note.     Sec  Canon  (Jook 
on  tliis  aubjcct, — pp.  146-7. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]        the   story   ABOUT   MACEDONIUS.  471 

that  it  \YOulcl  follow  from  that  very  circumstance,  (as  far  as  it 
is  true,)  that  Macedonius  "  is  a  witness  for  ©eof — j;c?/orcc."  ^ 

Instead  of  either  assenting  to  this,  (which  is  surely  a  self- 
evident  proposition  !), — or  else  disproving  it, — you  are  at  the 
pains  to  furbish  up  afresh,  as  if  it  were  a  novelty,  the  stale 
and  stupid  figment  propagated  by  Liberatus  of  Carthage, 
that  Macedonius  was  expelled  from  his  see  by  the  Emperor 
Anastasius  for  falsifying  1  Timothy  iii.  16.  This  exploded 
fable  you  preface  by  announcing  it  as  "  a  remarkable  fact," 
that  "  it  was  the  distinct  helicf  of  Latin  writers  as  early  as  the 
Vlth  century  that  the  reading  of  this  passage  had  been 
corrupted  by  the  Greeks."  ^  How  you  get  your  "  remarkable 
fact,"  out  of  your  premiss, — "the  distinct  belief  of  Latin 
writers,"  out  of  the  indistinct  rumour  ['  dicitur ']  vouched  for 
by  a  single  individual, — I  see  not.     But  let  that  pass. 

"  The  story  shows  "  (you  proceed)  "  that  the  Latins  in  the 
sixth  century  believed  o<?  to  be  the  reading  of  the  older  Greek 
manuscripts,  and  regarded  ©eo?  as  a  false  reading  made  out 
of  it."  (p.  69.) — My  lord  Bishop,  I  venture  to  declare  that 
the  story  shows  nothing  of  the  sort.  The  Latins  in  the  Vlth 
(and  every  other)  century  believed  that — not  6'?,  but— o,  was 
the  right  reading  of  the  Greek  in  this  place.  Their  belief  on 
this  subject  however  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the 
story  before  us.  Liberatus  was  not  the  spokesman  of  "  the 
Latins  of  the  Vlth,"  (or  any  other  bygone)  "century :"  but  (as 
Bp.  Pearson  points  out)  a  singularly  ill-informed  Archdeacon 
of  Carthage ;  who,  had  he  taken  ever  so  little  pains  with  the 
subject,  would  have  become  aware  that  for  no  such  reason  as  he 
assigns  was  Macedonius  [a.d.  511]  thrust  out  of  his  bishopric. 
If,  however,  there  were  at  least  thus  much  of  truth  in  the  story, 
— namely,  that  one  of  the  charges  brought  against  Macedonius 

1  Siipra,  p.  102.  *  Pp.  68-9. 


472  THE   TESTIMONY   OF   LIBER  ATUS  [Reply  to 

was  his  having  cornipted  Scripture,  and  notably  his  having 
altered  o<?  into  0eo9  in  1  Tim.  iii.  IG  ;  —  surely,  the  most 
obvious  of  all  inferences  would  be,  that  Be69  was  found  in  copies 
of  S.  PauTs  epistles  piitfortli  at  Constantinople  hy  arcliiepiscopal 
authorit)/  between  a.d.  4:9 G  and  a.d.  511.  To  say  the  least, — 
Macedonius,  by  his  writings  or  by  his  discourses,  certainly 
by  his  influence,  nutst  have  slioivn  liimsclf  favourable  to  ©eo? 
{not  0?)  e<^avepdi6rj.  Else,  with  what  show  of  reason  could  the 
charge  have  been  brought  against  him  ?  "  I  suppose  "  (says 
our  learned  Dr.  John  Mill)  "  that  the  fable  before  us  arose 
out  of  the  fact  that  Macedonius,  on  hearing  that  in  several 
MSS.  of  the  Constantinopolitan  Church  the  text  of  1  Tim.  iii. 
16  (which  witnesses  expressly  to  the  Godhead  of  Christ)  had 
been  depraved,  was  careful  that  those  copies  should  be  cor- 
rected in  conformity  with  the  best  exemplars."  ^ 

But,  in  fact,  I  suspect  you  completely  misunderstand  the 
whole  matter.  You  speak  of  "the  story."  But  pray, — 
Which  "  story  "  do  you  mean  ?  "  The  story  "  which  Libe- 
ratus  told  in  the  Vlth  century  ?  or  the  ingenious  gloss  which 
Hincmar,  Abp.  of  Eheinis,  put  upon  it  in  the  IXth  ?  You 
mention  the  first, — you  reason  from  the  second.  Either  will 
suit  me  equally  well.     But — una  la  volta,  per  carita  ! 

Hincmar,  (whom  the  critics  generally  follow,)  relates  that 
Macedonius  turned  OC  into  eeoc  (i.e.  ec),^  If  Macedonius 
did,  he  preferred  ©eo?  to  09.  .  .  .  But  the  story  which  Liberatus 
promulgated  is  quite  different.^     Let  him  be  heard : — 

"  At  this  time,  Macedonius,  bp.  of  OR,  is  said  to  have  been 
deposed  by  the  emperor  Anastasius  on  a  charge  of  having 
falsified  the  Gospels,  and  notably  that  saying  of  the  Apostle, 


>  Proleg.  in  N:T.—%  1013.  ^  0pp.  (ed.  1645)  ii.  447. 

^  Concilia,  v.  772  a.     I  quote  from  Uaniicr's  ed.  of  the  Brcviuriam, 
reprinted  Tiy  Clallaiidiu!^,  xii.  1532. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]    MISUNDEKSTOOD   BY   BISHOP   ELLICOTT.       473 

'  Quia  apparuit  in  came,  justificatus  est  in  spiritu.'  He  was 
charged  with  having  turned  the  Greek  monosyllable  OC  (i.e. 
'qui'),  by  the  change  of  a  single  letter  (Cji)  for  o)  into  OJC  :  i.e. 
'  ut  esset  Deus  apparuit  per  carnem.' " 

Now,  that  this  is  a  very  lame  story,  all  must  see.  In  reciting 
the  passage  in  Latin,  Liberatus  himself  exhibits  neither  '  qui,' 
nor  '  quod,'  nor  '  Deus,' — but  '  QUIA  apparuit  in  came.'  (The 
translator  of  Origen,  by  the  way,  does  the  same  thing.^) 
And  yet,  Liberatus  straightway  adds  (as  the  effect  of  the 
change)  '  ut  esset  Deus  ap2Jaruit  per  carnem : '  as  if  that  were 
possible,  unless  '  Deus '  stood  in  the  text  already !  Quite 
plain  in  the  meantime  is  it,  that,  according  to  Liberatus, 
ft)9  was  the  word  which  Macedonius  introduced  into  1  Tim. 
iii.  16.  And  it  is  worth  observing  that  the  scribe  who 
rendered  into  Greek  Pope  Martin  I.'s  fifth  Letter  (written 
on  the  occasion  of  the  Lateran  Council  a.d.  649), — having 
to  translate  the  Pope's  quotation  from  the  Vulgate  ('  quod 
manifestatus  est,') — exhibits  &)9  icJiavepcodT]  in  this  place.^ 

High  time  it  becomes  that  I  should  offer  it  as  my  opinion 
that  those  Critics  are  right  (Cornelius  a  Lapide  [1614]  and 
Cotelerius  [1681])  who,  reasoning  from  what  Liberatus 
actually  says,  shrewdly  infer  that  there  must  have  existed 
codices  in  the  time  of  Macedonius  which  exhibited  OC  e€OC 
in  this  place  ;  and  that  tJiis  must  be  the  reading  to  which 
Liberatus  refers.^  Such  codices  exist  still.  One,  is  preserved 
in    the   library  of  the  Basilian  monks  at  Crypta   Ferrata, 


^  iv.  465  c.  *  Concilia,  vi.  28  e  [  =  iii.  645  c  (ed.  Harduin)  ]. 

^  "  Ex  seqnentibus  coUigo  quasdam  exemplaria  tempore  Auastasii  et 
Macedonii  habuisse  6s  Geo? ;  ut,  mutatione  facta  os  in  as,  intelli2:eretur 
ut  esset  Deus"  (Cotelerii,  Ucd.  Gr.  Mon.  iii.  663) — " Q.  d.  Ut  hie  homo, 
qui  dicitur  Jesus,  esset  et  dici  posset  Deus,"  &c.  (Cornelius,  in  loc.  He 
declares  absolutely  "  olim  legerunt  .  .  .  .  6y  eeoy.") — All  this  was  noticed 
long  since  by  Berriman,  pp.  243-4. 


474  THE   LIBRARY   AT   CRYPTA   FERRATA.       [Reply  to 

already  spoken  of  at  pp.  44G-8  :  another,  is  at  Paris.     I  call 
them  respectively  '  Apost.  83  '  and  '  Panl  282.'  ^    This  is  new. 

Enouoh  of  all  this  however.  Too  much  in  fact.  I  must 
hasten  on.  The  entire  fable,  by  whomsoever  fabricated,  has 
been  treated  with  well-merited  contempt  by  a  succession  of 
learned  men  ever  since  the  days  of  Bp.  Pearson.^  And  altliough 
during  the  last  century  several  writers  of  the  unbelieving 
school  (chiefly  Socinians^)  revived  and  embellished  the  silly 
story,  in  order  if  possible  to  get  rid  of  a  text  which  witnesses 
inconveniently  to  the  Godhead  of  Christ,  one  would  have 
hoped  that,  in  these  enlightened  days,  a  Christian  Bishop  of 
the  same  Church  which  the  learned,  pious,  and  judicious  <3  ohn 
Berriman  adorned  a  century  and  a-half  ago,  would  have  been 
ashamed  to  rekindle  the  ancient  strife  and  to  swell  the  Soci- 


'  'Apost.  83,'  is  ^Crypta-Vcrrat.  A.  /3.  iv.'  described  in  tlie  Appendix. 
I  owe  the  information  to  the  learned  librarian  of  Crypta  Ferrata,  the 
Hieromonachns  A.  Rocchi.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  transcribe  tlie  letter  which 
conveyed  information  which  the  writer  knew  would  be  acceptable  to  me : — 
"  Cline  Rine  Domine.  Quod  erat  in  votis,  plures  loci  illius  Paulini  non 
modo  in  nostris  codd.  lectiones,  sed  et  in  his  ipsis  variationes,  adsequutus 
es.  Modo  ego  operi  meo  finem  imponam,  descri])tis  prope  sexcentis  et 
quinquaginta  quinque  vel  codicibus  vel  ]\ISS.  Tres  autem,  quos  prinium 
nunc  notatos  tibi  exhibeo,  pertinent  ad  Liturgicorum  ordineni.  Jam 
fulici  omine  tuas  prosequere  elucubrationes,  cautus  tantum  ne  studio  et 
]al)()rc  nimio  valetudinem  tuam  defatiges.  Vale.  De  Tusculano,  xi.  kal. 
Maias,  an.  R.  S.  mdccclxxxih.  Antonius  Rocciti,  Hieronidnachus 
liasilianus." 

For  'Paul  282,'  (a  bilingual  MS.  at  Paris,  known  as  '  Armenien  9,')  I 
urn  indebted  to  the  Abbe  Martin,  who  describes  it  in  his  Jntrodndion 
a  la  Critique  Textuelle  du  N.  T.,  1883,— pp.  G60-1.     See  Appendix. 

^  Prebendary  Scrivener  (p.  555)  ably  closes  the  list.  Any  one  desirous 
•  of  mastering  the  entire  literature  of  the  subject  should  study  the  Rev.  John 
Jierriman's  interesting  and  exhaustive  Dissertation , — pp.  229-263. 

'  The  nader  is  invited  to  read  wliat  Berriman,  (who  was  engaged  on  his 
'  Dissertation  '  while  Bp.  Butler  was  writing  the  *  Advertisement '  prefixed 
to  \\K^  An'thxpi''  [1736],)  has  written  on  this  part  of  the  subject, — pp. 
120-9,  l7;;-]ii8,  231-240,  259-60,  262,  <l-c. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]   EPIPHANIUS   CAT. — THEODORUS   STUD.  475 

nian  chorus.     I  shall  be  satisfied  if  I  have  at  least  convinced 
you  that  Macedonius  is  a  witness  for  0eo?  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16. 

[n]  The  testimony  of  an  ANONYMOUS  writer  (a.d  430), — 
of  Epiphanius  (a.d.  787), — of  Theodokus  Studita  (a.d. 
795  ?), — of  Scholia, — of  (Ecumenius,— 0/  Theopiiylact, — 

of  EUTHYMIUS. 

The  evidence  of  an  Anonymous  Author  who  has  been  mis- 
taken for  Athanasius, — you  pass  by  in  silence.  That  this 
writer  lived  in  the  days  when  the  IsTestorian  Controversy  was 
raging, — namely,  in  the  first  half  of  the  Vth  century, — is  at 
all  events  evident.  He  is  therefore  at  least  as  ancient  a 
witness  for  the  text  of  Scripture  as  codex  a  itself :  and  0eo9 
i^avepciiOrj  is  clearly  what  he  found  written  in  this  place.  ^ 
Why  do  you  make  such  a  fuss  about  Cod.  a,  and  yet  ignore 
this  contemporary  witness  ?  "We  do  not  know  uiho  wrote  the 
Epistle  in  question, — true.  Neither  do  we  know  who  wrote 
Codex  A.     What  then  ? 

Another  eminent  witness  for  ©eo9,  whom  also  you  do  not 
condescend  to  notice,  is  Epiphanius,  deacon  of  Catana  in 
Sicily,  —  who  represented  Thomas,  Abp.  of  Sardinia,  at  the 
2nd  Nicene  Council,  a.d.  787.  A  long  discourse  of  this 
Ecclesiastic  may  be  seen  in  the  Acts  of  the  Council,  trans- 
lated into  Latin, — which  makes  his  testimony  so  striking. 
But  in  fact  his  words  are  express,^  and  the  more  valuable 
because  they  come  from  a  region  of  Western  Christendom 
from  which  textual  utterances  are  rare. 

A  far  more  conspicuous  writer  of  nearly  the  same  date, 
Theodorus  Studita  of  CP,  [a.d.  759-826,]  is  also  a  witness 


^  Apud  Athanasiam,  0pp.  ii.  33  ;  and  see  Garnier's  introductory  Note. 

"^  '  Audi  Paulum  magna  voce  clamantem :  Deus  manifestatus  est  in  came 
[down  to]  asmmptus  est  in  gloria.  0  magni  doctoris  affatum!  DeuSy 
inquit,  mamfestatus  est  in  carne,^  (fee. — Concilia,  vii.  p.  618  e 


476  THE   TESTIMONY   OF  [Rei>ly  to 

for  0e6<?.^  How  does  it  happen,  my  lord  Bishop,  that  you 
contend  so  eagerly  for  the  testimony  of  codices  F  and  G, 
which  are  but  one  IXtli-century  witness  after  all,— and  yet 
entirely  disregard  living  utterances  like  these,  of  known 
men, — who  belonged  to  known  places, — and  wrote  at  a 
known  time  ?  Is  it  because  they  witness  unequivocally 
against  you  ? 

Several  ancient  Scholiasts,  expressing  themselves  di- 
versely, deserve  enumeration  here,  who  are  all  witnesses  for 
Oeo?  exclusively.^     Lastly, — 

GECUMENIUS^  (A.D.  990), — THEOniVLACT  *  (a.d.  1077), — 
EuTiiYMius^  (a.d.  lllfi),  —  close  this  enumeration.  They 
are  all  three  clear  witnesses  for  reading  not  09  but  ©eo?. 

[o]     The  testimony  of  Ecclesiastical  Tradition. 

Nothing  has  been  hitherto  said  concerning  the  Ecclesiasti- 
cal usage  with  respect  to  this  place  of  Scripture.  1  Tim. 
iii.  16  occurs  in  a  lection  consisting  of  nine  verses  (1  Tim. 
iii.  13-iv.  5),  which  used  to  be  publicly  read  in  almost  all 
the  Churches  of  Eastern  Christendom  on  the  Saturday  before 
Epiphany.^  It  was  also  read,  in  not  a  few  Churches,  on  tlie 
34th  Saturday  of  the  year.''     Unfortunately,  the  book  whicli 


^  Theodori  Studitas,  Epistt.  lib.  ii.  36,  and  15(3.  (Sirmondi's  Opera 
Varia,  vol.  v.  pp.  349  e  and  498  b,— Venet.  1728.) 

2  Paul  113,  (Mattliaji's  a)  contains  two  Scholia  which  witnesis  to  660? 
f(f)avfpoiOr] :— Paul  115,  (Matth;i5i's  d)  also  contains  two  Scholia. — Paul 
118,  (Matthaii's  h).— Paul  123,  (Mattha^i's  n).  See  Matth;ei's  N.  T. 
vol.  xi.     Pr;e/a^.  pp.  xlii.-iii.  ^ii,  228  a.  *  ii.  5G9  e  :  570  a. 

^  Panoplia, — Tergobyst,  1710,  fol.  pKy.  p.  2,  col.  1. 

'  But  in  Apost.  12  (He;j;.  375)  it  is  the  lection  for  the  30th  (X')  Satur- 
day.—In  Apost.  33  (Keg.  382),  for  the  31.st  (\a').— In  A  post.  2G  (Ueg. 
320),  the  lection  for  the  34th  Satiu'day  begins  at  1  Tim.  vi.  11. — Apostt. 
20  and  27  (Hegg.  320-1)  arc  said  to  have  a  peculiar  order  of  lessons. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  ecclesiastical   TRADITION.  477 

contains  lections  from  S.  Paul's  Epistles,  ('Apostolus '  it  is 
technically  called,)  is  of  comparatively  rare  occurrence, — is 
often  found  in  a  mutilated  condition, — and  (for  this  and 
other  reasons)  is,  as  often  as  not,  without  this  particular 
lesson. '^  Thus,  an  analysis  of  90  copies  of  the  '  Apostolus ' 
(No.  1  to  90),  is  attended  by  the  following  result: — 10  are 
found  to  have  been  set  down  in  error ;  ^  wliile  41  are 
declared — (sometimes,  I  fear,  through  the  unskilfulness  of 
those  who  profess  to  have  examined  them), — not  to  contain 
1  Tim.  iii.  16.^  Of  7,  I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  tidings.* 
Thus,  there  are  but  32  copies  of  the  book  called  'Apostolus 
available  for  our  present  purpose. 

But  of  these  thirty-two,  twcnty-scvcn  exhibit  ©eo?.^     You 
will  be  interested  to  hear  that   one  rejoices  in  the  unique 


'  For  convenience,  many  codices  are  reckoned  under  this  head  (viz.  of 
'  Apostohis ')  which  are  rather  'ATrdaToXo-euayyeXta.  Many  again  which 
are  but  fragmentary,  or  contain  only  a  very  few  lessons  from  the  Epistles : 
such  are  Apostt.  97  to  103.     See  the  Appendix. 

'  No.  21,  28,  31  are  said  to  be  Gospel  lessons  ('  Evstt.').  No.  29,  35  and 
36  are  Euchologia ;  "  the  two  latter  probably  Melchite,  for  the  codices 
exhibit  some  Arabic  words "  (Abbe  XIartin).  No,  43  and  48  must  be 
erased.     No.  70  and  81  are  identical  with  52  (B.  M.  Addit.  32051). 

^  X^iz.  Apost.  1 :  3:6:9  &  10  (which  are  Menologies  with  a  few 
Gospel  lections)  :  15  :  16  :  17  :  19  :  20  :  24 :  26  :  27  :  32  :  37  :  39 :  44  : 
47 :  50 :  53 :  55 :  56  :  59  :  60 :  61 :  63  :  64 :  66  :  67  :  68  :  71  :  72 :  73  : 
75:  76:  78:  79:  80:  87:  88:  90. 

*  Viz.  Apost,  4  at  Florence :  8  at  Copenhagen :  40,  41,  42  at  Eome : 
54  at  St,  Petersburg :  74  in  America, 

^  Xlz.  Apost.  2  and  52  (Addit.  32051)  in  the  B.  XIus,,  also  69  (Addit, 
29714  verified  b\  Dr.  C,  E.  Gregory):  5  at  Gottingen:  7  at  the  Propa- 
ganda (verified  by  Dr.  Beyer) :  11,  22,  23,  25,  30,  33  at  Paris  (verified  by 
Abbe  XIartin)  :  13,  14,  18  at  XIoscow :  38,  49  in  the  Vatican  (verified  by 
Signor  Cozza-Luzi) :  45  at  Glasgow  (verified  by  Dr.  Young) :  46  at 
Xlilan  (verified  by  Dr.  Ceriani) :  51  at  Besan§on  (verified  by  M,  Castan)  : 
57  and  62  at  Lambeth,  also  65  b-c  (all  three  verified  by  Scrivener) :  58 
at  Ch,  Ch.,  Oxford :  77  at  Moscow  :  82  at  Messina  (verified  by  Papas  Ma- 
tranga) :  84  and  89  at  Crypta  Ferrata  (verified  by  Hieromonachus  Rocchi). 


478  MSS.   AT   CRYPTA    FERRATA.  [Reply  to 

reading  Beou  :  ^  while  another  Copy  of  the  '  Apostohis  '  keeps 
'  Paul  282 '  in  countenance  by  reading  09  ©eo?.^  In  other 
words,  '  God  '  is  found  in  29  copies  out  of  32  :  while  '  who ' 
(09)  is  observed  to  survive  in  only  3, — and  they,  Western 
documents  of  suspicious  character.  Two  of  these  were  pro- 
duced in  one  and  tlie  same  Calabrian  monastery ;  and  they 
still  stand,  side  by  side,  in  the  library  of  Crypta  Ferrata :  ^ 
being  exclusively  in  sympathy  with  the  very  suspicious 
Western  document  at  Paris,  already  described  at  page  446. 

Ecclesiastical  Teadition  is  therefore  clearly  against  you, 
in  respect  of  the  reading  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  How  you  esti- 
mate this  head  of  Evidence,  I  know  not.  For  my  own  part, 
I  hold  it  to  be  of  superlative  importance.  It  transports  us 
back,  at  once,  to  the  primitive  age;  and  is  found  to  be 
infinitely  better  deserving  of  attention  than  the  witness  of 
any  extant  uncial  documents  which  can  be  produced.  And 
why  ?  For  the  plain  reason  that  it  must  needs  have  been 
once  attested  by  an  indefinitely  large  number  of  codices  more 
ancient  by  far  than  any  lohieh  %dc  now  possess.  In  fact, 
Ecclesiastical  Tradition,  when  superadded  to  the  testi- 
mony of  Manuscripts  and  Fathers,  becomes  an  over- 
whelming consideration. 

And  now  we  may  at  last  proceed  to  sum  up.  Let  me 
gather  out  the  result  of  the  foregoing  fifty  pages ;  and  remind 


'  Viz.  Apost.  34  (Reg.  383),  a  XVth-century  Codex.  The  Ablw^  Martin 
assures  irie  tl\at  this  copy  exhibits  ^va-Trjpinv  \  6h  ecpavepadt].  Xote 
however  that  the  iwsition  of  the  point,  as  well  as  the  accentuation,  jiroves 
that  nothing  else  but  6s  was  intended.  1'his  is  very  instructive.  What 
if  the  same  slip  of  the  pen  had  been  found  in  Cod.  b  ? 

*  Viz.  Apost.  83  (Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  fi.  iv.) 

^  Viz.  Praxapost.  85  and  86  (Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  /3.  vii.  wliich  exhibits 
fivarriptov  on  €(/)«  |  vfp^Ot)  (v  aapKi-  and  A.  /3.  viii.,  wliicli  exhibits  fivari- 
piov  oa  e  .  .  vepoidr}  |  tv  aapKv.  [.s/c.]).  CoMcerniug  tliesc  codices,  see 
above,  \)]\  4-16  to  448. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]     the   evidence   FOR   MY2TH'PION  "O.  479 

the  reader  briefly  of  the  amount  of  external  testimony  pro- 
ducible in  support  of  each  of  these  rival  readings  : — o, — 09, — 

0609. 

[I.]  Sit7R  of  the  Evidence  of  Veesions,  Copies,  Fatheks,  in 
favour  of  reading  iivcmqpiov  '  b  i(f)avepo)97)  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16. 

(a)  The  reading  /jLvar/jpiov '  0  ec^aveponOrj, — (which  Wet- 
stein  strove  hard  to  bring  into  favour,  and  wliich  was  highly 
popular  with  the  Socinian  party  down  to  the  third  quarter  of 
the  last  century,) — enjoys,  as  we  have  seen,  (pp.  448-53,) 
the  weighty  attestation  of  the  Latin  and  of  the  Peschito, 
— of  the  Coptic,  of  the  Sahidic,  and  of  the  .^thiopic  Versions. 

No  one  may  presume  to  speak  slightingly  of  such  evidence 
as  this.  It  is  the  oldest  which  can  be  produced  for  the 
truth  of  anything  in  the  inspired  Text  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment ;  and  it  comes  from  the  East  as  well  as  from  the  West. 
Yet  is  it,  in  and  by  itself,  clearly  inadequate.  Two  charac- 
teristics of  Truth  are  wanting  to  it, — two  credentials, — 
unfurnished  with  which,  it  cannot  be  so  much  as  seriously 
entertained.  It  demands  Variety  as  well  as  Largeness  of 
attestation.  It  should  be  able  to  exhibit  in  support  of  its 
claims  the  additional  witness  of  Copies  and  Fathers.     But, 

(/3)  On  the  contrary,  o  is  found  besides  in  onli/  one  Greek 
Manuscript, — viz.  the  Vlth-century  codex  Claromontanus,  D. 
And  further, 

(7)  Two  ancient  writers  alone  bear  witness  to  this  reading, 
viz.  Gelasius  of  Cyzicus,^  whose  date  is  a.d.  476  ;^  and  the 
UNKNOWN   Author  of  a   homily  of  uncertain   date  in  the 


1  Concilia,  ii.  217  c  (  =  ed.  Hard.  i.  418  b). 

^  He  wrote  a  history  of  the  Council  of  Nicaea,  in  which  he  introduces 
the  discussions  of  the  several  Bishops  present, — all  the  product  (as  Cave 
thinks)  of  his  own  brain. 


480  THE   EVIDENCE   OF  [Keply  to 

Appendix  to  Chrysostom^  ....  It  is  scarcely  intelligible 
how,  on  such  evidence,  the  Critics  of  the  last  century  can 
have  persuaded  themselves  (with  Grotius)  that  fxvarTjpLov '  o 
€(f)av6p(o6r]  is  the  true  reading  of  1  Timothy  iii.  16.  And  yet, 
in  order  to  maintain  this  thesis,  Sir  Isaac  Newton  descended 
from  the  starry  sphere  and  tried  his  hand  at  Textual  Criti- 
cism. Wetstein  (1752)  freely  transferred  the  astronomer's 
labours  to  his  own  pages,  and  thus  gave  renewed  currency  to 
an  opinion  which  the  labours  of  the  learned  Berriman  (1741) 
had  already  demonstrated  to  be  untenable. 

Whether  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  (in  his  work  '  de  Incar- 
nationc')  wrote  09  or  0,  must  remain  uncertain  till  a  sight  has 
been  obtained  of  his  Greek  together  with  its  context.  I  find 
that  he  quotes  1  Tim  iii.  16  at  least  three  times  : — [1]  Of  the 
first  place,  there  is  only  a  Latin  translation,  which  begins 
'  Quod  justificatvs  est  in  spiritu.'"^ — [2]  The  second  place 
comes  to  us  in  Latin,  Greek,  and  Syriac:  but  unsatisfac- 
torily in  all  three: — (a)  The  Latin  version  introduces  the 
quotation  thus, — '  Consonantia  et  Apostolus  dicit,  Ut  mani- 
feste  magnum  est  pietatis  mysterium,  QUI^  (or  quod*)  mani- 
festatus  (or  tum)  est  in  came,  justificatus  (or  tum)  est 
in  spiritu:' — (h)  The  Greek,  (for  which  we  are  indebted 
to  Leontius  Byzantinus,  A.D.  610,)  reads,  — ''O9  ic^ave- 
pco6>}    ev    aapKi,    iSoKaidoOr]    iu   TTvevfiaTt^ — divested    of  all 


'  viii.  2141). 

*  Cited  at  the  Council  of  CP.  (a.d.  553).  \_Co7icilia,  ed.  L.ibbe  et 
Cosyart,  v.  447  b  c=ed.  Harduin,  iii.  29  c  and  82  e.] 

^  Concilia,  Labbe,  v.  449  a,  and  Harduin,  iii.  84  d.       ^  Harduin,  iii.  32  d. 

"  A  Latin  translation  of  the  work  of  Leontius  {Contra  Nestor,  et 
Lutych.),  wherein  it  is  stated  that  the  present  place  was  found  in  Uh.  xiii., 
may  be  seen  in  Gallandius  [xii.  6C0-99 :  the  passage  under  consideration 
being  given  at  p.  G94  c  d] :  but  Mai  \_Script.  Vett.  vi.  290-312],  having 
discovered  iu  the  Vatican  the  original  text  of  the  excerpts  from  Theod. 
Mops.,  published  (from  the  xiith  book  of  Tlieod.  de  Jncarnatione)  the 
Greek  of  the  passage  [vi.  308].  From  this  source,  Migne  \_l'atr.  Gr.  vol. 
66,  col.  988]  seems  to  have  obtained  his  quotation. 


Bp.  Em,ioott.]         THEODORE   OP  MOPSUESTIA.  481 

preface.^  Those  seven  words,  thus  isolated  from  their  con- 
text, are  accordingly  printed  by  Migne  as  a  heading  only : — 
(c)  The  Syriac  translation  unmistakably  reads,  '  Et  Apo- 
stolus ^^.xit,Vere  suUiine  est  hoc  mysterium,  QUOD,' — omitting 
r;"}?  evcre^€La<i} — [3]  The  third  quotation,  which  is  found 
only  in  Syriac,^  begins, — '  For  truly  great  is  the-mystcry  of- 
thc-fear-of  God,  who  was  manifested  in-the-fiesh  and-was- 
pistified  in-tke-spirit.'  This  differs  from  the  received  text  of 
the  Peschito  by  substituting  a  different  word  for  evai^eca, 
and  by  employing  the  emphatic  state  '  the-flesh,'  '  the-spirit 
where  the  Peschito  has  the  absolute  state  'flesh,'  'spirit.' 
The  two  later  clauses  agree  with  the  Harkleian  or  Philoxe- 
nian.* — I  find  it  difficult  from  all  this  to  know  what  pre- 
cisely to  do  with  Theodore's  evidence.  It  has  a  truly 
oracular  ambiguity  ;  wavering  between  6 — o? — and  even 
©eo9.  You,  I  observe,  (who  are  only  acquainted  with  the 
second  of  the  three  places  above  cited,  and  but  imper- 
fectly with  that,)  do  not  hesitate  to  cut  the  knot  by  simply 
claiming  the  heretic's  authority  for  the  reading  you  advo- 
cate,— viz.  09.     I  have  thought  it  due  to  my  readers  to  tell 


*  Either  as  given  by  Mai,  or  as  represented  in  the  Latin  translation  of 
Leontius  (obtained  from  a  different  codex)  by  Canisius  {^Antiqum  Lectt., 
1601,  vol.  iv.],  from  whose  work  Gallandius  simply  reprinted  it  in  1788. 

*  Theodori  Mo])^.  Fragmenta  Syriaca,  vertit  Ed.  Sachau,  Lips.  1869, 
— p.  53. — I  am  indebted  for  much  zealous  help  in  respect  of  these  Syriac 
quotations  to  the  Rev.  Thomas  Randell  of  Oxford, — who,  I  venture  to 
predict,  will  some  day  make  his  mark  in  these  studies. 

^  Ibid.  p.  64.  The  context  of  the  place  (which  is  derived  from  Lagarde's 
Analecta  Syriaca,  p.  102,  top,)  is  as  follows  :  "  Deltas  enim  inhabitans 
hfec  omnia  gubernare  incepit.  Et  in  hac  re  etiam  gratia  Spiritus  Sancti 
adjuvabat  ad  hunc  effectum,  ut  beatus  quoque  Apostolus  dixit :  '  Vere 
grande  .  .  .  in  spirihi  ; '  quoniam  nos  quoque  auxilium  Spiritus  accepturi 
sumus  ad  perfectionem  justitias."  A  further  reference  to  1  Tim.  iii.  16  at 
page  69,  does  not  help  us. 

*  I  owe  this,  and  more  help  than  I  can  express  in  a  foot-note,  to  my 
learned  friend  the  Rev.  Henry  Deane,  of  S.  John's. 

2  I 


482  SUM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [Reply  to 

them  all  that  is  known  about  the  evidence  furnished  by 
Theodore  of  Mopsuestia.  At  all  events,  the  utmost  which 
can  be  advanced  in  favour  of  reading  ixvarriptov  •  o  in  1 
Timothy  iii.  16,  has  now  been  freely  stated.  I  am  therefore 
at  liberty  to  pass  on  to  the  next  opinion. 

[II.]  Swm  of  the  Evidence  of  Versions,  Copies,  Fathers  in 
favour  of  readinrj  fjbvcrrrjpiov '  09  ec^avepcadrj  in  1  Timothy 
iii.  16. 

Eemarkable  it  is  how  completely  Griesbach  succeeded  in 
diverting  the  current  of  opinion  with  respect  to  the  place  before 
us,  into  a  new  channel.  At  first  indeed  (viz.  in  1777)  he 
retained  @eo9  in  his  Text,  timidly  printing  09  in  small  type 
above  it ;  and  remarking, — '  Judicium  de  hdc  lectionis  varietate 
Icctorihus  lihcrum  rclinquere  j9/rtc?«7.'  But,  at  the  end  of 
thirty  years  (viz.  in  1806),  waxing  bolder,  Griesbach  sub- 
stituted 09  for  0609, — '  ut  12)31  (as  he  says)  '  nobis  constaremus.' 
Lachmann,  Tischendorf,  Tregelles,  Westcott  and  Hort,  and 
the  Revisers,  under  your  guidance,  have  followed  him  : 
which  is  to  me  unaccountable, — seeing  that  even  less  autho- 
rity is  producible  for  09,  than  for  0,  in  this  place.  But  let 
the  evidence  for  ixvarripLov '  09  icftavepoiOr}  ev  aapKc  be  briefly 
recapitulated  : — 

(a)  It  consists  of  a  siiu/lc  uncivil  copij,  viz.  the  corrupt  cod. 
j^,-^(for,  as  was  fully  explained  above,^  codd.  c  and  f-g  yield 
uncertain  testimony)  :  and  perhaps  two  cursive  copies,  viz. 
Paul  17,  (the  notorious  "  33  "  of  the  Gospels,) — and  a  copy 
at  Upsala  (No.  73),  which  is  held  to  recjuire  further  verifica- 
tion.^ To  these,  are  to  be  added  throe  otlier  liturgical  wit- 
nesses in  the  cursive  character — being  Western  copies  of  the 
book  called  '  Apostolus,'  which  have  only  recently  come  to 

1  Pages  187-4.T  =*  See  above,  p.  I  i  1. 


Bp.  Elltcott.]  for   reading  *02  'E<I>ANEPn'0H.  483 

light.  Two  of  the  codices  in  question  are  of  Calabriau 
origin.^  A  few  words  more  on  this  sul)ject  will  he  found 
above,  at  pages  477  and  478. 

(^)  The  only  Version  which  certainly  witnesses  in  favour 
of  09,  is  the  Gothic :  which,  (as  explained  at  pp.  452-3)  ex- 
hibits a  hopelessly  obscure  construction,  and  rests  on  the 
evidence  of  a  single  copy  in  the  Ambrosian  library. 

(7)  Of  Patristic  testimonies  (to  fiva-r^piov  '  o?  e^avepdiOr]) 
there  exists  not  one.  That  EriPHANius  [a.d.  360]  professiny 
to  transcribe  from  an  early  treatise  of  his  own,  in  which 
i^avepoidr]  stands  without  a  nominative,  should  prefix  o<? — 
proves  nothing,  as  I  have  fully  explained  elsewhere.^ — The 
equivocal  testimony  rendered  by  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia 
[a.d.  390]  is  already  before  the  reader.^ 

And  this  exhausts  the  evidence  for  a  reading  which  came 
in, — and  (I  venture  to  predict)  will  go  out, — with  the 
present  century.  My  only  wonder  is,  how  an  exhibition  of 
1  Tim.  iii.  16  so  feebly  attested, — so  almost  vnthout  attesta- 
tion,— can  have  come  to  be  seriously  entertained  by  any. 
"  Si," — (as  Griesbach  remarks  concerning  1  John  v.  7) — "  si 
tarn  pauci  ....  testes  ....  sufficerent  ad  demonstrandam 
lectionis  cujusdam  jvrjaLor'qTa,  licet  obstent  tarn  multa 
tamque  gravia  et  testimonia  et  argumenta ;  nullum  jyrorsus 
superessct  Mi  re  criticd  vcri  falsique  criterium,  et  textus  Novi 
Testamenti  universus  plane  incertus  esset  atque  duhiics."  * 

Yet  this  is  the  Eeading  which  you,  my  lord  Bishop,  not 
only  stiffly  maintain,  but  which  you  insist  is  no  longer  so 


1  See  above,  pp.  446-8  ;  also  the  Appendix.  *  See  pp.  426-8. 

3  See  pp.  480-2.  *  N.  T.  1806  ii.  ad  mlcem,  p.  [25]. 

2  I  2 


484  NOT    MODERN   OPINION,   BUT  [Reply  to 

much  as  "  open  to  reconsideration.''  You  are,  it  seems,  for 
introducing  the  cloture  into  Textual  debate.  But  in  fact  you 
are  for  inflicting  pains  and  penalties  as  well,  on  those  who 
have  the  misfortune  to  differ  in  opinion  from  yourself.  You 
discharge  all  the  vials  of  the  united  sees  of  Gloucester  and 
Bristol  on  me  for  my  presumption  in  daring  to  challenge  the 
verdict  of  "  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the  last  fifty  years," — of 
the  Eevisers, — and  of  yourself; — my  folly,  in  venturing  to 
believe  that  the  traditional  reading  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16,  (which 
you  admit  is  at  least  1530  years  old,)  is  the  right  reading 
after  all.  You  hold  me  up  to  public  indignation.  "  He  has 
made "  (you  say)  "  an  elaborate  effort  to  shake  conclusions 
ahout  tvhich  no  iJrofesscd  Scholar  has  any  donht  whatever ;  but 
which  an  ordinary  reader  (and  to  such  we  address  ourselves) 
might  regard  as  still  open  to  reconsideration.'' — "  Moreover" 
(you  proceed)  "  this  case  is  of  great  importance  as  an 
example.  It  illustrates  in  a  striking  manner  the  complete 
isolation  of  the  Beviewer's  position.  If  he  is  right,  all  other 
Critics  are  wrong."  * 

Will  you  permit  me,  my  lord  Bishop,  as  an  ordinary 
writer,  addressing  (like  yourself^  "  ordinary  readers," — re- 
spectfully to  point  out  that  you  entirely  mistake  the  pro- 
blem in  hand  ?  The  Greek  Text  of  the  N.  T.  is  not  to  be 
settled  by  Mouekn  Opinion,  but  by  Ancient  Authority.^ 
In  this  department  of  enquiry  therefore,  "  complete  isolation  " 
is  his,  and  his  only,  who  is  forsaken  by  Copies,  Versions, 
Fathers.  The  man  who  is  able,  on  the  contrary,  to  point  to 
an  overwhelming  corai)any  of  Ancient  Witnesses,  and  is 
contented  modestly  to  take  up  his  station  at  their  feet, — 
such  an  one  can  afford  to  disregard  "  The  Textual  Criticism 
of  the  last  fifty  years"  if  it  presumes  to  contradict  their  plain 


'  I'age  7G.  *  iSee  above,  pp.  .'!76-S. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]     ancient  AUTHOEITY,   THE  CRITERION.       485 

decrees ;  can  even  afford  to  smile  at  the  confidence  of  "  pro- 
fessed Scholars  "  and  "  Critics,"  if  they  are  so  ill  advised  as 
to  set  themselves  in  battle  array  against  that  host  of  ancient 
men. 

To  say  therefore  of  such  an  one,  (as  you  now  say  of  me,) 
"  If  he  is  right,  all  other  Critics  are  wrong," — is  to  present 
an  irrelevant  issue,  and  to  perplex  a  plain  question.  The 
business  of  Textual  Criticism  (as  you  state  at  page  28  of  your 
pamphlet)  is  nothing  else  but  to  ascertain  "  the  consentient 
testimony  of  the  most  ancient  Authorities."  The  office  of  the 
Textual  Critic  is  none  other  but  to  interpret  rightly  the 
solemn  verdict  of  Anticpiity.  Do  /  then  interpret  that  verdict 
rightly, — or  do  I  not  ?  The  whole  question  resolves  itself 
into  that !  If  I  do  not, — pray  show  me  wherein  I  have  mis- 
taken the  facts  of  the  case.  But  if  I  do, — why  do  you  not 
come  over  instantly  to  my  side  ?  "  Since  he  is  right,"  (I 
shall  expect  to  hear  you  say,)  "  it  stands  to  reason  that  the 
'  professed  Critics '  whom  he  has  been  combating, — myself 
among  the  number, — must  be  wrong."  ....  I  am,  you  see, 
loyally  accepting  the  logical  issue  you  have  yourself  raised. 
I  do  but  seek  to  reconcile  your  dilemma  with  the  actual 
facts  of  the  problem. 

And  now,  will  you  listen  while  I  state  the  grounds  on 
which  I  am  convinced  that  your  substitution  of  09  for  ©eo? 
in  1  Tim.  iii.  16  is  nothing  else  but  a  calamitous  perversion 
of  the  Truth  ?  May  I  be  allowed  at  least  to  exhibit,  in  the 
same  summary  way  as  before,  the  evidence  for  reading  in 
this  place  neither  o  nor  09, — but  ©eo?  ? 

[III.]  Sum  of  the  Evidence  of  Veesions,  Copies,  Fathees,  in 
favour  of  reading  @eo9  i(j>av€p(o6'r]  in  1  Tim.  iii.  1 6. 

Entirely  different, — in  respect  of  variety,  of  quantity  and 


486  EVIDENCE   OF  THE  ANCIENTS  [Rei'ly  to 

of  quality, — from  wliat  has  gone  before,  is  the  witness  of 
Antiquity  to  the  Eeceived  Text  of  1  Timothy  iii.  16  :  viz.  koI 
OfioXoyovfievoj'i  fjueya  earl  to  Tr]<;  evae^eia'i  fJLvcnrjpLOv'   0eo'5 

h^avepciidrj   ev  aapKL,  k.t.X I  proceed  to  rehearse  it  in 

outline,  having  already  dwelt  in  detail  upon  so  much  of  it 
as  has  been  made  the  subject  of  controversy.-*  The  reader  is 
fully  aware^  that  I  do  not  propose  to  make  argumentative 
use  of  the  first  six  names  in  the  ensuing  enumeration.  To 
those  names,  [enclosed  within  square  brackets,]  I  forbear 
even  to  assign  numbers ;  not  as  entertaining  doubt  concern- 
ing the  testimony  they  furnish,  but  as  resolved  to  build 
exclusively  on  facts  which  are  incontrovertible.  Yet  is  it 
but  reasonable  that  the  whole  of  the  Evidence  for  0eo? 
i(f)av€p(od7]  should  be  placed  before  the  reader :  and  he  is  in 
my  judgment  a  wondrous  unfair  disputant  who  can  atten- 
tively survey  the  evidence  which  I  thus  forego,  without 
secretly  acknowledging  that  its  combined  Weight  is  consi- 
derable ;  while  its  Antiquity  makes  it  a  serious  question 
whether  it  is  not  simply  contrary  to  reason  that  it  should 
be  dispensed  with  in  an  enquiry  like  the  present. 

[(a)  In  the  1st  century  then, — it  has  been  already  shown 
(at  page  463)  that  Ignatius  (a.d.  DO)  probably  recognized 
the  reading  before  us  in  three  places.] 

[{h)  The  brief  but  significant  testiniuny  of  Baknauas  will 
be  found  in  the  same  page.] 

[(c)  In  the  llnd  century,— lIirroLYTUS  [a.d.  190]  (as  was 
explained  at  page  463,)  twice  comes  forward  as  a  witness  on 
the  same  side.] 

[(d)  In  the  Ilird  century, — Gregory  Tiiaumaturgus,  (if 


*  Viz.  from  \\  iol  to  p.  178.  *  Sec  abovi',  ]'[\  KiL!-] 


Bp.  Ellicott.]         for   0EO'2   in   1    TIM.   III.   16.  487 

it  be  indeed  he)  has  been  already  shown  (at  page  4G3)  pro- 
bably to  testify  to  the  reading  @eo9  iipavepcoOrj.'l 

1(e)  To  the  same  century  is  referred  the  work  entitled 
CoNSTiTUTiONES  Apostolic^  :  which  seems  also  to  witness  to 
the  same  reading.     See  above,  p.  463.] 

[(/)  Basil  the  Gkeat  also  [a.d.  355],  as  will  be  found 
explained  at  page  464,  must  be  held  to  witness  to  ©eo? 
€(f)avepco6r]  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16 :  though  his  testimony,  like  that 
of  the  five  names  which  go  before,  being  open  to  cavil,  is  not 
here  insisted  on.] — And  now  to  get  upon  teira  firma. 

(1)  To  the  Ilird  century  then  [a.d.  264  ?],  belongs  the 
Epistle  ascribed  to  Dionysius  of  Alexandkia,  (spoken  of 
above,  at  pages  461-2,)  in  which  1  Tim.  iii.  16  is  distinctly 
quoted  in  the  same  way. 

(2)  In  the  next,  (the  IVth)  century,  unequivocal  Patristic 
witnesses  to  0eo<f  itpavepcodrj  abound.  Foremost  is  Didymus, 
who  presided  over  the  Catechetical  School  of  Alexandria, — 
the  teacher  of  Jerome  and  Kufinus.  Born  a.d.  309,  and 
becoming  early  famous,  he  clearly  witnesses  to  what  was  the 
reading  of  the  first  quarter  of  the  IVth  century.  His  tes- 
timony has  been  set  forth  at  page  456. 

(3)  Gregory,  bishop  of  Nazianzus  [a.d.  355],  a  con- 
temporary of  Basil,  in  two  places  is  found  to  bear  similar 
witness.     See  above  page  457. 

(4)  DiODORUS,  (or  '  Theodoras '  as  Photius  writes  his 
name,)  the  teacher  of  Chrysostom, — first  of  Antioch,  after- 
wards the  heretical  bishop  of  Tarsus  in  Cilicia, — is  next  to 
be  cited  [a.d.  370].  His  testimony  is  given  above  at  pages 
458-9. 


488  EVIDENCE  OF  THE  ANCIENTS  [Reply  to 

(5)  The  next  is  perhaps  our  most  illustrious  witness, — viz. 
(Jregory,  bishop  of  Nyssa  in  Cappadocia  [a.d.  370].  Re- 
ferences to  at  least  twenty-hoo  places  of  his  writings  have 
been  already  given  at  page  456. 

(G)  Scarcely  less  important  tlian  the  last-named  Father, 
is  Chrysostom  [a.d.  380],  first  of  Antioch, — afterwards 
Patriarch  of  Constantinople, — who  in  three  places  wit- 
nesses plainly  to  ©eo?  i^avepoidrj.     See  above,  page  457. 

(7)  And  to  this  century,  (not  later  certainly  than  the  last 
half  of  it,)  is  to  be  referred  the  title  of  that  Ke(f>d\aiov,  or 
chapter,  of  St.  Paul's  First  Epistle  to  Timothy  which  con- 
tains chap.  iii.  16, — (indeed,  which  heghis  with  it,)  viz.  Uepl 
Oeui^  aapK'ji(Teai<i.  Very  eloquently  does  that  title  witness  to 
the  fact  that  ©eo?  was  the  established  reading  of  the  place 
under  discussion,  before  either  cod,  B  or  cod.  X  was  pro- 
duced.    See  above,  pages  457-8. 

(8)  In  the  Vth  century, — besides  the  Codex  Alexan- 
DRINUS  (cod.  A,)  concerning  which  so  much  has  been  said 
already  (page  431  to  page  437), — we  are  able  to  appeal  for 
the  reading  0eo9  e^avepoidr],  to, 

(',))  Cyril,  Archbishop  of  Alexandria,  [a.d.  410,]  who  in 
at  least  two  places  witnesses  to  it  uuc(|uiv()cally.  See  above, 
PI).  464  to  470.     So  does, 

(10)  TiiEODORET,  Bishop  of  Cyrus  in  Syria,  [a.d.  420] : 
who,  in  at  least  four  places,  (see  above,  page  456)  renders 
unequivocal  and  important  witness  on  the  same  side. 

(11)  Next,  the  Anonymous  Author  claims  notice  [a.d. 
430],  whose  composition  is  found  in  the  Appendix  to  the 
works  of  Athanasius.     See  above,  page  475. 


JBp.  Elliuott.]  for   0EO'2   IN    1    TIM.  III.    16.  489 

(12)  You  will  be  anxious  to  see  your  friend  Euthalius, 
BISHOP  OF  SuLCA,  duly  recognized  in  this  enumeration.  He 
comes  next.  [a.d.  458.]  The  discussion  concerning  him  will 
be  found  above,  at  page  459  to  page  461. 

(13)  Macedonius  II.,  Patkiarchof  CP.  [a.d.  496]  must  of 
necessity  be  mentioned  here,  as  I  have  very  fully  explained 
at  page  470  to  page  474. 

(14)  To  the  Vlth  century  belongs  the  Geokgian  Version, 
as  already  noted  at  page  454. 

(15)  And  hither  is  to  be  referred  the  testimony  of 
Seveeus,  bishop  of  Antioch  [a.d.  512],  which  has  been 
already  particularly  set  down  at  page  458. 

(16)  To  the  Vllth  century  [a.d.  616]  belongs  the  Hark- 
leian  (or  Philoxenian)  Version  ;  concerning  which,  see  above, 
page  450.  "  That  ©eo-j  was  the  reading  of  the  manuscripts 
from  which  this  Version  was  made,  is  put  beyond  reach  of  doubt 
by  the  fact  that  in  twelve  of  the  other  places  where  evae^eca 
occurs,^  the  words  lA-l»*.>  Zo;**^*  ('  heauty-of-fear ')  are 
found  without  the  addition  of  1oi_^  ('  God').  It  is  noteworthy, 
that  on  the  thirteenth  occasion  (1  Tim.  ii.  2),  where  the 
Pescliito  reads  'fear  of  God,'  the  Harkleian  reads  'fear' 
only.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Harkleian  margin  of  Acts 
iii,  12  expressly  states  that  evae^eta  is  the  Greek  equivalent 
of  1A1l»jw>  Zo'pfcSa*  ('  Icauty-of-fcar ').  This  effectually  esta- 
blishes the  fact  that  the  author  of  the  Harkleian  recension 
found  ©eo9  in  his  Greek  manuscript  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16."  ^ 


1  Viz.  Acts  iii.  12 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  7,  8  ;  vi.  3,  5,  6  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  5  ;  Tit.  i.  1 ; 
2  Pet.  i.  3,  6,  7  ;  iii.  11. 

*  From  the  friend  whose  help  is  ackuovvledged  at  foot  of  pp.  450,  481. 


400  EVIDENCE  OF  THE  ANCIENTS.  [Reply  to 

(17)  In  the  Vlllth  century,  John  Damascene  [a.d.  730] 
pre-eminently  claims  attention.  He  is  twice  a  witness  for 
Beo?  i(f)av€pco6r],  as  was  explained  at  page  457. 

(18)  Next  to  be  mentioned  is  Epiphanius,  deacon  of 
Catana  ;  whose  memorable  testimony  at  the  2nd  Nicene 
Council  [a.d.  787]  has  been  set  down  above,  at  page  475. 
And  then, 

(10)  Theodorus  Studita  of  CP.  [a.d.  700], — concerning 
whom,  see  above,  at  pages  475-6. 

(20),  (21)  a7id  (22).  To  the  IXth  century  belong  the 
three  remaining  uncial  codices,  which  alike  witness  to  ©eo? 
i(f)av€p(o6r]  iv  aapKi : — viz.  the  '  CoD.  MOSQUENSIS '  (k)  ;  the 
'  Cod.  Angelicus  '  (l)  ;  and  the  '  Cod.  roRPiiYiiiANUS '  (p). 

(23)  The  Slavonic  Version  belongs  to  the  same  century, 
and  exhibits  the  same  reading. 

(24)  Hither  also  may  be  referred  several  ancient  Scholia 
which  all  witness  to  0eo9  €<pav€pco6r]  iv  aapKc,  as  I  explained 
at  page  476. 

(25)  To  the  Xth  century  belongs  CEcumenius  [a.d.  900], 
who  is  also  a  witness  on  the  same  side.     See  page  476. 

(26)  To  the  Xlth  century,  Tiieophylact  [a.d.  1077],  who 
bears  express  testimony  to  the  same  reading.     See  page  476. 

(27)  To  the  Xllth  century,  Euthymius  [a.d.  1116],  who 
closes  the  list  with  his  approving  verdict.     See  page  476. 

And  thus  we  reach  a  period  when  there  awaits  us  a  mass 
of  testimony  which  transports  us  back  (per  saltum)  to  the 
Church's    palmiest  days;    testimony,  which   rightly   under- 


Bi-.  Ellicott.]  evidence   OF   THE   COPIES.  491 

stood,  is  absolutely  decisive  of  the  point  now  under  dis- 
cussion. I  allude  to  the  testimony  of  every  known  copy  of 
S.  Paul's  Epistles  except  the  three,  or  four,  already  specified, 
viz.  D  of  S.  Paul ;  K,  17,  and  perhaps  73.  A  few  words  on 
this  last  head  of  Evidence  may  not  be  without  the  grace  of 
novelty  even  to  yourself.  They  are  supplementary  to  what 
has  already  been  offered  on  the  same  subject  from  page  443 
to  page  446. 

The  copies  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles  (in  cursive  writing) 
supposed  to  exist  in  European  libraries, — not  including 
those  in  the  monasteries  of  Greece  and  the  Levant,^ — amount 
to  at  least  302.^  Out  of  this  number,  2  are  fabulous  :^ — 
1  has  been  destroyed  by  fire  :* — and  6  have  strayed  into 
unknown  localities.^  Add,  that  37  (for  various  reasons)  are 
said  not  to  contain  the  verse  in  question;^   while  of  2,  I 


^  Scholz  enumerates  8  of  these  copies:  Coxe,  15.  But  there  must 
exist  a  vast  many  more  ;  as,  at  M.  Athos,  in  the  convent  of  S.  Catharine, 
at  Meteora,  &c.,  &c. 

*  In  explanation  of  this  statement,  the  reader  is  invited  to  refer  to  the 
Appendix  at  the  end  of  the  present  volume.  [Since  the  foregoing  words 
have  been  in  print  1  have  obtained  from  Rome  tidings  of  about  34  more 
copies  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles ;  raising  the  present  total  to  336.  The 
known  copies  of  the  book  called  '  Apostolus '  now  amount  to  127.] 

^  Viz.  Paul  61  (see  Scrivener's  Introduction,  3rd  ed.  p.  251) :  and 
Paul  181  (see  above,  at  pp.  444-5). 

*  Viz.  Paul  248,  at  Strasburg. 

^  Viz.  Paul  8  (see  Scrivener's  Introchiction) :  15  (which  is  not  in 
the  University  library  at  Louvain) :  50  and  51  (in  Scrivener's  Intro- 
duction) :  209  and  210  (which,  I  find  on  repeated  enquiry,  are  no  longer 
preserved  in  the  Collegio  Romano ;  nor,  since  the  suppression  of  the 
Jesuits,  is  any  one  able  to  tell  what  has  become  of  them). 

«  Viz.  Paul  42:  53:  54:  ZS  {Vat.  165,— from  Sig.  Cozza-Luzi):  60: 
64:  66:  76:  82:  89:  118:  119:  124:  127:  146:  147:  148:  152:  160: 
161 :  162 :  163 :  172  :  187  :  191  :  202 :  214 :  225  {Milan  N.  272  sup., 
—from  Dr.  Ceriani)  :  259 :  263 :  271 :  275 :  284  {Mode^ia  II.  a.  13,— from 
Sig.  Cappilli  [Acts,  195 — see  Appendix^) :  286  {Milan  e.  2  inf. — from 
Dr.  Ceriani  [see  Appendix]) :  287  {Milan  A.  241  inf. — from  Dr.  Ceriani 


492  UNANIMITY   OF   THE   COPIES  [Reply  to 

have  been  hitherto  unsuccessful  in  obtaining  any  account  •} — 
and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  sum  of  the  available  cursive 
copies  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles  is  exactly  254. 

Now,  that  2  of  these  254  cursive  copies  (viz.  Paul  17 
and  73) — exhibit  09, — you  have  been  so  eager  (at  pp.  71-2  of 
your  pamphlet)  to  establish,  that  I  am  unwilling  to  do  more 
than  refer  you  back  to  pages  443,-4,-5,  where  a  few  words 
have  been  abeady  offered  in  reply.  Permit  me,  however,  to 
submit  to  your  consideration,  as  a  set-off  against  those  hvo 
cojyies  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles  which  read  09, — the  following 
hvo-Jmndred  and  fifty-two  copies  which  read  ©eo?.^     To  speak 


[see  Appendix]) :  293  (Crypta  Ferrata,  a.  ^.  vi. — from  the  Hieromonachus 
A.  Rocchi  [see  Aj^pendixJ) :  302  (Berlin,  MS.  Grxc.  8vo.  No.  9. — from 
Dr.  C.  de  Boor  [see  ApjiendixJ). 

^  Viz.  Paul  254  (restored  to  CP.,  see  Scrivener's  Introduction') : 
and  Paul  261  (Muralt's  8 :  Petrop.  xi.  1.  2.  330). 

*  I  found  the  reading  of  150  copies  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles  at  1  Tim. 
iii.  16,  ascertained  ready  to  my  hand, — chiefly  the  result  of  the  labours 
of  Mill,  Kuster,  Walker,  Berriman,  Birch,  Matthasi,  Scholz,  Reiche, 
and  Scrivener.  The  following  102  I  am  enabled  to  contribute  to  the 
number, — thanks  to  the  many  friendly  helijers  whose  names  follow : — 

In  the  Vatican  (Abbate  Cozza-Luzi,  keeper  of  the  library,  whose 
friendly  forwardness  and  enlightened  zeal  I  cannot  sufficiently  ac- 
knowledge. See  the  Appendix)  No.  185,  186,  196,  204,  207,  294,  295, 
296,  297. — Propaganda  (Dr.  Beyer)  No.  92. — Crypta  Ferrata  (the 
Hieromonachus  A.  Rocchi.  See  the  Appendix,)  No.  290,  291,  292. — 
Venice  (Sig.  Veludo)  No.  215. — Milan  (Dr.  Ceriani,  the  most  learned 
and  helpful  of  friends,)  No.  173,  174,  175,  176,  223,  288,  289.— Ferrara, 
(Sig.  Gennari)  No.  222.— Modena  (Sig.  Cappilli)  No.  285. — Bologna 
(Sig.  Gardiani)  No.  105. — Turin  (Sig.  Gorrcsio)  No.  165, 168. — Florence 
(Dr.  Anziani)  No.  182,  226,  239. — Messina  (Papas  Filippo  Matranga. 
See  the  Appendix,)  No.  216,  283. — Palermo  (Sig.  Penerino)  No.  217. — ■ 
The  Escurial  (S.  Herbert  Capper,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Legation.  He 
executed  a  difficult  task  with  rare  ability,  at  the  instance  of  his  Excellency, 
Sir  Robert  Moricr,  who  is  requested  to  accept  this  expression  of  my 
thanks,)  No.  228,  229. — Paris  (M.  Wescher,  who  is  as  obliging  as  he  is 
learned  in  this  dei)artment,)  No.  16,  65,  136,  142, 150,  151, 154,  155,  156, 
157,  164. — (L'Abbc  Martin.     Sec   the  Appendix)  No.   282.     Arsenal 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  of   S.    PAUL'S   EPISTLES.  493 

with  perfect  accuracy, — 4  of  these  (252)  exhibit  6  ©eo? 
i<f)av€pa)0r)  ;^ — 1,  09  ©eo?  f — and  247,  ©ed?  absolutely.  The 
numbers  follow : — 

6. 

20. 

31. 

43. 

59. 

75. 

88. 
99.  100.  101.  102.  103.  104.  105. 
106.  107.  108.  109.  110.  111.  112.  113.  114.  115.  116. 
117.  120.  121.  122.  123.  125.  126.  128.  129.  130.  131. 
132.  133.  134.  135.  136.  137.  138.  139.  140.  141.  142. 
143.  144.  145.  149.  150.  151.  153.  154.  155.  156.  157. 
158.  159.  164.  165.  166.  167.  168.  169.  170.  171.  173. 
174.  175.  176.  177.  178.  179.  180.  182.  183.  184.  185. 
186.  188.  189.  190.  192.  193.  194.  195.  196.  197.  198. 
199.  200.  201.  203.  204.  205.  206.  207.  208.  211.  212. 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

13. 

14. 

16. 

18. 

19. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

49. 

52. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72. 

74. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

87. 

95. 

96. 

97. 

98. 

99. 

7. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

62. 

63. 

65. 

67. 

68. 

77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 

81. 

90. 

91. 

92. 

93. 

94. 

(M.  Thierry)  No.  130. — S.  Genevikve  (M.  Denis)  No.  247. — Poictikrs 
(M.  Dartige)  No.  276.— Bkrijn  (Dr.  C.  de  Boor)  No.  220,  298,  299, 
300,  301.— Dresden  (Dr.  Forstemann)  No.  237.— Munich  (Dr.  Laub- 
mann)  No.  55,  125,  126,  128.— Gottingen  (Dr.  Lagarde)  No.  243.— 
WoLFENBUTTEL  (Dr.  voii  Heinemaim)  No.  74,  241. — Basle  (Mons. 
Sieber)  No.  7.— Upsala  (\^r.  Belsheim)  No.  273,  274.— Lincoping  (the 
same)  No.  272. — Zurich  (Dr.  Escher)  No.  56. — Prebendary  Scrivener 
verified  for  me  Paul  252  :  253  :  255  :  256  :  257  :  258 :  260 :  264 :  265 : 
277. — Eev.  T.  Eandell,  has  verified  No.  13. — Alex.  Peckover,  Esq., 
No.  278.— Personally,  I  have  inspected  No.  24  :  34  :  62  :  63 :  224 :  227  : 
234:  235:  236:  240:  242:  249:  250:  251:  262:  266:  267:  268: 
269  :  270  :  279 :  280 :  281. 

1  Viz.  Paul  37  (the  Codex  LeicesL,  69  of  the  Gospels) :— Paul  85  (Vat. 
1136),  observed  by  Abbate  Cozza-Luzi :— Paul  93  (Naples  1.  b.  12) 
which  is  83  of  the  Acts, — noticed  by  Birch : — Paul  175  (Ambros.  f.  125 
sup.)  at  Milan  ;  as  I  learn  from  Dr.  Ceriani.     See  above,  p.  456  note  Q). 

*  Viz.  Paul  282, — concerning  which,  see  above,  p.  474,  note  Q). 


494  THE   COPIES  UNANIMOUS   AS   TO  [Reply  to 

213.  215.  216.  217.  218.^219.  220.  221.  222.  223.  224. 

226.  227.  228.  229.  230.  231.  232.  233.  234.  235.  236. 

237.  238.  239.  240.  241.  242.  243.  244.  245.  246.  247. 

249.  250.  251.  252.  253.  255.  256.  257.  258.  260.  262. 

264.  265.  266.  267.  268.  269.  270.  272.  273.  274.  276. 

277.  278.  279.  280.  281.  282.^283.  285.  288.  289.  290. 

291.  292.  294.  295.  296.  297.  298.  299.  300.  301. 

Behold  then  the  provision  which  the  Author  of  Scriptnre 
has  made  for  the  effectual  conservation  in  its  integrity  of  this 
portion  of  His  written  Word  !  Upwards  of  eighteen  hundred 
years  have  run  their  course  since  tlie  Holy  Ghost  by  His 
servant,  Paul,  rehearsed  the  '  mystery  of  Godliness  ;'  declaring 
this  to  he  the  great  foundation-fact,' — namely,  tliat  '  God  was 
MANIFESTED  IN  THE  FLESH.'  And  lo,  out  of  hvo  hundred  and 
fifty-four  copies  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles  no  less  than  two  hundred 
and  fifty -two  ^YQ,  discovered  to  have  preserved  that  expression. 
Such  '  Consent '  amounts  to  Unanimity ;  and,  (as  I  explained 
at  pj).  454-5,)  unanimity  in  this  subject-matter,  is  conclusive. 

The  copies  of  which  we  speak,  (you  are  requested  to  ob- 
serve,) were  produced  in  every  part  of  ancient  Christendom, — 
being  derived  in  every  instance  from  copies  older  than  them- 
selves; which  again  were  transcripts  of  copies  older  still. 
They  have  since  found  their  way,  without  design  or  con- 
trivance, into  the  libraries  of  every  country  of  Europe, — 
where,  for  hundreds  of  years  they  have  been  jealously 
guarded.  And, — (I  rej)eat  the  question  already  hazarded  at 
pp.   445-6,    and    now  respectfully   propose   it   to   you,   my 


^  The  present  locality  of  this  codex  (Evan.  421  =  Acts  170  =  Piuil  218) 
is  unknown.  The  only  Greek  codices  in  the  i)ublic  library  of  the 
'  Seminario '  at  Syracuse  are  an  '  Evst.'  and  an  '  Apost.'  (which  I  number 
respectively  3(52  and  113).  My  authority  for  6(6^  in  Paid  218,  is  Birch 
IProleg.  p.  xcviii.],  to  whom  Munter  communicated  his  collations, 

^  For  the  ensuing  codices,  see  the  Appendix. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  0EO'2    in    1    TIM.    III.    16.  495 

lord  Bishop ;  requesting  you  at  your  convenience  to  favour 
me  publicly  with  an  answer ;) — For  what  conceivable  reason 
can  this  multitude  of  witnesses  be  supposed  to  have  entered 
into  a  wicked  conspiracy  to  deceive  mankind  ? 

True,  that  no  miracle  has  guarded  the  sacred  Text  in  this, 
or  in  any  other  place.  On  the  other  hand,  for  the  last  150 
years,  Unbelief  has  been  carping  resolutely  at  this  grand 
proclamation  of  the  Divinity  of  Christ, — in  order  to  prove 
that  not  this,  but  some  other  thing,  it  must  have  been, 
which  the  Apostle  wrote.  And  yet  (as  I  have  fully  shown) 
the  result  of  all  the  evidence  procurable  is  to  establish  that 
the  Apostle  must  be  held  to  have  written  no  other  thing 
but  this. 

To  the  overwhelming  evidence  thus  furnished  by  252  out 
of  254  cursive  Copies  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles, — is  to  be  added 
the  evidence  supplied  by  the  Lectionarics.  It  has  been  already 
explained  (viz.  at  pp.  477-8)  that  out  of  32  copies  of  the 
'Apostolus,'  29  concur  in  witnessing  to  ©eo?.  I  have  just 
(May  7th)  heard  of  another  in  the  Vatican.^  To  these  30, 
should  be  added  the  3  Liturgical  codices  referred  to  at  pp. 
448  and  474,  note  (^).  Now  this  is  emphatically  the  voice 
of  ancient  Ecclesiastical  Tradition.  The  numerical  result  of 
our  entire  enquiry,  proves  therefore  to  be  briefly  this : — 

(I.)  In  1  Timothy  iii.  16,  the  reading  ©eo?  e<^avepoi6ri  ev 
aapKi,  is  witnessed  to  by  289  Manuscripts  :^ — by  3  Ver- 
sions :^ — by  upwards  of  20  Greek  Fathers.* 


1  Vat.  20G8  (Basil.  107),— which  I  number  '  A  post.  115 '  (see  Appendix.) 

2  Viz.  by  4  uncials  (a,  k,  l,  p),  +  (247  Paul  +  31  Apost.  =)  278  cursive 
manuscripts  reading  Gedy  :  +  4  (Paul)  reading  6  Geds  :  +  2  (1  Paul,  1  Apost.) 
reading  os  Gedf :  +  1  (Apost.)  reading  6b  =  289.  (See  above,  pp.  473-4 :  478.) 

3  The  Harkleian  (see  pp.  450,  489) :  the  Georgian,  and  the  Slavonic 
(p.  454). 

*  See  above,  pp.  487-490, — which  is  the  summary  of  what  will  bo 
found  more  largely  delivered  from  page  455  to  page  476. 


496      SUMMARY   OF   THE   EXTERNAL    EVIDENCE.      [Reply  to 

(II.)  The  reading  6  (in  place  of  Beo?)  is  supported  by  a 
single  MS.  (d)  : — by  5  ancient  Versions  ■} — by  2  late  Greek 
Fathers.^ 

(III.)  The  reading  09  (also  in  place  of  Beo?)  is  countenanced 
by  6  Manusckipts  in  all  (a,  Paul  17,  73  :  Apost.  12,  85,  80)  :— 
by  only  one  Version  for  certain  (viz.  the  Gothic  ^) : — not  for 
certain  hy  a  single  Greek  Father.* 

I  will  not  repeat  the  remarks  I  made  before  on  a  general 
survey  of  the  evidence  in  favour  of  0?  i^avepdaOT] :  but  I 
must  request  you  to  refer  back  to  those  remarks,  now  that 
we  have  reached  the  end  of  the  entire  discussion.  They 
extend  from  the  middle  of  p.  483  to  the  bottom  of  p.  485. 

The  unhappy  Logic  which,  on  a  survey  of  what  goes 
before,  can  first  persuade  itself,  and  then  seek  to  persuade 
others,  that  ©eo?  is  a  " lilain  and  clear  error;"  and  that 
there  is  "decidedly  preponderating  evidence,"  in  favour  of 
reading  09  in  1  Timothy  iii.  10  ; — must  needs  be  of  a  sort 
with  which  I  neither  have,  nor  desire  to  liave,  any  ac([uaint- 
ance.  I  commend  the  case  l)etween  you  and  myself  to  the 
judgment  of  Mankind;  and  trust  you  are  able  to  await  tlie 
common  verdict  with  the  same  serene  confidence  as  I  am. 

Will  you  excuse  me  if  I  venture,  in  tlie  lutmely  vernacular, 
to  assure  you  that  in  your  present  contention  you  '  have  not 
a  leg  to  stand  upon '  ?  "  Moreover  "  (to  quote  from  your 
own  pamphlet  [p.  70],)  "  /A/.s  cane  is  of  great  imjwrfancc  as  an 
example."  You  made  deliberate  choice  of  it  in  order  to  con- 
vict me  of  error.  I  have  accepted  your  cliallenge,  you  see. 
Let  the  present,  by  all  means,  be  regarded  1)y  the  public  as 


1  See  above,  pp.  448-4.'53 :  also  p.  479.         *  Sec  above,  pp.  479-480. 
s  Sec  above,  pp.  452-3.  ''  Sec  above,  ])p.  482,  483. 


Up.  Elmcott.]       INTERNAL  EVIDENCE  FOR  0EO'2.  497 

a  trial-place, — a  test  of  our  respective  methods,  yours  and 
mine.     I  cheerfully  abide  the  issue. 

(p)  Internal  evidence /or  reading  ©eo?  icjiavepdoOrj  in 
1  Tim.  iii.  16,  ahsolutcly  overivhdming. 

In  all  that  precedes,  I  have  abstained  from  pleading 
the  2^'^^oha'bilities  of  the  case ;  and  for  a  sufficient  reason. 
Men's  notions  of  what  is  '  probable '  are  observed  to  differ 
so  seriously.  '  Facile  intelligitur '  (says  Wetstein)  '  lectiones 
09  et  ©eo9  esse  interpretamenta  pronominis  o  :  sed  nee  6 
nee  09  posse  esse  interpretamentum  vocis  0e69.'  Now,  I 
should  have  thought  that  the  exact  reverse  is  as  clear  as 
the  day.  What  more  obvious  than  that  ec,  by  exhibiting 
indistinctly  either  of  its  delicate  horizontal  strokes,  (and 
they  were  often  so  traced  as  to  be  scarcely  discernible,^)  would 
become  mistaken  for  oc  ?  What  more  natural  again  than 
that  the  masculine  relative  should  be  forced  into  agreement 
with  its  neuter  antecedent  ?  Why,  the  thing  has  actually 
happened  at  Coloss.  i.  27;  where  "02  ean  'Kpta-To';  has  been 
altered  into  0,  only  because  p^vcnrjpiov  is  the  antecedent. 
But  waiving  this,  the  internal  evidence  in  favour  of  ©€09 
must  surely  be  admitted  to  be  overwhelming,  by  all  save 
one  determined  that  the  reading  shall  he  09  or  0.  I  trust  we 
are  at  least  agreed  that  the  maxim  '  pi'^^ocUvi  lectioni  prsestat 
ardua,'  does  not  enunciate  so  foolish  a  proposition  as  that 
in  choosing  between  two  or  more  conflicting  readings,  we 
are  to  prefer  that  one  which  has  the  feeblest  external 
attestation, — provided  it  be  but  in  itself  almost  unin- 
telligible ? 

And  yet,  in  the  present  instance, — How  (give  me  leave  to 
ask)  will  you  translate?     To  those  who  acquiesce   in   the 


*  See  above,  page  436,  and  middle  of  page  439. 

2   K 


498  INTERNAL  EVIDENCE  FOR  READING         [Reply  to 

notion  that  the  ixe<ya  ^varrjpLov  rrj^  evae^eia^  means  onr 
Saviour  Christ  Himself,  (consider  Coloss,  i,  27,)  it  is  obvious 
to  translate  '  wJio :'  yet  how  harsh,  or  rather  how  intolerable 
is  this !  I  should  have  thought  that  there  could  be  no  real 
doubt  that  '  the  mystery '  here  spoken  of  must  needs  be 
that  complex  exhibition  of  Divine  condescension  which 
the  Apostle  proceeds  to  rehearse  in  outline :  and  of  which 
the  essence  is  that  it  was  very  and  eternal  God  who  was  the 
subject  of  the  transaction.  Those  who  see  this,  and  yet 
adopt  the  reading  09,  are  obliged  to  refer  it  to  the  remote 
antecedent  @eo9.  You  do  not  advocate  this  view :  neither 
do  I.  For  reasons  of  their  own,  Alford  ^  and  Lightfoot  ^  both 
translate  '  who.' 

Tregelles  (who  always  shows  to  least  advantage  when  a 
point  of  taste  or  scholarship  is  under  discussion)  proposes  to 
render : — 

"  He  who  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  (he  who)  was  justified 
in  the  spirit,  (he  who)  was  seen  by  angels,  (he  who)  was 
preached  among  Gentiles,  (he  who)  was  believed  on  in  the 
world,  (he  who)  was  received  up  in  glory,"^ 

I  question  if  his  motion  will  find  a  seconder.  You  your- 
self lay  it  down  magisterially  that  09  "  is  not  em'phatic  ('  He 
who,'  &c.)  :  nor,  by  a  construdio  ad  sensum,  is  it  the  relative 
to  iJLV(7T7]piov ;  but  is  a  relative  to  an  omitted  though 
easily  recognized  antecedent,  viz.  Christ."  You  add  that  it 
is  not  improbable  "  that  the  words  are  quoted  from  some 
known  hymn,  or  probably  from  some  familiar  Confession  of 
Faith."  Accordingly,  in  your  Commentary  you  venture  to 
exhibit  the  words  within  inverted  commas  as  a  quotation: — 
"  And  confessedly  great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness :  '  who 


»  See  his  long  and  singular  note.  "^  Fresh  Revision,  p.  27. 

3  Printed  Text,  p.  231. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  0EO'2  in  1  TIMOTHY  III.  16.  499 

was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  justified  in  the  spirit,' "  &c.,^ — 
for  which  you  are  without  warrant  of  any  kind,  and  which 
you  have  no  right  to  do.  Westcott  and  Hort  (the  '  chartered 
libertines ')  are  even  more  licentious.  Acting  on  their  own 
suggestion  that  these  clauses  are  '  a  quotation  from  an  early 
Christian  hymn'  they  proceed  to  print  the  conclusion  of 
1  Tim.  iii.  16  stichometrically,  as  if  it  were  a  six-line  stanza. 

This  notwithstanding,  the  Eevising  body  have  adopted  '  He 
who,'  as  the  rendering  of  09;  a  mistaken  rendering  as  it 
seems  to  me,  and  (I  am  glad  to  learn)  to  yourself  also. 
Their  translation  is  quite  a  curiosity  in  its  way.  I  proceed 
to  transcribe  it : — 

"  He  who  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  justified  in  the  spirit, 
seen  of  angels,  preached  among  the  nations,  believed  on  in  the 
world,  received  up  in  glory." 

But  this  does  not  even  pretend  to  be  a  sentence :  nor  do  I 
understand  what  the  proposed  construction  is.  Any  arrange- 
ment which  results  in  making  the  six  clauses  last  quoted 
part  of  the  subject,  and  '  great '  the  predicate  of  one  long 
proposition, — is  unworthy. — Bentley's  wild  remedy  testifies 
far  more  eloquently  to  his  distress  than  to  his  aptitude  for 
revising  the  text  of  Scripture.  He  suggests, — "  Christ  ivas 
put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  justified  in  the  spirit,  ....  seen  hy 
Apostles.""^ — "  According  to  the  ancient  view,"  (says  the  Eev. 
T.  S.  Green,)  "  the  sense  would  be  :  '  and  confessedly  great 
is  the  mystery  of  godliness  [in  the  person  of  him],  who 
[mystery  notwithstanding]  was  manifested  in  the  flesh, 
&c.'  "  ^  .  .  .  .  But,  with  submission,  "  the  ancient  view  "  was 
not  this.      The  Latins, — calamitously  shut   up  within   the 


1  P.  226. 

2  '  Forte  fjLva-TTipiov  •  6  ^s   (BavariiBr]   eV   aapKi  .   .   .  iv  wvevfiaTi,  o}(f)6r) 
dnoaToXoisJ' — Bentleii  Critica  Sacra,  p.  67. 

^  Developed  Criticism,  p.  160. 

2  K  2 


nOO  OPINION  OF  ANCIENT  DOCTORS  [Reply  to 

limits  of  their  ' pietatis  sacramcntnm,  quod' — are  found  to 
have  habitually  broken  away  from  that  iron  bondage,  and  to 
have  discoursed  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  as  being  Himself  the 
'  sacramentum '  spoken  of.  The  '  sacramentum,'  in  their 
view,  was  the  incarnate  Word.^ — Not  so  the  Greek  Fathers. 
These  all,  without  exception,  understood  S.  Paul  to  say, — 
what  Ecclesiastical  Tradition  hath  all  down  the  ages  fiiithfuUy 
attested,  and  what  to  this  hour  the  copies  of  his  Epistles 
prove  that  he  actually  wrote, — viz.  "  And  confessedly  great  is 
the  mystery  of  godliness : — GoD  vxis  manifested  in  the  flesh, 
justified  in  the  sjyirit"  and  so  on.  Moreover  this  is  the  view 
of  the  matter  in  which  all  the  learning  and  all  the  piety 
of  the  English  Church  has  thankfully  acquiesced  for  the  last 
350  years.  It  has  commended  itself  to  Andre wes  and 
Pearson,  Bull  and  Hammond,  Hall  and  Stillingfleet,  Ussher 
and  Beveridge,  Mill  and  Bengel,  Waterland  and  Berriman. 
The  enumeration  of  names  is  easily  brought  down  to  our 
own  times.  Dr.  Henderson,  (the  learned  non-conformist 
commentator,)  in  1830  published  a  volume  with  the  follow- 
ing title  :■ — 

*  The  great  mystery  of  godliness  incontrovertible :  or,  Sir 
Isaac  Newton  and  the  Socinians  foiled  in  the  attempt  to  prove  a 
corruption  in  the  text  1  Tim.  iii.  16  :  containing  a  review  of  the 


^  Thus  Augustine  (viii.  828  f.)  parajihrascs, — '  In  came  manifestatus 
est  Fiiiius  Dei.' — And  Marius  Yictorinus,  a.u.  390  (ap.  Galland.  viii. 
161), — '  Hoc  enim  est  magnum  sacramentum,  quod  Deus  exanimavit  semet 
ipsum  cum  esset  in  Dei  forma  :^  'fuit  ergo  antequam  esset  in  came,  sed 
manifestatum  dixit  in  came.' — And  Fulgentins,  a.d.  513,  thus  expands 
the  text  (ap.  Galland,  xi.  232)  : — '  quia  scilicet  Verhum  quod  in  principio 
erat,  et  apud  Deum  erat,  et  Deus  erat,  id  est  Dei  unigenitus  FiJius,  Dei 
virtus  et  sapicntia,  per  quem  et  in  quo  facta  sunt  omnia,  .  .  .  idem  Deus 
unigenitus,^  &c.  &c. — And  Ferraudus,  a.d.  356  {ibid.  p.  356): — '  t7a  pro 
redemtione  humani  generis  humanam  naturam  credimus  suscepisse,  ut  ille 
qui  Trinitate  perfecta  Deus  unigenitus  permanehat  ac  permanet,  ipse  ex 
Maria  fieret  primogenitus  in  multisfrdtrihus,^  Sec. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  of  the  ENGLISH  CHURCH.  501 

charges  brought  against  the  passage ;  an  examination  of  the 
various  readings ;  and  a  confirmaiion  of  that  in  the  received 
text  on  jDrinciples  of  general  and  biblical  criticism.' 

And, — to  turn  one's  eyes  in  quite  a  different  direction, — 
'  Veruntamen,'  wrote  venerable  President  Koutli,  at  the  end 
of  a  life-long  critical  study  of  Holy  Writ, — (and  liis  days  were 
prolonged  till  he  reached  his  hundredth  year,) — 

'  Veruntamen,  quidquid  ex  sacri  textus  historia,  illud  vero 
baud  certum,  critici  collegerunt,  me  tamen  interna  cogunt  argu- 
menta  prajferre  lectionem  ©eos,  qnem  quidem  agnoscuut  veteres 
interpretes,  Theodoretus  caeterique,  duabus  alteris  6s  et  o.'^ 

And  here  I  bring  my  Dissektation  on  1  Tim.  iii.  16  to  a 
close.  It  began  at  p.  424,  and  I  little  thought  would  extend 
to  seventy-six  pages.  Let  it  be  clearly  understood  that  I  rest 
my  contention  not  at  all  on  Internal,  but  entirely  on  External 
Evidence ;  although,  to  the  best  of  my  judgment,  they  are 
alike  conclusive  as  to  the  matter  in  debate. — Having  now 
incontrovertibly,  as  I  believe,  established  geo's  as  the  best 
attested  Reading  of  the  place, — I  shall  conclude  the  present 
Letter  as  speedily  as  I  can. 

(1)    "  Co7n.position   of  the  Body   ivMcli  is  rcsjwnsible  for  the 
'  NeiD  Greek  Text:  " 

There  remains,  I  believe,  but  one  head  of  discourse  into 
which  I  have  not  yet  followed  you.  I  allude  to  your  "  few 
words  about  the  composition  of  the  body  which  is  responsible 
for  the  '  New  Greek  Text,'  "^ — which  extend  from  the  latter 
part  of  p.  29  to  the  beginning  of  p.  32  of  your  pamphlet, 
"  Among  the  sixteen  most  regular  attendants  at  your  meet- 
ings," (you  say)  "  were  to  be  found  most  of  those  persons  who 


^  MS.  note  in  his  interleaved  copy  of  the  N.  T.  He  adds,  *  Hajc 
addenda  posui  Notis  ad  S.  Hippolyium  contra  Noetum  p.  93,  vol.  i.  Scriptor- 
Ecclesiast.  Opusctilortim.'  ^  Page  29. 


502  COMPOSITION  OF  THE  REVISING  [Reply  to 

were  presumably  best  acquainted  with  the  subject  of  Textual 
Criticism."^  And  with  this  insinuation  that  you  had  "all 
the  talents  "  with  you,  you  seek  to  put  me  down. 

But  (as  you  truly  say)  "the  number  of  living  Scholars 
in  England  who  have  connected  their  names  with  the  study 
of  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the  New  Testament  is  exceed- 
ingly small."  ^  And,  "  of  that  exceedingly  small  number," 
you  would  be  puzzled  to  name  so  much  as  one,  besides  the 
three  you  proceed  to  specify  (viz.  Dr.  Scrivener,  Dr.  Westcott, 
and  Dr.  Hort,) — who  were  members  of  the  Eevision  com- 
pany. On  the  other  hand, — (to  quote  the  words  of  the  most 
learned  of  our  living  Prelates,) — "  it  is  well  known  that 
there  are  two  opposite  Schools  of  Biblical  Criticism  among  us, 
with  very  different  opinions  as  to  the  comimrative  value  of  our 
Manuscrip)ts  of  the  Greek  Testament.''^  And  in  proof  of  his 
statement,  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln  cites  "  on  the  one  side  " — 
Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort ;  "  and  on  the  other  " — Dr.  Scrivener, 

Now,  let  the  account  be  read  which  Dr.  Newth  gives  (and 
which  you  admit  to  be  correct)  of  the  extraordinary  method 
by  which  the  '  New  Greek  Text '  was  " settled"  *  "  for  the 
most  part  at  the  First  Eevision,"^ — and  it  becomes  plain  that 
it  was  not  by  any  means  the  product  of  the  independently- 
formed  opinions  of  16  experts,  (as  your  words  imply) ; 
but  resulted  from  the  aptitude  of  13  of  your  body  to  be 
guided  l)y  the  sober  counsels  of  Dr.  Scrivener  on  the  one 
hand,  or  to  be  carried  away  by  the  eager  advocacy  of 
Dr.  Hort,  (supported  as  he  ever  was  l)y  his  respected  col- 
league Dr.  Westcott,)  on  the  other.  As  Canon  Cook  well 
puts  it, — "  The  question  really  is.  Were  the  members  compe- 
tent to  form  a  correct  judgment?"®     "In  most  cases,"  "a 


'  r.  20.  *  r.  yO.  '  Address,  on  the  Revised  Vcrsiou,  p.  10. 

*  See  above,  pp.  o7  to  o'J.      ^  Bp.  EllicotCs  paini-hk't,  p.  34.      '■  I'.  231. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  body. — DR.  VANCE  SMITH.  503 

simple  majority  "^  determined  what  the  text  should  be.  But 
poTiderari  debent  testes,  my  lord  Bishop,  non  numerari?  The 
vote  of  the  joint  Editors  should  have  been  reckoned  practi- 
cally as  only  one  vote.  And  whenever  Dr.  Scrivener  and 
they  were  irreconcilably  opposed,  the  existing  Traditional 
Text  ought  to  have  been  let  alone.  All  pretence  that  it  was 
plainly  and  clearly  erroneous  was  removed,  when  the  only 
experts  present  were  hopelessly  divided  in  opinion.  As  for 
the  rest  of  the  Eevising  Body,  inasmuch  as  they  extempo- 
rized their  opinions,  they  were  scarcely  qualified  to  vote 
at  all.  Certainly  they  were  not  entitled  individually  to  an 
equal  voice  with  Dr.  Scrivener  in  determining  what  the 
text  should  be.  Caprice  or  Prejudice,  in  short,  it  was,  not 
Deliberation  and  Learning,  which  prevailed  in  the  Jeru- 
salem Chamber.  A  more  unscientific, — to  speak  truly,  a 
coarser  and  a  clumsier  way  of  manipulating  the  sacred 
Deposit,  than  that  which  you  yourself  invented,  it  would  be 
impossible,  in  my  judgment,  to  devise. 

(2)  An  Unitarian  Revisionist  intolerable. — The  Westminster- 
Abbey  Scandal. 

But  this  is  not  nearly  all.  You  invite  attention  to  the 
constituent  elements  of  the  Eevising  body,  and  congratulate 
yourself  on  its  miscellaneous  character  as  providing  a 
guarantee  that  it  has  been  impartial. 

I  frankly  avow,  my  lord  Bishop,  that  the  challenge  you 
thus  deliberately  offer,  surprises  me  greatly.  To  have  observed 
severe  silence  on  this  part  of  the  subject,  would  have  seemed 
to  me  your  discreeter  course.  Moreover,  had  you  not,  in 
this  marked  way,  invited  attention  to  the  component  elements 
of  the  Eevising  body,  I  was  prepared  to  give  the  subject 
the  go-by.     The  "  New  Greek  Text,''  no  less  than  the  "  Ncvj 


Fifth  Rule  of  the  Committee.  ^  Bp.  Ellicott's  pamphlet,  p.  30. 


504  THE  REVISING  BODY  EXHIBITED  A  [Rei'ly  to 

English  Version,"  must  stand  or  fall  on  its  own  merits ;  and  I 
have  no  wish  to  prejudice  the  discussion  by  importing  into  it 
foreign  elements.  Of  this,  you  have  had  some  proof  already ; 
for,  (with  the  exception  of  what  is  offered  above,  in  pages 
G  and  7,)  the  subject  has  been,  by  your  present  correspondent, 
nowhere  brought  prominently  forward. 

Far  be  it  from  me,  however,  to  decline  the  enquiry  which 
you  evidently  court.  And  so,  I  candidly  avow  that  it  was 
in  my  account  a  serious  breach  of  Church  order  that,  on 
engaging  in  so  solemn  an  undertaking  as  the  Revision  of  the 
Authorized  Version,  a  body  of  Divines  professing  to  act 
under  the  authority  of  the  Southern  Convocation  should 
spontaneously  associate  with  themselves  Ministers  of  various 
denominations,^  — -  Baptists,    Congregationalists,    Wesleyan 


^  No  fair  person  will  mistake  the  spirit  in  which  the  next  ensuing 
paragraphs  (in  the  Text)  are  written.  But  I  will  add  what  shall  eflectually 
protect  me  from  being  misunderstood. 

Against  the  respectability  and  personal  worth  of  any  member  of  tlio 
Revisionist  body,  let  me  not  be  supposed  to  breatlie  a  syllable.  All, 
(for  aught  I  know  to  the  contrary,)  may  be  men  of  ability  and  attainment, 
as  well  as  of  high  moral  excellence.  I  will  add  that,  in  early  life,  I 
numbered  several  professing  Unitarians  among  my  friends.  It  were  base 
in  me  to  forget  how  wondrous  kind  I  found  them:  how  much  I  loved 
thein  :  how  fondly  I  cherish  their  memory. 

Further.  That  in  order  to  come  at  the  truth  of  Scrijiture,  we  are 
bound  to  seek  help  at  the  hands  of  any  who  are  able  to  render  help, — who 
ever  doubted?  If  a  worshipper  of  the  lalsc  prophet, — if  a  devotee  of 
Buddha, — could  contribute  auything, — who  would  hesitate  to  sue  to  him 
for  enlightenment  ?  As  for  Abraham's  descendants, — they  are  our  very 
brethren. 

But  it  is  quite  a  different  thing  when  Revisionists  appointed  liy  tlie 
Convocation  of  the  Southern  Province,  co-opt  Sejuratists  and  even 
Unitarians  into  their  body,  where  they  shall  determine  tiie  sense  of 
Scripture  and  vote  upon  its  translation  on  equal  terms.  Surely,  when  the 
Lower  House  of  Convocation  accepted  the  5th  "  Resolution  "  of  the  Upper 
House, — viz.,  that  the  Revising  body  "shall  bo  at  liberty  to  invite  the 
Cti-dperalion  of  any  eminent  for  scliolarslii)),  to  wluitevcr  nation  or  religiou.s 


Bp.  Ellicott.]    SEEIOUS  BREACH  OP  CHURCH  ORDER.  505 

Methodists,  Independents,  and  the  like :  and  especially  that 
a  successor  of  the  Apostles  should  have  presided  over  the 
deliberations  of  this  assemblage  of  Separatists.  In  my 
liumble  judgment,  we  shall  in  vain  teach  the  sinfulness  of 
Schism,  if  we  show  ourselves  practically  indifferent  on  the 
subject,  and  even  set  an  example  of  irregularity  to  our 
flocks.  My  Divinity  may  appear  unaccommodating  and  old- 
fashioned:  but  I  am  not  prepared  to  unlearn  the  lessons 
long  since  got  by  heart  in  the  school  of  Andrewes  and 
Hooker,  of  Pearson  and  Bull,  of  Hammond  and  Sanderson, 
of  Beveridge  and  Bramhall.  I  am  much  mistaken,  moreover, 
if  I  may  not  claim  the  authority  of  a  greater  doctor  than 
any  of  these, — I  mean  S.  Paul, — -for  the  fixed  views  I  enter- 
tain on  this  head. 

All   this,  however,  is   as  nothing   in  comparison  of  the 
scandal  occasioned   by  the   co-optation   into  your   body   of 


body  they  may  belong  ;" — the  Synod  of  Canterbury  did  not  suppose  that 
it  was  pledging  itself  to  sanction  such  "  co-operation "  as  is  implied  by 
actual  co-optation ! 

It  should  be  added  that  Bp.  Wilberforce,  (the  actual  framer  of  the 
5th  fundamental  Resolution,)  has  himself  informed  us  that  "  in  framing 
it,  it  never  occurred  to  him  that  it  would  apply  to  the  admission  of  any 
member  of  the  Socinian  body."  Chronicle  of  Convocation  (Feb.  1871,) 
p.  4. 

"  I  am  aware,"  (says  our  learned  and  pious  bishop  of  Lincoln,)  "  that  the 
ancient  Church  did  not  scruple  to  avail  herself  of  the  translation  of  a 
renegade  Jew,  like  Aquila ;  and  of  Ebionitish  heretics,  like  Symmachus 
and  Theodotion ;  and  that  St.  Augustine  profited  by  the  expository  rules  of 
Tychonius  the  Donatist.  But  I  very  much  doubt  whether  the  ancient 
Church  would  have  looked  for  a  large  outpouring  of  a  blessing  from  God 
on  a  work  of  translating  His  Word,  where  the  workmen  were  not  all 
joined  together  in  a  spirit  of  Christian  unity,  and  in  the  profession  of  the 
true  Faith  ;  and  in  which  the  opinions  of  the  several  translators  were  to 
be  counted  and  not  weighed ;  and  where  everything  was  to  be  decided 
by  numerical  majorities  ;  and  where  the  votes  of  an  Arius  or  a  Nestorius 
were  to  be  reckoned  as  of  equal  value  with  those  of  an  Athanasius  or 
a  Cyril."     (Address  on  the  Revised  Version,  1881,  pp.  38.) 


506  AN  UNITARIAN  REVISIONIST.  [Reply  to 

Dr.  G.  Vance  Smith,  the  Unitarian  Minister  of  S.  Saviour's 
Gate  Chapel,  York.  That,  while  engaged  in  the  work  of 
interpreting  the  everlasting  Gospel,  you  should  have  know- 
ingly and  by  choice  associated  with  yourselves  one  who,  not 
only  openly  denies  the  eternal  Godhead  of  our  Lord,  but  in 
a  recent  publication  is  the  avowed  assailant  of  that  funda- 
mental doctrine  of  the  Christian  Eeligion,  as  well  as  of  the 
Inspiration  of  Holy  Scripture  itself,^ — filled  me  (and  many 
besides  myself)  with  astonishment  and  sorrow.  You  were 
respectfully  memorialized  on  the  subject  ;^  but  you  treated 
the  representations  which  reached  you  with  scornful  indif- 
ference. 

Now  therefore  that  you  re-open  the  question,  I  will  not 
scruple  publicly  to  repeat  that  it  seems  to  me  nothing  else 
but  an  insult  to  our  Divine  Master  and  a  wrong  to  the 
Church,  that  the  most  precious  part  of  our  common  Christian 
heritage,  the  pure  Word  of  God,  should  day  by  day,  week 
by  week,  month  by  month,  year  after  year,  have  been  thus 
handled ;  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  producing  a  Transla- 
tion which  should  supersede  our  Authorized  Version.  Tliat 
the  individual  in  question  contributed  aught  to  your  delibe- 
rations has  never  been  pretended.  On  the  contrary.  No 
secret  has  been  made  of  the  fact  that  he  was,  (as  might  have 
been  anticipated  from  his  published  writings,)  the  most 
unprofitable  member  of  the  Eevising  body.  Why  then  was 
he  at  first  surreptitiously  elected  ?  and  wliy  was  his  election 
afterwards  stifily  maintained  ?  The  one  purpose  achieved  by 
his  continued  presence  among  you  was  that  it  might  be 
thereby  made   to   appear  that   the  Church  of  England   no 


*  The  Bihh  and  Popular  Theohfjy,  by  G.  Vance  Smith,  1871. 

*  An  Unitarian  lieviser  of  our  Authorized  Version,  intolerable :  an 
earnest  Remonstrance  and  Petition, — addressed  to  yourself  by  your 
present  corrcsixjndent : — Oxford,  Parker,  1872,  pp.  8. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]    the  WESTMINSTER-ABBEY  SCANDAL.  507 

longer  insists  on  Belief  in  the  eternal  Godhead  of  our  Lord, 
as  essential;  but  is  prepared  to  surrender  her  claim  to 
definite  and  unequivocal  dogmatic  teaching  in  respect  of 
Faith  in  the  Blessed  Trinity. 

But  even  if  this  Unitarian  had  been  an  eminent  Scholar, 
my  objection  would  remain  in  full  force;  for  I  hold,  (and 
surely  so  do  you!),  that  the  right  Interpretation  of  God's 
Word  may  not  be  attained  without  the  guidance  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  whose  aid  must  first  be  invoked  by  faithful  prayer. 

In  the  meantime,  this  same  person  was  invited  to  com- 
municate with  his  fellow-Kevisers  in  Westminster-Abbey, 
and  did  accordingly,  on  the  22nd  of  June,  1870,  receive  the 
Holy  Communion,  in  Henry  VII. 's  Chapel,  at  the  hands  of 
Dean  Stanley:  declaring,  next  day,  that  he  received  the 
Sacrament  on  this  occasion  without  'joining  in  reciting 
the  Nicene  Creed,'  and  without  '  compromise,'  (as  he  ex- 
pressed it,)  of  his  principles  as  an  '  Unitarian.'  ^  So  con- 
spicuous a  sacrilege  led  to  a  public  Protest  signed  by  some 
thousands  of  the  Clergy.^  It  also  resulted,  in  the  next 
ensuing  Session  of  Convocation,  in  a  Eesolution  whereby  the 
Upper  House  cleared  itself  of  complicity  in  the  scandal.^  .  .  . 


*  See  letter  of  'One  of  the  Eevisionists,  G.  V.  S.'  in  the  Times  of 
July  11,  1870. 

'  Protest  against  the  Communion  of  an  Unitarian  in  Westminster 
Abbey  on  June  22nd,  1870 :— Oxford,  1870,  pp.  64. 

^  See  the  Chronicle  of  Convocation  (Feb.  1871),  pp.  3-28, — when  a 
Resolution  was  moved  and  carried  by  the  Bp.  (Wilberforce)  of  Winchester, — 
"That  it  is  the  judgment  of  this  House  that  no  person  who  denies  the 
Godhead  of  our  Lobd  Jesus  Christ  ought  to  be  invited  to  join  either 
company  to  which  is  committed  the  Revision  of  the  Authorized 
Version  of  Holy  Scripture :  and  that  it  is  further  the  judgment  of  this 
House  that  any  such  person  now  on  either  Comj^any  should  cease  to 
act  therewith. 

"  And  that  this  Resolution  bo  communicated  to  the  Lower  House, 
and  their  concurrence  req^uested  :" — which  was  done.     See  p.  143. 


508  FORECAST  CONCERNIXr,  THE  FUTURE       [Rkply  to 

How  a  good  man  like  you  can  revive  the  memory  of  these 
many  painful  incidents  without  anguish,  is  to  me  unin- 
telligible. That  no  blessing  from  Him,  '  sim  Quo  nihil 
validum,  nihil  sanctum,'  could  be  expected  to  attend  an 
undertaking  commenced  under  such  auspices, — was  but 
too  plain.  The  Revision  was  a  foredoomed  thing — in  the 
account  of  many  besides  myself — from  the  outset. 

(3)  The  probable  Future  of  the  Revision  0/  1881. 
Not  unaware  am  I  that  it  has  nevertheless  been  once 
and  again  confidently  predicted  in  public  Addresses,  Lec- 
tures, Pamphlets,  that  ultimate  success  is  in  store  for  the 
Revision  of  1881.  I  cannot  but  regard  it  as  a  suspicious 
circumstance  that  these  vaticinations  have  hitherto  in- 
variably proceeded  from  members  of  the  Revising  body. 

It  would  ill  become  such  an  one  as  myself  to  pretend  to 
skill  in  forecasting  the  future.  But  of  this  at  least  I  feel 
certain  : — that  if,  in  an  evil  hour,  (([uod  absit !),  the  Churcli 
of  England  shall  ever  be  induced  to  commit  herself  to  the 
adoption  of  the  present  Revision,  she  will  by  so  doing  expose 
herself  to  the  ridicule  of  the  rest  of  Christendom,  as  well  as 
incur  irreparable  harm  and  loss.  And  such  a  proceeding 
on  her  part  will  be  inexcusalde,  for  she  has  been  at  least 
faithfully  forewarned.  Moreover,  in  the  end,  she  will  most 
certainly  have  to  retrace  her  steps  with  sorrow  and  con- 
fusion. 

Those  persons  evidently  overlook  the  facts  of  tlic  prol)lem, 
who  refer  to  what  happened  in  the  case  of  the  Authorized 
Version  when  it  originally  appeared,  some  270  years  ago ; 
and  argue  that  as  the  Revision  of  1611  at  first  encountered 
opposition,  which  yet  it  ultimately  overcame,  so  must  it  fare 
in  the  end  with  the  present  Revised  Version  also.  Those 
who  so  reason  forget  that  the  cases  are  essentially  dissimilar. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  of  the  REVISION  OF  1881.  509 

If  the  difference  between  the  Authorized  Version  of  1611 
and  the  Ee vision  of  1881  were  only  this. — That  the  latter  is 
characterized  by  a  mechanical,  unidiomatic,  and  even  repul- 
sive method  of  rendering ;  which  was  not  only  unattempted, 
but  repudiated  by  the  Authors  of  the  earlier  work; — there 
would  have  been  something  to  urge  on  behalf  of  the  later 
performance.  The  plea  of  zeal  for  God's  "Word, — a  deter- 
mination at  all  hazards  to  represent  with  even  servile  pre- 
cision the  ipsissima  verba  of  Evangelists  and  Apostles, — 
this  plea  might  have  been  plausibly  put  forward:  and,  to 
some  extent,  it  must  have  been  allowed, — although  a  grave 
diversity  of  opinion  might  reasonably  have  been  entertained 
as  to  what  constitutes  '  accuracy '  and  *  fidelity '  of  translation. 

But  when  once  it  has  been  made  plain  that  the  underlying 
Greek  of  the  Revision  of  1881  is  an  entirely  new  thing, — is  a 
Tnanufactured  article  throughout, — all  must  see  that  the  con- 
tention has  entirely  changed  its  character.  The  question 
immediately  arises,  (and  it  is  the  only  question  which 
remains  to  be  asked,) — Were  then  the  Authors  of  this  '  New 
Greek  Text'  competent  to  undertake  so  perilous  an  enter- 
prise ?  And  when,  in  the  words  of  the  distinguished  Chair- 
man of  the  Eevising  body — (words  quoted  above,  at  page 
369,)  — "  To  this  question,  we  venture  to  answer  very  unhesi- 
tatingly in  the  negative," — What  remains  but,  with  blank 
astonishment,  not  unmingled  with  disgust,  to  close  the 
volume  ?  Your  own  ingenuous  admission, — (volunteered  by 
yourself  a  few  days  before  you  and  your  allies  "  proceeded 
to  the  actual  details  of  the  Eevision,")  —  that  "  we  have 
certainly  not  acquired  sufficient  Criticcd  Judgment  for  any  body 
of  Eevisers  hopefully  to  undertake  such  a  work  as  this," — is 
decisive  on  the  subject. 

The  gravity  of  the  issue  thus  raised,  it  is  impossible  to 
over-estimate.      We   find    ourselves    at   once    and    entirely 


510  THE  REVISION  OP  1881    DIFFERS  [Reply  to 

lifted  out  of  the  region  originally  proposed  for  investiga- 
tion. It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  the  degree  of  skill  which 
has  been  exhibited  in  translating  the  title-deeds  of  our 
heavenly  inheritance  out  of  Greek  into  English.  Those 
title-deeds  themselves  have  been  empirically  submitted  to  a 
process  which,  rightly  or  ivrongly^  seriously  affects  their  in- 
tegrity. Not  only  has  a  fringe  of  most  unreasonable  textual 
mistrust  been  tacked  on  to  the  margin  of  every  inspired 
page,  (as  from  S.  Luke  x.  41  to  xi.  11)  : — not  only  has  many 
a  grand  doctrinal  statement  been  evacuated  of  its  authority, 
(as,  by  the  shameful  mis-statement  found  in  the  margin 
against  S.  John  iii.  13,^  and  the  vile  Socinian  gloss  which 
disfigures  the  margin  of  Eom.  ix.  5^)  : — but  we  entirely  miss 
many  a  solemn  utterance  of  the  Spirit, — as  when  we  are 
assured  that  verses  44  and  46  of  S.  Mark  ix.  are  omitted  by 
'  the  test  ancient  authorities'  (whereas,  on  the  contrary,  the 
MSS.  referred  to  are  the  worst).  Let  the  thing  complained  of 
be  illustrated  by  a  few  actual  examples.  Only  five  shall  be 
subjoined.  The  words  in  the  first  column  represent  what 
you  are  pleased  to  designate  as  among  "the  most  certain 
conclusions  of  modern  Textual  Criticism"  (p.  78), — but  what 
/  assert  to  be  nothing  else  but  mutilated  exhibitions  of  the 
inspired  Text.  The  second  column  contains  the  indubitable 
Truth  of  Scripture, — the  words  which  have  been  read  by  our 
Fathers'  Fathers  for  the  last  500  years,  and  which  we 
propose,  (God  helping  us,)  to  hand  on  unimpaired  to  our 
Children,  and  to  our  Children's  Children,  for  many  a  century 
to  come : — 

Eevised  (1881).  Authorized  (1611). 

"  And  como,  follow  me."  "  And  come,  talce  up  the  cross 

and  follow  me."^ 


1  Tlie  Reader  is  invited  to  refer  back  to  pp.  132-135. 
*  'J'he  Reader  is  requested  to  refer  back  to  pp.  210-214. 
3  S.  Mark  x.  21. 


Bp.  Elucott]     essentially  FROM  THAT  OF  1611. 


511 


"  And  they  blindfolded  him, 
and  asked  him,  saying,  Pro- 
phesy." 

"  And  there  was  also  a  super- 
scription over  him.  This  is  the 
Kino;  of  the  Jews." 


"  And  they  gave  him  a  piece 
of  a  broiled  iish." 


"  And  when  they  had  blind- 
folded him,  tliey  struck  Mm  on 
(lie  face,  and  asked  him,  saying. 
Prophesy."  ^ 

"And  a  superscription  also 
was  written  over  him  in  letters 
of  Greek,  and  Latin,  and  Hebrew, 
This  is  the  King  of  the  Jews."^ 

"  And  they  gave  him  a  piece 
of  a  broiled  fish,  and  of  an 
honeycomb."^ 


But  the  next  (S.  Luke  ix.  54-6,)  is  a  far  more  serious  loss  : — 


"  '  Lord,  wilt  thou  that  we 
bid  fire  to  come  down  from 
heaven,  and  consume  them  ?' 
But  he  turned  and  rebuked 
them.  And  they  went  to 
another  village." 


"  '  Lord,  wilt  thou  that  we 
command  fire  to  come  down 
from  heaven,  and  consume 
them,  even  as  Elias  did  f  But 
he  turned  and  rebuked  them, 
and  said,  '  Ye  know  not  what 
manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of.  For 
the  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to 
destroy  mens  lives,  hut  to  save 
them,'  And  they  went  to 
another  village." 


The  unlearned  reader  sees  at  a  glance  that  the  only  dif- 
ference of  Translation  here  is  the  substitution  of  '  bid '  for 
'  command,'  — -  which  by  the  way,  is  not  only  uncalled  for, 
but  is  a  change  for  the  worse}      On  the  other  hand,  how 


1  S.  Luke  XX  ii.  64.  ^  S.  Luke  xxiii.  38.  ^  g_  ^uke  xxiv.  42. 

*  Elrrflv  is  '  to  command '  in  S.  Matth.  (and  S.  Luke)  iv.  3 :  in  S.  Mark 
V.  43 :  viii.  7,  and  in  many  other  places.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Revisers 
have  thrust  'command'  into  S.  Matth.  xx.  21,  where  ' grant ^  had  far 
better  have  been  let  alone :  and  have  overlooked  other  places  (as  S.  Matth. 
xxii.  24,  S.  James  ii.  11),  where  '  command '  might  perhaps  have  been 
introduced  with  advantage.  (I  nothing  doubt  that  when  the  Centurion  of 
Capernaum  said  to  our  Lord  fiovov  dire  Xoyo)  [Mtt.  viii.  8  =  Lu.  vii.  7], 
he  entreated  Him  *  only  to  give  the  ivord  of  command'')  [Over. 


512       THE  REVISION  OF  1611  STANDS  ON  QUITE  A    [Reply  to 

grievous  an  injury  has  been  done  by  the  mutilation  of  the 
blessed  record  in  respect  of  those  (3  +  5-f7+4  +  24=) 
forty-three  (in  English  fifty-seven)  undoubtedly  inspired  as 
well  as  most  precious  words, — even  "  ordinary  Eeaders  "  are 
competent  to  discern. 

I  am  saying  that  the  systematic,  and  sometimes  serious, — 
always  inexcusable, — liberties  which  have  been  taken  with 
the  Greek  Text  by  the  Eevisionists  of  1881,  constitute  a 
ground  of  offence  against  their  work  for  which  no  pretext 
was  afforded  by  the  Ee vision  of  1611.  To  argue  therefore 
from  what  has  been  the  fate  of  the  one,  to  what  is  likely  to 
be  the  fate  of  the  other,  is  illogical.  The  cases  are  not  only 
not  parallel :  they  are  even  wholly  dissimilar. 


We  all  see,  of  course,  that  it  was  because  Aoj  is  rendered  *■  granV  in 
the  (very  nearly)  parallel  place  to  S.  Matth.  xx.  21  (viz.  S.  Mark  x.  37), 
that  the  Revisers  thought  it  iucumbent  on  them  to  rejiresent  EtTre  in  the 
earlier  Gospel  differently ;  and  so  they  bethought  themselves  of  '  com- 
mand.^ (Infelicitously  enough,  as  I  humbly  think.  ^Promise''  would 
evidently  have  been  a  preferable  substitute:  the  word  in  the  original 
(flnelv)  being  one  of  that  large  family  of  Greek  verbs  which  vaiy  their 
shade  of  signification  according  to  their  context.)  But  it  is  plainly 
impracticable  to  level  up  after  this  rigid  fashion, — to  translate  in  this 
mechanical  way.  Far  more  is  lost  than  is  gained  by  this  straining  after 
an  impossible  closeness  of  rendering.  The  spirit  becomes  inevitably 
sacrificed  to  the  letter.  All  this  has  been  largely  remarked  upon  above,  at 
pp.  187-206. 

Take  the  case  before  us  in  illustration.  S.  James  and  S.  John  with 
their  Mother,  have  evidently  agreed  together  to  '  ask  a  favour '  of  their 
LoKD  (cf.  Mtt.  XX.  20,  Mk.  x.  35).  The  Mother  begins  EiVe, — the  sons 
begin,  Ao'?.  Why  are  we  to  assume  that  the  request  is  made  by  the 
Mother  in  a  different  spirit  from  the  sons  ?  Why  are  we  to  imjwse  upon 
her  language  the  imperious  sentiment  which  the  very  mention  of 
'  command  '  unavoidably  suggests  to  an  English  ear  ? 

A  prior,  and  yet  more  fatal  objection,  remains  in  fidl  force.  The 
Revisers,  (I  say  it  for  the  last  time,)  were  clearly  going  beyond  their 
prescribed  duty  when  they  set  about  handling  the  Authorized  Version 
after  this  merciless  fashion.  Their  business  was  to  correct  'plain  and 
clear  errors, — not  to  produce  a  '  New  English  Version.' 


Bf.  Ellicx)tt.]  different  FOOTING  FROM  THAT  OF  1881.    51?, 

The  cheapest  copies  of  our  Authorized  Version  at  least 
exhibit  the  Word  of  GoD  faithfully  and  helpfully.  Could 
the  same  be  said  of  a  cheap  edition  of  the  work  of  the 
Eevisionists, — destitute  of  headings  to  the  Chapters,  and 
containing  no  record  of  the  extent  to  which  the  Sacred  Text 
has  undergone  depravation  throughout  ? 

Let  it  be  further  recollected  that  the  greatest  Scholars  ana 
the  most  learned  Divines  of  which  our  Church  could  boast, 
conducted  the  work  of  Ee vision  in  King  James'  days ;  and 
it  will  be  acknowledged  that  the  promiscuous  assemblage 
which  met  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber  cannot  urge  any 
corresponding  claim  on  public  attention.  The7i,  the  Bishops 
of  Lincoln  of  1611  were  Eevisers :  the  Vance  Smiths  stood 
without  and  found  fault.  But  in  the  affair  of  1881, 
Dr.  Vance  Smith  revises,  and  ventilates  heresy  from  within  ■} 
the  Bp.  of  Lincoln  stands  outside,  and  is  one  of  the  severest 
Critics  of  the  work. — Disappointed  men  are  said  to  have  been 
conspicuous  among  the  few  assailants  of  our  '  Authorized 
Version,' — Scholars  (as  Hugh  Broughton)  who  considered 
themselves  unjustly  overlooked  and  excluded.  But  on  the 
present  occasion,  among  the  multitude  of  hostile  voices, 
there  is  not  a  single  instance  known  of  a  man  excluded  from 
the  deliberations  of  the  Jerusalem  Chamber,  who  desired  to 
share  them. 


^  Take  the  following  as  a  sample,  which  is  one  of  the  Author's  proofs 
that  the  '  Results  of  the  Revision '  are  '  unfavourable  to  Orthodoxy  :'— 
"  The  only  instance  in  the  N.  T.  in  which  the  religious  worship  or 
adoration  of  Christ  was  apparently  implied,  has  been  altered  by  the 
Revision:  '  At  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow,'  [Philipp.  ii.  10] 
is  now  to  be  read  '  in  the  name.'  Moreover,  no  alteration  of  text  or 
of  translation  will  be  found  anywhere  to  make  up  for  this  loss  ;  as  indeed 
it  is  well  understood  that  the  N.  T.  contains  neither  precept  nor  example 
which  really  sanctions  the  religious  worship  of  Jesus  Christ." — Texts  and 
Margins, — p.  47. 

2    L 


514  REVIEW  OF  THE  ENTIRE  SUBJECT.  [Reply  to 

To  argue  therefore  concerning  the  prospects  of  the  Eevision 
of  1881  from  the  known  history  of  our  Authorized  Version 
of  IGll,  is  to  argue  concerning  things  essentially  dissimilar. 
With  every  advance  made  in  the  knowledge  of  tlie  subject, 
it  may  he  confidently  predicted  that  there  will  spring  up 
increased  distrust  of  the  Eevision  of  1881,  and  an  ever 
increasing  aversion  from  it. 

(4)  Iicvioc  of  the  entire  subject,  and  of  tlie  respective 
positions  of  Bp.  Ellieott  and  myself. 

Here  I  lay  down  my  pen, — glad  to  have  completed  what 
(because  I  have  endeavoured  to  do  my  work  tlwrowjlilij)  has 
proved  a  very  laborious  task  indeed.  The  present  rejoinder 
to  your  Pamphlet  covers  all  the  ground  you  have  yourself 
traversed,  and  will  be  found  to  have  disposed  of  your  entire 
contention. 

I  take  leave  to  point  out,  in  conclusion,  that  it  places  you 
individually  in  a  somewhat  embarrassing  predicament.  For 
you  have  now  no  alternative  but  to  come  forward  and 
disprove  my  statements  as  well  as  refute  my  arguments :  or 
to  admit,  by  your  silence,  that  you  have  sustained  defeat  in 
the  cause  of  which  you  constituted  yourself  the  champion. 
You  constrained  me  to  reduce  you  to  this  alternative  when 
you  stood  forth  on  behalf  of  the  Eevising  body,  and  saw  fit 
to  provoke  me  to  a  personal  encounter. 

But  you  must  come  provided  with  something  vastly  more 
formidable,  rememljer,  tlian  denunciations, — which  are  but 
wind :  and  vague  generalities, — which  prove  nothing  and 
persuade  nobody :  and  appeals  to  the  authority  of  "  Lach- 
mann,  Tischendorf,  and  Tregelles," — which  I  disallow  and 
disregard.  You  must  })roducc  a  couiitrr-array  of  well-ascer- 
tained   facts;    and  you   must   build    tlicr(Mi])ou    irrefragable 


Bp.  Ellicott.]       one  result  OF  THIS  CONTENTION.  515 

arguments.  In  other  words,  yoU  must  conduct  your  cause 
with  learning  and  ability.  Else,  believe  me,  you  will  make 
the  painful  discovery  that  "  the  last  error  is  worse  than  the 
first."  You  had  better  a  thousand  times,  even  now,  ingenuously 
admit  that  you  made  a  grievous  mistake  when  you  put  yourself 
into  the  hands  of  those  ingenious  theorists,  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort,  and  embraced  their  arbitrary  decrees, — than  per- 
severe in  your  present  downward  course,  only  to  sink  deeper 
and  deeper  in  the  mire. 

(5)  Antici2)atcd  effect  of  the  2yresent  contention  on  the  Text  of 
1  Timothy  iii.  16. 

I  like  to  believe,  in  the  meantime,  that  this  passage  of 
arms  has  resulted  in  such  a  vindication^  of  the  traditional 
Heading  of  1  Timothy  iii.  16,  as  will  effectually  secure  that 
famous  place  of  Scripture  against  further  molestation.  Faxit 
Deus!  ...  In  the  margin  of  the  Ee  vision  of  1881,  I 
observe  that  you  have  ventured  to  state  as  follows, — 

"The  word  God,  in  place  of  He  who,  rests  on  no  sufficient 
ancient  evidence." 

In  the  words  of  your  Unitarian  ally.  Dr.  Vance  Smith, — 

"  The  old  reading  is  pronounced  untenable  by  the  Eevisers, 
as  it  has  long  been  known  to  be  by  all  careful  students  of 
the  New  Testament.  .  .  .  It  is  in  truth  another  example  of  the 
facility  with  which  ancient  copiers  could  introduce  the  word 
God  into  their  manuscripts, — a  reading  which  was  the  natural 
result  of  the  growing  tendency  in  early  Christian  times  ...  to 
look  upon  the  humble  Teacher  as  the  incarnate  Word,  and 
therefore  as  '  God  manifested  in  the  flesh  ' "  (p.  39). 

Such  remarks  proceeding  from  such  a  quarter  create  no 
surprise.  But,  pray,  my  lord  Bishop,  of  what  were  you 
thinking  when  you  permitted  yourself  to  make  the  serious 


*  Supra,  p.  424  to  p.  501. 

2  L  2 


516  UTTER  INCOMrATIBILITY  OF  THESE         [Reply  to 

mis-stateiucnt  wliicli  stands  in  the  margin  ?  Yon  nmst 
iieeds  have  meant  tliereby  that, — "The  word  He  who  in 
place  of  God,  on  the  contrary,  docs  rest  on  sufficient  ancient 
evidence."  I  solemnly  call  upon  you,  in  the  Name  of  Him 
l)y  whose  Spirit  Holy  Scripture  was  given,  to  prove  the 
truth  of  your  marginal  Note  of  which  the  foregoing  70  pages 
are  a  refutation. — You  add, 

"  Some  ancient  authorities  read  which." 

13 ut  why  did  you  suppress  the  fact,  which  is  undeniable, 
viz. :  that  a  great  many  "  Mo7-e  ancient  authorities "  read 
'  which '  (o),  than  read  '  who  '  (09)  ? 

(G)  The  nature  of  this  contention  explainal. 
And  yet,  it  was  no  isolated  place  which  I  was  eager  to  estab- 
lisli,  when  at  first  I  took  up  my  pen.    It  was  the  general  trust- 
worthiness of  the  Traditional  Text, — (the  Text  which  you  admit 
to  be  upwards  of  1500  years  old,) — which  I  aimed  at  illus- 
trating :  the  essential  rottenness  of  the  foundation  on  which 
the  Greek  Text  of  the  Eevision  of  1881  has  been  constructed  by 
yourself  and  your  fellow  Eevisers, — which  I  was  determined  to 
expose.     I  claim  to  have  proved  not  only  that  your  entire 
superstructure  is  tasteless  and  unlovely  to  a  degree, — but 
also  that  you  have  reared  it  up  on  a  foundation  of  sand.     In 
no  vaunting  spirit,  (God  is  my  witness  1),  but  out  of  sincere 
and  sober  zeal  for  the  truth  of    Scripture  I  say  it, — your 
work,  whether  you  know  it  or  not,  has  been  so  handled  in 
the   course   of    the  present  volume  of  500  pages   that   its 
essential  deformity  must  be  apparent  to  every  unprejudiced 
beholder.     It  can  only  be  spoken  of  at  this  time  of  day  as  a 
shapeless  ruin. 

A   ruin  moreover   it  is  which   does   not  admit  of  being 
repaired   or   restored.     And    why  ?     Because   the   mischief, 


Bp.  Ellicott.]        views,  AND  THOSE  OF  DR.  HORT.  517 

which  extends  to  every  part  of  the  edifice,  takes  its  beginning, 
as  already  explained,  in  every  part  of  the  foundation. 

And  further,  (to  speak  without  a  figure,)  it  cannot  be  too 
plainly  stated  that  no  compromise  is  possible  between  our 
respective  methods, — yours  and  mine :  between  the  new 
German  system  in  its  most  aggravated  and  in  fact  intolerable 
form,  to  which  you  have  incautiously  and  unconditionally 
given  in  your  adliesion ;  and  the  old  English  school  of 
Textual  Criticism,  of  which  I  humljly  avow  myself  a  disciple. 
Between  the  theory  of  Drs.  "Westcott  and  Hort  (which  you 
have  made  your  own)  and  the  method  of  your  present 
Correspondent,  there  can  be  no  compromise,  because 
the  two'  are  antagonistic  throughout.  We  have,  in  fact, 
nothing  in  common, — except  certain  documents ;  which  / 
insist  on  interpreting  by  the  humble  Inductive  process : 
while  you  and  your  friends  insist  on  your  right  of  deducing 
your  estimate  of  them  from  certain  antecedent  imaginations 
of  your  own, — every  one  of  Avhich  I  disallow,  and  some  of 
which  I  am  able  to  disprove. 

Such,  my  lord  Bishop,  is  your  baseless  imagination — 
(1)  That  the  traditional  Greek  Text  (which,  without  authority, 
you  style  "  The  Syrian  text")  is  the  result  of  a  deliberate 
Eecension  made  at  Antioch,  a.d.  250  and  850  ■} — (2)  That  the 
Peschito,  in  like  manner,  is  the  result  of  a  Eecension  made 
at  Edessa  or  Nisibis  about  the  same  time  ■? — (3)  That  Cureton's 
is  the  Syriac  '  Vetus,'  and  the  Peschito  the  Syriac  '  Vulgate  :'^ 
— (4)  That  the  respective  ancestries  of  our  only  two  IVth- 
century  Codices,  B  and  n,  "  diverged  from  a  common  parent 
extremelynear  the  apostolic  autographs:"*  —(5)  That  this  com- 


1  See  above,  pp.  272-275,  pp.  278-281.    ^  ggg  ^\yjve,  p.  275. 

^  See  above,  pp.  276-7.  *  See  above,  pp.  303-305. 


518  THE  VIEW  IIEKE  ADVOCATED  [Reply  to 

mon  original  enjoyed  a  "  general  immunity  from  substantive 
error ;  "  and  by  consequence— (6)  Tliat  b  and  n  provide  "  a  safe 
criterion  of  genuineness,"  so  that  "  no  readings  of  x  B  can  be 
safely  rejected  absolutely."^ — (7)  Similar  wild  imaginations 
you  cherish  concerning  c  and  D, — which,  together  with  ]5  and  X 
you  assume  to  be  among  the  most  trustworthy  guides  in 
existence ;  whereas  /  have  convinced  myself,  by  laborious 
collation,  that  they  are  the  most  cornqjt  of  all.  "We  are  thus 
diametrically  opposed  throughout.  Finally, — (8)  You  assume 
that  you  possess  a  power  of  divination  wdiich  enables  you 
to  dispense  with  laborious  processes  of  Induction ;  wdiile  /, 
on  the  contrary,  insist  that  the  Truth  of  the  Text  of  Scripture 
is  to  be  elicited  exclusively  from  the  consentient  testimony 
of  the  largest  number  of  the  best  Copies,  Fathers, 
Versions.^  There  is,  I  am  persuaded,  no  royal  road  to  the 
attainment  of  Truth  in  this  department  of  Knowledge.  Only 
through  the  lowly  portal  of  humility, — only  by  self-renouncing 
labour, — may  we  ever  hope  to  reach  tlie  innermost  shrine. 
They  do  but  go  astray  themselves  and  hopelessly  mislead 
others,  who  first  invent  their  facts,  and  then  proceed  to 
build  thereupon  their  premisses. 

Such  builders  are  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort, — with  whom 
(by  your  own  avowal)  you  stand  comj)letely  identified.^ 
I  repeat,  (for  I  wish  it  to  be  distinctly  understood  and 
remembered,)  that  what  I  assert  concerning  tliose  Critics 
is, — not  that  their  superstructure  rests  upon  an  insecure 
foundation ;  but  that  it  rests  on  no  foundation  at  all.  My 
complaint  is, — not  that  they  are  somewhat  and  frequently 
mistaken ;  but  that  they  are  mistaken  entirely,  and  that  tliey 
are  mistaken  throuyhout.    There  is  no  possibility  of  approxima- 


1  See  above,  p.  304.         *  See  above,  pp.  339-42  ;  also  pp.  422,  423, 
^  Sec  above,  p['.  391-7. 


Bp.  Ellicott.]  incompatible  WITH  THOSE  OF  DK.  HORT.    519 

tion  between  their  mere  assumptions  and  the  results  of  my 
liumble  and  laborious  method  of  dealing  with  the  Text  of 
Scripture.  We  shall  only  then  be  able  to  begin  to  reason 
together  with  the  slightest  prospect  of  coming  to  any  agree- 
ment, when  they  have  unconditionally  abandoned  all  their 
preconceived  imaginations,  and  unreservedly  scattered  every 
one  of  their  postulates  to  the  four  winds. 

(7)  Parting  Counsels. 
Let  me  be  allowed,  in  conclusion,  to  recommend  to  your 
attention  and  that  of  your  friends, — (I.)  "  The  last  Twelve 
Verses  of  S.  Maek's  Gospel  : "  —  (II.)  the  Angelic 
Hymn  on  the  night  of  the  Nativity : — (III.)  The  text  of 
1  Timothy  iii.  16, — these  three, — (in  respect  of  which  up  to 
this  hour,  you  and  I  find  ourselves  to  be  hopelessly  divided,) 
— as  convenient  Test  places.  When  you  are  prepared  frankly 
to  admit, —  (I.)  That  there  is  no  reason  whatever  for  doubting 
the  genuineness  of  S.  Mark  xvi.  9-20  :  ^— (II.)  That  eV 
av6pco7roL<i  euSoKia  is  unquestionably  the  Evangelical  text  of 
S.  Luke  ii.  14  :^ — and  (HI.)  That  ©eo?  i^avepcoOij  iv  aapKc  is 
what  the  great  Apostle  must  be  held  to  have  written  in 
1  Timothy  iii,  16,^ — we  shall  be  in  good  time  to  proceed  to 
something  else.  Until  this  happy  result  has  been  attained,  it 
is  a  mere  waste  of  time  to  break  up  fresh  ground,  and  to 
extend  the  area  of  our  differences. 

I  cannot  however  disguise  from  you  the  fact  that  such  an 
avowal  on  your  part  will  amount  to  an  admission  that  "  the 
whole  fabric  of  Textual  Criticism  which  has  Ijeen  built  up 
during  the  last  fifty  years  by  successive  editors  of  the  New 
Testament " — Lachmann  namely,  Tischendorf,  and  Tregelles, 
— is   worthless.      Neither   may  the   inevitable  consequence 


1  See  above,  pp.  3G-40 :  47-9 :  422-4. 
See  above,  pp.  41-7  :  420-2.        ^  See  above,  pp.  98-106  :  424-501, 


O'lD  THE  SUBJECT  DISMISSED.  [Klily,  &c. 

of  this  aJinissiou  be  concealed  :  viz.  that  your  own  work  as 
Eevisionists  has  been,  to  speak  plainly,  one  gigantic  blunder, 
from  end  to  end. 

(8)  The  subject  dismissed. 

The  issue  of  this  prolonged  contention  I  now  commend, 
with  deep  humility,  to  Almighty  God.  The  Spirit  of  Truth 
will,  (I  know,)  take  good  care  of  His  own  masterpiece, — the 
Written  Word.  May  He  have  compassion  on  my  ignorance, 
and  graciously  forgive  me,  if,  (intending  nothing  less,)  I  shall 
prove  to  have  anywhere  erred  in  my  strenuous  endeavour  to 
maintain  the  integrity  of  Scripture  against  the  rashness  of  an 
impatient  and  unlearned  generation. 

But  if,  (as  I  humbly  believe  and  confidently  hope,)  my 
conclusions  are  sound  throughout,  then  may  He  enable  men 
freely  to  recognize  the  Truth ;  and  tlnis,  effectually  avert  from 
our  Church  the  supreme  calamity  with  which,  for  a  few 
months  in  1881,  it  seemed  threatened  ;  namely,  of  having  an 
utterly  depraved  Eecension  of  the  Greek  Text  of  the  New 
Testament  thrust  upon  it,  as  the  basis  of  a  very  questionable 
'  Efcvision  '  of  the  English. 

My  lord  Bishop, — I  have  the  honour  to  wish  you  respect- 
fully farewell. 

J.  W.  B. 
Deanery,  Chichestek, 
July,  1883. 


THE   GRAHS   WITIIERETII :    THE   FLOWER   FADETII : 
BUT  THE   WORD  OF  OUR   GOD    SHALL   STAND   FOR   EVER, 


(     521     ) 


APPENDIX  OF  SACRED  CODICES. 


The  inquiries  into  which  I  was  led  (January  to  June  1883) 
by  my  Dissertation  in  vindication  of  the  Traditional  Eeading 
of  1  Tim.  iii.  IG,  have  resulted  in  my  being  made  aware  of  the 
existence  of  a  vast  number  of  Sacred  Codices  which  had  eluded 
the  vigilance  of  previous  Critics. 

I  had  already  assisted  my  friend  Prebendary  Scrivener 
in  greatly  enlarging  Scholz's  list.  We  had  in  fact  raised  the 
enumeration  of  '  Evangelia '  to  621  :  of  '  Acts  and  Catholic 
Epistles'  to  239  :  of  'Paul'  to  281  :  of  'Apocalypse'  to  108  :  of 
'  Evangelistaria '  to  299  :  of  the  book  called  '  Apostolus  '  to  81  : — 
making  a  total  of  1629. — But  at  the  end  of  a  protracted  and 
somewhat  laborious  correspondence  with  the  custodians  of  not 
a  few  great  Continental  Libraries,  I  am  able  to  state  that  our 
available  '  Evangelia '  amount  to  at  least  739  ^  :  our  '  Acts  and 
CatJi.  Epp:  to  261  :  our  '  Paul'  to  338  :  our  '  Ajjoc'  to  122 :  our 
'  Evstt.'  to  415  2  :  our  copies  of  the  '  Apostolus  '  to  128  ^  :  making 
a  total  of  2003.  This  shows  an  increase  of  three  hundred  and 
seventy-four. 

My  original  intention  had  been  to  publish  this  enumeration 
of  Sacred  Codices  in  its  entirety  as  an  Appendix  to  the  present 
volume :  but  finding  that  the  third  edition  of  Dr.  Scrivener's 
'  Introduction '  would  appear  some  months  before  my  own 
pages  could  possibly  see  the  light,  I  eagerly  communicated  my 
discoveries  to  my  friend.     I  have  indeed  proposed  to  myself  no 


1  Evan.  738  belongs  to  Oriel  College,  Oxford,  [xii.],  small  4to.  of  130  foil,  slightly  mut. 
Evan.  739,  Bodl.  Greek  Miscell.  323  [.xiii.],  8vo.  membr.  foil.  183,  mut.  Brought  from  Ephesus, 
and  obtained  for  the  Bodleian  in  1883. 

2  Evst.  415  belongs  to  Lieut.  Bate,  [xiii.],  cJiart.  foil.  219,  mutilated  throughout.  He 
obtained  it  in  1878  from  a  Cyprus  villager  at  Kikos,  near  Mount  Trovodos  (i.e.  Olympus.)  It 
came  from  a  monastery  on  the  mountain. 

3  Apost.  123  will  be  found  described,  for  the  first  time,  below,  at  p.  528. 


522  ArrENDix  of  sacred  codices. 

other  object  tliroiighoiit  Itiit  the  advancement  of  the  stndy 
of  Textual  Criticism  :  and  it  was  reasonable  to  hope  that  by 
means  of  his  widely  circulated  volume,  the  great  enlargement 
which  our  previously  ascertained  stores  have  suddenly  ex- 
perienced would  become  more  generally  known  to  scholars.  I 
should  of  course  still  have  it  in  my  power  to  reproduce  here  tlie 
same  enumeration  of  Sacred  Codices. 

The  great  bulk  howcTer  wbicli  the  present  volume  has 
acquired,  ind'ices  me  to  limit  myself  in  this  place  to  some 
account  of  those  Codices  which  have  been  expressly  announced 
and  discoursed  about  in  my  Text  (as  at  pp.  474  and  492-5). 
Some  other  occasion  must  be  found  for  enlarging  on  the  rest  of 
my  budget. 

It  only  remains  to  state  that  for  most  of  my  recent  discoveries 
I  am  indebted  to  the  Abbate  Cozza-Luzi,  Prefect  of  the  Vatican ; 
who  on  being  informed  of  the  object  of  my  solicitude,  with 
extraordinary  liberality  and  consideration  at  once  set  three 
competent  young  men  to  work  in  the  principal  libraries  of 
Eome.  To  him  I  am  further  indebted  for  my  introduction  to 
the  MS.  treasures  belonging  to  the  Basilian  monks  of  Crypta- 
Ferrata,  the  ancient  Tusculum.  Concerning  the  precious 
library  of  that  monastery  so  much  has  been  ofiered  already 
(viz.  at  pp.  44G-448,  and  again  at  pp.  473-4),  as  well  as 
concerning  its  learned  chief,  the  Hieronionachus  Antonio 
Eocchi,  that  I  must  be  content  to  refer  my  readers  to  those 
earlier  parts  of  the  present  volume.  I  cannot  however  suffi- 
ciently acknowletlge  the  patient  help  Avhich  the  librarian  of 
C!rypta  Ferrata  has  rendered  me  in  the  course  of  these  re- 
searches. 

For  my  knowledge  of  the  sacred  Codices  preserved  at  Messina, 
I  am  indebted  to  the  good  offices  and  learning  of  Tapas  Filippo 
Matranga.  In  respect  of  those  at  Milan,  my  learned  friend 
Dr.  Ceriani  has  (not  for  the  first  time)  been  my  efficient  helper. 
M.  Wesclier  lias  kindly  assisted  me  at  Faris  ;  and  Dr.  C.  de 
Boor  at  ]>erlin.  It  must  suffice,  for  the  rest,  to  refer  to  the 
Notes  at  fo(^t  of  lip.  401-2  and  477-8. 


APPENDIX  OF  SACRED  CODICES.         523 


Additional  Codices  of  S.  Paul's  Epistles. 

282.  (=Act.   240.     Apoc.   109).     Paris,   'Arme'nien   9'   (olim   Reg.  2247). 

memhr.  foil.  323.  This  bilingual  codex  (Greek  and  Armenian)  is 
described  by  the  Abbe'  Martin  in  his  Introduction  a  la  Critique  Textiwlle 
du  N.  T.  (isSS),  p.  6G0-1.  See  above,  p.  474,  note  (1).  An  Italian 
version  is  added  from  the  Cath.  Epp.  onwards.  Mut.  at  beginning 
(Acts  iv.  14)  and  end.  (For  its  extraordinary  reading  at  1  Tim.  iii.  IG, 
see  above,  p.  473-4.) 

283.  (=  Act.  241).  Messina  P  K  Z  (i.e.  127)  [xii.],  cliart.  foil.  224.  Mnt. 
begins  at  Acts  viii.  2, — ends  at  Hebr.  viii.  2  ;  also  a  leaf  is  lost  between 
foil.  90  and  91.     Has  virodd.  and  Commentary  of  an  unknown  author. 

284.  (=  Act.  195).     Modena,  ii.  a.  13  [xiii.  ?],  Mid.  at  the  end. 

285.  (=  Act.  196),  Modena,  ii.  c.  4  [xi.  or  xii.].  Sig.  Ant.  Cappelli  (sub- 
librarian) sends  me  a  tracing  of  1  Tim.  iii.  16. 

28(3.  Ambrosian  library,  e.  2,  inf.  the  Catena  of  Nicetas.  'Textus  particu- 
latim  pr£emittit  Commentariis.' 

287.  Ambrosian  a.  241,  inf.,  '  est  Catena  ejusdem  auctoris  ex  initio,  sed  noa 
complectitur  totum  opiis.' 

288.  Ambrosian   d.    541    inf.   [x.   or  xi.]  memhr.     Text  and  Catena  on  all 

S.  Paul's  Epp.  '  Textus  continuatus.  Catena  in  marginibus.'  It  was 
brought  from  Thessaly. 

289.  Milan  c.  295  inf.  [x.  or  xi.]  memhr.  with  a  Catena.  '  Textus  continu- 
atus.    Catena  in  marginibus.' 

290.  (=  Evan.  622.  Act.  242.  Apoc.  110).  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  a.  i. 
[xiii.  or  xiv.]  foil.  386 :  cliart.  a  beautiful  codex  of  the  entire  N.  T. 
described  by  Rocchi,  p.  1-2.     Menolog.     3Iut.  1  Nov.  to  16  Dec. 

291.  (=  Act.  243).     Ciypta  Ferrata,  A.  0.  i.  [x.]  foil.  139 :  in  two  columns, — 

letters  almost  uncial.  Particularly  described  l>y  Rocchi,  pp.  15,  16. 
Zacagni  used  this  codex  when  writing  about  Euthalius.  3Iut.,  beginning 
with  the  argument  for  1  S.  John  and  ending  with  2  Tim. 
t292.  (=  Act.  244).  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  0.  iii.  [xi.  or  xii.].  Memhr.,  foil.  172. 
in  2  columns  beautifully  illuminated  :  described  by  Rocchi,  p.  18-9. 
Zacagni  employed  this  codex  while  treating  of  Euthalius.     Menolog. 

293.  (=  Act.  245).  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  )3.  vi.  [xi.],  foil.  193.  3Iut.  at  the  end, 
Described  by  Rocchi,  p.  22-3. 

294.  (=  Act.  246).  Vat.  1208.  Abbate  Cozzi-Luzi  confirms  Berriman's 
account  [p.  98-9]  of  the  splendour  of  this  codex.  It  is  written  in  gold 
letters,  and  is  said  to  have  belonged  lo  Carlotta,  Queen  of  Jerusalem, 
Cyprus,  and  Armenia,  who  died  at  Rome  a.d.  1487,  and  probably  gave 
the  book  to  Pope  Innocent  VIII.,  whose  arms  are  printed  at  the 
beginning.  It  contains  etfigies  of  S.  Luke,  S.  James,  S.  Peter,  S.  John, 
S.  Jude,  S.  Paul. 

295.  (=  Act  247).    Palatino-Vat.  38  [xi.]  memhr.  foil.  35.     Berriman  (p.  100) 

says  it  is  of  quarto  size,  and  refers  it  to  the  ixth  cent. 

296.  Barberini  iv.  85  (olim  19),  dated  a.d.  1324.     For  my  knowledge  of  this 

codex  I  am  entirely  indebted  to  Berriman,  who  says  that  it  contains 
'  the  arguments  and  marginal  scholia  written  '  (p.  102). 


524  AITENDIX   (^F   SACKED   CODICES. 

297.  Barberini,  vi.  1'3  (olim  229),  membr.  [xi.]  foil.  195:  contains  S.  Paul's 
14  Ei)p.  This  codex  also  was  known  to  Berrinian,  who  relates  (p.  102), 
that  it  is  furnished  '  witli  the  old  mar<;inal  scholia.' 

298.  (=  Act.   248),   Berlin  (Hamilton:    N"   C25    in    the    English    printed 

catalogue,  where  it  is  erroneously  described  as  a  '  Lectionarium.')     It 
contains  Acts,  Cath.  Epp.  and  S.  Paul, — as  Dr.  C.  de  Boor  informs  me. 

299.  (=  Act.  249),  Berlin,  4to.  40  [xiii.]  :  same  contents  as  the  preceding. 

300.  (=  Act.  250),  Berlin,  4to.  43  [xi.],  same  contents  as  the  preceding,  but 

commences  with  the  Psalms. 

301.  (=  Act.  251),  Berlin,  4to.  57  [xiv.],  chart.     Same  contents  as  Paul  298. 

302.  (=  Evan.  642.     Act.  252.)     Berlin,  Svo.  9  [xi.],  probably  once  contained 

all  the  N.  T.     It  now  begins  witli  S.  Luke  xxiv.  53,  and  is  riiut.  after 
1  Tliess. 

303.  Milan,  n.  272  mf.     "  Excerpti  loci." 

304.  (=  Act.  253)  Vat.  3G9  [xiv.]  foil.  226,  chart. 

305.  Vat.  549,  mcmhr.  [xii.]  foil.  380.  S.  Paul's  Epistles,  \\itli  Thcophylact's 
Commentary. 

306.  Vat.  550,  menihr.  [xii.]  foil.  290 ;  contains  Romans  with  Comm.  of 
Chrysostom. 

307.  Vat.  551,  memhr.  [x.]  foil.  283.  A  large  codex,  containing  some  of 
S.  Paul's  Epp.  with  Comm.  of  Chrysostom. 

308.  Vat.  552,  memhr.   [xi.]  foil.   155.     Contains   Hebrews  with   Comm.  of 

Chrysostom. 

309.  Vat.  582,  memhr.   [xiv.]  foil.   146.     S.  Paul's  Epistles  with  Comm.  of 

Chrysostom. 

310.  Vat.  646  [xiv.],  foil.  250  :  'cum  supplcmenlis.'  Chart.  S.  Paul's  Epp. 
with  Comm.  of  Theophylact  and  Euthymius.     Pars  i.  et  n. 

311.  (=  Evan.  671).    Vat.  647.    C/mr<.  foil.  338  [xv.].    S.  Paul's  Epistles  and 

the  Gospels,  with  Theophylact's  Commentary. 

312.  Vat.  648,  written  a.d.  1232,  at  Jerusalem,  by  Simeon,  '  qui  et  Saba 
dicitur  :'  foil.  338,  chart.  S.  Paul's  Epistles,  with  Comm.  of  Theo- 
phylact. 

313.  (=  Act.  239).     Vat.  652,  chart,  [xv.]  foil.  105.     The  Acts  and  Epistles 

with  Commentary.     See  the  Preface  to  Tiieophylact,  ed.  1758,  vol.  iii. 
p.  v.-viii.,  also  'Acts  289'  in  Scrivener's  3rd.  edit.  (p.  263). 

314.  Vat.  692,  memln:  [xii.]  foil.  93,  mut.  Corinthians,  Oalatians,  Epiiesians, 
with  Commentary. 

315.  Vat.  1222,  chart,  [xvi.]  foil.  437.  S.  Paul's  Epp.  with  Theophylact's 
Comm. 

316.  (=  Act.   255).     Vat.    1654,   memhr.   [x.   or   xi.],  foil.    211.      Arts   and 

Epistles  of  S.  Paul  with  Chrysostom's  Comm. 

317.  Vat.  1656,  m^mbr.  [xii.],  foil.  182.     Hebrews  with    Conim.  of  Chryso- 

stom, folio. 

318.  Vat.    1659,   memhr.    [xi.]    foil.    414.      S.    Paul's   Epp.   wilh    Comm.  of 

Chrysostom. 

319.  Vat.  1971  (Basil  10)  memhr.  [x.]  foil.  247.    'EwiaTuKal  twv  a.TTurrrSXwi'  avy 

Tols  Tov  EvOaKiov. 

320.  Vat.  2055  (Basil  91),  mcmhr.  [x.]  foil.  292.  S.  Paul's  Epp.  wilh  Comm. 
of  Chrysoston]. 


APPENDIX  OF  SACKED  CODICES.         525 

321.  Vat.  20G5  (Basil  101),  [x.]  memhr.  foil.  358.  Romans  witli  Conitn. 
of  Chrysostom. 

322.  (=Act.  256)  Vat.  2099  (Basil  138)  memhr.  foil.  120  [x.].  Note  that 
though  numbered  for  the  Acts,  this  code  only  contains  eVio-ToAat  i5' 
Kal  KadoAiKoi,  avv  tols  a-rnxniicreai  XeLTovpyiKaTs  wepl  tSjv  Tjiu.epwi'  eV  als 

A€KTe'oi. 

323.  Vat.  2180  [xv.]  foil.  294,  chart.     With  Comm.  of  Theophylact. 

324.  Alexand.  Vat.  4  [x.]  foil.  256,  memhr.     '  Optimaj  notae.'     Eonians  witli 

Comm.  of  Chrysostom,  Xoy .  k^'.   '  Fuit  monasterii  dicti  rod  UepifiAewTov.' 

325.  (=Evan.  698.  Apoc.  117).  Alexand.  Vat.  6.  c/iar^.  foil.  33G  [xvi.],  a 
large  codex.  The  Gospels  with  Comm.  of  Nicetas :  S.  Paul's  Epp. 
with  Comm.  of  Tlieophylact :  Apocalypse  witli  an  anonymous  Comm. 

326.  Vat.  Ottob.  74  [xv.]  foil.  291,  chart.     Romans  with  Thexloret's  Comm. 

327.  Palatino-Vat.  10  [x.]  memhr.  foil.  268.     S.  Paul's  Epp.  witli  a  Patristic 

Commentary.     '  Felkman  aduotat.' 

328.  Palatino-Vat.  204  [x.]  foil.  181,  cum  additamentis.  With  the  interpre- 
tation of  CEcumenius. 

329.  Palatino-Vat.  325  [x.]  memhr.  foil.  163,  mut.  Inter  alia  adest  eU  iirim. 
irphs  TiiJ.66eov  o/LiLAuat  Tiufs  XpvffoffTSixov. 

330.  Palatino-Vat.  423  [xii.],  partly  chart.     Codex  miscell.  habet  eiricrroAwv 

irphs  KoAaaaaus  koI  @ecraa\oviK£7s  TreptKOiras  ffvv  rfj  kpfx-qviia. 

331.  Angelic,  t.  8,  6  [xii.]  foil.  326.  S.  Paul's  Epp.  with  Comm.  of 
Chrysostom. 

332.  (=  Act.  259).     Barberini  iii.  36  {ollm  22):  memhr.  foil.  328  [«(]•     I"ter 

alia  i-Knofji.ou  Ke(pa\.  rSiv  Xlpd^eoov  koI  iwL(TTo\u>v  tSjv  ay.  airoffTdXwv. 

333.  (=  Act.  260).  Barberini  iii.  10  (olim  259)  chart,  foil.  296  [xiv.]. 
Excerpta  eV  Upd^.  (f.  1.^)2):  'laKci^ov  (f.  159):  nerpou  (f.  162):  'lo>dvv. 
(f.  165):  'Iov5.  (f.  166):  irphs  Pce/j..  (f.  167):  irphs  Kop.  (f.  179):  irphs 
KoA.  (fol.  189) :  irphs  Qtffff.  (f.  193) :  irphs  Tifx.  a  (def.  inliu.). 

334.  Barb.  v.  38  (^olim  30)  [xi.]  foil.  219,  mut.     Hebrews  with   Comm.  of 

Chrysostom. 

335.  Vallicell.    f.    [xv.],   chart,   miscell.    Inter  alia,    us    ras   iiriaroAas   ruiv 

'AiroffToXwi'  i^Tiyriffiis  rives. 

336.  (=  Act.  261),  Casanatensis,  G.  11,  6. — Note,  that  though  numbered  for 

'  Acts,'  it  contains  only  the  Catholic  Epp.  and  those  of  S.  Paul  with  a 
Catena. 

337.  Ottob.  328.  [All  I  know  as  yet  of  this  and  of  the  next  codex  is  that 
6e6s  is  read  in  both  at  1  Tim.  iii.  16]. 

338.  Borg.  f.  vi.  16.     [See  note  on  the  preceding.] 

Additional  copies  of  the  '  Apostolus.' 

82.  Messina  nr  (i.e.  83)  foil.  331,  8vo.     Perfect. 

83.  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  /3.  iv.  [x.]  memhr.  foil.  139,  Praxapostolus.  Rocchi 
gives  an  interesting  account  of  this  codex,  pp.  19-20.  It  seems  to  be 
an  adaptation  of  the  liturgical  use  of  C  P.  to  the  requirements  of  the 
Basilian  monks  in  the  Calabrian  Churcli.  This  particular  codex  is  mut. 
in  the  beginning  and  at  the  end.  (For  its  extraordinary  reading  at 
1  Tim.  iii.  16,  see  above,  p.  473-4). 


520         APPENDIX  OF  SACRED  CODICES. 

84.  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  $.  v.  [xi.],  memhr.  foil.  245,  a  most  beautiful  codex. 

Rocchi  describes  it  carefully,  pp.  20-2.  At  the  end  of  the  Mennlngy  is 
some  liturgical  matter.  'Patet  Menologium  esse  merum  a.Tr6ypacpov 
alicujus  Menologii  CPtani,  in  usum.  si  velis,  forte  redact!  Ecclcsiao 
Eossauensis  in  Calabria.'  A  suggestive  remark  follows  that  from  this 
source  '  rituum  rubricaruraque  magnum  scgetcm  colligi  posse,  nee  non 
Commemorationem  Sanctorum  mirum  sane  numerum,  quas  in  aliis 
Menologiis  vix  invenies.' 

85.  Crypta  Ferrata  A.  j3.  vii.  [xi.]  memhr.  foil.  C4,  Praxapostolns.  This 
codex  and  the  next  exhibit  hs  ((pavepiidrj  in  1  Tim.  iii.  Ifi.  Tiie 
Menology  is  r.iut.  after  17  Dec. 

8G  Crypta  Ferrata  A.  fi.  viii.  [xii.  or  xiii.")  fragments  of  foil.  127.  mrmhr. 
Praxapostolns.  (See  the  pieceding.)  Interestingly  described  by 
Rocchi,  p.  23-4. 

87.  Crypta  Ferrata  A.  /3.  ix.  [xii  ],  foil.  104,  memhr.  Praxapostolns. 
Interestingly  described  by  Rocchi,  p.  24-5.  The  Menology  is  unfortu- 
nately defective  after  9tli  November. 

88.  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  )3.  x.  [xiii.?)  memhr.  16  fragmentary  leaves.  'Vcre 
lamentanda  est  qun3  Iniic  Eclogadio  calamitas  evenit'  (says  the  learned 
Rocchi,  p.  25),  '  quoniam  ex  ejus  residuis,  multa  Sanctorum  nomina 
reperics  qure  alibi  frustra  quresieris.' 

80.  Crypta  Ferrata  A.  /3.  xi.  [xi.]  memhr.  foil.  291,  mid.,  written  in  two 
columns.  The  Menology  is  defective  after  12  June,  and  elsewhere. 
Described  by  Rocchi,  p.  26. 

90.  (=  Evst.  322)  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  jS.  ii.  [xi.]  memhr.  foil.  259,  wMth  many 

excerpts  from  the  Fathers,  fully  described  by  Rocchi,  p.  17-8,  frag- 
mentary and  imperfect. 

91.  (=  Evst.  823)  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  5.  ii.  [x.]  memhr.  foil.  155,  a  singularly 

full  lectionary.     Described  by  Rocchi,  p.  38-40. 

92.  (=  Evst.    325)   Crypta   Ferrata,    A.   5.    iv.    [xiii.]    memhr.   foil.    257,  a 

beautiful  and  interesting  codex,  '  Calligrapho  Joanne  Rossanensi  Hiero- 
monaclio  Crypta^ferratfe' :  fully  described  by  Rocchi,  p.  40-3.  Like 
many  other  in  the  same  collection,  it  is  a  palimpsest. 

93.  (=  Evst.  327)  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  5.  vi.  [xiii.]  memhr.  foil.  37,  mnf. 
at  beginning  and  end,  and  otherwise  much  injured :  described  by 
Rocchi,  p.  45-6. 

04.  (=  Evst.  328)  Crypta  Ferratu,  A.  5.  ix.  [xii.'],  mrmhr.  foil.  117,  m%if. 
at  beginning  and  end. 

95.  (=  Evst.  331)  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  5.  xx.  [xii.]  memhr.  foil.  21,  a  mere 
fragment.     (Rocchi,  p.  51.) 

96.  (=Evst.  337)  Crypta  Ferrata,  A.  S.  xxiv.     A  collection  of  fragments. 

(Rocchi,  p.  53.) 

97.  (=  Evst.  339)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  /3.  ii.  [xi.]  memhr.  foil.  151,  elaborately 

described     by     Rocchi,    p.    244-9.       This    codex    once    belonged    tii 
Thoniasius. 

98.  (=  Evst.  340)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  0  iii.  [xiv.].  memhr.  foil.  201.  Goar 
used  this  codex:  described  by  Rocchi,  p.  240-51. 

99.  (=  lOvst.  341)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  /8.  vi.  [xiii.  or  xiv.J,  memhr.  foil.  101  : 

described  by  Rocchi,  p.  255-7. 


APPENDIX  OF  SACRED  CODICES.         527 

100.  (=  Evst.  344)  CryptiX  Ferratn,  r.  0.  ix.  [xvi.],  memhr.  fcill.  95,  mut. 

at  liegiiming  and  end,  and  much  injured. 

101.  (=  Evst.  B40)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  j3.  xii.  [xiv.],  memhr.  foil.  98.  mut. 
at  beginninp;  and  end. 

102.  (=  Evst.  347)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  0.  xiii.  [xiii.]  memhr.  foil.  188:  written 
by  John  of  Eossano,  Hieromonachus  of  Cryptaferrata,  described  by 
Rocchi,  p.  265-7. 

103.  C~  Evst.  349)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  /8.  xv.  [xi.  to  xiv.]  memhr.  foil.  41. — 

Described  p.  268-9. 
101.  (=Evst.   350)   Crypta   Ferrata,    r.  0.   xvii.  [xvi.].      Chart,    foil.   269. 
Described,  p.  269-70. 

105.  (-  Evst.  351),  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  0.  xviii.  [xiv.]  chart,  foil.  54. 

106.  (=  Evst.  352)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  0.  xix.  [xvi.]  chart,  foil.  195,  described 

p.  271. 

107.  (-  Evst.  353)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  0.  xxiii.  [xvii.],  memhr.  foil.  75,— the 

work  of  Basilius  Falasca,  Hieromonachus,  and  head  of  the  monastery, 
A.D.  1641,— described  p.  273-4. 

108.  (=  Evst.  354)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  0.  xxiv.  [xvi.]  chart,  foil.  302,— the 

work     of    Lucas     Felix,    head     of    the    monastery  ;     described,     p. 
274-5. 

109.  (=  Evst.  356)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  0.  xxxviii.  [xvii.].  chart,  foil.  91,  the 
work  of  '  Romaniis  Vasselli  '  and  'Michael  Lodolinus.' 

110.  (=  Evst.  357)  Crypta  Ferrata,  r.  0.  xiii.  [xvi.]     chart,  foil.  344. 

111.  (=  Evst.  35S)  Crypta   Ferrata,  A.   /3.  xxii.  [xviii.]     chart,  foil.   77,— 

described  foil.  365-6. 

112.  (—Evst.  312)  Messina,  memhr.  in  8vo.    foil.  60  [xiii.], — 'fragmcntum 

parvi  momenti.' 

113.  Syracuse  ('Semiuario')  chart,  foil.  219,  mut.  given  by  the  Cav.  Lan- 

dolina. 

114.  (=  Evan.  155)  Alex.  Vat. 

115.  [I  have  led  Scrivener  into  error  by  assigning  this  number  (A  post.  115) 
to  'Vat.  2068  (Basil  107).'  See  above,  p.  495,  note  (1).  I  did  not 
advert  to  the  fact  that  '  Basil  107  '  had  already  been  numbered  '  Apost. 
49.'] 

116.  Vat.  368  (Praxapostolus)  [xiii.]  foil.  136,  memhr. 

117.  (=  Evst.  381)  Vat.  774  [xiii.],  foil.  160,  memhr. 

118.  (=  Evst.  387)  Vat.  2012  (Basil  51),  foil.  211  [xv.]  chart. 

119.  Vat.  2116  (Basil  155)  [xiii.]  foil.  111. 

120.  Alexand.  Vat.  11  (Praxapostolus),  [xiv.]  memhr.  foil.  169. 

121.  (=  Evst.  395)  Alexand.  Vat.  59  [xii.]  foil.  137. 

122.  Alexand.  Vat.  70,  a.d.  1544,  foil.  IS:  "in  fronte  pronunciatio  Grsaca 

Latinis  Uteris  descripta." 

123.  (=  Evst.  400)  Palatino-Vat.  241  [xv.]  chart,  foil.  149. 

124.  (=  Evst.  410)  Barb.  iii.  129  {oUm  234)  chart,  [xiv.]  foil.  189. 

125.  Barb.  iv.  11  (oUm  193),  a.d.  1566,  chart,  foil.  158,  Praxapostolus. 

126.  Barb.  iv.  60  {olim  116)  [xi]  foil.  322,  a  fine  codex  with  menologium, 

Praxapostolus. 

127.  Barb.  iv.  84  (oZm  117)  [xiii.]  foil.  185,  with  menologium.     Mut, 


528  APPENDIX   OF   SACRED   CODICES. 

128.  Varis,  lira .  Grcrlc,  I'ii,  memhi:  [xiii.  or  xiv.],  a  huge  folio  of  Liturgical 
Miscellanies,  consisting  of  hetween  G  and  900  unnumbered  leaves.  (At 
the  (ra/3^.  wpb  twv  (pwTccv,  line  11,  0t  (cpa.)  Communicated  by  the 
Abbe'  Martin. 


Postscript  (Nov.  1883.) 

It  will  be  found  stated  at  p.  495  (line  10  from  the  bottom) 
that  the  Codices  (of  '  Paul '  and  '  Apost.')  which  exhibit  ©eos 
ecf)avepw97]  amount  in  all  to  289. 

From  this  sum  (for  the  reason  already  assigned  above),  one 
must  be  deducted,  viz.,  'Apost.  115.' 

On  the  other  hand,  8  copies  of  '  Paul  '  (communicated  by  the 
Abbate  Cozza-Luzi)  are  to  be  added  :  viz.  Vat.  64G  (Paul  310): 
647  (Paul  311):  1971  (Paul  319).  Palat.  Vat.  10  (Paul  327): 
204  (Paul  328).  Casanat.  G.  11,  16  (Paul  336).  Ottoh.  328 
(Paul  337).  Borg.  r.  vi.  16  (Paul  338).  So  that  no  less  than 
260  out  of  262  cursive  copies  of  St.  Paul's  Epistle, — [not  252  out 
of  254,  as  stated  in  p.  495  (line  21  from  the  bottom)], — arc  found 
to  witness  to  the  Eeading  here  contended  for.  The  enumera- 
tion of  Codices  at  page  494  is  therefore  to  be  continued  as 
follows :— 310,  311,  319,  327,  328,  336,  337,  338. 

To  the  foregoing  are  also  to  be  added  4  copies  of  the 
'Apostolus,'  viz.  Vat.  2116  (Apost.  119).  Palat.  Vat.  241 
(Apost.  123).  Barb.  iv.  11  [olim  193]  (Apost.  125).  Paris, 
Beg.  Gr.  13  (Apost.  128). 

From  all  which,  it  appears  that,  (including  copies  of  tlio 
'Apostolus,')  tub  codices  which  are  known  to  witness  to 
eebc 'ect)ANErU)eH  in  l  Tim.  iii.  16,  amount  [289 — 14-8-f4) 
TO  exactly  three  hundred. 


529 


INDEX  I. 

of  Texts  of  Scripture, — quoted,  discussed,  or  only  referred  to  in 
this  volume. — Note,  that  an  asterisk  (*)  distinguishes  references  to 
the  Greek  Text  from  references  to  the  English  Translation  (f). —  Where 
either  the  Beading  of  the  Original,  or  the  English  Translation  is 
largely  discussed,  the  sign  is  doubled  (**  or  ff)- 


PAGE 

Genesis   ii.  4 

.      .      119 

10      .      .      . 

.         180 

„       iii.  7      .      .      . 

.      180 

„          V.  1       .       .       . 

.     119 

„  xviii.  14     .      .      . 

183 

Exodus  X.  21-23      .      . 

61 

Leviticus  iv.  3    . 

183 

Deut.  xxxiv.  1-12    .      . 

48 

Judges  iv.  13     .      .      . 
2  Sam.  vii.  2,  3  .      .      . 

181 
192 

1  Kings  viii.  17,  18 

192 

1  Chron.  xvii.  1,  2  . 

192 

2  Chron.  xxiv.  8,  10,  11 

201 

Job  xxxviii.  2     .      .      . 

235 

Psalms  xxxiii.  18     . 

185 

xlv.  6      .      . 

182 

„       Ixxxiii.  9 

181 

Isaiah  xiv.  15     .      .      . 

56 

„      Ivii.  15     .      .      . 

185 

„         liii.  9     .      .      . 

467 

Jeremiah  xv.  9  . 

64 

Amos  viii,  9        ... 

64 

Zechariah  xi.  12 

150 

Apocrypha — Baruch  iii.  38 

37] 

S.  Matt.  i.  (genealogy)  . 

1       .      .      . 

3,  7,  10,  12  . 

18     119-22t**,  i 
„         21        ...     ] 

22       ...      . 
„         23        .      .      . 

[01 

11 

!04- 
L65- 

177* 

167t 
L9-21t 

186t 
,  224t 
,  184t 

173t 
186 

„         25      123-4**t,  3 

11*, 
416 

315*, 
*,  417 

PAGE 

S.  Matt.  ii.  1 156t 

„  2 155t 

4 156t 

5 173t 

6,  7 156t 

9 155t 

11,  12,  13       ...  15Dt 

„         15 155t 

„         16 I46t 

17 156t 

„         22 167t 

23  .       156t,  157t,  184t 

„     iii.  5 184t 

6 175t 

„         10 164t 

„         15 193t 

16 175t 

„     iv.  3 511t 

„         11 193t 

„  13,  15  ....  186 
„         18 184t 

18,  20,  21       .      .      .   180t 

„    V.  15 141t 

„         22  .      141 1,  180t,  317*, 

358-61** 

„         23 161t 

37 214t 

39  ...     129t,  214t 

„         40 193t 

„         44  .      ,       410-1**,  412 

,,     vi.  8 317* 

12 163t 

12,  14,  15       .      .      .    193t 
,,          13  .      .  105,  311*,  316* 

2    M 


530 


INDEX    I. 


S.Matt.vi.29 
„         30 
„    vii.  4 

9 
„  28 
„  viii.  3 

4 


13 

19 

2 

3 

5 

6 

9 

17 

X.18 

23 

33 


IX 


9 
21 

35 
„  xi.  11 

23 

29 
„  xii.  24,  27 

29 
„  38 
„         40 

43 
V  47 
„   xiii.  3 

„         19,  38 

32 
„         35 

36 
„  xiv.  2 

2,  3,  13 

15,  22,  23 
„         22 
„         30       , 
„         31 
„  XV.  14 
„         32,  39 
„  xvi.  2,  3 
7 

12 


PAGE 

.  167t 
.  167t 
.  193t 
.  168t 
.  199t 
.  153t 
.  259 
.  Silt 
.  316* 
.  183t 
.  32 
.  33 
.  32 
.  259 
.  141t 
.  148t 
.  183t 
.  148t 
33 
.  108* 
.  201t 
.  511t 
.  317* 

128t,  166t 
54-50**,  217* 
.  317* 
.  317* 

143t,  168t 
.  204t 
.  128t 
.  164t 

311*,  315* 
.  164t 
.  I5'4t 
.  214t 
.  164t 
.  316* 
.195tt 
.  141t 
68 

.  195t 
.  154t 
71*,  317* 
,  153t 
.  361 
.  195t 
105,  311*,  316* 
.  159t 
.  199t 


S.  Matt.  xvi.  17 
21 
xvii.  15 
20 
21 


24 
25 
27 
xviii.  6 
11 
17 


xix.  17 

XX.  15 

20 

21 

34 

xxi.  1- 

2 

8 

28 

31 

xxii.  9 

33 

xxiii.  35 

xxiv.  3 

XXV.  18, 

39 

46 

xxvi.  3 

7 

15 

22 

24 

36 

48 

53 

69 

74 

xxvii.  34 

37 

45 

46 

49 

50 

60 

61 


181 

317* 

205tt 

.  .  .  130*t,  317* 
91-2**,  206**,  217t, 
311*,  317*,  417 
.  .  .  176*t,  317* 
.   .   .   147t,  150 

146t 

.   .   .  128t,  147t 

ISlt 

92**,  311*,  315*,  417 

164t 

143t 

105,  139*t.217,  316* 

168t 

.   .   .   193t,  512t 

512t 

153t 

3  .   .   .  .   57 

154t 

.   .   .  59,  61,  145t 

178t 

316* 

141t 

199t 

316* 

178t 

27  .   .   .   .  148t 

167t 

207t 

143t 

200tt 

.   .   .   149-150tt 

128t 

173t 

.   .   .   182t,  210* 

203t 

168t 

183t 

154 

315* 

87 

.   .   .   .   61,  64 

159t 

.  33-4*,  309*.  315* 

193t 

.   .   .  162t,  198tt 
88 


INDEX  I. 


531 


S.  Matt,  xxvii.  61,  64,  GQ 

„  sxviii.   1 

2 

19 

20 

S.  Mark    i.     1 


9   . 

13   , 
16    . 
16,  18, 
18   . 

22  . 

23  . 

27  . 

28  . 
44   . 

.  1- 
11 
21 
22 


19 


12 


14,  16 

27    . 


29 

W.  13 

29 

36 

V.  31 
36 
43 

vi.  11 


14,  16 

16  . 

17  . 

20   .  66 
22   . 
24,  25 
27    . 
29   . 
30,  32 
33   . 
36,  45 


27  . 
31  . 
33,  35,  &c. 


132 


PAGE 

.   .  198t 
.   .  198t 
.   .  162t 
174t,  316* 
.   .  182t 
**,  135,  316* 
.   .  204t 
174t,  175t 
.   .  165t 
.   .  184t 
.   .  180t 
193t,  194t 
.   .  199t 
.   ,  172t 
105,  139t 
.   .  316* 
.   .  259 
.  30-33** 
.   .   259 
139*t,  148t 
.   .  148t 
.   .  141t 
.   .  316* 
.   .  143t 
.   .139*t 
.   .  170t 
.   .  178t 
145t,  195t 
.   .  402* 
139*t,  316* 
.   .  511* 
118,  137-8**, 
409-10**,  412* 
68 
.   70 
68 
315*,  417 
68,  315* 


-69 


147t 
167t 
68 
258* 
195t 
194t 
179t 
315* 
180t 
511t 


S.  Mark  viii.  9 195t 

23 143t 

„      26 259* 

ix.  1 316* 

„  18,  20,  22,  26  .  .  205t 
„  23  .  .  .  139*t,  217* 
„      23,  24,  29  .   .  69-71* 

38 260* 

„     39 169t 

„      42 181 

44,  46  .   .   .   .  510 

49 260* 

„  X.  17-31  .  .  326-31** 
21  .  .  .  217*,  510* 
„  35,  37  .  .  .  .  512* 
„  44,  46  .  .  .  .  105 
„  xi.  1-6  ....  57 
„      3  .  56-58**,  217*,  417 

4 182t 

„      6 193t 

„      8  .  58-61**,  418,  439* 

„      26 217* 

„  xii.  37 146t 

„      42 183t 

„  xiii.  19 160t 

„      32 210** 

„  xiv.  3  .   .200tt,  184-5tt* 

„      6 193t 

„      8 185 

„      11 150 

„      30 71** 

„      30,  68,  72  .   .   .  316* 

„      32 182t 

„      50 194t 

„      65 139* 

„      68  .   .   .  141t,  316* 

„      72 316* 

„   XV.  8  .   .   .  139*,  191t 

„      31 167t 

„      33 61 

„      39  ...   .  71-2** 

„      47 89 

„  xvi.  9-20  33, 36-40**,  47-9**, 

51*,  281-4*,  311*,  317*, 

418,419,422-4**, 

519* 

„      17,  20  .   .   .   .  204t 

„      19 470 

S.  Luke  i.  15   .   .   .  ISOf,  204t 

2  M  2 


532 


INDEX   I. 


S.  Luke 

i.  2G 

37 

42 

51 

78 

ii.  9 

12 

PAGE 

.  316* 
,  183t 
.139*t 
.  172t 
.  179t 
.  144t 
.  203t 
14  41-7**,51, 139t,316*, 

340-1**,  418,  419, 

420-2**,  519* 


29 

.   .  178t 

33 

.   .  161t 

38 

.  144t 

,   iii.  3 

.  184t 

9 

.  164t 

20 

.   68 

22 

.115** 

,  iv.  1 

.   .  218-219*t 

3 

.   .  403*t,  51 It 

7,  8,  17 

,  18,  21,  23, 

27,3 

5  .   .   .403*t 

29   . 

,   .  129t,  403t* 

32 

.   .   .   .  199t 

38,  4r 

5 

.   .   .   .404*t 

39   . 

.   .   .   .   144 

44   . 

.   .  315*,  404*t 

V.  2   . 

.   .   .   .  ISOf 

4   . 

.   .  141t,  162t 

5   . 

.   .   .   .  159t 

9   . 

.   .   128t,  352 

13   . 

.   .   .   .  153t 

18,  19 

...   32 

20   . 

...   32 

21   . 

.   .   .   33 

36   . 

.   .   .  139t 

37   . 

.   .   .  148t 

39   . 

...   110 

vi.  1  (SevT.)      73-5**,  311*, 

316* 

1  (^<r0.)   .   .   93-4* 

6 129t 

35   . 

.   .   .  146t 

38   .   . 

.   .   .  352 

39 

...  235 

48   .   . 

.   110,  315* 

vii.  7 

.   .   .  511* 

17   .   . 

.   .   .  172t 

37   .   . 

.   .   .200tt 

viii.  35-44 

, 

16-7** 

PAGE 

y.  Luke  viii.  45-6  .   .   .401-3**t 

46 158t 

„   ix.  7   .   .   '66-9**,  405* 

7,  8 68 

„    10   .   .   .  68, 260-1* 

12 195t 

31 184t 

39,  42  ...  .  205t 
54-6  .  311*,  315*,  511* 
55,  56   .   93*,  217,  418 

„   X.  1 316* 

10 6S 

11 1281 

15   .   .   .  :)4-6**,  418 

20 128t 

40 144t 

„    41,  42   .  116-117*,  311* 
„    41  to  xi.  11  .   ,   .  510* 

„    42 315* 

„  xi.  2-4  .   .   .  34-6**,  418 
„     4   .   .   .   163t,  317* 

11 179t 

„     15,  18,  19   .   .   .  317* 

„    21 143t 

„    54 261* 

„  xii.  2 169t 

„     18 261* 

;59 194t 

„    45   ...   .  195-6tt 

„  xiv.  1 179t 

21 169t 

„  XV.  16 181t 

16,  17   .   .   .   ,139t* 

„     17 407*t 

„    21 315* 

22 ISOt 

„    23 405* 

„    31 178t 

„  xvi.  3 159t 

9 139t* 

11 180t 

„     12 316* 

21 139t* 

„  xvii.  2 181t 

,,  xviii.  7 169t 

„  six.  10 92 

18 406*+ 

23 169t 

29 184t 


INDEX   I. 


533 


S.  Luke  xix.  29-34,  33  . 
„  xix.,  XX.  .  .  . 
..     XX.     1        .       .       . 


PAGE 

57 
94-5** 
.  144t 
.406*t 
.  170t 
.  316* 
.  144t 
.  184t 
.      150 


S.  Luke  xxiv.  53 
S.  John  i.     1 


25  .  .  . 
44  .  .  . 
xxi.  24  .  .  . 
34  .  .  . 
37  .  .  . 
xsii.  5,  6. 

19,  20  to  xxiv.  53      75-7* 
19,  20      .      .      .     78-9** 

22 173t 

43-4.  75,  76,  79-82**, 
131,  281*,  311*, 
316*,  340**,  411* 

60 154 

64 511* 

xxiii.  8 204t 

17      .      .      .  75,76,  311* 
23,  25      .      .      .      .    191t 

32 317* 

33 165t 

34      .  reverse  of  title,  75, 

76,  82-5**,  131, 

281-3*,311*,316*, 

411* 

75,  76,  85-8**, 

281-3,  311*,  418, 

511* 

72* 

61-5**,  315*  419 

.   .  88-9** 

75,  76,  88-9** 


38 


42 

45 

55 

xxiv.  1 


3 76 

4 144t 

6 76 

7   .   .   .   .  96-7** 

9 76 

10 89 

12   76,  89-90**,  281-3*, 
311* 

13 316* 

17   .   .   .  105,  139*t 
36,  40   .   .  76,  90-1** 

41 93* 

.  76,  511* 

.   .407*t 

76,  281-3*,  470 

.   .   .   76 


42 
44 
51 
52 


3,  10 
4 


9 

10 

13 

14 

18 

34 

42 
ii.  3 
iii.  3,  5,  6,  7,  8 

13   132-5**, 


6 
15 


34  . 
vi.  4 

21  . 

29  . 

32  . 

33  , 
51  . 
70  . 

vii.  39  . 

53  to  viii 
ix.  4 


5 

11 

35 

38 

x.  14 

32 

39 

xi.  12 

27 

xii,  3 

6 

7 

41 

43 

xiii.  10 

12 

14 

21-6 


PAGE 

.  76,  261-2* 

...  469 

132*t,  135,  174t 

.  174 

.  316* 

.  180t 

.  174t 

.  347 

.  178t 

82t,  315* 

.  316* 

.181t* 

.  316* 

.  347 

1*,  315*, 

510* 

.   145 

407-8**t 

.5-6** 

11*,  316* 

.   105 

353**,  354* 

.  154t 


11 


220 


.  160t 
.  180t 
.  142t 
.  316* 
.  164t 
.  316* 
.  311* 

9t*,  316* 

.  142t 

140t*,  316* 

.  315* 

.  316* 

**t,  315* 
.  160t 
.  142t 
.  141t 
.  163t 

184-5''tt 
.  201t 

39*t,  185 
. 140*t 
.  142t 

41t,  316* 
.  145t 
.  164t 
.   105 


534 


INDEX  I. 


S.  John  xiii.  24 
„    2-i-5 
„    29 
„  xiv.  4 
„     5, 9 
10,  14 
18 
oo 

„  XV.   1 

„  15 
20 
26 

„  xvi.  13 
15 
16,  17 
21 
23 
32 

„  xvii.  4 

4,6 

11 
11,12 

14 
24 

»    }^ 
„  iviii.  1 

5 

18 
24 
27 

„  35 
37 

„  xix.  16 
18 
20 
29 
34 

„    39 

„  40 
41 
42 

„  XX.  2 
4 
12 
13 
16 
28 

„    30 

„  xxi.  1,  9 


2-3 


19 


rAGE 

.  316* 
145*tt 
.  201t 

141t,  419 
.  170t 
.140t* 
.  163t 
.  142t 
.  180t 
.  179t 
,  352 
.  451* 
.  335 
.  210 
.  163t 
T  164t 
.140*t 
.  169t 
.140*t 
.  158t 
.  352 
. 140*t 
.  158t 

217-8**t 
.  158t 
.  181t 
.  316* 

.  leif 

.  162t 

.  128t 

,  160t 

.  178t 

.  128t 

87 

86 

.  128t 

33,  309* 

.  317* 

128t,  436 

.  317* 

.  129t 

.  159t 

.  167t 

162t,  165t 

.  159t 

.  140t 

.  469 

.  204t 

.  128t 


S.  John  xxi.  12,  15  . 
15   .   . 

15,  16,  17 


Acts 


2 

3 

5 

9 

18 

19 

23 


fagb 
.   .  142t 

I62t,  181*t 
.   .  180t 

23-4**,  317 
.  .  204t 
-  .  128t 
.  .  317* 
.  .  470 
.  .  153t 
.  .  316* 
.   .   150 


ii.  22 173t,  352 


43 

6 
14 

1 

16 

16,; 

24 
36 
24 

7 
12 
15 

;.  13 

16 
17 


173t 
316* 
191t 
144t 
129t 
173t 
204t 
178t 
142t 
183t 
129t 
144t 
129t 
129t 
141t 
352 


46 
,.  3 


20 
13 


45 186t,  352 

....  191t 
.  .  .  .  167t 
....  316* 
,   .   .   .  148t 

....  leof 

....  171t 
.  .  .  .  180t 
.  .  146t,  160t 
.  .  .  .  144 
....  316* 
....  180t 
.  .  .  .  144t 
.  .  .  .  146t 
.  .  .  .  143t 
.  .  .  .  142t 
.  .  .  .  144t 
....  195t 
....  162t 
.  .  .  .  192t 
.   .   .   .  316* 


11 
15 

17 
19 

5 
11 
12 
16 
17 

7 

13 
17 
20 


INDEX  I. 


535 


Actsxiii.  28 19 If 

xiv.  9 161t 

xvi.  Iti 195t 

29 192t 

xvii.  5 144t 

19 143t 

28 316* 

29 128t 

,    31  ...   .   150t,  160t 

,  xviii.  2,  24 142t 

7 53-4** 

,  six.  12 140t 

,  XX.  28 353-4* 

,  xxi.  37 149tt 

,  xxii.  13 144t 

15 352 

,    20 144t 

,  xxiii.  1 129t 

3 169t 

11,  27   ...   .  144t 

,  XXV.  13 316* 

,  xxvi.  28,  29  .   .   .151-2*tt 

,  xxvii.  14 176t 

26 167t 

37   .   .   51-3**,  316* 
xxviii.  1  .   .   .   177-8**t 

2 144t 

3 177t 

4 leof 

11 147t 

13 317* 

Rom.  i.  7 127t 

7— xiii.  1   .   .   .  440* 

20 207t 

iii.  22 167t 

29 168t 

iv.  8 315* 

V.  5 204t 

vi.  2 160 

3 168t 

vii.  1  .   .   .   .   142t,  168t 

15 142-3t 

ix.  5  .208tt,210-4**tt,354*, 
412*,  469,  510 

13 160 

22 167t 

xi.  2 142t 

4 156t 

.\ii.  6 167t 


Eom.  xii.  9  . 
„  xiv.  4  . 

15  . 

„  XV.  20  . 

„  xvi.  23  . 

25  . 

25,  26 

1  Cor.  i.  27 

iv.  21 

vi.  20 

,,  viii.  6 

ix.  11 

X.   1 

„   xii.  8-10 
20 
27 

,,   xiii.  — 
3 

,,   xiv.  7 
36 

„   XV.  34 
44 

„      55 

„   xvi.  12 


Cor. 


Gal. 


i.  3-7 

4 

23 

ii.  12 

iii.  3 

V.  8 

17,  19 
vi.  11 
12 
13 
15 

viii.  11,  14 
xii.  7 
xiii.  1 
ii.  4  . 
16  . 
iii.  1  . 


„  iv.  21-31 

Eph.  i.  1  . 

6  . 

10  . 

„  iii.  13  . 

21  . 

„  iv.  1  . 


PAGE 

.  214t 

.  167t 

.  143t 

.  167t 

.  127t 

.  143t 

.  464 

.   160 

.  441* 

.   160 

.  174t 

.   160 

.  167t 

.  166t 

167t,  168t 

.  167t 

201-2tt 

.  316* 

.  148t 

.  168t 

141t,  178t 

.   .  142t 

142t,  440* 

164t,  170t 

.  180t 

.  189t 

.  352 

.  167t 

.  167t 

. 140*t 

,  167t 

,  440* 

,  440* 

,  153t 

,  167t 

,  153t 

,  441* 

J19-20**t 

.  169t 

.  167t 

.  146t 

.  440* 

.196tt 

.  317* 

.  352 

.  173t 

.  192t 

.  178t 

,167t,  352 


536 


INDEX  I. 


Eph.  iv. 


Phil. 


Col. 


14  . 
17  . 

20  , 
29  , 
16  , 

1 

8 
15 
18 

6 
10 
23 
16 

3 

9 
16 
23 
27 


18  . 

22,  23 


12  . 

1  Thess.  i.  9 

,,   iv.  15 

2  Thess.  i.  3 
1  Tim.  ii.  2 


2  Tim. 


10 

17 

19 
1 

13  to  iv.  5 

16  .  98-106***, 
316*,  353, 
424-501***, 


iv.  1,2 

10 

14 
V.  13 
vi.  15 

20 

20 
i.  13 
ii.  1 

17,  2 
iii.  6 

16 
iv.  3 


PACK 

.  199t 
.  178t 
.   160 
.  178t 
.  214t 
.  129t 
.  153t 
.  139t 
.  128t 
.  143t 
.  513* 
.  146t 
.  128t 
,  440* 
.  192t 
72t,  174t 
.  441* 
497-8* 
.  128t 
■6**,  UOf 
.  441* 
.  441* 
.  15.3t 
.  441* 
127t 
127t 
489* 
440* 
440* 
439* 
441* 
476 
165t, 
419, 
515, 
519* 
.  440* 
.  439* 
.  441* 
.  441* 
.  441* 
.  344 
.  440* 
28,  351* 
.  14.3t 
,  440* 
.  441* 
208-9tt 
.  164t 


2  Tim.  iv.  17 

18 

Titus  i.  2   . 

2,  3. 

4   . 


13   .   . 
„  ii.  1   .   . 
Philemon,  ver.  12 
Heb.  i.  1,  2   . 


PAGK 

.   .  166t 

.   .  215 

.   .178t* 

.   .  143t 

.   .  143t 

.   .   .  128t 

,   .   .  164t 

,   .   .  439* 

,   .   .  164t 

.   .   .  153t 

.   .   .  172t 

2 174t 

8 182 

„   ii.  4 204t 

14 216 

„    16 143t 

„  iii.  19 169t 

„  iv.  8  .   .   .   .  162t,  186t 

„  vi.  2 199t 

„  viii.  2 180t 

„  ix.  24 180t 

„  X.  21 183t 

„  .xi.r7  ....   160t,  161t 

„    17,  28 163t 

26 146t 

„    28 160t 

35 143t 

38 141t 

„  .xii.  2 146t 

9 164t 

14 164t 

18  ....   .  178t 

„xiii.  9 199t 

S.James  i.  11  .   .   .  163t,  170t 

15 164t 

17 317* 

17,  18  .   .   .   .  217t 
ii.  2,  3  .   .   .   .  190t 

6 160t 

11 511* 

16 128t 

19 148t 

„   iii.  3 140t 

5 143t 

11 164t 

„   iv.  1 143t 

7 129t 

V.  16 141  + 

1  S.  Peter  i.  5 141  + 


INDEX   I. 


537 


1  s. 


2  S. 


iii.  20    . 
V.    9   . 
13   . 
Peter  i.  5-7 
20    . 
ii.  15   . 


1  S. 


eter  i.  23 


22 


i.  7 
10 
13 


ohn 


3 
14 
22 
27 
29 

4 


9  . 
15  , 
17  . 
iv.    3,6 

7  . 

14. 

19  . 

V.     1  . 

2  . 

4  . 

(i. 


PAGE 
.     216* 

.  179t 
,  467 
.  178t 
.  129t 

r29t,  141t 
174t,  400 
.  179t 
.  142 
106,  335 
.  178t 
355-6** 
.  167t 
.  169t 
.  167t 
.  160* 
.  164t 
.  169t 
.  347 
.  143t 
129t,  216 
.  347 
.  359 
.  153t 
.  127t 
.  347 
.  129t 
.  140t 
.  347 

127t,  129t 
.  347 
.  164t 


1  S.  John  V. 


3  S.  John 

S.  Jude  1 

5 

6 

14 

18 

ii.  5 

iii.  2 

iv.  6 

V.  12 

vi.  9 

viii.  13 

is.  13 

xiii.  18 

sir.  6 

14 

19 

XV.  6 

-xvi.  17 

xvii.  1 

xviii.  21 

22 

six.  6 

17 

21 

s.xii.  18,  19 

19 


PAGE 

.  483 
.  164t 

347-50** 
.  469 
.  129t 
.  154t 
.  129t 
.  140t 
.  207t 
.  178t 
.  129t 
.  143t 
.  140t 
.  143t 
.  143t 
.  127t 
.  183t 
.  183t 
135-7** 
.  165t 
.  165t 
.  172t 
.  140t 

2t,  199tt 
.200tt 
.  183t 
.  148t 

29t,  162t 

.  183t 

.  129t 

1 

.  409 


538 


INDEX   II. 

of  Fathers  referred  to,  or  else  quoted  (*),  iu  this  vol  nine.     For  the 
chief  Editions  employed,  sec  the  note  at  ]j.  121. 


Acta  Apostt.  (Syriac)  40,  62,  84,  423 

Philippi 84 

Pilati   .      .      .45,  62,  84,  423 

AlcimusAvit 213 

Ambrosius  24,  40,  73,  79,  85,  87,  90, 

91,    92,    123,    132,    133, 

213,  215*,  218,  410,  423 

Ammonius     .      .  23,  29,  88*,  89,  91 

Amphilochius  133,213  [<?t?.  Combefis] 

ps. ....      85 

Anaphora  Pilati G2 

Anastcasius  Ant.    .      .  213  [ed.  Migne] 

Sin.     44,  81,  84,  421  [ed. 

Migne] 
Andreas  Cret.  23,  44,  84,  421  [cd. 
Combefis] 
Anonymous  .  .  .  43,  100,  102 
Antiochus  mon.  84,  3(30  [ed.  Migne] 
Aphraates  .  40,  43,  133,  421,  423 
Apostolical,  see  "  Const itutiones." 
Archelaus  (with  Manes)        .      .      84 

Arius 80 

Athenagoras 410 

Atlianasius    44,  62,  64,  80,  84,  90, 

01,   121,   122,  123,  133, 

212,  220,  359 

ps. .      .      .     133,  402,  475 

Augustinus    24,  40,  81,   85,  90,  91, 

92,  116*,  123,  132,  133, 

213,356,  360,  410,423, 

500* 

Barnabas 103*,  463* 

Basilius  M.  44,  79,  84,  91,  102*,  108, 
122,  123,  133,  210*,  212, 
218,  219,  360,  402,  464* 

("il 133 

Scl 43,  421 


PAGE 

Brcviarium 213 

Capreolus 133 

Cassianus  .  81,  133,  213,  348,  411  [ed. 

1611] 

Caelestinus 218 


Ca;sarius  . 

ps. .      .      . 

Catena  (Cramer's) 
Chromatius    . 

Chronicon  Paschale 


Chrysostomus 


212,  215* 
55,  74,  81 
.  .  353 
.  .  348 
40,  74,  353  [ed. 
Du  Fresne] 
5,  23,  26,  27,  40,  43, 
44,  53,  55,  62*,  71*, 
72,  74,  80,  84,  90,  91, 
92,  99,  101*,  108, 
121,  122,  123,  133, 
151*,  152*,  177,  212, 
218,  219,  220,  353, 
356,  360,  402,  410, 
421,  423,  457 

ps. .    85,  90,  133,  218, 

360,  402,  427 

Clemens,  Alex.     115,  121,  208*,  218, 

327,  336*,  410 

Horn 38* 

(Syriac)   ...      91 

Clementina 84 

Concilia      [cd.     Labbe     et     Cossart] 

passim, 

Constitutioncs  Apostolicw  43,  84,  212, 

360,410,421, 

423,  463* 

Cosmaslndicopleustes  44,63,  133,  421 

[ed.  Montftiucon] 

ep.  Maiuniffi  .      ,      .  44,  421 

Cramer,  see  Catena, 
Cyprianus 


213,  218,  359 


INDEX   11. 


539 


Cyrillus  Alex.  5,  23,  43,  55,  62,  79, 
80,  84,  86,  89,  90,  96, 
102*,  103,  121,  122, 
132,  133,  163,  213, 
218,  219,  220,  353, 
356,  360,  402,  410, 
421,  423,  427,  428*, 
464-469** 

Hieros  43,  62, 72, 123, 151*, 

177,421,  470 
Damascenus,  see  '  Johannes.' 

Damasus,  P 92 

Dialogus 208*,  402 

Didymus  5,  40,  43,  80,  101,  122,  123, 

133,    212,    219,    348,    402, 

421,  423,  427,  456 

Diodorus  Tars.      .      .      .       101,  458 

Dionysivis  Alex 163 

ps. 23,    80,    101,    133, 

212,  462* 

ps. Areop.     .      .      .     80,  84 

Eastern  Bishops  at  Ephesus  col- 
lectively (A.D.  431)      .  43,  80,  421 
Epiphanius  40,  43,  44,  74,  79,  80,  90, 
96,   116,   122,  123,  133, 
212,  360,  402,  421,  423, 
427 

ps.  427 

diac.     Catan.    [a.d. 

787]    .     102,  103,  475 

Ephraemus  Syrus  43,  62,  64,  80,  82*, 

84,  122,  123,  215*, 

348,  360,  421 

ps. .      .       84,  353,  423 

Eulogius  ....  44,  212,  421 
Eusebius  Cses.  5,  23,  40,  43,  62*,  72, 
80,  84,  86,  87,  88*, 
89,  90,  96,  108,  122, 
136,  163,  218,  219, 
323-324**,  353,  359, 
410,  421,  423 

His  Canons    .      .     91 

Eustathius  ....  133,  212 
Euthalius  .  102,  458,  459-461** 
Eutherius  ...  84,  103,  427 
Euthymius  Zig.  .  360, 410,  465,  476* 
[ed.  Matthai] 

Facundus  81,  213 

Faustus 115 


Ferrandus 
Fulgentius 
Gaudentius 
Gelasins  Cyzic. 
Gennadius 
Gernianus  CP. 
Gospel  of  Nicodemus 


I'AGE 

.  213,  500* 
.  213,  500* 
...  24 
100,  213,  479 
.  .  80,  213 
44,  122,  421 
...      62 


ps 


Gregentius 423 

Gregorius  Naziauz.  23,  43,  73*,  80, 

101*,    121,    134, 

421,  457 

.        163,  220 

-  Nyssen.  23,  40,  43,  44,  84, 
87,  89,  101*,  12.3, 
134, 208*,  212, 360, 
410,  421,  456,  458 

—  Thaum.  44,  45,  102*,  463* 


Hegesippus 84 

Hesychius       ...       84,  163,  423 

Hieronymus  24,  40,  41,  63*,  64*,  73*, 

79*,  81,85,  90,92,  103*, 

108, 123*,  133,213,  348, 

356,359,  360*,  423,  427 

Hilarius  79,  81,  85,  91,  92,  115,  133, 

213,  218,  281,  360,  410 

Hippolytus  62,  64,  80,  84, 102*,  133, 

136,  212,  353,  423,  463* 

Ignatius 103*,  463" 


ps. 


84 


Johannes  Damascenus  44,  81,  85,  91, 

102,  123,  133, 

177,  213,  220, 

356,  360,  421, 

457 

Thessal.     .      .      .   96,423 


Irenaius  42,  64*,  80,  84,  122,  132, 

212,    220,    353,    356,    359, 

409,  420,  423 

Isidorus    .      .  23,  74,  123*,  360,  410 

Jnvius  mon 92 

Jvilian  hseret 80 

Julius  Africanus  ....  62*,  64 

Justinus  Mart.    79,  80, 115, 121, 360, 

410,  423 

ps. ...      84, 90 


Juvencus . 

Lactantius 

Leo  cp. 

ap.  Sabaticr 


91,  108,  115 

.     .     .115 

213,423 

.      .      .      41 


540 


INDEX   II. 


PAGE 

Leontius  Byz.  .  81,213,423,480 
Liberatus  of  Carthage  .  .  471-3 
Lucifer  Calarit.  .  .  133,  360,  410 
Macarius  Magnes  40,  62*,  220,  423 
[cd.  1876] 
Macedonius     .     470-475**,  102,  103 

Malchion 212 

Marcion    .      .34,  35,  61,  64,  96,  402 
Marius  Mercator    133,  213,  423,  468 

Victorinus     .      .      .      .500* 

Martinus  P 421,  473 

Maximus  . 
Tanria. 


Mode.stus  Hier 

Nestorius.      .  80 

Nicetas 

Nilus  mon. 

Nonnus 

Novatianus 

fficumenius 


.    23,  79,  81,  84 
91,  133,  213,  219, 
220,  360 
Methodius  44, 115,  212  [ed.  Combefis] 
.      .      .      .   423 
121,  212,  423,  427 
.      .      .      .    123 
.       62,  359,  410 
23,  133,  218,  353 
.      .        133,  213 
102,  348,  476 


Origenes  23,  41,  43,  58,  60,  62*, 
63**,  64,  72,  84,  87,  92, 
122*,  133,  136,  163,  208*, 
212,  219,  220,  348,  353, 
356,  359,  360,  402,  410, 
421,  427 

Opus  imperf. 85,  91 

Pacianus 410 

Palladius,  the  Arian  .      .      .      .213 

Pamphihis  Ca;s 177 

Papias 423 

Paschale,  see  *  Chronicori.' 

Patricius 423 

Paulinus 81 

Paulus  Ernes.  .  43,  80,  133,  213,  421 

Philastrius 24,  360 

Philo 43,  421 

Photius  CP.  .      .       81,  123,  360 


Porphyrius 132 

Prochis  CP 43,  123 

Prosper 423 

Salvianus 360 

Sedulius 24 

Severianus  Gabal.      .      .       132,  212 

Severus  Ant.  23,  40,  89,    102*,  133, 

213,  348,  360,  458 

ps.  Tatianus   .    80,  84,  122,  123,  402 

[ed.  Moesinger,  1876] 

TertuUianus  62*,  90*,   91,  92,  120, 

122,  208*,  213*,  215*, 

410,  423 

Titus  Bostr 43,  421 

Theodoretus  43,  55,  79,  80,  84,  91, 

102,    122,    133,    152*, 

213,  218,  219,  220,  336, 

356,  360,410,421,456, 

458* 

Theodorus  Herac.       .      .  84,  92,  133 

ha;ret 81 

Mops.  23,  62,  80, 103, 121, 

133,  212,  356,  360, 
480-482* 

■ Studita  [ed.  Sirmondi]  475 

Theodosius  Alex 81 

Theodotus  Ancyr.      .       43,  212,  421 

Gnosticus.      .      .      .102* 

Theophilus  Alex 212 

Ant 410 

Theophylactus    102,   147,   348,   360, 

410,  476  [cd.  Venet. 

1755] 

Victor  Antioch.  23,40,  60*,  132,409, 

423 

Victorinus      ....       133,  213 

Victricius 218 

Vigilius 133,  348 

Vincentius 423 

Zeno 133 


541 


INDEX    III. 

General  Index  of  Persons,  Places,  and  Subjects  referred  to  in  this 
Volume.  But  Scriptural  References  are  to  he  sought  in  Index  I. ; 
and  Patristic  References,  in  Index  II,  '  New  Codices '  vnll  be  found 
enumerated  in  the  Appendix. 


PAGE 

'  A,'  see  '  Alexandrinus.' 

K  and  B  :  see  '  B,'  and  '  Antiquity.' 

N  A  B  C  D,  in  conflict,  12,  13,  14, 

16-7,  30-1,  46-7, 

75-8,    94-5,    117, 

249,262,265,289, 

386 

'Abutor' 146 

Acacius,  Bp.  of  Melitene     .      .      178 

Accident 50-6 

jEthiopic,  sec  '  Version.' 

aydnri 201-2 

ai'Sios 207 

alrelu      .      .    ' 191-3 

alciv 182,208 

alwvios 207 

aKa^a.aT  pov 200-1 

Alexander  (Dr.),  Bp.  of  Derry,  107-8 

'Alexandrian'  readings      271-2,  357 

Alexandrinus  (cod.)  (A)    11-17,  345- 

347,  431-7 

aX-neiv6s 180 

Alford  (Dean)     .      .       381,  456,  498 

Allocution 413-5 

Alterations,  yet  not  improvements 

139-143 

Ammonius 29 

Amos  (in  S.  Matt,  i.)     .      .      .      186 

aix^i^\i](TTpov 184 

Amphilochius 210 

&lj.(t>oSou 182 

ava$ds  l'^" 

av  air  ecr  CO  f 1*5 

Anastasius  (Imp.)    .      .      •      .472-3 
Ancient  Authority,  sec  '  Ellicott.' 


PAGT? 

'  Ancoratus  ' 427 

Andrewes,  Bp 500 

Antioch 385,  391 

'  Antiochian,'  see  '  Syrian.' 

'Antiquity'. 333 

dj'TlO'TTJTe 129 

Anziani  (Dr.)     ....   445,  492 

Aorist 158-60,  162 

aneXirl^ovres 146 

acpLfvai 193-5 

Apolinaris 456, 458 

Apollonides 323-4 

OiTTOKvilV 195 

a,iro(TTo\oiva'yyiKia.  .  .  .  448 
'Apostolus'  446-8,  476-8,482,491. 
See  the  Appendix. 
Aram  (in  S.  Matt,  i.)  .  .  .  186 
Argument  e  silentio  .  .  .  469 
Armenian,  see  Version. 

Article,  the 164-5 

Articles  (Three)  in    the    '  Quarterly 
Review,'  their  history  pref.  ix-xiv 

&pTos 179 

apxoii 180 

Asaph  (in  S.  Matt,  i.)    .      .      .186-7 

Asclepiades 323-4 

'Ask'  (alreTf) 171-3 

'  Assassins  ' 147 

Assimilation.  .      .      .32,65-69 

,  proofs  of  .      .      .        66 

arevlffavTe^ 129 

'Attraction' 351-2 

av\r]Tai 148 

Authority,  (ancient)  see  'Ellicott.' 
avros 165 


542 


INDEX   III. 


'  B,'  see  '  Vaticanus.' 
B  and  N  (codd.),  sinister  resem- 
blance         12 

B  and  X  12,  255-7,  315-20,  333,  357, 
361,  365,  408,  410 

Bandinel  (Dr.) 445 

'  Baptist '  Revisers  ....  504-5 
Baptismal  Renunciation  ,  .  215 
Basil  to  Amphilochius  .      ,      .     210 

Basilides 29 

Beckett,  Sir  Edmund  .  .  38,  222 
Belsheim,  Dr.  J.  ,  444,  453,  493 
Bengel  (J.  A.)  .  .  .  .  246,  500 
Bentley,  Dr.  R.  .  .  432,  467,  499 
Berlin  (see  '  De  Boor  ')  .  .  492,  493 
Berriman,  Dr.  J.  432  433,  446,  468, 
474,  480,  500 

Bethesda 5 

Beveridge  (Bp.)       ,      .      .   351,  500 

Beyer  (Dr.) 477 

Bezaj,  cod.  (D)  11-7,77-9,  117,  264-5 

Birch  (Andreas)       .       246,  383,  467 

Blunders    149,  150,  180,  181 ;— 172, 

176,  177,  &c. 

Bois  (John) 228 

'Bondmaid' 196 

'Boon' 217 

'Bowls' 200 

'Branch' 184 

Broughton  (Hugh)  ....     513 

Bull  (Bp.) 212,  500 

•C,'  see  'Ephraemi.' 

Caius  (A.D.  175)  on  the  Text    .323-4 

Cambridge,  Codex  (D),  see  Bez£e. 

* Greek  Text '    Fref.  xxviii 

Capper  (S.  Herbert),  Esq.   .      .     492 

Cappilli  (Sig.) 491-2 

Carob  tree 181 

Castan  (M.) 477 

Castiglione 452 

Catalogue  of  Crypta  Ferrata    .     447 

Cedron 181 

Ceriani  (Dr.)  381,  452,  477,  491-2-3. 

See  the  Appendix. 

Changes  (licentious)      .      127, 403-7 

'Charity' 201-2 

Xttipioi/ 182 

Chronicle  of  Convocation  .  .  507 
'Church  Quarterli/ '  {IS82)    I'rcf.  xvi 


'  Church  Quart crhj:  (1883)  Pref.  xvi- 
XX.,  sxiv-vii. 
Citations,  see  '  Fathers.' 
Clemens,  Alex.  .  .  326-7,  327-31 
Codd.  B— K— A— C  —  D  11-17, 
.30,  108,  249,  262,  269-71 

F  and  G    .      .      .      .     438^3 

Paul  73 444 

181 444-5 

new,  see  the  Appendix. 

Collation  of  MSS.  .  .125,  246-7  ; 
with  the  Received  Text  249-50,262 
Complutensian  ....  391 
'Conflate  readings'.  .  .  258-65 
'  Conflation  '  examined  .  258-65,  285 
'  Congregationalist '  Revisers  .504-5 
Conjectural  emendation  .  .351-7 
Consent  of  copies  (see  '  Fathers')  454—5 
'  Conversnntllms'  .  .  .  ,  176 
Cook,  (Canon)  204-5,  214,  234,  372, 
381,  470,  502 
Cornelius  a  Lapide  ....  473 
Corruptions  in  the  N.  T.     .      .334—5 

Cotelerius 473 

Coxe  (Rev.  H.  0.)    .       306,  445,  491 

Cozza-Luzi (A bbate)  447,477,491-2-3 

see  the  Appendix. 

Cranbrook,  Viscount.      .  page  v-viii 

Creyk  (John) 433 

'Crib' 238 

Cross,  title  on 85-8 

C7'ux  criticonim,  the      ...       98 
Crypta  Ferrata  .      ,  447,  473-4,  478, 

521 
'  D,'  see  '  Bezre.' 

SaifiSviov 179 

Darkness 62-4 

Dartige  (M.) 493 

Dated  codices 292 

56 167-8 

Deane  (Rev.  H.)       .      450,  481,  489 
De  Boor  (Dr.  C.)      .      .      .      .492-3 
Definite,  see  Article. 
Delicate  distinction.      .      .      .     402 
Demoniacal  possession   .      .      .     20(5 

Denis  (M.) 493 

Derry  (Bp.  of),  see  Alexander. 
Design 56-65 

5iVT€p6Trf>OOTOy 73 


INDEX  III. 


543 


'Devil' 214-6 

Sid  ...  .  170,  173-4,  see  vw6 
Dialogue  (supposed)  320-8,  328-42 
Diatessaron,  see  '  Tatian.' 

StSaaKaAla 199 

SiSdcTKaAos 179 

SiSaxv 199 

Sifpx<')fJ^ai     ......     407 

Dionysius  Alex 461-2 

AtdffKovpoi 147 

Dissertation  on  1  Tim.  ill.  16 

Pref.  xxi-iv,  424-501 
Divination.  See  '  Verifying  faculty.' 
'  Doctrine '  extirpated    .      .      .      199 

Suv\os 179 

Svva/xis 204 

Dublin  (Abp.  of),  see  Trench. 

^interrogative 168-9 

Ebionite  Gospel 116 

Ecclesiastical  Tradition .      .      .     495 

Eclipse 63-5 

Editions  of  Fathers.      .      .      .      121 

(tyvwv 159 

Egyptian,  see  Version. 

eiSe  for  jSe 140 

ejKfj 359-61 

fl-Kftv 511-2 

efs 183 

iKKiiTTOVTOS 63-5 

iKafiov 139 

kXKr)vi(ni 149 

Ellicott  (Bp.  of  Gloucester),  on 

the  '  old  uncials  '       .    14-i5 

on  the  A.  V.     .      .  112,  368 

on  '  Revision'   xlii,  112,  124, 

126,  226-8,  368 

on  '  Marginal  Readings '  136-7 

on  '  Textus  Receptus  '  383-8, 

389-91 

•  on  1  Tim.  iii.  16     .     428-31 

on  2  Tim.  iii.  16     .      .     209 

on  Textual  Criticism    •     234 

on      '  innocent      Ignorance  ' 

349-50 

on  the  Greek  Text  .   369,  509 

on  '  Euthalius  '       .      .460-1 

his  jaunty  proposal     .     216 

his  Pamphlet    Fref.  xx-xxii, 

369  seq. 


Ellicott,  his   critical   knowledge  370, 
376,385,430,457,459-61, 
471-2,  Dedication  p.  viii 
his  requirement  antici- 
pated ....   371,397 

his     method      of    procedure 

372-4,  419-24,  459-61 

method  of  his  Reviewer  375- 

383, 496-7, 517,  Pref.  xxiv-vii 
appeals  to  Modern  Opi- 
nion, instead  of  to  An- 
cient Authority  376-8,415-6, 
438-9,  483-5,  514-5 

follows  Dr.  Hort  391-8,  455, 

517-8 

complains    of  Injustice    399, 

400-13 

suggested  Allocution     413-5 

his  defence  of  the  '  New 

Greek  Text,'  examined  415- 
9,  419-24 

i/xfiar  €11(1)1/ 140 

fv,  its  different  renderings  .      .171-2 

iv  dAiy(f> 151-2 

English  idiom     .      .     154-5,  158-75 

icpai/epiie-n 427,  468 

itpiardvai 144 

Ephraemi  cod.  (C)    .      .     11-17,  325 

'Epileptic  ' 205-6 

iiriirecruiv       ......      145 

Epiphanius 427 

iiriCTTacra 144 

rjiropei  [see  Scrivener,  ed.  3,  pp.  581-2] 

66-9 

Errors  (plain  and  clear)  3, 4,  105, 148, 

172,  216,  222-3,  228,  348, 

400-1,  430,  496,  512 

Escher  (Dr.) 493 

iffKOTiffdy] 61 

((TTriaav 150 

'  Eternal ' 207 

Eternity 208 

Ethiopic,  see  '  Version.' 

Eudocia 465 

'  Euraquilo ' 176 

evpediicreTat 356 

Euripides  (papyrus  of)  .      .      .321-2 

'  Euroclydon ' 176 

Euthalius      ....     429,460-1 


544 


INDEX  in. 


Eutherins 427 

eitdews 153-4 

Euthymius  Zigabenus.    SrclNDKX  II. 

'  Everlasting ' 207 

'Evil  One' 214-6 

i^eAdovaaf 402 

l|o5os 184 

Exodus 184 

E.xternal  evidence  ....  19-20 
'  F  '  and  '  G  '  (codd.)  ...  257 
'  Factor  of  Genealogy  '  .  .  .  256 
Farrar,  Canon  (now  Archd.)  Pref.  xv 
Fathers    .    121,  125-6,  sec  Index  II. 

Fell  (Bp.) 432 

Field  (Dr.)  146, 148, 163, 177, 180, 382 

Florence,  ace  '  Anziani.' 

Flute-players 

Forstemann  (Dr.)    . 

Future  sense       • 

Gabelentz  and  Loebe 

Gandell  (Professor) 

Gardiani  (Sig.)  . 

yeyevvvfj.fvoi 

Gelasius  of  Cyzicus  479,  see 

'Genealogical  Evidence' 

yiveais  and  yivvi)(Tis     . 

yfvvrjOeis       .... 

ytvos       

Geographical  distribution 

tristic  Testimony 
Gifford  (Dr.)       .      .      . 

yivdlCTKilS 


.      148 

441,  493 

163-4 

452 

184 

492 

347 

Index  II. 

.  253 

119-22 

.  347 

.  142 

of  Pa- 

45,  1.34 

.  214 

.   149 


Gloucester  (Bp.  of),  sec  '  EUicott.' 

yXwffcrSKOfxov 201 

'  (tOD  blessed  for  ever  ' !       .      .      211 

Gorresio  (Sig.) 492 

Gospel  incident 194-5 

(the  Ebionite)     .      .      .      116 

of  the  Hebrews  ...       29 

Gothic,  sec  Version. 

'  Graeco-Syrian,  see  '  Syrian.' 

'  Great  priest ' 1 82 

Green,  Rev.  T.  S 499 

Gregory  (Dr.  C.  R.)       .      .      .     477 

Gregory  Naz. 

Griosbach  (J.  J.)    380,  456,  482,  483 

Hall,  lip 500 

Hammond  (Dr.)        .      .      .   432,  .500 
Headings  of  the  Chapters    .    223.  412 


PACK 

Hellenistic  Greek     .      .      .      .182-4 

See  '  Septuagint.' 
Henderson  (Dr.)       ....      500 

Heracleon 29 

Hermophilus 323—4 

Herodotus 65 

Hesychius 29,163 

llila.Ty  on  fxvKos  ovikSs.      .      .      281 
Hincmar,  Abp.  of  Rheims   .      .     472 

Hoerning  (Dr.) 453 

'  Holy  Ghost  ' 204 

Hort,  Dr.  37, 135,  182,  211, 248,  394, 
(sec  Westcott  and  Hort). 

hypothesis  and  system,  see 

reverse  of  Title-page. 

—    his    '  Introduction ' 

analyzed     .      .      246-69 

'strong  preference 'for 

codd.  B  and  N   252,  269- 

271,  298-305,  307-8, 

312-14 

• •  mistaken  estimate  of 

B  and  X      .      .     315-20 
divining  and  verify- 
ing faculty  253,290,291, 
307-8 

—   imaginary      history 

of   the    Traditional 
Greek  Te.xt  27 1-88,  296-8 
antagonism    with    Pa- 
tristic  Antiquity  283-5, 
298-300 

fatal  dilemma     .      .  292-3 

Reiteration    .      .      .      306 

—  ultimate    appeal    to 

his  own  individual 
mind      .      .      .      .307-8 

'  Art  of  Conjectural 

Emendation'    .      .351-7 

absurd  Textual  hypo- 

thesis    .      .      .      .293-4 
intellectual  peculiar- 
ity   362 

—  method  of  editing  the 

Greek  Text       .      .     363 

Text  of  the  N.  T.     .  364-5 

often  forsaken  by  Dr. 

Westcott     .      .      .     352 
Hug  (J,  L.) 381 


INDEX   III. 


545 


Huish  (Ales.) 432 

Idiom,  see  '  English.' 

lepehs  (o  fiiyas) 182 

Imperfect  tense        .      .      .      .161 
Incident  (unsuspected)  .      .      .194-5 
'  Independent '  Reviewers    .      .504-5 
'  Innocent     ignorance  '    of    the 
Keviewer.      .      .      .     347-9,411 

Inspiration 208 

'  Instructions,'  see  '  Revisers.' 
Instrumentality  (ideas  of)  .  .  173 
Internal  Evidence  ....  253 
Interpreters,  (modern)  .  .  .  211 
'  Intrinsic  probability '.  .  .251-2 
Jacobson  (Dr.  W.)  Bp.  of  Chester  37 
Jechouias  (in  Matt,  i.)  .      .      .      186 

Jerome 73,  427,  449 

'Jesus' 184 

'Joanes' 181 

John  (S.)  and  S.  Mark         .      .      185 

Jona(sonof) 181-2 

Josephus 52 

Kai     ......      .      169-70 

—  its  force 209 

Kal  TTcDs 170 

Kaye  (Bp.)  on  Clemens  Al.       .      336 

KeSpoDV 181 

KevefiPaTevccv 356 

.  .  181 
.  .  181 
.       .      433 


Keparia  .... 
Kidron  .... 
Kippax  (Rev.  John) 

Kishon 181 

KKTffWV 181 

Knowledge  of  Christ  not  limited  210 

Kpd^as 71-2 

Lachmaun's  Text  21,  242-3,  246,  270, 

380-1 

Lagarde  (P.  A.  de)  ....     493 

Analccta  Syr. 


481 
9 
493 
380 
58-61 
201 


Latin  Version     . 
Laubmaun  (Dr.) 
Lawrence  (Abp.) 
'  Layers  of  leaves  '   , 
*  Lecythus  '  . 
Lee  (Archd.)  on  Inspiration  208,  230, 

382 
Leontins  Byzantinus  480,  see  Index  II. 
Liberatus  of  Carthage  .  .  .471-3 
Licentious,  see  '  Changes.' 


Lightfoot  (Dr.)  Bp.  of  Durham    145, 
498,  Pref.  xsxi. 
Limitation   of   our   Saviour's 

knowledge 210 

Lincoln  (Bp.  of),  sec  Wordsworth. 

\idos  /j.v\ik6s 181 

Lloyd  (Bp.)  ed.  of  N.  T.  .      .    .  Prcf. 

xvii-ix,  16 

Lord's  Prayer   .      .      .  34-6,  214-6 

'Love' 201-2 

Lucian 29 

Luke  (Gospel  according   to  S.)     16, 
34-5,  75-91,  249,  403-7 

'  Lunaticus  ' 205-6 

Macedonius  .      .      .  103,  470-5,  489 

Mai  (Card.) 121 

Malan  (Dr.  S.  C.)    67,  120,  123,  124, 

348,  356,  382,  451,  453-4 

ManichoBan  depravation.     .      .     220 

'Maranatha' 180 

Marcion 29,  34-5,  61 

Margin    3-6,  33,  115,  130,  131,  137, 
175,  236-7 
Marginal  References      .      .    223, 412 
Marius  Mercator  .      .      .     468, 

Mark  (Gospel  according  to  S.)  30,  262 

collation  of  15  verses      327-31 

last  Twelve  Verses  36-7,  39-10, 

48,  49,  51,  Ded.  vii,  Pref.  xxiii 

and  S.  John     ....      185 

Martin  (Abbe)  .  382,  446,  474,  477, 
478,  492,  528 
Martin  I.  (Pope)  .  .  .  421, 473 
Massmann  (H.  F.)  .  .  .  .  453 
Matrauga  (Papas  Filippo)  .  477,492, 
see  the  Appendix,  p.  522-3 

Matthffii  (C.  F.) 246 

Scholia  348,  380, 427, 

434,  465,  468 
Matthew  (S.)  chap.  i.  (Greek)  119-24, 

186 

(English)    156- 

7,  186 

Medial  agency 173 

Melita  and  Melitene      .      .      .177-8 

Menander 361 

Merivale  (Dean)       ....      230 
Messina,  see  '  Matranga  ' :  and  p.  523 

jxla 183 

2    N 


54(j 


IXDKX    HI. 


Middletou  (Bj).).      .      . 
Jliluii  (siv  '  Cei-iani  ')   . 


VAOK 

1(55,209 
452,  477, 

491-2-3 
Mill  (Dr.  John)  .  245,  383,  432,  437, 

472, 500 

on  co(.i.  D 13 

(Dr.  W.  H.)     ....     354 

Milligun  (Dr.) 39,48 

'Jliraole' 202-4 

lxvT]y.e7ov 197-9 

Moberly  (Dr.)  Bp.  of  S;ilisbury     lOG, 
228-9 
^Icideiia,  sec  'Caiipilli  ";  and  ji.  52.i 
Modern  Interpreters 
Ojiiuion,  sec  ' 


411 


licott. 


IXOVO-yiVQS  @ius 


18-: 


Wdiitfaucon 121 

'  Moreh  ' ISO 

Moiier  (Sir  Robert)       .      .      .      492 

ixuipi 180 

jj-vKos  6vik6s 181 

Mutilation G9-93 

Mystical  interjtretation  .  .  185 
vdpSov  ntcTTiKTis        .       .      .      .184-5 

Nazareth 184 

'  Necessity  '  of  Itevision  127,  160,  223, 

228 

Needless  eiianges      87-8,  224-5  ;  97, 

224-5,  399,  40.3-7 

viKpoiis  iyeipfTf        .      .       .      .      108 

Nemesis  of  superstition       .      .      350 

♦Netser' 184 

'  Neutral '  readings  .  .  271-2,357 
'  .^Jew  Knglish  Version  '  .  .225-6 
'  New  Greek  Text  ■  .  .  130,224-5 
Newth  (Dr.)  37-9,  109,  126,  369,  502 
Newton  (Sir  Isaac)  .  420,  480,  500 
Nilus  Kossanensis  ....  447 
Nineteen  changes  in  34  words  .  401 
Nominative  rejjeated  .  .  .  165 
'  Non-Alexandrian  '  readings     .      357 

*  Non-Alexandrian  I're-Syrian  *  357 
Nonsensical  rendering   .       .      .      218 

*  Non-Western  ' 357-8 

Notes  in  the  margin       .      .       .      175 

Numerals  in  MSS 52-3 

'  Number  of  the  Beast  '  .  .  135 
<5  iiv  4v  rij}  ovpavif    ....      1 3.'! 

Occupation  (Kight  of)    .]        199-206 


TAGK 

woe 139 

'Olivet' 184 

Ollivant  (Bp.) 146 

Omission,  intentional     .      .      .69-93 

vvos 181 

'  Or  '  not  meant  by  ^    .      .      .168-9 
0])inion,  (modern)  sec  '  Ellicott.' 
Origen,  as  a  textual  critic  .      .      292 

'6s 165 

OS  and  fleo'j,  in  MSS.      .      .      99-105 

OTi  for  on 14f» 

'  Otiuin  Norviccnsc,'  sec  'Field.' 

ovTuis 145 

iratSiaKT] 195-6 

TraAii' 57 

I'ahner  (Archd.)       ...      49,  126 

Papyrus 321-2 

Trapa^w 178 

irapaKkricts 190 

Paralytic  borne  of  four       .      .   30-3 
Paris  cod.,  sec  '  Ephraemi.' 

• ,  see  *  Wescher,'  '  Martin.' 

Parquoi  (M) 437 

Particles  (Greek)      ....      166 

ndca  ypa(f>'/i 208-9 

trdaas  Tas  iififpas     .      .      .      .152 

Trdcrxa,  t^ 353 

Paul  '17,'  '73,'  '181'  .      .      .443-8 

(S.),  Codd 493-4 

New  Codd.,  see  the  Appendix. 

Pearson  (Bp.)      .212,  432,  471,  500 
I'eckover  (Alex.),  Esq.  .      .      .     493 

Penerino  (Sig.) 492 

Perfect  (English)     .      .      .      158-60 

(Greek)        ....      163 

TTtpix^pos 184 

Perowne,  (Dean)      .      .        Frcf.  xxx 

Perverted  sense 218-9 

'  Phaseolus  vulgaris'      .      .      .      181 

Phavoi'inus 140 

Pliotius 467 

(pidA-n 200 

'I'istic  nard  ' 184 

'Plain  and  clear,'  sec  'Errors.' 

TrAeTcTTos  ox^os 145 

]Miii)erfect  sense  of  Aorist  .  .  162 
]\mdcr(iri  dchent  testes  .  .  .  455 
TTovripov,  {cLTrh  rod)  .  .  .  .214-6 
Possession  (Demoniacal)       .       .      2li6 


INDEX  m. 


547 


I'AGK 

Possession  (right  of)  .  .  199-2()(j 
Powles  (Rev.  R.  Cowley)  I'ref.  xxviii, 

'  Praxapostolus,'  sec  'Apostolus.' 

'  Pre-Syrian ' 357-8 

'  Pre-Syrian  Non- Western  '  .  3.57 
Preface  of  1611.      .     187-91,198-9 

1881 189 

Preponderating  evidence     .   411,496 

Prepositions 170-5 

'  Present '  (Greek),  sometimes  a 

Future  ....  163-4 

sense  of  '  perfect '      .      163 

Principle    of   translation,    mis- 
taken        187-96 

'  Principles    of    Textual    Criti- 
cism' 1 25-6, 227, 349-50, 374-5,41 1 

Probability 497 

Proper  names  in  S.  Matt.  i.  .  186 
'  Proud-in-the-imagination-of- 

their-hearts  ' 172 

Provision  (God's)  for  the  safety 
of  His  Word    .      .     8,  9,  338,  494 

Trpo€(pda(Tfi' 146 

Pronouns 165 

TrpCOTT) 180 

Pulcheria 465 

Pusey  (P.  E.)  .  345,  382,  449,  468 
Pyramus  and  Thisbe  .  .  .  171 
Pyramid  poised  on  its  apex  .342-5 
'  Quarterly  Review  '       .    Pref.  ix-xiv 

Quia 448,  473 

Quod  (in  1  Tim.  iii.  16)       .      .     448 

Quotations,  see  '  Fathers.' 

RanJell  (Rev.  T.)     .      .      .    481,  493 

'Ravine' 181 

'  Readings,'  see  '  Various.' 

before    '  Renderings  '    106, 

225 
Received  Text,  see  '  Textus.' 
Recension  (imaginary)  .      .      271-88 

Reiche  (J.  G.) 380-1 

Reiteration  not  Proof    .      .      .306-7 
Rendering    of  the    same    word    138, 
152-4,  187-202 
Result    of    acquaintance    with 

documents 337 

Rettig  (H.  C.  M.)  ....  442 
'  Revised  Version,'  see  '  Revision.' 


Revisers  exceeded  their  Instruc- 
tions : — 

(1)  lu  respect  of  the  English    112, 

127-30,  155-7,  225-6,  368, 
400-3 

(2)  In  respect  of  the  Greek  57-8, 

97,  118-26,  224,  399,  403-6 
Revising  body  (composition  of)  504-5 
Revision,  original  Resolution  and 

Rules    concerning  3,   97, 
114,  127,  130 

of  1611.      .      .167,508-14 

of    1881,    how    it    was 

conducted.     37,  117-8,  369 

unfair    in    its    method    116, 

131-8 

essentially  different  from 

that  of  1611  .      .     508-14 

rests  on  a  foundation  of 

sand     ....    110,516 
incapable  of  being  fur- 
ther revised    .      r      .      107 

its  case  hopeless      .      .226-7 

characterized    .      .      .     238 

its  probable  fate      .      508-14 

unfavourable  to  Ortho- 
doxy   .... 
interesting    specimens 


513 
171, 
401 
.   .   188 
.   .  453 
.   .   199 
307,  309-12 


Rhythm  in  translation 
Rieu  (Dr )  .  .  . 
Right  of  possession  . 
'  Ring  of  genuineness' 
Roberts  (Dr.)  36,  39-40,  48,  98,  230 
Rocchi  (Hieromonachus)  447-8,  474, 
492,  see  the  Appendix. 
Rogers,  the  poet       ....      162 

Romans  ix.  5 210-4 

Rome,    {See  '  Cozza    Luzi,' 

'Escher') 521 

Rose,  (Rev.  W.  F.),  of  Worle, 

Somersetshire.  Pref.  xxviii 
Rouser  (Professor)  ....  306 
Routh  (President)  152,  211,444,452, 

501 

Sachau 481 

S.    Andrews    (Bp.    of),    see   '  Words- 
worth.' 
Salisbury  (Bp.  of),  see  '  Moberly.' 


548 


INDEX    IIT. 


I'AG  E 

Samarin,  (woman  (if)  .  .  407-8 
Sanday,  (Dr.)     ....  Pref.  xvi 

Saville  'Prof.) 30(3 

Scholium  misunderstood  .  4C7,  468 
Scholz  (Dr.)  .  .  246,  380,  445,  456 
Scott  (Sir  Gilbert)  ....  306 
Scripture,  God's  provision  for  its 

safety  .     8,  9,  338,  494 

depraved  by  heretics     336 

Scrivener  (Prebendary)  13,  30,  37,  49, 

106,  108,  126,  231,  237-8, 

243,   246,   317,   381,   405, 

431,  474,  477,  493,  502-3, 

see  hack  of  Title. 

Septuagint    .      .     182,  183,  184,  228 

'  Sepulchre,'  the  Holy   ...      198 

(TTiixilov 203-4 


aiKapioi 


147 


Sieber  (M.) 493 


aiKepa 


180 


Sinaiticus,  cod.  (sS)  11-17,  265,  286, 

289,  291,  314-5,  325-6,  343-5 

Sixteen  places    ....        415-9 

Smith  (Dr.  Vance)  174,  204-5,  503-8, 

513,  515 

Sociniau  gloss 210-4 

'  Solvere  ainhulando '       126,  228,  xxxi 

aireKov\dTcop 147 

Spelling  of  proper  names    .      .186-7 

(TirXdyxva 153 

crirvpis 171,  180 

Stanley  (Dean)  ....  135,  507 
Stillingfleet  (Bp.)  ....  500 
a-Ti^ds  and  irroifidSes    .      .      .58-60 

(TvpTpi\pa(ra 185 

(rv(rTpi(j>oiJi.fvoov 176-7 

Syndics  of  Cambridge  Press     .  xxx-i 

Syracuse 494 

Syriac  Version 9 

'  Syrian,'  '  Antiochian,' '  Cracco- 
Syrian,' — Dr.     Ilort's 
designations    of    the 
Traditional  Greek  Text  257- 
65,  269 

its  assumed  origin    272-88 

and  history.      .      .    290-1 

characterized  290  87,  288- 

rdcpos 298 

Tatian  (^scc  Index  II.)  .  29,  336,  350 


TAGE 

'Teaching' 199 

TiKvov 153, 179 

TfXoS 51 

Teu-^es     .  157-64,506  'Aorist,'  'Im- 
perfect,'   '  Perfect.'    '  Pluper- 
fect,' '  Present.' 

• unidiomatically  rendered  402 

Test-places  (three)  ...     47,  519 
Text  to  be  determined  by  exter- 
nal evidence    .      .      .19-20,45 

jjrovision  for  its  security         10 

(Received),  see  '  Textus  Recep- 

tus  '  and  '  Syrian.' 
Texts,  see  Index  I. 
'Textus   Receptus'  12-3,  17-8,  107, 

118 

(Bj).  Ellicott  on)  388 

needs  correction  21, 

107 
see  '  Syrian,'  '  Tra- 
ditional.' 
Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  480,  see 
Index  II. 
Theodotus,  the  Gnostic.  .  .323-4 
Theophilus,  Bp.  of  Antioch       .        29 

ee6iTvevffTos 208-9 

Beds  and  os  in  MSS.     99-105,  425-6 

,  not  (is,  10  be  read  in  1  Tim. 

iii.  16.      .     Pref.  xxi-iv,  424-501 

Thierry  (M) 493 

Thirty  changes  in  38  words  .  171 
1  Timothy  iii.  16.  See  @e6s 
Tischeudorf  (Dr.)  22-4,  45,  243-4, 
246,  270-1,  370,  383, 
437-8,  451,  467 
Title  on  the  Cross    ....   85-8 

'  Titus  Justus' 53-4 

'Tomb' 198 

Tradition  (Ecclesiastical)    .      .      495 
Traditional  Text  departed  from 

6000  times      .      107 

sec  '  Syrian.' 

meaning  of  S. 

Mark  xiii.  32,  209-10 
'Transcriptional  probability'  .251-2 
Translators  of  1611       .    187-91,207 

of   1881,  mistaken 

principle  of  138,  187-96 
Transposition 93-7 


INDEX  III. 


549 


Tregelles  (Dr.)  22,  45,  243,  246,  270, 

370,  380,  383,  431,  451, 

467,  498 

Trench  (Abp.)    .      .      .xlii,  106,  229 

Trinitarian  doctrine       .      .      .174-5 

True  Text,  (only    safe  way  of 

ascertaining)  ....      339-42 

Tusculum 446 

Tyndale  (William)  .  167,  191,  192 
Uncials  (depravity  of  the  old)  12-17, 
30-5,  46-7,  75-6,  94-5 
Uniformity  of  rendering  .  166,  187 
'  Unitarian'  Reviser,  intolerable 

503-8 

vir6  and  Sid 156 

inrorvncocris 351 

Uppstrom  (Andr.)  ....  452 
Upsala  .  .  .  444,  see  '  Belsheim.' 
Ussher  (Abp.)     .      .      432,  469,  500 

Valckenaer 228 

Valentinus 29 

Various  Readings  49-50,  56,  65, 130-1 

Vaticanus,  codex  (B)  11-17,  265,  273, 

286,  289,  291,  314-5,  325, 

342-5,  see  '  B  and  N.' 

Veludo  (Sig.) 492 

Vercellone  (C.) 381 

Verifying  faculty     .    95-6,  109,  253, 

290-1,  307-8 

Version  (Authorized)    .      .      .112-4 

(old  Latin).      .      .      .9,448 

(Vulgate)    .      .      .      .9,419 

(Peschito)  .      .      .9,449-50 

(Harkleian)       ...      450 

(Coptic)      .      .      .   9,451-2 

■ (Sahidic)     .      .      .   9,451-2 

(Gothic)      ...    9,  452-3 

(Armenian)       .      .      .9,453 

(yEthiopic).      .      .      .9,453 

(Georgian)  ....     454 

■ (Arabic)      .      .      .      .453^ 

• (Slavonian)       .      .      .     454 

'Vials' 200 


TAG  E 

Von  Heinemaun  (Dr.)    .      .      .     493 
Vulgate,  see  '  Version.' 

W.  (M.) Fref.  xxviii 

Walton  (Bp.  Brian)       ...      432 
Waterland  (Dr.)       ....      500 
Way  (only  safe)  of  ascertaining 
the  True  Test       .      .      .     339-42 

Weber  (M.) 437 

Wescher  (M.) 492 

'  Wesleyan  Methodist '  Revisers  504-5 

West  the  painter     ....      162 

Westcott  (Dr.)     xlii,  124,  see  '  Hort.' 

Westcott  and  Hort  (Drs.)  24-9,  33, 

49,  51,  72,  83,  91,  92,  94,  95, 

97,  110,  114, 125,  134-5,  177, 

239-41,   245,  247,  370,   380, 

382,   499,   502,    518-9,     See 

reverse  of  Title-page,  and  I'ref. 

i,  xxxi 

357 

271-2 

361 

507 


Xl-lV,  XXVl-Vll 


'  Western,' 


readings  . 
and  '  Syrian ' 


'  Westminster  Abbey  scandal ' 

Wetstein  (J.  J.)     246,  383,  426,  456, 

467,  469,  480,  497 

Wilberforce  (Bp.)  229,  415,  505,  507 

Woide  (C.  G.) 434-7 

Woltii  Anecd.  Grmca.  .  .  .  458 
Wood  (C.  F.  B.)  ....  183 
Word,  incarnate  and  written  334-5, 
390-1 
Wordsworth  (Dr.  Charles)  Bp. 

of  S.  Andrews  106, 165, 
229-30,  382 

(Dr.  Christopher), 

Bp.  of  Lincoln    37,  112, 

147,  184,  226,  368,  382, 

400,502,505,513,OeJ.vi 

Wotton  (Henry)       ....     433 

Xenophon 149 

Young  (Patrick)       ....     432 

(Di'O,  of  Glasgow    .      ,     477 

^(ivT] 201 


LOKUON:    I'KlXTliD   BY    WILLIAM   CI.OWKS   AND   SONS,    LIMITICD,   STAMFORD  STUEET 
AND   CJIAKING   CllUSS. 


2  o 


BY    THE    SAME    AUTHOR. 


A  Plain  Covivicntary  on  the  Foiw  Holy  Gospels,  intended 

chiefly  for  Devotional  Reading,  1855.     5  vols.,  fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  ^^i  \s. 

Ninety  Short  Sermons  for  Family  Reading  r  followinp^  the 

Course  of  the  Christian  Seasons.  First  Series.  1855.  2  vols.,  fcap.  8vo., 
cloth,  8.f. 

Inspiration  and  Interpretation.     Seven  Sermons  preached 

before  the  University  of  Oxford ;  with  an  Introduction,  being  an  Answer 
to  a  volume  entitled  '  Essays  and  Reviews.'     1861.     8vo.,  cloth,  14?. 

A  Treatise  on  the  Pastoral  Office,  addressed  chiefly  to 
Candidates  for  Holy  Orders,  or  to  those  who  have  recently  undertaken 
the  Cure  of  Souls.     1864.     Svo.,  12^-. 

Ninety-one  Short  Sermons  for  Fatnily  Readijig  :  following 

the  Course  of  the  Christian  Seasons.  Second  Series.  1867.  2  vols.,  fcap. 
8vo.,  cloth,  8j-. 

The  last  Twelve  Verses  of  the  Gospel  according  to  S.  Mark, 

Vindicated againsi  Recent  Critical  Objectors,  and  Established.  1871.  8vo,, 
cloth. 

Plea   for   the    Study   of   Divinity   in   the    University   of 

Oxford.      1875. 

The  New  Lectionary  examined,  zvith  Reasons  for  its  Aniend- 

vient  at  the  present  time,' — ^jointly  with  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln  and  Dean 
Goulburn,  1877. 

Nehemiah,    a    Pattern     to    Bnilders :  —  Counsels    on     the 

recommencement  of  the  Academical  year.  A  Sermon  preached  at  S.  Mary- 
thc- Virgin's,  1878. 

The  Servants  of  Scripture  .•  published  by  the  S.P.C.K.,  1878. 
Prophecy — not  ''Forecast','  but  {in  the  ivords  of  Bishop  Btitler,) 

"  the  history  of  ezients  before  they  come  to  pass  "." — A  Sermon  preached  at 
S.  Mary-the- Virgin's,  1880 :  being  a  reply  to  Rev.  Brownlow  Maitland's 
"  Argument  from  Prophecy," — pp.  47. 

The  Disestablishment  of  Religion  in  Oxford,  the  Betrayal 

of  a  Sacred  Trust.' — Words  of  IVarni/iQ  to  the  University.  A  Sermon 
preached  at  S.  Mary-the- Virgin's,  1880  ;  2nd  edition,  pp.  56. 


BS188.B95 

^^--,s,onrewsed:  three  an,c,es 


L^^^2  00059  7304 


