BOOKS printed for J. HuTTon, 


I. The Country Parſon's Advice to his dai; 
in Two Parts. Part I. containing a plain and ſerious Ex- 
hortation to a Religious and Virtuous Life. II. General 
Directions bow to ive accordingly. INE — Eaton 7 
1 

II. The Kirn Conpar: or, the . 
Pilgrim in his Spiritual Conflict and Conqueſt. By John 

de Caſtaniza. Reviſed and recommended by the Reverend 
Richard Lucas, D. D. Rector of St. Stephen's Coleman- 
Street. The Second Edition. 


III. Private Prayers for every W i in the Week, Aud for 
the ſeveral Parts of each Day: Tranſlated from the Greek 
"Devotions of Biſhop Andreaus; with Additions, by George 
Stanhope, D. D. late Dean of Canterbury; and a Preface, 
in which is contained ſome Account of the Reverend 


Authors. 


W.A rien Va epentance 2nd Sorrow 
for Sin, and a ſtrict N Yau TG. e: written, about the 
middle of the Fourtfe r N. Ephraim che Syrian, 
Deacon of Edeſſa. 'Tranflated-info Engliſh from the Greek 
and Latin Verſions compared. Price 6d. or Forty Shillings - 
an Hundred to thoſe wha-give them away. 


V. A Collection of Forms of Prayer foe every Day in 
the Week. The Third Edition, Recommended by George 
| Whitfield, A.B. Price 6d. on à large Nane, 


Of whom may be bad, BiBLEs, r Books, 
Boo of Piety and Devotion, r Eu, Phy- 
lick, hs Ge 5 | 


* — _ CT 5 **"" 


* 
** 
3% — - 
0 
” — 
pe — 
* 
* 1 1 


2 ** - | ; vt ER * 
. « 3 2 A : , 7 
2 — „ „„ Hr +s "Ed $F& 1 1fT $3445 FT A. 


*. 4 1 * # $* 
L 4 . a4 L 


re V. 34. 


But 1 fay unto Jeu, Swear not 
e e all. 


MONO the ih 1 heinous Sins for 
; which this Nation is grown infamous, 
I perhaps there is no one mote crying, 

But withal more common, than the abbminz- 
Ble Cuſtom of Profane Stecaring and Curſing. 
Our Streets abound with Perſons of all Degrees 
21d Qualities, who are continually provoking 
the Holy One of Iſrael to Anger by their de- 
teſtable Oaths and Blaſphemies : and our very 
Shildten, ot of boſs Moiiths, the Plalmiſt 
obſerves in his Days, was perfefed Praiſe, 
are now grown remarkable for the quite op- 
poſite III Quality of Cur ing and Swearing, 
Fhis cannot but be a melancholy Proſpect for 
SVEN fncere and honeſt Miniſter of Jxsos 
Cty; to view his Fellow Chriftidns in; 
and ſucl? as will put him on contriving ſome 
Means t6 prevent the ſpreading at Kaft of ſo 
growing an Evil; knowing that the LORD 
(withbut Repentince) will aforedly- viſit for 


dens ** But, 9 War cas he do ? 
Publick 


252 — — — — x 


Publick Animadverſions are ſo neglected a- 
mongſt us, that where ſhall we find a com- 
mon Swearer puniſhed as the Laws direct? 
And as for private Admonition, Men are now 
ſo hardened through the Deceitfulneſs of Sin, 
| that to give them ſober, and pious Advice, and 
to ſhew. them the Evil of their Doings, is but 
like caſting Pearls before.Swine, they only turn 
again and rent you, Since Matters then are 
come to this paſs, all that we can do is this, 
that as we are appointed Watchmen and Am- 
baſſadors of the Lokp, it is our Duty from 
time to time to ſhew- the People their Tranſ- 
greſion, and warn Them their Sin; ſo that 
whether they will hear or whether they will 
forbear,, We however may deliver our -0wn 
Souls. That I therefore may diſcharge my 
Duty in this Particular, give me leave, in the 
Name of Gop, humbly to offer to your moſt 
ſerious Conſideration ſome few Obſervations 
on the Words of the Text, in order to ſhew 
the Heinouſneſs of profane Curſing and Swear- 

Bu before I proceed directly to the Pro- 
ſecution of this Point, it will be proper to 
clear this Precept of our Lorp from a Miſ- 
interpretation that has been put on it by a Set 
of Men, who heedlefsly infer from hence that 
our Saviour prohibits, Swearing before a Ma- 
giſtrate when required on a ſolemn and pro- 
per Occaſion. But that all Swearing is not 
abſolutely. unlawful for a Chriſtian, — is evi- 
dent from the Writings of St. Paul, whom 


. 


we 


£47. 1 


we: e fag upon ſome lama Occaſions 
uſing ſeveral Forms of Imprecation and Swear- 
ing, as, I call GOD. to, Witneſs, — GOD. is 
ny Judge, — By your Rejuicing in CHRIST 
FESUS, and ſuch like. And that our Savi- 
our does by no means forbid Swearing before 
a Magiſtrate, in the Words now before us, is 
plain, if we conſider the Scope and Defign 
he had in view, when he gave his Diſciples 
this Command. Permit me to obſerve to you 
then, that our Bleſſed Maſter, had ſet himſelf, 
from the ayth Verſe of this Chapter, out of 
which the Text is taken, to vindicate and 
clear the Moral Law from the corrupt Gloſſes 
and Miſconſtruction of the Phariſees, ho 
then fate in, Moſes's Chair, . but without were 
notoriouſly faulty in adhering too cloſely to 
the literal Expreſſion of the Law, without 
ever conſideriog the due Extent and ſpiritual 
Meaning of it. Accordingly they imagined, 
that becauſe Gop had ſaid, Thou ſhalt; not 
commit Adultery, that therefore, ſuppoſing. a 
Perſon was not guilty of the very. Act of Adul- 
tery, he was not chargeable with the Breach 
of the Seventh Commandment. And likewiſe . 
in the Matter of Swearing, becauſe Gop had 
forbidden his People in the Books of Exodus 


and Deuteronomy, to take his Name in vain, | 


or to Swear fallely by his Name; they there- 
fore judged it lawful to ſwear by any. Crea- 
ture in common Diſcourſe, ſuppoſing they did 

not directly mention the Name of Gop. Our 
Bleſſed Saviour therefore, in the Words now 
B 2 before 


44 
be fare us, ks their Miſtake about 
Swearing, as He had dane in the Verſes im- 
mediately foregoing that concerning Adultery, 
nd tells the People, that whatever Allowances 
Ws Phariſees ight give to ſtear by any 
Creature, yet He | ;ronounced it abſolutely un- 
lawful for any + his Fol lowers ta do fo. 
You have Ber, fays bY the it has tou, ſaid 
by them of old Time, 3 y, by the P 75 
ber and Teachers of the Jerk Law,) Thoy 
ſhalt not For five 77 WA t perform unto the 
Lord thine Ozths But t fay unto you, (1 I wha 
am appointed by the Father to be the Great Pro- 
wy and TrueLaygiver of his Church) Swear 
ot at all; in Your common Converſation, nei- 
ther by: Heaven, for it is GOD's Throne; and' 
therefore to Swear by That, is to ſwear b 
Him that ſits thereon ; neither by the Earl 
for it is bis Foot/tool ; nor by Jeruſalem, 
it is the City of the Great King : neither” 5/2 
hou Swear by thy Hegd, becauſe thou cant 
not make ane Hair w ite or black: But let 
Jour Communications (which pialeh ſhews that 
CnR1$8T is here ſpeaking o of ' Swearing, not be- 
fore a Magiſtrate, but 'in common Converſa- 
tion) let your Communications, ſays he, be 
Yea yea, Nay nay, a ſtrong Affirmation or Ne- 
gation at the moſt ; far whatever is more than 
this cometh of Evil, that is, cometh from an 
Evil Principle, from the Evil One, the Devil, | 
the Author of all Evil. * 
Waics by the way, methinks, ſhould be 
2 Caution to all jock Perſons who though not. 


guilty : 


p *. Þ 


1555 


Ward of Swearing. in the groſs Renſe of the 

Word, yet atteſt the Truth of what they are 

ſpeaking of, though ever ſq triflin 19 i by Axing 

7 2-4 my Life, As 1 live, By my Faith, R 
eaVens, and fuch wy wh 8099 Expreff 70 

however harmleſs and 1 they may be 

eſteemed by ſome ſorts: of People, yęt are tha 


very Oaths which qur Bleſſed Lord. condemns 
in the Words immediately following the ext; 


and Perſons who uſe ſuch unwarrantable Forms - 


of erung, muſt expect to be convicted and 
condemned as Swegrers at 2 aide 1 {c4 
cond Coming to judge the World. 15 

Bor to return: It appears then from the 


whole Tenour of our Saviour's Diſcourſe, that 


in the Words of the Text he does by no means 
diſannul or forbid Swearing before a Magl- 


ſtrate (which, as might be eaſily ſhewn, is 


bath - lawful. and neceſſary) but only profane | 
Searing: in common Converſation; the Hei- 
nauſneſs and Sinfulneſs of which F come how, 


as was above propoſed, more mene to... 377 


lay before you, 

AnD here, not to mention that it is a di 
re& Breach of our Bleſſed Mafter's and 
Lawgiver's Command in the Words of = 
Text, as likewiſe of the Third Commandment, 
wherein Gop poſitively declares, He wil] not 
bold him guiltleſs. (that is, will aſluxedly pu- 
niſh him) chat taketh bis Name in vain; Not 
to mention that it is the greateſt Abuſe of that 
noble Faculty of. Speech, whereby we are di- 
fang from the Brute See ; and the. 

great 


[6] 


cat hazard the common W. runs of be- 


ing perjured ſome time or other: Not to 


mention theſe Reaſons againſt it I ſay, which 
of themſelves would abundantly prove the Fol- 


ly and Sinfulneſs of Swearing : — I ſhall at this 
time content myſelf with inſtancing i in Four 


Particulars, which highly aggravate the Crime 
of profane SWEATING 3 and thoſe are ſuch as 
follow. 


Firſt "Becauſe there is no Temptation in 
Nature to this Sin, nor does the Commiſſion 
of it afford the Offender the leaſt Pleaſure or 
Satisfaction. 


Secondly, Becauſe it is a Sin which may be 


ſo often repeated. 


Thirdly, Becauſe it hardens Infidels againſt 
the Chriſtian Religion, and muſt give great 
Offence, and occaſion much Sorrow and Con- 


cern to every true Diſciple of JesUs CHRIST, / 


' Fourthly, Becauſe it is an * of Sin, 
which can only be matched in Hell. 


TAE Fi Reaſon then why wen in 
common Converſation is ſo heinous in Gop's 
Sight, and why we ſhould not ſwear at all, is 
becauſe it has no Temptation in Nature; nor 
does the Commiſſion of it, unleſs a Man be 
a Devil Incarnate, afford the Offender the 
leaſt Pleaſure or Satisfaction. | 

Now here, I preſume, we may lay it down 
as a i Maxim univerſally agreed on, that the 

Guik 


\ 


Ea 


Guilt of any Crime is increaſed or leſſened in 
proportion to the Weakneſs or Strength of 
the Temptation by which a Perſon is carried 
out to the Commiſſion of it. It was this Con- 
ſideration that extenuated and diminiſhed the 
Guilt of Saul's taking upon him to offer Sa- 
crifice before the Prophet Samuel came, and 
of Uzza's touching the Ark, becauſe it was 
in danger of Falling : As on the contrary what 
ſo highly aggravated the Diſobedience of our 
Firſt Parents and Lot's Wife, was, becauſe the 
former had ſo little Reaſon to eat the forbid- 
den Fruit, and the latter ſo ſmall a Tempta- 
tion to look back on Sodom. ; 
AND. now it this be granted, ſurely the 
common Swearer muſt of all Sinners be the 
moſt without Excuſe, ſince. there is no man- 
ner of Temptation in Nature to the Commiſ- 
ſion of his Crime. In moſt of the other Com- 
mands, Perſons perhaps may plead the Force 
of Natural Inclination in Excuſe for their 
Breach of them: One, for Inſtance, may al- 
ledge his ſtrong Propenſity to Anger, to excuſe, 
his. breaking of the Sixth: Another, his Prone- 
neſs to Luſt, for his Violation of the Seventh. 
But now ſurely the common Swearer has no- 
thing of this Kind to urge in his behalf: For 
though he may have a natural Inclination to, 
this or, that Crime, yet no Man, it is to bez 
preſumed, can ſay, He 1 is born of a Swearing! © 7 
Conſtitution.. | t 
Bur farther, as . is no \ Temptation to 
it, ſo bers, is no Pleaſure or Profit to be 7 ä 
from 


n | 


1 


dy the Commiſſion of it. Aſk tHe Prunkard 


hy he fiſes up early to follow ſtrong Drink, 


and he will tell you, becauſe it affords His 


ſenſual Appetite ſome” Kind of Pleaſure and 


Gratification, - though it be no higher an one 
than that of a Brute. Enquire of the cove- 
tous Worldling, why he defrauds and over- 
reaches his Neighbour, and he Has an Anſwer 
ready, To enrich himſelf, and to lay u 

Goods for many Vears. But it muſt cettainly 


puzzle the profune Swearer himſelf, to in- 


form you what Pleaſure he reaps from Swear- 
ing: for alas! it is a fruitleſs, taſteleſs Thitig, 
that he ſells his Soul for. But indeed he does 
not ſell it at all: In this Caſe he prodigally 
gives it away (without Repentance ) to the 
Devil; and parts with a blefled Eternity, and 
runs into ererlaſting Torrtieht, merely 255 
Nothing! 25 


Bor debug whiat este "Ri Hinoul: 
neſs of profane Swearing, is, That it is a Sin 
whieh may ſo often be repeated. | 

- Ty1s is another Conſideration which al- 
ways ſerves to leſſen or increaſe the Guilt and 
Malignity of any Sin. It was fome Excuſe 
for the Drunkenneſs of Noah, and the Adul- 

tery of David, that they comntififted: theſe 
Crirfies' but once: As of the contrary of the 


| rent Abraham's Diftruſt.of Gop, that he 


ated the - diſſembling of Sarah to be his 
Wiſe, two feveral tines. And if this be ad- 


= = . * 


raitiee: 29 atr pere * -othet Petſons 


Crimes, 
1 | 4 


4+ 4 8 
Crimes, ſurely much more ſo of the Guilt of 
common Swearing, becauſe it 1s a Sin which 
may be and is for the generality often repeat- 
ed. In many other groſs Sins it cannot be 
ſo: If a Man be overcome in Drink, there 
muſt be a conſiderable Time e er he can reco- 
ver his Debauch and return to his Cups again: 
or if he be accuſtomed to profane the Sab- 
bath, he cannot do it every day, but only one in 
ſeven. But alas! the profane Swearer is ready 
for another Oath almoſt before the Sound of 
the firſt is out of our Ears: Yea ſome double 
and treble them in one Sentence, even ſo as 
to confound the Senſe of what they ſay , by 


an horrible Din of Blaſphemy ! Now it the 


Great and Terrible FE HOV AH has ex- 
preſsly declared that He will not hold bim 
guiltleſs, that is, will aſſuredly puniſh him, 


that taketh his Name but once in vain; What 


a vaſt Heap of theſe heinous Sins lies at every 
common Swearer's Door ? It would be apt to 
fink him into an intolerable Deſpair, did he 
but fee the 'whole Sum of them. And Oh! 
what a ſeared Conſcience muſt that Wretch 
| have; that does not feel this prodigious 
Weight! NS. 


Bur, Thirdh, What ken the Sin of pro- 
Abane Swearing appear yet more exceedi 
finful is, that it hardens Infidels RENEE the 
. Chriſtian Religion. | 


Ir is the Apoſtle Saint Peter's Advice to 
the married. Perſons, of his Time, that they 
* «'C 1 ſhould 


5.2 


II. 


[ 10 1] 
ſhould walk as became the Goſpel of Cantsr, 
that thoſe that were without might be won to 
embrace the Chriſtian Religion, by ſeeing and 
obſerving; their pious Converſation coupled to- 
gether with Fear. And what the Apoſtle preſ- 
ſes on married Perſons we find elſewhere. en- 
Joined each particular Member of the Church. 
Accordingly we are commanded by our Bleſ- 
ſed Lord to let our Light ſo ſhine before Men, 
that they may ſee our good Works, and glorify 
our Father which is in Heaven. And the A- 
poſtle Saint Paul bids us walk circumſpettly 
fowards them that are without, redeeming the 
Time, that is, embracing all Opportunities to 
do them good, becauſe the Days are evil. But 
alas! in what a direct Contradiction does the 
profane Swearer live to this and ſuch. Pre- 
cepts, — who, inſtead of gaining Proſelytes to 
CHRIST from the unbelieving Part of the 
World, does all he can' to oppoſe it ! For 
how can it be expected, that Infidels ſhould 
Honour our Gop, when Chriſtians themſelves 
. deſpiſe him; or that any ſhould embrace our 
Religion, when Profeſſors of 1t themſelves 
make ſo light of one of its ſtricteſt Com- 
mands? No, to our Grief and Shame be it 
ſpoken, it is by reaſon of ſuch Impieties as 
theſe” that our Holy Religion (the beſt and 
pureſt in itſelf) is become a By-word among 
the Heathen ; that the ſacred Authority of the 
Holy Jzsvs and his Doctrine is deſpiſed ; and 
GOD's' Name, as it is written, Hlaſphemed 4 
mong the Gentiles. I 
15 THESE 


| 1 
THEsE cannot but be ſad Blocks and Of- 
ferices in the way of our Brethren's Conver- 
fion : But wo be to thoſe Men by whom ſuch 
Offences come: We may ſay of them, as our 
Bleſſed Lord did of Judas, It had been better 
for ſuch Men that they had never been born; 
or, as he threatens in another Place, It ſhall 
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in 
the Day of Judgment than for ſuch Sinners. 

Bur this is not all: As prophane Swearing 
muſt undoubtedly harden thoſe in their Infi- 
delity that are without, ſo muſt it no leſs 
grieve and give great Offence to thoſe honeſt 
and ſincere Perſons that are within the Church. 
We hear of David's complaining and crying 
out, Wo is me that I am conſtrained to dwell 

with Meſech, and to have my Habitation a- 
mongſt the Tents of Kedar: that is, That he 
was obliged to live and converſe with a People 
exceedingly wicked and prophane. And Saint 
Peter tells us, that Lot's righteous Soul was 
grieved day by day, whilſt he ſaw and obſerved 
the ungodly Converſation of the Wicked. . And 
no doubt it was one great Part of our bleſſed 
Maſter's Sufferings whilſt on Earth, that he 
was compelled to converſe with a wicked and 
perverſe Generation, and to hear his Heavenly 
Father's ſacred Name profaned and ſcoffed at 
by unrighteous and wicked Men. And ſure- 
ly it cannot but pierce the Heart of every true 
and ſincere Chriſtian, of every one that does in 
any meaſure partake of the Spirit of his Ma- 
ſter, to hear the Multitude of Oaths and 
C 2 Curſes 


Dr 
Curſes which proceed daily and hourly out of 
the Mouths of many People, and thoſe too 
whoſe liberal Education and ſeeming Regard 
for the Welfare of Religion, one would think, 
ſhould teach them a more becoming Behavi- 
our. . To hear the Great and terrible Name 
of Gop polluted by Men, which is adored by 
Angels, and to conſider how often that ſacred 
Name is prophaned in common Diſcourſe, 
which we are not worthy to mention in our 
Prayers: This, I fay, cannot but make each 
of them cry out with Holy David, Wo is me. 
that JI am conſtrained to dwell with Meſech, 
and to have my Habitation amongſt the Tents 
of Kedar. And though the Blaſphemies and 
profane Diſcourſes of others will not be im- 
puted to fincere Perſons for Sin, ſo long as. 
they have no Fellowſhip. with ſuch helliſh Fruits 
of Darkneſs, but rather reprove them ; nay 
rather will be imputed to them for Righteouſ- 
neſs, for thus lamenting the Wickedneſs of 
Sion: yet it will greatly enhance the preſent 


Guilt, and fadly-increaſe the future Puniſh- 
ment of every profane Swearer, by whom 


ſuch Offences come. For if, as our Saviour 
tells us, it had been better for a Man to have 
a Mill-ſtone tied about his Neck, than that 


be ſbonld offend one of his little ones, that is, 


the weakeſt of his Diſciples, How much 


forer Puniſhment will they be thought worthy 


of, who not only cauſe Gop's Name to be 


blaſphemed among the Gentiles, and the Re- 


ligion of our dear Redeemer to be abhorred; 
2 but 


P 


but who make his Saints to weep and mourn, 


and vex their righteous Souls from day to day, 
by their ungodly, profane, and blaſphemous 
Converſation? Surely as Gop will put the 
Tears of one into his Bottle, and recompence 
them with eternal Glory at the Great Day of 
Retribution, ſo it will be juſt in him to pu- 
niſh the other with eternal Sorrow for all their 
ungodly and hard Speeches, and caſt them in- 
to a Lake of Fire and Brimſtone, where they 
ſhall be glad of a Drop of Water to cool thoſe 
Tongues with which they have ſo often blaſ- 
"Oy the Loxp of Hoſts, and grieved the 
ople of our Goo. | 


Bur it is time for me to proceed to give 
my Fourth and laſt Reaſon, why common 
Swearing is ſo exceeding ſinful. And that is, 
becauſe it is ſuch an Extremity of Sin, that 


IV. 


can only be matched in Hell, where all are 


deſperate and without Hope of Mercy. The 
damned Devils and damned Souls of Men in 
Hell may be ſuppoſed to rave and blaſpheme 
in their Torments, becauſe they know that 


the Chains wherein they are held can never 
be knocked off: But for Men that ſwim in 
the River of Go p's Goodneſs, whoſe Mercies 


are renewed. to them every Morning, and who 


are viſited with freſh Tokens of his infinite 
unmerited Loving - kindneſs every Moment: 


for theſe favourite Creatures to ſet . their 


Mouths againſt Heaven, and to blaſpheme a 


gracious, patient, all-bountiful Gop; is a 
| Height 


2 7 


Height of sin which eceeds the Blackneſs 


and Impiety of Devils and Hell itſelf. 
Ax p now, after what has been here offered, 


to ſhew the Heinouſneſs of profane Curing ; 


and Swearing in common Converſation, may 


I not very juſtly addreſs myſelf to you in the 


Words of the Text, Therefore T ſay unto you, 


Swear not at all; ſince it is a Sin that has 


no Temptation in Nature, nor brings any Plea- 


ſure or Profit to the Committer of it; ſince 


bs. 2 . It hardens Infidels in their Infidelity, and af- 


fords ſad Cauſes of Grief and Lamentation to 
every honeſt Chriſtian; fince it is a Sin that 
generally grows into a Habit ; and laſtly, ſuch 
a Sin that can only be matched in Hell. 

1. Anp firſt then, if theſe Things be ſo, 
and the Sin of profane Swearing, as hath 
been in ſome meaſure ſhewn, is ſo exceeding 
ſinful, What ſhall we fay to ſuch unhappy 
Men, who think it not only allowable, but 


faſhionable and polite to take the Name - of 


GOD in vain; who imagine that Swearing 


makes them look big amongſt their Compa- 


nions, and really think it a Piece of Honour 
to abound in it? But alas! little do they 
think that ſuch a Behaviour argues the great- 
eſt Degeneracy of Mind and Fool-hardineſs 


that can poſſibly be thought of: For what 


can be more baſe than one Hour to pretend 
to adore GoDp in publick Worſhip, and the 
very next Moment to blaſpheme his Name ? 
Indeed ſuch a Behaviour- from Perſons who 
deny the * of a God * any ſuch Fools 

there 


* 035] 
there be) is not altogether ſo much to be won- = 
dered at : But for Men, who not only ſubſcribe 
to the Belief of a Deity, but likewiſe acknow- 
ledge him to be a Gop of infinite Majeſty 
and Power; for ſuch Men, I ſay, to blaſ- 
pheme his holy Name by prophane Curſing and 
Swearing, and at the ſame time confeſs that 
this very Gop has expreſsly declared He wrll not 
hold him guiltleſs, that is, will certainly and 


eternally puniſh ( without Repentance) him 


that taketh his Name in vain ; 1s ſuch an In- 
ſtance of Fool-hardineſs as well as Baſeneſs, 
that can ſcarcely be paralled. This is what 
they preſume not to do in other Caſes of leſs 
Danger: They dare not revile a General at 
the Head of his Army, nor rouſe a ſleeping 
Lion when within reach of his Paw. And is 
the Almighty Gop, the Great FEHOLVAH, 
the Everlaſting King, who can conſume them 
by the Breath of his Noſtrils, and frown them 
to Hell in an Inſtant ; is He, I ſay, the only 
contemptible Being in their Account that may 
be provoked without Fear, and offended with- 
out Puniſhment? No, though Gop bear 
long, he will not bear always: Time will 
come, and that too perhaps much ſooner . 
than ſuch Perſons may expect, when Gop 
will vindicate his injured Honour, when he 
will lay bare his Almighty. Arm, and make 
thoſe Wretches feel the eternal Smart of his 
Juſtice, whoſe Power and Name they have 
ſo often vilified and blaſphemed. Alas! what 
will become of all their Bree then ? 1 
3 ey 


[ 16 ] 


they then wantonly . with the Name of 
| upon 


their Maker, and call n the King of all 


the Earth to damn them any more in Jeſt? 


No, their Note will then be changed: indeed 
they ſhall call, but, alas! it will be for the 
Rocks to fall on them, and the Hills to cover 
them from the Wrath of bim that fitteth upon 


the Throne, and from the Lamb for ever. Alt 


is true, Time was when they prayed, though 
without Thought perhaps, for Damnation 
both for themſelves and others: And now 
they will find their Prayers anſwered, — They 
delighted in Curſing, therefore all it happen 
unto them; they loved not Bleſſing, therefore 


ſhall it be-far from them; they cloathed them- 
felves with Curfing like as with a Garment, 


and it ſhall come into their Bowels like Water, 
and like Oil into their Bones. e 


2. Bur farther, if the Sin of Swearing: is 


fo exceeding heinous, and withal ſo common, 
then it 15 every particulayPerſon's Duty, eſpe- 
cially thoſe that are in Authority, to do their ut 
moſt towards diſcountenancing and ſuppreſſing 
fo malignant a Crime. The Duty we owe both 
to Gop and our Neighbour requires this at our 
Hands: By the one we are obliged to affert 


©. our Maker's Honour; by the other to pre- 
vent our Neighbour's Ruin: Not to mention 
that it is thẽ greateſt Proof we can give of our 


undiſſembled Love to our Maſter, and is but 
doing as we would be done by, and as we our- 
ſelves act in Caſes of leſſer Conſequence.” Were 
we to hear either our own or our Friend's 
8 80 Sod 


. GGG 


— 
, 


N 


good Najne.vilified and hraduced, we would 


think it our boahden Duty to vindicate the 


wronged Reputation of each: And thall. the 
great terrible and Holy Name of our beſt and 
only Friend, our King, our Father, nay our 
Gop; Shall this, I ſay, be daily, nay every 


moment defied and blaſphemed ; and will no c 


one dare to ſtand up in Defence of his Ho- 
nour and Holinefs ? Be aſtoniſbed, O Heavens, 


at this! No, let us ſcorn all ſuch baſe and | 


treacherous Treatment: Let us, for once at 
leaſt, reſolve to ſupport the Cauſe. of Religion, 
and with a becoming prudent Courage mani- 


feſt our Zeal for the Honour of the LoR D of 


Hoſts. Men in Authority have double the 
Advantages of ordinary Chriſtians : Their very 
Office ſhews they are intended for the Puniſh- 
ment of Evil Doers: And ſuch is the Dege- 
neracy of Mankind, that the generality of 
them will be more influenced by the Power 


of Perſons in Authority, than by the moſt la- 
boured Exhortations from the Pulpit. TO 


ſuch therefore, if there are any here preſent, 


I humbly addrefs myſelf, beſeeching them in (ol 
the Name of our Lord Jesvs CHRIS, to do 


their utmoſt to put a ſtop to and reſtrain 2 
Fane Curſing and Swearing. And though. it 
muſt be confeſſed that this is a Work which 


5 requires a great deal of Courage and Pains, 
yet they would do well to conſider it is for 
Gop they undertake it, who certainly will ſup- 


port and bear them out in a due Execution of 


their Office here, and reward them with an ex- 


* 0 Feeding 


TT 3 


(+2 Fs RE =" ternal Weight of Glory hereafter; 


* it is time to draw towards a Concluſion. 
4. LE me therefore once more addteſs m 
| a to every Perſon here preſent, in the Name 
of our Lord JxEsus CHRisr ; and if any a- 
mongſt them have been any way guilty of this 
a Es: din of - Swearingg Let me intreat 
them by all that is near and dear tꝗ them, that 
they would neither give the Magiſtrate the 
Trouble to puniſh, mog their Friends ahy rea- 
ſon for the future to, wan them againſt com- 
mitting the Crime. ; but keep a conſtant and 
careful gte. over the Door of their Lips, and 
- withal, implore the Divine Alſiſtance (without 
which all is nothing) that ey offend: no more 
ſo ſcandalouſly wirh their Tongues: : Let them 
ſeriouſly lay to Heart What with great Plain- 
neſs and Simplicity has here been delivered: 
And if they have any regard for themſelves as 


: Men, or their Reputation as Chr tions; It 


they would not be a publick Scandal to their 
Proſeſſion, or a Grief to all that know or con- 
verſe with them; In ſhort, if they would not 


758 be Devils: Lame here, and aas Gop 


to. puniſh them eternally hereafter, I fay 
unto them in them in the Name of N 


e N eilen Song: not at nth LI EY 


4 how's; FE] 7 56 7 YG" 07 


PINTS. . 


ig D U TY 


of 


Fanity RELiGLON: | * 


OR, | 


TOS H U4's Reſolution worthy. 
the Imitation of ever y Maſter of 


AFAMILY. 


jr II —_— I. * " 


Job. i ante awe. ln io Days. of chow 
were gone about, that Job ſent and 


Feaſti 
a f them, and roſe up early in the Morning, 


1 DCC. XXXIX. 


1 
and offered Burnt- Offerings according to the Num. 
ber of them all ; for Job ſaid, It may be that yy ; 
Sons have ſi mned, and curſes Goa in their Hearts, 481 
Thus did Job continually.” N 4 * 

By GEORGE WHITE FIELD, A 

of Pembroke: OO. . by. 2 1 
FW 1 0 M D 0 x. 1 
Printed 8 C. DAVIS, at D lauer Bad. 4 
in Chancery-Lane. 1 
_—_ 
| 


