CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




^1 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105066 



THE 

PULPIT COMMENTARY, 

EDITED BY THE 

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ; 

AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY THE 



VEN. ARCHDEACON F. W. FARRAR, D.D., F.R.S.— RT. REV. H. COTTERILL, D.D., F.R.S E 

VERY REV. PRINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— REV. CANON G. RAWLINSON, M.A. 

REV. A. PLUMMER, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New Yoke and Toeonto. 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY 



EDITED BY THE 



VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 



DEAN OF GLOUCESTER : 



AND BY THE 



REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



ST. LUKE. 



By very rev. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER. 

ilgomiletics : 
By rev. J. MARSHALL LANG, D.D., 

THE BARONY PARISH, GLASGOW. 

i^omilies bg Various ^lutliers: 

REV. W. CLARKSON, B.A. REV. R. M. EDGAR. MA 

roz. 11. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
Nbw Yobk and Toronto. 



THE 



GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTBE Xm, 



Ven. 1 — 9. — Signs of the timet. The Lord 
eonttnue» Ms eolemn warnings. Israel pic- 
tured in the parable of the barren Jig tree. 

Ver. 1.— There were present at tlmt season, 
gome that told him of the Galileeans, whose 
blood Filate had mingled with their saori- 
fioes ; better rendered, now there were present 
at that particular time ; namely, when the 
Master was discoursing of the threatening 
signs of the times, and urging men to repent 
and to turn and make their peace with God 
while there was yet time, for a terrible 
crisis was impending on that doomed land. 
Some of those then present, probably Jeru- 
salem Jews, specially told off to watch the 
great Teacher, struck with his grave fore- 
boding tone, when he spoke of the present 
aspect of affairs, quoted to him a recent 
bloody fray which had taken place in the 
temple courts. " Yes, Master," these seemed 
to say, " we see there is a fierce hatred which 
is ever growing more intense between Jew 
and Boman. You know, for instance, what 
has just taken place in the city, only the 
victims in this case were Galilseans, not 
scrupulous, righteous Jews. Is it not pos- 
sible that these bloody deeds are simply 
punishments of men who are great sinners, 
as these doubtless were?" Such-like incidents 
were often now occurring under the Boman 
rule. This, likely enough, had taken place 
at some crowded Passover gathering, when 
a detachment of soldiers came down from 
the Castle of Antonia and had dealt a red- 
handed "justice" among the turbulent 
mob. Josephus relates several of the more 
formidable of 'such collisions between the 
Bomans and the Jews. At one Passover 
he relates how three thousand Jews were 
butchered, and the temple courts were filled 
with dead corpses ; at another of these feasts 
LUKE. — u. 



two thousand perished in like manner (see 
I Ant.,' xvu. 9. 3 ; XX. 5. 3 ; and ' Bell. Jnd.,' 
ii. 5 ; v. 1). On another occasion disguised 
legionaries were sent by Pilate the governor 
with daggers among the Passover crowds 
(see 'Ant.,' xviii. 31). These wild and 
terrible collisions were of frequent occurrence 
in these sad days. 

Vers. 2, 3. — And Jesus answering said 
nnto them, Suppose ye that these GaUleeans 
were sinners above all the Oalilaeans, becaose 
they suffered such things 1 I tell yon, Kay : 
but, except ye repent, ye shall aU likewise 
perish. " Yes," answered the Master, " these, 
you are right, are among the dread signs of 
the times I spoke of; but do not dream that 
the doom fell on those poor victims because 
they were special sinners. What happened 
to them will soon be the doom of the whole 
nation, unless a great <^hange in the life of 
Israel takes place." 

Ver. 4. — Or those eighteen, upon whom 
the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, 
think ye that they were sinners above all 
men that dwelt in Jerusalem! "You re- 
member," goes on the Master, "the catas- 
trophe of the fall of the tower in Siloam ; 
the poor sufferers who were crushed there 
were not specially wicked men." The Lord 
used these occasions, we see, for something 
more than the great national lesson. Men 
are too ready, now as then, to give way to 
the unloving error of looking at individual 
misfortune as the consequence of individual 
crime. Such human uncharitable judg- 
ments the Lord bitterly condemns. Ewald's 
conjecture in connection with this Siloam 
accident is ingenious, He supposes that 
the rigiil Jews looked on the catastrophe 
as a retribution because the workmen who 
perished were paid by Pilate out of the 
sacred oorban money (see Josephns, 'BelL 
Jud.,' ii. 9. 4). The works were no doubt 



THE GOSPEL AOCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xm. 1—35. 



in connection with the aqueduct to the 
Pool of Siloam. 

Ver. 5. — Except ye repent, ye shall all 
likewise perish. The words were indeed 
prophetic to the letter. Thousands of Jews 
perished in the last terrible war by the 
swords of the Koman legionaries, like the 
Galilaeans of ver. 1; not a few met their 
death in the capital among the ruins of the 
burning fallen houses. We know that Jeru- 
salem in its entirety was destroyed, and the 
loss of life in the siege, and especially in its 
dread closing scenes, was simply incalculable. 
Within forty years all this happened. 

Ver. 6. — He spake also this parable; A 
certain man had a fig tree planted in his 
vineyard. And then, without any further 
prelude, Jesus spoke this parable of the 
barren fig tree, which contained, in lan- 
guage scarcely veiled at all, warnings to 
Israel as a nation — the most sombre and 
threatening he had yet given utterance to. 
" Hear, O people," said the Master. " In the 
vineyard of the Lord of hosts is a fig tree, 
long planted there, but utterly unfruitful. 
It ia now on its last trial ; indeed, were it not 
for the intercession of the Gardener, the 
Lord of the vineyard had already pro- 
nounced its final doom." " The very inter- 
cession, though, is ominous ; the Vinedresser 
shows his mercifulness by deprecating im- 
mediate cutting down, but the careful speci- 
fication of conditions, and the limitation of 
the period within which experiments are to 
be made, intimate that peril is imminent. . . . 
The restriction of the intercession of the 
Vinedresser for a single year's grace indi- 
cates Christ's own sympathy with this 
Divine rigour. . . . The Vinedresser knows 
that, though God is long-suffering, yet his 
patience as exhibited in the history of his 
dealings with men is exhaustible, and that in 
Israel's case it is now all but worn out. And 
he sympathizes with the Divine impatience 
with chronic and incurable sterility " (Pro- 
fessor Bruce). A fig tree planted in his vino- 
yard ; and he came and sought fruit thereon, 
and found none. It is not an uncommon prac- 
tice to plant fig trees at the corners of vine- 
yards, thus utilizing every available spot of 
ground. Still the Lord's choice of a fig tree 
as the symbol of Israel, the chosen people, 
is at first sight strange. This image was no 
doubt selected to show those Pharisees and 
other Jews, proud of wliat they considered 
their unassailable position as the elect of 
the Eternal, that, after all, the position 
they occupied was but that of a fig tree in 
the corner of the vineyard of the world — 
planted there and watched over so long as 
it promised to serve the Lord of the vine- 
yard's purpose ; if it ceased to do that, if it 
gave no further promise of fruit, then it 
wonld be ruthlessly cut down. 



Ver. 7.— Behold, these three years I como 
seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none. 
Some expositors see in this period of three 
years an allusion to the storied past of 
Hebrew life, and in the number 3 discern 
the three marked epochs, each lasting 
several centuries, of the high priests, judges, 
and kings. This, however, is a very doubtful 
reference, owing to the impossibility of 
separating the first two periods of the rule 
of high priests and judges, as these inter- 
change and overlap each other. Another 
school of interpreters sees a reference to the 
three years of the public ministry of Jesus 
A better reference would be God's successive 
calls to Israel by tlie Law, the prophets, and 
by Christ. It is, however, safer, in this and 
in many of the Lord's parables, not to press 
every little detail which was necessary for 
the completion of the picture. Here the 
period of three years in which the Lord ot 
the vineyard came seeking fruit, represents 
by the number 3 the symbol of complete- 
ness — a period of full opportunity given to 
the tree to have become fruitful and pro- 
ductive. Cut it down; why cumhereth it 
the ground t better rendered, why doth it 
make the ground uteZessf It is an unpro- 
ductive tree, and occupies the place which 
another and a fertile tree might filL 

Ver. 8. — And he answering said onto him. 
Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall 
dig about it, and dung it. The last year — 
the year of grace they who listened to him 
then were living in. It was the last sum- 
mons to repentance, the final reminder to 
the old covenant people that to their high 
privileges as the chosen race there were 
duties attached. They prided themselves 
on the privileges, they utterly forgot the 
duties. The period represented by this last 
year included the preaching of John the 
Baptist, the public ministry of Jesus Christ, 
and the forty years of apostolic teaching 
which followed the Crucifixion and Eesur- 
rection. The last chance was given, but In 
the Vinedresser's prayer to the Lord of the 
vineyard there is scarcely a ray of hope. 
The history of the world supplies the sequel 
to this parable-stoiT. 

Vers. 10—17. — A miracle of mercy. The 
Lord's teaching on eertain strict observances 
of the sabbath day then practised by the more 
rigid Jews. 

Ver. 10. — And he was teaching in one of 
the synagogues on the sabbath. We hear 
little of our Lord's public teaching in the 
synagogues of the towns and villages through 
which he was then passing in this his last 
long journey. In the earlier months of the' 
ministry of Jesus he seems to have taught 
frequently in these houses of prayer, very 
possibly every sabbath day. It has been 
suggested, with considerable probability, 



OH. xm. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE, 



that owing to the persistent enmity of the 
hierarchy and dominant class at Jerusalem, 
he was excluded from some at least of the 
Bynagogues hy what was termed the " lesser 
excommunication." 

Ver. 11. — And, behold, there was a woman 
which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen 
years, and was bowed together, and could in 
no wise lift up herself. The description of 
the sufferer, so accurate in its details, marks 
the medical training of the compiler here. 
The malady was evidently a curvature of 
the spine of a very grave character. Her 
presence in the synagogue that day gives us 
a hint, at least, that this poor afflicted one 
loved communion with her God. Doubtless 
the faith and trust on her side necessary 
to the cure were there. Her first act, after 
she was sensible of the blessed change 
wrought in her poor diseased frame, was an 
outpouring of devout thanks to God. 

Ver. 14 And the ruler of the synagogue 

answered with indignation, because that 
Jesus had healed on the sabbath day. The 
people, as usual, were stirred to enthusiasm 
by this glorious act of power and mercy. 
Afraid, before the congregation of the syna- 
gogue, to attack the Master personally, the 
"ruler," no doubt influenced by members 
of the Pharisee party who were present, at- 
tempted to represent the great Physician as 
a deliberate soorner of the sacred Law. The 
sabbath regulations at this time were ex- 
cessively burdensome and childishly rigorous. 
The Law, as expounded in the schools of 
the rabbis, allowed physicians to act in 
eases of emergency, but not in chronic 
diseases such as this. How deep an interest 
must such a memory of the Master's as 
this sabbath day's healing have had for 
that beloved physician who has given his 
name to these memoirs we call the Third 
Gospel I Often in later years, in Syrian 
Antioch, in the great cities of Italy and 
Greece, would he, as he plied his blessed 
oraft among the sick on the sabbath day, be 
attacked by rigid Jews as one who profaned 
the day. To such would he relate this inci- 
dent, and draw his lessons of mercy and 
of love. 

Ver. 15. — The Lord then answered him, 
and said. Thou hypocrite, doth not each one 
of you on the sabbath loose his ox or hia 
ass from the stall, and lead him away to 
watering? Tbe older authorities here read 
"hypocrites," and thus join the cavilling 
Bjmagogue ruler with the whole sect of men 
who taught an elaborate ritual in place of 
a high, pure life. The Lord, in a few 
master-touches, exposes the hoUowness of 
such sabbath-keeping. Every possible in- 
dulgence was to be shown in cases where 
their own interests were involved ; no mercy 
or indulgence was to be thought of, though. 



where the sick poor only were concerned. 
He vividly draws a contrast between the 
animal and the human being. The ox and 
the ass, though, were personal property ; the 
afflicted daughter of Abraham was but a 
woman, friendless nnd poor. 

Vers. 18 — 21. — The Lord, in two little pro- 
phetic parables tells the people how strangely 
and mightily his religion would spread over 
the earth. 

Ver. 18. — Then said he, TTnto what is the 
kingdom of God like 1 and whereunto shall 
I resemble it? In the seventeenth verse 
— after the Lord's words spoken to his ene- 
mies, who took exception at his miracle 
of healing worked for the poor woman who 
had been bent for eighteen years, because 
he had done it on the sabbath day — ^we read 
how " all his adversaries were ashamed ; and 
all the people rejoiced for all the glorious 
things that were done by him." This dis- 
comfiture of the hypocrites, and the honest 
joy of the simple folk over a noble and 
Divine deed of mercy, accompanied by brave, 
kind words, seem to have suggested to the 
Master the subject of the two little parables 
of the mustard seed and the leaven, in which 
parables the growth of his glorious kingdom 
was foreshadowed from very small begin- 
nings. The very small beginning he could 
discern in what then surrounded him. 

Ver. 19. — ^It is like a grain of mustard 
seed, which a man took, and cast into his 
garden; and it grew, and waxed a great 
tree ; and the fowls of the air lodged in the 
branches of it. The simile was a well- 
known one in the Jewish world. " As small 
as a grain of mustard seed " was a proverb 
current among the people in those days. 
In Eastern countries this little seed often 
becomes a tree, and stories are even told 
of mustard trees so tall that a man could 
climb up into their branches or ride beneath 
them on horseback. Such instances are 
possibly very rare, but it is a common sight 
to see a mustard plant, raised from one of 
these minute grains, grown to the height 
of a fruit tree, putting forth branches on 
which birds build their nests. It was with 
soiTowful irony that the great Teacher 
compared the kingdom of God in those dsya 
to this small grain. The kingdom of God 
on earth then was composed of Jesus and 
his few wavering followers. To the eye of 
sense it seemed impossible that this little 
movement could ever stir the world, could 
ever become a society of mighty dimensions. 
"See," said the Master, taking up a little 
mustard seed ; " does this seem as though 
it would ever become a tree with spreading 
branches on which the birds might rest? 
The kingdom of God is like this seed." 

Ver. 21. — It is like leaven, which a woman 
took and hid in three measures of meal, till 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xm. 1—35. 



the whole was leavened. The^^rs* of theBS 
two little parables of the kingdom, "the 
mustard seed," portrayed its strangely rapid 
growth. The teoond, " the leaven," treats 
of the mighty Inward transformation which, 
the kingdom of Qod will effect in the hearts 
of men and women. Chemically speaking, 
leaven is a lump of sour dough in which 
putrefaction has begun, and, on being intro- 
duced into a far greater mass of fresh dough, 
produces by contagion a similar condition 
into the greater bulk with which It comes 
in contact. The result of the contact, how- 
ever, is that the mass of dough, acted upon 
by the little liuup of leaven, becomes a 
wholesome, agreeable food for men. It was 
a singularly striking and powerful simile, 
this little commonplace comparison, and 
exactly imaged the future progress of " the 
kingdom." Quietly, silently, the doctrine 
of the Master made its way into the hearts 
and homes of men. "He shall not strive, 
nor cry; neither shall any man hear his 
voice in the streets " (Matt. xU. 19). None 
on earth would have dared hint at the 
future Buoeess of the doctrine of the Master 
during the Master's life, and his death 
seemed as though it would effectually crush 
out the last feeble spark of life. The ap- 
parent result of his work was the devotion 
of a few simple hearts, mostly of fishermen, 
artisans, and the like, and yet, though men 
suspected it not, the secret and powerful 
influence was already at work ai>iong men. 
The story of the years succeeding the cross 
and the Resun-ection, on a broader stage and 
with more actors, was a story of similar 
silent, quiet working. In a century and 
a half after the strange leaven-parable had 
been spoken, the whole civilized world knew 
something of the Master's history and 
doctrine. His disciples then were counted 
by tens of thousands. No city, scarcely a 
village, but contained some into whose 
hearts the teaching hud sunk, whose lives 
the teaching had changed. In three 
measures vf meal. Perhaps referring here 
to the well-known division of man into 
body, soul, and spirit. More likely, how- 
ever, the number 3 is used as the sym- 
bol of completeness, signifying that the 
Divine purpose was then influencing the 
whole mass of mankind. Till the whole was 
leavened. It would seem as though the 
Master looked on to a definite time when 
all nations sliould come and worship him, 
and acknowledge his glorious sovereignty. 
If this be the case, then » very long period 
still remains to be lived through by the world; 
many kingdoms must rise and fall, new 
civilizations spring up, before that day of 
joy and gladness dawns upon the globe — 
that is, reasoning on the analogy of the past. 
Be this, however, as it may, the drift of both 



these parables of the kingdom distinctly 
points to a slow yet a progressive develop- 
ment of true religion. Very different, indeed, 
was the Jewish conception of Messiah's 
kingdom. They expected a rapid and 
brilliant metamorphosis of the then un- 
happy state of things. They never dreamed 
of the slow and quiet movement Messiah's 
coming was to inaugurate. One thing is 
perfectly clear — ^the Speaker of these two 
parable-stories never contemplated a speedy 
return to earth. With strange exactnesi 
the last eighteen hundred and fifty years 
have been fulfilling the conditions of the 
two similes, and as yet, as far as man can 
see, they are not nearly complete. 

Ver. 22. — And he went through the cities 
and villages, teaching, and journeying 
toward Jerusalem. This note of the evan- 
gelist simply calls attention that the last 
solemn progress in the direction of the 
capital was still going on. The question 
has been discussed at length above. St. 
Luke, by these little notes of time and place, 
wishes to direct attention to the fact that 
all this part of the Gospel relates to one 
great division of the public ministry — to 
that which immediately preceded the last 
Passover. 

Vers. 23 — 30. — Jesux replies to the qaestion 
of " Are there few that he saved ? " 

Ver. 23. — Then said one onto him. Lord, 
are there few that be saved 1 The imme- 
diate circumstance which called out this 
question is not recorded, but the general 
tone of the Master's later teaching, especially 
on the subject of his kingdom of the future, 
had disturbed the vision of many in Israel, 
who loved to dwell on the exclusion of all 
save the chosen race from the glories of the 
world to come. The words of the Second 
Book of Esdras, written perhaps forty or 
fifty years after this timo, well reflect this 
selfish spirit of harsh exclusiveness, pecu- 
liarly a characteristic of the Jew in the 
days of our Lord. " The Most Hiech hath 
made this world for many, but the world 
to come for few " (2 Esdr. viii. 1). ' There 
be many more of them which perish, than 
of them which shall be saved: like as a 
wave is greater than a drop " (2 Esdr. ix. 
15, 1 6). Other passages breathing a similar 
spirit might be quoted. What relics we 
possess of Jewish literature of this period 
all reflect the same stern, jealous, exclusive 
spirit. The questioner here either hoped to 
get fromthe popular Master some statement 
which might be construed into an approval 
of this national spirit of hatred of everythiu" 
that was not Jewish, or, if Jesus chose to 
combat these selfish hopes, the Master's 
words might then be quoted to the people 
aa unpatriotic. 

Ver. 21. — Strive to enter in at the strait 



OH. xnu 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



^ate : for many, I Bay unto yon, will seek 
to enter in, and shall not be able. The 
Master, as was frequently his oust(im, gave 
no direct answer to his questiouer, but his 
teaching which immediately follows con- 
tained the answer to the query. The older 
authorities, in place of " at the strait gate," 
read "through the narrow door." The 
meaning of the image, however, is the same, 
whichever reading be adopted. The image 
was not a new one. It had been used before 
by the Lord, perhaps more than once (see 
Matt. vii. 13, 14), and not improbably had 
been sufrgested by some town or fortress 
hard by the spot where he was teaching — 
a fort on a hill with a narrow road winding 
up to a narrow door. In the rabbinical 
schools he frequented in his youth, he 
might, too, have heard some adaptation of 
*he beautiful allegory known as the ' Tablet' 
of Oebes, the disciple of Socrates : " Dost 
thou not perceive a narrow door, and a path- 
way before the door, in no way crowded, but 
few, very few, go in thereat?" The teaching 
of the Master here is, that the door of sal- 
vation is a narrow one, and, to pass through 
it, the man must strive in real earnest. 
" See," he seems to say ; " if only few are 
saved, it will not be because the Jews are 
few and tbe Gentile nations many, but 
because, of the Jews and Gentiles, only 
a few really strive. Something different 
from race or national privileges will be the 
test at that narrow door which leads to life, 
" Many will seek to enter in, and shall not 
be able." The reason for the exclusion of 
these many is to be sought iu themselves. 
Tliey wished to enter in, but confined them- 
selves to wishes. They made no strong, 
vigorous etibrts. Theirs was no life of stern 
self-surrender, of painful self-sacrifice. To 
wish to pass through that narrow door is 
not enough. 

Ver. 25. — When once the master of the 
house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, 
and ye begin to stand without, and to knock 
at the door, saying. Lord, lord, open unto 
us ; and he shaU answer and say unto yon, 
I know you not whence ye are. Xhe great 
Teacher here slightly changes the imagery. 
The narrow door no longer is the centre of 
the picture ; one, called the " master of the 
house," becomes the principal figure. The 
door now shut may still be, most probably 
is, the narrow fort or hill-city entrance, and 
the one called the master is the governor 
of the Place of Arms, into which the door 
or gate led. It is now too late even for the 
earnest striver to enter in. Sunset probably 
— the shades of night, had the Divine 
Painter furnished the imagery — would have 
been the signal for the final closing of the 
door of the fortress. Death is the period 
when the door of salvation is shut to the 



children of men. It has been asied — ^To 
what time does the Master refer in the 
words " when once " ? It cannot be the epoch 
of the ruin of Jerusalem and the breaking 
up of the Jewish nationality, for then there 
was nothing in the attitude of the doomed 
people to answer to the standing without, 
to the knocking at the door, and to the 
imploring cries, " Lord, Lord, open unto 
us," portrayed here. It cannot be the second 
coming of the Lord ; surely then his people 
will not call on him in vain. It refers, 
without doubt, to the day of judgment, when 
the dread award will be pronounceil upon 
the unbelieving, the selfish, and the evil- 
liver. 

Vers. 26, 27. — Then shall ye begin to say. 
We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, 
and thou hast taught in our streets. But he 
shall say, I tell you, I know yon not whence 
ye are ; depart from me, all ye workers of 
iniquity. A very stem declaration on the 
part of Jesus that in the day of judgment 
no special favour would be granted to the 
souls of the chosen people. It was part of 
the reply to the question respecting the 
"fewness of the saved." The inquirer 
wished to know the opinion of the great 
Teacher on the exclusive right of Israel to 
salvation in the world to come, and this 
statement, describing salvation as something 
independent of all questions as to race, was 
the Master's reply. 

Ver. 28. — There shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abra- 
ham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the 
prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you 
yourselves thrust out. No less than six 
times is this terrible formula, which ex- 
presses the intensest form of anguish, found 
in St. Matthew's Gospel. St. Luke only 
gives us the account of one occasion on 
which they were spoken. They indicate, 
as far as merely earthly words ami symbols 
can, the utter misery of those unhappy ones 
who find themselves shut out from the 
kingdom in the world to come. " Abraham, 
and Isaac, and Jacob." In his revision of 
St. Luke's Gospel, Marcion, the famous 
Gnostic heretic, in place of these nnmes, 
which he strikes out, iuserts " all the just." 
He did this with a view to lower the value 
of the Old Testament records. 

Ver. 29. — And they shall come from the 
east, and from the west, and from the north, 
and from the south, and shall sit down in 
the kingdom of God. Instead of " shall sit 
down," a clearer and more accurate render- 
ing would be, shall recline as at a banquet. 
This image of the heaven-life as a banquet, 
at which the great Hebrew patriarchs were 
present, was a well-known one in popular 
Hebrew teaching. There is an unmis- 
takable reference to Isa. xlv. 6 and zlix. 12 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xm. 1—35. 



in this announcement of comers to the great 
banquet of heaven from all tlie four quarters 
of the globe. This completes the answer 
to the question. It forbids any limitation 
to the numbers of the eived. It distinctly 
includes in those blessed ranks men from 
aU parts of the far isles of the Gentiles. 

Ver. 30. — And, behold, there are last 
which shall be first, and there are first which 
shall he last. This expression, which 
apparently was more than once used by the 
Lord, in this place clearly has an historical 
reference, and sadly predicts the rejection of 
Israel, not only in this present world. 

"There above (on earth) 
How many hold themselvee for mighty 



Who here like swine shall wallow in the 

mire, 
Leaving behind them horrible dispraise I " 
(Dante, 'Inferno.') 

Vers. SI — 35. — 2^e message of Jesus to 
Berod Antipas, and the lament over the loved 
eity of Jerusalem, the destined place of hit 
won death. 

Ver. 31. — Thfe same day there came 
certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him. 
Get thee out, and depart hence : for Herod 
will kill thee. Very many of the older 
authorities read here. Instead of " the same 
day," "in that very hour." This incident 
eonnected with Heiod Antipas, which is only 
related by St. Luke, not improbably was 
communicated to Luke and Paul by Manaen, 
who was intimately connected with that 
prince, and who was a prominent member of 
the primitive Church of Antioch in those 
days when Paul was beginning his work for 
the cause (see Acts xiii. 1). This curious 
message probably emanated from Herod 
and Herodias. The tetraroh was disturbed 
and uneasy at the Lord's continued pre- 
sence in his dominions, and the crowds who 
thronged to hear the great Teacher oc- 
casioned the jealous and timorous prince 
grave disquietude. Herod shrank from 
laying hands on him, though, for the memory 
of the murdered friend of Jesus was a 
terrible one, we know, to the superstitious 
tetrarch, anil he dreaded being forced into 
a repetition of, the judicial murder of John 
the Baptist. It is likely enough that the 
enemies of the Lord were now anxious for 
him to go to Jerusalem and its neighbour- 
hood, where he would be in the power of 
the Sadducean hierarchy, and away from the 
protection of tlie uialilsean multitudes, with 
whom his influence was still very great. 
The Pharisees, who as a party hated the 
Master, willingly entered into the dee gn, 
and under the mask of a pretended friend- 
ship warned him of Herod's intentions. 

Yei. 32. — And he said nnto them, Qo ye. 



and teU that foz; literally, (hat the-fox. 
The Lord saw through the shallow device, 
and, in reply to his false friends, bade them 
go to that intriguing and false court with a 
message which he would give them. The 
epithet "she-fox" is perhaps the bitterest 
and most contemptuous name ever given by 
the pitiful Master to any of the sons of men. 
It is possible it might have been intended 
for Herodias, the influence of that wicked 
princess being at that time all-powerful at 
court. Behold, I cast out devils, and I do 
cures to-day and to-morrow, and the third 
day I shall be perfected. "Tell Herod or 
Herodias that I have a work still to work 
here ; a few more evil spirits to cast out, a 
few more sick folk to heal. I am going on 
as I have begun; no message, friendly or 
unfriendly, will turn me from my purpose. 
I have no fears of his royal power, but I shall 
not trouble him long; just to-day and to- 
morrow — this was merely (as in Hos. vi. 2) a 
proverbial expression for a short time — and 
on the third day I complete my work." This 
completion some have understood by the 
crowning miracle on dead Lazarus at 
Bethany, but it ia far better to understand 
it as referring to the Passion, as including 
the last sufferings, the cross, and the re- 
surrection. The T6A6ioC/tat here was supple- 
mented by the utterance with which the 
blessed life came to its close on the cross — 
TereAeo-Toi I TeAeioMTij became a recognized 
term for martyrdom. 

Ver. 33. — Nevertheless I must walk to- 
day, and to-morrow, and the day following; 
for it cannot he that a prophet perish out of 
Jerusalem. He reflects, " Yes, I must go 
on with my journey for the little space ye* 
left to me; " and then turning to the falsa 
Pharisee friends, with the saddest irony bids 
them not be afraid. Priest and Sanhedrin, 
the unholy alliance against him of Sadducee 
and Pharisee, would not be balked of the 
Victim whose blood they were all thirsting 
after. Their loved city had ever had one 
melancholy prerogative. It had ever been 
the place of death for the prophets of the 
Lord. That sad privilege would not be 
taken from it in his case. 

Ver. 34:.— Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which 
killest the prophets, and stonest them that 
are sent unto thee! This exquisite and 
moving apostrophe was uttered in similar 
language in the Passion-week, just as Jesus 
was leaving the temple for the last time. 
It was spoken here with rare appropriate- 
ness in the first instance after tlie promise 
of sad irony tbat the holy city should not be 
deprived of the spectacle of the Teacher- 
Prophet's death. "O Jerusalem, JerusalemI" 
It was a fareweU to the holy city. It was 
the sorrowful summing-up of the tenderest 
love of centmies. Never had earthly city 



OH, xm. 1—36.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINS TO ST. LUKE. 



been loved like this. There the anointed of 
the Eternal were to fix their home. There 
the stately shrine for the service of the 
invisible King of Israel was to keep watch 
and ward over the favoured capital of the 
chosen race. There the visible presence of 
the Lord God Almighty, the Glory and the 
Pride of the people, was ever and anon to 
rest. And in this solemn last farewell, the 
Master looked back through the vista of the 
past ages of Jerusalem's history. It was a 
dark and gloomy contemplation. It had been 
all along the wicked chief city of a wicked 
people, of a people who had thrown away 
the fairest chances ever offered to men — the 
city of a people whose annals were memor- 
able for deeds of blood, for the most striking 
ingratitude, for incapacity, for folly shading 
into crime. Not once nor twice in that 
dark story of Israel chosen messengers of 
the invisible King had visited the city he 
loved so well. These were invested with 
the high credentials which belong to envoys 
&om the King of kings, with a voice sweeter 
and more persuasive, with a power grander 
and more far-reaching than were the common 
heritage of men; and these envoys, his 
prophets, they had maltreated, persecuted, 
murdered. How often would I have 
gathered thy children together, as a hen 
doth gather her brood under her wings! 
God's great love to Israel had been imaged 
in the far back days of the people, when 
Moses judged them, under a similar meta- 
phor. Thm it WAS the eagle fluttering over 



her young and bearing them on her wings ; 
now it is slightly altered to one if possible 
more tender and loving, certainly more 
homely. How often in bygone days would 
the almighty wings, indeed, had Israel only 
wished it, have been spread out over them 
a sure shelter I Now the time of grace was 
over, and the almighty wings were folded. 
And ye would not ! Sad privilege, specially 
mentioned here by the Divine Teacher, this 
freedom of man's will to resist the grace of 
God. "Ye woiild not," says the Master, 
thus joining the generation who heard his 
voice to the stiffnecked Israel of the days 
of the wicked kings. 

Ver. 35. — Behold, your honse is left unto 
you desolate. The older authorities omit 
"desolate." The sentence will then read, 
" your house is left unto you." Their house 
fix>m henceforth, not his. Te shall not see 
me, nntil the time come when ye shall say. 
Blessed is he that oometh in the Kame of 
the lord, "Ye shall not se« me." Van 
Oosterzee comments here: "Their senses 
are still blinded. The veil of the Talmud 
that hangs over their eyes is twice as heavy 
as the veil of Moses." The promise which 
concludes this saying of the Master can only 
refer to the far future, to the day of the 
penitence of Israel. It harmonizes with the 
voice of the older prophets, and tells us that 
the day will surely come when the people 
shall look on him whom they pierced, and 
shall mourn. But that mourning will be 
turned speedily into joy. 



HOMILETIOa. 

Vers. 1 — ^9. — The larrenfig tree. " At that season," or " at that particular time " — 
whilst the pleading, warning words which follow from the forty-ninth verse of the 
previous chapter are ringing in the ears of those around the Lord — some bystandera 
tell him of judgments which had actually been fulfilled, of Galilseans whose blood 
Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. We have no information as to the particular 
event referred to. Biots, small insurrections, revolts from Koman authority, were by 
no means micommon, and we know that Pilate was cruel in his repression of them. 
Probably these GalilsBans had been rioting, and the procurator had profaued the holy 
things of the sanctuary by casting their blood over the offering made by fire. And 
the thought simmering in the minds of the superstitious speakers was, " These wretched 
people had not given the diligence which had been spoken of. They died unreconciled 
and impenitent. They were great offenders, therefore they endured great punish- 
ment." It was a prevalent belief among the Jews that signal calamity to individuals 
was the token of signal Divine displeasure. This was the inference of Job's companiuna 
when they saw him in the day of his sore grief. This was the inference of the men near 
Christ as to the victims of the dark catastrophe. And he who knows what is in man 
at once finds the place of their thought, rebukes their hasty reasoning, and summons 
them, instead of reflecting on others, to try their own ways and remember, " Except 
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." The parable which follows enforces this appeal 
to the conscience. It is a short but wonderfully expressive parable. " Everything ii 
involved in it," says Stier, " which a mission of repentance to a people demands." 

L Observe, the truth on which Jesus insists is tee need of febsohaii bbpbntanob 



8 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xm. 1—36. 

ON THE PABT OF AiiL. In contrast with hU audience, this was the application of the 
calamities related which he made. These were to him the prophecy of the doom 
awaiting every one who continued in his sins. Archbishop Trench emphasizes the 
" likewise." " Te shall all likewise perish, i.e. in a manner similar to that in which 
both the Gralilaeans and the eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell perished. So, 
in the destruction of Jerusalem years afterwards, multitudes of the inhabitants were 
crushed beneath the ruins of their temple and their city, and, during the last siege and 
assault, numbers were pierced through by the Roman darts, or, more miserably yet, 
by those of their own frantic factions in the courts of the temple, in the very act of 
preparing their sacrifices. So that, literally, their blood, like that of the Galilaeans, was 
11 ingled with their sacrifices, one blood with another." All befEillings of judgment 
wliich men witness should be, not occasions of criticism or of harsh stricture on others, 
but voices bidding to humility and self-examination. The sin which I can trace in 
my neighbour should chiefly remind me of the sin which has dominion over myself. 
If I have been kept from his transgression, let me thank the grace which has kept me, 
recall how great perhaps was the difference between his circumstances and mine, and 
ask whether, in some other form, I may not have been a transgressor as great as he. 
Reflections such as these will save from all Pharisaic exaltation, will send us to out 
knees for the erring brother, ay, and send us to our knees for ourselves — ^the word of 
the Lord sounding within, " Tbinkest thou that he is a sinner above thee, because he 
suffers such things? I tell thee, Kay : except thou repent, thou shalt likewise perish." 
IL Now see in the parable both the goodness and the bbveritt which lead 
TO BEPENTANOK. The details — who owns the vineyard? what the vineyard repre- 
sents? who ia the Dresser or the Gardener? for what the three years and the one 
year of grace stand ? — need not here be discussed. The parable is a picture of Almighty 
God in his dealings with his Church, Jewish or Gentile, in the desire of his love, in 
the responsiveness of his heart to the intercession of tiie Mediator whom he has 
appointed, in the deferring of his judgment so that a fuller opportimity may be given 
to men to confess his presence and seek him with their whole heart, and flee from the 
wrath to come. Notice three of the salient features. 1. The fruit which is sought — 
sought year by year with increasing disappointment ; fruit, the legitimate product of 
the tree, growing out of its life, marking its use and value. We hear the astonished 
" What more could I do to my vineyard that I have not done? " And nothing — " nothing 
but leaves." Herein we recognize the longing of the love of God. He gives to men 
that men may give of his, one to another. As his own goodness is " a flowing life- 
fountain," BO is the goodness which is the expression of the new heart and the right 
spirit. Tho fruitless tree keeps a certain energy to itself. There is a power in it which 
remains undeveloped. It draws the moisture away from the surrounding soil, it 
receives the rain and sunshine of heaven ; it is all an tn-come, there is no outcome. 
Is it not the type of the kind of person who is a stranger and foreigner to the life of 
the Eternal — a person who is fed, but does not feed ; who claims to be ministered to, but 
does not seek the bliss of ministering ; whose character has no distinct influence for good ; 
who is not what, in his place and according to his opportunity, the Lord of the vineyard 
expects him to be? God comes to men for his harvest. Is he receiving it from us? 
" Herein," says Christ, " is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit." Remember, 
"miKh fruit" — the well-matured, well-ripened godliness of the one in whose heart are 
God's ways. Resemblances cannot impose on him whose eyes are as a flame of fire. 
Why did he curse the tree which he beheld on his way to Bethany? Not because it 
was barren, but because it was false. In the fig tree the fruit should appear before the 
leaves. He saw leaves where there had been no fruit. Profession is nothin". A 
routine of religious offices is nothing. Appearance before God is nothing. Ail this 
may be only an extra assumed for an occasion, and then taken ofi'. The tree which 
produces is the tree that is sound at the core. The conscience right produces the Ufa 
' right. Repentance, the way of making the tree good ; holiness, the life of repentance 
— for this God comes to each of us, seeking, expecting. 2. What as to the intercession 1 
There appears on the scene the one who has been charged with the care of the vineyard. 
The first reference, no doubt, is to the Lord Jesus Christ himself, into whose hand the 
Father has given all things, and in whom is substantiated the craving of the old patri- 
arch for the Interpreter — " the one among a thousand to whom the Eternal is gracious. 



OH. xin. 1— 35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. fi 

and saith, Deliver from going down into the pit : I have found a ransom." It is he 
who ever liveth, the God-Man, to make intercession. " Yet not," as has been remarked, 
" as though the Father and the Son had different minds concerning sinners, not as 
though the counsels of the Father were wrath, aad of the Son mercy : for righteousness 
and love are not qualities in him who is Righteousness and who is Love ; they cannot, 
therefore, be set the one against the other, since they are his essential Being." Yes, 
"if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous." 
But there is a secondary reference not to be overlooked. Before Jesus left the world 
to go to the Father, he promised to send the Holy Ghost as another Advocate ; not 
another in the sense that he would be a different Person, but in the sense that he would 
be his other self — a Divine presence inhabiting the Church which is his body, and 
revealing and glorifying him. All faithful souls, anointed with the sevenfold gifts of 
this Paraclete, are joined with him in intercession for the unfaithful and unfruitful. 
The prayer of the Church is the voice of the Holy Ghost — Christ's voice echoing from 
human hearts. And the whole Bible is charged with the thought that, for the sake of 
the elect, because of their life and work and cry to heaven, judgments impending 
over the earth are stayed. Intercession is not a merely beautiful and becoming 
function; it is the power which binds "the whole round earth by golden chains about 
the feet oi God." "Cut it down; why mischieveth it the ground? - . . Lord, let it 
alone this year also." 3. Finally, GocPs times and spaces — what are they 1 " These 
three years I come." The three years h»ve been supposed to signify the epoch of the 
natural law, the epoch of the written Law, and, finally, the epoch of grace ; Moses, the 
prophets, the acceptable year of the Lord's coming ; the three years of Christ's ministry ; 
childhood, manhood, old age. Whatever may be the value we attach to these expla- 
nations, the fact denoted is the long-sufifering of God. Notice the two aspects of the 
waiting : to judge, but be gracious, and to judge and condemn. The latter is the 
" strange work." In grace, God comes silently ; for condemnation, he comes, first crying 
aloud by his threatenings, " I am coming quickly," that the opportunity for the Inter- 
cessor may be given. First, the axe is laid at the root of tlje tree ; there it lies, ready, 
yet the blow is deferred. " Cut it down ; " yet a little longer — " this year also." 

Vers. 22 — 30. — ITie question a/ad the answer. "He went through the cities and 
villages." The circuits into which the ministry of Jesus was divided are most interest- 
ing. "He went about doing good." One feature is suggested by the evangelist's 
sentence. The village is not overlooked. If the desire had been merely to gain 
influence, he would have limited the teaching to the city. " Win the great centres of 
the populations; thus you will establish your reputation; thence the light will radiate 
to the obscurer places ; " — this would have described the method of the action. Christ 
had another method. The small hamlet, no less than the crowded town, was the scene 
of his labour. It was the passion for souls which inspired him. The human soul, 
under all outward conditions, was one and the same to him. " The Son of man came 
to seek and to save that which was lost." Note the direction of the face. He is 
"journeying towards Jerusalem." The shadows of Gethsemane and Golgotha are 
lengthening. Ever before him, and now pressing on his heart, is the thought of the 
decease that he should accomplish. It is the occasion at once of the Saviour's sorrow 
and the Saviour's joy. The teaching would have been little without the forecast of the 
sacrifice; apart from the sacrifice, it loses its power. Jerusalem and its cross is the 
reference ever present to the Christian minister, whether in city or in village. In one 
of the places visited, the Lord is accosted by a person of whom the only notice is, 
" Then said one unto him." But the incident is instructive. It reminds us of (1) a 
kind of question that is to le discountenanced; and (2) a hind of practical exhortation 
that is to he enforced. 

I. A KIND or QUESTION THAT IS TO BE DISCOUNTENANCED. There IS no rcasou to 
doubt the good faith of the interrogator. He is reverent in his inquiry, "Lord." 
There is nothing captious in his tone. He is the type of many earnest minds, puzzled 
over the problems of human life and destiny — minds that feel the pressure of the things 
which circumscribe the opportunity of multitudes, the bars which seem to interpose 
between men's souls and salvation, the limitations arising from imperfect knowledge 
and untoward condition ; and, looking far and near over the ever-pouring throng, ask. 



10 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xm. 1—35. 

" Lord, what will this man and that man do ? What is the extent to which the purpose 
to gave wiU be realized ? " He answers by not answering. The absence of a direct reply 
is itself a reply. It intimates that speculations and inquiries in the line of the word 
addressed to him are not to be encouraged. There was the wisdom which he empha- 
sizes in the response once given by a child of quietness to the question, " What are the 
decrees of God? " " He knows that best himself," was the response. There are secrets 
which belong to the Lord our Grod, and these we must be content to leave with him. 
The things revealed belong to us; and these are expressed in the assurances that God 
loved the world, that whosoever believeth in the only begotten Son shall not perish, 
that him who comes to Christ he will in no wise cast out. They forget Christ's 
silence on the occasion before us who dogmatize either Calvinistically or Arminianisti- 
cally. What can poor human nature do, in view of all that relates to the ultimate 
state of men, but simply trust him who is absolute Righteousness and Infinite^ Love ? 
We may " faintly trust" larger hopes; we can, not faintly, but fully, trust him who 
will do what ia best for all, who " hateth nothing that he hath made." 

*■ Wait till he shall himself disclose 
Things now beyond thy reach, 
And be not thou meanwhile of those 
Who the Lord's secrets teach. 

•• Who teach thee more than he has tanghl« 
Tell more than he revealed. 
Preach tidings which he never brought. 
And read what he left sealed." 

n. A KIND OF PEAOTICAL BXHOETATION THAT IS TO BE EKFOBOED. Withdrawing 

the mind of the inquirer from vague speculations, the matter which the Lord places 
next before him is this, " Agonize to enter in at the strait gate." How urgent, how 
solemn is the entreaty 1 The strait gate ! Is it not a wide and ever-open one ? Yes, 
in one sense it is. None who come with a true heart, in fuU assurance of faith, will 
be, can be, excluded. There is room for the east, and for the west, and for the north, 
and for the south ; all nations, kindreds, peoples, and tongues. Christ's aim is, a 
universal religion. He throws his arms wide to all who labour and are heavy laden. 
But, in another sense, it is a strait gate. It is too narrow to admit any one in his sins. 
It is too narrow to admit the Pharisee in his Pharisaism, or the Sadducee in his 
Sadduceeism, or the Herodian in his Herodianism ; too narrow to admit any one in 
his "-ism," in his self-righteousness, in anything on which he rests with satisfaction as 
a ground of distinction or superiority. All who enter, enter as sinners looking for the 
mercy of God, and desiring to be cleansed from all unrighteousness. 

" Nothing in my hand I bring. 
Simply to thy cross I cling." 

The entrance into the strait gate is the first of all interests, is the most pressing of all 
concerns. Instead of scattering energy over secondary issues, energy is to be concen- 
trated on this. Put your whole strength into the accomplishment of the one end. 
Christ insists, " Strive [or, ' agonize '] to enter." " Faith is a very simple thing." Yet 
there is a discipline which is not a very simple thing. Evangelical, especially the 
phase which is called evangelistic, preaching too often overlooks the discipline. It is 
frequently an exclusive repetition »of the cry, "Believe, and you receive; believe, and 
you shall live." It forgets that the beginning of the gospel of Christ was " Repent 1 " 
It has not a distinct enough place for repentance. It is so occupied with the endeavour 
to make the way easy, that it fails to urge, with the intensity of Jesus' preaching, the 
necessity of a thorough self-repression, of a real taking of the cross, of the fighting of 
the good fight of faith. Let none overlook the agonistic side of the Christian life. Let 
the preacher echo and illustrate the sharp, stern, " Agonize to enter in " — not, indeed, 
a joyless and weary, but always, to flesh and blood, a real agony. There are three 
enforcements of the exhortation. 1. Many are unable to enter : unable when the desire 
becomes active. The door was open when the desire was torpid, when the heart was 
listless. They might have heard the beseechings of grace, but there was only a feeble 



OH. xm. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. U 



reuponse. Perhaps they intended, at some time, to enter; like Augustine, who 
prayed for his conversion, and added, " But not yet." Anyhow, the hour is coming 
when the impotence of unfulfilled intentions will be made manifest. Jesus' language 
passes (ver. 25) into the familiar form of parable. He imagines the Master of the 
house allowing the door to stand open — the invitation to all free and full. But at 
length he rises and shuts the door, and then those who had thought that any time 
would do, that there was no call to make haste, rush forward, clamouring for the 
entrance of which they had thought little — their damour to be met only with the 
retort, " I know you not whence ye are." " My sheep hear my voice, and I know 
them." These had not heard his voice. It is not the attraction of his voice to which 
they confess ; it is only the sense of their danger. And the word goes forth for judgment : 
" 1 know you not ; you are not mine." The parable is not to be unduly strained; but 
the point which it tends to illustrate is the necessity of instant, as well as earnest, 
agonizing. There is a "too late, too latel" From its unutterable darkness may the 
good Lord deliver us ! 2. Enjoyment of privilege will not avail as a plea. (Vers. 26, 
27.) To have had the teaching of the Lord in street and house, to have lived in the 
marvellous light of his gospel, to have realized his fellowship and the influences of his 
grace, — this is much. But the vital matter is, what is the use which has been made 
of privilege, of opportunity, of instruction, of means of grace ? That the Lord displayed 
his tokens in our midst may only add to our condemnation. Negligence, hardness of 
heart, the contempt of his Word and commandments, which is evidenced in the refusal 
to yield ourselves wholly to him who speaks from heaven, is iniquity ; and most solemn 
is the protestation, " Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity." 3. Orace unavailed 
of is blessing lost. (Vers. 28 — 30.) The Jew assured himself that in the kingdom of 
God, when declared, he would share the everlasting banquet with Abraham and Isaac and 
Jacob, and that part of the zest of this feast would be the consciousness that the hated 
Gentiles were excluded. The Lord warns his audience that the picture might be, would 
be, reversed. The grace which they would not use would be transferred to others, 
coming from the east, and the west, and the north, and the south. And he concludes 
with the sentence, which at other times also he utters, " There are last which shall 
be first, and there are first which shall be last." Verily it may here ba added, " Ue 
that hath an ear, let him hear." 

Vers. 31 — 35. — The composure and t?ie emotion of Jesus. L Thb compostjbe in thb 
FACE OP A MESSAGE WHICH MIGHT HAVE AGITATED. The message may have been 
a concoction of the Pharisees, who, wishing to have him removed from the district, used 
the name of Herod to alarm him ; or it may have been inspired by Herod himself, who, 
although desiring to see Jesus, was jealous of his popularity, and was fearful lest in 
some way an uproar might be excited among the people. The latter seems the more 
likely supposition. The circumstance that Jesus sends his reply to the king, and that 
in so doing he singles him out as crafty and subtle, trying to do by intrigue what he 
could not do openly — " that fox " — gives weight to the view that, in saying what is 
recorded, certain of the Pharisees obeyed the command of the human tyrant. Be that 
as it may, the message was calculated to disturb the mind with secret terrors. Per, of 
all the persons who pass before us in the life of our Lord, none was more capable of 
doing " the hellish thing " by mean ways than this petty ruler of Persea. His character 
has been thus described : " He was false to his religion, false to his nation, false to his 
friends, false to his brethren, false to his wife — the meanest thing the world had ever 
seen." What could not such a man do ? Would it not be well at once to take the 
hint, "Get thee out and depart thence"? But how perfectly calm is Jesus! No 
word like that could throw his soul off from its centre. The only phrase expressive 
of sheer scorn and contempt which ever fell from his lips belongs to this occasion 
(ver. 32). "Go tell that fox" — that human embodiment of deceit and cunning — 
" I shall take my time ; he cannot frighten me ; he cannot; hasten me. My work in 
his country will be done. I must work to-day, and tj-morrow, and the day following ; 
for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem." Notice some characteristic 
points in this reply. 1. 2'he three days. Is it a definite space of time that is marked 
out? If so, does it point to the remaining portion of the Galilsean ministry ? or to the 
time which would elapse before his departure from Herod's territory ? I incline to the 



12 THE (JOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xm. 1—36 

latter view. But it may be better to accept the saying as an intimation that, delibe- 
rately and without burry, he would accomplish his task — " not to-day nor to-morrow, 
but on a third day he would be perfected, or finished." 2. The clause, " it cannot be 
that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem." Ah I there is a sad irony in it. " Herod kill 
me here ? No ; I must reach the holy city. That is the slaughter-house of tha 
prophets. It would never do that I, the Prophet of Galilee, should perish elsewhere." 
Sublime, serene, we have the sentences, " Behold, I cast out devils, and do cures " 
(ver. 32) ; " I must walk to-day and to-morrow, and the day following " (ver. 33). 
A good man's mission is a concern of God ; God will take care of it and of him, so far as 
he is essential to it. It may be said that no person is indispensable ; yet, to a certain 
extent, persons are indispensable. And every one who is consciously striving after the 
best and noblest, and who is giving himself to some labour of love, may be sure that 
there is a Divinity hedging him around through which no fox can break. The Heroils 
of the world, with all their scheming, cannot shorten the times of God. As he wills, 
and while he wills, we must walk. Until he wills that we walk no longer, we are 
immortal. Eeposing in his heavenly Father's love, straitened until his baptism of 
blood is accomplished, "journeying towards Jerusalem," the Christ of the Eternal is 
lifted above the region of selfish fears. Tyrant cannot harm him, threat cannot rufiie 
him : " Walk and work to-day and to-morrow, and a third day to boot, I must and 
shall." 

II. But obseevb how and why the emotion of "that bamb houb" bursts 
FORTH. These Pharisees could not scare him from his purpose, but they touched 
the fountain of a Divine sensibility in his breast. And now, as at a later stage, a 
cry of intense sorrow escapes him — the sorrow of wounded, but agonizing love. The 
feeling of patriotism combines with the tenderness of Saviour-longing in the wail, more 
than wail, which begins (vers. 34, 35), " Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the 
prophets, and stonest them that are sent to thee!" The cry naturally follows the 
sadly ironical reference to Jerusalem as the slaughter-house of the prophets 1 "What are 
the thoughts which fill the mind of Ctirist as he utters it ? 1. The conscious oppositUm, 
between a love that would save and an obstinate dulness that will not be saved. Note 
the figure, so_ often employed in the Psalms and prophetical books of the Old Testa- 
ment — the vsdngs stretched out for the shelter and warmth, the peace and safety, of the 
brood (see Deut. xxxii. 11, 12). " How often," says the Lord Jesus (ver. 34), " would 
I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathereth her brood under her wings, 
and ye would notl" Is this, "How often would 11" merely a reference to previous 
visits to the capital and ministrations in it ? Nay, it is the Lord of the prophets who 
is speaking ; the allusion, in its full meaning, is to the often-made effort to gather the 
children together through the prophets whom Jerusalem killed, the messengers whom 
Jerusalem stoned. It is the truth afterwards brought out in the parable of the wicked 
husbandmen (see ch. xx). The protest is wrung from the patient, seeking, yet often 
baffled will to sa-»-e and bless. It is the protest which reverberates through infinite space 
concerning men— the protest whose subject-matter is, slighted overtures, unheedid 
calls, grace resisted, gifts sent away, knocks heard yet doors unopened ; the " I would " 
of God defied by the " I wiU not " of men. 2. 'Die knowledge of opportunity for ever 
gone. "If thou hadst bnovm even in this thy day the things that belong to thy 
peace I but now they are hid from thine eyes." This is spoken on the same day, at 
the same hour, as that in which the warnings connected with the entering in at the 
strait gate were uttered. Observe the connection with ver. 25. Solemn, awful 
words 1 The things were open to the eyes during the day, the time of Divine visita- 
tion ; then the eye would not regard them. It was fixed on other things — the black 
dust of earthly care, or the glittering dust of earthly vanity. Now the story is 
reversed. The eye would fain behold. Oh for a day of the Son of man ! Oh for 
the moments that have been thrown away ! But the Master of the house has risen up, 
and has shut to the door. The vision now (ver. 35) is a desolate house — a liouse left 
to itself, God-forsaken. "0 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, all thy palaces swallowed up, thy 
strongholds destroyed, thy solemn feasts and sabbaths forgotten, thine altar cast off, 
thy sanctuary abhorred, thy gates sunk, thy bars broken ; thou that wast called tha 
perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth, abandoned, as it might seem, by him 
who sought to gather thee, and thou wouldst not I C Jerup,alem, Jerusalem, bleak, 



on. XIII. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. 18 

bare, stripped ! dost thou not sit in thy lonely place among the silent lonely hills, 
spreading lorth thy hands, hut there is none to comfort thee ; yet ever in thy desola- 
tion witnessing, ' The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his command- 
ments ' ? " Jesus weeps I My soul, are these tears wept over thee ? Dost thou 
know the things that belong to thy peace ? Hast thou received the One who seeks 
to gather thee, and whose goodness and severity urge thee to repentance ? my soul, 
remember that he who shed tears, from the same fountain of love and mercy shed 
blood also. Let the tears of compassion and remonstrance send thee to the blood of 
cleansing. 

" Foul, I to the fountain fly ; 
Wash me. Saviour, or I die." 



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The significance of suffering. What does it mean, that all men suffer f 
and what is signified by the great calamities wliich some men endure? The Jews of 
our Lord's time were drawing inferences which were common and natural enough ; but 
they were not the safest nor the wisest that might have been drawn. In the light of 
the Master's teaching, we conclude — 

I. That suffeeino is always significant op sin. Whenever we see any kind of 
Buffering, whether it be ordinary sickness and pain, or whether it be of such an extra- 
ordinary character as that referred to here (vers. 1 — 4), we safely conclude that there 
has been sin. And this for two reasons. 1. That all sin tends toward suffering ; it 
has the seeds of weakuess, of decline, of dissolution, in it. Give time enough, and sin 
is certain, " when it is finished, to bring forth death." It carries an appropriate penalty 
in its own nature, and, except there be some merciful and mighty interposition to 
pevent it, the consequences will be felt in due time. 2. That it is certain there would 
have been no suffering had there been no sin. A good and holy man may be expe- 
riencing the results of other men's iniquity, and big trpubles not be directly traceable 
to any wrong or even any imprudence in himself. Yet were he not a sinful man, tc 
whom some penalty for some guilt is due, he would not have been allowed to be the 
victim of the wrong-doing of others. We bear the burden of one another's penalty ; 
and there is no injustice in this, because, though we all suffer on account of other men's 
actions, we suffer no more than is due to our own delinquency. The fact that a man 
is suffering some evil thing is therefore a proof that, whether or not he brought this 
particular°trial on himself, he has offended, he has broken Divine law, he has come 
under righteous condemnation. 

II. That great calamity is suggestive of great guilt. There are two con- 
siderations which suggest this conclusion. 1. One is a logical inference. We argue 
that if sinners suffer on account of their guilt, the greater sinners wiU be the greater 
sufferers. 2. The other is the result of observation. We do often see that men who 
have been guilty of flagitious crimes are compelled to endure signal sorrows ; the 
tempest of human indignation bursts upon them, or the fires of a terrible remorsb 
consume them, or the retribution of a righteous Providence overtakes and overwhelms 
them. 

III. That we are bound to take care lest we do our neighbour wrong in this 
conclusion of ours. 1. For the beinousness of individual guilt and the measurable 
magnitude of present punishment do not always correspond with one another. We do 
not° always know how much men are suffering ; they may be experiencing inward 
miseries we know not of ; audit is most likely that they are undergoing Jnward and 
spiritual deterioration which we cannot estimate — a consequence of sm which is 
immeasurably more pitiful than any loss of property or of health. 2. And the 
calamities that have overtaken a man njay be due to the fault of others, and they may 
be disciplinary rather than punitive in their bearing upon him. They may rather 
indicate that God is cleansing his heart and preparing his spirit for higher work, than 
that God is visiting him with penalty for past iniquity. We must therefore be slow 
to act on the principle on which the Jews based the conclusion of the text. There is 
one thing which it is always right to do. We may be sure— 



14 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xiii. 1—35. 

IV. That the wise thing is to make honest inquibt about oubselvbs. 
What about our own sin ? It is certain that we have sinned. Biblical statements, 
our own consciences, the testimony of our neighbours, — all affirm this. We have 
sinned aiiainst the Lord, and deserve his condemnation and retribution. 7s it certain 
that we have repented ? Have we turned away from the attitude and the actions of 
selfishness, of ungodliness, of insubmissiveness, of disobedience ? And are we resting 
and rejoicing in the mercy of God which is in Jesus Christ our Lord ? If not, we 
shall perish ; for impenitence means death. — C. 

Vers. 6 — ^9. — Fatal /rwitlessness. We have to consider — 

I. The primary siqnificanob of the pabable. What did the great Teacbei 
intend his hearers to understand by his words ? It was this (as I read it) : 1. The 
vineyard is the kingdom of God — that realm of truth and righteousness which he has 
been, from the beginning, establishing on the earth. 2. Israel is the Jig tree which 
God planted in his vineyard — a fig tree in a vineyard ; there not by any natural right, 
but at the option and discretion of the Divine Owner ; there " only so long as it served 
the purpose of him who planted it." 3. Sufficient time was given to Israel to show 
whether it would prove fruitful or fruitless, the " three years " standing for its day of 
probation, perhaps for the three periods represented by the judges, the kings, and the 
high priests. 4. Israel is found to be barren ; to be without true loyalty, real piety, 
solid worth. 5. Thus fruitless, it is only in the way ; it is failing to render the servica 
which another " people of God," another Church, would render ; it is thwarting the 
holy and beneficent purpose of its Creator. Not only is it useless, therefore; it is 
positively noxious and hurtful to the world ; it is a tree that must be cut down, for it 
cumbers the ground. 6. Jesus Christ, the Vinedresser, intercedes for it and obtains 
a merciful reprieve ; he will expend upon it the faithful toil of a gracious ministry. 
7. But he recognizes the fact that persistent barrenness must meet its appropriate fate 
— banishment from the kingdom of God. 

II. Its application to ouksblves. 1. God is founding a broad and blessed 
kingdom here — a kingdom wherein dwelleth righteousness and peace; a spiritual, 
universal, benignant empire. 2. In it he places us, as the children and heirs of the 
most precious privileges, seeing and hearing (as we do) what kings and prophets saw 
not, nor heard ; enlightened as to some most valuable points, in regard to which the 
disciples themselves were necessarily in the dark (see homily on ch. x. 23, 24). 
3. From us, thus advantaged, the Divine Husbandman demands good fruit. He may 
well expect that we should "yield much fruit" (John xv. 8), much reverence, purity, 
love, joy, service, usefulness. He is correspondingly disappointed and grieved whe'n 
he finds but little, or even none at all. 4. The unfruitful are not only the guilty, but 
they are the intolerably wasteful; they receive without returning, whilst others in 
their place would receive and return. (1) As those who are wrought upon by Christian 
truth and influence, they remain imblessed, where others in their place would hearken 
and heed, would obey and live. (2) As those who are professing to work on and for 
others, they are holding some post uselessly, where others would be scattering benefit 
and blessing on every hand. They cause a deplorable and unendurable waste in the 
kingdom of God. 5. Clirist offers us a merciful reprieve. Under his patient rule we 
are allowed another year, another period for repentance, for reformation, for renewal of 
heart and life. It is a sacred and a solemn time, an opportunity which we must not 
by any means neglect. For if we do, the word of Divine condemnation will be spoken, 
and we shall lose our place in the kingdom of our Lord. — C. 

Vers. 11—13. — The opportunity of love. Jesus found himself, on the sabbath day. 
In the synagogue ; and being in the right place, he found something more than he 
presumably went to seek (see next homily). We have our minds directed to 

I. Cub F.oed's opportunity, and the use he made of it. 1. He found this in the 
presence of human infirmity. There he saw a woman who had been afflicted in body 
for eighteen yiars ; she was " bowed together," etc. Not only was she subject to very 
considerable privation, but, as one whose figure was uncomely, she was exposed to the 
ridicule of the flippant and the heartless; and this without break for a very largo 
proportion of human life. Here was a most fitting object of tender pity and, if th# 



OH. xm. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. 15 

way were clear, of Divine help. 2. We mart the ready mani/estafion of his sympathy. 
He instantly spoke to her words of cheer and kindliness, awakening such hopes as she 
had not cherished for many a long year ; and then he laid upon her a healing touch ; 
" he laid his hands on her." It means much when God " lays his hand upon us." It 
meant everything to this woman with the new hope in her heart, that this kind, strong 
Prophet laid his hand of love and power upon her person ; then she felt how near he 
had come to her, how close at hand was the delivering hour. 3. Then came the exer- 
cise of his benignant power. A great as well as a good work was wrought. (1) The 
injury by long disease was undone in a single moment ; the rigidity of eighteen years 
was " immediately " relaxed (see Acts iv. 22). (2) The great Healer raised to the full 
stature and to the dignity and capacity of perfect womanhood one who had been help- 
lessly and hopelessly disfigured and crippled. (3) And he called forth from her, and 
from all who witnessed his work, reverent and grateful joy ; she and they rejoiced and 
glorified God. 

II. Cue own oppobtunitt. 1. The presence of human wrong, and its manifold con- 
sequences. Around us are ignorance, unbelief, vice, crime, sin ; around us, therefore, 
are poverty, want, suffering, shame, degradation, death. No man who has an open eye 
for the condition of his kind can fail to see, day by day, some pitiful object that may 
well excite his deepest and tenderest compassion — men and women, all too many, 
whom sin has " bowed down," and who can " in no wise lift themselves up." 2. The 
manifestation of our sympathy. And how shall we show our feeling of regret and of 
desire? (1) By our voice; by speaking the kind, true, enlightening, hope-giving 
word. (2) By our touch ,• we shall not succeed without this. To take a man by the 
hand, or to lay a brotherly hand upon his shoulder, is to come into healing contact 
with him. It is to " come near " to the one we are seeking to bless ; it is to give him 
the sense that, instead of " standing aloof," we feel and own and claim our brother- 
hood with him; it is to stand on the same level with him — the level of oxii common 
humanity, our erring, striving, suffering, aspiring humanity ; it is to be where the 
healing and restoring power can be exercised and received. 3. The result of our healing 
touch. We exert the influence that elevates. The first result is enlightenment con- 
cerning himself; then faith in a Divine Saviour ; then uprightness of character and 
erectness of spirit. The man is " made straight." He is no longer bowed down in 
spiritual bondage, with eyes directed to the earth ; he stands erect in spiritual freedom, 
in purity of heart, in a large and blessed hopefulness ; he has attained, through the 
influence of Christian love, a noble elevation ; henceforth he will walk in the way of 
life, with aU true dignity, in all gladness of soul, giving glory to the great Healer. — 0. 

Vers. 14 — 16. — Suggestions from the synagogue. The fact that this work of our 
Lord (see previous homily) was wrought in a synagogue on the sabbath day, and that 
it led to an outburst of fanaticism on the part of the ruler, which was followed by the 
severe rebuke of Christ, may suggest to us — 

I. That eaknbst seekers at the banctuabt mat find more than they seek. 
We may class this woman amongst the earnest seekers ; for the fact that, with such a 
bodily infirmity as hers, she was found in her place in the house of God is evidence of 
her devotion. She went there, we may assume, to seek the ordinary spiritual refresh- 
ment and strength which are to be found in worship, in drawing near to God and in 
learning his will. She found this as usual, and a great deal more ; she found imme- 
diate and complete restoration from her old complaint ; she found a new life before 
her ; she found a new Teacher, a Lord of love and power, in whose Person and in whose 
ministry God was most graciously manifesting himself to her. If we go to the sanc- 
tuary in an entirely unspiritual mood, with no hunger of soul in us, we_ shall probably 
come empty away ; but if we go there to worship God and to inquire of his will, 
desirous of offering to him the service he can accept, and to gain from him the blessing 
he is willing to impart, then is it not only possible, but likely, that we may secure more 
than we seek. God will manifest himself to us in ways we did not anticipate ; will 
show us the path we had never seen before; will take away the burden we thought 
we should bring home on our heart; will fill us with the peace or the hope that passes 
ail our understanding; will open to us gates of wisdom or joy we never thought to 



16 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xm. 1—85 

n. That nothing better befits the day of the Lobd than doing the distinctive 
work of the Lord. Jesus Christ completely disposed of the carping and censoriom 
criticism of the ruler. If it was right, on the sabbath day, to discharge a kindly office 
of no very great value and at some considerable trouble to a brute beast, how much 
more must it be right to render an invaluable service, by the momentary exercise of a 
strong will, to a poor suffering sister-woman who was one of the children of Abraham-, 
and one of the people of God ? And how can we better spend the hours which are 
sacred, not only to bodily rest, but to spiritual advancement, than by doing work which 
is peculiarly and emphatically Divine — by helping the helpless; by relieving the 
suffering; by enriching the poor; by enlightening those who are in darkness; by 
extricating those who are in trouble ; by lifting up them that are bowed down ? When, 
on the sabbath day, we forget our own exertions in our earnest desire to comfort, or to 
relieve, or to deliver, we may be quite sure that the Lord of the sabbath will not 
remember them against us, but only to say to us, " Well done." 

III. That a formal piety will not pbesbbve us feom the saddest sins. 
This ruler was probably regarded as a very devout man, because his ceremonialism was 
complete. But his routine observances did not save him from making a cowardly, 
because indirect, attack upon a beneficent Healer ; nor from committing an act of gross 
inhumanity — assailing the woman he should have been the first to rejoice with ; nor 
from falling into an utter misconception of the mind of God, thiaking that evil which 
was divinely good. We may hold high positions in the Church of Christ, may habitu- 
ally take very sacred words into our lips, may flash out into great indignation against 
supposed religious enormities, and yet may be obnoxious to the severe rebuke of the 
final Judge, and may stand quite outside and even far oft the kingdom of heaven. 
Let us be sure of our own position before we undertake the office of the accuser ; let 
us beware lest over our outward righteousness Divine Truth will at last inscribe that 
terrible word " hypocrisy." Formal piety proves nothing ; the only thing we can be 
sure about is the love of God in the heart manifesting itself In the love of men. — C. 

Vers. 18, 19. — The growth of the hvngdom of Qod. When we think of it we cannot 
fail to be impressed with the confidence, amounting even to the sublime, which Jesus 
Christ cherished in the triumph of his sacred cause. For consider — 

I. The utter insignipicanoe of " the kingdom " at its commencement. At first 
It was represented by one Jewish Carpenter, a young Man born of very humble 
parents, unlearned and untravelled, without any pecuniary resources whatever, 
regarded with disfavour by the social and the ecclesiastical authorities of his time, 
teaching doctrines that were either above popular apprehension or that ran counter to 
popular prejudices, unable to find a single man who thoroughly sympathized with 
him in his great design, moving steadily and fearlessly on toward persecution, 
betrayal, an ignominious and early death. Here was a grain indeed, something 
which, to the eye of man, was utterly insignificant and destined to perish in a very 
short time. Had we lived then and exercised our judgment upon the prospects of 
the nascent faith called by its Founder " the kingdom of God," we should certainly 
have concluded that in fifty years at the utmost it would have disappeared as a living 
power, and would only have remained, if it survived in any form at all, as a tradition 
of the past. But let us glance at — 

II. Its marvellous growth. Truly the least of all seeds has become the greatest 
of all herbs; the grain has grown and become a "great tree." In spite of (1) the 
determined opposition of other faiths, which resented and resisted its claim to sup- 
plant them ; (2) the sanguinary violence of the civil power, which almost everywhere 
strove to drown it in the blood of its adherents; (3) the hostility of the human 
heart, which has opposed itself continually to its purity, its spirituality, its unselfish- 
ness ; (4) the deadly injury done to it by the inconsistency, the unfaithfulness, the 
dissensions of its own disciples ; — it spread with wonderful rapidity. In three centuries 
it triumphed over the paganism of the known world ; it has become the accepted 
faith of Europe and of (the greater part of) America, and of many " islands of the 
sea;" it has gained a firm foothold in the other continents, in the midst of the most 
venerable systems of religious error. Since the purification of its creed and the 
awakening af its members to their high privileges, it has made an immense advance 



OH. xm. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL aCCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 17 

toward the goal of a complete triumph ; it has proved itself to be a benign and 
elevating power wherever it haa been planted; it is the refuge, the strengtii, the 
hope, of the human world. What are — 

lit. Its pbospectb? 1. It haa numerous enemies who predict that it will decline 
and die. They regard it as a spent force that must give place to other powers. But 
this prediction has been often made before, and it haa been falsified by the event. 

2. Its friends are more numerous, and they are more intelligent, and they are more 
energetic and self-denying than they ever were at any former period in its history. 

3. It holds truth which ministers to the wants of the human world — its sorrows, its 
sinss itsaspirationa — such as no other doctrine can pretend to. There is but one Jesus 
Christ in the history of the human race ; but one Saviour from sin, one unfailing 
Kefuge and Friend in life and in death. 4. God is with us in our work of faith and 
our labour of love. The crucified Lord will " draw all men unto him," and his salva- 
tion shall cover the earth, because the power which prevails against all finite forces is 
on its side. " All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye ihtrtfwe, 
and teach all nations," etc. (Matt, xxviii. 18, 19). — 0. 

Vers. 20, 21. — The peaceallenest and diffusiveness of Christian truth. The words of 
Christ may properly suggest to us — 

I. The quiet peaceableness of the Cheistian method. The starting and the 
spreading of " the kingdom of God " is like a woman taking and hiding leaven in some 
meal. How impossible to imagine any of the founders of the kingdoms or empires 
of this world thus describing the course of their procedure I The forces they employed 
were forces that shone, dazzled, smote, shattered; that excited wonder and struck 
terror ; that crushed and clanged and conquered. Those which the Son of man employed 
were such as fittingly reminded of a woman hiding leaven in some meal — silently but 
effectually penetrating to the depth ; quietly, peaceably spreading on every hand. He 
did not " strive nor cry," etc. ; his gospel " came not with observation," with beat of 
drum, with dramatic display ; shunning rather than seeking celebrity, he lived, taught, 
suffered, witnessed, died, leaving behind a penetrating power for good that should 
renew and regenerate the race. There may be occasion, now and then, to say and do 
that which astonishes or alarms or otherwise arouses ; but that is not the .Christian 
method. The influence which steals into the soul, which insinuates itself into the 
whole body, which noiselessly communicates a right spirit and diffuses itself without 
ostentation or pretence from centre to circumference, — that is the method of the Master. 

n. The diffusiveness of Divine truth fbom within outwards. " Leaven, which 
a woman . . . hid;" not spread over the surface, but put into, placed in the heart of it, 
there to spread, to permeate, working from the centre towards the surface. This is 
the method of the gospel as distinguished from that of the Law. The Law exerts its 
power in the opposite direction— /ro»j without inwards ; it acts directly on behaviour, 
leaving behaviour to become habit and habit to become principle. 1. Jesus Christ 
places tlie leaven of Divine truth in the mind, in the imderstanding, teaching us how to 
think of God and of ourselves, of sin and of righteousness, of the present and the future. 
2. Then Divine truth aflfects our feelings, producing awe, reverence, fear, hope, trust, 
love. 3. Thence it determines the desires and convictions, leading to choice, decision, 
full and final determination. 4. And thence, moving towards the surface, it decides 
behaviour and ends in rectitude of action, excellency of life ; so " the whole man," the 
complete nature, is leavened. Similarly, Divine truth is placed in the heart of the 
community, and, once there, it communicates itself from man to man, from home to 
home, from circle to circle, until " the whole " nation is leavened. But a man may 
ask. How is my entire nature to be thoroughly leavened with Christian principle — 
perfectly sweetened, purified, renovated, as it is not now ? Eave we enough of ths 
sacred leaven hidden within us f It is true that " a little leaven leaveneth the whole 
lump," but there is a quantity, less than which is insufficient for the work. Have 
we enough of the truth of Christ lodged in our minds for this great and high purpose ? 
Are we thinking, as Christ meant us to think, of our Divine Father, of our human 
spirit, of our human life, of the needs and claims of our neighbour, about giving and 
about forgiving, and about eternal life? Is our Master's thought on these great 
decisive, determining themes hidden in our hearts doing its sweetening and renewing 

LUKE. — 11 fl 



18 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xni. 1— 38. 

work within us ? Christ says, " Come to me ; " he also says, " Learn of me." Are ws 
diligently, meekly, devoutly learning of Christ, receiving more and more of his hallow- 
ing and transforming truth into our mind, to stii our feeling, to regulate our choice, to 
beautify and to ennoble our life ? — 0. 

Vers. 23, 24. — Vain inquiry and spiritual itrenuoumess. There is all the difference 
in the world between the question that is general and speculative and that which is 
personal and practical ; between asking, " Are there few that be saved ? " and asking, 
" What must I do to be saved ? " A great many unspiritual people show no small 
concern respecting matters that pertain to religion. It may be that they are curious, 
or that they are imaginative, or that they are visionary, and that religion provides 
a wide field for investigation, or for romance, or for mysticism. This speculative and 
unpractical piety may be: 1. A vain and unrewarded curiosity. It was so in this 
instance ; the applicant was moved by nothing more than a mere passing whim, and 
he received no gratification from Christ (see oh. xxiii. 8, 9 ; John xxi. 21, 22). It 
will be found that, on the one hand, Jesus always answered the questions of those 
who were in earnest, however humble might be the applicant ; and, on the other hand, 
that he never answered the questions of the irreverent, however distinguished the 
inquirer might be. And it is found now by us that if we go to his Word or to his 
sanctuary to inquire his will, we shall not go away unblessed ; but that if we go to 
either for mere gratification, we shall be unrewarded. 2. The retreat of irreligion and 
unworthiness (see John iv. 18 — 20). It is convenient to pass from personal and prac- 
ticfil considerations to those of theological controversy. 3. The act of mistaken 
religiousness (see John liv. 8). We act thus when we want to see the Divine side of 
God's dealings with us, or are anxious to know " the times and seasons which the 
Father hath put in his own power." Our Lord's reply suggests — 

I. The S0PBEME iMPOETANCB OP PEBSONAL EELiaioN. "Are there few that be 
saved? . . . Strive to enter in," etc. ; i.e. the question for you to be concerned to answer 
is, whether you yourself are in the kingdom of God ; that is preliminary to all others ; 
that is the thing of primary importance ; that is worth your caring for, your seeking 
after, your diligent searching, your strenuous pursuit. Surely the most inconsistent, 
self-condemning, contradictory thing of all is for men to be thinking, planning, dis- 
cussing, expending, in order to put other people into the right way when they them- 
selves are taking the downward road. Shall we not say to such, " Go and learn what 
this meaneth, ' Let every man prove his own work, then shall he have rejoicing in 
himself alone, and not in another ; for every man shall bear his own burden' of respon- 
sibility to God " ? The first duty a man owes to God and to his neighbour is the 
duty he owes to himself — to become right with the living God by faith in Jesus Christ 
his Saviour. 

II. The fact that enteancb into the kingdom op God demands great sthentt- 
ousNESS op sodl. 1. It is the great crisis of a man's career, and may well be attended 
with much spiritual disturbance. When a human soul first hears and heeds his 
Father's call and_ rises to return to his true spiritual home, he may well be affected 
with profound spiritual solicitude, and may well count that the goal he is seekin'^ is 
worth all the labour and all the patience he expends to reach it. 2. There are occa- 
sions when special strenuousness of soul is demanded. Such are these: (1) When 
a man by long neglect has lost nearly all his sensibility. (2) When the earnest seeker 
cannot find the consciousness of acceptance which he yearns to attain. (3) When 
a man finds himself opposed by adverse forces ; when " a man's foes are they of his own 
household ; " when he has to act as if he positively " hated " father and mother, in order 
to be loyal to his Lord ; when downright earnestness and unflinching fidelity brin" 
him into seiious conflict with the prejudices and the practices of the home, or the mart] 
or the social circle ; and when to toUow the lead of his convictions means to suffer to 

lose, to endure much at the hands of man. Then comes the message of the Master 

Strive, wrestle, agonize to enter in ; put forth the eflbrt, however arduous ; make the 
sacrifice, however great ; go through the struggle, however severe it may prove to be. 
Strive to enter in ; it will not be long before you will have your reward in a pure and 
priceless peace, in a profotmd and abiding joy, in a heritage which no man and no time 
can take from you.— 0. 



fflH. im. 1— 35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. If 

Ver. 30. — Fint and last. There are many beside those to whom these words were 
firtt applied by Jesus Christ to whom they are applicable enough. They were originally 
intended to denote the positions of — 

I. The Jew and the Gbntilb. The Jew, who prided himself on being the first 
favourite of Heaven, was to become the very last in God's esteem ; he was to bear the 
penalty due to the guilty race that "knew not the day of its visitation," but imbrued 
its hands in the blood of its own Messiah. The scenes witnessed in the destruction of 
Jerusalem are commentary enough on these words of Christ. But this truth has a far 
wider meaning ; it is continually receiving illumination and illustration. It applies to — 

II. The outwardly coeeeot and the ill-behaved. The Pharisee of every age 
and land is first in his own esteem, but he stands, in sullen refusal, far off the kingdom, 
while " the publican and the sinner " are found at the feet of Christ, asking for the way 
of life, for the waters of cleansing, for the mercy of God. 

III. The learned and the ignorant ; the astute and the simple-minded. Still 
we ask, "Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this 
world ? " Still may we, after the Master himself, give God thanks that he has " hidden 
these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes." Human 
learning, in its unholy and foolish pride, stiU closes its ear to the voice that speaks from 
heaven. Lowly minded simplicity still listens to the truth and enters the open gate 
of the kingdom of God. 

IV. The privileged and the unpeivilbged. The children of privilege may be 
said to be among " the first." We congratulate them sincerely and rightly enough ; 
yet are they too often found among the last to serve and to shine. For they build 
upon their privileges, or they reckon confidently on turning them some day to account, 
and they fail to use them as they should ; and the end of their presumption is indif- 
ference, hardness of heart, insensibility, death. The first has become the last. On the 
other hand, the ear that never before heard " the music of the gospel " is ravished by the 
sound of it ; the heart that never knew of the grace of God in Jesus Christ is touched 
by the sweet story of a Saviour's dying love, and is won to penitence and faith and 
purity ; the last is first. Let presumption everywhere tremble ; it stands on perilous 
ground. Again and again is it made to humble Itself in the dust, while simplicity of 
spirit is lifted up by the hand of God. — 0. 

Ver. 34. — Divine emotion, etc. These words are full of— 

I. Divine emotion. They are charged with sacred feeling. The heart of Jesus 
Christ was evidently filled with a profound and tender regret as he contemplated the 
guilt and the doom of the sacred city. Strong emotion breathes in every word of this 
pathetic and powerful lament. And manifesting to us the Divine Father as Jesus did, 
we gather therefrom that our God is not one who is unaffected by what he witnesses 
in his universe, by what he sees in his human children. The infinite Spirit is one in 
whom is not only that which answers to our intelligence, hut that also which answers 
to our emotion; and this, of course, in a manner answering to his Divinity. He 
rejoices in our return to his side and his service ; he is gladdened by our spiritual 
growth, by our obedience and activity; he is pleased with our silence and submissive- 
ness when we do not understand his way but bow to his holy will ; and he is pained 
by our spiritual distance from him, is grieved by our slackness and our lukewarmness 
and our withdrawal, is saddened by our sin. He looks with a deep. Divine regret on 
a Church or on a child of his that is rejecting his grace as Jerusalem did, and over 
whom, as over it, there impends a lamentable doom. 

II. Divine peesistbnot. " How often would I have gathered," etc. 1 The Saviour 
desired and endeavoured to gather the children of Jerusalem under his gracious 
guardianship, not once, nor twice, nor thrice ; his effort was a frequent act of mercy; 
it was repeated and prolonged. God " bears long " with us, forbearing to strike though 
the stroke be due and overdue ; he is " slow to anger and of great mercy." But he 
does more than that, and is more than that ; he continues to seek us that he may save 
us. He follows us, in his Divine patience, through childhood, through youth, through 
early manhood, through the days of prime, or uato declining years, with his teaching 
and his influence. He speaks to us by his Word, by his ministry, by his providence^ 
by his Spirit. He seeks to win us, to warn us, to alarm u%, to humble, and thus to 



20 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xm. 1— 35. 

save us. At how many times and in how many ways does our Saviour seek us I 
Eow often does he endeavour to gather us under the shadow of his love 1 

in. Human fkbbdom. " How often would I ! " " Ye would not ! " It is quite vain 
for us to attempt to reconcile God's omnipotence with our freedom, his right and 
power over us with our power to act according to our own will. The subject is 
beyond our comprehension, and it is true wisdom to leave it alone, as an inaccessible 
mountain peak which we cannot climb ; there is danger, if not death, in the attempt. 
But the facts are before us, visible as the mountain itself. God has power over us, 
and exercises that power benignantly and patiently. But he does not interfere with 
our freedom ; that, indeed, would be to unman us, to put us down from the level of 
children into that of irresponsible creaturedom. He leaves us free ; and we are free 
to oppose his sovereign will, to resist liis Divine grace, to be deaf to his pleading voice, 
to shake off his arresting hand. He " would " that we should be reclaimed, be raised, 
be enlarged, be ennobled ; and too often we " will not." A solemn, awful thing it is 
to share a human heritage, to live a human life, to incur human responsibility. 

lY. Human obdukact. Jerusalem " often " refused to be drawn to its Redeemer. 
Not only can we and do we resist the grace of God ; we can continue to do so ; and 
we do continue. We can spend our life in a long contest with redeeming love ; we 
can repel the overtures of mercy and go on rejecting our Father's offer of eternal life 
through all the years and periods of a long life of privilege. Men do this, and to them 
the words of Jesus are applicable in all their force ; over them, also, his lament has to 
be uttered. 1. It is well for those to whom it may apply to awake and to return before 
he says to them, " Your house is left unto you desolate." 2. It is better, for it is safer 
for us all to heed his inviting voice and place ourselves under the wings of his blessed 
friendship long before such words as those of our text are anywise applicable to us. — C, 

Vers. 1 — 21. — The grace and progress of OocFs kingdom. We saw at the close of last 
chapter how urgent a matter it is to get reconciled to God. Luke, in constructing his 
Gospel, introduces us next to a cognate thought — the necessity of repentance if judg- 
ment is to be escaped. Let us take up the orderly thoughts as they are laid before 
us in this passage. 

I. Judgment executed upon others is a call to BEFEaiTANCB addressed to us. 
(Vers. 1 — 5.) There was a disposition then, as there is stiU, to set down special judg- 
ment as the consequence of some special sin. Job's comforters simply expressed the 
fallacy to be found in every heart. When Christ's attention was, therefore, directed 
to the GaliL-ean emeute, and to the bloody way in which Pilate had put it down, he 
directed his hearers to discern in it a providential warning and call to repentance. 
The accident at the tower of Siloam had the same significance. It was a call to sur- 
vivors to repent lest a judgment as severe should overtake them. The fate of the 
dead was no proof of special sin, but it was a clear call to repentance addressed to the 
survivors.' The warning was singularly appropriate. The cruelty of Pilate and 
the overturning of the tower of Siloam had their counterparts in the siege of Jerusalem 
forty years after, when the people had demonstrated their impenitence. Hence we 
should learn the practical lesson from every judgment of the imperative necessity of 
personal repentance. These terrible calamities are allowed to occur, not that we may 
uncharitably criticize the conduct of the dead, but that we may carefully review the 
conduct of ourselves who survive, and repent before God.' 

II. Before men become finally impenitent and incorrigible they get a 
LAST OHANOB OF AMENDMENT AND REFORM. (Vers. 6 — 9.) The siege of Jerusalem 
has been before the prophetic eye of Christ, and, to impress the necessity of personal 
amendment and reform upon the people, he tells the parable of the fig tree. It is a 
history of care without any return. Orientals dig about their fruit-trees, and manure 
the roots, and encourage fruitfulness in every way.' Fruitless trees they burn, after a 
three-years' probation. Now, the Jews were as a nation represented by this fig tree. 

' Of. Geikie's ' Life and Words of Christ,' vol. i. p. 279 ; also Wolfe's ' Remains,' 6th edit., 
pp. 318—329. 

' Of. Gerok'g « Pilgerbrod,' i. 764; Geiok's 'Aus Ernster Zeit,' 8. 687; and Saurin'i 
' Sermons,' tome i. p. 375. 

• Ct Von Leuuep, p. 136. 



CH. xin. 1— 35,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 21 

Through long years the heavenly Hiishandman had given it every chance of hearing 
fruit. His long-suffering is nearly exhausted, and but for the dresser of the vineyard— 
by whom Jesus means himself — it would have been cut down as a cumberer of th« 
ground. His intercessions saved the nation for other forty years. And what tender 
care was expended on it in the closing ministry of Christ, and in the ministry of the 
apostles 1 Truly the tears of our Lord over Jerusalem, the self-sacrificing zeal of Paul 
and Peter and the rest for the conversion of their own countrymen, and the series of 
significant providences with which the forty years were filled, unite to show that the 
national annihilation was deserved. A fruitless nation must make way for others. 
Let this last chance of the Jewish nation, the forty years of respite between Christ's 
death and Jerusalem's doom, admonish sinners of their solemn responsibility amid 
similar respites still. The Lord's long-suffering, though great, is not infinite ; upon it 
sinners need not eternally presume; a day comes round in every case, when he 
who wiU be filthy and unholy is allowed to be so still (Rev. xxii. H). 

III. The sabbath should be the season of special uplifting to infirm 
BOULS. (Vers. 10 — 17.) How should a Divine day be spent ? This was the con- 
troversy Christ had with the chief priests and Jewish rulers. The rabbinical idea wag 
that it should be a day of purely physical rest, and that even healing should be post- 
poned to the succeeding and secular days. Our Lord, on the contrary, held that the 
sabbath was a day for special philanthropies, a day of opportunities such as the 
other days, with their secular routine, cannot afford. Hence the sabbaths were days 
of special miracle. Meeting a poor woman whose infirmities had been of eighteen years' 
standing, he took her, laid his hands upon her, and iiealed her. It was a glorious 
uplifting which the poor bent woman received. But the ruler of the synagogue, where 
this happened, indignantly objected to such a work being done on the sabbath day ; 
only to draw upon him, however, the rebuke of Jesus, " Ye hypocrites, doth not each 
one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to 
watering ? And ought not this woman," etc. ? (Revised Version). His argument is 
unanswerable. They were accustomed to deal mercifully with tlieir own beasts, but 
were ready most inconsistently to deal unmercifully with human beings, who should 
have been more valued, but are often, alas ! less cared for than dumb animals. Such 
hypocrisy found in Jesus a constant foe. His adversaries were thus put to shame, and 
the common people rejoiced and praised God for the glorious sabbath services which 
Jesus rendered to the poor and needy. Ought we not, then, to look for special 
upliftings of our infirm souls on the holy days ? Jesus is waiting to heal us, and to 
raise us up to spiritual power.' As Gerok daintily puts it, we should expect to pass 
from work-day worry to sabbath rest ; from earthly grief to heavenly joy ; from the 
yoke of sin to the service of the Lord. We do not utilize our Lord's days aright, if 
such experiences are not enjoyed. 

IV. The kingdom of God is a widening philanthbopy. (Vers. 18, 19.) After 
the philanthropy extended to the infirm woman, it was natural for our Lord to pass to 
the parable of the mustard seed. This represents an insignificant beginning, followed 
by growth to such an extent, that under the branches of the mustard tree the birds of 
heaven find fitting shelter. In the same way the kingdom of God began around 
Jesus, apparently an insignificant Person, and eventually passed on to afford shade to 
many. In a word, the kingdom of God is an extending philanthropy. It widens its 
arms and embraces more and more in its shadow. In the same way, we may be sure 
that it has no true lodgment within us, unless it is making our philanthropy a growing 
and extending power. We are not Christ's unless we have his beautiful and philan- 
thropic spirit. 

V. The kingdom of God is a thoroughly tbansfobming powbb. (Vers. 20, 21.) 
From mustard seed and its growth, Christ proceeds to speak of leaven. It is hid in 
the three measures of meal, and works its way onwards until the whole mass is 
leavened. There is thus indicated how thorough and gradual the work of Christianity 
is. We are not true Christians unless every portion of our nature feels its transforming 
power ; nor will Christianity pause until it has penetrated to the utmost extent the 
population of the world. The great idea of the parable is ihoroughntas. Let this 
characterise us always in our connection with the kingdom. — ^R. M. E. 

> 0£ Geiok'g ' Evangelien Fredigten,' •. SSL 



» THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xm. 1— 35. 

Vers. 22 — 35. — Chrisfs /arewtU words to the theocracy. As Jesus was journeying 
steadily towards Jerusalem, the people saw that a crisis was at hand. Hence, their 
anxiety to know how many would be saved in the new kingdom. They consequently 
inquire if the number of the saved shall be few. To this speculation the Lord returns 
a very significant answer ; he tells them that many shall strive to enter in on false 
grounds, and that they should strive to enter in on true ones. 

I. Those who speculate about numbebs are usuallt people who pltjmb them- 
selves UPON THEIR KBiviLBGES. (Ver. 26.) It is wonderful how men deceive them- 
selves. Here we find our Saviour asserting that at the last people shall come maintain- 
ing that because they have eaten and drunk in his presence, and because he has taught 
in their streets, they should be accepted and saved. We should naturally imagine 
that these privileges should lead souls to inquire anxiously how they have profited by 
them, whereas they are made the ground of claim and the hope of salvation. The 
Jews thought that, because they were possessed of privileges beyond other nations, 
they should be accepted before God; and self-righteous people to-day think that, 
because they have regularly gone to church and sacrament, and the various privileges 
of the sanctuary, they should for this reason be accepted and saved at last. So far 
from privileges constituting a ground of salvation, they are certain to prove a ground 
of increasing condemnation, if not faithfully used. People may be sinners all the time 
that they are associating with saints. They may be sitting at groaning tables provided 
by God, they may be listeniog to the lessons which he has furnished in his holy 
gospel, and yet their hearts may be homes of vanity, waywardness, and sin. 

IL OuB Lord directs them to strive to enter in at the strait gate instead 
OP speculating about itombers. (Ver. 24.) Many are more addicted to speculation 
and religious controversy than to decision of character. They would rather argue a 
point than make sure of their personal salvation. Now, what was the strait gate in 
our Lord's time ? It was attachment to himself as the humiliated Messiah, just as 
the wide gate and broad way were the expectation of a glorious and worldly Messiah 
(of. Godet, in lac.). It is easy to attach one's self to a winning, worldly cause ; it needs 
no spiritual preparation. But it was not easy, but took an effort of self-denial, to stick 
to the despised Saviour through all his sad and humiliating experience. And the 
same struggle is still needed. The cause of Christ is not a winning, worldly cause. 
You might do better in a worldly sense without identifying yourself with Jesus. But 
no man will ever have reason to regret identifying himself with the Saviour. No 
matter what self-denial it entails,"^ it is worth all the struggle. 

III. The last judgment shall be a reversal op human judgments. (Vers. 
25 — 30.) The current notions of Christ's time accorded to the Pharisees and religious 
foi-malists the chief seats in the new order of things which Messiah was to introduce. 
But Christ showed plainly that the Pharisaism and formalism of sinners will not save 
them or their sins in the day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God. The 
first shall then be last; while the last in the world's estimation shall be the first in 
God's.* Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob would have received scanty recognition from the 
Pharisees of Ckrist's time ; the patriarchs were men of a meek and quiet spirit, who 
did not seek to exalt themselves. Hence our Lord represents the despised ones getting 
to their bosom at the last, while the bustling Pharisees shall find themselves cast out. 

IV. We have next to notice Christ's contempt foe Herod. (Vers. 31, 32.) It 
was thought by some of the poor spirits in the crowd that Christ would quail before 
the murderous king Herod, and that the sooner ho got out of his jurisdiction the 
better. But no sooner do they suggest this to Christ, than he bursts into contemptuous 
terms about the cunning king. He calls him fox, and tells them to tell him, if they 
like, " Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures to-day and to-morrow, and the third 
day I shall be perfected." The perfection of which he speaks is that which is reached 
through experience. Christ was sinless, but he had to go through the whole gamut of 
human trial, including death itself. He had to experience all the " undertones " of 
human experience before he could be perfect. Hence he was " made perfect through 
suffering." Contempt of others may be the very finest proof of our healthy moral 

tate. It is the antipodes of that despicable flattery which is generally extended 
to kings. 

> Of. Mozley's ' Dniversity Bermons,' K& It. 



OH. xiT. 1— 35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LTJKK. 



» 



V. Lastly, wb must noticb his lauent oveb Jerusalem, bboausk the mmDBBEB 
OP THE PROPHETS. (Vers. 33 — 35.) Our Lord was going to perish at Jerusalem. The 
reason was that there the policy of the nation was carried out, and all the prophets 
had found there their fate, and yet Christ had offered his protection to the doomed 
city. As easily as ever hen gathered her tiny brood beneath her wings could he 
gather the whole cityful under his wings. It is a beautiful and indirect proof of his 
Divinity. No mere man would have expressed himself thus.* But Jerusalem would not 
accept his protection. Instead thereof, it resolved to murder him, as the last in the 
line of the prophets. No wonder, therefore, that their house was left desolate, and 
that the murdered Messiah would withdraw himself until better times! He takes his 
•' adieu of the theocracy," to use the words of Godet, and speaks of a welcome being 
his when the new views of a better time shall prevail. How important that we all 
should accept the proffered protection of the Saviour, and not imitate Jerusalem in her 
obstinacy and her doom 1 — B. M. K 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Vers. 1 — 6. — The Pharisee's feast on a 
idbbath day. The healing of the sick with 
dropsy, 

Ver. 1. — And it came to pass, as lie went 
into the house of one of the chief Pharisees 
to eat hread on the sahhath day. Still on 
the same journey ; the Lord was approach- 
ing gradually nearer Jerusalem. The house 
into which he entered this sabbath belonged 
to one who was a leading member of the 
PJiaiisee party, probably an influential 
rabbi, a man of great wealth, or a member 
of the Sanhedrin. "To eat bread on the 
sabbath day," as a guest, was a usual prac- 
tice ; such entertainments on the sabbath 
day were very usual; they were often 
luxurious and costly. The only rule ob- 
served was that all the viands provided 
were cold, everything having been cooked 
on a previous day. Augustine alludes to 
these sabbath feasts as including at times 
singing and dancing. They watched him. 
This explains the reason of the invitation to 
the great Teacher, on the part of a leading 
Pharisee, after the Master's bitter denuncia- 
tion of the party (see eh. xi. 39—52). The 
feast and its attendant circumstances were 
all arranged, and Jesus' watchful enemies 
waited to see what he would do. 

Ver. 2. — And, behold, there was a certain 
man before him which had the dropsy. 
This was the scheme of the Pharisee host. 
The sick man was not one of the invited 
guests; with the freedom which attends a 
feast in a large Oriental house, the afiBioted 
man was introduced, as though by chance, 
with other lookers-on. The skilful plotters 
stationed him in a prominent position, where 
the eyes of the strange Guest would at once 
foil on him. The situation is described by 



the evangelist with dramatic eleamess: 
"And, behold, there was a certain man 
before him which," etc. In an instant 
Jesus grasped the whole situation. It was 
the sabbath, and there before him was one 
grievously sick with a deadly chronic malady. 
Would he pass by — contrary to his wont— 
such a sufferer ? Would he heal him on the 
sabbath day? Could he? perhaps thought 
the crafty foes of the great Physician-Teacher. 
The disease was a deadly one, utterly inewr- 
dble, as they thought, by earthly means. 

Ver. 3. — And Jesus answering spake unto 
the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it 
lawful to heal on the sabbath day? And 
the Heart-reader read their thoughts, and in 
a moment he saw all and understood all, 
and answered the unasked question of his 
host and the assembled guests by putting 
to them another query, which went to the 
root of the whole matter which they were 
pondering in their evil hearts. 

Ver. 4. — And they held their peace. What 
could they say? If they had pressed the 
absurd restrictions with which they hedged 
round the sabbath day, they felt they would, 
be crushed by one of the Master's deep and 
powerful arguments. They had hoped he 
would have acted on the impulse of the 
moment, and healed the sufferer or else 
failed ; but his calm question confused them. 
And he took him, and healed him, and let 
him go. With one of his majestic exercises 
of Divine power — so slight a task to Christ 
— the deadly disease waa cured in a moment, 
and then, with quiet crushing contempt, the 
Physician passed into the Habbi, and to the 
awe-struck guests he put a question ; it was 
his apology for the late infringement of the 
traditions of the sabbath day. What had 
they to say ? 

Ver. 5. — And answered fhem, sayings 



• Ot Brown'i 'Divine Glory of Christ,' pp. 9, la 



24 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKB. [oh. xiv. 1— 3& 



Whiob of yon alull have an ass or an oz 
fallen into a pit, and will not straightway 
pnll him ont on the sabbath day % Most of 
the older authorities here, instead of " an ass 
or an ox," read " a eon or an ox." The dif- 
ference here in the reading without doubt 
arises from the perplexity which was felt in 
very early days Over the strangeness of the 
collocation of " a son and an ox." This is 
the reading, however, which, according to all 
the acknowledged principles of criticism, we 
must consider the true one. The meaning 
is clear. "If thy son, or even, to take a 
very different comparison, thy ox, were to 
fall into a pit, wouldn't you," etc. ? How 
the sophistries of the scribes and the per- 
plexing traditions of the Jerusalem rabbis 
on their sabbath restrictions must have been 
torn asunder by the act of mercy and power 
performed, and the words of Divine wisdom 
spoken by the.Physioian-Teacher of Galilee I 
The noble instincts even of the jealous 
Pharisees must have been for a moment 
stirred. Even they, at times, rose above 
the dreary, lightless teaching with which 
the rabbinical schools had so marred the 
old Divine Law. Dr. Farrar quotes a tra- 
ditional instance of this. " When Hillel " 
— afterwards the great rabbi and head of 
the famous school which bore his name — 
" then a poor porter, had been found half- 
firozen ander masses of snow in the window 
of the lecture-room of Shemaiah and Ahta- 
lion, where he had hidden himself, to profit 
by their wisdom, because he had been nnable 
to earn the small fee for entrance, they 
had rubbed and resuscitated him, though it 
aa$ the eabhath day, and had said that he 
was one for whose sake it was well worth 
while to break the sabbath." 

Vers. 7— li.— At the FhaHsegi fecat. The 
Mastei't teaching on the subject of seeking the 
most honourable plaoet. Who ought to he the 
gueeti at sm^ feasts. 

Ver. 7.— And ho put forth a parable to 
those which were bidden, when he marked 
how they chose out the chief rooms ; saying 
onto them. The scene with the sufferer 
who had been healed of bis dropsy was now 
over. The Master was silent, and the 
guests proceeded to take their places at tlie 
banquet. Jesus remained still, watching 
the manoeuvring on the part of scribes 
aad doctors and wealthy guests to secure the 
higher and more honourable seats. "The 
chief rooms ; " better rendered " first places." 

Vers. 8, 9. — When thou art bidden of any 
man to a wedding, sit not down in the 
highest room. The pretensions and conceit 
of the Jewish doctors of the Law had been 
for a long period intolerable. We have 
repeated examples in the Talmud of the 
exaggerated estimate these, the scholars and 
doctoral of Uw Law, formed of themselvei, 



and of the respect they exacted from all 
classes of the community. One can well 
imagine the grave displeasure with which 
the Divine Teacher looked upon this unholy 
frame of mind, and upon the miserable petty 
struggles which constantly were resulting 
from it. The expositors of the Law of 6o(^ 
the religious guides of the people, were 
setting an example of self-seeking, were 
showing what was their estimate of a fitting 
reward, what was the crown of learning 
which they coveted — the first seats at a 
banquet, the title of respect and honour I 
How the Lord — the very essence of whose 
teaching was eelf-surrender and self-sacri- 
fice — must have mourned over such pitiful 
exhibitions of weakness shown by the men 
who claimed to sit in Moses' seat I Lest 
a more honourable man than thon he bidden 
of him ; and he that bade thee and him come 
and say to thee, Give this man place. As 
an instance of such unseemly contention. 
Dr. Farrar quotes from the Talmud how, 
" at a banquet of King Alexander Jannseus, 
the rabbi Simeon ben Shetaoh, in spite of 
the presence of some great Persian satraps, 
had thrust himself at table between the 
king and queen, and when rebuked for his 
intrusion quoted in his defence Ecclus. 
XV. 5, 'Kxalt wisdom, and she ... shall 
make thee sit among princes.' " 

Yer. 12. — Then said he also to him that 
bade him, When thon makest a dinner or 
a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy 
brethren, neither thy kiiismen, nor thy rich 
neighbours; lest they also bid thee again, 
and a recompense be made thee. This re- 
mark of Jesus took place somewhat later in 
the course of the feast. Those present were 
evidently mostly, if not all, drawn from the 
upper ranks of Jewish society, and tiie ban- 
quet was no doubt a luxurious and costly 
entertainment. Godot's comment is singu- 
larly interesting, and well brings out the 
half-sorrowful, half-playful sarcasm of the 
Master. He was the rich Pharisee's Guest ; 
he was partaking of his hospitality, although, 
it is true, no friendly feelings had dictated 
the invitation to the feast, but still he was 
partaking of the man's bread and salt ; and 
then, too, the miserable society tradition 
which then as now dictates such conven- 
tional hospitality, all contributed to soften 
the Master's stern condemnation of the 
pompous lioUow entertainments ; so he " ad- 
dresses to his host a lesson on charity, which 
he clothes, like the preceding, in the graceful 
form of a recommendation of intelligent self- 
interest." _ The (tt^TTOTt, lest (ver. 12), carries 
a tone of liveliness and almost of pleasantry. 
"Beware of it; it is a misfortune to be 
avoided. For, once thou shalt have received 
human requital, it is all over with Divin« 
reoompense." Jesni did not mean to forbid 



CH. TTV. 1—85.] THE GOSPEL AOCOBDING- TO ST. LUKB. 



25 



cnr entertaining those whom we love. He 
means simply, " In view of the life to come, 
thou canst do better still." 

Vers. 13, 14. — ^Bnt when thou makest a 
feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, 
the blind: and thou shalt be blessed; for 
they cannot recompense thee. Great pagan 
mnralists, sick at heart at these dreary, 
selSsh society conventionalities, have con- 
demned this system of entertaining those 
who would be likely to make an equivalent 
return for the interested hospitality. So 
Martial, writing of such an incident, says, 
" You are asking for gifts, Sextus, not for 
friends." Nehemiah gives a somewhat 
similar charge to the Jews of his day: 
"Eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and 
send portions unto them for whom nothing 
is prepared " (viii. 1 0). Thou shalt be recom- 
pensed at the resurrection otthe just. There 
is no doubt that Jesus here was alluding 
to that first resurrection which would con- 
sist of the " just " only ; of that resurrection 
which St. John speaks of in rapt and glow- 
ing terms : " Blessed and holy is he that hath 
part in the first resurrection " (Kev. xx. 6). 
This was a doctrine evidently much insisted 
on by the early teachers of Christianity 
(see John v. 25 ; Acts xxiv. 15 ; 1 Cor. xv. 
23; 1 Thess. iv. 16; Phil. jii-.H; and 
compare our Lord's words again in ch. xz. 
85). 

Vers. 15 — Zi. — In reply to an observation 
of one of the guests, Jesus relates the parable 
of the great supper, in which he shows how 
few really cared for the joys of Ood's kingdom 
in the world to come. 

Ver. 15. — And when one of them that sat 
at meat with him heard these things, he 
said unto him. Blessed is he that shall eat 
bread in the kingdom of God. One of those 
who were partaking of the banquet, and 
had witnessed the whole scene, now speaks 
to the Stranger-Guest. He had looked on 
the miracle performed for the afflicted man; 
he had heard the wise words spoken by the 
Galilsean Kabbi; he had listened to the 
gentle and yet pungent rebuke to the Pha- 
risee for his ostentatious hospitality to the 
rich and great; he had marked the quiet 
reminder as to the many sufferers who really 
stood in need of the viands so plentifully 
spread for those who wanted them not; he 
had been specially struck by the mention 
of the recompense which the just who re- 
membered the poor would receive at the 
resurrection. This quiet observer, noticing 
that the Master's remarks were touching 
upon the recompense of the just in the world 
to come, now breaks in with a remark on the 
blessedness of him who should eat bread in 
the kingdom of God. The words do not 
leem to have been spoken in a mocking 
•piriti but to have been the genuine outcome 



of the speaker's admiration of the Guest so 
hated and yet so wondered at. There is, 
no doubt, lurking in the words a certain 
Pharisaic self-congratulation— a something 
which seems to imply, " Yes, that blessedness 
to which you, O Master, are alluding, I am 
looking forward confidently to share in. 
How happy will it be for us, Jews as we 
aie, when the time comes for us to sit down 
at that banquet in the kingdom of heaven I " 

Ver. 16. — Then said he unto him. Tlie 
parable with which the great Teacher 
answered the guest's remark contains much 
and varied teaching for all ages of the 
Church, but in tlie first instance it replies 
to the speaker's words. "Yes," said the 
Master, "blessed indeed are they who sit 
down at the heavenly feast. You think 
you are one of those whom the King of 
heaven has invited to the banquet; what 
have you done, though, with the invitation ? 
I know many who have received it who 
have simply tossed it aside ; are you of that 
number i Listen now to my story of the 
Divine banquet and of the invited thereto." 
A certain man made a great supper, and 
bade many. The kingdom of heaven, under 
the imagery of a great banquet, was a 
picture weU known to the Jews of that age. 
The guests in the Pharisee's house for the 
greater part were probably highly cultured 
men. At once they would grasp the meaT>- 
ing of the parable. They knew that the 
supper was heaven, and the Giver of the 
feast was God. The many — these were 
Israel, the long line of generations of the 
cliosen people. So far strictly true, they 
thought ; the Galilsean Teacher here is one 
with the rabbis of our Jerusalem schools. 
But, as Jesus proceeded, a puzzled, angry 
look would come upon the self-satisfied faces 
of Pharisee, scribe, and doctor; whispers 
would run round, "What means the Gali- 
lsean here ? " 

Vers. 17 — 20. — Come; for all things are 
now ready. And they all with one consent 
began to make excuse. The excuses, viewed 
as a whole, are paltiy, and " if," as it has 
been well said, " as a mere story of natural 
life it seems highly improbable, it is because 
men's conduct with regard to the Divine 
kingdom is not according to right reason. . . . 
The excuses are all of the nature of pretexts, 
not one of them being a valid reason for 
non-attendance at the feast." The fact was, 
the invited were pleased to be invited, but 
there the matter ended with them. The 
banquet, which they were proud to have 
been asked to share in, had no influence 
upon their everyday lives. They made their 
engagements for pleasure and for business 
without the least regard to the day or the 
hour of the banquet; indeed, they treated 
it with perfect indifferenoe. The lay t» 



26 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xiv. 1— 3& 



the parable is easily found. The Jews were 
"solemn triflers in the matter of religion. 
They were under invitation to enter the 
kingdom, and they did not assume the atti- 
tude of men who avowedly cared nothing 
for it. On the contrary, they were pleased 
to think that its privileges were theirs in 
oiftr, and even gave themselves credit for 
setting a liigh value on them. But in truth 
they did not. The kingdom of God had 
not by any means the first place in their 
esteem. . . . They were men who talked 
much about the kingdom of heaven, yet 
cared little for it; who were very religious, 
yet very worldly — a class of which too many 
speoimens exist in every age" (Professor 
Bruce, 'Parabolic Teaching'). I have 
bought a piece of ground. ... I have hought 
five yoke of oxen. ... I have married a 
wife, etc. These excuses, of course, by no 
means exhaust all possible cases. They 
simply represent examples of usual every- 
day causes of indifference to the kingdom 
of God. To all these excuses one thing is 
common — in each a present good is esteemed 
above the heavenly offer; in other words, 
temporal good is valued higher than spiritual. 
The three excuses may be classed under the 
following heads. (1) The attraction of 
property of different kinds, the absorbing 
delight of possessing earthly goods. (2) 
The occupations of business, the pleasure 
of increasing the store, of adding coin to 
coin, or field to field. (3) Social ties, 
whether at home or abroad, whether in 
general society or in the home circle; for 
even in the latter case it ia too possible 
for family and domestic interests so com- 
pletely to fill the heart at to leave no room 
there for higher and more unselfish aims, 
no place for any grander hopes than the 
poor narrow home-life affords. The primary 
application of all this was to the Jews of 
the Lord's own time. It was spoken, we 
must remember, to a gathering of the dite 
of the Israel of his day. In the report of 
the servant detailing to the master the above- 
recorded excuses, it has been beautifully 
said, " we may hear the echo of the sorrow- 
ful lamentation uttered by Jesus over the 
hardening of the Jews during his long 
nights of prayer." The invitation to the 
feast was neglected by the learned and the 
powerful among the people. 

Ver. 21. — Then the master of the house 
being angry said to his servant, Go out 
quimkly into the streets and lanes of the 
city, and bring in hither the poor, and the 
maimed, and the halt, and the blind. The 
invitations to the great feast, seeing that 
those first bidden were indifferent, were 
then sent out far and wide — through broad 
streets and narrow lanes, among wealthy 
publicans ^(tax-ooUeotors) and poor artisans. 



The Invitations were distributed broadcast 
among a rougher and less cultured class, 
but still the invitations to the banquet were 
confined to dwellers in the city ; we hear as 
yet of no going without the walls. Here the 
invitation seems generally to have been 
accepted. All this in the first instance 
referred to the Galilsean peasants, to the 
Jewish publicans, to the mass of the people, 
who heard him, on the whole, gladly. 

Ver. 22. — And the servant said, Lord, it 
is done as thou hast commanded, and yet 
there is room. While these words are neces- 
sary to complete the picture, still in them 
we have a hint of the vast size of the king- 
dom of God. The realms of the blessed 
are practically boundless. Here, again, in 
the first instance, there was a Jewish in- 
struction intended to correct the false 
current notion that that kingdom was narrow 
in extent, and intended to be confined to 
the chosen race of Israel. It is very dif- 
ferent in the Lord's picture. 

Ver. 23. — And the lord said unto the 
servant, Go out into the highways and 
hedges. Hitherto the parable-story has 
been dealing with the past and the present 
of Israel; it now becomes prophetic, and 
speaks of a state of things to be. The third 
series of invitations is not addressed to 
inhabitants of a city. No walls hem in 
these far-scattered dwellers among the high- 
ways and hedges of the world. This time 
the master of the house asks to his great 
banquet those who live in the isles of the 
Gentiles. And compel them to oome in. A 
greater pressure is put on this class of out- 
siders than was tried upon the favoured 
first invited. The indifferent ones were left 
to themselves. They knew, or professed to 
know and to appreciate, the nature of that 
feast in heaven, the invitation to which they 
treated apparently with so much honour, 
and really with such contempt. But fheia 
outsiders the Divine Host would treat dif. 
ferently. To them the notion of a pitying, 
loving God was quite a strange thought ; these 
must be compelled — must be brought to him 
with the gentle force which the angels used 
when they laid hold of the hand of lingering 
Lot, and brought him out of the doomed 
city of the plain. Tiius faithful men, in- 
tensely convinced of the truth of their mes- 
sage, compel others, by the bright earnest- 
ness of their words and life, to join the 
company of those who are going up to the 
feast above. Anselm thinks that God may 
be also said to compel men to come in when 
he drives them by calamities to seek and 
find refuge with him and in his Church. 
That my house may be filled. In ver. 22 
the servant, who knew well his master's 
mind and his master's house too, and its 
oapabiUtiea, tells his lord how, after many 



OH. iiv. 1— 35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



21 



had accepted the invitation and were gone 
in to the banquet, "yet there was room." 
The master of the house, approving his 
servant's words, confirms them by repeating, 
" Bring in more and yet more, that my house 
may be filled." Bengel comments here with 
his quaint grace in words to which no trans- 
lation can do justice : " Neo natura neo 
gratia patitur vacuum." Our God, with his 
burning love for souls, will never bear to 
contemplate a half-empty heaven. " Messiah 
will see of the travail of his soul, and be 
satisfled." « The love of God," says Godet, 
" is great ; it requires a multitude of guests ; 
it will not have a seat empty. The number 
of the elect is, as it were, determined before- 
hand by the riches of tlie Divine glory, 
which cannot find complete reflection with- 
out a certain number of human beings. The 
invitation will, therefore, be continued, and 
consequently the history of our race pro- 
longed, until that number be reached." 

Ver. 24. — For I say nnto you. That none 
of those men which were bidden shall taste 
of my supper. Whose words are these? 
Are they spoken by the host of the parable- 
story ; and if so, to whom does he address 
them ? For in the original Greek it is not 
"I say unto thee" (singular), the servant 
with whom throughout he has been holding 
a colloquy, but "I say unto you" (plural). 
Who does he mean by " you " ? The assem- 
bled guests? or especially the already in- 
■iroduced poor of ver. 21 (so Bengel) ? But 
what conceivable purpose, as Stier well asks, 
urould be served by addressing these stem 
words to tbe guests admitted? Would their 
bliss be increased by a side-glance at those 
who had lost what they were to enjoy? 
How inharmonious a close would this be of 
a parable constructed with such tender gra- 
oiousness throughout I It is better, there- 
fore, to understand it as spoken with deep 
solemnity by the Master himself to the 
assembled guests in the Pharisee's house, 
with whom he was then sitting at meat, and 
for whose special instruction he had spoken 
the foregoing parable of the great supper. 
•"I say unto you, that none of those who 
were bidden in the parable-story (and ye 
know full well that you yourselves are in- 
cluded in that number) shall sit at my table 
in heaven." This identification of himself 
as the Host of the great heavenly banquet 
was quite in accordance with the lofty and 
unveiled claims of the Master during the 
last period of his public ministry. Through- 
out this exposition of the great supper 
parable, the idea of the primary reference 
to the Jewish people has been steadily kept 
in view. It was a distinct piece of teaching, 
historic and prophetic, addressed to the Jew 
of the days of our Lord. As years passed 
on, it became a aa,jing of the deepest inte- 



rest to the Gentile missionaries and to the 
rapidly growing Gentile congregations of the 
first Christian centuries. In time it censed 
to be used as a piece of warning history 
and of instructive prophecy, and the Church 
in every succeeding age has recognized its 
deep practical wisdom, and is ever discover- 
ing in it fresh lessons which belong to the 
life of the day, and which seemingly were 
drawn from it and intended for its special 
instruction, for its warning and for its 
comfort. 

Vers. 25 — 35. — The qualifications of hit 
real disciples. Two short parables illustrative 
of the high price such a real disciple must 
pay if he would indeed be his. The half- 
hearted disciple is compared to flavourless 
salt. 

Ver. 25. — And there went great multi- 
tudes with him. These great multitudes 
were made up now of enemies as well as 
friends. Curiosity doabtless attracted many ; 
the fame of the Teacher had gone through 
the length and breadth of the land. The 
end, the Master well knew, was very near, 
and, in the full view of his own self-sacrifice, 
the higher and the more ideal were the 
claims he made upon those who professed to 
be his followers. He was anxious now, at 
the end, clearly to make it known to all 
these multitudes what serving him really 
signified — entire self-renunciation; a real, 
not a poetic or sentimental, taking up the 
cross (ver. 27). Even his own chosen dis- 
ciples were yet a long way from apprehend- 
ing the terrible meaning of this cross he 
spoke of, and which to him now bore so 
ghastly a significance. 

Ver. 26. — If any man oome to me, and 
hate not his father, and mother, and wife, 
and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, 
and his own life also, he cannot be my dis- 
ciple. The Lord's teaching throughout, in 
parable and in direct saying, pressed home 
to his followers that no home love, no 
earthly affection, must ever oome into com- 
petition with the love of God. If home and 
his cause came ever into collision, home and 
all belonging to it must gently be put aside, 
and everything must be sairificed to the 
cause. Farrar quotes here from Lovelace — 

" I could not love thee, dear, so much, 
Loved I not honour more." 

Vers. 28 — 30. — For which of you, intending 
to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and 
couuteth the cost, whether he have sufficient 
to finish it ? Lest haply, after he hath laid 
the foundation, and is not able to finish it, 
aU that behold it begin to mock him, saying, 
This man began to build, and was not ablt 
to finish. The imagery was not an un- 
familiar one in those days. The magnifi- 
cent Hercdian house had » passion for 



28 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST LUKE, [oh. xiv. 1— 35. 



erecting great buildings, sacred and profanQj 
in the varied cities under their sway. They 
would doubtless be often imitated, and no 
doubt many an urfinished edifice testified 
to the foolish emulation of some would-be 
imitator of the extravagant royal house. 
Now, such incomplete piles of masonry and 
brickwork simply excite a contemptuous 
pity for the builder, who has so falsely cal- 
culated his resources when he drew the plan 
of the palace or villa he was never able to 
finish. So in the spiritual life, the would- 
be professor finds such living harder than 
he supposed, and bo gives up trying after 
the nobler way of living altogether; and the 
world, who watched his feeble efforts and 
listened with an incredulous smile when he 
proclaimed his intentions, now ridicules 
him, and pours scorn upon what it considers 
an unattainable ideal. Such an attempt 
and faUore injure the cause of God. 

Vers. 31, 32. — Or what king, going to 
make war against another king, sitteth not 
down first, and oonsnlteth whether he be 
able with ten thousand to meet him that 
Cometh against him with twenty thousand 1 
Or else, while the other is yet a great way 
off, he sendeth an amhassage, and desireth 
conditions of peaoe. It is not improbable 
that this simile was derived from the history 
of the time. The unhappy connection of 
the tetraroh Herod with Herodias had 
brought about (he divorce of that sovereign's 
first wife, who was daughter of Aretas, a 
powerful Arabian prince. This involved 
Herod in an Arabian war, the result of 
which was disastrous to the tetrarch. Jose- 
phus points out that this ill-omened incident 
was the commencement of Herod Antipas'a 
subsequent misfortunes. Qui Lord not im- 
probably used this simile, foreseeing what 
would be the ultimate end of this unhappy 
war of Herod. The first of these two little 
similes rather points to the building up of 
the Christian life in the heart and life. The 
second is an image of the warfare which 
every Christian man mnst wage against the 
world, its passions, and its lusts. If we 
cannot brace ourselves up to the sacrifice 
necessary for the completion of the building 
up of the life we know the Master loves; 
if we shrink from the cost involved in the 
warfare against sin and evil — a warfare which 
will only end with life — better for us not to 
begin the building or risk the war. It will 
be a wretched alternative, but still it will 
be best for ub to make our submission at 
once to the world and its prince ; at least, 
by so doing we shall avoid the soaixdal and 



the shame of injuring a cause which we 
adopted only to forsake. The Swiss com- 
mentator Godet very naturally uses here 
a simile taken from his own nationality: 
" Would not a little nation like the Swiss 
bring down ridicule on itself by declaring 
war with Prance, if it were not determined 
to die nobly on the field of battle?" He 
was thinking of the splendid patriotism of 
his own brave ancestors who had determined 
so to die, and who carried out their gallant 
purpose. He was thinking of stricken fieldj 
like Morgarten and Sempaoh, and of brave 
hearts like those of Rudolph of Erlach, and 
Arnold of Winkelried, who loved their 
country better than their lives. This was 
the spirit with which Christ's warriors must 
undertake the hard stem warfare against an 
evil and corrupt world, otherwise better let 
his cause alone. The sombre shadow of the 
cross lay heavy and dark across all the 
Bedeemer's words spoken at this time. 

Ver. 33. — So likewise, whosoever he be of 
you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he 
cannot be my disciple. " We must live in 
this world as though the soul was already 
in heaven and the body mouldering in the 
grave " (St. Francis de Sales). There was 
much unreasoning, possibly not a little 
sentimental enthusiasm, among the people 
who crowded round Jesus in these last 
months of his work. The steru, uncom- 
promising picture of what ought to be the 
life of his real followers was painted espe- 
cially with a view of getting rid of these 
useless, purposeless enthusiasts. The way 
of the cross, which he was about to tread, 
was no pathway for such light-hearted 
trifiers. 

Vers. 34, 85. — Salt is good : but if ths 
salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it 
be seasoned t It is neither fit for the land, 
nor yet for the dunghill ; but men oast it out. 
Here " salt " stands for the spirit of self- 
sacrifice, self-reuunoiation. When in a man, 
or in a nation, or in a Church, that salt ia 
savourless, then that spirit is dead; there 
is no hope remaining for the man, for the 
people, or the Chnroh. The lesson was a 
general one — it was meant to sink into each 
listener's heart ; but the Master's sad gaze 
was fixed, as he spoke the sombre truth, on 
the people of Israel whom he loved, and on 
the temple of Jerusalem where his glory- 
presence used to dwell. Men cast it out. 
Jesus could hear the armed tramp of the 
Eoman legions of the year 70 as they oast 
out his people firom their holy laud. 



CH. XIV. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. t» 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 24:.— The great supper. The feast of whict Christ was partaking bad been 
carefully prepared, and was an event of some consequence in the town. This may 
be inferred not only from the tone of the Lord's remarks, but also from the intima- 
tions of the evangelists. Thus from ver. 12 it appears that the Pharisee had gathered 
together the elite of the. place, along with his more intimate friends and his kinsmen. 
From ver. 7 we learn that there had been an eager scramble on the part of the guests 
for the chief places, the precedencies, and dignities. It was the observation of this 
which called forth the saying (ver. 11), " Whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; 
and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." Notice, too, as proving the care 
which had been bestowed on the entertainment, that there was an understanding 
among the more prominent guests that the movements and words of the invited 
Prophet should be closely watched. In fact, the supper was a trap laid. To complete 
the scheme, a man was introduced (ver. 2) who laboured imder a severe illness — 
dropsy; a man whose presence might be a temptation to the loving-hearted Healer to 
violate the sacredness of the sabbath. Jesus, we are told (ver. 3), " answering," i.e. 
knowing the intention of the lawyers and Pharisees, put a question to them which 
revealed the thoughts of the heart, whilst it so vindicated his work of mercy that it 
reduced his hypocritical'friends to silence : " they could not answer him again to these 
things " (ver. 6). This great supper is the text of one of the most beautiful of our 
Lord's parables. The introduction of the parable is very simple. He had taught his 
host a lesson of charity (vers. 12 — 14), when one of the company, catching at the last 
clause, " recompensed at the resurrection of the just," and giving this the accepted 
Pharisee-meaning — a banquet at which the elect of the nation would sit down with 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (presuming, of course, that he would have a place at that 
banquet)— exclaims, " Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God " (ver. 
15). " Yes," virtually replies the Prophet, " only recollect that this kingdom of God 
is not the blessedness which you imagine ; nay, since the call to it has been rejected 
by those who were bidden — i.e. the covenant-people — that call will be extended, in the 
fulness of its glory, to the publicans and sinners whom you reject — the people of the 
streets and lanes; it will be extended further still, even to the ignorant heathen — 
the people of the highways and hedges. For (representing in these words the giver of 
the festival) " None of those men that were bidden shall taste of my supper " (ver. 24). 
Such was the primary application of the parable. In its details it is entirely within 
the circle of prophetic ideas. The supper is an Old Testament symbol of the day of 
Christ, the Messiah (see Isa. xxv. 6). The " many bidden " were those who, having 
Moses and the prophets, were possessors both of the Word heard outwardly with the 
ear, and of ths grace through which it is grafted inwardly in the heart. The servant 
at the supper-time denotes that preaching of the kingdom which began with John the 
Baptist, and was carried on by our Lord and those whom " he sent before his face into 
every city and place, whither he himself would come." The excuses intimate the pleas 
on which the invited, with one consent, turned away from the call. And the further 
missions of the servant, first keeping within the city, to the streets and lanes, and, 
secondly, quitting the precincts of the city, to the highways and hedges, denote, as 
has been said, the inclusion of the excluded classes of the Jews, along with the Sama- 
ritans, and the bidding of the Gentiles to the light of the gospel. " I said," thus ancient 
prophecy expressed it (Isa. Ixv. 1), " Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not 
called by my Name." Passing from the first relations 6f the parable to those which 
more directly concern us, every part of it is suggestive of some aspect of Christian truth 
or life. Notice three points — 

I. The hospitality of God. God is the Presence shadowed forth in the " man who 
makes the great supper." In the notion of such a supper we see the Divine hospitality. 
A supper carries with it the thought of an abundant provision, of satisfaction for all 
want, of an infinite and various fulness. And is not this associated in the Scriptures 
with the very name of God ? Take, e.g., one of the most beautiful utterances of the 
Psalter, Ps. xxxvi. 5 — ^9. Indeed, the manifold revelation of God in nature, provi- 
dence grace, in the firmament above us, the earth around us, the great and wide sea. 



80 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xiv. 1— 36. 

our own consciousness, the Word who in the beginning was with God and was God- 
God himself in every form of his commuDioation, is the exoeeiliiig joy of the pure 
in heart. His greatness is so hospitable. It makes room for all our littleness and 
weakness " in its lap to lie." As Faber, in verses of sweetest music, has sung — 

"Thus doth thy grandeur make us grand ourselves; 
'Tis goodness makes us fear ; 
Thy greatness makes us brave, as children are 
When those they love are near. 

"Great God ! our lowliness takes heart to play 
Beneath the sliadow of thy state ; 
The only comfort of our littleness 
Is that thou art so great. 

" Then on thy grandeur I will lay me down ; 
Already life is heaven for me ; 
No cradled child more softly lies than I ; 
' Come soon, Eternity.' " 

It ia this hospitality that is declared in the Son of the Eternal Love. Christ la the 
Great Supper. In him God has " abounded towards us in wisdom and prudence." 
St. Paul speaks of " the love of Christ which passeth knowledge," of Christ " the AU in 
all;" and, more particularly defining the supper-making, he says, "Christ, of God 
made to us Wisdom, Kighteousness, Sanctification, Eedemption." All that we need as 
men, all that is salvation for sinners, is ours in him. And how is it ours? " If any 
man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, 
and he with me." 

II. The chuelishnbss or men. This is God, with the door thrown wide open, the 
table prepared, the life eternal given, the grand, ever-urgent "Come!" "Ho, every 
one that thirsteth, . . . and he that hath no money, come 1 " But what is the reception ? 
Strange, wonderful, but still too true, " They all with one consent began to make 
excuse " (ver. 18). Look at the excuses. They are pictures of states of mind, of attitudes 
of thought, as real now as at any time. Three such pictures are sketched. The first 
(ver. 18), a mind which rejoices in a good realized. The man has the desire of his 
heart. He is the lord of broad acres. " Soul, take thine ease ; what need for thee of 
the supper?" The second (ver. 19), a mind still immersed in business, with its cares 
and anxieties. The man has just concluded an important purchase ; before all else he 
must prove it. The third (ver. 20), a mind absorbed in earthly delights and social 
relationships — ^he " cannot come." We can trace, in the three pictures, a climax like 
that of the parable reported in Matt, xxii., which closely resembles this. There is an 
ascending scale in the rejection. The first i* covetous to a degree ; he would go with 
all his heart — only that little estate ; he must needs " pray let me be excused." The 
second is polite, but more abrupt; there is a graceful wave of the hand, a gentlemanly 
" Pray let me be excused ; " but there is no " I must needs." The third is rude 
and flat in his denial ; there is a quick " No, I cannot." Is it not the climax of 
worldliness in every period? And what is worldliness? The celebrated Robert 
Hall one day wrote the word "God" on a slip of paper. "You can read that?" ho 
said, as he passed the slip to a friend. " Yes." He covered the name on the slip 
with a sovereign. " Can you read it now ? " The sovereign was above, was nearer the 
gaze than Ood. That is worldliness. It is not the having, not the purchasing, of the 
ground or the oxen. It is the having the earthly thing in the first place, the setting 
of the " must needis " over against it. And it is the mind which does this, to which 
the heavenly kingdom is second to the earthly good, which is fruitful of excuses. Oh, 
how often it puts off I how often there comes even the rude " I cannot " 1 Has the 
Giver of the supper found such a mind in any of us ? 

III. The commission op the sbbvant. It is to bear the Master's call, to declare 
that " all things are ready;" that salvation is full and is present; life now, life for 
ever, given with God's " yea " and " amen " to even the chief of sinners. The word 
of the reconciliation is " Come 1 " the ministry of reconciliation implies, " Go, ever out 



OH. XIV. 1— 35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 81 

and out." The house of the Lord must be filled ; he is bent on the winning of aouli. 
A supper, and none to eat ; a great supper, and only a few guests! 

" Salvation ! O salvation 1 

The joyful sound proclaim, 
Till earth's remotest nation 
Has learnt Messiah's Name.* 

" Compel them " Is the voice of the Everlasting Love. Use, i.e., all means of moral 
suasion ; circle around their wills ; plead, beseech, entreat, persuade, " instant in season 
and out of season ; " draw them, watch over them ; establish such links between the 
messenger and them that they shall feel that they must come with you, since God is 
with you of a truth. " Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did 
beseech jou by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God." 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 7 — 11. — Christ's word on modesty. The remark which the condnct of these 
guests called forth from Christ suggests to us — 

I. OuE Lord's interest in the humbler details op oub daily life. We might 
have imagined, judging antecedently, that the great Teacher would not conceru him- 
self with a matter so trivial as this ; or that, if he did, we should not find a record of 
his remark in a narrative so brief as are our evangels. We know that he had occasioa 
to rebuke the Pharisees for letting religious faith lose itself altogether in minute and 
infinitesimal prescriptions (oh. xi. 42 j Mark vii. 4). And theie is a very remarkable 
absence from our Master's teaching of petty regulations. He sought not to prescribe 
particulars of behaviour, but to convey Divine principles and to impart a holy and a 
loving spirit ; he knew that these would spontaneously and invariably issue in appro- 
priate conduct. But Jesus Christ would not have us think that he is indifferent to the 
way in which we act on small occasions. He could be " much displeased " by an act 
of small oflBciousness (Mark x. 13, 14) ; and he could be deeply moved by an act 'of 
simple generosity (ch. xxi. 2, 3). And we may learn from this incident that it is not 
a matter of indifference how we behave in the common occurrences of our daily life : 
to what homes we go, what place in the house we take, how we act at the table (1 Cor. 
s. 31), what is the tone of our conversation (Matt. xii. 37), with what raiment we are 
clothed (1 Pet. iii. 3), whether we encourage or discourage the weak and timid disciple 
(Matt. X. 42 ; xviii. 6). These things, and such things as these, are occasions when, by 
manifesting a kindly and humble spirit, we may greatly please our Divine Lord, or 
when, by an opposite spirit, we may seriously offend him. 

II. The pebfbebnce of modesty to self-asseetion. Jesus Christ here plainly 
and emphatically commends modesty of spirit and behaviour, and as decidedly con- 
demns an immodest self-assertion. To take a lower place than we might claim to do 
is often found to be the prudent and remunerative course. Self-assertion frequently 
goes too far for its own ends, and is discomfited and dishonoured. Every one is pleased 
when the presumptuous person is humiliated. But modesty is frequently recognized 
and honoured, and every one is gratified when the man who " does not think more 
highly of himself than he ought to think " is the object of esteem. But when, in a 
more worldly and diplomatic sense, such modesty does not answer; when a strong 
complacency and a vigorous self-assertion do, as they often will, pass it in the race of 
life, and snatch the fading laurel of " success ; " — still is it the becoming, the beautiful 
thing; still is it worth possessing for its own sake. To Je lowly-minded is a far bettor 
portion than to have all the honours and all the gains which an ugly assertiveness may 
command. 

III. The vital value of humility. (Ver. 11.) Lowliness of mind, penitence, 
may be of small account in the eyes of men, but, on the part of those as guilty as we 
are it is everything in the sight of God : " Blessed are the poor in spirit : for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven." Spiritual pride is utterly offensive to God, and draws down 
his most serious condemnation ; if we exalt ourselves we shall be abased by him. But 
a sense of our own unworthiness is what he looks to see in children that have forgotten 



a THE aOSi^L ACCOBDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xiv. 1— 35. 

their Father, in Bubjects that have been disloyal to their King ; and when he sees it 
he is prepared to pardon and to restore. If we humble ourselves before him and plead 
his promise of life in Jesus Christ, he will exalt us ; he will treat us as his children ; 
he will make us his heirs ; he will raise us up to " heavenly places in Christ Jesus." — C. 

Vers. 12 — 14. — Moderation ; disinterestedness ; patience, "We find in these words 
of our Lord — 

L The cokrbotion op a common fault. Jesus Christ did not, indeed, intend to 
condemn outright all family or social gatherings of a festive character. He had already 
sanctioned these by his own presence. The idiomatic language, " do not, but," signifies, 
not a positive interdiction of the one thing;, but the superiority of the other. Yet 
may we not find here a correction of social, festive extravagance ; the expenditure of 
an imdue measure of oxii resources on mutual indulgences ? It is a very easy and 
a very common thing for hospitality to pass into extravagance, and even into selfish 
indulgence. Those who invite neighbours to their house in the full expectation of 
being invited in return may seem to themselves to be open-handed and generous, 
when they are only pursuing a system of well-understood muttial ministry to the 
lower tastes and gratifications. And it is a fact that both then and now, both there 
and here, men are under a great temptation to expend upon mere enjoyment of this 
kind a degree of time and of income which seriously cri pples and enfeebles them. Thus 
that is given to display and indulgence which might be reserved for benevolence and 
for piety ; thus life is lowered, and its whole service is reduced ; thus we fail to reach 
the stature to which we might attain, and to render to our Master and his cause the 
service we might bring. In the matter of indulgence, direct or (as here) indirect, 
while we should keep away from asceticism, it is of still greater consequence that we 
do not approach a faulty and incapacitating selfishness. 

II. An invitation to a noble habit. "Call the poor - . . and thou shah be 
blessed; for they cannot recompense thee." An act of disinterested kindness carries its 
blessing with it. 1. It is an intrinsically excellent thing. " To do good and to commu- 
nicate " is honourable and admirable ; and to do this with no thought of return from 
those who are benefited, is an act of peculiar and exceptional worth. It takes very 
high rank in the scale of spiritual nobleness. 2. It allies us with the highest and the 
best in all the universe ; with the noblest men and women that ever lived in any land 
or age ; with the angels of God (Heb. L 14) ; with our Divine Exemplar (Mark x. 45) ; 
with the eternal Father himself (Matt. v. 45). 3. It leaves a benign and elevating 
influence on our own spirit. Every man is something the better, is so much the 
worthier and more Christ-like, for every humblest deed of disinterested benevolence. 

III. The pbomisb of a pure bewabd. If the idea of recompense is admitted, 
everything turns upon the character of the reward, so far as the virtue of the action 
is concerned. To do something for an immediate and sensible reward is unmeritorioufl ; 
to act in the hope of some pure and distact recompense is an estimable because a 
spiritual procedure. Our life is, then, based upon faith, upon hope, and especially 
upon patience. To do good and to be content to wait for our recompense until " the 
resurrection of the just," when we shall reap the approval of the Divine Master and 
the gratitude of those whom we have served below, — this is conduct which our Lord 
approves ; it bears the best mark it can bear— that of his Divine benediction. 0. 

Ver. 18. — Excusing ourselves. There are two things which seem as if they could 
not exist together, but which we continually confront. One is the felt obli<ration and 
value of religion, and the other is the mournful commonness of irreligion. Where 
shall we find an explanation of the coexistence of these two things ? "We find it in 
the habit of self-excuse. With one consent men excuse themselves. Now, an excuse 
is one of two things. 

I. A pbbtbxt which men invent, bo as to shun, without self-reproach, a plain but 
painful duty. A tradesman is not prospering in business; he is aware that he ig 
losing money ; he feels sure that an examination of his books will show a serious deficit 
at the end of the year ; he knows that he ought to acquaint himself with his actual 
financial position ; but he is reluctant to see how far he is behind ; he would much 
rather escape that scrutiny, and he consequently looks about for a reason that he can 



OH. xiT. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 98 

place before hiB own mind for postponing it. He easily discovers one. He could make 
better use of the time ; he ought not to neglect an opportunity that offers of making 
a good bargain — or anything else. What does it matter? Anything will serve; one 
pretext is as good as another. Here is a human soul that owes much to its Creator , 
has received everything, and has paid nothins; or scarcely anything — owes "ten 
thousand talents," and " has nothing to pay." One comes to him from God, and says, 
•' See how things stand between you and your Maker ; ' acquaint thyself with him, and 
be at peace.' " But the man shrinks from the scrutiny ; he is in debt, and knows that 
he is; he would much rather enter into any other account than that. So he searches 
for some plausible reason for putting it off to another time. And he easily finds one. 
Excuses are in the air, at every one's command. He has no time for religious inquiry ; 
so many people speak in God's Name, he is not sure who holds the truth ; he will he 
under more favourable spiritual conditions further on— or something else. What does 
it matter? One excuse serves as well as another. It is nothing but a screen put up 
between the eye and the object. This is a course of action to be ashamed of. It is 
not manly ; it is not right ; it is perilous ; it is delusive, and leads down to destruction. 
II. A PRErBKBNOE of that which is second-rate to that which is of supreme impor- 
tance. Here the particular illustrations of the parable serve us. These men are invited 
to be present at that which they ought to attend; but they allow something of 
inferior urgency to detain them. God is inviting us to partake of a most glorious 
spiritual provision ; he is offering eternal life to his human children. He is sending 
his servants to say, "Come, for all things are ready I" But how many decline 1 and 
they decline because they " make excuse ; " they put into the first place that which 
should come second. It is the demands of business ; or it is the cares of the house- 
iiold ; or it is the sweets of literature, of art, of family affection ; or it is the claims of 
human friendship ; or it is the hope of political influence or renown. It is something 
human, earthly, finite, on the ground of which the soul is saying, " Ambassador of 
Christ, I pray thee have me excused 1 " But it is wrong and it is ruinous to act thus. 
1. Nothing will ever justify a man in placing first in his esteem that which Grod has 
placed second, in keeping behind that which has such sovereign claims to stand in 
front. The claims of God the eternal Father of spirits, of Jesus Christ our Divine 
Saviour, of our own priceless spirit, of those whom we love and for whose immortal 
well-being we are held responsible by God, — these cannot be relegated to a secondary 
and inferior position without serious guilt. 2. Nothing will make it other than/oolish 
for a man to leave unappropriated the immeasurable blessings of godliness ; to prefer 
any passing earthly good to the service of Jesus Christ, the service which hallows all 
joy, sanctifies all sorrow, ennobles all life, prepares for death, and makes ready for 
judgment and eternity. How can Buoh foUy be surpassed? — 0. 

Ver. 23. — Spiritual Ireadth. The parable presents the gospel as a «acred feast pre- 
pared by the Divine Lord for the hungering hearts of men. The invitation is declined 
by one and another, who have inclinations for other and lower good than that which is 
thus provided. Hence the measures taken to supply their room. The text suggests — 

I. The largeness of God's lovino purpose. God wills that his house " shall be 
filled." This house of his grace is built on a large scale ; in it are " many mansions," 
many rooms. The magnitude of it answers to the greatness of his power and to the 
boundlessness of his love. The number of the ultimately redeemed will be vast indeed. 
To this point: 1. The hopes of all holy and generous souls. ?. The terms of predic- 
tive Scripture. 3. The attributes of the wise, strong, benignant Father of men. 
4. The duration of the redemptive scheme. 6. The character of the redemptive work 

the Incarnation, the sorrow, the shame, the death, of the Son of God. God's loving 

purpose is to gather a multitude which no man can number into the heavenly home, 
into the eternal mansions. 

II. The fulness or the Divinb commission. Those who represent the Lord of the 
feast are to " go into the highways and hedges, and compel men to come in." No 
people are to be excluded; no efforts are to be spared; no "stone is to be left 
unturned " to win men to the feast. There is to be a sacred compuMon used rather than 
the efforts of the " servants " should be unsuccessful. Here is no warrant for persecu- 
tion. No two things can conceivably be further apart from one another than the use 

LUKK. — ^IL D 



34 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xiv. 1—35. 

of violence and the spirit of Christ. To employ cruelty in order to compel men into 
Christianity is worse than a senseless solecism ; it is a flagrant and guilty contradiction. 
There are other and nobler ways of " compelling men to come in " to the kingdom and 
the Church of Christ — ways which are not discordant but harmonious with the spirit 
and the teaching of the Lord of love. They are such as these : 1. The constant and 
irresistible beauty of our daily life. The " waters" of spiritual loveliness " wear" the 
hardest stones of spiritual obduracy. 2. Occasional magnanimity of Christian conduct. 
Men are often compelled to bow down in admiration and even in reverence before some 
deed of noble self-saorifice, of lofty heroism. 3. Convincing presentation of the Chris- 
tian argument. The truth of Christ may be presented so cumulatively, so forcibly, so 
directly, so practically, so winningly, so affectionately, that the most defiant are 
abashed, the most prejudiced are convinced, the most impervious are penetrated, the 
most insensible are moved and won ; they are compelled to come in. 4. Earnest per- 
sistency of Christian zeal. There is a blind, imprudent zeal, which is worse than 
worthless, which only teases and torments, which does not alliu"e but drives to a greater 
distance. But there is also a wise, holy, Divine persistency, which will not be refused, 
which employs every weapon in the sacred armoury, which knows how to wait in 
patience as well as how to work in ardour, which, like the patient Saviour himself, 
" stands at the door, and knocks." This is the zeal which continues to plead with men 
for God, and ceases not to plead with God for men, until the barriers are broken down, 
until the indifference is broken up, until the heart looks up to heaven and cries, " What 
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life ? " — C. 

Vers. 25 — 83. — The time and the room for calculation in religion. What room is 
there in the religion of Jesus Christ for calculation ? What amount of reckoning before 
acting is permissible to the disciple of our Lord ? When and in what way should he 
ask of himself — Can I afford to do this ? Have I strength enough to undertake it ? 

I. The ciecumstance which suggested the idea. It was the temporary popu- 
larity of Christ that led him to the strain of remark we have in the text. " There 
went great multitudes with him " (ver. 25), fascinated by his presence and bearing, 
or struck by his teaching, or marvelling at his mighty works. And these men and 
women were far from entering into his spirit or sharing his high purpose ; it was 
necessary that they should understand what discipleship to Jesus meant, what absolute 
self-surrender it involved. So the Master gave utterance to the strong and trenchant 
words recorded in the context (vers. 26, 27). And the words of the text itself are 
explanatory of this utterance. Their import is this : " I say this because it is much 
better you should know what you are doing by following me than that you should 
enter upon a course which you will find yourselves obliged to abandon, than that you 
should undertake a duty to which you will find yourselves unequal, AH wise people, 
before they definitely commit themselves to any policy carefully consider whether 
they can carry it through. Every wise builder calculates the cost before he begins to 
build ; every wise king estimates his military strength before he declares war. So do 
you consider whether you are prepared to make a full surrender of your will to my 
will, of your life to my service, before you attach yourselves to my side ; for whoever 
is not able to 'forsake all that he hath' at my bidding, 'cannot be my disciple.' 
Ponder the matter, therefore; weigh everything before you act, count the cost, decide 
deliberately and with a full understanding of what it is you are doing." 

II. The place theeb is fob calculation in peesonal religion. 1. At the 
entrance upon a Cluristian life. It would seem as if there could be no room for reckon- 
ing here. We may well ask— When God calls us to himself, when Christ invites 
us to come unto him, what time should we allow ourselves before respondint^ to his 

summons? Should not our response be immediate, instantaneous? We reply Time 

enough to understand what we are undertaking to be and to do ; time enough to take 
the Divine message into our full and intelligent consideration ; so that our choice may 
be not the impulse of an hour, but the fixed and final purpose of our soul. God would 
not have us act in ignorance, in misconception. In malice we may well be children 
but in understanding we should be men. There is no step any man can take which is 
comparable in importance with that which is taken when a human soul enters the 
kingdom of God : on that hang everlasting issues. Let men, therefore, diligently and 



OH, XIV. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKfi. 35 

reverently Inquire until tliey understand what it means to haye a living faith in Jesus 
Christ, to enter his spiritual kingdom, and become one of his subjects ; let them under- 
stand, among other things, that it means the cheerful and full surrender of themselves 
to the Sayiour himself, with all that such surrender involves (ver, 33). 2. At the 
entrance on a public profession of personal religion. Here is a visible " Church " which 
we are invited to join, taking upon ourselves the Christian name, and openly avowing our 
attachment to our Lord ; thus honouring him before men. This is a step to be taken 
deliberately. Before taking it, a man should certainly ask himself whether he is pre- 
pared to act in accordance with his profession evert/where, in all circles and in every 
sphere ; not only where he will be encouraged to do the right, but where he will be 
solicited to do the wrong thing ; not only in the midst of genial influences, but in the 
throng of perilous temptations. But while these things are to be carefully taken into 
account, there must be reckoned, on the other side, the assurance which genuine piety 
may always cherish of needed Divine succour. If we go forth in the Name and in th» 
strength of our Lord to do that which is his own command, we may confidently count 
on his support ; and with him at our right hand we shall not be moved from the path 
of integrity and consistency. Look the facts in the face, but include all the facts ; and 
do not forget that among these are the promises of the faithful Friend. 3. Before under- 
taking any post of sacred service. It would be worse than foolish for a Christian man 
to go forth to any enterprise requiring an amount of physical strength, or of intellectual 
capacity, or of educational advantages, which he knows well he does not possess. That 
would be to begin to build and to be unable to finish, to declare war with the certainty 
of defeat. At hU times, when we are thinking of Christian work, we must carefully 
consider our qualifications. A wise and modest refusal is a truer sacrifice than an 
indiscreet and unwarrantable acceptance. But, again, let our judgment include the 
great factor of the Divine presence and aid, and also the valid consideration that com- 
petency comes with exercise, that to him that hath (uses his capacities) is given, and 
he has abundance (of power and of success). — 0. 

Ver. 26. — Chritt and kindred. The circumstances under which these words were 
spoken will explain the strength of the language used. Jesus Christ said that he came 
" not to send peace on earth, but a sword," by which he meant that the first effect of 
the introduction of his Divine truth would be (as he said) to set the members of the 
same family " at variance " against one another, and to make a man's foes to be " they 
of his own household" (Matt. x. 34 — 36). By honouring and acknowledging him as 
the Messiah of the Jews and as the Redeemer of mankind, his disciples would excite 
the bitterest enmity in the minds of their own kindred ; they would be obliged to act 
OS if they hated them, causing them the keenest disappointment and the severest 
sorrow. They would be compelled to act as if they hated their own life also, for they 
would take a step which would remove all comfort and enjoyment from it, and make it 
valueless if not miserable. On the relation of Jesus Christ and his gospel to human 
kindred, it may be said that Christianity — 

I. Disallows parental TyRANNT. Such unmitigated authority as the Roman law 
gave to the parent over the child is not sanctioned, but implicitly condemned, by Jesus 
Christ. No human being is wise enough or good enough to exercise such prerogative ; 
and to yield such deference is to cede the responsibility which om* Creator has laid 
upon us, and which cannot be devolved. 

II. Disallows filial wokship. Such idolatrous homage as the children of the 
Chinese render to their parents is also distinctly unchristian ; it is giving to the crea- 
ture what is due only to the Creator. It is to elevate the human above its lawful level. 

III. Sanctions and enjoins filial dbvotedness. Out Lord himself severely con- 
demned the perversity of the Pharisees, who contrived to evade filial obligations by 
sacred subtleties (Mark vii. 9 — 13). And amid the physical agonies and the spiritual 
struggles and sufferings of the cross he found time to commend his mother to the care 
of " the beloved disciple." His apostles explicitly enjoined filial obedience (Eph. vi. 1). 
And entering into the profounder spirit of our Lord's teaching, we are sure that he 
desires of children that they should not only be formally obedient to their parents' 
word, but that they should be careful to render to them all filial respect in manner ; 
ihoul'd have regard to their knawn will, whether uttered or unexpressed ; should rend«r 



M THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xnr. 1-5S 

the lerrice of love and of cheerfulness rather than of constraint ; should make theii 
filial miniBtry to abound as parental health and strength decline. 

IV. Bbserves absolute obedibnob fob the Divine Redbemke. When Christianity 
is assailing a false faith, as in the first century, as in heathen lands to-day, it very fre< 
quently happens that disciples have to choose between their attachment to the earthly 
parent and their obligations to Christ. Then the words of Jesus Christ have a literal 
application ; then the convert has to pass through the most severe and trying of all 
conflicts ; he has to weigh one authority against another ; he has to make a decision 
which will cause grief and wrath to one whom he would fain please and honour. But 
much as the human parent may have been to him, and strong as are his claims, the 
Divine Eedeomer is more, and his claims are stronger still and stronger far. The Lord 
who created him (John i. 3 ; Col. i. 16) ; who redeemed him with his own blood ; who 
sought and found and restored him ; who has made him an heir of eternal life ; — this 
Lord, who has been upholding him by his power, and who is the one Hope and Eefuge 
of his soul, has claims upon his obedience to which even those of a human parent are 
utterly unequal. And when the choice has to be made, as it sometimes has even here 
and now, there can be but one course which he recognizes as right; it is to choose 
the side and the service of the holy Saviour; ■meekly hearing the heavy cross of 
domestic severance; earnestly praying for the time when the human authority will be 
reconciled to the Divine ; faithfully believing that the sacrifice which is thus entailed 
will bring with it, in Christ's own time and way, a large and abundant recompense 
(Mark x. 28— 30).— 0. 

Vers. 34, 35. — Ourselves at talt. It is hardly possible to mistake the meaning ol 
Christ here. We know that salt is the great preservative of animal nature, the anti- 
dote of putrefaction and decay. We know also that the great Teacher intended that 
his disciples should be the salt of the earth, doing in the human the same purifying 
work which salt does in the animal world. 

I. The pbesbbvino power of the good in the booiett nr which thbt arb 
FOUND. 1. As those who act directly on God, and so on behalf of men. Had there 
been ten righteous men in Sodom, they would have preserved it from destruction. 
Similarly, the presence of a few righteous men would have saved the cities of Canaan. 
Is it not the presence of the righteous men and women in our modern cities which 
averts the retribution of God ? 2. As those that act directly on man, and thus on God. 
As there is a tendency in animal nature, when life is extinct, towards putrefaction, so 
is there a tendency in human nature, when spiritual life is extinct, towards degeneracy 
and corruption. It is the fimction of salt in the economy of nature to prevent this 
result, to preserve sweetness and wholesomeness ; it is the part of moral goodness to 
prevent corruption in society and to preserve purity and excellency there. And this 
it does. Purity, sobriety, uprightness, reverence, self-control,— these are powers for 
subduing, for restraining ; they are powers that permeate, that sweeten, that preserve. 
This is eminently true of Christian discipleship : for it has (1) truth to propoujid 
which is most cleansing in its character ; and it has (2) a life to live which is eminently 
purifying in its influence — the distinctive truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the 
life of the great Exemplar, which every follower of his is charged and is empowered to 
live again. 

IL The DANasB that this power will be lost. " Salt is good : but if the salt 
have lost its savour 1 " It may do so. The salt, by exposure to sun and rain, may 
lose its pungency and its virtue while retaining its appearance. 1. And so Christian 
truth may lose its distinguishing force. Men may use Christian forms of speech in their 
teaching, and yet the doctrine they declare may be an enfeebled and emasculated 
Christianity, from which all that is distinctive and all that is redeeming is extracted: 
it is salt without its savour. 2. And so Christian life may lose its excellency and its 
virtue. These may be blurred and blemished lives, o)r they may be spotted and stained 
lives, or they may be lives with nothing in them beyond mere conventional propriety 
—lives not animated by the love of Christ, not filled with the Spirit of Christ, not 
governed by the principles of Christ ; not blamable, but not beautiful; not wicked, but 
worldly ; not criminal, but not Christian : the salt has lost its savour. 

IIL The bxtekmb unlikelihood of restoration. "If the salt have lost . . . 



oH-x-n.!— 35.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKB. 9t 

wherewith shall It be seasoned?" That is an impossibility. Salt that has lost fts 
virtue is useless for all ordinary purposes, and is " cast out." It is not ahsolvtely impos- 
sible for the soul that has lost its Christian spirit and character to regain its worth, but 
it is very difficult and it ia very rare. The recovery of lost feeling is a spiritual marvel. 
1. It is so improbable that no man who loves his soul will expose himself to the peril ; 
if he does, he most seriously endangers his spiritual life, he most gravely imperils his 
eternal future. 2. It is no^ so impossible that any unfaithful soul need despair. True 
penitence and genuine faith will bring back the wanderer from the fold to the shelter 
of the good Shepherd's love. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 24. — Table-talk of Jesus. We have now brought before ua an Interesting 
conversation which Jesus had with certain guests at an entertainment in the house 
of " one of the chief Pharisees." It was a sabbath-day feast, indicating that sociality 
was not incompatible even with Jewish sabbath-keeping. Into the guest-chamber had 
come a poor man afSicted with the dropsy, and, to the compassionate eye of our Lord, 
he afforded an opportunity for a miracle of mercy. But, before performing it, he tests 
their ideas about sabbath-observance. They were sufficiently merciful to approve of 
sociality among themselves, but the healing of neighbours was another matter. They 
could even be merciful to cattle if they were their own ; but to be merciful to a brother 
man would have shown too much breadth of sympathy. The sick man might wait 
till Monday, but an ass or an ox might die if not delivered out of its difficulty, which 
would be so much personal loss. In spite of their narrow-mindedness, our Lord took 
the poor man and healed him, and then proceeded to give the guests very wholesome 
advice. 

I. Let d8 look at thb pabablb about the weddino. (Vers. 7 — 11.) To the 
Lord's eye the feast became the symbol of what is spiritual. The wedding of the 
parable is the consummation of the union between God and his people. The invita- 
tion is what is given in the gospel. Hence the advice is not instructive as to the 
prudential temper, but as to our spirit in coming before God. Shall it be the spirit 
which claims as right the highest room, or that which accepts as more than we deserve 
the lowest room ? In other words, shall we come before God in a spirit of self- 
righteousness or in a spirit of self-abasement ¥ Now, our Lord points out, from the 
collisions of social life, the absolute certainty of the self-important and self-righteous 
being abased among men ; how much more in the righteous administration of God ! 
The self-righteous under his administration shall be abased, how deeply and terribly 
we cannot conceive. On the other hand, those who have learned to hunible themselves 
xmder the mighty hand of God shall be exalted in due season, and have glory in the 
presence of the celestial guests I Jesus thus attacked the self-righteousness of the 
Pharisees, not as a social, but as a spiritual question. God would at last cast it away 
from his presence and society with loathing and contempt.' On the other hand, telf- 
abasement is the sure sign of grace and the sure earnest of glory. He who takes with 
gratitude the lowest room in God's house is certain of speedy promotion 1 

II. OUB HOSPITALITY BHOtTLD BE DiVINB IN ITS SPIBIT AND CHARAOTBB. (VerS. 

12 — 14,) Having improved the conduct of the guests, and shown its spiritual bearings, 
he next turns to the host, and gives him an idea of what hospitality should be. It 
should not be speculative, but disinterested — something, in fact, which can only be 
recompensed at the resurrection of the just. In no clearer way could our Lord indicate 
that hospitality should be exercised in the light of eternity ; and the bearing of it 
upon spiritual interests should constantly be regarded. And here we surely iihonld 
learn : 1. How important it is to be social, God is social. His Trinity guarantees 
the sociality of his nature. We are to be God-like in our sociality. 2. It may b« 
most helpful to lonely spirits upon earth. Many a lonely heart may be saved for 
better things by a timely social attention, 3. There is great blessing in giving atten- 
tion to people who cannot return it. It is a great field of delight that those with largo 
hearts may have, " It is more blessed to give than to receive." We are following 

* Suggestive discourses on this passage may bo found in GeroVs * Pilgerbrod,' i. 669 ; 
Gerok's 'Aus Emster Zeit,' s, 574; Hofaoher's 'Predigten,' s, 670; Beck's 'Ohristliche 
Bodeq,' i. i. 290. 



38 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvi. 1— 35 

God's plan in tlie attentions we bestow. 4. At the final arransement of God'« 
kingdom, all such disinterested hospitality shall be recompensed. How? Surely by 
opportunity being afforded of doing the like again 1 The hospitable heart, which keeps 
eternity in view in all its hospitality, shall have eternity to be Btill more hospitable in. 
III. The paeablb of the great supper. (Vers. 15 — 24.) Jesus proceeds from 
the question of hospitalities to present the gospel in the light of a supper provided by 
the great Father above, and to which he invited sinners as his guests. And here we 
have to notice : 1. The greatness of the supper. The preparations were long and 
elaborate. How many centuries were consumed in preparing the feast which we have 
in the gospel ! It was to be the greatest " feast of reason and flow of soul " the world 
has seen. And so it is. Nowhere else does man get such food for his mind and heart 
aa in the eospel of Christ. 2. The freedom of the invitations. Many were bidden. 
No niggardliness about the invitations. They are scattered so freely that, alas 1 they 
aie not by many sufficiently prized. 3. The supplementary summons by the faithful 
servant. It is not an invitation by ink and pen merely that God sends, but he backs 
the written revelation by personal persuasion by the mouth of faithful servants. Here 
is the sphere of the gospel ministry. These true ministers tell what a feast is ready 
in the gospel, and what their own experience of it has been. 4. The triviality of the 
excuses. To the invitations sent out by God men make excuses. There is something 
peculiarly sad and significant in refusals upon insufficient grounds. Our Lord gives 
us ,tliree examples of the excuses men make for refusing salvation and the gospel. 
(1) The first man puts a piece of ground before salvation. " Real property " keeps 
many a man out of the kingdom of heaven. (2) The second puts cattle before salva- 
tion. Many men are so interested in good " stock," and all the mysteries of breeding 
and work, as to have no time for their eternul interests. A few chattels keep multi- 
tudes out of God's kingdom. (3) The third puts social concerns before spiritual. He 
has married a wife, and so cannot attend to the claims of God. Society, its attractions 
and allurements, is keeping multitudes out of the kinglom above. These are but 
specimens of the trivialities wtiich are monopolizing men's attention, and preventing 
their giving good heed to the things of the gospel. 5. The extension of the invitation 
to those who are sure to accept it. The poor, maimed, halt, and blind represent the 
souls who feel their spiritual poverty and defects, and who are sure to appreciate God's 
gracious invitation. When the self-righteous spurn it, the abased and humiliated 
greedily receive it. 6. 'I'he abundant room, and the difficulty in getting the plcuxa 
filled. There is no possibility of any one coming and being refused admittance. There 
is roonj for all who tare to come. Those who will not taste of the supper are those who 
thought themselves better employed. In compelling men to come in, we must do our 
best in persuading them to accept the gospel. May we leave nothing undone that the 
Divine table may be filled.' — R. M. E. 

Vers. 25 — 35. — The cost of discipleship. The Pharisee's banquet being over, our 
Lord continues his journey towards Jerusalem, and, as a crisis is evidently lU hand, he 
has a goorlly multitude of exi)ectant followers. Have they any notion of the cost 
of discipleship? Are they prepared for all which it involves? Jesus determines to 
make this unmistakable, and go he gives them the admonition contained in the present 
section. He gives point to his advice by mentioning the folly of beginning to build 
a tower without calculating the cost of finishing it, or of beginning a war without 
calculating the reasonable chances of success. Each follower would have a costly 
tower to build in the devoted life he must lead, and a costly war to wage in the 
contest for the faith. It was every way desirable, therefore, that they should go care- 
fully into the meaning of discipleship, and undertake it intelligently. 

I. Nothing less than the first place in the heart mdst be offered untc 
Jesus. (Ver. 26.) He insists on being put before father and mother, before wife and 
children, before brothers and sisters. All relations are to be put below him. He 
must be more than them all. It is a great demand, and yet a most reasonable one. 
For : 1. The love of Jesus anticipated aW parental loye. In fact, the love of our parents 
is only the latest expression of his far-seeing and foreseeing love. The generations to 
whom we owe bo much have only mediated for us the love of Jesus. 2. The unity of 
• Cf. Gerok'i ' Evangelien-Predigten,' b. 806. 



CH. XIV. 1—35.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TC ST. LUKE. 39 

marriage only feebly illustrates the intensify of Christ's love. Husband owes much to 
wife, and wife to husband. The marriage union is a close and intimate one ; but Jesus 
comes closer to our hearts than husband or wife can. He is nearer, and should be 
dearer, than either. 3. The rising generation does not lay so much love and hope at 
our feet as Jesus. Children are dear ; the promise of their young lives and hearts is 
precious ; they come as pledges for the future ; they are prophecies of the world about 
to be ; but " the holy Cliild Jesus " comes closer to our hearts than even they. He is 
the prophecy of all coming time, the goal and ideal at which, not the rising generation 
only, but generations yet unborn, are to aim. 4. He gives us a more profound brother- 
hood than brothers or sisters can. The brotherhood of Jesus, " the elder Brother born 
for all adversity, and who can never die," is an experience which brothers and sisters 
can only help us to understand.^ Jesus consequently claims first place, because 
in his manifold relations he is not only more than each, but more than all combined. 

II. We must peize Christ more than life itself. (Ver. 26.) Life is another 
precious benefit which we naturally prize. Satan, in the trial of Job, imagined that 
Job would give all that he had rather than lose his life (Job ii. 4), He fancied that 
the patriarch, who would not curse God under the loss of children and property, would 
break down if God touched his bone or his flesh. But Job was so spiritually minded 
as to be ready to trust God, even should he, for some mysterious and hidden reason, 
slay him (Job xiii. 15). Now, Jesus comes and insists on being put before life itself. 
When the two come into competition there must be no question about yielding the 
palm to Christ. Jesus is more to us than physical life, because he is our spiritual life 
(John xiv. 6). We can never forfeit blessed existence so long as we trust in Christ, 
and the mere existence of the body is but a bagatelle in comparison. 

III. Self-sacbificb is the marching order of the redeemed. (Ver. 27.) The 
idea of cross-bearing is often interpreted as if it simply meant enduring those " crosses " 
to which life is heir. But much more is meant than this. In the Eevised Version it 
is pnt, " Whosoever doth not bear Ms own cross." Now, as Christ carried his cross to 
to die upon, so must we take our lives in our hands, and be ready at any moment to 
sacrifice them for Jesus. He was crucified for us : are we ready to be crucified for him, 
or to die in any other way he wishes? It is the martyr-spirit which Christ here insists 
upon. He is surely worthy of such self-sacrifice. 

IV. We must forsake all as a ground of confidence if we would follow 
Jesus, (Ver. 33.) Christ, having insisted on disposing of our lives as he pleases, 
nexts insists on disposing of our property. He comes in with his right to tell us, 
as he told the rich young ruler, that we must give up our aU for his sake. Not, of 
course, that he exercises this right often. Voluntary poverty has been an exceptional 
way of serving him. But we may all show plainly that our property is his, and that, 
when Christ and our possessions come into competition, all must give way to him. If 
we prize property more than Jesus, then he is nothing to us. We must be ready to 
put him before everything which we have, and to sacrifice everything when he claims 
it from us. In this way we make Christ first and all in all. 

V. The world needs such principles in practice to keep it from corruption. 
(Vers. 34, 35.) Were it not for the self-sacrifice of souls, the world would become 
utterly corrupt. Now, it is this heroic element which Christ's cause has pa/r excellence 
supplied. Only by the martyr-band, whose pure self-sacrifice was unmistakable, has 
the world been kept from utter selfishness and corresponding corruption. It was 
mindful of this martyr-spirit which his gospel ensures, that Jesus told his servants 
they were " the salt of the earth " (Matt. v. 13). Unless this wholesome antidote to 
natural selfishness be supplied, society must go to pieces. It cannot be built on 
selfishness. The economics which assume no higher ethical element than each man 
looking after himself, may give expression to tendencies ; but they must be overpassed 
by realities if the world is to keep moderately sweet and habitable.' But suppose 
that Christ's servants make a mere profession of self-sacrifice, and do not carry out the 
spirit of their Master, then they become but insipid salt, which can only be trodden 
underfoot of men on the highway, where nothing is meant to grow. In other words, 

• Of. Hull's sermon at King's Li^nn, on " The Christian Brotherhood of Man : " ' Sermong,' 
I p. 121. 

' Of. Caimes's ' Logical Method of Political Economy.' 



40 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xt. 1—32. 



the Christians who are not genuine are sure to be despised. They are trodden down 
by a world whom they have vainly tried to deceive. A.falia professor is the most con- 
temptible of all men.— K. M. E. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XV. 



Vers. 1 — 32. — The Lord meaki hit three 
foraVle-itories of the " lost, in which he 
explains his reason for loving and receiving 
the sinful, 

Veis. 1, 2. — Then drew near nnto him 
all the publicans and sinners for to hear 
him. And the Fharisees and scribes mnr- 
mored, saying, This Man receiveth sinners, 
and eateth with them ; more accurately 
rendered, there were drawing near to him. 
This was now, in the last stage of the final 
journey, the usnal state of things. The 
great outside class came ia crowds to listen 
to Jesus. These were men and women who, 
through home and family associations, 
through their occupations, which were 
looked npon with disfavour by the more 
rigid Jews, often no doubt through their 
own careless, indifferent character, bad little 
or nothing to do with their religious and 
orthodox countrymen. Poor wanderers, 
sinnerst thoughtless ones, no one cared for 
them, their present or their future. Do not 
these in every age make np the majority 7 
The i^eligious, so often Pharisees in heart, 
despising them, refusing to make allow- 
ances for them, looking on them as hope- 
lessly lost ones. Bat at no time was this 
state of things so accentuated as when Jesns 
lived among men. Now, among such care- 
less irreligious men and women, are many 
whose hearts are very tender, very ready tb 
listen if the teacher of religion has any 
kind, wise words for them. The grave and 
severe, yet intensely pitiful and loving, doc- 
trines of the'Galilcean Master found such. 
His words were words of stem rebuke, and yet 
were full of hope, even for the hopeless. No 
man had ever spoken to them like this Man. 
Hence tlie crowds of publicans and sin- 
ners who were now ever pressing round the 
Master. But the teachers of Israel, the 
priestly order, the learned and rigid scribes, 
the honoured doctors of the holy Law, — these 
were indignant, and on first thoughts not 
without reason, at the apparent preference 
felt for and special tenderness shown by 
Jesus to this great outside class of sinners. 
The three parables of this fifteenth chapter 
were the apologia of the Galilcean Master to 
orthodox Israel, but they appeal to an 
audience far greater than any enclosed in 
the coasts of the Holy Land, or living in 
that restless age. 



Vers. 3 — 5. — ^And he spake this parable 
nnto them, saying, What man of yon, having 
an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, 
doth not leave the ninety and nine in the 
wilderness? Now, there are two leading 
ideas in the three stories — one on the side 
of the Speaker ; one on the side of those to 
whom the parable-stories were spoken. (1) 
On the tide of the speaker. God's anxiety for 
sinners is shown ; he pities with a great pity 
their wretchedness ; he sets, besides, a high 
value on their souls, as part of a treasure be- 
longing to him. (2) On the side of the listeners. 
Their sympathy with him in his anxiety for 
sinners is claimed. He has sought it hitherto 
in vain. The imagery of the first story is verj 
homely — easy, too, to understand. A small 
sheep-master pastures his little flock of a 
hundred sheep in one of those wide unculti- 
vated plains which fringe portions of the 
land of promise. This is what we must 
understand by "the wilderness." The 
himdred sheep represent the people of 
Israel. The lost sheep, one who had 
broken with Jewish respeftabUity. One 
only is mentioned as lost, not by any means 
as representing the small number of the 
outcast class — the contrary is the case — but 
as indicative of the value in the eyes of the 
All-Faiher of one immortal soul. And go 
after that which is lost, nntil he find itt 
And when he hath found it, he layeth it on 
his shoulders, rejoicing. This diligent 
search after the l«st one, the tender care 
shown by the shepherd when the object of 
his search was found, and the subsequent 
joy, pictured in a humble everyday figure 
the mode of acting of which the orthodox 
Jews complained. They said, " He receiveth 
sinners, and eateth with them." 

Ver. 6. — And when he oometh borne, he 
oalleth together his friends and neighbonrs, 
saying unto them, Bejoice with me; for I 
have found my sheep which was lost. And 
here the shepherd craves for sympathy from 
his fellows ; he would have others share in 
his joy in finding the perishing, suffering 
sheep. This sympathy with his effort to 
win the lost the Galilasan Master had 
looked for among the rulers and teachers of 
Israel in vain. Now, sympathy, it must be 
remembered, is not merely sentiment or 
courtesy. True sympathy with a cause 
means working in good earnest for the 
cause. This, however, the ruling spirits in 
Israel, in every seot, coldly refused. They 



en. XV. 1—32.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



i\ 



not only declined their eympathy with the 
acts of Jesus ; they positively condemned his 
works, his efibits, his teaching. 

Ver. 7. — I say unto yon, that likewise 
joy shall he in heaven over one sinner that 
repenteth, more than over ninety and nine 
jnst persons, which need no repentance. 
" But," the Master went on to say, " what 
I looked for in vain on earth, see, I have 
found in heaven. What men coldly refused 
me, the celestials have joyfully given. 
Theae understand ma. They love both me 
and my work, do the holy angels." This 
coldness, even opposition, on the part of the 
Pharisees and the religious men of Israel 
toliimself and his works, to his teachings 
of meroy and love, seems certainly to be 
the reason why Jesus emphasizes, both 
here and in the next parable, the sympathy 
which he receives, not on earth from men, 
but in heaven from beings, inhabitants of 
another world. Men, have, however, asked 
—Why do these heavenly beings rejoice over 
the one more than over the ninety and 
nine ? It is utterly insufficient to say that 
this joy is occasioned by the getting back 
something" that was lost. Such a feeling is 
conceivable among men, though even here 
it would be an exaggerated sentiment, but 
in heaven, among the immortals, no such 
feeling eould exist ; it partakes too much of 
the sentimental, almost of the hysterical. 
This higher joy must be due to another 
causa Kow, the shepherd, when he found 
the wanderer, did not bring it back to 
the old fold, or replace it with the rest of 
the iiook, but apparently (ver. 6) brought 
it to his own home. This would seem to 
indicate that sinners whom Jesus has come 
to save, and whom he has saved, are placed 
in a better position than that from which 
they originally wandered. This gives us the 
clue to the angels' joy over the "found one" 
more than over those who were safe in the 
old fold. The Talmudists have taught — 
and their teaching, no doubt, is but the 
reflection of what was taught in the great 
rabbinical schools of Jerusalem before its 
ruin — that a man who had been guilty of 
many sins might, by repentance, raise him- 
self to a higher degree of virtue than the 
perfectly righteous man who had never 
experienced his temptations. If this were 
so, well argues Professor Bruce, " surely it 
was reasonable to occupy one's self in en- 
deavouring to get sinners to start on this 
noble career of self-elevation, and to rejoice 
when in any instance he had succeeded. 
But it is one thing to have correct theories, 
and another to put them into practice. . 
So they found fault with One (Jesus) who 
not only held this view as an abstract doc- 
trine, but acted on it, and sought to bring 
ttiose who had strayed furthest from the 



paths of righteousness to repentance, b» 
lieving that, though last, they might yet be 
first." 
_ Ver. 8. — ^Either what woman having ten 
pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth 
not light a candle, and sweep the house, 
and seek dilige^itly till she find it? 
Another and very homely picture is painted 
in this parable. This time the chief figure 
is a woman, a dweller in a poor Syrian vil- 
lage, to whom the loss of a coin of small 
value out of her little store is a serioiu 
matter. In the story of the lost sheep the 
point of the parable turns upon the suffering 
and the siu of man, under the image of a 
lost sheep searched for and restored by the 
Divine pity. Here, 'in the second parable- 
story, the ruined soul is represented as a 
lost coin, and we learn from it that God 
positively misses each lost soul, and longs 
for ita restoration to its true sphere and 
place in the heaven life and work for which 
it was created. In other words, in the first 
parable the lost soul is viewed from man's 
standpoint; in the second, from God's. If, 
then, a soul be missed, the result will be, 
not only missing for itself, but something 
lost for God. 

Vers. 9, 10. — And when she hath found 
it, she oalleth her friends and her neighbours 
together, saying, Bejoioe with me ; for I ' 
have found the piece which I had lost 
Likewise, I say unto yon, there is joy in th« 
presence of the angels of God over one sinner 
that repenteth. Again, as in the parable 
of the lost sheep, we find this longing for 
sympathy ; again the finding of this sym- 
pathy ill heavenly places, among heavenly 
beings, is especially recorded. There is a 
slight diflerence in the language of re- 
joicing here. In the first parable it was, 
"Rejoice with me; for I have found my 
sheep which wot lost ; " here, "... for I 
have found the piece which I had lost." In 
the first it was the anguish of the sheep 
which was the central point of the story ; in 
the second it was the distress of the woman 
who had lost something; hence this differ- 
ence in the wording. "What grandeur 
belongs to the picture of this humble re- 
joicing which this poor woman celebrates 
with her neighbours, when it becomes the 
transparency through which we get a 
glimpse of God himself, rejoicing with his 
elect and his angels over the salvation of a 
single sinner I " (Godet). 

Ver. 11. — And he said, A certain man had 
two sons. It seems probable that this and 
the two preceding shorter parables were 
spoken by the Lord on the same occasion, 
towards the latter part of this slow solemn 
journeying to the holy city to keep his laat 
Passover. The mention of the publicans 
and sinners in ver. 1 seems to point to lome 



42 



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xv. 1—32. 



coneiderable city, or its immediate vicinity, 
B8 the place where these famous parables 
were spoken. This parable, as it is termed, 
of the prodigal son completes the trilogy. 
Without it tiie Master's formal apologia for 
his life and work would be incomplete, and 
the rebuke of the Pharisaic selflshnesa and 
censoriousnesa would have been left un- 
finished. In the apologia much had still 
to be said concerning the limitless love tind 
the boundless pity of God. In the rebuke 
the two first parables had shown the Pliarisee 
party and the rulers of Israel how they 
ought to have acted ; this third story shows 
tliem how they did act. But the Church of 
Christ — as each successive generation read 
this exquisite and true story — soon lost 
Bight of all the temporal and national sig- 
nification at first connected with it. The 
dweller in the cold and misty North feels 
that it belongs to him as it does to the 
Syrian, revelling in his almost perpetual 
summer, to whom it wns first spoken. It is 
a story of the nineteenth century just as it 
was a story of the first. We may, witii all 
reverence, think of the Divine Master, as he 
unfolded each successive scene which por- 
trayed human sin and suffering, and heavenly 
pity and forgiveness, man's selfish pride and 
,God's all-embracing love, passing into an- 
other and broader sphere than that bounded 
by the Arabian deserts to the south and 
the Syrian mountains to the north, forget- 
ting for a moment the little Church of the 
Hebrews, and speaking to the great Church 
of the future — the Church of the world, to 
which, without doubt, this Catholic parable 
of the prodigal, in all its sublime beauty 
and exquisite pathos, with all its exhaust- 
less wealth of comfort, belongs. 

Vers. 12, 13. — And the younger of them 
aaid to his father. Father, give me the por- 
tion of goods that falleth to me. And he 
divided unto them his living. And not many 
days after the younger son gathered all 
together. The subject of the story this 
time is not derived from humble life. The 
family pictured is evidently one belonging 
to the wealthy class. There was money to 
be distributed; there were estates to be 
cultivated ; means existed to defray the cost 
of feasting on a large scale ; mention, too, is 
made incidentally of costly clothing and 
even of gems. Like other of the Lord's 
parable-teachings, the framework of the 
story was most likely founded upon fact. 
The family of the father and the two sons 
no doubt had been personally known to the 
Galilsean Teacher. This imperious demand 
of the younger seems strange to us. Such 
a division, however, in the lifetime of tlie 
father was not uncommon in the East. So 
Abraham in his lifetime bestowed the main 
body of his possessions on Isaac, having pre- 



viously allotted portions to Ws other sons. 
There was, however, no Jewish law which 
required any such bestowal of property in 
the parent's lifetime. It was a free gift on 
the part of the father. But to the young 
son it was a hapless boon. 

"God answers sharp and sudden on gome 
prayers ; 
And flings the thing we have asked in our 

face, 
A gauntlet — with a gift in it." 

(E. B. Browning.) 

And took his journey into a far country. 
The youth, who probably in the Master's 
experience had suggested this part of the 
story, after receiving his share of money, 
started with unformed purposes of pleasure, 
perhaps of trade. The man, who was a Jew, 
left his home for one of the great world's 
marts, such as Carthage or Alexandria, 
Antioch or Eome. And there wasted his 
substance with riotous living. This is an 
extreme case. Few probably of the publicans 
and sinners whose hearts the Lord touched 
so deeply, and who are examples of the 
great class in every age to whom his gospel 
appeals so lovingly, had sinned so deeply 
as the young man of the story. Indecent 
haste to be free from the orderly quiet 
home-life, ingratitude, utter forgetfulness of 
all duty, the wildest profligacy, — these were 
the sins of the prodigal. It has been well 
remarked that the line runs out widely to 
embrace such a profligate, that every sinner 
may be encouraged to return to God and 
live. There is a grave reticence in sparing 
all details of the wicked life — a veil which 
the elder son with pitiless hand would snatch 
oway (ver. 30). 

Ver. 14.— And when he had spent aU. 
True of many a soul in all times, but espe- 
cially in that age of excessive luxury and 
splendour and of unbridled passions. 

"On that hard Roman world, disgust 
And secret loathing fell ; 
Deep weariness and sated lust 
Made human life a hell." 

(Matthew Arnold.) 

There arose a mighty famine in that land; 
and he began to be in want. The " mighty 
famine " may be understood to represent difli- 
cult times. War or political convulsions, so 
common in those days, may have speedily 
brought about the ruin of many like the 
prodigal of our story, and his comparatively 
small fortune would quickly have been 
swallowed up. Selfish evil-living, excesses 
of various kinds, had gained him no real 
friends, but had left him to meet the ruia 
of his fortune with enfeebled powers, home- 
less and friendless ; hence the depth of the 



OH. XV. 1-32.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKK 



48 



degradation in which we speedily find him. 
Not an unusual figure in the great world- 
drama, this of tlie younger son — the man 
who had sacrifloed everytliing for selfish 
pleasure, nnd soon found he had absiilutely 
nothing left but suifering. Very tonchingly 
the greatest, perhaps, of our Eiiijlish poets 
writes of this awful soul-famine. In his 
case fortune and rank still remained to him, 
but everything that can really make life 
precious and beautiful had been wasted. 

"My days are in the yellow leaf; 

The flowers and fruits of love are gone ; 
The worm, the anguish, and the grief, 

Are mine alone. 

" The fire that on my bosom preyg 
Is lone as some volcnnio isle ; 
No torch is kindled at its blaze— 

A funeral pile ! " 
(Byron.) 

Ver. 15. — kai lie went and joined himself 
to a eitizen of that country. " That citizen," 
says St. Bernard, quoted by Archbishop 
Trench, " I cannot understand as other than 
one of the malignant spirits, who in that 
they sin with an irremediable obstinacy, 
and liave passed into a permanent dispo- 
sition of malice and wickedness, are no 
longer guests and strangers, but citizens and 
abiders in the land of sin." This is a true 
picture of the state of such a lost soul, which 
in despair has yielded itself up to the evil 
one and his angels and their awful prompt- 
ings and suggestions ; but the heathen citizen 
is well represented by the ordinary sordid 
man of the world, who engages in any in- 
famous calling, and in the carrying on of 
which he employs his poor degraded ruined 
brothers and sisters. To feed swine. What 
a shudder must have passed through the 
auditory when the Master reached this climax 
of the prodigal's degradation ! For a young 
Israelite noble, delicately nurtured and 
trained in the worship of the chosen people, 
to be reduced to the position of a herdsman 
of those unclean creatures for which they 
entertained such a Inalhing and abhorrence 
that they would not even name them, but 
spoke of a pig as the other thing I 

Ver. 16. — And he would fain have filled 
his belly with the husks that the swine did 
eat : and no man gave unto him. So low 
was this poor lost man reduced, that in his 
bitter hunger he even came to long for the 
coarse but nutritious bean with which the 
herd was fed. Tliese swine were of some 
value when fattened for the market; but 
he, the swineherd, was valueless — he might 
starve. The husks in question were the 
long bean-shaped pods of the carob tree 
(Caratonia tiliqua), commonly used for 
fattening Bwine in Syria and Egypt. They 



contain a proportion of sugar. The vers 
poorest of the population occasionally use 
them as food. 

Ver. 17.— And when he came to himself. 
This tardy repentance in the famous parable 
has been the occasion of many a sneer from 
the world. Even satiety, even soul-hunger, 
did not bring the prodigal to penitence; 
nothing but absolute bodily suffering, cruel 
hunger, drove him to take the step which in 
the end saved him. There is no doubt it 
would have been far more noble on the 
young man's part if, in the midst of his 
downhill career, he had suddenly paused, 
and, with a mighty and continued effort of 
self-control, had turned to purity, to duty, 
and to God. Certainly this had been heroic 
conduct — a term no one would think of ap- 
plying to anything belonging to the life of 
the younger son of our story. But though 
not heroic, is not the conduct of the prodigal 
just what is of daily occurrence in common 
life ? The world may sneer ; but is not tuch 
a repentance, after all, a blessed thing? It 
is a poor mean way, some would tell us, of 
creeping into heaven ; but is it not better to 
enter into God's city even thus, with bowed 
head, than not at all ? Is it not better to 
consecrate a few months, or perhaps years, 
of a wasted life to God's service, to noble 
generous deeds, to brave attempts to undo 
past mischief and neglect, than to go sinning 
on to the bitter end? There is something 
intensely sorrowful in this consecrating to 
the Master the end of a sin-worn life ; but 
there is what is infinitely worse. What a 
deep well, too, of comfort has the Church- 
taught teacher here to draw from in his 
weary life-experiences I How many hired 
servants of my fatner's have bread enough 
and to spare, and I perish with hunger ! 
Among the bitternesses of his present degra- 
dation, not the least was the memory of his 
happy childhood and boyhood in his old 
home. 

" For a sorrow's crown of sorrows 
Is remembering happier things." 

The family of the prodigal, as we have 
already remarked, was certainly possessed 
of wealth, and was probably one of high 
rank. In the old home there was nothing 
wanting. 

Vers. 18, 19. — I will arise and go to my 
father . . . make me as one of thy hired 
servants. The repentance of the prodigal 
was real. It wag no mere sentimental 
regret, no momentary flash of sorrow for a 
bad past. There was before him a long 
and weary journey to be undertaken, and 
he — brought up in luxury — had to face it 
without means. There was the shame of 
confession before dependents and relativei 
and friends, and, as the crown of all, there 



44 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKB. [oh. xv. 1— 3i. 



waB the position of a servant to be filled in 
the home where once he had been a son, for 
that was all he hoped to gain even from his 
father's pitying love. 

Ver. 20. — And he arose, and oame to his 
father. And so he came safe liome; sad. 
Buffering, ragged, destitute, but still safe. 
But, in spite of this, the parable gives scant 
encouragement indeed to sin, poor hope 
indeed to wanderers from the right way, 
like the hero of our story ; for we feel that, 
though he escaped, yet many were left 
behind in that siid country. We dimly 
see many other figures in the picture. The 
employer of the prodigal was a citizen, but 
only one of many citizens. The prodigal 
himself was a servant— one, though, of a 
great crowd of others ; and of all these 
unhappy dwellers in that land of sin, we 
only read of one coming out. Not an en- 
couraging picture at best to any soul pur- 
posing deliberately to adventure into that 
country, with the idea of enjoying the plea- 
sant licence of sin for u season and then 
coming home again. Such a home-coming 
is, of course, possible — the beautiful story of 
Jesus telU us this ; but, alas I how many stay 
behind 1 how few come out thence 1 But 
when he was yet a great way off, his father 
saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and 
fall on his neok, and kissed him. But 
although many who wander never escape 
from that sad country, it is not because they 
would be unwelcomed should they choose 
to return. The whole imagery of this part 
of the parable tells us how gladly the 
eternal Father welcomes the sorrowful 
penitent. The father does not wait for the 
poor wanderer, but, as though he had been 
watching for him, sights him afar off, and 
at once takes compassion, and even hastens 
to meet him, and all is forgiven. 

Ver. 21. — Father, I have sinned against 
heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more 
worthy to be called thy son. Many, though 
not all, of the older authorities add here 
(apparently taking them from ver. 19) the 
words, " make me as one of thy hired (ser- 
vants)." The selfsame words of the 
original resolution are repeated. They bad 
been stamped deep into the sad heart which 
so intensely desired a return to the old 
quiet, pure home-life ; but now in his father's 
presence he feels all is forgiven and for- 
gotten, therefore he no longer asks to be 
made as one of the servants. He feels that 
great love wiU be satisfied with nothing less 
than restoring him, the erring one, to all the 
glories and happiness of the old life. 

Ver. 22. — But the father said to his 
servants. Bring forth the best robe, and put 
it on hiTTi ; and put a ring on his hand, and 
shoes on his feet. The older authorities 
add " quickly " after the words "bring 



forth." Everything is done by the father 
to assure the wanderer of full and entire 
forgiveness. Not only is a welcome given to 
the tired, ragged son, but he is invested at 
once, with all speed, with the insignia of his 
old rank as one of the house. But it is 
observable not a word is spoken of reply to 
the confession ; in grave and solemn silence 
the story of the guilty past is received. 
Nothing can excuse it. He forgives, but 
forgives in silence. 

Vers. 23, 24.— And bring hither the fatted 
calf. There was a custom in the large 
Palestinian farms that always a calf should 
be fattening ready for festal occasions. 
And let us eat. . . . And they began to be 
merry. Who are intended by these plurals, 
us and they f We must not forget that the 
parable-story under the mortal imagery is 
telling of heavenly as well as of earthly 
things. The sharers in their joy over the 
lost, the servants of the prodigal's father on 
earth, are doubtless the angels of whom we 
hear (vers. 7, 10), in the two former parables 
of the lost sheep and of the lost drachma, 
as rejoicing over the recovery of a lost soul. 

Ver. 25. — Now his elder son was in the 
field. The broad universal interest of the 
parable here ceases. Whereas the story of 
the sin and the puuisliment, the repentance 
and the restoration, of the prodigal belongs 
to the Chmrch of the wide world, and has 
its special message of warning and comfort 
for thousands and thousands of world- 
workers in every age, thie division of the 
story, which tells of the sour discontent of the 
prodigal's elder brother, was spoken espe- 
cially to the Pharisees and rulers of the 
Jews, who were bitterly incensed vrith Jesus 
being the Friend of publicans and sinners. 
They could not bear the thought of sharing 
the joys of the world to come with men 
whom they had despised as hopeless sinners 
here. This second chapter of the great 
parable has its practical lessons for every- 
day common life ; but its chief interest lay 
in the striking picture which it drew of that 
powerful class to whom the teaching ol 
Jesus, in its broad and massive character, 
was utterly repulsive. Now, while the 
events just related were taking place, and 
the lost younger son was being received 
again into his father's heart and home, the 
elder, a hard and selfish man, stern, and yet 
careful of his duties as far as his narrow 
mind grasped them, was in the field at his 
work. The rejoicing in the house over the 
prodigal's return evidently took him by 
surprise. If he ever thought of that poor 
wandering brother of his at all, he pictured 
him to himself as a hopelessly lost and 
ruined soul. The Pharisees and rulers 
could not fail at once to catch the drift of 
the Master's parable. They too, when the 



OH. XV. 1—32.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



45 



Lord came and gathered in that great har- 
vest of sinners, those firstfruitd of his 
mighty work — they too were " in the field " 
at work with their tithings and observauces, 
making hedge after hedge round the old 
saopsd Hebrew Law, uselessly fretting their 
Uvea away in a dull round of meaningless 
ritual observances. They — the Pharisee 
party — when they became aware of the great 
crowds of men, whom they looked on as lost 
sinners, listening to the new famous Teacher, 
who was showing them how men who had 
lived their lives too could win eternal life — 
they, the Pharisees, flamed out with bitter 
wrath against the bold and daring Preacher 
of glad tidings to such a worthless crew. 
In the vivid parable-story these indignant 
Pharisees and rulers saw themselves clearly 
imaged. 

Ver. 28. — ^Therefoie came his father out, 
and entreated him. The disapprobation of 
Jesus for Pharisee opinions was very marked, 
yet here and elsewhere his treatment of 
them, with a few exceptional cases, was 
generally very gentle and loving. There 
was something in their excessive devotion 
to the letter of the Divine Law, to the holy 
temple, to the proud traditions of their race, 
that was admirable. It was a love to Gcid, 
but a love all marred and blurred. It was 
ft patiiotism, but a patriotism utterly mis- 
taken. The elder brother here was a repre- 
sentative of the great and famous sect, both 
in its fair and repulsive aspect, in its moral 
severity and correctness, in its harshness and 
exclusive pride. The father condescended 
to entreat this angry elder son ; and Jesus 
longed to win these proud mistaken Phari- 
sees. 

Vers. 29 — 32. — Lo, these many years do 
I serve thee. Bengel quaintly commentg 
here, "Servus erat." This was the true 
nature of this later Jewish service of the 
Eternal. To them the eternal God was 
simply a Master. They were slaves who 
had a hard and difficult task to perform, and 
for which they looked for a definite pay- 
ment. Neither transgressed I at any time 
thy commandment. We have here repro- 



duced the spirit, almost the very words, of 
the well-known answer of the young man 
in the gospel story, who was no doubt a 
promising scion of the Pharisee party : " All 
these things have I kept from my youth 
up." The same thought 'sias in the mind, 
too, of him who thus prayed in the temple . 
*' God, I thank thee that I am not as other 
men are," etc. (eh. xviii. 11, 12). Yet 
thou never gavest me a kid. . . . AU that I 
have is thine. Thy brother has the shoes, 
tlie ring, the robe, the banquet; thou the 
inheritance, for all that I have is thine. 
Wliy grudge to thy brother an hour of the 
gladness which has been thine these many 
years? As soon as this thy son was come, 
. . . For this thy brother was dead. The 
angry elder son will not even acknowledge 
the prodigal as his brother; with bitter 
scorn and some disrespect he speaks of him 
to his father as " thy son." The father 
throughout the scene is never incensed. 
He pleads rather than reproaches, and to 
this insolence he simply retorts, " Thy 
brother was dead to us, but now — It was 
meet that we should make merry, and be 
glad." What was the end of this strange 
scene ? The last words, breathing forgivo- 
ness and joy, leave a, sweet sense of hope 
upon the reader that all would yet be well 
in that divided household, and that the 
brothers, friends again, would clasp hands 
before the loving father's eyes. But 
when Jesus told the parable to the 
crowds, the story was not yet played out. 
It depended on the Pharisees and rulers 
how the scene was to end. What happened 
at Jerusalem a few weeks later, when the 
Paesion-drama was acted, and some forty 
years later, when the city was sacked, tells 
us something of what subsequently happened 
to the elder son of the Lord's parable. But 
the end has yet to come. We shall yet see 
the brothers, Jew and Gentile, clasp hands 
in loving friendship before the father, when 
the long-lost elder son comes home. There 
will be joy then indeed in the presence of 
the angels of God. 



HOMILBTICS. 

Vers. 11 — 32. — Ihe parable of the prodigal son. This parable is at once a history, 
a poem, and a prophecy. A history of man in innocence, in sin, in redemption, in 
glory. A poem — the song of salvation, whose refrain, " My son was dead, and is alive 
acain, was lost, and is found," is ringing through the courts of the Zion of Gud. A 
prophecy, speaking most directly and solemnly, in warning and meditation, emphasis 
of reproof or of encouragement, to each of us. It is beyond the reach of the scalpel of 
criticism. Its thoughts, its very words, have enriched every speech and language 
in which its voice has been heard. It stands before us " the pearl of parables," " the 
gospel in the gospel " of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. It is the last of three 
stories, illustrative of Divine grace, which were spoken especially to the Phariseea^ 



46 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO BT. LUKE, [oh, xv. 1-32. 

and to them with reference to their cavil as expressed in ver. 2. Without minntely 
analyzing the three, the progress of the teaching may be indicated. Bengel has, with his 
usual felicitousness of touch, indicated this progress. The silly sheep represents the 
sinner in his foolishness. The sinner lying in the dust, yet still with the stamp of 
Divinity on him, is figured by the piece of money. Finally, the younger of the two 
sons is the representation of the sinner left to the freedom of his own will, and falling 
into an estate of sin and misery. We can trace, too, a progress in the setting forth of 
the Divine love. The journey of the shepherd into the far wilderness speaks to us 
of the infinite compassion of highest God ; for the sheep's own sake he goes after it 
until he finds it ; and the recovery is the occasion of the joy of heaven. The aspect 
specially illustrated by the search for the piece of silver is the infinite value to God of 
every soul. Not one will he lose; for his righteousness' sake he will seek until he finds. 
The last of the parables combines the two former, with a glory superadded : Infinite 
Compassion recognizing the infinite preciousness of the humau life, but this, now, in 
the higher region of Fatherhood and sonship. Let us discard all stiffening exposition 
of Christ's words ; e.g. that which takes as its key-thought that the younger son is the 
Gentile world, the elder son the Jewish Church. Let us regard it in the width of its 
generosity, as the picture of him whose love is reflected in the " Man who reoeiveth 
sinners, and eateth with them." The two words of the parable are " lost " and " found." 
Let us try to open up the wealth of meaning in them. 

L Lost. 1. Whence ? There is a glimpse into the sweet home-life — the father with 
the two sons. The joy of the father's home is the communion of his children. It was 
what he saw in the Father which moved the prayer of Jesus, " That they whom thou 
gavest me may be with me where I am." The joy of the child's home is the communion 
of the Father, and is realized when the Father's life — not the Father's living — is the 
desire, and the word of the psalm is fulfilled, " In thy presence is fulness of joy, and 
in thy right hand are pleasures for evermore." So we think of the days speeding on — 
musical, blessed days, such as we recollect, perhaps, in the home of our childhood, 
when, as we lookback, the sun seemed to shine far more brightly than now, and the 
day was longer, and all was peace. Parents and children together! For it is man's 
home to abide with God as Father. By-and-by there comes the far country, because 
there is no Father. 2. Eow ? The younger son demands the portion of goods that 
falleth to him. Mark how the tone has lowered, how the eye has drooped. " Father, 
give me ! " is the cry of the filial heart. " Give me my daUy bread I " is a true prayer, 
because it waits on God; it sees the living in the life which he gives. But "my 
portion of goods " is the voice of a sinful independence. It separates " what is mine " 
from what is " my Father's ; " it conceives of liis as being, by some right or title, mine. 
Himself, as the good, is no longer the all. This is the serpent's lie. " Ye shall not 
surely die, for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof your eyes shall be 
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." Such was the seductive 
whisper in the beginning. As if (1) God was keeping to himself a God-dom, in 
jealousy preventing the enjoyment of a blessedness which was the man's right. And 
as if (2) the way to know good is through the experience of evil — good discerned as the 
opposite of that which we have tasted, instead of evil being felt only as the darkness 
seeking to overtake the light in which we are abiding. The serpent's lie repeats itself 
in many forms, not the least familiar that which insinuates, " Let the young man sow 
his wild oats ; the good oats will come afterwards. Let him take his fill of enjoyment ; 
there will come the sober days and the quiet time." It works in us all ; it is the 
tendency of the sinful mind to withdraw from the authority of Heaven, from the rule 
of duteous love, to appropriate for self, and in mere self-will, the living of God. The 
father does not deny the son. He respects the sovereignty in the son which is 
derived from himself. " He who suffers us to go our way takes care indeed that it be 
hedged with thorns." But a son cannot be forced as a slave. If go he will, go he 
must. The father divides the living. 3. Whither f Not at once, possibly, does the 
separation in will show itself. It is not always easy to trace the first moment of the 
apostasy. Many a one continues, for a time, in the semblance of piety, even after he 
has ceased to desire spiritual things. But " not many days after " the rift in the luta 
appears. "He gathers all together." Now the purpose of the will is active; n« 
advice wiU stand in the man's path. The father's tear, the father'* smUe, avails not ; 



OH. XV, 1—32.] THE GOSPEL ACOOBDING TO ST. LTJKB. 47 

not the sight of the old roof-tree, or the remembrance of the sweet life that lies behind. 
There is an eager "farewell;" he rushes forward — Whither 1 "To a far country." 
Yes ; yield to appetite, to fleshly lust, it will take the soul on and on, away from the 
fences of religion, away to the far-off Nod, bidding it, as Cain did, build there the city 
of habitation, yet bidding only to mock, since he who would put miles between him 
and the face of his Father in heaven must be a sorry fugitive and vagabond. " A 
far country 1" That is wherever God is forgotten, is dishonoured as the Father. 
No ship is needed to bear one to the uttermost parts of the earth ; the distance is 
measured not by oceans or continents, but by tracts of affection and sympathy. 
" Alienated from the life of God " — this is the far country. Observe the two stages of 
the existence in the far country — the fulness and the famine. (1) There U fulness — 
a season of apparently inexhaustible happiness : " riotous living." The life of the 
youth is like a mountain-torrent that has been pent up and bursts forth. The Greek 
word has the force of "prodigally." And prodigal the wanderer is in the earlier 
period. Fill high the bowl; loud let the revel swell; eat, drink; there is more to 
follow, there is more behind. 

" Such is the world'i gay garish feast 
In her first charming bowl, 
Infusing all that files the breast, 
And cheats th' unstable soul." 

But — ^what? " The substance is wasting ; " literally, is "scattering abroad;" for so 
it is. As has well been said, " All creaturely possession consumes itself in the using ; all 
wealth must turn itself into poverty, either by its actual dissipation or in consequence 
of the folly of covetousness, which the more mammon increases is the less satisfied 
by it. Thus man, in his sin, consumes first of all his earthly goods, so that he can no 
more find comfort or satisfaction in them ; and then, alas 1 the true and real posses- 
sions which his heavenly Father communicated to him are also consumed." What a 
description of substance scattered (Prov. v. 7 — 14) 1 (2) Then comes in the second 
■tage. All which had been gathered together spent ; then arises the /omrae. For one 
who has nothing there is always a famine in that land. The world wiU give you so 
long as you have to give it ; when you can bring nothing, when you are used up ; ah, 
the fields which seemed golden become the bleakest of moors. There is no sight mors 
pitiful than a worn-out, used-up worldling. 

" The fire that on my bosom prey» 
Is lone as some volcanic isle ; 
No torch is kindled at its blaze^ 
A funeral pile I " 

Alas ! the pleasure has died out; the soul, the immortal self, not yet dead, is in want 
in a famine-stricken land. How is this want to be met ? 4. Wherein ? It is an evil 
and bitter thing to forsake the Lord. The son's own wickedness is correcting him, 
and his backslidings are reproving him. In want, but not yet in poverty blessed with 
desire. Here is the witness. Hitherto the son has been the son, wicked, reckless, 
but still not naturalized in that far country. The day of this separation has passed ; 
and, ohl the double degradation ! " Ke joins himself" — "pins himself" is the word- 
becomes wholly, abjectly dependent on, " a citizen of that country." He began by 
being his own master; he ends by being the slave of the citizen. The world uses for 
its pleasure the one who uses the world for his pleasure. A man's passion ia his 
minister for a time; by-and-by it becomes his tyrant. A very hard tyrant! The 
devil has no respect for the freedom of the will : " I was your companion, your Mephis- 
topheles, your slave. Now I have you, you are mine ; get out and feed these swine." 
It was an employment which conveyed the idea of utter wretchedness to a Jew. Strong, 
thickly laid, is the colouring; it is not one whit too strong or too thickly laid for fact. 
How do we behold this prince, this son of the Father? Toiling in the fields, with no 
shelter except the rude hut which he makes, and his only companions — the herd of 
fwinel Ard all the while the hunger gnawing 1 Were not these swine, wallowing in 
the mire, picking the carobs, eating the scanty grass, happy as compared with him? 
They got what Siey wanted ; he provided their food for them, but there is none to 



«8 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKB. [oh. xv. 1—32. 

giye him. He had rejected his father's hand, and there is no hand in all the world 
outstretched to him. In Oriental lands there grows a tree whose fruit is like the 
bean-pod, though larger than it, with a dull, sweet taste; the swine would take of it ; 
and the longing eye of the swineherd is cast on it. It is all he can get, for there is 
no food in that far country suited to him. The soul starves, whether in riotous 
living or in want, until it looks upwards and learns the old home-cry, " Father, 
give me I " 

II. Found. Consider the return, the welcome, the supper. "It is meet," says the 
father, " that we should make merry and be glad." 1. Mark ihe steps of the return. 
The hopeful feature about the poor swineherd is that, although pinned to the citizen 
of the country, he is yet a person distinct. He has sold himself; but himself is more 
than, other than, the citizen. There is an inalienable nobility which even " riotous 
living " cannot stamp out. There are " obstinate questionings," " blank misgivings," 
" fugitive recollections of the imperial palace whence he came." Ponder the record of 
the finding of the conscience, and the Litany first, and the Jubilate afterwards, which 
followed the finding. " He comes to himself." He has never been the right true self 
from the moment when he demanded the portion. The right self is sonship.' This 
wallowing in the sty with swine, this bound-overness to tyrant appetite and earthliness 
ah 1 as one awaking from a horrid dream he recognizes the reality. And wherein does 
the conscience, now awakened, become articulate ? (1) There is the sense of an awful 
discord and wrong. The menial of that citizen left to starve. How different are the 
menials in his father's house I They have bread enough and to spare. " Whatever is 
orderly is blest. I, the disorderly, the one out of place, out of my right mind, am the 
unblest, the one perishing with hunger." It was this feeling which came over the wild 
student when, in the solemn sweet moonlight, he gazed from the height on one of the 
fairest scenes of nature. And the cry was evoked, " All lovely, all peaceful, except 
myself 1 " — a cry that bade him back to another and nobler life. Who is there that in 
calmer moments does not understand the inward g'ai ce of the vision — the peacefiil 
father's house, and the misrule, unrule, of the self-willed and undutiful ? (2) There 
succeeds a higher thought: "The menial in that house, and I, the son I" Gradually there 
emerges the feeling of the heaven — the authority from which the sovil has broken, the 
order it has contravened, and more still, " against heaven, and before thee." The recol- 
lection of the father rushes in, bringing tides of holy ardour. Sis eye, the son feels, 
has been following him in the journey, in the wasting of the substance ; it has been all 
"be/ore him." "0 my father, my father 1 to have grieved and wounded thee! I 
will weep no longer. I will arise and go. I will throw myself on thee. I will ask for 
a place anywhere, if only it is near thee ; if I may be again in thy sight, and no longer 
<Ae sinner I " It is a repentance not to be repented of. The matter of it is not, " I 
have played the fool exceedingly ; " it is ever and throughout " I have sinned." What 
causes the will to arise is the longing to be again with the father, to pour out the 
broken and contrite spirit on his bosom. And he arises and goes. " The best and most 
blessed said and done " that can be in heaven or on earth. 2. And now for the welcome. 
The love that descends is always greater than the love that ascends. The love of the 
child is only a response to the love of the parent. And as to this father 1 Most touch- 
ingly explicit is the word of Jesus. " When yet a great way off, the father saw him." 
A very great way off I Even in the> far country he had been near. The seeing 
expresses the knowing all about the misery, and the earnestness of the return — a seeing 
that is a drawing also, a drawing through the need, and all along the journey forming 
an atmosphere of love that compassed him about. To come to the lOve of God is to 
realize that he was first ; it is to find that which found us when yet a great way apart. 
What more? A reproach? A reproof? The arms are at once thrown around the 
neck, and the kiss of reconciling fatherliness is printed on the cheek. The forgiveness, 
observe, comes before all confession. In confessing the sin we meet the blessing that 
has already covered us. But there is a confession. " The truest and best repentance," 
as it has been said, " follows, and does not precede, the sense of forgiveness ; and thus 
too, repentance will be a thing of the whole life long, for every new insight into that 
forgiving love is as a new reason why the sinner shuuld mourn that he ever sinned 
against it." Only, note, beneath the pressure of that fatherly heart there is no mention 
•f tike hired servant's place. The " Father, I have sinned," is gobbed forth on the father's 



OH. XV. 1—32.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 4» 

heart, and the son leaves himself to the father's will. And how the expression of the 
welcome rises I The hest robe is ordered out ; a sonship higher tl^ that of- mera 
birth. " The adoption of children by J^ns Christ to the Father " ia the best robe. 
And the ring is to be put on the hand— the ring with the seal of the spirit -of adoption. 
And shoes are provided for the torn and weary feet, that henceforth thej may walk up 
and down in the Name of the Lord. And hasten, complete the tokens of the rejoicing — 
make ready the supper in which the father can rejoice over hit child with joy, and rest 
in his love. 3. The fulfilment of the welcome 1b the tapper, with the slain fatted calf, 
and the dancing and mnsio. It denotes the free festal joy of God, of heaven, in the 
found, repenting sinner. It denotes also the festal blesse(&e8S of the sinner himself 
when the great Object of all need and longing ia found, when he is at home with hia 
God. There is a representation of the supper in Bom. V. ' We hear the music and dancing 
in Bom. viiL They express the truth of the new existence. There had been, in the 
past, a living, but not a fellowship, with the Father; henceforth it is fellowship : God ia 
the soul's Good, and the life is lived in and out of him. Oh the swellings of harmony, 
of poetic triumphant raptures, now I ** My son was dead ; and is alive again ; was lost, 
and is found." So much for the younger son and the father. Bfat we must not over- 
look the elder son. And we must not misjudge him. He was not bad ; he is not a 
mere churl. He is faithful, if he is not free ; he is just, if he is not generous. He 
had never transgressed a command ; if his life had no heights, it had no depths ; it had 
been even and calm. And he had been blessed, for he had been ever with the father, 
and all that was the fathei's had been his. We need not fix on any particular repre- 
sentation of the elder eon. The Pharisee-heart is, no doubt, castigated in the picture. 
But it touches many who would resent being associated with the Pharisee. Erum- 
macher was once asked his opinion of the elder son. He quietly said, " I well know 
now, for I learned it only yesterday." Being asked further, he laconically remarked, 
" Myself," and confessed that yesterday he had fretted his heart to find that a very 
ill-conditioned person had suddenly been enriched with a remarkable visitation of 
grace. The sketch supplies the foil to the love of God. It brings out, also, hia 
patience and gentleness in the dealing with the elder son. How the fathv bears 
even with the foolish wrath I How be reasons and expostulates, and invites to a share 
in the joy I " Meet that wa should make merry, and be glad— I over my son, thoa 
over thy brother." Two things notice. 1. The one as hearing on the elder son. He 
comes out of the fields, punctual and orderly in all his ways. He cannot understand 
the merry-making ; he never had received a kid. That son's life had been a wholesome 
one. The prodigal had his ecstasies ; but the elder eon had had his lifctime. He is the 
man of habit— ^bit which is to us better than instinct. The danger to the man of habit 
is that he becomes mechanical, doing his part steadily, but without the oil of gladness. 
2. The other as hearing on the yowiger ton. Let not Christ's teaching be misapplied. 
Do not think that it is a higher thing to be first irreligious and then religious ; to 
spend the best part of the life in eelf-gratification, and give God only the remnanta. 
Ah I years of godlessness leave their record. They write their impression od brain and 
heart; and, free and full as ia God'a forglTenesa^ the impression cannot be obliterated. 
What a man save, he reapa. 



HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTHOIB. 

Vers. 1, Z.—A Utter charge the Mghett tribute. The great Teacher himself said 
that the things which are highly esteemed among men may be abomination in the 
sight of God ; and we may safely assume that the converse of this proposition is true 
also. Certainly, in this hitter charge brought against our Lord we now perceive the 
very highest tribute which could be paid him. 

L A BiTTBB OHAROB AOAIKBT THE Savioub. It is uot easy fo» UB to realize the 
intensity of the feeling here expressed. The Jews, arguing from the general truth 
that holiness shrinks from contact with guilt, supposed that the heller any man was, 
the more scrupulously would he avoid the sinner; and they concluded that the very last 
thing the holiest man of all would do was to have such fellowship with sinners as to 
" eat with them." Their patriotic hatred of the publican, and their moral repugnance 

MSX.— 'IL > 



60 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xt. 1-32. 

toward "the sinner," filled them with astonishment as they saw him, who claimed to 
be the Messiah himself, taking up a positively friendly attitude toward both of these 
intolerable characters. Their error was, as error usually is, a perversion of the truth. 
They did not understand that the same Feeing who has the utmost aversion to sin can 
have and does have the tenderest yearning of heart toward the sinner ; that he who 
utterly repels the one is mercifully pitying and patiently seeking and magnanimously 
winning the other. So the men of acknowledged piety and purity in the time of our 
Lord failed completely to understand him, and they brought against him the charge 
which might well prove fatal to his claims — that he was having a guilty fellowship with 
the outcast among men and the abandoned among women. 

II. The highest tribute to the Savioue. In that attitude and action of his which 
seemed to his contemporaries to be so unworthy of him we find the very thing which 
constitutes his glory and his crown. Of course, association with sinners, on the basis 
of spiritual sympathy with them, is simply shameful ; and to break up their associa- 
tion with the intemperate, the licentious, the dishonest, the scornful, is the first duty 
of those who have been their companions and have shared their wrong-doings, but whose 
eyes have been opened to see the wickedness of their course. It is for such to say, 
" Depart from me, ye evil-doers ; for I will keep the commandments of my God." But 
that is far from exhausting the whole truth of the subject. For Christ has taught us, 
by his life as well as and as much as by his Word, that to mingle with the sinful in order 
to tuccowr and save them is the supreme act of goodness. When a man's character 
has been 8o well established that he can afford to do so without serious risk either to 
himself or to his reputation, and when, thus fortified, well armed with purity, he 
goes amongst the criminal and the vicious and the profane, that he may lift them up 
from the miry places in which they are wandering, and place their feet on the rock of 
righteousness, then does he the very noblest, the divinest thing he can do. It was 
this very thing which Jesus Christ came to do : " lie came to seek and to save that 
which was lost." It was this principle which he was continually illustrating ; and 
nothing could more truly indicate the moral grandeur of his spirit or the beautiful 
beneficence of his life than the words by which it was sought to dishonour him : " This 
Man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them." It is this which will constitute the 
best tribute that can be paid to any of his disciples now. " There is nothing of which 
any true minister of Jesus Christ, whether professional or not, ought to be so glad and so 
proud, as to be such that the enemies of the Lord shall say tatmtingly, while his friends 
will say thankfully, ' This man receiveth sinners.' " 

III. The oeeatest possible bncoubagement to oitrselves. There are men who 
know they are sinners, but care not ; there are those who do not know that they are 
guilty in the sight of God ; and there are others who do know and who do care. It is 
to these last that the Saviour of mankind is especially addressing himself. To them 
all he is offering Divine mercy ; restoration to the favour, the service, and the likeness 
of God ; everlasting life. On their ear there may fall these words, intended for a grave 
accusation, but constituting to the enlightened soul the most welcome tidings — " This 
Man receiveth sinners." — C. 

Vers. 8 — 7. — ThepM-ahle of the lost sheep. Of these three parables, illustrative of 
the grace of Christ shown to lost human souls, the first brings into view — 

I. The great foolishness of the wandeeing soul. It goes from God as a foolish, 
sheep strays from the Ibid. So doing, it leaves security for peril. In the fold is safety j 
in the wilderness are many and serious dangers. At home with God the soul is per- 
fectly safe from harm ; its life, its liberty, its happiness, is secure ; but, apart and astray 
from God, all these are not only gravely imperilled, they are already forfeited. It also 
\ea,wes plenty for want. In the fold is good pasture; in the wilderness is scarcity of 
food and water. With God is rich provision for the spirit's need, not only satisfying 
its wants, but ministering to its best and purest tastes ; at a moral distance from him 
the spirit pines and withers. To go from God is an act of uttermost folly. 

II. The stbaitb to which it is bbduoed. 1. It is on the point of perishing. Without 
the interposition of the seeking Shepherd, it would inevitably perish. 2. It is reduced 
to such utter helplessness that it has to be carried home, " laid upon his shoulders." 
( i) Under the dominion of sia the soul draws nearer and nearer to spiritual destruction { 



CH,xv. 1— 32.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 51 

and (2) it is often found to be reduced to bo low a state that it can put forth no effort 
of its own, and can only be carried in the strong arms of love. 

in. The love op the Divine Shephekd. The strong and keen interest taken by 
the human shepherd in a lost sheep is indicative of the tender interest which the 
Father of our spirits takes in a lost human soul. The former is more occupied in his 
thought and care with the one that is lost than he is, for the time, with the others 
that are safe ; the latter is really and deeply concerned for the restoration of his lost 
child. And as the shepherd's sorrow leads him to go forth and search, so does the 
Father's tender care lead him to seek for liis absent son. Christ's love for us is not 
general, it is particular ; it reaches every one of us. He cares much that each one of 
the souls for whom he suffered should enjoy his true heritage, and when that is being 
lost he desires and he " seeks " to restore it. 

IV. His PERSisTEKCY IN SEEKING. "Until he find it." The shepherd, in pursuit of 
the lost sheep, is not detained by difficulty or danger ; nor does he allow distance to 
stop his search ; he goes on seeking until he finds. With such gracious persistency 
does the Saviour follow the wandering soul; year after year, period alter period in his 
life, through several spiritual stagej, the good Sliepherd pursues the erring soul with 
patient love, until he finds it. 

V. His jot in finding it. The shepherd's joy in finding and in recovering, shown 
by calling his friends and neighbours together, saying, " Rejoice with me," etc., is 
pictorial of the Saviour's joy when a soul is redeemed from sin and enters into the life 
which is eternal. He rejoices nut only, not chiefly, because therein does he " see of 
the travail of his soul," but because he knows well from what depth of evil that soul 
has been rescued, and to what height of blessedness it has been restored ; he knows 
also how great is the influence, through all ages, which one loyal and loving human 
spirit will exert on other souls. — 0. 

Ver. 10. — The Joy of the angels. Our first thought may be — What do the angels 
know about us ? But our second thought should be — ^How likely it is that the angels 
would be deeply interested in us ! For, granted that there are " heavenly hosts " who 
are in supreme sympathy with God, and who are therefore careful to watch the work- 
ings of his holy will in the broad realm he rules, what is there more likely than that 
they would be profoundly interested in the recovery of a lost world, in the restoration 
of a rebellious and ruined race ? We could well believe that it would be the study of 
the angelic world, the practical problem that would engage their most earnest thought, 
if it did not occupy their most active labours. And this being so, we can understand 
the greatness of their joy " over one sinner that repenteth." For — 

I. They know, better than wb, the stern consequences of sin. Not, indeed, 
by experience. Experience is not the only teacher, and it does not at all necessarily 
follow that one who has had some experience of a course of conduct knows more about 
it than another who has had no experience at all; otherwise we should be driven to 
the absurd conclusion that guilty man knows more about sin than God does. Many 
of the inexperienced are a great deal wis4r than many who have had " part and lot in 
the matter," because those learn from all they witness, and these do not learn from 
anything they do and suffer. The " angels of God " witness the commission and also 
the fruits of sin ; they see what lengths and depths of wrong and wretchedness it 
brings about from year to year, from age to age ; they see what evil it works within 
and witliout, in the sinner himself and on all with whom he has to do. As they live 
on through the centuries, and as they learn Divine wisdom from all that they behold 
in the universe of God, they must acquire a hatred of sin and a pity for sinners which 
is beyond our own emotion and which passes our reckoning. How great, then, their 
joy when they witness the , emancipation of one human soul from spiritual bondage, 
the birth of a spirit into the life eternal ! 

n. They know, better than we, thk blessed fruits of obedience. Here they 
have their own angelic experience to guide and to enlighten them. With added years 
of loyalty to the King of heaven ; with the spiritual enlargement which (we can well 
believe) comes with a holy and stainless life, they rejoice in God and in his servics 
with ever-deepening delight ; their heritage becomes ampler, their prospects brighter, 
as the celestial periods pass away ; and when they think what it means for one holy 



a THE GOSPEL AOCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xv. 1—82. 

Intelligence to be filled with the fulness of Divine life and of heavenly blessedness, wa 
can comprehend that they would rejoice " over one sinner that repenteth." 

in, Thby abb deeply inteeestbd is the pkoqbess op the kingdom of God, and 
they know, better than we, how limitless is the influence one soul may exercise. 
1. Because they earnestly, supremely desire the honour of God, the glory of Christ on 
the earth, they rejoice that one more spirit is brought into loyal subjection to his 
rule. 2. Because they desire that everything may be put under his feet, they rejoice 
that all that one man can do — which means more in their measurement than it means 
in ours — will be done to further his cause and exalt his Kame.— 0. 

Ver. 11. — The Father's home. By the Father's home we commonly mean the 
heavenly home, the sphere where the nearer and more immediate presence of God ia 
realized. But heaven once included earth — earth was once a district of heaven. God 
meant this world to be a part of his own home ; this, but for the separating force of 
Bin, it would be now; and this, when sin has been cast forth, it will be again. And it 
is properly regarded as a home because the relation in which God wished its inhabitants 
to stand toward himself was that (and is that) of children to a Father. The truest 
picture, the nearest statement, the least imperfect representation of that relationship, is 
not found in the words, " A certain king had subjects," or " A certain proprietor had 
servants (or slaves)," but in those of our text, " A certain man had sons." Nothing bo 
adequately represents God's position toward us as fatherhood, or our true position 
toward him as sonship, or the sphere in which we live before him as the Father's 
home. This family relationship means — 

I. His dwelling with us. God's dwelling with us or in us is very closely asso- 
ciated with his Fatherhood of us (see 2 Cor. vi. 16 — 18). The ideal human father ia 
one who dwells under the roof where the family resides ; who is at home with his 
children, maintaining a frequent and a close and intimate intercourse with them. 
Such is God our Father's desire concerning us. He wishes to be near us all and 
near us always ; so near to us that we have constant access to him ; that our free, full, 
happy, unconstrained "fellowship is with the Father;" that it is the natural and 
Instinctive thing for us to go to him and make owe appeal to him in all time of need. 

II. His control of oub lives. God's purpose is to direct the lives we are living, 
to choose our way for us, even as a father for his children; so that we shall be going 
where he sends us, be doing his work, be filling up his outline, be walking ia the path 
his own hand has traced. 

III. His education of cub spirits. Our children come to our home with great 
capacities, but with no power. It is our parental privilege to educate them, so that 
their various faculties — physical, mental, spiritual — shall be developed, so that they 
shall gain knowledge, acquire wisdom, exert influence, be a blessing and a power in 
the world. God places us here, in this home of his, that he may educate us ; that, by 
all we see and hear, by all we do and suffer, we may be taught and trained for noble 
character, for faithful service, for an ever-broadening sphere. 

IV. His paebntal satisfaction with us. Perhaps the most exquisite satisfaction, 
the very keenest joy which fills and thrills the human heart, is that which is born of 
parental love ; it is the intense and immeasurable delight with which the father find 
the mother behold their children as these manifest not merely the beauties of bodily 
form but the graces of Christian character, and as they bring forth the fruits of a holy 
and useful life. God meant and still means to have such parental joy in us; to look 
on us, the children of his home, and be gladdened in his heart more than when he 
looks on all the wonders of his hand in field and forest, in sea and sky. It is our 
docility, our affection, our obedience, our rectitude and beauty of character and of 
spirit, that constitute the source of his Divine satisfaction. The children of the Father's 
home are dearer and more precious far than any marvellous things in all the breadth 
of his universe. Thus God's thought concerning our race was to establish a hdly 
family, himself the Divine Father ; we his holy, loving, rejoicing, human children ; this 
world a happy home. That wot his thought in creation, that is his purpose in redemp- 
tion. To its blissful realization the best contribution each one of us can make is to 
become his true and trustful child, reconciled to him in Jesus Christ, living before hiat 

' day in filial love and joy. — 01 



OH.XV. 1— 32.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINQ TO ST. LUKE. C3 

Vers. 12, 13. — Departures ihe/ar eovmtry. We all know only too well that God'i 
gracions purpose concerning us (see previous homily) has been diverted by our sin; 
the holy and happy home-life which he designed and introduced has been broken up 
by our unfilial attitude and action. From the Father's home we have wandered away 
into " the far country." _ The strict parallel to this picture we find in the disobedience 
of our first parents and in the gradual departure of our race from God and from his 
righteousness to a great distance from him. As to ourselves, there never was a time 
when we were not outside the home; yet we may speak of — 

I. The nearness of childhood. For not only does a great poet speak of " heaven 
lying about us in our infancy," but One from whom there is no appeal tells us that 
"of such [as the little child] is the kingdom of heaven." In childhood are those quali- 
ties which are most favourable to the reception of the truth and grace of God. And if in 
our childhood we did not stand actually within the door, we did stand upon the threshold 
of the Father's house. Then God spoke to us, whispered his promises in our ear, laid 
his hand upon us, touched the chords of our heart, drew forth our thought, our wonder, 
our hope, our yearning, our prayer. And well is it for us, blessed are we among the 
children of men, if, thus hearing that voice and feeling that hand Divine, we chose 
the good part, entered in at the open door, and have been thenceforth inmates of that 
home of faith and love 1 But perhaps it was not so ; perhaps, like the prodigal son, 
we were dissatisfied with the heritage of the Father's favour, of a Saviour's love; 
perhaps we wanted a " portion of goods " quite different from this, and went away and 
•stray from God. And there came — 

II. A DEPABTUBB FROM THIS NEARNESS OP CHILDHOOD. We Opened the Bible with 
less interest and closed it with less profit ; we neglected the throne of grace ; we began 
to shun the sanctuary ; we became less careful of our speech and our behaviour ; God 
was less and still less in our thought; our hold upon Christian principle became 
relaxed, and the cords of the temporal and the materisA were wound around ua. Then 
we dwelt in — 

III. The fab coitntbt of bin. For sin is a " far country." 1, It ia to lea long 
♦"py off from Qod himself; to be separated from him in spirit and in sympathy ; to be 
willing to spend our time without his society; to be satisfied with his absence. The 
soul, instead of continually looking up for his guidance and his good pleasure, shuns 
his eye and tries to shake itself free from his hand;" instead of placing itself under his 
elevating teaching and enlarging influence, the soul sinks into lower conditions, and 
loses its grasp of truth and power and goodness ; instead of sharing his likeness, the 
ioul goes down into folly and wrong. 2. It is to he a long way from his home. For 
God's home is the home of righteousness, of wisdom, and of blessedness ; and to be 
living under the dominion of sin is to be dwelling in a sphere of unrighteousness ; it is 
to be spending our days and our powers in an element of folly ; it is to be cutting our- 
selves off from the sources of true joy, and to be where all the roots of sorrow are in the 
soil. Surely there is no epithet anywhere applied to sin which so truly and so powerfully 
characterizes it as this — it is the far country of the soul ; under its sway the human 
spirit is separated by a measureless distance from all that is worthiest and best. Why- 
should any soul continue there, when God is ever saying, " Eetum unto me, and I will 
return unto you;" when Christ is ever saying, " Come unto me, and I will give you 
rest » ?— 0. 

Vers. 13 — 15. — Life in the far country. When the prodigal son had attained his 
wish and was free to do as he liked without the restraints of home, how did he fare ? 
He found, as in our distance from God we shall find, that life there meant throe evil 
things — 

I. A TWOFOLD WASTE. He " Wasted his substance in riotous living." He misspent 
his powers, devoting to frivolous and tmremunerative enjoyment those bodily and 
mental faculties that might have been put to profitable use, and he scattered the 
material resources vrith which he started. Sin is spiritual waste. 1. It is the waste of 
consumption. The " substance " of the soul includes : (1) Spiritual understanding; a 
noble capacity to perceive Divine truths and heavenly realities — ^the thoughts, the 
wishes, the purposes of Gtod. Under the dominion of sin this capacity becomes 
enfeebled i ia disuse it rusts and is eaten away: " From him tiiat hath not £iuw not 



64 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO, ST. LUKE. [ch. xv. 1— 32 

what lie has] is taken away that [unused capacity] which he 'has." (2) Spiritual 
tensibility ; the capacity of feeling the force of things Divine, of being sensibly and 
practically affected by them, of being moved and stirred by them to appropriate deci- 
sion and action. No man can live on in conscious sin wilhout continually losing this 
sacred and precious sensibility. Neglected and unapplied, it withers away, it wastes. 
2. It is the waste of perversion. Man was made for the very highest ends — made for 
God ; to study, to know, to love, to serve, to rejoice in God himself. And when he 
spends bis powers on himself and on his own animal enjoyment, he is " wasting his 
substance," turning from their true Object to one immeasurably lower the faculties and 
the opportunities with which he came into the world. 

II. Pitiable want. " He began to be in want." Indulgence is expensive, and 
unfits for work ; sinful companions are happy to share the treat, but they are slow to 
refill the purse. Sin leads down to destitution; it takes away a taste for all pure 
enjoyment, and provides nothing lasting in its stead. The man who yields himself to 
the power of sin loses all joy in God, all relish for spiritual enjoyments, all gratification 
in sacred service, all capacity for appreciating the fellowship of the good and great, all 
sense of the sacredness and spiritual worth of life. What has he left ? He is beggared, 
ruined. " No man gives unto him ; " no man can give unto him. You cannot give 
to a man what he is not capable of receiving ; and until he is radically changed he 
cannot receive anything truly precious at your hands. 

III. Gkibvoub dbgbadation. He was " sent into the fields to feed swine." This 
was bad enough ; yet was there one thing worse — " he was fain to fill his belly with 
the husks the swine did eat." He went down to the lowest grade imaginable. The 
degradation of the soul is the very saddest thing under the sun. When we see a man 
who was made to find his heritage in God's likeness and service satisfying himself with 
that which is bestial, degrading himself to the drunkard's song, to the impure jest, to 
the part of astute roguery, and finding a horrible enjoyment in these shameful things, 
then we see a human heart satiating itself with " husks that the swine do eat," and 
then we witness the most lamentable of all degrailations. 

Such is life in the " far country." Distance from God means waste, want, degrada- 
tion. Its full and final outworking may take time, or it may hasten with terrible 
rapidity. But it comes sooner or later. 1. There is a way of return even from that 
" strange land," that evil estate (see succeeding homilies). 2. How wise to place 
ourselves out of danger of these dire evils by connecting ourselves at once with Jesus 
Christ!— 0. 

Ters, 17 — ^19. — The soul's return. Out in the far country, living a life of guilty 
waste, of dreary want, of shameful degradation, the prodigal son was in truth a man 
" beside himself; " he was lost to himself; he had taken leave of his own better self, 
of his understanding, of his reason ; from his own true self he was afar off. But now 
there is — 

I. A KETUBN TO HIMSELF. 1. He regains his wisdom as he gains a sense of his 
folly. He returns to his right mind ; he loses his infatuation as he perceives how great 
is his foolishness to be in such a state of destitution when he might " have all things 
and abound." What insensate folly to be starving among the swmewhen he might be 
sitting down at his father's table 1 The soul comes to itself and regains its wisdom 
when it perceives how foolish it is to be perishing with hunger in its separation from 
God when it might he " filled with all the fulness of God." Our reason returns to us 
when we refuse to be any longer misled by the infatuation, by "the deceitfulness of 
sin," and when we see that the pining and decay of our spiritual powers is a poor 
exchange indeed for the wealth and health of spiritual integrity. 2. He is restored to 
sanity of mind as he obtains a sense of his sinfulness. To be able to say, as he is now 
prepared to say, "I have sinned," is to come back into aright and sound spiritual 
condition. We are in a wholly unsound mental state when we can regard our dis- 
loyalty and disobedience to God with complacency and even with satisfaction. But 
when our ingratitude, our forgetfulnesg, our unfilial and rebellious behaviour towards 
God, is recognized by us as the " evil and bitter thing " it is, as the wrong and shameful 
thing it is, and when we are ready, with bowed head and humbled heart, to say, " Father, 
i bare lianed," then are we in our right mind ; then have we returned to owselvet. 



«H,XT. 1—32.3 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO St. LUKE. 65 

II, A EESOLVE TO KETTKN TO GoD. This retum on the part of the prodigal : 
1. Arose from a sense of the greatness of his need. 2. Was based on a sound con- 
fidence, viz. that the father, whose disposition he knew so well, would not reject but 
receive him. 3. Included a wise and right determination, viz. to make a frank 
confession of his sin and to accept the humblest position in the old home which tha 
father might allot him. (1) Out of the greatness and soreness of our need we come to 
the conclusion that we will return unto God. Our state of guilt and shame is no 
longer tolerable; we must turn our back on the guilty past and the evil present; there 
is no refuge for our soul but in God — " in God, who is our home." (2) We may hold 
fast the firm conviction that we shall be graciously received. Of this we have the 
strongest assurance we could have in the character and the promises of God, and in 
the experience of our brethren. (3) Our resolution to retum should include the wise 
and right determination : (a) To make the fullest confession of our sin ; meaning by that 
not the use of the strongest words we can employ against ourselves, but the full out- 
pouring of all that is in our heart ; for, above all things, God " desires truth in the 
inward parts." (6) To accept whatever position in God's service he may appoint us. 
Not that we are expecting that he will make us " as a hired servant ; " we may be sure 
(see next homily) that he will place us and count us among his own children ; but so 
humble should our spirit be, such should be our sense of undeservedness, that we 
should be ready to be anything and to do anything, of however lowly a character it may 
be, which the Divine Father may assign us in his household. — C. 

Vers. 20 — 24. — 2%e welcome home. Having seen the younger son of this parable 
dissatisfied with his estate, having followed him into the far country of sin, having 
seen how there he frittered or flung everything away in his guilty folly and was reduced 
to utmost want and degradation, and having been with him in the hour of self-return 
and wise resolve, we now attend him on his way home to his father. We look at — 

I. The wisdom op immediate action. " He said, I will arise . . . and he arose." 
" Most blessed said and done," as has been well remarked. What if he had lingered 
and given room for vain imaginations of things that would " turn up " on his behalf 
where he was, or for needless fears as to the reception he would have at home I How 
many more sons and daughters would there be now in the Father's home if all who 
said, " I will arise," had at once arisen, without parleying, without giving space for 
temptation and change of mindl Let there be no interval between saying and doing; 
let the hour of resolution to return be the hour of returning. 

II. The abounding geacb op his father's welcome. 1. He eagerly desired his 
son's retum; he was looking out for it; when he was yet a great way off he saw him, 
and recognized him in all his rags and in all his shame. 2. He went forth to mee>< 
him ; did not let his dignity stand in the way of his giving his son the very earliest 
assurance of his welcome home ; he " put himself out," he " ran " to receive him back. 
3. He welcomed him with every possible demonstration of parental love. He tenderly 
embraced him ; he had him at once divested of his livery of shame and clad with 
the garments of self-respect and even honour ; he ordered festivities to celebrate his 
return. As if he would say, " Take from him every sign and token of misery and 
want; remove every badge of servitude and disgrace; clothe him with all honour; 
enrich him with all gifts ; ring the bells ; spread the table ; wreathe the garlands ; 
make every possible demonstration of joy ; we will have music in our hall to utter the 
melody in our hearts, 'for this my son,' etc." It all means one thing; .every stroke 
in the picture is intended to bring out this most precious truth — the warm and joyous 
welcome which every penitent spirit receives from the heavenly Father. (1) We do 
not wonder at the misgivings of the guilty heart. It is natural enough that those who 
have long dwelt at a great distance from God should fear lest they should fail to find 
in God cdl the mercy and grace they need for full restoration. (2) Therefore we bless 
God for the fulness of the promises made to us in his Word — promises made by the 
lips of the psalmist, of the prophet, and of his Son our Saviour. (3) And therefore we 
thankfully accept this picture of the prodigal's retum ; for as we look at it and dwell 
upon it we gain a sense and a conviction, deeper than any verbal assurances can 
convey, of the readiness, the eagerness, the cordiality, the fulness, of the welcome with 
which the Father of our spirits takes back his erring but returning child. If any 



58 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST, LUKE. [oh. xt. 1—32. 

wandering one ebmeB to us and says, "Will God receive me if I ask his mercy?" we 
reply, " Look at that picture, and decide ; it is a picture drawn hy the eternal Son to 
indicate what the eternal Father will do when any one of his sons comes hack to him 
from the far country of sin. Look there, and you will see that it is not enough to say, 
in reply to your question, ' He will not refuse you ; ' that is immeasurahly short of 
the truth. It is not enough to say, ' He will forgive you ; ' that also is far short ol 
the whole truth. That picture says, ' children of men, who are seeking a place in 
the heart and the home of the heavenly Father, know this, that your Father's heart 
is yearning over you with a houndless and unquenchable affection, that he is far more 
anxious to enfold you in the arms of his mercy than you are to he thus embraced ; he 
is not only willing, but waiting, ay, longing, to receive you to his side, to give 
you back all that you have lost, to reinstate you at once into his fatherly favour, 
to confer upon you all the dignity of sonship, to admit you to the full fellowship 
of his own famUy, to bestow upon you the pure and abiding joy of his own happy 
home.'"— C. 

Ver. 31. — Ungrateful recipiency cmd ample heritage. The " elder brother " ii by no 
means so unpopular out of the parable as he is in it. As he is seen in the picture 
every one is ready to throw a stone at him. In actual life there are many Christian 
people who pay him the high compliment of a very close imitation. We are in danger 
of setting up a certain type of Christian character as a model, and if one of our neigh- 
bours should show any serious departure from that type, we are disposed to be shy of 
him and to shun him. Is the returned penitent whom Christ has received into his 
k)ve always cordially welcomed into our society and made to feel at home with us? 
But let us look at this young man as — 

I. A TYPE or THE UNGBATEFUL BE0IPIBNT8 OP THE CONSTANT KINDNESS OF GoD. 

Me complained of his father's partiality in that for his brother there had been killed 
H fatted calf, while not even a kid had been slain for himself and his friends. But the 
reply was that, without any intermission, he had been enjoying the comfort of the 
parental hearth and the bounty of the parental table; that one extraordinary feast 
granted to his brother was nothing in comparison with the constant and continued 
manifestations of fatherly love and care he had been receiving day by day for many 
years. " Thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine." It is for us to remember 
that our Divine Father's continual loving-kindnesses are much more valuable than 
one interposition on our behalf. A miracle is a much more brilliant and imposing 
thing than an ordinary gift, but one miracle is not such evidence of fatherly love as we 
have in an innumerable series of daily and hourly blessings. A greater gift than the 
manna in the wilderness were the annual harvests which fed many generations of the 
people of God. A more valuable gift than the water that issued from the rock in the 
'desert were the rains, the streams, and the rivers that fertilized the soil from year to 
year. Kinder than the providential rescue from threatening embarrassment or impend- 
ing death is the goodness which preserves in peaceful competence and unbroken health 
through long periods of human life. It is a sad and serious mistake ; it is indeed more 
and worse than a mistake when we allow the very constancy of God's kindness, the 
very regularity of his gifts, to hide from our hearts the tact that he is blessing us in 
largest measure and in fullest parental love. He is saying to us the while, " Children, 
ye are ever with me, and all that I have is yours." 

II. A TYPE OF OUR COMMON SONSHIP. In the parable the father says to his son, "My 
property is thine — thine to use and to enjoy; there is nothing I have made that is 
within your view and your reach which you are not free to partake of and employ ; all 
that I have is thine." Is not that our goodly estate as the sons of God ? This world 
is God's property, and he shares it with us. He interdicts, indeed, that which would 
do us harm or do injury to others. Otherwise he says to us, "Take and partake, 
enrich your hearts with all that is before you." 1. And this applies not only to all 
material gifts, but to all spiritual good — to knowledge, wisdom, truth, love, goodness; 
to those great spiritual qualities which are the best and most precious of the Divine 
possessions. 2. It has also a far-reaching application ; it is a promise as well as a 
declaration. Of " all that God has " we only see and touch a very small part now and 
here. Soon and yonder we shall know far more of what is included In his glorioui 



CH.XT. 1— Sa.j THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, 6? 

estate, and still and erer will it be true that what is his 18 onr8 ; for he livea to share 
with his children the blessedness and the bounty of his heavenly home. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Murmun on earth, and Joy in heaven. Our blessed Lord, in his 
progress towards Jerusalem, had shown the same kindly interest in the outcast classes 
which had always characterized him, and his love was beginning to tell. Publicans and 
sinners gathered eagerly, around him to hear his tender, saving words; while the 
reputable Pharisees and scribes eyed him from a distance with self-righteous suspicion. 
Their murmurs, however inaudible to mere man", were audible to him to whom all 
things are naked and open, and he exposes their criticisms by a trinity of parables 
which are without peers in literature. Stier thinks that the trinity of parables is 
intended to present the Persons of the adorable Trinity in their respective relations to 
our salvation. The first would thus represent the Son's shepherd-care ; the second, 
the Spirit's maternal solicitude for the restoration of lost souls to the heavenly treasure ; 
and the third, the Father's yearning that prodigal sons might come home.* This view 
is certainly commendable, and not too artistic for such a weighty Preacher as the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and such a reporter as St. Luke. Leaving the third and greatest of the 
parables for separate treatment, let us, in this homily, discuss the other two ; and ■■ 
they are so similar, we need not separate them in our treatment. 

L We akb hekb tauqht bt Christ what dnfallbn bbingb think about them- 
selves. (Ver. 7.) A door is opened by these parables into heaven, and we have 
glimpses of the celestial world. Jesus is here testifying abiut heavenly things (John 
iii. 12). Now, we muit know, in the first place, who are meant by the ninety and 
nine sheep which never went astray, and by the nine pieces of silver which were never 
lost. They cannot mean self-righteous souls such as the Pharisees and scribes. For 
they needed repentance, and over them no eel" Mai ones would think of rejoicing. 
Hence they can only refer to unfallen beings.' Now, the parables imply that there is 
joy over the unfallen. Why should there not be ? To us who are fallen it appears but 
right that the most intense joy should be taken in the unfallen and sinless. They are 
a new type of beings to us. We have only had one of them in this world. The sinless 
Saviour broke the law of continuity, and constitutes the marvel of human history.* 
Ninety and nine unfallen beings would seem to us a marvellously interesting group. 
A sinless city, such as the new Jerusalem is, appears to our comprehension such a 
novelty, such a new notion and thought amid the sad monotony of sin, that we almost 
wonder how those who have got within the city could ever think of aught beyond it. 
And yet to the unfallen ones themselves — sinlessness being the rule, and no exception 
being found within the celestial city — there must come over the joy with which they 
contemplate each other a certain monotony, which must keep the joy down to a certain 
uniform level. Where everything is exactly as it should be, and no tragedy is possible, 
the joy of contemplation must be so vmiform as to partake almost of what is common. 
The sinless ones contemplate one another with rapture, doubtless, but the joy is not 
of the intensest type by reason of the monotony and sameness associated of necessity 
with it. We may make sure of this by simply contrasting the complacency of the self- 
righteous with the consciousness of the sinless that they never can be more than 
unprofitable servants, for they can never rise above the sphere of duty. Nothing cor- 
responding to the self-satisfaction of the Pharisee, who thanks God that he is not as 
other men, can be entertained by the celestial world. They are not absorbed in self- 
admiration. That is only possible with lost men! So that the joy of unfallen beings 
over one another is modified by the thought that their sinlessness is nothing more than 
should be expected from those possessed of such privileges as they. Unlost sheep and 
money receive but moderate admiration. 

IL We abb HEBE TAUGHT WITH WHAT IBTBNSB INTBEE8T UNFALtEN BBINQS CON- 
TEMPLATE THE OAEBBE OF LOST SOULS. (Vers. 4, 8.) The problem of sin comes upon 
the sinless as an exception to the rule. They contemplate the career of the lost as a 

> Cf. • Words of the Lord Jesus' (Clark's edition of 1864), vol. iv. pp. 109, 110. 

' Cf. Nettleton's ' Sermons and Eemalns,' p. 62 ; also Arndt's • Gleiehniss-Reden,' erstei 
theil, B. 97 ; Gerok's ' Aub Ernster Zeit,' s. 400 ; and Beck's ' Ohristliche Beden,' band L 
1. 128. 

• Of. Mozley's Essay ' Of Christ alone without Sin.' 



5« THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xv. 1— 32. 



tragedy added to the monotony of life. They hover over the lost ones with intense 
interest. They follow their career and study its issues. We must not regard the 
celestial world as walled out from the tragedies of this earth. All, according to Christ's 
idea, is open to the celestial side. We may not see with our dull eyes the city of the 
Apocalypse ; but the celestials can follow our terrestrial careers and note the lessons 
of our different destinies. " The bourne from whence no traveller returns " is the celes- 
tial oouBtry. The lack of tidings is here, not there ! The majority beyond the shadows 
may seem all silent, like the grave, to us ; but the din of our voices reaches across the 
void to them, and constitutes a study of unfailing interest, 

III. The UNF ALLEN ONES HAVE SENT FORTH MESSBNaERS TO SAVE THE LOST. (Vers. 

4 — 6, 8, 9.) An2;els hover around us, and with intensest interest contemplate our sin- 
burdened, sin-stained careers. But the celestial world did not contemplate the problem 
from a distance, and allow the wanderers to die. Two, at all events, came forth from 
heaven in the interests of lost men — the shepherd Son of God, and the Spirit, with all 
womanly tenderness. The Second and Third Persons of the adorable Trinity have come 
forth as messengers to save lost men. In addition, there are multitudes of ministering 
angels who exercise a mysterious but real ministry, and aid the heirs of salvation in 
their pilgrimage home. To the celestial visitants, however, who are set before us in 
these parables, we must meanwhile give our attention. 1. The good' Shepherd. He 
follows the lost sheep over the mountains into the wilderness, up the rocky steeps, 
wherever lost souls wander and are waiting to be found. It was arduous work. It 
involved the exchange of Paradise for this wilderness-world, and a life of privation and 
trouble of many kinds, and all that the lost sheep might be found and brought home. 
Christ's work was self-denial and self-sacrifice in the highest degree. He had to lay 
down his life for the rescue of the sheep. 2. The painstaking Spirit. Like the house- 
wife who searched so thoroughly the dust of the house until she found the lost piece of 
money, w> the Spirit somes down and searches in the dust of this world for lost souls, 
that he may restore them to the heavenly treasure. There is no work too severe or too 
searching for the Spirit to undertake in the rescue of our lost souls. As Gerok puts it, 
" No trouble is too great for God to undertake in seeking out a soul." 

IV. The jot of the celestial world over EEPENTANT souls is OBEATEB TE.iS 

THEIB JOY OVER THE DNFALLEN. (Vers. 7, 10.) OuT Lord represents the joy of heaven 
over one repentant sinner as greater than the joy over even ninety and nine unfallen 
beings. No angel of light amid his sinless glory ever caused such rapture to the 
heavenly world as does a sinner repenting and returning to God. " Gabriel," says 
Nettleton, "who stands in the presence of God, never occasioned so much joy in 
heaven. We may number ninety and nine holy angels and then say, ' There is joy 
in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over those ninety and nine just 
persons.' The creation of the world was a joyful event, when ' the morning stars sang 
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy.' But this is not to be compared with 
the joy over one sinner that repenteth. . . . The joy of angels is most sensibly felt 
every time one more is added to the company of the redeemed. The ninety and nine 
already redeemed seem to be forgotten, when, with wonder and joy, they behold their 
new companion with whom they expect to dwell for ever. Could we know, as well as 
angels do, the reality of a sinner's repentance, we should know better how to rejoice." 
How important, consequently, should we regard the repentance of a sinner 1 Instead of 
our indulging in Pharisaic suspicion and murmuring, should we not join the joyful com- 
panies above in their ecstasy over the lost being found? And does it not further help 
us to understand why evil has been permitted, seeing that grace can translate it into 
so much joy ? In all the assemblies of the saints we have reason to believe angels are 
present, watching with intense interest the exercises and noting what repentances 
result. The interest we take in such services is, we must believe, as nothing to the 
interest of the heavenly world. How they must wonder at so much indifference on 
our parti How they must wonder at the cool and matter-of-fact way we receive 
tidings of credible conversions to God ! The joy of heaven over penitent sinners is 
a standing rebuke to our murmurings or apathy 1 May the thought of it lead to a 
better feeling and a better life 1 — B. M. E. 

V«r8. 11—32. — "From home, and hack." The two previous parables which oni 



CH. XV. 1—32.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 59 

Lord related in defence of his conduct are really but introductory to what has been with 
justice called " the pearl of parables," that of the prodigal son. To it we will now 
devote ourselves, under the title recently given to it as "From home, and back." It 
brings out in a most interesting way the attitude of God the Father towards lost souls. 
It is necessary before setting out, however, to notice that, according to the ancient Law, 
the division of the family inheritance was not conditioned by the parent's death. If 
a sou insisted on his share, the father publicly declared to his household his testa- 
mentary intentions, and the son entered at once into possession.^ What our Lord's 
parable supposes, therefore, is what constantly occurred. The father did not keep his 
testamentary intentions a secret to be revealed only at his death, but got up and declared 
publicly how the inheritance was to be allotted, and the impatient son entered at once 
into possession. Death, as a matter of fact, does not enter into the case at all. Theie 
is another preliminary point which we had better distinctly state, and that is th^t 
historically the younger .son is intended to cover the case of the " publicans and sinners " 
Jesus was receiving into the kingdom of God; while the elder son covers the case of 
the " Pharisees and scribes " who murmured at Christ's policy. If we keep this clearly 
in view, it will help us greatly in our interpretation. We shall take up the two sons 
in the order presented in the parable. 

I. The pbodigal leaving home and coming back. (Vers. 11 — 24.) Imagining he 
could not enjoy life with his father and amid the restraints of home, he clamours for 
his share of the inheritance, turns it into money, and sets out. We cannot do better 
than take up the stages in the history one by one, and interpret them as we proceed. 
We have, then : 1. The emigration. (Ver. 13.) Now, if this younger son represents 
historically " the publicans and sinners," we must remember that they did not leave 
Palestine or even Jerusalem when separated from the Jewish Church. The emigration 
pictured in the parable was, therefore, not emigration to a locally distant land, but to 
a morally distant land ; in other words, by the " far country " is not meant a foreign 
country, but the country oi forgetfulness of Qod. The soul that lives at a distance 
from God, that never considers that he is near, has by that forgetfulness of him emi- 
grated to the " far country," and gone from home. In strict accordance with this 
principle of interpretation, the " substance " which was gathered and wasted in the 
far country was moral wealth, not monetary. As a matter of fact, the publicans, or 
tax-gatherers, were in many cases careful, money-gathering men, and not spendthrifts 
in the vulgar sense. What was squandered, therefore, in the far-off land of forgetful- 
ness of God was moral wealth, the wealth of the heart and mind. The waste was moral 
waste. And it is just here that we have to notice what may be called the defamation 
of the prodigal, in that painters and expositors have represented his " riotous living " 
as including actually the deepest immorality. This was the line adopted, too, by the 
elder brother, who represented his brother as having devoured the father's living with 
harlots (ver. 30), although, as a matter of fact, he had no evidence of such " excess of 
riot " in the case at all. The most careful expositor of this parable has accordingly 
pointed out that the prodigal did not reach the sphere of sensuality until he envied the 
swine, and then only entered it by the mental act.' It is when we note how carefully 
our Lord constructed the parable, that we can see how the moral character of the pub- 
licans was appreciated in the picture, and they were not confounded with sinners of 
the more sensual type. The far-off country, then, and the waste which took place 
there, represent the land of forgetfulness of God, and the waste of mind and heart that 
a God-forgetting life is certain to experience. 2. The famine. (Ver. 14.) This is the 
second stage. It represents the hunger of the heart and mind which comes over the 
soul that has forgotten God and taken to worldly courses. The famine is the utter 
vacancy of heart that settles down upon the moral emigrant. He begins to realize 
what he has lost by leaving God. 3. The effort after recovery. (Vers. 15, 16.) The 
famished worldling betakes himself to work; becomes a swineherd — an unlawful 
occupation for a Jew — our Lord touching thus gently on the question of the fajming of 
the taxes for Rome by the publicans ; and finds that there is no real regeneration to be 
foxmd in work. He, in his utter want of satisfaction, wishes he could satisfy his soul 

' Of. Maine's 'Ancient Law,' 4th edit, pp. 198—214. 

* 'La Paiabole de l'£nfant Frodigue,' pax D. Chantepie de la Saussaye, p. 4& 



eO THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvi. 1— 3L 

as the swine satisfy their nature, npon husks. Sensuality Is seen by the femlshed one 
to be as unsatisfying as work. And then the last experience Is the utter helplessness of 
man. " No man gave unto him;" no one could minister to his mental trouble. It is 
through a similar experience the soul comes. Self-recoveiy turns out to be a delusion, 
and man is found to be of no avail. 4. The retwn of reason. (Vers. 17 — 19.) In 
bis isolation he begins to see that aU the past forgetfulness of God was a mistake; that 
he was insane to take the course he did ; and that in his right mind he must act 
differently. Accordingly he begins in sane moments to reflect on the Father's house, 
how good a Master God is, how his hirelings have always enough and to spare, and that 
the best thing for him to do is to return, confess his fault, and get what place in God's 
house he can. This is repentance — the remembrance of God and how we have sinned 
against him. 5. Coming hack. (Ver. 20.) The resolution to come home must be put 
in practice. The hope may only be for a servant's place, yet it is well to begin the 
return journey and test the loving-kindness of God. 6. The welcoma home. (Vers. 
20, 21.) The father has been on the look-out for the son, and, the moment he begins 
the journey, the father's compassion becomes overpowering, and he nms and falls on 
the prodigal's neck and kisses him. And when the broken-hearted son pours forth his 
penitence, and that he is no more worthy to be called a son, he is met by the father's 
welcome and passionate embrace. In this most beautiful way does our Lord bring out 
God's yearning for lost souls, and his intense delight when they return to him. 7. The 
feast of Joy, (Vers. 22 — 24) Orders are given to the servants to take away his rags, 
and put upon him the best robe, and a ring on his hand, as signs of his rank as his 
father's son, and shoes on his feet, and to prepare the fatted calf and have a merry feast. 
In this way does our Lord indicate the joy which fills God's heart and that of the 
angels and that of the returned soul himself when he has come home to God. It is 
indeed " joy unspeakable and full of glory." These are the stages, then, in a soul's 
history as it passes into the far-off land of forgetfulness of God, and then gets back to 
his embrace. 

IL The eldb« boh btatiho at homb, but nevbk happt. (Vers. 25 — 32.) W« 
now turn to our Lord's picture of the Pharisees and scribes, under the guise of the elder 
brother. Although these men had not left the Church, although they put in their 
appearance at the temple, they never were happy in their religion. 1. Nominally at 
homt, the elder $on is yet from home. (Ver. 25.) The elder son was always at work 
in the fields, happiest away from the father. Tha self-righteous spirit is after all an 
isolating spirit. The elder son was really as forgetful of God as the younger, only 
the forgetfulness took a diflferent form. 2. 2^ merry-making at home distresses him. 
(Vers. 26 — 30.) He first asks an explanation of the xmusual mirth, and then, when he 

fets it, bursts into a fit of censoriousness of the most exaggerated character, in which 
e accuses the father of favouritism in receiving his penitent child, and refuses to be 
any party to such merry-making. How it exposes the gloomy, Pharisaic spirit which 
with some passes for religion! 3. The godless spirit manifests itself toithin him. (Ver. 
29.) He has been a faithful and faultless servant, he believes, and yet he has never 
got even a kid to make merry with his friends. His whole Idea of joy is away from 
the father. He is still in the first stage of the younger brother, from which he happily 
has escaped. 4. He is unable to realize how meet it is to rejoice over the return of the 
lost. (Vers. 31, 32.) The father's expostulations are vain, although they ought to 
have been convincing. Joy over the recovery of the lost is one of the necessities of an 
un warped nature. It was this great sin of which the scribes and Pharisees were guilty, 
that they would not rejoice at the recovery of fallen fellows by the ministry of Christ. 
May the broken-heartedness of the prodigal be ours, and never the heartlesaness and 
censoriousness of the elder brother 1 — B. M. £!. 



EXPOSITION, 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Vers, l-^l.— The LorXt teaching <m the 
tiglit KM tjf earthly goseessioni with regard 



to the protpeet of another world, in (he form 
of tlie two parables of the unjust steward, and 
Lives and Lazarus. 
Yen. I, JL— And he said also unto Ui 



OH. XVI. 1—31.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINO TO ST. LUKB. 



«1 



disotplea. There la no doubt that this 
important teaching belongs to the last 
portion of onr Lord's life, and it is probable 
that it is closely connected with the parable 
of the prodigal son just related. It is not 
likely that two such weighty sermons had 
been preached at the same time, but in the 
evening, or on the following day, or at least 
on the next sabbath, the same auditory that 
listened to the prodigal son we believe were 
startled and enthralled by the story of the 
unjust steward, and then, or very shortly 
after, by the awful and vivid picture of life 
beyond the grave in the parable of the rich 
man and Lazarus. There is a close link of 
thought between the parable of the unjust 
steward and that of the prodigal. The 
heroes of both these narratives, in the first 
instance, had a considerable share of this 
world's goods entrusted to their charge, and 
by both, in the early portions of the story, 
these goods were misused and wasted. The 
Greek words used of the " wasting " of the 
prodigal and of the steward were in both 
cases the same(ch. zv. 13 ; xvi. 1). No parable 
in the New Testament has been so copiously 
discussed or has received so many and such 
varying interpretations at the hands of ex- 
positors. We will at once put aside all the 
ingenious, but from onr point of view mis- 
taken, interpretations which see in "the 
steward" the Pharisees, the publicans, 
Judas Iscaiiot, or Satan. The parable has 
a broader, a more direct, a more universally 
interesting, meaning. It contains a deep 
and important teaching for every man or 
woman who would wish to rank among the 
followers of Jesus Christ. Now, our Lord 
would have all men look forward gravely 
and calmly to the certain event of their 
death, and, in view of that event, would have 
them make careful and thoughtful prepara- 
tion for the life which was to come after 
death. To press this most important lesson 
home, the Master, as his custom was at this 
late period of his ministry, conveyed his 
instruction in the form of a parable. The 
sketch of a steward about to be dismissed 
fiom his ofBoe, and who thus would be 
(tripped of his income, was a fit emblem of 
a man about to be removed from this world 
by death. The steward in the parable-story 
felt that, when dismissed, he would be as it 
were alone, stripped of all, and destitute. 
The soul of such a man, when dead, would 
be also stripped of everything, would be 
alone and destitute. The question here 
might be asked — ^Why take for the principal 
figure of the parable so immoral a character 
as an unjtut steward ? The answer is well 
suggested by Professor Bruce, "For the 
gimple reason that his misbehaviour is the 
natural explanation of the impending dis- 
missal. Why should a faithful steward be 



removed from office? To conceive such a 
case were to sacrifice probability to a moral 
scruple." Roughly, then, two things all- 
important to us are taught here : (1) that 
dismissal, death, will certainly come; (2) 
that some provision certainly ought to be 
made for the life that lies beyond — the life 
that comes after the dismissal, or death. 
There was a certain rich man, which had a 
steward; and the same was aocnsed unto 
him that he had wasted his goods. And he 
called him, and said unto him, How is tt 
that I hear this of thee % give an account of 
thy stewardship; for thou mayest be no 
longer steward. The story of the parable 
contains little incident. There is the rich 
man, clearly a noble of high rank, whose 
residence is at a distance fxora his estates, 
the scene of the little story. Over these he 
has placed, as administrator or factor, the one 
called here a steward ; the revenues of the 
lands this ofiicial has wasted; he appears 
to have been generally a careless if not a 
dishonest servant. The owner of the estates, 
when he becomes aware of the facts of the 
case, at once gives notice of dismissal to the 
steward, desiring him, however, before yield- 
ing up his ofSce, to give in his accounts. 
Appalled at the sudden and utter destitution 
which lay before him, the steward occupies 
the short time of oMce yet remaining to 
him in devising a plan by which he would 
secure the good offices of certain persons 
who were in debt to his master. He (the 
steward) had yet a little time of power 
remaining before he was turned adrift; he 
would turn this to account, and would do a 
good turn to these men, poor neighbours of 
his, and debtors to his lord, while he was in 
office, and so win theii friendship, and, on 
the principle that one good turn deserves 
another, would be able to reckon on their 
gratitude when all else had failed him. 
With the immorality of the act by which 
he won the good will of these debtors of his 
master we have nothing to do; it is simply 
a detail of the picture, which is composed of 
figures and imagery chosen for their fitness 
to impress the lesson intended to be taught. 
Give an aewumt of thy itewardship; for 
thou mayest be no longer tteward. This 
taking away the position and privileges of 
the man represents the act of death, in 
which God takes away from us all the 
varied gifts, the possessions, and the powers 
large or small with which we are entrusted 
during our lifetime. Our day of dismissal 
will be the day of our passing away from 
this life. 

Ver. 3.— What shall I dot for my lord 
taketh away from me the stewardship. This 
day of dismissal mmt be prepared for ; very 
carefully, very anxiously, the man who hail 
received the sentence of doom ponders over 



62 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xn. 1—31. 



his future. The lesson of tte Master is 
spoken to all; it is a solemn warning to 
each of us to see what we can do by way 
of providing for the inevitable day when we 
shall find ourselves alone and naked and 
perhaps frienilless in the great, etranse 
world to come. The hero of the parable 
seems suddenly, after a life of carelessness 
and thoughtlessness, to have awakened to a 
sense of his awful danger. So the voice of 
the real Owner of the goods, whiuh we have 
BO long deluded ourselves into thinking were 
our own, comes to ua, bidding us make ready 
to give them back again to him, their Owner, 
and at the same time to render an account 
of our administration of them. The voice 
comes to us in the varied forms of conscience, 
sickness, misfortune, old age, sorrow, and 
the like ; well for us if, when we hear it, we 
at once determine, as did the steward of the 
parable, to make a wise use of the goods in 
our power for the little time they are still 
left to us to dispose of as we will. 

Ver. 4. — I am resolved what to do. The 
first part of the parable teaches, then, this 
great and all-important lesson to men — that 
they will do well to provide against the day 
of dismissal from life. The second part 
points out very vividly how kindness, 
charity, beneficence, towards those poorer, 
weaker, more helpless than ourselves is one 
way, and that a very sure and direct way, 
of 80 providing against the inevitable dis- 
mission, or death. Vers. 5, 6, and 7 simply 
paint in the details of the interesting picture 
of the parable. This singular plan of pro- 
viding for himself by becoming a benefactor 
of the debtor, remarks Professor Bruce, was 
by no means the only possible one under the 
circumstances; but the Speaker of the pa- 
rable made his hero make choice of it as the 
aim of the imaginary narrative was to teach 
the value of beneficence as a passport into 
the eternal habitations. Various explana- 
tions have been suggested to account for 
the diiference in the gifts to the debtors. 
It is probable that when our Lord spoke 
the parable, reasons for these varied gifts 
were given, such as the circumstances of 
the debtors. It is scarcely now worth while 
to frame ingenious guesses respecting the 
details, which apparently do not affect the 
grand lessons which the story was intended 
to teach. 

Ver. 8. — And the lord commended the 
unjust steward, because he had done wisely. 
This, again, is a detail which has little 
bearing on the main teaching. It is a 
graphic and sarcastic eulogy which a good- 
humoured man of the world would pro- 
nounce upon a brilliant and skilful, although 
unprincipled, action, and it completes tiie 
story as a story. It seems evident that 
the intentiouB of the steward in regard to 



the debtors were carried out, and that they 
were really indebted to him for the release 
of a part of their indebtedness, and that the 
owner of the property did not dispute the 
arrangement entered into by his steward 
when in ofBce. For the children of this 
world are in their generation wiser than 
the children of light. This was a melan- 
choly and sorrowful reflection. It seems to 
say, " I have been painting, indeed, from 
the life. See, the children of this world, men 
and women wliose ends and aims are 
bounded by the horizon of this world, who 
only live for this life, how much more 
painstaking and skilful are they in their 
working for the perishable things of this 
world than are the children of light in their 
noble toiling after the things of the life to 
come. The former appear even more in 
earnest in their search after what they 
desire than do the latter. There is under- 
lying the Lord's deep and sorrowful reflection 
here, u moui-nful regret over one feature 
that is, alasl characteristic of well-nigh all re- 
ligious life — the unkindness which religious 
professors so often show to one another. 
One great division of Christianity despises, 
almost hates, the other ; sect detests sect ; a 
very slight difference in religious opinion 
bars the way to all friendship, often to even 
kindly feeling. With truth Godet remarks 
here "that the children of this world use 
every means for their own interest to 
strengthen the bonds which unite them to 
their contemporaries of the same stamp, but, 
on the other hand, the children of light 
neglect this natural measure of prudence; 
they forget to use Gtod's goods to form bonds 
of love to the contemporaries who might one 
day give them a full recompense, when they 
tliemselves shall want everything, and these 
shall have abundance." 

Ver. 9. — And I say unto yon, Make to 
yourselves friends of the mammon of un- 
righteousness. Then, with his usual solemn 
formula, " I say unto you," the Lord gave 
out his moral interpretation of the parable. 
His words were addressed to possessors of 
various degrees of wealth. " You will soon 
have to give up all your worldly goods ; be 
prudent in time, make some real friends out 
of the mammon of unrighteousness ; by means 
of that money entrusted to your care, do 
good to others who are in need." The 
mammon of unrighieousness. This word 
" mammon " does not denote, as some have 
supposed, the name of a deity, the god of 
wealth or money, but it signifies " money " 
itself. It is a Syriac or Aramaic term. The 
words, " of unrigliteousness," are added be- 
cause in so many cases the getting of money is 
tainted with unrighteousness in some form 
or other; and, when possessed, it so often 
I hardens the heart, as the Lord himself said 



OH. XVI. 1-31.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 



63 



In another place (ch. xviii. 25), that it was 
easier for a camel to pasa through the eye of 
a needle than for a rich man to enter the 
kingdom of God. « What the steward of 
my story," said the Master, " did to men of 
Ms world, see that you with your money do 
toward those who belong to your world." 
That, when, ye fail, they may receive yon 
into everlasting habitations. So that when 
you shall be dismissed from being stewards 
of God's possessions, that is, when ye shall 
die, "when ye suffer the last eclipse and 
bankruptcy of life," that then others, your 
friends, may receive you (welcome you) "into 
everlasting dwellings. The majority of the 
older authorities here, instead of " when ye 
fail," read, " when it (money) shall fail you " 
(by the event of your death). The sense 
of the passage, however, remains the same, 
whichever reading be adopted. Bat now a 
deeply interesting question arises — When 
the Lord speaks of friends receiving us after 
death into eternal homes, to what friends is 
he alluding ? Great expositors, Ewald and 
Meyer, for instance, tell us that he means 
the angels. But the plain sense of the 
parable points, not to angels, but to poor, 
weak, suffering persons whom we have helped 
here ; these, then, must be the friends who 
will receive us, or welcome us, in the world 
to come. A further query suggests itself — 
flow will these be able to receive us? To 
such a question no definite reply can be 
given. "We know too little of the awful 
mysteries of that world to be able even to 
hazard a surmise as to the help or the 
comfort which grateful, Mossed spirits will 
be able to show to their brethren the newly 
arrived, when they receive them. His word 
here must suffice us ; well will it be for us, 
if one day we practically discover the holy 
secret for ourselves. Godet has a weighty 
note with which he concludes his exposition 
of Ihis difficult but most instructive parable : 
" There is no thought more fitted than that 
of this parable, on the one hand to under- 
mine the idea of merit belonging to alms- 
giving (what merit could be got out oi xliat 
which is another's ? and is not all money, are 
not all goods out of which we bestow our 
alms, God's ?) ; and on the other, to encourage 
us in the practice of that virtue which 
assures us of friends and protectors for the 
grave moment of our passing into the world 
to come." One beautiful and exquisitely 
comforting thought is shrined in this playful 
and yet intensely solemn utterance of Jesus. 
The eternal tents, the " many mansions," as 
John calls them, will have among their 
occupants, it is certain, many a one whose 
life ou earth was hard and sorrowful. These 
are now enjoying biiss indescribable, these 
poor Lazaruses, to whom this world was so 
sad, so dreary a habitation. And perhaps 



a portion of their blessedness consists in 
this power, to which the Lord makes allusion 
here, of assisting others — the helped here 
becoming the helpers there. Although the 
teaching of Christ and his chosen servants 
here and elsewhere shows us distinctly that 
no merit can attach to almsgiving, seeing 
that our alms are only given out of property 
entrusted to us for a short time by God for 
this and other similar purposes, yet the 
same authoritative teaching informs us that 
God has regard to almsdeeds done in the 
true spirit of love, in determining our eternal 
destiny. Thus a message direct from heaven 
informs the Roman legionary Cornelim 
that his prayers and alms were come up for a 
memorial before God. Paul writes toTimothy 
to charge the Ephesus Christians "that 
they do good, that they be rich in good 
works, ready to distribute, willing to com- 
municate ; laying up in store for themselves 
a good foundation against the time to come, 
that they may lay hold on eternal life." 
In the parable of Lazarus and Dives we 
shall find this principle yet more clearly 
illustrated. These are only a few out of 
the many passages where this generosity 
and almsgiving is commended to the believer 
with peculiar earnestness. 

Ver. 10.— He that is faithful in that 
which is least is faithful also in much : and 
he that is unjust in the least is unjust also 
in much. This and the next three verses 
are closely connected with the parable of the 
unjust steward. Our Lord no doubt con- 
tinued speaking, and these four verses con- 
tain a general r^mm^oi what may be called 
his refieotions on the important piece of 
teaching he had just delivered. We have 
here the broad rule, upon which God will 
decide the soul's future, laid down. If the 
man has been faithful iu his administration 
I if the comparatively unimportant goods of 
earth, it is clear that he can be entrusted 
with the far more important things which 
belong to the world to come. There is, 
too, in these words a kind of limitation and 
explanation of the foregoing parable of the 
unjust steward. The conduct of that steward, 
regarded iu one point of view, was held to 
be wise, and we. though in a very different 
way, were advised to imitate it ; yet here 
we are distinctly told that it is fidelity, not 
uufaitlifulness, which will be eventually re- 
warded— the just, not the unjust steward. 

Ver. 11. — The unrighteous mammon. As 
above in the parable, " mammon " signifies 
money. The epithet " unrighteous " is used 
in the same sense as in ver. 9, where wo 
read of the " mammon of unrighteousness." 

Yer. 12. — ^And if ye have not been faith- 
ful in that which is another man's. Hero, 
we have our earthly possessions plainly 
spoken of as the goods of another, that i.s, 



M 



■THE GOSPEL ACOOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xti. 1— «1» 



of Ood, and of these goods we are bnt the 
temporary stewards. Who shall give you 
that which is your ownl We have here a 
very magnificent promise. Although on 
earth man can possess nothing of his own 
—here he is but a steward for a time of 
property belonging to another — yet a prospect 
is held out to him that, if he be found 
faithful in the trust while on earth, in the 
world to come something will be given to 
him really and truly his own. There will 
be no dismissal or death there. 

Ver. 13. — No servant can serve two 
masters. . . Ye cannot serve God and 
mammon. Very vividly is this experience 
brought out in the great parable which 
immediately follows. There the rich man 
was evidently one who observed the sacred 
ritual of the Law of Moses : this we learn 
without doubt from his conversation after 
death with Abraham. Thus he tried, after 
his light, to serve Ood, but he also served 
mammon : this we learn, too, clearly from 
the description given to us of hia life, from 
the mention of ttie gorgeous apparel and the 
sumptuous feeding. The service of the two 
was incompatible, and we know from the 
sombre sequel of the story to which master 
the rich man really held, and whom — alas 
for him I— in his heart he despised. 

Ver. 14.— And the Pharisees also, who 
were covetous, heard all these things : and 
tney derided him. This shows that many 
of the dominant sect had been present and 
had listened to the parable of the unjust 
steward. Although scrupulous, and in s 
way religious men, these Pharisees were 
notorious for their respect and regard for 
riches, and all that riches purchase, and 
they felt, no doubt deeply, the Lord's bitter 
reproach of covetousness. They, the rulers 
and leaders of Israel, the religious guides, 
were evidently attacked in such teaching 
as they bad been lately listening to, not 
the common people whom they so despised. 
The scornful words alluded to in the ex- 
pression, " they derided him," were no doubt 
directed against the outward poverty of the 
popular Galileean Teacher. " It is all very 
well," they would say, " for one springing 
from the ranks of the people, landless, 
moneyless, to rail at wealth and the 
possessors of wealth; we can understand 
such teaching from one such as you." 

Ver. 15. — ^And he said unto them, Ye are 
they which justify yourselves before men ; 
hut God knoweth your hearts. The part 
the Pharisees played in public imposed 
upon the people. The great influenoe which 
they exercised was in great measure due to 
the respect generally felt for their strict 
and religious lives. The hypocrisy of this 
famous sect — it wag probably in many oases 
snoonsoious hypocrisy — asd the false coloor- 



ing which U gave religion, contributed not 
a little to the state of things which led to 
the final disruption of the Jewish nation as 
a nation some forty years after these words- 
were spoken. It is only a student of the 
Talmud who can form any notion of the 
Pharisee mind ; a superficial study even of 
parts of this strange, mighty collection will 
show why our Lord was so seemingly hard 
in hia rebukes of these often earnest and 
religious men; it will show, too, why the 
game Divine Master at times seemed to 
change his words of bitter wrath into accents 
of the tenderest sympathy and love. Tor 
that which is highly esteemed among men 
is abomination in the sight of Ood. Espe- 
cially alluding to that haughty pride -of 
men in wealth and money, which, after all, 
is not theirs. 

Ver. 16. — The law and the prophets were 
until John : since that time the kingdom of 
God is preached, and every man presseth 
into it. Some expositors discern so little 
connection between the sayings contained 
in these verses which intervene between the 
two great parables of the unjust steward 
and the rich man and Lazarus, that they 
consider them as a number of sayings of 
the Master collected by Luke and inserted 
here. A clear thread, however, runs through 
the whole piece between the two parables. 
Probably, however, here, as in many parts 
of the Gospel, we only have just a bare 
sketch, or precis, of what the Lord said; 
hence its fragmentary character. Here (in 
the sixteenth verse), the Master went on 
speaking to the Pharisees who derided him 
(ver. 14). " Up to the period of John the 
Baptist," said the Master, ** the old state of 
things may be said to have continued in 
force. With him began a new era ; no longer 
were the old privileges to be confined to 
Israel exclusively; gradually the kingdom 
of God was to be enlarged, the old wall of 
separation was to be taken down. See, every 
man is pressing into it ; the new state of 
things has already begun ; you see it in the 
crowds of publicans, sinners, Samaritans, and 
others pressing round me when I speak of 
the kingdom of God." 

Ver. 17. — ^And it is easier for heaven and 
earth to pass, than one tittle of the Law to 
fail. "Yet think not," went on the Master, 
."that, thongh things are changing, the 
Divine Law will ever fail. The mere tem- 
porary and transitory regulations will, of 
course, give place to a new order, but not the 
smallest part of one letter of the Divine 
moral Liaw will fail." " One tittle." This is 
the rendering of a Greek word the diminu- 
tive of " horu," which denoted the horn or 
extremity of a Hebrew letter, by the omis- 
sion or addition of which — to give an instance 
—the l«tter d beooiBes the letter r ; thus witk 



CH. xn. 1—31.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. 



fit 



the horn it is *), daleth, d; without the horn 
1, resh, r. The heresiarch Marcion (second 
century) here, in hie recension of St Luke, 
changes the text thus: "It is easier for 
heaven and earth to pass, than for one tittte 
of my saying$ to fail." Maroion, who refused 
to allow the Divine origin of iiny part of the 
Old Testament, was afraid of the testimony 
which this assertion of our Lord would give 
to the Divine authority of the Pentateuch. 
lu illustration of his saying that the moral 
Law given to the Jews was cliangeless, and 
while earth endured would never fail, the 
Blaster instances one grave chapter of tlie 
Law with which there bad been much tam- 
pering — that of divorce. " See," he said, 
" the new state of things which I am now 
teacliing, instead of loosening the cords with 
wliioh the old Law regulated human society, 
will rather tighten them. Instead of a 
laxer code being substituted, 1 am preaching 
a yet severer one. My law of divorce is a 
severer one than that written down by 
Moses." 

Ver. 18. — Whosoever putteth away his 
wife, and marrieth another, committech 
adultery : and whosoever marrieth lier tliat 
is put away from her husband, oommitteth 
adultery, The teaching of the rabbis in the 
time of our Lord on the question of the 
marriage tie was exceedingly lax, and 
ti n leil to grave immorality in the family 
life. In the late uTilawful marriage of 
Herod Antipas with Heroilias, in which so 
niMiiy aaond and family ties were rudely 
torn asunder, no rabbi or doctor in Israel 
but cine had raised his voice in indignant 
prnti Bt, anil tliat one was the friend and con- 
neci.nii of Jeous of Nazareth, the propliet 
John the Baptist. Divorce for the most 
trivial caused Wiis s.mptioiied by the rabbis, 
and even sufh men as Hillel, the grandfather 
of t!,at Gamaliel whom tradition speaks of 
a.t the rabbi whose lectiiies were listeneii to 
by Ihe Boy Jesus, taught that a man might 
divorce his wife if in the cooking she burnt 
his (iioiier or even over-talteJ his soup (see 
Talmud, treali-,6 'Giltin,' ix. 10). 

SS. Luke ami Paul, different to the preat 
masters of profane history, like Thuoydides, 
or Livy, or Xenoplion, were evidently at no 
pains to round off their narratives. They 
give us the account of the Lord's words and 
works very much as they had them from 
the first listeners and eye-witnesses. When 
the notes aud memories were very scant and 
fragmentary, as appear to have been the 
case in the Lords disi;onrse which St. Luke 
interposes between tlie parable of the steward 
and that of Dives and Lazarus, the frag- 
mentary notes are reproduced without aqy 

LUKK. — II. 



attempt to round off the condensed, and at 
first sight apparently disconnected, ntter- 
ances. So here, directly after the frag- 
mentary report of certain sayings of Jesua, 
the great parable of Lazarus and Dives is 
introduced with somewhat startling abrupt- 
ness ; nothing of St. Luke's is added — simply 
the original report as Luka or Paul received 
it is reproduced. 

The following is probably the connection 
in which the famous parable was spoken. 

When the Lord spoke the parable-story of 
the unjust steward, he pressed home to the 
listeners, as its great lesson, the necessity of 
providing against the day of death, and he 
showed how, by the practice oi kindness here 
towards the poor, the weak, and the suffei<> 
ing, they would make to themselves friends 
who would in their turn be of use to them 
— ^who would, in their hour of sore need, 
when death swept them out of this life, 
receive them into e"erlasting habitations. 

We believe that the Master, as he spoke 
these things, purposed — either on that very 
occasion, or very shortly after, when his 
listeners were again gathered together — sup- 
plemcnting this important teaeliing by an- 
other parable, in which the good of having 
friends in the world to come should be 
clearly shown. The parable of Lazaius and 
Dives, then, may be regarded as a piece of 
teaching following on to aud closely con- 
nected with the parable of the unjust 
steward. 

Nine verses, however, as we have seen 
are inserted betwi en the two parables. Of 
these, vers. 10 — 13 are simply S' me reflec- 
tions of the Master on the parable of the 
steward just spoken. Then comes ver. 14 — 
a scornful interruption on tlie part of the 
Pharisee listeners. Our Lord replies to this 
(vers. 15 — 18), and then goes on, either then 
or very soon after, to the same auditory, with 
the parable of Lazarus and Dives, which io, 
in fact, a direct sequel to the parable of the 
unjust steward, and whioli St. Luke pro- 
ceeds to relate without any further preamble. 

Ver. 19. — There was a certain rich man. 
He is thus introduced by the Lord without 
any details respecting his age or place of 
residence — namelens^ too 1 Seems he not to 
have been reading fjom that book where he 
found the name of the poor man written, but 
found not the name of Uie rich ; for that book 



66 



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINd TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvi. 1— 8L 



is the book of life»» (Sermon 178. 8 of St. 
Aug^tine). Tiadition eayg bU name waa 
Kimeusie, but it is simply a baseless tradi- 
tion. Whioli was olothed in purple and fine 
linen. The words which describe the life of 
Dives were chosen with rare skill ; they ere 
few, but enough to show us that the worldly 
hero of the story lived a life of royal magni- 
ficence and boundless luxury. Eia ordinary 
apparel seems to have been purple and fine 
linen. This purple, the true sea purple, was 
a most precious and rare dye, and the purple 
garment so dyed was a royal gift, and was 
scarcely used save by princes and nobles of 
very high degree. In it the idol-images were 
sometimes arrayed. The fine linen (byssus) 
was worth twice its weight in gold. It was 
in hue dazzlingly white. And fored sump- 
tuously every day. With this princely rich 
man banquets were a matter of dluly occur- 
rence. Luther renders the Greek here, 
"lebte herrlich und in Freuden." Thus 
with all the accompaniments of grandeur 
this nameless mighty one lived, his halls 
ever filled with noble guests, hia ante- 
chambers with servants. Everything with 
him that could make life splendid and joyous 
was in profusion. Some have suspected that 
our Lord took, as the model for his pic- 
tuile here, the life of the tetrarch Herod 
Antipas. The court of that magnificent and 
luxurious prince would certainly have well 
secved as the original of the picture; but 
Herod was still living, and it is more likely 
that Jesus was describing the earth-Ufe of 
one who had already been" dismissed " from 
his earthly stewardship, end who, when he 
spoke the parable, was in the world to come. 
Yers. 20, 21. — And there was a certain 
beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at 
his gate, full of sores, and desiring to be fed 
with the ommbi which fell from the rich 
man's table. In striking contrast to the life 
of the rich man, the Master, with a few 
touches, paints the life of the beggar Laza- 
rus. This giving a name to a personage 
in the parable occurs nowhere else in the 
evangelists' reports of our Lord's parabolic 
teaching. It probably was done in this case 
just to give OS a hint, for it is nothing more, 
of the personal character of the poor sufferer 
who in the end was so blessed. The object 
of the parable, as we shall see, did not in- 
clude any detailed account of the beggar- 
man's inner life; just tAis name is given him 
to show us why, when he died, he found 
himself at once in bliss. Among the Jews 
the name very often describes the character 
of him who bears it. The Greek name 
Lazarui is derived from two Hebrew words, 
Elrezar ("God-help"), shortened by the 
rabbis into Leazar, whence Xoiartw. He 
was, then, one of those happy ones whose 
confidence, in all lui giief and misery, was in 



God alone. Well was his tmst, as we shall 
see, justified. The gate at kwhioh he was 
daily laid was a stately portal (irvAii)!/). 
Lazarus is represented as utterly unable to 
win his bread. He was a constant sufferer, 
covered with sores, wasting under the do- 
minion of a loathsome, incurable disease. 
This representative of human suffering has 
taken a strange hold on the imagination of 
men. In many of the languages of Europe 
the name of the beggar of the parable ap- 
pears in the terms "lazar," "lazar-house," 
and " lazaretto," "lazzaronL" Unable him. 
self to walk, some pitying friend or friends 
among the poor — the poor are never backward 
in helping others poorer than themselves, 
thus setting a noble example to the rich- 
brought him and laid him daily close by the 
splendid gates of the palace of Dives. The 
crumbs signify the broken fragments which 
the servants of the rich man wonld con- 
temptuously, perhaps pityingly, toss to the 
poor helpless beggar-man as he lay by the 
gate, moreover the dogs came and licked 
his sores. These were the wild, homeless 
pariali dogs so common in all Eastern cities, 
who act as the street-scavengers, and are 
regarded as unclean. This mention of the 
dogs clustering round him does not suggest 
any contrast between the pitying animals 
and pitiless men, but simply adds additional 
colour to the picture of the utter helpless- 
ness of the diseased sufferer ; there he lay, 
and as he lay, the rough homeless dogs 
would lick his unbandaged wounds as they 
passed on the forage. 

Ver. 22. — And it came to pass, that the 
beggar died, and was carried by the angels 
into Abraham's bosom. At last kind death 
came, and relieved Lazarus of his sufferings. 
His dismissal, as might have been expected, 
preceded that of tbe rich man ; for he was 
enfeebled by a deadly disease. We must not, 
of course, press too much the details we find 
in parables; still, from our Lord's way of 
speaking of the great change in the cases 
of both Lazarus and Dives, it would seem aa 
though there was absolutely no pause be- 
tween the two lives of this world and the 
world to come. The rich man evidently is 
pictured as closing his eyes upon his gorgeous 
surroundings here, and opening them directly 
again upon his cheerless surroundings there. 
Lazarus is described as being borne at once 
into Abraham's bosom. Indeed, some in- 
terpret the words as signifying that the body 
as well as the soul was carried by angela 
into Paradise. It is, however, better, with 
Calvin, to understand the expression as al- 
luding only to Lazarus's soul ; of tiie body 
of the pauper nothing was said, as men prob- 
ably contemptuously, if not carelessly, buried 
it with the burial rites which such homeless, 
friendless ones too often reoeiv*. The plaoa 



OH. XVI. 1—31.] TEE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST, LUKE, 



67 



whither the blest Lazarus went is termed 
"Abraham's bosom." This term was used 
by the Jews indifferently, with " the garden 
of Eden," or " under the throne of glory," 
for the home of happy but waiting' souls. 
The rich man also died, and was buried. 
There is a terrible irony liere in this men- 
tion ot burial. This human pageantry of woe 
was for the rich man what the carrying by 
the angels into Abraham's bosom was for 
Lazarus — ^it was his equivalent ; but while 
these empty honours were being paid to his 
senseless, deserted body, the rich man was 
already gazing on the surroundings of his 
new and cheerless home. After the moment's 
sleep of death, what an awakening 1 

Yer. 23. — ^And in hell he lift up his eyes, 
being in torments ; more accurately, in Bades 
(the unseen world of tlie dead)Ae lift ap his 
eyes. The idea of suffering does not lie in 
these first words, but in the participle " be- 
ing in torments," which immediately follows. 
It is noticeable that, in this Divine picture of 
unhappy life in the other world there is no 
coarse, vulgar word-painting such as we 
meet with so often in mediseval human 
works. The very fact of the man's being 
unhappy is gently represented. The graver 
aspeot of the torments we learn from the 
bapless one's own words. Still, it is all very 
awful, though the facts are so gently told us. 
" Being in torments :" How could it be other- 
wise for such a one as Dives? The home of 
the loving, where Abraham was, would be 
no home for that selfish man who had never 
really loved or caied for any one save him- 
self. What were the torments? men with 
hushed voices ask. A little further on tlie 
doomed one speaks of a flame and of his 
tongue apparently burning, owing to the 
scorching heat ; but it would be a mistake 
to think of a material flame being intended 
here. There is nothing in the description of 
the situation to suggest this ; it is rather the 
burning never to be satisfied, longing for 
something utterly beyond his reach, that 
the unhappy man describes as an inextin- 
guishable flame. Were it desirable to dwell 
OQ these torments, we should remind men 
how lustful desires change rapidly into tor- 
ture for the soul when the means for grati- 
fying them exist not. In the case of Dives, 
his delight on earth seems to have been 
Booiety, pleasant jovial company, the being 
surrounded by a crowd of admiring friends, 
the daily banquet, the gorgeous apparel, the 
stately house, — these details more than hint 
at the pleasure he found in the society of 
courtier-friends ; but in the other world he 
seems to have been quite alone. Whereas 
among the blessed there appears to be a 
sweet companionship. Lazarus is in the com- 
pany of Abraham, who, of course, only repre- 
sents a great and goodly gathering. " Abra- 



ham's bosom" is simply the well-known 
expression ibr that feast or banquet of the 
happy souls judged worthy of an entrance 
into Paradise. But in that place where the 
rich man lifted up his eyes there seems a 
strange and awful solitariness. A total ab- 
sence of everything, even of external causes 
of trouble, is very noticeable. He was alone ; 
alone with his thoughts. And seeth Abra- 
ham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. 

Ver. 21. — ^And he cried and said, Father 
Abraham, have mercy on me, and send 
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his 
finger in water, and cool my tongue ; for I 
am tormented in this flame. His intense 
longing seems to be for companionship. 
" Oh for a friend," he seems to say, " who 
could speak to me, comfort me, give me the 
smallest alleviation of the pain I suffer 1" 
What picture of a hell was ever painted by 
man comparable to this vision of eternal 
solitude, peopled alone by remorseful me- 
mories, described by Jesus ? As the Divine 
Speaker advanced in his thrilling, melan- 
choly description of the rich man's condition 
in the world to come, how vividly must th6 
listeners have recalled the Master'«j earnest 
advice to them, in his former parable of the 
steward, to make to themselves rehile here 
friends who would receive them into ever- 
lasting habitations I They saw the meaning 
of that detail of the parable then. Were 
they, in their luxurious abundance, were they 
making friends here who would help them 
there in the eternal tents ? Were they not, 
perhaps, making the same mistake as the 
rich man of the story? The question might 
be asked — Why is Abraham, the father of the 
chosen race, the centre of this blessed life in 
Hades ? In reply, firstly, it must be remem- 
bered that the whole colouring of this parable 
is peculiarly rabbinic, and in the schools of 
the rabbis the life of the blessed in Paradise 
is represented as a banquet, over which, 
until Messiah come, Abraham is represented 
as presiding. And, secondly, when the 
parable was spoken, the Saviour was actually 
on earth; his great redemption work had 
still to be accomplished. There was truth 
as well as error mingled in that strange 
rabbinical teaching. Messiah, as Messiah, 
when the parable was being probably acted, 
had not entered that realm where Abraham 
and many another holy and humble man of 
heart were in the enjoyment of exquisite 
bliss. 

Ver. 25. — Bnt Abraham said, Son; remem- 
ber that thou in thy lifetime reoeivedst thy 
good things, and likewise Lazarus evU 
things : but now he is comforted, and then 
art tormented. Abraham here simply bids 
the tortured man to call to his memory tiie 
oircumstaneesof thelifehehad lived on earth, 
telling him that in these circumstances h« 



«8 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xvi. 1— 81 



would find the reason for hia present woeful 
state. It was no startling record of vice and 
crime, or even of folly, that thu father of the 
faithful calls attention to. He quietly re- 
calls to the rich man's memory that on earth 
ho had lived a life of princely splendour and 
luxury, and that Lazarus, sick and utterly 
destitute, lay at his palace gate, and was 
allowed to lie there uiipitied and unhelped. 
And because of the studied moderation of 
its language, and the everyday character 
of its hero Dives — for he, the rich man, not 
Lazarus, is the real hero, the central cha- 
racter of the great parable-lesson — the 
lesson of the parable goes home necessarily 
to many more hearts than it would have 
done had the hero been a monster of wicked- 
ness, a cold calculating or else a plausible 
villain, a man who shrank not from sacri- 
ficing the lives and happiness of his fellow- 
men if their lives or happiness stood in his 
way. Dives was merely a commonplace 
wealthy man of the world, with self-centred 
aims, and the sin for which he was con- 
demned to outer darkness was only that 
•everyday sin of neglecting out of the mam- 
mon of unrighteousness^in other words, out 
of his money — to make for himself friends 
who should receive him into the eternal 
tents, 

Ver. 26. — And beside aU this, between as 
and you there is a great gulf fixed : so that 
tb^ which would pass from hence to yon 
cannot ; neither can they pass to us, that 
would come from thence. Although the 
wholtt thought which runs through this 
parable is new, and peculiar to Christ, yet 
the colouring of the picture is nearly all 
borrowed from the great rabbinic schools ; 
one of the few exceptions to this rule being 
this chasm or gulf which separates the two 
regions of Hades. The rabbis represented 
the division as consisting only of a wall. 
" What is the distance between Paradise 
and Gehenna ? According to E. Johanan, a 
wall; according to other teachers, a palm- 
breadth, or only a finger-breadth " (' Midrash 
on Koheleth '). What, asks the awestruck 
reader, is this dreadful chasm? why is it 
impassable? will it be forever there? will 
no ages of sorrow, no tears, no bitter heart- 
felt repentance .succeed in throwing a bridge 
across it? Many have written here, and 
kindly souls have tried to answer the stern 
question with the gentle, loving reply which 
tlieir souls so longed to hear. Wliat is im- 
possilde to the limitless love of d'od? 
Nothing, wistfully says the heart. But, 
when interrogated closely, the parable and, 
indeed, all the Master's teaching on this 
I'oint preserves a silence complete, impene- 
trable. 

Vers. 27, 28.— Then he said, 1 pray thee 
therefore, father, that thou wonldest send 



him to my father's house : for I have five 
brethren; that he may testify nnto them; 
lest they also come into this place of tor- 
ment. The condemned w^niesces in this 
dread fact ; convinced of the utter impossi- 
bility of any interchange of sympathy be- 
tween him and the dwellers in the realms 
of bliss, he ceases to pray for any alleviation 
of his own sad and wretched state. But 
another wail of woe quickly rises from the 
awful solitude. What means this second 
prayer of the doomed man? Are we to 
read in it the first signs of a new and noble 
purpose in the lost soul, the first dawning 
of loving thoughts and tender care for 
others ? It seems, perhaps, unkind not to 
recognize this; but the Divine Speaker evi- 
dently had another purpose here when ho 
put these words into the mouth of tlie lost 
rich man — he would teach the great lesson 
to the living that a selfish life is iuexousablo. 
On first thoughts, the rich man's request to 
Abraham appears prompted alone by his 
anxiety for the future of his brothers who 
were still alive ; but on examination it would 
seem, to use the striking words of Professor 
Bruce, that he wished rather to justify his 
own sad past by some such reflection as 
this: "Had only some one come from the 
dead with the calm, clear light of eternity 
shining in his eyes, to inform me that this 
life beyond is no fable, that Paradise is a 
place or state of unspeakable bUss, and 
Gehenna a place or state of unspeakable 
woe, I should have renounced my voluptuous, 
selfish ways, and entered on the path of 
piety and charity. If one had come to me 
from the dead, I had surely repented, and 
so should not have come to this place of 
torment." 

Ver. 29. — Abraham saith unto him, They 
have Hoses and the prophets ; let them 
hear them. The reply of Abraham was 
especially addressed to those Jews who were 
standing round him and even asking for a 
sign. They had all read and heard again 
and again the Books of Moses and the 
records of the prophets ; if these guides had 
failed to show them the right way, a special 
messenger sent to them would be quite use- 
less. 

Vers. 30, 31. — And he said, Nay, father 
Abraham : but if one went unto them from 
the dead, they will repent. And he said 
unto him, If they hear not Moses and the 
prophets, neither will they he persuaded, 
though one rose from the dead. The Master 
not only wished to drive home this momen- 
tous truth to the hearts of the group of varied 
rauka and orders listening to him then; his 
words were for a far larger auditory, so he 
prolongs the dialogue between Dives and 
Abraham. "If Lazarus from the dead 
would only go to them," pleaded the lo«t 



OH. XVI. 1—81.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIN(J TO ST. LUKB. 



Bonl. " Even if I send," replied Abraham, 
" and T.azarus goes, they will not be per- 
Buaded." Thpy would see him, listen to 
him, perhaps, and then, when the first feel- 
ings of amazement and fear were dying 
away, would find some plausible reasons for 
disregarding the messenger and his message. 
Criticism would rlisouss the appearance; it 
would be disposed of by attributing it to 
an hallucination, or others would suggest 
that the visitant from the other world had 
never been really dead, and these pleas would 
be readily taken up by others who cared not 
to examine the question for themselves, and 
BO life, careless, selfish, thoughtless, would 
go on as it had done aforetime. A striking 
example of what the Lord asserted through 
the medium of the shade of Abraham took 
place within u few days from that time. 
Anoiher Lazarus did come back again from 
the dead into the midst of that great 
company of friends and mourners and jealous 
watchers of Jesus gathered round the sepul- 
chral cave of Bethany, and though some 
true, faithful hearts welcomed the mighty 
sign with awful joy, still it served not to 
touch the cold and calculating spirit of 
Pharisee, scribe, and Sadducee, thirsting 
for the blood of the Master, whom they 
feared and hated, and whose word had 
summoned back the dead into their midst. 
The mighty wonder wrought no change 
there. One went unto them from the dead, 
and yet their hard hearts only took counsel 
together how they might put Lazarus again 
to death. 

And so the parable and this particular 
course of teaching came to a close. Perhaps 
it is the deepest, the most soul-stirring of 
all the utterances of the Master. Expositors 
for eighteen centuries have drawn out of 
its clear, fathomless depths new and ever 
new truths. It is by no means yet ex- 
hausted. This voice from the other side 
of the veil charms and yet appals, it 
terrifies and yet enthrals all ages, every 
class, each rank of men and women. There 
are many other important items of special 
teaching which have been scarcely touched 
on in the notes above. Among the more 
interesting of these is the brief notice of 
the life which the blessed lead in Para- 
dise. The happy dead are represented as a 
wide family circle. Abraham is pictured 
with Lazarus in his bosom. The image is 
taken from the way guests used to sit at a 
banquet. John at the Last Supper occupied 
a similar position with regard to the Master 
(John xiii. 23, 25) to that occupied by 
Lazarus with regard to Abraham here. The 
two extremes of the social scale are thus 
represented as meeting in that blessed com- 
pany on terms of the tenderest friendship. 
W^ith these were Isaac and Jacob and all 



the prophets (oh. xiii. 28> " AH the just,' 
as Marcion gives it in his recension of St 
Luke. And while the Paradise-life for the 
blessed dead is described as a holy communion 
of saints, there is evidently no correspond- 
ing communion in the case of the unhappy 
dead. The selfish rich man finds himself 
in an awful solitude. The Buffering is 
rather represented by the image of the void; 
there are no external causes of pain ap- 
parently ; heuoe his longing to speak a word 
with Lazarus, to feel the touch of a friendly 
sympathizing hand, if only for a moment, 
to distract his burning remorseful thoughts. 
Tliere was nothing to live for there, nothing 
to hope for, but he felt he must go on living 
— hopeless. As no special crime, no glaring 
sin of lust or wanton excess or selfish 
ambition, is laid to the rich man's charge, 
and yet when dead he is represented as 
lifting up his eyes, being in torments, many, 
especially men belonging to those schools 
which are generally unfriendly to the re- 
ligion of Jesus Christ, have endeavoured to 
show that the condemned was condemned 
on account of his riches, while the saved 
was saved because of his deep poverty. 
Nor is this error alone common to tha 
Tubingen school, and to brilliant free-lances 
in religious literature like M. Benan. Some 
such mistaken notion doubtless materially 
aided the rise and the popularity of tha 
mendicant orders, who played so important 
a part in the Christianity of the Middle 
Ages in so many lands. But the burden of 
our thrilling parable emphatically is not 
"Woe to the riehl 'blessed are the poor'." 
The crime of the life to which so awful a 
punishment was meted out as the guerdon, 
was selfish inhumanity, which Christ teaches 
us is the damning sin. (See his words in 
his great picture of the final judgment. 
Matt. XXV. 41 — 46.) Lazarus was no solitary 
individual ; he was one of the many suffering 
poor who abound in this world, and to find 
whom the rich need not go far from their 
own gates. Lazarus represents here the 
opportunity for the exercise of Dives's hu- 
manity. Of this, and doubtless many like 
opportunities. Dives cared not to avail him- 
self. He was apparently no ill-natured, 
cruel man, he was simply self-centred, 
delighting in soft living, generous wines, 
costly fare, sumptuous clothing, good society. 
He loved to be surrounded with applauding, 
pleasant guests ; but the Lazaruses of the 
world, for him, might pine away and die in 
their nameless awful misery. Professor Bruce, 
with great force, puts the following words 
into the beggar Lazarus's mouth; these words 
tell us with startling clearness what was 
the sin of Dives : " I was laid at this man's 
gate ; he knew me ; he could net pass from 
his house into the street without seeing my 



70 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LTJKB. [ch. xvi. 1—31. 



condition, as a leprous beggar, yet as a 
beggar I died." Dives here was endowed 
richly with all the materials of human 



of vast wealth. Then, too, in tho lattei 
part of the parable, when the imminent 
danger which the five brothers of the lost 



happiness, but he kept all his happiuess to | Dives ran of being similarly lost, was flis' 
himself, he took no trouble whatever to ' cussed, the danger is represented as spring- 
diffuse his joy and gladness, his bright and j ing from their careless disregard of the Law 



many -coloured life among that great army 
of weak, poor, woe-begone brothers and 
sisters who go far to make up the popula- 
tion of every great city. That riches are 
not in themselves a ground for exclusion 
fiom the blessed life is plainly shown by 
the position occupied by Abraham in that 
happy family circle of the blessed. For 
Abraham, we know, was a sheik possessed 



and the prophets, and not from the fact of 
their being rich men. When Ezckiel sought 
for examples of the most righteous men 
that had ever lived, he chose, it must be 
remembered, as exemplars of mortals 1 iving 
the fair, noble life loved of God, three men 
distinguished for their rank and riches - 
Noah, Daniel, and Job (Ezek. ziy. 14, 20). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — The unjust steward. Whereas the three preceding parahles were 
spoken to the Pharisees, this is spoken to the disciples. It is not quite certain whether 
all the parables were uttered at or about the same time ; but the use of the Vfoid " also " 
(ver. 1) suggests that they were. Anyhow, the saying before us has reference tq a 
different kind of wasting from that of the younger son — a wasting against which the 
followers of Jesus are solemnly warned. We are called to listen to the Master as he 
indicates temptations and enforces duties within the special circle of discipleship. This 
parable is a saying hard to be understood. Many explanations have been given. A 
very learned commentator, appalled by the difficulties connected with the interpreta- 
tion, abandoned the attempt, declaring that the solution of the problem is impossible. 
And truly, if we canvassed all the schemes of exposition which have been proposed, 
all the inferences which have been founded on clauses, and all the speculations which 
have been raised, we should find " no end in wandering mazes lost." Let our aim be 
less ambitious ; let us try to get hold of some plain, practical instruction which shall 
help us to be better disciples of Jesus Christ. The outline of the story is simple. The 
dramatis personce are not numerous. A wealthy landowner has a steward who, in the 
management of his estates, possesses a large discretionary power. He is informed that 
this steward has, not stolen or wrongfully applied, but by neglect or want of skill 
has squandered, the estate entrusted to him. He is called to account and is dismissed 
peremptorily. Now comes into view the adroitness of the man. He wishes to hpve 
some friends who can do him a good turn when he is out of a situation ; and so, before 
news of his dismissal reaches any, while it is supposed that he has full power, he oal'"' 
tugether those who are in arrears of rent or are otherwise indebted to his lord. We cn^ 
imagine the trembling with which they obey the summons. How bland and smilir, 
is the factor ! What kind inquiries as to wife and children and belongings I And then 
" By the way, what is the amount of your obligation ? " Two specimens are given 
One person owes a hundred measures of oil. " Take your pen," says the factor, " scow 
out the hundred, and make it fifty." Another owes a hundred measures of wheal. 
" Take your pen, write down eighty," All retire charmed, loud in the steward's praise. 
Had he not secured a warm place in their regard ? When told of his downfall, woula 
not they all cry, " Shame ! " and speak of him as the tenants' friend, and welcome him 
to their houses ? The point of the lesson which Christ would teach is this — separate 
the energy from the dishonesty, the foresight from the fraud, and as he, for his own 
wrong ends, was wise and calculating, so, for your right ends, practise a wisdom like 
his, though nobler than his : " Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unright- 
eousness, that when ye die, or fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations." 
Now, without puzzling ourselves over the details of the parable, consider the lessons 
inculcated as to (1) Ohrisiian respormbility ; (2) Christian administration; and 
(3) Christian service. 

L Christian bbsponsibilitt. In the relation of the steward to the rich man we 
have a foreshadowing of the relation in which we stand to God. " Steward " ii the 



OH. xvL 1— 31,] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. 71 

word ■which indicates this relation. To every one of us is given a chargp of goods 
whose Owner is God. Our own constitution — physical, mental, moral — is a trust ; all 
our endowments — talents, powers of whatsoever kind — are a property of which we are 
farmers; and he who thinks that he can do as he likes with these, that he can dissi- 
pate his suhstance by intemperance, or alienate his strength from higher ends, is false 
to his Maker and false to himself. So with regard to all our influence — direct and 
indirect — it is a power delegated to us by the Almighty, and to be realized under the 
sense of the account to be rendered to him. Money, relationships, social positions, — all 
are items of the estate over which we are set. Do we all realize this as we should ? 
Do we not sadly forget this fact of stewardship ? Christ speaks of " the mammon of 
unrighteousness." Here is an explanation which has been given. " The ears of Jesus 
must have been repeatedly shocked by the kind of rashness by which men speak, 
without hesitation, of ' my fortune,' ' my land,' ' my house.' He who felt keenly the 
dependence of man on God perceived that there was in this 'feeling of property a sort of 
usurpation, a forgetfulness of the real owner; in hearing such language he seemed to 
see the tenant changing into the master." Ah I does he not hear such language every 
day? Is it not in the air ? Is it not in onr own feeling? Are we not, in many ways, 
changing the tenant into the master, the steward into the owner? taking the goods, and 
using them without giving praise to him whose they are? Would that the answer 
given to the first question in an old Catechism were written into the texture of every 
life — " Man's chief end is to glorify God, and to enjoy him for ever." 

II. Connected with Christian stewardship is the truth of Christian administra- 
tion. And may it not be said that this is a truth far too little studied and practised ? 
When we hear of depressions of trade, of hard, dull times, we may well reflect on the 
saying of the Prophet Haggai (i. 5, 6), " Consider your ways. Ye have sown much, and 
bring in little ; ye eat, but ye have not enough ; ye drink, but ye are not filled with 
drink ; ye clothe you, but there is none warm ; and he that earneth wages, earneth wages 
ta put it into a bag with holes." In regard to Christian objects, is there not much 
to learn from such tact and prudence as the steward's in the parable ? Do we not need 
them much in the conduct of benevolent enterprises ? Competition may be healthy ; 
but a competition which, in a limited area, or on mere windmills, spends a force which 
should be far more diffusive, is not only not healthy, it is a loss and a scandaL Is not 
this the kind of competition which is too prevalent in ecclesiastical and in charitable 
spheres ? Otherwise must we not confess that, through our want of inventiveness or 
wisdom in management, our want of skill to turn opportunities to the best advantage, 
of the sagacity which is exercised in worldly matters, we lay ourselves open to the 
rept'oach, " The children of this age are wiser in their generation than the children 
of light " (ver. 8) ? Realize that, whether there is much or little, faithfulness is 
demanded of the steward — such a disposal or investment of all wealth as that the 
Lord's interests are furthered. To each of us is given the charge, " So allocate the 
mammon of uniighteousness, the uncertain, unstable wealth which you possess, that it 
shall not hinder, but help you to the everlasting habitations." How many does that 
mammon hinder ! How few of us so use our money as to advance not only Christ'sj 
cause but our own holiness ! But should it not be rendered a means of spiritual gain ? 
It is concerning this fidelity to God in the laying out of the perishable riches that 
Christ iiints that they in whom it abounds will not want the friendly welcome when 
the tent of this tabernacle is dissolved, and the spirit passes into the everlasting 
habitations. 

III. A word as to Christian service. This mammon, which was meant to be an 
instrument for the accomplishment of our stewardship, is apt to assume the bearing of 
a master. At first it is the slave, the most obedient, until, by constant trafficking 
with it and by taking it into the region of our affections, it becomes our love ; and 
when it is the love of a man, the consideration which to him is first, the supreme 
point of his interest, then it ascends from the kitchen into the parlour, and claims the 
self as its own. This mammon-rule, mammon-worship, is one of the most distinct 
features of the day, and few of us know how deep is its mark in our sotils. Here is the 
choice — this mammon, or Christ with the thorn-crowned brow; this mammon, or God 
himself. One or other we may serve ; Christ insists we cannot serve both (ver. 13). 
" Tliat usurping lord has a will so different from God's wiU, gives commands so opposite 



ra THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvi. 1— 31. 

to Ms, that occasion must speedily arise when one or other will have to he slighted, 
despised, and disoheyed, if the other he regarded, honoured, and served. God, foi 
instance, will command a scattering, when mammon will urge to a further keeping and 
gathering ; God will require spending on others, when mammon or the world will urge 
a spending on one's own lusts. Therefore, the two Lords having characters so different 
and giving commands so opposite, it will he impossible to reconcile their services : one 
must be despised if the other is held to ; the only faithfulness to the one is to break 
with the other ; ' ye cannot serve God and mammon.' " " Choose ye this day whom 
ye will serve." There is to he no playing at religion. A saintly voice (Augustine) 
has thus interpreted the election : may the " amen " to his words arise from our souls ! 
" my God, thou sweetness ineffable, make bitter for me all carnal comfort which 
draws me away from the love of eternal things, and in evil manner allures me to itself 
by the view of some present delightsome good. Let me not be overcome, Lord, by 
flesh and blood. Let not the world and the brief glory thereof deceive me. Let not the 
devil and his subtle fraud supplant me. Give me strength to resist, patience to endure, 
and constancy to persevere. Give me, instead of all the comforts of the world, the most 
sweet unction of thy Holy Spirit and the love of thy blessed Name." 

Vers. 19 — 31. — The rich man and Lazarut. A parable so striking and solemn that, 
as has been said, " they must be fast asleep who are not startled by it." It is in 
several reSpects unique. Figure is so blended with reality, so rapidly passes into 
reality, that we are doubtful where and how far to separate between the form of trutti 
and the truth itself. Indeed, it has been questioned whether the discourse is to be 
regarded as a parable at all ; whether it is not to be regarded as the record of facts and 
experiences. Alone, too, of all the pictorial sayings of Jesus, it carries thought into the 
region behind the veil ; it gives us a glimpse into the hidden economy. He who has 
access to the invisible takes us whither the eye of man has never pierced. And yet it 
is most difficult to settle on what principle we shall interpret the mysterious conversa- 
tions reported, and what signification we are to attach to the words concerning the 
world of the dead. Let us not strain the sentences beyond the meanings which they 
are fairly entitled to bear; let us aim at a calm, truthful, practical application of 
Christ's teaching to heart and conscience. 

L Consider the eelation of the parablb to the words which precede, and to 
THE CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH suRRODND, IT. The Pharisees, we are told in ver. 16, had 
derided the teaching as to " the mammon of unrighteousness," their opposition having 
been intensified by the declaration, " Ye cannot serve God and mammon." The reply 
of Christ contains an indictment with two counts, in respect of which their mammon- 
worship was made apparent. 1. Their self-justifying spirit before men. Their piety 
was so disposed as to attract the observation and win the applause of men. It was the 
covering of covetousness, because it indicated a dependence on men, a wish to make 
gain of godliness. The parable which follows illustrates the same state of mind and 
heart under another phase of the same world-worship. Certainly the portrait of the 
rich man resembles the Sadducee rather than the more severe and abstemious Pharisee. 
But extremes often meet. Pharisee and Sadducee have this in common — man and the 
present are more than God and the future : to look well, to stand well with society, is 
really the horizon of the aim and the prize of the ambition. 2. Their merely outward 
and legal righteousness. In their casuistry (as, e.g., about marriage, glanced at in 
ver. 19) they tampered with the eternally right and good ; and their essential unbelief 
was proved by the failure to see that Moses and the prophets prepared men for that 
kingdom of God to which John had pointed, and into which he had called every one to 
press. They were so imbedded in their respectabilities that they felt no need of this 
kingdom, and did not receive it. The parable presents a man who, having Moses and 
the prophets, had never awakened out of a false, carnal security, had never seen his 
real poverty and wretchedness. And all, in the latter part of the tale, which brings 
out his awakenment when too late — the torments of his conscience, his appeal, his cry, 
his pleading for his brethren — is intended to vivify the worthles.sness and worse than 
worthlessness of the trust on which the Pharisee was built up, and to declare that, 
before the Judgment-seat of the Eternal, Moses and the prophets would witness against 
him for hia rejection of the Light that had come into the world. 



OH. XVI. 1—31.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. T3 

IL Now, having seen its root in moral conditions which Christ intended to lay 
bare, beqaed the salient features op the sketch before us. 1. There is a 
rich man. No particulars as to his estate are given ; no judgment is passed on 
his character. It is not said that he had amassed his wealth by unfair means, or 
that he was unjust, or that he was harsh; he is simply presented as rich, fond of 
show and glitter and good living. Now and again a monarch might assume his 
robe of costly purple, but purple and fine linen are the ordinary dress of this Dives, 
and the appointments of his tahle are always splendid. A jovial, magnificent personage, 
to whom menials in gorgeous array do homage, and whom all the flunkeydom of hig 
city silently reverences. There is only one drawback. At the entrance to his palace, 
a beggar — a miserable creature, full of sores — is laid ; one so reduced that he is glad of 
the crumbs which fall from the table. Such crumbs are dainties to him. Clearly, no 
effort is made to relieve this beggar; none is employed to heal his diseases; his only 
guardians and mediciners are the ours which prowl about Eastern cities. The " inhu- 
manity of man " is condemned by the action of these curs. 2. The rich man has no 
name, the beggar has — Lazarus, or Eleazar, " God's help." Beautifully Augustine asks, 
" Seems not Christ to you to have been reading from that book where he found the 
name of the poor man written, but found not the name of the rich ; for that book is 
the book of life ? " Thus day by day, the millionaire, reclining on his couch, his 
table groaning with delicacies, elegantly sipping at this, and taking that, and withal 
complaining of indigestion, occasionally sallying forth and dazzling all by his splendour, 
is yet offended by the loathsome thing at the gate, from which the eye is withdrawn. 
Day by day the gaunt form of haggard poverty obtrudes on the rights of wealth ; 
squalor, in all its hideousness, stares into the face of wealth. Is it not the contrast 
which, instead of lessening, becomes more intense as the curious complexity which we 
call civilization develops ? — civilization, with its hei ahts separated only by hand-breadths 

from its depths. Day by day it is so, until 3. " Died." Ah ! a word which it is 

impossible to expunge, whicti gathers up the fears and tears, which crowns or crushes 
the hopes of men. First the beggar. To him death is a mes^a ^e of relief, bidding away 
from sores which dogs have licked to joys in which anguls share, from the Jiaggtd 
pavement, hard and cold, of the palace of the rich man harder and colder still, to the 
embrace and warmth and fulness of Abraham's bosom. " It is well," says Dives, when 
he misses the bundle of rags and disease; "it is the best thing which could happen to 
that Lazarus ! " But the clock moves on ; the " purple and fine linen " begin to hang 
about the limbs; the viands come and go untasted ; there is the sickness, the sick-bed, the 
mufiSed knocker, the bated breath of physicians ami attendants. Oh, horror of horrors! 
it is death ! All must be left. The hands which used to be so full are now still, starched, 
and empty 1 The poor to die, — that is good ; but the rich man also to die 1 What is 
the difference between the two ? Of the one the burial is noted ; no doubt a grand 
affair, for which, possibly, he had himself arranged. I have heard of a Dives, who, 
afraid that he might not have a sufBciently splendid coffin, procured a sarcophagus from 
Ej;ypt, and lay down in it to be sure that it would fit. The burial ; yes, but some- 
thing more I Beggar and millionaire are in Hades — the sheol of the Old Testament — 
the unknown place, the unseen region which contains the departed until the coming of 
the Lord. What of the beggar ? While he was on earth man in pity carried him to 
the palace gate, and laid him there to starve and rot unless the crumb was thrown to 
him. When he dies angels carry him to the place of bliss, though not yet heaven, 
which was signified sometimes by the word " paradise," sometimes by the phrase 
" under the throne," sometimes by " Abraham's bosom." For the millionaire there is 
only Hades ; no purple robe and fine linen, no sumptuous feast ; the robe and the 
linen are now only a garment of fire, the sumptuous feast only a reminiscence con- 
tinued in torments. To him Hades is only the reservation to the judgment of the 
great day. 4. And there is the awakenment. The Lord describes it in sentences 
which it is better only to summarize. The eyes of Dives are lifted up, and lo I near, yet 
far off, is Abraham, and — can it be? — with him Lazarus; no rags now, no sores now; 
his now the " ptu-ple and fine linen " and the sumptuous living, for he is in the bosom 
of Abraham. And through these distances there rings a cry — no cry to the Father 
In heaven, no cry for repentance ; only to " Father Abraham," and only a respite from 
the pain, even a moment's respite ; a cry which is still charged with the old hauteur. 



74 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xvi. 1—31. 

" Send that beggar to serve me." To this he has come ; there is no thought of banquet 
or wines ; only the tip of the erstwhile beggar's finger dipped in water and cooling the 
tongue. Alas ! the reply sounds the knell of all hope ; mild, yet awful, it is, " Son, 
remember 1 " What ? The good things are exhausted. He had got all that he had 
lived for ; he had, in the bygone existence, a choice of things, and he had made his 
choice. His reward was drained. Lazarus had no portion in the world which was 
gone from sight. His election had been outside of it. He has come to his choice; he 
has entered on his reward. " He is comforted, but thou art tormented." For the rest, 
even supposing the will to grant the request, it cannot be. " There is a great gulf 
fixed " (ver. 26), and no passage may be between the upper and lower sides of the 
Hades of the dead. " Without God, and without hope." Is it a touch of still surviving 
humanity, or is it lest the misery be aggravated, that the petition of Dives proceeds, 
" Then send him where there is no gulf fixed ; send him to my father's house, to my 
five brethren " (vers. 27, 28). " They have Moses and the prophets " (ver. 29). 
" Nay, but if one went to them from the dead, they will repent " (ver. 30). " If they 
hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from 
the dead " (ver. 31). 

Conclusion. What a variety of " instruction in righteousness " is suggested by this 
parable 1 It Invites thought in the direction of the most awful questions which connect 
themselves with human destiny. 1. As to the Hades — the condition, or place, of the 
dead. Dean Alford proposes a good rule of interpretation : " Though it is unnatural to 
suppose that our Lord would, in such a parable, formally reveal any new truth respect- 
ing the fate of the dead, yet, in conforming himself to the ordinary language current on 
these subjects, it is impossible to suppose that he whose essence is truth could hav« 
assumed as existing anything which does not exist. It would destroy the truth of 
our Lord's sayings if we could conceive him to have used popular language which does 
not point at truth." What is that, then, in the figures, in the symbols employed, as 
to which we can say, " Here is matter to be pondered and believed in " ? Christ seems 
to put the stamp of his approval on these things. (1) That there is a conscious personal 
life after death. If this is not true, he would have started from a falsehood. (2) That 
in this future life the identity of the self is preserved. All references imply this. The 
rich man lifts up his eyes. He sees Lazarus. He cries, " Father Abraham ! " He recalls 
his father's house and his five brethren. The I who was is the essential / for ever. 
(3) That in the other world, the intermediate Hades, there is a separation between the 
evil and the good. We should not unduly strain the meaning of " the great gulf fixed." 
It is in Abraham's reply to a soul in which, there is no sign of a turning to God ; which 
is as far from the faith of the patriarch as hell is from heaven. Between a soul thus 
godless, and the holy dead who are at rest in the Lord, there is a great gulf fixad. But 
to press this into an argument for a hell of endless torment is to overstep the limits of 
parabolic interpretation. Yet, undoubtedly, a most solemn warning is conveyed — the 
warning that, in the world to come, the distinctions of character are sharp, clear, and 
fixed; that then the real tendencies of mind are manifested, and find their natural 
affinities. As to the torment of this Dives in Hades, Luther hit on the right explana- 
tion when, in one of his sermons, he exclaims, " It is not corporeal. All is transacted 
in the conscience .ns he perceives that he has acted against the gospel. Nothing was 
actually spoken by him, but only internally felt." It is in view of this that we appre- 
hend the scope of the recorded conversation. That is the outward form in which the 
emotion, the terror, of the conscience is portrayed. For, the retribution, whose fire is 
not quenched, is pointed to in the saying, " Son, remember ! " " It is not necessary to 
'magine anything beyond the stroke, stroke, stroke, ever repeating, of a soorpion-con- 
soieiice," recalling, revivifying all the past, the real character of actions being made 
evident, as with the force of a fire from whose heat nothing can be hidden. To perceive 
the awful vengeance-taking on every soul of man that doeth evil, it is not necessary 
to suppose more than the quickening of conscience into full energy, than the continual 
accusation of the soul which forgets nothing, or finds all preserved, eternized for it, 
" when the roaring cataract of earthly things is still." 2. To return to the most 
pressing instruction of the parable ; life or death is the choice before every one of us. 
Death; if to any one comforts are more than duties, if the plane of the existence is a 
merely worldly one — good things of one kind or another, and the kingdom of God 



OH. XVI. 1—31.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDIN& TO ST. LUKK 78 

left out of the reckoning. The rich man is not condemned because of his riches; tht 
poor man is not carried into Abraham's bosom because of his poverty. The riche.^ 
were the temptation, and tlie soul had been mastered ; but one may be rich and yet 
simple in heart as a child, not trusting in the riches, willing to distribute, and recog- 
nizing the stewardship to God for all. One may be poor, yet greedy, showing covetous- 
ness by the fierceness with which the sense of want is expressed, by the bitter envying; 
of the more fortunate, by the utter absence of poverty of spirit. But, " Son, remember ! " 
if thou livest for good things, thou mayest have them ; but then, the greater the pros- 
perity, the greater the curse, the more fatal will the possession be to the true life — the 
life in God. By-and-by, for even the hardest and dullest there is an awakenment — to 
shame and everlasting contempt. Here, messages of love, the very pleading of the one 
risen from the dead may fail to reach the heart ; there, where the ever-shifting scenes 
of this world disappear for ever, shall be heard the voice of conscience, speaking only 
for doom. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS ATJTHOEa 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Cleverness and sagacity. There is a wide difference between worldly 
cleverness and spiritual sagacity; of these two acquisitions, the former is to be ques- 
tioned if not avoided, the latter to be desired and attained. Christ's teaching here will 
be entirely misunderstood if we fail to discriminate between them. 

I. The employer's commendation op his stewabd's cleverness. " Eis lord" 
(not our Lord) commended the unjust steward because he had acted " shrewdly '' (not 
" wisely ') (ver. 8). What does this commendation amount to? It cannot be a justifi- 
cation of his action upon the whole, — that idea cannot be entertained, for this action 
on the steward's part was wholly adverse to the employer's interests. It was simply 
a compliment paid to his keenness ; it was equivalent to saying, " You are a very clever 
fellow, a very sharp man of the world ; you know how to look after your own temporal 
affairs ; " only that, and nothing more than that, is meant. 

II. Odb Lord's commendation of spiritual saoacitt. 1. Jesus Christ could not 
possibly praise cleverness when devoid of honesty. He could not do that for two 
reasons. (1) Because mere cleverness without honesty is a criminal and a shameful 
thing; no amount of imaginable " success " would compensate for the lack of principle ; 
he who pays truthf-jlness for promotion, conscientiousness for comfort, purity for grati- 
fication, self-respect for honour or applause, pays much too high a price, does himself 
an irreparable wrong, sini against his own soul. (2) Because mere cleverness does not 
succeed in the end. It did not here. The steward of the text would have been better 
off if he had shown less sharpness and more fidelity ; if he had been faithful he would 
not have been reduced to a dishonourable shift to secure a roof above his head. It does 
not anywhere. No one is more likely to outwit himself than a very clever man of the 
world. Unprincipled dexterity usually finds its way to desertion and disgrace. Suc- 
cess begets confidence, confidence runs into rashness, and rashness ends in ruin. No 
wise man would bind up even his earthly fortunes with those of his clever, unscrupu- 
lous neighbour. 2. Jesus does praise sagacity in connection with integrity. Ho would 
like the "children o^ light" to show as much forethought, ingenuity, capacity, in their 
sphere as the " children of this world " show in theirs. He counsels them, for instance, 
to put out their money to good purpose, so as to secure much better results than it is 
often made to yield. Make' friends with it, he suggests. What better thing can we 
buy than friendship ? Not, indeed, that the very best fellowship is to be bought like 
goods over the counter or like shares in the market ; but by interesting ourselves in our 
fellov-men, by knowing their necessities and by generously ministering to them, we 
can win the gratitude, the blessing, the benediction, the prayers of those we have 
serveil and succoured. And how good is thisl What will personal comforts, bodily 
gratifications, luxuries in dress and furniture, any visible grandeurs, weigh against this ? 
Nay, more, our Lord suggests, we may make even money go further than this; it may 
yield results that will pass the border. It, itself, and all the worldly advantages it 
secures, we know that we must leave behind ; but if by its means we make friends 
with those who are " of the household of faith," we relieve them in their distress, help 



7« THE GOSPEL AOCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xvi. 1—31 



them in their emergencies, strengthen them as they pass along the rough road of life, 
— then even poor perishable gold and silver will be the means of helping us to a fuller, 
sweeter, gladder welcome when our feet touch the other shore of the river that runs 
between earth and heaven. This is true sagacity as compared with a shallow shrewd- 
ness. It is to make such of our possessions, and of all our resources of every kind, 
that they will yield us not only a passing gratification of the lower kind, but rather a 
real satisfaction of the nobler order, and even lay up in store for us a " treasure in the 
heavens," enlarging the blessedness which is beyond the grave. (1) Is our wisdom 
limited to a superficial cleverness ? If so, let us " become fools that we may be wise " 
indeed. (2) Are we making the best use of the various faculties and facilities God has 
committed to our trust? There are those who turn them to a very small account 
indeed, to whom they are virtually worth nothing ; and there are those who are com- 
pelling them to yield a rich harvest of good which the loni;est human life will be too 
short to gather in. — C. 

Ver. 5. — Our indebtedness to our Lord. "How much owe.st thou unto my Lord?" 
Taking these words quite apart from the context to which they properly belong, we 
may let them suggest to us the very profitable question, how much we, as individual 
men, owe to him who is the Lord of alL 

I. We owe him far more than wb can bstimatb. Who shall say how much we 
owe our God when we consider : 1. The intrinsic value of his gifts to us. How much 
are we indebted to him who gave us our being itself ; who gave UB our physical, 
mental, and spiritual capacities ; who has been preserving us in existence ; who has 
been supplying all our wants ? 2. The wisdom of his gifts ; their moderation, not too 
large and liberal for our good ; the conditions under which he grants them — ^in such 
wise that all manner of virtues are developed in us by our necessary exertions to obtain 
tliem. 3. The love which inspires them. The value of a gift is always greatly enhanced 
by the good will which prompted its bestowal. God's gifts to us his children should 
be very much more highly valued by us because all that he gives to us is prompted 
by his Fatherly interest in us ; all his kindnesses are loving-kindnesses. 4. The cost- 
liness of one supreme Gift. " He spared not his own Sou, but delivered him up for us 
all." The costlmess of that surpassing Gift is such as we have no standards to compute, 
no language to express. 

II. Each one of us has his own special indebtedness. " How much owest t?ioa 
unto my Lord?" 1. One man has been long spared in sin, and has been reclaimed at 
last; he owes peculiar gratitude for long patience and merciful interposition at the 
last. 2. Another has had his rebelliousness suddenly and mightily broken down ; he 
ia under peculiar obligation for God's redeeming and transforming grace. 3. A third 
has been led almost from the first by the constraining influences of the home and the 
Cliurch ; he owes very much for the earliness and the constancy and the gentleness 
of the Divine visitation. Which of these three owes most to the heavenly Father, to 
the Di vine Saviour, to the renewing Spirit ? Who shall say ? But we can say this, that — 

III. We all owe more than we can hope to pat. We are all in ths position of 
him who "owed ten thousand talents," and had not to pay (Matt, xviii.). When we 
consider the unmeasured and practically immeasurable amount of our indebtedness to 
God, anil also consider the feebleness of our power to respond, we conclude that there 
is but one way of reconciliation, and that is a generous cancelling of our great debt. 
We can only Ciist ourselves on the abounding mercy of God in Jesus Christ our Lord, 
and accept bis forgivin,^ love in liim. For his sake he will forgive iis "all that debt," 
will treat us as those who are absolutely free and pure: then will uprising and over- 
flowing gratitude fill our hearts, and the future of our lives will be a holy and happy 
sacrifice, the oflering ol our filial love. — 0. 

Ver. 10. — The wisdom of fidelity. Between the text and the verse that precedes it 
there is some interval of thought. There may have occurred a remark ujade by one 
of our Lord's apostles : or we may supply the words, — "as to the supreme importance 
and obligatoriness of fidelity, there is the strongest reason for being faithful at all times 
and in everything;" for "he that is faithful in that which is least," etc. This utter- 
ance of our Lord is seen to be profoundly true, if we consider— 



CH. XVI, 1—31.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 77 

I. The law op ikwabd growth. The Lord of our nature knew that it was "in 
man" to do any act more readily and easily the second time than the first, the third 
than the second, and so on continually; that every disposition, faculty, principle, 
grows by exercise. This is true in the physical, the meutal, and also in the spiritual 
sphere. It applies to acts of submission, of obedience, of courage, of service. One who 
is faithful to-day will find it a simpler and easier thing to be faithful to-morrow. The 
boy who faithfully studies at school, scorning to cheat either his teacher or his fellows, 
will be the apprentice who faithfully masters his business or his proftssion ; and Tie 
will be the merchant on whom every one may rely in large transactions in the market ; 
and he will be the minister of state who will be trusted with the cnnduct of imperial 
afl'airs. Fidelity of habit will grow into strong spiritual piinciple, and will form a large 
and valuable part of a holy and Christ-like character. "He that is laithful in that 
which is least will," in the natural order of spiritual things, " be faithful also in much." 
Of course, the converse of this is equally true. 

II. The peinciplb of Divine reward. God blesses uprightness in the very act, for 
ho makes the upright man something the better and the stronger for his act of faithful- 
ness. That is much, but that is not all. He holds out to faithfulness the promise of 
a reward in the future. This promise is twofold : 1. It is one of heavenly wealth, or 
wealth of the highest order. The proprietor of the estate (ver. 1) would remuve the 
unfaithful steward altogether; but he would treat faithfulness very differently — he 
would be prepared to give him something so much better that it might even be called 
" true riches " (ver. 11) ; nay, he might even go so far as to give him lands, vineyards, 
which he should not farm for another, but for himself, which he should call " his own " 
(ver. 12). The Divine Husbandman will reward fidelity in his service by granting to 
his diligent servants " the true riches ; " not that about which there is so much of the 
fictitious, the disappointing, the burdensome, as there is about all earthly good, but 
that which really gladdens the heart, brightens the path, ennobles the life — that noble 
heritage which awaits the " faithful unto death " in the heavenly country. 2. It is 
inalienable wealth, that will not pass. Here a man points to his estate and says com- 
placently, " This is mine.'' But it is only his in a secondary sense. He has the legal 
u>e of it, to the exclusion of every other while he lives. But it is alienable. Disaster 
njay curae and compel him to part with it; death will come and undo the bond which 
binds it to him. It is only his in a certain limited sense. Of nothing visible and 
iiiiitcrial cau we say strictly that it is "our own." But if we are faithful to the end, 
Gud will une day endow us with wealih with which we sliall not be called to part; of 
which no revolution will rob us, of which death will not deprive us — the inalienabla 
estHte of heavenly honour and blessedness; that will be "our own" for ever. 

III. 'I HE GROUND FOR PRAISE AND EATIBNCB. 1. Bless God that he is now righteously 
endowing and enlaiging his faithful ones. 2. Live in the well-assured hope that the 
future will disclose a much larger sphere for spiritual integrity. — 0. 

Ver 11. — The true riches. We mu^t gain our idea of the sense in which the word 
" tiue " is to be taken by our knowledge of Christ's use of it. And we know that he 
used it as distii guishing, not the cuirect from the incorrect, or the existing from the 
iiuayinarv, but the valuable from the comparatively unimportant, the substantial from 
I he sluiiluwy, the us.sential from the accidental, the abiding from the transitory. It is 
111 this &nse that he says of himself, " J am the true Light;" i.e. "I am not that which 
uiidcrs the smaller service of revealing outw.ird objects and the outward path, but that 
A Inch niiders the supreme service of making clear Divine and heavenly truth, and the 
.vay that loads home to God himself." Thus he speaks also of himself as "the true 
liirad ; " i.e. not the food which sustains for a few hours, but that inward and spiritual 
Muiiiishment which satisfies the soul and makes it strong for ever. Similarly he 
dcilari's that he is "the true Vine;" i.e. the Divine Author of the soul's refreshment, 
atreiigtii, and ji>y. We shall, therefore, find in " the true riches" those treasures which 
are truly valuable, which peimauently endow their possessor, in opposition to those 
uiher treasures which are of inferior worth. We glance at — 

L The inferior character of earthly treasure. No doubt these riches, which 
are not entitled to be called the " true riches," have a worth of their own which is far 
from contemptible. Indeed, they render us services which we cannot help calling 



78 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvi. 1— 31. 

valuable; they provide ub with shelter, with food, with raiment, with instruction, and 
even (in the sense of ver. 9) with friendship. But they neither supply to us nor secure 
for us lasting satisfaction. 1. They do not supply it in themselves. The possession 
of wealth may give, at first, considerable pleasure to the owner of it ; but it may 
be doubted whether there is not more pleasure found in the pursuit than in the posses- 
sion of it. And it cannot be doubted that the mere fact of ownership soon ceases 
to give more than a languid satisfaction, often balanced, often indeed quite outweighed, 
by the burdensome anxiety of disposing of it. 2. They do not ^nsure it. They can 
command a large number of pleasant things ; but these are not happiness, much less 
are they well-being. That life must have been short or that experience narrow which 
has not supplied many instances in which the riches of this world have been held by 
those whose homes have been wretched, and whose hearts have been aching with unrest 
or even bleeding with sorrow. 

II. The supreme value of spiritual good. 1. TAere are true riches in reverence. 
To be living in the fear of God ; to be worshipping the Holy One ; to be walking daily, 
hourly, continually, with the Divine Father; to have the whole of our life hallowed by 
sacred intercourse with heaven ; — this is to be enriched and ennobled indeed. 2. There 
is real wealth in love. Our best possession at home is not to be found in any furniture ; 
it is in the love we receive, and in the love we have in our own hearts: "The kind 
heart is more than all our store." And to be receiving the constant loving favour of 
a Divine Friend, and to be returning his affection ; to be also loving with a true and 
lasting love those for whom he died ; — this is to be really rich. 3. Uiere are true riches 
in the peace, the Joy, the hope, of the gospel of Christ. The peace that passes under- 
standing ; the joy that does not pall, and which no man taketh from us — joy in God 
and in his sacred service; the hope that maketh not ashamed, that is full of immor- 
tality; — these are the true riches. To be without them is to be destitute indeed ; to 
hold them is to be rich in the sight of God, in the estimate of heavenly wisdom. — C. 

Ver. 13. — The dividing-line. Ingenuity is an excellent thing in its way; it counts 
for much in the conduct of life ; it renders valuable aid in our " taking possession of 
the earth and subduing it;" it has its place and function in the spirituid sphere. A 
holy love will press it into its service and make it further its benign and noble aims. 
But there is a dividing-line, which is such that no ingenuity will enable us to stand 
on both sides of it. We must elect whether we will take our place on this side or on 
the other of it. That line is found in the service of Jesus Christ. To be his servant 
is to have withdrawn from the service of the world ; to remain in the latter is to 
decline " to serve the Lord." We may be loyal enough to this present world, may be 
animated by its spirit, governed by its principles, numbered amongst its friends, and — 

L Yet make a loud profession of piety ; or 

n. Yet enjoy a good reputation for religion, — witness the Pharisees of our 
Lord's time and the false prophets of an earlier age ; or — 

III. Still odunt ourselves among the people of God ; for many of those whom 
God " knoweth afar off" are persuaded of themselves that they are quite near and very 
dear to him. In nothing do men make greater mistakes than in the estimation that 
tjiey form of their own moral and spiritual worth. But no man can live under the 
dominion of any one sin or with his heart yielded to the objects and interests of time, 
and — 

IV. Yet bk a true servant of Christ. For to be the servant and follower of 
Christ is: 1, To have surrendered self to him, and the spirit of selfishness is the 
essential spirit of worldliness. 2. To have sworn undying enmity to all the false 
doctrines and pernicious habits which abound in " the world," and which both charac- 
terize and constitute it. 3. Not to be living for time, but to be building for eternity. — C. 

Ver. 14. — The explanation of false judgment. " Herein is a marvellous thing," that 
the men who were reputed to be the best and wisest among the people of God went so 
far astray in their judgment and their behaviour that they treated with positive con- 
tempt the Good and the Wise One when he lived before their eyes and spoke in their 
hearisg. It demands explanation. 

L Av APrABKN«i.T mrAcoouNTABLK FACT. Here we hare: L Heavenly wiadom 



CB. XTi. 1— SL], THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUEE. 19 

derided by those who were divinely inatruoted. The Pharisees had the Law of God 
in their hands. MoreoTer, they had it in their minds and memories ; they were per- 
fectly familiar with it; they knew it well to the last letter. They had the great 
advantage of the devotional Scriptures following the legal, and the didactic and the 
illuminating prophetic Scriptures added to both. Then, to crown all, came the 
enlightening truths of the great Teacher himself; yet they failed to appreciate and even 
to understand him. Nor did they simply turn from him without response ; they took 
up the ^sition of acute and active opposition — " they derided him ; " they sought to 
bring his doctrine into popular contempt. 2. Divine goodness derided by those who 
were exceptionally devout. No man could impeach the devoutness of the Pharisees, 
that is to say, so far as manner and habit were concerned. Their outward behavioor 
was reverent in the extreme ; their habit of life was regulated by rules that brought 
them into frequent formal connection with God and with his Word. Tet with aU 
their exterior piety they saw the Holy One of God living his transcendently beautiful, 
his positively perfect life before them, and, instead of worshipping him as the Son of 
God, instead of honouring him as one of the worthiest of the sons of men, they actually 
judged him to be unholy and imworthy, and they endeavoured to bring him under the 
contempt of all good men 1 Such was their moral perversity, their spiritual contra- 
dictorinesB. 

IL The tbtib explanation of it. That which accounts for this radical and 
criminal mistake of theirs was spvtitual unsoundness. They were all wrong at heart ; 
they loved the wrong thing, and a false affection led them, as it will lead all men, very 
far astray. Everything is explained in the parenthetical clause, " who were covetous." 
For covetousness is an unholy leljishness. It is a mean and a degrading carefulness 
about a man's own circumstances, a small and a withering desire for an enrichment at 
other men's expense ; it is an affection which lowers and which enslaves the soul, ever 
dragging downwards and deathwards. And it is also a gvilty worldliness. It is not 
that ambition to make the most and best of the present, which may be a very honour- 
able aspiration ; for " all things are ours [as Christian men], things present " as well as 
things to come (1 Cor. iii. 22); it is rather the moral weakness which allows itself to 
be lost and buried in the pursuits and pleasures of earth and time ; it is the narrowing 
of the range of human attachment and endeavour to that which is sensuous and 
temporal, excluding the nobler longings after the spiritual and the eternal. This 
worldliness is not only a guilty thing, condemned of God; but it is a disastrous thing, 
working most serious evils to mankind. 1. It distorts the judgment. 2. It leads men 
into wrong and mischievous courses of action; it led the Pharisees to take such an 
attitude and to initiate such proceedings against Christ as culminated in his murder. 
3. It ends in condemnation — such severe judgment as the Lord passed on these blind 
guides (see Matt, xxiii.). If we would be right at heart and in the sight of God, it 
is clear that "our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the scribes and 
Pharisees." (1) Multiplied ceremonialism will not suffice. (2) Perfected proprieties 
will not avail. (3) Only a humble, trustful, loving heart will make us right. A true 
affection, the love of Christ, will lead us into truth and wisdom, will commend us to 
God, will land us iu heaven. — 0. 

Ver. 15. — Divine and human Judgment. This declaration of Christ was a judgment 
in a double sense. It was drawn down upon themselves by the Pharisees, who had 
been doing their worst to bring into derision the doctrine and the character of our Lord. 
This reply was not indeed a retort, but it was of the nature of a judgment. It declared 
the mind of Christ, and it declared it in strong disapproval of evil-doing and strong 
condemnation of an evil spirit. It brings before us three subjects of thought. 

I. OUB DBSIEB TO STAND WELL WITH OUE BRETHREN. " Yo . . . justify yOUrSClveS 

before men." The desire to be justified of man is almost universal. 1. It may be a 
right and worthy sentiment. When the approval of man is regarded in the light of a 
confirmation of God's acceptance of us or of the commendation of our own conscience, 
then is it right and honourable. 2. But it may be of very Uttle value indeed ; it is 
so when it is sought merely as a matter of gratification, irrespective of the considera- 
tion of its true moral worth. For the approval of man ia often a very hollow and 
always m transient thing; change the company, and yon change the verdict; wait 



80 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvi. 1— 31 



until a later day, and you have a contrary decision. The hero of the past generation 
is the criminal of the present time. And it may be that the man or the action the 
multitude are praising is the one that God is most seriously condemning. Of what 
value, then, is " the honour that cometh f om man " ? (1) Care nothing lor the 
opinion of the selfish and the vicious. (2) Ca e little for the judgment of those whose 
character you do not know. (3) Be desirous of living in the esteem of the good 
and wise. 

It. God's sbarohino qlancb. " God knoweth your hearts." Men do not see us as 
we are ; we do not know ourselves with any thoroughness of knowledge ; the power 
we have and use to impose on others reaches its climax when we impose on ourselves, 
and persuade ourselves that those things are true of us which are essentially false. 
Only God "knows us altogether; " for it is he alone that " looketh upon the heart," that 
is " a Disoerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart." His glance penetrates to 
the innermost chambers of our soul. He sees : 1. The motives by which we are actuated 
in our deeds ; seeing often that apparently good deeds are inspired by low or even bad 
motives, and that deeds which society condemns are relieved by unselfish promptings. 

2. The feeling that accompanies our expression ; whether it is slight or whether it is 
ieep ; otten perceiving that it is more or that it is less than we imagine it to be. 

3. The purpose of our heart toward himself; determining whether, in the presence of 
much profession, there is genuine devotedness ; whether, iu the absence of profession 
and even of assurance, there is not true godliness in the soul. 

IIL The Divine eeveesal. "That which is highly esteemed," etc. Of those 
things concerning which these strong words are true, there are : 1. Assumed and 
also unpractical piety . The hypocrite is hateful in the sight of Absolute Purity ; we 
know what Christ thought of him. Less guilty and yet guilty is the mere cere- 
monialist — he who has no more piety than is found in a multitude of sacred ceremonies, 
who has not learned to regulate his life or to regard the claims of others. To frequent 
the sanctuary on one day, and the next to take a mean advantage of some weak brother, 
is odious in the sight of the common Father. 2. Self-seeking philanthropy — the show 
of doing good to others which is nothing more than a profitable pretence, a course of 
conduct which has a benevolent aspect but which is secretly aiming at its own enrich- 
ment. 3. Irreverent activity. Men often yield great admiration to those whose lives 
are full of successful labour, who build up large fortunes or rise to great eminence and 
power by much energy and unremitting toil. But if those men are living godless lives, 
are excluding from the sphere of their thought and effort that Divine One, " with 
whom they have [everything] to do," and whose creative, preserving, and providing 
love has everything to do with their capacity, must we not say that the lives of these 
men are so seriously defective as to be even " abomination in the sight of God " ? — 0. 

Vers. 19 — 26. — The sin and doom of selfish worldliness. This parable, taken (as I 
think it should be), not in connection with the immediately preceding verses (16 — 18), 
but with those that come before these (with vers. 1 — 15), is a very striking confirma- 
tion of the doctrine delivered by Christ concerning selfishness and worldliness. He 
briars its sinfulness and its doom into bold relief. 

1. Where the rich man was weono. 1. Not in being rich. He is not brought 
forward as the type of those whose very possession of wealth — because ill-gotten — is 
itself a crime and a sin. He may be supposed to have entered on his large estate quite 
honourably. 2. Not in being vicious. There is no trace of drunkenness or debauchery 
here. 3. Not in being scandalously cruel. It is not a monster that is here depicted ; 
not one that took a savage and shameful pleasure in witnessing the sufferings of others. 
He was so far from this that he consented to the beggar being placed at his gate, and 
(it may be taken) that he allowed his servants to give the suppliant broken pieces 
from his table ; he was not at all unwilling that the poor wretch outside should have 
for his dire necessity what he himself would never miss. This is where he was wrong. 
4. He was living an essentially selfish and worldly life. God gave him his powers and 
his possessions in order that with them he might glorify his Maker and serve his 
brethren. But he was expending them wholly upon himself, or ratner upon his present 
personal enjoyment. If he parted with a few crumbs which he could not feel the loss 
o^ that was an exception so pitifully small as to serve no other purpose than that of 



OH. XVI. 1—31.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO- TO ST. LUKE. 81 

" proving the rule." It went for nothing at all. His spirit was radically and utterly 
selfish ; his principles were essentially worldly. It was nothing to him that outside 
his gates was a world of poverty, of which poor Lazarus was only one painful illustra- 
tion ; that sad fact did not disturh his appetite or make his wines lose anything of 
their relish. It was nothing to him that there were treasures of a better kind than 
those of house and lands, of gold and silver ; that there was an inheritance to be gained 
in the unseen world ; enough for him that his palace was his own, that his income was 
secure, that his pleasures there was no one to interrupt. Selfishness and worldlinesS 
characterized his spirit ; they darkened and degraded his life, and thay osaled his doom. 

II. The beveeitt op his doom. " In hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments ; " 
" There is a great gulf fixed." Jesus Christ was not now unveiling the future world 
for curious eyes ; he was simply using current language and familiar imagery to inti- 
mate to us that the man who has lived a selfish and worldly life will meet with severe 
condemnation and grievous penalty in the next world ; a penalty in regard to which 
he has no right to expect either mitigation or release. 

1. Are our lives governed by the spirit of active lenevotence t To throw the crumbs 
to Lazarus is far from " fulfilling; the law of Christ " (Gal. vi. 2). We must go a 
very long way beyond that infinitesimal kindness. We must have a heart to pity 
the poor and needy ; a soul to sympathize with them and share their burdens (Matt, 
viii. 17) ; a generous hand to help them (ch. x. 33 — 37). The sorrow and the sin of 
the world must be upon our heart as a serious and heavy weight, and we must be 
ready to make an earnest effort to soothe the one and to subdue the other. 2. Have 
wa regard to the day of trial and the future of retribution (gee Matt. xxv. 41-^6)? — C. 

Vers. 19, 20. — Poverty at the gate of wealth. Here is a picture which we recognize 
in England in this nineteenth century quite as readily as it would be recognized in 
Jud%a in the days of our Lord ; it is that of poverty and wealth in very (close associa- 
tion. It is not only a picture to look upon but a problem to solve, and one of much 
urgency as well as great difSculty. 

I. Poverty and wealth in close juxtaposition. As the rich man of the parable 
could not enter his house without seeing Lazarus lying in rags and sores at his gate, 
BO are we unable to pass our days without being impressed with the fadt that " the 
poor [even the very poor] we have with us," and indeed all around us. Lazarus lies 
at our gate. Not only have we the professional beggar, who has adopted " begging " 
as his means of livelihood, but we have the whole army of the unfortunate, who have 
been incapacitated by some means, and who cannot " work that they may eat ; " and 
we have also another large and equally pitiable multitude of the ill-paid, who cannot 
earn enough by the honest industry in which they are employed to sustain themselves 
and their families. And so it comes to pass that in England to-day, side by side with 
competence, with wealth, with inestimable afSuence, is poverty walking in rags, lying 
in loneliness, shivering with cold and hunger, working without reward that is worthy 
of the name. It is a sad sight in a Christian land; and it is not sad alone, it is 
alarming ; for such extremes are full of evil and of peril. 

II. The painful aspect of this fbatubb op our modbbn life. For who can 
doubt : 1. The dangers attending great wealth f It leads to luxury, and luxury favours 
sloth, indulgence, a false standard of the worth and purpose of life, a proud heart, and 
a haughty bearing. In circumstances where there is no necessity for energetic and 
patient labour, and where there is every opportunity of enjoyment, many evil wpeds 
grow fast, and there the best flowers that grow in the garden of the Lord too (fften 
languish. Or who can doubt : 2. The perils of extreme poverty f These lead down by 
a straight and steep path to servility, to craftiness and cunning, to falsehood, to dis- 
honesty, to envy and hatred. And who can fail to see : 3. 2%e evil influence on the 
State of these two extremes ? Here there can be no true brotherhood, no proper associa- 
tion and co-operation ; here is separation from one another, a division as great as that 
which is interposed by the high mountain range or the broad sea ; nay, greats than 
that ! Many English people see more and know more of the inhabitants of Switzer- 
land than they see and know of the denizens of the streets of another part of their own 
parish. It is the uninteresting and objectionable poor at their gate who are the 
"strangers." ' 

LUILB. — U. • 



S2 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvx 1— 31. 

IIL Onb HiTiOATTNa FEATURE. This juxtaposition of poverty and wealth provide* 
an oppoitunity for the exercise of sincere benevolence and of the highest Christian 
wisdom. To the Christian heart there is a plaintive plea which cannot be vmheard or 
disregarded, even though Lazarus be kept out of sight and hearing by judicious 
arrangements. And to the honest patriot there is an inviting and urgent problem to 
which, far more than to the questions of fortifications and armaments, he will give 
earnest heed, viz. how to bring about an approachment, an intermingling, of all classes 
and conditions of men, a better distribution of the great resources of the land. 

IV. The true hope of adjustment. Whither shall we louk for a better distri- 
bution of the riches of the land ? 1. Almsgiving cau only touch the fringe of the 
difficulty. 2. Economic changes may have a valuable part to play in the matter ; but 
we are not yet agreed as to the best course to take. 3. Beneficent legislation will 
certainly bring its large contribution ; it can do two things : it can (1) educate the 
whole nation, and so provide every citizen with necessary weapons for the battle of life ; 
and it can (2) do much to remove temptation from the path of the weak. But it is : 
4. Spiritual renewal which must prove the main source of social reconstruction. 
Change the character, and you will change the condition of men. And the one force 
which will effect this is the redeeming and regenerating truth of Gk>d, made known by 
the holy lives and in the loving words of the disciples of Jesus Christ. — G. 

Vers. 27 — 31. — A dangerous delusion. The rich man found himself xmdergoing the 
penalty of a selfish and worldly life, and, bethinking himself of his five brethren, he 
desired for them the advantage which he himself had not possessed ; he prayed that a 
visitant from the unseen world might appear to them and warn them of the danger in 
which they stood. He thought this extraordinary privilege would accomplish for them 
what the ordinary influences around them had not wrought. He was assured that in 
this notion he was mistaken ; if they were not hearing " Moses and the prophets, 
neither would they be persuaded though one rose from the dead." 

L Tee one hope fob ebriko and sinful men — that they may he persuaded. They 
are living in sin ; for selfishness and worldliness are such in the sight of Gkid that they 
may be said to be sin itself; they are the soul turning from the living God to find its 
centre, its sphere, its satisfaction, in its own poor self, in the material and transitory good 
of this present world. And living in sin, men are living under God's high displeasure, 
under his solemn and awful condemnation, in peril of final banishment and penalty in 
the future. The one hope for them is that they wiU be persuaded : 1. To consider. 
To consider whence they came, whose they are, unto whom they owe their powers and 
their possessions, what is the true end and aim of human life, their accountableness to 
the God whom they have neglected and displeased, the nearness of death, the greatness 
of eternity. 2. To repent. That is, not to be convulsed with a strong and passing 
agony of soul, nor to use the current and approved language of contrition, but to change 
their minds, their views, their feelings ; to have in their hearts a deep sense of shame 
and of regret that they should have so sadly misspent their powers and lost their 
opportunities. 3. To resolve. To come to a deliberate and fixed resolution to live 
henceforth unto God their Saviour. 

IL The bbfuoe of the uisobedibnt. There are many who, when they thus recog- 
nize their duty, are " not disobedient to the heavenly vision ; " they say, " Lord, what 
wilt thou have me to do f " and proceed without delay to do his holy will. But there 
are others who weakly and wrongly postpone the hour of decision and of return. They 
think that the time will come for them to enter the kingdom of God, but it has not 
yet arrived. There has not happened to them any great viatation. God has not 
appeared in any striking and overwhelming form. There will come an hour when it 
will be made manifest to them that they must no longer delay ; when they will be 
mightily constrained to yield themselves to the service of the Supreme ; then they will 
freely and gladly respond; meantime they will pursue the old path of selfishness and 
worldly pleasure. 

IIL 1"hb vanity and the folly of this rbsobt. 1. The vanity of it. Jesus 
Christ taught that men, if they were unmoved by the sacred truths they learned in 
Deuteronomy and Isaiah, would not be stirred to newness of life even by an apparition 
from the unseen world ; that it was not by the extraordinary and the startling, but by 



rat XVI. 1—31.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 8!> 

the divinely true, that souls wete tc be saved. And this doctrine is in conformity 
with the known facts of our human experience. Men that know their Lord's will but 
delay to do it will find some excuse for disobedience when the unusual or even when 
the supernatural is before them. The disobedient heart goes on in sinful procrastina- 
tion, with a vague and feeble hope that this hour will come ; but it does not arrive. 
He has a vision of sudden death, but he rises from the sick-bed to pursue the old path ; 
he loses some companion and is powerfully admonished of his own mortality, but he 
returns from his friend's grave the same man that he was before ; he goes to hear the 
wonderful preacher and listens with admiration not unmixed with fear or even trem- 
bling, but he awakes on the morrow with a closed mind, with an unbroken heart. Some 
great trouble overtakes and overthrows him, but his soul is hardened, and the " sorrow 
of the world wcrketh death " and not life in his case. His hope is a vain one. 2. The 
folly of it. Why should he wait for the extraordinary, the supernatural ? Has he not 
at hand everything he needs to convince him and to induce him to take the step of 
spiritual decision ? Why want some one from heaven to bring down the word of truth 
or the Saviour himself (Rom. x. 6) ? All that we want we have. (1) Our conscience 
is urging us to a life of holy service. (2) Our reason tells us that our present and eternal 
welfare is bound up with the forgiveness and the favour of the living God, in whose 
power we stand and who holds all our future in his sovereign hand. (3) Our Divine 
Father is summoning us to his side, to his hearth, to his table, and is waiting to 
welcome us. (4) Our gracious Saviour is inviting us to an immediate and to an 
absolute trust in himself. (5) The Holy Spirit of God is pleading and striving with 
U8. There is no reason, there is no excuse, for a single day's delay. Every one to 
whom it is right to listen, everything to which it is wise to yield attention, says, 
■" Come." It is only the evil voices around us and from below that say, " Wait." 
Delay means the doom ol Dives ; immediate obedience leads along the paths of heavenly 
wisdom and holy service to the home of the blessed. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — Money as a means of grace. The previous chapter was spoken against 
the pride of the Pharisaic party, who were too exclusive to welcome publicans and 
sinners to the same feast of privilege as themselves. The parable now before us was 
spoken against their covetousness. It will be found that, as the graces are to be found 
and grow together, so do the vices of mankind. The idolatry of wealth goes hand-in- 
hand with pride. In warning his disciples, however, against the vice, our Lord incul- 
cates positive truth, and brings out in his parables the important fact that money 
may either be a means of grace to men, or a temptation and a snare. The first parable, 
about the unjust steward, shows us one who was wise in time in the use of money ; 
the second parable, about the rich man and Lazarus, shows us one who became wise 
when it was too late and his doom was sealed. The story need be no moral difficulty 
to us. The all-important point is the deprivation of bis stewardship. It was taken 
from him on the ground of injustice of some kind. In view of his exodus from the 
stewardship, he prudently makes his lord's debtors his debtors too, by largely reducing 
their liabilities. Having thus made friends with them all, he awaits his dismissal 
with confidence, and expects befriendment when out of his situation. It is his prudence, 
not his motives, that our Lord commends. Now, to our Lord's spiritual eye, this was 
a beautiful representation of what a soul may do in prospect of dismissal from his 
earthly stewardship at death. He may take the money he happens to possess, and, 
feeling that it is not his own absolutely, but God's, and that he is only a steward of it, 
he can use it liberally, making the troubles of his brethren lighter, so that, having laid 
them under obligations to him, he can calculate with certainty upon their cordial 
sympathy in the world beyond the grave. A prudent outlay may make hosts of 
friends among the immortals beyond; in a word, money may be utilized as a very 
important means of grace. 

L Maumon 18 A BAD MABTEB. (Ver. 13.) We start with this thought as a kind of 
background to the more comforting teaching which our Lord here emphasizes. The 
soul that is enslaved by mammon becomes miserable. Is not this implied in the term 
"miser," which designates the slave of money? The poor slave is kept grinding 
away, amassing more and more, and yet never getting any benefit from all the lust of 
gold. Nothing seems more foolish and insane than the race for riches; nothing more 



U THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvi. 1— 3L 

ruinous than the snares into which the runners fall. When life's end comes and the 
accumulated hoard has to be left behind, the condition of the soul is pitiful indeed. 

II. On the other hand, money mat be made a vbey useful 8EEVANT. (Vers, 
1 — 9.) For nothing is gained by denying that money is a great power. How much 
it can accomplish 1 Every department of enterprise regards money as the " one thing 
Beedful." So powerful is it, that people by the use of it may become thoroughly hated, 
as many selfish speculators and covetous people are every day. On the other hand, it 
may be so wisely laid out as to increase our friends to troops. A judicious use of 
money can gather friends around us by the thousand. It may serve us by increasing 
our list of friends. 

III. Money can be used by us to sbhvb God. (Vers. 10 — 12.) This is the gist of 
Christ's teaching in the parable before us ; and we never use money aright until we 
have got this idea driven home of serving God by it. And to emphasize this, let us 
notice : 1. Money is Qod's, and we are never more than stewards of it. This truth 
underlies the whole parable. The very rich man who has the steward is God. We 
are all his stewards, faithful or unfaithful, as the case may be, in our use of his money. 
It is never ours apart from God ; it is ours only as his stewards. Other things are 
held far more surely — for example, education, thoughts, culture. They enter our 
being and become ours, we have reason to believe, for evermore. But money is only 
ours for a time — a loan from God to be put out to a proper use. 2. We are faithful in 
our stewardship when we give ungrudingly to those who are in real need. God gives 
US " enough and to spare " for the purpose of laying the needy under obligation. In 
this way we transmute our money into gratitude. The gratitude of the assisted is 
better than the money, for it abides and cau be enjoyed when money cannot. 3. Ood 
guarantees the gratitude and the reward. Some of the recipients may turn out to be 
ungrateful, but " he that giveth unto tlie poor lendeth unto the Lord," and " Inasmuch 
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto 
me." We are, therefore, sure of the highest recognition when for the Lord's sake we 
help our fellows. 

IV. The tbult obnebous and liberal soul has a welcome awaitino him in thb 
btbbnal tabernacles. (Ver. 9.) The expression, "eternal tabernacles," to adopt 
the Revised Version, seems to indicate everlasting progress to be realized in the next 
life. We shall be moving onwards even there to higher and higher attainment. Those 
we have befriended here will receive us into their eternal tents. There will be recog- 
nition and fellowship and its accompanying progress. What a judicious outlay to 
have all this awaiting us in the world to come 1 What a means of grace money may 
thus become 1 and what a help to glory 1 Let the so-called unjust steward, then, 
admonish us to make the most of our capital on earth, that we may have the best 
heavenly return from it when we have left the money behind us for ever. — R. M. E. 

Vers. 14 — 31. — The misuse of money. The possibility of making "friends of the 
mammon of unrighteousness " has been clearly set before us by our Lord in the pre- 
ceding parable. The " eternal tents " may afford us warmest welcome if we have con- 
scientiously used our money. But the Pharisees who needed the warning against 
covetoi sness only derided him for his pains. It is supposed that it was his poverty 
which they thought took away his right to speak as he did of riches. He is conse- 
quently compelled to turn upon them a severer rebuke, and he does so in the sentences 
preceding, as well as in the substance of, the next parable. The intermediate sentences 
need not long detain us. Christ charges the Pharisees with self-justification. Now 

this can only take place " before men." It is an appeal to a mere human tribunal to 

those who can only judge by the appearance, but cannot search the heart. (Sod he 
tells them plainly, will not endorse this justification. He will reverse the sentence of 
self-complacency. He follows up this by stating the permanence of the Law. The 
reputation of the Pharisees may wither and decay, but not one tittle of the Law shall 
fail. And in present circumstances he declares that the Divine kingdom is being 
stormed by anxious men who have learned to humble themselves in penitence and 
pass into exaltation through pardon. They ought to see to it that they are not induced 
by lust to play fast and loose with the unchanging Law, and to imagine that they can 
divorce their wives on the usual pretexts, and be guiltless. But now we must proceed 



BH. XVI, 1—31.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 8i 

to the striking parable of the rich man and Lazarus. Upon the details of the storj 
we do not tarry. It is an exquisitely powerful picture. The artist is here at his best 
The rioh man in his " purple and fine linen, faring sumptuously every day ; " the pool 
man " laid at his gate, full of sores," and thankful for the crumbs that fall from the rioh 
man's table and for the attention of the dogs ; then two deaths, when lo I the positions 
are reversed, and the poor man finds himself in the bosom of Abraham and with his 
good things all about him, while the rich man finds himself in utter poverty, in need 
of everything and sure of nothing. The picture closes, too, all hope for such a selfish 
soul as the rich man proved himself to be. The following lessons are here taught us. 

I. EVEKT ONE WITH MEANS HAS AMPLE OPPORTUNITY IN THIS LIFE OP BEING GBNB- 

aous. (Ver. 20.) The friends of the poor man laid him, or, as the word (_ip4p\riTo) 
may mean, " threw him down" at the rich man's gate.^ There could be no doubt 
about the rich man's opportunity; it was pressed upon his notice. And amid all the 
artificial separations which civilization makes between rich and poor, there is always 
some friendly hand to force opportunity upon us. " The poor we have with us always." 
They appear, do what we may, at the feast of life, and we cannot exclude them from 
our considerations. It requires an effort to be utterly ungenerous. Now, we ought to 
bless God that he has not left us with any excuse for hard-heartedness. He brings the 
world's needs to our very gates. He emphasizes opportunity. He gives us outflow for 
our generosities. He will not leave us in our hard-heartedness, but calls us evermore 
to nobler things. 

II. Self-indulqenob makes people ABSOLUTELY PITILESS. (Ver, 21.) Mosheim, 
in a suggestive discourse from this parable, reminds us at the outset of the words of 
Peter about " fleshly lusts warring against the soul." ' It is wonderful how hard- 
hearted luxurious living can make people. The rich man in the parable can find in 
his heart to pass out and in and never once to relieve his poor brother. The latter may 
have got crumbs from the rich man's table, but if he did, it was more likely by the 
servants' charity than by the master's orders. Prom the self-indulgent worldling he 
got no consideration. He is ignored, for the selfish soul has become pitiless. When 
self is supreme, it can shut out all consideration of others from one's thoughts. When 
they obtrude themselves or are obtruded upon our attention, we say, alas ! that they 
have no claim upon us, forgetting that they are our brothers. Against such hard- 
heartedness we should all be upon our guard. 

III. Death, in depriving the selfish soul of his good thingb, leaves him nbcbs- 
BARiLT IN tobmbnt. (Vers. 22, 23.) Good living is a most dangerous habit when it 
constitutes any man's all. A soul, to be confined to this tariff, is in danger of dying 
into utter want. The round of sensual indulgence goes on day after day, the appetites 
are gorged, and man sinks down into the animal pure and simple. Now, if the world 
beyond makes no provision for such gross indulgences ; if it has no venison and cham- 
pagne ; if the appetites are left without a larder and the famine of the senses has come ; — 
what kind of life must the poor soul have ? It needs no furnace of actual fire to secure 
his torment. The burning desire, within which nothing can quench, leaves him of 
necessity in torment. If God has made no provision for the intemperate, for the 
gourmand, for the dissolute, in their environment beyond the grave, must not their 
lusts, denied satisfaction, be perpetual torment ? The torment of unsatisfied desire, the 
hunger of a self-centred spirit, must be terrible ! 

IV. Unbelief ib inexcusable, and may be invinomlb. (Vers. 27 — 31,) The 
selfish worldling had evidently been living without regard to a future life. In his 
torment he realizes that his five brethren are living the same heedless life. Lest, 
therefore, they should come and increase hit torment, he asks that Lazarus be sent on 
a special mission to warn tliem about their doom. Now, it is plain that, with Moses 
and the prophets in their hands, they were without excuse. What, then, did Moses 
and the prophets teach ? They do not teach with great distinctness the doctrine of a 
future life. They undoubtedly imply that doctrine. But the question is — Did the rich 
man or his brethren need that doctrine to guard them against inhumaBity of life? 
Must I tremble before prospective torment ere I am convinced that I ought to h« 

• Of. Bruoe'a • Parabolic Teaching of Ohiist,' p. 88& 

* ' Heilige Beden,' enter theil, f . 65, ete. 



86 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvn. 1—37. 



generous and considerate ? ' Nay, do I not know by fhe law of conscience that such 
conduct as is inhuman must incur the curse of God ? Even the pagans are inexcusable 
when they live inhuman lives. Besides, we must not, with the rich man, imagine that 
a prescribed miracle may overbear all unbelief. Unbelief may be invincible. No 
miracle may be strong enough to defeat self-will. May we all be kept from such a 
hardened state ! 
V. Abraham, as he chekishes Lazakus in the other life, shows us how a eich 

MAN MAT PBKPETUATE HIS KINDLY OFFICES AND INFLUENCE. (Vers. 23 25.) It haS 

been very properly observed that in Abraham we have a rich man in blessedness, as a 
set-off to the other rich man in torment. Abraham was very probably the richer of 
the two while in life, but he had used hi^ wealth for the good of his fellows. He had 
cherished the poor and needy. And so it is to o;ood-hearted, faithful Abraham that the 
consolation of Lazarus is committed. Here the habits of helpfulness which the patriarch 
had cultivated upon earth find exercise in the better world. What a prospect is thus 
opened up to the large-hearted ! Heaven will be full of opportunity for ministration. 
Those whose lot has been a hard one in this world will be taken to the bosom of the 
patriarchs of God — those who have become " seniors " in his house of many mansions 
— and receive from them the compensation which God has in store for all who have 
learned to love him. — H. M. E. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAl-TiDK XVU 



Vers. 1 — 37. — The Master's teaehing on the 
subject of the injury worked on the souls of 
others by our sins. The disciples pray for 
an increase of faith that they may be kept 
from such sins. The Lord's reply. His little 
parable on humility. The healing of the ten 
lepers. The ingratitude of all save one. The 
qiiestion of the Pharisees as to the coming of 
the Kingdom. The Lord's answer, and his 
teaching respecting the awful suddenness of 
the advent of the Son of man. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Then said he nnto the dis- 
oiplel, It is impossible but that offences will 
oome : but woe unto him, through whom 
they come ! It were better for him that a 
millstone were hanged about his neck, and 
he cast into the sea, than that he shonld 
offend one of these little ones. The thread 
of connection here is not very obvious, and 
many expositors are content with regarding 
this seventeenth chapter as simply contain- 
ing certain lessons of teaching placed here 
by St. Luke without regard to anything 
which preceded or succeeded them in the 
narrative, these expositors regarding the 
contents of this chapter as well authenti- 
cated sayings of the Master, which were 
repeated to Luke or Paul without any pre- 
cise note of time or place, and which ap- 
peared to the^ too important for them to 
omit in these memoirs of the Divine life. 
Notwithstanding this deliberate opinion, 
endorsed by Godet and others, there does 
seem a clear connection here with the narra- 
tive immediately preceding. The Divine 



Master, while mourning o»er the sorrowfril 
certainty of offences being committed in the 
present confused and disordered state ol 
things, yet pronounces a bitter woe on the 
soul of the man through whose agency the 
offences were wrought. The " little ones " 
whom these offences would injure are clearly 
in this instance not children, although, oi 
course, the words would include the very 
young, for whom Jesus ever showed the 
tenderest love ; but the reference is clearly to 
disciples whose faith was only as yet weak 
and wavering — to men and women who 
would be easily influenced either for good 
or evil. The offences, then, especially 
alluded to were no doubt the worldliness 
and selfishness of professors of godliness. 
The sight of these, professedly serving God 
and all the while serving mammon more 
earnestly, would bring the very name of 
God's service into evil odour with some; 
while with others such conduct would serve 
as an example to be imitated. The selfish 
rich man of the great parable just spoken, 
professedly a religious man, one who evi- 
dently prided himself on his descent from 
Abraham the friend of God, and yet lived 
as a heartless, selfish sinner, who was even- 
tually condemned for inhumanity, was pro- 
bably in the Lord's mind when he spoke 
thus. What fatal injiury to the cause of 
true religion would be caused by one such 
life as tliat 1 It were better for him that a 
millstone were hanged about his neek, and he 
cast into the Ma. This was a punishment 
not unknown among the ancients. The 
ancient Latin Version, and Maroion in hia 



' Of. Bruce, tt( lupra. 



cH. xvn. 1— 37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 



87 



recension of St. Luke, read here, " It were 
better for him that he had never been bom, 
or that a millstone," etc. The awful sequel 
to a life which apparently had given the 
offence to which the Lord referred, endorses 
this terrible alternative. Yes; better indeed 
for him had that evil life been cut short 
even by such a death of horror as the Mas- 
ter pictures here, when he speaks of the 
living being oast into the sea bound to a 
millstone. 

Ver. 3. — Take heed to yourselves : If thy 
brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; 
and if he repent, forgive him. " But do you 
take heed," the Lord wett on to say, " my 
disciples; you too are in danger of commit- 
ting deadly sin yourselves, and of doing my 
cause irreparable injury. Soft living in 
selfish luxury, about which I have been 
speaking lately, is not the only wrong you 
can commit ; there is sore danger tiiat men 
placed as you are will judge others harshly, 
even cruelly, and so offend in another way 
•the little ones' pressing into the kingdom: 
this is your especial snare." Things Jesus 
had noticed, perhaps congratulatory, self- 
sufficient comments he had heard them make 
on the occasion of the lately spoken parable 
of Dives, very likely had suggested this 
grave warning. So here he tells them, the 
future teachers of his Church, how they 
must act; while ever the bold, untiring, 
fearless rebukers of all vice, of every phase 
of selfishness, they must be never tired of 
exercising forgiveness the moment the of- 
fender is sorry. The repentant sinner must 
never be repelled by them. 

Ver. 5. — And the apostles said unto the 
Lord, Increase our faith. The disciples, 
moved by the severe and cutting rebuke of 
their Master — a rebuke they probably felt 
their harsh, self-congratulatory state of mind 
had well merited^-come to him and ask him 
to give them such an increased measure of 
faith as would enable them to play better 
tlie difficult and responsible part he had 
assigned them. They evidently felt their 
weakness deeply, but a stronger faith would 
supply them with new strength; they 
would thus be guided to form a wiser, 
gentler judgment of others, a more severe 
opinion too of themselves. 

Ver. 6. — And the Lord said, If ye had 
faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might 
say unto this sycamine tree, Be thou plucked 
up by the root, and be thou planted in the 
sea ; and it should obey you. The Lord 
signifies that a very slight real faith, which 
he compares to the mustard seed, that 
smallest of grains, would be of power suffi- 
cient to accomplish what seemed to them 
impossible. In other words, he says, "If 
you have any real faith at all, you will be 
•ble to win the victory over yourselves 



necessary for a perpetual loving judgment 
of others." The gycamine tree here men- 
Jioned in his comparison is not the syca- 
more; he was probably standing close by 
the tree in question as he spoke. The 
sycamine is the black mulberry, Motui 
nigra, still called lycamenea in Greece. 

Vers. 7, 8.— But which of you, having a 
servant ploughing or feeding cattle, will say 
unto him by-and-by, when he is come from 
the field. Go and sit down to meati and 
will not rather say unto him. Hake ready 
wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and 
serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; 
and afterward thou shalt eat and drink t 
And here we have the Lord's answer tohia 
disciples' request to increase their faith. 
They were asking for a boon he would not, 
nay, could not, grant them yet. A small 
measure of real faith was sufficient to teach 
them that God would give them strength 
enough to keep themselves from committing 
this offence against love and charity of 
which he warned them so solemnly; but 
they prayed for more. " They were asking 
for faith, not only in a measure sufficient for 
obedience, but for a faith which would ex- 
clude all uncertainty and doubt. They were 
looking for the crown of labour before their 
work was done, for the wreath of the con- 
queror he/ore they had fought the battle. . . . 
In other words, the ' increase of faith ' for 
which the apostles prayed was only to come 
through obedience to their Master's will " 
(Dean Plumptre). The little parable was 
to teach them that they were not to look to 
accomplishing great things by a strong faith 
given to them in a moment of time, but they 
were to labour on patiently and bravely, 
and afterwardt, aa in the parable-story, they 
too should eat and drink. It was to show 
them that ia the end they should receive 
that higher faith they prayed for, which was 
to be the reward for patient, gallant toU. 
And gird thyself, and serve me. It is scarcely 
wise, as we have before remarked, to press 
each separate detail of the Lord's parables. 
Zeller, quoted by Stier, " makes, however, an 
application of this to the ' inner world of 
the heart,' in which there is no going 
straightway to sit down at table when a 
man comes from his external calling and 
sphere of labour, but we must gird ourselves 
to serve the Lord, and so prepare ourselves 
for the time when he will receive us to his 
supper." This is interesting, but it is doubt- 
ful if the Lord intended these special appli- 
cations. The general sense of the parable 
is clear. It teaches two things to all who 
would be, then or in the ages to come, 
his disciples— patience and humility. It 
reminds men, too, that his eervice it an 
arduous one, and that for those really en- 
I gaged in it it not only bring* hard toil in 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE, [oh. xvn. 1—37. 



the fields during the day, but alao further 
duties often in the evening-tide. There is 
no rest for the faithful and true servant of 
Jesus, and this restlesa work must be 
patiently gone through, perhaps for long 
years. 

Vers. 9, 10. — Doth he thank that servant 
because he did the things that were com- 
manded him % I trow not. So likewise ye, 
when ye shajlhave done all those things 
whifih are cofflfanded you, say. We are un- 
profitable servants : we have done that which 
was our duty to do. And for the loyal, 
patient, unwearied worker there must be no 
saying, " What shall we have therefore 1 " 
(Matt. xix. 27). No spirit of self-com- 
plaognoy and of self-satisfaction must be 
allowed to brood over the faithful servant's 
thoughts. In much of the Lord's teaching 
at this period of his life the position of man 
as regards God seems to have been dwelt on. 
God is all ; man is nothing. In God's great 
love is man's real treasure; man is simply a 
steward of some of God's possessions for a 
time ; 'man is'a servant whose duty it is to 
work ceaseleasly for his Master, God. There 
are hints of great rewards reserved for the 
faithful steward in heaven, promises that a 
time should< come when the unwearied 
servant should sit down and eat and drink 
in his Master's house ; but these high guer- 
dons were not earned, but were simply free, 
graeioui gifts from the Divine Sovereign to 
his creatuKS wiio should try to do his will. 
This patient, unwearied toil ; this deep sense 
of indebtedness to God who loves man with 
so intense, so strange a love ; this feeling that 
we can i^ever do enough for him, that when 
we have taxed all our energies to the utmost 
in his service, we have done little or no- 
thing, and yet that all the while he is smil- 
ing on with his smile of indescribable love ; 
— this is what will increase the disciples' 
faith, and only this. And in this way did 
the Lord reply to the disciples' prayer, 
" Increase our laith." 

Ver. 11. — And it came to pass, as he went 
to Jerusalem. Just a note of time and 
place inserted by St. Luke to remind the 
reader that all these incidents took place, 
this important teaching and the momentous 
revelations concerning man's present and 
future were spoken, during those last few 
mouths preceding the Crucifixion, and gene- 
r.illy in that long, slow progress from the 
nnrth of Palestine through Galilee and 
Samaria to the holy city. 

Vers. 12, 13. — And as he entered into a 
certain village, there met him ten men that 
were lepers, which stood afar off : and they 
lifted up thoir voices, and said, Jesus, Mas- 
ter, have mercy on us. These met him 
somewhere outside the village, separated, by 
the fact of their unhappy malady, leprosy. 



from their fellows, in accordance with the 
old Mosaic Law of Lev. xiii. 46, " He is un- 
clean: he shall dwell alone; without the 
camp shall his habitation be." These had 
no doubt heard of the many lepers who 
had been healed by the Galileean Teacher 
who was then drawing nigh the village. 
They did not venture to approach him, but 
they attracted his attention with their hoarse, 
sad cry. The legal distance which these 
unfortunates were compelled to keep from 
passers-by was a hundred paces. He does 
not seem to have touched them, or talked 
with them, but with an impressive majesty 
bids them go and return thanks for their 
cure, which his will had already accom- 
plished. They evidently believed implicitly 
in his healing power, for without further 
question they went on their way as he had 
commanded, and as they went the poor suf- 
ferers felt a new and, to them, a quite 
strange thrill of health course through their 
veins; they felt their prayer was granted, 
and that the fell disease had left them. They 
were not sent to the capital city j any priest 
in any town was qualified to pronounce on 
the completeness of a cure in tiiis maiadj 
(Lev. xiv. 2—32). 

Ver. 16. — And he was a Samaritan. Ap- 
parently nine of these lepers were Jews, and 
only one a Samaritan. This man would not 
have been allowed to associate with Jews 
but for the miserable disease with which he 
was afiSioted, and which obliterated all dis- 
tinction of race and caste. It is the same 
now at Jerusalem; in the leper-houses, 
termed " Abodes of the Unfortunate," Jews 
and Mohammedans will live together. 
Under no other circumstances will these 
hostile peoples do this. 

Ver. 17. — Where are the ninel It has 
been suggested that the priests, in their 
hostility to Jesus, hindered the return of the 
nine. The one who was a Samaritan would 
naturally pay little heed to a remonstrance 
from such a quarter. From the terms of 
the narrative it is, however, more likely that 
the strange Samaritan, as soon as he felt he 
was really cured, moved by intense, adoring 
gratitude, at once turned back to ofier his 
humble, heartfelt thanks to his Deliverer. 
The others, now they had got what they so 
earnestly required, forgot to be grateful, and 
hurried off to the priests to procure their 
certificate of health, that they might plunge 
at once again into the varied distractions of 
everyday life — into business, pleasure, and 
the hke. The Master appears especially 
moved by this display. He seems to see in 
the thanklessuess of the nine, contrasted 
with the conduct of the one, the ingratitude 
of men as a whole, " as a prophetic type of 
what will also ever take place " (Stier). 

Ver. 19.— Thy faith hath made thee whol* 



CH. xvn, 1-37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



This was something more than the first 
noble gift, which he, in common with his 
■ nine fellow-sufferers, had received. A new 
power was his from that day forth. Closely 
united to his Master, we may think of the 
poor unknown Samaritan for ever among 
the friends of Jesus here and in the world 
to come. There are degrees in grace here. 
The nine had faith enough to believe im- 
plicitly in the Master's power, and in con- 
sequence they received his glorious gift of 
health and strength ; but they cared to go 
no further. The one, on the other hand, 
struck with the majesty and the love of 
Jesus, determined to learn more of his 
Benefactor. From henceforth we may con- 
sider the Samaritan was one of "his 
own." SS. Luke and Paul gladly recorded 
this "memory," and no doubt not once or 
twice in the eventful story of their future 
lives used the incident as a text for their 
teaching when they spoke to the stranger 
Gentiles in far cities. Being a hated 
Samaritan, they would say, argued no hard- 
ness of heart, nor was it any bar to the 
bestowal of Jesus' most splendid gifts, first 
of life here, and then of life glorious and 
full in the world to come. 

Ver. 20. — And when he was demanded of 
the Fharlsees, when the kingdom of God 
should come. The following discourse of 
the Lord in reply to the Pharisee question, 
" When Cometh the kingdom ? " was delivered, 
clearly, in ths dosing days of the ministry, 
probably just before the Passover Feast, 
and in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem. 
The query was certainly not put in a 
friendly spirit. The questioners had evi- 
dently caught the drift of much of our 
Lord's late teaching, and had seen how 
plainly he was alluding to himself as 
Messiah. This seems to have been the 
starting-point of their bitter, impatient 
inquiry. We must remember that the great 
rabbinic schools in which these Pharisees 
had received their training connected the 
coming of Messiah with a grand revival of 
Jewish power. If in reality this GalUseau 
Eabbi, with his strange powers, his new 
doctrines, his scathing words of reproach 
which he was ever presuming to address to 
tlie leaders in Israel, — ^if in reality he were 
Messiah, when was that golden age, which 
the long looked-for Hope of Israel was to 
introduce, to commence? But the words, 
we can well conceive, were spoken with the 
bitterest irony. With what scorn those 
proud, rich men from Jerusalem looked on 
the friendless Teacher of Galilee, we know. 
We seem to hear the muttering which 
accompanied the question : " Thou our King 
Messiah I " The kingdom of God oometh not 
with observation. This answer of our Lord's 
may be paraphrased : " The kingdom of God 



Cometh not in conjunction with snoh obser- 
ration and watching for external glorious 
things as now exist among you here. Lo, it 
will burst upon you suddenly, unawares." 
The English word " observation " answers to 
the signification of the Greek as meaning a 
singularly anxious watching. 

Yer. 21. — Neither shall they say, Lo here ! 
or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of 
God is within yon. That kingdom will be 
marked out on no map, for, lo, it is even 
now in your midst. It may be asked — How 
"in your midst"? Scarcely not as Godet 
and Olshausen, following Chrysostom, think, 
in your hearts. The kingdom of God could 
not be said to be in the hearts of those 
Pharisees to whom the Master was espe- 
cially directing his words of reply here. It 
should be rather understood tji the midst of 
your ranks; so Meyer and Farrar and others 
interpret it. 

Yer. 22. — And he said unto the disciples. 
The Master now turns to the disciples, and, 
basing his words still upon the question of 
the Pharisees, he proceeds to deliver a 
weighty discourse upon the coming of the 
kingdom which will be manifest indeed, and 
externally, as well as internally, exceeding 
glorious, and for which this kingdom, now 
at its first beginning, will be for long ages 
merely a concealed preparation. Some of 
the imagery and figures used in this dis- 
course reappear in the great prophecy in 
Matt. xxiv. (a shorter report of which St. 
Luke gives, ch. xxi. 8 — o6). Here, how- 
ever, the teaching has no reference to the 
siege of Jerusalem and the destruction of 
the Jewish polity, but only to "the times 
of the end." The days wiU come, when ye 
shall desire to see one of the days of the 
Son of man, and ye shall not see it. In the 
first place, our Lord addressed these words 
to the disciples, who, in the long weary 
years of toil and bitter opposition which lay 
before them, would often long to be back 
again among the days of the old Galilsean 
life, when they could take their doubts and 
fears to their Master, when they could listen 
without stint to his teaching, to the words 
which belonged to the higher wisdom. Oli, 
could they have him only for one day in 
their midst again I But they have a broader 
and more far-reaching reference ; they speak 
also to all his servants in the long Christian 
ages, who will be often weary and dispirited 
at the seemingly hopeless nature of the 
conflict they are waging. Then will these 
indeed long with an intense longing for 
their Lord, who for so many centuries keeps 
silence. These will often sigh for just one 
day of that presence so little valued and 
thought of when on earth. 

Yer. 23. — And they shall say to yon, Sea 
here ; or, See there : go not after them, aoi 



90 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ivn. 1—37, 



follow them. Again addressed to tbe dis- 
ciples in the fiist instance, but with a far 
more extended reference. In the early days 
of Christianity such false reports were ex- 
ceedingly frequent; false Messiahs, too, 
from time to time sprang up ; unhealthy 
visions of an immediate return disturbed 
the peace and broke into the quiet, steady 
■work of the Church. Nor have these dis- 
turbing visions been unknown in later ages 
of Christianity. Dean Alford has a curious 
comment here. He sees in the words of 
this verse a warning to all so-called exposi- 
tors and followers of expositors of prophecy 
who cry, " See here I or, See there ! " every 
time that war breaks out or revolutions 
occur. 

Ver. 24. — For as the lightning, that light- 
eneth out of the one part under heaven, 
shineth unto the other part under heaven; 
80 shall also the Son of man be in his day. 
" Yea," went on the Miister, " let not delusive 
expectations interrupt you or turn you aside 
out of the narrow way of patient faith, for 
my coming will, like the lightning, be 
sudden, and will gleam forth on every side. 
There will be no possibility of mistake then." 

Ver. 25. — But first must he suffer many 
things, and be rejected of this generation. 
But, and here again he repeats "as a 
solemn refrain to all his teaching," the 
warning to his own of the fearful end fast 
coming on him. If he is to come again 
with glory, he must first go away with 
shame, persecuted, forsaken, by the genera- 
tion then living. The suffering Messiah 
must precede the glorified Messiah. After 
this rejection and luffering would begin 
the period alluded to above (ver. 22) as 
the time when men should long to have 
him only for one day in their midst. During 
this period Messiah should continue invisi- 
ble to mortal eye. How long this state was 

to continue, one century or (eighteen 

have already passed), Jesus himself, in his 
humiliation, knew not; but he announced 
(vers. 26 — 30) that a gloomy state of things 
on earth would be brought to a close by his 
reappearance. Ah I "when the Son of man 
Cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?" 

Vers. 26 — 28.— As it was in the days of 
Noe (Noah) ... as it was in the days of lot. 
The prominent sin of the antediluvian, he 
reminds them, was sensuality in its varied 
forms. The torch of religious feeling will 
have waned in that unknown and possibly 
distant future when Messiah shall reap- 
pear, and will be burning with a pale, faint 
light. The bulk of mankind will be given 
up to a sensuality which the higher 
culture then generally reached will have 
been utterly powerless to check or even to 
modify. Men, just as in the days when the 
«rk wa« building and Noah was preaching, 



as in the days when the dark cloud was 
gathering over the doomed cities of the 
plain and Abraham was praying, will be 
entirely given up to their pursuits, their 
pleasures, and their sins. They will argue 
that the sun rose yesterday and on many 
yesterdays ; of course it will rise to-morrow« 
Perfect security will have taken possession 
of the whole race, just as, on a smaller scale, 
was the case in the days of Noah and of 
Lot, when the flouds came and tbe fire, and 
did their stem, pitiless work ; so will that 
day of the second coming of Messiah, with 
its bloody and fiery dawn, assuredly come 
on man when he is utterly unprepared. 

Ver. 30. — Even thus shall it be in the day 
when the Son of man is revealed. " Is re- 
vealed," that is to say, he has been present 
all along, through those long ages of wait- 
ing ; only an impenetrable veil has hid him 
from mortal eyes. In that day will the veil 
be lifted, " and they shall look upon me 
whom they have pierced " (Zech. xii. 10). 

Vers. 31, 32.— In that day, he which shall 
be upon the house-top, and his stuff in the 
house, let him not come down to take it away : 
and he that is in the field, let him likewise 
not return back. Bemember Lot's wife. The 
Lord, with this striking imagery, describes, 
not the attitude which men who would be 
saved must assume when he appears with 
power and great glory — there will be uo time 
then to shape any new way of life — but it 
pictures the attitude they must always main- 
tain, if they would be his servants, towards 
the things of this world. His servants must 
be ready to abandon all earthly blessings at 
a moment's notice ; none but those who have 
been sitting loosely to these will be able, 
when the sudden cry comes, at once to toss 
away all, and so to meet the long-tarrying 
Bridegroom. The reminder of Lot's wife — 
a very familiar story to Jews — warned all 
would-be disciples of the danger of the 
double service, God and the world, and how 
likely the one who attempted it would be to 
perish miserably. 

Ver. 33. — WhoEoever shall seek to save 
his life shall lose it ; and whosoever shall 
lose his life shall preserve it, Very deep 
must have been the impression which this 
saying made upon the early Church. So 
literally did many interpret it, that the 
wiser and more thoughtful men in the con- 
gregations during the days of persecution 
had often to prevent persons of botli sexes 
recklessly throwing away their lives in the 
conflict with the Komau authorities. Very 
many in the first three centuries positively 
courted martyrdom. 

Vers. 34, 35.— I tell you, in that night there 
shall be two men in one bed ; the one shall 
be taken, and the other shall be left. Two 
women shall be grinding together ; the ojt» 



3H. xvn. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACOOBDINO TO ST. LUKB. 



91 



Bholl be taken, tlie other left. How taken 7 
Not, as Bome scliolara have supposed, taken 
onCy 10 perish, but taken away by the Lord 
in the way described by St. Paul in 1 Thess. 
iv. 17, where he paints how the faithful 
servant who is living when the Lord returns 
in glory, will be caught up in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air. The other will 
be left. Thus, as it has been strikingly 
observed, " the beings who have been most 
closely connected here below shall, in the 
twinkling of an eye, be parted for ever." 

Ver. 36 ia wanting in nearly all the oldest 
authorities. It was subsequently inserted 
in this place by copyists from Matt. xxiv. 40 
— a passage in which much of the imagery 
here used was repeated by the Master. In 
one important feature this discourse differs 
from that delivered at Jerusalem a little 
later, and reported at length by St. Matthew 
in his twenty-fourth chapter. There ia no 
reference hero (in St. Luke) to the siege of 
Jerusalem; the whole teaching is purely 
teleological, and deals exclusively with what 
will take place at the close of this age. 

Ver. 37. — And they answered and said 
unto him, Where, lord t The disciples were 
still unable to grasp the full meaning of 
their Master's words when he spoke of his 
second advent being visible in all parts of 
the world, comparing it to a flash of lightning 
which gleams at the same instant in every 
point of the horizon. " Where, Lord, will 
all this take place which tliou hast been 
telling us about ? " And he said unto them, 
Wheresoever the body is, thither will the 
eagles be gathered together. The imagery 
is taken from Job ■'tttit- 30, "Where the 



slain are, there is she " (the eagle); the bird 
intended being most probably the great 
vulture, well known in Syria. It is seen, 
for instance, travellers tell us, in hundreds 
on the Plain of Gennesaret ; it is a hideous- 
looking bird, equal to the eagle in size and 
strength, and acts as a scavenger to purify 
the earth from the putrid carcases with 
which it would otherwise be encumbere<l. 
" Do you ask where all this will take place ? 
As the curtain of the future rolls up be- 
fore my inward eye, I see the vultures of 
Divine vengeance flying in flocks athwart 
the whole area of the earth; the sky is 
darkened with their numbers ; far as my 
eye can reach, I still see them. Alas I for 
the habitable earth, my Father's goodly 
world ... it is rank everywhere with cor- 
ruption . . . wheresoever the carcase is, there 
the vultures will gather together" (Dr. 
Morrison). The Lord's answer to the 
question — " Where ? " was that his words ap- 
plied to the whole earth. The terrible and 
awful scenes he had pictured would take 
place everywhere. The carcase, as Gtodet 
phrases it, is " humanity, entirely secular and 
destituteof the lifeof God. . . . The eagles 
(vultures) represent punishment alighting 
on such a society." There is another inter- 
pretation of these words, which, although 
many great expositors favour it, must be 
rejected as improbable, being so alien to the 
context of the whole passage." The dead 
body (the carcase), according to these inter- 
preters, is the body of Christ, and the eagles 
are his saints, who flock to his presence, and 
who feed upon him, especially in the act of 
Holy Communion. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 10.— The Addition Besought. We are not informed of the circumstances 
which called forth the discourse condensed in the first ten verses of the chapter. An 
occasion was, by some incident, provided for a solemn warning against the sin cf an 
unforgiving and uncharitable spirit. And this warning apparently intensified a con- 
viction which had been simmering in the minds of the disciples, and led to the prayer, 
" Lord, Increase [or, ' add to us '] faith." Have we not a part in this cry ? Are there 
not some of us who feel that, although we live in the light of Christ's Word and 
kingdom, we yet need one great addition — faith ? — 

** The childlike faith that asks not sight. 
Waits not for wonder or for sign." 

I. Thb pbateb supposbb a want. Trace this want from two or three positions. 1. 
Reflect how sorely we are wanting in a lively sense of the great truths of our holy faith. 
These truths are not mere opinions ; they are facts. The seat of the doctrine is the fact ; 
it is with the facts that faith has primarily to do. Are we receiving the facts with our 
whole mind and strength ? That God is ; that Jesus Christ is ; that the Holy Spirit 
of God is witnessing with our spirits and helping our infirmities ; — ^what of these 
fundamental verities? Bealize what a thorough grasp of these facts would involve; 
what manner of persons they ought to be to whom they are matters of experience and 
eongciousuesi. And what are we ? Alas I is it not too certain that, between the 



92 THE GOSPEL ACOOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvii. 1—37, 

truths in which we declare our belief, and the affections and attitudes of our minds, 
there is a sad disproportion ; that whilst we say, " Lord, I believe," we have need of the 
addition, " Help our unbelief; add to us faith " ? 2. Eeflect again, how constantly un 
are reminded that the words of Christ are " too deep, too high," for us. Even when we 
follow him as our Master, how dim are our apprehensions of his truth! Perhaps this 
was the immediate reason of the apostles' prayer. They had been listening to wonder- 
ful teaching — e.g. the cycle of parables in the fourteenth and fifteenth chapters — and, 
after hearing all, how poor was the vision of the realities with which the sayings were 
charged 1 And the demand made on them in respect of forgiveness, how could they 
meet such a demand in a world like this ? "0 Lord, thy thoughts are very deep, thy 
commandment is exceeding broad; add faith!" Can we not sympathize? Do we not 
often feel that Christ's doctrine is pitched on a note far above the level of our mind? 
We think that it will not do to interpret it too literally, that we must take only broad 
and general views. The teaching as to conduct seems too fine, too pure And other- 
worldly for the state of things about us. How can we realize it ? " Lord, add to us 
faith." 3. Eeflect, once more — when we look around, what is one of the chief wants of 
the time f Is it not faitfc. ' How much of the instruction given in Christian churches 
is halting and confused "^ *he sceptic too evidently looking over the shoulder 1 Beligion 
is a, thing talked ab»' rather than lived in. And when we scrutinize the counte- 
nances of the " anonyaious many-sided " force which we call society, what furrows 
appear in it! what lines betokening the absence of trust — man in man, having its root 
in the absence of trust ; man in the living God I Is not this signified in the conflict of 
interests — labour and capital, class against class. To bridge the yawning social chasms, 
oh for a new spirit of faith ! We need a chasm-bridging Church — a Church pressttiug, 
with a new force, the ideal of Christian brotherhood. " Lord, add to those who call 
on thy Name the faith by which the just live, through which ' they work victories, 
obtain promises, stop the mouths of lions ' ! " It is because of the lack of an heroic trust 
in the living God and his government that so few sycamine trees are plucked up by 
the root, so few mountains of sin and pride are cast into the sea. " Lord, bid us 
sFfptch forth our palsied hand, that we may take the fulness of thy grace I Add to us 
faith I" 

il. So much for the want which the prayer supposes. Consider thb scope and 
IMPORT or THE PEATEB ITSELF. First, it suggcsts the way of the addition ; secondly, 
it reminds us of the conditions on which the increase sought is realized, 1. The way of 
the addition. " The apostles said v/nto the Lord" It is the only example of a common 
appeal, the only instance of the apostles, as distinct from the disciples, having a special 
concerted supplication. Sometimes there was a holy restraint on them, and they 
durst not ask him. But this is a matter on which they could speak ; it came out of 
the sense of their relation to him that they should go, with their great weakness, direct 
to his presence. Sometimes, when the hard saying was uttered, they reasoned one 
with another. But this is not a matter for conference. Only the hand of the Lord 
opened wide can supply the needed addition. For so it is. In pressing with the little 
we have to the Lord himself, we get the addition, we have the faith. Any faith, any 
trust whatsoever in the eternal love and righteousness, is a gift of God, a hold which 
God has on you, and wliich, if you only go whither it would lead, wiU bear you to a 
confidence more complete and unreserved. The one thing is, do not stop, mourning 
over what you have not; use what you have; it is enough to lead you to the Lord. 
Little-faith, at least thou canst cry. Cry the more, the more that the noisy world 
within or without bids thee hold thy peace. Cry the more, the less thou dost seem to 
have. "To them that have no might, he increaseth strength." "This poor man 
cried, and the Lord heard him." 2. Further, connecting the apostles' prayer with the 
Lord's reply, we see the condition on which the increase sought is realized. The reply 
is given in vers. 8—10. There is a twofold type, with a twofold promise. (1) The 
mustard seed, smallest of all seeds, which yet grows into the tallest of trees. Let there 
be faith, even of the dimensions of this seed, any measure whatsoever, then be sure 
of a Divine power co-operating, which is able to do exceeding abundantly above all 
that can be asked. As the seed is the promise of the tree, so is this your small 
faith the promise of a greater and ever greater. " Not by might, nor by power, but ty 
my Spirit, saith the Lord of boita." (2) Nay, says the Lord, pointing to some mul- 



OH.XTO. 1— 37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKK »S 

berry tree at band, " does that seem strong ? Strength which may be compared to 
that of tearing the tree up by the roots and casting it into the sea is, through Divine 
co-operation in that grain-like faith. It can tear up by the roots and cast into the sea 
the selfishness against which the commandment of love has struck." But now follows 
the condition. What I take the words from ver. 7 to mean is, " If. you would have 
that faith, if you would have more faith, you must cease from all self-trust, you must 
renounce all self-complacency, you must be as nothing before God. The highest pos- 
sible excellence is only the fulfilment of an obligation. You are only unprofitable 
servants. Your life is a bright life only when, instead of thinking of what you are to 
get from God, or of thanks from God for service, you take the servant's place, and are 
only and wholly God's. Do not aim at accomplishing great things. Let your one point 
be an unwearied continuance. Work now, and rest afterwards when all is done. The 
less there is of self and self-feeling, the more you are busied with him as his servants 
and sons, the purer, larger, and more victorious will be your faith. All true faith has 
the certainty of addition ; and this addition will be in the measure in which the faith 
leaves the heart alone with God, worshipping and obeying his holy wilL 

" So in the darkness I may learn 
To tremble and adore, 
To sound my own vile notMDgnes% 
And thus to love thee more. 

" To luve thee, and yet not to think 
That I can love so much, 
To have thee vrith me. Lord, all day. 
Yet not to feel thy touch." 

Vem. 11 — 19. — The ten lepers. Our minds have been so occupied by the fulness of 
teaching contained in the three last chapters, that we have almost lost sight of the 
progress of our Lord to the capital. Now the evangelist recalls our attention. He 
presents the little party, followed no doubt by many who were attracted from one 
motive or from another, as " passing through the midst of," or rather " betweeD 
Samaria and Galilee " — Samaria on the right, Galilee on the left, and before them the 
river Jordan. It is in the immediate neighbourhood of a certain village, no name given, 
that the company are met by the fellowship of misery. A sad spectacle indeed, but 
one not unfrequent in the sunny isles of Southern seas, and in Eastern cities and 
thoroughfares. "Sauntering down the Jaffa road," says Dr. Thomson, "on my 
approach to the holy city, in a kind of dreamy maze, with, as I remember, scarcely one 
distinct idea in my head, I was startled out of my reverie by the sudden apparition of 
a crowd of beggars, without eyes, nose, hair. They held up to me their handless arms, 
unearthly sounds gurgled through throats without palates; in a word, I was horrified." 
It is a group of these miserables which clamours to Jesus as he nears the village walls. 
Those with him had heard the wild "Tam^, tamd! Unclean, unclean I" when suddenly 
the cry was exchanged for " Jesus, Master, have mercy on us I " These ten, each a 
homeless man ; some with the recollection, perhaps, of happy homes, of other days, of 
the solaces of human love, — all drawn together by virtue of that gregarious instinct 
which acts on even the wretched. Class distinctions, even the estrangement of oppo- 
site nationalities, are forgotten in the one uniting circumstance — a common woe. No 
man would have allowed the dust of the Jew to have the same place of sepulture as 
the dust of the Samaritan ; but these men, dead while they live, may herd as they 
please. Oh, what a sight to that heart in whose consciousness there survived the feel- 
ing of the morning stars and the triumph of the sons of God over the creation on which 
God had pronounced his " Very good " 1 What resistless eloquence in the cry, " Jesus, 
Master, have mercy " 1 He hears, and he answers in his own way ; for in the Gospels 
there is a striking variety in the dealings of the Lord with those who call on him. 
Each person is a specialty to him. His way with these ten is not to respond as he 
did to the leper who knelt to him, beseeching, " If thou wilt, thou canst." To them 
he gives no direct answer; he bids them at once go and show themselves to the priests. 
This was the trial of their faith. The priests could only pronounce a person cured; 
for the ten to obey was equivalent to a tnist that the power of the cure lay with Jesui 



»4 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvn. 1—37. 

the Master. They go ; and shortly the limbs no longer drag, the sensations of health, 
as of new fresh currents coursing through the frame, tell them that they are cleansed. 
And now for the point of the incident. One, and only one, turns back, and he a 
Samaritan ; and with a loud voice he gives God the glory, and, falling down before his 
Benefactor, renders thanks and praise. " Were there not the ten cleansed ? Where 
are the nine ? There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this 
stranger." It is the old story of the thankless heart. Note some of the lights and 
shadows of the picture of ingratitude. 

I. Alilj HAD BEEN EARNEST UNDBB THE PBBSSUKB OF THE OREAT WANT AND HST 

THE PRESENCE OF THE DELIVERER. There was faith enough for prayer, not for praise. 
Is this uncommon ? We have heard that, overtaken by unexpected calamity — fire, 
shipwreck, etc. — ^knees which for long years refused to bow, have bowed, and lips 
that uttered the adorable Name only in blasphemy have uttered the most fervenl 
pleadings for mercy. The record of the great plague in London is a most grapliic 
description af a new earnestness which nearly the whole population manifested, so 
that there were not clergy enough, services enough, to meet tiie demand for prayer. 
Have we not the tokens of this same state of feeling in ourselves? Oh, there is no 
difficulty in a cry when the life hangs in doubt, when the shadow of death creeps up the 
wall of the home and lies across the bed of the dearly beloved. The heart needs no 
book then to teach to pray ; it will cling to any plank; somehow, anyhow, the voice 
must rise like a fountain, "Jesus, Master, have mercy 1 " 

II, WhEBE ABK THE NINE WHO WERE EARNEST? 

"Even he who reads the heart — 
Knows what he gave and what we lost, 
Sin's forfeit, and redemption's cost — 
By a short pang of wonder crost. 
Seems at the sight to start." 

They are cleansed. The need is relieved. They are so far on their way. Perhaps 
there had been some discussion between the one and the nine, and they may have 
argued, " Let ns get to our homes. Grateful to him ? Certainly ;. but he will never miss 
us." Have we not all illustrated the reasoning? How did the writing of Hezekiah 
when he was sick condemn him when he was well I " I will go softly all my days" was 
part of the writing which contained the reflections and purposes of the recovery. How 
did that harmonize with his pride and ostentation to the messengers of Baladan ? 
Alas! how quickly is the love which special moments originate overborne by the 
return of the old things, or the influence of new scenes and circumstances ? 

" Kot showers across an April sky 
Drift when the storm is o'er, 
Faster than those false drops and few 
Fleet from the heart, a worthless dew." 

Most of all is this true when the record borne is of blessings bestowed, when the prayer 
which brought to the feet of Jesus has been answered even in a manner which can be 
traced. What healings are received 1 and yet there is no turning back of the soul to 
glorify the Healer 1 What plenteousness of redemption I and yet there is no loud voice 
to confess the Redeemer 1 The proportion is the nine thankless to the one thankful. 
And is not ingratitude among the most common of vices ? — the Aaron's rod which 
swallows up and comprises in itself all the baser vices ? Archdeacon Farrar quotes the 
lines of Wordsworth — 

" Fve heard of hearts unkind 

Kind deeds with coldness still returning : 
Alas I the gratitude of men 

Hath left me ofteuer mourning." 

And he adds, *• If Wordsworth found gratitude a common virtue, his experience must 
have been exceptional." " Give thanks unto the Lord at the remembrance of his 
holiness. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name. Bring an offering, and 
C«me into his courts." 



OH. XTIL 1— «7.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 9B 

Vers. 20 — Z7.—The kingdom and the day of the Son of man. This passage is not to 
be isolated as if it were a definition complete in itself of Christ's view of the kingdom 
of God. Some, doing this, have found in it a jiistiflcation of the teaching that God's 
kingdom has no external character, that the coming of the Lord is only a revelation of 
truth in and to the heart of man. This is to do violence to the language of Jesus. In 
what he says afterwards to his own, in the solemn discourse reported two chapters hence, 
he refers to the coming of the Son of man as a fulfilment which would have its outward 
signs and effects, and for which his people are to wait. On the occasion before us he 
sets his Word in the sharpest possible antagonism to the carnal and unworthy notions 
which prevailed among the Pharisees who had demanded a statement from him as to 
bow the kingdom should come. E.g. the Pharisees conceived of this kingdom as • 
victorious world-power. " Not so," is the assertion (ver. 20) ; " God's kingdom does 
not come with observation, does not lend itself to such outwardness as your vision 
contemplates." The Pharisees separated the citizenship in the Divine kingdom from 
character. The right to partake of its glories was a political right. It measured the 
extravagance of their social caste. It was not a chastening and purifying expectation. 
It was a dream of conquest and outward abundance which kept their minds on the 
stretch, which made them dupes of those who claimed to be Messiahs or forerunners 
of Messiahs. " The kingdom of God," says Jesus, " is not hevalded by loud professions, 
by cries of, 'Lo here I or, lo there!' Unobserved, often unthought of, are its marches 
and movements, its surprises and its conquests " (ver. 21). As the concluding touch of 
the answer, Jesus warns against a restless asking " when the kingdom shall come," as 
if it were a prospect wholly future. He reminds us (ver. 21) that the kingdom is 
here and now, that it is verily and indeed among us. And the caution is as timely for 
uB to-day as it was for the Pharisee then. For we are all apt to associate God's king- 
dom with some distant prospect or some condition removed from the world in which 
we live. And the doctrine of the Lord's advent is too often mixed up with schemes of 
prophecy, with calculations of catastrophes and the like, which men profess to expound 
or to forecast, crying, "Lo herel or, lo there!" Not, therefore, without meaning for 
more than the old Hebrew separatists is the counsel, " Look into the region of charac- 
ter for the reality of the kingdom. Where the King is, there is the court. If God has 
possessed your souls, his kingdom is among, is in you." Observe the solemn discourse 
to the disciples suggested by the demand which he has met. The words which follow 
from ver. 22 may be regarded either as an epitome of longer addresses, or as an address 
in itself complete. Look on it as an instruction preliminary, and preparatory, to the 
fuller opening up of the time of the end. The shadows are getting longer and longer ; 
Jerusalem is not far ahead ; the night is at hand in which, under the form of his first 
appearing, the Son of man cannot work. The look forward in the verses before us is to 
(1) a day of distress ; (2) a day calling for patient faith ; (3) a day of retribution and 
judgment. 

I. A DAT OP DISTRESS. When (ver. 22) the mind would cast a regretful retrospect 
on the time when the Lord was with them — their Sun and Shield. Ah 1 would that 
he, the Bridegroom of our souls, 

*• Our Shepherd, Husband, Friend, 
Our Prophet, Priest, and King," 

were going before ub as in the days of old I But no ; the shadow on the dial oi 
time cannot be put back. The Church mnst face perplexities and follow its path 
through them. It hears voices crying, " Lo here ! and lo there 1 " and the voices 
are so delusive that even the elect are often bewildered. The Master's word is, 
"Onwards!" He bids us look up where Stephen beheld him — standing, bending 
forward in sympathy and help. In the struggle, through the din, although it seems 
as if he were not, he is with his Church until the end of the age. 

II. A DAT OALLINO FOB PATIENT FAITH. There are incertitudes and exciliemente 
which sometimes almost suspend the action of faith. There are complications in the 
Church and the world which induce a feverishness of tone. What the Lord enjoins 
(ver. 25) is a calm, although wakeful, vigilance. He reminds his followers that the 
way to the crown is by the cross, that the offence of the cross must be exhausted, and 
th^n tho end iball come. Thus, whihit the sentence is (vers. 26 — 30), " The coming 



S8 THE GOSPEL ACOORDINO TO ST. LUKE. [m. xvn. 1—87. 

may be at any moment, it will be, as w s prefigured in the days of Noali and Lot, 
when men are least expecting it," the balancing thought is added, that a testimony 
must be given to all the nations. And the right kind of waiting is that which seeks 
to fill up what remains of his sufferings, so that, when he shall appear, hia people may 
be found " not sleeping in sin, but diligent in his service, and rejoicing in his praises." 
It is in this connection that the reference is made (ver. 29) to the tradition concerning 
the wife of righteous Lot, " She looked back, and beSame a pillar of salt," The world- 
clinging heart was stiffened into a very column of worldliness. Bemember, there are 
to be no regrets, no glances behind. A heart single, and free for the Lord, is the con- 
dition of the disciple who shall escape all these things that shall come to pass, and 
stand before the Son of man. " Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it } 
and whosoever shall lose hia life shall preserve it " (ver, 33). 

III. A DAT OP JUDGMENT. The revelatloH of Christ is a judgment — in the fuller 
meaning of the word, a making manifest, a bringing to light of the hidden bents of 
mind and separation of the true from the false. Whenever Christ is presented, the 
judgment is set and the books are opened. The end is simply the fuE apocalypse 
of the judgment which is now proceeding. The lightning (ver. 24) " that lighteneth 
out of the one part of heaven, shining to the other," is the manifestation of the 
electricity with which the atmosphere is charged. What of this day of judgment? 
It is (vers. 27, 28) the condemnation of th world as to its worldliness in both its more 
sensual and its more cultured aspects — the senstM^iYj/ typified in the days of Noah; the 
culture, with coarseness, typified in the wealthy citizen of Sodom, It is (vers, 34, 35) 
the disjunction of the closest of life's fellowships— the two in the bed, the two at the 
mill, the two in the field. The issues that, unobserved by many, are being adjusted 
and completed will be set forth in their rcEility, What men would not believe men 
will be brought to know. " The Lord cometh ; he cometh to judge the earth." 
"Where?" ask these simple men, affrighted — "where. Lord?" and the enigmatical 
response (ver, 37) is given. Wherever there is corruption, wrong, death, there is the 
scene of the judgment of God. Jerusalem was the carcase more immediately in view, 
and the eagle, sign of the Roman empire, that was raised over its battlements was the 
sign of other eagles that were already gathering. But may we not ask whether the 
Jerusalem that is in bondage, the Christendom that is, is not ripening for judgment? 
" Receiving the kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace whereby we may 
■arre God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear : for our God is a consuming fir«.* 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1, 2.—8p{ritudl resittance. Our Lord here delivers very weighty trutli of 
B practical kind to the whole body of his adherents — to " the disciples." It is truth 
which remains as appropriate and as necessary as it was when it was uttered. 

L OuB NEED OP THE POWER OP spiBiTTTAL BEsisTANCB, " It is impossible but that 
offences will come." Knowing the human world as Christ knew it, he perceived that 
his disciples would, through many generations, be subjected to continual and severs 
trial of their faith. With such error, such selfishness, such despotism, such heartless- 
ness, such iniquity in the world, it was inevitable that temptations should abound. 
The path of Christian life must lie through a country beset with moral evil ; the 
journey home must be attended by the most serious perils. 1. The aim of the enemy. 
This would be, as it is still, to lead the disciples of Christ into (1) doubt, disbelief, 
denial, apostasy; (2) indecision and irreligion; (3) half-heartedness in worship, in 
sacred service, in domestic and individual devotion ; (4) worldliness of tone and spirit ; 
(5) unworthy and (ultimately) injurious and even fatal methods of presenting the 
truth and advocating the cause of Christ; (6) laxity of speech and of behaviour, 
loading down to positive and destructive sin. 2. The weapons of his attack. These 
are(l) evil suggestion ; (2) bad example; (3) specious argumentation ; (4) command- 
ment and constraint. 3. Our resources of resistance. These are (1) a simple sagacity ; 
such a knowledge of the evil that is in men as will ensure vigilance, a wise carefulness, 
■ hesitation to commit ourselves to every plausible spokesman, to every inviting and 
well-sounding doctrine (1 John iv. 1). (2) A spirit of fidelity; a steadfastness of 



CIH.XVII.1-.3T.] THE GOSPEL AOCOBDINCJ TO BT. LUKlfi. 97 

purpose and earnestness of spirit that is born of pure devotedness to a DiTine fiavioor, 
and that is sustained by intimacy of fellowtibrp with him. (3) Strength in Qod — 
that strength which comes from God's own indwelling in the soul and direct action 
upon it (Isa. zl. 29—31). 

IL OuB Lobd'b beoabd r>b his disciples of aiTUBLEB BAKX. "Woe untoUm" 
through whom it results that the stumbliDg-block is in the way and the weak discipl* 
falls 1 " It were better for him" that the worst disaster should befall him than that he 
should contract such guilt as that and be open to such condemnation. Nothing could 
more strongly mark the deep interest our Lord takes in his humbler disciples than the 
severity of this his indignation against those who wrong them. T^e intensity of his 
wrath is the measure of the depth and tenderness of his love. Among his followers 
•re those who occupy high places — in ecclesiEvstical position, in social honour, in 
mental equipments, in constitutional strength. But there are also those who take the 
lower place ; not the children only — the " little ones " in years and size — but the inex- 
perienced, the unsophisticated and unsuspecting, the mentally weak, the spiritually 
feeble ; those who are much at the mercy of the strong ; those who, for some cause 
and in some one respect, are unendowed and unequipped with the ordinary means of 
defence. These " little ones " are often : 1. The object of disregard. Many pass them 
by as unworthy of consideration ; they will not repay attention ; they will not con- 
tribute anything considerable to the cause In hand. 2. The mark at which iniquity 
aims. For it is one that can be easily hit ; it is a victim ready for the blow. 3. But 
it is for us to remember that they are always the objeA of our Lord's peculiar interest 
and affection. He cares for them the more that men care for them so little. He 
remembers them in " their low estate ; " and as a mother lets her heart go most freely 
to her weakest child, so does he bestow upon these members of his Church all the 
fulness and all the tenderness of his Divine love. He indicates to us here how he feels 
toward those that do them harm ; and, conversely, it is safe for us to infer that he is 
peculiarly pleased with those who, entering into his own spirit, love and guard and 
guide these disciples of lowlier rank. 

III. Christ's estimate op bin ahv scfpebing. ■ It were better,*" etc. We have 
sometimes to choose between sinning and suffering ; e.g. the martyr in time of per- 
secution ; the son or servant commanded to do that which to him would be sm because 
"not of faith." This word of our Lord remmds us that any physical suffering, any 
bodily evil, any temporal misfortune, ot whatever magnitude it be, is much to be pre- 
ferred to any serious sin. Be sunk in the sea, be utterly extinguished, let the worse 
come to the worst, but do not descend to anything which is mean, which is unholy or 
impure, which would stain your own conscience or injure and perhaps slay a brother's 
or a sister's character, which would grieve the Father and Saviour of us all. — C. 

Vers. 3, 4.-^0ur duty when wronged. The opening words of this passage, "Take 
heed to yourselves," point to our Lord's sense of the great diEBoulty we are likely to 
experience in learning the forthcoming truth, or to the great stress he lays upon its 
illustration in our lives — ^it might well be either or both of these. For it is a difficult 
lesson to learn well ; and our Master does make much, as other passages show, of this 
particular grace. 

L OnB OPENNESS TO iNJUBT. 1. We come into the world with a strong sense of 
what is due to us. We all feel that there is due to us a certain measure of respect as 
human beings, as those made in the image of God ; also that we can claim just and 
equitahlf treatment. Men may not withhold or remove from us that which we consider 
to belong to us. If they do we are aggrieved ; we have a sense, more or less deep, of 
having been wronged — our sense of injury rising and falling with the sensitiveness 
of our nature and the character of the offence. There is neither virtue nor vice, honour 
nor shame, in this. It is an instinct of our nature which we haw in common with our 
kind. 2. There are many possibilities of offence. In our present condition we touch 
one another at so many points that there is great likelihood of offence being given and 
taken. At home ; in all the oomplictttions of our business life ; in all our social rela^ 
tions • in the Church of Christ and the worship of God ; in the field of philanthropy ;— • 
in all these domains we " have to do " with one another ; and it is improbable in a very 
high degree, it is almoat impossible, that we should always comport ourselves as oaf 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvii. 1— 37. 



aeiglibours would expect ; it ie inevitable that we should occasionally differ as to what 
>i due from one to another. 

IL OuB DANGBB UNDER A SENSE OP INJUBY. 1. The mistake we are likely to fall 
into when we have a sense of injury is that of instantly concluding that we have been 
wronged ; we are apt to hurry to the conclusion that some one has slighted or injured 
us. But before we give way even to a strong feeling, we should make quite sure that 
things are as they seem to be. There are many ])ossibiiities of mistake in this world of 
error and misunderstanding. 2. The sin into which we are tempted to fall is that of 
■giving way to unbecoming anger and unchristian retaliation — & feeling of bitter resent- 
ment, vindictive, passionate, such as does not become the children of God ; and action 
which is intended to result in suffering on the part of the wrong-doer ; we proceed to 
" avenge ourselves." 

III. OnB DUTY WHEN WRONGED. 1. Direct communication, and, where it is neces- 
sary, friendly remonstrance. Matthew tells us that Christ enjoined upon us that, 
under a sense of injury, we should " go and tell our bi other his fault between ourselves 
and him alone." This is surely most wise. Instead of dwelling upon it and magnify- 
ing it in our own mind ; instead of talking about it and causing it to be spread aboad 
and discoloured and misrepresented, — the one right thing to do is to go at once to our 
offending neighbour and tell him our grievance. It is very likely he will explain every- 
thing, and there will be no need of any overlooking on our part; or, if wrong has been 
done, it is very likely he will appreciate our fairness and friendliness in coming straight 
to him, and will make the apology that is due on his part. Then must come : 2. Frea 
and full forgiveness, "if he repent, forgive him." If he should refuse to repent, we 
must pity him and pray for him, that his eyes may be opened and his action amended, 
and himself raised by doing the right and honourable thing. But if he repent, then it 
is our high and Christian duty to forgive. And how shall we forgive ? Even as God, for 
Christ's sake, forgives us (Eph. iv. 32). (1) Immediately. (2) Frankly and heartily ; 
reinstating the one who has wronged us in the place he occupied before in our confi- 
dence, affection, kindness. (3) UncaJculatingly. " Seven times in a day." However 
often our child, our servant, our neighbour, may offend, if there be sincere penitence on 
his part, and therefore an honest effort to amend, we do well to forgive. The more of 
this grace we have in our heart and life, the closer is our resemblance and the fuller is 
our obedience to our forgiving Saviour. — 0. 

Vers. 6, 6. — Effective faith. It is the part of a wise teacher to endeavour both to 
elevate and to humble his disciples. He will not discharge his whole duty nor realize 
his full opportunity unless he imparts elevating aspirations and unless he promotes a 
deep humility of heart; he will thank God and congratulate himself when he knows 
that his hearers are happily sensible of progress, and also when be learns that they are 
profoundly dissatisfied with their attainments. Both these results ensued from the 
teaching of our Lord. 

I. The disciples' dissatiseaotion with themselves. Evidently the apostles of 
our Lord felt that there was something lacking in their souls which they would gladly 
possess. The doctrine of the great Teacher, perhaps, was not so clear to them as they 
could have wished ; or perhaps they felt themselves a painfully long distance behind 
their Leader in their spirit and bearing; or it may be that they found themselves 
nnable to do such u-orks as they judged they ought to be able to do, in and through 
the Name of the great Healer. But whencesoever their source of dissatisfaction, they 
agreed that they were in spiritual want. 

II. 'I'heib conclusion as to the remedy they needed. They agreed that what 
was wanted was au increase of faith. And they were perfectly right in their judgment. 
1. They wanted to believe in Christ in a way not then open to them. They became 
" gri ai er in the kingdom of heaven " afterwards, more enlightened, more spiritual, more 
devoted, more useful, because afterwards they had a deep and a firm faith in Jesus 
Cbrist as their almighty Saviour, as their Divine Lord. But they did not know him 
yet as snch ; for as such he had only begun to reveal himself to them. 2. But they 
needrd a fuller faith in him as they did then know him. A more complete and implicit 
cmifidence in him (1) would have led them to eject from their minds all their own old 
I' tjudioes and i^epossessioni, and so have made way for the reception of his truth in 



CH. xvTi. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. 99 

ItB ftilnpsR and in its power ; (2) would have evoked a profounder reverence and a more 
fervent affectiim, and thus have led to a nearer likeness tu him in spirit and in 
character; (3) would have given them power over the forces of evil outside them, and 
made them equal to the emergencies to which they were unequal (see Matt. xvii. 19, 20). 
They did well, therefore, to make of their Lord the request they made, " Increase our 
faith." 

III. The tbttth contained in oub Lord's beplt. " If ye had faith as a grain of 
mustard seed," etc. This truth is surely not that the possession of a faith at slight as 
the mustard seed is small will suffice, hut that the faith which is full as is the mustard 
seed of lift and power of appropriation will avail for all occasions. For it is not true 
that a slight and feehle faith dues suffice. It failed the apostles on one memorahle day 
(ch. ix. 40). It has been failing ever since. Only a faith which is a living and a 
growing power, like the mustard seed in the soil, will triumph over the difficulties to 
be met and mastered. The fact is that: 1. A formal faith is worth nothing at all; 
indeed, less than nothing, for it deludes and misleads. 2. A feeble faith will accomplish 
little. It sinks in the liour of trial (Matt. xiv. 30) ; it shrinks from open avowal, and 
makes feeble fight in the hour of battle (John iii. 1; vii. 50; xix. 38); it enters upon, 
but abandons, the goodly enteiprise (Acts xiii. 13). 3. A livino;, appropriating faith 
is the only effective power. A faith that, like the mustard seed in the soil, puts forth 
the power of life, and appropriates to itself the riches that are around it in order that, 
further on, it may bear fruit — this is a power that will be felt. It will accomplish great 
and even wonderful things ; it will surprise the unbelieving as much as if it actually did 
the very thing which the Master speaks of in his illustrative language. (1) It will 
uproot great evils in God's Name and strength. (2) It will upraise noble structures of 
good, when inspired at the same source. 

1. Is there anything seriously lacking in our spirit, character, life, work ? 2 
May it not be traced to the absence or to the feebleness of our faith? If we believed 
more truly in Jesus Christ, if we realized more thoroughly what we accept, should we 
not be more to God and do more for him? 3. Shall we not come to our Saviour, 
unhesitatingly, earnestly, perseveringly, with this prayer of the apostles ? — 0. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — The spirit of Christian service. The hardest nut may have the 
sweetest kernel; the least inviting and most difficult parable may have the most 
strenjithening and stimulating truth beneath the surface. So with this passage. We 
may be even repelled from treating it because it seems to represent our Father in a 
light in which we do not like to look at him. It seems as if we were required to 
regard him as a hard taskmaster, indifferent to the past labour and present weariness of 
his servants, accepting their service without sign or token of recognition. We don't 
recognize the portrait in this picture. But when we look longer and see more, we 
understand that Jesus Christ did not for a moment intend to convey this impression of 
his Father and ours. 1. It is inconsistent with the revelation of God which Christ 
gave us both in his doctrine and in his own Person and life. For in both of these 
God is revealed to us as a Father who gives rather than receives. Jesus Christ himself 
was " amongst us as he that serveth ; " he " came not to be ministered unto but to 
minister, and to give his life ; " it is not from him that we can receive the impression 
that God is one that exacts everything and makes no response. 2. Christ's method of 
teaching does not require us to interpret the parable in this sense. He argued not 
only from comparison, but from contrast; not only from the less to the more worthy, 
but also from the unworthy to the excellent. He said, " If an unjust judsie for a had 
reason will do right, how certainly will the just Judge for a high one ! " He said, " If 
an ungracious neighbour, prompteii by a selfish consideration, will listen and comply, 
how much more surely will the gracions God, from beneficent considerations!" So 
here. The slave, when he returns from his day's laborious duties, prepares, unthanked, 
for his master's comfort before he thinks of his own necessities; and he does thi* 
unquestioningly, uncomplainingly. How much more ready, more eager, should we be S) 
serve our God! — we who are nut slaves, but children; to serve hiin, who is no unre- 
sponsive and inconsiderate taskmaster, but who is Considirateness itself, whu is 
Besponsiveness itself, who ,is Encouragement itself. We should be ready and eager to 
serve him to the uttermost, and wheja we have done everything we can do, be prepared 



iOO 'iUiii tjUtoi-ifili AOCOBDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvn. 1— 87. 

to Bay, "It Is nothing of all that we should do and would do for thee." Now, there 
■re certain occasions to which this more particularly applies ; and here we have a touch 
of resemblance in the parable. As the master there requires of his slave something 
over and above his day's work in the field, so does our Lord sometimea ask of us more 
&an we thought he would when he first said to us, " follow me," and we said, " Lord, 
1 will." This may be in the way— 

L Of active berviob; e.g. when parents have clothed and fed, taught and trained 
their own children, they may be directed, in God's providence, to take charge of the 
children of others; or when the minister, superintendent, missioner, teacher, finds 
that the duty he has undertaken involves a great deal more of costly work than he had 
eounted upon — more time, trouble, patience, self-mastery, self-sacriflce. 

II. Op saobipiob ; e.g. when the young man leaves home or college for work in the 
foreign field, he finds that the privations he has to endure, the scenes he has to witness, 
the discouragements he has to bear, the parting with his children he has to go through, 
we a great deal more than he realized when he started on his way. 

III. Of scBMissioir. When life seems to have been lived through, its strength spent 
and its work done, the weary human spirit craves rest, the rest of the heavenly home ; 
but God may allot many months or even years of patient waiting before the summons 
is sent to "come up higher." And in whatever way, or to whatever degree, the 
heavenly Father may ask of his children the service which they did not look for, such 
should be and may be their spirit of (1) perfect trusffulness, and of (2) fervent love, 
that they will gladly and faithfully respond; doing with alacrity and bearing with 
cheerfulness all his holy will, and quite disposed at the end to say, " All is not half 
enough to give unto the ' Lamb that was slain,' who is worthy to receive the riches 
of our hearts and of our lives," — 0. 

Vers. 11 — 19. — The commonness of ingratitude, etc. Under the guidance of this 
narrative, we think of — 

I. The commonness of ingbatitudb. Only one of these ten men had a sufficient 
seijse of indebtedness to return to Christ to ofier thanks. The ingratitude of the 
remaining nine touched, smote, wounded our Lord, and he used the reproachful words of 
the text (ver. 17). This ingratitude was not a remarkably exceptional illustration of 
our nature; it is one of those things in respect of which "he that increaseth knowledge 
increaseth sorrow." For that which youth refuses to believe, experience obliges us to 
acknowledge, viz. that to accept a great boon from the hand of love, and to show uo 
proper sense of gratitude, is not a rare but a common thing. It is likely enough that 
we may go much out of our way to do a man a kindness, and that when we look for 
his response we shall be disappointed. What then ? Shall we be diverted from the 
path of beneficence by this unlovely fact ? Shall we say, " Since it is very likely that 
my services will not be appreciated, they shall not be rendered " ? Certainly not. For : 
1. There is gratitude to be gained and to be enjoyed. This proportion is not represen- 
tative. It is not the case that nine men out of ten are insensible to kindnesses shown 
them. It is as likely as not, perhaps more likely than not, that if we do help our 
brother in his hour of need, if we do sustain him in sorrow, succour him in distress, 
stand by him in temptation, lead him into the kingdom of God, we shall win his 
gratitude, and we may secure the profound, prayerful, lifelong affection of a human 
heart. And what better reward, short of the favour and friendship of God, can we gain 
than that? 2. If we fail to obtain this, we shall stand by the side of our Divine 
Master; we shall share his experience; we shall have "fellowship with the sufferings 
of Christ." He knew well what it was to serve and be unappreciated, to serve and be 
disparaged. To be where he stood, to 

<* Tread the path onr Master trod. 
To bear the cross he bore," 

—this b an honour not to be declined. 3. If man our brother does not bless ns, 
Christ our Saviour will. The most heroic deed of love may go, has gone, unrewarded 
of man. But the smallest act of kindness rendered to the humblest child will not 
go unrewarded of him. "Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones 
9 oup of cold water only . . . shall <n no wise lose his reward." 



OH. xvn. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 101 

II. The tmcotTNTED debt dub to Jesus Chbtst. These nine men having received 
the greatest good one man could receive from another — deliverance frota a living 
death — failed to recognize their obligation, did not stop to consider it. They were not 
the last to be guilty in this respect. 1. How much more do many owe to Christ than 
they think they do ! They say, " We do not choose to range ourselves nniier him and 
call him 'Master;' we can construct our own character, can build up rectitude and 
purity and benevolence of spirit apart from his truths or his will ; we can do without 
Christ." But suppose we subtract fj-om the elevating and purifying influences which 
have made these men what they are all those elements which are due to Christ, how 
much is left? How little is left? The influences that come from him are in the air 
these men are breathing, in the laws under which they are living, in the literature they 
»re reading, in the lives they are witnessing; they touch and tell upon them at every 
point, they act silently and subtly but mightily upon them ; they owe to Jesus Christ 
the best they are and have ; they ou°ht to come into direct, living, personal relations 
with the Lord himself. 2. How much more do some men owe to Christ than they 
%tay to consider] These nine men would not have disputed their obligation had they 
been challenged, but they were so anxious to get home to their friends and back to 
their business that they did not stay to consider it. Have we stayed to consider what 
we owe to him who, though he has not indeed cured us of leprosy, has at infinite cost 
to himself prepared for us a way of recovery from that which is immeasurably worse 
— from sin and death ? to him who, " though he was rich, for our sakes became poor, 
that we through his poverty might be rich"? 

III. The peril op early privilege. It is significant enough that the tenth leper 
who did return to give glory to God was a Samaritan — was " this stranger." Taking 
this fact with that concerning the Eoman soldier whose faith surprised our Lord, and 
that of the Syro-Phoenician woman whose importunity prevailed over every obstacle, 
we may conclude that the Hebrew mind was so familiarized with " signs and wonders," 
that those outside the sacred circle were far more impressed by what they witnessed 
than the people of God themselves. It is well to be the children of privilege ; but 
there is one grave peril connected with it. We may become so famihar with the 
greatest of all facts as to become insensible to their greatness. The Swiss peasant who 
lives on the Alpine slopes sees no grandexir in those snow-clad summits on which his 
eyes are always resting; the sailor who lives by the sea hears no music in "old 
ocean's roar." We may become so familiar even with the story of the cross that our 
minds are unaffected by its moral grandeur, by its surpassing grace. It behoves us to 
take earnest heed that we fall not into this fatal snare ; lest many should come " from 
the north, and the south, and the east, and the west, and sit down in the kingdom of 
God," and we, the children of the kingdom, be excluded. We must do our utmost to 
realize the great truths which have go long been uttered in our hearing. — 0. 

Vers. 20, 21.— Sadical mistakes respecting (he kingdom of God. Pharisaism took 
its hostile attitude toward Christianity because it entirely failed to understand it. It 
maile two radical mistakes which completely misled it. 

I. The mistakes which Pharisaism made. 1. As to the character of the coming 
kingdom. It thought it was to be outward, earthly, political, temporal ; it was looking 
and longing for the time when another David, another Judas Maooabseus, should come, 
should liberate the Holy Land from the grasp of the pagan power, and make Jerusalem 
the metropolis, the centre and glory of the earth. 2. As to the evidences and signs of 
its coming. It looked for a grand display of power, for overwhelming evidences that 
would strike every eye and startle and convince every mind that One was at hand who 
should assume the sovereignty awaiting him. And so it came to pass that when Jesus 
was born at Bethlehem, a Babe cradled in a manger; when he grew up to be a Carpenter 
at Nazareth ; when he gathered no army, and struck no blow for national deliverance ; 
when there was no ostentation about his method ; when he lived to bless and teach 
individual men and women, and wrought his work quietly and unpretendingly ; — Phari- 
saism decided that he was not the Coming One, and that his reign was not to prove the 
Kingdom of God. Pharisaism entirely mistook God's purpose, and fatally misinterpreted 
his procedure. 

II Tbb uibtaeeb nro whiob wh abs liablb to fall. Not, of oourse, the 



102 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvn. 1— 37. 

same but similar, and equally disastrous. 1. When we look for blessedness in out- 
ward ciicuujstauces instead ol' in inward peace. We say, " If I could but win that priz*, 
gain that post, secure tliat frieudshi|i, earn that income, how bright would be my lot, 
how glad my heart, how radiant ray life I " But we are wrong. Gladness of heart and 
excellency of life are not to be found in sunny circumstances, but in a pure heart, a 
heart that is at rest, a heart at home with God. " Out of the heart are the issues of life ; ' 
the fountain of lasting joy rises from our own breast ; the kingdom of God is within 
us. 2. When we look for blessedness in the time that is beyond. "Man never is, but 
always to he blessed." There is even an unchristian longing for the heavenly future. 
When " to ahide in the flesh" is more needful for those for whose welfare we are largely 
responsible, then the " kingdom of God " for us is not in the distance ; it is in the 
present sphere of duty; it is in present peace, present joy, present service, in the 
blessedness which Christ gives to his servants 

" Before they reach the heavenly fields, 
Or walk the golden streets," 

in those " heavenly places " of holy service and happy fellowship in which he " hat 
made them to sit" (Eph. ii. 6). 3. When we wait for heavenly influences to fall 
upon us instead of availing ourselves of those we have. Not only is there no need 
for any soul to wait for some remarkable and overwhelming influences before entering 
the kingdom, not only is it wholly unnecessary, but it is positively wrong to do so. 
It is in those quiet influences which are now working within your heart that God 
comes to you. He will never be nearer to a human soul than when his Spirit fills it 
with a holy longing, and makes it eager to know what it must do to enter into life. 
Wait not for anything that is coming: act on the promptings that are within you, and 
your feet shall then surely stand within the kingdom of God. — 0. 

Vers. 22 — 25. — 'The Irief day of opportunity. The thought of our Master in this 
passage (as I understand it) is this : " 1 have been asked when the kingdom of God will 
come : my reply is that it has come already ; that you have not to look about in this 
and that direction ; here, in the midst of you, impersonated in him that speaks, is the 
kingdom. It is present in the Present One. But," he says to his disciples, " he is present 
in a very strict sense. The time will soon be here when you will greatly long for his 
fellowship, and you will not be able to possess it. Do not believe those who will tell 
you that the Son of man is still on earth; it will not be true. His life below will be 
of the very briefest; it will be but as a lightning-flash which passes through the dark- 
ened lieavens in a moment, and is g' ine again ; so brief will be his stay, so soon will he 
be gone. But before he goes he must sufi'er many things; much must be done, for 
much must be endured, before bis short day is done." 

I. The brief day of oub Lokd's opportunity. When we think of the long 
centuries that preceded, and of those that have already succeeded, the day of Christ, 
we may well regard his short visit to our world as a mere flash of light for transitori- 
ness. What were those few months of his short stay among men compared with all 
those dark ages, and to all those that have been illumined by the light which his truth 
has shed upon them 1 But, transient as it was, it sufficed. It does not take long to 
utter or to illustrate the most Divine and the most vital truths ; it did not take long 
to undergo the most mysterious and the most availing sorrows — it took but a few 
agonizing hours to die the death of atonement. Into that short day of npjiortunity our 
Divine Hedeomer compressed : 1. The utterance of all needful truth — all the truth we 
r.eed for our guidance into the kingdom of God, and for our passage through life and 
death into the kingdom of glory. 'A. The illustration of every human grace; the living 
of a human lile in all its perfect loveliness and grandeur. 3. The endurance of sorrow 
such as constituted him for ever the Man of sorrows, and the High Priest of human 
nature, touched with the feeling of our infirmities (Heb. iv. 15). 4. The dying of that 
death which is the all-sufficient sacrifice for sin. A few months of time sufficed to 
complete his work and make him the Divine Teacher, Leader, Friend, Saviour, of the 
whole race of man for all time to come. 

II. OoR BRIEF DAY. 1. Measured by hours, our day is very brief. Human life ii 
•hort at the longest. We are "but of yesterday," and to-morrow we shall not be. 



OH. XVII. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 108 

The rocks and even the trees look down on many generations. And in all the bustle 
and battle, in all the pursuits and pleasures of our life, the little time we have hastens 
away and is gone far sooner than we thought it would go. It is not only our poetry 
that sings, but our experience that testifies of the swiftness of our course beneath the 
sun. 2. Yet it holds manifold and precious opportunities of regaining our poaition as 
the children and heirs of God; of doing "many things" that shall tell even in future 
years for truth and God ; of" suffering many things" after Christ our Lord, and in holy 
and noble fellowship with him (Phil. iii. 10). 3. Its transiency is an urgent reason 
for (1) immediate decision, and (2) constant and earnest action in the cause of right- 
eousness. Whilst we have the light that shines, let us walk and let us work in the 
light.— a 

Vers. 26 — 30. — The unlearnt lesson. Man differs from the brute creation in that he 
learns and profits by experience — he advances. He passes through stage after stage 
toward the perfection of his life updn the earth. He is the hunter at one period, then 
the shepherd, then the agriculturist. From the lowest barbarism he reaches, in time, 
the most refined civilization. But he is very slow indeed to learn, if he does learu at 
all, moral and spiritual truths. The excellency of thrift, of temperance, of purity, of 
patience, — how long a time it is taking man to acquire these virtues ! Our text opens 
to us the truth of the danger of spiritual trifling, and indicates that what men were 
long ages ago, that they still are in this respect. 

I. Spibitdai. TBIFL1N&. The men of the time of Noah were living in a state of 
utter worldliness and impiety. They were not without remonstrance and rebuke ; 
Noah was himself " a preacher of righteousness " unto Ihem. But they hearkened not, 
nor heeded ; they made light of his admonitions and his warnings. They found some 
pretext under which they could easily hide the truth he reminded them of, and they 
went on their way of materialism and enjoyment. The same with the people of Sodom, 
and the character and instruction of Lot. And so with us. 1. Men are living in 
sinful selfishness and worldliness — many in crime, many more in vice; but a very 
large multitude in practical godlessness. God is not iu all, he is not in many if in any 
of their thoughts. His will is not the object of their inquiry, is not the rule of their 
life. 2. The religious teacher comes and admonishes ; he says, " Man cannot live by 
bread alone ; " the claims of the Divine Father, of the holy SaviDur, are the supreme 
claims, etc. 3. But still the same course is pursued; the better thoughts that are 
momentarily stirred in the heart are silenced ; sacred truths are extinguished ; the truth 
of God is treated lightly ; the world and the things that are in the world are upper- 
most and are victorious. 

II. The palpable folly op such tbiflinq as this. 1. It is attended with 
immediate and certain injury. For it is impossible for a human soul to reject the truth 
or to quench the Spirit of God, and not be seriously the worse for such an act. 2. There 
is the grave peril of a great disaster. The generation is eating and drinking and marry- 
ing, and behold I the Flood sweeps them away. The cities are trading and feasting, and 
lo 1 the fires of heaven come down and consume them. They who trifle with the most 
sacred things are sure to find that, suddenly, in such an hour as they think not, the 
end arrives. The business plans are all broken off ; the brilliant career is concluded ; 
the flow of pleasures is arrested. Death suddenly appears, and deals his fatal blow. 
These sacred opportunities which have been so little prized, so much disparaged, recede 
with terrible rapidity and disappear. Opportunity that waited by the side, and waited 
all in vain, melts and vanishes in a moment. The snul awakes from its long lethargy 
to see that its powers have been wasted and that its chance is gone I 

III. The elusiveness or this solemn lesson. Men have always known this, and 
they have always acted as if they were ignorant of it. " As it was ... so shall it be." 
So is it to-day. By spiritual trifling men fritter away the golden chance that Divine 
love puts into their hands. Be wise in time. Realize what you are doing, what injury 
you are working, what risk you are running. — C. 

Vers. 34 — 36. — Accidentt. "The one shall be taken, and the other left." And 
who or what is it that decides which one shall be taken and which left? Events ara 
often occurring which convey to us the impression of — 



104 THB GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKB. CoH.rvn.1— «»■ 

L Thb IiAbob AMDtTNT OF AooiDENT whlch enters into the fabric of human Ufa. 
fske, for example, a bad railway accident. How accidental it seems that one man 
should jusb miss that train and be saved, and that another should just catch it and be 
killed ; that one should take a seat in the carriage which is crushed, and another in the 
carriage which is left whole ; that one should be sitting exactly where the bent and 
twisted timber pierced him, and another exactly where no injury was dealt, etc.! 
It is the same with the battle-field, with the thunderstorm, with the falling house. 
One is taken, and another left ; and the taking of the one and the leaving of the other 
aeems to be pure accident — not the result of reason or forethought, but entirely for- 
tuitous. 

II. OuB coRBEOTED THODGHT coNCERKiNO TT. 1. Of accident in the sense of ehanca 
we know there is nothing. Kvgrything is " under law ; " and even where there is no 
law apparent, we are assured, by the exercise of our reason, that there must be the 
operation of law, though it is out of our sight. In this world of God's, pure chance has 
not an inch of ground 'to work upon. 8. There is usually much more play of reason 
and habit in " accidental events " than seems at first sight. Things result as they do 
because habit is stronger than judgment, or because foolish men disregard the counsel 
of the wise ; because thoughtful men take the precautions which result in their safety, 
and because thoughtless men take the action which issues in their suffering or death. 
8. The providence of God covers the entire field of human life. May we venture to 
believe that the hand of God ts in the events and issues of life? I think we may. 
(1) It is clearly within the range of the activities of an Infinite Being to whom nothing 
is small as nothing is great, (2) His Fatherhood would lead him to follow the course 
of every one of his children with parental interest, and to interpose his hand wherever 
he saw it \/as wise to do so. (3) Scripture warrants the conclusion : " Precious in the 
sight of the Lord is the death of his saints ; " " The way of man is not in himself; it is 
not in man that walketh to direct his steps;" " Not ai sparrow falleth to the ground 
without your Father : ye are of more value than many sparrows." 

III. The large measure of uncertainty that bema,tn8 and must EEMAnr, 
Human science has introduced many safeguards, but it has also introduced new perils. 
The " chapter of accidents " is as long as it ever was in the contemporary history of 
mankind. God is supreme, hut he lets many things happen we should antecedently 
have supposed he would step in to prevent ; he lets good men take the consequence 
of their mistakes; he permits the very holy and the very useful to be overtaken 
by sad misfortunes and even by fatal calamities. We cannot guarantee the future ; 
we cannot ensure prosperity, health, friends, reputation, long life. To one that seem* 
to be heir to all these good things they will fall ; to another who seems equally likely 
to inherit them they will be denied : one is taken, the other left. Therefore let ua 
turn to— 

IV. Thk one good thing on which wb can absolutelt count. There ia "a 
good part which shall not be taken away." Thta is a Christian character; its founda- 
tions jire laid^in repentance and faith ; it ia built up of reverent study, of worship, of 
the obedience of love. Its glory is in resemblance to Jesus Christ himself. This is 
within every man's reach, and it cannot be taken ; it rmist be left. He who secure* 
that is safe for ever. No accident can rob him of his heritage. His treasure and ium- 
self are immovable ; for " he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever." — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 19. — Graces ttimulated and strengthened. The preceding chapter nrget 
most powerfully, by precept and parable, consideration for others. Money is to be used 
for this end. But consideration may be shown in many other ways. And want of 
consideration may be one of those " occasions of stumbling" (so in Bevised Version) to 
the Lord'* little ones which shall be visited with such overwhelming retribution. Our 
Lord consequently begins by teaching — 

L The obeat da'ngjr op causing a littlb one to btumblb. (Vers. 1, 2.) In 
this wuy he urges his disciples to watchfulness. He plainly ipapUes that defenceless 
individuals Who" fall through stumbling-blocks placed in their path shall have in 
Qod a most terrible Avenger. Better the most fearful physical detith than the fat* 
ef those whs cause them to stumble. Of Judas it was expressly stated it would 
bATB been better if he had never been bom ; and the sams mighi b« said of vrwy 



OH. xvn. 1— 37.] THE GOSPEL A0CORDIN(J TO ST. LUKB. 105 

one who, like him, throws BtumWing-blocks In his brother's way. The ruin of the 
Innocent, through exposing them to temptation, will be visited by God's most terrible 
indignation. 

II. Thb disciples of Christ must ottabd against aw uNBELEimNo and unfor- 
oiviNQ TEMPER. (VoTS. 3, 4.) The disciples are to take heed to themselves. They 
are not to be avengers. They have not the solidity of judgment or of character to 
exercise vengeance. It is to be left to God. If, therefore, a brother trespass against 
us, we are to pursue such a path as will result in forgiveness and recunciliation. We 
•re te rebuke him courageously ; then, if he repents, if he shows signs of sorrow and 
confesses his fault, even though it should be repeated seven times a day, we are to for- 
give him. Now, this forgiving spirit is Divine. It is God-like. It is the spirit Gud 
has manifested in Christ, and which we should cultivate most diligently. 

III. Our Lord's exhortations led the disciples to seek an increase of taith. 
(Vers. 5 — 10.) When we have discovered how small our forgiving 8|)irit is, we rhon 
begin to see how small other graces are, and to cry, "Lord, Increase our faith." It is 
most instructive to notice how our Lord responds to the disciples' desire. And : 1. He 
$hows them how very small their faith is. His statement implies that it whs less than 
a grain of mustard seed, for, if they had even so little a measure of genuine faith, they 
could remove any difficulty out of their path. Even a sycamine tree might be plucked 
up by the roots, or any difficulty which such an obstacle would represent, and be cast 
by faith into the sea. The first lesson we have got to learn is how small our faith is, 
and then it will soon increase. 2. He impresses on them the cultivation of a sense of 
their oion unprofitableness to Ood. He likens them to a farm-servant who, when he has 
finished in the field, comes home and is then pu< to wait at table on his lord. His 
work is never done. He turns from one occupation to another ; and only laments at 

. the close that he could not do more and better. Now, this sense of unprofitableness 
really arises out of the magnificence of the Christian ideal. The Christian system sets 
before us such incomparable excellency, that we are always coming short of it. All 
Christian progress is just conditioned upon this sense of unprofitableness. Our faiih 
will grow exceedingly when this sense of unprofitableness has been secured and is 
maintained. Of course, this teaching of onr Lord is quite consistent with the reward 
promised in his grace, of "Well done, good and faithful servant." The servant looks 
at his labours in the light of strict justice, and acknowledges his shortcoming. The 
Master looks at them in the light of grace and love, and rewards them with overflowing 
bounty. Even when receiving the reward at last, it will be with surprise, and with 
the consciousness that we have been but unprofitable servants. 

IV. The disciples abb instedotbd at the same time regarding human inqbati- 
lUDB. (Vers. 11 — 19.) It so happened that ten lepers cross the Saviour's path, and 
their cry for mercy meets with immediate response. But their cure is given on their 
way to the priests, who could only give them a certificate of cure. The sense of cure 
came upon the ten, we may believe, at the same time. But only one, and he a 
Samaritan, returned to express his gratitude. The other nine, all Jews, passed on to 
the priest with a joyful sense of cure, but little sense of gratitude. It was such 
ingratitude as called for the animadversion of Jesus, while the Samaritan's gratitude 
led our Lord to say his faith hath made him whole. It seems clear that he became 
attached to Jesus in a way the others did not. The expression of his gratitude led to 
en assurance of faith. Now, this was a wholesome lesson for the disciples, as it is also 
for us. How many blessings have we all got from the hands of Christ, for which we 
have returned no thanks at all 1 And, if we have been ungrateful to our Lord, should 
we not put up with a good deal of ingratitude? It is a sense of personal ingratitude 
vhich will stimulate the grace within us, and make us less surprised when we are the 
objects of ingratitude on the part of others we have befriended. In this plain and 
practical fashion our Lord stimulated and strengthened the graces of his disciples, and 
indicates how our graces may be stimulated likewise.— B. M. E. 

Vers. 20 — 37. — The advent of the kingdom and the King. Jesus was on Journey to 
Jerusalem when the ingratitude of the nine lepers, just noticed, took place, and thli 
gave rise to speculation as to the near approach of his kingdom. His enemies, the 
Pharisees, put the sarcastic question when the kingdom of God should oome, a* much 



106 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xvii. 1— 37 

as to say, " Wo have heard of it long ; we should like to see it." ' This leads our Lord 
to unfold the nature of his kingdom's advent and of Ms own. 

L His kingdom combb in the hbabts of men. (Vers. 20, 21.) The charaoteristio 
of worldly kingdoms has always been ostentation. They try to impress the senses by 
noisy advents, brag, advertisement, the blare of bugle and roll of drum. And soma 
think that there is nothing worth talking about which can come in any milder way. 
The Jews expected a kingdom of God to supersede the Eoman, and that its advent 
would be seen in the defeat and expulsion of the conquerors of Canaan. But, no; the 
kingdom was coming in men's hearts ; it was there it had its sphere and home. 1. 
How superficial is the sovereignty which is not founded in the heart I This is the 
world's experience daily. The outward sovereignty is a name and based on fear. . 2. 
Bow noble is the sovereignty which is based upon peoples hearts 1 It is here Jesus 
reigns. We love him. Wo would die for him. Thus his kingdom progresses wherever 
a heart is touched by Christ's love. His triumph is over the selfishness of mankind 
He conquers them by self-sacrificing love.* 

II. The King himself is to come as suddenly as the liqhtninq-flash. (VerB. 
22 — 24.) He is not to give warning of his approach. There will be no need to go 
here or there under the impression that he has come quietly and privately, to prepare 
for his public manifestation ; but suddenly like the lightning-flash, and publicly like 
its heaven-enlightening beam, is he to come for judgment. Hence the awful sudden- 
aess of his advent is distinctly implied. He will give no premonitory warnings, but 
overwhelmingly sudden and awful will be his approach. No wonder in such circum- 
stances that many shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, one of those 
seasons of quiet philanthropy such as the Saviour was now leading among men. The 
Pharisees were mistaking altogether the significance of his present mission. 

III. The RESULTS OF THE present MiSAPPKEHENSlONB. (Vers. 25 — 30.) 1. Theirs* 
sad result will be the rejection and martyrdom of Jesus (ver. 25). Misapprehending 
the significance of his meek and lowly philanthropic life, his generation united in 
rejecting him, and secured his crucifixion on the tree. They would not have the King 
when actually among them in flesh and blood. 2. Men will act like the antediluvian* 
and Sodomites up to the very time of our Lord's advent. A sense of carnal security 
characterized these sinners. They thought in Noah's day that no harm would over- 
take them. There was no sign of the Deluge except Noah's precautions against it, and 
they would not act upon such signs. In Sodom it was the same. The inhabitants 
thought no change would come over their selfish, sensual dream. But the Deluge came, 
and the fire and brimstone descended, notwithstanding. So will it be with the advent 
of Christ — it will come as a sudden, unexpected judgment upon many. And this 
carnal security is a present danger with many. They fancy they are safe, that nothing 
will interfere with their security ; but the Saviour makes his advent suddenly, and they 
are overwhelmed. 

IV. The realities of the advent. (Vers. 31 — 37.) Now, the truth is clearly 
brought out that some shall be saved and others lost at the advent. 1. Let us look at 
the lost. They are brought under our notice here in several ways. Thus Lot's wife it 
talcen as a type of the lost. Now, we know that she was lost through looking longingly 
back to her worldly things. God, by his angels, had set the family's faces towards the 
mountains and himself. Were they prepared to take him and his favour as their 
portion, and give up all their property in Sodom ? If they looked longingly behind 
them, it would show that the world was still more to them than God. The poor wife 
could not resist the temptation, and so she was changed into a pillar of salt. She is, 
then, the type of those who are almost saved, but worldliness gets the better of them, 
and they are lost. Again, the lost ones are represented as food' for eagles (ver. 37). 
This brings out the corruption characterizing them. They have become moral carrion, 
which only the eagles can consume. There is, doubtless, a reference to the Roman 
■invasion under Titus, and to the destruction of corrupt Jerusalem. The Roman armies 
were God's scavengers to destroy a coirupt people. This was one way in which Clirist 
made an advent to judgment. Lastly, we have the lost described as those who are 
continually eeehing to save themselves (ver. 33). Those whose one aim in life is lelf- 

' Eobertson's ' Human Eaoe and other Sermons,' p. 63. 
* Of. Liddon's ' Church Troubles,' serm. i. 



flfi. xvm. 1-43J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



10'. 



preservation, the saving of themselves at every turn, who think of self ag the supreme 
concern, are only losi/iy themsdues. The curious paradox is that those who save theai 
selves at every turn lose themselves ; while those who do not count their lives dear, 
but Cii list's concern as supreme, find themselves safe at last. Let us see to it, there- 
fore, that we are neither worldly minded, nor corrupt, nor given up to selfislmesS; elso 
we are among the lost. 2. But let us look at the saved ones. These are thuse who 
have kept Christ before them as their Lord and Master, whose interests should be 
supreme (ver. 33). They value him more than life, and so he saves them. The 
nature of salvation is thus plainly unfolded. The saved ones are those with whom 
Christ is all in all. They prefer him to everything else. The instinct of self-preserva- 
tion has in them given place to an instinct to preserve the honour and promote the 
kingdom of the Master. And those who have trusted him and honoured him so 
thoroughly shall find that he will not disappoint them. Let us wait for his appearing, 
then, and love it; and when it flashes across the world, we shall be allowed to escape 
the judgments that come upon the earth, and to stand before the Son of man. — B. M. E. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER xvm. 



Vers. 1 — 14. — The Lord speaha the two 
parables on prayer — the importunate widow, 
and the Pharisee and publican. 

Ver. 1. — And he spake a parable unto 
them to this end, that men ought always to 
pray, and not to faint. The formula e^eye 
SJ KaL, literally, " and he spake also," calls 
tttention to the fact that the parable-teach- 
ing immsdiately to follow was a oontinua- 
tion of what had preceded. Indeed, the 
connection between the first of the two 
parables, which urges restless continued 
prayer, and the picture which the Lord had 
just drawn of men's state of utter forgetful- 
ness of God, is obvious. " The Son of man 
has been rejected ; he has gone from view ; 
the masses are plunged in gross worldli- 
ness ; men of God are become as rare as, in 
the days of Abraham, they were in Sodom. 
What, then, is the position of the Church ? 
That of a widow whose only weapon is in- 
cessant prayer. It is only by means of this 
intense concentration that faith will be pre- 
served. But such is precisely the disposition 
which Jesus fears may not be found even in 
the Church at his return " (Godet). 

Ver. 2. — ^Ihere was in a city a judge, 
which feared not God, neither regarded man. 
Probably enough the whole scene was a 
sketch from life; under such a rule as that 
of Herod Autipaa there were, doubtless, 
judges of the character here portrayed. 

Ver. 3. — And there was a widow in that 
eity ; and she came unto him, saying, Avenge 
me of mine adversary. The petitioner was 
a woman and a widow, the latter being in 
the Bast a synonym for helplessness. With 
no one to defend lier or plead her cause, this 
widow was ever a pruy to the covetous. Not 
once nor twice in the noble generous words 
of the chivalrous Hebrew prophets we find 
this readiness on the part of those in power 



to neglect, if not to oppress these helpless 
widow-women, steinly commented upon. So 
in Isaiah we read (i. 23), " They judge not 
the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the 
widow come unto them." While Jesus (Matt, 
xxiii. 14) includes this cowardly sin among 
the evil deeds of the rulers of the Israel of 
his day : " Ye devour widows' houses, and 
for a pretence make long prayer." A more 
desperate situation, as regards any hope of 
obtaining the object of her earnest prayer, 
could not well be pictured — a careless, 
coiTupt judge of the lawless Herod period 
for the tribunal in Israel, and a poor help- 
less widow for the suppliant. The forlorn 
woman of the parable represents tlie Church 
or people of God in dire straits, overborne 
by an unbelieving world and seemingly for- 
gotten even of their God. The story is a 
reminder that there is hope even in that 
extreme situation sketched in the parable, 
if the petitioner only continues persistent 
in her prayer. The argument which lies on 
the surface of the parable-teaching is obvious: 
if sucU a judge will in the end listen to the 
prayer of a suppliant for whom he cares 
nothing, will not God surely listen to the 
repeated prayer of a suppliant whom ho 
loves with a deep, enduring love ? Suoli is 
the argument of the story. Importunity, it 
seems to say, must inevitably triumph. But 
underlying this there is much deep teaching, 
of which, perhaps, the most important item 
is that it insists upon the urgent necessity 
for us all to continue in prayer, never faint- 
ing in this exercise though no answer seeun 
to come. " The whole life of the faithful," 
as Origen once grandly said, " should be one 
great connected prayer." That is the real 
moral of the story ; but there are a number 
of minor bits of Divine teaching contained 
in this curious parable setting, as we shall 
see. Avenge me of mine adversary. We 
must not suppose that mere T&ngeaB<)e i<> 



108 



THE GOSPEL ACCOHDING TO ST. LtJKB. [ca. xvm. 1—43. 



the vnlgar senee is ■what the widow prayed 
for ; that would be of no use to her ; all she 
wanted waa that the judge should deliver 
her from the oppression which her adversary 
exercised over her, no doubt in keeping from 
her the heritage to which she was lawfully 
entitled. Of course, the granting her prayer 
vrould involve loss and possibly punishment 
to her fraudulent oppressor. 

Ver, 7. — And shall not God avenge his 
own elect, which cry day and night nnto 
him 1 The Master tells us that God permits 
Buffering among his servants, long after they 
have begun to pray for deliverance. But 
we are counselled here to cry day and night 
nnto him, and, though there be no sign of 
reply, our prayers shall be treasured up 
before him, and in his own good time they 
will be answered. Though he bear long 
with them. With whom does God bear 
long ? With the wrong-doers, whose works 
and words oppress and make life heavy and 
grievous to the servants of God ; with these 
who have no claim to consideration will 
God bear long. And this announcement 
gives us some olne to the meaning of the 
delay we often experience before we get an 
answer to many of our prayers. The prayer 
is heard, but God, in the exercise of mercy 
and forbearance, has dealings with the op- 
pressors. It were easy for the Almighty to 
grant an immediate answer, but only at the 
cost often of visitiug some of the oppressors 
with immediate punishment, and this is not 
his way of working. God bears long before 
his judgments swift and terrible are sent 
forth. This has ever been his way of work- 
ing with individuals os with nations. Was 
it not thus, for instance, that he acted to- 
wards Egypt and her Pharaohs during the 
long period of the bitter Hebrew bondage ? 
We who would lie God's servants must be 
content to wait God's time, and, while wait- 
ing, patiently go on pleading, sure that in 
the end " God will avenge his own elect, 
which cry day and night unto him." 

Ver. 8. — I tell yon that he will avenge 
them speedily. " Non bientSt, mais bien vite " 
(Godet). It means that God will act in 
accordance with his servant's prayer, not 
soon, but suddenly ; sure and sudden at the 
crisis the action of Divine providence comes 
at the last "as a thief in the night." Never- 
theless when the Son of man cometb, shall 
he find faith on the earth ) These difficult 
words seem to point at least to a fear lest, 
the second coming being long delayed, true 
faith would have died out of the hearts 
even of the godly. Such a fear might be 
Jesus' ; for we know, from his own lips, that 
to him, while on earth and wearing the 
body of humiliation, the day and hour of 
the second advent was not known. Was 
not ooi Ix>id speaking with the aame lad 



onlook in his parable of the virgins, when 
he said, " they all slumbered and slept," 
wise virgins as well as foolish (Matt. xxv. 5)? 
"It is often the case that God's action as 
a Deliverer is delayed until his people have 
ceased to hope for deliverance. So it was 
with Israel in Egypt ; so was it with her 
again in Babylon. ' Grief was calm and 
hope was dead' among the exiles when the 
word came tha' they were to return to their 
own land ; and then the news seemed too 
good to be true. They were 'like them 
that dream' when they heard the good 
tidings. This method of Divine action — 
long delay followed by a sudden crisis — so 
frankly recognized by Christ, is one to which 
we find it hard to reconcile ourselves. These 
parables help us so fur, but they do not 
settle everything. They contain no philo- 
sophy of Divine delay, but simply a pro- 
clamation of the fact, and an assurance that, 
in spite of delay, all will go well at the last 
with those who trust in God" (Professor 
Bruce). 

Ver. 9. — And he spake this parable. With 
this parable, "the Pharisee and the pub- 
lican," St. Luke concludes his memories of 
the last journeyings toward Jerusalem. The 
incidents which directly follow took place 
close to Jerusalem; and here St. Luke's 
narrative rejoins that of SS. Matthew and 
Mark. No note of time or place assists us 
in de6ning exactly the period when the 
Master spoke this teaching ; some time, how- 
ever, in these last journeyings, that is, in 
the closing months of the public ministry, 
the parable in question was certainly spoken. 

Ver. 10. — Two men went up into the 
temple to pray ; the one a Pharisee, and the 
other a publican. This parable constitutes 
an important chapter in Jesus' apology or 
defence — if we may dare use the word — for 
loving the sinful, for consorting with pub- 
licans and sinners. It tells men, in very 
simple language, how they are saved ; not 
by works of righteousness which they have 
done, but of grace ; in other words, by God's 
free mercy. Jewish religious society in the 
time of our Lord, as represented by the great 
Pharisee sect, totally misunderstood this 
Divine truth. They claimed salvation as a 
right on two grounds : (1) because they 
belonged to the chosen race ; (2) because 
they rigidly and minutely obeyed the pre- 
cepts ot a singular code of laws, many of 
them devised by themselves and their 
fathers. Upon these two grounds they 
claimed salvation, that is, eternal blissful 
life. Not content with this claim of their 
own, they condemned, with a sweeping, 
harsh condemnation, all other peoples, and 
even those of their own race who neglected 
rigidly to observe the ordinances and ritual 
I of a law framed ia great measure is Ui» 



ca. xvni. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



100 



schools of their own rabbis. Two extreme 
instances are here chosen — a rigid, exclusive, 
self-satisfied member of the rt-liglous society 
of Israel ; and a Jewish officer of the listed 
Eoman government, who knew little or 
nothing of the Law, but yet who longed after 
a higher life, and oiaved for an inward peace 
which he eTideutly was far from possessing. 
These two, the Pharisee and the publican, 
both went up to God's holy house, the 
temple, with a view of drawing near to the 
eternal King. 

Ver. 11. — The Pharisee stood and prayed 
thus with himself, God, I thank thee that 
I am not as other men are. How closely 
drawn from the life is this picture of a 
Pharisee will be seen by a comparison of 
the prayer here with the prayer of a rabbi 
contained in the Talmud. When Eabbi 
Nechounia Ben Hakana left his school, he 
■used to say, " I thank thee, O Eternal, my 
God, for having given me part with those 
who attend this school instead of running 
through the shops. I rise early like tliem, 
but it is to study the Law, not for futile ends. 
I take trouble as they do, but I shall be 
rewarded, and they will not. We run alike, 
but I for the future life, while they will 
only arrive at the pit of destruction " (from 
the treatise ' Berachoth '). 

Ver. 12. — I fast twice in the week. There 
was no Buoh precept in the Law of Moses. 
There only a single fast-day in the year was 
enjoined, the Day of Atonement (Lev. xvL 29). 
By the time of Zechariah the prophet (viii. 
19) the one fast-day had grown into four. 
But this festing twice every week was & 
burthensome observance imposed in the 
later oral Law. Thursday and Monday 
were the appointed fasting-days, because 
tradition related how, on those days, Moses 
ascended and descended from Sinai. Com- 
pare the Talmud (treatise ' Bava Khama,' 
fol. 82. 1). I give tithes of all that I possess. 
Here, again, the Mosaic ordinance only 
enjoined tithes of corn, wine, oil, and cattle. 
The later rabbinic schools directed that 
everything should be titlied, down to the 
mint and anise and cummin. And so this 
poor deluded Pharisee dreamed he had 
earned his eternal salvation, forgetting that 
the tithes he so prided himself on paying 
were merely tithes of goods of which he was 
steward for a little time, tithes, too, given 
back to their real Owner — God. Could this 
be counted a claim upon God ? He boasted, 
too, that he was no extortioner: did he forget 
how often he had coveted? He was no 
adulterer: what of those wicked tlioughts 
which so often found a home in his heart ? 
He rejoiced that he was not like tbe publican 
and others of that same class : did he think 
of the sore temptations to which these and 
the like were exposed, and from which he 



was free? He gloried in his miserable tithei 
and oiTerings : did be remember how really 
mean and selfish he was? did he think of 
his luxury and abundance, and of the want 
and misery of thousands round him? did 
his poor pitiful generosity constitute a daim 
to salvation? All this and more is shrined 
in the exquisite story of Jesus, who shows 
men that salvation — if it be given to men 
at all — must be given entirely as a Iree gift 
of God. 

Ver. 13. — And the publican, standing afar 
off, would not lift up so much as his eyeg 
unto heaven, hut smote upon his breast, 
saying, &od he merciful to me a sinner! 
Utterly sad and heart-broken, the publican 
neither recounts nor thinks of good kind 
deeds done, or special sins committed; no 
thoughts came into that poor heart, such aa, 
" I have done some fair deeds ; I am not alto 
gether vile and sinful." He felt that with 
him evil so far overbalanced good that he 
could make no plea for himself, and yet he, 
too, longed for salvation, so he threw him- 
self wholly upon God's mercy and love in 
his sad prayer, " God be merciful to me th6 
sinner I " for so the words should be rendered. 
Different to the Pharisee, who thought him- 
self better than his neighbours, this man, 
in his sad humility, evidently thought other 
men better than himself, but BtUl he bo 
trusted in God that he felt even for him, the 
sinner, there might be mercy. 

Ver. 14. — I teU you, this man went down 
to his house justified rather than the other : 
for every one that exalteth himself shall be 
abased ; and he that humbleth himself shall 
he exalted. And the publican was right; 
there was mercy evsn for him, all sin-stained 
though he was. The words with which the 
Lord closes his teaching are full of comfort. 
That prayer he tells us was heard and 
granted. The "I tell you" of Jesus here 
means, as Stier well puts it, "I tell you, for 
I know, I have seen, I have heard all this 
in many such a case, and in many such 
prayers." With this example of prayer 
favourably heard, there is surely no sin- 
burthened soul on earth who may not take 
courage in seeking God's face. One great 
object of this parable, we may believe, was ta 
suggest some such thoughts, to embolden 
sorrowful, heart-broken sinners simply to go 
to God, trusting in his great pitying love. 
It should not be forgotten that the publican's 
prayer was heard in the temple; a silent 
approval seems given to his having thus 
Bought out the appointed consecrated place 
of prayer. 

Vers. 15 — 30. — Jesui and the children. 
The young ruler refuses to give up his riches. 
The Lard speaks of the reward of them that 
leave all for his sake. 

Ver. 15. — ^And they bronght onto him also 



110 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xviii. 1—4.1. 



infants, that he would touch them. Our 
Lord's noticing children is several times 
alluded to in the Gospels. There was some- 
thing evidently in his look and manner 
which singularly attracted little ones to 
him. SS. Matthew and Mark both recount 
this blessing of the children immediately 
after the teaching on divorce. Our liOrd 
thus sanctifies the bond of marriage and its 
legitimate offspring. It was a silent but 
powerful reply to the mistaken inference 
which his disciples had drawn irom his 
words. Tliey had said, "It is not good to 
many" (JIatt. six. 10). But when his 
disciples saw it, they rebuked them. Some- 
thing of wliat the Master had said concern- 
ing the marriage state affected the disciples. 
Had he not just (see Matt. xix. 10^12) been 
claiming high honour for the solitary life 
where there were no family ties to claim 
attention ? Surely, then, these women and 
their children had better stand aloof : what 
had that grave and earnest Teacher of theirs 
to do with these ? He had higher and more 
important matters on his mind 1 

Ver. 16. — But Jesus called them unto him, 
and said, Suffer little children to come unto 
me, and forbid them not : for of such is the 
kingdom of God. St. Mark, who gives us 
here the memories of a faithful eye-witness 
— St. Peter — records how much displeased 
Jesus was when he saw them pushing back 
the mothers and their little ones, eager to 
win a smile or perhaps a touch from him 
whom the people justly regarded as the 
children's Friend. It seems also to have 
been tbe practice for Jewish mothers to 
bring their babes to famous rabbis, and to 
ask these teachers to bless their little ones. 
Christ's " interest in the little children was 
real, and for their own eakei. It was 
primary ; not merely secondary, and because 
(if the childlikeness of his subjects. Jf they 
who are like little children belong to the 
kingdom of heaven^ why should we for a 
moment doubt that the little children them- 
eelves belong to tl,/: kingdom^ Doubtless 
they all do. And if that change which meu 
call death happen tn them while they are 
still little children, we may rest assured 
that it will be to the little ones life ever- 
lasting. They will not be shut out from 
the higher province of the kingdom of 
heaven when they are snatched away from 
the lower" (Dr. Morrison). St. Murk's ac- 
count, being that of an eye-witness, is fuller 
and more graphic. It is read in the OiBoe 
of the Churcli of England for the Baptism 
of Infants, wherein young children are in 
like iiianner presented to Christ. It is con- 
sidered that the Master's words and act here 
justify the Church in commending infants, 
as such, to the blessing of their Father. 
Buiely if little ones were capable of spiritual 



blessings then, they are so now. It it 
noticeable that these children were not 
brought to the Lord to be taught, but " that 
he should put his hands upon them, and 
bless them" (Mark i. 16> 

Ver. 17. — 'Whosoever shall not receive the 
kingdom of God as a little child shall in no 
wise enter therein. Jesus here reminds 
men that if they hope to enter the kingdom, 
it must be in the spirit of cliildren, who 
never think of putting forward any claim 
of merit or paying any price for kindness 
showed them. His Jate parable of the 
Pharisee and publican was evidently in the 
Master's mind when he said this. 

Ver. 18. — And a certain ruler asked him, 
saying. Good Master, what shall I do to 
inherit eternal life ? This incident is related 
in the three synoptical Gospels. St. Matthew 
speaks of him as the young man. St. Luke 
here styles him a ruler ; by some the title 
is supposed simply to denote that he was 
the ruler of a synagogue or congregation ; 
others, however, consider that it denotes that 
the subject of the narrative was a ruler of 
the Jews, and possibly, but this is of course 
doubtful, a member of the Sanhedrin. His 
youth (Matt. xix. 20) is not at v.arianc« 
with this inference. Youth is defined by 
Pfiilo as including the period between 
twenty-one and twenty-eight. All the 
three evangelists mention his great wealth. 
Dean PI umpire suggests that his large pog- 
sessions and evident devotion had probably 
opened to him, at a comparatively early age, 
a place in the great council. His question 
concerning eternal life indicates tiiat he was 
a Pharisee, and he evidently represented the 
noblest phase of this religious party. He 
had sedulously followed out the precepts of 
the best rabbinic schools of his day, but 
there was something lacking, he felt, and 
his intercourse with Jesus and the influence 
of the Master's words led him to take tijis 
question point-blank to the famous 'J'eacher, 
who he felt — alone of any master whom he 
had met — was able to satisfy this longing 
desire of his heart. 

Ver. 19. — And Jesus said unto him, 'Why 
callest thou me good? none is good, save 
one, that is, God. The title " good " was a 
singular one for the young ruler to have 
used. It was never used to the most famous 
rabbis by their pupils. It implied an in- 
tense reveience, but nothing more. The 
young man distinctly did not then believe 
the Master was Divine, else he had never 
made the great refusal recorded directly 
afterwards. "To be a good man is im- 
possible. . . . God alone could have this 
honour " (Plato, ' Phssd..' 27). " You are 
looking at me," said the Master, " as a man : 
why give me this strange, lofty title? You 
are looking on me only as an earthlr 



OH. xvin. 1— 43,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKB. 



lU 



Teacher." The great Heart-reader was 
reading the young man's thoughts, thoughts 
which Booa crystallized, as we shall see, 
into the refusal to do what he, whom he 
chose to style " good," directed him to carry 
out. 

Ver. 20. — Thou knowest the command- 
ments. The report in St. Matthew is some- 
what fuller. There the ruler, when directed 
to the commandments, replies by asking 
" which ? " expecting most likely to be re- 
ferred to some of the elaborate traditional 
laws of the rabbinic schools, which were 
difficult to keep even by men in the position 
of a wealthy Pharisee ; but to bis surprise 
Jesus mentions the most general and best- 
known of the ancient ten. 

Yer. 21. — And he said, All these have I 
kept from my youth up. He listens to the 
Master with something lUre impatient sur- 
prise. There is a ring of concealed indig- 
nation in his " All these have I ever kept. 
What do you take me for? I am a religious, 
God-fearing Jew ; from my child-days have 
I kept these." Kept these I How little 
the poor questioner knew the secrets of hia 
own heart! Yet he had answered Jesus 
in the true spirit of a Pharisee trained care- 
fully in the rabbinic schools. We read, 
for instance, in the Talmud how "when 
Rabbi Chaninah was dying, he said to the 
angel of death, ' Go and fetch me the book 
of the Law, and see whether there is any- 
thing in it which I have not kept.' " 

Ver. 22. — Now when Jesus heard these 
things, he said unto him, Yet lackest thon 
one thing. St. Mark (x. 21), who had St. 
Peter's memories to draw from, adds here a 
very touching detail. "Jesus beholding 
him [looking earnestly at him] loved him." 
There was something noble and true in that 
life, struggling in the imperfect light of the 
rabbinic teaching after eternity and heaven, 
and feeling that in all its struggles some 
element was surely wanting ; and Jesus, as 
he gazed on the young earnest face, loved 
him, and proceeded to show him liow far 
removed his life was as yet from the perfect 
life he dreamed of attaiuing to. He would 
show him in a moment how selfish, how 
earthly, were his thoughts and aims; how 
firmly chained to earth that heart of his, 
which he thought only longed for heaven. 
Sell all that thou h&st, and distribute unto 
the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in 
heaven : and come, foUow me; " Well," the 
Master said, " I will test you. You say you 
have from your child-days kept your whole 
duty to your neighbour ; you say that you 
hunger after the higher righteousness. Do 
you really? Will you indeed be perfect 
(Matt. xix. 21) ? Then I will tell you what 
you lack. Go, sell those great possessions 
whioh I know you love so dearly, and give 



all to the poor, and come, take up the cross 
(Mark x. 21), and follow me, the home- 
less, landless 'Teacher whom you call by the 
Divine title ' good.' " The « cross " of St. 
Mark only Jesus understood then in all its 
dread significance. It was coming then 
very near ; and the great Teacher saw that 
his true servants, if they would indeed 
follow him, must follow him along that 
lonely road of suffering he was then tread- 
ing. " Via crucis, via lucis." The young 
ruler, with his great wealth, thought he had 
from his youth done his whole duty to his 
neighbour. The Galilsean Master, whom he 
so reverenced and admired, reminded him 
that out of those wide domains, those stored- 
up riches, out of the mammon of unright- 
eousness, he had forgotten to make to him- 
self I'riends who, when he died, should 
receive him into the eternal tents of heaven. 
This is what he lacked. He had probably 
heard the Lord's teaching in the parables 
of the unjust steward and of Lazarus, 

Ver. 23. — And when he heard this, he 
was very sorrowful : for he was very rich. 
St. Mark adds (a memory of Peter's) that 
when he heard this the ruler went away 
frowning, with a lowering look. This wa« 
too much. He could not, even at the bid- 
ding of that loved Teacher, give up the 
pleasant life he loved so well , the things he 
prized so highly ; so silently and sadly he 
turned away, 'i'he ' Gospel of the Hebrews,' 
a very ancient document, dating from the 
first days of the faith, a few fragments only 
of which have come down to us in quota- 
tions in the Fathers, thus describes the 
scene : " Then the rich man began to 
scratch his head, for that was not to his 
mind. And the Lord said to him. How 
tlien canst thou say, I have kept the Law ; 
for it is written in the Law, Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour as thyself; and, lol many of 
thy brethren, children of Abraham, live in 
the gutter, and die of hunger, while thy 
table is loaded with good things, and nothing 
is sent out to them ? " (quoted by Origen, in 
Matt. xix.). Dante calls this " The Great 
Refusal," and represents the shade of the 
young ruler among the throng of the use- 
less, of those who faced both ways (' Inferno,' 
X. 27). It is worthy of notice that there 
was no angry retort from the wealthy ruler, 
no scornful, cynical smile of derision, as we 
read of among the covetous, wealthy Phari- 
sees (oh. xvi. 14). Still, in the heart of this 
seeker after the true wisdom there was » 
sore conflict. Grieving, sorrow-stricken, 
with gloomy looks, he turned away in silence. 

Ver. 24. — And when Jesus saw that he 
was very sorrowful, he said, How hardly 
shall they that have riches enter into the 
kingdom of Ood! The temptations which 
beset a rich man are so many and so various. 



lis 



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvin. 1— 4* 



The poor, Indeed, vrith all their trials, Btand 
fairer for the kingdom than do their envied 
riclier brothers and sisters. 

Ver. 25.— For it is easier for a oamel to 
go through a needle's eye, than for a rich 
man to enter into the kingdom of Ood, 
This simile taken in its plain and obvious 
sense, appears to many an exnggerated one, 
and various explanations have been sug- 
gested to soften it down. The best is found 
in Lord Nugeiit's 'Lands Classical and 
Bacred,' who mentions tliat in some moiiern 
Syrian towns the narrow gate for foot- 
passengers at the side of the larger gate by 
which waggons, camels, and other beasts of 
burden enter the city, is known as the 
"needle's eye." It is, however, very uncer- 
tain whether this term for the little gate 
was known in ancient times. But the simile 
was evidently a common one among the 
Jews. The 'Talmud, for instance, gives us 
the parallel phrase of an elephant passing 
through a needle's eye. The Koran repeats 
the very words of the Gospel. It is the 
object of the proverb to express human 
impossibility. 

" I would ride the camel, 
Yea leap him flying, through the needle's 

eye 
As easily as such a pampered soul 
Could pass the narrow gate." 

(Southey.) 

It seems strange that the three evangelists, 
SS. Matthew, Mark, and Luke, who tell this 
story of the young questioner and the 
Master's conversation with him, do not 
mention his name. And yet he must have 
been a conspicuous personage in the society 
of the time. First of all, his riches were 
evidently reraaikable. One account tells us 
that he was " very rich." Two of the Gospels 
mention his " great possessions." St. Luke 
tells us that he was " a ruler." He was, 
then, certainly a very wealthy Jew holding 
a high ofSuial position, not improbably a 
member of the Sanhedrin council. Why is 
he nameless in the three Gospels? Dean 
Plumptre has a most interesting theory that 
the young wealthy ruler was Laiarus of 
Bethany. He bases his hypothesis upon the 
following data : He begins by stating that 
" there is one other case in the flrst two 
Gospels which presents similar phenomena. 
In the narrative of the supper at Bethany, 
Bt. Matthew and St. Mark record the pas- 
sionate affection which expressed itself in 
pouring the precious ointment of spikenard 
upon our Lord's head as the act of ' a 
woman ' (Matt. xxvi. 7 ; Mark xiv. S), 
leaving her unnamed. In John xii. 8 we 
find that the woman was Mary, the sister of 
Lazarus. The train of thought thus sug- 
gested points to the supposition that here 



also there may have been reasons for sup- 
pressing in the records a name which was 
fumiliar to the narrator. What it the young 
ruler were Lazarus himself? The pointi 
of agreement are sufficiently numerous to 
warrant the conjecture. The household of 
Lazarus, as the spikenard ointment ehowa, 
were of the wealthier class. The friends 
who came to comfort the bereaved sisters 
were themselves, in St. John's language, 
'of the Jews,' t.e. of the chief rulers (John 
xi. 19). The young ruler was obviously a 
Pharisee, and the language of M.irtha (John 
xi. 24) sliows that she, too, believed in eter- 
nal life and the resurrection of the dead. 
The answer to the young ruler, ' Que thing 
thou luokest' (as given by St. Mark and 
St. Luke), is almost identical with that to 
Martha, ' One thing is needful ' (ch. x. 42). 
In such a case, of course, nothing can be 
attained beyond conjectural iuferBUoe ; but 
the present writer must avow his belief that 
the coincidences in this case are such as to 
carry the evidence to a very high point of 
probability." 

Ver. 26. — ^Aud they that heard it said, 
Who then can be saved! This hard saying 
appeared to the disciples to be terribly com- 
prehensive in its scope ; the longing to be 
rich was confined to no one class or order, it 
was the universal passion. Were they guilt- 
less here ? Were they not looking for riches 
and glory in the Messianic kingdom of the 
immediate future? And of all peoples the 
Jews in every age have been credited with 
the blindest devotion to this idol, wealth. 
In St. Mark (x. 24) we find certainly an 
explanatory statement : " Uow hard is it 
for them that trust in riches to enter into 
the kingdom of God I " But this explana- 
tory and softened statement is not found in 
the older authorities ; these read instead, in 
Mark x. 24, simply the words, " How hard 
is it to enter the kingdom of God 1 " Hard 
alike, the Master meant, for rich and poor, 
though harder for the former. 

Ver. 27. — And he said, The things whloh 
are impossible with men are possible with 
Ood. Yes, impossible, the Divine Teacher 
repeated, from a man's point of view ; im- 
possible from the platformi of legal obedience 
on which the young ruler (ver. 21) had 
taken his stand, or the Pharisee in his 
prayer (vers. 11, 12); but it was not im- 
possible with God. He might give this 
salvation as a perfectly free gift, utterly 
undeserved, perfectly unmerited, as he did 
to the prodigal son when he returned, or to 
the publican when he beat his breast in 
almost voiceless mourning, or still more 
conspicuously, not many days later, to the 
penitent thief dying oii the cross. 

Ver. 28.— Then Peter said, Lo, ve ha«« 
left all, and followed thee. Ag^in the qnea> 



OH. xvm. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 



118 



tion ot Peter, eridently acting as spokes- 
man of the twelve, is repeated by the first 
three evangelists. Strangely faithful in 
their accounts of their own dealings with 
their adored Master, they never veil or hide 
any human weakness or error of their own 
which led to an important bit of teaching 
from their Lord. Now, in this place, they, 
in the person of Peter, gave utterance to a 
very worldly, but a very natural, thought. 
The ruler bad failed when the test wa» 
applied to him ; he was a conspicuous ex- 
ample of failure in the rich to enter the 
kingdom. But they had not failed when the 
test had been applied to them; they had 
given all up for his sake : what would be 
their reward ? 

Vera. 29, 30. — And he said onto them, 
Verily I say unto you, There is no man that 
hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or 
wife, or children, for the kingdom of God's 
sake, who shall not receive manifold more 
in this present time, and in the world to 
come life everlasting. Evidently, from the 
reports of the three evangelists, the reply 
of Jesus was a lengthy one, and contained 
much deep teaching. St. Luke only gives 
us, however, one section, so to speak, of 
the great discourse which followed upon 
Peter's question. Here and in St. Mark 
Peter and the twelve receive a quiet rebuke 
la this general promise. The Master seems 
to say, " My promises are not especially to 
you, my first followers, but to all who, not 
for any selfish hope of recompense or reward, 
but for the kingdom of God's sake, give up 
what they hold dearest ; there will be real, 
true happiness for them even in this world, 
and in the world to come unspeakable joy 
will be their portion ; theirs will be the life 
that knows no ending." St. Mark adds, with 
rare truth, that the happiness which his 
faithful are to enjoy in this world will be 
accompanied with persecationa. It is the 
same beautiful thought which the Master 
had put out before, only the gem now is set 
in different wonla. " Blessed ai e they which 
are persecuted for righteousness' sake : for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven" (Matt. 
V. 10 ; see, too, vers. 11, 12). St. Matthew 
deals especially with another division of the 
Lord's discourse. Here Jesus speaks of the 
future of the twelve ; and, looking forward 
to the generally noble and self-devoted lives 
he saw these would live, he tells them of 
the great destiny surely reserved for them 
if they remained faithful to the end. But 
even here, in his words, " the first shall be 
last " (Matt. xix. 30), and still more point- 
edly in the parable of tlie laLourers which 
followed (Miitt. XX. 1 — 16), he warned these 
devoted but often mistaken men of the 
danger of self-complacency. It was only 
because lie foresaw that in these really great 
LUKE. — H. 



ones this spirit would in the end be over- 
come (at least in eleven of them) that he 
made the grand and mysterious prontise of 
Matt. xix. 28. 

The narrative here, in the three synopti- 
cal Gospels, is not continuous; at this point 
there is a break. There is little doubt but 
that the sickness and death of Lazarus of 
Bethany, and the summons of the sisters to 
Jesus, took place about this period. The 
three synoptical evangelists are silent here 
for reasons we have discussed elsewhere. 

Between vers. 30 and 31 there probably 
should be inserted the hasty journey to 
Bethany. The Master was not far when the 
news of his friend's death reached him. 
Immediately after the miracle there appears 
to have been a meeting of the Sanhedrin, 
when it was decided to put Jesus to death, 
though not during the ensuing Passover, 
with such precautions as were possible. 
The terrible decision became known. Jesus 
then retired to Ephraim, an obscure village 
about twenty miles from the city. Here a 
very short time was spent in absolute retire- 
ment and seclusion. But the Passover Feast 
was nigh at hand. In company with some 
of the crowded pilgrim caravans, and secure 
under their protection till his last few dayk 
of work were accomplished, Jesus journeys 
to Jerusalem. At this point the three 
synoptical Gospels take up the story again. 
The eleventh chapter of St. John fills up 
this gap in the connected story. 

Yors. 31 — 42. — Jeeus again teUa {hem ofhU 
Passion, The healing of the blind at Jericho. 

Yer. 31. — Then he took unto him the 
twelve, and said unto them. St. Mark 
(x. 32) prefaces tijis announcement with the 
words, " And they were in the way going 
up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before 
them : and they were amazed ; and as they 
followed, they were afraid." There wag 
something unusual, evidently, in the man- 
ner and behaviour of the Master ; silently, 
wrapped up in his own lofty meditations, 
he strode on in front of the company of his 
followers. A feeling of awe and fear stole 
over them as they watched the silent Master 
witli the sliadow of the coming cross fallings 
perhaps, across his countenance. Much had 
happened lately: the teaching growing 
more and more solemn as the end drew 
near ; the raising of Lazarus ; the intense 
enmity of the great men of the nation ; the 
fixed determination to put the Master t9 
death; his short retirement; then the an- 



114 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LTTKB. [oh. xvin. 1— 43. 



noiincement tliat he was going up to face 
hie enemies at the great feast in Jerusalem ; 
and now alone and silent he walked at their 
head. What was coming? thought the 
twelve and their friends. He read their 
thoughts, and, calling them round him, told 
them what was about to happen. Behold, 
we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that 
are written by the prophets conoeming the 
Bon of man shaU be accomplished. 

Vers. 32, 33. — For he shall he delivered 
nnto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and 
Epitefnlly entreated, and spitted on : and 
they shall scourge him, and put him to 
death : and the third day he shall rise again. 
The outlines of the Pasaion he had sketclied 
for the disciples before on two occasions, 
but never so clearly as now. He even tells 
them the manner of his end, and how his 
own countrymen would give him up to the 
Bomaus, and how these Gentiles, amidst 
every conceivable circumstance of horror, 
would do him to death. And the Master 
closed his dread revelation by predicting 
his speedy resurrection. 

Ver. 34. — And they understood none of 
these things : and this saying was hid from 
them, neither knew they the things which 
were spoken. But they listened aU dazed 
and confused ; they could not take it in, 
neither the shame of the death of their loved 
Leader, nor the glory of the Resurrection 
which was to follow immediately after. 
They could not persuade themselves that 
the hopes of an earthly Messianic glory in 
which they were to share must positively 
be given up. "We must learn to love 
Divine truths before we can understand 
them," said Pascal. " Toweird everything 
which is contrary to natural desire," wrote 
Eiggenbach (in Godet), " there is produced 
in the heart a blindness, which nothing 
but a miracle can heul." 

Yer. 35. — And it came to pass, that as he 
was come nigh unto Jericho. Jericho was 
once called " the City of Palms," afterwards 
" the City of Perfumes." It was about 
eighteen miles from Jerusalem. In the Hero- 
dian times it became a popular resort, owing 
to the aifection the great Herod entertained 
for it. Its palm-groves and balsam-gardens 
were a present from Antony to Cleopatra. 
Herod the Great bought them from her, and 
made it one of his royal cities, and ailorned 
it with many stately buildings, and even- 
tually died there. It is now a miserable 
village. A certain blind man sat by the 
wayside begging. An apparent discre- 
pancy exists in the three accounts given of 
this act of our Lord. St. Luke speaks of 
one blind man who was healed as onr Lord 
was entering the town. St. Matthew and 
St. Mark mention that the miracle took 
place a* our iiord was leaving the place, 



and St. Matthew mentions that two blind 
men received their sight at the bidding of 
Jesus. Several solutions of this little dif&- 
culty have been proposed. Perhaps the 
most probable is that the sufferers were sit- 
ting near the town gates as the Lord entered. 
They, hearing who was passing by, eagerly 
called to him for help. Surrounded by the 
crowd, he probably did not hear the cry, or 
possibly wished to test the earnestness of 
their faith by allowing them to wait. They 
follow him through the place, and in the 
open space outsiile the city they attract 
his attention, and he heals them. Or, in 
the words of Dr. Morrison, " the case seems 
to have begun as he entered into the city, 
but it culminated in all likelihood as he 
depaited." A later explanation, apparenUy 
preferred by Godet and Farrar, is that, as 
Joeephus and Eusebius distinguish between 
the old and the new Jericho — the old town 
on the ancient site, ami the new Herodian 
town which had sprung up at a little dis- 
tance from it — the blind man might, accord- 
ing to some traditions, have been healed as 
Jesus was leaving old Jericho; according 
to others, as he was entering the new town. 
The fact of SS. Mark and Luke only men- 
tioning one blind man is easily explained. 
There was one evidently (as we shall suggest 
further on), a well-known character in Chris- 
tian story — Bartimaeus. Two of the evan- 
gelists reeoi'Jed his cure, as being of special 
interest to the Church, leaving the second 
among the numberless unrecorded miracles 
of healing of Jesus. A certain blind man. 
St. Mark names him Bartimeeus. It may 
be inferred that, as St. Mark specially names 
him, this man was well known in early 
Chri^tian story. We know that after the 
cure he joined the company as one of the 
followers of Jesus. 

Ver. 37. — ^Aud they told him, that Jesus 
of Nazareth passeth by. The Lord's name 
was by this time a household word in Pales- 
tine, and among the sick and afflicted a 
most precious and welcome sound. 

Ver. 38. — Jesus, thou Son of David. This 
form of address distinctly shows that the 
idea that the Babbi of Nazareth, the great 
Wonder-worker, the wise kind Teacher, 
was in some way or otiier the long looked- 
for Deliverer, was now taking possession 
of the people's mind. " Son of David " was 
distinctly a Messianic salutation. 

Ver. 39. — And they which went before 
rebuked him. It must be remembered that 
our Lord was surrounded by a great host of 
Passover pilgrims, by many of whom he 
was reverenced as " some great One," per- 
haps the King Messiah. Such a low wail- 
ing cry on the part of a blind beggar, asking 
to be brought into the presence of him they 
wondered at and admired and hoped n 



OH. xvin. 1-43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



na 



much from, seemed a great presumption: 
henue these rebukes. 

Vers. 40, 41. — And Jesns itood, and com- 
manded him to be bronght nnto him. St. 
Mark here adds, " And they call the blind 
man, saying unto him. Be of good com- 
fort, rise ; he calleth thee." These kindly 
Bympatluzing words of the disciples to the 
beggar, doing their loving Master's behest, 
were one of Peter's own memories of the 
scene under the walls of Jericho. And 
when he was oome near, he asked him, say- 
ing, What wilt then that I shall do nnto 
thee? Many besides the governor Pilate, 
who a few days later put the query to him, 
" Art thou a King, then ? " during this period 
must have often asked silently the same 
question. We shall soon see the whole 
multitude carried away with enthusiasm, 
giving him a royal welcome as he entered 
the city. Here, with a majesty truly royal, 
as Godet well remarks, Jesus seems to open 
op to the beggar the tieasures of Divine 



power in " What wilt thou that I shall do 
unto thee?" and to give him, as it were, 
carte hlanohe. And he said, Lord, that I 
may receive my sight. There is a curious 
variation in the terms of this request in that 
ancient Syriao Version known as " the Cure- 
tonian," In the account of St. Matthew, 
" That our eyes might be opened, and we 
shall see thee." 

Ver. 42. — And Jesus said nnto him, Beoeive 
thy sight. " Magnifique aumSne du Christ " 
(PressensQ. Thy faith hath saved thee. 
The American Longfellow has united the 
cry for mercy of the blind, the kindly sym- 
pathizing words of the disciples (reported 
by St. Mark), and the gift of Jesus Christ, 
in his exquisite poem of ' Blind Bartimcsna.' 

" Those mighty voices three — 
'iTjffoC, i\iriil6v /ie 1 
Q6.pffii^ eyeipe' tputvet fft 1 
'H irlarit <rov aiataxi ttX" 



H0MILETI08. 

Vers, 1 — 8. — The importunate widow. The importance which Christ attaches to 
prayer is evidenced by the frequency with which he recurs to it in his teaching, and 
the variety of his illustration of its duty and blessedness. The sermon on the mount 
enforces it as one of the cardinal virtues of the perfect disciple. In the eleventh chapter 
of this Gospel both the manner after which we are to pray, and the assurance on which 
faith should rest, are presented. Again, towards the close of the ministry we are 
introduced to two parables bearing on it, each with the lesson which the Master would 
teach clearly defined. The former of these two has this as its object (ver. 1), " that 
men ought always," i.e. unremittingly, " to pray, and not to faint ; " i.e. not to be 
scared by hindrances, or induced to desist by the sickness which comes through hope 
deferred. The structure of the parable is very simple. There is a judge who neither 
fears God nor regards man. A poor widow, who has been wronged, claims his inter- 
position. He pays no regard to her suit. But she importunes him ; day by day she 
presents herself, until, though he has no regard to the justice of her case, he listens to 
her pleading in order that he may be relieved of her solicitations. If man, unjust and 
selfish, thus yields to unceasing prayer, how much more, argues Jesus, will he, who is 
the Absolutely Just and the Infinitely Loving, yield to the cry, day and night, of his 
own people ! Notice three features in the delineation. 

I. God in oontbast with the human avbnqeb. The latter consults his own ease. 
He acts in mere selfishness. The Eternal Eighteousness is ever consistent with itself. 
" To this man will I look, even to him that is humble and contrite in spirit." 

II. God's people in contrast with the widow. They resemble her in one thing 
— ^in the sense of need, of helplessness. But the widow stands in no special relation 
to the judge. God's people are his own elect. They are part of the blood-bought, 
ransomed family. " As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of 
God ; " and " the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him." Each of them is in 
the most intimate relation to the Eternal. " I am poor and needy, yet the Lord 
thinketh on me." 

III. The LONGhsirFrBKiNO ot God in contrast with the lonq-sufferino op man. 
The long-sufiFering of man is in consequence of the indisposition to act; if in the end 
it is dispelled, if the action after a lengthened interval lollows, it is only that repose 
may be purchased by the effort, and that the mind may be free to carry out its unloving 

g rejects. God bears long with his elect, not because he is unwilling to bless, but that 
e may draw them closer ^-f Vffiself, that he may prepare them for fuller measures of 



116 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LTJKB. [oh. xvrn. 1— 48. 

blessing, that he may chasten their wills into completer union with his will, and so 
ultimately bestow the higher gifts of his Patheihood. When they cry, there is much 
that needs to be corrected; they desire only what they regard as the best or what will 
relieve tliem from some pressure. There is still a distance between their will and his ; 
he delays the answer that they may be brought in true self-emptiness to his heart, 
and that, their faith being purified, they may be enriched out of his exceeding abun- 
dance. So the Lord bore long with Job ; in him patience had its perfect work ; he 
learned to "abhor himself, and repent in dust and ashes;" he was "attuned also to 
finer issues '' by the charity which led him to pray for his friends. And the Lord 
turned hia captivity when his prayer was thus disciplined and enlarged, and he 
received " twice as much as he had before." So, too, the woman of Canaan cried, and 
" the Lord answered her not a word" (Matt. xv.). Then came she " a,nA. worshipped 
him." She bowed her whole soul before him, and she received the reward of the 
"great faith." " Therefore," says the Lord, "/aire* ?io<." " I'ray without ceasing." 'I'he 
heavens above are not brass. There is a flexibility in the ordering of the universe 
which admits of the answer, direct and real, to prayer. "More things are wrought by 
prayer than the world dreams of." "0 thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all 
flesh come." The Lord anticipates a decadence in the belief as to the efficacy of prayer, 
for he adds a " nevertheless " (ver. 8). Is this loss of faith true of the Church and of 
Christians in this day ? 

Vers. 9 — 14. — The Pharisee and the publican. The lesson as to prayer is continued. 
The parable which follows exhibits the spirit and conditions of effectual prayer. Mark 
the two features of the audience specially addressed. He speaks to certain (1) who 
trusted in themselves as heing righteous; (2) who, as the outcome of this trust, 
despised others. He spoke in the previous parable of " God's own elect." Now, the 
Pharisees accounted themselves the elect of God. They were puffed up by this con- 
fidence. They regarded themselves as the righteous, who kept the Law, both oral and 
written. And, indeed, they were most scrupulous as to every requirement ; nay, they 
were willing to burden themselves with minute and vexatious observances. And th« 
sin which beset them was the pride shadowed forth in one of the two who Yreut up to 
pray. As the illustration of the elect, the Lord chooses a tax-gatherer, one of a hated 
class, for whom, in Pharisee-thou'^ht, there was no place in the kingdom of heaven. 
The instruction is suitable to every time. Pharisee separation and pride are features 
to be recognized in the Church of this day, as they were prominent in the Jewish 
Church of our Lord's day. Ever to be studied is the antithesis — respectability in the 
Pharisee, non-resptctability in the publican. See the two. The one, with his broad 
phylactery, his supercilious bearing, his Pharisaism reflected in every feature of his 
sallow countenance, as with measured step he proceeds to the temple. In its inner 
court he stands ei-ect ; he arranges his prayer-robe, he looks around, the face darkened 
by a scowl as he observes the publican in a distant comer of the sacred building. And 
then he lifts his eye. No prayer trembles in any tone ; no pleading escapes through 
any word; he " speaks with himself" rather than with God. It is a soliloquy, a self- 
gratified recital of his own piety. If he says, " God, I thank thee" (vers. 11, 12), it is 
not for any grace that he has received, it is not in acknowledging that only through 
a higher mercy and strength he is what he is; nay, with someihin; uf familiarity in 
the address, he bids the Almighty join him in admiration of his virtues, on account of 
which he is lifted above other men. Only by certain averages of his own striking 
does he measure his excellence, the climax being reached, when t.iere comes the con- 
temptuous " even as this publican." Oh, what a superior perfon, to be sure! With 
what satisfaction must highest Heaven regard one who fasted twice in the week, and 
gave tithes of all he possessed! The other, with hurried gait, as one intent only on 
pouring out his heart before God, takes his place far off. He has no wish to disturb 
tiie complacency ol his fellow-worshipper. He claims nothing ; self-assertion in every 
form is absent from his heart. The only presence with him is the Holy One of Israel. 
Beneath the vision of his holiness all that is of the earth must keep silince. He will 
not even lift up his eyes. He has not much to record ; human righteousness even is 
But a filthy rag when held up to the light of that Perfect Holiness. And as for him, 
*h, there can be only the one prayer, " God be merciful to me a sinner I " (ver. 13). He 



CH. xvni. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. ll'i 

i« overpowered with the conviction of sin. His only refuge is the mercy of the Eternal. 
"I tell you" (ver. 14), concludes Christ, "this man is manifested to be one of God'g 
elect. He, not the other, returns to his house the one accepted and justified." The 
parable is most suggestive. 

I. It is the exposure op spiritual pride nr its root and fruit. Its root, the 
measurement of self by " other men." God is not in the thought. The song of the 
seraphim, " Holy, holy, holy. Lord God of hosts," sounds faintly in the ear. The 
mind is not occupied with him and his holiness. It looks around rather than above. 
The standard is a social one. There is " a zeal for the Law, but not according to 
knowledge." Having settled the constituents of righteousness, and having in conduct 
realized these constituents, it looks from the legal vantage-ground on others. And, 
seeing the many below the elected level, it whispers within itself, " I thank thee that 
I am not as they." The / struts abroad with a distinct sense of superiority. This 
pride is the parasite of religiosity. And religiosity is the whole religion of many. Reli- 
giosity meaus the performance, punctilious and sincere, of acts and offices, functions 
and services. It may comprehend a wide area of the existence. It may fill up much 
of time and much of thought, and he who abounds in it is held to be a religious man. 
But it is a morality untouched by the emotion of the broken and contrite spirit. 
There is no distinctively evangelical motive force. On an earlier occasion, the contrast 
between the routine religiosity and the warm religion of the heart was presented at 
the dinner-table where Simon the Pharisee presided, and the woman washed the 
Lord's feet with her tears. Of her he said, " She hath loved much." Here the Pharisee 
is in opposition to the publican, who had the inner spirit of poverty. Now, one 
who has the religiosity, not the religion, is apt to rest on the duties which he dis- 
charges, on the zeal which he manifests. He trusts in himself as being righteous, 
and, wherever there is this trust, there creeps around it a feeling of superiority. " I 
am not as other men are." It engenders the separatist's haughty spirit. It brings in 
the sentiment of a caste. The " I" belongs to the religious world, " others " are without. 
Let us beware lest we rest satisfied with a righteousness like that of the Pharisee, lest 
we substitute the outward for the inward — what we do for what we are. Let us beware 
of that which always develops with this tendency — the habit of comparison of self 
with others on levels lower than our own, instead of realizing " the vision splendid " 
of that righteousness which demands the entire self. It is this trust, this self-elevation, 
this pride of righteousness, which vitiates the sacrifice of many who go up to the 
temple to pray. 

II. It is the COMMENDATION OF HUMILITT, IS ITS ESSENTIAL NATURE AND BLESSED- 
NESS. What is humility ? It is not so much a self-consciousness as a God-conscious- 
ness ; not so much a mean thinking of ourselves as a thrilling, penetrating consciousness 
of him who is perfect holiness and truth. There is a self-abhorrence, but that follows 
the seeing of God with the opened inner eye. The Pharisee had no conviction of sin, 
because he had no real discernment of the Eternal. His god was the property of his 
caste, one on whom he had a claim because of his belonging to the caste and doing 
what was required by it. The publican felt God at his heart ; and the sight avpoke the 
longing to be holy as God is, and the longing to be holy called out the sense of wrong- 
ness. Oh, how he had offended 1 how selfish and grasping and wicked he had been I 
All else fades into indistinctness; in that temple there are to him but the two preseuces, 
God and his soul, and the soul cries, " God be merciful ! " It is the first cry of the soul 
which God has appropriated. There is no real prayer until that cry. A genuine 
earnest pleading is evoked. The beginning of all prayer, Christ reminds us, is the 
taking of the sinner's place, and the simple appeal to mercy. And as it is the first, 
so it is the cry ever pulsing through prayer. It is never wanting from the justi- 
fied. The pardon has been received. The blood cleanses from all sin; but not the 
less, all the more, is the knowledge of sin and the need of the ever-renewed application 
of mercy. This is humility — sinful self cast on Divine mercy, and, forgiven much, 
loving much. There is no measurement with other men, for God is the all in alL 
And this is blessed. The Pharisee returns — his pride more deeply written into his 
nature, its blight and curse; no spring in the heart, no visitation of any day-spdag 
from on high. Remaining in his pride, he was truly abased. The publican return*— 
a burden rolled off from his heart, a new elasticity in his step, a new l^gbt is bM 



118 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvin. 1-^ 

eountenance. " The winter is past, . . . the flowers appear on the earth." He is at 
peace with God, justified, sanctified, righteous in the communion of the Eighteous Ona 
" I, yet not I, for he lives in me." In his humility he was exalted. 

Vers. 18 — 25. — The ruler who refused the crown. It is a certain niler, a young man, 
who accosts our Lord. And the question which he asks represents one of the deepest 
cravings of the human breast. Is it only in the Gospels that we find this question ? 
It is written into all the religions, into the best of all the philosophies, the poetries, the 
guesses at truth, which have commanded the thought of the ages. It is as old as 
human nature, as manifold in its complexion as the human experience, as abiding in 
its persistence as the human need. It is our question— one compared with which the 
hundred things which claim our attention are only as strivings after wind. Let ua 
listen. The eternal life : what is it ? and how is it realized ? 

I. What did the young man mean when he came running and kneeling and 
asked, " What shall I do to inherit eternal life ? " The answer may indicate the 
essential features of the desire that has haunted the breast. Clearly he meant 
three things : 1. A real, personal existence— one implying distinct consciousness and 
activity. He is too prosaic, too selfishly in earnest, to mean less than this. 2. An 
existence removed from the imperfections of the present time. His notions of immortality 
may have been crude ; but he certainly desired a life which, as contrasted with the 
changeful and limited, is an eternal life. 3. A life in relation to a moral or spiritual 
system. He has possessions. Sirens are ever luring him to the fateful shores of 
pleasure. Against them " the categorical imperative " of conscience is ever dominant. 
It says, " Root thy conduct in the everlastingly true. The eternal life is not mere 
endlessness. It is endless goodness, truth. And to be in harmony with this is to live 
eterually." Now, such being the contents of his thought, the burden which he brings 
to the Master is — how it comes that, although the harmony of his conduct with 
this system is complete, he is still unsatisfied ; nay, that the more he seems to approach 
the ideal the more conscious he is that it is far ahead of him. " Explain it to me " 
is the passionate entreaty ; and who does not love him for this sublime passion ? 
" What is the missing quantity ? What is the plus yet to be possessed that I may 
have eternal life ? " 

II. Turning to the answer op Christ, and connecting it with words elsewhere, 
WHAT IS Christ's exposition of the eternal life ? The question is, " What shall 
I do ? " And to this the specific reply is, " Be free. Tour life does not consist in the 
abundance of your possessions. Can you part with them, that you may the more 
unreservedly obey the vision which has dawned on you?" (ver. 22). Thus the truth 
probed him. He might not have been called actually to sell his estate, any more 
than Abraham was called to offer up Isaac. But the trial of his will was made ; 
and, in the trial, he was found wanting (ver. 23). Do we blame him ? — we whom 
the truth is proving every day, only to find that we are caught up by all kinds of 
vanities 1 He turned away ; and, alas ! what of us ? But the demand of the Lord 
reminds us of the requirement essential to the eternal life. Life, we are told by 
scientists, consists in an adaptation of organism to surrounding. When the adaptation 
is complete, and the surrounding nourishes the organism, there is health. When it 
is impaired, there is sickness ; when it is broken, there is death. Human life has both 
a spiritual and a material environment. As the ruler rightly supposed, the eternal 
life implies correspondence to the spiritual environment. Where there is no such 
correspondence, where, in Scripture phrase, the life is " without God," there is death. 
Where the correspondence has been formed, and the inner life is nourished by the 
system which surrounds it, there is spiritual, eternal life. But are not the phrases, 
" systems," " environments," too vague and abstract? Do we not need something more 
concrete, something nearer us, than such ahsti actions ? Tliis is more concrete, thi» 
is nearer us, " Take up the cross ; come, follow me " (ver. 22). A perfect Man has 
walked this earth — One in whom the correspondence with the heavenly environment 
was complete, who lived in and with a Father in heaven, and whose meat v\ as to do 
his will. His existence, in its details, we cannot copy; but his life, in its principles, 
inspirations, in all that gave it its beauty and glory, we can realize, under varying 
condition!. To be joined to him ; to live in his light ; to be tiie maauer of peison 



CH. xvin. 1— 43.] THE (lOSPBL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 119 

that he was ; to he afiSanced to him as the Lord and Friend and Brother of our perfect 
choice; and have his flesh as meat indeed, and his blood as drink indeed; — this is the 
way to the eternal life. But what is this life whose way is thus defined ? It must 
be kept always in view that eternal is not merely another name for endless. Endless 
time would not be eternity. The eternal is the timeless. Everlasting existence may 
be involved; but this is because the life is what it is — Divine, and therefore imperish- 
able. Christ hag supplied many unfoldings of this Divine life (see John iii. 1 — 13 ; 
vj. 32 — 53; xviL 3). May the guidance of the Holy Spirit illumine this teaching! 
and may we all realize the secret of St. John : " He that hath the Son hath the life 1 " 
III. This bulbr interests us. The narrative conoerninf; him suggests reflections 
which may be dwelt on with profit. 1. The difficulty, the hindrance, to salvation thai 
is interposed Try riches. (Vers. 24, 25.) Great possessions, Christ declares, increase 
the risk of losing the true spiritual health, are apt to stand in the way of the eternal 
life. It is not the riches themselves that are evil ; it is, as one of the evangelists 
explains, the trust in them, the sensation of them, that is the evil. And may there 
not be a trust in riches, even when they are not actually possessed ? We may have 
very little, and yet have such a craving for more as proves that the ungotten wealth 
stands for our best. More than this, with little there may be as much of earthliness 
and love of the world as when there is much. It is a wretchedj slavery which one often 
sees, and the feeling of which one often detects in one's own breast. Persons are 
miserably ruled over by the sense of wealth. Neither do they get the good, nor does 
the world get the full good, of what they have. On the other hand, the poor cannot 
rise to the real dignity of their being because they set possessions on the height which 
they regard as the summum honum. Social life is honeycombed by that trust in 
riches. " How hard it is," says Christ, " for those that have riches to enter into the 
kingdom of God ! " (ver. 24). 2. A crown is refused. Who the ruler was we cannot 
tell. On a sudden he appears, on a sudden he disappears. Is he wrecked, like a ship 
with full sail, at the harbour-bar 1 It is noticeable that Jesus " lovsd him ; " in this 
distinction he is bracketed, in the Gospels, with Martha and Mary and Lazarus. For 
a moment the crown hangs over his head. Did he finally reject it ? But he waves 
it aside. Oh, not the last who has missed the flood-tide — the blessing offered to the 
man, and the man turning from itl Young men, all, reflect I 

Vers, 35 — 43. — Bartimceus. Here are two noises suggestive of the human life vrith 
which we are all familiar. There is the tramp, tramp, tramp, of the swaying multi- 
tude, the din of the many minds, many experiences, many mouths, all moving in 
obedience to a common impulse. Men and women, when they become mere units of 
a crowd, forget for the time their personal histories. They are swept on by the 
current, sharing and adding to its excitement. There is nothing more unaccountable 
sometimes than the impulses which are communicated from person to person, and pass 
by infection to the multitude. Diflorent days have their different idols. Those who 
are shouting themselves hoarse with their hosannahs at Jericho will shout them- 
ielves hoarse with the cry, "Away with him! Crucify him!" at Jerusalem. Oh, 
fickle popularity ! The Lord knew what the applause of the crowd was worth. The 
children crying in the temple were far more to him than the loud voice and the 
tremendous enthusiasm of the thousands who had swelled the triumph of the entry 
into the city of David. But through that tumult, in the midst of that noise, there 
is another — that which always reaches the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. Only one 
voice, at most two voices, shrill and clamorous — the voice of misery and want and 
prayer ! Had he not heard that same voice in highest heaven ? Had it not pierced 
through the praises of angel and archangel, of cherubim and seraphim — the cry of a 
sinful and weary world ? A little one only in the system of the universe, but the 
least in need has a special way of access to the Eternal Love. Far off the great 
Shepherd hears the bleat of the sheep that has strayed into the wilderness. He who 
heard the sigh of the world from the excellent glory will not turn from the piteou* 
pleading of the poor and needy. God's tenderness individualizes. " Thii poor man 
cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles." 

L Beqabd this poob uan. Perhaps we shall realize that he is our near kinsman. 
L Se has been sitting hy the wayside begging. And what are we all but beggars at tit* 



120 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. [oh. xvm. 1— 43 

world's wayside ? Even the mind most richly endowed, the heart most wealthy in 
love and imagination, needs " the life more and fuller." Is there no begging from 
heaven 1 no consciousness of a fountain of living waters ? This Bartimaaiis, taking 
his place day by day ou the thoroughfare and asliing an alms, is only too faithful a 
picture of me, wanting, desiring, and, alasl too often trying to satisfy my soul with 
some dole ot happiness or excitement thrown to me — a beggar all the while, blind. 
2. What is this ? An unusual bustle and din. What does it mean? We can imagine 
the question addressed, with only a languid interest, to some person at hand — a languor 
which vanishes when the answer is given, " It is Jesus of Nazareth who is passing 
by." Ah ! the newness of cry, sign of newness of life ! What and how he had heard 
of this Jesus we know not ; but he had heard enough to open the gates of the soul. 
The one argument is need, the one reasoning, " I am here ; he is there. Son of David, 
have mercy on mel " It is the great hour of a human life when speech is begun between 
the soul and heaven. Such speech arrests the love of Gtod in the way. " We enter 
heaven by prayer." 3. Those around hid the one who cries hold his peace. So speak 
the many to the one in earnest. Notice how often in the Gospels the disciples are 
represented as keeping back from .Christ insteail of helping to him (see ver. 15). They 
did not know the heart of God. And men do not know it still. There is often a 
"Bend away" in the minds of even the well-disposed. Earnestness meets discourage- 
ments where it leasts expects them. Cry on, thou who hast felt the breath of the 
passing Saviour. If those about thee are unsympathetic, throw thyself the more on 
thy Lord ; the more they protest, cry thou the more, " Son of God, they will not take 
me up. Father and mother even forsake me. Thou, thou only art my hope. Make 
no tarrying, my God." 

II. Think of the Savioue, in whom the livxno God is kkvealbd. 1. There is 
the Christ-commandment. " Briug him hither to me." It is the commandment to an 
often misunderstanding and misinterpretitig Church. Christ has much to bear at the 
hand of the world; he has much also to bear at the hand of his Church. How 
frequently those who are his repel rather than attract, send away rather than bring 1 
" Bring " — there is no gainsaying this charge. Instantly the tone of the multitude 
changes. Now it is, " Rise, be of good comfort ; he calleth thee." And what alacrity 
in the Bartimseus-obediencel The old tattered garment connected with the past time 
of. It may have beeo, a sinful life is thrown away. There is no stopping to inquire 
how the blind can reach that blessed presence. He has called. In the call there is 
the pledge of a sufScient grace. mirror of Divine condescension 1 word, preparing 
fur work, of power 1 " The blind, the poor, bring to me ! " 2. There is the Christ- 
question. " What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee ? " The question is put when 
the presence is reached. The presence is the help to the answer. Now, the great 
underlying want is expressed, " Lord, that I may receive my sight." Is it not the 
prayer of the human heart when the quickening presence of God is realized ? It is to 
prepare for the revelation that the wUl is gently besieged. He cannot force ; he can 
only draw. Stooping to thee, the person thou art, and as thou art, the word of grace 
and truth is, "What wilt thou?" 3. And then the Christ-action. "He touched the 
eyes," says St. Matthew. " Receive thy sight : thy faith hath saved thee," says 
St. Luke. His faith had been a trust in the dark. He could not make the light, but 
he could call for it. And he had called, he had pressed to Christ, awfully in earnest, 
unboundedly confident. The faith saved through what it did. It brought him to the 
Lord; and that is salvation. The first use of the new sight was to behold the 
Deliverer. The first face that wrote its image in the heart was the face of God in 
Christ. Saved, whole, because that face was formed in the heart of hearts, never 
more to fade from it. " I was blind ; now I see." " Go thy way," says the Lord. 
" Nay, dearest Master, where thou goest I will go. Where thou dwellest I will dwell. 
Thy way it mine. Mine the new song which thou hast given. Thou hast touched 
my ev«»— 

« • AAd in that light of Ufe 111 walk 
Till travelling days aie dune.' " 



OH, xvm. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIKG TO ST. LUKE. 121 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Gontinuance in prayer : Divine delay. We have first to consider 

what is — 

I. The aequmbnt in the text. It is one from the less to the greater, or ratlier 
from the unworthy to the worthy. If a bad man will, for a poor reason, acceile to the 
req^uest of one for whom he cares nothing, how much more certainly will the Ri'^hteous 
One himself, for a good reason, espouse the cause of those who are so dear to him ! 
The reasons for contidence in God's faithfulness and interposition are therefore threefold. 
1. If an unprincipled judge amongst men will finally do justice, ai-suredly the righteous 
Judge of all the earth will do so. His character is something which cannot fail ; we 
Diay build on that as on the most solid rock. 2. If justice is granted by us for so poor 
a reason as that of fearing vexatious annoyance, surely God will listen and will respond 
to reverent and believing prayer. He is far more certain to be won by that in us which 
pleases hin. than is an unjust judge by that in his appellant which aniioys him. And 
our approach to him in prayer, our reverent attitude, our faith in his goodness, our 
trust in his Word, — all this is very pleasing unto our Father. 3. If a man will yield a 
demand made by one to whom he does not feel himself related, and in whom he is 
absolutely uninterested, how confident we may be that God will interpose on behalf of 
those who, as his own sons and daughters, are dear to his parental heart, and who, 
collectively, constitute " his own elect " — those who are most tenderly and intimately 
related to him in Jesus Christ his Son I 

II. The serious fact of the Divinii delay. " Though he bear Ions with them ' 
(ver. 7), or, " and he delays [to interpose] in their cause" (Dr. Bruce). It is certain 
that, from our point of view, God does delay to vindicate his penple; his answer does 
not come as soon as we expect it; it is held back so long that we are ready " to faint " 
(lose heart). Thus was it many times in the history of Israel ; thus has it been 
frequently in the history of the Chiiroh of Christ. How many times have suffering 
bands of noble martyrs looked up piteously and despondently to heaven as they cried, 
"How loni, Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood?" Thus 
has it been in multitudes of individual instances ; men have been oppressed, or they 
have been embarrassed, or they have been disappointed, or they have been otherwise 
afflicted; they have appealed to God for his deliverino; grace; and they have looked 
long in vain for the Divine response. They say, " my God, I cry, . . . but thou 
hearest noL " (Ps. xxii. 2). 

III. The explanation that will be found. The time will come when we shall 
understand why God did delay to answer us. But we may be quite sure that when 
it comes it will be seen: 1. That it was not in him — not in his absence from us, nor his 
indifference to.us, nor his unreadiness to help us. 2. That it was in us — m our unreadi- 
ness to receive his interposition, or in the misuse we should malie of it, or in the greaicr 
aud truer good to be gained by our patience than by our relief; and thus in the ultimate 
gain to our own well-being by his withholding. 

IV. The blessed fact that it is only a delay. " I tell you that he will avenge 
them speedily." 1. It is probable that when God does manifest his power he will wurk 
speedy and overwhelming destruction to the guilty ; he will avenge " speedily," i.e. 
quiddy, instantaneously. "How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! 
ihey are utterly consumed with terrors. As a dream when one awaketh ; so, Lord, 
when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image " (Ps. Ixxiii. 19, 20). 2. It is 
certain that in his own time and way God will defend his people, that he will relieve 
his children, that he will redeem and bless his " own elect." His faithfulness to his 
Word ; his love for them that love him ; his intimacy of relation to those who are " in 
Jesus Christ ; " — this is a sure and absolute pledge that the appeal to him cannot be and 
will not be in vain. Men ought continuously, perseveringly, to pray, and never to lose 
heart. The day of Divine appearing is entered in the books of God. — C. 

Ver. 8. — Ow unbelief. " Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find 
faith on the earth ? " These words have no special reference, if they have any at all. 



122 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa 10 ST. LUKE. [oh. xvm. 1—48. 

to the condition of the world at the " second coming " of Christ. In order to ander- 

stand and appreciate them, we must consider — 

I. What is the force and KANas op this expbbsbioh, " the coming of the Son of 
man." And it will be found on investigation that it signifies any special manifestation 
of God's power or any special appearance of Christ either in Person or in providence. 
This may he : 1, In mercy ; including the Incarnation, when the Son of man came 
" not to destroy but to save" the world; the Eesurrection, when he came in power and 
triumph from the other world ; the Day of Pentecost, when he came in marvellous out- 
pouring of Divine influence upon the world. 2. In judgment ; including the destruction 
of Jerusalem; the day of death to each human being; the day of judgment itself, 
when " before him shall be gathered all nations." 

II. What is the application of it in the text. A widow appeals for redress 
against " her adversary " (the defendant) to an unprincipled judge. He puts her off 
until her importunity makes him listen and respond in order to save himself from 
annoyance. Arguing d fortiori, our Lord contends that God, the righteous Judge, will 
most certainly grant to his own people (children) the requests they make of him (see 
previous homily). But, continues the great Teacher, who had such a perfect insight 
into our nature, when he does that, and "comes" in judgment to his foes and in 
mercy to his friends, will he find his friends expecting him? will they be looking for 
his appearing ? will their attitude be one of holy expectation, of instant recognition, 
and of devout thankfulness? or will they not, after all their asking, be positively 
surprised and even incredulous at his manifestation? He wK come most assuredly, 
but when he comes, will he find faith on the earth ? 

III. What illtjstbations we have of the tetjth of it. 1. We have two striking 
tcriptaral illustrations. (1) Christ's own coming, after his resurrection, to his dis- 
ciples. Instead of looking for him and welcoming him, according to his word (ver. 33), 
they were astounded and incredulous (oh. xxiv. 11, 22, 23, 37). He did not " find 
faith " in them. (2) His coming in providential deliverance to Peter. When the 
Church had been praying without ceasing for him, they should have been hoping 
for a Divine visitation in response to their prayer. Nevertheless, when it came, were 
they not found unbelieving and astonished (Acts xii. 5, 15)? Are we much better 
than they ? 2. Christ's coming in judgment. Such narrow and false interpretations 
as the Jews were apt to put upon sudden and sad calamities (ch. xiii. 1 — 4) we must 
scrnpulously avoid. But when we see a man who has defied all laws, human and 
Divine, brought down into shame and ruin, or when we see a guilty empire which was 
founded on violence, sustained by force, and nourished in corruption, stricken down by 
defeat and reduced to dishonour and disaster, shall we be surprised as if a strange thing 
had happened ? or shall we not rather feel that this is precisely what we had every 
reason to expect from the righteousness of the Divine Kuler? 3. Christ's coming 
in grace and mercy. When the Christian family, in answer to earnest and continued 
prayer, is just saved from serious embarrassment and perhaps from disgrace; when the 
Christian Church, after much pleading for God's Spirit, receives marked and manifest 
tokens of the presence and power of God in the midst of it ; when the Christian teacher 
or pr( acher, as the issue of much devout and faithful work, finds many souls to be 
seeking the life which is of God ; — is the attitude of that family, that Church, that 
teacher, one of calm expectation and devout acquiescence? or is it not rather one of 
surprise, if not even of incredulity ? When we have been imploring the Son of man to 
come, and he comes at our appeal, does he find us awaiting and expecting him? 
Surely, with fuller and deeper laith on our part, there would be a more frequent coming 
on the part of our gracious Lord in life-giving; power and blessing. — 0. 

Vers. 9 — 14. — The Pharisee and the publican. The scene indicated by our Lord's 
opening sentences is easily realized. We readily picture to our minds the place and 
the two persons in whom we are interested — the haughty Pharisee and the humble- 
minded publican. We readily imagine their demeanour as they enter, their posture 
as they praj, their reception as they pass through the courts going and returning. 
But we ask how and why was it that the Pharisee was rejected and the publican 
accepted. And in reply we say : 1. In some respects the two men stood on the same 
ground. Both were icee from the taint of idolatry and were worshipping God ; both 



OH. xvm. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 123 

appreciated the privilege of prayer ; both came to the same building, and, using the 
same invocation, each uttered the uppermost thought in his mind. 2. In some aspectg 
the Pharisee seemed to have the advantage. (1) He had the respect of the public, the 
good and God-fearing public, of the respectable people of his day ; (2) he had lived the 
worthiest life in all social and political relations ; (3) he was much the more " religious " 
of the two, in the sense that his habit of life was devout and charitable, while that of 
the publican had been godless and avaricious. 3. The terms of their respective prayers 
are not decisive of their acoeptableness in the sight of God. (1) A truly humble m&u 
might speak to God in the strain, though not in the spirit, of the Pharisee. It is 
quite right to thank God for being preserved from presumptuous sins and being kept 
in the path of rectitude and devotion (see Ps. xli. 12, 13). (2) A thoroughly formal 
worshipper might present the petition of the publican. How often, since then, have 
these or very similar words been used by "penitents" who have been impenitent, by 
those who have tak«n the language of humility on their lip while they " have regarded 
iniquity in their heart " ! A modern writer (T. T. Lynch) represents these two men as 
going up again to the temple ; but this time the Pharisee, adopting the publican's form 
of words in hope of acceptance, is again rejected ; while the publican, giving thanka 
to God foi Mb reconciliation and renewal, is again accepted — 

" For sometimes tears and sometimes thanka. 
But only truth can please." 

How, then, do we explain the fact that " this man went down to his house Justified 
rather than the other " ? 

I. The Pharisee had tormed a badioallt false bsttmatb of his own character, 
and the publican a true one of his. The Pharisee thought he was everything God' 
wished him to be, and was miserably wrong in his estimate ; he was reckoning that 
God cared chiefly if not exclusively for the outside in religion, that his favour was 
secured by ceremonies, by proprieties, by punctualities, by utterances of prescribed 
forms. He failed to understand that this was only the shell and not the kernel, and 
that the shell of correct behaviour is nothing without the kernel of a reverent and 
loving spirit. The publican, on the other hand, believed that he was very far from 
right with God ; that he had been living a guilty life, and was condemned of God for 
60 doing ; and his thought was true. 

II. The Pharisee's false estimate led him into self- flattery ; the publicanV 
true estimate into frank, penitential acknowledgment. Under the cover of gratitude, 
the one man paid himself handsome compliments, and held on high his great meritorious- 
ness, thus confirming in his own mind the delusion that he was a favourite of Heaven; 
the other, moved by a deep sense of personal unworthiness, made honest confession 
of sin, and sought the mercy he knew he needed. 

III. God hates the proud, and honoitrs the humble-hearted. Old and New 
Testaments may be said to be full of this truth. God has said and has repeated, he 
has most plainly and emphatically declared, that pride is odious and unpardonable in 
his sight ; but that humility shall live before him (ver. 14 ; see also Ps. xxxii. 5 ; 
cixxviii. 6 ; Prov. xxviii. 13 ; Isa. Ivii. 15 ; Matt. v. 3 ; 1 Pet, v. 6 ; 1 John i. 8, 9). 
Here is: 1. ^ message of solemn warning. It concerns those who are the spiritual 
descendants of the Pharisee ; who are satisfied with their spiritual condition but have 
no right to be so; who are building the hope of their hearts on things which are 
external, but in whom the love of God does not dwell. And here is : 2. A message of 
gracious encouragement. It concerns those who are burdened with a sense of sin and 
need not remain so. The way of mercy is open to every penitent soul. Jesus Christ 
is the " Propitiation for the sins of the whole world," and the grace of God in him far 
more than suffices for every guilty heart. In him we have forgiveness of sins; in him 
we have peace and hope and joy, even eternal life. — 0. 

Vers. 15, 16. — Christ and the children : a sermon to children. This familiar and 
attractive scene is well conceived and described in the lines commencing, " Over the 
hills of Jordan." It contains valuable lessons for the young. 

L The kindliness of Jesus Christ. Some kind men are not kindly. They will 
do a great deal for jou, will give much to you, will run leriouj risks or even make 



124 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvm. 1—48. 

seriouB sacrifices on your behalf; but they are not gracious, genial, winning. They are 
not approachable ; you are not drawn to them ; you are not inclined to address them 
and make frieads with them ; they rather repel than invite you. Such was not Jesus 
Christ. He was not only kind at heart, but kindly in manner and in bearing. The 
children of his day went freely and gladly to him. That " he was never seen to smile " 
is a wholly unauthorized and, we may be quite sure, an entirely false statement. 
Did he not take those infants into his arms with a smile upon his face ? Did he not 
frequently, ay, constantly, smile as he looked upon innocency, npon hopefulness, upon 
childhood ? Think of Jesus Christ as not only the kind but the kindly One, as not 
only the good but the gracious One, as not only the wise but the winning One. Think 
of him as that One to whom, if he were with us now as he was with men of old, you 
would be drawn with an irresistible attraction, and to whom you could, without any 
effort, unburden your heart. And believe that just what he was on earth he is in 
heaven. 

n. Jesus Chhist still receives ds to the shelter op his loving poweb. Ha 
took them up into his arms. The arms of the parent are the place of shelter to the 
child; to them in all time of danger or of distress he naturally and eagerly resorts. It 
is the place of strength, of defence, of succour. But youth needs more than human 
sympathy and help ; it needs a refuge in Divine tenderness and power. It does so 
always ; but more particularly when parental care is lost, because the parents them- 
selves have "passed into the skies." Very seriously is this need felt when parental 
care is left behind, when youth or young manhood goes forth from the shelter of the 
home. Then how priceless is the shelter of the loving power of the Divine Friend ! 
In that unknown " world " which lies beyond the home-life are perils that cannot ba 
anticipated, and that are all unknown. Take care to secure the invaluable refuge 
of the Divine arm ; for only in the protection of the all-wise Leader and almighty 
Friend will safety be found. 

III. Jesus Christ still lays his hand upon us. Mark tells us (x. 16) that he 
"put his hands upon them, and blessed them." You still sing, "I wish that his hands 
had been laid on my head." It is a right and becoming thought. But the laying of 
the hand of flesh on those children's heads may not have wrought any great spiritual 
change in them ; they may have grown up to reject him. Of far more consequence 
Is it that Christ should now lay the hand of his Divine power and grace upon your 
heart; that he should so act upon you by his Divine Spirit that your mind should 
be illumined, and that yeu understand what is the good and the wise thing to do ; 
that your heart should be touched so that you will live to love him who is worthiest 
of all that is best. "His touch has stUl its ancient power." Yes; and more than 
the healing touch which gave sight to the blind and wholeness to the poor leper is that 
benignant power which opens the closed mind and cleanses the unholy heart. 

IV. Jesus looks and waits for toue submission. He says that it is you who, 
of all people, can most readily enter his holy kingdom. He must have your free and 
full consent. When he made the world, and sent the sun on its course, and gave to the 
sea its bounds, " he spake, and it was done ; he commanded, and it stood fast." Ha 
compels all things in nature to do his bidding ; but he asks, he invites your trust, your 
worship, your love. He cannot bless yciu as he would unless you consent to receive 
him as your own personal Lord and Saviour and Friend. But he assures you that this 
is open to you as it is not to others ; the young can readily give their attention, their 
docility, their love, their obedience. Fewer and slighter hindrances are in your way 
than are in the path of those who have travelled further. Of such as you are now " is 
the kingdom of God." This is the golden chance of your lite. — C. 

Ver. 17. — The child of man and the kingdom of Ood. Jesus Christ not only 
opened the gate of his kingdom to the little child as he opened his arms to the little 
children whom the mothers of Judah brought to him ; he also took the little child as 
a type of the true disciple. He taught us that if we wish to enter his kingdom, our 
ipirit must be the child-spirit. " Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as" 
etc. And what is this spirit ? It is that of — 

I. DooiLlTT, or readiness to accept what is told us. The ideal child is teachable ; it 
will learn because it is ready to receive ; it has not found out the way of distrust and of 



OH. xvrn. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 12» 

reieotion ; it talres in the liglit, the truth, which is offered and it grows therehy. Men 
of mature years and powers, who have had all the advantages of Christian privileges, 
often stand without the kingdom hecause they will not receive the truth that is offered 
them ; their mind is preoccupied with theories, systems, imaginations, of their own. 
They seem to know much; they believe they know much, for they are familiar with 
some things of which many (perhaps most) are ignorant; they could easily puzzle their 
neighbours by asking questions which these could not answer ; they have a number o' 
facts and laws, and a much larger number of names at their command ; they " seem 
to be wise " (1 Cor. iii. 18). But their knowledge is very small in comparison with all 
that has to be acquired ; it is partly (largely) local, temporary, evanescent (1 Cor. xiii. 
8) ; it is nothing to the wisdom of God. It becomes them, as it becomes us all, to 
feel toward God as our little children feel towards us — to cherish a spirit of docility. 
How much more he has to tell us than we have to teach them! How much greater 
is our ignorance in his sight than theirs is in ours! He who will not accept the 
doctrine of the Divine Fatherhood ; he who will not yield himself to a Divine Saviour ; 
he who will not pursue the path of holy service, hoping to find at the end of it a 
heavenly home, — because this does not square with some favourite theories, or because 
it transcends the range of some intellectual faculties, cannot enter the kingdom of 
truth, and therefore shuts himself out of the kingdom of God. We shall faU to stand 
on the first rung of the ladder that reaches heavenly wisdom unless we realize that 
we are all of us but very little children in the presence of our Father, and unless 
with docile spirit we come to his feet and say, "Lord, we are very ignorant; wilt 
thou teach us ? " 

" Lead UB, O Father, in the path of truth ; 
Unhelped by thee, in error's maze we grope." 

n. Simplicity. The little child (of our thought and our affection) is simple, trans- 
parent, sincere ; he says just what is in his mind, does not pretend he is naughty when 
he believes himself to be good — ^is real. This God demands of us — " truth in the inward 
parts," sincerity of spirit. It does not further our cause with hira to atfect a piety that 
is not genuine ; to simulate a penitence of ■^rhich our heart knows nothing ; to use 
the language of humility while pride is reigning within. He would rather we tell 
him just what we feel, just what we are, than adopt the most appropriate confessions 
or petitions. We must be like the children of our home ; we must mean what we say 
when we draw nigh to him. 

III. Teustfclnbss. Christianity is a religion which centres in a Person, in one 
Divine Being. " He that believeth in me," " that abideth in me," — that is the pre- 
vailing note. Trust in Jesus Christ as the Teacher, Saviour, Sovereign of the human 
soul, is the way of life. He who has that stands within "the kingdom of Go'l." 
Where shall we learn to trust f Is it not of the little child ? As the child fiees for 
refuge to its parent's arms, confides itself and all it has or hopes for to its parent's 
wisdom and love, so the human soul is invited to commit itself and all its everlasting 
interests to the Almighty Saviour, to say with implicit, childlike confidence and 
self-surrender — 

" Jesus, Kefuge of my soul, 
Let me to thy bosom fly." 

0. 

Vers. 18 — 22. — The golden chance: a sermon to the young. Many features combine 
to make this incident one of peculiar interest. 

I. The pkinoipal actob in the scene a young man. Matthew tells us this quite 
incidentally (xix. 22), but it adds great interest to the occurrence. For our hearts are 
drawn towards youth. Youth is innocent, ingenuous, frank, trustful, hopeful, loving. 
There is, moreover, some mystery about it. We know what the old man has been ; 
we know what the man of middle life will be ; but of youth we cannot tell ; it may 
accomplish great things; it is covered with the delicate buds, with the beautiful flowers 
of promise. 

n. A T0UN8 MAN OP WEALTH AND INFLUENCE. This might not make him more 
interesting to Christ; but it does to us. The rich young heir may be of no more 
intrinsic worth than the beggar by the wayside ; but because he is the heir of fortune. 



126 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvin. 1—43. 

we care about him, we watch his career ; we are specially glad if he takes a wise coutm, 
and are specially grieved if he goes astray. 

III. A YOUNG MAN WITH SOME OF THE NOBLER QUALITIES OP YOUTH. 1. We nota 

his reverence. Youth should be reverent, ignorance and inexperience should pay 
to knowledge and wisdom the regard which is their due. We like this young man 
because he saw in that homeless Teacher a wisdom superior to his own, and came and 
prostrated himself before him in becoming homage. 2. We note his ardour. Ha 
came running (Mark x. 17) to meet and to learn of Christ. Youth should be, as in 
the person of this inquirer it was — eager, ardent, enthusiastic, sanguine of good things. 
3. We note his religiousness. "Heaven lies about us in our infancy," etc. Youth is 
the time when heavenly visions are most and best seen ; when Divine claims, spiritual 
realities, are strongest and clearest to the soul ; then " life eternal " has the deepest 
meaning. So was it with him. To him life held something larger and better than all 
his lands and houses ; other and higher voices than those of debtors and stewards reached 
his ear; he bad a vision of a holy service in which he might be engaged; of a Divine 
life he might be living ; and running in his eagerness, and kneeling in his reverence, 
he li >oked up into the face of Christ and said, " Good Master, what good thing shall I do, 
that I may have eternal life?" 

IV. A YOUNG MAN IN THE PEESBNCB OP Chkist, exoitlug his Special interest. A 
young man, with his life before him and a soul not yet stained by the evil which is 
in the world, standing in the very presence of him who knew what human life might 
include and what the human soul was worth, who could tell him how to enlarge the 
one and how to ennoble the other, and who (Mark x. 21) took a tender and loving 
interest in this earnest spirit, — what could we have more profoundly interesting than 
this? 

V. Jesus Chkist bbvealino to him the true state of his heart. Our Lord's 
treatment of inquirers differed much ; it was, no doubt, determined by the state of 
their heart, as he alone knew it. He replied to this young man as he did, because he 
wished him to know where he actually stood; he wished to show him that, in order 
to be prepared to lay hold on eternal life, it was not only necessary to have such 
sincerity as he had, and such earnestness as he had, but such earnestness as would 
make him ready to yield everything to the Lord of his life ; and that this he had not. 
So, after leading him up to the point, he said, " Sell all that thou hast," etc. And 
then the inquirer knew that he lacked one thing — one essential thing ; he wanted that 
thoroughness of purpose toward God which made self-surrender possible to him. It 
was a glorious, golden chance, then used or then lost when this interview was held. 
It must have been the crisis of his career, on which everything hung for all the future. 
Similar in its nature, though not alike in its circumstances, is the opportunity offered 
to each one of us. 1. All the life of Christian privilege is the golden chance of our 
existence. "Now is the accepted time," the period when everything is open to us, when 
a noble and immortal future stretches out before us and is within our power. 2. Youth 
is the golden chance of life. It is in the days that are now passing, when the heart is 
warm, and the mind is open, and the conscience tender, and the life unburdened and 
unemljarrassed, that Christ should be approached and his lasting friendship gained. 
3. The day of Divine visitation is the golden chance of youth — that day when the 
truth and the grace of Jesus Christ are most powerfully felt, and a voice from heaven 
is heard saying of the path of life, " This is the way : walk ye in it." — 0. 

Ver. 24. — Wealth and piety. Wherein lies the difficulty of a rich man entering the 
kingdom ? This young ruler shrank from parting with his property ; but Jesus Christ 
does not ordinarily ask men of wealth to " sell all that they have, and give to the 
poor." His difiBculty, therefore, is not the common one. 1. It is not that the rich 
man is not as welcome to the friendship of Christ as the poor man. He does not make 
distinctions in his invitation, or in his desire that men should come to him. In him 
in whom is neither male nor female, bond nor free, there is neither rich nor poor. The 
poor as much as the rich, and also the rich as much as the poor, are the objects of his 
love and of his seeking. The Lord of our nature regards us, and concerns himself for 
us, not on account of our circumstances, but because he knows the value of our souls. 
2. Not because the rich man cannot illustrate the distinctive graces of Christianity. 



OH. xvra. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 127 

The sale and distribution of property in apostolic times was an expedient which wag 
adopted for the occasion ; but it was not insisted upon as necessary even then (Acts y. 
4), and it was very soon abandoned. Paul, writing to Timothy, wrote on the sup- 
position that the Christian Church included many wealthy men (1 Tim. vi.). Every 
age and every country has witnessed the lives of wealthy Christian men, who have 
illustrated every grace that the great Teacher has commended. It is clear that a 
rich man may he as humble, as generous, as temperate, as pure, as devout, as any poor 
man can be; and he sometimes is so. The explanation of our Lord's language is 
found in the fact that riches are apt to put a serious obstacle in the way of entrance into 
the kingdom. If we would find our way into that holy and blessed kingdom, it ia 
necessary that we should have a sense of our personal emptiness and need. We come 
to Christ to be filled with his fulness, to be enriched by his grace and love. He is a 
Physician, and it is they who feel that they are sick that are likely to apply for his 
healing power. He is the Divine Source of all wealth and enrichment (Rev. iii. 18), 
and they must know themselves to be poor who come to buy of him gold that they 
may become rich. Hence the difficulty. It is for this reason that — 

I. A MAN WHOSE MIND IS PULL OP KNOWLEDGE finds it hard to receive distinctive 
Christian truth. He is rich, as compared with his fellows, in the acquisition of know- 
ledge. He is proud of this possession of his, and is bent on making the most of it. 
Jesus Christ comes to him, and says that he must lay aside his own views and notions, 
and sit at his feet and receive the truth he brings to him from God. Then the "rich" 
man has to sacrifice his favourite theories, has to make nothing of his learning, that 
he may admit to his mind the wisdom that is from above ; and he finds it very " hard " 
to do this. 

II. A MAN WHO IS CLOTHED WITH HONoUK finds it hard to take a very humble view 
of himself. For honour is an order of wealth, and one that is highly prized. But the 
natural and common effect of it is to lead those who are the objects of it to form a 
flattering view of themselves ; it is hard to get them to believe that in God's sight 
they may be as sinful as those held in very much less regard by their fellow-men. But 
the ground on which human souls must come to Christ is that of humiUty. " Blessed 
are the poor in spirit : for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." 

III. A MAN WHOSE CHAMBERS AKE P0LL OP TKBASUEB is tempted to Seek his satis- 
faction in the lower good. We have to make our choice, as Divine truth is presented 
to us, whether we will live for the service of Christ or for our own personal enjoyment 
and aggrandizement. To the poor, to the afflicted, to the suffering, to those who know 
they have not long to live, the temptation to live for this present world is nut so 
strong ; on their ear the overtures of the gospel of grace fall as that very thing they 
need for their comfort and their peace ; they have little to surrender, they have much 
to gain. But to those to whom every avenue of enjoyment is open ; to those who 
may look hopefully, perhaps confidently, for place, for power, for society, for pleasure, 
for honour, — the inducement is very strong and urgent to cast in their lot with those 
" whose portion is in this life." Many voices very close to their ear, very clear and con- 
vincing, call for their strength to be given to the material rather than the spiritual, to 
the temporal rather than the eternal, to the human rather than the Divine ; and it ia 
" hard " for them to resist and to overcome. 1. Let poverty find its ample consolation 
in the accessibility of the riches that always satisfy and never flee. 2. Let those who 
know neither poverty nor riches thank God for the happy mean in which his provi- 
dence has placed them — ^not subjecting them to the temptations of either. 3. Let wealt^i 
beware lest it mal:e a sad, a supreme, mistake ; lest, in the great spiritual strife, it — 

"Clutch the tinsel gilding, and let go the crown of life." 

0. 

Veri. 28, 29 (comp. Mark. x. 29, 30). — Christ's estimate of a Christian life. It ii 
certain that no literalist could ever understand Jesus Christ. Men of this order of 
mind utterly failed to understand him in his own time (see particularly John vi. 41 — 46), 
and they are equally at fault to-day. It is clearly impossible to give a literal inter* 
pretation to these words of the Lord ; the facts of the case do not permit it. But going 
to the heart of this Divine utterance, we understand that any one who for Christ's sake 
suffers the loss of kindred and of worldly goods, shall have that which, in the sight \it 



128 THE GOSPEL AOCOBDINO TO ST. LDKB. [ch. xvin. 1— 48. 

God and in the light of his truth, is worth a hundred times more than any human or 
earthly blessings can be. We shall better see the truthfulnesti of this declaration if we 
approach the main thought from a little distance, and consider that human lift is some- 
thing the value of which depends not on the qitantity hut on the kind of it. A small 
quantity of human life outweighs in value a large amount of animal life. A very 
small portion of the higher human life transcends in value a large extent of lower 
human life. " Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Catbay." Bailey has well 
written— 

"Life's more than breath and the quick round of blood; 

It is a great spirit and a busy heart. 

We live in deeds, not years ; in thoughts, not breaths ; 

In feelings, not in figures on a dial. 

We should count time by heart-throbs. He most live* 

Who thinks most, feels the noblest, acts the beat" 

And there is wisdom as well as strength in the lines — 

" One crowded hour of glorious life 
Is worth an age without a name." 

Lifting up this truth to the spiritual level of the teaching of Jesus Christ, we find that 
in such a life as that which is of him and in him — for the attainment of which we may 
have to make very great sacrifices — 

I. Thbke is an elevated and teanbpobting jot experienced in the very endurance 
of persecution; and this alone goes far towards fulfilling the Saviour's word. This 
statement is simply historical. The apostles returned from the council, condemned 
and severely scourged, " rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his 
Name." Paul and Silas sang the praises of God in the darkness and foulness of a 
Philippian dungeon. And under every sky since then, men and women, old and young 
and in the midst of life, have gone to the dungeon and to the stake and to the open 
grave in which they were to be buried alive, not with tears in their eyes and lamenta- 
tions on their tongues, but with songs of praise upon their lips, and with keen, exultant 
triumph in their hearts. To-day there is far more of real and lasting joy to be found 
under the roof of the missionary compound than in the palatial buildings of European 
capitals, profounder and more lasting satisfaction in the self-sacrificing labours of the 
evangelist than in the lounging idleness of the sons and daughters of fashion and of 
pleasure. 

II. In TE0B DisciPLEBHTP THERE ABE souKOES OF JOT wMch altogether outweigh 
any losses that may be entailed by fidelity. Some people know just enough of " reli- 
gion " to find it a weariness, a burden, an nnxiety. This is neither piety nor policy ; it 
does not secure God's favour, and it gives no satisfaction to them. But the true and 
thorough servant of Jesus Christ, heartily surrendering himself to his Divine Redeemer, 
and devotedly engaging in his service, has " manifold more " of blessedness than he 
loses by anything with which he parts. He has (1) the favour, the forgiving and 
abiding love of God his Father; his lifelong, his unfailing friendship; (2) happy, holy 
fellowship with Jesus Christ, and, through him, with the true and pure and good 
amongst men ; (3) a share in that holy service, outside of which is no rectitude for man, 
in which is rightness and wisdom, and therefore peace and joy ; (4) the luxury, the 
blessednesB of usefulness, of doing good and communicating, of being a source of strength 
and healing to the poor and needy; (5) "And in the world to come eternal life:" not 
the lingering and lasting shadows into which Greek and Eoman shrank from descending ; 
not the uninviting sh^l of the Hebrews ; but everlasting day, eternal life — life in its 
fiilness, its freedom, its blessedness, its glory, life never ceasing but enlarging and 
unfolding evermore. What commanding, convincing, constraining reasons are here for 
choosing the Master's service 1 What is it that he asks us to surrender for his sake ? 
Anything in the way of profit, or pleasure, or companionship? Perhaps something in 
these ways. But what we gain by accepting him as Saviour and Friend is a thousand 
times more precious than all that we can be called upon to renounce. Even here and 
now God gives to us far more than he takes from us ; and, beside this, in the world 
to come is " eternal life." We may well do as Peter said be and his associates had done 
— Uave all to follow Christ. — 0. 



CH. xvin. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 129 

Vers. 31 — 34. — God's concealing kindness, etc. The clear prevision which the Lord 
Jesus Christ had of the future which was before him may suggest to us the 
thought — 

L God's kindkbss in oonoealmbnt. We often try to forecast the future, and 
sometimes wish that we could do so less imperfectly than we can. But our rery 
inability to do this is to us a valuable shield that saves us from great unhappiness. For 
who of us would care to proceed at all if he knew all the sorrowful experiences through 
which his path would lie ? We sometimes feel a humane satisfaction that the sheep and 
cattle that browse so contentedly to-day in the field have not their short enjoy meat 
marred by any expectation of the slaughter-house they are to entfer to-morrow. And 
we may well be thankful that so thick a veil hangs over Our future, thast we cannot 
possibly tell what are the troubles that will befall us, or where our life will be darkened 
with its deep«r shadows. Even when, as with Paul, we know that " bonds and afflic- 
tions abide us," still, like him, we do " not know the things that will befall us " then. 
And whilst, on the one hand, we very commonly have enough of premonition to make 
desirable preparation for coming evil, on the other hand our life is so ordered that we 
go happily and hopefully on our way, untroubled by the evils which are in front of us 
but which are mercifully hidden from our view. 

II. OuB Lobd's leadbkship in the expebienob of appbehbnsion. Our happy 
inability to anticipate the future is not the whole of the truth, though it is a large part 
of it. It remains true that there is a considerable anciount of apprehension in the struc- 
ture of our life. There are times when we clearly foresee some trial ahead of us. We 
may not know precisely the time of its arrival, nor the elements of which it will be 
composed. But we can tell that " our hour is coming." Before us, at no great dis- 
tance, is suffering, is separation, is loss, is loneliness, is heart-ache. The rctad we are 
travelling along will soon descend, and we shall go down into the darkly shaded valley. 
Of that we have no doubt ; and our spirit trembles, our heart is full of foreboding and, 
perchance, misgiving. How shall we pass through that dark valley ? flow bravely or 
how weakly, how worthily or how unbecomingly, shall we undergo that experience 
when it comes ? There are many sources of encouragement to which we might resort. 
But this passage speaks to us of one of the best of them. Christ has gone this way 
before us — ^this way of keen and anxious apprehension. He knew that the most trying 
experiences were only a little way in front of him. He knew that the last extremity 
of human hatred and of human cruelty would be visited upon him. The Jews would 
condemn him with all their malignity, and the Gentiles would maltreat him with all- 
their disdainful and powerful heartlessness. The sad and shameful future jmmediatefy 
before him stood clear to his sight, clearer far than any comin? sorrow can shape itself 
to us. Therefore we may feel that: 1. We are treading in the footsteps of our Lord, 
and it is enough for the disciple to be as his Master. 2. We may be confident of his 
tenderest and fullest sympathy. He has suffered just what we are suffering now. 3. He 
will help us in our time of need. As he himself sought of man the succour he did not 
find, and was glad to receive from heaven the comfort he did not ask (Mark liv. 34, 37 ; 
fljid ch. xxii. 43), we may be well assured that he will not refuse us all the aid we need 
and ask of him when the trial-hour of our experience shall have come. 

III. The ditfioultt op disciplbship — to leaen unwelcome tboth. There waa 
no inherent incomprehensibleness in the words Christ here employed ; yet " they under- 
stood none of these things." Why did they not comprehend such intelligible langiiage ? 
Because the truth conveyed was so exceedingly unwelcome. It cut across all their 
cherished hopes respecting the Messiah; it dashed their natural expectations to the 
ground; and it went sorely against all that their affection prompted them to believe and 
cherish. "It could not, must not, did not mean that," they said in their hearts. It is 
not the strangeness nor the profundity of truth which is too much for us ; it is its 
remoteness from that on which we have set our heart. We do not understand that which 
clashes with our prejudices, or our passions, or our affections. The apostles of Christ 
would have saved themselves from many hours of awful sorrow and abject hopelessness 
and painful incredulity, if their feelings had allowed them to understand the truth 
which their Master put so plainly and so repeatedly before them (Matt. xvi. 21 ; xviL 
22 ; XI. 17). Can it be that Jesus Christ is saying something to us which we ought 
to understand, but do not because it is unwelcome to our hearts, or because it is at 

LUKB. — H. X 



130 THE GOSPEL ACOORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvm. 1—43, 

variance with all our old and strong habits of thought ? Is it possible that he is calling 
us to repentance, to self-surrender, to a full confession of our faith, to a nobler life, to 
some field of active work, and we do not understand what he is saying to us? Where 
his own apostles so greatly failed, may not we be found at &ult? Shall we leave it to 
future darkness and a great surprise and a mortifying discovery of error to set ui 
straight? Or shall we not rather recognize in time our liability to mistake ; seek to 
have an open mind to receive all his holy will concerning us; ask God to help us to 
remove the bandages of prejudice and of earthly attachments from the eyes of our 
understanding ; seek by docility and devoutness of spirit to be such disciples of the 
Master that, when he speaks even unwelcome truth to uii^ we shall understand him 
and obey ? — C. 

Ver. 37. — Present hit passing opportunity. Pathetic stories are told of those who, 
in circumstances of the greatest danger or distress, have suddenly found themselves 
almost within reach of blessed deliverance, but who just failed to realize their hope. 
It is the captive knight past whose dungeon a friendly host is filing, and the sound of 
the clarion drowns his pleading cries ; or it is the shipwrecked sailor on the lonely island 
whose laboriously constructed signal the ship that is homeward bound does not descry, 
and who sees his one chance of rescue vanishing away. Those who have never known a 
supreme misfortune, together with a possibility, which was only a possibility, of deliver- 
ance, cannot realize the thrilling and all but intolerable suspense of such moments of 
present but passing opportunity as Bartimseus now knew. He was blind, helpless, shut 
out from all the' sights and nearly all the enjoyments of human life ; his lot was of the 
darkest and the saddest ; and there was passing by One who could turn darkness into 
day, dreariness and gloom into blessedness and beauty, if only he could win his ear and 
make his plea. This glorious Healer was within a few paces of him, would soon be 
actually in front of him, would all too soon be gone beyond his calL " Jesus of Kazaretli 
was passing hyl" We see here— 

L The soreness or otjb bpibitual need. We are blind, helpless, suffering tha 
worst privations, under the dominion of sin. We recognize not our Father, our 
brethren, our true selves, our true opportunities, our chief perils, our real interests ; and 
our blindness is not only immeasurably reducing the value of our present life, but is 
leading us to that which is darker still and sadder far. 

n. The iibab pebsbnob op Jesus Chbist. A Divine Deliverer is at hand. Quite 
near to us, within reach of our voice, within touch of our hand, is One who can open 
our eyes and make us see clearly all that we need to know. At our very door is One 
who is not only ready at our entreaty, but even prepared already and eager to supply 
all our need. Here is One who offers to : 1. Enlighten our mind. 2. Eestore the 
relationship to God our Father we have lost by our sin. 3. Constitute himself our 
almighty and unchanging Friend and Guide through all our life. 4. Conduct us and 
receive us to a heavenly home. 

in. The PAssrNQ op present oppobtdnity. This priceless chance is ours to-day; 
but how long will it remain within our reach ? Jesus of Nazareth is near, but he is 
passing. 1. We know nothing of Christian privilege beyond the grave, and our life is 
hastening on ; it may close at any hour, and it is hurrying away on the swift wings of 
duty and of pleasure. 2. The favoured period of youth is still more transient. Christ 
is very near us in the golden days of youth, when the spiritual nature is so open and 
so respoasive ; but how fast these days are fleeing ! how soon will they be gone 1 3. The 
hour of special grace and of rare privilege is but an hour — that time when Heaven puts 
forth its most constraining influences, and we see and feel that the gates into the king- 
dom of God are opened wide for our entrance. We cannot afford to delay when Jesus 
of Nazareth is near us. When eternal life is within our grasp, we must compel every 
other interest to take the second place ; and this, not only because it is of such tran- 
scendent value, but because we may never have so golden an opportunity again. There 
is " a tide " in the history of every man which leads on to something more than " for- 
tune ; " it leads unto life — the life that is Divine and everlasting. On no account what- 
ever must that be " omitted." Foolish beyond all reckoning, as well as guilty before 
God, is the soul that lets Jesus of Nazareth pass by without seeking his feet mod finding 
his favour. — 0. 



en. svm. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKJS. 13i 

Ver, 41. — What we want of Christ Our hearts are drawn towards blind BartimsBiis ; 
we compassionate him for his long-continued blindness ; we enter into his feeling oi 
keen hopefulness when he hears of the passing of Jesua Christ ; we like the importunity 
of the man, his sturdy refusal to be put down by popular clamour; we like also hia 
manly directness in reply to the question asked him, "Lord, that I may receive my 
sight!" We owe him some gratitude in that it was his necessity which provided our 
Lord with one more opportunity of illustrating his power and his pity, and of carrying 
on the great redemptive work he came to accomplish. For these miracles he wrought 
were a part, and a valuable part, of that work of his. If apprised of less value than 
they once were, they are very far indeed from being valueless. And amongst other 
things they illustrate Christ's personal dealing with men. As he did not heal in troops 
and companies but addressed himself to each individual man or woman that was sick 
or suffering, blind or lame, so does he now make hia appeal to each individual heart, 
and say to this man and to that man, " What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee ? " 
And what do we want of him, as he thus approaches us? 

L Those who want nothing in particulab. They meet with their neighbours to 
worship him and to hear about bim, but they have no sense of need in their hearts ; 
their souls are not suffering and smarting under a painful sense of sin ; their hearts are 
not athirst for the living God and Saviour. They wish for " bread enough," but it is 
not the bread of life for which they hunger; they would like much to be wealthy, but 
they are not careful to be " rich toward God." 

IL Those who want nothing of Christ sow. The time will come when they 
will be glad of a Saviour and Friend — some future hour of sorrow, or difficulty, cr lone- 
liness, and certainly the hour of death ; they would like to keep open the line of com- 
munication, but at present they do not feel that they want anything of the great 
Healer of hearts. But let us look rather at — 

III. What we all do really want of him. If our Divine Father is not to be 
disappointed in us, if our lives on earth are not to be miserable failures, then may we 
all urge, with this blind man, " Lord, that we may receive our sight ! " For it is 
essential to the life of our life that we sliould be enlightened upon : 1. The transcendent 
value of the human spirit, and thus understand of how much more value we ourselves 
are than any of our earthly surroundings, or than the body which is our temporary 
residence. 2. The intimate and tender relation in which we stand to God. That God 
is the one Being with whom we have to do, from whom we cannot withhold our love 
and service without doing him and ourselves the greatest wrong, who is " earnestly 
remembering " and patiently seeking us in our distance and estrangement. 3. The 
supreme and abiding blessedness of the service of Christ ; that this is the soul's only 
true rest and portion, its peace and its inheritance. We want that these great saving 
truths should stand out before the eyes of our soul as the solid and living facts, in com- 
parison with which all other things are of small account ; we want to recognize in 
them the great verities which alone will satisfy and save us. If we would that Christ 
should do this for us, we must remember that what he is saying to us is this : (1) 
"Learn of me;" (2) "Believe in me;" "Have faith in me;" (3) "Abide in me;" 
(4) "Follow me."— 0. 

Vers. 1 — 14. — Lessons in prayer. Our Lord, in the two parables composing the 
present passage, gives the disciples encouragement to pray. The one brings out the 
need of perseverance and importunity in prayer ; the other brings out the spirit of self- 
abasement which should be cultivated in prayer. They are ^us linked together as 
twin lessons in the art of prayer. 

I. Let us notice the nbbdftji. impobtunitt of God's elect as ilhistbated 
BY the iMPOBTtTNATE WIDOW. (Vers. 1 — 8.) The story is about an earthly judge of 
unscrupulous character, to whom a widow in her weakness, but with a deep sense of 
injury, appeals for redress. The weak woman is able by her importunity to extort 
from the heartless judge the redress which he would give on no other conditions. He 
even becomes facetious and humorous over it, and declares that he will avenge her, 
lest " by her continual coming she strike me." Having related this story, our Lord 
makes certain deductions from it. And: 1. Se declares that at hia coming there will 
It little faith in his advent (Ver. 8.) Now, this unbelief about his advent can b« 



i-^ THE ^GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LTJKB. [oh, xvm. 1—431 

aoeonnted for on several grounds. (1) The procession of nature is so uniform. All 
things seem to continue as they were from the creation. Nature is on so large and 
grand a scale that we do not appreciate the real progress, and imagine that we are in 
the midst of a standstill. Uniformity, however, is not standstill. (2) Hope deferred 
will make many hearts sick. And so what has been so long talked of and yet haa 
never appeared will be thought at last as never to appear. And (3) stoicism will 
lead many just to take things as they are, and entertain no concern about any change. 
It is astonishing how easy-going people tolerate manifest wrongs rather than take the 
trouble either to pray about them or to work for their removal. But : 2. Ow Lord 
acknowledges tTie wrong to which his elect ones have been exposed. Their cry is for justice, 
for redress, like the widow. Now, our Lord admits that his people have not got justice 
from the world. The world has not been worthy of them. The world has made them 
time after time martyrs. It is a great assurance that the Lord acknowledges his 
servants' wrongs. 3. Ee intimates at the same time that, like the widow, they mil need 
importunity. The one weapon must be wielded and wielded incessantly. He keeps us 
waiting doubtless for our good. If we got all the moment we asked it, how should we 
ever learn patience? But: 4. Ee promises a sudden redress. The idea seems to be 
not " speedily " but " suddenly " he will avenge them. It will be a sharp and decisive 
deliverance when it comes. We thus see that all life's discipline is planned to stimu* 
late prayer. And when we have least taste for it, we should, like Luther, pray on. 
This is the importunity the Lord loves and will answer. 

IL LbT us notice the BFIBIT 07 SELF-ABASEMENT WHIOH BEOtTLD 0HAHACT ER115M 
OUB PBAYEB AS ILLUSTBATED IN THE PABABLE OV THE PhABISEE AND THE FUBLIOAN. 

(Yers. 9 — 14.) And in this second story we have a Pharisee first presented whose 
prayer is an outburst of self-confidence. He thanks God that he is so much better 
than his neighbours. For in these he recognizes extortioners, unjust men, and 
adulterers. A self-righteous spirit is censorious; its prayer is a criticism; even • 
publican's modesty in standing afar off, and his contrition in smiting on his breast, 
are set down to his disparagement. Then the Pharisee can congratulate himself on 
fasting twice a week, and on giving tithes of all he possesses. But he was not a bit the 
better for all this so-called prayer, this bit of blatant self-praise. On the other hand, 
the publican, though he remained afar off and hardly ventured to look up, but smote 
on his breast and cried, " God be merciful to me a sinner 1 " went down to his house a 
happier and better man. For the important point is not their consciousness, but God's 
attitude towards their respective spirits. To the one spirit God responds by justifica- 
tion and a sense of acceptance. The other is sent empty away. Hence the principles 
Jesus deduces are twofold, 1. Self-exaltation always precedes abasement. The proud 
will sooner or later get his fall. The Pharisaic spirit is always humiliated in the end. 
The man who is filled with self-satisfaction is only demonstrating his own self-ignor- 
ance and distance from God and his great ideal. 2. Self-abasemeyit always leads to 
excitation. It is when we feel " as a beast " before God, like Asaph in the seventy-third 
psalm, that we are on the way to spiritual rapture. For God has provided for the 
abased sinner the pardon he needs, and, besides the pardon, sanctification and everlast- 
ing progress. Let us, then, pray in the penitential key continually, and let us pray 
determined not to be denied ; and heights of spiritual exaltation and rapture will be 
seen rising from our very feet, and inviting us to sit down on them with Jesus. — 
B.M. E. 

Vers. 15 — 30. — The children of th« kingdom. During the progress of the King 
towa,rds Jerasalem, his personal influence and benediction were greatly valued. It 
would seem that mothers brought their children to him to be blessed, and ended by 
producing the very little ones. The disciples thought the line should be drawn some- 
where, and so ventured to forbid the anxious mothers, only, however, to receive the 
signitioant rebuke from him, "Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them 
not : for of such is the kingdom of God." We are thus introduced to the important 
principle that- 




OH. xvra. 1—43.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 133 

It is when we recognize in him onr Father, and are prepared to accept as little children 
all he sends, and to do all he commands, that we truly belong to his kingdom. Hence 
the two characteristics specially brought out are (1) trust, and (2) obedience. It is thus 
we are to test ourselves. Do we trust God our Father as little children trust their 
fathers according to the flesh? and do we obey our heavenly Father as little ones obey 

their earthly parents? Then are we in the kingdom. 

II. Christ expects the kiohest EnLBB to teust and to obbt him likb a littls 
CHILD. fVers. 18 — 27.) We have here an interesting case of anxiety, and how Christ 
dealt with it. And here we have to notice that : 1. Neither his wealth nor his position 
tatisfied the young vvHer. Something more was needed. The heart cannot content 
itself with either rank or gold. Hence his anxiety to lay hold on eternal life, which he 
felt was something more than he had yet obtained. 2. He fancied he could entitle him- 
tdf to it by a stroke ofpublie service. Hence his inquiry, " Good Master, what shall I 
do to inherit eternal life?" His notion was that he could claim it as a right, if he 
could only find out the additional duty ho felt able to discharge. 3. Jestu destroy* 
with a single stroke his overestimate of human nature. The flattery of human nature 
coincides with self-esteem. The young ruler believed in his own goodness and capa- 
bilities, and ho complimented Jesus as "good Master," because he believed in the 
existence of any number of good men— himself, of course, included. Now, Jesus wfll 
not accept a false compliment. Human nature is not good; and it is not as a mete 
man that he is going to receive such flattery. Hence he tells the ruler that there is no 
mere man good; that God alone is good. There is here no repudiation of goodness as 
belonging to himself, but simply a repudiation of goodness as an attribute of unaided 
humanity. 4. Jesus insists on examination of past conduct in the light of the Divine 
Law. He asks the young ruler if he has kept the second table of the Decalogue, and 
been dutiful to his fellow-men. Looked at from without, the self-sufScient mind 
imagines it is a simple thing to keep the Law. But when for "law" we substitute "love," 
the self-examination does not so assure us. Meanwhile the young ruler is strong in the 
belief that he has kept the whole Law. 5. Jesus now demands, as a test of his trust 
in him, the surrender of his riches to the poor, and the subsequent following of him. The 
demand was for faith. When we consider that Jesus was apparently but a poor artisan, 
then, unless the young ruler would absolutely and implicitly trust him, he would never 
think of obeying his demand. The result proved that he was not yet ready to trust 
Jesus, He trusted his money more 1 Hence his sorrow as he leaves the Lord. And 
herein lies the money-danger. It bids for the trust of the soul. Moneyed men find it 
hard to trust any one more than money. They think it only natural that they should 
feel independent. But if money leads men away from Jesus, it is a curse, and not a 
blessing. When tempted to be covetous, let us remember that money has its special 
dangers, and makes it harder and even impossible for some to enter into God's kingdom, 
6. Jesus, while stating the difficulty which rich men find in entering Ood^s kingdom, 
shows that Qod manifests his great power in saving some of them. Money is such a 
barrier that we might well despair of the salvation of any rich men. Poor men have a 
chance. They have so little that they dare not trust in it, but in God only. But the 
rich man is tempted to trust in the uncertain riches, and leave God out of the account. 
But for this very reason God magnifies his grace in saving some rich men — in saving 
some in spite of all their temptation to trust in their abundance. A rich yet real 
believer is a splendid illustration of the grace of God. He sees through his riches and 
forbids them to come between his soul and his Saviour. 

III. ChEIST indicates the EBCOMPENSB awaiting all those who have 8ACEIFICED 

THEiB ALL FOB HIM. (Vers. 28 — 30.) Peter, as spokesman for the others, asks Christ 
what they shall have, seeing they have sacrificed their worldly positions to follow him. 
Tliey thought that they should have some recompense. Nor were they mistaken ; for 
Christ shows that they shall have : 1. A recompense in kind in this world. Often 
when a home is left for the sake of Jesus, a happier home is found in the midst of the 
Lord's work. When rich prospects are renounced for the Saviour's sake, unexpected 
recompense comes round in the shape of riches. When relatives are resigned that 
Christ's cause may be promoted, new relations spring up around the devoted soul and 
bring compensation. And the spirit of loving appreciation which appropriates all 
lltiiigs makes uupl* amends for aU oar Belf-denial for our SavioHr (1 Coc UL 81— Jt^ 



184 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xvm. 1— 4a. 

2. A recompense in the world to come in the shape qf eternal Ufe. So that self-denial, 
gelf-renunciation, becomes the path to the life eternal. The opportunity of living in 
Ood and for God awaits all sincere souls in the other life, and satisfies them. Let na 
consequently rejoice in hope of the glory, and have grace to fear no eviL— B. M. £. 

Vers. 81 — 43. — Blindness, mental and physical. Having spoken to the disciples 
about recompense, he balances his consolation by giving them fair warning of his own 
approaching humiliation and death. But they were so infatuated about the honours 
that they were totally blind to the humiliation. Christ's words were no better than 
idle tales to them. It suggests — 

L The one-sided way in which people mat bead the Bible. (Ver. 31.) What 
was about to happen to Jesus was prophesied ages before. The Old Testament pre- 
sented a suffering as well as an exalted Messiah. But the Jews totally overlooked the 
humiliating aspect. And in the very same way people go still to God's Word, and find 
there only what they want to find. It needs great trials oftentimes to expound some 
passages of the Divine Word to us. We are partial students; we do not enter into the 
wide meaning of the Word as God would have us ! 

II. GkBAT TBIAL9 ABE NEEDED TO OPEN OUE EYES TO THE OVERLOOKED BBALITIE8. 

(Vers. 32 — 34.) It is plain that they did not take in Christ's meaning until he was 
actually taken from them and crucified. In the terrible suffering which seemed to 
extinguish all their fond hopes, the overwhelmed men got the spiritual vision, and were 
enabled to see a suffering as well as an exalted Messiah revealed in the Divine Word. 
And do we not often, when crushed and broken by trial, come to appropriate passages 
of God's Word which formerly were blank to us ? We ought to bless God for the 
opened eye, even though the process of opening it be painful. 

in. The KBSUBEECTION op ChBIST made amends fob all the PEBVIOTJS StrFFEBINO. 

(Ver. 33.) For resurrection was exaltation ; it was glory which could only be reached 
through the tomb. No possibility was there of Jesus being raised if he had never died. 
It is an experience cheaply purchased, perhaps, through death and the grave. 

IV. Let us conteast with this the cube of blind BAETiMatrs. (Vers. 35 — 48.) 
From blind disciples — mentally blind — Luke proceeds to speak of the blind beggar and 
his physical cure. Jesus was proceeding to Jerusalem to enter it as King. It was a 
royal progress. Here was one of the splendid accompaniments of it. 1. The condition 
of the poor blind beggar. He was blind, and, as he could not keep himself by work, 
he had to beg. He was thus perfectly helpless and dependent. And he knew his defi- 
ciencies. There was no unconsciousness of them or indifference to them. 2. The 
knowledge he possessed of Jesus. He had heard of Christ's miracles, how he had cured 
several blind men previously. He knew he was the Son of David, and regarded him 
as true Messiah. Hence his knowledge of Christ was sufficient to lead him to throw 
himself upon his mercy as soon as he had the chance. 3. The visit of Jesus to his 
neighbourhood. Jesus was passing on, and the crowd surged mightily around him. 
The noise fell upon the blind man's acute ear, and led him to ask what it aU meant. 
Then, as soon as he learned that Jesus was passing by, he began to cry, "Jesus, 
thou Son of David, have mercy on me ! " Noble example ! Should not all who feel 
their need of mercy cry as Bartimseus did ? 4. Discouragement only intensifies his 
eagerness for blessing. The crowd rebuked him, but Bartimseus persevered. The 
more discouragement, the more importunity. So let it be with us in our seasons of 
discouragement. 6. ITie call of Jesus. The importunate one is summoned to the 
Saviour's presence. Those who once discouraged him now urge him forward. 6. The 
inquiry of Jesus. Bartim^us is asked what mercy he desires ; and his whole soul goes 
forth in the words, " Lord, that I may receive my sight 1 " It is surely well when we 
clearly know our need and desire its supply. 7. The cure conferred and its consequences. 
BartimsBUs is thrown upon his faith ; according to this is his cure. But his faith was 
strong enough for the occasion. He consequently sees plainly, and his fresh sight is 
used to guide him after Jesus. So is it with us if we receive from Jesus our spiritual 
healing. Tlien we see the Saviour plainly, and we learn and are proud to follow him. 
Uhe people, too, in seeing us follow Christ, will learn to glorify the God of grace who 
tas enabled u« to do so. — B. M. E. 



CM. XIX. 1—48.] THE GOSPEL ACXX)EDINa TO ST. LUKE. 



135 



BIPOSITIOir. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Vers. 1 — 10, — Je$u$ lodges in the Jumse of 
Zaeohteut, "the chief among the publicant" at 
Jericho. This episode, wliicli took place at 
Jerleho just before the Lord's entry into 
Jerusalem the last time, ia peculiar to this 
Oospel. That the source was Hebrew 
(Aramaic) is clear from the wording of the 
narration. Some brief Hebrew (Aramaic) 
memoir was given to St. Luke, whence he 
derived his information of this most inte- 
resting and instructive incident of the last 
journey of the Master. 

Vers. 1, 2. — And Jesus entered and passed 
through Jericho. And, behold, there was a 
man named Zaoohesns, which was the chief 
among the publicans, and he was rich. 
Jericho, under the Herods, had become again 
aa important centre of trade. It lay on the 
road from Perjea to Judsaa and Egypt, and 
had, of course, an important custom-house. 
The balm which came especially from the 
Gilead district was sent through there into 
all parts of the world. Zacchseus was at the 
head of this customs department at Jericho. 
The exact position of such an official in 
those days is not known. He probably 
farmed the customs revenue under some 
great Soman capitalist of the equestrian 
order. In such an appointment it was easy 
to commit even involuntary injustices. The 
temptations to such an official to enrich 
himself at the expense of others, besides, 
were sadly numerous. Named Zacchseue. 
Zakhai signifies "pure" (see Ezra ii. 9; 
Neh. vii. 14). It is curious that we find ia 
the Talmud a man named Zakkai, the father 
of the famous rabbi Joohanan, living at 
Jericho. 

Ver. 3. — He was little of statore. Such 
a curious detail comes, of course, from some 
memoir written just at the time. 

Ver. 4.— Into a sycomore tree. Fieat 
eyeomorus, the fig-mulberry, is here meant. 
It grew in the Jordan valley to a consider- 
able height; the low, spreading branches 
were easy to climb. " We can picture the 
scene to our mind's eye. The eager, wist- 
ful, supplicating face looking down from the 
fresh green foliage — it was early spring — 
and meeting the gaze of Jesus as he passed " 
(Dean Plumptre). 

Ver. 5. — ZaoohEBUs, make haste, and come 
down; for to-day I most abide at thy house, 
Jericho was one of the cities of the priests, 
and yet our Lord, setting public opinion 
at defiance, passed over their houses, and 



announced his intention of lodging for tha 
night with one whose life's occupation was 
so hateful to the Jewish rellgiuus world. 
The Master recognized in the intense eager- 
ness of Zacchseus to get a sight of him, and 
possibly a word from him, that It was in the 
chief publican's house where lay his Father's 
business for him in Jericho. 

Ver. 7. — They all murmured. This very 
inclusive statement, " they all," shows the 
general intensely Jewish spirit of the age, 
narrow and sectarian. The people could 
not imagine goodness, or earnestness, or 
generosity in one who served the hateful 
Boman power. Probably in priestly Jericho 
this stem exclusive spirit was especially 
dominant. 

Ver. 8. — And Zacoheeus stood, and said 
unto the Lord; Behold, Lord, the half of my 
goods I give to the poor ; and if I have taken 
anything £com any man by false accusation, 
I restore him fourfold. Zaochaeus's memor- 
able speech was addressed not as an apologia 
to the murmtiring, jealous crowd, either in 
the room or the courtyard of the house, but 
to his Divine Guest, who, he felt, understood 
him, whose great heart, he knew, sympa- 
thized with him in that life of his, so 
tempted and yet so full of quiet, noble acts ; 
for the chief publican's words do not refer 
to a future purpose, but they speak of a 
past rule of life which he had set for himself 
to follow, and probably had followed for a 
long period. So Godet, who paraphrases 
thus: "He whom thou hast thought good 
to choose as thy host is not, as is alleged, 
a being unworthy of thy choice. Lo, pub- 
lican though I am, it is no ill-gotten gain 
with which I entertain thee." In a pro- 
fession like his, it was easy to commit in- 
voluntary injustice. There may, too, have 
been, probably was, many a hard if not an 
unjust act worked by the chief of the tax- 
gatherers and his subordinates in their 
difficult employment. 

Ver. 9. — And Jesus said unto him. This 
day is salvation come to this house. This 
solemn announcement on the part of the 
Bedeemer was something more than a mere 
comforting assurance to a man who, in spite 
of difficulties and temptations, had striven 
manfully to lead a brave and generous life, 
helping, it is clear, the very multitude who 
were so ready to revile him. It is an 
assurance to the world that men might 
work in any profession or calling, and at 
the same time live a life pleasing to God. 
It repeats with intense emphasis — and this 
is the great lesson of tills striking scene — 
that it is never the work or the position in 
life which ennobles the man in the sight of 



18B 



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xa. 1—44 



Qod, btrt only the way in which the work 
h done, and the position ftsed, which are of 
price in his pure eyes. The hated publican 
•t the receipt of custom — the servant of 
Borne, might eo live as to win the smile of 
God, as well aa the priest in the sanctuary, 
or the rabbi in his theological school. He 
also is a son of Abraham. That is to say, 
a spiritual son — a son in the highest and 
most real sense. Zaccheeus was a faithful 
follower of Abraham, in his life and in his 
faith. 

Ver. 10.— 7or the Son of man is come to 
BBek and to save that which was lost. A 
quiet rebuke to the Pharisees and priests 
and theii followers, who would limit the 
redeemed. Surely the "publicans" and 
the great tempted mass of mankind needed 
him more than the happy privileged class. 
It was for the sake of these poor wandering 
sheep that he left his home of grandeur and 
peace. But there was a vein of ead irony 
running through these words of the Master. 
Between the lines we seem to read some such 
thoughts as these: "You know, O priests 
and Pharisees, you do not want me. You 
think you are safe already. But these poor 
despised ones, they want, they welcome me, 
like this Zacchsaus." This, too, was a lesson 
for all time. This scene probably took 
place the evening of the Lord's arrival at 
Kacchnus's house at Jericho, after the even- 
ing meal, when the roum and court of the 
house were filled with guests and curious 
spectators. Dean Flumptre has an interest- 
ing suggestion that Zaccheeus the publican 
was one and the same with the publican of 
dt. xviii. 10 — 14, who in the temple " smote 
upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to 
me a sinner I " " Is it too bold a conjecture 
that he who saw Nathanael under the iig 
tree (John i. 48) had seen ZacchsBus in the 
temple, and that the figure in the parable 
of eh. xviii, 14 was in fact a portrait ? " 
Vers. 11 — 27. — The parable of the pounds. 
Ver. 11. — And as they heard these things, 
he added and spake a parable. The words 
which introduce this parable-story indicate 
its close connection with the events which 
had jnst taken place. " He added, and 
apake (iipoaOiXs cine)." Because he was nigh 
to Jerusalem, and because they thought that 
the kingdom of Ood should immediately 
appear. Thus were briefly stated the reasons 
which determined the Master to speak the 
following parable. First, " he was nigh to 
Jerusalem," only at most a few hours' jour- 
ney from the holy city — his last solemn, 
awfnl visit, when the mysterious act of stu- 
pendons love would be accomplished. So he 
determined to give a veiled parabolic picture 
of himself and of his chosen people. Second, 
• thav thought that the kingdom of God 
iiwiW UaiannlBteljr appeag." In hia parable 



he proposed to moderate the wild romantia 
enthusiasm of his immediate followers and 
of the Passover crowds by painting for them 
a quiet picture of the future of work and" 
waiting which lay before them. The parable 
contains three sets of lessons. (1) The varie- 
ties of reward apportioned to different de- 
grees of zeal and industry in the Master'a 
service. (2) The eternity of loss and shame 
wliioh will be the portion of the slothful 
and unfaithful servant (3) The terrible 
doom of his enemies. 

Ver. 12. — He said thereforer A eertala 
nobleman went into a far country to receive 
for himself a kingdom, and to return. There 
was a singular fitness in the Master's choice 
of a framework for his parable, which at first 
sight would seem strange and unreal. Two 
nobles, Herod and Archelans, in that age 
had literally gone horn. Jericho, where the 
Speaker of the parable-story then was, to a 
far country across the sea — to Home, to re- 
ceive a kingdom from Csesar (Josephus, 
« Ant.,' xiv. 14 ; xvii. 9). And one of these 
two nobles, Archelans, had rebuilt the stately 
royal palace of Jericho, under the very 
shadow of which the Speaker and the 
crowds were perhaps standing. 

Ver. 13.^-And he called his tes servants, 
and delivered them ten pounds, and said 
unto them, Occupy till I oome, No doubt 
when our Lord spoke these parables he 
considerably enlarged the details, made 
many parts of the framework clearer than 
the short reports which we possess can 
possibly do. The meaning of the great 
noble's action lieie is that he wished to 
test his servants— to try their various capa- 
bilities and dispositions, intendiog, when 
he should return from his long journey, 
having received his kingdom, to appoint 
them to high offices in the administration, 
to such positions, in &ct, as their action in 
regard to the small deposit now entrusted 
to them should show themselves capable of 
filling. The Greek verb rendered " occupy " 
(TtpayiMT^iaaaii) occurs here only in the 
New Testament : a compound form of it is 
rendered (ver. 15) by " gained by trading." 

Ver. 14. — ^Bnt h^ citizens hated him. 
Again history supplies the framework. This 
was what the Jews had done in the case of 
Archelans. They had sent a hostile depu- 
tation to complain of their future king he- 
fore the emperor's court at Borne. In the 
parable, in these " citizens who hated him" 
a thinly veiled picture is given of those 
Jews who utterly rejected the mission of 
Jesus, and by whose designs the Crucifixion 
was brought about. 

Ver. 16.— Thy pound. At first the small- 
ness of the sum given to each of the ser- 
vants is striking. Was it not a sum unworthy 
ot a noUe Mont to reoeivo • Ungdoaf 



OH. XIX. 1—48.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDiNa TO ST. LTIKB. 



137 



The Attic pound was in valae somewhat 
lees than £4 sterling. In the parable of the 
talents (Matt. xxv. 14—30), where although 
very different lessons are inculcated, yet the 
imagery is somewhat similar, the amounts, 
however, are vastly larger, varying from 
five talents, which would represent about 
£1000. Here the very smallness of the 
Bum entrusted to the servants has its deep 
meaning. The "nobly born" one who is 
about to receive a kingdom, represents our 
Lord, who here is in a state of the deepest 
poverty and humiliation. The little sum 
in one sense represents the work he was 
able then to entrust to his own. Again, the 
paltriness of the sum given them seems to 
suggest what a future lay before them. No 
sharing in what they hoped for — the glories 
of a Messianic kingdom on earth. No rest 
in repose under the shadow of the miglity 
throne of King Messiah. The " very little " 
(ver. 17) told them — ^if they would only 
listen — that their future as his servants 
would be a life of comparatively obscure 
inglorious activity, without rank or power, 
landless, homeless, well-nigh friendless. But 
the sequel of the parable told more than 
this. It proclaimed that their Master was 
able to estimate the moral worth of those 
who had been faithful and true in a " very 
little ; " ay, more, was in a position to re- 
ward the faithful servant. And the recom- 
pense, a city for a pound, jtUst hints at the 
magnificent possibilities of the heaven-life, 
just suggests the splendour of its rewards. 

Ver. 17. — Well, thou good servant. It is 
noticeable that, in the bestowal of the " five 
cities " upon the servant who had with his 
one pound gained five, no expression of 
praise like this " good servant " is used by 
the King on his return. Now, what does 
this omission teach us? Christ, we know, 
was very careful and very sparing in his 
use of moral epithets. " Why oallest thou 
ue good?" was his stem address to the 
young ruler who used the expression, not 
because he was convinced of its applicability, 
but because he was desirous of paying a 
flattering compliment to the wise Babbi 
from whom he desired information. We 
may safely conclude that, from the second 
servant in the story, the one who had earned 
but five pounds, he withheld the noble 
appellation " good " because he felt he had 
not deserved it. He had done well, it is 
true, and was splendidly recompensed, but 
Le might have done more. He had won a 
high and responsible place in the kingdom; 
he was appointed the ruler over five cities; 
but he had not earned the noble title, &.yaBos, 
" good." Very accurately, indeed, it seems, 
wUl places and names and power be awarded 
in the heaven-life, exactly in proportion to 
meriti and deserts. 



Vers. 20, 21.— And another came, saying, 
lord, behold, here is thy pound, which I 
have kept laid up in a napMn : for I feared 
thee, because thou art an austere man : tbon 
takest np that thou layedst not down, and 
reapest that thon didst not sow. This is 
the third class into which the servants who 
knew their Lord's will are roughly divided. 
We have, first, the devoted earnest toiler, 
whose whole soul was in his Master's work 
— great, indeed, was his reward. And, 
second, we have the servant who acquitted 
himself fairly respectably, but not nobly, 
not a hero in the struggle of life ; he, too, 
is recompensed magnificently, far above his 
most ardent hopes, but still his reward is 
infinitely below that which the first brave 
toiler received at his Lord's hands. The 
third falls altogether into a different cata- 
logue. He is a believer who has not found 
the state of grace offered by Jesus so brilliant 
as he hoped ; a legal Christian, who has not 
tasted grace, and knows nothing of the 
gospel but its severe morality. It seems to 
him that the Lord gives very little to exact 
so much. "Surely," such a one argues, 
" the Lord should be satisfied with us if wo 
abstain from doing ill, from squandering 
our talent." The Master's answer is singu- 
larly to the point : " The more thou knowest 
that I am austere, the more thou shouldest 
have tried to satisfy me 1 " The Christian 
who lacks the experience of grace ought to 
be the most anxious of workers. The 
punishment here is very different from that 
awarded to the enemies (ver. 27). We hear 
nothing of darkness and gnasliing of teeth; 
it is simply deprivation. Still, even this 
modified penalty seems to tell of an eternity 
of regret and loss. Instead of the ten cities, 
or even the five, there is not even the poor 
pound left to the hapless condemned one, 
unworthy even to retain that little heritage. 
, Ver. 23. — Wherefore then gavestnot thou 
my money into the bank, that at my coming 
I might have required mine own with usury 1 
Many in "the bank" have seen mirrored 
those Christian societies and religious or- 
ganizations to which every believer may 
entrust the resources which he is uncertain 
how best to use himself. Without particu- 
larizing, however, it seems better to under- 
stand the Lord hero simply intending to 
teach, by his image of the bank, that no 
man in this world is doomed to inactivity 
or uselessness, but that there will be oppor- 
tunity afforded to every one who is willing 
to use his talent in a humble and obscure, 
if not in a heroic and conspicuous, way. 

Ver. 27. — But those mine enemies, whiob 
would not that I should reign over them, 
bring hither, and slay them before me. An 
obvious reference to the Lord's dealings 
with the ohoeen people^ and an nnmiitalrable 



138 



THE GOSPEL AOOOEDINQ TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xvra. 1— 43. 



reference to the awful ruin and disaster 
wfaich was eo soon to oyerwhelm the city 
and temple and the whole nationality. But 
behind this temporal reference there looms 
in the background the vast shadow of a 
terrible eternal doom reserved for the ene- 
mies of the Redeemer. Godet has a beau- 
tiful and suggestive note on the signification 
of the ten and five cities, the reward of the 
faithful toiler here. " They," the "cities," 
" represent mortal beings in a lower state of 
development, but whom the glorified faithful 
are commissioned to raise to their Divine 
destination." 

Vers. 28 — 48. — Jetru enten Jerusalem as 
King Messiah (vera. 29 — 44). Bis work in 
the temple (vers. 45 — 48). St. Luke here 
passes over in silence the events which 
happened after the episode at the house of 
Zaochjens at Jericho and the speaking the 
great parable of " the pounds." This 
parable may have been spoken in the house 
of Zacchseus before leaving Jericho, but it 
seems better to place it somewhere in the 
course of the walk from Jericho to Bethany, 
B distance of some twelve nules. 

St. John fills up the gap left in the 
narrative of St. Luke. 

The main body of pilgrims to the feast, 
with whom Jesus and his company were 
travelling, left him on the Jericho road at 
Bethany: they going on to their caravan- 
serai in the holy city, he remaining for two 
nights with his friends at Bethany — the 
next evening Jesus was entertained at 
Bethany in the house of Simon the leper 
(Matt. xxTi. 6—13 ; Mark xiv. 3— 9)— the 
feast at which Lazarus the risen sat a guest 
and Martha served, and to which Mary 
brought her precious ointment and her con- 
trition (John xi. 1 — 9). 

Jesus must have arrived at Bethany before 
■unset on Friday, Nisan 7, and therefore 
before the sabbath began. 

The sabbath was spent in quiet. The 
snpper probably took place directly after 
the end of the sabbath. The next morning 
(Palm Sunday) the Lord started for Jeru- 
salem, and entered the holy city in the 
triumphant way as King Messiah related by 
St. Luke in our Gospel. 

Ver. 29. — And it came to pass, when he 
was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany. 
Bethphage is never mentioned in the Old 
Testament, but in the Talmud we find it 
vpeoifiod in some interesting ceremonial 



directions. It was evidently an ontlying 
suburb of Jerusalem. Bethphage, which 
lay between the city and Bethany, was by 
the rabbis legally counted as part of Jeru- 
salem. Bethany signifies " House of Dates," 
no doubt so called from its palm trees. 
Bethphage, " House of Green Figs," from its 
fig-orchards. Tlie modem Bethany is known 
as EUAzarieh or Laiarieh, the name attach- 
ing to its connection with the history of 
Lazarus. 

Ver. 30. — ^Te shall find a oolt tied, whereon 
yet never man sat : loose him, and bring 
him hither. The account of this trans- 
action is less circumstantial in St. Luke 
than in the other evangelists. The reference 
to the prophecy of Zech. ix. 9 is here left 
out. This prophecy is, however, necessary 
for the fuU understanding of the mystic act 
of riding upon an ass's colt. St. Luke, com- 
piling especially for Gentile readers, would 
feel that such a reference to the old Hebrew 
story would scarcely interest a foreigner, and 
would serve to distract such a one's inte- 
rest in the progress of the great recitaL 
For us, however, the meaning of the scene, 
read in the light of the Zechariah (ix. 9) 
words and of Hebrew story generally, is as 
follows : The disciples and multitude wished 
their Master to claim a kingdom. At this 
moment in his eventful history, aware that 
death awaited him in the course of the next 
few days, he chose to gratify them ; so he 
claimed his kingdom, but a kingdom utterly 
unlike what they longed for. He came to 
his royal, sacred city in the strange guise 
foreshadowed by Zechariah, as a Prince of 
Peace, not with chariot and horse, but 
meekly riding on an ass's colt, claiming, too, 
a dominion from sea to sea, from the river 
to the ends of the earth (Zech. ix. 10). 
Whereon yet never man sat. For this reason 
specially adapted for a sacred use (see 
Numb. xix. 2 ; Dent. xxi. 3 ; 1 Sam. vi. 7). 

Ver. 31. — And if any man ask you, Why 
do ye loose him ? thus shall ye say unto him, 
Because the Lord hath need of him. Had he 
not right here ? surely the cattle on a thou- 
sand hills were his I St. Matthew not only 
mentions the colt, but also the ass. This 
little detail is unnoticed by St. Luke. Prob- 
ably the oolt, though not brokea in, would 
go the more quietly accompanied by its 
mother. But the reason of St. Matthew's 
special mention of the ass as well as of the 
colt was the reference to Gen. xlix. 11, in 
whicli Justin Martyr, in a curious chapter 
of the 'Dialogue with Trypho,' finds a 
direct reference to the ass and the foal (see 
Justin Martyr, 'Dialogue with Trypho^' 
o. liii.). 

Ver. 35. — They oast their garments upon 
the colt. " An extemporized housing in 
default of the purple trappinga Donbtleia 



OH. XIX. 1—48.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



189 



the fittest of the proffered robes would be 
selected by the disciples " (Morrison). 

Ver. 36. — And as he went, they spread 
their clothes in the way. A common act of 
homage to a king or royal personage. So 
in the case of Jehu, the officers of the army 
offered him this tribute (2 Kings ix. 13). 
So Agamemnon walked on costly carpets 
and tapestry when he entered his palace at 
Myoense. Clyiemnestra, In the ' Agamem- 
non' of iEschylus, says — 

" But, my loved lord, 
Leave now that car ; nor on the bare groand 

set 
That royal foot, beneath whose mighty tread 
Troy trembled. Haste, ye virgins, to whose 

care 
This pleasing office Is entrusted, spread 
The streets with tapestry; ]et the groand 

be covered 
With richest purple, leading to the palace. 
That honour with just state may grace his 

entry." 

(905—911.) 

Ver. 37. — At the descent of the mount of 
Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples 
began to rejoice and praise Ood with a load 
voice for all the mighty works that they had 
seen. At this point on the Bethany road 
the city of Jerusalem comes into view. 
Here a crowd of pilgrims to the Passover 
Feast, many of whom were well acquainted 
with Jesus, came out to meet and welcome 
him with their branches of palm. These 
joined his friends who accompanied him 
from Bethany. This enthusiasm was ex- 
cited among the Passover pilgrims in great 
measure owing to the report which by this 
time had got abroad of the raising of Laza- 
rus (see John xii. 17, 18). Many had 
already gone out from the city to Bethany 
to see Jesus and Lazarus. Of the Messianic 
sliouts of welcome which sounded in the 
crowd, St. Luke does not mention the " Ho- 
sanna I " of St. Matthew, no doubt because 
this peculiar Hebrew cry would not have 
conveyed any meaning to the Gentile readers 
to whom his story was especially addressed. 
The two incidents which follow — the crying 
nut of the stones, and the weeping of the 
Master over his beautiful doomed city (vers. 
39-44:)— occur only in St. Luke. His source 
of information here was evidently quite 
different to the other two gynoptists or 
St. John. 

Vers. 39, 40. — And some of the Pharisees 
from among the multitude said unto him, 
Master, rebuke thy disciples. And he an- 
swered and said unto them, I tell you that, 
if these should hold their peace, the stones 
would immediately cry out. These Phari- 
sees were probably some of that great and 
influential seot who had all along listened 



with respect and attention to the Master, 
looking upon him as a most able and power- 
ful Babbi, but refusing to entertain any of 
the growing Messianic conceptions respecft- 
ing hia person. Godet graphically paints 
the scene in his suggestion that the words, 
" Bebuke thy disciples," were accompanied 
with an irritated and anxious look towards 
the frowning citadel of Antonia, where the 
Roman garrison of Jerusalem lay. It was 
there in full view of Jesus and the erowds. 
The anxious look seemed to say that the 
Bomans were on the watch for any signs of 
disaffection on the part of the hated and 
suspected Jews. The answer of Jesus, 
continues the same writer, has a terrible 
majesty. "If I could silence all these," 
looking round on the Impassioned faces of 
the multitude as they waved their palm 
branches in homage to their King, "the 
very stones on the ground would cry aloud." 
This striking imagery was a memory of our 
Lord of the prophecy of Habakkuk : " The 
stone shall cry out of the wall, and the 
beam out of uie timber ahaU answer it" 
(ii. 11). 

Ver. 41.— He beheld the city. It was a 
very different view to what the traveller of 
the present day would see from the same 
spot. Though Jerusalem, when Jesns 
Christ was teaching on earth, was «ul>ject 
to the stranger Herodian, and the Herodian 
to the great Italian power, yet the beauty 
and glory of the city were remarkable. Still 
glittered in the midst of the great city that 
"mass of gold and snow" known as the 
temple. The far-extending suburbs were 
covered with the gardens and palaces of 
the wealthy Jews. But the mighty memo- 
ries which bung so thickly round the sacreji 
city and the glorious house of Ood after all 
constituted its chief charm. What might 
not that city have been I what splendid and 
far-reaching work might it not have done ! 
and now the cup of its iniquities was just 
brimming over ; only a few more short years, 
and a silence the most awful would brood 
over the shapeless ruins of what was once 
Jerusalem and her house on Zioa, the joy 
of the whole earth. And wept over it. No 
merely silent tears of mute sorrow, but 
iKKavaiP, he wept aloud. All the insults 
and the sufferings of the Passion were 
powerless to elicit from the Man of sorrows 
that expression of intense grief which the 
thought of the rain of the loved city called 
' forth. 

Ver. 42. — ^If thon hadst known, even thou, 
at least in this thy day. The emphatic 
repetition of the "thou," and the broken 
form of the sentence, tell of the intense feel- 
ing of the Divine Speaker. "In this thy 
day." There was still time, still one day 
left, before his terrible trial-time began, 



140 



THE GOSPEL AOCOBDING TO ST. LUKE, lon.xix.1— «L 



which filled np the meaenre of Jerasalem 
and her people's iniquity. Still one day in 
vhioh, had they only known "the things 
which belonged to their peace," they might 
have won a forgiveness for aU the past 
centuries of sin. 

Vers. 45, 46. — And he went into tuo 
temple. The recital of St. Luke here is 
more general and less precise than that of 
the other two synoptista. The Lord on 
that " Palm Sunday " evening simply went 
into the temple, " and when he had looked 
round about upon all things " it was then 
evening, and he returned to his lodging at 
Bethany with the twelve (Mark xi. 11). 
The expulsion of the money-changers, men- 
tioned in the next verse (46"), took place 
on the following day. St. Matthew adds 
another interesting detail respecting tlie 
excitement caused by the presence of Jesus 
in the city. " When he was come into 
Jerusalem, all the city whs moved, saying. 
Who is this?" (Matt. xxi. 10). And he 
went into the temple, and began to cast 
out them that sold therein, and them t'.iit 
bought ; saying unto them, It is written, 
my house is the house of prayer: but ye 
have made it a den of thieves. This visit of 
the Lord to the temple^ in which he spoke 



and acted as King Messiah, was a fulfilment 
of Mai. iii. 1, 2. In the outer court of the 
temple stalls had been erected in which 
money-changers were located (geld-wechsel 
eomptoir — change de monnaiee), in order 
that pilgrims from foreign lands might be 
able to exchange their foreign coins for the 
purchase of sacrificial victims. These also 
seem to have been sold in the precincts. 
All this made the courts of the Lord's house 
a scene of noise and tumult, and, from the 
Master's stern words, a scene often of cheat- 
ing and overreaching. The wonis of Jesus 
Wire taken from Isa. Ivi. 7 and Jer. vli. 11. 
Ver. 47. — And he taught daily in the 
temple. This and the foUnwing verses give, 
after the manner of St. Luke, both in his 
Gospel and in the Acts, a general picture 
of the Lord's life in these last days of his 
public ministry in Jerusalem; and of the 
effect of his last teaching (1) upon the 
priests and scribes, etc., and (2) upon the 
mass of the people. The Greek word ren- 
dered " very attentive to hear (him) " is an 
expressive one, and describes the intense 
attention with which the people generally 
listened to the last solemn public utterances 
of the Master. It means literally, "they 
hong upon his lips." 



HOMILETICa 

Veri. 1 — 10. — Zaechceui. Very pleasant was the city of Jericho when our Lord 
passed thiough it ; and very pleasant is the Scripture which records the visit of Jesus 
to it. It has a &agrance like that of the roses and palms in which the gardens of 
Jericho were luxurious j its verses remind us of the cells of the many honeycombs for 
which it was famous. Each verse is full of sweet and holy thought, A child can 
understand it ; an angel will desire to look into it. One of the two incidents which 
have made Jericho memorable in connection with the life of the Saviour of men has 
been already considered. That which is told in the verses before us points to a different 
series of circumstances, a different and perhaps fuller illustration of the more Catholic 
aspect of Christ's mission. Consider three points. 

L The incident illustrates a pubposb triumphant ovbe hindrances. These 
hindrances connect with social position, with wealth, with personal disqualifications. 
1. Ee wat a tax-gatherer. His place was usually filled by Boman knights, who farmed 
the taxes that they might replenish their empty coffers. It was a calling which 
aroused the hostility of the Jews. And to be a social Ishmael is hurtful to all that is 
generous and noble in the breast. He was " chief among the publicans " — a great man 
to whom many deferred ; with the temptation, therefore, to imagine that the crowd 
was a Tulgarity to be shunned, and so to isolate himself from the enthusiasms of the 
townsfolk. 2. Ee was rich. Almost insensibly a kind of pride grows in the person 
who la wealthy. He is conscious of his means. And the comfort with which they 
surround him tends to dull the edge of more spiritual feeling, to withdraw the interest 
from truths which imply the sense of need and poverty. He might have said to him- 
self^ " This Jesns of Nazareth, what is he to me P I have all that heart can desire : 
why should I make an ado about this travelling Prophet f " Z. Ee was short of stature. 
A Uttle man : what hope was there that he would obtain a glimpse of the passing 
Nazarene ? Why should he expose himself to the risk of being laughed at, especially 
when the chances were against his obtaining even a glimpse of the Stranger? Against 
•11 midt h1p'^r«"i^' the purpose to see Jasu* is npieme. He must ; the beoesait/ of 



OH. m. 1—48.] THB GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. 141 

hla soul makes him quick in invention. He forces his way through the crowd, climbs 
the small sycamore tree, and there he waits. He knows, confusedly enough, but by a 
kind of Intuition, that the Poorest of all who on foot treads the street is his Lord; 
that with him ia the wealth wanting which a man has no real inheritance. When the 
fountains of the inner deep are broken up, when any one is in earnest about the king* 
dom of G-od and his righteousness, the mere accidents of position and circumstance are 
forgotten. The Princess Alice of England, on her dying-bed, acknowledged her debt 
to a Scotsman in humble life for the help he had given in bringing her soul back to its 
test in Christ, Zacchseus, chief among the publicans, heeds not appearances, thinks 
not of dignity, runs before the multitude, perches himself on the branch of the fig tree 
that he might see him whom his soul loved. 

II. The incident illustrates thb meeiinq between a supbemb fubfose in man 
ASB THB PUBFOBB OF THB LOVB OF GoD. It may be said that the publican's motive 
was mere curiosity. Supposing that it was, it brought about the sight of the Lord. 
Ciuiosity impelled Augustine to the church of Ambrose in Milan, and there Christ 
found him. It is a gain to get people, even from an inferior desire, within the reach of 
the gospel of grace : who knows whether the one who came to scoff may not remain to 
pray f But was there not a cause deeper than mere curiosity at work in Zacchaeus ? He 
may not have had the same kind of plea as blind Bartimaeus, but he had his own plea; 
and what Christ asks from each of us is that, as we are, in the specialties of our need 
and condition, we come to him. Faith carries an " I must " in its bosom. It always 
presses : " To-da,y I must see thee who thou art." That day the two " I musts," the 
one in the sinner, the other in the Saviour's heart, meet and touch. " Zaccheeus, to-day 
I must abide at thy house " (ver. 5). What a journey that " I must " of Jericho repre- 
sents 1 Has it not come from the heaven of heavens, out from the bosom of the great 
God himself? The fig leaves and branches cannot hide from Christ. The eyes of the 
two are seeking each other. He looks up ; the one for whom he is in search receives 
the gaze. That one knows that he is looked into ; he is understood ; he is named. 
And the fellowship is formed from which neither things present nor things to come 
can separate. 

III. The incident illustrates the pubposb of a mind bbnbwed in its spirit. What 
is the response to the Lord's " make haste " ? " He made haste, and came down, and 
received him joyfully " (ver. 6). The whole heart opens to this new Master. There 
is no further asking who he is. That has been answered by the heart itself; and the 
welcome to his home, to all, immediately follows. If Christ will take one such as he, 

" Love so amazing, so Divine, 
Demands the soul, the life, the all." 

There is more than this. We need not discuss whether the noble speech recorded in 
ver. 8 is the vindication of the publican as against the calumuies of those around him, 
indicating that he had not been the unjust extortioner whom they took him to be ; 
that he had been in the habit of giving half of his goods to the poor. The latter part 
of the verse at least is the expression of a solemn purpose formed in Christ's presence. 
It indicates a change of character. " Is his pocket converted ? " was a question put, 
when the conversion of one who had been greedy and selfish was announced. Hitherto 
this Zaccheeus had lived to make money ; now he will live to use it. Hitherto he had 
lived for himself; now he will live for God. Henceforth he will aim, not only at being 
just, but at making others the better and happier for him. When Christ is received 
joyfully, the narrow becomes the broad, the hard becomes the generous ; the levels of 
the life are altered : " Old things pass away, and all things become new." 

IV. Reflecting on the incident, two points are to be noted — its revelation of Christ, 
and its enforcement of the solemn word " opportunity." 1. Christ the Brother and 
Eaviovr. (1) It is interesting to observe that, on the same day, poor and rich were 
visibly embraced within the love of God. That love stretches from pole to pole in 
human experience and condition. Christ's sympathies are not with class as against 
class ; for he is the Son of man. When the beggar comes he is so polite : " What wilt 
thouV" As to ZacohsBUS, he turns to the Jews (ver. 9). Everywhere he recognizes a 
something of God — a jewel to be snatched from among the ruins. " He is not afraid 
of oonaorting with the rich lest peopla should say he carea too mu«h for money, any 



14a THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xix. 1—48. 

more than he is of consorting with the poor lest they should say he cares too little for 
respectability. He will dine with the Pharisee, if invited ; and he will dine with a 
publican, even when uninvited, if the man's heart be indeed a guest-chamber." The 
most brotherly of hearts is the heart of God. (2) The Brother and the Saviour. See 
the sentence in which the conjunction is realized (ver. 10). It was spoken with 
immediate reference to Zaochseus. He was lost, for he had lived alone ; and whoso 
lives alone, away from the light of God, out of sympathy with his brethren, an outside 
person, is really one lost. And is not Christ among us to bring the outsiders in, to 
awaken up dead worldly souls, and restore them to communion with the Father in heaven 
and the Father's children on earth ? Christ is the Saviour because he is the Brother, 
and he is the Brother because he is the Son. Look at the Saviour in his work of love. 
The royalty of his grace shines marvellously forth. Note the se^-invitation : " I love 
him because he first loved me." Note also the joy of salvation — not a passing glimpse 
— "I must abide." There is a new rule, a new companionship, a new mirth. 2. The 
word " opportunity " is enforced. That word contains the lesson most obviously taught 
in every part of the story. Jesus is passing ; to-day and to-day only. There is no 
time to trifle. " Make haste, and come down." 

Vers. 11 — 27. — Tke parable of the poundt. This parable closely resembles that 
reported in Matt. xxv. 14 — 30. The two are undoubtedly different, but they have 
much in common. We cannot rightly understand each without balancing it by the 
other. Certainly we realize the full effect of their application when, to borrow an 
expressive figure, we look on them " as twin parables, resembling one of those trees 
whose main trunk separates just above the earth into two equal towering stems." 
Thus connecting them, let us extract a portion of the instruction conveyed, our topics 
these : (1) The endowments bestowed ; (2) the trading recommended ; and (3) the 
dealing of the Matter with his servants presented. 

I. Observe the two principles which run in parallel lines as the peinciples op God's 
DlSTEiBnTlON OP ENDOWMENTS. 1. The parable of the talents suggests an inequality in 
the gifts or faculties with which God enriches men : one gets five talents, another two, 
and another one. And this description is entirely consistent with fact. It is true as 
to even the commonest things ; it is true as to higher qualities of intellect and will. 
There is no dead level. There are hills and plains ; there are gardens and deserts in 
man's world as well as in the physical universe. God takes fact into account. He 
distributes according to ability ; he imposes responsibility according to ability. He 
does not demand that the one with two talents make the ten — only the four. Let 
the vessel, according to its possibilities, be full ; the smaller vessel is not required to 
hold the amount of the larger. One farm may not be as extensive as another, but it is 
still a farm. Cultivate to the measure of the farm ; make full use of the capital such 
as it is. "What but this, O man, does the Lord thy God require of thee?" 2. But 
observe the teaching in the parable of the pounds. If talents are unequally bestowed, 
remember every one has his pound. The pound was of very small value as compared 
with the talent — £3 or a little more as compared with £160. The ten servants get each 
one pound — the same sum in every case. We have varying capacity, but we have all 
some capacity — " a little knowledge, a little love, a little experience, a little money, 
a little favour with men, a little conscience, a little pity, a little time, a little oppor- 
tunity." We have one mina, one pound. Work, my brother, with thy pound, rather 
with the pound that the Lord has given thee. It may be increased tenfold, and the 
gain is (ver. 17) a city for every added pound — a blessing in possession, and rule, wholly 
unmerited by, yet graciously corresponding to, the servant's faithfulness. 

II. What means the occupyino ob tbadino which the Loed enjoins on a&l 
TO WHOM HE GIVES HIS GOODS? Let it be remembered that, in the olden time, the 
relation between master and sei-vant was different from that in our time. It is not 
usual to leave sums of money to the servant to be put out by him in his master's behalf 
when he takes a journey into the far country. But it was a common practice to make 
such arrangements as allowed the slave to transact business, either on condition of 
paying a yearly sum to his master, or on the footing of a man with so much of another's 
wealth committed to his charge to be invested for the other's benefit. To this custom 
our Lord refers. " Occupy [or, ' trade '] till I come." The two persons opposed are tha 



OH. XIX. 1—48.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 14S 

trader and the idler; and the striking feature is that the idler is denounced as "the 
slothful and wicked servant." All start with some advantages ; they are not persouh 
just hired ; they have been in his service, they know his character, and they know 
what he wants. The one who does not trade is lying when he excuses himself; his 
slothfulness (ver. 22) is sheer wickedness. The point of the exhortation can very 
readily be apprehended. God wants his interest, as the merchant wants his. How is 
this interest to be gained ? The purpose and destination of life must be kept steadily 
in view— 

•Not enjoyment, and not sorrow. 

Is OUT destined end and way ; 

But to act that each to-morrow 

Find us farther than to-day," 

Recollect that the Belf in each of us connects with two factors — God who made us ; and 
our brother, whose good is to be as sacred to us as our own. We cannot be making 
increase unless we are true to him whose we are, and to every one who is near us ; 
unless both God and man are benefited, and benefited the more the ^rua.er our means 
and ability are. Consider how we can best lay out our influence, \a haCever that may 
be ; how we can best use our time ; how we can get the best percentage for whatever 
capacity, whatever force, we possess. As it is essential to a prosperous business that 
there be a good administration, reflect how we are administering the affairs with which, 
in one sphere or another, we are entrusted — in a word, on what plan, with what aim, 
and by what methods, our life is being fulfilled. Give two men five pounds each ; 
in the hands of the one they may remain five pounds neither more nor less, or they 
will gradually melt away ; the other will spend the sum wisely, will so invest it that 
it will increase to him tenfold. We have read the story of the successful merchant 
of Bristol — the beginning of whose merchant life was the horseshoe that he picked up 
one day on his way to school, and carried for three miles and sold to the blacksmith for 
a penny. That penny was the foundation of a business proaounoed, after his death, 
the largest in the West of England, turning nearer millions than thousands in the 
course of the year. All was the result of the judicious use of that which he had. In 
our Christian life and service this is the lesson which we most need to learn. Is there 
not comfort in the thought that, whilst the talents increase only twice, the poundi 
increase ten times ? The more ordinary gifts which we all have, when faithfully 
applied, are capable of indefinite increase. We cannot keep unless we add ; and it is 
God's law that to him who, thus adding, has, much is given. In spiritual, as in every 
other kind of commerce, much always tends to the making of more. The trader and 
the idler! Notice, neither the talent nor the pound is absolutely lost. It is not 
a spendthrift who is held up to contempt. It is the awfully careful man. It is the 
one who hoards. " There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth ; and there is that 
withholdeth, . . . and it tendeth to poverty." Here is the one who withholds. And a 
distinction is delicately hinted at. The pound is carefully wrapped in the napkin ; the 
man intends to do something with it when the convenient season comes ; in the mean 
time it is safe in the napkin. But the talent is not in a napkin ; it is hidden in the 
earth — " a precious thing," as it has been said, " made worthless because abandoned to 
be useless. And within how many a man's earthiness is there a talent hidden and 
wasted ? " Take that thought home — the Master's antipathy to the idler. Who of us, 
in these harvest-days of God, is standing all the day idle ? 

III. Consider the dbalino or the Lobd with his bbevants. That is very striking 
and solemn as it is set before us in both the parables, especially the one as to the talents. 
In that of the pounds we are told only that the unused, napkin-hidden, pound is taken 
from the unprofitable servant and given to the one who has ten pounds. " Lord," hig 
hearers exclaim, " he hath ten pounds " (ver. 25). The thriftiest, the most diligent, will 
get the addition. Why not? He has proved himself the ablest, the one who hag 
given the most abundant guarantee that it will not be wasted. But in that of the 
talents the judgment is, " Let the unfaithful be bound hand and foot, and cast into the 
outer darkness." The wasted Ufe, the life that has buried its force in mere earthi- 
ness, is that for which the outer darkness is reserved. The soul consigns itself to an 
unspeakable loneliness that, by indolence and engrossment with what is perishing, loses 



144 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINa TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xix. 1— 4a 

the grace of Gbd. Abiding alone is the second death — the outer darkness. Must note- 
worthy are the scathing sentences to the poor trembling idler ! How he stammers out 
his lame and impotent excuses (vers. 20, 21) ! The very words are sent back. The 
mouth is the witness against the man. He might have known, should have known, 
if he had done right would have known, that his excuse was a falsehood. Hard 
thoughts of the Lord are certain if the Lord's work is shirked. The man would not 
be foolish if he were not wicked. O man, woman, with thy pound kept, but not traded 
with, who shall abide the day of his coming? who shall stand when he appeareth? 
Very different are the sentences on the nine who have been faithful, who have seen in 
their pound the Lord's pound, and traded with it for him. Humbly, joyfully, the first 
and the second meet the Master's eye (vers. 16, 18). What is the award ? It is go 
gracious (ver. 17) : " Thou hast been faithful in a very little." To faithful service, 
rule is given. The one who can best serve is the one who can best rule. 

* Strive, man, to win that glory; 
Toil, man, to gain that light; 
Send hope before to grasp it, 
Till hope be lost in sight." 

Vers. 28 — 44. — From Jericho to Jerusalem, The last glimpse which we obtain of 
Moses presents him wending his way up the slope of Mount Nebo, thence to give one 
fond gaze towards the land he might not enter, and, having so done, then to lay himself 
down and die. Lnagination has often attempted to portray the working of the great 
lawgiver's mind, the emotion of his heart, the thoughts which must have crowded on 
him as he took that last solitary journey to the sepulchre which no man must know, 
in which the Lord alone was to bury him. Jesus Christ, by whom came grace and 
truth, is now facing the hill of sacrifice. He has begun the ascent to Mount Calvary, 
not alone and yet alone ; the people crowd behind, but of the people there is none with 
him in the region of consciousness and desire. Only the Father knows the Son. Let 
u* not attempt to draw aside the veil. Words to be pondered, but not commented on, 
are these (ver. 28) : " When he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to 
Jerusalem." Coming near the capital, Jesus and his apostles made for Bethany. It 
was Friday evening. He must spend the last sabbath on earth in the quiet of the 
rural village. We can suppose what that sabbath was — not so much to him, for now 
he is moving in a sphere beyond our vision, but to those with whom he passed the 
hallowed hours. When the sun sets and the sabbath is over, a family feast is made 
in the house of Simon, once a leper. Lazarus, the man raised from the dead, one of the 
party, Martha for the time resuming her old ways, and Mary filling her heart with his 
love, until, swayed by an irresistible impulse, she pours on him the contents of an 
alabaster box of ointment — the preparation against the approaching burial. It was on 
the Sunday morning that the Lord set out for Jerusalem, at first in the ordinary guise of 
a pilgrim. People were hovering around the home, waiting for him, and at every step 
of the journey the number increased. Then occurred the transaction mentioned in 
vers. 29 — 35. From a place not now to be identified, but not far from Bethany, 
called Bethphage, or " the house of figs," the Saviour " in lowly pomp rides on to die." 
Verily, the King comes, " meek and lowly." His state, his pageant, at best is humble. 
And yet its simplicity is its royalty ; its want of the poor tinsel and trapping of earthly 
greatuess is the sign of the kingdom which is in the world, yet not of it. *' Behold the 
Man 1 " " Behold your King I " The procession sweeps onward, along the southern 
shoulders of Olivet, until the road, having gained the summit of the hill, turns north- 
ward and begins the descent. And there the stream that had poured out from Jerusalem 
when the news was borne that the Prophet was on his way to the city met the stream 
pouring towards Jerusalem, and the disciples, inspired by an enthusiasm which was 
caught up and prolonged by the multitude, rent the air with songs (ver. 38) of joy and 
praise to God, and rock and cave and peak sent it back in gladsome echoes. 'Truly, 
a soul-stirring entry I The whole city is moved as Jesus of Nazareth rides through its 
gate, and passes towards Mount Zion and the holy and beautiful house which glitters 
on its heights. Before we think of him there, pause over two characteristic signs of tb* 
King given in his journey on that day. 



CH. XIX. 1— 48.J THE GOBPEL ACCORmNa TO ST. LUKE. 1« 

L The King's wokd of power. (Ver. 31.) " Say, The Lord hath need of him." 
We do not believe that there was any secret agreement between Christ and the owner 
of the colt. But he was a man prepared for the announcement ; he was at least in the 
outer circle of believers. He understood who was meant by " the Lord," and the Lord's 
need was the one irresistible argument. So should it be. That the Lord needs, that 
there is a use for us and ours, should be enough. First, the King's word has its bond 
over us personally. Man, woman, it is for ttiee that Jesus calls. He needs thy heart, 
for he redeemed it; thy life, for it is his; thyself, for "he is thy Lord, and worship 
thou Mm." Shall not the response " straightway " be, " Now to be thine, for ever 
thine"? And then the possessions. Art thou ready to give Mm what thou hast, 
however dear it may be? Ah 1 the life 'is a new life when Christ's voice, as the voice 
of the life's true Master, is heard, and the answer is returned, " Here am I ; for thou 
didst call me." 

IL The King's sobeow. (Ver. 41.) "He beheld the city, and wept over it." It 
has been noticed that "at the grave of LiwaruB he had dropped silent tears, but here 
he wept aloud. All the shame of his mockery, all the anguish of his torture, was 
powerless to extort firom Mm a single groan, or to wet Ms eyelids with one trickling 
tear, but here all the pity that was in him overmastered'^is human spirit, and he not 
only wept, but broke into a passion of lamentation in which the choked voice seemed 
to struggle for its utterance." It was the ^ony of the Saviour over the lost. There 
had been the time of the visitation, and Jerusalem had not known it. Now was the 
day, the hour, the last offer, the last opportunity ; and it was to be rejected. The city 
was hardened in ignorance. It was blinded by its own deceived heart, and all that 
remained was ruin. And thus he weeps stiU ; for still men hear their own passions and 
inclinations, not the voice of the prophets whom he rises early and aemia, 

" Te hearts that love the Lord, 

If at this sight fi bom, 
See that in thought, in deed, in word. 

Ye hate what made him moum." 

Ver. 48 — >eh. xx. 18. — Passion Week. The last of the old Hebrew propbets^ 
Malachi (iii. and iv.), had announced that the Lord, the Sought One, would come 
"suddenly" into his temple, and manifest himself there in a threefold character — that of 
Judge, that of the Purifier and Refiner, and that of the swift Witness of the kingdom 
of heaven. It is in this threefold character that Christ is presented during the week 
in which he suffered. 2%e Judge. St. Mark, with his usual delicacy of touch. Informs 
us that, after the procession which swept through the gates of the city halted at the 
foot of Mount Moriah, Jesus advanced to the temple, walked through its courts, and 
looked round about on all things (Mark xi. 11). Every part of the building, every 
arrangement, every feature, was comprehended in that gaze. It was the act of the 
Judge. The survey^completed, the Purifier and Befiner disposes his crucible. At 
the beginning of the ministry he cleansed the house of his Father, which had been 
rendered a den of merchandise; at the end of the ministry he repeats the cleahsjng 
(vers. 45, 46). Jerusalem was crowded ; outside the city wall there was a vast city 
of pilgi ims' booths. For the sale of victims for sacrifice, and no doubt for the vending 
of many wares besides, the temple precincts were for the time a huge holy fair. One 
could scarcely distinguish that its real purpose was an asylum for weary hearts, a 
refuge for sin-stricken consciences, a place for quiet meditation and prayer. Where, 
amid the hubbub of buyer and seller, could the pious Israelite '" dwell in the courts of 
Jehovah, beholding his beauty and inquiring in his temple"? It is this that kindles 
the wrath of the Son of God, and incites to the action portrayed by the synoptic 
evangelists. " Who shall stand when he appears who is like a refiner's fire, and like 
fuller's soap?" This purging of the holy house of that which made it like a cave 
of brigands was the work of that first day, which has been called Palm Sunday, 
The night which followed was spent in Bethany, perhaps on the slope of Olivet 
On the second day we find the Lord again in the temple, and now in the third 
of Malachi's characters — as the svit/'t Witness against the enemies of God. This wag 
the aspect of his countenance on the days which remained until the night came on 

LUKK.— H. !• 



lie THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. [en. xix- 1—48. 



which, in the form of his human presence, the Lord could no more work. " He taught 
iaiiy in the temple " (ver. 47). The events of the Monday would seem to be these : 
In the keen-aired early morning, Jesus, on his way to the temple, is hungry. He sees 
(Matt. xxi. 19 ; Mark xi. 12 — 14) a fig tree, evidently a conspicuous one, which, rich in 
leaves, gave the promise of fruit. There is nothing but leaves, a mere simulacrum, the 
■emblance without the reality of goodness. As a lesson to all the ages, a swift witness 
against all part-acting, he pronounces over it tlie curse of the Eternal Truth, and leaves 
it to wither and rot. The temple gained, again the dense crowd gathers around the 
Prophet of Nazareth. The phrase is most expressive : " The people were very attentive 
to hear him" (ver. 48). The tide had not yet turned. He was still engirt by the 
hosanoahs of tiie multitude; when, lol cries are heard, "Make way for the chief 
priest 1 " and, followed by a retinue of priests and scribes, the head of the temple- 
worship confronts the Teacher, Poor, purblind souls 1 they do not look for his authority 
to the truth with which he is filled, to the works which he does. To bigots like them 
the certificates which the truth supplies are unintelligible; their only point is a formally 
expressed delegation of power (ch. xx. 2). Had not Jesus met similar cavils at the Feast 
of Tabernacles two years before? Had he not argued (John v. 32 — 47) that it is im- 
possible for minds brimful of prejudice, loving and courting the honour of men, to under- 
stand iiim, to know whose he is, whence he comes, and by what right he speaks ? 
But now he will not thus argue. They are there to browbeat and overawe him ; 
they shall themselves be silenced by a thrust impaling them on the horns of a dilemma 
from which they will escape only in confusion aad chagrin. Question is replied to by 
the question of ch. xx. 3, 4. They cannot answer. Then, rejoins the Truth, " Neither 
tell 1 you by what authority I do these things " (ver. 8). And there follows a series 
of parables bearing on and bringing out the obstinacy which had just been exemplified : 
the two sons ; the wicked husbandmen ; and the marriage of the king's son. Only the 
second of these is quoted by St. Luke (xx. 9 — 16). The parable is in harmony with 
well-known prophetic symbols ; e.g. Isa. v. 1 — 7. The vineyard is the kingdom of God, 
which had been planted in Israel ; the husbandmen are the priests and scribes to whom 
bad been committed the care of the vineyard; the servants sent — first one, then another, 
and then a third — ^to demand the fruit, represent the prophets, ending with John the 
Baptist; and the climax of the wickedness of the husbandinen is the rejection and 
death of the beloved Son. "What will the owner do with such men?" Christ 
demands. He pauses for the reply ; and, not perceiving that it is pronouncing its own 
judgment, his audience answers, " He will miserably destroy them, and give the vine- 
yard tij uthers." Ah ! priest and Pharisee, out of your own mouth are you condemned. 
" The kiijgdom of heaven shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing 
forth the fruits thereof." And from startled consciences comes back the shuddering, 
" God forbid ! " He has not done with them. The eye, flashing its holy fire, fastens on 
the crouching multitude, and, resuming the discourse, he sends straight home the words 
of Ps. civiii. 22, 23. Solemn, memorable words! Pause and ponder them. The 
spuming of the Incarnate Love and truth by those amongst whom he came often seems 
to us a miserable infatuation, a double-dyed sin against the Holy Ghost. Are we sure 
that Christ, coming as the swift Witness, would be welcomed even in the house of his 
friends to-tiay ? The late General Gordon said, " No ; he would be a Stranger, rejected, 
if not despised, by the society which is professedly Christian." One thing, at all events, 
IS strange ; and that is that men and women should live in such marvellous light as 
that into which we are called, and remaiu the men and women they are, unmoved by, 
unresponsive to, the voice of God, wilhng to live apart from him whose service is their 
perfect freedom. May we not summon ourselves before the great white throne of 
truth, and ask whether God is receiving Irom us the fruit of his own vineyard; 
whether we are consciously and really living to him; whether our attitude towards the 
Son of his love is that of a whole-hearted and loyal acceptance ; or only like that which 
has been itrikingly compared to " some fever-reduced patient, lifting himself up for an 
instant from the bed on which he is lying, and putting out a hand, and then falling 
back again, the vacillating, fevered, paral , zed will recoiling from the resolution, the con- 
science having power to say, ' Thuu oughtest,' but with no power to enforce the execu- 
tion of its decrees, and the heart turning away from the salvation that it would have 
fuund in the lore of God to tiie loss that it finds in the lovo of self and earth." That 



OH. XIX. 1—48.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 147 

Tacillation, that impotence, is the strange, sad thing, Eeflect intensely, prayerfully, 
on the house which the builders rejected. Which of the two ways is It, will it be: 
this House taken as the Head of the corner, the reconciling centre of all the days — pride, 
wilfulness falling on it, and through the fall broken ? or, the house rejected, and th« 
Comer-stone falling on the disobedient soul, grinding its very strength to powder T 
Tjoto lejeoted — the wrath of the Lamb : who can measure that force ? 



HOMILIES BY VAKIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — ^9. — Zacc^umisi th« triumph of earnestness. The incident here recorded 
provides a very good opportunity for the imagination. We can picture the scene before 
us quite vividly ; it is a subject for the sacred artist. But let us look at the triumph 
of earnestness as illustrated in the story of Zacchffius. 

L It triumphed over the peril which attends wealth. This man was rich 
(ver. 2). Eiches are unfavourable to religious earnestness ; we have Christ's own word 
for it (oh. s.viii. 24 ; see homily). They present a very strong inducement to their 
•wner to forsake the fountain of living waters, and to quench his thirst in the lower 
streams. Far too often they lead to luxury, to indulgence, to spiritual indifference. 
But Zacchieus did not suffer this calamity to befall him, this fatal injury to be wrought 
upon him. His spiritual solicitudes won the victoiy over his temporal circumstances, 

II. It triumphed over the DEMOBALiziNa calling in which he was engaobd. Our 
daily vocation must necessarily have a very great influence over us for good or evil; 
and if it be one that tends to lower and degrade a man, he is placed in the greatest 
possible peril. Much wisdom of mind, much resoluteness of soul, and much devoutness 
of spirit must be required to withstand the adverse powers. But though Zacehaeus was 
engaged in a pursuit that invited avarice and oppression, still he did not lose hia 
religious earnestness. 

III. It triumphed over an evil bbpwtation. Few things are more degrading than 
a bad name. Men quickly become what they are supposed to be and what they 
ire called. Let all his neighbours consider and call a man a rogue, and it will be 
sirange indeed if he maintains his integrity. Yet, although Zacohrous was denominated 
and dismissed as " a publican," spoken of by a term which was full of the strongest 
reproach, he did not descend to that level. 

IV. It triumphed over the obstacles which stood between him and Chbbt. He 
could not venture to solicit an interview with this holy Prophet ; that he knew was 
completely barred by his vocation. He found it difficult to secure even a view of him 
as lie passed along ; his smallness of stature was against him. But such was his 
determination that he disregarded all considerations of dignity and decorum, and ran 
any risk of popiilar derision and affront, and climbed up, as if he had been a boy, into 
a tree to command a view of Jesus of Nazareth. So he prevailed. 

V. It won wholly unexpected good. 1. The honour of entertaining this great 
Prophet at his own house ; thus securing a standing to which he had long been a 
stranger. 2. The advantage of a protracted interview, an extended privilege, in which 
he could not only secure a few sentences from the great Teacher, but could imburden 
his heart to him and learn his holy will. 

VI. It led to newness of life. (Vers. 8, 9.) Zacchseus from that day forth was 
a new man. His character was thenceforth determined: whatever selfishness or 
wrongness there had been, it should be renounced, and, where possible, reparation 
should be made. Character and life were to be cleansed and renewed ; and Christ took 
him up into his favour and friendship. He was to be perfectly restored to the position 
he had lost. By his pursuit and practice he had become an alien, disinherited, no 
longer admitted to the services of the sanctuary. But now he was to be, in the fullest 
and deepest sense of the word, " a son of Abraham," a far truer son of his than many 
who prided themselves on their descent from the " father of the faithfuL" 

Thus earnestness of spirit completely prevailed. 1. Only earnestness will prevaiL 
Indifference will go down to the death from which it is already not far removed. Half- 
heartedness will go only a very little way towards the goal ; it will have to take soma 
trouble and to suffer some pains, but it will not wia Uie prize Even iofuliivttUMi, 



148 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xix. 1— 4a 



which bears a considerable resemblance to earnestness, but is not the same thing, will 
fail before the way is trodden and the end secured. Only earnestness wins. 2. It 
always must. Whatever comes in the way ; whatever inward or outward obstacles 
present themselves ; whatever personal or social hindrances intervene ; however victory 
be delayed; notwithstanding that the case may again and again seem hopeless; — 
still in the end earnestness will succeed. Jesus Christ will manifest himself; he will 
be found in the home; his presence and his grace will fill the soul with joy; lie 
will declare sonship and heirship to his devoted and determined follower. — 0. 

Ver. 9. — Forfeiture and recovery. Our Lord's words refer in the first instance to— 

L The loss and keoovery by ZACCHiEus of his place in the commonwealth of 
Israel. 1. He had forfeited this. It was by no means inalienable. Only they were 
the true children of Abraham who did the deeds, who lived the life, who were possessed 
with the spirit, of Abraham. So our Lord taught himself (see John viii. 39). This was 
Paul's doctrine also (Rom. ii. 28, 29 ; ix. 7 ; Gal. iii. 7). The true child of Abraham 
was he who walked by faith, who was the servant and the friend of God (Isa. xli. 8). 
But ZaochKus had lost this true, this real and effectual sonship. For he had been 
living the life of sense, and not of faith ; he had departed from the service of God, and 
engaged in the practice of extortion and corruption. He had ceased to be the friend 
of God, and made friendship with an evil world. 2. But now he was in the path of 
restoration. He was penitent ; he was a seeker after heavenly wisdom in Jesus Christ ; 
and this meant renewal of heart and life ; it meant rising into a new and elevated 
region, breathing the pure air of devotion, of service, of righteousness ; it meant the 
recovery of the forfeited birthright. Salvation had come to himself and his household; 
once more he was " a son of Abraham." We are thus led to look at — 

n. The sad possibilities of fobfeitcbe open to all the children of men. God 
made us to Ve heirs of all that is good and blessed — of liberty, of truth, of honour and 
of love, of himself and of his kingdom. But sin comes in and spoils our heritage ; 
under its evil ban we lose our good estate ; our inheritance is forfeited ; instead of being 
the " sons of God" and the " children of wisdom," we become rather the " children of 
wrath." We may forfeit : 1, Our liberty. We may become, how many do become, 
enslaved by some evil habit which holds them fast in its strong coils — some bodily or 
mental habit ! 2. Our hold upon the truth. We may lose our faith in, and our appre- 
ciation of, the leading and vital doctrines which bring us into close and conscious 
fellowship with God. 3. Our very manhood. For there are many who suffer them- 
selves to sink so low in the moral scale that they forfeit all claim to be accounted men; 
their lives are simply brutal. 4. Our rightful place in the estimate of our fellow-men. 
We may lose all the esteem, the confidence, and (consequently) the affection of our 
neighbours. 5. The friendship of Jesus Christ. Too often those who once walked 
with him and worked for him stand aside, and " walk no more " by his side ; they leave 
his service, they lose his loving favour, they cannot be any longer counted among his 
friends. And with all this there must be the sad and grievous forfeiture of : 6. The 
hope of eternal life. For when fidelity is lost, hope is lost also. 

III. The blessed opening fob bbstoeation provided by the Saviour of souls. 
There is no " house," however fallen, to which " salvation " may not come ; no human 
being, however sunk in sin and wrong, who may not be restored in the mercy of God 
by the power of Jesus Christ the Saviour. It is when he is admitted to the home 
iUid to the heart that recovery is attained. In him, for all earnest seekers, is escape 
from bondage and from error and unbelief; in his service is found the gradual but 
efiectual return of the trust and the love of man ; he offers the renewal of his friend- 
ship, and opens again the closed door of hope to the penitent and the believing spirit. 
The slave of sin becomes the son of God ; the companion of the evil-doer becomes the 
friend and co-worker of Christ ; the candidate for condemnation becomes the hoir of 
heaven. — C. 

Ver. 10. — The great purpose of Christ. Mankind bad lost its way utterly, its way 
from the home of God, from the fields of truth, from the path of holiness, from the 
fountains of joy ; was wandering, blind and miserable, in forbidden ways ; was stum- 
bling on the dark mountaiuB of error and sin. And the Son of man came to seek tbit 



OH. XIX. 1—48.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 149 

erring and lost race, to lead it back again, to restore it to its heritage in wisdom, in 
tlghteousness, in God. This great and most beneficent purpose is enough of itself to 
explain such action as he took on this occasion ; it covers the propriety of the conduct 
which seemed at the time so inexplicable to the good people of his day. For on what 
more fitting errand could the Saviour be engaged than on that of saving anothei 
human soul from its sin and its shame, and lifting it up into the light and liberty 
of the truth ? But there are three reasons which we gain from the words or the actions 
of our Lord which perfectly justified him (and woiild justify us) in seeking out and 
saving a lost human soul. 
' I. An appeal to our finer and nobler instincts. If you have a hundred 
iheep, and of these all but one are safely sheltered from the cold and protected from 
every peril, but that one is shut out. Is away shivering in the blast, is exposed to the 
attack of the wild beast, is nearing the deadly precipice, — your heart prompts you to 
leave those that are safe, and to go and seek and rescue the one that is lost. Christ's 
heart prompts him to find that human soul which is lost in the mazes of error, or 
caught in the meshes of vice, or starving on the barren plains of unbelief. The most 
generous instincts of our nature will help us to understand his action when he went to 
the house of the publican, or suffered the daughter of shame to come in penitence to 
his feet. 

II. An appeal to otjr higher interests. We should put forth that labour in 
the field of sacred usefulness which is most remunerative. But which answers best — 
attention to the pretentious Pharisee, or to the shamefaced publican? To forgive fifty 
shillings to him who will first dispute the claim and then think nothing of your readi- 
ness to forego it will not be so satisfactory as to forgive five hundred pounds to him 
who is constrained to acknowledge the indebtedness, and is filled with gratitude to you 
for cancelling it. To endeavour to convince the scribe and the Pharisee of sin would 
have proved vain and fruitless work ; but to lead some guilty ones to penitence and 
purity was to earn unbounded gratitude, and to unloose streams of devoted love that 
should refresh the parched and thirsty soil. 

III. An appeal to oub sense op duty. The physician has several patients ; some 
of them are not very ill, and these have the idea that they know what ails them and 
what remedies will do them good; but there are two or three that are dangerously, 
perhaps desperately ill, who do not know what they should do for recovery, and who 
will gladly take his advice and adopt his measures. To whom should he go but to 
those who need him most and will receive him best ? 

1. Let MS enter more into the pitifulness of spiritual degradation. Sin is to be con- 
demned, and strong indignation is often a duty and even a grace. But it is also very 
pitiful. Whether we find it in publican or harlot, in the covetous man or in the 
degraded woman, it is a thing to grieve over, even as Christ our Lord did, with a 
generous compassion ; to affect our hearts with a pure and even deep distress. And if 
we should feel thus as we contemplate the condition of one lost human being, what 
should our emotion be in view of the multitudes who are sunk in superstition, in wrong- 
doing, in utter hopelessness and helplessness! When we "see these multitudes," 
should we not, like the Master, be " moved with compassion for them, because they are 
as sheep without a shepherd " ? May we not well exclaim— 

" My God, I feel the mournful scene, 
And my heart bleeds for dying men. 
While fain my pity would reclaim 
And snatch the firebrands from the flame" I 

2 Let us avail ourselves of every means for seeking and saving the lost : whether it 
be individual effort, or action in combination with others, or liberal contribution to the 
missionary institution, let every opportunity be taken to follow in the path of love 
once trodden by " those sacred feet." — C. 

Ver. 10. — Saving the lost. It has been questioned whether there can be mentioned 
one word which is more pathetic than any other. It might be well maintained that 
thii word would be found in our text. What truly and profoundly pathetic pictures art 



180 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xes. 1— 48. 

called up before us by the 80und of the word, "lost"! It speaks to us of the vessel far 
out of its track and drifting toward the rocks where it wUI find its ruin ; it speaks of 
the traveller lost among the mountains, moving toward the precipice over which he if 
bound to fall and perish ; it speaks of the firm whose affairs have been growing serious 
and have now become desperate, before which there is no other prospect than the closed 
door and a place in tlie gazette ; and it speaks of the sad story, old as sin but young as 
yesterday, of one that has been deceived and led astray, over whose character and over 
whose future the darkest shadows rest. But our text reminds us of — 

I. The lost world which Christ came to save. 1. There was a day in the history 
of heaven when it was announced that a new world was lost; that a race created in its 
Divine Maker's image was lost, had departed from the truth and wisdom of God, had 
left its home in his love, and had wandered away in guilt and wrong. 2. Only God 
himself could comprehend what that meant; what evil, what sorrow, what error, what 
darkness of soul, what wretchedness of life, what degradation of character, what death- 
fulness. 3. But the Son of God determined to restore it; ordered everything in his 
holy providence that would prepare for his own personal intervention ; in due time 
manifested himself in the flesh, spake, wrought, lived, suffered, died, arose, reascended ; 
left behind him the great work of redemption in all its fulness and fitness — the gospel 
of the grace of God. 

II. The lost soul which he is ever seeking and saving. 1. The sense in which 
each sinful human soul is lost. (1) It has lost its way ; it is a traveller going in the 
wrong direction, away from his home toward the perilous precipice. (2) It has lost its 
treasure, its heritage ; for it has lost its peace, its harmony, its accordance with all 
those beings to whom it is most nearly and vitally related ; it has lost its hopes. 
(3) It has lost its worth, its likeness to the Holy One ; it has been brought down to 
folly, to that which is unbeautiful and unworthy. 2. The fact that Christ is seeking it. 
(1) JJe is tenderly interested in every human soul. At all stages in its history. When it 
is in the far country he is regarding it with infinite compassion and Divine yearning ; 
when the first thought of returning is kindled in the heart and the beginnings of peni- 
tence are seen; when there is earnestness which makes toward, but does not amount to^ 
actual repentance (see Mark x. 21) ; when the soiil is seeking its Saviour. (2) He is 
endeavouring to win if. He is coming to it by various approaches, laying a loving hand 
upon it at many points, addressing it in many tones, returning again and again to it 
in patient solicitude. " Behold, he stands at the door, and knocks." (3) Our only pos- 
sible response. Not, indeed, that we cannot reject and refuse him ; we can ; it is open 
to us to do that. But, then, how can we f If we would not be shamefully and guiltily 
ungrateful, if we would not make his dying and ever-living love to be of no avaU to us, 
if we have any regard for our own present and immortal blessedness, if we would win 
the prize and enjoy the heritage of eternal life, the only possible response we can make 
to the seeking Saviour is to open wide the door of our hearts and bid him enter and 
take full possession of our grateful and loving spirit. — C. 

Vers. 12 — 27. — Prdbaiion and award. Jesus Christ here invites ns to do two 
things. 

I. To TREAT this LIFE AS A TIME OF SAOEBD OPPORTUNITY. Tho " UObleman " of 

the parable gave to his servants a certain sum, of which they were to make good use 
during his absence. His charge was this : " Occupy till I come." 1. The time of the 
nobleman's absence stands for our mortal life. Whether it be lung or short, our present 
life is a period during which we have to be preparing for another of far greater con- 
sequence. It is a probationary period, that on which the larger and more serious future 
depends. This is in harmony with our experience ; for one part of our life is a preparation 
for another, and the nature of the succeeding period depends upon the charncter of that 
which precedes it — childhood for youth, youth for young manhood, etc. 2. The " pound '" 
of the parable stands for God-given opportunity — for the constitutional capacity with 
which we are endowed ; for the favouring circumstances and facilities by which we are 
surrounded ; for the Christian privileges with which we are blessed. 3. The smallnesg 
of our endowment affords no escape from responsibility. Only " one pound." It seemi 
a very small sum for a nobleman to give in charge ; but clearly it was large enough 
fat * righteous requiiement. If o plea could be found in the littleuesi of the aum ; it u 



CH. XDc. 1—48.] THB GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 161 

Dot eren urged. No man Is entitled to say that his human spirit is worth nothing to 
God, his life worth nothing to the cause of righteousness; only God knows how 
Taluable one human spirit, one earthly life, is. 4. No slavish tinaidity will excuse tha 
most faint-hearted (vers. 21, 22). Our God is not a Being from whose service w« 
have to turn because we shrink from his severity (Ps. ciil. 8 — 14; Isa. zL 29; IviL 
16; 2 Cor. viii. 12). 

n. To LOOK FOBWABD TO A DAT OF ACOOUNT AND OF AWARD. 1. There wiU be • 

day of judgment. The nobleman will return and call his servants before him (ver. IS), 
This may stand for some one great day, or we may still better look upon it as the day, 
-when our earthly life terminates, and when we shall, as individual souls, stand before 
the Judge. 2. God will require of us the use we have made of our opportunity ; what 
we have gtdned; what we have done in the direction (1) of self-culture, minisfering to 
the growth of our spiritual faculties; (2) of the service of our kind, enlightening and 
Biding and blessing them ; (3) of magnifying the Name of our Divine Lord. 3. Ha 
will express his Divine judgment concerning us — ^his warm approval of those who hare 
been most faithful (ver. 17) ; his acceptance of those who have not been unfaithful 
(ver. 19) ; his displeasure with the unworthy (ver. 22). We are to look for the clearly 
and fully expressed decision of Jesus Christ upon the character of our life-work, upon 
the comparative excellency or faultiness of our Christian life. 4. He will determine tha 
measure of our award by the degree of our fidelity (see vers. 17, 19). The more faith- 
ful and devoted the life on earth, the larger the recompense, the brighter the crown, 
the broader the sphere, in the heavenly kingdom. The doctrine of Matt. xx. 14, 16 
does not contradict this ; it simply teaches that those to whom God gives a smaller 
■hare of bounty and of grace are not to complain because there are those to whom he 
grants a larger one. God is righteous, and he not only will not forget our work and 
labour of love (Heb. vi. 10), but he will not allow those of his servants who hava 
devoted their powers to his cause with the greatest energy, constancy, and sell^ 
■acrifice to misa the most generous and gracious recognition at his loving hand. — 0. 

Vers. 12 — ^24. — Life a sacred opportunity. We may bring out the main thought of 
our Master in this parable if we consider the four points of — 

I. God's bovebeigntt of oub life. He is the Divine Lord of our life. It cama 
from him; it is continued by him; it is enriched perpetually and liberally from his 
bountiful stores ; and it is subject to his sway. He has a sovereign right to determine 
what it shall be — what shall be its aim and its issue. He is the " nobleman;" we are 
" his servants." If we do think of objecting to his claim (ver. 14), we shall only be 
disappointed and defeated in our rebelliousness of heart. He cannot be dethroned; 
against his right to rule there can be no appeaL Submission is our true wisdom, as it 
is our first and last obligation. 

II. The SACRED chaege he lays upon vs. He gives to each of us money (silver) — 
• talent (Matt, xxv.), a "pound " (text), and he says to each of us, " Occupy till I come." 
1. The time of the nobleman's absence represents our mortal life, or (more correctly) the 
period between our first sense of responsibility and the last hour of consciousness. 2. 
The pound (talent) represents the opportunity of service which he places within our 
reach. This opportunity is impounded of (1) our natural capacity — bodily, mental, 
spiritual ; and of (2) all the favourable circumstances by which we are attended as we 
pass through our life — education, home influence, capital, facilities for entering a sphera 
of activity, etc. And this sacred opportunity looks out in three directions : (1) the culti- 
vation of our own nature ; (2) the service of mankind ; (3) the worship of God, and work 
in his broad field. The Lord of our life is saying to us, " Occupy till I come ; " <.e. put 
out this pound, employ this sacred opportunity now within your reach, turn it to good 
account, use your capacities and your circumstances for high and noble ends — for your 
own spiritual enlargement, for the good of yotir brethren, for the glory of Christ. 

III. Thb bbwabd of FAiTHFUiiKESs. (Vers. 16 — 19.) Here are two principles on 
which we may depend as guiding the Divine hand when the day of account arriveib 
1. Those who have done well will receive God's gracious commendation and reward. 
To them he will express his good pleasure, and to them he will give an award, i. 
They who have been more faithful will receive the more gracious approval and tha 
larger spheres Ha who turns his ooa found into tan has a warmer welcome and a men 



m THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. Hx. 1—48. 

liberal reward ; to him are those most gladdening words addressed, and to him are 
entrusted not five hut ten cities over whicli to rule (ver. 17). " Then shall every man 
have praise of God." But then shall those who have striven hard and toiled long and 
suffered much in the cause of Jesus Christ have a fuH measure of benediction ; and to 
such will ie apportioned a crown that wiU be bright indeed, a sphere that will be broad 
indeed. 

IV. The penalty of nkoligbnIob. (Vers. 20—24.) The slothful servant may make 
excuses, but they will be brushed aside ; he himself will be severely condemned ; he 
will be divested of what he has left him ; he wiU be sent into saddest exile (Matt. xxv. 
30). It is not the atheist, or the criminal, or the perpetrator of vicious deeds ; it is not 
the outward and flagrant transgressor, who is here condemned and sentenced ; it is the 
man who made nothing of his life ; it is the man who had no sense of sacred responsi- 
bility ; It is he who withheld his powers from the service of God ; — it is he who is pro- 
nounced to be so guilty. To let our lives go by without making them a service and 
a blessing, to let our powers and our opportunities rust in mere disuse, is to be accu- 
mulating a debt which we shall not be able to discharge, and which will make us to 
appear' bankrupt at the great account.-^C. 

Ver. 26. — 2%e law of spiritual increase. Here we have one of those paradoxes of 
Jesus Christ into the heart of which many have failed to find iheir way. Why, it is 
asked, should one who has have more? will he not have too much? Why should he 
who has but little lose the little he has? will he not be still worse off than ever? 
Where is the wisdom, where the righteousness of this couise? This criticism arises 
from a pure misunderstanding of Christ's meaning. We shall see what he meant if we 
consider — 

I. The view Christ took or possession. When may a man be said to have any- 
thing ? When he has legal documents to prove that it belongs to him ? Or when it is 
securely locked up in a box or buried in the earth ? Not at all. It is when he is wing 
it, when he is turning it to account, when he is making it answer the purpose for 
which it exists. If a man lets an object rust in disuse, remain unemployed, he has it 
not, virtually and practically. It is not his at all ; it does him no good, renders him 
no service, is to him as if it were not; he has it not, in truth. This accords perfectly 
with Christ's usage in Matt. xxv. There the men who put out their talents had them ; 
the man who hid his latent had it not. He who does not make use of that which is at 
his command only "seemeth to have" (or thinketh he has) it (ch. viiL 18). It is 
use that really constitutes possession. This is not a mere fancy or conceit ; it is the 
language of truth, it is the verdict of experience. The miser does not really possess his 
gold ; it answers to him none of the ends which make it the valuable thing it is. He 
might as well own as many counters. He seems to have (thinks he has) money, but in 
truth he has it not. It is thus with men of great intellectual capacity which they do 
not'-jpmploy ; their faculties, unused, are of no value to themselves or to others; they 
might as well be non-existent. According to the wise and true usage nf the great 
Teacher, we have the things we use ; those we use not we have not. Now we can 
understand — 

II. The Divine law op incekasb and decline. For this is not a mere action 
done on one particular occasion ; there is nothing exceptional or arbitrary about it. 
It is a Divine method invariably adopted; a Divine principle running through the 
whole econony ; a Divine law with illustrations on every hand. It affects us at every 
turn of our life, in every part of our nature. It applies to us considered : 1. Physically. 
The muscle that is used is developed ; that which is neglected shrinks, and in time 
becomes wholly powerless. To him that has is given ; from him that hath not Is taken 
away. 2. Mentally, The boy who cultivates his intellectual capacities becomes mentally 
strong ; every acquisition of knowledge is an increase of power ; the more he knows the 
better he can learn: to him that has is given. But the boy who does not study, but 
wastes his youth in idlene-ss, not only does not acquire knowledge ; he loses the faculty 
of acquisition : from him that has not is taken away that (capacity) which he has. 
3. Spiritually. (1) Spiritual perception. The little child can readily understand the 
rlfrnents of the Christian faith, and, apprehending them, go on to master "the deep 

lags of God." But the aged man who hag learnt nothing of Divine truth throogh • 



OH. XIX. 1—48.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 153 

long lite of godlessness, is quite unteachable ; he is dull of appreheDslon ; from him 
has been taken away, etc. ; his faculties have become shrivelled. (2) Christian work. 
Every one has a certain capacity for usefulness ; and he is bound to put it out at once ; 
if he waits until his capacity has grown into a power, he will find that not only will he 
not gain the skill he is waiting for, but he will lose the capacity he now has. But if, 
on the other hand, he uses what he has, the exercise of his humblest talent will bring 
increase, and he will soon acquire the strength and facility he is eager to possess. 
What, therefore, we wish to be able to do — teach, preach, pray, etc. — we must set about 
doing ; every intelligent, devout effort to do good means not only a little good done, 
but a little power gained. What we do poorly to-day we shall do fairly well to-morrow ; 
be ourselves to-day, we shall surpass ourselves to-morrow. Aptitude comes with e£fort 
and exercise : to him that has is given. (3) Spiritual sensibility. The little child 
is open to impression, and, if he yields to the truth he knows, that truth will alwaya 
be effective ; but if he rejects it his heart becomes hardened, and he becomes increas- 
ingly unresponsive : from him that has not, etc.'' Thus God's holy Law engirts us on 
every side; we cannot step outside it. It is determining our character and our 
destiny. We must act upon it, must turn it to good account. We must see to it that 
we really have what we seem to have, that we are using the talent, the opportunity, 
that is at our command. Then to us will be given — ^here, on the earth, in the shape of 
increased faculty and multiplied usefulness; tiiere, in the heavens, in the way of a £ar 
broader sphere of celestial service. — 0. 

Vers. 28 — 38. — Christ's royalty. Something like • royal procession is here 
described. On the foal of an ass, on which it comported as well with Oriental ideas of 
honour as with Christian ideas of peace that he should ride, the " King came, meek," 
but not without attention and acclaim, into Jerusalem. A large company of the curious, 
the devout, and even the enthusiastic, welcomed him as " the King that came in the 
Name of the Lord." At last, thought his disciples, his hour is come ; at last their 
Master was entering on his heritage, was assuming his kingdom ; at last their iong- 
delayed hopes were to be fulfilled. Gladly they accepted and sustained the greetings 
of the multitude, and fondly, we may be sure, they hoped that a triumphant issue was 
at hand. But it had no such ending as they looked for. Jesus went into the temple, 
healed the sick, received the adoration of the children, whose voices (as we can well 
believe) were the last to sink into silence, and went quietly back to Bethany. What, 
then, dii it mean ? What was the service and significance of the scene ? 

I. A VALUABLE KBMINDEE OP HIS POWBE OF SELF-RESTRAINT. He had been movlng 
among men as "one that serveth," as one that " ministered." He had moved as a very 
humble traveller along the path of human life. But how easv it would have been for 
him to call forth the honour of the people, and to live amid the excitements of popu- 
larity, and to reach the high places of power 1 But this he resolutely declined to do, 
choosing deliberately the lowlier but the nobler path of humble, holy service. 

II. A STEIKING INDICATION OF HIS ACCEPTANCE WITH THE PEOPLE. No One CaU Say 

that Christ's teaching was not profound ; it was deep as the very fountains of truth. 
No philosophy went further; he went down into the deep places of the human soul. 
Yet, while the philosophers made their appeal to the cultured, Christ addressed him- 
self to the multitude, to the common human heart. And " all the people were very 
attentive to hear him." So here, while the men who prided themselves on their 
knowledge looked on with angry disdain (ver. 29), the people and the children were 
enthusiastic in his favour — they recognized in the Prophet of Nazareth the true Teacher 
that had come from God. Better be numbered among the simple-hearted who can 
appreciate the Divine than among the wise and learned who misread the providence 
of God, and stand sullen and sUent while everything is inviting to jo)" and praise. 
Better be the ignorant cottager whose heart is full of reverence, or the little child who 
has the songs of Zion on his lips and the love of Jesus in his heart, than the learned 
critic who never bends the knee or bows the heart in homage to the true and the eternal. 
in. A HINT OP Christ's true eotaltt. The Messiah of the Jews was to be a 
King. To that conclusion prophecy pointed with unfailing finger, and on that event 
Jewish faith rested with gathering hope. The Son of David was to occupy his father's 
throne ; the daughters of Jerusalem were to rejoice because " her King was coming." 



154 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xix. 1— «8. 

Claiming the Messiahship, Jesug was bound to claim this sovereignty, but how do thia 
without encouraging the current fallacy as to his temporal and visible royalty ? Is not 
this siniple scene the answer ? Christ tben and thus said, " I am the King you are 
awaiting." But its extreme simplicity and its transiency showed that he did not 
intend to wear the trappings and be surrounded with the common grandeurs of earthly 
royalty ; it showed that he came not for pomps and pageantries and outward triumphs 
but to seek a sovereignty of another kind in another realm altogether. That very 
simple and passing regal state was only an emblem of the spiritual sovereignty which 
was immeasurably higher and more to be desired. Sweet to his ear may have been 
the acclaim of the populace and the hosannas of the children ; but how much sweeter 
is the voice of man or woman or of little child who goes in glad submission to bin 
feet to offer loyal service to the Divine Bedeemer, to place heart and life beneath his 
gracious and benignant sway I 

IV. A PROPHECY OP FAR FnTTTRB OLOBT. Never on this earth will that scene be 
re-enacted ; but there is an hour coming, when, in another realm, it will be amplified and 
perpetuated. Christ will be acknowledged King by all the hosts celestial and tenes- 
trial. The transient gladness of the sacred city will be nothing to the everlasting joy 
of the new Jerusalem ; the passing enthusiasm of that happy demonstration to the 
abiding blessedness of the life in the heavenly land. Yet may we take that one hour 
of Jerusalem's acceptance of her King as a prelude and a prophecy of the adoration 
which the redeemed of every kindred and tribe shall pay him when they cast their 
crowns at his feet. 

■*0h that with yonder sacred throng 
We at hia feet may fall," eta I 

FbaotioaIi lessons. We gather : 1. That Jesus Christ Is now claiming the real, 
spiritual sovereignty of ourselves. He is calling upon us not to strew his path with 
palm branches, but to offer him the first place in our heart ; to yield him our perfect 
trust, our unfailing and unfading love, our cheerful and constant obedience. 2. That 
the rest of soul which follows such surrender of ourselves is incomparably better than 
the passing exultation of a triumphal entry. 3. That by loyal and devoted service in 
his cause we shall gain a place in the acclaiming company that will praise the King in 
his celestial glory.— 0. 

Ver. 28. — Eagerness in the upward path. " He went before, ascending up to 
Jerusalem." " To go to Corinth " once meant to give way to dissipation. What did it 
mean to " go to Jerusalem " ? To the Jews generally it meant to go to some sacred 
service, to visit the temple of Jehovah, to enter the sacred precincts where sacrifice was 
offered to God. To Jesus Christ, now, it meant to go on to martyrdom and to death. 
But still to go thither was to "go up," was to "ascend," and in his progress to that 
sacred city he did not lag behind, nor even walk abreast ; he " went before," he showed 
great eagerness in that upward and most honourable path. Such was his eagerness of 
soul that the disciples were astonished and even awed as they beheld it (Mark x. 32) ; 
they were profoundly impressed with the ardour and intensity of his spirit : " As they 
followed they were afraid." We may share the Saviour's spirit of holy ardour and 
elevation as we tread — 

I. The path op holt fbivileoe. When may we be said to be on the upward 
road so far as our activities are concerned? When we are presiding? or when we are 
ruling? or when we are winning? or when we are rejoicing? It may be so. But 
assuredly we are then on the way that slopes upward and heavenward when we are 
in the path of sacred privilege, when we are " on our way to God " — to his nearer 
presence, to the worship of the Holy and the True One, to communion with the 
righteous Lord of all, to fellowship with Christ, to gathering at his table of love, to work 
in his vineyard. Then are we in the high places — " in the heavenly places ; " then are we 
engaged in an exercise of human power which is most worthy of our highest faculties 
and reflects dignity on our human nature ; then are we " ascending" in tpirit ; and we 
do well to feel that it is not a time for slackness of speed, for exhaustion of spirit, for 
signs of weariness. We should show a sacred ardour, a holy eagerness, like unto hi™ 
who " went before " as he ascended to Jerusalem 



ciH. xrs. 1—48.1 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST, LUKE, 165 

n. The WAT OF witnbsb-beabino. To go to Jerusalem was, to our Lord, to go 
where he should " bear witness to the truth " (John xviii. 37) ; should bear witness by 
words, of which many would be utterly misunderstood, and many treated with high 
disdain ; should bear witness by suffering, by calm, brave, patient endurance of wrong. 
And to do this was to go up, to ascend ; as it is to-day, and will always be. Whera 
shall we find the martyr-witnesses among mankind ? Not as we look down, but as we 
look up — up to the very loftiest altitudes that human foot has ever trodden. Kings 
and statesmen walk not along such lofty, such truly celestial paths as do they who 
speak amid derision or suffer without iiinching to attest the living truth of God. When 
we go forward toward self-sacrifice for Christ's sake we " ascend up " to the high places 
of the kingdom of God. It may well be with no faltering or lingering step, but with 
a free and forward movement, like him who now " went before," that we move to 
those sacred and noble levels. 

III. The mount op tbanslation. Jesus went up to Jerusalem, to Calvary, to 
that wondrous redeeming death which is the world's great sacrifice. We may well 
■ay that he ascended to that. That was the culminating point of his career; that not 
only concluded, but crowned his course. And after receiving all the light which he has 
shed upon it, we need not be ever speaking of death as a dark valley down which we 
must descend ; we may rather regard it as a mount of translfition up which we move. 
In all things physical, indeed, we descend to die ; our powers become lower, our life 
grows less. But we walk by faith in Christ Jesus. And by faith we regard ourselves 
as going up to the gateway which admits to the celestial glories. In view of that 
which immediately afterwards awaits us, we need not lag behind; we may press 
forward, like our Master, as we draw toward the close, and may eagerly pass on the 
way which ends in death and victory. — C, 

Vers. 39, 40. — Suppression and expression. It is not difficult to find the meaning of 
ovu: Lord in this hyperbolical utterance of his. " Why should I silence my disciples? " 
he says. " Of what use would it be to suppress such strong feelings as theirs? Feeling 
•will always find its vent. If suppressed in one form, it will express itself in another ; if 
driven underground in one spot, it will only come up in another ; if these human beings 
whose hearts are so filled with exultation were silenced, the very stones would cry out," 
It is useless, and worse than useless, to try to extinguish enthusiasm by a hard repres- 
sive commandment. The folly of suppression and the wisdom of allowing and inviting, 
indeed of providing, the means of suitable expression will apply to many things, 

I, Youthful cubiositt. Curiosity is au irrepressible thing; it will be satisfied. 
Age cannot extinguish it, try how it may. It may have occasion to check it, but its 
true wisdom is to guide it — to take the necessary trouble to satisfy it in the best 
possible way. Curiosity is not a plant of the evil one ; it is rooted in the soul by the 
heavenly Father ; it is a main source of knowledge ; it ought to be wisely but amply 
nourished. If We endeavour to suppress it we shall find that it will not ht suppressed, 
but will find other ways of satisfaction than those we disallow. 

II. The love of liberty. A desire for freedom and independence is a strong 
sentiment of the human soul. Where intelligence exists there it will arise and assert 
itself. It will not be put down ; it cannot be put out. Authority may " rebuke" it, as 
the Pharisees wanted Christ to act on this occasion ; but the Lord of our nature knows 
that it will be heard and must be respected. Neither domestic, nor social, nor national, 
nor ecclesiastical despotism can survive beyond a certain time. The aspirations of the 
human soul for freedom will not be denied. If not permitted a wise and rightful form 
of action, they will take improper and harmful ones. 

III. The bbligious sentiment in man. Philosophy has tried to silence the voice 
of faith; it has undertaken to rebuke the disciples; and it has temporarily and super- 
ficially succeeded. But it has found that so deep and so strong is the religious senti- 
ment in man that when religion is driven down below the surface it comes out again 
In superstition in some form or other. The sense of the Supreme, a yearning of the 
human heart for the living God, is not to be erased iiom the soul, is not to be removed 
from the life of man. 

IV, Definite beliqious convictions. These also are not to be suppressed. Man 
have taken very various views of the doctrines of the Christian faith ; and, as we know 



166 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIKG TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xix. 1— 48. 

too well, opponents have not only "rebuked," but tried arrogantly and forcibly to 
silence, those who have differed from them. But they have not succeeded. Keligious 
conviction is an inextinguishable force ; slain in the persons of its champions, it rises 
■gain and reappears, oftea in tenfold power. 

v. Ebligious enthusiasm. To this the words of our Lord primarily and most 
properly apply. Religious fervour may frequently be disposed to take a form which 
we do not think the best, or even the suitable and becoming. But we must take care 
how we deal with it. It is not a thing to be suppressed ; it is to be encouraged and 
enlightened and guided. It is, or it has within it, a true, living power; this power 
is of God, and is for good. Abruptly and harshly rebuked and silenced, it will only 
assert itself in other and probably still more questionable forms. Treated with Chris- 
tian sympathy and encouragement (see ch. x. 49, 50), informed and enlightened by 
superior intelligence, directed into wise channels, it may do a noble work for the 
Master and mankind. 1. Let not a young enthusiasm be mindful only of its own 
exuberance; let it be regardful of the judgment and feeling of experience. 2. Let 
experience be tolerant of eager-hearted enthusiasm, and be prepared to count itamonggt 
its friends. — 0. 

Ter. 41. — The tears of Christ. We are touched by the tears of a little child ; for they 
are the sign of a genuine, if a simple, sorrow. Much more are we affected by the tears 
of a strong and brave man. When a man of vigorous intelligence, accustomed to 
command himself, gives way to tears, then we feel that we are in the presence of a 
very deep and sad emotion. Such were the tears of Christ. Twice, at least, he wept; 
and on this occasion we understand that he gave free vent to an overpowering distress. 
The tears of Christ speak of two things more especially. 

L His tbndbb sympathy with human sobeow. The grief which now overwhelmed 
the Saviour was (as we shall see) very largely due to his sense of its past and its 
approaching guilt. But it was also due, in part, to his foreknowledge of the sufferings 
its inhabitants must endure. An intense sympathy with human woe was and is a 
very large element in the character and life of Jesus Christ. 1. It was his compassion 
(or our race that brought him from above — ^that we by his poverty might become rich. 
2. It was this which, more than anything else, accounts for the miracles he wrought. 
He could not see the blind, and the lame, and the fever-stricken, and the leprous without 
tendering them the restoring grace it was la his power to bestow. He could not see 
mourning parents and weeping sisters without healing the heart-wounds he was able to 
cure. 3. It was this which drew to himself the confidence and affection of loving 
hearts. It was no wonder that pitiful women and tender-hearted children, and men 
whose hearts were unhardened by the world, were drawn in trust and love to the 
responsive Son of man, whose step was always stopped by a human cry, to whose 
compassion no stricken man or woman ever appealed in vain. 4. It is this feature ot 
his character which makes him so dear to us now as our Divine Friend. For in this 
world, where sorrow treads so fast on the heels of joy, and where human comforters so 
often fail us, of what priceless value is it to have in that Everlasting One, who is the 
Ever-present One, a Friend who is " touched" with our griefs, and who still carries our 
sorrows by the power of his sympathy I (1) Let us thank God that we have such a 
Friend in him ; and (2) let us resolve before God that such a friend will we seek and 
strive to he. 

II. His PEorouND eegket fob those who abe ts the wkong. With what eyes 
do we look npon human sin when we see it at its worst ? How are we affected by the 
sight of a drunkard, of a thief, of a foul-mouthed and fallen woman ? Are we filled 
with contempt ? Many bad things are indeed contemptible ; but there is a view to be 
taken which is worthier and more Christ-like than that ; a view which is more humane 
and more Divine — a feeling of profound pitifulness and sorrowful regret. It was this 
which filled the heart of Christ when he looked upon Jerusalem, and that called forth 
his tearful lamentation. Much was there about that city that might well move his 
righteous anger, that did call down his strong, unsparing indignation (Matt, xxiii.) — 
Its spiritual arrogance, its religious egotism, its fearful pretentiousness, its deep-seated 
hypocrisy, its heartless cruelty, its whitewash of ceremony without with all its 
corruptness and selfishness within. But Jesus forebore to denounce; he stopped tt 



OH. XIX. 1—48.] THE GOSPEL AOCOBDINO TO ST. LUKE. 157 

weep. He was most powerfully affected by the thought that Jerusalem might hava 
been so much to God and man, and was — what she was. Jesus Christ was not so much 
angered as he was saddened by the presence and the eight of sin. He might hava 
withered it up in his wrath, but he rather wept over it in his pity. This is the 
Christian spirit to be cherished and to be manifested by ourselves. We must contemn 
the contemptible ; but we rise to higher ground when we pity the erring because they 
are in error, when we mourn over the fallen because they are down so low, when we 
grieve for those who are afar off because they are astray from God and blessedness. 
But we must not only weep for those who are in the wrong because they are in the 
wrong. We must do our utmost to set them right. " How often " did Christ seek to 
gather those sons and daughters of Jeiusalem under the wings of his loTe I How often 
and bow earnestly should we seek to reclaim and to restore ! — C. 

Vers. 41, 42. — Judcea and England. Did Jesus Christ grieve over Jerusalem as a 
patriot over his own country? Was there an element of patriotic sorrow in that 
touching and tearful lament ? Did he love that land any the more because, as concerning 
the flesh, he was the Son cf David, was born at Bethlehem, and regarded the Jews as 
his fellow-citizens? The idea is open to one objection. To be a patriot seems to put a 
man under limitation. To love our own country more than others is to love others less 
than our own. We shrink from associating with him anything that even looks like 
partiality or partisanship. On the other hand, we must take care that we do not lose 
the human in our desire to preserve the Divine. Might not the same consideration be 
urged against our Lord cherishing a peculiar regard and affection for his mother, his 
sisters, his brothers, his personal friends ? But who can doubt that there was especial 
love in his heart for these ? There was then, probably, something of patriotic grief in 
those tears of Christ, an additional pang in his heart, as he thought that it was 
Jerusalem itself, the city round which so many associations gathered, whose guUt and 
doom stood in clear, sad vision before him. However that may be, he felt deep 
compassion as he looked forward to — 

L The fdtubb or the Holt Land. We speak of the land or country, though it 
was the city of Jerusalem over which he wept. But in the sense in which " Paris is 
France " Jerusalem was Judasa, was Israel itself. It was the strength, the light, the 
glory, of the land ; it was the centre to which all the inhabitants looked and journeyed ; 
it was the source of the people's habits and beliefs. Tlie capital taken, everything was 
well-nigh gone, the fate of the country was settled. Concerning this people, this 
nation, Jesus Christ felt, as he beheld the city : 1. That it had been enriched with 
peculiar privilege. (1) Commencing with a signal and glorious deliverance from bondage ; 
(2) continued with the granting of a Law and a system admirably fitted to save them 
from surrounding superstitions and impurities ; (3) multiplied by the coming of psalmist 
and of prophet with inspiring song and elevating speech and life, uplifting their imagi- 
nation and cleansing their conscience ; (4) enhanced by the strong and severe, but yet 
kind and merciful, discipline through which they were made to pass ; (5) culminating 
in the presence, the teaching, the life, of him, in whom One wiser than Solomon, mightier 
than David, devouter than Samuel, nobler than Elijah and John, "was there." 2. That 
it was charged with a high and sacrtd mission. It was designed by God to be the 
depository and guardian of his Divine truth, to hold fast and to hold high those great 
verities which are the strength, the life, and the glory of our manhood. Just what part 
it was to have play, d, and what exact service it would have rendered our race had it 
been loyal and true, may be questioned by us. But it would undoubtedly have pla>yed 
a very great part, and been, as a nation, the great factor in the restitution of mankind. 
3. That it had now missed its chance, and was hastening to its doom. (1) The Hebrew 
faith had become a hollow formality, a mere ritual, from which true reverence, love, 
charity, earnestness, were all absent ; and (2) the nation was in the very act of rejecting 
and was about to slay its Messiah, thus going down into the darkest crime and then 
going on to the saddest disaster. We glance at — 

II. The futdee of our own cotjntet. There is no little parallelism between 
Judsea and England. 1. God has enriched our land Yiith. peculiar privilege*. We hava 
(1) a large share of religious liberty ; (2) a good measure of spiritual enlightenment, not 
indeed without some dark shadows of ignorance and Buperstition ; (3) numerous an4 



158 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINO TO ST. LUKB. [o«. xix. 1— 48, 

strong organizationa ooTering the land, whose function is to teach, to guide, to guard, 
to rescue, and redeem. May we not say, " He hath not dealt so with any nation ; as for 
his statutes and commandments, they have not known them" as we hare known them? 
2. God has given us a high and a great mission to perform. EesponsibUity goes with 
privilege ; it is, indeed, the obverse side of the same thing. We have not only to present 
to his view " a holy nation " within our own borders, to raise our own community to 
the height of Christian knowledge, of social purity, of national well-being in all its 
forms ; but also to diffuse the light of Divine truth far and vdde, and to make our 
infl\ience tell for peace, righteousness, and truth in every quarter of the globe. 3. We 
have to consider whether we are declining that mission ot are fulfilling it. That la • 
question which cannot be determined by public pro'fessions ; nor by the number or 
character of our sanctuaries; nor by the number or constitution of our Churches. It 
can only be determined by the actual spiritual and moral condition of our people, of the 
multitudes and millions of our citizens ; and by the earnestness and devotedness of 
Christian men and women in the field of sacred work. By these criteria we stand or 
faU.— 0. 

Ver. 4i.—The time of visitation. " This thy day ; * " The time of thy visitation." 
What is it that makes man, everywhere and under all conditions, so deeply interesting ? 
He is found on savage shores in nakedness and barbarism, in idolatrous lands living in 
saddest superstition, in the slums and purlieus of great cities as debased and vicious 
as the brutes of the field, yet still most interesting. It is because Grod made man for 
himself, and, far as he has wandered from his side, it is still open to him to return. It 
is because man was created to move along the loftiest levels, and, low as he has fallen, 
it is in him to rise. Bring to bear the right influences upon him, and from the very 
lowest depths of debasement and dishonour he may attain to noble heights of excellency 
•nd power. Again and again in the history of mankind and of individual men has 
this been proved to be true. Illustrative and reassuring instances can be adduced in 
'■bich whole tribes, or even nations, and in which particular men and women, have 
been visited with " the truth and grace of Jesus Christ," and have been lifted up to 
knowledge, to virtue, to piety, to spiritual beauty, to preparedness for the heavenly 
sphere. But the serioas aspect of this truth is that which is here suggested, viz. that 
God's dealings with us may reach a climax which is ignorantly and fatally neglected. 
We know how true this was of the Hebrew people. God's dealings with them (see 
previous homily) were long-continued, varied, gracious ; they culminated in the coming 
of the King's Son. Then Divine Wisdom uttered its voice in their hearing; then 
Divine Power wrought its marvels of mercy before their very eyes ; then Divine Purity 
lived its life of loveliness ; and Divine Love manifested itself in a hundred forms of 
kindness and of pity in the very midst of them. But " this their day," this " time of 
their visitation," they did not know. Israel missed its golden chance, and went down, 
as a nation, to rise no more. But looking at God's redemptive dealing with ourselves, 
as individual spirits, we see — 

I. How OFTEN God visits us in his redeeming love. In childhood, by a mother's 
tenderness ; in youth, by a father's wisdom ; in young manhood (womanhood), by many 
voices of the home and of the Church, uniting to say, " Thy God hath commanded thy 
strength ;" in prime, by some chastening providence, laying his hand upon ua and 
constraining us to listen and to understand. 

II. How HIS DEALINGS WITH US OULMINATB in some day of grace. There comes 
a time in the history of souls — ^it may come in any period of life — when "the powers of 
the world to come " are most strongly felt, when God's nearness is most vividly realized, 
when the claims of Christ most forcibly touch and move the soul, when the kingdom 
of God is very near, and its gates are seen to stand wide open. It is " this thy day," it 
is the " time of visitation " to such a human heart. 

III. How WISE, THEN, u IMMEDIATE ACTION I How wlse and Well for us to huno 
the time of ovu- visitation, to recognize our great and priceless opportunity, to flee to the 
seeking Saviour " swift as the morning light," lest the golden chance be gone, the gates 
of opportunity be closed I — 0. 

Ver. 46. — The house of prayer. The strong indignatifm of our Loid shswn on this 



OH. xn. 1-48.] THE GOSPEL AOCOKDING TO ST. LUKE. 169 



ooeaiion is * plain indication of tlie importance h» >. ^ed to right thought concerning 
the sanctuary, and to the right use of it. He brv.^ght into prominence the act of 

grayer aa that which should, above all things, characterize the house of God. We enter 
ito his thought if we consider — 

L The sense in which baobhtob was fbayeb. The temple existed primarily and 
pre-eminently for sacrifice. There, and there alone, might sacrifices be ofiiered to ths 
Lord. It was the one place in all the land where the sin offerings and the burnt ofiei- 
ings could be presented. Was it not, then, essentially, the place of sacrifice t Truly; 
but sacrifice, when rightly viewed, was a form of prayer. In it and by it the offerer 
drew near, consciously, to the loving God ; in it he made confession of sin to God ; in 
It he made acknowledgment of his ccntinual indebtedness to God ; in it he supplicated 
the mercy and the grace of God. But this is prayer ; it is prayer in the form of offer- 
ing rather than in words. Less than this — this conscious approach, this confession, 
thanksgiving, and supplication — ^is not prayer at all. Inasmuch, then, as the temple 
was the place of sacrifice, it was the place of prayer. 

IL The fact that these was boom in the temple for fbateb as we obdi- 
HABILT undebstand IT. We gather from our Lord's own words that the temple was 
the place commonly chosen by the people for the offering of prayer (ch. zviii. 10). 
It was toward the temple that the exiled Jews looked when they knelt down to pray 
in distant lands ; and it was in the temple that they stood to pray when that sacred 
building was within reach. It was, no doubt, regarded as of all places in the world 
the very fittest in which to realize the presence of Jehovah, and to spread forth the 
soul's desires and aspirations before him. There were many places for prayer, but that 
was the place of prayer. 

IIL The place of prayeb in the Christian sanotuabt. By what, above all 
things else, should the Christian sanctuary be characterized? 1. It should be the 
place of common assemhly. Where all classes of the people meet together, the rich and 
the poor, and feel that the Lord is the Maker of them all (Prov. zxii. 2); where the 
learned and the unlearned worship and bow down together, and " kneel before the Lord 
their Maker " (Ps. xov. 6) ; it is the place where human spirits meet, and where earthly 
circumstances are of no accotint whatever — where wealth does not weigh, and rank 
creates no distinction. 2. It should be the place of spiritual enlightenment. (1) Where 
the Word of God is read, and should be read (as it may be) impressively and effectually ; 
for there is nothing in literature which is more fitted to attract and interest a mis- 
cellaneous assembly ; (2) where the will of God is faithfully delivered, and the gospel 
of Christ expounded and enforced ; (3) where the cause of the Master and of mankind 
is fully and earnestly pleaded. But most espeeially is it : 3. The place of prayer. 
Here, either in sacred psalmody, or through some prepared formula, or led by the 
extemporaneous thought and aspiration of the minister, the worshippers draw nigh to 
God in every way in which he is approached by man — in adoration, in communion, in 
thanksgiving, in confession, in supplication, in consecration. No worshipper in the 
house of the Lord can reach a higher level of spiritual attainment than when he pours 
out his heart in prayer to God in these various utterances ; and no minister in the 
house of the Lord can render to the people gathered together a truer or higher ser- 
vice than when he helps them thus to approach the Father of spirits, and thus to 
come into direct communion with him. Then is the house of God put to its noblest 
and worthiest use when it is made by those who meet within its walls " the house 
of prayer." — 0. 

Ver. 46. — Desecration. Our Lord was touched and troubled with a holy indignation 
as he saw the temple of Jehovah turned into a place of trafSc ; that which was intended 
for the approach of the human spirit to God made to serve the purpose of hard bargaining, 
and even, as we judge from the language of the text, of dishonest dealings. It was 
a shocking, aa intolerable desecration, and, exerting the authority which always resided 
in him and which he occasionally put into exercise, he drove these hucksters from the 
sacred place which tbey were desecrating by their presence and their practices. What 
places are we now tempted to desecrate ? 

I. The sANCTtTABY. When, instead of making it a place of worship, of drawing near 
to God, of speaking to him or for him, of learning something more of his holy will, we 



160 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [en. xix. 1— 4a 

nake it a place for distinguishing ourselves, or for advertising our respectability, or for 
gaining enjoyment which is wholly unspiritaal. 

II. The homb. When that which should be the abode of peace, of love, of purity, 
of fellowship, of tenderness, of gracious ministry, of quiet growth and joy, ia turned 
into a scene of bitterness, of lecriminatiun, of estrangement, of deterioration, of 
imhappiness. 

IIL The place op business. That might be a sphere where valuable virtues and 
most acceptable graces are manifested and are strengthened — truth, equity, courtesy, 
honour, courage, sagacity; too often it is nothing better than a sphere in which deceit, low 
cunning, dishonesty, a mean and miserable selfishness, are sown and reaped bountifully. 

IV, The human body. In our treatment of this bodily frame, so skilfully and so 
wonderfully made, so nicely adjusted to receive and convey impressions from and to the 
outside world of man and nature, we may and we should act as if we were dealing with 
a very sacred thing. By cleanliness, by moderation, by purity ; by entertaining through 
the ear and the eye God's own truth and wisdom ; by employing the tongue to speak 
his love and to sing his praise ; by letting the graces of Christian character write them- 
selves, as they will, in lineaments of beauty upon our countenance ; by letting our bodies 
be, as they may be, the very temples of the Holy Ghost (1 Cor. vi. 19), — we may make 
them worthy and sacred in the sight of God. But when we regard them as mere 
instruments of gratification, and make them the ministers of sinful and even shameful 
pleasure, how great is such desecration before God ! 

V. Human life. It is here that the Holy One most often sees with Divine regret 
a pitiful desecration. He gave us our life that it might be spent, through all its stages, 
in sacred service, in spiritual growth, in elevating joy, in excellent preparation for the 
larger and fuller life beyond. How grievously is it desecrated when it is turned into 
a time for mere pecuniary acquisition, or for mere fleshly enjoyment, or for mere 
emptiness and aimlessness of existence I 1. What a pitiful waste is this 1 and how it 
will one day be deplored as absolutely irreparable ! 2. How perilous to form such evil 
habits of the soul, every day becoming more fixed! how wise to hear the Master's 
Toice summoning us to noble service, " Why stand ye all the day idle? go, work in mj 
vineyard " 1 — 0. 

Ver, 48. — Chrlsfs poptilarity. That Jesus Christ, as a Teacher, had no small share 
of popularity is beyond all question. " The people were astonished at his doctrine ; 
for his word was with power ; " " He taught them as one that had authority." His 
hearers wanted to know "whence hath this Man this wisdom?" The officers of the 
Banhedrin declared that " Never man spake like this Man." His enemies' purpose waa 
defeated: "They could not find what they might do: for all the people were very 
attentive to hear him." Large companies of men and women flocked to hear him; he 
had not to seek an audience ; he had to seek shelter from their curiosity and intrusion. 
•' Whence had this Man " this popularity ? What was the source and the secret of it ? 
There were — 

L Thbee things in bpitb op which he was populak with the people. 1. Th4 
depth of his doctrine. Many gain a ready audience with the people by carefully 
restricting themselves to those truths which their hearers can easily understand! 
superficialities are generally acceptable. Not so with the great Teacher. He struck 
tax below the surface, and was frequently announcing and enforcing truths which the 
majority of his hearers must have found "hard to be understood." Many of hie 
utterances were "hard sayings" (John vi. 60). 2. The height of his pwpose. Christ 
would have " got on " with the multitude much further and faster if he had but brought 
down his teaching to the level of their national aspirations. But when they were 
thinking of something as shallow and as transitory as a political revolution, he was 
laying broad and deep the foundations of a spiritual, universal, everlasting kingdom of 
God. His lofty purpose was high as the heavens above their hopes. His and tl eir aims 
were altogether diverse and inconsistent with one another. 3. The strength and straight- 
mess qfhis charge. " Do you suppose these men were extraordinary sinners ? I tell you, 
Kay ; but except ye repent," etc. ; " Except ye be converted, and become as little 
ohildren, ye cannot enter the kingdom;" "Except your righteousness exceed the 
nghteousness of the scribes," etc. (ch. xiii. 2, 3 ; Matt, xviii. 3 ; y, 20). 



OH. ziz. 1— 18.] THE GOSPEL ACOORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 161 

n. Two THINOB WHICH CONTRIBUTED TO, WITHOUT ACCOUNTINO FOB, HIS POPULABITT. 

1. The iUustrativeness of his style. He called to his aid all visible nature, all homely 
scoupatioQS, the fiuniliarities of social and domestic life. 

** He talked of grass and wind and rain, 

And fig trees and fair weather, 
And made it his delight to bring 

Heaven and the earth together. 
He spoke of lilies, vines, and com. 

The sparrow and the raven ; 
And words so natural, yet so wise. 

Were on men's hearts engraven." 

2. The /earhtg/rimt he showed to those who were the worst enemies of the people. He 
denounced in unsparing terms the selfishness and rapacity as well as the pretentious- 
ness and actual impiety of those who were fastening the bonds of a merciless and 
oppressive legality on the necks of their yictims; and the people looked on with 
approval and with enjoyment. Men always listen with delight when oppression is 
unsparingly denounced. They always like to see the mask torn off the face of &lse- 
hood. But it is not here that the secret of the popularity of Jesus is to be found. 

III. FOUB THINGS WHICH MADE ChBIBT's TEAOHINO AOOEPTABLB TO THOSE WHO HEARD 

Hiu, and may well make his doctrine acceptable to us to-day. 1. He spoke of those 
things the truth of which the people most wanted to know. They did not want to know 
a number of legal niceties and small social and domestic proprieties of which the scribes 
spoke to them. They wanted to know what Grod thought of them, and how he felt 
toward them, and what was the way by which they could gain and claim his favour ; 
what was the meaning and the purpose and th^possibility of human life ; what followed 
death ; and what was the true hope for the after-time. On such themes Jesus spoke to 
men, and we need not wonder that " all the people listened attentively " as he spake. 
2. He spoke as one that knew. He spoke "with authority, and not as' the scribes ; " 
" His word was with power." He did not indulge in hair-splitting argumentations, 
nor in vague and dreamy imaginings, nor in doubtful and unreliable guesses. He 
spake as one that knew ; as one who could speak about God, because he came forth 
from him, and dwelt with him ; about prayer, because he was in constant communion 
with Heaven; about righteousness, because he himself was pure in heart; about love, 
because his whole life was one act of self-denial. Out of the depths of a living soul he 
gave the known facts of experience, the certain truths of God. 3. His teaching was 
that of helpfulness and hopefulness. He saw men "as sheep without a shepherd, tired 
out and lying down," wandering, smitten, dying. He grieved over the multitudes that 
were being misled, and he longed to do them good, to lead them back ; he knew that he 
could help, that he could restore them. So he announced himself as that One who 
came " to preach good tidings to the poor, to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance 
to the captive ; " he offered himself as One to whom all the heavy-laden might repair, and 
in whom they would find rest unto their souls. He stretched forth an uplifting hand 
to those who were thought by every one else to have fallen beyond recovery. He 
breathed hope and life into despairing and dying ears. 4. His doctrine was sustained 
by his character and his life. Men listened to him, not only because he " spake as never 
man spake," but because he lived as never man lived before — ^in such perfect purity, in 
such constant devotion, in such self-forgetting love, with such gracious and tender 
sympathy in his heart and upon his countenance. They listened to him with such 
wrapt attention because they loved him for his goodness and for his love. (1) Such 
popularity as springs from such sources as these we may desire and seek to obtain. 
(2) For these same reasons we should be as attentive to hear the Master as were " the 
common people who heard him gladly " when he lived amongst us. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 10.— -A son of Abraham found in Zacchoeus the publican. The healing oi 
blind Bartimaeus was not the only saving act done by Jesus at Jericho. A notable 
publican, called Zaccbsiis, becomes the object of our Lord's compassion and the subject 
of his grace. He was at the head of the custom-house, as we should now call it, and in 
bis important post he had become rich. Having heard of Jesus and seen the advancing 
IiUKB. — n. ■ 



162 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xrt. 1— 48 

crowd, his curiosity prompted him to have a look at him if possihle; but, being little 
of stature, he could Dot from the ground obtain the view he wished. Accordingly he 
ran before, climbed up into a sycamore tree, one ol whose branches it has been supposed 
may have extended across the road, and, perched upon this, he awaited the advent ol 
Jesus. How astonished he must have been to find Jesus pausing below his perch, 
looking up, naming him, and telling him, " Zacchaaus, make haste, and come down ; 
for to-day I must abide at thy house " ! Thus invited, he came down with all haste, 
and received Christ joyfully. Doubtless the Pharisees will murmur at Christ becoming 
the publican's guest; but what does it matter when Zacchajus is gathered into the 
kingdom of God, makes his declaration about future conduct, and receives the Lord's 
assurance of being Abraham's son? Let us notice the points of interest as they 
present themselves in this case. 

L Zacch^us needed a Saviour. For success is not sufficient for any man. He 
needs besides, salvation from sin, that is, from selfishness, and often from success itself. 
It is well when even curiosity leads a man to the Saviour, and to a sense of his great 
need. Zacchjeus's case is instructive lor us alL Hit) need of a Saviour ought to 
emphasize our need. 

U. His hindkanoes in seeking the Sayioub. And of these we shall only mention 
three. 1. His riches. These are often a great hindrance to souls. They compete with 
Christ as a ground of trust. Men are tempted to trust in uncertain riches instead of 
in the living God. Zacchaeus had, however, got over this hindrance, and, rich man 
though he was, he was not ashamed to climb the sycamore to get a sight of Jesus. 2. 
His business. For the tax-farming had been denounced and excommunicated by the 
Jewish authorities, so that Zacchaeus, because of his business, did not enjoy the means 
of grace in the measure and amount he might otherwise have done. Jesus had, how 
ever, overcome this hindrance by his own manly and merciful policy, and insisted ot 
associating with publicans and sinners to save them. Every one should ask himself 
the question, however, if his business is a hindrance or a help to his salvation. Can 
we ask Christ to meet us in it and save us in it? or can we only expect him to save us 
from it? 3. His physical state. His stature hindered him for a time from seeing 
Jesus, as the physical state of others often hinders them. But when one is thoroughly 
in earnest, he can overcome all hindrances as Zacchaeus did by climbing the sycamore. 
Hindrances may be changed by energetic action into helps and spiritual gains. 

III. Salvation means heartfelt sympathy with a personal Savioub. For 
salvation comes to ua clothed in loving personality, and the advent of Jesus to our 
souls, as in the case of Zacchaeus, is the advent of salvation. What we are asked in the 
gospel to do is to trust a Person, and to accept of safety in his blessed society. There 
is no abstract and confusing process to be passed through, but a concrete and real 
fellowship to be entered on and enjoyed. 

IV. The saved soul proves his salvation bt libeealitt and restitution. As 
soon as Zacchseus enters into sympathy with Christ, he makes a public profession. 
Here is his resolve deliberately made to Christ, " Behold, Lord, the half of my goods 
I give to the poor; and if I have wrongfully exacted aught of any man, I restore four- 
fold" (Revised Version). His riches are now to be made a means of grace, enabling 
him, in the first place, liberally to make restitution to all wronged ones ; and secondly 
to dedicate largely to the poor. Contact with Christ has opened his heart and made 
him open-handed. Murmuring Pharisees might restrict their ostentatious almsgiving 
to a tenth, but converted Zacchffius will dedicate a half to the wants of the poor 1 A 
rich man may thus make his wealth the basis of princely generosity, and reap a reward 
in the gratitude of God's poor people. 

V. Jesus gives Zacoh2bus a blessed assubanoe of sonship. For Zacchaans, if 
originally a Jew, had forfeited through his tax-gathering his position in the Jewish 
Church. No longer would the Jewish authorities regard him as a son of Abraham or 
heir of the promises. But Jesus interposes and reinstates him in his position of 
privilege. He declares before the guests that Zacchaus has been saved by his visit to 
his house, and that this salvation-visit is because the publican is also a son of Abraham. 
In this beautiful way the selecting love of God in Christ is set before the people and 
the assurance of Abrahamic sonship conveyed to the new convert. It is thus tha 
Lord o«mforts those who trust in hiui. 



OH. xnc. 1—48.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 162 

VI. Christ thus demonstrates his mission to seek and save the lost. Not by 
the parables of the fifteenth cliapter merely does he demonstrate the meroiiul character 
of his mission, but also by such a missionary act as the salvation of Zaccheeus. Aa 
" the Son of man " he is interested in the welfare of his race, and finds in the lost the 
sphere of his gracious operation. It is thus he comforts the lost imes, by enabling them 
to see that they are the proper objects of his compassion. — E. M. E. 

Vers. 11 — 27. — The law of capital in Chrisfs kingdom. Zacchasus's conversion and 
all the stir on leaving Jericho led many in the crowd to imai. n ■■ that Christ was 
immediately to assume a visible kingdom. To remove misapprelienaion, therefore, he 
proceeds to tell them a parable which would at once rouse them to the necessity of 
working instead of indulging in lackadaisical waiting. Comparing himself to a 
nobleman who is going into a far country to receive a kingdom and to return, he com- 
pares his disciples to servants left to make the best of what is entrusted to them. 
The worldly minded as distinct from the servants are called his citizens, whose spirit is 
manifested in the message transmitted to him, "We will not have this man to reign 
over us." Then the return of the crowned king is to be celebrated by the distribution 
of rewards and punishments as the case may be. Out of this significant parable we 
may learn the following lessons. 

I. It IS IN HEAVEN, AND NOT ON EARTH, OtTR LoRD IS TO RECEIVE HIS KlNaDOM. This 

is the great mistake many have made about Christ's kingdom and reign. They localize 
head-quarters on earth instead of in heaven. It is not by a democratic vote, by a 
plebiscite, our Lord is to receive his kingdom, but by donation from the Father. When 
he went away by death, resurrection, and ascension, therefore, it was to receive » 
kingdom that he might return crowned. Hence we are to regard him as now reigning 
over his mediatorial kingdom. He is on the throne. His government is administered 
from the heavenly places. 

II. It is PERILOUS TO REFUSE TO ACKNOWLEDGE HIS PRESENT REIGN. The citizCUS 

that hate the absent King will be slain before him when he returns for judgment. 
Hostility, enmity, to Christ, if continued, must lead to utter discomfiture at last. 
Rebellion of spirit is, therefore, to be diligently uprooted if we would have any share 
in Christ's kingdom. It is at our peril if we refuse his loving and righteous reign. 

m. Christ's servants live under a law of capital in his kingdom. In this 
parable we have " pounds," and not " talents," referred to. The question is, therefore, 
uf some equal endowment which all receive in common, not of unequal endowment 
distributed in sovereign wisdom. In the parable of the talents, given in another 
Gospel, we have equal diligence exhibited iu the use of unequal endowments ; and the 
reward is righteously equalized in the completed kingdom. Here, on the other hand, 
we have an unequal use of equal endowments, with the unequal reward attached iu 
proportion to the diligence. We discern in the arrangement, therefore, that law of 
increase wbich has been denominated the law of capital. But first we have to settle 
the signification of the pounds. We shall not be far astray if, with Godet, we regard 
them as indicating those donations of Divine grace which are offered to the Lord's 
servants, we may suppose, in equal measure. These endowments are put to use in 
some cases, utterly neglected in others. It will be found at last that the law of capital 
has obtained in the Lord's arrangements. One man, by judicious use of what the Lord 
has given, finds his grace growing tenfold, so that by the time the Lord returns he is 
ready to undertake the government of ten cities. Another man, by diligence, but not 
so persevering as the former, finds his graces growing fivefold, so that in the final 
arrangement he is equal to the oversight of five cities. A third is represented as 
making no use whatever of his endowment, under the impression that the Lord is a 
grasping speculator, who wants to make the most he can out of men. He ventures to 
return bis trust just as it was. He finds, however, that his selfish idleness is visited 
with utter ruin. He has the misused endowment recalled and made over to the better 
trader. " To him that hath shall be given." Accumulated capital tends to increase 
in proper hands, and it is right it should do so. It follows, then, from this law of 
capital as thus applied : 1. That tee should use diligently every means to increase our 
Christian graces, Sanctification should be our life-work, and all action, meditation, 
prayer, should be utilized for the one great object of becoming the best servants of our 



164 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LITKE. [oh. xix. 1—48. 

Master our circumstances admit of. 2. We shall find ourselves therehy lecoming rulers 
of men. It is wonderful the influence exercised by consecrated lives. It is easy 
nnderstanding how we may become kings and priests unto God the Father. As con- 
secrated by his grace, we begin immediately to influence others for good and to reign. 
3. The influence on earth will have its counterpart in the reign enjoyed hy us in heaven. 
For heaven will be the home of order. It will be no happy, musical mob. It will be 
a great society, with recognized kings of men, under the gracious authority, of course, 
of him who is "King of kings, and Lord of lords." Influence, character, all that is 
gracious, is destined to be contiaued and to abide. Those who have done meu most 
good, and made the most of their opportunities here, shall be rewarded with correspond- 
ing influence in the well-ordered commonwealth above. 4. Wrong views of Christs 
character may also he perpetuated, with their corresponding judgments. The pitiful 
servant who tliought his Master austere, hard, grasping, was only attributing his own 
hard cliaracter to his superior. He failed to understand him. So is it with some souls. 
They insist on misunderstanding God, and the result is tluat their misunderstanding 
continues and is its own punishment. How important, therefore, that we should have 
coirect views of God our Saviour ! It will save us from misuse of his gifts and graces, 
and from the doom awaiting all faithless soula. — B. M. E. 

Vers. 28 — 48. — The advent of the humble King. To illustrate sti^l more thoroughly 
the character of his kingdom as one not of ostentation and worldly glory, but of 
humility, our Lord directed two of his disciples to procure for him a colt, the untrained 
foal of an ass, that he might ride into Jerusalem thereon. The marvellous way in 
which the ass was lent to him indicated preternatural knowledge. Upon this colt, 
ihen, he sat, and passed amid the hosannas of the people into the sacred city. But his 
advent was in tears, and his terminus was not a p:\lace, but the temple. The whole 
character of the procession and its termination tended to upset all vulgar Messianic 
hopes and lead thinking minds to reflection. Let us look at the different stages of the 
royal progress and such lessons as they suggest. 

I. The humble chabaoteb of the pbocession. (Vers. 28 — 40.) For it was on an 
ass, not on any royal mule, he rode; to fulfil the prophecy of Zechariah, "Rejoice , 
greatly, O daughter of Zion ; shout, daughter of Jerusalem ; behold, thy King Cometh 
unto thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon 
a colt the foal of an ass" (Zech. ix. 9). The very fact of his selecting such a lowly and 
despised animal indicated his humility. At the same time, his perfect command of 
the untrained colt revealed his sovereignty in animated nature — that, like an unfallen 
Adam, he was lord of the lower creatures. It was akin to his being with the wild 
beasts and unscathed in the wilderness. But secondly, the extemporized character 
of the procession was humiliating. A great king gets tlie parade organized, and knows 
what will for the most part compose his escort. But this King of kings rests his escort 
upon the extemporized enthusiasm of the crowd, and values at its proper figure the 
measure of enthusiasm that is evoked. He knew that the same people who then 
shouted, " Hosauna ; Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord : peace 
in heaven, and glory in the highest 1 " would a few days after cry out, " Crucify him I " 
And so he was humiliated rather than honoured by the shallow enthusiasm of the 
motley crowd. Thirdly, the unseemly interruptions of the Pharisees rendered it 
humiliating. So irritated were they that they urged bim to rebuke the disciples for 
crying out as they were doing. But the Lord only declared that, if the disciples were 
silent, the very stones would <;et tongues to sound his praise. This Pharisaic jar, this 
unseemly interruption, must have been humiliating to the Lord. To bear it as he did 
demonstrated the humility and meekness of his spirit. Truly he was "meek and 
lowly in heart." 

II. The tears op the advancing Kino are notaislb. (Vers. 41 — 44.) For 
instead of a city welcoming him, instead of this city of the great King recognizing the 
day of her visitation, and opening her arms for her Deliverer, there was apathy and 
scorn for his methods and aims. No wonder, therefore, that he had to speak about the 
siege of Titus, which he saw plainly must come. Pursuinsj; their poor worldly policy, 
they must be encompassed ultimately by the Roman eagles. And so he wept those 
tears of deepest sorrow over the impenitence of Jerusalem. How different &om the 



oaxx. 1— 47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKa 



16S 



prooessioTiB of earthly monarchs or great captains! The very last thing looked for on 
Buoh occasions would be tears. The sympathy of this Saviour for Jerusalem sinners 
was deep indeed when it led him to such a weeping-time as the processionists witnessed. 

III. His second pdripioation of the temple was the culmination of the pro- 
cession. (Vers. 45, 46.) The tempter wanted him to begin his Messianic work by a 
harmless descent from the temple-pinnacle ; he began his work by entering into the 
temple and casting out^the traffickers. And now he has to finish his work by repeat- 
ing the purification. /Usually the processions of kings end at palace gates and in 
palace halls ; but the procession of Christ ends at the temple and in its court. He 
must convert it from a den of thieves to a place of prayer. The meaning of his 
kingdom could not be better represented./ It was really the sphere of religion and of 
worship that he made his own ; in the regulation thereof he was supreme, and exercised 
his influence. 

IV. He tattoht daily in the temple until the end. (Vers. 47, 48.) He was 
surrounded by his enemies. They were on the qui vive to secure him and put him 
away. But now that his hour of self-sacrifice is near, he feels himself immortal till his 
work is done. It is the interests of others that occupy him. He must teach to the 
last. And so from Bethany he comes in morning by morning to instruct the interested 
crowds. What solemn lessons they must have been, those closing ones of Jesus ! And 
they attracted great attention, and their popularity restrained his enemies, although it 
must have intensified their determination to put him out of the way. Thus we have 
seen how this humble King entered Jerusalem to work reformation there, and, if 
possible, save the people by enlightening and teachina; them. If his mission failed with 
most, it succeeded with some, and inaugurated the new kingdom, wtdch is " righteous- 
ness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost." — B. M. H. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XX. 



Vers. 1 — 8. — Question of the prieits and 
ecribes as to the nature of the authority under 
which Jesue was acting. 

Vers. 1, 2 — And it came to pass, that on 
one of those days, as he taught the people 
in the temple, and preached the gospel. We 
are now in the midst of the so-called Passion 
week. Probably the events related in this 
chapter took place on the Tuesday. The 
first day of the week, Palm Sunday, was 
the day of the public entry into the city. 
The purification of the temple took place on 
the Monday, on which day also the barren 
fig tree was cursed. We are now consider- 
ing the events of the Tuesday. The Greek 
word evayye^iCofihov is especially a Pauline 
word; we find it rarely used save in his 
writings, and of course in those of St. Luke. 
St. Paul uses it twenty times, and St. Luke 
twenty-five. The chief priests and the scribes 
came upon him with the elders, and spake 
unto him, saying, Tell us, by what authority 
doest thou these things? This appears to 
have been a formal deputation from the 
supreme council of the Sanhedrin. The 
three classes here specified represented prob- 
ably the three great sections of the San- 
hedrin— (1) priests, (2) scribes and rabbis, 
(3) Levites. These came upon him evidently 
with hostila intent, »nd surrounded him as 



he was walking in the temple. The jealous 
anger of the rulers of the Jews had been 
lately specially excited by the triumphant 
entry on Palm Sunday, and by the stir and 
commotion which the presence of Jesus liad 
occasioned in the holy city. And in the 
last two or three days Jesus had evidently 
claimed especial power in the temple. He 
had publicly driven out the money-changers 
and vendors of sacrifloial victims who plied 
their calling in the sacred courts. He had, 
in addition, forbade the carrying vessels 
across the temple (Mark xi. 16), and had 
allowed the children in the temple, probably 
those attached to its choir, to shout " Ho- 
sanua I " to him as the Messiah. From the 
point of view of the Sanhedrin, such a ques- 
tion might well have been looked for. His 
interlocutors made quite sure that Jesus, in 
reply, would claim having received a Divine 
commission. Had he made openly such a 
formal claim in reply to their question, then 
he would have been cited before the supreme 
court to give an account of himself and his 
commission. Then, as they tliought, would 
have been their opportunity to convict him 
out of his own mouth of blasphemy. 

Vers. 3 — 6. — And he answered and said 
unto them, I will also ask you one thing; 
and answer me : The baptism of John, was it 
from heaven, or of men f And they reasoned 
with themselves, saying, If wa shall say. 



16ft 



THS gospel ACCORt)lNa mo ST. LUKB. [or. XX. 1— 4r 



From heaven; he will say, Why then helieved 
ye him not ] Bnt and if we say, Of men ; all 
the people will stone us ; for they he per- 
suaded that John was a prophet. The reply 
of Jesua was one of strange wisdom. He — 
Jesus — as was well known, had been intro- 
duced to the people by this very Jolm. If 
the Sanhedrin acknowledged John the 
Baptist as a divinely accredited messenger, 
then surely they could not question the 
claims of one borne special witness to by 
him, brought forward and introduced to 
public notice by him ! If, on the other 
hand, the Sanhedrin refused to acknowledge 
the authoritypf John as a Heaven-sent mes- 
senger, which would have been the course 
they would have preferred, then the popu- 
larity and influence of tlie Sanhedrin would 
have been sorely imperilled, for tlie people 
generally held firmly that John the Baptist 
was really a prophet of the Lord. They 
even feared^as we read, " All the people 
will stone us " — personal violence on the part 
of the people whose favour they so zealously 
oourted. 

Ver. 7. — And they answered, that they 
o«uld not tell whence it was. The reply of 
Jesus, whioh 80 perplexed the Sanhedrin, 
really inflicted a grave blow to their prestige, 
thus compelling the grave doctors of the 
Law, who claimed the right of deciding all 
momentous questions, to decline to pro- 
nounce a judgment on so grave a question 
as "the position of the Baptist," that mighty 
preacher who had so stirred and roused 
Israel and who had with his life paid the 
forfeit of his boldness in rebuking crime in 
high places, thereby no doubt enormously 
enlarging his already vast popularity with 
the people. 

Ver. 8. — And Jesus said unto them. Neither 
tell I yon by what authority I do these 
things. .Tesus, on hearing their plea of 
ignorance, now contemptuously declines to 
answer the Sauhedrists' question in the di- 
rect way they desired, but at once proceeds 
to speak a parable which unmistakably con- 
tains the reply. 

Vera. 9 — 19. — Pnrahle of the wiclced hus- 
bandmen in the vineyard, and the eimile of 
the corner-stone, 

Ver. 9. — A certain man planted a vineyard, 
and let it forth to husbandmen. Under a 
very thin parabolic veil, Jesus foretells the 
awful tra;^'cdy of the next few days. He 
adopts a well-knnwn imagery, and seems to 
Bay, "Listen to Isaiah's well-known story of 
the vineyard, the vineyard of the Lord of 
hosts, wliich is the house of Israel. I will 
expand it a little, that I may show you how 
it stands with you as regards this matter of 
' authority,' that we may see whether you 
have as much respect for the ascertained 
will of Uod as ye pretend, so that ye should 



be sure to submit to me if only ye were 
satisfied that 1 was an accredited Messenger 
of God" (Professor Bruce). For a long 
time. Bepresenting the nearly two thousand 
years of Jewish history. 

Vera. 10 — 12. — He sent a servant to the 
husbandmen, that they should give him of 
the fruit of the vineyard. After the pains 
and care bestowed upon the vineyard, tl.at 
is, after the many mifrhty works done in 
Israel's behalf, the Lord of hosts looked for 
fruits of gratitude and fidelity in some pro- 
portion to the mighty favours which it had 
received from him. The people were in- 
tended to be the example to, and the educa- 
tors of, the world, and, instead of carrying 
out these high functions, they lived the 
poor selfish life so sadly depicted in the long 
story contained in the historical and pro- 
phetical books. " He looked that it [his 
vineyard] should bring forth grapes, and it 
brought forth wild grapes" (Isa. v. 2). 
But the husbandmen beat him, and sent him 
away empty. And again he sent another 
servant: and they heat him also, and en- 
treated him shamefully, and sent him away 
empty. And again he sent a third : and they 
wounded him also, and cast him ont. These 
represent the prophets, those faithful ser- 
vants of the Lord, whose toils and trials and 
fate are painted in the Epistle to the Hebrews 
(xi.) in such glowing and eloquent language. 
And again he sent. In vers. 11 and 12, 
irpoo-eflero wep.'fiai, literally, "he added to 
send another" — a Hebraism. This shows 
St. Luke here based hi? account on a Hebrew 
(Aramaic) original. Professor Bruce well 
puts the thoughts which possessed the 
wicked husbandmen thus : "When tlie ser- 
vants came for fruit, they were simply sur- 
prised. ' Fruit 1 did you aay? We have 
occupied the position of viiie-dressera, and 
have duly drawn our wages : what more do 
you want ? ' Such was the actual fact in 
regard to the spiritual heads of Israel. They 
were men who never thought of fruit, but 
only of the honour and privilege of being 
entruated with the keeping of the vineyard. 
They were triflers, men utterly devoid of 
earnestness, and the practical purpose of the 
property committed to their charge they 
habitually forgot. Generally speaking, they 
had utterly lost sight of the end of Israel's 
calling." Their anger flamed forth when 
accredited messengers of the Lord visited 
them and reminded them of their forgotten 
duties ; they vented their furious wrath by 
persecuting some and killing others of these 
faithful men. 

Ver. 13. — Then said the lord of the vine- 
yard, What shall I dot I will send my 
beloved son. The guilt of the husbandmen 
who acted as vine-dressers here reached its 
highest measure. The wwds represented 



OB. XX. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL AGCOBDlNa TO ST. LUKE. 



165 



here by Jesus as spoken by God, possess the 
deepest doctrinal Talue. They, under the 
thin veil of the parable-story, answer the 
question of the Sanhedrin (ver. 2), "By 
what authority doest thou these things?" 
The deliberative words, "What shall I do?" 
recall the Divine dialogue alluded to in 
Gen. i. 26. St, Luke here represents the 
Father as calling the Son, "my Beloved." 
St. Mark adds that he was an only Son. 
Such sayings as this, and the remarkable 
prayer of Matt. xi. 25 — 27, are a clear indi- 
cation of the Christology of the synoptists. 
Their estimate of the Person of the blessed 
Son in no wise differed from that given us 
by St. John at much greater length and 
with fuller details. 

Ver. 14. — But when the husbandmen saw 
him, they reasoned among themselves, say- 
ing, IMs is the heir: come, let us kill him, 
that the inheritance may be ours. The 
husbandmen are represented as knowing the 
son and heir. Nor can we resist the con- 
clusion that some at least of those grave 
learned men who sat in the Sanhedrin as 
priests or scribes well knew who the Speaker 
of the awful words claimed to be, and, in 
resisting him and seeking his destruction, 
were deliberately sinning against the voice 
of their own liearts. 

Vers. 15, 16. — So they oast him ont of the 
Tineyard, and killed him. The parable-story 
of itself was an improbable one. The con- 
duct of the husbandmen, the long patience 
of the owner of the vineyard, his last act in 
sending hie beloved and only son, — all this 
makes up a history without a parallel in 
human experience. Yet this is an exact 
sketch of what did actually take place in 
the eventful story of Israel 1 What therefore 
shall the lord of the vineyard do nnto them t 
He shall come and destroy these hnsband- 
men, and shall give the vineyard to others. 
Again a hint of a solemn deliberation in 
heaven, a prophetic picture of the future 
of the Jewish race fulfilled with terrible 
exactness. And when they heard it, they 
said, Ood forbid ! Well understood they the 
Speaker's meaning here. He foreshadowed, 
in no veiled language, the utter ruin of the 
Jewish polity. When they heard this, for- 
getting to be scornfal, they exclaimed, in 
deprecation of the ominous and terrible 
prediction, Mii 7fi'o<Tol which we rejider 
accurately, though not literally, "God 
forbid I " 

Vers. 17, 18. — And he beheld them, and 
said, What is this then that is written, The 
stone which the builders rejected, the same is 
become the head of the comer 1 Whosoever 
shall fall upon that stone shall be broken ; 
bat on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind 
him to powder. In spite of the deprecating 
expression, the leverity of the tune of Jeaus 



increases in his next words, when, looking 
at them with grave anger (i/ifiKe'fias), he pro- 
ceeds to speak of himself under the figure 
of the rejected stone. Quoting a well- 
known psalm (cxviii. 22), and using the 
imagery of Isa. viii. 14, 15 and Dan. ii. 44, 
he describes his fortunes under the image 
of a corner-stone — that stone which forms 
the junction between the two most prominent 
walls of a building, and which is always 
laid with peculiar care and attention. In 
ch. ii. 34 of our Gospel Simeon refers to 
the same well-known prophetic saying. The 
husbandmen who had just been described as 
vine-dressers are now described as builders, 
and the murdered son is reproduced under 
the image of a comer-stone tossed aside as 
useless. In the first part of the picture, the 
earthly humiliation of Messiah is portrayed 
when the stone is laid in the earth. In the 
second, the stone falling from the top of 
the building represents the crushing of all 
earthly opposition by Messiah in his glory. 
Woe to the builders, then, who had scorn- 
fully rejected him 1 

Ver. 19. — And the chief priests and the 
scribes the same hour sought to lay hands 
on him; and they feared the people: for 
they perceived that he had spoken tnis 
parable against them. Again the Sanhedrin 
take counsel. They long to arrest him on 
some capital charge ; but they dared not, for 
the people, joined by the Passover pilgrims, 
had exalted him to the rank of a hero. 
Not a few evidently looked on him at that 
period as King Messiah. But the feeling of 
the great council was intensely bitter. Tliey 
felt their power and influence was slipping 
away from them. These last parables were 
scarcely veiled attacks on them. In the 
last spoken words he had calmly announced 
that he was to die, and their hands were to 
carry out the bloody work. And then, in 
the simile of the corner-stone, he, in no 
ambiguous terms, told them that in killing 
him they will not be done with him, for 
that in the end they will be utterly crushed 
by his power. 

Vers. 20—26. — The question of the tribute 
money. 

Ver. 20. — And they watched him, and 
sent forth spies, which shonld feign them- 
selves just men, that they might take hold 
of his words, that so they might deliver him 
nnto the power and authority of the governor. 
In their intense hatred, conscious that the 
populace wtre on the whole in sympathy 
with Jesus, the Sanhedrin, to carry out 
their design on his life, determined to avail 
themselves of the hated Boman military 
police. Their hope henceforward is to sub- 
stantiate a charge of treason against him. 
This was, in those troublous times, when 
insurrection against the detested Gentile 



168 



THE GOSPEL ACOOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xx. 1—47. 



rule was evei being plotted, a comparatively 
easy matter. The incident of the tribute 
money, which immediately follows, was part 
of this new departure in the Sanhedrin 
policy respecting the murder they so longed 
to see carried out. 

Vers. 21, 22. — And they asked him, saying, 
Master, we know that thou sayest and 
teachest rightly, neither acceptest thon the 
person of any, hut teachest the way of Qod 
truly: Is it lawful for ns to give tribute 
unto Csesar, or no 1 SS. Matthew and Mark 
both tell us that in this plot the Herodians 
were united with the Pharisees (and San- 
hedrin). The great Nazareth Eeformer was 
equally hateful to both these hostile parties ; 
hence their union in this matter. It was 
a well and skilfully laid question. This 
" tribute " was a capitation tax — a denarius 
a head assessed on the whole population, 
the publicans who farmed it being answer- 
able for it to the Eoman treasury. As a 
direct personal tax it was most unpopular, 
and was looked on by scrupulous legalists 
and the more zealous Jews as involving a 
greater humiliation than the ordinary im- 
port or export customs dues. It occasioned 
at times popular tumults, as in the case of 
Judas of Galilee (Acts v. 37). If Jesus 
answered the question in the affirmative: 
" Yes, it is lawful for the Jews to give 
this tribute to Csesar," then the Pharisees 
would use this decision of his as a means of 
undermining his credit with the zealous 
populace. " See, after all," they would say, 
"this pretended Messiah of yours is but 
a poor-hearted traitor. Think of King 
Mestiah paying tribute to a Gentile." If, 
on the other hand, the Master had said such 
payment of tribute was unlawful, then the 
Herodians, who were watching him, hoping 
for some such expression of opinion, would 
at once have denounced him to their Boman 
friends as One who taught the people — 
only too ready to listen to such teaching — 
lessons of sedition. In the latter case Pilate 
and the officials of Bome would have taken 
good care that the Galileean Master had 
troubled the Sanliediin no more. 

Ver. 24. — Show me a penny; literally, 
o denarius, a coin of the value of lid., but 
really representing a larger sum in our 
money. It seems probable, from the lan- 
guage of Mark xii. 15, 16, that his interro- 
gators had to borrow the Roman coin in 
question from some of the neighbouring 
money-changers. These Jews would scarcely 
carry any but Jewish coins in their girdles. 
That the Eoman denarius, however, was 
evidently a coin in common circulation in 
those days, we gather from the parable of 
the labourers >n the vineyard. Whose image 
and snpersoription hath it 1 They answered 
and said, Csssar's. ** On one lide would be 



the once beautiful but now depraved features 
of Tiberius; the title 'Pontifex Maximus' 
was probably inscribed on the obverse" 
(Farrar). 

Ver. 25. — And he said unto them, Bender 
therefore unto Csssar the things which he 
Ceesar's, and unto Ood the things which be 
Ood's. As regarded the immediate issues 
the Lord's answer was in the affirmative : 
"Yes, it is lawful under the present cir- 
cumstances to pay this tribute." The 
Boman money current in the land, bearing 
the image and title of the Csesar, bore per- 
petual witness to the fact that the rule of 
Eome was established and acknowledged by 
the Jewish people and their rnlers. It was 
a well-known and acknowledged saying, 
that " he whose coin is current is king of 
the land." So the great Jewish rabbi 
Mairaonides, centuries after, wrote, "XJbi- 
cunque numisma regis alicujus obtinet, illio 
incolse regem istum pro Domino agnoscuut." 
The tribute imposed by the recognized 
sovereign ought certainly to be paid as a 
just debt; nor would this payment at all 
interfere with the people's discharging their 
duties God-ward. The tithes, tribute to the 
temple, the offerings enjoined by the Law 
they revered, — these ancient witnesses to 
the Divine sovereignty in Israel might and 
ought still to be rendered, as well as the 
higher obligations to the invisible King, 
such as faith, love, and obedience. Tribute 
to the Csesar, then, the acknowledged sove- 
reign, in no way interfered with tribute to 
God. What belonged to Csesar should be 
given to him, and what belonged to God 
ought to be rendered likewise to him. 
Godet, in a long and able note, adds that 
Jesus would teach the turbulent Jewish 
people that the way to regain their theocratic 
independence was not to violate the duty 
of submission to Csesar by a revolutionary 
shaking off of his yoke, but to return to the 
faithful fulfilment of all duties toward Gtod. 
" To render to God what is God's was the 
way for the people of God to obtain a new 
David instead of Csesar as their Lord. To 
tlie Pharisees and Zealots, 'Bender unto 
Csesar;' to the Herodians, 'Bender unto 
God.' " Well caught *^8 great Christian 
teachers their Master's thought here in all 
their teaching respecting an institution such 
as slavery, in their injimotions concerning 
rigid and unswerving loyalty to established 
Butliority. So St. Paul : " Be subject to the 
powers . . . not only from fear of punish- 
ment, but also for conscience' sake " (Bom. 
xiii. 1 and 1 Timothy). 

Vers. 27 — iO. —The icomful question of 
the Sadducees bearing on the doctrine of fht 
resurrection, and the Lord's reply. 

Vers. 27, 28. — Then came to him eertain 
of the Saddnoeei, which deny that then if 



OH. XX. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



I6t 



any restureotion; and they asked him, say- 
ing, Master, Moses wrote unto us, If any 
man's brother die, having a wife, and he 
die without children, that his brother should 
take his wife, and raise up seed unto his 
brother. This is the only occasion related 
in the Gospels where our Lord comes in 
direct conflict with the Sadduoees. They 
were a small but very wealthy and power- 
ful sect. The high priests at this period 
and their families seem to have belonged 
generally to this party. They acknowledged 
as Divine the books of Moses, but refused 
to see in them any proof of the resurrec- 
tion, or indeed of life after death. To the 
prophets and the other books they only 
attached subordinate importance. Super- 
cilious worldlinesB, and a quiet indifference 
to all spiritual things, characterized them 
at this period. They come, comparatively 
speaking, little in contact with Jesus dur- 
ing his earthly ministry. While the Phari- 
see hated the Galileean Master, the Sadducee 
professed to look on him rather with con- 
tempt. The question here seems to have 
been put with supercilious scorn. SS. 
Matthewand Mark preface the Lord's answer 
with a few words of grave rebuke, exposing 
the questioners' utter ignorance of the deep 
tilings involTed in their query. 

Vera. 29—33. — There were therefore seven 
brethren: and the first took a wife, and 
died without children. And the second 
took her to wife, and he died ohUdless, 
And the third took her ; and in like manner 
the seven also: and they left no children, 
and died. last of all the woman died also. 
Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of 
them is shel for seven had her to wife. 
The question here put to the Master was 
a well-known materialistic objection to the 
resurrection, and had on several occasions 
been asked by these shallow Epicureans — 
SB the Talmud calls them — to the great 
rabbis of the schools of the Pharisees. 
Their usual answer was that the woman 
in question would be the wife of the first 
husband. 

Vers. 34 — 36. — And Jesus answering said 
onto them, The children of this world marry, 
and are given in marriage : but they which 
shall be accounted worthy to obtain that 
world, and the resurrection from the dead, 
neither marry, nor are given in marriage : 
neither can they die any more. How dif- 
ferent are the few rare pictures which our 
Master draws of the heaven-life to those 
painted by the great founders and teachers 
of other world-wide religions I In his world 
beyond the grave, while he tells ns of a 
continuing existence, of varied and ever- 
increasing activity, in contradistinction to 
the Nirv&na of Bnddha, in these pictures of 
Jesua the lenautti paiadiae of Mohammed, 



for instance, finds no place. Marriage is, 
according to our Lord's teaching, but a 
temporary expedient to preserve the human 
race, to which death would soon put an end. 
But in the world to come there will be no 
death and no marriage. We may assume 
from his words here that the difference 
between the sexes will have ceased to exist. 
They are equal unto the angels. Equal 
with the angels in being immortal ; no 
death ; no marriage. Jesus in this place 
asserts that angels have a body, but are ex- 
empt from any difference of sex. The angels 
are here introduced because our Lord was 
speaking with Sadducees, who (Acts xxiii. 8) 
denied the existence of these glorious beings. 
He wished to set the seal of his teaching 
on the deeply interesting question of the 
existence of angels. 

"Vers. 37, 38.— ITow that the dead are 
raised, even Moses showed at the bush. 
You Sadducees, in your own arbitrary 
fashion, set aside the authority of the 
prophets and all sacred books save tlie 
Pentateuch ; well, I will argue with yon 
on your own, comparatively speaking, 
narrow ground — ^the books of Moses. Even 
he, Moses, is singularly clear and definite 
in his teaching on this point of the resur- 
rection, though you pretend he is not. You 
are acquainted with the well-known section 
in Exodus termed ' the Bush : ' what read 
yon there?" When he calleth the Lord 
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, 
and the God of Jacob. For be is not a God 
of the dead, but of the living; more ac- 
curately rendered, not a God of dead 
beings, hut of living heings. The mean- 
ing of the Lord's argument is, " God would 
never have called himself the God of Abra- 
ham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, if these patri- 
archs, after their short lives, had become 
mere crumbling dust. God cannot be the 
God of a being who does not exist." So 
Josephus — who, however, no doubt drew 
his argument from these words of Christ, 
for this strong and conclusive argument 
from the Pentateuch for the immurtality 
of man does not appear to have occurred 
to rabbis before the time of our Lord — so 
Josephus writes : " They who die for God's 
sake live unto God as Abraham, Isaai^ and 
Jacob, and all the patriarchs." The ex- 
pression, " at the bush," should be rendered 
" in the Bush," that is, in that division ol 
Exodus so numed. So the Jews termed 
Sam. i. and following verses "the Bow;" 
Bzek. i. and following section, " the Chariot." 

Vers. 39, 40. — Then certain of the scribes 
answering, said. Master, thou hast well said 
And after that they durst not ask him anj 
question at all. "This prompt and sublime 
answer filled with admiration the icrib*^ 
who had so often aought this deoiaive word 



I?0 



The gospel according to ST. LtrKE. [ch. xx. 1-47 



in Moses without finding it; they cannot 
restrain themselves from testifying their 
joyful surprise. Aware from this time forth 
that every snare laid for him will be the 
occasion for a glorious manifestation of his 
wisdom, they give up this method of attaelc " 
(Godet). 

Vers. 41 — ii.—TJie question respecting 
Clirist'e being David's Son. 

Ver. 41. — And he said unto them, How 
say they that Christ is David's Soni St. 
Matthew gives us more details of what 
went before the following saying of Jesus 
in whioli he asserts the Divinity of Messiah. 
Jesus asked the Pharisees, " What t,hink ye 
of Christ ? whose Son is he ? They say 
untn him, The Son of David. He saith unto 
them. How then doth David in spirit call 
him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my 
Lord," etc. ? (Matt. xxii. 42—44). This is 
one of the most remarkable sayings of our 
Lord reported by the synoptists ; in it he 
distinctly claims forhimself Divinity, pa)•<^c^■ 
pation in omnipotence. Unmistakably, lately, 
under the thinnest veil of parable, Jesus 
had told the people that he was Messiah. 
For instance, his tomds in the parable of 
the " wicked husbandmen j " in the parable 
of " the pounds ; " in his late acts in the 
temple — driving out the sellers and buyers, 
allowing the children in the temple to 
welcome him with Messianic salutation, re- 
ceiving as Messiah the welcome of the 
Passover pilgrims and others on Palm Sun- 
day as he entered Jerusalem. In his later 
parables, too, he had with startling clearness 
predicted his approaching violent death. 
Now, Jesus was aware that the capital 
charge which would be brouglit against him 
would be blasphemy, that he had called 
himself, not only the Messiah, but Divine, 
the Son of God (John v. 18 ; x. 33 ; Matt. 
xxvi. 65). He was desirous, tlien, before 
the end came, to show from an acknowledged 
Messianic psalm that if he was Messiah — 
and unquestionably a large proportion of 
tlie people received him as such — he was 
also Divine. The words of the psalm (ox.) 
indisputably show this, viz. that the coming 
Messiah was Divine. This, he pointed out 
to them, was the old faith, the doclrine 
taught in their own inspired Scriptures. 
But this was not the doctrine of the Jeios in 
the time of our Lord. Tltey, like the Ebionites 
in early Christian days, expected for their 
Messiah a mere " beloved Man." It is most 
noticeable that the Me.isianic claim of Jesus, 
although not, of course, concedcil by the j 
scribes, was never protested against by 
them. That would have been glaringly un- 
popular. So many of the people, wu know, 
were persuaded of the truth of tiiese pre- [ 
tensions; Jesus had evidently the greatest | 
ditiiculty to stay the people's enthusiasm >n I 



his favonr. What the scribes persiBtently 
repelled, and in the end condemned him 
for, was his assertion of Divinity. In this 
passage he shows from their own Seriptnres 
that sv hoe ver was Messiah mutt he Divine. 
He spoke over and over again as Messiah ; 
he acted with the power and in the 
authority of Messiah; he allowed himself 
on several public occasions to be saluted as 
such : who would venture, then, to question 
that he was fully conscious of his Divinity ? 
This conclusion is drawn, not from St. 
John, but exclusively from the recitals of 
the three synoptists. 

Ver. 42. — And David himself salth in the 
Book of Fsalms, The lord said unto my Lord, 
Sit thou on my right hand. The Hebrew 
runs thus : " Jehovah said to my Lord 
(Adonai)." The Eternal is represented aa 
speaking to David's Lord, who is also 
David's Son (this appears clearer in St. 
Matthew's aocoijnt, xxii. 41 — 46). The 
Eternal addresses this Person as One raised 
to sit by him, that is, as a Participator in 
his all-power, and yet this one is also David's 
Son ! The scribes are asked to explain this 
mystery ; alone this can be done by re- 
ferring to the golden chain of Hebrew 
Messianic prophecy ; no scribe in the days of 
our Lord would do this. Such passages as 
Isa. ix. 6, 7 : Micah v. 2 ; and Mai. iii. 1, 
give a complete and exhaustive answer to 
the question of Jesus. 

Ver. 44. — David therefore calleth him 
Lord, how ii he then his Son? That Jesus 
was the acknowledged descendant of David 
during his earthly ministry, is indisputable; 
we need but refer to the cries of the 
populace on Palm Sunday, the words of 
the woman of Canaan, of blind Bartimseus, 
and others. History bears its witness to the 
same fact. The Emperor Domitian, it is 
well known, summoned the kinsmen of 
Jesus, the sons of Jude, his so-called 
brother, to Rome as "the sons of David." 

Vers. 45 —47. — St. Luke's brief summary of 
theLord's denunciation of the scribes and others. 

Vers. 45, 46. — Then in the audience of 
all the people he said nnto his disciples, 
Beware of the scribes. Here, in St. Matthew, 
follows the great denunciation of the Sanhe- 
drist authorities with the other rabbis, 
Pharisees, and public teachers and leaders 
of the people. It fills the whole of the 
twenty-third chapter of the First Gospel. 
The details would be scarcely interesting 
to St. Luke's Gentile readers, so he thus 
briefly summarizes them. Which desire to 
walk in long robes. " With special oon- 
spicuousness of fringes (Numb. xv. 38 — 40). 
' The supreme tribunal,' said R. Nachman, 
'will duly punish hypocrites who wrap theit 
talliths round them to appear, what they 
ue not, true Pharisees ' " (Farrai). 



cfi. XX, 1— 4t.] tHl; GOSPEL ACCOEDINA fO ST. t\]t&. 



1?1 



Ver. 47. — Which devonr widows' houses. 
Josephus specially alludes to the influence 
which certain of the Pharisees had acquired 
over women as directors of the conscience. 
For a show ; rather, in pretenae. " Their 
hypocrisy was so notorious that even the 
Talmud records the warning given by 
Alexander Jannseus to his wife on his death- 
bed against painted Pharisees. And in 
their seven classes of Pharisees, the Tal- 
mudio writers place ' Shechemitet,' Pharisee! 



from self-interest; ' StumhUn,' so mook- 
humble that they will not raise their feet 
from the ground ; ' Bleeders' eo mock- 
modest that, because they will not raise 
their eyes, they run against walls, etc. 
Thus the Jewish writers themselves depict 
the Pharisees as the Tartuii'es of antiquity " 
(Farrar). Shall receive greater damnation ; 
rather, judgment. The translators of our 
beautiful English version are most un- 
happy in their usual rendering of K/>I/ia. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 19 — oil. xxi. 38. — The last working day. It is Tuesday, the last of the 

Lord's working days ; for Wednesday and the early part of Thursday were spent 
apparently in the quiet of his Bethany home. A busy, trying day, crowded with 
events in which we see the Sun of God enduring against himself the contradiction of 
sinners. Let us gather up a part of its teaching. When, in the early morning, Christ 
entered the outer courts pf the temple, he encountered a deputation of persons secretly 
commissioned by the Pharisees to entrap him into admissions which might be used 
against him (vers. 19, 20). The deputation consisted (Matt. xxii. 16) of some of the 
more prominent scholars of the rabbis, and some politicians who were attached to the 
Herodian dynasty. For bo it often is — a common hatred will unite those whose posi- 
tions, mental or moral, are antagonistic This has been frequently exemplified in 
religious and religio-political movements. The emissaries of priest and politician, thus 
leagued together, submit their question with ceremonious politeness (vers. 21, 22). 
He to whom they speak knows what is in man (ver. 23). And, demanding the 
penny, with the coin held before them he returns the famous sentence on which so 
much has been spoken and written, which has been rendered the catchword of heated 
ecclesiastical controversy (ver. 24), " Whose image and superscription hath this penny ? " 
It is the image and superscription of the proud Tiberins. " Then," is the reply, " if 
you use his coin, give back to him what is his due, and to God, whose is the uaage and 
superscription on the human soul, give back what is God's" (ver. 25). The confusion 
of the spies is complete. "They marvelled at his answer, and held their peace" 
(ver. 26). As the day passes, another deputation appears on the scene. This time the 
Sadducees (ver. 27) measure the sword of their wit against the Witness for God. The 
Sadducee mind, cold, cynical, cavilling, pronouncing all earnestness fanaticism, with no 
definite views as to a life beyond the present, but willing enou<!h to toy over the subject 
— faith and the things of faith being only a matter to be talked about — ^has its repre- 
sentative in all ages. And it has some traf&cking with Christ. It has its problems, its 
questions, its discussions. Behold an illustration of their kind in the problem sub- 
mitted as to the seven brothers (vers. 28 — 33). A more foolish issue than that raised 
it is scarcely possible to conceive, and it might have been treated with contemptuous 
silence. But truth may be taught even though the occasion of the teaching is unworthy. 
And, by the incident related, a weighty, suggestive instruction is elicited, one which 
giv°s, as by a lightning flash, not only a glimpse into the invisible, but a discernment 
(if the spirit of the old Mosaic economy. First of all, disabusing the thought of his 
hearers of their carnal conceptions of the resurrection-life (vers. 34 — 36), he reminds 
them (ver. 87) of the character which, by their own admission, belonged to God; of the 
great covenant word which Moses uttered when he called the Eternal "the QkA of 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob." Could they conceive him (ver. 38) the God of mere empty 
names ? Does not the word imply that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are not mere dust 
and ashes, but still living persons, heart to heart with him? It is not wonderful that 
the quickness and keenness of the reply, and the light which it shed on human destiny, 
impressed all who were present ; so that the multitude hearing were astonished at his doc- 
trine, and from the admiring crowd (Matt. xxii. 23) came the approbation, echoed (ver. 39) 
by certain of the scribes, " Master, thou hast weU said." But not yet does the temptation 
cease. A jurist, or student of the Law, accustomed to hair-splitting distractions and 



172 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ca. xx. 1—4? 

controversies over mere pin-points, exclaims, " Master, which is the great command- 
ment in the Law? "(Matt. xxii. 35). In the school to which he belonged, the precepts 
of the moral and ceremonial law were reckoned to be more than six hundred, although 
the great Eabbi Hillel reminded his pupils that, after all, the word, " Do justly, love 
mercy, and walk humbly with God," is the essence of the Law, the rest being only 
commentary. "Which commandment," asks this lawyer, "is the greatest, Master? 
What sayest thou?" Let us thank the tempting jurist whose question evoked the 
golden wisdom of the emphatic enforcement of tiie two sentences to which all 
obedience returns and from which all worthy conduct departs — the first commandment 
bidding us love God with all the heart, and the second, which is like to it, bidding us 
love our neighbour as ourselves (Matt. xxii. 37 — 40). Pharisee, Sadducee, and scribe 
have all been defeated in their trial of Jesus. It is his turn to try them. He will not 
let them go until he has shown them the slowness of their minds, and left with them 
a question to be afterwards inwardly digested. He puts the query, " What think ye 
of Christ?" (Matt. xxii. 42). And when they answer, " He is the Son of David," he 
reminds them (vers. 41 — 44) of the language of the psalmist, implying that there is 
another than the merely filial relation : " If David call liim Lord, how is he then his 
Son?" Who can abide the thrusts of Jesus? No more questions are asked. No; 
and pointing to his discomfited tormentors, he preaches the terrible denunciation epito- 
mized in vers. 45 — 47, given at fuller length in the eight crushing woes of Matt, xxiii. 
It is a scene that beggars description — the grandest moment in the ministry of Christ, 
the Prophet and King. The evangelist, guided, perhaps, by the sense of fitness to that 
scene, represents the tone of the speech as changing, at the close of the commination, 
from indignation hot and strong to the moaning, saddened cry of a heart breaking with 
grief — the cry, already considered, over impenitent, hard-hearted Jernsalem. So the 
Lord moves towards the gate cf the temple. It is on his way thither that he observes 
(ch. xxi. 1 — 4) the action of the poor widow, who cast into one of the chests which were 
placed in the temple courts her poor little all. How calm was the soul which, even in 
the heat of that day of temptation, could pause, observe, and speak of a deed apparently 
so insignificant 1 It is observable that the last word of Christ in the temple should be 
one concerning the love and the love-oflfering, which are better than formal sacrifices. 
Kver to be remembered, too, is the sentence, " He looked up, and saw the gifts cast into 
the treasury." The gifts that men and women furtively cast, thinking that none will 
observe the meanness, or the ostentatiously cast money expecting that all will applaud 
the munificence, he sees. He is always looking to the treasury ; he estimates the real 
value of the offering. What is the principle of the commendation? " One coin," says 
an old Father, " out of a little is better than a treasure out of much ; for it is not con- 
sidered how much is given, but how much remains behind." " He went out and departed 
from the temple." It is the "Ichabod," the departing of the glory. Thirty-five years 
later the hply and beautiful house was left desolate ; the prediction (ver. 6) as to the 
great costly stones was fulfilled. The ploughshare of a fearful retribution was driven 
through Isael's palace, as through Israel itself. The quitting of the temple by the Son 
of God was the beginning of the end. Thenceforth it was the whited sepulchre, beau- 
tiful in appearance, but within full of the dead bones of religion and all spiritual 
uncleanness. Lo! the house is left to these Pharisees desolate. As the closing feature 
of that great Tuesday, we behold Christ and his apostles seated on the slope of Olivet. 
The golden radiance of the setting sun is flung over the glorious city. The pinnacles 
of the temple, the palaces, and massive buildings and endless houses of the Jews are, 
one by one, bathed in the georgeous reflection. There, in the vale below, are Gethsemane 
and the Kedron, and around are the well-known features of the landscape so dear to 
the Israelite. It is with this prospect fuU in his view that Jesus gives the instruction 
as to the end of the age in those mysterious intimations in which the downfall of the 
city of the great King is so blended with other and greater catastrophes that it is difiBcult 
to distinguish what relates specially to the one and what relates specially to the others. 
Oh, how urgent the exhortation to vigilance I How real and solemn for all the 
injunction " to pray always, that we may be accounted worthy to escape all these tbingi 
thai shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man" (ver. 36) 



PH.XX.1— 47.J THE GOSPEL AOCORDINa TO ST. LUKBL 178 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — The great Teacher's silence. The refusal of Jesus Christ to answer th« 
question proposed to him demands explanation and suggests remark. 

I. Thb diffioultt wb find in his silence. Had not the Sanhedrin a right to ask 
this of him? It was a legally. constituted body, and one of its functions was to guide 
the people of the land by determining who was to be received as a true Teacher from 
God. John had recognized their right to formally interrogate him (John i. 19 — 27). 
As Jesus was claiming and exercising authority (ch. xix. 45), it seems natural and 
right that this coimcil of the nation should send a deputation to ask the question in 
the text; and, if that be so, it seems only right that our Lord should give them a 
formal and explicit answer. Why did he not ? 

II. Its explanation. There was: 1. A formal justification. The Sanhedrin had 
not yet declared its mind on the great Prophet who had been before the public, and in 
regard to whom an official decision might well be demanded. Jesus Christ, as a Jew, 
bad a right to ask this question concerning one whose ministry commenced before his 
own, and had already been concluded. If they were unwilling or unable to pronounce 
a judgment, they ruled themselves unfit or incompetent to do what they undertook to 
do. As the event proved, they declined to say, and their refusal justified Jesus in 
withdrawing his own case from a tribunal which confessed its own incompetence. But 
there was also : 2. A moral ground on which our Lord might base his action. The 
Sanhedrin was not solicitous to guide the people in the ways of truth and righteous- 
ness ; they wanted to entrap their enemy (see ch. xix. 47). Their aim was not holy, 
but unholy ; not patriotic, but malevolent. They were not seeking the public good, but 
their own personal advantage ; they desired to crush a rival, and so to maintain their 
own position of authority. Such an object as this deserved no regard; it was one not 
to be respected, but to be defeated ; and our Lord, with Divine wisdom, adopted a 
course which cut the ground completely from beneath their feet. 

III. Its signipioancb to ourselves. Jesus Christ will not always answer our 
questions. Whether or not he will do so depends on the spirit in which he is approached 
by us. 1. Mere curiosity has nothing to expect of him (see ch. xiii. 23, 24 ; Acts L 
6, 7). 2. Unmeaning and wnspiritual utterance makes no way with him (see ch. xiv. 
1 5). The formalities and proprieties of religious language fall on his ear, but they do 
not touch his heart or move his hand. 3. Malevolent activity can look for nothing but 
defeat from his wisdom and his power (see text and followin>5 verses of this chapter). 
4. Presumption will be turned away unrewarded. To see the Father as he is in him- 
self is an impossible and impracticable desire; our wisdom is to understand him as he 
is revealed in his Son (John xiv. 8, 9). We may not ask of Christ those things which 
are beyond the range of our powers. 5. Impatience must be postponed, and must wait 
the fitter time (John xvi. 12). Christ will sometimes, perhaps often, be silent when 
we would that he should speak to ns. But there is — 

IV. One condition under which he will speak to va. Practical, spiritual 
earnestness will draw down his blessing, will command his gracious and life-giving 
word. If we earnestly and jierseveringly seek our own spiritual well-being or that of 
oihers, we shall not fail to hear him say, " According to your faith be it unto you." — C. 

Ver. 16. — Defecation and doom. We may regard — 

i. The force of these words as originally applied. The people who listened 
to this parable: 1. Deprecated a guilt in which they were to he partakers. "God for- 
bid," said they, " that we should do such shameful things as these, that we should be in 
any way involved in such crimes as these 1 Whosesoever hands may be dyed with the 
blood of the Husbandman's Son, ours sliall be stainless." Yet were they moving on to 
the last and worst enormity, ami already were they doing their b-st to bring about the 
guilty consummation. 2. Deprecated a doom to which they were descending. " God 
forbid," said they, " that we should be subjected to the Divine wrath, and that we should 
lose that place of privilege we have so long enjoyed ! May Heaven avert from us the 
calamity of having to yield to another nation or kingdom the post of honour, the place 
of privilege, which our fathers handed down to usl " But they were then pursuing the 



174 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xx. 1—47. 

course which led inevitably to this very doom. If they only walked on in the path 
along which they were then hurrying, tliey were bound to reach that " miserable" end. 
II. Its application to 00a own hearts and lives. 1. We may be supposing 
ourselves incapable of wrong-doing the seeds of which are already sown ia our heart. 
Hazael proved to have " dog " enough in him to do the worst things he shuddered at 
when he spoke (2 Kings viii. 13). David discovered that he was capable of a selfish- 
ness which he was condemning to death in another (2 Sam. xii. 5 — 7). These Jews 
shrank from an action which was described to them, as a thing too base for them to 
commit ; and yet they were in the very act of committing it. We little know what 
possibilities of evil are within us ; we cannot estimate aright our own capacity for 
wrong-doing. Probably every man has ia his heart something of which sin may lay 
hold in some dark hour, and by which he may conceivably be led down to guilt and 
shame. The declension and fall of those who once stood among the worthiest and the 
most honoured speaks to us in earnest tones of the possible wandering of our own 
souls from God and goodness. Even Paul realized this stem possibility, and acted 
upon it (1 Cor. iz. 27). The histories of the erring and ruined souls of men who once 
Seemed beyond the reach of wrong and crime, but who became entangled in their meshes 
and were slain by them, call upon us to be (1) watchful with a constant vigilance, and 
(2) prayerful with an unflagging earnestness, lest we too fall under the power of 
temptation (Matt. xxvi. 41). 2. We may be supposing ourselves safe from a doom 
which lies straight in front of us. How many a youth imagines himself secure from a 
degradation and a darkness toward which he has, in the sight of God, already set his 
footl How many a man considers himself safe from a low and dishonouraljle level, 
when he is already on the slope that leads down to it I What if we could see the goal 
to which the path we tread is tending I " God forbid," we say, " that this should be our 
destiny!" and all the while our face is turned in that direction. There is "an earnest 
need for prayer" that God would show us what is the way in which we are walking; 
that, if we are in the wrong road, he would "apprehend" us even as he apprehended 
his chosen messenger (Phil. iii. 12), and turn our feet into the way of his testimonies 
(Ps. oxxxix. 23, 24).— 0. 

Ver. 17. — 2%e rejection and exaltation of Christ. We look at — 

I. The bejeotion op Jesus Christ. Its strangeness. 1. From an evidential 
point of view. How came the builders to reject that valuable Stone? How was 
it that all the miracles of Jesus, so wonderful, so beneficent, so simple, and so credible 
as they were; that the life of Jesus, so holy and so beautiful, so gracious and so 
winning as it was ; that the truth spoken by Jesus, so profound, so original, so lofty, 
so satisfying to the deepest wants of man as it was ; — how came it to pass that all this 
left him the "despised and rejected of men"? 2. From a. providential point of view. 
How do we account for it that there should have been such a long and complicated 
preparation for the coming of the Messiah of the Jews, and of the Redeemer of mankind, 
and that he should fail to be recognized when he came ? Does not all that Divine 
arrangement of Law and ritual and prophecy, of privilege and discipline, seem to have 
been attended with f4ilure? Of what use was all that elaborate |ireparation, when the 
people of God rejected the Son of God ? when he to whom everything pointed, and of 
whom everything foretold, was not welcomed and honoured, but denounced as a deceiver 
and slain as a criminal ? 

II. CoNSlOEBATiONB WHICH ACCOUNT FOB IT ; Or which, if they do not account for 
it, lessen our surprise concerning it. 1. As to the evidential difficulty. We need not 
wonder that the very strongest evidence failed to convince those who were uncon- 
vinced. What evidence can prevail against bigotry (or prejudice) and selfishness com- 
bined? Our knowledge and experience of mankind must have abundantly proved that 
either of these can rep<el the clearest and weightiest proofs ; much more can both of 
them. And surely prejudice and self-interest never found a firmer seat than they 
found in the minds of the " chief priests and the scribes " who led the opposition to our 
Lord. 2. As to the providential difficulty. We must take into our consideration (1) the 
fact that God's dealings with our race include such apparent failures as this, and oblige 
us to wait the issue before we judge ; (2) the fact that the long preparation of Israel 
was by no means wholly an apparent failure. There is evidence of much tulfilmeut of 



OH. XX. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 17B 

prophecy; tliere is the valuable contribution of all that is contained in Old Testament 
Scripture, which is a rich and precious heritagu to the human race ; and there is, above 
all, the formation of a pure and reverent people, distinguished from and raised above 
all surrounding nations in the supreme element of moral character, which supplied tlie 
human material for the first great missionary epoch. Moreover, the very rejection of 
Jesus Christ has proved to be the beginning and foundation of ultimate succeoS, and of 
a success far deeper and larger than any contemporary and national triumph would 
have been. It has led up to — 

III. His exaltation. 1. Notwithstanding his humiliation. That Stone was rejected 
indeed; that Teacher was silenced, that Prophet slain, that cause covered with inlamy ; 
those hopes, cherished by a few disciples, "ere laid in the tomb and covered from sight ; 
yet, notwithstanding all that apparent defeat and discomfiture, that " Stone has become 
the Head of the corner," that Teacher the great Teacher of Divine wisdom, that Prophel 
the acknowledged Saviour of mankind, that cause the kingdom of God upon earth. 2. 
As the reward of his humiliation. " Wherefore also God hath highly exalted him " (Phil. 
ii. 6—11; Heb. ii. 9, 10). 3. As the result of his humiliation. "I, if I be lifted up, 
will draw all men unto me." The cross has been the great loadstone which has been 
attracting the world. It is to a crucified Saviour, once slain for our sins, dying in 
mercy toward our race, that we are drawn in faith and love. It is he " who loved us, 
and gave himself for us " unto such shame and sorrow and death — it is he whom wf 
rejoice to make the Friend of our heart and the Sovereign of our life. 

1. Learn the^Zace of privilege. It is well for us that we stand where we do stand — 
at a point in time where we can recognize the Corner-stone. The mountain is best 
seen afar off, the city or the sea is best seen from above, the character of the generation 
is best understood after some interval of time. We know Jesus Christ betier than we 
should have done had we lived when he was the Stone rejected of the builders. We 
cjuld not be better placed than we are by the providence of God for understanding 
him and rejoicing in his worth. 2. Know the day of opportunity. Eecognizing the 
true character of that once-slighted " Stone," knowing Jesus Christ as we know him 
now, it is for us to accept Lim without delay as our personal Redeemer, and to commend 
him, with all devotedness, to the estimation and trust of all beholders. — C. 

Ver. 18. — Contact and conflict with Christ. There is one thing which, as a stone or 
rock, Christ is willing and waiting to be to us ; there is that also which, in spite o) 
his own desire concerning us, we may compel him to be to us. 

I. The Eock on which we mat build. 1. Christ desires to be as the Comer-stone 
or Foundation-stone on which the whole structure of our character and of our destiny 
is resting. 2. If we exercise a living faith in him, we shall find him to be all this to 
us. (1) Building on him, our confidence in the forgiving love of God will be well 
grounded and our peace of mind will be secure ; (2) building on him, our character 
will be strong and samtly, our life will be useful and noble ; (3) resting on him, our 
souls will be sustained in hours of trial; (4) abiding in him, we shall have peace at 
the last. 

II. Thb Rock against which we are bkdised oe even broken. We cannot 
come, in any sense or degree, into conflict with Christ without bein^ injured by the act. 
1. To turn from him is to deprive ourselves of the best; it is to rob ourselves of the 
highest motives to rectitude and spiritual worth, of the deepest springs of goodness and 
of beauty, of the heavenliest influences that can breathe upon the soul, of the purest 
and most elevating joys that can fill the heart, of the noblest activities that can occupy 
and crown our life. 2. To reject him, whether by deliberate and determined refusal or 
by a foolish and guilty procrastination, is to do conscious wrong to ourselves ; it is to 
injure our conscience, to weaken our will, to suffer constant spiritual deterioration, to 
be moving along that downward slope which ends in darkness of mind and in self- 
despair. 3. To disobey the commandments of Christ is to come into collision with 
those laws of God which are also laws of our spiritual nature, any and every infraction 
of which is attended with inward and serious injury; e.g. to hate our brother without 
a cause, to look with lustful eye, to love our own life rather than the cause of God and 
righteousness, — ^this is to suffer harm and damage to the spirit. 4. To work against 
Christ and his ^pel is to be constructing that which will be destroyed, is to b« 



ITS THE GOSPEL ACCOSDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. zx. 1—47. 

delving and building on the saDd with the tide coming in which wiU wash every' 
tiling away. In no way can we take up an attitude of resistance to Jesus Christ 
without " wronging our own bouI ; " it may be by a cruel renunciation of all that i« best, 
or it may be by incurring the judgment which must fall and does &11 upon folly 
and sin. 

III. Thk Eook which mat 0RX7SH us IN ITS FALL. " On whomsoever it shall fall," 
etc. The snow-drift and the glacier are magnificent objects on which to gaze ; but how 
terrible is the descending, destructive avalanche 1 It is simply inevitable that the 
brightest light should cast the deepest shade ; that fullest privilege and most abounding 
3px>ortunity should, in the case of the guilty, end in deepest condemnation and severest 
penalty (John iii. 19 ; Heb. vL 4—8 ; Phil. iii. 18, 19). " When God arises to judgment," 
when the rock of Divine dissatisfaction falls, when the " wrath of the Lamb " is revealed, 
then must there be made known what God intends by " everlasting destruction from 
his presence." All that is meant by that we do not know : we may well resolve that, 
by timely penitence and loving faith, we will never learn by the teaching of our own 
experience. — C. 

Vers, 19 — 26. — The tacred and the $ecular. There are three preliminary truths 
trhich may be gathered before considering the proper subject of the text. 1. The 
worthlessness of heartUu praise. What value dp we suppose Jesus Christ attached to 
the eulogium here pronounced (ver. 2) ? How worthless to him now are the epithets 
which are uttered or the praises which are sung by lips that are not sincere 1 2. The 
evil end of a false attitude toward Christ. The attitude of hostility which his enemies 
had definitely tal^en up led them to resort (1) to shameful deceit (ver. 20), and (2) to a 
malign conspira< ; % ainst the one Teacher who could and would have led them into 
the kingdom of (iu^. 3. The final discomfitvre of guilt. (Ver. 26.) It is silenced and 
ashamed, Eespectiiig the principal subject before us, we should consider — 

L Two KOTIONB THAT FIND NO COUNTENANCE IN OUR LoBD's BBPLT. 1. When JeSUS 

answered, " Render unto Cassar," etc., he did not mean to say that the spheres of the 
secular and the sacred lie s» apart that we cannot serve God while we are serving the 
state. Let none say, " Politics are politics, and religion is religion." Th&t is a 
thoroughly unchristian sentiment. If we ought to "eat and drink," if we ought to do 
everything to the glory of God, it is certain that we ought to vote at elections, to speak 
at meetings, to exercise our political privileges, and to discharge our civil duties, be 
they humble or high, to the glory of God. A man may be, and should be, serving 
Christ as truly and as acceptably in the magistrates' court, or in the lobby of the House 
of Commons, as he can be in the school or the sanctuary. 2. Nor did Christ mean to say 
that these spheres are so apart that a man cannot be serving the state while he is engaged 
in the direct service pf God ; for, indeed, there is no way by which we render so true 
and great a service to the whole body politic as when we are engaged in planting 
Divine truth in the minds and hearts of men ; then are we sowing the seeds of pease, of 
industry, of sobriety, of every national virtue, of a real and lasting prosperity. 3. 
Nor yet that there are no occasions whatever when we may act in opposition to the 
state. Our Lord encouraged his apostles in their refusal to obey an unrighteous 
mandate (Acts v. 28, 29). 

11. The leading tkuth which Chbist's words contain, viz. that our obligation 
to God does not conflict with our ordinary allegiance to the civil power. If the latter 
should enjoin apostasy, or blasi>heray, or positive immorality, then disobedience would 
become a duty, and might rise into heroism, as it has often done. But ordinarily, we 
can serve God and be loyal citizens at the same time, and this none the less that the 
rulers whom we serve are Mohammedans or pagans. To be orderly and law-abiding 
under the rule of an infidel is as lar as possible from being unchristian. On the con- 
trary, it is decidedly Christian (see 1 Tim. iL 2; Rom. iii. 1 — 7). Indeed, service ren- 
dered to " the froward " has a virtue not pussessed by service to "the good and gentle ; " 
and faithful citizenship- in " a strange land " may bo a more valuable and acceptable 
service than in a Christian go intry. C)ur duty, in the li-iht of Christ's teaching, is not 
that of discovering conscii niious objections to the support of the civil government ; it 
is rather that of rendering a hearty obedience to the Divine will, and also of conforming 
in all loyalty to the requirements of human law. — 0, 



OH. XX. 1—47.] THE GK)SPEL ACOORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 177 

Vera. 27 — 38. — Fomtdations of Christian hope. On what foundation do we build 
our hope for the future ? Not now on any philosophical deductions ; these may have a 
certain measure of strength to some minds, but they are not firm enough to carry such 
a weight as the hope of immortality. We build on the Word that cannot be broken — 
on the promise of Jesus Christ. Our future'depends upon the will of our Divine Creator, 
on the purpose of our God, and only he who came from God can tell us what that 
purpose is. Here, as elsewhere, we have— 

I. The firm geound of Christian promise. Our Lord tells us, from his own 
knowledge, that there is a future for the sons of men. And he indicates some features 
of this future. 1. Our life will be one of perfect purity. There is to be nothing of the 
grosser element that enters into our social relations here (ver. 35). Great founders of 
great faiths have promised to their disciples a paradise of enjoyment of a lower kind. 
Christ leads us to hope for a life from which everything that is sensual will be removed. 
Love will remain, but it will be spiritual, angelic, absolutely pure. 2. It will be a life 
without end, and therefore without decay. "Neither can they die any more" (ver. 36). 
How blessed the life that knows no fear of interruption, of dissolution, of sudden cessa- 
tion, and, more particularly, that is free from the haunting consciousness of passing on 
to a time when faculty must fade, or the sadder sense of decline already commenced or 
even hastening to its end I What will it be to live a life that becomes ever brighter 
•nd fuller as the periods of celestial service pass away ! 3. It will be a life of highest 
honour and elevation. " They are equal unto the angels ; and are the children of God, 
being the children of the resurrection " (ver. 36). " Now are we the sons of God," and 
when the future life is disclosed our sonship will mean yet more to us — it will be life on 
a loftier plane, in a deeper and fuller sense ; we shall be nearer to God, and more like 
him in our faculty and in our spirit and our character. 

II. The additional support of Christ's infeeenob. To be "the God of 
Abraham," he argued, meant to be the God of a living soul ; he whose God was the 
living God was a living man in the fullest sense. For God to be our God includes 
everything we need. The living God is the God of living mea ; the loving God of 
loving men ; the blessed God of happy men ; the holy God of holy men. All the 
highest good for which we long in our noblest hours is guaranteed to us in that " the 
everlasting God," the righteous and the faithful and the loving One, is our Ood. 1, 
The heritage of the future is not promised unconditionally ; there are " those accounted 
worthy to obtain " it ; therefore there are those who are not worthy, and who will miss 
it. 2. The condition that is implied is that of a living personal connection with God 
himself Those who can truly claim him as " their God " may confidently look forward 
to an eternal home in his presence and in his service. To us, to whom he has revealed 
himself in his Son, this means a living union with Jesus Christ our Saviour. To know 
him, to live unto him, to abide in him, — this is life eternal. — 0. 

Vers. 40 — 44. — The lowliness and the greatness of Jesus Christ. This is <Ae subject 
of these verses ; but they are suggestive of minor truths. We have — 

I. A PROOF OF UTTER FALSITY. (Ver. 40.) How came these men to be afraid to 
ask questions of Christ? Others did not shrink from him, or fear to ask things of 
him. The children were not afraid of him ; nor were " the strangers " — those not of 
Israel ; nor were the women who waited on him and learned of him ; nor the simple- 
hearted and genuine inquirers. It was only the men who sought his overthrow, because 
they dreaded his exposure ; it was only those who shrank from his heart-searching gaze 
and his truth-telling words, that dared not approach him and ask questions of him. 
No man however ignorant, no child however young, need shrink from the Lord of 
love, from asking of him what he needs ; it is only the false who are afraid. 

II. The TIME FOB AGGRESSIVE ACTION. The Bucccssful general may act long on 
the defensive, but he waits and looks for the moment of attack. Jesus bore long with 
the questionings of his enemies, but the time had come for him to ask something of 
them. We may well hear long with the enemies of Christ, but the hour comes when 
we must bear down upon them with convincing and humbling power. 

III. The OCCASIONAL duty of putting men into a DIFFICULTY. On this occasion 
our Lord placed his hearers in a difficulty from which he did not offer to extricate 
them. His prophetic function was to enlighten, to liberate, to relieve. But here wag 

ItUKB.— «» » 



178 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINa TO ST. LUKE, f^xx. 1—4:1. 



an occasion when he best seryed men by placing them in a difficulty from which they 
founa no escape. Such service may be rare for a Christian teacher, but it does occur. 
There are times when we cannot render a man a better service than that of humbling 
him, of showing him that there are mysteries in presence of which he is a little child. 

Iv. Thb wisdom of furtheb inquiry. These Pharisees imagined that they knew 
everything about the Scriptures that could be known. They were learned, but they 
were unwise; they had a large verbal and literal acquaintance with their sacred 
books, but they had missed their deepest meaning. They had not inquired humbly, 
intelligently, reverently enoag;h. How much more is there in our New Testament 
than we have yet found 1 What depth of wisdom in the words of Christ 1 What 
enlightenment in the letters of his apostles 1 Though we may not have missed our way 
BO grievously as the scribes had done, yet may there be very much of Divine truth wa 
have not yet discovered, which patient and devout inquiry will disclose. 

Y. Thb lowliness and the obieatness of Jesub Chbist. He is the Son of David, 
and he is also his Lord. We understand that better than the most advanced and 
enlightened of his disciples could at that point. " As concerning tbe flesh " he was 
" born of a woman, made under Law ; " yet is he " exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour ; " 
Son of man and Son of God. Only thus could he be what he came to be : 1. Our 
Mediator between God and man. 2. Our Divine Saviour, in whom we put our trust 
and find mercy unto eternal life ; our Divine Friend, of whose perfect sympathy we 
can be assured; our rightful Lord, to whom we can bring the offering of our heartf 
and lives. — C. 

Vers. 45 — H.— Character and precept, etc Theae verses suggest five truths of 
practical importance. 

I. That chabaotbb is or hobk consequence than pbecept. "Beware of the 
scribes ; " they " sit in Moses' seat, and teach things that you should do " (Matt, xxiii 
2) ; but their conduct is such that they are to be avoided rather than sought after. 
Beware of the bad man, though he be a good teacher; the influence of his life will be 
stronger than the effect of his doctrine ; the one will do more harm than the other wiU 
do good. In a religious teacher, character is the principal thing ; if that be unsound, 
proceed no further ; seek some one else, one that you can respect, one that will raise you 
by the purity of his heart and the beauty of his behaviour. 

II. That ungodly men fall into a foolishness the depth of which they 
DO not suspect. How childish and even contemptible it is for men to find gratification 
in such display on their own part and in such obsequiousness on the part of others as 
is here described (ver. 46) I To sink to such vanity is wholly unworthy of a man whe 
fears God, and who professes to find his hope and his heritage in him and in his service. 
They who thus let themselves down do not know how poor and small is the spirit 
they cherish and the behaviour in which they indulge; they do not suspect that, in the 
estimate of wisdom, it is at the very bottom of the scale of manliness. 

III. That familiarity with Divine truth is consistent with the commission 
OF the wobst offences. The scribes themselves, familiar with every letter of the 
Law, could descend to heartless misappropriation in conjunction with a despicable 
hypocrisy (ver. 47). Guilt and condemnation could go do further than this. It ia a 
solemnizing thought that we may have the clearest view of the goodness and the 
righteousness of God, and yet may be very far on the road to perdition. Paul felt the 
solemnity of this thought (1 Cor. ix. 27). It is well that the children of privilege and 
the preachers of righteousness should take this truth to heart and test their own 
integrity. 

IV. That the affectation of piety is a serious aggravation of quilt. The 
" making long prayers " entailed a " greater condemnation." Infinitely ofiensive to the 
Pure and Holy One must be tha use of his Name and the affectation of devotedness to 
his service as a mere means of selfish acquisition. The fraud which wears the garb 
of piety is the ugliest guilt that shows its face to heaven. If men will be transgressors, 
let them, for their own sake, forbear to weight their wrong-doing with a simulated 
pi<ty. The converse of this thought may well be added ; for it is truth on the positive 
Hide, viz. — 

V. That devout benevolence ib goodness at its best. To serve our fellow-men 



OH. XX. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 179 

because we love Christ, their Lord and ours, and because we believe that he would 
have us succour them in their need, is to do the right thing under the purest and 
worthiest prompting; it is goodness at its best. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 19. — Christ's collision with the Sanhedrin. We have studied Christ's triumphal 
entry into Jerusalem and his cleansing of the temple. And now we have to notice the 
interruptions to which he was subjected as he improved his last days of ministration in 
the temple-court. He had exercised authority in God's house, he was also teaching 
with authority the people ; hence the Jewish rulers came, demanding from him the 
sign of his authority to do so. As with many still, there is great demand for signs, 
certiflcates, orders. In these circumstances Jesus throws them back on John the 
Baptist, and asks if they had made out his authority. This so "cornered" thera 
that they decline giving an opinion, and Jesus consequently is warranted in declining 
to tell them by what authority he takes the course he does. Now, here it is to be 
noticed — 

L The ministey of Jesus was bound up histobioallt with the claims of John. 
It was to the Baptist he went for baptism. It was when being baptized by John that 
he received the gifts of the opened heaven, descemling dove, and assurance of Sonship. 
It was from John he received the first start in securing disciples, when the Baptist pointed 
to him and said, " Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world ! " 
How natural, therefore, that Jesus should take the chief priests back to John ! It was 
no able manoeuvre on the Master's part, but simple historic defence. "John recognized 
my authority and mission ; he set his seal upon them : shoidd this not satisfy you ? " 
And surely this course taken by our Lord has deep significance. If ever one in this 
world might have stood in his own indiviilual right and said, "My work and teaching 
are surely self-evidently Divine," he was the Man ; but no, he takes his questions along 
the historic line, and shows how he stands on prophetic ground, as successor of the last 
of the prophets. It was the recognition of the prophetical succession rather than any 
independent assumption. 

II. Fbae of man will incapacitate men fob the simplest act of judgment. 
What Jesus asks these rulers to decide is whether John the Baptist, in introducing 
baptism, was taking a Heaven-inspired course or not. "The baptism of John, was it 
from heaven, or of men ? " Instead of facing the question like men, they fenced with 
it. They saw clearly that in either case their answer would put them in a difficulty. 
If they said that John's baptism was from heaven, Jesus would immediately say, 
" Why then believed ye him not? " but if they declared it was a mere human innova- 
tion, they would come into such collision with the people as to run the risk of being 
stoned. In fear of man they decline judgment. Now it is instructive here to notice 
that such temporizers never can be martyrs. They have no notion of dying for their 
conviction about John. Why should they be stoned? They prefer being silent on the 
whole subject. As long as we fear man more than God, as long as we value man's 
esteem more than truth, we are unfit for judgment. We only become impartial when 
we are ready to take truth with all its consequences upon us. 

III. The incompetent do not deserve to be treated as judges. These rulers 
have demonstrated their utter incompetency to undertake any decision upon a prophet's 
claims. They are consequently treated by Jesus as undeserving of the position of 
judges. It were well if this rule were faithfully observed. Men are treated often as if 
they had the judicial spirit, capacity, and temper, when they are simply man-fearing 
partisans. It is lost time putting such people in the judgment-seat. Better far to spend 
the time in teaching the common people, as the Master did, than in trying to convince 
the partisans who interrupt good work and do none themselves. 

IV. By A PARABLE OF JUDGMENT HE REVEALS TO THESE PARTISANS THEIR DANGER. 

The vineyard indicates the theocratic people, the husbandmen the men who exercised 
government among them, and the naturally expected fruit was the loyalty and spiritual 
service which prophets called for but seldom secured for their Master in heaven. 
Instead of rendering the fruits, the rulers of the Jewish people subjected the line of 
prophets to increasing indignities. Last of all, the only Son is sent ; but, instead of 
reverencing him and yielding to Divine denjands, they cast him out of the Jewish 
Church and ki 1 him. Bow clearly does Jesus thus claim Sonship to God, and indicatf 



180 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINQ TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xx. 1— 4T. 

Lib approaching and dreardfiil doom 1 The result of this murder of God's Son is to be 
the transference of the theocracy from the Jews to other husbandmen. The chief 
mestB and scribes are to be supplanted by apostles; and Judaism to give place to 
Christianity, Seeing that the parable was spoken against them, they cry, "God 
forbid!" but Jesus clinches his argument by apt quotation from their own Scri|itures. 
He asks, " Is not the stone rejected of the builders to become the head of the corner ? 
And will not all who collide with it be either broken or ground to powder?" In this 
way he claims to be the test of men, and his rejection to be fatal and finaL — B. M. £. 

Vers. 20 — 40. — Christ supreme in debate. We have seen in the last section how our 
Lord told a parable whose bearing was unmistakably against the Jewish rulers. They 
are determined, ia consequence, to so entrap him in discussion as, if possible, to bring 
bim within the grasp of the Roman governor. Bat in entering the doubtful field of 
debate with a base purpose such as this, it was, as the sequel shows, only to be 
vanquished. Jesus proves more than a match for the two batches of artful men who 
try to entrap him. Let us look at the victories separately, and then at Jesus remaining 
Master of the field. 

L His victory oveb the bbvolutionabt pabtt. (Vers. 21 — 26.) This party was 
composed mainly of Pharisees. They corresponded to the modern revolutionary party 
in settled or conquered states. They were constantly fomenting sedition, plotting 
against the Eoman power, the sworn enemies of Cjesar. They come, then, with their 
difficulty about tribute. But notice : 1. Their real tribute to Christ's character in 
their pretended flattery. (Ver. 21.) They own to his face that he was too brave to 
make distinctions among men or to accept their persons. In other words, their testi- 
mony clearly is that, like God his Father, Jesus was " no respecter of persons." No 
one is fit to be a teacher of truth who panders to men's tastes or respects their per- 
sons. Only the impartial mood and mind can deal with truth truthfully. In the 
hollow flattery of the Pharisees we find rich testimony to the excellency of Jesus. 2. 
Notice their scruple about paying tribute. (Yer. 22.) The law of the nation might 
possibly be made to teach the duty o/ being tributary to none. It was this they wished 
to elicit from him, and so hand him over to the governor as siiditious. They wished a 
pretext for revolution, and if he furnished them with one and perished for it, so much 
the better, they imagined. The baseness of the plot is evident. Their hearts are 
hostile to Ciesar, but they are ready to become " informers " against him for the sake of 
getting rid of him. 3. Notice how simply he secured a victory. Showing them at once 
that he knew their designs, he asks them to show him a penny. In his poverty he 
hardly possessed at this time • spare penny to point his teaching. Having got the 

Senny, he asks about the image on the currency, and receiving for answer that it was 
eesar's, he simply instructs them to give both Csesar and God their due. Ceesar has 
his domain, as the currency shows. He regulates the outward relations of men, their 
barter and their citizenship, and by his laws he makes them keep the peace. But 
beyond this civil sphere, there is the moral and the religious, where God alone is King. 
Let God get his rights as well as Caesar, and all shall be well. These words of Christ 
■onnded the death-knell of the Jewish theocracy. They point out two mutually inde- 
pendent spheres. They call upon men to be at once loyal citizens and real saints. We 
may do our duty by the state, while at the same time we are conscious citizens of 
heaven, and serve our unseen Master in all things.* 

IL ilis vicTOBT OVER THE Sadducbbs. (Vers. 27 — 38.) The Pharisees having 
been confounded by his subtle power, he is next beset by the rival party, the party of 
sceptical and worldly tendencies. They have given over another world as a no-man's 
land, the region of undoubted difficulty and puzzle. Especially do they think it 
impossible to settle the complicated relations into which men and women enter here 
in any hereafter. Accordingly they state a case where, by direction of the Mosaic Law, 
a poor woman became successively the wife of seven brothers. In the other life, ask 
they, whose wife shall she be ? Christ's answer is again triumphant through its sim- 
plicity. In the immortal life to which resurrection leads there shall be no marrying or 
giving in marriage. All shall be like the angels. No distinction in sex shall continue. 
All are to be " sons of GKxi, being sons of the resurrection " (Bevised Yersi(Ht). Tht 
* Ot Beisier'i ' Sermons,' tome It. p. 239, eta 



OH. XX. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LtJKB. 181 

complicated earthly relations shall give place to the simplicity of soresAip. God's family 
shall embrace all others. His Fatherhood shall absorb all the descending aifectiona 
which on earth illustrate feebly his sxirpassing love, and our sonship to him will embrac* 
all the ascending affection which his descending love demands. Tiie sim|jlicity of a 
holy family, in which God is Father and all are brethren, and the angels are our hi^ih- 
born elder brethren, will take the place of those complex relationships which sometime* 
sweeten and sometimes sadden himian love. But, in addition, our Lord renders 
Sadduoeeism ridiculous by showing from the Scriptures these sceptics revered that 
the patriarchs had not ceased to be, but were still living in the bosom of God. For 
God, in claiming from the burning bush to be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, 
revealed the reality of life beyond death. It was a demonstration of the lesurrection. 
The patriarchs must have been living worshippers wheo God was still their God, aud 
this fife unto him demands for its perfection the resurrection. The plenitude of life is 
guaranteed in the continued and worshipful life beyond the grave. In this simple and 
perfect fashion Jesus silences the Sadducees. 

III. He remains complete Master of the field. (Vers. 39, 40.) They are beaten 
in the field of debate. Jesus is Victor. There is no question now which they can ask 
him. All is over on the plane of intellectual and moral argument. Not even a 
Parthian arrow can be shot against him. But treachery and brute force remain, and 
they can have him betrayed and crucified whom they cannot refute. Resort to weapons 
like these is always proof of weakness. Victory has always been really with the 
persecuted party. Persecution on the part of any cause or organization demonstrates 
its inherent weakness. Hence we hail the Christ in the temple as the supreme 
Master and Conqueror of men. The very men who put unholy hands upon him must 
have felt that they were doing the coward's part after ignominious defeat. The weapons 
of our warfare should always be spiritual ; with carnal weapons we only confess defeat 
and court everlasting shame. — R. M. B. 

Ver, 40 — ch. xxi. 4. — Vindications and judgments. We saw on the last occasion how 
Christ had vanquished all who had tried with him the fortunes of debate. And now 
we find him putting a pertinent question to them about himself, and effectually puzzling 
them. Not, of course, that he had this in view in pre.-enting it. His purpose was 
always a clear and pure one ; it was, as Godet suggests, to vindicate beforehand those 
claims to Divine Sonship on the ground of which they are so shortly to condemn him 
to death. 

I. CoNsiDBE Christ as David's Son and Lord. (Vers. 41 — 44.) It is clear from 
the Gospels and from the Trirgums that the Messiah wanted by the Jews was not 
necessarily to be Divine. It was a temporal prince, a military Messiah, they longed for; 
and no Divinity was needful to play the role of " conquering hero " which they desiredl 
A merely human Messiah would have suited them admirably. When they got one, 
therefore, who claimed to be Divine, they condemned him for blasphemy, and never 
stopped until they had made away with him by crucifixion.* Our Lord's question in 
the temple was to arouse them to a sense of Messiah's proper claims. This suggests : 
1. How prone we are to he satisfied with mere human saviours. The Jews wanted 
a Messiah to collect armies, to deliver them from Roman bondage, and to give them 
all frood situations in the new kingdom. They wanted nothini;; that a clever leader 
could not do for them. And there are plenty of people whose oidy desired salvation is 
from hunger and thirst and discomfort of a physical kind. They have no real longing 
after deliverance from sin and covetousness and discontent. Their one thought is to 
find somebody who can help them on a bit. 2. David's royal line produced a Prince 
who VMS also David's Lord. Now, it is plain from the psalm (ex.) which Jesus quotes 
that David realized in the Messiah his present Lord. He ruled over David, and was 
recognized by David as his Lord. When we add to this the fact that David was tha 
greatest monarch of his time, we see that the only interpretation of this Lordship is the 
Divinity of Messiah. This Messiah is made by the Most High to sit at his right hand 
until his enemies are made his footstool. The whole picture Involves and implies 
Christ's Divinity. Now, if these scribes and Pharisees had actid honestly, they would 
have said, " Here is a point which escaped us ; this Lordship over David is a claim which 

■ Of. Tiefiiy, on ' The Sternal Sonship,' 4tb edit., pp. 77—99. 



188 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxi. 1— 88 



the sonship does not cover; there must be more in the Messiahship than we suspect; 
we must reconsider our attitude towards Jesus, and do him justice." But instead oi 
this, they deliberately ignored the difSoulty, and went on with their persecution of the 
Divine Messiah. Now, this is surely to show us that we need a Divine Saviour, for the 
salvation must be from the power and guilt of sin. We need a Saviour who will be our 
Lord ; to whom we not only owe allegiance, but give it cheerfully. It is a Divine Lord 
of the ages, the King of kings, the Lord of lords, the infinite Majesty, whom we need to 
give us the emancipation which can alone profit our souli. 

IL CoNsiDBB Christ's condemnation op the scribes. (Vers. 45 — 47.) Seeing how 
tbey reject the scriptural evidence of his claims, Jesus proceeds to warn his disciples 
against them. He knows them thoroughly. And : 1. He charges them with skil/vMy 
manufacturing a religious reputation. They wore peculiar garments ; the maa-milliaen 
of the day had been brought into requisition. They welcomed recognition from the 
people in the markets ; they took, as their right, the highest seats in the synagogue 
and the chief rooms at social feasts. They manufactured such a reputation as secured 
them abundant honour. 2. They traded upon their reputation. Widows got their 
advice and intercession, and paid them well for giving it. In fact, our Lord charges 
them with devourino; widows' houses in their greed. Instead of the widows inspiring 
pity, they seemed eligible because defenceless victims. 3. Their condemnation shall 
be proportionally great. Professions which are traded upon will ultimately procure a 
deeper condemnation. How needful that the genuineness of our profession should be 
tested 1 If it is for God's dear sake, and not for the sake of worldly advantage, it will 
stand the test at last. 

III. Consider Christ's encomium upon the poor widow. (Oh. xxi. 1 — 4.) Sitting 
over against the treasury, our Lord saw both rich and po'or depositing their gifts. Some 
of the rich gave largely out of their abundance, and Jesus noted doubtless the proportion. 
But one poor widow came along, and she deposited in the temple-chest a single farthing. 
It was little, but it was her all. Behind her sackcloth Jesus discerned the biggest 
heart in all the company. Now, we are taught by this circumstance ; 1. That all our 
gifts are deposited in sight of Christ. As Divine Saviour he sits, so to speak, over 
against every treasury, and notes what the people deposit there. There is no such thing 
as secret giving so far as Jesus is concerned. We may give so that the right hand 
knows not what the left is giving, but Jesus knows all the same. 2. It is the heart 
which determines the character of our liberality. It is not the quantity of money, but 
the quality of the act, which is important. A farthing from a widow is more in the 
sight of God than thousands from a millionaire. Hence we ought to examine ourselves, 
and see clearly what our motives may be. 3. Hence it is possible even for the poorest 
to be liberal. It is this which we require to have driven home. When poor as well as 
rich give with large-heartedness, the Church's " golden age " shall come. It is to this 
that otu Lord would lead us. — B. M. E. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXI. 



Vers. 1 — i. — The widow's mite. We find 
this little sketch only here and in St. Mark 
(xii. 41 — 44). The Master was sitting — 
resting, probably, after the effort of the 
great denunciation of the scribes and 
Pharisees— in the covered colonnade of that 
part of tlie temple which was open to the 
Jewish women. Here was the treasury, with 
its thirteen boxes in the wall, for the re- 
ception of the alms of the people. These 
boxes were called shopheroth, or trumpets, 
because they were shaped like trumpets. 



swelling ont beneath, and tapering npward 
into a narrow mouth, or opening, into which 
the alms were dropped. Some of these 
"trumpets" were marked with special in- 
sciiptioni, denoting the destination of the 
offuiiugs. 

Ver. 1. — ^And he looked np, and saw the 
rich men casting their gifts into the trea- 
sury. It is not Improbable that a special 
stream of almsgivers were just then passing 
through the temple court, many being 
specially impressed by the solemn words 
they had juat been listening to. 

Ver. 2. — And he saw also a certain poor 
widow easting ia thithei two mites. Tha 



«&. ixi. 1-38.] tfiE GOSPEL ACCOfeDlKG 'tO ST. LtlKfi. 



183 



mite (A.6irT(!y) was the amallest current coin. 
Two of these little pieces were the smallest 
legal offering which could be dropped into 
the "trumpet." But this sum, as the 
Heart-reader, who knew all things, tells us 
(yer. 4), was every particle of money the had 
in the world; and it was this splendid 
generosity on the part of the poor solitary 
widow which won the Lord's praise, which 
has touched the hearts of so many genera- 
tions since, which has stirred up in so many 
hearts an admirntion of an act so strangely 
beautiful, but well-nigh inimitable. 

Vers. 5 — 7. — The temple — it» impending 
ruin. The dieciplet' qtiestiont. 

Yer. 5. — And as some spake of the temple. 
After the Lord's remark upon the alms- 
giving of the rich men and the poor widow 
to the treasury of the temple, the Master 
left the sacred building for his lodging out- 
side the city walls. As far as we know, 
his comment upon the widow's alms was 
his last word of public teaching. On their 
way home, while crossing the Mount of 
Olives, they apparently halted for a brief 
rest. It was then that some of his friends 
ealled attention to the glorious prospect 
ot the temple, then lit up by the setting 
sun. It was, no doubt, then in all its per- 
fect beauty, a vast glittering mass of white 
marble, touched here and there with gold 
and colour. Whosoevei had not gazed on 
it, said the old rabbis, had not seen the 
perfection of beauty. It is possible that the 
bystander's remark was suggested by the 
memory of the last bit of Divine teaching 
they had listened to. "Lord, is not the 
house on Zion lovely? But if only such 
gifts as those you have just praised with 
such unstinting praise had been made, never 
had that glorious pile been raised in honour 
of the Eternal King." More probable, how- 
ever, the sight of the great temple, then 
bathed in the golden glory of the fast-setting 
sun, recalled some of the Master's sayings 
of that eventful day, notably such as, 
" Your house is left unto you desolate," 
which occurred in the famous twice-spoken 
apostrophe, " O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou 
that killest the prophets I " (Matt, xxiii. 38 ; 
ch. xiii. 35). "What, Lord I will that 
house, so great, so perfect in its beauty, so 
loved, the joy of the whole earth, — will that 
house be left desolate and in shapeless 
ruins?" With goodly stones. The enormous 
■ize of the stones and blocks of marble with 
which the temple of Jerusalem was built 
excited the surprise of Titus when the city 
fell. Josephus mentions (' Bell. Jud.,' v. 5) 
that some of the levelled blocks of marble 
or stone were forty cubits long and ten 
high. And gifts; better rendered, tacred 
offerings, such as the " golden vine," with 
itt TMt olnsteia, the gift of Herod — which 



probably suggested the discourse, "I an 
the true Vine" (reported in John xv.)— such 
as crowns, shields, vessels of gold and sUver, 
presented by princes and others who visited 
the holy house on Zion. The temple was 
rich in these votive offerings. The historian 
Tacitus, for instance, calls it " a temple if 
vast wealth " (' Hist.,' v. 8). 

Ver. 6.— There shall not he left one itone 
npon another. There is a remarkable pas- 
sage in 2 Esdr. x. 54, " In the place wherein 
the Highest beginneth to show his city, there 
can no man's building be able to stand." 
The Lord's words were fulfilled, in spite of 
the strong wish of Titus to spare the temple. 
Josephus, writing upon the utter demolition 
of the city and temple, says that, with th» 
exception of Herod's three great towers and 
part of the western wall, the whole circuit 
of the city was so thoroughly levelled and 
dug up that no one visiting it would believe 
that it had ever been inhabited ('Bell. 
Jud.,' vii. 1. 1). 

Ver. 7. — And they asked him, saying, 
Master, bntwhen shall these things be? and 
what sign will there be when these things 
shall come to pass f St. Mark (xiii. 3) tells 
us that these questioners were Peter and 
James, John and Andrew. They said to 
tlieir Master, " When shall these things be, 
and what sign shall precede them?" They 
asked their question with mingled feelings 
of awe and gladness : of awe, for the ruin 
of their loved temple, and all that would 
probably accompany the catastrophe, was a 
dread thought ; of gladness, for they asso- 
ciated the fall of city and temple with 
the manifestation of their Lord in glory. 
In this glory they would assuredly share. 
But they wished to know more respecting 
the times and seasons of the dread event. 
Of late the disciples had begun dimly to 
see that no Messianic restoration such as 
they had been taught to expect was con- 
templated by their Master. They were re- 
casting their hopes, and this solemn pre- 
diction they read in the light of the late 
sad and gloomy words which he had spoken 
of himself and his fortunes. Perhaps be 
would leave them for a season and then 
return, and, amid the crash of the ruined 
city and temple, set up his glorious kingdom. 
But they longed to know when this would 
he ; hence the question of the four. 

The Lord's answer treated, in iti first 
and longer portion, exclusively of the de- 
struction of Jerusalem and its temple — the 
fair city and the glorions house on which 
they were then gazing, glorified in the 
light of the sunset splendour; then, as be 
spoke, gradually the horizon vridened, and 
the Master touched apon the fortune* ol 



184 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxi. 1— 38 



the great world lying beyond the narrow 
pale of the doomed, ohoaen people. He 
oloses hiB grand summary of the world's 
fortanes by a sketch of his own return 
in glory. The disciples' hearts must have 
sunk as they listened ; for how many ages 
lay between noio and then I Yet was the 
great prophecy full of comfort, and in 
later days was of inestimable practical 
value to the Jerusalem Christians. The 
discourse, which extends from ver. 8 to 
ver. 36, has been well divided by Godet 
into four divisions. (1) The apparent signs 
of the great oatastroplje, which must not 
be mistaken for true signs (vers. 86 — 19). 
(2) The true sign, and the destruction of 
Jerusalem, which will immediately follow 
it, with the time of the Gentiles, which will 
be connected with it (vers. 20 — 24). (3) 
The coming of the Lord, which will bring 
this period to an end (vers. 25 — 27). (4) 
The practical application (vers. 28 — 36). 

Vers. 8 — 19. — The apparent signs which 
would show tliemselves, but which must not 
be mistaken for the true signs immediately 
preceding the catastrophe. 

Ver. 86. — Many shall come in my name, 
saying, I am Christ. Many of these pre- 
tenders appeared in the lifetime of the 
apostles. Josephus mentions several of these 
impostors ('Ant.,' xx. 8 §§ 6—10; 'Bell. 
Jud.,' ii. 13. § 5). Theudas, one of tliese 
pretenders, is referred to in Acts xxi. 38 
(see, too, Josephus, 'Ant.,' xx. 5. § 1). 
Simon Magus announced that he was 
Messiah. His rival Dositheus, his disciple 
Menander, advanced similar pretences. Mr. 
Greswell (quoted by Dean Mansel, ' Speaker's 
Commentary,' on Matt. xxiv. 5) has called 
attention to the remarkable fact tliat, while 
many of these false Messiahs appeared in 
the interval between the Lord's ascension 
and the Jewish war, there is no evidence 
tliat any one arose claiming this title before 
tlie beginning of his ministry. It was 
necessary, he infers, that the true Clirist 
should first appear and be rejected by the 
great body of the nation, before they were 
j udicially given over to the delusions of the 
false Christs. 

Vers. 9, 10. — Wars and commotions . . . 
nation shall rise against nation, and king- 
dom against kingdom. Josephus the Jewish, 
and Tacitus the Roman, historian — the former 
in his ' Jewish Wars,' and the latter in his 
' Annak '^deserilie the period which imme- 
diately followed the Crucifixion as full of 
wftre, crimes, violences, earthquakes. "It 
vas a time," says Tacitus, " rich in disasters, | 



horrible with battles, torn with seditiona, 

savage even in peace itself." 

Ver. 11. — Great earthquakes. These seem 
to have been very frequent daring the 
period ; we hear of them in Palestine, Italy, 
Greece, Asia Minor, Crete, Syria, famines 
and pestilences. The Jewish and pagan 
historians of this time — Josephns, Suetonius, 
Tacitus, and others — enumerate several 
memorable instances of these scourges in 
this eventful time. Fearful sights and great 
signs. Among the former may be especial!} 
enumerated the foul and terrible scenes 
connected with the proceedings of the 
Zealots (see Josephus, ' Bell. Jud.,' iv. 3. § 
7 ; v. 6. § 1, etc.). Among the great signs 
" would be the rumour of monstrous births ; 
the cry, ' Woe I woe I ' for seven and a half 
years of the peasant Jesus, son of Hanan; 
the voice and sound of departing guardian- 
angels ; and the sudden opening of the vast 
brazen temple gate which required twenty 
men to move it " (Farrar). 

Ver. 12.— But before all these, they shall 
lay their hands on you, and persecute yon. 
The Master continues his prophetic picture. 
From speaking generally of wars, and dis- 
asters, and tumults, and awful natural phe- 
nomena, which would mark the sad age in 
which his hearers were living, he proceeded 
to tell them of things which would surely 
befall them. But even then, though terrible 
trials would be their lot, they were not to 
be dismayed, nor to dream that the great 
catastrophe he had been predicting was yet 
at hand. Some doubt exists as to t\xf mean- 
ing of "before " (irpif) in this twelfth verse, 
It usually has been understood in a temporal 
sense, i.e. " Before all the wars, etc., I have 
been telling you of, you will be persecuted." 
A more definite sense is, however, produced 
by giving the word ■irp6 (before) the signi- 
fication of "before," equivalent to "more 
important " — " more important for you as 
signs will be the grave trials you will have 
to endure : even these signs must not dis- 
may you, or cause you to give up your 
posts as teachers, for the end will not be 
heralded even by these personal signs." 
Delivering you up to the synagogues, and 
into prisons, being brought before kings 
and rulers for my Name's sake. What may 
be termed instances of many of these special 
persecutions are detailed in the Acts (see, 
for instance. Acts v. 40; and portions of vi., 
vii., viii., xii., xiv., xvi., xxi., and following). 
Ver. 15.— For I will give you a mouth 
and wisdom, which all your adversaries 
shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. 
Instances of the splendid fulfilment of this 
promise are supplied in the " Acts " report 
of St. Stephen's speech (vii.), and St. Paul's 
defence spoken before the Roman governor 
Felix (xxv.) and before King Agrippa(xxvi ), 



CH. XXL 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



185 



Ver. 16. — And ye shall be betrayed both 
oy parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and 
friends. His disciples must be prepared to 
pay, as the price of their friendship with 
him, the sacrifice of all home and domestic 
life and peace. How often in the records of 
the early Christians are these terrible suffer- 
ings added to public persecution I Literally, 
his own would have very often to give up 
mother, father, friends, for his sake. And 
some of you shall they cause to be put to 
death. This was literally true in the caae 
of several of those tlien listening to him. 

Ter. 17. — And ye shall be hated of all 
men for my Name's sake. All the records of 
early Christianity unite in bearing witness 
to tSe universal hatred with which the new 
sect were regarded by pagans as well as 
Jews. The words of the Boman Jews re- 
ported in Acts xzviii. 22 well sum this up, 
"As concerning this sect, we know that 
everywhere it is spoken against" (see, 
too. Acts xxiv. 5 and 1 Pet. ii. 12). The 
Boman writers Tacitus, Fliny, and Sue- 
tonius, bear the same testimony. 

Yer. 18. — But there shall not an hair of 
your head perish. Not, of course, to be under- 
stood literally ; for comp. ver. 16. Bengel's 
comment accurately paraphrases it: "Not 
a hair of your head shall perish without 
the special providence of God, nor without 
reward, nor before the due time." The 
words, too, had a general fulfilment ; for the 
Christian community of Palestine, warned 
by this very discuurse of the Lord's, fied in 
time irom the doomed city, and so escaped 
the extermination which overtook the Jewish 
people in the great war which ended in tlie 
fall of Jerusalem (a.d. 70). 

Ver. 19. — In your patienoe possess ye your 
louls. Quiet, brave patience in all difficulty, 
perplexity, and danger, was the attitude 
pressed upon the believers of the first days 
by the inspired teachers. St. Paul con- 
stently strikes this note. 

Vers. 20 — 24:. — The true ligna which hii 
people are to he on the watch for. 

Ver. 20. — And when ye shall see Jerusa- 
lem compassed with armies, then know that 
the desolation thereof is nigh. This is to 
be the sign that the end has come for 
temple, city, and people. Wars and rumours 
of wars, physical portents, famine and pesti- 
lence succeeding each other with a terrible 
persistence, all these will, in the foitb- 
coming years, terrify and perplex men's 
minds, presages of something which seems 
impending. But his people are to bear in 
mind that thesie were not the immediate 
signs of the awful ruin he was foretelling. 
But when the holy city was invested, when 
hostile armies were encamped about her — 
then thii would surely come to pass, and 
■ome of these very bystanders would be- 



hold it — then, and not till then, let his 
people take alarm. Let them at once and 
at all cost flee from temple and city, for 
there would be no deliverance, God had 
left his house, given up the chosen people. 
" Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the 
Gentiles" (ver. 24). It is probable that 
these solemn words of the Master, becoming, 
as they did, at a comparatively early date, the 
property of tlie Church, saved the Christian 
congregations in Palestine from the fate 
which overtook the Jewish nation in the last 
great war. Clearly warned by Jesus that 
the gathering of the Boman armies in the 
neighbourhood of Jerusalem was the un- 
mistakable sign of the end of the Jewish 
polity, the Christian congregations fled to 
Pella beyond Jordan. The Jews never 
ceased to the last trusting that deliverance 
from on high would be vouclisafed to the 
holy city and temple. The Christians were 
warned by the words of the Founder of their 
faith — words spoken nigh forty years before 
the siege — that the time of mercy was hope- 
lessly past. 

Ver. 24. — And they shall fall by the edge 
of the sword, and shall be led away cap- 
tive into all nations. It is computed that 
1,100,000 Jews perisiied in the terrible war 
when Jerusalem fell (a.d. 70). Benan writes 
of this awful slaughter, "that it would seem 
as though the whole (Jewish) race had de- 
termined upon a rendezvous for extermina- 
tion." Jerusalem shall be trodden down of 
the Gentiles. After incredible slaughter and 
woes, Titus, the Emperor Vespasian's sod, 
who commanded the Boman armies, ordered 
the city (of Jerusalem) to be razed so com- 
pletely as to look like a spot which had 
never been inhabited (Josephus, ' Bell. 
Jud.,' V. 10. § 5). The storied city has 
been rebuilt on the old site — but tetthout the 
temple — and since that fatal day, more than 
eighteen centuries ago, no Jew save on bare 
sulferaiice has dwelt in the old loved and 
sacred spot. In turn, Boman and Saracen, 
Norseman and Turk, have trodden Jerusa- 
lem down. Literally, indeed, have the sad 
words of Jesus been fulfilled. TTntil the 
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. These few 
words carry on the prophecy past our own 
time (how far past?) — carry it on close to 
the days of the end. "The times of the 
Gentiles " signify the whole period or epoch 
which must elapse between the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem and the temple, and the 
beginning of the times of the end when the 
Lord will return. In other words, these 
" times of the Gentiles " denote the period 
during whicli they — the Gentiles — hold the 
Church of God in place of the Jews, deposed 
from that position uf favour and honour. 
These words separate the prophecy of Jesus 
which belongs solely to the ruin of the 



186 



tfifi GOS^Eti ACdOHWNO TO ST. LUKfi. [««. xxi. 1— 38. 



city and temple from the eschatological 
portion of the same prophecy. Hitherto 
the Lord's words referred solely to the fall 
of Jerusalem and the ruin of the Jewish 
race. Now begins a short prophetic de- 
scription of the end and of the coming of 
the Son of man in glory. 

Vers. 25 — 27. — The prophecy of the coming 
of the Son of man in glory. The signs which 
ehall precede this advent. And there shall be 
signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the 
stars ; and npon the earth distress of nations, 
with perplexity; the sea and the waves 
roaring ; men's hearts failing them for fear, 
and for looking after those things which 
are coming on the earth: for the powers 
of heaven shall be shaken. And then shall 
they see the Son of man coming in a clond 
with power and great glory. The Lord con- 
tinues his solemn prophecy respecting things 
to come. Kow, the question of the four 
disciples — to which this great discourse was 
the- answer — was, When were they to look 
for that awful ruin of city and temple of 
which their loved Master spoke ? But they, 
it must be remembered, in their own minds 
closely connected the temple's fall with some 
glorious epiphany of their Master, in which 
they sliKuM share. He answers generally 
tlieir formal question as to the temple, 
describing to them the very signs they are 
to look for as heralding the temple's fall. 
He now proceeds to reply to their real query 
respecting the glorious epiphany. The 
templets ruin, that belonged to the period 
in which they were living ; but the glorious 
epiphany, that lay in a far distance. " See," 
he said, " city and temple will be destroyed ; 
this catastrophe some of yon will live to 
see. The ruin will be irreparable ; a new 
epoch will set in, an epoch I call ' the times 
of the Gentiles.' These once despised 
peoples will have their turn, for I shall be 
their Light. Ages will pass before these 
'times of the Gentiles' shall be fulfilled, 
but the end will come, and then, and not 
till then, will the Son of man come in glory. 
Listen; these shall be the signs which shall 
herald this glorious advent: Signs in the 
sun, and in the moon, and in the stars." St. 
Matthew (xxiv. 29) supplies more details 
concerning these " signs." The sun would 
be darkened, and the moon would not give 
her light ; the stars would fall from heaven. 
These words are evidently a memory of 
language used by the Hebrew prophets to 
express figuratively the downfall of king- 
doms. So Isaiah (xiii. 10) speaks thus of 
the destruction of Babylon, and Ezekid 
(xxxii. 7) of the fall of Egypt (see too 
Isa. ixxiv. 4). It is, however, probable 
that our Lord, while using language and 
figures familiar to Hebrew thought, fore- 
-■hadowed » literal fulfilment of his words. 



So Gtodet, who picturesquely likens our globe 
just before the second advent to "a ship 
creaking in every timber at the moment oi 
its going to pieces." He suggests that 
" our whole solar system shall then undergo 
unusual commotions. The moving forces 
(Smdfieis), regular in their action till then, 
shall be, as it were, set free from their laws 
by an unknown power, and, at the end of 
this violent but short distress, the world 
shall see him appear " (see 2 Pet. iii. 10 — 12, 
where it is plainly foretold that tremendom 
physical disturbances shall precede the 
second coming of the Lord). The Son of man 
coming in a cloud. The same luminous 
cloud we read of so often in the Pentateuch: 
the flames of the desert-wanderings; the 
pillar of cloud and fire ; the same bright 
cloud enveloped the Lord on the Mount 
of Transfiguration; it received him as he 
was taken up (Acts i. 9). Nothing is said 
in this place as to any millennial reign of 
Christ on earth. The description is that of 
a transitory appearance destined to effect 
the work upon quick and dead — an appear- 
ance defined more particularly by St. FaOl 
in 1 Cor. xv. 23 and 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17. 

Vers. 28 — 36. — Practical teaching arising 
out of the foregoing prophecy respecting the 
fall of Jerusalem and the " last things." 

Yer. 28. — And when these things begin 
to come to pass, then look np, and lift up 
yonr heads ; for your redemption draweth 
nigh. There is no doubt that the first 
reference in this verse is to the earlier part 
of the prophecy— the fate of the city and 
the ruin of the Jewish power. "Your re- 
demption" would then signify " your deliver- 
ance " from the constant and bitter hostility 
of the Jewish authority. After a.d. 70 and 
the fall of Jerusalem, the growth of Chris- 
tianity was far more rapid than it had been 
during the first thirty or forty years of its 
existence. It had no longer to cope with 
the skilfully ordered, relentless opposition 
of its deadly Jewish foe. Yet between the 
lines a yet deeper meaning is discernible. 
In all times the earnest Christian is on the 
watch for the signs of the advent of his 
Lord, and the restless watch serves to keep 
hope alive, for the watcher knows that that 
advent will be the sure herald of his re- 
demption from all the weariness and pain- 
fulness of this life. 

Ver. 29. — And he spake to them a parable. 
" It is certain," went on the Lord to say, 
" that summer follows the season when the 
fig tree and other trees put forth their green 
shoots. It Is no less certain that these 
things — the fall of Jerusalem, and later the 
end of the world — will follow closely on the 
signs I have just told you about." 

Ver. 32. — Verily I say unto yon, Thii 
geneiatioa ihall not pais away, till %U h* 



ott. atn. 1— 38.] Tflfi GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO 81?. LtJKB. 



1«7 



MlflUed. In the interpTetation of this verse, 
ft Terse wliich has occasioned much per- 
plexity to students, any noq-natural sense 
for " generation " (yeved), such as being an 
equivalent for the Christian Church (Origen 
and Ohrysostom) or the hitman race (Jerome) 
must be at once set aside. Teveti (generation) 
denotes roughly a period of thiity to forty 
years. Thus the vfords of the Lord here 
simply asserted that within thirty or forty 
years all he had been particularly detailing 
would be fulfilled. Now, the burden of his 
prophecy had been the destruction of the 
city and temple, and the signs they were 
to look for as immediately preceding this 
great catastrophe. This was the plain and 
simple answer to their question of ver. 7, 
which asked "when these things should come 
to pass." The words he had added relative 
to the coming of the Son of man did not 
belong to the formal answer, but were 
spoken in passing. This mighty advent 
the Lord alluded to as probably a very 
remote event — an event certainly to be post- 
poned, to use liis own words, "until the 
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." Not so 
the great catastrophe involving the ruin of 
Jerusalem and the temple, the prophecy 
concerning which occupied so much of the 
Lord's reply. That lay in the immediate 
future; that would happen in the lifetime 
of some of those standing by. Before forty 
years had elapsed the city and temple, now 
lying before them in all its strength and 
beauty, would have disappeared. 

Ver. 33. — Heaven and earth shall pass 
away : but my words shall not pass away. 
A general conclusion to the whole prophecy. 
" No word of mine," said the Master, " wUl 
ever pass away unfulfilled. Some of you 
will even live to see the terrible fulfilment 
of the first part of these utterances. All 
that mighty pile of buildings called Jeru- 



salem wQl pass away, but my words which 
told of their coming ruin will remain. All 
this vast creation, earth, and stars will dis- 
appear in their turn, but these sayings of 
mine, which predict their future passing 
away into nothingness, will outlive both 
earth and heaven." 

Ver. 31. — And take heed to yovrselves. 
The Master ended his discourse with an 
earnest practical reminder to his disciples 
to live ever with the sure expectation of his 
return to j udgment. As for those who heard 
him then, conscious of the oncoming doom of 
the city, temple, and people, with the solemn 
procession of signs heralding the impending 
ruin ever before their eyes, no passions or 
cares of earth surely would hinder ttiem from 
living the brave, pure life worthy of his 
servants. As for coming generations — for 
the warning voice of Jesus here is equally 
addressed to them — they too must watch 
for another and far more tremendoxis ruin 
falling upon their homes than ever fell upon 
Jerusalem, The attitude of his people in 
every age must be that of the " watcher " 
till he come. 

Ver. 37. — ^And in the daytime he was 
teaching in the temple; and at night he 
went out, and abode in the mount that is 
called the Mount of Olives. This brief 
picture of the last days of public work is 
retrospective. This was how our Lord spent 
"Palm Sunday" and the Monday and 
Tuesday of the last week. The prophetic 
discourse reported in this twenty-first chapter 
was, most probably, spoken on the afternoon 
of Tuesday. After Tuesday evening he 
never entered the temple as a public Teacher 
again. Wednesday and Thursday were 
spent in retirement. Thursday evening he 
returned to the city to eat the last Passover 
with his oini. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vers. 1 — i,— Worth in the estimate of wisdom. What is the real worth of a human 
action ? Surely, to us who are acting every waUeful hour of life, a very serious ques- 
tion. How shall we decide that an action of ours is worthy or unworthy, and what is 
the standard by which we shall estimate the comparative excellence of worthy deeds ? 
Our text gives us one principle by which to judge. There are, however, two others 
which are essentially Christian, that should be placed in the foreground. Acts are 
worthy — 

I. As THBT ABB tTSEFUL ; as they tend to promote well-being. And here we should 
note that their usefulness is greater: 1. As they affect character rather than circum- 
•itance. 2. As they are free from drawback ; for the usefulness of many a course of 
action is the difference between the intentional good and the incidental evil that is 
wrought. 3. As they are permanently influential and therefore reproductive. Many 
a deed, being done, is done with; it has no appreciable results; but many another is 
as seed in the soil — there is a fruitful harvest to be reaped from it in the after-time. 

IL AoooKDiNO TO THE SPIRIT IN WHICH THEY ABE DONE. If useful things are done 
in the spirit of rivalry, oi for the purpose of display, or in the hope of social or material 



188 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LtJKE. [oh. xxi. 1— 38. 

remuneration, their worth in God's sight Is nothing or next to nothing. If they are 
done to honour and to please Jesus Christ, or prompted by pure benevolence, or in the 
spirit of filial obedience, they have a real worth and are the objects of Divine approval. 
But the teaching of our text is that actions are worthy — 

III. Measured bt theib unselfishness. If at heart they are selfish, then in the 
judgment of God they are without virtue ; in proportion to their generosity, and that is 
to say, to their costliness, they are beautiful, and even noble. 1. The gift of money. The 
widow's mite was more in the sight of God than the rich men's gold ; and it was so 
because they gave of their abundance a sum the loss of which they would not feel — ^a 
sum that entailed no reduction of their comfort and constituted no sacrifice at all; but 
she gave all that she had — a sum she would miss much, a truly generous sacrifice. 
How often we applaud the donation of some hundreds of pounds, when the ten shillings 
contributed by some struggling worker has a higher place in the heaveuly ledger! 2. 
The gift of time. The man whose easy circumstances allow him to give much time to 
religion or philanthropy may be less worthy and may be making a really smaller 
contribution than he who, pressed hard by pecuniary obligations and having a heavy 
burden of family responsibility to carry, yet squeezes a few hours from toilful days to 
lend a helping hand to the cause of Christ and of man. The kora subsceeivm are of 
more account than many leisure days. 3. Active service in the field of Christian labour. 
Some men are so constituted that they can render service in the pulpit, on the plat- 
form, in the class-room, almost without cost ; they can speak without previous prepara- 
tion and without subsequent exhaustion. But others can only serve at much cost 
to themselves; their strength is taxed to be ready for the hour of opportunity, they 
expend themselves freely in the act of utterance or in the outpouring of sympathy, 
and tliey know what the miseries of prostration mean. A slight service, as reckoned 
by the time-table or the census, on the part of these latter may be more than equal to 
very prominent and much-appreciated work rendered by the Ibrmer. 4. The sacrifice 
of life. It might seem ihat those who gave their life for their Lord or for their kind 
vtere all offering a gift of the same value. But not so. Life has very different values 
at different stages. It is comparatively little for the man who has spent his days 
and his powers to surrender the short and uninteresting remainder; it is much for 
the young man who has all the pleasures and prizes of life within his reach to part 
with the bright, inviting future in order to serve his fellows ; the deed is nobler, for 
the sacrifice is greater. (1) Let us take care that we do not judge by the appearance 
only, or we shall be unjust. (2) Let us be sure that every true act of worthy service 
is appreciated and will be owned of Christ. — C. 

Vers. 5, 6. — The destructible and the indestructible. We have our Lord's own 
authority for comparing the temple with a human being (John ii. 19). He, how- 
ever, compared it with his body ; we may without any impropriety make the compari- 
son with a human spirit — with the maa himseifl We look at it in regard to its 
destructibleness. 

I. The bcildinq itself, and oub being itself. The temple was the pride and 
the delight of every Jew. Among other things that gratified him, he rejoiced in its 
strength ; he felt that it was secure. Generations of men would come and go, but 
that building would remain. Built of the most durable materials, it would deiy the 
actiiin of the elements; placed in the strong city and guarded with such ramparts, the 
enemy would assail it in vain. Where it then stood, there after many centuries it 
would be f lund. But the Jew was wrong; already those elements were at work which 
would bring on the fatal conflict, and that generation was not to pass (ver. 33) until 
that glorious fabric should be cast down and " not one stone left upon another." A 
very slight thing in comparisnn with such a great and imposing structure seems a 
human being How easily destroyed I "crushed before the moth ; " " destroyed between 
the morning and the evening." Yet is there within the compass of the smallest and 
feeblest man that which is more lasting than the temjile, that which will survive the 
strongest structure that art or nature ever reared. Not that the human soul is abso- 
lutely indestructible : " Be can create and he [cnn] destroy it." But it is created and 
intended for immortality. And if only it be on the side of truth and in the service of 
Qod — w Christ Jesua, it if destined for immortality ; it will BttTTiT« the strongest 



OH. XXL 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. 189 

temples and the most impregnable castles ; no wrath of man, no lapse and wear of time, 
no shock of material forces, can destroy it ; it is indestructible. 

II. Its stbength and beauty, and odb own. The temple was "adorned with 
goodly stones and gifts." But strong as these massive stones were, and carefully as 
those gifts were guarded, the day came, and came in the experience of that very 
generation, when not one stone was left upon another, and nothing of the exquisite 
offerings was preserved ; everything perished in the fire or was ploughed up by the ruth- 
less share. Now, there is one thing which no fire can consume and no violence shatter 
— a spiritually strong and spiritually heautiful character ; a holy and lovely character 
rooted in Christ and sustained by his indwelling Spirit. Buildings massive and solid, 
fortunes large and brilliant, kingdoms fortified by great armies and costly navies, — these 
may be broken to pieces and perish. But the character of a Christian man, who is 
simply loyal to his Master, cannot be broken. Character that is not rooted in faith and 
that is not sustained by devotion may fall and be broken, and great and sad is the fall 
of it. But (1) let a man build on the foundation which is laid for it, even Jesus Christ; 
(2) let him abide in Christ by a living faith ; (3) let him seek the continual sustenance 
of the Spirit of God ; — and no opposing or wasting forces will touch him to harm him. 
The strength and beauty of his character will remain, will become stronger and fairer 
with the passing years, will be the object of commendation when the eye of the great 
Judge shall rest upon them at last. — C. 

Ver. 13. — Afterwards. " No chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but 
grievous : nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness." 
Concerning any course we take the question how it affects us now is not so important 
as is the question to what it leads, or, in the words of the text, " to what it turns." 
And while that which is very pleasant often " turns to " much that is painful and 
bitter, or even shameful (see Hev. x. 10), on the other hand, that which is very trying 
and even saddening at the time often " turns to" an issue that is full of honour and of 
joy. The context suggests that — 

I. Peesecution turns to testimony — to a most valuable proof of sincerity and 
faithfulness. When a man endures the blows and buffetings of the cruel hand of the 
persecutor, " we know the proof of him ; " we write him down a true, loyal, noble 
servant of Christ. To how many men, not of the earliest age only but of all ages, has 
this steadfastness in the hour of trial been accepted by us as a "testimony" of the 
very greatest worth, so that their names are treasured by us as those of men that have 
done highest honour to their race I And their martyr-sufferings have turned to a 
testimony in the heavenly country ; they have gained for them there the commenda- 
tion of their Lord and the greeting of their glorified brethren. When, from " wandering 
in deserts, and in moimtains, and in dens and caves of the earth," the persecuted 
Christians of Madagascar came forth to be welcomed by those who were then living 
under a kindly rule, they were greeted as such faithful and heroic men deserved to 
be ; their persecution had turned into a testimony. In a similar way we may say that— 

II. Toil tubnb into achievement. The toil of the desk, of the field, of the shop, 
of the factory, may be hard and wearisome ; our back may bend beneath our burden ; 
our mind may be strained to its utmost capacity of continuance ; but let us take courage 
and work on at our task ; further on is the precious goal of achievement ; after a while 
we shall look with unspeakable satisfaction on the work that has been done, the result 
that has been reached. 

III. Peivation tuens into enrichment. Sad and serious indeed are the privations, 
the losses, which are suffered when men are suddenly reduced in their temporal posses- 
sions, or when they are bereaved of near relatives or most intimate friends. Yet is 
there something more than compensation when the loss of the one leads, as it has 
often led, to the enrichment of the soul, by its finding refuge in God and in his service ; 
or when the loss of the other has brought to the soul the fulness of the sympathy and 
friendship of Jesus Christ ; privation has turned to enrichment. 

IV. Seevioe turns into eule. The soldier in the ranks becomes an ofScer of the 
»rmy ; the apprentice becomes the master ; by long and faithful service in any one 
of the fields of human activity we prepare to rule. Thus is it in the spiritual realm. 
Obedience to Divine Uw turns into a perfect self-command, which is another name 



190 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxi. 1— 3a 

for liberty. And a lifelong service of Jesus Christ will turn to an occupancy of that 
heavenly sphere for whioli our fidelity shall have fitted us ; the " faithful and wise 
servant " his Lord will " make ruler over all his goods " (Matt. xxiv. 45 — i7). Faithful 
service here " turns to " happy and helpful rule hereafter. 

V. Patient waiting turns to blissful pabtioipation. Some souls have much 
waiting for the hour of deliverance, for " the redemption of our body;" it is a weary 
and a trying time. To " learn to wait " is the hardest of all lessons. But (hough the 
night seem very long, the morning will come in time; and if the steadfast soul wait 
patiently the holy will of God, the long endurance shall turn to a full and joyous par- 
ticipation in the glury that is to be revealed — the " glorious liberty of the children of 
God."— 0. 

Vers. 14 — 19. — Inevitable trial and unfailing resources. Here we have one more 
illustration of the faithfulness of Jesus Christ toward his apostles. So far was he from 
encouraging in them the thought that their path would be one of easy conquest and 
delightful possession, that he was frequently warning them of a contrary experience. 
It was not his lault if they failed to anticipate hardship and suffering in the near 
future ; he told them plainly that his service meant the cross, with all its pain and 
shame. In reference to the apostles of our Lord, we have here — 

I. The severity of the trials that webe before them, Jesus Christ had 
already indicated the fact that fidelity to his cause would entail severe loss and trial ; 
here he goes into detail. He says that it will include : 1. General execration. They 
would be " hated of all men." This is a trial of no small severity ; to move among 
men as if we were unworthy of their fellowship ; to be condemned, to be despised, to 
be shunned by all men ; to be the object of universal reprobation ; — this is a blow which, 
if it " breaks no bones," cuts into the spirit and wounds the heart with a deep injury. 
Fidelity to their Master and to their mission would entail this. 2. Desertion and 
treachery on the part of their own friends and kindred. (Ver. 16.) Very few sorrows 
can be more piercing, more intolerable, than desertion by our own family, than betrayal 
by our dearest friends ; it is the last and worst calamity when " our own familiar friend 
lifts up his heel against us." Those who abandoned the old faith, or rather the 
Pharisaic version of it, and who followed Christ had to be prepared for this domestic 
and social sorrow. 3. Death. (Ver. 16.) 

II. The csFAiLiNa resources on which thbt could depend. 1. Everything they 
suffered would be endured for the sake of Jesus Christ ; all would be " for my Name's 
sake " (ver. 17). We know how the thought that they were experiencing wrong and 
undergoing shame for Christ's sake could not only alleviate, not only dissipate sorrow, 
but even turn it into joy (see Acts v. 41 ; Phil. i. 29). 'To suffer for Christ's sake 
could give a thrill of sacred joy such as no pleasures could possibly afford. 2. They 
would have the shield of the Master's power (ver. 18). Not a hair of their head should 
perish until he allowed it. That mighty Friend who had kept them in perfect safety, 
though enemies were many and fierce, would be as near to them as ever. His presence 
would attend them, and no shaft should touch them which he did not wish to hurt 
them. 3. They should have the advantage of his animating Spirit (vers. 14, 15). 
Whenever wisdom or utterance should be needed, the Spirit of Christ would put 
thoughts into their mind and words into their lips. His animating power should be 
upon them, should dwell within them. 4. They should triumph in the end; not, 
indeed, by martial victories, but by unyielding tovalty. " In patience " (in persistency 
in the right course) " they would possess their souls." Losing their life in noble martyr- 
dom, they would save it (ch. ix. 24) ; loving their life, they would lose it ; but " hating 
their life in this world, they would keep it unto life eternal " (John xii. 25). The 
bright promise of an unfading crown might cheer them on their way, and help them ta 
pursue without flagging the path of devoted loyalty. 

Application. I. tUmilar trials await the faithful now. The dislike, the aversion, 
the opposition, of some, if not the active and strong hatred of all ; the opposition, 
perhaps quiet enough, and yet keen and injurious enough, of our own friends or 
relatives ; loss, struggle, suffering, if not fatal consequences of enmity. Downright 
loyalty to Jesus Christ, tenacity and intensity of conviction, usually carry persecution 
■ad trial with them. 2. W» have the same resources the apostles had. (1) The constant, 



OH. XXI. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 191 

lustainin^, inspiring iense that we are enduring all for Christ our Saviour — for him who 
suffered all things for us. (2) His protecting care. (3) His indwelling, upholding 
Spirit. (4) The strong assurance that he will cause us to triumph, that he will help 
us to be faithful unto death, and will then give us the crown of life ; that by " patient 
continuance in well-doing" (patience, perseverance) we shall have "etenul lil'e " 
(shall possess our souls).— -C. 

Vei. 28. — TTie second redemption, " Lift up your heads ; for your redemption draweth 
nigh." Jesus Christ led his disciples to think that beyond the redemption which ha 
was working out for them, and subsequent to it in time, was another great deliverance 
which should prove of unspeakable value to them. This is true now of our discipleship ; 
we look for and we sorely need a second redemption. 

L Its oharacteb. It is not, like the first, distinctively and purely spiritnaL 
That was ; men were yearning for a political revolution and redemption. But the 
kingdom of heaven was not to be " of this world ; " it was to be wholly inward and 
spiritual ; it was to be our redemption from sin and restoration to the favour and the 
I likeness of our Divine Father. But the second redemption is not distinctively and 
primarily that of the soul ; it is to be " the redemption of our body " (Rom. viii. 23). 
It will have a gracious and beneficent effect, a redeeming and elevating influence, upon 
the soul ; but in the first instance it is a redemption from a troublous and trying 
condition ; it is being taken away, by the appearance of Christ, in the providence of 
God, from • state in which happy service is almost impossible; it is a removal from 
storm to calm, from hostile to friendly forces, from turbulence to serenity; from hard 
conflict, or tense anxiety, or painful sufferina;, to " the rest which remaineth for the 
people of God." It is a blessed and merciful change from unfavourable to favourable 
conditions. 

II. OuE HUMAN NEED OP IT. We are not of this world, we who have been redeemed 
by Jesus Christ and renewed by the Spirit of God. And we may be nobly, even 
grandly, victorious over it, being " always caused to triumph " by that Divine Spirit 
that dwells within us, and " strengthens us with all might." Yet are we actually, and 
by universal experience, seriously affected by it, and we suffer many things as we 
pass through it. We may suffer, as the early Christians did (to whom these word* 
were addressed), from persecution, and thereby be made " most miserable " (1 Cor. xv. 
19). Our life may be made worthless, or worse than worthless, to us by the cruelties 
of our fellow-men. Or we may suffer so much from privation of privilege, or from the 
struggles of daily life, or from grief and disappointmept, or from a steadily advancing 
decrepitude, that we may earnestly long for this second redemption, the redemption of 
our body. We may be in sore need of its approach, of its presence. 

III. Its kindly shadow. It will then be much to us, perhaps everything, that our 
redemption draweth nigh. 1. It is something that at any moment we may be within 
a step of the heavenly sphere ; for anything we know, Christ may be about to say 
concerning us, " This day ye shall be with me in Paradise." 2. It is more that we may 
be confident that a life of holy activity will rapidly pass away and bring us to the day 
of rest and of reward. 8. It is very much indeed that the duration of the blessed 
future will prove to be such that any number of years of earthly trouble will be 
nothing in comparison. 4. It is also a truth full of hope and healing that every day 
spent in faithful service or patient waiting brings us that distance nearer to the blessed- 
ness that lies beyond. 

" We nightly pitch our moving tent 
A day's march nearer home." 

Beneath the varied and heavy burdens of time we are fain to bow our heads; but we 
shall lift them up with strength and eager-hearted expectation as we realize thai 
every step forward is a step onward to the heavenly horizon. — C. 

Ver. 33. — The immortality of Christian truth. These striking words suggest to us — 

L Cheist's conscious connection with the Eternal Father. Had there not 

been in him a profound and abiding consciousness that, in a sense far transcending our 

own experience, God dwelt in him and he in God, these words would hare been wholly 



192 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDmO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxi. 1— 38 

indefensible ; tbey would hare been in the last degree immodest. Proceeding irom anj 
other than the Son of God himself, they would have simply repelled us, and would have 
cast grave discredit on every other utterance from the same lips. It was because he 
was Divine, and felt the authority which his Divinity conveyed, that he could and did 
use such words as these without any trace of assumption ; without violating that 
" meekness and lowliness of heart" which he claimed to possess— the possession of which 
neither friend nor enemy has attempted to dispute. 

II. The permanence of truth compabed with the transitoriness of matter. 
It is only in a limited and figurative sense that we can speak of material things as 
eternal. The hour will come when they will perish ; indeed, they are perishing as we 
speak. The immovable rocks, the everlasting hills, are being disintegrated by sun and 
rain ; the fixed earth rises and falls ; the " changeless rivers " are cutting new courses 
for their waters. Only truth abides ; it is only the words in which the thought of the 
Eternal is expressed that do not pass away. Fashions do not touch it with their 
finger; revolutions do not overthrow it; dispensations leave it in its integrity. We 
look particularly at — 

III. The immortality of the THOuaHTS of Christ. 1. We have found him • 
true Prophet. Events have happened according to his word. 2. We are finding him 
to be the Divine Teacher of truth to-day. He has that to say to us which, in our 
better moods and worthier moments, we hunger and thirst to hear. In his deathless 
words there are still treasured for us salvation from our sin, comfort in our sorrow, 
sanctity in our joy, strength in our struggle, companionship in our loneliness, and peace 
and hope in our decline and death. Unto whom shall we go if we sit at his feet no 
longer? 3. We ohall find him the Source of truth in the after-life. Death will not 
make his words less true, even of it makes some of them less applicable than they are 
here and now. His thoughts will never lose their hold upon our heart, never cease to 
affect and shape our course. The truths which Jesus spake eighteen centuries ago 
will beautify otir life and bless our spirit in the furthest epochs and the highest spheres 
of the heavenly world. (1) If we would render the truest service to ourselves, we shall 
do our utmost to fill our minds with the thoughts of Christ ; for these will prepare us 
for any and every condition, here or hereafter, in which we can possibly be placed. 
(2) If we would serve our race most effectively, we shall consider in how many ways 
we can impress his thoughts upon the minds of men and weave them into the institu- 
tions of the world. And we shall find, at any rate, these three: (a) The testimony of 
a Christian life, (li) The utterance, in public or in private, of Christian doctrine, (e) 
The support of Christian institutions.— ^3. 

Ver. S4:.— Christian and unchrittian ewref vines*. Take care not to be overtaken 
and overweighted by care is the simple and intelligible paradox of the text ; in other 
words, have a wise care lest you have much care that is unwise. There is a carefulness 
that is eminently godly and worihy, the absence of which is not only faulty and 
dangerous, but even guilty and fatal ; but there is another carefulness which is an excess, 
a wrong, an injury in the last degree. 

I. A WISE ORDINATION OF GoD. Surcly it is in pure kindness to us that God has 
ordained that if we will not work neither shall we eat ; that possession and enjoyment 
involve thoughtfulness and activity on our part. To be provided with everything we 
ouuld wish for without the necessity for habitual consideration as well as regular exertion 
is found to be hurtful, if not positively disastrous to the spirit. The necessity for care, 
in tbe sense of a thoughtful provision for this life, involves two great blessings. 1. The 
formation of many homely but valuable virtues — the cultivation of the intellect, fore- 
thought, diligence, sobriety of thought and conduct, regularity of daily habits, the 
practice of courtesy, and the avoidance of offence, etc. 2. The practice of piety ; there 
is perhaps no better field in which we can be serving God than in that of our daily 
duties as citizens of this world. Whether it be the counting-house, the desk, the 
factory, the shop, the home, the school, — in each and in all of these there is a constant 
opportunity for remembering and doing the will of God ; there will true and genuine 
godliness find a field for its exercise and its growth, 

II. Occasion for filial trust. Care, in the sense of anxiety, about our temporal 
•fi'airi is an evil to be met and mastered by Christian thought. Christ has said to us, 



OT. XXL 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINO TO ST. LUKE. 193 

" Take no thought [be not anxious] for your life " (Matt Ti 25) ; Paul writes, " Be 
careful [anxious] for nothing," etc. (Phil. iv. 6) j Peter sayi, *• Caiting all your care 
upon him ; for he careth for you " (1 Pet, v. 7), Clearly our Chriitian duty ii to do 
our best with head and hand, hy thoughtfulness and diligence, to ask for God's direc- 
tion and blessing, and then to put our trust in him, resting humbly but confidently on 
his Word of promise. This is a promise where there is much occasion for filial trust- 
fuloesB. When the way is dark we must not yield to an unspiritual anxiety, but rise 
to a holy, childlike faith in our heavenly Father. 

III. A SPHERE FOB DETERMINED LIMITATION. The great and the growing temptation 
is to 611 our lives and hearts with the affairs of time. No more needful or seasonable 
counsel could be given us than this of our Lord, " Take heed to yourselves, lest your 
hearts be overcharged with ... the cares of this life." Undue and unwise carefulness about 
these mundane interests does two evil things : it wean out that which is good — good 
health, good spirits, good temper ; and it shuts out that which is best — for it excludes 
the worship and the direct service of God ; it leaves no time for devout meditation, for 
profitable and instructive reading, for religious exercises, for Christian work. It 
shuts men up to the lesser and lower activities ; it dwarfs their life, it starves their 
soul ; tliey " lose their life itself for the sake of the means of living." Two things are 
requisite, requiring a very firm and vigorous hand. 1, To resist the temptation to 
enlarge our worldly activities when such enlargement means spiritual shriQka°;e, as it 
very often does. 2. To insist upon it that the cares of life shail not exclude daily 
communion with God and the culture of the soul. If we do not exhibit this wise 
care against the unwise carefulness, we shall (1) displease our Divine Lord by our 
disobedience; (2) sacrifice ourselves to our circumstances; (3) be unready for the 
advancing future ; " that day will come upon us unawares," and we shall not be 
" worthy to stand before the Son of man " (see next homily).— -0. 

Ver, 36. — Standing before Christ. " Watch , . . and pray that ye may be accounted 
worthy ... to stand before the Son of man." What ia involved in this worthiness ? 
It must include our being— 

I. Prepared to give accoukt to him. We know that we shall have to do that 
(Rom. xiv. 10 ; 2 Cor. v. 10) ; and we must expect, when we do stand before the 
Judge, to account to Jesus Christ for (1) the relation which we have voluntarily 
sustained to himself — how we have received his invitation, and with what fulness 
we have accepted him as the Itedeemer, the Friend, the Lord of our heart and life ; 
(2) the way in which we have served him since we called ourselves by his Name — 
t.e. how closely we have followed him, how obedient we have been to his command- 
ments, how earnest and faithful we have showed ourselves in his cause; in fact, how 
true and loyal we have proved to be as his servants here. 

II. Conformed to his likeness. Will not our Lord expect to find those who pro- 
fessed to be his disciples, who had access to so many and such great privileges, stand 
before him luch as he lived and died to make them t We know what that is. " He 
gave himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity ; " he has " called us to holiness ; " 
he came and wrought his work in order that he might make us to be in our spirit ana 
character the children of God, bearing our heavenly Father's image. He will there- 
fore look to those who stand before him as his redeemed ones for : 1. Purity of heart ; 
the abhorrence of all that is evil, and love for that which is good and true and pure. 
2. A loving spirit ; a spirit of unselfishness, of devotedness, of generosity, of tender 
solicitude for the well-being of others. 3. Reverence and consecration of heart to God, 

III. Ebady fob the heavenly SPHERE. To " Stand before " the king meant to be 
ready to fulfil his royal behest, prepared to do at once and to do effectively whatever 
he might require. To stand before our Divine Sovereign means to be ready to do his 
bidding, to execute his commandments as he shall employ us in his heavenly service. 
We naturally and rightly hope that he will entrust us with the most honourable 
errands, will appoint us to elevated posts, will charge us with noble occupations that 
will demand enlarged ability and that will contribute great things to his cause and 
kingdom. We may be sure that the devoted and faithful disonarge of our duties here 
will prove the best preparation for celestial activity and usefulness. He that is faithful 
in a few things now will be made ruler over many things hereafter. He who puts out 

I.UEE. — n. 



19i THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LtKE. [oh. xxi. 1— 38, 

his talents here will be found worthy to stand before the King, and to be employed by 
Lim in broad and blessed spheres of service there. If we would be " accounted worthy 
to do this, we must " watch and pray." 1. We must spend much time with God — in the 
study of his will and in supplication for the quickening influences of his Spirit. 2. We 
must often examine our own hearts, observing our progress or retrogression, ready for 
the act of penitence, or of praise, or of reconsecration as we find ourselves declining. 
We must also observe the forces that are around us, and distinguish carefully between 
the hostile and the frieudly, between those which make for folly and for sin and those 
which lead up to wisdom and- to righteousness. — C. 

Vers. 6 — 38. — Preliminaries of the second advent. It would seem that, S8 an 
interlude amid his diligent teaching in Jerusalem, Jesus and the disciples, on their way 
back to Bethany, had paused on the Mount of Olives and contemplated the temple. 
The building was a superb one, and so well put tosether that the disciples and people 
generally believed it would last till doomsday. Hence, amid their admiration for the 
gorgeous pile, came their question about the end of the world, which would, they 
believed, synchronize with that of the temple. Now, our Lord, while prophesying its 
destruction, warns them not to be mistaken about times and signs. 

I. GuB Lord warns the disciples against false alarms. (Vers. 7 — ^9.) He 
indicates that many false Messiahs will arise, declaring their Messiahship and the speedy 
approach of the end. They are to be for the most part of the military type, for this 
was the kind of Messiah Israel wanted. The result will of necessity be " wars and 
tumults." But the disciples ought not to be alarmed at these mere preliminaries. The 
end would not be " immediately " (Revised Version). It is well known that between 
our Lord's time and the destruction of Jerusalem quite a number of military and 
mushroom Messiahs arose, " making confusion worse confounded." They were only 
the outcome of the people's false hopes, and of no prophetic import 

II. The disciples, as their Lord's witnesses, would experience both persecd- 
TioNS AND inspirations. (Vers. 10—19.) And here the Lord states that persecution of 
his people would precede national and natural troubles. War, earthquake, and pesti lence 
would be the providential judgment upon unrighteous persecution. But the persecuted 
witnesses should receive the inspiration needful to speak resistlessly. They might be 
betrayed and martj'red, but no real injury would overtake them. " There shall not 
an hair of your head perish." In this remarkable deliverance of our Lord about ptrse- 
cution lie implies that his people are really imperishable. The world might do iis best 
to annihilate them by fire and sword ; their bones might be scattered, no marble tells 
whither; but the Lord who loves and prizes his people's dust will reorganize the 
scattered remains, and demonstrate how absolutely imperishable his people are. Hence 
he urges patience. "In your patience," he declares, "ye shall win your souls." So 
that it was a most wonderful preparation of these marked men for martyrdom and all 
preceding tribulation. Were we more dependent on Divine inspirations, we should be 
more calm and influential before a hostile world. 

III. The destbdction op Jerusalem is distinctly foretold as an instance 
OF DESERVED VENGEANCE. (Vers. 20 — 24.) And here the Lord gives his people 
directions to escape from the doomed city as soon as they should see the armies gather- 
ing round it. The siege was drawn upon it by no misconduct of theirs, but by the 
misconduct of their enemies : why, therefore, shouM the Christians lay down their lives 
for a false policy and cause? Their duty was, if possible, to escape. He also hints at 
the horrors of the siege, and how mothers with their infant children would suff'er 
terribly. The issue of the investment would be the slaughter of multitudes and the 
exile of the rest. The Jews became wanderers and exiles from that momeut. 

" Tribes of the wandering foot and wesry breast, 
liow sliiill ye Heo away aud be at rest I 
The wild duve hath her nest, the fcix his cave. 
Mankind their country — Israel but the grave 1 " 

IV. RlTDEMPTIOK MAT BE DISCERNED AB DRAWING NIGH. (Vers. 25 — 33.) Ovif 

T.ord indicates that distress of nations, perplexity, and faint-heartediiess through fear 



OH. xxn. 1— 71,] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. 



195 



frill precede his second coming;. But his people need be no sharers in this fear. So far 
from this, as soon as the judgment-signs begin they are to lift up their hends, assured 
that redemption is drawing nigh. The outlook may be wintry for the world, but it is 
summer for the saints of God. And here we may notice : 1. The parable of the spring 
trees. (Vers. 29, 30.) Our Lord reminds the disciples that every spring, in the buds 
and shoots of the vaiious trees there is the promise of the sumiuer. The progress is 
gradual, yet noticeable. In the same way his people are to look for the signs of coming 
summer, and to manifest a hopeful spirit in beautiful contrast to the despairing spirit of 
the world. 2. 2%e imperishable character of the Christian stock. (Vers. 31 — 33.) All 
the world's opposition and persecution will not annihilate the Christian stock. As the 
martyrs fall before their persecutors, it is only to summon fresh witnesses for the 
Master from the ranks of their enemies. The Christian stock abidea. There need be 
no fear. Let this be left to the unbelieving world. 

V. The Lobd's PEOPiiE ooght consequently to be watching and pratino fob 
THE ADVENT. (Vers. 34 — 38.) And in the conclusion of this discourse our Lord 
clearly indicates : 1. That it is possible to escape the judgments which are coming on the 
earth be/ore the advent. For there is no merit in allowing one's self to be involved in 
judgments which others by their unbelief have invited. It is our duty to escape, if 
possible, the catastrophe. 2. It can only be by a watchful and prayerful spirit. Stlt- 
indulgence, everything that woidd dull our sense of the impending advent, must be 
•voided. It is to come as a thief and a snare upon those that dwell on the face uf the 
whole earth. Hence the imperative necessity of watching. And it is prayer which 
will help us in our watching. We must wrestle with the coming King, that he may 
count us worthy to escape the world's judgments and to stand before him. 3. How 
great a privilege it will be to be permitted to stand in the presence of the Son of man 1 
No such privilege is afforded even by the greatest of eaithly kings. It becomes us, 
therefore, to be in downright earnest about this privilege, and by persevering prayer to 
secure it. 

VI. OOB liOKD GAVE THE DISCIPLES THE EXAMPLE OP THE WATCHFUL PBATER 

BEQUIBED. (Vers. 37, 38.) For it would seem that, in the closing days, the people 
came so early to the temple to be taught, that he could not go a-i far as Bethany to 
spend the night. He went out, thejefore, at nightfall to the Mount of Olives, and 
spent the night-watches more in prayer than in sleep. He was showing what persever- 
ing prayer in the crises of history must be. Let our Lord's Gethsemane liabits call 
each of us to privacy and patient prayer such as will alone secure the proper public 
■pirit.— fi. M. E. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXIL 



Ver. 1— ch. xxiii. 56. — The Last Pass- 
over. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Short explanatory introduc- 
tion. 

Ver. 1. — Now the Feast of T7nleavened 
Bread drew nigh, wUch is called the Pass- 
over. These words show that many of the 
readers for whom tliis Gospel was intended 
weie foreigners, who were unacquainted 
with Jewish terms such as the " Pass- 
over." Paisover (ri irairx«, HDD) means, 
literally, " a passing." The feast so named 
commemorated the manner in which the 
chosen people were spared in Egypt when 
the destroying angel of the Lord passed 
over all Israelitish bouses, which had been 
■prinkled with the blood of the lamb, with- 
out slaying the firstborn. Dr. Farrar sug- 
gests that the Greek word wairxa i» > 



transliteration, with a sort of alliterative 
allusion to the Greek ird<rx!», "I suflfer." 
This greatest and most important of the 
Jewish feasts, which ever brouglit a great 
host of pilgrims to Jerusalem, was kept in 
the first mnuth of tlie Jewish year (Nisan), 
from the 15th of the month, the day of full 
moon, to the 2lBt. Roughly, this corre- 
sponded to the eud of our Manh. 

Ver. 2. — And the chief priests and scrihes 
sought how they might kill him ; for they 
feared the people. I'he determination, long 
maturing, liad, during the last few days of 
public teaching, been come to on the part 
of the Sanhedrin. They had determined to 
pnt the dangerous public Teaclier to death. 
The bitter hatred on tiie part of the Jewish 
rulers had been gradually growing in in- 
tensity during the two years and a half of 
the public ministry of Jesus of Nazareth. 
Thb laiBLug uf Lazarus seems to have finally 



198 



THE GOSPEL AOCOKDINQ TO ST. LUKE. [oii. xxn, 1— 7i- 



deeidnd the governing body with as little 
dt'lay as poBeible lo cnrnpass tlic Itelormer'a 
death. The temporary withdrawal of the 
Lord alter the great miracle def' rred tlieir 
purpose for a 8i ason ; after, liowever, a re- 
tirement for a few weeks, Jesus appeared 
again, shortly before the Passover, and 
taught publicly in the temple, at a season 
when Jerusalem was crowded with pilgrims 
arriving for the great feast. Never had his 
teai-hing excited such interest, never had 
it stirred up such burnin;; opposition as at 
this juncture. This decided the Jewish 
rulers to carry out their design on the life 
of the Galilsean Teacher with as little delay 
as possible. The only thing that per- 
plexed them was how this could safely be 
Bccomplished, owing to the favour in which 
he was held by the people, especially by 
the crowds of pilgrims from the provinces 
then in Jerusalem. 

Vers. 3 — 6. — Judas Iseariot betrayi hit 
Master. Then entered Satan into Judas 
Bumamed Iseariot, being of the number of 
the twelve. And he went his way, and 
communed with the chief priests and captains, 
how he might betray him unto them. And 
they were glad. This was their chance. 
In the very heart of the Galilaean Teacher's 
own company a traitor showed himself, oue 
who knew well the plana of his Master, 
With his help the Sanhedrin and the 
priestly party would be enabled to effect 
the arrest privately. They then must trust 
to Itoman jealousy to help them to carry out 
their evil design. The expression, " Then 
entered Satan into Judas," is a strong one, 
and definitely shows that, in the opinion of 
these inspired compilers of the Gospels, there 
was a person who bore rule over the powers 
of evil. The character and history of the 
faithless friend of Jesus is mournfully in- 
teresting. For one to whom such splendid 
chances were offered to fall so low, is an 
awful mystery. It is clear that the be- 
trayal was no sudden impulse. He set up 
self as the one object of all his thoughts, 
and followed Jesus because he believed 
that, in following him, he could best serve 
his own interests. His ambition was cruelly 
disappointed by his Master's gradual un- 
folding his views respecting his kingdom, 
which was not to be of this world. Ue was 
still further shocked by the undisguised 
announcement on the part of his Master, 
whose greatness and power Judas recog- 
nized from the first, that he would be re- 
jected by the nation, and even put to death. 
It has been suggested, as an explanation of 
the betrayal, that at the last he seems to have 
fancied that he could force the manifesta- 
tion of Christ's power by placing him in 
the hands of his enemies; out the accept- 
ance of a reward, miserable though it 



was, seems to point to Tulgar greed, and to 
the idea of making friends svith the domi- 
nant party in the state now thai hig 
Muster evidently looked loiward to a violent 
death, as the real motives of the betrayal. 
The queslion has been asked whether 
Christ, in his choice of Judas as one of the 
twelve, read the inmo.~t depths and i^Blles 
of his character. Canon Westcott, in a pro- 
found note on John xiii. l.S, writes "that 
the records of the gospel lead us to believe 
that the Lord had perfect human know- 
ledge realized in a human way, and there- 
fore limited in some sense, and separable 
in consciousness from his perfect Divine 
omniscience. He knew the thoughts of 
men absolutely in their manifold pussi- 
bllities, and yet as man, not in their actual 
future manifestation." These mysteries 
" underlie all religious life, and. indeed, all 
finite life — for finite being includes the 
pi>3sibility of sin and the pnssihiJity of 
fellnwship between the Creator and the 
creature. . . . Thus we may be content to 
have this concrete mystery as an example — 
the most terrible example— of the issues of 
the two fundamental mysteries of human 
existence." 

Vers. 7 — 13. — The disciples Peter and 
John are directed to prepare /or the last 
Passover. 

Ver. 7. — Then came the day of nnleavened 
bread. This was the Thursday, Nisan 13. 
On this afternoon all leaven was carefully 
and scrupulously put away ; hence the 
name. 

Ver. 8. — Go and prepare ns the Passover, 
that we may eat. The three synoptists 
unite in describing this solemn meal, for 
which Peter and John were sent to prepare, 
as the ordinary Paschal Supper, liut, on 
oiimparing the record of the same Supper 
given by St. John, we are irresistihly led to 
a different conclusion ; for we reail that on 
the following day those who led Jesus into 
the Prsetorium went not in themselves, "lest 
they should be defiled ; but that they might 
eat the Passover " (John xviii. 28) ; and again 
it is said of the same day, that " it was the 
preparation of the Passover" (John xix. 
14). So the time of the Supper is de- 
scribed by St. John (xiii. 1) as "before the 
Feast of the Passover." It appears that our 
Lord was crucified on the 14th of Nisan, on 
the very day of the sacrifice of the Paschal 
Lamb, a few hours befure the time of the 
Paschal Supper, and that his own Last 
Supper was eaten the night before, that is, 
twenty-four hours before the general time 
of eating the Passover Supper. The most 
venerable of the Fathers preserved this as 
a sacred tradition. So Justin Martyr : " On 
the day of the Passover ye took him, and 
on the day of the Passover ye crucified him" 



OH. tm. 1—71.] THE GOSfEL ACCOBDINO TO ST. LUKE. 



191 



('Pial. cnm Trypho,' ch. iii.). To the 

Bainu effect write Irenseua (' Adv. Hnor.,' 
iv. 23) and Tertullian ('Adv. Judffios,' 
ch. 8). Clement of Alexandria is mot>t 
definite: "The Lnrd did not eat liis last 
Passover on thu legal day of the Passover, 
bnt on the previcius day, the I3th, and 
Buffered on the day fidlowing, being himself 
tlie Passover" (Frasrraeut from 'Chmn. 
Pusclial.,' p. 14, edit. Dindorf). Hippolytus 
of Portus beiirs similar testimony. The 
question — as to whetlier the fiimnus Last 
Supper was the aituiil Passover Supper, or 
the anticipatory Paschal Feast, wliich we 
believe it to liave lieen — is important ; for 
thns the language of St. Paul (1 Cor. v. 7), 
" Christ our Passover is saorifioud for us," 
Is justified. " The apoatle regarded not the 
Last Supper, but tlie death of Christ, as the 
antitype of the Paschal sacrifice, and the 
correspondence of type and antitype would 
be inonmplute unless the saerifice of the 
Beileemer took place at the time ou which 
Blone that of the Pasehal lamb could 
legally be offered " (Dean Blansel). 

Ver. 9. — And they said unto him. Where 
wilt thou that we prepare? It is probable 
that the disciples, in asking this question, 
concluded that the Passover was to be eaten 
by tLem and their Master at the same time 
with tlie rest of the Jews on the following 
day ; but our Lord gave directions for its 
being eaten the same evening. 

Ver. 10.— And he said unto them, BehoM, 
when ye are entered into the city, there 
shall a man meet you. The name of the 
man who should meet them was omitted — 
purposely, think Theophylact and others, 
lest the place of meeting should be pre- 
maturely known to Judas. Bsaring a pitcher 
of virater. This would be an unu.iual sight 
in an Oriental city, where the water is drawn 
by women. It is probable that the " miin " 
whom the Master forct/)ld John and Peter 
would meet, was tlie master of the house, 
Who, according to the Jewish custom on the 
13th of Nisan, before the etars appeared in the 
heavens, had himself to go to the public 
fountain to draw the water with which the 
unleavened bread for the Passover Feaat 
Was kneaded. 

Vur. 12. — And he shall show you a large 
npper room furnished: there make ready. 
The house which possessed so large an 
upjier chamber must have been one of con- 
siderable size, and evidently belonged to a 
man of some wealth and position, possibly 
to Nicodejuus or Joseph of Aiima'Jiaea. 
That it periiaps belonged to St. Mark's 
fandly has also been suggested. It had 
eviileiilly been pre|iared beforehand for the 
piirjiooe of the feast, in ohe<lience to a pre- 
vious direction of Jesus. "Furnished" (l(rTpa- 
liiyof) applies specially to carpets spread 



over the conches for the reception of gnesti. 
" In this large upper chamber thus pre- 
pared," said tlie I^rd, "make the uecea- 
sary arrangements for the Paschal Supper ; 
procuring and preparing the lamb, the un- 
leavened bread, the herbs, and other cus- 
tomary dishes." It seems probable that 
this " large upper room," evidently belonging 
to a disciple, or at least to one friendly to 
Jesus, was the same room which, in the 
happier hours after the Kesurreetion, wit- 
nessed the appearance of the Risen to the 
eleven, and, later, the descent of the Holy 
Ghost at Pentecost. 

Vers. U— 38.— The Laet Supper. 

Ver. 14. — And when the hour was come, 
he sat down, and the twelve apostles with 
him. The preparation had been made in 
the " large upper room," and the Lord and 
the twelve sat down, or rather reclined on 
the couches covered with carpets, the tables 
before them laid with the dishes peculiar to 
the solemn Passover Supper, each dish 
telling its part of the old loved story of the 
great deliverance. There was the lamb 
the Pasclial victim, and the bitter herbs, the 
unleavened bread and the reddi&h sweet 
conserve of fruits— commemorating, it is y 
said, by its colour the hanl labours of brick- 
making, one of the chief burdens of the 
Egyptian bondage — into which the Master 
dipped the sop, and gave it to the traitor- 
apostle (John xiii. 26). The Lord reclined, 
probably, at the middle table; St. John 
next to him; St. Peter most likely on tlie 
other side ; and the others reclining in an 
order corresponding more or less closely 
with the threefold division of the twelve 
into groups of four. The Supper itself had 
its special forms and ceremonies, which the 
Lord transformed as they proceeded in such 
a way as te change it into the sacred Supper 
of the New Testament 

Ver. 15.— And he said unto them, With 
desire I have desired to eat this Passover 
with yon before I suffer. This peculiar 
expression, " with desire," etc., is evidently 
a reproduction by St. Luke of the Lord's 
very words repeated to him originally in 
Aramaic (Hebrew). They seem to be a 
touching apology or explanation from him 
to his own, for thus anticipating the regular 
Pa^sove^ Supper by twenty-four hours. He 
had been lunging with an intense longing 
to keep this last Passover with them : Firri 
as the dear human Friend who would make 
this his solemn last farewell. (Do not we, 
when we feel the end is coming, long for 
a last communion with our dearest ones?) 
And, lecondly, as the Divine Master who 
would gather up into a final discourse hia 
most important, deepest teaching. We find 
this teaching especially reported by St, John 
in his Gospel (xiiL — xiiL). And thudly. 



198 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LtJKK [oh- xxn. 1— tl. 



as the Founder of a great reh'ginn, he pnr- 
poBed,on this momentous occasion, transform- 
ing the most solemn festal gathering of the 
ancient Jewish people, which commemorated 
their greatest deliverance, into a feast which 
should — as age succeeded age— commemo- 
rate a far greater deliverance, not of the 
old chosvn race only, but of every race under 
heaven, Tliese were three of the reasons 
why lie hail desired so earnestly to eat this 
Passover wltli them. "To-moirow, at the 
usual hour, when the people eat their Pass- 
over, it will be too late for us." This he 
expresses in his own sad words, "before I 
tufer." 

Vers. 16 — 18. — For I say unto yon, I will 
not any more eat thereof, nntil it be fulfilled 
in the kingdom of God. There was yet one 
other reason for the Master's special desiie 
once more to eat the solemn Passover with 
his chosen disciples. He would, by some 
significant action and word, show that the 
great Jewish feast, for so many centuries 
the centra] act of the riiual observances 
under the Mosaic Law, from henceforth 
would be superseded by a new and a yet 
more solemn religious rite. The Jewish 
Passover was to give place to the Christian 
sacrament. He, their Master, would with 
them share in the Passover meal that even- 
ing for the last time. The next time that 
he would partake would be still with them, 
but it would be in the kingdom of God, that 
is to say, in the Church of God, which 
was to be founded after his resurrection. 
The kingdom of God commenced with the 
resurrection of Jesus. The constant cele- 
bration of the Holy Eucharist commenced 
from that time ; it is more than probable 
that our Lord partook of it, after his re- 
surrection, with his own (see ch. xxiv. 30 ; 
Acts X. 41). I will not any more eat thereof, 
nntil ... I will not drink of the fruit of the 
vine, until, etc. These statements, which 
speak of a final partaking (eating ami drink- 
ing), are closely parallel to the command 
contained in vers. 19, 20. The first state- 
ment seems solemnly to close the celeliralion 
of the Pab.^over Feast; the second, to in- 
stitute with equal solemnity a new feast in 
its place — 

" With desire I have defired to eat this 
paesover with you before I suffer" (ver. 15); 
lor — 
The Passover Feast is The Holy Eucharist 

solemnly put an end is solemnly iusti- 

to. tuted. 

"I will not any " he took bread, .. . 
more eai thereof, until and brake it, and 
it be fulHUed in the gave unto them : . . . 
kingdom of God " This do in remem- 
(ver. 161 branoe of me" (ver. 

19). 



" I will not drink " Likewise also th« 
of the fruit of the cup after Supper'* 
vine, until the king- (ver. 20). 
dom of God shall 
come " (ver. 18). 

It was in the course of the great ritual 
Supper on some of the occasions when the 
cup was passed round, and the unleavened 
bread formally broken or dipped in one of 
the Passover dishes, that the Lord found 
his opportunity solemnly to announce the 
formal abrogation of the old Paschal Supper 
and the institution of the new communion 
feast. The above literal interpretation of 
the Lord's mystic words, "until that day 
when I drink it new with you in my Father'* 
kingdom " (Matt. xxvi. 29), or, as St. 
Luke reports them, " I will not drink of 
the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of 
God shall come" — which literal interpre- 
tation in the main is that prefirred by Dean 
Mansel (Commentary on Matt. xxvi. 29); 
see, too, St. Chrysostom in Matt. Horn. 
Ixxii., who adopts the same literal interpre- 
tation — does not exclude a yet deeper and 
more spiritual meaning which lies beneath 
the surface, and which speaks of another 
and spiritual banquet in the heavenly realm, 
which not only the Redeemer, but also his 
redeemed, will partake of. Heaven-life 
under the form of a banquet was imagery 
well known and often painted by the Jewish 
masters in the old rabbinic schools before 
and contemporary with the earthly life of 
Christ. Tlie New Testament writers in 
several places have adopted the similar 
imagery, notably in Matt. viii. 11; oh. 
xxii. 30 ; Rev. xix. 9. How widespread 
and well loved was this Jewish representa- 
tion of the heaven-life under the form of a 
banquet is ole:ir from the three above-quoted 
references taken from SS. Matthew, Pnul 
(Luke), nnd John. 

Vers. 19, 20. — And he took bread, and gave 
thanks, and brake it, and gave unto ti^em, 
saying. This is my body which is given for 
you : this do in remembrance of me. Like- 
wise also the cup after snpper, saying, This 
cup is the new testament in my blood, which 
is shed for you. Around these words, and 
the parallel passages in SS. Matthew and 
Maik, for more than a thousand years fierce 
theological disputes have raged. Men have 
gone gladly to prison and to death rather 
than renounce what they believed to be the 
true inter[iretation. Now, a brief exegitieal 
commentary id not the place to enter .into 
thp-e sad controvi rsies. It will be suffi- 
cient here to indicate some of the lines of 
thought which the prayerful earnest reader 
iniglit wisely follow out soastoattain certain 
just ideas res|jeoting the blessed rite here in- 
stituted — ideas which mav suffice for ft pra^ 



OH. xxn. 1— 71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. 



199 



tical Telisrions life. Now, we possess a DiviTie 
commentary on this sacrament instituted by 
onr Lord. It is noticeable that St. John, 
whose Gospel was the latest or well-nigh 
the latest of the canonical writings of the 
New 'J'estament, when at great length he 
relates the story of the last Passover evening 
and its teaching, does not allude to the 
institution of that famous service, which, 
when he wrote his Gospel, had become part 
of the settled experience of Church life. 
He preeupposet it; for it had passed then 
into the ordinary life of the Church. In 
another and earlier portion of his Gospel, 
however, St. John (vi. 32 — 58) gives us a 
record of the Lord's discourse in the syna- 
goijue of Capernaum, in which Jesus, while 
speaking plainly to those who heard him at 
the time, gave by anticipation a commentary 
on the sacrament which he afterwards in- 
Btituted. The truth which was taught in 
this discourse is presented in a (pecifio act 
and in a concrete form in the Holy Com- 
munion. In the fifty-third verse of that 
sixth chapter we read, " Verily, verily, I say 
unto you. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son 
of man, and drink his blood, ye have no 
life in you." How is this now to be done? 
We reply that our Lord has clothed these 
ideas and brought them near to us in this 
sacrament ; while, by his teaching in the 
sixth cliapter of St. John, he guards this 
sacrament from being regarded on the one 
band as an end in itself, or on the other as 
a mere symbol. Certain truths, great land- 
markt laid down in this discourse, have to be 
borne in mind. (1) The separation of the 
llesli of the Son of man into flesh and blood 
(John vi. 53) presupposes a violent death 
submitted to for the salce of others (John vi. 
51). (2) Both these elements, the flesh and 
the bliiod, are to be appropriated individually 
by tlie believer (John vi. 56). (3) How ap- 
propriated? St. Bernard well answers the 
question which he asks: "What is it to 
eat his flesh and to drink his blood, but 
to share in Ma sufferings and to imitate the 
life he lived when with us in the flesh ? " 
(St. Bernard, on Ps. iii. 3). "If ye suffer 
with liira, ye shall also reign with him." 
The Holy Eucharist is from one point of 
view a great truth dramatized, instituted for 
the purpose of bringing before n: ?n in a 
vivid manner the great truths above »lluded 
to. But it is something more. It I: rings to 
the believer, to the faithful comm inicant, 
to the one who in humble adoring faith car- 
ries out to the best of his ability his Master's 
dying charge — it brings a blessing too great 
for us to measure by earthly language, too 
deep for us to fathom with human inquiry. 
For the partaking of this Holy Communion 
is, first, the Christian's solemn public confes- 
»iou of bis £Eiith in Chxist ciuoiiied; his 



solemn private declaration that it is his 
deliberate wish to suifer with his Lord and 
for his Lord's sake ; that it is, too, his firm 
purpose to imitate the earthly life lived by 
his Lord. The partaking of this Holy 
Communion, too, is the Christian's most 
solemn prayer for strength thus to suffer 
and to live. It is, too, his fervent expression 
of belief that this strength will be surely 
given to him. Further, the partaking of 
this Holy Communion is, above all, tlie 
Cliiistinn's most solemn prayer {oi living 
union with Christ — " that Christ may dwell 
in his heart by faith." It is, too, his fervent 
expression of belief that " then we dwell in 
Christ, and Christ in us ; we are one with 
Christ, and Christ with us." This confession, 
declaration, and prayer he constantly renews 
in obedience to the dying command of his 
Master. It is difBcult to understand liow any 
belief in a physical change in the elements 
of bread and wine, such as is involved in 
the theory of transubstantiation held in the 
Roman Church, or of consubstantiation in 
the Lutheran community, can be supposed 
to enhance the reverence of the communi- 
cant, or to augment the blessing promised. 
The words of the Lord, " This is my body 
. . . my blood," cannot surely be pressed, 
seeing that the same Divine Speaker was in 
his discourses in the habit of using imagery 
which could not literally be pressed, sucb 
as " I am the Bread of life," " I am the Door 
of the sheep," " I am the true Vine," etc. 
Nothing that can be conceived is more 
solemn than tlie simple rite, more awful in 
its grandeur, more Divine and far-reaching 
in its promises to the faithful bilievur. 
Human imaginings add nothing to this Di- 
vine mystery, which is connected at once 
with the Incarnation and the Atonement. 
They only serve to envelop it in a shroud of 
earth-born mist and cloud, and thus to dim 
if not to veil its Divine glory. 

Vers. 21 — 23. — The Lord's sorrowful allu- 
sion to Judas the traitor. 

Ver. 21. — But, behold, the hand of him 
that hetrayeth me is with me on the table. 
This is the second mention of the traitor in 
St. Luke's account of the Last Supper. From 
St. John's recital, we gather that Jesus re- 
turned several times in the course of that 
solemn evening to this sad topic. That one 
of his own little inner circle, so closo'y asso- 
ciated with him, should so basely betray 
him, was evidently a very bitter drop in the 
Lord's cup of suffering. la his dread ex- 
perience of human sorrow it was needful 
that the Christ should fulfil in his owu ex- 
perience what even the noblest of the chl- 
dren of men — David, for instance — had felt 
of the falseness of friends. What suffering 
can be inflicted on a generous heart com- 
parable to it ? Surely he of whom it waj 



200 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. [cu. xJui. 1—71. 



writtrn, " Wliose sorrows are Hire unto my 
eorrows? " mu«t make trial of lids l)itterness. 
Clirysobtnm tUiuks that the Blaster, in 
some of these repeat d allusions durine; the 
•' Slipper," tried to win Judas over to a better 
mind. 

Ver. 22. — Woe unto that man hy whom 
he is betrayed ! We seem to hear a wailing 
in tliis woe, although the <lenunciati')n was 
BO firmly pronounced. St. Matthew, in his 
account, here adds some more words spoken 
by the Master, " It had been good for that 
man if he had not been born." Dean Plump- 
tre, on this saying of (Jhrist, very sugges- 
tively remarks, " Awful as the words were, 
they have their bright as well as their dark 
side. According to the estimate which men 
commonly form, the words are true of all 
except those who depart this life in the 
faith and fear of God. In his applying 
them to the case of the traitor in its excep- 
tional enovmity, there is suggested the 
thought that for others whose guilt was not 
like his, existence even in the penal suffer- 
ing wliich their sins have brought upon 
them may be better than never to have 
been at all." 

Ver. 23. — And they began to inquire 
among themselves, which of them it was 
that should do this thing. That all the dis- 
ciples, on hearing this statement of their 
Master, should at once que.'-tion their own 
hearts with the " Is it I ? " (of St. Matthew's 
Gospel), sliows with what cunning skill the 
arrh-traitor must have concealed not merely 
his plans but his very sentiments. No sus- 
picion on their parts ever seems to have 
fallen on Judas, their companion for so long 
a time. The direct colloquy of the Lord 
with the traitor, reported at length in the 
other Gospels on the occasion of dipping the 
sop into one of the Paschal dishes, was most 
prcjbably carried on in a whisper (see John 
xiii. 20 — 29, where mention is specially made 
of the disciples' ignorance of the dread 
meaning of tiieir Blaster's words to Judas). 

Vers. 24 — 30. — The jealousy among the 
disciples. 

Ver. 24. — And there was also a strife 
among them, which of them should be ac- 
counted the greatest. The Lord's words in 
these verses are peculiar to St. Luke. The 
strife among the disciples which suggested 
the Lord's coirective sayings was evidently 
no mere dispute as to precedence in their 
places at the supper, but some question as 
to their respective positions in the coming 
kingdom of which their Master had said so 
much in the course of his later instructions. 
It is closely connected witli the " feet-wash- 
ing" related at length by St. John (xiii. 4 — 
17). This has been well described as a 
parable in action, exhibited to illustrate 
fozoibly the novel and sublime truth which 



he was teaching thera, the world-teachers of 
the future, thai, in self-sacrifice consisted tlie 
sec.ret of true greatness. In the kingdom of 
heaven this would be found to be conspicu- 
ously the case. 

Ver. 25. — Are called benefactors (depye- 
Toi). Those who were listening knew well 
how utterly false these high-sounding hu- 
man titles often were. ZvepyeTiis (Euer- 
getes), Benefactor, was the well-known title 
apiiropiiated by Ptolemy Euergetes and 
other hated royal tyrauts well kuuwu to the 
Jewish peojile. 

Ver. 28. — Ye are they which have con- 
tinued with me in my temptations. But 
after the gentle rebuke of their jealous am- 
bition, wldch rebuke was veiled in the great 
instruction, their Master, with the ten- 
derest grace, referred to their unswerving 
loyalty to him. Their faithfulness stood out 
at that hour in strong contrast with the con- 
duct of Judas. It is always thus with theil 
Blaster and ours. Every good deed, every 
noble thought, each bit of generosity and 
self-forgetfulness on our part, is at once 
recognized and rewarded a hundredfold not* 
as then, 

Ver. 29.— And I appoint unto yon a king^ 
dom, as my Father hath appointed unto me. 
This promise refers to earth and this life. 
Thiy and their snccesEors in his Church 
would bear sway over men's hearts. Hia 
kingdom would be administered by thera. 
With sirangely literal accuracy has this 
promise been fu Ifilled. From the hour when 
the despised Blaster, already doomed to a 
shameful death, uttered this seemingly im- 
probable prediction, his kingdom over men's 
hearts has been extending. 37>en at most 
the kingdom numbered a lew hundreds ; now 
it can only be reckoned by millions. For 
centuries the story of the civilized world has 
been the story of this kiugdnin. 

Ver. 30. — That ye may eat and drink at 
my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. While 
the words just considered (ver. 29) referred 
to a success and a reward, the scene of 
which was to be this world, the Master now 
continues his promises of reward to his 
chosen faithful followers — a reward which 
will be their blessi d portion in eternal life, 
which will follow this. Firet, the endless 
bliss to be shared with him is pictured 
under the old favourite Jewish image of the 
heavenly banquet; and teeimd, in that 
heavenly realm a special place of honour 
and a distinct work is promised to these 
Lis chosen faithful servants. 

Vers. 31— 38.— T/m! I^rd foretelU Simon 
Petei's fall, lie telh the diaeiplet of the 
hard timet coming on them. 

Ver. 31. — And the Lord said, Simon, 
Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to liar* 



OB. xxn.l— n.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



iOx 



you, that lie may sift you as wheat. The 
majoiity of the more ancient authorities 
omit the worda, "and the LorJ eiiid." 
These words were possibly inserted at an 
early date to obviate the abruptness of this 
su(hlen change in tlie subjcet-malter of the 
Lord's discourse. The more accurate trans- 
lation would be, "Satan obtained you by 
asking that he," etc. Bengel comments 
witli "not content with Judas." This saying 
of Jesus is a very mysterious one; it revt-als 
to us something of what is going on in the 
unseen world. A similar request wns made 
by the same bitter, powerlul Ibe in the case 
of Job (i. 12). Are we to understand that 
these are examples of what is constantly 
going on in that world so close to us, but 
from which no whisper ever reaches our 
.mortal ears? Such grave thoughts lend 
especial inlensity to those words in the 
prayer of prayers, where we ask "our 
Father which is in heaven " to ddiver us 
from evil, or the evil one, as so many of our 
best scholars prefer to translate airh tov 
Toirlipov.i Satan asks that he may test and 
try the apostles. Judas he liad alrciidy 
tempted, and he had won him. Possibly 
this signal victory emboldened him to 
priiffer this request. We may imagine the 
evil one arguing thus before the Eternal : 
■' These chosen ones who are appointed to 
work in the future si> tremendous a work in 
thy Name, are utterly unworthy. 1-et me 
just try to lure them away witli my lures. 
Lc, they wiU surely fall. See, one has 
•Iready." 

Ver. 32. — But I have prayed for thee, that 
thy faith fail not. The prayer of Satan 
apparently was not refused. Jesus, how- 
ever, says, that for one of that loved com- 
pany, who he knew from his peculiar 
temperament was in especial peril, he had 
prayed. The prayer ws:,^ answered thus : 
the temptation came to all the apostles; all 
fell; Peter, though, more disastrously by 
far than his brethren, but the result of the 
full was not hopeless despair as in the ease 
of Judas, but bitter remorse and a brave 
manly repentance. "It is said by Roman 
divines (e.g. Maldonatus, & Lapide, and Mai, 
here) that this prayer and precept of our 
Lord extends to all bishops of Rome us St. 
Peter's successors, and that in speaking to 
St. Peter our Lord spoke to them. Would 
they be willing to complete the parallel, 
and siiy that the bishops of Rome specially 
need prayer, because they deny Christ? Let 
them not take a part of it and leave the 
rest" (Bishop Wordsworth). When thou 
art converted. "Converted" must not be 
understood here in its technical sense; it 
■hould rather be tninslated, "And thou, 
when thou hast turned (t.e. to Oud) 
■trengthea thy biethien." 



Ver. 8.3. — And he said nnto him, lord, I 
am ready to go with thee, both into prison, 
and to death. This kind of eonfiilent 
enthusiasm is usually a sign of weakness. 
Jesus, the Heart-reader, knew too well what 
sucli a wild piotestation was worth, and 
wer)t on at once to ])redict his friend's and 
servant's awful fall, that very night. 

Vers. 35, 8(j. — And he said unto them, 
When I sent yon without parse, and scrip, 
and shoes, lacked ye anything 1 And they 
said, Nothing. Then said he unto them, But 
now, he that hath a purse, let him take it, 
and likewise his scrip ; and he that hath no 
sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one. 
The Lord speaks one more word to his own 
before leaving the upper room. More oeeu- 
pied with the future tri»ls of his ili.'-ei)iles 
than with his own tragic destiny, which he 
knew was about to be fultillcd, he reminds 
his friends of the comparatively quiet and 
serene existence they had been spr niling 
during the last two years and a half with 
him. In that period, generally speaking, 
they had been weleoineil and kindly enter- 
tained by the people, sometimes, they would 
remember, oven with enthnsiasm. Put they 
must prepare now for a dill'erent life — cold 
looks, opposition, even bitter perseeution, 
would be their lot for the future. They 
must order themselves now to meet these 
things. No onliiiary prudent forethought 
must be omitted by them. lie hwl more 
than hinted that this future lay before tliem 
in his words, "Behold, I send you forth as 
lambs in thn midst of wolves;" now he 
plainly tells them what kind of life awaited 
them in the iuimediato future. Of rourse, 
the advice as to the swnrd was not mi-ant 
to be taken liteially. It was one of those 
metaphors the Lord used so often in hii 
teaching. For a similar metaphor stiU 
more elaborately developed, see Kph. vi. 17, 
and following verses. 

Ver. 37. — For I say nnto you, that this 
that is written must yet be accomplished in 
me. And he was reckoned among the trans- 
gressors. Here he shows them what he 
meant. They, as disciples of One treated 
as a malefactor, had suiely nothiiig to ex- 
pect but hatred and jiersecution. 'otier re- 
marks that this is the first time that the 
Lord himself directs ua to the fifty-third 
chapter of Isaiah/that moot pre-eminent 
and Complete text of the Passion. For the 
things concerning me have an end. 1'he 
tragic end of his earthly ministry is close at 
band. The prophetic description of the 
sulicring Servant of the Lord will soon be 
found to have been terribly accurate. 

Ver. 38. — And they said, Lord, behold, 
here are two swords. And he said onto 
them, It is enough. As so often, the dis- 
ciples took their Maatei'a words witk ourioiu 



£02 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 8T. LUKE, [oh. xxn. 1— Tt 



Mteralness, and, as a reply, produced two 
swords, aa if these two poor weapons could 
help them in the coming times of sore need. 
If they were to stand firm in the long trial- 
season which lay before them, they must 
surely provide themselves with very differ- 
ent weapons to these; their arms in the 
campaign of the future must he forged in 
no earthly workshop. But our Lord sadly 
deoUneil then to enter into further explana- 
tion His meaning would be all clear to 
them soon, so he closed the dialogue with 
the words, " It is enough." Tiiis veise was 
curiously perverted in the famous Bull of 
Pope Boniface VIII., "Unara saiiotam," to 
prove his possession of both secular and 
spiritual power : " Uicentibus apostolis, ecce 
glndiiduo, iu Ecclesia scilicet, quutp apostoli 
loquerentiir, nou respondit Domiuus nimia 
tise, sed satis. . . . Uterqueergoinpotestate 
est Kccleaiie, epirltualis scilicet gladius et 
uaterialis." 

Vers. 39 — 16. — The agony in the garden. 
This eventful scene is recounted in detail 
by all the three synoptists. St. Matthew's 
account is the most complete. St. Mark 
•dds one saying of the Lord's containing a 
dvep theological truth, " Abba, Father, all 
things are possible unto thee." These re- 
markable words, occurring as they do in the 
midst of the most solemn scene of prayer in 
the Redeemer's earth-life, tell of the vast 
possibilities of prayer. What may not be 
Accomplished by earnest supplication to the 
throne of grace ? 

St. Luke's account is the shortest, but it 
contains the story of the angelic mission 
ef help, and the additional detail of the 
** bloody sweat." 

Bt. John alone of the fonr omits the scene ; 
but, as in other most important recitals 
where he refrains from repeating the story 
Cf things thoroughly known in his Master's 
Church at the period when he committed 
bis Gospel to writing, he takes care, how- 
ever, often to record some hitherto unre- 
corded piece of the Lord's teaching, which 
is calculated to throw new light upon the 
momentous twice and thrice told incident, 
the story of which he does not deem it 
necessary to repeat. So in ch. ii. he throws 
a flood of liglit upon Christian baptism. 
Ch. vi. is a Divine commentary on the Holy 
Eucharist. While in ch. xii. 23—28 he 
gives us, in his Mnster's words, a new in- 
sight into that awful sorrow which was the 
source of the agony in Gethsemane. 



Canon Westcott snggests that the sncces- 
sion of the main events recorded by the fiiui 
evangelists was as follows : — 
Approx. time. 

1 a.m The agony. 

The betrayaL 

The conveyance to the high 
priest's house, probably ad- 
joining "the Booths of 
Hanan." 

2 a.m........ .The preliminary examinatfon 

before Annas in the pre- 
sence of Caiaphas. 

About3a.iD...The examination before Caia- 
phas and the Sanhedrin at 
an irregular meeting at 
"the Booths." 

Abont5ajn...The formal sentence of the 
Sanhedrin in their own 
proper place of meeting — 
Gazith or Beth Midrash 
(ch. xxii. 66 ; Matt. xxviL 
1, npcaias yevofieiftjs ', comp. 
Mark XT. 1 ; ch. xxii. 66, 
&s 4yivero rjfi^pa.). 
The first examination before 
Pikte at tlie palace. 
S.SO a.iD....The examination before Herod. 
The scourging and first mock- 
ery by the soldiers at the 
palace. 
6.30 a.m. ...The sentence of Pilate (John 

Xix. 14, 5ipa^vuis eKTTj). 

7 a.m....,„..The second mockery of the 

condemned " King " by the 

soldiers. 
9 a.m ...The Crucifixion, and rejection 

of the stupefying draug it 

(Mark xv. 25, ^v Spo TpiTTj). 

12 noon The last charge. 

12 — 3p.m...The darkness (Matt, xxvii. 

45 ; Mark xv. 33 ; oh. xxili. 

44, iSc i)<ri\ Sipa, Ikti) . . . tut 

Upas ivvirtis). 
Sp.m The end. 

Ver. 39. — And he came out, and went, u 
he was wont, to the Mount of Olives. In 
the other evangelists we find the place on 
the Mount of Olives described as Gotli- 
semane. The word Gethsemane signifieg 
" oil-press." It was a garden ; one of the 
many charming gardens which Josephus 
tells us old Jerusalem abounded with. It 
psrhaps belonged to a friend of Christ, or 
else was with others of these gardens, or 
"paradises," thrown open at the great 
festival seasons to the faithful pilgrims who 
on these occasions crowded the holy city 
and its suburbs. There is at the present day 
just beyond the brook Kedron, between the 
paths that go up to tlie summit of the 
mount, about three quarters of a mile from 
the Jerusalem wall, an euolosed garden 



oa. XXII. 1—71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDiNO TO ST. ttJKfi. 



26$ 



called Gethsemane. It belongs to the 
Latin community in Jerusalem. In it are 
eipfht very ancient olive trees. When 
Henry Maundrell visited the spot, in 1697 , 
these eight aged trees were believed to be 
the same that stood there in the blessed 
Saviour's time. Bove the botanist, in 
Ritter's 'Geography of Palestine," vol. iv., 
quoted by Dean Mansel, says tliese vener- 
able olive trees are two thousand years old. 
Josephus, however, relates that in the great 
siege the soldiers of Titus cut down all 
the trees in the Jerusalem suburbs. Even if 
this be assumed, these soldiers, from some 
feeling of awe stirred up by the tradition 
which hung, of course, round this hallowed 
spot, might have spared this little sacred 
grove ; or they might at the time have been 
still young saplings, of no use for the pur- 
pose of the siege operations. " In spite of 
all the doubts that can be raised against 
their antiquity, the eight aged olive trees, 
if only by their manifest difference from all 
others on the mountain, have always struck 
even the most indifferent observers. They 
will remain, so long as their already pro- 
tracted lil'e is spared, the most venerable of 
their race on the surface of the earth. Their 
gnarled trunks and scanty foliage will 
always be regarded as the most affecting of 
the sacred memorials in or about Jerusalem 
— the most nearly approaching to the ever- 
lasting hills themselves in the force with 
which they carry us back to the events of 
the gospel history " (Dean Stanley, ' Sinai 
and Palestine,' p. 455). 

Ver. 40. — Pray that ye enter not into 
temptation. The temptation in question 
was tlie grave sin of moral cowardice into 
which ao soon the disciples fell. Had tliey 
prayed instead of yielding to the overpower- 
ing sense of weariness and sleeping, they 
would never have forsaken their Master in 
his hour of trial and danger. 

Ver. 42. — Saying, Father, if thou he 
willing, remove this cap from me : never- 
theless not my will, but thine, be done. 
The three synoptists give this prayer in 
slightly varying terms ; " hut the figure of 
the cup is common to all the three ; it was 
indelibly impressed on tradition. This cup, 
which Jesus entreats God to cause to pass 
from before (irapa) his lips, is the symbol 
of that terrible punishment, the dreadful 
and mournful picture of which is traced 
before him at this moment by a skilful 
painter with extraordinary vividness. The 
painter is the same who in the wilderness, 
using a like illusion, passed before his view 
the magical scene nf the glories belonging 
to the Messianic kingdom" (Godet). 1/ 
tnjtt bt willing. He looked on in this 
supreme hour, just before "the Passion" 
really began, to the Crucifixion and all the 



horrors which preceded It and accompanied 
it — to the tri ason of Judas; the denial of 
Peter; the desertion of the apostles; the 
cruel, relentless enmity of the priests and 
rulers; the heartless abandonment of the 
people; the insults; the scourging; and 
then the shameful and agonizing linger- 
ing death which was to close the Passion 
and, more dreadful than all, the reason why 
he was here in Gethsemane ; why he was 
to drink this dreadful cup of suffering; the 
memory of all the sin of man I To drink 
this cup of ^ suffering, measureless, incon- 
ceivable, the Redeemer for a moment shrank 
back, and asked the Father if the cross was 
the only means of gaining the glorious end 
in view — the saving the souls of unnumbered 
millions. Could not God in his unlimited 
power find another way of reconciliation? 
And yet beneath this awful agonv, Iho in- 
tensity of which we are utterly incapable of 
grasping — beneath it there lay the intensest 
desire that his Father's wish and will should 
be done. That wish and will were in reality 
his own. The prayer was made and answered. 
It was not the Father's will that the cup 
should pass away, and the Son's will was 
entirely the same; it was answered by the 
gift of strength — strength from heaven being 
given to eriable the Son to drink the cup 
of agony to its dregs. How this strength 
was given St. Luke relates in the next 
verse. 

Ver. 43. — And there appeared an angel 
nnto him from heaven, strengthening him. 
The Lord's words reported by St. Matthew 
were no mere figure of rhetoric. " My soul 
is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." 
The anguish and hoiror were so great that 
he himself, according to his humanity, must 
have before the time become the victim of 
death had he not been specially strengthened 
from above. This is the deep significance 
and necessity of the angel's appearance. 
So Stier and Godet, the latter of whom 
writes, " As when in the wilderness under 
the pressure of famine he felt himself 
dying, the presence of this heavenly being 
sends a vivifying breath over him, — a Di- 
vine refreshing pervades him, body and sold, 
and it is thus he receives strength to con- 
tinue to the last the struggle." 

Ver. 44. — And his sweat was as it were 
great drops of blood falling down to the 
ground. Some (for instance, Theophylact) 
understand this " as it were " to signify 
that the expression, " drops of blood," was 
simply parabolic; but it is far better to 
understand the words in their literul sense, 
as our Church does when it piays, "Hy 
thine agony and bloody sweat." Atlianasius 
even goes so far as to pronounce a ban upon 
those who deny this sweat of blood. Com- 
mentators give instances of this blood-sweat 



m 



THE GOSPEL ACCOllMNO tO St. Lt*E. (tm. Xxn. 1— ?1 



nnder abnormnl pathological clrcumstanoes. 
Some, tliougli by no means all, of the olileat 
authorities omit these last two verses (43, 
44). Tlieir omission in many of these 
ancient minusoripts was probably due to 
mistaken reverenue. Tlio two oldest and 
most aulhoritative translations, the Itula 
(Latin) and Peshito (Syriac), contain them, 
however, as do the most important Fathers 
of the second century, Justin and Irensaus. 
We have, then, apart from the evidence of 
manuscripts, the testimony of the earliest 
Christiiiiiity in Italy and Syria, Asia Minor 
and Gaul, to the genuineness of these two 
famous verses. Tliey are printed in the ordi- 
nary text of the Eevised English Version, 
with a side-note allu<ling to their absence 
in some of the ancient authorities. 

Vers. 45, 46. — He found them sleeping for 
sorrow, and said unto them, Why sleep ye t 
rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. 
The events of the past evening; the long 
excitement stirred up by listening to such 
words as their Master had been speaking to 
them during the sad hours of the Last 
Supper; the sure consciousness of coming 
sorrow ; tlien the walk through the silent 
city: — all predisposed them to sleep. Com- 
mentators are never weary with pressing 
tlipse excuses for the slumber of the eleven 
at that awful moment. But all these things, 
tliough they may well have predisposed 
them ti slumber, are not sufficient to ac- 
count for that strange heavy sleep which 
seems to have paralyzed the eleven in Geth- 
seniane. In spite of thrir Master's solemn 
injunction to watch and pray, he finds 
them, several times during that dreadlul 
watch of his in the garden, asleep, in spite 
of his asking them for sympathy and prayer, 
in spite of his evident longing for their 
sympatliy — each time he cast his eyes on 
them, he sees them, not watching, but sleep- 
ing I Many a time in their work-filled lives 
those fishermen ho loved so well, John and 
Peter and Andrew, had toiled all niglit with 
their nets ; but on this night of sorrow, when 
their pleading voices were listened for, 
possibly their hand-press waited for, their 
sileut sympathy certainly longed for, they 
slept, seemingly forgetful of all save their 
own ease and comfort. Surely on this night 
of temptation they were influenced by some 
invisible power, who lulled them to sleep 
during those precious moments when they 
should have been agonizing with their 
Master in prayer, and so arming themselves 
agaiubt the supreme mumeut of temptation 
just coming upon them. But swayed by 
the power of evil of whom tlie Lord had 
been warning tliem, but in vain, tliey let 
the moments slip by, and the hour of temp- 
tation came on them unawares. We know 
how ghevously they all felL 



" ' Forsake the Christ thou sawest tranS" 

fi;{ured I liim 
Who trod the sea and brought the dead 

to life? 
What should wring this from Ihee?' — y« 

laugh and ask. 
What wrung it 'I Even a torchlight and a 

noise. 
The sudden Boman faces, violent hands, 
And fear of what the Jews might dot 

Just that; 
And it is written, ' I forsook and fled : ' 
There was my trial, and it ended thus." 
(Browning, ■ A Death in the Desert.') 

Vers. 47 — 53. — The arreii of the Eedeemer. 
All the four evangelists tell the story of the 
last hours, in the main the same, though 
the language is often quite difierent. and 
fresh and important details appear in each 
memoir. 

The general effect on the thoughtful 
reader is that the Crucifixion and the events 
leading up to it were very far from being 
the result of the counsels of the Jewish 
leaders, the outcome of their relentless 
enmity. The death and all the attemlant 
circumstances took place in their solemn 
order, then, when the public teaching of the 
Bedeemer was finished, because it had been 
determined by some higher and grander 
power than was possessed by Jerusalem 
Banhedrin or Roman Senate. 

So St. Matthew, in his aoconnt, twice 
(xxvi. 54, 56) gives the ground for the 
arrest, " That the Scriptures might be ful- 
filled." And the Scriptures were bat the 
echoes of that other and grander power. 

Ver. 47. — And while he yet spake, behold 
a multitude. Different to his disciples, their 
Master, who had prayed and received as an 
answer to his prayer the angel's visit, was 
now, when the hour of murtal danger struck, 
in possession of the profuundest calm. No- 
thing disturbed his serenity any more. With 
calm majesty he advanced to meet the traitor 
as he guided his Master's deadly enemies 
into the garden. From this hour Jesus 
welcomes the cross, from which for a brief 
moment he had seemed to shrink. The com- 
pany who was thus guided to Gethsemane 
to effect the arrest in the dead of the night 
was composed of Roman legionaries de- 
tailed for this duty from a cohort on guard 
iu the Antonia Fort by the temple, ami of 
Levitical guards belonging to the temple — 
an armed force of police, part of the temple 
watch at the disposal of the priests. Ht 
that was oalled Judaa, oue of the twelva. 



OH. xxn. 1— 71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 



20S 



Each of the evansrelists mention the presence 
of the triiitor. It was evidently a strange 
and startling detail for tlie writers of tliese 
memoirs tliat one of the cliosen twelve should 
have been the betrayer I And drew near 
onto Jesus to kiss him. This was tlie dgn 
agreed upon between Judiis and his em- 
ployers. They knew that it would be night, 
and that Gethsemune was sliaded with 
olives, and that therefore some conspicuous 
sign would be necessary to iudiciite to the 
guards which of the company of twelve was 
the iMa^t^T whom tliey were to adze. But 
the signal was Bujierfluous, for, as St. John 
telld us, Jtsus of Ilia own accord advanced 
before the otijers, telling thi>so who came for 
him who he was. Because of this kiss 
the early Chri.-tian Church discontinued the 
oustiimiiry brotherly kiss on Good Friday. 

Ver. 50. — And one of them smote the 
servant of the high priest, and cut off his 
right ear. The name of the disciple who 
smote tlie servant of the higli priest is given 
by St. John : it was Peter. He gives, too, 
the servant's name, Malclius. John wrote 
many years later, when Jerusalem had long 
ceased to exist ; Peter, too, had passed away. 
Befiiro this ineident, St. John relates how 
the lloman and Jewish guards " went back- 
ward, and fell to the ground." What 
overawed the party of ariued men is un- 
certain — whether some supernatural or 
merely a natural cause ; possibly something 
of majesty in the Lord's appearance im- 
pelled these men to retire and reverently to 
salute him they were ordered to seize. St. 
John mentions this to show that it was of 
his own free will that he rendered him- 
self up. 

Ver. 51. — Suffer ye thus far. The exact 
meaning of these words has been much 
debated. They probably were addressed to 
the company of armed men, and contained a 
plea for the mistaken zeal of his disciple 
Peter. "Exeuse this resistance." And he 
touched his ear, and healed him. This 
miraculous cure of the wound inflicted 
by the zealous disciple is related by the 
physician Luke. 

Ver. 63. — When I was daily with yon in 
the temple, ye stretched forth no hands 
against me : but this is your hour, and the 
power of darkness. These words of the 
Lord may signify, " It was from a cowardly 
fear of the people whom you felt were my 
friends that you did not dare to arrest me 
in the full light of day." But it is better 
to take the last clause as possessing a deeper 
meaning : " I have often been in your 
power before, when, without concealment, I 
taught publicly in that sacred house where 
you are the appointed guardians ; you never 
dared to lay hands on me then. But this, I 
knoWj it your hour, the moment God has 



given up to you to effect this sad triumph, 
and this (i.e. the power by which you work) 
is the power of darkness (i.e. the power of 
the spirit of darkness)." 

Vers. 5i — U2. — The denial of Peter. 
Ver. 54.— Then took they him, and led 
him, and brousfht him into the high priest's 
house. And Peter followed afar off. There 
has been some discussion here on the ques- 
tion of harmonizing the separate accounts. 
There is, however, no real difficulty if the 
fcllowuig hiotoiical details be borne in 
mind. The actual high priest at this junc- 
ture wasCaiaphas, son-in-law to Annas, who 
was the legal high priest, but had been 
deposed by the Roman power some time 
before. Annas, however, although prevented 
by the Enman government Irum bearing 
the high priestly insignia, was apparently 
looked upcin by the people as the rightful 
possessor of the dignity, and evidently ex- 
ercised the chief authority in the Jewish 
councils. It seems that he and his son-in- 
law Caiaphas, the Roman nominee, occupied 
together the high priest's palace. Tliere 
were three trials of our Lord by the Jews : 
(1) Before Annas (John xviii. 12—18). (2) 
Before Caiaphas and what has been termed 
a committee of the Sanhedrin (John xviii. 
24 ; Matt. xxvi. 59— 6S ; Mark xiv. 55—65). 
(3) Formally before the whole Sanhedrin at 
dawn (ch. xxii. 66 — 71; Matt, xxvii. 1; 
Mark xv. 1). The thrice-repeated denial of 
Peter took place: (1) On his first going in 
(he was admitted through the iniluence of 
John, who was known to the officials) to 
the court-yard of the higli priest's palace, in 
anbwer to the female servant who kept the 
door (John xviii. 17). (2) As he sat by the 
fire warming himself, in answer to another 
maid (Matt. xxvi. 69) and to other by- 
standers (John xviii. 25; ch. xxii. 58), in- 
cluiling the kinsman of Malchus (John 
xviii. 26). (3) About an hour later (ch. 
xxii. 59), after he had lelt the fire to avoid 
the questioners, and had gone out into the 
porch or gateway leading into the com t-yard, 
in answer to one of the maids who had 
spoken before (Mark xiv. 69 ; Matt. xvi. 71), 
and to other bystanders (ch. xxii. 59 ; Matt. 
xxvi. 73 ; Mark xiv. 70). 

Ver. 55. — And when they had kindled a 
fire in the midst of the hall, and were set 
down together, Peter sat down among them. 
We know that the arrest in Gethsemane 
was followed by the flight of the eleven 
apostles. John and Peter, however, once 
out of reach of the armed band, seem in 
some way to have recovered from tlieir first 
panic, and to have followed their Master 
and his guards into the city. Arrived at 
the high priest's house, John, who wa» 
known to the high priest, had no difficulty 
in procuring admission for himself and his 



MB 



THE GOSPBr. AOCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxn. 1—71. 



companion. Peter's motive in pressing into 
what he knew for him was a locality full of 
peril, is given by St. Matthew (xxvi. 58), 
"to see the end." There was no doubt 
there was in the heart of the impulsive, 
loving man, sorrowful anxiety and deep 
sorrow for his dear Master's fate. But, alas I 
with the feverish sad expectation to see 
what he felt would be the end, there was no 
earnest prayer for guidance and help. The 
fire is mentioned because, generally speak- 
ing, the nights in the Holy Land about the 
Passover season are warm. The cold on 
this night appears to be spoken of as some- 
thing unusual. Peter sat doim among them. 
" St. Jolin (it must be supposed) had passed 
on into the audience-chamber, so that St. 
Petor was alone. St. John, who remained 
closest to the Lord, was unmolested; St. 
Peter, who mingled with the indiflerent 
crowd, fell" (Westcott). 

Yer. 56. — Sat a certain maid beheld him 
as he sat by the fire, and earnestly looked 
npon him, and said, This man was also with 
Iiun. Comparing the several accounts of 
the evangelists together, we see how 
naturally the incidents followed each other. 
As he entered, the portress first thought she 
recognized him as one of tlie followers of the 
well-known Teacher just arrested on a 
capital charge. Tlicn as, weary and chilled, 
he drew near the fire, the firelight ahone 
on his face, a face known to many who had 
listened during the last few days to his 
Master as he taught, with his disciples 
rouped round him in the temple-courts 
lefore crowds of listeners. Thoroughly 
alarmed, he drew aside from the friendly 
wai mth of the fire into the outer shade of 
the gateway ; yet he could not tear himself 
•way from the neighbourhood of the spot 
where his dear Master was being interro- 
gated by his deadly foes ; and even there, 
while lurking in the shadow, he was re- 
cognized again, and then, just as he was in 
the act of fiercely denying, with oaths and 
curses, his friendship for and connection 
with Jesus, came the Master by, after the 
■econd examination before Caiaphas and 
certain members of the Sanhedriu, being 
conducted by the guard to another and 
more formal court. And as the Master 
passed, he turned and looked upon hia poor 
cowardly disciple. 

Ver. 59. — For he Is a Galilsean. The 
itrong provincial dialect of the fisherman of 
the Lake of Galilee at once told these 
Jerusalem Jews, accustomed to the peculiar 
pronunciation of the Galilee pilgrims at the 
Fassover Feast, that tlie man whom they 
iuspei ted certainly came from the same 
province as Jesus the Accused. 

Ver. ei. — And the Lord turned, and 
looked upon Fetei. As he was passing from 



i; 



the interrogation before Caiaphas to be ex- 
amined before the Sanliedrin assembled in 
solemn council, he heard his servant's well- 
known voice raised and accompanied with 
oaths and curses, assuring the by-standen 
he had no connection with and knew 
nothing of Jesus of Nazareth. Then, as he 
passed, the Master turned and looked on hii 
old friend, that disciple who so lately had 
declared that even if all others deserted the 
Lord, he never would I The glance of Jesus 
was full of the tenderest pity ; it was not 
angry, only sorrowful; but it recalled Peter 
to his better, nobler self. SS. Matthew and 
Mark (Peter's own Gospel) record how, 
when he heard the cock crow, which St. 
Luke tells us happened as our Lord turned 
to look on the recreant disciple, he re- 
membered all, and burst into bitter weeping. 
We meet him again on the Eesurrcction 
morning in company with St. John (John 
XX. 3), whence, it would seem, that in his 
bitter sorrow he had turned to his old friend, 
who had probably heard his denial. St. 
John, who briefly in his narrative touches 
npon the "denial," omits to mention the 
repentnuce, but, according to his custom, 
specially illustrates it in the scene by the 
lake (John xxi. 15, and following verses). 

Vers. 63 — 65. — After the eecond examina- 
tion, the officials of the Sanhedrin mock and 
ill treat Jem» as one doomed to death, 

Ver. 63.— And the men that held Jesus 
mocked him, and smote him. The position 
of the Bedeemer when the cruelties took 
place, described in this and the two follow- 
ing verses, was as follows : After the arrest 
in Gethsemane, the guards, Jewish and Bo- 
man, escorted the Prisoner to the palace of 
the high priest in Jerusalem. There both 
Annas and Caiaphas apparently lodged. In 
the first instance, Jesus was brought before 
AnuEis, who was evidently the leading per- 
sonage of the Sanhedrin of that day. De- 
tails of the preliminary examination are 
given apparently by John xviii. 13, 19 — 24. 
In this first and informal trial Caiaphas 
was evidently present, and took part (ver. 
19). At the close of this unofficial but im- 
portant proceeding, Annas sent him to Cuia- 
phas. The true reading in John xviii. 21 is 
djreirT«Aei' oSv, " Annas therefore sent him." 
That is, at the close of the first unqfficiai 
examination, which took place in Annas's 
apartments in the palace of the high priest, 
Annas sent him to be examined officially 
before Caiaphas, the reigning high pries^ 
and a comiuittee of the Sanhedrin. This, 
the second trial of Jesus, is related at some 
length by St. Matthew (xxvi. 59—66) and 
St. Mark (xiv. 55- 64). The priests on that 
occasion sought false witnesses, but their 
witness did not, we know, agree. Jesus 
kept silence until Caiaphas arose, and with 



BH. xxiLl— 71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. 



207 



ftTrful Bolemnity adjured him to say whether 
he waa the Christ, tlie Son of God. So ad- 
jured, Jesus answered definitely In the afiiim- 
ative. Then Caiaphas rent his robe, and 
appealed to the assembly, -who answered the 
appeal by a unanimous cry, " He is g:iulty of 
deatli." After this hearing before Caiapnas 
and a committee of the Sanhedrin, the con- 
demned One was conducted before the full 
assembly of the Sanhedrin. 'While beiuo; 
led across the court,' he heard Peter's third 
deriiul. It was during the interval which 
elapsed before the great council assembled, 
thut the mocking related in these verses (63 — 
6S) took place. 

Ver. 64. — And when they had Mindfolded 
him, they struck him on the face, and asked 
him, saying. Prophesy, who is it that smote 
thee 1 The Jews, in this terrible scene (see, 
too, for further details of the outrages, Matt. 
xxvi. 67 ; Mark xiv. 65), were unconsciously 
working out a literal luliilment of Isaiah's 
picture of the righteous Sufferer (Isa. 1. 6 ; 
liii. 3—7). 

Vers. 66— 71.— ITie third trial he/ore the 
Sanhedi in, 

Ver. 66 — And as soon as it was day; The 
Sanhedrin as a council could only meet by 
day ; all the preliminaries had been settled 
and the course of procedure fully arranged 
when the legal time for the meeting of the 
state council arrived. The elders of the 
people and the chief priests and the scribes 
came together, and led him into their coun- 
oil. These were the three constitutional 
parts of the Sanliedrin. The name of the 
famous Sanhpdrin, curiously enough, is a 
Greek, not a Hebrew or Aramaic word, being 
derived from wviSpiov, an assembly. We 
first come on the word, says Dr. Farrar, 
when this state council summoned before 
them Hyicanus II., son of Alexander Jan- 
naeus. In the time of our Lord, the Eoman 
government had taken from tliem the power 
of carrying out capital sentences ; hence their 
biinging Jesus before Pilate. Tliere is a 
remarkable tradition that tlie council left 
their proper place of assembly, Gazilh, and 
sat in another chamber (forty years before 
the destruction of the temple). Now, it was 
forbidden to condemn to death except in 
Gazith (see ' Avoda Zara,' pp. 61, etc.). Dr. 
Wtstcott quotes from Deienbourg ('Essai 
aur I'Histoire et la Geographic de Palestine '), 
who suggests the probability of tlie night 
sitting of Annas and Caiaphas and the mem- 
bers of the Sanhedrin favourable to tlieir 
policy (the second trial) being held at " the 
Booths of the Sons of Hanau" (Annns). 
These booths, or shops, were under two 
cedars on the Mount of Olives (Jerusalem 
Talmud, 'Taanith,' iv. 8). There were 
four of these booths, which were for the sale 
^ objeota legally paie> ^ one of these 



pigeons were sold for the sacrifices of all 
Israel. De'renbourg conjectures that these 
booths on tlie Mount of Olives were part of 
the famous Booths of the Sons of Hanan 
(Annas), to which the Sanhedrin retired 
wiien it left the chamber Gazith. 

Ver. 67.— Art thou the Christ 1 tell n». 
And he said unto them. If I tell yon, ye will 
not believe. In his answer Jesus evidently 
refers to something which had preceded this 
inteiTogation on the part of the Sanhedrin. 
He refeired, no doubt, to that night exami- 
nation before Caiaphas and certain chosen 
members of the council — the meeting passed 
over by St. Luke, but recounted by SS. 
Matthew and Mark. In this earlier trial, 
which we (see above) term the second, a 
similar question had been put to Jesus, but, 
as Lange and Stier point out, now the politi- 
cal si^'nificance of the charge, the claim to 
Messianic royalty, is brought into promi- 
nence. They were desirous to formulate an 
accusation which they could bring before 
the Eoman tribunal of Pilate. The words, 
"Son of God," which the fury of jealous 
anger had wrung from Caiaphas (Matt. xxvi. 
63), is here left out of sight, and is only 
brou!>lit forward again by the Teice Jewish 
wrath excited by the Lord's quiet words 
telling of his " session at the right hand" 
(vers. 69, 70). Jf I tell you, ye will not 6»- 
lieve. If you, who have seen my life, have 
heard my words, and seen my works, believe 
not, to what end is it to say it again now? 

Ver. 68. — And if I also ask you, ye will 
not answer me. Tire Lord here especially 
refers to tliose public questions of his put to 
members of the Sanhedrin and otliers in 
the last days of his public ministry, such as 
we find in Matt. xxii. 45, to which the rulers 
had attempted to give no answer. 

Ver. 6!J — Hereafter shall the Son of man 
sit on the right hand of the power of God, 
Jesus decided to put an end to this weary 
and useless triiil, and supplied his judges 
with the evidence tliey were seeking to ex- 
tort from him. The* Master's words would 
recall to the teachers of Israel, sitting as his 
judges, the words of tlieir loved prophet 
Daniel (vii. 13, 14). These solemn words 
of his were, and they perfectly understood 
them as such, a claim on tiie part of the 
Prisoner who stood before them — a direct 
claim to Divine glory. 

Ver. 70.— Then said they all, Art thou 
then the Sou of God 1 Now tiringing forward 
the loftier title formerly suppressed (in ver. 
67). " And art thou, then, dost Ihou, poor 
Man, vain in thy imagining, dost thou assert 
thyself to be the Sou of God?" So Stier. 
And he said unto them, "ie say that I am. 
This form of reply is not used in Greek, but 
is frequent in rabbinic, liy such an an- 
swer the one interrogated accepts as hit oton 



20S 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oH.xxn.1— 71 



aflrmntion the question put to him in its 
entirely. We Imvu, tliun, here, in the clearest 
possilile lau^'ua^H: (1) A jilain Hsaertion by 
our Luril of liis Divinity. (2) The reply of 
tlie SMnhuilrists, Bliowin<i; tliat they fur their 
part distinctly umluraiood it as bupIi, but to 
make it quite clear tliey uuked him if tliat 



wot hia meaning, i.e. the Rsgertion of hii 
Divinity. (3) We have the Lord's qniet 
answer, " Yes, that was liis meaninj." Tli6 
next verso (71) shows that they were satis- 
fied with tlie evidenee which they pro- 
ceeded witliuut delay to lay before the 
Boman goveiuor, Pilata 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 30. — Wednesdai/ and Thursday of Passion Week. Look at that picture — 
the Son of God awaiting the hour; s|>endinj the last day before the arrest and the triil 
in the deep seclusion of the Bethany home. Over that day the veil of an impenetrable 
secrecy bangs. One thina only is certain — it was a time in which the shrinking 
spirit, whdst feeling even unto death the shadow of the exceeding heaviness, never- 
theless drank of the brook by the way, the comforting "I am not alone, for the 
Father is with me." Look at this picture — the priests and scribes, defied and 
denounced in the temple and in the presence of the people, have resolved that, bv fair 
means or by foul, they must get rid of this "Swift Witness" against them. These 
men, united by a common hatred, consult (ver. 2) how they may kill him. We can 
imagine the conferences in the dimly lighted chamber — the partial light only casting 
deeper shadows, and bringing into fuller relief the lines of fierce resentment on the 
faces of the councillors. There is no debate as to the object ; the only and the long 
debate is simply as to the means of accomplishing the object. Their deliberations ara 
unexpectedly aided. The evangelist informs us of ttie satisfaction which lightens their 
countenances as they conclude tlie bargain with Judas of Karioth, and receive from him 
the assurance that he will find " the opportunity to betray him to them " (ver. 6) with- 
out the risk of exciting a tumult. Thus, whilst heaven is calm, hell is agitated at its 
de|itbs; whilst love is directing its prayer and looking up, pride and envy are laying 
their plots and meditating the darkest crime which hlots the jiage of history. " Mark 
the perfect, and behold the upright; for the end of that man is peace." "But the 
wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and 
dirt." The early hours of Thursday swiftly pass. The next day is the great Paasover 
day; and the disciples have begun to press the inquiry, "Where shall we keep it?" 
In the fiirenoon (ver. 8) Jesus gives Peter and John his instructions. A place is in the 
Lord's view. That the one to wliose house the apostles are directed was a believer may 
be inferred (1) from the word which the three synoptists represent the Lord as using, 
"Tiie Master saith" (ver. 11); and (2) from the confidential character of the message. 
The two are commanded to go in advance of the party, and have all in readiness for a 
celebration of the Paschal meal, which probably anticipated by one day the usual 
celebration of the Lord's Passover. Christ and the remaining ten apostles follow in the 
evening. Nothing is told us of that journey, whether, e.g., it was private, or whether, as 
usual, Jesus was accompanied by a multitude of people. It is the last time on which 
the feet of the Christ who had been known after the flesh shall press the grassy slope 
of the hill he loved. But he had spoken to his own of another day, that foretold in 
prophecy, when " his feet shall stand on the Mount of Olives, which is befure Jerusalem 
on the east . . , the day when the light shall not be clear nor dark, but one day known 
to the Lord, And living waters shall go out from Jerusalem ; half of them toward the 
former sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea; . . . and the Lord shall be King 
over all the earth" (Zcch. xiv. 4 — 9). All that is reported is this: " Wlien the hour 
was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him " (ver. 14). The details of 
that memorable evening are full of interest; and, regardiag them, the narratives of the 
evans'-lists are singularly explicit. " The fuur streams that go forth to water the earth 
in that tale meet in a common channel; the four winds of the Spirit are in it, united 
and one." The scene is (vers. 11, 12) "a larije upper room" — the guest-chamber of the 
house. (For distinction, emphasize " the guest-chamber.") 1. Its object. To receive 
and entertain the Friend, the one to be honoured. Is not Christ the Guest (Rev. iii. 
20)? 2. Its characteristics. The best room. Is he not entitled to the best ? A largt 
room. The whole breadth of the life's aims, the whole strength of the hes^rt's love, ii 



OH. xxiL 1—71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 209 

due to him. An upper mom. Poor and sorry is the life that has no upper room ; 
blessed is the life nhose upper room is reserved for him. A furnished room, all in 
readiness for his presence — a heart and will furnished for every good work. 3. Its con- 
secration. How realized? On our side, by an unreserved surrender: "The Master 
saith ; " and by the ready-making of faith and love, as symbolized in Peter and John. 
On his side, by the coming as the Lamb of God with the gospel of forgiveness, and as 
the Bread of life to have communion with us and we with him. When Jesus enters 
the room there is a strife for precedence, for the places nearest him. St. Luke places 
the strife (ver. 24) along with the questioning among themselves who would be false 
to Christ ; but his lansuage, " there was also," is inexact, and it seems consistent with 
the fitness of things that the contention should occur when seats were being taken. 
The Master, observing it, administers the rebuke recorded in vers. 26, 27 ; and, having 
so done, be proceeds to comply with the ceremonial of the feast. It was wont to begin 
with the passing of a cup of wine, blessed and hallowed. The word recorded in vers. 15, 
16 is spoken before the dispensation of the cup ; the word in vers. 17, 18 accompanies 
the dispensation ; both words intimating the declinature to partake of the shadowy rite 
when the substance is so soon to bo realized. " Suffer it to be so now," said Jesus to 
John at the baptism. The now is exhausted. "I will not any more" is the sentence 
of the supper-table. As they divide the cup, he rises. He is minded to give them the 
lesson never to be forgotten, as his sharpest rebuke of all their contentions for priority — 
the lesson so graphically related in John xiii. 1 — 17. Resuming his place at the table, lo 1 
a troubled look flits across the countenance. A little later in the evening he can no longer 
refrain. There is one seated near him over whom the heart yearns, though it recoils 
from his baseness (ver. 21). The hand of the betrayer is with him, " One of you." 
Startled, deeply moved, the question passes f] om one and another, " Lord, is it I ? " 
Simon whispers to John, " Ask who it is ; " and John, leaning forward, his head close to 
Jesus, puts the question. He gets the sign by which the one will be identified — a morsel 
to be dipped in the dish that is before the Lord will be given to him. It is given to 
Judas, hitherto silent, something of the better self still struggling within. But, after 
the sop, the Satanic spirit gains in boldness. He has the effrontery to ask, " Is it 1 ? " 
What is the answer ? " 'i'hou hast said . . . That thou doest do quickly." Judas, 
there is no need to linger; thou art detected. "The Son of man goeth, as it is 
written : but woe unutterable to thee ! " It is difficult to determine the precise stage in 
the keeping of the feast at which the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was instituted. 
Matthew makes the departure of the traitor precede the appointment of the ordinance. 
Luke seems to place the institution of the Supper at an earlier period than the depar- 
ture. But the fact of the institution is beyond doubt (vers. 19 — 21). The Christian 
Church, in all ages, has obeyed the command of her beloved Lord, spoken in the guest- 
shamber when keeping the Passover with his disciples : " This do in remembrance of 
me." The central point of the interest attaching to the Thursday evening is this con- 
secration of the bread and the cup as the abiding pledges of redeeming love. It is sad 
to think that over the gracious words of Christ in the consecration so many contro- 
versies should have been waged. Why cannot men recognize the language of figure 
uid symbol ? Those who insist that in the sentence, " Take, eat ; this is my body," there 
is implied the transubstantiation of the cake of bread held in the hand, claim for that 
sentence a narrow literalism which they themselves do not observe when they read, 
"i am the true Vine," or "I am the Door." Let us receive, with all possible oblation 
of praise, the earthly creatures as, in sacramental use, the hallowed representations to 
the eye and pledges to the soul of the never-failing nourishment of the body that was 
broken and the blood that was shed for us. Let all who would feed on Jesus in their 
heart with thanksgiving reflect on the words of the Thursday evening which mirror 
his consciousness, and let them examine themselves in the light of this consciousness 
" With desire I have desired" (ver. 15). my Lord, if thy desire was thus vehe- 
ment ; if, because of it, thou didst overlook all that lay in the immediate future ; if 
thou didst so long to share thy feast with men, why the want of desire in me ? why 
the backwardness and slowness of my soul to receive thee in the mysteries of thy love? 
Lord lead me in thy truth, and teach me. " Until the kingdom of God shall come " 
(ver. 18). my Lord, how vivid to thee was the future consummation of thy sacri- 
fice! As, in perspective, the distaut is often near, the intervening spaces being lost 
WITK. — U. ' 



210 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LTTKE. [ch. xxn. 1—71 

to sight, BO was it with thee. Thou didst behold thy kinedom in glory as at hand, 
»nd thy soul stretched forward whither thy prayer afterwards pointed, — " Father, that 
which thou hast given me, 1 will that where I am they also may be with me." Wliy 
beats my pulse so slow and feeble in response to the hope of thy kingdom ? Why is 
my Lord's Supper so much of a mere commemoration, so little of a prophetic joy, of a 
prayer, aa already in the vision of the kingdom ? " Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly." 

*• Thou strong and loving Son of man, 

Redeemer from the bonds of sin, 
Tis thou the living spark dost fan 

That sets my heart on fire within. 
Thou openest heaven once more to men — 

The soul's true home, thy kingdom. Lord; 
And I can trust and hope again. 

And feel myself akin to God." 

Vers. 31 — 34. — The special word to Simon. Its solemnity is indicated by tlie twice- 
repealed " Simon." Oljserve, when the warning is given, this is the name used ; after- 
wards (ver. S-l), in reply to the disciple's protestation, "I am ready to go both to prison 
and to death," the name is changed, " I tell thee, Peter." How gentle, how pathetic, 
the irony ! Of the Peter, the rock, it is to be said, " The cock shall not crow until 
thou shall thrice deny that thou knowest me." Note three points in the word of 
Christ. 

I. Thb tekptation. To him the personality of the tempter Is always real, Eeal, 
in respect of his own temptations : " Get thee hence, Satan ; " " The prince of this 
world Cometh." Now we are reminded that it is real in respect of the temptations of 
men. Beware of foolish speaking and jesting in connection witli the actual existence 
of the Satan. "Behold!" says Jesus. AH is vividly present to him; he would 
have the agency of the adversary vividly present to his follower. The expression 
employed is very striking (see the Revised Version, "Satan asked to have you"). 
The phrase recalls the scene in Job ii. But this is memorable — the tempter recognizes 
the proprietary of the Lord. Of Judas it is said, " Satan entered into him." Of Simon 
it is said, " He asked to have you." "I'his is one over whom he has no right. He 
belongs to the Son of God — a man given him by the Father. And he makes request 
that the disciple be sifted. In the margin of the Revised Version it is put as an alter- 
native reading : " He obtained you by asking." All is so suggestive. The Christian 
Father speaks of the Chriftmn's fasting-days. Such days are often part of tlie experi- 
ence of God's people. The sieve, as if with God's permission, is applied. The tempter 
obtained the Lord himself by asking, and the sieve was applied to him. It was 
similarly applied to his apostle; it is similarly applied, in one form or another, to those 
who are his. God will have his wheat winnowed. Remember, there is the sieve: 
" Watch and pray." 

II. 1'uE INTERCESSION. It IS spoken of (ver. 32) as past, and as a transaction accom- 
plished in the invisible world. And who knows what transactions are there realized ? 
How blessed Is the assurance that 

" Where high the heavenly temple stands, 
The house of Gnd, not made with hands, 
A great High Priest our nature wears, 
Tho Guardian of mankind appears " I 

"J made intercesnirm for thee." Ah I in the day when all secrets are declared, with whad 
inarvollous li>;ht will this word be illumined! Ye Simons of all ages, thyself, my soul, 
what a reflection it is that between the one tempted and the outer darkness there is 
the intercession of the ever-living and ever-mighty One, who is able to "save to the 
uttermost"! What is the intercession? Not that the sieve be withdrawn, that the 
sifting fail? It is needful. Simon would not have been the Peter he became with- 
out the sieve and without the discipline. The tempter ah- the trial are used as 
discijiline. He who would not pray that his own be taken out of the world, will not 
pray that the Satan-request be relused. No; but he intercedes that the " faith fail 
ftot * (ver. 32). The great feature of Simon was his confidence in Christ. Why should 



on. xxn. 1—71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 211 

he have been selected as the Rock-man, who wag lo often rash, and who so weakly 
denied his Master? Through all there was still the faith. He had quicker insight 
into the secrets of his Master's power and presence than any of his fellows ; he had a 
higher and fuller perception of and trust in him. Were this to fail, all would fail. 
And the fruit of the intercession was evidenced in the springing back of his faith — 
nay, in its rising to a still higher measure of knowledge on the ruins of the old self- 
confidence ; there was created the new heart that by-and-by was ready to go to prison 
and death. 

III. The EXHORTATION. Simon will turn again. When the Lord turns, in the day 
of the trial, and looks on the apostate disciple, there is born a godly sorrow which 
works repentance not to be repented of. Out of this repentance there comes the earnest, 
" Lord, thou knowest all things ; thou knowest that I love thee." And the charge is, 
" Do thou, when once thou hast turned again, stablish thy brethren " (ver. 32, Revised 
Version). The most helpful man is he who has himself been tempted, who has passed, 
not without scars, through the fight of fnith. It is the sympathy of the soul that has 
come through great tribulation that has the delicate touch, the majnetic force, the 
faculty of establishing the brethren. All discovery of the Lord is to be utilized in the 
way of strengthening, cheering, building up human souls in the kingdom of God. 
What we receive we hold in trust for others, and, in giving as we receive, what we 
have gained becomes doubly ours. 

"Heaven does with ug as we with torches do, 
Not light them for themselves." 

Experience of God and his love is the best teacher. What we learn, even through 
falls and failures, turns most to the profit of poor buman nature. Simon, after the 
rifting, through the turning again, was the conflrmer of the brethren. 

Vers. 39 — 46. — Oefhsemane. It is now dark. On the way to the Mount of Olives, 
i-.e customary retreat of Jesus (ver. 39), at the point where the upward slope bi gins, 
theie is a shady place, belonging, perhaps, to one of those who believed in him, whither 
" Jesus had often resorted " (John xviii. 2). The site of the garden of Gethseuiane may, 
with sufficient accuracy, be identified. It may not have been the exact spot, over- 
sli.idowed by the eight venerable trees, which immemorial tradition has distinguished 
as the scene of the lonely vigil, but it must have been close to that spot. It was a place 
where there were many olives, and, as the name suggests, an oil-press ; a place of per- 
fect quiet and seclusion, where, beyond the voices of rude men, there was the peace of 
heaven. To this place he who had uttered the high-priestly prayer brought the high- 
priestly sacrifice; and there he began the walk through the valley of the sh.idow of 
death. The tale of the sore amazement and exceeding heaviness is told, with more 
fulness of detail, by the Evangelists Matthew and Mark (see homiletics in loc.). 
Here, without enlarging on the meaning and scope of the features of the narrative, 
note — 

I. The agony. (Ver. 44.) It has always been felt that in this there is immeasur- 
ably more than a mere revolt from imminent pain and death. The anguish is marked 
by an intensity for which this revolt cannot account. A brave man, however sensitive, 
can face, with unflinching fortitude, a hit;h enterprise, even though its fatal consequence 
is evident. " The sweat becoming as it were gieat drops of blood," speaks of a con- 
flict in the soul for which the impending physical dissolution cannot account. Some 
references supply us with suggestions. 1. 'I'he announcement made at the Supper-table 
(John xiv. 30), of the coming of the prince of the world, speaks to us of a temptation, 
intensified by the circumstances of the hour, in the line of the wilderness-temptation, 
to grasp the power of the Messiah otherwise than through the suffering of the cross 
(see, in this connection. Matt. xxvi. 53). 2. The sorrow which cast its shade over 
his countenance when the betrayal was mentioned (John xiii. 21) ; the horror with 
which he regarded the perfidy (ver. 22; Matt. xxvi. 24); the utterance by which he 
awdke the disciples, marking out the betrayal as the bitterness of tlie hour at hand 
(Matt. xxvi. 45) ; the appeal to Judas (ver. 48) ; — these things indicate the amazement 
and pain caused by the action of the son of perdition. 3. The word of the Sou to the 
Father as to the cup so lull of woe that he humbly besought its removal, reminds lu 



212 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxn. 1— 71. 

of a region beyond all that our thought can trace, in which the Christ of God was 
treadin>; the wine-press alone. Better, in view of this, a holy reticence than a zeal 
which is eager with explanations. If we must speak of the S|iecial fearfulness and 
trembling ot Gethsemane, let us simply say that there, in all its crushing weight, was 
realized the bearing of the sin of the wuild. 

II. The prater. 1. Observe its characteristics. (1) Humility. "He kneeled 
down." More strongly still St. Mark says (xiv. 30), " He fell on the ground." It was 
the attitude of deepest reverence, of entire prostration. In the hign-piiestly prayer, 
"he lifted up his eyes to heaven;" but now, in human weakness and dependence, 
he is prostrate before his Father. Sign of the " godly fear " (Heb. v. 7) for which he 
was heard. (2) Importunate repetition. Thrice he prayed, "saying the same words" 
(Matt. xxvi. 44). It is not the eloquence, but the sincerity of desire in the prayer 
which God regards. (3) Increasing earnestness. " Being in an agony, he prayed more 
earnestly." The greater the pressure on the soul, the more fervent became the cry. 
The sorrow of the disciples sent them to sleep ; his sent him to the Father. " Love 
overmasters agony," not agony love. Let the disciple learn of the Master. 2. Observe 
its subject-matter. (Ver. 42.) " Remove this cup from me;" or (as in Matt. xxvi. 30), 
" Let this cup pass from me." It was the pleading of the sensitive human soul. And 
we may be assured that to plead for the removal of a cup of pain, for relief from burdens 
which seem greater than we can bear, is in tlie way of the child's privilege; only tiiere 
must be the spirit of entire dependence. " If thou be willing." There is to be no " if" 
where God's promise is absolute. We do not need to say, " If thou be willing, make thy 
grace sufficient." His pledge as to this is distinct and unequivocal : " My grace is suffi- 
cient." From this, on this resting, we pray. But when we desire that concerning 
which we have no definite assurance of the Father's mind, then all is to be subordinated 
to him. This is to abide in the Son as he is revealed in Gethsemane. " If we ask any 
thing according to God's will, he heareth us." The godly McCheyne sp"ke of getting 
into tune for prayer. We get into tune when we learn Christ's "11 it be puBsible;" "If 
thou be willing." 

" Renew my will from day to day ; 
Blend it with thine," eto. 

3. Observe its answer. The answer is manifest : (1) In the rinhting " Nevertheless." 
(Ver. 42.) In the prayer the soul realized " God my Rock." From wliat Uiiglit have 
been self-seeking, it was delivered. 

"Do thou thy holy will: 
I will lie still; I will not stir. 
Lest 1 should break the eh arm." 

■•In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in 
my soul." (2) In the comforting angel. (Ver. 43.) The holy one, sign of the sym- 
pathy in heaven above. For to the one who prays in an agony the heavens are not brass. 
There are ministries of love. God's angels are all ministering spiiits. In visible form 
the angel may not appear; but we know that he is with Uii in the comluii and peace. 
Have we not the Couifoiter himself?^ 

" A gracious, willing Guest, 
While he can find one humble heart 
Wherein to rest." 

And thns, though the cup does not pass, the will of the Son is strengthened into 
perfect harmony with the will of the Father. He rises up Irom prayer, ready, " strong 
in the Lord, and in the power of his mij^ht." 

III. Observe, finally, the bemonstranob. Very touching the word to Peter (Matt. 
xxvi. 40). The one hour never again to come, the one hour of watching, lost in sleep 1 
And now (ver. 46). May not the pathetic question ring in the ears of tlie Christian? 
Why do we sleep^we whom the Son of man has associated with himself in his prayers 
and pains? We asleep, and he toiling! We asleep, and the world lying in darkness I 
Ah 1 in the solemn light of Gethsemane, what is the utmost Christian activity but a 
dumber? and how many who claim to be Christ's are fast asleep, not for sorrow, but 



OH. xxTi. 1—71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. tl8 

in self-indulgence and sin! Oh that the gentle, reproachful " why ? " maybe b8 an 
Alanim-clnck to conscience, a continual incitement to will and heart 1 The spirit may 
be willing, but the flesh is ever weak. " Rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation 1 " 

Ver. 47 — nh. xxiii. 46. — Thursday night to Fri'lay evening. It is time to be going. 
Tlie footfall of the coming host has alieady been heard, and the gleam of the lanterns 
and the flashing of the swords have been detected at no great distance. Guiltily, under 
shadow (if night, the conspirators have approached. "While Jesus is yet spesiking." 
(ver. 47), tlie ti-aitor is bending forward to give the salute of friend.ship. Note the 
question, so lull of gentle dignity, "Companion, wherefore art thou come? Betrayest 
thou the Son of man with a kiss?" Note what follows down to the flight of the 
apostles, wlicn to them it seems that the end has come. " We trusted that it had been 
be whci should have redeemed Isniel;" and now? Betrayed into the hands of sinners, 
he is " led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep dumb before her sheaiers." 
Priest, Pharisee, scribe, he who scourged you with the whip of his holy indignation 
is now the Prisoner on whose bleeding body the furrows of your scourge may be made 
long. No legion of angels will interpnse. The Son of God only waits to die. There 
are : (1) a piecognition by Annas ; (2) an arraignment be/ore Vaiaphas and the Sanhe- 
drim ; and, finally (3^, the deliverance to the judicature of the governor. Briefly trace 
the nariative. 

I. The precoonition by AN^fAS. Annas, or Hanan, to whom first the fettered Jesus 
is borne, occupied at the time a peculiar position. His son-in-law, Joseph Caiaphas, was 
the actual high piiest. But Annas, having been deposed by the Roman govi-rnor, was 
still regnnied as the priest Jure divino, and his influence seems to have been immense. 
Five of his sons and his son-in-law were raised to the pontifical throne. It was under 
the last of his &v,e sons that James, the brother of our Lord, was put to death. He was 
an unscrupulous intriguer. A Sadducee, wHo had been mixed up in foul plots and 
conspiracies, the head of " a viper brood," as ^ Jewish chronicler says, which amassed 
wealth by unlawful gains. Farrar has called attention to the fact that, when the oap- 
tuie of Jesus is determined, the Pharisees disappear from the scene ; his implacable 
enemies are the chief priests aiid scribes. Before this Annas Jesus stands (John xviii. 
13 — 23). Some questinns are put as to his disciples and doctrine. And these, as has 
well been remarked, Jesus answers " with dignified repulsion" — a repulsion so sharp 
that the first blow inflicted on that sacred face was bestowed by one of the menials of 
the court. "Answerest thou the high priest so?" How complete the self-ivstraint 
expressed in the only action which followed — the reply, " If I have spoken evil, bear 
witness of the evil ; but if not, why strikest thou me?" 

II. The arbaignment before Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin. All that Annas 
could do was to order his Prisoner to be still more tightly bound, and to send him to 
the portion of the temple court which was occupied by the priest, his son-in-law, 
Caiaphas. The morning had not yet dawned, and until dawn no meeting of council 
could be convened. It was during this interval that the predicted denial of the Lord 
by Peter occuried (vers. 54 — 62). The clock marks the hour of six, when Caiaphas 
and his assessors confiont the Nazarene. Their object is to establish a charge of blas- 
phemy, and suborned witnesses are cited. 'Jliey are clumsy perjurers, who contradict 
one another and coutiadict themselves. And the evidence bi'eaks down. Then the 
tactics aie changed. The high priest, directly addressing the Prisoner, demands a 
" yea " or " nay " to the interrogation, " Art thou the Christ ? " Jesus has been silent, 
but now (vers. 60 — 71), calmly and solemnly, he answers, " Thou hast said ; " and adds 
that, by-and-by, they should see " the Son of man sitting on the right hand of the 
power of God." It is enough. " Blasphemy ! " is the shout, and he is condemned as 
worthy of death. And there ensues a scene of brutal ferocity. The wretches in 
attendance spit on the fuce, buffet, strike him with the palms of their hands, and rend 
the air with ribald cries. For the world shows its baseness when a man is down; 
then the many rush forward to have their fling and kick. 

III. Jesus is delivebed to tub judicature of the governor. What priests and 
elders could do lias been done. The piocurator alone could inflict the sentence o( 
death. Their next movement must be to coerce him into the carrying out of their plan, 
^nd they know tliat in Pontius Pilate, stained with violences the report of which to 



214 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxn. 1— 71 

his Imperial mnster would coat him his gnvernTnent, if not his life, they hare the nilBr 
whom they c»n rule. Two appearancps (ch. zxiii.) of our Lord before the governor are 
recorded, and between them stands the episode with which the name of Herod is asso- 
ciated. There is nothing more sad than the record of the expedients, the shufflings to 
and fro, the efforts to save One whom Pilate felt to be guiltless, whilst yet he daied 
not give effect to his convictions. A record most sad, but most instructive. Is it not 
a portrait, many of whose features suggest cowardly concessions, timidities, struggles 
between conscience and policy in which conscience is worsted, with wliich, in one form 
or another, too many of us are familiar? A character-sketch, like that of Pilate in the 
trial, gauges the directions and the possibilities of the human nature which is common lo 
us all. In the afternoon of Friday the Saviour of sinners was crucified. An incident 
on the way to Calvary is related by the evangelist, which is touching in itself, and 
which reminds us of the attitude of mind, the kind of feeling towards him, the Crucified, 
which he denies and accepts. We are told that he was " followed by a great con)pany 
of women, who bewailed and lamented him" (vers. 27 — 31). Observe his saying, most 
tenderly prefaced by the phrase, " Daughters of Jerusalem." Virtually, he declines 
tears and cries, which express only sorrow over his fate. He wishes those who bewail 
to estimate the significance of the spectacle, to realize what it foreboded for them and 
theirs; to weep not /or him, hut with him in his sadness concerning Jerusalem, iit hia 
baffled longing to gather its children together, in his thwarted purpose to save and 
bless. The events of that day were the prophecy of a doom not to be long delayed; 
in his thought and emotion as to this doom, and in this alone, he sought their sympathy. 
And so, remember, Chriot desires not a luxury of sentiment, which ends in lamenta- 
tions on account of his suffering. He desires partnership in his suffering. His cross ia 
to be our cross. We are to hold ourselves identified with him in it. The apostle'* 
words are the interpretation of the genuine Christian sentiment: "I was crucified with 
Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, hut Christ liveth in me: and the life wliich 
I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave 
himself for me ; " " God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesua 
Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world." 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES. 

Ver. 2. — Piety, pedantry, and formalism. Of all those who in any and every 
way were responsible for the death of Jesus Christ, the lar<;est share of guilt lies at the 
door of the religious lenders of the time. The Roman soldiers were only the immediatt 
instrumerits of it; the Jewish populace were only the blind agents of it; but these 
scribes and chief priests were the guilty instigators of it : they brought it about. It 
was they who first conceived the idea ; it was they who suggested and urged it ; it was 
they who ceased not to agitate and direct until the dark deed was done. How came 
they to go so far astray ? How came it to pass that while "all the people came early 
in the morning to him in the temple for to hear him" (ch. xxi. 38), thus ben Ing 
witness to the sincerity of their discipleship and their desire to know the truth he 
taught, they, the loaders of the land — scribes who were familiar with every letter of the 
Law, priests who were daily occupied in the services of the sanctuary, learned duct^J-s, 
and pious ministrants — were actively and earnestly compassing his death ? The lact is 
that — 

I. Eeligiotts pedantry mat be very learned, and yet whot.ly wrong. These 
men knew their Scriptures with a fulness and nicetv of detail that surpasses the know- 
ledge we have of our sacred writings ; and they had also a perfect familiarity with the 
teachings of traditional lore. They des]iised the ignoiance of the common people in 
these respects (see John vii. 47). Yet they were not wise with the wisdom of Qui; 
they entirely failed to understand the Divine will and the way to eternal life. The 
religion they taught and lived was utterly heartless; it was a service without any soul 
in It, a mechanism without any life in it ; it was an elaborate error, a great and sad 
misconception of the mind of God > it was a surrender of freedom that did man no 
good and gave God no pleasure ; it was a toilsome and torturing imposition that neither 
satisfied the intellect, nor cleansed the heart, nor elevated the life. And it lo pervertod 



Oft. xxn. 1—71.] "THE (JOSPBL ACCOEDIU& fO St. LUKil tl5 

the judgment that, when the Truth himself came to reveal the Father, these learned 
hut unwise leaders, instead of being eager to hear him like the people (ch. xxi. 3ti), 
were " seekins; how they might kill him." 

II. Eeligious formalism will oo to great lengths of wrong-doing. If the 
scribes were men of pedantry, the chief priests represented the evil and error of religious 
formalism; and the latter were in no way behind the former in either spiritual blindness 
or malevolence. Thuy, too, failed to recognize their Messiah, and were actively engaged 
in compassing his murder. In every age and land religious formalism has been blind 
and cruel; it has failed to recognize the reformer when he has come to speak in God's 
name ; and it has been forward to accuse and to slay him. Such has been its spirit 
and its course, that the home of love and mercy ^as been converted into tbe hotbed of 
hatred and of cruelty. It is'another illustration of the truth that the corruption of the 
best becomes the worst of all ; the piety that runs into ordinances, utterances, alisti- 
nences, formalities, will in time degenerate into utter error and shameful wrong. This 
is a truth which applies to many more Churches than one ; it is, indeed, more or less 
applicable to all religious circles. There lies a deep-seated tendency in our nature 
which accounts for the facts in our Lord's time and La every age since then. Let us, 
therefore, learn tliat— 

III. True piety ib found in bectitijde of heart and life. Not in holding and 
professing certain correct formulae ; not in going through certain ceremonies or observ- 
ing a number of rules and regulations. These have their place in the kingdom of God, 
but they do not by any means assure us of our place in it. It is riihtness of heart 
toward God our Father and our Saviour, and consequent integrity of life, which make 
us to *' stand before God " as his loyal subjects now, and will make us " worthy to 
stand before the Son of man " when he shall call us to his nearer presence. — 0. 

Vers. 3 — 6. — 2%e deepest wound, etc. When everything has been allowed for Judas 
that the most ingenious and the most charitable have begged us to consider, we must 
juuge him to be a man whose conduct is to be solemnly and seriously condemned. It 
is Divine Love itself that decides this question (see ver. 22 ; Matt. xxvL Zi ; John 
xvii. 12). The text suggests to us — 

I. That oub deepest wounds are those we receive at the hand of our nearest 
FEIF.NDS. How much force is there in the parenthesis, " being of the number of the 
twelve" I What deep pathos is in those sad words of the Lord, "Verily I say unto 
you, that one of you shall betray me " (Matt. xivi. 21) ! This was a " sword that 
entered into his soul," a keen distress, one of the very bitterest of all the sorrows of 
the Son of man. That one whom he had admitted to his intimate fellowship, of whom 
he had made a friend, who had partaken of his confidence and shared his strong alTec- 
tion, — that he should be the one to betray him to his foes 1 There is no trouble possible 
to us so great as that which lies open to us on the side of our purest and strongest 
affectidus. It is not our avowed enemy, nor the man to whom we are indifferent, but 
it is our dearest friend, who has it iu his power to lacerate our soul with the sharpest 
thrust, and to spoil our life by throwing over it the darkest shadow (see Pa. xli. 9). 
1. Be slow to admit to the inner sanctuary of the heart ; for he who has entrance 
there holds your happiness in his own right hand. 2. Bealize the responsibility of 
intimate friendship; it is not only a privilege, but an oblij^ation ; it gives you power 
to gladden and to bless, but also opportunity to mar and to destroy. 

II. That money plays a large part, fob good ob evil, in human life. They 
" covenanted to give him money." It seems hardly credible that any man who had 
lived in the society of Jesus Christ, and had witnessed his kindness and his purity, 
should take money for betraying him. Other motives — those of resentment nr ambi- 
tion—are far less shocking and revolting than this mercenary one. To betray his Master, 
his Friend, for thirty pieces of silver, fills us with wonder and excites the deepest 
reprobation. But for what has not money been responsible in human history ? How 
large a part it plays in the great drama I What untold good it is instrumental in 
effecting! What admirable virtues it is the means of illustrating I To what deeds of 
folly and even of infamy the desire to obtain it has conducted 1 It is clear that men 
who have been trained to hate immoral and criminal behaviour with an intense haired 
have been induced to part with every principle they have honoured, and to do the worst 



216 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxii. 1— 71. 

deeds they have denounced, in order to obtain money, when they have found themselvea 
pressed for its possession. Probably no man who has not felt it knows the deadly 
force of the temptation. Who shall say that he is safe from this powerful snare ? It 
is probable that to obtain money more evil deeds have been done than under any other 
inducement whatever. Therefore let every man beware lest he subjects himself to this 
strong and fell temptation. Let neither an overweening ambition nor extravagance of 
habit lead where the possession of more money becomes an imperative demand. Modera- 
tion in desire and economy in habit save men from a temptation in which, it may be, 
their souls would ha entangled and their very life taken away. 

III. That earnestness is sure to seek its oppoktunitt until it FiNns rr. He 
" sought opportunity to betray him." By whatever motives inspired, Judas was intent 
on compassing the act he had undertaken. And he did not wait idly until an oppor- 
tunity offered itself. He sought it. If evil is thus in earnest, how much more so 
should righteousness and mercy be ! These should surely be about their holy and 
loving work "with both hands earnestly." Opportunity to raise, to help, to redeem, 
to restore, — this is not to be passively waited for, but to be actively sought out. There 
is a very marked diflference between readiness to work when we are invited and even 
urged to do so, and that noble zeal which will not be contented without finding 
material fur activity. It is the difference between a goodness that you do not blame 
and a goodness that you admire; between a life that will not stand condemned and 
a life that will he crowned with victory and honour. If there are those who, in the 
interest of error and of evil, will set about diligently to promote these ends, shall we 
not put forth our utmost energy on behalf of truth and heavenly wisdom ? If men 
can be found who will "seek opportunity" to helray, shall not we with deeper devoted- 
ness "seek opportunity " to honour our Lord? — C. 

Vera. 15, 16. — The Passion, from two standpoints. I. Ab it i.ooked to cub Lord 
WHEN HE WAS APPROACHING IT. It was to him a terrible trial, which he was eager to 
reach and pass through. " With desire he desired" the time to arrive when he should 
suffer and should complete his work. He did not wish to escape it ; he was not looking 
about for an alternative ; he knew that he could not save himself if he would save the 
vi-orld ; and he longed for the trial-time to come and to be passed. Here was the heroic, 
and here was also the human. Here was the determination to endnre, and, at the same 
time, the natural, human anxiety to know the worst and to exchange an almost intoler- 
able suspense for the suffering that awaited him. 1. Having chcpsen the path of ."elf- 
^■.xcrifice, and having entered upon and pursued it, it behoved him to continue and to 
cumplete his appointed work. He could not turn back without suffeiing defeat ; he 
iccepted the dark future that was before him as a sacred duty. From it there must be 
110 turning aside to other emls ; and there was none. He never wavered in his purpose 
from beginning to end. "This shall not be unto thee," from Peter, appears to have 
been a strong shock of temptation to him (Matt. xvi. 21 — 23). But nothing induced 
him to turn aside by a single step from the path of sacrificial service. 2. Yet we have 
here a glimpse of the extreme severity of the trial he underwent. He knew that his 
'suffering" would immediately follow this Passover, and he "earnestly desired" that 
I' issover to come, that the sufferings might follow. With perfect reverence we may 
^ ly that he could not realize what they would include, for they had never before beea 
'^vperienced; they stood absolutely by themselves, and could not be known until they 
lere actually felt. And this element of suspense and uncertainty must have added a 
;reat weight of trouble to the sorrows of our Lord. " How bitter that cup no heart can 
conceive;" not even his heart did conceive until it was in his hands. (1) Like our 
liord, we should go on without faltering to the darkest future which we feel it beeomeg 
13 to face. (2) As with him, the uncertainty of the actual elements of our grief may 
oppress our spirit and fill us with eager desire for its coming (see also ch. xii. 50). 
(3) We shall find, as he found, all needful Divine help when the hour dues actually 
arrive. 

II. As HE WOULD HAVE US REQARD IT NOW. That Is, 88 a Completed work of 
redeeming love. That last Passover has been "fulfilled in the kingilom of God." All 
that the Passover prophesied has been fulfilled. The "Lamb of God" has been slain— 
that Lamb " which takuth away the sin of the world." Everything in the way of 



OH. xxn. 1— 71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 211 

■acred endurance, of Divine preparation, is now completed, and the way into the kino;dom 
is open. Those sufferings to which Jesus was bo eagerly looking forward, to which he 
had now come, with nothing between them and him but that Passover Feast, had to be 
endured (see ch. xxiv. 26) ; and now they have been endured. Everything predicted in 
sacred rite or solemn utterance has been "fulfilled," and we wait for nothing more. 
We sit down to no predictive Passover Feast, because " Christ, our Passover, is slain for 
us." What we have to do is gratefully and eagerly to avail ourselves of the " finished " 
work of our redeeming Lord; to let that suffering, that death, that sacrifice, (i) evoke 
our humility; (2) call forth our faith ; (3) kindle our love and command our obedience ; 
(4) inspire us with sacred and abiding joy, inasmuch as his " surruw uuto death " is the 
iourcB of our eternal life. — 0. 

Vers. 19, 20. — The Lord's Supper. A very simple rite as first observed was the 
Lord's Supper. But lor certain passages in the Acts of the Apostles and in the Epistles, 
we should not have known that Jesus Christ intended to create a permanent institution. 
But though the simpler the ceremouy is the more scriptural it is, yet are the ideas 
asbociated with it and suggested by it many and important. They are these — 

I. The near presence op oub Lord. Not in the elements but presiding over the 
company. It is a table at which he entertains his friends ; and can he, the Divine Host, 
himself be absent ? 

" Around a table, not a tomb. 

He willed our gathering-place should be ; 
When going to prerare our home, 
The Saviour said, ' Remember me.' " 

And ttt that table, meeting and commnnins; with his friends, we may feel iure and 
can realize forcibly that onr living Lord is, in soirit and in truth, " in the midst of us." 

II. Christ our Strength and oitr Joy. The chosen elements are bread and wine, 
the sources of strength and of gladness. He, our Lord, is the one constant Source of 
our spiritual nourishment and strength, of the joy with which our hearts are for ever 
glad. 

III. Christ our PROPiriATiosr. The hroken bread, the outpoured wine— of what 
do these speak to our hearts ? Of the " marred visage," of the weariness, of the poverty 
and privation, of the toill'ulness and loneliness of that troubled life, of the griefs and 
pains of that burdened and broken heart, of the shame and the darkness and the death 
of the last closing scene. We stand with bowed head and reverent spirit at that cross 
and see — 

" Sorrow and love flow mingled down." 

And our hearts are full as we ask — 

"Did e'er such love and sorrow meet; 
Or thorns compose so rich a crown?" 

And we realise that that sorrow was borne, that death died,/or us. " This la my body, 
• given for you ; ' my blood, ' shed for you.' " It is the Propitiation for our sins. 

IV. Our individual appropriation op our Lord's obbat work. Each one eats of 
that bread and drinks of that cup. As he does so, in and by that act he declares his 
own personal need of a Divine Saviour; he affirms his conviction that the sacrifice was 
offered for him; he renews his faith in the Divine Eedeemer; he recognizes the claim 
of him that loved him unto death ; he rededicates himself to Jesus Christ and to his 
service; he rejoices, in spirit, in his reconciled Father, in his Divine Lord and Frieud. 

V. Happy and holy communion with one another. Gathered round one table, in 
the felt presence of our common Lord, all invited to drink of the same cup (Matt, 
xxvi. 27), we are drawn to one another in the bonds of Christian love. We rcHlize our 
oneness in him as a strong bond which triumiihs over all tlie separating influences of 
the world. Faith, joy, love, are kindled and " burn within us ; " and we are strengthened 
and sanctified, built up, enabled to " abide in him." — C. 

Vers. 21, 22. — Jesus and Judas ; owr Lord and ourstlvet. The ordinance of tlw 



218 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. [cb.xxu.I—TL 

Lord's Supper was closely connected, not only in time but in apostolic thonsht, with 
the act of the beirayal (see 1 (Jor. xi. 23) — the institution of the greatest privilege with 
the commission of the darkest crime. Our Lord's demeanuur on this occasion is well 
worthy of our most reverent thouuht. 

I. Jesus and Judas. 1. His length of sufferance. After knowing that Judas waa 
seeking to betray him (ver. 6^, Jesus might well have expelled him from his society, 
lie might have done so, acting judicially, as being no longer worthy to be classed 
among his apostles. He might liave done so, acting prudentially, as one (1) whom it 
was not wise to admit to his counsels and his plans; and as one (2) whose association 
with the eleven would be a source of evil. He might very appropriately have declined 
to acknowledge liim as an officer and a friend. But Jesus did not press his right. On 
the contrary, he let him continue as one ot the twelve, he let him come under the same 
roof with himself, he permitted him to share the I'asclial feast: the hand of him that 
was betraying him was " with him on the table." To such a length as that his long- 
BuHering went. 2. IIi» dignity in rebuke. He did not break forth into passionate 
invective; he did not use words of natural and permissible vehemence; he quietly 
said, "Woe unto that man," etc. I Matthew tells us that he added, "It had been good 
for that man if he had not been born," What a transcendent calmness and serenity 
of spirit we have here I What a contrast between two children of men! One man 
preparing to betray his Teacher, his Friend, his Master; the other compassionating his 
betrayer for the depth of his fall and the sadness of his doom. Jesus went on to his 
sacrificial death and to his throne ; Judas went out into the night (John xiiL 30)— into 
the dark night of guilt, of shame, of despair, of death. 

II. Oltb Lord and ourselves. 1. The wrong; against our Lord it is still open to 
us to commit. We cannot betray him as Judas did ; yet may we do that which 
answers to, and is almost if not quite as deplorable as that sad and shameful act. Let 
us consider that: 1. We know more about Jesus than Judas then did; for we have 
all the light of his resurrection and of the teaching of his apostles. 2. He has granted 
to us mercies as many and as great in intrinsic value as those he bestowed on Judas. 

3. Owing him as much as Judas did, we may do even greater injury to his cause than 
the traitor did. The act of Iscariot ultimately issued in the all-sufBcient sacrifice; this 
did not extenuate or lessen his guiltiness by a simple grain ; but it nullified the mischief 
of the crime. We may do incalculable and irreparable mischief to the cause of our 
Master by our unfaithfulness, our infidelity, our disobedience, our criminal negligence. 

4. By such disloyalty we may wound and grieve his Spirit almost as severely as his 
betrayer did. Wherefore let us : (1) Be humble-minded. "Let him that thinketh he 
standeth," etc If we could find the man who has smitten Christ and his cause the 
severest blow that was ever struck, it is probable that we might easily find an hour ia 
that man's history when he would have shrunk with holy horror from such a guilty act. 
(2) Be prayt-r/ul ; ever looking heavenward with the supplication, " Hold thou me 
up," etc. (3) £e diligent in the field of earnest Christian work. It is the idler in the 
vineyard whom the tempter will assail. It is the faithful workman who is in a position 
to say, after his Lord and Leader, "The prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing 
in mo" (John liv. 30).— a 

Ver.s. 24 — 27. — Greatness after Christ. Three thinsB claim our attention. 

I. Apostolic failure. When the apostles of our Lord came to look back on this 
most memorable evening, how pained and how ashamed they must have felt as they 
recollected this unseemly contest (ver. 24)1 At the very hour when their Lord was 
manifesting his love and his forethought for his Church in two most striking and touch- 
ing ways — at the very hour when his heart was torn with distracting sorrow by the 
desertion and treachery of one of his chosen band, and when he might well have been 
looking for some consolation in the attachment and the obedience of the others, they 
must needs show their unlikeiiess to himself and their unworthiness of their position 
by an untimely dispute about their own importance! In connection with that con- 
descending service of their Loid's, how small such a controversy seems! And in 
connection with such a trial as that through which he was passing, how unbecoming 
and ill-timed was any anxiety about their own afl'airs ! It was in their power to render 
to Jesus Christ a most helpful sympathy, and, instead of doing that, they grieved him 



ca. xxn. 1—71.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 219 

by the exhibition of a contentious and an ambitious spirit. It was a sad failure on 
tlieir part. How often do his disciples fail him now! How often do they let the 
opportunity of loving and effective service pass unui-ed ! When the hour strikes for 
faitlifiilness, or for courage, or for self-sacrifice, or for humility, or for energetic action, 
is there not found unfaithfulness, or timidity, or selfish time-serving, or pride, or a 
culpable inactivity, that loses everything and leaves behind nothing but failure and 
regret ? 

_ II. Worldly vahity. (Ver. 25.) What a poor thing indeed is mere official 
dignity, or even arbitrary power, or servile flattery! Official dignity without moral 
worth is a miserably hollow thing. Arbitrary power, exercised in caprice and apart 
from a pure desire to do good and to enrich, is an evil thing; it is injurious to 
the possessor and it is burdensome to the objects of it. Servile flattery is a false 
thing. It is simply contemptible on the part of those who pay it; it is morally 
ruinous to those who accept it. Let the "Gentiles" act thus if they must; but "^e 
shall not be so." Ye who care to be true, to be loving, to be humble^ye shall not 
sit on that seat of honour, ye shall not run into that serious temptation, ye shall 
not pursue such a worthless prize. Other and better things are within your reach ; 
for you there is — 

Hi. Christian greatness. (Vers. 26, 27.) L Jesus Christ, the greatest One, was 
the Servant of all. He como to serve ; it was his holy, heavenly errand ; he came to 
seek and to save the lost. He lived to serve. That act of menial service in which 
he had just been engaged (John xiii. 1 — 5) was only a picture and illustration of the 
whole spirit and substance of his life; to bear the burden of others was the law of his 
life (Gal. vi. 2). He lived to heal, to help, to comfort, to enlighten, to redeem ; his 
life from end to end was a loving ministry, a gracious and generous service (Mark z. 
46). He luffered to serve. He died to serve. He had a perfect right to say, " I am 
among you as he that serveth." 2. Wo are nearest to our Lord as we live to serve; 
we rise towards the spiritual stature of Jesus Christ as we are filled with this his spirit 
and as we live this his life. There is a paih for ambition to tread in the kingdum of 
Christ ; but it is not the path that leads to high office and official dignity and popular 
applause : these things may come unsought, and be used for good. But the one road 
along which true Christian greatness travels is the way of self-forgetting service. 
To be touched and moved by the sorrows and the sins of our fellow-men ; to be stirred 
to helpful, earnest, sacrificial effort on their behalf; to pity the poor and needy; to seek 
and to save the lost; to breathe the air and to do the work of an unpretentious but 
effective kindness, to have the right to say, "I am among you as he that serveth;" — 
that is greaiuesa after Christ himself. — 0. 

Vers. 28 — 30. — Fidelity and its reward. The lesson of the text is the bountiful 
reward of faithfulness to Jesus Christ ; but taking these words ot his in connection 
with the position in which he well knew himself to be, they speak to us of— 

L 'I'he majestic confidence of ona Lord. "I appnint [bequeath] unto you a 
kingdom . . . that ye may sit on tlirones." And who is this thus calmly disposing of 
kingdoms and thrones? — a reigning emperor, a biilliant conqueror? Only a poor, 
homeless, soldierless Prophet ! One who knew that he was about to he taken, tried, 
convicted, scourged, crucified ! Yet he meant it all. What majestic confidence in 
God, in the power of his gos[iel, in his own integrity ! With what reverent homage 
shall we bow before him who could make such royal offers when the shadow of the 
cross already rested on his path! And what nobler sight is there to be seen among 
men than that of one (missionary, minister, teacher, reformer, etc.) calmly going on 
his way when every one and when everything is against him, confident in the triumph 
of the cause for which he pleads! Taking these words of Christ in connection with 
tae preceding verses, we see — 

11. The quicknkss with which he parsed fbom corhectton to cokmendation. 
Seeing that his apostles were not only silenced, but humbled by the rebuke he had 
kdministered to them (vers. 24 — 26), and wishing to reassure and revive them, our 
Lord turned to the fidelity they had shown toward himself, and spuke words of praise 
and of promise. "You are wrong altogether in your spirit and behaviour in this 
matter ; I blame you for thii. But be not cast down ; I do not forget your constancy 



820 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxn. 1—71. 

toward me in all my times of trial, and I will reward you." Such was, such U, the 
gracious, considerate, generous Master. 

" His anger in io slow to rise, 
So ready to abate." 

It is tlie flying shadow which the wind-driven cloud casts tipon the field, chased hy 
the hastening sunshine. " slow to strike and swift to spare ! " rnicrht well have been 
written of him. Can it he said or sung of us, in our relations with one another ? 
But the main truth here is — 

III. The eewakd of fidelitt in the Master's sbkviob. Our Lord wished to 
assure his disciples that he was hy no means unmindful or iinappreciative of their 
faithfulness; and he found the best proof of this in their constancy toward himself in 
his times of trouble. Through all poverty, all persecution, all desertion, all apparent 
failure, they had been true and loyal — they had shared his sorrows, had kept step with 
him thruugh the dark shadows; they had ministered to his bodily necessities (John 
iv. 8), and (so far as they could) had sympathized with him in his spiritual conflicts. 
" Ye are they who have continued with me in my trials." And what a reward he was 
prepared to give them (vers. 29, 30) ! Not understanding these words literally, we take 
it that their Lord held out before them; 1. Fulness of joy. "Eat and drink at my 
table." 2. Signal honour. " Sit on thrones." 3. Large and abiding power and 
influence. "I appoint unto you a kingdom." This promise has been already fulfilled, 
thdugh in a different form from that which they then expected — in the exalted privilege 
of being the first to publish the gospel of his grace to mankind ; in the gloiious work 
of writing those memorials and letters which show no sign of age and are esteemed the 
one ahsvlutely invaluable literature of the world; in the celestial joy, dignity, influence, 
which they have long inherited. (1) What are the best proofs of loyalty we can give? 
These are (a) showing tender sympathy and untiring helpfulness towards his people 
(see Matt. xxv. 40); (i) having continual regard to his will in all the duties and 
details of our life (see John xiv. 15, 21, 23) ; (c) being practically concerned for the 
progress of his kingdom. (2) What is the reward he will grant usi A. goodly measure 
of joy, — of sacred joy in worship, fellowship, work, life; ^honour, — the esteem which 
purity and love rarely, if ever, fail to win ; of quiet power, — the holy and blessed 
influence which spiritual beauty and earnest testimony exert on heart and life, which 
they transmit from generation to generation. This reward here ; and hereafter joy, 
honour, power, such as we must wait to see and must resolve to experience. — C. 

Vers. 31, 32 (first part). — The worth of Tnan. These verses afford incidental but 
valuable evidence of the surpassing worth of the human spirit, and should help us to 
feel of how much greater account are we ourselves than anything that merely belongs 
to us. This is brought out by — 

I. The designs that abb laid against us. It was evidently in a verj"- solemn and 
earnest strain that Jesus said, " Satan desired to have you [plural], that he may sift," 
etc. The evil one longed with eagerness, and strove with strength, to pass the apostles 
of Christ through the sieve of temptation, that he might compass their overthrow. And 
Peter, at a later hour, tells us that that is his attitude and habit in regard to all Christian 
discijiles (1 Pet. v. 8). We may take it that: 1. All the unholy intelligences of the 
spiritual realm are bent on securing our overthrow. 2. In this malign intention they 
are supported by human agents. And this, not only because evil naturally propagates 
evil, and because the wicked feel stronger and more secure as tbey are more numerous, 
but because they recognize the value of one human spirit and the advantage secured by 
gaining it to their side. Hence there is a deliberate and determined design often made 
upon the individual man by the forces of evil. This is a fact hy no means to be over- 
looked. As we go on our heavenward way there may be an ambush laid for us at any 
point ; at any time strong spiritual foes may do their utmost to contrive our fall. The 
possibilities of evil and of ruin are manifold. We may fall by error and unbelief, hy 
pride, by selfishness, by worldliness and vanity, by intemperance or impurity, hy 
departure in spirit from the fear and love of God. There is room, there is reason, foi 
vigilance on the part of him who believes himself well on the way toward or even 
neariug the gates of the celestial citjr. 



am. rxn. 1— 71.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. 221 

II. The solicitudb of odr Savioub on our behalf. "I have prayed for thee." 
The strain of our Lurd's address, "Simon, Simon," and the fact of his interceding oij 
Peter's behalf, 8|>eak of a tender solicitude on his part for his disciple. Jesus knew 
well all Peter's intirmities ; but he also knew how ardently he could love, h(iv\ devotedly 
he could serve, how much he could be. Hence the intensity of his desire that he would 
not be overcome. And for this reason we may be sure that our Lord is legarding ug 
all with a Divine Interest. He knows the worth of any and every human <pirit — ^how 
much it can know and can enjoy ; whom and what it can love ; what graces it can illus- 
trate, and what trutli adorn; what influence it can instil; what good, and even great, 
work it can accomplish for God and man. He knows also what sorrow it may bring 
upon itself, what shame, what ruin ; and also what irreparable injury it may do. We 
need not hesitate, but should accustom ourselves to think that Jesus Christ is regarding 
us with a very tender interest; is lollowin^ the choices we are making and the course 
we are pursuing with holy and loving solicitude; is grieved when he sees us wander 
from the way of wisdom, rejoices in us and over us when he sees us take the upward 
path. 

IIL The realitt of oub human responsibility. Jesus Christ prayed that Peter's 
faith might not fail. And it did not — we should naturally expect. But in part it did. 
It did not utterly break down as that of Judas did, but it failed to kee^i iiim loyal in 
a very trying hour. It did not save him from the act of denial and from the sorrow 
which succeeded the sin. It did not in any way relieve the apostle of his individual 
resiKjnsibility. He continued to " bear his own burden," as every man must. Nut the 
very highest privilege, not even the intercession of the Lord himself, will relieve us 
of that. It must rest with us, in the last resort, whether we will strive and win, or 
whether we will yield and be lost. — C. 

Ver. 32 (latter part). — The privilege of spiritual maturity. "When thou art con- 
verted, strengthen thy brethren." This forward-looking injunction of Christ remind* 
us of— 

I. Odr need of stbenothenino power. Such are the manifold and eflfectWe forces 
opposed to us, invisible as well as visible and human (see Eph. vi. 12); so strong and 
80 subtle are the temptations that beset us on every side ; that we urgently need, not 
only the presence of resisting principles within us, but the aid of friendly and helpful 
•uxiliaries around us. We want, indeed, the help which is from above ; that is the 
first thing to seek. And, having besought that, we do well to avail ourselves of all the 
strength we can gain from other sources. For the battle is severe, and we are often 
hard pressed by our vigilant and relentless foes. 

II. The help we can find in man. God is, as stated, the Source of spiritual strength. 
He renews our strength by the direct communications of his Divine Spirit. But man 
helps us also. " A man shall be as an hiding-place ... as rivers of water ... as 
the shadow of a great rock." Paul went through the region of Galatia, " strengthen- 
ing the disciples " (Acts xviii. 23). Peter was to " strengthen his brethren." We can 
and we should do much to strengthen one another, to build one another up on our holy 
faith. We can do this : 1. By the force of a beautiful and attractive example. 2. By 
the utterance of invigorating truth. 3. By the inspiration of a cheerful, hopelul, loving 

spirit. 

III. The incompetence of inexperience. Peter was not in a position to afford 
spiritual strength then. He was too inexperienced. He had not yet learned what the 
fierceness of the fire of temptation meant. He did not then understand where his true 
strength lay. He had not yet graduated in the school of experience. It is they, and 
only they, who know what spiritual struggle means who can impart to others the help 
they need. We must have passed through the waters before we can undertake to teach 
others how to swim the strong stream of trial and temptation. 

IV. The unfitness of unfaithfulness. Peter was abuut to fall. A few hours 
would find him in the power of the adversary. Befoie another day dawned he would 
have to reproach himself as a disloyal disciple. He was about to rest under the shadow 
of great guilt, and he would have to wait until he came iorth from that shadow. Not 
until he " was converted," not until the spirit of overweening self-confidence had given 
Blace to th»t of humble trust in God, not until the knowledge of Chiist "after the 



222 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxn. 1— 7L 

flesh " had passed, had risen into a knowledge of him that was truly spiritual and real, 
— not till then would he be fitted to " strengthen his brethren." His case was strikingly 
parallel with that of David (see Ps. li. 11 — 13). We have similar experiences now. 
When the Christian disciple loses ground spiritually and morally, it becomes him to 
" return unto the Lord" himself, and " then to teach transgressors " the way of God; 
it becomes him to undergo a change of spirit, to be " renewed in the spirit of his mind," 
and then to speak the helpful and sustaining truth ot Christ. Unfaithfulness to our 
Lord, departure and distance from him, — this has no teaching function ; its first duty 
is penitential ; then it may think of useful work. But we should understand that 
all true usefulness rests on the foundation of spiritual integrity; it can find no other 
footing. 

V. Thb privileqb op Christias maturity. Peter was to look forward to a not 
distant future, when, liaving learnt truth by what he suffered, he should strengthen his 
brethren in all that was true and wise and good. This he did, and in this he found a 
noble heritage. To this we may look forward as the reward of spiritual struggle, as 
the goal of earthly good. What better portion can we 'ask for than to be the source of 
spiritual strength to our brethren and sisters as they bear the burdens and fight the 
battles of their life?— 0. 

Vers. 33, 34 (with 55 — 62).— T7i« apostWs fall. From this most memorable incident, 
recorded with noticeable candonr by all the evangelists, many lessons spring. 

I. How IGNORANT OF HIMSELF EVEN A GOOD MAN MAY PROVE ! (Ver. 33.) Petcf 

believed himself to be capable of daring and enduring the very last extremity in the 
cause of his Master. He would have utterly ridiculed the idea that the sneer of a 
servant-girl could draw from him a denial of his Lord. The event showed how entirely 
he mistuok himself. We ought to know ourselves well; but, in fact, we do not. We 
suppose ourselves to he strong and steadfast, when we are feeble and unreliable ; or to 
be humble-minded, when we are proud of heart; or to be generous, when we are essen- 
tially self-seeking; or to be devout, when we are really unspiritual; to be near to God, 
when we are afar off (Rev. iii. 17 ; 1 Cor. x. 12 ; Ps. xix. 12, 13 ; cxxxix. 23, 24). 

II. How PERFECT THE KNOWLEDGE OUR MaSTER HAS OF OUR HEART AND LIFE ! (Yet. 

34.) Jesus knew how weak his disciple was, and he foresaw his speedy failure. He 
knows us altogether. He knows our heart; how sincere is our purpose, how frequent 
are our efforts, how many our disappointments, how faulty is our nature, how wounded 
and weak is our s]iirit. He knows also our life. He sees it as it lies before his all- 
beholding eye; he "knows the way we take," the path we are about to pursue. It is 
to One who has a thorough and complete knowledge of us that we belong, and it is to 
him we draw nigh in our best hours. 

HI. From what a height a good man mat fall ! This erring one is no other than 
the Ajiostle Peter, the very man who had made the great conlessinn, and upon wtom 
or upon whose testimony Christ would build his Church (Matt. xvi. 13 — 19). It is he 
who had been admitted to such close fellowship with Christ, and been allowed the high 
privilege of rendering him constant personal service. There is no office, however high 
it may be in the Christian Church, which will ensure to its occupant spiritual integrity. 
And even he who has been " raised up to heavenly places," and has known even the 
raptures of an exalted spiritual experience, may fall under the power of temptation. 
It is not the lofty but the lowly that stand on safe ground in the kingdom of God. 

IV. How steep IS the descent of sin! From a presumptuous and blind self-con- 
fidence Peter fell to a half-hearied following (ver. 54); from that he fell to untruth- 
fulness and denial of his Lord (ver. 57); from that to a more deliberate and repeated 
denial (vers. 58, 59), accompanied even (as Matthew tells us) with profanity. Sin is 
a slope which seems slight at the summit, but it becomes steeper and yet steeper as we 
go on our downward way. And it too often happens that we reach a point where we 
cannot arrest ourselves, but are compelled against our own desire to continue. Shun 
tlie first step in the downward course! 

V. How merciful IS Christ's method op conviction I (Ver. 61.) Not a blow that 
smote him to the ground ; nut even burning wurds of condemnation that should sound 
ever aflerwaids in his soul ; but one reproachful glance — the look of wounded love. So 
merciful and so pitiful is our Lord when we are tmfaithful or disloyal to him now. B» 



OH. xrn. 1—71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKB. 223 

bears long with OS ; he Beets to win tia back through added privilege acd mnltipHed 
mercy ; he deals very patiently and gently with us ; only when other and milder meihods 
fail does he mercifully afflict us, that in some way and by some means he may redeem 
ns from folly and from ruin. 

VI. Whither Christ seeks to lead the erbino. (Ver. 62.) He seeks to lead us, 
•s bj' his reproving glance he led his fallen disciple, to a pure and saving penitence. 
He would have our hearts filled with a worthy and a cleansing shame, with a purifying 
sorrow; that this may lea(i us into a condition of (1) abiding humility, of (2) living 
faith, of (3) thorough leconsecration to himself and to his cause. — C. 

Vers. 35 — 38. — Misundertfanding Christ. There is no teacher who has been so well 
heard, and none that has been so much honoured and obeyed, as Jesus Christ. Yet 
there can have been few who have been so much misunderstood as he has been. We 
have our attention drawn by the text to— 

I. CoNTEMPORART MisuNUERSTANDiNO. 1. By the aposthi themsflves. (1) On this 
occasion their Lord wished to intimate to them, in strong and forcible language, that to 
whatever perils and straits they had been exposed before, the time was now at hand 

' when, he himself being taken from their side and the saddest foreshadowinga being 
fulfilled, they would be subjected to far severer trials, and would be (in a sense) cast on 
their own defences. The apostles, mistaking his meaning, put a literal interpretation 
on his words, and produced a couple of swords, as perhaps meeting the emergency I 
(a) On a previous occasion (Matt. xvi. 5 — 8) the Lord wariitd them against " the leaven 
of the Pharisees ; " and they supposed him to refer to their neglect in forgetting the 
bread I (3) They completely failed to apprehend his meaning when he foretold his 
own sufferings and death (ch. xviii. 31 — 34). 2. By his disciples generally. (1) They 
could not comprehend what he meant by "eating his flesh and drinking Lis blood 
(John vi. GO). (2) They comfiletely misunderstood the end he had in view, the 
cliaracter of that " kingdom of heaven" of which he spoke so much. (3) They did not 
enter into the great redeeming purpose for which he came. 3. By his enemies. (1) In 
BO small a matter as his saying recorded in John ii. 19 ; (2) in so great a matter as 
that recorded in John xviii. 37. 

II. Subsequent MisuNDERSTANnreo. In how many ways has the Church of Christ, 
iince apostolic days, misunderstood its Lord! It has done so in regard to the mearnng 
of particular words ; and in regard to the great end he had in view (the nature of his 
kingdom); and in regard to the means and methods he would have his friends employ. 
How pitifully and how painfully has it misunderstood him when it lias intorjiretud his 
reference to the sword of the text (ver. 36), and his use of the word " compel " (ch. xiv. 
23) as justifying every conceivable cruelty in the farthernnce of his cause 1 

III. Modern misunderstandino. Judging from what we know has been, we con- 
clude that it is likely enough that we also misunderstand our Master. 1. We may 
fail to reach the true significance of his words ; we may find out, further on, that they 
have anotlier and a larger meaning than that we have been ascribing to them. 2. We 
may mistake his will as to the objoct we should work for, or as to the right and the 
wise methods we should adopt to secure our end. 3. We may be wrong in our judgment 
of what Christ is doing with ourselves and with our life; we may misread his Divine 
purpose concerning us. There are three principles which we shall do well to keep in 
mind in our endeavour to understand the Divine Teacher. The thought of Christ is 
(1) profound rather than superficial ; (2) spiritual rather than sensuous ; (3) compre- 
hensive and far-seeing (reaching through time to immortality) rather than narrow and 
time- bounded. — C. 

Vers. 39 — 45. — Gethsemane. As we enter " the place which is called Oethsemane," 
we pass into the " holy place," the nearest of all to " the holy of holies " — that is, to 
Calvary itself. Thither our Lord went on this most memorable evening; and "his 
disi lilies followed him" — the eleven who remained faithful to him. But even of 
these only three were counted worthy to attend him into the secret place of prayer 
and struggle, and to witness his agony. Sucli sorr iw as he was then to know seeks 
the secret place and chooses only the very clonust and dearest friendship for its 
ministry Then fell upon our Divine Lord a sorrow and a temptation ; an agitation 



224 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxu. 1— 7L 

and agony of bouI for which onr language has no name, onr heart no room, our life 
no experience. We ask — What was that intolerable and overwhelming anguish, which 
the Saviour askeii might pass from him, and which had so marvellous and so terribly 
8i>iriificant an effect on bis bodily nature (vers. 42 — 44)? Our completest answer 
leaves much to be said, much to be explained. 1. We barely touch the outer line of 
the whole circle of truth when we speak of the apprehtnsion of coming torture and 
death as events in the natuial, physical sphere. It is an irreverent and wholly 
unworthy conception that what many men— many who have not even been good men 
— have faced without flinching, our Lord and Master shrank from with an over- 
mastering dread. 2. We come nearer to the centre of the truth when we think tliat 
the whole shadow of the cross, with its spiritual darkness and desolation, then began 
to rest upon him. Something of that shadow had been darkening his path before 
(Mark X. 38 ; ch. xii. 50 ; John xii. 27). And this shadow darkened and deepened 
as he drew near to the dread hour itself. At this point the cross immediately con- 
fronted him in all its awful severity, and he knew that this was the time whea he 
must finally resolve to endure everything or to retrace his steps. This, then, was the 
critical hour; then was "the crisis of the world." Great and terrible was the tempta- 
tion to decline the fearful future now at hand; it was a temptation he struggled 
against with a spiritual violence that showed itself in the drops of blood; it was 
a temptation he only overcame by tearful supplications to the Eternal Father for his 
prevailing succour (Heb. v. 7). 3. But we miss our true mark if we do not include 
the thought that he was then bearing something of the burden of human sin. Whatever 
was intended by " bearing our sins in his own body," by " making his soul an offering 
for sin," and by expressions similar to these, we believe that Jesus Christ was then 
in the very act of fulfilling these predictions when he thus strove and suffered in the 
garden. As we look upon him there we see " the Lamb of God taking away the sin 
of the world." The scene may teach ui very varied lessons and affect us in many 
ways ; but it is certainly well fitted to be — 

I. An attraction to bouls still distant fbom the Satioub. It says, " Behold 
how he loved you 1 " 

II. An invitation to pbater fob FArriTFxrLNEss in the Hotm of trtai,. Both before 
and after, the Master exhorted his disciples to pray that " they entered not into temp- 
tation" (vers. 40, 46). He himself triumphed through the strong efBcacy of prayer 
(ver. 41), Prayer, appropriate at all times, is urgently needed as we enter the shadow 
oi temptation; but it is positively indispensable when the greater trials of our Iif« 
assail us. 

III. A SUMMONS TO STRENtTOtIS AND UNFALTERINO PERSE VEBANOB. Christian pilgrim. 

Christian workman, do you weary of your way or of your work ? Does the one seem 
long and thorny, or the other tedious and unsuccessful ? Do you think you must 
sleep as the disciples did, or that you must put down the cup as their Master did not ? 
Do you talk about giving up the journey, about retiring from the field ? Consider him 
who went quite through the work the Father gave him to do, who strove and suffered 
to the very last; consider him, the agonizing but undaunted, the suffering but 
resolving Saviour ; consider him, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. 

" Go, labour on, spend and be spent. 
Thy joy to do the Father's will ; 
It is the way the Master went, 
Should not the servant tread it BtUl?* 

0. 

Ver. 42 (latter part).— SeJ^-sttrrenrfcr. "Not ray will, but thine, be done.'' These 
words are sugiiestive as well as expressive. They suf^gest to us — 

I. The ESSENTIAL NATURE OF SIN. Where shall we find the root of sin? Its mani- 
fold fruits we see around us in all forms of irreligion, of vice, of violence. But in wnat 
shall we find its root ? In the preference of our own will to the will of Ood. If we 
trace human wrong-doing and wrong-being to its ultimate point, we arrive at that 
conclusion. It is because men are not willing to be what God created them to be, not 
willing to do what he desires them to do ; it is because they want to pursue those 
lines of thought and of action which he has forbidden, and to find their pleasiue and 



OH. xxn. 1— 71.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 225 

their poition in tbings which he has disallowed, — that they err from the strait path 
and begin the course which ends in condemnation and in death. The essence of all 
Bin is in this assertion of our will against the will of God. We fail to recognize the 
foundation truth that we are his ; that by every sacred tie that caa bind one being to 
another we are bound, and we belong to him from whom we came and in whom we 
live, and move, and have our being. We assume to be the masters of our own lives and 
fortunes, the directors of our own selves, of our own will ; we say, " My will, not thine, 
be done." Thus are we radically wrong ; and being radically wrong, the issues of our 
hearts are evil. From this fountain of error and of evil the streams of sin are flowing ; 
to that we trace their origin. 

II. The houb and act op bpimttjaIi subrender. When does the human spirit 
return to God, and by what act ? That hour and that act, we reply, are not found at 
the time of any intellectual apprehension ot the truth. A man may understand but 
little of Christian doctrine, and yet may be within the kingdom of heaven ; or, on the 
other hand, he may know much, and yet remain outside that kingdom. Nor at the 
lime of keen sensibility ; for it is possible to be moved to deep and to fervent feeling, 
and yet to withhold the heart and life from the Supremo. Nor at the time of associa- 
tion with the visible Church of Christ. It is the hour at which and the act by which 
the soul eordiaTly surrenders itself to God. When, in recognition of the paramount 
claims of God the Divine Father, the gracious Saviour of mankind, we yield ourselves 
to God, that for all the future he may lead and guide us, may employ us in his holy 
service ; when we have it in our heart to say, " Henceforth thy will, not ours, be 
done ; * — then do we return unto the Lord our God, and then does he count us among 
the number of his own. 

III. The highest attain-mbnt of Christian ENDEAVotrB. When do we reach 
our highest point ? Not when we have fought our fiercest battle, or have done our 
most fruitfid work, or have gained our clearest and brightest vision of Divine truth ; 
but when we have reached the point in which we can most cheerfully and most 
habitually say, after Christ our Lord, " Not my will, but thine, be done ; " when under 
serious discouragement or even sad defeat, when after exhausting pain or before terrible 
Buffering, when under heavy loss or in long-continued loneliness, or in prospect jf early 
death, we are perfectly willing that God should do with us as his own wisdom bud love 
direct — 0. 

Vers. 47 — 52, ^Z.— Christianity and violtnte. The use of the sword by Piter, snu 
the presence of " swords and staves " in the hands of the ofiScers, suggest to us the con- 
nection between Jesus Christ (and his disciples) and the employment of violeife ; and 
this both by them and against them. 

L The cusBEMLmBss of violence used against Jesdb Christ and his DjgorPLES. 
It is true that there was pmething worse than the weapons of violence in that garden ; 
the traitor's kiss was very much worse. We may be sure that Jesus was conBcious of 
a far keener wound from those false lips of Judas than he would have been from the 
hands of those armed men had they struck him with their strength. The subtle 
schemes and the soft but treacherous suggestions of false Mends are deadlier in their 
issue, if not in their aim, than the hard blows of open adversaries. But : 1. How 
unseemly was open violence shown to Jesus Christ I To come with sword and stick 
against the Gentle One from heaven ; against him who never used his omnipotence to 
harm a single adversary ; against him who " would not break the bruised reed" among 
the children of men ; against him who had been daily employing his power to relieve 
from pain, to raise from weakness, to remove privation, to restore from death! 2. How 
unseemly is such violence shown to Ohrisfs true disciples I His true disciples, those 
who are loyal and obedient to their Lord, are men and women in whom a patient and 
loving spirit is prevailing; they are peace-makers among their brothers and sisters; 
they have " put away bitterness, wrath, anger, clamour, railing ; " they walk in love ; 
they seek to win by a gentle manifestation and by a gracious utterance of the truth. 
How entirely inappropriate and unseemly is violence shown to them I And it may be 
added, how useless is such violence employed against the cause they advocate I It has 
never happened yet that sword and stave have crushed the living truth. They have 
•mitten its champions to the ground, but they have only brought out into the light 
LUKE. — n. • 



226 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxii. 1— 7L 

the heroic courage and noble unselflshnesa which that truth inspires. " So that those 
things [those persecutions] have fallen out rather uato the fuitherance of the gospeL" 
Cruelty strikes at its enemy, and smites itself. 

II, The unlawfulness of violence employed on behalf op Christianitt. How 
vain and how foolish the act of " smiting -with the sword" (ver. 49)! It was an act of 
intemperate and ill-considered zeal ; it was calculated to do much more harm than 
good. Its effects had to be undone by the calm interposition and the healing power of 
Christ (ver. 51). It was rebuked by the Master in decided terms (Matt. xxvi. 52). 
And from that hour to the end of apostolic history the use of physical violence dis- 
appears. Well would it have been for the cause and kingdom of our Lord if it had 
never been revived. The sword and the stave have no place in the Christian armoury. 
The weapons of its warfare are not carnal. Such instruments do not, they cannot, 
serve it ; they gain a momentary victory at the sad and great expense of entirely mis- 
representing the spirit and the method of Jesus Christ. Compulsion is utterly out of 
place in connection with the Church of Christ ; it loses immeasurably more than it 
gains by that resource. Let the disciples of Christ be assured that (1) the utterance 
of Divine iruti, especially the truth that relates to the redeeming love of the Saviour 
himself; (2) living a life of blamelessness and beauty, of integrity and kindness; (3) 
depentlence on the aid of the Divine Spirit to make the spoken Word and the living 
innuoaoe efi'ectual and mighty ; — that these are the weapons which will con(iuer the 
enemies of Christ, and will place him upon the throne of the world. — C. 

Ver. 53. — The power ^spiritual darkness. As our Lord, declining to avail himself 
of the physical forces at his command, surrendered himself to the will of his assailants, 
he used an expression which was full of spiritual significance. " This is your hour," 
he said, " and the power of darkness." By this he intimated (1) that the hour of his 
enemies' triumph had ariived — the brief hour of their outward success and inward exul- 
tation, the dark hour of his humiliation and visible defeat ; and (2) that this passing 
hour was simultaneous with the prevalence of the power of darkness. Wicked men 
were to triumph because the forces of guilty error were for the time prevailing. We 
look at — 

I. The powee of darkness. 1. Its spiritual nature. It is a state of spiritual 
blindness. We may not, with a great Greek philosopher, resolve aU evil into error ; 
but we may say that sin is contiiuially, is universally, springing from inward blindness. 
Men do not see the truth ; they call good evil, and evil good ; they have the most false 
imaginations concerning all objects, from the Divine Being himself to the lowliest 
human duty ; and hence they go far astray. 2. Its most glaring manifestations. It 
lays its unholy hand on innocence, on Divine Love itself, and leads it away to trial and 
crucifixion. It conducts the devoted servant of Christ to the brutal judge, to the 
shameful scaffold, to the devouring flame. It arms a vast multitude of men and leads 
them forth to a vain and useless strife, shedding human blood and wasting human 
labour, as if Christ would be pleased or could be served by such means as these. It 
covers with the sacred name of religion a system that holds millions of human beings 
in a degrading bf.ndaee- '»■ "wnrllj:? all the sinful institutions the world has seen and 
suffered from. 3. Its most aepcoraoie effects. These are not found in the deeds and the 
sufferings of men, but rather in their souls ; the worst issue of spiritual misconception 
is in the utter darkness of spirit in which it ends. " If the light that is in us be dark- 
ness, how great must that darkness be I " It meaus : (1) False thoughts. Here were 
men who should have known better thinking the worst things of Jesus Christ^ 
judging him to be a criminal, to ba a traitor, to be a blasphemer; and there are men 
amougst us who, under the power of error, think altogether wrong thoughts of God 
and of the Saviour — thoughts which do him wrung, which misrepresent him to the 
mind, which repel rather than attract the soul. (2) Bad feelings. Here were men 
indulging in feelings of positive and perfect hatred against Jesus Christ ; and there are 
men, misled by the power of darkness, hating instead of loving the Father of spirits, 
repelled from instead of being drawn towards good and true souls whom they have 
grievously misunderstood. (3) Wrong purposes of heart. Uuder this malignant 
influence men are purposing to injure their fellow-men. Instead of resolving to 
rescue, to raise, to eiinoble them, they determine to put them down or to hold them 



OH. xnL 1—71.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINO TO ST. LUKE. 227 

down, to lay a hard hand upon them and keep them harmless because helpless. It is 
in the blinding, misleading, deteriorating effects upon the soul itself that the very 
worst results of darkness are to be seen. 

IL OtJB HOPE CONCERNINO IT. The " power of darkness " was coincident with " the 
hour" of the enemies of our Lord. And that was hut an hour; it was limited to the 
brief period of the Passion. Then came Christ's glorious hour — the hour of his resur- 
rection ; the hour of his ascent to the right hand of Power. The prevalence of this 
evil power of darkness is limited in time ; it will not last for ever. Innocence, purity, 
truth, love, righteousness, may be led away to trial and death, as they were then in the 
Person of Jesus Christ ; but the hour of their resurrection and their triumph will arrive. 
Let faithful lahowr do its noble part, and let calm and Christian patience bring its 
priceless contribution, and another hour will strike than that of the foes of Christ, 
and another power than that of moral darkness will take the sceptre and rule the 
world.— 0. 

Ver. 54. — Distant discipUthip. "Peter followed afar off." 1. In this we find some- 
thing that was commendable. The impulsive and energetic Peter did not exhaust his 
zeal in that imfortunate, sword-stroke of his ; nor was it quenched by the rebuke of his 
Master. Though it was far from an ideal discipleship to "follow afar off," it wai 
discipleship still. Wo do not read that the others did as much as that; they probably 
sought their own safety by complete retirement. Peter could not do that ; his attach- 
ment to Christ did not allow him to disconnect himself any further than was involved 
in a distant following. But : 2. In this we find something that was incomplete. The 
disciple desired to be near enough to his Master to know what the end would be, but he 
wished to be far enough off to be secure from molestation. He took counsel of his fears, 
and was so far from the scene that he was showing no sympathy with his Friend, and 
was running no risk from his enemies. It is not at all unlikely that this timidity, 
from which he succeeded in partially and momentarily shaking himself, was the 
beginning and the explanation of his subsequent failure. 

I. Genuine discipleship. This is found m following Christ. 1. Owning his claim 
as Lord and Leader of the soul ; owning it by a willing and entire submission of our 
will to his will, a consecration of our life to his service, a perfect readiness of heart to 
say, "Lord, I will follow thee." 2. Endeavouring to walk even as he walked — in 
reverence, in righteousness, in love. S. Striving to live this Christian life not only after 
him, but unto him. 

II. Distant discipleship. We follow "afar off" when we are: 1. Lathing in 
devotion. He who is only found irregularly and infrequently with God, in the attitude 
of praise and prayer, and in the act of studying his holy will, must be at a great 
distance firom that "beloved Son" who spent so much time with his Father, and found 
so much strength in his conscious presence and loving sympathy. 2. Wanting in 
purity. He whose spirit is much entangled with the cares, absorbed in the pursuits 
and prizes, hungering and thirsting for the pleasures of this world, and certainly he 
whose soul is to any considerable degree affected and tainted by the lower temptations 
of the flesh, — is a long way behind the holy Saviour ; is far off from him who was " holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from t,in," from him " in whose mouth no guile was 
found." 3. Failing in generous and practical kindness. He who is only sparingly 
offering his resources, spiritual or material, to the cause of human comfort and elevation, 
who is drawing the line of his service at the point of self-sacrifice, and declines to go 
across it, — is surely a very distant follower of that gracious and generous Friend of man 
who suffered the very last and the very worst that he might redeem us from sin and 
restore us to truth, to holiness, to God. This distant discipleship is, in every aspect, 
to be deplored. (1) It is unfaithfulness to ourselves. A departure from the position 
we took when we first "yielded ourselves unto God, as those alive from the dead." (2) 
It is perilous to our own souls. That way failure lies ; and failure here means utter 
and disastrous defeat ; it means suffering and shame ; it may even mean death. (3) It 
is disappointing to our Divine Lord. He looks for a close following on our part; he 
wants »is to be at his side, to be serving him with all our strength, to he like him in 
spirit and in character and in life. And when he sees us " afar off," he is grieved with 
■s instead of rejoicing in ua. (1) Let those who have been abiding in him, aud there- 



228 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. fcH. xxn. 1—71 

fore following him closely, bo watchful and prayerful that they do not "drift away" 
and lag behind ; (2) and let those who have to reproach themselves as distant disciples 
draw near to their Lord in renewed penitence and devutedness of spirit. — 0. 

Ver. 61. — 7^ look of our Lord. "And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter." 
What was there then, and what is there now, in the glance of Jesus Christ ? 

I. His look of pbnetbation. We read of one of the earliest disciples being con- 
vinced by our Lord's discernment of him under the thick foliage of the fig tree ; he 
was then told to look for greater things than that (John i. 50). And surely one of 
those greater things was found in that penetration which saw through the thicker 
covering of the human flesh and of humau speech and demeanour to the very thought 
of the mind, to the very desire of the heart, to the inmost secrets of the soul. Ho 
knew what was in man. It was his knowledge of men that directed him in his vary- 
ing tieatment of them; it is his penetrating insight into men now that determines his 
ilealing with us alL 

II. His look op compassion. What did the sick and the suffering, the fevered and 
the paralyzed and the leprous, the men and women who had left afflicted ones behind 
them at their homes — what depths of tender compassion did these sons and daughters 
of Israel see in the eyes of Jesus Christ ? And what inexhaustible fulness of pity, 
what unbounded sympathy, may not the stricken and the sorrowing souls who are 
badly bruised and wounded on life's highway still find in "the face of Jesus Christ"! 

III. His look of sad rbpboach. Sometimes there was that in the glance of Jesus 
Christ from which the guilty shrank. When " he looked round about on them with 
anger," we may be sure that his bafled enemies quailed before his glance. And when 
" the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter," what keen sorrowful reproach was then 
apparent in the face of Jesus Christ 1 how that look gathered up all possible words and 
tones of solemn expostulation, of sad disappointment, of bitter sorrow! It was a look 
which wrought great things in the apostle's soul, the remembrance of which, we may 
be sure, he carried with him to the end. Christ has all too many occasions now to 
turn toward us that reproachful glance. 1. When we fail to keep the promises we 
made him at the time of our self-surrender. 2. When we fail to pay the vows we 
made him in some hour of discipline. 3. When we fall seriously short of the allegiance 
which all his disciples owe to him — in reverence, in obedience, in submission. Let us, 
who are professing to follow him, ask ourselves what we should see in his countenance 
if we stood face to face with him to-day. Would it be the benign look of Divine com- 
mendation 1 or would it be the pained look of sorrowful reproach ? To those who are 
inquiring their way to life it is a source of blessed encouragement that they will see, 
if they regard their Lord — 

IV. His LOOK or TENDBB INTEREST. When the rich young man came and made his 
earnest inquiry of the great Teacher, he was not yet in the kingdom, and was not 
yet fully prepared to enter it ; but he was a sincere and earnest seeker after God, and 
" Jesus, beholding him, loved him " (Mark x. 21). With such tender regard, with such 
loving interest, does he look down on every true suppliant who looks up to him with 
the vital question on his lips, " Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit 
eternal life y'—C. 

Vers. 63, 64. — T)ie patience of Christ. In these touching words, which we cannot 
read without a sentiment of shame as members of the human race, we have — 

I. A PICTURE OF SUPREME ENDURANCE. How much OUT Lord was called upon to 
tndure, we shall be best able to realize when we consider : 1. The greatness of which 
he was conscious (see ver. 70). He knew and felt that he had a right to the most 
reverent homage of the best and hij;hest, and was thus treated by the worst and 
lowest. 2. The power which he knew he wielded: with what perfect ease could he 
have extricated himself from these cruel insults I 3. The character of the men who 
were maltreating him — the lowest amongst the low. 4. The nature of the indignities 
to which they subjected him ; these went from bad to worse — from binding him to 
beating him, from beating him to spitting upon l,im, from this most shameful indignity 
to the yet more cruel sneer at his holy mission, " Prophesy unto us," etc. They vented 
upon him the very last extremes of human contumely and shame. 



OH. xxn. 1— 71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 229 

IL A PioTUBB o» BUBtiMB PATIENCE. He bore it all with perfect calmness. Here 
ehone forth in its full lustre " the meekness of Jesus Christ." " When he was reviled, 
he reviled not again ; when he suffered, he threatened not ; " " As a sheep before her 
shearers," etc. And wherein shall we find the source and explanation of this sublime 
patience? 1. He was bent on bearing, to the full and to the end, his Father's will. 
2. He was determined to complete the work he had undertaken, and of that work those 
sufferings were a part. He was then " wounded for our traugressions," then was he 
" bruised for our iniquities," and by those " stripes were we healed." 

Application. 1. Like our Divine Master, we are called upon to endure. In doing 
those things we believe to be right of which others do not feel the obligation, also in 
abstaining from those things we feel to be wrong, which other people allow, we come 
into conflict, we excite displeasure, we incur odium, we suffer censure, opposition, 
ridicule ; we " bear his reproach." Thorough loyalty to our Lord and to our own con- 
victioBB means exposure to the assaults and indignities of the world. 2. We have 
the highest incentives to endure. (1) As with our Master, it is the Father's will that we 
should suffer. (2) As with Christ, it is an important part of the testimony we are to 
bear and the work we are to do in this world. (3) Only thus can we completely 
follow our grcit Leader ; he who does not go with Christ into the valley of humiliation 
does not follow him all the way he trod. (4) So doing, we are building up a strong 
Christian character, and are thus preparing for fuller and higher service. (5) Then are 
we especially pleasing our Master, and " great is our reward in heaven " (Matt. y. 
10— 12).— 0. 

Vers. 1 — 23. — The last Passover of our Lord. After the significant survey of Jeru- 
salem's fate which is given in the previous chapter, Jesus seems to have remained 
quietly at Bethany, or in the Mount of Olives, until the time for the Passover. The 
season of solitude was brief, but all the more important in consequence. Every 
moment was utilized by our Lord that he might be ready for his great ordeal. But 
if he was making preparations, so were his enemies. Accordingly, we have an 
account here of the treason which led up to his sacrifice. We have, consequently, 
to consider — 

I. Thk trbasoh op Judas. (Vers. 1 — 6.) The Sanhedrin was in session, anxious 
to seize on Jesus and get him removed; for they feared that an attached populace 
would declare for him rather than for the old leaders. It was a vain fear. The people 
were fickle, and as ready to cry out for his crucifixion as they had been to cry 
" Hosanna 1 " Yet the fear of losing popularity goaded the Church leaders to despera- 
tion. Being beaten in debate by the Master-Mind who tabernacled among them, they 
can only expect by treachery to secure their purpose. They find their ready instru- 
ment in Judas. And here consider : 1. The wurldliness of Judas. He had evidently 
joined the cause of Jesus in hope of a place in a world-kingdom. But our Lord's pro- 
phecies of his speedy suffering and death have blighted all these hopes. How can he 
best make his peace with the world, which is getting the upper hand, and before which 
Jesus is going down ? Judas believes that he can best do this by betraying Jesus to 
his enemies, and, to make the transition the easier for himself, be consents to do the 
ghameful work for thirty pieces of silver — the mean price of the life of a slave 1 It was 
not covetousness pure and simple which led Judas to such a bargain, but astute world- 
liness. He was making bis peace with the world on the most liberal terms. 2. Kotice 
the Satanic inspiration under which Judas acted. It is evident that Scripture repre- 
sents the sphere of evil as under the domination of a great personality called Satan. 
He can enter into men and take possession of them. But we are not to suppose that 
he has the same intimate access to the human spirit which God the Holy Ghost enjoys. 
We have reason to believe that Satan moves men by presenting in all their attractive- 
ness the worldly motives such as we have noticed. Further, the Satanic impulse is 
■uch as in no way to relieve the subject of it from responsibility. No one will be able 
to plead " not guilty " on the ground of Satanic temptation. 3. Notice the mean prvr- 
dence under which the traitor acted. Had the band come in open day, when the 
entranced populace hung upon the lips of Jesus, there would have been a dangerous 
emeute, and life been lost. Accordingly, Judas seeks to betray Jesus " in the absence 
of the multitude." There is a meanness and cowardice about most of the diabolic 



23d tHE GOSPEL ACCOBDING fO ST. ttJKE. ten. xxii. 1— tl 

wickedness which goes on in the world ; a cowardice, moreover, which is generallj 
overtaken by just and terrible retribution. 

II. Prbpahations fok the last Passovek. (Vers. 7 — 13.) Jesus meanwhile 
directs the two disciples, Peter and John, to make ready the Passover. He so times 
the celebration as to have it over on the Thursday night of the Passover week, and 
without haste, to secure the further preparation which his spirit required. And here we 
have the facts set before us (1) that he owed accommodation to the consideration o< 
a stranger; and (2) that his supernatural knowledge guided the disciples in their 
quest of a guest-chamber. There, then, in the guest-chamber of a stranger, without 
taking the lamb to the temple, but in the primitive fashion, the two faithful men made 
ready for their Master. It was a recurrence to the primitive ritual. 

III. The Passovee Feast. (Vers. 14 — 18.) With the twelve accordingly he comes 
at the appointed hour, and sits down to the significant feast. He tells them with what 
desire he had contemplated this last Passover before he should suffer. He will not again 
eat of it till it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God. The order of celebration was first the 
passing round of the wine-cup ; next, the bitter herbs, dipped, as salad would be, in 
a red sauce made of almonds, nuts, figs, and other fruits ; next, another wine-cup, after 
which the father of the family explained the nature of the rite ; then came the morsel 
of unleavened bread and the piece of the roast lamb, made palatable by the aforesaid 
sauce ; the last act was the passing round of a third wine-cup (cf. Godet, in loc.). 
It must have been a touching and tender type in the eyes of him who was so soon to 
be offered. We should have listened to his explanations on that occasion with pecu- 
liar interest. His references must have been somewhat veiled in presence of the 
betrayer, yet sufficiently explicit to have broken ordinary hearts. It was a marvellous 
feast — the Paschal Lamb himself partaking of the Passover ; the Antitype experiencing 
a special benefit through the study of the type! What a solemnity, moreover, is 
thrown over the whole scone through his indication that it is all shortly to be fulflUud I 

IV. The institution of the Lord's Supper. (Vers. 19, 20.) CJpon the more 
formidable feast, which is to pass away on fulfilment, Jesus founds a simpler feast, to be 
celebrated till he comes again. It is to consist of bread and wine, two of the elements 
there at the table. The bread is to represent his body, which is to be broken for his 
people ; and the wine his blood, which is for them to be shed. In this way a memorial 
more lasting than biass or marble is to be reared, and his gracious presence is to be 
experienced in the Christian Church. The new institution was a promise of the most 
gracious kind, regarding the season when he would be absent from them. 

V. The intimation of the betrayal. (Vers. '21 — 23.) Along with the solemn 
joy there is dashed profoundest sorrow at the intimation of betrayal by one of the 
apostolic band. A traitor is there, and they should know it. Good sign in that each 
man suspects himself! They all, except Julas, ask Christ if it is he. Last of all, it 
would seem, came the inquiry of the real traitor. But this unearthing of the false one 
does not sUake him from his foul purpose. Christ could not do more for him than he 
here does, even though it does not save him. How salutary is self-suspicion I How 
dangerous self-confidence 1 — E. M. E. 

Vers. 21 — ^i.— The proper Christian spirit. Through our Lord's faithful dealing 
the disciples bad been led to wholesome self-suspicion. They cried out at the possibility 
of a betrayal of the Master, " Lord, is it I ? " But no sooner have their minds been 
relieved through the singling out of Judas than they swing round again to self-con- 
fidence and even base ambition. There, at the table of the Lord, in spite of the 
hallowed associations, they speculate who is to be greatest in the coming kingdom. 
Jesus has consequently to check this nascent ambition. He does so by ennobling — 

I. The spirit op service. (Vers. 24 — 27.) Now, the world's idea is that it ia 
noble to exercise authority, to be able to order people about. In fact, the world has 
come to call men " benelactors " who have done nothing but command other peopla 
What tributes are paid to princes, who have done nothing all their lives but issue orders 
and receive the homage and service of other people ! A blear-eyed world is ready, as 
Christ here shows, to pronounce such princes the benefactors of their age and country. 
But he has come into the world to ennoble the opposite idea. Here at this very feast he 
has been as one that servelh. His whole life, moreov er, has been a public service. Every 



OH. xxn: 1— 71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 23J 

wtere he has jnst considered how he could serve others. To minister, not be ministered 
unt"), was his continual care. To malie the service of others glorious in the eyes ol 
discerning men was one great purpose of his earthly life. This reveals also the very 
spirit of the Divine life.' God is Lord of all because Servant of all. He sustains all, as 
he has created all; and his greatness is the greatness of ministration. It is only 
Oriental barbarism which supposes greatness to consist in indolent and luxuriant state. 
Here, then, is the field of genuine ambition. Let us try to be first in the field of service ; 
let us do our best and most for the benefit of all about us; and then alone shall we 
become noble and Christ-like. 

II. Christ indicates the eesultant inflitencb. (Vers. 28 — 30.) To these 
disciples, who continue with Christ in his temptations, he appoints a kingdom. In 
this kingdom they are to have thrones, and to be judges of the twelve tribes of Israel. 
In this way our Lord indicates the influence which these men, who entertain his spirit 
of service, will acquire. And when we consider the history of Christianity, we see 
that even in the world of humanity these humble servants of God and mankind have 
become kings and judges. It is by their deliverances in the primitive age that men 
are judging themselves and being judged. The apostles are pre-eminently the 
sovereigns of this new and letter time. And this posthumous influence on earth is 
only a faint reflection of their influence in heaven. Now, is not this to encourage every 
serviceable soul? Let each of us be only content to serve, to do whatever a brother 
needs, and by our service we acquire influence and kingship. The world is really 
ruled by obliging, serviceable, meek, and earnest men. 

III. Christ next points out to Petbb his DANaBR, kecovert, and consequent 
USEFULNESS. (Vers. 31 — 34.) For, strange to say, temptation is overruled as well as 
service to the creation of influence. There is in Peter's nature a good deal of pride 
and vain-glory to be winnowed out. There is wheat within him, but also chaff. ' Now, 
Satan had set his mind upon the fall of Peter ; but Jesus has already prayed for him 
that his faith may not fail. Here was Peter's safeguard in the timely intercession of 
his Master." How watchful the Lord was and is for souls I Oh, how our want of 
watchfulness stands rebuked! Yet Peter was permitted to fall under temptation; but 
he was won back again, converted the second time, so to speak, by the loving look of 
Jesus; and thus destined to become a strengthener of the brethren. So that our 
Lord's prayers for us may be that, through permitted humiliations and tears and 
penitence, we may pass on to power. It is only when self-confidence, as in Peter's 
case, has been purged out of us by humiliating discoveries of our personal weakness, 
that we are in a position to undertake the care and strengthening of brethren. 
Broken-hearted Simon becomes, after Pentecost, the reliable Eock-man, worthy of the 
new name, Peter. 

IV. The contrasted policies of confidence and op prudence. (Vers. 35—38.) 
In sending the disciples out on their first missions, Jesus relied on the hospitality of 
the people as a fitting support for his agents. Going to the people as philanthropists, 
working miracles, preaching the advent of Messiah, they would meet with such support 
as would be all-sufiicient. This was the policy of confidence — the reliance on the 
people for entire support. But when the world turned against Christ, and realized 
how opposed he was to its worldliness, then the disciples would require to exercise all 
possible prudence. They would require to look out for themselves, and even to fight 
for their own hand. That is to say, there are times when we may trust the world, and 
times when we are warranted in distrusting it. When is it, we are inclined to ask, 
that the prudential temper must take the place of confidence? When the world is 
determined on injustice. Thus at this time the world is about to reckon Christ among 
the transgressors, and to do him manifest injustice. The fit of unfairness was upon 
it, and the disciples should then stand in self-defence. But other days would dawn 
again, when disciples will be warranted in pursuing a pulioy of public confidence, and 
thus giving the world the chance of compensation. Let us wisely consider the "signs 
of the times," and act accordmgly. Christ will guide us to the policy which is best, il 
we prayerfully ask him. — B. M. E. 

' Cf. Dr. Dykes's noble sermon on ver. 27: 'Sermons,' p. 291. 

• Cf. Viuet'a 'Nouvelles Etudes Evangeliques,' p. 238; also 'WoolBey's 'Beligion of th« 
Present and the Future,' p. 186; aud Dykea's ' Sermons,' p. 263. 



232 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxii. 1— 7X. 

Vers. 39 — 63. — Oethsetnant. After the Passover and the address given In John xiv., 
he led the disciples out through the vineyards, where most likely John xv. was 
delivered to them, and John ivi., until he reached his usual rendezvous in Gethsemane, 
part of the Mount of Olives. Here let us suppose the high-priestly prayer given in 
John xvii. took place, which heing ended, he retired to an adjacent and secluded place 
for further prayer. Gethsemane was thus his preparation for suffering and death, as 
the Transfiguration had been for work. And here we have to notice — 

I. His dbead op the denouement was not a dbead op physical pain and death. 
His cry for escape, if possible, was not prompted by physical fear. He always showed 
himself brave before danger of a mere physical kind. Socrates seems the braver man 
before he drank the hemlock, but this was because Socrates could not see the issues 
that weire before him as Christ foresaw his fate. The cup he shrank from was not like 
that of Socrates. It was no literal cup, but the apprehension of isolation from his 
Father. Not the trial, nor the mockery, nor the physical pain, but the isolation from 
God, the sense of forsakenness, the constraint to cry, "My God, my God, why hast 
thou forsaken me ? " which prompted the cry to escape. Now, the very elevation of 
his being rendered the dread of separation even for the shortest season from his Father 
intensely painful. Vulgar souls can take separation from others quietly, but the 
elect souls pass through deepest pains in consequence. That darkness which came 
on when Son was separated from Father because of the sin-bearing was what Jesus 
dreaded, and would gladly have escaped. Want of fc41owship with the Father seemed 
to this holy Child Jesus something to he escaped if at all possible. 

II. The intensity and efpicaoy of his pkayer. Just as Jacob had to wrestle at 
Peniel to obtain the blessing, so had the Saviour in the garden. He was in an agony 
of earnestness, and was in consequence bathed in a bloody sweat. Time after time he 
prayed thus earnestly. And we are expressly told, " He was heard in that he feared " 
(Heb. V. 7). His prayer was efficacious. Now, let us consider what he prayed for. It 
was for deliverance from isolation from God — deliverance from death without a sense of 
the Divine fellowship. And when we consider the sequel, we find that he was heard, 
and his prayer answered. For (1) he enjoyed an angelic visit and wss strengthened 
by it (ver. 43) ; (2) he was granted light and fellowship mth the Father before death 
supervened; and (3) he was saved from death by resurrection. In these ways the 
Father undoubtedly heard and answered the cry of Christ in Gethsemane. 

III. Notice the disciples' sleep op sobeow. For sorrow often induces sleep, while 
at other times it makes sleep impossible. In the present case the disciples ought to 
have been praying for Jesus, for themselves, seeking preparation for the trial ho had 
forewarned them was at hand. Instead of doing so they slept. Here we have to 
notice : I. Opportunity for shouting spiritual sympathy was missed. Jesus, as we 
know, was most anxious they should watch with him. He needed and he sought their 
sympathy ; but they, in thoughtlessness, denied it to him. It would be well if deepest 
consideration were exhibited for noble souls that are greatly tried. 2. Opportunity for 
private preparation was missed. They themselves needed spiritual help more than 
Christ. They could less afford than he to meet the crisis prayerlessly. Yet this was 
their condition when the trial fell upon them. 3. Physical effort was their only 
resource when the crisis came. They could lay on with the sword. It does not take 
much prayer to help men to fight. But other and better weapons were needed than 
Peter's sword, but they could only be taken out of the armoury by prayer. 

IV. The beteatal. Judas and his band were upon them before the slei py dis- 
ciples had time to pray. He had planned the capture as only a coward can. He 
betrays Christ with the semblance of friendship, trying to give the Master the usual 
kiss. To this offer Jesus simply replies, "Judas, betraycst thou the Son of man with 
a kiss ? " Force behind deceit is apparently overpowering the spirituality which had 
its home in that place of prayer. 

V. The depenob op the disciples and the miracle op the Mastbb. The disciples, 
spiritually off guard, betake themselves to the carnal weapon, and Peter lays round him 
with the sword. He succeeds in cutting off the right ear of tlie high priest's servant. 
Here is fresh trouble created. If this servant has to go back thus wounded, a warrant 
will soon be out for the di^ciples, and the whole issue thrown into perplexity. Our 
Lord accordingly interposes, heals the sufferer's ear, and advises Peter to put up hii 



OH. xxn. 1—71.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 233 

sword. In this way Jesus rescues the disciples from the liahility incurred through 
their own imprudence. It was a wonderful consideration manifested when his own 
troubles were rising to their height. 

VI. The ebbtjkb administered to his enemies. Why had they come out again -t 
him as against a thief? Had he not confronted them time after tim« iu open day 5 
They had not dared to lay hands upon him then. He thus convicted them of 
cowardice. It was " their hour, and the power of darkness." A deed of darkuess da' e 
not be done in open day. Thus was it that our Lord bravely met his adversaries. He 
was prepared, though the disciples were not. — ^B. M. E. 

Vers. 54 — 71. — Christ t trials in tJie high priest's palace. The agony of Gethsemane 
Is over, and our Lord has met his enemies in the calmness of real courage. He allows 
himself to be led to the palace of the high priest, and we have now to consider all the 
trials through which he passed there. The first of these is from Peter. Love to the 
Master keeps the disciple in the train of tbe procession, and even leads him to linger 
without until through John's good offices he gets into the hall. But, alas I instead of 
keeping near the Master, he lingers near the fire which was kindled in the hall to keep 
the cold at bay. And here let us notice — 

I. Peter's temptation. (Vers. 54 — 60.) It was identification with a lost cause. 
Here is Jesus down ; no hope apparently lingers about him ; he cannot now be saved. 
What use is there in further identifying himself with Jesus? Instead of responding 
boldly to the challenge and confessing Christ, he is tempted to deny him. And the 
denials are repeated, the last time with an oath. Peter's distant view of his Master 
and of his cause leads him to the fatal conclusion that it is safest to cut the connection 
and deny that he has ever known him. It is, alas ! the temptation of men still. In 
the blazing light of society, when worldliness seems so strong and comfortable, it is 
convenient to ignore the Master and his cause. Peter's temptation is constantly 
repeated, and his fall has its counterpart continually in the cowardice of souls. 

II. Petbie'b eecovekt and eepektanoe. (Vers. 61, 62.) The Master in warning 
him had given him a sign, that of the cook-crow. It acts as an alarum upon the dull 
ear of Peter. Along with this there comes the look ineflkble of the loving Lord. The 
great heart is broken, and Peter passes out to weep bitterly. We have a great contra><t 
between the sorrow of Peter and that of Judas. It is the sorrow of the world which 
worketh death in the one case ; it is the sorrow which is godly and saving in the other. 
As Gerok, in an admirable discourse upon the snbject, says, (1) Peter's sorrow proceeds 
upon his sin, Judas's upon the consequences of his sin ; (2) Peter's sorrow turns him 
from the world, Judas's turns him towards the world ; and (3) Peter's .■sorrow leads him 
to life, Judas's leads him to death.^ Peter's repentance was thus the consequence of his 
Master's love, and the sign of his recovery. How sensible he must have been of the 
mighty wrong he had done the Master 1 Jesus knew when Peter slunk away out of 
the palace that he was safe in his bitter sorrow, and that he w6uld come forth from it 
a better man. Our Lord's trial through Peter's faithlessness terminated when the 
disciple's heart was broken. 

III. The buffet-game. (Vers. 63 — 65.) The heavy hours till morning must be 
spent, and so the soldiers determine to get some amusement out of their notable 
Prisoner. They make Jesus, consequently, the centre in what is now known as the 
buffet-game. Blindfolding him, they proceed to strike him, and call upon him to tell 
who has inflicted the blows. They are terrible liberties they thus take with the Son 
of God. But they are unable to irritate this meek and lowly Man. Their blows are 
lost upon his magnificent meekness. They must have been struck at the majestic 
carriage of the Prisoner under their brutal horse-play. Yet the blows of the soldiers 
were less a trial, we may be sure, than the faithlessness of the disciple. But we are 
surely taught how essentially degrading it is to manufacture mirth out of the humilia- 
tion of others 1 The soldiers never were so brutal as when they treated Jesus in the 
style they did. 

IV. His teial befoeb the Sanhedkin. (Vers. 66 — 71.) In the morning the 
Jewish authorities assembled, and their line of examination was as to the nature of his 
Messiahshin. Aa we have seen, it was not a Divine, but a military Messiah the Jew» 

' Oerok'a ' Evangelien-Fredigten,' s. 276. 



2S4 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxiii. 1— 56. 



desired. To their question he replies first that they will not believe him if he answers 
them truthfully. They will only believe what they like. In other words, faith is 
largely a matter of the will as influenced by emotion. They were not prepared to 
accept truth and follow it to its consequences. After this preliminary, Jesus goes on 
to declare, "Prom henceforth shall tlie Son of man be seated at the right hand of the 
power of God " (Revised Version). That is to i-ay, his Messiahship is to be a heavenly 
reign, not an earthly and temporal one. At once they saw in this a claim to Divine 
Sonship. Hence they challenge him upon the point, and get his manly reply that he is. 
On this ground they condemn him. It is plain, therefore, that this Divine Messiah 
was not what suited their fancy. It was not deliverance from such impalpable foes as 
sin and anxiety and suffering they desired, but from the Romans. They wanted a 
military leader — a pasha ; and when God gave them his Son as their heavenly Kin^, 
they condemned him to an ignominious death. It is thus that men despise their 
greatest blessings, and do their best to put them out of the way. — ^E. M. K 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 



Vers. 1 — 4. — Ihe trial before Pilate : First 
examination. 

Ver. 1. — And the whole multitude of them 
arose, and led him unto Pilate. The San- 
hediin had now formally condemned Jesus 
to death. Tliey were, however, precluded 
by the Roman regulations then in force from 
carrying out their judgment. A capital 
sentence in Judraa could only be inflicted 
as the result of a decision by the Roman 
court. The Sanhedrin supposed, and as ife 
shall see rightly, that the judgment they 
had pronounced would speedily be con- 
firmed by the Roman judge. The Sanhe- 
drin condemnation to death was, liowever, 
from the Jewish standpoint, illegal. In 
capital cases judgment could not be legally 
pronounced on the day of trial. But in the 
case of Jesus, tiie Accused was condemned 
without the legal interval which should 
have been left between the trial and the 
sentenee. The Prisoner wiis tlien at once 
hurried before the Eonlati tribunal, in order 
that the Jewish sentence might be confirmed 
and carried out with all the additional hor- 
rors which accompanied Gentile public exe- 
cutions in snch cases of treason. De'renbourg 
('Histoire de ia Paltstine,' p. 201) attributes 
the undue illegal precipitancy of the whole 
Ijroceeding to tire overwhelming influence 
exercised in the supreme council by Annas 
and Caiaphas with their friends who were 
Sadducees, a party notorious for their cruelty 
as well as for their unbelief. Had the 
Phari»^s borne sway in the Sanhedrin at 
that juncture, such an illegality could never 
have taken place. Tliis apology possesses 
certain weight, as it is based upon known 
historical facts ; yet when the general bear- 
ing of the Pharisee party towards onr Lord 
during the greater part of his public minis- 
try is remembered, it can scarcely be sup- 
posed that the action of the Sadducee 



majority in the Sanhedrin was repugnant to, 
or even opposed by, the Pharisee element in 
the great assembly. Pilate. Pontius PUate, 
a Roman knight, owed his high position as 
Procurator of Judsea to his friendship with 
bcjcu us, the powerful minister of the Em- 
peror Tiberius. He probably belonged by 
birth or adoption to the gens of the Pontii. 
When Judsea became formally subject to the 
empire on the deposition of Archeiaus, Pon- 
tius Pilate, of whose previous career nothing 
is known, tlirough the interest of Sejanus, 
was appointed to govern it, with the title of 
procurator, or collector of the revenue, in- 
vested with judicial power. This was in 
A.D. 26, and he held the post for ten years, 
when he was deposed from his office in dis- 
grace. His government of Judsea seems to 
have been singularly unhappy. His great 
patrou Sejanus hated the Jews, and Pilate 
seems faithfully to have imitated his power- 
ful friend. Constantly the Roman governor 
appear* to have wounded the susceptibilities 
of the strange, unhappy people he was placed 
over. Fierce disputes, mutual insults arising 
out of apparently purposeless acts of arbi- 
trary power on his side, characterized the 
period of his rule. His behaviour in the one 
great event of his life, when Jesus was 
brought before his tribunal, will illustrate 
his character. He was superstitious and 
yet cruel; afraid of tlie people he affected 
to despise; faithless to the spirit of the 
authority with which he was lawfully in- 
vested. In the great crisis of his history, 
from the miserably selfish motive of securing 
his own petty interests, we watch him de- 
liberately giving up a Man, whom he knew 
to be innocent, and felt to be noble and 
pure, to torture, shame, and death. 

Ver. 2. — And they began to aconse him, 
saying. We found this fellow perverting the 
nation, and forbidding to give tribute to 
Ceesar, saying that he himself is Christ a 
King. To imderstand this scene perfectly 



cH. xxin. 1— 66.] TSfi GOSPEL AdCORDliia TO ST. LUKE. 



231. 



we must read St. John's account in his 
eighteenth chapter (ver. 28 and following). 
From the place of meeting of the Sanhedrin, 
JesuB was led to the palace of Pilate, the 
Prffltorium. The Boman governor was evi- 
dently prepared for the case ; for application 
must have been made to him the evening 
before for the guard which arrested Jesus in 
Gethsemane. St. John tells us that the dele- 
gates of the Sauhedrin entered not into the 
hall of judgment, "lest they should be de- 
filed ; but that they might eat the Passover." 
Pilate, who knew well from his past experi- 
ence how iiercely these fanatics resented 
any slight offered to their religious feelings, 
wishing for his own purposes to conciliate 
them, went outside. These Jews, prior to 
eating the Passover, would not enter any 
dwelling from which all leaven had not 
been carefully removed ; of course, this had 
not been the case in the palace of Pilate. 
The governor asks them, in St. John's 
account, what was their accusation against 
the Man. They replied that they had 
three charges: (1) he had perverted the 
nation; (2) be had forbidden that tribute 
should be given to Caesar; (8) he had 
asserted that he was Christ a King. 

Ver. 3. — And Filate asked him, saying, 
Art thou the King of the Jews % Pilate then 
went again into his judgment-hall, where 
he had left Jesus, but before going back 
h« could not resist addressing an ironical 
word to the accusing Jews : " Take ye him, 
and judge him according to your Law " (John 
xviii. 31), to which the Sauhedrists replied 
that they were not allowed to put any man to 
death, thus publicly confessing the state of 
comparative impotence to which they were 
now reduced, and also revealing their deadly 
purpose in the case of Jesus. Pilate, having 
gone into the judgment-hall again, proceeds 
to interrogate Jesus. The first two accusa- 
tions he passes over, seeing clearly that they 
were baseless. The third, however, struck 
him. Art thou, poor, friendless, powerless 
Kan, the King I have been hearing about ? 
And he answered him tuxd said, Thou sayest 
it. St. Luke gives only this bare summary 
of the examination, in which the prisoner 
Jesus simply replies "Yes," he was tlie 
King. St. John (xviii. 33 — 38) gives us a 
more fall and detailed account. It is more 
than probable that John was present during 
the interrogatory. In the sublime answers 
of the Lord, his words explanatory of the 
nature of iiis kingdom, which " is not of this 
world," struck Pilate and decided him to 
give the reply we find in the next verse. 

Ver. i. — Then said FUate to the chief 
priests and to the people, I find no fault in this 
Han. The Boman was interested in the 
poor Prisoner ; perhaps he grudgingly ad- 
mired him. He was so different to the 



members of that hated nation he had been 
brought into such familar contact with ; 
utterly unselfish, noble with a strange no- 
bility, which was quite unknown to ofBciaU 
and politicians of the school of Pilate; but 
as regards Bome and its views quite harm- 
less. The Boman evidently was strongly 
opposed to harsh measures being dealt out 
to this dreamy, unpractical, generous En- 
thusiast, as he deemed him. 

Vers. 5 — 12. — Pilate lendt Jesu$ to be tried 
by Serod. 

Ver. 5. — And they were the more fierce, 
saying. He stirreth up the people, teaching 
throughont all Jewry, beginning from Gali- 
lee to this place. On hearing the Boman 
governor's declaration that in his opinion 
the Prisoner was innocent, the Sauhedrists 
became more vehement, repeating with in- 
creased violence their accusation that Jesus 
had been for a long time past a persistent 
stirrer-up of sedition, not only here in the 
city, but in the northern districts of Galilee. 

Vers. 6, 7. — ^When Pilate heard of Galilee, 
he asked whether the Han were a OaUlBean. 
And as soon as he knew that he belonged 
unto Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to 
Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem 
at that time. Kow, Pilate dreaded lest these 
Jews should make his clemency towards the 
Prisoner a ground of accusation against him 
at Bome. Pilate had enemies in the capital. 
His once powerful patron Sejanus had just 
fallen. His own past, too, he was well 
aware, would not bear examination; so, 
moved by his cowardly fears, he refrained 
from releasing Jesus in aooordance with what 
his heart told him was just and right ; and yet 
he could not bring himself to condemn One 
to whom he was drawn by an unknown feel- 
ing of reverence and respect But hearing 
that Jesus was accused among other tilings 
of stirring up sedition in Galilee, he thought 
he would shift the responsibility of acquit- 
ting or condemning, on to the shoulders of 
Herod, in whose jurisdiction Galilee lay. 
Herod was in Jerusalem just then, because 
of the Passover Feast. His usual residence 
was Capernaum. 

Ver. 8. — ^And when Herod saw Jesus, he 
was exceeding glad : for he was desirous to 
see him of a long season, because he had heard 
many things of him ; and he hoped to have 
seen some miracle done by him. This was 
Herod Antipas, the slayer of John the Bap- 
tist. He was at that time living in open 
incest with that princess Herodias concern- 
ing whom the Baptist had administered 
the publio rebuke which had led to his 
arrest and subsequent execution. Godet 
grapliicaUy sums up the situation : " Jesus 
was to Herod Antipas what » juggler is to 
a sated court — an object of curiosity. But 
Jesus did not lend himself to such a part ; be 



236 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxm. 1—56 



had neither words nor niTTacles for » man go 
diBposeri, in ■whom, bosides, he saw with 
horror the murderer of John the Baptist. 
Before this personage, a monstrous mixture 
of bloody levity and somhie superstition, he 
maintained a silence whioli even the accusa- 
tion of the Pauhedrin (ver. 10) could not 
lead him to break. Herod, wounded and 
humiliated, took vengeance on this conduct 
by contempt." 

Ver. 11. — And Herod with Ms men of 
war set Mm at nought, and mocked him, 
and arrayed Mm in a gorgeous robe, and 
«ent >iim again to Pilate. He treated him, 
not as a criminal, but as a mischievous re- 
ligious Enthusiast, worthy only of contempt 
and scorn. Tlie " gorgeous robe," more ac- 
euiately, " bright raiment," was a white 
festal mantle .such as Jewish kings and 
Roman nobles wore on great occasions. It 
was probably an old robe of white tissue of 
some kind, embroidered with silver. Dean 
Plumptre suggests that we might venture to 
trace in this outrage a vindictive retaliation 
for the words whiuh the Teacher had once 
spoken — with evident allusion to Herod's 
eourt — of those who were gorgeously appa- 
relled (ih. vii. 25). It was this Herod of 
whom tlie Lord had spoken so recently with 
lor him a rare bitterness, " Go ye, and tell 
that fox [literally, 'she-fox'] Herod" (oh. 
xiii. 32). 

Ver. 12. — And the same day Pilate and 
Herod were made friends together. This 
union of two such bitter enemies in their 
enmity against Jesus evidently struck the 
early Church with sad wonderment. It is 
referred to in the first recorded hymn of the 
Church of Christ (Acts iv. 27). How often 
has the strange sad scene been repro- 
duced in the world's story since I Worldly 
men apparently irreconcilable meet together 
in frieudsliip when opportunity offers itself 
for wounding Christ ! 

Vers. 13 — 25. — The Lord it tried again 
before Pilate, who wishes to release him, but, 
over-persvaded by the Jews, delivers him to be 
crticijied. 

Vers. 13— 16.— And Pilate . . . said unto 
them . . , behold I . . . have found no fault 
in this Man ... No, nor yet Herod : . . . lo, 
nothing worthy of death is done unto Mm ; 
more accurately rendered, is done by him. 
This was the Roman's deliberate judgment 
publicly delivered. The decision then an- 
nounced, that he would scourge him (ver. 
16), was singularly unjust and cruel. Pilate 
positively subjected a Man whom he had 
pronounced innocent to the horrible punish- 
ment of scourging, just to satisfy the clamour 
of the Sanhedrists, because he dreaded what 
they might accuse him of at Rome, where 
he knew he had enemies I He thought, 
wrongly as it turned out, that the sight of 



Jesns after he had undergone this dreadful 
and disgraceful punishment' would satisfy, 
perhaps melt to pity, the hearts of these 
restless enemies of his. 

Ver. 17. — (For of necessity he must release 
one unto them at the feast.) Probably, how- 
ever, before the scourging was inflicted, the 
attempt to liberate Jesus in accordance with 
a custom belonging to that feast was made 
by Pilate. We know it failed, and a con- 
demned robber called Barabbas was pre- 
ferred by the people. The more ancient 
authoiities omit this verse (17). It pro- 
bably was introduced at an early period into 
many manuscripts of St. Luke as a marginal 
gloss, as an explanatory statement based nn 
the words of Matt, xxvii. 15 or of Mark xv. 6. 
As a Hebrew custom, it is never mentioned 
save in this place. Such a release was a 
common incident of a Latin Lectisterniura, 
or feast in honour of the gods. The Greeks 
had a similar custom at the Thesmophoiia. 
It was probably introduced at Jerusalem by 
the Roman power. 

Vers. 18,19. — ^And they cried out all at once, 
saying. Away with this Man I and release 
unto us Barabbas : (who for a oertaiu se- 
dition made in the city, and for murdor, 
was cast into prison). Barabbas, whose re- 
lease the people demanded at the instigation 
of the influential men of the Sanhedrin, was 
a notable leader in one of the late insur- 
rectionary movements so common at this 
time. St. John styles him a robber ; this 
well' describes the character of the man; 
a bandit chief who carried on his lawless 
career under the veil of patriotism, and 
was supported and protected in conse- 
quence by many of the people. The mean- 
ing of his name Bar-Abbot is " Son of a 
(famous) father," or possibly Bar-Babbas, 
" Son of a (famous) rabbi." A curious 
readingis alluded to by Origen, which inserts 
before Barabbas the word "Jesus." It does 
not, however, appear in any of the older or 
more trustworthy authorities. Jesns was 
a common name at that period, and it is 
possible that " when Barabbas was led out, 
the Roman, with some scorn, asked the 
populace whom they preferred — Jesus Bar- 
Abbas or Jesus who is called Christ I " (Far- 
rar). That this reading existed in very 
early times is indisputable, and Origen, 
who specially notices it, approves of its 
omission, not on critical, but on dogmatio 
grounds. 

Ver. 23. — And they were instant with 
loud voices, requiring that he might be 
crucified. The Roman governor now fnund 
that all his devices to liberate Jesus with 
the consent and approval of the Jews were 
fruitless. After tlie clamour which resulted 
in the release of Barabbas had ceased, the 
terrible cry, "Crucify him I" was raised 



OH. xxin. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDIN& TO ST. UJKS. 



237 



among that fickle crowd. Pilate was deter- 
mined to carry out his threat of scourginp; 
the Innocent. That might satisfy tiiera, 
perhaps excite their pity. Something whis- 
pered to him that he would be wise if he 
refrained from staining bis life with the 
blood of that strange quiet Prisoner. 

St. Luke oraits here the " scourging ; " the 
mock-homage of the soldiers; the scarlet 
lobe and the crown of thorns ; the last 
appeal to pity when Pilate produced the 
pale, bleeding Sufferer with the words, " Ecce 
Homo t " the last solemn interview of Pilate 
and Jesus, related by St. John; the sus- 
tained clamour of the people for the blood 
of the Sinless. " Then he delivered Jesua to 
their vnll" (ver. 25). (See Matt, xxvii., 
Mark. XT., and John six., for these details, 
omitted in St. Luke.) 

Of the omitted details, the most important 
piece in connection with the " last things " 
is the recital by St. John of the examination 
of Jesus by Pilate in the Prsetorium. None 
of the Sanhedrists or strict Jews, we have 
noticed, were present at these interroga- 
teiiss. They, we read, entered not into the 
jndgment-liall of Pilate, lest they might 
be defiled, and so be precluded from eating 
the Passover Feast. 

St. Jehu, however, who appears to have 
be«n the most fearless of the " eleven," and 
who besides evidently had friends among 
the Sanhedrin officials, was clearly present 
at these examinations. He too, we are 
aware, liad eaten his Passover the evening 
before, and therefore had no defilement to 
fear. 

The first interrogatories have been already 
alluded to, in the course of which the 
question, " Art thou a King, then? " was put 
by Pilate, and the famous reflection by the 
Koman, " What is truth ? " was made. 
Then followed the " sending to Herod ; " 
the return of the Prisoner from Herod ; the 
offer of release, wliich ended in the choice 
by the people of Barabbas. The scourging 
of the prisoner Jesus followed. 

This was a horrible punishment. The 
condemned person was usually stripped and 
fastened to a pillar or stake, and then 
scourged with leather throngs tipped with 
leaden balls or sharp spiltes. 

The effects, described by Romans, and 
Christians in the ' Martyrdums.' were 



terrible. Not only the muscles of the back, 
but the breast, the face, the eyes, were torn ; 
the very entrails were laiil bare, the anatomy 
was exposed, and the sufferer, convulsed 
with torture, was often thrown down a 
bloody heap at the feet of the judge. In 
our Lord's case this panishment, though 
not proceeding to the awful consequences 
described in some of the ' Martyrologies,' 
must have been very severe : this is evident 
from his sinking under the cross, and from 
the short time which elapsed before his 
death upon it. " Eecent investigations at 
Jerusalem have disclosed what may have 
been the scene of the punishment. In a 
subterranean chamber, discovered by Captain 
Warren, on what Mr. Fergusson holds to 
be the site of Antonia — Pilate's Prsetorium — 
stands a truncated column, no part of the 
construction, for the chamber is vaulted 
above the pillar, but just such a pillar as 
criminals would be tied to to be scourged " 
(Dr. Westcott). 

After the cruel scourging came the mock- 
ing by the Boman soldiers. They threw 
across the torn and mangled shoulders one 
of those scarlet cloaks worn by the soldiers 
themselves — a coarse mockery of the royal 
mantle worn by a victorious general. They 
pressed down on his temples a crown or 
wreath, imitating what they had probably 
seen the emperor wear in the form of laurel 
wreath — Tiberius's wreath of laurel was 
seen upon his arms (Suetonius, ' Tiberius,' 
c. 17). The crown was made, as an old 
tradition represents it, of the Zizyphwa 
Chridi, the nuhk of the Arabs, a plant 
which is found in all the warmer parts of 
Palestine and about Jerusalem. The thorns 
are numerous and sharp, and the flexible 
twigs well adapted for the purpose (Tris- 
tram, 'Natural History of the Bible,' p. 
429). "The representations in the great 
pictures of the Italian painters probably 
come very near the truth" ('Speaker'! 
Commentary '). 

In his right hand they placed a roed to 
simulate a sceptre, and before this sad, woe- 
begone Figure "they bowed the knee, 
saying, Hail, King of the Jews ! " 

Hase (' Geschichte Jesu,' p. 573) is even 
moved to say, "There is some comfort 
in the fact that, even in the midst of tha 
mockery, the truth made itself felt, Herod 



233 



THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. LUKE, [oh, xxm. 1— 5a 



recognizeB hia innocence by a white lobe; 
the Boman soldiery his royalty by the 
■ceptre and the crown of thoma, and that 
has become the highest of all crowns, as 
was fitting, being the most meritorious." 

It was then and thut that Pilate led Jesus 
out before the Sanhedrists and the people, 
as they shouted in their unreasoning fuiry, 
" Crucify him I " while the Roman, partly 
sadly, partly scornfully, partly pitifully, as 
he pointed to the silent Sufferer by his side, 
pronounced "Eece Homo I" 

But the enemies of Jesus were pitiless. 
They kept on crying, " Crucify him 1 " and 
when Pilate still demurred carrying out 
their bloody purpose, they added that " by 
their Law he ought to die, because he made 
himself the Son of God." 

All through that morning's exciting scenes 
had Pilate seen that something strange and 
mysterious belonged to that aolitary Man 
accused before him. His demeanour, hia 
words, his very look, had impressed the 
Boman with a singular awe. Then came 
his wife's message, telling him of her dream, 
warning her husband to have nothing to do 
with that just Man, Everything seemed to 
whisper to him, " Do not let that strange, in- 
nocent Prisoner be done to death : he is not 
what he seems." And now the fact, openly 
published by the furious Jews, that the poor 
Accused claimed a Divine origin, deepened 
the awe. Who, then, had he been scourg- 
ing? 

Once more Pilate returns to his judgment- 
hall, and he says to Jesu.*, again standing 
before him, " Whence art thou ? " 

The result of this last interrogatory St. 
John (xix. 12) briefly summarizes in the 
words, " From thenceforth Pilate sought to 
release him." 

The Sanhedrists, and their blind instru- 
ments, the fickle, wavering multitude, when 
they perceived the Boman governor's in- 
tention to release their Victim, changed their 
tactics. They forbore any longer to press 
the old charges of blasphemy and of in- 
definite wrong-doing, and they appealed only 
to Pilate's own dastardly fears. The Prisoner 
claimed to be a King. If the lieutenant of 
the emperor let such a traitor go free, why, 
that lieutenant emphatically was not Ciesar's 
friend I 

Such a pica tsr the Sanhedrin to use 



before a Boman tribunal, to ask for death 
to be inflicted on a Jew because he had 
injured the majesty of Borne, was a deep 
degradation ; but the Sanhedrin well knew 
the temper of the Boman judge with whom 
they had to deal, and they rightly calculated 
that his fears for himself, if properly aroused, 
would turn the scale and secure the con- 
demnation of Jesiu. They were right. 

Ver. 24. — And Pilate gave sentence that 
it should be as they required. This sums up 
the result of the last charge of the Sanhe- 
drin. Pilate's selfish fears for himself over- 
powered all sense of reverence, awe, and 
justice. There was no further discussion. 
Bar- Abbas was released, and Jesus was de- 
livered up to the will of his enemies. 

Vers. 26 — 32. — On the way to Calvary. 
Simon the Oyrenian. The daughters oj 
Jerusalem. 

Ver. 26. — And as they led him away. 
Plutarch tells us that every criminal con- 
demned to crucifixion farried his own cross. 
There was borne in front of him, or else hung 
round his own neck, a white tablet, on whicu 
the crime for which he sufiered was inscribed. 
Possibly this was what was afterwards affixed 
to the cross itself. Simon, a Cyreuian. 
Cyrene was an important city in North 
Africa, with a large colony of resident Jews. 
These Oyrenian Jews had a synagogue of 
their own in Jerusalem. It is probable tliat 
Simon was a Passover pilgrim. St. Mark 
tells us he was the father of "Alexander 
and Eufus ; " evidently, from his mention of 
them, these were notable persons in the 
early Christian Church. Very likely their 
connection with the followers of Jesus dated 
from this incident on the road to Calvary. 
Coming out of the country. He was pro- 
bably one of the pilgrims lodged in a village 
near Jerusalem, and met the sad procession 
as he was entering the city on his way to 
the temple. On him they laid the cross. 
Our Lord was weakened by the trouble and 
agitation of the past sleepless night, and 
was, of course, faint and utterly exhausted 
from the effects of the terrible scourging. 
The cross used for this mode of execution 
was (1) either tlie Crux decussata X , what 
is usually known as St. Andrew's cross ; or 
(2) the Crux commissa -p, St. Anthony's 
cross; or (3) the ordinary Boman cross +, 
Crux immissa. Our Lord suffered on the 
third description, the Boman cross. This 
consisted of two pieces, the one perpendicular 
(etaticulurn), the other horizontal (antenna). 
About the middle of the first was fastened 
a piece of wood (aediW), on wliioh the con- 
demned rested. This was necessary, else, 
during the long torture, the weight of the 
body would have torn the hands, and the 



OH. xxm. 1—56,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. 



239 



body would have fallen. The croBS was not 
very high, scarcely twice the height of an 
ordinary man. Strong nails were driven 
through the hands and feet. The victim 
usually lived about twelve hours, soinetimeB 
much longer. The agouies enduied by the 
crucified have been thus summarized : " The 
fever which soon set in produced a burning 
thirst. The increasing inflammation of the 
wounds in the back, hands, and feet; the 
congestion of the blood in the head, lungs, 
and heart ; the swelling of every vein, an 
indescribable oppression, racking pains in 
the head; the stiffness of the limbs, caused 
by the unnatural position of the body ; — 
these all united to make the punishment, in 
the language of Cicero (' In Verr.,' v. 64:), 
erudelissimum teternmrnnque eupplicium. 
From the beginning Jesus had foreseen 
that such would be the end of his life." 

Ver. 27. — ^And there followed him a great 
company of people, and of women, which 
also bewailed and lamented him. The great 
company was made up of the usual concourse 
of curious lookers-on, of disciples, and others 
who had heard him in past days, and now 
oame, with much horror, to see the end. 
The women specially noticed consisted mostly, 
oo doubt, of holy women of his own com- 
pany, such aa the " Maries," together with 
some of those kindly Jerusalem ladies who 
were in the habit of soothing the last hours 
of these condemned ones — ^unhappily in those 
sad days so numerous — with narcotics and 
anodynes. These kindly offices were appa- 
rently not forbidden by the Koman authori- 
ties. This recital respecting the women is 
peculiar to St. Luke. 

Vor. 28. — But Jesus turning unto them 
■lid, Daughters of Jernsalem. This address 
to them by the Lord indicates that the 
majority at least of this company of sympa- 
thizing women belonged to the holy city. 
Weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, 
and for your children. Again here, as on 
the cross, the utter unselfishness of the dying 
Master comes out. His thoughts in his 
darkest hour were never of himself. Here, 
apparently, for the first time since his last in- 
terrogation before Pilate does our Lord break 
silence. Stier beautifully calls this the first 
part of the Passion eermon of Christ, The 
second part consisted of the " seven words 
on the cross." " Weep," said our Lord here 
It is noticeable that it is the only time in 
his public teaching that he is reported to 
have told his listeners to weep. " The same 
lips whose gracious breatli had dried so 
many tears now cry on the way to the 
cross, 'Weep for yourselves, and for your 
children."' 

Ver. 29. — Blessed are the barren. A 
strange beatitude to be spoken U> the women 
of Urael, who, througli all their checkered 



history, so passionately longed that thi$ 
barrenness mierht not be their portion I 

Ver. 30.— Then shall they begia to say to 
the mountains, Fall on us ; and to the hills, 
Cover us. The allusion, in the first place, 
was to the awful siege of Jerusalem and to 
the undreamed-of woea which would accom- 
pany it ; and in the second place, to the 
centuries of misery and persecution to which 
the children of these "daughters of Jeru- 
salem" would, as Jews, be subjected in all 
lands. 

Ver. 31.— For if they do these things in a 
green tree, what shall be done in the dryl 
Bleek and others interpret this saying here 
thus : The green wood represents Jesus con- 
demned to crucifixion as a traitor in spite of 
his unvarying loyalty to Rome and all lawful 
Gentile power. ThH dry wood pioturt- s the 
Jews, who, ever disloyal to Bome and all Gen- 
tile authority, will bring on theniB Ives with 
much stronger reason the teriible vengeance 
of the great concjuering empire. Theophy- 
laot, however, better explains the saying in 
his paraplirase, " If they do these things in 
me, fruitful, always green, undying through 
tlie Divinity, what will they do to you, 
fruitless, and deprived of all life-givinjf 
righteousness ? " So Farrar, who well sum 
marizes, " If they act thus to me, the Inno- 
cent and the Holy, what shall be the fate of 
these, the guilty and false ? " 

Ver. 32.— And there were also two other, 
malefactors, led with him to be put to death. 
Many commentators suppose that these were 
companions of that Bar-Abbas tlie robber 
wlio had just been released. They were 
not ordinary tliieves, but belonged to those 
companies of brigands, or revolted Jews, 
which in those troublous times were to 
numerous in Palestine, 

Vers. 33 — 49. — The Crucifixion. 

Ver. 33. — And when they were come to the 
place, which is called Calvary ; literally, unto 
the place which is called the ekvll. The 
familiar name " Calvary " has its origin in 
the Vulgate translation, Caharium, a skull. 
The name " Place of a skull," Golgotha 
(properly Gulgoltha,3,n Aramaic word NnS:S3, 
corresponding to the Hebrew Gulgoleth, 
rhihl, which in Judg. ix. 53 and 2 Kings 
ix. 35 is translated " skull "), does not come 
from the fact that the ikulls of condemned 
persons remained lying there, but it is so 
called from being a bare rounded mound 
like a skull in form. Dean Plumptre sug- 
gests that the spot in question was chosen 
by the Jewish rulers as a deliberate insult 
to one of their own order, Joseph of Arima- 
thsea, whose garden, with its rock-sepulohra, 
lay hard by. A later legend derives the 
name from its being the burying-plaoe of 
Adam, and that as the blood flowed flODi 



240 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxin. 1— B& 



the Bacred wounds on his sknll, his sonl was 
translated to Paradisa A tradition trace- 
able to the fourth oentnry has identified this 
spot with the building known as the Church 
of the Holy Sepulchre. St. Cyril of Jeru- 
salem alludes to the spot repeatedly. In 
the time of Ensebius there was no doubt as 
to the site. The Bordeaux Pilgrim (a.d. 333) 
writes thus: "On the left side (of the 
original Church of the Holy Sepulchre) is 
the hillock (monticulm) Golgotha, where 
the Lord was crucified. Thence about a 
stone-throw distance is the crypt where his 
body was deposited." Eecent research con- 
firms this very ancient tradition, and scholars 
are generally now agreeing that the evidence 
in support of the traditional lite is strong 
•nd seemingly conclusive. And the male- 
factors, one on the right hand, and the other 
on the left. St. John adds, "and Jesus in 
the midst," as liolding the position of pre- 
eminence in that scene of uttermost shame. 
Even in suffering Christ appears as • King. 
Westoott tlius comments on the next detail 
recorded by St. John (xix. 19), where the 
accurate rendering is, "And Pilate wrote a 
title also." This title (see further, ver. 38) 
was drawn up by Pilate, who caused it to be 
placed on the cross. The words, " wrote a 
title also," perliaps imply that the placing 
of the Lord in the midst was done by 
Pilate's direction. 

Yer. 34. — ^Ihen said Jesus, Father, forgive 
them; for they know not what they do. 
These words are missing in some of the 
oldest authorities. They are found, how- 
ever, in the majority of the most ancient 
manuscripts and in the most trustworthy 
of the old versions, and are nndonbtedly 
genuine. These first of the seven words 
from the cross seem, from their position 
in the record, to have been spoken very 
early in the awful scene, probably while 
the nails were being driven mto the hands 
and feet. Different from other holy dying 
men, he had no need to say, "Forgive 
me." Then, as always, thinking of others, 
he utters this prayer, uttering it, too, as 
Stier well observes, with the same con- 
sciousness which bad been formerly ex- 
pressed, " Fatlier, I know that thon hearest 
me always." " His iatercession has this for 
ita ground, though in meekness it is not ex- 
pressed: 'Father, I will that thou forgive 
them. " In the same sublime consciousness 
ieho he uxu, he speaks shortly after to the 
penitent thief hanging by his side. Tiiese 
words of the cruciflud Jesus were heard by 
(he poor sufferer chise to liim ; they — with 
other things he had noticed in the One 
crucified in the midst — moved bim to that 
piteous prayer which was answered at once 
■o qnickly and so royally. St. Bernard 
«omment8 thni on this first word from the 



cross: " Judsei clamant, 'Cmoifigel' Ohristut 
olamat, ' Ignosce I ' Magna illorum iniquitas. 
Bed major tua, O Domine, pietasl" And 
they parted bis raiment, and cast lota. The 
rough soldiers were treating the Master as 
already dead, and were disposing of his 
raiment, of which they had stripped him 
before fastening him to the cross. He was 
hanging there naked, exposed to sun and 
wind. Fart of this raimeiit was torn 
asunder, part they drew lots for to see who 
was to wear it. The garments of the cruci- 
fied became the property of the soldiers who 
carried out the sentence. Every cross was 
guarded by a guard of four soldiers. The 
coat, for which they cast lots, was, St. John 
tells us, without seam. " Chrysostom," who 
may have written from personal knowledge, 
thinks that the detail is added to show " the 
poorness of the Lord's garments, and that 
in dress, as in all other things, he followed 
a simple fashion." 

Ver. 35. — And the people stood beholding 
A hush seemB to have fallen over the scene. 
The crowd of by-standers were awed as they 
at first silently gazed on the dying form of 
the great Teacher. What memories must 
have surged up in the hearts of many of the 
gazers — memories of his parables, his mighty 
miracles, his words of love ; memories of the 
raising of Lazarus, and of the day of palms I 
Such a silent awe-struck contemplation was 
dangerous, the rulers felt, so they hastened 
to commence their mockery — " to clear," aa 
Stier remarks, " the stifling air, and deafen 
the voice which was stirring even in them- 
selves." " Look now," they would cry, * at 
the end of the Man who said he could do, and 
pretended to do, such strange, unheard-of 
things I" They seem soon to have in- 
duced many to join in their mocking cries 
and gestures, and so to break the awful 
silence. 

Ver. 36. — And the soldiers also mookel 
him, coming to him, and offering him 
vinegar. Three times in the Crucifixion 
scene we find a mention of this vinegar, or 
the sour wine of the country, the common 
di'ink of the soldiers and others, being 
offered to the Sufferer. (1) Matt, xxvii. 34. 
This was evidently a draught prepared with 
narcotics and stupefying drugs, no doubt 
by some of those compassionate women 
addressed by him on his way to the cross 
as "daughters of Jerusalem," a common 
work of mercy at that time, and one appa- 
rently permitted by the guards. This, St. 
Matthew tells us, " he tasted of," no doubt 
in courteous recognition of the kindly 
purpose of the act, but he refused to do 
more than tnste of it. He would not dull 
the sense of pain, or cloud the clearness ol 
his communion with his Father in that lail 
awful hom. (2) The second, meiuioue4 



CH. xxm. 1— 56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



241 



here hy St. Luke, seems to imply that the 
soldieia mocked his agony of thirst — one of 
the tortures induced by oruoifixiou — by 
lifting np to his parched, fevered lips, 
vessels containing their sour wine, and then 
snatching them hastily away. (3) The 
third (John xix. 28 — 30) relates that here 
the Lord, utterly exhausted, asked for and 
received this last refreshment, which re- 
vived, for a very brief space, his fast failing 
powers, and gave him strength for his last 
utterances. The soldiers, perhaps acting 
under the orders of the compassionate 
centurion in command, perhaps touched 
with awe by the brave patience and strange 
dignity of the dyiog Lord, did bim this last 
kindly ofSce. 

Ver. 38. — ^And a enpersoription Also was 
written over him in letters of Greek, and 
Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KINO OF 
THE JEWS. The older authorities omit " in 
letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew," 
but the fact is indisputable, for we read the 
same statement in John xix. 20, where in the 
older authorities the order of the titles is, 
"in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek." 
Such multilingual inscriptions were common 
in the great provincial cities of the empire, 
where so many nationalities were wont to 
congregate. The four reports of the inscrip- 
tions slightly differ verbally, not substan- 
tially, Pilate probably (see note on ver. 33, 
on effect of accurate rendering of John xix. 
19, " and Pilate wrote a title also ") wrote a 
rough draft with his own hand, " Eex Jn- 
dseorum hie est." One of the officials trans- 
lated freely into Hebrew and Greek the 
Boman governor's Latin memorandum of 
what he desired to have written in black on 
the white gypsum-smeared board to be 
affixed to the upper arm of the cross. 

D'nwn ^^B nxjn ib" (John). 

'O PaaAebs ray 'UvScdun (Mark)b 

Bex Judteorum hie ett (Luke). 

Dr. Farrar suggests that the title over the 
cross was as above. St. Matthew's is an 
accurate combination of the three, and was 
not improbably, as a combination of the three 
inscriptions, the common form reproduced 
in the first oral Gospel. 

Vers. 39, 40. — And one of the malefactors 
which were hanged railed on him, saying, 
If thon be Christ, save thyself and us. But 
the other answering rebuked him, saying, 
Sost not thou fear Qoil In the first two 
synoptists we read how, shortly after they 
were nailed to their crosses, both thieves 
"reviled" Jesus. The Greek word, how- 
ever, used by 6S. Matthew and Mark is 
a>v€iStCov (reproached). The word used by 
St. Luke in this place of the impenitent one 
IB ifiKa<r4iiiiiei, " began to use injurious and 
LUKB. — II. 



insulting language " — a much stronger term. 
Farrar suggests that at first, during the 
early hours of the Crucifixion, in the madness 
of anguish and despair, they both probably 
joined in the reproaches levelled by all 
classes aUke at One who might seem to them 
to have thrown away a great opportunity. 
They, no duubt, knew something, possibly 
much, of Jesus' career, and how he had 
deliberately prevented more than once the 
multitude from proclaiming him King. 
Watching him as he hung bravely patient 
on his cross, only breaking the dread 
silence with a low-muttered prayer for his 
murderers to his Father, one of these mis- 
guided men changed his opinion of his 
fellow-Sufferer, changed his opinion, too, o< 
his own past career. There, dying with • 
prayer for others on his lips, was the Ex- 
ample of true heroism, of real patriotism. 
Jf thou be Christ. The more ancient 
authorities read. Art thou not the Christt 
But the other. In the Apocryphal Gospel of 
Nicodemus the names of the two are given 
as Dysmas and Gysmas, and these names 
appear still in Calvaries and stations in 
Boman Catholic lands. Seeing thou art in 
the same condemnation. His words might 
be paraphrased, " How canst thou, a dying 
man, join these mere lookers-on at our execu- 
tion and agony ? we are undergoing it our- 
selves. Dost thou not fear Godi In a few 
hours we shall be before him. We have at 
all events deserved our doom ; but not this 
Sufferer whom you revile. What has h* 
done?" 

Yer. 42. — ^And he said unto Jesus, Lord, 
remember me when thou comest into thy 
kingdom. The majority of the older authori- 
ties omit " Lord." The translation should 
run thus : And he said, Jesus, remember me 
when thou comest in thy kingdom — in, not into. 
The penitent looked forward to the dying 
Jesus coming again in (arrayed in) his 
kingly dignity, surrounded with his power 
and glory. Very touching is this confidence 
of the dying in the Dying One who was 
hanging by his side, his last garment taken 
from him ; very striking is this trust of the 
poor penitent, that the forsaken Lord will one 
day appear again as King in his glory. He, 
and he alone, on that dread day read aright 
the superscription which mocking Pilate 
had fixed above the cross, " This is the King 
of the Jews." He read " with Divine clear- 
sightedness in this deepest night " (Krum- 
macher). He asks for no special place in 
that kingdom whose advent be sees clearly 
approaching; he only asks the King not 
to forget Mm then. On this knowledge of 
the thief concerning the second advent ot 
Christ, Meyer well writes, " The thief must 
have become acquainted with the predic- 
tions of Jesus concerning his ooming, whiot 



'H2 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxm. 1— 5& 



may very easily have been the case at Jeru- 
Balem, and does not directly presuppose any 
instructions on the part of Jesus ; although 
he may also have heard him himself, and 
still remembered what he heard. The extra- 
ordinary character of his painful position in 
the very face of death produced as a conse- 
quence an extraordinary action of firm faith 
in those predictions." 

Ver. 43. — ^And Jesus said nnto him, Verily 
1 say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with 
me in paradise. No strengthening angel 
could have been more welcome to the dying 
Redeemer than these words of intense peni- 
tence and strong faith. Very beautifully 
Stier suggests that the crucified King " can- 
not see these two criminals, cannot direct 
his glance to this last without adding to his 
own agony by movement upon the cross. 
But that he forgets, and turns with an im- 
pulse of joy as well as he can to the soul that 
speaks to him, thus making the nails more 
firm." With those solemn words, " Verily I 
say unto thee," with which he had so often 
in old days begun his sacred sayings, he 
replied to the sufferer by his side. One at 
least, St. John, of his disciples would have 
heard the well-known words from the well- 
known voice. What memories must they 
not have recalled to that disciple whom 
Jesus loved, as he stood hard by the cross 
with the Mother of sorrows I The Lord's 
answer was very striking. Bemember him, 
who could call on him with such reverent 
faith at the moment of his deepest humilia- 
tion I Eemember him I yes ; but not in the 
far-off " coming," but on that very day, before 
the sun then scorching their tortured bodies 
set ; he would not be remembered by him 
only, but would be in closest companionship 
with him, not, as he prayed, in some far-off 
time in the midst of the awful tumult of the 
bloody and fiery dawn of the judgment 
advent, but almost directly in the fair gar- 
den, the quiet home of the blessed, the object 
of all Jewish hopes. There would he be 
remembered, and there, in company with his 
Lord, would the tortured condemned find 
himself in a few short hours. Are we right 
in thinking that there was no fulfilment of 
the words till death had released the spirit 
from its thraldom? May there not even 
then have been an ineffable joy, such as 
made the flames of the fleiy furnace to be as 
a "moist, whistling wind " (Song of the Three 
Children, ver. 27), such as martyrs have in 
a thousand oases known, aetiiig almost as a 
physical anssthetio acts ? (Dean Flumptre). 

" Non parem Paulo veniam require, 
Gratiam Petri neque posco, sed quam 
In crucis ligno dederis latroni 
Sedulus oro." 

This striking verse is engraved on the tomb 



of the great Copernicns, and allndes to thli 
prayer and its answer. Paradise. This is 
the only instance we have of ova Lord's 
using this well-known word. In the ordi- 
nary language used by the Jews, of the un- 
seen world, it signifies the " Garden of Eden," 
or " Abraham's bosom ; " it represented 
the locality where the souls of the righteous 
would find a home, after death jeparnted 
soul and body. The New Testament writers, 
Luke and Paul and Jolin, use it (Acts ii. 
31 ; 1 Cor. xv. 5 ; 2 Cor. xii. 4 ; Eev. ii. 7). 
To Luke and Paul, probably, this was a 
memory of the word spoken on the cross, 
which they alone record in their GospeL It 
may have been told Luke by the Mother of 
sorrows herself. John, who uses it in his 
Kevelation, doubtless heard it himself as he 
stood at the foot of the cross. Paradeisoa is 
derived from the Persian Yioidparde*, which 
signifies a park or garden. 

Ver. 44. — Tlte time of the Crucifixion, And 
it was about the sixth hour. We have be- 
fore given (see note on ch. xxii, 47) the 
approximate hours of the several acts of the 
last night and day. This verse gives us the 
time of the duration of the " darkness " — &om 
the sixth to the ninth hour ; that is in our 
reckoning, from 12 noon to 3 p.m. With 
this date tbe other two synoptists agree 
(comp. Matt, xxvii. 45 ; Mark xv. 33). Our 
Lord had then been on the cross three hours 
(see Mark xv. 25, where it is stated that he 
was crucified in the third hour, i.e. 9 a.m.). 
But while the three synoptists are in perfect 
harmony, we are met with a grave difficulty 
in St. John's account, for in ch. xix. 14 of 
his Gospel we read how the final condemna- 
tion of our Lord by Pilate took place about 
the sixth hour. At first sight, to attempt 
liere to harmonize St. John with the three 
synoptists would seem a hopeless task, as 
St. John apparently gives the hour of the 
final condemnation by Pilate, which the 
three give as the hour when the darkness 
began, i.e. when the Sufferer had already 
hung on the cross for three hours. Various 
explanations have been suggested; among 
these the most satisfying and probable is 
the supposition that, while the three synop- 
tists followed the usual Jewish mode of 
reckoning time, St. John, writing some half 
a century later in quite another country, 
possibly twenty years after Jerusalem and the 
temple had been destroyed, and the Jewish 
polity had disappeared, adopted another 
mode of reckoning the hours, thus follow- 
ing, probably, a practice of the province in 
which he was living, and for which he was 
especially writing. Dr. Westcott, in an ad- 
ditional note on John xix. 14, examines the 
four occasions on wliioh St. John mentions 
a definite hour of the day; and comes to 
the conclusion that the fourth evangelist 



OH. xxni. 1— 56.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE, 



243 



generally reokoned his hoars from midnight. 
The BomaoB reckoned their civil days from 
midnight, and there are also traces of reckon- 
ing the liOurB from midnight in Asia Minor. 
•• About the sixth hour " would then be about 
six a.m. Before touching upon the strange 
darkness which at the sixth hour seems to 
have hung over the land like a black 
pall, we note that somewhere in the first 
three hours, possibly after the words spoken 
to the dying penitent, must be placed 
the incident of the entrusting the virgin- 
mother to St John (xix. 25, etc.). There 
is no doubt that on the surface of this, 
his third word from the cross, lay a loving 
desire to spare his mother the sight of his 
last awful suifeiing. Hence his command 
to John to watch over from henceforth the 
mother of his Lord. We may assume, then, 
that, in obedience to his Master's word, John 
led Mary away before the sixth hour. So 
Bengel, who comments here, " Great is the 
faith of Mary to be present at the cross; 
great was her submission to go away before 
his death." And there was a darkness over 
all the earth until the ninth hour. St. 
Matthew gives us additional particulars re- 
specting this phenomenon. He says tliat 
besides this darkness there was also an 
earthquake, and that several graves were 
opened, and the dead during those hours of 
solemn gloom appeared to many in the holy 
city. Early Christian writers of high au- 
thority, such as TertuUian (' Apol.,' ch. 21) 
and Origen (' Contra Gels.,' ii. 33), appeal to 
this strange phenomenon as if attested by 
heathen writers. It was evidently no slight 
or imaginary portent, but one that was well 
known in the early Christian years. The 
narrative does not oblige us to think of any- 
thing more than an indescribable and oppres- 
sive darkness, which like a vast black pall 
bung over earth and sea. The effect on the 
■ooffing multitude was quickly perceptible. 
We hear of no more cries of mocking and 
derision ; only just at the end of the three 
dark hours is the silence broken by the mys- 
terious and awful cry of the Sinless One re- 
lated by SS. Matthew and Mar]-, " My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" 
Godet's comment is remarkable: "The 
darkness, the rending of the veil of the 
temple, the earthquake, and the opening of 
several graves, are explained by the pro- 
found connection existing on the one side 
between Christ and humanity, on the other 
between humanity and nature. Christ is the 
Soul of humanity, as humanity is the soul 
of the external world." The darkness, he 
suggests, was perhaps connected with the 
earthquake with which it was accompanied, 
or it may have resulted from an atmospheri- 
cal or cosmical cause. The phenomenon 
need not necessarily h«Te extended over all 



the earth ; it probably was confined to Pales- 
tine and the adjacent countries. 

Ver. 45. — And the veil of the temple was 
rent in the midst. This was the inner veil, 
which hung between the holy place and the 
holy of holies. It was rich witli costly em- 
broidery, and very heavy. Before the will- 
ing surrender of life told of in the next verse 
(46), our Lord spoke twice more. These 
fifth and sixth words from the cross are pre- 
served by St. John (xix. 28, 30). The first 
of these, " I thirst " — an expression of bodily 
exhaustion, of physical suffering — was pre- 
dicted as part of the agony of the Servant 
of God (Ps. Ixix. 21). The sei^ond, "ii m 
finished I" tells that "the earthly life had 
been carried to its issue. That every essen- 
tial point in the prophetio portraiture of 
Messiah had been realized. The last suffer- 
ing for sin had been endured. The end of 
all had been gaineil. Nothing was left un- 
done or unborne " (Westcott). 

Ver. 46. — And when Jesus had cried 
with a load voice, he said. This is better 
rendered, and Jesus cried with a loud 
voice and $aid. The cry with the loud 
voice is the solemn dismissal of his spirit 
when he commended it to his Father. 
The object of the receiving the refreshment 
of the vinegar — the sour wine (John xix. 
30) — was that his natural forces, weakened 
by the long suffering, should be restored 
sufficiently for him to render audible the 
last two sayings — the " It is finished ! " of 
St. John, and the commending his soul to 
his Father, of St. Luke. Father, into thy 
hands I commend my spirit. St. John (xix. 
30) has related now already Jesus had 
uttered the triumphal cry, TeriKea-rai ! " It 
is finished 1 " This was his farewell to earth. 
St. Luke records the words which seem 
almost immediately to have followed the 
"It is finished!" This commending his 
Spirit to his Father has been accurately 
termed his entrance-greeting to heaven. 
This placing his spirit as a trust in the 
Father's hands is, as Stier phrases it, an ex- 
pression of the profoundest and most blessed 
repose after toil. "It is finished I" has 
already told us that the struggling and com- 
bat were sealed and closed for ever. Doc- 
trinally it is a saying of vast importance; 
for it emphatically asserts that the sou] 
will exist apart from the body tn tlie hands 
of God. This at least is its proper home. 
The saying has been echoed on many 
a saintly death-bed. Stephen, full of the 
Holy Ghost, in his great agony shows us 
the form of this blessed prayer we should 
properly use for ourselves at that supreme 
hour, when he asked the Lord Jesus to 
receive his spirit, and then fell asleep. 
Thus coming to the Son, we come through 
him to the Father. Huss, on hia wav to the 



244 TIJE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxiii. 1—56. 



stake, wlien his enamiei were triumphantly 
giving over liis soul to devila, said with no 
leas theological accuracy than with sure, 
calm faith, "But I commit my spirit into 
thy hand, O Lord Jesus Christ, who hast 
redeemed it." And having said thns, he 
gave up the ghost. This setting his spirit 
free was his own voluntary act. He had 
already told his disciples of liis own inde- 
pendent power to liiy down and take up his 
life (Jolin X. 17, 18). The great teachers of 
the early Church evidently lay stress on 
this (see Tertulllan, 'Apol.,' ch. 21). Au- 
gustine's words are striking : " Quis ita 
dormit quando voluerit, sicut Jesus mortuus 
est quando voluit ? Quis ita vestem ponit 
quando voluerit, slout se came exuit quando 
vult? Quis ita cum voluerit abit, quomodo 
ille cum voluit obiit?" and he ends with 
this practical conclusion : " Quanta spe- 
randa vel tlmenda potestas est judicantis, si 
apparuit tanta moiientis ? " " Under these 
circumstances," writes Dr. Westoott, " it 
may not be fitting to speculate on the 
physical cause of the Lord's death, but it 
has been argued that the symptoms agree 
with a rapture of the heart, such as might 
be produced by intense mental agony." 

Ver. 47. — Now when the centurion saw 
what was done, he glorified God, saying, 
Certainly this was a righteous Han. This 
was the Roman officer who was in command 
of the detachment on guard at the three 
crosses. St. Paul — who, if he did not abso- 
lutely put together the Third Gospel and 
the Acts, had much to do with the com- 
pilation and arrangement of these writings — 
on his many journeys and frequent changes 
of residence in different parts of the em- 
pire, had many opportunities of judging the 
temper and spirit of the Boman army, and 
on several occasions speaks fitvourably of 
these officers (ch. vii. 2 ; xxiii. 47 ; Acts s. 
1 ; xxii. 26 ; xxvii. 43). Certainly this was 
arighteouB Man. The noble generosity, the 
brave patience, and the strange majesty of 
the Sufferer ; the awful portents which for 
three hours had accompanied this scene — 
portents which the centurion and many of 
the bystanders could not help associating 
with the crucifixion of liim men called " the 
King of the Jews ; " then the death, in which 
appeared no terror ; — all this drew forth the 
exclamation of the Roman. In St. Matthew, 
the words of the centurion which are re- 
ported are "the Son of God." Twice in 
those solemn houn h»^ the centurion heard 
the Cruolfled pray to his Father. This may 
liave suggested the words, " Sou of God ; " 
but this change in the later Gospel of St. 
Luke to "a righteous Man " seems to point 
to the sense in which the Boman used the 
lofty appellation. 

Tec 48. — ^And all the people that came 



together to that sight, beholding the thingf 
which were done, smote their breasts, and 
returned. We must remember that the con- 
demnation of the Christ was no spontaneous 
deed of the multitude. Their miserable 
share in the act was suggested to them by 
their rulers. In the multitude very quickly 
revulsion of feeling sets in, and they often 
regret the past with a bitter, useless regret. 
The wave of sorrow which seems to have 
swept across those wavering, unstable hearts, 
which induced them to smite their breasts 
in idle regret, was a dim and shadowy re- 
hearsal of the mighty sorrow and true 
penitence which will one day, as their 
prophet told them, he the blessed lot of the 
once-loved people when " they shall look 
upon me whom they have pierced, and they 
shall mourn for him, as one mourueth for 
his only son " (Zech. xii. 10). 

Ver. 49. — Stood afar off. Disciples open 
and secret, friends and acquaintances among 
the Jerusalem citizens and Galil^san pil- 
grims (with the exception of the little 
group of which Mary and John were the 
centre till the dying Lord bade them leave 
him), all alike lacked courage and devotion, 
all feared to stand by their Master and 
Friend at that awful season. Ee trod the 
winepress alone (see Isa. Ixili. 3). None 
possessed the heroio faith which through 
the sombre cloud of seeming failure could see 
the true glory of the Sun of Blghteousaess, 
which to soon was to arise and shine. 

Vers. 50— 56.— Tfte mtomlment. The 
sequence of events which immediately 
followed the death of Christ appears to have 
been as follows. 

Our Lord expired apparently soon after 
3 p.m. The "even" alluded to by St. 
Matthew and St. Mark began at 8 p.m. and 
lasted till sunset, about 6 p.m., when the 
sabbath commenced. Some time, then, be- 
tween 3 p.m. and 6 p.m. Joseph of Arlma- 
thtea went to Pilate to ask for the body of 
Jesus. The governor was surprised, not at 
the request, but at hearing that Jesus was 
dead already (Mark xv. 44), and, to assure 
himself of the fact, sent to inquire of the 
centurion on duty at the crosses. Some- 
where about the same time, probably a little 
later in tlie " evening," but still before 6 p.m., 
the Jews, {.«. the Sanhedriu leaders, came 
to Pilate with a request that the death of 
the three crucified might be hastened by 
their legs being broken, in order that their 
bodies hanging on the crosses might not 
pollute the very sacred day which.followed 



OH, sxnr. 1— 56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. 



246 



(It wonld'be the sabbath, and the day of the 
PaasoTer.) 

This terrible, but perhaps merciful, end to 
the tortures of the cross seems not to have 
been uncommon in Jewish crucifixion in- 
flicted by the Roman authority. 

Crucifixion with this and all its attendant 
horrors was abolished by the first Christian 
emperor Constantine in tbe fourth century. 

The two thieves apparently expired under 
this treatment. The soldiers, however, when 
they looked on the form hanging on the cen- 
tral cross, found the Crucified, as we know, 
dead already. To make sure of this, one of 
tbe executioners thrust his spear deeply into 
the side of the motionless body of Jesus, 
"and forthwith came there out blood and 
water" (John xix. 33,34). Upon this, in 
accordance with the permission of the gover- 
nor already obtained, the body of the Lord 
vas delivered to Joseph of Aiimathesa and hia 
friends. 

Vers. 50, 51. — And, behold, there wai » 
man named Joseph, a ooonseUor; and he 
was a good man, and a just : (the same had 
not consented to the counsel and deed of 
them ;) he was of Arimathaea. This Joseph 
was a member of the Sanhedrin, a personage 
of high distinction in Jerusalem, and evi- 
dently of great wealth. It is especially 
mentioned that his vote in the supreme 
council was not given when the death of 
Jesus was determined on. Nicodemiis and 
his costly offering of spices for the entomb- 
ment is only mentioned by St. John (xix. 
39). Arimathsea, the place whence this 
Joseph came, is famous in Jewish history, 
being identical with Ramathaim Zophim, 
tbe "Ramah of the watchers," the native 
town of Samuel. Each evangelist speaks 
of Joseph in high terms, and each in his 
own way. "Luke styles him 'a counsellor, 
good and just ; ' he is the xaXhs K^ya66s, the 
Greek ideal. Mark calls him 'an honour- 
able counsellor,' the Roman ideal. Matthew 
writes of him as ' a rich man : ' is not this the 
Jewish ideal ? " (Godet). And St. John, we 
might add, chooses another title for this 
loved man, "being a disciple of Jesus:" 
this was St. John's ideal. In Joseph of 
Arimathsea and Nicodemus we have speci- 
mens of a class of earnest and devout Jews, 
perhaps not uncommon at that time — men 
who respected and admired our Lord as 
a Teacher, and half believed in him as tbe 
Messiah (the Christ), and yet from many 
mixed and various motives shrank from 
confessing him before men till after the 
oroai had been endured. It was not only 



the Resurrection which so enormously in- 
creased the number and raised the character 
of the followers of Jesus. When he was 
gone, men refiected on the inimitable life, 
on the deep, heart-searching teaching, on 
the confirmatory works of power; and when 
the news of the Resuixeotion came, the little 
wavering, half-hearted band of followers and 
hearers became in a few months a great 
host, and in a few years they had spread 
over the then civilized world. There is a 
strange but interesting tradition which tells 
how this Joseph of Arimathsea came to 
Great Britain about a.d. 63, and settled in 
Glastonbury, and there erected a humble 
Christian oratory, the first In England. The 
miraculous thorn of Glastonbury, long sup- 
posed to bud and blossom every Christmas 
Day, was reported to have sprung from the 
staff which Joseph stuck in the ground as 
he stopped to rest himself on the hill-top. 

Ver. .^3. — And he took it down, and 
wrapped it in linen. The last sad rites 
of love seem all to have been performed by 
friendly hands. Joseph and Nicodemus, 
and those with them, reverently took down 
the pierced and bleeding body ; then, after 
the usual ablution, the sacred head was 
covered with the napkin, the soudarion (St. 
John), and the holy body was wrapped 
tenderly and carefully in broad bands of 
the finest linen, covered with thick layers 
of tbe costly aromatic preparation of which 
Nicodemus had laid up such ample store 
(St. John). This was to preserve the loved 
remains of the Master from any corruption 
which might set in before they could pro- 
ceed with the process of embalming, which 
was delayed necessarily until after the 
sabbath and Passover day were passed. 
St. John adds, "as the manner of the Jews 
is to bury," probably marking the Jewish 
custom of embalming and thus preserving 
the body, as contrasted with burning, which 
was the Roman usage. And laid it in a 
sepulchre that was hewn in stone. St. 
John tells us the sepulchre was in a garden. 
This seems not to have been an unusual 
practice with " the great " among the Jews. 
Josephus relates of Kings Uzziah and 
Manasseh that they were buried in their 
gardens (' Ant.,' ix. 10 and x. 3. 2). " He 
made his grave with the rich " (Isa. liii. 9;. 
Wherein never man before was laid. St. 
John styles it "a new sepulchre." These 
details are given to show that the Lord's 
sacred body was not brought into contact 
vrith corruption. 

Ver. 51. — And that day was the prepara- 
tion, and the sabbath drew on. It was the 
prepaiation for the sabbath, but more espe- 
cially for the great Passover Feast. St 
John, for this reason, calls the coming 
sabbath " a high day." Dreu on ; literally 



246 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ot. xxin. 1-66. 



hegan to dawn ; although the sabbath hegan 
at sunset, the whole time of darkness was 
regarded as anticipatory of the dawn. The 
evening of Friday was Bometimes even 
called " the daybreak." 

Vers. 55, 56. — And the women also, which 
came with him from Galilee, followed after, 
and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body 
was laid. And they returned, and prepared 
spices and ointments. The real process of 
embalming, the women who were of the 
company of Jesus — the Maries, Salome, and 
others — proposed to undertake as soon as 
the sabbath was passed, that is, on the first 
day of the coming week — the Sunday. How 
little even his nearest and dearest friends 
dreamed of a resurrection of the body I It 
seems probable that they expected, at least 
some of them, a glorious reappearance of 
Jesus, but when, but how, they had evi- 



dently formed no definite aoneepMan. Konq 
however, seemed to have thought of th< 
bodily resnrrection which took place on the 
first day of the week— on that Sunday 
morning. Si Matthew (xxviL 62 — 66) re- 
lates how, after the entombment, the chief 
priests and Pharisees went to Pilate and 
asked that the sepulchre might, ^ until the 
third day," he made snre; and how the 
Boman governor bade them take such pre- 
cautions as seemed good to tbem. These 
— his bitter opponents — were more clear- 
sighted than his friends. They had some 
dim fears of tomething which might still 
follow, while his disciples, in their hopeless 
sorrow, thought all was over. And rested 
the sabbath day aooording to the command- 
ment. "It was the last sabbath of the old 
covenant. It was lecupuloasly lespected' 
(Godet). 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 47 — 56. — Friday nigM until Sunday morning, "It tiflnishedl ' But then 
are witnesses to the solemnity of the moment and the significance of the word, whose 
testimony gives weight to the voice of conscience The rumble and reel of the earth- 
quake are felt. When " the loud voice " is uttere«, the veil which separates the most 
noly from the holy place is torn in two ; an ominous darkness covers the city ; there 
is a crash as of rending rocks and opening tombs, and strange forms, as of those who 
were dead, flit before the vision. Three hours are marked by portents (vers. 44, 45), 
beneath whose impression even the officer in charge of the Itoman soldiery exclaims 
(ver. 47), "Certainly this was a righteous Man. He must have been a Son of God." 
And when, besides, the multitude, hushed and solemnized, gazes on the countenance 
now calm and still in the repose of death, and the recollection of the life so pure and 
noble becomes vivid in the mind, the reaction from intense excitement sets in, and 
(ver. 48) smiting on their breasts in unavailing sorrow, they steal away from the scene 
of death. Only two groups remain — the soldiers, who must watch until the crucified 
are dead, and their bodies are removed ; and " the acquaintance of Jesus, and the women 
who had followed him from Galilee, far off, in speechless amazement beholding these 
things " (ver. 49). All that remains is the buriaL He whose cross was erected between 
the malefactors is dead. The priests and scribes had begged that the closing act of 
the death by crucifixion, that called the cruci/ragium — the smiting or breakiog of the 
legs — might be hastened and the corpses removed, so that no offence to decency might 
be felt on the high day, " the double sabbath," at hand, Pilate had acceded to the 
request ; and the forms of the two malefactors had been smitten. Not the form of 
Jesus. No spark of life, it was said, remained. Only, to make assurance sure, a spear 
is thrust into the side ; the spear, it may be, pierced the pericardium of the heart, 
or that had already been ruptured ; anyhow, a mixture of blood and water flows out. 
St. John is emphatic as to this, no doubt to silence the suggestion that Jesus had only 
seemed to die, or that the seeming death had been only a swoon. No, says the 
evangelist (John xix. 35), "I saw it myselL" It la the lymbolio meaning of that 
effusion which we set before us when we sing— 

" Let the water and the blood. 
From thy riven side which flowed^ 
Be of sin the double oure^ 
Cleanse me from its guilt and power." 

Is the Lord buried in the sepulchre reserved for those who had been doomed ft» capital 
punishment? No. Here there comes into view the beautiful and atriking inoiden* 



at xxm. 1— 66.] ISE GOSPEL ACCORD liJO TO ST. LUKE. ill 

recorded in vers. 60 — 53. And, in connection with it, we light on a word which is used at 
the hour when we should least have expected to fiod it. One of the Sanhedrists — a man 
universally esteemed for piety and prudence— Joseph of Arimathasa — had not consented 
to the counsel and deed of his colleagues. Hitherto he had never dared to avow the 
attraction which he felt. Why should he now risk his reputation, it may be his life, 
by an acknowledgment which he had withheld in his earlier days? Every dictate of 
worldly wisdom bade him be wholly silent. What do we read in Mark xv. 43 ? It is 
the death of Christ that dispels the fear, that at last prompts to decision. He goes in 
holdly to Pilate, and craves the body of Jesus. And the demand of the senator is 
granted. And as he bears away the sacred frame, he is joined by another (John xlx. 
39), the Nicodemus of whom we read at the beginning of the ministry (John iii.), who 
brings with him a princely offering of myrrh and aloes. The reverent and loving 
hands thus joined together wrap the body (ver. 53) in linen, and hastily and partially 
embalm it, lajdng it in the tomb which Joseph had scooped out for himself as his 
own last resting-place. What happened between this time and the third, the 
appointed day ? Let us ask, first, What, as it concerns our Lord f secondly. What, 
as it concerns the disoipletl and, thirdly. What, as it concerns the world which 
crucified him f 

I. What happened as it concerns oub Lord? Two or three words give us 
some hints concerning our Lord after his death and before the Eesurrection. First, 
his own assurance given to Mary on the resurrection-day (John xi. 17), " I am not 
yet ascended to my Father." The place and condition into which he passed, in dying, 
were intermediate between the life on earth and the life in glory. He was not then, as 
the Man Jesus, in the glory of the Father. And, as bearing on this, we further recall 
the promise to the dying malefactor (ver. 43). " Lord, remember me," he had said, 
"when thou comest into thy kingdom." "To-day," was the reply, "shalt thou be 
with me in Paradise." Paradise, then, received the soul of Christ. Thither he bore 
with him the one who, in penitence and faith, had cast himself on his mercy. And 
Paradise meant the region in the under-world of the dead set apart for the faithful as 
their rest until the resurrection — a blessedness real, though incomplete; a garden with 
the tree of life in it, but not the full enjoyment of the beatific vision. This is the 
meaning of the clause in the Apostles' Creed, " He descended into hell," i.e. into Hades, 
the state of the dead. It is true that this clause has not the antiquity which may be 
claimed for other clauses ; but it expresses the belief of all times that our Lord sub- 
mitted to the conditions of the holy dead — that he was truly and verily numbered 
among them. The soul was actually in Hades, or She61. What part In the great 
redemptive work was fulfilled by this descent ? Had he a ministry in this short but 
significant period ? There is a passage in 1 Peter too obscure to allow of being pressed 
as an answer to this question, but suggestive of interesting lines of thought (1 Pet. 
iii. 18 — 20). To many it has seemed that the preaching to the spirits in prison men- 
tioned there was the work of the Hades-state ; that he proclaimed his gospel to those 
who were kept in ward — ^not the righteous only, but those who were disobedient, e.g. 
the antediluvian generations to which Noah had preached in vain. And the inference 
drawn from this view of the passage has appeared " to throw light on one of the darkest 
enigmas of Divine justice — the cases where the final doom seems infinitely out of pro- 
portion to the lapse which lias incurred it." No argument can be built on a passage 
whose interpretation is doubtful ; but the exposition hinted at falls in with convictions 
which have been cherished from the time of the apostles. We are, at all events, on 
solid Scripture ground when we suppose that, in the world of the dead, the triumph 
over him that had the power of death, <.«. the devil, was completed. The descent was 
the following of the enemy into his innermost citadel ; it was the spoiling of the 
principalities and power of darkness ; it was the opening of the way through death into 
life by him who has the keys of Hades. Is not Paradise all the sweeter that Christ 
has been there ? Is not the inheritance all the surer that through death he went to 
the Father? Is not this the symbol of our faith and hope^that "the Lord has set 
his cross in the midst of Hades, which is the sign of victory that will remain to 
eternity"? 

II. What happened as rr concbrns thb disoipleb. But what of those who 
weep tad lament whilst the world ia rejoicing — ^the sorrow-stricken, orphaned company 



248 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxiii. 1— S6. 

of disciples? The last to leave the place where the body of Jesus was laid, as the first 
to hasten to the tomb when the sabbath is past, are the holy women (vers. 65, 66). 
We see them on Friday evening watching the tomb, and observing how the lifeless 
form was attended to, and then hastening into the city, that they may make ready the 
spices and ointments for embalming before the sabbath began. Their love is stronger 
than their faith. The heart'* yearning is sometimes more than the heart's believing. A 
very dreary sabbath that was to all the disciples. " They rested according to the com- 
mandment " (ver. 56). A commandment — rest, and nothing more. What conflicts of 
thought and affection 1 What desolation of spirit 1 Peter — what a strange sabbath it 
must have been to him! Only one thing for alL The sense of relation to the crucified 
Jesus can never be effaced ; but it has no glow of hope, it has only the darkness of a 
memory, the gloom of a despair. " They rested on the sabbath ; hut " (the first word 
of the twenty-fourth chapter should he " but " rather than " now ") ; but the running of 
the spirit, the movement of the love, is only towards the garden and its sepulchre. Is 
it not the type of Church, of Christian, wanting the power of the Holy Ghost ? Work 
for Christ, loyal but cheerless, without sight of his glory, or waiting for his advent— 
this is suggested by the preparation of the spices and ointments, and the sabbath- 
keeping but without the true spiritual sabbath, the joy of the Lord; ordinances 
observed, but with no inner alacrity, only because of the commandment. This is 
suggested by the unrestful resting on that seventh day. Not yet is there the anointing 
of the Holy Ghost, the power of the Eesurrection. 

III. What happened ab it concerns the world which CRPciriED him. Is it 
not strange that what was absent from faith as a hope was present to imbelief as a 
fear? Those who had crucified the Lord have their memory wonderfully quickened. 
They recall (Matt, xxvii. 62 — 64) some words which he uttered nearly three years 
before, about a temple which he would raise in three days, and their dread gives a force 
to these words. Sabbath though it be, the chief priests and Pharisees seek an audience 
of Pilate, and beg him to " make the sepulchre sure until the third day, lest his dis- 
ciples come by night, and steal him away, and say to the people. He is risen from the 
dead : and so the last error be worse than the first." They are told to go their way and 
do as they choose ; and hence the sealing of the great stone and the setting of the 
watch. Is not all now secure? Have they not for ever dispelled the illusions as to 
the Deceiver? So thought the Jewish authorities ; so men think still. They are always 
crying out that the Christian religion is effete, that the Christian's Christ has been 
slain. '• Are there any Christians still ? " asked a notable sceptic some years ago. 
purblind souls 1 What avail your watch and seal ? He whom you call Deceiver is 
yet alive; and there are compunctions of heart, convictions of guilt and wrong-doing, 
and needs of spiritual restoration and inward rectitude, which will assert themselves 
against all your philosophies I Pentecost days are never far distant days when a 
mighty remorse rolls over the minds of men, and the cry which never can be silenced, 
because it is the cry of the human soul in its most solemn hours, and with reference to 
its deepest wants, bursts through lips which are quivering with a genuine earnestness, 
" What shall we do to be saved ? " On that sabbath the world religious and irreligious 
holds its rest. It cannot altogether forget ; but it holds its Paschal feasts, and complies 
with all the etiquette of these feasts, as if there were no Calvary, as if no Jesus had 
lived and died. And is not this the feature of all times? Do not men push their 
ambitious projects, scheme and toil, spend their strength, and hold their sabbaths 
without the living consciousness of the Christ who died for their sins? May not we 
ourselves say — 

" I sin ; and heaven and earth go round 

As if no dreadful deed were done. 
As if Christ's blood had never flowed 

To hinder sin or to atone"? 

There Is no word more solemn than that (Heb. vi. 4 — 6) in which the sacred writer 
reminds us that if those who have tasted the Word of God and the powers of the world 
to come fall away, they pass from the fold of the Church into the ranks of Christ's 
enemies, seeing " they crucify to themselves the Sou of God afresh, and put him to an 
open shame." 



OH. mn. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 249 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The Divine kingdom. Deeply interesting is this interview between 
the Nazarene and the Roman, the Jewish Prisoner and the Roman judge; the one the^ 
brought forth as a malefactor and now seated on the throne of the world, the other 
then exalted on the seat of power and now sunk to the depth of universal pity if not 
of imiversal scorn. " Art thou a King ? " asks the latter, in the tone of lofty supe- 
riority. " I am," replies the former, in the tone of calm and profound assurance. What, 
then, was this kingdom of which he spoke ? What was that kingdom of God, that 
kingdom of heaven, that " kingdom of the truth " (John xviii. 37) which he foretold, 
which he came to this world and which he laid down his life to establish ? It was the 
sovereignty of Ood over all human souls. Sod's claim — which is not founded on pre- 
scription, nor upon /orce, hut upon righteousness — is his claim on the reverence, the 
aifection, the obedience, of those whom he has created, preserved, enriched, who owe to 
him all that he demands of them. With us, who have revolted from his rule, this 
means nothing less than the restoration of our loyalty, and thus our return to his like- 
ness and to his favour as well as to his sway. We look at — 

L The okiginality op the conception. We plume ourselves upon the originality 
of our ideas, upon our "creations." But when did the mind of man launch on the sea 
of human thought such a conception as this kingdom of God? Men had entertained 
the idea of founding by force a widely extended empire which should command the 
outward homage and tribute of hundreds of thousands of men, and should last for many 
generations. But who ever designed a creation like this glorious " kingdom of 
heaven " — a world-wide sway embracing all living souls whatsoever, exercised by an 
unseen King, in which the service of the lip, and even that of the life, would be of no 
account at all without the homage of the heart and the willing subjection of the spirit, 
characterized by universal righteousness, and crowned by abounding peace and lasting 

joy? 

II. The immensity of the wobk to be ACCOMPr.iSHBD. For what would be involved 
in the establishment of such a kingdom as this ? Kot only the formation and main- 
tenance of a new religion that should hold up its head and keep its course amid sur- 
rounding faiths, but the utter intolerance and complete subversion of every other creed 
and cultus ; the emptying of all the temples and all the synagogues in every land ; the 
dissolution of all the venerable religious institutions which were rooted in the prejudice, 
fixed in the affections, wrought into the habits and the lives of men ; it meant the 
establishment in the convictions and in the conscience of mankind of a faith which 
came into direct collision with all its intellectual pride, with all its social selfishness, 
with all its powerful passions. 

III. Its sublimity as a purpose and a hope. Not merely to ameliorate the cir- 
cumstances and conditions of a country, or of the world at large. That would have 
Been a noble purpose ; but that would have been slight and small in comparison with 
the aim of Jesus Christ. His view was to put away the source of all poverty and sorrow 
and death ; to "put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; " to found in the hearts and 
therefore in the lives of men a kingdom of holiness, and therefore of true and lasting 
blessedness; to restore to God his rightful heritage in the love of his children, and, 
at the same time, to restore to men everywhere their high and glorious portion in the 
favour and friendship, in the likeness and glory, of God. Was ever scheme, was ever 
hope like this — so divinely new, so magnificently great, so unapproachably sublime ? 
1. The way into this kingdom is by a humble, living faith. 2. The way on to its 
higher places is the service of sacrificial love. The path which takes us to the cross 
is the way to the throne. — U. 

Yers. 4 — 12. — The majesty of meekness, etc. Beautiful in the last degree, as a moral 
spectacle, is the sight of the meek but mighty Saviour in the presence of the scornful 
human sovereign. But there are many lessons wliich we may gather on oiu' way to 
that striking scene. 

I. How pitiful human authority may prove to be ! Poor Pilate, occupying hii 
high seat of authority and power, is " driven with the wind and tossed," as if he wen 



250 THE GOSPEL ACOOBDINO TO ST. LUES. [oh. xzm. 1— 6ft. 

a leaf upon the ground. He " finds no fault in Jesus " (ver. 4), but he dares not acqolt 
him ; he is afraid of the men he is there to govern. He casts about for a way of escape ; 
he at lasts hits upon the poor expedient of shifting the difiBculty to other shoulders. He 
presents to us a very pitiable object as a man who sits in the chair of office, and dares 
not do his duty there. Authority divested of a manly courage and shaking with few 
of consequences is a deplorable thing. 

IL How fEBBLE IB HBBB PASSIONATE vsHisiiENOB ! The people, led by the priests, 
were " the more fierce" (ver. 5), insisting that Pilate shovdd not release the Prisoner of 
whose innocence he was convinced. We see them, with hatred flashing from their eyes, 
indulging in frantic gestures of deprecation and incitement, londly clamouring for the 
condenmation of the Holy One. Their urgency did, indeed, prevail for the moment, as 
vehemence frequently does. But into what a dire and terrible mistake it led them! to 
what a crime were they hastening 1 what awful issues were to spring from their success^ 
How truly were they sowing the wind of which they woidd reap the whirlwind! 
Earnestness is always admirable; enthusiasm is often a great power for good; but 
passionate vehemence is nothing better than a noisy feebleness. It is not the presence 
of real power ; it is the absence of intelligence and self-control. It leads men to actions 
which have a momentary success, but which end in a lasting failure and in sad disgrace. 

III. How UNFBUiTFUi. IS IDLE ouBiosiTT. (Vers. 8, 9.) Herod congratulated himself 
too soon. He reckoned on having a keen curiosity fully gratified ; he thought he had 
this Prophet in his power, and could command an exhibition of his peculiar faculty, 
whatever that might prove to be. But he did not want to arrive at truth, or to be 
better able to do bis duty or serve his generation ; and Jesus Christ declined to minister 
to his royal fancy. He was silent and passive, though urged to speech and action. 
Christ will speak to ova hearts, and will work for our benefit and blessing when we 
approach him in a reverent and earnest spirit ; but to a worldly and irreverent curiosity 
he has nothing to say. It mtist retire ungratified, and come again in another mood. 

IV. How INCONSTANT IS DNSPIBIT0AL FEiBNDSHiPl Herod had Very little to thank 
FUate for, on this occasion; h'e appears to have mistaken a cowardly attempt to evade 
duty for a mark of personal respect or a desire to effect a reconciliation (ver. 12). A 
friendship that had to be renewed, and that was patched up in so slight a way and on 
such mistaken ground, would not last long and was worth very little. Friendship that 
is not built on thorough knowledge and on mutual esteem is exceedingly fragile and 
of small account. It is only common attachment to the same great principles and to 
the one Divine Lord that binds together in indissoluble bonds. Sameness of occupa- 
tion, similarity of taste, exposure to a common peril, or the possession of a common 

hope, this is not the rock on which friendship will stand long ; it rests on character, 

and on the character that is formed by close, personal intimacy with the one true 
Friend of man. 

V. How WBONO AND EVEN WICKED IS tJNBNLIGHTBNBD BCORN I (Vcr. 11.)^ Quite 

unimaginable is the uproarious laughter and the keen, low enjoyment with which the 
actors went through this wretched ribaldry, this (to us) most painful mockery. How 
little did they think that he whom they were so mercilessly insulting was the King he 
claimed to be, and was immeasurably higher than the highest of them all I Wrong and 
wicked is human scorn. Often since then has it mocked at truth and wisdom, and 
poured its poor ridicule on the head of holiness and true nobility I It is not only 
the " stranger " who may prove to be the " angel unawares entertained ; " it is also the 
man whom we do not understand, whom we may think entirely in the wrong, whom 
we are tempted to despise. Many are the mockers who will be fain, one day, to receive 
a gracious pardon from the object of their derision, 

VI. How MAJESTIC 18 BPiBiTUAL MEEKNESS 1 (Vcr. 11.) We know Well how our 
Lord bore this cruel trial. "A silent Man before his foes" was he. Able at any 
moment to bring them into utmost humiliation, to turn the mocking glance of triumph 
into the countenance blanched with unspeakable fear, and the brutal laugh of mockery 
into a cry for mercy, he stood without a blow, without a word on his own behalf 
enduring as one that saw the invisible and the eternal. There is nothing more majestio 
than a calm endurance of wrong. To accept without return the strong buffeting of 
eruelty, to take without reply the more keen and pienjing utterance of falsehood, 
because stillneas or silence will advance the cause of truth and the kingdam ef Qod — ' 



OH. xxm. 1— 66.] THE GOSPEL A00ORDIN3 TO ST. LUKB, 261 

this is to be very " near the throne " on which it is onr highest ambition to be placed ; 
it ia to be carrying out, most acceptably, the conxmandment of the meek, majeitie 
Saviour m he aays to us, ** Follow me I "—0. 

Ver. 19f—0uilty eompromUe. Twice (iee yer. 22) Pilate made this offer to the 
Jews. He would chastise Jesus and release him ; he would thus gratify them by putting 
the Object of their hatred to pain and humiliation, and he would satisfy his own con- 
science by saving an innocent man from the last extremity. It was a poor and a guilty 
compromise he proposed as a solution. If Jesus were as guilty as they claimed that 
he was, he deserved to die, and Pilate was in duty bound to condemn him to death ; if 
he were innocent, he certainly ought not to have been subjected to the exposure and 
agony of scourging. It was a cowardly and ignoble endeavour to save himself at the 
expense either of public or of individual justice. Compromises are of very different 
character. There are compromises which are— 

I. Just, and therefobe honoxtrable. Two men in business have claims one against 
the other, and one cannot convince the other by argument ; the proposal is made to 
adjust their respective claims by a compromise, each man consenting to forego some- 
thing, the concession of the one being taken as a fair equivalent to that of the other : 
this is honourable to both. It very prol>ably results in each man getting what is his 
due, and it saves both from the misery and espenbe of litigation, and preserves good 
will and even Mendship. 

IL Wish, and therefore commensablb. A society— it may be (^ m distinctly 
teligious character — is divided by its members holding opposite opinions. Some advo- 
cate one course, the others urge a different one. The idea is suggested that a third 
course he adopted, which includes some features of the two ; there is no serious principle 
involved, it is only a matter of procedure, a question of expediency. Then it will prob- 
ably be found to be the wisdom of that society to„ accept the proposed compromise. 
Every one present has the double advantage of securing something which he approves, 
and (what ia really better, if it could but be realized) that of yielding something to 
tiie wishes or the convictions of other people. 

111. Guilty, and thbrbfoeb condbmnablb. Such was that of the text Such 
bave been innumerable others since then. All are guilty that are effected : 1. At the 
expense of truth. The teacher of Divine truth may bring his doctrine down to the 
level of his hearers' understanding; he may make known the great verities of the faith 
•* in many portions " (iroKviiepus) j but he may not, in order to " please men," distort or 
withhold the living truth of God. If he does that he shows himself unworthy of his 
office, and he exposes himself to the severe condemnation of his Divine Master. 2. At 
the expense of Justice. However anxious we may be to preserve outward harmony, we 
may not, for the sake of peace, do any one man a wrong ; may not asperse his character, 
injure his prospects, wound his spirit. Eather than do that, we must face the storm, 
and guide our bark as best we can. 3. At the expense of self-respect. If Pilate had 
been less hardened than he probably was, less accustomed to the infliction of human 
pain and shame, he would have gone back to the interior of his house ashamed of him- 
self, as he thought of the lacerating scene that immediately followed that mockery of 
• trial. If we cannot yield without inflicting on our own soul a real spiritual injury, 
without doing (or leaving undone) an action the remembrance of which will not only 
shame but weaken us, then we must not compromise the matter in dispute. We must 
tell our tale, whatever it may be ; we must make our motion, whomsoever it may 
offend ; we must walk straight on in the road of rectitude, in the path of humanity.— 0. 

Yer. 24.— TAe eharaoter of Pilate. It is true that Pilate's opinion concerning Jesus 
of Nazareth was Tery different indeed from that of his accusers ; but he latle imagined 
that it would be to that poor suffering Prisoner that he would owe such immortality 
as he is to enjoy. Tet so it is ; it is only because we are disciples of Jesus Christ that 
we care to ask who and what was Pilate. He is nothing but the gold upon the altar. 
In considering the elements of his character, we note— 

L That hb was possessed of snerot and KNTSBPsisa He would hardly hsfv 
leached the station he occupied, or held it as long as he did, if h* had notluui these t«a 
foaUties ia his ohaiaoter. 



262 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiii. 1— 56 

IL That he was not devoid op spibitual disobbnment. It is clear that he was 
much impressed by all that he saw of Jesus. The calmness, patience, and nubility of oiir 
Lord called forth from Pilate a sincere respect. There was genuine admiration in hii 
heart as he led forth the Divine Sufferer and exclaimed, " Behold the Man ! " He was 
affected, and even awed, by the moral greatness he was witnessing. He may also have 
been moved to pity. 

III. That his wobldlinesb had wobn out his faith. He had probahly had his 
yisions, in earlier days, of the saoredness and supremacy of truth ; he had indulged his 
idea of what was morally good and sound, more to be desired than riches, more to bo 
pursued than honour or authority. But a life of worldliness had done for him what 
it will do for any of its votaries — it had eaten away his early faith ; it had caused his 
fairest views and noblest purposes to melt and to disappear ; it had left his spirit " naked 
to his enemies," without any assured belief in any one or in anything. " To bear witness 
to the truth." " What is truth ? " asks the poor sceptic, whose soul was empty of all 
sustaining trust, of all ennobling hope. 

IV. That he had come to suboedinatb eighteousnbsb to poijoy. That Prisoner 
on his hands was innocent : of that he was well assured. He would not condemn him to 
a cruel death unless he was obliged to do so. But he must not push his preference for 
righteousness too far. He must not seriously endanger his own position ; he must not 
put a handle into the power of his enemies. No ; rather than that, this pure and holy 
One must be scourged, must even die the death. As the trial proceeds, it appears that 
he is exciting a very strong hostility to himself. Let the poor Man go, then, to his 
doom ; one more act of injustice, however regrettable in itself, will not make much 
difference. " And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required." 

Application. 1. Outward circumstances prove very little. It is the judge whom 
we pity now ; it is the bound and buffeted, the maltreated and maligned Prisoner 
whom we now honour and emulate. 2. Real strength is in righteousness and in love. 
Unrighteousness and selfishness, in the person of Pilate, resorted to shifts and expedients, 
and vacillated again and again between obligation and self-interest. Flawless integrity 
and abounding love for man, in the person of Jesus Christ, wavered not for an instant, 
but pursued its holy and gracious piupose through pain and shame. Policy prevails 
for a very little while ; it goes back to its palace, but its end is exile and suicide. 
Poverty and love go through the deep darkness of earth to the unshadowed glory of the 
skies. — G. 

Ver. 26. — Compuhion and invitation ; the human and th» Divine methods. Here we 
have an illustration of — 

I. Human violence. " They laid hold upon" one Simon, and " him they compelled " 
(Matt, xxvii. 32) to bear his cross. What right had these Roman soldiers to impress 
this stranger into their service ? What claim had they upon him ? By what law of 
rectitude did they arrest him as he was entering the city, and insist on his bearing a 
burden, and going whither he would not? What justified them in laying hands upon 
him and violently enforcing this service ? None whatever ; nothing whatsoever. It 
was only another instance of the unscrupulousness of human power. Thus has it been 
everywhere and always. Let men but feel that they have the mastery, that theirs it 
the more powerful mind, the firmer will, the stronger hand, and they will ask no leave, 
consult no law, be restrained by no consideration of conscience. The history of man, 
where not under special Divine direction, has been the history of the assertion of 
strength over weakness ; that has been the course of national, of tribal, of family, of 
individual life. The strong man, well armed, has " laid hold upon " the weak man, and 
laid some burden upon him to carry. He has virtually said, " I can command your 
labour, serve me ; if you refuse to do so, you shall pay some penalty of my own 
choosing." Human violence (1) is essentially unrighteous, for it is based on no claim 
that can be properly so called ; (2) has been found to be shamelessly unmerciful ; (3) 
has been gradually, though slowly, subjected to the great rule of Christ (Matt. vii. 12) ; 
(4) is destined in time to make way for the rule of righteousness. 

II. Divine PBEgUAgivENEss. God does not compel us to serve him. He may 
indeed, so wisely overrule all things as to make the life deliberately withheld fro» him 
or the action directed agaiaat him {ej/. the act of betrayal by Judas) contribute *f> the 



OH. xxm. 1— 56.] THE GOSPEL AOOOKDINa TO ST. LUKE. 253 

final issue; but he does not force the individual soul to serve him. Jesus Christ does 
not compel ub to his service. It is true that his invitations have the authority of a 
command; but his commands have the sweetness of invitations. 1. He invites us to 
approach him and seek his favour. " Come unto me all ye that labour " is not a 
severe command ; it is a most gracious invitation. " Whosoever believeth on me hath 
everlasting life " is not a peremptory injunction ; it is a welcome and generous announce- 
ment. And while it is indeed true that Christ says, imperatively " Follow me ! " it is 
also true that he does not force any one into his company ; he makes his appeal to our 
conscience and conviction ; he will not have any in his service who do not freely and 
whole-heartedly consent to come. 2. He graciously influences us, that we may see 
and follow the true light. Paul, indeed, does speak of Christ as " apprehending," or 
laying hold of, him (Phil. iii. 12). But this referred to the very exceptional mani- 
festation of his Divine power, and the language is strongly figurative. The Spirit of 
God does illumine our understanding and affect our heart ; but he does not compel us 
to decide without the consent of our own will. In the last resort we have to " choose 
life" or death. 3. He summons us to &full discipleship by following him as one that 
bore a cross (ch. ix. 23 ; Matt. xvi. 24). He lets us know that we shall not meet with 
his full approval if we do not bear the cross after him, if we do not follow him in the 
path of sacrificial love. But there is truest kindness, both of substance and manner, in 
this his urgent challenge. 4. He promises us inward rest here, and a large reward 
hereafter, if we do hear his voice and do thus follow him. Between human compulsion 
and Divine invitation or Divine constraint, there is exceeding breadth : the one is an 
intolerable tyranny ; the other is essential righteousness, and introdiixet to true liberty, 
to spiritual resl^ to abiding joy. — C. 

Vers. 27 — 31. — Sympathy and solicitude. Before reaching Calvary an interesting 
Knd instructive incident occurred. Among the tumultuous crowd that surged round 
the soldiers and their victims were many women. These were better away, we are dis- 
posed to think, irom a scene so brutal and so harrowing as this. But we will believe 
that something better than curiosity, that gratitude, that affection, that womanly pity, 
drew them, spite of their natural shrinking, to this last sad ending. By whatever motives 
impelled, they were certainly moved to strong com|iassion as they saw the Prophet of 
Nazareth, the great Healer and Teacher, led forth to die. Their loud laments did not 
fall on the ear of One too occupied with his own impending doom to hear and heed 
them. Our Lord made to these weeping women the reply which is here recorded, 
longer and fuller than we should have supposed the circumstances would allow. It 
suggests to us — 

I. That human distbess nbveb fails to beach and touch him. If there were 
any moments in his life when he might have been preoccupied, and might not have 
noticed the sounds of sorrow, it was this hour of his agony, this hour when the weight 
of the world's ain rested on his soul, when the great sacrifice was in the very act of 
being offered. Yet even then he heard and stopped to console the troubled. An 
»ppeal to Jesus Christ in circumstftnces of sorrow is never ill-timed. 

II. That such sympathy with Jesus Christ is entirely out of place. " Weep 
not for me." Some men speak and act as if it were appropriate to express sympathy 
with the Saviour on account of his sufferings. It is, indeed, impossible to read the story 
of his last hours, and realize what it all meant, without having our sympatlietio feeling 
very keenly quickened ; but Jesus Christ does not ask that we should express to him, 
or to one another, our sympathy with him as One that then suffered. These sufleringg 
are past ; they have placed him upon the throne of the world ; they have made brighter 
than ever his celestial crown, deeper than ever his heavenly joy. So far as we are 
concer[ied, and so far as they speak of our sin, they may well humble us ; in so far as 
he is concerned, we rejoice with him that he " was perfected through suffering." 

III. That a holy solicitude fob ourselves and ours is often the most appro- 
priate sentiment. " Weep for yourselves, and for your children." We know well what 
reason these Jewish women had, both as patriots and as mothers, to be concerned for 
the fate that threatened their country and their homes. Our Lord certainly would not 
condemn, would not disparage, an unselfish sympathy. He who wept at Bethany, and 
whose law of 1ot« was the law that covered and inspired a gracious burden-bearing 



2S4 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKB. [oh. xxra. 1—56. 



(Gal. t1. 2), could not possibly do that. Indeed, we seldom stand nearer to his side 
than when we " weep with them that weep." But there are many times when we are 
tempted to be troubled by our brother's smaller difficulty instead of being concerned 
about our own much greater one. Do not be blind to the bodily pains or the circum- 
stantial struggles of your neighbour ; but look eager.ly and earnestly to the rent which is 
opening in your own reputation, to the gap that is increasingly visible in your own con. 
sistency, to the fact that you are palpably descending the slope which leads down to 
spiritual ruin. 

IV. That thbbb abb bad extremities of evil when nothing is left but a 
HOPELESS CRY. (Ver. 30.) 

V. That sin and punishment become deeper and nearer as time goes on. The 
green tree is exposed to the consuming fire ; but the green tree in time becomes the 
dry, and how much more certain and more fierce then will be the devouring flame ! 
The nation goes from bad to worse, from the worse to the worst ; from dark to darker 
guilt, from condemnation to calamity. So does a human soul, unguided by heavenly 
truth and unguarded by holy principle. At any and every time in danger, its peril 
becomes continually greater as its guilt becomes constantly deeper. Go not one step 
farther in the course of sin, in the way of worldliness, into the " far country " of forget- 
fulness. Each step is an approach to a precipice. Beturn on thy way without a 
moment's lingering. — C. 

Ver. 34. — Magnanimity an attainment. " Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them ; 
for they know not what they do." When— at what particular point did he say that ? 
It is commonly believed that he uttered this most gracious prayer just at the time of 
the actual crucifixion. Just when the nails were driven into those hands, the hands 
that had constantly been employed in some ministry of mercy ; into those feet that had 
been continually carrying him on some errand of kindness ; or just when the heavy 
cross, with its suffering Victim fastened upon it, had been driven into the ground with 
unpitying violence ; — just then, at the moment of most excruciating pain and of intoler- 
able shame, he opened his lips to pray for mercy on his executioners. We have here — 

L A BARB instance OF HUMAN MAGNANIMITY. 1. CoUSCiouS, HOt Onlv of perfect 

innocence, but of the purest and even the loftiest aims, Jesus Christ found himself not 
only unrewarded and unappreciated, but misunderstood, ill treated, condemned on • 
totally false charge, sentenced to the most cruel and shameful death a man could die. 
What wonder if, under those conditions, all the kindliness of his nature had turned to 
sourness of spirit ! 2. At this very moment he was the object of the most heartless 
cruelty man could inflict, and must have been suffering pain of body and of mind that 
was literally agonizing. 3. At such a time, and under such treatment, he t igets him- 
•elf to remember the guilt of those who were so shamefully wronging him. 4. Instead 
of entertaining any feeling of resentment, he desired that they might be forgiven their 
wrong-doing. 5. He did not haughtily and contemptuously decline to condemn them ; 
he did not hardly and reluctantly forgive them; he found for them a generous extenua- 
tion ; he sincerely prayed his heavenly Father to forgive them. Human magnanimity 
could hardly go further than that. 

II. A beautiful example of HIS OWN LOFTY DOCTRINE. When in his great 
sermon (Matt. v. — vii.) he said, "Love your enemies . . . pray for them which despite- 
fuUy use and persecute you, that ye may be the children of your Father whiuh is in 
heaven," he urged upon us to cherish and to illustrate the loftiest virtue on the highest 
grounds. This he now beautifully, perfectly exemplified. He was literally and truly 
praying for those who were using him despitefuUy. As the greatest generals and 
captains have proudly and honourably claimed that they " never bade men do that 
which they were not willing to do themselves," so this our glorious Leader, he who 
came to be the " Leader and Perfecter of the faith " (Heb. xii. 2 : Alford), never desired 
of us any virtue or grace which he did not possess and did not himself adorn. He 
could and did say to his disciples, not only, " Go thither in the way of righteousness," 
but also, "Follow me in every path of purity and love." We may well love our 
enemies, and pray for those who despitefuUy use us, that we may be the children of 
our Father in heaven, and that we may be followers of our patient, magnanimous 
Mast«r> And it is here, truly, that we hav9— 



OH. xxra. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 265 

in. A CHALLENGE TO A GREAT ATTAINMENT. 1. To pray sincerely for those who 
do us wrong is one of the very highest points, if not actually the very loftiest, of human 
magnanimity. To dismiss all vindictive purpose, all resentful thought ; to look at our 
enemy's procedure in a liindly light, and to take, as Christ did here, a generous view of 
it ; to cherish a positive wish for his good ; to put this wish into action, into prayer ; — 
by these stages we reach the summit of nobility. 2. This is an attainment we should 
sedulously and devoutly pursue. There are those of noble nature, men and women 
whom God endows with a most " excellent spirit," to whom this may be plain and 
easy ; to them it is not a steep ascent to be laboriously climbed, but a gentle slope 
along which they can walk without difBoulty. But to most men it is an attainment 
and not an endowment. It is an attainment which can only be secured by earnest 
and continued cultivation. But we have for this great end the most eflfeotual means : 
(1) the realization of the near presence of God, and the knowledge of his Divine 
apiiroval ; (2) the sense that whea we succeed we win the greatest of all victories ; 
(3) the efficacy of prayer — its subjective influence, and the aid which it brings na/rom 
above ; (4) the inspiration of our Lord's example, and that of hia most faithful 
followers (Acts vii. 60 ; 2 Tim. iv. 16). — 0. 

Ver. 34. — Sin greater than it seems. " They know not what they do." There ii 
more in our actions, and therefore in our life, than there seems to be to ourselves (see 
" The largeness of our life," homily on ch. x. 16). There is more of good ; more also of 
evil. These soldiers imagined that they were doing nothing more than executing a 
malefactor. They were murdering a Messiah ; they were putting to death the Son of 
Man, the Saviour of mankind. They knew not what they did ; they did not recognize 
the extreme seriousness, the actual awfulness, of the crime they were committing. 
Thus is it constantly. We suppose ourselves to be doing something of very little 
consequence ; but he who knows the realities and the issues of all things sees in our 
action something far more serious than we see. We know not what we do when wo 
err from the straight line of moral and spiritual rectitude. We do not know — 

I. How WE HDBT A HUMAN 8PIEIT WHEN WB WOUND IT. Whether this be by some- 
thing said or done, by a glance of the eye, by the withholding of the expected word or 
action, we often wound more deeply than we think. We suppose we have caused a 
momentary irritation. If we knew all, we should know that we have produced a sore- 
ness of feeling, a keenness of disappointment, or (it may be) a depth of distress, which 
it will take weeks or months to heal. 

II. How WE WKONO OUESELVBS WHEN WE SIN AGAINST OUB OONSCIBNOB. It is. We 

assure ourselves, a very slight deviation from rectitude ; it is a negligence for which 
we can easily make up a little further on. But, in truth, we have begun a slow, steady, 
spiritual descent, which will take us to the bottom. We know not what we do when 
we take the first step in moral laxity. We have started our soul on an evil course 
we have done ourselves a wrong which we quite fail to measure. 

III. How WE DAMAGE ANOTHER'S CHABACTEB WHEN WE INJURE IT. We have Only 

induced our neighbour to take a step which will open his eyes to that which he ought 
to know. So we say, and perhaps think. But, in fact, we have done much more than 
that. We have led him to do that which has injured his conscience, which has weak-' 
ened his self-respect, which has enfeebled his character. He will be less strong, hence- 
forth, in the evil hour of temptation ; he will be more open to attack, less likely to 
resist and to conquer his adversary. When we lead into temptation and sin, we " know 
not what we do." 

IV. How WE OBIETB OUB SaVIOUB WHEN WE DISOBEY OB DISHONOUR HIM. We 

do not know how much he expects of his disciples, especially of those who have such 
opportunities as we have of knowing and doing his will — how much attachment, how 
strong an affection, how quick an obedience, how full and patient a submission, he has 
a right to look for, and does wait to receive. And we do not know the fulness and 
intensity of his feeling of disappointment and sorrow when we fail him. The disciple* 
did not know what they did, how grievously they failed, when they slept in that hour 
through which they should have watched. What depth of touching, tenderest pathos 
we hear in these words of gentle remonstrance : " Could ye not watch with me one 
hour?" 



256 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxni. 1— Sft 

V. How WB HINDER THE OAUBB OF Chkist when We discredit it. We think, perhaps, 
that the evil impression we have conveyed hy our inconsistency will soon be forgotten, 
lost entirely in the current of human affairs. But more harm is done than we know or 
think. Some souls are shocked, scandalized, injured ; their faith is lessened, perhaps 
pierced ; they will not count for Christ what they would have counted. Springs of 
anti-Christian influence are started : who shall say whither they will flow 1 

VL How WB BIN AGAINST GoD WHEN WB WITHHOLD FROM HIM OUBSBLVES AND OUE 

SERVICE. We may imagine that we are only delaying till a more suitable or convenient 
time the duty we intend to discharge. But we are really disobeying a Divine com- 
mand ; we are refusing a Divine invitation ; we are continuing in open rebellion, in 
unfilial estrangement. We are seriously sinning against our heavenly Father, our 
merciful Saviour, our rightful and righteous Sovereign. 1. Our ignojrance of "what 
we do" is in part a necessity of our finite nature; tor we cannot possibly look down 
into the depth of things ; nor can we look on to the final issues. This is beyond the 
compass of our powers. 2. But it is in part also the fault of our character. We da 
not think, we do " not consider " (Isa. i. 3), we do not inquire. We do not use as we 
might our spiritual faculties. More patient, prayerful consideration of "what we do " 
would save us from many errors, many wrongs, and also from many painful memories 
and much self-reproach. — 0. 

Ver. 35. — A sad spectacle and the supreme vision. " And the people stood beholding." 
"Sitting down they watched him there" (Matt, xxvii. 36). Shall we envy those 
spectators the scene they then witnessed ? Shall we wish that we had lived when, with 
our mortal eyes, we could have seen the Saviour crucified on our behalf? I think not. 
With this distance of time and space between us, we have a better, truer standpoint 
where we are. No doubt we lose much by that distance ; but we gain at least as 
much as we lose. To those who "stood beholding," or who "sat and watched," 
there was — 

I. An bxoebdinglt bad speotaolb. They saw ; 1. A human being suffering the 
last extremity of pain and shame. Some among that company could look upon that 
scene with positive enjoyment, some with stolid indifference ; but those of whom we 
think, the disciples, would witness it with intense, heart-piercing sympathy, with 
utmost agitation of spirit. His suffering must, in a large degree, have been theirs also 
— theirs in proportion to the love they bore him. 2. A Prophet who had failed to be 
appreciated, and was now a martyr nobly dying in attestation of the truth. 3. A 
sacred cause losing its Chief and Champion ; a cause being wouuded and almost certainly 
slain in the person of its Founder and Exponent. For who could hope that there 
would be found amongst his disciples any that would take the standard from his hands, 
and bear it on to victory? For Christ to die was for Christianity to perish. Such was 
the spectacle on which his disciples looked as they gathered about his cross. The scene 
was more vivid, more impressive, more powerfully affecting, as thus enacted before 
their eyes ; but we see in reality more than they did. We have before us— 

II. The supreme vision on which we can gaze on earth. We see : 1, One who onct 
luffered and died, but whose agony is over; whose pain and sorrow are not now to 

• him sources of evil, but, on the other hand, the ground and the occasion of purest joy 
and highest honour (see homily on vers. 27 — 31). Had we been present then, we 
must have shrunk from the spectacle before us as too painful for sensitiveness to 
endure. Now we can bear to dwell on his dying and his death, because the element of 
overwhelming and blinding sympathy is happily withdrawn. 2. A grand spiritual 
victory. We do not see in the crucified prophet One that was defeated ; we see One 
that told us all that he came to tell, communicating to us all the knowledge we need 
in order to live our higher Ufe on earth, and to prepare for the heavenly life beyond ; 
that was not prevented from delivering any part of his Divine message; that completed 
all he came to do; that was amply entitled to say, as he did before he died, "it i» 
finish^ /" Z. A Divine Redeemer ensuring, by his death, the triumph of his cause. 
Had be not died as he did, had he saved himself as he w.is taunted and challeuged to 
do, had he not gone on to that bitter end and drunk that bitter cup even to the dregs, 
then he would have failed. But because he suffered unto death, he triumphed 
gloriously, and became " the Author of eternal salvation to all them that beliere." 



OH. xxm. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 267 

This is the supreme vision of human souls. We do well to gaze on nobility as we 
see it illustrated in human lives around us. We do well to look long and lovingly on 
human virtue as manifested in the lives and deaths of the glorious army of martyrs. 
But there is no vision so well worthy of our view ; of our frequent, our constant, our 
protracted and intense beholding, as that of the merciful and mighty Saviour dying for 
our sins, dying in wondrous love that he might draw us to himself and restore us to 
our Father and our home. Before our eyes Christ crucified is conspicuously set forth 
(Gal. iii. 1) ; and if we would have forgiveness of sin, rest of soul, worthiness of spirit, 
nobility of life, hope in death, a blpssed immortality, we must direct our eyes unto him 
who was once " lifted up " that he might be the Befuge, the Friend, the Lord, the 
Saviour of the world to the end of time. Betier than the ^dest spectacle man ever 
saw is that supreme vision which is the hope and the life of each looking and trusting 
human heart. — C. 

Vers. 35 — 37. — Self-saving and lelf-taonjke. We have two things here of which the 
latter is much the more worth looking at. 

I. Inhumanity at its lowest. There are many degrees of inhumanity. 1. It is 
bad for men or women deliberately to shut themselves out of the society of the wrong 
and miserable, in order that, without distraction, they may minister to their own com- 
fort or consult their own well-being. 2. It is worse to look on the wounded traveller as 
he lies within sight and reach of us, and to pass him coldly by " on the other side." 3. 
It is worse still to regard the overthrow of human greatness or prosperity with positive 
satisfaction of spirit, to find a guilty enjoyment in the humiliation of another. 4. It 
is worst of all to do as did these men at the cross — to mock at human misery, to taunt 
it in the hour of its agony, to add another pang to the keen sufferings that already 
lacerate the soul. Alas! what may not men become! what positively awful possi- 
bilities of evil are wrapt up in every human soul I that tiny hand, so soft and delicate, 
so beautiful, so harmless, what blow may it not possibly strike, some day, against all 
that is most sacred and most precious ! It makes all the difference whether, under 
Christian principles, we are steadily climbing up toward that which is holy and 
Divine ; or whether, under the dominion of evil forces, we are slowly sliding down 
toward all that is wrong and base. What an argument for ranging ourselves, while 
yet young, under the guidance of Jesus Christ, the Bighteous and the Gracious One I 

II. Magnanimity at its highest. 1. 2%e extremity of evil to which our Lord 
was then submitting ; the most excruciating bodily pain ; the most terrible and almost 
intolerable mental distress ; the apprehension of approaching death. 2. The powerful 
temptation presented to him to deliver himself from it all. By one volition of his will 
he could have descended from the cross, thus releasing himself and confounding his 
enemies. He had (1) the strongest possible inducement to do this from the instincts 
of the nature he had assumed ; (2) the strongest possible provocation to do this in the 
bitter and cruel taunts of his enemies. 3. His most Tiuignanimous refusal to exert his 
power in his own favour. He heard those derisive cries, but he heeded them not. He 
let those revilers think that he was unable to save himself; he knew that if he did 
save himself he could not save others (Matt, xxvii. 42). So he voluntarily continued 
to endure all that torture of body, to bear all that burden of shame and agony of spirit, 
to go on and down into the deepening shadow of death. Surely spiritual nobility 
could never strike a higher note than that, could never reach a loftier summit than 
that. How far can we follow our Lord along this upward path ? There have been men 
who, at a certain point in their career, have clearly foreseen a dark and deathful 
ending, who have been entreated by their friends to go no further, to stand aside, to 
" save themselves " and think no more about the salvation of others (see Acts xxL 12). 
And it is quite possible that, though we shall never be placed in a position just like 
that of our Master, w« may have the choice offered us which was then offered him — ^we 
may have to choose between saving ourselves and leaving others to their fate on. the one 
hand, or sacrificing ourselves and saving our fellows on the other hand. If that choice 
should be presented to us, what should we do? The answer depends very much on the 
measure of the spirit of unselfishness we are cherishing and practising continually. (1) 
Before us is a noble opportunity — that of teaching, enlightening, (instrumentally) 
redeeming men ; but (2) we cannot use this opportunity to any extent without aelf- 

IiUKE. — o. 



258 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. [ch. xxni. 1— 56. 

sacrifice. If we are determined to " save ourselves," we shall do but very little in the 
work of caving others. (3) We must choose between the two : either we must resolve 
to spare ourselves expenditure and endurance, and let the work of human elevation go 
on without our help ; or we must resolve not to spare ourselves, not to save time or 
money, or trouble, or health, not to spare ourselves uncongenial acts or unpleasant 
endurances, that men may learn whafthey know not, may see that to which they are 
yet blind, that they may be led out of exile into the kingdom of God. If we are keep- 
ing our Master well In view, especially if we are beholding him on the cross refusing to 
save himself though challenged with utmost bitterness to do so, we also shall make 
the nobler choice.— 0. 

Yen. 89 — iS.—True penitenei. These verses narrate what we may call a standard 
fact of the gospel of Christ — a fact to which appeal will always be made, as it has 
always been made, in reference to a late repentance. We have to consider — 

I. The BBEvrrr with which a oekat bpibitital eevolution mat be wBotrGHT 
IN A HUMAN MIND. Twclve houTS before, this man was a hardened criminal, habituated 
to a life of rapacious and murderous violence ; his counterpart is to be found to-day in 
the cells of a penal establishment. And now, after a short companionship with Jesus, 
after hearing him speak and seeing him suffer, his heart is purged and cleansed of its 
iniquity, he is another man, he is a child of God, an heir of heaven. There are great 
capacities in these human souls of ours, which do not come often into exercise, but 
which are actually within us. Powerful speech, imminent peril, great emergencies, 
•udden inspiration from God, — these and other things will call them forth ; there is a 
brilliant flash of remembrance, or of emotion, or of realization, or of conviction and 
resolution. And then that which is ordinarily wrought in many days or months is 
accomplished in an hour. The movements of our mind are not subject to any time-table 
calculations whatsoever. No man can define the limit of possibility here. Great revo- 
lutions can be and have been wrought almost momentarily. Not slowly toiling upward 
step by step, but more swiftly than the uprising of the strongest bird upon fleetest 
wing, may the human soul ascend from the darkness of death into the radiant sunshine 
of hope and life. 

II. The THOBOnOHNEBB OF THIB MAN'S OHANGB AS EVIDENCED BT HIS W0BD8. 1, He 

recognizes the existence and the power and the providence of God (ver. 40). 2. He has 
a sense of the turpitude of his own conduct, a due sense of sin (ver. 41). 3. He recog- 
nizes the innocence and excellence of Jesus Christ (ver. 41). 4. He believes in bus 
real royalty, though it is so hidden from sight, and though circumstances are so terribly 
against it (ver. 42). 6. He believes in the pitifulness as well as the power of this 
kingly Sufferer, and he makes his humble but not unhopeful appeal to his remembrance. 
6. He does the one thing for Christ he can do as he is dying on the cross — he remon- 
strates with his companion in crime, and seeks to silence his cruel taunts. Here is 
penitence, faith, service, all springing up and in earnest exercise in this brief hour. 

III. A BUDDEN TBANBITION FEOM THE LOWEST TO THE HIGHEST ESTATE. (Ver. 43.) 

" What a day to that dying man ! How strange a contrast between its opening and its 
close, its morning and its nightl Its morning saw him a culprit condemned before the 
bar of earthly judgment ; before evening shadowed the hill of Zion he stood accepted 
at the bar of heaven, lie morning saw him led out through an earthly city's gates in 
company with One who was hooted at by the crowd that gathered round him ; before 
night fell upon Jerusalem the gates of another city, even the heavenly, were lifted up, 
and he went through them in company with One around whom all the hosts of heaven 
were bowing down as he passed to take his place beside the Father on his everlasting 
throne " (Hanna). In view of this most interesting fact we gather two lessons. 1. 
One of hopefulness. It is never too late to repent ; in other words, repentance, when real, 
is never ineffectual. None could be more undeniably impenitent until within a few 
hours of his death than this malefactor, and no man's penitence could be more decisively 
availing than his. It was real and thorough, and therefore it was accepted. It is a 
great thin^ for those who speak for Christ t» be warranted, as they are, in going to the 
dying and despairing, and telling these departing ones, that true penitence, however late, 
avails with God ; that his ear is not closed against the sigh of the contrite, even at the 
last hour of the day ; that up to the last there if mercy to be had by them who truly 



OH. xxni. 1— 66.] THE GOSPEL AOCORDma TO ST. LUKK 259 

seek it. But there Is another lesson to be learnt. 2. One of warning and of fear. 
There is every reason to hope that true though late repentance is always accepted ; hut 
there is grave reason to fear that late repentance is seldom real and true. How often 
does experience prove that men in apparently dying hours have helieved themselves to 
be penitent when they have only been apprehensive of coming doom I The dread of 
approaching judgment is far from being the same thing as repentance unto life. Not 
the last hour, when a selfish dread may be so easily mistaken for spiritual conviction, 
but the day of health and strength, when conviction can pass into action and honest 
shame into faithful service, is the time to turn from sin and to seek the face and the 
favour of the living God. Let none despair, but let none presume.— 0. 

Ver. 44. — 2%« shelter of the darkness, Tho darkness which fell upon Jerusalem at 
midday and enshrouded the scene of the Crucifixion was a phenomenon for which it is 
impossible to accoimt physically, and which it is not easy to explain morally. It is a 
matter for reverent conjecture, for thoughtful and devout inference, for sacred and 
solemn imagination. We are on sure ground when we say that it came from the Divine 
Father, and came on behalf of his beloved Son. We do not venture much when we 
suggest that it came in response to that Son's appeal in this dark " day of his flesh " 
(Heb. V. 7). We may do well to consider what was the probable impression it made on 
those who were concerned in that sad and sacred scene. 

L On thb leadebs op the people. Surely they were smitten with consternation. 
One would suppose that, as these men witnessed the wonderful works of Christ, some 
doubts as to the rightness of their antagonism to him must have darted into their minds, 
and that beneath their confident and defiant attitude of enmity there must have lain 
some secret misgivings as to the course they were taking. Probably they were not 
without their fears that something would happen at the last to disappoint them. But 
as the day wore on, and Jesus actually hung upon the cross, and his strength was 
certainly going, and the people quietly acquiesced if they did not possibly " assist," all 
seemed to be satisfactory, to be indeed triumphant. When, lo I a strange, unaccount- 
able darkness, an impenetrable obscurity! The sun refuses to shine at midday. No 
man sees his fellow, or sees him only in the faintest light. The Crucified One is screened 
from view. The scoffs and shouts are silenced, and there is a terrible stillness and 
solemnity. What can that mean ? God is speaking in his own chosen way, and is 
rebuking their guilty deed. There is a quaking at the proud Pharisee's heart, a trem- 
bling in the soul of the scribe ; there are no more taunts from their bitter lips ; an 
unspeakable terror invades even their closed hearts which no casuistry can bar. Is it, 
then, the blood of their Messiah that they have been shedding ? 

n. On the multitude. How must they have been subdued with awe, if not 
agitated with wild alarm ' How overwhelming to their less cultured minds must so 
astounding an event have been 1 " Whither," we hear them say, " have our rulers led 
us? Surely there is something sacred and Divine in this Galilajan Prophet I Heaven is 
pronouncing in his favour. Have we crucified our King 1 Will his blood be upon us ? " 
and the daughters of Jerusalem already begin to weep for themselves and for their 
children, as they think that some great calamity impends. 

III. On the Roman soldier. Trained to face peril and to be calm even in the pre- 
sence of overshadowing death, he probably remained quiet and firm, the least moved of 
all the throng. Nothing could be done, and he would lean on his spear, waiting the 
centurion's command when light should break; though exceedingly astonished and 
awe-struck, he would stand to his post with unmoved purpose and well-mastered fear. 

IV. On the disciples. To them it must have come as a relief, if not a promise. 
Believing in their Lord, wondering with great amazement at his capture and crucifixion, 
they would feel that any miraculous interposition was not unlikely, was quite probable. 
It raised their hopes a few degrees above despair ; possibly many degrees. If God inter- 
posed thus far, he might restore everything. At the least, this welcome darkness 
screened themselves, who were too near the cross for security, though too far from their 
Mastw for service ; perhaps it quieted their fear while it comforted their conscience. 

Y. On the Saviour himself. To him we may be well assured that it was • most 
welcome succour. 1. It was a verdict from heaven attesting his innocency. It brought 
confusion to bis enemies and confirmation to himself. It was " a sign from heaven ' ' 



260 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, [oh xxiii. 1— 56. 

distinctly in his favonr. The sun refused to shine on to guilty a crime as that then 

perpetrated ; the darkness that wrapped them round was God's attestation of the dark- 
ness of the deed then being enacted. 2. It effectually shut the mouth of ribaldry and 
reproach. " It stopped each wagging head, it silenced each gibing tongue." We cannot 
tell how painful and how piercing to his sensitive spirit those cruel mookings were; 
nor can we, therefore, tell how much of a relief was the stillness that came with the 
darkness. 3. It screened him from shame. " Men would leave the Crucified exposed 
in shame and nakedness to die, but an unseen hand was stretched forth to draw the 
drapery of darkness round him and hide him from vulgar gaze." 4. It gave him a 
desired privacy for sorrow and for prayer. Sorrow and prayer always seek solitude ; 
they desire to be alone with God. We do not like any others, except it be one that is 
most beloved, to witness the deeper griefs, or the sadder and sterner wrestlings of our 
soul. We seek the shade of some Gethsemane for such sacred experiences as these. 
What awful sorrow now rested upon Christ, now agitated his soul to its very depths, we 
may never understand. But we know that the burden he lx)re for us was at its very 
heaviest, that the sorrow he endured for us was at its extremest point just at this time, 
for it culminated in that terrible cry of desolation (Matt, xxvii. 45, 46) which we do 
not try to fathom, which silences all speech and subdues every spirit. Such sacred 
sorrow, accompanied, as it certainly was, with the most close communion and fervent 
prayer, was not for the curiosity of that heartless crowd. It needed the most perfect 
privacy. And so the Divine Father, in this supreme hour of his Son's great work and 
of the redemption of mankind, " made darkness, and it was night ; " shut the Saviour 
round with the merciful folds of thick darkness, that he might be alone with that 
Father in whose sole presence the great sacrilice was to be completed.— 0. 

Ver. 45. — The rent veil. At the time when Jesus died it is exceedingly probable 
that there would be priests in the " holy place." It was now afternoon, it was drawing 
toward the time of evening sacrifice ; they would be in attendance rendering the service 
of the sanctuary ; they would certainly be aware of what was happening just outside 
Jerusalem, and would be powerfully affected by the fact. Suddenly, as if grasped and rent 
hy unseen hands, that most sacred veil interposing between the antechamber and the 
reception-room of God himself, was torn in twain, " from the top to the bottom." The 
incident was undeniably miraculous. No Jew would have dreamed of daring to do an 
act that would have been so impious in a man. A Divine hand must have been there, 
and when they entered into the mysterious darkness and felt the earthquake, must not 
these priests have asked themselves whether the rending of the veil did not signify a new 
epoch in the kingdom of God ? May not the conversion of a " great company of the 
priests " (Acts vi. 7) be partly accounted for by this striking and significant event ? 
13ut what did it symbolize 1 

I, That God hab adopted a new method of ABSERTnja his holiness and 
IMPRESSING IT ON THE MIND AND HEART OF THE WORLD. That veil was an essential 
part of a system of carefully graduated approach to God. It divided the " holy " from 
the " most holy " place, and beyond it none might pass but the high priest, and he only 
once a year. It was intended to teach the absolute holiness of God — that it was only as 
men were prepared, and as they were separated from sin that they could be admitted to 
his presence. It was not without effect on the Jewish mind ; that nation had thus 
grasped the idea of the purity and perfection of God. But now his character was so 
revealed that all such symbolism was no longer needed. The death of Jesus Christ 
his Son, as the Sacrifice for the sin of the world, was an expression of Divine holiness 
incomparably superior to the symbolism of the temple and for ever superseding it. 
Henceforth, when men wanted to know what God felt about sin — how he hated it, 
what he thought it worth while to do and to suffer in order to expel it — they would 
look to that cross at Calvary, and there read his mind and know his will. Holy 
places were no longer needed. 

II. That God had now provided another and better way of mbbot fob 
MANKIND. Behind the veil was the innermost chamber ; and of this chamber the furni- 
ture was the ark with the two tables of the Law, and the merci/seat above it ; we read 
of this conopartment thus : "within the veil before the mercy-seat." Mercy was thus 
resting Ml Law. Mercy always must be founded on holiness ; for without holiness there 



«s. ixni. 1— S6.] TAB GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LU&Sl. 2«1 

can be no mercy worthy of the name. And on the great Day of Atonement the high 
priest entered this "holy of holies," and sprinkled blood upon the mercy-seat for 
the cleansing of the sins of the nation. But the cross of Jesus Christ spoke of the 
Divine mercy as no temple furniture could do; there needed nothing to teach the 
supremacy of mercy above Law after the dying love of the Redeemer of mankind, and 
there needed E3 more sprinkling of blood upon a meroy-seat after this great Day of 
Atonement, when "by one sacrifice of himself for ever "the spotless Lamb of God 
presented " a Propitiation for the sins of the world." The temple rites then became 
obsolete; its services were past; there need be no more guarding of one sacred place from 
another ; let the sacred curtain he taken down or rent in twain. 

IIL That the way to the Holt One himself is now open to all mankind. 
That Teil was an instrument that not only secluded, but excluded; through it no eye 
might venture to glance, no intruding hand might reach, no presumptuous feet might 
step. To pass that limit was to incur the heaviest penalty ; " the Holy Ghost this 
signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest." But now 
" the good High Priest is come, supplying Aaron's place," and having offered up the 
one all-sufScient sacrifice, having obtained thereby " eternal redemption," that exclud- 
ing veil is rent in twain, that barrier is broken down ; there are no more limitations, 
no more distinctions ; there is access for every child of man to the mercy-seat of God — 
to the Holy One himself, to seek his grace and find his favour. Are we drawing nigh ? 
Are we entering in? Are we availing ourselves of this priceless privilege, this glorious 
provision for our spirit's need ? In many words and ways God invites us to draw nigh 
to himself: he did so when his invisible hand rent in twain that separating veil. 
" Having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus ... let us 
draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith." — 0. 

Ver. 46. — Sow to die and to live. Our text treats of the dying of our Lord. We 
may distinguish between death and dying. All men die, but all men have not a dying 
experience. Those who are killed instantaneously in war or by accident, those who 
are attacked by fatal apoplexy, those who die in their sleep, have no such experience. 
It is probable that we shall have to face the fact that we are passing away from life, 
that when a few more hours have come and gone we shall have entered the unseen 
world. It is therefore of no small value to us that our great Exemplar underwent 
not only death, but the conscious act of dying, and that in this respect also he " left 
us an example that we should follow his steps." We look at — 

L The dying op oub Lord in the light op these wobds. The words he uttered 
just as his end drew near indicate : 1. Deep serenity of spirit. They show nothing of 
agitation or anxiety ; they breathe a calm stillness of soul ; they are fragrant of peace 
and tranquillity. They begin with that word, " Father," which all along had been 
a name of strength and peace ; he was evidently resting in the assurance of parental 
love. And the words that follow are in a strain of entire spiritual composure. 2. True 
and living faith. Jesus was resigning his spirit to God's gracious charge, knowing 
that in his holy and mighty keeping it would be safe and blessed. Here was fullest 
confidence in God and in immortality. 3. Holy resignation. As a Son of man, Jesus 
felt still subject to the Divine Father of all ; and as he came to do and bear his will, 
and had done and had borne it perfectly in every hour and act of life, so now in this 
last volition he yielded himself to God. Thus with a soul tranquil to its profoundest 
depths, realizing the unseen and eternal world, resigning his spirit to the Divine 
Father, he bowed his head in death. 

II. OuB OWN depaetukb. Having found in the death of Jesus Christ that which 
is the ground of our pardon, our peace, our life before God ; having lived in the love and 
in the service of a once crucified and now ever-living Saviour ; — there is no reason to 
doubt that we shall die as he died, breathing the spirit he breathed, if we do not use 
the very language that was upon his lips. 1. Our departure will be tranquil. We 
shall not be terrified, alarmed, agitated ; our spirit will look calmly forward to the 
moment of departure from this world and of entrance into another. We shaU face the 
very near future with a smile. 2. For we shall be sustained by a {tinner /attA. (1) We 
shall feel that we are only going into the nearer presence of our own Father— of him 
before whom we have been living and in whom we have been rejoicing ; only passing 



262 THE GOSPEL ACCORDIlJG TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxnt 1—56 

from one room to another in our Father's house. (2) We shall have faith in Jesui 
Christ himself. That death upon the cross constitutes him a Divine Saviour, in whom 
we hide ; and we shall die in the calm assurance that we shall be " found in him," 
and accepted through him. We shall say, with deeper and fuller meaning than the 
psalmist could, " Into thine hand I commit my spirit : thou hast redeemed me, O Lord 
Ood of truth " (Ps. xxxi. 5). (3) We shall yield ourselves to God in the spirit qf 
consecration, assured that in that new and unknown realm which we are entering wa 
may spend our time and our powers, liberated and enlarged, in his holy and blessed 
service : and the spirit of consecration is the spirit of confidence and hope. And while 
these words are particularly appropriate to dying lips, and very probably suggested 
the last utterance of the first Christian martyr (Acts vii. 69), they need not be held in 
reserve for that occasion ; they admirably express our true attitude in — 

III. Que daily life. So David evidently felt (Ps. xxxi. 5), and so we may feel. 
In faith and in self-surrender we should be continually commending our spirit to our 
heavenly Father's charge : 1. When the day is done and we enter the nightly dark- 
ness and unconsciousness, during which we can take no charge of ourselves, 2. As we 
go forth each morning to duties, trials, temptations, opportunities, to which our own 
unaided strength is quite unequal. 3. If we feel that we are entering some dark cloud 
of adversity and trial in which we shall have peculiar need of Divine support. 4. When 
we are called to new spheres and weightier responsibilities, wherein other graces will 
be required than any that have yet been demanded of us. At all such times should 
we, in faith and consecration, commit the keeping of our souls to our heavenly Father, 
to be sheltered in his faithfulness, to be enriched by his love and his power. — C. 

Ver. 48. — Sacred impression$. There was a considerable company of spectators at 
the Crucifixion. They were attracted not only by the spectacle of a triple execution, 
but, far more, by the fact that the Prophet whose fame had filled the land was to be 
led forth to die. It was not the riffraff of Jerusalem merely that "beheld the things 
that were done.'' The sense of impropriety in attendance at such sanguinary and 
harrowing scenes is quite modern. It did not prevail there and then. Probably the 
leading citizens were present — the well-to-do, the educated, the refined— male and 
female. All classes and all characters were there — the devout and the profane, the 
rough and the gentle, the selfish and the sympathetic. And of that large company of 
people there would be present men and women very variously affected toward Jesui 
Christ. We may say, without hesitation, that the eleven were there; though it is more 
than likely that, for a time at any rate, they stood afar off, we cannot doubt that they 
were there, waiting and wondering ; hoping with a faint hope, fearing with a terrible 
and mastering dread. Many true and loyal disciples were there, among whom, truest 
among the true, were the women who had followed him and " ministered to him " 
(Matt, xxvii. 55). Besides these were the fickle, doubled-minded multitude, who cried, 
" Hosannah 1 " one day, and a few days later shouted, " Crucify him 1 " And beyond 
these in spiritual distance were his implacable and bitter enemies. What may we 
suppose to have been the effect of the Crucifixion on the minds of *' the people that cama 
together to that sight " ? 

I, Immediate effects pkobablt peodtjoed. 1. There were physical elements sure 
to excite their wondering imagination. When an unnatural darkness brooded over the 
entire scene for three long dread hours, when the earth trembled, when the loud death- 
cry of the suffering Saviour pierced the air, there was a combination of strange marveJs 
and unusual experiences which must have shaken their souls and filled them with a 
great awe. 2. And there were moral elements there fitted to touch their hearts. There 
was the presence of death — death, " the great reconciler," that quenches strong ani- 
mosities, that awakens an unwonted pity, that subdues the hardened soul to a surprising 
softness. There was the death of a Man still young, of a Man who had rendered 
undeniably great services to many hearts in many homes. There was death met with 
heroic fortitude, undergone with a calmness, a magnanimity, a moral greatness, such 
as their eyes had never seen before. These two elements together powerfully affected 
the people that drew to that sight ; and with whatsoever thought in their mind they 
" came together," it is certain that a very great majority of them went home astonished. 
if not ashamed and alarmed ; they returned " smiting their breasts," But what wer«— • 



<H. Mm. 1—58.] THE GOSPEL ACOORDING TO ST. LUKE. 263 

II. The OTiTiMATB BPFEOTS PRODUCED? 1. Some effects were permanently good, 
Surely it was partly, if not largely, the remembrance of what they had seen and dona 
and felt on this great day that led to the " pricking of heart " they experienced whea 
Peter spoke so faithfully, and led them to Christian baptism (Acts ii. 22, 23, 37 — 41). 
Was not the " smiting of the breast " more than an antecedent in time to that being 
smitten in heart when they listened and responded ? 2. Others, we may be sure, were 
evanescent and unfruitful. It would have been a very singular case if there were not 
many who felt much agitation that day, and the next, and, perhaps, the day after; 
but who soon allowed pressing cares or passing pleasures to drive convictions from the 
soul. They " smote their breasts, and returned ; " but, instead of returning to God, they 
went back to the old routine and the old formalism and unspirituality. It is well to 
be affected by the facts of God's providence, whether these be simple and ordinary, or 
whether unusual and startling. It is well indeed to he affected by the view of a 
Saviour's death, however that death may be presented to our souls. But let no man 
rest contented with such emotion as was in the breast of the people who "came 
together to that sight." It is wholly undecisive ; if it lead not to something better 
than itself, it will bring forth no fruit of life. It must pass, and should pass quickly, 
into an intelligent conviction of sin, into a real and living faith in him who was then 
the Crucified One, and so into newness of life in him and unto him. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — ^25. — Jesus vindicated hy his enemies. We pass now from the ecclesiastical 
to the secular sphere. The charge brought forward in the Sanhedrin is blasphemy ; 
before Pilate and Herod the charge must be sedition and treason. Yet amid his 
unscrupulous enemies unimpeachable testimony is forthcoming of his innocence. 

I. The testimony elicited by Pilate. (Vers. 1 — 7.) The accusation made 
against Christ was twofold : (1) forbidding to pay tribute ; (2) assuming royalty. Now, 
the first part of the accusation was totally false. Jesus, when asked about the tribute, 
had expressly advised the people to " render unto Csesar the things that are Caasar's." 
There could be no conflict of interests between the emperor and Christ so far as tribute 
was concerned. Doubtless upon this first point Pilate received ample assurance that it 
was groundless. When, again, he inquired about Christ's royalty, he was told that his 
kingship was not earthly, but spiritual. Although Pilate could not grasp its exact 
meaning, he saw sufBcieat to assure him that it was on a different plane from that of 
CsBsar's. Hence Pilate declared his innocence before his accusers. Upon this the chief 
priests and scribes were reduced to the complaint that he was stirring up the people from 
Galilee to Judsea. Strange complnint, that Jesus was rousing up his fellows I He was 
troubling Israel very much as Blias had done. Men are in desperate need of an accu- 
sation when they resort to this one, which merely means that the accused one is in 
downright earnest ! ' As soon as Pilate hears of Christ's earnestness in Galilee, he 
inquires if he belongs to Herod's jurisdiction, and is happy to hand him over for trial 
to the Idumean. 

II. The testimony borne by Herod. (Vers. 8 — 12.) We have next to notice 
how Herod has unconsciously to testify to Christ's innocence. The murderer of the 
Baptist thinks, now that Jesus is brought before him, that he has only to express a 
wish for a miracle, and it will be gratified. To his great surprise and humiliation he 
receives no answer to his numerous questions ; nor do the fierce calumnies of the Jews 
elicit from the meek Messiah a single word in mitigation or defence. The treatment 
of Herod was that of silent contempt. The wicked king deserved no other fate. And 
his only revenge was to mock Christ and set him at naught. So they array him in a 
robe such as the high priests wore, white and brilliant, indicating at once what he pre- 
tended to be and how innocent he really was. Herod, in sending him back in this 
scornful fashion, conveyed to Pilate's mind clearly that he had no more fault ta 
find with him than the Boman governor had.* This was the second testimony to the 
innocency of Jesus. 

III. The testimony implied by the demand tor Barabbas. (Vers. 13 — 19.) 
In no clearer way could the chief priests have shown the utter groundlessness of their 
first charge than in demanding Barabbas in preference to Jeaus. Here was a real rebel, 

• Of. Saurin's • Sermons,' tome xi. p. 236. 

* Cf. Qodet, in 2«o. ; also Gerok's ' Evangelien-Ftedigten,' ». 319, 



264 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiii. 1— 56 

who had committed murder in the insurrection, and he is made the idol of the Jewish 
populace. They show in this their tympathy with sedition. They show clearly to 
Pilate that Jesus must be thwarting in some way their seditious designs, else they 
would not clamour so eagerly for his blood. Instead of substantiating their accusation 
against Jesus, therefore, they really formulate an accusation of treason against them- 
selves. They were guilty ; he was innocent. They were the dangerous class ; Jesui 
occupied a region altogether outside the interests of Caesar. 

IV. Jesus baobifioed to popolab olamoub. (Veis. 20 — 25.) There is no show 
of justice in condemning Christ. All accusation against him fails, and all which can 
be done is to shout him down. If Jesus be not crucified, Jerusalem will go into revolt. 
Will not an imeute be worse than the death of an individual ? And so the worldly 
governor, charged by Home to keep the peace in the province at all hazards, prefers to 
deliver the innocent to the will of the guilty than to brave their wrath. It is clamour 
that secures his condemnation. The judge, who should be the protector of the inno- 
cent, unites with the populace in doing him to death. Alas I that men should be so 
bent on peace as to be ready to sacrifice the Innocent to secure it I And yet our Lord's 
character never shone with so bright a lustre as when he submitted to such wrongs as 
these. He was truly meek and lowly in heart when he bore so quietly the wrath of 
the Jews and the time-serving policies of Pilate and Herod. This friendship of Herod 
and of Pilate, resting on a common indifference to Jesus, is the emblem of those worldly 
truces which men make who wish to enjoy immunity from trouble; but they do not 
wear welL — B. M. E. 

Vers. 26 — 46. — The merciful Saviour on the cross. Delivered unto the will of the 
Jews by the indecision of Pilate, Jesus accepts the cross, and proceeds under its crushing 
weight towards Calvary. But seeing him fainting under it, they press Simon the 
Cyrenian into service, and he has the everlasting honour of carrying the end of the 
beam after Jesus. Thus is it in all life's burdens — the weighty end of them is carried 
by the sympathetic Master, while the lighter end he allows his people to carry after 
him. And here we must notice — 

L His consideeation fob Jbbusalbm'b wbepino DAtTGHTEBS. (Vers. 27—31.) 
The victim of Home's cruelty, he has enlisted the sympathy of many weeping women. 
They see in his death the departure of their best earthly Friend. It is the moment 
of their deepest sorrow. But Jesus tells them to reserve their tears for themselves. 
This death of his will lead inevitably to the destruction of Jerusalem and to the dire 
calamities of the nation. These will be much more lamentable than any sorrows through 
which he is now to pass. Why, then, does he call upon them to weep? Manifestly 
that their timely repentance may ensure their escaping the troubles which are so surely 
coming upon the earth. But the self-forgetful attitude of Jesus is surely most instruc- 
tive. He thinks not of himself, but of their hard case, even though on his journey to 
the cross. It is the most perfect consideration for others' welfare, and the most beautiful 
forgetfulness of one's own, that he here exhibits. 

II. He was numbeeed with the tbansqeessoes. (Vers. 32, 33.) There was 
something peculiarly contemptuous in the arrangement of Jesus between two notable 
criminals. They were robbers — perhaps had been associates of Barabbas. They had 
committed, most probably, murder in the insurrection, so that the cross was the rightful 
end of such careers. But to number Jesus, the innocent, with them, to make him one 
with the greatest criminals then available, was diabolical! And yet he does not 
protest. Nay, he is willing to be thus identified that he may save even one of his 
associates. And yet, is not this arrangement, which numbered him with the trans- 
gressors, simply the outward expression of the great fact which is the foundation of our 
salvation? If Jesus had not voluntarily taken up the position of substitute, and iden- 
tified himself with sinners, we should never have been redeemed. 

III. Intbboession feom the cbosb. (Ver. 34.) It was ignorance on the part of 
many which led to this great crime, but culpable ignorance. They should have known 
better. They needed forgiveness for it. They are the subjects of his intercession. He 
prays, " Father, forgive them ; for they know not what they do." There never had 
been such a forgiving spirit manifested since the world began. No wonder that the 
dying scenes took on ever after a new halo, and that martyrs were able, in spit* of 



OH. xxm. 1— 56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 265 

luffering, to forgive their murderers and intercede for their ealvationl It was the glory 
of patience which was manifested upon the cross. 

IV. The CBABas of belf-neqlbot. (Vers. 35 — 38.) As they walk round the 
cross in their selfishness, the Jews charge Jesus with self-neglect. He had saved 
others, but now he does not try to save himself. If he would only show that he can 
take care of "number one," they would believe on him. Assuredly we have here 
the self-revelation of the world. The world believes in the selfish, self-seeking leaders 
of men. A Napoleon or Csesar, who is willing to sacrifice millions of men to gratify 
his ambition, is believed in — at all events for a time! But Jesus, who sacrifices himself, 
is derided. Yet in the end the kingship of the self-sacriflcinj Saviour is acknowledged. 
The true King of the Jews is he who could lay down his life for his subjects, and bo 
redeem them. 

V. The first eecognizbb of Christ's kingship. (Vers. 39 — i3.) One in the 
Tast assemblage, however, sees below the surface, and recognizes the sovereignty oi 
self-sacrifice. At first reviling Christ, he had come to see, beneath the meek exterior of 
the Saviour, the real regal spirit. Hence he changes sides, begins to rebuke the other 
malefactor who continues his unholy maledictions, and then quietly implores the Lord 
to remember him when he comes in his kingdom. The poor robber, who had perhaps 
fought under some false Messiah, and knew what Jewish hopes were, believes that this 
meek and suffering One upon the cross beside him will yet come to his kingdom. 
When that advent is to be he knows not. But even in the far-off time it will be well 
for him to be remembered by him. Thus he prays, and is answered. But " To-day 
shalt thou be with me in Paradise," is the blessed hope set before him. Paradise is 
part of his kingdom, and the dying robber will be with Jesus in its peaceful bowers 
that very day. What a hope to be opened up to the dying man 1 What comfort it 
gave him, and should give to us 1 

VI. The consummation. (Vers. 44 — 46.) After these preliminaries are settled, the 
dealing of Jesus with the Father himself comes on. It was meet that a veil of darkness 
should surround the suffering Son and the righteous Father. The Priest and the Victim, 
who offered himself without spot to God, should in deep darkness pass through the act 
of unexampled worship. No wonder also that the veil of the temple was rent in the 
midst ; for it was exactly this which his death secured — a way into the holiest through 
the rent veil of his flesh. And then, when the cry of desolation, that loud and bitter 
cry, " My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" had given place to quiet assur- 
ance, and amid returning light the last cry from the cross went up to heaven, " Father, 
into thy hands I commend my spirit!" it was meet that he should quietly siurrender 
his life and give up the ghost. There is much to encourage and strengthen us in this 
consummation on the cross. — B. M. E. 

Vers. 47 — 56. — The consequences of our SaviouT's death. Our Lord died in the 
light. The disappearance of the darkness before his decease was an outward symbol 
of the light and serenity which came across his spirit. His departure exercised a 
powerful influence upon all around the cross. Let us notice the consequences of the 
death, as detailed by Luke. 

I. The Roman centurion was convinced of Christ's bighteousness and Divine 
SoNSHiP. (Ver. 47.) In Matthew the exclamation of the centurion is given as, "Truly 
this was the Son of God ; " while here in Luke it is, " Certainly this was a righteous 
Man." The one conclusion had reference to the Soman trial. His death was so glorious 
and triumphant as to vindicate his character from every aspersion. He was no male- 
factor, but a benefactor of mankind. The other conclusion had reference to the Jewish 
trial, which was on the ground of his claim of Sonship. Now, his last cry was in tlie 
light of Sonship, and " Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit ! " was so tenderly 
and yet flrmly uttered as to convince the centurion that the Lord's claim was real 
In the same way, should not our death as believers constitute some vindication of our 
character and claims ? It should show that our righteousness and sonship were not 
pretences, but glorious realities. 

n. The people wbbe convinced of thbib sin in having clamoured foe his 
obucifixion. (Ver. 48.) The smiting on the breast was a sign of perplexity and peni- 
tence. They were evidently humiliated that they had so treated One who could so 



266 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxin. 1— 66. 



noUy die. If the conviction of the centurion was an earnest of the conversion of the 
pagan world, this was an earnest of the conversion of the Jewish (of. Godet, in loe^. 
The meek and quiet spirit with which Christ died broke down their hard-heartedness 
more than any other course could have done ; so that its effect was a manifest prepara- 
tion for the triumphs of the Pentecost. And should not a Christian's death strike alarm 
into the heart of unbelievers, suggesting to them the possibility of their being imable to 
meet death with becoming courage ? 

III. His acquaintancb and the women feom Galilee abb pbteh'ied with 
ASTONISHMENT. (Ver. 49.) "They stood," we are told, "afar off." They were so 
unmanned that they could not venture nigh. To them the death was inexplicable. 
It was apparently the defeat of all their hopes. It was a crushing blow. No mystery 
in providence had ever appeared to them exactly like this. They were ready to say, 
with Jacob, "All these things are against us." Is this not the position of God's 
people often? They have entertained bright hopes about the Master and his cause, 
but have found them fading away like summer flowers, so that they stand perplexed 
and afar off before God's providences. Is it not the dark hour before the dawn ? 
Is it not the travail-hour before the jubilance of birth ? The disciples experienced this, 
and so may we. Before apparent defeat, let us always exclaim by faith, " It is real 
victory." 

IV. Joseph of Abiuathsa is led bt Christ's death to seal decibioh. 
(Vers. 50 — 52.) Joseph, a good and just man, had been for some time, we know not 
how long, a "secret disciple" of Jesus. Nicodemus and he seemed to be in the same 
category, and perhaps they were led into faith about the same time. In the Sanhedrin 
they had done all that timid men could to prevent the crime of the Crucifixion ; but 
popular feeling was always too strong for them. They had not as yet taken the bold 
step of professing to belong to Christ. But, strange to say, the death of Jesus, the 
apparent defeat of his cause, determined them both to be professors. Joseph accordingly 
goes and boldly begs the body from Pilate, that he may lay it in his own new tomb, 
while Nicodemus goes off to procure the needful spices. And here have we what 
seems a law in God's kingdom. Successors always appear to carry on his work. 
Christ's death induces two at least to join his cause at once. As the apparently 
important pass away, it is only to be succeeded by others, and perhaps a larger number, 
to take up the fallen banner and prove their faithfulness. Apparent calamities are 
splendid tests of character — they call forth the brave 1 

V. Cheist's funeeal could only be a temporabt njTBRMENT. (Vers. 53 — 56.) 
It was necessary that the body should be put away before the sabbath began. Now, 
if he died a little after three o'clock, there were less than three hours to complete the 
interment. There could not be the customary embalmment. All that was possible 
was to wrap the dear remains in linen with spices, and then, if nothing prevented, to 
complete the embalmment on the first day of the week. It was a hurried burial, there- 
fore, and by compulsion a temporary one. Yet " with the rich was his tomb." It 
was in a virgin sepulchre, so to speak, he lay for a season, just as he had lain in the 
Virgin's womb. It was so far private also that none apparently but the immediate 
friends and acquaintances followed the funeraL All the circumstances combined to 
make the funeral and interment most singular. It was well known where they laid 
him ; it was known that they intended completing the embalmment on the first day of 
the week ; his enemies had every opportunity, therefore, to prevent any imposture about 
a resurrection. All was above-board, like everything iu our Lord's life. Consequently 
there was in the burial of Jesus a noble foundation laid for that crowning hope of 
resurrection. We shall see that there was every advantage offered to those who wished 
to expose duplicity about his rising again. It was the most important burial and most 
hopeless, so far as the mourners were concerned. They above all others seemed obliTiniiv 
of all promise of ranurectioo. — B. M. £. 



<m. XXIV. i— S3.] l:Hfi GbSPfili ACC06t)IN(l TO ST. LUKfi. 



26-, 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



VeiB. 1 — 49. — The Eeshrbeotion. All 
the four evangelists give an account of the 
Reauireotiou. None of the four, however, 
attempt to give a history of it simply from 
a human point of sight. Each Gospel pro- 
bably reproduces the special points dwelt 
on in certain great centres of Christian 
teaching, in what we should now term 
different schools of thought. (Attempts 
have been made by theological /». nolars to 
elcusify these as Jewish, Gentile, Greek, 
Boman ; but only with indifferent success). 

The teacliing which St. Matthew's Gospel 
represents, evidently in the Besurrection 
preaching dwelt with peculiar insistence on 
the great Galilsean appearance of the Bisen. 
St. Luke confines himself exclusively to the 
appearance, in Judssa. St. John chooses for 
his Besurrection instruction scenes which 
had for their theatre both Galilee and 
Judssa. St. John, as his central or most 
detailed piece of teaching, dwells on a 
fishing scene on Gennesaret, the actors being 
the well-known inner circle of the apostles. 
While St. Luke chooses for hia detailed 
Besurrection narrative a high-road in a 
Jerusalem suburb; and for actors, two 
devoted, but historically unknown, disciples. 

Then there is no question of discrepandea 
in this portion of the great history. It is 
not easy to frame a perfectly satisfactory 
harmony of all the events related by the 
four, after the Lord had risen ; for, in fact, 
we possess no detailed account or history of 
what took place in that eventful period in 
presence of the disciples. We simply have 
memoranda of eye-witnesses of certain inci- 
denta connected with the Besurrection se- 
lected by the great first teachers as specially 
adapted to thuir own preaching and instruc- 
tion. 

The events of the first Easter Day have 
been tabulated by Professor Westcott, in 
what he terms a provisional arrangement, as 
follows : — 

Approz. time. 

Very early The Besurrection, followed by 

on Sunday the earthquake, the descent 

of the angel, the opening of 

the tomb (Matt, xzviii. 2 — 1). 



Approx. time, 

5 a.m Mary Magdalene, Mary the 

[mother] of James and Sa- 
lome, probably with others, 
start for the sepulchre in the 
twilight. Mary Magdalene 
goes before the others, and 
returns at once to Peter and 
John (John zx. 1, etc.). 
5.30 a.m. ...Her companions reach the 
sepulchre when the gun had 
risen (Mark xvi. 2), 
A vision of an angeL 
Message to the disciples (Matt 
zxviii, 5, etc ; Mark xvi 5, 
etc.). 

6 a-m, ......Another party, among whom 

is Joanna, cume a little later, 
but still in the early morn- 
ing (ch. xxiv. 1, etc ; comp. 
Mark xvi. 1, note). 

A vision of " two young men." 

Words of comfort and instruc- 
tion (ch. xxiv. 4, etc.). 
6.30 a.m. ...The visit of Peter and John 
(John XX. 3—10). 

A vision of two angels to Mary 
Magdalene (John zx. 11 — 
13). 

About the same time the com- 
pany of women carry their 
tidings to the apostles (ch. 
xxiv. 10, etc.). 

7 a.m The Lord reveals himself to 

Mary Magdalene (John xx. 
14—18; Mark xvi 9). 
Not long after he reveals him- 
self, as it appears, to the 
company of women who are 
returning to the sepulchre. 
Charge to the brethren to go 
to Galilee (Matt, zxviii. 9, 
etc.). 

4 — 6 p.m.., The appearance to the two 
disciples on the way to 
Emmaus (ch. xxiv. 13, etc. ; 
Mark xvi. 12). 
After 4 p.m.. .An appearance to St. Peter 
(ch. xxiv. 34; comp. 1 Cor. 
XV. 5). 

S p.m Tlie appearance to the eleven 

and others (ch. xxiv. 36, 
etc. ; Mark xvi. 14 ; John 
XX. 19, etc.). 

In the above table one point must be 
specially noticed : two companiet or separate 
groups of women are mentioned as going 
to the sepulchre with the same pious object 
of assisting in the final embalming of th< 
sacred body. 



1:HE (JOSPEL AOCORDIlJa To St. LUKfi. toH. Sxiv. 1— §3 



If this be aBsnmed to be tbe fact, there 
will be nothing improbable in the Bupposi- 
tion that both these groups of women, all 
doubtless intimate friends belonging to the 
little company of the Master, but living 
probably some distance apart in Jerusalem, 
came together some time on the sabbath day, 
and then arranged to meet early on the first 
day at the aepulohre. Probably the spices 
purchased in some haste jtut before the ea&- 
liaf A commended were jndged inadequate. 

(1) For in ch. zxiii. 56 we read of a com- 
pany of women, most probably including all, 
ia. both groups, of holy women, who, after 
beholding the sepulchre, "returned, and 
prepared spices and ointments ; knd rested 
ike iahbath day." 

(2) In Mark xtI 1 we read, " When the 
idbhath tccu past, Mary Magdalene, and 
Mary the mother of James, and Salome, 
bought [not ' had bought] sweet spices, that 
they might come and anoint him." This 
company (alluded to in Mark xvi 1) arrives 
the first at the sepulchre, and sees the vision 
of one angel (Mark xvi 5). The other com- 
pany (alluded to in ch. sxiv. 1) arrives not 
long after at the sepulchre, and sees the 
vision of two angels (ch. xxiv. 4). 

In considering the accounts of the Besur- 
rection, the following memoranda will be 
found suggestive : — 

(1) The holy women are the principal 
actors in all the four accounts of tbe circum- 
stances connected with the tomb. But their 
assertions were not believed by the disciples 
until their statements were confirmed by 
the Lord's personal appearance. 

(2) When St. Paul (1 Cor. xv. 5—8) suraa 
up the great appearances of our Lord, tbe 
basis of our faith, he makes no reference to 
his appearance to Mary Magdalene (John 
XX. 14, etc. ; Mark xvi. 9) or to the women 
(two Maries mentioned Matt, xxviii. 9, 10). 

(3) No evangelist describes the Resurrec- 
tion — no earthly being having been present. 
St. Matthew is the evangelist who, in his 
narrative, goes furthest back. He mentions 
the shock of the earthquake, the awful 
presence of the angel, the benumbing terror 
which seized the guards who were watching. 
Most probably these signs accompanied the 
Besurrection. 

(4) Tbe risen Lord appeared only to his 



(5) That no future doubt should be thrown 
on the reality of tlie appearances of tha 
Kisen, he showed himself not only to solitaiy 
individuals, but to companies, i.e. to two, 
to the eleven (repeatedly), and to above five 
hundred brethren at once. And these 
manifestations took place (a) at different 
hours of the day ; (6) in difierent localities — 
in Judsea, in Galilee, in rooms of houses, in 
the open air. 

Vers. 1—12.-2^ neturreetion. At fht 
sepulchre. 

Ver. 1. — ITow upon the first day of the 
week, very early in the morning, they earns 
nnto the sepulchre, bringing the smcei 
which they had prepared, and certain otaers 
with them. In the foregoing general note 
on the Besurrection, the probability has been 
discussed of the holy women having been 
divided into two companies who separately 
came to the sepulchre. St. Luke's notice 
here refers to the party ^^o arrived tha 
second at the tomb. 

Ver. 2. — And they found the stone rolled 
away from the sepulchre. The tomb in 
which the body of the " King's Sou " was 
laid was in a garden close by the scene 
of the Crucifixion. It had been recently 
hewn out of a rock, the low ridge opposite 
the slight ascent of Calvary. " In front of 
a tomb belonging to a rich family there 
was generally a vestibule open to the air, 
then a low entrance sometimes, as in this 
case, on the side of a rock, leading into a 
square chamber of moderate dimensions, on 
one side of which was a place for the body, 
either cut some se>en feet into the rock, or 
lengthways, three feet deep, with a low 
arch over it. . . . The tomb had been lately 
made, and the door which closed the en- 
trance, the only aperture into the tomb, 
was a large stone " (' Speaker's Commen- 
tary,' on Matt xxvii. 60). Eecent investi- 
gations in Jerusalem serve to confirm the 
accuracy of the original traditional sites, 
(comp. Williams, ' Holy City,' ii. 240 ; Pro- 
fessor Willis, "Treatise on the Holy Se- 
pulchre,' etc.). We find the following passage 
in tlie Bordeaux Pilgrim (a.d. 333): "On 
the left side (of the o\iginal Church of the 
Holy Sepulchre) is the hillock Golf>;otha, 
where the Lord was crucified. Thence 
about a stone-throw distance is the crypt 
where his body wm deposited." St. Cyril 
of Jerusalem makes several references to the 
spot. In the days of Eusebius (first half of 
the fourth century) there was no doubt as to 
the site. 

Ver. 4. — And it came to pass, as they 
were mnoh perplexed thereabout, beholdi 
two men stood by them in shining garmentft 
To one company of women one angel nf 



rn. XXIV. 1—53.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



269 



peared ; to another, two. Mary Magdalene, 
a little later, saw two ans^els in white sitting, 
as it were keeping watch and ward over the 
sepulchre for a short time after the sacred 
form had left it. The woids which these 
beings from another sphere spoke to the 
raonrning women were slightly different, 
but the teaching was the same in each case : 
" He is not here, but is risen. Do you not 
remember what he told you when he was 
yet with you ?" Van Oosterzee and Farrar 
repeat a beautiful passage from Leasing 
on this : " Cold discrepancy-mongers, do 
you not, then, see that the evangelists do 
not count the angels? . . . There were 
not only two angels — there were millions of 
them. They appeared not always one and 
the same, not always the same two ; some- 
times this one appeared, sometimes that; 
sometimes on this place, sometimes on that ; 
sometimes alone, sometimes in company; 
sometimes they said this, sometimes they 
said that." 

Vers. 6, 7. — He is not here, but is risen. 
These words were repeated in each of the 
angelic communications at the sepulchre. 
Kemember how he spake unto yon when he 
was yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of inan 
most he delivered into the hands of sinful 
men, and be crucified, and the third day rise 
again. The angels here call to the women's 
memory the Master's former promises of the 
Resurrection. In SS. Matthew and Mark 
the angel bids them tell the disciples not to 
forget the appointed place of meeting in 
Galilee, referring to the Lord's words on 
the way from the " Last Supper " to Geth- 
aemane (Matt. xxvi. 32 ; Mark xiv. 28). 

Ver. 9. — And told all these things unto 
the eleven, and to all the rest. The account 
of the scenes at the sepulchre in St. Luke 
are the least vivid and detailed of the four 
evangelists. It must be remembered that 
Matthew, Mark (the amanuensis of Peter), 
and John relate their own memories here, as 
well as what they had heard from the holy 
women. Peter and John, we know, were 
present themselves at the sepulchre. St. 
Luke received his less detailed and more 
summarized account of that early morning, 
year's after, most probably from the lips of 
one of the holy women who had formed part 
of one of the " two companies " who carried 
spices for the embalming. 

Ver. 11. — And their words seemed to them 
as idle tales, and they believed them not. 
The utter incredulity of the friends of Jesus 
when these reports of his resurrection were 
wrought to them is remarkable when con- 
trasted with the evident dread of the 
Sanhedrin that something of grave moment 
would happen after three days had elapsed. 
The disciples were evidently amazed at 
lieir Master's rising from the dead. The 



chief priests and Jewish leaders would 
apparently have been surprised if something 
startling had not happened (see Matt, 
xxvii. 63, etc., where an account Is given 
of the measures these able but unprincipled 
men took, in their short-sighted wisdom, to 
counteract any fulfilment of the Crucified 
One's word — a fulfilment they evidently 
looked forward to as to no improbable 
contingency). The utter surprise of the 
disciples at the Eesurreotion, which in their 
Gospels they truthfully acknowledge, is no 
small side-proof of the genuineness of these 
records of the event. 

Ver. 12. — Then arose Peter, and ran tmto 
the sepulchre ; and stooping down, he beheld 
the liien clothes laid by themselves, and 
departed, wondering in himseU at that 
which was oome to pass. This verse is 
omitted in some of the ancient authorities. 
It is, however, no doubt genuine, and is, in 
fact, a condensed report (omitting all men- 
tion of John) of the narrative given at length 
in St. John's Gospel (xx. 3—10). 

Vers. 13 — 35. — The meeting with the risen 
Jesus on the way to Emmaus. 

Ver. 13. — And, behold, two of them. 
This long piece, which relates in a singu- 
larly vivid and picturesque manner one of 
the earliest appearances of the Bisen, is 
peculiar to St. Luke. St. Mark (xvi. 12, 13) 
mentions it, but as it were only in passing. 
This Gospel, written probably after the 
Gospels of SS. Matthew and Mark, holds a 
middle place between the earliest apostolic 
memoirs represented by the first two G ospels 
and the last memoir, that of St. John, which 
was probably put out in its present form by 
the apostle "whom Jesus loved" some time 
in the last fifteen years of the first century. 
Writers of varied schools unite in expressions 
of admiration for this singularly beautiful 
" memory of the Lord." Godet styles it one 
of the most admirable pieces in St. Luke's 
Gospel. Kenan, belonging to another, per- 
haps the most cheerless of all schools of 
religious thought, writes thus : " L'^pisode 
des disciples d'Bmmaus est un des r&its les 
plus fins, les plus nuances qu'il y ait dans 
aucuue langue " (' Les Evangiles,' p. 282). 
Dean Plumptre speaks of "the long and 
singularly interesting narrative peculiar to 
St. Luke." He says, " It must be looked 
upon as among the ' gleaning of the grapes,' 
which rewarded his researches even after 
the full vintage had apparently been 
gathered in by others " (i.e. SS. Matthew 
and Mark). 'The " two of them," although 
doubtless well known in the apostolic age, 
seem to have held no distinguished place in 
early Christian history (see note on ver. 18, 
where Cleopas is mentioned). That sama 
day. The first day of the week — the firsi 
Easter Day. The events of the early morn 



270 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINQ TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiv. 1— 63. 



Ing of the EesDrrecHon have been already 
commented upon. To a village called £m- 
mauB. This Emmaua, the narrative tells 
us, was about sixty furlongs — some six 
miles and a half — from the holy city. It 
was situated east-south-east from Jeru- 
salem. The name is connected with the 
modern Arabic term Eammdm (a bath), 
and indicates probably, like the Latin 
Jquse, or the French Aix, and the English 
" Bath," or " Wells," the presence of medi- 
cinal springs ; and this may possibly account 
for St. Luke the physician's attention having 
in the first instance been drawn to the spot. 
This Emmaus is now called Kulonieh. A 
curious Talmudical reference, quoted by 
Godet, belongs to this place Emmaus, now 
Kulonieh: "At Maflza they go to gather 
the green boughs for the Feast of Taber- 
nacles" (Talmud, 'Suoca,' iv. 5). Else- 
where it is said that " Maftza is Kulonieh." 

Ver. 15. — While they communed to- 
gether and reasoned, Jesns himself drew 
near, and went with them. One, if not the 
first, fulfilment of the comforting promise, 
" Where two or three are gathered together 
in my Name, there am I in the midst of 
them." Compare also the words of Malachi, 
" Then they that feared the Lord spake often 
one to another: and the Lord hearkened, 
and heard it " (iii. 16). 

Ver. 16. — But their eyes were holden, 
that they should not know him. So Mary 
Magdalene looked on and failed to recognize 
at first the Person of her adored Maste* 
(John XI. 15). So by the lake-shore, as h'j 
stood and spoke to the tired fishermen, they 
who had been so long with him knew him 
not. Some mysterious change had been 
wrought in the Person of the Lord. Between 
the Besurrection and the Ascension, men 
and women now looked on him without a 
gleaiA of recognition, now gazed on him 
knowing well that it was the Lord. " It is 
vain," writes Dr. Westcott, "to give any 
simply natural explanation of the failure 
of the disciples to recognize Christ. After 
the Besurrection he was known as he pleased, 
and not necessarily at once. . . . TUl they 
who gazed on him were placed in something 
of spiritual harmony with the Lord, they 
could not recognize him." The two on 
their walk to Emmaus, and Mary Magdalene 
in the garden, were preoccupied with their 
sorrow. The fisher-disciples on the lake were 
preoccupied with their work, so that the 
vision of the Divine was obscured. The 
risen Christ will surely fulfil his own words, 
" The pure in heart, they shall see God" — 
but only the pure in heart. 

Ver. 17. — What manner of oommnnioations 
are these that ye have one to another, as ye 
walk, and are sadl The older authorities 
make the question stop at "as ye walk," 



and then add, "and they stood still, looking 
sad." This change is, of course, of no great 
importance, but it considerably adds to the 
vividness of the picture. 

Ver. 18. — And the one of them, whose 
name was Cleopas. This name is a Greek 
contraction of Cleopatrot, and points to 
Alexandrian antecedents. Dean Plump- 
tre suggests that this may in part, perhaps, 
account for this Cleopas, not improbably a 
Jew of Alexandria, imparting to St. Luke 
what had not found its way into the current 
oral teaching of the Hebrew Church at 
Jerusalem, as embodied in the narratives 
of SS. Matthew and Mark. Art thou only 
a stranger in Jerusalem t better translated, 
dost thou alone eojourn in JerueaJem, and 
not know, etc. ? That is to say, " Art thou 
the only stranger in Jerusalem who does 
not know about the wonderful events which 
have just taken place in the holy city ? " 

Ver. 19. — And they said unto him. Con- 
cerning Jesns of Bfazareth, which was a 
Prophet mighty in deed and word before 
Ood and all the people. To the Stranger's 
question, " What things have so lately ex- 
cited Jerusalem V " they both probably burst 
out with "the Name," then doubtless on 
all lips in the holy city, " Jesus of Nazareth," 
the hated and adored Name. And then they 
went on with a further explanation to One 
who seemed a stranger just arrived: they 
explained who this Jesus was supposed to 
have been. " He was a Prophet mighty in 
deed and word before God and all the 
people," which Lange happily paraphrases 
"equally great in secret contemplative 
holiness and in public acts of beneficence." 
But then the " two " explained, " 2'A is he 
was; for he is no more. Our chief priests 
and rulers have done him to death. They 
have crucified him." 

Ver. 21.— But we trusted that It had 
been he which should have rede<imed IsraeL 
And Me who were his friends and followers, 
we thought we had found in him the Be- 
deemer of Israel, King Messiah I Think I 
the Bedeemer crucified I Although the Ee- 
deemer, in the sense they probably under- 
stood the word, was something very different 
to the sense we give to it, the idea was still 
something very lofty and sublime. It in- 
cluded, no doubt, much of earthly glory and 
dominion for Israel, but in some definite 
sense the Gentile world, too, would share in 
the blessings of Messiah. And to think of 
the shameful cross putting an end to all these 
hopes I And beside all this, to-day is the 
third day since these things were done. 
But yet terrible and despairing as was the 
story of Cleopas and his friend, their tone 
was not quite hopeless; for they went on, 
" And now we have come to the third day 
since they cruoifled him." No doubt they 



OH, XXIV. 1—53.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKB. 



271 



dwelt a short spiuse on the expression, " third 
day," telling the Stranger how their dead 
Master, when alive, had bade hia friends 
watch for the third day from his death. 
The third day, he had told them, would be 
the day of his triumphant return to them ; 
and, strangely enough, on the early morning 
of this tliird day, something did happen 
which had stirred, excited, and perplexed 
them. Certain women of their company, 
who had been early to the grave of the 
Master, meaning to embalm the corpse, 
found the sepulchre empty, and they came 
back reporting how they had seen a vision 
of angeU there, who told them their Master 
lived. What did it all mean 1 

Ver. 24. — ^And certain of them which 
were with us went to the sepulchre, and 
fonnd it even so as the women had said : but 
him they saw not. Tholuch writes, " Does 
not their word sound as the language of 
those in whose heart the smoking flax yet 
glimmers, though nigh to extinction?" 

Yer. 25. — Then he said nnto them, 
fools, and slow of heart to believe all that 
the prophets have spoken! better trans- 
ited, O foolish men, and slow of heart to 
believe in all that the prophets have spohen t 
The Stranger now replies to the confused 
story of sorrow and baffled hopes just lit up 
with one faint ray of hope, with a calm 
reference to that holy book so well known 
to, so deeply treasured by every Jew. 
"■See," he seems to say, "in the pages of 
our prophets all this, over which you now so 
bitterly mourn, is plainly predicted: you 
must be blind and deaf not to have seen 
and heard this story of agony and patient 
sufEering in those well-known, well-loved 
pages 1 When those great prophets spoke 
of the coming of Messiah, how came it 
about that you missed seeing that they 
pointed to days of suffering and death to be 
endured byhimbefore his time of sovereignty 
and triumph could be entered on ? " 

Ver. 26. — Ought not Christ to have 
suffered these things, and to enter into his 
glory t better translated, ought not the 
Christ, etc.? "St. Luke dwells on the 
Eesurrection as a spiritual necessity; St. 
Mark, as a great fact; St. Matthew, as a 
glorious and majestic manifestation ; and 
St. John, in its effects on the members of 
the Church. ... If this suffering and 
death were a necessity (o6x 'Sei), if it 
was in accordance with the will of God 
that the Christ should suffer, and so enter 
into his glory, and if we can be enabled to 
see this necessity, and see also the noble 
issues which flow from it, then we can 
understand how the same necessity must in 
due measure be laid upon his bretliren" 
(Westcott). And so we obtain a key to 
some of the darkest problems of humanity. 



Thus the Stranger led the "two" to se. 'ha 
true meaning of the "prophets," whose 
burning words they had so often read and 
heard without grasping their real deep 
signification. Thus he led them to see that 
the Christ must be a suffering before he could 
be a triumphing Messiah; that the cruci- 
fixion of Jesus, over which they wailed with 
so bitter a wailing, was in fact an essential 
part of the counsels of God. Then he went 
on to show that, as his suffering is now ful- 
filled — for the Crucifixion and death were 
past — nothing remains of that which is 
written in the prophets, but the entering 
into his glory. 

Ver. 27. — And beginning at Moses and all 
the prophets, he expounded nnto them in all 
the Scriptures the things ooncerning him- 
self. The three divisions, the Pentateuch 
(Moses), the prophets, and all the Scrip- 
tures, cover the whole Old Testament re- 
ceived then in the same words as we possess 
them now. The Lord's proofs of what he 
asserted he drew from the whole series of 
writings, rapidly glancing over the long 
many-coloured roll called the Old Testa- 
ment. "Jesus had before him a grand 
field, from the Protevangelium, the first 
great Gospel of Genesis, down to Malachi. 
In studying the Scriptures for himself, be 
had found himself in them everywhere 
(John V. 39, 40)" (Godet). The things 
concerning himself. The Scriptures which 
the Lord probably referred to specially were 
the promise to Eve (Gen. iii. 15); the 
promise to Abraham (Gen. xxii. 18); the 
Paschal lamb (Exod. xii.); the scapegoat 
(Lev. xvi. 1 — 34) ; the brazen serpent 
(Numb. xxi. 9) ; the greater Prophet (Dent, 
xviii. 15); the star and sceptre (Numb, 
xxiv. 17); the smitten rock (Numb. xx. 11 ; 
1 Cor. X. 4), etc. ; Immanuel (Isa. vii. 14); 
" Unto us a Child is bom," etc. (Isa. ix. 6, 
7); the good Shepherd (Isa. xl. 10, 11); 
the meek Sufferer (Isa. 1. 6); he who 
bore our griefs (Isa. liii. 4, 5) ; the Branch 
(Jer. xxiii. 5 ; xxxiii. 14, 15) ; the Heir of 
David (Ezek. xxxiv. 23); the Euler from 
Bethlehem (Micah v. 2); the Branch 
(Zech. vi. 12); the lowly King (Zech. ix. 
9); the pierced Victim (Zech. xii. 10); 
the smitten Shepherd (Zech. xiii. 7) ; tlie 
messenger of the covenant (Mai. iii. 1) ; the 
Sun of Righteousness (Mai iv. 2) ; and no 
doubt many other passages. Dr. Davison, 
in his book on prophecy, pp. 266 — 287, 
shows that there is not one of the prophets 
without some distinct reference to Christ, 
except Nahum, Jonah (who was himself a 
type and prophetic sign), and Habakkuk, 
who, however, uses the memorable words 
quoted in Eom. i. 17. To these we must 
add references to several of the psalms, 
notably to the sixteenth and twenty-second. 



272 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxiv. 1— 53, 



where Bufferings and death are spoken of as 
belonging to the perfect piotiire of the Ser- 
vant of the Lord and the ideal King. His 
hearers wnnld know well how strangely the 
agony of Calvary was foreshadowed in those 
vivid word-pictures he called before their 
memories in the course of that six-mile 
walk from Jerusalem to Bmmaus. 

Ver. 28. — And they drew nigh unto the 
Tillage, whither they went: and he made 
as though he would have gone further. 
This was no feint or deception. The Lord 
would have left them then to themselves 
had they not prayed him with real earnest- 
ness to abide with them. " How many are 
there," says Stier, " to whom he has drawn 
near, but loith whom he has not tarried, 
because they have suffered him to 'go 
away again,' in his living and heart- mov- 
ing words I How comparatively rare is it 
for men to reach the full blessing they 
might receive (see, for example, the striking 
liistorical instance, 2 Kings xiii. 14, 19)1" 
But these were not content to let the un- 
known Teacher pass on, and see no more of 
him, and hear no more of his strange power- 
ful teaching. It is the words of, and the 
thought contained in, this verse which sug- 
gested the idea of the well-known hymn — 

" Abide with me ; fast falls the eventide." 

Ver. 29. — And he went in to tarry with 
them. Some have supposed that one at 
least of the two had a dwelling at Emmaus ; 
but the position which the strange Teacher 
assumed as " Master of the household," in 
the solemn act recorded in ver. 30, seems to 
indicate that it was an inn where they 8o- 
journed. 

Ver. 80. — And it came to pass, as he sat at 
meat with them, he took bread, and blessed 
it, and brake, and gave to them. There was 
a deep significance in the concluding act 
of this memorable appearance of the risen 
Lord. This taking the bread, and blessing 
it, and breaking it, and then giving it to 
them, was no ordinary act of courtesy, or 
welcome, or friendship, which, from a master 
or teacher might be shown to his disciples. 
It resembles too closely the great sacramental 
act in the upper room, when Jesus was alone 
with his apostles, for us to mistake its 
solemn sacramental character. The great 
teachers of the Church in different ages 
have generally so understood it. So Chry- 
sostom in the Eastern, and Augustine in the 
Western Church j so Theophylaot, and later 
Beza the Reformer all affirm that this meal 
was the sacrament. It taught men generally, 
even more plainly than did the first sacred 
institution teach the twelve, that in this 
solemn breaking of bread the Church would 
recognize their Master's presence. So gene- 
lally, iu faet, has tim Emmaus "breaking 



of bread" been recognized by the Catholic 
Church as the sacrament, that later Bomanist 
divines have even pressed it as a scriptural 
demonstration for the abuse which adminis- 
tered the elements nnder one form (com- 
pare, for instance, the 'Refutation of the 
Confession of Augsberg,' quoted by Stier, 
iu his comment on this passage of Luke, 
' Words of the Lord Jesus '). How unneces- 
sary and forced such a construction is, Bishop 
Wordsworth points out in his note on ch. 
xxiv. 30, " It may be remembered that 
bread (Stpros') was to the Jews a general 
name for food, including drink as well as 
meat. . . . Thus bread became spiritually 
an expressive term for all the blessings 
received from communion in Christ's body 
and blood, and the K\d(rts &pTou, or ' breaking 
of bread,' was suggestive of the source from 
which these blessings flow, (viz.) Christ's 
body (jc\(iii.evov) broken (1 Cor. xL 2i) ; 
hence KKins Sprov in Acts ii. 42 is a general 
term for the Holy Eucharist." 

Ver. 31. — He vanished oat of their sight. 
Not here, not now, can we hope to understand 
the nature of the resurrection-body of the 
Lord ; it is and must remain to us, in our 
present condition, a mystery. Certain facts 
have, however, been revealed to us : (1) The 
Resurrection was a reality, not an appear- 
ance ; for on more than one occasion the Lord 
permitted the test of touch. He also ate 
before his disciples of their ordinary food. 
(2) Yet there was a manifest exemption 
from the common conditions of bodily (cor- 
poreal) existence; for he comes through a 
closed door; he could withdraw himself 
when he would from touch as well as 
from sight; he could vanish in a moment 
from those looking on him; he could, as 
men gazed on him, rise by the exertion of 
his own will into the clouds of heaven. (3) 
He was known just as he pleased and when 
he pleased ; for at times during the " forty 
days " men and women looked on him with- 
out a gleam of recognition, at times they 
gazed at him, knowing well that it was the 
Lord. On the words, " he vanished out of 
their sight," Godet writes, " It must be 
remembered that Jesus, strictly speaking, 
wa,s already no more with them (ver. 44), and 
that the miracle consisted rather in bis 
appearing than in his disappearing." Dr. 
Westcott expresses the same truth in differ- 
ent language, " What was natural to him 
before was now miraculous, what was before 
miraculous is now natural." 

Ver. 32. — And they said one to another, 
Did not our heart burn within as, while he 
talked with us by the way 1 better rendered, 
wai not our heart burning within ua, while, 
etc.? 

Vers. 33, 34. — And they rose up the same 
hoar, and retomed to Jerusalem. "They 



OH. XXIV. 1—53.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 



273 



fear no longer the night-journey from whicli 
they had dissuaded their unknown Com- 
panion" (Bengel). And found the eleven 
gathered together, and them that were with 
them, saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and 
hath appeared to Simon. Late that evening 
Cleopas and his friend arrived from Emmaus 
at Jerusalem. Hastening to the accustomed 
meeting-place of the disciples of Jesus, to 
tell their wondrous story of the meeting 
with the risen Master, they find the eleven 
together fall of joy. Peter had seen and 
had no doubt conversed with his Master. 
What a meeting must that have been I The 
once eager and devoted apostle had probably 
not gazed on that form in life since he caught 
the sorrowful look bent on him in the court- 
yard, when Jesus, bound, passed through 
and heard his servant denying him with 
oaths and curses. This appearance to Peter 
is not recorded in the Gospels. It is, how- 
ever, placed first of all by St. Paul in his 
records of the manifestation of the Bisen 
(1 Cor. XV. 4—8). 

Ver. 35. — And they told what things were 
done in the way, and how he was known 
of them in breaking of bread. The two 
travellers now relate to the eleven their 
wondrous story. The words used by Cleopas 
and his fHend in their narration, 4v rj xXda-ei 
ToB &pTav, which should be rendered,'" in the 
breaking of the bread," are significant. It 
is an expression which, at the time when 
St. Luke wrote his Gospel, had acquired a 
definite meaning in the language of the 
Christian Church, and was applied to break- 
ing bread in the "Supper of the Lord" 
(see Acts ii. 42, 46; 1 Cor. x. 16). WhUe 
they were speaking together, the personal 
appearance of the Lord was vouchsafed to 
them; for, of a sudden, he stood in the 
midst and spoke to them t 

Vers. 36—49. — The Lord appears <• (he 
apostles as they were gathered together on the 
evening of the first Easter Day. 

Ver. 36. — And as they thus spake, Jesns 
himself stood in the midst of them. St. 
John, who also gives an account of this 
appearance of the Hisen, adds the detail, 
" when the doors were shut." The eleven 
and their friends were gathered together for 
counsel, probably too in hope that some- 
thing more would happen after what had 
already taken place that Easter Day — the 
report of the holy women of the repeated 
vision of angels, their own verification of 
the empty sepulchre, and above all the 
testimony of Peter that he had seen the 
Lord. Into this anxious, waiting assembly 
the two "Emmaus" disciples enter with 
their wondrous story. In the act of their 
mentally comparing notes, Jesus himself 
stood in the midtt of them. This sudden 
presence there is evidently supernaturaL 
IiUSB. — n. 



He " stood in the midst of them," though 
the doors were carefully closed and barred 
" for fear of the Jews." Rumours of the 
Besurrection, no doubt, had abeady spread 
through the city, and it was uncertain 
whether such rumours might not be followed 
by the arrest of the chief followers of the 
Crucified. Peace be unto yon. This was 
the ordinary Jewish greeting, but on this 
occasion, spoken by the Lord, possessed more 
than the ordinary meaning. This " peace " 
was his solemn, comforting greeting to hia 
own, just as " his peace " which he left with 
them on the sad Thursday eve was his 
solemn farewell to the eleven, spoken, per- 
haps, in the same " upper room " just before 
he went out to the garden of the agony. 

Ver. 37. — ^But they were terrified and 
affrighted. They spoke one to another of 
the Master; they discussed the empty se- 
pulchre, the angelic vision, the recital by 
Peter of his interview with the Risen, and 
were listening to the details of the quiet 
Emmaus meeting, all hoping for something 
more ; but this sudden, mysterious appear- 
ance of their crucified Master in their midst 
was not, after all, what they had looked for. 
It terrified them. And supposed that they 
had seen a spirit. How else could they 
explain his presence in their midst, when 
the doors were shut ? The evangelists make 
no attempt to explain his sudden appearance. 
He was simply there as they spoke of him 
It is clear that his presence could be ac- 
counted for in no ordinary, natural way. 
His disciples felt that ; hence their supposi- 
tion that they were looking on a spirit. We 
can, with our present limited knowledge, 
form no adequate conception of this resur- 
rection-body of the Lord. It was a reality, 
no phantasm or appearance ; of that the 
scene about to be described gives us ample 
evidence. Still, it is clear that his resurrec- 
tion-body was not bound by the present 
conditions of material existence of which we 
are conscious. Epiphanius ascribes to the 
body of the risen Lord \eirT6Tris iryevfiaTuci,, 
"a spiritual subtilty." Euthymius uses 
similar language when he speaks of " his 
body being now subtile, thin, and unmixed." 
He could come into a closed, barred room. 
He could be visible or invisible, known or 
unknown, as he pleased and when he pleased. 

Ver. 38. — ^And he said unto them, Why ore 
ye troubled ? and why do thoughts arise in 
your hearts 1 He had just given them hia 
peace. He proceeds farther to allay their 
fears. Before showing them his pierced 
hands and feet and side, before eating is 
their presence, he addresses these comfort- 
ing words to them: "See," he seems t» 
say, "I give you my peace: why are yc 
troubled? why do yon allow perplexing, 
harassing thong^hta to arise in your hearts? 



274 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxiv. 1— 61 



The past is forgiTen and forgotten." "I 
come not," as Stier beautifully sugests, "ai 
a wrathful Judge to reckon with you for 
yoar unbelief and unfaithfuluesa. I bring 
to you (and all the world) from my se- 
pulchre something very different from up- 
braidings." 

Ver. 39. — ^Behold my hands and my feet, 
that it is I myself. "See," he says, in- 
viting the terror-stricken disciples to a calm, 
unaffrighted contemplation — " see my hands 
and my feet pierced with the nails which 
fastened them to the cross ; it is I myself." 
Handle me, and see ; for a spirit hath not 
flesh and bones, as ye see me have. The 
first words quietly told the awe-struck ones 
to look closely at him, and to ascertain 
from the dread marks he bore that what 
they looked upon was Jesus their Master. 
Then he proceeded to bid them touch him, 
handle him, and so assure themselves that 
it was no phantom, no bodiless spirit, that 
stood before them. These words of the 
Lord, and the invitation, " handle me, and 
see," made the deepest impression on the 
hearers. These, then, were proofs of the 
Resurrection that admitted of no shadow of 
doubt. These words, this sight, changed 
their lives. What cared they afterwards 
for men and men's thieatenings 7 Death, 
life, to them were all one. They had seen 
the Lord, tliey had handled with their 
hands " that which was from the be- 
ginning" (see 1 John i 1). Browning 
forcibly puts this thought which so in- 
fluenced the iirst great teachers. The dying 
St. John is dwelling on the thought that 
when he is gone there will be none left 
with men who saw and touched the Lord. 

" If I live yet, it is for good, more love 
Through me to men : be nought but ashes 

here 
That keep awhile my lemblanoe, who was 

John. 
Still, when they scatter, there is left on 

earth 
No one alive who knew (consider this I), 
Saw with his eyes, and handled with his 

hands, 
That which was from the first, the Word 

of Ufe. 
How will it be when none more saith, * I 

saw'?" 

('A Death in the Desert.') 

Ver. 40. — Some (but not the majority) of 
the older authorities omit this verse. And 
lehen he had thus spoken, he showed them 
his hands and liis feet. It has been sug- 
gested that the Bisen simply pointed to 
those parts of his body which were not 
covered with clothing, and invited the dis- 
ci plei to touch Otete, and so to assure them- 
*elTM th»t he h»d actually flesh and bone. 



Von Gerlach has an interesting suggestion 
that the feet were especially referred to 
" because there was in the feet something 
more convincing and touching than even in 
the hands, on account of the wonder that 
One who had been so grievously wounded 
could move." The real reason, however, of 
the Lord calling attention to the hands and 
feet comes out &om St. John's account of 
this appearance of the Bisen, for he adds 
that Jesus also showed them his tide. Thus 
he pointed to the wounded members of his 
blessed body to show that in the resurrec- 
tion-body he retained these marks of his 
wounds. That be retained them now and 
for ever we know from the glorious vision of 
the Revelation, where the wounded humanity 
of the Lord appears throned and adored in 
the liighest heaven : " Lo, in the midst of the 
throne and of the four beasts [living crea- 
tures], and in the midst of the elders, stood 
a Lamb as it had been slain" (Bev. v. 6). 
Our Master and God retains these as the 
glorious tokens of his victory and atone- 
ment. Augustine very strikingly deduces 
from this that perhaps we shall see the same 
with respect to the wounds of the martyrs 
(' De Civ. Dei,' lib. xxU. cap. 19). 

Vers. 41, 42. — And while they yet believed 
not for joy. The awful joy of the disciples 
now was something too deep for words, even 
for calm belief. St. John records it, too, 
with simple pathos. " Then were the dis- 
ciples glad, when they saw the Lord." 
This was the fulfilment of his promise to 
them, when, full of sadness, they were 
listening to him that last solemn Passover 
evening in the upper room. " Ye now 
therefore have sorrow : but I will see you 
again, and your heart shall rejoice, and 
your joy no man taketh from you " (John 
xvi. 22). In after-days, as John preached 
and taught in his old age, how the remem- 
brance of that hour must have stirred in his 
heartwhen he thus wrote ofitt Have ye here 
any meat 1 And they gave him a piece of 
a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. The 
Master would not permit this state of 
wondering ecstasy to continue ; so he changes 
the current of their thoughts by thus de- 
scending into the region of everyday life, 
at the same time powerfully demonstrating 
by this further proof that, though changed, 
his resurrection-body was no mere Dooetio 
semblance, no phantom, but that he could 
eat if he chose. The next sentence (ver. 43) 
tells simply how he took the food, and ate 
before them. The fish and honeycomb which 
they gave him no doubt formed the staple of 
their evening meal. Fish was part of the 
common food of the disciples — we see this 
from the miracles of the five thousand and 
the four thousand, and also from the neirra- 
tive of John xxi. 9. Honey, we know, in 



OH. XXIV. 1-63.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. 



27S 



Canaan, the land flowing with milk and 
honey, wag common enough to enter into 
the diet of the poor (compare, among many 
pasaagss, Ezod. iii. 8, 17; Deut. xxvi. 9, 15 ; 
Jet. xi. S ; Isa. viL 15, 22 ; Matt. iii. 4). 

Vers. 44 — 49. — A summary of tome of the 
Lord'i last words. The next six verses do 
not record sayings uttered the same first 
Easter eTening. They are, in fact, a very 
brief sammary of instructions given by the 
Master on different occasions during the 
forty days which elapsed between the Besur- 
rection and the Ascension, 

In considering the reasons of the omission 
of any special reference to the Galilsean 
appearances of the risen Lord, two points 
must be borne in mind. 

(1) Neither Luke nor Paul had any 
personal reminiscences, like Matthew, or 
Mark (who wrote down, we believe, St, 
Peter's memories), or St. John. Luke was 
dependent on other sources altogether, 

(2) Luke, when he wrote the Gospel 
bearing bii name, probably proposed to 
complete his recital of the close of the 
earthly ministry of the Lord in his second 
work, the Acts of the Apostles. His know- 
ledge of what took place after the Resurrec- 
tion was evidently derived from a source 
anfamiliar with the Galilsean manifestations 
of the risen Lord. 

St. Luke's knowledge of the Ascension 
seems to have been most precise. He 
evidently lays great stress upon the im- 
portance of this last scene, both as a piece 
of evidence and as a theme of teaching; for 
he not only concludes his Gospel with it, 
but commences bis book of the Acts with 
the same recital, accompanied with further 
details. 

Ver, 44. — And he said unto them, These 
are the words which I spake unto you, 
while I was yet with yon, that all things 
must be fulfilled, which were written in the 
Law of Hoses, and in the prophets, and in 
the Psalms, conoeming me. The words, 
" while I was yet with you," plainly show 
that, in the Master's mind, the period of his 
sojourn with men was, in the human sense 
of the expression, jpast. His abode now was 
elsewhere. This and the next verse (45) 
probably refer to what the Master said that 
first Easter evening to the assembleddisciples, 
but tlie exact fixing the time in the forty 
days (the time specially mentioned by St. 
Luke in the Acta aa elapsing between the 



Besurrection and the Ascension, Acts 1 3) is 
of comparatively small importance. What is, 
however, of real moment is the weight Jesus 
showed that he attached to Old Testament 
words and types and prophecies by this 
repeated mention. The remarks of Meyer 
and Van Oosterzee on this subject are well 
worthy of being quoted : " If the exegete 
should read the Old Testament Scriptures 
without knowing to whom and to what 
they everywhere point, the New Testament 
clearly directs his understanding, and places 
him under an obligation, if he would be a 
sound Christian teacher, to acknowledge its 
authority and interpret accordingly. Doubt 
as to the validity of our Lord and of his 
apostles' method of expounding, involves 
necessarily a renunciation of Christianity " 
(Meyer). " They who consult the teaching 
of Jesus and his apostles with respect to 
the prophecies concerning the Messiah, need 
not grope in uncertainty, but should, never- 
theless, remember that the Lord probably 
directed the attention of the disciples, on 
this occasion (he is referring to the walk to 
Emmaus), less to isolated Scriptures than 
to the whole tenor of the Old Testament in 
its typical and symbolical character " (Van 
Oosterzee). 

Ver. 45, — Then opened he their nnder- 
standing, that they might understand the 
Scriptures. Assuming (as is most probably 
the case) that vers. 44 and 45 refer to 
words spoken by Jesus on the first Easter 
evening to the eleven and to Cleopas and 
his friend, then the way in which he opened 
their understanding is described by St. 
John (xx. 22) thus : " He breathed on them, 
and saith nnto them, Keceive ye the Holy 
Ghost." Among the new powers bestowed 
on them by this Divine gift, St. Luke 
especially dwells on the spiritual insight 
henceforth possessed by these men into the 
Scriptures of the Old Testament, hitherto 
only partly understood. This power was 
doubtless one of the great instruments of 
their success as preachers. 

In the next four verses (46 — 49) St. Luke 
evidently briefly summarizes the Master's 
great sajrings, some probably spoken in the 
course of the walk to Emmaus, some on that 
first Easter evening, some on other occasions 
during the forty days which elapsed between 
the Besurrection and the Ascension. The 
introductory words, " and said unto them " 
(ver. 46), seem the commencement of this 
summary, 

Ver. 46. — ^Thns it is written, and thna it 
behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from 
the dead the third day. The majority of the 
older authorities omit the wordt, "and thiu 



276 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiv. 1— 53 



It behoved." The verse ghould be read thus ; 
" Thus It ig written that Christ should 
Buffer," etc. These words probably were 
spoken on that first Saster evening. 
They were apparently repeated on several 
occasions during the forty days. The Old 
Testament — ^they would see now with the 
new light cast upon it — showed the necessity 
of an atoning Redeemer, from the sin wiilch 
it everywhere reveals, and of a dying Re- 
deemer, from the death which it proclaims 
as the consequence. While the same Scrip- 
tures no less authoritatively proclaim that 
through this suffering the Redeemer-Messiah 
should attain to his glorification. 

Ver. 47. — And that repentance and re- 
mission of sins should be preached in his 
Name among all nations. This is more de- 
finitely expressed in Matt, xxviii. 19 and 
Mark ivi. 15, where the universality of his 
message, here summarized, is found In the 
form of a definite command. Beginning at 
Jemsalem. St. Luke enlarges the thought 
contained in these words in his Acts (I. 8). 
Ps. ex. 2, contains the prophecy that from 
Zion should first proceed the proclamation. 

Ver. 48. — Ye are witnesses of these things. 
This personal witHess of the first preachers 
of Christianity was the secret of their great 
power over men's hearts. What Dr. West- 
cott wrote of St. John was true of the rest 
of the eleven. " We have teen, and do testify. 
He (John) had no laboured process to go 
through ; he saw. He had no constructive 
proof to develop; he bore witness. His 
source of knowledge was direct, and his 
mode of bringing conviction was to afiSrm." 

Ver. 49. — And, behold, I send the promise 
of my Father upon you. Promised on the 
last Passover evening (John liv. — ivi ; see 
especially John xiv. 16 — 26; xv. 26, 27; 
xvi. 7, etc.), and fulfilled partly on the first 
Easter evening, when he breatlied on them 
(John XX. 22), and completely on the first 
Pentecost (Acts ii. 1, etc.). But tarry ye in 
the city of Jerusalem, until ye he endued 
with power from on high. These words 
apparently were spoken on the day of his 
ascension (see Acts I. 4). 

Vers. 50 — 53. — The Asobnsion. In con- 
sidering the questions which suggest them- 
selves in connection with the ascension of 
our blessed Lord, we are met on the 
threshold with the fact that only St. Luke, 
in his Gospel in this place, and In the Acts 
(I.), has given us a detailed account of the 
scene. But the fact Is referred to plainly 
by St. John (iii. 13; vi. 62; xx. 17) and 
by St. Paul (Eph. Iv. 9, 10 ; 1 Tim. iii. 16). 
A vast number of passages besides, In the 
Epistles of SS. Paul, Peter, and James, and 



in the Revelation of St. John, presuppose 
the Ascension, when they describe the 
heavenly glory of Jesus and of hig aesslon 
at the right hand of God. 

St. John's triple mention of the Ascension 
(see above) is exactly in accordance with 
his constant practice In his Gospel; he 
avoids rewriting a formal narrative of things 
which, when he wrote, were well known in 
the Churches ; yet he alludes to these things 
In clear and unmistakable language, and 
draws from them his lessons and conclusions. 

Notably this is the case in the Fourth 
Gospel with regard to the sacraments. ** It 
contains," says Dr. Weatcott, "no formal 
narrative of the institution of sacraments, 
and yet It presents most folly the idea of 
sacraments." 

Heander writes with great force on this 
apparent omission of the Ascension: "We 
make the same remark npon the ascension 
of Christ as was before made upon his 
miraculous conception. In regard to neither 
Is prominence given to the special and actual 
fact In the apostolic writings ; in regard to 
both, such a fact is presupposed In the 
general conviction of the apostles, and in 
the connection of Christian consciousness. 
Thus the end of Christ's appearance on earth 
corresponds with Its beginning. Christi- 
anity rests npon supernatural facts — stands 
or falls with them. By faith in them has 
the Divine life been generated from the be- 
ginning. Were this Mth gone, there might 
indeed remain many of the effects of what 
Christianity has been; but as for Chris- 
tianity in the true sense, as for a Christian 
Church, there could be none." 

Yer. 50. — ^And he led them out as far ai 
to Bethany; more accurately, and he led 
them out until they were over <igainst Bethany. 
The scene of the Ascension could scarcely 
have been the central summit of the Mount 
of Olives {Jebel-el-Tur"), according to ancient 
tradition ; but It is more likely that it took 
place on one of the remoter uplands which lie 
above the village. " On the wild uplands 
which immediately overhang the village, he 
finally withdrew from the eyes of his disciples, 
In a seclusion which, perhaps, could nowhere 
else be found so near the stir of a mighty 
city; the long ridge of Olivet screening 
those hills, and those hiUs the village 
beneath them, from all sound or sight of 
the city behind ; the view opening only on 
the wide waste of desert-rocks and ever 



TO, xxm 1— 63.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKB. 



27/ 



descending Talleys, Into the depths of the 
distant Jordan and its myaterious lake" 
(Dean Stanley, 'Sinai and Palestine,' 
eh. iii.). He lifted up his hands, and 
hlossed them. In Acts i. 4 we read how 
Jesus, having assembled (o-wftAifrfftfj/oj) the 
apostles, gaye them some last commands 
before he left them. It is not expressly 
stated that only the eleven were present on 
this oooasion. When he had finished speak- 
ing, "he lifted up his hands, and blessed 
them." There is now no laying on of 
hands. "Jam non imposuit mauus," com- 
ments Bengel. Those hands, as they were 
lifted up, were already separated from them, 
the space between the Eisen and those he 
was blessing grew greater every moment. 

Ver. 51. — ^Aud it came to pass, while he 
blessed them, he was parted from them, and 
carried up into heaven; more accurately 
rendered, while he bhseed them, he 'parted 
from them, and wat carried up into heaven. 
The last clause, "was carried up into 
heaven," is absent from some, but not from 
the majority of the older authorities. The 
Acts (i. 9) describe the act of ascension 
thus : " As they were looking, he was taken 
up ; and a cloud received him out of their 
sight," The eleven and those chosen to 
witness the last earthly scene of the Lord's 
ministry came together, in obedience prob- 
ably to some command of their Master, to 
some meeting-place in Jerusalem, possibly 
the well-known upper room. Thence he 
led them forth from the sacred city, past 
the scene of the agony and the scene of the 
weeping, on to some quiet spot hard by 
loved Bethany, talking to them as they 
went ; and as he spoke, suddenly he lifted 
up his pierced hands and blessed them ; and 
in the very act of performing this deed of 
love, he rose, they still gazing on him — ^rose, 
as it appears, by the exercise of his own vrill 
into the air, and, while they still gazed, a 
cloud came and veiled him from their sight. 
Be was parted from them, and carried up 
into heaven. Among the appearances of 
the Bisen to his followers during the forty 
days (ten of these distinct appearances are 
related in the Gospels and Epistles), this 
last notably differs frojn all that preceded 
it. As at other times when he showed him- 
self to his friends during these forty days, 
so on the " Ascension " day Jesus apparently 
came forth suddenly from the invisible 
world ; but not, as on former occasions, did 
he suddenly vanish from sight, as if he 
might shortly return as he had done before. 
But on this fortieth day he withdrew in a 
different way ; as they gazed he rose up 
into the air, and so he parted from them, 
thus solemnly suggesting to them that 
not only was ho "no more with them " (ver. 
M), but that even those occasional and 



inpematnral appearances ronohsafed t« 
them since the Besurrection were now at an 
end. Nor were they grieved at this final 
parting ; for we read — 

Ver. 52. — And they worshipped him, and 
returned to Jerusalem with great joy. Thit 
" great joy," on first thoughts, is singular 
till we read between the lines, and see how 
perfectly they nmo grasped the new mode of 
the Lord's connection with his own. They 
knew that henceforth, not for a little time 
as before the cross, not fitfully as since the 
Eesurreotion, but that for ever, though their 
eyes might not see him, would they feel his 
blessed presence near (see John xiv. 28; xvi. 
7). One question more connected with the 
Ascension presses for an answer. Much 
modern criticism regards this last scene 
simply as one of the ordinary disappearances 
of the forty days, and declines to admit any 
external, visible fact in which the Ascension 
was manifested. But St. Luke's description , 
both in his Gospel and in the Acts, is plainly 
too circumstantial to admit of any hypothesis 
which limits the Ascension to a purely 
spiritual elevation. At the end of his 
earthly ministry, the evening before the 
cross, Jesus asked back his glory : " Now, O 
Father, glorify thou me with thine own sel^ 
with the glory which I had with thee before 
the world was " (John xvii. 5). The Ascen- 
sion and consequent session at the right 
hand was the answer to the prayer of Christ. 
It was necessary for the training of the first 
teachers of Christianity that the great fact 
should be represented in some outward and 
visible form. "The physical elevation," 
writes Dr. Westcott, "was a speaking 
parable, an eloquent symbol, but not the 
truth to which it pointed, or the reality 
which it foreshadowed. The change which 
Christ revealed by the Ascension was not a 
change of place, but a change of state ; not 
local, but spirituaL Still, from the neces- 
sities of our human condition, the spiritual 
change was represented sacramentally, so to 
speak, in an outward form. . . , He passed 
beyond the sphere of man's sensible exist- 
ence to the open presence of God " (' The 
Kevelation of the Risen Lord '). The session 
at the right hand of God (Mark xvi. 19) 
cannot designate any particular place. The 
ascension, then, of Jesus is not the exchange 
of one locality, earth, merely for another we 
term heaven. It is a change of state ; it is 
a passing from all confinement within the 
limits of space to omnipresence. 

Ver. 53. — ^And were continually in the 
temple, praising and blessing God. Amen. 
These last words of the Gospel just alluded 
to the life of the first teachers, which is 
dwelt upon with considerable detail in the 
Acts. In the early days which succeeded 
the Ascension, the temple wad its courts 



878 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxiv. 1— 53 



were the principal resort of the teachers of 
the new •* way." We know that in an ex- 
traordinarily short time the numbers of 
adherents to the crucified and risen Jesus, 
in Jerusalem only, were counted by thou- 
sands. The temple and its vast courts, from 
its storied past, from its having been the 
scene of much of the Master's last teaching, 
was the natural centre for these leaders of 
the new "way." When Luke wrote the 
words, " were continually in the temple," it 
is almost certaio that he proposed continu- 
ing his great narrative in the botik we 
know as the Acts of the Apostles, in 
which, guided by the Divine Spirit, he re- 
lates to us how the Lord Jesus continued to 
work on earth — in and by his Church— from 
his glory-throne in heaven. The early 
chapters of the Acts take up the thread of 
the gospel story, and describe the life and 
work of the friends of Jesus in the great Je- 
rusalem temple, the dangers they had to 
encounter, and the splendid success which 
rewarded their brave, faithful toil. These 
same Acts, in the first lines of their 
thrilling story, take up again the Ascension 
■oene, which is described with fresh and 
vivid details From these detaila we learn 



how, when the disciples' eyet were fixed 
on that cloud which veiled their ascending 
Master, they became aware of two stranger- 
forms with them, clad in white and glisten- 
ing garments. They knew these belonged to 
no earthly company. They were two among 
the thousands of thousands of angels, pos- 
sibly the angels of the Resurrection, who sat 
in the empty garden-tomb. These angels 
tell the awe-struck friends of the ascended 
Jesua that their adored Master will one day 
(Acts i. 2) come back to earth in like manner 
as they had seen him go to heaven. " O 
earth, thou grain of sand on the shore of 
the great ocean of the universe of God, 
thou Bethlehem among the princes of the 
regions of heaven, thon art and thou ever 
wUt be, amoug ten thousand times ten thou- 
sand suns and worlds, the loved one, the 
elect of the Lord ; thee will he visit again ; 
thou sbalt provide him a throne,' even as 
thou gavest him a manger; thon sbalt re- 
joice in the splendour of his glory, even as 
thon drankest bis blood and his tears, and 
moumedst at his death. On thee he hath 
a great work yet to accomplish" (Hafeli. 
quoted by Stier). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — The Resurrection-morning. Who are the witnesses to the Resorrec- 
tion ? What is the evidence on which it was believed by the first disciples? — on which 
it is received by all Christians still ? 

I. The witnesses are the holy womeu and thb apostles. It is (ver. 1) the 
very early momins : " while it was yet dark," says St. John ; " as the day began to 
dawn," says St. Matthew; "at the rising of the sun," says St. Mark. Then the 
women hasten towards the sepulchre. How many formed the company, or, as seems 
to be implied, the two companies, of women we know not. The Dames of five are given, 
and the rest are grouped under the phrases, the " others that were with them," and 
" the others from Galilee." They quickly pass through the silent streets. Jerusalem 
is still asleep; neither memory of what had happened, nor fear of what might happen, 
has disturbed its repose. They have only one care (ver. 1) — the complete embalming 
of the body which had been hastily laid in the rock-hewn sepulchre of Joseph. There 
is no idea beyond this ; there is no hope even against hope that, on this the third day, 
he would rise again. With the eagerness characteristic of woman's nature, they pro- 
ceed, the question never suggesting itself until they near the tomb, " Who shall roll 
away the stone from the mouth of the cave ? " It would seem that they did not know of 
the guard » hich had been commanded to watch or of the sealing of the stone, for that had 
been done on the sabbath morning; but some of them had observed the setting of the 
stone — a block three or four feet in height, and two or three in breadth, requiring several 
men to move it. " How shall it be moved? how shall we find an entrance ?" is the 
question before them as they press towards the holy place. Now, what are the facts ? 
In the dawn, half-clear and half-dark, as the east begins to lighten, Mary of Magdala, 
the foremost of the company, sees the cave standing wide open — the stone having 
been rolled aside. Horror-struck, she turns to her companions, and, yielding to the 
moment's impulse, she speeds back to the city to communicate her fears to Peter and 
John (John xx. 1, 2). In the mean time, her companions venture forward. Timidly 
they enter the tomb, or the vestibule of the tomb, to search for the body. Lo, there 
(Matt zxviiL 2, 3), on the stone which bad been pushed into » «omer, tits wa 



ca. ixiv. 1— 5l] tHE dOSi-KL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 279 

"whose countenance is like lightning, and his raiment white as snow," and prostrat* 
on the ground are the Roman sentries. The women start, but the assuring word, " Fear 
not ye," is spoken, and the invitation (Matt, xxviii. 6) is given to " come and see the 
place where the Lord lay." Yes, guardians, and only guardians, are these — one where 
the head, another where the feet, of Jesus had been — token of the complete, protecting 
care of his Father. And these guardians ask (vers. 5 — 7), "Why do you seek the living 
among the dead ? " and repeat the testimony, " He is not here : he is risen," bidding them 
remember his own words, and bear the news of the Resurrection to the sorrowing com- 
pany. It is with fear and great joy that they depart, running to bring the disciples word. 
They encounter scepticism. Their hot, eager sentences (ver. 11) seem to the apostles 
"as idle tales, and they believe them not." Peter and John, however, have already 
obeyed the importunate pleading of Mary. And there, to be sure, as they reach the 
sepulchre, is the open door. John, who is first, looks in without entering ; Peter, coming 
up, enters at once. "John," observes Matthew Henry, " could outrun Peter, but Peter 
could out-dare John." Undoubtedly the tomb is empty. Examining it, they discover 
(ver. 12) the linen clothes laid by themselves ; and the napkin which had surrounded 
the head laid by Itself. There had been no haste. Not thus would any have acted 
who had borne away the sacred form. Peter, after minute examination of the sur- 
roundings, " departed, wondering in himself at that which was come to pass." John, 
with the quick intuition of love, not only wondered, but believed — felt sure that these 
grave-clothes were the sign of a victory. Such is the account of that ever-memor- 
able morning. The arrangement of its events may not be absolutely accurate ; in 
the ignorance of all that occurred, it is impossible to supply every link in the chain of 
narrative. The evangelists are so filled with the one reality, " He is risen," that 
they are not careful as to the minutis of the circumstances. On the Resurrection, as 
personal, as real, the structure of Christian life and doctine is reared. By the effect 
of the Resurrection the apostles were transformed. The foolish and slow-hearted 
fishermen of the past became the princes of a new and heavenly kingdom. " With 
great power they gave witness to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace 
was upon them all." 

II. But WITHOUT FURTHER DWELLING ON THE EVIDENCES OF THE ReSUBBEOTION 
AS AN HISTORICAL FACT, CONSIDER IT A8 A MIGHTY SPIRITUAL FORCE. Consider what 

the apostle calls " the power of the Resurrection." What is the central truth of the 
forty days between the Resurrection and Ascension ? Study the brief account of these 
forty days, and you see at once a change in the manner and conditions of the revela- 
tion of Christ. He shows himself only to chosen witnesses. St. Mark says that ho 
appeared to the disciples " in anottier form." The eyes of the disciples are declared to 
be so held (ver. 16) that they do not know him. It is the same Jesus, but much is 
altered. "He came and he went as he pleased; material substances such as the 
fastened doors were no impediment to his coming ; when he was present his disciples 
did not, as a matter of course, know him." These forty days were what the sunrise 
is to the day; they were the beginning of the relation in which he stands to his 
Church now. All his self-revelations are pictures of the way and truth of his presence 
as we are called to realize it. Men had seen him without knowing him ; now they 
know him without seeing him. We behold him, as Newman has finely said, " passing 
from his hiding-place of sight without knowledge to that of knowledge without sight." 
As a transition-time, giving us intimations of the glory in which he is abiding and 
of the grace in which he is dealing with us, regard the period that was ushered in by 
the early morning of the first day of the week. It was a great day. Four appearances 
are noted. The first (John xx.), to Mary of Magdala, followed or preceded, perhaps, 
by an appearance to the other women (Matt, xxiii.) ; the second (vers. 13 — 35), to the 
two brethren journeying to Emmaus ; the third, to Simon Peter (ver. 35) ; and the fourth 
(John XX. 19 — 23), to the disciples assembled at night when the doors were shut for 
fear of the Jews. Each of these appearances is significant. St. Luke relates the 
Becond. One remark only as to Mary of Magdala. Renan has asserted that the glory 
of the Resurrection belongs to her; that, " after Jesus, it is Mary who has done the most 
to the founding of Christianity." There can be nothing more contrary to the explicit 
statements of the evangelists than much that is contained in the brilliant French- 
man's statement. But the message of Mary is indeed the basis of the faith of tha 



280 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiv. 1— 6a 

Church, the basis of the faith of humanity. " If Christ is not risen, our hope is vain , 
we are yet in our sins," And the commandment which sent her to the disciples ia 
the inspiration of all Christian hearts. " Go, tell my brethren." Tell the message 
of the risen Lord in the light with which the countenance is irradiated ; tell it in the 
glad obedience by which the life is sanctified ; teU it through all that you do and are ; 
tell — let your teaching cease only with your breathing — that Christ has risen, that the 
imprisoning stone has been rolled away, and the kingdom of heaven is open to all 
believers, its gates being closed neither by day nor by night, for there is no night 
there. 

Vers. 13 — 35. — Emmaus. (For a beautiful paraphrase of this Scripture, see the 
passage in Cowper's poem ' Conversation,' beginning, " It happened on a solemn even- 
tide." The incident is presented by him as an illustration of converse "such as it 
behoves man to maintain, and such as God approves." And it is impossible to resist 
the appropriateness of the lesson which is enforced.) The time of the memorable 
appearance is the afternoon, probably between four and six ; and its prominent persons 
are two disciples, not apostles, whom it is impossible to identify. The one is called 
Klopas or Cleophas, supposed by many to be Alphseus, the brother of Joseph of 
Nazareth, and father of James ; but the name being a contraction of deopatrus, the 
suppositioa it scarcely admissible. The other is not mentioned by name, and many 
conjectures concerning him have been framed. A worthy German pastor once said, 
" The learned cannot come to any agreement who the other was, and I will give you 
this good counsel — let each of you take his place." Look at these two men as they jour- 
ney. " The sun of the Resurrection was enveloped in thick clouds of despondency and 
sorrow, scarcely penetrated by a ray of light." It would seem that they had left the 
gathering of disciples before Mary had brought her tale. What they dwell on is, 
"True, the body was not in the tomb; but then he was not seen;" and one risen 
from the dead was a thought which they could scarcely credit. They are not sure 
even that the women really saw angels ; it was, perhaps, only a vision of angels, and, 
having the notions of their time as to ghosts and apparitions, they incline to the belief 
that there was no reality in the presence of whom the Maries and Salome and others 
had spoken. No ; he is dead, and the third day has come and gone, and he has not 
been seen. Let this state of mind be noted. There was no predisposition in Christ's 
followers to accept the Resurrection. Far from this, the evidence made way against 
doubtings, against scepticisms, we might say, of the most obstinate nature. These 
foolish and slow-hearted men were almost the last people likely to credit the tale. 
How was it that this temperament, incredulous, despondent, so quickly gave way to one 
full of worship and great joy ? How was it that such men gave up all, travelled hither 
and thither with the one message ever on their lips, many of them suffering death 
because they would maintain that the Christ who was crucified did rise, had been seen 
by them, and is alive for evermore ? I can find only one answer to the question — They 
witnessed to truth. " The Lord is risen indeed." But regard the incident in the light 
of the thought that the forty days in which Christ showed himself alive after his 
Passion were intended as a time of preparation for that new form of his presence which 
began when the day of Pentecost was fully come. Studying the forty-days' period, we 
can find many hints and suggestions as to the manner of Christ's intercourse with us, 
of his coming to us in the Comforter whom he promised until the end of the age. The 
special teaching of this journey to Emmaus, and all that befell the two, may be gathered 
under three points: (1) Christ with us, hut unrevealed; (2) Christ teaching, but 
personally unrecognized ; (3) Christ revealed and recognized. 

I, Oheist with ds, but unebvbalbd. a Stranger asks the cause of the dejection of 
the two travellers, and, by his sympathy and courtesy, draws out their confidence. Two 
reasons for not discerning him are given. The one is (Mark xvi. 12), that "he appeared 
in another form " than that with which they were familiar. Not the form of the Shepherd 
going before them, but that of the Companion in walking and working clothes travelling 
by their side. But there is the other reason (ver. 16) — " Their eyes were holden that 
they should not know him." They were not at that time in spiritual light ; their 
vision was narrowed by their great sorrow. Are not these still the reasons why so 
often we do not see the Christ who is with us as we travel along the thoroughfares ol 



OH. xxnr. 1— 53.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, 281 



life ? He is not in the form in which we expect him. Sometimes he hides himself, 
that he may get the more fully into our hearts. He is with us, wanting the halo, want- 
ing all that would at once declare him, that he may be more intimately our Friend, 
" familiar, patient, condescending, free." And we miss or mistake him, because we can- 
not see beneath the form, because our minds aie self-occupied, or, when intent on higher 
things, are wanting in the elevation, in the pure sweet light, of the spiritual mind. Only 
when the spiritual eyes are opened do we know who has been and is with us. But he is 
with us as we toil on our toilsome way, bearing the heat and burden of the afternoon. 
It is he who is touching the springs of our thought and action. It is he who is speak- 
ing to us. Fear not, thou weary and heart-sore disciple ; when thy comforts seem to 
be gone, he, the Comforter, is close to thee. Thy tears are falling ; he is nigh with his 
" Why weepest thou ? " Thou art seeking thy God, but thy soiU is unresting, because 
it cannot find the Rock ; he is nigh with his " Whom seekest thou ? " Thou hast left 
the city's din behind thee, and art alone with thyself; he is nigh, assuring thee that the 
fairest vineyards are those which are received from the valley of troubling. Thou art 
in communion with some kindred spirit, exchanging the fears and joys of the mind 
that turns to heaven ; he is nigh, rejoicing to add himself to the two or three. The 
story of Emmaus is indeed a figure of the life-pilgrimage. Bear from it the pledge 
that whosoever is true to the light, is, though halting and uncertain may be his steps, 
the neighbour to Jesus Christ — Jesus himself near and in fellowship with tdl com- 
muning and reasoning. 

II. And how? Tbachiko, althouoh peesonallt umeecoonizbd. What Christ 
was in his dealing with the two, he has been in his dealing with his Church. During 
the past centuries he has been " teaching and expounding the things concerning him- 
self." Did he not promise that the Holy Ghost would be the Guide into all truth, 
through the glorifying of him, the receiving of his and showing it to his own ? What 
is the witness for the fulfilment of this office ? It is the history of the past eighteen 
centuries. The text from which the Holy Ghost has been preaching is that which 
Jesus sounded (ver. 26) ; and the way of the sermon is the very way of Christ (ver. 27). 
Moses and the prophets, apprehended in New Testament light, have, for these centuries, 
been read, opened up, as the treasury of the things of Christ. Thought and culture, 
devotion and obedience, stand to-day where they stood yesterday — before the mighty 
" Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory ? " Is there 
not progressiveness in the teaching of the Holy Ghost? There is development in 
Christianity. It has its permanent, but it has its progressive, element also. It is only 
by little and little that the higher truth of the kingdom enters the hearts of men. Precept 
must be on precept, line on line, until the dispensation of the opening, when the 
Church, gathered fully into the house of the Lord, will receive from the pierced hand 
the bread of the eternal life. So in personal history and experience. There is One 
teaching us, even when we do not recognize who he is. Life is the school in which the 
Holy Ghost is the Instructor. Christ and Christ's love, and the meaning of our 
existence as interpreted in Christ's cross, is the lesson in which we are taught. We pass 
from standard up to standard, the book which regulates all the teaching being the 
Scriptures. Many are the forms which the Holy Ghost, the Teacher, assumes ; many 
are the agencies through which he draws near. But if, with receptive minds, we are 
yielded to him, he is taking us step by step along the path of the manifold education 
meant for the disciple of Jesus ; expounding as we are able to bear, stooping to our 
immaturities and weaknesses; a presence in us rather than external to us, stimulating 
thought and desire, enkindling into fuller flame the smoking flax ; so that by-and-by 
we are able to say, " Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the 
way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures ? " (ver. 32). 

III. Behold Chbist bevealed and becoqnized. The village is reached. Must the 
delightful companionship end ? Courteously saluting them, the Stranger apparently is 
going on. Nay, the sun is about to set ; they entreat him not to leave them (ver. 29). 
He would have gone on if there had been no prayer. The personal desire is essential to 
the tarrying. But that desire never pleads in vain. How many never plead for the 
tarrying — ^indeed, do not want it I For the drawing near and journeying with us, no 
desire from us is needed. Christ does that of his own will. But the tarrying ii 
another matter. He caunot force an entrance ; he will be forced. " They constrained 



^ THE (JOSPEL AOCORDINO TO ST. LtlKE. [oh. xiw. 1—63. 

him." He receWeg sinners fvr salvation ; their reception of him * salvation (Bev. 
iii. 20). At meat with them he is revealed. What it was that disclosed him we 
cannot exactly say. The whole manner is solemn and striking. At once he takes the 
head of the table. The Master's place is conceded to him. And that always prepares 
for revelation. When the heart is trnly yielded to Christ, the moment of the showing 
of himself is near. He takes the bread ; he blesses ; he breaks, and gives it to the two. 
And their eyes are opened, and they know him. There is the voice, the blessing, and 
I think, the sight of the pierced hands — the sight that I expect to have in glory. The 
meal may not have been a full sacrament. But Christ's presence and blessing made, 
the meal sacramental ; for that presence and that blessing elevate whatever is ordinary. 
And the action before us is a consecration of ordinance as well as Word as the means 
of revelation. The Word prepares for the ordinance; in the ordinance Christ is 
revealed. Is not this a forecast of the future ? Is it not Christ's will to make himself 
known to those who sit at meat with him — they having first constrained him and 
being thus spiritually susceptible — in the breaking of bread? Observe the signs of 
the revelation. A new sight (ver. 31); a new energy (ver. 33); a new sympathy 
(vers. 33, 34) ; a new eloquence (ver. 35). Joy, joy to the disciples who have seen the 
Lord. But he has vanished out of their sight. He must not hinder, by his bodily 
presence, the lifting of the consciousness into the region of the spiritual presence. 
That on which afterwards they dwell is, not the glimpse they have had of face and 
hand, but the power of his Spirit, the life-giving force of his Word (ver. 32). The 
clouds were dispelled by the rising of the Day-star in the heart. That_ is the sign 
of Christ with us here. By that we know that it is he who has been talking with ns. 
One day, but not in this present time, we shall see him as he is; he will bless and break 
and give to us himself, the Bread of life. And then he will not vanish out of our sight. 

*0h, then shall the veil be removed. 

And round me thy brightness bo ponied} 
I shall meet him whom absent I loved, 
I shall see whom unseen I adored.' 

Vers. 36 — 43. — Chriit and hit Church. I. The Chueoh. It is foimd in miniature 
in the upper room — " The eleven, and them that were with them." 1. It* ttparation. 
It is isolated from the onter world. A new bond, a new manner, of union is already 
realized. It is not of the world, as Christ himself was not. There is a door shut 
between the little flock and the Jews. A supreme attraction to him whom the world 
sees not, an affiance of soul of which the world knows not, unites fthe company, and, 
in thus uniting, separates it. It has a secret with which the world does not inter- 
meddle. 2. lU unity. (1) That stands in Christ, " Ye have not chosen me, but I 
have chosen you" (John xv. 16). The Church is not a mere voluntary association; 
it is a spiritual orgaTUsm rooted and grounded in the Man Christ Jesus — in what he is 
and has done, in his Divine-human Person, and the offices which he executes as 
Bedeemer. (2) It is realized through continuance in the apostles' doctrine and fellow- 
ship. " The eleven, and those with them." Christ had looked through the ages down to 
'3ie end of the time, and thus had spoken : " I pray for those who shall believe on me 
.hrough the word of the men whom thou didst give me." Here the eleven form the 
centre of the company. There is a definite word on which the Church is built. It 
has not a mere collection of " memoranda ; " it is not an institution of " hazy outlines." 
It has a distinct testimony — that of the apostles and prophets. And there is a social 
life, a fellowship, by which it " makes increase to self-edifying in love " — the fellowship 
which continues that which is witnessed to in the assembly of the eleven and those 
with them. Remember, it \a fellowship, all holding themselves to be fellows in Christ, 
exchanging their experiences, imparting the gift which each has received, that it may 
tend to quicken the faith and love of all. " As they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in 
th« midst" (ver. 36). 

II. Cheist. He had promised, " I will not leave yon comfortless ; I will come to 
you." Behold the fulfilment and the way of the fulfilment of this promise. Behold 
him present in his Church. 1. TTie sovei'eignty of the presence. On a sudden he standi 
in the midst. They are not expecting him. He comes through barred doon, It is the 



cH. XXIV. 1—53.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINQ TO ST. LUKE. 283 

day of hia power. Christ prescribes means; he ordcuns channels of grace; and, where 
there is the obedience of faith in the use of the means, there is blessing. " Where two 
•r three are gathered together, there am I in the midst of them." But in all that 
speaks of spiritual life, there is the witness for a spiritual sovereignty, for reserves of 
power in the hands of the Lord himself. The new birth is a secret and a surprise 
(John iii. 7, 8). 2. It is the personal Jesus who is present to liless — " Jesus himself." 
(Ver. 36.) Above and beyond the mere teaching and fellowship, there is the Lord. 
Christianity is Christ. The full blessing, that which wholly fills the soul, is himself 
in felt relation with each self. " Of him are ye in Clirist Jesus, who of God is made to 
us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctifioation, Redemption" (1 Cor. i. 30). 3. The announce- 
ment of the presence is peace. (Ver. 36.) One of the last words before he suffered was 
" peace." It was the legacy of the dying Saviour. The salutation uf the risen Saviour 
is, " Peace to you I" — the customary salutation transformed and glorified. His immanence 
in the Church is evidenced by the breathing of peace over human souls. " Peace with 
God through the Lord Jesus Christ ; " " The peace of God which passeth all under- 
standing." 4. The complete tenediction of the presence. (1) Fears and doubts are 
scattered. The disciples are terrified and affrighted (ver. 37). They are afraid at his 
tolsens. Scepticisms reassert themselves. A Church, a Christian, wanting in spiritual 
enthusiasm, with a low spiritual temperature, is subject to the logs of doubt. Its 
action is crippled by a subtle scepticism. When he is realized as truly in the midst, 
the fogs are dispelled. There is a counteracting why (ver. 38). In the psalms 
(Ps. xUi.) the soul, dark and doubtful, asks, "Why hast thou forgotten lue?" Its 
questioning is dispelled through another why: "Why art thou cast down my 
soul ? " The blessed Jesus-question to poor confused humanity is, " Why art thou 
troubled? and why do thoughts arise in thy heart?" As the Sun of Righteousness 
shines into the soul, the melancholy, perplexing thoughts scatter, the cluuds whose 
banks lie so low on the heart's horizon flee away. (2) The evidence of the sacrifice 
establishes the faith. (Vers. 39, 40.) He shows the pierced hands and feet — the wounds 
whence comes the healing, the death whence has come the life. And, even in the 
glory into which he has entered, the print of the nails is seen. The gaze of the 
redeemed who share that glory is ever towards the Lamb that was slain. " Worthy is 
the Lamb 1" (p)'^\io full revelation is the Divine humanity. (Vers, 41 — 43.) While 
they believe, and yet can scarcely believe, for the joy seeias too great and too won- 
derful, he eats the fish and honeycomb before them. It is no ghost who is in that 
room ; it is very man of very man. And this is the abiding consciousness and 
strength of the Church. It presents the true humanity. It has the true humani- 
tarianism. The Christ is he " who liveth and was dead, and is alive for evermore." 
And in him humanity is fulfilled, represented, and redeemed. This is the truth of the 
social life of tlie Church. The Church is not a mere institute for instruction and 
worship ; it is a social state built up in the ever-abiding humanity of Jesus Christ. 
Thus, in the upper room at Jerusalem, on the first Easter night, there is an apocalypse 
of the great mystery, Christ and the Church. 

Vers. 44 — 49. — The instruction of the apostles. The words contained in these 
verses are a summary of the instruction given by the risen Lord during the forty days 
in which he showed himself alive after his Passion. They are not to be regarded as 
the outline of only one discourse, following the appearance to the eleven recorded in 
the previous verses ; they are rather the heads of the teaching which was imparted in 
the great period between the Resurrection and the Ascension. " We must suppose the 
evangelist to be hurrying to a close in this portion of his history, and to be giving us 
a brief sketch of the words and actions of our Lord which are summed up in the 
expression in the first chapter of the Book of Acts, " .Jesus had given commandment 
Anto the apostles." Note the points in this instruction. 

I. The sword which his Chuech is to wield. (Vers. 44, 45.) As St. Paul after- 
wards said, " The sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God." The Lord gives the 
treasury from which the Church is to draw — the Law, the prophets, the psalms, tiie 
Scriptures ; but these writings, with the key to their inner meaning, to their saving 
force — "all things in them concerning me." The great word spelt through all the 
books— each book, as De Quincey put it, forming as it were a letter of the word — ^is 



284 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiv. 1— 5» 

" Christ." And not only so ; these Scriptures are to be expounded and enforced in th» 
light and through the skill of the opened understanding. This is the secret of th 
effect; it is this that makes them the sword. Only when they are thus the weapoj 
of the Spirit, illuminating the mind of the teacher, as well as acting on the conscience 
of the heaver, are they quick and powerful. The opening of the understanding is 
spoken of as a definite action at a definite time. " Then opened he their understand- 
ing." What a new light is then shed on the sacred page I What a blessed " Eureka ! " 
is then realized I The foolish and slow in heart go forth with the sword of the Spirit, 
" conquering and to conquer." 

II. The message which the Chdkch is to deliver. (Ver. 46.) Tho message is : 
the Christ whom God has sent, and the world needs — the historical Christ, incarnate, 
Buffering, crucified, risen ; and this Christ presented as the fulfilment of all Scripture, 
the consummation of Divine thought and purpose, " the Lamb slain from the founda- 
tion of the world," the Prophet, Priest, and King, by whom man is redeemed, in whom 
the nature and want, the hope and desire, of all nations are interpreted. The Church 
is called to teach that " thus it hehoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the 
third day." Wide is the environment of truth, and the Church must sweep this 
environment in its vision ; but this is the centre of all the circle. 

III. The conditions of fellowship in the kingdom of God which it is to 
DECLARE. (Ver. 47.) The beginning of the gospel preached by Christ was the word 
"repent " (Matt. iv. 17). Now he solemnly and emphatically urges that repentance is to 
be the great fact in New Testament preaching. The end to be ever before the Church 
18 " to open the eyes, and turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of 
Satan to God." And with this repentance is to be associated the blessing of the 
kingdom, " remission of sins ; " i.e. the sending of the guilt and power of sin away from 
between the soul and God, and thus making the inner vision clear, inspiring with the 
consciousness of the spirit of adoption and the spirit of brotherhood, confirming in the 
liberty wherewith Christ makes free. In the name of Christ, all nations are to be 
summoned to repent, and receive this remission ; the voice lifted up with strength, 
" There is none other Name given under heaven among men whereby we must bs 
saved." 

IV. Thb wiTNBSi which THK Chuech is to ebalizb. (Ver. 48.) 1. Its range. 
"Among all nations." The universality and catholicity of the Christian word, of the 
Christian Church, are asserted, with regal authority, at the conference on the mountain 
in Galilee (Matt, xxviii. 18 — 20). 2. Its course, " Beginning at Jerusalem." There, 
where the Lord of glory was crucified, the first call to repentance is to be sounded, the 
first offer of the Christ for the remission of sins is to be made. So it was (Acts ii.). 
But, from Jerusalem, the course of the witness is ever outward — " to Jadaaa, Samaria, 
the uttermost parts of the earth." We are first to find our own ; but the love which 
begins, is never to stop, at home, i.lti power, (Ver. 49.) Not in the witnessing man 
or woman ; not in the things witnessed to ; not in word, ordinance, ministry ; no, the 
power is from on high. Christ reasserts what he taught in the last discourse before he 
suffered. The great consolation then was the promise of the Father — that in which his 
Fatherly love and will are expressed, his great promise to his Son — the Holy Ghost. 
It is the Holy Ghost who testifies of him. He is not the accompaniment of the Church ; 
the Church is his accompaniment. " He shall testify of me : and ye also shall bear 
witness " (John xv. 26, 27). Now, in the forty days' instruction, he repeats this word. 
He reminds us that the power of witnessing is a descent from on high, the anointing of 
the man by the Holy Spirit. Two things are said — the one, the declaration that the 
promise is imminent, " I am sending it ; " and the other, the injunction to wait in the 
city, to attempt nothing, until the promise is made good, and they are endued with 
the power. Let the Church, let every Christian, remember the injunction ; let eternal 
thanksgiving arise because the promise of the Father has been sent, and the Holy 
Spirit now dwells with the Church. 

Vers. 60 — 53. — The farewell and the Ascension, Once more the old relation is 
resumed. The Shepherd of Israel goes before his little flock. They see him, as in the 
former time, at their head. The well-known route is taken, the well-known place is 
raaohed. And the crowning memory of Bethany is imprinted on their hearts. It ii 



OR. xxiY. 1— IS8.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 288 



the scene of the last adieu, of the Ascension (ver. 50). In the earlier history of Israel 
(2 Kings ii.) there was a day when the sons of the prophets, referring to ISIijah, said 
to Elisha, " Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head 
to-day ? " And his answer was, " Tea, I know it ; hold ye your peace." There were no 
sons of prophets thus speaking to the eleven. But whispers, no douht, in their hearts 
raised shadows of some coming event. Something like the old amazement and fear 
''Mark x. 32) would be felt as, in silence, they followed their Leader. He is to be 
taken from their head; but better far than the mantle thrown on Elisha from the 
vanishing prophet is to be their portion. Observe Christ as he is revealed in the 
concluding verses of the Gospel ; observe those whom he is to leave behind. 

I. Observe Christ as he is herb revealed. See: 1. The action of the Lord 
towards them. " He lifted up his hands" (ver. 50). Before he suffered he had lifted up 
his eyes to heaven, and the voice of intercession had been raised for them (John xvii.). 
As the high-priestly prayer closed, the voice had passed from the tones of earnest but 
humble pleading into those of the Sovereign expressing his will : " I will that they also 
whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am." Now the Priest, about to ascend 
to his throne, extends those hands in which is the print of the nails. It is the first 
time in which we are introduced to this attitude in the Gospels. The uplifted hands 
are the sign of the accepted sacrifice ever potent to cleanse. They are the sign of the 
rightiousness ever ample to clothe. They are the sign of the protection ever sufficient 
to overshadow his Church. The uplifted hands constituted the last recollection of tha 
Christ whom the disciples had seen; they marlc the abiding trutli of the Christ whom 
the eye sees not. And, as the hands are lifted, the lips are opened to bless. What 
were the words of the blessing? Perhaps the benediction (Numb. iv. 24) which the 
sons of Aaron were commanded to pronounce was included in it. But who can measure 
all that it comprehended — all the wealth of grace and truth with which it was charged ? 
Let us say rather, with which it is charged for the Chuich until the end of the age. 
"Lo, I am with you alway, blessing and keeping, my face shining on you, my wdl 
gracious to you, the light of my countenance lifted on you, my peace possessing you." 
2. The ascending Lord. " While blessing" (ver. 51). While the accents of his tender- 
ness are flowing over the soul, lo 1 he moves from the soil on which he and his have been 
standing. Upward, ever upward, he is borne ; they gaze in wonder as the form in which 
they have beheld him is sublimated and passes whither their adoiiug vision can no longer 
follow. The apostle who was " born out of due time " completes, as far as thought of 
mortal can, the account of the evangelist (Eph. i. 20—23), when he describes the 
ascent "far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every 
name that is named, not only in this world, but in that which is to come ; " all things 
put nnder the feet of the glorified Man, " Head over all things to the Church, which is 
his body, the fulness of him that fiUeth all in all." He is " parted from them ; " but 
only to be more nearly and entirely with them ; only to bear with him the humanity 
through which Highest God is in touch with the whole life of man ; only that, in the 
unchangeable Priesthood, he may ever live to make intercession ; only to make good the 
word as to the promise of the Father. When ten more days have passed, the gates 
which had opened that the King of glory might enter, shall open again, and the 
Paraclete, Christ's other self, shall descend from the heaven into which he has gone, 
to fill the little company with his presence. And in that day they shall know that he 
is in the Father, and they in him, and he in them. 

II. Obskrvb the disciples. 1. The new worship. They had Allowed him, and 
bad called him Master. His appearances -during the forty days had prepared thtm 
for something higher still. Now, in deepest revei ence, they kneel before the Lord. 
Thomas learns the whole reality of his answer, " My Lord and my God." Mary learns 
that which is higher and holier than the touch with which, on the resurrection-morning, 
she had sought to detain him. John learns the word which afterwards he wrote, " This 
is the true God, and the Eternal Lile." Peter learns that which moves him to interpret 
the consciousness of faith, " Whom having not seen ye love." Then first sounds the 
music which burst forth, in later years, in the sublimest hymn of the Church : " We 
praise thee, God ; we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. . . . Thou art the King of 
glory, Christ." And this worship is the true life of the Church. It is the outcome 
(^ the taith in th« Eesurrection. " Christ died, yea rather, is risen again, and is evep 



286 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. [oh. xxiv. 1— 53. 

at the right hand of God, making interoession for us." Wanting this, there may he such 
an apostrophe as that with which Beoan concludes his ' Life of Jesus ; ' but worship full 
and adoring there cannot be. It is this worship which is the spring of all energy, the 
pledge of all victory, the bond of union between heaven and earth. " Salvation to oui 
God who sitteth on the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and efer." 2. Tke new 
joy. " They returned to Jerusalem " (ver. 25). But what a difference 1 They had left 
it dispirited, weighed down by many thoughts. Now " they come again rejoicing, 
bringing their sheaves with them." " Parted from them ! " Might they not feel as 
sheep without a Shepherd ? Nay ; for they know that their Shepherd is with them. 
Their hope had been sealed and confirmed, and they are flushed with " a great joy." 
Should not this joy thrill the Church? Enthusiasm is essential to its vitality. To 
be strong, it must be sanguine, triumphant. Times of worshipful faith are always 
times of great joy. " We triumph in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom 
we received the reconciliation." 3. The new life. " They were continually in the 
temple" (ver. 53). But the temple had a new meaning to them. Rite and offering, 
house of prayer and songs of praise, were all clothed with a new character. It was 
their Father's house, and he had given a new song to tlieir lips. Continually are they 
" praising and blessing God." This is the life ; for they are sitting in the heavenly 
places, and partaking of the heavenly things. "Day by day we magnify thee.'' 
Beautiful as the first days of summer is this picture of the waiting Church. Would 
that the impression of this life of praise and blessins; were more evident in the Church, 
witnessing, working, and still waiting. May the Charch be " found unto praise, and 
honour, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ " 1 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0E3. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Side-lights from the Besurrection. The simple, unpretending story of 
the Resurrection, as here narrated, brings into view other truths than that great and 
supreme fact of the rising of our Lord. We have our attention called to — 

I. The constancy and the eagerness op tbub APrECTioN. (Ver. 1.) No thought 
had these women of deserting him whom they loved but whom the world hated and 
had now slain. On the contrary, the enmity of those that maligned and murdered him 
made their affection to cleave all the more firmly to him. It attended him right up to 
the very last ; it follpwed him to the grave ; it came to bestow those final ministries 
which only devoted affection would have cared to render. And it showed itself as 
eager as it was constant. " Very early in the morning they came unto the sepulchre." 
True love to our Lord will stand these tests. It will survive the enmities and opposi- 
tions of an indifferent or a hostile society; it will be unaffected by these except, 
indeed, to be strengthened and deepened by them ; moreover, it will show its loyalty 
and its fervour by the eagerness of its service, not waiting for the last hour of necessity, 
but availing itself of the first hour of opportunity. 

II. The disappearance of difficulties as we oo on oub way of faithful 
BERVioB. We know from Mark (xvi. 3) that these women were full of apprehension 
lest they should be unable to get the stone rolled away from the door. But they went 
on their way to do their sacred office ; and when they reached the spot they found 
their difficulty vanished (ver. 2). 'I his is the common experience of the seeker after 
God in Christ, of the man desirous of discharging his duty in the fear of God, of the 
Christian worker. " Who will roll away that intervening stone ? " we ask timidly and 
apprehensively. " How shall we get over that insurmoimtable barrier? How will our 
weakness prevail against such solid obstacles ? " Let us go on our way of faith, of 
duty, of loving service, and we shall find that, if some angel has not been on the 
scene, the hindrance has disappeared, the way is open, the goal within our reach, 
the service within the compass of our powers. 

III. The surprises that await us as we peoobed. These women found an 
empty grave, visitants from the unseen world, a most unexpected though most 
welcome message ; instead of a mournful satisfaction, they found a new hope, far too 
good and far too great to be held all at once within their heart (vers. 4 — 7). Peter, 
too, found himself the subject of a great astonishment (ver. 12). God has hii merciful 



OH. XXIV. 1—53.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 287 



surprises for us as we proceed on our Christian path. He may surprise us with a sudden 
fear or a suddeu sorrow; but he also surprises us with an unanticipated peace; with an 
unlooked-for joy ; with a new, strange hope ; before long be will introduce us to the 
blessed surprise of the heavenly realities. 

IV. The neahness of the heavenly to the earthly sphere. (Ver. 4.) Angels 
were always at hand to render service in the great redemptive work. Why should we 
think of heaven as " beyond the stars" ? Why should we not think of it as encom- 
passing us on every side, only separated from us by a thin veil, through which our 
mortal senses cannot pass to its glorious spectacles and its blessed harmonies ? 

V. That God has much better things in store for us than we think possible. 
Neither the wondering women nor the incredulous apostles could believe in such 
a happy issue as they were assured of, though they had been carefully prepared to 
expect it (ver. 11). In the feebleness of our faith we say to ourselves, " Surely God is 
not going to give me that, to place me there, to bestow on me such a heritage as this I " 
But why not ? For him to make all grace, all power, all life, to abound, is for him to 
do what he has promised, and what he has been doing since he first opened his hand 
to create and to bestow. — C. 

Vers. 5, 6.— 2%e Resurrection and the Life. No smallest touch of censure can wp 
trace in the words of these angels. On their errand of faithful love these women 
would not be greeted thus. It was but a strong, awakening appeal, calling them ti' 
consider that, while they had come in the right spirit, they had come on a superfluous 
mission, and were looking in the wrong place for their Lord. Not there in the tomb 
among the dead, but breathing the air of a life that would never be laid down, was he 
whom they sought. The words attest — 

L The bbburrection of odb Lord. This was: 1. Here attested by the angels. 
It was, at the same time, indicated by the empty tomb. The latter, of course, would 
not of itself prove such a fact ; but it strongly sustained the word of the heavenly 
visitants. But beyond this, weightier than this, was : 2. The repeated and unmistak- 
able evidence of the apostles and the women. Ten several times, at least, the risen 
Saviour was seen by those who knew him best. These were so thoroughly assured of the 
fact of his rising again, that they not only testified it, but risked and even sacrificed 
their lives to propagate a faith of which it was the corner-stone. And they not only 
undoubtedly believed it themselves, but they spoke as men who could be and who 
were credited by those who heard them. Then we have here : 3. The twofold buttress 
of a Divine promise and of human incredulity. Jesus " spake, saying, . . . the third 
day he should rise again." Tliis was the fulfilment of the promise of One who gave 
such convincing proof that he could do what he willed. Moreover, it was believed in 
•pite of the strongest incredulity. The apostles ought to have expected it, but they did 
not ; we might almost say that it was the last thing they were looking for. They had 
given up their Lord and their cause as utterly lost ; and when the tidings came, they 
refused to believe (ver. 11). So far from the Eesurrection being the figment of a 
diseased expectation, it was a fact forced upon minds strongly predisposed to discredit 
it. The second clause of the angels' sentence was as true as the first : he was not 
there ; he had risen. He had kept his word ; he who had commanded the winds and 
the waves, and who showed himself Master of the elements of nature, now proved that 
the keys of death were in his royal hand, and proved himself to be the Son of God, 
the Lord of life. And with his " glorious resurrection " comes the fact of — 

II. OuB OWN IMMORTALITY. The resurrectiou of Jesus Christ is the sure sign, 
proof, forerunner, of our own life beyond the grave. Without that supreme and 
crowning fact, we could have had no certain hope, no assurance ; without that he could 
not have been to us " the Eesurrection and the Life." With that he can be and is. 
Now we have in him a living Lord, who can carry out his kindest promises and be to 
us all that, during his ministry, he undertook to be. Wherefore let us : 1. Seek and 
find spiritual life in the once-crucified and ever-living Saviour. " He that believeth 
in him, though he w»re [spiritually] dead, yet shall he live," live in very deed and 
truth, ».«. live before God, unto God, and in God — partake of the life which is spiritual 
and Divine. 2. Be assured, then, of a blessed immortality ; for " whoso liveth [in him] 
«nd believeth in him shall never die." His outward, bodily dissolution will be a mere 



288 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiv. 1— 53. 

incident in his career ; so far from its being a termination of it, it will prove to be the 
starting-point of another and nobler life than the present, one nearer to God and far 
fuller of power, of usefulness, of blessedness. 3. Bealize this truth concerning the 
departed. We may go to the grave and weep there like the sorrowing sisters of 
Bethany ; we may tend their tomb with the carefulness which is the simple promptins; 
of pure and deep afiection ; but let us learn to dissociate our thoughts of our departed 
friends from the grave. They are not there ; let us not be seeking the living among 
the dead. There rest their mortal remains, but they themselves are with God, with the 
Saviour whose presence and friendship are exceeding gladness, with the holy and the 
true who have passed into the skies. They are in the light and the love and the joy 
of home. Let us dwell ou this, and comfort ourselves and comfort one another with 
these thoughts. — C. 

Vers. 13 — 32. — Privilege; unconscious companionship; incredulity. In this most 
interesting narrative, beside a verj' pleasing and attractive picture, we have a variety 
of lessons. We may gather instruction respecting — 

L OuB Lord's elective love. It was a very great favour he granted to these two 
men. Why, we ask, was it rendered to them f Of one we do not even know his name, 
and of the other nothing but his name. Why was so rare and high a privilege 
accorded to these obscure disciples, and not rather to those more prominent and active? 
In truth, we find ourselves quite unable to decide who are the fittest to receive special 
favours from the hand of God, or on what grounds he wills to manifest his presence 
and his power. His selections, we are sure, cannot be arbitrary or irrational. God 
must have not only a reason, but the best reason, for everything he does. But into the 
reasons for his choice we often may not enter ; they lie beyond our reach. It is not to 
the acknowledged leaders of the Church that God often chooses to manifest especial 
privilege, but to those who are simple, unexpectant, unknown. He grants illumina- 
tions of his Spirit, peculiar joy and gladness of heart in him, remarkable success in the 
utterance of Hs truth, anticipatory glimpses of heavenly glory, to whom he will. And 
these are quite likely to be found amongst the humbler members of his Church. If 
there is any law which will guide our judgment it is this — ^that it is to the "pure 
in heart," to those who have most perfectly conquered the fleshly passions and are 
most freed from worldly ambitions and anxieties, who have the simplest and purest 
hope in him and desire toward him, that he vouchsafes his presence and grants the 
teaching and inspiration of his Spirit. But Christ's elective love is fully as much of 
a/act as it is of a doctrine. 

II. TJNCONSciotrs COMPANIONSHIP WITH Ghrist. These two men were walking and 
talking with Christ, receiving his truth and responding to his appeal, their hearts 
" burning within them" as they held sweet and sacred intercourse with him ; yet they 
did not recognize him ; they had no idea that they were having fellowship with the 
Lord. There is much unconscious companionship with Jesus Christ now. Men are 
led into belief of the truth, are impressed with the sovereign claims of God upon their 
service, and of Jesus Christ upon their love ; they ask, they inquire, they come to the 
feet of Christ to learn of him ; they come to the cross of Christ to trust in him ; they 
shim what they believe to be offensive, and pursue what they think is right and 
pleasing in his sight ; and yet they are not at rest. They thiak they may be in a 
good way or in a fair way to find life ; but they do not realize that they are in the 
right way. The fact is ofttimes that they are walking in the path of life with Christ, 
but " their eyes are holden that they do not know him." A Divine One has joined 
himself to them, as familiarly and unpretendingly as to these two disciples, 
ingratiating himself into their favour, wooing and winning their trust and their love ; 
but because there has been no period of well-recognized revolution, no sudden remark- 
able convulsion, they have failed to perceive that the work wrought within them has 
been that of his own kind and holy hand. Such souls need to learn that oftenest it is 
not in the wind, or in the earthquake, or in the fire, but in the stiU small voice of 
familiar truth and gracious influence, that Christ comes to the soul in renewing power. 
If it is in Christ we are trusting, if it is in hie service we are most willing to live, if it 
is his will we are most concerned to do, then it is he himself by whose side we are 
walking day by day. 



OH. XXIV. 1—53.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 263 

m. Thk btrangb inoebdulitt of Christian disciplebhip. Our Master, who was 
80 gentle and bo considerate, here employs a very strong expression (ver. 25). This is 
the language of serious reproach; it is a weighty rebuke. The disciples of Christ 
ought to have read their Scriptures better, and they ought to have heeded the reiterated 
warning and promise he had himself given them of his death and his rising again. 
But while vfe wonder at what seems to us their slowness to learn and to believe, are 
we not as obtuse and as incredulous as they were ? Do we not fail to grasp the pro- 
mises of God as they are written in his Word, as they were spoken by his Son our 
Savior* ? When those things happen which we should expect to happen in connection 
with the teaching of Divine truth ; when the Spirit of God works mightily and merci- 
fully in the suuls of men; when hard hearts are broken and stubborn wills are subdued 
to the obedience of Christ ; when wrong and shameful lives are changed into pure and 
holy ones ; when the kingdom of God comes amongst us ; — are we not surprised, incre- 
dulous? Are we not tempted to ascribe these issues to other than heavenly sources? 
And yet ought not this very result to happen ? Is it not precisely what we should 
liave been looking for, and wondering that it did not occur? We shall probably find 
abundant illustrations of Christian incredulity to match anything of which we read in 
our New Testament. " Slow of heart " are we to believe ail that the Master has said 
of the presence and the power and the promises of God. — C. 

Vers. 13 — Z'i.-^Further lessons hy the way. Other lessons beside those already 
gleaned (see preceding homily) await our hand in this instructive story. 

I. The thsbad of trial which runs through the fabric of oub life. On 
one occasion our Lord asked a question of one of his disciples, and of that question it 
is said, " This he said to prove him " (John vi. 6). There were other occasions, e.g. 
that of the blind beggars by the wayside, and that of the Syro-phoenician woman, when 
Jesus said things to prove or to try those who came to him. We have the same thing 
here. He drew near to these two disciples in the guise of a stranger ; he chose to 
remain unknown to them ; he drew them out as if he were one unacquainted with the 
events which were filling their minds and hearts ; he induced them to discover them- 
selves freely and fully both to his own eyes and to theirs ; moreover, he was in the act 
of passing on, and would have gone beyond Emmaus if they had not availed themselves 
of the opportunity of persuading him to remain. And thus he tried them. The 
" trial of our faith," and of our love and loyalty, forms a great part of our Master's 
dealing with ourselves. It explains many otherwise inexplicable things in our life. 
God appears to us other than the kind, gracious, pitiful, considerate Father that he is ; 
Christ seems to be other than the present, strong, faith-rewarding Master that he is. 
Why does God let such things happen to us? Why does not Christ bring to pass that 
for which we labour and pra}' so earnestly? It may be that, in these cases, he is 
trying us ; proving the sincerity and deepening the roots of our faith and love and zeal. 
We shall be the stronger, and our lives will be the more fruitful, for his action or his 
lingering, a little further on. 

n. The true way to make the sabbath a deliqht. It was fitting that on 
the first sabbath of the Christian era there should be recorded an instance in which the 
day was spent as Christ would have it be. What a pleasant picture this of communion 
with Christ, of searching the Scriptures, of sitting down at the same table with him ! 
We have here : 1. Communion mth our Lord. About one-fourth of the whole day 
these favoured men were conversing with Christ, opening their minds and outpouring 
their hearts to him, telling him their hopes and their fears, and receiving kind and 
illuminating responses from his lips. So should our " fellowship be with the Father, 
and with his Son Jesus Christ," on the " day of the Lord." And as we may be sure 
that the way to Emmaus was marvellously shortened that afternoon, and the village 
houses showed themselves long before they were looked for, so will earnest and loving 
communion with our living; Lord, so will our walking with Christ, make the hours go 
swiftly by on the wings of holy and elevated joy, and we shall " call the sabbath a 
delight." 2. Sacred study. (Vers. 27, 32.) How wonderful these Scriptures which 
contain the record of Divine revelation ! So short as to be capable of being committed 
to the memory, and yet so full as to contain all that is needful for our enlightenment 
and enrichment, for ((uidanc' to God and heaven ; so dull to the unqulckened conscience, 
LUKB. — -u. V 



290 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiv. 1—53 

and so delightful to the awakened and renewed ; holding mysteries insoluble to human 
learning, and yet intelligible and instructive from Genesis to Revelation to the earnest 
inquirer after truth and life ; valueless in the market, and yet precious beyond all price 
to aU who want to know how to live and how to die. As Christ and the two learners 
walked and talked, new light shone on the old passages, and the way was too short and 
the time too soon gone for their interest and their eagerness to be expended. 3. Meet- 
ing the living Lord at his table. (Ver. 30.) This was not, strictly speaking, a " sacra- 
mental" meal to which they sat down. It was not the " Lord's Supper" of which they 
partook. But there was about it so much of reverence, of religious earnestness, W holy 
communion, of sacred joy, that it may well suggest to us that most excellent way of 
spending some part of " the Lord's day." 

III. The woeth of all TKnB Christian laboitb. Possibly those who teach may 
sometimes ask themselves whether it is worth their while to conduct so small a class, 
to preach to so poor a congregation. Here is the answer to that questioning. If the 
risen Lord of glory thought it worth his while to walk seven miles and spend two hours 
in enlightening the minds and comforting the hearts of two humble and obscure dis- 
ciples ; if he was content to spend a good part of his first sabbath in taking a class of 
two, and pouring from the rich treasury of his truth into their minds, we may not think 
it unworthy of us to spend time in enlightening or comforting one human heart that 
craves the succour it is in our power to give. The disciple is not above his Master. 

IV. The secret of spiritual interest. Do we devoutly wish that we knew 
more of that sacred gladness of which these disciples were so happily conscious as he 
"talked with them by the way, and opened to them the Scriptures " (ver. 32)? Then : 
1. Let us see that we are, as they were, earnestly desirous of knowing more of Jesus 
Christ. Let us go to our Bible and go up to the house of the Lord with that eml 
distinctly and prominently in view. 2. Let us seek and gain the same Divine illumina- 
tion. It is still to be had, though that voice is not now heard in our ear. The " Spirit 
of truth " is with us still, waiting to illumine and to enlarge our hearts ; if we seek 
his aid and open our minds to Ms entrance, he will "guide us into all the truth" 
(John xvi. 13).— C. 

Ver. 29. — Z%e exigenay of old age. The disciples "constrained" our Lord to abide 
with them ; for, they said, " It is toward evening, and the day is far spent." This act of 
theirs and their words taken together are suggestive of the truth that those whose life 
is fast waning — ^with whom it is " toward evening," whose day is " far spent " — have 
urgent need that Jesus Christ should " abide with " them. We have before us the 
special spiritual necessities of old age. It has — 

I. Its special eesponsibilitt. We look to advanced religious experience to set us 
a particularly blameless example, to show us most clearly the spirit and the complexion 
of a distinctly Christian life, to lead us in the direction of spirituality and purity. 
For this high service the near presence of the Saviour is needed, and the constant 
exercise of his gracious power. 

II. Its special temptation. The temptation of age is to querulousness, to an 
illiberal criticism of the present and to an undue and partial preference of the past, to 
an unjust and imwise severity in judging the eccentricities and irregularities of the 
young, to a dissatisfaction with the comparative obscurity to which it is itself descend- 
ing. To prevail against this temptation, and to preserve equanimity, sweetness, cheer- 
fulness of spirit and hopefulness of heart, age has urgent need of a constant renewal 
from above. 

III. Its special privations. There are a few who live to a " good old age " with- 
out any or without much consciousness of loss. But these are only a few. With old 
age usually comes privation. In respect of sight, of hearing, of power of locomotion, 
of facility in speaking, of memory, of intellectual grasp, the aged are painfully conscious 
that " they are not what they were ; they speak with diminished fire, they act with a 
lessened force." Their life is lower, is narrowed ; they are less to their contemporaries 
than they used to be. They need comfort under the sense of loss ; they need another 
source of satisfaction and of joy. In whom, in what, shall they find it, but in the 
Person and the presence of the Divine Friend and Saviour? 

IV. Its special loneliness. Age is often lonely. It misses the companioiu of 



CH. xxiT. 1— 63.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDma TO ST. LUKE. 291 

its youth and it« prime. Most of these, perhaps nearly all, have fallen, and they are 
as the last leaf upon the wintry hough. " They are all gone, the old familiar faces," 
is the plaintive strain of their discourse ; and some who still live have drifted away 
from them in space or in spirit. There is no one left who can go back with them in 
thought and sympathy to the old times, the memory of which is so pleasant, and which 
they would fain revisit with the friends of youth and childhood. Age is apt to be very 
lonely, and it has great need of a Divine Companion who does not pass away, who 
"abides," who is " the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever." 

v. Its special limitation. We all know that there may not he many days left 
in which we can bear witness for our Lord and his gospel. But the aged know that 
there can not be many more left to them. So much the more, therefore, as they see 
the sight approaching when they can work no more for their Master, may they well 
desire to he and to do all that still lies in their power. Every hour is golden to him to 
whom but few remain. And because the opportunities of serving men here on earth 
are narrowing perceptibly day by day, the aged may earnestly entreat their Lord to 
be near to them, and to let his grace rest upon them, that their last days may be full 
of fruitfulness as well as of peace and hope. 

VL Its nearness to death. We wish not only to " live unto the Lord," but also 
to " die unto the Lord ; " to honour him in the manner of our death as well as by the 
spirit of our life. They who feel that the evening shadows are gathering, and that the 
night of death is near, may well wish for the near presence of the upholding Saviour, 
with whom they will go tranquilly and hopefully through the last darkness. " Abide 
with us," they say ; " be with us as we take the last steps of our earthly journey, go 
down with us into the deep waters, attend us till we reach the heavenly shore," 

" Oh, meet us in the valley. 

When heart and flesh shall fail. 
And softly, safely, lead us on, 

Until within the veil ; 
When faith shall turn to gladness. 

To find ourselves with thee. 
And trembling Hope shall realiz* 

Her fuU fehoity." 

a 

Vers. 83 — 43. — Seme and spirit : the Besurrection. The story of the Resurrection in 
itg relation to the disciples of our Lord suggests to us thoughts concerning — 

I. The teiumph or the spibit over the flesh. These two disciples who had 
walked from Jerusalem to Bmmaus, and who persuaded the mysterious Stranger to 
remain because the day was far gone, and subsequently spent some time in earnest 
converse with him, now hastened hack to Jerusalem (ver. 33). This was quite contrary 
to their intention when they set out from the city ; it was not in the natural order of 
things to start out again on a long two-hours' walk after the fatigues of that eventful 
day. But their minds were so enlarged, their hearts so filled with joy, their souls so 
stirred with animating and vivifying hope, that they could not remain where they 
were; they must impart the transporting and transforming tidings to the crushed and 
sorrowing brethren they had left behind them that afternoon. It was late and dark, 
and (when they thought of it) they were tired. But what were these considerations ? 
They were things not to be entertained for a moment, they were a mere feather's weight 
in the scale ; and we may be certain that they set off to Jerusalem with a much lighter 
step in the evening, and far more alacrity of spirit, than they left that city in the 
afternoon of the day. In one sense " we are but dust and ashes," but " animated clay; " 
our soul is subject to certain limitations from its close connection with the body. Yet 
can the spirit triumph nobly over the flesh. Let hut the kindling truth come down 
from heaven, let the Divine hand but touch the secret springs of the soul, and all 
our bodily sensations and our lower instincts go down and disappear. Fatigue, loss, 
danger, death itself, is nothing to a soul alight with the celestial fire. A new hope, a 
new faith, a new purpose, can carry the weary frame along the dusty road of duty, or 
up the steep ascent of arduous or dangerous achievement, better than angels* wings. 
Our true self is not the tabernacle of the flesh, but the indwelling and yictoriou* spirit. 



292 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxnr. 1— 53. 

II. The essential service which the flesh renders to the spirit. Chris- 
tianity is essentially spiritual. It makes its appeal to the spiritual nature; its aim is 
spiritual ; and the weapons of its warfare are also spiritual — the efforts of the spirit of 
man and the energies of the Spirit of God. But it rests largely on a basis of facts 
attested by our senses — the fact of the Incarnation, " God manifested in the flesh," 
the " Word made flesh ; " the fact of the miracles of Christ, miracles wrought before 
the eyes of men, and assured by their sensible observation of them; the fact of a 
blameless life lived in the bodily presence of eye-witnesses ; the fact of the death at 
Calvary, borne witness to by those who actually beheld it ; and the great crowning 
fact of the Resurrection, the return of Jesus Christ in the flesh to his disciples. The 
entire fabric of our religion rests upon the history of the Man Christ Jesus ; and the 
accejitance of him as a Divine Teacher, whose word can be trusted and whose character 
can be honoured, stands or falls with the truth of the Resurrection. For if he did not 
rise again, he certainly was not the One he claimed to be. Of what service to us, then, 
these physical facts here recorded — his eating with the two at Emmaus ; the sound of 
the familiar voice in many words of intercourse ; the sight of his hands and feet with 
the imprint of the cruel nails ; the sight and feeling of the " flesh and bones," which a 
spirit has not but which they found he had ; and the act of sitting down at the table 
and eating of the fish and honeycomb before their eyes? The sight of his face, the 
sound of his voice, the style of his speech, the handling of his limbs ("handle me, and 
see," ver. 39), supplemented by his eating and drinking before them, — all this at length 
convinced their incredulity that it was indeed the risen Lord himself, returned accord- 
ing to his word. And all this accumulated evidence of all the senses is as good for us 
as it was for them. We are thankful for this multiplication of the material evidence, 
for, taken with other considerations, it substantiates the great fact of facts, and gives 
to us not only a marvellously original Thinker, but an unmistaken and faultless 
Exemplar, a Divine Lord and Master. The human senses never rendered to the 
human soul so great a service as when they attested the supreme fact of the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ. But they still do render very valuable service in every Christian life. 
1. The control and regulation of our senses for Christ's sake and in obedience to his 
word is a continual tribute to the power of his truth. 2. Our feet can carry us forth 
on errands of Christian charity. 3. Our hands can be put daily to deeds of righteous- 
ness, of justice, of excellency. 4. Our lips can sing the praises of our Lord, and can 
speak words of kindness to the young, of sympathy to the suffering and sorrowing, of 
hope to the dying. 5. Our eye can read, our ears can hear, the truths which impart oi 
which sustain the inner life of the spirit. Through our bodily senses God's own 
living truth, and with his truth himself also, comes continually into our soul ; and 
through these same senses there go forth from us all healing, all helpful, all saving 
intiuencis to the world ; and thus we enrich and are enriched. — C. 

Ver. 36. — The peace of Christ. It is true that these words, " Peace be unto you ! " 
were the ordinary Jewish salutation. But remembering that our Lord used these 
words a second time in this interview (see John xx. 21), and having in mind the 
way in which he made these words his own, and gave to them not merely a formal but 
a profound significance (John xiv. 27), we may find much meaning in them. We 
recognize the fact that they were — 

I. Specially appropriate to the oiBcnMSTANCES. The minds of his apostles had 
passed through the deepest distress. They had lost their Lord and their Friend ; and 
with him they had lost, as they thought, their cause and their hopes ; they were, there- 
fore, afflicted with an overwhelming grief. And now they were fiiUed with the liveliest 
agitation. They were in a mental state in which blighted hopes were struggling with 
darkest fears ; their soul was stirred to its very depths ; and what, above all things, 
they needed was One that could come and say, " Peace be unto you ! " It was the 
very word that was wanted to be breathed into their ear, to be spoken to their heart. 

II. Admirably descriptive of his abiding mission. It is true that Jesus once 
said, " I came not to send peace, but a sword." But it will be found, on referring, that 
then he simply meant to say that division and strife would be an inevitable incident 
of the course of his gospel ; he did not mean that this was its deep purpose or its Ion" 
and last result. It was Uie back-water, and not the main current, of the truth ha 



en. XXIV. 1-53.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LtTKfi. 293 

preached. Christ came to give peace to a world profoundly disturbed and disquieted 
by sin. "Come unto me," he said, " and I will give you rest." Not as the world 
gives rest or peace does he give.' (1) Not mere comfort or gratification that is very 
short-lived ; (2) nor satisfaction that is based on ignorance of ourselves, and must before 
long be exposed ; (3) nor the quiet of indifference or unbelief that must soon be broken 
up. Not of this order is the peace of Christ. It is : 1. Best to the burdened conscience. 
He shows us our sin and makes us ashamed of it; he fills our heart with a true and 
righteous sorrow for it ; he awakes within us a just and honourable concern for the 
consequences of it. And then he offers himself as the One who bore the burden upon 
himself, through whom we may find forgiveness and acceptance. And " being justified 
by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ." 2. Abiding gladness 
to the hungering heart. " In the world " is unsatisfiedness of soul, emptiness and heart- 
ache ; a sense of disappointment. But in him is a true and lasting satisfaction. " How 
happily the days in his blest service fly ! " To live heartily and wholly unto him who 
loved us and gave himself for us, to expend our powers in his praise and in his service, 
— this is the secret of lifelong peace. All the lower springs will fail, bat this never. 
To " lose our life " unto him is to " find it " and to keep it for ever. 3. Comfort to the 
troubled spirit. When darkness falls upon the path, when losses come, when bereave- 
ment makes a gap in the home and in the heart, when some heavy disappointmeut 
blights the prospect, — then the felt presence, the realized sympathy, and the unfailing 
succour of that Divine Friend give a peace which is deeper than our distiirbance, a 
thrice-blessed calm to the tempest-tossed soul. 4c. Peace in death. For many centuries 
the dying have departed in peace because they have hoped for everything through the 
Divine Saviour ; they have calmly " slept in Jesus ; " and those who now look forward 
to death as a passage through which they wiU be passing can find no better wish or 
prayer than that " the music of his Name " may " refresh their soul in death." — 0. 

Ver. 45. — l%e Divine Spirit and the human understanding. It may be that we 
do not sufficiently recognize the very intimate connection between our human intelli- 
gence and the action of the Spirit of God. We may be seriously in danger of coming 
short in gratitude for all that God has wrought for us in this respect, and in prayer for 
his continued and especial help in the future. 

I. The Divine endowment with which he starts va on cue coubsb. We 
receive from his creative hand a kind and a measure of intellectual power which may 
be said to vaiy with each individual of the human race. To one he giveth five talents, 
to another two, to another one. And it is not only difference in measure, but also in 
kind. The human spirit has many faculties, and one man has a large share of one 
and another a goodly share of another, " as it pleaseth him." Most happily for us, 
there is every possible variety of human understanding resulting from the different 
capacities and dispositions with which our Creator endows us. 

II. The beneficent law of expansion he has obdadibd for va. The law 
under which we live, and under which our understanding grows, is this — " to him that 
hath is given." We observe, we hear and read, we reflect, we reason, we construct and 
produce ; and as we do this, we grow — our intelligence is opened and enlarged. Thus 
by the operation of one of his wise and kind laws God is " opening our understanding " 
every day, but more particularly in the earlier days of curiosity and of study. Youth 
has but to do its rightful and proper work, and God will do his gracious, enlarging 
work • and thus he wUl " build up " a mind, well stored with knowledge and wisdom, 
capable of great and noble service. 

III. The spboiaIi illuminations he has orantbd and is willino to impabt. 
1. God has given to members of our race illumination or expansion of mind which we 
pronounce miraculous, i.e. not in accordance with known laws. Such was the inspira- 
tion he gave to Moses when he inspired him to write his books; or that he gave tc 
Samuel, to Elijah, to Isaiah, to Zechariah, when he moved these prophets to remonstrate 
with or to exhort their contemporaries, or to write words that should live for all time on 
the sacred page ; or that he gave to these two disciples when he opened their understand- 
ing that they might understand the Scriptures as they had never understood them before ; 
or that he gave to the Apostles Peter and Paul and John when he prompted them to 
•peak u they spoke and to write as they wrote. Here was an altogether unusual and 



2&4 THE GOSPEL ACCOHBlNa TO ST. LtJKE. [ce. xxiv. 1—53. 



gupernaiural enlightenment and enlargement of mind granted for the special purpose of 
making known his mind and will to the race of man. 2. God still imparts special 
illumination to us according to our need and in response to our prayer. The " age of 
miracles" may be past, but assuredly the age of Divine illumination is not passed, 
God remains, and will remain, in constant communication with his human children ; 
he has, and ever will have, access to their understanding ; he can touch and quicken 
us, can enlarge and equip our minds for special service in his Name and cause, can 
make clear to our minds those things which have been obscure, whether in his Word or 
in his providence, so that we can " understand the Scriptures," and also interpret his 
dealing with ourselves and his fashioning of our lives. Three things become us, (1) A 
sense of our own insufficiency — ^insufficiency both for comprehending what we are called 
upon both to consider and (as far as may be) to understand, and for doing the work of 
explanation and enforcement which is required of us. (2) Faith im, God — ^in his obser- 
vation of us ; in his interest in our humble endeavours to take our part and do our work ; 
in his power over us to "open our understanding" as well as to "open our heart" 
(Acts xvi. 44 ; see Eph. 1. 18 ; 2 Tim. ii. 7). (3) Prayer for Divine illumination. 
Lacking wisdom, let us ask of God, " who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth 
not " (Jas. i. 5 ; see Col. i. 9 ; Eph. i. 16, 17). Whenever we read the Scriptures that 
we may learn the " mind of Christ," whenever we stand up to speak in his Name, when- 
ever we set ourselves to any effort that requires spiritual wisdom, we do well to pray 
in the spirit, if not in the language, of our gi-eat poet — 

" Thou, O Spirit, that dost prefer 
Before all temples the upright heart and pure. 
Instruct me ; for thou know'st : . . . What in me is darl^ 
Illumiue I What is low, raise »nd support I " 

0. 

Ver. 47.— 2%e solemn charge. It is an allowable curiosity to wonder how the 
apostles of our Lord received this " their solemn charge." 1. They must have been 
greatly impressed by its extreme seriousness ; they were to preach repentance and remis- 
sion of sin " among all nations." And although they did not know as we do what 
that meant, and how wide was the range of the Saviour's purpose, they could realize as 
we cannot how deep and bitter would be the enmity which a gospel of the crucified 
Nazarene would encounter, more especially in Jerusalem. 2. But they may have been 
powerfully sustained by the presence of the Lord himself. The " power of his resur- 
rection" was then upon their souls; they were to go forth in his Name, who had just 
triumphed over man's last and greatest enemy — death. What could they not do 
through him? If we ask what was the message, in its fulness, which they were 
charged to deliver, we reply — 

I. Eepbntance as Chbist had pkeaohbd it. They were to preach repentance in 
hit Name. Therefore of the kind which he demanded. And this was no mere out- 
ward amendment ; it was not found in the external habits of devotion ; no amount of 
almsgiving, fasting, prayers, would constitute it. It meant : 1. Self -condemnation. Not 
necessarily the exhibition of overwhelming emotion, but the decided and deep con- 
viction of our own unworthiness, and real regret for wrong done and for service with- 
held in the past. 2. The return of the heart to God. The coming back from the far 
country of estrangement, or forgetfulness, or denial and open enmity, and the seeking 
anew the F'ather's face and favour. 3. The outcasting from the soul of all tolerance of 
evil, so that sin is not only shunned but hated. 4. The pursuit of all moral excellency; 
to be attained by the study and the love of the great Exemplar himself. And this 
repentance, real and thorough, was to be immediate. There was to be no guilty and 
dangerous pcistponement ; as soon as the soul recognized its duty it was to start on the 
true and right course. 

II. Remission as Cheist offered it. And this was : 1. FuU. It was a forgive- 
ness without reserve. The son (of the parable, ch. xv.) was not relegated to the 
servants' hall, though he had thought of asking for no more than that. He was 
admitted to the full honour of sonship; he was to wear the best robe and the ring, and 
he was to sit down to the table which was loaded in his honour. The mercy we 
receive through Christ, and which is to be offered " in his Name," is no imperfect thing ; 



OH. XXIV. 1—53.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. LUKE. 299 

It ti full, entire, complete. All past transgressions are absolutely forgiven, so that 
they will never be alleged against us or stand between us and the love of God. We 
ourselves are taken into the gracious favour of our heavenly Father, admitted to Ms 
family, counted among his own children, constituted his heirs, having freest access to 
his presence, welcome to call him by the most endearing name. 2. Immediate. There 
is no probation or appreiiticeship to be served ; we have not to wait to approve our- 
selves ; we are not sentenced to any form of expiation by menial service before we gain 
our childhood. At once, so soon as we retm-n in spirit unto God, that moment we are 
welcomed to the side and to the home of our Father. 3. In faith. We are to seek 
and to find forgiveness " in Christ's Name," i.e. in the exercise of a simple but living 
faith in him as in our Divine Saviour. So the apostles evidently understood their 
Master (see Acts x. 43 ; xiii. 38, 39; 1 Pet. i. 8, 9 ; 1 John ii. 12). Thus the ascended 
Saviour instructed the "abortive-born apostle" (Acts xxvi. 18), and thus that faithful 
witness continually taught (see Acts xx. 21). Those who speak for Christ are to invite 
all sinful men to put their trust in him, the Saviour of mankind, the " Propitiation for 
the sins of the world," and, accepting him as such, to take the full, free mercy of God 
unto eternal life. 

Such was the message which the apostles were solemnly charged to deliver. There 
was in this great instruction : 1. One charge which they were more particularly to 
observe — they were to begin at Jerusalem. It was right they should begin there, for 
it was there that all " these things " (ver. 48) were known and could be attested ; and, 
beginning there, the grace and the magnanimity of the Crucified One would be more 
abundantly manifested. 2. Another, which more particularly affects ourselves — this 
message of mercy is to be carried to " all nations." It is " the common salvation," 
needed by all and fitted for all, to work out and send forth which the Lord Jesus lived 
and died. — G. 

Ver. 48. — Bearing witness. These brief words, "Ye are witnesses," being among 
the very last which Jesus spoke to his apostles, must have lingered in their ear for the 
rest of tlieir life. In moments of doubt, or of depression, or of danger, the remembrance 
that their Lord and Leader had charged them to be his witnesses may well have stirred 
and strengthened them to fresh courage and to renewed activity. They are words that 
may well stimulate us also to duty and self-sacrifice. 

I. The ttniqtje sbevicb bendeebd by the apostles. They were witnesses of 
" those things," the greatest things that were ever seen and ever attested in the history 
of mankind ; things they were on the full and true statement of which, on the cordial 
and practical acceptance of which, depended the life and the hope of the world. They 
could face all with whom they came in contact, and declare that they saw with their 
own eyes, heard with their own ears, witnessed in their own persons : 1. A perfectly 
beautiful, a spotless human life, in which, though they saw it under all possible circum- 
stances and when under least constraint or reserve, they could find no flaw at all (1 Pet. 
ii. 22). 2. Works of power, which were invariably works of pity and of kindness, of 
such a nature that there was no possibility of mistake. 3. Words of truth and grace 
such as mortal lips had never spoken, and such as met the deepest wants of man's 
liungering heart, of his yearning and aspiring soul. 4. Sufferings and sorrows beyond 
what others knew, borne with a patience that was sublime. 5. A death undergone in 
shame and pain, amid natural wonders and with more than human nobility. 6. A 
glorious resurrection from the grave. 7. A message of mercy and hope to be delivered 
to all mankind in the name of this great Teacher, Healer, Sufferer, Conqueror, 

II. The valuable sbbvicb which is open to ub all. 1. We also can testify, 
ill word, to " these things." We leave, and are content to leave, some mysteries which 
belong to the Christian faith ; we do not try, as we need not try, either to explain or 
to understand them. But "these things," which the world needs to know for its 
inward peace and its true prosperity, we can speak. We are familiar with the holy and 
beautiful life of Jesus Christ. We know the thought, we " have the mind of Christ " 
on all the deepest and highest subjects with which our character and our destiny are 
bound up. We are conversant with the sufferings and the sorrows of the Saviour ; for 
the story of his Passion is better known by us than any other history whatsoever — it 
is not only in our memory, it is in our heart. We can speak of his death and of hia 



296 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiv. 1— 6a 

triumph over the grave. We know well what is the messafje of truth and grace ha 
desires to be declared to the whole world. We can speak of him and for him. 2. And 
we can find an audience. There are many wlio will not listen to us, hut there are 
those who will. The young, who have a spirit of docility and inquiry ; the sich and 
the sad, to whom " the consolation which is in Christ " is the one thing that heals and 
calms ; the poor, to whom the pearl of great price is welcome, and who are willing to b« 
made " rich toward God ; " the disappointed and the weary, who are glad to know of 
One who can give " rest unto the soul ; " — these will receive our testimony. 3. We can 
bear the best and truest witness of the life. What men want to be convinced of is 
that Christianity is a living power; that it not only has very fine sentiments to teach 
— these can be found elsewhere — hut that it is a moral and spiritual power that can 
save the lost, can cleanse the foul, can soften the hard-hearted, can humble the proud, 
can arouse the indifferent and obtuse, can infuse cheerfulness and joy into the heart of 
the poor and lowly, can give rest of spirit to those who are encompassed by the cares 
of time, can fill the soul with tender sympathy and prompt to generous and self-denying 
succour, can substitute a forgiving for a vindictive spirit in the wronged, can enable its 
possessors to gain a victory over themselves and over the world and to crown a vic- 
torious life by a death of calm tranquillity and joyful hope. Here is scope for witness- 
bearing ; and, as every Christian man has the truth of Christ on which to feed, the 
example of Christ to follow, and the Holy Spirit of Christ to whom to look for his 
indwelling power, it is open to every disciple to be a witness, whose testimony shall bo 
valuable on earth and acceptable in heaven. — 0. 

Ver. 49. — The secret of spiritual strength. How came it to pass that the apostles 
of our Lord became such strong men and did such noble work for their Master and for 
mankind so soon after they manifested such weakness as they did ? We consider^- 

I. Their insufficibnot trp to the time of the Ascension. They had been 
receiving for many months the inestimable advantage of Christ's own teaching for their 
mental enlightenment, and his own influence for their spiritual ennoblement. And 
this teaching and training cannot have been — we may con6dently say was not — without 
very great value throughout their subsequent course. Yet they imdouhtedly lacked 
something which would complete them for the great task before them. They showed 
but scant determination (Matt. xxvi. 41, 43), but feeble courage (Matt. xxvi. £6), but 
little understandmg of their Master's aim (Acts i. 6) ; and this, too, at the very close 
of his ministry, when their great and special privilege was expiring. Something more 
they sadly needed to prepare them for their work. 

II. The promised power. 1. Its announcement and its confirmation. It was first 
predicted by the prophets who preceded our Lord (Isa. xliv. 3) ; and more particularly 
Joel (ii. 28, 29). It was renewed and confirmed, at first more indefinitely, and here 
more definitely, by our Lord (John xiv. 16, 26 ; xv. 26, 27 ; xvi. 7 ; text). 2. Its 
historical fulfilment (Acts ii. 1 — 11). 3. Its permanent results. These men, whose 
character and whose fitness for their grand and lofty mission left much to be desired, 
" endued with power from on high," became wonderfully equipped for and admirably 
adapted to the noble mission to which Christ appointed them. l]hey became strong 
(1) to stand in the evil hour of temptation, defying the authority of Jewish council 
and the sword of Roman ruler ; they became strong (2) to sufi'er, rejoicing that they 
were " counted worthy to suffer shame " for the Master's sake and Name ; they became 
strong (3) to testify, " with great power " giving witness to the Resurrection, and great 
grace being on them all; they became strong (4) to grasp the great central and saving 
truths of the gospel, making known to their own compeers by their speech, and to all 
time by their letters, the " mystery which was hidden from the generations," the great 
and gracious purpose of God to the whole race of men ; they became strong (5) to build 
and work, to lay the foundation-stone of the gospel of Christ (Eph. ii. 26), of that 
Church of the future which has already endured for eighteen centuries, and is more 
than ever bent on the conversion and conquest of the world. We know what made 
these weak men strong, these failing men to triumph. It was the power of the Holy 
Ghost resting upon them, opening their eyes that they might see, quickening their 
souls that they might feel, nerving their hearts that they might stand, strengthening 
their hands that they might labour and achieve. 



OH. XXIV. 1-53.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDtJCG TO ST. LUKE. 29? 

III. Its lastins lesson. It is this which, if anything does, will make ua strong 
also. What the Christian workman wants is the power which comes immediately from 
God, the inspiration of the Divine Spirit ; in truth, the same bestowal as that which 
the apostles were now promised and afterwards received. The miraculous endowments 
which accompanied the gift of the Holy Ghost were but the accidents of the bestowal. 
The power to heal without failure or to speak without error was nothing to the powei 
to testify without fear and to live without reproach. 

" Though on our heads no tongues of Are 
Their wondrous powers impart," 

we need, as much as they did then, the illuminating, sanctifying, empuwoilug influences 
of Heaven — " God's Spirit in our heart." Without that, our most heroic efforts wiU fail ; 
with it, our humblest endeavours will succeed. To gam that we must have (1) purity 
of heart and aim ; (2) earnest aud believing prayer. — 0. 

Ver. 50. — The Ascension. Many thoughts offer themselves to us as we think upon 
this last scene. 

I. The fitness of the place whence Jesus ascended. Not, indeed, that Jerusalem 
could claim to he worthy of such an honour — Jerusalem that had but lately dyed its 
hands in the blood of its Messiah. But as the ancient dwelling-place of God, as the 
seat and source of heavenly truth, as the metropolis of religion upon the earth, as the 
place that furnishes the name and type of the city of our hope, as the joyous gathering- 
place of the good, — ^it was well that, from without its walls, he whose presence makes 
the home and the joy and the glory of his people should pass to his throne. For from 
that moment "Jerusalem" meant another thing to mankind. Christ took up its 
meaning as he rose. All the associations of love and hope, of grandeur and gladness, 
which had belonged to the earthly are transferred to the heavenly city, where he dwells 
in glory, where he reigns in power. There is a transference, not formal but actual, 
of the centre and metropolis of religious thought from the Jerusalem below to the 
Jerusalem above. 

II. The nature op the last scene. "They climb the hillside; they cross its 
summit; they are approaching Bethany. He stops; they gather round. He looks 
upon them; he lifts his hands; he begins to bless them. What love unutterable in 
that parting look ! What untold riches in that blessing I His hands are uplifted, his 
lips engaged in blessing, when slowly he begins to rise. Eaith has lost her power to 
keep him ; the waiting up-drawing heavens claim him as their own. He rises, but 
BtiU, as he floats upward through the yielding air, his eyes are bent on those uplooking 
men ; his arms are stretched over them in the attitude of benediction, his voice is heard 
dying away in blessings as he ascends. Awe-struck, in silence they follow him with 
straining eyes as his body lessens to sight, till the commissioned cloud enfolds, cuts off 
all further vision, and closes the earthly and sensible communion between Jesus and 
his disciples " (Dr. Hanna). 

III. The kecbption the Savioue had in heaven. There have been " triumphant 
entries" in this little world of ours, and in the history of our human race, the pouring 
forth in loud acclaim of the pride and joy of many thousands of hearts. But to what 
a vanishing point do they sink when placed by the side of this entry of the conquering 
Saviour into heaven ! Though unable to form any conception tliat can approach the 
glorious reality, yet we may well love to linger in imagination over that blessed scene. 
His struggle over, his sorrows borne, his temptations met and mastered, his work 
finished, his great battle fought and his victory won, — the victorious Lord passes through 
all the ranks of the angelic host, amid their reverent worship and adoring acclamation*, 
to his throne of power and glory. 

"Look, ye saints ! the sight is glorious : 

See the Man of sorrows now 
-From the fight returned victorious; 
Every knee to him shall bow." 

rV The effect immediately pkoduobd on the minds of the disciples. Blank 
dismay, inconsolable sorrow, should we think? So thinking, we should be wnmg. 



298 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. sxiv. 1—53 

They " returned to Jerusalem with great joy." Yet their Master was gone from them 
to return no more till that uncertain and distant day of which the angels spoke 
(Acts i. 11). How do we account for this ? The explanation is found here — they 
were now per/ectli/ asswred of the Divine mission of Jesus Christ. His death had cast 
a dark shadow of doubt and dread over their hearts. His resurrection had revived their 
confidence and their hope. But this final manifestation, this " sign in the heavens," 
this act of being taken up, like Elijah, into heaven, swept away the last fragment of 
doubt that may have been left beiind ; they were now absolutely sure, without any 
reserve or qualification whatever, that the Master they had loved and served was indeed 
their true Messiah, the Sent of God, worthy of their deepest veneration and their 
strongest attachment ; so they " worshipped him '' reverently, and went back to Jeru- 
salem with the joy of faith and love filling their souls. There is no misery so unen- 
durable as doubt, and there is no blessedness so sweet as rest of heart after spiritual 
disquietude. 

V. Its permanent bpfbot on the apostles' minds. This was unreservedly good. 
It was " expedient for them that he should go away." His bodily absence changed the 
complexion of their dependence upon him. It had been that of childhood; it was now 
to be that of manhood. With him by their side, as he had been, they would not have 
become the " men in him" they did become after he left them. The deeper and fuller 
knowledge of him they gained by his departure led to an enlargement of faith and 
to a deepening of love, and also to that fulness of attachment and consecration we 
recognize and rejoice in during their later life. They came to know him and love him 
and serve him as the Divine Saviour of mankind, and this made them worthier men 
and truer servants of their Lord. All earthly ambitions respecting the right and left 
hand of the throne were transformed into a noble consecration to the invisible Lord. 

VI. Its PEICELES8 value to oubsblvbs. 1. Christ is accessible to us all. Had he 
lived and reigned at Jerusalem, or some other sacred metropolis, he would only have 
been accessible to those who dwelt or journeyed there. But now he is " with us all." 
For heaven is everywhere; the throne of grace is within the reach of the faintest 
whisper that comes from every burdened heart, from every seeking soul, wheresoever 
it may be breathed. A living faith can now realize the constant nearness of its living 
Lord ; it has not to take even a sabbath day's journey to find itself in his presence 
and to make known its request, 2. He is seated on the throne of power. To him who 
has passed into the heavens we can realize that " all power is given " (Matt, xxviii. 18). 
We can well believe that our Master in heaven can do for us what we ask of him ; 
that his arm is one of glorious might ; that his hand has plenteousness of bounty and 
of blessing. And in all our time of need we can go to him, with holy confidence, to 
ask of him the help, the guidance, the blessing, we require. 3, He has all rightful 
authority. If he still dwelt on earth, we might be dubious of this ; but to the heavenly 
Saviour we unanimously and cordially ascribe all headship ; to him we jdeld our willing 
and unquestioning obedience ; and we rejoice to believe that he is ruling and governing 
the affairs of his Church, and reigning in the interests of the whole human race ; that 
it is his hand that is at the helm, and that will safely guide the tempest-ridden vessel 
to the harbour, 4, He is our constant and ever-living Lord, With all that is earthly 
we associate change and death; with the heavenly we connect the thought of con- 
tinuance and life. Of our heavenly Lord we can think, and we delight to think, that 
whoever changes he is evermore the same, "yesterday, and to-day, and for ever;" that 
while human ministers " are not suffered to continue by reason of death," he hath " an 
unchangeable priesthood," and is able to save evermore (" to the uttermost ") all those 
" that come unto God by him." And as we look forward to the future, and realize our 
own mortality, we cherish the joyous thought that, if we do but " abide in him" until 
the evening shadows gather and "life's long day" passes into the darkness of death, 
we shall, in heaven's eternal morning, open our eyes to see the " King in his beauty," 
to " behold his glory," and shall " sit down with him on his throne," sharing for ever 
his own and his saints' everlasting rest. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — The Resurrection discovered. When the women and the other mourner? 
left the Lord's tomb on the evening of the Crucifixion, it was with the intention, aftei 
the sabbath was past, of completing the embalmment. This office of love seems to 



en. XXIV. 1—53.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LtJKE. ^9* 

have been left largely to the women ; for it is they who make their way, in the early 
morning of the first day of the week, to the sepulchre. They seem to have had no 
knowledge, for they had no apprehension, of the Eoman guard, which was manifestly 
placed at the sepulchre on the Jewish sabhath, when the disciples and the women were 
keeping the sad day in strictest privacy. Their one apprehension was how to roll 
away the stone ; but, like so many apprehended difficulties, it was found to vanish 
away — some hands stronger than women's had been before them and had rolled away 
the stone, and left them no difficulty in discovering an empty tomb. The narrative of 
John about Mary Magdalene's visit is quite consistent with Luke's narrative ; for, as 
Gilbert West has pointed out in his admirable analysis of the Eesurrection-history, 
Mary rushes off alone to tell the disciples, " They have taken away the Lord out of the 
sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him " — ^implying that others had 
been with her at the tomb. Without any misgivings, therefore, about the reliable 
character of the history, let us point out the instructive steps in the discovery of our 
Lord's resurrection. 

I. The women with the shoes discoveb an bmptt tomb. (Vers. 1 — 3.) They had 
employed the evening after the sabbath was past in preparing all that was needful for 
embalming thoroughly and finally the Saviour's body. It was with this fragrant burden 
they made their way in the twifight towards the tomb, to find their fears groundless 
and the stone already removed. But a new fear now laid hold on them. There is no 
body in the tomb ; it is empty. They do not appear to have taken in the significance 
of the grave-clothes carefally put aside because never to be needed more, as John did 
at his subsequent visit ; their whole anxiety was about what had become of the dear 
body which they had come to embalm. The empty tomb was a discovery. The first 
impression, as indicated by Mary's message (John xx. 2), was that their enemies had 
seized the body and disposed of it to defeat all their ideas of embalming. One thing 
is certain from the history, that neither the women nor the disciples could have been 
parties to the removal of the body. 

II. The women that waited got explanations fbom the angels. (Vers. 4 — 7.) 
Mary Magdalene, acting on impulse, seems to have hurried off to tell Peter and John 
about the discovery of the empty tomb, while her companions wait longer to get some 
explanation, if possible, regarding it. And the waiting women are not disappointed. 
Angels appear in shining garments, and, as the women sink before them in terror, thej 
proceed to reassure them with the glad tidings, " Why seek ye the living among the 
dead? He is not here, but is risen : remember how he spake unto you when he was 
yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful man, 
and be crucified, and the third day rise again." It was the angels that reminded them 
of the promise of resurrection, and how it was now fulfilled. This is the second stage, 
therefore, in the discovery of the Resurrection. The fear of the women had been that 
the Jews had got the body. But there cjould have been no such plot_ carried out, for 
the very simple reason that, if they had got the body and it had not risen, they could 
have produced such evidence at the Pentecost as would have overturned the apostolic 
testimony, and prevented the inauguration of the Christian society. The angelic 
explanation, based as it was on our Lord's previous promises, was the only satisfactory 
one. The Resurrection was the fulfilment of Christ's deliberate plan. 

III. The repobt of the women to the eleven and the best. (Vers. 8 — 11.) 
It is quite reasonable to suppose that Mary Magdalene was the forerunner of the rest, 
and through her report induced Peter and John to start at once for the sepulchre, while 
the main body of the women, consisting of Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and 
others, returned more leisurely to make their report. At all events, the narrative of 
Luke implies all that is given by Matthew and by John. For the disciples who went 
to Emmaus distinctly say that certain of the disciples " went to the sepulchre, and 
found it even so as the women had said; but him they saw not" (ver. 24) — implying 
that the women, in their report, had spoken of having seen the Master.^ The testimony 
of the women was based upon a threefold foundation — first, the assurance of the angels ; 
secondly, the promise of resurrection given in Galilee by the Lord ; thirdly, according to 

• Cf. Gilbert West's ' Observations on the History and Evidences of the Besurreotlon of 
Jesus Christ ' — a work which received favourable recognition from Lessing, in hia remaiki 
appended to the ' Wslfenbiittel Fragments.' 



800 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xxiv. 1—53. 

Matthew's account, an interview with the risen Lord himself (Matt, ixviii. 9, 10). 
It was a remarkable testimony certainly, but at the same time it had ample warrant. 

IV. The best-attested facts may seem, to dazed minds, the idlest fancies. 
(Ver. 11.) The poor disciples are, however, so overpowered with grief and disappoint- 
ment that they are utterly unprepared for the announcement of the Resurrection. 
Here the suppler mind of woman is revealed in contrast to the more plodding, sifting, 
logic-demanding mind of man. The women enjoy the consolations of the Resurrection 
much sooner tlian the men. They take in the evidence at a glance. They do not 
question. They simply accept. But the disciples will not believe in a hurry. And 
Bo the messengers of the best tidings ever related unto men are at first in the position 
of the Master himself, and constrained to cry, " Who hath believed our report?" And 
the unbelieving criticism of to-day is more unreasonable than the disciples were before 
the women. Because the resurrection of Christ may break in upon the ideas of nature's 
absolute uniformity which the critics have adopted, the whole evidence of resurrection- 
power continued through the ages is to be treated as an idle tale I Minds may be so 
dazed with grief or with success on certain lines as to discredit the completest evidence 
ever offered to the world. Before prejudice, the strongest facts get resolved into the 
idlest fancies. We should earnestly seek an impartial mind. 

V. Peter's fibst attempt to deal with the evidence or the Resubkbction. 
(Ver. 12.) Peter, as we learn from John's account, accompanied by John, rushes off to 
see the sepulchre. He reaches it after John, but pushes past him, and goes into the 
sepulchre. There he sees the linen clothes laid by themselves, yet departs without 
reaching anything but perplexity. To John's keener intellect the grave-clothes, so neatly 
deposited and the napkin laid in a place by itself, show that Jesus had risen, and laid 
aside his sleeping-clothes, as we do our night-dresses in the morning, because he had 
entered on the day of resurrection. John becomes a believer in the Resurrection on 
circumstantial evidence. Peter, it would seem, cannot make it out, and has to get 
a personal interview somewhat later on that day (of. ver. 34), before he can take it in. 
It thus appears that one mind may handle the Resurrection evidence successfully, while 
another may only stumble through it into deeper perplexity. But when a soul like 
Peter is in earnest, the Lord will not leave him in the darkness, but will grant such 
further light as will dispel the gloom and dissipate all perplexity. Meanwhile the 
discovery of Christ's resurrection is but the interesting first stage in the remarkable 
evidence to part of which we have yet to proceed. — R. M. B. 

Vers. 13 — 35. — The risen Christ the test Escort on the pilgrimage of life. We left 
Peter in perplexity, but he and John must have returned to the rest of the disciples, 
and reported the emptiness of the sepulchre, but that they had not seen the Risen One 
(ver. 24). John does not seem to have communicated his own convictions unto the 
others. Most likely he is turning the matter over in his mind, as contemplative and 
deep-thinking men will do before giving a public pronouncement. Meanwhile there is 
a dispersion of some of the disciples that very afternoon. Thomas seems to have gone 
away, and to have remained away that night. And two of them proceed seven or eight 
miles into the country to Emmaus, where their home seems to have been. It is these 
two pilgrims that we are now to follow. They leave the city, and their conversation 
is sad. They are discussing the bright hopes which have been so lately quenched by 
the crucifixion of their Lord. It is while so sad that Jesus joins them ; for he who had 
been the "Man of sorrows'' and "acquainted with grief" is ever breaking in upon 
men's troubles to relieve them. His treatment of these " unwilling sceptics," as they 
have been lately called, is most instructive.* He probes their sorrow, gets an insight 
into its cause, gets them to state their hopes, their disappointments, and the rumours 
they bad heard of his resurrection. On this basis, although apparently an unknown 
Stranger, he proceeds to show them their error and slowness in not believing all that 
the prophets have spoken about Messiah. Beginning, therefore, at Moses, he expounds 
to them from all the prophets that Messiah must first suffer, and then enter into his 
dory. The exposition was so brilliant and interesting, that they felt their hearts 
burning within them during the process. Then, under compulsion, he enters their 
lodging at Emmaus, sits down as Guest, then proceeds as Host to distribute the food as 
' Ct Munger'i ' Appeal to Life,' p. 25. 



OH. XXIV. 1—53.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 801 

at the sacramental meal. Not till then did they recognize their risen Lord in the 
devout Being who graced their board. Once recognized, and thus dispelling all their 
doubt, he vanishes into the invisible. Such experience could not be quietly kept at 
Emmaus. They resolve to return that very night to Jerusalem, to report their interview, 
and how blessed an Escort Jesus had been in their pilgrimage. They are in time for 
the manifestation of the Risen One to the assembled disciples. We may learn Irum tbe 
narrative such lessons as these. 

1. Jesus makes his advent to tjb when oim boui.s are sad. This is the very 
spirit of the dispensation. Thus he cried, " Come unto me, all ye that labour and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest " (Matt. xl. 28). And as the risen Saviour he 
prefers, we may well believe, the house of mourning; to the house of mirth. Not only 
so, but when souls are in sad perplexity, when they are " unwilling soepticiJ," it is his 
delight to come and be their Escort along life's way, and lead them out of gloom and 
difficulty into real peace and joy. Now, when we know how accessible he is through 
prayer, we shoiild never undertake any pilgrimage without securing the companionship 
of Jesus. 

IL We leabn that Jesus is often with us while we know it not. Here 
was he with these two pilgrims, taking step by step with them to Emmaus, and yet 
their eyes were so holden that they did not know him. He was near them, but they 
did not know him. Is not this the case with aU of us ? He is at our side, he takes 
every step with us, but we are so blinded with care and preoccupation that we fail to 
see him or enjoy his society as" we should. The omnipresence ot Jesus should be the 
believer's constant consolation. 

III. Jesus is himself at onob the great Subject and the great Expositor 
OF Scriptube. Here we find him, ufter listening so sympathetically to all the difficulties 
of the disciples, proceeding to expound to them, " in all the Scriptures, the things con- 
cerning himself." " The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." And here it is 
well to notice what is the substance of the whole revelation. It is put in these words 
of the risen Saviour, " Ought not Messiah to have suffered these things, and to have 
entered (eltrexeeiv) into his glory ? " The Authorized and Revised Versions have ahke 
failed to give the proper rendering here. Our Lord declares that he has entered 
already into his glory, just as he has already passed through his sufferings. We believe 
it can be made out from this and other passages that our Lord ascended — of course 
invisibly — without disciples as spectators, to heaven, and reported himself on high 
immediately after telling Mary, "I ascend [not 'will ascend'] unto my Father and 
your Father, to my God and your God" (John xx. 17 ; cf. also Bush on ' The Resurrec- 
tion.') This supposition of an ascension on the very day of the Resurrection enables us 
to understand iiis movements during the rest of the day, and his bestowal of the Spirit, 
which was conditioned on his glorification, in the evening (John xx. 22 ; cf. John 
vii. 39). It also enables us to regard heaven as his head-quarters during the forty 
days before his visible ascension from Olivet. Upon this interesting subject we cannot 
now dwell, however ; but we content ourselves by pointing it out, and emphasizing the 
fact of Jesus as the suffering and glorified Messiah being the Hero, the Substance, and 
the great Expositor of revelation. It is when we look for him in the Word that it 
becomes luminous and delightful. 

IV. The entertainment of Jesus is sure to lead to special blessing. These 
two men insisted on Jesus sojourning with them, because it was towards evening and 
the day was far spent. And as he sojourned, he was transmuted from Guest to Host, 
and gave them a sacramental instead of common feast. It is when devoutly asking a 
blessing on the bread that he is recognized, only, however, to vanish like a vision from 
their sight. Now we may pass through an analogous experience. Is not this what is 
meant by the Master when he says, " Behold, I stand at the door, and knock : if any 
man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, 
»nd he with me " (Rev. iii. 20) ? If we are open-hearted, and welcome Jesus, he will 
enter ovu- hearts and sup with us, taking whatever we have to give him, and delighting 
in it, and enable us to sup with him. He wUl change into a Host from being our Quest. 
It was thus he acted at the marriage of Cana; it was thus he acted at Emmaus; it was 
thus he acted on the shore of the Galitean lake. He may be Guest, but he will soon 
<)how himself to be our Host, and give us a feast of fat things. 



802 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xxiv. 1—53 

y, Lite is laboelt a livino upon happy ueuobies. As soon as the Risen One 
had vanished, they began to compare notes about the burning heart, and all the happy 
memories of their journey from Jerusalem. And as they plodded in that night through 
the dark to report their great discovery, they lived upon the happy memory. But, had 
they only known it, the risen Jesus was in some way making that return journey to 
Jerusalem too, making for the same upper room, to reveal himself to the disciples, and 
their fellowship with him might have been repeated. At all events, we need not live 
on happy memories, but may enjoy Christ's spiritual presence and his escort all through 
the pilgrimage of life. It is this which will make the present life a heaven, not by 
anticipation merely, but in actual enjoyment ; for fellowship with Christ, even though 
he be unseen, is the chief element of heaven. May we have the great Escort with us 
all the way 1— B. M. £. 

Vers. 36 — 53. — Infallible proofs and inevitahle partings. The Bmmaus pilgrims 
have hardly entered the upper room and reported their interview with Jesus, receiving 
the intelligence that perplexed Peter has got his perplexity resolved, when, notwith- 
standing that the doors are barred for fear of the Jews, tlie Risen One appears in the 
midst of them, and says, " Peace be unto you ! " They are at first terrified at such an 
advent, seeing that it sets aside the ordinary laws of matter, and shows all precaution 
unavailing when Jesus is determined to get in. But he soon disabuses their minds 
and dismisses their troubles. Although he can get through barred doors, he is not 
» disembodied spirit, but a Person with flesh and bones. This he proceeds to demon- 
strate to their sense-perceptions. Having given them infallible proofs, he next proceeds 
to expound the Scriptures in detail to them, just as he had done on the way to Emmaus. 
On these sure foundations he bases their faith, and sends them forth, commissioned to 
preach repentance and remission of sins. He concludes his interview with the promise 
of the Father, for which they were to wait at Jerusalem after his visible ascension. 
And so he is carried up to heaven from Bethany, and the disciples return to wait at 
Jerusalem in joy until they receive power from on high. And here we have to 
notice — 

I. The message of the eisen Saviodb to distbactbd souls ib feaoe. The salu- 
tation of the East received new depth and meaning when employed by the risen Saviour, 
when for the first time he appeared among his assembled disciples. He only could 
pacify them. He is the same "Peacemaker" stUl. It is his advent which drives 
away distractions, and secures a peace which passeth all understanding. 

II. The risen Jesus supplies infallible proofs of his eesurbection to the 
PACIFIED DISCIPLES. When pacified by him, they were then fitted for judgment. To 
place the proofs before worldly, distracted souls would have been throwing pearls before 
swine.* It is before the disciples whose fears have been dispelled that he place* the 
proofs. He urges calm investigation. Here are his hands and feet and side. Uundle 
him, use sense-perception to the utmost. Make out that he has a body, and the uame 
one which was crucified. Their joy at the proofs overpowered them for the moaent, 
80 that they could hardly credit it. Then he asked them for meat, and was content 
to eat before them a piece of a broiled fish. The honeycomb addition is not supp)rted 
by the best manuscripts, and has been omitted in the Revised Version. The last doubt 
must depart before such proofs. It is the same Saviour who had been crucified, and 
he is among them in a body, able to partake of food, and perform all the fui^tions 
assigned to a body dominated by a healthy spirit. Now, although, we cannot see or 
handle the Risen One, we have yet the evidence of his Resurrection so set before as that 
only criminal partiality can resist it. Dr. Arnold, so accomplished an historian, declares 
that th&re is no fact of history sustained by better evidence.' If we made sure of 
impartial and fearful minds to begin with, the infallible proofs would be reco||^ed in 
their full power. 

III. The bisen Savioub helps his servants to understand the Sojuptubbs. 
We learn from John's account that " he breathed on them," and so conveyed to them 
the Holy Ghost. Along with the outward exposition, therefore, of the Script ire refer- 

' Cf. on this important point a sermon by Bishop Beichel on ' The Necessary Limits of 
Christian Evidences.' 
' ' Sermons on Christian Lift ; its Hopes, its Fears, and its Close,' 4tb edit., pp. 15, I& 



m. XXIV, 1—58.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKB. 30» 



enc«s to himself, there is given the inward inspiration. It is this which made these 
men such masters of the sacred oracles so far as they indicate Christ's mission. With 
opened understandings, with inspired hearts, the once sealed book became an open 
secret, and the fountain-head of missionary enterprise. And the witnesses need similar 
enlightenment still. By waiting on the Master prayerfully and studiously we shall 
olrtain the key to interpretation, and have the fairy palaces unlocked for us. 

IV. A GOSPEL OF EBPEKTANOB AND REMISSION OP SINS OP A UNIVEBSAI, CHABAOTEB 

n TO BE FBEACHED IN HIS Name. For Cbrist comes to make men sorry for their sins, 
while at the same time they enjoy the sense of their pardon. As risen Saviour, he is 
the outward Guarantee of our justification from all things from which we could not be 
justified by the Law of Moses. He was " delivered for our offences, and raised again 
for our justification" (Bom. iv. 25). And to these benefits all nations are to have 
access. The proofs of resurrection, the understanding of the Scriptures, and the inspira- 
tion of the Holy Ghost, were with a view to a practical issue in the publicatwn of glad 
tidings to all nations. 

V. POWEE 18 GUABANTEED IF THBT WAIT PEATBBFtrLLY AT JERUSALEM. They hsA 

got the Spirit as zephyr-breath. They had still to get him in Pentecostal and fiery 
power. Hence they are encouraged by the Lord to wait for this at Jerusalem, for work 
without spiritual power would be useless. And they waited, and were made world- 
conquerors by the gift of power. So ought the Lord's people to wait for power stilL 

VI. The Asckssion was the neobssaby complement op bbsdbbeotion, and thx 
OUABANTEE OP ULTIMATE viOTOBT. We have already seen reason for believing that, on 
the day of resurrection, Jesus privately ascended to the Father, reported himself there, 
and made heaven his head-quarters during " the great forty days." But a public ascen- 
sion before the assembled disciples was necessary to establish their faith and joy. And 
10 they were permitted to see their beloved Lord ascending, in spite of gravitation, up 
into the blue heavens, and speeding towards the centre of the universe at the right 
hand of God. Yet the inevitable separation did not prevent them from returning to 
Jerusalem with great joy, and continuing there until the Pentecost. They divided 
their time between the upper room and the temple. They waited in joyful anticipation 
of the promised power, and they got it in due season. And the Ascension ought to be 
to all believers a matter of definite experience. It is to this St. Paul refers when he 
speaks. In the Epistle to the Ephesians, of being " raised up together with Christ, and 
made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus." There is an ascension-experi- 
ence as well as a resurrection-experience — an experience ia which we feel that we have 
risen superior to all earthly attractions, and that we, setting our affections, indeed, on 
things above, are sitting by faith among them with our Lord. It is this ecstatic state 
which heralds the advent of spiritual power. May it belong to all of usl — B. M. K. 



HOMILETICAL INDEX 



TO 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIIG TO ST. LUKE. 



VOLUME II 



CHAP TEE xm. 

THKm 

The Barren Pig Tree 

The Qaestion and the Answer 

The Composnre and the Emotion of 

JesuB... 
The Significance of Suffering 
Fatal Fniitleasness ... .^ 

The Opportunity of Love ... ^. 

Snggestions from the Synagogne ... 
The Growth of the Kingdom of God 
The Peaceahleness and Diffusiveness 

of Christian Truth 
Vain Inquiry and Spiritual Strenuous- 

ness ... .» 

First and Last ... .^ ... 

Divine Emotion, eto. 
The Grace and Progress of God's 

Kingdom 
Christ's Farewell Words to the Theo- 

oraoy... »M .•• *M 

CHAPTER Xr7. 

The Great Supper ... ». 

Christ's Word on Modesty 

Moderation; Disinterestedness; Pa- 
tience 

Excusing Ourselves .~ 

Spiritual Breadth 

The Time and the Boom for Calcula- 
tion in Beligion ... >•• 



rAOB 

7 
9 

11 
13 

14 
14 
15 
16 

17 

18 
19 
19 



S2 



29 
81 

32 
32 
33 

84 



THEHB rAGV 

Christ and Kindred ,„ ... 35 

Ourselves as Salt ... ,.. 36 

Tahle-Talk of Jesus ... ... 87 

The Cost of Diacipleship ... ... 88 

CHAPTER XV. 

The Parable of the Prodigal Son ... 45 

A Bitter Charge the Highest Tribute 49 

The Parable of the Lost Sheep ... 50 

The Joy of the Angels ... ... 51 

The Father's Home ... ... 52 

Departure ; the Far Country ... 63 

Life in the Far Country ... ... 53 

The Soul's Return ... ... 64 

The Welcome Home ... ... 55 

Ungrateful Recipiency and Ample 

Heritage ... ... ... 56 

Murmurs on Earth, and Joy in Heaven 57 

" From Home, and Back " ... 68 

CHAPTER XVL 

The trnjust Steward ... .. 70 

The Rich Man and Lazarus .. 72 

Cleverness and Sagacity ... .. 75 

Our Indebtedness to our Lord ... 76 

The Wisdom of Fidelity ... ,.. 76 

The True Riches... ... ... 77 

The Dividing-Line ... ... 78 

The Explanation of False Judgmont 98 



INDEX. 



THEHK rAOX 

Divine and Human Jndgment .,, 79 
The Sin and Doom of Selfish World- 

linesa... ... ... „, 80 

Poverty at the Gate of Wealth ... 81 

A Dangerous Delusion ... ... 82 

Money as a Means of Qraoe ... 83 

The Misuse of Honey ... .^ 84 



CHAPTBB XVII. 

The Addition Besought ,„ „. 91 

The Ten Lepers ... ... ... 93 

The Kingdom and the Day of the Son 

of Man ... ... ... 95 

Spiritual Resistance ... ... 96 

Our Duty when wronged ... ... 97 

EiTfotire Faith ... ... ... 98 

Tlie Spirit of Christian Service ... 99 
The Commonness of Ingratitude, etc. 100 
Kadioal Mistakes respecting the King- 
dom of God ... ... ... 101 

The Brief Day of Opportunity ... 102 

The Unlearnt Lesson ... ... 103 

Accidents ... ... ... 103 

Graces stimulated and strengthened 104 
The Advent of the Kingdom and the 

King ... ... .M _ 105 

CHAPTER XVin. 

The Importunate Widow ... ... 115 

The Pharisee and the Publican 116, 122 

The Ruler who refused the Crown . . . 118 

Bartimsens ... ... ... 119 

Continuance in Prayer : Divine Delay 121 

Oar Unbelief ... ... ... 121 

Christ and the Children : a Sermon 

to Children ... ... ... 123 

The Child of Man and the Kingdom 

of God ... ... ... 124 

The Golden Chance : a Sermon to the 

Young ... ... ... 125 

Wealth and Piety ... ... 126 

Christ's Estimate of a Christian Life 127 

Ood's Concealing Kindness, etc. ... 129 

Present bnt Passing Opportunity ... 180 

What we want of Christ ... ... 131 

Lessons in Prayer ... ,„ 131 

The Children of the Kingdom ... 132 

iBliudnesB, Mental and Physical ... 134 



CHAPTER XTX. 




THEHB 


rxat 


Zacohaana 


... 140 


The Parable of the Pounda 


... 142 


From Jericho to Jerusalem 


... 144 


Tassion Week 


... 145 



Zacchaeus ; the Triumph of Earnest- 
ness ... ... ... „. 147 

Forfeiture and Recovery ... ... 148 

The Great Purpose of Christ ... 148 

Saving the Lost ... ... „. 149 

Probation and Award ... ... 150 

Life a Sacred Opportunity ... 151 

The Law of Spiritual Increase ... 152 

Christ's Royalty ... ... ... 153 

Eagerness in the Upward Path ... 154 

Suppression and Expression ... 155 

The Tears of Christ ... ... 156 

Judsea and England ... ... 157 

The Time of Visitation ... ... 158 

The House of Prayer ... ... 158 

Desecration ... ... ... 159 

Christ's Popularity ... ... 160 

A Son of Abraham found in Zacohssus 

the Publican ... ... ... 161 

The Law of Capital in Christ* a King- 
dom ... ... ... ... 163 

The Advent of the Humble King „. 164 

CHAPTER XX. 

The Last Working Day ... ,„ 171 

The Great Teacher's Silence ... 173 

Deprecation and Doom ... ... 173 

The Eejeotion and Exaltation of Christ 174 

Contact and Conflict with Christ ... 175 

The Sacred and the Secular ... 176 

Foundations of Christian Hope ... 177 
The Lowliness and the Greatness of 

Jesus Christ ... ... ... 177 

Character and Precept, etc. ... 178 

Christ's Collision with the Sanhedrin 179 

Christ Supreme m Debate ... 180 

Vindications and Judgments ... 181 



CHAPTER XXL 

Worth in the Estimate of Wisdom ... 187 
The Destructible and the Indestmo- 

tible ... M« M. •■• IS8 

Afterwards m m m 189 



INDEX. 



Hi 



[iiBvitablo Trial and Unfailing He. 

soarces ... ... ... 190 

The Second Rerlemption ... ... 191 

The Immortality of Christian Trnth 191 

Christian and Unchristian Carefulness 192 

Standing before Christ ... ... 193 

Preliminaries of the Second Advent 194 

CHAPTEE XXII. 

Wednesday and Thursday of Passion 

Week... ... ... ... 208 

The Special Word to Simon ... 210 
Gethsemane ... ... 211, 223, 232 

Thursday Night to Friday Evening ... 213 

Piety, Pedantry, and Formalism ... 214 

The Deepest Wound, etc. ... ... 215 

The Passion, from Two Standpoints 216 

The Lord's Supper ... ... 217 

Jesns and Jndas ; cor Lord and onr- 

selves ... ... ... 217 

Greatness after CKriat ... ... 218 

Fidelity and its Reward ... ... 219 

The Worth of Man ... ... 220 

The Privilege of Spiritual Maturity 221 

The Apostle's Fall ... ... 222 

Misunderstanding Christ ... ... 223 

Self- surrender ... ... ... 224 

Christianity and Violence ... ... 225 

The Power of Spiritual Darkness ... 226 

Distant Discipleship ... ... 227 

The Look of our Lord ... ... 228 

The Patience of Christ ... ... 228 

The Last Passover of our Lord ... 229 

The Proper Christian Spirit ... 230 
Christ's Trials in the High Priest's 

Palace ... ... ... 233 

CHAPTBK XXIII. 

Friday Night until Sunday Morning. 

"It is Finished!" ... ... 246 

The Divine Kingdom ... ... 249 

The Majesty of Meekness, eto. ... 249 

GfoUtjr CompromiM ^t •> 251 



THBUB VAfll 

The Character at Pilato ... ... 261 

Compulsion and Invitation j tb* 

Human and the Divine Method* ... 252 

Sympathy and Solicitude ... ... 263 

Magnanimity an Attainment ... 264 

Sin Greater than it seems... ... 255 

A Sad Spectacle and the Snpreme 

Vision ... ... .„ 256 

Self-Saving and Self-Saorifica ... 257 

True Penitence ... ... ^ 258 

The Shelter of the Darkness ... 259 

The Rent Veil ... ... ^ 260 

How to die and to live ... ... 261 

Sacred Impressions ... „. 262 

Jesns vindicated by his Enemies ... 263 

The Merciful Saviour on the Cross ... 264 
The Consequences of our Saviour's 

Death „ 265 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

The Eesurrection.Moruing ... 278 

Emmaua ... ... ,.. 280 

Christ and his Church ... ... 282 

The Instruction of the Apostles ... 283 
The Farewell and the Ascension ... 284 
Side-Lights from the Kesurrection... 286 
The Resurrection and the Life ... 287 
Privilege ; Unconscious Companion- 
ship; Incredulity ... ... 288 

Further Lessons by tlie Way ... 289 

The Exigency of Old Asfe ... ... 290 

Sense and Spirit : the Resurrection 291 

The Peace of Christ ... ... 292 

The Divine Spirit and the Human 

Understanding ... ... 293 

The Solemn Charge ... ... 294 

Bearing Witness... ... ... 295 

The Secret of Spiritual Strength ... 296 

The Ascension ... ... ... 297 

The Resurrection discovered ... 298 
The Risen Christ the Beat Escort on 

the Pilgrimage of Life ... ... 800 

Infallible Proofs and Inevitable Part- 
ings ,m IM M a. 803 



Bfamar 



