1. 1,!  ii  i  iiji  iiiSiiS  .iiiiiiiitt        I         I)      ' 

Mi      i  il  iMiiiii'  iil  ! 

II  '^      I  '    i  Silii;iii  i  ■  i, 


iiill'     jijii 


tmw 


wm^ 


■  111  iiiiil 

;;  ill  j|iMiMif.Mi!i;f  ^'u 


i       Uiii 


1 


'Ml 


i'lifli 


]m\ 


,K  '■ 


:..'|^ 


( ;. 


J  J' 


Hi' 

;?TB 

^Kjfes-icalS^tt^N^ 


BR    45     .H37    v. 2 

Bunyan,    John,     1628-1681 

The  pilgrim's  progress 


/ 


THE 


PILGRIM'S     mOGRESS. 


BY  JOHN  BUNYAN. 


THK 


PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS 


THIS  WORLD  TO  THAT  WHICH   IS  TO  COME 

DELIVERED   UNDER   THE    SIMILITUDE 

Of 

A    DREAM. 

WHKREIN  13  DISCOVKRKD, 

THE  MANNER  OF  HIS  SETTING  OUT  ; 
HIS  DANGEROUS  JOURNEY,  AND  SAFE  ARRIVAL  AT  THE  DESIRED  COUNTRY. 

BY  JOHN    BUNYAN. 

ACCURATELY    I'RINTED   FROM  THE    FIRST    EDlTroN,    WITH    NOTICES   OF  ALL   THE   SUBSEQUENT 
ADDITIONS   AND    ALTERATIONS   MADE    BY   THE   AUTHOR   HIMSELF. 

/  /'  EDITI-D    FOR 

%\)t  feansferU  mnoIIpsJ  ^ocietp, 

WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION 

BY      GEORGE      OFFOR. 


LONDON : 

PRINTED    FOR   THE    SOCIETY,    BY 

J.    HADDON,  CASTLE    STREET,    FINSBURY. 

M.DCCO.XLVII. 


LONDON ; 
J.  C.AUIION,    pa;  XTER,   CASTL!-:   STREET,    riNSBURY. 


ADVERTISEMENT, 


After  twelve  months'  labour,  attended  with  an  anxious  wish  to 
do  justice  to  our  great  pilgrim  forefather,  John  Bunyan,  and  his 
wondrous  Pilgrimage,  this  volume  is  submitted,  with  respectful 
deference,  to  the  judgment  of  the  members  of  the  Hanserd  Knollys 
Society. 

A  correspondence  with  the  late  Mr.  Southey,  when  he  undertook 
a  similar  task,  led  me  to  expect  great  difficulties ;  an  expectation 
which  has  been  fully  realized.  He  thus  expressed  himself  in  a 
letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Major,  dated  Keswick,  21st  March,  1829.i 
"  It  has  put  me  upon  a  careful  collation  of  the  text,  and  I  do  not 
repent  of  the  unexpected  labour  which  has  been  thus  occasioned,  as 
it  "will  be  the  means  of  presenting  the  work  in  Bunyan's  own 
vigorous  vernacular  English,  which  has  been  greatly  corrupted  in 
the  easiest  and  worst  of  all  ways — that  of  compositors  and  cor- 
rectors following  inadvertently  their  own  mode  of  speech.  The 
copy  of  Heptinstall's  edition  has  been  of  use  in  that  collation ;  and 
sometimes  in  the  one  which  goes  to  pi'ess,  corrupt  as  it  is,  I  have 
found  a  better  reading  than  in  the  folio.  These  are  minute  pains 
of  which  the  public  will  know  nothing,  but  of  which  a  few  readers 
will  feel  the  worth.  A  correct  text  has  appeared  to  me  (who,  both 
as  a  verseman  and  a  proseman,  am  a  weigher  of  words  and  sen- 
tences) of  so  much  consequence  since  I  undertook  the  collation,  that 
I  should  like  to  correct  the  proofs  myself."  Mr.  Major  informs  us 
that  "every  proof-sheet  was  transmitted  to  Mr.  Southey  at  Keswick, 
and  the  modern  printer,  whom  he  lately  heard  exulting  in  the 
beauty  of  a  large-paper  bound  copy,  now  mellowed  and  glossy  with 
comparative  age,  was  as  happy  in  minutely  following  his  'copy' 
as  former  mar-texts  seem  to  have  been  in  perpetuating,  if  not 
engendering,  the  foulest  errors." 

*  Gentleman's  Magazine,  July,  1844. 


VI  ADVERTISEMENT. 

And  after  all  these  cares,  that  beautifully  printed  vulume  is  full 
of  errors.  It  must  be  allowed  that  Mr.  Southey  was  at  a  vast 
distance  from  the  press,  and  that  not  having  the  great  advantage 
of  consulting  the  original  editions,  he  had  to  weigh  the  various 
readings.  Finding  "  Heman "  one  of  the  Lord's  champions  in 
Heptinstall's  edition,  changed  for  Haman  in  another,  and  then 
to  Mordecai  in  a  third,  he  unfortunately  preferred  the  last  to  the 
true  reading  of  Bunyan,  who  had  named  as  the  champion  the 
humble  unassuming  Psalmist  Heman. 

The  edition  now  presented  to  the  Society  is  carefully  corrected 
from  Bunyan's  first  copy,  Avhich  is  followed  literally,  in  the 
orthography,  capitals,  italics,  and  punctuation.  Every  omission  or 
alteration  that  the  author  made  during  his  life  is  noted,  as  well  as 
the  edition  in  which  such  alterations  first  appeared.  Where  the 
author  in  the  second  part  refers  to  the  first  his  figures  are  retained, 
but  a  reference  is  added  to  this  edition  in  parenthesis.  All  the 
original  wood-cuts  are  accurately  copied  by  that  very  excellent  and 
worthy  artist,  Mr.  Thomas  Gilks,  of  Fenchurch  Buildings.  Every 
reference  has  been  proved,  and  where  there  appeared  an  evident 
typographical  error  it  is  corrected ;  but  in  all  such  cases  the  altera- 
tion is  noted  at  the  foot  of  the  page.  Restored  to  its  original  state, 
the  reader  will  find  that  the  colloquial  Saxon-English  used  by  John 
Bunyan  is  by  far  the  best  medium  through  which  his  nan-ative  can 
be  told. 

The  great  popular  error,  -nath  regard  to  this  extraordinary  book, 
has  been  a  notion  tliat  no  unlettered  man,  from  his  own  resources, 
however  fertile,  could  have  written  it ;  more  especially  while  shut 
up  in  a  prison.  Let  every  reader  impartially  examine  the  evidence 
produced  in  the  Introduction,  proving  that  the  Pilgrim's  Progress 
was  written  in  prison,  and  that  no  sentence  or  idea  was  bor- 
rowed in  its  composition  :  coming  to  this  conclusion,  then  must 
he  be  deeply  affected  AVTith  the  consideration  that  divine  teaching, 
aided  by  the  bible  alone,  performed  that  which  all  previous  human 
learning,  however  profound,  had  been  unable  to  accomplish.  We 
may  safely  conclude  that  all  the  author's  trials,  and  sufferings,  and 
deep  experience,  were  intended  to  fit  him  for  this  important  work, 
which  no  man,  fettered  with  conventional  or  educational  trammels, 
could  have  effected. 

If  tlie  editor  has  been  severe  upon  a  system  of  compulsory 
ceremonies,   which    has   ever   entailed  misery  upon   all   countries 

*  Southey's  Edition,  p.  170.     Heptinstall,  163.     Hansen!  Knollys  Society,  15(j. 


ADVERTISEMENT.  Vll 

in  which    it  has  existed,  he  pleads  his  conscientious  indignation 
while  reviewing    the  cruelties   practised   upon  our  pilgrim  fore- 
fathers,   and    among    them    upon   the    high-minded,    unflinching, 
honourable  author  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress;  who  was  dragged 
from  the  arms  of  an  affectionate  family,  incarcerated  in  a  damp 
prison  situated  upon  the  bed  of  a  river  for  nearly  thirteen  years, 
and  threatened  with  an  ignominious  death,  for  holding   and  fre- 
quenting   assemblies    for   religious    Avorship,    sanctioned    by    the 
authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  prohibited  by  Acts  of  Parliament. 
The  Jews  crucified  the  Saviour,  pagans  tormented  by  cruel  deaths 
his   disciples,  and   all   state   religionists,   whether  popish   or   pro- 
testant,  have  offered  up  to  the  Moloch  UNiFORivnTY  their  holocaust  of 
human  victims.     Even  under  the  Commonwealth  certain  fryers  were 
empowered  to  deprive  ungodly,  imbecile,  traitorous  priests,  or  plu- 
ralists,  of  their  livings, — a  power  which  should  exist  only  in  the 
churches  under  their  ministry.    Many  who  have  written  of  Bunyan 
and  his  trials  have  restrained  their  feelings  because  these  cruelties 
were  perpetrated  under  the  sanction  of  law.  Did  Daniel  or  the  Hebrew 
youths  temporise  when  violation  of  unholy  laws  subjected  them  to 
the  lions'  den  or  fiery  furnace  ?   If  such  writers  were  called  upon  by 
law  to  worship  Mahomet,  and  deny  Christ,  would  they  obey  ?     If 
required  to  give  up  their  children  as  a  burnt  sacrifice,  would  they  obey  ? 
Does  God  require  us  with  our  spirits  to  obey  him,  rather  than  man 
when  human  laws  trench  upon  the  divine  prerogatives  ?    Dare  we 
hesitate  ?  Who  is  to  judge  ?    Who  can  judge  ?    But  the  individual 
whos^  naked  soul  must  answer  for  itself,  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
God.     Those  who  seek  the  yoke  of  the  state  merely  to  aid  them  in 
obtaining  wealth  and  honour,  under  the  pretext  of  curino-  souls 
have  ignorantly  spoken  of  dissenters  with  contempt — and  shall  not 
the  Clu-istian  be  faithful  to  them  ?    We  are  bound  by  our  allegiance 
to  Christ  to  seek  peace  with  all  men  ;  but  Ave  are  equally  bound  to 
be  faithful  when  dealing  with  the  systems  of  the  oppressor  ;  more 
especially  when  he  appears  as  a  "  man  black  of  flesh,  but  covered 
with  a  very  light  robe."  ^     Our  controversy  is  not  with  individuals, 
many  of  Avhom  are  worthy  our  highest  esteem,  but  who  submit  to 
a  system,  which,  in  our  opinion  is  opposed  to  the  spread  of  Christ- 
ianity.    The  Aveapons  of  our  warfare,  are  not  rates,  tithes,  fines, 
imprisonments,  tortures,  or  death  ;  but  are  spiritual,   and  able  to 
pnil  doAvn  those  strongholds  Avhich  defy  all  the  carnal  weapons 
that  ever  Avere  or  can  be  invented. 

^   Pilgrim's  Pioi^icss,  p.  I.";.'). 


Vlll  ADVERTISEMENT. 

If  any  of  my  observations  are  too  harsh  upon  a  gentleman  who 
appears  publicly  to  dispute  the  veracity  of  Bunyan,  and  that  of 
his  personal  and  pious  friends,  I  shall  regret  having  made  them. 
But  a  doubt  as  to  the  truthfulness  of  such  a  man  could  not 
pass  unnoticed,  and  more  especially  when  such  doubts  had  not  the 
slightest  foundation  in  evidence. 

My  most  serious  apology  is  due  to  the  subscribers  for  so  long  an 
Inti-oduction.  This  apology  cannot  be  made  in  fewer  words  than 
those  of  Bunyan  : 

"  If  that  thou  wilt  not  read,  let  it  alone." 

The  great  object  of  exhibiting  a  correct  text  has  been  attained. 
HoAv  far  the  Introduction  may  dissipate  doubts  as  to  where  the 
Dream  was  written,  or  show  the  school  in  which  the  author  was 
ti"ained  to  compose  his  immortal  Allegory,  the  reader  must  judge. 

Much  yet  may  be  discovered  to  throw  additional  light  upon 
this  interesting  subject :  every  new  fact  increases  the  fame  of  the 
humble  unassuming  author  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress. 

To  a  host  of  kind  and  obliging  friends  I  am  deeply  indebted  ;  to 
name  them  all  would  occupy  too  much  space,  but  some  of  these 
acts  of  kindness  must  be  personally  aclmowledged.  : — To  R.  S. 
Holford,  Esq.,  for  the  use  of  the  first  edition  ;  to  W.  B.  Gurney, 
Esq.,  for  the  second  ;  to  Mr.  Leslie,  for  the  third  ;  to  the  executors 
of  my  late  friend  Lea  Wilson,  Esq.  ;  to  R.  B.  Sherring,  Esq., 
Bristol  ;  to  W.  Vines,  Esq.,  Leather-sellers'  Hall  ;  to  Joshua 
Wilson,  Esq.,  Highbury  ;  to  the  Rev.  J.  H.  M.  Luxmoore  ;  the 
Rev.  R.  Pliilip  ;  Mr.  H.  Althans,  jun. ;  Mr.  Thos.  Rodd,  and  to 
Mr.  Lilley,  for  the  use  of  rare  books.  To  Sir  G.  Grey,  and  to 
Charles  Lechmere,  Esq.,  for  the  liberal  use  of  the  State  Papers  ;  to  J. 
B.  Lennard,  Esq.,  for  extracts  from  the  registers  of  the  Privy  Council. 
To  Mr.  Bowden  and  the  Society  of  Friends  for  access  to  the  royal 
pardon,  and  other  documents  in  the  archives  at  Devonshire  Plouse ; 
and  in  common  with  the  whole  Christian  community,  I  am  under 
the  greatest  obhgation  to  Dr.  Cheever,  for  his  admirable  Lectures  on 
the  Pilgrim's  Progress. 

GEORGE  OFFOR. 


BEDFORD  GAOL.— Situated   over  the  middle   of  the  river  Ouse,  in  wliich  John  Bunyan 
tlie  wondrous  DREAM.    This  Trison  was  pulled  down  in  1765 :  the  View  was  taken  in  1761. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Art  thou  for  something  rare,  and  profitable  1 
Wouldst  thou  see  a  Truth  ivithin  a  Fable  ? 
Art  than  forgetful?  wouldst  thou  remember 
From  New-year's-day  to  the  lust  of  Decemljer? 
Then  read  my  fancies,  they  will  stick  like  Burs. 

Bunyan's  Apology  for  his  Book. 


The  progress  of  a  human  being, — possessed  of  an  immortal 
soul,  beset  by  spiritual  foes  of  deepest  subtilty,  travelling 
through  an  enemy's  country, — from  its  entrance  upon  the 
responsible  duties  of  this  world,  until  death  ushers  it  into  an 
eternal  existence,  either  of  exquisite  happiness  or  awful 
misery,  is  happily  represented  by  a  pilgrimage. 

The  patriarch  felt  this  when  he  bowed  before  Pharaoh,  and 
said,  "  The  days  of  the  years  of  my  pilgrimage  are  .  .  .  few 
and  evil  ...  I  have  not  attained  unto  the  days  of  the  years 
of  the  life  of  my  fathers  in  the  days  of  their  pilgrimage."  ^ 

1  Gen.  xlvii.  9. 
b 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

David  sang  the  statutes  of  the  Lord  in  the  house  of  his  pil- 
grimage." And  after  the  lapse  of  ages,  when  the  volume  of 
inspiration  was  about  to  close,  the  inspired  apostles  continued 
the  simile,  "and  confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and 
pilgrims  on  the  earth." ^  "I  beseech  you  as  strangers  and 
pilgrims,  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts  ;"^  "  See  then  that  ye  walk 
circumspectly;"^  "  So  run  that  ye  may  obtain."^  These  are 
instructions  that  reach  every  Christian  convert  in  all  ages 
throughout  the  world.  We  are  warned  to  be  sober,  and  to 
be  vigilant;  because  our  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion, 
walketh  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.'^  "  He  shall 
cast  some  of  you  into  prison,  that  ye  may  be  tried :  be  thou 
faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life." ^ 

All  mankind  are  pilgrims  :  all  are  hastening  through  this 
world.  The  Christian  willingly  considers  that  his  life  is  a 
journey,  because  he  is  seeking  a  better  country;  but  the 
greater  multitude  are  anxious  to  forget  that  this  life  is  a 
preparation  for  futurity ;  and  they  shudder  when  approach- 
ing the  brink  of  the  grave.  Although  perpetual  examples 
warn  them  that  suddenly,  at  a  moment  when  they  least 
expect  the  fatal  catastrophe,  it  may  befall  them ;  still,  as  if 
infatuated,  they  make  no  inquiry  of  the  Holy  Oracles,  but 
take  the  miserable  counsel  of  "  Worldly-AViscman,"  to  seek  a 
refuge  in  lies,  which  death  will  terribly  sweep  away  ;  or  they 
wholly  neglect  any  preparation  for  so  important  and  certain, 
if  not  sudden,  an  event.  All  are  on  the  advance;  time 
hurries  on  those  whose  pilgrimage  is  limited  to  the  foul  but 
fascinating  streets  of  the  "  City  of  Destruction,"  to  their 
eternal  doom ;  while  those  who  receive  the  Christian  calling 
press  on  in  the  narrow  and  difficult  path  that  leads  to  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem. 

To  condense  the  instructions  given  in  the  inspired  writings 
into  a  map  of  the  road,  a  guide  or  hand-book  to  the  Celestial 
City,  a  help  to  Zion's  travellers,  and  a  faithful  warning  to 
the  votaries  who  crowd  the  broad  road  to  ruin,  was  a  labour 

■^  Ps.  cxix.  5-1.  '   Ifel).  xi.-l.S.  MTot.  ii.  11.  ''   Epli.  \ .  1 ,-), 

'  1  Cor.  i.x  24.         ^   \  Pet.  v.  8.  »  Rev.  ii.  10. 


INTRODUCTIOX.  XI 

of  love  worthy  of  the  highest  human  intellect,  the  warmest 
Christian  philanthropy. 

It  is  surprising  that  a  work  which  so  naturally  suggests 
itself  to  the  imagination,  and  which  is  of  such  universal 
interest,  was  delayed  so  long.  The  abstruse  dreams  of 
Jewish  Rabbies ;  the  splendid  figures  that  floated  before  the 
minds  of  Oriental  and  Greek  sages ;  and  the  intense  subtilty 
of  the  schoolmen  of  the  middle  ages,  were  intended  for  a  very 
limited  class,  including  only  their  immediate  disciples.  It 
belonged  to  a  more  expanded  soul;  to  one  who  could  with 
unbounded  charity  embrace  all  nations,  all  tongues,  and 
every  people,  as  brethren  in  the  vast  dominions  of  his  God  ;  to 
one  who  felt  that  human  happiness  would  not  be  perfect  until 
this  universe  became  the  kingdom  of  his  Christ. 

To  write  for  the  instruction  of  the  whole  family  of  man  is 
not  the  province  of  a  bigoted  sectarian,  whose  visions  of  hap- 
piness extend  not  beyond  his  own  immediate  disciples.  Had 
ancient  sages  or  more  modern  schoolmen  felt  the  universal 
pilgrimage  of  man  through  time  as  a  very  limited  period  to 
fit  him  for  an  unbounded  eternity,  surely  some  of  the  great 
and  illustrious  philosophers  of  by-gone  ages  would  have 
attempted  to  complete  an  allegory,  the  outline  of  which  had 
been  given  in  the  earliest  of  records,  the  Holy  Oracles.  No 
trace,  however,  has  yet  been  found  either  in  Oriental, 
Hebrew,  Greek,  or  Latin  literature  of  such  an  attempt. 
The  honour  of  producing  this  extraordinary  work  was  re- 
served to  a  later  age,  and  conferred  upon  an  Englishman, — 
a  man,  as  to  human  learning,  unlettered,  but  deeply  learned 
in  the  school  of  Christ,  and  profoundly  skilled  in  all  the 
subtilties  of  the  human  heart ;  to  a  man  connected  with  a 
denomination,  eminent  for  love  of  Christian  liberty  and  for 
hazardous  but  resolute  obedience  and  conformity  to  every 
institute  which  they  found  in  the  New  Testament,  and  there- 
fore everywhere  spoken  against  and  bitterly  persecuted. 
This  important  work,  was  destined  to  be  accomplished  by  a 
preaching  mechanic,  not  vainly  claiming,  but  really  possess- 
ing, apostolic  descent  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  as  his  works  and 

b2      . 


XU  INTRODUCTION. 

afflictions  fully  proved ;  to  a  man,  while  suffering  under  the 
tyranny  of  Antichrist,  whose  judges  shut  him  up  to  languish 
in  a  noisome  prison  for  twelve  years  and  a  half  of  the  prime 
of  his  life,  thus  vainly  attempting  to  bend  his  free,  his 
heaven-born  spirit,  to  submit,  or  pretend  to  submit,  to  the 
absurdities  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer ;  and  to  bow  his 
neck  to  that  galling  yoke  of  hypocrisy  and  despotism,  state 
religion,  having  at  its  head,  at  that  time,  the  most  debauched 
monarch  in  Europe. 

The  indictment  preferred  against  him  was,  "  That  John 
Bunyan,  of  the  town  of  Bedford,  labourer,  hath  devilishly 
and  perniciously  abstained  from  coming  to  church,  to  hear 
divine  service,  and  is  a  common  upholder  of  several  unlawful 
meetings  and  conventicles,  to  the  great  disturbance  and  dis- 
traction of  the  good  subjects  of  this  kingdom,  contrary  to  the 
laws  of  our  Sovereign  Lord  the  King.  To  which  he  pleaded. 
We  have  had  many  meetings  together  both  to  pray  to  God,  and 
to  exhort  one  another;  and  that  we  had  the  sweet  comfort- 
ing presence  of  the  Lord  among  us  for  our  encouragement, 
(blessed  be  his  name  therefore),  I  confess  myself  guilty,  no 
otherwise.  No  witnesses  were  examined,  but  a  plea  of 
guilty  was  recorded,  and  his  sentence  was,  You  must  be  had 
back  again  to  prison,  and  there  lie  for  three  months  following ; 
and  at  the  three  months'  end,  if  you  do  not  submit,  and  go  to 
church  to  hear  divine  service,  and  leave  your  preaching,  you 
must  be  banished  the  realm :  and  if,  after  such  a  day  as  shall 
be  appointed  you  to  be  gone,  you  shall  be  found  in  this  realm, 
you  must  stretch  by  the  neck  for  it,  I  tell  you  plainly ;  and 
so  he  [the  justice]  bid  the  jailor  have  him  away."^ 

A  persecuting  hierai'chy  having  been  reinstated  in  power, 
revived  obsolete  and  tyrannical  laws.  The  mechanic  shall  not 
pi'each  or  teach.  This  was  the  sullen,  stern  voice  of  despotic 
authority.  But  at  the  imminent  risk  of  transportation,  and 
even  of  death,  Bunyan  had  persevered  in  instructing  the 
peasantry  within  the  reach  of  his  voice.  lie  was,  for  this 
and  for  not  attending  his  parish  church,  sent  to  Bedford  Gaol, 

"  Bunyan's  own  act'ouut  of  liis  imprisonment,  p.  27. 


INTRODUCTION.  Xlll 

and  the  means  that  were  thus  used  to  prevent  his  voice  from 
being  heard  by  a  few  poor  labourers,  were  overruled  by  God 
to  become  the  source  of  most  extensive  good. 

Dragged  from  the  arms  of  an  affectionate  wife,  who  was 
brought  to  death's  door  by  painful  apprehensions  that  her 
husband's  life  would  be  sacrificed  ;  bereaved  of  the  company 
of  his  children,  and  of  personal  communion  with  the  little 
flock  of  Christ  to  which  he  ministered,  this  holiest,  most 
harmless,  and  useful  of  men,  was  incarcerated  in  a  gaol,  with 
felons  and  the  worst  of  characters.  But  "  surely  the  wrath 
of  man  shall  praise  Thee ;  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  Thou 
restrain."^  Here  he  finds  a  resting-place,  where,  having 
commended  his  bereaved  wife  and  infant  family  to  the  protec- 
tion of  his  Lord,  even  in  that  den,  with  a  conscience  void  of 
offence  and  full  of  spiritual  peace,  he  tranquilly  reposed, 
waiting  with  resignation  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Father. 

"  These  walls  and  bars  cannot  a  prison  make, 
The  freeborn  soul  enjoys  its  liberty  ; 
These  clods  of  earth  it  may  incaptivate, 
Whilst  heavenly  minds  are  conversant  on  high, 
Ranging  the  fields  of  blessed  eternity."^ 

Free  from  the  mental  wretchedness  which  cankered  the  souls 
of  his  persecutors ;  one  of  whom,  named  Feckenham,  whose 
violent  conduct  will  be  presently  seen,  died  miserably  while 
his  victim  was  in  prison.^  And  the  Christian  inhabitants 
of  Bedford  looked  upon  his  wretched  end  as  a  just  judgment 
of  God  upon  persecutors. 

Care  should  always  be  taken  when  we  are  inclined  to 
notice  awful  events  as  judgments.  Thus  when  Charles  II. 
said  to  Milton,  "Your  loss  of  sight  is  a  judgment  of  God 
upon  you  for  your  sins  committed  against  my  fjither ; "  the 
intrepid  poet  dared  to  answer,  "  Does  your  majesty  judge  so? 

^  Ps.  Ixxvi.  10.  his  neighbours,  that  the  widow  could 
*  From  a  poem  by  Stejihen  Colledge,  not  hire  a  hearse,  but  took  his  body  in 
a  preaching  mechanic,  a  few  days  before  a  cart  to  the  grave. — Narrative  of  Pro- 
he  suffered  death,  August,  1681.  ceedings  against  the  Nonconformists  at 

'  He  was  called  the  grand  informer,  Bedford,  small  4to,  1()70. 
and  such  were  the  indiunant  feelings  of 


XIV  INTRODUCTION. 

Then  how  mucli  greater  must  have  been  his  sins,  seeing 
that  I  have  only  lost  my  sight,  while  he  lost  his  eyes,  and 
head,  and  all." 

Bunyan's  days  were  spent  as  happily  as  the  prison  disci- 
pline would  permit.  Labouring  to  provide  for  his  family, 
studying  his  Bible,  endeavouring  to  instruct  his  fellow- 
prisoners,  and  writing  books,  filled  up  every  moment  of  his 
time.  And  here  his  vivid  imagination  conceives,  and  his 
pen  writes  the  wondrous  Pilgrimage  under  the  similitude  of  a 
Dream.  It  is  afterwards  published  to  the  world ;  and  by  it 
he  has  preached,  and  is  now  preaching,  not  only  to  the  villa- 
gers in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bedford,  but  makes  known  the 
glad  tidings  of  salvation, — the  way  of  escape  from  the  city 
of  Destruction, — the  pilgrim's  path  to  heaven,  to  millions  of 
every  clime. 

Thus  do  the  emissaries  of  Satan  ever  over-reach  themselves. 
So  it  was  when  the  Bishop  of  London  paid  his  gold  for  a  few 
score  of  English  New  Testaments  to  burn  them.  The  money 
that  Tyndale  received  from  Tonstall  enabled  him  to  publish  a 
new  and  superior  edition,  corrected  in  the  translation,  and 
which  was  extensively  circulated.  Some  of  these  remain  to 
this  day,^  a  monument  to  the  piety  and  talent  of  the  trans- 
lator, and  to  the  folly  of  persecution.  It  led  Tyndale  to 
sing, 

"  The  devilisli  imiK  did  strive  to  have, 
For  the  hol}^  book,  a  burning  grave  ; 
But  all  their  travail  vas  in  vain, 
God  multiplied  it  quick  again. 
The  pope  and  devil  are  scared  and  wondered. 
Their  gold  bums  one  but  makes  a  hundred."  * 

We  probably  should  have  heard  little  of  Bunyan, — he 
might,  with  thousarids  of  similar  valuable  characters,  have 
remained  unknown,  had  not  the  natural  enmity  of  the  human 
heart  to  the  simple  but  divine  truths  of  Christianity  excited 
wicked  men  to  acts   of  persecution.      Crafty   and   design- 

*  A  copy  in  my  library,  and  one  upon  under  an  emblematical   device  rcpre- 

vellum  in  the  British  Museum.  senting  one  book  burning  and  a  num- 

•"*  On  an  ancient  painting  of  Tyndale,  bcr  of  similar  books  jumping  out  of  the 

the  martyr,  in  po.«session  of  the  Editor,  fire. 


INTRODUOTlUN.  XV 

ing  priests,  under  the  pretence  of  the  cure  of  souls,  engrossed 
the  patronage  of  the  state,  enjoyed  exalted  dignities  among 
their  fellow  men,  and  immense  wealth.  To  preserve  this 
worldly  eminence,  they  sought  to  stay  the  onward  improve- 
ment of  the  human  mind  and  the  progress  of  divine  truth. 
No  plan  appeared  to  them  better  adapted  to  this  end,  than 
one  which  had  been  tried  and  failed,  and  which  is  opposed  to 
that  pleasing  variety  which  so  distinctly  appears  in  all  the 
operations  of  nature.  It  was  another  and  more  stringent 
act  of  uniformity  in  religion,  to  prevent  personal  examination, 
which  is  so  strictly  enjoined  in  the  word  of  God,  upon  the 
mode  of  access  and  approach  to  the  throne  of  grace ;  to  limit 
all  to  one  dull  round  of  forms  and  ceremonies;  in  fine,  to  de- 
mand the  entire  prostration  of  the  immortal  mind  before  the 
claim  of  priestcraft  to  infallibility.  Such  a  system  could 
only  be  supported  by  violence  and  tyranny.  Therefore  was 
it  enacted  by  law  that  all  should  constantly  attend  the  parish 
church,  and  go  through  the  prescribed  service,  upon  pain  of 
fine,  imprisonment,  transportation,  or  death.  If  any  benevo- 
lent person,  not  connected  with  their  sect,  was  detected  in 
visiting  and  praying  with  the  sick,  teaching  the  ignorant  the 
way  to  heaven,  comforting  the  distressed  conscience,  or  con- 
verting sinners  to  holiness,  he  was  doomed  to  imprison- 
ment, that  such  useful  labours  might  be  stopped.  These  pre- 
tended soul-curers  were  monopolizers  of  the  worst  description, 
retailing  soporific  mental  food,  at  an  enormous  price,  slum- 
bering over  a  formal  round  of  service  like  a  lullaby,  to  keep 
the  people  asleep  in  their  natural  and  sinful  state,  while  they 
prevented  others  from  furnishing  heavenly  warning  and 
nourishment  free  from  tithes,  dues,  or  church  rates.  Similar 
attempts  had  been  made  before,  and  the  licentious  monarch 
had  only  to  look  back  to  his  father's  history,  and  read  their 
dread  effects.  Experience  may  make  wise  men  wiser,  but  will 
never  make  fools  wise.  The  attempt  was  again  made,  and  again 
it  failed,  but  marked  its  course  with  misery  and  desolation. 

By  this  time  the  Bible  had  been  widely  circulated  among 
the  people;  education  had  spread  abroad  the  means  of  exam- 


XVI  INTRODUCTION. 

inlng  those  sacred  pages ;  and  a  holy  ministry  under  the 
commonwealth  had  sown  the  seed  of  life.  Many  felt  the 
powers  of  the  world  to  come,  and  upwards  of  twenty  thou- 
sand persons  had  sanctioned  the  Confession  of  Faith  of  the 
Baptist  churches ;  while  multitudes  of  godly  men  and  women, 
of  other  denominations,  were  also  proving  the  sincerity  and 
truth  of  their  Christian  profession  by  their  harmless,  benevo- 
lent, and  pious  conduct.  Such  a  course  of  life  secures,  gene- 
rally speaking,  some  of  the  comforts  of  this  world ;  and 
thirst  for  plunder  might  tempt  some  of  their  enemies  to 
assist  more  heartily  in  this  wholesale  persecution.  Among 
the  first  of  those  upon  whom  the  hand  of  tyranny  fell,  was 
John  Bunyan,  a  man  who  had  determined  at  all  cost  to  main- 
tain his  integrity.  With  the  most  inflexible  devotion  to  his 
Saviour,  he  preferred  death  to  hypocrisy,  and  could  make  no 
terms  with  the  enemies  of  his  soul's  happiness  and  salvation. 
He  knew  the  power  of  state  religion;  it  had  crucified  his 
Lord  and  burned  his  disciples.  Still  in  the  face  of  the  most 
imminent  danger,  he  refused  to  pretend  to  believe  that  the 
priest  could  turn  babies  into  children  of  God  and  inheritors 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  or  that  he  had  power  to  forgive 
sins.  He  dared  not  conform  to  ceremonies  which  were  not 
commanded  in  holy  writ.  He  could  not  unite  with  a  system 
essentially  opposed  to  Christianity,  inasmuch  as  it  usurped 
the  throne  of  God,  in  wickedly  attempting  by  coercive  laws  to 
regulate  or  direct  the  mode  in  which  the  soul  shall  publicly 
worship  its  Creator,  Redeemer,  and  bountiful  Benefactor. 
Bunyan  refused  obedience  to  laws  that  interfered  with  the 
sacred  rights  of  conscience.  His  free,  immortal  spirit  was 
not  to  be  confined  in  the  miserable  prison  of  articles,  creeds, 
and  confessions,  made  by  fallible  mortals,  for  aught  he  knew, 
aided  by  the  evil  one.  He  persevered  in  his  pious,  benevolent 
course,  and  the  tyrants  immured  him  in  a  prison.  Here  his 
God  most  eminently  honoured  and  blessed  him,  and  by  his 
providence  consecrated  him  to  be  a  guide  and  companion  to 
Christian  pilgrims  of  every  country  and  every  age,  while  on 
their  way  to  the  city  of  Zion. 


INTRODUCTION.  XVll 


THE   FIRST    PART    OF    THE   PILGRIM  S   PROGRESS, 
WRITTEN    IN    PRISON. 

That  this  singular  work  was  composed  in  Bedford  Gaol  is 
a  fact  that  was  universally  admitted  for  more  than  a  century 
and  a  half,  when  a  controversy  on  the  subject  was  raised  by 
the  author  of  the  Life  and  Times  of  Bunyan.  That  gentle- 
man, in  1839,  stated  that  "In  the  case  of  Bunyan,  joy  was 
the  strength  of  his  imagination  as  well  as  of  his  heart,  when  he 
conducted  the  Holy  War  like  a  Wellington,  and  his  Pilgrim's 
Progress  like  a  Moses.  And  this  was  done,  be  it  remem- 
bered, in  Bedford  Gaol."  ^  We  do  not  pretend  to  understand 
what  meaning  Mr.  Philip  intends  to  convey  by  this  lan- 
guage :  fear  appears  as  much  as  joy  to  have  been  the 
strength  of  Bunyan's  imagination.  We  might  have  under- 
stood it  better,  had  the  author  made  Cromwell  the  guide  in 
the  Holy  War,  and  Paul  in  the  Pilgrim.  The  Holy  War 
was  written  many  years  after  the  author's  final  release  from 
prison.  The  only  reason  for  making  this  extract  is  to  show 
that  the  full  impression  on  Mr.  Philip's  mind  was  that 
Bunyan  wrote  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  while  he  was  a  prisoner 
in  Bedford  Gaol. 

He  further  states,  that  "  Bunyan's  chief  enjoyment  in 
prison,  next  to  his  high  communion  with  God  and  heaven, 
w^as  the  composition  of  his  Pilgrim's  Progress."  ^  Mr. 
Philip  surely  cannot  mean  that  writing  it  occupied  the 
author  and  beguiled  his  time  for  twelve  years.  Bunyan's 
own  account  shows  that  it  w^as  quickly  finished : 

"  Thus  I  set  pen  to  paper  with  delight. 
And  quickly  had  my  thoughts  in  black  and  white."  ^ 

But  supposing  him  to  mean  that  during  some  period  of  his 

^  Life  and  Times,  p.  246.  *  Philip's  Life  and  Times  of  Ban- 

yan, p.  393.  '  Apology. 


XVIU  INTRODUCTIOlf. 

confinement  this  book  was  written,  his  statement  would  per- 
fectly coincide  with  all  that  had  been  published  upon  the 
subject.  His  Life  and  Times  of  Bunyan,  the  author  states 
to  have  been  the  result  of  diligent  research ;  that  his  re- 
searches were  successful  beyond  his  most  sanguine  expecta- 
tions ;  and  that  he  had  discovered  much  that  was  unknown 
or  unnoticed  hitherto.  He,  with  no  little  self-conceit,  says 
of  his  work  :  "  It  claims,  indeed,  to  be  as  complete  a  Life  of 
Bunyan  as  his  own  documents  or  the  traditions  of  his  country 
can  furnish : "  ^  and  within  six  years  confesses  that  in  it  he 
had  made  some  sad  blunders.  Excepting  the  question  of 
research,  the  work  is  as  good  as  could  be  expected  from  one 
who  has  little  sympathy  wuth  the  spirit  of  Bunyan,  and  who 
differs  with  him  upon  very  important  topics.  Mr.  Philip 
appears  not  to  know  the  difference  between  the  Strict  and 
the  Particular  Baptists.^  He  asserts  that  Bunyan  "  had 
offended  the  whole  body  of  the  General  Baptists."^  With 
that  body  he  was  never  connected,  and  had  no  controversy. 
He  considers  that  had  Bunyan  "  not  been  a  Baptist,  he 
would  have  written  little  more  than  his  Pilgrim  and  Holy 
War,'"^  other  sects  having  profounder  theologians!  He 
praises  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  which  contains  in  it 
what  Bunyan  considered  awful  delusions,  such  as  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins  by  the  priest,  baptismal  regeneration,  and  other 
absurdities  bordering  upon  blasphemy ;  and  he  even  seems 
to  hanker  after  the  use  of  it  in  his  own  chapek^  Bunyan,  at 
the  risk  of  his  life,  exhorted  the  people  of  God  not  to  touch 
the  Common  Prayer ;  and  Mr.  Philip  says,  "  This  was  in 
bad  taste,  certainly  ; "  *  and  then  quibbles  about  the  people 
of  God  not  being  the  people  of  the  realm  !  and  therefore  that 
he  had  not  offended  the  law.  His  volume  is,  however,  the  best 
collection  of  materials  tliat  we  have,  and  will  aid  some  future 
historian,  who,  possessing    the  spirit   and  principles  of   tliat 

*  Preface,  vi.  ^  Critique,  p.  xxv. 

*  Strii't  ill  practice  as  to  comww/iw/i,-  ^  I'age  249. 
particular  in  doctrine,  in  opposition  to  •'  Page  360, 
general  redempthn.                                  -  '  J 'age  ;511i. 


mTRODUCTION.  XIX 

most  illustrious  man,  may  give  to  the  world  a  valuable  history 
of  his  life-  and  times. 

Within  a  very  few  years  after  Mr.  Philip  had  made  known 
to  the  public  the  result  of  his  diligent  researches,  he  appears  to 
have  been  troubled  with  some  ignis  fatuus,  which  he  mistook 
for  a  new  light  as  to  the  place  where  the  Pilgrimage  was 
written.  This  he  published  in  his  Critique  on  the  Writings 
and  Genius  of  Bunyan.*  And  in  it  he  slily  says  of  Bunyan's 
poetry,  "  as  no  one  reads  his  rhymes  now,  I  say  nothing  about 
them  !"^  As  some  of  these  rhymes,  in  the  Author's  Apology, 
convey  to  us  the  circumstances  under  which  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress  was  written,  it  might  have  been  better  to  have  read 
them ;  but  here  we  have  a  sweeping  denunciation  of  these 
rhymes,  followed  by,  "I  say  nothing  about  them."  He 
further  says,  "  that  Bunyan  did  as  much  justice  to  the 
Reign  of  Grace  as  his  Calvinism  would  allow  him!"*^  We 
can  pardon  Mr.  P.,  supposing  him  to  be  connected  with  a 
neighbouring  island, — for  saying  that  the  germs  of  a  work 
appeared  in  the  Strait  Gate  a  year  before  it  teas  ivritten  ; '  but 
we  cannot  pass  by  his  insinuation  that  Charles  Doe, 
Bunyan's  personal  friend,  endeavoured  to  mislead  the  public 
as  to  the  place  where  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  was  written. 
The  new  light  thus  glimmers  forth :  "  I  was  unwilling  to  be 
awakened  from  the  popular  dream,  that  the  Pilgrim  was 
written  as  well  as  conceived  in  Bedford  Gaol ;  for  I  never 
heard  or  suspected  anything  else,  until  Doe's  dates,  taken 
from  Bunyan's  '  own  reckoning,'  came  into  my  hands ;  and 
then  500  pages  of  my  Life  of  him  were  stereotyped."^ 
Where  were  the  author's  diligent  researches  made?  Doe's 
dates  were  in  the  British  Museum,  and  in  many  libraries. 
And  if  500  pages  were  stereotyped  when  the  discovery  was 
made,  Avhy  not,  before  the  volume  was  published,  have  recast 
a  few  of  those  pages,  and  not  have  sent  forth  what  he  con- 
sidered to  be  a  false  statement  ?     He  also  says,    "  Thus  both 


Published  by  Nelson,  in  1845. 

'  Page  V. 

Page  xvi. 

*  Page  XXX. 

Page  xxix. 

XX  INTRODUCTION. 

conjecture  and  imagination  are  left  quite  at  liberty  to  fancy 
when,  and  how  much  [of]  the  design  was  formed  in  prison ; 
and,  what  is  better,  it  is  now  certain  that  the  book  itself  was 
written  in  Bunyan's  own  cottage  at  Elstow,  which  will  from 
henceforth  be  a  more  sacred  spot  than  ever."  9  Mr.  Philip 
goes  on  to  say  :  "  It  has  been  already  stated,  on  Doe's  autho- 
rity, that  Bunyan  was  writing  the  '  Strait  Gate  '  when  his 
allegory  struck  him  ;  and  he  himself  confesses  that  he  was 
'  almost  done  '  when  it  did  so."  ^  Upon  reading  this,  my 
attention  was  at  once  directed  to  Doe's  dates  taken  from 
Bunyan's  own  reckoning,  a  fine  copy  of  which  is  in  my 
library,  folio,  1692.  It  is  called  'The  Struggler  for  the 
Preservation  of  Mr.  John  Bunyan's  Labours ; '  -  and  it  is 
hardly  possible  to  conceive  my  amazement  on  finding  that 
Mr.  Doe's  testimony  is  exactly  the  reverse  of  Avhat  Mr. 
Philip  asserts  it  to  be.  "With  all  respect  for  my  worthy 
friend  and  neighbour,  who  is  perfectly  incapable  of  any  wilful 
misrepresentation,  I  can  only  account  for  his  strange  mistake 
by  charitably  supposing  that  at  the  time  when  he  thought  he 
awoke  from  the  popular  dream,  he  was  in  what  is  vulgarly 
called  a  brown  study,  or  that  the  moon  was  at  the  full ; 
when,  under  the  influence  of  a  disturbed  imagination,  he 
thought  that  Mr.  Doe  had  authorized  him  to  make  such  a 
marvellous  statement  as  that  the  Pilo-rim's  Progress  was 
written  in  Bunyan's  own  cottage  at  Elstow.  Charles  Doe 
gives  three  statements,  all  of  which  are  accurate.  The  first 
is  the  order  in  which  Bunyan  published  his  works  to  the 
world :  in  this  he  places  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  without  a 
date,  between  the  Strait  Gate,  1676,  and  the  Fear  of  God, 
1679  ;  and  the  accuracy  of  this  is  proved  by  the  discovery  of 
a  first  edition,  dated  1678.  lie  follows  this  Avith  two  dis- 
tinct accounts  of  where  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  was  written. 
In  this,  his  great  allegory  follows  the  Grace  Abounding  :  the 
Avords  "and  others,"  allude  to  books  not  only  written,  but 
published,  while  he  was  in  prison.     His  words  are  these : — 

'  Page  xxxi.  2  C"riti(iue,  p.  ii.  ;  Life  ami  Times  of 

'  Page  xxxi.  '       Biinvaii,  p.  oSO. 


INTRODUCTION".  XXI 

"  Whilst  he  (Bunyan)  was  thus  twelve  years  and  a  half 
in  prison,  he  writ  several  of  his  published  books  (as 
by  many  of  their  epistles  appears),  as.  Pray  by  the 
Spirit,  Holy  City,  Resurrection,  Grace  Abounding,  and 
others;  also  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  as  himself  and 
many  others  have  said."  On  the  following  page  Doe  thus 
reasons  upon  the  fact,  again  stating  that  the  book  was 
ivritten  in  Prison : — "  What  hath  the  devil  or  his  agents 
gotten  by  putting  our  great  gospel  minister  Bunyan  in 
prison?  For  in  prison  (as  before  mentioned)  he  wrote 
many  excellent  books,  that  have  published  to  the  world  his 
great  grace,  and  great  truth,  and  great  judgment,  and  great 
ingenuity ;  and  to  instance  in  one.  The  Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress, he  hath  suited  to  the  life  of  a  traveller  so  exactly  and 
pleasantly,  and  to  the  life  of  a  Christian,  that  this  very  book, 
besides  the  rest,  hath  done  the  superstitious  sort  of  men,  and 
their  practice,  more  harm,  or  rather  good,  as  I  may  call  it, 
than  if  he  had  been  let  alone  at  his  meeting  at  Bedford,  to 
preach  the  gospel  to  his  own  auditory,  as  it  might  have  fallen 
out ;  for  none  but  priest-ridden  people  know  how  to  cavil  at 
it ;  it  wins  so  smoothly  upon  their  affections,  and  so  in- 
sensibly distils  the  gospel  into  them ;  and  hath  been  printed 
in  France,  Holland,  New  England,  and  in  Welsh,  and  about 
a  hundred  thousand  in  England,  whereby  they  are  made 
some  means  of  grace,  and  the  author  become  famous,  and 
may  be  the  cause  of  spreading  his  other  gospel  books  over  the 
European  and  American  world,  and  in  process  of  time  may 
be  so  to  the  whole  universe."'  Mr.  Doe  does  not  give  the 
date  when  this  allegory  was  published,  nor  does  he  say  that 
Bunyan  was  writing  "The  Strait  Gate"  when  his  allegory 
struck  him  ;  nor  does  Bunyan  say  that  he  had  "  almost 
done  "  "The  Strait  Gate"  when  it  did  strike  him.  Nor  is  it 
probable  that  he  continued  to  reside  at  Elstow  when  he  left 
the  prison,  having  taken  the  j^astoral  charge  of  the  church  at 
Bedford.     Charles  Doe's  account,  which  is  indispvitable,  was 

'  Mr.  Philip  must  have  seen  the  Straggler,  for  he  quotes  these  very  words !     See 
Life  and  Times,  p.  556. 


XXll  INTRODUCTION. 

re-published  by  Mr.  Jukes,  iu  the  Patriot  of  April  16,  1846, 
in  answer  to  Mr.  Philip's  childish  assertions.  In  a  letter  on 
the  23rd  of  the  same  month,  Mr.  Philip,  in  attempting  to 
reply,  argues,  still  more  childishly,  that  Bunyan  tried  to  write 
such  a  work  in  prison,  but  never  succeeded ;  and  that  tliis  led 
him  to  speak  of  having  written  it  in  prison.    Bunyan  says  : 

"  ....  I  set  pen  to  paper  with  delight, 

And  quickly  had  my  thoughts  in  black  and  white." 

And  no  one  has  ever  dared  to  doubt  his  veracity,  except  Mr. 
Philip.  He  again  asserts  that  he  relies  upon  Doe's  definite 
dates,  rather  than  upon  his  vague  phrases.  The  fact  is,  that 
Doe  gives  no  date  at  all.  His  phrase  is,  "Bimyan  lorote  his 
Pilgrim's  Progress  in  prison.^''  He  who  calls  this  a  vague 
phrase  must  be  far  advanced  in  second  childhood ;  and  we 
request  our  excellent  friend  lsli\  Jukes,  who  calls  him  "  very 
arbitrary,  very  unfair,  and  very  inconsistent,"  to  feel  rather 
sorrow  than  anger  at  his  unhappy  state. 

Having  thus  dissipated  Mr.  Philip's  ignis  fatuus,  it  may 
amuse  the  reader  and  more  effectually  disperse  the  vapours 
with  which  it  was  composed,  by  producing  some  further 
conclusive  and  collateral  proofs  that  Bunyan  did  Avrite 
his  immortal  work  while  he  was  in  prison  for  Christ's  sake. 
Let  us  first  consider  honest  John's  own  testimony.  He 
commences  the  allegory  thus:  "As  I  walked  through  the 
wilderness  of  this  world,  I  lighted  on  a  certain  place,  where 
was  a  Den ;  And  I  laid  me  down  in  that  place  to  sleep : 
And  as  I  slept  I  dreamed  a  Dream."*  In  the  margin  he 
tells  us  that  the  word  "  Den  "  means  "  The  Gaol,"  thus 
indicating  the  place  where  the  first  part  of  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress  was  conceived.  Had  this  work  been  printed  when 
it  Avas  written,  the  author  would,  as  in  other  of  his  books, 
have  dated  his  introduction  from  the  gaol,  in  which  case  there 
would  have  been  no  need  of  any  note  to  connect  the  word 
Don  Avith  the  gaol.     Nor  did  he  feel  the  necessity  of  such  a 

*  Piljjiim,  !>.  1. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXlll 

reference  until  after  the  second  edition,  vfhen  he  inserted  this 
plain  indication  that  he  wrote  it  while  he  was  a  prisoner. 

"And  thus  it  was  :  I  ^n-iting  of  the  Way 
And  Race  of  Saints,  in  this  our  Gospel  Day, 
Fell  suddenly  into  an  Allegory 
Aljout  their  Journey,  and  the  way  to  Glory, 
In  more  than  twenty  things,  which  I  set  down  ; 
This  done  I  twenty  more  had  in  my  Cro«Ti, 
And  they  again  began  to  multiply, 
Like  sparks  that  from  the  coals  of  fire  do  fly, 
Nay,  then  thought  I,  if  that  you  breed  so  fast, 
I'll  put  you  by  yourselves,  lest  you  at  last 
Should  i3rove  ad  infinitum. 

Neither  did  I  but  vacant  seasons  spend 
In  this  my  scribble  ; 

Thus  I  set  pen  to  paper  with  delight. 

And  quickly  had  my  thoughts  in  black  and  white. 

For  having  now  my  method  by  the  end, 

Still  as  I  pull'd,  it  came  ;  and  so  I  penned 

It  down,  until  it  came  at  last  to  be. 

For  length  and  breadth  the  bigness  which  you  see." 

This  simple  statement  by  John  Bnnyan  requires  no  com- 
ment. In  gaol  he  was  writing  some  book,  most  probably  his 
own  spiritual  pilgrimage,  as  is  beautifully  expressed  by  Dr. 
Cheever :  "  As  you  read  the  Grace  Abounding,  you  are 
ready  to  say  at  every  step.  Here  is  the  future  author  of 
Pilgrim's  Progress.  It  is  as  if  you  stood  beside  some  great 
sculptor,  and  watched  every  movement  of  his  chisel,  having 
had  his  design  explained  to  you  before,  so  that  at  every  blow 
some  new  trait  of  beauty  in  the  future  statue  comes  clearly 
into  view."  Wliile  thus  employed,  he  was  suddenly  struck 
with  the  thought  of  an  Allegory  about  the  saints'  journey  to 
heaven,  and  he  at  once  commenced  writing  it,  and  at  his 
vacant  seasons  finished  the  work.  So  familiar  was  it  with 
him  to  connect  the  term  den  with  a  prison,  that  when  treat- 
ing of  his  spiritual  Imprisonment  in  Doubting  Castle,  the 
Giant,  instead  of  ordering  his  prisoners  to  their  cell  or  dun- 
geon, says,  "  Get  you  down  into  yoiu'  den  again." 

My  second  evidence  is  the  first  edition  of  the  book  itself. 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

This  bears  strong  internal  proof  of  its  having  been  written 
long  before  it  was  published.  It  must  be  remembered  that 
the  second  edition  issued  from  the  same  press,  by  the  same 
publishers,  also  in  the  same  year ;  and  there  will  be  found, 
on  comparing  the  two  editions,  a  very  striking  difference  in 
the  spelling  of  many  words,  such  as  "drownded"  is  corrected 
to  "  drowned  ;  "  ^  "  slow  "  to  "  slough  ;  "  *  "  chaulk  "  to 
"  chalk  ;  "  5  «  travailer  "  to  "  traveller  ;  "  «  "  countrey  "  to 
"  country  ;  "  "  raggs  "  to  "  rags  ;  "  ^  «  brast "  to  "  burst ;  "  » 
&c.  &c.  This  may  readily  be  accounted  for  by  the  author's 
having  kept  the  work  in  manuscript  for  some  years  before  it 
was  printed,  and,  having  taken  the  advice  of  many  friends 
who  had  read  the  manuscript,  upon  the  propriety  of  pviblish- 
ing  it,  he  either  had  no  inclination  or  no  leisure  to  revise  it 
when  he  had  decided  upon  sending  it  forth  to  the  public. 
There  is  an  apparent  difference  of  twenty  years  between  the 
spelling  used  in  these  two  books,  which  were  published  in 
the  same  year,  and  issued  from  the  same  press ;  besides  which 
there  Avere  very  considerable  additions  of  new  characters  in 
the  second  edition.  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  the  printer 
followed  Bunyan's  spelling,  punctuation,  capitals,  and  italics. 
And  this  shows  that,  notwithstanding  his  very  numerous  en- 
gagements, he  had  found  time  to  cultivate  and  improve  his 
talents  in  composition  between  the  ivriting  of  the  first  and 
the  publication  of  his  second  edition. 

Our  third  evidence  is  that  of  a  pious  gentleman,  who  was 
one  of  Bunyan's  personal  and  "  true  friends,"  and  enjoyed 
the  happiness  of  a  long  acquaintance  with  him.  It  is  in  the 
continuation  to  the  Grace  Abounding,  published  in  1692, 
from  which  time  it  was  very  extensively  circulated  with 
that  deeply  interesting  narrative.  This  author  says  that, 
"during  Bunyan's  confinement  in  prison,  he  wrote  these 
following  books,  viz..  Of  Prayer  hy  the  Spirit;  The  Holy 
Citic ;    Resurrection ;     Grace    Aboundiny ;     Pilgrim's    Pro- 

'  Page  9.  ®  Page,  p.  -27. 

*  Page  25.  ^  '  Page  3 1 . 

*  Apology,  p.  xi.  "  Page  69. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

GEESS,  1st  Part."  Nothing  can  be  more  conclusive  than  such 
evidence  by  an  eye-witness,  one  of  Bunyan's  intimate  friends, 
and  which  for  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  was  never  doubted, 
nor  ought  it  ever  to  have  been  doubted. 

The  fourth  proof  is.  The  Tradition  handed  down  in  the 
family  of  his  fellow  prisoner,  Mr.  Marsom,  an  estimable 
and  pious  preacher,  who,  with  Bunyan,  was  confined  in 
Bedford  Gaol  for  conscience'  sake.  His  daughter  married 
Mr.  Gurney,  the  grandfather  of  the  late  Baron  Gurney, 
and  of  W.  B.  Gurney,  Esq.,  his  brother,  the  present 
venerated  treasitrer  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society, 
and  he  bears  this  testimony :  "  Thomas  Marsom  was  an 
ironmonger,  and  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  at  Luton;  he 
died  in  January,  1725-6,  at  a  very  advanced  age.  This 
Thomas  Marsom  was  a  fellow  prisoner  with  Bunyan,  and 
my  grandfather,  ^vho  knew  him  well,  was  in  the  habit  of 
repeating  to  his  son,  my  father,  many  interesting  circum- 
stances which  he  had  heard  from  him  connected  with  his  im- 
prisonment. One  of  these  was,  that  Bunyan  read  the  manu- 
script of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  to  his  fellow  prisoners, 
requesting  their  opinion  upon  it.  The  descriptions  naturally 
excited  a  little  pleasantry,  and  Marsom,  who  was  of  a  sedate 
turn,  gave  his  opinion  against  the  publication;  but  on  re- 
flection requested  permission  to  take  the  manuscript  to  his 
own  cell,  that  he  might  read  it  alone.  Having  done  so,  he 
returned  it  with  an  earnest  recommendation  that  it  should  be 
published."  How  easily  can  we  imagine  the  poor  prisoner 
narrating  the  various  adventures  of  his  pilgrims  when  illus- 
trating a  subject  of  discourse  in  the  gaoL  He  had  received 
calls  to  join  more  wealthy  churches,^  but  he  cleaved  to  his 
poor  flock  at  Bedford.  Suppose  his  exhortation  to  have  been 
on  those  words,  "  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give ; "  how 
admirably  could  he  iuti-oduce  all  the  Jesuitic  subtilties  of 
By-ends,  Money-love,  and  his  party.  Hear  him  exhort  his 
fellow  prisoners  on  the  "  terrors  of  the  Lord,"  and  you  would 

"  Doe's  Reasons  for  printing  Bun-  a  prominent  place  in  his  Life  and 
van's  Works,  X.     This  ought  to  talco         Times. 


XXVI  INTRODUCTION. 

anticipate  his  leading  in  the  burdened  Christian, — his  adven- 
tures in  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  and  recounting 
the  awful  dream  of  the  day  of  judgment,  which  is  related  in 
the  Interpreter's  House, — or  when  preaching  on  the  words, 
"resist  the  devil,"  who  like  him  could  recount  the  fight  with 
Apollyon  ? 

Thus  we  have  seen  the  evidence  of  Charles  Doe,  Bunyan's 
contemporary  and  friend  ;  proof  given  by  the  author  himself, 
in  his  own  words,  "  Den,"  the  "  Gaol "  in  all  but  the  first 
editions;  the  evidence  of  a  pious  friend  of  Bunyan,  who 
long  enjoyed  his  acquaintance,  and  wrote  the  continuation  of 
his  spiritual  life,  published  within  four  years  of  his  decease ; 
and  the  traditions  handed  down  to  us  by  one  of  his  fellow 
prisoners.  If  we  refuse  such  testimony,  neither  should  we 
believe  if  Bunyan  himself  came  from  the  invisible  world  to 
confirm  its  truth. 

The  reason  why  it  was  not  published  for  several  years  after 
his  release,  appears  chiefly  to  have  been  the  difference  of  opi- 
nion expressed  by  his  friends  as  to  the  propriety  of  printing 
a  book  which  treated  so  familiarly  the  most  solemn  subjects. 

"  Well,  when  I  had  thus  put  my  ends  together, 
I  showed  them  others,  that  I  might  see  whether 
They  would  condemn  them,  or  them  justify  : 
And  some  said,  let  them  live  ;  some,  let  them  die. 
Some  said,  John,  print  it  ;  others  said,  not  so  : 
Some  said,  it  might  do  good  ;  others  said.  No." 

The  heavenly  mindedness  of  the  author  made  it  a  painful 
effort  when  public  duty  impelled  him  to  act  contrary  to  the  ad- 
vice of  pious  friends.  "  I  said  to  them.  Offend  you  I  am  loth ;" 
but  the  result  was  that  "  at  last "  he  determined  to  decide  the 
question  upon  which  there  Avas  this  singular  balance  of 
opinion,  and  he  published  the  work  which  has  immortalized 
his  name. 

Somewhat  similar  to  this  was  the  conference  of  dissenting 
ministers  held  in  London  when  Sunday-schools  were  first 
recommended,  and  at  which  some  of  my  friends  were  present ; 
the  desecration  of  the  lord's  day  was  pleaded  against  them, 


INTRODUCTION.  XXVll 

and  it  was  only  by  a  very  small  majority  that  institutions 
Avere  sanctioned  which  advanced  the  spread  of  divine  truth 
with  a  rapidity  as  extraordinary  as  is  the  increased  speed  of 
travelling  by  the  aid  of  steam. 

Thus  was  it  debated  whether  the  Pilgrim  should  walk 
forth  or  not,  fearing  lest  the  singularity  of  his  dress  should 
excite  trivial  or  vain  thoughts  in  the  readers,  like  the  distui'b- 
ance  at  Vanity  Fair ;  or  it  might  arise  from  a  fear  lest  the 
various  characters  and  dialogues  should  be  thought  to 
approach  in  the  slightest  degree  to  a  drama.  It  is  perhaps 
impossible  to  account  for  the  different  feelings  excited  in 
men's  minds  by  reading  the  same  narrative.  In  this  case 
the  fear  was,  lest  it  should  tend  to  excite  a  light  or  trifling 
spirit  while  considei'ing  the  solemn  realities  of  eternity.  In 
most  cases  reading  this  volume  has  had  a  solemnizing  effect 
upon  the  mind.  Some  have  tried  to  read  it,  but  have  shut 
it  up  with  fear,  because  it  leads  directly  to  the  inquiry.  Have 
I  felt  the  burden  of  sin?— Have  I  fled  for  refuge  ?  Others, 
because  it  has  such  home-thrusts  at  hypocrisy,  and  such 
cutting  remarks  upon  those  who  profess  godliness,  but  in 
secret  are  wanton  and  godless.  The  folly  of  rehance  upon  an 
imperfect  obedience  to  the  law  for  the  pardon  of  sin,  repeat- 
edly and  fiiithfully  urged,  is  a  hard  and  humbling  lesson.  It 
mercilessly  exposes  the  worthlessness  of  all  those  things  which 
are  most  prized  by  tlie  worldling.  No  book  has  so  con- 
tinual and  direct  a  tendency  to  solemn  self-examination. 
Every  character  that  is  drawn  makes  a  powerful  appeal  to 
the  conscience,  and  leads  almost  irresistibly  to  the  mental 
inquiry,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  No  work  is  better  calculated  to 
infuse  deeper  solemnity  into  the  mind  of  an  attentive 
reader. 

In  addition  to  the  serious  opposition  of  his  friends  to  the 
publication  of  the  Pilgrim,  we  must  also  consider  the  author's 
other  engagements.  After  so  long,  so  harassing,  so  unjust  an 
imprisonment,  much  of  his  time  must  have  been  spent  in  restor- 
ing order  in  his  house  and  in  his  church, — paying  pastoral 
visits, — recovering  lost  stations,  and  extending  his  devotional 

c  2 


XXVlll 


INTRODUCTION. 


and  ministerial  exercises  in  all  tlie  villages  around  and  within 
his  reach.  So  great  was  his  popularity  that  an  eye-witness  says, 
when  he  preached  in  London,  "  if  there  were  but  one  day's 
notice  given,  there  would  be  more  people  come  together  to 
hear  him  preach  than  the  meeting-house  would  hold.  I  have 
seen,  to  hear  him  preach,  about  twelve  hundred  at  a  morning 
lecture,  by  seven  o'clock  on  a  working  day,  in  the  dark  win- 
ter time."  1  Such  popularity  must  have  occasioned  a  consider- 
able tax  upon  his  time,  in  addition  to  which  he  was  then 
warmly  engaged  in  his  controversy  on  baptism,^  and  in  some 
admirable  practical  works.  These  may  have  been  some  of 
the  reasons  why  a  humble,  pious  author  hesitated  for  several 
years  to  publish  a  work,  on  the  practical  bearing  of  which 
his  friends  had  expressed  such  opposite  opinions.  At  length 
he  made  up  his  mind. 

"  Since  you  are  thus  divided, 
I  print  it  will ;  and  so  the  case  decided,"^ 


^  Charles  Doe,  in  the  Struggler. 
*  This  controversy  has  been  some- 
what misunderstood.  It  was  whether 
water-haptisra  was  a  pre-requisite  to 
the  Lord's  table.  It  had  no  rt-Lation 
to  the  mode,  whether  by  sprinkling  or 
by  immersing.  Bunyan's  position  was 
that  water-baptism  was  a  personal  and 
not  a  relative  or  even  a  church  ques- 
tion, and  that  those  who,  by  their  life, 
conduct,  and  profession,  jjrove  that  they 
iiad  been  l)aptized  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
ought  to  be  admitted  to  the  Lord's 
table,  even  if  they  rejected  both  sprin- 
kling and  immersion,  and  had  never 
been  baptized  with  water  at  all.  The 
new  birth  or  spiritual  baptism  was  with 
him  the  only  pre-requisite  to  the  com- 
munion of  saints  at  the  table  of  their 
Lord.  Bunyan's  great -great -grand- 
daughter, a  venerable  lady,  upwards  of 
eighty  years  of  age,  with  whom   I   had 


much  interesting  conversation,  differed 
with  her  ancestor,  and  was  united  to  a 
strict  baptist  church.  Her  fear  was 
that  mixed  communion  might  tend  to 
contention  ;  but  she  admitted  that  in 
tlie  church  at  Bedford  no  bitterness  on 
this  subject  had  injured  them.  It  was 
a  church  of  Christ  in  1  G.50,  and  so  it  has 
continued,  a  blessing  to  the  neighbour- 
hood, although  water-baptism  was  no 
bar  to  communion.  The  difference  be- 
tween Banyan  and  the  strict  baptists 
em))races  the  distinction  drawn  between 
John's  baptism  and  that  which  was  to 
come  after,  if  not  to  supei-sede  it,  and 
upon  which  every  individual  is  bound  to 
form  his  own  judgment.  See  Matt.iii.  11 ; 
Mark  i.  8;  Luke  iii.  IG  j  and  John  i. 
'2(j — 33  :  compare  with  Heb.  vi.  2  ; 
and  Eph.  iv,  3. — Editor. 
'  Apology,  p.  vi. 


INTEODUCTION.  XXIX 


bunyan's  qualifications  to  write  the  pilgrim's 
progress  sanctified  by  prison  discipline. 

That  the  author  of  the  Pilgrim  was  pre-eminently  quali- 
fied to  write  such  a  work  is  proved  by  its  vast  circulation, 
and  by  the  extraordinary  interest  which  it  created  and  has 
kept  alive  for  nearly  two  centuries  throughout  the  world. 
This  ought  not  to  excite  surprise,  when  it  is  recollected  that 
it  was  the  production  of  a  man  profoundly  learned  in  all  the 
subtilties  of  the  human  heart, — deeply  skilled  in  detecting 
error  and  sophistry, — thoroughly  humbled  under  a  sense  of 
his  own  unworthiness.  He  was  baptized  into  the  divine 
truths  of  Christianity  by  the  searching,  wounding,  and  heal- 
ing influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Shut  up  for  twelve  years 
with  his  Bible,  all  the  rags  of  popery  and  heathenism  were 
stripped  off,  and  he  came  out,  a  living  theology,  comparatively 
free  from  mere  human  doctrines  or  systems.  The  spirit  of 
the  prophets  and  apostles  breathes  in  his  language.  His  was 
an  education  which  all  the  academies  and  universities  in  the 
world  could  not  have  communicated.  He  was  deeply  learned 
in  that  "  wisdom  that  is  from  above,"  ^  and  can  only  be 
acquired  in  the  school  of  Christ.  His  spirit  was  nurtured 
by  close,  unwearied,  prayerful  searching  of  the  word  of  life, — 
by  perpetual  watchfulness  over  the  workings  of  his  spirit, 
and  by  inward  communion  with  his  God.  He  knew  well 
what  was  meant  by  "groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered,"^  as 
well  as  by  being  "  caught  up,"  as  it  were,  "  to  the  third  hea- 
ven," even  to  "  paradise,"  and  in  his  spirit  to  "  hear  un- 
speakable words  which  it  is  not  possible  for  man  to  utter."  ^ 
He  had  gone  through  every  severe  trial ;  with  the  Psalmist 
he  had  sunk  in  deep  mire  where  there  was  no  standing ;  the 
powers  of  darkness  like  "the  floods  overflow  me;"^  and  with 
him  he  could  also  sing,  "  I  will  extol  thee,  O  Lord,  for  thou 
hast  lifted  me  up,"*^  "  Thou  hast  brought  up  my  soul  from 

*  James  iii.  17.  "2  Cor.  xii.  4.       ^  Ps,  xxx,  1. 

*  Rom.  viii.  -Jti.  '  P.s.  Ixix,  Q. 


XXX  INTRODUCTION. 

the  grave  ;  "^  "  He  brought  me  up  out  of  an  horrible  pit ;"' 
"  Thou  hast  healed  me ;  "  "  Thou  hast  put  off  my  sack-cloth, 
and  girded  me  with  gladness."  In  his  happier  days,  he  felt 
that  he  was  an  inhabitant  of  that  invisible,  holy,  spiritual 
Jerusalem, — the  universal  church  of  Christ,  encompassed  by 
"  the  Lord  as  a  wall  of  fire,  and  the  glory  in  the  midst  of 
her,"  He  lived  in  an  atmosphere,  and  used  a  language,  un- 
known to  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  and  which  a  poet  laureate 
mistook  for  reveries,  for  "  the  hot  and  cold  fits  of  a  spiritual 
ague,"  or  for  the  paroxysms  of  disease.-  His  mind  was 
deeply  imbued  with  all  that  was  most  terrific  as  well  as  most 
magnificent  in  religion.  In  proportion  as  his  Christian  course 
became  pure  and  lovely,  so  his  former  life  must  have  been 
surveyed  with  unmitigated  severity  and  abhorrence. 

His  energetic  eloquence  attracted  to  his  sermons  every  class ; 
and  when  the  learned  Dr.  John  Owen  was  asked  by  the  king 
how  a  man  of  his  learning  could  hear  a  tinker  preach,  he  re- 
plied, "  Had  I  the  tinker's  abilities,  I  would  most  gladly  relin- 
quish my  learning."  Thus  did  a  man  profoundly  versed  in 
scholastic  literature  sanctified  by  piety,  bow  to  the  superiority 
of  the  Spirit's  teaching.  The  unlettered  tinker  led  captive, 
by  his  consecrated  natural  eloquence,  one  of  the  most  emi- 
nent divines  of  his  day. 

Considering  the  amazing  popvilarity  of  the  Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress, and  its  astonishing  usefulness  to  all  classes  of  mankind, 
in  all  the  countries  of  the  earth,  may  we  not  attribute  its 
author's  deep  and  hallowed  feelings, — severe  trials  and  every 
lesson  of  divine  wisdom  he  received,  as  being  intended  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  to  fit  him  to  write  this  surprising  Dream  ? 

Bunyan  was  a  master  of  rhcto'ric,  and  logic,  and  moral  philo- 
sophy, Avithout  studying  those  sciences,  or  perhaps  even 
understanding  the  terms  by  which  they  are  designated.  His 
Bible  (wondrous  book  !)  was  his  library.  All  his  genius 
was  nurtured  from  the  living  fountain  of  truth,  it  puri- 
fied his   style,   and   adapted  his  work  by  its  simplicity  and 

'  Ps.  XXX,  3,  ^  Ts.  xl.  2.  »  Souther's  Life  of  Hunyan,  xxxii. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXI 

energy  to  every  understanding.  His  key  to  its  mysteries, 
was  earnest  holy  prayer ;  and  musing  over  the  human  heart, 
and  watching  the  operations  of  nature,  afforded  him  an  ample 
illustration  of  its  sacred  truths.  His  tiine  for  study  was 
every  moment  of  his  life  that  he  could  save  from  sleep,  and 
even  then  his  ever  active  spirit  was  busy  in  dreams,  many  of 
which  contained  valuable  lessons,  so  that  his  mind  became 
most  richly  stored  and  was  perpetually  overflowing. 

Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that,  in  addition  to  his  heavenly, 
he  possessed  peculiar  earthly  qualifications  for  such  a  work, — 
that  he  had  been  the  very  ringleader  in  all  manner  of  vice 
and  ungodliness.  Dr.  Ryland's  description  of  his  character 
is  written  with  peculiar  pungency  :  "  No  man  of  common 
sense  and  common  integrity  can  deny,  that  Bunyan,  the  tinker 
of  Elstow,  was  a  practical  atheist,  a  worthless  contemptible 
infidel,  a  vile  rebel  to  God  and  goodness,  a  common  profligate, 
a  soul-despising,  a  soul-murdering,  a  soul-damning  thought- 
less wretch,  as  could  exist  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Now  be 
astonished,  O  heaven,  to  eternity,  and  wonder,  O  earth  and 
hell !  while  time  endures.  Behold  this  very  man  become  a 
mu-acle  of  mercy,  a  mirror  of  wisdom,  goodness,  holiness, 
truth  and  love.  See  his  polluted  soul  cleansed  and  adorned 
by  divine  grace — his  guilt  pardoned — the  divine  law  inscribed 
upon  his  heart,  the  divine  image  or  the  resemblance  of  God's 
moral  perfections  impressed  upon  his  soul."i  He  had  re- 
ceived a  common  education,  but  vicious  habits  had  "  almost 
utterly "  blotted  out  of  his  memory  every  useful  lesson ; 
so  that  he  must  have  had,  when  impressed  with  divine 
truth,  great  determination  to  have  enabled  him  not  only 
to  recover  the  instruction  which  he  had  received  in  his 
younger  days,  but  even  to  have  added  to  it  such  stores 
of  valuable  information.  In  this,  his  natural  quickness  of 
perception  and  retentive  memory  must  have  been  of  ex- 
treme value.  Having  been  mixed  up  intimately  with  every 
class  of  men,  and  seen  them  in  their  most  unguarded  mo- 

'  Bunyan's  Works,  8vo.     Preface  by  Ryland. 


XXXll  INTRODUCTION. 

ments,  it  enabled  him  to  draw  his  characters  in  such  vivid 
colours  and  with  such  graphic  accuracy.  Filled  with  an  in- 
spiration which  could  be  drawn  from  the  Bible  alone,  he  has 
delineated  characters  as  touching  and  interesting  to  us  in  the 
nineteenth  century  as  they  were  to  our  pilgrim  forefathers  of  a 
bygone  age,  and  as  they  will  be  to  the  Christian  sojourner 
of  ages  yet  to  come.  It  is  a  history,  with  little  variation,  of 
that  which  must  always  happen  while  Christianity  endures. 

Bunyan  had  run  the  round  of  sin ;  had  sown  the  seed  of 
vice,  and  brought  forth  the  bitter  fruits  of  repentance ;  had 
felt  intense  alarm  lest  eternal  torments  should  swallow  up  his 
soul  in  death ;  had  fled  for  and  found  refuge  in  the  suflferings 
of  Christ.  His  burden  removed,  he  loved  much,  because  to 
him  much  had  been  forgiven ;  he  had  been  brought  up  out  of 
horrible  darkness,  and  well  was  he  quahfied  to  aid  those  who 
were  walking  through  the  dismal  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death ! 

Happily  the  glorious  Dreamer  never  appeared  to  have  any 
idea  of  his  own  immortal  fame  as  an  author :  all  his  spirit 
centred  in  his  Saviour ;  all  his  efforts  were  to  make  known 
the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  surrounding  sinners.  If  he 
coveted  the  tongue  of  an  angel,  it  was  not  for  brilliancy  of 
language,  but  that  he  might  use  burning  words  to  make  an 
indelible  impression  upon  his  hearers.  His  humble  books 
were  printed  without  ornament  upon  inferior  paper  of  the 
class  called  chap-books,  from  their  being  vended  by  travelling 
hawkers  called  chapmen,  now  magniloquently  called  col- 
porteurs. 

His  character  and  qualifications  were  admirably  portrayed 
by  his  pastor  J.  Gifford,^  in  his  introduction  to  the  first  edition 

^  John  Giftbrd  had  been  a  major  in  converts  into  a  churcli  at  Bedford,  about 

the   king's   army  ;    was  convicted    for  1G50,    over  which    lie  became  pastor, 

raising  an  insurrection  in  Kent  and  sen-  Bunyan  joined   this   church    in    1653, 

tenced  to  die,  but  made  his  escape  from  and  eventually   became  its    pastor   in 

prison,  and  settled  in  Bedford  as  a  medi-  1G71  ;  audit  continues  to  this   day  a 

cal  practitioner.    He  was  a  great  perse-  flourishing    Christian    church.      Vide 

cutor,  but  l)ecame  after  his  conversion  a  Brooke's  Lives  of  the   Puritans,  vol. 

baptist  minister,  and  formed  his  fellow  iii,  p.  257. 


INTEODUCTION.  XXXIU 

of  a  "Few  Sighs  from  Hell,  1658,"  and  as  this  interesting 
portrait  was  not  inserted  in  any  of  the  snbsequent  editions  of 
of  that  book,  and  has  escaped  the  "  diligent  researches"  of 
all  the  biographers  of  Bunyan,  I  am  tempted  to  give  it  ver- 
batim, more  especially,  as  it  is  generally  believed  that  John 
GifFord  was  the  Evangelist  Avho  directed  the  Pilgrim  to  the 
Wicket  Gate.  "  Concerning  the  author  (whatsoever  the 
censures  and  reports  of  many  are,)  I  have  this  to  say,  that  I 
verily  believe  God  hath  counted  him  faithful,  and  put  him  into 
the  ministery ;  and  though  his  outward  condition  and  former 
employment  was  mean,  and  his  humane  learning  small,  yet 
is  he  one  that  hath  acquaintance  with  God,  and  taught  by  his 
Spirit,  and  hath  been  used  in  his  hand  to  do  souls  good ;  for 
to  my  knowledge  there  are  divers,  who  have  felt  the  power  of 
the  word  delivered  by  him,  and  I  doubt  not,  but  that  many 
more  may,  if  the  Lord  continue  him  in  his  work ;  he  is  not 
like  unto  your  drones  that  will  suck  the  sweet,  but  do  no 
work.  For  he  hath  laid  forth  himself  to  the  utmost  of  his 
strength,  taking  all  advantages  to  make  known  to  others 
Avhat  he  himself  hath  received  of  God  ;  and  I  fear  that  is  one 
reason  why  the  archers  have  shot  so  soarly  at  him ;  for  by  his 
and  others'  industry,  in  their  Master's  work,  their  slothfulness 
hath  been  reproved,  and  the  eyes  of  many  have  been  opened 
to  see  a  difference  between  those  that  are  sent  of  God,  and 
those  that  run  before  they  are  sent.  And  that  he  is  none  of 
those  light  fanatick  spirits,  that  our  age  abounds  withal :  this 
following  discourse,  together  with  his  former,  that  have  been 
brought  to  publique  view  will  testifie  ;  for  among  other  things 
that  may  bear  record  to  him  herein,  you  shall  find  him  magni- 
fying and  exalting  the  holy  scriptures,  and  largely  showing 
the  Avorth,  excellency,  and  usefulness  of  them. 

"  And  surely  if  thou  shalt  (notwithstanding  this)  stumble 
at  his  meanness  and  want  of  humane  learning,  thou  wilt  declare 
thine  unacquaintance  with  God's  declared  method,  who  to  per- 
fect his  own  praise,  and  to  still  the  enemy  and  avenger,  makes 
choice  of  habes  and  sucklings,  and  in  their  mouthes  ordaineth 
strenfjth. — Ps.  viii.  2.     Though  men  that  have  a  great  design 


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

do,  and  must  make  use  of  those  that  in  reason  are  most  likely 
to  effect  it,  yet  must  the  Lord  do  so  too?  then  instruments 
(not  himself)  Avould  carry  awny  the  praise ;  but  that  no  flesh 
should  glory  in  his  presence,  he  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things 
of  the  world  to  confound  the  ivise,  and  base  things  of  the  world, 
and  things  that  are  despised  hath  God  chosen.  1  Cor.  i.  27, 
28,  29.  Cast  thine  eye  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  gospel 
dispensation  (which  surely,  if  at  any  time,  should  have  come 
forth  in  the  wisdom  and  glory  of  the  world),  and  thou  shalfc 
see  what  method  the  Lord  did  take  at  the  first  to  exalt  his  Son 
Jesus ;  he  goes  not  amongst  the  Jewish  rabbles,  nor  to  the 
schools  of  learning,  to  fetch  out  his  gospel  preachers,  but  to 
the  trades,  and  those  most  contemptible  too  ;  yet  let  not  any 
from  hence  conceive,  that  I  undervalue  the  gifts  and  graces 
of  such  who  have  been,  or  now  are  endued  with  them,  nor  yet 
speak  against  learning,  being  kept  in  its  place,  but  my  meaning 
is,  that  those  that  are  learned  should  not  despise  those  that 
are  not ;  or  those  that  are  not,  should  not  despise  those  that 
are,  who  are  faithful  in  the  Lord's  work  :  and,  therefore,  be- 
ing about  to  leave  thee,  I  shall  leave  with  thee  two  scriptures 
to  be  considered  of.  The  one  is,  John  xiii.  20. —  Verily, 
verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  that  receiveth  whomsoever  I  send 
(mark  whomsoever),  receiveth  me  ;  and  he  that  receiveth  me, 
receiveth  Him  that  sent  me.  The  other  is  Luke  x.  16. — He 
that  heareth  you,  heareth  me ;  and  lie  that  despisest  you, 
despisest  me ;  and  he  that  despiseth  me,  despiseth  Him  that  sent 
me. — I.  G."  Bunyan  closes  his  own  preface  with  these 
words,  "  I  am  thine,  if  thou  be  not  ashamed  to  own  me,  be- 
cause of  my  low  and  contemptible  descent  in  the  world, 
John  Bunyan."  This  was  altered  in  the  subsequent  editions 
to,  "  I  am  thine,  to  serve  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  John  Bunyan." 

Bunyan's  great  natural  abilities  required  to  be  tempered  in 
the  school  of  affliction :  and  his  ardent  temperament  met 
with  no  ordinary  degree  of  chastisement ;  his  principles  and 
constancy  were  tried  by  bonds  and  imprisonment ;  his  spirit, 
in  the  warfare  of  controversy,  not  only  with  the  enemies  of 
his  Lord,  but  upon  minor  points  with   his   brother  disciples. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 

And  with  some  of  these  he,  after  their  wordy  war,  met  in  the 
same  common  gaol ;  united  in  worship  before  the  throne  of 
God ;  former  wounds  Avere  healed,  and  heart-burnings  sancti- 
fied ;  and  he  became  more  fully  fitted  as  a  guide  to  all  pilgrims 
of  every  sect.  He  passed  through  every  trial  that  his  Lord 
saw  needful,  to  temper  his  ardent  spirit,  and  fit  him  to  write 
his  immortal  Allegory. 

That  a  man  possessing  such  extraordinary  talent  should  ex- 
cite the  envy  of  some,  and  the  bitterest  animosity  of  others 
is  natural.  "  The  archers  did  shoot  sorely  at  him,"  and  never 
was  a  man  better  armed  to  resist  and  crush  his  comparatively 
puny  assailants.  In  those  days  hard  words  and  uncivil  lan- 
guage were  commonly  used  in  controversy,  and  Bunyan's 
early  associations  and  singular  genius  furnished  his  quiver 
with  arrows  of  piercing  point.  His  moral  character  was 
assailed  in  the  grossest  terms;  he  was  called  a  wizard,  a 
Jesuit,  a  highwayman,  a  libertine,  and  was  charged  as  guilty  of 
every  crime  ;  to  this  he  gave  a  direct  denial,  and  triumphantly 
pointed  to  his  whole  conduct  since  his  conversion  as  a  refutation 
of  such  unfounded  calumnies.  These  malignant  accusations 
are  referred  to  and  refuted  in  that  thrilling  narrative,  "  The 
singular  experience  and  great  sufferings  of  Mrs.  Agnes  Beau- 
mont," contained  in  a  very  deeply  interesting  volume,  "An 
Abstract  of  the  gracious  Dealings  of  God  with  several  eminent 
Christians,  by  Samuel  James,  M.A.""  Another  and  very 
different  tournament  took  place  between  him  and  E.  Fowler, 
afterwards  bishop  of  Gloucester.  He  published  his  views  of 
"  The  Design  of  Christianity:"  that  it  was  merely  the  restora- 
tion of  man  to  his  primitive  state.  Bunyan  saw  his  book,  and 
very  justly  conceiving  that  the  learned  divine  had  asserted  some 
gross  errors  upon  doctrinal  points  of  the  greatest  importance ; 
he  treated  the  embryo  bishop  just  the  same  as  if  he  had  been 
a  brother  tinker,  a  mere  man,  who  was  attempting  to  rob  his 
[Bunyan's]  beloved  Master  of  one  of  the  most  glorious  gems 
in  his  crown.     In  the  almost  incredibly  short  time  of  forty 

'  The  public  were   indebted  to  Mr.    S.  J.   Button  for  a  new  and    handsome 
edition  of  this  work,  in  1824. 


XXXVl  INTRODUCTION. 

five  days*  he,  in  gaol,  composed  an  answer,  consisting  of  one 
hundred  and  eighteen  pages  of  small  quarto,  closely  printed, 
and  in  Avhich  he  completely  demolished  the  theory  of  this 
great  scholar.  It  is  entitled,  "  A  Defence  of  the  Doctrine  of 
Justification  by  Faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  showing  true  Gospel 
Holiness  flows  from  thence ;  or  Mr,  Fowler's  pretended  De- 
sign of  Christianity  proved  to  be  nothing  more  than  to 
trample  under  foot  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  :  and  the 
idolizing  of  man's  own  righteousness."  In  this  hastily  writ- 
ten, but  valuable  book,  Bunyan  used  very  strong  language, 
reflecting  upon  a  man  of  considerable  influence,  and  one  of 
his  decided  enemies.  Of  some  of  Mr.  Fowler's  sentiments, 
he  says,  "  Here  are  pure  dictates  of  a  brutish  beastly  man, 
that  neither  knows  himself  nor  one  tittle  of  the  word  of  God.^ 
But  why  should  this  thief  love  thus  to  clamber  and  seek 
to  go  to  God  by  other  means  ^  than  Christ.  Mr.  Fowler 
said,  '  It  cannot  be  worth  our  while  to  lay  out  any  consider- 
able matter  of  our  heat,  either  for  or  against  doubtful  opinions, 
alterable  modes,  rites  and  circumstances  of  religion  : — it  would  be 
like  the  apes  blowing  at  a  glow-worm,  which  affords  neither 
light  nor  warmth,''  and  whatsoever  is  commended  by  the 
custom  of  the  places  we  live  in,  or  commanded  by  superiors, 
our  Christian  liberty  is  to  do  them.'"^  Bunyan  knew  the 
feelings  of  the  clergy  in  his  own  neighbourhood,  and  he  also 
knew  that  the  Act  of  Uniformity  had  just  tui-ned  out  all  the 
godly  and  evangelical  ministers  from  the  church  of  England. 
To  this  sophistry  as  to  a  Christian's  being  bound  by  the  custom 
of  the  country  he  lives  in,  and  by  the  authority  of  superiors, 
as  to  outward  forms  or  ceremonies  of  divine  worship  and  reli- 
gious teaching,  our  Pilgrim's  guide  thus  breaks  out  into  what 
Mr.  Fowler  calls  a  Kabshakeh,  "  I  know  none  so  wedded 
thereto  as  yourselves,  even  the  whole  gang  of  your  rabling 
counterfeit  clergy  ;  who  generally,  like  the  Jpe  you  speak  of, 

*  From  13  November  to  27tli  of  De-  '  Design  of  Cliristianitj,  fivo,   1671, 
cember,  1671-     See  pref.  and  page  1.  p.  "23.'). 

*  I'age  .5.  9  Design  of  C'hristianitv,  ]>.  •J4_'. 

*  Paee  29. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVII 

lye  blowing  up  the  applause  and  glory  of  your  trumpery, 
and  like  the  Tail  with  your  foolish  and  sophistical  arguings, 
you  cover  the  filthy  parts  thereof." ^ 

To  Bunyan's  Treatise  a  reply  was  immediately  published, 
and  in  it  the  gentleman  and  scholar  complains  of  the  unchari- 
table terms  used  by  Bunyan,  and  we  are  led  to  expect  some- 
thing polite  and  genteel,  but  unfortunately  the  bishop  in  ex- 
pectancy or  one  of  his  friends  beats  the  tinker  in  harsh  epithets 
Avithout  answering  his  hard  arguments.     This  scoffer  calls  our 
Pilgrim's  guide   "grossly  ignorant,"   "most  unchristian  and 
wicked,"  ^  "  a  piece  of  proud  folly,"  "  so  very  dirty  a  creature 
that  he  disdains  to  defile  his  fingers  with  him ;  "^  and  yet  writes 
a  book  in  reply  to  him.     He  vauntingly  says,  that  "  Bunyan 
can  no  more  disgrace  the  bishop  than  a  rude  creature  can 
eclipse  the  moon  by  barking  at  her,  or  make  palaces  contempt- 
ible by  their  lifting  up    their    legs    against  them."^     He  is 
not   in    the   least   concerned   [so   he    pretends]  at  the  brut- 
ish harjiings  of  such  a  creature;"    "a  most  black-mouthed 
calumniator  ;  "  ^  "  John  Bunyan,  a  person  that  hath  been  near 
these  twenty  years,  or  longer,  most  infamous  in  the  town 
and  county  of  Bedford,  for  a  very  pestilent  schismatick ;  "  * 
and  winds  up  much  of  his  abuse  in  these  words: — "I  now 
appeal  to  authority,  Avhether  this   man  ought  to  enjoy    any 
interest  in  his  Majesty's  toleration  ?  and  whether  the  letting 
such   firebrands,    and    most    impudent,     malicious    schisma- 
ticks,  go  unpunish't,  doth  not  tend  to  the  subversion  of  all 
govei'nment?     I  say,  let  our  superiors  judge  of  this." ^     Bun- 
yan had  then  suffered  nearly  twelve  years'  imprisonment,  and 
was  more  zealous  and  intrepid  than  ever;  and  yet  this  fanatic 
bishop  would  have  had  his  imprisonment  continued,  or  his 
life  forfeited,  because  he   could  not  resist  the   arrows  with 
which  this  prisoner  for  Christ  assailed  him,  drawn  all  burning 
from  the  furnace  of  God's  holy  word.     This  was  one  of  the 
lessons  by  which  Bunyan  was  taught  how  to  lead  the  Pil- 

^  Bunyan  on  Justificafinn,  lfi72,  4to,  *  Preface.  *  Page  70. 

p.  90.  ^  Page  2.  *  Page  3. 

^  Dirt  wipt  ott;  4to,  1(372,  title. 


XXXVUl  INTRODUCTION. 

grims  in  their  attack  upon  the  monster,  state  religion,  which 
was  very  rampant,  and  looked  upon  the  pilgrims  with  great 
disdain ;  but  these  valiant  worthies  did  continually  assault 
him,  until  he  became  wounded,  "  And  it  is  verily  believed  by 
some,  that  this  beast  will  certainly  die  of  his  wounds."  ^  How 
would  it  delight  the  church  of  Christ  to  witness  his  death, 
and  to  see  his  vile  remains  buried  under  all  his  implements 
of  torture ;  his  inquisitions,  flames  and  stakes,  dungeons  and 
racks^  halters  and  church  rates.  Another,  and  a  very  serious 
lesson,  he  was  taught  in  the  controversy  which  he  carried  on 
with  some  Quakers  and  Strict  Baptists. 

And  here  I  feel  bound  to  remai'k  that  Mr.  Philip,  throughout 
his  Life  and  Times  of  Bunyan,  display's  rather  a  singular  spirit 
of  that  sectarianism,  the  absence  of  which  in  a  Baptist  he  so 
greatly  admires.  He  cannot  let  slip  any  apparent  opportunity 
to  have  a  fling '^  at  the  Quakers  and  Baptists.  This  is  not 
exactly  the  spirit  in  which  the  life  and  times  of  a  persecuted 
minister  of  the  latter  denomination  should  be  written.  He 
appears  also  to  have  no  ordinary  degree  of  self-complacency, 
which  contrasts  well  with  the  humility  of  him  who  subscribed 
himself,  "  Thine,  if  thou  be  not  ashamed  to  own  me  ;  "'^  "An 
unworthy  servant  of  Christ ;  "9  "  That  poor  contemptible  crea- 
ture." ^  In  reading  his  pages,  we  are  continully  reminded  of  a 
conversation  between  the  late  Mr.  Ford  of  Stepney,  and  a 
young  minister  who  had  just  preached  for  him.  He  was  very 
anxious,  and  pressed  much,  to  have  Mr.  Ford's  opinion  of  his 
sermon  ;  when  that  faithful  minister  said,  "  My  dear  young 
friend,  I  thought  that  the  congregation  generally  thought 
that  you  thought  your  sermon  very  clever !  " 

Banyan's  controversy,  which  is  said  to  have  been  with  the 
Quakers,  was  in  foct  not  with  that  highly  respectable  and 
useful  body  of  Christians,  but  with  persons  whom  he  con- 


"  Pilgrim's  Progress,  p.  331.  sions,  from  which  we  hope  that  divine 

^  His  remarks  arc  unworthy  a  more  truth  may  soon  awaken  him. 

polite  term.     Like  a  multitude  of  pro-  *  A  few  Sighs  from  Hell.     lCo8. 

fessing  Christians,  he  is  asleep,  and  en-  '■*  Gospel  Trutli  opened.     1656. 

joys  certain  popular  dreams  and  dc4u-  ^  Doctrine  of  the  Law  and  Grace. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX 

sidered  to  be  under  serious  delusions :  some  of  these  called 
themselves  Quakers.  At  this  period  the  Society  of  Friends 
were  not  united  into  a  body  or  denomination.  The  battle,  ac- 
cording to  his  own  words,  was  against  Satan,  and  tliose  lies  with 
which  he  had  deceived  some  enthusiastic  spirits.  These  charac- 
ters were  called  by  Bunyan,  a  company  of  loose  ranters  and 
light  notionists,  with  here  and  there  a  legalist,  who  were  shak- 
ing in  their  principles,  sometimes  on  this  religion  and  sometimes 
on  that.  It  is  true  that  he  talks  of  the  Quakers'  delusions  ; 
but  his  fight  was  with  principles,  and  not  persons,  and  he 
sets  forth  what  in  his  opinion  were  "  the  lies  with  which  the 
devil  beguileth  poor  souls."  First,  That  salvation  was  not 
fully  completed  for  sinners  by  Christ  Jesus.  Secondly,  That 
the  light  within  was  sufficient  without  the  written  word. 
Some  of  these  visionaries  denied  the  divinity  of  Christ ; 
others  asserted  that  Christ  was  born,  lived,  and  was  crucified 
within  them,  and  that  he  was  only  to  be  found  within  them- 
selves by  the  aid  of  that  light  which  enlighteneth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  the  world;  that  his  being  found  in 
fashion  as  a  man,  and  humbling  himself  to  the  death  of  the 
cross, — in  fact,  that  his  personal  appearance  on  earth  was 
only  typical  of  his  taking  up  a  residence  in  the  soul  of  every 
believer.  Thus  they  entirely  abandoned  and  neglected  the 
written  word.  They  adopted  some  singular  practices,  lived 
upon  bread  and  water  ;  foi'bade  marriage,  and  refused  to  ivear 
hat-bands.  Such  were  the  adversaries  against  whom  he 
wrote  the  first  book  that  he  published.  It  was  about  this  time 
that  Naylor  appeared,  and  he,  acting  under  the  delusion  of  hav- 
ing Christ  within  him,  rode  on  an  ass  into  Bristol,  while  the 
mob  strewed  their  clothes  before  him,  crying,  "  Hosannah  ! 
blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  And 
instead  of  reasoning  with  him,  in  order  to  remove  this  tem- 
porary delusion,  he  Avas  cruelly  tormented,  imprisoned, 
pilloried,  with  its  brutal  accompaniments ;  burned  through 
the  tongue  with  a  hot  iron ;  branded  with  a  B  on  his  fore- 
head, for  blasphemy ;  whipped,  and  confined  to  hard  labour. 
Mr.    Grainger   says  "  that    the   discipline   of  a  prison  soon 


xl  INTRODUCTION. 

restored  him  to  his  senses ;"7  and  we  are  inclined  to  think 
that  he  was  mercifully  restored  to  his  right  mind,  because  he 
was  some  years  afterwards  received  into  the  Society  of 
Friends  as  a  member,  and  died  in  their  communion ;  a  fact 
which  the  clergyman  had  not  the  honesty  to  state. 

Against  this  first  work  of  Bunyan's,  an  ansAver  was  published 
by  Edward  Burroughs,  afterwards  an  eminent  Quaker.  In  this 
he  fought,  as  Bunyan  called  it,  "  bitterly,  with  a  parcel  of  scold- 
ing expressions ;  "  and  he  advises  him  not  to  appear  so  gross 
a  railing  Rabshakeh.  And  in  fact,  he  proved  himself  a  match 
for  his  adversary  with  those  weapons.  He  calls  Bunyan  of 
the  stock  of  Ishmael,  and  of  the  seed  of  Cain,  whose  line 
reacheth  to  the  murthering  priests,  enemies  of  Christ,  preach- 
ing for  hire.  Bunyan  replies,  "  These  are  words  flung  unto 
the  winds  by  thee,  my  adversary."  And  he  charges  the 
Quakers  with  holding  some  of  the  errors  which  distinguished 
the  Ranters,  and  uses  some  railing  terms,  calling  these 
Quakers  fond  hypocrites  and  deceivers.  Burroughs  having 
thoughtlessly  urged  that  there  was  not  a  Quaker  heard  of  in 
the  days  of  John,  ^  his  keen  antagonist  replied,  "  Friend, 
thou  hast  rightly  said,  there  was  not  a  Quaker  heard  of 
indeed,  though  there  were  many  Christians  heard  of  then." 
*'  Your  sister,  Anne  Blackley,  bid  me,  in  the  audience  of 
many.  To  tliroio  away  the  Scriptures ;  to  which  I  answered. 
No,  for  then  the  devil  ivould  he  too  hard  for  me^  Among  other 
queries  put  to  him  by  Burroughs,  one  was,  "Is  not  the  liar 
and  slanderer  an  unbeliever,  and  of  the  cursed  nature  ?  "  ^ 
Bunyan's  reply  was :  "  The  liar  and  slanderer  is  an  unbe- 
liever; and  if  he  live  and  die  in  that  condition,  his  state  is 
very  sad,  tho'  if  he  turn,  there  is  hope  for  him ;  therefore 
repent,  and  turn  quickly,  or  else  look  to  yourselves,  for  you 
are  the  men,  as  is  clear  by  your  discourse." 

This  controversy,  carried  on  with  great  spirit  and  warmth, 
related  much  to  that  difficult  question,  whether  Christ  con- 

'  Biog.  Hist,  of  England. 

"  Doubtless  meaning  that  they  were  not  then  called  Quakers. 

*  Query  8. 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 

tinued  his  human  body  after  his  ascension,  or  was  it  resolved 
into  a  spiritual  form.     It  must  have  had  a  beneficial  ten- 
dency.    Bunyan  considered  that  his  antagonist  did  not  value 
the  Holy  Oracles  sufficiently ;  and  Burroughs  considered  that 
too  little  attention  was  paid  to  "  Christ  formed  in  us  the  hope 
of  glory."     Both  were  questions  of  the  deepest  importance ; 
and  happy  was  it  for  those  of  their  countrymen  who  witnessed 
the  strife  between  these  giants,  and  were  led  earnestly  and 
prayerfully  to  search  into  these  vital  and  important  truths.  The 
dispute  presented  much  wholesome  fruit,  although  not  served 
up  in  silver  dishes.     Burroughs's  friend,  Howgill,  bears  this 
testimony  of  his  worth: — "  Though  thou  didst  cut  as  a  razor 
— and  many  a  rough  stone  hast  thou  squared  and  polished, 
and  much  knotty  wood  hast  thou  hewn  in  thy  day — yet  to  the 
seed,  thy  words  dropped  like  oil,  and  thy  lips  as  the  honey- 
comb."    A  contest  which  involved  in  it  a  close  examination 
of  the  sacred  Scriptures,   certainly  affi)rded  valuable  lessons 
in  fitting  Britain's  allegorist  for  his  great  and  important  work. 
Bunyan's  difference  of  opinion  relative  to  the  terms  of  com- 
munion at  the  Lord's   table,    led  to  a  controversy  with  the 
Particular  Baptist  churches,  to  all  of  which  he  was  sincerely 
attached :  and  this  was  probably  one  of  the  means  by  which 
he  was  enabled  to  write  an  itinerary  to  all  pilgrims ;  for  it 
must  have  blunted  the  edge   of  his  sectarian   feelings,   and 
have  enlarged  his  heart  towards  the  whole  Christian  commu- 
nity of  every  class.     In  the  preface  to    the   Reason  of  his 
Practice,  he  displays  all  the  noble  sentiments  of  a  Christian 
confessor ;  of  one  who  has  been  deservedly  called  the  Apostle 
of  Bedford,  or  Bishop  Bunyan.      "  Faith  and  holiness  are  my 
professed  principles,  with  an  endeavour,  so  far  as  in  me  lieth,  to 
be  at  peace  with  all  men.     What  shall  I  say  ?  let  mine  enemies 
themselvea  be  judges,  if  anything  in  these  following  doctrines, 
or  if  aught  that  any  man  hath  heard  me  preach,  doth,  or  hath 
according  to  the  true  intent  of  my  words,  savoured  either  of 
heresy    or   rebellion.     I  say  again,  let  they  themselves   be 
judges,  if  aught  they  find  in  my  writings  or  preaching,  doth 
render  me  worthy  of  almost  twelve  years'  imprisonment,  or 

d 


Xlii  INTRODUCTION. 

one  that  deserveth  to  be  hanged,  or  banished  for  ever,  accord- 
ing to  their  tremendous  sentence  ?  Indeed,  my  principles  are 
such  as  lead  me  to  a  denial  to  communicate  in  the  things  of 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  with  ungodly  and  open  profane ; 
neither  can  I,  in  or  by  the  superstitious  inventions  of  this 
world,  consent  that  my  soul  should  be  governed  in  any  of  my 
approaches  to  God,  because  commanded  to  the  con- 
trary, AND  commended  FOR  SO  REFUSING.  Wherefore, 
excepting  this  one  thing,  for  which  I  ought  not  to  be  re- 
buked, I  shall,  I  trust,  in  despite  of  slander  and  falsehood, 
discover  myself  at  all  times  a  peaceable  and  obedient 
subject.  But  if  nothing  will  do,  unless  I  make  my  con- 
science a  continual  butchery  and  slaughter-shop, — unless  put- 
ting out  mine  own  eyes,  I  commit  me  to  the  blind  to  lead  me  (as  I 
doubt  is  desired  by  some),  I  have  determined,  the  Almighty 
God  being  my  help  and  shield,  yet  to  suffer,  if  frail  life 
might  continue  so  long,  even  till  the  moss  shall  grow  on  mine 
eyebrows,  rather  than  to  violate  my  faith  and  principles. 
Touching  my  practice  as  to  communion  with  visible  saints, 
although  not  baptized  with  water ;  I  say  it  is  my  present  judg- 
ment so  to  do,  and  am  willing  to  render  a  further  reason 
thereof,  shall  I  see  the  leading  hand  of  God  thereto.  Thine 
in  bonds  for  the  Gospel,  John  Bunyan." 

KiflS.n,  Denne,  T.  Paul,  and  Danvers  replied  to  this  Con- 
fession ;  Jesse  and  others  defended  it.  This  led  to  the  pub- 
lication of  "  The  Differences  about  Water  Baptism  no  Bar 
to  Communion,"  and  to  the  "Peaceable  Principles  and 
True."  The  controversy  was  carried  on  with  sufficient 
acrimony  to  shake  Bunyan's  sectarian  feelings,  and  to  excite 
in  his  breast  a  determined  spirit  of  personal,  prayerful  inquiry 
at  the  Fountain  of  Truth,  in  all  matters  both  of  faith  and 
practice,  at  even  the  risk  of  life. 

Here,  again,  a  painful  sense  of  duty  requires  me  to  notice 
the  unfair  dealing  of  Mr.  Philip  with  John  Bunyan.  He  asserts 
that  which  is  a  perversion  of  truth,  bordering  upon  falsehood. 
Mr.  Philip  says  that  Bunyan  "also  rebuked  those  of  them  [the 
Baptists]  who  spoke  stoutly,  and  a  hundred  times  ovei*,  against 


INTRODUCTION.  xliii 

the  baptism  of  the  Church  of  England,  as  anti-christian."  ^ 
He  did  believe  it  anti-christian,  and  therefore  he  rejected  it ; 
and  Mr.  Philip  may  do  well  to  follow  his  example  as  to  that 
cunningly  devised  fable.  The  Baptists,  in  their  argument  with 
Bunyan,  had  alleged  that  Episcopalians  and  Presbyterians  all 
agreed  that  some  kind  of  ^<;afer-baptism  was  commanded ;  and 
in  reply,  he  cuttingly  taunts  them,  "  They  are  against  your 
manner  of  dipping,  as  well  as  the  subject  of  water-baptism ; 
neither  do  you,  for  all  you  flatter  them,  agree  together  in  all 
but  the  subject.  Do  you  allow  their  sprinkling  ?  Do  you  allow 
their  signing  with  the  cross  ?  Why  then  have  you  so  stoutly, 
an  hundred  times  over,  condemned  those  things  as  anti- 
christian  ?  "  ^  This  is  as  much  as  to  say.  If  you  think  with 
them  that  an  unmeaning  ceremony  turns  a  baby  into  a  child 
of  God  and  an  Inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  if  you 
agree  with  signing  with  the  cross,  and  sprinkling  with  water, 
why  call  it  anti-christian :  but  if  you  do  not  agree  with  these 
inventions,  then  you  will  do  well  to  call  them  anti-christian 
still. 

The  principles  of  our  great  allegorist  upon  this  subject 
have  spread  almost  over  all  the  Baptist  churches.  Bunyan 
probably  considered  these  sentiments  as  the  precursors  of  the 
dawn  of  a  happy  day,  when  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
with  purifying  power  like  heavenly  fire,  shall  absorb  all  these 
bitter  waters  of  contention  which  occasioned  such  angry, 
unholy  dissension  among  the  churches  of  Christ;  when  the 
soul  of  every  believer  shall  be  imbued  and  immersed  in  sacred 
love  and  zeal  for  the  honour  of  our  Lord  and  the  increase  of 
his  kingdom  ;  and  the  subject  of  water-baptism,  as  a  personal 
duty,  be  better  understood  and  appreciated. 

In  this  conflict  with  his  brethren,  all  that  sanctified  pene- 
tration, that  unwavering  fortitude,  and  that  determination 
first  to  understand,  and  then  to  do  his  Lord's  will,  was  dis- 
played, that  fitted  the  author  to  write  his  surprising  allegory, 

^  Page  500.  p.  99.     Mr.  Philip  quotes  from  Hogg's 

^  Differences  about  Water  Baptism  edition  of  Bunyan's  works,  but  it  is  the 
no    Bar    to    Communion,    8vo,    1673,        same  as  tlie  original  work. 

d  2 


xliv  INTRODUCTION. 

and  to  be  a  "  Great-heart "  to  guide  and  protect  bis  weaker 
fellow  pilgrims.  Soon  the  prisons  of  England  were  filled 
with  the  most  pious  and  virtuous  of  her  citizens ;  and  when 
Bunyan  and  his  antagonists,  lx)th  Quakers  and  Baptists, 
were  confined  within  the  same  walls  ;  conversed  upon 
spiritual  things ;  worshipped  unitedly  their  God  by  the  same 
way  of  access  ;  all  former  bitterness  and  animosities  were 
swallowed  up  in  the  communion  of  saints ;  and  the  wall  of 
separation  was  thrown  down, — not  only  did  their  sufferings 
increase  their  catholic  spirit  and  respect  for  each  other,  but 
they  became  a  blessing  to  many  who  were  confined  for  real 
crimes:  and  when  they  came  forth,  it  was  with  renewed 
powers  to  proclaim  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  Hun- 
dreds of  poor  imprisoned,  godly  ministers  felt  the  power  of 
those  words,  "  Blessed  be  God  who  comforteth  us  in  all  our 
tribulation,  that  we  may  be  able  to  comfort  them  that  are  in 
trouble."  ^  Like  Kelsey,  a  Baptist  minister  who  suffered 
seventeen  years'  imprisonment,  they  could  say : 

"  I  hope  the  more  they  punish  me,  that  I  shall  grow  more  bold  : 
The  furnace  they  provide  for  me,  will  make  me  finer  gold. 
My  friends,  my  God  will  do  me  good,  wlien  tliey  intend  me  harm  ; 
They  may  suppose  a  prison  cold,  but  God  can  make  it  warm. 
What  if  my  God  should  suffer  them  on  me  to  have  their  will, 
And  give  me  lieaven  instead  of  earth  ?     I  am  no  loser  still." 

Thus  does  antichrist  destroy  himself,  for  whether  he  im- 
prisons the  Christian,  or  only  takes  his  goods  for  church  rates 
or  ecclesiastical  impositions,  he  arms  liim  with  weapons  to 
hasten  the  destruction  of  his  own  kingdom. 


»  2  Cor.  i.  4. 


INTRODUCTION,  xlv 


BUNYAN  S   RELEASE   FROM   PRISON,    AND   PUBLICATION 
OF    THE   pilgrim's   PROGRESS. 

The  reigns  of  the  debauched  Charles  IL,  and  the  besotted 
James,  those  fag-ends  of  an  unhappy  race,  were  the  most 
humihating  that  these  reahns  ever  Avitnessed.  Deep  dissimu- 
lation,^ oft-repeated  falsehoods,  wilful  and  deliberate  perjuries, 
were  employed  by  the  first  of  these  royal  profligates  to  obtain 
the  throne.  Solemn  pledges  to  pardon  political  offenders 
were  ruthlessly  violated,  as  well  as  the  oaths  and  declarations 
"  that  Hberty  should  be  extended  to  tender  consciences  on  re- 
ligious subjects,  so  that  none  should  be  disturbed  or  called  in 
question  for  any  differences  of  opinion  in  matters  of  reli- 
gion." ''  The  fanatic  church  of  England  soon  obtained  laws 
in  direct  violation  of  all  the  king's  oaths  and  declarations, 
such  as  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  the  Test  and  Corporation 
Acts,  the  Five-mile  and  Conventicle  Acts,  and  a  revival  of 
the  old  statutes  for  compelling  all  persons  to  attend  the 
church  service ;  and  thus  forcing  the  weak-minded  to  become 
hypocritical  members  of  the  sect  which  was  then,  and  con- 
^tinues  to  this  day,  to  be  preferred  by  the  state  as  best  suiting 
its  purposes.  Among  the  rest  was  an  Act  ordering  all  the 
subjects  of  the  realm,  for  ever,  to  meet  in  their  respective 
churches  on  the  29th  of  May  in  each  year,  and  thank  God 
that  these  kingdoms  were  on  that  day  new  born  and  raised 
from  the  dead :  ^  an  act  which  has  not  been  repealed,  but 
remains  a  disgrace  to  our  statute  book.  A  hurricane  of 
persecution  followed,  and  all  the  gaols  in  the  kingdom  soon 
became  filled  with  those  of  our  countrymen,  who,  by  their 
virtue  and  piety,  were  the  brightest  ornaments  of  Chris- 
tianity. While  these  barbarities  were  perpetrating,  desolations 

®  That  thorough  courtier,  Lord  Hali-         jewel   in   the  royal  crown,"      Harris's 
fox,  apologizes  for  him  thus  :  "If  he         Charles  II.  vol.  ii.  p.  16. 
dissembled,   let  us  remember  that  he  ''  Declaration  from  Breda, 

was  a  king  ;  and  that  dissimulation  is  a  *  Meaning   the   restoration    of    the 

Stuart  dynasty. 


xlvi  INTRODUCTION. 

followed  in  rapid  succession.  A  fearful  pestilence  swept 
away  the  inhabitants  of  the  metropolis,  followed  in  the  next 
year  by  a  conflagration  which  destroyed  the  cathedral  and 
nearly  all  its  churches,  magazines,  houses,  and  enormous 
wealth.  Again,  in  the  succeeding  year  came  a  Dutch  fleet, 
which  took  Sheerness,  destroyed  our  shipping,  and  caused  a 
degree  of  consternation  thus  described  by  an  eye-witness,  who 
was  attached  to  the  court :  ^  "  I  was  at  London  in  the  plague 
and  fire  years,  yet  in  neither  did  I  observe  such  consternation 
and  confusion  in  the  looks  of  all  men,  as  at  this  time,  and 
with  great  cause:  for  if  the  Dutch  had  then  come  up  to 
London,  they  had  found  all  open  to  them,  not  one  gun 
mounted  at  Tilbury  Fort,  nor  one  frigate  ready  in  the  river ; 
so  as  they  might  have  forced  all  the  ships  in  the  river  up 
to  the  bridge,  and  there  have  burnt  them,  which  would 
certainly  have  fired  the  Tower  and  all  the  suburbs  west  to 
Blackwall,  as  well  as  Southwark  below  bridge."  Still  the 
persecution  of  the  Christians  was  continued  in  all  its  rigour. 

Bunyan  was  one  among  the  first  persons  punished  under 
the  sanction  of  these  wicked  laws.  In  November,  1660,  he 
became  a  victim,  and  was  persecuted  for  the  virtue  of  refusing 
to  be  a  hypocrite.  The  account  of  this  event,  as  written  by 
himself,  is  incorporated  in  all  his  biographies,  and  is  deeply 
interesting  and  instructive.  He  was  warned,  and  might  have 
escaped  for  that  time,  if  he  had  omitted  to  preach  at  the 
village  of  Samsell,  or  even  by  altering  the  time  of  the  ser- 
vice ;  but  no  fear  could  make  him  swerve  one  jot  from  the 
path  of  duty.  The  constable  entered,  and  going  up  to  the 
pulpit,  laid  his  hand  upon  him.  Bunyan,  with  the  Bible 
open  in  his  hand,  stedfastly  fixed  his  eyes  upon  the  man, 
when  he  turned  pale,  relinquished  his  grasp,  and  left  him. 
Truly  did  one  of  his  friends  say,  "  he  had  a  sharp  quick  eye."  ^ 
He  then  gave  himself  up  to  those  who  had  come  to  appre- 
hend him. 

Thus  was  he  taken,  sent  to  prison,  and  threatened  with 

'  Mr.  Roger  Cook.  Rennet's  History  »  Continuation    to   Grace    Abound- 

of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  265.     '  inp. 


INTRODUCTION.  xlvii 

transportation  or  the  halter,  unless  he  would  conform,  or  pre- 
tend to  conform,  to  whatever  religion  happened  to  be  by  law 
established.  This  at  all  hazards  he  steadily  refused.  Bun- 
yan's  sufferings  in  prison  were  aggravated  by  his  affectionate 
feelings  for  his  blind  daughter,  and  with  tender  apprehen- 
sion he  speaks  of  her  in  language  of  impassioned  solicitude. 
*'  Poor  child,  thought  I,  what  sorrow  art  thou  like  to  have 
for  thy  portion  in  this  world !  Thou  must  be  beaten,  must 
beg,  suffer  hunger,  cold,  nakedness,  and  a  thousand  calamities, 
though  I  cannot  now  endure  the  wind  shall  blow  upon  thee ! 
Oh,  the  hardships  I  thought  my  blind  one  might  go  under, 
would  break  my  heart  to  pieces ! "  Then  he  casts  himself 
upon  the  boundless  power  of  his  God,  repents  his  doubts,  and 
is  filled  Avith  consolation. 

His  wife  was  a  partaker  of  his  own  spirit, — a  heroine  of 
no  ordinary  stamp  in  so  trying  a  situation.  She  came  to 
London  with  a  petition  for  the  release  of  her  husband,  which 
was  presented  to  the  House  of  Lords ;  but  in  vain.  Time 
after  time  she  appeared  in  person  before  the  judges ;  and 
although  a  delicate  young  woman  of  retiring  habits,  pleaded 
the  cause  of  her  husband  and  his  children  in  language 
Avorthy  of  the  most  talented  counsel;  but  all  her  supplica- 
tions were  fruitless,  although  Judge  Hale  Avas  evidently 
affected  by  her  poAA'erful  appeal,  and  felt  much  for  her. 
"  This  courageous,  this  fine,  high-minded  English  woman, 
and  Lord  Chief  Justice  Hale,  and  Bunyan,  have  long  since 
met  in  heaven ;  but  how  little  could  they  recognize  each 
other's  character  on  earth  !  How  little  could  the  distressed, 
insulted  Avife  have  imagined,  that  beneath  the  judge's 
ermine,  there  Avas  beating  the  heart  of  a  child  of  God, 
a  man  of  humility,  integrity,  and  prayer !  How  little  could 
the  great,  the  learned,  the  illustrious,  and  truly  pious  judge 
ha\"e  dreamed  that  the  man,  the  obscure  tinker,  whom  he  was 
suffering  to  languish  in  prison  for  want  of  a  writ  of  error, 
Avould  one  day  be  the  subject  of  greater  admiration  and  praise 
than  all  the  judges  in  the  kingdom  of  Great  Britain !  How 
little  could  he  dream,  that  from  that  narroAv  cell  Avhere  the 


Xlviii  INTRODUCTION. 

prisoner  was  left  incarcerated,  and  cut  off  apparently  from  all 
usefulness,  a  glory  would  shine  out,  illustrating  the  govern- 
ment and  grace  of  God,  and  doing  more  good  to  man,  than 
all  the  prelates  and  judges  of  the  kingdom  put  together  had 
accomplished."  ^ 

How  many  thousands  will  in  heaven  search  out  Bunyan, 
to  hear  his  own  accounts  of  his  sufferings,  and  how  he  con- 
ceived his  wondrous  dream !  Nor  will  they  forget  the  wife 
whose  Plain  Man's  Pathway  led  him  to  his  first  inquiries 
after  the  Wicket-gate ;  nor  his  Elizabeth,  who  so  nobly 
pleaded  for  him  before  the  judges. 

The  number  of  nonconformists  who  were  imprisoned  in 
these  trying  times,  will  never  be  fully  known  until  the  great 
day  when  all  secrets  will  be  revealed,  to  the  honour  of  the 
persecuted  and  the  infamy  of  the  persecutors.  They  were  of 
both  sexes  and  of  all  ages,  from  the  child  of  nine  or  ten  years 
to  the  hoary-headed  saint  of  eighty,  who,  bending  and  trem- 
bling over  the  grave  with  bodily  infirmities,  was  driven  to 
prison  and  incarcerated  in  a  filthy  dungeon.  In  Picart's 
Religious  Ceremonies,9  it  is  stated  that  the  number  of  dis- 
senters, of  all  sects,  who  perished  in  prison  under  Charles  II. 

was  EIGHT    THOUSAND. 

As  a  sect,  the  Quakers  were  the  most  severely  handled. 
Not  only  were  they  the  ardent  friends  of  religious  liberty, 
but  their  principles  were  a  blow  at  the  root  of  priestly 
pridje  and  domination;  they  denied  the  right  of  any  gospel 
maintenance,  whether  by  forcible  or  voluntary  contribu- 
tions ;  and  taught  that  the  work  of  the  ministiy  Avas  one  of  the 
purest  benevolence,  and  not  to  be  fulfilled  for  the  love  of  pelf, 
or  idleness,  or  worldly  distinction.  The  law  required  them 
to  attend  the  church,  and  when  there,  roused  by  the  foolish 
and  wicked  observations  of  the  priest,  it  was  common  for 
them  to  take  out  their  Bibles,  and  denounce  in  awful  terms 
the  conduct  of  such  blind  teachers,  who  were  leading  their 


*  Dr.  Cheever's  Lectures.  niille    dissenlcrf:    de  toutes  les   croy- 

*  Paria,  180!),  torn.  x.  p.  71":  "  Huit         ances  p6rirent  en  prison." 


mTRODUCTlON.  xKx 

equally  blind  hearers  to  everlasting  perdition.  And  for  this 
they  were  imprisoned  and  cruelly  treated. 

If  some  of  the  nonconformists  occasionally  interrupted  the 
clergyman  while  preaching,  the  chiu'ch  party  frequently  did 
the  same  to  both  Baptists  and  Quakers.  Thus  it  happened 
when  Bunyan  was  preaching  in  a  bam,  a  church  scholar, 
wounded  by  his  observations,  cried  out,  "  You  are  a  deceiver, 
a  person  of  no  charity,  nor  fit  to  preach;  for  you  condemn 
the  greater  portion  of  your  hearers."  Bunyan  replied,  "  Did 
not  Jesus  Christ  preach  to  the  same  eiFect,  when  he  described 
four  sorts  of  hearers,  —  the  highway,  stony,  thorny,  and 
good-ground  ?  whereof  the  good  ground  were  the  only  per- 
sons to  be  saved  ?  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  Jesus  was  unfit 
to  preach?  Away  with  such  logick  !  "  The  scholar  rode 
away  much  better  punished  than  by  imprisonment  for  dis- 
turbing a  congregation  which  he  was  not  compelled  to  attend. 

Multitudes  of  Quakers  and  Baptists  were  confined  for  the 
non-payment  of  ruinous  fines,  imposed  after  the  officers  of 
injustice  had  swept  away  all  the  worldly  goods  that  they 
possessed.  In  most  cases  they  were  treated  with  extreme 
cruelty  ;  some,  even  in  the  midst  of  the  plague  then  raging, 
were  dragged  from  their  homes  and  families,  and  shut  up 
in  a  gaol  little  better  than  a  pest-house,  in  which  seventy- 
nine  members  of  the  Society  of  Friends,"  and  a  great  num- 
ber of  other  nonconformists  died,  and  obtained  a  happy 
release  from  the  fangs  of  tyranny.  Upwards  of  eight  thou- 
sand Quakers  alone  suffered  imprisonment ;  ^  and  the  record 
of  those  who  died  in  prison,  as  preserved  at  Devonshire 
House,  BIshopsgate,  gives  the  fearful  number  of  three  hun- 
dred and  ninety-nine  persons  of  that  persuasion  only.  At 
Carlisle,  Dorothy  Waugh  and  Ann  Robinson,  for  preaching, 
were  dragged  through  the  streets,  with  each  an  iron  instru- 
njent  of  torture,  called  a  bridle,  upon  their  heads,  and  were 
treated   with   gross   indecency.*       A    youth   named  James 


^  Hooke"s  Address  to  both  Houses  of  '  Ibid. 

Parliament,  4to,  1() 74.  *  Besse's  Suft'eriiigs. 


1  INTRODUCTION. 

Parnell,  aged  nineteen,  was  treated  with  a  degree  of  cruelty 
which,  had  it  not  been  well  aiithenticated,  would  have  been 
beyond  our  credibility.  "  He  was  thrust  into  a  hole  in 
Colchester  Castle  not  so  wide  as  a  baker's  oven,  and  at  a 
considerable  height  from  the  pavement ;  in  climbing  down  to 
get  his  food,  his  hands  being  benumbed,  he  lost  his  hold, 
and  fell  upon  the  stones,  wounding  his  head  severely,  and 
bruising  his  body.  In  this  state  he  was  beaten  by  the  jailer, 
and  thrust  into  a  similar  hole  nearer  the  pavement.  He  was 
shortly  released  from  further  torments  by  death. "  ^  A  me- 
morial was  presented  to  the  king  and  his  council  at  White- 
hall, "  Being  a  brief  relation  of  some  of  the  cruel  and 
inhuman  usage,  and  great  persecution  and  imprisonment  of 
above  four  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty  of  the  people  of 
God,  in  scorn  called  Quakers,  for  worshipping  of  God  and 
meeting  together  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."^  The  sum- 
mary of  this  frightful  broadside,  which  gives  an  account  of 
the  number  of  Quakers  in  every  prison  throughout  the  king- 
dom, and  is  of  undoubted  authority,  shows  that  such  was  the 
thronged  state  of  the  prisons,  that  in  some  cases  they  were 
crowded  into  so  small  a  space  that  some  had  to  stand  while 
the  others  laid  down.  Many  were  taken  out  dead.  To  add  to 
their  trials,  in  Somersetshire  the  vilest  felons  were  ironed  to 
the  poor  Quakers ;  all  the  prisons  were  filled  with  men,  women, 
and  children ;  the  aged  and  young,  healthy  and  sick,  were  in- 
discriminately shut  up  with  the  vilest  of  ruffians,  their  clothes 
torn  ofi";  women  taken  from  their  beds  in  the  night,  and 
driven  along  the  dirty  roads  in  winter  to  prison ;  sixty-eight 
thrust  into  a  small  room,  without  bread  or  water,  some  of  the 
women  being  in  the  most  trying  and  delicate  state  ;  many  in 
chains  and  fetters,  wallowing  in  indescribable  filth.  Sixty 
of  these  Quakers  were  at  one  time  confined  with  John  Bun- 
yan  and  his  friends  in  the  prisons  in  Bedfordshire  ;  and  in 
one  place  of  confinement  in  that  county,  "  fifty  are  in  a  close 
and  strait  place,  where  many  are  sick  and  weak,  and  likely  to 

*  Besse's  Sufferings,  vol.  i.  p.  191. 

"  Devonshire  House,  in  a  volume  of  tracts,  4to,  No.  .57. 


INTRODUCTION.  li 

perish."  A  very  affecting  appeal  was  made  at  this  time  to 
the  House  of  Commons.  One  hundred  and  sixty-four  non- 
conformists called  Quakers  assembled  at  Westminster,  and 
sent  in  a  petition,  stating  that  many  of  their  brethren  lay  in 
irons,  cruelly  beaten  by  cruel  jailers ;  many  have  died  in 
their  sufferings,  and  many  lie  sick  and  weak  upon  straw  ; 
and  then  praying  that  they  might  suffer  in  their  stead,  and 
that  their  bodies  might  be  put  into  the  holes  and  prisons,  and 
an  equal  number  of  their  suffering  dying  friends  be  released. 
Well  might  the  editor  of  the  Christian  Examiner  call  this 
"  the  feelings  of  majestic  benevolence  expressed  in  tender  and 
beautiful  simplicity."  ^  In  the  gaol  for  the  city  of  Bedford, 
in  which  Bunyan  was  confined,  the  prisoners  were  treated 
with  an  extraordinary  degree  of  humanity,  for  which  the 
jailer  was  severely  threatened  by  some  of  the  inhuman  jus- 
tices. So  was  Bunyan's  valuable  life  preserved,  and  he 
favoured  with  an  opportunity  of  writing  the  Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress, and  so  fulfilling  his  great  and  appointed  work.  During 
this  time  he  was  permitted,  by  favour  of  the  jailer,  to  visit 
his  family,  and  even  to  go  to  London.  This  soon  Avas 
rumoured ;  and  one  night  he  felt  so  uneasy,  when  at  home, 
that  at  a  very  late  hour  he  went  back  to  the  prison.  The 
news  of  his  being  with  his  family  at  Elstow,  was  that  very 
day  taken  to  a  neighbouring  priest,  who  at  midnight  sent  a 
messenger  to  the  gaol,  that  he  might  be  a  witness  against  the 
merciful  keeper.  On  his  arrival  he  demanded,  "  Are  all  the 
prisoners  safe  ?  " — "  Yes."  "  Is  John  Bunyan  safe  ?  " — 
"Yes."  "  Let  me  see  him."  He  was  called,  and  appeared  ; 
and  all  was  well.  His  kind-hearted  jailer  said  to  him,  "  You 
may  go  out  when  you  will,  for  you  know  much  better  when 
to  return  than  I  can  tell  you."  While  he  was  suffering  this 
imprisonment,  his  friends  in  Bedford  were  severely  visited  by 
the  ruthless  hand  of  persecution. 

Mr.  Ruff  head  ^  was  one  of  Bunyan's  principal  friends  and 
supporters,  and  had  the  honour  of  being  the  first  that  had  his 

'  Christian  Examiner,  vol.  i.  p.  211. 

*  Spell  "  Roughed  "  in  the   Indulgence,  167-. 


Hi  INTRODUCTION. 

house  plundered  in  the  general  persecution,  when  those  who 
refused  to  attend  the  church  service  were  so  severely  visited. 

The  eiFect  of  persecution  upon  this  excellent  and  pious 
man  was,  that  he  within  two  years  opened  his  house  for  the 
reception  of  the  despised  Christians,  and  it  was  tlie  first  place 
of  icorshijj  that  was  licensed  in  Bedford  for  the  use  of  the 
nonconformists,  if  not  the  first  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
The  account  of  the  ruffianly  transactions  which  took  place  at 
this  time,  is  contained  in  a  rare  tract,  called  "  A  True  and 
Impartial  Narrative  of  some  Illegal  and  Arbitrary  Proceed- 
ings against  Innocent  Nonconformists  in  the  Town  of  Bed- 
ford, 4to,  1670."  8  "  On  Monday  the  30th  of  May,  Fecknam, 
the  chief  apparitor,  with  the  churchwarden,  constable,  and 
overseer,  began  to  distrain.  The  person's  name  is  J.  Ruff- 
head  at  whose  house  they  first  began.  He  had  been  fined 
three  pounds,  and  they  took  away  two  timber  trees,  value 
seven  pounds."  ^ 

He  must  have  been  a  man  of  some  consequence  in  the 
town,  to  have  been  dealt  with  so  leniently ;  for  in  most  cases 
they  swept  away  all  the  stock  in  trade,  tools,  and  household 
furniture,  and  left  the  bare  walls  to  shelter  the  widow  and 
her  lamenting  orphans.  Mr.  Foster,  a  justice,  went  with  the 
band,  and  in  some  cases  doubled  the  fine,  because  it  Avas  not 
immediately  paid.  The  misery  was  such,  that  the-  porters 
said  they  would  be  hanged,  draion,  and  quartered,  before  they 
loould  assist  in  that  work.  Two  of  them,  for  so  refusing,  were 
caught  and  sent  to  Bedford  Gaol,  where  doubtless  they  gave 
an  account  to  Bunyan  of  the  cruel  trials  to  which  his  pious 
friends  were  subjected.  The  trained  bands  were  called  out 
to  assist,  but  "the  tradesmen,  journeymen,  labourers,  and 
servants  having  either  left  the  town  or  hid  themselves,  to 
avoid  his  [Fecknam's]  call,  the  town  was  so  thin  of  people, 
that  it  looked  more  like  a  country  village  than  a  corporation ; 
and  the  shops  being  generally  shut  down,  it  seemed  like  a  place 
visited  with  a  pest,  where  usually  is  written  upon  the  door, 

*   Ju  niv  own  libr.-irv.  '  I'«1bC  ^- 


INTRODUCTION.  liii 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us  !  "  Similar  desolations  fell  upon 
many  cities  in  the  kingdom,  which  must  have  been  utterly 
ruined,  had  the  absurd  attempt  to  enforce  uniformity  been 
continued. 

Our  pious  teacher  had  his  time  so  fully  occupied  in 
prison,  that  his  hours  must  have  passed  more  sweetly  and 
swiftly  than  those  of  a  debauched  monarch,  surrounded 
with  luxuries,  in  his  magnificent  palaces.  To  make  laces, 
the  profit  of  which  supported  a  beloved  wife  and  his  family 
of  helpless  children,  must  have  employed  many  of  his  hours, 
to  procure  the  scantiest  food  and  most  homely  clothing.  But 
he  found  time  also  to  study  his  Bible,  teach  his  fellow  prison- 
ers, and  compose  books  which  have  inscribed  his  name  on  the 
page  of  history  more  indelibly  and  brilliantly  than  it  could 
have  been  if  set  with  diamonds  on  the  most  splendid  earthly 
crown.  He  who  could  write,  and  loved  to  write,  such 
volumes,  wanted  not  occupation  or  solace;  he  might  have 
said,  I  have  found  a  nest  of  honey  in  the  carcass  of  the  lion 
that  roared  upon  me.  The  world  has  from  that  time  been 
refreshed  with  its  SAveetness,  while,  as  a  spiritual  medicine,  it 
counteracts  the  guilt  and  wretchedness  of  man.  From  such 
adversity  God  has  extracted  manna  for  the  nourishment  of 
his  church  in  the  wilderness. 

Stone  walls  do  not  a  prison  make, 
Nor  iron  bars  a  cage  ; 
Minds  innocent  and  quiet  take 
That  for  a  hermitage. 

For  though  men  keep  my  outward  man 
Within  their  locks  and  bars, 
Yet  by  the  faith  of  Christ  I  can 
Mount  higher  than  the  stars. 

These  be  the  men  that  God  doth  count 
Of  high  and  noble  mind  ; 
These  be  the  men  that  do  surmount 
What  you  in  nature  find. 

First  they  do  conquer  their  own  hearts, 
All  worldly  fears,  and  then 
Also  the  devil's  fiery  darts. 
And  persecuting  men. 


liv  INTRODUCTION. 

How  refreshing  for  such  Scriptures  as  these  "to  thrill 
through  the  soul "  of  a  ijrisoner  for  Christ :  "  Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled,"  &c.  ;  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribu- 
lation ;  but  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  overcome  the  world." 
Thus  Bunyan  says,  "  I  have  had  sweet  sights  of  the  forgive- 
ness of  sin  in  this  place.  O  the  Mount  Zion,  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem,  the  innumerable  company  of  angels,  and  God  the 
Judge  of  all ;  Jesus  the  Mediator,  and  the  spirits  of  just 
men  made  perfect!  I  have  seen  here  what  I  never  can 
express.  I  have  felt  the  truth  of  that  Scripture,  'Whom 
having  not  seen  ye  love ;  in  whom,  though  now  ye  see  him 
not,  yet  believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory.'  " 

It  may  be  asked.  Why  dwell  so  much  upon  the  sufFermgs 
of  our  pilgrim  forefathers  ?  My  reply  is.  To  those  trials  in 
the  person  of  John  Bunyan,  we  are  indebted  for  his  invaluable 
book.  To  the  groans  and  tears  and  blood  of  these  saints  we 
owe  the  great  privileges  we  now  enjoy.  And  my  object 
also  is  to  warn  my  readers  to  touch  not  the  unclean  thing. 
She  is  governed  by  the  same  powers  now  as  she  was  then ; 
the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  remains  unaltered  ;  but  a  more 
humane  code  of  laws  protects  our  persons  from  her  tyranny. 
She  will  remain  the  same,  while  her  unholy  and  unrighteous 
monopoly  of  state  patronage  and  power  is  continued.  She  is 
defiled  with  the  sufferings  unto  death  of  many  of  the  saints 
of  God.  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  together  icitli  unbelievers : 
come  out  from  among  them,  and  he  ye  scjiarate,  saith  the  Lord.^ 

It  would  not  be  proper  to  pass  by  the  contemptible 
sophistry  with  which  ]\Ir.  Southey  justifies  an  intolerant, 
bigoted  hierarchy  in  sending  our  Pilgrim  to  prison,  "  where 
his  understanding  had  leisure  to  ripen  and  to  cool  . . .  favour- 
able for  his  moral  and  religious  nature." "  Can  this  be  the 
language  of  the  author  of  AVat  Tyler  ?  Yes ;  the  smile  of 
royalty  had  elevated  and  corrupted  him.  He  might  now 
regret   that   he  was    not    born    in    Bonner's    days,    to   have 

1  2  Cor.  vi.  14, 17.  '  '  Southey's  Life  of  Bunyan,  p.  Ixvi. 


INTRODUCTION.  Iv 

assisted  in   improving  the  morals  and  religion  of  the  mar- 
tyrs, by  flogging  them  in  the  coal-house ! 

The  same  language  which  Southey  uses  to  justify  the 
church  of  England  in  sending  our  Pilgrim  to  prison,  is 
equally  calculated  to  justify  the  horrid  cruelties  practised 
upon  those  pious  and  amiable  martyrs,  Tyndale,  Latimer,  or 
Ridley ;  or  even  to  vindicate  the  state  religion  of  a  former 
time  in  crucifying  of  the  Saviour.  The  alleged  offence  was 
refusing  to  transfer  the  obedience  of  a  free  immortal  spirit 
from  God,  who  justly  claims  it,  to  erring,  debauched,  or  un- 
godly man,  who,  instigated  by  Satan,  assumes  the  preroga- 
tives of  Deity  to  reign  over  the  mode  and  form  of  worship ; 
to  impose  trammels  upon  that  which  must  be  free,  if  it  exists 
at  all ;  for  God  is  Spirit,  and  they  who  worship  him,  must  do 
it  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 

When  the  English  established  church  considered  herself 
unsafe,  unless  Bunyan  and  many  hundred  kindred  minds 
were  shut  up  in  prison,  it  proved  itself  to  be  a  disgrace  to 
the  gospel  and  an  injury  to  a  free  people.'^  All  national 
hierarchies  have  estimated  the  minds  of  others  by  their  own 
standard ;  but  no  real  minister  of  the  gospel  can  be  like  the 
Vicar  of  Bray,  who  was  determined  to  retain  his  vicarage, 
whatever  doctrine  he  might  be  ordered  to  preach. 

How  strangely  different  were  the  feelings  of  the  poor, 
pious,  unlettered  teacher,  to  those  of  archbishops,  bishojjs, 
and  clergy,  thousands  of  whom  swore  under  Henry  VIII.  and 
Edward  VI.  to  abjure  the  pope ;  perjured  themselves  under 
Mary,  by  swearing  to  maintain  •  him ;  and  under  Elizabeth, 
again  perjured  themselves  by  taking  a  new  oath  to  un-oath 
Queen  Mary's  oath ;  and  all  within  the  space  of  a  few  years. 
The  interference  of  the  state,  by  preferring  one  sect  to  an- 
other, naturally  puts  the  people  upon  desperate  courses,  either 
to  play  the  hypocrite,  and  have  no  conscience  at  all,  or  to  be 
tortured  for  having  a  conscience  not  fashionable  or  pleasing 
to  the  court  party.     They  must  either  deny  their  faith  and 

^  Dr.  Cheever,  p.  95. 


Ivi  INTRODUCTION. 

reason,  or  if  virtuous,  be  destroyed  for  acting  according  to 
them.^  Those  who  have  no  religion  have  always  persecuted 
those  who  have  religious  principles ;  and  to  enable  them  to  do 
this,  they  must  obey  the  state,  be  it  Christian  or  be  it 
Mohammedan.  Force  makes  hypocrites  :  persuasion  alone 
makes  converts. 

Such  wholesale  persecutions  bid  fair  to  destroy  the  trade 
and  commerce  of  the  kingdom,  and  involve  it  in  one  universal 
desolation.  Sir  W.  Petty  the  founder  of  the  Shelbourne 
family,  then  a  man  of  considerable  note,  demonstrated  this 
in  his  Political  Arithmetic ;  and  the  illustrious  founder  of 
Pennsylvania  gave  a  just  picture  of  the  miseries  inflicted  by 
the  Church  of  England,  in  her  endeavours  to  force  pious  and 
honest  men  into  her  communion.  "  Persons  have  been  flung 
into  gaols,  gates  and  trunks  broken  open,  goods  distrained,  till 
a  stool  hath  not  been  left  to  sit  down  on.  Flocks  of  cattle 
driven,  whole  barns  full  of  corn  seized.  Parents  left  without 
their  children,  children  without  their  parents,  both  without 
subsistence.  But  that  which  aggravates  the  cruelty  is,  the 
widow's  mite  hath  not  escaped  their  hands ;  they  have  made 
her  cow  the  forfeit  of  her  conscience,  not  leaving  her  a  bed 
to  lie  on,  nor  a  blanket  to  cover  her :  and  which  is  yet  more 
barbarous,  and  helps  to  make  up  this  tragedy,  the  poor  help- 
less orphan's  milk  boiling  over  the  fire,  was  flung  away,  and  the 
skillet  made  part  of  their  prize  ;  that,  had  not  nature  in  neigh- 
bours been  stronger  than  cruelty  in  such  informers  and  officers, 
to  open  her  bowels  for  their  relief  and  subsistence,  they  must 
have  utterly  perisht ;  "  and  what  has  such  cruelty  procured  ? 
"  the  judgments  of  God,  the  hatred  of  men.  To  the  sufferers, 
misery  ;  to  their  country,  decay  of  people  and  trade ;  and  to 
their  own  consciences  an  infinite  guilt."  ^  "  Men  must  either 
have  no  conscience  at  all,  or  be  hanged  for  having  a  conscience 
not  fashionable."^  He  winds  up  a  manly,  learned  and  ex- 
cellent treatise,  by  saying,  (inter  alia)  that  "  the  interests  of 
Bi'itain  will  stand  longer  upon  the  legs  of  the  English  people 

*  England's   Present   Interest,   4t6,  ^  Ibid.  Preface. 

1675,  by  William  Penn.  *  Ibid.  p.  39. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ivii 

than  of  the  English  Church,"  ^  and  signs  himself  "  An  English 
Christian  Man,  William  Penn."  Persecution  for  his  pure  reli- 
gious feelings  drove  him  and  thousands  of  the  best  English 
citizens  across  the  Atlantic,  to  seek  among  savages  the  repose 
denied  to  them  by  the  Church  of  England,  and  to  found  a  state 
and  an  empire  where  the  perfect  equality  and  happiness  of  every 
sect — the  non-interference  of  the  state  with  the  spiritual 
things  of  conscience  and  of  God,  will  render  it  eventually  the 
most  mighty  of  empires,  and  an  unbounded  blessing  to  the 
whole  universe. 

At  length  the  king  was  aroused,  probably  the  grim  head 
of  his  father  flitted  before  his  alarmed  imagination,  and  to 
restore  tranquillity  to  his  kingdom  he  issued  a  declaration  for 
liberty  of  conscience ;  whether  induced  by  the  groans  of 
an  afflicted  people,  many  thousands  of  whom  had  suffered  the 
loss  of  all  things,  or  by  the  weakening  of  his  kingdom  by  the 
multitudes  who  emigrated  to  America,  to  escape  the  tyranny 
of  ecclesiastical  persecution,  or  whether  to  relax  the  laws 
against  the  Papists  has  been  a  subject  of  controversy,  and 
however  we  may  be  sceptical  as  to  royal  declarations,  yet, 
judging  cautiously,  I  am  inclined  to  hope  that  the  motives  set 
forth  in  that  declaration  were  true ;  at  all  events,  it  is  an 
indelible  record,  that  the  dreadful  experiment  tried  for  twelve 
cruel  years,  to  compel  uniformity  in  divine  worship  by  fines 
imprisonment,  and  even  death,  most  signally  failed,  while  it 
involved  the  kingdom  in  a  state  of  desolation  from  which 
it  required  the  glorious  revolution  of  1688  to  restore  it  to 
comparative  prosperity. 

•  Favoured  by  the  prompt  and  kind  permission  of  Sir  George 
Grey,  one  of  her  Majesty's  principal  Secretaries  of  State,  and 
the  very  courteous  and  hearty  assistance  of  Mr.  Lechmere, 
Keeper  of  the  Archives  in  the  State  Paper  Office,  every  pos- 
sible search  was  made  to  find  any  papers  or  records  relative 
to  the  imprisonment  and  discharge  of  Bunyan.  Having  thus 
an  opportunity  of  transcribing  all  that  could  be  found  at  the 
fountain  head  of  intelligence,  it  may  prove  interesting  to  our 

*  Penn's  England's  Interest,  imge  a7. 
e 


IVIU  INTKODUCTION. 

readers  to  possess  a  correct  copy  of  these  important  docu- 
ments. The  first  is  the  King's  declaration  under  his  own 
autograph  signature. 

^11  T>  His  Ma''^'  Declaration 

l^narieS      IX  to  all  his  Loveing  subjects 

Our  care  and  Endeavours  for  the  preservation  of  the  Rights  and  Interests  of  the 
Church,  have  been  sufficient!}'  manifested  to  the  World  by  the  whole  course  of 
Our  Government  since  Our  happy  Restauracon,  and  bj'  the  many  and  frequent 
wayes  of  Coercion  that  Wee  have  used  for  reduceing  all  erring  or  dissenting 
persons,  and  for  composeing  the  unhappy  differences  in  matters  of  Religion,  which 
Wee  found  among  Our  Subjects  upon  Our  Retume:  But  it  being  evident  by  the 
sad  experience  of  twelve  yeares  that  there  is  very  Little  fruite  of  all  those  forceable 
Courses  Wee  thinke  Our  Selfe  oblidged  to  make  use  of  that  Supreame  Power  in 
Ecclesiastical  1  Matters  which  is  not  onely  inherent  in  Us,  but  hath  been  declared 
and  Recognized  to  be  soe  by  severall  Statutes  and  Acts  of  Parliament;  And  there- 
fore Wee  doe  now  accordingly  issue  this  Our  Declaration,  as  well  for  the  quieting 
the  Mindes  of  Our  Good  Subjects  in  these  Points,  for  Inviteing  Strangers  in  this 
Conjuncture  to  come  and  Live  under  Us,  and  for  the  better  Encouragement  of  all 
to  a  chearefuU  following  of  their  Trade  and  Callings,  from  whence  Wee  hope  by 
the  Blessing  of  God  to  have  many  good  and  happy  Advantages  to  our  Govern- 
ment; As  also  for  preventing  for  the  future  the  danger  that  might  otherwise  arise 
from  Private  Meetings,  and  Seditious  Conventicles  ; 

And  in  the  first  place.  Wee  declare  Our  expresse  Resolution  Meaneing  and 
Intention  to  be,  Tliat  the  Chiu-ch  of  England  bee  preserved  and  remaine  entire  in 
its  Doctrine,  Discipline  and  Government,  as  now  it  stands  established  by  Law  ; 

And  that  this  bee  taken  to  bee,  as  it  is,  the  Basis,  Rule,  and  Standard  of  the 
General]  and  Publicke  Worshipp  of  God,  And  that  the  Orthodox  Conformable 
Clergy  doe  receive  and  enjoy  the  Revenues  belonging  thereunto  ;  And  that  no 
Person,  though  of  a  different  opinion  and  Perswasion  shall  bee  exempt  from  paying 
his  Tythes,  or  other  Dues  whatsoever.  And  further  Wee  declare.  That  no  Person 
shall  bee  capable  of  holding  any  benefice,  Liveing,  or  Ecclesiasticall  Dignity  or 
Preferment  of  any  kinde  in  this  Our  Kingdome  of  England,  who  is  not  exactly 
Conformable.  Wee  doe  in  the  next  Place  declare  Our  Will  and  Pleasure  to  bee, 
That  the  Execution  of  all  and  all  manner  of  Penall  Lawes  in  matters  Ecclesiasticall, 
against  whatsoever  sort  of  Non  Comformists,  or  Recusants,  bee  immediately  sus- 
pended, and  they  are  hereby  suspended.  And  all  Judges,  Judges  of  Assise 
and  Gaole  Delivery,  Sheriffes,  Justices  of  the  Peace,  Mayors,  Bayliffs,  and  other 
Officers,  whatsoever,  whether  Ecclesiasticall,  or  Civill,  are  to  take  notice  of  it,  and 
pay  due  Obedience  thereunto. 

And  that  there  may  be  no  pretence  for  any  of  Our  Subjects  to  continue  their 
illegall  meetings  and  Conventicles  Wee  doe  Declare,  That  wee  shall  from  time  to 
time  allow  a  sufficient  Number  of  Places,  as  they  shall  bee  desired,  in  all  parts  of 
this  Our  Kingdome,  for  the  use  of  such  as  doe  not  conforme  to  the  Church  of 
England,  to  meete  and  assemble  in,  in  Order  to  their  Publick  Worship  and  Devo- 
tion ;  which  Places  shall  bee  open  and  free  to  all  Persons. 

But  to  prevent  such  disorders  and  inconveniencies  as  may  happen  by  this  Our 
Indulgence,  if  not  duely  rcguhvted,  and  that  they  may  be  the  better  protected  by 
the  Civill  Magistrate  Our  expresse  Will  and  Pleasure  is.  That  none  of  our  Subjects 


INTRODUCTION.  lix 

doe  presume  to  meete  in  any  Place,  untill  such  Place  bee  allowed,  and  the 
Teacher  of  that  congregation  be  approved  by  Us. 

And  Lest  any  should  apprehend  that  this  Restriction  should  make  Our 
said  Allowance  and  approbation  difficult  to  bee  obtained,  Wee  doe  further 
Declare,  That  this  Our  Indulgence,  as  to  the  Allowance  of  the  Publick  Places  of 
Worship,  and  approbation  of  the  Teachers,  shall  extend  to  all  sorts  of  Non- 
Conformists  and  Recusants,  except  the  Recusants  of  the  Roman  Catholick  Religion, 
to  whom  We  shall  in  no  wise  allow  Publick  Places  of  Worshii^,  but  only  indulge 
them  their  share  in  the  common  Exemption  from  the  execution  of  the  Penall  Lawes, 
and  the  Exercise  of  their  Worship  in  their  private  Houses  onely. 

And  if  after  this  Our  Clemency  and  Indulgence,  an}^  of  Our  Subjects  shall 
presume  to  abuse  this  Liberty,  and  shall  jDreach  seditiously,  or  to  the  Derogation 
of  the  Doctrine,  Discipline,  or  Government  of  the  Established  Church,  or  shall 
meet  in  Places  not  allowed  by  Us,  Wee  doe  hereby  give  them  warneing,  and  Declare, 
We  will  proceed  against  them  with  all  imaginable  severity :  And  Wee  will  Lett 
them  see  We  can  be  as  Severe  to  punish  such  offenders,  when  soe  justly  provoked, 
as  We  are  Indulgent  to  truely  tender  consciences.  In  Wittnesse  whereof  Wee  have 
caused  Our  Greate  Scale  of  England  to  be  putt  and  affixed  to  these  presents. 
Given  att  Our  Court  att  Whitehall  this  fifteenth  day  of  March  in  the  24*"^  yeare 
of  OurReigiie  167  A. 

Upon  this  being  published  an  outcry  was  raised  by  the 
Church,  that  it  was  only  intended  to  favour  the  Papists, 
although  in  it  they  are  expressly  prohibited  from  the  public 
exercise  of  their  religion.  So  angry  was  the  king  at  his 
motives  being,  as  he  said,  misrepresented,  that  he  went  to  the 
Council  Office,  called  for  the  deed,  and  with  his  own  hand 
broke  off  the  great  seal ;  the  ribbon  remains  to  this  day  to 
which  the  seal  had  been  attached.  Still,  the  declaration, 
having  passed  the  patent  offices,  was  fully  acted  upon,  and  a 
return  was  ordered  from  the  sheriffs  throughout  the  kingdom, 
of  the  names  of  all  prisoners  for  disobedience  to  the  laws  in 
ecclesiastical  matters  within  their  respective  divisions,  with 
the  causes  of  their  commitment.  The  following  are  the 
minutes  of  the  Privy  Council  to  which  their  returns  were 
submitted : — 

At  the  Court  at  Whitehall  the  8th  of  May  1672 

The  Kings  most  excellent  Ma*'^ 

Lord  Arch  Bp  of  Canterbury  Visco*  Ffauconberge 

Lord  Keeper  Vise*  Halifax 

Duke  of  Lauderdail  Lord  Bp  of  London 

Lord  Chamberlain  Lord  Newport 

e2 


Ix  INTRODUCTION. 

Earle  of  Bridgwater  Lord  HoUis 

Earle  of  Essex  M""  Vice  Chamberlain 

Earle  of  Anglesey  Mr.  Secretary  Trevor 

Earle  of  Bathe  S'  John  Buncombe 

Earle  of  Carlisle  Mr  Chancellor  of  the  Dutchy 

Earle  of  Craven  Master  of  the  Ordinance 

Earle  of  Shaffsbury  S'  Thomas  Osborne 

Whereas  his  Ma*'"^  of  his  Princely  Clemency  was  gratiously  pleased  to  direct 
that  Letters  should  be  written  from  this  Board  to  the  Sherriffs  of  the  respective 
Countyes  and  Citties  and  Countyes,  and  Townes  and  Countyes  ^vithin  his  Ma*'^^ 
Kincdome  of  England  and  Dominion  of  Wales,  requireing  them  to  retume  perfect 
lists  or  Callenders  of  the  Names  time  and  Causes  of  Comittment  of  all  such 
Prisoners  called  Quakers  as  remaine  in  their  several!  Gaoles,  or  prisons,  which 
they  accordingly  did,  and  the  same  were  by  order  of  his  Ma*''  in  Councell  of  the 
third  of  this  instant  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  right  Hono'^''  the  Lord 
Keeper  of  the  great  Scale  of  England,  [Sir  Orlando  Bridgman,]  who  haveing  con- 
sidered thereof  did  this  day  returne  them  againe  together  with  his  opinion  there- 
vpon  as  followeth  viz* 
The  Retumes  that  are  made  touching  the  prisoners  in  the  severall  Goales  are  of 

several!  Kindes. 

1  All  such  of  them  as  are  returned  to  be  convicted  to  be  Transported  or  to  be 
Convicted  of  a  Premunire  (vpon  which  Convictions  I  suppose  Judgment  was 
given)  are  not  legally  to  be  discharged  but  by  his  Ma*'"'^  pardon  vnder  the  great 
scale. 

2  All  those  that  are  returned  to  be  in  prison  vpon  writts  of  Excomunicato  Capiendo 
not  mentioning  the  cause  ought  not  to  be  discharged  till  the  cause  appeares — 
ffor  if  it  be  for  Tythes,  Legacyes,  Defamations  or  other  private  Interest,  they 
ought  not  to  bee  discharged  till  the  partie  be  satisfied. 

3  All  those  that  are  returned  in  prison  for  debt  or  vpon  Exchequer  processe  or  of 
any  of  the  other  Courts  at  Westminster,  are  not  to  be  discharged  till  it  be 
Knowne  for  what  cause  those  processes  Issued  and  those  debts  be  discharged. 

4  Those  that  are  in  prison  for  not  paying  their  ffynes  ought  not  to  be  discharged, 
without  pitying  their  ffynes  or  a  Pardon. 

All  the  rest  I  conceive  may  be  discharged.  Which  being  this  day  taken  into 
consideration  his  Ma^^^^  was  gratiously  pleased  to  declare,  that  he  %rill  Pardon  all 
those  persons  called  Quakers,  now  in  prison  for  any  offence  Committed,  relateing  only 
to  his  Ma*'*  and  not  to  the  prejudice  of  any  other  person.  And  it  was  therevpon 
ordered  by  his  Ma^'=  in  Council]  That  a  List  of  the  Names  of  the  Quakers  in  the 
Severall  Prisons  together  with  the  causes  of  their  Comittment  be  and  is  herewith  sent 
to  his  Ma*'""^  Attorney  Generall  who  is  required,  and  Authorized  to  prepare  a  Bill 
for  his  Ma*'*^  Ri  yall  Signature  conteyning  a  Pardon  to  passe  the  great  Scale  of 
England,  for  all  such  to  whom  his  Ma*''=  may  legally  grant  the  same  &  in  Case 
of  any  ditficultie  that  he  attend  the  Lord  Keeper,  and  receive   his   directions 

therein. 

Ex.  J.  W.  Walker. 

Order  of  Coun^iU  for  the  Quakers  * 
generalle  Pardon. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixi 


Endorsed. 


This  is  a  true  List  of  the  Names  of  such  persons  commonly  called  Quakers 
and  others  which  are  by  Vertue  of  an  Order  of  Councill  of  the  8th  of  May  last 
past  to  be  inserted  in  a  general!  Pardon. 

Ex.  J.  W.  Walker. 

Then  follow  the  names  of  four  hundred  and  seventy-one 
prisoners  ordered  to  be  inserted  in  the  pardon.  One  sentence 
in  this  opinion  of  the  Lord  Chancellor,  Sir  Orlando  Bridgman, 
is  worthy  of  especial  regard.  Having  noticed  the  cases  of  all 
those  who  had  been  legally  convicted,  either  by  summary 
process  before  a  magistrate,  or  by  petty  session,  or  by  a  jury, 
he  winds  up  with  a  sweeping  expression,  *'  All  the  rest  may  he 
discharged.^''  That  multitudes  were  imprisoned  without  con- 
viction, upon  the  mere  verbal  orders  of  a  justice,  there  can 
be  no  doubt.  These  would  be  set  at  liberty  Avithout  any 
formal  pardon — even  in  Bunyan's  case,  no  evidence  was 
taken.  In  a  conversation  between  him  and  the  justice,  and 
also  with  the  clerk  privately,  he  denied  having  offended  any  law 
whatever,  and  yet  was  sent  to  prison  without  redress. 

On  the  following  day,  the  9th  of  May,  1672,  Bunyan,  being 
still  a  prisoner,  he  was,  in  pursuance  of  the  declaration  for 
liberty  of  conscience,  licensed  to  be  a  teacher,  being  one  of  the 
first  persons  that  were  so  registered,  and  his  was  also  the  first 
permission  to  preach  given  to  any  dissenter  from  the  esta- 
blished sect  in  this  country. 

The  volume  from  which  these  extracts  are  made  is  called 
Indulgences,  1672. — Under  the  head  "  Congregationall." 

CHARLES  &c.     To  all  Mayors,  Bailiffs,  Constables  and  other 
Bedford  Qur  Officers  and  Ministers  Civil  and   Military  whom  it  may  con- 

-  .    .  „  ceme,  Greetino;.     In  Pursuance  of  our  Declaration  of  the  lath  of 

John     Bunyon  ^  o 

to  be  a  teacher  March  167^  Wee  doe  hereby  permitt  and  licence  John  Bunyon  to 
in  the  house  of  bee  a  Teacher  of  the  Congregation  allowed  by  Us  in  the  Howse  of 
Josias  Roughed  Josias  Roughed  Bedford  for  the  use  of  such  as  doe  not  conforme 
y  '^'  "  to  the  Church  of  England,  who  are  of  the  Perswasion  commonly 
called  Congregationall.  With  further  licence  and  permission  to  him  the  said  John 
Bunyon  to  teach  in  any  other  place  licensed  by  Us  according  to  our  said  Declara- 
cion.  Given  at  Our  Court  at  Whitehall  the  0th  day  of  May  in  the  24th  yeare  of 
our  Reigne,  1672. 

By  his  Ma""  Command 

Arlington. 


Ixii  INTEODUCTION. 

At  the  same  time  the  House  of  Josias  Roughed  was  re- 
gistered in  the  following  form  : — 

CHARLES  &c.  To  all  Mayors,  Bailiffs,  Constables  and  other 
A  place  for  a  q^^  Officers  and  Ministers  Civill  and  Military,  whom  it  may  con- 
.    ,  '     ceme.  Greeting.     In  pursuance  of  Our  Declaracon  of  the  15  of 

March  I67i  Wee  have  allowed  and  Wee  doe  hereby  allow  of  the 
Howse  of  Josias  Roughed  in  Bedford  to  be  a  place  for  the  use  of  such  as  doe  not 
conforme  to  the  Church  of  England  who  are  of  the  Perswasion  commonly  called 
Congregationall  to  meet  and  assemble  in,  in  order  to  their  Publick  Worship  & 
devotion.  And  all  and  Singular  Our  Officers  and  Ministers  Ecclesiasticall  Civill  and 
Military,  whom  it  may  conceme  are  to  take  due  notice  hereof,  And  they  and  every 
of  them  are  hereby  strictly  charged  and  required  to  hinder  any  Tumult  or  Dis- 
tiurbance,  &  to  protect  them  in  their  said  Meetings  &  Assemblies.  Given  at  &c 
the  9th  day  of  May  in  the  2-ith  yeare  of  Our  Reigne  1672 

By  his  Ma*'<^'  Command 

Arlington. 

The  Church  of  Christ  at  Bedford  is  here  called  Congrega- 
tional. In  ten  months  about  three  thousand  five  hundred  of 
these  licences  were  granted,  only  one  being  at  Bedford  ;  many 
were  for  persons  and  places  called  Anabapt,  all  others  were 
under  the  term  Congregational.  Philip  Henry  was  Indulged 
*'in  his  house,  Malpas  Parish  in  Flintsliire."  Thomas 
Senior  and  Henry  Ashurst,  in  their  respective  houses  at 
Clapton,  in  Hackney.  Bunyan's  church  could  not  fairly 
be  called  Anabapt,  because  it  consisted  of  members  some  of 
whom  had  not  been  baptized  in  or  with  water,  some  christened 
in  infancy,  and  others  immersed  on  a  profession  of  their 
faith. 

Mr.  Roughed,  whose  house  was  licensed  for  Bunyan  to 
preach  in,  was  plundered  a  few  months  previously  for  refusing 
to  go  to  church.  To  attend  such  a  place  was  one  month  a 
violation  of  the  law,  visited  with  ruinous  fines  and  imprison- 
ments, and  the  next  month  places  are  licensed  according  to 
law,  for  any  person  to  attend  instead  of  going  to  church. 
Law-makers  must  ever  be  the  scorn  and  derision  of  the  world, 
when  they  interfere  with  divine  and  spiritual  worship. 

About  this  time  George  Whitehead,  one  of  the  most  useful 
and  leading  members  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  became 
deeply  affected  with  the  cruel  punishments  that  his  brethren 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixiii 

and  sisters  were  suffering  for  Christ's  sake.  He  was  a  man 
who  with  equal  composure  and  zeal  could  plead  before  royalty 
and  nobles  in  a  state  apartment,  or  impart  consolation  to  a 
suffering  Christian  in  a  dungeon  or  a  pest-house.  He  thus 
mentions  it  in  his  Journal — "  After  the  declaration  of  March 
15,  1672,  a  very  weighty  and  tender  concern  fell  upon  my 
spirit  with  respect  to  our  dear  friends  then  in  prison,  being 
about  four  hundred  straitly  confined."  ^  Unfortunately  he 
gives  no  date  as  to  when,  while  enjoying  a  solitary  walk, 
this  impression  was  made  upon  his  mind.  It  was  certainly 
after  the  declaration  for  Liberty  of  Conscience.  Immediately 
upon  that  declaration,  orders  had  been  sent  for  a  return  of  all 
such  prisoners  as  ought  under  its  provisions  to  be  released. 
This  return  had  been  submitted  to  Sir  Orlando  Bridsman, 
the  Keeper  of  the  Great  Seal,  and  his  report  was  taken  into 
consideration  by  the  Privy  Council,  on  the  8th  of  May,  and 
judging  from  other  entries  in  Whitehead's  Journal,  it  appears 
to  have  been  about  or  after  that  time,  that  his  feelings  were 
excited  by  heavenly  charity  to  seek  the  release  of  his  suffering 
friends.  He  then  consulted  a  friend,  Thomas  Moor,  who  had 
some  influence  with  the  king,  and  having  written  a  letter,  it 
gained  them  access  to  his  Majesty  in  Council,  and  he  in  answer 
to  their  entreaties  on  behalf  of  their  friends,  who  were  suffer- 
ing cruel  imprisonments  merely  for  conscience'  sake,  said, — 
"  I'le  pardon  them."  They  then  obtained  a  warrant  to  the 
Attorney-general,  for  a  free  pardon,  of  which  the  following 
is  a  copy : — 

Our  will  and  pleasure  is,  that  you  prepare  a  bill  for  the  royal  signature,  and  to 
pass  our  Great  Seal  of  England,  containing  our  gracious  pardon  unto  [here  follow 
the  prisoners'  names].  Of  all  offences,  contempts  and  misdemeanours  by  them,  or 
any  of  them  committed  before  the  21st  day  of  July  1672,  against  the  several 
statutes  made  in  the  first,  twenty-third,  and  thirty-fifth  years  of  the  reign  of  Queen 
Elizabeth  ;  in  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  our  late  royal  grandfather,  King 
James  ;'  and  in  the  16th  year  of  our  reign — in  not  coming  to  church  and  hearing 
divine  service  ;  in  refusing  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  supremacy,  and 
frequenting  or  being  present  at  seditious  conventicles  ;  and  of  all  premunires, 
judgments,  convictions,  sentences  of  excommunication,  and  transportation  there- 
upon ;  ;ind  of  all  fines,  amercements,  pains,  penalties,  and  forfeitm'es  whatsoever, 

^  Whitehead's  Christian  Progress,  8vo,  1725,  p.  350. 


Ixiv  INTRODUCTION. 

thereby  incurred,  with  restitution  of  lands  and  goods,  and  such  other  clauses,  and 
non  obstantes,  as  may  render  this  our  pardon  most  effectual  ;  for  which  this  shall 
be  your  warrant. 

Given  at  our  Court  at  Whitehall  the  —  day  of  June,  in  the  twenty-fourth  year 
of  our  reign. 

But  now  a  new  and  very  serious  difficulty  presented  itself 
in  the  shape  of  enormous  fees,  in  the  different  offices  through 
which  the  pardon  had  to  pass ;  these  amounted  to  between 
twenty  and  thirty  pounds  for  each  person  whose  name  was 
inserted  in  it.  Whitehead  again  applied  to  the  king,  and  at 
length  all  difficulties  were  removed  by  the  following  order : — 

"  His  Majesty  is  pleased  to  command,  that  it  be  signified  as  his  pleasure  to  the 
respective  officers  and  sealers,  where  the  pardon  to  the  Quakers  is  to  pass,  that  the 
pardon,  though  comprehending  great  numbers  of  persons,  do  yet  pass  as  one 
pardon,  and  pay  but  as  one. 

"  Arlington. 
«  At  the  Court  at  Whitehall, 
the  13th  of  Sep,  1672." 

Whitehead  adds,  "  Though  we  had  this  warrant  from  the 
king,  yet  we  had  trouble  from  some  of  the  covetous  clerks, 
who  did  strive  hard  to  exact  upon  us." 

This  indefatigably  benevolent  man,  speaking  from  memory, 
says,  that  "the  other  dissenters  were  prisoners  in  Bedfordshire, 
Kent,  and  Wiltshire,  as  I  remember  in  the  same  instrument 
with  our  friends."  The  fact  is,  that  the  original  list  was  of 
Quakers  and  others ;  and  the  additional  names  were  prisoners 
in  Kent,  Devon,  Exon,  Sussex,  and  Durham.  The  merit  of 
his  exertions  is  heightened  by  knowing  that  when  the  king 
said,  "  I'le  pardon  them,"  he  included  all  dissenters,  Bunyan 
among  the  others,  according  to  the  list  first  prepared  by  his 
Attorney-general,  and  not  any  list  of  George  Whitehead's,  still 
he  exerted  himself  just  the  same,  as  if  they  had  all  been 
members  of  the  Society  of  Friends.  His  words  are,  "  Our 
being  of  different  judgments,  did  not  abate  my  compassion 
or  charity,  even  towards  those  who  liad  been  my  opposers  in 
some  cases.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  my  God,  who  is  the  father 
and  fountain  of  mercies,  whose  love  and  mercies  in  Christ 
Jesus  to  us,  should  oblige,  us  to  be  merciful  and  kind  one  to 


INTRODUCTION.  IxV 

another,  we  being  required  to  love  mercy,  as  well  as  to  do 
justly,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  the  Lord  our  God." 

This  original  patent,  with  the  Great  Seal  attached  to  it, 
is  carefully  preserved  by  the  Society  of  Friends,  in  their 
archives  at  Devonshire  House,  and  it  contains  the  names  of 
twenty  prisoners,  not  included  in  the  order  of  Privy  Council. 
But  Bunyan's  name  is  in  both.  It  is  in  Latin  in  the  usual 
form,  prepared  by  Mr.  Nicolls,  the  principal  clerk  to  the 
Attorney-General,  to  the  following  effect : — 

"  Charles  the  Second  by  the  Grace  of  God  of  England,  Scotland,  France  and 
Ireland,  King,  Defender  &c.  To  all  to  whom  the  present  letters  shall  come 
greeting — Know  ye  that  we  moved  with  piety  ^  of  our  special  grace,  and  of  our 
certain  knowledge  and  mere  motion.  Have  pardoned,  remitted  and  released  and 
by  these  presents  for  us  our  heirs  and  successors  Do  pardon,  remit  and  release  to 
Edward  Pattison,  John  Ellis,  Arthur  Cooke  and  Richard  Cannon  prisoners  in  our 
Gaol  of  Newgate  within  our  City  of  London." 

And  in  the  same  form  the  prisoners  are  named  in  the  other 
gaols  throughout  the  kingdom.  The  following  were  fellow 
suflferers  at  that  time  in  Bedford  Gaol : — 

"John  Fenn,  John  Bunnion,  John  Dunn,  Thomas  Haynes,  George  Farr, 
James  Rogers,  John  Rush,  Tabitha  Rush,  and  John  Curfe,  Prisoners  in  the  Com- 
mon Gaol  for  our  County  of  Bedford.  The  names  and  places  of  imprisonment 
having  been  given  of  the  four  hundred  and  ninety-one  prisoners — to  each  of  them 
— or  by  whatsoever  other  names  or  name — surname — addition  of  name — Art — 
Office — Mystery  or  Place  they — are  known  deemed  called  or  named  or  lately  was 
kno^vn  &c.  All  and  all  manner  crimes  transgressions  offences  of  premunire — un- 
lawful conventicles  contempts  and  ill  behaviour  whatsoever — by  himself  alone  or 
with  any  other  person  howsoever  whensoever  or  in  what  manner  soever  or  where- 
soever advised  commanded  attempted  done  perpetrated  or  committed  before  the 
thirtieth  day  of  July  last  past  before  the  date  of  these  presents,  against  the  form  of 
the  Statute  &c.  In  witness  of  which  thing  we  have  caused  these  our  letters  to  be 
made  patent.  Witness  myself  at  Westminster  the  13th  of  September  in  the 
twenty-foiuth  year  of  our  reign  [1672.]     By  writ  of  Privy  Seal.     Pigott. 

This  instrument  is  extended  by  the  forms  of  law,  so  that 
every  name  is  repeated  eleven  times,  and  in  which  our  worthy 

^  Charles  II. 's  notion  of  being  pious  and  walking  uj)on  the  battlements  of 
must  have  arisen  from  the  flattery  be-  sovereignty,  they  sooner  receive  the 
stowed  upon  his  father,  it  being  imijos-  inspirations  of  heaven." — Howel's  Do- 
sible  to  have  arisen  from  any  other  dona's  Grove,  p.  61.  [Why  not  con- 
source. "  The  conceptions  of  kings  duct  divine  service  over  the  dome  of 
are  as  far  above  the  vulgar,  as  their  St.  Paul's  ?] 
condition  is  ;  for  being  higher  elevated, 


Ixvi  INTRODUCTION. 

sufferer's  name  is  spelt  in  four  different  ways.  Bunnion 
twice,  Bunyan  five  times,  Bunnyon  once,  and  Bunnyan  three 
times.  It  is  singular  that  he  spelt  his  own  name  in  different 
ways  in  the  early  part  of  his  life,  and  on  the  drawing  of  his 
portrait  by  White  it  is  spelt  John  Bunion,  while  on  the  en- 
graving done  by  the  same  artist  it  is  John  Bunnyon.'  The 
names  inserted  in  this  pardon  are  four  hundred  and  ninety- 
one. 

Bunyan  having  had  a  very  sharp  controversy  with  the 
Quakers,  it  is  a  strong  manifestation  of  their  Christian  spirit 
that  he  certainly  obtained  his  release  through  their  instru- 
mentality; for  they  paid  all  the  expenses  of  getting  the 
royal  grant,  and  also  of  having  it  served  throughout  the 
kingdom ;  and  to  do  this  with  speed,  many  of  the  prisoners 
being  in  a  dying  state  with  the  severity  of  their  sufferings, 
duplicates  of  the  pardon  were  made  and  authenticated,  and 
messengers  were  despatched  throughout  the  country  to  set 
the  prisoners  at  liberty.  At  first.  Whitehead  and  his  friends 
took  the  patent  with  them,  and  produced  it  at  the  assizes  and 
quarter  sessions.  With  some  reluctance  on  the  part  of  the 
persecuting  justices,  they  consented  to  discharge  the  prison- 
ers named  in  the  patent,  not  daring  to  disobey  the  Royal 
mandate.  They  then  discovered  that  some  of  the  pious 
sufferers  had  still  been  omitted,  notwithstanding  the  return 
made  by  the  sheriffs,  and  the  additions  which  had  been  made 
at  Whitehead's  request,  before  the  great  seal  was  attached.  On 
behalf  of  these  they  pleaded  effectually,  and  they  also  were 
discharged  from  confinement. 

It  is  said  that  Bishop  Barlow  interceded  for  Bunyan  ;  but 
if  he  did,  there  is  no  record  or  petition  to  that  effect  pre- 
served either  in  the  State  Paper  or  Privy  Council  Offices. 
He  was  not  then  a  bishop,  but  possessed  great  influence,  and 
had  written,  "  The  Case  of  a  Toleration  in  Matters  of  Beli- 
gion,"  which  he  extended  further  than  any  divine  of  that  age. 
This,  and  his  friendship  with  Dr.  Owen,  might  have  given 
rise  to  the  report.     Barlow  became  afterwards  a  trimmer,  and 

'  I'rint  Rnsm,  Britisli  Museum. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixvil 

sided  with  the  court  party, — a  very  natural  eftect  of  his  eleva- 
tion into  bad  company. 

My  conviction  is,  that  Bunyan  owed  his  release  to  the 
desolating  effects  produced  by  a  wholesale  persecution  visit- 
ing tens  of  thousands  who  dared  not,  as  they  valued  the 
honour  of  Christ  or  the  salvation  of  their  souls,  attend  the 
national,  and  in  their  opinion,  anti-scriptural,  service ;  and 
that  the  Privy  Council,  finding  that  the  country  must  be 
plunged  into  revolution  or  ruin  if  the  wretched  system  of 
compulsive  uniformity  was  continued,  determined  to  relax  its 
severity,  grant  liberty  of  worship,  and  discharge  the  prisoners. 
As  this  could  not  be  done  by  proclamation,  and  the  prisoners 
were  too  poor  to  sue  out  a  patent  individually,  much  difficulty 
and  delay  might  have  arisen  to  prevent  their  discharge.  This 
was  removed  by  the  active  benevolence  of  George  White- 
head. The  appeal  which  he  and  his  friends  made,  was 
allowed;  and  he  appears  to  have  obtained  the  insertion  of 
twenty  names,  which  were  not  in  the  Privy-Council  list,  to 
be  added  to  the  pardon.  Whitehead's  concern  appears  to 
have  been  after  the  great  list  had  been  made  in  which  Bun- 
yan's  name  was  included.  Still,  he  was  deeply  indebted  to 
that  excellent  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends  for  the  pay- 
ment of  the  fees  and  for  sending  his  release  to  the  prison,  and 
so  far,  for  obtaining  his  liberty.  By  this  patent,  all  fines  were 
remitted,  and  that  without  finding  security  for  future 
conduct. 

Charles  Doe  states  that  on  the  21st  of  December,  1671, 
while  Bunyan  was  yet  a  prisoner,  he  was  by  the  church  at  Bed- 
ford called  to  the  pastoral  office.  This  was  in  or  about  the  last 
of  his  twelve  years'  imprisonment ;  and  being  out,  he  preached 
the  gospel  publicly  at  Bedford,  and  about  the  countries,  and 
at  London,  with  very  great  success,  being  mightily  followed 
everywhere.^  He  possessed  a  devoted  wife,  to  whom  he  was 
married  about  the  year  1658,  he  being  then  a  widower  with 
four  children.  His  marriage  to  his  first  wife,  one  of  his 
biographers  says,  "proves,  too,  I  readily  grant,  that  she  had 

*  The  Straggler. 


Ixviii  INTRODUCTION. 

little  pnulence.""     If  by  prudence  he  means  worldly  pelf 
Bunyan  valued  it  not :  they  were  happy  in  their  union,  and 
she  was  highly  honoured.     Had  she  been  unhappy,  he  would 
have  been  charged  as  the  cause   of  her  unhappiness.      She 
was  the  chosen  vessel  to  assist  him  in  obtaining  the  treasures 
of  the  gospel,  and  must  be  honoured  as  one  of  the  means  by 
which    he   was   prepared   to   publish   his  universal  guide  to 
Christian  pilgrims.     His  second  wife,  who  pleaded  his  cause 
with  such  modest  intrepidity  before  the  judges,  must  have 
assisted   him   greatly  in  arranging  his  affairs.     One    of  his 
oldest  biographers  tells  us,  that  "  when  he  came  abroad  again, 
he  found  his  temporal  affairs  were  gone  to  wreck,  and  he  had, 
as  to  them,  to  begin  again,  as  if  he  had  newly  come  into  the 
world ;  but  yet  he  was  not  destitute  of  friends,  who  had  all 
along  supported  him  with  necessaries,  and  had  been  very  good 
to  his  family,  so  that,  by  their  assistance  getting  things  a  little 
about  him  again,  he  resolved,  as  much  as  possible,  to  decline 
Avorldly  business,  and  give  himself  wholly  up  to  the  service  of 
God."^     A  circumstance  which  took    place    on   the  6th    of 
November,   1673,  must  have  greatly  comforted   him.     His 
sufferings  and  ministry  were  a  blessing  to  his  son  Thomas, 
who  not  only  became  a  member  of  his  church,  but  was  set 
apart  as  an  occasional  preacher,  and  exercised  bis  ministerial 
gifts  in  the  villages  round  Bedford.     In  six  years  after  his 
liberation,  he  had  published  nine  valuable  treatises,   among 
which  were  his  controversial  books  with  his  Baptist  brethren ; 
and   then  he,  having   overcome   all   his  scruples,   published, 
although  against  the  wish  of  some  of  his  friends,  the  first  part 
of  this  greatest   of   all  his   labours,   his   vade-mecum    of   the 
heaven-ward  pilgrim,  by  which  liis  memory  is  embalmed  and 
his  name  diffused  throughout  all  the  Christian  churches  of 
every  sect  and  denomination. 

'  Mr.  Philip,  p.  24.     ^  Life,  18mo,  1G92  ;  rc-published  by  Ivimcy,  1832 ;  p.  31 . 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixix 


WAS   BUNTAN   ASSISTED   IN   THE   COMPOSITION   OF 
HIS   PILGRIM? 


To  this  question  take  his  own  reply 


"  Some  say  the  Pilgrims  Progress  is  not  mine, 
Insinuating  as  if  I  would  shine 
In  name  and  fame  by  the  worth  of  another. 
Like  some  made  rich  by  robbing  of  their  Brother. 
Or  that  so  fond  I  am  of  being  Sire, 
I'le  father  Bastards  :  or  if  need  require, 
I'le  tell  a  lye  in  Print  to  get  applause. 
I  scorn  it  ;  Jolui  such  dirt-heap  never  was, 
Since  God  converted  him.     Let  this  suffice 
To  shew  why  I  my  Pilgrim  Patronize. 

It  came  from  mine  own  heart,  so  to  my  head. 
And  thence  into  my  fingers  trickled  ; 
Then  to  my  Pen,  from  whence  immediately 
On  Paper  I  did  dribble  it  daintily. 

Manner  and  matter  too  was  all  mine  own, 
Nor  was  it  unto  any  mortal  known, 
'Till  I  had  done  it.     Nor  did  any  then 
By  Books,  by  wits,  by  tongues,  or  hand,  or  pen, 
Add  five  words  to  it,  or  ^vrote  half  a  line 
Thereof :  the  whole,  and  ev'ry  whit  is  mine. 

Also  for  This^  thine  eye  is  now  upon. 
The  matter  in  this  manner  came  from  none. 
But  the  same  heart,  and  head,  fingers  and  pen, 
As  did  the  other.     Witness  all  good  men  ; 
For  none  in  all  the  world  without  a  lye. 
Can  say  that  this  is  mine,  excepting  I. 

I  write  not  this  of  any  ostentation, 
Nor  'cause  I  seek  of  men  their  commendation  ; 
I  do  it  to  keep  them  from  such  surmize. 
As  tempt  them  will  my  name  to  scandalize. 
Witness  my  name,  if  Anagram 'd  to  thee, 
The  Letters  make,  Nu  honey  in  a  B. 

"John  Bunyan.' 


"  I  dare  not  presume  to  say,  that  I  know  I  have  hit  right  in  every 
thing  ;  but  this  I  can  say,  I  have  endeavoured  so  to  do.  True, 
I  have  not  for  these  things  fished  in  other  men's  waters  ;  my 
Bible  and  Concordance  are  my  only  library  in  my  WTitings."^ 

The  Holy  War.  »  Preface  to  Solomon's  Temple  Spiritualized. 


Ixx  INTRODUCTION. 

He  who  doubts  the  word  of  John  Bunyan,  knows  nothing 
of  the  character  and  soul  of  a  man  who  suffered  nearly  thir- 
teen years'  imprisonment  in  Bedford  Gaol  rather  than  utter  a 
falsehood,  or  use  the  slightest  simulation.  Such  objectors 
deserve  chastisement  in  Doubting  Castle,  and  should  be 
flogged  with  the  Royal  garter,  "  Honi  soit  qui  mal  y 
pense."  But  such  there  have  been  from  1678  to  a  late  period  ; 
and  the  same  feeling  which  led  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees 
to  reject  the  Messiah,  because  he  appeared  as  the  son  of  a 
carpenter,  probably  has  led  authors  of  great  repute  to  express 
their  doubts  as  to  the  originality  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
because  the  author  was  an  unlettered  man, — the  reason  Avhy, 
as  his  pastor  says,  "  the  archers  shot  so  sorely  at  him." 

Dr.  Dibdin,  in  his  Typographical  Antiquities,  describing 
Caxton's  Pilgrimage  of  the  Soul,  says  :  "  This  extraordinary 
production,  rather  than  Bernard's  Isle  of  Man,  laid  the  found- 
ation of  John  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress."  ^  The  late  Dr. 
Adam  Clarke,  in  a  Postscript  to  a  Life  of  Bunyan,  observes, 
that  "his  Avhole  plan  being  so  very  similar  to  Bernard's 
religious  allegory,  called  the  Isle  of  Man,  or  Proceedings  in 
Maushire ;  and  also  to  that  most  beautiful  allegorical  poem 
by  Mr.  Edmund  Spencer,  oddly  called  the  Fairy  Queen, 
there  is  much  reason  to  believe  that  one  or  other,  if  not  both, 
gave  birth  to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress."  "* 

Mr.  Montgomery,  a  devoted  admirer  of  Bunyan's  genius, 
considers  that  the  print  and  the  verses  entiled  The  Pilgrim, 
in  AVhitney's  Emblems,  dedicated  to  the  Earl  of  Leicester, 
in  1585,  might  perhaps  have  inspired  the  first  idea  of  this 
extraordinary  work."  ■' 

Southey,  who  investigated  this  subject  with  great  ability, 
came  to  a  very  pointed  conclusion :  "  It  would  indeed  be  as 
impossible  for  me  to  believe  that  Bunyan  did  not  write  the 
Pilgrim's  Progress,  as  that  Person  did  write  a  certain  copy 
of  verses  entitled  the  Devil's  Thoughts."  Now  as  these 
verses  were   doubtless  written  by   Southey  himself,   he  had 

s  Vol.  i.  p.  153.  by  C.  C.  V.  G.,  1844.  p.  44. 

*  Bunvan's  Pilgrim  :  an  Epic  Pofem  '  Montgomery's  Christian  Poet. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxi 

arrived  at  a  conviction  that  Bunyaa  was  fully  entitled  to  all 
the  honour  of  conceiving  and  Avriting  his  great  allegory. 
Still,  he  says,  "the  same  allegory  had  often  been  treated 
before  him.  Some  of  these  may  have  fallen  in  Bunyan's  way, 
and  modified  his  own  conceptions  when  he  was  not  aware  of 
any  such  influence."^  It  is  high  time  that  these  questions 
were  fully  investigated  and  set  at  rest. 

It  must  be  kept  in  mind,  that  Bunyan  knew  no  language 
but  his  own.  When  he  used  five  common  Latin  words  in 
Dr.  Skill's  prescription,  "  Ex  carne  et  Sanguine  Christi," 
this  perfectly  unassuming  author  tells  his  readers,  in  a  mar- 
ginal note,  "  The  Lutine  1  horroivJ'''  It  is  absurd  to  suppose 
that  learned  men  read  to  him  old  monkish  manuscripts,  or  the 
allegories  of  a  previous  age ;  for  his  design  was  unknown,  he 
had  formed  no  plan,  nor  had  he  any  intention  to  have  written 
such  a  book,  until  it  came  upon  him  suddenly.  His  first  idea 
was  inspired  from  one  of  his  own  works  while  composing  it, 
and  then  the  whole  story  ilowed  into  his  mind  as  quick  as  he 
could  write  it.  Every  attempt  has  been  made  to  tarnish  his 
fair  fame :  the  great  and  learned,  the  elegant  poet  and  the 
pious  divine,  have  asserted  that  some  of  his  ideas  were  founded 
upon  the  works  of  previous  writers. 

Every  assertion  or  suggestion  of  this  kind  that  came  to  my 
knowledge,  has  been  Investigated,  and  the  woi-ks  referred  to 
have  been  analysed.  And  beyond  this,  every  allegorical  work 
that  could  be  found  previous  to  the  eighteenth  century,  has 
been  examined  in  all  the  European  languages ;  and  the  result 
is  a  perfect  demonstration  of  the  complete  originality  of  Bun- 
yan. "It  came  from  his  own  heart."  The  plot,  the  charac- 
ters, the  faithful  dealing,  are  all  his  own.  And  what  is  more, 
there  has  not  been  found  a  single  phrase  or  sentence  bor- 
rowed from  any  other  book,  except  the  quotations  from  the 
Bible  and  the  use  of  common  proverbs.  To  arrive  at  this 
conclusion  has  occupied  much  time  and  labour,  at  intervals, 
during  the  last  forty  years.  The  works  read  and  analysed 
commence  with  our  monkish  manuscripts,  and  continue 
'  Southey's  Life  of  Bunyan,  p.  xc. 


Ixxii  INTRODUCTION. 

through  the  printed  books  published  prior  to  the  reforma- 
tion, when  the  church  having  no  competition  in  the  cure  of 
souls,  spoke  out  without  disguise ;  and  from  that  time  to 
1678,  when  our  Pilgrim  appeared.  Many,  if  not  all  the 
works  so  examined,  contain  useful  information,  and  some  of 
them  show  what  was  taught  by  the  church  of  England  Avhen 
she  refused  the  Bible  to  the  laity,  and  was  unreformed.  And 
as  my  readers  ought  to  judge  for  themselves,  while,  in  most 
cases,  these  rare  volumes  are  beyond  their  reach,  it  may 
prove  useful  to  print  these  analyses,  and  then  every  reader 
can  form  his  own  opinion  as  to  the  probability,  or  rather  the  im- 
possibility, of  Bunyan's  having  gained  any  idea,  or  phrase,  or 
name,  from  any  source  but  his  own  prolific  imagination.  My 
determination  in  all  these  researches  has  been  to  report  the 
whole  truth ;  and  had  it  been  discovered  that  some  hints 
might  have  been  given  by  previous  writers,  it  would  not  have 
been  any  serious  reflection  upon  the  originality  of  a  work 
which  has  no  prototype.  This  idea  is  well  represented  by 
Mr.  Montgomery :  "  If  the  Nile  could  be  traced  to  a  thou- 
sand springs,  it  would  still  be  the  Nile ;  and  so  far  undis- 
honoured  by  its  obligations,  that  it  would  repay  them  a 
thousand  fold,  by  reflecting  upon  the  nameless  streams  the 
glory  of  being  allied  to  the  most  renowned  of  rivers."^  But 
there  has  been  no  discovery  of  any  tributary  spring  ;  no 
borrowed  phrases  ;  no  more  hints,  even,  than  such  as  natu- 
rally arise  from  the  open  treasury  or  storehouse  of  Holy 
Writ. 

The  greatest  characteristic  of  original  genius  is  its  sponta- 
neous exertion, — the  evidence  of  having  written  without 
labour  and  Avithout  the  consciousness  of  doing  anything 
remarkable,  or  the  ambitious  aim  of  doing  a  great  work. 
The  greatest  efforts  of  genius  flow  as  naturally  as  it  is  for 
common  men  to  breathe.  In  this  view,  Bunyan's  work 
comes  nearer  to  the  inspired  poetry  of  the  Hebrews  in  its 
character,  than  any  other  human  composition.  He  wrote  from 
the  impulse  of  his  genius,  sanctified   and  illuminated  by  a 

*    Introiluctory  Essay  to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  Collins,  p.  xxv. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxiii 

heavenly  influence ;  as  if,  indeed,  he  had  exerted  no  volun- 
tary supervision  over  its  exercise.  Everything  is  as  natural 
and  unconstrained  as  if  it  had  not  been  intended  for  public 
inspection.  There  has  not  been  found  any  model  with 
Avhich  it  can  even  be  compared.^  It  is  a  beautiful  trans- 
parency, seen  as  the  heavenly  light  shines  through — the  Re- 
newed spirit  alone  enjoys  the  picture  in  its  perfection,  with  all 
its  chaste  but  glowing  colours.  It  can  be  fully  appreciated 
only  by  him  who  possesses  that  spiritual  light  without  which 
the  things  of  God  and  heaven  cannot  be  discerned. 

In  examinino;  the  followins;  accounts  of  allesjories  com- 
posed  by  learned  doctors,  bishops,  and  divines,  the  simple 
Christian  will  rejoice  and  triumph  in  the  amazing  superiority 
of  a  poor  unlettered  preaching  mechanic,  guided  only  by  his 
Bible.  Sanctified  learning  is  exceedingly  valuable  ;  yet  the 
productions  of  an  unlettered  man,  wholly  influenced  by  the 
Holy  Oracles,  shines  resplendently  over  the  laboured,  murky 
productions  of  lettered  men,  who,  forsaking  the  simplicity  of 
the  gospel,  are  trammelled  with  creeds,  confessions,  canons, 
articles,  decretals,  fathers,  and  grandfathers. 

The  first  work,  in  the  order  of  time,  that  claims  our  notice, 
has  never  been  printed.     It  is  called  : 


The  Pilgrim. 


This  ancient  poem,  a  manuscript  on  vellum,  illustrated  with  drawings,  but  ver} 
much  damaged,  is  in  the  Cottonian  Collection  at  the  British  Museum  ;  probably 
translated  in  the  fifteenth  century  from  the  first  of  the  Three  Pilgrimages,  a  French 
manuscript.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a  Dream,  and  it  concludes  by  fixing  the  pilgrim 
as  a  monk  in  a  Cistercian  monastery.  Soon  after  setting  out,  he  is  temjited  by  a 
golden  image,  but  is  driven  from  it  by  the  ajipearance  of  a  dead  corpse.  He 
then  encounters  an  armed  man,  who  endeavours  to  entice  him  to  turn  aside  to 
see  his  mistress,  and  uses  a  magic  circle  and  incantations.  They  hold  a  long 
conversation,  in  which  is  narrated  the  case  of  a  Duke  Fryse,  who  had  consented 
to  be  baptized  ;  he  is  represented  ^vith  a  girdle  about  his  middle,  otherwise 
naked,  except  his  crown  ;  but  w^hen  he  had  got  into  the  baptistery,  he  becomes 
alarmed  by  a  voice  which  informs  him  that  it  is  an  unlucky  day  : 


'  Dr.  Cheevers. 


Ixxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

"  For  liym  thought  he  herde  a  cry 
That  afFermed  certeynly 
For  synne  and  for  Inyquyte 
How  mo  folk  schulde  dampned  be 
At  the  day  of  Jugemente 
Gon  to  helle  there  to  be  brent, 
Ye  mo  as  in  comparisoun 
Thanne  folk  for  ther  savacvon 
Scholde  that  day  receyued  be 
To  dwelle  in  heuene  that  fayre  cyte." 

The  dulce,  although  a  bishop  has  got  him  by  one  hand,  with  one  of  his  legs  in 
the  baptistery  ;  yet  he  gets  his  liberty,  and  runs  away.  Had  sprinkling  been  in 
fashion  in  those  days,  the  bishop  might  readily  have  managed  the  christening  with 
a  handful  of  water.  The  pilgrim  then  has  a  ve4y  long  adventm-e  with  Heresy,  who 
strives  earnestly  to  draw  him  aside.  She  is  engaged  \vith  a  pair  of  scissors,  cutting 
strips  from  Pelagians,  Arians,  and  other  "  Sectys  founde  false  and  vntrewe."  These 
slie  puts  together,  to  form  a  new  system  of  divinity.  He  becomes  sadly  puzzled  ; 
she  had  laid  her  nets  so  artfullv,  ''  In  lond,  on  water,  and  in  the  hayr."  He  sees 
many  attempt  to  pass,  but  all  are  entangled  ;  at  length,  by  fasting  and  by  great 
penance,  he  slips  through  the  nets. 

He  is  then  assaulted  by  Satan,  who  tells  him  that  he  has  devoured  thousands  of 
Christ's  flock,  and  has  so  many  arts  that  he  cannot  escape  him.  The  devil,  to 
terrify  the  pilgrim,  narrates  a  recent  adventure,  by  which  he  had  succeeded  in 
destroying  a  holy  hermit.  He  had  transformed  himself  into  an  angel  of  light, 
and  went  to  the  hermit,  warning  him  that  Satan  would  soon  overcome  him  if  he 
was  not  courageous  to  resist ;  that  he  would  appear  to  him  in  the  shape  of  his 
father,  and  if  he  parleyed  with  the  fiend,  he  must  be  lost ;  and  exhorted  him  to 
smite  the  fiend  at  once  with  sword  or  knife.  Soon  after  this,  his  father  really 
came  to  visit  him,  when  the  deluded  hermit  plunged  a  dagger  to  his  heart,  and 
thus  fell  into  the  jaws  of  the  fiend.  The  pilgrim,  much  terrified,  kept  crossing 
himself,  at  which  Satan  drew  back  ;  and  by  continuing  to  make  the  sign  of  the 
cross,  lie  makes  his  escape.  He  is  then  stopped  by  Fortune  and  her  Wheel,  and 
by  Idolatry,  but  evades  them.  A  fortune-teller  wishes  him  to  have  his  nativity 
cast,  but  as  he  knows  that  many  men  are  born  at  the  same  moment,  some  to  for- 
tune and  many  to  misery,  he  knows  that  there  can  be  no  virtue  in  such  consulta- 
tions of  the  stars.  He  is  then  profited  by  images  in  churches,  to  remind  us  of  the 
holy  lives  of  saints  : 

"  And  vn  to  folkes  many  on  [a  one] 
Fill  greet  proft'yte  also  they  don." 

Sorcery  endeavours  to  catch  him  with  her  crooked  hook  ;  and  he  is  assailed  by 
Worldly-gladness,  but  escapes.  At  length  Grace  Dieu  visits  him  in  a  stately  ship, 
liaving  a  palace  and  castle  on  deck.  He  embarks,  and  is  shown  a  large  baptistery, 
filled  with  tears  from  an  eye  in  a  rock.  This  bath  is  replenished  with  tears  of 
repentance,  by  works  of  supererogation.     Its  virtues  are  thus  described  : 

"  For  it  re-cureth  euery  wounde 
Call  this  Baptym  the  secunde 


INTRODUCTION.  IxXV 

That  dothe  away  alle  greuaunce 
With  which  water  Dame  penaunce 
MalvAth  a  lye  I  the  ensure 
To  wasche  away  al  ordure, 
In  whiche  bath  in  certayne 
The  hooly  womman  Mawdelyne 
Iwashen  was  tak  heed  her  to 
The  Apostle  Peter  eke  also 
And  many  mo  than  I  may  telle 
Were  Iwaschen  in  this  welle 
And  so  schalt  thou  by  reed  of  me 
Yeue  thou  lyste  to  purged  be." 

Grace  Dieu  fills  up  the  bath,  and  the  pilgi-im,  naked,  enters  the  baptistery  to 
his  middle,  and  is  bathed  and  washed.  She  then  tells  him  he  may  make  his 
choice  of  monastic  orders, — Cisterces,  Clunys,  Charterhous,  or  Preechers  Minours  : 
he  chooses  to  ejiter  the  Cistercian  order.  The  porter,  "  Drede  of  God,"  at  first 
refuses  him  ;  but  Charity  receives  and  shows  him  over  the  establishment  :  he  is 
shoivn  many  books.     The  librarian  sa3-s  : 

"  And  my  name  zeue  thou  lyste  be 
Is  called  Agyographe, 
Which  is  to  seyne  I  the  ensure 
Of  holy  wrytynge  the  Scripture, 
And  at  feyres  and  at  feestis 
I  reste  in  skynnes  off  dede  bestis." 

She  expresses  a  clear  notion  of  the  Old  Testament  as  enlightened  by  the  N'eiv  : 

"  I  mene  as  thus  in  sentement. 
That  the  oolde  testament 
Were  derke  and  cloudy  ofi:'  his  syght 
Zeue  that  it  ne  took  his  lyght 
Claryfyed  by  entendement 
Off  the  newe  testament, 
Whos  schynjTige  in  conclusyoun 
Is  cause  oflT  our  Salvacyoun." 

He  is  shown  a  mirror,  which  exhibits  the  sins  of  the  person  who  looks  in  it  ;  he 
is  also  shown  one  of  Flattery's  mirrors,  which  exhibits  the  most  defiled  as  angels 
of  purity.  He  is  at  length  introduced  to  the  chief  prior,  Obedience,  and  sits  doMTi 
to  dinnA' : 

"  And  also  as  I  dyde  obserae. 
Noon  other  foike  at  mete  serue 
But  folkes  deede  euere  more 
Where  off  I  was  abaschj-d  sore." 

Abstinence  is  the  frevtourer  and   butler  ;  the  servants  were   the  skeletons  of 

/2 


Ixxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

those  who  hail  fouiuled  and  endowed  the  abbey.     Wilful  Poverty,  in  a  state  ol 
nudity,  sings  a  song,  ending  with  : 

"  I  slepe  in  Joye  and  sekemess 
For  theues  may  not  robbe  me." 

Unwilling  Poverty  sits  grumbling  and  murmuring.  Dame  Chastity  at  last  intro- 
duces the  pilgrim  to  Prayer,  who  makes  him  welcome  in  these  lines  : 

"  Wherefore  callyd  1  am  Prayere 
Whiche  that  am  the  messagere 
That  flee  to  heuene  with  whynges  lyght, 
Fer  aboue  the  sterres  bryght 
To  fore  the  lord  to  present 
Prayer  made  in  good  entente." 

He  then  speaks  to  the  pilgrim  about  the  servants,  who  were  the  spectres  of  the 
foimders  : 

"  And  eche  wyght  for  his  good  dede 
Is  v/orthi  to  resseyue  his  mede 
Lyke  his  merjte  off  equyte 
These  deede  folk  which  thou  dost  se." 

Grace  Dieu,  Obedience,  Latrya,  and  Prayer,  then  give  him  instructions  for  his 
future  conduct  in  the  monastery,  where  he  remains  mitil  death  strikes  him,  and 
he  awakes  from  his  sleep. 

There  is  an  ancient  pilgrimage  noticed  in  Skelton's  Ryght 
Delectable  Trcatyse  upon  a  Goodly  Qarlande  or  Chapelct 
of  Laurell.  The  author  recounts  his  literary  labours,  inter 
alia : 

"  Of  my  ladys  grace  at  the  contemiilacyoun 
Owt  of  frenshe  in  to  englysshe  prose 
Of  mannes  lyfe  the  peregrynacioun 
He  did  translate,  enterprete  and  disclose." 

No  copy  of  this  pilgrimage  has  been  discovered  and  identified  as  his  ;  and 
very  high  authority  connects  the  second  line  with  the  "  peregrynatioun."  If  so,  it 
is  in  prose  :  but  if  the  first  hvo  lines  refer  to  the  Contemplation  on  the  Virgin 
Mary's  Grace,  a  prose  work,  and  Skelton  being  a  poet,  it  would  lead  us  to  infer 
that  the  pilgrimage  was  in  verse.  The  poem  last  described  may  prove  to  be  the 
translation  referred  to  by  Skelton.  Be  that  as  it  may,  Bunyan  never  gained  a  liint 
from  John  Skelton,  the  satirist. 

The  Abbey  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

This  curious  allegory  was  written  by  .John  Alcockc,  the  founder  of  Jesus 
College,  Cambridge,  a  learned  and  abstemious  English  bishoj),  in  the  reigii  of 
Henrv  VII. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxvii 

Tlie  author  represents  the  fall  and  recovery  of  mankind  under  the  simile  of  an 
Abbey,  the  inmates  of  which  are  perfect  in  holiness  and  happiness.  The  abbess 
is  Charity  ;  the  prioress,  Wisdom  ;  the  sub-prioress,  Mekeuesse  ;  and  the  niuis, 
Poverty,  Cleanness,  Temperance,  Soberness,  Penance,  Buxomness,  Confession, 
Righteousness,  Predication,  Strength,  Pacience,  Simplicity,  Mercy,  Largeness, 
Reason,  Pity,  Meditation,  Orison,  Dovocion,  Contemplation,  Chastity,  Jubilation, 
Honesty,  Curtesy,  Fear,  and  Jealousy.  This  abbey  was  conveyed  by  the 
Almighty  to  Adam,  Eve,  and  their  heirs  for  ever,  upon  condition  that  he  withstood 
the  temptation  of  the  fiend  and  that  of  his  wife.  The  deed  is  witnessed  by  angels 
and  man,  heaven  and  earth,  sun  and  moon,  stars,  and  all  creatures.  Geven  at 
Paradise,  the  first  day  that  man  was  made  ;  in  the  year  of  the  reigning  of  Almighty 
God,  King  of  kings,  whose  kingdom  never  began  nor  never  shall  have  end.  No 
persons  were  to  be  admittetl  until  Conscience  had  cleansed  the  soul  with  grace  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Two  maidens,  called  Love  and  Righteousness,  shall  cast  away 
from  Conscience  all  mamier  of  filth  ;  IMeekness  and  Poverty  shall  keep  them 
poor  in  spirit. 

The  abbey  was  situated  upon  the  waters  of  repentance.  Joy  and  Mercy  built 
the  walls  and  strengthened  them  with  alms.  Patience  and  Strength  are  the  pillars 
and  buttresses.  The  nuns  have  each  her  place  :  Contemplation  is  the  doctor  ; 
Devotion  the  butler  [the  bishop  remarks,  "  Alas  !  if  I  durst  say,  full  many  be 
in  religion  (nuns),  but  few  be  religious  "]  ;  Orjson  shall  be  chanter.  St.  Bernard 
saith,  When  we  jiray  in  good  life,  our  good  Angel  danseth  and  maketh  thereof  a 
present  to  the  Father  of  heaven.  The  abbey  being  so  well  furnished,  a  tyrant 
came,  and  in  an  evil  hour,  while  the  portress  was  absent,  he  put  in  his  four 
daughters,  who  were  all  of  shrewd  manners  :  the  fiend  father  of  them  all.  Their 
names  were  Pride,  Envy,  False  Judgment,  and  Lust  ;  and  these  destroyed  the 
abbey,  and  disjiersed  the  inmates.  The  punishment  of  man  was  the  loss  of 
Paradise,  to  spend  his  days  in  sorrow,  to  eat  grass  that  groweth  on  the  earth,  and 
never  to  come  to  bliss  until  the  abbey  was  restored.  When  Adam  and  Eve 
died,  their  souls  went  to  hell  ;  and  not  only  they,  but  all  those  that  of  them 
came  for  four  thousand  six  hundred  years  :  to  hell  they  went,  every  one.  Then 
some  of  the  nuns  prayed  the  Holy  Ghost  for  assistance.  David,  Isaiah,  and  others 
endeavoiu-ed  to  re-edify  the  abbey;  but  in  vain.  At  length  Christ  came,  and 
sought  out  the  abbess  and  her  company  for  thirty-three  years  ;  and  at  last  brought 
them  together  by  hanging  on  the  cross  ;  after  which  he  led  them  with  him  into 
hell,*  and  took  out  Adam  and  Eve  his  wife,  and  all  his  friends,  and  replaced  them 
in  the  Abbey  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  Paradise. 

From  this  curious  and  very  rare  little  volume,  Bunyan  could  not  have  gained 
any  idea  ;  but  in  it  are  some  translations  of  passages  of  Scripture  made  fifty  years 
before  any  version  of  the  Bible  was  published  in  English  :  Matt.  iii.  2,  "  Shriv 
ye  and  do  ye  penance,  and  be  ye  of  good  belief ;  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
nigheth  fast."  John  viii.  6  :  "  He  stooped  do\vn  and  wrote  on  the  groimd  with 
his  finger  all  their  sins,  so  that  each  of  them  might  se  how  sinfuU  other  was." 
Matt.  xxvi.  38  :  "I  have,  he  said,  full  much  dread  against  that  I  shall  die.  Sit 
ye  down,  he  said,  and  wake  ye,  and  bid  your  beads  till  I  come  again  to  you."  - 

'   Hence  "the  descent  into  hell  "  in  ^  From  a   copy  in  my  ov.'n  library, 

a   popish    creed    falsely    called    ''  the        printed  by  Wynkin  de  Worde. 
Apostles"  Creed." 


Ixxviii  INTRODUCTION. 

The  Pylgremage  of  the  Soicle.     Printed  by  William  Caxton. 
1483.     Small  Folio.^ 

Dr.  Dibclin  having,  in  his  account  of  this  very  rare  volume, 
stated,  that  "  this  extraordinary  production,  which,  perhaps, 
rither  than  Bernard's  '  Isle  of  Man,'  laid  the  foundation  of 
John  Bunyan's  'Pilgrim's  Progress,'  I  shall  make  no  apology 
to  the  reader  for  the  following  specimens  of  its  poetry  and 
prose."  Not  daring  to  trust  to  the  doctor's  specimens,  which 
occupy  eight  folio  pages,  my  analysis  is  drawn  from  a  careful 
perusal  of  the  original  edition  by  Caxton,  compared  with  the 
manuscript  written  in  1413  ;  the  result  is,  to  establish  honest 
John's  originality,  and  to  excite  great  surprise  that  the  learned 
doctor  could  have  published  so  unfounded  an  insinuation. 

As  I  lave  in  a  seynt  lam-ence  nyght,  slepyng  in  my  bedde,  me  bifelle  a  full 
merueylous  dreme. 

Having  finished  my  pilgrimage  and  laid  aside  my  fleshly  carrion,  it  appeared 

loathsome  and  dame  Misericord   buried   it.     The  fowle  horrible   Satan   cruelly 

menaced  me  and  told  me  I   was  his  prisoner — a  youngling  of  full  huge  beauty 

appeared,  and  defends  the  soul  of  the  pilgrim,  who  is  taken  to  judgement.     He  is 

brouglit  before  Michael,  while  his  good  angel  pleads  for  him  Satan  cries  loudly 

against  him.     The  devils  comjjlain  that  as  soon  as  a  pilgrim  is  born  and  washed  in 

the  salt  lye  (christened)   Grace  Dieu  assigns  them  a  guardian  angel — we  are  ill 

used,  let  us  cry  a  row  so  loud  that  in  spite  of  them  they  shall  hear  our  complaint. 

Peter  the  porter  of  heaven  is  called  to  testify  whether  the  pilgrims  have  done 

penance — Call  St.  George  for  the  Gentiles,  for  clerks  St.  Nicholas,  for  hermits  St. 

Anthony,  St.  Benet  for  monks,  for  wedded  folk  St.  Paul — not  that  he  was  ever 

married,  but  he  taught  the  duties  of  marriage — for  widows  St.  Anne,  for  maids  St. 

Katherine.     The  Pilgrim  is  placed  before  the  tribunal,  and  liis  guardian  angel 

pleads  that  he  had  kept  his  belief,  never  lost  his  scrip,  nor  his  burden*  and  had 

persevered  to  the  end,  he  ought  to  be  safe.     The  ciu'sed  Satan  acknowledged  that 

the  Pilgrim   passed  the  water  and  was  therein  waslied  and  fully  cleansed  of  all 

rather  fylthe,^  but  as  soon  as  he  knew  good  and  evil  he  set  little  by  that  washing, 

but  cast  himself  like  a  swine  in  ordure  and  fylthe.     He  was  washed  at  a  tender  age 

unwillingly,  and  although  by  this  laver  the  foul  spot  of  sin  original  was  utterly 

avoided,  yet  he  has  not  kept  the  vow,  and  is  more  spotted  with  deadly  sin  than  lie 

was  before  he  was  washed  ;  and  as  all  heathen  men  that  have  never  received  this 

laver  belong  to  our  Company  because  they  have  it  not,  much  more  those  that  have 

received  these  gifts  of  Grace  de  Dieu  and  despised  them  he  must  be  ours.     The 

soul  pleads  in  verse,  he  appeals  to  Jesus.     Some  of  the  lines  are  strildng : 

'  British  Museum,  21,  d.  *  Original  sin. 

*  Thr  pilgrim's  staflT. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxix 

"  For  though  there  ran  a  river  from  tliy  side, 
That  all  the  world  doth  fully  overflow, 
Thy  grace  is  whole,  as  every  man  may  know." 

He  then  appeals  to  Mary  : — 

"  Now  be  my  help  a  blissful  heaven's  queue 
Let  somewhat  of  the  gi-ace  on  me  be  seen 

I  am  be-knowen  that  I  have  done  amiss 

Eternal  death  deserved  with  my  deed 

But  gracious  Lady  Queen  of  Heaven's  bliss 

Thou  be  my  help  and  comfort  in  this  nede 

I  am  that  same  that  highly  have  mis-wrought 

Against  thy  child  Jesus  and  eke  thee 

Yet  know  I  well  that  Lion  is  he  not 

Nor  thou  nor  might  no  Lioness  be 

In  thou  there  is  no  malice  nor  cruelty 

Though  that  I  have  thy  son  and  the  agrieved 
By  thee  is  all  my  trust  to  be  relieved." 

He  calls  upon  Michael — John  Baptist,  apostles  and  martyrs,  and  all  saints. 

Justice  pleads  against  him  and  will  allow  none  to  speak  on  his  behalf.  He  then 
answers  for  himself,  and  accuses  Satan  of  being  a  liar  ;  but  the  fiend  calls  ^  the 
tvorm  of  conscience  to  bear  witness  against  him,  and  he  relates  all  his  vvickedness  that 
was  not  purged  with  penance,  and  as  he  spoke  Satan  ^vrote  it  all  down  in  a  great 
paper.  The  soul  defends  himself  by  having  at  all  times  born  his  -  burden  and 
scrip,  by  his  natural  frailty  and  the  temptations  of  Satan  and  allurements  of 
the  world.  Mercy  pleads  for  him  that  he  had  been  contrite,  and  made  amends 
for  sin,  and  had  confessed  ;  but  when  his  good  and  bad  deeds  were  weighed,  the 
evil  was  heaviest.  Then  Mercy  flew  to  heaven  and  brought  back  a  pardon  from 
Jesus,  which  is  given  in  verse,  inter  alia  : 

"  At  instance  of  mine  own  mother  sweet 
To  whom  I  may  no  manner  of  tiling  deny 
And  mercy  also  may  I  not  forget 
Unto  their  good'  myself  I  will  apply 
This  grace  I  grant  them  of  my  royalty 
That  I  shall  them  receive  unto  my  peace 
Of  hell  pain  I  grant  them  full  release." 

Christ  balances  his  wicked  works  with  : 

"  Of  the  treasure  of  my  bitter  passion 
And  of  the  merit  of  my  mother  dear 
To  whom  none  other  hath  comparison 
With  merit  of  my  saints  all  in  fear 
That  to  m}'  bidding  full  obedient  were 
Of  plenty  and  of  superabundance 
A  forset  full  which  putteth  in  balance." 

^  Svndcrcsvs.  ^  His  stall' or  vows.  "Bone. 


IXXX  INTRODUCTION. 

The  balance  is  in  favour  of  the  soul,  and  his  sentence  is  to  bear  all  his  sins  as  a 
burden  into  i)iirgatory,  and  abide  in  the  fire  until  all  are  biu-ned  and  thou  clean 
piu-ged  of  all  thy  foul  sins,  shall  then  be  pardoned.  At  this  sentence  Satan  is  sore 
annoyed,  and  has  great  anguish. 

He  meets  a  number  of  pilgrims  from  piu-gatory,  who  sing  to  the  Trinity  and  to 
Mary  a  song  of  praise  for  their  deliverance.  The  angels  join  in  a  song  without 
comparison  more  lusty  than  he  had  heard  before.  Then  came  one  pilgrim, 
conducted  by  an  huge  number  of  angels,  each  having  in  his  hand  some  lusty  instru- 
ment, as  harp,  organs,  some  of  which  he  could  not  describe.  It  was  a  soul  who, 
by  extraordinary  penance,  had  suffered  his  purgatory  on  earth.  He  then  sees  a 
number  of  jjilgrims  condemned  to  "  brenne  withynne  the  fyre  of  helle,  neuer  to  be 
releued."  An  ugly  company  of  devils  seized  them,  saying,  "  Goo  we  fast  in  to 
helle  ;  there  shall  we  fynde  a  warm  duellynge  place."  Our  poor  pilgrim  is  taken 
to  purgatory,  where,  in  three  days,  he  imagines  that  he  has  suffered  a  thousand 
years'  indescribable  tortiu^es.  His  guardian-angel  is  with  him  in  the  fire,  but  being 
a  pure  spirit,  suffereth  not.  In  his  torments,  he  is  told  that  naught  can  help  him 
but  masses  and  the  good  "  dedes  of  hooly  chirche."  He  asks,  what  is  the  use  of 
the  pardons  and  indulgences  granted  by  the  church  ?  His  angel  tells  him  that 
they  abridge  the  time  of  punishment  and  pain  ;  that  for  every  deadly  sin  he  must 
suffer  seven  years'  purgation,  and  the  thousand  years  that  he  had  suffered  was  but 
as  a  moment,  for  his  fardel  of  sins  seemed  to  be  as  huge  as  ever,  although  the  fire 
was  so  fierce,  that  if  the  great  sea  fell  therein,  it  would  be  dried  in  a  moment.  At 
length,  Grace  Dieu  sends  from  the  church  a  quantity  of  prayers,  masses,  and  good 
works  to  comfort  the  pilgrims  in  purgatory, — a  packet  to  each  prisoner,  with  the 
names  of  those  wlio  had  pm-chased  the  masses  for  their  relief.  Every  soul  an- 
swered the  summons  and  greedily  took  the  relief,  all  swimming  in  hot  fire  :  it  was 
ointment  that  relieved  their  ho'rid  pains  and  decreased  their  burden  of  sins.  He 
then  discovers  the  place  in  which  Adam  and  the  fathers  to  John  the  Baptist  were 
confined  till  Christ  descended  into  hell  and  released  them.  The  prison  also  in 
which  the  souls  of  infants  who  had  died  without  being  christened, — a  dark  and 
doleful  place,  where  they  will  be  shut  up  for  ever.  He  inquires  how  it  is  possible 
for  the  God  of  love  thus  to  condemn  the  innocent  ?  His  angel  refers  him  to  the 
words  of  Christ  to  Nicodemus  :  "As  seynt  John  recordeth,  he  seith,  that  an  inno- 
cent deyng  luithout  hajitym  is  dampned  withouted  oide.''^  And  they  lay  in  end- 
less darkness,  and  never  know  joy  ;  and  this  pain  shall  be  extended  to  all  the  most 
innocent  souls  not  baptized.  All  tliese  places  of  punishment  are  within  enclosed 
all  round  by  the  earth.  He  is  then  led  by  his  angel  to  the  surface  of  the  earth, 
he  fire  still  burning  within  him,  to  every  place  in  which  ho  had  committed  sin;  the 
punishment  was  according  to  the  nature  of  his  crime, — sometimes  shut  up  in  thick 
ice,  the  pain  being  more  intolerable  than  fire.  This  was  for  having  used  baths 
and  steues*  for  easement  of  his  body.  One  soul  who  had  been  purged,  could  not 
escape,  because  his  executors  had  neglected  to  pay  his  debts.  He  finds  that  one 
day's  penance  upon  earth  cleanseth  from  sins  more  than  years  of  purgatory.  In 
the  journey  he  finds  his  bones,  and  lias  a  long  conversation  with  them,  in  which 
they  mutually  criminate  each  other. 

His  guardian  angel  then  takes  him  into  the  very  depth  of  the  earth,  to  hell,  the 
stink  of  which  nearly  caused  his  soul  to  burst.     The  unbapfized  innocents  he  Sixw 

*  Strange  perversion  of  the   words,  '  Brothels. 

*  Yv  must  be  born  again  I  " 


INTRODUCTION.      *  Ixxxi 

in  a  place  :  "  Hit  was  wonder  merueylous  blacke  and  derke  ynowe  : "  ever  flying 
about  seeking,  but  never  finding,  a  hole  to  escape.  He  then  came  to  a  darker 
place  of  "  fire  horrible  and  wonder  hideous."  There  saw  he  the  cursed  fiends  ; 
some  blew  tlie  fire  ;  some  with  iron  forks,  righted  the  brands  ;  some  with  sharp 
hooks,  dressed  the  wretched  souls  into  divers  pains.  Lucifer  sat  in  a  red-hot 
iron  chair,  chained  with  red-hot  chains.  The  devils  torment  each  other.  The 
punishment  of  Pride  is  that  a  devil  sits  upon  her  head,  and  befouls  her  as  much  as 
he  can.  Hypocrites  are  trodden  perpetually  under  foot  by  devils,  engulphed  in 
fire  and  stink.  The  envious  and  backbiters  were  hung  by  red-hot  iron  hooks 
through  their  tongues  over  eternal  flames.  Judas  thus  hung,  but  as  his  mouth  had 
kissed  the  king,  his  lips  shined  like  gold  ;  but  his  tongue  was  drawn  out  by  his 
neck,  and  he  hung  in  hottest  flames.  Traitors  were  broken  upon  wheels,  fixed  by 
hooks,  turning  swiftly  round  :  the  same  punishment  was  inflicted  upon  lawyers, 
proctors,  and  counsel,  who  had  pleaded  for  the  guilty  against  the  innocent,  to  fill 
their  purses.  Uj^on  seeing  a  number  of  souls  being  devoured  by  wolves,  but 
never  eaten  ;  others  having  molten  brass  poured  down  their  throats,  he  swooned, 
but  is  revived  by  his  angel.  These  were  the  jjunishments  of  extortioners.  Angry 
jJeople  were  tied  up  in  bundles,  and  jjitched  into  fiery  furnaces  ;  drunkards  were 
laid  upon  burning  coals,  with  sulphur,  their  throats  slit,  and  tongues  drawn  through 
the  slit ;  the  lechoiu-s  were  laid  upon  beds  of  burning  thorns,  full  of  venomous 
and  huge  toads  and  worms,  for  ever  biting  and  gnawing  them.  The  boiling  caul- 
dron and  pit  of  hell  was  boiling  full  of  heretics  ;  and  when  our  Lord  shall  renew 
the  world,  all  their  burning  and  stinking  and  horrible  pains  shall  be  renewed,  and 
all  the  filth  that  may  be  found  in  every  other  place  shall  be  cast  thereto.  He  then 
ascends  to  the  earth,  and  sees  the  tree  from  which  Eve  plucked  the  apple,  and 
which,  after  process  of  time,  formed  the  cross  on  which  the  Saviour  suffered.  Then 
follows  a  number  of  dialogues  between  the  Trinity,  regarding  the  scheme  of  mercy. 
His  piu'gation  being  finished,  and  sins  consumed,  his  angel  took  him  by  the  hand, 
and  began  to  mount  towards  heaven.  The  angel  shows  him  many  mansions  ;  tells 
him  how  saints'  days  are  to  be  kept.  In  the  f«ist  of  the  Purification,  the  cheru- 
bims  sing  this  song  : 

"  Heryed  be  thou  blysfull  heuen  quene 
And  worshyped  mote  thou  be  in  euery  place 
That  moder  art  and  very  mayden  clene 
Of  god  our  lord  thou  geten  hast  that  grace 
Thou  cause  of  ioyes  arte,  and  of  solace 
By  meryte  of  thy  great  humylyte 
And  by  the  floure  of  thy  vyrgynyte 

flonoured  be  thou,  blessyd  lady  bryght 
By  thy  person  embelysshed  is  nature 
Of  heuen  blysse  augmented  is  the  lyght 
By  presence  of  so  fayre  a  creature 
Thy  worthynesse  passeth  al  mesm^e 
For  vnto  thyn  estate  Imperyall 
No  preysynge  is  that  may  be  peregal." 

Ill  the  feast  of  Ascension  the  father  honoured  the  sone  ;  and  at  the  feast  of 
Assumpcion,  the  Son  honoured  and  worshipped  his  mother. 


Ixxxii  INTRODUCTION. 

Song  of  angels  on  Easter  day  : 

"  When  thou  were  dead  to  hell  thou  descended 
And  fetched  them  out  that  lay  there  in  pain." 

The  angel  illustrates  to  him  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  by  the  world  being 
round  without  beginning  or  end  ;  having  breadth,  length,  and  depth,  which  three, 
by  unity  in  measure,  comprises  one  world.  So  in  a  body,  is  matter,  form,  and  sub- 
stance :  if  one  of  these  be  missing,  it  is  imperfect.  So  the  matter  is  likened  to  the 
Father,  the  form  to  the  Son,  and  the  substance  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  So  to  every 
perfect  work,  there  must  be  might,  cunning,  and  will.  He  then  asks,  that  as  these 
three  are  one,  how  came  it  that  one  was  separated  and  became  incarnate  alone  i 
This  is  accounted  for,  as  a  sun-beam  does  not  leave  the  sun,  but  enliveneth  the 
earth  ;  so  the  Son  illuminated  the  world,  being  clothed  with  man's  flesh  in  the 
blessed  maiden,  and  yet  departed  he  not  from  his  Father's  presence.  When  pro- 
perly prepared,  the  angel  went  to  prepare  his  way  to  heaven,  and  as  he  looked  after 
liim,  a  "wonder  huge  light"  descended  from  the  high  heaven,  smiting  on  his  eye, 
and  awoke  him  from  his  sleep  ;  whereof  he  was  full  sori-y,  after- having  seemed  to 
live  so  many  thousand  years  ;  the  clock  struck  twelve  and  the  bell  tolled  midnight, 
and  he  remembered  that  he  had  not  slept  three  hours  while  all  these  adventures 
had  passed.  Now  Jesus  give  us  grace  to  come  to  this  bliss  !  Translated  in  1413, 
and  printed  by  W.  Caxton,  June  Gth,  1483. 

There  is  in  the  British  Museum  *  a  very  fine  and  curious  MS.  copy  of  this 
very  singiilar  work,  illustrated  vrith  rude  illuminated  drawings.  It  finishes  with  : 
"  Here  endith  the  dreem  of  the  pilgrimage  of  the  soule,  translated  owt  of 
the  Frensch  in  to  Englysche.  The  yere  of  our  Lord  m.cccc.xui."  The  translator 
craves  indulgence,  if  "  in  som  places  ther  it  be  oner  fantastyk  nought  grounded 
nor  foundable  in  holy  scripture,  ne  in  doctoers  wordes,  for  I  myght  not  go  fro  myn 
auctor." 

The  original  work  was  written  in  verse  by  Guillaume  de  Guillonvillc,  prior  of 
Chaalis,  about  1330. 

The  Booke  of  the  PylfjTTjmage  of  Man.  4to,  26  leaves.  Wood- 
cut of  Pilgrim,  with  staff  au.l  cockle-shell,  and  clasped 
book  in  his  left  hand.^ 

Here  begynneth  a  boke  in  Frenche,  called  le  pelerynagc  de  L'homme  (in 
latyn,  peregrinatio  humani  generis),  and  in  oure  Maternal  tunge,  the  j)ylgryniage 
of  mankynd,  of  late  drawen  and  in  compendiouce  prose  copouded  by  the  rcuerent 
father  in  god  dane  william  hendred  Prioure  of  the  honoiu-able  place  and  pryory 
of  Leomynstre  ;  and  now  newly  at  the  specyal  commaundemente  of  the  same 
Father  reuerent  I  haue  compyled  the  tenure  of  the  same  in  Metre  comprehended 
in  xxvi.  chaptours  as  ensuynge  appereth. 

*  Addit.  MSS.,  Bibl.  Eg.  C15.     It  *  This  rare  book  is  in  the  library  of 

was  bought  of  Mr.  Rodd,  1836;  hut  Queen's   College,  Oxford.      I  am  in- 

appears  to  want   the  first    leaf  of  the  dobted    to    my    friend  Mr.    Underbill 

text.  for  the  above  analysis. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxxii 

THE   TABLE.- 

First,  the  prologe,  with  the  exposyon  and  enterpretacyon  of  the  name  of 

their  sayd  reuerent  father  in  God. 
Item  how  man  was  made  of  viij  partyes.     Capitulo  primo. 

Item  how  ahnyghty  god  put  adam  into  j^aradyce,  and  of  his  first  age.  Ca.  .  ij 
Item  the  secounde  age  of  mankynde,  and  howe  y  sonnes  of  noe  Bylded  the 

Toirre  of  Babylon.     Ca2>.  .  .  .  .  •        i'j 

Item  how  man  procedyd  his  thirde  age,  and  of  the  synkynge  of  eyties.  Ca.  iiij 
Item  howe  Moyses  receyuyd  ij  tables  of  the  iawe  in  the  iiij  age  of  man.  Ca.  v 
Item    howe  kjTig    Salamon    byldyd  the   temple  of  god   in  the    Cytie    of 

Jerusalem.     Ca.  .  .  .  .  .  .        vi 

Item  howe  the  vj  age  enduryd  telle  che  commynge  of  oure  sauyoure.     Ca.    .       vij 
Item  how  mankynde  endm'ed  and   of  the  nombre  of  yeres  from  the    be- 
•  gynnynge  of  the  worlde  to  the  byrthe  of  criste.     Ca.  .  .  .      viij 

Item  howe  almyghty  God  was  pylgrym  for  iij   causes  and  howe  he  gaue 

mankynde  ensample  to  do  his  pylgrymage.     Ca.         .  .  .        ix 

Item  which  iij  synguler  poyntys  apperteyne  to  a  jjylgryme.     Ca.  .         x 

Item  howe  mankynde  entereth  the  londe  of  June  at  the  age  of  Ix.  Ca.  .  xi 
Item  an  exposicion  autorysed  by  Scripture  of  ^  concepcion  of  seynt  John 

Baptyst.     Ca.  .  .  .  .  .  •       xij 

Item  howe  mankynde   entereth  into  a  kyngdome  namyd  the  londe  of  July 

and  parte  of  the  marterdome  of  seynt  Thomas  of  cauntorbury.     Ca.  .      xiij 

Item  a  parable  of  auctorytie  of  the  hooly  order  of  seynt  Benet.     Ca.  .     xiiij 

Item  how  mankynde  enteryth  the  empyre  of  august  and  of  the  abound- 

aunte  welth  that  there  is.     Ca.       .  .  .  .  .       xv 

Item  howe  mankynde  enteryth  and  goeth  thorowe  the  dukedome  of  Sep- 
tember.    Ca.  .  .  .  .  .  .      xvj 

Item  howe  mankynde  enteryth   into  the    londe  of  October  at  the  age  of 

a  C.  yere.     Ca.  .  .  .  .  .  ..    xvij 

Item  how  mankynde  enteryth  the  barm-y  of  Nouembre.     Ca.       .  .    xviij 

Item  howe  mankynde  enteryth  the  lordshyp  of  December.     Ca.  .      xix 

Item  howe  mankynde  goth  thorowe  the  londe  of  January  and  of  the  strastye 

that  coste.     Ca.  .  .  .  .  .  .       xx 

Item  howe  mankjTide  enteryth  the  londe  of  February.     Ca.         .  .     xxi 

Item  howe    man    procedyth    his  pylgrymage  in   and  thorowe  the  londe  of 

Marche.     Ca.  ......     xxij 

Item  howe  Batayle  was  mayntaynd   bytwene  sol  Justice  and  pluto  duke 

o  tenebris.     Ca.  ......    xxiij 

Item  howe  vyse    toke    the     fowarde   on  his  party,  and  howe  sol  Justicie 

fled.     Ca.  ......  xxiiij 

Item  howe  sol  justicie  turned  agayne  and  dyscurafyte  vyce  and  wanne  the 

feld.     Ca.  ......     XXV 

Item  the  conclucyon  of  this  boke.      Ca.         ....    xxvi 

Here  endeth  the  table. 

"  We  hym  folowynge  a  full  good  spede. 
Shortly  anone  the  skrymysche  beganne. 
And  so  sure  for  matter  in  dede. 
Uyce  with  his  felysshyp  faste  layed  on 
That  voce  mea  was  agast  soone. 


IXXXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

Thcnne  oure  capteyne  Sol  iusticie. 
With  In  manus  tuas  away  dyd  flye. 
In  to  a  darke  vale  that  was  nygh  by. 
But  yet  at  the  desyre  and  speeyall  request. 
Of  a  gi-acyouse  man  callyd  domine  exaudi. 
He  came  agayne  and  shortly  in  haste. 
To  ayde  us  there  came  one  hyeng  taste. 
Whiche  is  callyd  with  all  and  some. 
Benedictus  qui  venit  ad  prelium." 

So  lie  sets  out  with  Beatus  vir  for  a  guide,  and  enters  the  land  of  June^a 
royal  land,  full  of  pleasures  and  fruits,  of  which  he  eat  plenteously  in  every  lane  ; 
then  came  to  a  place  held  by^  the  "  Pope  of  June,"  where  was  the  cleanest 
castell  in  Xtendom  called,  "  castell  of  corpus  xpi." 

"  Of  whiche  indulgence  by  auctorytye 
The  founder  is  called  by  naturall  sext 
Of  the  romaynes  romanus  pontifex  " 

Where  man  could  be  healed  from  worldly  wretchedness  and  sinful  sore. 

His  guide  then  led  him  to  dominus  illuminatio  for  a  safe  conduct  in  all  the  lands 
they  should  \isit  : 

"  So  for  to  jDurchas  a  parfyte  \vryte. 
To  soule  justicie  we  take  our  way. 
Sealed  to  haue  oure  ^affe  condyte. 
And  he  shortly  sayde  not  nay. 
But  also  haue  us  of  his  lyuery. 
A  fencyble  garment  Joyntly  compyled. 
With  fayth  and  hope  that  we  exiled." 

Tliey  then  come  to  a  monastery,  &c. 

Emprynted  at  London  liy    me    Richard   Faques,  dwellyng  in    Poulys    churche 
yerde  at  the  sygne  of  the  Maydynhed. 


The  informacym  for  pijlgnjmes  unto  the  holy  lande,  That  is 
to  lof/te  to  Rome,  to  Jherusalem  and  to  Many  Other  Holy 
Places.     Imprinted  by  Wynkin  de  Worde.      1524.^ 

This  rare  volume  is  a  hand-book  for  pilgrims  ;  gives  the  routes,  coin,  conveyances, 
fees,  and  other  instructions  to  those  who  were  going  on  any  distant  pilgrimage.  It 
also  contains  the  narrative  of  a  pilgrim  in  his  journey  to  tlie  Holy  Land.  Sixty- 
six  jiilgrims  sailed  from  Venice,  in  one  ship  ;  they  visit  Jerusalem  and  other 
places  in  the  Holy  Land.  He  gives  the  pronunciation  of  useful  words  to  enable 
future  visitors  to  ask  for  bread,  wine,  &c.  It  is  a  very  rare  tract,  but  there  is 
nothing  allegorical  about  the  narrative,  wliicli  is  simply  of  tho  facts  as  they  took 
place. 

*  Retrospective  Review,  Vol.  II.,  p.  327. 


INTRODUCTION,  IxXXV 

The  next  allegorical  work  in  chronological  order  represent- 
ing life  as  a  pilgrimage  is 

Tlie  Historic  of  Graunde  Amoure  niid  la  bell  Pucel ;  called  the 
Pastime  of  Pleasure,  containing  the  Knowledge  of  the  Seven 
Sciences,  and  the  Course  of  Mans  Life  in  this  Worlde.  In- 
vented by  Stephen  Hawes,  Grome  of  King  Henry  the 
Seuenth  his  Chamber.  Printed  by  John  Waylande,  1554, 
Small  4to. 

Such  is  the  rarity  of  this  volume  that  although  it  wants  six  leaves  it  bears  this 
inscription  on  the  fly  leaf,  "  I  Ijought  this  Volume  at  Mr.  Bindley's  sale,  January 
21st,  1813,  for  the  inordinate  sum  of  forty  guineas.  James  BosAvell  (author  of 
Dr.  Johnson's  pleasant  twaddle)." 

The  narrative  is  of  a  love-sick  knight  in  search  of  a  lady,  named  La  Bel  Pucel. 
He  is  directed  to  the  Tower  of  Doctrine,  where  he  is  told  that  he  must  become 
proficient  in  the  seven  liberal  sciences,  in  order  to  mn  his  lady. 

Walking  in  a  gay  meadow,  he  finds  a  statue,  whose  hands  point  to  two  paths, 
one  of  contemplative  life  : — 

"  And  in  the  other  hande,  ryght  fayre  wrytten  was 
This  is  the  waye,  of  worldly  dignitye 
Of  the  actiue  lyfe,  who  wyll  in  it  passe 
Unto  the  tower,  of  fayre  dame  beautye 
Fame  shall  tell  him,  of  the  way  in  certaintye 
Unto  la  bell  pucell,  the  fayre  lady  excellent 
Aboue  all  other,  in  cleare  beauty  splendent." 

In  pursuit  of  this  beautiful  virgin  he  chooses  the  path  of  active  life,  and  sets  out. 

"  Thus  all  alone,  I  began  to  trauayle 
For  the  on  my  waye,  by  long  continuaunce 
But  often  times,  I  had  great  maruayle 
Of  the  by  pathes,  so  full  of  pleasaunce 
Whiche  for  to  take,  I  had  gi-eat  doubtance 
But  euermore,  as  nere  lis  I  myght 
I  toke  the  waye,  whiche  went  before  me  right." 

On  his  journey  he  falls  asleep,  and  is  awaked  by  the  sound  of  a  horn.  A 
lovely  lady,  on  horseback,  rides  swiftly  up  to  him,  accompained  by  two  greyhounds, 
with  their  names  set  in  diamonds  upon  their  collars — Grace  and  Governaunce. 
The  lady  proves  to  be  Fame,  she  presents  to  him  the  two  greyhounds,  praises  la 
beU  Pucell,  and  instructs  him  how  to  attain  her  in  the  tower  of  music,  and  she 
informs  him  that  he  will  have  great  labour,  and  must  pass  through  hard  adventures 
before  he  will  attain  his  object. 

"  For  by  the  waye,  there  lye  in  waite 
Gyantes  great,  disfigured  of  nature 
That  all  deuoureth,  by  their  euil  conceite 


IxXXvi  INTRODUCTION. 

Against  whose  strength,  tliere  may  no  man  endure 
They  are  so  huge,  and  strong  out  of  measure 
With  many  serpentes,  foule  and  odious 
In  sundry  likenesse,  blacke  and  tedious 

But  bej'ond  them,  a  great  sea  there  is 

Beyonde  whiehe  sea,  there  is  a  goodly  land 

Most  full  of  fruite,  replete  with  ioye  and  bliss 

Of  right  fine  golde,  appeareth  all  the  sande 

In  this  faire  realme,  where  the  tower  doth  stand 

Made  all  of  golde,  enameled  aboute 

With  noble  stories,  whiehe  do  appeare  without." 

He  at  length  arrives  at  the  Castle,  when  the  portresse  thus  questions  him  : 

"  Tyll  that  I  came  to  a  royall  gate 
Where  I  sawe  standyng  the  goodly  portres 
Whiehe  axed  me,  from  whence  I  came  alate 
To  whom  I  gan,  in  euery  thing  expresse 
All  myne  aduenture,  chaimce  and  busines 
And  eke  my  name,  I  tolde  her  euery  dell 
When  she  hearde  thys,  she  liked  me  ryght  well." 

The  portress,  whose  name  was  Countenaunce,  introduced  him  into  the  castle,  and 
in  the  fair  hall  upon  the  arras  is  portrayed  the  perils  he  will  have  to  encounter  ; 
that  folly  will  beset  his  path,  but  that  correction  will  follow. 

"  And  in  her  hande,  a  strong  knotted  whippe 
At  every  iarte  she  made  him  for  to  skippe." 

He  finds  that  he  will  have  to  destroy  a  giant  with  three  heads — another  more 
fierce  with  four  heads,  and  a  third  still  more  terrible  with  seven  heads,  and  at 
length  he  will  win  and  wed  La  Bell  Pucell.  The  principal  officers  in  the  castle 
are  thus  named  : 

"  The  marshal),  }clipped  was  dame  Reason 
And  the  yeurcs,  also  observaunce 
The  panter  Pleasaunce,  at  euery  season 
The  good  Butler,  curteys  continuaunce 
And  the  chiefc  coke,  was  called  temperauncc 
The  lady  chambcrlayne,  named  fidclitye 
And  the  hyc  stewarde,  Liberalitye." 

He  is  then  sent  in  succession  to  Grammar,  Logic,  Rhetoric,  and  at  length  to 
Music.  In  the  temple  of  music,  he  sees  and  falls  deeply  in  love  witli  La  Bell 
Pucell.  She  returns  liis  love,  but  infonns  him  that  he  will  have  to  brave  many 
desperate  adventures  before  they  can  be  united.  He  promises  to  fit  himself  for 
all  that  may  happen,  and  goes  to  Chivalry — he  is  taught  by  Minerva — harnessed 
and  knighted. 

"  For  first  good  hope,  his  legge  harneys  should  be 
His  habcrgion,«of  perfect  righteousnes 
Gyrde  fast,  wyth  the  girdle  of  chastitic 


INTRODUCTION.  IxXXvii 

His  rich  2Jlacarde,  should  be  good  busines 
Brodered  with  almes,  so  full  of  larges 
The  helmet  mekenes,  and  the  shelde  good  fayeth. 
His  swerde  Gods  worde,  as  S.  Paule  sayeth." 

Fortitude,  Consuetude,  Justice,  Misericorde,  Sapience,  Curtesye,  Concord  and 
dame  Minerva  see  him  on  liis  road,  and  bid  him  farewell.  His  first  adventure  is 
with  a  Kentish  man,  Godfrey  Gobilion,  who  gives  an  account  of  his  parentage  in 
these  lines  : 

"  I  cham  a  gentilman,  of  much  noble  kynne 
Though  Iche  be  cladde,  in  a  knaues  skynne 

For  there  was  one,  called  Peter  Pratefast 
That  in  all  his  life,  spake  no  worde  in  waste 
He  weddid  a  wife,  that  was  called  Maude 
I  trow  quod  I,  she  was  a  gorgious  boude 
Thou  liest,  quod  he,  she  was  gentle  and  good 
She  gaue  her  liusbande,  many  a  furde  hode 

And  at  his  meales,  without  any  misse 
She  would  him  serue,  in  clenly  wise  i^vys 
God  loue  her  soule,  as  she  loued  clenlines 
And  kept  her  dishes,  from  all  foulenes 
When  she  lacked  clowtes,  without  any  fayle 
She  wyped  her  dishes,  with  her  dogges  tayle." 

Tlie  conversation  that  ensues  between  these  worthies,  on  the  misfortunes  of 
lovers,  exceeds  for  gross  indelicacy  the  tales  of  Chaucer.  Grand  Amour  con- 
tinues his  jounaey,  and  becomes  a  regular  Jack  the  Giant-killer.  His  first 
adventure  was  with  a  monster  twelve  feet  high,  with  three  heads.  These  he 
decapitated  ;  and  is  then  attacked  by  a  second  and  more  formidable  giant,  fifteen 
feet  long,  with  seven  heads,  named,  Dissimulation,  Delay,  Discomfort,  Yariaunce, 
Envy,  Detraction,  and  Doubleness  ;  all  these  he  cuts  off,  and  is  then  received  and 
entertained  by  seven  fine  ladies.  His  next  fierce  encoimter  is  with  demons. 
Pallas  instructs  him  how  to  fight  with  them.  He  attacks  and  slays  the  great 
dragon — wins  La  Bell  Pucell,  and  is  married  to  her,  and  enjoys  great  happiness, 
until  he  is  quietly  removed  by  death  to  purgatory  ;  where,  having  been  purified, 
he  goes  to  heaven. 

In  vain  have  I  endeavoured  to  discover  the  intention  of  the  author  in  this 
allegory.  His  editor  says,  that  it  was  to  stimulate  young  men  to  study  the  seven 
liberal  sciences !  Its  natural  effect  would  be  to  stimulate  them  to  licentiousness. 
These  were  the  class  of  books  given  to  the  people  by  the  church,  in  preference 
to  the  Bible. 

We  now  come  to  a  very  rare  pilgrimage,  written  in  Italian, 
and  entitled  Libro  del  Peregrino,  by  J.  Cauice,  dedicated  to 
Lneresse  Borgie. 

The  edition  in  my  library  is  "  El  nouamente  stampato  et 
hystoriato,  small  8vo,  with  woodcuts,  Venice,  1524."     I  have 


Ixxxviii  INTRODUCTION. 

also  a  translation  into  French,  by  T.  Dassy,  Secretary  of 
State  to  the  King  of  Navarre ;  it  is  called  "  Le  Peregrin  : 
traictant  de  L'honneste  et  pudique  amour,  par  pure  et 
sincere  Vertu."  It  is  elegantly  printed  in  black  letter,  with 
woodcuts,  small  4to,  Lyons,  1528,  and  from  it  the  following 
analysis  was  made  : 

The  pilgrim,  a  native  of  Ferrara,  at  the  age  of  twenty-two  years  on  May-day, 
attended  to  hear  a  Dominican  Friar  preach.  Divine  love  lay  in  ambush,  and  the 
eloquence  of  the  preacher  pierced  his  heart.  He  passed  a  restless  night — speaks 
in  silence,  and  at  length  cries  out,  0  life  more  miserable  than  death  ;  his  thoughts 
wound  him  and  he  is  wretched.  Under  the  character  of  a  lady  named  Geneure, 
the  daughter  of  Angiolo  (the  Virgin  Mary,  queen  of  angels),  to  that  time  un- 
known to  him,  is  personated,  that  which  alone  can  cure  his  wounded  spirit.  This 
lady  is  very  wise  and  modest,  young,  but  ancient  in  jjrudence,  and  very  difficult  to 
obtain.  He  becomes  very  desirous  of  obtaining  her,  and  his  pilgrimage  is  made 
with  this  object.  Through  the  aid  of  Geneure's  nurse  Violante,  he  corresponded 
with  her,  and  sought  an  interview.  He  is  directed  to  a  subterraneous  passage,  by 
which  he  hopes  secretly  to  reach  her  house  in  the  night  ;  but  mistakes  the  chamber, 
and  enters  that  of  another  young  lady,  named  Lyonore,  (the  lioness)  the  daughter 
of  Petruccio,  (the  flurty),  and  mistook  her  for  Geneure.  This  sad  adventure  with 
Lyonore  involves  him  in  great  trouble.  It  came  to  the  knowledge  of  Geneure, 
and  she  weeps  for  her  pilgrim's  treason  ;  but  is  comforted  by  her  mother,  (the 
blessed  Virgin,)  who  tells  her  that  it  is  natural  to  man  to  go  astray.  Genem'e 
threatens  to  enter  a  nunnery,  and  submits  to  her  mother  that  the  vows  of 
obedience  and  poverty  are  of  sovereign  virtue.  The  pilgrim,  before  Gcneiu-e 
entered  upon  her  noviciate,  met  her  accidentally  at  church,  and  profioses  marriage, 
his  faults  are  forgiven,  they  become  united ,  and  pass  their  time  in  great  happiness, 
until  death  again  separated  them. 

If  Bunyan  had  been  able  to  have  read  this  quaint  old  Italian  or  French  story, 
he  would  never  have  devoted  his  valuable  time  to  such  a  mass  of  rubbish  ;  and  if 
he  had,  not  the  slightest  idea  could  have  suggested  itself  to  have  assisted  him  in 
composing  the  adventures  of  his  Pilgrim.  In  fact  he  dared  not  have  spent  an 
hour  over  a  book,  which,  under  the  title  of  "  The  Pilgrim,"  contains  all  the  loose- 
ness of  an  Italian  love  story. 

It  is  a  matter  of  great  regret  that  those  who  write  and 
publish  for  the  millions,  too  frequently  circulate  opinions  and 
supposed  facts  without  personal  investigation.  ]\Ir.  Chambers, 
the  popular  publisher  at  Edinburgh,  whose  works  find  readers 
as  far  as  the  English  language  is  known,  has  joined  those 
who  detract  from  Bunyan,  by  charging  him  with  plagiarism. 

In  his  Encyclopanlia  of  Literature,'  speaking  of  Gawin  Douglas,  the  Bishop  of 
Dunkeld,  a  celebrated  Scottish  poet,  he  observes  :  "  The  principal  original 
composition    of  Douglas    is   a    long  -poem,  entitled    *  The   Palace   of  Honour.^ 

'   Vol.  i.  p.  44. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxxix 

It  was  designed  as  an  epilogue  for  the  conduct  of  a  king,  and  therefore 
addressed  to  James  IV.  The  poet  represents  himself  as  seeing,  in  a  vision, 
a  large  company  travelling  towards  the  Palace  of  Honour.  He  joins  them, 
and  narrates  the  particulars  of  the  pilgrimage.  The  well-known  Pilgrim's 
Progress  bears  so  strong  a  resemblance  to  this  poem,  that  Bunyan  could  scarcely 
have  been  ignorant  of  it."  With  some  trouble,  I  found  a  copy  of  this  very  rare 
tract  by  Douglas.  It  is  a  short  poem,  but  being  in  the  ancient  Scottish  dialect,  it 
is  quite  long  enough  to  weary  an  Englishman's  patience.  Had  it  been  Douglas's 
long  poem,  a  translation  of  Virgil,  it  would  have  defied  any  attempt  of  mine  to  read 
it;  but  by  the  aid  of  a  good  modem  glossary,  I  read  it  through,  and  to  my  extreme 
surprize,  found  that  it  has  not,  either  in  the  plot  or  detail,  the  slightest  similarity 
whatever  to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  and  that  it  is  written  in  terms  that  a  poor  un. 
lettered  minister  could  not  have  understood.  ^  Had  Bunyan  seen  and  read  the 
following  stanza,  and  ^mderstood  it,  how  indignant  would  he  have  felt  at  the 
author's  notion  of  baptismal  regeneration. 

"  Ze  bene  all  borne  the  sonnis  of  Ire  I  ges 
Sine  throw  Baptisme  gettis  grace  and  faithfulnes. 
Than  in  zone  Carwell  surelie  ze  remane. 
Oft  stormested  with  this  warldis  brukilnes 
Quhill  that  ze  fall  in  sin  and  wretchitnes 
Than  schip  brokin  sail  ze  drown  in  endles  pane 
Except  be  faith  ze  find  the  plank  agane 
Be  Christ,  wirking  gude  warkis  I  vnderstund 
Remane  thairmth,  thir  sail  zow  bring  to  land.*  " 

Surely  Mr.  Chambers  could  not  have  imagined  that  the  representation  of  a  large 
party  going  up  a  hill  of  polished  marble,  and  on  the  summit  seeing  the  infernal 
regions  as  narrated  in  the  following  verses,  could  have  aided  Bunyan  in  his  solemn 
account  of  the  Christian's  feeling  in  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death. 

"  As  we  approchit  neir  the  hilles  heid 
Ane  terribill  sewch  birnand  in  flammis  reid 
Abhominabill,  and  how  as  hell  to  se 
All  full  of  brintstane,  Pick  and  bulling  Leid, 
Q,uhair  mony  ^vi'etchit  creatiu-e  lay  deid. 
And  miserabill  catiues  zelland  loude  on  hie 
I  saw,  quhilk  den  micht  weill  compairit  be 
Till  Xanthus  the  flude  of  Troy  sa  schill 
Birnand  at  Venus  best  contrair  Achill. 
Amid  our  passage  lay  this  vglie  sicht 
Nocht  braid  bot  sa  horribill  to  euerie  wicht 
That  all  the  warld  to  pas  it  suld  haue  dreid. 
Weill  I  considderit  na  vpperraair  I  micht. 
And  to  discend  sa  hiddeous  was  the  hicht 
I  durst  not  auenture  for  this  eird  on  dreid 

The    princijjal    character   in    the  He  then  follows  them  to  the  palace  of 

story  is  represented  as  being  in  a  desert,  honour,  and  gives  a  description  of  what 

when,   hearing    the    noise    of    an   ap-  took  place, 
preaching  cavalcade,  he  gets  into  a  stock  -  Page  44. 

[a   hollow  tree],  and  sees  them  pass. 


XC  INTRODUCTION. 

Trimbland  I  stude  wt  teith  chatterand  gude  speid 
My  Nymphe  beheld  m)'  cheir  and  said  let  be 
Thow  sail  nocht  aill,  and  lo  the  caus  (quod  schc) 
To  me  thou  art  commit,  &c.® 

There  may  be  as  much  poetic  beauty  in  these  lines  as  there  is  melody  in  the 
drone  of  the  bagpipe,  but  there  is  not  the  slightest  similarity,  nor  even  any  idea  in 
the  whole  poem,  that  coidd  by  possibility  have  aided  the  author  of  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress. 

The  Pryke  of  Conscience.^ 
A  very  curious  old  English  poem;  it  ia  theological  and  descriptive,  but  not  alle- 
gorical. 

The  Myrrour  of  Lyfe,  by  William  of  Xassyngton,  1-418.^ 

An  ancient  English  poetical  treatise  on  religion  ;  excepting  the  title,  it  has  no 
pretence  to  allegory. 

Castellum  Amoris.  Le  Chateau  D^ Amour,  by  Robert  Grosteste. 

A  fine  copy  of  this  curious  poem  in  Norman  French,  is  in  the  British  Museum.^ 
It  narrates  the  creation  and  fall  of  man;  the  four  daughters  of  God,  Mercy,  Truth, 
Patience,  and  Peace,  unite  to  devise  the  means  of  man's  restoration.  The  prophets 
predict;  the  Saviour  is  born  in  the  great  palace  of  Love;  the  palace  is  described 
with  its  keepers;  Satan  attem))ts  to  overcome  the  keepers. — It  is  a  very  curious 
poem,  and  is  called  at  the  end,  Scala  Call. 

"O  baptize  treslour  fussent  "They  were  then  baptized 

Et  nomi  Deu  pater  et  Det  fiz.  In  the  names  of  God  the  Father  and  of  the  Son 

Et  du  saynt  espiritz  And  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

Kar  qi  baptize  no  serra  For  whoever  is  not  baptized 

Ca  en  eel  ne  entera  He  in  heaven  shall  not  enter 

Mes  ci  creaut  cy  baptize  But  those  created  in  this  baptism 

Serront  mys  a  sauuete."  Shall  be  put  into  salvation." 

Scala    Perfeccionis   Englyshed.       The    Ladder    of  Perfeccion, 
written  by  Walter  Hilton,  about  1380. 

This  was  one  of  the  most  popular  of  the  monkish  ^vritings,  and  so  much  esteemed 
in  the  reign  of  James  the  Second,  as  to  have  been  published  by  tlie  court  to  pro- 
mote the  influence  of  popery  in  these  realms;  this  is  very  much  altered,  and  not 
miproved.  The  only  allegory  in  it  is  the  ladder  placed  upon  the  cartli  to  ascend 
by  steps  to  heaven.  It  was  intended  for  monks  and  nuns  to  guide  them  in  de- 
votional exercises,  so  that  tlieir  affections  might  bc'feradually  raised  from  eartlily 
things.  It  is  the  most  scriptural  of  all  the  monkish  manuscripts,  but  the  evangelical 
truths  are  omitted  in  the  more  modern  printed  editions.  Thus  he  says,  if  we  were  only 

'  Page  42.  2  Brit,  Mus.  Eg.  657. 

*  Bib.  Egcrt.  81(5.     B.  ^  Roy.  Lib.  17,  c.  viii. 


INTRODUCTION.  XCl 

infected  by  original  sin,  and  had  escaped  the  poUution  of  actual  transgression,  we 
must  have  perished  but  for  the  sufterings  of  Christ.^  To  speak  for  thy  profit  and 
my  owTi,  "say  I  thus  that  thou  neuer  so  moche  a  wreche,  hadest  thou  done  neuer 
so  moche  syn,  for  sake  thi  self  and  al  thi  werkes  gode  and  bad,  cry  mercy  and  aske 
oneli  saluacion  bevertu  of  the  precious  passion  mekeli  and  trusteli  and  with  outyen 
doute  thou  schalt  haue  it,  and  fro  this  original  syn  and  al  other  that  thou  have 
done  thou  sal  be  saf."'  Dr.  Dibdin  considers  this  a  wild  and  dangerous  exposition 
of  the  consoling  doctrines  of  the  Christian  religion  made  by  an  enthusiastic  writer  !* 
Hilton  gives  a  faithful  warning  against  placing  dependence  upon  happy  feelings, 
unless  they  arise  from  a  living  faith.^  "  I  had  rather  feel  and  have  a  stedfast 
desire  and  a  pure  spiritual  union  with  my  Lord  Jesus,  though  I  cannot  see  him 
with  my  ghostly  eye,  than  to  have  without  this  desire  the  fruit  of  all  the  bodily 
penance  of  all  living  men,  or  all  the  visions  and  revelations  of  angels'  songs  and 
sounds."  "Jesus  leadeth  the  soul  into  itself.  The  secret  voice  of  Jesus  is  fully 
true  :  '  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  know  me.'  There  is 
no  feigning  in  it,  nor  fantasy,  nor  pride,  nor  hypocrisy;  but  softness,  meekness, 
peace,  love,  and  charity.  And  it  is  full  of  life,  love,  and  grace;  and,  therefore, 
when  it  soundeth  in  the  soul,  it  is  sometime  of  so  great  might,  that  the  soul 
suddenly  layeth  of  hand  all  that  there  is,  praying,  speaking,  reading,  or  thinking, 
and  all  manner  of  bodily  work,  and  listeneth  thereto,  fully  hearing  and  perceiving, 
in  rest  and  in  love,  the  sweet  steuen^  of  this  spiritual  voice,  as  it  were  ravished 
from  the  mind  of  all  earthly  things.  Sometimes  Jesus  showeth  himself  as  a 
master,  sometimes  as  a  father,  and  sometimes  as  a  lovely  spouse  ;  and  it  keepeth 
the  soul  in  a  wonderful  reverence,  and  a  lovely  beholding  of  him,  that  the  soul 
liketh  never  so  well  as  then.'"'  It  is  delightful  to  meet  with  such  beams  of  the 
Sun  of  righteousness  in  a  dark  age,  like  the  day-sjiring  on  high,  breaking  through  a 
dismal  night  with  its  cheering  rays.** 

The  Pilgrimage  of  Perfectio7i ;    supposed  to  be  written  by 
William  Bond.     4to,  printed  by  Pynson,  1526. 

A  fine  copy  of  this  rare  book  is  in  the  extensive  and  valuable  library  of  my  kind 
friend,  the  Rev.  J.  H.  M.  Luxmoore,  rector  of  Marcweil,  near  Wrexham,  by  whose 
permission  the  following  analysis  was  made. 

This  work  is  more  particularly  intended  for  the  monastic  orders,  to  promote 
what,  in  those  days,  was  called  pious  feelings,  which  was  to  treat  the  gifts  of  jirovi- 
dence,  the  comforts,  and  even  necessaries  of  life,  with  contempt;  to  abstain  from 
reasonable  enjoyments;  to  retire  into  solitudes  where  no  relative  duties  could  be 
performed;  lacerating  the  body;  submitting  the  soul  mth  blind  obedience  to  the 
will  of  men;  a  looking  forward  with  dread  to  the  future;  contemplating  the  God 
of  love,  not  as  the  forgiver,  but  as  the  avenger  of  sin;  and  to  which  may  be  added, 

*  Chap.  xliv.  '  Cap.  xliv.  part  2. 

'  Copied   from   a  fine   and    perfect  ^  It  is  very  suri)rising  that  so  little 

MS.  in  the  editor's  library,  ch.  xliv.  appears  to  be  known  of  this  good  man; 

*  Typographical  Antiquities,  vol.  ii.  he  was  a  Carthusian  monk  of  Sion,  or 
p.  37.  Shene,    and   author   of    about   twelve 

^  Spelling  modernized.  different  works. 


Sound,  from  "  streuen,"  or  strain. 


.^2 


Xcii  INTRODUCTION. 

tliat  climax  of  pride,  fanaticism,  and  folly,  in  which  Jews,  Mohammedans,  and  all 
antichrist  glory,  that  there  is  no  salvation  out  of  the  pale  of  their  own  sect. 

The  volume  commences  with  the  tree  of  grace  and  the  tree  of  vice ;  under  the 
branch  of  avarice  a  nun  is  told  to  KotC  gt  a  ptn  Or  a  nttJtll  fecjlt  COUtrSfg  tO 

gf  rommauuticnifnt  of  tfjciv  soucraine  it  is  liampnable. 

It  is  divided  into  two  parts  :  first,  "  sheweth  howe  the  lyfe  of  euery  cristian  is  as 
a  pilgremage  :  second,  the  iourney  of  religion — man  is  never  contented  in  the  cage 
of  this  world;  wherfore  it  appereth  that  ther  is  an  hyer  cage  and  another  place  for 
his  full  contentation." — "As  the  iewes  spoyled  Egipt  of  their  richesse,  so  the 
christians  have  spoyled  both  iewes  and  philosophers  of  the  noble  veritees  of  phi- 
losophy ;" 

"In  heuen  euery  man  and  woman  shalbe  as  an  emperom*  and  empresse." 

The  journey  begins  with  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  professing  by  it  to  be 
pilgrims;  openly  forsixking  the  devil,  pomps,  mortal  sins,  honours,  riches,  and 
pleasures;  for  daily  sustenance,  is  given  the  blessed  body  of  oiu"  Lord  in  the  sacra- 
ment, by  which  these  pilgrims  are  raised  above  nature  to  immortal  glory.  John  vi.  53, 
is  thus  translated  :  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  son  of  the  virgin,  and  drink  his 
blood,  ye  cannot  have  Hfe  in  you;"  but  it  is  silent  as  to  the  cup  being  denied 
to  the  laity.  1  Peter  ii.  2,  3,  are  thus  translated,  "as  infants  and  young 
children  :  whom  our  mother,  holy  chui-ch,  hath  brought  forth,  by  the  regeneration 
of  baptism  in  the  faith  of  Christ  Jesus." 

Then  follow  very  extensive  instructions  to  the  pilgrims,  without  any  attempt  at 
allegory.  Many  portions  of  scripture  are  given,  but  they  are  strangely  translated. 
The  Lord's  prayer:  "0  father  in  heuen  delyuer  vs  fro  all  euyll  of  pej'ne  and 
synne.  Suffre  vs  nat  to  be  ouerthrowen  in  temptacion.  Forgyue  vs  our  offences 
as  we  forgyue  them  that  hath  offended  vs.  Gyue  vs  our  dayly  sustenaunce  and 
necessaryes.  Thy  wyll  be  fulfylled  in  erthe,  as  it  is  in  heuen.  Thy  kyngdome 
come  to  vs.  Thy  holy  name  be  santifyed."- — 1  Cor.  iii.  13;  "but  yet  (as  saynt 
Poule  sayth)  tlie  fyer  of  purgatory  must  proue  his  workes."  When  suffering  pain 
from  fasting,  he  adviseth  that  such  pain  be  allayed  by  using  these  words:  "Ah, 
caryon  carion  and  wormes  meate :  what  vauntage  shalte  thou  haue,  ever  to  stufFe 
and  fyll  the  greedy  gutte  of  thy  bely  with  delicate  meetes  and  drinkes  which  damn 
the  soule."  Praying  to  our  blessed  Lady  and  to  the  saints  is  ordered  because  Job 
was  commanded  to  "  call  to  some  of  the  sayntes  of  heuen,  and  they  wil  answere," 
Job  V.  1 .  In  the  ten  commandments  the  second  is  omitted,  and  the  tenth  is 
divided  into  two  to  make  up  the  number.  The  Virgin  Mary  can  obtain  blessings 
for  us,  because  "The  mother  of  God,  sheweth  to  her  son  her  pappes  and  brestes, 
with  the  whicli  she  gaue  hym  sucke !  !  therefore  make  supplication  to  her,  to  have 
mercy  on  this  present  churche  militant,  releue,  socoure,  <ind  helpe  it."  The 
heavenly  anthem  is  translated  ;  "  Glory  be  to  god  in  heuj-n,  and  peace  in  erthe  to 
man  or  woman,  that  bathe  a  good  wyll,"  Luke  ii.  11.  The  pilgrimage  is  divided 
into  seven  days,  and  on  the  seventh  the  soul  approaches  to  perfection;  and  here 
the  feelings  or  experience  of  the  pilgrims  strongly  remind  us  of  some  modem 
sects,  such  as,  the  Irvingites — ''  Some  in  this  vnwont  ioye  hciue  been  compelled 
to  syng,  some  to  wepe,  some  coude  nothinge  spcke;  but  Jesu,  Jcsu,  Jesu.  Some 
coude  nat  saye  so  moche,  but  onely  e.vpresse  suche  voi/ces,  (hat  be  nat  in  use  to 
xignifye  any  thyng  :  one  Masseus  in  such  ioye  coude  speke  nothing  but  v  v  v."  With 
the  Quakers,  "  Some  other  in  such  jubile,  trymbled   or  quaked  in  all  the  ioyntes 


INTRODUCTION.  Xciii 

of  their  bodyes."  Like  the  Ranters,  "  Some  were  constrayned  to  leape  and  daunce 
for  ioye,  and  some  to  clappe  their  handes."  Some  have  ari-ived  at  so  high  a  state 
of  mortification,  that  if  asked  "  whether  they  coude  be  contented,  for  the  love  and 
pleasure  of  god,  and  to  fulfyll  his  wyll,  to  lye  for  euermore  in  the  paynes  of  hell, 
without  remedy,  they  wolde  answere  :  ye  with  all  their  hertes."  In  such  a  state 
was  St.  Bernard  who  was  ravished  before  the  cross  when  the  body  "  losed  itselfe 
from  the  crosse,  and  halsed^  and  kyssed  hym  most  swetely;"  the  holy  Brigit  was 
lifted  up  in  the  aire,  and  her  face  was  made  to  shyne  brighter  than  the  sonne  ! !! 
The  reader  need  not  be  told  that  Bunyan  could  have  had  no  help  from  this  im- 
piue  source. 

The  Pype,  or  Tonne  of  the  lyfe  of  perfection.     4to,  1532. 

This  is  an  allegorical  work  for  the  instruction  of  nuns,  written  by  the  old  wretch 
of  Sion;3  and,  although  it  is  not  a  pilgrimage  or  a  dream,  it  is  a  guide  to  female 
pilgrims.     Under  the  idea  of  wine  being  kept  in  a  pipe  or  tun,  is  represented. 
1.  The  life  of  perfection,  as  the  loine ;  2.  Religion,  the  pipe;  3.  Essential  vows, 
obedience,  wilful   poverty,  and   chastity,   the  staves;  4.  Holy  rules,  the  hoops; 
5.  Ceremonies,  the  wickers,  by  which  the  hoops  are  made  fast.     If  these  prickers 
fail,  the  hoops  open,  the  cask  falls  to  pieces,  and  the  vnne  is  lost;  all  depends  upon 
the  ceremonies.    This  curious  book  was  pulilished  to  prevent  the  spread  of  heresy 
"by  newe  fangle  persones,"  aided  by  the  New  Testament,  which  had  then  been 
about  six  years  in  circulation  in  England;  for  "Luther,  with  all  his  discyples,  de- 
praue  all  maner  of  religyons,  except  onely  (as  they  call  hit)   the  religyon   of 
Christe.     Wherefore  I  thought   it  necessary  to  answer  the  perilous  poison  of  such 
blaterers."     The  work  is  divided  into  three  parts:  "Of  Obedience,"  "Wylfull 
Pouertie,"  and  "Chastite;"  being  the  three  gi-eat  vows  made  by  the  nuns,  to  whom 
it  is  addressed.     I.   Of  Obedience.  Without  implicit  obedience,  there  is  not  the 
slightest  hope  of  salvation.     This  related,  not  only  to  the  obedience  due  by  nuns 
to  the  pope,  the  priest,  and  the  abbess,  but  also  to  the  obedience  due  by  a  wife  to 
her  husband.     If  married  ladies  acted   in  the  same  spirit  then  as  they  do  now, 
might  not  the  sorrowful  inquiry  have  been  made,  "  Lord,  are  there  [even  a]  few 
that  be  saved  ?"     "  Kynges  as  sone  as  they  were  conuerted  and  bajjtized,  left  their 
dyademes  and   were  subiects  unto   the    clergie,  and   under  theyr  obedience;"  a 
peculiar  kind  of  anti-nomianism  reigned  in  the  church;  "I  say,  that  no  temporall 
lawe  maye  bynde  any  spirituall  persone.     This  have  we  said  vnto  Tyndale  that 
arche  heretike."      Some  of  the  rules  and  examples  show  that  nuns  were  true 
women,  who  could  braule  and  chide;  eat  and  drynke  to  excess^"  they  be  in  right 
great  jeoperty  of*  nawfrage  and  wracke  of  chastite."     Obedience  in  ecclesiastical 
payments  is  enforced  by  a  very  odd  translation  of   Numb,  xviii.   22  :    "  Those 
persones  that  wolde  nat  be  obedient  duely  to  pay  theyr  tythes,  were  judged  by  our 
Lord  \Tito  deth ;"  and  whether  God,  or  the  vicar  of  God,  give  any  manner  of  com- 
mandment, it  is  all  one,  and  by  like  reverence  to  be  performed;  "  our  lorde  god, in 
maner  m^kyng  the  prelates  and  souereynes  equall  with  hymselfe."     The  extent  of 
obedience  is  thus  illustrated  :  "that  man  that  in  obedience  to  his  souereyne  dyd 
caste  his  ovme  chylde  quicke  into  a  hole  flamynge  ouen  has  now  laude,  prayse, 

^  Halsed,  bowed  the  head.  near  Richmond,  on  the  banks  of  the 

'A  monk  in  the  monastery  of  Syon,         Thames. 

*  Naiifrage, 'shipwreck.' 


XCIV  INTRODUCTION. 

thanke,  and  grace,  because  he  was  obedient  as  he  would  have  had  indignation  of 
god  and  vengeaunce  if  he  had  not  obeyed."  2.  Of  Wylfull  Pouertie.  This  vow 
was  so  strict  that  no  monk  or  nun  was  to  consider  their  clothes  their  o^vn,  but  the 
property  of  the  establishment;  and,  to  terrify  the  poor  votaries,  a  story  is  told, 
fol.  cc,  of  a  monk  that  did  appear  after  his  death  to  one  of  his  companions,  showing 
that  he  was  in  marvellous  great  j^ains,  "  for  bycause  he  gaue  a  payre  of  olde  showes 
vnto  a  pore  body  without  leaue;"  All  the  efforts  and  threats  to  prevent  getting 
money  was  in  vain,  and  our  unhappy  author  laments  that  there  are  few  monasteries 
in  England  but  where  the  monks  lend  and  borrow;  play  for  money  at  all  manner 
of  games;  dice,  cards,  bowls,  and  sometimes  at  worse  or  more  inconvenient  things; 
while  the  nuns  enjoy  their  gains;  make  good  cheer;  sing  and  laugh,  play  and 
sport,  and  be  as  meiTy  as  lay  people.  We  close  our  account  of  this  singular 
volume  by  extracting  a  curious  version  of  Ps.  cxxxvii.  9  :  "  Blessed  be  that 
person  that  doth  hold  and  restrain  his  children,  and  that  doth  thrust  and  crush 
their  head  unto  the  stone,  that  is  unto  Christ  and  his  passion  and  death."  No  one 
can  for  a  moment  suppose  that  Bunyan  could  have  gained  a  hint  from  this 
volume. 

Viaggio  Spirituale,  nel  quale,  facendosi  passaggio  da  questa  vita 
mortale,  si  ascende  alia  celeste.  Del  R.  P.  Cornelio  Bellanda, 
di  Verona,  4to.  with  the  Aldine  mark.   Venetia,  1578. 

This  spiritual  pilgrimage,  from  mortal  life  to  the  celestial,  has  nothing  in  it 
allegorical,  but  in  ten  chapters  treats  of  penance,  confession,  the  judgment,  heavenly 
blessedness,  &c.     It  is  a  very  rare  volume,  elegantly  printed  by  Aldus,  jun.  ^ 

The  Vision  of  Pierce  Plowman. 

This  is  a  very  curious  poem,  comi^osed  about  the  time  of  Wiclif,  by  one  of  the- 
Lollards,  said  to  be  by  Robert  Langland.  It  is  a  poetical  vision  or  dream,  in  which 
he  exposes  and  reproves  vice,  and  extols  Christian  vii-tue.  The  printer  [R.  Crowley, 
15.50]  states,  that  it  was  written  in  the  time  of  Edward  the  Third,  when  it  pleased 
God  to  open  the  eyes  of  many  to  see  his  truth,  giving  them  Ijoldness  of  iieart  to 
open  their  mouths  and  cry  out  against  the  works  of  darkness.  This  writer  feigneth 
himself  in  dreams  most  Christianly  to  instruct  the  weak,  and  sharply  rebuke  the  ob- 
stinate blind.  He  godlily,  learnedly,  and  wittily  rebuked  vice  in  all  classes.  There 
is  nothing  in  this  very  interesting  Ijook  that  could  have  aided  Bunyan,  but  it 
presents  a  melancholy  picture  of  the  state  of  the  clergy,  and  of  society  generally,  at 
that  time;  according  to  his  account,  pilgrims  were  very  sad  stor3'-tellers. 

"  Pilgrames  and  Palmers  plyght  hem  togyther 
For  to  seke  S.  James  and  sayntcs  at  Rome 
They  went  forth  thevT  way,  wyth  many  wyse  talcs, 
And  had  leaue  to  Ive  all  hvr  Ivfe  after." 


^  In    the    Hilary    at   Grove    Street,         V    Imprimarie    iles    Aide,    vol.    i.    p. 
Hackney.    Sec  Renonard  Anivilcs,  de         .'W7. 


INTRODUCTION.  XCV 

The  hermits  appear  to  have  had  a  still  worse  propensity: 

"  Hermets  on  a  heape  wyth  hoked  staues 
Wenten  to  Walsingham,  and  her  wenches  after." 

Chaucer's  Canterbury  Tales 

Were  told  on  a  pilgi'image  to  the  shrine  of  Thomas  a  Becket;  and  it  is  evident 
that  these  pretended  holy  joairneys  were  full  of  vice  and  profligacy. 

Erasmus  on  the  Religious  Pilgrimages. 

In  the  same  order  is  the  very  droll  coloquy  of  Erasmus,  called  t\\e  Religious  Pil- 
grimage :  this  is  preceded  by  an  account  of  a  shipwreck,  when  all  the  passengers 
and  crew  are  calling  each  on  his  patron  saint,  promising  jjilgrimages  and  offerings. 
Among  them ;  "  one  vowed  to  St.  Christopher,  in  the  great  church  at  Paris, '  as  loud 
as  he  could  bawl,'  that  he  might  be  sure  to  be  heard,  a  loax  candle,  as  big  as  him- 
self, and  he  was  rather  a  mountain  than  a  statue :  a  friend  gave  him  a  touch.  Have 
a  care  lohat  you  promise,  says  he,  for  if  you  should  sell  yourself  to  your  shirt,  you 
are  not  able  to  purchase  such  a  candle.  Hold  your  tongue,  you  fool,  says  t'other? 
softly,  for  fear  the  saint  should  hear  him  ;  let  me  set  foot  a  land  once,  and  he  has 
good  luck  if  he  get  so  much  as  a  tallow  candle  of  me  ! !"  This  pilgrimage  has  a 
long  letter  from  the  Virgin  Mary  WTitten  by  one  of  her  secretaries,  in  droll  terms, 
complaining  that  it  is  of  no  use  that  hundreds  should  jiray  to  her  at  once,  for  she 
could  only  hear  one  at  a  time,  and  had  no  jjower  to  assist  her  worshij^pers.  No 
one  can  suppose  that  Bunyan  gained  any  hint  from  such  satmcal  works  as 
these. 

Spencer  s  Fairy  Queen. 

To  this  work  Dr.  Adam  Clarke  considered  Bunyan  to  have  been  indebted  for 
some  ideas  in  his  Pilgrim,  or  Holy  War.  It  must  require  no  ordinary  degree  of 
penetration  to  discover  that  which  is,  to  many,  perfectly  concealed. 

This  is  a  very  long  but  elegant  allegorical  poem,  composed  of  seven  legends : 
1.  The  Knight  of  the  i  ed  Cross,  or  Holiness.  This  gallant  knight,  properly 
caparisoned  and  accoutred,  rides  forth  with  Truth  represented  as  a  fair  lady;  his 
first  adventiu'e  is  with  a  monstrous  dragon  called  Error,  who  is  slain.  They  take 
refuge  in  the  cell  of  an  aged  sire  who  acted  the  part  of  a  holy  hermit,  but  proved 
to  be  a  most  unholy  enchanter;  he  calls  spirits  from  the  vasty  deep,  and  transforms 
them  into  a  gallant  knight  and  a  beautiful  woman.  He  kindles  a  flame  of  jealousy 
in  the  breast  of  the  red  cross  knight,  so  that  he  abruptly  quits  his  fair  companion, 
and  in  his  journey  meets  with  a  knight  called  "  Sans  Foy ;"  they  fight,  and  Sans  Foy 
is  killed,  and  a  lovely  lady,  his  companion,  is  taken  captive;  she  proves  to  be 
"Falsehood."  He  is  taken  prisoner  by  the  contrivance  of  Falsehood,  and  is  thrown 
into  a  dungeon  in  the  castle  of  giant  Orgoglio,  where  he  lies  in  despair  for 
three  months.  Truth  induces  prince  Arthur  to  attack  the  giant,  whose  body  dis- 
appears when  he  is  slain  after  a  fearful  combat  ;  he  relieves  the  red  cross  knight 
from  a  cell — 

"  Where  entred  in,  his  feet  could  find  no  floor, 
But  all  a  deep  descent,  as  dark  as  Hell, 
That  breathed  ever  forth  a  filthv  banefu'l  smell." 


XCvi  INTRODUCTION. 

He  is  then  led  to  a  house  of  holiness,  and  is  taught  repentance.  Our  knight  then 
seeks  and  fights  the  old  dragon  fiend  for  three  successive  days  and  kills  him.  He 
visits  the  infernal  realms;  sees  what  the  classic  poets  have  described;  meets  again 
with  his  ladj'  Truth,  and  his  adventures  close  with  their  marriage.  The  next  legend 
is  that  of  Temperance  narrating  the  exploits  of  Sir  Guyon.  He  attacks  and  over- 
comes Furor,  Incontinence,  and  Mammon.  He  recounts  from  a  friar's  book  "  a 
chronicle  of  Briton's  Kings."  His  startling  description  of  our  forefathers  is  a 
good  specimen  of  his  versification  and  stanzas  : 

"  But  far  in  land  a  salvage  nation  dwelt 
Of  hideous  giaunts,  and  halfe-beastly  men, 
That  never  tasted  grace,  nor  goodness  felt ; 
But  wild  like  beastes  lurking  in  loathsome  den, 
And  flying  fast  as  roebucke  through  the  fen ; 
All  naked  without  shame  or  care  of  cold, 
By  hunting  and  by  spoiling  liveden ; 
Of  stature  huge,  and  eke  of  corage  bold, 
That  sonnes  of  men  amazed  their  stemesse  to  behold." 

Temperance  is  besieged,  but  relieved  by  Prince  Arthur.  Then  follows  the  legends 
of  Britomartis,  or  Chastity  :  all  the  chapters  are  headed  with  poetical  con- 
tents; as, 

"  The  Avitches  sonne  loves  Florimell, 
She  flyes ;  he  faines  to  dy. 
SatvTene  saves  the  squyre  of  Dames 
From  Gyauntes  tyranny." 

The  other  legends  are  of  friendship,  justice,  courtesy,  constancy,  and  mutability. 
The  first  legend  of  Holiness  is  the  only  one  that  bears  the  slightest  resemblance  to 
any  part  of  the  Pilgrim  or  Holy  "War.  In  this  we  have  a  battle  with  the  old  dragon 
fiend,  a  descent  into  hell,  and  being  a  prisoner  in  a  giant's  castle.  It  is  not  at  all 
likely  that  Bunyan  could  have  found  time,  even  had  he  the  inclination,  to  have 
read  the  Fairy  Queen.  His  poetry  is  from  the  school  of  Francis  Quarles,  and  not 
of  Spencer.  The  knightly  hero  seeks  the  old  dragon  fiend;  the  pilgi-im  is  sought  by 
ApoUyon.  Apostolic  injunctions  would  naturally  lead  our  allcgorist  Bunyan  to  portray 
the  dreadful  combat.  "  The  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he 
mav  devour,"  whom  resist.  Clothed  in  the  armour  descril)ed  in  the  Epistle  to 
theEphesians,  and  wielding  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  his  final  success  was  certain— 
"  resist  the  devil  and  he  will  flee  from  you."  Such  texts,  with  his  own  experience 
of  the  saint's  conflict  with  the  powers  of  darkness,  naturally  suggested  the  fight 
with  Apollyon,  without  the  aid  of  any  uninspired  author. 

All  Spencer's  imagery  of  the  Infernal  Regions  is  taken  from  Ovid,  Virgil,  and 
Dante.  But  the  pilgrims'  fears  while  passing  through  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of 
Death,  depict  the  author's  personal  feelings,  and  the  experience  of  David.  "The 
sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and  the  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me  :  I  found 
trouble  and  sorrow."  ^  The  strong  language  of  Job,=  "  A  dreadful  sound  is  in  his 
ears;  he  belie veth  not  that  he  shall  return  out  of  darkness;"  and  the  emotions  of 
the  psalmist,  "  an  liorrible  pit  and  the  miry  clay,"  led  to  an  intensity  oi  feeling, 

'   Ps.  cxvi.3.  -  '  Job  'i^- 


INTRODUCTION.  XCVli 

under  doubts  and  fears,  which  knightly  poetry,  however  elegant,  could  never  have 
engendered.  Spencer  was  a  philosopher  well  acquainted  with  heathen  literature, 
from  which  his  images  are  drawn.  While  Bunyan,  shut  out  of  the  enticing  trea- 
sures of  human  learning,  possessed  in  that  inspired  volume,  which  was  his  daily 
solace  under  severe  privations,  the  most  noble  model  for  his  allegorical  imagery,  he 
neither  wanted,  nor  could  he  liave  gained,  the  slightest  hint  from  Spencer. 

Le  Voyage  du  Chevalier  Errant.  Par  F.  J.  de  Cartheny. 
Written  about  the  year  1311.  8vo,  Anvers,  1557.  Pub- 
lished in  English  under  the  title  of  The  Voyage  of  the  Wan- 
dering Knight.  Showing  the  whole  course  of  Man's  Life  ; 
how  apt  he  is  to  follow  Vanity,  and  how  hard  it  is  for  him 
to  attain  to  Virtue.  Devised  by  John  Cartheny,  a  French- 
man ;  and  Translated  out  of  French  into  English  by 
W.(illiam)  G.(oodyeare),  of  Southampton,  Merchant :  a 
work  worthy  the  reading,  and  dedicated  to  Sir.  F.  Drake, 
Knt.  London,  Printed  by  Thos.  Snodham,  4to.  No  date, 
but  about  1611.     (See  Herbert,  p.  1022.) 

The  knight  determines  to  seek  the  palace  of  true  felicity,  and  first  tries  riches, 
pleasure,  and  honoiu-s  ;  but  he  adds,  "  I  was  as  very  a  fool  in  this  as  he  who  hoped 
to  catch  fish  by  angling  in  the  air,  or  hunt  the  hare  with  hounds  in  the  open  sea." 
Under  the  guidance  of  Folly,  he  obtained  from  an  aiTnorer  named  Evil-will,  a 
shirt  of  lasciviousness,  a  doublet  of  lewd  desires,  ^hosen  of  vain  i^leasures,  armour 
of  ignorance,  a  corslet  of  inconstancy,  '^vambraces  of  arrogancy,  gauntlets  of  idle- 
ness, a  gorget  of  licentiousness,  a  helmet  of  lightness,  a  buckler  of  shamelessness,  a 
gilt-cap  of  vain-glory,  a  girdle  of  intemperance,  a  sword  of  rebellion,  and  a  lance 
named  Hope  of  Long-life.  "  Then  Pride  jDrepared  me  a  galloping  horse  called 
Temerity.  At  last  Folly  apparelled  herself  lightly  with  a  cloak  of  feathers,  and 
mounted  upon  a  jenet  ;  and  opening  her  feathers  and  wngs  with  the  wind,  away 
she  flew  ;  and  I  also,  at  a  wild  adventure,  set  spurs  to  my  horse,  and  away  we  went 
both." 

During  their  ride.  Folly  tells  him  her  triumjihs  in  such  gi-oss  terms,  that  the  knight 
found  fault  with  this  insatiable  empress,  and  calls  her  some  very  unpolite  names  ; 
but  not  having  received  God's  grace,  he  was  unable  to  forsake  her.  They  come  to 
two  paths,  one  a  goodly  green  meadow, — the  other  rocky,  narrow,  and  full  of  moun- 
tains ;  and  here  met  with  two  elegant  ladies,  on  chargers  richly  caparisoned. 
Lady  Voluptuousness  pictures  to  him  the  pleasures  of  idleness,  with  all  worldly 
delights  ;  and  Lady  Felicity,  the  advantages  of  industry  and  virtue.  As  the  hus- 
bandman could  expect  no  com  imless  he  i^repared  the  ground  and  sowed  the  seed  ; 
so  t^at  man  is  marvellously  misinformed  who  thinketh  to  achieve  true  blessedness 
unless  he  prepares  his  way  by  virtue  and  good  deeds.  But  while  Reason  preferred 
the  good  advice  of  Felicity,  Folly  prevailed,  and  led  him  to  the  palace  of  voluptuous- 
ness. The  palace  is  minutely  described,  with  all  its  wanton  and  luxiuious  enjoy- 
ments. After  leading,  a  beastly  life,  eleven  days,  he  goes  out  hunting,  accompanied 

^  Stockings.  -  Armour  for  the  arms. 


XCVIU  INTRODUCTION. 

by  his  gay  ladies  ;  when  suddenly  the  palace  sinks  into  the  earth,  yielding  such  an 
air  of  brimstone,  that  the  like  hath  not  been  felt.  The  knight  'sunk  into  a  beastly 
bog  up  to  his  saddle,'  and  his  companions  changed  into  serpents,  snakes,  toads,  and 
venomous  worms.  He  fell  into  despair,  howled,  and  scratched  his  face  ;  he  tried 
in  vain  to  get  out,  and  found  "  that  after  a  man  be  once  sunk  in  sin,  he  will  not 
be  able  to  recover  himself  unless  he  have  the  help  of  God's  gi-ace."  After  bitter 
repentance,  he  prays  ;  and  a  splendid  lady,  called  God's-Grace,  relieved  him,  and 
he  left  Temerity  his  horse,  and  Folly  his  governess,  in  the  bog  to  fish  for  frogs. 
"  Thus  you  see  that  God's  grace  draweth  us  from  sins  without  any  merit  of  ours  ; 
howbeit  not  without  an  inward  heart-grief  and  sorrow  for  sin,  which  is  a  special 
gift  of  God's  grace."  His  new  guide  showed  him  the  ruins  of  the  palace  of  worldly 
felicity  converted  into  a  great  bed  of  iron,  red  hot,  upon  which  his  late  companions 
were  tormented.  He  is  then  led  to  the  school  of  repentance,  which  is  surromided 
with  a  moat,  called  Humility.  Here  all  his  follies  are  brought  to  his  remem- 
lirance ;  he  sees  what  torments  he  had  deserved  for  them,  and  was  half  in 
despair.  Portions  of  Scripture  are  exhibited,  which  comfort  and  convert  him. 
Understanding,  now  preaches  him  a  sermon  on  the  history  of  IMary  Alagdalen. 
The  knight  then  receives  the  communion,  and  is  carried  to  the  palace  of  Virtue. 
The  third  part  of  the  voyage  describes  the  happiness  which  is  felt  in  company  with 
Lady  Virtue.  At  length  Faith,  from  the  top  of  a  tower,  shows  him  the  city  of 
heaven.  It  concludes  wth  a  prayer,  the  creed  and  ten  commandments,  and  an 
exhortation  to  perseverance  until  the  knight  shall  attain  the  glorious  city  of 
Paradise.  Although  this  work  was  doubtless  intended  for  good,  yet  such  is  the 
indelicacy  of  many  of  its  scenes,  that  it  was  more  calculated  to  excite  evil  jiassions 
than  to  lead  an  inquirer  to  happiness.  The  way  of  salvation  is  confined  to  moral 
observances,  without  that  spring  of  virtue  which  flows  from  faith  in  Jesus  Christ, 
and  its  consequent  evangelical  obedience.  There  is  no  similarity  between  this 
Voyage  and  the  Pilgrim's  Progi-ess,  except  it  be  the  foresight  of  the  heavenly 
paradise,  which  has  been,  and  is,  one  of  the  enjoyments  of  the  real  Christian 
from  the  Revelations  of  John  to  the  present  time.^  There  is  no  groimd  for  sup- 
posing that  the  persecuted  Bunyan  ever  saw  this  "  Chevalier  Errant." 

Whitney  s  Emblems.  4to.  Leyden,  1586,  p.  179.  The  cut 
over  which  represents  a  iiiaa  swimming,  with  a  pack  upon 
his  back. 

"  Desire  to  hauc,  dothe  make  vs  muche  indurc. 
In  trauayle,  toilc,  and  labour  voide  of  reste  : 
The  marchant-man  is  caried  with  this  lure, 
Throughe  scorching  heate,  to  regions  of  the  Eastc  : 

Oh  thirste  of  goulde,  what  not  ?  but  thou  canst  do  : 
And  make  mens  hartes  for  to  consent  thereto. 

The  trauailer  poore,  when  shippe  doth  suffer  wracke. 
Who  hopes  to  swimme  vnto  the  v.'ished  lande, 
Dothe  venture  life,  with  fardle  on  his  backe, 
That  if  he  scape,  the  same  in  steede  maye  stande. 

'  Mr.  Lowndes,  in  his  Bibliographi-         Pilgrim's  Progress,  was  much  indebted 
(al  Manual,  says  that   Bunyan,  in  his         to  this  Wandering  Knight. 


INTRODUCTION.  XCIX 

Thus,  hope  of  life,  and  louo  vnto  his  goods, 
Houldes  vp  his  chinne,  with  burthen  in  the  floods." 

Another  emblem  has  a  cut,  representing  a  Pilgrim  with  his  staff  leaving  a  globe 
[the  world]  behind  him,  p.  225,     Peregi'inus  Christianus  loquitur. 

Adve  deceiptfull  ivorlde,  thy  pleasures  I  detest : 

Noive,  others  with  thy  showes  delude  ;  my  hope  in  heauen  doth  rest. 

Inlarged  as  followeth : 

Even  as  a  flower,  or  like  vnto  the  grasse, 

Which  now  dothe  stande,  and  straight  with  sithe  dothe  fall; 
So  is  our  state  :  now  here,  now  hence  wee  passe  : 
For,  time  attendes  with  shredding  sithe  for  all. 

And  deathe  at  lengthe,  both  oulde,  and  yonge,  dotli  strike  : 

And  into  dust  dothe  turne  vs  all  alike. 

Yet,  if  we  marke  how  swifte  om-  race  dothe  ronne, 
And  waighe  the  cause,  why  wee  created  bee : 
Then  shall  wee  know,  when  that  this  life  is  donne. 
Wee  shall  bee  sure  our  countrie  right  to  see. 

For,  here  wee  are  but  straungers,  that  must  flitte  : 

The  nearer  home,  the  nearer  to  the  pitte. 

O  happie  they,  that  pondering  this  arighte, 

Before  that  here  their  pilgi-image  bee  past, 

Resigne  this  worlde  :  and  marche  with  all  their  mighte 

Within  that  pathe,  that  leades  where  ioyes  shall  last. 

And  whilst  they  maye,  there,  treasure  vp  their  store. 

Where,  mthout  rust,  it  lastes  for  euermore. 

This  worlde  must  chaunge  :  That  worlde,  shall  still  indm-e. 

Here,  pleasures  fade :  There,  shall  they  endlesse  bee. 

Here,  man  doth  sinne  :  And  there,  hee  shalbee  pure, 

Here,  deathe  hee  tastes  :  And  there,  shall  neuer  die. 

Here,  hathe  hee  griefe  :  And  there  shall  ioyes  possesse, 
As  none  hg,th  scene,  nor  anie  harte  can  gesse." 

These  are  the  poems  from  which  Mr.  Montgomery  conceives  Bunyan  might 
perhaps  have  inspired  his  first  idea. 

The  other  of  Whitney's  Emblems  upon  pilgrimage  is  under  a  cut,  representing 
Mercm-y  and  two  men  travelling  upon  a  road. 

"  The  trauaylinge  man,  vncertaine  where  to  goe, 

When  diners  wayes  before  his  face  did  lie, 
Mercurius  then,  the  perfect  pathe  did  showe, 
Which  when  he  tooke,  he  neuer  went  awrie, 

But  to  his  wishes,  his  iorneys  ende  did  gaine 

In  happie  hovne,  by  his  direction  plainc. 


C  INTRODUCTION. 

This  trauailinge  man  :  doth  tell  our  wandringe  state, 

Before  whose  face,  and  eeke  on  euerye  side, 

Bvpathes,  and  waves,  appeare  amidd  our  gate, 

That  if  the  Lorde  bee  not  our  onlie  guide  : 
We  stumble,  fall,  and  dailie  goe  astraye. 
Then  happie  those,  whome  God  doth  shew  the  waye." 

The  Pilf^rimage  to  Paradise.  Compiled  for  the  Direction, 
Comfort,  and  Resolution  of  God's  poore  distressed  Chil- 
dren in  passing  through  this  irksome  Wildernesse  of 
Temptation  and  Tryall.  By  Leonard  Wright.  4to,  Lon- 
don, 1591.    Full  of  sound  instruction,  but  not  allegorical. 

Benoist  (Father-Confessor  to  Mary  Queen  of  Scots),  le  Che- 
valier Chrestien. 

This  is  a  dialogue  between  a  Christian  knight  and  an  infidel,  whom  he  attempts 
to  instruct  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  the  Romish  faith.  It  has  cuts  represent- 
ing the  knight's  horse  and  the  various  parts  of  his  armour  and  habiliments,  which 
are  spiritualized.  Some  of  these  instructions  to  an  infidel  are  curious  :  "  Comma 
I'Eglise,  second  Paradis,  a  este  plante'e  et  est  contenue  en  la  Vierge,  monde  mys- 
tique."* "  De  la  descente  de  Jesus  Christ  en  enfer,  ou  il  a  remporte  encore  une 
autre  victoire  sur  Satan,  brisant  ses  prisons,  et  deliverant  les  Peres  qu'il  y  tenoit 
captif."  *  This  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  descent  into  hell  in  what  is  called  the 
Apostles'  Creed.  Among  other  curious  discoveries  which  the  author  makes,  is 
that  if  Adam  had  not  been  persuaded  to  sin  by  his  wife,  his  posterity  would  not 
have  been  corrupt.' 

The  Pilgrimage  of  Princes.     By  L.   Lloid,   one   of  Queen 
Elizabeth's  Sergeants-at-Arms. 

There  is  nothing  allegorical  in  this  entertaining  volume.  It  is  a  pilgrimage  to 
the  characters  and  works  of  princes,  which  are  curiously  exhibited.  A  few  iu-e 
in  poetry,  such  as  that  of  King  Herod  : 

"  When  Herod  reigned  in  Juda  king 

His  life  so  loathsome  led. 
On  sucking  babes  and  infants  blood, 

This  cruel  tyrant  fed. 
To  seek  our  Saviour  Christ,  he  kill'd 

The  Babes  of  Juda  land  ; 
And  thought  our  God  could  not  escape 

His  fomie  bloody  hand. 
Of  worms  this  Herod  was  devoured. 

Of  vermin  loe,  and  mice  : 
His  bones,  his  flesh,  was  all  consumed 

And  eaten  up  of  Lice." 

*  Edit.  Rouen,  ICOfi,  8vo,  p.  .07.    ,  •'  Page  Hid.  '■  J'agc  K?->. 


INTRODUCTION.  CI 

The   Pilgriins  Journey   toioards  Heaven.     By  William  Web- 
ster.    8 vo,  London,  1613.     This  is  not  allegorical. 

The  Pilgrim. 

This  old  comedy  by  Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  could  afford  no  hint  to  Bunyan, 
and  it  is  very  probable  that  he  never  wasted  one  of  his  precious  minutes  over 
a  play. 

In  the  darker  ages,  and  even  to  the  present  day.  In  Roman 
Catholic  countries  the  word  pilgrim  is  only  understood  as  re- 
lating to  a  meritorious  pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of  some  saint. 
The  principal  places  were  Rome,  Loretto,  Jerusalem,  Com- 
postella,  and  the  local  shrines  with  which  every  country  in 
Europe  abounded.  It  was  a  duty  inculcated  upon  all ;  and 
two  visits  to  a  neighbouring  shrine  were  considered  equivalent 
to  one  at  double  the  distance.  Such  as  were  unable  to  go  in 
person,  gave  money  to  have  the  duty  performed  by  proxy. 
Frequently  two  hundred  thousand  pilgrims  were  at  Loretto  at 
one  time.  They  formed  processions  round  the  palace  of  our 
Lady,  on  their  bare  knees,  five,  seven,  nine,  or  twelve  times. 
We  can  scarcely  credit  the  accounts  of  the  number  of  devo- 
tees who  practised  all  sorts  of  vices,  going  and  returning,  to 
secure  the  pardon  of  sin,  by  visiting  the  shrine,  and  invoking 
the  aid  of  the  saint—  so  besotted  and  intoxicated  were  mankind 
made  by  the  Church.  In  six  months,  from  January  to  June, 
1435,  the  King  of  England  granted  licences  to  two  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  fifty  pilgrims,  to  Compostella  alone ;  and 
it  is  impossible  to  give  any  idea  of  the  myriads  of  Europeans 
Avho  perished  on  pilgrimages,  especially  to  the  Holy  Land. 
The  church  constantly  prayed  for  these  votaries,  as  the 
Church  of  England  now  prays  for  those  who  travel  by  land 
or  by  water,  &c. 

The  Rev.  W.  Acworth,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Bible  Society, 
related  an  anecdote,  which  may  be  useful  to  travellers  in 
popish  countries  :  *  "  A  gentleman  who  had  travelled  before 
me  from  Rome,  had  with  him  some  Bibles,  Testaments  and 
tracts,  on  the  top  of  them  he  had  placed  good  old  John  Bunyan's 

*  Report,  May,  1 836,  p.  392. 


CU  INTRODUCTION. 

Pilgrim's  Progress  ;  when  the  package  was  opened,  the 
Douannicrs  examined  this  book,  and  not  being  very  good  En- 
glish scholars,  they  knew  not  what  to  make  of  the  title,  Bun — 
Bun — Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress  !  '  What  is  that  ?  '  said 
one,  'Oh,'  replied  the  other,  "tis  some  work  on  the  ad- 
vantage of  pilgrimages ; '  and  consequently  the  whole  were 
immediately  allowed.  Now,  I  had  my  regular  passport ;  but 
I  venture  to  say,  that  good  John  Bunyan's  Pilgrim  was  a 
better  passport  for  the  Bible,  than  any  other  which  could 
have  been  found  on  that  occasion." 

The  most  curious  of  these  painful  pilgrimages  is 

The  Pilgrim  of  Loretto  performing  his  Voiv  made  to  the  Glorious 
Virgin  Mary,  Mother  of  God.  By  L.  Richeome,  4to,  Paris, 
1630.     Dedicated  to  Mary,  Queen  of  Charles  I. 

This  work  is  intended  to  show  the  merits  and  advantages  of  pilgrimages  to  holy 
places  ;  because  the  Jews  were  pilgrims  to  Jerusalem  three  times  a  year.  The 
kings,  or  sages,  made  their  pilgrimage,  guided  by  the  star  of  the  world.  Our  Lord 
was  a  pilgrim  in  Egypt,  and  he  has  left  many  places  to  which  Christians  should 
undertake  holy  pilgrimages,  and  obtain  the  fruits  of  his  gi'aces  ;  among  these, 
Loretto  is  the  most  famous.  This  chapel  is  forty  feet  long,  twenty  wide,  and 
twenty-five  high,  built  of  ordinarj'  small  stones,  hard  and  squared  long,  of  the 
colour  of  brick  ;  the  walls  adorned  with  paintings  of  sacred  stories — a  stone  altar, 
"  breathing  as  it  were  something  divine."  The  image  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  crowned 
with  precious  stones  ;  her  gown  of  cloth  of  gold,  with  a  sky-coloiu-ed  mantle.  On 
her  left  arm  the  little  child  Jesus,  having  a  countenance  full  of  grace  and  majesty. 
In  the  year  1291,  the  9th  of  May,  this  house  was  at  night  carried  by  angels 
from  Galilee  into  Sclavonia,  and  remained  there  four  years.  On  the  night  of  the 
19th  of  November,  1294,  it  was  removed,  first  into  the  Mark  of  Ancona,  to  a  forest, 
the  property  of  a  lady  named  Loretto  ;  but  the  forest  being  infested  with  thieves, 
it  was  removed  to  a  hill  hard  by.  In  less  than  a  month,  it  was  again  removed  to 
Reccanata,  and  there  remains.  Dr.  Franklin  says,  that  three  removes  are  as  bad 
as  a  tire  ;  l)ut  this  house,  with  all  its  contents  was  bodily  removed,  without  injury, 
four  times  ;  and  to  prevent  scepticism,  the  autlior  recounts  some  wonders  per- 
formed by  angels  :  "  we  know  by  their  naturall  force,  they  roule  about  the  huge 
frames  of  the  celestiall  Bodys,  from  East  to  West  with  an  admirable  swiftness  and 
constancy  now  these  six  thousand  ycares  togeather,  without  any  paine  or  difficulty  : 
a  work  without  comparison  more  difficult,  than  to  carry  a  house  once  or  twice, 
from  one  country  to  another,  although  it  be  miraculous,  and  admirable  for  tho 
rarenes."  He  adds  the  testimony  of  Francis  Prior,  which,  if  true,  decides  the 
fact :  "  he  had  often  heard  of  his  gi-andfather,  that  he  did  see  the  house  of  the 
blessed  Virgin,  when  Vicing  carried  in  the  air  it  lighted  -in  the  forest  ; "  besides 
which,  it  was  honoured  with  innumerable  miracles.  The  result  was,  that  emperors 
popes,  and  princes,  presented  gifts  to  the  Virgin,  until  the  massive  gold  and  silver 
plate,  diamonds,  and  baubles  accumulated   to  an  incredible   value  ;    it  has  been 


INTRODUCTION.  CUl 

thought,  that  millions  of  pounds  sterling,  would  not  have  paid  for  them,  at  a  fair 
valuation.^ 

This  pilgrimage  is  completed  in  forty  days  ;  thrice  seven  going,  being  the  num 
ber  of  penance  and  purgation  ;  nine  to  spend  at  Loretto,  for  the  orders  of  angels, 
the  intellectual  light,  and  ten  to  return,  it  being  the  number  of  perfection.  The 
pilgrim  is  to  use  his  rosary  of  sixty-three  beads,  the  age  of  the  Virgin  when  she 
died  ;  saying  upon  the  small  beads  an  Ave  Maria,  and  upon  the  larger,  every 
tenth,  a  Pater-noster.  Having  confessed  and  communicated,  three  pilgrims  com- 
mence the  pilgrimage  ;  and  the  first  day's  meditation  was  on  the  condition  of 
man,  as  a  pilgrim  and  stranger  upon  earth.  It  closes  with  a  canticle,  of  which 
this  is  the  last  stanza  : 

"  Merrily  then,  let's  march  apace 
Unto  this  blessed  Virgin's  Hall, 
There  shall  we  see  the  heavens  grace 
Inclosed  in  a  Chappel  small  : 

And  learne  to  be  of  this  mayde-wife 
Perfect  Pilgrimes  all  our  life." 

Similar  instructions  are  given  for  each  day's  meditation.  After  the  ten  com- 
mandments follow  the  five,  which  were  forgotten  or  omitted  in  the  decalogue,  and 
are  called  the  Commandments  of  the  Church.  1.  To  keep  the  feasts.  2.  To 
hear  mass.  3.  To  fast  Lent,  etc.  4.  To  confess.  .5.  To  take  the  sacrament  at 
Easter  ;  to  which  are  added,  6,  Not  to  marry  in  times  forbidden,  and  7.  To  pay 
tithes. 

When  they  had  arrived  at  Loretto,  themes  were  given  for  this  nine  days'  medita- 
tion, during  his  sojourn  there — as,  a  meditation  upon  the  holy  eucharist ;  on  the 
conception  of  the  blessed  Virgin  ;  on  her  ancestors  ;  presentation  ;  espousal  of 
Joseph  and  Mary,  both  being  virgins  to  the  time  of  their  death  ;  the  incarnation  ; 
nativity,  &c.  Before  leaving  Loretto,  they  pray  to  the  Virgin  ;  the  close  of  this 
prayer  is  :  "  to  stirre  us  up  to  yield  honour,  prayse,  and  immortal  thanks  to  the 
Sonne  and  (he  Mother,  who  tvith  their  honour  have  made  thee  so  honourable.''^ 

On  their  return,  these  pilgrims  were  mistaken  for  thieves,  and  narrowly  escaped 
death.  Many  miracles  are  talked  over"  and  among  them  one  narrated  by  Fisher 
bishop  of  Rochester,  in  1526,  in  his  book  iigainst  fficlamisadius,  of  a  priest  who 
lived  many  months  without  food  or  hunger,  and  in  the  midst  of  snow,  without 
feeling  cold,  by  licking  a  stone. 

The  best  sentence  in  the  volume  is  in  the  35th  day.  The  meditation  is 
upon  the  preaching  of  John  :  "  he  that  in  his  preaching  maketh  himsolfe  admired, 
and  not  Jesus  Christ,  and  draweth  the  harts  of  his  hearers  after  liimselfe,  and  not 
after  Jesus  Christ,  is  a  thiefe,  employing  his  Maisters  money  and  guiftcs  to  his  ovvno 
uses,  and  not  to  his  Maisters  honour."  The  three  pilgrims  being  benighted, 
climbed  an  oak  to  pass  the  night.  One  of  them  said,  "  If  it  rains,  what  shall  we 
do  %  '*"  "  We  will  doe,"  answered  another,  "  as  they  do  in  Normandy."  "  And 
what  do  they  there  ? "  replied  he.  "  They  let  it  rain,"  quoth  the  other.  At 
eleven  o'clock  at  night,  they  are  alarmed  by  a  horrible  spectacle.  A  monstrous 
old  goat,  with  a  black  candle  burning  blue  between  his  horns,  read  in  a  book,  making 
a  circle,  when  sixty-six  sorcerers  and  witches  came  riding  through  the  air,  to  this 
devil's  ball.     As  they  arrived,  they  did  the  old  goat  liomage,  by  kissing  under  his 

*  See  Library  of  Learning,  8vo,  p.  465. 


CIV  INTRODUCTION. 

tail,  and  commenced  dancing.  Upon  a  bank  they  made  an  altar,  and  parodied 
the  sacrifice  of  the  mass.  At  length,  the  old  goat  caught  sight  of  the  pilgrims  ;  in  a 
moment  the  dance  was  dashed  ;  three  of  them  were  turned  into  fierce  wolves,  who 
mounted  the  tree  to  devour  the  pilgrims  ;  but  they  made  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and 
said,  "  Jesus  Maria  ; "  the  wolves  fell  do^^Ti  like  sacks  of  corn,  and  the  assembly 
vanished,  leaving  a  most  horrible  stench  behind  them  ;^  as  if  the  plague  had  there 
burnt  all  the  rags  of  her  infection.  All  this  is  nan-ated,not  as  an  allegory,  but  as  a 
matter  of  fact.  When  such  abominable  stories  were  believed,  we  can  hardly  wonder 
at  the  brutal  severity  of  om-  laws  against  poor  old  women,  called  witches. 

In  the  morning,  among  gobbets  of  flesh  and  other  foul  matters,  they  found  a 
piece  of  turnip,  cut  to  resemble  a  host,^  with  a  silver  chalice  and  paten  ;  these  they 
carried  to  the  nearest  Monastery,  from  which  they  had  been  stolen. 

A  merchant,  who  had  befriended  the  pilgrims,  when  in  the  most  imminent 
danger  of  being  murdered,  vowed  to  devote  himself  to  religion,  and  was  instantly 
carried,  by  invisible  agency,  through  the  air,  for  many  miles  to  a  monastery,  where 
he  took  the  vows. 

The  pilgrims  meet  some,  beset  with  pretended  reformation,  and  recover  them  to 
holy  church,  by  narrating  some  miracles  ;  among  others,  one  of  a  priest,  who  was 
captured  by  the  Tiu-ks,  and  on  his  refusing  to  turn  Mahomedan,  they  took  out 
his  bowels  and  heart,  and  put  them  into  his  hands,  leaving  him  to  be  devoured  J)y 
wild  beasts.  But  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow  that  he  had  made  to  the  blessed  Virgin, 
he  got  up  and  walked  to  Loretto,  with  his  heart  and  bowels  in  his  hands — recounted 
to  the  ofiicers  of  the  church  what  had  happened,  showed  them  his  empty  body 
and  his  life  in  his  hands,  and  fulfilled  his  vow  !  A  painting  of  this  miracle  is 
preserved  in  the  chapel.  The  pilgrims,  on  the  fortieth  day,  return  in  safety  and  be- 
come monks.  This  curious  and  rare  volume  ends  with  the  Litany,  Rosary,  and  Corone 
of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  in  English  :  being  the  official  prayers  to  Mary,  as  sanc- 
tioned by  the  church.  These  illustrate  the  dispute  as  to  whether  or  not  she  is  an 
object  of  worship  with  the  Romish  Church.  The  following  is  "The  Oblation  of 
the  Assumption :" 

"0  Soueraigne  Lady  and  Virgin,  the  honour  of  mankind,  and  beauty  of  the 
heavens,  1  humbly  offer  unto  thee  10.  Aves  and  one  I'ater-noster,  to  the  glorious 
mystery  of  the  Assumption  ;  when  by  the  B.  Sonne,  thou  wert  called  to  his  euer- 
lasting  glory,  &  deseruedst  at  tiiy  happy  passage  to  haue  present  the  holy  Apostles 
thy  scruants,  &  wast  receiued  body  and  soule  into  the  heauenly  habitations  of  the 
celestiall  spirits,  as  Queene  of  the  Angels  &  mother  of  their  Lord  &  niaister." 

The  lady,  who,  with  considerable  talent  and  great  humility 
published  Bunyan  ia  epic  poetry,  under  the  signature  of 
C.  C.  V.  G.,  in  a  note  to  a  "  Key,"  says,  "  It  is  a  certain 
fact,  and  one  not  very  generally  known,  that  a  complete  de- 
sign of  a  Pilgrim's  Progress  is  to  be  found  in  Lucian's  'Her- 

O  o  o 

raotimus  ; '  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  Bunyan  could  have 
seen  it  there,  from  the  limited  educational  advantages  he 
possessed ;   yet,  the  obvious  allegory  occurred  to  his   mind, 

'  Pages  35G,  .3.57.     This  volume  is         liln-ary. 
of  extreme  rarity — it  is  in  the  Editor's  '  Host,  the  consecrated  wafer. 


INTRODUCTION.  CV 

unschooled  as  it  was,  in  a  similar  arrangement  with  that  sug- 
gested by  Lucian." 

Mr.  Tooke  thus  translates  the  passage :  ^  "  Hermotimus,  of 
Cladomena,  of  whom  it  is  related,  that  his  soul  often 
quitted  him,  and  after  having  wandered  a  long  while  about 
the  world  by  itself,  returned  again  into  its  body,  and  that 
Hermotimus  was  several  times  taken  for  dead,  and  always 
rose  again."  To  this  Mr.  Wieland  adds  a  note:  "It  was 
a  singular  gift  that  he  had  of  being  able  to  leave  his  body,  and 
come  into  it  again ;  and  as  a  proof  that  his  soul,  while  its 
body  lay  for  dead,  was  actually  out  of  it ;  he  knew,  not  only 
to  give  account  of  the  remotest  places,  and  of  what  he  had 
there  seen  and  heard,  with  accuracy  and  in  conformity  to 
truth,  but  also  foretold  sundry  future  events,  as  earthquakes 
and  other  calamities,  which  actually  came  to  pass.  And  this 
he  carried  on  so  long,  that  his  faithful  wife  was  induced  to 
deliver  up  his  body,  during  one  such  emigration  of  the  soul, 
to  his  enemies,  who  immediately  burnt  it.  And  thus  for  ever 
stopped  all  re-entrance  to  the  poor  soul.  The  learned  Bishop 
Huet  directly  pronounces  this  beautiful  story,  to  be  an  old 
wife's  tale."  Where  the  poor  burnt-out  soul  obtained  another 
habitation,  we  are  not  told.  This  idea  has  been  lately  re- 
vived, among  other  absurdities  called  Mesmerism,  but  what 
idea  Bunyan  could  get  from  it,  is  far  beyond  my  comprehen- 
sion. 

The  book  that  has  been  most  noticed  as  likely  to  have  been 
seen  by  Bunyan,  is  Bolsiverfs  Pilgrimage  of  Duyfkens  and 
WillemynJiens,  8vo,  Antwerp,  1627.  It  was  translated  into 
French,  and  became  somewhat  popular.  This  book  was 
noticed  by  two  gentlemen  from  Yorkshire,  who  called  to  see 
my  extensive  collection  of  early  English  bibles  and  books, 
about  twenty  years  ago.  Among  other  books  they  noticed  a 
very  fine  copy  of  this  rare  volume  of  Bolswert's,  the  prints 
in  which  reminded  them  of  Bunyan's  Pilgrim,  and  on  their 
return  to  the  north,  a  paragraph  was  inserted  in  a  provincial 

^  Lucian's  Works,  translated  by  Tooke,  with  Wieland's  notes,  4to,  1820,  vol. 
■2,  p.  ^(JS. 

h 


Cvi  INTKODUCTION. 

paper  stating  that  oiir  Pilgrim's  Progress  was  a  translation. 
The  falsehood  of  such  a  statement  has  been  fully  proved 
by  Mr.  Southey,  to  whom  the  identical  volume  was  lent  for 
the  purpose  of  fully  entering  into  the  question,  and  there 
appears  not  to  be  the  slightest  similarity  in  the  two  stories ; 
the  cuts  which  struck  my  visitors  were — A  man  sleeping, 
and  a  pilgrim  leaning  over  the  bed ;  through  the  open  door 
two  pilgrims  are  seen  walking ;  they  stoop  on  the  bank  of  a 
river,  at  the  head  of  which,  in  the  distance,  the  sun  is  setting. 
Another  cut  represents  the  pilgrims  with  foolscaps  on  their 
heads,  driven  by  a  mob,  and  one  of  them  before  a  man  sitting 
with  his  secretary  at  a  table ;  a  third  shows  the  alarmed 
pilgrim  in  a  circle  of  lighted  candles,  while  a  necromancer 
produces  goblins  and  sprites  from  an  overhanging  hill;  a 
fourth  shows  the  two  pilgrims  going  up  a  steep  mountain, 
when  one  of  them  falls  over  the  brink.  The  story  is,  that 
Dovekin  goes  to  Willemynken  to  awake  her,  and  she  sets  out ; 
they  wash  in  a  river  which  has  its  source  in  Rome,  and, 
taking  the  Netherlands  in  its  loay,  flows  on  to  Jerusalem.  They 
are  infested  with  vermin  at  a  kermes ;  go  through  a  number 
of  ridiculous  adventures,  until  one  is  blown  fi-om  a  rock,  and 
is  lost ;  the  other  arrives  at  Jerusalem  and  is  married. 

The  Pilgrim's  Practice,  containing  many  Godly  Prayers.     By 
Robert  Bruen.     8vo,  Lond.  1621. 

The  SouUs  Progresse  to  the  Celestiall  Canaan  or  Heavenly 
Jerusalem.  Bg  way  of  godlg  meditations  and  holy  contempla- 
tions. Accompanied  with  divers  learned  exhortations  and 
pithy  perswasions,  tending  to  Christianity  and  Humanity. 
In  two  parts.  First  on  the  Nature  of  God,  and  second  on 
the  Sum  of  the  Gospel.  By  John  Wells,  small  4to, 
1639. 

"  The  Pilgrinis  Profession.''^  This  is  accompanied  by  "  The 
Pearl  of  the  Gospel ;"  with  a  glass  for  Gentlemen  to  dress 
themselves  by.     By  Thomas  Taylor,  D.D.     8vo,  1624. 

There  is  iiotbing  allogorical  in  these  volumes. 


INTKODUCTION.  CVll 

We  now  come  to  a  similar  class  of  books  published  during 
Bunyan's  life. 

Wholesome  Repast  for  the  Soule  in  her  Pilgrimage  towards 
Jerusalem  which  is  above.  By  John  Hodges.  A  pocket 
volume,  1638. 

This  is  a  series  of  meditations  on  passages  of  Holy  Writ,  arranged  in  the  order  of 
the  alphabet. 

True  Inventory  of  the  Goods  and  Chattels  of  Superstition,  late 
of  the  parish  of  Ignorance  in  the  county  of  Blind  Devotion. 
4to,  1642. 

The  Last  Will  and  Testament  of  Sir  J.  Presbyter,  with  his  ad- 
monitions to  legions  of  perjured  friends.     4to,  1647. 

The  two  last  belong  to  a  series  of  satirical  attacks  upon  Episcopacy. 

The  Christian  Pilgrim  in  his  Conflict  and  Conquest.  By  John 
Castaniza.  A  curious  but  not  allegorical  volume  of  popish 
instructions,  with  fine  plates.     Printed  in  Paris,  1652. 

Bernard' s  Isle  of  Man;  or,  the  Legal  Proceedings  in  Manshire 
against  Sin. 

This  interesting  little  volume  was  very  popular.  The  author,  a  puritan  member 
of  the  Church  of  England,  whose  nonconformity  was  permitted  from  the  personal 
respect  felt  for  him  by  his  bishop.  The  purity  of  his  life;  his  zeal  for  the  con- 
version of  perishing  sinners ;  and  his  obedience  to  the  dictates  of  his  own 
conscience  would,  but  for  such  protection,  have  subjected  him  to  persecution. 
The  late  Dr.  Adam  Clarke^  considered  that  there  was  much  reason  to  believe  that 
The  Isle  of  Man,  or  Spencer's  Fairy  Queen,  gave  birth  to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress 
and  Holy  War.  Dr.  Southey  -  imagines  that  Bunyan  had  seen  this  book,  because 
his  verses  introductory  to  the  second  part  have  some  similarity  to  Bernard's 
Apology  for  his  Allegory,  which  closes  the  volume.  Such  authorities  induced  me 
to  a  careful  re-perusal  of  a  book  which  had  given  me  much  pleasure  in  by-gone 
days.  Sin  is  the  Thief  and  Robber;  he  stealeth  our  graces;  spoileth  us  of  every 
blessing;  utterly  undoeth  us,  and  maketh  miserable  both  body  and  soul.  He  is  a 
murderer;  spares  no  person,  sex,  or  age;  a  strong  thief;  no  human  power  can  bind 
him;  a  subtle  thief;  he  beguiled  Adam,  David,  yea,  even  Paul.  The  only  watch- 
man to  spy  him  out  is  Godly- Jealousy ;  then  his  resort  is  in  Soul's  ToAvn,  lodging 
in  the  heart.     Sin  is  to  be  sought  in  the  by- lanes,  and  in  Sense,  Thought,  Word, 

*  Postscript  to  Wetherall's  Life  of  Epic  Poem,  by  C,  C.  V.  G.,  Parsons' 
Bunyan   prefixed   to  the    Pilgrim,  an        Town,  1844.    *  Life  of  Bunyan,  p.  xci. 

h  2 


CVIU  INTRODUCTION. 

and  Deed  Streets.  The  hue  and  cry  is  after  fellows  called  Outside,  who  nod 
or  sleep  at  church,  and,  if  awake,  have  their  mind  wandering;  Sir  Worldly-wise,  a 
self-conceited  earth-worm;  Sir  Luke-warm,  a  Jack-on-both-sides ;  Sir  Plausible 
Civil;  Master  Machiavel;  a  licentious  fellow  named  Libertine;  a  snappish  fellow, 
one  Scrupulosity;  and  one  Babbling-Babylonian;  these  conceal  the  villain  Sin.  To 
escape,  he  pretends  to  be  an  honest  man;  calls  vices  by  virtuous  names;  his  re- 
lations. Ignorance,  Error,  Opinion,  Idolatry,  Subtilty,  Custom.  Forefathers,  Sir 
Power,  Sir  Sampler,  Sir  Most-do,  Sir  Silly.  Vain  Hope,  Presumption,  Wilful  and 
Saint-like,  all  shelter  and  hide  him.  The  Justice,  Lord  Jesus,  issues  his  warrant, 
God's  Word;  the  Constable,  Mr.  Illuminated-Understanding,  dwelling  in  Regene- 
ration, aided  by  his  wife  Grace;  his  sons  Will  and  Obedience,  and  his  daughters 
Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  with  his  men  Humility  and  Self-Denial,  and  his  maids 
Temperance  and  Patience.  Having  got  his  warrant,  he  calls  to  aid  his  next 
neighliour  Godly  Sorrow,  with  his  seven  sons  Care,  Clearing,  Indignation,  Fear,  Ve- 
hement Desire,  Zeal,  and  Revenge ;  these  are  capable  of  apprehending  the  sturdiest 
thief.  He  goes  to  the  common  inn,  an  harlot's  house  called  Mistress  Heart,  a  re- 
ceptacle for  all  villains  and  thieves,  no  dishonest  person  being  denied  house-room. 
Mistress  Heart  married  her  own  father,  one  Old  Man,  keeping  riot  niglit  and  day, 
to  prevent  any  godly  motion  from  lodging  there.  The  house  has  five  doors.  Hearing, 
Seeing,  Tasting,  Smelling,  and  Feeling.  Eleven  maids-,  impudent  harlots,  wait 
upon  the  guests,  Love,  Hatred,  Desire,  Detestation,  Vain-hope,  Despair,  Fear, 
Audacity,  Joy,  Sorrow,  and  Anger,  and  a  man-servant  Will.  The  Dishes  are  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh,  served  in  the  platter  of  pleasure ;  the  lust  of  the  eyes  in  the 
plate  of  profit;  and  the  pride  of  life.  The  drink  is  the  pleasures  of  sin  ;  their  bed- 
room is  natural  corruption.  "  In  this  room  lyeth  ISIistress  Heart,  all  her  maids, 
her  man,  and  all  her  guests  together  like  wild  Irish."  The  bed  is  impenitency, 
and  the  coverings  carnal  security;  when  the  constable  enters,  he  attaches  them  all 
with  apprehensions  of  God's  wrath,  and  carries  them  before  the  judge,  who 
examines  the  jirisoners,  and  imprisons  them  until  the  assizes,  in  the  custody  of  the 
jailor.  New  Man.  "  If  any  prisoner  breaks  out,  the  sheriff  Religion  must  bear  the 
blame;  saying.  This  is  your  religion,  is  it?"  The  keepers  and  fetters,  as  vows, 
fasting,  prayer,  &c.,  are  described  with  the  prison. 

The  second  jiart  is  the  trial  of  the  prisoner,  and  judgment  without  ajipcal:  the 
commission  is  Conscience;  the  circuit  the  Soul;  the  counsel  for  the  king  are  Divine 
Reason  and  Quick-sightedness;  the  clerk  Memory;  the  witness  Godly  Sorrow;  the 
grand  jury  Holy  Men,  the  inspired  authors;  the  traverse  jury  Faith,  Love  of  God, 
Fear  of  God,  Charity,  Sincerity,  Unity,  Patience,  Innocency,  Chastity,  Equity, 
Verity,  and  Contentation;  all  these  are  challenges  by  the  prisoners,  who  would  be 
tried  by  Nature,  Doubting,  Careless,  &c.,  all  freeholders  of  great  means.  This  the 
judge  overrules;  Old  Man  is  put  on  his  trial  first,  and  David,  Job,  Isaiah,  and 
Paul,  are  witnesses  against  him.  He  pleads  "There  is  no  such  thing  as  Original 
Corruptions;  Pelagius,  a  learned  man,  and  all  those  now  that  are  called  Ana- 
baptists, have  hitherto,  and  yet  do  maintain,  tliat  sin  cometh  by  imitation,  and 
not  by   inbred  pravity.*  Good,  my  lord,  cast  not  away  so  old  a  man,  for  I  am  at 

*  Acts  xxviii.  22.     This  slander  was  many    times    reprinted,    the    eleventh 

thus  published  in  1683.    In  the  face  of  Article  in  which  is — "In  tiic  beginning 

the  Baptist  Confession  of  p\uth,  printed  God  made  all  things  very  good;  created 

in   1G46,  presented  to  parliament,  and  man  after  his  own  image;  full  with  all 


INTRODUCTION.  CIX 

this  day  5569  years  old."  He  is  found  guilty,  aad  his  sentence  is — "Thou  shalt  be 
carried  back  to  the  place  of  execution,  and  there  he  cast  off,  ivith  all  thy  deeds,  and 
all  thy  members  daily  mortified  and  crucified  ivith  all  thy  lusts,  of  every  one 
that  hath  truly  put  on  Christ."  Mistress  Heart  is  then  tried;  Moses  (Gen.  viii.  21); 
Jeremiah  (xvii.  9);  Ezekiel,  Matthew  (xv.  9),  and  others,  give  evidence,  and  she 
is  convicted,  and  sentenced  to  perpetual  imprisonment  under  the  jailor,  Mr.  New- 
Man.  All  the  rest  of  the  prisoners  are  tried;  the  juries  called  in  due  order;  prison- 
ers plead;  witnesses  are  called;  defence  heard;  verdict  given,  and  sentence  passed. 
One  among  the  prisoners,  named  Papistry,  has  a  long  trial  with  numerous  scriptures 
brought  to  testify  against  him  :  his  sentence  closes  the  book — "  That  thou,  the 
Master  of  Iniquity,  with  the  Old  Serpent  called  the  Devil,  or  Satan  thy  father,  with 
thy  lewd  mother  that  great  whore,  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  Jesus, 
which  sitteth  upon  a  scarlet-coloured  beast ;  as  also  with  that  false  prophet,  the  son 
of  perdition,  thy  guide  and  governor,  shall  be  cast  alive  where  the  dragon  is,  into 
the  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brimstone,  there  to  be  tormented  with  all  the  marked 
ones  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  Lamb;  without 
rest  day  and  night,  the  smoke  of  which  torment  shall  ascend  up  for  ever  and  for 
ever,  without  mercy  or  hope  of  redemption."  The  contents  form  a  key  to  the 
allegory.  There  is  not  the  slightest  similarity  between  this  and  the  Pilgrim's  Pro- 
gress, and  the  only  resemblance  it  bears  to  the  Holy  War  is  making  the  senses  the 
means  of  communication  with  the  heart  or  soul — an  idea  usual  and  universal  in 
every  age,  the  use  of  which  cannot  subject  a  writer  to  the  charge  of  plagiarism. 
A  correspondent  in  the  Gentleman's  Magazine*  imagines  the  following  strange  ge- 
nealogy or  descent:  Bunyan  from  Bernard;  from  Fletcher's  Purple  Island;  from 
Spencer's  Fairy  Queen;  from  Gawin  Douglas's  King  Hart;  from  the  Old  Mysteries 
and  Moralities  ;  he  might  have  added,  from  the  dreams  of  the  fathers ! ! ! 

Scudders  Christian^  Daily  Walk,  1625. 

This  excellent  book  was  much  read  by  the  Puritans  and  Nonconformists,  and 
was  strongly  recommended  by  Dr.  Owen  and  R.  Baxter.  The  sum  of  it  is  a 
Christian's  directions  to  walk  with  God.  The  moral  actions  of  man's  life  are  aptly 
resembled  by  the  metaphor  of  walking ;  no  man  while  he  liveth  here  is  at  home. 
There  are  two  contrary  homes  to  which  every  man  is  always  going,  either  to 
heaven  or  to  hell.  Every  action  of  man  is  one  pace  or  step  whereby  he  goeth  to 
the  one  place  or  the  other;  so  that  God's  own  children,  while  they  live  in  this 
world  as  pilgrims  and  strangers,  are  but  in  the  ivay,  not  in  the  country  which  they 
seek. 

meet  perfection  of  nature,  and  free  wrath,  the  servants  of  sin,  the  subjects 
from  all  sin ;  but  long  he  abode  not  of  death,  and  other  miseries  in  this 
in  this  hdnour,  Satan  using  the  subtilty  world,  and  for  ever,  unless  the  Lord 
of  the  serpent  to  seduce,  first  Eve,  then  Jesus  Christ  set  them  free."  How  mar- 
by  her  seducing  Adam,  who,  without  vellous  that  a  pious  clergyman,  while 
any  compulsion,  in  eating  the  forbidden  presenting  to  the  world  the  Trial  of 
fruit,  transgressed  the  command  of  Sin,  should  be  guilty  of  so  great  a  piece 
God  and  fell,  whereby  death  came  upon  of  iniquity,  as  this  gross  and  uncalled-for 
all  his  posterity,  who  noiv  arc  conceived  misrepresentation. 
in  sin,  and,  by  nature,  the  children  nf  *  January,  1844,  p.  32. 


ex  mTKODUCTION. 

A  Spiritual  Duel  between  a  Christian  and  Satan.  By  H.  J. 
1646 ;  with  a  frontispiece  representing  a  Saint  armed,  sup- 
ported by  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  fighting  Diabolus, 
attended  by  Mundus  and  Caro.  Flame  is  proceeding  from 
the  mouth  of  Diabolus.  This  is  a  long  and  dreary  con- 
ference between  a  sinner  and  Satan,  with  soliloquies  and 
prayers  extending  over  425  pages,  not  relieved  by  any 
thing  allegorical.  ^ 

A  Spiritual  Journey  of  a  young  man  towards  the  Land  of 
Peace  to  live  essentially  in  God,  ivho  met  in  his  journey  with 
three  sorts  of  dispute.  With  some  proverbs  or  sentences, 
which  the  old  age  spake  to  the  young  man.  Also  a  Spirit- 
ual dialogue  whereunto  is  annexed  a  round  or  chorus 
dance,  whereunto  the  vain  heathenish  lusts,  with  their 
wicked  confused  loose  minds  and  thoughts  (as  well  in  con- 
fusion as  in  a  show  of  holiness)  assemble  from  all  corners  of 
the  earth  and  dancing  hand  in  hand  skip  and  jump  to 
Hell.  Translated  out  of  Dutch.  London,  printed  by  J. 
Macock,  1659.     Small  4to. 

There  is  nothing  allegorical  in  this  volume  ;  it  consists  of  disputations,  proverbs, 
and  dialogues,  the  whole  intent  of  which  is  to  show  that  an  illuminated  uniform 
spirit  must  be  sought,  not  from  the  Bible,  but  from  inward  light,  and  that  to  seek 
knowledge  from  the  scriptures  without  that  spirit,  is  like  journeying  by  night  with 
a  lanthorn  in  which  there  is  no  light — fighting  with  a  scabbard  without  a  sword — 
quenching  thirst  with  a  vessel  in  which  is  no  wine,  or  being  contented  when  hungry 
with  a  cupboard  or  bin  without  bread. 

A  fine  copy  of  this  book  is  in  the  library  of  Mr.  H.  Althans,  jun. 

Under  the  Commonwealth,  a  great  effort  was  made  to 
purify  the  church,  by  an  examination  of  all  the  clergymen, 
who,  either  from  profane  conduct,  ignorance,  or  want  of 
talent,  or  whose  violent  attachment  to  monarchy  led  them 
to  foment  rebellion  against  the  Government,  and  who  were 
unfit  for  the  work  of  the  ministry.  These  triers  and  judges 
arc  all  named  in  an  ordinance  of  the  Lords  and  Commons, 
20th  October,  1645,  and  26th  September,  1646.  The  de- 
scription of  characters  is  thus  given : 

^   In  the  library  of  Mr,  H.  Althans,  jun. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXI 

"  All  persons  that  shall  blasiihemously  speak  or  write  any  thing  of  God,  his 
holy  word,  or  Sacraments.  An  incestuous  person.  An  adulterer.  A  fornicator. 
A  drunkard.  A  profane  swearer  or  curser.  One  that  hath  taken  away  the  life  of 
any  person  maliciously.  All  worshippers  of  images,  Crosses,  Crucifixes,  or 
Reliques  ;  all  that  shall  make  any  images  of  the  Trinity,  or  of  any  Person  thereof. 
All  religious  worshippers  of  Saints,  Angels,  or  any  mere  creature.  Any  person 
that  shall  profess  himself  not  to  be  in  chanty  with  his  neighbour.  Any  person 
that  shall  challenge  any  other  person  by  word,  message,  or  writing  to  fight,  or  that 
shall  accept  such  challenge  and  agree  thereto.  Any  person  that  shall  knowingly 
carry  any  such  challenge  by  word,  message,  or  writing.  Any  person  that  shall 
upon  the  Lord's  day  use  any  dancing,  playing  at  dice,  or  cards,  or  any  other  game  ; 
Masking,  Wake,  Shooting,  Bowling,  playing  at  foot-ball,  or  stool-ball,  Wrestling, 
or  that  shall  make,  or  resort  unto  any  plays,  interludes,  fencing.  Bull-baiting  or 
Bear-baiting,  or  that  shall  use  hawking,  hunting  or  coursing,  fishing  or  fowling,  or 
that  shall  publickly  expose  any  wares  to  sale,  otherwise  than  as  is  provided  by  an 
ordinance  of  parliament.  Any  person  that  shall  travel  on  the  Lord's  Day  without 
reasonable  cause.  Any  person  that  keepeth  a  known  stewes  or  brothel  house,  or 
that  shall  solicit  the  chastity  of  any  person  for  himself  or  any  other.  Any  person, 
father  or  mother,  that  shall  consent  to  the  marriage  of  their  child  to  a  papist,  or 
any  person  that  shall  marry  a  papist.  Any  person  that  shall  repair  for  any 
advice  unto  any  witch,  wizard  or  fortune  teller.  Any  person  that  shall  assault 
his  parents,  or  any  magistrate,  Minister,  or  Elder  in  the  execution  of  his  office. 
Any  person  that  shall  be  legally  attainted  of  Burretry,  Forgery,  Extortion,  or 
Bribery.  And  the  severall  and  respective  Elderships  shall  have  power  likewise  to 
suspend  I'rom  the  sacrament  of  the  Lords  Supper  all  ministers  that  shall  be  duly 
proved  to  be  guilty  of  any  of  the  crimes  aforesaid,  from  giving  or  receiving  the 
Sacrement  of  the  Lords  Supper."  With  power  to  appeal  to  the  provincial  Assem- 
bly, to  the  National!,  and  from  thence  to  the  Parliament.^ 

The  commissioners,  called  triers,  ejected  many  from  their 
livings  who  had  been  a  disgrace  to  their  calling ;  and  this 
has  been  since  called  the  sufferings  of  the  clergy.  To  ridicule 
some  of  the  Calvinistic  doctrines,  a  small  volume  was  pub- 
lished entitled  "  The  Examination  of  Tilenus  in  Utopia :" 
London,  1658,  said  to  have  been  written  by  Bishop  Womack ;  ^ 
and  merely  because  the  names  of  the  supposed  triers,  are  Dr. 
Absolute,  Mr.  Fatality,  Mr.  Fri-babe,  Dr.  Damn-man,  Mr. 
Take  o'  Trust,  Mr.  Narrow  Grace  [Philip  Rye],  Mr.  Know- 
little  [Hugh  Peters],  Dr.  Dubious  [R.  Baxter],  &c. ;  there- 
fore it  has  been  asserted  ^  that  Bunyan  must  have  read  and 
profited  by  this  book,  in  composing  his  allegorical  works. 

^  An  original  copy   in  possession  of  ^  A  most  intelligent  bookseller,  and 

the  Editor — pp.  5 — 7.  a  great  admirer  of  Bunyan,  lent  me  two 

-  Southey's  Life  of  Bunyan,  p.  92.  volumes,  observing  that  it  was  univer- 


CXU  INTRODUCTION. 

It  is  neithex*  a  Pilgrim's  Progress,  a  Holy  War,  or  a 
Heavenly  Footman;  and  to  imagine  that  Bunyan  was  as- 
sisted by  this  book,  merely  because  the  triers  are  named  after 
some  doctrinal  or  practical  bias  ;  is  as  absurd  as  to  suppose 
that  the  boys  in  a  grammar  school  were  aided  by  Bunyan, 
because  they  nick-named  their  master,  "  Dr.  Flog'em,"  for  his 
unmanly  and  absurd  attempts  to  drive  Latin  by  force  into 
his  pupils. 

We  now  come  to  a  short  Pilgrimage  which  has  in  it  one 
feature  similar  to  the  perseverance  of  Christian.  It  is  one 
of  the  delightful  Poems  of  George  Herbert's,  in  his  Pocket 
Volume  called  "  The  Temple,"  entitled :  •* 

The  Pilgrimage. 

"  I  travel  on,  seeing  the  hill,  where  lay 
My  expectation. 
A  long  it  was  and  weary  way 
The  gloomy  cave  of  Desperation 
1  left  on  the  one,  and  on  the  other  side 
The  rock  of  Pride. 

And  so  I  came  to  Phansies  meadows  strewed 
With  many  a  flower 
Fain  would  I  here  have  made  abode, 
But  I  was  quicken'd  by  my  hour. 
So  to  cares  cops  I  came,  and  there  got  through 
With  much  ado. 

That  led  me  to  the  wild  of  Passion  ;  which 
Some  call  the  world  ; 
A  wasted  place,  but  sometimes  rich. 
Here  I  was  robb'd  of  all  my  gold, 
Save  one  good  Angel,  which  a  friend  had  ti'd 
Close  to  my  side. 

At  length  I  got  unto  the  gladsom  hill, 
W^here  lay  my  hope, 
Where  lay  my  heart ;  and  climbing  still. 
When  1  had  gain'd  the  brow  and  top, 
A  lake  of  brackish  waters  on  the  ground 
Was  all  I  found. 

sally  admitted  that  the  triers  had  aided  the  slightest  ground   for  such    an  ad- 

our  Author  ;  but  if  he  had  ever  read  mission. 

thetriers,  it  must  have  tried  his  patience,  *  Eleventh  edition,  pp.  135,  136. 

and  satisfied  him    that  there  was  not 


INTRODUCTION.  CXlll 

With  that  ahash'd  and  struck  with  many  a  sting, 
Of  swarming  fears, 
I  fell,  and  cry'd,  Alas  my  King  ! 
Can  both  the  way  and  end  be  tears  ? 
Yet  taking  heart,  I  rose,  and  then  perceiv'd 
I  was  deceived. 

My  hill  was  further  :  So  I  slung  away. 
Yet  heard  a  cry 
Just  as  I  went,  None  goes  that  ivay 
And  lives  :  If  that  be  all,  said  I, 
After  so  foul  a  Journey  death  is  fair, 
And  but  a  chair." 

The  only  similarity  is  that  Christian  goes  up  the  hill  Difficulty,  he  hears  the  rry 
of  Timorous  and  Mistrust :  "  Just  before  us  lie  a  couple  of  lions ;  if  we  came 
within  reach,  they  would  presently  pull  us  in  pieces."  Christian's  reply  was  :  "  If 
I  go  back,  I  shall  perish.  If  I  can  get  to  the  celestial  city,  I  am  sure  to  be  in 
safety  there.     I  must  venture."  * 

The  Pilgrim^ s  Pass  to  the  New  Jerusalem.     By  M.  R.  Gent, 
London,  1659,  small  8vo. 

This  volume  contains  a  series  of  meditations  on  passages  of  Scripture,  intended 
to  convey  the  consolations  of  a  good  hope  through  faith  in  the  Redeemer  to  his 
pilgrims.     It  contains  nothing  allegorical. 

Philotheas  Pilgrimage  to  Perfection.  Described  in  a  Practice 
of  Ten  Days'  Solitude.  By  Brother  John  of  the  Holy 
Cross,  Frier  Minour.     Small  8vo,  Bruges,  1668.^ 

A  rare  volume,  published  during  the  time  that  Bunyan  was  writing  his  Pilgrim's 
Progress  ;  and  it  is  not  at  all  probable  that  he  saw  this  Roman  Catholic  produc- 
tion ;  but  if  he  had  seen  and  read  it,  he  could  not  have  gleaned  a  hint  to  use  in 
his  wondrous  Dream.  It  is  dedicated  to  the  Countess  Dowager  of  Sussex.  In 
this.  Brother  John  Cross  has  made  a  wonderful  discovery, — that  countesses  being 
the  more  refined  images  of  God  above  the  vulgar,  have  by  their  noble  descent  a 
clearer  aptness  to  sublime  thoughts  and  actions  !  What  could  such  a  man  have 
thought  of  the  son  of  a  carpenter,  of  fishermen,  of  publicans,  or  of  tent-makers  ? 
The  pilgrim's  name  is  "  Philothea  : "  she  enters  on  her  pilgrimage  with  the 
author's  good  wishes,  expressed  in  the  language  of  Holy  Toby  :  "  Walk  well,  God 
be  ill  thy  icay,  and  his  holy  Angell  accompany  Thee.^'  The  journey  is  divided 
into  ten  days'  solitary  employment,  that  the  pilgrim  might  be  ravished  into  the 
heavenly  paradise,  to  hear  and  see  what  we  are  loath  to  leave  and  cannot  utter. 
To  attain  this,  very  minute  directions  are  given  as  to  time,  place,  posture  of  body, 
method,  choice  of  a  guide,  &c.  The  guide  he  describes  as  "  a  medicine  of  life  and 
immortality."    "Woe  be  to  him  that  is  alone,"  says  Brother  John,  probably 

*  Page  47.  '  In  the  editor's  library. 


CXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

feeling  under  his  state  of  celibacy.  His  qualification  is  knowledge,  charity,  and 
discretion  ;  he  will  securely  lead  thee  to  rest  and  peace.  Her  exercises  are  to  be 
vocal  prayer,  reading  spiritual  books,  corporal  mortifications,  and  manual  labour  ; 
use  only  one  meal  a  day  ;  to  this  add,  a  hair  cloth  next  the  skin  and  occasional 
floggings.  These  are  general  instructions,  which  are  followed  by  objects  for 
meditation  on  each  day's  journey,  so  as  to  arrive  at  perfection  in  ten  days  : 
solitude,  humility  and  austerity,  patience  and  charity,  vileness  by  sin,  the  sacra- 
ment, mortification,  flight  from  earth,  spiritual  life,  God  speaking  to  man,  love's 
ascents  and  descents,  the  soul's  repose  in  God,  union  with  Christ,  and  ending 
with  meditations  upon  the  Passion. 

Reading's  Guide  to  the  Holy   City,  or  Directions  and  Helps  to 
an  Holy  Life.     4to,  Oxford,  1657. 

There  is  nothing  allegorical  in  this  volume. 

An  Hue  and  Cry  after  Conscience :  or  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  hy 
Candle-Light  in  Search  after  Honesty  and  Plain  Dealing* 
Represented  under  the  Similitude  of  a  X^K^^iftl* 
Wherein  is  discovered  The  Pritty  manner  of  his  setting- 
out.  His  Pleasant  Humours  on  his  Journey.  The  Dis- 
appointment he  met  with  after  all  his  Search.  Together, 
With  his  flight  at  last  into  another  Country,  where  he  is 
still  on  his  Rambles.  Written  by  John  Dunton.  1685.  18mo. 

The  advertisement  to  the  reader  says  that  as  the  author's  previous  work  was  of 
the  pilgrim's  journey  to  an  heavenly  country,  so  now  of  all  sorts  of  wicked  pilgrims 
of  either  sex,  that  are  either  posting  directly  to  hell  or  madly  dancing  and  frollick- 
ing  upon  the  brink  of  destruction.  Progressing  by  candle-light,  all  manner  of  vice 
and  roguery  is  painted  to  the  life,  in  its  proper  colours  ;  and  then  brought  to  light 
as  a  fatal  spectacle  to  the  thinking  and  gazing  part  of  mankind,  together  with  the 
most  eminent  cheats  of  all  trades  and  professions. 

This  is  a  display  of  vice,  villainy,  and  deceit  of  every  description,  without  any 
continuous  plot  ;  and  it  adds  one  to  a  thousand  proofs  of  the  degraded  and  de- 
bauched state  of  society  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  and  of  our  happy  exemption 
from  such  scenes.  Morality  and  purity  have  extended  as  voluntary  eftbrts  to  spread 
divine  tnith  increased;  awful  was  the  state  of  society  when  none  but  state- paid 
priests  were  permitted  to  teach  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation.^ 

The  Flainc  Mans  Path-way  to  Heaven.    By  Arth.  Dent.    1601 . 

There  is  a  rare  tract  under  this  title  in  black  letter,  with  a  wood-cut  of  the 
author,  12  leaves  ;  but  the  book  that  was  made  a  blessing  to  Bunyan  is  a  small 
octavo  volume. 

This  little  book  made  a  considerable  part  of  the  worldly  goods  which  Bunyan's 

*  A  copy  of  this  t)ook  is  preserved  in  Dunton's  NN'orks,  No.  700,  •},  in  the 
British  Museum. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXY 

first  wife  brought  as  her  "portion ,  and  it  became  one  of  the  means  by  which  he 
was  awakened  from  the  dreary  sleep  of  sin,  and  therefore  an  invahiable  por- 
tion. It  is  singular  that  no  one  has  charged  him  with  taking  any  hints  from  this 
book,  which  is  one  of  the  very  few  books  which  he  is  known  to  have  read  prior  to 
his  public  profession  of  faith  and  holiness  in  baptism.  The  author,  in  his  epistle, 
calls  it  "  a  controversie  with  Satan  and  Sinne."  It  is  a  dialogue  between  "  a 
Divine,  an  Honest  Man,  an  Ignorant  Man,  and  a  Caviller."  They  commence 
about  buying  a  good  cow,  then  worth  four  pounds,  and  are  drawn  into  religious 
conversation.  The  author  is  so  high  a  Calvinist,  that  speaking  of  infants,  he 
says,  "  some  no  doubt  are  saved  through  the  election  of  grace."  He  commences 
with  the  new  birth  :  arguments  are  adduced  to  show  why  good  and  worthy  men 
are  lost,  because  they  esteem  a  preacher  no  more  than  a  shoemaker,  nor  the  Scrip- 
tures than  their  old  shoes.  He  places  lying  among  the  principal  sins,  which  he 
calls  the  Beelzebubs  of  the  world.  He  introduces  very  familiar  illustrations  and 
well-known  proverbs.  Speaking  against  pride,  he  says,  "  How  proud  many 
(especially  women)  be  of  baubles.  For  when  they  have  spent  a  good  part  of  the 
day  in  tricking  and  trimming,  pricking  and  pinning,  pranking  and  pouncing,  gird- 
ing and  lacing,  and  braving  up  themselves  in  most  exquisite  manner,  out  they 
come  into  the  streets  with  their  pedler's  shop  upon  their  backs  and  take  themselves 
to  be  little  Angels — they  are  one  lump  of  pride — the  time  will  come  when  they  and 
all  their  gay  clouts  will  be  bm-ied  in  a  grave — what  will  all  this  profit  them  when 
their  bodies  are  buried  in  the  dust  and  their  souls  in  hell  fire  ?  what  then  will  they 
say  of  these  doubled  and  redoubled  ruffs,  strutting  fardingales,  long  locks,  fore 
tufts,  shag  haire  and  new  fashions  ?  "  He  complains  of  two  marks  being  paid  for  a 
pair  of  stockings  [£1  6s.  8d.]!  "What  say  you  to  our  artificial  women,  which 
will  be  better  than  God  hath  made  them  .'  they  like  not  his  handy  work,  they  will 
mend  it — they  will  have  other  corriplections,  other  hair,  other  bones,  and  other  .... 
than  God  made  them."  Modern  refinement  prevents  one  of  these  words  from  being 
copied  ;  but  the  monstrous  deformity  shown  by  some  ladies  of  our  day,  appears 
then  to  have  been  in  fashion.  Dent  calls  such  ladies,  pictures,  puppets,  and  pea- 
cocks. Had  Bunyan  been  a  plagiarist,  how  readily  might  he  have  borrowed  an 
idea  from  Dent  of  the  Muck-rake.  "  The  gripple  muck-rakers  had  as  leve  part 
with  their  blood  as  their  goods.  They  will  pinch  their  own  backs  and  bellies  to 
get  their  god  into  their  chests."  But  Bunyan's  Muck-rake  is  all  his  own.  "  Mony 
lazie  lozels  and  luskish  youths  do  nothing  but  walk  the  streets,  sit  on  stalls  and 
frequent  Ale  houses.  Many  rich  women  do  ordinarily  lie  in  bed  till  nine  of  the 
clock  and  then  forsooth  rise,  and  make  themselves  ready  to  goe  to  dinner.  And 
after  they  have  well  dined,  they  spend  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  a  good  part  of  the 
night  also  in  playing,  prattling,  babbling,  cackling,  prating,  and  gossipping.  Fie 
on  this  idle  life."  ^ 

The  enmity  of  the  natural  man  against  those  who  bear  the  image  of  Christ  is 
thus  expressed :  "  It  is  a  wonder  to  consider  how  deadly  the  wicked  hate  the 
righteous,  and  almost  in  every  Thing  oppose  themselves  against  them  :  and  that 
in  most  virulent  and  spiteful  manner.  They  raile  and  slander,  scofl:'  and  scorne, 
mocke  and  mowe  at  them,  as  though  they  were  not  worthy  to  live  upon  the  earth. 
They  esteeme  every  pelting  Rascall,  and  prefer  euery  vile  Varlet  bafore  thcni. 
And  though  they  have  their  lines  and  liberty,  their  breath  and  safety,  and  all  that 

^  Page  170. 


CXVl  IXTRODUCTION. 

they  haue  else  by  them  [for  their  sakes],  yet  for  all  that,  they  could  be  content 
to  eate  their  heart  with  garlicke  :  so  great,  so  fiery,  so  burning  and  hissing-hot  is 
their  fury  and  malice  against  them.  They  may  be  compared  to  a  man  that  stand- 
eth  upon  a  bough  in  the  top  of  a  tree,  and  with  an  axe  choppeth  it  off,  &  there- 
withal! falleth  down  with  it,  and  breaketh  his  necke."  ^  Dent,  speaking  of  the 
entrance  by  the  strait  gate,  says :  "  It  must  be  done  by  great  strife  against  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  Diuell — none  can  enter  in  without  vehement  crowding 
and  almost  breaking  their  shoulder-bones — many  which  seek  shall  not  bee  able  to 
enter."  How  diiferent  to  Bunyan's  description  :  "  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened 
unto  you."  Yet  both  are  right :  one  places  his  obstacles  long  before  the  pilgrim 
arrives  at  the  gate ;  then,  having  overcome  the  world  and  the  flesh,  the  devil  shoots 
at  him  ;— the  other  reserves  all  the  Christian's  opposition  to  the  time  when  entering 
the  gate.  Dent's  language  is  picturesque  :  "  We  haue  all  the  Diuels  in  hell 
against  vs,  with  all  their  horns,  heads,  marvellous  strength,  infinite  wiles,  cunning 
devices,  deepe  slights,  and  methodical  temptations.  Here  runnes  a  sore  streame 
against  vs.  Then  haue  we  this  present  euill  world  against  us,  with  her  innume- 
rable baits,  saares,  netts,  gins  and  grins  to  catch  vs,  fetter  vs  and  entangle  vs. 
Heer  haue  wee  profittes  and  pleasures,  riches  and  honour,  wealth  and  preferment, 
ambition  and  couetousnesse.  Heere  comes  in  a  Camp-royall  of  spirituall  and  in- 
uisible  enemies.  Lastly  we  haue  our  flesh,  that  is,  our  corrupted  nature  against 
vs  :  wee  haue  our-selues  against  our-selues."  This  book  was  written  fifty  years 
after  the  reformation  ;  but  so  slow  were  the  clergy  to  teach  or  the  people  to  learn, 
that  when  a  farmer  is  asked,  "  What  is  the  end  of  receiving  the  sacrament  ?  "  he 
answered,  "  To  receive  my  maker."  And  when  asked  how  many  sacraments  there 
were,  his  answer  was,  "  Two,  Bread  and  Wine  "  !  Bunyan  must  have  felt  the 
force  of  such  language  as  this  :  "  Every  sin  that  a  man  committeth  is  as  a  thorn 
thrust  deep  into  the  soul  :  which  will  not  be  got  out  again  but  with  many  a  sigh, 
and  many  a  sorrowful  Oh  !  Oh  !  Every  sin  is  written  with  a  pen  of  iron,  and  the 
point  of  a  diamond  upon  the  conscience  which  if  not  felt  in  this  life,  then  with  woe 
and  alas  when  it  is  too  late."  The  farmer  being  deeply  affected  with  a  sense  of 
his  danger,  Atheist  advises  him  to  read  "  The  Court  of  Venus,  The  palace  of  Plea- 
sure, Bevis  of  Southampton,  Ellen  of  Rummin,  The  Merry  jest  of  the  friar  and  the 
boy,  The  pleasant  story  of  Clem  of  the  Clough,  Adam  Bell,  and  William  of 
Cloudesley,  The  odd  tale  of  William  llichard  &  Humfrey  :  The  ])retty  conceit  of 
John  Splinters  last  will — excellent  books  against  heart  qualms  and  dumpishness." 
To  which  the  zealous  minister  replied  :  "  They  .ire  good  to  kindle  a  fire — they  were 
devised  by  the  devil,  seen  and  allowed  by  the  Pope,  printed  in  Hell,  bound  by 
Hobgoblins  and  published  in  Rome,  Italy  and  Spain."  ^ 

This  volume  must  have  been  exactly  suited  to  the  warm  imagination  of  Bunyan. 
It  had  proved  invaluable  to  him  as  a  means  of  conversion  ;  but  after  a  careful  and 
delightful  perusal,  no  trace  can  be  found  of  any  phrase  or  sentence  havijig  beeu 
copied  into  the  Pilgrim's  Progress. 


The  result  of  long,  anxious,  and  expensive  inquiries  is  that 
from  the  first  idea  to   the  completion  of  his  Pilgrim's  Pro- 

^  Page  221.  s  Page  371,  372,  edit.  1(;25. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXVll 

gress,    it   entirely  flowed   from  Bunyan's   own   soul.     Well 
might  he  say : 

"Manner  and  matter  too,  was  all  mine  own." 

Bishop  Patriclis  Parable  of  the  Pilgrim.     4to,  1687. 

Whoever  has  patience  to  watle  through  ten  pages  of  Bishop 
Patrick's  Parable,  must  be  fully  convinced  that  his  lordship's 
limpir.g  and   unwieldly  Pilgrim  will  never  be  able,  with  all 
his  hobbling,  to  overtake,  or  even  to  get  within  sight  of  John 
Bunyan  by  many  a  thousand  miles ;  a  striking  proof  that  ex- 
quisite natural  ability  casts  a  brighter  and  more  captivating 
lustre,  than  the  deepest  acquired  parts.     The  bishop's  pilgrim 
has  only  one  description  which  has  the  slightest  similarity  to 
Bunyan's    style.     A   gentleman    rides   up   to    the   pilgrims, 
"  very  civil  and  inviting,'^  but  they  observed  that  he  had  a 
sword  by  his  side,  and  a  pair  of  pistols  before  him,  together 
with   another   instrument    hanging   at   his   belt,  which    Avas 
formed  for  pulling  out  of  eyes.     They  told  him,  "  We  are 
strongly  possessed  against  those  who  would  make  us  believe 
we  cannot  see  our  way  unless  we  let  them  pull  out  our  eyes, 
and  who  are  not  content  to  labour  by  reason  to  bring  them 
to  their  bent,  but  shoot  them  to  death  if  they  stiffly  refuse,  as 
if  they  were  but  rogues  and  thieves."     The  learned  bishop 
does  not  approve  of  the  Roman  Catholics  using  force,  pulling 
out  of  eyes,  or  shooting  churchmen ;  wdiile  at  that  very  time 
his  own  church,  if  dissenters  refused,  to  use  his  own  phrase, 
to  have  their  eyes  pulled  out,  sent  them  to  prison,  tormented 
them,  and  in  some  cases  they  hung,  drew,  and  quartered  them  ! 
On  getting  rid  of  him,  another  man,  more  sad  and  melancholy, 
crossed  tlieir  way,  with  a  dagger  by  his  side  and  a  pistol  peeping 
out  of  his  pocket ;  he  represents  the  Presbyterians  or  Inde- 
pendents, and  to  him  the  Episcopalian  says,  "  I  retain  my  own 
eyes,  but  use  also  those  of  '  the  Conductors  of  Souls  :  and  am 
glad  with  all  mine  heart  that  I  have  met  with  one  both  to 
teach  and  to  watch  over  me.'     Your  dagger  will  soon  grow  to 
a  sword  ;  you  pretend  to  liberty,  and  will  give  none."     How 


CXVlll  INTRODUCTION. 

true  is  the  saying,  "  with  what  judgment  ye  judge,  ye  shall 
be  judged.'"  The  very  crime  which  the  learned  bishop  im- 
putes to  others,  was  most  prominently  his  own  ;  for  at  that 
time  no  church  was  more  hostile  to  the  Christian's  duty  of 
seeing  with  his  own  eyes  or  judging  for  himself  from  a  per- 
sonal examination  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.  The  bishop  ex- 
claims against  those  who  persecuted  his  church,  but  veils  the 
infamous  protestant  persecutions  by  which  that  same  church 
was  spotted  as  with  a  leprosy. 

After  all  Patrick  is  but  a  sorry  pedlar,  dealing  in  damaged 
wares ;  for  instead  of  Christian  experience  formed  from 
Scripture,  we  find  scraps  from  the  philosophers  and  heathen 
mythology.  Patrick  and  Bunyan  were  writing  their  pilgrims 
about  the  same  time :  they  do  not  appear  to  have  any  thing 
in  common.  Patrick  was  a  learned  man,  and  his  elaborate 
work  requires  the  pains  to  read  it  which  he  took  in  its  com- 
position ;  while  Bunyan's  story  flowed  freely  from  his  rich 
imagination,  and  the  reader  enjoys  it  with  the  same  flowing 
pleasure. 

The  sixth  edition  of  the  Parable  of  the  Pilgrim  has  a  finely 
executed  frontispiece,  representing  a  jjilgrim  leaving  a  city 
and  going  a  round-about  way  to  the  New  Jerusalem,  which 
shines  forth  in  the  clouds.^ 

Jesus,  Maria,  Joseph  or  the  devout  Pilgrhn   to  the  ever  blessed 
Vh-r^in  Mary.     12 mo,  Amsterdam,  1663. 

This  is  a  mere  guide  to  devotees  in  their  api)ro;iches  to  the  Virgin  Mary. 
^  London,  1 687. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXIX 


BIBLTOGEAPHICAL  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  EDITIONS  OF  THE 
pilgrim's  PROGRESS  PUBLISHED  DURING  THE  AUTHOR'S 
LIFE,  WITH  NOTICES  OF  THE  MORE  PROMINENT  MODERN 
EDITIONS. 

The  first  edition  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  was  published 
in  a  foolscap  8vo.,  in  1678.  This  volume  is  of  extraordinary- 
rarity  ;  only  one  copy  being  known  to  exist,  and  that  in  the 
most  beautiful  preservation,  in  the  original  binding,  clean  and 
perfect.  It  was  discovered  in  a  nobleman's  library,  and  judg- 
ing from  its  appearance  had  never  been  read.  It  is  now  in  the 
cabinet  of  H.  S.  Holford,  Esq.,  of  Weston  Birt  House, 
Tetbury,  Gloucestershire.  To  that  gentleman  the  public  are 
deeply  indebted  for  his  liberal  permission,  not  only  to  copy 
it,  but  also  to  correct  the  proof  sheets  of  this  edition.  We  are 
also  under  great  obligation  to  his  very  intelligent  bookseller, 
Mr.  Thomas  Rodd,  for  the  facilities  he  afforded,  both  in  copy- 
ing and  in  correcting  the  proofs.  As  the  edition  now  presented 
to  the  subscribers  is  an  accurate  reprint,  not  merely  verbal, 
but  literal,  including  the  punctuation,  and  the  use  of  capitals 
and  italics,  it  will  only  be  needful  to  point  out  wherein  it 
differs  from  the  later  editions.  The  volume  contains  253 
pages,  with  a  black  letter  head-line.  It  has  no  portrait  or 
cuts.  It  contains  some  words  and  sentences  which  were 
omitted  in  all  the  subsequent  editions.  As  all  these  omissions 
and  alterations  will  be  seen  in  reading  the  text  and  are  ex- 
plained in  the  notes,  they  do  not  require  any  particular 
remarks.  The  most  important  of  these  omissions  are  on  pp. 
69,  and  131,^  and  these  were,  very  probably,  occasioned  by 
typographical  errors  in  printing  the  later  editions. 

The  second  edition  was  published  also  in  the  year  1678.  The 
title  is  nearly  similar  to  the  first,  with  the  words:  "The  second 
Edition,  with  Additions."  And  to  this,  very  considerable  ad- 
ditions had  been  made ;  more  particularly  on  our  pages  1  to 

^  In  every  case  the  page  refers  to  this  reprint. 


CXX  INTRODUCTION. 

4,  12  to  22,  25,  26,  56  to  58,  85,  117,  128  to  131,  136  to 
141,  and  192.  As  these  are  all  printed  in  the  present  edition 
between  commas,  the  reader  will  easily  trace  them.  A  copy 
of  this  book,  wanting  the  verses  at  the  end,  is  in  the  British 
Museum,  and  a  very  fine  and  perfect  one  is  in  the  library  of 
W.  B.  Gurney,  Esq.,  Denmark  Hill.  It  is  comprised  in  276 
p.iges,  has  no  portrait  or  cuts.  It  has  many  more  typogra- 
phical errors  than  the  first  edition,  but  the  spelling  is  greatly 
modernized  and  improved. 

The  third  edition  appeared  in  the  following  year,  1679,  by 
the  same  publishers.  A  most  beautiful  copy  of  this  rare 
volume,  bound  in  olive  morocco,  to  all  appearance  new,  is  in 
the  library  of  the  Rev.  *  *  *  ^ 

It  contains  287  pages,  with  a  protrait  of  the  author,  en- 
graved by  R.  W.  f.  marked  upon  the  rock,  but  no  other  cut 
or  illustration.  In  this  a  considerable  addition  was  made,  as 
will  be  seen  by  referring  to  our  page  119  to  126  ;  and  this 
completed  the  allegory.  From  that  time,  every  addition  pre- 
sents some  little  additions  of  side  notes  or  references,  all  of 
which  arc  carefully  noted  in  this  reprint. 

The  fourth  edition  is  by  the  same  publishers,  in  1680;  it 
contains  288  pages,  and  has  the  portrait.  A  copy  of  this  is 
in  possession  of  the  executors  of  the  late  Lea  Wilson,  Esq. 
On  the  back  of  the  portrait  is  an  "  Ari  Advei'tisement  from  the 
Huohscller.^^ 


"  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  having  sold  several  Impressions,  and  with  good  Ac- 
ceptation among  the  People  (there  are  some  malicious  men  of  our  profession  of 
!e«-d  principles,  hating  honesty,  and  Coveting  other  men's  rights,  and  which  we 
call  Land  Pirates,  one  of  this  society  is  ciilled  Thomas  Bradyll  a  Printer,  who  I 
found  Actually  Printing  my  book  for  himself,  and  five  more  of  his  Confederates)  but 
in  truth  he  hath  so  abominably  and  basely  falcitied  the  true  Copie,  and  changed  the 
Notes,  tliat  they  have  abused  the  Author  in  the  sense,  and  the  proprietor  of  his 
right  (and  if  it  doth  steal  abroad,  they  put  a  cheat  upon  the  peoj)le).  You  may  dis- 
tinguish it  thus,  The  Notes  are  Printed  in  Long  I'rimer,  a  base  old  letter  ahnost 
worn  out,  hardly  to  be  read,  and  such  is  the  Book  itself.  Whereas  the  true  Copie 
is  Printed  in  a  Leigable  fair  Character  and  Brevier  Notes  as  it  alwaies  has  been, 
tliis  Fouilh  Edition  hath,  as  the  third  had,  the  Author's  Picture  before  the  Title 


7  Lent  to  me  l)y  my  vortliy  friend  Mr.  Leslie,  Bookseller,  Great  Queen  Street. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXl 

and  hath  more  than  22  passages  of  Additions,  pertinently  placed  quite  thorow  the 
Book,  which  the  counterfeit  hath  not, 

N.  Ponder." 

"  This  is  Brevier,  and  the  true  Copy.    "  This  is  Long  Primer  Letter." 

The  additions  alluded  to,  are  quotations  from  scripture,  and 
side  notes.  Dunton  had  a  high  opinion  of  Braddyll,  and  calls 
him  a  first-rate  printer,  active,  diligent,  and  religious."  Pon- 
der certainly  did  not  unite  in  these  encomiums. 

The  fifth  edition  is  also  by  Ponder,  and  was  published  in 
1680,  it  contains  221  pages.  This  has  the  portrait,  and  one 
woodcut  on  page  128, — the  Martyrdom  of  Faithful,  with  the 
verse  beneath. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  editions  are  in  the  library  of  the  late 
Lea  Wilson,  Esq. 

The  sixth  has  not  been  found  in  a  perfect  state. 

The  seventh,  in  very  beautiful  preservation,  is  in  the  library 
of  R.  B.  Sherring,  Esq.  Bristol.  It  was  printed  by  Ponder,  1681, 
containing  286  pages,  handsomely  printed,  with  the  portrait, 
and  the  cut  of  the  Martyrdom  of  Faithful,  on  a  separate  leaf, 
between  the  pages  164  and  165.  It  was  a  copy  of  this 
edition  which  Bunyan  used  in  writing  his  second  part,  all  the 
references  in  which,  to  the  first  part,  are  correctly  made  to 
this  edition.  On  the  back  of  the  portrait  is  a  manuscript 
memorandum,  that  the  book  was  given  to  Thos.  Hayward 
Aug.,  1682.   Pretium  Is.  6d. 

The  eighth  came  out  in  1682;  it  has  212  pages,  and  two 
leaves  of  a  list  of  "  Books,"  printed  for  Ponder,  the  publisher. 
A  fine  copy  of  this  edition  is  in  Sion  College  Library.  This 
has,  in  addition  to  the  portrait  and  cut  of  the  Martyrdom  of 
Faithful  (p.  121),  a  cut  of  the  pilgrims  ascending  on  the  clouds 
to  heaven — p.  204.  Mr.  Pocock,  in  the  introduction  to  the 
Art  Union  Edition,  oblong  folio,  1844,  describes  a  copy  of 
this  eighth  edition,  in  possession  of  the  late  L.  Wilson,  Esq., 
as  having  on  p.  135,  the  cut  of  Doubting  Castle ;  this  is  not 
in  the  one  in  Sion  College,  and  if  it  had  been  in  that  copy  it 

'^  Life  and  Errors  of  John  Dunton. 

i 


CXXU  INTRODUCTION. 

would  have  occupied  p.  145,  by  error  numbered  135,  but 
which  is  filled  with  letter-press ;  the  same  error  of  paging 
occurs  in  the  ninth  editions,  but  they  have  the  cut.  It  is 
much  to  be  regretted  that  the  lamented  death  of  Mr.  Wilson 
has  for  the  present  shut  up  his  library.  If  his  copy  is  the 
eighth  edition,  and  has  that  cut,  it  proves  that  there  were 
two  eighth  editions  (so  called,)  in  1682,  but  that  in  Sion 
College  wants  the  frontispiece  which  Mr,  Wilson's  copy 
possesses.     On  the  back  of  this  is  the  following 

"  Advertisement. 

"  The  Pilgrims  Progress  having  found  good  Acceptation  among  the  People  to 
the  carrying  off  a  Seventh  Impression,  which  had  many  Additions,  more  than  any 
preceding  :  and  the  Publisher  observing,  that  many  persons  desired  to  have  it 
Illustrated  with  Pictures,  hath  endeavoured  to  gratitie  them  therein  ;  And,  besides 
those  that  are  ordinarily  Printed  to  the  fifth  Impression,  hath  provided  Thirteen 
Copper  Cuts  curiously  Engraven  for  such  as  desire  them." 

Of  these  cuts,  which  were  sold  for  one  shilling,  nothing  is 
known,  unless  they  are  the  set  of  neat  engravings  inserted 
four  in  a  sheet,  in  Chandler  and  Wilson's  edition  of  Bunyan's 
Works,  2  vols,  folio,  1737,  very  fine  impressions  of  which 
appeared  in  an  early  German  translation,  published  in  London, 
and  under  these  are  the  Erifjlisli  verses ;  they  are  sixteen  in 
number,  but  if  the  three  "  that  are  ordinarily  printed  to  the 
eighth  impression  "  be  deducted,  the  number  then  agress  Avith 
the  advertisement.  The  whole  of  these  designs  were  cut  in 
wood,  and  with  the  verses  printed  in  the  thirteenth  edition, 
and  probably  in  the  eleventh  or  twelfth. 

This  eighth  edition  looks  as  if  it  was  printed  with  a  Dutch 
type;  sheet  D,  p.  49  to  72,  differs  from  the  rest  of  the 
volume,  and  it  is  very  singular  that  in  the  two  following 
editions  the  same  difference  is  found  in  sheet  D,  which  is  a 
sharper  type,  and  more  closely  j^rinted. 

Gay,  in  his  "  What-d'ye-call  it  ?  "  a  farce,  represents  a  man 
about  to  be  shot,  when  a  countryman  offers  him  a  book  to 
pray  by  ;  he  takes  it,  and  says : 

"  I  will,  I  will. 

Lend  me  thy  handkercher.     [Reads  and  weeps.]     '  The  Pilgrim's  Pro—' 

I  cannot  see  for  tears !     '  Pro-'  Progress,'— Oh  ! 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXIll 

'  The  Pilgrim's  Progress — eighth — edi-ti-on, 

'  Lon-don — print-ed — for — Ni-cho-las  Bod-ding-ton  : 

'  With  new  ad-di-tions  never  made  before,' 

'  Oh  !  'tis  so  moving,  I  can  read  no  more  !'  " 

This  was  first  acted  in  1715,  and  proves  that  the  Pilgrim 
was  then  a  most  popular  religious  book.  The  late  Mr.  Heber, 
and  Mr,  Wilson,  supposed  that  this  referred  to  the  eighteenth 
edition,  which  was  printed  for  N.  Boddington ;  but  might  it 
not  more  probably  refer  to  the  Eighth  edition  of  the  pilgrim, 
jiart  2,  which  was  printed  by  that  celebrated  publisher. 

There  are  two  ninth  editions,  both  bearing  the  imprint  of 
N.  Ponder;  the  first  of  these  is  dated  1683,  212  pages.  A 
copy  of  this  is  in  the  library  of  Wm.  Vines,  Esq.,  of  Brewers 
Hall,  and  another  in  possession  of  L.  Pocock,  Montague 
Street.  It  has  a  different  portrait,  but  the  same  woodcuts 
as  to  the  eighth,  with  the  addition  of  Doubting  Castle  on  p. 
145,  numbered  135. 

Another,  and  distinct  edition,  is  called  the  ninth,  also  by  N. 
Ponder,  with  the  same  cuts  as  the  last,  on  212  pages,  but  with 
a  different  type  ;  this  bears  the  date  of  1684.  A  copy  is  in 
the  extensive  library  of  Joshua  Wilson,  Esq.,  Highbury.  On 
the  back  of  the  portrait,  there  is  the  advertisement  of  the 
thirteen  copper  plates  in  addition  to  those  "  ordinarily 
printed  to  the  eighth  impression." 

The  tenth  edition,  by  Ponder,  1685,  on  200  pages.  In  the 
title  the  name  is  spelt  Bunian,  but  he  signs  the  Apology  as 
usual,  Bunyan.  This  has  the  frontispiece,  and  two  woodcuts 
only,  that  of  Doubting  Castle  is  omitted.  On  the  reverse 
of  the  title,  is  this  "  Advertisement :  " 

The  Pilgiims  Progress,  from  this  World  to  that  which  is  to  come  ;  The  Second 
Part :  delivered  under  the  similitude  of  a  Dream,  wherein  s  set  forth  the  Manner 
of  the  setting  out  of  Christians  Wife  and  Children,  their  angerous  Journey,  And 
Safe  Arrival  at  the  desired  Country,  by  John  Bunian.  I  have  used  Similitudes. 
Hos.  12.  V  10.     Price  One  Shilling. 

Eleventh  edition,  date  unknown. 

Twelfth — the  only  copy  we  have  seen  of  this  edition  has  a 
manuscript  title,  dated  1688,  also  by  Ponder.     This  agrees 

i2 


CXXIV  INTIIODUCTIOX. 

exactly  with  the  account  of  the  thh-teenth  edition,  given  by- 
Mr.  Pocock,  from  Mr.  Wilson's  copy.  It  has  fourteen  wood- 
cuts, with  the  verses  under  each,  the  last  of  which  affords  a 
curious  proof  of  the  extreme  carelessness  with  which  this 
popular  work  was  published.  This  cut,  in  the  former  copies, 
represented  the  pilgrims  triumphantly  rising  on  the  clouds  to 
the  celestial  city,  attended  by  angels  Avith  the  crown,  and 
under  this  was  a  suitable  verse — see  page  190.  Imagine  this 
cut  exchanged  for  one  in  which  you  see  the  two  pilgrims  in 
distress,  wading  through  the  river  of  death ;  one  sinking  in 
despair,  the  other  holding  his  chin  above  water ;  and  you 
read  under  this  picture,  the  same  verse  that  was  placed  under 
that  of  their  triumphal  ascent : 

"  Now,  now  look  how  the  holy  Pilgrims  rise  ; 
Clouds  are  their  Chariots.     Angels  are  their  Guide," 

A  more  complete  travesty  could  hardly  have  been  devised. 

Bunyan  gives  a  hint  in  the  verses  with  which  the  first  part 
is  concluded,  of  his  intention  to  continue  the  allegory.  This 
was  not  done  until  1684,  and  the  great  popularity  of  his  work 
induced  unworthy  men  to  publish  continuations  even  under  a 
signature  intended  to  cheat  the  public  into  a  belief  that  they 
came  from  the  pen  of  Bunyan.  He  thus  warns  the  public, 
in  the  verses  prefixed  to  the  second  part : 

"  'Tis  tnie,  some  have  of  late,  to  Comiterfeit 
My  Pilgrim,  to  their  own,  my  Title  set  ; 
Yea  others,  half  my  name  and  Title  too  ; 
Have  stichcd  to  their  Book,  to  make  them  do  ; 
But  yet  they  by  their  Features  do  declare 
Themselves  not  mine  to  be,  whose  ere  they  are." 

No  trace  has  been  found  of  the  book  or  books  which 
appeared  before  1684  under  Bunyan's  initials  or  half  his 
name.  The  only  counterfeit  which  has  been  discovered  is  in 
the  library  of  the  Baptist  Mission  House,  wanting  the  fron- 
tispiece." It  was  published  under  the  following  title  :  "  The 
Second   Part   of  the   ^^ilgvimfit   |Jrogrf00,   from   this 

'^  A  perfect  copy  is  also  in  tlie  editor's  library. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXV 

present  World  of  Wickedness  and  Misery  to  an  eternity  of 
Holiness  and  Felicity,  exactly  described  under  the  similitude 
of  a  Dream,  &c.  They  were  Strangers  and  Pilgrims  on  Earth, 
Heb.  xi.  13 — 16.  Let  us  lay  aside  every  weight  and  the  sin 
that  doth  so  easily  beset  us,  Heb.  xii.  7.  London,  for  Thomas 
Malthus  at  the  Sun  in  the  Poultry  1683."  The  frontispiece 
has  two  whole  length  portraits,  one  sleeping  with  his  head 
resting  on  his  hand — both  In  clerical  garb. 

The  author  dedicates  with  some  pomp  his  little  work  to  Jehovah,  and  signs  it 
T.  S.  There  are  two  poems  at  the  end  of  the  volume  by  R.  B.,  and  the  author's 
Apology  for  his  Book,  It  is  very  probable,  from  this  Apology,  that  the  author  was 
one  of  those  who  when  consulted  about  publishing  Bunyan's  first  part,  said  "  No." 
He  calls  Bunyan's  volume  "  a  necessary  and  useful  tract,  which  hath  deservedly 
obtained  such  an  universal  esteem  and  commendation  ; "  and  he  then  destroys  all 
his  commendation  by  discovering  a  four- fold  defect  in  that  discourse,  —  First,  no- 
thing is  said  of  man  in  his  first  creation  ;  second,  nor  of  his  misery  in  his  lapsed 
state,  before  conversion ;  third,  briefly  passing  over  Divine  goodness  in  recon- 
ciling sinners  ;  and  fourthly,  the  reading  of  it  occasioned,  in  vain  and  frothy  minds, 
lightness  and  laughter. 

Such  carping  criticism  is  utterly  unworthy  of  comment.  Bunyan  finds  his  pil- 
grim fallen  from  his  first  creation  into  a  state  of  misery,  and  under  a  sense  of  his 
danger,  crying,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved?"  He  unfolds  in  multitudinous 
variety  instances  of  Divine  goodness  in  reconciling  sinners,  and  almost  irresistibly 
leads  his  reader  to  accompany  the  poor  pilgrim  in  his  way  to  the  celestial  city,  full 
of  the  solemnity  of  his  heavenly  calling. 

Who  the  author  of  this  Pilgrim's  Progress  is,  it  may  be  diflScult  to  ascertain.  He 
dreams  that  multitudes  are  dancing  in  the  broad  way  to  misery,  and  only  two  or 
three  toiling  on  the  narrow  up-hill  path  to  happiness.  He  accounts  for  this,  first, 
from  infant  baptism  leading  them  to  imagine  that  they  are  in  the  riglit  path,  and 
that  no  profaneness  can  prevent  them  attaining  that  eternal  inheritance  which  they 
vainly  imagine  to  be  a  right  conferred  upon  them  in  their  christening  ;  secondly, 
they  delight  in  sin  ;  thirdly,  preferring  to  go  to  hell  with  a  multitude,  rather 
than  to  heaven  with  a  few  ;  fourthly,  because  their  reward  is  of  merit  and  not  of 
gift  ;  fifthly,  "  many  refuse  the  narrow  way  because  of  its  simplicity  :  they  must 
have  their  glorious  colleges  and  splendid  ministers,  their  beautiful  quires,  and  raised 
altars,  with  hangings  of  arras  and  tapestry,  furnished  with  the  finest  silver  and  gold 
of  Ophir,  a  gaudy  and  pompous  worship  and  musick  to  delight  their  spirits,"  &c. 
He  found  these  people  dancing  with  mirth  and  jollity  round  a  bottomless  pit  to  the 
outcries  and  screeches  of  the  damned,  and  playing  with  the  flames  of  hell.  One 
of  these  madmen  becomes  alarmed  at  the  preaching  of  Boanerges,  and  Conscience 
and  Judgment  do  their  utmost  to  terrify  him.  Then  comes  Affection,  and  pro- 
mises the  poor  penitent  wings  to  fly  above  the  clouds.  Will  hufts  and  hectors,  and 
must  have  him  leave  ofl^  canting  and  whining  ;  but  after  a  long  dialogue.  Will  con- 
sents to  go  on  pilgrimage.  They  meet  with  Apollyon,  and  have  other  adventures  : 
a  poor,  spiritless  copy  of  the  inimitable  first  part  by  Bunyan.  After  passing  more 
than  half  his  pilgrimage,  his  old  heart  is  taken  out,  and  a  new  one  given  to  him. 


CXXVl  INTRODUCTION. 

Under  the  idea  of  a  feast,  where  the  guests  are  fed  on  dishes  of  gospel  mysteries, 
sauced  with  eternity,  the  author  states  his  peculiar  notions.  He  at  length  arrives 
at  the  River  ;  Faith  and  Hope  support  him  ;  he  is  received  by  the  Shining  Ones, 
and  enters  the  city.  In  all  probability,  this  book  never  reached  a  second  edition, 
being  totally  eclipsed  hy  the  real  Second  Part,  in  1684. 

The  author  of  this  forgery,  in  his  Apology,  refers  to  a  cus- 
tom among  the  Puritans  of  giving  the  mourners  at  a  funeral 
a  book  instead  of  rings,  gloves,  wine,  or  biscuit.  This,  he 
says,  would  prevent  trifling  discourse,  as  is  too  commonly 
used  on  such  occasions.  Among  those  few  who  have  prac- 
tised this,  abundance  of  good  hath  been  done  by  that  means, 
and  who  knows,  were  it  more  generally  used  at  our  burials, 
what  good  might  be  effected  thereby  ?  - 

At  length,  in  1684,  Bunyan  published  the  Second  Part  of 
his  Pilgrim's  Progress  in  a  similar  volume  to  his  first.  It 
has  224  pages.  For  the  use  of  a  fine  copy  of  this  rare  book, 
we  are  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  the  executors  of  the  late 
Lea  Wilson,  Esq.  In  this  volume  seven  pages  are  in  a  larger 
type  than  the  rest,  from  p.  100  to  106  inclusive;  p.  106  is 
numbered  120.  It  has  only  one  cut,  — the  dance  round  the 
head  of  Giant  Despair.  The  next  edition,  which  we  have  been 
fortunate  enough  to  obtain,  has  a  similar  title  to  the  first;  it 
has  no  indication  of  what  edition  it  is,  but  bears  the  date  of 
1687.  These  two  editions  were  published  by  N.  Ponder  in 
the  Poultry.  The  sixth  edition  ajjpeared  in  1693,  by  Ponder 
and  Boddington  in  Duck  Lane ;  the  ninth  is  by  N.  Bodding- 
ton,  at  the  Golden  Ball,  in  Duck  Lane,  1708. 

Since  that  time  innumerable  editions  have  issued  from  the 
press  ;  but  before  giving  a  short  account  of  the  most  pronii- 

^  One  of  these  books  is  the  memo-  lasting  Rest  of  the  Saints  in  Heaven^ 

rial  of  a   most  valuable    Seventh-day  My  copy  has,  within  a  black  border  ; 

Baptist :    "  The    Last  Legacy  of  I\Ir.  '•  In  remembrance  of  Mrs.  Mary  Cross, 

Joseph  Davis,  who  departed  this  Life  the  late  wife  of  Mr.  John  Cross,  &c. 

Feb.  16,  170^,  being  a  Brief  Account  &c.     This  book  she  had  a  particular 

of  the  most  Material  Circumstances  of  respect  for  ;  and  therefore  it  is  hoped 

his   Life  and  Profession.     Written  by  it  will  by  her  Friends  be  more  accept- 

himself,  and  given  at  his  Funeral  to  his  able  than    Gloves."      It   is    bound    in 

Friends  and  Acquaintance,  &:c."  With-  black,  with  a  gilt  skull  and  cross-bones 

in  a  black  border.     Another  Book  used  on  the  cover, 
for  this  pur])ose  was  Dr.  Bates's  Ever- 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXVll 

nent  of  these,  we  must  not  forget  an  impudent  forgery,  called 
the  Third  Part  of  this  popular  allegory. 

It  was  probably  the  intention  of  Bunyan  to  write  a 
third  part.  Christian's  four  boys,  with  their  wives  and  chil- 
dren, remained  to  be  a  blessing  to  the  church.  He  closes  his 
second  part  with  these  words :  "Should  it  be  my  lot  to  go  that 
way  again,  I  may  give  those  that  desire  it,  an  Account  of  what 
I  here  am  silent  about ;  mean  time  I  bid  my  reader,  Adieu.^'' 
His  design  might  have  been  to  display  the  difficulties  of  main- 
taining a  course  according  to  godliness  in  the  busy  scenes  of 
life,  among  mechanics,  tradesmen,  and  others.  His  death  in 
1688  cut  short  his  labours  ;  but  in  a  short  time  there  appeared. 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  S^c.  the  Third  Part — to  which  is 
added  The  Life  and  Death  of  John  Bunyan,  Author  of  the 
first  and  second  part :  this  compleating  the  whole  Progress. 

In  a  very  few  years  after  Bunyan's  death,  this  third  part 
made  its  appearance ;  and  although  the  title  does  not  directly 
say  that  it  was  written  by  Bunyan,  yet  it  was  at  first  gene- 
rally received  as  such.  In  1695^  it  reached  a  second 
edition,  and  a  sixth  in  1705.  In  1708  it  was  denounced  in 
the  title  to  the  ninth  edition  of  the  second  part,  by  a  "  Note, 
the  third  Part,  suggested  to  he  J.  Bunyan's  is  an  imposture." 
It  is  surprising  that  so  contemptible  a  production  could  for  one 
moment  have  been  received  by  the  public  as  written  by  Bun- 
yan. The  late  Rev.  John  Newton,  in  very  happy  language, 
asserts  that  "  a  common  hedge  stake  deserves  as  much  to  be 
compared  with  Aaron's  rod,  which  yielded  blossoms  and 
almonds,  as  this  poor  performance  to  be  obtruded  upon  the 
world  as  the  production  of  Bunyan."*  Dr.  Ryland  justly 
observes,  that  "  when  the  anonymous  scribbler  of  the  third 
part -of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  tried  to  obtrude  his  stuff  on 
the  world  as  the  production  of  Mr.  Bunyan,  the  cheat  was 

3  The  first  edition  is  in  the  British  *  Mr.  Newton  copied  this  from  the 

Museum,  but  it  has  no  title.     The  life  preface  of  an  edition  of  the  Pilgrim's 

which  is  appended  to  it  has  the  date  Trogress    with   notes,    12mo,    London, 

1G92.  17a-2. 


CXXViii  INTRODUCTION. 

soon  discovered ;  every  Christian  of  taste  could  see  the  dif- 
ference as  easily  as  Ave  can  discern  the  superior  excellence  of 
a  Raphael  or  a  Titian  from  the  productions  of  a  common 
dauber :  and  we  can  as  easily  distinguish  Bunyan  from  all 
other  writers,  as  we  can  discern  the  difference  between  the 
finest  cambric  and  a  piece  of  hop-sacking."^  The  author  of 
this  forgery  is  as  yet  unknown. 

It  was  at  first  the  intention  of  the  council  of  the  Hanserd 
Knollys  Society  to  print  this  in  small  type,  as  a  supplement 
to  this  volume  ;  but  upon  examination,  the  extreme  indelicacy, 
or  more  properly,  indecency,  of  some  parts,  and  the  absurdity 
of  others,  led  them  to  the  determination  of  keeping  the  pages 
of  Bunyan  clear  from  such  impurity.  One  of  the  scenes  in 
the  cave  of  Contemplation,  is  a  pompous  jumble  of  absur- 
dities, that  might  afford  a  good  lesson  to  young  scholars  in 
rhetoric,  to  show  how  it  may  run  wild. 

For  many  years  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  was  continually 
printed  on  very  ordinary  paper,  and  innumerable  were  the 
copies  that  issued  from  the  press ;  the  wood-cuts,  when  worn 
out,  were  replaced  by  an  inferior  set.  Each  part  was  published 
separately,  in  the  oi'dinary  shilling  chap-book  form  ;  these  are 
sometimes  met  with  bound  together,  and  forming  a  stout 
volume.  Thus  part  1st,  twenty-second  edition,  with  new  cuts, 
1727,  with  part  2nd,  the  thirteenth  edition,  with  five  cuts  and 
a  note, stating  that  the  third  part  is  an  imposture;  and  then  part 
3rd,  thirteenth  edition,  1743.  Anotlier  copy  has  part  1st,  the 
twenty-third  edition,  1731  ;  part  2nd,  the  fourteenth  edition, 
1728;  and  part  3rd,  the  twelfth  edition,  not  dated.  The 
first  edition  of  the  three  parts,  uniformly  printed,  which  has 
fallen  under  our  notice,  is  by  J.  Clarke,  1743 ;  a  MS. 
memorandum  gives  the  price  of  the  volume,  Is.  6d.  The 
most  wretched  set  of  cuts  are  to  an  edition  printed  for  D. 
Bunyan,  in  Fleet  Street ;  another  with  similar  cuts  is  sold 
by  J.  Bunyan  above  the  Monument,  meaning  higher  up  Fish- 
street  Hill  than  where  the  Monument  stands.     At  length,  in 

'  rreface  to  Bunvan's  Works,  fivo,  179'2. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXIX 

1728,  there  appeared  a  handsome  edition  of  the  two  parts, 
"  Adorned  with  curious  sculptures  by  J.  Sturt."  The  editor 
states  that  the  former  editions  were  for  the  poorer  sort  at  a 
cheap  rate  [in  a  small  type],  so  that  many  worthy  Christians 
by  age  and  infirmities  were  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  it. 
This  was  duly  weighed  by  persons  of  distinction  and  piety, 
who  determined  to  have  it  handsomely  printed,  and  they 
generously  contributed  by  large  subscriptions,  to  secure  its 
being  a  correct  edition.  In  comparison  with  all  that  had  pre- 
ceded it,  this  shone  forth  an  elegant  8vo  volume,  fit  at  that 
period  to  ornament  any  library  or  drawing-room.  The  en- 
gi-avings  are  from  the  old  designs  and  well  executed.  This 
was  for  many  years  considered  to  be  the  standard  edition,  and 
was  frequently  reprinted ;  in  1775,  two  editions  of  this  volume 
were  published,  after  w^hich  that  with  Mason's  Notes  super- 
seded it.  Who  the  editor  was  is  not  known  ;  but  this  book, 
which  was  considered  to  be  the  most  correct  edition,  very 
sadly  abounds  with  gross  errors.  In  the  conversation  when 
Faithful  joined  Christian,  about  the  old  man  who  offered 
Faithful  his  three  daughters,  the  editor  has  altered  it  to  "  one 
of  them."  In  part  2,  p.  63,  "lines"  is  put  for  "lions;" 
another  and  very  serious  error  occurs  in  the  catechising  of 
James  by  Prudence  ;  she  asks  him,  "  How  doth  God  the  Son 
save  thee  ?  "  the  answer  is  left  out,  and  the  next  question ; 
and  it  appears  thus  :  "  By  his  illumination,  by  his  renovation^ 
and  by  his  preservation."  The  lines  that  were  omitted  are  : 
"  James.  By  his  Righteousness,  Death,  and  Blood  and  Life. 
Prud.  And  how  doth  God  the  Holy  Ghost  save  thee  ? " 
Mr.  Mason,  in  his  edition  with  notes,  took  as  his  standard 
this  erroneous  copy,  and  put  a  note  at  the  bottom  of  the 
page  [69]: 

(f)  I  cannot  prevail  on  myself  to  let  this  part  pass  by,  without  making  an  ob- 
servation. Mr.  Bunyan  expresses  himself  very  clear,  and  sound  in  the  faith  ;  but 
here  it  is  not  so:  for  what  is  here  ascribed  to  the  Son,  is  rather  the  work  of  the 
Spirit ;  and  indeed  the  work  of  salvation,  eftected  by  the  Son  of  God  is  intirely 
left  out."i 

In  the  next  edition  with  Mason's  Notes  he,  having  dis- 
covered his  error,  very  properly  inserted  the   missing  lines. 


CXXX  INTRODUCTION. 

but    as    Improperly    continued    his    note    reflecting    upon 
Bunjan.^ 

A  line  is  omitted  in  Sturt's  edition,  part  2,  p.  185,  and  in 
many  subsequent  ones.  "  How  were  their  Eyes  now  filled 
with  celestial  visions,"  should  be  "  how  were  their  Ears  now 
filled  with  heavenly  noises  and  their  Eyes  delighted  with 
celestial  visions."  But  a  more  unaccountable  error  occurs  in 
the  first  part,  p.  95,  where  Bunyan  says  "  the  Brute"^  in  his 
kind  serves  God  far  better  than  he  "  [Talkative],  the  printer 
has  strangely  altered  the  word  "  Brute  "  for  "  Brewer."  It 
is  easier  to  account  for  an  error  in  printing  a  missal  in  Paris, 
in  the  rubrick  of  which  should  be,  "Ici  le  pretre  otera  sa 
calotte,"  here  the  priest  shall  take  off  his  cap ;  but  in  printing, 
the  "  a  "  was  exchanged  for  "  u  "  in  calotte  :  the  printer  Avas 
ruined  and  the  books  burnt.  It  is  quite  impossible  to  notice 
all  the  errors  ;  they  abound  in  almost  every  page  of  all  these 
interesting  editions.  Some  of  these  errors  have  been  con- 
tinued through  nearly  all  the  modern  editions,  with  other 
serious  alterations.  Thus,  when  the  pilgrims  in  the  second 
part,*  leave  the  Delectable  Mountains,  they  in  a  song  record 
the  goodness  of  God  in  giving  them,  at  proper  distances, 
places  of  rest,  "  Behold,  how  Jit/?/  are  the  stages  set ! "  the 
word  "  stages  "  is  altered  in  many  to  "  tables ;  "  ^  and  in 
other  editions  to  "  stables."  '^  When  the  pilgrims  escape 
from  Doubting  Castle,  they  sing,  "  Out  of  the  way  we  went," 
&c. ;  one  line  of  these  verses  is  left  out  in  all  the  modern 
editions,  an  omission  which  ought  to  have  been  seen  and  sup- 
plied, because  all  these  songs  throughout  the  volume  are 
uniformly  in  stanzas  of  six  lines.  In  Hopeful's  account  of  his 
convei'sion,  Bunyan  says,  "  I  have  committed  sin  enough  in 
one  duty  to  send  me  to  hell ;  "  this  is  altered  to  "  one  day." 

*  In    possession    of   S.  J.    Button,  ^  Page  344. 

Esq.,  Racquet-court  ;     of  Mr.   Gam-  ^  With   Scotfs    Notes    and    Mont- 

mon,     Bcthiial- green  ;     and    of    the  gomery's    Essay.      Glasgow,    by    Col- 

cditor.  iins. 

'  It  is  correct  in  the  edition  of  172(5,  *  Edits,  with  ]\Iason's    Notes,    and 

of  which  Lord  Ashburnham  has  a^  very  in     the     first     with     Sturt's      i)hitcs, 

line  copy.  17"J8. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXl 

In  the  conversation  Avith  Ignorance,  Christian  observes : 
"  When  our  thoughts  of  our  hearts  and  ways  agree  with  the 
—  word;"  meaning  when  we  sit  in  judgment  upon  our 
thoughts,  and  our  opinion  of  our  thoughts  agrees  with  the 
word :  but  the  strength  and  meaning  of  this  serious  passage 
is  lost  by  altering  the  words  to  "  when  the  thoughts  of  our 
hearts,"  &c.  This  alteration  has  been  very  generally,  if  not 
universally,  made.  Another  very  extraoi-dinary  error  has 
crept  into  many  editions,  and  among  them  into  the  elegant 
copies  printed  by  Southey  and  the  Art  Union,  with  their 
wild  prints  in  oblong  folio.  It  is  in  the  conversation  between 
Christian  and  Hopeful  about  the  robbery  of  Little  Faith. 
Bunyan  refers  to  four  characters  in  Scripture  who  were 
notable  champions,  but  who  were  very  roughly  handled  by 
Faint-heart,  Mistrust,  and  Guilt :  they  made  David  ^  groan, 
mourn,  and  roar.  Heman  and  Hezekiah  too,  though  cham- 
pions in  their  day,  had  their  coats  soundly  brushed  by  them. 
Peter  would  go  try  what  he  could  do — they  made  him  at  last 
afraid  of  a  sorry  girl. 

Some  editor  not  acquainted  with  Heman, '^  and  not 
troubling  himself  to  find  who  he  was,  changed  the  name 
to  one  much  more  common  and  familiar,  and  called  him 
"  Haman."  ^  More  recent  editors,  including  JNIr.  Southey 
and  the  Art  Union,  probably  conceiving  that  Haman,  how- 
ever exalted  he  was  as  a  sinner,  was  not  one  of  the  Lord's 
champions  in  his  day,  changed  the  name  to  that  of  Mordecai.9 
A  most  unwarrantable  and  foolish  alteration.  In  p.  9  of 
the  second  part,  "  This  Vision "  is  put  for  "  This  Visitor." 
The  marginal  note,  p.  178,  "The  Light  of  the  Word"  is 
changed  to  "  The  Light  of  the  World."  This  error  is  per- 
petuated by  Southey  and  others.  A  copy  of  Sturt's  edition, 
with-  every  error  marked  in  the  text,  appears  to  be  more 
covered  with  spots  than  a  leopard's  skin. 

*  Ps.  xxxviii.  10-2.  1792,  &c.  ;  London,  by  Wilkins,  1782, 

'  See  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  and  by  D.  Bunyan,  1768. 

^  Edits,    by    Birds    and    Co.,   Edia-  '  It  occurs  in  an  edition,   London, 

burgh,    8vo  ;     Mosley,     (Jainsborough,  by  Hodsou  and  Doighton,  1702. 


CXXXU  INTRODUCTION. 

This  wondrous  Dream  has  been  translated  into  nearly  all 
the  languages  of  the  world.  How  important,  then,  to  have  a 
standard  text,  the  authority  of  which  might  be  relied  upon  as 
accurate  !  To  Mr.  Doe's  enumeration  of  one  hundred  thou- 
sand copies  in  English  having  been  circulated  in  the  life  of 
the  author,  must  be  added  all  the  editions  in  North  America. 
There  were  then  also  translations  into  French,  Flemish, 
Dutch,  Welsh,  Gaelic,  and  Irish ;  and  since  then  it  has  been 
read  by  the  Christian  Hebrews  in  the  holy  city,  Jerusalem,  in 
their  own  language  without  points  ;  and  probably  beside  the 
waters  of  Jordan  and  Tiberias ;  and  far  may  it  spread !  ^  It 
has  also  been  translated  into  Spanish,  Portuguese,  Italian, 
Danish,  German,  Estonian,  Armenian,  Burmese,  Singhalese, 
Orissa,  Hindostanee ;  Bengalee,  by  Dr.  Gary,  8vo,  Serampore, 
1821;  Tamil,  Marathi,  Canarese,  Gujaratti,  Malay,  Arabic,  in 
a  handsome  8vo  volume,  with  wood-cuts,  printed  at  Malta  ; 
Samoan,  Tahitian,  Pichuana,  Bechuana,  Malagasy,  New  Zea- 
land.- And  in  Dr.  Adam  Clarke's  library  was  a  copy  in  Latin, 
entitled  Peregrinatis  Progressiis,  a  J.  Bunyan  Lat  edit,  a  Gul. 
Massey,  4to.  A  copy  of  the  Welsh  translation,  published 
before  Bunyan's  decease,  but  which  had  not  come  to  his 
knowledge,  is  in  the  library  of  Miss  Atherton,  of  Kersell 
Cell,  near  Manchester.  That  lady  not  understanding  the 
Welsh  language,  most  readily  and  kindly  furnished  me  Avith 
some  particulars  of  this  rare  volume,  extracted  in  Welsh. 
These  were  translated  by  our  excellent  secretaiy.  Dr.  Davis ; 
and  it  appears  that  the  title-page  exactly  follows  the  English 
editions.  The  preface  is  signed  S.  H.  It  has  the  marginal 
notes  and  references.  Licensed  by  K.  Midgley,  23rd  of 
November,  1687.  Printed  in  London  by  J.  Bichai'dson, 
12mo,  1683,  the  10th  of  January.  "  The  translator  advises 
such  as  desire  to  learn  to  read  Welsh,  to  buy  the  Primer 
and  Almanack  of  Mr.  Thomas  Jones,  because  the  letters  and 
syllables  ai*e  m  them."   Mr.  Thomas  liodd  informed  me  that  he 

'  Gentleman'sMagazine,  April,  1844.  "  See  lists  by  Tract  Society,  in  Re- 

It  is  in  a  small  12mo,  the  price  of  which         port,  1847, and  in  "  the  l'ilgrim,"a  tract, 
looks  Jewish,  Gs,  Also  copies  in  post^cssion  of  the  editor. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXllI 

had  lately  sold  a  copy  in  Welsh,  translated  by  Thomas  Jones, 
published  in  1699,  small  8vo.  The  Dutch  edition  was  very 
neatly  printed,  with  superior  cuts,  t'Utrecht,  by  Jan  van 
Paddenburgh,  1684. 

The  French  translation  is  a  neat  pocket  volume,  with 
copper-plates,  Amsterdam,  chez  Boekholt,  1685.  The  front- 
ispiece represents  our  pilgrim  with  his  burden  on  his  shoul- 
ders, knocking  at  the  wicket-gate.  The  title  is.  Voyage  d'un 
Chrestien  vers  I'Eternite  par  Monsieur  Bunjan  F.M.  en 
Bedtford.  The  "  Lecteur  ami "  comprises  fourteen  pages. 
In  it  he  describes 

"  The  author  of  this  book, Mr  John  Bunyan,  is  at  this  time  an  upright  and 
faithful  minister  at  Bedford  in  England— a  man  of  unexampled  2iiety  and  devotion, 
such  a  one  as  Demetrius  of  whom  John  speaks  in  his  3rd  Epistle  and  r2th  verse. 
Every  one  bears  witness  that  in  this  little  volume  and  in  his  other  works  appear  a 
manifest  and  peculiar  wisdom,  very  great  experience,  and  a  penetrating  sight  into 
spiritual  things.  The  design  of  our  author  is  simply  to  present  a  penitent  soul 
seeking  God  on  his  journey  toivards  Eternity.  How  he  turns  from  his  former 
state  of  perdition,  leaves  his  home,  and  sets  his  steps  towards  the  Jerusalem  on 
high — his  adventures  by  the  way — his  view  of  those  that  choose  for  themselves  by- 
paths that  lead  to  hell — we  doubt  not  but  that  some  in  turning  over  these  leaves 
will  read  their  own  experience  ingeniously  drawn  out,  and  their  own  portrait  placed 
before  their  eyes,  as  if  they  saw  themselves  in  a  glass.  The  Christian  traveller,  the 
true  citizen  of  Zion,  is  skilfully  portrayed  to  the  life.  If  a  hypocritical  professor 
should  have  his  eyes  illuminated  he  will  here  see  himself  under  another  name  than 
that  of  Christian — his  foolish  imaginations  overthrown — his  hopes  perish,  and  all 
his  expectations  swept  away  like  a  cobweb.  If  any  one  judge  that  this  mode  of 
writing  is  not  sufficiently  solemn  for  such  spiritual  matters,  and  doubt  the  propriety 
of  representing  them  as  a  dream  and  under  such  images,  they  should  recollect  that 
our  author  was  unintentionally  led  to  this  manner  of  writing,  and  found  himself 
very  much  embarrassed  as  to  the  propriety  of  publishing  it  to  the  world  ;  and  did 
not  venture  to  print  it  until  persuaded  by  many  learned  and  pious  men.  Our 
Bunyan  wrote  allegorically,  in  the  hopes  that  divine  truth  might  reach  the  very 
depths  of  the  heart.  !Many  great  theologians  have  treated  the  most  important 
truths  in  the  same  figurative  manner,  following  the  footsteps  of  our  great  and  sove- 
reign Rabbi  Jesus  Christ,  who  taught  by  similitudes,  as  also  the  prophets  were 
constrained  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  speak.  Oh  that  our  readers  may  find  themselves 
to  be  true  citizens  of  Zion,  with  their  feet  in  the  Royal  Highway,  that  they  may  be 
fortified,  consoled,  and  instructed,  and  if  convinced  of  backsliding  may  return  to 
the  paths  of  peace  to  love  King  Jesus  the  Lord  of  the  Hill.  And  may  many  take 
our  Christian  by  the  skirt  of  his  robe  and  say  we  will  go  with  thee.  May  it  arrest 
the  attention  of  the  Flemings  as  it  has  that  of  the  English,  among  whom  in  a  very 
few  years  it  has  been  printed  many  times." 

This  interesting  preface,  which  we  have  somewhat  abridged, 
ends  with  a  quotation  from  Acts  xx.  32. 


CXXXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

Bunyan's  language  is  so  purely  English,  his  style  so  collo- 
quial, his  names  and  titles  so  full  of  meaning,  that  it  must 
have  been  a  most  difficult  book  to  translate.  This  is  seen  on 
turning  to  the  fifth  question  put  by  Prudence,  on  the  pil- 
grim's arrival  at  the  Palace  Beautiful.* 

"  Pru.  Et  qui  est  ce,  je  te  prie,  que  te  rend  si  desireux  de  la  montagne  de  Sion  ? 

"  Chres.  Quoy,  demandes  tu  cela  ?  0  mon  Dieu  !  comme  le  cert"  brume  apres 
le  decours  des  eaux  fraisches,  ainsi  mon  ceur-''  desire  apres  toy  le  Dieu,  le  Grand 
Dieu  vivant.  C'est  la  ou  j'attends  de  voir  en  vie  celuy  que  je  vis  autrefois  mort, 
et  pendu  sur  la  croix  ;  c'est  la  oii  j'espere  d'etre  unefois  decharge  de  toutes  ces 
choses,  qui  me  causeiit  tant  de  peine,  tant  de  douleur,  tant  de  dommage,  &  m'en 
ont  cause  jusques  a  ce  jour  icy  ;  c'est  la,  a  ce  qu'on  ma  dit,  qu'il  n'y  aura  plus  de 
mort ;  c'est  la  oii  je  jouiray  d'une  corapagnie,  a  laquelle  je  prendray  le  plus  grand 
plaisir.     Car,  pour  te  dire  la  verite,  je  I'aime  ;  voire. 

"  Je  t'aimeray  en  toute  obeissance. 
Tante  que  vivray,  O  mon  Dieu,  ma  puissance. 

Je  dis,  je  I'aime,  a  cause  qu'il  a  illumine  les  yeux  obscurcis  de  mon  entendement 
par  une  lumiere  divine,  jirocedee  des  rayons  du  soleil  de  sa  grace,  lumiere  qui  m'a 
servi  de  guide  pour  me  conduire  en  ce  chemin ;  mais  aussi  je  I'aime,  pource  qu'il 
ma  decharge  de  mon  fardeau :  &  je  me  trouve  las  a  cause  de  mon  mal  interieur  ; 
ah  que  mon  ceur  soupire  apres  ce  lieu,  ou  je  serai  delivre  de  mourir  ;  apres  cette 
compagnie,  ou  Ton  chantera  a  jamais,  saint,  saint,  saint,  est  PEternal  des  armies." 

This  answer  in  English  is  one  hundred  and  two  words  ;  in 
French  extending  to  two  hundred  and  twenty. 

The  Slough  of  Despond  is  called  Le  Bourbicr  Mesfiance ; 
Worldly- Wiseman,  Sage  Mondain ;  Faithful,  Loyal ;  Talka- 
tive, Grand  Jaseur ;  Pickthank,  Flatteur ;  My  Old  Lord 
Letchery,  Mon  vieux  Seigneur  Assez  Bon ;  No-good,  Vau- 
trien ;  Live-loose,  Vivant  Mort;  Hate-light,  Grand  Haineux; 
Bye-ends,  Autrefin.  The  poetry  would  have  seriously  puz- 
zled the  worthy  translator,  but  instead  of  attempting  it,  he 
supplies  its  place  from  French  psalms  or  hymns.  The 
copper-plates  are  rather  fine  specimens  of  drawing  and  en- 
graving. Sweeping  the  room  at  the  Interpreter's  house,  and 
Attempting  to  awake  the  Sleepers  on  the  Enchanted  Ground, 
are  new  designs.^ 

There  is  a  copy  in  the  British  Museum  somewhat  modern- 

*  See  p.  .IG.  "  A  fine  copy  is  in  the  library  of  S. 

'  Uniformly    spelt    in     this     book,        .J.  Button,  Esq.,  Racquet-court,  Fleet- 
ceur.  .  street. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXV 

izecl,  Rotterdam,  1722  ;7  and  a  very  handsome  edition  with 
plates  by  an  eminent  Dutch  engraver,  printed  at  Rotterdam, 
1757  ;  ^  and  one  Avith  wood  cuts,  12mo,  Basle,  1728,9  &c.  &c. 
There  are  French  Protestant  translations  ;  and  in  addition  to 
these,  there  have  been  many  editions  of  a  Roman  Catholic 
translation  into  French.  This  is  greatly  abridged,  and  of 
course  Giant  Pope  is  omitted ;  and  so  is  the  remark  about 
Peter  being  afraid  of  a  sorry  girl.  They  are  very  neat  pocket 
volumes,  printed  in  Paris,  1783;  at  Rouen,  1821,  &:c.  &c. 
Entitled,  "  Le  Pelerinage  D'un  Nomme  Chretien  Traduit 
de  L'Anglois."  In  the  preface  the  Roman  Catholic  transla- 
tor calls  the  English  nation,  "judicievise  et  eclairee."  The 
editor  bought  a  copy  of  this  book  in  a  convent  in  France. 
The  lady-abbess  assured  him  that  it  was  a  most  excellent 
work  to  promote  piety  and  virtue  !  A  sentence  which  first 
led  him  to  the  discovery  that  the  old  lady  had  a  remarkabK 
sweet  voice. 

Dr.  Cheever  accounts  thus  for  the  extensive  popularity 
of  our  Pilo;rim  : 

"  It  is  a  piece  of  rich  tapestry,  in  which,  with  the  word  of  God  before  him  as  his 
original  and  guide,  and  with  all  these  heavenly  materials  tinged  in  the  deep  feelings 
of  his  own  converted  heart,  he  wove  into  one  beautiful  picture  the  spiritual  scenery 
and  thrilling  events  of  his  own  journey  as  a  Christian  pilgrim.  It  is  all  fresh  and 
graphic  from  his  own  experience,  vivid  with  real  life,  freshly  portrayed  from  the 
word  of  God ;  nor  can  you  tell  that  Bunyan  was  of  any  sect,  save  that  he  was  a 
living  member  of  the  church  of  Christ." 

Not  only  has  this  work  afforded  the  deepest  interest  to  the 
painter ;  but  it  has  also  excited  the  poet  to  sing  his  pilo-rim's 
adventures,  both  in  rhyme  and  blank  verse.  The  ornamental 
embellishments  were  at  first  good  wood-cuts  for  a  chap  book,  ^ 
faithful  copies  of  which  will  be  found  in  this  edition ;  these 
dwindled  down  in  succeeding  editions  to  the  cheapest  and 
most  contemptible  cuts  that  can  be  conceived.  The  worst  of 
these  is  in  an  edition  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  by  a  name- 

[  1113.  b.  3  Rodd's  Catalogue,  1835. 

**  In  possession  of  Mr.  Tliornton,  the  ^  Books  sold  by  hawkers. 

Cottage,  Clapham  Common. 


CXXXVl  INTRODUCTION. 

sake  of  the  author,  Mr.  D.  Bunyan.  The  next  series  were 
the  copper-plates  to  Sturt's  edition ;  fine  impressions  of  these 
designs  are  found  four  on  a  page  in  the  first  complete  edition 
of  Bunyan's  works,  1737.  Since  then  many  beautiful  sets  of 
engravings  have  been  published  in  the  editions  by  Heptinstall 
and  Scott,  between  1788  and  1793, — a  series  of  sixteen 
elegant  designs  by  Stothard,  engraved  by  Strut.^  These 
were  reduced,  and  published  in  4to,  with  Sonnets  by  George 
Townsend,  Prebendary  of  Durham.  Thus  at  length  we  find 
that  Bishop  Bunyan  keeps  company  with  other  dignitaries. 
Twenty-four  original  outlines  were  published  by  Mrs.  Mac- 
kenzie ;  and  a  set  of  very  beautiful  engravings,  with  a  valu- 
able letter-press  accompaniment  by  J.  Conder.  The  edition 
by  Southey  is  elegantly  illustrated.  The  Art  Union  has 
favoured  the  public  with  a  series  of  illustrations  in  oblong 
folio,  some  of  which  would  probably  puzzle  even  the  keen 
penetrating  eye  of  Bunyan  to  discover  what  work  they  were 
intended  to  illustrate,^  A  more  serious  defect  is  observable 
in  this  oblong  edition,  on  page  47.  Bunyan's  terms  are  con- 
sidered as  too  vulgar,  and  two  of  his  words  are  exchanged  for 
the  more  polite  term  of  "harlot;"  while  on  the  corner  of 
page  36  a  disgustingly  indecent  cut  is  exhibited  ! 

The  earliest  poetical  attempts  to  promote  the  circulation  of 
the  Pilgrim,  is  of  the  first  part,  done  into  verse  by  Francis 
Hofiinan,  printed  by  R.  Tookey,  1706.  Not  only  is  the 
prose  versified,  but  he  has,  according  to  his  taste,  versified 
Bunyan's  verse.  Thus  the  long  controversy  as  to  the  pro- 
priety of  publishing  the  work  in  Hoffhian's  verses,  is  : 

"One  P.irt  said  Print  it,  others  it  dccry'd, 
Some  said  it  would  do  good,  which  some  deny'd  : 
I  seeing  them  divided  to  Extreams, 
Could  from  tliem  hope  no  Favour  but  the  Flames  ; 
Resolving  since  Two  Parties  could  not  do't, 
Bein^  Third  my-self,  to  give  the  casting  Vote 
And  have  it  printed." 

'  Sturt  an'l  Strut  were  men  of  a  dif-  Faithful,  one  of  them  with  a  crucifix  ; 
ferent  era.  the     Destruction    of    Bye- ends,    &c. 

*  The    meeting    of    Christian  .and        &c. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXYll 

It  has  a  smart  hit  at  occasional  conformity.  Thus  Apollyon 
says : 

"  'Tis  with  professors  now  in  Fashion  grown, 
T'espouse  his  cause  a  while  to  serve  their  own 
Come,  with  me  go  occasionally  back, 
Rather  than  a  preferment  lose,  or  lack.'" 

Judging  from  these  and  other  specimens,  it  is  not  surprising 
that  the  work  was  never  re-published.  It  has  some  wood- 
cuts, and  is  very  rare.*  Many  attempts  have  been  made 
to  render  Bunyan's  Pilgrim  a  popular  work  in  poetry,  but  all 
have  failed.  The  most  respectable  is  by  J.  S.  Dodd,  M.D., 
8vo,  Dublin,  1795.  This  is  in  blank  verse,  and  with  good 
engravings ;  it  has  also  an  index  and  all  the  passages  of  Scrip- 
ture given  at  length, — not  only  those  that  are  directly  re- 
ferred to,  but  also  a  number  of  others  which  might  have 
suggested  ideas  to  the  author  that  he  embodied  in  his  work. 
The  notes  are  well  written  and  short :  they  were  reprinted 
Avithout  acknowledgment  in  an  edition  of  the  Pilgrim,  in  three 
parts,  published  by  Macgowan,  London,  1822. 

George  Burder,  the  well-known  author  of  the  Village 
Sermons,  published  in  1804  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
part  the  first,  versified,  which  passed  through  several  large 
editions,  and  was  much  used  in  Sunday  Schools :  it  has  wood- 
cuts. A  very  handsome  edition  of  this  has  been  lately  pub- 
lished by  Messrs.  Bagsters,  the  celebrated  printers  of  correct 
Bibles.  It  has  also  the  Second  Part,  by  the  author  of  Scrip- 
ture Truths  in  Verse,  and  is  profusely  ornamented  with 
wood-cuts.  T.  Dibdin  also  published  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's 
Progress,  metrically  condensed  in  six  cantos.  This  embraces 
only  the  first  part.  The  author  claims  having  kept  the  sim- 
plicity of  the  original,  and  a  rigid  observance  of  every  doctrine 
enforcing  the  certainty  of  the  only  one  road  to  safety  and 
salvation.^  The  late  Isaac  Taylor,  of  Ongar,  published  Bun- 
yan  Explained  to  a  Child,  being  Pictures  and  Poems  founded 

'  Page  60.  the  library  of  Lord  Ashburnham.     It 

*  A    perfect  copy  in  the  library    of        is  referred  to  by  Mr.  Southey,  p.  xcvii. 

W.  B.  Gurney,   Esq.;  and  anotherin  =  Post  8vo,  Harding  and  King,  1334. 

h 


CXXXVUl  INTRODUCTION, 

upon  the  Pilgrim's  Progress ;  two  very  neat  and  interesting 
little  volumes,  each  containing  fifty  cuts.^ 

Dr.  Adam  Clarke  considered  that  our  Pilgrim  might  be 
more  read  by  a  certain  class  if  published  as  an  epic  poem. 

"  The  whole  body  of  the  dialogue  and  description  might  be  preserved  perfect 
and  entire  ;  and  the  task  would  not  be  difficult,  as  the  work  has  the  complete 
form  of  an  epic  poem,  the  versification  alone  excepted.  But  a  poet,  and  a  poet 
only,  can  do  this  work,  and  such  a  poet  too  as  is  experimentally  acquainted  with 
the  work  of  God  on  his  own  soul.  I  subscribe  to  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Addison,  that 
had  J.  Bunyan  lived  in  the  time  of  the  primitive  fathers,  he  would  have  been  as 
great  a  father  as  any  of  them."  ^ 

A  lady  who  wrote  under  the  Initials,  C.  C.  V.  G.,  has 
recently  made  the  attempt,  and  she  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  aware  that  Dr.  Dodd  had  gone  over  the  same  ground. 
It  is  a  highly  respectable  production,  divided  into  six  cantos, 
but  includes  only  the  first  part. 

The  Pilgrims  Progress  Versified.     By  the  Rev.  W.  E.  Hume, 
B.A.     2  vols.  fcp.  8vo.  184-1-5. 

In  this  poetic  attempt  each  part  is  divided  into  six  cantos.  At  the  first  glance,  it 
appeared  more  like  a  parody  than  a  serious  effort  to  convey  the  sense  ;  but  the 
author  appears  to  be  in  earnest,  A  very  few  lines  will  show  the  poetic  talent 
which  is  displayed.     The  pilgrim  about  to  start : 

"  Trembling  he  was,  and  tears  I  well  could  track, 
Till  broke  he  forth,  and  cried,  '  What  shall  I  do  alack  !  '  " 

On  Ignorance  arriving  at  the  gates  of  the  Celestial  City  : 

"  They  told  the  King,  but  down  he  would  not  run." 

The  first  part  ends  thus  : 

"  The  way  to  hell,  from  gate  of  heaven  was  there 
E'en  as  from  Ruin's  town.     I  woke — had  dream'd  declare." 

A  Free  Poetic  Version  of  the  First  Part  of  the  Pilgrim^s 
Progress.  In  ten  books.  By  J.  B.  Drayton.  With  a 
Memoir,  and  Notes  selected  and  abridged  from  the  Rev. 
T.  Scott.     12mo,  Cheltenham.     No  date. 

This  first  appeared  under  the  title  of"  Poetic  Sketches  from  Bunyan,"  fcp.  8vo, 
1821.     "  To  tempt  those  who  slight  the  original  as  a  coarse  and  illiterate  produc- 

«  Post  8vo,  London,  1835.     '  '  Postscript  to  a  Life  of  Bunyan,  1844, 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXIX 

tion  to  give  it  a  perusal,  and  they  will  find  that  its  merits  are  of  the  highest  order 
— conceived  in  the  true  spirit  of  poetry — like  a  rude  but  luxuriant  wilderness." 
The  Christian's  burden  is  called  "a  sordid  pest."  His  description  of  the  Inter- 
preter will  give  an  idea  of  Mr.  Drayton's  style  : 

"  Meek  was  his  mien 
Yet  fiery  keen 

The  ordeal  inquest  of  his  eye, 

And  blent  with  hoary  majesty 
A  stately  wand  he  bore  ; 

But,  ere  he  taught  his  mystic  lore. 

He  asked  the  Pilgrim's  late  abode, 

His  errand,  and  his  destined  road." 

When  Christian  met  the  men  running  from  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death, 
his  inquiry  is  anything  but  poetic — "  Hold  !   What's  the  damage  ?  " 

Little  interest  has  been  excited  by  these  endeavours  to 
versify  the  Pilgrim.  All  the  attempts  to  improve  Bunyan 
are  miserable  failures :  it  is  like  holding  up  a  rushlight  to 
increase  the  beauty  of  the  moon  when  in  its  full  radiance. 
His  fine  old  vernacular  colloquial  English  may  be  modernized 
and  spoiled,  but  cannot  be  improved.  The  expression  used  to 
denote  how  hard  the  last  lock  in  Doubting  Castle  "  went," 
may  grate  upon  a  polite  ear,  but  it  has  a  deep  meaning  that 
should  warn  us  of  entering  bye-path  meadows. 

Bunyan's  poetry  interspersed  throughout  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress,  displays  the  perpetual  bent  of  the  writer's  mind. 
No  show,  no  attempt  at  parade,  all  his  object  is  to  fix  truth 
upon  the  conscience ;  and  some  of  his  homely  rhymes  ought 
never  to  be  forgotten.  The  impression  made  in  childhood 
"  sticks  like  burs."  Who  that  once  read  the  lay  of  the 
Shepherd's  boy,  ever  forgot  the  useful  lesson  ? 

''  He  that  is  down  need  fear  no  fall, 
He  that  is  low  no  pride. 
He  that  is  humble  ever  shall 
Have  God  to  be  his  guide." 

Even  Mr.  Philip,  who  in  1845  said  "no  one  reads  his 
rhymes- now,"  ^  thought  in  1839,  "that  some  of  Bunyan's 
poetry  rises  to  an  awful  sublimity ! "  ^  Many  believe  this, 
and  will  read  them  still,  without  the  fear  of  being  classed 
with  these  no  ones. 

*  Critique,  xvi.  ^  Life  and  Times,  336. 

k  2 


Cxl  INTRODUCTION. 

Mr.  Burder,  of  Coventry,  divided  the  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
part  1  in  20,  and  part  2  into  15  chapters,  Avith  short  notes 
at  the  end  of  each ;  ^  it  has  been  several  times  re-published  ; 
but  this  innovation  was  not  well  received. 

Xumerous  have  been  the  editions  with  notes,  to  illustrate  the 
author's  meaning,  by  men  of  some  eminence ;  but  Montgo- 
mery's beautiful  description  at  once  shows,  that  doctrinally 
or  experimentally  considered,  they  are  not  needed.  "  Bun- 
yan's  allegory  is  so  perfect,  that,  like  the  light,  whilst  re- 
vealing through  its  colourless  and  undistorting  medium  every 
object,  yet  is  itself  concealed." 

The  attempts  of  Mason,  Burder,  Scott  and  others,  to  ex- 
plain the  spiritual  meaning  of  such  a  writer,  may  meet  the 
reproof  contained  in  the  following  anecdote :  "  A  late  eminent 
and  venerated  clergyman,  published  an  edition  of  Bunyan's 
Pilgrim,  which  he  accompanied  with  expository  notes.  A 
copy  of  this  work  he  benevolently  presented  to  one  of  his 
poor  parishioners.  Some  time  afterwards,  the  poor  man  was 
met  by  the  clergyman,  who  inquired,  '  Well,  have  you  read 
the  Pilgrim's  Progress  ? '  the  reply  was,  '  Yes,  sir.'  It  was 
further  asked,  '  Do  you  think  you  understand  it  ?  '  '  Oh,  yes, 
sir,'  was  the  answer,  with  this  somewhat  unexpected  addition, 
*  And  I  hope  before  long  I  shall  understand  the  notes  I'"" 

A  strange  attempt  was  made  by  Joshua  Gilpin,  rector  of 
Wrockwardine,  Shropshire,  to  fit  Bunyan  with  a  modern  and 
fashionable  suit  of  clothes,  and  under  the  tuition  of  a  petit 
maitre,  train  him  for  elegant  drawing-room  company.  How 
odd  an  idea  to  dress  Bunyan  a-la-mode,  place  him  in  an 
elegant  party,  chill  him  with  ices,  and  torment  his  soul  with 
the  badinage  of  a  Mrs.  Perkins's  Ball.  Mr.  Gilpin  com- 
plains that  the  Pilgrim's  defects  are  conspicuous  and  offensive, 
but  gives  no  specimens  of  them.  Instead  of  Faithful  telling 
Christian  the  common  feeling  against  Pliiible,  in  plain  En- 
glish ,  "  O,  they  say,  hang  him,  he  is  a  turn-coat ;  he  was  not 
true  to  his  profession ;"     Mr.  Gilpin  prefers,  "They  tauntingly 

'  Brit.  Miis.  1 1.",.  li. ;  editor's  library.         *  Pritcbard's  Life  of  Ivimey,  p.  130. 


mTROUuoTioN.  cxli 

say,  that  he  was  not  true  to  his  profession."  And  as  to  the 
unfashionably  pointed  remarks  by  the  Intrepreter,  that  a 
Christian  profession,  without  regeneration,  is  like  a  tree  whose 
leaves  are  fair,  but  their  heart  good  for  nothing,  but  to  be 
tinder  for  the  devil's  tinder  box.^  This  is  too  bad  to  be  mended, 
and  is  therefore  struck  out  altogether.  The  public  did  not 
encourage  Mr.  Gilpin's  metamorphoses,  and  the  book  is  for- 
gotten ?  - 

It  would  be  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  attempts  which 
have  been  made  to  copy  Bunyan's  Allegory.  A  few  of  them 
deserve  notice.  One  of  these  was  an  impudent  forgery.  It 
was  under  the  title  of  the  Progress  of  the  Pilgrim,  in  two 
parts,  written  by  way  of  Dream,  adorned  with  several  new 
pictures.  Hos.  xii.  10.  I  have  used  similitudes.  London,  by 
J.  Blai'e,  at  the  Looking  Glass,  on  London  Bridge,  1705. 
In  this,  which  is  published  as  an  original  work,  Evangelist  is 
called  Good-news;  Worldly  Wiseman,  Mr.  Politic  Worldly; 
Legality,  Mr.  Law-do;  The  Interpreter,  Du'ector;  The 
Palace  Beautiful,  Grace's  Hall ;  Giant  Desperation  of  Diffi- 
dent Castle ;  Mr.  Despondency  and  his  daughter  Much- 
afraid,  are  called,  One  Much-cast-down  and  his  kinsman 
Almost  Overcome.  Whoever  was  employed  in  stealing  this 
literary  property,  and  disguising  the  stolen  goods,  appears  to 
have  been  a  Boman  Catholic ;  he  omits  Giant  Pope,  and 
Faithful  called  Fidelius  is  hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered,  that 
being  the  punishment  inflicted  on  the  Roman  Catholics,  by 
Elizabeth  and  James  I. 

The  Spanish  Pilgrim  ;  or  an  admirable  discovery  of  a  E-omish 

Catholic.  ^ 

A  tract  to  show  the  easiest  way  to  invade  Spain. 

The  Pilgrim  ;  or  a  Picture  of  Life,  by  a  Chinese  Philosopher, 
2  vols,  by  Johnston.* 

A  caricature,  exhibiting  English  manners,  in  the  reign  of  George  III.,  througli  u 
distorted  medium. 

1  Page  245.  =•  Brit.  Mus.  1103.  e. 

=  (!vo.  1  ai  1 ,  Brit.  Mus.  1113.  c.  J  3.  «  King's  Library,  Brit.  Mus.  24.5.  f.  7. 


CXlii  INTRODUCTION. 

Since  then,  the  public  have  been  supplied  with  an  Original 
Pilgrim,  by  De^^iderius,  1717.  The  Pilgrims  Progress,  from 
Quakerism  to  Christianity,  by  F.  Bugg,  4to,  1698.  The 
New  Pilgrims';  or,  the  Pious  Indian  Convert,  1748. 

ShruhsoWs  Christian  Memoirs;  or,  New  Pilgriinacje  to  the 
Heavenly  Jerusalem.  1777  ;  republished  1799,  and  in 
1807. 

This  was  supposed  to  contain  allusions  to  certain  persons  of 
some  note,  and  was  for  a  time  a  popular  book. 

The  Female  Pilgrim ;  or  the  travels  of  Hephzibah,  a  descrip- 
tion of  her  Native  Country,  wath  the  State  of  the  Inhabit- 
ants thereof.     By  John  Mitchell. 

This  contains  some  account  of  the  religious  state  of  this 
country,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  reign  of  George  III. ;  it 
has  plates,  and  passed  through  several  editions.  The  author 
states  that  he  has  not  been  influenced  by  malice  to  those  per- 
sons whose  characters  he  has  drawn  as  odious  ! 

The  Progress  of  the  Pilgrim^  Good  Intent,  in  Jacobinical  Times, 
by  Miss  Anne  Burgess,  of  the  Vale  of  Honiton. 

This  was,  for  a  time,  very  popular,  and  went  through  many 
editions ;  it  arose  out  of  the  French  lievolution,  and  was  in- 
tended to  counteract  republican  principle,  and  free  inquiries 
into  practices  called  religious.  It  has  some  witty  passages,  and 
a  tender  attachment  to  the  Crown  and  Mitre.  It  represents 
philosophy  as  having  for  its  father,  Lucifer;  and  its  mother 
Nonsense  !  ^  That  the  mitre  assumes  no  control  Lawful, 
government  and  church  establishments  arc  venerable,  and  to  be 
admired  and  supported;  that  the  riglits  of  man  teach  plunder 
and  robbery  ;  that  those  who  oppose  the  church,  as  by  law  es- 
tablished, seek  to  promote  atheism.  The  authoress  invents  a 
She  Devil,  called  Mental  Energy,  who  invites  men  to  de- 
struction, by  thinking  for  themselves.     It  must  have  required 

'     ^  Paste  63. 


INTRODUCTION.  cxliii 

the  aid  of  some  church  wealth  and  influence,  to  have  pushed 
this  book  into  circulation  ;  it  is  now  nearly  forgotten.^ 

The  Sojourn  of  a  Sceptic  in  the  Land  of  Darkness,  to  the  City 
of  Strongholds,  in  the  Similitude  of  a  Dream.  Edinburgh, 
1847. 

The  prose  and  poetry  in  this  volume  are  equally  contemptible  : 

"  Who  follow  lies  they  love  (that  walk  or  crawl) 
A  lie  at  last  to  ruin  may  pursue  ; 
Who  swallow  greasy  camels,  hump  and  all 
A  gnat  may  scandalize,  and  strangle  too  ?  "  ^ 

This  is  one  of  those  books,  which,  in  the  words  of  Person,  "  will  be  read  when 
Homer  and  Virgil  are  forgotten,  but — not  till  then." 


THE    OPINIONS    OF     THE    LEARNED    UPON    THE    MERITS    OF 
THE     pilgrim's     PROGRESS,     AND     THE     CAUSES     OF     ITS 
.  POPULARITY. 

To  venerate  the  memory  of  Bunyan,  is  the  duty  of  every 
British  Christian ;  quite  as  much  as  it  is  the  pride  of  English- 
men universally  to  admire  the  genius  of  Shakespeare  or  of 
Milton,  the  philosophy  of  Locke,  or  the  philanthrophy  of 
Howard.  He  ought  ever  to  be  placed  in  that  constellation 
which  is  composed  of  the  brightest  luminaries  that  shed  a 
lustre  upon  our  national  literature.  His  Allegory  seizes  our 
imaginations  in  childhood,  and  leaves  an  indelible  impression — 
it  excited  our  wonder  then,  and  our  admiration  and  esteem  in 
riper  age.     Thus  one  of  our  best  poets  describes  the 

"  Pleasure  derived  in  childhood  approved  in  age." 

Cowper's  apostrophe  to  Bunyan  : 

"  Oh  thou,  whom,  borne  on  fancy's  eager  wing 
Back  to  the  season  of  life's  hajipy  spring, 
I  pleased  remember,  and  while  memory  yet 
Holds  fast  her  office  here,  can  ne'er  forget : 

*  In  the  Editor's  Library.  '  Page  113. 


CXliv  INTEODUCTION, 

Ingenious  Dreamer  !  in  whose  well-told  tale 
Sweet  fiction  and  sweet  truth  alike  prevail  ; 
Whose  humorous  vein,  strong  sense,  and  simple  style, 
May  teach  the  gayest,  make  the  gravest  smile  ; 
Witty,  and  well  employed,  and  like  thy  Lord, 
Speaking  in  parables  his  slighted  word  ; 
I  name  thee  not,  lest  so  despised  a  name 
Should  move  a  sneer  at  thy  deserved  fame. 
Yet  e'en  in  transitory  life's  late  day, 
That  mingles  all  my  brown  with  sober  grey, 
Revere  the  man,  whose  Pilgrim  marks  the  road, 
And  guides  the  Progress  of  the  soul  to  God  : 
'Twere  well  with  most,  if  books  that  could  engage 
Their  childhood,  pleased  them  at  a  riper  age  ; 
The  man,  approving  what  had  charmed  the  boy, 
Would  die  at  last  in  comfort,  jieace,  and  joy." 

The  influence  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  had  upon  a  late 
learned  and  zealous  divine,  is  well  described  in  the  auto- 
biography of  the  celebrated  Dr.  Adam  Clarke. 

A  child's  view  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress : 

"  At  this  early  age  he  read  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  as  he  would  read  a  book  of 
chivalry.  Christian  was  the  great  hero,  by  whom  the  most  appalling  difficulties 
were  surmounted,  the  most  incredible  labours  performed,  powerful  enchantments 
dissolved,  giants  conquered,  and  devils  quelled.  It  was  not  likely  that  he  would 
see  it  as  a  spiritual  allegory,  and  therefore  it  was  no  wonder  that  he  could  not 
comprehend  how  Christian  and  Hopeful  could  submit  to  live  several  days  and 
nights  in  the  dungeon  of  Doubting  Castle,  under  the  torture  of  Giant  Despair, 
while  the  former  '  had  a  key  in  his  bosom  which  could  open  every  lock  in  that 
castle,' " 

Lord  Kaimes,  who  did  not  in  the  slightest  degree  partake 
with  Bunyan  in  his  feelings  of  veneration  for  Christianity, 
admires  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  as  being  composed  in  a  style 
enlivened  like  that  of  Homer,  by  a  proper  mixture  of  the 
dramatic  and  narrative. 

Mr.  Graingei",  who  was  of  the  high  church  party,  in  his 
Biographical  History  of  England,  calls  it  "Bunyan's  master- 
piece ;  one  of  the  most  popular,  and  I  Avill  add  one  of  the 
most  ingenious  books  in  the  English  language." 

Dr.  S.  Johnson,  that  unwieldly  and  uncouth  leviathan  of 
English  literature,  who  was  so  thorough-bred  a  churchman  as 
to  starve  himself  on  a  crossed  bun  on  Good  Friday,  and  to 


INTRODUCTION.  Cxlv 

revel  in  roast  beef  and  good  cheer  the  day  dedicated  to  Christ's 
mass  ;  who  was  so  well  taught  in  the  established  church  as  to 
pray  for  his  wife  "  Tetty,"  thirty  years  after  her  decease ; 
yet,  even  he,  with  his  deep-rooted  prejudices  against  dis- 
senters, cannot  withhold  his  meed  of  praise,  and  describes  the 
Pilgrim's  Progress  as  "  a  work  of  original  genius,  and  one  of 
the  very  few  books  which  every  reader  wishes  had  been 
longer. "  ^ 

"  Johnson  praised  John  Bunyan  highly  :  his  Pilgrim's  Progress  has  great  merit, 
both  for  invention,  imagination,  and  the  conduct  of  the  story  ;  and  it  has  had  the 
best  evidence  of  its  merit,  the  general  and  continued  approbation  of  mankind. 
Few  books,  I  believe,  have  liad  a  more  extensive  sale.  It  is  remarkable,  that  it 
begins  very  much  like  Dante  ;  yet  there  was  no  translation  of  Dante  when  he 
wrote.     There  is  reason  to  think  that  he  had  read  Spencer."^ 

A  deeply  read,  learned,  and  highly  esteemed  clergyman 
told  me  that  when  he  was  young,  placed  under  peculiar  cir- 
cumstances,^ he  read  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  many  times ;  for 
when  he  arrived  at  the  "  Conclusion,"  he  never  thought  of 
changing  his  book,  but  turning  to  the  first  page,  started  again 
with  poor  Christian,  and  never  felt  weary  of  his  company. 

Dr.  Franklin,  whose  sound  judgment  renders  his  opinion 
peculiarly  gratifying,  in  his  praise  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
comes  home  to  the  feelings  of  all  who  have  read  this  univer- 
sally admired  book: 

"  Honest  John  Bunyan  is  the  first  I  know  of,  who  has  mingled  narrative  and 
dialogue  together,  a  mode  of  writing  very  engaging  to  the  reader,  who  in  the  most 
interesting  passages  finds  himself  admitted  as  it  were  into  the  company  and  present 
at  the  conversation.     Defoe  iind  Richardson  have  imitated  him  with  success."^ 

Toplady  speaks  Avith  the  warmth  of  a  Christian,  who  not 
only  admired,  but  understood  and  felt  its  important  truths : 

*'  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  is  the  finest  allegorical  work  extant :  describing  every 
stage  of  a  Christian's  experience,  from  conversion  to  glorification,  in  the  most  artless 
simplicity  of  language  ;  yet  peculiarly  rich  with  spiritual  unction,  and  glowing  with 
the  most  vivid,  just,  and  well  conducted  machinery  throughout.  It  is,  in  short,  a 
master-piece  of  piety  and  genius  ;  and  will,  we  doubt  not,  be  of  standing  use  to  the 
people  of  God,  so  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endure." 

^  Mrs.  Piozzi's  Anecdotes.  ^  At  church,  obliged  to  sit  still,  while 

*  Boswell's  Life  of  Johnson,  8vo.  a  dull  parson  read  equally  dull  sermons, 
vol.  2,  p.  210.  *  Private  Life  of  Franklin. 


cxlvi  mTRODUCTlON. 

Dr.  E-yland's  opinion  was  that 

"  As  a  popular  practical  writer,  on  a  great  variety  of  important  subjects  for  the 
use  of  tlie  bulk  of  common  Christians,  I  will  dare  to  aflirm  that  he  has  few  equals 
in  the  Christian  world.  I  am  persuaded  there  never  has  been  a  writer  in  the 
English  language  whose  works  have  spread  so  wide,  and  have  been  read  by  so  many 
millions  of  people  as  Mr.  Bunyan's." 

The  Great  French  Biography,  (Roman  Catholic,)  having 
alluded  to  his  employment  in  prison,  adds : 

"  Mais  il  y  ecrivit  aussi  son  fameiix  Vo3'age  du  Pelerin,  allegorie  religieuse  par- 
faitement  soutenue,  qui  a  eu  cinquante  editions,  et  a  et6  traduite  en  plusieurs 
langues,""^ 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress  has  proved  an  invaluable  aid  to  the 
Sunday  School  Teacher,  and  to  the  Missionary.  One  of  the 
latter  wrote  home  with  joy  to  inform  his  Christian  friends,  that 
a  Malay  sat  up  three  nights  to  read  it,  never  having  before  seen 
so  beautiful  a  bouk,  and  praying  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may 
influence  his  countrymen  to  read,  and  also  enlighten  their 
hearts  to  understand  the  wondrous  dream.  The  Pundit  who 
was  engaged  to  translate  it  into  Singhalese,  was  so  deeply 
aflTected  by  the  story,  that,  at  times,  he  could  not  proceed  ; 
when  he  had  passed  the  wicket-gate,  and  Christian's  burden 
fell  from  his  shoulders,  at  the  sight  of  Christ  crucified,  he  was 
overcome  with  joy — he  laughed,  wept,  clapped  his  hands, 
danced,  and  shouted,  "  delightful,  delightful !  "  It  was  es- 
pecially blessed  to  the  persecuted  Christian  natives  in  Ceylon ; 
in  their  distress  when  driven  from  home,  in  places  of  danger, 
they  encouraged  each  other  by  repeating  portions  of  scrij)ture, 
and  the  vivid  delineations  of  perseverance  and  triumph  from 
the  Pilgrim's  Pro^rress. 

No  book,  the  result  of  human  labour  and  ingenuity,  has 
been  so  eminently  useful.  Let  Homer  have  the  credit  of  his 
lofty  poem  ;  Plato  of  his  Philosophy  ;  Cicero  of  his  elegancies, 
and  Aquinas  of  his  subtilties ;  but  for  real  value,  as  connected 
with  human  happiness,  our  unlettered  mechanic  rises  infinitely 
their  superior. 

*  Hvo.  Paris,  Ifild,  t.  ;i.  p.  412. 


INTRODUCTION.  cxlvii 

Before  taking  a  walk  with  the  pilgrims,  to  point  out  a  few 
peculiarities  not  noticed  by  commentators,  it  may  be  well  to 
answer  the  inquiry  so  often  made — Is  the  narrative  that  of 
the  author's  and  his  wife's  own  experience?  My  humble 
opinion  is  that  he  did  not  so  intend  it.  His  first  wife  had 
been  for  years  an  inhabitant  of  the  Celestial  City,  and  his  second 
was  a  decided  Christian,  long  before  his  Pilgrim  was  written. 
At  the  pillar  to  commemorate  Lot's  wife.  Hopeful  calls  to 
Christian,  "for  he  was  learned,"  a  title,  so  far  as  lettered 
lore  was  concerned,  Bunyan  could  not  have  given  to  himself, 
nor  would  he  have  applied  it  as  to  his  own  spiritual  know- 
ledge. In  other  places  he  is  called  "good  Christian;"  the 
appellation  "  good,"  he  would  not  have  given  to  himself.  It 
appears  not  to  be  intended  to  portray  the  experience  of  any 
one  man  or  woman,  but  the  feelings,  doubts,  conflicts,  enjoy- 
ments of  the  Christian  character.  The  whole  household  of 
faith  embodied  and  described  from  the  sacred  pages,  enlarged 
by  his  own  experience,  and  that  which  he  discovered  in  his 
Christian  intercourse;  fi'om  the  first  fearful  cry,  "What 
shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?"  until  the  crown  of  glory  and  im- 
mortality is  put  upon  his  head  with  the  anthem,  "It  is 
finished,"  "Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord." 

The  object  of  the  Society,  for  the  members  of  which  this 
volume  is  published,  is  to  give  the  text  in  all  its  integrity 
without  gloss  or  comment,  leaving  it  to  every  member  to  add 
his  own  notes,  and  apply  the  characters  so  admirably  drawn 
as  he  may,  in  the  judgment  of  charity,  feel  inclined;  still 
a  few  illustrations  from  authors,  with  whose  works  Bun- 
yan was  probably  familiar,  may  prove  amusing  and  in- 
structive. 

One  of  his  commentators  has  made  a  discovery  which  will 
certainly  startle  our  readers;  he  has  found  a  proof  and  an 
illustration  of  the  practice  of  christening  infants,  in  the  pages 
of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress.  This  shows  how  singularly  the 
mind  becomes  habituated  to  Jesuitical  and  far-fetched  argu- 
ments to  maintain  a  popish  custom,  which  can  neither  be 
supported  by  scripture  nor  reason.     It  is  in  an  edition  with 


Cxlviii  INTliODUCTlON. 

notes  by  Mr.  St.  John,  and  a  key  by  H.  Wood.^    In  the  index 
there  appears  the  followiog  sentiments  under  the  word — 

"Baptism.  The  ordinance  of  to  be  observed,  and  the  advantage  that  children 
are  thereby  made  partakers,  who  are  thus  early  admitted  into  the  visible  church  of 
Christ.  Christian's  sons  having  been  married,  and  their  olive  branches  were 
springing  up,  when  Christiana  and  her  troop  of  children  and  grandchildren  had 
passed  the  hill  Lucre,  and  arrived  at  the  green  meadows.  Here  they  find  a  house 
is  built  for  the  nourishing  and  bringing  up  those  lambs,  the  babes  of  those  women 
that  go  on  pilgrimage." 

The  annotator  seizes  an  opportunity  from  this  parental 
anxiety  to  "train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go," 
to  introduce  Bunyan  as  an  authority  for  baby  baptism,  as  if 
parental  anxiety  for  the  Christian  training  of  his  family  was 
connected  in  any  manner  whatever  with  throwing  a  few 
drops  of  Avater  on  a  baby's  face,  or  with  a  wet  finger  crossing 
its  forehead,  and  then  the  wet  being  wiped  off  again ! !  It  reminds 
rae  of  a  sectarian  clergyman  who  in  a  sermon  in  South  Hackney 
parish  church,-  on  those  words  "train  up  a  child,"  gravely 
told  his  hearers  that  Solomon  meant,  train  up  a  child  in  the 
Church  of  England ! !  and  in  no  other  way. 

But  to  return  to  our  Pilgrim  ;  a  charge  hr.s  been  made 
against  the  arrangement  of  the  story,  because  the  converts  in 
the  town  of  Vanity  are  not  described  as  having  entered  the 
way  by  the  Wicket  gate.  They  witness  the  patient  endurance 
of  sufferings  in  Faithful,  and  are  led  to  feel  that  there  nnist 
be  some  solemn  realities  in  religion  to  which  they  Avere 
strangers;  we  have  no  account  of  their  feelings  nor  misery; 
their  Slough  of  Despond,  or  entering  the  Avicket  gate,  or  relief 
on  the  sight  of  Christ  crucified,  for  all  this  has  been  already 
told  in  Christian's  experience.  The  lovely  inmates  in  the 
Palace  Beautiful,  descriptive  of  the  temper  Avhich  every 
member  of  a  Christian  church  ought  to  cultivate,  are  left 
there  as  if  they  went  no  farther  toAvards  Zion.  Christian's 
journey  does  not  appear  to  occupy  the  time  taken  to  perform 
the  same   distance   by  Christiana.      These  and  many  other 

^  Published  by  Rickerby,  Sherborne  Lane,  1 838. 
^  And  afterwards  published. 


INTRODUCTION.  Cxlix 

apparent  discrepancies  are  essential  to  the  author's  design, 
because  he  represents  it  all  under  the  similitude  of  a  Dreaji. 
The  following-  quotations  clearly  indicate  some  changes  of 
importance  interfering  with  Christian  Liberty  between  the 
writing  of  the  first  part  in  prison  before  ]  673,  and  the  publica- 
tion of  the  second  part  in  1684.  When  Christiana  came  to 
the  Slough  of  Despond, 

"She  perceived  also,  that  notwithstanding  the  command  of  the  king  to  make 
this  place  for  pilgrims  good,  yet  it  was  rather  worse  than  formerly.  For  that 
many  there  be  that  pretend  to  be  the  king's  labourers;  and  that  say  they  are  for 
mending  the  king's  highway,  that  being  dirt  and  dung  instead  of  stones,  and  so 
mar  instead  of  mending. "- 

Before  the  Pilgrims  attempted  to  ascend  the  Hill  Difficulty, 
they  sought  for  some  refreshment,  and  Great  Heart  said — 

"  This  is  the  spring  that  Christian  drank  of,  before  he  went  up  this  hill;  and 
then  'twas  clear,  and  good;  but  tiow  'tis  dirty  with  the  feet  of  some  that  were  not 
desirous  that  pilgrims  here  should  quench  their  thirst."  ^ 

The  two  lions  in  the  way  to  frighten  the  young  inquirer 
from  making  a  public  profession  at  the  Palace  Beautiful,  may 
represent  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  powers  when  assuming 
the  throne  of  God  to  judge  and  compel  men  as  to  forms 
of  divine  worship.  Their  effort  was  to  prevent  further  in- 
quiries, and  thus  turn  the  pilgrims  back  to  the  City  of 
Destruction ;  they  are  chained  to  show  that  these  devils  are  un- 
der divine  control,  and  can  only  hurt  such  as  they  may  devour. 
A  cessation  or  temporary  relief  from  persecution,  puts  them 
to  sleep  as  Faithful  passes ;  and  a  recollection  of  the  misery 
and  cruelties  they  had  so  recently  perpetrated,  raises  Giant 
Grim  to  back  them,  and  terrify  Christiana,  Mercy,  and  the 
children.  The  effects  of  this  cruel  persecution  of  the  saints, 
thinned  the  number  of  professors. 

"Now  to  say  the  truth  this  way  had  of  late  lain  much  unoccujjied,  and  was 
almost  all  grown  over  with  grass."* 

Their  fears  are  at  that  time  dissipated  by  Great  Heart  the 
guide,  who  slays  the  Giant. 

^  Page  2-2().  '  Page  2o8.  *  Page  2fJ3. 


Cl  INTRODUCTION. 

Wliilc  Christiana  and  ber  company  rest  at  the   town  of 
Vanity, 

"  There  came  a  Monster  out  of  the  woods,  and  slew  many  of  the  people  of  the 
town.  It  would  also  carry  away  their  children,  and  teach  them  to  suck  its  whelps. 
Now  no  man  in  the  town  durst  so  much  as  fiice  this  Monster  ;  but  all  men  fled 
when  they  heard  the  noise  of  his  coming.  This  monster  propounded  conditions  to 
men,  and  such  men  as  loved  their  lives  more  than  their  souls,  accepted  those  con- 
ditions.   So  they  cnme  under."  ^ 

From  all  this  it  is  obvious,  that  between  the  time  when 
Bunyan  wrote  the  first  part,  and  the  publication  of  the 
second,  some  painful  events  had  taken  place,  interfering  with 
a  Christian  profession.  Those  iniquitous  laws,  called  the  Five 
Mile  and  the  Conventicle  Acts,  were  passed  in  the  16th,  17th 
and  22nd,  Car.  II. ;  the  first  of  these  imposed  ruinous  fines, 
imprisonment,  and  death,  upon  all  persons  above  sixteen  years 
of  age,  who  attended  divine  service  where  the  Liturgy,  the 
compulsive  use  of  which  had  proved  an  awful  curse  and  scourge 
to  the  kingdom,  was  not  read.  The  second  ordained  that  no  non- 
conformist minister  should  live  within  five  miles  of  any  town. 
Bunyan  did  inhabit  and  live  in  Bedford  by  compulsion,  but  he 
was  not  proceeded  against,  although  it  Avould  have  been  as  just 
as  was  the  conduct  of  the  Recorder  of  London  on  the  trial 
of  Pcnn,  for  holding  a  conventicle ;  for  he  ordered  an  officer 
of  the  court  to  put  Penn's  hat  on  his  head,  and  then  fined 
Penn  for  having  it  on ! !  The  third  of  these  Acts  was  to  sup- 
press all  meetings  for  worship  among  the  nonconformists; 
these  were  passed  in  1665,  1666,  and  1671,  and  in  a  short 
time  made  the  frightful  desolations  to  which  we  have  before 
referred  ;  so  that  the  first  part  must  have  been  written  before 
1666  or  1667,  when  these  abominable  laws  were  enforced, 
and  the  second  part  after  their  effects  had  been  seen  and  felt. 
That  these  horrid  laws  were  obtained  and  put  in  force  by  the 
clergy,  urged  on  by  the  bishoi)S,  we  have  melancholy  proof. 
Even  all  publicans  attending  any  conventicle,  had  their 
licences  taken  from  them.''     In  the  Diocese  of  Salisbury  not 

*  Page  :'.30. 

•^  See  Harris's  Life  of  t'harles  II.,  vol.  ii.  p.  ]06,iSiC. 


INTRODUCTION.  cli 

one  dissenting  meeting  was  left.  On  the  11th  of  October, 
1666,  an  order  was  issued  that  in  Scotland  all  leases  and 
rents  should  be  void  as  to  those  who  did  not  attend  the  parish 
church.  Any  person  holding  a  conventicle  was  fined  five 
thousand  marks;  and  at  length  the  king  ordered  military- 
execution  in  that  kingdom  ujoon  all  nonconformists,  without 
process  or  conviction.^  The  saints  of  those  days  comforted 
one  another  with  a  proverb: — "It  is  better  that  the  body 
should  die  to  this  world  by  the  lions  without,  than  that  body 
and  soul  should  die  eternally  by  our  lusts  within."^  Inter- 
ference with  the  education  of  the  children  of  dissenters,  was 
under  the  14  Car.  II.,  Avhich  enacts,  "that  no  person  shall 
teach  any  children,  whether  in  a  private  family  or  in  a  school, 
unless  licensed  by  his  diocesan,  and  all  were  to  be  taught 
according  to  the  book  of  Common  Prayer,"  or  ruinous  fines 
and  imprisonments  were  enforced.  Thus  the  Slough  of  Despond 
became  more  foul ;  the  spring  of  water  became  muddy ;  the 
lions  so  thinned  the  number  of  pilgrims  that  the  grass  grew 
upon  the  road,  and  the  monster  was  very  rampant.  He  who 
feels  no  indignation  when  listening  to  such  enormous  crimes 
perpetrated  by  wicked  laAvs,  has  the  despicable  spirit  of  a 
slave.  Nothing  but  the  voice  of  the  Saviour  commanding  us 
to  forgive  his  and  our  enemies,  could  prevent  us  leading  our 
children  to  the  altar  of  our  God  to  swear  eternal  enmity 
against  a  system  founded  on  tyranny,  and  producing  as  its 
eifects  all  the  abominations  of  desolation. 

The  man  in  the  iron  cage^  at  the  Interpreter's  house,  has 
been  supposed  to  represent  an  apostate,  one  John  Child,  pro- 
bably personally  known  to  Bunyan.  He  had  been  a  baptist 
minister,  and  was  born  at  Bedford  in  1638,  but,  for  fear  of 
persecution,  had  conformed  to  the  Church  of  England,  and 
was  afterwards  terrified  with  awful  compunctions  of  con- 
science ;  he  was  visited  by  Mr.  Keach,  Mr.  Collins,  and  a 
Mr.  B.  (probably  Bunyan.)  When  pressed  to  return  to  the 
fold  of  Christ,  he  said — "  If  ever  I  am  taken  at  a  meeting, 

3  Page  33.  *  Harris's  Charles  II.,  vol.  ii,  p.  120, 


clii  INTRODUCTION. 

they  will  have  no  mercy  on  me,  and  triumph,  This  is  the 
man  that  made  his  recantation  ;  and  then  ruin  me  to  all  intents 
and  purposes,  and  I  cannot  bear  the  thought  of -a  cross  nor  a 
prison.  1  had  a  fjmcy,  the  other  morning,  that  the  sheriff's 
officers  were  coming  to  seize  all  that  I  had."  His  cries 
were  awful.  "I  shall  go  to  hell;  I  am  broken  in  judgment ; 
ivhen  I  think  to  i^ray,  either  I  have  a  fiushim^  in  my  face,  as  if 
it  were  in  aflame,  or  I  am  dumb  and  cannot  speak.'"  In  a  fit  of 
desperation  he  destroyed  himself  on  the  15th  October,  1684. 
Tliis  was  one  of  the  innumerable  unholy  triumphs  of  the  state 
in  its  interference  with  religion.^ 

Christian's  sleeping  in  the  arbour,^  as  well  as  the  emblem 
of  the  muck-rake^  seen  in  the  Interpreter's  house,  is  illus- 
trated by  Quarle  in  his  Emblems : 

"  Well,  sleep  thy  fill,  and  take  thy  soft  reposes; 
But  know,  withal,  sweet  tastes  have  sour  closes; 
And  he  repents  in  thorns,  that  sleeps  in  beds  of  roses." ^ 

And  on  an  avaricious  muck-rake  : 

"  The  vulture  of  insatiate  minds 
Still  wants,  and  wanting  seeks,  and  seeking  finds, 
New  fuel  to  increase  her  rav'nous  fire."" 

The  warning  given  by  Evangelist  to  the  pilgrims,^  that  per- 
secution awaited  them,  might  have  been  drawn  from  the 
affectionately  faithful  conduct  of  Mr.  Gilford,  Bunyan's  pastor, 
in  encouraging  him  to  preach  in  the  villages  at  the  risk  of  im- 
prisonment, and  even  of  death. 

The  trial  at  Vanity  Fair  is  an  almost  unconscious  operation 
of  quiet  but  keen  satire  upon  the  trials  which  took  place  at 
the  time,  sanctioned  by  all  the  formalities  of  law :  "  they 
brought  them  forth  to  their  trial  in  order  to  their  con- 
demnation." 

Every  dissenter  should  read    the  trial  of  William  Penn 


*  Relation  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  «  Page  240. 

John  Child,  1734.  7  Book  i. — vii. 


INTRODUCTION.  cliii 

and  William  Mead,  which  took  place  in  August,  1670.'*  They 
were  indicted  for  preaching  in  Gracechurch  Street,  the  police 
and  military  having  taken  possession  of  the  Friends'  meeting- 
house there.  The  jury  refused  to  find  Mead  guilty,  when  the 
judge  addressed  them — "  Gentlemen,  you  shall  not  be  dis- 
missed till  we  have  a  verdict  that  the  court  will  accept ;  and 
you  shall  be  locked  up  without  meat,  drink,  fire,  and  tobacco: 
you  shall  not  thus  think  to  abuse  the  court ;  we  will  have  a 
verdict,  by  the  help  of  God,  or  you  shall  starve  for  it."  They 
requested  an  essential  accommodation,  but  it  was  peremptorily 
denied.  Having  been  locked  up  all  night,  on  the  following 
morning,  when  the  court  was  opened,  the  jury  again  persisted 
in  finding  Mead  not  guilty ;  and  the  foreman  said,  "We  have 
agreed  according  to  our  consciences."  The  lord  mayor  re- 
plied, "  That  conscience  of  yours  would  cut  my  throat ;"  he 
answered,  "No,  my  lord,  it  never  shall :"  when  the  lord  mayor 
said,  "  But  I  will  cut  yours  so  soon  as  I  can."  Again  they 
were  locked  up  until  the  evening ;  they  then  kept  to  their 
verdict,  when  the  lord  mayor  threatened  to  cut  the  foreman's 
nose.  Penn  said,  "  It  is  intolerable  that  my  jury  should  be 
thus  menaced,"  when  the  mayor  cried  out,  "  Stop  his  mouth ; 
jailor,  bring  fetters,  and  stake  him  to  the  ground."  Penn  re- 
plied calmly,  "Do  your  pleasure;  I  matter  not  your  fetters:" 
and  the  recorder  thus  addressed  the  jury,  "  I  say  you  shall  go 
together,  and  bring  in  another  verdict,  or  you  shall  starve." 
A  second  night  they  were  locked  up  without  food  or  accom- 
modation ;  on  the  third  morning  these  true  born  Englishmen 
ao;ain  brought  in  their  verdict  not  guilty,  and  for  this  the 
jury  were  sent  as  prisoners  to  Newgate!!!  Their  names 
were,  Thomas  Veer,  Edward  Bushell,  John  Hammond,  Henry 
Henley,  Henry  Michel,  John  Brightman,  Charles  Milson, 
Gregory  Walklet,  John  Baily,  William  Lever,  James  Damask, 
and  Wil  Plumsted — names  that  ought  to  be  printed  in  gold, 
and  exhibited  in  the  house  of  every  nonconformist,  and  sculp- 
tured in  marble  to  ornament  our  new  House  of  Commons. 


Siale  Trials;  and  also  published  at  the  time,  price  twopence. 

/ 


cliv  INTRODUCTION. 

The  effects  of  persecution  for  refusing  to  obey  man  when 
he  usui*pecl  the  throne  of  God,  hastened  an  approaching 
era.  England  shuddered;  dissenters  increased;  and  event- 
ually the  king  saved  his  contemptible  head  by  the  quickness 
of  his  heels.  Toleration  succeeded  persecution,  and  it  is 
now  time  that  freedom  should  take  the  place  of  toleration, 
and  the  liberties  of  Englishmen  be  freed  from  the  polluted 
touch  of  any  hierarchy. 

The  difference  between  the  time  when  the  first  part  of 
the  Pilgrim's  Progress  was  written,  and  the  second  printed, 
appears  very  strikingly  in  the  state  of  the  town  of  Vanity. 
"  In  those  days  we  were  afraid  to  walk  the  streets,  but  now 
we  can  show  our  heads.  Then  the  name  of  a  professer  was 
odious,  noic  specially  in  some  parts  of  our  town,  religion  is 
counted  honourable."  ^ 

The  surprising  difference  between  then  and  noiv  can  only  be 
accounted  for  by  the  Declaration  for  liberty  of  conscience 
made  in  1672,  while  the  author  was  in  prison,  proving  by 
strong  circumstantial  evidence  that  the  first  part  was  written 
before  1672,  the  second  having  been  written  before  1684,  and 
even  then  the  nonconformist  ministers  were  called  "kid- 
nappers ;"^  and  very  soon  after  this,  persecution  again  lifted 
up  her  accursed  head. 

How  keenly  does  Christian  unravel  the  subtilties  of  Bye- 
Ends  and  his  company.  Bunyan  was  awfully  but  justly  severe 
against  hypocrisy  upon  such  as  named  the  name  of  Christ, 
and  did  not  depart  from  iniquity.  In  his  "Holy  Life,  the 
Beauty  of  Christianity,"  he  thus  addresses  such  characters : 
"Christ  calls  them  hypocrites,  whited-walls, painted  sepulchres, 
fools  and  blind.  This  is  the  man  that  hath  the  breath  of 
a  dragon ;  he  poisons  the  air  round  about  him.  This  is  the 
man  that  slays  his  children,  his  kinsmen,  his  friend,  and  him- 
self; that  offends  his  little  ones.  Oh !  the  millstone  that  God 
will  shortly  hang  about  your  neck,  Avhen  the  time  is  come 
that  you  must  be  drowned  in  the  sea  and  deluge  of  God's 
wrath."  « 

•  Page  327.     ^  Page  292,  marifin.      "  Bunvairs  Works,  fivo,  pp.  1391,  1392. 


INTRODUCTION.  clv 

When  By-Ends  would  have  joined  the  Pilgrim's  company. 
Christian  was  decided :  "  Not  a  step  farther,  unless  you  will 
own  religion  in  his  rags  as  well  as  Avhen  in  his  silver  slippers, 
and  stand  by  him  too  when  bound  in  irons." ''^ 

Christian  having  admirably  triumphed  over  these  enemies 
and  over  Demas,  becomes  confident,  and  not  only  involves 
himself,  but  leads  his  companion  into  great  trouble.  While  in 
the  dungeon,  and  sufifering  under  awful  doubts,  Bunyan  aptly 
introduces  the  subject  of  suicide. 

The  dialogue  upon  self-murder,  between  Christian  and 
Hopeful  in  Doubting  Castle,  might  have  been  intended  as  an 
antidote  to  Dr.  Donne's  singular  treatise  to  prove  "  that 
self-homicide  is  not  so  naturally  sin,  that  it  may  never  be 
otherwise."  So  singular  a  thesis  by  a  learned  man  and  a 
dignitary  of  the  church,  must  have  made  a  deep  impression 
upon  the  public.  It  was  published  by  authority  in  1644.  In 
his  preface,  the  learned  Doctor  says:  "Whether  it  be  because 
I  had  my  first  breeding  and  conversation  with  men  of  a  sup- 
pressed and  afflicted  religion,  accustomed  to  the  despite  of 
death,  or  from  other  causes ;  whensoever  any  affliction  assails 
me,  methinks  I  have  the  keys  of  the  prison  in  my  own  hand, 
and  no  remedy  presents  itself,  so  soon  to  my  heart  as  mine 
own  sword.  Often  meditation  of  this  hath  won  me  to  a 
charitable  interpretation  of  their  action  who  die  so ;"  and  his 
conclusion  is,  ^  "that  self-homicide  may  be  free,  not  only 
from  enormous  degrees  of  sin,  but  from  all."  The  whole 
work  displays  great  learning  and  extreme  subtilty ;  I  doubt 
much  whether  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  could  have  argued  so 
absurdly  wicked  a  proposition  better ;  and  against  such  an 
adversary  Bunyan  appears  in  the  person  of  Hopeful,  and  in  a 
few  words  dissipates  all  the  mist  of  his  subtilties,  and  exposes 
the  utter  peril  and  destruction  that  must  follow  so  aAvful  a  sin 
as  self-murder.  The  dignitary  of  the  church  was  taught  by 
schoolmen  a  difi^erence  between  sins  which  a  simple  Christian 
could  not  have  conceived.     Dr.  Donne  quotes  the  penitential 


7  Page  124.  «  Page  26. 

12 


clvi  INTRODUCTION. 

canons  which  inflict  a  greater  penance  upon  one  who  kills  his 
wife,  than  upon  one  who  kills  his  mother;  not  that  the  fault 
is  greater,  but  that,  otherwise,  more  would  commit  it." ^  Our 
pious  Pilgrim,  taught  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  abhors  all  sin  as 
bringing  the  curse  of  the  law  upon  the  sinner,  and  requiring 
the  blood  of  atonement  to  cleanse  its  stain. 

Bunyan  was  by  nature  a  philosopher;  he  knew  the  devices 
of  Satan,  and  warns  the  professor  of  his  danger  of  backsliding. 
The  conversation  upon  this  subject  between  the  pilgrims,'^ opens 
the  depths  of  the  human  heart,  and  the  subtilties  of  Satan. 
One  Temporary  represents  those  professors  who  return  to  the 
world ;  he  had  wept  under  a  sense  of  sin  ;  had  set  out  on  pil- 
grimage, but  was  perverted  by  Save-self.  Christian  had  a 
narrow  escape  from  Worldly  Wiseman,  but  Temporary  was 
lost.  He  warns  the  pilgrim  of  one  great  device  of  the  enemy  in 
his  treatise  of  "A Holy  Life."  "Take  heed,  professor,  of  those 
sins  which  Satan  finds  most  suitable  to  your  temper  and  con- 
stitution ;"  these,  as  the  little  end  of  the  wedge,  enter  with 
ease,  and  so  make  way  for  those  that  come  after,  with  which 
Satan  knows  he  can  rend  the  soul  in  pieces. 

In  the  conversation  with  Ignorance,^  Bunyan  speaks  the 
sentiments  but  not  in  the  language  of  Arthur  Dent,  when  in  the 
Plain  Man's  Path-way  to  heaven,  he  says: — "You  measure 
yourselves  by  yourselves,  and  by  others  ;  which  is  a  false 
metewand.  For  you  seem  to  lie  straight,  so  long  as  you  are 
measured  by  yourselves  and  by  others ;  but  lay  the  rule 
of  God's  word  unto  you,  and  then  you  lie  altogether 
crooked." 

At  length  Christian  and  Hopeful  arrive  at  the  river  which 
has  no  bridge ;  they  cross  in  safety,  and  ascend  to  blessed- 
ness, which  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  hath  it 
entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive."  We  see  them 
enter,  and  are  ready  to  exclaim, 

"Celestial  visions— Then  the  wondrous  story. 
Of  Bunyan  s  Pilgrims  seem'd  a  tale  most  true  ; 

•  Page  28.  '^  Pa^e  180.  '  Page  174. 


INTRODUCTION.  clvii 

How  he  beheld  their  entrance  into  glory, 

And  saw  them  pass  the  pearly  portal  through ; 

Catching,  meanwhile,  a  beatific  view 

Of  that  bright  city,  shining  like  the  sun 

Whose  glittering  streets  appeared  of  golden  hue, 

Where  spirits  of  the  just,  their  conflicts  done, 

Walk'd  in  white  robes,  with  palms,  and  crowned  every  one.' 

After  having  accompanied  the  Pilgrim  and  his  friend 
Hopeful  to  the  gates  of  the  Celestial  City,  and  longed  to 
enter  with  him  into  the  realms  of  bliss,  we  naturally  revert 
to  his  widow  and  orphans,  and  with  renewed  delight  do  we 
find  the  truth  of  the  promise  :  "  Thy  Maker  is  thy  husband," 
"a  father  to  the  fatherless."  We  unite  heart  and  soul  Avith 
the  amiable  family  at  the  Interpreter's  house,  who  "  leaped 
for  joy "  when  she  arrived.  And  on  reaching  the  Palace 
Beautiful,  "  Oh  what  a  noise  for  gladness  was  there  within, 
when  the  Damsel  did  but  drop  that  word  out  of  her  mouth, 
Christiana  and  her  boys  have  come  on  pilgrimage."  Having 
been  the  road  before,  we  feel  renewed  pleasure  at  every  step, 
and  richly  enjoy  our  new  companions ;  for  the  inexhaustible 
treasures  of  Bunyan's  mind  furnishes  us  with  new  pleasures 
every  step  of  the  way. 

Bunyan's  views  of  church  fellowship  show  his  heavenly- 
mindedness,  and  happy  would  it  be  for  the  church  if  all  its 
members  were  deeply  imbued  with  these  peaceful,  lovely 
principles ;  he  thus  expresses  them : 

"  Christians  are  like  the  several  Flowers  in  a  garden,  that  have  upon  each  of  them 
the  Dew  of  Heaven,  which  being  shaken  with  the  wind,  they  let  fall  their  dew  at 
each  others  roots,  whereby  they  are  jointly  nourished,  and  become  nourishers  of  one 
another.  Also  where  the  Gardiner  has  set  them,  there  they  stand,  and  quarrel 
not  one  with  another.^  For  Christians  to  commune  savourly  of  God's  matters  one 
with  another,  it  is  as  if  they  opened  to  each  others  nostrils  Boxes  of  Perfumes.^ 
Saith  Paul  to  the  Church  at  Rome  :  /  long  to  see  yon,  that  I  may  impart  unto 
you  some  spiritual  gift,  to  the  end  yon  may  be  established ;  that  is,  that  I  may 
be  comforted  together  tvith  you,  by  the  mutual  faith  both  of  yon  and  me." 
Rom.  i."  11,  12." 

The  character  of  Mercy  is  lovely  throughout  the  whole 

^  Barton's  Minor  Poems,   1824,  fcp.  ^  Cliristian  Behaviour,  in  Bunyan's 

«vo,  p.  r.').  '  Page  243,  Works,  I6f)2,  p.  '-,95. 


clviii  INTRODUCTION. 

journey ;  but  there  is  a  circumstance  in  her  courtship  which 
may  not  be  generally  understood.  It  is  where  she  refers  to 
the  conduct  of  her  brother-in-law,  to  her  sister  Bountiful ;  a 
method  of  separating  man  and  wife  at  all  times  perfectly 
illegal,  and  happily  at  present  unknown :  "  Because  my 
sister  was  resolved  to  do  as  she  begun,  that  is,  to  shew  kind- 
ness to  the  poor,  therefore  her  husband  first  cried  her  down 
at  the  cross,  and  then  turned  her  out  of  his  doors."  ^  This  is 
a  summary  mode  of  divorce,  not  mentioned  in  any  work  on 
vulgar  customs  or  popular  antiquities.  My  kind  friend,  the 
Rev.  J.  Jukes,  the  pastor  of  the  church  at  Bedford,  informs 
me,  "  That  the  practice  of  crying  a  wife  at  the  market  cross 
seems  to  have  prevailed  in  Bedfordshire  almost  to  the  present 
time,  and  to  have  been  merely  a  mode  of  advertisement  to 
the  public,  that  the  husband  would  not  pay  the  debts  of  his 
wife,  contracted  subsequent  to  the  time  when  it  occurred." 

The  character  of  Mr.  Brisk  is  wittily  drawn  in  Bunyan's 
emblems : 

— "  Candles  that  do  blink  ^vithin  the  socket. 
And  saints  whose  eyes  are  always  in  their  pocket. 
Are  much  alike  ;  such  candles  make  us  fumble ; 
And  at  such  saints,  good  men  and  bad  do  stumble.'' 

Bunyan  enjoyed  the  beauties  of  nature,  especially  the  sing- 
ing of  bii'ds ;  thus  when  Christiana  leaves  the  Palace  Beauti- 
ful, the  songs  of  the  birds  are  reduced  to  poetry,  to  comfort 
the  Pilo-rims.  A  bird  furnished  him  with  one  of  his  divine 
emblems.     It  is  upon  the  lark : 

"  This  pretty  bird,  oh  !  how  she  flies  and  sings 
But  could  she  do  so  if  she  had  not  wings  1 
Her  wings  bespeak  my  faith,  her  songs  my  peace  ; 
When  I  believe  and  sing,  my  doubtings  cease."* 

Mercy  longs  for  that  mirror  which  flatters  not,  and  the 
shepherds  give  her  a  Bible.  Modern  Christians  may  wonder 
that  she  had  not  previously  furnished  herself  with  one  ;  doubt- 
less she  had  the  use  of  one,  and  all  her  pocket  money  went  to 

'  Page  274.  '  *  Page  282. 


INTllODUCTION.  clix 

relieve  the  distresses  of  the  poor  of  Christ's  flock.  Think  of 
the  thousands  of  pious  men  and  women  incarcerated  in 
dungeons,  because  they  loved  Christ,  and  dared  not  violate 
conscience.  What  a  charge  upon  those  saints  who  possessed 
the  means  of  rendering  them  assistance.  The  revenues  of 
the  church  by  law  established  were  never  used  for  the  dis- 
tribution of  Bibles ;  of  late  years,  part  of  the  wealth  she 
derived  from  her  monopoly  in  printing  incorrect  Bibles  has 
been  wrung  from  her,  and  the  word  of  life  now  flows  all  pure 
as  a  mighty  river,  to  refresh  the  earth.  All  honour  be  paid  to 
those  who  fought  that  battle,  and  obtained  that  important 
victory.  In  Banyan's  time,  the  church  allowed  it  only  "  in  a 
niggard  stream,  and  that  i^olluted."  Herbert  has  well  expressed 
the  value  of  the  mirror  which  Mercy  longed  for :  ^ 

"  The  Bible  is  the  looking-glass  of  souls,  wherein 
All  men  may  see 
Whether  they  be 
Still  as  by  nature  they  are,  deformed  with  sin  ; 
Or  in  a  better  case, 
As  new  adorned  with  grace."  * 

And  he  has  thus  shown  the  value  of  its  sacred  pages,  to 
guide  the  benighted  travellers :  "  Greatheart  struck  a  light, 
and  took  a  view  of  his  book  or  map."  ^ 

"  The  Bible  !     That's  the  book.     The  book  indeed, 
The  book  of  books  ! 
On  which  who  looks, 
As  he  should  do  aright,  shall  never  need 
Wish  for  a  better  light 
To  guide  him  in  the  night."' 

The  Christian  reader  can  scarcely  know,  after  having  read 
the  whole  volume,  which  gave  the  greatest  enjoyment  ; 
whether  travelling  in  company  with  Christian  and  his  bosom 
friend,  or  the  delightful  feelings  excited  by  witnessing  the 
matronly  conduct  of  Christiana;  seeing  her  modest  friend, 
Mercy,  a  lovely  companion,  or  the  excellent  picture  of  child- 

*  Page  342.  *  Page  353. 

^  Herbert's  Synagogue,  p.  i.  '  Herbert's  Synagogue,  p.  15. 


clx  ADDENDA. 

like  behaviour  iu  the  four  boys  :  retracing  the  road,  every 
step  becomes  delightfully  intei'esting,  and  the  Valley  of 
Humiliation  the  most  lovely  picture  of  the  whole.  The 
courtship  of  Mr.  Brisk — the  additions  to  their  company — the 
weddings,  and  the  happy  close,  by  the  final  perseverance  of 
the  whole  party,  lead  every  reader  earnestly  to  wish  for  a 
third  part,  more  adventures,  more  of  the  divine  goodness, 
more  proofs  that  in  this  world,  with  all  its  bitterness,  the 
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  makes  its  possessors  happy ;  yes,  "  we 
have  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  of  that 
which  is  come."  But  death,  probably  from  the  latent  effects 
of  his  imprisonment,  cut  short  the  valuable  life  of  the  Pilgrim's 
friend.  And  now  a  poor  though  just  recompence  is  to  be 
paid  to  his  memory,  by  placing  his  image,  with  those  of 
Milton,  Shakspeare,  Hampden,  and  the  giant  men  who  have 
shed  glory  upon  this  nation,  in  the  splendid  new  house  in 
which  the  Commons  of  England  are  to  hold  their  sittings. 

GEORGE  OFFOR. 


ADDENDA. 


Since  that  part  of  the  Introduction  was  printed  which 
relates  to  the  final  release  of  Bunyan  from  prison,  some  im- 
portant information  has  been  obtained  through  the  kindness 
of  J.  B.  Lennard,  Esq.,  of  the  Privy  Council  Office,  and 
from  some  original  letters  written  at  the  time  by  Members 
of  the  Society  of  Friends,  by  which  it  appears  that  Bunyan 
owed  his  release  to  following  the  advice  of  George  Whitehead, 
which  was  to  petition  the  king. 

Upon  the  declaration  for  Liberty  of  Conscience,^  the  fol- 
lowing Circular  was  sent  to  the  sheriffs  from  tlie  Council  : 

"  After  our  hearty  commendations — Wlicreas  rcriuest  Imth  been  made  unto  His 
Majesty,   in  behalf  of  the  Quakers,  wlio  remain  at  present  in  several  gaols  and 

'  See  p.  Iviii . 


ADDENDA.  clxi 

prisons  of  this  Kingdom,  That  His  Majesty  would  be  pleased  to  extend  his 
mercy  towards  them,  and  give  order  for  their  Release  ;  Which  His  Majesty  taking 
into  consideration,  hath  thought  fit,  in  order  to  his  clearer  information,  before  he 
resolve  any-thing  therein,  to  command  us  to  vprite  these  Our  Letters  unto  you  : 
And,  accordingly  wee  do  hereby  will  and  require  you  to  procure  a  perfect  Lyste 
or  Calendar  of  the  names,  time,  and  causes  of  comitment  of  all  such  Persons 
called  Quakers,  as  are  remayning  in  any  Goale  or  Prison  within  that  County,  and 
to  return  y®  same  forthwith  to  this  Board.  And  so  nothing  doubting  of  your 
ready  performance  of  this  His  Majesty's  command,  we  bid  you  heartily  farewell. 
From  the  Court  at  Whitehall,  y^  29th  of  March,  1672. 

Signed 

Earle  of  Ossory  Earle  of  Carlisle  Lord  Holies 

Earle  of  Bathe  Ea  of  Lauderdail  Mr.  Sec?  Trevor 

Earle  of  Craven  Lord  Newport  Mr.  of  y*  Ordnance." 

Like  tres  dated  and  signed  ut  supra  were  sent  to  y®  Warden  of  y^  Fleet  and 
Mareshall  of  y*  King's  Bench  Prisons,  And  to  y«  IMayors  or  Justices  of  y*  seuerall 
places  hereunder  written,  viz. 

Citty  and  County  of  y®  Citty  of  Chester.    Citty  and  County  of  Lincolne. 

Citty  and  County  of  y*  Citty  of  Exon.      Citty  and  County  of  BrestoU. 

Towne  and  County  of  Poole.  Towne  and  County  of  Southton. 

Citty  and  County  of  Glocester.  Citty  and  County  of  y<^  Citty  of  Yorke.^ 

The  indefatlgfible  manner  in  which  the  Quakers  proceeded 
to  get  the  requisite  official  signatures  to  release  their  suffer- 
ing and  dying  friends,  is  beyond  all  praise.  They  wrote  to 
all  their  meetings  throughout  the  country  to  obtain  assistance, 
to  enable  them  to  meet  the  demands  for  fees,  and  even  sent 
their  female  friends  to  the  officials,  to  press  on  this  glorious 
gaol  delivery.     This  appears  from  the  following  letters : 

George  Whitehead  to  Stephen  Crisp. 

Zrd  of  1st  Month  [AprW]  1672. 
Before  thy  letter  had  come  to  hand,  I  had  drawn  up  a  paper  containing  the 
substance  of  thine,  which  Thos.  Moore  had  given  to  the  King,  together  with  a 
list  of  the  prsemunired  Friends  and  of  those  sentenced  to  banishment  &c.  ;  which 
hitherto  has  been  eifectual,  in  order  to  a  further  enquiry  about  Friends,  &c. 
How  far  the  King  and  Council  have  proceeded,  in  answer  to  the  request,  I  leave 
it  to  Wm.  Crouch  to  inform  thee.  Thy  paper  is  kept  for  a  further  occasion  if 
need  be,  if  our  end  be  not  answered  by  them.  But  we  are  encom-aged  to  hope 
well  for  divers  reasons.  I  could  not  well  send  to  write  to  thee  before,  being  much 
exercised  for  the  sufferers.  The  Council  yesterday  signed  the  letters  to  the 
Sheriffs  for  a  return  of  Friends  Commitments,  &c.  to  the  Board  ;  so  that  they  are 
like  to  be  had  with  expedition  into  the  several  Counties. 

My  very  dear  love  to  thee,  thy  wife,  R.  Crouch,  and  Friends 
In  haste,  thy  dear  brother, 
[From  the  original.]  G.  W. 

^  Extracted  from  the  Register  of  the  Privy  Council. 


Clxii  ADDENDA. 


John  Rouse  to  Margaret  Fox. 

London,  Ath  of '2nd  Month  [May'\,  1672. 
Dear  Mother, 

Last  6th  day  the  two  women  took  the  grant  out  of  the  Attorney-general's 
office,  and  he  gave  them  his  fee,  which  should  have  been  £5;  his  clerk  took  but 
20s.,  whereas  his  fee  was  40s.  Yesterday  they  went  with  it  to  the  King,  who  signed 
it  in  the  Council ;  and  Arlington  also  signed  it,  but  would  take  no  fees,  whereas  his 
fees  would  have  been  £\'l  or  £20;  neither  would  Williamson's  man  take  any 
thing,  saying,  that  if  any  religion  were  true,  it  was  ours.  To-morrow  it  is  to  pass 
the  signet,  and  on  sixth  day  the  privy  seal,  and  afterwards  the  broad  seal,  which 
may  be  done  on  any  day.  The  power  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought  mightily  in  the 
accomplishment  of  it ;  and  the  Lord  hath  bowed  their  hearts  wonderfully  in  it 
blessed  be  his  name  for  ever  I 

Thy  dear  son  in  the  Lord, 

JouN  Rouse. 

Circular  sent  to  the  Quakers  in  the  Country : 

Friends  and  Brethren, 

We  suppose  you  may  not  be  insensible  how  that  upon  sundry  applica- 
tions made  to  the  King  and  Council  in  time  past  and  more  especially  now  of  late 
for  the  release  of  our  dear  suffering  Friends,  the  Clerk  and  others,  and  others 
attending  him  and  them,  have  upon  that  account  been  put  to  a  great  deal  of 
trouble  and  pains  in  writing  of  orders  and  letters  to  the  Sheriffs  of  the  respective 
Counties  in  England  and  Wales,  and  otherwise  in  order  to  Friends  discharge,  and 
although  for  some  years  together  their  laboiu-  therein  (as  well  as  those  of  us  who 
travelled  in  that  affair  on  Friends  behalf)  was  from  time  to  time  rendered  ineffectual, 
yet  at  this  present,  there  appears  a  very  great  jirobability  of  accomplishing  our 
friends  liberty,  which  hath  and  doth  renew  an  additional  trouble  upon  them,  and 
thereby  a  further  obligation  laid  upon  us  to  requite  them  for  their  pains,  and  not 
only  them  but  also  the  Clerks  of  the  Keeper,  Attorney  General,  and  other  inferior 
officers,  who  in  drawing  up  the  Kings  grant  and  orders,  and  Friends  general 
discharge  (now  in  agitation  towards  an  accomplishment)  will  be  at  no  small 
trouble  in  writing  and  other  services  in  order  thereunto  that  we  apprehend 
Friends  cannot  be  clear  if  they  do  not  in  some  measure  answer  the  reasonable 
part  in  them  by  gi-atifying  them  for  their  pains.  Wherefore  we  saw  meet  to 
recommend  it  to  such  Friends  in  the  Counties  as  are  or  have  been  lately 
prisoners  for  the  truth's  sake  and  who  are  to  share  in  the  benefit  that  may 
accrue  by  the  King's  intended  general  discharge  that  they  will  be  pleased  to  con- 
tribute their  proportion  toward  the  defraying  of  this  great  charge  which  they  are 
desired  forthwith  to  take  into  their  consideration  accordingly  and  to  send  it  up  to 
London  with  all  convenient  expedition  unto  Gerad  Roberts,  John  Osgood,  and 
William  Welch  or  any  or  cither  of  them  for  the  purpose  aforementioned.  We 
remain  Your  dear  friends  and  brethren. 

London,  5th  of  4th  mo.  1672. 

Part  of  the  money  is  already  disbursed  on  this  behalf  by  Friends  in  London. 

Extracted   from  the  Minute  Book  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  1G72,  Devonshire 

House,  Bishopsgate. 


ADDENDA.  clxiii 

Ellis  Hookes  to  Alargaret  Fox. 

UlhofGth  month  (Sept.)  1672. 
"G.  W.  and  myself  have  been  much  employed  this  summer  in  the  business  of 
the  prisoners  liberty,  &c." — he  describes  the  process  of  getting  the  pardon  through 
the  various  offices. 

Ellis  Hookes  to  Margaret  Fox. 

1st  of8lh  mo  (A"ou.)  1672. 
The  deed  of  pardon  prepared  on  1 1  skins  about  500  names ;  hoped  that  a  letter 
from  the  principal  Secretary  of  State  "  may  be  effectual  to  discharge  them." 

Same  to  same. 

10 th  of  Idth  month  (Jan.)  167|. 
All  the  prisoners  were  Discharged  except  those  in  Durham,  Cumberland,  Lan- 
cashire, and  Monmouth  in   Wales. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  Privy  Council,  held  on  the  8th  of 
May,  1672,'^  in  presence  of  His  Majesty,  and  a  numerous 
assembly  of  his  nobles,  before  the  order  was  made  to  relieve 
the  Quakers,  it  is  recorded : 

At  the  Court  at  Whitehall 
8th  May,  1672. 
Reference  Peticon  severall  Up^j^  reading  this  day  at  the  board  the  humble  pe- 

Non-Conformisi3     Prisoners     ^.^.^^  ^^  j^j^^  ^         j^,^^^  Bunyon,  John  Dunn,  Thomas 
in    Cambridge     Castle     and  „.  tt  ,  U  t^  ■ 

Bedford  Goale.  Haynes,  Simon  Haynes,  and  George  rarr  prisoners  in 

the  Goal  of  Bedford  and  James  Rogers  prisoner  in  the 
Castle  of  Cambridge  for  being  at  Conventicles  and  Non-conformity.  It  was  ordered 
to  be  referred  to  the  Sheriff's  of  the  Counties  of  Bedford  and  Cambridge  to  examine 
the  said  Petitions  and  forthwith  certify  this  Board  whether  the  said  parties  are  de- 
tained in  prison  for  the  offences  therein  mentioned  or  for  what  other  crimes. 

At  the  Coiu-t  at  Whitehall 
ye  17th  of  May,  1672. 
The  King's  most  excellent  Mat'^. 

Lord  Arch  Bp  of  Canterbury  Earle  of  Shafisbury 

Lord  Keeper  Viscot  Fauconberg 

Duke  of  Lauderdale  Viscot  Halifax 

Duke  of  Ormonde  Lord  Newport 

Marquis  of  Worcester  Lord  Mollis 

Earle  of  Bridgewater  Lord  Clifford 

Earle  pf  Essex  Mr.  Vice  Chamberlain 

Earle  of  Anglesey  Mr.  Secretary  Trevor 

Earle  of  Bathe  Mr.  Montague 

Earle  of  Carlisle  Mr.  Chancellor  of  y«  Dutchy 

Earle  of  Craven  Master  of  y«  Ordnance 

Earle  of  Arlington  Sr  Thomas  Osborne 

'  See  p.  Ix.  Introduction. 


clxiv  ADDENDA. 

Whereas  by  order  of  the  Board  of  the  8th  Instant  the  humble  Petition  of  John 
Fenn  John  Bunyon  John  Dunn  Thomas  Haynes  Simon  Haynes  and  George  Farr 
Prisoners  in  the  Goale  of  Bedford  Convicted  upon  severall  Statutes  for  not  con- 
forming to  the  Rights  and  Ceremonyes  of  the  Church  of  England  and  for  being  at 
unlawful  Meetings,  was  Referred  to  the  Sheriffe  of  the  County  of  Bedford  who 
was  required  to  Certify  this  Board  whether  the  said  persons  were  coihitted  for  the 
Crimes  in  the  said  Petition  mentioned  and  for  no  other  which  he  haveing  accord- 
ingly done  by  his  certificate  dated  the  11th  Instant  It  was  thereupon  this  day 
ordered  by  his  Mat'e  in  Councill,  That  the  said  petition  and  Certificate  be  (and 
are  herewith)  sent  to  his  Mamies  Attorney  Generall,  who  is  authorised  and  required 
to  insert  them  into  the  Generall  Pardon  to  be  passed  for  the  Quakers.  If  he  finds 
that  they  are  within  the  compass  of  his  Mamies  pardon  according  to  the  Rule  Pre- 
scribed by  the  order  of  the  8th  of  May  about  pardon  for  the  Quakers. 

The  like  order  for  Francis  Holcroft  and  James  Rogers  for  frequenting  unlawful 
meetings  as  by  certificate  from  the  Sheriffe  of  Cambridge  of  the  10th  and  11th 
Instant. 

At  a  Court  at  Whitehall,  y^  22nd  May  1672, 

A  similar  order  was  made  for  Walter  Peim  and  twelve  others,  prisoners  in 

Wilts. 

At  a  Court  ye  7th  of  June  1672, 

On  a  Certificate  of  the  Mayor,  Sheriflf  and  Aldermen  of  Worcester,  Robert 
Smith,  a  Baker,  was  ordered  to  be  inserted  in  the  pardon. 

On  the  12th  of  June  the  petition  of  twenty-two  prisoners  was  read  and  referred 
to  the  Sheritfs,  and  on  the  26th  their  names  were  ordered  to  be  inserted  in  the 
pardon. 

On  the  14th  of  June  Thomas  More  the  Quaker  obtained  a  similar  order,  and  on 
the  26th  of  June  Thomas  Gower  Durham  and  eight  prisoners  in  Devon  and  Exeter 
were  ordered  to  be  inserted  in  the  pardon. 

Through  all  these  minutes  the  intended  patent  is  referred 
to  as  the  General  Pardon  to  the  Quakers. 

Thus  we  find  undoubted  proof  upon  the  records  of  the 
Privy  Council  of  England,  presided  over  by  the  king  in  per- 
son that  John  Bunyan's  only  crime,  as  certified  by  the  sheriff, 
and  for  which  he  was  counted  worthy  of  so  cruel  an  imprison- 
ment, was  being  present  with  others  to  worship  his  Maker 
in  simplicity  and  in  truth.  This  was  all  his  crime  ;  "  the  very 
head  and  front  of  his  offence."  Oh,  that  all  her  Majesty's 
subjects  would  constantly  follow  his  example!  then  might 
our  prisons  be  converted  into  colleges  and  schools,  and  our 
land  become  an  earthly  Paradise. 


SYNOPSIS. 


FIRST    PART. 

The  Author's  Apology,  a  poem.  Graceless  becomes  a  Chris- 
tian ;  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  his  soul ;  is  treated  by  his  family 
as  one  diseased ;  guided  by  Evangelist ;  runs  towards  the  Wicket- 
gate  ;  is  overtaken  by  Obstinate  and  Pliable ;  persuades  Pliable  to 
fly  with  him ;  fall  into  the  Slough  of  Despond ;  Pliable  returns ; 
Christian,  assisted  by  Helj),  goes  on ;  meets  Worldly- Wiseman ; 
complains  of  his  burden,  and  is  sent  out  of  his  way  to  the  liouse 
of  Legality;  terrified  at  Mount  Sinai;  Evangelist  appears  and 
puts  him  again  into  the  right  road ;  arrives  at  the  Wicket-gate ; 
is  admitted  by  Good- Will  and  sent  to  the  Interpreter's  house ;  is 
shown  a  picture;  a  dusty  room;  Passion  and  Patience;  the  fire 
of  grace ;  the  valiant  man ;  the  man  in  despair ;  the  trembler ; 
proceeds  to  the  cross;  loses  his  burden;  angels  give  him  a  par- 
don, new  cloathing,  a  mark  and  a  roll ;  tries  to  alarm'_^three  men 
asleep,  but  in  vain ;  meets  Formalist  and  Hypocrisy  ;  ascends  the 
hill  Difficulty ;  sleeps  in  the  arbour  and  drops  his  roll ;  is  awak- 
ened and  pursues  his  journey ;  meets  Mistrust  and  Timorous ; 
misses  his  roll ;  returns  in  grief  and  recovers  it  ;  goes  on  to 
the  palace  Beautiful ;  encouraged  by  Watchful  he  passes  the 
lions,  and  after  examination  is  admitted  according  to  the  laws  of 
the  house;  entertained;  sleeps  in  the  Chamber  of  Peace;  sees 
the  study ;  the  armoury ;  the  Delectable  Mountains ;  enters  the 
Valley  of  Humiliation ;  fights  with  and  overcomes  ApoUyon ; 
comes  to  the  Valley  of  the   Shadow  of  Death ;  terrified  by  the 


Clxvi  SYNOPSIS. 

spies ;  assaulted  -with  foes  wlio  care  not  for  his  sword ;  betakes 
himself  to  another  weapon,  "  All-prayer ;"  comes  out  of  the  Valley 
and  passes  the  old  giants,  Pagan  and  Pope ;  overtakes  Faithful,  a 
fellow  pilgrim;  hold  communion  with  each  other;  converse  with 
Talkative ;  Evangelist  forewarns  them  of  persecution ;  enter 
Vanity  Fair;  are  maltreated;  imprisoned;  Faithful  is  tried  and 
burned;  Clu-istian  pursues  his  journey,  and  is  joined  by  Hopeful; 
Byends  wishes  to  join  them;  the  sophistry  of  Hold-the- World 
detected ;  Demas  tempts  them  to  the  Hill  Lucre,  but  they  refuse; 
arrive  at  the  Elver  of  the  Water  of  Life ;  they  go  into  By-path 
Meadow ;  follow  Vain-Confidence ;  are  taken  by  Giant  Despair, 
and  imprisoned  in  Doubting  Castle ;  arguments  for  and  against 
suicide ;  escapes  by  the  Key  of  Promise ;  erects  a  pillar  to  caution 
others ;  arrive  at  the  Delectable  Mountains ;  entertained  by  the 
shepherds ;  shown  Mounts  Error,  Caution,  Clear ;  see  the  Celestial 
Gate ;  receive  some  cautions ;  fail  in  attempting  to  convert  Igno- 
rance ;  robbery  of  Little-Faith ;  meet  the  Flatterer,  and  are 
caught  in  his  net ;  released  by  a  Shining  One ;  meet  Atheist ; 
adventures  on  the  Enchanted  Ground ;  means  of  Avatchfulness ; 
enter  the  Land  of  Beulah ;  are  sick  Avith  love ;  approach  the 
River  of  Death ;  no  bridge ;  full  of  fear  and  dread,  but  get  safely 
over ;  received  by  angels  ;  admitted  to  glory. 


SECOND      TART. 

The  Author's  Avay  of  sending  it  forth,  a  Poem.  Sagacity  nar- 
rate? how  Christiana,  the  widow  of  Christian,  reflects  upon  her 
former  conduct,  feels  her  danger,  and  agrees  with  her  children 
to  follow  her  late  husband  in  pilgrimage ;  is  encouraged  by  a 
secret  influence  on  her  mind  that  .she  would  be  received ;  her 
neighbours  dissuade  her,  but  she  prevails  upon  one  of  them, 
Mercy,  to  go  with  her ;  she  is  reviled  by  her  acquaintance ;  get 
over  the  Slough  of  Despond,  and  are  admitted  at  the  Wicket- 
gate  and  rejoice  together.  They  are  fed,  washed,  and  sent  on 
their  way ;  the  children  eat  the  enemies'  fruit ;  are  assaulted,  but 
rescued  by  the  Reliever ;  arrive  at  the  Interpreter's  house ;  shown 


SYNOPSIS.  clxvii 

the  significant  rooms,  the  man  who  prefers  a  muck-rake  to  a 
celestial  crown,  the  spider  in  the  best-room,  the  hen  and 
chickens,  butcher  and  sheep,  the  garden,  the  field,  the  robin ; 
the  Interpreter's  proverbs ;  tree  rotten  at  heart ;  they  relate  their 
experience;  Mercy  is  sleepless  for  joy;  they  are  washed,  wliich 
enlivens  and  strengthens  them ;  sealed  and  clothed ;  Greatheart 
guards  them  to  the  house  called  Beautiful;  pass  the  sepulchre 
where  Christian  lost  his  burden ;  pardon  by  word  and  deed,  an 
important  distinction;  see  Simple,  Sloth,  and  Presumption  hanging; 
names  of  those  that  they  had  ruined ;  Hill  Difiiculty ;  By-ways, 
although  stopped  and  cautioned,  still  entered ;  rest  in  the  Arbour, 
but  are  afraid  to  sleep ;  still  suffer  by  forgetfulness ;  punishment 
of  Timorous  and  Mistrust ;  Giant  Grim  slain ;  Pilgrims  arrive 
at  the  Palace  Beautiful ;  Greatheart  returns ;  they  are  enter- 
tained for  a  month ;  the  children  catechised ;  Mr.  Brisk  makes  love 
to  Mercy ;  her  sister  Bountiful's  unhappy  marriage ;  Matthew  sick 
with  the  enemies'  fruit ;  is  healed  by  Dr.  Skill ;  his  prescriptions  ; 
instructive  questions ;  they  are  greatly  strengthened ;  Mr.  Great- 
heart  sent  to  guard  them;  enter  the  Valley  of  Humiliation,  and 
are  pleased  with  it ;  shepherd  boy's  song ;  see  the  place  where 
Christian  and  ApoUyon  fought;  come  into  the  Valley  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death ;  are  greatly  terrified ;  Giant  Maul  slain ;  find 
Old  Honest,  a  pilgrim,  sleeping ;  he  joins  them ;  story  of  Mr. 
Fearing ;  good  men  sometimes  much  in  the  dark ;  he  fears  no 
difiiculties  only  lest  he  should  deceive  himself;  case  of  Self- Will; 
a  singular  sect  in  the  author's  time ;  are  entertained  at  the  house 
of  Gains ;  pilgrims,  the  descendants  of  the  martyi's ;  Matthew  and 
Mercy  betrothed;  riddles  in  verse;  Slay-Good,  a  giant,  slain; 
Feeble- Mind  rescued;  proves  to  be  related  to  Mr.  Fearing; 
Not-Right  killed  with  a  thunder-bolt;  Matthew  and  Mercy,  and 
James  and  Phebe,  married ;  Feeble-Mind  and  Eeady-to-Halt  join 
the  Pilgrims;  profitable  converse  between  Honest  and  Greatheart; 
Vanity  Fair;  the  death  of  Faithful  had  planted  a  little  colony 
of  pilgrims  there ;  pleasant  communion ;  courage  and  an  unspotted 
life  essential  to  pilgrims ;  Samuel  and  Grace,  and  Joseph  and 
Martha,  man-ied.     The   Monster  [state   religion]    assaulted   and 


clxviii  SYNOPSIS. 

wounded  ;  believed  by  some  that  he  will  die  of  his  wounds  ;  pass  the 
place  where  Faithful  was  martyred  ;  the  silver  mine  ;  Lot's  wife  ; 
arrive  at  the  river  near  the  Delectable  Mountains;  By-path  Meadow; 
slay  Giant  Despair,  and  Diffidence,  his  wife,  and  destroy  Doubt- 
ing Castle ;  release  Mr.  Despondency  and  Miss  Much- Afraid ; 
Great- Heart  addresses  the  shepherds  in  rhyme ;  Mounts  Marvel, 
Innocent,  and  Charity ;  see  the  hole  in  the  side  of  the  Hill ;  Mercy 
longs  for  a  curious  mirror;  the  pilgrims  are  adorned;  story  of 
Turnaway;  find  Valiant-for-Truth  wounded  by  thieves;  account 
of  his  conversion ;  the  question  debated,  that  if  we  shall  know  our- 
selves, we  shall  know  others  in  the  future  state ;  arguments  used 
by  relatives  to  prevent  pilgrimage ;  the  Enchanted  ground ;  an 
arbour  called  the  Slothful's  Friend ;  in  doubt  as  to  the  way,  the 
book  or  map  is  examined  ;  Heedless  and  Bold  in  a  fatal  sleep ; 
surprised  by  a  solemn  noise,  they  are  led  to  Mr.  Standfast  in 
prayer,  he  having  been  assailed  by  Madam  Bubble ;  arrive  in  the 
Land  of  Beulali  and  are  delighted  with  celestial  visions  on  the 
borders  of  the  River  of  Death ;  Christiana  summoned,  addresses 
her  guide,  blesses  her  children  and  her  fellow  pilgrims  ;  her 
last  words ;  Ready-to-Halt  passes  the  river ;  Feeble-Mind  is  called, 
will  make  no  will,  and  goes  up  to  the  Celestial  City ;  De- 
spondency and  Much- Afraid  die  singing ;  Honest  dies  singing, 
Grace  reigns;  Valiant-for-Truth  and  Stand-Fast  joyfully  pass 
the  river,  leaving  a  solemn  message  to  relatives.  Joy  in  heaven 
on  the  arrival  of  the  pilgrims.  Clu'istiana's  children  a  blessing  to 
the  church. 


The  first  and  second  editions  have  no  Portrait  of  the 
Author  :  the  third  has  an  engraved  Portrait  by  White. 
Tins  Cut  is  copied  from  the  seventh  edition. 


THE 

Pilgrim's      P  r  o  g  r  e  f  s 

FROM 
THIS     WOULD 

TO 

That  which  is  to  come  : 

Delivered  under  the  Similitude  of  a 

D  R  E  A  M 

Wherein  is  Discovered 

The  manner  of  his  setting  out. 

His  Dangerous  Journey ;  And  safe 

Arrival  at  the  Desired  Countrey. 

/  liaue  ufed  Similitudes.     Hof.  12,  10. 

By   John     Bunyan 
%\ztxi^z^   and   <€ntreti    accorbins   to   t@rt)er. 

LONDON, 

Printed    for    Nath.    Ponder    at    the    Peacock 
in  the  Poultrey  near  Cornhil,  1678. 


THE 


AUTHOR'S    Apology 

For    his    BOOK. 


~f/f/^JIen  at  the  first  I  took  my  Pen  in  hand, 

Thus  for  to  write ;  I  did  not  understand 
That  I  at  all  should  make  a  Utile  Book 
In  such  a  mode ;  Nay,  I  had  undertook 
To  make  another,  which  when  almost  done  ; 
Before  I  was  aware,  I  ^this  begun. 

And  thus  it  ivas :  I  meriting  of  the  Way 
And  Race  of  Saints,  in  this  our  Gospel- Day, 
Fell  suddenly  into  an  Allegori/ 
About  their  Journey,  and  the  way  to  Glory, 
In  more  than  twenty  things,  which  I  set  doivn ; 
This  done,  I  twenty  more  had  in  my  Crown, 
And  they  again  began  to  multiply, 
Like  sparks  that  from  the  coals  of  fire  do  fly. 
Nay  then,  thought  I,  if  that  you  breed  so  fast, 
ni  pvt  you  by  your  selves,  lest  you  at  last 
Should  prove  ad  infinitum,  and  eat  out 
The  Book  that  I  already  am  about. 

Well,  so  I  did ;  but  yet  I  did  not  think 
To  show  to  all  the  World  my  Pen  and  Ink 
In  such  a  mode ;  I  only  thought  to  make 
I  kneiv  not  what :  nor  did  I  undertake 
Thereby  to  please  my  Neighbour  ;  no  not  I; 
I  did  it  mine  own  self  to  gratifie. 

'  thus,  2nd  edit. 


vi  The  Authors  Apology  for  his  Book. 

Neither  did  I  hut  vacant  seasons  spend 
In  this  my  Scribble ;  nor  did  I  intend 
But  to  divert  my  self  in  doing  this, 
From  worser  thoughts,  which  make  me  do  amiss. 

Thus  I  set  Pen  to  Paper  with  delight, 
And  quickly  had  my  thoughts  in  black  and  white. 
For  having  now  my  Method  by  the  end, 
Still  as  I  pulVd,  it  came  ;  and  so  I  penned 
It  down  ;  until  it  ^  came  at  last  to  be, 
For  length  and  breadth  the  bigness  which  you  see. 

Well,  when  I  had  thus  put  mine  ends  together, 
I  shew'd  them  others,  that  I  might  see  whether 
They  would  condemn  them,  or  them  justijie  : 
And  some  said,  let  them  live ;  some,  let  them  die. 
Some  said,  John,  print  it ;  others  said.  Not  so  : 
Some  said.  It  might  do  good  ;  others  said,  No. 

Now  was  I  in  a  straight,  and  did  not  see 
Which  was  the  best  thing  to  be  done  by  me : 
At  last  I  thought,  Since  you  are  thus  divided, 
I  print  it  will ;  and  so  the  case  decided. 

For,  thought  I,  Some,  I  see,  would  have  it  done. 
Though  others  in  that  Channel  do  not  run  ; 
To  prove  then  who  advised  for  the  best, 
Thv^  I  thought  fit  to  put  it  to  the  test. 

I  further  thought,  if  now  I  did  deny 
Those  that  would  have  it  thus,  to  gratifie, 
I  did  not  know  but  hinder  them  I  might 
Of  that  which  would  to  them  be  great  delight. 

For  those  -  that  were  not  for  its  coming  forth, 
I  said  to  them,  '  Offend  you  I  am  loth ; 
Yet  since  your  Brethren  pleased  with  it  be. 
Forbear  to  judge,  till  you  do  further  see. 

'  at  last  it  came;  2nd  edit.  '  '  Offend  you  I  am  loth,'  reman 

»  'which;  2nd  and  all  sub.  edits.      8th  and  sub.  edits. 


The  Authors  Apology  for  his  Book.  vii 

If  that  thou  wilt  not  read,  let  it  alone ; 
Some  love  the  meat,  some  love  to  pick  the  bone  : 
Yea,  that  I  might  them  better  ^palliate, 
I  did  too  with  them  "  thus  ^Expostulate. 

May  I  not  write  in  such  a  stile  as  this  ? 
In  such  a  method  too,  and  yet  not  miss 
^Mine  end,  thy  good  ?  why  may  it  not  be  done  ? 
Dark  Clouds  bring  Waters,  when  the  bright  bring  none 
Yea,  dark,  or  bright,  if  they  their  Silver  drops 
Cause  to  descend,  the  Earth,  by  yielding  Crops, 
Gives  praise  to  both,  and  carpeth  not  at  either, 
But  treasures  up  the  Fruit  they  yield  together  : 
Yea,  so  commixes  both,  that  in  her  Fruit 
None  can  distinguish  this  from  that,  they  suit 
Her  well,  when  hungry  :    but  if  she  be  full, 
She  spues  out  both,  and  makes  their  blessings  null. 

You  see  the  ways  the  Fisher-man  doth  take 
To  catch  the  Fish  ;    what  Engins  doth  he  make  ? 
Behold  how  he  *  ingageth  all  his  Wits, 
Also  his  Snares,  Lines,  Angles,  Hooks  and  Nets. 
Yet  Fish  there  be,  that  neither  Hook,  nor  Line, 
Nor  Snare,  nor  Net,  nor  ^Engin  can  make  thine  ; 
They  must  be  gropH  for,  and  be  tickled  too. 
Or  they  will  not  be  catcht,  what  e're  you  do. 

How  doth  the  Fowler  seek  to  catch  his  Game, 
By  divers  means,  all  which  one  cannot  name  ? 
His  Gun,  his  Nets,  his  Lime-twigs,  light,  and  bell: 
He  creeps,  he  goes,  he  stands ;  yea  who  can  tell 
Of  all  his  postures,  Yet  there's  none  of  these 
Will  make  him  master  of  what  Fowls  he  please. 


'  'palliate,'    to  the  9th,  1083;  '  'My,'  3rd  and  sub.  edits, 

altered   to    '  moderate,'    in   9th,  *  engageth,  3rd  and  sub.  edits. 

1684,  and  sub.  edits.  *  Engine,  3rd  and  sub.  edits. 

■^  '  thus,'  roraan,  3rd  edit. 


viii  The  Authors  Apology  for  his  Book. 

Yea,  he  must  Pipe,  and  Whistle  to  catch  '  this  : 
Yet  if  he  does  so,  '  that  Bird  he  will  miss. 

If  that  a  Pearl  may  in  a  Toads-head  dwell, 
And  may  be  found  too  in  an  "^  Oister-shell ; 
If  things  that  promise  nothing,  do  contain 
What  better  is  then  Gold ;   who  will  disdain, 
^{That  have  an  inkling  ofit^  there  to  loohy 
That  they  may  find  it.     Now  my  little  Booh, 
{Tho  void  of  all  those  paintings  that  may  make 
It  with  this  or  the  other  Man  to  take^ 
Is  not  without  those  things  that  do  excel 
What  do  in  brave,  but  empty  notions  dwell. 

'^fVell,  yet  lam  not  fully  satisfied, 
^  That  this  your  Book  will  stand  when  soundly  Irfd ; 

Why,  whats  the  matter  !     it  is  dark,  zvhat  tho? 
But  it  is  feigned.    What  of  that  I  tro  ? 
Some  men  by  feigning  words  as  dark  as  mine. 
Make  truth  to  spangle,  and  its  rayes  to  shine. 
^But  they  want  solidness:    Speak  man  thy  mind, 
^  They  drown  d  the  weak ;    Metaphors  make  us  blind. 

Solidity,  indeed  becomes  the  Pen 
Of  him  that  writeth  things  Divine  to  men  : 
But  must  I  needs  want  solidness,  because 
By  Metaphors  I  speak ;     ^  Was  not  Gods  Laws, 
His  Gospel- Laws,  in  ^  older  time  held  forth 
By  Types,  Shadows  and  Metaphors  ?     Yet  loth 
Will  any  sober  man  ^  be  to  find  fault 
With  them,  lest  he  be  found  for  to  assault 

"this'  and  'that,'  roman,  Srd  "  First  four  words  roman,  3rd 

and  sub.  edits.  and  sub.  edits. 

"  Oister-shell  ;  roman,  3rd  and  *  Line   roman,   3rd    and    sub. 

eub.  edits.  edits. 

'  (  ),  not  in  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  '  were,  8th  and  sub.  edits. 

Two  lines  roman,  3rd  and  '  olden,  3rd  and  sub.  edits, 

sub.  edits.                                .  a  man  below,  2nd  edit 


The  Authors  Apology  for    his  Book.  ix 

The  highest  Wisdom.     No,  he  rather  stoops, 

And  seeks  to  find  out  what  hy  pins  and  loops, 

By  Calves  ;  and  Sheep  ;    hy  Heifers,  and  hy  Rams ; 

By  Birds,  and  Herbs,  and  hy  the  hlood  of  Larnhs, 

God  speaketh  to  him.     And  happy  is  he 

That  finds  the  light,  and  grace  that  in  them  be. 

Be  not  too  forward  therefore  to  conclude. 
That  I  want  solidness,  that  I  am  rude  : 
All  things  solid  in  shew,  not  solid  be  ; 
All  things  in  parables  despise  not  we. 
Lest  things  most  hurtful  lightly  we  receive. 
And  things  that  good  are,  of  our  souls  bereave. 

My  dark  and  cloudy  words  they  do  but  hold 
The  Truth,  as  Cabinets  inclose  the  Gold. 

The  Prophets  used  much  by  Metaphors 
To  set  forth  Truth  ;   Yea,  who  so  considers 
Christ,  his  Apostles  too,  shall  plainly  see, 
That  Truths  to  this  day  in  such  Mantles  be. 

Am  I  afraid  to  say  that  holy  Writ, 
Which  for  its  Stile,  and  Phrase  puts  down  all  Wit, 
Is  every  where  so  full  of  all  these  things, 
(Dark  Figures,  Allegories,)  yet  there  springs 
From  that  same  Book  that  lustre,  and  those  rayes 
Of  light,  that  turns  our  darkest  nights  to  days. 

Come,  let  my  Carper,  to  his  Life  notv  look, 
And  find  There  darker  lines  then  in  my  Book 
He  findeth  any.     Yea,  and  let  him.  know, 
That  in  his  best  things  there  are  worse  lines  too. 

May  we  but  stand  before  impartial  men. 
To  his  poor  One,  I  ^  durst  adventure  Ten, 
That  they  will  take  my  meaning  in  these  lines 
Far  better  than  his  Lies  in  Silver  Shrines. 


^  dare,  rSid  and  sub.  edits. 


X  The  Authors  Apology  for  his  Book. 

Come,  Truth,  although  in  Swadling-clouts,  I  find 
Informs  the  Judgement,  rectifies  the  Mind, 
Pleases  the  Understanding,  makes  the  Will 
Submit ;  the  Memory  too  it  doth  fill 
With  tohat  doth  our  ^Imagination  please  ; 
Likewise,  it  tends  our  troubles  to  appease. 

Sound  words  I  know  Timothy  is  to  use  ; 
And  old  Wives  Fables  he  is  to  refuse. 
But  yet  grave  Paul,  him  no  where  "doth  forbid 
The  use  of  Parables  ;  in  which  lag  hid 
That  Gold,  those  Pearls,  and  precious  stones  that  were 
Worth  digging  for;   and  that  with  greatest  care. 

Let  me  add  one  word  more,  O  man  of  God  ! 
Art  thou  offended  ?  dost  thou  wish  I  had 
Put  forth  my  matter  in  an  other  dress. 
Or  that  I  had  in  things  been  more  express  ? 
2  Three  things  let  me  propound,  then  I  submit 
^  To  those  that  are  my  betters,  {as  is  fit.) 

1.  I  find  not  that  I  am  denied  the  use 
Of  this  my  method,  so  I  no  abuse 

Put  on  the  Words,  Things,  Readers,  or  be  rude 
In  handling  Figui^e,  or  Similitude, 
In  application  ;  but,  all  that  I  may, 
Seek  the  advance  of  Truth,  this  or  that  way  : 
Denyed,  did  I  say  ?     Nay,  I  have  leave, 
{Example  too,  and  that  from  them  that  have 
God  better  pleased  by  their  tcords  or  ways. 
Then  any  man  that  breatheth  now  a  days,) 
Thus  to  express  my  mind,  thus  to  declare 
Things  unto  thee,  that  excellentest  are. 

2.  I  find  that  men  (as  high  as  Trees)  will  write 
Dialugue-wise  ;  yet  no  man  doth  them  slight 

*  Imaginations,    3rd   and    sub.  "  ^  These  two  lines  transposed 

edits,  in  the  »th  and  sul>.  edits. 

"  (lid,  yrd  and  sub  edits. 


The  Authors  Apologj'  for  his  Book.  xi 

For  writing  so  :  Indeed  if  they  abuse 

Truth,  cursed  be  they,  and,  the  craft  they  use 

To  that  intent ;  But  yet  let  Truth  be  free 

To  make  her  Salleys  upon  Thee,  and  Me, 

Which  way  it  pleases  God.     For  who  knows  how, 

Better  than  he  that  taught  us  first  to  Plow, 

To  guide  our  Mind  and  Pens  for  his  Design  ? 

And  he  makes  base  things  usher  in  Divine. 

3.  I  find  that  holy  Writ  in  many  places, 
Hath  semblance  with  this  method,  where  the  cases 
^  Doth  call  for  one  thing,  to  set  forth  another  : 
Use  it  I  may  then,  and  yet  nothing  smother 
Truths  golden  Beams ;  Nay,  by  this  method  may 
Make  it  cast  forth  its  rayes  as  light  as  day. 

And  now,  before  1  do  put  uj)  my  Pen, 
^Fle  sheiv  the  profit  of  my  Book,  and  then 
Commit  both  thee,  and  it  unto  that  hand         \_stand. 
That  pulls  the  strong  down,  and  makes  weak   ones 

This  Book  it  chaidketh  out  before  thine  eyes 
The  man  that  seeks  the  everlasting  Prize : 
It  sheivs  you  whence  he  comes,  whither  he  goes, 
What  he  leaves  undone ;  also  ivhat  he  does : 
It  also  shews  you  how  he  runs,  and  runs 
Till  he  unto  the  Gate  of  Glory  comes. 

It  shows  too,  who  sets  out  for  life  amain. 
As  if  the  lasting  Croivn  they  woidd  attain  : 
Here  also  you  may  see  the  reason  why 
They  loose  their  labour,  and  like  Fools  do  die. 

This  Book  will  make  a  Travailer  of  thee, 
If  by  its  Counsel  thou  tvilt  ruled  be ; 
It  will  direct  thee  to  the  Holij  Land, 
If  thou  wilt  its  Directions  understand : 

^  Do,  .3rcl  and  sub.  edits.  '  I'l,  or  I'll,  7th  and  sub.  edit?. 


? 


xii  The  Authors  Apology  for  his  Book. 

Yea,  it  will  make  the  sloathfnl,  active  be  ; 
The  Blind  also,  delightful  things  to  see. 

Art  thou  for  something  rare,  and  profitable  ? 
Wouldest  thou  see  a  Truth  within  a  Fable  ? 
Art  thou  forgetful?  woiddest  thoti  remember 
From  New-year's-day  to  the  last  of  December  ? 
Then  read  mi/ fancies,  they  will  stick  like  Burs, 
And  mat/  be  to  the  Helpless,  Comforters. 

This  Book  is  writ  in  such  a  Dialect, 
As  may  the  minds  of  listless  men  affect  : 
It  seems  a  Novelty,  and  yet  contains 
Nothing  but  sound,  and  honest  Gospel-strains. 

Would'st  thou  divert  thy  self  from  Melancholly 
Would' St  thou  be  pleasant,  yet  be  far  from  folly  ? 
WouWst  thou  read  Riddles,  Sf  their  Explanation  ? 
Or  else  be  '  droivnded  in  thy  Contemplation  ? 
Dost  thou  love  picking  meat  ?     Or  wouldst  thou  see 
A  man  Vth  Clouds,  and  hear  him  speak  to  thee  ? 
WoukVsl  thou  be  in  a  Dream,  and  yet  not  sleep  ? 
Or  wouldest  thou  in  a  moment  laugh,  and  weep  ? 
Wouldest  thou  "loose  thy  self,  and  catch  no  harm? 
And  find  thy  self  again  without  a  charm  ? 
Woidd'st  read  thy  self,  and  read  thou  know'st  not  what 
And  yet  know  whether  thou  art  blest  or  not. 
By  reading  the  same  lines  ?     O  then  come  hither. 
And  lay  my  Book,  thy  Head,  and  Heart  together. 


John  Bunyan. 


'  drowned,  2nd  and  sub.  edits:  *  Iosg,  3id  and  sub.  edits, 


THE 


Pilgrims  Progress 


111  the  similitude  of  a 


D     R     E     A 


A 


S  I  walk'd  throuQ-h  the  wilderness  of  this 
world,  I  lighted  on  a  certain  place,  where 
was  *a  Denn;  And  I  laid  me  down  in  that 
place  to  sleep  :  And  as  I  slept  I  dreamed 


'Ilis  Out- 
cry.' 


a   Dream.      I   dreamed,  and  behold  I  saw  «  ^«^^*  Luke  14!  33. 
cloathed  with  ^Raggs,  standing  in  a  certain  place,  with  Habl^g.t. 
his  face  from  his  own  House,  a  Book  in  his  hand,  and^"^'^^-^^- 
a  great  burden  upon  his  back.     I  looked,  and  saw 
him  open  the  Book,  and  Read   therein ;   and  as  he 
Read,  he  wept  and  trembled  :  and  not  being  able 
longer  to  contain,  he  brake  out  with  a  lamentable 
cry  ;  saying,  what  shall  I  do  ? 

t  '  In  this  plight  therefore  he  went  home,  and '^'^'^  ^  •^'" ' 
'  *  refrained  himself  as  long  as  he  could,  that  his 
'  Wife  and  Children  should  not  perceive  his  dis- 
*  tress  ,•    but  he  could  not  be  silent   long,   because 

'  Not  "inserted  in  the  1st  or  2nd  t  This  paragraph,  as  marked 

edit.,  but  found  in  the  7th  and  with  inverted  commas,  was  first 

subt.  ones.  inserted   in  the  second    edition, 

*  '  Rags,'  all  the  sub.  edits.  and  continued  in  all  subsequent 

^  First  inserted  in  oth  and  subt.  ones, 

edits.,  but  all  in  error  quote  '  Acts  *  '  Restrained,'  in  2nd  edit. 
2.  27.' 


Cf)e  ^ailgrims;  progresis;* 


that  his  trouble  increased  :  wherefore  at  length 
he  brake  his  mind  to  his  Wife  and  Children  ;  and 
thus  he  began  to  talk  to  them,  0  my  dear  Wife, 
^said  he,  and  you  the  Children  of  my  bowels,  I  your 
dear  friend,  am  in  my  self  undone,  by  reason  of  a 
burden  that  lieth  hard  upon  me  :  moreover,  I  am  for 
certain  informed,  that  this  our  City  will  be  burned 
ivith  fire  from  Heaven,  in  which  fearful  overthrow, 
both  myself,  with  thee,  my  Wife,  and  you  my  sweet 
babes, shall  miserably  come  to  mine;  except  (the  which, 
yet  I  see  not)  some  way  of  escape  can  be  found, 
whereby  we  may  be  delivered.  At  this  his  ^  Rela- 
tions were  sore  amazed  ;  not  for  that  they  be- 
lieved, that  what  he  '  had'^  said  to  them  was  true, 
but  because  they  thought,  that  some  frenzy  dis- 
temper had  got  into  his  head  :  therefore,  it  draw- 
ing towards  night,  and  they  hoping  that  sleep 
might  settle  his  brains,  with  all  hast  they  got  him 
to  bed ;  but  the  night  was  as  troublesome  to  him 
as  the  day :  wherefore  instead  of  sleeping,  he 
spent  it  in  sighs  and  tears.  So  when  the  morning 
was  come,  they  would  know  how  he  did  ;  ^he  told 
them,  ^  worse  and  ^  worse.  He  also  set  to  talking 
to  them  again,  but  they  began  to  be  hardened  ; 
they  also  thought  to  drive  away  his  distemper  by 
harsh  and  surly  carriages  to  him  :  sometimes  they 
would  deride,  sometimes  they  would  chide,  and 
sometimes  they  would  quite  neglect  him  :  where- 
fore he  began  to  retire  himself  to  his  Chamber  to 
pray  for,  and  pity  them  ;  and  also  to  condole  his 
own  misery  :  he  would  also  walk  solitarily  in  the 
Fields,  sometimes  reading,  and  sometimes  praying  : 
and  thus  for  some  days  he  spent  his  time. 


*  '  saith  he;  7th,  8th,  and  !)th  ; 
168.^. 

'  FirstinsertedinOthcdit.,! <;84. 
'  Inserted  in  8th  edit. 

*  '  Revelations  they  were,'  7th 
edit. 


^  '  said  he,'  previous  to  the  0th, 
1  f)84. 

•  '  And  he  told,"  7th  edit. 

^  Italics,  !)th,  1  fi84,  and  snb. 

*  Inserted  in  7th  edit. 


Cf)f  ^Silgiimd  t^iciffitsid* 


Christian  no  sooner  leaves  the  World  but  meets 
Evangelist,  who  lovingly  him  greets 
With  tidings  of  another :  and  doth  show 
Him  how  to  mount  to  that  from  this  below. 


This  cut  was  introduced  after  the  Ktth  edition.     It  is  copied  from 
the  1  nth  edition,  1 692. 


4  €i)t  ^aUffnmsi  ^aro^ress. 

'  Now,  I  saw  upon  a  time,  when  he  was  walking 
'  in  the  Fields,  that  he  was  (as  he  was  wont)  read- 
'  ing  in  his  Book,  and  greatly  distressed  in  his 
'  mind ;  and  as  he  read,  he  burst  out,  as  he  had 

;Act.siG.3o,  *  done  before,  crying,  What  ahall  I  do  to  be 
'  saved  f ' 

I  saw  also  that  he  looked  "^  this  way,  and  "  that 
way,  as  if  he  would  run  ;  yet  he  stood  still,  because 
as  1  perceived  he  could  not  tell  which  way  to  go, 
I  looked  then,  and  saw  a  Man  named  Evangelist 
coming  to  him, and  asked.  Wherefore  dost  thou  cry? 
He  answered,  Sir,  I  perceive,  by  the  Book  in  my 

"^Heb.a  27.  hand,  that  I  am  Condemned  to  die,  and  *  after  that 
to  come  to  Judgement ;   and  I  find  that  I  am  not 

»^jobiG.  21.  *  ^j]jjj-jg    |.Q    jJQ    ^]^g    f^,.g|-^    jjQP   *  able    to   do   the 

*^Ezek.  22.  second. 

Then  ^  said  Evangelist^  Why  not  willing  to  die  ? 
since  this  life  is  attended  with  so  many  evils  ?  The 
Man  answered.  Because  I  fear  that  this  burden 
that     is     upon    my    back,     will    sinck    me    lower 

» isa  30. 33.  then  the  Grave;  and  I  shall  fall  into  *  Tophet. 
And  Sir,  if  I  be  not  fit  to  go  to  Prison,  I  am  not  fit 
'^  (I  am  sure)  to  go  to  Judgement,  and  from  thence 
to  Execution  ;  and  tlie  thoughts  of  these  things 
make  me  cry. 

Then  ^said  Evangelist,  If  this  be  th}'  condition,  why 
standest  thou  still  ?     He  answered.  Because  I  know 

'^^^j^/^^j^^^^Miot  whither   to   go.     Then   he  gave  him    <i  Pnrch- 

tll'^''  ■"'■''  'tni^^it  Roll,  and  there  was  written  within,  *  Fly  from 

*  Mat.  3  7.    iJi^Q  wrath  to  come. 

The  Man  therefore  Read  it,  and  looking  upon 
Evangelist  very  carefully  ;  said,  ^\'llither  must  I  fly  l 
Then  said  Evangelist,  pointing  with  his  finger  over  a 


*  First  inserted  in  8th  edit.  *  '  saith,'  7th  and  i)th,  1(583. 

'  ' thk'  and  ^ that''  italics,  7th  "  'I  am  sure,'  omitted  in  2nd 

and  sub.  and  sub. 

^  All  the  editions  ryfer  to  '  Job  ''  '  saith,'  7th  and  sub. 

2G.  21,  22.;'  evidently  a  typ.  error.  "  First  inserted  in  the  2nd  edit 


very  wide  Field,  Do  you  see  yonder  *  Wicket-gate-^  *  Mat  7. 
The  Man  said.  No.     Then  said  the  other,  Do  you 
see  yonder*  shining-  light  ?     He  said,  I  think  I  do.  *Psai.  119. 
Then  said  Evangelist,  Keep  that  light  in  your  eye,  2Pet.i.i9.'' 
and  2'o  up  directly  thereto,  *  so  shalt  thou  see  the  *c'/»-M<<t-</ie 
ijrate;  at  which  when  thou  knockest,  it  shall  be  tola  camwt  be 

f  1  I  111  found  icuh- 

thee  what  thou  shalt  do.  outtheword. 

So  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  the  Man  began  to 
run  ;  now  he  had  not  run  far  from  his  own  door, 
but  his  Wife  and  Children  perceiving  it,  began  to 
cry  after  him  to  return :  *  but  the  Man  put  his  l^""^^  ^^ 
fingers  in  his  Ears,  and  ran  on  crying,  Life,  Life, 
Eternal  Life  :  so  he  looked  not  behind  him,  *  but  »Gen.i9.i7. 
fled  towards  the  middle  of  the  Plain. 

The  Neighbours  also  came  out  to  *  see  him  run,  Theytimtfly 
and  as  he  ran,   some   mocked,  others   threatned  ;  v^roiAto 

1  .      -        „  -   .  «;  TVT  come  are  A 

and  some  cried  alter  him  to  return:     JNow  ?im.oi\^  Gazing  stock 

1  1  1  •  1  1  1  ■,        ^  to  the  world. 

those  that  did  so,  there  were  two  that  were  resolved  *jer.  20.10. 
to  fetch  him  back  by  force  :  *  The  name  of  the  one  *  obstinate 
was  Obstinate,  and  the  name  of  the  other  Pliable.  foLw  him. 
Now  by  this  time  the  Man  was  got  a  good  distance 
from  them  ;  But  however  they  were  resolved  to 
pursue  him  ;  which  they  did,  and  in  ^^  a'  little  time 
they  over-took  him.  Then  said  the  Man,  Neigh- 
bours, Wherefore  are  you  come?  They  said,  To 
perswade  you  to  go  back  with  us  ;  but  he  said,  That 
can  by  no  means  be  :  You  dwell,  '^  said  he,  in  the 
City  of  Destruction  (the  place  also  where  I  was 
born,)  I  see  it  to  be  so  ;  and  dying  there,  sooner  or 
later,  you  will  sink  lower  then  the  Grave,  into  a 
place  that  burns  with  Fire  and  Brimstone ;  Be 
content  good  Neighbours,  and  go  along  with 
me. 

*  What !    said  Obstinate,  and  leave  our  Friends,  *  obstinate. 
and  our  comforts  behind  us ! 


*  All  the  early  editions  refer  to  °  '  And,'  2nd  and  sub. 

'  V.  29,'  but  it  should  be  19  :  there  *  '  a  little,'  2nd  and  sub. 

are  only  21  verses  in  the  chapter.  ^  '  (said  he),'  7th  and  sub. 

C 


18. 


16, 


6  €f)t  pilgn'msf  progress* 

Christian.  *  Ycs,  SBi'd  ChHstian,  (for  that  was  his  name)  be- 
2  Cor.  4.  cause  that  ^all  '  ivhich  you  shall  forsake,'  is  not* 
worthy  to  be  compared  with  a  little  of  that  that 
I  am  seeking  to  enjoy,  and  if  you  will  go  along 
with  me,  ^'  and  hold  it,'  you  shall  fare  as  I  my  self; 
3 Luke  15.  for  there  where  I  go,  is  *  enough,  and  to  spare; 
Come  away,  and  prove  my  words. 

Obst.  What  are  the  things  you  seek,  since  you 
leave  *  all  the  World  to  find  them  f 
"1  Pet.  1.4.  Chr.  I  seek  an  *  Inheritance^  incorruptible,  un- 
defiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away;  and  it  is  laid 
Heb.  11.  up  in  Heaven,  and  *^ fast  there,  to  be  bestowed  at 
the  time  appointed,  on  them  that  diligently  seek  it. 
'  ^  Read  it  so,  if  you  will,  in  my  Book.' 

Ob.  Tush,  said  Obstinate,  away  with  your  Book ; 
will  you  (JO  back  with  us,  or  no  ? 

Ch.  No,  not  I,  ''  said  the  other ;  because  I  have 
Luk.9.e2.  laid  my  hand  to  the  *  Plow. 

Ob.  Come  then.  Neighbour  Pliable,  let  us  turn 
again,  and  go  home  without  him ;  There  is  a 
Company  of  these  Crazd-headed  Coixombs,  that 
when  they  take  a  fancy  by  the  end,  are  wiser  in 
their  own  eyes  then  seven  men  that  can  render  a 
Reason. 

Pli.  Then  said  Pliable,  Don't  revile  ;  if  what  the 
good  Christian  says  is  true,  the  things  he  looks  after, 
are  better  than  ours  :  my  heart  inclines  to  go  with 
my  Neighbour. 

Obst.  What!  more  Fools  still f  be  ruled  by  me 
and  go  back;  who  knows  whither  such  a  brain-sick 
fellow  will  lead  you?  Go  back,  go  back,  and  be 
wise. 

^  '  which  you  shall  forsake^  7th  and  10th,  is  in  roman,  and  all  in 

and  sub.  edits.  italics. 

"  '  and  hold  it^  not  in  the  first  "  Safe  there,  2nd  and  sub. 

edition.  *  '  Read  it  so,  if  you  will,  in  my 

*  Luke  15.  17,  9th  and  sub.  Book,'   added   in   the    2nd    and 

*  All,    roman,   7th  -and    sub.  sub. 

This    sentence    in    9th,     1684,  ^  '  Saith,' 7th  and  sub. 


Ch.  ^'  Nay,  but  do  thou  'f  come  with  ^me  Neigh-  ♦;j''jjf^'if° 
hour  Pliable ;  there  are  such  things  to  be  had  which  ^^*fbi"s"^'"" 
I  spoke  of,  and  many  more  Glories  besides.     If  you  ^<'"^" 
believe  not  me,  read  here  in  this  Book  ;  and  for  the 
truth  of   what    is   exprest    therein,   behold    all    is 
confirmed  by  the  f  blood  of  him  that  made  it.  t^^eb.  13. 

Pli.    Well  Neighbour  Obstinate,  {'said  Pliable)  I'^f'^^^-^J; 
begin  to  come  to  a  point ;  I  intend  to  go  along  with  f-  ^ 
this  qood  man,  and  to  cast  in  my  lot  with  him:    But^cont^ted 

1   /^  •  7  77  1  .        J       to  go  with 

my  good  Companion,  do  you  know  the  way  to  this  de-  christian.- 
sired  place  f 

Ch.  I  am  directed  by  a  man  whose  name  is  Evan- 
gelist, to  speed  me  to  a  little  Gate  that  is  before  us, 
where  we  shall  receive  ''  instruction  about  the  way. 

Pli.  Come  then  good  Neighbour,  let  us  be  going. 
®  Then  they  went  both  together. 

Obst.  And  I  will  go  back  to  my  place,  said  Obsti- " '  obstinate 
nate.     I   will  be  no  Companion    of  such  miss-led  back.- 
fantastical  Fellows, 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  when  Obstinate  was 
^^  gon  back.  Christian   and   Pliable  went  *  talking  '^.^^^'c^Jis 
over  the   Plain ;  and  thus   they   began   their  dis-  pi^^ie'' 
course, 

Christ.  Come  Neighbour  Pliable,  how  do  you 
do  ?  I  am  glad  you  are  perswaded  to  go  along 
with  me  ;  ^^and  had  even  Obstiiiate  himself,  but  felt 
what  I  have  felt  of  the  Powers  and  Terrours  of  what 
is  yet  unseen,  he  would  not  thus  lightly  have  given 
us  the  ^^back. 

Pliable.  Come  Neighbour  Christian,  siiice  there  is 
none  but  us  two  here,  tell  me  now  further,  what  the 

^  '  Nay,  but  do  thou,'  first  ap-  ''  '  instructions,'  3rd  and  sub. 

peared  in  the  8th  edit.  *  All  Italics,  2nd  and  sub. 

*  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  '  7th  and  sub.  edits. 

*  '  thy,'  3rd  and  sub.  ^° '  gone,'  2nd  and  sub. 

*  Eighth  and  sub.  edits.,  omit-  ^* '  and '  omitted   in  2nd    and 
ting  the  reference  to  Heb.  1 3. 20. 2 1 .  sub. 

'  '  saith,'  Srd  and  sub.  " '  bag,'  in  2nd  edit. ;  back,  3rd 

*  '  consented,'  7th  edit. ;  '  con-      and  sub. 
tented,'  sub.  edits. 

c2 


8  mn  lailtyn'mes  |3rciC!:rfs;5; 

things  are,  and  how  to  be  erijoyed,  whither  we  are 

goinfi  f 
\u?x^fun.         ^^^'  I    can   better   conceive    of    them    with    my 
nnoMahu:^  Mind,  thcn  speak  of  them  with  my  Tongue:   But 

yet  since  you  are  desirous  to  know,  I  will  read  of 

them  in  my  Book. 

Pli.  And  do  you  think  that  the  words  of  your  Book 

are  certainly  true  f 
I  Tit  1. 2.        Q^^    Yes  verily,  for  it  was  made   by  him  that  f 

cannot  lye. 

Plia.    Well  said ;  what  things  are  they  ? 
johnia'27;      ^^^'  There  is  an  *  endless  Kingdom    to  be  In- 
28.29.       habited,  and  everlasting  life  to  be  given  us;  that 

we  may  Inhabit  that  Kingdom  for  ever. 
Pli.    Well  said  ;  and  ivhat  else  f 
+j2Tim.^4.8.      Chr .  Thcrc  are  Crowns  of  Glory  to  be  given  us  ;t 
Matlh.  13.    and  Garments  that  will  make  us  shine  like  the  Sun 

in  the  Firmament  of  Heaven. 

Plia.    This  is  '^excellent ;  And  what  else  f 
Rev^V^Te^'       ^^^-  There  shall  be  no  more  crying,    *nor  sor- 
^7.  chap.2i.  j.Q^  .  Pqj.  }^g  ^}j^^  jg  owner  of  the  ^places,  will  wipe 

all  tears  from  our  eyes. 

Pli.  And  what  company  shall  we  have  there  f 
\l^^\'^;a       Cf^-    There   we   shall    be   with  Seraphims*   and 

1  Thes.  4.16,   ^^-  7  •  y-i  i  ' 

Y^.  *iiey.7.  Cheruoms,  Creatures  that  will  dazle  your  eyes  to 
look  on  them :  There  also  you  shall  meet  with 
thousands,  and  ten  thousands  that  have  gone  before 
us  to  that  place  ;  none  of  them  are  hurtful,  but 
loving,  and  holy  :  every  one  walking  in  the  sight  of 
God  ;   and  standing  in  his  presence  with  acceptance 

t  Rev.  4. 4.  f^j.  ^y^y  .  jj^  ^  -word,  tJiere  we  shall  see  the  f  Elders 
with  their  Golden  Crowns  :   There  we  shall  see  the 

h^it'iX  Ho^y  *  Virgins  with  their  Golden  Harps  :  there  we 

Moh.  12. 2.1  shall  see   ''Men  that    by    the   World   were  cut  in 

First  introduced   in  tlie  9th  ^  '  place,'  2nd  and  sub. 

edit,  1  (584.  *  Altered  in  3rd  to  '  lie  v.  7.  .57;' 

^  'This  is  very  pleasant,'    8th  Btli  and  '.)th  to  '  Rev.  5.  57;'  and 

and  sub.  sub.,  to '  .'>.  1 1 ,'  which  last  is  rio;ht. 


»>  2  Cor.  5.  2, 


pieces,  ^  burned  in  flames,  eaten  of  Beasts,  ^  drown- 
ded  in  the  Seas,  for  the  love  that  they  bare  to  the 
Lord  of  the  place  ;  all  well,  and  cloathed  with 
^  Immortality,  as  with  a  Garment.  3,^5^ 

Pli.  The  hearing  of  this  is  enough  to  ravish  ones 
heart ;  but  are  these  things  to  be  enjoyed  f  How 
shall  we  get  to  be  Sharers  ^hereof  f 

Ch.  The  Lord,  the  Governour  of  that  Countrey, 
hath  Recorded  that  "m  this  Book  :  The  substance  of  l^^a.  H- 12. 

J  oh.  /•  oj' 

which  is,  If  we  be  truly  willino;  to  have  it,  he  will  S'^'^p- ^-  f  • 
bestow  it  upon  us  freely.  chap.22.17. 

Pli.  Well,  my  good  Companion,  glad  am  I  to  hear 
of  these  things  :   Come  on,  let  iis  mend  our  pace. 

Ch.  I  cannot  go  so  fast  as  I  would,  by  reason  of 
this  burden  that  is  upon  my  back. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  just  as  they  had 
ended  this  talk,  they  drew  near  to  a  very  Miry ' ^M^^^]'-^^'' 
Slough,  that  was  in  the  midst  of  the  Plain,  and  they  p°"^-" 
being  heedless,  did  both  fall  suddenly  into  the  bogg. 
The  name  of  the  Slow  was  Dispond.  Here  there- 
fore they  wallowed  for  a  time,  being  grieviously 
bedaubed  with  the  dirt ;  and  Christian,  because  of 
the  burden  that  was  on  his  back,  began  to  sink  in 
the  Mire. 

Pli.  Then  said  Pliable,  Ah,  Neighbour  Christian, 
where  are  you  note  f 

Ch.  Truly,  said  Christian,  I  do  not  know. 

Pli.  At  that  Pliable  began  to  be  offended  ;  and 
angerly  said  to  his  Fellow,  Is  this  the  happiness  you 
have  told  me  all  this  while  off  if  we  have  such  ill  speed 
at  our  first  setting  out,  what  may  we  expect,  HwiM  this, 
and  our  Journeys  end  f  ^May  I  get  out  again  with  my  ■»/«  i^  not 
life,  you  shall  possess  the  brave  Country  alone  for  me.  piMbL 
And  with  that  he  gave  a  desperate  struggle  or  two, 
and  got  out  of  the  Mire,  on  that  side  of  the  Slough 


burnt,'  2nd  and  sub.  *  Introduced  in  the  8th  edit, 

drowned,'  3rd  and  sub.  and  sub. 

thereof,'  8th  and  sub. 


•Chris 

trouble 


10  C!)e  ^pilffnms;  progress;* 

which  was  next  to  his  own  House  :  So  away  he  went, 
and  Christian  saw  him  no  more. 

Wherefore  Christian  was  left  to  tumble  in  the 
Slough  of  ^  Dispondency  alone,  but  still  he  endea- 
voured.to  struggle  to  that  side  of  the  Slough,  that 
wTekt  was  still  further  ®from  his  own  House,  and  next  to  the 
fw-Zrfrom  Wicket-gate  ;  the  which  he  did,  but  could  not  get 
^Ho^e!"      out,  because  of  the  burden  that  was  upon  his  back. 
But  I  beheld  in  my  Dream,  that  a  Man  came  to 
him,  whose  name  was  Help,  and  asked  him,  What 
he  did  there  f 

Chr.  Sir,  said  Christian,  I  was  ^directed,  this 
way,  by  a  man  called  Evangelist ;  who  directed  me 
also  to  yonder  Gate,  that  I  might  escape  the  wrath 
to  come :  And  as  I  was  going  thither,  I  fell  in  here. 
'JueJ'^°'  Help.  But  why  did  you  7iot^  look  for  Hhe 
steps  f 

Ch.  Fear  followed  me  so  hard,  that  I  fled  the 

next  way,  and  fell  in. 

umt^v^''      Help.  ' '  Then,  said  he,'  *  Give  me  thy  hand  !    So 

►-P6.40. 2.    ]jg  gave  him  his  hand,  and  ^  he  drew  him  out,  and 

set  him  upon  sound  ground,  and  bid  him  go  on  his 

way. 

Then  I  stepped  to  him  that  pluckt  him  out ;  and 
said  ;  Sir,  Wherefore  (since  over  this  place,  is  the 
way  from  the  City  of  Destruction,  to  yonder  Gate) 
is  it,  that  this  Plat  is  not  mended,  that  poor  Tra- 
vellers might  go  thither  with  more  security  ?  And 
he  said  unto  me,  this  Miry  slough  is  such  a  place 
ma'kZthe  as  cauuot  be  mended  :  It  is  the  descent  whither  the 
i'^^Mrf/  scum  and  filth  that  attends  conviction  for  sin,  doth 
continually  run,  and  therefore  it  is  called  the  Slough 
of  Dispond :  for  still  as  the  sinner  is  awakened 
about  his  lost  condition,  there  ariseth  in  his  soul 
many  fears,  and  doubts,  and  discouraging  appre- 

*  '  Deapond,^  2nd  and  sub.  *  '  Then,  said  he,'  first  inserted 
'  '  bid  go,'  2nd  and  sub.                  in  the  2nd  edit. 

*  '  not  yov,'  2nd  and  sub-  *  First  inserted  in  the  2nd  edit. 


hensions,  which  all  of  them  get  together,  and  settle 
in  this  place  :  And  this  is  the  reason  of  the  badness 
of  this  ground. 

It  is  not  the  ''pleasure  of  the  King,  that  this '■^sa. 35. 3, 4. 
place  should  remain  so  bad ;  his  Labourers  also, 
have  by  the  direction  of  His  Majesties  Surveyors, 
been  for  above  this  sixteen  hundred  years,  im- 
ploy'd  about  this  patch  of  ground,  if  perhaps  it 
might  have  been  mended  :  yea,  and  to  my  know- 
ledge, ^saith  he,  Here  hath  been  swallowed  up,  at 
least  Twenty  thousand  Cart  Loads  ;  Yea  Millions,  of 
wholesom  Instructions,  that  have  at  all  seasons  been 
brought  from  all  places  of  the  Kings  Dominions  ; 
(and  they  that  can  tell,  say,  they  are  the  best  Mate- 
rials to  make  good  ground  of  the  place  ;)  If  so  be  it 
might  have  been  mended,  but  it  is  the  Slough  of 
Dispond  still ;  and  so  will  be,  when  they  have  done 
what  they  can. 

True,  there  are  b}^  the  direction  of  the  Law-giver, 
certain   g-ood   and  substantial  'Steps,  placed   even ' ^« ■f':''; 

C7  1      '     1  Tiiiscs  of  Jot- 

through  the  very  midst  of  this  Slouqh ;  but  at  such  »"•«»««"«  <"^ 
time   as  this  place  doth  much    spue   out  its  nlth,  Webyfauh 
as  it  doth  against  change  or  weather,  these  steps  are 
hardly  seen  ;  or  if  they  be.   Men  through  the  dizi- 
ness  of  their  heads,  step  besides  ;  and  then  they  are 
bemired  to   purpose,  notwithstanding  the  steps  be 
there  ;  but  the  ground  is  ^  good  when  they  are  once  'i  sa.  12. 
got  in  at  the  Gate. 

Now   I  saw  in   my  Dream,   that  by  this   iime  * '  piyajbu 
Pliable  was   got   home   to  his    House  ^again  :   So  ildZTisited 
his  Neighbours  came  to   visit  him  ;   and   some   of tor^/^  "^''" 


them  called  him  wise  Man  for  coming  back;   and  taimneZ%' 
some  called  him   Fool,  for  hazarding  himself  with  lefu^u'*^- 
Christian  ;  others  again  did  mock  at  his  Cowardli- 
ness ;  saying,  Surely  since  you  began  to  venture,  I 

'  '  said,'  2nd  and  sub.  '  '  again,'  omitted  in  the  9th, 

^  First   inserted    in    the    2nd       ]  084,  and  sub.  edits. 
edit.  *  Third  and  sub.  edits. 


12 


ClK  pilg:rimss  ^rogfitss;* 


»  Mr.  World- 
ly-Wiseman 
meetx  with 
Christian. 


Talk  betu-ixt 
Afn  Worldly- 
Wiseman 
and  Chris- 
tian. 


would  not  have  been  so  base  to  have  given  out 
for  a  few  difficulties.  So  Pliable  sat  sneaking 
among  them.  But  at  last  he  got  more  confidence, 
and  then  they  all  turned  their  *  tales,  and  began  to 
deride  poor  Christian  behind  his  back. 

And  thus  much  concerning  Pliable. 

^'  Now  as  Christian  was  walking  ^solitary  by 
'  himself,  he  espied  one  afar  off  come  crossing  over 
'  the  field  *  to  meet  him  ;  and  their  hap  was  to 
'  meet  ^  just  as  they  were  crossing  the  way  of  each 
'  other.^  The  Gentleman's  name  ^ '  that  met  him,' 
'  was,  Mr,  Worldly  -Wiseman,  he  dwelt  in  the  Town 
'  of  Carnal-Policy,  a  very  great  Town,    and  also 

*  hard  by,  from  whence  ^  Christian  came.  This 
'  man  then  meeting  with  ^  Christian,  and  having 
'  someinckling  of  him,  for  ^Christians  setting  forth 
'  from  the  City  of  Destruction,  was  much  noised 
'  abroad,  not  only  in  the  Town,  where  he  dwelt, 
'  but  also  it  began  to  be  the   Town-idW  in  some 

*  other  places.  Master  Worldly-  Wiseman  therefore, 
'  having  some  guess  of  him,  by  beholding  his  labo- 
'  rious  going,  by  observing  his  sighs  and-  groans, 

*  and  the  like,  began  thus  to  enter  into  some  talk 
'  w^ith  Christian. 

'  World.  How  now,  good  fellow,  whither  away  after 
'  this  burdened  manner  ? 

'  Chr.  A  burdened  manner  indeed,  as  ever  I 
'  think  poor  creature  had.  And  whereas  you  ask 
'  me.  Whither  away,  I  tell  you,  Sir,  I  am  going  to 
'  yonder  Wicket-gate  before  me  ;  for  there,  as  I  am 
'  informed,  I  shall  be  put  into  a  way  to  be  rid  of 
'  my  heavy  burden. 

'  Worl.  Hast  thou  a  Wife  and  Children  f 


^  '  tailes;  7th  edit. 

'  All  this  interview  with  World- 
ly-Wiscnian,  and  its  consequences, 
as  marked  with  inverted  conmias, 
first  appeared  in  the  2nd  edit. 

'  '  solitarily,'  7th  and  sub. 


*  to  *  Italics,  3rd  and  sub. 

5  Inserted  in  the  8th  and  sub. 
edits. 

"  'Christian,'  Italics  after  7th 
edit. 


€i)t  pilgrims!  ^arogitsssi*  13 

*  Chr.  Yes,  but  I  am  so  laden  with  this  burden, 
'  that  I  cannot  take  that  pleasure  in  them  as  for- 
'  merly  :   rnethinks,  I  am  as  if  *I  had  none.  29.^  ^°'^''' 

'  Worl.  Wilt  thou  hearken  to  me,  if  I  give  thee 
'  counsel'/ 

'  Chr.  If  it  be  good,  I  will ;  for  I  stand  in  need 
'  of  good  counsel. 

'  Worl.  I  would  advise  thee  then,  that  thou  with  «// ">/';.worid- 
'  speed  get  thy  self  7id  of  thy  burden ;  for  thou  wilt  "i^in-  ^'^un- 
'  7iever  be  settled  in  thy  mind  till  then  :  nor  canst  thou  "an.' 
'  enjoy  the  benefits  of  the  blessing  which  God  hath  be- 
'  stowed  upon  thee  till  then. 

'  Chr.  That  is  that  which  I  seek  for,  even  to  be 
'  rid  of  this  heavy  burden  ;  but  get  it  oif  my  self  I 
'  cannot :  nor  is  there  a  man  in  our  Country  that 
'  can  take  it  off  my  shoulders  ;  therefore  am  I  going 
'  this  way,  as  I  told  you,  that  I  may  be  rid  of  my 
'  burden. 

'  Worl.  Who  bid  thee  go  this  way  to  be  rid  of  thy 
*  burden  ? 

'  Chr.  A  man  that  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  very 
'  great  and  honorable  person ;  his  name,  as  I  re- 
'  member  is  Evangelist. 

'  Worl.   *  ^I  beshrow  him  for  his  counsel ;  there  ^'-^  worfdiy- 
'  not  a  more  dangerous  and  troublesome  way  i?i   the  ^J^i^^^a 
'  world,  than  is  that  unto  which  he  hath  directed  thee ;  cJTi;f'f ^ 
'  and  that  thou  shall  find  if  thou  wilt  be  ruled  by  his 
'  counsel :    Thou  hast  met  with  somethinq  (as  I  per- 
'  ceive)  already  ;  for  I  see  the  dirt  of  the  Slough  of 
'  Dispond  is  upon  thee ;  but  that  Slough  is  the  begin- 
'  ning  of  the  sorrows  that  do  attend  those  that  go  on 
'  in  that  way :  hear  me,  I  am  older  than  thou !  thou 
'  art  like  to  meet  with   in  the  way  which  thou  goest^ 
'  Wear-isomness,  Painfulness,  Hunger,  Perils,  Naked- 
'  ness,  Sword,  Lions,   Dragons,  Darkness,   and  in  a 
'  word,  death,  and  what  not?     These  things  are  cer- 
'  tainly  true,  having  been  confirmed  by  many  testimo- 
'  Inserted  in  the  3rd  and  sub. 


14  Cf)e  ^^ilgiims!  ^rogiT^sf. 

'  nies.  And  why  should  a  man  so  carelesly  cast  aivay 
'  himself,  by  givmg  ^  head  to  a  strdnger. 

'  Chr.  Why,  Sir,  this  burden  upon  m}^  back  is 

'  more  terrible  to  me  than  are  all  these  things  which 

'of^h/kMrt  '  y^"  have  mentioned  :  *  nay,  methinks  I  care  not 

chrfsuans-  '  wliat  I  mcct  witli  in  the  way,  so  be  I  can  also  meet 

'  with  deliverance  from  my  burden. 

'  Work  How  earnest  thou  by  ^thy  burden  at  first  f 
'  Chr.  By  reading  this  Book  in  my  hand. 
wisTman'^'      '  Worl.  I  thoii()ht  SO  ',  mid  it  is  happened  unto  thee 
y°(^jv/m'^'  '  (i^  to  other  iveaJc  men,  ivho  meddling  icith  things  too 
ti^s'in^^' '  high  for  them,  do  suddenly  fall  into  thy  distractions ; 
mfe"%"''   '  'ivhich  distractions  do  not  only  unman  men,  (as  thine 
'  I  perceive  has  done  thee)  but  they  run  them  upon 
'  desperate  ventures,  to  obtain  they  know  not  ichaf. 
'  Chr.   I  know  what  I  would   obtain  ;  it  is  ease 

*  for  my  heavy  burden. 

X'tvoridi  '  Work  But  wliy  imlt  thou  seek  for  ease  this  way, 
^i^'mi^re  '  ^^^^'^^9  ^0  many  dangers  attend  it,  especially,  since 
^'^^straight; '  (Jiadst  thou  but  patience  to  hear  me,^  I  coidd  direct 

*  thee  to  the  obtaining  of  what  thou  desirest,  icithout 
'  the  dangers  that  thou  in  this  ivay  icilt  run  thy  self 
'  into :  yea,  and  the  remedy  is  at  hand.  Besides,  I 
'  will  add,  that  instead  of  those  dangers,  thou  shalt 

*  meet  ivith  much  safety ,  friendship,  and  content. 

'  Chr.  Pray,  Sir  open  this  secret  to  me. 

'  Worl.    ^Nhy  in  yonder  Village,    (the  Village   is 

*  named  Morality)  there  dwells  a  Gentlemcm,  whose 
'  7ianie  is  Legalit}^,  a  very  judicious  man  (and  a  man 
'  of  a  very  good  name)  that  has  skill  to  help  men  oj^ 
'  icith  such  burdens  as  thine  are,  from  their  shoidders : 
'  yea,  to  my  knowledge  he  hath  done  a  great  deal  of 
''good  this  way:  Ai,  and  besides,  he  hath  skill  to 
'  cure  those  that  are  somewhat  crazed  in  their  wits 
'  with  their  burdens.  To  him,  as  I  said,  thou  may  est 
'  go,  and  be  helped  presently.     His  house  is  not  quite 

*  '  heed,'  7th  and  sub.  *  In  Hrd  and  sub. 

'  '  the  burden,"  7th  edit,  and  sub. 


a  mile  from  this  place  ;  and  if  he  should  not  be  at 
home  himself  he  hath  a  pretty  younxj  man  to  his  Son, 
whose  name  is  Civility,  that  can  do  it  (to  speak  on) 
as  well  as  the  old  Gentleman  himself :  There,  I  say, 
thou  mayest  he  eased  of  thy  burden,  and  if  thou  art 
not  minded  to  go  bach  to  thy  former  habitation,  as 
indeed  I  would  not  icish  thee,  thou  mayest  send  for 
thy  Wife  and  Children  to  thee  to  this  Village,  ichere 
there  are  houses  now  stand  empty,  one  of  which  thou 
mayest  have  at  reasonable  rates  :  Provision  is  there 
also  cheap  and  good,  and  that  which  ivill  make  thy 
life  the  more  happy,  is,  to  be  sure  there  thou  shall 
live  by  honest  neighbors,  in  credit  and  good  fashion. 

*  Now  was  Christian  somewhat  at   a  stand,  but V'^^'^Vf '*" 

-"  t^nared  by 

presently  he  concluded  ;  if  this  be  true  which  this  ^7,^°'^?^^ 
Gentleman  hath  said,  my  wisest  course  is  to  take^'OT<is'' 
his  advice,  and  with  that  he  thus  farther  spoke. 
'  Chr.   Sir,  which  is  my  way  to  this  honest  man's 

*  house  ? 

*  Worl.  Do  you  see  yonder  ^  high  hillf  sL^"""* 
'  Chr.  Yes,  very  well. 

*  "Worl.  By  that  Hill  you  must  go,  and  the  first 

*  house  you  come  at  is  his. 

'  So  Christian  turned  out  of  his  way  to  go  to  Mr. 

*  Legality's  house  for  help  :  but  behold,  when  he 

*  was  got  now  hard  by  the  Hill,  it  seemed  so  high, 

*  and  also  that   side  of  it  that  was   next  the  way 
'  side,  did  hang  so  much  over,  that  Christian  was 

'  *  afraid   to  venture  further,  lest  the  Hill  should '*  <^^r^''''"* 

'  oiraid  that 

'  fall  on  his  head  :  wherefore  there  he  stood  still,  -^^("'f  sinai 

"OMW  'all  on 

*  and  he  ^wot  not  what  to  do.    Also  his  burden,  now,^^^''''-'^- 

*  seemed  heavier  to  him,  than  while  he  was  in  his 

'  way.     There  came  also  '{'flashes  of  fire  out  of  the+g^^^'^-i^ 
'  Hill,  that  made  *  Christian  afraid  that  he  should  *  ^«""- 1^- 
'  be  burned  :  here  therefore  he  swet,  and  did  quake 
'  for  f  fear.     And  now  he  began  to  be  sorry  that +Heb.i2.ii.s 
'  he  had  taken  M.v.  Worldly -Wisemans  counsel;  and 

'  In  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  '  All  the  edits,  refer  to  Heb.  12. 

^  'and  wotted,' 3rd  and  sub.edits.      v.  11  :  it  should  be  12.  v.  21. 


16 


CI)e  pagrim^  i3rog:resis!. 


'  t  Evange- 
list rcasoiis 
afresh  v:itk 
Christian. 


••Evange-  '  ^ith  tliat  liG  saw  *  Emngellst  comiug  to  meet  him; 
chiistiaV    '  at  the  sight  also  of  whom  he  began  to  blush  for 

uiuUr  Mount  c?  ?•  i  i 

Sinai,  a/«z  '  shamc.  So  Evangelist  drew  nearer,  and  nearer, 
vml/upon  '  and  coming  up  to  him,  he  looked  upon  him  with 
'  a  severe  and  dreadful  countenance  :  and  thus  be- 
'  gan  to  reason  with  Christian. 

'Evan,  t  What  doest  thou  here?  'Christian,'^ 
'  said  he  ?  at  which  word  ^  Christian  knew  not  what 
'  to  answer :  wherefore,  at  present  he  stood  speech- 
*  less  before  him.  Then  said  Evangelist  farther.  Art 
'  not  thou  the  man  that  I  found  crying  without  the 
'  walls  of  the  City  of  Destruction  ? 

',  Chr.  Yes,  dear  Sir,  I  am  the  man. 

'  Evan.  Did  not  I  direct  thee  the  way  to  the  little 
'  Wicket-gate  f 

'  Chr.  Yes,  dear  Sir,  said  Christian. 

'  Evan.  How  is  it  then  that  thou  art  so  quickly 
'  turned  aside,  for  thou  art  noiv  out  of  the  ivayf 

'  Chr.  I  met  with  a  Gentleman,  so  soon  as  I  had 
'  got  over  the  Slough  of  Dispond,  who  perswaded 
'  me,  that  I  might  in  the  Village  before  me,  find  a 
'  man  that  could  take  off  my  burden. 

'  Evan.  What  teas  hef 

'  Chr.  He  looked  like  a  Gentleman,  and  talked 
'  much  to  me,  and  got  me  at  last  to  yield  ;  so  I 
'  came  hither  :  but  when  I  beheld  this  Hill,  and 
'  how  it  hangs  over  the  way,  I  suddenly  made  a 
'  stand,  lest  it  should  fall  on  my  head. 

'  Evan.  What  said  that  Gentleman  to  you  ? 

'  Chr.  Why,  he  asked  me  whither  I  was  going, 
'  and  I  told  him. 

'  Evan.  And  what  said  he  then  f 

'  Chr.  He  asked  me  if  I  had  a  Family,  and 
'  1  told  him :  but,  said  I,  I  am  so  loaden  with  the 
'  burden  that  is  on  my  back,  that  I  cannot  take 
'  pleasure  in  them  as  formerly. 

'  Evan.  And  ivhat  said  he  then  f 


'  Introduced   in   the  t5tH  and 
sub.  edits. 


words,'  ;kd  and  sub. 


Heb.   13. 


Cfte  pilsnms!  procyresisi*  17 

*  Chr.  He  bid  me  with  speed  get  rid  of  my  bur- 
den, and  I  told  him,  'twas  ease  that  I  sought: 
And  said  I,  I  am  therefore  going  to  yonder  Gate 
to  receive  further  direction  how  I  may  get  to  the 
place  of  deliverance.  So  he  said  that  he  would 
shew  me  a  better  way,  and  short,  not  so  attended 
with  difficulties,  as  the  wa}^,  Sir,  that  you  set  me 
^'in':  which  way,  said  he,  will  direct  you  to  a 
Gentleman^s  house  that  hath  skill  to  take  off  these 
burdens  :  So  I  believed  him,  and  turned  out  of 
^  that  way  into  ^  this,  if  haply  I  might  be  soon 
eased  of  my  burden  :  but  when  I  came  to  this 
place,  and  beheld  things  as  they  are,  I  stopped  for 
fear,  (as  I  said)  of  danger :  but  I  now  know  not 
what  to  do. 

*  Evan.   Then  (said  Evangelist)  stand  still  a  little, 
that  I  may  shew  thee  the  words  of  God.     So  he 
stood  trembling.     Theii  (said  Evangelist)   *  See  3* 
that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh  ;  for  if  they 
escaped  not  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  Earth, 

*  much  more  shall  not  we  escape,  if  we  turn  away '  *  Evang. 
from   him   that   speaketh   from  Heaven.     He   *«zc?  christian  0/ 
moreover,  ''"  Now  the  just  shall  live  by  faith  ;  out  if'^l^^'"'^-  ^^■ 
any  man  draws  back,  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure 
in  him.     He  also  did  thus  apply  them.  Thou  art  the 
man  that  art  running  into  this  misery,  thou  hast  be- 
gan to  reject  the  counsel  of  the  most  high,  and  to 
draw  back  thy  Joot  from   the  way  of  peace,   even 
almost  to  the  hazarding  of  thy  perdition. 

'  Then  Christian  fell   down  at  his  foot  as  dead, 
crying.  Wo  is  me,  for  I  am  undone :   at  the  sight 
of  which  Evangelist  caught  him  by  the  right  hand, 
saying,  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemies  shall  *J^««''j;y- 
be   forgiven  unto  men;  be  not  faithless,  but   h^-'Markz, 

^  'in,'  added  in  the  Oth,  1684,  ^  Added  in  the  .3rd  and  sub. 

and  sub.  *  Omitted  in  the  9th  and  10th 

^  'that,'    'this,'     italics,    9th,  edits. 
1(584,  and  sub. 


m)t  pilgrimsi  proffresis;. 


When  Christians  unto  carnal  men  give  ear, 
Out  of  their  way  tliey  go,  and  pay  for't  dear, 
For  master  Worldly-  Wiseman  can  but  shew 
A  Saint  the  way  to  Bondage  and  to  woe. 


Copied  from  the  edition  of  1692. 


nJohn4.5. 


lieving;  then  did  Christian  again  a  little  revive, 
and  stood  up  trembling,  as  at  first,  before 
Evangelist. 
'  Then  Evangelist  proceeded,  saying,  Give  more 
earnest  heed  to  the  things  that  I  shall  tell  thee  of.  I 
will  now  shew  thee  who  it  was  that  deluded  thee, 
and  who  'twas  also  to  whom  he  sent  thee.  The  ^^^^^ 
man  that  met  thee,  is  one  Worldlii-  Wise?}ian,  and  wiseman 

•     11  •!  ni  1*1  1        described  by 

rightly  IS  he  so  called  ;  partly,  *  because  he  ?iYj"ohi" 
savoureth  only  the  Doctrine  of  this  world  (there- 
fore he  always  goes  to  the  Town  of  '^Mortality  to 
Church)  and  partly  f  because  he  loveth  that 'toai.  6.12.' 
Doctrine  best,  for  it  saveth  him  from  the  Cross ; 
and  because  he  is  of  this  carnal  temper,  therefore 
he  seeketh  to  ^  prevent  my  ways,  though  right. 
Now  there  are  three  things  in  this  mans  counsel  'c^lT&- 
that  thou  must  utterly  abhor  :  \fS^' 

'  \.  His  turning  thee  out  of  the  way.  wiseman." 

'  2.  His  labouring  to  render  the  Cross  odious  to 
'  thee. 

'  3.  And   his  setting  thy  feet  in  that  way  that 
'  leadeth  unto  the  administration  of  Death. 

*  First,  Thou  must  abhor  his  turning  thee  out  of 
'  the  way  ;  yea,  and  thine  own  consenting  thereto  : 
'  because  this  is  to  reject  the  counsel  of  God,  for 
'  the  sake  of  the  counsel  of  a  Worldlij -Wiseman. 
'  The  Lord  says,  *  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  2!^''''*  ^^' 
'  gate,  the  gate  to  which  I  ^  sent  thee;  for  strait  is  Matt. 7. 13, 
'  the  gate  that  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  he  that 
''find  it.  From  this  little  wicket-gate,  and  from 
'  the  way  thereto  hath  this  wicked  man  turned 
'  thee,  to  the  bringing  of  thee  almost  to  destruc- 
'  tion;.hate  therefore  his  turning  thee  out  of  the 
'  way,  and  abhor  thyself  for  hearkening  to  him. 

^  Inserted    in    3rd    and    sub.  '  Misprinted  in  2nd,  GoL,  and 

edits.  many  sub.,  Col. 

"^  Altered  to  Morality  in   8th  *  8tli    and  sub.  edits. :    '  per- 

and  sub.  edits.  vert.' 

*  '  send,'  3rd  and  sub.  edits. 


20 


^f)(  ijilffnms;  ^3rocj:rf£{s!* 


hate     his     setting     of 

that     leadeth     to     the 

And     for    this    tliou 


'  Secondly,  Thou  must  abhor  his  labouring  to 
render  the  Cross  odious  unto  thee  ;  for  thou  art 
to  *  prefer  it  before  the  treasures  ^  of  Egypt :  be- 
sides, the  King  of  Glory  hath  told  thee,  t  that  he 
that  will  save  his  life,  shall  lose  it :  and  *  he  that 
comes  after  him,  and  hates  not  his  father  and 
mother,  and  icife,  and  children,  and  brctJiren,  and 
sisters  ;  yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  he  my 
Disciple.  I  say  therefore,  for  a  man  to  labour  to 
perswade  thee,  that  that  shall  be  thy  death,  with- 
out which  the  truth  hath  said,  thou  canst  not 
have  eternal  life,  This  Doctrine  thou  must 
abhor. 

'  Thirdly,  Thou  must 
thy  feet  in  the  way 
ministration  of  death, 
must  consider  to  whom  he  sent  thee,  and  also 
how  unable  that  person  was  to  deliver  thee  from 
thy  burden. 

*  He  to  whom  thou  was  sent  for  ease  being  by 
name  Legality,  is  the  Son  of  the  *  Bond-woman 
which  now  is,  and  is  in  bondage  with  her  children, 
and  is  in  a  mystery  this  Mount  Sinai,  which 
thou  hast  feared  will  fall  on  thy  head.  Now  if 
she  with  her  children  are  in  bondage,  how  canst 
thou  expect  by  them  to  be  made  free  ?  This 
Legality  therefore  is  not  able  to  set  thee  free  from 
thy  burden.  No  man  was  as  yet  ever  rid  of  his  bur- 
den by  him,  no,  nor  ever  is  like  to  be  :  ye  cannot 
be  justified  by  the  Works  of  the  Law  ;  for  by  the 
deeds  of  the  Law  no  man  living  can  be  rid  of 
his  burden  :  therefore  Mr.  Worldly -Wison an 
is  an  alien,  and  Mr.  Legality  '^is'  a  cheat :  and  for 
his  ''own  Civility,  notwithstanding  his  simpering 
looks,  he  is  but  an  hypocrite,  and  cannot  help 
thee.     Believe  me,   there  is  nothing  in  all   this 

*  '  in   Egypt,'    3rd    p,nd    sub.  *  '  is,'  inserted  in  the  bth  und 

edits.  sub.  edits. 

'  In  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  his  Son,'  in  all  sub.  edits, 


noise,  that  thou  hast  lieard  of  this  sottisli  man\  but 
a  design  to  beguile  thee  of  thy  Salvation,  by  turn- 
ing thee  from  the  way  in  which  I  had  set  thee. 
After  this  Evangelist  called  aloud  to  the  Heavens 
for  confirmation  of  what  he  had  said  ;  and  with 
that  there  came  words  and  fire  out  of  the  Moun- 
tain under  which  poor  Christian  stood,  that  made 
the  hair  of  his  flesh  stand  ^'  up.'  The  words 
were  thus  pronounced,  As  many  as  are  of  the  ^'^^■^•y^'^ 
works  of  the  Law,  are  under  the  curse ;  for  it  is 
written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all 
thi^igs  which  are  written  in  the  Book  of  the  Law  to 
do  thejn. 

'  Now  Christian  looked  for  nothing  but  death, 
and  began  to  cry  out  lamentably,  even  cursing 
the  time  in  which  he  met  with  Mr.  Worldly -Wise- 
man, still  calling  himself  a  thousand  fools  for 
hearkening  to  his  counsel  :  he  also  was  greatly 
ashamed  to  think  that  this  Gentlemans  arguments, 
flowing  only  from  the  flesh,  should  have  that  pre- 
valency  with  him  ^  *  as  to  cause  him  '  to  forsake 
the  right  way.  This  done,  he  applied  himself 
again  to  Evangelist  in  words  and  sense  as  follows. 

'  Chr.  Sir,  what   think  you  ?     is   there   hopes  ?  '^^'j-"^\ 
may  I  Jiow  go  back,  and  go  up  to  the  Wicket-gate,^;j^/^'^^J^\^ 
shall  I  not  be   abandoned  for  this,  and  sent  back 
from  thence  ashamed.     I  am  sorry  I  have  heark- 
ened to  this  man's  counsel,  but  may  my  sin  be 
forgiven. 

'  Evang.  Then  said  Evangelist  to  him,  Thy  sin  is 
very  great,  for  by   it  thou   hast   committed   two 
evils  ;  thou  hast  forsaken  the  way  that  is  good,  to 
tread  in  forbidden  paths:   yet  will  the  man  ^of '.^*^''^"^^ 
the  Gate  receive  thee,  for  he  has  good  will  for'"'"' 

^  'this     sottish     men,'      3rd;  edits,  is  to  Solom.  3.  10  ;  but  cor- 

'  these  sottish  men,'  sub.  edits.  rected  in  sub.  edits. 

*  '  up,'  inserted  in  8th  and  sub.  *  Inserted  after  the  2nd  edit, 
edits.  *  '  at  the  Gate '  sub.  edits. 

*  Reference  iu  the  2nd  and  8rd  '  Added  after  the  2nd  edit. 


22  Ci)f  ^ailtjnmg  progresij>» 

'  men  ;  only,  said  he,  take  heed  that  thou  turn  not 
'  aside  again,  lest  thou  perish  from  the  way  when 

"Psalm 2.  '  liis  wpath  is  kindled  but  a  little.  Then  did 
'  Christian  address  himself  to  go  back,  and  Evan- 
'  (jelisty  after  he  had  ^  kej3t  him,  gave  him  one 
'  smile,  and  bid  him  God  speed :  so  he  went  on 
'  with  hast,  neither  spake  he  to  any  man  by  the 
'  way  ;  nor  if  any  ^  man  asked  him,  would  he 
'  vouchsafe  them  an  answer.  He  went  like  one 
*  that  was  all  the  while  treading  on  forbidden 
'  ground,  and  could  by  no  means  think  himself 
'  safe,  till  again  he  was  got  into  the  way  which  he 
'left  to  follow  Mr.  Worldly -Wisemans  counsel.' 
^By  this  time,  Christian  was  got  up  to  the  Gate. 
Now  over  the  Gate  there  was  Written,  Knock  and 

'Matt. 7. 8  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you}  He  knocked  therefore, 
more  then  once  or  twice,  saying, 

May  I  now  enter  here  f  will  he  within 
Open  to  sm'vy  me,  though  I  have  ^bin 
An  undeserinnfi  Rebel  f  then  shall  I 
Not  fail  to  sing  his  lasting  praise  on  high. 

At  last  there  came  a  grave  Person  to  the  Gate, 
named  Good-will,  who  asked  Who  ivas  there  f  and 
whence  he  came  f  and  what  he  would  have  f 

Ch.  Here  is  a  poor  burdened  sinner.  I  come 
from  the  City  of  Destruction,  but  am  going  to 
Mount  Zion,  that  I  may  be  delivered  from  the 
wrath  to  come  ;  I  would  therefore.  Sir,  since  I  am 
informed  that  by  this  Gate  is  the  way  thither, 
know  if  you  are  willing  to  let  me  in. 
'-TheQau        Good  Will."'  I  am  willinq  with  all  my  heart,  said 

imll  be  (ipeti-  -k         r~\ 

feanedt^  hc  ;  and  with  that  lie  opened  the  Gate. 

■/ters. 

*  Added  after  the  2nd  edit.  process  of  time  Christian  got  up 

*  '  kist,'  sub.  edits.  to  the  Gate.'     An  alteration  ren- 

*  '  man,'  omitted  from  the  9th,  dered  needful  by  this  long  addi- 
1684.  and  sub.  edits.    ^  tion  to  the  text  in  the  2ud  edit. 

*  2nd  and   sub.   edits.,    '  so  in  "  '  been,'  2nd  and  sul).  edits. 


€f)t  l^il^vm^  progresig* 


23 


He  thai  will  enter  in  must  first  without 
Stand  knocking  at  the  Gate,  nor  need  he  doubt 
That  is  a  knocker  but  to  enter  in  ; 
For  God  can  love  him,  and  forgive  his  sin. 


Copied  from  the  edition  of  1 692. 


1)  2 


'  Christian 

Entred  the 


24  CJ)f  pilcjiimsi  ^Jrogitsis; 

So,  when  Christicm  was   ^stepping  in,  tlie  other 

gave  him  a  pull ;  Then  said  Christian, \\'\\?Lt  means 

that  ?     The  other  told  him,  A  little  distance   from 

-Satan  en-   this  Gate,  there  is  erected  a  strono-  Castle,  of  which" 

vies  those  t-»77      7'i/-^  •  P  i  ill  i 

that  enter     Beelzebuo  IS  the  Captain  :  irom  tiience  both  he,  and 

the  straight  •ii-i  a  ii 

<?«<«■  them  that  are  with  him  shoot  Arrows  at  those  that 
come  up  to  this  Gate  ;  if  happily  they  may  dye  be- 
fore they  can  enter  in.  Then  said  Christian,  I  re- 
andlrJi-"" i'^y^^  and  tremble.  So  when  he  was  got  in,  the 
uiny:^       ]\/[an  of    the  Gate  asked  him,  Who  directed  him 

thither  ? 
'w  Talk  he-        Ch.   \\  Evanqelist  bid  me  come  hither  and  knock, 
««./ Chris-   (as  I  did  ;)  And  he  said,  that  you,  hir,  would  tell 

tian.'2  \  '^  ^  J         '  ' 

me  what  I  must  do. 

Good  Will.  An  open  Door  is  set  before  thee,  and 
no  man  can  shut  it. 

Ch.  Now  I  begin  to  reap  the  benefits  of  my 
^  hazzards. 

Good  Will.  But  hoiv  is  it  that  you  came  alone  f 

Ch.  Because  none  of  my  Neighbours  saw  their 
danger,  as  I  saw  mine. 

Good  Will.  Did  any  of  them  know  of  your 
coming  f 

Ch.  Yes,  my  Wife  and  Children  saw  me  at  the 
first,  and  called  after  me  to  turn  again  :  Also  some 
of  my  Neighbours  stood  crying,  and  calling  after 
me  to  return  ;  but  I  put  my  Fingers  in  ^mine  Ears, 
and  so  came  on  my  way. 

Good  Will.  But  did  none  of  them  follow  you,  to 
perswade  you  to  (jo  hack  f 

Ch.  Yes,  botli,  Obstinate,  and  Pliable :  But  when 
they  saw  that  they  could  not  prevail.  Obstinate  went 
railing  back  ;  but  Pliable  came  with  me  a  little 
way. 

Good  Will.  But  why  did  he  tiot  come  through  f 

Ch.  We  indeed    came    both    together,   until    we 

'  '  slipping;;  7tli  edit.  '  '  hazards,'  2nd  and  snl). 

'  Introduced  after  the  2nd  edit.  *  'my,'  2nd  and  sub. 


came  at  the   ^Slovv  oi  Dispond,  into  the  which,  we 
also  suddenly  fell.     And  then  was  my  Neighbour 
Pliable    discouraged,    and    would    not    adventure 
further."      Wherefore   getting   out   again,   on   that  °^^f ^;\™«^ 
side  next  to  his  own  House  ;  he  told   me,  1  should  '^^ts^'I^M 
possess  the  brave  Countrey  alone   for   him  :   So  he  "XgTmiw 
went  his  way,  and  I  came  mine.    He  after  Obstinate,  "'""'' 
and  I  to  this  Gate. 

Good  Will.  Then  said  Good  Will,  Alass  poor  Man, 
is  the  Cselestial  Glory  of  so  small  esteem  with  him, 
that  he  counteth  it  not  worth  running  the  hazards 
of  a  few  difficulties  to  obtain  it. 

^ '  Chr.  Truly,   said    Christian,    I    have  said  the 
'  truth  of  Pliable,  and  if  I  should  also  say  '  ^all'  the 
'  truth  of  my  self,  it  will  appear  there  is  *no  better- ^"^'^j;^|«'^'^ 
'  ment  'twixt  him  and  mv  self.     'Tis  true,  he  wQnt^ffWon 

J  '  _  the  man  at 

'  back  to  his  own  house,  but  I  also  turned  aside  to^'''^'*' 
'  go  in  the  way  of  death,  being  perswaded  thereto 
'by   the  carnal   ^arguments   of  one   Mr.  Worldly- 
'  Wiseman. 

'  Good  Will.  Oh,  did  he  light  upon  you  !  what, 
'  he  would  have  had  you  a  sought  for  ease  at  the 
'  hands  of  Mr.  Legality ;  they  are  both  of  them  a 
'  very  cheat :   but  did  you  take  his  counsel  ? 

'  Chr.  Yes,  as  far  as  I  durst,  1  went  to^  find  out 
'  ''^  Mi:'  Legality,  until  I  thought  that  the  Mountain 
'  that  stands  by  his  house,  would  have  fallen  upon 
'  my  head  :  wherefore  there  I  was  forced  to  stop. 

'  Good  Will.  That  Mountain  has  been  the  death 
'  of  many,  and  will  be  the  death  of  many  more : 
•  'tis  well  you  escaped  being  by  it  dasht  in  pieces. 

'  Chr.  Why,  truly  I  do  not  know  what  had  be- 

'  Slough,  2nd  and  sub.  ^  Misprinted   '  agi-eement  '   in 

'  So  far  as  the  text  is  marked      3rd,  7th*  8th,  and  9th,  1683. 

by  an    inverted    comma,  it  was  ^  By    a    typ.    error,   the   2nd 

tirst    introduced    into    the  2nd      edit,   is  printed,  '  I  went  not  to 

edit.  find.' 

^  Inserted      after      the  2nd  "' Mr.' omitted  in  the  2nd  edit.. 

eflit.  but  inserted  subsequently. 


26  C!)e  ^ilffinmsi  progi^sisi* 

'  come  of  me  tliere,  had  not  Evanfjelist  haj^pily  met 
•  me  again  as  I  was  musing  in  the  midst  of  my 
'  diwips  :  but  'twas  Gods  mercj^that  he  came  to 
'  me  again,  for  else  I  had  never  come  hither.  But 
'  now  1  am  come,  such  a  one  as  I  am,  more  fit  in- 
'  deed  for  death  by  that  Mountain,  than  thus  to 
'  stand  talking  with  my  Lord  :  But  ^O,  what  a 
'  favour  is  this  to  me,  that  yet  I  am  admitted  en- 
'  trance  here. 
'^^ft'^         '  Good   Will.    We   make  no    objections    ao;ainst 

comforted  ^  ^  Jo 

again.'-'     '  jjny,   notwithstanding    all    that  they   have   done 

•  johnG.s?.  i  ijefore   they  come  hither,   *they  in  no  ^wise  are 

'  cast    out,^    Well/  good  Christian,  come    a  little 
way  with  me,  and  I  will  teach  thee  about  the  way 

•  Christ. rfi-  thou  must  Q'o.     Look  before  thee;  dost  thou   see 

rectec  yet  on  ^  n   p  rr\t  •  i  x 

hisu-ay.'i  this  narrow  way?  That  is  the  way  thou  must  go.  It 
was  cast  up  by  the  Patriarchs,  Prophets,  Christ, 
'  and '  "*  his  Apostles  ;  and  it  is  as  straight  as  a 
Rule  can  make  it :  This  is  the  way  thou  must 
go. 
afndd'^loi-  ^h*  ^^^  s^^^  Christian,  ^ Is  there  no  turnings 
inyhisuay.'  ^^^  whidiugs  1)1)  wMch  a  Stranger  may  loose  the 
way? 

Goodwill.  Yes,  there  are  many  ways  ^Butt  down 

upon  this  ;  and  they  are  Crooked,  and  Wide :   But 

thus  thou   may'st  distinguish    the   right  from   the 

'•"  Mat.  7.  wrong,  That^^  only  being  *  straight  and  narrow. 

« Christian        Thcu  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  II  That  Christian  asked 

hurdm.      him  further,  If  he  could  not  help  him  off  with   his 

burden  that  was  upon  his  back  ;  For  as  yet  he  had 


'  '  Oh  ! '  sub.  edits.  '  '  and '    inserted  in  2nd  and 

*  Inserted  after  the  2nd  edit.  sub.  edits. 

^  '  ways,'  7th  edit.  ^  '  are. '  after  the  3rd  edit. 

*  Quotation  in  itaUcs  after  the  '  '  BUTT '    in    3rd   and    sub. 
7th  edit.  edits. 

*  'and  therefore,  good  Chris-  '"  'The   right,'   after  the   2nd 
tian^   2nd  and  sub.  edits.  edit. 

*  'THAT' in  capitals,  2nd  and  "  Fii-st  inserted    in    the    2nd 
Bub.  edits.  edit. 


P  There  is  no 
deliverance 


€\)t  liiTgnmsi  progress*  27 

not  got  rid  thereof,  nor  could  he  by  any  means  get 
it  off  without  help. 

He  told  him ;  As  to  ^  the  burden,  be  content  to 
bear  it,  untill  thou  comest  to  the  place  of  ''Deliver 
ance ;  for  there  it  will  fall  from  thy  back  it  self.       ■''guMmd 

Then  Christian  began  to  gird   up  his  loins,   and  ^^'^'^^{y 
to  address  himself  to  his  Journey.     So  the  other '^^^^^''J? ''■ 
told  him,  that  by  that  he  was  gone  some  distance  ^''"**- 
from  the  Gate,  he  would  come  at  the  House  of  the 
Interpreter  ;  at  whose  Door  he  should  knock  ;  and 
he  would  shew  him  excellent  things.     Then  Chris- 
tian took  his  leave  of  his  Friend,   and  he  again  bid 
him,  God  speed. 

Then  he  went  on,  till  he  came  at  the  House  of 
the  "^Interpreter,  where  he  knocked  over  and  over :« christian 

1  1  T^  111     TiTi  comes  to  the 

at  last  one  came  to  the  Door,  and  asked  Who  luas  Homeofae 

,  _  Interpreter. 

there  f 

Ch.  Sir,  here  is  a  ^  Travailer,  who  was  bid  by 
an  acquaintance  of  the  Good-man  of  this  House,  to 
call  here  for  my  profit :  I  would  therefore  speak 
with  the  Master  of  the  House  :  so  he  called  for  the 
Master  of  the  House  ;  who  after  a  little  time 
came  to  Christian,  and  asked  him  what  he  would 
have  ? 

Ch.  Sir,  said  Christian,  I  am  a  Man  that  am  come 
from  the  City  of  Destruction,  and  am  going  to  the 
Mount  Zion,  and  I  was  told  by  the  Man  that  stands 
at  the  Gate,  at  the  head  of  this  way,  That  if  I  called 
here,  you  would  shew  me  excellent  things,  ""such  as '/(««  «''«'•- 
would  be  an  help  to  me  in  my  Journey. 

Inter.  Then  said  the  Interpreter,  'Come  in,  I  will  J/o'''""'""" 
shew  thee  that  which  will  be  profitable  to  thee.     So 
he  commanded  his  Man  to  light  the  Candle,  and 
bid  Christian  follow  him  ;  so  he   had   him  into   a 
private  Room,  and  bid  his  Man  open  a  Door  ;  the 

'  '  thy '  burden,  2nd  and  sub.  ^  '  Traveller,'    2nd    and    sub. 

odits.  edits. 


28 


Cf)f  ^ilgnme;  |3iog:rfsisi» 


•ChriBtian 
sees  a  brave 
Picture- 

"  The  fash  ion 
of  the  Pic- 
ture. 


M  Cor.  4.15. 
I  Gal.  4.  19. 


* '2  These. 2. 
7. 


»  The  mean- 
ing of  the 
Picture. 


*■  Why  he 
shewed  him 
tlie  Picture 
Hist. 


which  when  he  had  done,  ^Christian  saw  a  ^Picture 
of  a  very  grave  Person  hang  up  against  the  Wall, 
and  this  was  the  fashion  of  it.  "//  had  eyes  ^  lift 
up  to  Heaven,  the  best  of  Books  in  ^its  hand,  the  Law 
of  Truth  was  writteti  upon  ^its  lips,  the  World  was  be- 
hind his  back  ;  it  stood  as  if  it  Pleaded  vcith  Men,  and 
a  Crown  of  Gold  did  hang  over  its  head. 

Ch.  The?i  said  Christian,  What  means  this  f 
Inter.  The  Man  whose  Picture  this  is,  is  one  of  a 
thousand,  he  can''  beget  Children,  Travel  in  birth 
with  Children,  and  ^' Nurse  them  himself,  when  they 
are  born.  And  whereas  thou  seest'  him  with  "eyes 
lift  up  to  Heaven,  the  best  of  Books  in  his  hand, 
and  the  Law  of  Truth  writ  on  his  lips  :  it  is  to  shew 
thee,  that  his  work  is  to  know  and  unfold  dark 
things  to  sinners  ;  even  as  also  thou  seest  ^him 
stand  as  if  he  Pleaded  with  Men  :  And  whereas 
thou  seest  the  World  as  cast  behind  him,  and  that 
a  Crown  hangs  over  his  head  ;  that  is,  to  shew  thee 
that  slighting  and  despising  the  things  that  are  pre- 
sent, for  the  love  that  he  hath  to  his  Masters  service, 
he  is  sure  in  the  World  that  comes  next  to  have 
Glory  for  his  Reward  :  Now,  said  the  Interpreter,  I 
have  shewed  thee  this  Picture  first,  ''because  the 
Man  whose  Picture  this  is,  is  the  only  Man,  whom 
the  Lord  of  the  Place  whither  thou  art  going,  hath 
Authorized,  to  be  thy  Guide  in  all  difficult  places 
thou  mayest  meet  with  in  the  way  :  wherefore  take 
good  heed  to  what  1  have  shewed  thee,  and  bear 
well  in  thy  mind  what  thou  hast  seen ;  lest  in  thy 
Journey,  thou  meet  with  some  that  pretend  to  lead 
thee  right,  but  their  way  goes  down  to  death. 
Then  he  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  into 


'  '  the  Picture,'  2nd  and  sub. 
edits. 

'  '  lifted,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

"  '  his,'  2nd  and  sub>,  cxcciit 
8th,  '.tth,  1684  ;  and  10th. 


'  his  '  after  2nd  edit. 
Omitted    in    3rd    and 


.'dits. 


'his 


edits. 


eyes, 


sub. 
2nd     and    sub. 


CI)f  pilgrims;  prcigre^sJ*  29 

a  very  large  Parlour  that  was  full  of  dust,  because 
never  swept;  the  which,  after  he  had  reviewed  a 
little  while,  the  Literpreter  called  for  a  man  to 
sweep  :  Now  when  he  began  to  sweep,  the  dust  be- 
gan so  abundantly  to  fly  about,  that  Christian  had 
almost  therewith  been  choaked  :  Then  said  the  Ifi- 
terpreter  to  a  Damsel  that  stood  by,  Bring  hither 
'  the'^  Water,  and  sprinkle  the  Room  ;  '  the'  ^ which 
when  she  had  done,  '  it '  ^  was  swept  and  cleansed 
with  pleasure. 

Ch.  Then  said  Christian,  What  meatis  this  f 
In.  The  Interpreter  answered  ;  this  Parlor  is  the 
heart  of  a  Man  that  was  never  sanctified  by  the 
sweet  Grace  of  the  Gospel :  The  dust,  is  his  Original 
Sin,  and  inward  Corruptions  that  have  defiled  the 
whole  Man;  He  that  began  to  sweep  at  first,  is  the 
Law  ;  but  She  that  brought  water,  and  did  sprinkle 
it,  is  the  Gospel  :  Now,  whereas  thou  sawest  that 
so  soon  as  the  first  began  to  sweep,  the  dust  did  so 
fly  about  that  the  Room  by  him  could  not  be 
cleansed,  but  that  thou  wast  almost  choaked  there- 
with. This  is  to  shew  thee,  that  the  Law,  instead  of 
cleansinp-  the  heart  (bv  its  working:)  from  sin,  ""doth  ■'Rom.- e. 
revive,  put  ^strength  into,  and  increase  it  in  these, 
soul,  ^*  even'  as  it  doth  discover  and  forbid  it,  ^but 
doth  not  give  power  to  subdue. 

Again,  as  thou  sawest  the  Damsel  sprinkle  the 
Room  with  Vsater,  upon  which  it  was  cleansed  with 
pleasure  :  This  is  to  shew  thee,  that  when  the  Gos- 
pel comes  in  the  sweet  and  precious  influences 
thereof  to  the  heart,  then  I  say,  even  as  thou  sawest 
the  Damsel  lay  the  dust  by  sprinkling  the  Floor 
with  Water,  so  is  sin  vanquished  and  subdued,  and 


'  '  the,"  added  to  the  2nd  edit.  *  '  even,'   added  after  the  2nd 

^  'the  which,'   3rd    and    sub.  edit, 

edits.  «  Instead    of  '  but,'    the    3rd 

''it,'    added    after    the     2nd  and  sub.  edits,  read  '  for  it.' 
edit 


30  mn  iMlqviim  ^arogresis; 

S'5^^26^    the  soul  made  clean,  through   the  Faith   of  it,  and 

R^ni.'i6.^25,  consequently  sfit  for  the  King  of  Glory  to  inhabit. 

Job.  15.13.       1  saw  moreover  in  my  Dream,''  that  the  Inter- 

L^iPa^sion  P^^fei'  took  him   by  the  hand,  and  had  him  into  a 

tieLl^'      little  Room,  where  sat  two  little  Children,  each  one 

havfiZr^^  in  his  Chair :  The  name  of  the  eldest  was  Passion, 

"*'"•         and   ^ '  the  name  '   of  the  other  Patience  ;  Passion 

seemed  to  be  much  discontent,   but  Patience  was 

very  quiet.     Then   Christian  asked,   What  is   the 

reason  of  the   discontent  of  Passion  f     The  Inter- 

freter  answered,   The  Governour   of  them   would 

have  him  stav  for  his  best  thino-s   till  the  beo-in- 

ning  of  the  next  year  ;  but  he  will  have  all  now : 

7o^Mng.  '^^^  Patience  is  willing  to  wait. 

'^ Passion ;««><      Thcn    I    saw   that    one   came  to  ^Passion,  and 

brought  him   a  Bag   of  Treasure,   and  poured   it 

down   at  his  feet ;  the  which   he  took  up,  and  re- 

joyced  therein  ;    and   withall,  laughed  Patience   to 

scorn  :      But  I    beheld    but   a  while,  and    he    had 

Mwtz^Micwy  lavished  all  away,  and   had   nothing*  left  him  but 

lavishes  all      -p.  ''  ~ 

away.  KagS. 

l^'otndeT''      Ch,   Then  said  Christian  to  the  Interpreter,  "^Ea?- 
jmnnd  this  matter  more  fully  to  me. 

In.  So  he  said.  These  two  Lads  are  Figures ; 
Passion,  of  the  Men  of  this  World  ;  and  Patience, 
of  the  Men  of  that  which  is  to  come :  For  as  here 
thou  seest.  Passion  ivill  have  all  noiv,  this  year  ;  that 
is  to  say,  in  this  World ;  So  are  the  Men  of  this 
World  :  they  must  have  all  their  good  things  now, 
they  cannot  stay  till  next  Year;  that  is,  untill  the 
neM  World,  for  their  Portion  of  good.  That  Pro- 
"  The  World,  vcrb,  A  ""Bird  in  the  Hand  is  worth  two  in  the  Push, 
BirdinThe  is  of  morc  Authority  with  them,  than  are  all  the 
Divine  Testimonies  of  the  good  of  the  World  to 
come.  But  as  thou  sawest,  that  he  had  quickly 
lavished  all  away,  and  had  presently  left  him,  no- 

'  '  it    now,'      :}rd     ;ind     siib.  ^  '  the  naiiic '  acMcd  iiftcr  tho 

edits.  '  2nd  edit. 


thing  but  Raggs^  ;  So  will  it  be  with  all  such  Men 
at  the  end  of  this  World. 

Ch.   Then  said  Christian,  Now  I  see  that  Patience 
has  the  best  °  Wisdom  ;  and  that  ^ipon  many  accounts,  l^fl^fl^ 
1.  Because  he  stays  for  the  best  things.     2.  A?id  also  wudoi^i. 
because  he  will  have  the  Glory  of  His,  ivhen  the  other 
hath  nothing  but  Raggs} 

In.  Nay,  you  may  add  another  ;  to  wit,  The  glory 
of  the  neMWovldi  will  never  wear  out ;  but  these  are 
suddenly  gone.  Therefore  Passion  had  not  so  much 
reason  to  laugh  at  Patience,  because  he  had  his 
good  things  first,  as  Patience  will  have  to  laugh  at 
Passion,  because   he  had   his  best  things  last;   for  ^"«5'« '^/'«< 

.  ,  ,  ,  ,      ~  ,  arejirst  mus. 

first  must  Q'lve  place  to  last,  because  last  must  have?"«i'?«<^f' 

,..  17  •  1  1  •  n  things 

his  time  to  come,  but  last  ffives  place  to  nothinq  ;  for  thatareiasi 

~  h        1  ■•  n  1  '"'^  lasting. 

there  is  not  another  to  succeed  :  he  therefore  that 
hath  his  Portion  first,  must  needs  have  a  time  to 
spend  it;  but  he  that  has  his  Portion  last,  must 
have  it  lasting-ly.     Therefore  it  is  said  of  *^Z^?m', ''Luk.  le. 

~   •  Dives  lu'd 

In  thy  lifetime  thou  hadest,'^  or  receivedest  thii  qood ''i» good 
things,  and  likeimse  Lazarus  evil  tilings  ;  But  now  he 
is  comforted,  and  thou  art  tormented. 

Ch.  Then  I  perceive,  'tis  not  best  to  covet  things 
that  are  now ;  but  to  wait  for  things  to  come. 

Ifi.  You  say  Hhe  Truth  ;  For  the  tlmiqs  that  « re  2 cor. 4.  is. 

m  J  '  ,/  j'f^Q  first 

seen,  are  Temporal  ;  btit  the  thinqs  that  are  not  seen,  things  are 

T~t  in  1  11   •!  •  ^"'  Tevipo- 

are  hiternal  :  but  though  this  be  so;  yet  since 'o^ 
things  present,  and  our  fleshly  appetite,  are  such 
near  Neighbours  one  to  another ;  and  again,  because 
things  to  come,  and  carnal  sense,  are  such  strangers 
one  to  another  :  therefore  it  is,  that  the  first  of  these 
so  suddenly  fall  into  amity,  and  that  distance  is  so 
continued  between  the  second. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  the  Interpreter 
took  Ghristian    by   the  hand,  and   led   him   into   a 

*  '  Rags,'  2nd  and  suli.  edits.  ^  '  the,'    omitted   in  2nd    and 

"^  '  Hadest,  or,'  omitted  in  2nd      sub.  edits, 
and  sub.  edits. 


32  mn  pilgnmsi  ^9rogitsi5» 

place,  where  was  a  Fire  burning  against  a  Wall, 
and  one  standing  by  it  always,  casting  much  Water 
upon  it  to  quench  it :  Yet  did  the  Fire  burn  higher 
and  hotter. 

Then  said  Christian,  What  means  this? 

The  Interpreter  answered,  This  fire  is  the  work 
of  Grace  that  is  wrought  in  the  heart ;  he  that  casts 
Water  upon  it,  to  extinguish  and  put  it  out,  is  the 
Devil :  but  in  that  thou  seest  the  fire  notwithstand- 
ing burn  higher  and  hotter,  thou  shalt  also  see  the 
reason  of  that :  So  he  had  him  about  to  the  back 
side  of  the  Wall,  where  he  saw  a  Man  with  a 
Vessel  of  Oyl  in  his  hand,  of  the  which  ho  did 
also  continually  cast  ^  (but  secretly,)  into  the  fire. 
Then  said  Christian,  What  means  this  f  The 
Interpreter  answered,  This  is  Christ,  who  con- 
tinually with  the  Oyl  of  his  Grace,  maintains  the 
work  already  begun  in  the  heart ;  B}^  the  means  of 
which,  notwithstanding  what  the  Devil  can  do,  the 
2  Cor.  12.9.  souls  of  his  People  prove  gracious  still.  And  in 
that  thou  sawest,  that  the  Man  stood  behind  the  Wall 
to  maintain  the  fire  ;  this  is  to  teach  thee,  that  it  is 
hard  for  the  tempted  to  see  how  this  work  of  Grace 
is  maintained  in  the  soul. 

I  saw  also  that  the  Interpreter  took  him  again  by 
the  hand,  and  led  him  into  a  pleasant  place,  where 
was  builded  a  stately  Palace,  beautiful  to  behold ; 
at  the  sight  of  which.  Christian  was  greatly  de- 
lighted ;  he  saw^  also  upon  the  to))  tliereof,  certain 
Persons  ^walked,  who  were  cloatiicd  all  in  Gold. 
Then  said  Christian,  May  we  go  in  thither  ? 
Then  the  Interpreter  took  him,  and  led  him  up 
toward  the  door  of  the  Palace  ;  and  behold,  at  the 
door  stood  a  great  Company  of  men,  as  desirous  to 
go  in,  but  durst  not.  There  also  sat  a  Man,  at  a 
little  distance  from  the  door,  at  a  Table-side,  with  a 

'  ( )  Acldcfi    in    2nd    an,d    sub.  ^  '  Avalking,"     2nd     and     sub. 

edits.  edits. 


The  Va- 
liant Man. 


Cl)e  ^ilgiimei  ^iDgreds;  33 

Book,  and  his  Inkhorn  before  him,  to  take  the  Name 
of  him  that  should  enter  therein  :  He  saw  also  that 
in  the  door-way,  stood  many  Men  in  Armour  to 
keep  it;  being  resolved  to  do  to  the  ^Man  that ^  would 
enter,  what  hurt  and  mischief  they  could.  Now 
was  Christian  somewhat  in  ^a  muse  :  at  last,  when 
every  Man  started  back  for  fear  of  the  Armed  Men  ; 
Christian  saw  a  Man  of  a  ver}^  stout  countenance 
come  up  to  the  Man  that  sat  there  to  write ;  saying, 
Set  down  my  name,  Sir,  the  which  when  he  had 
done,  he  saw  the  Man  draw  his  Sword,  and  put  an 
Helmet  upon  his  Head,  and  rush  toward  the  door 
upon  the  Armed  Men,  who  laid  upon  liim  with 
deadly  force  ;  but  the  Man,  not  at  all  discouraged, 
fell  to  cutting  and  hacking  most  fiercely;  so,  after  he 
had  received  and  given  many  wounds  to  those  that  ^''^-  ^^-  ^^• 
attempted  to  keep  him  out,  he  cut  his  way  through 
them  all,  and  pressed  forward  into  the  Palace  ;  at 
which  there  was  a  pleasant  voice  heard  from  those 
that  were  within,  even  of  ^the  Three  that  walked 
upon  the  top  of  the  Palace,  *^'  saying,' 

Come  in,  Come  in  ; 

Eternal  Glory  thou  shalt  uiin. 

So  he  went  in,  and  was  cloathed  with  such  Gar- 
ments as  they.  Then  Christian  smiled,  and  said,  I 
think  verily  I  know  the  meaning  of  this. 

Now,  said  Christian,  let  me  go  hence :  Nay  sta}^ 
(said  the  Interpreter,)  till  I  have  shewed  thee  a  little 
more,  and  after  that  thou  shalt  go  on  thy  way.  So 
he  took  him  by  the  hand  again,  and  led  him  into  a 
very  dark  Room,  where  there  sat  a  Man  in  an  ''Iron  '^''i'"" 

^^     ''  like  an  Iron 

Lage.  Cage. 

Now  the  Man,  to  look  on,  seemed  very  sad :  he 

*  '  Men,'  after  the  2nd  edit.  *  '  those    that    walked,'     2nd 

*  '  will,'  in  the  7th  edit.  and  sub.  edits. 

'  '  a  maze,'  2nd  ;  '  amaze,'  7th  '  '  saying,'   added  to  the    2nd 

and  sub.  edit.  and  sub.  edits. 

*  First  inserted  in  the  2nd  edit. 


34  Cl)f  pilgnmes  ^rogrrsis!* 

sat  witli  his  eyes  looking  down  to  the  ground,  liis 
hands  folded  together;  and  he  sighed  as  if  he  would 
break  his  heart.  Then  said  Ohrutian,  What  means 
this  ?  At  which  the  Inter jweter  bid  him  talk  with 
the  Man. 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian  to  the  Man,  What  art 
thou  f  The  Man  answered,  /  am  ivhat  I  was  not 
once. 

Chr.  What  wast  thou  once  f 
M.ukes.  Man.  The  Man  said,  I  was  once  a  fair  and 
flourishing  Professor,  both  in  mine  own  eyes,  and 
also  in  the  eyes  of  others :  I  once  was,  as  I  thought, 
fair  for  the  Coelestial  City,  and  had  then  even  joy  at 
the  thoughts  that  I  should  get  thither. 

Chr.   Well,  but  ivhat  art  thou  now  ? 

Man.  I  am  now  a  Man  of  Despair,  and  am  shut 
up  in  it,  as  in  this  Iron  Cage.  I  cannot  get  out ;  O 
noiv  I  cannot. 

Chr.  But  how  earnest  thou  in  this  condition  f 

Man.  I  left  off"  to  watch,  and  be  sober ;  I  laid 
the  reins  upon  the  neck  of  my  lusts;  I  sinned 
against  tlie  light  of  the  Word,  and  the  goodness 
of  God  :  I  have  grieved  the  Spirit,  and  he  is 
gone ;  I  tempted  the  Devil,  and  he  is  come  to 
me  ;  I  have  provoked  God  to  anger,  and  lie  has 
left  me  ;  I  have  so  hardened  my  heart,  that  I  can- 
not repent. 

Then  said  Christian  to  the  Interpreter,  But  is 
there  no  hopes  for  such  a  Man  as  this  ?  Ask  him, 
said  the  Interpreter?^  ^Nay,  said  Christian,  pray  Sir, 
do  you. 

^  Inter.  Then  said  Hhe  Interpreter,  Is  there  no 
hope  but  you  must  be  kept  in  '^  this  Iron  Cage  of 
Despair  f 

*  Inserted  in  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  '  '  Ch)\  in  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

*  'Nay,   said    Chr'mian,    pray,  *  'the  Christian,'   2nd  to  8th; 
Sir,  do  you.,  only  occurs  in  the      after  that 'Christian.' 

1st  edit.  '  ''  '  the,' 2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


Man.  No,  none  at  all. 

^  Inter.    Why  t     The  Son  of  the  Blessed  is  very 


e  19. 


»Heb.  10.  28, 
29. 


Mail.  I  have  ^Crucified  him  to  myself,  a  fresh.  I  j-Heb.e. g 
have  despised  ^  his  Person,  I  have  despised  his  j];"*" 
Righteousness,  I  have  counted  his  Blood  an  unholy 
thing,  I  have  done  despite  ""to  the  Spirit  of  Grace  : 
Therefore  I  have  shut  my  self  out  of  all  the  Pro- 
mises ;  and  there  now  remains  to  me  nothing  but 
threatnings,  dreadful  threatnings,  ^faithful  threat- 
nings  of  certain  Judgment  'and  firy  Indignation,'^ 
which  shall  devour  me  as  an  Adversary. 

^  Inter.  For  what  did  you  brim)  yourself  into  this 
condition  f 

Man.  For  the  Lusts,  Pleasures,  and  Profits  of  this 
World  ;  in  the  ^injoyment  of  which,  I  did  then  pro- 
mise my  self  much  delight;  but  now  ^even  every 
one  of  those  things  also  bite  me,  and  gnaw  me  like 
a  burning  worm. 

"^  Inter.  But  canst  thou  not  now  repent  and 
turn  f 

Man.  God  hath  denied  me  repentance  ;  hisWord 
gives  me  no  encouragement  to  believe  ;  yea,  him- 
self hath  shut  me  up  in  this  Iron  Cage;  nor  can  all 
the  men  in  the  World  let  me  out.  O  Eternity  ! 
Eternity  !  how  shall  I  grapple  with  the  misery  that 
I  must  meet  with  in  Eternity  ! 

Inter.  Then  said  the  Interpreter  to  Christian,  Let 
this  mans  misery  be  remembred  by  thee,  and  be  an 
everlasting  caution  to  thee. 

Chr.  Well,  said  Christian,  this  is  fearful ;  God 
help  me  to  watch  and  be  sober  ;  and  to  pra}',  that  I 
may  shun  the  "^causes  of  this  mans  misery.  Sir,  is  it 
not  tinie  for  me  to  go  on  my  way  now  ? 

^   '  Chr.''  in  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  *■  '  enjoyment,'  2nd  and  sub. 

-  '  Fearful,' 7th  and  sub.  edits.;  '  'even,'    omitted  in  2nd  and 

except  the  8th  has  '  faithful.'  sub. 

^  Introduced  after  tlie  2nd  edit.  ®  '  cause,' 3rd  and  sub.  edits. 


1  C  or.  15. 
1  'i  hess.  4 

Jude  15. 
a'ihes.1.8. 


3(J  €i)(  13ilQ:nm£S  ^nDjiesis;* 

Tnter.  Tarry  till  I  shall  shew  thee  one  thing  more, 
and  then  Hhou  shalt  go  on  thy  way. 

So  he  took  Christian  by  the  hand  again,  and  led 
him  into  a  Chamber,  where  there  was  one  a  rising" 
out  of  Bed  ;  and   as  he  put  on  his  Rayment,  he 
shook   and   trembled.     Then  said    Christian,   ^^  'i.Y 
doth  this  Man  thus  tremble  ?     The  Interpreter  then 
bid  him  tell  to  Christian  the  reason  of  his  so  doing, 
So  he  began,  and  said  :  This  night  as  I  was  in  m}'^ 
sleep,  I  Dreamed,  and  behold  the  Heavens  grew  ex- 
ceeding black  ;  also   it  thundred  and  lightned   in 
most  fearful  wise,  that   it  put  me  into  an  Agony. 
So  I  looked  up  in  my  Dream,  and  saw  the  Clouds 
^rack  at  an   unusual   rate ;  upon  which  I  heard  a 
great  sound  of  a  Trumpet,  and  saw  also  a  Man  sit 
upon  a  Cloud,  attended  with  the  thousands  of  Hea- 
ven ;  they  were  all  in  flaming  fire,  also  the  Heavens 
f'o'v'IIo^^  *was   on    a  burning  flame.      I  heard  then  a  voice, 
12,13,14.     saying.  Arise  ye  Dead,  and  come  to  Judfpnent ;    and 
with  that,  the  Rocks  rent,  the    Graves  opened,  & 
mc^til',    the  Dead  that  were  therein,  came   forth  ;    some  of 
p^8.5.i,2,3.5  them  were  exceeding  glad,  and  looked  upward  ;  and 
Dan.  7.10 «  g^^j^^  souglit  to   hidc  thcmsclves  under  the  Moun- 
tains.     Then   I    saw  the   Man  that   sat   upon  the 
Cloud,  open   the  Book  ;  and   bid   the  World  draw 
near.     Yet  there  was  by  reason  of  a  ''Fiery  flame 
that  issued  out  and  came  ^from  before  him,  a  con- 
venient distance  betwixt  him  and  them,  as  betwixt 
Dan':  7!  I ^' the  Judge  and  the  Prisoners  at  the  Bar.     I  heard 
it  also  proclaimed  to  them  that  attended  on  the  Man 

'  '  you  shall,'  Srd  edit.  edits. ;    8th,  Dan.  10 ;  altered  in 

"  'rising,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  ytli,  lGli3,  to  10,7,  and  omitted 

'  '  rackt,'  7th  edit,  [driven  by  in  some  edits, 

the  wind].  ^  '  Fierce,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

*  'were,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  "  'from,'  omitted  in  the  lotli 

*  All  the  early  editions  agree  edit, 
in  the  references  to  Ps.  5.  1,  2,  .3 ;  *  First  inserted  ui  L'nd  edit,  as 
but  Ps.  i»o.  1,  2,  0,  would  have  Maj.  50.2,3,  and  omitted  in  7th; 
answered  much  better.^  but  correct  in  sub.  edits. 

''  Inserted  in    1st,  to  the  7th  '  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


\) 


€i)t  |3ilgnmsi  ^lognsisi*  37 

tliat  sat  on  the  Cloud;  "^  Gather  together  the  Tares,  /"//f? 'Mats.  12. 

Chaff,  and  Stubble,  and  cast    them   itito  the   burning  ^^'^^■i-^- 

Lake;  and  with  that,  the  Bottomless  pit  opened,  just 

whereabout  I  stood  ;  out  of  the  mouth  of  which 

there    came  in   an  abundant   manner  Smoak,  and 

Coals  of  fire,  with  hideous  noises.     It  was  also  said 

to  the  same  persons  ;    Gather  my  Wheat  into  ^my ' 'i'«''e  3. 

Garner.      And   with   that   I    saw  many  catch't  up 

•^and  carried  away  into  the  Clouds,  but  I  was  left  J^?  ]'^®''- *■ 

behind.      I  also  sought  to  hide  my  self,  but  I  could 

not;  for   the  Man   that  sat   upon  the  Cloud,   still 

kept  his   eye  upon   me:   my   sins  also   came   into  Ro^  2.14, 

^'my'     mind,    and    my    Conscience    did    accuse 

me  on  every  side.     Upon  this  I  awaked  from  my 

sleep. 

Chr.  But  what  ivas  it  that  made  you  so  fraid  of 
this  sight  ? 

Man.  Why  I  thought  that  the  day  of  Judgement 
was  come,  and  that  I  was  not  ready  for  it :  but  this 
frighted  me  most,  that  the  Angels  gathered  up 
several,  and  left  me  behind  ;  also  the  pit  of  Hell 
opened  her  mouth  just  where  I  stood  :  my  Con- 
science too  ^within  afflicted  me  ;  and  as  I  thought, 
the  Judge  had  always  his  eye  upon  me,  shewing 
indignation  in  his  countenance. 

Then  said  the  Interpreter  to  Christian,  Hast  thou 
considered  all  these  things  f 

Chri.  Yes,  and  they  put  me  in  hope  and  fear. 

Inter.  Well,  keep  all  things  so  in  thy  mind,  that 
they  may  be  as  a  Goad  in  thy  sides,  to  prick  thee 
forward  in  the  way  thou  must  go.  Then  Christian 
began  to  gird  up  his  loins,  and  to  address  himself 
to  his  Journey.     Then    said    the   Interpreter,  The 

'  This  was  changed  to  '  Mark'  ^  '  my,'    altered    to    '  the  '    in 

in  the  2nd  edit.,  and  the   error      2nd  and  sub.  edits, 
continued  in  all  the  sub.  copies.  *  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

*  First  inserted  in  2nd  edit.  *  '  within,'  omitted  in  2nd  and 

sub.  edits. 


38 


€\)t  ^i3ilgrimsi  yrogitsie; 


Who's  this ;    the  Pilgrim.    How  !  'tis  very  true, 
Old  things  are  past  awaj-,  all's  become  new. 
Strange  !  he's  another  Man  upon  my  word, 
They  bo  fine  Feathers  that  make  a  fine  Bird. 


Copied  from  the  13th  edition,  1692. 


CJ)e  ^iilgnm^^  ^rogresisi*  39 

Comforter  be  always  with  thee  good  Christian,  to 
guide  thee  in  the  way  that  leads  to  the  City. 

So  Christian  went  on  his  way,  saying. 

Here  I  have  seen  things  rare,  and  profitable  ; 

Things  pleasant,  dj-eadfiil,  things  to  make  me  stable 

In  what  I  have  began  to  take  i?i  hand  : 

Then  let  me  think  on  them,  and  understand 

Wherefore  they  shewed  me  ^was,  and  let  me  be 

Thankful,  O  good  Interpreter,  to  thee. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  the  high  way  up 
which  Christian  was  to  go,  was  fenced  on  either  side 
with  a  Wall,  and  that  Wall  is  called  Salvation.  "'^^'''^^^■' 
Up  this  way  therefore  did  burdened  Christian  run, 
but  not  without  great  difficulty,  because  of  the 
load  on  his  back. 

He  ran  thus  till  he  came  at  a  place  somewhat 
ascending ;  and  upon  that  place  stood  a  Cross,  and 
a  little  below  in  the  bottom,  a  Sepulcher.  So  I  saw 
in  my  Dream,  that  just  as  Christian  came  up  with 
the  Cross,  his  burden  loosed  from  off  his  Shoulders, 
and  fell  from  off  his  back ;  and  began  to  tumble, 
and  so  continued  to  do,  till  it  came  to  the  mouth  of 
of  the  Sepulcher,  where  it  fell  in,  and  I  saw  it  no 
more. 

Then  was  Christian  glad  ^and  lightsom,  and  said  'Mmsl^ufof 
with  a  merry  heart.  He  hath  given  me  rest,  by  his Zldm!"e'^ 
sorrow  ;  and  life,  by  his  death.     Then  he  stood  still  fiuuVoT/or 
a  while,  to  look  and  wonder ;  for  it  was  very  sur-  '"'^" 
prising  to  him,  that  the  sight  of  the  Cross  should 
thus  ease  him  of  his  burden.     He  looked  therefore, 
and  looked  again,  even  till  the  springs  that  were  in 
his  head  sent  the  Vaters  down  his  cheeks.     Now  as  'z-^-^i'  12. 
he  stood  looking  and  weeping,  behold  three  shining 
ones  came  to  him,  and  saluted  him,  with  Peace  be 
to   thee:    so  the  first  said  to  him,   Thy  sins  be  for- 

^  '  was,'  altered  to  '  were '  '  2nd  and  sub.  edits. ;  but  all 
about  1690.  refer  tu  Isa.  36.  1  :    evidently  a 

typographical  error. 

e2 


fVIarki 


40 


Cf)e  pilgnmss  ^^rogitds; 


1 1  '  Zech.  3. 

1.' 

'  •  *  Ephes. 


A  Christian 
can  sing  tho 
alone,  vhen 
God  doth  ijive 
him  the  joy 
of  his  heart. 


Simple, 
Sloth,  and 
Presump- 
tion. 


'  t  ProT.  23. 

24/3 


*"  There  is  no 
perswation 
will  do,  if 
God  opentih  , 
not  the  eyes 


(jiven.  Tlie  second,  stript  liim  of  his  Rags,  and 
cloathed  him  with  change  of  Raiment.  The  third 
also  set  a  mark  in  his  fore-head,  and  gave  him  a 
Roll  with  a  Seal  upon  it,  which  he  bid  him  look  on 
as  he  ran,  and  that  he  should  give  it  in  at  the 
Coelestial  Gate ;  so  they  went  their  way.  Then 
Christian  gave  three  leaps  for  joy,  and  went  ^  out 
singing, 

Thus  far  did  I  come  loaden  with  my  sin  ; 
Nor  coidd  oucjht  ease  the  (frief  that  I  ivas  in, 
Till  I  came  hither :  What  a  place  is  this  ! 
Must  here  be  the  beginning  of  my  bliss  ! 
Must  here  the  burden  fall  from  off  my  bachf 
Must  here  the  strings  that  bound  it  to  me,  crack  f 
Blest  Cross  !  blest  Sepidcher  !  blest  rather  be 
The  Man  that  there  icas  put  to  shame  for  me. 

I  saw  then  in  my  Dream  that  he  w^ent  on  thus, 
even  untill  he  came  at  a  bottom,  where  he  saw,  a 
little  out  of  the  way,  three  Men  fast  asleep  with 
Fetters  upon  their  heels.  The  name  of  the  one  was 
''Simple,  another  Sloth,  and  the  third  Presumption. 

Christian  then  seeing  them  lye  in  this  case,  went 
to  them,  if  peradventure  he  might  awake  them. 
And  cryed,  You  are  like  them  that  sleep  on  the  top 
of  a  Mast,  for  the  dead  Sea  is  under  you,  a  Gulf 
that  hath  no  bottom  :  Awake  therefore  and  come 
away,  be  willing  also,  and  I  will  help  you  off  with 
your  Irons.  He  also  told  them.  If  he  that  goeth 
about  like  a  roaring  Lion  comes  by,  you  will  cer- 
tainly become  a  prey  to  his  teeth.  A\  ith  that  they 
lookt  upon  him,  and  began  to  reply  in  this  sort : 
^'Simple  said,  I  see  no  danger ;  Sloth  said,  Yet  a  little 
more  sleep :  and  Presumption  said,  Every  Fatt  must 


'  First  inserted  in  the  2nd  edit. ; 
all  the  editions  refer  to  '  Mark  2. 
V.  2,'  but  it  niust  liave  l)een  a 
mistake  for  v.  -5. 


^  '  went     on,'     3rd    and    sub. 
edits. 

^  First  added  to  2nd  edit. 


stand  upon  his  oum  bottom,  ^ivhat  is  the  answer  else 
that  I  should  give  thee?  And  so  thei/  lay  down  to 
sleep  again,  and  Christian  went  on  his  way. 

Yet  was  he  troubled  to  think,  That  men  in  that 
danger  should  so  little  esteem  the  kindness  of  him 
that  so  freely  offered  to  help  them  ;  both  by  awak- 
ening of  them,  counselling  of  them,  and  proffering 
to  help  them  off  with  their  Irons.  And  as  he  was 
troubled  there-about,  he  espied  two  Men  come  tum- 
bling over  the  Wall,  on  the  left  hand  of  the  narrow 
way  ;  and  they  made  up  a  pace  to  him.  The  name 
of  the  one  was  Formalist,  and  the  name  of  the  other 
Hi/pocrisie.  So,  as  I  said,  they  drew  up  unto  him, 
who  thus  entered  with  them  into  discourse. 

Chr.   Gentlemen,  Whence  came  you,    and  whither '^^m^'umT 
^doyougof  ^^'^■' 

Form,  and  Hyp.  We  were  born  in  the  Land  of 
Vain-glory,  and  are  going  for  praise  to  Mount  Sion. 

Chr.    Why    came  you   not  in   at  the   Gate   which 
standeth  at  the  beginninxf  of  the  way  f     Know  you  not 
that  it  is  ivritten,  "That  he  that  cometh  not  in  by  the " j oh.  lo.i. 
door,  but  climbeth  up  some  other  icay,  the  same  is  a 
thief  and  a  robber  f 

Form  and  Hyp.  They  said,  That  to  go  to  the 
Gate  for  entrance,  was  by  all  their  Country- men 
counted  too  far  about ;  and  that  therefore  their 
usual  way  was  to  make  a  short  cut  of  it,  and  to 
climb  over  ^ '  the  wall,'  as  they  had  done. 

Chr.  But  tvill  it  not  be  counted  a  Trespass,  against 
the  Lord  of  the  City  whither  we  are  bound,  thus  to 
violate  his  revealed  will  f 

Form,  and  Hyp.  They  told  him,  ''That  as  for  that,  ^Theythat 
he  needed  not  to  trouble  his  head  thereabout:  {ov''y-'^yXiJ^''^ot 
what  thev  did,    they  had  custom  for ;    and   could  tlinktZt' 

"  "  they  can  my 

something  in 
vindication 

*  to  *  Inserted  m  the  1st  edit.  '  whither  go  you  ?    9th  edit.,  of  their  oim 
only.  16R4,  and  sub.                                  Practice. 

*  Inserted  in  the  3rd  and  sub.  *  '  over  it  as,'  2nd  edit.  ;  '  over 
edits.  the  wall/  3rd  and  sub.  edits. 


42  CI)e  pilgnms  f^rogres^, 

produce,  if  need  were,  Testimony  that  would  witness 
it,  for  more  than  a  thousand  years. 

Chr.  Bid,  said  Christian,  will  ^i/our  practice  stand 
a  Trial  at  Law  f 

Form,  and  Hyp.  They  told  him,  That  Custom,  it 
being  of  so  long  a  standing,  as  above  a  thousand 
years,  would  doubtless  now  be  admitted  as  a  thing- 
legal,  by  ^  any  Impartial  Judge.  And  besides,  said 
they,  so  be^  we  get  into  the  way,  what's  matter 
which  way  we  get  in  ;  if  we  are  in,  we  are  in  :  thou 
art  but  in  the  way,  who,  as  we  perceive,  came  in  at 
the  Gate  ;  and  we  are  also  in  the  way,  that  came 
tumbling  over  the  wall :  Wherein  now  is  thy  con- 
dition better  than  ours  ? 

Chr.  I  walk  by  the  ^  Rule  of  my  Master,  you 
walk  by  the  rude  working  of  your  fancies.  You  are 
counted  thieves  alread}^  by  the  Lord  of  the  waj^ ; 
therefore  I  doubt  you  will  not  be  found  true  men 
at  the  end  of  the  way.  You  come  in  by  your  selves 
without  his  direction,  and  shall  go  out  by  your 
selves  without  his  mercy. 

To  this  they  made  him  but  little  answer ;  only 
they  bid  him  look  to  himself.  Tlien  I  saw  that 
they  went  on  every  man  in  his  way,  without  much 
conference  one  with  anotlier ;  save  that  these  two 
men  told  Christian,  That,  as  to  Laws  and  Ordinances, 
they  doubted  not  but  they  should  as  conscientiously 
do  tliem  as  he.  Therefore  said  they,  We  see  not 
wherein  tliou  differest  from  us,  but  by  tlie  Coat  tliat 
is  on  thy  back,  which  was,  as  we  tro,'  given  thee 
by  some  of  thy  Neighbours,  to  hide  the  shame  of 
tliy  nakedness. 
"'Gai.z.  ]6       Chr.   By  •'Laws  and  Ordinances,  you  will  not  be 

'  '  will  you    stand,'    nth    and  *  '  Rule '    in    italics,  2nd   and 

nth  edits.,  1GJ5:3  ;  'will  it  stand,'  suh.  edits, 

nth  edit.  1G84,  and  sub.  *  'tro,'  or  'trow,'  l)elieve. 

'  'an,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  '  All  the  editions  (inoie  Gal.  1. 

*  'if   we   get,"    2nd    and    sub.  16;   but  the  author  nuist   have 

edits.                                    ••  intended  it  for  Gal.  2.  Ki. 


C!)e  pilgrims  ^rogiteisi*  43 

Scaved,  since  you  came  not  in  by  the  door.     And  as 
for  this  Coat  that  is  on  my  back,  it  was  given  me  by 
tlie  Lord  of  the  place  whither  I  go  ;  and  that,  as  you 
say,  to  cover  my  nakedness  with.     And  I  take  it  as 
a  token  of  his  kindness  to  me,  for  I  had  nothing  but 
rags  before.     And  besides,^  thus  I  comfort  myself  as  f christian 
I  go :   Surely,  think  I,  when  I  come  to  the  Gate  ofionhcoat 
the  City,  the  Lord  there-of  will  know  me  for  good,  dndiscZu- 
since  I  have  his  Coat  on  my  back  ;  a  Coat  that  he  wTi/, he^'u' 
ffave  me  freely  in  the  day  that  he  striijt  me  of  my  aUoZm hs 
rags.     1  have  moreover  a  mark  in  my  lorehead,  ot  hi^Mou. 
which  perhaps  you  have  taken  no  notice,  which  one 
of  my  Lords  most  intimate  Associates,  fixed  there  in 
the  day  that  my  burden  fell  oft'  my  shoulders.      I 
will  tell  you  moreover,  that  I  had  then  given  me  a 
Roll  sealed  to  comfort  me  by  reading,  as  I  go  ^  in 
the  way;  I  was  also  bid  to  give  it  in  at  the  Coeles- 
tial  Gate,  in  token  of  my  certain  going  in  after  it : 
all  which  things  I  doubt  you  want,  and  want  them, 
because  you  came  not  in  at  the  Gate. 

To  these  things  they  gave  him  no  answer,  only 
they  looked  upon  each  other  and  laughed.  Then  I 
saw  that  they  went  on  all,  save  that  Christian  kept 
before,  who   had  no   more  talk  but   with  himself,  i'^'l"!f"^." 

'  '  has  talk  vith 

and   that  somtimcs  sighingly,  and   somtimes   com- ''^™"'-^' 
fortably  :    also  he  would    be   often  reading   in  the 
Roll  that  one  of  the  shining  ones  gave  him,  by  which 
lie  was  refreshed. 

I  beheld  then,  that  they  all  went  on  till  they  came 
to  the  foot  of  an^  \l\\\,*'  DiifieidW'  ^  at  the  bottom  o{^H,comato 

1   •    1  o        •  mi  "^  ^  •  1  the  hill  Dipi- 

wliicli  was  a  bpring.      1  here  was  also  in  the  same  "<«y- 
place    two    other   ways    besides    that   which    came 
straight  from  the  Gate;  one  turned  to  the  left  hand, 
and  the  other  to  the  right,  at  the  bottom  of  the  Hill : 

'  I  go  on,"  fith  otlit.  and  sub.  ^  '  the    Hill,"    2nd    and     sub. 

First    inserted   in  Dth   edit.,      edits. 
IfiBi  *  The  name  or  the  hill  omitted 

in  tlie  1st  edit. 


44  CJ)e  pilgrims  progrtsi^, 

but  the  narrow  way  lay  I'ight  up  the  Hill  (and  the 
name  of  the  going  up  the  side  of  the  Hill,  is  called 
■tisa.49.]o.'iZ>/^^?('/(y.)  Christian  now  went  to  the  Spring  and 
drank  thereof  to  refresh  himself,  and  then  began  to 
go  up  the  Hill ;  saying, 

"  This  Hill,  though  high,  I  covet  to  ascend ; 

The  difficulty  will  not  me  offend ; 

For  I  perceive  the  way  to  life  lies  here; 

Come,  pluck  up,  Heart ;  lets  neither  fai)it  nor  fear: 

Better,  tho  difficult,  th'right  way  to  go, 

Than  ivrong,  though  easie,  where  the  end  is  wo. 

The  other  two  also  came  to  the  foot  of  the  Hill. 
But  when  they  saw  that  the  Hill  was  steep  and 
high,  and  that  there  was  two  other  ways  to  go; 
and  supposing  also,  that  these  two  ways  might  meet 
again,  with  that  up  which  Christian  went,  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Hill :  Therefore  they  were  resolved 
to  go  in  those  ways  (now  the  name  of  one  of 
those  ways  was  Danger,  and  the  name  of  the  other 
''Thedanyer  jy^glynction.')  So  ''the  ouc  took  the  way  which  is 
o^^ofthi  called  Danger,  which  led  him  into  a  great  AYood  ; 
and  the  other  took  directly  up  the  way  to  Destruc- 
tion, which  led  him  into  a  wide  field  full  of  dark 
Mountains,  where  he  stumbled  and  fell,  and  ^rise 
no  more. 

I  looked  then  after  Christian,  to  see  him  go  up  the 
Hill,  where  I  perceived  he  fell  from  running  to 
going,  and  from  going  to  clambering  upon  his 
hands  and  his  knees,  because  of  the  steepness  of  the 
place.  Now  about  the  midway  to  the  top  of  the 
^rac«!"*"'""'^  Hill,  was  a  pleasant  ^Arbour,  made  by  the  Lord  of 

^  First  inserted  in  2nd  edit,  as  '  '  rose,'  3rd  and  sub.  edits. 

Isa.  45.  10,  but  corrected  in  7th  *  Altered  to 'yl  Tro/Y/' in  Sturfs 

and  sub.  edits.  correct  edition. 

^  'The    Hill,'    2nd    and    sub.  »  'refreshing,"    after  3rd  edit, 
edit. 


mn  ^atlsinnsi  ^arogit^s. 


45 


Shall  they  who  wrong  begin  yet  rightly  end  ? 
Shall  they  at  all  have  safety  for  their  friend? 
No,  no,  in  headstrong  manner  they  set  out, 
And  headlong  will  they  fall  at  last  no  doubt. 


Copied  from  the  13tli  edition,  1602. 


46  C!)e  iSiIgnms;  |i3rogrf35* 

the  Hill,  for  the  ^refreshment  of  weary  Travailers. 
Thitlier  therefore  Christian  got,  where  also  he  sat 
down  to  rest  him.  Then  he  piill'd  his  Roll  out  of 
his  bosom  and  read  therein  to  his  comfort ;  he  also 
now  began  afresh  to  take  a  review  of  the  Coat  or 
Garment  that  was  given  him  as  he  stood  by  the 
Cross.  Thus  pleasing  himself  a  while,  he  at  last 
fell  into  a  slumber,  and  thence  into  a  fast  sleep, 
which  detained  him  in  that  place  untill  it  was 
iiicthai  almost  nio'ht,  and  in  his  sleep  his  'Roll  fell  out  of 
ivser.  ijis  hand.  JNow  as  he  was  sleepmg,  there  came  one 
•'fProv.6.6.- to  him,  and  awaked  him  saying,  Go  to  the  ant, 
thou  sluggard,  consider  her  ivaijs  and  be  wise.  And 
with  that  Christian  suddenl}^  started  up,  and  sped 
him  on  his  way,  and  went  a  pace  till  he  came  to 
the  top  of  the  Hill. 

Now  when  he  was  got  up  to  the  top  of  the  Hill, 
there  came  two  Men  ^running  against  him  amain  ; 
»,S^rS  the  name  of  the  one  was  Timorus^  ^and  the  name 
Timor«r;"''  of  tlie  other  Mistrust,  to  whom  Christian  said.  Sirs, 
what's  the  matter  you  run  tlie  wrong  way  ?  Timo- 
rus  answered,  That  they  were  going  to  the  City  of 
Zion,  and  had  got  up  that  difficult  place  ;  but,  said 
he,  the  further  we  go,  the  more  danger  we  meet 
with,  wherefore  we  turned,  and  are  going  back 
again. 

Yes,  said  Mistrust,  for  just  before  us  lye  a  couple 
of  Lyons  in  the  way,  whether  sleeping  or  wakeing 
we  know  not ;  and  we  could  not  think,  if  we  came 
within  reach,  but  they  would  presently  pull  us  in 
pieces. 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian,  You  make  me  afraid, 
but  whither  shall  I  fiy  to  be  safe  ?  If  I  go  back  to 
mine  own  Countrey,  That  is  prepared  for  Fire  and 


'   Inserted  in  2nd  edit,  and  svib.  ^  '  and    the    (Uhor,"    2nd    and 

■^  '  runniniT  amain,"  Htli  and  lltli  s\il>.  edits, 

edit.  \'V\ ;  '  running  to  meet  him  *  In  the  ;!nd  and  suK  edits, 
amain,'  nth  edit.,  1684,  atrd  sub. 


Brimstone  ;  and  I  shall  certainly  perish  there.  If  I 
can  get  to  the  Coelestial  City,  I  am  sure  to  be  in 
safety  there.      I  must  venture  :  To  2:0  back  is  no-  '"Christian 

^      'J  ,      n  shakes  off 

thing  but  death,  to  go  forward  is  fear  of  death,  and/'^«'-'' 
life  everlasting  beyond  it.  I  will  yet  go  forward. 
So  Mistrust  and  Timorus  ran  down  the  Hill ;  and 
Christian  went  on  his  way.  But  thinking  again  of 
what  he  heard  from  the  men,  he  felt  in  his  bosom 
for  his  Roll,  that  he  might  read  therein  and  be 
comforted;  but  he  felt  and  ''found  it  not.     Then '  <?'^''i?"^" 

'  _  ^  missed  his 

was  Christian  in  great  distress,  and  knew  not  what  ff^^^j^^^f' 
to  do,  for  he  wanted  that  which  used  to  relieve  him,  ta^ecomfort. 
and  that  which  should  have  been  his  Pass  into  the 
Coelestial  City.     Here    therefore   he    began  to  be 
much  perplexed,   and   knew  not   what  to   do;    at '*'^«^J'«»•- 
last  he  bethought  himself  that  he  had  slept  in  the  hURou-' 
Arbour  that  is  on  the  side  of  the  Hill :  and  falling 
down  upon  his  knees,  he  asked  God  forgiveness  for 
^that  his  foolish  Fact ;  and  then  went  back  to  look 
for  his  Roll.     But  all  the  way  he  went  back,  who 
can   sufficiently  set  forth  the  sorrow  of  Christians 
heart  ?    somtimes    he   sighed,    somtimes  he  wept, 
and  often  times  he  chid  himself,  for  being  so  fool- 
ish to  fall  asleep  in  that  place  which  was  erected 
only  for  a  little   refreshment  ^  from  his  weariness. 
Thus  therefore  he  w^ent  back  ;  carefully  looking  on 
this   side   and  on  that,  all  the  way  as  he  went,  if 
happily  he  might  find  his  Roll,  that  had  been  his 
comfort   so  many  times  in  his  Journey.     He  went 
thus  till  he  came  again  within  sight  of  the  Arbour, 
where  he  sat  and  slept ;  but  that  sight  renewed  his 
'sorrow  the  more,  by  bringing  again,  even  afresh, '  christian 
his  evil  of  sleeping  into  his  mind.     Thus  therefore /oX';/«;^V 
he  now  went  on  bewailing  his  sinful  sleep,  saying,  2^"'' 
0  wretched  Man  that  I  am,  that  I  should  sleep  in  the  7,8.'^''^'' 

*  111  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

^  that    foolish  Fact,   8th   and  '  '  for,'  .'^rd  and  sub.  edits, 

sul).  edits. 


48  CI)f  ^3ilgnms!  laititjrfgsi. 

day-time  !  that  I  should  sleep  in  the  midst  of  diffi- 
culty !  that  I  should  so  indulge  the  flesh,  as  to  use 
that  rest  for  ease  to  my  flesh,  which  the  Lord  of  the 
Hill  hath  erected  only  for  the  relief  of  the  spirits  of 
Pilgrims  !  How  many  steps  have  I  took  in  vain  ! 
(Thus  it  happened  to  Israel  for  their  sin,  they  were 
sent  back  again  by  the  way  of  the  Red-Sea.)  and  I 
am  made  to  tread  those  steps  with  sorrow,  which  I 
might  have  trod  with  delight,  had  it  not  been  for 
this  sinful  sleep.  How  far  might  I  have  been  on 
my  way  by  this  time  !  I  am  made  to  tread  those 
steps  thrice  over,  which  I  needed  not  to  have  trod 
but  once  :  Yea  now  also  I  am  like  to  be  benig-hted, 
for  the  day  is  almost  spent.  O  that  I  had  not  slept  ! 
Now  by  this  time  he  was  come  to  \\\QArhour  again, 
where  for  a  while  he  sat  down  and  wept,  but  at  last 
(as  Christian  would  have  it)  looking  sorrowfully 
'fin^hhu^"^  dow^i  under  the  Settle,  there  he  espied  his  Roll;  the 
Roll-where    which  lic  wlth  tremblino'  and  haste  catch't  up,  and 

he  lostit.^  ...  "  ^. 

put  it  into  his  bosom  ;  but  who  can  tell  how  joyful 
this  Man  was,  when  he  had  gotten  his  Roll  again ! 
For  this  Roll  was  the  assurance  of  his  life  and  accept- 
ance at  the  desired  Haven.  Therefore  he  laid  it  up 
in  his  bosom,  gave  thanks  to  God  for  directing  his 
eye  to  the  place  where  it  lay,  and  with  joy  and  tears 
betook  himself  again  to  his  Journey.  But  Oh  how 
nimbly  now,  did  he  go  up  the  rest  of  the  Hill  ! 
Yet  before  he  got  up,  the  Sun  went  dow^n  upon 
Christian  ;  and  this  made  him  again  recall  the 
vanity  of  his  sleeping  to  his  remembrance,  and  thus 
he  again  began  to  condole  with  himself:  Ah^  thou 
sinful  sleep  !  how  for  thj/  sake  am  I  like  to  he  be- 
nighted in  my  Journey  !  I  must  walk  ivithout  the 
Sun,  darkness  must  cover  the  path  of  my  feet,  and  I 
must  hear  the  noise  of'  the  '^  doleful  Creatures,  because 

•  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

^  Altered  to  '  Oh '  in  2nd  and  '  8tli  and  sub.  edits, 

sub.  edits. 


CiK  i^ilgnms  ^logiesisi*  49 

of  my  sinful  sleep !  Now  also  he  remembered  tlie 
story  that  Mistrust  and  Timorus  told  him  of,  how 
they  were  frighted  with  the  sight  of  the  Lions. 
Then  said  Christian  to  himself  again,  These  Beasts 
range  in  the  night  for  their  prey,  and  if  they  should 
meet  with  me  in  the  dark,  how  should  I  shift  them  ! 
how  should  I  escape  being  by  them  torn  ^  '  in  ' 
pieces  ?  Thus  he  went  on  his  way,  but  while  he 
was  thus  be  way  ling  his  unhappy  miscarriage,  he 
lift  up  his  eyes,  and  behold  there  was  a  very  stately 
Palace  before  him,  the  name  ^whereof  was  Beauti- 
ful, and  it  stood  just  by  the  High-way  side. 

So  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  he  made  haste  and 
went  forward,  that  if  possible  he  might  get  Lodging 
there  ;  now  before  he  had  gone  far,  he  entered  into 
a  very  narrow  passage,  which  was  about  a  furlong 
off  of  the  Porters  Lodge,  and  looking  very  narrowly 
before  him  as  he  went,  he  espied  two  Lions  in  the 
way.  Now,  thought  he,  I  see  the  dangers  that 
Mistrust  and  Timorus,  were  driven  back  by.  (The 
Lions  were  Chained,  but  he  saw  not  the  Chains) 
Then  he  was  afraid,  and  thought  also  himself  to  go 
back  after  them,  for  he  thought  nothing  but  death 
was  b?fore  him  :  ^\xi{\\e  Porter  at  the  Lodge,  whose 
Name  is  "^Wafc/ful,  perceiving  that  Christian  made  ;°M?r.  13. 
a  halt,  as  if  he  would  go  back,  cried  unto  him,  sa}^- 
ing,  Is  thy  strength  so  small  ?  fear  not  the  Lions, 
for  they  are  Chained  :  and  are  placed  there  for  trial 
of  faith  where  it  is ;  and  for  discovery  of  those  that 
have  none  :  keep  in  the  midst  of  the  Path,  and  no 
hurt  shall  come  unto  thee. 

Then  I  saw  that  he  went  on,  trembling  for  fear  of 
the  Lions ;  but  taking  good  heed  to  the  directions 
of  the  Porter ;  he  heard  them  roar,  but  they  did 
him  no  harm.     Then  he  clapt  his  hands,  and  went 

'  Inserted  in  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  ^  The  verse  added  to  2nd  and 

''  Altered  to  '  of  which,'    2nd      suli.  edits, 
and  sub.  edits. 


50 


Cl)e  pilgruuEi  progress!* 


Difficult  is  behind,  Fear  is  before, 

Though  he's  got  on  the  Hill,  the  Lions  roar ; 

A  Christian  man  is  never  long  at  ease. 

When  one  fright's  gone,  another  doth  him  seize. 


Copied  from  tlie  thirteenth  edition,  1 092. 


2ri)e  ^^ilgnmeJ  progitsisi*  5i 

oil,  till  he  came  and  stood  before  the  Gate  where 
the  Porter  was.  Then  said  Christian  to  the  Porter, 
Sir,  What  house  is  this?  and  may  I  lodge  here 
to  night  ?  The  Porter  answered,  This  House  was 
built  by  the  Lord  of  the  Hill,  and  he  built  it  for  the 
relief  and  security  of  Pilgrims.  The  Porter  also 
asked  whence  he  was,  and  whither  he  was  going  ? 

Chr.  I  am  come  from  the  City  of  Destruction, 
and  am.  going  to  Mount  Zion,  but  because  the  Sun 
is  now  set,  I  desire,  if  I  may,  to  lodge  here  to 
night. 

Por.    What  is  i/otir  name  f 

Chr.  My  name  is  now  Christian  ;  but  my  name 
at  the  first  was  Graceless :  I  came  of  the  Race  of 
Japhet,  whom  God  will  perswade  to   dwell   in  the  27.*' 
Tents  0^  Shem. 

Por.  But  how  doth  it  happen  ^that  you  come  so 
late,  the  Sun  is  set  f 

Chr.  I  had  been  here  sooner,  but  that,  wretched 
man  that  I  am  !  I  slept  in  the  Arbour  that  stands 
on  the  Hill  side ;  nay,  1  had  notwithstanding  that, 
been  here  much  sooner,  but  that  in  my  sleep  I  lost 
my  Evidence,  and  came  without  it  to  the  brow  of 
the  Hill ;  and  then  feeling  for  it,  and  finding  it  not, 
I  was  forced  with  sorrow  of  heart,  to  go  back  to  the 
place  where  I  slept  my  sleep,  where  I  found  it,  and 
now  I  am  come. 

Por.  Well,  I  will  call  out  one  of  the  Virgins  of 
this  place,  who  will,  if  she  likes  your  talk,  bring 
you  in  to  the  rest  of  the  Family,  according  to  the 
Rules  of  the  House.  SoWatchful  the  Porter  rang  a 
Bell,  at  the  sound  of  which,  came  out  at  the  door 
of  the  House,  a  Grave  and  Beautiful  Damsel,  named 
Discretion,  and  asked  why  she  was  called. 

The  Porter  answered,  This  Man  is  in  a  Journey 

*  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  ^  '  that,'   omitted   in   8th  and 

sub.  edits. 


52  Cfee  |3ilgnms  ^ardgitd^* 

from  the  City  of  Destruction  to  Mount  Zkm^  but 
being  weary,  and  benighted,  he  asked  me  if  he 
might  lodge  here  to  night ;  so  I  told  him  I  would 
call  for  thee,  who  after  discourse  had  with  him, 
mayest  do  as  seemeth  thee  good,  even  according  to 
the  Law  of  the  House. 

Then  she  asked  him  whence  he  was,  and  wdiither 
he  was  going,  and  he  told  her.  She  asked  him 
also,  how  he  got  into  the  way,  and  he  told  her ; 
Then  she  asked  him,  What  he  had  seen,  and  met 
with  in  the  way,  and  he  told  her  ;  and  last,  she 
asked  his  name,  so  he  said,  It  is  Christian  ;  and  I 
have  so  much  the  more  a  desire  to  lodge  here  to- 
night, because,  by  what  I  perceive,  this  place  was 
built  by  the  Lord  of  the  Hill,  for  the  relief  and 
security  of  Pilgrims.  So  she  smiled,  but  the  water 
stood  in  her  eyes  :  And  after  a  little  pause,  she 
said,  I  will  call  forth  two  or  three  more  of  the 
Family.  So  she  ran  to  the  door,  and  called  out 
Prudence,  Piety,  and  Chnriti/,  who  after  a  little  more 
discourse  with  him,  had  him  in  to  the  Family  ;  and 
manv  of  them  meetino-  him  at  the  threshold  of  the 
House,  said.  Come  in  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord  ; 
this  House  was  built  by  the  Lord  of  the  Hill,  on 
purpose  to  entertain  such  Pilgrims  in.  Then  he 
bowed  his  head,  and  followed  them  into  the  House  : 
So  when  he  was  come  in,  and  set  down,  they  gave 
him  som thing  to  drink  ;  and  consented  together 
that  until  supper  was  ready,  some  ^one  or  two  of 
them  should  have  some  particular  discourse  with 
Christian,  for  the  best  improvement  of  time  :  and 
they  appointed  Pietij,  and  Prudence,  '  ^and  Charity^' 
to  discourse  with  him  ;  and  tlius  they  began. 

cwm^  ^"''       Piety.   Come  (jood  Christian,  since  we  have  been  so 
''»"»•"'        lovimj  to  you,  to  receive  you  into  our  House  this  niyht; 

'  '  some  of  them,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.         '  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


let  us,  if  perhaps  we  may  better  our  selves  thereby,  talk 
with  you  of  all  things  that  have  happened  to  you  in 
your  Pilgrimage. 

Chr.  With  a  very  good  will,  and  I  am  glad  that 
you  are  so  well  disposed. 

Piety.  What  moved  you  at  first  to  betake  yourself 
to  a  Pilgrims  life. 

Chr.  I  was  ''driven  out  of  my  Native  Countrey,  by  tif^'^.^**"^" 
a  dreadful  sound  that  was  in  mine  ears,  to  wit.  That  frivenoutof 
unavoidable  destruction  did  attend  me,  if  I  abode  countrey. 
in  that  place  where  I  was. 

Piety.  But  how  did  it  happen  that  you  came  out  of 
your  Countrey  this  way  f 

Chr.  It  was  as  God  would  have  it,  for  when  I  was 
under  the  fears  of  destruction,  I  did  not  know 
whither  to  go  ;  but  by  chance  there  came  a  Man, 
even  to  me,  (as  I  was  trembling  and  weeping) 
whose  name  is  ^Evangelist,  and  he  directed  me  to  1^°"^^%^°^ 
the  Wicket-Gate,  which  else  I  should  never  have'^sion. 
found  ;  and  so  set  me  into  the  way  that  hath  led 
me  directly  to  this  House. 

Piety.  But  did  you  not  come  by  the  House  of  the 
Interpreter  '? 

Chr.  Yes,  and  did  see  such  things  there,  the  re- 
membrance of  which  will  stick  by  me  as  long  as  I 
live  ;  specially  three  "things,  to  wit.  How  Christ,  in'^  reh^sai 
despite  of  Satan,  maintains  his  work  of  Grace  in  the  'f""  "^ '''« 
heart ;  how  the  Man  had  sinned  himself  quite  out 
of  hopes  of  Gods  mercy  ;  and  also  the  Dream  of  him 
that  thought  in  his  sleep  the  day  of  Judgement  was 
come. 

Piety.    Why  f     Did  you  hear  him  tell  his  Dream  f 

Chr.  Yes,  and  a  dreadful  one  it  was.  I  thought 
it  made  my  heart  ake  as  he  was  telling  of  it,  but 
yet  I  am  glad  I  heard  it. 

Piety.  Was  that  all  that^  you  saw  at  the  House  of 
the  Interpreter  f 

*  '  all  you  saw,'  lUtli  edit. 
F 


54  €:t)e  ^pilgrims  ^arogiteis!* 

Chr.  No,  he  took  me  and  had  me  where  he 
shewed  me  a  stately  Palace,  and  how  the  People 
were  clad  in  Gold  that  were  in  it ;  and  how  there 
came  a  venturous  Man,  and  cut  his  way  througii 
the  armed  men  that  stood  in  the  door  to  keep  him 
out ;  and  how  he  was  bid  to  come  in,  and  win  eter- 
nal Glory.  Methought  those  things  did  ravish  my 
heart ;  I  ^ could  have  stayed  at  that  good  Mans 
house  a  twelve-month,  but  that  I  knew  I  had  further 
to  go. 

Piety.  And  what  saw  you  else  in  the  way  ? 

Chr.  Saw  !  Why  I  went  but  a  little  further,  and 
I  saw  one,  as  I  thought  in  my  niind,  hang  bleeding 
upon  the  Tree  ;  and  the  very  sight  of  him  made  my 
burden  fall  off  my  back  (for  I  groaned  under  a 
^weary  burden)  but  then  it  fell  down  from  off  me. 
'Twas  a  strange  thing  to  me,  for  I  never  saw  such  a 
thing  before  :  Yea,  and  while  I  stood  looking  up, 
(for  then  I  could  not  forbear  looking)  three  shining- 
ones  came  to  me  :  one  of  them  testified  that  my  sins 
were  forgiven  me  ;  another  stript  me  of  my  Rags, 
and  gave  me  this  Broidred  Coat  which  you  see  ; 
and  the  third  set  the  mark  which  you  see,  in  my 
forehead,  and  gave  me  this  sealed  Roll  (and  with 
that  he  plucked  it  out  of  his  bosom.) 

Piety.   But  you  saw  more  then  this,  did  you  not? 

Chr.  The  things  that  I  have  told  you  were  tlie 
best :  yet  some  other  ^ small  matters  I  saw,  as 
namely  I  saw  three  Men,  Simple,  Sloth,  and  Pre- 
sumption^ lye  a  sleep  a  little  out  of  the  way  as  I  came, 
with  Irons  upon  their  heels  ;  but  do  you  think  I 
could  awake  them  !  I  also  saw  ^Formalist  and 
Hypocrisie  come  tumbling  over  the  wall,  to  go,  as 
they  pretended,    to   Sion,    but   they  were   quickly 

'  '  would,'  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  small,'  omitted  in  2nd  and 

^  '  a  heavy,'  2nd  to  7th  edit.  ;  sub.  edits. 
'  a   very   heavy,'   8th  -and    sub.  *  '  Formality,'    .3rd    and    sub. 

edits.  edits. 


lost ;  even  as  I  myself  did  tell  them,  but  they  would 
not  believe  :  but,  above  all,  I  found  it  hard  work  to 
get  up  this  Hill,  and  as  hard  to  come  by  the  Lions 
^mouths  ;  and  truly  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  good 
Man,  the  Porter  that  stands  at  the  Gate,  I  do  not 
know,  but  that  after  all,  I  might  have  gone  back 
again  :  but  now  I  thank  God  I  am  here,  and  I 
thank  you  for  receiving  of  me. 

Then  Prudence  thought  good  to  ask  him  a  few 
questions,  and  desired  his  answer  to  them. 

Pru.  Do  ijou  not  think  somtinies  of  the  Coutitrey ''Prmence 

r  1  ai  discourses 

jrom  whence  you  came  /  /"'»•«' 

Chr.  Yes,  *^but  with  much  shame  and  detestation  ;  ■'christians 

Tridti,  if  I  had  been  mindful  of  that  Countreii  from  '«'  -'^"^'w 

whence  I  came   out,   I  might   have  had  opportunity  "eb.  n.  is, 

to  have  returned,  but  now  I  desire  a  better  Coimtrey, 

that  is,  an  Heavenly. 

Pru.  Do  you  not  yet  bear  away  with  you  some  of 

the  things  that  then  you  were  conversant  withal  f 
Chr.  Yes,  but  greatly  against  my  will ;  especially 

my  inward  and  ^carnal  coo-itations  :   with  which  all  '^^"f'i*" 

./  o  IP  1         distasted 

my  Countrey-men,    as   well    as    myself,   were  de-  ■^'^itii  capmi 

»'''  111  !•  cofjUations. 

lighted  ;  but  now  all  those  thmgs  are  m}^  grief:  and 
might    I    but    chuse    mine    own    things,    I    would 
^chuse  never  to  think  of  those  things  more  ;    but  X'^i^^'"'"'* 
when  I  would  be  doing  of  that  which  is  best,  that '^°'""'' 
which  is  worst  is  with  me. 

Pru.  Do  you  not  find  sometimes,  as  if  those  things 
were  vanquished,  ivhich  at  other  times  are  your  per- 
plecvity. 

Chr.   Yes,  but  that   is  but  seldom  ;   but  they  are 
to  me  ^Golden  hours,  in  which  such  things  happens  '0^^^*"^"* 
to  me'.  ''^«'■■'• 

Pru.  Can  you  remember  by  what  means  you  find 
your  anoyances  at  times,  as  if  they  were  vanquished  f 

°  '  mouth,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  ''  Fii'st    inserted    in    the  8th 

*  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  edit. 

f2 


56  C!)e  ^3ilgnm5  ^rogresiei* 

M/«)rchris-  Chr.  Yes,  when  ''I  think  what  I  saw  at  the  Cross, 
l'o"tf' '  that  will  do  it ;  and  when  I  look  upon  my  Broi- 
^orriu^is.  dered  Coat,  that  will  do  it ;  also  when  I  look  into 

the  Roll  that  I  carry  in  my  bosom,  that  will  do  it ; 

and  when  my  thoughts  wax  warm  about  whither  I 

am  going,  that  will  do  it. 

Pru.  And  ivhat  is  it  that  makes  you  so  desirous  to 

go  to  Mount  Zion  ? 
'ir/iy Chris-      Chr.  Why,  'there  I  hope  to  see  him  alive.,  that 
h.atMov.nt  did  hang  dead  on  the  Cross;  and  there  I  hope  to 

be  rid  of  all  those  things,  that  to  this  day  are  in  me 
'  +  isa.  25. 8.  an    anoiance  to  me;    there   they  say  there   is  no 

death,  and  there  I  shall  dwell  with  such  Company 

as  I  like  best.     For  to  tell  you  truth,  I  love  him, 

because    I     was    by    him     eased    of    my    burden, 

and  I  am  weary  of  my  inward  sickness  ;   I  would 

fain  be  where  I   shall  die  no  more,  and   with  the 

Company   that   shall   continually  cry   Holy,  Holy, 

Holy. 
''''ciis?ourscI       '  Then  said   Charity  to    Christian,  Have   you   a 
'''""■         ''  family  f  are  you  a  married  manf 

'  Chr.  I  have  a  Wife  and  four  small  Children. 
'  Cha.  And  why  did  you  not  bring  them  along  with 

'  you  f 
'l^Ti'ovt       '  ^'^^^*-  Then  Christiayi  *wept,  and  said.  Oh  how 
''^anlaW'  '  ^villingly  would  I  have  done  it,  but  they  were  all 
'drm.        <  of  them  utterly  averse  to  my  going  on  Pilgrim- 

'  age. 

'Cha.  But  you  should  have  talked  to  them,  and  have 

*  endeavoured  to  have  shewen  them  the  danger  of  being 

'  behind. 

'  Chr.  So  1  did,  and  told  them   also  what  God 
Gen.  19. 14.  4  j^g^j  shewed  to  me  of  the  destruction  of  our  City  ; 

'  but  I  seemed  to  them  as  one  that  mocked,  and 

'  they  believed  me  not. 


*  First    inserted   in    the    2iid  °  Lines  marked  '  were  first  in- 

edit.  '  sorted  in  the  2nd  edit. 


'  Cha  A7id  did  you  'pray  to  God  that  he  would 
*  bless  your  counsel  to  them  ? 

'  Chr.  Yes,  and  that  with  much  affection ;  for 
you  must  think  that  my  Wife  and  poor  Children 
were  very  dear  unto  me. 

'  Cha.  But  did  you  tell  them  of  your  own  sorroiv, 
and  fear  of  destruction  f  for  I  suppose  that  destruc- 
tion was  visible  enough  to  you  f 

'  Chr.  Yes,    over,   and    over,    and  over.       They 
might  also  *see  my  fears  in  my  countenance,  in  ^tj^n" /,«,., 
my  tears,   and  also  in  my   trembling  under  the  'i0t3« 
apprehension  of  the  Judgment  that  did  hang  over  '^Try'' 
our  heads  ;  but  all  was  not  sufficient  to  prevail  with  '^a'^^!' 
them  to  come  with  me. 

'  Cha.  But  what  could  they  say  for  themselves  why 
they  came  not  f 

'  Chr.  Why,  *my  Wife  was  afraid  of  losing  thisjwj'ir" 
World  ;  and  my  Children  were  given  to  the  foolish  '-adtdrm 
delights  of  youth  :  so  what  by  one  thing,  and  what  ''tmfim. 
by  another,  they  left  me  to  wander  in  this  manner 
alone. 

'  Cha.  But  did  you  not  with  your  vain  life,  damp 
all  that  you  by  words  used  by  way  of  perswasion  to 
bring  them  away  with  you  f 

'  Chr.  Indeed  I  cannot  commend  my  life  ;  for  I 
am  conscious  to  my  self  of  many  failings  :  therein, 
I  know  also  that  a  man  by  his  conversation,  may 
soon  overthrow  what  by  argument  or  perswasion 
he  doth  labour  to  fasten  upon  others  for  their 
good  :  Yet,  this  I  can  say,  I  was  very  wary  of 
giving  them  occasion,  by  any  unseemly  action,  to 
make  them  averse  to  going  on  Pilgrimage.  Yea,  -^o'^o^^^'j^"'* 
for  this  very  thing,  they  would  tell  me  I  was  too!j^}o7w^-j 
precise,  and  that  I  denied  my  self  of  ^sins  (for  their  .'c'J 
sakes)  in  which  they  saw  no  evil.  Nay,  I  think  I 
may  say,  that,  if  what  they  saw  in  me  did  hinder 
them,    it   was    my    great    tenderness    in    sinning 

■*  '  of  things,"  after  the  2nd  edit. 


fe  and 
Idren. 


58  Cfte  ^ailgnms;  ^^rogres^^* 

'  against  God,  or  of  doing  any  wrong  to  my 
'  Neighbor. 
'*i  John  3.  '  Cha.  Indeed,  *Cain  hated  his  Brother,  because  his 
•Christian  *  own  works  were  evil,  and  his  Brother's  righteous  ; 
'Vidr  blood  '  and  if  thy  Wife  and  Children  have  been  offended  with 
'],eruh.  '  thee  for  this,  they  thereby  shew  themselves  to  be  iui- 
tEzek.  3.19.1  ^  'placable  to  '\good ;  and  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul 
'■from  their  blood.' 

Now  I   saw  in  my  Dream,  that  thus  they   sat 

talking  together  until  supper  was  ready.      So  when 

they  had    made   ready,   they   sat    down    to   meat; 

tiM'la^i^to ' -'^o'^^  the  Table  was  furnished  ^with  fat  things,  and 

hi,  supper,   ^yjt-}^  Wine  that  was  well  refined  ;  and  all  their  talk 

LHS/ef   'at  the  Table,  was  about  the  Lord  of  the  Hill :  As 

time.         namely,  about  what  ^he  had  done,  and  wherefore 

he  did  what  he  did,  and  why  he  had  builded  that 

House  :    and  by  what  they  said,  I  perceived  that 

he  had  been  a  great  Warriour,  and  had  fought  with 

il^s^^fi^    and  slain  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,   but 

not  without  great  danger  to  himself,  which  made 

me  love  him  the  more. 

For,  as  they  said,  and  as  I  believe  (said  Chris- 
tian) he  did  it  with  the  loss  of  much  blood  ;  but 
that  which  put  Glory  of  Grace  into  all  he  did,  was, 
that  he  did  it  '^out'  of  pure  love  to  his  Countrey. 
And  besides,  there  were  some  of  them  of  the  House- 
hold that  said,  they  had  'seen  and  spoke  with  him 
since  he  did  dye  on  the  Cross ;  and  they  have  at- 
tested, that  they  had  it  from  his  own  lips,  that  he  is 
such  a  lover  of  poor  Pilgrims,  that  the  like  is  not 
to  be  found  from  the  East  to  the  West. 

They  moreover  gave  an  instance  of  what  they 
affirmed,  and  that  was.  He  had  stript  himself  of  his 
glory  that  he  might  do  this  for  the  Poor ;  and  that 

*  All  the  editions  refer  in  error  '  '  HE,'  in  all  this  paragraph, 

to    '  Ezek.   4.    19;'     and     have      3rd  and  sub.  edits, 
placed  the  mark  of  reference  be-  *  2nd  and  sub.  edits, 

twcen  the  words  '  to  t  good.'  '  '  been,'  after  the  2nd  edit. 

*  '  out,'  8th  and  sub.  edits. 


'  Christ 
makes 


Sam.  2.1 
113. 
7.2- 


they  heard  him  say  and  affirm,  That  he  would  not 
dwell  in  the  Mountain  of  Zioji  alone.  They  said 
moreover,  That  he  had  made  many  Pilgrims 
''Princes,  though  by  nature  they  were  Beggars 
born,  and  their  original  had  been  the  Dunghil.         bS^s!^ 

Thus  they  discoursed  together  till  late  at  night,  y/af 
and  after  they  had  committed  themselves  to  their 
Lord  for  Protection,  they  betook  themselves  to  rest. 
The  Pilgrim  they  laid  in  a  large  upper  ''Chamber,  ^eS"' 
whose  window  opened  towards  the  Sun  rising ;  the  ^""^ 
name  of  the  Chamber  was  Peace,  where  he  slept  till 
break  of  day ;  and  then  he  awoke  and  sang, 

Whei'e  am  I  now  !  is  this  the  love  and  care 
Of  Jesus,  for  the  men  that  Pilgrims  are  ! 
Thus  to  provide  !     That  I  shoidd  be  forgiven  ! 
And  dwell  already  the  next  door  to  Heaven  ! 

So  in  the  Morning  they  all  got  up,  and  after  some 
more  discourse,  they  told  him  that  he  should  not 
depart,  till  they  had  shewed  him  the  Rarities  of  that 
place.  And  first  they  had  him  into  the  Study, 
"where  they  shewed  him  Records  of  the  greatest ;  christian 

■/  C7  fiGtl  znto  the 

Antiquity :  in  which,  as  I  remember  my  Dream,  stadn,ami 
they  shewed  him  farst  the  Pedigree  oi  the  Lord  ot  there 
the  Hill,  that  he  was  the  Son  of  the  Ancient  of 
Days,  and  came  by  ^an  eternal  Generation.  Here 
also  was  more  fully  Recorded  the  Acts  that  he  had 
done,  and  the  names  of  manv  hundreds  that  he 
had  taken  into  his  service  ;  and  how  he  had  placed 
them  in  such  Habitations  that  could  neither  by 
length  of  Days,  nor  decaies  of  Nature,  be  dissolved. 
Then  they  read  to  him  some  of  the  worthy  Acts 
that  some  of  his  Servants  had  done.  As  how  they 
had  subdued   Kingdoms,    wrought   Righteousness, 


'  References  added  to  the  2nd         '  '  by    that,'    3rd     and     sub. 
edition,  and  sub.  edits 


60  C&e  ^ailgnins  ^Jrogrrsisi, 

obtained   Promises,   stopped   the  mouths  of  Lions, 

-iiteb.  11. 33,  quenched  the*^  violence   of  Fire,  escaped  the  edge 

^^-  of  the  Sword  ;  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong, 

waxed  valiant  in   fight,   and  turned  to  flight  the 

Armies  of  the  Aliens. 

Then  the}^  read  again  in  another  part  of  the  Re- 
cords of  the  House,  where  it  was  shewed  how  willing 
their  Lord  was  to  receive  into  his  favour  any,  even 
any,  though  they  in  time  past  had  offered  great 
affronts  to  his  Person  and  proceedings.  Here  also 
were  several  other  Histories  of  many  other  famous 
things,  of  all  which  Christian  had  a  view.  As  of 
things  both  Ancient  and  Modern  ;  together  with 
Prophecies  and  Predictions  of  things  that  have  their 
certain  accomplishment,  both  to  the  dread  and 
amazement  of  enemies,  and  the  comfort  and  solace 
of  Pilgrims. 

The  next  day  they  took  him  and  had  him  into 
'Christian  thc  ^Armory  ;  where  they  shewed  him  all  manner 
Ai-mory.  of  Fumiturc,  wliicli  their  Lord  had  provided  for  Pil- 
grims, as  Sword,  Shield,  Helmet,  Brest  plate,  All 
Prayer,  and  Shooes  that  would  not  wear  out.  And 
there  was  here  enough  of  this  to  harness  out  as 
many  men  for  the  service  of  their  Lord,  as  there  be 
Stars  in  the  Heaven  for  multitude. 

They  also  shewed  him  some  of  the  Engines  witli 

which  some  of  his  Servants  had   done  wonderful 

'Christian is  thing's.     ^  Thcv  shewed  him  ^ Moses  ^06.,  the  Ham- 

WOtfl^  to  S€€  ^  *^ 

^^^CH«<  nier  and  Nail  with  which  Jael  slew  Sisera,  the 
Pitchers,  Trumpets,  and  Lamps  too,  with  which 
Gideon  put  to  flight  the  Armies  of  Midian.  Then 
they  shewed  liim  the  Oxes  goad  wherewith  Shamger 
slew  six  hundred  men.  They  shewed  him  also  tlie 
Jaw  bone  with  which  Sampson  did  such  mighty 
feats  ;  they  shewed  him  moreover  the  Sling  and 
Stone  with  which  David  slew  Goliah  of  Gath  :   and 

*  '  Mqses's,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


the  Sword  also  with  which  their  Lord  will  kill  the 
Man  of  Sin,  in  the  day  that  he  shall  rise  up  to  the 
prey.  They  shewed  him  besides  many  excellent 
things,  with  which  Christian  was  much  delighted. 
This  done,  they  went  to  their  rest  again. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  on  the  morrow  he 
got  up  to  go  forwards,  but  they  desired  him  to  stay 
till  the  next  day  also,  and  then  said  they,  we  will, 
^if  the  day  be  clear,  shew  you  the  ^delectable  Moun-  schristian 
tains  ;  which  they  said,  would   yet  further  add  to  dd'cctaue 

hn      .        1  ,1  ,ii'i  Mountains. 

IS  comfort;  because  they  were  nearer  the  desired 

^  Haven,  then  the  place  where  at  present  he  was.   So 

he   consented  and  staid.     When  the  Morning  was 

up,  they  had  him  to  the  top  of  the  House,  ^and  bid  ^i^a.  33.  le, 

him  look  South,  so  he  did  ;  and  behold  at  a  great 

distance  he  saw  a  most  pleasant  Mountainous  Coun- 

trey,  beautified  with  Woods,  Vinyards,  Fruits  of  all 

sorts.  Flowers  also;  '^with'  Springs  and  Fountains, 

very   delectable  to  behold.       Then  he   asked    the 

name  of  the  Countrey,  they  said  it  was  Immanueh 

Land:  and  it  is  as  common,  said  they,  as  this  Hill 

is,   to   and  for  all  the  Pilgrims.     And   when   thou 

comest  there,  from  thence,  ^said  they,  thou  maist 

see  to  the  Gate  of  the  Coelestial  City,  as  the  Shep- 

heards  that  live  there  will  make  appear. 

Now  he   bethought  himself  of  setting  forward,' ^^J^^^.^j^^.^^ 

and   they  were  willing   he   should  :   but  first,  said 

they,  let  us  go  again  into  the  Armory,  so  they  did  ; 

and  when  he  came  there,  they  "^ harnessed  him  from  '■christian 

head  to  foot,  with  what  was  of  proof,  lest  perhaps  he  ^t- 

should   meet  with  assaults  in   the  way.     He  being 

therefore    thus     acoutred    walketh     out    with     his 

friends  to  the  Gate,  and  there  he  asked  the  Porter 

if  he  saw  any  Pilgrims  pass  by.  Then   the  Porter 

answered,  Yes.  , 

^  (if  the  day  be  clear),  2ncl  and  *  Omitted  in  the  first,  edit, 

sub.  edits.  ^  '  said  they,'    omitted  in  3rd 

^  '  Heaven,'  7th  and  loth.  and  sub.  edit. 


tcay 
mod. 


'  How  Chris 
tian  and  tk 


62  Cfte  pilgrims  progrt^s!* 

Chr.   Pray  did  you  know  him?  '  ^said  he.' 

Por.  I  asked  his  name,  and  he  told  me  it  was 
Faithful. 

Chr.  O,  said  Christian,  I  know  him,  he  is  my 
Towns-man,  my  near  Neighbour,  he  comes  from  the 
place  where  I  was  born  :  how  far  do  you  think  he 
may  be  before  ? 

Porter.  He  is  got  by  this  time  below  the  Hill. 

Chr.  'Well,  said  Christian,  good  Porter  the  Lord 
atpartiny*  bc  with  tlicc,  aud  add  to  all  thy  blessings  much  in- 
crease, for  the  kindness  that  thou  hast  shewed  to 
me. 

Then  he  began  to  go  forward,  but  Discretion, 
Piety,  Charittj,  and  Prudence,  would  accompany  him 
down  to  the  foot  of  the  Hill.  So  they  went  on  to- 
gether, reiterating  their  former  discourses  till  they 
came  to  go  down  the  Hill.  Then  said  Christian, 
As  it  was  difficult  coming  up,  so  (so  far  as  I  can  see) 
it  is  daiuferous  going  down.  Yes,  said  Prudence,  so 
it  is ;  for  it  is  an  hard  matter  for  a  man  to  go  down 
o/nu^iua-  into  the  valley  of  Humiliation,  as  thou  art  now,  and 
''*"'■  to  catch  no  slip  by  the  way  ;  therefore,  said  they, 

are  we  come  out  to  accompany  thee  down  the  Hill. 
So  he  began  to  go  down,  but  very  warily,  yet  he 
caught  a  slip  or  too. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  these  good  Com- 
panions, ^when  Christian  was  gone  down  to  the 
bottom  of  the  Hill,  gave  him  a  leaf  of  Bread,  a  bottle 
of  Wine,  and  a  cluster  of  Raisins  ;  and  then  he  went 
on  his  way. 

But  now  in  this  Valley  of  Humiliation  poor 
Christian  was  hard  put  to  it,  for  he  had  gone  but  a 
little  way  before  he  espied  a  foul  Fiend  coming  over 
the  field  to  meet  him  ;  his  name  is  Apollyon.  Then 
did  Christian  begin  to  be  afraid,  and  to  cast  in  his 

«  Added    to     2nd    and     sub.  *  From    '  when  '     to     '  Hill,' 

edits.  in    parentheses     after    the     1st 

''  0th  and  sub.  edit.  edit. 


Cl)e  t^ilgnmg  prDgredd, 


63 


Whilst  Cliristiaii  is  among  his  godly  friends, 
Their  golden  mouths  make  him  sufficient  'mends. 
For  all  his  griefs,  and  when  they  let  him  go, 
He's  clad  with  northern  steel  from  top  to  toe. 


Copied  from  the  13th  edition,  1()92. 


64  Cl)e  ^ailgnms;  llroffies^si, 

mind  whither  to  go  back,  or  to  stand  his  ground. 

'^^Anmr    ^"^  ^^^  considered  again,  that  he  liad  no  Armour 

'back'i'       ^^^'  ^^^^  back,  and  therefore  thouglit  that  to  turn  the 

back   to  him,  might  give  him  greater  advantage 

with  ease  to  pierce  him  with  his  Darts  ;  therefore 

l^ohuimr  he  resolved  ""to  venture,  and  stand  his  ground.     For 

I'ro^hlf'   thought  he,  had  I  no  more  in  mine  eye,  then  the 

Apoiiyon.     gaviug  of   my  life,  'twould    be    the    best   way   to 

stand. 

So  he  went  on,  and  Apolhjon  met  him  ;  now  the 
Monster  was  hidious  to  behold,  he  was  cloathed  with 
scales  like  a  Fish  (and  they  are  his  pride)  he  had 
Wings  like  a  Dragon,  '  ^feet  like  a  Bear,'  and  out 
of  his  belly  came  Fire  and  Smoak,  and  his  mouth 
was  as  the  mouth  of  a  Lion.  When  he  was  come 
up  to  Christian,  he  beheld  him  with  a  disdainful 
countenance,  and  thus  began  to  question  with  him. 
Apol.  Whoice  come  you,  and  ivJdther  are  you 
bound f 

Chr.  I  '^am'  come  from  the  City  of  Desfructioti, 
[Dhcoia-se    Svhich   is  the  place  of  all  evil,  and  am  g-oino-  to  the 

Christian        CltV  01  Zl07l. 

'yon.  Apol.  By  this  1  "perceive  thou  art  one  oj  my  Sub- 

jects, for  all  that  Countrey  is  mine ;  and  I  am  the  Prince 
and  God  of  it.  How  is  it  then  that  thou  hast  ran 
away  from  thy  King  f  Were  it  not  that  I  hope  thou 
maiest  do  me  more  service,  I  ivould  strike  thee  now  at 
one  blow  to  the  ground. 

Chr.  I  was  born  indeed  in  your  Dominions,  but 
your  service  was  hard,  and  your  wages  such  as  a 

;^^»Rom.  c.  man  could  not  live  on,  for  the  wages  of  Sin  is  death; 
therefore  when  I  was  come  to  years,  I  did  as  other 
^  considerate  persons  do,  look  out,  if  perhaps  I 
might  mend  my  self. 

Apol.   There  is   no  Prince  that  will  thus   lightly 

•  Oth,  16B4,  and  puh.  *  Added  to  2nd  and  sub.  edit. 

'  '  on  the,' 3rd  and  sub.  edits.'  '  '  considcratod,"  .'frd  and  sub. 

edits,  to  the  !Uh. 


We  f  ilcrnmg  ^progresis!*  65 

lose  his  Subjects,  neither  will  I  as  yet  lose  thee.     But 
since  thou  complaifiest  of  thy  service  and  wages  '"<5e^„He°"^°"^ 
content  to  go  back  ;  ivhat  our  Countrey  will  afford,  I  do 
here  promise  to  give  thee. 

Chr.  But  I  have  let  my  self  to  another,  even  to 
the  King  of  Princes,  and  how  can  I  with  fairness 
go  back  with  thee  ? 

Apol.  Thou  hast  done  in  this,  according  to  the  Pro- 
verb, "  chanqed  a  bad  for  a  worse  :  bat  it  is  ordinarii "  Apoiiyon 

r  7  77  r  77  7  1  •        n  vmjLi-values 

jor  those  that  have  projessed  themselves  his  servants,  <^}"^ts  ser- 
after  a  while  to  give  him  the  slip,  and  return  again  to 
me  :  do  thou  so  to,  and  all  shall  be  ivell. 

Chr.  I  have  given  him  my  faith,  and  sworn  my 
Allegiance  to  him  ;  how  then  can  I  go  back  from 
this,  and  not  be  hanged  as  a  Traitor? 

Apol.   Thou  didest  the  same  to  me^  and  yet  I  fl;7w°Apoiiyon 

.77.  7  77      • /»  7  -77        ■?  >  prdcnds  to 

Willing  to  pass  by  all,  ij  now  thou  will  ''yet    turn  i"^ ''^^trcijui.-' 
again,  and  go  back. 

Chr.  What  I  promised  thee  was  in  my  non-age ; 
and  besides,  I  count  that  the  Prince  under  whose 
Banner  now  I  stand,  is  able  to  absolve  me  ;  yea,  and 
to  pardon  also  what  I  did  as  to  my  compliance  with 
thee  :  and  besides,  (O  thou  destroying  Apollyon)  to 
speak  truth,  I  like  his  Service,  his  Wages,  his  Ser- 
vants, his  Government,  his  Company,  and  Coun- 
trey better  then  thine  :  and  therefore  leave  off  to 
perswade  me  further,  I  am  his  Servant,  and  I  will 
follow  him. 

Apol.    Consider  aqain  ivhen  thou  art  iii  cool  blood,  ^ronyon 

1  ft/  ^  plcctus  the 

what  thou  art  like  to  meet  with  in  the  wait  that  thoui^''^""''""'' 
qoest.     Ihou  knowest  that  for  the  most  part,  his  Ser- *° '^'^"■'"^ 

•'  mil  7  -T'  Christian 

vants  come  to  an  ill  end,  because  theii  are  transaressors  f''""' p^'''^'^- 

J  -fT  /»       T  inn  in /lis 

against  me,  and  my  ways :  now  many  of  them  have  ««^- 
been  put  to  shameful  deaths  !  and  besides,  thou  countest 

*  Omitted  in  2nd  and  all  sub.  ^  Not  in  the  1st  and  2nd,  but 

edits.,  but  the  mark  for  the  re-  inserted    in    the    3rd    and   sub. 

ference  is  continued  in  the  2nd  edits, 
edit. 


6G  m)t  pilgrims  f  rogresis;* 

his  service  better  then  mine,  whereas  he  never  came  yet 
from  the  place  where  he  is,  to  deliver  any  that  served 
him  out  of  ^our  hands  ;  but  as  for  me,  how  many 
times,  as  all  the  World  very  well  hnows,  have  I  delivered, 
either  by  power  or  fraud,  those  that  have  faithfully 
served  me,  from  him  and  his,  thoiujh  taken  by  them, 
and  so  I  will  deliver  thee. 

Chr.  His  forbearing  at  present  to  deliver  them, 
is  on  purpose  to  try  their  love,  whether  they  will 
cleave  to  him  to  the  end  :  and  as  for  the  ill  end 
thou  sayest  they  come  too,  that  is  most  glorious  in 
their  account :  For  for  present  deliverance,  they  do 
not  much  expect  it ;  for  they  stay  for  their  Glory, 
and  then  they  shall  have  it,  when  their  Prince 
comes  in  his,  and  the  Glory  of  the  Angels. 

Apol.  Thou  hast  already  been  imfaithful  in  thy 
service  to  him,  and  how  dost  thou  think  to  receive 
waffes  of  him  f 

Chr.  Wherein,  O  Apollyon,  have  I  been  unfaith- 
ful to  him. 
tua!uThr\s-      Apol.   Thou  didst  faint  at  first  setting  out,  ivhen 
^auij"'^''    i^^f^^^  ^^^-^^   almost   choked  in   the  Gulf  of  Dispond ; 
agahxst  him.  ^j^^^^  diddcst  attempt  wrong  ways  to  be  rid  of  thy  bur- 
den, whereas  thoji  shouldest  have  stayed  till  thy  Prince 
had  taken  it  off:   Thou  didst  sir  fully  sleep  and  loose 
thy  choice  thing  :    thou  ivast  also   almost  perswaded 
to  qo  back,  at  the  sight  of  the  Lions  ;   and  when  thou 
talkest  of  thy  Journey,  and  of  what  thou  hast  heard, 
and  seen,  thou  art  inivardly  desirous  of  vain-glory  in 
all  that  thou  sayest  or  doest. 

Chr.  All  this  is  true,  and  much  more,  which  thou 
hast  left  out;  but  the  Prince  whom  I  serve  and 
honour,  is  merciful,  and  ready  to  forgive:  but  be- 
sides, these  infirmities  possessed  me  in  thy  Coun- 
trey,  for  there  I  suckt  them  in,  and  I  have  groaned 
under  them,  been  sorrj'  for  them,  and  have  obtained 
pardon  of  my  Prince. 

*  '  their,'  2iid  and  suli.  edits. 


Apol.  Then  Apolli/on  broke  out  into  a  p;rievous  Apoiiyon  m 
rage,  saying,  I  am  mi  miemy  to  this  rrince  :  1  liate  upotiQWrn- 
his  Person,  his  Laws,  and  People  :  I  am  come  out  on 
purpose  to  withstand  thee. 

Chr.  Apoiiyon  beware  what  you  do,  for  I  am  in 
the  Kings  High-way,  the  way  of  Holiness,  there- 
fore take  heed  to  your  self. 

Apol.  Then   Apoiiyon    strodled    quite   over   the 
whole  breadth  of  the  way,  and  said,  I  am  void  of 
fear  in  this  matter,  prepare  thy  self  to  dye,  for   I 
swear  '  ^by  my  Infernal  Den,  that'  thou  shalt  go  no 
further,  here  will  I  spill  thy  soul ;  and  with  that,  he 
threw  a  flaming  Dart  at  his   brest,  but  Christian 
had  a  Shield  in  his  hand,  with  wliich  he  caught  it, 
and  so   prevented   the   danger  of  that.     Then  did 
Christian  draw,  for  he  saw  'twas  time  to  bestir  him  ; 
and  Apoiiyon  as   fast  made  at  him,  throwing  Darts 
as  thick   as   Hail ;  by   the  which,  notwithstanding 
all   that  Christian   coukl   do    to  avoid   it,  Apoiiyon  christian 
wounded  him   in  his  ^head,  his  '^hand  and  "^  ioot',hulnder^ 
this  made  Christian  give  a  little  back  :    Apoiiyon  fam^'and 
therefore  followed   his  work  amain,  and  Christian  tZl^'''' 
again  took  courage,  and  resisted  as  manfully  as  he 
could.     This   sore  Combat  lasted  for  above  half  a 
day,  even  till  Christian  was  almost  quite  spent.   For 
you   must   know  that  Christian  by   reason    of    his 
wounds,  must  needs  grow  weaker  and  weaker. 

Then  Apoiiyon  espying  his  opportunity^  began  to 
gather  up   close  to   Christian,  and   wrestling   with 
him,  gave  him  a  dreadful  fall ;  and  with  that,  Chris-  Apoiiyon 
tians  Sword  flew  out  of  his  hand.     Then  said  Apol-  tofi"JZ 
lion,  I  am  sure  of  thee  now  ;  and  with  that,  he  had  uan.^^"^' 
almost'  prest  him  to  death,  so  that  Christian  began 
to    despair   of  life.      But  as   God  would    have  it, 
while  Apoiiyon  was  fetching  of  his  last  blow,  thereby 


'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  the,'  omitted    in   2nd    and 

''  Italics,  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  sub.  edits. 


68 


€i)t  |3ilcj:nm6  ^Jrogiegs;* 


A  more  unequal  niatcli  can  liariily  be, 
Christian  must  figlit  an  Angel ;  but  you  see, 
The  valiant  man  by  lianilUng  Sword  and  Shield, 
Doth  make  him,  tho'  a  Dragon,  quit  the  field. 


Copied  from  the  thirteenth  edition,  1G92. 


to  make  a  full  end   of  this  good  Man,   Christian 
nimbly  reached  out  his  hand  for  his  Sword,  and 
caught  it,  saying,  Rejoyce  not  against  me,  0  mine  rlZlT^vcr 
Enemy  !  when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise ;  and  with  that,  ufMie"?. 
gave  him   a  deadly  thrust,  which  made  him  give  ^ " 
back,  as  one  that  had  received  his  mortal  wound  : 
Christian  perceiving  that,  made  at  him  again,  say- 
ing, Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  Con-  gLt  ^°'"'  ^• 
querors, '  ^through  him  that  loved  ?(s.'     And  with  that,  •^^™-  *•  ^• 
Apollyon  spread  forth  his  Dragons  wangs,  and  sped 
him  away,  that  Christian  ^for  a  season  saw  him  no 
more. 

In  this  Combat  no  man  can  imagine,  unless  he 
had  seen  and  heard  as  I  did,  what  yelling,  and  io^'^'t/tu' 
hideous  roaring  Apollyon  made  all  the  time  of  the  fke[!^ltaior. 
fight,  he  spake  like  a  Dragon :  and  on  the  other 
side,  what  sighs  and  groans  ^brast  from  Christians 
heart.  I  never  saw  him  all  the  while,  give  so  much 
as  one  pleasant  look,  till  he  perceived  he  had 
wounded  Apollyon  with  his  two  edged  Sword,  then 
indeed  he  did  smile,  and  look  upward  :  but  'twas 
the  dreadfuUest  sight  that  ever  I  saw-. 

So  when   the  Battel   was   over.  Christian  said,  I 
will  here  give  thanks  to  him  that  hath  delivered  me  g^Jl^eod 
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lion  ;  to  him  that  did  help  %^^l{Ze. 
me  against  Apollyon  :  and  so  he  did,  saying. 

Great  Beelzebub,  the  Captain  of  this  Fiend, 
Designed  my  ruin  ;  therefore  to  this  end 
He  sent  him  harnest  out,  and  he  with  rage 
That  Hellish  was,  did  fiercely  me  Ingage  : 
But  blessed  Michael  helped  nie,  and  I 
By  dint  of  Sword,  did  quickly  make  him  fly e  ; 
Therefore  to  him  let  me  give  lasting  praise, 
A  nd  thank  arid  bless  his  holy  name  always. 

^^  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  '  '  groans  burst,'  2nd  and  sub. 

■  '  for    a   season,'    omitted    in      edits. 
2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

G 


70 


Cfte  }3ilgnme!  |3rogres!£S» 


»  Christian 
goei!  Oil  his 
Journey  with 
his  Sieord 
drav-n  in  his 
hand. 


'  '  The  Valley 
of  the  shadow 
of  Death.' 


'  The  Chil- 
dren of  Vie 
Spies  go 
bock. 

' ' *  Numb 
13.' 


Then  there  came  to  him  an  hand,  with  some  of  the 
leaves  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  the  which  Christian  took, 
and  applied  to  the  wounds  tliat  he  had  received  in 
the  Battel,  and  was  healed  immediately.  He  also  sat 
down  in  that  place  to  eat  Bread,  and  to  drink  of  the 
Bottle  that  was  given  him  a  little  before  ;  so  being 
refreshed,  he  addressed  himself  to  his  Journey,  with 
his  ^Sword  drawn  in  his  hand,  for  he  said,  I  know 
not  but  some  other  Enemy  may  be  at  hand.  But 
he  met  with  no  other  affront  from  Apollyon,  quite 
through  this  Valley. 

Now  at  the  end  of  this  Valley,  was  another, 
called  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Deaths  and 
Christian  must  needs  go  through  it,  because  the 
way  to  the  Coelestial  City  lay  through  the  midst  of 
it :  Now  this  Valley  is  a  very  solitary  place.  The 
Prophet  ^^ Jeremiah  thus  describes  it,  A  Wilderness,  a 
Land  of  desarts,  and  of  Pits,  a  Land  of  drought,  and 
of  the  shadoio  of  death,  a  Land  that  no  Man  (but  a 
Christian)  pa.sseth  through,  and  ivhere  no  man  dwelt. 

Now  here  Christian  was  worse  put  to  it  then  in 
his  fight  with  ApoUyon,  as  by  the  sequel  you  shall 
see. 

I  saw  then  in  my  Dream,  that  when  Christian 
was  got  to  the  Borders  of  the  Shadow  of  Death, 
there  met  him  two  Men,  '^Children  of  them  that 
brought  up  an  evil  report  of  the  good  Land,  making- 
hast  to  go  back :  to  whom  Christian  spake  as 
follows, 

Chr.  Whither  are  i/o?c  going  f 

Men.  They  said,  Back,  back;  and  ^'we'  would 
have  you  to  do  so  too,  if  either  life  or  peace  is 
prized  by  you. 

Chr.   Whyf  ichats  the  matter  f  .s«zW  Christian. 

Men.  Matter  !  said  they  ;  we  were  going  that  way 
as  you  are  going,  and  went  as  far  as  we  durst ;  and 
indeed  we  were  almost  past  coming  back,  for  had 

^  8th  and  sub.  edits.  '  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


Cfte  piTgnm£(  progresis:.  7i 

we  gone  a  little  further,  we  had  not  been  here  to 
bring  the  news  to  thee. 

Clir.  But  what  have  you  met  with,  said  Christian  ? 

Men.  Why  we  were  almost  in  the  Valley  of  the  pg_^|:foVia 
shadow  of  death,  but  that  by  good  hap  we  looked 
before  us,  and  saw  the  danger  before  we  came  to  it. 

Chr.  But  what  have  you  seen,  said  Christian  ? 

Men.  Seen  !  why  the  Valley  it  self,  which  is  as 
dark  as  pitch  ;  we  also  saw  there  the  Hobgoblins, 
Satyrs,  and  Dragons  of  the  Pit :  we  heard  also  in 
that  Valley  a-  continual  howling  and  yelling,  as  of 
a  people  under  unutterable  misery  ;  who  there  sat 
bound  in  affliction  and  Irons  :  and  over  that  Valley 
hangs  the  discouraging  ''Clouds  of  confusion,  death  ;^^°^q3 22 
also  doth  always  spread  his  wings  over  it :  in  a 
word,  it  is  every  whit  dreadful,  being  utterly  with- 
out Order. 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian,  /  perceive  not  yet,  by 
what  you  have  said,  but  that  ^this  is  my  way  to  the '■^ev.  2.6. 
desired  Haven. 

Men.  Be  it  thy  way,  we  will  not  chuse  it  for 
ours  ;  so  they  parted,  and  Christian  went  on  his 
way,  but  still  with  his  Sword  drawn  in  his  hand, 
for  fear  lest  he  should  be  assaulted. 

I  saw  then  in  my  Dream,  so  far  as  this  Valley 
reached,  there  was  on  the  right  hand  a  very  deep 
Ditch  ;  That  Ditch  is  it  into  which  the  blind  have  Psai.  eg.  u. 
led  the  blind  in  all  Ages,  and  have  both  there 
miserably  perished.  Again,  behold  on  the  left 
hand,  there  was  a  very  dangerous  Quagg,  into 
which,  if  even  a  good  man  falls,  he  ^can  find  no 
bottom  for  his  foot  to  stand  on.     Into  that  Quagg 

*  The  errors  in  these  quotations  117.19.    Sturt's  eor/w^  edits.  Ps. 

in  the  editions  subsequent  to  the  44.  29;  Ps.  107.  19. 

2ndare singular :3rd to 7th, Ps. 44.  "  In  2nd  and  sub.  edits.,   'he 

29  ;  Ps.  107.  19  ;  8th,  Psal.  4. 19  ;  find,'   doubtless  a  typ.   error  in 

Psal.  107. 19;  9th,  1683,  Ps.  23.4;  omitting  the  word,   'can';    the 

Ps.  107.  19  ;  9th,  1684,  Ps.  4.  19 ;  first  is  right. 
Ps.  117.  19;  10th,  Ps.  4.  19;  Ps. 

g2 


72  Cf)e  ^ilgnmsi  procritsis;* 

Kmg  David  once  did  fall,  and  had  no  doubt  therein 
been  smothered,  had  not  He  that  is  able,  pluckt 
him  out. 

The  path-way  was  here  also  exceeding  narrow, 
and  therefore  good  Christian  was  the  more  put  to 
it ;  for  when  he  sought  in  the  dark  to  shun  the  ditch 
on  the  one  hand,  he  was  ready  to  tip  over  into  the 
mire  on  the  other ;  also  when  he  sought  to  escape 
the  mire,  without  great  carefulness  he  would  be 
ready  to  fall  into  the  ditch.  Thus  he  went  on,  and 
I  heard  him  here  sigh  bitterly  :  for  besides  the 
dangers  mentioned  above,  the  path-way  was  here 
so  dark,  that  oft  times  when  he  lift  up  his  foot  to 
set  forward,  he  knew  not  where,  or  upon  what  he 
should  set  it  next. 

About  the  midst  of  this  Valley,  I  perceived  the 
mouth  of  Hell  to  be,  and  it  stood  also  hard  by  the 
way  side  :  Now  thought  Christian,  what  shall  I  do  ? 
And  ever  and  anon  the  flame  and  smoak  would 
come  out  in  such  abundance,  with  sparks  and 
hideous  noises,  (things  that  cared  not  for  Christians 
Sword,  as  did  ApoUi/on  before)  that  he  was  forced 
to  put  up  his  Sword,  and  betake  himself  to  another 
'Eph.  6. 18.  weapon  called  ^All  Prayer,  so  he  cried  in  my 
WPsai.  116.  hearing,  ^0  Lord  I  beseech  thee  deliver  my  Soul. 
Thus  he  went  on  a  great  while,  yet  still  the  flames 
would  be  reaching  towards  him :  also  he  heard 
doleful  voices,  and  rushings  too  and  fro,  so  that 
sometimes  he  thought  he  should  be  torn  in  pieces, 
or  troden  down  like  mire  in  the  Streets.  This 
frightful  sight  was  seen,  and  these  dreadful  noises 
Christian     wcrc  heard  by  him  for  several  miles  together  :   and 

7'"'  '""  •  1  1111111 

T^'wJii  ^^^i^^g  to  a  place,  where  he  thought  he  heard  a 
company  of  Fiends  coming  forward  to  meet  him,  he 
stopt,  and  began  to  muse  what  he  had  best  to  do. 
Somtimes  he  had  half  a  thought  to  go  back.  Then 
again  bethought  he  might  be  half  way  through  the 
"  All  the  editions  refer  to  Ps.  116.  3. 


€l)t  |8ilcrnmef  procyitsfsf. 


73 


Poor  man  !  where  art  thou  now  ?  thy  day  is  night. 
Good  man  be  not  cast  down,  thou  yet  art  right . 
Thy  way  to  Heaven,  lies  by  the  gates  of  Hell  ; 
Chear  up,  hold  out,  with  thee  it  shall  go  well- 


Copied  from  the  edition  of  1602. 


74  €\)t  ^ilsnmsi  progress;. 

Valley  ;  he  reniembred  also  how  he  had  already 
vanquished  many  a  danger  :  and  that  the  danger 
of  going  back  might  be  much  more,  than  for  to  go 
forward,  so  he  resolved  to  go  on.  Yet  the  Fiends 
seemed  to  come  nearer  and  nearer,  but  when  they 
were  come  even  almost  at  him,  he  cried  out  with  a 
most  vehement  voice,  /  ivill  walk  in  the  strength  of 
the  Lord  God ;  so  they  gave  back,  and  came  no 
further. 

One  thing  I  would  not  let  slip,  1  took  notice  that 

now  poor  Christian  was  so  confounded,  that  he  did 

not  know  his  own  voice  :  and  thus  I  perceived  it : 

Just  when  he  was  come  over  against  the  mouth  of 

the  burning  Pit,  one  of  the  wicked  ones  got  behind 

him,  and  stept  up  softly  to  him,  and  whisperingly 

suggested  many  grievous  blasphemies  to  him,  w^hich 

wc'Se  1^6  ''verily   thought   had  proceeded   from  his  own 

^btlphmi^s^,  mind.      This  put  Christian  more  to   it   than   any 

tZn'thM    thing  that  he  met  with  before,  even  to  think  that  he 

ttSto/u^  should  now  blaspheme  him  that  he  loved  so  much 

7nind.        before  ;  yet  ^ could  he  have  helped  it,  he  w^ould  not 

have  done  it :  but  he  had  not  the  discretion  neither 

to  stop   his  ears,  nor  to  know  from  whence  those 

blasphemies  came. 

When  Christian  had  travelled  in  this  disconsolate 
condition   some  considerable  time,  he  thought  he 
heard  the  voice  of  a  man,  as  going  before  him,  say- 
P8ai.23. 4.    ing,  Though  I  ivalk  through  the  valley  of  the  shaddow 
of  deathy  I  will  fear  none  ill,  for  thou  art  with  me. 
Then  was  he  glad,  and  that  for  these  reasons  : 
First,  Because  he  gathered  from  thence  that  some 
who  feared  God  were  in  this  Valley  as  well  as  him- 
self. 
Job  9. 10.         Secondly,  For  that  he  perceived  God  was  with 
them,  though  in   that  dark  and  dismal  state ;  and 
why  not,  thought  he,  with  me,  though  by  reason  of 

^  '  if  he  could,'  2iid  and  sub.  edits. 


C!)e  13ilgnm5  progress*  75 

the  impediment  that   attends  this  place,  I  cannot 
perceive  it. 

Thirdly,  For  that  he  hoped  (could  he  over-take 
them)  to  have  company  by  and  by.  So  he  went  on, 
and  called  to  him  that  was  before,  but  he  knew  not 
what  to  answer,  for  that  he  '  ^also'  thought  himself 
to  be  alone :  And  by  and  by,  the  day  broke  ;  then  ^^^^j'^'j^"^^^ 
said  Christian,  ^ He  hath  turned  the  shadow  of  death  "f'^"^-  ^ 

/  <J  Amos  5.  8. 

into  the  morriing. 

Now  morning  being  come,  he  looked  back,  not 
*^out'  of  desire  to  return,  but  to  see,  by  the  light 
of  the  day,  what  hazards  he  had  gone  through 
in  the  dark.  So  he  saw  more  perfectly  the  Ditch 
that  was  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Quag  that  was 
on  the  other ;  also  how  narrow  the  way  was  which 
^lay  betwixt  them  both  ;  also  now  he  saw  the  Hob- 
goblins, and  Satyrs,  and  Dragons  of  the  Pit,  but  all 
afar  off,  for  after  break  of  day,  they  came  not  nigh ; 
yet  they  were  discovered  to  him,  according  to  that 
which  is  written,  ijTt^  discovereth  deep  thimjs  out  of'.^^]°^^'^- 
darkness,  and  bringeth  out  to  light  the  shadow  of 
death. 

^o\f  v{?i?,  Christian  much  affected  with  his  deliver- 
ance from  all  the  dangers  of  his  solitary  way,  which 
dangers,  ^tho  he  feared  them  more  before,  yet  he 
saw  them  more  clearly  now,  because  the  light  of  the 
day  made  them  conspicuous  to  him  ;  and  about  this 
time  the  Sun  was  rising,  and  this  was  another  mercy 
to  Christian  :  for  you  must  note,  that  Hho  the  first 
part  of  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  death  was  dan- 
gerous, yet  this  second  part  which   he  was  yet  tO'»r/.c««- 

K'p  •^  ^        f  1  p        o  cond  part  of 

go,  was,    II  possible,  tar  more  dangerous  :  tor  from  timvaiky 
the  place  where  he  now  stood,  even  to  the  end  of  oi«/  "'"'' 
the  Valley,  the  way  was  all  along  set  so  full  of 
Snares,  Traps,  Gins,  and  Nets  here,  and  so  full  of 

°  2nd  aud  sub.  edits.  *  '  though,"  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

*  Added  after  the  3rd  edit.  *  '  (if  possible)'  3rd  and  sub. 

'  '  led;  after  the  2ud  edit. 


76  €f)t  ^ailgnmsi  ^rogfirsis* 

Pits,  Pitfalls,  deep  holes  and  shelvings  down  there, 
that  had  it  now  been  dark,  as  it  was  when  he  came 
the  first  part  of  the  way,  had  he  had  a  thousand 
souls,  they  had  in  reason  been  cast  away  ;  but  as  I 
said,  just  now  the  Sun  was  rising.  Then  said  he, 
Job  29. 3.  His  candle  shineiJi  on  my  head,  and  by  his  light  I  go 
through  darkness. 

In  this  light  therefore,  he  came  to  the  end  of 
the  Valley.  Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  at  the 
end  of  this  Valley  lay  blood,  bones,  ashes,  and 
mangled  bodies  of  men,  even  of  Pilgrims  that  had 
gone  this  way  formerly :  And  while  I  was  musing 
what  should  be  the  reason,  I  espied  a  little  before 
me  a  Cave,  where  two  Giants,  Pope  and  Pagan, 
dwelt  in  old  time,  by  whose  Power  and  Tyranny 
the  Men  whose  bones,  blood,  ashes,  &c.  lay  there, 
were  cruelly  put  to  death.  But  by  this  place  (7//m- 
tian  went  without  much  danger,  whereat  I  some- 
what w^ondered  ;  but  I  have  learnt  since,  that  Pagan 
has  been  dead  many  a  day  ;  and  as  for  the  other, 
though  he  be  yet  alive,  he  is  by  reason  of  age,  and 
also  of  the  many  shrewd  brushes  that  he  met  with 
in  his  younger  dayes,  grown  so  crazy,  and  stiff  in 
his  joynts,  that  he  can  now  do  little  more  than  sit  in 
his  Caves  mouth,  grinning  at  Pilgrims  as  they  go 
by,  and  biting  his  nails,  because  he  cannot  come 
at  them. 

So  I  saw  that  Christian  went  on  his  way,  yet  at 
the  sight  of  the  old  Man,  that  sat  in  the  mouth  of 
the  Cave,  he  could  not  tell  what  to  think,  specially 
because  he  spake  to  him,  though  he  could  not  go 
after  him  ;  saying,  You  ivill  never  mend,  till  more 
of  you  he  burned:  but  he  held  his  peace,  and  set  a 
good  face  on't,  and  so  went  b}',  and  catcht  no  hurt. 
Then  sang  Christian, 

O  world  of  wonders  !  (I  can  say  no  less) 
That  I  should' be  preservd  in  that  distress 


That  I  have  met  with  here !     O  blessed  bee 
That  hand  that  from  it  hath  delivered  me  ! 
Dangers  in  darkness.  Devils,  Hell,  and  Sin, 
Did  compass  me,  while  I  this  Vale  was  in  : 
Yea,  Stiares,  and  Pits,  and  Traps,  and  Nets  did  lie 
My  path  about,  that  worthless  silly  I 
Might  have  been  catcKt,  intangled,  and  cast  down  : 
Bat  since  I  live,  let  Jesus  uwar  the  Crown. 

Now  as  Christian  went  on  his  way,  he  came  to  a 
little  ascent,  which  was  cast  up  on  purpose,  that 
Pilgrims  might  see  before  them  :  up  there  there- 
fore Christian  went,  and  looking  forward,  he  saw 
Faithful  before  him,  upon  his  Journey.  Then  said 
Christian  aloud.  Ho,  ho,  So-ho ;  stay  and  I  will  be 
your  Companion.  At  that  Faithful  looked  behind 
him,  to  whom  Christian  cried  again,  Stay,  stay,  till 
I  come  up  to  you  :  But  Faithful  answered,  No,  I  am 
upon  my  life,  and  the  Avenger  of  Blood  is  behind  me. 
At  this  Christian  was  somwhat  moved,  and  putting 
to  all  his  strength,  he  quickly  got  up  with  Faithful, 
and  did  also  over-run  him,  so  the  last  ivas  Jirst.^^^^, 
Then  did  Christian  vain  gloriously  smile,  because 
he  had  gotten  the  start  of  his  Brother :  but  not 
taking  good  heed  to  his  feet,  he  suddenly  stumbled 
and  fell,  and  could  not  rise  again,  untill  Faithful 
came  up  to  help  him. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  they  went  very  lovingly 
on  together  ;  and  had  sweet  discourse  of  all  things 
that  had  happened  to  them  in  their  Pil2:rimaQ:e  :  and  christians  : 

,,  ^j      ...  1  O  O      '  fall, ',na.kes 

tlius  Chnstian  began.  Faithfuiand 

Chr,  My  honoured  and  well  beloved  Brother  Faith-  togdur^^ 

ful,  /  mn  glad  that  I  have  overtaken  you ;  and  that 

God  has  so  tempered  our  spirits,  that  we  can  ivalk  as 

Compayiions  in  this  so  pleasant  a  path. 

Fai.  I  had  thought  dear  friend,  to  have  had  your 

company  quite  from  our  Town,  but  you  did  get  the 


Christian 
Hakes 
Faithful. 


78  €i)t  iSiIgnmei  ^arogitsJsi^ 

start  of  me ;  wherefore  I  was  forced  to  come  thus 
much  of  the  way  alone. 

Clir.  IIoiv  long  did  you  stay  in  the  City  o/*  Destruc- 
tion, before  you  set  out  aftei'  me  on  your  Pikjr image  f 
Their  talk        j^di^  Till  I  coulcl  stav  uo  lonoer ;  for  there  was 

about  the  ^  c  r 

fZTirLice  g^<2at  talk  presently  after  you  was    gone  out,  that 
'tk^ijcame.    Qur   City   would    in    short    time    with    Fire    from 
Heaven  be  burned  down  to  the  ground. 

Chr.    What!     Did  your  Neighbours  talk  so? 

Faith.  Yes,  'twas  for  a  while  in  every  bodies 
mouth. 

Chr.  What,  and  did  no  more  of  them  but  you  come 
out  to  escape  the  danger  f 

Faith.  Though  there  was,  as  I  said,  a  great  talk 
thereabout,  yet  I  do  not  think  they  did  firmly  believe 
it.  For  in  the  heat  of  the  discourse,  I  heard  some 
of  them  deridingly  speak  of  you,  and  of  your  des- 
perate Journey,  (for  so  they  called  this  your  Pil- 
grimage) but  1  did  believe,  and  do  still,  that  the  end 
of  our  City  will  be  with  Fire  and  Brimstone  from 
above:  and  therefore  I  have  made  mine  escape. 

Chr.  Did  you  hear  no  talk  of  Neighbour  Pliable  ? 

Faith.  Yes  Christian,  I  heard  that  he  followed 
you  till  he  came  at  the  Slough  of  Dispoud,  where, 
as  some  said,  he  fell  in  ;  but  he  would  not  be  known 
to  have  so  done  :  but  I  am  sure  he  was  soundly  be- 
dabled  with  that  kind  of  dirt. 

Chr.  And  ivhat  said  the  Neighbours  to  him  f 
"Zl^Ioult  Faith.  He  hath,  since  his  going  back,  been  had 
greatly  in  derision,  and  that  among  all  sorts  of 
People  :  some  do  mock  and  despise  him,  and  scarce 
will  any  set  him  on  work.  He  is  now  seven  times 
worse  than  if  he  had  never  gone  out  of  the  City. 

Chr.  But  why  should  they  be  so  set  against  him, 
since  they  also  despise  the  way  that  he  forsook  f 

Faith.  O,   they  say,   Hang  him,   he  is  a  Turn- 

®  '  were,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


ed  of  irlieit,  lie 
fiol  home. 


€\)t  ^ilmim  progress;  79 

Coat,  he  was  not  true  to  bis  profession.    I  think  God 
has  ^stired  up  even  his  Enemies  to  hiss  at  him,  and  J«- 29.  is, 
make  him  a  Proverb,  because  he  hath  forsaken  the 
way. 

Chr.  Had  you  no  talk  with  him  before  you  came 
out  f 

Faith.  I  met  him  once  in  the  Streets,  but  he 
leered  away  on  the  other  side,  as  one  ashamed  of 
what  he  had  done  ;  so  I  spake  not  to  him. 

Chr.    y^ell,  at  my  first  settinfj  out,  I  had  hopes  of 
that  Man  ;  but  now  I  fear  he  ivill  perish  in  the  over- 
throw of  the  City,  for  it  is  happened  to  him,  according  ^^\^'P''^-^- 
to  the  true  Proverb,  The  Dog  is  turned  to  his  Vqmit  ^!'^J°g'^'^ 
again,  and  the  Sow  that  ivas  Washed  to  her  ivallotvimj 
in  the  mire. 

Faith.  They  are  my  fears  of  him  too :  But  who 
can  hinder  that  which  will  be  ? 

^^Ch\  Well  Neighbour  Faithful,  said  Christian, 
let  us  leave  him  ;  and  talk  of  things  that  more  im- 
mediately concern  ourselves.  Tell  me  now,  what 
you  have  met  ivith  in  the  way  as  you  came ;  for  I 
know  you  have  met  with  some  things,  or  else  it  may 
be  writ  for  a  ivonder. 

Faith.  I  escaped  the  Slough  that  I  ^perceive  you 
fell  into,  and  got  up  to  the  Gate  without  that  dan- 
ger ;  only  I  met  with  one  whose  name  was  Wanton,  Faubfui 
that  had  like  to  have  done  me  a  mischief.  Wanton. 

Chr.  'Twas  well  you  escaped  her  Net ;  Joseph  was  jf^^jf?-"' 
hard  put  to  it  by  her,  and  he  escaped  her  as  you  did, 
but  it  had  like  to  have  cost  him  his  life.     But  what  did 
she  do  to  you  f 

Faith.  You  cannot  think  (but  that  you  know 
somthing)  what  a  flattering  tongue  she  had,  she 
lay  at  me  hard  to  turn  aside  with  her,  promising 
me  all  manner  of  content. 

*  'stirred,'  sub.  to  1st.  edit.  *  'the,'  in  the  7th  edit.  onl)'. 

®  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  perceived,'  3rd  and  sub. 


80  Cfte  |3ilgnmsi  ^Srcigrfs^* 

Chr.  Nay,  she  did  not  promise  you  the  content  of  a 
(food  conscience. 

Faith.  You  know  ^M'hat  I  mean,  all  carnal  and 
fleshly  content. 
•  Pro. 22. 14.      Chr.   Thank  God  you  have  escaped  her  :   The^ ab- 
horred of  the  Lord  shall  fall  into  her  Ditch. 

Faith.  Nay,   I   know  not  whether  J  did  wholly 
escape  her,  or  no. 

Chr.    Why,   I  ^tro    you    did  not   consent  to    her 
desires  f 

Faith.  No,  not   to  defile  my  self;  for  I  remem- 
bered   an  old  writing  that  I  had  seen,  which  saith, 
Pro  5. 5.     ffgy  gf^pg  fahc  hoM  of  hell.     So  I  shut  mine  eyes. 
Job  31. 1.    because  I  would  not  be  bewitched  with  her  looks  : 
then  she  railed  on  me,  and  I  went  ^my  way. 

Chr.  Did  you  meet  ivith  no  other  assault  as  you 
came  f 

Faith.  When  I  came  to  the  foot  of  the  Hill  called 

Difficidty,  I  met  with  a  very  aged  Man,  who  asked 

Heii assault-  T^Q    Jf/iat  I  icas,  ttiid  wMthcr  hound?     I  told  him, 

td  Oji  Adam  '  '  ' 

tufint.  That  I  was  a  Pilgrim,  going  to  the  Coelestial  City : 
Then  said  the  Old  Man,  Thou  lookest  like  an  honest 
felloiv ;  Wilt  thou  be  content  to  divell  with  me,  for 
the  wages  that  I  shall  give  thee  f  Then  I  asked  him 
his  name,  and  where  he  dwelt  ?  He  said  his  name 
was  Adam   the  first,  and  ''do  dwell  in  the  Totvn  of 

^Eph.i.  22. '^Dgceit.  I  asked  him  then.  What  was  his  work? 
and  what  the  wages  that  he  would  give?  He  told 
me,  That  his  work  was  many  delights  ;  and  his 
wages,  that  I  should  he  his  Heir  at  last.  I  further 
asked  him,  What  House  he  kept,  and  what  other 
Servants  he  had  ?  so  he  told  me.  That  his  House 
was  maintained  with  all  the  dainties  in  the  ivorld,  and 
that  his  Servants  were  those  of  his  oimi  begetting.   Then 

*  '  know  that,"  8rd  to  the  Dtli,  *  '  away,'  7th  edit. 

16H3,  and  lOth  edits.  '  'I  dwell,'   2nd  to  7th;  'that 

'  '  I  tro,'  or  1  trow — 1  believe.         he  dwelt,"  8th  and  sub. 


I  asked,  ^if  he  had  any  children?     He  said  that  he 
had   but  three   Daughters,  The    ^ lusts   of  the  ^esh,  ^uohn  2. 
the  ^Itists  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life ;  and  that  ^^' 
I  should  marry  them  ^all,  if  1  would.    Then  I  asked, 
how  long   time  he  would  have  me  live  with  him? 
And  he  told  me  As  long  as  he  lived  himself. 

Chr.  Well,  and  what  conclusion  came  the  Old  Man 
and  you  to,  at  last  f 

Faith.  Why,  at  first,  I  found  my  self  somewhat 
inclinable  to  go  with  the  Man,  for  I  thought  he 
spake  very  fair;  But  looking  in  his  forehead  as  I 
talked  with  him,  I  saw  there  written,  Put  off  the 
old  Man  with  his  deeds. 

Chr.  And  hoiv  then  f  » 

Faith.  Then  it  came  burning  hot  into  my  mind, 
whatever  he  said,  and  however  he  flattered,  when 
he  got  me  home  to  his  House,  he  would  sell  me  for 
a  Slave.  So  I  bid  him  forbear  to  talk,  for  T  would 
not  come  near  the  door  of  his  House.  Then  he  re- 
viled me,  and  told  me  that  he  would  send  such  a 
one  after  me,  that  should  make  my  way  bitter  to 
my  soul  :  So  I  turned  to  go  away  from  him  :  But 
just  as  I  turned  my  self  to  go  thence,  I  felt  him  take 
hold  of  my  flesh,  and  give  me  such  a  deadly  twitch 
back,  that  I  thought  he  had  pulFd  part  of  me  after 
himself;  This  made  me  cry,  '^0  wretched  Man  !  So  dRom.7.24. 
I  went  on  my  way  up  the  Hill. 

Now  when  I  had  got  about  half  way  up,  I  looked 
behind  me,  and  saw  one  coming  after  me,  swift  as 
the  wind  ;  so  he  overtook  me  just  about  the  place 
where  the  Settle  stands. 

Chr.  Just  there,  said  Christian,  did  I  sit  down  to 
rest  me ;  but,  being  overcome  with  sleep,  I  there  lost 
this  Rollout  of  my  bosom. 

Faith.  But  good  Brother  hear  me  out :  So  soon 

^  '  how  many  Children  he  had  ?'  *  '  all,'  omitted'  from  2nd  and 

2nd  and  sub.  sub.  edits. 

'  '  lust,'  .3rd  and  sub. 


82  Cf)f  ^iilgnmei  ^arogrei^g* 

as  the  Man  over-took  me,  he  was  but  a  word  and  a 
blow  :  for  down  he  knockt  me,  and  laid  me  for 
dead.  But  when  I  was  a  little  come  to  my  self 
again,  I  asked  him  wherefore  he  served  me  so  ?  he 
said,  Because  of  my  secret  inclining  to  Adam  the 
first ;  and  with  that,  he  strook  me  another  deadly 
blow  on  the  ^brest,  and  beat  me  down  backward, 
so  I  lay  at  his  foot  as  dead  as  before.  So  when  I 
came  to  my  self  again,  I  cried  him  mercy ;  but  he 
said,  I  know  not  '^how'  to  show  mercy,  and  with 
that  knockt  me  down  again.  He  had  doubtless 
made  ^a  hand  of  me,  but  that  one  came  by,  and  bid 
him  forbear. 

Chr.    WJio  was  that,  that  bid  him  forbear? 

Faith.  I  did  not  know  him  at  first,  but  as  he  went 
by,  I  perceived  the  holes  in  his  hands,  and  ^'  in'  his 
side  ;  then  I  concluded  that  he  was  our  Lord.  So 
I  went  up  the  Hill. 
r/Mose^'  Chr.  That  Man  that  overtook  you,  was  Moses.^  he 
spareth  none,  neither  knoiceth  he  how  to  shew  mercy 
to  those  that  transgress  his  Law. 

Faith.  I  know  it  very  well,  it  was  not  the  first 
time  that  he  has  met  with  me.  'Twas  he  that  came 
to  me  when  I  dwelt  securely  at  home,  and  that  told 
me,  He  would  burn  my  House  over  my  head,  if  I 
staid  there. 

Chr.  But  did  not  ^you  see  the  House  that  stood 
there  on  the  top  of  that  Hill,  on  the  side  of  which 
Moses  met  you  f 

Faith.  Yes,  and  the  Lions  too,  before  I  came  at 
it;  but  for  the  Lions,  I  think  they  were  asleep,  for 
it  was  about  Noon  ;  and  because  I  had  so  much  of 
the  day  before  me,  I  passed  by  the  Porter,  and  came 
down  the  Hill. 

Chr.  He  told  me  indeed  that  he  saw  yoti  go  by,  but 

'  Spelt   '  breast '    in    2nd   and  •*  '  made  an  end,'  2nd  and  sub. 

sub.  »  Added  to  Hth  and  sub. 

'  Added  to  the  2nd  and  sub.  *  '  you  not,'  3rd  and  sub.  edits. 


€f)t  pilffnmss  progresJg*  83 

/  wish  you  had  called  at  the  House  ;  for  they  woidd 
have  shewed  you  so  many  Rarities,  that  you  would 
scarce  have  forgot  them  to  the  day  of  your  death.  But 
pray  tell  me,  Did  you  meet  nobody  in  the  Valley  of 
Humility  ? 

Faiidi.  Yes,  I  met  with  one  Discontent,  who  would  ^^^^l^  ^,^ 
willingly  have  perswaded  me  to  go  back  again  with  Discontent. 
him  :  his  reason  was,  for  that  the  Valley  was  alto- 
gether without  Honour  ;  he  told  me  moreover,  That 
there  to  go,  was  the  way  to  disobey  all  my  Friends, 
as  ^Pride,  Arogancy,  Self-Conceit,  worldly  Glory, 
with  others,  who  he  knew,  as  he  said,  would  be 
very  much  offended,  if  I  made  such  a  Fool  of  my 
self  as  to  wade  through  this  Valley. 

Chr.  Well,  and  how  did  you  answer  himf 
Faith.  I  told  him.  That  although  all  these  that  ^J^^lf^^ 
he   named  might  claim   kindred  of  me,  and  that  D'^content. 
rightly,  (for  indeed  they  were  my  Relations,  accord- 
ing to  the  flesh)  yet  since  I  became  a  Pilgrim,  they 
have  disowned  me,  as  I  also  have  rejected  them ; 
and    therefore    thev   were  to    me    now,   no    more 
than  if  they  had  never  been  of  my  Linage ;   I  told 
him  moreover.  That  as  to  this  Valley,  he  had  quite 
mis -represented  the  thing  :  for  before  Honour  is 
Humility,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall.     There- 
fore said  I,  I  had  rather  go  through  this  Valley  to 
the  Honour  that  was  so  accounted  by  the  wisest, 
than   chuse  that   which  he  esteemed  most  ^  worth 
our  affections. 

Chr.  Met  you  with  nothing  else  in  that  Valley  f 
Faith.  Yes,  I   met  with  Shame;   But  of  all  the^«f««-.„ 
Men  that  1  met  with  in  my  Pilgrimage,  he  1  think  shame. 
bears  the  wrong  name :    the  other  would  be  said 
nay,  after  a  little  argumentation,  (and  some  what 
else)  but  this  bold  faced  Shame,  v/ould  never  have 
done. 

'  These  names  are  in  italics  in  '  '  worthy,'  3rd  and  sub. 

the  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


84  ClKPiIsnniss  ^arogresisi* 

Chr.  TT/iT/,  what  did  he  say  to  you. 
Faith.  A¥hat !  why  he  objected  against  Religion 
it  self;  he  said  it  was  a  pitiful  low  sneaking  business 
for  a  Man  to  mind  Religion  ;  he  said  that  a  tender 
conscience  was  an  un-manly  thing,  and  that  for  a 
Man  to  watch  over  his  words  and  ways,  so  as  to  tye 
up  himself  from  that  hectoring  liberty,  that  the 
brave  spirits  of  the  times  accustom  themselves  unto, 
would  make  ^me  the  Ridicule  of  the  times.  He 
ch^TiV^'  objected  also,  That  but  few  of  the  Mighty,  Rich,  or 
Phil. 3. 7. 8. -^-g^^  were  ever  of  my  opinion;  nor  any  of  them, 
'  ^neither,'  before  they  were  perswaded  to  be  Fools, 
and  to  be  of  a  voluntary  fondness,  to  venture  the 
48/  ^*''"''  '^'  loss  of  all,  for  no  body  else  knows  what.  He  more- 
over objected  the  base  and  low  estate  and  condi- 
tion of  those  that  were  chiefly  the  Pilgrims  of  the 
times,  in  which  they  lived,  also  their  ignorance,  and 
want  of  understanding  in  all  natural  Science.  Yea, 
he  did  hold  me  to  it  at  that  rate  also,  about  a  great 
many  more  things  than  here  I  relate  ;  as,  that  it  was 
a  shame  to  sit  whining  and  mourning  under  a  Ser- 
mon, and  a  shame  to  come  sighing  and  groaning 
home.  That  it  was  a  shame  to  ask  my  Neighbour 
forgiveness  for  petty  faults,  or  to  make  restitution 
where  I  had  taken  from  any  :  He  said  also  that  Reli- 
gion made  a  man  grow  strange  to  the  great,  because 
of  a  few  vices  (which  he  called  by  finer  names)  and 
made  him  own  and  respect  the  base,  because  of  the 
same  Religious  fraternity.  And  is  not  this,  said  he, 
a  shame  ? 

Chr.  And  what  did  you  say  to  him  ? 

Faith.  Say  !    I  could  not  tell  what  to  say  at  ^the 

first.     Yea,  he  put  me  so  to  it,  that  my  blood  came 

up  in   my  face,  even  this  Shame  fetch't   it  up,  and 

hud  almost  beat  me  quite  off*.      But  at  last  I  began 

°  '  make    the    ridicule,'    2nd  ;  *  Added  to  the  2nd  and  sub. 

'  make  liim  the  Ridicule,'  3rd  and  *  '  the,'   omitted   in   2nd    and 

sub.  sub.  edits. 


€i)t  ^ailgrimgi  ^vogresisi*  85 

to  consider,  That  that  which  is  highly  esteemed  [l*'^''^''^^' 
among  Men^  is  had  in  abonmiation  with  God.  And 
I  thought  again,  This  Shame  tells  me  what  ^men 
are,  but  it  tells  me  nothing  what  God,  or  the  word 
of  God  is.  And  I  thought  moreover,  That  at  the 
day  of  doom,  we  shall  not  be  doomed  to  death  or 
life,  according  to  the  hectoring  spirits  of  the  world ; 
but  according  to  the  Wisdom  and  Law  of  the  High- 
est. Therefore  thought  I,  what  God  says,  is  best, 
'  indeed  '^  is  best,  though  all  the  Men  in  the  world 
are  against  it.  Seeing  then,  that  God  prefers  his 
Religion,  seeing  God  prefers  a  tender  Conscience, 
seeing  they  that  make  themselves  Fools  for  the 
Kingdom  of  Heaven,  are  wisest ;  and  that  the  poor 
'  ^  man '  that  loveth  Christ,  is  richer  then  the 
greatest  Man  in  the  world  that  hates  him  ;  Shame 
depart,  thou  art  an  Enemy  to  my  Salvation  :  shall  I 
entertain  thee  against  my  Soveraign  Lord  ?  How 
then  shall  I  look  him  in  the  face  at  his  coming  ? 
Should  I  now  be  ashamed  of  his  ways  and  Servants,  Mai.  s.  38. 
how  can  I  expect  the  blessing  ?  But  indeed  this 
Shame  was  a  bold  Villain  ;  I  could  scarce  shake 
him  out  of  my  company  ;  yea,  he  would  be  haunt- 
ing of  me,  and  continually  whispering  me  in  the 
ear,  with  some  one  or  other  of  the  infirmities  that 
attend  Religion  :  but  at  last  I  told  him,  'Twas  but 
in  vain  to  attempt  further  in  this  business  ;  for  those 
things  that  he  disdained,  in  those  did  I  see  most 
glory  :  And  so  at  last  I  got  past  this  importunate 
one.  "'And  when  I  had  shaken  him  off,  then  I  be- 
'  gan  to  sing' 

TJie  tryals  that  those  men  do  meet  withal 
That  are  obedient  to  the  Heavenly  call, 

^  Added  to  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  "  '  man,'  added  to  2nd  and  sub. 

'  onen,'  italics,  2nd  to  7th.  «  First  inserted  in  the  2nd  edit., 

'  indeed,'  8th  edit,  and  sub.         and  continued  subsequently, 
H 


4    (\ 


86  €\)t  ^^ilgrimg  progiesss^* 

Are  manifold,  and  suited  to  the  flesh, 

And  come,  and  come,  and  come  again  afresh ; 

That  now,  or  somtime  else,  we  hy  them  may 

Be  taken,  overcome,  and  cast  away. 

0  let  the  Pilgrims,  let  the  Pilcjrims  then. 

Be  vigilant,  and  quit  themselves  like  men. 

Chr.  /  am  glad,  my  Brother,  that  thou  didst  with- 
stand ''this  Villain  so  bravely ;  for  of  all,  as  thou 
sayst,  I  think  he  has  the  ivrong  name  :  for  he  is  so 
bold  as  to  follow  us  in  the  Streets,  and  to  attempt  to 
put  us  to  "shame  before  all  men  ;  that  is,  to  make  us 
"^ashamed  of  that  which  is  good :  but  if  he  icas  not 
himself  audacious,  he  would  never  attempt  to  do  as  he 
does,  but  let  us  still  resist  him  :  for  notunthstanding  all 
his  Bravadoes,  he  promoteth  the  Fool,  and  none  else. 
The  Wise  shall  Inherit  Glory  said  Solomon,  but 
shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of  Fools. 

Faith.  /  thi)ik  ive  must  cry  to  him  for  help  against 
shame,  that  woidd  have  us  '  ^to '  be  valiant  for  ^the 
Truth  upon  the  Earth. 

Chr.  You  say  true.  But  did  you  meet  no  body 
else  in  that  Valley  f 

Faith.  No,  not  I,  for  I  had  Sun-shine  all  the 
rest  of  the  way,  through  that,  and  also  through  the 
Valley  of  the  shadow  of  death. 

Chr.  'Tivas  well  for  you,  I  am  sure  it  fared  far 
otherwise  with  me.  I  had  for  a  long  season,  as  soon 
almost  as  I  entred  into  that  Valley,  a  dreadful  Com- 
bat with  that  foul  Fiend  Apollyon  :  Yea,  I  thought 
verily  he  would  have  killed  me ;  especially  when 
he  got  me  down,  and  crusht  me  under  him,  as  if  he 
would  have  crusht  me  to  pieces.  For  as  he  threw 
me,  my  Sword  flew  out  of  my  hand  ;  nay  he  told 

'  '  this,'     and     '  shame,'     and  '  7th  edit, 

'ashamed,'  roman,  2nd  and  sub.  '  'the,'    omitted  in   2nd   and 

edits.  sub. 


CJ)e  pilgrims!  progress;*  87 

me  He  was  sure  of  me  :  but  /  cried  to  God,  and  he 
heard  me,  and  delivered  me  out  of  all  my  troubles. 
Then  I  entred  into  the  Valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death,  and  had  no  light  for  almost  half  the  way 
through  it.  I  thought  I  should  ^a  been  killed  there, 
over,  and  ov^er  ;  But  at  last,  day  brake,  and  the  Sun 
^rise,  and  I  went  through  that  which  was  behind 
with  far  more  ease  and  quiet. 

Moreover,  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  as  they  went 
on,  Faithful,  as  he  chanced  to  look  on  one  side,  saw 
a  Man  whose  name  is  Talkative,  walking  at  a  dis- 
tance besides  them,  (for  in  this  place,  there  was  room 
enough  for  them  all  to  walk)  He  was  a  tall  Man,  Talkative 
and  somthing  more  comely  at  a  distance  than  at  hand. 
To  this  Man  Faithful  addressed  himself  in  this 
manner. 

Faith.  Friend,  Whither  away  f     Are  you  going  to 
the  Heavenly  Countrey  f 

Talk.  I  am  going  to  ^that  same  place. 

Faith.  That  ^is  well;  Then  I  hope  ive  may  have 
your  good  Comjjamj. 

Talk.  AVith    a   very  good  will,  will   I   be  your 
Companion. 

Faith.   Come  on  then,  and  let  us  go  together,  and^f^^y^f^ 
let  us  spend  our  time  in  discoursing  of  things  that  are  ^Z»f!^' 
profitable. 

Talk.  To  talk  of  things  that  are  good,  to  me  is 
very  acceptable,  with  you,  or  with  any  other  ;  and 
I  am  glad  that  I  have  met  with  those  that  incline 
to  so  good  a  work.  For  to  speak  the  truth,  there 
are  but  few  that  care  thus  to  spend  their  time  (as 
they  are  in  their  travels)  but  chuse  much  rather  Taikatives 
to  be  speaking  oi  things  to  no  profit,  and  this  hath  •i'^course. 
been  a  trouble  to  me. 

Faith.   That  is  indeed  a  thing  to  be  lamented ;  for 

^  '  a,'  altered  to  '  have,'  in  2nd  ^  '  to  the  same,'  3i'd  and  sub. 

and  sub.  edits.  edits. 

*  '  rose,'  2nd  and  sub.  *  '  That's,'  7th  edit. 

H  2 


88  Ci)f  pilgnmsi  progitds; 

what  things  so  worthy  of  the  2ise  of  the  tongue  and 
mouth  of  inen  on  Earth,  as  are  the  things  of  the  God 
of  Heaven  ? 

Talk.  I  like  you  wonderful  well,  for  your  ^saying 
is  full  of  conviction  ;  and  I  will  add,  What  thing 
'  ^is  '  so  pleasant,  and  what  so  profitable,  as  to  talk 
of  the  things  of  God  ? 

What  things  so  pleasant  ?  (that  is,  if  a  man  hath 
any  delight  in  things  that  are  wonderful)  for  in- 
stance :  If  a  man  doth  delight  to  talk  of  the  History 
or  the  Mystery  of  things,  or  if  a  man  doth  love  to 
talk  of  Miracles,  Wonders  or  Signs,  where  shall  he 
find  things  Recorded  so  delightful,  and  so  sweetly 
penned,  as  in  the  holy  Scripture  ? 

Faith.  That's  true :  but  to  be  profited  by  such 
things  in  our  talk,  should  be  ^ that  which  we  design. 
I; laikative's  Talk.  That  is  it  that  I  said  :  for  to  talk  of  such 
'couth.  things  is  most  profitable,  for  by  so  doing,  a  Man 
may  get  knowledge  of  many  things,  as  of  the  vanity 
of  earthly  things,  and  the  benefit  of  things  above  : 
(thus  in  general)  but  more  particularly,  By  this  a 
man  may  learn  the  necessity  of  the  New-birth,  the 
insufficiency  of  our  works,  the  need  of  Christs 
righteousness,  etc.  Besides,  by  this  a  man  may 
learn  by  ^talk,  what  it  is  to  repent,  to  believe,  to 
pray,  to  suffer,  or  the  like  :  by  this  also  a  Man  may 
learn  what  are  the  great  promises  and  consolations 
of  the  Gospel,  to  his  own  comfort.  Further,  by  this 
a  Man  may  learn  to  refute  false  opinions,  to  vindi- 
cate the  truth,  and  also  to  instruct  the  ignorant. 

Faith.  All  this  is  true,  and  glad  am  I  to  hear  these 
things  from  you. 

Talk.  Alas !  the  want  of  this  is  the  cause  that  so 
few  understand  the  need  of  faith,  and  the  necessity 

*  'sayings  is,'  .3rd  ;  '  sayings  '  In  the  irJth  edit.,  1692,  'our 
are,'  7th  and  sub.                                chief  design." 

•  '  is,'  added  3rd  and  sub.  •  •  by   talk,'    omitted    in    ."^rd 

edit,  and  sub. 


0  brace 
Talkative. 


€\)t  pilgrims!  progitsfS*  89 

of  ^a  work  of  Grace  in  their  Soul,  in  order  to  eter- 
nal life  :  but  ignorantly  live  in  the  works  of  the 
Law,  by  which  a  man  can  by  no  means  obtain  the 
Kingdom  of  Heaven. 

Faith.  But  hy  your  leave ^  Heavenly  knowledge  of 
these,  is  the  gift  of  God ;  no  man  attaineth  to  them 
hy  humane  industry,  or  only  hy  the  talk  of  them. 

Talk.  All  this  I  know  very  well,  for  a  man  can 
receive  nothing  except  it  be  given  him  from 
Heaven  ;  all  is  of  Grace,  not  of  works  :  I  could  give 
you  an  hundred  Scriptures  for  the  confirmation  of 
this. 

Faith.  Well,  then,  said  Faithful,  ichat  is  that  one 
thing,  that  we  shall  at  this  time  found  our  discourse 
upon  f 

Talk.  What  you  will  :  I  will  talk  of  things  ^^'ikative 
Heavenly,  or  things  Earthly;  things  Moral,  or 
things  Evangelical ;  things  Sacred,  or  things  Pro- 
phane ;  things  past,  or  things  to  come  ;  things 
^forraign,  or  things  at  home  ;  things  more  Essen- 
tial, or  things  Circumstantial  ;  provided  that  all  be 
done  to  our  profit. 

Faith.  Now  did  Faithful  heg'm   to  wonder;  andl^gl'^l^^hy 
stepping  to  Christian,  (for  he  walked  all  this  while  hy  ^^"'^"^«- 
himself,)  he  said  to  him,  (hut  softly)  What  a  hrave 
Companion  have  we  got  I     Surely  this  man  will  make 
a  very  ewcellent  Pilgrim. 

Chr.  At  this  Christian  modestly  smiled,  and  said, 
This  man  with  whom  you  are  so  taken,  will  beguile  ^^'/el'^rfi.- 
with  this  tongue  of  his,  twenty  of  them  that  know  TaikTuv^ 
him  not.  ^Slt- 

Faith.  Do  you  know  him  then?  "'"'■ 

Chr.  Know  him  !  ^Yes,  better  than  he  knows 
himself. 

Faith.  Pray  what  is  he '^ 

'  '  a   works,'   ;3i-d   edit. ;   '  the  '  '  foreign,'  2nd  and  sub. 

works,'  "th  ;  '  a  work  of  Grace  in  *  '  yea,'  7tli  edit, 

tlicir  souls,' 'ith.  1084. 


90  ClK  pilgrims  yrogressi* 

Chr.  His  name  is  Talkative,  he  dwelleth  in  our 
Town ;  I  wonder  that  you  should  be  a  stranger  to 
him,  only  I  consider  that  our  Town  is  large. 

Faith.  Whose  son  is  he  f  And  whereabout  doth  he 
dwell  f 

Chr.  He  is  the  son  of  one  Saywell,  he  dwelt  in 
Pratbuj-roiv  ;  and  he  is  known  of  all  that  are  ac- 
quainted with  him,  by  tlie  name  of  Talkative  in 
Pratin()-roiv  :  and  notwithstanding  his  fine  tongue, 
he  is  but  a  sorry  fellow. 

Faith.    Well,  he  seems  to  be  a  very  pretty  man.' 

Chr.  That  is,  to  them  that  have  not  through 
acquaintance  with  him,  for  he  is  best  abroad,  near 
home  he  is  ugly  enough  :  your  saying,  That  he  is  a 
petty  man,  brings  to  my  mind  what  I  have  ob- 
served in  the  work  of  the  Painter,  whose  Pictures 
*shews  best  at  a  distance  ;  but  very  near,  more  un- 
pleasing. 

Faith.  But  I  am  ready  to  think  you  do  but  ^jcst, 
because  you  ^smiled. 

Chr.  God  forbid  that  I  should  jest,  (though  I 
smiled)  in  this  matter,  or  that  I  should  accuse  any 
falsely  ;  I  will  give  you  a  further  discovery  of  him  : 
This  man  is  for  any  company,  and  for  an}^  talk  ;  as 
he  talketh  now  with  j'ou,  so  will  he  talk  when  he  is 
on  the  Ale-bench :  and  the  more  drink  he  hath  ^in 
his  crown,  the  more  of  these  things  he  hath  in  his 
~mouth :  Religion  hath  no  place  in  his  heart,  or 
house,  or  conversation  ;  all  he  hath,  lieth  in  his 
tongue,  and  his  Religion  is  to  make  a  noise  therewith. 

Faith.  Say  you  so!  Then  am  I  in  this  man 
greatly  deceived. 

Chr.    Deceived !    you   may   be  sure  of  it.     Re- 

*  '  shew,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  ''  The    2nd    edit,    here    adds, 

*  Italics,  2nd  and  sub.  '  crown,  the  more  of  these  things 
'  'hath  on,'  3rd  edit,  to  7th  ;       he  hath  in  his:'  this  must  have 

restored  to 'hath  in,' 8th  and  sub.      been   a   typographical    error    in 
pdits.  printing  the  same  line  twice. 


member  the  Proverb,  They  say  and  do  not;   but  ^/^^fcor.^izo. 
Kimjdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power.     He  ™^^'jj<= 
talketh  of  Prayer,  of  Repentance,  of  Faith,  and  oidocs'not. 
the  New  Birth  :    but  he  knows  but  only  to  talk  of 
them.     I  have  been  in   his  Family,  and  have  ob- 
served him  both  at  home  and  abroad  ;    and  I  know 
what  I  say  of  him  is  the   truth.     His  house  is  a^HUhomeis 
empty    of  Religion,   as  the  white  of  an  Egg   is  ofR^'-mon. 
savour.     There  is  there,  neither  Prayer,  nor  sign  of 
Repentance  for  sin  :    Yea,  the  ^ bruit  ii^   his  kind 
serves  God  far  better  than  he.    He  is  the  very  stain,  He  u  a  stain 
reproach,  and  shame  of  Religion  to  all  that  know  Rom.  2. 24. 
him  ;  it  can  hardly  have  a  good  word  in  all  that  end 
of  the  Town  where  he  dwells,  through  him.     Thus 
say   the   common  People  that  know  him,  A  Saint  ne  Proverb 
abroad,  and  a  Devil  at  home :  His  poor  Family  finds  hLr^"^ 
it  so,  he  is  such  a  churl,  such  a  railer  at,  and  so 
unreasonable  with  his  Servants,  that  they  neither 
know  how  to  do  for,  or  speak  to  him.     Men  that 
have  any  dealings  with  him,  say  'tis  better  to  deal  Menehumo 
with  a  Turk  then  with  him,  for  fairer  dealing  they  ''"»• 
shall  have  at  their  hands.     This  Talkative,  if  it  be 
possible,  will  go  beyond  them,  defraud,  beguile,  and 
over-reach  them.     Besides,  he  brings  up  his  Sons 
to  follow  his   steps ;    and   if  he   findeth   in  any  of 
them  a  foolish  timorousness  (for  so  he  calls  the  first 
appearance  of  a  tender  conscience)  he  calls  them 
fools  and  blockheads  ;  and  by  no  means  will  imploy 
them  in  much,  or  speak  to  their  commendations  be- 
fore others.     For  my  part  I  am  of  opinion,  that  he 
has  by  his  wicked  life  caused  many  to  stumble  and 
fall ;  and  will  be,  if  God  prevent  not,  the  mine  of 
many  more. 

Faith.    Well,  my  Brother,  I  am  bound  to  believe 
you-;  not  only  because  you  say  you  knoiv  him,  but 

*  '  brute,'    10th    edit.      By  a      Start's  very  correct  editions  have 
curious  typographical   error,   all       '  the  Brewer  '  ! 


92  €\)t  pilgrimsi  ^3ro5resiss» 

also  because  like  a  Christian,  ijou  make  your  reports 
of  men.  For  I  cannot  think  that  you  speak  these 
things  of  ill  will,  but  because  it  is  even  so  as  you  say. 

Chr.  Had  I  known  him  no  more  than  you,  I 
might  perhaps  have  thought  of  him  as  at  the  first 
you  did  :  Yea,  had  he  received  this  report  at  their 
hands  only  that  are  enemies  to  Religion,  I  should 
have  thought  it  had  been  a  slander  :  (A  Lot  that 
often  falls  from  bad  mens  mouths  upon  good  mens 
Names  and  Professions  :)  But  all  these  things,  yea 
and  a  great  many  more  as  bad,  of  my  own  know- 
ledge I  can  prove  him  guilty  of.  Besides,  good 
men  are  ashamed  of  him,  they  can  neither  call  him 
Brother  nor  Friend ;  the  very  naming  of  him  among 
them,  makes  them  blush,  if  they  know  him. 

Fa.  Well,  I  see  that  "^Saying  and  ^ Doing  are  two 
things,  and  hereafter  I  shall  better  observe  this  dis- 
titiction. 

Chr.   They  are  two  things  indeed,  and   are    as 

diverse  as  are  the  Soul  and  the  Body  :    For  as  the 

Body  without  the  Soul,  is  but  a  dead  Carkass  ;  so, 

I/'mS^n.  Saying,  if  it  be  alone,  is  but  a  dead  Carkass  also. 

The  Soul  of  Religion  is  the  practick  part :    Pure 

»wTm  22!^"  -Religion  and  imdejilcd,  before   God  and  the  Father, 

23,2i,25,26.  j,,  f/^l^_^   j'q  ^.^gj^  ^/^g  Fathcrlcss  and   Widows  in  their 

affliction,  and  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the 
World.  This  Talkative  is  not  aware  of,  he  thinks 
that  hearing  and  saying  will  make  a  good  Christian, 
and  thus  he  deceiveth  his  own  Soul.  Hearing  is 
but  as  the  sowing  of  the  Seed  ;  talking  is  not  suffi- 
cient to  prove  that  fruit  is  indeed  in  the  heart  and 
life  ;  and  let  us  assure  our  selves,  that  at  the  day  of 
^i(Uh.^25^'  Doom,  men  shall  be  judged  according  to  their 
fruits.  It  will  not  be  said  then.  Did  you  believe  f 
but,  were  you  Doers,  or  Talkers  only  ?  and  accord- 
ingly shall  they  be  judged.  The  end  of  the  World 
is  compared   to  our  Harvest,  and  you  know  men  at 

"  '  Saying, '  '  Doing, '  roman,  2nd  and  sub. 


Harvest  regard  nothing  but  Fruit.  Not  that  any 
thing  can  be  accepted  that  is  not  of  Faith:  But  I 
speak  this  to  show  you  how  insignificant  the  profes- 
sion of  Talkative  will  be  at  that  day. 

Fa.    This  brings  to   my  mind  that  of  Moses,  by  oeutiV." 
which  he  describeth  the  beast  that  is  clean.     He  is  such  Faithful  fo«- 

vmced  of  the 

an  one  that  parteth  the  Hoof,  and  cheweth  the  Cud  :  Tatkativf 
Not  that  parteth  the  Hoof  only,  or  that  cheweth  the 
Cud  only.  The  Hare  cheweth  the  Cud,  but  yet  is  un- 
clean, because  he  parteth  not  the  Hoof.  And  this  truly 
resembleth  Talkative ;  he  cheiveth  the  Cud,  he  seeketh 
knowledge,  he  cheweth  upo7i  the  Word,  but  he  divideth 
not  the  Hoof  he  parteth  7iot  with  the  way  of  .sinners  ; 
but  as  the  Hare,  '^he'  retaineth  the  foot  of  a  Dog,  or 
Bear,  and  therefore  is  unclean. 

Chr.   You   have  spoken,  for  ought  I  know,  the 
true  Gospel   sense  of  those  Texts,   and  I  will   ^^^Yz\^-^i^ 
another  thing.     Paul  calleth  some  men,  yea  and  ''• 
those  great  Talkers  too,  sounding  Brass,  and  Tinck- 
lingC3^mbals  ;  that  is,  as  he  Expounds  them  in  an- Talkative 
other  place,  Things  ivithout  life,  giving  sound.  Things  that  sound 
without  life,   that  is,   without   the   true  Faith   and'"'"" 
Grace    of  the   Gospel  ;    and   consequently,    things 
that    shall    never   be    placed    in    the    Kingdom  of 
Heaven  among  those  that  are  the  Children  of  life  : 
Though  their  sound,  by  their  talk,  be  as  if  it  were 
the  Tongue  or  voice  of  an  Angel, 

Fait.  Well,  I  was  not  so  fond  of  his  company  at 
first,  but  I  am  as  sick  of  it  now.  What  shall  tve  do 
to  be  rid  of  him  f 

Chr.  Take  my  advice,  and  do  as  1  bid  you,  and 
you  shall  find  that  he  will  soon  be  sick  of  your 
Company  too,  except  God  shall  touch  his  heart 
and  turn  it. 

Fait.    What  would  you  have  me  to  do  ? 

Chr.  Why,  go  to  him,  and  enter  into  some  seri- 
ous discourse  about  the  poiver  of  Religion  :  And  ask 

'  '  he,'  added  in  the  Sid  and  sub.  edits. 


.94 


U)t  ^ailgnms;  ^arcicritgei* 


Talkatives 
faUe  disco- 
very of  a 
work  of 
grace. 


him  j)lainly  (when  he  has  approved  of  it,  for  that 
he  will)  whether  this  thing  be  set  up  in  his  Heart, 
House  or  Conversation. 

Faif.  Then  Faithful  stepped  forward  again,  and 
said  to  Talkative :   Come,  ivliat   chear  f     how  is  it 

710W  ? 

Talk.  Thank  you,  Well.  I  thought  we  should 
have  had  a  great  deal  of  Talk  by  this  time. 

Fait.  Well,  if  you  ivill,  ice  icill  fall  to  it  now  ;  and 
since  you  left  it  with  me  to  state  the  question,  let  '  ^it' 
be  this :  How  doth  the  saving  grace  of  God  discover 
it  selfivhen  it  is  in  the  heart  of  man? 

Talk.  I  perceive  then  that  our  talk,  must  be  about 
the  power  of  things  ;  Well,  'tis  a  very  good  question, 
and  I  shall  be  willing  to  answer  you.  And  take 
my  answer  in  brief  thus.  First,  Where  the  Grace 
of  God  is  in  the  heart,  it  causeth  there  a  great  out- 
cry against  sin.     Secondly, 

Fait.  Nay  hold,  let  us  consider  of  one  at  once :  I 
think  you  should  rather  say^  It  showes  itself  by  inclin- 
ing the  Soul  to  abhor  its  sin. 

Talk.  Why,  what  difference  is  there  between  cry- 
ing out  against,  and  abhoring  of  sin  ? 

Fait.  Oh  !  a  great  deal ;  a  man  may  cry  out  against 
fr^r  "^  *^'^^  of  policy  ;  but  he  cannot  abhor  it,  hut  by  vertue  of 
a  Godly  antipathy  against  it :  I  have  heard  many  cry 
Old  against  sin  in  the  Pulpit,  ivho  yet  can  abide  it  tcell 
enough  in  the  heart,  ^  and  house,  and  conversation. 
Josephs  Mistris  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  as  if  she 
had  been  very  holy  ;  but  she  would  iinllingly,  notwith- 
standing that,  have  committed  uncleanness  with  him. 
Some  cry  out  against  sin,  even  as  the  Mother  cries  out 
against  her  Child  in  her  lap,  when  she  calleth  it  Slut 
and  naughty  Girl,  and  then  falls  to  hugging  and  kiss- 
ing it. 


3  To  Cry  ov.t 
against  sin, 


GiMi.  39.  15. 


*  2nd  and  sub. 

^  'They  cry  out,'  3rd  and  sub. 


edits.':  corrected  to  '  The  cry  out,' 
in02. 

*  '  and,' omitted  in  2nd  and  sub. 


Talk.  You  lie  at  the  catch,  I  perceive. 

Fait.  No  not  I,  I  am  only  for  settinc)  things  right. 
But  ivhat  is  the  second  thing  whereby  you  would  prove 
a  discovery  of  a  ivork  of  grace  in  the  heart  f 

Talk.  Great  knoivledge  of  Gospel  Mysteries. 

Fait.   This  signe  should  have  been  first,  but  first  or 
last,  it  is  also  false  ;  for,  Knowledge,  great  knowledge,  ^^^f /JT"« 
may  be  obtained  in  the  mysteries  of  the  Gospel,  and  yet  "f^'^^"^^ 
no  ivork  of  grace  in  the  Soid :    Yea,  if  a  man  have  all 
knoivledge^  he  jnay  yet  be  nothing,  and  so  consequently 
be  no  child  of  God.      When  Christ  said,  Do  you  know 
all  these  things  ?  and  the  Disciples  had  ansivered. 
Yes :  He  addeth,  Blessed  are  ye,   *if  ye  do  them. 
He  doth  not  lay  the  blessing  in  the  ^knowing  of  them, 
but  in  the  doing  of  them.     For  there  is  a  knowledge 
that  is  not  attended  with  doing  :  He  that  knoweth  his 
Masters  will,  and   doth  it  not.     A  man  may  know 
like  an  Angel,  and  yet  be  no  Christian  ;  therefore  your 
sign  '  ^of  it '  is  not  true.     Indeed  to  know,  is  a  thing 
that  pleaseth  Talkers  and  Boasters  ;  but  to  do,  is  that 
which  pleaseth  God.     Not  that  the  heart  can  be  good 
without  knowledge,  for  without  that  the  heart  is  naught : 
There  is  therefore  knoivledge  and  knowledge.     Know-  Knowledge 
ledge  that  resteth  in  the  bare  speculation  of  things,  and  kdge. 
knowledge  that  is  accompanied  with  the  grace  of  faith 
atid  love,  which  pids  a  man  upon  doing  even  the  will  of 
God  from  the  heart :  the  first  of  these  will  serve  the 
Talker,  but  ivithout  the  other  the  true  Christian  is  not 
content.     Give  me  understanding,  and  I  shall  keep  Truehaov:- 
thy  Law,   vea   I   shall  observe  it  with  my  whole  ed'«i<Am- 
heart,     rsal.  cxix.  34. 

Talk.  You  lie  at  the  catch  again,  this  is  not  for 
edification. 

Fait.  Well,  if  you  please  propound  another  sign 
hoiv  this  work  of  grace  discovereth  it  self  where  it  is. 


*  'that  do  them,'  7th  edit.  '  8th  and  sub.  edits. 

'  '  knowledge,'  7th  edit. 


96  Cf)e  ^3ilgnms!  ^Srogresssi* 

Talk.  Not  I,  for  I  see  we  shall  not  agree. 
Fait.    Well,  if  you  will  not,  ivill  you  give  me  leave 
to  do  it  f 

Talk.  You  may  use  your  Liberty. 
omgoodsign      Fait.  A  wovk  of  (iTace  in  the  soul  discover eth  itself, 

oj  grace.  i  ■  i  i        i     '  i  j 

joh.  16. 8.    either  to  htm  that  hath  it,  or  to  slanders  by. 

Rom.  /.  24  '  «-' 

1°^-  \^-  ^-         To  him  that  hath  it,  thus.     It  qives  him  conviction  of 

Mar.  16.  16.  /^     ?  7  . 

jer^aVi^D    '^^'^^»  especially  of  the  defilement  of  his  nature,  and  the  sin 
Acf'i  \2^'  of  unbelief  (for  the  sake  of  which  he  is  sure  to  be  damned, 
Re^''2i^6    \f  lie  findeth  not  mercy  at  Gods  hand  by  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ.)     This  sight  and  sense  of  things  worketh  in 
him  sorrow  and  shame  for  sin  ;   he  findeth  7noreover 
revealed  in  him  the  Saviour  of  the  World,  and  the  ab- 
solute necessity  of  closing  with  him  for  life,  at  the 
which  he  findeth  hungri^igs  and  thirstings  after  him, 
to  which  hungrings,  etc.  the  promise  is  made.     Now 
according  to  the  strength  or  weakness  of  his  Faith  in 
his  Saviour,  so  is  his  joy  and  peace,  so  is  his  love  to 
holiness,  so  are  his  desires  to  know  him  more,  and  also 
to  serve  him  in  this  World.     But  thougJi  I  say  it  dis- 
covereth  it  self  thus  unto  him ;  yet  it  is  but  seldom  that 
he  is  able  to  conclude  that  this  is  a  work  of  Grace,  be- 
cause his  corruptions  now,  and  his  abused  reason,  makes 
his  mind  to  mis-judge  in  this  matter  ;  therefore  in  hi?n 
that  hath  this  work,  there  is  required  a  very  sound 
Judgement,  before  he  can  with  stcddiness  conclude  that 
this  is  a  work  of  Grace. 
^u\^27.        '^0  others  it  is  thus  discovered. 
'Mat.  5. 9.         \    j^y  fi^^  ewperimental  confession  of  his  Faith  in 
Christ.     2.  By  a  life  answerable  to  that  confession, 
3ips'5o^'23^'  ^^   ^^^^'   ^    W^  ^f  holiness ;    heart-holiness,  family- 
E°ek'"29'43  ft-ollness,  (if  he  hath  a  Family)  and  by  Conversation- 

*  All  the  editions  refer  to  Gal.  reference,  but  it  ought  to  be  Mat. 

2.  15.  .5.  19. 

"  'Phil.  2.  17,'  2nd;   'Phil.  8.  *  Joh.  24.  15,  1st  to  the   9th, 

17,'  7th  and  l.'Uh  ;  correct  in  the  1683,  and  10th  ;   'John  2.'  9th, 

.'ird,Hth,!)th,  and  10th.     Qy.  ought  lfi8.3. 

it  to  be  3.  17  ?  ^  Ps.  50.  23,  1st  edit.  ;  Ps.  .50. 

'  All  the  edits,  agree   in  this  20,  •liA.  and  sub. 


holiness  in  the  World:  which  in  the  general  teacheth 
him,  inwardly  to  abhor  his  Sin,  and  himself  for  that 
in  secret,  to  suppress  it  in  his  Family,  and  to  promote 
holiness  in  the  World ;  not  hy  talk  only,  as  an  Hypo- 
crite or  Talkative  Person  may  do  :  hut  by  a  practical 
Subjection  in  Faith,  and  Love,  to  the  power  of  the 
word :  A  nd  now  Sir,  as  to  this  brief  description  of 
the  work  of  Grace,  and  also  the  discovery  of  it,  if 
you  haive  ought  to  object,  object ;  if  not,  then  give  me 
leave  to  propound  to  you  a  second  question. 

Talk.  Nay,  my  part  is  not  now  to  object,  but  to 
hear,  let  me  therefore  have  your  second  question. 

Faith.  It  is  this,  Do  you  experience  the  first  part  Anotiiergood 
of  this  description  of  it  f  and  doth  your  life  and  con- 
versation testifie  the  same  f  or  standeth  your  Religion 
in  Word  or  in  Tongue,  and  not  in  Deed  and  Truth  ? 
pray,  if  you  incline  to  answer  me  in  this,  say  no  more 
then  you  know  the  God  above  will  say  Amen  to  ;  and 
also,  nothing  but  what  your  Conscience  can  justifie  you 
in :  For,  not  he  that  commendeth  himself  is  ap- 
proved, but  whom  the  Lord  commendeth.  Besides, 
to  say  I  am  thus,  and  thus,  when  my  Conversation,  and 
all  my  Neighbours  tell  me  I  lye,  is  great  wickedness. 

Talk.  Then  Talkative  at  first  bes^an  to  blush,  but  Taikative,u,« 

o  '  pleased   with. 

recovering  himself.  Thus  he  replyed.  You  come  now  ^^^^i^^ 
to  Experience,  to  Conscience,  and  God  :  and  to 
^appeals  to  him  for  justification  of  what  is  spoken  : 
This  kind  of  discourse  1  did  not  expect,  nor  am  I 
disposed  to  give  an  answer  to  siich  questions,  be- 
cause, I  count  not  myself  bound  thereto,  unless  you 
take  upon  you  to  be  a  Catechizer  ;  and,  though  you 
should  so  do,  yet  I  may  refuse  to  make  you  my 
Judge  :  But  I  pray  will  you  tell  me,  why  you  ask 
me  such  questions? 

Faith,  Because  I  saio  you  forward  to  talk,  and  be-  ne  reasons 
cause  I  knew  not  that  ijou  had  ought  else  but  notion,  put  to  hhn 

'  timt  question. 

* '  appeal/  2iid  and  sub. 


98  Cf;e  pilgnmsi  iSrogresis;* 

Besides,  to  tell  you  all  the  Truth,  I  have  heard  of 
you,  that  you  are  a  Man  ivhose  Religion  lies  in  talk, 
and  that  your  Conversatio7i  gives  this  your  Mouth- 
Faithfuis     "profession  the  lye.     They  say  You  are  a  spot  amo7uj 
<o  Talkative.  Christians,  and  that  Religion  fareth  the  ivorse  for  your 
ungodly  conversation,  that  some  already  have  stumbled 
at  your  tvicked  ways,  and  that  more  are  in  danger  of 
being  destroyed  thereby ;  your  Religion,  and  an  Ale- 
House,  and  Comtousness,  and  imcleanness,  and  swear- 
ing, and  lying,  and  vain    Company-keeping,  etc.  ivill 
stand  together.      The  proverb  is  true  of  you,  which  is 
said  of  a    WJiore,  to  wit,  That  she  is  a  shame  to  all 
Women  ;  .w  you  are  a  shame  to  all  Professors. 
Talkative         Talk.  Sincc  you  are  ready  to  take  up  reports,  and 

flings  away     ,         .       ,  -'     ,  "^  ■,  t  ^  ^  ^ 

.from Faith-  to  judge  so  rashly  as  you  do;  1  cannot  but  con- 
clude you  are  some  peevish,  or  ^melancholly  Man, 
not  fit  to  be  discoursed  with,  and  so  adieu. 

Chr.  Then  came  up  Christian,  and  said  to  his 
Brother,  I  told  3^ou  how  it  would  happen,  3'our 
words  and  his  lusts  could  not  agree ;  he  had  rather 
leave  your  company,  then  reform  his  life :  but  he  is 
Agoodnd-  gouc  as  I  Said,  let  him  go;  the  loss  is  no  mans 
but  his  own,  he  has  saved  us  the  trouble  of  going 
from  him  ;  for  he  continuing,  ^as  I  suppose  he  will 
do,  as  he  is,  he  would  have  been  but  a  blot  in  our 
Company:  besides,  the  Apostle  says,  From  such 
withdraw  thy  self 

Faith.  But  I  am  glad  ice  had  this  little  discourse 
with  him,  it  may  happen  that  he  icill  think  of  it  aqain; 
however,  I  have  dealt  plainly  ivith  him,  and  so  am  clear 
of  his  blood,  if  he  perisheth. 

Chr.  You  did  well  to  talk  so  plainly  to  him  as 
you  did,  there  is  but  little  of  this  faitliful  dealing 
with  men  now  a  days  ;  and  that  makes  Religion  ^so 

•  'melancholy,'  2nd  and  subs.  *  '  to  stink,' 2nd  ;  'to  stink  so,' 

'  From      '  as '     to     '  do,'     in      3rd  and  sub.  edits, 
brackets,  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


arice 


stink  in  the  nostrills  of  many,  as  it  doth:  for  they 
are  these  Talkative  Fools,  whose  Religion  is  only  in 
word,  and  are  debauched  and  vain  in  their  Conver- 
sation, that  (being  so  much  admitted  into  the  Fel- 
lowship of  the  Godly)  do  ''stumble  the  World, 
blemish  Christianity,  and  grieve  the  Sincere.  I 
wish  that  all  Men  would  deal  with  such  as  you 
have  done,  then  should  they  either  be  made  more 
conformable  to  Religion,  or  the  company  of  Saints 
would  be  too  hot  for  thera.   ^ '  Then  did  Faithful  say,' 

How  Talkative  at  first  lifts  up  his  Plumes  ! 
How  bravely  doth  he  speak  !  how  he  presumes 
To  drive  down  all  before  him  !  but  so  soon 
As  Faithful  talks  of  Heart-work,  like  the  Moon 
That's  past  the  full ^  into  the  ^ivain  he  goes  ; 
And  so  will  all^  but  he  that  Heart- work  knoivs. 

Thus  they  went  on  talking  of  what  they  had  seen 
by  the  way;  and  so  made  that  way  easie,  which 
would  otherwise,  no  doubt,  have  been  tedious  to 
them  :  for  now  they  went  through  a  Wilderness. 

^ '  Now  when  they  were  got  almost  quite  out  of 
'  this  Wilderness,  Faithful  chanced  to  cast  his  eye 

*  back,  and  espied  one  coming  after  them,  and  he 

*  knew  him.     Oh  !    said   FaitJful  to  his   Brother, 

*  who  comes  yonder  ?  Then  Christian  looked,  and 
'  said.  It  is  my  good  friend  Evangelist.  ^Ay,  and 
'  my  good  friend   too,  said  Faithful;  for  'twas  he 

'  that  set  me  the  way  to  the  Gate.     Now  was  Evan-  'Evangelist 

*  gelist  come  up  unto  them,  and  thus  saluted  them.   'TeTagain. 

*  Eva?i.  Peace  be  with  you,  dearly  beloved,  and, 
'  peace  be  to  your  helpers. 

9  '  puzzle,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  ajelist,  as  marked  with  inverted 

^  '  Then  did  Faitkf  id  say,''  added  commas,  first  appeared  in  the  2nd 

to  the  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  edition,  and  was  continued  in  all 

"  '  wane,'  7th  and  sub.  edits.  the  subsequent  ones. 

'  All  this  interview  with  Evan-  *  '  Ai,'  2nd  and  3rd  edits. 


100 


€i)t  pilgrims!  pioffirsisJ. 


'  Tliey  are 
'gladattJie 
'sigJU  of  him. 


'  His  exhorta- 
'  tion  to  them. 


'John  4.  3C. 
'  Gal.  6.  9. 
'  1  Cor.  9.  24, 
'25,26,27. 


Rev.  3.  11. 


*  Clir.  Welcome,  welcome,  my  good  Evangelist, 
the  siyht  of  thy  countenance  brings  to  my  remem- 
brance, thy  ancient  kindness,  and  unwearied  labor- 
ing for  my  eternal  good. 

'  Faitli.  And,  a  thousand  times  ivelcome,  said  good 
Faithful ;  Thy  company,  0  sweet  Evangelist,  how 
desirable  is  it  to  us,  poor  Pilgrims  ! 

'  Evan.  Then,  said  Evangelist,  How  hath  it  fared 
with  you,  my  friends,  since  the  time  of  our  last 
parting?  ivhat  have  you  met  with,  and  hoiv  have 
you  behaved  your  selves  ? 

'  Chr.  Then  Christian,  and  Faithful  told  him  of 
all  things  that  had  happened  to  them  in  the  way;  and 
how,  and  with  what  difficulty  they  had  arrived  to 
that  place. 

'  Evang.  Right  glad  am  I,  said  Evangelist;  not 
that  you  '  ^have'  met  with  trials,  but  that  3'ou  have 
been  victors,  and  for  that  you  have  (notwithstand- 
ing many  weaknesses,)  continued  in  the  way  to 
this  very  day. 

*  1  say,  right  glad  am  I  of  this  thing,  and  that  for 
mine  own  sake  and  ^^ours ;  I  have  sowed,  and  you 
have  reaped,  and  the  day  is  coming,  when  both 
he  that  sowed,  and  they  that  reaped  shall  rejoyce 
together;  that  is,  if  you  hold  out:  for,  in  due 
time  ye  shall  reap,  if  you  faint  not.  The  Crown 
is  before  you,  and  it  is  an  incorruptible  one ;  so 
run  that  you  may  obtain  it.  Some  there  be  that 
set  out  for  this  Crown,  and  after  they  have  gone 
far  for  it,  another  comes  in,  and  takes  it  from 
them  ?  hold  fast  therefore  that  you  have,  let  no 
man  take  your  Crown  ;  you  are  not  yet  out  of  the 
gun-shot  of  the  Devil :  you  have  not  resisted  unto 
blood,  striving  against  sin  :  let  the  Kingdom  be 
always  before  you,  and  believe  stedfastly  concern- 
ing things  that  are  invisible.     Let  nothing  that  is 


'  8th  and  subs,  edits. 


€i)t  ^ilffnmsf  ^^lOffresis!*  loi 

on  this  side  the  other  world  get  within  you  ;  and 
above  all,  look  well  to  your  own  hearts,  and  to 
the  lusts  thereof;  for  they  are  deceitful  above  all 
things,  and  desperately  wicked :  set  your  faces 
like  a  flint,  you  have  all  power  ^on  Heaven  and 
Earth  on  your  side. 

'  Chr.  Then  *  Christian  thanked  him  for  his  e.z^horta-:Z''>^k^l 
tion,  but  told  him  withal,  that  they  tvould  have  him  ''{ZmiZ'. 
speak  farther  to  them  for  their  help,  the  rest  of  the 
ivay  ;  and  the  rather,  for  that  the?/  well  knew  that  he 
ivas  a  Prophet,  and  could  tell  them  of  things  that 
might  happen  unto  them  ;  and  also  how  they  might 
resist  and  overcome  them.  To  ivhich  request  Faith- 
ful also  consented.  So  Evangelist  began  as  fol- 
low eth. 

'  Evan.  *My  Sons,  you  have  heard  in  the  words  ;*.^«r'; 

„.  ^o^/^^^^^  aicteth  what 

01  the  truth  ot  the  (jrospel,  that  you  must  throuo-h  'foubustiiei, 

....  1.  -J  ~       '  shall  meet 

many    tribulations    enter    into   the    Kinp'dom   of '^'''"'^^a- 

TT  AT  •!•  /^••ii      '"ity-Fair, 

Heaven.     And  ao-am,  that  in   every  City,  bonds '""'^  «»:•■'""■- 

1  ro'       •  ^   '  ^         •  ii  n  '  agcth  them 

and  ainictions  abide  in  you;  and  therefore  you  ;'o«'«'/^«- 
cannot  expect  that  you  should  go  long  on  your 
Pilgrimage  without  them,  in  some  sort  or  other. 
You  have  found  something  of  the  truth  of  these 
testimonies  upon  •you  already,  and  more  will  im- 
mediately follow :  for  now,  as  you  see,  you  are 
almost  out  of  this  Wilderness,  and  therefore  you 
will  soon  come  into  a  Town  that  you  will  by  and 
by  see  before  you:  and  in  that  Town  you  will  be 
hardly  beset  with  enemies,  who  will  strain  hard 
but  they  will  kill  you:  and  be  you  sure  that  one 
or  both  of  you  must  seal  the  testimony  which 
you  hold,  with  blood:  but  be  you  faithful  unto 
death,  and  the  King  will  give  you  a  Crown  of 
life.      *  He    that   shall    die   there,    although    his!r,^^"''*P,'f 

11.  lot  It  uiU  be 

death    will    be  unnatural,  and  his   pain  perhaps  'JJ^'/l^'"^' 
ffreat,  he  will  yet  have  the  better  of  his  fellow ;  ii"^ '''!,. 

1,  *'•,  •ni  better  oj  h  is 

not  only  because  he  will  be  arrived  at  the  Coeles- '  ^'''''''' 

^  '  in  Heaven,'  8rd  and  sub. 
I 


102  Cfte  ^atlgnms;  ^3rcig:ies!s!* 

*  tial  City  soonest,  but  because  he  will  escape  many 
'  miseries  that  the  other  will  meet  with  in  the  rest 
'  of  his  Journey.  But  when  you  are  come  to  the 
'  Town,   and  shall  find   fulfilled  what  I  have  here 

*  related,  then  remember  your  friend,  and  quit 
'  your  selves  like  men  ;  and  commit  the  keeping 
'  of  your  souls  to  your  God  "'in  well-doing,'   as 

*  unto  a  faithful  Creator.' 

Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  when  they  were 
got  out  of  the  Wilderness,  they  presently  saw  a 
Town  before  them,  and  the  name  of  that  Town  is 
Vnnifij ;  and  at  the  Town  there  is  a  Fair  kept, 
called  Vanity-Fair :  It  is  kept  all  the  Year  long,  it 
Ecd^i'  ^"  beareth  the  name  of  Vanity-Fair,  because  the  Town 
chap.  2.  n.  where  tis  kept,  is  lighter  then  Vanity  ;  and  also, 
because  all  that  is  there  sold,  or  that  cometh 
thither,  is  Vanity.  As  is  the  saying  of  the  wise, 
All  that  cometh  is  Vanity. 

This  Fair  is  no  new  erected  business,  but  a  thing 
of  Ancient  standing ;  I  will  shew  vou  the  original 
of  it. 
TheAnti-         Aluiost  fivc  thousand  years   agone,  there  were 

quity  nf  tins  ^  t~^       y  '     1      /~^•  ^ 

Fair.  Pilgrims  walkmg  to  the  Coelestiai  City,  as  these 
two  honest  persons  are  ;  and  Beelzebub,  Apollyon, 
and  Lccjion,  with  their  Companions,  perceiving  by 
the  path  that  the  Pilgrims  made,  that  their  way  to 
the  City  lay  through  this  Toivn  of  Vanity,  they 
contrived  here  to  set  up  a  Fair  ;  a  Fair  wherein 
should  be  sold  of  all  sorts  of  Vanity,  and  that  it 
should  last  all  the  year  long.  Therefore  at  this 
chandizeof  ^^«"''  ^^'^  all  such  Mcrchandizc  sold.  As  Houses, 
thu  Fair.  Lands^  Trades,  Places,  Honours,  Preferments,  Titles, 
Countreys,  Kingdoms,  Lusts,  Pleasures  and  De- 
lights of  all  sorts,  as  Whores,  Bauds,  Wives,  Hus- 
bands, Children,  Masters,  Servants,  Lives,  Blood, 
Bodies,  Souls,  Silver,  Gold,  Pearls,  precious  Stones, 
and  what  not, 

'  Added  in  the  8tli  and  sub.  edits. 


C!)e  pilgnmsf  ^pingresig* 


103 


Beliold  Vanity-Fair !  tlie  Pilgiiins  Uiere 
Are  chain'd  and  stand  beside  : 

Even  so  it  was  our  Lord  pass'd  here, 
And  on  Mount  Calvary  dy'd. 


Copied  from  the  third  edition  of  the  second  part. 
I  2 


104  €\)t  ^pilffnmg  ^aioffiesis;* 

And  moreover,  at  this  Fair  there  is  at  all  times 
to  be  seen  Juglings,  Cheats,  Games,  Plays,  Fools, 
Apes,  Knaves,  and  Rogues,  and  that  of  ^all  sorts. 

Here  are  to  be  seen  ^'  too,'  and  that  for  nothing, 
Thefts,  Murders,  Adultries,  False-swearers,  and 
that  of  a  blood -red  colour. 

And  as  in  other  fairs  of  less  moment,  there  are 
Hhe  several  Rows  and  Streets,  under  their  proper 
names,  where  such  and  such  Wares  are  vended  :  So 
here  likewise,  you  have  the  proper  Places,  Rows, 
Streets,  (viz.  Countreys  and  Kingdoms,)  where  the 
Wares  of  this  Fair  are  soonest  to  be  found :  Here  is 
Thi streets  \\ie  Brittain  Row,  the  French  Row,  the  Italian  Row, 
the  Spanish  Row,  the  German  Row,  where  several 
sorts  of  Vanities  are  to  be  sold.  But  as  in  other 
fairs^  some  one  Commodity  is  as  the  chief  of  all 
the/«fr,  so  the  Ware  ol  Rome  and  her  Merchandize 
is  greatly  promoted  in  this  fair :  Only  our  Enxjlish 
Nation,  with  some  others,  have  taken  a  dislike 
thereat. 

Now,  as   I  said,  the  way  to  the  Coelestial  City 

lyes  just  ^thorow  this  Toivn,  where  this  lusty  Fair  is 

kept ;  and  he  that  will  go  to  the  City,  and  yet  not 

icor.  5. 10.  go  ^thorow  this  Town,  must  needs^o  out  of  the  World. 

Christ  went   Thc   Priucc  of  Princes   himself,    when  here,  went 

aro«j7  t  M  |^]^j.Qyo]i  this  Town  to   his  own  Countrey,  and  that 

i^x\%  A,' 5,' 0,  u\)0\'i '<i  Fair-day  too  :   Yea,   and  as   I  think,  it  was 

Beelzebub  the  chief  Lord  of  tliis  Fair,  that  invited 

him  to  buy  of  his  Vanities;  yea,  would  have  made 

him  Lord  of  the  Fair,  would  he  but  have  done  him 

Reverence  as  he   went   ^thorow   the    Town.     Yea, 

because  he  was  such  a  person  of  Honour,  Beelzebub 

had  him  from  Street  to  Street,  and  shewed  him  all 

the  Kingdoms  of  the  World  in  a  little  time,  that  he 

'  Altered  to  '  every  kind,'  2nd  *  '  through,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

and  sub.  edits.  '  '  Mattli.  7-  «,'  2nd  to  7th,  and 

»  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  in  10th  ;  '  Matth.  4.  1,'  9th,  1G83  ; 

'  1st  to  7th,  but   omitted   in  correct  in  8th  and  9th,  1684. 
8th  and  sub.  edits. 


€f)t  piTgn'msJ  procn'fsfsf^  i05 

might,  if  ^  possible,  allure  that  Blessed  One,  to 
chea!pen  and  hiiy  some  of  his  Vanities.  But  he  had  chnstbnught 
no  mind  to  the  Merchandize,  and  therefore  left  the  ms'f^iT 
Town^  without  laying  out  so  much  as  one  Farthing 
upon  these  Vanities.  This  Fair  therefore  is  an 
Ancient  thing,  of  long  standing,  and  a  very  great 
Fair. 

Now  these  Pilgrims,  as   I  said,  must  needs  ^oThePUgnmi 
thorow  this  y^zr;  Well,  so   they   did;   but  behold,'""    ■'""^' 
even  as  they  entred  into  the /«?>,  all  the  people  in 
the/a^r  were  moved,  and  the  Town  it  self  as  it  were  Thefairina, 
in  a  Hubbub  about  them  ;  and  that  for  several  rea-  them. 
sons :  For, 

First,  The  Pilgrims  v/ere  cloathed  with  such  kind  Then-rn 
of  Raiment  as  was  diverse  from  the  Raiment  of  any  '"'''fr"*- 
that  Traded  in  that  fair.     The  people  therefore  of 
the  fair  made  a  great  gazing  upon  them:   Some '^^o''^  ^>8- 
said  they  were  Fools,  some  they  were  Bedlams,  and 
some  they  are  Outlandish-men. 

Secondly,  And  as  they  wondred  at  their  Appa- 2't'?rat«^o/ 

1  i^TiTi  •  I'O  if>p  the  hubbub. 

rel,  so  they  did  likewise  at  their  bpeech,  lor  tew 
could  understand  M'hat  they  said  ;  they  naturally 
spoke  the  Language  of  Canaan,  but  they  that  kept 
they«?V,  were  the  men  of  this  World:  So  that  from 
one  end  of  the  fair  to  the  other,  they  seemed  Bar- 
barians each  to  the  other. 

Thirdly,  But  that  which  did  not  a  little  amuse  "'^'^"'■<' 

in/ri  T  1  1  n'l-  cause  of  the 

the   Merchandizers,   was,   that  these   Pilgrims   set  ^^bbub.' 
very   light   by   all  their  Wares,  they  cared  not,  so 
much   as  to  look  upon   them :  and  if  they  called 
upon  them  to  buy,  they  would  put  their  fingers  in 
their  ears,  and  cry,  TurJi  away  mine  eyes  from  be-  pmi.^s.io,' 

*  '  (if  possible),'  2nd  and  sub.  reference  to  1  Cor.  2. 7,  8,  is  placed 
edits.  to  the  next  paragraph.     By  what 

*  All  the  edits,  agree   in  this  authority    are    these   alterations 
reference.      The   Tract   Society's  made  ? 

edition  has  it,   1   Cor.  4.   9,  and  '  Added  to  the  'Ind  and  sub. 

have  added  to  it  Job.  12.  1  ;  the       cdit8. 


106  Cfte  ^ilffrimg  ^Srogressf^ 

holding  vanity ;  and  look  upwards,  signifying  that 
their  Trade  and  Traffic  was  in  Heaven. 
'Fourth  One  chanced  mockino-lv,  beholdino;  the  carriao-es 

hubbub.'-'     01  the  men,  to  say  unto  them,  What  will  ye  buy  i 
prov.  23. 23.  But  tlicy,  looking  gravely  upon  him,  said,  We  huy 
the  Truth.     At  that,  there  was  an  occasion  taken  to 
Thtyan      dcspisc  tlic  meu  the  more;  some  mockino-,  some 

mocked.  ^      .  ,    .  i    p    n  i 

taunting,  some  speakmg  reproachfully,  ana   some 
j,^^^.^..^^^  calling  upon  others  to  smite  them.     At  last  things 
habbuh.       came  to  an  hubbub  and  great  stir  in  the  fair,  in  so 
much  that  all  order  was  confounded.     Now    was 
word  presently  brought  to  the  great  one  of  the  fair, 
who  quickly  came  down,  and  deputed  some  of  his 
most  trusty  friends  to  take  these  men  into  exami- 
nation, about  whom  they«?'r  was  almost  overturned. 
flaitjied.    So  the  men  were  brought  to  examination;  and  they 
that  sat  upon  them,  asked  them  whence  they  came, 
^whether  they  went,  and  what  they  did  there  in 
ney  <eH«*o  such  an  unusual  Garb  ?     The  men  told  them,  that 

they  are,  and  -r\  t        •  i      en  •titbit 

ichencethey  thcv   wcrc   PiloTims  aud   Strano-ers  in  the  World, 

came.  JO  _  O, 

i"^]5  le"' ^^^  that  they  were  going  to  their  own  Countrey, 
which  was  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem  ;  and  that  they 
had  given  ^none  occasion  to  the  men  of  the  Town, 
nor  yet  to  the  Merchandizers,  thus  to  abuse  them, 
and  to  let  them  in  their  Journey.  Except  it  was, 
for  that,  when  one  asked  them  what  they  would 
buy,  they  said  they  would  bmj  the  Truth.  But  they 
that  were  appointed  to  examine  them,  did  not  be- 

fcSl'""'  lieve  them  to  be  any  other  than  Bedlams  and  Mad, 
or  else  such  as  came  to  put  all  things  into  a  confu- 
sion in  the  fair.  Therefore  they  took  them  and 
beat  them,  and  besmeared  them  with  dirt,  and  then 

Theyareputput  tlieiTi  iuto  thc  Cao'c,  that  they  iniQlit  be  made 

iH  the  Ca.O€     ^  o     '  ■/  o 

a  Spectacle  to  all  the  men  of  the /«/;•.    There  there- 
fore they   lay   for  some  time,  and  were  made  the 

^  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  They  are  taken  for  madmen," 

"  '  whither,'  2nd  and  sub.  in  the  foUo  edit.  1737. 

*  '  no,"  2nd  and  sub.    - 


C!)f  ^ailffnmg  ^Srogresisi*  107 

objects  of  any  mans  sport,  or  malice,  or  revenge. 
The  great  one  of  the  fair  laughing  still  at  all  that 
befel  them.     But  the  men  being:  patient,  and  not  Their  be- 
rendering    railing    for    raihng,    but   contrary vvi se  *'*'^t'«r/c. 
blessing,  and  giving  good  words  for  bad,  and  kind- 
ness for  injuries  done  :    Some  men  in  the  fair  that  Themmo/ 
were  more  observing;,  and  less  prejudiced  then  the /««"«' 

,  I         1  11111  c        aMo'iig  them- 

rest,   began  to  check  and  blame  the  baser  sort  tor  «?wsa6o»< 

,.  -11  1  1  1  j1  theseUoo  men. 

their  contmual  abuses  done  by  them  to  the  men  : 
They  therefore  in  angry  manner  let  fly  at  them 
again,   counting  them  as  bad   as  the  men  in   the 
Cage,  and  telling  them  that  they  seemed  confede- 
rates, and  should  be  made  partakers  of  their  mis- 
fortunes.    The  other  replied.  That  for  ought  they 
could  see,  the  men  were  quiet,  and  sober,  and  in- 
tended no  body  any  harm  ;    and  that  there  M^ere 
many  that  Traded  in  their  fair,  that  were  more 
worthy  to  be  put  into  the  Cage,  yea,  and  Pillory 
too,  then  were  the  men  that  they  had  abused.   Thus, 
after  divers  words  had  passed  on  both  sides,  (the 
men  ^themselves  behaving  themselves  all  the  while 
very  wisely  and  soberly  before  them,)  they  fell  to 
some  Blows,  ^' among  themselves,'  and  did  harm 
one  to  another.     Then  were  these   two  poor  men  Theuarc 
brought  before  their  Examiners  again,  and  there  ^«"""so/ 
charged  as  being  guilty  of  the  late  Hubbub  that«"«.' 
had  been  in  the  fair.     So  they  beat  them  pitifully,  rhenareud 
and   hanged    Irons  upon  them,   and  led   them   in«f/fmm 
Chain es  up  and  down  the/«?*r,  for  an  example  *and  terror to'"^'' 
a  terror  to  others,  lest  any  ^should  further  speak  in 
their  behalf,  or  joyn  themselves  unto  them.     But 
Christian  and  Faithful  behaved  themselves  yet  more 
wisely,  and  received  the  ignominy  and  shame  that 
was  cast  upon  them,  with  so  much  meekness  and  so'ico/Mf 
patience,  that  it  won  to  their  side  (thous'h   but  few/a»ao/»'/o 

^  '  behaving  themselves,'    2ud  *  '  and  terror,'  3rd  and  sub. 

and  sub.  edits.  '  '  should  speak,'  3rd  and  sub. 

'  Added  to  3rd  and  ^ub.  edits. 


108  €f)t  ^as:rimsi  f  rciptsisJ^ 

in  comparison  of  the  rest)  several  of  the  men  in  the 

yjzeV.     This  put  the  other  party  yet  into  a  greater 

rage,  insomuch  that  they  concluded  the  death  of 

Ticfir  adver-  thcsc   two   mcn.     Whcrcforc  they   threatned   that 

Touetom   the   Cage   nor  Irons  should  serve  their  turn,  but 

that  they  should  die,  for  the  abuse  they  had  done, 

and  for  deluding  the  men  of  t\\efair. 

Then  were  they  remanded  to  the  Cage  again 
until  further  order  should  be  taken  with  them.  So 
they  put  them  in,  and  made  their  feet  fast  in  the 
Stocks. 

^'  Here  ^also  they  called  again  to  mind  what  they 

*  had  heard  from  their  faithful  friend  Evangelist^ 
'  and  ^was  the  more  confirmed  in  their  way  and 
'  sufl:erings,  by  what  he  told  them  would  happen  to 

*  them.  They  also  now  comforted  each  other,  that 
'  whose  lot  it  was  to  suffer,  ^that  even  he  should 
'  have  the  best  on't ;  therefore  each  man  secretly 
'  wished  that  he  might  have  that  preferment ;  but 
'  committing  themselves  to  the  All-wise  dispose  of 
'  him  that  ruleth  all  things,  with  much  content 
'  they  abode  in  the  condition  in  which  they  were, 
'  until  they  should  be  otherwise  disposed  of.' 

"^aain'ut  Tlicn  a  couvcuient  time  being  appointed,  they 
j^;'^^'^^^^''^^  brought  them  forth  to  their  Tryal  in  order  to  their 
Tviraf'""  Condemnation.  When  the  time  was  come,  they 
were  brought  before  their  Enemies  and  arraigned  ; 
The  Judge's  name  was  Lord  Hategood.  Their  in- 
dictment was  one  and  the  same  in  substance,  though 
somewhat  varying  in  form  ;  the  Contents  whereof 
was  this. 
Their  Indict-  That  tlieti  wcve  enemies  to,  and  disturbers  of  their 
Trade',  that  they  had  made  Commotions  and  Divisions 
in  the  Town,  and  had  won  a  party  to  their  own  most 

•  The  lines  marked  '  first  in-  ''  '  Here  therefore,'  9th    1684, 

serted  in   the   2nd   edition,    and      and  sub. 
continued  subsequently.  *  '  were,'  Hth  and  sub.  edits. 

^  'that,'  omitted  in  3rd  and  subs. 


mtnt. 


Wbt  ^sagn'mss  ^rogitsfs^.  io9 


Now  Faithful  play  the  man,  speak  for  thy  God : 
Fear  not  the  wickeds  malice  nor  their  rod  : 
Speak  boldly  man,  the  truth  is  on  thy  side  ; 
Die  for  it,  and  to  life  in  triumph  ride. 


Copied  from  the  13th  edition,  1692. 


Faithfuls 

ansioerfo 


110  €i)t  ^Bilgnms;  ^3icicj:rf«j5j* 

damjerou.s  opinions,  in  contempt  of  the  Law  of  their 
Prince. 

Then  Faithful  began  to  answer,  That  he  had  only 
himi-jf.  ggj.  iiiniself  against  that  which  had  set  it  self  against 
him  that  is  higher  then  the  highest.  And  said  he, 
As  for  disturbance,  I  make  none,  being  my  self  a 
man  of  Peace ;  the  ^ Party  that  were  won  to  us, 
were  won  by  beholding  our  Truth  and  Innocence, 
and  they  are  only  turned  from  the  worse  to  the 
better.  And  as  to  the  King  you  talk  of,  since  he  is 
Beelzebub,  the  Enemy  of  our  Lord,  I  defie  him  and 
all  his  Angels. 

Then  Proclamation  was  made,  that  they  that 
had  ought  to  say  for  their  Lord  the  King  against 
the  Prisoner  at  the  Bar,  should  forthwith  appear 
and  give  in  their  evidence.  So  there  came  in  three 
Witnesses,  to  wit.  Envy,  Superstition,  and  Pick- 
thank.  They  ^was  then  asked.  If  they  knew  the 
Prisoner  at  the  Bar  ?  and  what  they  had  to  say  for 
their  Lord  the  King  against  him? 
Envyic-  Thcu  stood  forth  Envy,  and  said  to  this  effect ; 
My  Lord,  I  have  known  this  man  a  long  time,  and 
will  attest  upon  my  Oath  before  this  honourable 
Bench,  That  he  is 

Judge.     Hold,  give  him  his  Oath  ; 

So  they  sware  him.  Then  he  said.  My  Lord, 
This  man,  notwithstanding  his  plausible  name,  is 
one  of  the  vilest  men  in  our  Countrey ;  he  neither 
regardeth  Prince  nor  People,  Law  nor  Custom: 
but  doth  all  that  he  can  to  possess  all  men  wnth 
certain  of  his  disloyal  notions,  whicli  he  in  the 
general  calls  Principles  of  Faith  and  Holiness. 
And  in  particular,  I  heard  him  once  my  self  affirm. 
That  Christianity  and  the  Customs  of  our  Town  of 
Vanity,  2vcre  DianictricaUy  opposite,  and  coidd  not  be 
reconciled.     By  whicli  saying,  my  Lord,  he  doth  at 

'  '  Parties,'  2nd  and  sub.  ^  3rd  and  siili.  except  7tli. 

'  They  were,'  2nd  and  sub. 


gins. 


once,   not  only  condemn  all  our  laudable  doings, 
but  us  in  the  doing  of  them. 

Jiidg.  Then  did  the  Judge  say  to  him.  Hast  thou 
any  more  to  say  ? 

E71V.  My  Lord  I  could  say  much  more,  only  I 
would  not  be  tedious  to  the  Court.  Yet  if  need  be, 
when  the  other  Gentlemen  have  given  in  their 
Evidence,  rather  then  any  thing  shall  be  wanting 
that  will  dispatch  him,  I  will  enlarge  my  Testimony 
against  him.  So  he  was  bid  stand  by.  Then  they 
called  Superstition,  and  bid  him  look  upon  the  Pri- 
soner ;  they  also  asked.  What  he  could  say  for  their 
Lord  the  King  against  him?  Then  they  swarehim, 
so  he  began. 

Super.  My  Lord,  I  have  no  great  acquaintance  3  supersu- 
with  this  man,  nor  do  I  desire  to  have  further 
knowledge  of  him;  However  this  I  know,  that  he 
is  a  very  pestilent  fellow,  from  some  discourse  that 
the  other  day  I  had  with  him  in  this  Toivn;  for 
then  talking  with  him,  I  heard  him  say.  That  our 
Religion  was  naught,  and  such  by  which  a  man 
could  by  no  means  please  God:  which  sayings  of 
his,  my  Lord,  your  Lordship  very  well  knows,  what 
necessarily  thence  will  follow,  '^two  ivit.  That  w^e 
still  do  worship  in  vain,  are  yet  in  our  Sins,  and 
finally  shall  be  damned  ;  and  this  is  that  which  I 
have  to  say. 

Then  was  Pickthank  sworn,  and  bid  say  what  he 
knew,  in  behalf  of  their  Lord  the  King  against  the 
Prisoner  at  the  Bar. 

Fick.  My  Lord,  and   you  gentlemen    all.    This  pick-thanks 
fellow  I  have  known  of  a  long  time,  and  have  heard 
him  speak  things  that  ought  not  to  be  spoke.     For 
he  hath  railed  on  our  noble  Prince  Beelzebub,  and 
hath  spoke  contemptibly  of  his  honourable  Friends,  smw  ore  a?; 
whose  names  are  the  Lord  Oldman,  tlie  Lord  Car-^GrmtT'^ 


.  onct. 


3rd  and  sub.  except  the  7th.  *  '  to,'  2nd  and  suh.  edits. 


112  Cf)e  ^ilcrnmef  |3rogiTs(^. 

nal-deli()ht,  the  Lord  Lujcurious^  the  Lord  Desire  of 
Vain-glory,  my  old  Lord  Lechery^  Sir  Having  Greedy, 
with  all  the  rest  of  our  Nobility;  and  he  hath  said 
moreover,  that  if  all  men  were  of  his  mind,  if  pos- 
sible, there  is  not  one  of  these  noble  Men  should 
have  any  longer  a  being  in  this  Town.  Besides, 
he  hath  not  been  afraid  to  rail  on  you,  my  Lord, 
who  are  now  appointed  to  be  his  Judge,  calling  you 
an  ungodl}^  Villian,  with  many  other  such  like  vili- 
fying terms,  by  ^  which  he  hath  bespattered  most  of 
the  Gentry  of  our  Town.  Wiicn  this  Pickthank 
had  told  his  tale,  the  Judge  directed  his  speech  to 
the  Prisoner  at  the  Bar,  saying.  Thou  Runagate, 
Heretick,  and  Traitor,  hast  thou  heard  what  these 
honest  Gentlemen  have  witnessed  ao:ainst  thee  ? 

Faith.  May  I  speak  a  few  ivords  in  my  own 
defence  ? 

Jiidg.  Sirrah,  Sirrah,  thou  deservest  to  live  no 
longer,  but  to  be  slain  immediately  upon  the  place  ; 
yet  that  all  men  may  see  our  gentleness  towards 
thee,  let  us  ^see  what  thou  '''vile  Runagate'  hast 
to  say. 
Faithfuls  Faith.  1.  I  say  then  in  answer  to  what  Mr.  Envi/ 
hinisdf.  hath  spoken,  I  never  said  ought  but  this.  That  what 
Rule,  or  Laws,  or  Custom,  or  People,  icereflat  against 
the  Word  of  God,  are  diametrically  opjposite  to  Chris- 
tianity. If  I  have  said  amiss  in  this,  convince  me 
of  my  errour,  and  I  am  ready  here  before  you  to 
make  my  recantation. 

2.  As  to  the  second,  to  wit,  Mr.  Superstition,  and 
his  charge  against  me,  I  said  only  this,  That  in  the 
worship  of  God  there  is  required  n  divine  Faith  ;  but 
there  can  he  no  divine  Faith  icithout  a  divine  Revela- 
tion of  the  will  of  God :  therefore  whatever  is  thrust 
into  the  worship  of  God,  that  is  not  agreeable  to  ^a 

*  '  with  which,'  2nd  and  sub.  ^  Added  to  8th  and  sub.  edits. 

'  '  us  hear,'   3rd  and  sub.,  ex-  '  '  to    divine'    2nd    and    sub. 

ceptTth.  ,  edits. 


Cfte  ^pilgrims;  larogresig*  ii3 

divine  Revelation,  cannot  he  done  but  by  an  humane 
Faith  ;  which  Faith  ivill  not  ^pro/it  to  Eternal  life. 

3.  As  to  what  Mr.  Pickthank  hath  said,  I  say, 
(avoiding-  terms,  as  that  I  am  said  to  rail,  and  the 
like)  That  the  Prince  of  this  Town,  with  all  the 
Rableraent  his  Attendants,  by  this  Gentleman 
named,  are  more  fit  Mbr  a  being  in  Hell,  than  in 
this  Town  and  Countrey  ;  and  so  the  Lord  have 
mercy  upon  me. 

Then  the  Judge  called  to  the  Jury  (who  all  this 
while  stood  by,  to  hear  and  observe)  Gentlemen  of  ^.f^^^^^f,^ 
the  Jury,  you  see  this  man  about  whom  so  great  an  ^''^  •^"'■^• 
uproar  hath  been  made  in  this  Town  :  you  have  also 
heard  what  these  worthy  Gentlemen  have  witnessed 
against  him  ;  also  you  have  heard  his  reply  and 
confession :  It  lieth  now  in  your  brests  to  hang  him, 
or  save  his  life,  But  yet  I  think  meet  to  instruct  you 
into  our  Law. 

There  was  an  Act  made  in  the  days  of  Pharaoh  ^^od.h 
the  Great,  Servant  to  our  Prince,  That  lest  those  of 
a  contrary  Religion  should  multiply  and  grow  too 
strong  for  him,  their  Males  should  be  thrown  into 
the  River,     There  was  also  an  Act  made  in  the  days 
of  Nebuchadnezzar  the  Great,  another  of  his  Ser-oan.  3. 
vants,  that  whoever  would  not  fall  down  and  wor- 
ship his  golden  Image,  shonld   be  thrown  into  a 
fiery  Furnace.     There  was  also  an  Act  made  in  the 
days  of  Darius,  That  who  so,  for  some  time,  called  Dan.  e. 
upon  any  God   but  ^his,   should  be   cast  into  the 
Lions  Den.     Now  the  substance  of  these  Laws  this 
Rebel  has  broken,  not  only  in  thought  (which  is  not 
to  be  born)  but  also  in  word  and  deed ;  which  must 
therefore  needs  be  intolerable. 

For  that  of  Pharaoh,  his  Law  was  made  upon  a 
supposition,  to  prevent  mischief,  no  Crime  being  yet 

'  'not  be   profit,'    2nd   to  7th  '  'for  being,'  10th  edit, 

edits. ;   '  not  be   profitable,'    8th  ^  '  but  him,'  2nd  and  sub. 

and  sub. 


apparent ;  but  here  is  a  Crime  apparent.  For  the 
second  and  third,  you  see  he  disputeth  against  our 
Reb'gion  ;  and  for  the  Treason  he  hath  confessed, 
he  deserveth  to  die  the  death. 
an/thi'"^  Then  went  the  Jury  out,  whose  names  were,  Mr. 
Aames.-  Bluid-man,  Mr.  No-good,  Mr.  Malice,  Mr.  Love-lust, 
Mr.  Live-loose,  Mr.  Heady,  Mr.  Hicjh-mind,  Mr. 
Enmity,  Mr.  Lyar,  Mr.  Cruelty,  Mr.  Hate-light,  and 
Mr.  Implacable,  who  every  one  gave  in  his  private 
Verdict  against  him  among  themselves,  and  after- 
wards unanimously  concluded  to  bring  him  in 
guilty  before  the  Judge.  And  first  '  ^ among  them- 
pHrauv^--  selves,'  Mr.  Blindman  the  foreman,  said,  I  see  clearly 
'^''^■'  that  this  man  is  an  Heretick.  Then  said  Mr.  No-good, 
Atuay  ivith  such  a  fellow  from  the  Earth.  Ay,  said 
Mr.  Malice,  for  I  hate  the  very  looks  of  him.  Then 
said  Mr.  Love-lust,  I  could  never  endure  him.  Nor  I, 
said  Mr.  Live-loose,  for  he  would  alwayes  be  condemn- 
ing my  icay.  Hang  him,  hang  him,  said  Mr.  Heady. 
A  sorry  Scrub,  said  Mr.  High-mind.  My  heart  riseth 
against  him,  said  Mr.  Enmity.  He  is  a  Rogue,  said  Mr. 
Lyar.  Hangi^ig  is  too  good  for  him,  said  Mr.  Cruelty. 
Lets  dispatch  him  out  of  the  ivay,  said  Mr.  Hate-light. 
Then  said  Mr.  Implacable,  Might  I  have  all  the 
World  given  me,  I  coidd  not  be  reconciled  to  him, 
colUdeto  therefore  let  us  forthwith  bring  him  in  guilty  of 
ti^JP"'"  death;  And  so  "they  did,  therefore  he  was  pre- 
sently Condemned,  To  be  had  from  the  place 
where  he  was,  to  the  place  from  whence  he  came, 
and  there  to  be  put  to  the  most  cruel  death  that 
could  be  invented. 

They  therefore  brought  him  out,  to  do  with  him 
according  to  their  Law  ;  and  first  they  Scourged 
him,  then  they  Buflfetted  him,  then  they  Lanced  his 
flesh  with  Knives;  after  that,  they  Stoned  him  with 
Stones,  then  prickt  him  with  their  Swords,  and  last 

'  -"ird  and  sub.,  except  the  7tli  edit. 


(I  ath 


The  Cruel 
iknth  of 
Faithful. 


Cf)e  ^lilSiimd  ^arcigit^si. 


115 


Brave  Faithful,  Bravely  done  in  word  and  deed  ; 
Judge,  Witnesses,  and  Jury,  have  insteed 
Of  overcoming  thee,  but  shewn  their  rage. 
When  they  are  dead,  thou'lt  live,  from  age  to  age. 


Copied  from  the  7th  edition,  1681. 


116  Z])t  pilgitme:  ^arocritsisf* 

of  all  tliey  burned  him  to  Ashes  at  the  Stake. 
r^tanf^'  Thus  caiTie  Faithful  io  his  end.  *  Now,  I  saw  that 
Horses  wau  there  stood  behind  the  multitude,   a  Chariot  and 

to  take  away  f>     tt  •    •  p  t-t        7 

Faithful.'  a  couple  of  Horses,  waitmg  for  Faithful,  who  (so 
soon  as  his  adversaries  had  dispatched  him)  was 
taken  up  into  it,  and  straightway  was  carried  up 
through  the  Clouds,  with  sound  of  Trumpet,  the 
nearest  way  to  the  Ccelestial  Gate.      But    as    for 

^^aai^^'"  Christian,  he  had  some  respit,  and  was  remanded 
back  to  prison,  so  he  there  remained  for  a  space : 
But  he  that  over-rules  all  things,  having  the  power 
of  their  rage  in  his  own  hand,  so  wrought  it  about, 
that  Ch7'istian  for  that  time  escaped  them,  and  went 
his  way. 


( 4 


And  as  he  went  he  Sang,'  '  saying,' 


iwchr^-"'       Well,  Faithful,  thou  hast  faithfulljj  profest 
yauMuf'"-^      Unto  thy  Lord:  icith  '^him  thou  shall  be  blest ; 
"dldh!^  When  Faithless  ones,  with  all  their  vain  delights, 

Are  cry  in  f)  out  under  their  hellish  plicjhts 
Sine/,  Faithful,  sing  ;  and  let  thy  name  survive. 
For  though  they  kilVd  thee,  thou  art  yet  alive. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  Christian  went  not 
forth  alone,  for  there  was  one  whose  name  was 
hal'alltiier  Hopcful,  (beiug  Hiadc  50  by  the  beholding  of  Chris- 
companion.  fjqji  and  FaitJiful  \\\  t\\c\v  words  and  behaviour,  in 
their  sufferings  at  t\\efair)  who  joyned  himself  unto 
him,  and  entering  into  a  brotherl}^  covenant,  told 
him  that  he  would  be  his  Companion.  Thus  one 
died  to  ^make  Testimony  to  the  Truth,  and  another 
rises  out  of  his  Ashes    to   be   a  Companion  with 


*  3r(l  and  sub.  edits.,  except  the  '  '  with  whom,'    2nd   and  sub. 

7th; 'saying,' added  toBthandsub.  edit. 

°  '  still   a    Prisoner,"    8th   and  ''  '  to  bear,'  8th  and  sub. 
sub.  edits. 


€i)t  f  ilgnms!  ^rocyitsis;*  ii7 

Christian  '^in  his  PilsTimao-e.'     This  Hopeful  also  ^'""''^I'f, 

~  ~  f>  more  of  the 

told   Christian,  that  there  were  many  more  of  thef^'^ff" 
men   in  the  fair  that   would  take   their  time   SLndf"""""- 
follow  after. 

So  I  saw  that  quickly  after  they  were  got  out  of 
the  fair,  they  overtook  one  that  was  going  before 
them,  whose  name  was  By-ends-,  so  they  said  to ^^'^fg'*"*'"- 
him,  What  Countrey-man,  Sir  ?  and  how  far  go  ^nds. 
you  this  way  ?  He  told  them,  That  he  came  from 
the  Town  of  Fair-speech,  and  he  was  going  to  the 
Coelestial  City,  (but  told  them  not  his  name.) 

From  Fair-speech,  said  Christian;  is  there  amj'^s*^^'"'-^^ 
that  be  ^cjood  live  there  ? 

By-ends.  Yes,  said  By-ends,  I  hope. 

Chr.  Pray  Sir,  what  may  I  call  you  f  '  said 
Christian!^ 

By-ends.  I  am  a  Stranger  to  you,  and  you  to  me;  fJi^l^^f^J" 
if  you  be  going  this  way,  I  shall  be  glad  of  your  ««'»«• 
Company  ;  if  not,  I  must  be  content. 

Chr.  This  Toivn  of  Fair-speech, '  '^said  Christian/ 
I  have  heard  of  ^  it,  and,  as  I  remember,  they  say  its 
a  Wealthy  place. 

By  ends.  Yes,  I  will  assure  you  that  it  is,  and  I 
have  very  many  Rich  Kindred  there. 

Chr.  Pray,  who  are  your  Kindred  there,  if  a  man 
may  be  so  bold  ? 

By-ends.  '  ^Almost  the  whole  Town  ;  and  in  par- 
'  ticular,  my  Lord  Turn-about,  my  Lord  Time- 
'  server,  my  Lord  Fair-speech,  (from  whose  Ancestors 

*  that  Town  first  took  its  name :)  Also  Mr.  Smooth- 
'  man,  Mr.    Facing-bothways,    Mr.  Atiy-thiny,    and 

*  the  Parson  of  our  Parish,  Mr.  Two-tongues,  was 
'  my  Mothers  own  Brother  by  Father's  side  :  And,' 

'  8tb  and  sub.  *  3rd  and   sub.  edits.,   excent 

^   '  There  are,'  8th  and  sub.  the  7th. 

"  2nd  edit,  and  sub.  ®  '  heard  of,'  8th  and  sub.  edits. 

'  '  any  that  be  good  that  lives  *  The  lines  marked  '  were  first 

there,'  2nd  ;  '  any  good  that  lives  inserted  in  the  2nd,  and  continued 

there,'  -^i-d  and  sub.  in  sub.  edits. 

K 


118  Ci)e  filgnms  ^progitssi* 

To  tell  you  '  ^the'  Truth,  I  am  '^become'  a  Gen- 
tleman of  good  Quality ;  yet  my  Great  Grand- 
father was  but  a  Water-man,  looking  one  way,  and 
Rowing  another  ;  and  I  got  most  of  my  Estate  by 
the  same  occupation, 

Chr.  Are  you  a  Married  man  f 

Khi^riZf      By-ends.  Yes,  and  my  Wife  is   a  very  Virtuous 

Bv-prid..      woman,    the    Daughter    of    a   Virtuous    woman  : 

She  was    my    Lady  Fainings   Daughter,  therefore 

she   came   of  a   very   Honourable   Family,  and  is 

arrived    to    such    a    pitch    of    Breeding,    that   she 

knows  how  to  carry  it  to  all,  even  to  Prince  and 

ends'S's  Peasant.     'Tis  true,  we  somewhat  differ  in  Religion 

{nX%;o".  from  those  of  the  stricter  sort,  yet  but  in  two  small 

points :    First,   we   never  strive  against  Wind   and 

Tide.      Secondly,    We    are    alwayes  most    zealous 

w^hen  Religion  goes  in  his  Silver  Slippers  ;  we  love 

much  to  walk  with  him  in  the  Street,  if  the  Sun 

shines,  and  the  people  applaud  ^it. 

Then  Christian  stept  a  little  ^a  to  side  to  his  Fellow 
Hopeftd,  saying,  It  runs  in  my  mind  that  this  is  one 
By-ends  o{  Fair-sj^eech,  and  if  it  be  he,  we  have  as 
very  a  Knave  in  our  Company,  as  dwelleth  in  all 
these  parts.  Then  said  Hopeful,  Ask  him  ;  methinks 
he  should  not  he  ashamed  of  his  name.  So  Christian 
came  up  with  him  again,  and  said,  Sir,  you  talk  as 
if  you  knew  something  more  then  all  the  World 
doth,  and  if  I  take  not  my  mark  amiss,  I  deem  I 
have  half  a  guess  of  you  :  Is  not  your  name  Mr. 
By-eyids  of  Fair-speech  ? 

By-ends.  That"  is  not  my  name,  but  indeed  it  is 
a  Nick-name  that  is  given  me  by  some  that  cannot 
abide  me,  and  I  must  be  content  to  bear  it  as  a  re- 
proach, as  other  good  men  have  born  theirs  before 
me. 

^  i?rd  and  suli.  '  '  applaud  him,'  8th  and  sub. 

*  3rd  and  sub.    t  dit?.,   except  '  '  a  little  aside,'  8th  and  sub. 

the  7th.  ^  '  This,'  2nd  and  sub. 


€in  IBil^viin^  fitigitsisi*  119 

Chr.  But  did  you  nemr  gwe  an  occasion  to  men  to 
call  you  by  this  name  f 

By-ends.  Never,  never  !  the  v^^orst  that  ever  I  did 
to  give  them  an  occasion  to  give  me  this  name,  was,  now^r 
That  I  had  alwayes  the  luck  to  jump  in  my  Judge-  '^«"i«- 
ment  with  the  present  way  of  the  times,  whatever  it 
was,  and  my  chance  was  to  get  thereby ;  but  if  things 
are  thus  cast  upon  me,  let  me  count  them  a  bless- 
ing, but  let  not  the  malicious  load  me  therefore  with 
reproach. 

Chr.  /  thoucjht  indeed,  that  you  ^was  the  man  that 

I  ^had  heard  of,  and  to  tell  you  what  I  think,  I  fear 
this  name  belongs  to  you  more  properly  tliayi  you  are 
ivilling  we  should  think  it  doth. 

%-ends.  Well,  if  you  will  thus  imagine,  I  cannot  He^^siretto 
help  it.     You  shall  find  me  a  fair  Company-keeper,  panywuh 

■  n     ^  •\^        •^^         ^       •  .'-^  r'  Christian. 

II  you  Will  still  admit  me  your  associate. 

Chr,  If  you  will  go  with  us,  you  must  go  against 
Wind  and  Tide,  the  which,  I  perceive,  is  against  your 
opinion :  You  must  also  own  Religion  in  his  Rags,  as 
well  as  when  in  his  Silver  Slippers,  and  stand  by  him 
too,  when  bound  in  Irons,  as  well  as  tvhen  he  walketh 
the  Streets  with  applause. 

By-ends.  You  must  not  impose,  nor  Lord  it  over 
my  Faith ;  leave  me  to  my  liberty,  and  let  me  go 
with  you. 

Chr.  Not  a  step  further,  unless  you  will  do  in  what 
I  propound,  as  we. 

Then  said  By-ends,  I  shall  never  desert  my  old 
Principles,  since  they  are  harmless  and  profitable. 
If  I  ma}^  not  go  with  you,  I  must  do  as  I  did  before 
you  overtook  me,  even  go  by  my  self,  untill  some 
overtake  me  that  will  be  glad  of  my  Company. 

'^Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that   Christian  and  '  ^r^J"^' 

TT    •     r    1    c  11*  11  1*        !•  adrtChris- 

'  Hopeful,  lorsook  him,  and  keept  their  distance  be-  tian^jarfi- 

'  '  you  were,'  2nd  and  sub.  '  All  this   interview    between 

*  '  I  heard,'  2nd  and  sub.  By-ends   and   his   company   was 

first  inserted  in  the  3rd  edit. 
K  2 


120 


€i)t  yilgnmsj  ^3rogres»£«» 


'  I/e  has  new 
t'ompa- 


'  'By-ends 
Character  of 
the  Pil- 
grims.' 


fore  him,  but  one  of  them  looking  back,  saw  three 
men  following*  Mr.  By-ends^  and  behold,  as  they 
came  up  with  him,  he  made  them  a  very  low 
Conje,  and  they  also  gave  him  a  Complement. 
The  mens  names  were  Mr.  Hold-the-World,  Mr. 
Money-love,  and  Mr.  Save-all ;  men  that  Mr.  By- 
ends,  had  formerly  bin  acquainted  with  ;  for  in 
their  minority  they  were  schoolfellow,  and  were 
taught  by  one  Mr.  Gripe-inan,  a  School-master  in 
Love-gain,  which  is  a  market  town  in  the  County 
of  Coveting  in  the  North.  This  Schoolmaster 
taught  them  the  art  of  getting,  either  by  violence, 
cousenage  flattery,  lying  or  by  putting  on  a  guise 
of  Religion,  and  these  four  Gentlemen  had  attained 
much  of  the  art  of  their  Master,  so  that  they  could 
each  of  them  have  kept  such  a  School  them- 
selves. 

'  Well  when  they  had,  as  I  said,  thus  saluted  each 
other,  Mr.  Mony-love  said  to  My.  By-ends,  who  are 
they  upon  the  Road  before  us  ?  For  Christian  and 
Hopeful  were  yet  within  view. 

^By-ends.  They  are  a  coupleof  far  countrey-men, 
that  after  their  mode,  are  going  on  Pilgrimage. 

'  Mony-love.  Alas,  why  did  tliey  not  stay  that 
we  might  have  had  their  good  company,  for  they, 
and  we,  and  you  Sir,  I  hope,  are  all  going  on  '  a' 
^Pilgrimage. 

'  By-ends.  We  are  so  indeed,  but  the  men  before 
us,  are  so  ridgid,  and  love  so  much  their  own  no- 
tions, and  do  also  so  lightly  esteem  the  Opinions 
of ''others ;  that  let  a  man  be  never  so  godl}^,  yet 
if  he  jumps  not  with  them  in  all  things,  they 
thrust  him  quite  out  of  their  company. 

'  Mr.  Save- all,  that's  bad  ;  But  we  read  of  some, 
that  are  righteous  over-much,  and  such  mens  ridgid- 


^  Aided  nfter  the  "rd  edit. 


*  'on  a  Pilgrimage,'  9th,  1684, 
and  sub. 


*  'of  other,'  7th  edit. 


Wi)t  pilgrims  proijrfssf*  121 

'  ness  prevails  with  them  to  judge  and  condemn  all 
'  but  themselves.  But  I  pray  tvhat  and  hoiv  many, 
'  were  the  things  wherein  you  differed. 

'  By-ends^  why  they  after  their  headstrong  man- 
'  ner,  conclude  that  it  is  duty  to  rush  on  their  Journy 
'  all  weathers,  and  I  am  for  waiting  for  Wind  and 

*  Tide.  They  are  for  hazzarding  all  for  God,  at  a 
'  clap,  and  I  am  for  taking  all  advantages  to  secure 
'  my  life  and  estate.  They  are  for  holding  their 
'  notions,  though  all  other  men  ^are  against  them, 
'  but  I  am  for  Religion  in  what,  and  so  far  as  the 
'  times,  and  my  safety  will  bear  it.  They  are  for 
'  Religion,  when  in  rags,  and  contempt,  but  I  am 
'  for  him  when  he  walks  in  his  golden  slipers  in  the 
'  Sun-shine,  and  with  applause. 

'  Mr.  Hold-the-WorU,    Ai,  and  hold   you  there 

*  still,  good   Mr.  By-ends,  for,  for  my  part,  I  can 

*  count  him  but  a  fool,  that  leaving''  the  liberty  to 
'  keep  what  he  has  ;  shall  be  so  unwise^  as  to  lose 
'  it.  Let  us  be  wise  as  Serpants,  'tis  best  to  make 
'  hay  when  the  Sun  shines ;  you  see  how  the  Bee 
'  lieth  still   all   winter   and  bestirs  her  ^then  only 

*  when  she  can  have  profit  with  pleasure.  God 
'  sends  sometimes  Rain,  and  sometimes  Sun-shine  ; 

*  if  they  be  such  fuols  to  go  through  the  first,  yet 

*  let  us  be  content  to  take  fair  weather  alonir  with 
'  us.  For  my  part  I  like  that  Religion  best,  that 
'  will  stand  with  the  security  of  Gods  good  blessings 
'  unto  us  ;  for  who  can  imagin  that  is  ruled  by  his 
'  reason,  since  God  has  bestowed  upon  us  the  good 
'  things  of  this  life,  but  that  he  would  have  us  keep 
'  them  for  his  sake.  Abraham  and  Solomon  grew 
'  rich  in  Religion.  And  Job  sales,  that  a  good  man 
^  shall. lay  up  (jold  as  dust.      '^But'  He  must  not 

*  '  be  against,'  10th  edit.  *  'bestirs  her  only,'  after  the 
^  '  having  the  liberty,'  after  the      3rd  edit. 

8rd  edit.  »  '  But,'   added   after  the  3rd 

*  'unwise  to  lose,'  0th,   1684,       edit, 
and  1  nth  edits. 


122  CfK  ^^ilgrims  ^3iogresis!* 

be  siicli  as  the  men  before  us,  if  they  be  as  you 
have  discribed  them. 

'  Mr.  Save-all.  I  think  that  we  are  all  agreed  in 
this  matter,  and  therefore  there  needs  no  more 
words  about  it. 

'  Mr.  Mony-love.  No,  there  needs  no  more  words 
about  this  matter  indeed,  for  he  that  believes 
neither  Scripture  nor  reason  (and  you  see  we  have 
both  on  our  side)  neither  knows  his  own  liberty, 
nor  seeks  his  own  safety. 

'  Mr.  By-ends.  My  Brethren,  we  are,  as  you  see, 
going  all  on  Pilgrimage,  and  for  our  better  diver- 
sion from  things  that  are  bad,  give  me  leave  to 
propound  unto  you  this  question. 

'  Suppose  a  man ;  a  Mmister,  or  a  Tradesman,  8fc. 
should  have  an  advantage  lie  before  him  to  get  the 
good  blessings  of  this  life.  Yet  so,  as  that  he  can  by 
no  means  come  by  them,  except  in  appearance,  at  least 
he  becomes  extraordinary  Zealous  in  some  p)oints  of 
Religion,  that  he  medled  not  ivith  before,  may  he  not 
use  this  means  to  attain  his  end,  and  yet  be  a  right 
honest  man  f 

'  Mr.  Mony-love.  I  see  the  bottom  of  your  ques- 
tion, and  with  these  Gentlemens  good  leave,  I 
will  endeavour  to  shape  you  an  answer.  And  first 
to  speak  to  your  question,  as  it  concerns  a  Minis- 
ter himself.  Suppose  a  Minister,  a  worthy  man, 
possessed  but  of  a  very  small  benefice,  and  has  in  his 
eye  a  greater,  more  fat,  and  plump  by  far ;  he  has 
also  now  an  opportunity  of  getting  of  it ;  yet  so  as  by 
being  more  studious,  by  p7'eachi}ig  more  frequently, 
and  zealously,  and  because  the  temper  of  the  people 
requires  it,  by  altering  of  some  of  his  principles,  for 
my  part  I  see  no  reason  but  a  man  may  do  this  (pro- 
vided he  has  a  call.)  Ai,  and  more  a  great  deal 
besides,  and  yet  be  an  honest  man.     For  why, 

'  1.  His  desire  of  a  greater  benefice  is  lawful  (this 
cannot  be  contradicted)  since  'tis  set  before  him 


ClK  ^ailgrims  piogiesis*  123 

*  by  providence ;  so  then,  he  may  get  it  if  he  can, 
'  ynakbu)  no  question  for  conscience  sake. 

'  2.  Besides,  his  desire  after  that  benefice,  makes 
'  him  more  studious,  a  more  zealous  preacher,  8fc. 
'  and  so  makes  him  a  better  man.  Yea  makes  him 
'  better  improve  his  parts,  which  is  according  to  the 
'  mind  of  God. 

'  3.  Now  as  for  his  complying  with  the  temper 
'  of  his  people,  by  ^dissenting,  to  serve  them,  some 
'  of  his  principles,  this  argueth,  i.  That  he  is  of  a 
'  ^self  denying  temper.  2.  Of  a  sweet  and  winning 
'  deportment.  3.  And  so  more  fit  for  the  Ministe- 
'  rial  function. 

'  4.  I  conclude  then,  that  a  Minister  that  changes 
'  a  s7naU  for  a  g^^eat,  should  not  for  so  doing,  be 
'  judged  as  covetous,  but  rather,  since  he  is  im- 
'  proved    in    his    parts    and   industry   thereby,   be 

*  counted  as  one  that  pursues  his  call,  and  the 
'  opportunity  put  into  his  hand  to  do  good. 

'  And  now   to  the  second  part  of  the  c[uestion 

*  which  concerns  the  Tradesman  you  mentioned  : 
'  suppose  such  an  one  to  have  but  a  poor  imploy  in 
'  the  world,  but  by  becoming   Religious,  he  may 

*  mend  his  market,  perhaps  get  a  rich  wife,  or  more, 
'  and  far  better  customers  to  his  shop.  For  my 
'  part  I  see  no  reason  but  that  this  may  be  lawfully 

*  done.     For  why, 

'  1.  To  become  religious  is  a  vertue,  by  what 
'  means  soever  a  man  becomes  so. 

'  2.  Nor  is  it  unlawful  to  get  a  rich  wife,  or  more 
'  custome  to  my  shop. 

'  3.  Besides  the  man  that  gets  these  by  becoming 
'  religious,  gets  that  which  is  good,  of  them  that  are 

^  The  9th  edit.,  1683,  has  '  dis-  '  desert  '  his  old  principles  :  '  dis- 
serting,' evidently  a  typographi-  semble '  might  have  been  better, 
cal  error,  the  word  being  rightly  '  '  a  safe  denying,'    8rd   edit., 
spelt    '  dissenting '    in   the   9th,  but   it    must    have   been   a  typ. 
1684,  and  10th  edit.     The  hypo-  error, 
crite  may  '  dissent,'  but  does  not 


124  Ci)e  iSilgnms  ^logre^s; 

'  good,  by  becoming  good  himself;  so  then  here  is 
'  a  good  wife,  and  good  customers,  and  good  gaine, 

*  and  all  these  by  becoming  religious,  which  is 
'  good.     Therefore  to  become  religious  to  get  all 

*  these  is  a  good  and  profitable  design. 

'  This  answer,  thus  made  by  this  Mr.  Mony-lom 

*  to  Mr.  By-ends^  question,  was  highly  applauded 
'  by  them  all ;  wherefore  they  concluded  upon  the 
'  whole,  that  it  was  most  wholsome  and  advan- 
'  tagious.  And  because,  as  they  thought,  no  man 
'  was  able  to  contradict  it,  and  because  Christian 

*  and  Hopeful  was  yet  within  call ;  they  ^joyfulh^ 

*  agreed  to  assault  them  with  the  question  as  soon 
'  as  they  overlook  them,  and  the  rather  because  they 
'  had  opposed  Mr.  By-ends  before.  So  they  called 
'  after  them,  and  they  stopt,  and  stood  still  till  they 

*  came  up  to  them,  but  they  concluded  as  they  went, 

*  that  not  '  Mr.^'  By-ends,  but  old  Mr.  Hold-the- 
'  world  should  propound  the  question  to  them,  be- 

*  cause,  as  they  supposed,  their  answer  to  him  would 
'  be  without  the  remainder  of  that  heat  that  was 
'  kindled  betwixt  Mr.  By-ends  and  them,  at  their 
'  parting  a  little  before. 

'  So  they  came  up  to  each  other  and  after  a  short 

*  salutation,  Mr.  Hold-the-world  propounded  the 
'  question  to  Christian  and  his  fellow,  and  bid  them 
'  to  answer  it  if  they  could. 

'  Chr.  Then  said  Christian,  even  a  babe  in  Reli- 

*  gion  may  answer  ten  thousand  such  questions. 
'  For  if  it  he  unlawful  to  follow  Christ  for  loaves,  as 
'  it  is,  Joh.  6.  How  much  more  abominable  is  it  to 
'  make  of  him  and  religion  a  stalking  horse  to  get 

*  and  enjoy  the  world.     Nor  do  we  find  any  other 

*  than  Heathens,  Hypocrites,  Devils  and  Witches 
'  that  are  of  this  opinion. 

'  1.  Heathens,  for  when  Ha?nor  and  Shechem  had  a 

*  '  they  joyntly,'  after  the  3rd  '  '  Mr."    added   after   the   Mrd 

edit.  edit. 


Cf)e  ^ailcrnmd  ^Srogresis!*  125 

mind  to  the  Daughter  and  Cattle  oi  Jacob,  and 
saw  that  there  was  no  waies  for  them  to  come  at 
them,  but  b}-  becoming  circumcised,  they  say  to 
their  companions  ;  If  every  male  of  ''us  be  cir- 
cumcised, as  they  are  circumcised,  shall  not 
their  Cattle,  and  their  substance,  and  every  beast 
of  theirs  be  ours.  Their  Daughter  and  their 
Cattle  were  that  which  they  sought  to  obtain,  and 
their  Religion  the  stalking  horse  they  made  use 
of  to  come  at  them.  Read  the  whole  story,  Gen. 
34.  20,  21,  22,  23. 
'  2.  The  Hypocritical  Pharisees  were  also  of  this 
Religion,  long  pra^^ers  were  their  pretence,  but  to 
get  widdows  houses  were  their  intent,  and  greater 
damnation   was  from  God  their  Judgment,  Luke 

20.  46,  47. 

'  3.  Judas  the  Devil  was  also  of  this  Religion,  he 
was  religious  for  the  bag,  that  he  might  be  pos- 
sessed of  what  was  therein,  but  he  was  lost,  cast 
away,  and  the  very  Son  of  perdition. 

'  4,  Simon  the  ^  witch  was  of  this  Religion  too, 
for  he  would  have  had  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he 
might  have  got  money  therewith,  and  his  sentence 
from  Peters  mouth  was  according,  Acts  8.  19,  20, 

21,  22. 

'  5.  Neither  will  it  out  of  my  mind,  but  that  that 
man  that  takes  up  Religion  for  the  world,  will 
throw  away  Religion  for  the  world  ;  for  so  surely  as 
Judas  designed  the  world  in  becoming  religious  : 
so  surely  did  he  also  sell  Religion,  and  his  Master 
for  the  same.  To  answer  the  question  therefore 
affirmatively,  as  I  perceive  you  have  done,  and  to 
accept  of  as  authentick  such  answer,  is  both 
Heathenish,  Hypocritical  and  Devilish,  and  your 
reward  will  be  according  to  your  works.     Then 

"^  '  of  it,'  3rd  edit.,  typ.  error.  rity.     See  Southey's,  Arts-Union, 

''  Altered   in  modern   editions      and  even  Tract  Society's  edits, 
to  '  Wizard,'  but  upon  no  autho- 


126  Cl)f  ^Silgrimsi  ^^itigresisi^ 

'  they  stood  stareing  one  upon  another,  but  had  not 
'  whei'ewith  to  answer  Christian.  Hopeful  also  ap- 
'  proved  of  the  soundness  of  Christians  answer,  so 
'  there  was  a  great  silence  among  them.  Mr.  Bij- 
'  ends  and  his  company  also  staggered,  and  kept 
'  behind,  that   Christian  and  Hopeful  might  outgo 

*  them.  Then  said  Christian  to  his  fellow,  if  these 
'  men  cannot  stand  before  the  sentence  of  men, 
'  what  will  they  do  with  the  sentence  of  God  ?  &  if 
'  the}^  are  mute  when  dealt  with  by  vessels  of  clay, 
'  what  will  they  do  when  they  shall  be  rebuked  by 

*  the  flames  of  a  devourins:  fire  ? ' 


The  ease  that 
Pilgrims 
have  is  but 
little  in  this 
life. 


Then  Christian  and  Hopeful  out-went  "him,  and 
went  till  they  came  at  a  delicate  Plain,  called 
Ease,  where  they  went  with  much  content ;  but 
that  plain  was  but  narrow,  so  they  Avere  quickly  got 
over  it.  Now  at  the  further  side  of  that  plain,  was 
Lucre //iH  a  a  Httlc  Hill  callcd  Lucre,  and  in  that  Hill  a  Silver- 

(iangerov.s  ' 

HUl.  Mine,  which  some  of  them  that  had  formerly  gone 

that  way,  because  of  the  rarity  of  it,  had  turned  aside 
to  see ;  but  going  too  near  the  brink  of  the  pit,  the 
ground  being  deceitful  under  them,  broke,  and  they 
were  slain  ;  some  also  had  been  maimed  there, 
and  could  not  to  their  dying  day  be  their  own 
men  again. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  a  little  oft'  the 

'*Demasn<road,   ovcr   against  the  Silver-Mine,   stood  Denias 

the  ma  ^  ^i  1  1-1        \  n  -r* 

Lucre.8'      ( Gentleman-hke,)  to  call  to  Passengers  to  come  and 
•»j{e calls to^GQ  '•  Who  said  to   Christian  and  his  Fellow  ;    Ho, 
an"Ho''p°efui turn  asidc  hither,  and  I  will  shew  you  a  thing 
himP''''         Chr.    What  thing  so  deserving,  as  to  turn  us  out  of 
the  ivay  ?  ^'-  to  see  it.' 

De.  Here  is  a  S\\\ev-Mine,  and  some  digging  in 

'  On  the  addition  of  the  con-  '  3rd  and  sub.  edits, 

trovci-sy   with    By-ends'    coinpa-  "  '  to  see  it,'  added  to  the  0th, 

nions,  the  word  '  him '  was  altered  1  tiiy ,  and  sub.  edits. 
to  'them  again,'  ;?rd  and  sub.  edits. 


€i)t  pilgrims!  prositsi'g.  127 

it  for   Treasure  ;    if  you   will  come,  with  a  little 
^  paines  you  may  richly  provide  for  your  selves. 

Hopef.  Then  said  Hopeful,  Let  us  qo  see.  .  Hopeful 

/~^i  TVT  T  •   1       y^7      ••  Ti  1  1PT'      tempted  tO  QO 

C/ir.  JNot  1,  said  Christian;  1  have  heard  ot  this  * '« chm- 

,-p  ,,  111  ''^"^  holds 

place  belore  now,  and  how  many  have  there  be&a.  hhniack , 
slain;  and  besides,  that  Treasure  is  a  snare  to  those 
that  seek  it,  for  it  hindreth  them  in  their  Pilgrim- 
age.    Then  Christian  called  to  Demas,  saying,  Is  hos.  4.  i8.= 
not  the  place  dangerous  f  hath  it  not  hindred  many 
in  their  Pilgrimage  ? 

De.  Not  very  dangerous,  except  to  those  that  are 
careless:  but  withal,  he  blushed  as  he  spake. 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian  to  Hopeful,  Let  us  not 
stir  a  step,  but  still  keep  on  our  way. 

Hope.  /  icill  iimrrant  you,  when  By-ends  comes  up^ 
if  he  hath  the  same  wwitation  as  ive,  he  will  turn  in 
thither  to  see. 

Chr.  No  doubt  thereof,  for  his  principles  lead  him 
that  way,  and  a  hundred  to  one  but  he  dies  there. 

De.  Then  Demas  called  again,  saying,  But  will 
you  not  come  over  and  see  ? 

Chr.  Then  Christian  roundly  answered,  saying,  ^^^,;^f"f",,^ 
Demas,  Thou  art  an  Enemy  to  the  right  ways  of  the  ^^7^\io 
Lord  of  this  way,  and  hast  been  already  condemned 
for  thine  own  turning  aside,  by  one  of  his  Majesties 
Judges  ;  and  why  seekest  thou  to  bring  us  into  the 
like  condemnation  ?  Besides,  if  we  at  all  turn 
aside,  our  Lord  the  King  will  certainly  hear  there- 
of; and  will  there  put  us  to  shame,  where  we  would 
stand  with  boldness  before  him. 

Demas  cried  again,  That  he  also  was  one  of  their 
fraternity  ;  and  that  if  they  would  tarry  a  little,  he 
also  himself  would  walk  w  ith  them. 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian,  What  is  thy  name  ? 
is  it  not  ^it  by  the  which  I  have  called  thee? 

^  'pains,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  it  not  be  a  misprint  for  12.  8.? 

^  This  reference  is  put  Hos.  4.  ^  '  is  it  not  the  same,'  2nd  and 

16 — 19,  by  Tract  Society,  but  may      sub.  edits. 


128  ClK  pilgrimsi  progitssJ* 

De.  Yes,   m}^   name  is  Demas,  I  am  the  son  of 

Abraham. 

20^^'Taf         Chr.  I  know  you,  Gehazi  was  your  Great-Grand- 

chap.V.^i,   f'Vtlier,  and  Judas  your  Father,  and  you  have  trod 

2,3,4,5.     \\iq\y  steps.     It  is  but  a  devilish  prank  that  thou 

usest :  Thy  Father   was  hanged  for  a  Traitor,  and 

thou  deservest  no  better  reward.     Assure  thy  self, 

that   when  we  come  to  the  King,  we  will  do  him 

word  of  this  thy  behaviour.     Thus  they  went  tlieir 

way. 

By    this   time  By-ends   ^'and  his    companions' 
was  come  again  within  sight,  and  ^he  at  the  first 
f,^,^"oVe°"  beck   went  over  to  Demas.     Now  whether  Hie  fell 
"'''^-  into  the  Pit  by  looking  over  the  brink  thereof ;  or 

whether  ^he  went  down  to  dig,  or  whether  he  ^was 
smothered  in  the  bottom,  by  the  damps  that  com- 
monly arise,  of  these  things  I  am  not  certain :  But 
this  I  observed,  that  he  ^ never  was  seen  again  in 
the  way.     ^'Then  sang  Christian,' 

By-ends  and  Silver-DemdiS  both  afjree  ; 
One  calls,  the  other  runs,  that  he  may  he, 
A  sharer  in  his  Lucre  :  so  these  two^ 
Take  up  in  this  World ,  and  no  further  go. 

^'  Now  I  saw,  that  just  on  the  other  side  of  this 

'  Plain,  the  Pilgrims  came  to  a  place  where  stood 

J-amjeMo-  '  au  old  Monument,  hard  by  the  High-way-side,  at 

nummt.      4  ^j^^   siglit   of  wliicli    tlicy    were  both  concerned, 

*  Quoted  in  the  first  edit,  as  v.  '  '  they  was,'  3rd;  'they  were,' 
10,  but  corrected    in    2nd    and      sub. 

sub.  ^  '  they  never  was,'  3rd ;  '  never 

*  'and   his   companions,'   was,      were,'  sub.  edits. 

3rd  to  7th ;  were,  8th  and  sub.  *  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

edits.  *  '  these  do,'  3rd  and  sub. 

'  '  and  they,'  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  *  All  this  narrative  about  Lot's 

'  '  they  fell,'  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  Wife  marked  with  inverted  com- 

*  '  they    went,'    3rd   and  sub.  mas  was  first  inti-oduced  into  the 
edits.  2nd  edition. 

'  3rd  and  sub. 


Cf;e  iSiTgnms;  progitsi^*  129 

because  of  the  strangeness  of  the  form  thereof; 
for  it  seemed  to  them  as  if  it  had  been  a  Wo?)ian 
transformed  into  the  shape  of  a  Pillar:  here  there- 
fore they  stood  looking,  and  looking  upon  it,  but 
could  not  for  a  time  tell  what  they  should  make 
thereof.  At  last  Hopeful  espied  written  above 
upon  the  head  thereof,  a  Writing  in  an  unusual 
liand ;  but  he  being  no  Scholar,  called  to  Chris- 
tian (for  he  was  learned)  to  see  if  he  could  pick 
out  the  meaning  :  so  he  came,  and  after  a  little 
laying  of  Letters  together,  he  found  the  same  to 
be  this,  Remember  Lots  Wife.  So  he  read  ft  to 
his  fellow ;  after  which,  they  both  concluded,  that 
that  was  the  *  Pillar  of  Salt  into  which  Lot's  Tl^z/e  ' » oen.  19. 

"       26. 

was  turned  for  her  looking  '''  back'  with  a  covetous 
hearty  when  she  was  going  from  Sodom  '^'  for 
safety.'  which  sudden  and  amazing  sight,  gave 
them  occasion  of  this  discourse. 

'  Chr.  Ah  my  brother,  this  is  a  seasonable  sight, 
it  came  opportunely  to  us  after  the  invitation 
which  Demas  gave  us  to  come  over  to  view  the 
Hill  Lucre  :  and  had  we  gone  over  as  he  desired 
us,  and  as  thou  wast  inclining  to  do  (my  Brother) 
we  had,  for  ought  I  know,  been  made  ^our  selves 
^'  like  this  Woman,'  a  spectacle  for  those  that  shall 
come  after  to  behold. 

'  Rope.  I  am  sorry  that  I  Was  so  foolish,  and  am 
made  to  wonder  that  I  am  not  now  as  Lofs  Wife ; 
for  wherein  was  the  difference  'twixt  her  sin  and 
mine ;  she  only  looked  back,  and  I  had  a  desire  to 
go  see  ;  let  Grace  be  adored,  and  let  me  be 
ashamed,  that  ever  such  a  thing  should  be  in 
mine  heart. 

'  Chr.  Let  us  take  notice  of  what  we  see  here, 
'  for  our  help  for  time  to  come  :    This  woman  es- 

"  added  to  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  ^  '  like  this  Woman,'  added  in 

^  '  ourselves,'    omitted  in  the      the  8th  and  sub.  edits. 
10th  and  sub.  edits. 


130 


Cl)e  ^iltynmei  ^arogit^si. 


•  Num.  26. 
9,  10. 


t  Ver.  10. 


caped  one  Judgment ;  for  she  fell  not  bv  the 
destruction  of  Sodom,  yet  she  was  destroyed  by 
another ;  as  we  see,  she  is  turned  into  a"^  Pillar 
of  Salt. 

'  Hope.  True,  and  she  may  be  to  us  both  Caution, 
and  Ewample  ;  Caution  that  we  should  shun  her 
sin,  or  a  sign  of  what  judgment  will  overtake  such 
as  shall  not  be  prevented  by  this  caution :  So 
Korah,  Datlian,  and  Ahiram,  with  the  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  men,  that  perished  in  their  sin,  did 
also  become  *a  sign,  or  example  to  others'^  to  be- 
ware :  but  above  all,  I  muse  at  one  thing,  to  wit, 
how  Demas  and  his  fellows  can  stand  so  confi- 
dently yonder  to  look  for  that  treasure,  which  this 
Woman,  but  for  looking  behind  her,  after  (for  we 
read  not  that  she  stept  one  foot  out  of  the  way) 
was  turned  into  a  pillar  of  Salt ;  specially  since 
the  Judgment  which  overtook  her,  did  make  her 
an  example,  within  sight  of  where  the}'^  are  :  for 
they  cannot  chusc  but  see  her,  did  they  but  lift 
up  their  eyes. 

'  Chr.  It  is  a  thing  to  be  wondered  at,  and  it 
argueth  that  their  heart  Ms  grown  desperate  in 
the  case  ;  and  I  cannot  tell  who  to  compare  them 
to  so  fitly,  as  to  them  that  pick  Pockets  in  the 
presence  of  the  Judge,  or  that  will  cut  Purses 
under  the  Gallows.^  It  is  said  of  the  men  of 
Sodom,  that  they  were  sinners^^  exceedincjly ,  because 
they  were  sinners  before  the  Lord ;  that  is,  in  his 
eyesight ;  and  notwithstanding  the  kindnesses 
that  he  had  shewed  them,  for  the  land  of  Sodom, 
was  now,  like  the  '("Garden  of  Eden  heretofore. 
This  therefore  provoked  him  the  moreto  jealousie, 


'  'to  others,'  omitted  in  8th 
and  sub.  edits. 

^  '  their  hearts  are,'  8th  and 
sub. 

^  In  these  times  the  purse  was 
carried  lianging  to  a  gu-dle  round 


the  waist,  a  cut-purse  is  synony- 
mous to  a  modern  pickpocket  ; 
great  dexterity  was  requisite  to 
cut  and  carry  away  the  purse 
■without    the    knowledge    of    its 


^A  Ricer. 
Psal.  65.  9. 
Rev.  22. 

Ezek.  47. 


Cfte  pilffnmsi  ^rogiesid*  i3i 

'  and  made  their  plague  as  hot  as  the  fire  of  the 
'  Lord  out  of  Heaven  could  make  it.  And  it  is 
'  most  rationally  to  be  concluded,  that  such,  even 
'  such  as  these  are,  that  shall  sin  in  the  sight,  yea, 
'  and  that  too  in  despite  of  such  examples  that  are 
'  set  continually  before  them,  to  caution  them  to 
'  the  contrary,  must  be  partakers  of  severest  Judg- 
*  ments. 

'  Hope.  Doubtless  thou  hast  said  the  truth,  but 
'  what  a  mercy  is  it,  that  neither  thou,  but  espe- 
'  cially  I,  am  not  made  my  self  this  example:  this 
'  ministreth  occasion  to  us  to  thank  God,  to  fear 
'  before  him,  and  always  to  remember  Lofs  Wife.' 

I  saw  then,  that  they  went  on  their  way  to  a  plea- 
sant River,  which  Dmnd  the  King  called  the  River  of\ 
God ;  but  John^  the  River  of  the  water  of  life  :  Now 
their  way  lay  just  upon  the  bank  of  the  River : 
here  therefore  Christian  and  his  Companion  walked 
with  great  delight;  They  drank  also  of  the  water  of 
the  River,  which  was  pleasant  and  enlivening  to 
their  weary  Spirits :  besides,  on  the  banks  of  this 
River  on  either  side  were  c/reen  Trees,  that  bore  ^all  ^■^^./'^"'* 
manner  of  Fruit  ;*  fand  the  leaves  of  the  Trees  were  andfmi^so/ 
good  for  Medicine  ;  with  the  Fruit  of  these  Trees ''''  ^'■'''• 
they   were  also  much   delighted  ;f   and   the  leaves 
they  eat  to  prevent  Surfeits,  and  other  Diseases  that 
are  incident  to  those  that  heat  their  blood  by  Tra- 
vels.    On    either   side    of  the    River    was   also   a 
Meadow,  curiously  beautified  with  Lillies ;  And  it  f^Sahey 
was  green  all  the  year  long.     In  this  Meadow  they  ^si%l°'"'*° 
lay  down  and  slept,  for  here  they  might  lie  down  is^!l4^3o. 


^  '  therefore  all  manner,'    2nd  this  passage  in  its  purity,  but  the 

edit.  words  omitted  in  the  2nd  were 

*  From  t  to  t  is  omitted,  in  the  never  restored. 

2nd   and   sub.  edits.,  probably  a  *  Quoted   by  all  the  editions, 

typographical  error.  The  7th  and  Psal.  22.     It  refers  to  Psal.   12. 

sub.  edits,  have  '■  green  Trees,  for  5  :  but  Psal.  23.  2,  appears  more 

all   manner  of    Fniit  ;   and  the  suitable. 
Leaves,'  cfcc.    The  first  edition  has 


132  Cfte  pilgrims  ^Jrogrcsis* 

safely.  When  they  awoke,  they  gathered  again  of 
the  Fruit  of  the  Trees,  and  drank  again  of  the 
Water  of  the  River  :  and  then  lay  down  again  to 
sleep.  Thus  they  did  several  days  and  nights. 
^'  Then  they  sang  :' 

Behold  ye  how  these  Crystal  streams  do  glide 
(To  comfort  Pilgrims)  by  the  Highivay  side; 
The  Meadows  green,  besides  their  fragrant  smell. 
Yield  dainties  for  them:  And  he  that  can  tell 
What  pleasant  Fmit,  yea  Leaves,  these  Trees  do  yield, 
Will  soon  sell  all,  that  he  may  buy  this  Field. 

So  when  they  were  disposed  to  go  on  (for  they 
were  not,  as  yet,  at  their  Journeys  end)  they  eat 
and  drank,  and  departed. 

Now  I  beheld  in  my  Dream,  that  they  had  not 
journied  far,  but  the  River  and  the  way,  for  a  time, 
parted.     At  wliich  they  were  not  a  little  sorry,  yet 
they   durst  not  go  out  of  the  way.     Now  the  way 
from  the  River  was  rough,  and  their  feet  tender  by 
Numb.  21. 4.  reason   of  their  ^Travels:  So  the  souV  of  the  Pil- 
grims was  much  discouraged,   because  of   the  way  : 
Wherefore  still  as  they  went  on,  they  wished  for 
better  way.     Now  a  little  before  them,  there  was 
on  the  left  hand  of  tlie  Road,  a  Meadow,  and  a  Stile 
to  go  over  into  it,  and  that  Meadow  is  called  By- 
Path-Aleadoiv.     Then   said    Christian  to  his  fellow, 
By-Path-     If  this  Meadow  lieth  alons:  bv  our  way  side,  lets  2:0 
One  Tenlpta-  over  iuto  it.     Thcu   he  went  to  the  Stile  to  see,  and 
makeway    behold  a  Path  lay  alonff  by  the  way  on  the  other 

for  another        •  •■  »    .,  n  ^     ,rr\-  T  •    i  •  i 

side  01  the  lence.  1  is  according  to  my  wish  said 
Christian,  here  is  the  easiest  going ;  come  good 
Hopeful,  and  ^lets  us  go  over. 

'  2nd  and  sub.  editions.  '  '  Souls  of  the  Pilgrims  were,' 

"  '  their  Trials,'   7th,  but    re-  8th  and  sub.  edits. 

restored    to     'Travels'    in    sub.  *  '  and  let   us,'   2nd   and    sub. 

edits.  edits. 


€i)t  pilsn'ms?  ^SrogitsisJ.  133 

Hop.  But  hoiv  if  this  Path  should  lead  us  out  of 
the  ivay  f 

Chr.  That's  not  like,  said  the  other  ;  look,  doth  SC 
it  not  go  along  by  the  way  side  ?    So  Hopeful,  being  ^^^."Z^f 
perswaded  by  his  fellow,  went  after  him  over  the"'"'"''^- 
Stile.     When  they  were  gone  over,  and  were  got 
into  the  Path,   they  found  it  very  easie  for  their 
feet ;  and  withal,  they  looking  before  them,  espied 
a  Man   walking   as   they   did,  (and  his  name  was 
Vain  confidence)  so  they  called  after  him,  and  asked 
him  whither  that  way  led  ?  he  said.  To  the  Coeles- 
tial   Gate.       Look,    said   Christian,   did   not  I  tell  ;;*^^„%";ff 
you  so  ?    by  this  you  may  see  we  are  right :    so  Sf  ^"" 
they  followed,  and  he  went  before  them.     But  be-  ^''"■^'^^^'^^ 
hold  the  night  came  on,  and  it  grew  very  dark,  so 
that  they  that  were  behind,  lost  the  sight  of  him 
that  went  before. 

He   therefore  that  went  before  {Vain  confide7ice^2%iuo' 
by  name)  not  seeing  the  way  before  him,  fell  into  a^.«'?^^^^^^ 
deep  Pit,  which  was  on  purpose  there  made  by  the "»« »"• 
Prince  of  those  grounds,  to  catch  vain  glorious  fools 
withall,  and  was  dashed  in  pieces  with  his  fall. 

Now  Christian  and  his  fellow  heard  him  fall.    So  f,~"^ 
they  called,  to  know  the  matter,  but  there  was  none  ^,^^'ho^p". 
to  answer,  only  they  heard  a  groaning.     Then  said  ^''^• 
Hopeful,  Where  are  we  now  ?     Then  was  his  fellow 
silent,  as  mistrusting  that  he  had  led  him  out  of  the 
way.     And  now  it  began  to  rain,  and  thunder,  and 
lighten  in  a  very  dreadful  manner,  and  the  water 
rose  amain. 

Then  Hopeful  groaned  in  himself,  saying.  Oh  that 
I  had  kept  on  my  ivay  ! 

Chr.  Who  ^ could  have  thought  that  this  path 
should  have  led  us  out  of  the  way  ? 

Hope.  /  was  afraid  ont  at  ^*  the'  very  first,  and 

^  2nd,  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  the,'  first    inserted   in  the 

*  '  Who  would,'  7th  edit.  9th  edit.  1684,  and  sub. 


134  Cftr  |3ilffnmsi  ^3rog:its!6* 

therefore  gave  you  that  gentle  caution.     I  mould  have 
spoke  jylainer,  but  that  you  are  ^ older  then  I. 
rS"«c«         ^'^'^*-  Good  Brother  be  not  ofFended,  I  am  sorr}^  1 
^ofhu^Bro   have  brought  thee  out  of  the  way,  and  that  I  have 
utyV^     put  thee  into  such  eminent  danger  ;  pray  my  Bro- 
ther forgive  me,  I  did  not  do  it  of  an  evil  intent. 

Hope.  Be  comforted  my  Brother  for  I  forgive  thee  ; 
and  believe  too,  that  this  shall  be  for  our  good. 

Chr.  I  am  glad  I  have  with  me  a  merciful  Bro- 
ther: But  we  must  not  stand  thus,  let's  try  to  go 
back  again. 

Hope.  But  good  Brother  let  me  go  before. 
Chr.  No,  if  you  please,  let  me  go  first ;  that  if 
there  be  any  danger,  I  may  be  first  therein,  because 
by  my  means  we  are  both  gone  out  of  the  way. 

Hope.  No,   said  Hopeful,  you  shall  not  go  first, 

for  your  mind  being  troubled,  may  lead  you  out  of 

the  way  again.     Then  for  their  encouragement,  they 

6jer.  31.21.  hcard   the  voice  of  one  sayino;    Let  thine  heart  be 

danger  of    towards  uic  Hiqh-waii,  even  the  wait  that  thou  wentest, 

drowning  as  .  ^f'  i  i   •  •  ^  -wtr 

they  go  hack,  turn  ugain  i  But  by  this  time  the  Waters  were 
greatly  risen,  by  reason  of  which,  the  way  of  going 
back  was  very  dangerous.  (Then  I  thought  that  it 
is  easier  going  out  of  the  way  when  we  are  in,  then 
going  in  when  we  are  out.)  Yet  they  adventured 
to  go  back  ;  but  it  was  so  dark,  and  the  flood  was 
so  high,  that  in  their  going  back,  they  had  like  to 
have  been  drowned  nine  or  ten  times. 

Neither  could  they,  with  all  the  skill  they  had, 
get  again  to  the  Stile  that  night.  Wherefore,  at 
last,  lighting  under  a  little  shelter,  they  sat  down 
there  till  the  day  brake  ;  but  being  weary,  they  fell 
iftt^wTi"  asleep.  Now  there  was  not  far  from  the  place 
ijalrr' ""  ^^here  they  lay,  a  Castle^  called  Doubting- Castle,  the 
owner  whereof  was  Giant  Despair,  and  it  was  in  his 

*  '  you  are  bolder,'  2nd  edit.  '  In  all  the  editions,  '  Jer.  31. 

•  the  8th  and  sub.  has  '  Bro-  1,'  is  quoted,  but  the  author  cer- 
ther.'  tainly  meant  ver.  21st. 


mn  ^pilffnmss  ^piogitsisf* 


135 


The  PUgrinis  now,  to  gratifie  the  Flesh, 
Will  seek  Us  ease ;  but  Oh !  how  they  afresh 
Do  thirehy  plunge  themselves  new  grieves  into 
Who  seek  to  pleeue  the  Flesh,  theinselves  undo. 


Copied  from  the  9th  edition,  1683,  in  which  this 
cut  first  appeared. 


L    2 


136  Ci)e  ^ilcjrimd  ^arogressi, 

grounds    they   now   were   sleeping-;    wherefore  he 

getting  up  in  the  morning  early,  and  walking  up 

Z)fi4romd  ^''^^  down  in  his  Fields,  caught  Christian  and  Hope- 

ih^nTo"^"  /«/  asleep  in  his  grounds.     Tlien  with  a  (jri)n  and 

caitie^''^     ^urly  voice  he  bid  them   awake,  and  asked  them 

whence   they  were  ?    and   what   they   did    in    his 

grounds  ?     They  told  him,  they  were  Pilgrims,  and 

that  they  had  lost  their  way.     Then  said  the  Giant, 

You  have  tliis  night  trespassed  on  me,  by  trampling 

in,  and   lying   on   my  grounds,  and  therefore  you 

must  go  along  with  me.     So  they  were  forced  to 

go,  because  he  was  stronger  then  they.     They  also 

had  but  little  to  sa^^  for  they  knew  themselves  in  a 

fault.     The  Giant  therefore  drove  them  before  him, 

VfJ^Z'    aiifl  put  them  into  his  Castle,  into  a  very  dark  Dun- 

oiLsnesa  of  i  'J 

^''^''imi^"''  g^^"»  nasty  and  stinking  to  the  ^spirit  of  these  two 


gonment 


'Peal.  88. 18.  n^en :  Here  then  they  lay,  from  Wednesdaij -movn- 
ing  till  Saturdai/  night,  without  one  bit  of  bread,  or 
drop  of  drink,  or  "any  light,  or  any  to  ask  how 
they  did.  They  were  therefore  here  in  evil  case, 
and  were  far  from  friends  and  acquaintance.  Now 
in  this  place,  Christian  had  double  sorrow,  because 
'twas  through  his  unadvised  4iaste  that  they  were 
brought  into  this  distress. 

^ '  Now  Giant  Despair  had  a  Wife,  and  her  name 

*  was  Diffidence  :  so  when  he  was  gone  to  bed,  he 
'  told  his  Wife  what  he  had  done,  to  wit,  that  he 

*  had  taken  a^  couple  of  Prisoners,  and  cast  them 
'  into  his  Dunfjcon,  for  trespassing  on  his  grounds. 
'  Then  he  asked  her  also  what  he  had  best  to  do 

*  further  to   them.     So  she  asked  him  what  they 

*  were,  whence  they  came,  and  whither  they  were 

''  The  2nd  and  sub.  edit,  quote  ^  '  unadvised  Counsel,'  8th  and 

ver.  16,  but  the  1st,  which  quotes  sub.  edits, 

ver.  1»,  is  right.  '   The    narrative    about    Mrs. 

*  'the    Spirits,'    8th   and   sub.  2)(//t<fence  as  marked  with  inverted 

edits.  commas,  was  first  iutrodnced  into 

'   '  or    light,'    3rd    and     sub.  the  2ud   edition,  and  continued 

edits.  subsequently. 


m)t  pilsnm^  ^rogre^£S.  i37 

bound ;   and  he  told  her  :    Then   she  counselled 
him,  that  when  he  arose  in  the  morning,  he  should 
beat   them,    without   ^any    mercy :    So   when    he 
arose,    he    getteth     him    a    grievous    Crab-tree 
Cudgel,  and  goes  down  into  the  Dungeon  to  them  ; 
and  there,  first  falls  to  rateing  of  them  as  if  they 
were  dogs,  although  they  gave  him  never  a  word 
of  distaste :  ^'  then'  he  falls  upon  them,  and  *  beats  o^i Thursday 
them   leariully,   in  such  sort,  that  they  were  not  s^a^^'n'^ 
able  to  help  themselves,  or  to  turn  them  upon  the  ^rs. 
floor.     This  done,  he  withdraws  and  leaves  them, 
there  to  condole  their  misery,  and  to  mourn  under 
their  distress :    so   all   that    day  they   spent    the 
time  in  nothing  but  sighs  and  bitter  lamentations. 
The  next  night  she   talking    with   her  Husband 
about  them  farther,  and  understanding  that  they 
were  yet  alive,  did  advise  him  to  counsel  them,  to 
make  away  themselves  :     So  when  morning  was 
come,   he  goes  to  them  in  a  surly  manner,  ^'  as 
before,'  and  perceiving  them  to  be  very  sore  with 
the  stripes  that  he  had  given  them  the  day  before; 
he  told  them,  that  since  they  were  never  like  to 
come  out  of  that  place,  their  only  way  would  be, 
forthwith  to  make^  an  end  of  themselves,  either  .'*07i Friday 
with  Knife,  Halter,  or  Poison:   For  why,  said  he,  spah- co^t- 
should  you  chuse  life,  seeing  it  is  attended  with  a^v'/w" 
so  much  bitterness.     But  they  desired  him  to  let^''"'' 
them  go  ;  with  that  he  looked  ugly  upon  them, 
and  rushing  to  them,  had  doubtless  made  an  end 
of  them  ^and  himself,  but  that  he  fell  into  one  of 
his   fits;    (for  he  sometimes  ^ '  in  sun-shine  wea- •*?%  ciant 
ther'  fell  into  fits)  and  lost  (for  a  time)  the  use  of  Ta'ST* 
his  hand  :  wherefore  he  withdrew,  and  left  them, 

'  'without  mercy :' loth  edit.         serted   in    error   by    the    print- 

*  'then,'   omitted  in   the   2nd      er. 

edit.  "^  '  in  sun-shine  weather,'  omit- 

*  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  ted  in  2nd  ;  again  inserted  in  3rd 

*  '  of  them    liimself,'  3rd  and  to  8th  :  '  in  Sun-shincy  weather,' 
sub.  edits.  '  and'  was  probably  in-  9th  and  sub.  edits. 


138 


€i)t  ^Silgnmsi  ^3rogreg£(« 


'  *  C'liristian 
crushed. ' 


'  *  Hopeful 
comfoiis 


(as  before)  to  consider  what  to  do.  Then  did  the 
Prisoners  consult  between  themselves,  whether 
'twas  best  to  take  his  counsel  or  no:  and  thus 
they  began  to  discourse. 

'  Chr.  Brother,  said  Christian,  what  shall  we  do? 
the  life  that  we  now  live  is  miserable  :  for  my 
part,  I  know  not  whether  is  best,  to  live  thus,  or 
^to  die  out  of  hand  ?  *  Mj/  soul  chnseth  strangling 
rather  than  life ;  and  the  Grave  is  more  easie  for 
me  than  this  Dungeon :  Shall  we  be  ruled  bv  the 
Giant  ? 

'  Hope.  Indeed  our  present  condition  is  dreadfid, 
and  death  ivould  be  far  more  ivelcome  to  me  than  thus 
for  ever  to  abide :  But  yet  let  us  consider,  the  Lord 
of  the  Country  to  which  we  are  going,  hath  said. 
Thou  shall  do  no  murther,  no  not  to  another  man^s 
person  ;  much  more  then  are  we  forbidden  to  take 
his  counsel  to  kill  our  selves.  Besides,  he  that  kills 
another,  can  but  commit  murder  upon  his  body  ;  bid 
for  one  to  kill  himself  is  to  kill  body  and  soid  at 
once.  And  moreover,  my  Brother,  thou  talkest  of 
ease  in  the  Grave  ;  but  hast  thou  forgotten  the  Hell, 
whither  for  certain  the  murderers  go  ?  for  no  mur- 
derer hath  eternal  life,  etc.  And,  let  us  consider 
again,  that  all  the  Law  is  not  in  the  hand  of  Giant 
Despair  :  Others,  so  far  as  I  can  widerstand,  have 
been  taken  by  him,  as  well  as  ive ;  and  yet  have  es- 
caped out  of  his  hand :  Who  knows,  but  that  God 
that  made  the  world,  may  cause,  that  Giant  Despair 
may  die ;  or  that,  at  some  time  or  other  he  may  for- 
get to  lock  us  in ;  or,  but  he  may  in^  short  time  have 
another  of  his  fits  before  us,  and  may  lose  the  use  of 
his  limbs  ;  and  if  ever  that  shoidd  come  to  pass  again, 
for  nnj  part,  I  am  resolved  to  pluck  up  the  heart  of  a 
man,  and  to  try  my  utmost  to  get  from  under  his 
hand.     I  was    a  fool  that  I  did  not  try  to  do  it 


3rd  and  sub.  edits. 

'  or  die,'  8th  and  sub.  edits. 


'  '  in   a   short   time,'  8th  and 
sub.  edits. 


€i)t  pilgnms  piogressi*  139 

before :  but  however,  my  Brother,  let's  he  'patient, 
and  endure  a  while-,  the  time  may  come  that  may 
give  us  a  happy  release :  but  let  us  not  be  our  own 
murderers.  With  these  words  Hopeful  at  present 
did  moderate  the  mind  of  his  Brother ;  so  they  con- 
tinued together  (in  the  dark)  that  day,  in  their  sad 
and  doleful  condition, 

'  Well,  towards  evening  the  Giant  goes  down 
into  the  Dungeon  again,  to  see  if  his  Prisoners 
had  taken  his  counsel ;  but  when  he  came  there, 
he  found  them  alive,  and  truly,  alive  was  all  :  for 
now,  what  for  want  of  Bread  and  Water,  and  by 
reason  of  the  Wounds  they  received  when  he  beat 
them,  they  could  do  little  but  breath  :  But,  I  say, 
he  found  them  alive;  at  which  he  fell  into  a  griev- 
ous rage,  and  told  them,  that  seeing  they  had  dis- 
obeyed his  counsel,  it  should  be  worse  with  them, 
than  if  they  had  never  been  born. 

'  At  this  they  trembled  greatly,  and  I  think  that 
Christian  fell  into  a  Swound  ;  but  coming  a  little 
to  himself  again,  they  renewed  their  discourse 
about  the  Giants  counsel;  and  whether  yet  they 
had  best  to  take  it  or  no.  Now  Christian  again  ' «  christian 
seemed  to  be  lor  doing  it,  but  Hopeful  made  his 
second  reply  as  foUoweth. 

''Hove.    Mil  Brother,    said   he,    remembrest  thou '  * '^''V'^^'^'^ 

J  T  7  77  7  /»  A  n  comforislnm 

not  hoiv  valiant  thou  hast  been  heretofore  ;  A  poll  von  «?'»»«.  ^i/ 
could  not  crush  thee,   nor  could  all  that  thou  didstf^'^'^^^ 
hear,  or  see,  or  feel  in  the  Valley  of  the  shadow  q/'TO«m6ra«cf.i 
Death  ;  what  hardship,  terror,  and  amazement  hast 
thou  already  gone  through,  and  art  thou  now  nothing 
but  fear  ?     Thou  seest  that  I  am  in  the  Dungeon 
with  thee,  afar  iveaker  man  by  nature  than  thou  art: 
Also  this  Giant  has  wounded  me  as  well  as  thee ;  and 
hath  also  cut  of  the  Bread  and  Water  from  my 
mouth ;  and  with   thee  I  mourn  without  the  light : 
but  let's  Ccvercise  a  little  more  patience.     Remember 

*  3rd  and  sul).  edits. 


140 


Cfee  i3iltj:nmss  progreeisf* 


• »  On  Satur- 
day </ie  Giant 
threaUied, 
that  shortly 
hewoaldjndl 
them  in 
pieces. 


how  thou  plmjedst  the  man  at  Vanity  Fair,  and  wast 
neither  afraid  of  th^  Chain  nor  Cage ;  nor  yet  of 
hloody  Death :  ivherefore  let  ns  (at  least  to  avoid  the 
shame,  that  becomes  not  a  Christian  to  be  found  in) 
bear  up  with  jiatience  as  well  as  ive  can. 

'  Now  ni^ht  being  come  again,  and  the  Giant 
and  his  Wife  being  in  bed,  she  asked  him  con- 
cerning the  Prisoners,  and  if  they  had  taken  his 
counsel:  To  which  he  replied.  They  are  sturdy 
Rogues,  they  chuse  rather  to  bear  all  hardship, 
than  to  make  away  themselves.  Then  said  she, 
Take  them  into  the  Castle-yard  to  morrow,  and 
show  them  the  Bones  and  Skulls  of  those  that  thou 
hast  already  dispatch'd  ;  and  make  them  believe, 
e're  a  week  comes  to  an  end,  thou  also  wilt  tear 
them  in  pieces,  as  thou  hast  done  their  fellows  be- 
fore them. 

'  So  when  the  morning  was  come,  the  Giant  goes 
to  them  again,  and  takes  them  into  the  Castle- 
yard,  and  shews  them  as  his  Wife  had  bidden 
him  :  '-'These,  said  he,  were  Pilgrims  as  you  are, 
once,  and  they  trespassed  in  my  grounds,  as  you 
have  done ;  and  when  1  thought  fit,  I  tore  them 
in  pieces  ;  and  so  within  ten  days  I  will  do  you. 
Go  get  you  down  to  your  Den  again ;  and  with 
that  he  beat  them  all  the  way  thither:  ^  for  they 
lay  therefore  all  day  on  Saturday  in  ^a  lamentable 
case,  as  before.  Now  when  night  was  come,  and 
when  Mrs.  Diffidence  and  her  Husband,  the  Giant, 
were  got  to  bed,  they  began  to  renew  their  dis- 
course of  their  Prisoners:  and  withal,  the  old 
Giant  wondered,  that  he  could  neither  by  his 
blows,  nor  counE'd,  bring  them  to  an  end.  And 
with  that  his  Wife  replied,  I  fear,  said  she,  that 
they  live  in  ^hope  that  some  will  come  to  relieve 
them,  or  tliat  they  have  pick-locks  about  them; 


^  '  for,'  omitted  in  sub.  edits. 
^  '  in  lamentable,'  7th  ;  restored 


to  '  in  a  lamentable,'  8th,  !)th,  and 
1 0th  edits. 

*  '  in  hopes,'  10th  edit. 


€f)t  ^ilffnmsf  ^roffitsf^.  141 

'  by  the  means  of  which  they  hope  to  escape. 
'  And,  sayest  thou  so,  my  dear,  said  the  Giant,  I 
'  will  therefore  search  them  in  the  morning.' 

Well,  on  Satiirdny  about  midnight  they  began 
to  pray,  and  continued  in  Prayer  till  almost  break 
of  day. 

Now  a  little  before  it  was  day,  good  Christian,  as 
one    half   amazed,    brake    out    in    this    passionate 
Speech,   What  a  fool,  quoth  he,  am  I  thus  to  lie  in  a  Key  in 
a  stinkimj  Dungeon,   when  I  may   as  loell  ivalk  at  bomn^ued 
lihcrty  I     I  have  a  Key  in  my  bosom,  called  Fro-  opau^^any 
mise,  that  will,  I  am  persuaded,  open  any  Lock  in  ooVting 
Doubting  Castle.     Tlien  said  Hopeful,  That's  good 
news  ;  good  Brother  pluck  it  out  of  thy  bosom  and 
try : 

Then  Christian  pulled  it  out  oi  his  bosom,  and 
began  to  try  at  the  Dungion  door,  whose  bolt  (as 
he  turned  the  Key)  gave  back,  and  the  door  flew 
open  with  ease,  and  Christian  and  Hopeful  both 
came  out.  Then  he  went  to  the  outward  door  that 
leads  into  the  Castle  yard,  and  with  his  Key  opened 
^the  door  also.  After  he  went  to  the  Iron  Gate, 
for  that  must  be  opened  too,  but  that  Lock  went 
damnable  hard,  yet  the  Ke}^  did  open  it ;  then  they 
thrust  open  the  Gate  to  make  their  escape  with 
speed,  but  that  Gate,  as  it  opened,  made  such  a 
^creaking,  that  it  waked  Giant  Despair,  who  has- 
tily rising  to  pursue  his  Prisoners,  felt  his  Limbs  to 
fail,  '^'  for  his  fits  took  him  again,'  so  that  he  could 
by  no  means  go  after  them.  Then  they  went  on, 
and  came  to  the  Kings  high  way  ^again,  and  so 
were  safe,  because  they  were  out  of  his  Juris- 
diction. 

Now  when  they  were  gone  over  the  Stile,  they 
began  to  contrive  with  themselves  what  they  should 

*  '  that  door,'  8th  and  sub.  edits.  *  3rd  and  sub.  edits. 

*  '  a  cracking,'  3rd  ;  '  a  crak-  '  '  again,'  omitted  in  3rd  and 
ing,'  7th  and  sub.  edits.                      sub.  edits. 


142  Ci)e  ^ailtrnmsi  progrtsiS* 

do  at  that  Stile,  to  prevent  those  that  should  come 

after,  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  Giant  Despair. 

'*Apmar  So  they  consented  to  erect  there  a  Pillar,  and   to 

erected  by  i  •  i 

a^hufei-  engrave  upon  the  side  thereof 'this  Sentence?'^  Over 
^"■'•"  this  Stile  is  the  Way  to  Doubting- C«.^//e,  which  is 
kept  hy  Giant  Despair,  icho  despiseth  the  King  of 
the  Coelestial  Countrey,  and  seeks  to  destroy  his  holy 
Pilgrims.  Many  therefore  that  followed  after,  read 
what  was  written,  and  escaped  the  danger.  This 
done,  they  sang  as  follows. 

Out  of  the  way  we  went,  and  then  we  found 
What  'twas  to  tread  upon  forbidden  ground  : 
And  let  them  that  come  after  have  a  care, 
'^  Lest  heedlesness  makes  them,  as  ive,  to  fare  ' 
Lest  they,  for  trespassing,  his  prisoners  are. 
Whose  Castle's  Doubting,  a7id  whose  na?ne's  Despair. 

The  delect-        Thev  wcnt  then,  till  thev  came  to  the  delectable 

able  moun-      _--  •'.  i-ii»/r  •''ii  it  ip 

tains.         iVlountams,  which  Mountains  belong  to  the  Lord  oi 
Theyarere-  ^^^^^  Hill,  of  v.'hicli  wc  havc  spokcu  bcforc  ;  so  they 
freshedinthe  wcut  uD  to  thc  Mouutaius,  to  bcliold  the  Gardens 
and   Orchards,    the   Vineyards,   and   Fountains   of 
water ;  where  also  they  drank,  and  washed  them- 
selves, and  did  freely  eat  of  the  Vineyards.     Now 
there  was  on  the  tops  of  these  Mountains,  Shep- 
herds  feeding  their  flocks,  and  they  stood  by  the 
high-way    side.     The  Pilgrims   therefore  went   to 
them,  and  leaning  upon  their  staves,  (as  is  common 
with  weary  Pilgrims,  when  they  stand  to  talk  with 
^^^«^^;""'any    by    the    way,)    they  asked.    Whose    delectable 
herds:  >      Mountains  are  these?  and  whose  be  the  sheep  that  feed 
upon  themf 

*  8th  and  sub.  edits.  ning  with  '  Les€     It  is  unfortun- 

•  This  line  was  omitted  in  10th      atelj'  left  out  of  all  the  modern 
and  sub.  edits.     Such  a  typogva-      editions. 

phical  error   is  easily  accounted  '  ord  and  suV).  edits, 

for  by  two  following  lines  begin- 


Ct)e  ^ilcyrimi^  ^roffit£S£{. 


143 


Mountains  delectable  they  now  ascend, 
Where  Shepherds  be,  -which  to  them  do  commend 
Alluring  things,  and  things  that  cautious  are, 
PilcTims  are  steddy  kept  by  faith  and  fear. 


Copied  from  the  13th  edition,  1692. 


144  Cf)e  ^Jilgnmsi  ^Jrocrrtsisi^ 

vohnio.n.      Shep.  These  Mountains  are  Immanuch  Land^  and 
they   are   within   sight  of  his  City,  and  the  sheep 
also  are  his,  and  he  laid  down  his  life  for  them. 
Chr.  Is  this  the  ivay  to  the  Ccelestlal  City  f 
Shep.  You  are  just  in  your  way. 
Chr.  Hoiv  far  is  it  thither  f 

Shep.  Too  far  for  any,  but  those  that  ^ shall  get 
thither  indeed. 

Chr.  Is  the  ivay  safe,  or  dangerous  f 
Shep.  Safe  for   those  for  whom  it  is  to  be  safe, 
Hoe.  14. 9 :  j^^^  tra)is(/ressors  shall  fall  therein. 

Chr.  Is  there  in  this  place  any  relief  for  Pilgrims 
that  are  iveary  and  faint  iyi  the  icay  f 

Shep.  The  Lord  of  these  Mountains  hath  given 
Heb.13.1,2,  us  a  charge,  iVo/ /o  he  forgetful  to  entertain  strangers  : 
Therefore  the  good  of  the  place  is  ^even  before  you. 
I  saw  also  in  my  Dream,  that  when  the   Shep- 
herds perceived  that  they  were  way-fairing  men,  they 
also   put  questions  to  them,   (to  which  they  made 
answer  as  in  other  places,)  as.  Whence  came  you  1 
and.  How  got  you   into  the  way  ?    and.   By   what 
means  have  you  so   persevered  therein  ?     For  but 
few   of  them  that  begin  to  come  hither,  do  shew 
their    face   on    these    Mountains.     But   when    the 
Shepherds    heard    their    answers,    being    pleased 
therewith,  they  looked  very  lovingly  upon  them  ; 
ZrdsVd^^'  ^"cl  said,  Welcome  to  the  delectable  Mountains. 
"'The'if^n^l      The  Shepherds,  I  say,  whose  names  were  Knoiv- 
fj^yt^-  ledge,  Ea'perience,  Watchful,  and  Sincere,  took  them 
by  the   hand,  and   had   them  to  their  Tents,  and 
made  them    partake  of  that  which  was  ready  at 
present.     They  said  moreover,  We  would  that  you 
should  stay  here  a  while,  to  ''acquaint  with  us,  and 
yet  more  to  solace  yourselves  with  the  good  of  these 

'  Omitted    in    2nd    and    sub.  *  '  even,'   omitted    in   all   but 

edits.  the  first  edit. 

*  'shall,''  roman,  in  all  but  the  '  3rd  and  sub.  edits, 

first  edit.  '  'to  be  acquainted,'  2nd  and 

sub.  edits. 


delectable  Mountains.  They  '''then'  told  them, 
That  they  were  content  to  stay;  and  so  they  went 
to  their  rest  that  night,  because  it  was  very  late. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  in  the  morning, 
the  Shepherds  called  up   Christian  and  Hopeful  to 
walk  with  them  upon  the  Mountains  :   So  they  went 
forth    with   them,   and  walked   a  while,  having   a 
pleasant  prospect   on    every  side.     Then   said  the 
Shepherds  one   to    another,    Shall   we  shew  these 
Pilo^rims  some  wonders?     So  when  they  had  con- '•™«,'/ are 
eluded  to  do  it,  they  had  them  hrst  to  the  top  oi  an  das.'-' 
Hill   called  ^Erroui\  which,  was  very  steep  on  i\\eTheMoxm- 
furthest  side,  and  bid  them  look  down  to  the  bot-  rour. 
torn.     So    Christian  and   Hopeful  lookt  down,  and 
saw  at  the  bottom  several  men  dashed  all  to  pieces 
by   a  fall  that  they  had  from  the  top.     Then  said 
Christian,   What    meaneth    this  ?     The    Shepherds 
answered ;  Have  you  not  heard  of  them  that  were 
made  to  err,  by  barkening  to  Hymeneus,  and  P//?- '^'2jim.2. 
letus,   as  concerning  the  Faith  of  the  Resurrection 
of  the  Body  ?     They  answered.  Yes.     Then  said 
the  Shepherds,  Those  that  you   see   lie  dashed  in 
pieces  at  the  bottom  of  this  Mountain,  are  tJiey:  and 
they  have  continued  to  this  day  unburied  (as  you 
see)  for  an  example  to  others  to  take  heed  how  they 
clamber  too  high,  or  how  they  come  too  near  the 
brink  of  this  Mountain. 

Then  I  saw  that  they  had  them  to  the  top  of  an- 
other Mountain,   and  the  name  of  that  is  Caution  ;  1^°^'^^^^ 
and  bid  them  look  a  far  off.    Which  when  they  did, 
they  perceived  as  they  thought,  several  men  walk- 


^  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  death    he    continued    the    word 

*  In  17-7,  and  in  all  modern  'sure.' 

editions,    this     was    altered    to  ^  Spelt '  Error,'  in  2nd  and  sub. 

'  shewn  wonders ;'    but   the   au-  edits. 

thor's  meaning  appears  to  be —  *  2nd  and  sub.  edits,  quoted  as 

that  those  wonders  were  real,  un-  ver.  IS,  19  ;  but  corrected  in  8th 

doubted,  sure.     From  the  intro-  and  sub.  to  17,  18. 
duction  of  this  note  to  Bunyau's 


146  CfK  pilgnmsf  ^arogresisi, 

ing  up  and  down  among  the  Tombs  that  were  there. 
And  they  perceived  that  the  men  were  blind,  be- 
cause they  stumbled  sometimes  upon  the  Tombs, 
and  because  they  could  not  get  out  from  among 
them.     Then  said  Christian,  What  ^means  this  f 

The  Shepherds  then  answered,  Did  you  not  see 
a  little  below  these  Mountains  a  Stile  that  led  into 
a  Meadow  on  the  left  hand  of  this  way  ?  They 
answered,  Yes.  Then  said  the  Shepherds,  From 
that  Stile  there  goes  a  path  that  leads  directly  to 
Doubting-Castle,  which  is  kept  by  Giant  Despair; 
and  these  men  (pointing  to  them  among  the  Tombs) 
came  once  on  Pilgrimage,  as  you  do  now,  even  till 
they  came  to  that  same  Stile.  And  because  the 
right  way  was  rough  in  that  place,  they  chose  to 
go  out  of  it  into  that  Meadow,  and  there  were  taken 
by  Giant  Despair,  and  cast  into  Doubting- Castle ; 
where,  after  they  had  a  while  been  kept  in  the  Dun- 
geon, he  at  last  did  put  out  their  eyes,  and  led 
them  among  those  Tombs,  where  he  has  left  them 
to  wander  to  this  very  day  ;  that  the  saying  of  the 
piov.2i.iG>  wise  Man  might  be  fulfilled.  He  that  wandereth  out 
of  the  way  of  understanding,  shall  remain  in  the  Con- 
gregation of  the  dead.  Then  Christian  and  Hopeful 
looked  ^one  upon  another,  with  tears  gushing  out; 
but  yet  said  nothing  to  the  Shepherds, 

Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  the  Shepherds 
had  them  to  another  place,  in  a  bottom,  where  was 
a  door  in  the  side  of  an  Hill;  and  they  opened  the 
door,  and  bid  them  look  in.  They  looked  in  there- 
fore, and  saw  that  within  it  was  very  dark,  and 
smoak}^ ;  they  also  thought  that  they  heard  there  a 
^lumbring  noise  as  of  fire,  and  a  cry  of  some  tor- 

*  'What    meant  this,'  2nd   to  *  Quoted  in  error,  Prov.  21.  26, 

7th,  but  restored  to  '  means,'  in  in  all  the  edits. 
8th  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  lumbring,'  altered  to  '  rum- 

'  '  upon  one  another,'  3rd  and  bling,'  in  the  2nd  and  sub.  edits, 
sub.  edits. 


mented,  and  that  they  smelt  the  scent  of  Brim- 
stone. Then  said  Christian,  What  means  this  f  The 
Shepherds  told  them,  ^saying,  this  is  a  By-way  to^^T^ 
Hell,  a  way  that  Hypocrites  go  in  at;  namely,  such 
as  sell  their  Birth-right,  with  Esau  :  such  as  sell 
their  Master,  with  Judas  :  such  as  blaspheme  the 
Gospel,  sviih.  Alea^a7ider :  and  that  lie  and  dissemble, 
with  Anatiias  and  Saphira  his  wife. 

Hopef.  Then  said  Hopeful  to  the  Shepherds,  / 
perceive  that  these  had  on  them,  even  every  one,  a  shew 
of  Pilgrimage  as  we  have  now;  had  they  notf 
Shep.  Yes,  and  held  it  a  long  time  too. 
Hopef.  Hoiv  far  might  tJieij  go  on  Pilgrimage  in 
their  ~ day,  since  they  notwithstanding  were  thus  miser- 
ably cast  awaij  f 

Shep.  Some  further,  and  some  not  so  far  as  these 
Mountains. 

Then  said  the  Pilgrims  one  to  another,  We  had 
need  ^to^'  cry  to  the  Strong  for  strength. 

Shep.  Ay,  and  you  will  have  need  to  use  it  when 
you  have  it,  too. 

By   this   time   the   Pilgrims   had  a  desire  to   go 
forwards,  and  the  Shepherds  a  desire  they  should; 
so  they  walked   together  towards  the    end  of  the 
Mountains.     Then   said  the  Shepherds  one  to  an- 
other. Let  us  here  shew  to  the  Pilgrims  the  Gates 
of  the  Ccelestial  City,  if  they  have   skill  to   look 
through   our    Perspective    Glass.       The    Pilgrims  'j*J'/^p^^f^' 
then  lovingly   accepted  the  motion  :  So  they   had  fi'^lf:i' 
them   to  the   top    of  an   high    Hill,   called    Clear,  *^^^^^^^^^ 
and    gave  them  their  Glass  to  look.      Then   they 
essayed  to  look,  but  the  remembrance  of  that  last 
thing    that    the    Shepheards    had    shewed    them, 
made   their    Miand    shake,     by    means    of    which 

«  '  saying,'  omitted  in  2nd  and  *  '  to,'  added  in   the  8th   and 

sub.  edits.  sub.  edits. 

^  'their  days,'  9th  edit.  1683.  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

^  '  their  hands,'  3rd  and  sub. 


148  ^i)t  pilgrimsi  progresis* 

impediment,  they  could  not  look  steddily  through 
*dav{^flar.  thc  Glass ;  yet  they  thought  they  saw  something 
like  the  Gate,  and  also  some  of  the  Glory  of  the 
place,  ^' Then  they  went  away  and  sang'  ^' this 
Song.' 

Thus  hij  the  Shepherds,  Secrets  are  reveaVd, 
Which  from  all  other  men  are  kept  conceaVd  : 
Come  to  the  Shepherds  the7i,  if  you  ivould  see 
Things  deep,  things  hid,  and  that  mysterious  be. 

When  they  were  about  to  depart,  one  of  the 
Shepherds  gave  them  a  note  of  the  iraij.  Another 
'cltt^^/f^  of  them  hid  them  beware  of  the  flatterer,  The 
third,  bid  them  take  heed  that  they  sleep  not  upon  the 
Inchanted  Ground,  and  the  fourth,  bid  them  God 
speed.     So  I  awoke  from  my  Dream. 

And  I  slept,  and    Dreamed  again,   and  saw  the 

same  two  Pilgrims  going  down  the  Mountains  along 

the  High-way  towards  the  City.    Now  a  little  below 

these  Mountains,  on  the  left  hand,  lietli  the  Coun- 

^'coTcfitf  trey  of  Conceit,  from  w'hich  Countrey  there  comes 

caLfign^"^  into  the  way  in  which  the  Pilgrims  walked,  a  little 

ranee.        crookcd  Lauc.     Here  therefore  they  met  with  a  very 

brisk  Lad,  that  came  out  of  that  Countrey  ;  and  his 

name  was  Ignorance.    So  Christian  asked  him.  From 

ivhat  parts  he  camef  and  ichithcr  he  teas  going  f 

Christian         Jfpi^  Sip,  I  was  bom  in  the  Counti-ey  that  lieth 

ranee  hath   off  thcrc,  a  Httlc  on  the  left  hand  ;  '^and  I  am  Sfoinff 

some  talk.  i        /-i      i  •    i    /n  •  o  o 

to  the  Ccelestial  City. 

Chr.  But  hoiu  do  you  think  to  get  in  at  the  Gate, 
for  you  may  find  some  difficulty  there  f 

Ign.  As  other  good  People  do,  said  he. 

2  '  The  fruits,'  7th  and  sub.  '  '  this    Song,'   8th    and    sub. 

'  '  slavish  '  altered  to  '  servile,'  edits. 

9th  and  sub.  edits.  •  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

*  Added   to  the  3rd  and  sub.  '  'and  am,'  10th  edit, 
edits. 


Cf)e  ^Silgnm^  ^rogresis;*  149 

Chr.  But  what  have  you  to  shew  at  that  Gate,  that 
7nay  cause  that  the  Gate  should  he  opened  to  you  f 

Ian.  I  know  my  Lords  will,  and  I  have  been  a"^ 

J      T  •  T  1   •  T     -r»  grouiidof 

good   Liver,    1   pa}^  every   man  his  own ;    1  Pray,  ignorance's 
Fast,  pay  Tithes,  and  give  Alms,  and  have  left  my  "'^''' 
Countrey,  for  whither  I  am  going. 

Chr.  But  thou  earnest  not  in  at  the  Wicket-gate, 
that  is  at  the  head  of  this  way,  thou  earnest  in  hither 
through  that  same  crooked  Lane,  and  therefore  I  fear, 
however  thou,  may  est  think  of  thy  self  when  the  reckon- 
ing day  shall  come,  thou  wilt  have  laid,  to  thy  charge, 
that  thou  art  a  Theif  and  a  Robber,  instead  of  ^ '  get- 
ting^  admitance  into  the  City. 

Ignor.  Gentlemen,  ye  be  utter  strangers  to  me,  Ifverffm 
know  you  not,  be  content  to  follow  the  Religion  ofj-^^'.''''"^ 
your  Countrey,  and  I  will  follow  the  Religion  of 
mine.  I  hope  all  will  be  well.  And  as  for  the 
Gate  that  you  talk  of,  all  the  World  knows  that 
that  is  a  great  way  off  of  our  Countrey.  I  cannot 
think  that  any  man  in  all  our  parts  doth  so  much 
as  know  the  way  to  it ;  nor  need  they  matter 
whether  they  do  or  no,  since  we  have,  as  you  see, 
a  fine  pleasant  green  Lane,  that  comes  down  from 
our  Countrey  the  next  way  into  ^it. 

When  Christian  saw  that  the  man  was  wise  in  his 
own  conceit,  he  said  to  -^o/?<?/)^/ whisperingly,  jT/i^re  P"-.  26.  i2.» 
is  7nore  hopes  of  a  fool  then  of  him.     And  said  more- 
over. When  he  that  is  a  fool  walketh  by  the  ivay,  /zz>  ecci.io.  3. 
wisdom  faileth  him,  and  he  saith  to  every  one  that  he  ^°o«7oor* 
is  a  fool.     What,  shall  we  talk  further  with  him  ? 
or  out-go  him   at  present  ?    and   so  leave   him   to 
think  of  what  he  hath  heard  already  ;  and  then  stop 
again  for  him  afterwards,  and  see  if  by  degrees  we 
can  do  any  good  of  him  ?     '^'  Then  said  Hopeful:' 


*  8th  and  sub.  edits.  *  2nd  to  the  8th  edit,  quote  ver. 

*  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  1 1  ;  9th  and  sub.  ver.  12. 

*  '  into  the  way,'  8th  and  sub. 

M 


150  €f)t  piltn-imd  ^grotjresig* 

Let  Ignwance  a  little  while  now  muse 
On  what  is  said,  and  let  him  not  refuse 
Good  Counsel  to  imhrace,  lest  he  remain 
Still  Ignorant  of  what's  the  chiefest  gai?i. 
God  saith,  Those  that  no  understand ing  have, 
{Although  he  made  thevi)  them  he  will  not  save. 

Hop.  ^'  He  further  added,'  It  is  not  good,  I  think, 
to  say^  all  to  him  at  once,  let  us  pass  him  by,  if  you 
will,  and  talk  to  him  anon,  even  as  he  is  able  to 
hear  it. 

So  they  both  went  on,  and  Ignorance  he  came 
after.  Now  when  they  had  passed  him  a  little 
way,  they  entered  into  a  very  dark  Lane,  where 
they  met   a  man   whom  seven   Devils  had  bound 

prov!5^'22f  ^^'^^^^  seven  strong  Cords,  and  were  ^carrying  of  him 
back  to  the  door  that  they  saw  ^in  the  side  of  the 
Hill.  Now  good  Christian  began  to  tremble,  and 
so  did  Hopeful  his  Companion :  Yet  as  the  Devils 
led  away  the  man,  Christian  looked  to  see  if  he 
knew  him,  and  he  thought  it  might  be  one  Tmii- 

u^o^^'  ^^^i/  that  dwelt  in  the  Town  o^  Apostact/.     But  he 

Turn-away.  ^[q\  jjot  perfectly  scc  his  face,  for  he  did  hang  his 
head  like  a  Thief  that  is  found  :  But  being  gone  past. 
Hopeful  looked  after  him,  and  espied  on  his  back  a 
Paj)er  with  this  Inscription,  Wanton  Professor,  and 

Christian     damuaMe  Apostate.     Then  said  Christian  to  his  Fel- 

telltth  his        1  TVT  T  n  1  1  1    '     1 

compmiion  Iqw,  Now  1  Call  to  remembrancc  that  which  was 

Little-Faith,  told  mc  of  a  thing  that  happened   to   a  good  man 

hereabout.     The  name  of  the  man  was  Little-Faith, 

but  a  good  man,  and  he  dwelt  in    the   Town   of 

Sincere.     The  thing  was  this  ;  at  the  entering  in  of 

■^™a'«-»«2/-  this  passage  there  comes  down  from  Broad-wag-gate 

Dead-man's  a  Lauc  callcd  Dead-mans-la?ie ;  so  called,   because 

"^'         of  the  Murders  that  are  commonly  done  there.  And 


*  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  were  a  carrying,'  9th  edit. 

*  'to  say  to  him  all  at  once,'       1G}?4, and  sub.  edits. 

9th,  1684,  and  sub.  edits.  '  '  saw  on,'  2nd  and  sub. 


Cfte  ^BilgnmsJ  progitssi*  i5i 

this  Little-Faith  going  on  Pilgrimage,  as  we  do 
now,  chanced  to  sit  down  there  and  slept.  Now 
there  liappened,  at  that  time,  to  come  down  that 
Lane  from  Broad-way-gate  three  ^Sturdy  Rogues, 
and  their  names  were  Faint-heart,  Mistrust,  and 
Guilt,  (three  brothers)  and  they  espying  Little-Faith 
where  he  was,  came  galloping  up  with  speed  :  Now 
the  good  man  was  just  awaked  from  his  sleep,  and 
was  getting  up  to  go  on  his  Journey.  So  they 
came  ''all  up  to  him,  and  with  threatning  Language 
bid  him  stand.  At  this,  Little  faith  lookt  as  white  Lutie-Paith 
as  a  Clout,  and  had  neither  power  to  fig-ht  nor  flie.  Faint-heart, 

,  *■  ^  Mistrust 

Then  said  Faint-heart,  Deliver  thy  Purse  ;   but  he  a^vi  Guut. 
making  no  haste  to  do  it,  (for  he  was  loth  to  lose 
his  Money,)  Mistrust  ran  up  to  him,  and  thrusting 
his  hand  into  his  Pocket,  puU'd  out  thence  a  bag  J^^;«y^«* 
of  Silver.      Then  he  cried   out,  Thieves,  thieves.  f'«'i,'i«'* 
With  that,   Guilt  with   a  great   Club  that  was  m  ''-o'^"- 
his   hand,    strook   Little-Faith   on   the   head,    and 
with   that    blow    fell'd   him   flat   to   the    ground, 
where   he   lay   bleeding   as  one  that  would    bleed 
to  death.      All  this  while  the  Thieves  stood   by  : 
But  at  last,    they    hearing    that  some   were   upon 
the  Road,  and  fearing  lest  it  should  be  one  Great- 
grace  that   dwells  in  the   City   of  Good  confidence, 
they  betook    themselves   to    their   heels,    and    left 
this  good  man   to  shift  for  himself.     Now  after  a 
while,  Little-faith  came  to  himself,  and  getting  up, 
made  shift  to  ^scrabble  on  his  way.     This  was  the 
story. 

Hopef.  But  did  they  take  from  him  all  that  ever 
he  had f 

Christ.  No  :  The  place  where   his  Jewels  were,  Lutie-fauh 

1  1»1  II  '111  lost  not  his 

they  never  ransak  t,  so  those  he  kept  still  ;   but  as,  tes* «"«?»•• 

*  '  hardy   Rogues  ; '    7th  :    re-  *  '  to  scramble,'  8th  and  sub. 

stored  to  ' sturdy '  in 8th  and  sub.  edits.     'Scrabble,'   to  go   on  all 

edits.  fours. 

"  '  up  all,'  2nd  and  sub. 

M  2 


152  cIk  1  ilcrnms;  frogresis;* 

I  was  told,  the  good  man  was  much  afflicted  for  his 
loss.     For   the  Thieves  got  most  of    his  spending 

1  Pet.  4. 18.  Money.     That  which  they  got  not  (as  I  said)  were 

Jewels,  also  he  had  a  little  odd  Money  left,  but 
Little-Faith  scttvce  cnougli  to  bring  him  to  his  Journeys  end  ; 
to  his  Jour-  nay,  (if  I  was  not  mis-informed)  he  was  forced  to 

neys  end.         ii  l  i'if»T  /c  i    • 

beg  as  he  went,  to  keep  himseli  alive,  (lor  his 
Jewels  he  might  not  sell.)  But  beg,  and  do  what 
he  could,  he  ivent  (as  we  say)  with  many  a  hiiiufvij 
belhj,  the  most  part  of  the  rest  of  the  way. 

Hopef.  Bnt  is  it  not  a  wonder  they  got  not  from 

him  his  Certificate,  by  which   he  was   to  receive  his 

admittance  at  the  Ccelestial  gate  ? 

f^S™"        Chr.  ^No  '  'Tis  a  wonder  but '  they  got  not  that : 

Iwtc,mninfl.  thougli  tlicy  luist  it  not  through  any  good  cunning 

2  Tim.  1.14.  Qf  j-jjg^  fQj.  j-,g   being  dismayed  with   their  coming 

upon  him,  had  neither  power  nor  skill  to  hide  any 
thing  :  so  'twas  more  by  good  Providence  then  by 
his  Indeavour,  that  they  mist  of  that  good  thing. 

Hopef-  But  it  must  needs  be  a  comfort  to  him,  that 
they  got  not  this  ^  Jewel  from  him. 
2Pet.  1. 9.<  Chr.  It  might  have  been  great  comfort  to  him, 
had  he  used  it  as  he  should  ;  but  they  that  told  me 
the  story,  said,  That  he  made  but  little  use  of  it  all 
the  rest  of  the  way  ;  and  that  because  of  the  dismay 
that  he  had  in  *^their  taking  away  ^of  his  Money  : 
indeed  he  forgot  it  a  great  part  of  the  rest  of  Hhe 
Journey  ;  and  besides,  when  at  any  time,  it  came 
into  his  mind,  and  he  began  to  be  comforted  there- 
with, then  would  fresh  thoughts  of  his  loss  come 
again  upon  him,  and  those  thoughts  would  swallow 
up  all. 

'  '  No,'   omitted  ;  and   '  'Tis  a  3rd  ;  but  restored  to  '  this  Jewel,' 

wonder  but,'  inserted  in  2nd  and  8th  and  sub.  edits, 
sub.  edits.  '  '  in   the    taking,'    7th,    9th, 

*  All  the  editions  agree  in  this  1684,  and  sub. 

reference:    probably   a  misprint  '''of,'  omitted,  Hrd,  9th,  1684, 

for  2  Pet.  2.  9.  and  sub. 

*  '  this  Jewels,'  a  typ.  error  in  "  '  of    his   Journey,'    2nd  and 
2nd  edit.;  altered  to  'his  Jewels,'  sub.  edits. 


€in  ^ilgnms!  pitigitssf*  153 

Hope.  Alas  poor  Man!    this  could  not  but  be  « 2,%'^'/ ^'"^ 
great  grief  unto  him. 

Chr.  Grief!  Ay,  a  grief  indeed,  would  it  ^not 
a  been  so  to  any  of  us,  had  we  been  used  as  he,  to 
be  Robbed  and  wounded  too,  and  that  in  a  strange 
place,  as  he  was?  'Tis  a  wonder  he  did  not  die 
with  grief,  poor  heart !  I  was  told,  that  he  scattered 
almost  all  the  rest  of  the  way  with  no  thing  but 
doleful  and  bitter  complaints.  Telling  also  to  all 
that  over-took  him,  or  that  he  over-took  in  the  way 
as  he  went,  where  he  was  Robbed,  and  how ;  who 
they  were  that  did  it,  and  what  he  lost ;  how  he 
was  wounded,  and  that  he  hardly  escaped  with  life. 

Hope.  But  'tis  a  wonder  that  his  ^necessities  did  not 
put  him  upon  selling,  or  pawning  some  of  his  Jewels., 
that  he  might  ham  ^ivherewith  to  relieve  himself  in  his 
Journey. 

Chr.  Thou  talkest  like  one  upon  whose  head  is  christian 
the  Shell  to  this  very  day  :  For  what  should  he  paivn/eiiowfor 
them  ?  or  to  whom  should  he  sell  them  ?     In  all  maung. 
that  Countrey   where  he  was  Robbed,  his   Jewels 
were  not  accounted  of,  nor  did  he  want  that  relief 
which  could  from   thence  be  administred  to  him  ; 
besides,  had  his  Jewels  been  missing  at  the  Gate  of 
the  Coelestial  City,  he  had  (and  that  he  knew  well 
enough)  been  excluded  from  an  Inheritance  there; 
and  that  would  have  been  worse  to  him  then  the 
appearance  and  villany  of  ten  thousand  Thieves. 

Hope.    Why  art  thou  so  tart  my  Brother  f     Esau  Heb.  12.  le. 

sold  his  Birth-right,  and  that  for  a  mess  of  Pottacje  ; 

and  that  Birth-right  ivas  his  greatest  Jewel ;  and  if  he, 

ivhy  might  not  Little-Faith  do  so  too  f 

Chr.  Esau  did  sell  his  Birth-riaht  indeed,  and  so  ^,  *'^<^«w^« 
,         .        1.1  11  1   •  111  "-"""  ^^^" 

do  many  besides;  and  by  so  doing,  exclude  them- «»rfLittie- 

selves  from  the  chief  blessing,  as  also  that  Caytiff 

did.     But  you  must  put  a  difference  betwixt  Esau 

^  '  not  have  been,'  2nd  and  sub.  '  '  his  necessity,'  3rd  and  sub. 

'-'dits.  '  '  therewith,'  f!th  and  sub. 


154  CfK  |3ilcj:nmsi  ^Srocjreds* 

and    Little-faith,   and    also   betwixt   their   Estates. 
Esaus   Birth-right  was  Typical,    but   Little-faitlis 
^^dbyhis  Jewels  were  not  so.     Esau's  belly  was  his  God,  but 
Gen.' 25. 32.  Littlc-faitli s  belly  was  not  so.     Esaus  want  lay  in 
his  fleshly  appetite,  Little-faitlis  did  not  so.     Be- 
sides, Esati  could  see  no  further  then  to  the  fulfil- 
ling of  his  Lusts,  For  I  am  at  the  'point  to  dye,  said 
he,  and  ivhat  (jood  iviU  this  Birth-rigJit  do  me  f     But 
Little-faith,  though  it  was  his  lot  to  have  but  a  little 
faith,  was  by  his  little  faith  kept  from   such  extra- 
vagancies; and  made  to  see  and  jwize  his  Jewels 
more,  then  to  sell  them,  di^Esaii  did  his  Birth-right. 
^JhuZ  You  read  not  any  where  that  Esau  had  faith,  no  not 
so  much  as  a  little :  Therefore  no  marvel,  if  wdiere 
the  flesh  only  bears  sway  (as  it  will  in  that  JMan 
where  7io  faith  is  to  resist)  if  he  sells  his  Birth-ri(jlit, 
and  his  Soul  and  all,  and  that  to  the  Devil  of  Hell; 
jer.  2. 24.    for  it  is  witli  such,  as  it  is  with  the  Ass,  Vilio  in  her 
occasions  cannot  be  turned  aieay.     When  their  minds 
are  set  upon  their  Lusts,  they  will  have  them  what- 
ever   the}^  cost.      But  Little-faith  was   of   another 
EsausPot-   temper,  his  mind  was  on  things  Divine ;  his  lively- 
iage.         hood  was  upon  things  that  were  Spiritual,  and  from 
above ;  Therefore  to  what  end  should  he  that  is  of 
such  a  temper  sell  his  Jewels,  (had  there  been  an}^ 
that  would  have  bought  them)  to  fill  his  mind  with 
empty  things  ?     Will  a  man  give  a  penny  to  fill  his 
inTIoem  ^cHy  wltli  Hay  ?   or  can  you  perswade  the  Turtlc- 
d^ove^wld"  dove  to  live  upon  Carrion,  like  the  Crowf     Though 
tte  Crow,   faithless  ones,  can  for  carnal  Lusts,  pawn,  or  nior- 
gage,  or  sell  what  they  have,  and  themselves  out- 
right to  boot ;  yet  they  that  have  faith,  savinfj  faith, 
though  but  a  little  of  it,  cannot  do  so.     Here  there- 
fore, my  Brother,  is  thy  mistake. 

Hopef.  /  acknoivlcdge  it ;  but  yet  your  severe  re- 
flection had  almost  made  me  angry. 

Chr.  Wliy,  I  did  but  compare  thee  to  some  of  the 
Birds  that  are  of  the  brisker  sort,  who  will  ruu   to 


Little-Faith 
could  not 


€i)t  pticrnms;  progresis.  155 

and  fro  in  Hroden  paths  with  the  shell  upon  their 
heads  :  but  pass  by  that,  and  consider  the  matter 
under  debate,  and  all  shall  be  well  betwixt  thee 
and  me. 

Hopef.  Bid  Christian,  These  three  fellows,  I  am 
persiuaded  in  my  heart,  are  but  a  compamj  of  Cowards : 
ivould  they  have  run  else,  think  you,  as  they  did,  at  the 
noise  of  one  that  was  coming  on  the  road  f  Why  did  "°„^^^^4 
not  Little-faith  pluck  up  a  ^great  heart  ?  He  might, 
methinks,  have  stood  one  brush  with  them^  and  have 
yielded  when  there  had  been  no  remedy. 

Chr.  That  they  are  Cowards,   many  have  said,  ^^^f^''^^^ 
but  few  have  found  it  so  in  the  time  of  Trial,     ^^aet'ethat 
for  a  great  heart,  Little-faith  had  none  ;  and  I  per- ''"'<^/"^*^- 
ceive  by  thee,  mv  Brother,  hadst  thou  been  the  Man  wehave 

1        -t         "^  I  o  II  11  more  courage 

concerned,  thou  art  but  tor  a  brush,  and  then  to  «'»«i «««. 
yield.     And  verily,  since  this  is  the  height  of  thy  «'« "'• 
Stomach  now  they  are  at  a  distance  from  us,  should 
they  appear  to  thee,  as  they  did  to  him,  they  might 
put  thee  to  second  thoughts. 

But    consider    again,    they    are     but    Journey- 
men-Thieves,  they  serve  under  the   King  of  the 
Bottom-less  pit ;  who,  if  need  be,  will  come  in  to 
their  aid  himself,  and   his  voice  is   as  the  roaming '  ps^^- s- b. 
of  a  Lion.     I  my  self  have  been  In  gaged  as  this  J;^,^.'^,"''",^^ 
Little-faith  was,  and  I   found  it  a  terrible  thing.  ^^f/~"' 
These  three  Villains  set  upon  me,  and  I  beginning 
like  a  Christian  to  resist,  they  gave  but  a  call,  and 
in  came  their  Master :   I  would,   as  the  saying  is, 
have  given  my  life  for  a  penny ;  but  that,  as  God 
would   have  it,   I    was  cloathed    with   Armour  of 
proof.     Ay,  and  yet  though  I  was  so  harnessed,  I 
found  it  hard  work  to  quit  my  self  like  a  man  ;  no 
man  can  tell  what  in  that  Combat  attends  us,  but 
he  that  hath  been  in  the  Battle  himself. 

'  'untrodden  paths,'  3rd    and      edits.,  except  the  9th,  1683,  which 
sub.  edits.  has  '  great.' 

'  'a  greater,'    2nd    and    sub.  '  'Psal.  8.  5,'  7th  edit.;  but 

ought  it  not  to  be  1  Pet.  5.  8  ? 


156  CJ)e  |3ilg:rims!  ^rogresis;* 

Hopef.  Well,  but  they  ran  you  see,  when  they  did 
but  suppose  that  one  Great-grace  ivas  in  the  way. 

Chr.  True,  they  *^'  have'  often  fled,  both  they  and 
their  Master,  when  Great-(frace  hath  but  appeared, 
chlm^wn.  and  no  marvel,  for  he  is  tlie  Kings  Champion :  But 
I  tro,  you  will  put  some  difference  between  Little- 
faith  and  the  Kings  Champion  ;  all  the  Kings  Sub- 
jects are  not  his  Champions  :  nor  can  they,  when 
tried,  do  such  feats  of  War  as  he.  Ts  it  meet  to 
think  that  a  little  child  should  handle  Goliah  as 
David  did  ?  or  that  there  should  be  the  strength  of 
an  O^  in  a  Wren  ?  Some  are  strong,  some  are 
weak,  some  have  great  faith,  some  have  little :  this 
man  was  one  of  the  weak,  and  therefore  he  went  to 
the  walls. 

Hopef.  I  icoidd  it  had  been  Great-grace,  ^b?'  their 
sakes. 

Chr.  If  it  had  been  he,  he  might  have  had  his 
hands  full  :  For  I  must  tell  you.  That  though  Great- 
grace  is  excellent  good  at  his  Weapons,  and  has 
and  can,  so  long  as  he  keeps  them  at  Swords 
point,  do  well  enough  with  them  :  yet  if  they  get 
within  him,  even  Faint-heart,  Mistrust,  or  the  other, 
it  shall  go  hard  but  they  will  throw  up  his  heels. 
And  when  a  man  is  down,  you  know  what  can 
he  do. 

Who  so  looks  well  upon  Great-graces  face,  shall 
see  those  Scars  and  Cuts  there,  that  shall  easily  give 
demonstration  of  what  I  say.  Yea  once  I  heard 
^'  that '  he  should  say,  (and  that  when  he  was  in 
the  Combat)  We  despaired  even  of  life :  How  did 
these  sturdy  Rogues  and  their  Fellows  make  David 
groan,  mourn,  and  roar  ?  Yea,  ^ Heman,  and  Heze- 
kiah  too,   though  Champions   in   their  day,  were 

^  '  liave,'  added  in  3rd  and  sub.  alteration  mentioned  in  the  In- 

edits.  troduction:    Ilaman  not  having 

*  Added  to  3rd  and  sub.  edits.  been  a  Christian   champion,   his 

^  'Ilaman,'    Hrd    to    7th,    0th,  name  was  changed  for  I\lordecui ! 

lf)S3.     This  led  to  the  sipgular 


Cfje  ^iilgrims!  ^rogitsisi*  157 

forced  to  bestir  them,  when  by  these  assaulted  ;  and 
yet,  Hhat  notwithstanding,  they  had  their  Coats 
soundly  brushed  by  them.  Peter  upon  a  time  would 
go  try  what  he  could  do;  but,  though  some  do  say 
of  him  that  he  is  the  Prince  of  the  Apostles,  they 
handled  him  so,  that  they  made  him  at  last  afraid 
of  a  sorry  Girle. 

Besides,  their  King  is  at  their  Whistle,  he  is  never 
out  of  hearing ;  and  if  at  any  time  they  be  put  to 
the  worst,  he,  if  possible,  comes  in  to  help  them  : 
And,    of  him    it   is   said.   The  Sivord  of  him   ^^^^^^  [g^^^Vhfna 
layeth  at  him   cannot  hold  the  Spear,  the  Dart,  7ior  ^i^^-^iness. 
the    Habergeon,     he    esteemeth  Iron    as  Straw,  and 
Brass  as   rotten    Wood.      The  Arrow  canriot   make 
him     jiie.      Slingstones  are    turned  with    him   into 
stubble.    Darts   are    counted   as    stubble,    he  laugheth 
at  the   shaking  of   a   Spear.     What    can    a    man 
do   in  this   case  ?     'Tis  true,   if  a   man   could   at 
every    turn    have  Jobs  Horse,  and  had    skill   and  '//"^J^^^^j 
courage  to  ride  him,  he  might  do  notable  things,  ^^/'jl^y^''"^'* 
For  his  neck  is  clothed  with  Thunder,  he  tvill  not  be  "'''''^■ 
afraid  as  the  Grashoper,  the  glory  of  his  Nostrils  is 
terrible,   he  paweth   in    the    Valley,    rejoyceth  in  his 
strength,  and  goeth  out  to  meet  the  armed  men.     He 
mocketh  at  fear,  and  is  not  affrighted,  neither  turneth 
back  from  the  Sword.    The  quiver  rattleth  against  him, 
the  glittering  Spear,  and  the  shield.     He  swalloioeth 
the  ground  with  fierceness  and  rage,  neither  believeth  he 
that  it  is  the  sound  of  the  Trumpet.     He  saith  among 
the  Trumpets,  Ha,  ha  ;  and  he  smelleth  the  Battel  afar 
off,  the  thundring  of  the  Captains,  ayid  the  shoutings. 

But  for  such  footmen  as  thee  and  I  are,  let  us 
never  desire  to  meet  with  an  enemy,  nor  vaunt  as  if 
we  could  do  better,  when  we  hear  of  others  that 
they  have  been  foiled,  nor  be  tickled  at  the  thoughts 
of  our  own  manhood,  for  such  commonly  come  by 

'^  '  that,'    onutted  in  2nd  and  '  Quotation  added  to  tlie  3rd 

sub.  edits.  and  sub.  edits. 


ir)8  €l)t  pilgrims  ^rogitsssi* 

the  worst  when  tried.  Witness  Peter,  of  whom  I 
made  mention  before.  He  would  swagger,  Ay  he 
woukl  :  He  would  as  his  vain  mind  prompted  him 
to  say,  do  better,  and  stand  more  for  his  Master, 
then  all  men  :  But  who  so  foiled,  and  run  down  by 
these  ^  Villains,  as  he  ? 

When  therefore  we  hear  that  such  Robberies  are 
done  on  the  Kings  High-way,  two  things  become  us 
to  do;  first  to  go  out  Harnessed,  and  to  be  sure  to 
take  a  Shield  luith  us  :  For  it  was  for  want  of  that, 
that  he  that  laid  so  lustily  at  Leviathan  could  not 
make  him  yield.  For  indeed,  if  that  be  wanting, 
he  fears  us  not  at  all.     Therefore  he  that  had  skill, 

Epii.  0. 16.  hath  said,  Above  all  take  the  Shield  of  Faith,  where- 
with ye  shall  he  able  to  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the 
wicked. 

'Tis good         'Tis  erood  also  that  we  desire  of  the  King;  a  Con- 

to  hdve  Ch 

Convoy.'  voy,  yca  that  he  will  go  with  us  himself  This 
made  David  rejo3'ce  when    in   the  Valley   of  the 

Ex. 33. 15.  shaddows  ^of  death;  and  Moses  was  rather  for 
dyng  where  he  stood,  then  to  go  one  step  without 

psai.  3.5,6,  ]iis  Qod.     O  my  Brother,  if  he  will  but  go  along 

psai.  27.1,  with  us,  what  need  we  be  afraid  of  ten  thousands 

2  3 

that  shall  set  themselves  against  us,  but  without 
i8a.  10. 4.     him,  the  proud  helpers  fall  under  the  slain. 

I  for  my  part  have  been  in  the  fray  before  now, 
and  though  (through  the  goodness  of  him  that  is 
best)  I  am  as  you  see  alive  :  yet  I  cannot  boast  of  my 
manhood.  Glad  shall  I  be,  if  I  meet  with  no  more 
such  brunts,  though  I  fear  we  are  not  got  beyond 
all  danger.  However,  since  the  Lion  and  the  Bear 
"hath  not  as  yet  devoured  me,  I  hope  God  will  also 
deliver  us  from  the  next  uncircumcised  Philistine. 
'''Then  sang  Christian  :' 

*  '  with  these  villanies,'  2nd  to  death,'  in  the  Hth  and  sub.  edits. 
7th  ;  it  is  restored  to  '  these  Vil-  "  '  have  not,'  -Srd  and  sub.  edits, 
laius,'  in  the  »th  and  sub.  edits.  '  Added    in  the  .'U-d  and  sub. 

*  Corrected     to     '  Shadow    of  edits. 


Poor  Little-faith  !     Hast  been  among  the  Thieves  f 
Wast  TohFd  !  Remember  this,  Who  so  believes 
^And  (j/ets  more  faith,  shall  then  a  Victor  be 
Over  ten  thousand,  else  scarce  over  three. 

So  they  went  on,  and  Ignorance  followed.     They 
went  then  till  they  came  at  a  place  where  they  saw 
a  way  put  it  self  into  their  way,  and  seemed  withal,  ^J™^"'"^ 
to  lie  as  straight  as  the  way  which  they  should  go  ; 
and  here  they  knew  not  which  of  the  two  to  take, 
for    both   seemed   straight  before  them  ;  therefore 
here  they  stood  still  to  consider.     And  as  they  were 
thinking  about   the  way,  behold  a   man   black   oi'tlr^fi^s 
flesh,  but  covered  with  a  very  light  Robe,  came  to  "'""' 
them   and   asked   them.    Why  they  stood   there  ? 
They   answered,  They  were  going  to    the  C celes- 
tial   City,    but    knew   not    which   of    these    ways 
to  take.     Follow   me,  said  the  man,  it  is  thither 
that  I  am  a'oinQ:.     So  they  followed    him   in   the  christian 
way    that    but   now  came   into    the    road,   which 'owu^ucjerf. 
by    degrees    turned,    and    turned    them     so    from 
the  City  that  they  desired  to  go  to,   that  in  little 
time  their   faces  were   turned  away   from  it ;    yet 
they  followed  him.     But  by  and  by,  before  they 
were  aware,  he  led  them  both  within  the  compass  we?/ ore 
of  a  Net,  in  which   they  were  both  so  entangled  a  mT 
that  they   knew  not  what   to   do ;   and  with  that, 
the  ivJiite  Robe  fell  off  the  black  mans  back ;  then 
they  saw  where  they  were.     Wherefore  there  they 
lay  crying  sometime,  for  they  could  not  get  them- 
selves out. 

Chr.  Then  said  Christian  to  his  fellow,  Now  do  l^^ZSt 
see  my  self  in  an  errour.     Did  not  the  Shepherds  **'"^'- 
bid  us  beware  of  the  flatterers  ?     As  is  the  saying  of 
the  Wise  man,  so  we  have  found  it  this  day  :  A  Pro.  29. 5. 

*  '  And  get  more  Faith ;  then 
shall  you  Victors  be,'  3rd  and  sub.  ^  8th  and  sub.  edits, 

edits. 


160  €\)t  tJilcjn'mss  ^3rocj:red$* 

9nan  that  flatteretli  his  Neighbour,  spreadeth  a  Net  for 
his  feet. 

Hopef  They  also  gave   us  a  note  of  directions 
about  the  way,  for  our  more  sure  finding  thereof: 
butthere-in  we  have  also  forgotten  to  read,  and  have 
not  kept  our  selves  from  the  Paths  of  the  destroyer. 
p«ai.  17.4.   Here  David  was  wiser  than  wee  ;  for  saith  he,  Co?i- 
cerniiig  the  works  of  men,  hy  the  word  of  thy  lips,  I 
have  kept  me  from  the  Paths  of  the  destroyer.     Thus 
they  lay  bewailing  themselves  in  the  Net.     At  last 
iifcomfsto  ^'^^y  espied  a  shining  One  coming  towards  them, 
whTptahS  with  a  whip  of  small  cord  in  his  hand.     When  he 
hand.        ^^g  come  to  the  place  where  they  were.  He  asked 
them  whence  they  came  ?   and  what  they  did  there  ? 
They  told  him,  That  they  were  poor  Pilgrims  going 
to  Sion,  but  were  led  out  of  their  way,  by  a  black 
man,   cloathed   in  white,   who    bid    ns,   said    they, 
follow  him  ;   for  he  was  going  thither  too.     Then 
j)^H.'u.'32.   said   he   with   the   Whip,    it    is    Flatterer,   a    false 
if"""-^^'^^' Apostle,   that  hath    transformed  himself    into    an 
Angel  of  light.     So  he  rent  the  Net,  and  let  the 
men  out.     Then  said  he  to  them,  Follow  me,  that 
I  may  set  you  in  your  way  again  ;  so  he  led  them 
back  to  the  way,  which  they  had  left  to  follow  the 
I^mdlnd  Flatterer.     Then  he  asked  them,  saying,  Where  did 
M^MnL  you  lie  the  last  night  ?     They  said,  with  the  Shep- 
herds  upon  the  delectable  Mountains.      He   asked 
them  then,  If  they  had   not  ^of  them  Shepherds  a 
note   of  direction  for  the  ivay  f      The}^    answered. 
Yes.     But  did  you,  said  he,  when  you  ^vvas  at  a 
stand,  pluck  out  and  read  your  note  ?     They  an- 
swered,   No.      He   asked  them   why  ?      Tiiey    said 
they  forgot.     He  asked,  moreover,  If  the  Shepherds 
fint^poLn.   did  not  bid  them  beware  oi  i\\Q,  Flatterer  f     They 
Rom.  16. 18.  answered.  Yes  ;  But  we  did  not  imagine,  said  they, 
^that  this  fine-spoken  man  had  been  he.^ 

^  '  of  those,"  lOtli  edit.  *  '  yuu    wcix',"    2iid    and   sub. 

^to'  Italics,  2nd  and  sulv  edity.       edits. 


Cfte  pilgrimd  ^arogres^*  i6i 


Deut.  25.  2. 
2  Chron.  G. 


Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  he  commanded 
them  to  lie  down;  which  when,  they  did,  he  chas- ^^^^^3 19. 
tized  them  sore,  to  teacli  them  the  good  vv^ay  wlierein 
thev  should  walk:  and  as   he  chastized   them,  hQTiieyare 
said,  As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten;  ^^ ««»« o»i ^eir 
zealous  therefore,   and  repent.     This  done,   he   bids 
them  go  on  their  way,  and  take  good  heed  to  the 
other  directions  of  the  Shepherds.     So  they  thanked 
him  for  all  his  kindness,  and  went  softly  along  the 
right  way,  ^ '  Singing.' 

Come  hither,  you  that  walk  along  the  way ; 
See  how  the  Pilgrims  fare,  that  go  a  stray  ! 
They  catched  are  in  an  intatigling  Net, 
'Cause  they  good  Counsel  lightly  did  forget : 
'Tis  true,  they  rescued  were,  hut  yet  you  see 
They're  scourgd  to  boot :  Let  this  your  caution  be. 

Now  after  a  while,  they  perceived  afar  off,  one 
coming  softly  and  alone,  all  along  the  High-way  to 
meet  them.  Then  said  Christian  to  his  fellow. 
Yonder  is  a  man  with  his  back  toward  Sion,  and  he 
is  coming  to  meet  us. 

Hopef  I  see  him,   let  us  take  heed  to  our  selves 
now,  lest  he  should  prove  a  Flatterer  also.     So  he 
drew  nearer  and  nearer,  and  at  last  came  up  unto 
them.     His  name  was  Atheist,  and  he  asked  them  Hl'ttthm^ 
^whether  they  were  going? 

Chr.    We  are  going  to  the  Mount  Sion. 

Then  Atheist  M\  \nio  a  very  great  Laughter.         ata^^.^' 

Chr,  What  is  the  meaniyig  of  your  Laughter  f 

Atheist.  I  Laugh  to  see  what  ignorant  persons 
you  are,  to  take  upon  you  so  tedious  a  Journey;  and 
yet  are  like  to  have  nothing  but  your  travel  for 
your  paines. 

Chr.    Why  man  f  Do  you  think  we  shall  not  be  togikeT'"^ 
received  f 

'  3rd  and  sub.  edits..  ®  '  whither,'  2nd  and  sub. 


'.ler.  22.  13. 
Ec.  10.  15. 


162  CfK  ^Jilcrnms;  progresi^* 

Atheist.  Received  !     Tliere  is  no   such  place  as 
you  Dream  of,  in  all  this  World. 

Chr.  But  there  is  in  the  World  to  come. 
Atheist.  When  I  was  at  home  in  mine  own  Coun- 
trey,  I  heard  as  30U  now  affirm,  and,  from  that 
hearing  went  out  to  see,  and  have  been  seeking  this 
City  ®this  twenty  years :  But  find  no  more  of  it, 
than  I  did  tlie  first  day  I  set  out. 

Chr.   We  have  both  heard  and  believe  that  there  is 
such  a  place  to  be  found. 

Atheist.  Had  not  I,  when  at  home,  believed,  I  had 
not  come  thus  far  to  seek :  But  finding  none,  (and 

taket^ii^  yet  I  should,  had  there  been  such  a  jDlace  to   be 

ll^lvM  found,  for  I  have  gone  to  seek  it  further  than  you) 
I  am  going  back  again,  and  will  seek  to  refresh 
my  self  with  the  things  that  I  then  cast  awa}^,  for 
hopes  of  that  which  I  now  see  is  not. 

SwelfL        Chr.  Then  said  Christian  to  Hopeful,  his  ^Fellow, 

Brother,      jg  (f  f^,^^^  wMch  tMs  muu  hath  said? 

^rnct^         Hopef.^-,^^  heed,  he    is  one   of  t\\e  Flatterers ; 

TcovXt.  I'emember  what  it  hath  cost  us  once  already  for  our 
harkning  to  such  kind  of  Fellows.  What !  no 
Mount  Sion  !  Did  we  not  see  from  the  delectable 
Mountains  the  Gate  of  the  City  ?     Also,  are  we  not 

hraic'fT'^' ^^"^  to  walk  by  Faith?     Let  us  go  on,  said  Hope- 

formerchas-  ful  Jest  tlic  mau  witli  thc  Whip  ^ov^ertakes  us  ao-ain. 

tucmel^ts^s    ^       1-.  iiii  i  it  i-it 

anheip  Y qu  siiould  liavc  tauo'lit  me  that  Lesson,  which  1 

against  pre-  .  »  • ,  i       n         y-< 

«!^«j^»p<a-  will  round  you  in  the  ears  withall ;   Cease,  my  son, 
prov.  19.27.  to  hear  the  Instruction  that  causeth   to  err  from  the 

words  of  knowledge.     I  say   my  Brother,  cease  to 
Hcb.  10.39.  hear  him,  and  let  us  believe  to  the  saving  of  the 

Soul. 

Chr.  Ml/  Brother,  I  did  not  put  the  question  to 


''  All  the  editions  agree  in  this  '  Altered  to    '  Companion,'  in 

reference,  but  should   it  not  be  the  10th  edit.,  108.5. 

ver.  12  ?  ^  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

"  '  this,'    omitted    in   Hth   and  ^  '  overtake,'      Hth     and    sub. 

sub.  edits.  edits. 


€\)t  |3ilgnms;  progits^si*  i63 

thee,  for  that  I  doubted  of  the  truth  of  our  belief  my- 
self:  But  to  prove  thee,  and  to  fetch  from  thee  a  fruit  ^/Hfj/ 
of  the  honesty  of  thy  heart.     As  for  this  man,  I  know  '"«'«• 
that  he  is  blinded  by  the  god  of  this  World  :   Let  thee  ijohn2.2i.3 
and  I  go  on,  knowing  that  we  have  belief  of  the  Truth, 
and  no  lie  is  of  the  Truth* 

Hopef  Now  do  I  rejoyce  in  hope  of  the  Glory 
of  God  :  So  they  turned  away  from  the  man ;  and 
he,  Laughing  at  them,  went  his  way. 

I  saw  then  in  my  Dream,  that  they  went  till  they  Theyare. 

•  ''     /~y  1         •'i.  ,  -,-,       come  to  the 

came  into  a  certam  Lountrey,  whose  Air  naturally  hickmued 
tended  to  make  one  drowsie,  if  he  came  a  stranger 
into  it.     And  here  Hopeful  began  to  be  very  dull  "°f;o"|,J"" 
and  heavy  of  sleep,  wherefore  he  said  unto  Chris-  ^^'o^^*. 
tian,  I  do  now  begin  to  grow  so  drowsie,  that  I  can 
scarcely  hold  up  mine  eyes  ;  let  us  lie  down  here 
and  take  one  Nap. 

Chr.  By  no  means,  said  the  other,  lest  sleeping,  ^^J,f;|f,fj 
tve  never  aivake  more.  ""■"^"''• 

Hopef  Why  m}'^  Brother  ?  sleep  is  sweet  to  the 
Labouring  man  ;  we  may  be  refreshed  if  we  take  a 
Nap. 

Chr.  Do  you  not  remember  that  one  of  the  Shep- 
herds bid  us  beivare  of  the  Inchanted  ground  f     He 
meant  by  that,   that  we  should  beivare  of  sleeping  ; 
ivherefore  let  us  not  sleep  as  ^do  others,  but  let  us  watch  iTUes.  5.  e. 
and  be  sober. 

Hopef  I  acknowledge  my  self  in  ^  'a'  fault,  and ^^1'" """'^'" 
had  1  been  here  alone,  I  had  by  sleeping  run  the 
danger  of  death.     I  see  it  is  true  that  the  wise  man  Eccies.4. 9. 
saith,  Ttuo  are  better  than  one.     Hitherto  hath  thy 
Company  been  my  mercy ;  and  thoti  shalt  have  a 
good  reward  for  thy  labour. 

Chr.  Noiv  then,  said  Christian,  to  prevent  drowsi-  IrolTr^l 
ness  in  this  place,  let  us  fall  into  good  discourse.  ^goolfu^ 

course. 

'  All  the  editions  quote  1  John  *  '  others  do,'  7th  edit. 

2.  11;  evidently  a  typ.  error  for  '  'in  a  fault,'  3rd  and  sub. 

ver  21.. 


course  pre- 
vents 'drow- 
siness. 


164  Cf)e  ^3ilcrrimd  progregsi* 

^ouiftre-       Hopef.  With  all  my  heart,  said  the  other. 
Chr.    Where  shall  we  begin  f 
Hopef.  Where  God  began  with  us.     But  do  you 
begin,  if  you  please. 

"'Chr.  /  loill  sing  you  first  this  song! 

i/SeT-"''       When  Saints  do  sleepy  grow,  let  them  come  hither, 
And  hear  how  these  two  Pilgrims  talk  together  : 
Yea,  let  them  learn  of  them,  in  any  wise. 
Thus  to  keep  ope  their  droivsie  slumbring  eyes. 
Saints  fellowship,  if  it  be  managed  well. 
Keeps  them  awake,  and  that  in  spite  of  hell. 

'^*  They  he-      Chr.  Then  Christian  beo:an  and  said,  /  will  ask 

gm  at  the  .  ~  ' 

'^^'"^s"*/ J/o?<5  a  question.     How  came  you  to  think  at  first  of 
version.-      '  SO  '^  doijig  tts  you  do  noiLi  ? 

Hopef.  Do  you  mean,  How  came  I  at  first  to  look 
after  the  g-ood  of  my  Soul  ? 
Chr.    Yes,  that  is  my  meaning. 
Hopef  I  continued  a  great  while  in  the  delight 
of  those  things  which  were  seen  and  sold  at  our 
fair;  things  which,  ^as  I  believe  now,  would  have 
(had  I  continued  in  them  still)   Mrownded  me  in 
perdition  and  destruction. 
Chr.    What  things  ivere  they  f 
Hopef.  All  the  Treasures  and  Riches  of  the  World. 
uMrf^^^^^    I    delighted    much    in    Rioting,    Revelling, 
conoe^sion?-  Driukiug,  Swcaring,  Lying,  Uncleanness,  Sabbath- 
breaking,  and  what  not,  that  tended  to  destroy  the 
Soul.     But  I  found  at  last,  by  hearing  and   con- 
sidering of  things  that  are  Divine,  which  indeed   I 
heard  of  you,  as  also  of  beloved  Faithful,  that  was 
Rom.  e.  21,  put  to  death  for  his  Faith  and  good-living  in  Vanity- 
Eph.  5.  c.    fair.  That  the  end  of  these  things  is  death.     And  that 

•  8th  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  drowned,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

'  ;5rd  and  and  sub.  "  '  so,'  7th  edit. :  omitted  in  the 

**  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  8th  :  altered  in  9th  and  sub.  to 

'  '  which  I,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  '  of  doing  what  you  do  now  \ ' 


Cf)e  pilgnmei  |irogres!s!»  i65 

for  these  things  sake,  the  wrath  of  God  cometh  upon 
the  children  of  disobedience. 

Chr.  And  did  you  presently  fall  under  the  power  of 
this  conviction  f 

Hopef  No,  I  was  not  willing  presently  to  know  [^J^^^'^l^ll^^ 
the  evil  of  sin,  nor  the  damnation  that  follows  upon  ';j/JJ,7^;,^ 
the  commission  of  it,  but  endeavoured,  when  my'^;'''^'' 
mind  at  first  began  to  be  shaken  with  the  word,  to 
shut  mine  eyes  against  the  light  thereof. 

Chr.  But  what  icas  the  cause  of  your  carrying  of  it 
thus  to  the  first  workings  of  Gods  blessed  Spirit  upon 
you? 

Hopef  The  causes  were,  i.  I  was  ignorant  ^'^^^\ff^°f^^t- 
this  was  the  work  of  God  upon  me.  I  never  thought  \l^^^{. 
that,  by  awaknings  for  sin,  God  at  first  begins  the 
conversion  of  a  sinner.  2.  Sin  was  yet  very  sweet 
to  my  flesh,  and  I  was  loth  to  leave  it.  3.  I  could 
not  tell  how  to  part  with  mine  old  Companions, 
their  presence  and  actions  were  so  desirable  unto 
me.  4.  The  hours  in  which  convictions  were  upon 
me,  were  such  troublesome  and  such  heart-aflfright- 
ing  hours,  that  I  could  not  bear,  no  not  so  much  as 
the  remembrance  of  them  upon  my  heart. 

Chr.  Then  as  it  seems,  sometimes  you  got  rid  of 
your  trouble. 

Hopef.  Yes  verily,  but  it  would  come  into  my 
mind  again,  and  then  I  should  be  as  bad,  nay  worse, 
then  I  was  before. 

Chr.  Why,  ivhat  was  it  that  brought  your  sins  to 
mind  again. 

Hopef.     Many  things,  as, 

1.  If  I  did  but  meet  a  o-ood  man  in  the  Streets:  \^^/f\^' 

O  '  lixul  lost  his 

QY  sense  of  sin, 

'         TPTi  1  ^  1    '  1         T-»Mi  "KlMt  brovxrJU 

2.  If  I  have  heard  any  read  in  the  Bible  ;  or,       itimi^-^' 

3.  If  mine  Head  did  begin  to  Ake  ;  or, 

4.  ^'  If '  I  were  told  that  some  of  my  Neighbours 
were  sick ;  or, 

*  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  *  '  If,'  3rd  and  sub. 

N 


166  C!)f  ^3!lg:nms  ^Jrogressi* 

5.  If  I  heard  tlie  Bell  Toull  for  some  that  were 
dead  ;  or, 

6.  If  I  thought  of  dying  my  self ;   or, 

7.  If  I  heard  that  siiddain  death  happened  to 
others. 

8.  But  especially,  when  I  thought  of  my  self,  that 
1  must  quickly  come  to  Judgement. 

Chr.  And  could  you  at  any  time  with  ease  get  off 
the  guilt  of  sin,  when  hy  any  of  these  wayes  it  came 
upon  you  f 

Hopef.  No,  not  'latterly,  for  then  they  got  faster 
hold  of  my  Conscience.  And  then,  if  I  did  but 
think  of  going  back  to  sin  (though  my  mind  was 
turned  against  it)  it  would  be  double  torment  to 
me. 

Chr.  And  how  did  you  ^do  then? 
'cllidl^        Hojycf  I  thought  I  must  endeavour  to  mend  my 
^^kisguiu  life'  foi'  ^Ise  thought  I,  I  am  sure  to  be  damned. 
iLrs'&ai      C!hr.  A7id  did  you  indeavour  to  mend  f 
llx'^rf'it'  Hopef.  Yes,  and  fled  from,  not  only  my  sins,  but 

moid.'''  sinful  Company  too  ;  and  betook  me  to  Religious 
Duties,  as  Praying,  Reading,  weeping  for  Sin, 
speaking  Truth  to  my  Neighbours,  etc.  These 
things  ^I  did,  with  many  others,  too  much  here  to 
relate. 

Chr.  A  nd  did  you  think  your  self  well  then  f 
S/1m-      Jiopef  Yes,  foi-  a  while;    but   at   the    last   my 
sdfwdv.    trouble  came  tumbling  upon  me  again,  and  that 
over  the  neck  of  all  my  ^Reformations. 

Chr.  How  came  that  about,  since  ^you   was  now 
Reformed  ? 
'Zfati^t       Hopef.  There  were  several  things  brought  it  upon 
aSS     ^^^e,    especially    such    sayings   as    these ;    All  our 


why.'' 


^  '  not  heartily,'   2nd  ;  '  not  I,'  '  '  Reformation,'  ntli  and  sub. 

3rd  and  sub.  edits.  edits. 

*  '  did  you  then,'  7th  edit.  '  '  you   were,'    2nd    and    sub. 

'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  edits. 
^  '  did  I,'  3rd  and  sub.  edits. 


C!)e  pilgnmsi  ^rogre^^s*  167 

righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags.     By  the  works  of\^^.ox^  6.^ 
tfie  Laiv  no  man  shall  be  justified.      When  you  have  luv.n.io. 
done  all  things,  say,  We  are  unprofitable :  with  many 
more   ^the  like.     From  whence  I  began  to  reason 
with   my  self  thus:    If  all  my  righteousnesses  are 
filthy  rags,  if  by  the  deeds  of  the  Law,   no  man 
can   be  justified  ;  And  if,  when  we  have  done  all, 
we  are  yet  unprofitable :    Then  tis  but  a  folly  to 
think  of  Heaven  by  the  Law.     I  further  thought 
thus:  *If  a  Man  runs  an  1001.  into  the  Shop-keepers  ;^'»^^.6^^^«? 
debt,  and  after  that  shall  pay  for  all  that  he  shall  «t«^^«^'^ 
fetch,    ^yet  his  old  debt   stands  still  in  the  Book /'">'•• 
uncrossed ;    for   the  which   the   Shop-keeper   may 
sue  him,  and  cast  him  into  Prison  till  he  shall  pay 
the  debt. 

Chr.  Well,  and  how  did  you  apply  this  to  your 
self? 

Hopef.  A¥hy,  I  thought  thus  with  my  self:  I  have 
by  my  sins  run  a  great  way  into  Gods  Book,  and 
that  my  now  reforming  will  not  pay  off"  that  score  ; 
therefore  I  should  think  still  under  all  my  present 
amendments,  But  how  shall  I  be  freed  from  that 
damnation  that  I  ^have  brought  my  self  in  danger 
of  by  my  former  transgressions  ? 

Chr.  A  very  good  application  :  but  pray  go  on. 

Hope.  Another  thing  that  hath  troubled  me,  even 
since  my  late  amendments,  is,  that  if  I  look  nar-  2^'^^^^' 
rowly  into  the  best  of  what  I  do  now,  I  still  see  sin,  if^^^Xilt 
new  sin,  mixing  it  self  with  the  best  of  that  I  do.  ^^9^'^'^  ' 
So  that  now  I  am  forced  to  conclude,  that  notwith- 
standing  my  former  fond   conceits  of  my  self  and 
duties,  I  have  committed  sin  enough  in  one  *^duty 


'"such  like,' 2nd  and  sub.  edits.  *'I   brought,'     8th  and  sub. 

'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  edits. 

*  'yet  if  his   old   debt    stand  *  The  word   'duty'   has    been 

still  in  the  Book  uncrossed,  for  most  unwarrantably  changed  for 

that    the    Shopkeeper    may   sue  '  day '  by  modern  editors, 
hun,'  &c.,  8th  and  sub. 

n2 


hi 


168  Cfte  |3ilgnmsi  yrogitos; 

to  send   me   to  Hell,   though  my  former  life  liad 
been  faultless. 

Chr.  And  ivhat  did  you  do  then? 

Thumude       Hopef.  Do  !   I  could  not  tell  what  to  do,  till  I 

f4uhfa/X  brake  my  mind  to  Faithful;  for  he  and  I  were  well 

]nn/ii'ie''^  acquainted  :  And  he  told  me,  That  unless  I  could 

sa^edj-      obtain  the   righteousness  of  a  man  that  never  had 

sinned,  neither  mine  own,  nor  all  the  righteousness 

of  the  World  could  save  me. 

Chr.  And  did  you  think  he  spake  true? 
Hopef.  Had  he  told  me  so  when  I  was  pleased 
and  satisfied  with  mine  own  amendments,  I  had 
called  him  Fool  for  his  pains  :  but  now,  since  I  see 
my  own  infirmity,  and  the  sin  that  cleaves  to  my 
best  performance,  I  have  been  forced  to  be  of  his 
opinion. 

Chr.  But  did  you  thinks  when  at  first  he  suggested 
it  to  you,  that  there  ivas  such  a  man  to  he  found,  of 
whom  it  might  justly  be  said,  That  he  never  com- 
mitted sin  f 
Itfrtedat ''^  Sopcf  I  must  coufess  the  words  at  first  sounded 
pramu'  strangely,  but  after  a  little  more  talk  and  company 
with  him,  I  had  full  conviction  about  it. 

Chr.  And  did  you  ask  him  what  man  this  was^  and 
how  you  mud  be  justified  by  him  f 
Rom  ^l'  Hope.  Yes,  and  he  told  me  it  was  the  Lord  Jesus, 

coii-        that  dwelleth  on  the  riff  lit  hand  of  the  most  Hio-h  : 

1  I'et.  1.  •  . 

'"aikldm-    ^^^^  thus,  said  he,  you  must  be  justified  by  him, 
duon-u-n'of  even  bv  trustino-  to  what  he  hath  done  by  himself 

the    ViOl  to  V  ^  ^ 

hesavclv  in  tlic  days  of  his  flesh,  and  suffered  when  he  did 
hang  on  the  Tree.  I  asked  him  further,  How  that 
mans  righteousness  could  be  of  that  efiicacy,  to 
justifie  another  before  God  ?  And  he  told  me.  He 
was  the  mighty  God,  and  did  what  he  did,  and 
died  the  death  also,  not  for  himself,  but  for  ^us  ;  to 
whom  his  doings,  and  the  worthiness  of  them 
should  be  imputed,  if  I  believed  on  him. 
'  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  "  '  for  me,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


€i)t  l^c^vim^  ^piogre^si*  i69 

Chr.  And  what  did  you  do  then  f 

Hope.  I  made   my  objections  against  my  believ-  'of"aJ°^[' 
ing,  for  that  I  thought  he  was  not  willing  to  save  ''*'''•' 
me. 

Chr.  And  what  said  Faithful  to  you  then? 

Hopef.  He  bid  me  go  to  him   and  see :  Then  I 
said,  It  was  presumption:  ^but  he  said,  No;  for  I  Mat.  11.28. 
was  invited  to  come.     Then  he  gave  me  a  Book  o^l^ff^il 
Jesus  his  inditing,  to  incourage  me  the  more  freely  «*'"«'«^''' 
to  come:  And  he  said  concerning  that  Book,  That  Matt. 24. 35. 
every  jot  and  tittle  there  of  stood  firmer  then  Heaven 
and  earth.     Then  I   asked   him.  What  I  must  do 
when  I  came  ?  and  he  told  me,  I  must  entreat  upon  nan'^c  % 
my  knees  with  all  my  heart  and  soul,  the  Father  to  {f  •  ^^-  ^■^• 
reveal  him  to  me.     Then  I  asked  him  further.  How 
I  must  make   my  supplication  to   him?     And  he 
said,  Go,  and  thou  shalt  find  him  upon  a  mercy-  le^^iit 
seat,  where  he  sits  all  the  year  long,  to  give  pardon  sHebri^e. 
and  forgiveness  to  them  that  come.     I  told  him  that 
I  knew  not  what  to   say  when  I  came  :    *and  he  "0^^^/"' 
bid  me  say  to  this  eflfect,  God  be  merciful  to  ?)ie  a 
si7i7ier,  and  make  me  to  know  and  believe  in  Jes^is 
Christ ;  for  I  see  that  if  his  righteousness  had  not 
been,  or  I  have  not  faith  in  that  7'ifjhteousness,  I  am 
utterly  cast  away  :  Lord,  I  have  heard  that  thou  art  a 
merciful  God,  and  hast  ordained  that  thy  Son  Jesus 
Christ  shoidd  be  the  Saviour  of  the  World ;  and  more- 
over, that  thou  art  willing  to  bestow  him  upon  such  a 
poor  sinner  as  I  am,  {and  I  am  a  sinner  indeed)  Lord 
take  therefore  this  opportunity,  and  magnifie  thy  grace 
in  the  Salvation  of  my  soid,  through  thy  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  Amen. 

Chr.  Aiid  did  you  do  as  you  were  bidden  f 

Hopef.  Yes;  over,  and  over,  and  over.  ^Heprmjs 

^  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  ed  in  sub.  edits,  to  Numb.  7.  8. 

^  '  but,'    omitted  in   2nd   and      The  first  is  right, 
sub.  edits.  '  All  the  edits,  agree  in  this 

'  1st  edit.,  Numb.  7.  80;  alter-      quotation,  but  it  should  be  Ileb. 

4.  la 


170  ClK  ^^ilgnmsi  |3iogiTg£(» 

Chr.  A?id  did  the  Father  reveal  ^his  Son  to  you  f 
Hopef.  Not  at  the  first,  nor  second,  nor  tliird,  nor 
fourth,  nor  fifth,  no,  nor  at  the  sixth  time  neither. 
Chr.    What  did  you  do  then  f 
Hopef,  What !  why  I  could  not  tell  what  to  do. 
Chr.  Had  you  not  thoughts  of  leaving  off  praying  f 

'to  leave  off       Hopef.  Ycs,  an  hundred  times,  twice  told. 

vrayiiH^A'        Chr.  And  ivhat  ivas  the  reason  you  did  not  f 

'Ztu<^"of       Hopef  I  believed  that  that  was  true  which  had 

f^;^'^*''""''  been  told  me,  to  ivit,  That  without  the  righteousness 
of  this  Christ,  all  the  World  could  not  save  me : 
And  therefore  thought  I  with  my  self,  If  I  leave  oiF, 
I  die ;  and  I  can  but  die  at  the  Throne  of  Grace. 

Habb.  2.3.  And  withall,  this  came  into  my  mind,  If  it  tarry, 
ic ait  for  it,  because  it  ivill  surely  come,  and  will  not 
tarry.  So  I  continued  Praying  untill  the  Father 
shewed  me  his  Son. 

Chr.  And  how  was  he  revealed  wito  you  f 

Kj)ii.  1. 18,  Hopef  I  did  not  see  him  with  my  bodily  eyes, 
but  with  the  eyes  of  mine  understanding  ;  and  thus 

revmiedto    J^  was.      Ottc  day  I  was  very  sad,  I  think  ^sader 

Aw!'"'"'  then  at  any  one  time  in  my  life  ;  and  this  sadness 
was  through  a  fresh  sight  of  the  greatness  and  vile- 
ness  of  my  sins :  And  as  I  was  then  looking  for 
nothing  but  Hell,  and  the  everlasting  damnation  of 
my  Soul,  suddenW,  as  I  thought,  I  saw  the  Lord 
Jesus  look  down  from  Heaven  upon  me,  and  saying, 

Acts  16. 30,  j^qIIqi^q  Q^i  ij^Q  XjQ^d  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shall  be 
saved. 

But  I  replyed.  Lord,  I  am  a  great,  a  very  great 

2  Cor.  12. 9.  sinner;  and  he  answered.  My  grace  is  sufficient  for 
thee.     Tlien  I  said.  But  Lord,  what  is  believing  ? 

Joh.6. 35.  ^jj^  then  I  saw  from  that  saying,  [//f  that  conieth 
to  me  shall  never  hunger,  and  he  that  belicceth  on  me 
shall  never  thirst^  That  believing  and  coming  was 
all  one,  and  that  lie  that  came,  that  is,  ran  out  in 

*  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  '^  '  sadder/  2nd  and  sub. 

'  'the  Son;  ]oth  edit. 


1.  15. 
Rom.  10.  4. 


Cfte  ^^ilcrnmsJ  progressf*  i7i 

his  heart  and  affections  after  salvation  by  Christ,  he 
indeed  believed  in  Christ.  Then  the  water  stood 
in  mine  eyes,  and  I  asked  further,  But  Lord,  may 
such  a  great  sinner  as  I  am,  be  indeed  accepted  of 
thee,  and  be  saved  by  thee  ?  And  I  heard  him  say, 
And  him  that  cometh  to  me^  I  will  iti  no  wise  cast  out.  *Joh.  e.  37. 
Then  I  said,  But  how.  Lord,  must  I  consider  of  thee 
in  my  coming  to  thee,  that  my  faith  may  be  placed 
aright  upon  thee  ?  Then  he  said,  Christ  Jesus  came  \^^^ 
into  the  World  to  save  simmers.  He  is  the  end  of  the  "^^"^ 
Law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believes.  He 
died  for  our  sins,  and  rose  again  for  our  justification  : 
He  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  ^5]'' 
blood:  He  is  Mediator  between  God  and  us.  He 
ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  From  all 
which  I  gathered,  that  I  must  look  for  righteousness 
in  his  person,  and  for  satisfaction  for  my  sins  by  his 
blood  ;  that  what  he  did  in  obedience  to  his  Fathers 
Law,  and  in  submitting  to  the  penalty  thereof,  was 
not  for  himself,  but  for  him  that  will  accept  it  for 
his  Salvation,  and  be  thankful.  And  now  was  my 
heart  full  of  joy,  mine  eyes  full  of  tears,  and  mine 
affections  running  over  with  love  to  the  Name, 
People,  and  Ways  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Chr.  This  was  a  Revelation  of  Christ  to  your  soul 
indeed :  But  tell  me  particidarly  ivhat  effect  this  had 
up07i  your  spirit. 

Hopef  It  made  me  see  that  all  the  World,  not- 
withstanding all  the  righteousness  thereof,  is  in  a 
state  of  condemnation.  It  made  me  see  that  God 
the  Father,  though  he  be  just,  can  justly  justifie 
the  coming  sinner  :  It  made  me  greatly  ashamed 
of  the  vileness  of  my  former  life,  and  confounded 
me  with  the  ^sence  of  mine  own  Ignorance;  for 
there  never  came  thought  into  mine  heart  before 

'    *  1st  edit.,  John  0.  3(5  ;    2ud 

and  sub.  edits.,  6.  16  ;  it  should  °  '  sense,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

be  6.  37. 


172  mn  isilgnmsi  f  rogresssi* 

now,  that  shewed  me  so  the  beauty  of  Jesus  Christ. 
It  made  me  love  a  holy  life,  and  long  to  do  some- 
thing for  the  Honour  and  Glory  of  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Yea  I  thought,  that  had  I  now  a 
thousand  gallons  of  blood  in  my  body,  I  could  spill 
it  all  for  the  sake  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

I  then^  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  Hopeful  looked 
back  and  saw  Ignorance,  whom  the}^  had  left  behind, 
coming  after.  Look,  said  he  to  Christian,  how  far 
yonder  Youngster  loitereth  behind. 

Chr.  Ay,  Ay,  I  see  him ;  he  careth  not  for  our 
Company. 

Hopef.  But  I  tro,  it  would  not  have  hurt  him,  had 
he  kept  pace  with  us  hitherto. 

Chr.  That's  true,  but  I  warrant  you  he  think eth 
otherwise. 
roM«i7igno-      Hope.  That  I  think  he  doth,  but  however  let  us 

ranee  coraei  r  ca         t  t  -i 

upagain.     tarry  fov  Mm.     So  they  did. 

TJteirtaik.        Tlicu  Christian  said  to  him,  Co)ne  away  man,  why 
do  you  stay  so  behind  ? 

Igno.  I  take  my  pleasure  in  walking  alone,  even 
more  a  great  deal  then  in  Company,  unless  I  like 
it  the  better. 

Then  said  Christian  to  Hopeful  (but  softly)  Did 
I  not  tell  you,  he  cared  not  for  our  Company  :  But 
however,  ^'  said  he,'  come  up,  and  let  us  talk  away  the 
time  in  this  solitary  place.  Then  directing  his  Speech 
to  Ignorance,  he  said.  Come,  how  do  youf  how  stands 
it  between  God  and  your  Soul  now  ? 

'Mgno-  Ignor.  I  hope  well,  for  I  am  always  full  of  good 

<nidtL  ^  '  motions,  thai  come  into  my  mind  to  comfort  me  as 

ground  of  it.'  t  n 

1  walk. 

Chr.    What  good  motions  f  pray  tell  us. 
Ignor.  Why,  I  think  of  God  and  Heaven. 


9    « 


'  I  6aw   then/  2nd  and  sub.  '  2nd  edit.     The  3rd  and  sub. 

edits.  edits,  except  the  7th,  have  also  a 

^  3rd  and  sub.  edits,  except  the  reference    to   Prov.  28.    20,   evi- 

7th.  dently  a  typograpliical  error. 


€i)t  |3ilcj:nms!  ^procyresisf*  173 

Chr.  So  do  the  Devils  and  damned  Souk. 

Igiior.  But  I  think  of  them,  and  desire  them. 

Chr.  So  do  many  that  are  never  like  to  come  there: 
The  Soul  of  the  Sluggard  desires  and  hath  nothing.^  'Pr.  13. 4.- 

Ignor.  But  1  think  of  them,  and  leave  all  for 
them. 

Chr.  That  I  doubt,  for  leaving  of  all  is  an  hard 
matter,  yea  a  harder  matter  then  many  are  aware  of. 
But  ivhy,  or  by  what,  art  thou  perswaded  that  thou 
hast  left  all  for  God  and  Heave?!  f 

Ignor.  My  heart  tells  me  so. 

Chr.   The  wise  man  sayes,  He  that  trusts  his  own  Pr.28. 26.* 
heart  is  a  fool. 

Ignor.  This  is  spoken  of  an  evil  heart,  but  mine 
is  a  good  one. 

Chr.  But  hoiv  dost  thou  prove  that  ? 

Ignor.  It  comforts  me  in  "^the  hopes  of  Heaven. 

Chr.  That  may  be,  through  its  deceitfulness,  for  a 
mans  heart  may  minister  comfort  to  him  in  the  hopes 
of  that  thing,  for  ivhich  he  i/ef  has  no  ground  to 
hope. 

Ignor.  But  my  heart  and  life  agree  together,  and 
therefore  my  hope  is  well  grounded. 

Chr.  Who  told  thee  that  thy  heart  and  life  ^agrees 
together  f 

Ignor.  My  heart  tells  me  so. 

Chr.  Ask  my  Fellow  if  I  be  a  Thief.  Thy  heart 
tells  thee  so  !  Ewcept  the  word  of  God  beareth  witness 
in  this  matter,  other  Testimony  is  of  no  value. 

Ignor.  But  is  it  not  a  good  heart  that  has  good 
thoughts  ?  And  is  not  that  a  good  life  that  is 
according  to  Gods  Commandments  ? 

Chr.    Yes,    That  is  a  good  heart  that  hath  good 

'  The'referencehere  intheSrd  Pr.  28.  29,  in  8th  and  sub.     It 

and  8th  edits,  to  Prov.  28.  29,  is  should  have  been  Pr.  28.  26. 

wrong  ;    it    ought   to    be    Prov.  *  '  in  hopes,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

13.  4.  ^  'yet  he  has,'  7th  edition. 

*  1st  Pr.  28.  25;    2nd  to  6th,  *  'agree,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 
Prov.  28,  29  ;    omitted  in   7th ; 


174  €in  pilffnmsi  ^rocjiTSis!* 

thomjhts,  and  that  is  a  (pod  life  that  is  accordimj  to 
Gods  Commandments  :  But  it  is  one  tliuuj  indeed  to 
have  these^  and  another-  thing  only  to  think  so. 

Ifjnor.  Pray  what  count  you  good  thoughts,  and 
a  lite  according  to  Gods  Commandments  ? 

Chr.  There  are  good  thoughts  of  divers  kinds,  some 
respecting  our  selves,  some  God,  some  Christ,  and  some 
other  things. 
'^JJ''«'«''«      Iqnor.    What   be  good   thoughts  respecting  our 
thowjhts.-     selves  ? 

Chr.  Sitch  as  agree  with  the  Word  of  God. 

Ignor.  When  does  our  thoughts  of  our  selves 
agree  with  the  Word  of  God  ? 

Chr.  When  we  pass  the  same  Judgement  upon  our 
selves  which  the  Word  passes  :  To  explain  my  self. 
The  Word  of  God  saith  of  persons  in  a  natural  con- 
Rom.  3.  dition,  There  is  none  Rigiiteous,  there  is  none  that 
'Gen. 6. 5.  (lotli  good.  It  saitli  «/.w,  That  every  imagination 
of  the  heart  of  man  is  only  evil,  and  that  continu- 
ally. And  again.  The  imagination  of  mans  heart  is 
evil  from  his  Youth.  Now  then,  when  we  think  thus 
of  our  selves,  having  sense  thereof,  then  are  our 
thoughts  good  ones,  because  according  to  the  Word  of 
God. 

Ignor.  I  will  never  believe  that  my  heart  is  thus 
bad. 

Chr.  Therefore  thou  never  hadst  one  good  thought 
concerning  thy  self  i?i  thy  life.  But  let  me  go  on  :  As 
the  Word  passeth  a  Judgement  upon  our  HEART,  so 
it  passeth  a  Judgement  upon  our  WA  YS ;  and  when 
^our  thoughts  of  our  HEARTS  and  WA  YS  agree 
tvith  the  judgment  which  the  Word  givcth  of  both,  then 
are  both  good,  because  agreeing  thereto. 

Ignor.  Make  out  your  meaning. 

"  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  modern    editions   to   '  when   the 

*  1st  to  Ttli  edits.  Gen.  (>.  8  ;  thout^hts.'      What   could   induce 

the  8th  and  sub.  ones,  Gen.  (5.  2.  any   editor  so  to  alter   the  text 

'  This   is    altered  in    all    the  and  jtcrvert  its  meaning  \ 


Cfte  filgnms!  f  rogitsisi*  i75 

Chr.  Wiy,  the  Word  of  God  saith,  That  mans  ways  rsai.  ^f-^^- 
arc  crooked  ways,  not  good,  but  perverse :  It  saith,  ^om.  3. 
They  are  7iatiirally  out  of  the  good  way,  that  they  have 
not  knoivn  it.  Now  when  a  man  thus  thinketh  of  his 
ways,  I  say  when  he  doth  sensibly,  and  with  heart- 
humiliation  thus  think,  then  hath  he  good  thoughts  of 
his  oivn  ways,  because  his  thoughts  now  agree  with  the 
judgme7it  of  the  Word  of  God. 

Ignor.  What  are  good  thouglits  concerning  God? 

Chr.  Even  (as  I  have  said  concerning  our  selves) 
ivhen  our  thoughts  of  God  do  agree  ivith  what  the 
Word  saith  of  him.  And  that  is,  tvheti  we  think  of 
his  Being  and  Attributes  as  the  Word  hath  taught: 
Of  which  I  cannot  now  discourse  at  large.  But  to 
speak  of  him  with  reference  to  us,  Then  ive  have 
right  thoughts  of  God,  when  ive  think  that  he  knoivs  us 
better  than  we  know  our  selves,  and  can  see  sin  in  us, 
when  and  where  we  can  see  none  in  our  selves  ;  when 
ive  think  he  knows  our  in-?nost  thoughts,  and  that  our 
heart  ivith  all  its  depths  is  alwayes  open  unto  his  eyes  : 
Also  when  we  think  that  all  our  Righteousness  stinks 
in  his  Nostrils,  and  that  therefore  he  cannot  abide  to 
see  us  statid  before  him  in  any  confidetice  even  ^of  all 
our  best  performances. 

Ignor.  Do  you  think  that  I  am  such  a  fool,  as  to 
think  God  can  see  no  further  than  I  ?  or  that  I 
would  come  to  God  in  the  best  of  my  performances? 

Chr.    Why,  how  dost  thou  think  in  this  matter  f 

Ignor.  Wh}^,  to  be  short,  I  think  I  must  believe  in 
Christ  for  Justification. 

Chr.  How  !  think  thou  must  believe  in  Christ,  when 
thou  seest  not  thy  need  of  him  !  Thou  neither  seest 
thy  original,  or  actual  infirmities,  but  hast  such  an 
opinion  of  thy  self,  and  of  ivhat  thou  doest,  as  plainli/ 
renders  thee  to  be  one  that  did  never  see  a  necessity  of 
Christs  perso7ial  righteousness  to  justifie  thee  before 
God  :  Hoiv  then  dost  thou  say,  I  believe  in  Christ  ? 

^  '  even  in  all,'  9th  and  sub.  edits. 


176  Cl)f  |3tlgnms!  ^Jrogrrs^* 

Iffnor.  I  believe  well  enough  for  all  that. 
Chr.  Hoiv  doest  thou  believe  f 
o/Tiio^"'"'      Icjnor,  I  believe  that  Christ  died  for  sinners,  and 
ranee.'        ^jj^^  J  gj^^ll  be  justified  before  God  from  the  curse, 
through  his  gracious  acceptance  of  my  obedience  to 
his  Law  :    Or  thus,  Christ  makes  my  Duties  that 
are  Religious,  acceptable  to  his  Father  by  virtue  of 
his  Merits;  and  so  shall  I  be  justified. 

Chr.  Let  me  give  an  miswer  to  this  confession  of 
thy  faith. 

1.  Thou  believest  with  a  Fantastical  Faith,  for  this 
faith  is  no  where  described  in  the  Word. 

2.  Thou  belicvest  imth  a  False  Faith,  because  it 
taketh  Justification  from  the  personal  righteousness  of 
Christ,  and  applies  it  to  thy  own. 

3.  This  faith  maketh  not  Christ  a  Justifier  of  thy 
person,  but  of  thy  actions  ;  and  of  thy  person  for  thy 
actions  sake,  ichich  is  false. 

4.  Therefore  this  faith  is  deceitful,  even  siich  as 
unll  leave  thee  under  icrath,  hi  the  day  of  God  Al- 
mighty. For  true  Justifying  Faith  puts  the  soul  (as 
sensible  of  its  lost  condition  by  the  Law)  upon  flying  for 
refuge  unto  Ghrists  righteousness:  (Which  righteous- 
ness of  his,  is  7iot  an  act  of  grace,  by  which  he  maketh 
for  Justification  thy  obedience  accepted  with  God,  but 
liis  personal  obedience  to  the  Laiv  in  doing  and  suffer- 
ing fcrr  us,  what  that  required  at  our  hands)  This 
righteousness,  I  say,  true  faith  accepteth,  under  the 
skirt  of  ichich,  the  soul  being  shrouded,  and  by  it  pre- 
sented as  spotless  before  God,  it  is  accepted,  a7id  acquit 

from  condemnation. 

Ignor.  What !  would  you  have  us  trust  to  what 
Christ  in  his  own  person  has  done  without  us ! 
This  conceit  would  loosen  the  reines  of  our  lust, 
and  toUerate  us  to  live  as  we  list.  For  what  mat- 
ter how  we  live,  if  we  may  be  Justified  by  Christs 
personal  rigliteousucss  from  all,  when  we  believe  it? 

^  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


Chr.  Ignorance  is  thy  name,  and  as  thy  name  is, 
so  art  thou;  even  this  thy  answer  demonstrateth  ivhat 
I  say.  Ignorant  thou  art  of  what  Justifying  right- 
eousness is,  and  as  ignorant  how  to  secure  thy  Soul 
through  the  faith  of  it,  from  the  heavy  ivrath  of  God. 
Yea,  thou  also  art  ignorant  of  the  true  effects  of  saving 
faith  in  this  righteousness  of  Christ,  which  is,  to  bow 
and  win  over  the  heart  to  God  in  Christ,  to  love  his 
Name,  his  Word,  Ways,  and  People ;  and  not  as  thou 
ignorantly  imaginest. 

Hop.  Ask  him  if  ever  he  had  Christ  revealed  to 
him  from  Heaven  ? 

Ignor.    What !   You  are  a  man  for  revelations !  Ijal^slcItT 
believe  that  what  both  you,  and  all  the  rest  of  you  say  ""-'"'■' 
about  that  matter,  is  but  the  fruit  of  distracted  braines. 

Hop.  Why  man  !  Christ  is  so  hid  in  God  from 
the  natural  apprehensions  of  all  *^ flesh,  that  he  can- 
not by  any  man  be  savingly  known,  unless  God  the 
Father  reveals  him  to  them. 

Ignor.   That  is  your  faith,  but  not  mine ;  yet  mine' ^^^p'f^ 
I  doubt  not,  is  as  good  as  yours:  Though  I  have  'fiotf^fi^''£f"'* 
in  my  head  so  many  whimzies  as  you.  '"'^■'* 

Chr.  Give    me    leave   to   put  in  a    word  :     You 
ought  not  so  slightly  to  speak  of  this  matter  :  for 'Mat.  11.27. 
this  I  will  boldly  affirm,  (even  as  my  good  Compa- 
nion hath  done)  that  no  man  can  know  Jesus  Christ  !^^°';-^?' 

y  ^  3.    Epli.  1. 

but  by  the  Revelation  of  the  Father  :  yea,  and  faith  ^s,  w- 
too,  by  which  the  soul  layeth  hold  upon  Christ  (if 
it  be  right)  must  be  wrought  by  the  exceeding 
greatness  of  his  mighty  power ;  the  working  of 
which  faith,  I  perceive,  poor  Ignorance,  thou  art 
ignorant  of.  Be  awakened  then,  see  thine  own 
wretchedness,  and  flie  to  the  Lord   Jesus;  and  by 


^  2nd  and  sub.  edits.  pographical  error,  followed  in  sub. 

I  *  of  the  flesh,'  3rd  and  sub.  edits, 
edjts.  ^  3rd  and  sub.  edits,  refer  to  1 

All  the  editions  refer  to  Mat.  Cor.  11.  3. 
11.  28  ;  it  must  have  been  a  ty- 


178  C!)e  pUgrimsi  ^Jrogit^si* 

his  righteousness,    wliich   is    the    righteousness   of 
God,  (for  he  himself  is  God)  thou  shalt  be  delivered 
from  condemnation. 
hrolTu  Igno.    You  (jo  so  fast,  I  cannot  keep  pace  with  you; 

do  you  go  on  before,  I  must  stay  awhile  behind. 

'  ^  Then  they  said,' 

Well  Ignorance,  imlt  thou  yet  foolish  be, 
To  slight  good  Counsel,  ten  times  given  thee  f 
And  if  thou  yet  refuse  it,  thou  shalt  know 
Ere  long  the  evil  of  thy  doing  so  : 
Remember  man  in  time,  stoop,  do  not  fear. 
Good  Counsel  taken  well,  ^ saves  ;  therefore  hear  : 
But  if  thou  yet  shalt  slight  it,  thou  ivilt  be 
The  loser  (^Ignorance)  Fie  warrant  thee. 

'  ^  Then  Christian  addressed  thus  himself  to  his 
fellow.' 

Chr.  Well,  come  my  good  Hopeful,  I  perceive 
that  thou  and  I  must  walk  bv  our  selves  ao'ain. 

So  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  they  went  on  a  pace 
before,  and  Ignorance  he  came  hobling  after.  Then 
said  Christian  to  his  companion,  It  pities  me  much 
for  this  poor  man,  it  will  certainly  go  ill  icith  him  at 
last. 

Hope.  Alas,  there  are  abundance  in  our  Town  in 
his  condition  ;  whole  Families,  yea,  whole  Streets, 
(and  that  of  Pilgrims  too)  and  if  there  be  so  many 
in  our  parts,  how  many  think  you,  must  there  be  in 
the  place  where  he  was  born  ? 

Chr.  Indeed  the  Word  saith,  He  hath  blinded  their 
eyes,  lest  they  should  see,  &c.  But  noiv  we  are  by 
our  selves,  ivhat  do  you  think  of  such  menf  Have 
they  at  no  time,  think  you,  convictions  of  sin,  and  so 
consequently  fears  that  their  state  is  dangerous  f 

'  '  secures,''  7th  edit.  *  2iid  and  sub.  edits. 


Hopef.  Nay,  do  you  answer  that  question  your 
self,  for  you  are  the  elder  man. 

Chr.  Then  I  say  sometimes  (as  I  think)  they  may, 
but  they  being  naturally  ignorant,  imderstand  not  that 
such  convictions  tend  to  their  good ;  and  therefore  they 
do  desperately  seek  to  stifle  them,  and  presumptuously 
continue  to  flatter  themselves  in  the  way  of  their  own 
hearts. 

Hopef  I  do  believe  as  you  say,  that  fear  tends  J^^f^;°''"^' 
much  to  Mens  good,  and  to  make  them  right,  at 
their  beginning  to  go  on  Pilgrimage. 

Chr.    Without  all  doubt  in  doth,  if  it  be  right :  for  'Jj'^f-^f- 
so  says  the  word,  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  begin-  Pro.  i.  7.^ 
ning  of  Wisdom. 

Hopef  How  will  you  describe  right  fear  ? 

Chr.  True,  or  right  fear,  is  discovered   by  three  nhjidfear. 
things. 

1.  By  its  rise.  It  is  caused  by  saving  convic- 
tions for  sin. 

2.  It  driveth  the  soul  to  lay  fast'  hold  of  Christ 
for  Salvation. 

3.  It  begetteth  and  continueth  in  the  soul  a 
great  reverence  of  God,  his  word,  and  ways,  keeping 
it  tender,  and  making  it  afraid  to  turn  from  them, 
to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left,  to  any  thing  that 
may  dishonour  God,  break  its  peace,  grieve  the 
Spirit,  or  cause  the  Enemy  to  speak  reproachfully. 

Hopef.  Well  said,  I  believe  you  have  said  the 
truth.  Are  we  now  almost  got  past  the  Inchanted 
ground  ? 

Chr.    Why,  are  you  weary  of  this  discourse  ? 

Hopef.  No  verily,  but  that  I  would  know  where 
we  are. 

Chr.  We  have  not  now  above  two  miles  further  to 
qo  thereon.     But  let  us  return  to  our  matter.     Now  ^ ' *  wiiy ig- 

"-'  norant  per- 

^  All  the  editions  refer  to  Job.  ^  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 

28.  29  ;  there  being  only  twenty-  *  All  the  editions  quote   Pro. 

eight  verses  in  the  chapter.  17.  it  should  be  1.  ver.  7. 


180  Cf)e  i3ilgnm5  ^Jrogrtds; 

som  stifle     iiiQ  Iqnorant  know  not  that  such  convictio7is  that  tend 

'^11: l'^^"'^'  to  put  them  in  fear,  are  for  their  good,  and  therejore 
they  seek  to  stifle  them. 

Hopef  How  do  they  seek  to  stifle  them? 

tMi^J^'"  ^^^^'-  1-  'I'^^^y  think  tluit  those  fears  are  wrought 
by  the  Devil  (though  indeed  they  are  wrought  of 
God)  and  thinking  so,  they  resist  them,  as  things 
tliat  directly  tend  to  their  overthrow.  2.  They 
also  think  that  these  fears  tend  to  the  spoiling  of 
their  faith,  (when  alas  for  them,  poor  men  that  they 
are  !  they  have  none  at  all)  and  therefore  they 
harden  their  hearts  against  them.  3.  They  pre- 
sume they  ought  not  to  fear,  and  therefore,  in  de- 
spite of  them,  wax  presumptuously  confident.  4. 
They  see  that  these  fears  tend  to  take  away  from 
them  their  pitiful  old  self-holiness,  and  therefore 
they  resist  them  with  all  their  might. 

Hope.  I  know  something  of  this  ni}^  self;  for  be- 
fore I  knew  my  self  it  was  so  with  me. 

Clir.  Well,  we  will  leave  at  this  time  our  Neigh- 
bour Ignorance  bi/  himself  and  fall  upon  another  pro- 
fitable question. 

Hopef  With  all  my  heart,  but  you  shall  still 
begin. 

Talk  about        Cliv.    Wcll  tlieu,  did  iiou  not  know  about  ten  years 

owe  Tempo-  .      ^  ,  ,  n  j 

rary.         ago,  One  lemporary  m  your  parts,  who  was  ajorwara 

man  in  lieligion  then  ? 
Where  he         Hope.  Khow  him!     Yes,  he  dwelt  in  Graceless,  ii 

Town  about  two  miles  ofi"  of  Honesty,  and  he  dwelt 

next  door  to  one  Turn-back. 

Clir.  Right,  he  dwelt  under  the  same  roof  with  him. 
*"^He  was  Wcll,  that  man  was  much  awakened  once ;  I  believe 
once.-         that  then  he  had  some  sight  of  his  sins,  and  of  the 

wages  that  was  due  thereto. 

Hope.  I  am  of  your  mind,   for  (my   House  not 

being  above   three  miles  from  him)   he  would  oft 

times  come  to  me,  and  tliat  with  many  tears.    Truly 

*  2iid  and  sub.  edits. 


€in  pilcynmsi  ^arogiesis;^  isi 

I  pitied  the  man,  and  was  not  altogether  withont 
hope  of  him  ;  but  one  may  see  it  is  not  every  one 
that  cries,  Lord,  Lord. 

Chr.  He  told  me  once,  That  he  was  resolved  to  go  on 
Pilgrimage  as  we  ^do  noiv;  but  all  of  a  sudden  he 
grew  acquainted  with  one  Save-self,  and  then  he  became 
a  stranger  to  me. 

Hope.  Now  since  we  are  talking  about  him,  let 
us  a  little  enquire  into  the  reason  of  the  suddain 
backsliding  of  him  and  such  others. 

Chr.  It  may  be  very  profitable,  but  do  you  begin. 

Hope.  Well  then,  there  are  in  my  judgement  four 
reasons  for  it. 

1.  Though  the  Consciences  of  such  men  are  tJ^fi^o!""' 
awakened,  yet  their  minds  are  not  changed  :  there-  ^71,'^f.""* 
fore  when  the  power  of  guilt  weareth  away,  that 
which  ^provoked  them  to  be  Religious  ceaseth. 
Wherefore  they  naturally  turn  to  their  own  course 
again  :  even  as  we  see  the  Dog  that  is  sick  of  what 
he  hath  eaten,  so  long  as  his  sickness  prevails,  he 
vomits  and  casts  up  all ;  not  that  he  doth  this  of  a 
free  mind  (if  we  may  say  a  Dog  has  a  mind)  but 
because  it  troubleth  his  Stomach  ;  but  now  when 
his  sickness  is  over,  and  so  his  Stomach  eased,  his 
desires  being  not  at  all  alienate  from  his  vomit,  he 
turns  him  about  and  licks  up  all.  And  so  it  is 
true  which  is  written,  The  Dog  is  turned  to  his  own^'P^^-^-^ 
vomit  again.  This  I  say  being  hot  for  heaven,  by 
virtue  only  of  the  sense  and  fear  of  the  torments  of 
Hell,  as  their  sense  of  Hell,  and  the  fears  of  dam- 
nation chills  and  cools,  so  their  desires  for  Heaven 
and  Salvation  cool  also.  So  then  it  comes  to  pass, 
that  when  their  guilt  and  fear  is  gone,  their  desires 
for  Heaven  and  Happiness  die  ;  and  they  return  to 
their  course  again, 

*  '  as  we  go  now;  2nd  and  sub.  '  '  provoketli,'   7th,  9th,   1684, 
edits.                                                     and  10th  edits. 

*  2nd  and  snb.  edits. 

O 


182  €f)t  ^ailgnms  prcig:ite!£{* 

2'y.  Another  reason  is,  they  have  slavish  fears 
that  do  over-master  them.  I  speak  now  of  the 
prov.  29. 25.  fears  that  they  have  of  men  :  Fo7'  the  fear  of  men 
brinfjeth  a  snare.  So  then,  though  they  seem  to  be 
hot  for  Heaven,  so  long  as  the  flames  of  Hell  are 
about  their  ears,  yet  when  that  terrour  is  a  little  over, 
they  betake  themselves  to  second  thoughts;  namely, 
that  'tis  good  to  be  wise,  and  not  to  run  (for  they 
know  not  what)  the  hazard  of  loosing  all ;  or  at 
least,  of  bringing  themselves  into  unavoidable  and 
un-necessary  troubles :  and  so  they  fall  in  with  the 
world  again. 

3^y.  The  shame  that  attends  Religion,  lies  also 
as  a  block  in  their  way ;  they  are  proud  and 
haughty,  and  Religion  in  their  eye  is  low  and  con- 
temptible :  Therefore  when  they  have  lost  their 
sense  of  Hell  and  wrath  to  come,  they  return  again 
to  their  former  course. 

4'^  Guilt,  and  to  meditate  terrour,  are  grievous 
to  them,  they  like  not  to  see  their  miser}^  before 
they  come  into  it.  Though  perhaps  the  sight  of  it 
first,  if  they  loved  that  sight,  might  make  them  flie 
whither  the  righteous  flie  and  are  safe;  but  because 
they  do,  as  I  hinted  before,  even  shun  the  thoughts 
of  guilt  and  terrour,  therefore,  when  once  they  are 
rid  of  their  awakenings  about  the  tenors  and  wrath 
of  God,  they  harden  their  hearts  gladly,  and  chuse 
such  ways  as  will  harden  them  more  and  more. 

Chr.  You  are  pretty  near  the  business,  for  the  bot- 
tom of  all  is,  for  want  of  a  chancje  in  their  mind  and 
will.  And  therefore  they  are  but  like  the  Fellon  that 
standeth  before  the  Judge,  he  quakes  and  trembles,  and 
seems  to  repent  most  heartily ;  but  the  bottom  of  all  is, 
the  fear  of  the  Halter,  ^not  of  any  detestation  of  the 
offence  ;  as  is  evident,  because,  let  hit  this  man  have 
his  liberty,  and  he  will  be   t  Thief,  and  so  a  Rogue 

"  '  not  that  he  hath  any,"  ftth  and  sub.  edits. 


How  the 
Apoitatf. 
lies  b  ick. 


Cfte  pilgrims!  progitsJg*  i83 

still;  whereas,  if  his  mind  was  changed,  he  ivould  be 
otherwise. 

Hope,  Now  I  have  shewed  you  the  reasons  of 
their  going  back,  do  you  shew  me  the  manner 
thereof. 

Chr.  So  I  will  willingly . 

1.  They   draw  off  their  thoughts  all  that  they^' 
may,  from   the  remembrance  of  God,  Death,  and 
Judgement  to  come. 

2.  Then  they  cast  off  by  degrees  private  Duties, 
as  Closet-Prayer,  curbing  their  lusts,  watching, 
sorrow  for  sin,  and  the  like, 

3.  Then  they  shun  the  company  of  lively  and 
warm  Christians. 

4.  After  that,  they  grow  cold  to  publick  Duty,  as 
Hearing,  Reading,  Godly  Conference,  and  the  like. 

5.  Then  they  begin  to  pick  holes,  as  we  say,  in 
the  Coats  of  some  of  the  Godly,  and  that  devilishly; 
that  they  may  have  a  seeming  colour  to  throw  Reli- 
gion (for  the  sake  of  some  infirmity  they  have  spied 
in  them)  behind  their  backs. 

6.  Then  they  begin  to  adhere  to,  and  associate 
themselves  with  carnal  loose  and  wanton  men. 

7.  Then  they  give  way  to  carnal  and  wanton  dis- 
courses in  secret ;  and  glad  are  they  if  they  can  see 
such  things  in  any  that  are  counted  honest,  that 
they  may  the  more  boldly  do  it  through  their 
example, 

8.  After  this,  they  begin  to  play  with  little  sins 
openly. 

9.  And  then,  being  hardened,  they  shew  them- 
selves as  they  are.  Thus  being  lanched  again  into 
the  gulf  of  misery,  unless  a  Miracle  of  Grace  pre- 
vent it,  they  everlastingly  perish  in  their  own  de- 
ceivings. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  by  this  time  the 
Pilgrims  were  got  over  the  Inchanted  Ground,  and  isa.o?.  4 
entering  in  the  Countrey  of  Beidah,  whose  Air  was  iy%~' 

o  2 


184  Cf)f  ^3ilci:nmi5  ^arogre^s?* 

very  sweet  and  pleasant,  the  way  lying  directly 
through  it,  they  solaced  themselves  there  for  a  sea- 
son. Yea,  here  they  heard  continually  the  singing 
of  Birds,  and  saw  every  day  the  flowers  appear  in 
the  earth :  and  heard  the  voice  of  the  Turtle  in  the 
Land.  In  this  Conntrey  the  Sun  shineth  night  and 
day  ;  wherefore  this  was  beyond  the  Valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  and  also  out  of  the  reach  of  Giant 
Despair ;  neither  could  they  from  this  place  so 
much  as  see  Doubting-Castle.  Here  they  were 
within  sight  of  the  City  they  were  going  to :  also 
here    met    them    some  of   the  Inhabitants  thereof. 

Amjtu.  For  in  this  Land  the  shining  Ones  commonly 
walked,  because  it  was  upon  the  Borders  of  Heaven. 
In  this  Land  also  the  contract  between  the  Bride 
and   the   Bridgroom   was    renewed  ;     Yea   here,  as 

is;i  62. 5.  the  Bridegroom  rejoyceth  over  the  Bride,  so  did  their 
God  rejoijce  over  them.     Here  they  had  no  want  of 

ver.  8.  Corn  and  \A'ine  ;  for  in  this  place  Uhey  met  with 
abundance  of  what  they  had  sought  ^'for'  in  all 
their  Pilgrimage.  Here  they  heard  voices  from  out 
of  the    City,   loud    voices ;  saying,   Say  ye  to    the 

Ver.  11.  daughter  of  Zion,  Behold  thy  Salvation  cometh,  be- 
hold, his  reward  is  ivith  him.     Here  all  the  Inhabi- 

ver.  12.  tants  of  the  Countrey  called  them,  The  holy  People^ 
The  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  Sought  out,  etc. 

Now  as  they  walked  in  this  Land,  tliey  had  more 
rejoicing  then  in  parts  more  remote  from  the  King- 
dom to  whicJi  they  were  bound  ;  and  drawing  near 
to  the  City,  they  had  yet  a  more  perfect  view 
thereof.  It  was  builded  of  Pearls  and  precious 
Stones,  also  the  Street  thereof  was  paved  with 
Gold,  so  that  by  reason  of  the  natural  glory  of  the 
City,  and  the  reflection  of  tlie  Sun-beams  upon  it. 
Christian,  with  desire  fell  sick,  Hopeful  also  had  a 
fit  or  two  of  the  same   Disease  :    Wherefore    here 

'  '  they  met  abundance,'   10th  '  2nd  and  sub.  edits, 

edit. 


€f)t  i^ilgnmg  Irogitsiei*  i85 

they  lay  by  it  a  while,  crying  out  because  of  their 
pangs,  If  you  see  my  Beloved,  tell  him  that  I  am  sick 
of  love. 

But  being  a  little  strengthened,  and  better  able 
to  bear  their  sickness,  they  walked  on  their  way, 
and  came  yet  nearer  and  nearer,  where  were 
Orchards,  Vineyards  and  Gardens,  and  their  Gates 
opened  into  the  High-way.  Now  as  they  came  up  to 
these  places,  behold  the  Gardener  stood  in  the  way; 
to  whom  the  Pilgrims  said.  Whose  goodly  Vine- 
3^ards  and  Gardens  are  these  ?  He  answered,  They  oeut. 23,24. 
are  the  Kings,  and  are  planted  here  for  his  own 
delig^hts,  and  also  for  the  solace  of  Pilgrims.  So 
the  Gardiner  had  them  into  the  Vineyards,  and  bid 
them  refresh  themselves  with  Dainties;  He  also 
shewed  them  there  the  Kings  walks,  and  the  Arbors 
where  he  delighted  to  be  :  And  here  they  tarried 
and  slept. 

Now  I  beheld  in  my  Dream,  that  they  talked 
more  in  their  sleep  at  this  time,  then  ever  they  did 
in  all  their  Journey ;  and  being  in  a  muse  there- 
about, the  Gardiner  said  even  to  me,  Wherefore 
musest  thou  at  the  matter?  It  is  the  nature  of  the 
fruit  of  the  Grapes  of  these  Vineyards  to  go  down 
so  sweetly,  as  to  cause  the  lips  of  them  that  are 
asleep  to  speak. 

So  I  saw  that  when  they  awoke,  they  addressed 
themselves  to  go  up  to  the  City.  But,  as  I  said, 
the  reflections  of  the  Sun  upon  the  Cit}^  (for  the  Rev.  21. 18. 
City  was  pure  Gold)  was  so  extreamly  glorious, 
that  they  could  not,  as  yet,  with  open  face  behold  2001,3.18.^ 
it,  but  through  an  Instrument  made  for  that  pur- 
pose. So  I  saw,  that  as  they  went  on,  there  met 
them  two  men,  in  Raiment  tliat  ''shone  like  Gold, 
also  their  faces  shone  as  the  light. 


*  quoted  as  1  Cor.  3.  IR,  in  all  *  '  that   sinned  like  Gold,'  7th 

the  editions.  edition. 


186  mn  ^ilcynmsi  ^SrocrresisJ* 

These  men  asked  the  Pilgrims  whence  they 
came?  and  they  told  them  ;  they  also  asked  them, 
Where  they  had  lodg'd,  what  difficulties,  and  dan- 
gers, what  comforts  and  pleasures  they  had  met  in 
the  way  ?  and  they  told  them.  Then  said  the 
men  that  met  them,  You  have  but  two  difficulties 
more  to  meet  with,  and  then  you  are  in  the  City. 

Christian  then  and  liis  Companion  asked  the 
men  to  go  along  with  them,  so  they  told  them  they 
would  ;  but,  said  they,  you  must  obtain  it  by  your 
own  faith.  So  I  saw  in  my  Dream  that  they  went 
on  together  till  they  came  ^within  sight  of  the 
Gate. 

Now  I  further  saw  that  betwixt  them  and  the 

Deati..  Gate  was  a  River,  but  there  was  no  Bridge  to  go 
over,  the  River  was  very  deep  ;  at  the  sight  there- 
fore of  this  River,  the  Pilgrims  were  much 
'^stounded,  but  the  men  that  went  with  them,  said. 
You  must  go  through,  or  you  cannot  come  at  the 
Gate. 

Death  u  not      Xhc  Pilgrims  then,  began  to  enquire  if  there  was 

uelcome  to  ~  i        ^  i    . 

nature       jjq  otlicr  wav  to  thc  Gate  ;  to  which  they  answered, 
fepasaoutofYQQ   hy^i   thcrc    hath  not    any,    save   two,   to    wit, 

this  World  '  -^  '  .  '  ' 

I'cof'iTs]  ^^^^^'^   ^^^  Elijah,   been    permitted   to   tread   that 
52  '  path,  since  the  foundation  of  the  World,  nor  shall, 

untill  the  last  Trumpet  shall  sound.     The  Pilgrims 
then,  especially  Christian,  began  to  dispond  in  his 
mind,  and  looked  this  way  and  that,  but  no  way 
could  be  found  by  them,  by  which  they  might  es- 
cape the  River.     Then  they  asked  the  men,  if  the 
Waters  were  all  of  a  depth  ?     They  said.  No  ;  yet 
fj'nluom-  ^^^^y  could  not  help  them  in  that  Case,  for  said  they: 
om^gh       You  shall  find  it  deeper  or  shallotver,  as  you  believe  in 
'''""         the  King  of  the  place. 

They  then  addressed  themselves  to  the  Water; 
and  entring.    Christian  began  to  sink,  and  crying 

"  '  came  in  sight,'  2iid  and  sub.  ''  '  mucli  stun'd,"  2nd  and  sub. 

edits.  edits. 


Ci)e  ^ilsrims  ^rogres^si,  i87 

out  to  his  good  friend  Hopeful;  he  said,  I  sink  in 
deep  Waters,  the  Billows  go  over  my  head,  all  his 
Waves  go  over  me,  Selah. 

Then  said  the  other,  Be  of  good  chear,  my  Bro- 
ther, I  feel  the  bottom,  and  it  is  good.     Then  said  ciinsuans 

.      .  .  ®  „  ,  conflict  at 

Christian,  Ah  my  friend,  the  sorrows  of  death  have  ^'^'^^^'"■' "f" 
compassed  me  about,  I  shall  not  see  the  Land  that 
flows  with  Milk  and  Honey.  And  with  that,  a  great 
darkness  and  horror  fell  upon  Christian,  so  that  he 
could  not  see  before  him ;  also  here  he  in  great 
measure  lost  his  senses,  so  that  he  could  neither 
remember  nor  orderly  talk  of  any  of  those  sweet 
refreshments  that  he  had  met  with  in  the  way  of  his 
Pilgrimage.  But  all  the  words  that  he  spake,  still 
tended  to  discover  that  he  had  horror  of  mind,  and 
^hearty  fears  that  he  should  die  in  that  River,  and 
never  obtain  entrance  in  at  the  Gate  :  here  also,  as 
they  that  stood  by,  perceived,  he  was  much  in  the 
troublesome  thoughts  of  the  sins  that  he  had  com- 
mitted, both  since  and  before  he  began  to  be  a  Pil- 
grim. 'Twas  also  observed,  that  he  was  troubled 
with  apparitions  of  Hobgoblins  and  Evil  Spirits. 
For  ever  and  anon  he  would  intimate  so  much  by 
words.  Hopeful  therefore  here  had  much  adoe  to 
keep  his  Brothers  head  above  water,  yea  sometimes 
he  would  be  quite  gone  down,  and  then  ere  a  while 
he  would  rise  up  again  half  dead.  Hopeful  also 
would  endeavour  to  comfort  him,  saying,  Brother,  I 
see  the  Gate,  and  men  standing  ^by  it  to  receive  us. 
But  Christian  would  answer  :  'Tis  you,  'tis  you  they 
wait  for,  you  have  been  Hopeful  ever  since  I  knew 
you ;  and  so  have  you,  said  he  to  Christian.  Ah 
Brother,  said  he,  surely  if  I  was  right,  he  would 
now  arise  to  help  me  ;  but  for  my  sins  he  hath 
brought  me  into  the  snare,  and  hath  left  me.  Then 
said  Hopeful,  My  Brother,  you  have  quite  forgot 

®  '  heart  fears,'    8th    and  sub.  '  '  hy  to  receive  us,'  8th  and 

edits.  sub.  edits. 


188  CIk  ^ailgnms!  ^roffress* 

psai.73. 4,  the  Text,  where  its  said  of  the  wicked,  There  is  no 
hand  in  their  death,  hut  their  strength  is  Jirm,  theij  are 
not  troubled  as  other  men,  neither  are  they  plagued  like 
other  men.  These  troubles  and  distresses  that  you 
go  through  in  these  Waters,  are  no  sign  that  God 
hath  forsaken  you,  but  are  sent  to  try  you,  whether 
you  will  call  to  mind  that  which  heretofore  you 
have  received  of  his  goodness,  and  live  upon  him  in 
your  distresses. 

chHftiandt-      Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  Christian  was  ^as 

liverea  from    ,  •!  rfi  i 

deatT'^^'"  m  amuse  awhile  ;  To  whom  also  Hopeful  added  this 

Avord,   Be  of  good  chear,  Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee 

whole :  And  with  that,  Christian  brake  out  with  a 

loud  voice.  Oh  I  see  him  again  !  and  he  tells  me, 

isa.  43. 2.3     When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  he  ivith 

thee,  ayid  through  the  Rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow 

thee.     Then  they  both  took  courage,  and  the  enemy 

was  after  that  as  still  as  a  stone,  untill  they  were 

gone    over.      Christian   therefore   ])resently   found 

ground  to  stand  upon ;  and  so  it  followed  that  the 

rest  of  the  River  was  but  shallow.     Thus  they   got 

over.     Now  upon   the  bank  of  the  River,  on  the 

other  side,  they  saw  the  two  shining  men  again, 

who  there  waited  for  them.    Wherefore  being  come 

do'waitfor  ^up  out  of  the  River,  they  saluted  them  saying.  We 

''ll^thZare    «?'6  ministrinq  Spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  those 

'Z%Z"^that  shall  he  Heirs  of  Salvation.     Thus  they  went 

along  towards  the  Gate,  now  you  must  note  that  the 

City  stood  upon  a  mighty  hill,  but  the  Pilgrims 

went  up  that  hill  tvith  ease,  because  they  had  these 

two  men  to  lead  them  up  by  the  Arms  ;  also  they 

pufoffZr-  had  left  their  Mortal  Garments  behind  them  in  the 

t'diti/.         River;  for  though  they  went  in   with    them,  they 

'  To  the  7th  edit,  this  reference  *  '  Avas   in   a   muse,'    2nd  and 

is  to  Psal.  33.  4;)  ;  after  that  the      sub.  edits. 

reference    is    omitted,    probably  '  Quoted  Isa.  40.  2.  in  all  the 

from  finding  that  it  was  not  the       edits. 

right  Psalm.  ''  '  up,"  omitted  in  Jnd  and  sub. 

edits. 


€f)t  ^ilgnmsf  progiTSJiS*  i89 

came  out  without  them.  They  therefore  went  up 
here  with  much  agility  and  speed,  though  the 
foundation  upon  which  the  City  was  framed  was 
higher  than  the  Clouds.  They  therefore  went  up 
through  the  Regions  of  the  Air,  sweetly  talking  as 
they  went,  being  comforted,  because  they  safely 
got  over  the  River,  and  had  such  glorious  Com- 
panions to  attend  them. 

The    talk    they   had    with    the    shining    Ones, 
was  about  the  Glory  of  the  place,  who  told  them, 
that  the  beauty,  and  glory  of  it  was  inexpressible. 
There,  said  they,  is  the  Mount  Siou,  the  Heavenly 
Jertcsalem,  the  innumerable  company  of  Angels,  and  23%^^'  ^^' 
the  Spirits   of  Just   men  made   perfect:    You   are  ^^^  In- 
going  now,   said    they,    to   the  Paradice  of  God, 
wherein  you  shall  see  the  Tree  of  Life,  and  eat  of 
the   never-fading   fruits   thereof:    And   when  you 
come  there  you  shall  have  white  Robes  given  you, 
and  your  walk  and  talk  shall  be  every  day  with  the 
King,  even  all  the  days  of  Eternity.      There  you 'Rev.  21. 1. 
shall  not  see  again,  such  things  as  you  saw  when 
you  were  in  the  lower  Region  upon  the  Earth,  to 
wit,  sorrow,  sickness,  affliction,  and  death,  for  the 
fo7'mer  tlimgs  are  passed  away.     You  are  going  now 
to  Abrahamy  to  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  to  the  Pro-  {gais'u*' 
phets  ;  men  that  God  hath  taken  away  f\^om  the  evil 
to  come,  and  that  are  now  resting  upon  their  Beds, 
each  one  walking  in  his  righteousness.     The  men 
then   asked.  What  must  we  do  in  the  holy  place  ? 
To  whom  it  was  answered,  You  must  there  receive 
the   "comfort  of  all  your  toil,  and  have  joy  for  all 
your  sorrow  ;   you  must  reap  what  you  have  sown, 
even  the  fruit  of  all  your  Prayers  and  Tears,  andoai.  e.  7- 


*  The  1st  edit,  refers  to  Rev.  ^  'Isa.  65.  14,'  in  all  the  edits. 

21.  1  ;  the  2nd  to  the  7th  to  22.  It  should  be  ver.  l7. 
1  ;  and  the  sub.  edits,  to  Rev.  22.  ''  '  comforts,'     8th     and     sub. 

7  ;  but  probably  Rev.  22.  ver.  4  edits. 
and  5  were  intended. 


190 


Clje  ^ailgnmsi  ^arogressJ* 


Now,  now  look  how  the  holy  Pilgrims  ride, 
Clouds  are  their  Chariots,  Angels  are  their  Guide  : 
Who  would  not  here  for  him  all  Hazards  run, 
'I  hat  thus  provides  for  his  wlien  this  World's  done  ■ 


Copied  from  the  8th  edition,  1682. 


[In  the  13th  and  many  subsequent  editions  this  cut 
was  substituted  by  one  representing  the  pilgrims 
in  distress,  wading  through  the  river  ;  yet  the 
above  verse  was  continued  under  it  !  !] 


€i)t  ^3iIg:r(m£S  ^rogitsfs;^  i9i 

sufferings  for  the  King  by  the  way.  In  that  place 
you  must  wear  Crowns  of  Gold,  and  enjoy  the  per- 
petual sight  and  Visions  of  the  Hoi?/  One,  for  ^f/^ere  i  Joh.  3. 2. 
i/oii  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  There  also  you  shall 
serve  him  continually  with  praise,  with  shouting 
and  thanksgiving,  whom  you  desired  to  serve  in 
the  World,  though  with  much  difficulty,  because  of 
the  infirmity  of  your  flesh.  There  your  eyes  shall 
be  delighted  with  seeing,  and  your  ears  with  hear- 
ing, the  pleasant  voice  of  the  mighty  One.  There 
you  shall  enjoy  your  friends  again,  that  are^  got 
thither  before  you ;  and  there  you  shall  with  joy 
receive,  even  every  one  that  follows  into  the  Holy 
Place  after  you.  There  also  you  shall  be  cloathed 
with  Glory  and  Majesty,  and  put  into  an  equipage 
fit  to  ride  out  with  the  King  of  Glory.  When  he 
shall  come  with  sound  of  Trumpet  in  the  Clouds,  as 
upon  the  wings  of  the  Wind,  you  shall  come  with 
him  ;  and  when  he  shall  sit  upon  the  Throne  of  iThess.4. 
Judgement,  you  shall  sit  by  him  ;  yea,  and  when  he  Jude  'u.' 
shall  pass  Sentence  upon  all  the  workers  of  In- icoi/6,'2,3. 
iquity,  let  them  be  Angels  or  Men,  you  also  shall 
have  a  voice  in  that  Judgement,  because  they  were 
his  and  your  Enemies.  Also  when  he  shall  again 
return  to  the  City,  you  shall  go  too,  with  sound  of 
Trumpet,  and  be  ever  with  him. 

Now  while  they  were  thus  drawing  towards  the 
Gate,  behold  a  company  of  the  Heavenly  Host 
came  out  to  meet  them  :  To  whom  it  was  said,  by 
the  other  two  shining  Ones,  These  are  the  men  that 
have  loved  our  Lord,  when  they  were  in  the  World; 
and  that  have  left  all  for  his  holy  Name,  and  he 
hath  sent  us  to  fetch  them,  and  we  have  brought 
them  thus  far  on  their  desired  Journey  ;  that  they 
may  go  in  and  look  their  Redeemer  in  the  face  with 
joy.     Then  the  Heavenly  Host  gave  a  great  shout, 

'  '  are  gone,'  2nd  and  sub. 


192 


€\n  |3ilgnmsi  ^rogrfssi* 


Revel.  19. 


sajn'ng,  Blessed  are  they  that  are  called  to  the  Marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb  : 

^  '  There  came  out  also  at  this  time  to  meet  them, 
'  several  of  the  Kings  Trumpeters,  cloathed  in  white 
'  and  shining  Rayment,  who  with  melodious  noises, 
'  and  loud,  made  even  the  Heavens  to  eccho  with 
'  their  sound.  These  Trumpeters  saluted  Christian 
'  and  his  Fellow  with  ten  thousand  welcomes  from 
'  the  world  :  And  this  they  did  with  shouting,  and 
'  sound  of  Trumpet. 

'  This  done,  they  compassed  them  round  on  every 
side  ;  some  went  before,  some  behind,  and  some  on 
the  right  hand,  some  on  the  left  (as  'twere  to  guard 
them  through  the  upper  Regions)  continually 
sounding  as  they  went,  with  melodious  noise,  in 
notes  on  high  ;  so  that  the  very  sight  was  to  them 
that  could  behold  it,  as  if  Heaven  it  self  was  come 
down  to  meet  them.  Thus  therefore  they  walked 
on  together,  and  as  they  walked,  ever  and  anon, 
these  Trumpeters,  even,  with  joyful  sound,  would, 
by  mixing  their  Musick,  with  looks  and  gestures, 
still  sionifie  to  Christian  and  his  Brother,  how  wel- 
come  they  were  into  their  company,  and  with  what 
gladness  they  came  to  meet  them  :  And  now  were 
these  two  men,  as  'twere,  in  Heaven,  before  they 
came  at  it ;  being  swallowed  up  with  the  sight  of 
Angels,  and  with  hearing  of  their  melodious  notes. 
Here  also  they  had  the  City  it  self  in  view,  and 
they  thought  they  heard  all  the  Bells  therein  to 
ring,  to  welcome  them  thereto  :  but  above  all,  the 
warm,  and  joyful  thoughts  that  they  had  about 
their  own  dwelling  there,  with  such  company,  and 
that  for  ever  and  ever.  Oh  !  by  what  tongue  or 
pen  can  their  glorious  joy  be  expressed:'  ^and 
thus  th(!y  came  up  to  the  Gate. 


'  Su  lav  as  marked  with  in- 
verted connnas  first  inserted  in 
the  2nd,    and    continued  in   all 


tlic  sub.  edits. 

*  'and,'  omitted  in  (he  3rd  and 
sub.  edits. 


€l)t  ^ilgiims!  ^^rogitssss*  193 

Now  when  they  were  come  up  to  the  Gate,  there 
was  written  over  it,  in  Letters  of  Gold,  Blessed  «r6^  Re.  22.  u. 
thei/  that  do  his  co}U7?iandments,  that  theij  may  have 
right  to  the  Tree  of  life  ;  and  may  enter  in  through 
the  Gates  into  the  City. 

Then  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  the  shining  men 
bid  them  call  at  the  Gate,  the  which  when  they  did, 
some  from  above  looked  over  the  Gate ;  to  wit, 
Enoch,  Moses,  and  Elijah,  etc.  to  whom  it  was  said, 
These  Pilgrims,  are  come  from  the  City  o^  Destruc- 
tion, for  the  love  that  they  bear  to  the  King  of  this 
place:  and  then  the  Pilgrims  gave  in  unto  them 
each  man  his  Certificate,  which  they  had  received 
in  the  beginning  ;  Those  therefore  were  carried  in 
to  the  King,  who  when  he  had  read  them,  said. 
Where  are  the  men  ?  To  whom  it  was  answered. 
They  are  standing  without  the  Gate,  the  King  then 
commanded  to  open  the  Gate,  That  the  righteous  isa.  26  2. 
Nation,  said  he,  that  keepeth  Truth  may  enter  in. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  these  two  men  went 
in  at  the  Gate  ;  and  loe,  as  they  entered,  they  were 
transfigured,  and  they  had  Raiment  put  on  that 
shone  like  Gold.  There  was  also  that  met  them 
with  Harps  and  Crowns,  and  gave  them  to  them  ; 
the  ^Harp  to  praise  withall,  and  the  Crowns  in 
token  of  honour  ;  Then  I  heard  in  my  Dream  that 
all  the  Bells  in  the  City  Rang  *' again'  for  joy; 
and  that  it  was  said  unto  them,  Enter  ye  into  the  joy 
of  your  Lord.  I  also  heard  the  men  themselves, 
^say,  that  they  sang  with  a  loud  voice,  saying. 
Blessing,  Honour,  Glory  and  Power,  be  to  him  that  Rev. 5. 13, 
sitteth  upon  the  Throne,  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever  and 
ever. 

T^ow  just  as  the  Gates  were  opened  to  let  in  the 
men,  I  looked  in  after  them  ;  and  behold,  the  City 

^  'the    Harps,'    8th   and   sub.  *  2nd  and  sub  edits, 

edits.  "  '  say,'  omitted  in  the  8th  and 

sub.  edits. 


doe 

him  over. 


194  Cf)e  ^ilcrnms!  progres^si* 

shone  like  the  Sun,  the  Streets  also  were  paved  with 
Gold,  and  in  them  walked  many  men,  with  Crowns 
on  their  heads,  Palms  in  their  hands,  and  golden 
Harps  to  sing  praises  withall. 

There  were  also  of  them  that  had  wings,  and  they 
answered  one  another  without  intermission,  saying, 
Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  is  the  Lord.  And  after  that,  they 
shut  up  the  Gates  :  which  when  I  had  seen,  I 
wished  my  self  among  them. 

Now  while  I  was  gazing  upon  all  these  things,  I 
'i.jnomnce  tumed  mv  head  to  look  back,  and  saw  Iqnorance 

comes  up  to  i         T->  •  •  i  i  i 

the  River,  comc  up  to  thc  Kiver  side  ;  but  he  soon  got  over, 
and  that  without  half  that  difficulty  which  the  other 
two  men  met  with.     For  it  happened  that  there  was 

lllltl'Z''  then  ^in  that  place  one  Vai?i-hope  a  Ferry-man,  that 
with  his  Boat  helped  him  over  :  so  he,  as  the  other 
I  saw,  did  ascend  the  Hill  to  come  up  to  the  Gate, 
only  he  came  alone ;  neither  did  any  man  meet 
him  with  the  least  incouragement.  A\  hen  he  was 
come  up  to  the  Gate,  he  looked  up  to  the  writing 
that  was  above  ;  and  then  began  to  knock,  suppos- 
ing that  entrance  should  have  been  quickly  admi- 
nistered to  him  :  But  he  was  asked  by  the  men  that 
lookt  over  the  top  of  the  Gate,  Whence  came  you  ? 
and  what  would  ^you  have?  He  answered,  I  have  eat 
and  drank  in  the  presence  of  the  King,  and  he  has 
taught  in  our  Streets.  Then  they  asked  him  for 
his  Certificate,  that  they  might  go  in  and  shew  it  to 
the  King.  So  he  fumbled  in  his  bosom  for  one, 
and  found  none.  Then  said  they,  Have  you  none  ? 
But  the  man  answered  never  a  word.  So  the}'^ 
told  thc  King,  but  he  would  not  come  down  to  see 
him,  but  commanded  the  two  shining  Ones  that 
conducted  Christian  and  Hopeful  to  the  City,  to  go 
out  and  take /^?2orrt«c<?  and  bind  him  hand  and  foot, 

*  '  in  thc  place,'  7th  edit.  *  '  what  he  would  have,'  3rd  to 

'  First   inserted    in    the    Sith      7  th ;    restored   to   '  what   would 
edit.,  1  (;»2.  you  have,'  in  8th  and  sub. 


CI)e  ^^ilgnmsi  progresi^*  i95 

and  have  him  away.  Then  they  took  him  up,  and 
carried  him  through  the  air  to  the  door  that  I  saw 
in  the  side  of  the  Hill,  and  put  him  in  there.  Then 
I  saw  that  there  was  a  way  to  Hell,  even  from  the 
Gates  of  Heaven,  as  well  as  from  the  City  of  De- 
struction.    So  I  awoke,  and  behold  it  was  a  Dream. 


FINIS. 


19G  CI)f  ^ailffnmes  ^3rogrr5J£^» 


The  Conclusion. 

N07V  Reader,  I  have  told  my  Dream  to  thee  ; 
See  if  thou  canst  Interpret  it  to  me ; 
Or  to  thy  self,  or  Neighbour  :  but  take  heed 
Of  mis-interpreting  ;  for  that,  instead 
Of  doing  good,  will  but  thy  self  abuse  : 
lly  mis-interpreting  evil  insues. 

Take  heed  also,  that  thou  be  not  extrcam, 
In  playing  with  the  out-side  of  my  Dream  : 
Nor  let  my  figure,  or  similitude. 
Put  thee  into  a.  laughter  or  a  feud ; 
Leave  this  for  Boys  and  Fools ;  but  as  for  thee. 
Do  thou  the  substance  of  my  matter  see. 

Put  by  the  Curtains,  look  within  my  Vail ; 
Turn  up  my  Metaphors  and  do  not  Jail : 
There,  if  thou  seekest  them,  such  things  to  find, 
As  ivill  be  helpfuil  to  an  honest  mind. 

What  of  my  dross  thou  findest  (here,  he  bold 
To  throw  away,  but  yet  preserve  the  Gold. 
What  if  my  Gold  be  wrapped  up  in  Ore? 
None  throws  away  the  Apple  for  the  Core : 
But  if  thou  slialt  cast  all  away  as  vain, 
I  know  not  but  'twill  make  me  Dream  a*'ain, 

T  II  E    E  N  I). 


THE 

Pilgrim's    Progrefs. 

FROM 

THIS     WORLD 

TO 

That   which    is    to   come 

The  Second    Part. 

Delivered  under  the  Similitude  of  a 

DREAM 

Wherein  is  fet  forth 
The  manner  of  the  fetting  out  of  Chri- 
stians Wife  and  Children,  their 
Dangerous    JOURNEY, 
AND 
Safe  Arrival  at  the  Desired  Country. 

By  JOHN  BUNYAN, 

I  have  ujed  Similitudes,  Hof.  12.10. 


LONDON, 

Printed  for  Nathaniel  Ponder  at  the  Peacock 

in  the  Poultry,  near  the  Church,   i684. 


P  2 


THE 

Authors  Way  of  Sending  forth 

H  I  S 

Second      Part 

Of  the 

PILGRIM. 


GO,  HOW  my  little  Book,  to  every  place, 
Where  my  first  Pilgrim,  has  hut  sheivn  his  Face 
Call  at  their  door  :  If  any  say,  who's  there  ? 
Then  answer  thou,  Christiana  is  here. 
If'  they  bid  thee  come  in,  then  enter  thou 
With  all  thy  boys.     And  then,  as  thou  know'st  how. 
Tell  who  they  are,  also  from  whence  they  came. 
Perhaps  they'l  know  them,  hy  their  looks,  or  name  : 
But  if  they  should  not,  ask  them  yet  again 
If  formerly  they  did  not  Entertain 
One  Christian  a  Pilgrim;  If  they  say 
They  did:  And  teas  delighted  in  his  way  : 


202 


Then  let  them  know  that  those  related  were 
Unto  him:   Yea,  his  Wife  and  Children  are. 

Tell  them  that  they  have  left  their  House  and  Home, 
Are  turned  Pilgrims,  seek  a  World  to  come: 
That  they  have  met  with  hardshijjs  in  the  way. 
That  they  do  meet  with  troubles  night  and  Day  ; 
That  they  have  trod  on  Serpents,  fought  with  Devils, 
Have  also  over-come  a  many  evils. 
Yea  tell  them  also  of  the  next,  who  have 
Of  love  to  Pilgrimage  been  stout  and  brave 
Defenders  of  that  way,  and  hoiv  they  still 
Refuse  this  World,  to  do  their  Fathers  will. 

Go,  tell  them  also  of  those  dainty  things, 
That  Pilgrimage  unto  the  Pilgrim  brings. 
Let  them  acquainted  be,  too,  hotu  they  are       , 
Beloved  of  their  King,  under  his  care ; 
What  goodly  MansionsybT"  them  he  provides. 
The  they  meet  with  rough  Winds,  and  swelling  tides. 
How  brave  a  calm  they  will  enjoy  at  last, 
Who  to  their  Lord,  and  by  his  ways  holdfast. 

Perhaps  with  heart  and  hand  they  will  embrace 
Thee,  as  they  did  my  firstling,  and  will  Grace 
Thee,  and  thy  fellows,  with  such  chear  and  fair, 
As  shew  will,  they  of  Pilgrims  lovers  are. 


1    Object 

But  how  if  they  will  not  believe  of  me 
That  I  am  truly  thine,  cause  some  there  be 
That  Counterfeit  the  Pilgrim,  and  his  name. 
Seek  by  disguise  to  seem  the  very  same. 
And  by  that  means  have  wrought  themselves  into 
The  hands  and  Houses  of  I  knoiv  not  who. 


203 
Answer. 

'  Tis  true,  some  have  of  late,  to  Counterfeit 
My  Pilgrim,  to  their  own,  my  Title  set ; 
Yea  others,  half  my  name  and  Title  too  ; 
Have  stitched  to  their  Booh,  to  mahe  them  do ; 
But  yet  they  hy  their  Features  do  declare 
Themselves  not  mine  to  he,  whose  ere  they  are. 

If  such  thou  meetst  with,  then  thine  only  way 
Before  them  all,  is,  to  say  out  thy  say, 
In  thine  own  native  Language,  which  no  man 
Now  useth,  nor  with  ease  dissemble  can. 
Ij  after  all,  they  still  of  you  shall  doubt, 
TJiinking  that  you  like  Gipsies  go  about, 
In  Naughty-wise  the  Countrey  to  defile. 
Or  that  you  seek  good  People  to  beguile 
With  things  unwarantable :  Send  for  me 
And  I  ivill  Testifie  you  Pilgrims  be  ; 
Yea,  I  will  Testifie  that  only  you 
My  Pilgrims  are:   And  that  alone  will  do. 

2.   Object. 

But  yet,  perhaps,  1  may  enquire  for  him 
Of  those  that  wish  him  Damned  life  and  limb. 
What  shall  I  do,  when  I  at  such  a  door. 
For  Pilgrims  ask,  and  they  shall  rage  the  more  ? 

Answer. 

Fright  not  thy  self  my  Book,  for  such  Bugbears 
'Are  nothing  else  but  ground  for  groundless  fears  : 
My  Pilgrims  Book  has  traveVd  Sea  and  Land, 
Yet  could  I  never  come  to  understand, 


204 


That  it  was  slighted,  or  turnd  out  of  Door 
By  any  Kingdom,  were  they  Rich  or  Poor. 

In  France  and  Flanders  where  men  kill  each  other 
My  Pilgrim  is  esteemed  a  Friend,  a  Brother. 

In  Holland  too,  'tis  said,  as  I  am  told, 
My  Pilgrim  is  with  some,  ivorth  more  than  Gold. 

Highlanders,  and  Wild-Irish  can  agree. 
My  Pilgrim  should  familiar  with  them  he. 

'Tis  in  New-England  under  such  advance. 
Receives  there  so  much  loving  Countenance, 
As  to  he  Trim'd,  uew-ClotKd,  and  Deck't  with  Gems, 
That  it  may  shew  its  Features,  and  its  limbs, 
Yet  more,  so  comely  doth  my  Pilgrim  walk, 
That  of  him  thousands  daily  Sing  and  talk. 

If  you  draw  nearer  home,  it  will  appear 
My  Pilgrim  knows  no  ground,  of  shame,  or  fear  ; 
City,  and  Countrey  will  him  entertain. 
With  Welcome  Pilgrim.      Yea,  they  cant  refrain 
From  smiling,  if  my  Pilgrim  he  hut  hy, 
Or  shews  his  head  in  any  Company. 

Brave  Galants  do  my  Pilgrim  hug  and  love. 
Esteem  it  much,  yea,  value  it  above 
Things  of  a  greater  hulk,  yea,  with  delight. 
Say  my  Larks-leg  is  better  then  a  Kite. 

Young  Ladys,  and  young  Gentle-tvomen  too, 
Bo  no  small  kindness  to  my  Pilgrim  shew ; 
Their  Cabinets,  their  Bosoms,  and  their  Hearts 
My  Pilgrim  has,  'cause  he  to  them  imparts. 
His  pretty  riddles,  in  such  wholsome  straines 
As  yields  them  profit  double  to  their  paines 
Of  reading.      Yea,  I  think  I  may  be  hold 
To  say  some  prize  him  far  above  their  Gold. 

The  very  Children  that  do  walk  the  street. 
If  they  do  but  my  Holy  Pilgrim  meet, 


205 

Salute  him  will,  will  wish  him  icell  and  say, 
He  is  the  only  Stripling  o/"  the  Day. 

They  that  have  never  seen  him,  yet  admire 
What  thei/  have  heard  of  him,  and  much  desire 
To  have  his  Company,  and  hear  him  tell 
Those  Pilgrim  storyes  which  he  knows  so  well. 

Yea,  some  who  did  not  love  him  at  the  first, 
But  caVd  him  Fool,  and  Noddy,  say  they  must 
Now  they  have  seen  and  heard  him,  him  commend. 
And  to  those  tohom  they  love,  they  do  him  send. 

Wherefore  my  Second  Part,  thou  needst  not  he 
Afraid  to  shew  thy  Head :  None  can  hurt  thee, 
That  wish  hut  well  to  him,  that  went  before, 
'  Cause  thou  com^st  after  with  a  Second  store, 
Of  things  as  good,  as  rich,  as  profitable, 
For  Young,  for  Old,  for  Stay  ring  and  for  stable. 

3   Object. 

But  some  there  be  that  say,  he  laughs  too  loud  ; 
And  some  do  say  his  Head  is  in  a  Cloud. 
Some  say,  his  Words  and  Storys  are  so  dark. 
They  know  not  how,  by  them,  to  find  his  mark. 

Answer. 

One  may  (I  think  J  say,  both  his  laughs  and  cryes, 
May  ivell  be  guest  at  by  his  watry  Eyes. 
Some  things  are  of  that  Mature  as  to  make 
Ones  faricie  Chechle  while  his  Heart  doth  ake, 
When  Jacob  saw  his  Rachel  with  the  Sheep, 
He  did  at  the  same  time  both  kiss  and  weep. 

Whereas  some  say  a  Cloud  is  in  his  Head, 
That  doth  but  shew  how  Wisdom's  covered 


206 


With  its  own  mantles :  And  to  stir  the  mind 
To  a  search  after  what  it  fain  wovld find, 
Things  that  seem  to  he  hid  in  ivords  obscure, 
Do  but  the  Godly  mind  the  more  alure  ; 
To  study  what  those  Sayings  should  contain. 
That  speak  to  us  in  such  a  Cloudy  strain. 

I  also  hnow,  a  dark  Similitude 
Will  on  the  Fancie  more  it  self  intrude, 
And  will  stick  faster  in  the  Heart  and  Head, 
Then  things  from  Similies  not  borrowed. 

Wherefore,  my  Book,  let  no  discouragement 
Hinder  thy  travels.     Behold,  thou  art  sent 
To  Friends  not  foes  :  to  Friends  that  will  give  place 
To  thee,  thy  Pilgrims,  and  thy  words  imbrace. 

Besides,  what  my  first  Pilgrim  left  conceaTd, 
Thou  my  brave  Second  Pilgrim,  hast  reveaCd 
What  Christian  left  locKt  up  and  went  his  way  ; 
Sweet  Christiana  opens  xoith  her  Key. 

4.    Object. 

But  some  love  not  the  method  of  your  first, 
Romance  they  count  it,  throw't  away  as  dust, 
If  I  should  meet  with  such,  what  should  I  say? 
Must  I  slight  them  as  they  slight  me,  or  nay  ? 

Answer. 

My  Christiana,  if  ivith  such  thou  meet. 
By  all-means  in  all  Loving-wise,  them  greet ; 
Render  them  not  reviling  for  revile ; 
But  if  they  frown,  I  prethee  on  them  smile, 
Ferhaps  ^tis  Nature,  or  some  ill  report 
Has  made  them  thus  dispise,  or  thus  retort. 


207 

Some  love  no  Cheese,  some  love  no  Fish,  and  some 
Love  not  their  Friends,  nor  their  own  House  or  home 
Some  start  at  Pigg,  slight  Chicken,  love  not  Fowl, 
More  then  they  love  a  Cuckow  or  an  Owl, 
Leave  such,  my  Christiana,  to  their  choice, 
Jnd  seek  those,  who  to  find  thee  will  rejoyce  ; 
By  no  means  strive,  hut  in^  all  humble  wise, 
Present  thee  to  them  in  thy  Pilgrims  guise. 

Go  then,  my  little  Book  and  sheiv  to  all 
That  entertain,  and  hid  thee  welcome  shall. 
What  thou  shalt  keep  close,  shut  up  from  the  rest. 
And  wish  what  thou  shalt  shew  them  may  he  hlest 
To  them  for  good,  may  make  them  chuse  to  he 
Pilgrims,  hetter  by  far,  then  thee  or  me. 

Go  then,  I  say,  tell  all  men  who  thou  art, 
Say,  I  am  Christiana,  and  my  part 
Is  now  with  my  four  Sons  to  tell  you  what 
It  is  for  men  to  take  a  Pilgrims  lot; 

Go  also  tell  them  who,  and  what  they  he. 
That  now  do  go  on  Pilgrimage  with  thee ; 
Say,  here's  my  neighbour  Mercy,  she  is  one. 
That  has  long-time  with  me  a  Pilgrim  gone  : 
Come  see  her  in  her  Virgin  Face,  and  learn 
'Twixt  Idle  ones,  and  Pilgrims  to  discern. 
Yea  let  young  Damsels  learn  of  her  to  prize. 
The  World  which  is  to  come,  in  any  wise ; 
When  little  Tripping  Maidens  follow  God, 
And  leave  old  doting  Sinners  to  his  Rod ; 
'Tis  like  those  Days  wherein  the  young  ones  crVd 
Hosanah  to  whom  old  ones  did  deride. 

Next  tell  them  of  old  Honest,  who  you  found 
With  his  whit  hairs  treading  the  Pilgrims  ground  ; 

'  '  but  in  humble  wise,'  2nd  and  sub.  edits. 


208 

Yea,  tell  them  how  plain-hearted  this  man  was, 
How  after  his  good  Lord  he  bare  his  Cross  : 
Perhaps  with  some  gray  Head  this  may  prevail, 
With  Christ  to  fall  in  Love,  and  Sin  bewail. 

Tell  th'em  also  how  Master  Fearing  went 
On  Pilgrimage,  and  how  the  time  he  spent 
In  Solitariness,  with  Fears  and  Cries, 
And  hoio  at  last,  he  icon  the  Joyfid  Prize. 
He  was  a  good  man,  though  much  down  in  Spirit, 
He  is  a  good  Man,  and  doth  Life  inherit. 

Tell  them  of  3Iaster  Feeblemind  also, 
Who,  not  before,  but  still  behind  would  go  ; 
Shew  them  also  how  he  had  like  been  slain, 
And  how  one  Great-Heart  did  his  life  regain  : 
This  man  was  true  of  Heart,  tho  iveak  hi  grace, 
One  might  true  Godliness  read  in  his  Face. 

Then  tell  them  of  Master  Ready-to-halt, 
A  Man  loith  Crutches,  but  much  without  fault  : 
Tell  them  hoiv  Master  Feeblemind,  and  he 
Did  love,  and  in  Opinions  much  agree. 
And  let  all  know,  tho  weakness  was  their  chance 
Yet  sometimes  one  could  Sing,  the  other  Dance. 

Forget  not  Master  Valiant-fbr-the-Truth, 
That  Man  of  courage,  tho  a  very  Youth. 
Tell  every  one  his  Spirit  zvas  so  stout, 
JVo  Man  could  ever  make  him  face  about. 
And  how  Great-Heart,  and  he  coidd  not  forbear, 
But  put  down  Doubting  Castle,  slay  Despair. 

Overlook  not  Master  Despondancie, 
Nor  Much-a-fraid  his  Daughter,  tho  they  ly 
Under  such  Mantles  as  may  make  them  look 
(  With  some)  as  if  their  God  had  them,  forsook. 
They  softly  went,  but  sure,  and  at  the  end. 
Found  thai  the  Lord  o/'PiJorims  was  their  Friend. 


209 

When  thou  hast  told  the  World  of  all  these  things, 
Then  turn  about,  my  hook,  and  touch  these  strings ; 
Which,  if  but  touched  will  such  Musick  make, 
Thefl  make  a  Cripple  dance,  a  Gyant  quake. 

These  Riddles  that  lie  coucKt  within  thy  breast. 
Freely  propound,  expound :  and  for  the  rest 
Of  thy  misterious  lines,  let  them  remain, 
For  those  whose  nimble  Fancies  shall  them  gain. 

Now  may  this  little  Book  a  blessing  be, 
To  those  that  love  this  little  Book  and  me, 
And  may  its  buyer  have  no  cause  to  say, 
His  Money  is  hut  lost  or  thrown  aioay. 
Yea  may  this  Second  Pilgrim  yield  that  Fruit ; 
As  may  with  each  good  VW^v'nws  f ancle  sute, 
And  may  it  perswade  some  that  go  astray, 
To  turn  their  Foot  and  Heart  to  the  right  way. 


Is  the  Hearty  Prayer 


of  the  Aiitlior, 


John  Bunyan. 


THE 


Pilgrims  Progress 


In  the  Similitude  of  a 


DREAM. 


The  Second  Part. 


Courteous  Companions,  some-time  since,  to  tell 
you  my  Dream  that  I  had  of  Christian  the  Pilgrim, 
and  of  his  dangerous  Journey  toward  the  Celestial 
Countrey,  was  pleasant  to  me,  and  profitable  to 
you.  I  told  you  then  also  what  I  saw  concerning- 
his  Wife  and  Children,  and  how  unwilling  they 
were  to  go  with  him  on  Pilgrimage  :  Insomuch 
that  he  was  forced  to  go  on  his  Progress  without 
them,  for  he  durst  not  run  the  danger  of  that 
destruction  which  he  feared  would  come  by  staying 
with  them,  in  the  City  of  Destruction  :  Wherefore 
as  I  then  shewed  you,  he  left  them  and  departed. 

IN^ow  it  hath  so  happened,  thorough  the  Multi- 
plicity of  Business,  that  I  have  been  much  hindred, 
and  kept  back  from  my  wonted  Travels  into  those 
Parts  whence  he  went,  and  so  could  not  till  now 
obtain  an  opportunity  to  make  further  enquiry  after 
whom  he  left  behind,  that  I  might  give  you  an 


212  C!)f  ^eronti  part  of 

account  of"  them.  But  liaving  had  some  concerns 
that  way  of  late,  I  went  down  again  thitherward. 
Now  having  taken  up  my  Lodgings  in  a  Wood 
about  a  mile  off  the  place,  as  I  slept  I  dreamed 
again. 

And  as  I  was  in  my  Dream,  behold,  an  aged  Gen- 
tleman came  by  where  I  lay  ;  and  because  he  was 
to  go  some  part  of  the  wa}'  that  I  was  travelling, 
me  thought  I  got  up  and  went  with  him.  So  as  we 
walked,  and  as  Travellers  usually  do,  I  was  as  if  we 
fell  into  discourse,  and  our  talk  happened  to  be 
about  Christian  and  his  Travels  :  For  thus  I  began 
with  the  Old-man. 

Sir,  said  I,  what  Town  is  that  there  below,  that 
lieth  on  the  left  hand  of  our  ivay  f 

Then  said  Mr,  Sagasitij,  for  that  was  his  name, 
It  is  the  City  of  Destruction,  a  populous  place,  but 
possessed  with  a  very  ill  conditioned  and  idle  sort 
of  People. 

/  thouifht  that  was  that  City,  quoth  I  /  went  once 
mi)  self  throuffh  that  Town,  and  therefore  know  that 
this  report  you  give  of  it,  is  true. 

Sag.  Too  true,  I  wish  I  could  speak  truth  in 
speaking  better  of  them  that  dwell  therein. 

Well  Sir,  quoth  I,  Then  I  perceive  you  to  be  a  well 
meaning  man :  and  so  one  that  takes  pleasure  to  hear 
and  tell  <f  that  which  is  good ;  pray  did  you  never 
hear  what  happened  to  a  man  sometime  ago  in  this 
Town  {whose  name  was  Christian)  that  went  on  Pil- 
grimage up  towards  the  higher  Regions  f 

Sag.  Hear  of  him  !  Ay,  and  I  also  heard  of  the 
Molestations,  Troubles,  Wars,  Captivities,  Cries, 
Groans,  Frights  and  Fears  that  he  met  with,  and 
had  in  his  Journey.  Besides,  I  must  tell  you,  all 
our  Countrey  rings  of  him,  there  are  but  few 
Houses  tliat  have  heard  of  liim  and  his  doings,  but 
have  sought  after  and  got  the  Records  of  liis  Pil- 
grimage ;  yea,    I   tlnnk    1   may  say.  That   that  his 


Cf)e  pilgn'msf  progress!*  213 

hazzardous  Journey,  has  got  a  many  wel-wishers  to 
his  ways  :  For  though  when  he  was  here,  he  was  ^™;f 
Fool  in  every  mans  mouth,  yet  now  he  is  gon,  he  '^^^'"J^^^'^l^. 
highly  commended  of  all.     For,  'tis  said  he  lives 'j;°^,^«'^«^^,j^ 
bravely  where  he  is:  Yea  many  of  thern  that  are ''"^^«''^ ''«'■< 
resolved  never  to  run  his  hazzards,  yet  have  their 
mouths  water  at  his  gains. 

They  may,  quoth  I,  luell  think,  if  they  think  any 
thing  that  is  true,  that  he  liveth  well  where  he  is,  for 
he  now  lives  at  and  in  the  Fountain  of  Life,  and  has 
ivhat  he  has  without  labour  and  sorrow,  for  there  is  no 
grief  mixed  therewith/^ 

Sag.  Talk  !  The  People  talk  strangely  about  him. 
Some  say,  that  he  now  walks  in  White,  that  he  has  Rev.  3. 4. 
a  Chain  of  Gold  about  his  Neck,  that   he   has  a 
Crown  of  Gold,  beset  with  Pearls,  upon  his  head  :  chap.  e.  n. 
Others  say  that  the  shining  ones  that  sometimes 
shewed  themselves  to  him  in  his  Journey,  are  be- 
come his  Companions,  and  that  he  is  as  familiar 
with  them  in  the  place  where  he  is,  as  here  one 
Neighbour   is   with    another.     Besides,    'tis   confi- 
dently affirmed  concerning  him,  that  the  King  of 
the   place  where    he   is,  has   bestowed  upon   him  zec.  3. 7. 
already  a  very  rich  and  pleasant  Dwelling  at  Court, 
and   that  he  every  day  eateth  and   drinketh,  and  Luke  u.  15. 
walketh,  and  talketh  with  him,  and  receiveth  of  the 
smiles  and  favours  of  him  that  is  Judg  of  all  there. 
Moreover,  it  is  expected  of  some  that  his  Prince, 
the  Lord  of  that  Countrey,  will  shortly  come  into 
these  parts,  and  will  know  the  reason,  if  they  can 
give  any,  why  his  Neighbours  set  so  little  by  him, 
and  had  him  so  much  in  derision  when  they  per-  J^de  i4. 15. 
ceived  that  he  would  be  a  Pilgrim. 

For  they  say,  that  now  he  is  so  in  the  affections  'Khi^^um" 
of  his  Prince,  and  that  his  Soveraign  is  so  niuch  ['/^^^^g^^^^'^^;, , 

t  In  1728,  these  words  were  '  Added  in  an   edition  dated 

here  introduced  :  '  But  pray,  what      1687, 
talk  have  the  people  about  him  1 ' 

Q 


214  mn  ^ewntr  ^art  of 

concerned  with  the  Indignities  that  were  cast  upon 
Christian  when  he  became  a  Pilgrim,  that  he  will 
look  upon  all  as  if  done  unto  himself;  and  no  mar- 
Luke  10. 16.  vel,  for  'twas  for  the  love  that  he  had  to  his  Prince, 
that  he  ventured  as  he  did. 

I  dare  say,  quoth  I,  I  am  glad  on  it ;  lam  cjlad 
Rev.  14. 13.  ybr  the  poor  mans  sake,  for  that  now  he  has  rest  from 
his  labour,  and  for  that  he  now  reapeth  the  benefit  of 
his  Tears  ivith  Joy  :  and  for  that  he  has  got  beyond  the 
5.^."  " '     Gun-shot  of  his  Enemies,  and  is  out  of  the  reach  of 
them   that  hate  him.     I  also   am  glad  for    that   a 
Rumour  of  these  things  is  noised  abroad  in  this  Conn- 
trey  :    Who  can  tell  but  that  it  may  ivork  some  good 
effect  on  some  that  are  left  behind  f     But,  pray  Sir, 
while  it  is  fresh  in  my  mind,  do  you  hear  any  thing  of 
his   Wife  and  Children  f  poor  hearts,  I  wonder  in 
my  mind  what  they  do  ! 
•ooodTid-        Saq.  Who  !    Christiana,  and    her  Sons  !      They 
K-^irlVf"are  like  to  do  as  well  as  did  Christian  himself,  foV 
Trtnf^'"     though  they  all   plaid   the   Fool   at   the   first,   and 
would  by  no  means  be   perswaded  by  either  the 
tears  or  entreaties  of  Christian,  yet  second  thoughts 
have  wrought  wonderfully  with  them;   so  they  have 
packt  up  and  are  also  gone  after  him. 

Better  and  better,  quoth  I.  But  what !  Wife  and 
Children  and  allf 

Sag.  'Tis  true,  I  can  give  you  an  account  of  the 
matter,  for  1  was  upon  the  spot  at  the  instant,  and 
was  throughly  acquainted  with  the  whole  affair. 

Then,  said  I,  a  man  it  seems  may  report  it  for  a 
truth  f 

Sag.  You  need  not  fear  to  affirm  it,  I  mean  that 
they  are  all  gon  on  Pilgrimage,  both  the  good 
Woman  and  her  four  Boys.  And  being  we  are,  as 
I  perceive,  going  some  considerable  way  together,  I 
will  give  you  an  account  of  the  whole  of  the  matter. 
This  Christiana  (for  that  was  her  name  from  the 

»  Inserted  in  1687. 


€t)t  ^ilgnmsJ  ^^rosresisi,  215 

day  that  she  with  her  Children  betook  themselves 
to  a  Pilgrims  Life,)  after  her  Husband  was  gone  over  gfg^nfyT 
the  River,  and  she  could  hear  of  him  no  more,  her 
thoughts  began  to  work  in  her  mind  ;  First,  for 
that  she  had  lost  her  Husband,  and  for  that  the 
loving  bond  of  that  Relation  was  utterly  broken 
betwixt  them.  For  you  know,  said  he  to  me, 
nature  can  do  no  less  but  entertain  the  living  with 
many  a  heavy  Cogitation  in  the  remembrance  of  the 
loss  of  loving  Relations.  This  therefore  of  her  Hus- 
band did  cost  her  many  a  Tear.  But  this  was  not  Mark  this 
all,  tor  Christiana  did  also  begm  to  consider  with  churies  to 
her  self,  whether  her  unbecoming  behaviour  to-  Rdatwm. 
wards  her  Husband,  was  not  one  cause  that  she 
saw  him  no  more,  and  that  in  such  sort  he  was 
taken  a  way  from  her.  And  upon  this,  came  into 
her  mind  hy  sivarms,  all  her  unkind,  unnatural,  and 
ungodly  Carriages  to  her  dear  Friend :  which  also 
clogged  her  Conscience,  and  did  load  her  with 
guilt.  She  was  moreover  much  broken  with  call- 
ing to  remembrance  the  restless  Groans,  brinish 
Tears  and  self-bemoanings  of  her  Husband,  and 
how  she  did  harden  her  heart  against  all  his  en- 
treaties, and  loving  perswasions  (of  her  and  her 
Sons)  to  go  with  him,  yea,  there  was  not  any  thing 
that  Christian  either  said  to  her,  or  did  before  her, 
all  the  while  that  his  burden  did  hang  on  his  back, 
but  it  returned  upon  her  like  a  flash  of  lightning, 
and  rent  the  Caul  of  her  Heart  in  sunder.  Specially 
that  bitter  out-cry  of  his,  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved,  l^^^f^^ 
did  ring  in  her  ears  most  dolefully. 

Then  said  she  to  her  Children,  Sons,  we  are  all 
undone.  I  have  sinned  away  your  Father,  and  he 
is  gone;  he  would  have  had  us  with  him;  but  I 
would"  not  go  my  self,  I  also  have  hindred  you  of 
Life,  With  that  the  Boys  fell  all  into  Tears,  and 
cryed  out  to  go  after  their  Father.  Oh  !  Said 
Christiana,  tliat  it  had  been  but  our  lot  to  go  with 

q2 


216 


€i)t  ^ttoixti  ^art  of 


James  1 
24,  25. 


Christiana's 
Dream 


him,  then  had  it  fared  well  with  us  beyond  what 
'tis  like  to  do  now\  For  tho'  I  formerly  foolishly 
imagin'd  concerning  the  Troubles  of  your  Father, 
that  they  proceeded  of  a  foolish  Fancy  that  he  had, 
or  for  that  he  was  over  run  with  Melancholy  Hu- 
2^'  mours  ;  yet  now  'twill  not  out  of  my  mind,  but  that 
they  sprang  from  another  cause,  to  wit,  for  that  the 
^Light  of  Light  was  given  him,  by  the  help  of 
w  hich,  as  I  perceive,  he  has  escaped  the  Snares  of 
Death.  Then  they  all  wept  again,  and  cr3^ed  out : 
Oh,  Wo,  worth  the  day. 

The  next  night,  Christiana  had  a  Dream,  and 
Luke  18. 13.  behold  she  saw  as  if  a  broad  Parchment  was  opened 
before  her  in  which  were  recorded  the  sum  of  her 
ways,  and  the  ^times,  as  she  thought,  lookt  ve^y 
black  upon  her.  Then  she  cried  out  aloud  in  her 
sleep,  Lord  have  Mercy  upon  me  a  Sinner^  and  the 
little  Children  heard  her. 

After  this  she  thought  she  saw  two  very  ill 
favoured  ones  standing  by  her  Bed-side,  and  saying. 
What  shall  we  do  with  this  Woman  f  For  she  cryes 
out  for  Mercy  waking  and  sleeping :  If  she  be  suffered 
to  go  on  as  she  begins,  we  shall  lose  her  as  we  have 
lost  her  Husband.  Wherefore  we  must  by  one 
way  or  other,  seek  to  take  her  off  from  the  thoughts 
of  what  shall  be  hereafter  :  else  all  the  World  can- 
not help  it,  but  she  will  become  a  Pilgrim. 

Now  she  awoke  in  a  great  Sweat,  also  a  tremb- 
ling was  upon  her,  but  after  a  while  she  fell  to 
sleeping  again.  And  then  she  thought  she  saw 
Christian  her  Husband  in  a  place  of  Bliss  among 
mmiy  Ijnmortals,  with  an  Ilaip  in  his  Hand,  Stand- 
ing and  playing  upon  it  before  one  that  sate  on  a 
Throne  with  a  Rainbow  about  his  Head.  She  saw 
also  as  if  he  bowed  his  Head  with  his  Face  to  the 


'  Mark  this, 
tliis  is  the 
guintefcenc" 
of  HelL'^ 


'Help 

against  Dii 
courage- 
vient.'  • 


*  Altered  [1726]  after  the  au- 
thor's death  to  '  Light  of  Life.' 


»  Altered, 
crimes.' 

"  Added  in  1687. 


1708,    to   '  the 


Cfte  ^ilgnms!  progres^sJ.  217 

Pav'd-work  that  was  under  the  Prince's  Feet,  say- 
ing, /  heartihj  thank  my  Lord  and  Ki7ig  for  hanging 
of  me  into  this  Place  Then  shouted  a  company  of 
them  that  stood  round  about,  and  harped  with  their 
Harps  :  but  no  man  living  could  tell  what  they 
said,  but  Christian  and  his  Companions. 

Next  Morning  when  she  was  up,  had  prayed  to 
God,  and  talked  with  her  Children  a  while,  one 
knocked  hard  at  the  door;  to  whom  she  spake  out 
saying,  If  thou  comest  in  Gods  name^  come  in.  So 
he  said  Amen,  and  opened  the  Door,  and  saluted 
her  with  Peace  he  to  this  House.  The  which  \y\\exi  •  cmiHcuom 
he  had  done,  he  said,  Christiana,  knowest  i\\ou  freshTmlgt 
wherefore  I  am  come?  Then  she  blusht  and  trem-rfimL^o'^'"" 
bled,  also  her  Heart  began  to  wax  warm  with 
desires  to  know  whence  he  came,  and  what  was  his 
Errand  to  her.  So  he  said  unto  her ;  my  name  is 
Secret,  I  dwell  with  those  that  are  high.  It  is  talked 
of  where  I  dwell,  as  if  thou  had'st  a  desire  to  go 
thither :  also  there  is  a  report  that  thou  art  aware 
of  the  evil  thou  hast  formerly  done  to  thy  Husband 
in  hardening  of  thy  Heart  against  his  way,  and  in 
keeping  of  these  thy  Babes  in  their  Ignorance. 
Christiana,  the  merciful  one  has  sent  me  to  tell 
thee  that  he  is  a  God  ready  to  forgive,  and  that  he 
taketh  delight  ^to  multiply  to  pardon  offences.  He 
also  would  have  thee  know  that  he  inviteth  thee  to 
come  into  his  presence,  to  his  Table,  and  that  he 
will  feed  thee  with  the  Fat  of  his  House,  and  with 
the  Heritage  of  Jacob  thy  Father. 

There  is  Christian  thy  Husband,  that  was,  with 
Legions  more  his  Companions,  ever  beholding  that 
face  that  doth  minister  Life  to  beholders:  and  they 
will  all  be  glad  when  they  shall  hear  the  sound  of 
thy  feet  step  over  thy  Fathers  Threshold. 


^  Inserted  in  1687.  death  [1708]  to  Ho  multiply  the 

Altered    after    the    iiutlinr's      pardon  of  offences.' 


218  €f)t  ^ttoixti  part  of 

Christiana  at  this  was  greatly  abashed  in  her  self, 
and   bowing  her  head  to  the  ground,  this   Visitor 
proceeded   and  said,    Christiana !    Here  is  also  a 
Letter   for  thee   which   I  have  brought  from  thy 
Husbands  King.     So  she  took  it  and  opened  it,  but 
Sony  1.3.     [^  smelt  after  the  manner  of  the  best  Perfume,  also 
it  was  Written  in  Letters  of  Gold.     The  Contents 
of  the  Letter  was,  That  the  King  ivould  have  her  do 
as  did  Christian  her  Husband ;  for  that  was  the  way 
to  come  to  his  City^  and  to  dwell  in  his  Presence  with 
'^ttol^r^  e/oy,  forever.     At  this  the  good  Woman  was  quite 
come?'       overcome:  So  she  cried  out  to  her  Visitor,  Sir,  ivill 
you  carry  me  and  my  Children  with  you,  that  we  also 
may  go  and  worship  this  King  ? 
'Further In-      Tlicn  sald  the  Visi'tor,  Christiana!  The  hitter  is 
c^igtia"naV  leforc  thc  sweet :  Thou  must  through  Troubles,  as 
did  he  that  went  before  thee,   enter  this  Celestial 
City.     Wherefore  I  advise  thee,  to  do  as  did  Chris- 
tian thy  Husband :  go  to  the  Wicket  Gate  yonder, 
over  the  Plain,  for  that  stands  in  the  head  of  the 
way  up   which  thou  must  go,  and  I  Avish  thee  all 
good  speed.     Also  I  advise  that  thou  put  this  Letter 
in  thy  Bosome.     That  thou  read  therein  to  thy  self 
and  to  thy  Children,  until  you  have  got  it  by  root- 
of-Heart.     For  it  is  one  of  the  Songs  that  thou  must 
Sing  while  thou  art  in  this  House  of  thy  Pilgrim- 
psai.  119.54.  age.     Also  this  thou  must  deliver  in  at  the  further 
Gate. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  this  Old  Gentle- 
man, as  he  told  me  this  Story,  did  himself  seem  to 
be  greatly  affected  therewith.  He  moreover  pro- 
ceeded and  said.  So  Christiana  called  her  Sons  to- 
'v^lfswca^  gcther,  and  began  thus  to  Address  her  self  unto 
^joulZy.v  them.  My  Sons,  I  have  as  you  may  perceive,  been 
of  late  under  much  exercise  in  my  Soul  about  the 
Death  of  your  Father  ;  not  for  that  I  doubt  at  all 
of  his   Happiness :   For  I  am  satisfied  now  that  he 

'  Added  in  1087. 


Cfte  |3ilgnmd  ^progits^si*  219 

is  well.  I  have  also  been  much  affected  with  the 
thoughts  of  mine  own  State  and  yours,  which  I 
verily  believe  is  by  nature  miserable :  My  Car- 
riages also  to  your  Father  in  his  distress,  is  a  great 
load  to  my  Conscience.  For  I  hardened  both  my 
own  heart  and  yours  against  him,  and  refused  to  go 
with  him  on  PiloTimao;e. 

The  thoughts  of  these  things  would  now  kill  me 
out-right ;  but  that  for  a  Dream  which  I  had  last 
night,  and  but  that  for  the  incouragement  that  this 
Stranger  has  given  me  this  Morning.  Come  my 
Children,  let  us  pack  up,  and  be  gon  to  the  Gate 
that  leads  to  the  Celestial  Countrey,  that  we  may 
see  your  Father,  and  be  with  him,  and  his  Compa- 
nions in  Peace,  according  to  the  Laws  of  that  Land. 

Then  did  her  Children  burst  out  into  Tears  for 
Joy  that  the  Heart  of  their  Mother  was  so  inclined  : 
So  their  Visitor  bid  them  farewel:  and  they  began 
to  prepare  to  set  out  for  their  Journey. 

But  while  they  were  thus  about  to  be  gon,  two  of 
the  Women  that  were  Christianas  Neighbours,  came 
up   to  her  House   and  knocked   at  her  Dore.     To 
whom  she  said  as  before,  If  you  come  in  Gods  name,  'n^oTciT^'^ 
come  in.     At  this  the  Women  were  stun'd,  for  Husguage funds 

'  her  old 

kind  of  Language,  they  used  not    to    hear,   or   to  {^^^f'^\. 
perceive  to  drop  fiom  the  Lips  of  Christiana.     Yet 
they  came    in  ;    but  behold  they  found    the   good 
Woman  a  preparing  to  be  gon  from  her  House. 

So  they  began  and  said,  Neighbour,  pray  what  is 
your  meaning  hy  this. 

Christiana  answered  and  said  to  the  eldest  of 
them  whose  name  was  Mrs.  Timorous,  I  am  prepar- 
ing for  a  Journey  (This  Timm-ous  was  d^\\g\itev\i^f[iG^f 
to  him  that  met  Christian  upon  the  Hill  Difficulty  : 
and"  would  a  had  him  gone  back  for  fear  of  the 
Lyons.) 

Timorous.  For  what  Journey  I  pray  you  ? 

'  Added  in  1687. 


Timorous 

comes  to  risit 


220  CI)e  ^ewnti  part  of 

Chris.  Even  to  go  after  my  good  Husband;  and 
with  that  she  fell  a  weeping. 

Timo.  I  hope  not  so,  good  Neighbour,  pray  for 
^i'^rMtrcie,  your  poor  Childrens  sakes,  do  not  so  unwomanly 
TjJours.  cast  away  your  self. 

Chris.  Nay,  my  Children,  shall  go  with  me ;  not 
one  of  them  is  willing  to  stay  behind. 

Timo.  I  wonder  in  my  very  heart,  what,  or  who 
has  brought  you  into  this  mind. 

Chris.  Oh,  Neighbour,  knew  you  but  as  mucli  as 
I  do,  I  doubt  not  but  that  you  would  go  with  me. 

Timo.  Prithee  what  new  knowledg  hast  thou  got 
that  so  worketh  off  thy  mind  from  thy  Friends,  and 
that  tempteth  thee  to  go  no  bodij  hyiows  where  f 

Chris.  Then  Christiana  reply'd,  I  have  been 
sorely  afflicted  since  my  Husbands  departure  from 
Death.  jjjg  .  \yyy^^  specially  since  he  went  over  the  River. 
But  that  which  troubleth  me  most,  is  my  churlish 
carriages  to  him  when  he  was  under  his  distress. 
Besides,  I  am  now,  as  he  was  then ;  nothing  will 
serve  me  but  going  on  Pilgrimage.  I  was  a  dream- 
ing last  night  that  I  saw  him.  O  that  my  Soul 
was  with  him.  He  dwelleth  in  the  presence  of  the 
King  of  the  Countrey,  he  sits  and  eats  with  him  at 
his  Table,  he  is  become  a  Companion  of  Immortals, 
icor^s.  1,  and  has  a  House  now  given  him  to  dwell  in,  to 
which,  the  best  Palaces  on  Earth,  if  compared, 
seem  to  me  to  be  but  as  a  Dunghil.  The  Prince  of 
the  ^  Place  has  also  sent  for  me  with  promise  of 
entertainment  if  I  shall  come  to  him;  his  messenger 
was  here  even  now,  and  has  brought  me  a  Letter, 
which  Invites  me  to  come.  And  with  that  she 
pluck'd  out  her  Letter,  and  read  it,  and  said  to 
them,  what  now  will  you  say  to  this  ? 

Timo.  Oh  the  madness  that  has  possessed  thee  and 
thy  Husband,  to  run  your  selves  upon  such  difficulties  ! 

'  Altered  to  'Palace,'  in  1693,  aud  most  subsequent  editions. 


Cfte  pilgnmsi  ^rogiesig*  221 

You  have  heard,  I  am  sure,  what  your  Husband  did 
meet  with,  even  in  a  manner  at  the  first  step,  that  he 
took  on  his  way,  as  our  Neighbour  Obstinate  can  yetY^^\^"(^_ 
testifie  ;  for  he  went  along  with  him,  yea  and  plyable]^slo^.] 
too  until  they  like  wise  men,  were  afraid  to  go  any 
further.      We  also  heard  over  and  above,  how  he  met 
with  the  Lyons,  Apollion,  the  shadow  of  death,  and 
many  other  things.     Nor  is  the  dayiger  that  he  met 
with  at  Vanity  fair  to  be  forgotten  by  thee.     For  ifingfoj"^^' 
he,  tho'  a  man,  was  so  hard  put  to  it,  what  canst  thou^'^''-'^ 
being  but  a  poor    Woman,  do  f      Consider  also  that 
these  four  sweet  Babes  are  thy  Children,  thy  Flesh  and 
thy  Bones.      Wherefore,  though  thou  shoiddest  be  so 
rash  as  to  cast  away  thy  self :    Yet  for  the  sake  of  the 
Fruit  of  thy  Body,  keep  thou  at  home. 

But  Christiana  said  unto  her,  tempt  me  not,  my 
Neighbour:  I  have  now  a  ^price  put  into  mine 
hand  to  get  gain,  and  I  should  be  a  Fool  of  the 
greatest  size,  if  I  should  have  no  heart  to  strike  in 
with  the  opportunity.  And  for  that  you  tell  me  of 
all  these  Troubles  that  I  am  like  to  meet  with  in 
the  way,  they  are  so  far  off  from  being  to  me  a 
discouragement,  that  they  shew  I  am  in  the  right. 
The  bitter  must  come  before  the  siveet,  and  that  also  ^^1^'"'"' 
will  make  the  sweet  the  sweeter.  Wherefore  sinceS'^I-s' 
you  came  not  to  my  House  in  Gods  name,  as  I  said, 
I  pray  you  to  be  gon,  and  not  to  disquiet  me 
farther. 

Then  Timorous  also  revil'd  her,  and  said  to  her 
Fellow,  come  Neighbour  Mercie,  lets  leave  her  in 
her  own  hands,  since  she  scorns  our  Counsel  and 
Company.  But  Mercie  was  at  a  stand,  and  could 
not  so  readil}'^  comply  with  her  Neighbour  :  and 
that  for  a  two-fold  reason.  First,  her  Bowels  yearned  ^Btmuymm 
over  Christiana :  so  she  said  with  in  her  self.  If  my  t/ana!^^"^" 
Neighbour  will  needs  be  gon,  I  will  go  a  little  way 

'  Added  in  1687.  *  Altered  to  '  a  prize,'  in  1708, 

and  sub.  edits. 


222  Cfte  ^ewnb  ^art  of 

with   her,   and    help  her.     Secondly,  her   Bowels 
yearned  over  her  own  Soul,   (for  what   Christiana 
had  said,   had  taken  some  hold  upon  her  mind.) 
Wherefore  she  said  within  her  self  again,  1  will  yet 
have  more  talk  with  this  Christiana,  and  if  I   find 
Truth  and  Life  in  what  she  shall  say,  my  self  with 
my  Heart  shall  also  go  with  her.    Wherefore  Mercy 
began  thus  to  reply  to  her  Neighbour  Timorous. 
fl^ab^her;      Mercie.  Neighbour,  /  did  indeed  come  with  you  to 
liL^tolcr.  '^^^  Christiana  this  Morning,  and  since  she  is,  as  you 
see,  a  taking  of  her  last  farewel  of  her  Country,  I 
think  to  walk  this  Sun-shine  Morning,  a  little  way 
with  her  to  help  her  on  the  way.     But  she  told  her 
not  of  her  second  Reason,  but  kept  that  to  her  self. 
Timo.  ^^  ell,  I  see  you  have  a  mind  to  go  a  fool- 
ing too  :  but  take  heed  in  time,  and  be  wise :  while 
we  are  out  of  danger  we  are  out ;  but  when  we  are 
in,  we  are  in.     So  Mrs.  Timorous  returned  to  her 
House,  and  Christiana  betook  herself  to  her  Journey. 
^^Ss     ^^^  when   Timorous  was  got  home  to  her  House, 
^latlh^'^  she  sends  for  some  of  her  Neighbours,  to  wit,  Mrs. 
l°^^l^^  Bats-eyes,  Mrs.  Inconsiderate,  Mrs.  Light-mind,  and 
to  do.         Mrs.  Knoiv-nothing.     So  when  they  were  come  to 
her  House,  she  falls  to  telling  of  the  story  of  Chris- 
tiana, and  of  her  intended  Journey.     And  thus  she 
began  her  Tale. 

Timo.  Neighbours,  having  had  little  to  do  this 
morning,  I  went  to  give  Christiana  a  visit,  and 
when  1  came  at  the  door,  I  knocked,  as  you  know 
'tis  our  Custom.  And  she  answered,  If  you  come 
in  Gods  name,  come  in.  So  in  I  went,  thinking  all 
was  well:  But  when  I  came  in,  I  found  her  prepar- 
ing her  self  to  depart  the  Town,  she  and  also  her 
Children.  So  I  asked  her  what  was  her  meaning 
by  that,  and  she  told  me  in  short,  that  she  was  now 
of  a  mind  to  go  on  Pilgrimage,  as  did  her  Husband. 

*  Altered  to  '  Christiana,'  in  1687. 


m)t  pilgrims!  ^rogresis!.  223 

She  told  me  also  a  Dream  that  she  had,  and  how 
the  King  of  the  Country  where  her  Husband  was, 
had  sent  her  an  inviting  Letter  to  come  thither. 

Then  said  Mrs.  Know-nothing,  a7id  what  do  you  no't^'in^""^" 
thiyik  she  will  go  f 

Timo.  Ay,  go  she  will,  what  ever  come  on't;  and 
methinks  I  know  it  by  this,  for  that  which  was  my 
great  Argument  to  perswade  her  to  stay  at  home, 
(to  wit,  the  Troubles  she  was  like  to  meet  with  in 
the  way)  is  one  great  Argument  with  her  to  put 
her  forward  on  her  Journey.  For  she  told  me  in 
so  many  words.  The  bitten'  goes  before  the  sweet. 
Yea,  and  for  as  much  as  it  so  doth,  it  makes  the 
sweet  the  sweeter. 

Mrs.  Bats-eyes.    Oh  this  blind  and  foolish  Wo- ,^-^;^^'^- 
man,  said  she,  will  she  not  take  warning  by  her 
Husbands  Afflictions  ?  For  my  part,  I  see  if  he  was 
here  again  he  would  rest  him  content  in  a  whole 
Skin,  and  never  run  so  many  hazards  for  nothing. 

Mrs.  Inconsiderate,  also  replyed,  saying,  away  111^^1^^°"^' 
with  such  Fantastical  Fools  from  the  Town,  a  good 
riddance,  for  my  part,  I  say,  of  her.  Should  she 
stay  where  she  dwels,  and  retain  this  her  mind, 
who  could  live  quietly  by  her?  for  she  will  either 
be  dumpish  or  unneighbourly,  or  talk  of  such  mat- 
ters as  no  wise  body  can  abide  :  Wherefore  for  my 
part  I  shall  never  be  sorry  for  her  departure,  let  her 
go  and  let  better  come  in  her  room ;  'twas  never 
a  good  World  since  these  whimsical  Fools  dwelt 
in  it. 

Then  Mrs.  Liqht-mind  added  as  followeth.    Come  Mrs.ugu- 

1    •       1    •       1        (•  m    n  T  ■\T  ^  mind,  Jl/ci- 

put  this  kmd  oi  lalk  away.     1  was   Yesterday  atf^«"iwan- 
Madam    Wantons,  where  we  were  as  merry  as  the'^'^'^^^*"* 
Maids.     For  who  do  you  think  should  be  there,  but /<»•  Faithful 
I,  and  Mrs.  Love-the-Jtesh,  and  three  or  four  unove'^part.pag.' 
with  Mr.  Lechery,  Mrs.  Filth,  and  some  others :  So 
there  we  had  Musick  and  dancing,  and  what  else 
was  meet  to  fill  up  the  pleasure.     And  I  dare  say 


224 


€in  ^ttonts  ^3art  of 


Discourse  be- 
twixt Mercie 
and  go  id 
Christiana. 


Mercie  in- 
clines to  go. 


'  Christiana 
inould  have 
Iter  Neigh- 
tour  with 
herfi' 


Mercy  douhts 
of  acccpt- 
ance. 


Christiana 
allures  her 
to  the  Gate 
lohich  is 
Christ,  and 
promiseth 
tliere  to  en- 
(juirefor  her. 


my  Lady  her  self  is  an  admirably  well  bred  Gentle- 
woman, and  Mr.  Leclierij  is  as  pretty  a  Fellow. 

By  this  time  Christiana  was  got  on  her  way,  and 
Mercie  went  along  with  her.  So  as  they  went,  her 
Children  being  there  also,  Christiana  began  to  dis- 
course. And,  Mercie,  said  Christiana^  I  take  this 
as  an  unexpected  favour,  that  thou  shouldest  set 
foot  out  of  Doors  with  me  to  accompany  me  a  little 
in  my  way. 

Mercie.  Then  said  ijoung  Mercie  (for  she  was  but 
youncj,)  If  I  thought  it  would  be  to  purpose  to  go  with 
7/ou,  I  would  never  go  near  the  Toivn  any  more. 

Chris.  Well  Mercie,  said  Christiana,  cast  in  thy 
Lot  with  me.  I  well  know  what  will  be  the  end  of 
our  Pilgrimage,  my  Husband  is  where  he  would 
not  but  be,  for  all  the  Gold  in  the  Spanish  Mines. 
Nor  shalt  thou  be  rejected,  tho  thou  goest  but  upon 
??zy  Invitation.  The  King  who  hath  sent  for  me  and 
my  Children,  is  one  that  delighteth  in  Mercie. 
Besides,  if  thou  wilt,  I  will  hire  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
go  along  with  me  as  my  servant.  Yet  we  will  have 
all  things  in  Common  betwixt  thee  and  me,  only 
go  along  with  me. 

Mercie.  But  how  shall  I  be  ascertaiyied  that  I  also 
shall  be  entertained  f  Had  I  this  hope,  ^but  from  one 
that  can  tell,  I  woidd  make  no  stick  at  all,  but  would 
go  being  helped  by  him  that  can  help,  tho'  the  way  was 
never  so  tedious. 

Christiana.  Well,  loving  Mercie,  I  will  tell  thee 
what  thou  shalt  do,  go  witli  me  to  the  Wicket  Gate, 
and  there  I  will  further  enquire  for  thee,  and  if 
there  thou  shalt  not  meet  with  incouragement,  I 
will  be  content  that  thou  shalt  return  to  thy  place. 
I  also  will  pay  thee  for  thy  Kindness  which  thou 
shewest  to  me  and  my  Children  in  thy  accompany- 
ing of  us  in  our  way  as  thou  doest. 


Added  in  IGS; 


'  this  hope  from  one,'  1687. 


ana 

Mer- 

s  com- 

pany.' 


her  carnal 
Relatimis' 


%\)t  pil0rmT£{  ^rogresid*  225 

Mercie.   Then  ivill  I  go  thither,  and  will  take  what  "Mercy 
shall  follow,   and  the  Lord  grant  that  my  Lot  may 
there  fall  even  as  the  King  of  Heaven  shall  have  his 
heart  upon  me. 

Christiana,  then  was  glad  at  her  heart,  not  only  ^^.^I'J'm 
that  she  had  a  Companion,   but  also  for  that  she^y',^^^? 
had  prevailed  with  this  poor  Maid  to  fall  in  love 
with  her  own  Salvation.    So  they  went  on  together, 
and  Mercie  began  to  weep.     Then  said  Christiana, 
wherefore  weepeth  my  Sister  so  ? 

Mer.  Alas !  said  she,  who  can  but  lament  that  shall gJ^^^JJJ^^ 
but  rightly  consider  what  a  State  and  Condition  my 
poor  Relations  are  in,  that  yet  remain  in  our  sinful 
Town :  and  that  which  makes  my  grief  the  more 
heavy,  is  because  they  have  no  Instructor,  nor  any  to 
tell  them  what  is  to  come. 

Chris.   Bowels   becometh    Pilgrims.     And    thou  p^f^J'^'^^ie 
dost  for  thy  Friends,  as  my  good   Christian  did  for  J?!"^'],'''^,j„. 
me  when  he  left  me  ;  he  mourned  for  that  I  would  ^l"^^^^a/'^ 
not  heed  nor  regard  him,  but  his  Lord  and  ours  did 
gather  up  his  Tears,  and  put  them  into  his  Bottle, 
and   now   both    I,  and   thou,   and   these   my  sweet 
Babes,  are  reaping  the  Fruit  and  benefit  of  them. 
I    hope,   Mercie,  these  Tears   of  thine  will  not  be 
lost,  for  the  truth  hath  said  ;   That  they  that  sow  in  p^^,  ^,6  5. 
Tears  shall  reap  in  Joy,   in  singing.     And  he  that  ^■ 
goeth  forth   and  weepeth  bearing  precious  seed,  shall 
doubtless    come    again    with    rejoicing,    bringing   his 
Sheaves  with  him 

Then  said  Mercie, 

Let  the  most  blessed  be  my  guide, 
Ift  be  his  blessed  Will, 
Unto  his  Gate,  into  his  fould. 
Up  to  his  Holy  Hill. 

And  let  him  never  suffer  me. 
To  swarve,  or  turn  aside 

'  Added  in  1687.  ="  'his  Fold,'  1687. 


226  C!k  ^uonti  \Uvt  of 

From  his  free  grace,  and  Holy  ivays. 

What  ere  shall  me  betide. 

And  let  him  cjather  them  of  mine^ 
That  I  have  left  behind. 
Lord  make  them  pray  they  may  be  thine. 

With  all  their  heart  and  mind. 

Ifltfl^.      Now  my  old   Friend    proceeded  and  said,   But 
'^ThMroicn    wlien  Christiana  came  up  to  the  Slow  of  Despond, 
ciZ'ion.%in'  she  began  to  be  at  a  stand  :  For,  said  she,  This  is 
tTrd^^Hfe.  the  place  in  which  my  dear  Husband  had  like  to 
have  ^abeen  smuthered  with  Mud.     She  perceived 
also,  that   notwithstanding  the  Command   of  the 
King  to  make  this  place  for  Pilgrims,  good  :  yet  it 
was  rather  worse  than  formerly.     So  I  asked  if  that 
was  true  ?    Yes,  said  the  Old  Gentle-man,  too  true. 
For   that   many  there   be   that   pretend  to  be  the 
King's  Labourers ;   and  that  say  they  are  for  mend- 
ing the  Kings  Highway,  that  bring  Dirt,  and  Dung 
instead  of  Stones,  and  so  marr  instead  of  mending. 
Here  Christiana  therefore  with  her  Bo3^s,  did  make 
'bohiZVoie  ^    Stand  :     but  said    Mercie,  come  let   us  venture, 
fpond"^"^'  ^"ly  ^^*  ^s  be   wary.     Then  they  looked  well  to 
the   Steps,   and  made  a   shift  to  get  staggeringly 
over. 

Yet   Christiana  had  like  to  a  been  in,  and  that 

not  once  nor  twice.     Now  they  had  no  sooner  got 

over,  but  thc}^  thought  they  heard  words  that  said 

Luke  i.  45.    unto  them.  Blessed  is  she  that  believeth,  for  there  shall 

be  a  perforjnance  of  the  things  that  have  been  told  her 

from  the  Lord. 

Then  they  went  on  again;  and  said  Mercie  to 
Christiana,  Had  I  as  good  ground  to  hope  for  a 
loving  reception  at  the  Wicket-Gate,  as  you,  I  think 
no  Slow  of  Despond  would  discourage  me. 

Well,  said  the  other,  you  know  your  sore,  and   I 

'  '  to  a  been,'  1687.  *  Added  in  1687. 


and 
As 
as  in 
thand 


Cl)e  ^ailgnmd  ^rosresi^*  227 

know   mine;    and   good  friend,  we  shall  all   have 
enough  evil  before  we  come  at  our  Journeys  end. 

For  can  it  be  imagined,  that  the  people  that  de- 
sign to  attain  such  excellent  Glories  as  ive  do,  and 
that  are  so  envied  that  Happiness  as  ive  are ;  but 
that  we  shall  meet  with  what  Fears  and  Scares,  with 
what  Troubles  and  Afflictions  they  can  possibly 
assault  us  with,  that  hate  us  ? 

And  now  Mr.  Sagaciety  left  me  to  Dream  out  my 
Dream  by  my  self.     Wherefore  me-thought  I  saw 
Cimstiana,  and  Mercie  and  the  Boys  go  all  of  them 
up  to  the  Gate.     To  which  when  they  were  come,  ^Sdhe 
they   betook   themselves  to  a  short  debate,  about  ™"*j^:;;f^ 
how  they   must  manage  their  calling  at  the  Gate,  *j?^';^' 
and  what  should  be  said  to  him  that  did  open  to  ^^'?^ 
them.     So  it  was  concluded,  since  Christiana  w^'S>^°p'- 
the  eldest,  that  she  should  knock  for  entrance,  and 
that  she  should  speak  to  him  that  did  open,  for  the 
rest.     So   Christiana  began   to  knock,  and  as  her '^  p^rt  vog. 
poor  Husband  did,  she  knocked,  and  knocked  again. 
But  instead  of  any  that  answered,  they  all  thought 
that  they  heard,  as  if  a  Doo:  came  barking;  upon  y^«  Jos',  <Ae 

J  '  &  ^o        r  Beril  an 

them.     A  Dog  and  a  great  one  too,  and  this  vcv^^o,  E'mny  to 
the  Woman  and   Children  afraid.     Nor  durst  they 
for  a  wdiile  to  knock  any  more,  for  fear  the  Mastiff 
should  fly   upon  them.     Now   therefore  they  were 'Ch/jstiana 

1111  11  •         ^      '  •!  1  "'"*  ^^^ 

Q:reatly  tumbled  up  and  down  in  their  mmds,  and  oompaniom 

"  »/  l  '}}€Tplex6(i 

knew  not  what  to  do.  Knock  they  durst  not,  for  «^«^'«  „ 
fear  of  the  Dog :  go  back  they  durst  not  for  fear 
that  the  Keeper  of  that  Gate  should  espy  them,  as 
they  so  went,  and  should  be  offended  with  them. 
At  last  they  thought  of  knocking  again,  and  knocked 
more  vehemently  then  they  did  at  the  first.  Then 
said  the  Keeper  of  the  Gate,  who  is  there  ?  So  the 
Dog  left  off  to  bark,  and  he  opened  unto  them. 

Then  Christiana  made  low  obeysance,  and  said, 
Let  not  our  Lord  be  offended  with  his  Hand  maid- 

*  Added  in  1687. 


228  Cfje  ^etonti  part  of 

ens  for  that  we  have  knocked  at  his  Princely  Gate. 
Then  said  the  Keeper,  Whence  come  ye,  and  what 
is  that  you  would  have? 

Christiana  answered,  We  are  come  from  whence 
Christian  did  come,  and  upon  the  same  Errand  as 
he  ;  to  wit,  to  be,  if  it  shall  please  you,  graciously 
admitted  by  this  Gate,  into  the  way  that  leads  to 
the  Celestial  City.  And  I  answer,  my  Lord  in  the 
next  place,  that  I  am  Christiana  once  the  Wife  of 
Christian,  that  now  is  gotten  above. 

With  that  the  Keeper  of  the  Gate  did  marvel, 
saying.  What  is  she  become  now  a  Pilgriin,  that  but  a 
while  ago  abhorred  that  Life?  Then  she  bowed  her 
Head,  and  said.  Yes ;  and  so  are  these  my  sweet 
Babes  also. 

Then  he  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  let  her  in 

and  said  also.  Suffer  the  little  Children  to  come  unto 

•6  How      me,  and  with  that  he  shut  up  the  Gate.     This  done, 

ueiiteHairud  hc  callcd  to  a  Trumpeter  that  was  above  over  tlie 

at  the  Gate.'     /-^     ,  .        ,     •  i-yj      .      .  •    i  i  •  i 

'Luke  15. 7.  (jrate,  to  entertani  Christiana  with  snouting  and 
sound  of  Trumpet  for  joy.  So  he  obeyed  and 
sounded,  and  filled  the  Air  with  his  Melodious 
Notes. 

Now  all  this  while,  poor  Mercie  did  stand  with- 
out, trembling  and  crying  for  fear  that  she  was  re- 
jected. But  when  Christiana  had  gotten  admittance 
for  her  self  and  her  Boys  :  Then  she  began  to  make 
Intercession  for  Mercy. 

ana-s Prayer      Chris.  Aiid  shc  Said,  my  Lord,  I  have  a  Compa- 

friend  7iio7i  of  minc  that  stands  yet  ivithout,  that  is  come 
hither  upon  the  same  account  as  my  self,  f  One  that 
is  much  dejected  in  her  mind,  for  that  she  comes,  as 
she  thinks,  without  sending  for,  whereas  I  was  sent  to 
by  my  Husbands  King  to  come. 

Tiu  delays       Now  Mcrcie  beo;an  to  be  very  impatient,  for  each 

■makt  the  .  --.  ,~,  ilf  1 

^"'ifir     Minute  WHS  as  long  to  her  as  an  hour,  whcrerore  she 
fcrventer.     prevented  Christiana  from  a  fuller  interceding  for 

*  Added  in  1687.  '  Omitted  in  1687,  and  sub.  edits. 


Cf)f  f  ilgnmd  ^^rogitssJ*  229 

her,  by  knocking  at  the  Gate  her  self.  And  she 
knocked  then  so  loud,  tliat  she  made  Christiana  to 
start.  Then  said  the  Keeper  of  the  Gate  who  is 
there  ?     And  said  Christiana,  it  is  my  Friend. 

So  he  opened   the  Gate,  and  looked  out ;    but 
Merciew^s  fallen  down  without  in  a  Swoon,  for  she^„^^,^j7 
fainted    and  was   afraid,    that  no  Gate  would    be 
opened  to  her. 

Then  he  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  said.  Damsel, 
I  bid  thee  arise. 

O  Sir,  said  she,  I  am  faint,  there  is  scarce  Life 
left  in  me.  But  he  answered.  That  one  once  said. 
When  my  Soul  fainted  within  me,  I  remembred  the  Jonah  2. 7. 
Lord,  and  my  'prayer  came  in  unto  thee,  into  thy  Holy 
Temple.  Fear  not,  but  stand  upon  thy  Feet,  and 
tell  me  wherefore  thou  art  come. 

Mer.  I  am  come,  for  that,  unto  which  I  was  never '?'''«'^«''f/ 

.  .      .  7-7-  "/  "f  fnvtn- 

invited,   as   my  Friend  Christiana  was.     Hers  wasw"' 
from  the  King,  and  mine  was  but  from  her:  Where- 
fore I  fear  I  presume. 

Did  she  desire  thee  to  come  with  her  to  this  Place  f 

Mer.  Yes.  And  as  my  Lord  sees,  I  am  come. 
And  if  there  is  any  Grace  or  forgiveness  of  Sins  to 
spare,  I  beseech  that  I  thy  poor  Handmaid  may  be 
partaker  thereof. 

Then  he  took  her  again  by  the  Hand,  and  led  her 
gently  in,  and  said  :  I  pray  for  all  them  that  believe  'marktuzr 
on  me,  by  what  means  soever  they  come  unto  me. 
Then  said  he  to  those  that  stood  by  :  Fetch  some- 
thing, and  give  it  Mercie  to  smell  on,  thereby  to 
stay  her  fainting.  So  they  fetcht  her  a  Bundle  of 
Myrrh,  and  a  while  after  she  was  revived. 

And  now  was  Christiana  and  her  Boys  and 
Mercie  received  of  the  Lord  at  the  head  of  the  way, 
and  spoke  kindly  unto  b}"  him. 

Then  said  they  yet  further  unto  him.  We   are 

7  Added  in  1687. 
R 


230  Ei)t  M'ttoixH  lart  of 

sorry  for  our  Sins,  and  beg  of  our  Lord  his  Pardon, 
and  further  information,  what  we  must  do. 
f  r"^^.-,.       I  2:rant  Pardon,  said  he,  by  word,  and  deed  ;  by 

Jcitm  20.20.  o  ^  '^  pp.*'  ,  1  1    •  I 

word  m  the  promise  of  forgiveness  :  by  deed  m  the 
way  I  obtained  it.  Take  the  first  from  my  Lips 
with  a  kiss,  and  the  other,  as  it  shall  be  revealed. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream  that  he  spake  many 
good  words  unto  them,  whereby  they  were  greatly 
gladed.  He  also  had  them  up  to  the  top  of  the 
Gate  and  shewed  them  by  what  deed  they  were 
^Jim^em  s^'^^d*  ^^^^  t^l^  them  withall,  that  that  sight  the}' 
afar  off.  wouUl  liave  again  as  they  went  along  in  the  way,  to 
their  comfort. 

So  he   left  them    a  while  in    a   Summer  Parler 
\llmihe'    below,  where  they  entred  into  talk   b}^  themselves. 
chriMiam:  ^^^  ^j^^g  Ghristiana  began,  0  Lord !  How  glad  am 
/,  that  we  are  (jot  hi  Idtlier ! 

Mer.  So  you  icell  may  ;  did  I,  of  all,  have  cause  to 
leap  for  Joy. 

Chris.  I  thought,  one  time,  as  I  stood  at  the  Gate 
(because  I  had  knocked  and  none  did  ansiver)  that  all 
our  Lahour  had  been  lost :  Specially  when  that  ugly 
Curr  made  such  a  heavy  barking  ^against  us. 

Mer.  But  my  worst  Fears  was  after  I  saw  that 
you  was  taken  in  to  his  favour,  and  that  I  was  left 
behind  :  Now  thought  I,  'tis  fulfiled  which  is 
Mat.  24. 41.  Written.  Two  Women  shall  be  Grinding  together,  the 
one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left.  I  had  much 
ado  to  forbear  crying  out,  Undone,  undone. 

And  afraid  I  was  to  knock  any  more  ;  but  when 
I  looked  up,  to  what  was  Written  over  the  Gate,  I 
took  Courage.  I  also  thought  that  I  must  either 
^-  knock  again  or  dye.  So  I  knocked  ;  but  I  cannot 
tell  how,  for  my  spirit  now  struggled  betwixt  life 
and  death. 

Chris.   Can  you  not  tell  how  you  knocked  f     I  am 

"  Inserted  in  1G87.    ,  •  'heavy  harking  at  its'  1687. 


1  Part. 
30.  [22] 


€i)t  ^ilcrnmsJ  ^rogresis;  231 

sm'e  your  knocks  were  so  earnest,  that  the  veri/  sound  ^l^}l^^f^^ 
of  them  made  me  start,  I  thought  I  never  heard  such  '^Zmhrn^r 
knocking  in  all  my  Life.     I  thought  you  would  a  M^lVn  12 
come  in  by  violent  hands,  or  a  took  the  Kingdom  by 
storm. 

Mer.  Alas,  to  be  in  my  Case,  who  that  so  was, 
could  but  a  done  so  ?  You  saw  that  the  Door  was 
shut  upon  me,  and  that  there  was  a  most  cruel  Dog 
thereabout.  Who,  I  say,  that  was  so  faint  hearted 
as  I,  that  would  not  a  knocked  with  all  their  might  ? 
But  pray  what  said  m}^  Lord  to  my  rudeness,  was 
he  not  angry  with  me  ? 

Chris.    When  he  heard  your  lumbrinq  noise,  he  qave  'f^^"*' 

•--'  •-'  ■^  *J  pl6<iseu  with 

a  tvonderfid  Innocent  smile.     I  believe  what  iiou  did  'o"'^  ^^^^ 

•/  _^  c/  restless 

■pleased  him  ivell  enough.  For  he  shewed  no  sign  to '^'''^''^^^■"^ 
the  contrary.  But  I  marvel  in  my  heart  ivhy  he  keeps  ifiuesoni 
such  a  Dog  ;  had  I  known  that  afore,  I  fear  I  should  tiowaiut 
not  have  had  heart  enough  to  a  ventured  my  self  in  this  wm  iiTiu 
manner.  But  now  we  are  in,  ive  are  in,  and  I  am  Hmt^enif 
glad  with  all  my  heart.  Z"Ir'setllu.'^ 

Mer.  I  will  ask  if  you  please  next  time  he  comes 
down,  why  he  keeps  such  a  filthy  Cur  in  his  Yard. 
I  hope  he  will  not  take  it  amiss. 

A?/  do,  said  the  Children,  and  perswade  him  to\'^^(^ii- 

7  1    •  r  /»  •    7       7  -77      7   •  7  ^^  """* 

lianq  liim,  for  we  are  afraid  lie  will  bite  us  when  2^;^  «/mid  0/ ?/<« 

•'  ''  "J  dog. 

go  hence. 

So  at  last  he  came  down  to  them  again,  and 
Mcrcie  fell  to  the  Ground  on  her  Face  before  him 
and  worshipped,  and  said,  Let  my  Lord  accept  of 
the  Sacrifice  of  praise  which  I  now  offer  unto  him, 
with  the"calves  of  my  Lips. 

So  he  said  unto  her.  Peace  be  to  thee,  stand  up. 

But    she   continued    upon    her   Face    and   said, 
Righteous  art  thou  0  Lord  ivhen  I  plead  with  thee,  fer.  12. 1, 2. 
iiet  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thii  Judqments  :    Where-  posmlus 

^  Inserted  in  1687  ;  '  praises '  *  Omitted  in  1687,  and   sub. 

altered  to  '  prayer,'  in  1726.  edits. 

^  Inserted  in  1687. 

r2 


232 


€f)t  M>ttoi\ii  part  of 


foi'e  dost  thou  keep  so  cruel  a  Dog  in  thy  Yard,  at  the 
sight  of  which^  such  Woinen  and  Children  as  we,  are 
ready  to  jly  from  thy  Gate  fm'  fear  ? 

He  answered,  and  said  ;   That  Dog  has  another 

*-*Denii:  -''''Owner,  he  also  is  kept  close  in  another  man's 
ground  ;  only  my  Pilgrims  hear  his  barking.     He 

luTi'i"^'  belongs  to  the  Castle  which  you  see  there  at  a  dis- 
tance :  but  can  come  up  to  the  Walls  of  this  place. 
He  has  frighted  many  an  honest  Pilgrim  from 
worse  to  better,  by  the  great  voice  of  his  roaring. 
Indeed  he  that  owneth  him,  doth  not  keep  him  of 
any  good  will  to  me  or  mine ;  but  with  intent  to 
keep  the  Pilgrims  from  coming  to  me,  and  that 
they  may  be  afraid  to  knock  at  this  Gate  for  en- 
trance. Sometimes  also  he  has  broken  out,  and  has 
woj-ried  some  that  I  love  ;   but  I  take  all  at  present 

'AciM-kto  patiently.      I  also  o'ive  mv  Pilo:rims   timely  help  : 

the  carnal       h\         ^  ii-  i  i-  ^ 

fear  of  the  bo  tliey  arc  not  delivered  up  to  his  power  to  do  to 
them  what  his  Dogish  nature  would  prompt  him  to. 
But  what  !  My  purchased  one,  1  tro,  hadst  thou 
known  never  so  much  before  hand,  thou  wouldst 
not  a  bin  afraid  of  a  Dog. 

The  Beggars  that  go  from  Door  to  Door,  ivill, 
rather  then  they  will  lose  a  supposed  Alms,  run  the 
hazzard  of  the  hauling,  barking,  and  biting  too  of  a 
Dog:  And  shall  a  Dog,  a  Dog  in  another  Mans 
Yard  :  a  Dog  whose  barking  I  turn  to  the  profit  of 
Pilgrims,  keep  any  from  coming  to  me  ?  I  deliver 
them  from  the  Lions,  their  Darling  from  the  power 
of  the  Dog. 

Mercy.  Then  said  Alercie,  I  confess  my  Igno- 
rance :  I  spake  what  I  understood  not :  I  acknoic- 
.f  M  ledge  '  that'^  thou  docst  all  things  ivcU. 

Chris.  Then  Christiana  began  to  talk  of  their 
Journey,  and  to  enquire  after  the  way.  So  he  fed 
them,  and  washed  their  feet,  and  set  them  in  the 


Pilgrims.' 


'  Christians 
■when  wise 
eniiuffh  ac- 
quience  in  the 
■wisdom 
their  Lord, 


*  Inserted  in  1087. 


mn  ^ilgn'msi  ^Sroffreefsf*  233 

way  of  his  Steps,  according  as  he  had  dealt  with  If^^^^f^' 
her  Husband  before. 

So  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  they  walkt  on  ^'  in  ' 
their  way,  and  had  the  weather  very  comfortable  to 
them. 

Then  Christiana  began  to  sing,  saying. 

Bless' t  be  the  Day  that  I  began, 
A  Pilfjrim  for  to  be. 
And  blessed  also  be  that  man, 
That  thereto  moved  me. 

'  Tis  true,  '  twas  long  ere  I  began 
To  seek  to  live  for  ever  : 
But  now  I  run  fast  as  I  can, 
'Tis  better  late,  theii  never. 

Our  Tears  to  joy,  our  fears  to  Faith 
Are  tur7ied,  as  we  see: 
Thus  our  beginning  {as  one  saith,) 
Sheivs,  what  our  end  will  be. 

Now  there  was,   on  the  other   side  of  the  Wall 
that  fenced  in  the  way  up  wliich  Christiana  and  her 
Companions  was  to  go,  *a  Garden  ;  and  that  Gar- ^.i^^^^'e"'-' 
den  belonged  to  him  whose  was  that  Barking  Dog 
of  whom  mention  was  made  before.     And  some  of 
the  Fruit-Trees  that  grew  in  that  Garden  shot  their 
Branches  over  the  Wall,  and  being  mellow,  they 
that  found  them  did  gather  them  up  and  oft  eat  of 
them  to  their  hurt.     So  Christianas  Boys,  as  Boys 
are  apt  to  do,  being  pleas'd  with   the  Trees,  and 
with  the  Fruit  that  did   hang  thereon,  did  ^ Plash  '^ato}"^'"" 
them,  and   began  to   eat.     Their  Mother  did  also|™"r 
chide  them  for  so  doino^;  but  still  the  Boys  went 


on. 


Well,   said   she,   my   Sons,  you   Transgress,   for 

•  Added  in  1687.  trees.     The  boys  [did  Plash]  had 

^  'did  Pluck,'  1687,  and  sub.      a  cut  at  the  trees,  and  knocked 
edits.     '  Plash,'  to  cut  hedges  or      the  fruit  oflf. 


234  C!)e  ^erontr  ^aart  of 

that  Fruit  is  none  of  ours  :  but  she  did  not  know 
that  they  did  belong  to  the  Enemy  ;  He  warrant 
you  if  she  had,  she  would  a  been  ready  to  die  for 
fear.  But  that  passed,  and  they  went  on  their  way. 
Now  by  that  they  were  gon  about  two  Bows-shot 
from  the  place  that  ^let  them  into  the  way  :  they 
JavVred  ^^PJ^d  two  vcry  ill-favoured  ones  coming-  down 
""«««■  apace  to   meet  them.     With  that   Christiana,   and 

Mercie  her  Friend  covered  themselves  with  their 
Vails,  and  so  kept  on  their  Journey  :  The  Children 
also  went  on  before,  so  that  at  last  they  met  to- 
gether. Then  they  that  came  down  to  meet  them, 
came  just  up  to  the  Women,  as  if  the}'^  would 
imbrace  them  ;  but  Christiana  said,  Stand  back,  or 
cixrfsuanr"  g^  pcaccably  by  as  you  should.  Yet  these  two,  as 
men  that  are  deaf,  regarded  not  Christianas  words ; 
but  began  to  lay  hands  upon  them  ;  at  that  Chris- 
tiana waxing  very  wroth,  spurned  at  them  with  her 
feet.  Mercie  also,  as  well  as  she  could,  did  wliat 
she  could  to  shift  them.  Christiana  again,  said  to 
'^;^^*  f/j?;,^.  them.  Stand  back  and  be  gon,  for  we  have  no 
ghuith  Money  to  loose  being  Pilgrims  as  ye  sec,  and  such 
too  as  live  upon  the  Charity  of  our  Friends. 

Ill-fa.  Then  said  one  of  the  two  of  the  Men,  we 
make  no  assault  upon  you  for  Money,  but  are  come 
out  to  tell  you,  that  if  you  will  but  grant  one  small 
request  which  we  shall  ask,  we  will  make  Women 
of  you  for  ever. 

Christ.  Now  Christiana  imagining  what  they 
should  mean,  made  answer  again,  We  will  neither 
hear  nor  regard^  nm-  yield  to  what  you  shall  ask.  We 
are  in  haste,  cannot  stay,  our  Business  is  a  Business 
of  Life  and  Death  :  So  again  she  and  her  Com- 
panions made  a  fresh  assay  to  go  past  them.  But 
they  letted  them  in  their  way. 

Ill-fa.  And  they  said,  we  intend  no  hurt  to  your 
lives,  'tis  another  thing  we  would  have. 

*  'led  them;  1687.  *  Inserted  in  1087. 


ichcii  tee  a  re 
assaulted.' ' 


€i)t  pilsnmg;  proffitsis;.  235 

Christ.  Ay,  quoth  Christiana,  you  would  have  usshecryesoiu. 
Body  and  Soul,  for  I  know  'tis  for  that  you  are 
come  ;  but  we  will  die  rather  upon  the  spot,  then 
suffer  our  selves  to  be  brought  into  such  Snares  as 
shall  hazzard  our  well  being  hereafter.  And  with 
that  they  both  Shrieked  out,  and  cryed  Murder, 
Murder:  And  so  put  themselves  under  those  Laws  g^aV'^^' 
that  are  provided  for  the  Protection  of  Women. 
But  the  men  still  made  their  approach  upon  them, 
with  design  to  prevail  against  them :  They  there- 
fore cryed  out  again. 

*Now  thev  being:,  as  I  said,  not  far  from  the  Gate  ''"^'^  n^od 

•^  ®  1       .  .  1  IP  to  cry  out 

in  at  which  they  came,  their  voice  was  heard  irom 
where  they  was,  thither  :  Wherefore  some  of  the 
House  came  out,  and  knowing  that  it  was  Chris- 
tiana's Tongue  :  they  made  haste  to  her  relief.  But 
by  that  they  was  got  within  sight  of  them,  the 
Women  was  in  a  very  great  scuffle,  the  Children 
also  stood  crying  by.  Then  did  he  that  came  in  for^i 
their  relief,  call  out  to  the  Ruffins  saying,  What  is 
that  thing  that  you  do  ?  Would  you  make  my  Lords 
People  to  transgress  ?  He  also  attempted  to  take 
them  :  but  they  did  make  their  escape  over  the 
Wall  into  the  Garden  of  the  Man,  to  whom  the 
great  Dog  belonged,  so  the  Dog  became  their  Pro- 
tector. This  Reliever  then  came  up  to  the  Women, ^''«^^'^^^^'«« 
and  asked  them  how  they  did.  So  they  answered,  '^^/°''' 
we  thank  thy  Prince,  pretty  well,  only  we  have 
been  somewhat  affrighted,  we  thank  thee  also  for 
that  thou  camest  in  to  our  help,  for  otherwise  we 
had  been  overcome. 

Reliever.  So  after  a  few  more  words,  this  Reliever 
said,  as  followeth  :  /  marvelled  much  when  you  was  rAeReuever 
entertained  at  the  Gate  above,  being  ye  knew  that  ye  wom<n. 
wer^  hut  weak  Women,  that  you  petitioned  not  the  Lord 
there  for  a  Conductor  :    Then  might  you  have  avoided 

^  Inserted  in  1(787. 


Tlie  Reliever 


236  Cl)e  ^rroutr  part  of 

these   Troubles,    and   Dangers:    For  he   would  have 
granted  you  one. 

'marktut:-^  Christ.  Alas  said  Christiana^  we  were  so  taken 
with  our  present  blessing,  that  Dangers  to  come 
were  forgotten  by  us ;  besides,  who  could  have 
thought  that  so  near  the  King's  Palace  there  should 
have  lurked  such  naughty  ones :  Indeed  it  had 
been  well  for  us  had  we  asked  our  Lord  for  one ; 
but  since  our  Lord  knew  'twould  be  for  our  profit, 
I  wonder  he  sent  not  one  along  with  us. 

S'o/'"        Rclie.    It  is  not  always  necessary  to  grant  things 

asking  for.  ^j^gf  asked  for,  lest  hy  so  doing  they  become  of  little 
esteem  ;  bid  when  the  ivant  of  a  thing  is  felt,  it  then 
comes,  under,  in  the  Eyes  of  him  that  feels  it,  that 
estimate,  that  properly  is  its  due,  and  so  consequently 
will  be  thereafter  used.  Had  my  Lord  granted  you  a 
Conductor,  you  ivoidd  not  neither,  so  have  bewailed 
that  oversight  of  yours  in  not  asking  for  one,  as  now 
you  have  occasion  to  do.  So  all  things  work  for  good, 
and  tend  to  make  you  more  wary. 

Christ.  Shall  we  go  back  again  to  my  Lord,  and 
confess  our  folly  and  ask  one  ? 

Ilelie.  Your  Confession  of  your  folly,  I  will  pre- 
sent him  with  :  To  go  back  again,  you  need  not.  For 
in  all  places  where  you  shall  come,  you  will  find  no 
want  ait  all,  for  in  every  of  my  Lord's  Lodgings  which 
he  has  prepared  for  the  reception  of  his  Pilgrims,  there 
is  sufficient  to  furnish  them  against  all  attempts  ichat- 
soever.     But,  as  I  said,  he  will  be  inquired  of  by  them 

Ezek. 36.37. /o  do  it  for  tlicm  i  and  'tis  a  poor  thing  that  is  not 
worth  asking  for.  When  he  had  thus  said,  he  went 
back  to  his  place,  and  the  Pilgrims  went  on  their 
way. 

The  Mistake       Mcr.  Tlictt  Said  Mercie,  what  a  sudden  blank  is 

of  Mercie.  ' 

here  ?     I  made  account  we  had  now  been  past  all 
danger,  and  that  wc  should  never  see  sorrow  more. 

^  Inserted  in  1687. 


Cfte  i9ilgnm£f  ^Siogitsis^.  237 

Christ.  Thy  Itmocency,  my  Sister,  said  Clwistiana  ^^,'|f"*"^'^ 
to  Mercie,  may  excuse  thee  much  ;  but  as  for  me, 
my  fault  is  so  much  the  greater,  for  that  I  saw  this 
danger  before  I  came  out  of  the  Doors,  and  yet  did 
not  provide  for  it,  where  Provision  might  a  been 
had.     I  am  therefore  much  to  be  blamed. 

Mer.  Then  said  Mercie,  how  knew  you  this  before 
you  came  from  homef  pray  open  to  me  this  Riddle. 

Christ.  Why,  I  will  tell  you.  Before  I  set  Foot 
out  of  Doors,  one  Night,  as  I  lay  in  my  Bed,  I  had 
a  Dream  about  this.  For  methought  I  saw  two 
men,  as  like  these  as  ever  the  World  they  could 
look,  stand  at  my  Beds-feet,  Plotting  how  they  might 
prevent  my  Salvation.  I  will  tell  you  their  very 
words.  They  said,  ('twas  when  I  was  in  my 
Troubles,)  What  shall  we  do  with  this  Womaii  f  For  ^ormm^'^f-^ 
she  cries  out  waking  and  sleepincj  for  forgiveness,  ifp^^^^'^- 
she  he  sujfered  to  go  on  as  she  begins,  ive  shall  lose  her 
as  we  have  lost  her  Husband.  This  you  know  might 
a  made  me  take  heed,  and  have  provided  when 
Provision  might  a  been  had. 

Mer.  Well  said  Mercie,  as  bii  this  neqlect,  we  have'^f^y   , 

J     ,     7  T  .  makes  good 

an  occasioti  miiiistred  unto  us,  to  behold  our  own  miner-  ■'^^of  their 

r^  -r  7  '77  neglect  oj 

fections  :   So  our  Lord  has  taken  occasion  thereby,  to  ''"'y'' 
make  jnanifest   the  Riches  of  his  Grace.     For  he,  as 
we  see,  has  followed  us  with  un-asked  kindness,  and 
has  delivered  us  from  their  hands  that  were  stronger 
than  we,  of  his  meer  good  pleasure. 

Thus  now  when  they  had  talked  away  a  little 
more  time,  they  drew  nigh  to  an  House  which  \q(^1^'"-'- 
stood  in  the  way,  which  House  was  built  for  the 
relief  of  Pilgrims  :  As  you  will  find  more  fully 
related  in  the  first  part  of  these  Records  of  the 
Pilgrims  Progress.  So  they  drew  on  towards  the 
House,"  (the  House  of  the  Interpreter)  and  wdien 
they  came  to  the  Door  they  heard  a  great  talk  in 

'  Inserted  in  1687. 


238  €l)t  ^erouti  ^ait  oi 

the  House,  they  then  gave  ear,  and  heard,  as  they 
m^rplet^  thought,  Christiana  mentioned  by  name.      For  you 
chri^uan^s  J^ust  know  that  there  went  along,  even  before  her, 
going  on  jni-.^  talk  of  hcr  aud  her  Childrens  p'oino-  on  Pilsrrim- 
age.      And   this  thing   was  the  more   pleasing    to 
them,  because  they  had  heard  that  she  was  Chris- 
tiaiis  Wife  ;  that  Woman  who  was  sometime  ago, 
so  miwilling  to  hear  of  going  on  Pilgrimage.    Thus 
therefore  they  stood  still  and  heard  the  good  people 
within   commending  her,  who  they  little  thought 
'ts7<ci-/ioc^«  stood  at  the  Door.     '\  Kt  last  Christiana  knocked  as 
she  had  done  at  the  Gate  before.     Now  when  she 
had    knocked,   there   came   to   the   Door  a  young- 
Damsel,  *'  named  innocent,'  and  opened  the  Door 
and  looked,  and  behold  two  Women  was  there. 
'■^^'i'LfiZ       Dams.   Then  said  the  Damsel  to  them.  With  ivhom 

IS  opened  to  ' 

no'clni''  ^^'  ^'Oidd  you  speak  in  this  place  f 

Christ.  Christiana  answered,  we  understand  that 
this  is  a  privileged  place  for  those  that  are  become 
Pilgrims,  and  we  now  at  this  Door  are  such  :  Where- 
foi'e  we  pray  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  that  for 
which  we  at  this  time  are  come ;  for  the  day,  as 
thou  seest,  is  very  far  spent,  and  we  are  loth  to 
night  to  go  any  further. 

Dams.  Pray  what  may  1  call  your  name,  that  I 
may  tell  it  to  my  Lord  within  ? 

Christ.  My  name  is  Christiana,  I  was  the  Wife  of 
that  Pilgrim  that  some  years  ago  did  travel  this 
way,  and  these  be  his  four  children.  This  Maiden 
also  ^is  my  Companion,  and  is  going  on  Pilgrimage 
too. 

Innocent.  Then  ran  Innocent  in  (for  that  was  her 

name)  and  said  to  those  within,  Can  you  think  who 

ZvMofthc  is  at  the  Door  !     There  is  Christiana  and  her  Chil- 

warchruti-  di'en,  and  her  Companion,  all  waiting  for  enter- 


ana 


/•%rt«.^'^  tain  men  t  liere.      *Then   they  leaped  for  Joy,   and 

*  Inserted  in  1687.  "  '  is  iilso,'  1<J87. 


Ci)e  ^ilcynmss  progwsigJ*  239 

went  and  told  their  Master.  So  he  came  to  the 
Door,  and  looking  upon  her,  he  said,  Art  thou  that 
Christiana  ivhom  Christian  the  Good-man,  left  behind 
him,  ivhen  he  betook  himself  to  a  Pilgrims  Life. 

Christ.  I  am  that  Woman  that  was  so  hard- 
hearted as  to  slight  my  Husbands  Troubles,  and 
that  left  him  to  go  on  in  his  Journey  alone,  and 
these  are  his  four  Children ;  but  noAv  I  also  am 
come,  for  I  am  convinced  that  no  way  is  right  but 
this. 

Inter.   Then  is  fulfilled  that  which  also  is  Writte7i 
of  the  Man  that  said  to  his  Son,  go  work  to  day  in  my  Mat.  21. 20. 
Vineyard.,  and  he  said  to  his  Father,  I  ivill  not ;  but 
afterwards  repented  and  icent. 

Christ.  Then  said  Christiana,  So  be  it,  Amen. 
God  make  it  a  true  saying  upon  me,  and  grant  that 
I  may  be  found  at  the  last,  of  him  in  peace  without 
spot  and  blameless. 

Inter.  But  why  standest  thou  thus  at  the  Door, 
come  in  thou  Daughter  of  Abraham,  we  tvas  talking 
of  thee  but  now :  For  tidings  have  come  to  us  before, 
how  thou  art  become  a  Pilgrim.  Come  Children, 
come  in ;  come  Maiden,  come  in ;  so  he  had  them  all 
in  to  the  House. 

So  when  they  were  within,  they  were  bidden  sit 
down   and  rest  them,   the   which   when  they   had 
done,  those  that  attended  upon  the  Pilgrims  in  ^^^^'^dfo's^ 
House,  came  into  the  Room  to  see  them.     And  one  l^'f""",?  „ 
smiled,  and  another  smiled,  and  they  all  smiled  for^°'^^«^'- 
Joy  that  Christiana  was  become  a  Pilgrim.     They 
also  looked  upon  the  Boys,  they  stroaked  them  over 
the   Faces  with  the  Hand,  in  token  of  their  kind 
reception  of  them:  they  also  carried  it  lovingly  to 
Mercie,  and  bid  them  all  welcome  into  their  Mas- 
ters House. 

After  a  while,  because  Supper  was  not  ready,  the 
Literpreter  took  them  into  his  Significant  Rooms,  ^^'^^^^f^- 

'  Inserted  in  1687.      '  ^'"""*-' 


240  Cf)e  ^ffontr  ^3art  of 

Lp. 28 to 37.]  and  sliewed  them  what  Christian,  Christiands  Hus- 
band had  seen  sometime  before.  Here  therefore 
they  saw  the  Man  in  the  Cage,  the  Man  and  his 
Dream,  the  man  that  cut  his  way  thorough  his 
Enemies,  and  the  Picture  of  the  biggest  of  them 
all:  together  with  the  rest  of  those  things  that  were 
then  so  profitable  to  Christian. 

This  done,  and  after  these  things  had  been  some- 
what digested  by  Christiana,  and  her  Company : 
the  Interpreter  takes  them    apart  again  :   and   has 

The  man     them  first  into  a  Room,  where  ivas  a  man  that  could 

Muckrake  look  no  waij  hut  doivnivards,  with  a  Muckrake  in  his 
hand.  There  stood  also  one  over  his  head  with  a 
Celestial  Crown  in  his  Hand,  and  proffered  to  give 
him  that  Crown,  for  his  Muck-rake ;  but  the  man  did 
neither  look  up,  nor  regard ;  hut  raked  to  himself  the 
Straws,  the  small  Sticks,  and  Dust  of  the  ^  Floar. 

Then  said  Christiana,  I  perswade  my  self  that  I 
^knew  somewhat  the  meaning  of  this :  For  this  is  a 
Figure  of  a  man  of  this  World :  Is  it  not,  good  Sir  f 
Inter.  Thou  hast  said  the  right,  said  he,  and  his 
Muck-rake  doth  shew  his  Carnal  mind.  And 
whereas  thou  seest  him  rather  give  heed  to  rake  up 
Straws  and  Sticks,  and  the  Dust  of  the  Floar,  then 
to  what  he  says  that  calls  to  him  from  above  with 
the  Celestial  Crown  in  his  Hand ;  it  is  to  show, 
That  Heaven  is  but  as  a  Fable  to  some,  and  that 
things  here  are  counted  the  only  things  substantial. 
Now  whereas  it  was  also  shewed  thee,  that  the  man 
could  look  no  way  but  downwards:  It  is  to  let  thee 
know  that  earthly  things  when  they  are  with  Power 
upon  Mens  minds,  quite  carry  their  hearts  away 
from  God. 

•chriBti-  Christ.   7y^e7^  *«zW  Christiana,  0  /  deliver  me  from 

'::£J:T  tUs  Muck-rake. 

Inter.  That  Prayer,  said  the  Interpreter,  has  lain 

"  'Floor,'  1687.  '   Inserted  in  1687. 

•  '  know;  1 687. 


Muck-rake."' 


CI)e  |3ilg:nmss  progresisi.  241 

by   till  'tis   almost  rusty:   Give  me  not  Riches^  Isprov.so. s. 
scarce  the  Prayer  of  one  of  ten  thousand.     Straws, 
and   Sticks,   and    Dust,    witli   most,   are  the  great 
things  now  looked  after. 

With  that  Mercie,  and  Christiana  wept,  and  said. 
It  is  alas  !  too  true. 

When  the  Interpreter  had  shewed  them  this,  he 
has  them  into  the  very  best  Room  in  the  House,  (a 
very  brave  Room  it  was)  so  he  bid  them  look  round 
about,  and  see  if  they  could  find  any  thing  profit- 
able there.  Then  they  looked  round  and  round  : 
For  there  was  nothing  there  to  be  seen  but  a  very 
great  Spider  on  the  Wall;  and  that  they  overlookt. 

Mer.  Then  said  Mercie,  Sir,  I  see  nothing ;  but 
Christiana  held  her  peaee. 

Inter.  But  said  the  Interpreter,  look  again :  she  fj^^^_ 
therefore   lookt  again    and   said.    Here  is   not  any 
thing,  but  an  Kfil}/  Spider,  who  hangs  by  her  Hands 
upon   the  Wall.     Then   said   he,   Is  there  but  one 
Spider  in  all  this  spacious  Room  ?     Then  the  water 
stood   in   Christianas   Eyes,  for  she  was  a  Woman 
quick  of  apprehension:    and   she   said.  Yes,  Lord,  i<y<j;^ 
there  is  here  ^more  than  one.     Yea,  and  Spiders  fJ^J')" 
whose  Venom   is   far   more   destructive   then   that 
which  is  in  her.     The  Literpreter  then  looked  plea- 
santly  upon    her,    and    said,    Thou    hast    said   the 
Truth.     This  made  Mercie  blush,  and  the  Boys  to 
cover  their  Faces  :  For  they  all  began  now  to  un- 
derstand the  Riddle. 

Then  said  the  Interpreter  again,  The  Spider  taketh  p™-  ^^-  ^^■ 
hold  with  her  hands  as  you  see,  and  is  in  Kings  Pal- 
laces.     And  wherefore  is  this  recorded;  but  to  shew 
you,  that  how  full  of  the  Venome  of  Sin  soever  you  'neinter- 
be,  yet  you  may  by  the  hand  of  Faith  lay  hold  of/'-^"*^"^" 
and    dwell  in   the  best  Room   that  belongs  to  the 
Kings  House  above  ? 

Chris.  I  thought,  said    Christiana,  of  something 

'  Inserted  in  1687-  ^  'more  here,'  1687. 


242  €\)t  ^erontr  ^3art  of 

of  this  ;  but  I  could  not  imagin  it  all.  I  thoiiglit 
that  we  were  like  Spiders,  and  that  we  looked  like 
nglv  Creatures,  in  what  fine  Room  soever  we  were  : 
But  that  by  this  Spider,  this  venomous  and  ill  fa- 
voured Creature,  we  were  to  learn  how  to  act  Faith, 
'  ^that'  came  not  into  my  mind.  ^And  yet  she  has 
taken  hold  with  her  hands,  as  I  see,  and  dwells  in 
tlie  best  Room  in  the  House.  God  has  made  no- 
thing in  vain. 

Then  they  seemed  all  to  be  glad  ;  but  the  water 
stood  in  their  Eyes:  Yet  they  looked  one  upon  an- 
other, and  also  bowed  before  the  Interpreter. 

He  had  them  then  into  another  Room  where  was 
a  Hen  and  Chickens,  and  bid  them  observe  a  while. 
midciMi    ^^  *^"^  ^^  ^^^^   Chickens  went  to    the   Trough  to 
ens  drink,   and  every   time   she  drank  she   lift  up  her 

head  and  her  eyes  towards  Heaven.  See,  said  he, 
w^hat  this  little  Chick  doth,  and  learn  of  her  to 
acknowledge  whence  your  Mercies  come,  by  receiv- 
ing them  with  looking  up.  Yet  again,  said  he, 
observe  and  look  :  So  they  gave  heed,  and  per- 
ceived that  the  Hen  did  walk  in  a  fourfold  Method 
towards  her  Chickens,  i.  She  had  a  common  call, 
and  that  she  hath  all  day  long.  2.  She  had  a  spe- 
cial call,  and  that  she  had  but  sometimes.  3.  She 
Matt.  23. 27  had  a  hroodinrj  note,  and  4.  she  had  an  out-cry. 

Now,  said  he,  compare  this  Heji  to  your  King, 
and  these  Chickens  to  his  Obedient  ones.  For  an- 
swerable to  her,  himself  has  his  Methods,  which  he 
walketh  in  towards  his  People.  By  his  common 
call,  he  gives  nothing,  by  his  special  call,  he  always 
has  something  to  give,  he  has  also  a  brooding  voice, 
for  them  that  are  wider  his  Wing,  and  he  has  an 
out-cry,  to  give  the  yilarm  when  he  seeth  the  Enemy 
come~     I  chose,  my  Darlings,  to  lead  you  into  the 

*  Inserted  in  1087.  thoughts,  that  she  worketh  witli 

'  Altered    after    the    author's      her  hands.' 
death,  tu  '  that  came  not  into  my 


€i)t  pilgn'mss  progresss!*  243 

Room  where  such  things  are,  because  you  are  Wo- 
men, and  they  are  easie  for  you. 

Chris.  And  Sir,  said  CJirisfinna,  pray  let  us  see  some 
more:   So   he  had  them  into  the  Slauo'hter-house,  ^/ "t«" 

_^  ^  Bvicher  ana 

where  was  a  Butcher  a  killing  of  a  Sheep:  Kxidi  ^^e  sheep. 
behold  the  Sheep  was  quiet,  and  took  her  Death 
patiently.  Then  said  the  Interpreter :  you  must 
learn  of  this  Sheep,  to  suffer :  And  to  put  up  wrongs 
without  murmurings  and  complaints.  Behold  how 
quietly  she  takes  her  Death,  and  without  objecting 
she  suffereth  her  Skin  to  be  pulled  over  her  Ears. 
Your  King  doth  call  you  his  Sheep. 

After  this,  he  led  them  into  his  Garden,  where  o/the 
was  great  variety  of  Flowers  :  and  he  said,  do  you 
see  all  these?  So  Christiana  said,  yes.  Then  said 
he  again.  Behold  the  Flowers  are  divers  in  Stature, 
in  Quality,  and  Colour,  and  Smell,  and  Virtue,  and 
some  are  better  than  some  :  Also  where  the  Gar- 
diner has  set  them,  there  they  stand,  and  quarrel 
not  one  with  another. 

Again,  he  had  them  into  his  Field,  which  he  had  o/thePiM. 
sowed  with  Wheat,  and  Corn:  but  when  they  be- 
held, the  tops  of  all  was  cut  off,  only  the  Straw  re- 
mained. He  said  again.  This  Ground  was  Dunged, 
and  Plowed,  and  sowed  ;  but  what  shall  w^e  do 
with  the  Crop  ?  Then  said  Ckristiana,  burn  some 
and  make  muck  of  the  rest.  Then  said  the  Inter- 
preter again.  Fruit  you  see  is  that  thing  you  look 
for,  and  for  w^ant  of  that  you  condemn  it  to  the 
Fire,  and  to  be  trodden  under  foot  of  men:  Beware 
that  in  this  you  condemn  not  your  selves. 

Then,  as  they  were  coming  in  from  abroad,  they  ofm_ 
espied  a  little  Robhin  with  a  great  Spider  in  his  ^/tespTder.' 
mouth.  So  the  Interpreter  said,  look  here.  So 
they  looked,  and  Mercie  wondred  ;  but  Christiana 
said,  what  a  disparagement  is  it  to  such  a  little 
prett)'^  Bird  as  the  Robbin-red-breast  is,  he  being 
also  a  Bird  above  many,  that  loveth  to  maintain  a 


244  Cl)e  ^fronti  ^3art  of 

kind  of  Sociableness  with  Man?  I  had  thouglit 
they  had  lived  upon  crums  of  Bread,  or  upon  otlier 
such  harmless  matter.  I  like  him  worse  than  I  did. 
The  Interpreter  then  replied,  This  Robbin  is  an 
Emblem  very  apt  to  set  forth  some  Professors  by  ; 
for  to  sight  they  are  as  this  Robbin,  pretty  of  Note, 
Colour  and  Carriage,  they  seem  also  to  have  a 
very  great  Love  for  Professors  that  are  sincere ; 
and  above  all  other  to  desire  to  ^sosciate  with,  and 
to  be  in  their  Company,  as  if  they  could  live  upon 
the  good  Mans  Crums.  They  pretend  also  that 
therefore  it  is,  that  they  frequent  the  House  of  the 
Godly,  and  the  appointments  of  the  Lord:  but  when 
they  are  by  themselves,  as  the  Robbin,  they  can  catch 
and  gobble  up  Spiders,  they  can  change  their  Diet, 
drink  Tniquity,  and  swallow  down  Sin  like  Water. 
youwuiget       So  whcn  tliey  were  come  again  into  the  House, 

at  that  which  to  ^  i.  i  /^j      •   i  • 

!,et  lies  unre- because  ouppcr  as  yet  was  not  ready,  C/instiana 
again  desired  that  the  Interpreter  would  either  shew 
or  tell  of  some  other  things  that  are  Profitable. 

Then  the  Interpreter  began  and  said,  The  fatter 
the  Soiv  is,  the  more  she  desires  the  Mire ;  the  fatter 
the  OcV  is,  the  more  gamesomly  he  goes  to  the  Slaugh- 
ter ;  and  the  more  healthy  the  lusty  man  is,  the  more 
prone  he  is  unto  Evil. 

There  is  a  desire  in  Women,  to  go  neat  and  fine, 
and  it  is  a  comely  thing  to  be  adorned  ivith  that,  that 
in  Gods  sight  is  of  great  price. 

'Tis  easier  watching  a  night  or  two,  then  to  sit  up  a 
whole  year  together :  So  'tis  easier  for  one  to  begin  to 
profess  well,  then  to  hold  out  as  he  should  to  the  end. 

Every  Ship- Master,  ichen  in  a  Storm,'  will  wil- 
lingly cast  that  over  Board  that  is  of  the  smallest  value 
in  the  Vessel;  but  who  will  throw  the  best  out  first  ? 
none  but  he  that  feareth  not  God. 

One  leak  will  sink  a  Ship,  and  one  Sin  will  destroy 
a  Shiner. 

*  '.to  sociate,'  1687. 


Ci)e  ^pilgrims  progress;*  245 

He  that  forgets  his  Friend,  is  ungrateful  unto  him  ; 
but  he  that  forgets  his  Saviour  is  unmerciful  to  him- 
self 

He  that  lives  in  Sin,  and  looks  for  Happiness  here- 
after, is  like  him  that  soweth  Cockle,  and  thinks  to  fill 
his  Barn  ivith  Wheat  or  Barley. 

If  a  man  would  live  well,  let  him  fetch  his  last  day 
to  him,  and  make  it  always  his  company-Keeper. 

Whispering  and  change  of  thoughts,  proves  that  Sin 
is  in  the  World. 

If  the  World,  tvhich  God  sets  light  by,  is  counted  a 
thing  of  that  worth  ivith  men  :  tvhat  is  Heaven  ^which 
God  commendeth  f 

If  the  Life  that  is  attended  with  so  many  troubles, 
is  so  loth  to  be  let  go  by  us,  What  is  the  Life  above  f 

Every  Body  will  cry  up  the  goodness  of  Men ;  but 
who  is  there  that  is,  as  he  should,  affected  with  the 
Goodness  of  God  f 

We  seldom  sit  down  to  Meat;  but  we  eat,  and  leave: 
So  there  is  in  Jesus  Christ  more  Merit  and  Righteous- 
ness then  the  whole  World  has  need  of. 

When  the  Interpreter  had  done,  he  takes  them 
out  into  his  Garden  again,  and  had  them  to  a  Tree tlmtllroLn 
whose  inside  was  all  Rotten,  and  gone,  and  yet  it  «*''««'■' 
grew  and  had  Leaves.  Then  said  Mercie,  what 
means  this  ?  This  Tree,  said  he,  whose  out-side  is 
fair,  and  whose  iiiside  is  Rotten ;  it  is  to  which 
many  may  be  compared  that  are  in  the  Garden  of 
God  :  Who  with  their  mouths  speak  high  in  behalf 
of  God;  but  indeed  will  do  nothing  for  him:  whose 
Leaves  are  fair ;  but  their  heart  Good  for  nothing, 
but  to  be  Tinder  for  the  Devils  Tinder-Box. 

Now  Supper  was  ready,  the  Table  spread,  and  They  an  at 
all  things  set  on^  the  Board;  so  they  sate  down  and  '^"^'^'*'^' 
did  eat  when  one  had  given  thanks.     And  the  In- 
terpreter did    usually   entertain   those  that  lodged 

*  '  Heaven  that  God,'  1G87.  ''  '  ou  Board,'  1687. 


246  ClK  ^ttoixH  ^3art  of 

with  liini,  with   Musick  at  Meals,  so  the  Ministrels 
played.     There  was  also  one  that  did  Sinq-.     And 
a  very  fine  voice  he  had. 
His  Song  was  this. 

The  Lord  is  only  my  Support, 
And  he  that  doth  me  feed : 
Hoio  can  I  then  want  any  thinij. 
Whereof  I  stand  in  need  f 

When  the  Song-  and  Musick  was  ended,  the  In- 
terpreter asked  Ghristiana,  What  it  was  that  at  first 
Talk  at  Sup-  did  move  her  to  betake  herself  to  a  Pik/rims  Life  f 

per.  ,      ,  «^_  n 

A  R^etition      Christiana  answered.     First,  the  loss  of  mv  Hus- 

0/  Chris-  .  .  i»iT  I'l 

n^na:sEx-  band  came  into  mv  mmd,  at  which  I  was  heartily 

pevxerwe.  ,  j  ^  ^      j 

grieved  :  but  all  that  w^as  but  natural  Affection. 
Then  after  that,  came  the  Troubles,  and  Pilgrimage 
of  my  Husbands  into  my  mind,  and  also  how  like  a 
Churl  I  had  carried  it  to  him  as  to  that.  So  guilt 
took  hold  of  my  mind,  and  would  have  drawn  me 
into  the  Pond;  but  that  opportunely  I  had  a 
Dream  of  the  well-being  of  my  Husband,  and  a 
Letter  sent  me  by  the  King  of  that  Country  wliere 
my  Husband  dwells,  to  come  to  him.  The  Dream 
and  the  Letter  together  so  wrought  upon  my  mind, 
that  they  forced  me  to  this  way. 

Inter.  Bid  met  you  loith  no  opposition  afore  you 
set  Old  of  Doors  ? 

Chris.  Yes,  a  Neighbour  of  mine  one  Mrs.  Timo- 
rous, (She  was  a  kin  to  him  that  would  have  per- 
swadcd  my  Husband  to  go  back  for  fear  of  the 
Lions.)  She  all-to-be-fooled  me  ;  for,  as  she  called 
it,  my  intended  desperate  adventure ;  she  also 
urged  what  she  could,  to  dishearten  me  to  it,  the 
hardship  and  Troubles  that  my  Husband  met  with 
in  the  way ;  but  all  this  I  got  over  pretty  w^ell. 
But  a  Dream  that  I  had,  of  two  ill  lookt  ones,  that 
1   thought  (lid  Plot  how  to  make  me  miscarry  in 


my  Journey,  that  hath  troubled  me  much  :  Yea,  it 
still  runs  in  my  mind,  and  makes  me  afraid  of 
every  one  that  I  meet,  lest  they  should  meet  me  to 
do  me  a  mischief,  and  to  turn  me  out  of  the  way. 
Yea,  I  may  tell  my  Lord,  tho'  I  would  not  have 
every  body  know  it,  that  between  this  and  the  Gate 
by  which  we  got  into  the  way,  we  were  both  so 
sorely  assaulted,  that  we  were  made  to  cry  out 
Murder,  and  the  two  that  made  this  assault  upon 
us,  were  like  the  two  that  I  saw  in  my  Dream. 

Then  said  the  Tnteri^reter ,  Thy  beginning  is  good, 
thy  latter  end  shall  greatly  increase.  So  he  ad- 
dressed himself  to  Mercie,  and  said  unto  her,  And  ^  ff*'^^'' 

'  '  'put  to  Mer- 

what  moved  thee  to  come  hither  sweet-heart?  "« 

Mercie.  Then  Mercie  blushed  and  trembled,  and 
for  a  while  continued  silent. 

Interpreter.  Theyi  said  he,  he  not  afraid,  only  be- 
lieve, and  speak  thy  mind, 

Mer.  So  she  began  and  said.  Trul}^  Sir,  my '^Mereysan 
want  of  Experience,  is  that  that  makes  me  covet  to 
be  in  silence,  and  that  also  that  fills  me  with  fears 
of  coming  short  at  last.  I  cannot  tell  of  Visions, 
and  Dreams  as  my  friend  Christiana  can  ;  nor  know 
1  what  it  is  to  mourn  for  my  refusing  of  the  Coun- 
sel of  those  that  were  good  Relations. 

Interpreter.  What  was  it  then,  dear-heart,  that  hath 
prevailed  ivith  thee  to  do  as  thou  hast  done  f 

Mer.  Why,  when  our  friend  here,  was  packing 
up  to  be  gone  from  our  Town,  I  and  another  went 
accidentally  to  see  her.  So  we  knocked  at  the 
Door  and  went  in.  When  we  were  within,  and 
seeing  what  she  was  doing,  we  asked  what  was  her 
meaning.  She  said  she  was  sent  for  to  go  to  her 
Husband,  and  then  she  up  and  told  us,  how  she  had 
seen  him  in  a  Dream,  dwelling  in  a  curious  place 
among  Immortals  wearing  a  Crown,  playing  upon  a 
Harp,   eating  and  drinking  at  his  Princes  Table, 

*  Inserted  in  1687. 

s  2 


248  Cl)e  ^eronti  part  of 

and  singing  Praises  to  him  for  bringing  him  thi- 
ther, &c.  Now  methought,  while  she  was  telling 
these  things  unto  ns,  my  heart  burned  within  me. 
And  I  said  in  my  Heart,  if  this  be  true,  I  will  leave 
my  Father  and  my  Mother,  and  the  Land  of  my 
Nativity,  and  will,  if  I  may  go  along  with  Chris- 
tiana. 

So  I  asked  her  further  of  the  truth  of  these 
things,  and  if  she  would  let  me  go  with  her  ?  For 
I  saw  now  that  there  was  no  dwelling,  but  with  the 
danger  of  ruin,  any  longer  in  our  Town.  But  yet  I 
came  away  with  a  heavy  heart,  not  for  that  1  was 
unwilling  to  come  away  ;  but  for  that  so  many  of 
my  Relations  were  left  behind.  And  I  am  come 
with  all  the  desire  of  my  heart,  and  will  go  if  I 
may  with  Christiana  unto  her  Husband,  and  his 
King. 

Inter.  Thy  setting  out  is  good,  for  thou  hast  given 
Ruth  2. 11,  credit  to  the  truth.  Thou  art  a  Ruth,  who  did  for 
the  love  that  she  bore  to  Naomi,  and  to  the  Lord 
her  God,  leave  Father  and  Mother,  and  the  land  of 
her  Nativity  to  come  out,  and  go  with  a  People  that 
she  knew  not  heretofore.  The  Lord  recompence  thy 
ivork,  and  '^a  full  reward  be  given  thee  of  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel,  under  whose  Wings  thou  art  come  to 
trust. 

Now  Supper  was  ended,  and  Preparations  was 

made  for  Bed,  the  Women  were  laid  singly  alone, 

'/rel?th^n.  ^^^  ^^^^  Boys  by  themselves.     Now  when  Mercie 

'dcesfor     ^as  in  Bed,  she  could  not  sleep  for  joy,  for  that 

'MeTcy-s     jjQyy  jjgj.  (Joubts  of  missino'  at  last,  were  removed 

rot.'        further  from  her  than  ever  they  were  beiore.     bo 

she   lay  blessing   and  Praising  God  who  had  had 

sucli  favour  for  her. 

In  the  Morning  they  arose  with  the  Sun,  and 
prepared  themselves  for  their  departure :   But  the 

"  'and  fui;  1687.  Inserted  in  1687. 


Cfte  i^ilgn'mei  ^rog;itsisi*  249 

Interpreter   would    have    them   tarry   a  while,   for, 
said  he,  you  must  orderly  go  from  hence.     Then 
said  he  to  the   Damsel  that  at  first  opened   unto 
them,  Take  them  and  have  them  into  the  Garden  to 
the  Bath^   and  there  wash  them,   and  make  them 
clean  from  the  soil  which  they  have  gathered  by 
travelling.     Then  Innocent  the  Damsel  took  them 
and  had  them  into  the  Garden,  and  brought  them  sancuficl 
to  the  Bath^  so  she  told  them  that  there  they  must  ''""■ 
wash  and  be  clean,  for  so  her  Master  would  have 
the  Women  to  do  that  called  at  his  House  as  they 
were  going  on  Pilgrimage.     They  then  went  in  and  \Theyu-a,h 
washed,  yea  they  and  the  Boys  and  all,  and  they'"'^ 
came  out  of  that  Bath  not  only  sweet,  and  clean  ; 
but  also  much  enlivened  and  strengthened  in  their 
Joynts  :  So  when  they  came  in  they  looked  fairer  a 
deal,  then  when  they  went  out  to  the  washing. 

When  they  were  returned  out  of  the  Garden 
from  the  Bath,  the  Interpreter  took  them  and  looked 
upon  them  and  said  unto  them,  fair  as  the  Moon. 
Then  he  called  for  the  Seal  wherewith  they  used  to  i^p^'j^^tf 
be  Sealed  that  were  washed  in  his  Bath.  So  the 
Seal  was  brought,  and  he  set  his  Mark  upon  them, 
that  they  might  be  known  in  the  Places  whither 
they  were  yet  to  go  :  Now  the  seal  was  the  contents 
and  sum  of  the  Passover  which  the  Children  of 
Israel  did  eat  when  they  came  out  from  the  Land  s.^g/'lo.'"^ 
of  Egypt :  and  the  mark  was  set  between  their 
Eyes.  This  seal  greatly  added  to  their  Beauty, 
for  it  was  an  Ornament  to  their  Faces,  It  also 
added  to  their  gravity  and  made  their  Counte- 
nances more  like  them  of  Angels. 

Then  said  the  Interpreter  again  to  the  Damsel 
that  waited  upon  these  Women,  Go  into  the  Vestry 
and  fetch  out  Garments  for  these  People  :  So  she 
went  and  fetched  out  white  Rayment,  and  laid  it 

*■  Inserted  in  1687.  '  Quotation  inserted  in  1687. 


lity. 


250  Cf)e  ^eronl5  \Uvt  of 

down  before  him,  so  he  commanded  them  to  put  it 
dotked.'  on.  It  was  fine  Litineti,  white  and  clean.  When  the 
Women  were  thus  adorned  they  seemed  to  be  a 
Terror  one  to  the  other.  For  that  they  could  not 
see  that  glory  each  one  on  her  self,  which  they 
could  see  in  each  other.  Now  therefore  they  began 
to  esteem  each  other  better  than  themselves.  For 
-  you  are  fairer  than  I  am,  said  one,  and  you  are 
more  comely  than  I  am,  said  another.  The  Child- 
ren also  stood  amazed  to  see  into  what  fashion  they 
were  brought. 

The  Interpreter  then  called  for  a  Man-Servant  of 
his,  ^'one  Great-heart^  and  bid  him  take  ^Sz^^orc^,  and 
Helmet^  and  Shield,  and  take  these  my  Daughters, 
said  he,  and  conduct  them  to  the  House  called 
Beautiful,  at  which  place  they  will  rest  next.  So 
he  took  his  Weapons,  and  w^ent  before  them,  and 
the  Interpreter  said,  God  speed.  Those  also  that  be- 
longed to  the  Family  sent  them  away  with  many  a 
good  wish.     So  they  went  on  their  way,  and  sung. 

This  place  has  been  our  second  Stage, 
Here  we  have  heard  and  seen 
Those  good  things  that  from  Age  to  Age. 
To  others  hid  have  been. 

The  Dunghill-raker,  Spider,  Hen, 
The  Chicken  too  to  me 
Hath  taught  a  Lesson,  let  me  then 
Conformed  to  it  be. 

The  Butcher,  Garden,  and  the  Field, 
The  Robbin,  and  his  bait. 
Also  the  Rotten-tree  doth  yield 
Me  Argument  of  Weight 

To  move  me  for  to  watch  and  pray. 
To  strive  to  be  sincere, 
To  take  my  Cross  up  day  by  day, 
A  nd  serve  the  Lord  until  fear. 

•■'  Inserted  in  1687. 


€f)t  ^ilgrimsi  ^rosrcg£{,  251 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream  That  they  went  on,  and 

J  J  •,  * '  1  part 

Greatheart  went  before  them,  so  they  went  ^ii&pag.sv 
came  to  the  place  where  Christians  Burthen  fell  off 
his  Back,  and  tumbled  into  a  Sepulchre.  Here 
then  they  made  a  pause,  and  here  also  they  blessed 
God.  Now  said  Christiana,  it  comes  to  my  mind 
what  was  said  to  us  at  the  Gate,  to  wit,  that  we 
should  have  Pardon,  by  fKorc?  and  Deed;  by  word, 
that  is,  by  the  promise  ;  by  Deed,  to  wit,  in  the 
way  it  was  obtained.  What  the  promise  is,  of  that 
I  know  something :  But  what  is  it  to  have  Pardon 
by  deed,  or  in  the  way  that  it  was  obtained,  Mr. 
Great-heart,  I  suppose  you  know ;  wherefore  if  you 
please  let  us  hear  you  discourse  thereof. 

Great-heart.  Pardon  by  the  deed  done,  is  Pardon  Accnnme>d 
obtained  by  some  one,  for  another  that  hath  need  'unsaid at 
thereof:  Not  by  the   Person  pardoned,  but  in  the  dTscwreeV 
way,  saith  another,  in  which  I  have  obtained  it.    ^OjukfiMby 
then,  to  speak  to  the  question  more  large,  the  par- 
don that  you   and   Mercie   and   these    Boys   have 
attained,   was  obtained  by  another,  to  wit,  by  him 
that  let  you  in  at  the  Gate  :  And  he  hath  obtain'd 
it  in  this  double  way.    He  has  performed  Righteous- 
ness to  cover  you,  and  spilt  blood  to  wash  you  in. 

Chris.  But  if  he  parts  with  his  Righteousness  to 
us  :    What  ivill  he  have  for  himself  f 

Great-heart.  He  has  more  Righteousness  than 
you  have  need  of,  or  then  he  needeth  himself. 

Chris.  Pray  make  that  appear  f 

Great-heart.  With  all  my  heart,  but  first  I  must 
premise  that  he  of  whom  we  are  now  about  to 
speak,  is  one  that  has  not  his  Fellow.  He  has  two 
Natures  in  one  Person,  plain  to  be  distinguished, 
impossible  to  be  divided.  Unto  each  of  these  Na- 
tures a  Righteousness  belongeth,  and  each  Right- 
eousness is  essential  to  that  Nature.  So  that  one 
may  as  easily  cause  tlie  Nature  to  be  extinct,  as  to 

*  Inserted  in  1687. 


252  mn  ^ttoiiti  ^art  of 

separate  its  Justice  or  Righteousness  from  it.  Of 
these  Righteousnesses  therefore,  we  are  not  made  par- 
takers so,  as  that  they,  [^or]  any  of  them,  should  be 
put  upon  us  that  we  might  be  made  just,  and  live 
thereby.  Besides  these  there  is  a  Righteousness 
which  this  Person  has,  as  these  two  Natures  are 
joyned  in  one.  And  this  is  not  the  Righteousness 
of  the  God-head,  as  distinguished  from  the  3fa?i- 
hood ;  nor  the  Righteousness  of  the  Manhood,  as 
distinguished  from  the  God-head ;  but  a  Righteous- 
ness which  standeth  in  the  Union  of  both  Natures  : 
and  may  properly  be  called,  the  Righteousness  that 
is  essential  to  his  being  prepared  of  God  to  the 
capacity  of  the  Mediatory  Office  which  he  was  to 
be  intrusted  with.  If  he  parts  with  his  first  Right- 
eousness, he  parts  with  his  God-head;  if  he  parts 
with  his  second  Righteousness,  he  parts  with  the 
purity  of  his  Manhood ;  if  he  parts  with  this  third, 
he  parts  with  that  perfection  that  capacitates  him 
to  the  Office  of  Mediation.  He  has  therefore  an- 
other Righteousness  which  standeth  in  performance, 
or  obedience  to  a  revealed  Will :  And  that  is  it  that 
he  puts  upon  Sinners,  and  that  by  which  their  Sins 
are  covered.  Wherefore  he  saith,  as  hy  one  mans 
disobedience  many  were  made  Sinners :  So  hy  the  obe- 
dience of  one  shall  many  be  made  Ricjhteotis, 

Chris.  Bid  are  the  other  Righteousnesses  of  no  use 
to  us  f 

Great-heart.  Yes,  for  though  tliey  are  essential  to 
his  Natures  and  Office,  and  so  cannot  be  communi- 
cated unto  another,  yet  it  is  by  Virtue  of  them,  tliat 
the  Rigliteousness  that  justifies,  is  for  that  purpose 
efficacious.  The  Righteousness  of  his  Godhead  gives 
Virtue  to  his  Obedience ;  the  Righteousness  of  liis 
Man-hood  giveth  capability  to  his  obedience  to 
justifie,  and  the  Righteousness  that  standeth  in  the 

'^  Omitted,  probably  a  typographical  error,  it  was  inserted  in  the 
following  editions. 


Union  of  these  two  Natures  to  his  Office,  giveth 
Authority  to  that  Righteousness  to  do  the  work  ^of 
which  it  is  ordained. 

So  then,  here  is  a  Righteousness  that  Christ,  as 
God,  has  no  need  of,  for  he  is  God  without  it :  here 
is  a  Righteousness  that  Christ,  as  Man,  has  no 
need  of  to  make  him  so,  for  he  is  perfect  Man  with- 
out it.  Again,  here  is  a  Righteousness  that  Christ 
as  God-man  has  no  need  of,  for  he  is  perfectly  so 
without  it.  Here  then  is  a  Righteousness  that 
Christ,  as  God,  as  Man,  as  God-man  has  no  need 
of,  with  Reference  to  himself,  and  therefore  he  can 
spare  it,  a  justifying  Righteousness,  that  he  for  him- 
self wanteth  not,  and  therefore  he  giveth  it  away. 
Hence  'tis  called  the  gift  of  RigJitcousness.  This  ^«™  ^-  ^'^• 
Righteousness,  since  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  has 
made  himself  under  the  Law,  must  be  given  away  : 
For  the  Law  doth,  not  only  bind  him  that  is  under 
it,  to  do  justly;  but  to  use  Charity:  Wherefore  he  must, 
he  ought  by  the  Law,  if  he  hath  two  Coats,  to  give 
one  to  him  that  hath  none.  Now  our  Lord  indeed 
hath  two  Coats,  one  for  himself,  and  one  to  spare  : 
Wherefore  he  freely  bestows  one  upon  those  that 
have  none.  And  thus  Christiana,  and  Mercy,  and 
the  rest  of  you  that  are  here,  doth  your  Pardon 
come  by  deed,  or  by  the  work  of  another  man  ? 
Your  Lord  Christ  is  he  that  has  worked,  ^and  has 
given  away  what  he  wrouglit  for,  to  the  next  poor 
Begger  he  meets. 

But  again,  in  order  to  Pardon  by  deed,  there  must 
something  be  paid  to  God  as  a  price,  as  well  as 
something  prepared  to  cover  us  withal.  Sin  has 
delivered  us  up  to  the  just  curse  of  a  Righteous  Law : 
Now.  from  this  curse  we  must  be  justified  by  way  of 
Redemption,  a  price  being  paid  for  the  harms  we 
have  done,  and  this  is  by  the  Blood  of  your  Lord  : 

•  'for  which,'  1687.  "  'and  given  away,"  1687. 


254 


€i)t  0ttoi\ii  ^3art  of 


s  Gala.  3.  13, 


Christiana 
affected  2cilh 
this  way  of 
Redemption. 


'  *  How  the 
Strings  that 
bound  Chris- 
tians bur- 
den to  him 
were  cut.'  * 


'  '  Hoiu  af- 
fection to 
Christ  is  be- 
got in  the 
Soul.' 


Who  came  and  stood  in  your  place,  and  stead,  and 
died  your  Death  for  your  Transgressions.  Thus  has 
he  ransomed  you  from  your  Transgressions,  by 
Blood,  and  covered  your  pointed  and  deformed 
Souls  with  Righteousness  :  For  the  sake  of  which, 
God  passeth  by  you,  and  will  not  hurt  you,  when 
he  comes  to  Judge  the  World. 

Chris.  This  is  brave.  Noiv  I  see  that  there  was 
something  to  be  learnt  by  our  beincj  pardoned  by  word 
and  deed.  Good  Mercie,  let  us  labour  to  keep  this  in 
mind,  and  my  Children  do  you  remember  it  also.  But, 
Sir,  was  not  this  it  that  made  my  good  Christians 
Burden  fall  from  off  his  Shoulder,  and  that  made  him 
(jive  three  leaps  for  Joy? 

Great-heart.  *Yes,  'twas  the  belief  of  this,  that 
cut  those  Strings  that  could  not  be  cut  by  other 
means,  and  'twas  to  give  him  a  proof  of  the  Virtue 
of  this,  that  he  was  suffered  to  carry  his  Burden  to 
the  Cross. 

Chris.  I  thought  so,  for  tho'  my  heart  2vas  lightful 
and  joyous  before,  yet  it  is  ten  times  more  lightsome 
and  joyous  now.  And  I  am  perswaded  by  what  I 
have  felt,  tho'  I  have  felt  but  little  as  yet,  that  if  the 
most  burdened  Man  in  the  World  ivas  here,  and  did 
see  and  believe,  as  I  noiv  do,  'twould  make  his  heart 
the  more  merry  and  blithe. 

Great-heart.  There  is  not  only  comfort,  and  the 
ease  of  a  Burden  brought  to  us,  by  the  sight  and 
Consideration  of  these  ;  but  an  indeared  Affection 
begot  in  us  by  it :  For  who  can,  if  he  doth  but  once 
think  that  Pardon  comes,  not  only  by  promise,  but 
thus  ;  but  be  affected  with  the  way  and  means  of 
his  Redemption,  and  so  with  the  man  that  hath 
wrought  it  for  him  ? 

Chris.  True,  methinks  it  makes  my  Heart  bleed  to 
think  that  he  should  bleed  for  me.      Oh  !  thou  loving 


*  Quoted  as  T.ala.  13.  13  ;  and  so 
continued  in  many  cditityi**- 


"  Inserted  in  1687. 


€i)t  ^ilgnms:  ^3iog:it5d*  255 

one,  Oh  !  thou  Blessed  one.  Thou  deservest  to  have 
me,  thou  hast  bought  me :  Thou  deservest  to  have  me  If^^'^j  ^'"^ 
all,  thou  hast  paid  for  me  ten  thousand  times  more  than  )J,^^4^;"^,. 
/  am  worth.  No  marvel  that  this  made  the  Water 
stand  in  my  Husbands  Eyes,  and  that  it  made  him 
trudf)  so  nimbly  on.  I  am  perswaded  he  ivished  me 
ivith  him  ;  but  vile  Wretch,  that  I  ivas,  I  let  him  come 
all  alone.  0  Mercy,  that  thy  Father  and  Mother 
were  here,  yea,  and  Mrs.  Timorous  also.  Nay,  I ivish 
now  with  all  my  Heart,  that  here  was  Madam  Wanton 
too.  Surely,  surely,  their  Hearts  ivould  be  affected,  nor 
could  the  fear  of  the  one,  nor  the  powerful  Lusts  of  the 
other,  prevail  with  them  to  go  home  again,  and  to  refuse 
to  become  good  Pilgrims. 

Great-heart.  You  speak  now  in  the  warmth  of 
your  Affections,  will  it,  think  you,  be  always  thus 
with  you  ?  Besides,  this  is  not  communicated  to 
every  one,  nor  to  every  one  that  did  see  your  Jesus 
bleed.  There  was  that  stood  by,  and  that  saw  the 
Blood  run  from  his  Heart  to  the  Ground,  and  \ et'To  he  affect 
were  so  far  off  this,  that  mstead  of  lamenting-,  they  cin-jstand 
lauffhed  at  him,  and  instead  of  becoming  his  Dis-AeM^do« 

•     1  1-111  1       •         TT  •        .1    •  O      ^s  a  thing 

ciples,  did  harden  their  Hearts  against  him.  ^ospecmi:^ 
that  all  that  you  have,  my  Daughters,  you  have  by 
a  peculiar  impression  made  by  a  Divine  contemplat- 
ing upon  what  I  have  spoken  to  you.  Remember 
that  'twas  told  you,  that  the  Hen  by  her  common 
call,  gives  no  meat  to  her  Chickens.  This  you  have 
therefore  by  a  special  Grace. 

Now  I  saw  still  in  my  Dream,  that  they  went  on 
until  they  were  come  to  the  place,  that  Simple,  and  simple,  «>« 
Sloth,   and    Presumption,    lay   and    slept    in,   when  presumptio 
Christian  went    by  on    Pilgrimage.      And    behold  i/y. 
they  were  hanged  up  in  Irons  a  little  way  off  on  the 
other-side. 

Mercy.   Then  said  Mercy   to  him  that  icas  their 

*■  Inserted  in  1687. 


256 


Cf)f  ^tronb  |9ait  of 


Bthold  here  koto  the  slothful  are  a  signe 

Hung  lijp,  cause  holy  ways  they  did  decline 

See  here  too  how  the  Child  doth  play  y  man, 

And  weak  grow  strong,  when  Great-heart  leads  the  Van. 


This  cut  is  not  in  the  late  JMr.  Wilson's  copy  of  the 
the  1st  edition,  but  is  in  that  of  1 687.  It  is  there 
placed  innnediately  after  the  party  left  the  Inter- 
preter's house,  as  if  to  show  the  order  in  which 
thoy  walked,  but  it  evidently  belongs  to  the  time 
when  thoy  ]i,-vss('d  fhc  fhnc  victims  tn  idlonoss. 


€f)t  pilgiime;  progitsisi*  257 

Guide,  and  Conductor,  What  are  those  three  men  f 
and  for  ivhat  are  they  hanged  there  f 

Great-heart.  These  three  men,  were  Men  of  very 
bad  Qualities,  they  had  no  mind  to  be  Pilgrims 
themselves,  and  whosoever  they  coidd  they  hin- 
dered ;  they  were  for  sloth  and  folly  themselves, 
and  whoever  they  could  perswade  with,  they  made 
so  too,  and  withal  taught  them  to  presume  that  they 
should  do  well  at  last.  They  were  asleep  when 
Christian  went  by,  and  now  you  go  by  they  are 
hanged. 

Mercy.  Bid  cotdd  they  perswade  any  to  be  of  their 
Opinion  f 

Great-heart.  Yes,  they  turned  several  out  of  the  Thewcnma. 
way.     There  was  Slow-pace  that  they  perswaded  to 
do  as  they.     Thev  also  prevailed  with  one  Short- '^^''^.f'-^y 

7*1  -\T      1  •!  T  •  n  1  prevailed 

Wind,  with  one  JSo-heart,  with  one  Lvnqer-after-lust.'^vontoumi 

1         •    I  en  77  1-1  1T7  ^  out  of  the 

and  with  (yno, bteepy-head,  and  with  a  young  Woman  '"■°'y-"' 
her  name  was  Dull,  to  turn  out  of  the  way  and  be- 
come as  they.  Besides,  they  brought  up  an  ill- 
report  of  your  Lord,  perswading  others  that  he  was 
a  task-Master.  They  also  brought  up  an  evil 
report  of  the  good  Land,  saying,  'twas  not  half  so 
good  as  some  pretend  it  was  :  They  also  began  to 
vilifie  his  Servants,  and  to  count  the  very  best  of 
them  meddlesome,  troublesome  busie-Bodies  :  Fur- 
ther, they  would  call  the  Bread  of  God  Husks ;  the 
Comforts  of  his  Children  Fancies,  the  Travel  and 
Labour  of  Pilgrims,  things-  to  no  Purpose. 

Chris.  Nay,  said  Christiana,  if  they  were  such, 
they  shall  never  he  bewailed  by  me,  they  have  but  ivhat 
they  deserve,  and  I  think  it  is  well  that  they  hang  so 
near  the  High-umy  that  others  may  see  and  take  warn- 
ing. .  But  had  it  not  been  ivell  if  their  Crimes  had 
been  ingraven  in  some  Plate  of  Iron  or  Brass,  and  left 
here,  even  where  they  did  their  Mischiefs,  for  a  caution 
to  other  bad  Men. 

*  Inserted  in  1687. 


258  U)t  J>nonti  ^art  of 

Great-heart.  So  it  is,  as  you  well  may  perceive  if 
you  will  go  a  little  to  the  Wall. 

Mercie.  tVo,  no,  let  them  hang,  and  their  Names 
Rot,  and  their  Crimes  live  for  ever  against  them  ;  I 
think  it  a  high  favour  that  they  were  hanged  afore  we 
came  hither,  who  knows  else  what  they  might  a  done  to 
such  poor  Women  as  we  are  f  Then  she  turned  it 
into  a  Song,  saying, 

Now  then  you  three,  hang  there  and  he  a  Sign 
To  all  that  shall  against  the  Truth  combine : 
A?id  let  him  that  comes  after,  fear  this  end, 
If  unto  Pilgrims  he  is  not  a  Friend. 

And  thou  my  Soul  of  all  such  men  beware, 
That  unto  Holiness  Opposers  are. 

ip«'„<p«5'-       Thus  tliey  went  on  till  they  came  at  the  foot  of  the 
E^ek^.34.18.  Hill  Difficulty.     Where  again  their   good    Friend, 
fietiiw,  of     Mr.   Great-heart  took  an   occasion  to  tell  them    of 
Mn^mm-o- what  hapi)ened  there  when  Christian  himself  went 
by.     So  he  had  them  first  to  the  Spring.     Lo,  saith 
he,  This  is  the  Spring  that  Christian  drank  of,  before 
he  went  up   this  Hill,  and   then   'twas  clear,   and 
good  ;  but  now  'tis  Dirty  with  the  feet  of  some  that 
are  not  desirous  that  Pilgrims  here  should  quench 
their  Thirst:   Thereat  Mercy  said,  And  ivhy  so  en- 
vious  trot     But   said   their  Guide,   It  will  do,  if 
taken  up,  and  put  into  a  Vessel  that  is  sweet  and 
good  ;  for  then  tlie  Dirt  will  sink  to  the  bottom, 
and  the  Water  come  out  by  it  self  more  clear.   Tims 
therefore  Christiana  and  her  Companions  were  com- 
pelled to  do.     They  took  it  up,  and  put  it  into  an 
Earthc:i-pot,  and  so  let  it  stand  till  the  Dirt  was 
gone  to  the  bottom,  and  then  they  drank  thereof. 
\hobarr!d        Ncxt  lic  slicwcd  tlicui  tlic  tvvo  by-ways  that  were 
Z,faliTom^^  the  foot  of  the  Hill,  where  Formality  and  Ilypo- 
'iucl'"''      crisie,    lost  themselves.     And,   said   he,    these    are 
62^44]. ''"*'■  dangerous  Paths :  Two  were  here  cast  away  when 

'  Inserted  in  1687. 


Cf)e  iilsnmsi  prosit^s^^  259 

Christian  came  by.  And  although,  as  you  see, 
these  ways  are  since  stopt  up  with  Chains,  Posts, 
and  a  Ditch  :  Yet  there  are  that  will  chuse  to  adven- 
ture here,  rather  than  take  the  pains  to  go  up  this 
Hill. 

Christiana.   The   Way  of   Transgressors  is  hard,  p™  13  15. 
'Tis  a  wonder  that  they  can  get  into  those  ways,  with- 
out danger  of  breaking  their  Necks. 

Greatheart.  They  will  venture,  yea,  if  at  any 
time  any  of  the  Kings  Servants  doth  happen  to  see 
them,  and  doth  call  unto  them,  and  tell  them  that 
they  are  in  the  wrong  ways,  and  do  bid  them  be- 
ware the  danger ;  then  they  will  railingly  return 
them  answer  and  say,  ^4^ /or  the  Word  that  thou  ^^^r.  i4.  w, 
hast  spoken  irnto  us  in  the  naine  of  the  King,  we  will 
not  hearken  unto  thee ;  hut  ice  will  certainly  do  what- 
soever thing  goeth  out  of  our  oivn  Mouths,  &c.  Nay 
if  you  look  a  little  farther,  you  shall  see  that  these 
ways,  are  made  cautionary  enough,  not  only  by 
these  Posts,  and  Ditch  and  Chain ;  but  also  by 
being  hedged  up.    Yet  they  will  choose  to  go  there. 

Christiana.   Thei/  are  Idle,  they  love  not  to  take  "^'^ '''^'^^v- 

t/  ^  '  t/  r-         .       .         y  some  do 

Pains,  up-hill-ivaii  is  unpleasant  to  them.     So  it  isf^^efogom 
fulfilled  unto  them  as  it  is  Written.     The  way  of  the  Prov.  15. 19. 
slothful  man  is  a  Hedge  of  Thorns.      Yea,  they  will 
rather  chuse  to  walk  upon  a  Snare,  then  to  go  up  this 
Hill,  and  the  rest  of  this  way  to  the  City. 

Then  they  set  forward,  and  began  to  go  up  the  ^jlf^^^^^^^' 
Hill,  and  up  the  Hill  they  went ;  but  before  they '"  ''• 
got  to  the  top,  Christiana  began  to  Pant,  and  said, 
I  dare  say  this  is  a  breathing  Hill ;  no  marvel  if 
they  that  love  their  ease  more  than  their  Souls, 
chuse  to  themselves  a  smoother  way.  Then  said 
Mercie,  I  must  sit  down,  also  the  least  of  the  Chil- 
dren began  to  cry.  Come,  come,  said  Great-heart, 
sit  not  down  here,  for  a  little  above  is  the  Princes 

'  Inserted  in  1687. 


260  mn  ^erontr  part  of 

Ardour.     Then  took  lie  the  little  Boy  by  the  Hand, 
and  led  him  up  thereto. 
M^ Arbour!        When  they  were  come  to  the  Ardour,  they  were 
lliul^Gi'  ^'ery  willing  to  sit  down,  for  they  were  all  in  a  pelt- 
Man.  11.2s.  ing  heat.     Then  said  Merci/,  How  sweet  is  rest  to 
them  that  Labour  f     And  how  good  is  the  Prince  of 
Pilgrims,  to  provide  such  resting  places  for  them  ? 
Of  this  Arbour  I   have  heard  much;  but  I  never 
saw  it  before.     But  here  let  us  beware  of  sleeping  : 
For  as  1  have  heard,  for  that  it  cost  poor  Christian 
dear. 

Then    said   Mr.   Great-heart  to   the   little   ones. 
Come    my   pretty   Boi/s,  how   do    you    do?     what 
Boyl'Z'-      think  you  now  of  going  on  Pilgrimage  ?     Sir,  said 
I7kk"and    the  least,  I  was  almost  beat  out  of  heart ;  but  I 
Mercy.        thank   you   for  lending  me  a   hand    at    my  need. 
And   I  remember  now  what  my  Mother  has   told 
me,  namely,  That  the  way  to   Heaven  is  as  up  a 
Ladder,   and  the  way  to   Hell  is   as  down   a  Hill. 
But  I  had  rather  go  up  the  Ladder  to  Life,  than 
down  the  Hill  to  Death. 
I'ard^t'up        Then  said  Mercie,  But  the  Proverb  is,  To  (jo  down 
downmi:  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  easie  :    But  James  said  (for  that  was  his 
Name)  The   day  is  coming  when  in   my  Opinion, 
()oing  down  Hill  tvill  be  the  hardest  of  all.     'Tis   a 
good  Boy,  said  his  Master,  thou   hast  given  her  a 
right  answer.     Then  Mercy  smiled,   but  the  little 
Boy  did  blush. 
fhemsdwf'       Chris.  Come,  said  Christiana,  will  you  eat  a  bit, 
a  little  to  sweeten  your  Mouths,  while  you  sit  here 
to  rest  your  Legs  ?     For   I   have  here  a  piece   of 
Pomgranate  which  Mr.  Interjjreter  put  in  my  Hand, 
just  when  I  came  out  of  his  Doors  ;  he  gave  me 
also  a  piece  of  an   Honey-comb,  and  a  little  Bottle 
of  Spirits.     I  thought  he  gave  you  something,  said 
Mercy,  because   he  called   you  a  to-side.     Yes,  so 

*  Inserted  in  1687. 


Cfte  i3ilg:n'msi  proffitsis!*  26i 

he  did,  said  the  other.  But  Mercy,  It  shall  still 
be  as  I  said  it  should,  when  at  first  we  came  from 
home  :  Thou  shalt  be  a  sharer  in  all  the  good  that 
I  have,  because  thou  so  willingly  didst  become  my 
Companion.  Then  she  gave  to  them,  and  they  did 
eat,  both  Mercy ^  and  the  Boys.  And  said  Chris- 
tiana to  Mr.  Great-heart,  Sir  will  you  do  as  we  ? 
But  he  answered.  You  are  going  on  Pilgrimage, 
and  presently  I  shall  return  ;  much  Good  may  what 
you  have,  do  to  you.  At  home  I  eat  the  same 
every  day.  Now  when  they  had  eaten  and  drank, 
and  had  chatted  a  little  longer,  their  guide  said  to 
them.  The  day  wears  away,  if  you  think  good,  let 
us  prepare  to  be  going.  So  they  got  up  to  go, 
and  the  little  Boys   went  before ;    But  Christiana  'Christiana 

**  fOVQ€tS  fi€V 

forgat  to  take  her  Bottle  of  Spirits  with  her,  so  she  f^"'"j'/, 
sent  her  little  Boy  back  to  fetch  it.  Then  said 
Mercy,  I  think  this  is  a  losing  Place.  Here  Chris- 
tian lost  his  Role,  and  here  Christiana  left  her 
Bottle  behind  her  :  Sir,  what  is  the  cause  of  this  ? 
so  their  guide  made  answer  and  said.  The  cause  is 
sleep  or  forgetfulness  ;  some  sleep,  when  they  should 
keep  awake ;  and  some  forcjet,  when  they  should 
remember ;  and  this  is  the  very  cause,  why  often  at 
the  resting  places,  some  Pilgrims  in  some  things 
come  off  losers.  Pilgrims  should  watch  and  re-Marhm,. 
member  what  they  have  already  received  under 
their  greatest  enjoyments :  But  for  want  of  doing 
so,  oft  times  their  rejoicing  ends  in  Tears,  and 
their  Sun-shine  in  a  Cloud  :  Witness  the  story  of  Itii?^-!^^ 
Christian  at  this  place. 

When  they  were  come  to  the  place  where  Mis- 
trust and  Timorotis  met  Christiati  to  perswade  him 
to  go  back  for  fear  of  the  Lions,  they  perceived  as 
it  were  a  Stage,  and  before  it  towards  the  Road,  a 
broad  plate  with  a  Copy  of  Verses  Written  thereon, 
and   underneath,  the  reason  of  raising  up  of  that 

^  Inserted  in  1687. 
T 


262  €l)t  ^erontr  ^art  of 

Stage  in  that  place,  rendered.     The  Verses   were 
these. 

Let  him  that  sees  this  Stage  take  heed 

Unto  his  Heart  and  Tongue : 

Lest  if  he  do  not,  here  he  speed 

As  some  have  long  ago?ie. 

The  words  underneath  the  Verses  were,  This 
Stage  was  built  to  jmnish  such  upon,  ivho  through 
Timorousness  or  Mistrust,  shall  be  afraid  to  go  fur- 
ther on  Pilgrimage.  Also  on  this  Stage  both  Mistrust 
and  Timorous  were  burned  thorough  the  Tomjue  ivith 
an  hot  Iron,  for  endeavouring  to  hinder  Christian  in 
his  Journey. 

Then  said  Mercy.     This  is  much  like  to  the  say- 
ing- of  the  beloved,  What  shall  be  given  unto  thee?  or 
what  shall  be  done  unto  thee  thou  false  Tongue?  sharp 
Arrotvs  of  the  mighty,  ivith  Coals  of  Jumper. 
cM49.f  ■        ^^  ^^^^y  ^vent  on,  till  the}^  came  within  sight  of 
the  Lions.     Now  Mr.  Great-heart  was  a  strons;  man, 
AnEmhum  SO  hc  was  not  afraid  of  a  Lion  :   But  yet  when  they 
%"onVave-  wcrc  comc  up  to  the  place  where  the  Lions  were,- 
t'noZ^Z]  the  Boys  that  went  before,  were  glad  to  cringe  be- 
^,^mmu.    hind,  for  they  were  afraid  of  the  Lions,  so  they  stept 
bus  come.    ]^^q\^  ^j^j  wcut  behind.     At  this  their  guide  smiled, 
and  said,  How  now  my  Boys,  do  you  love  to  go 
before  when  no  danger  doth  approach,  and  love  to 
come  behind  so  soon  as  the  Lions  appear  ? 

Now  as  they  went  up,  Mr.  Great-heart  drew  his 

Sword  with  intent  to  make  a  way  for  the  Pilgrims 

G\&n\:1nd   i'^  spite  of  the  Lions.     Then  there  appeared  one, 

"•f''^*"^^'"^  that  it  seems,   had  taken    upon  him  to   back  the 

the  Lions.  '  r 

Lions.  And  he  said  to  the  Pilgrims  guide,  What 
is  the  cause  of  your  coming  hither?  Now  the 
name  of  that  man  was  ^^  Grim,  or'  Bloody-man,  be- 

'  Inserted  in  1687. 


Psal.  120, 
3,4. 


Cfte  f  ilgnmsi  f  rogresisi*  263 

cause  of  his  slaying  of  Pilgrims,  and  he  was  of  the 
race  of  the  Giants. 

Great-heart.  Then  said  the  Pilgrims  guide,  these 
Women  and  Children,  are  going  on  Pilgrimage, 
and  this  is  the  way  they  must  go,  and  go  it  they 
shall  in  spite  of  thee  and  the  Lions. 

Grim.  This  is  not  their  way,  neither  shall  they 
go  therein.  I  am  come  forth  to  withstand  them, 
and  to  that  end  will  back  the  Lions, 

Now  to  say  truth,  by  reason  of  the  fierceness  of 
the  Lions,  and  of  the  Grim  Carriage  of  him  that 
did  back  them,  this  way  had  of  late  lain  much 
un-occupied,  and  was  almost  all  grown  over  with 
Grass. 

Christiana.  Then  said  Christiana^  tho'  the  High- 
ways have^  a  been  un-occupied  heretofore,  and  tho' 
the  Travellers  have  been  made  in  time  past,  to 
walk  thorough  by-Paths,  it  must  not  be  so  now  I 
am  risen,  Now  I  am  Risen  a  Mother  in  Israel.  Judg.  5.6,7. 

Grim.  Then  he  swore  hy  the  Lions,  but  it  should  ; 
and  therefore  bid  them  turn  aside,  for  they  should 
not  have  passage  there. 

Great-heart.  But  their  guide  made  first  his 
Approach  unto  Grim.,  and  laid  so  heavily  at  him 
with  his  Sword,  that  he  forced  him  to  a  retreat. 

Grim.  Then  said  he  (that  attempted  to  back  the 
Lions)  will  you  slay  me  upon  mine  own  Ground  ? 

Great-heart.  'Tis   the  Kino-s  High- way  that   ys^'/jiguu- 

~~  *'  .         tviixt  Grim 

are  in,  and  in  his  way  it  is  that  thou  hast  placed  thy  j^^f^.^^.'^f' ■ 
Lions  ;  but  these  Women,  and  these  Children,  tho' 
weak,  shall  hold  on  their  way  in  spite  of  thy  Lions. 
And  with  that  he  gave  him  again,  a  down-right 
blow,  and  brought  him  upon  his  Knees.  With  this 
blow  he  also  broke  his  Helmet,  and  with  the  next 
he  cut  ofi"  an  Arm.  Then  did  the  Giant  Roar  so 
hideously,  that  his  Voice  frighted  the  Women,  and 

*  Corrected  to  'have  been,'  1687.  ^  Inserted  in  1687, 

t2 


264  mn  ^noiiti  ^3ait  of 

VoJ'''-'''  '^"^'  y^*'  *^^y  ^^^^'6  8'^^<i  ^^  s^^  ^1^^^  li^  sprawling  upon 
the  Ground.  Now  the  Lions  were  chained,  and  so 
of  themselves  could  do  nothing.  Wherefore  when 
old  Grim  that  intended  to  back  them  was  dead,  Mr. 
Great-heart  said  to  the  Pilgrims,  Come  now  and 
follow  me,  and  no  hurt  shall  happen  to  you  from 

fcySC'the  Lions.  They  therefore  went  on;  but  the 
Women  trembled  as  they  passed  by  them,  the  Boys 
also  look't  as  if  they  would  die  ;  but  they  all  got  by 
without  further  hurt. 

Now  then  they  were  within  Sight  of  the  Porter's 
Lodg,  and  they  soon  came  up  unto  it ;  but  they 
made  the  more  haste  after  this  to  go  thither,  because 
'tis  dangerous  travelling  there  in  the  Night.     So 

'tothePorters  ^hcu    thcy    wcrc    come   to    the    Gate,   the    guide 

Lodge:*  knocked,  and  the  Porter  cried,  ^t'/^o  is  there  f  but 
as  soon  as  the  Guide  had  said,  it  is  I,  he  knew  his 
Voice  and  came  down.  (^For  the  Guide  had  oft 
before  that,  come  thither  as  a  Conductor  of  Pil- 
grims) when  he  was  come  down,  he  opened  the 
Gate,  and  seeing  the  Guide  standing  just  before  it 
(for  he  saw  not  the  Women,  for  they  were  behind 
him)  he  said  unto  him,  How  now,  Mr.  Great-heart, 
what  is  your  business  here  so  late  to  Night  ?  I 
have  brought,  said  he,  some  Pilgrims  hither,  where 
by  my  Lords  Commandment,  they  must  Lodg.  I 
had  been  here  some  time  ago,  had  I  not  been 
opposed  by  the  Giant  that  did  use  to  back  the 
Lyons.  But  I  after  a  long  and  tedious  combate 
with  him,  have  cut  him  off,  and  have  brought  the 
Pilgrims  hither  in  safety. 

Porter.    Will  you  not  go  in,  and  stay  till  Morning  f 

a«S'i1"^      Great-heart,    No,   I  will  return  to  my  Lord '  to 

go  back:*    night. 

'Ttupu-         Christiana.  Oh  Sir,  I  know  not  how  to  be  willing 
piore?iU      you  should  leave  us  m  our  ril2;rmias:e,  vou  have 


coTapany 
UUl    ■ 


*  Inserted  in  1087. 


€l)t  ^ilgnmsJ  ^arogredsi*  265 

been  so  faithful,  and  so  loving  to  us,  you  have 
fought  so  stoutly  for  us,  you  have  been  so  hearty 
in  counselling  of  us,  that  I  shall  never  forget  your 
favour  towards  us. 

Mercie.  Then  said  Mercie,  O  that  we  might  have 
thy  Company  to  our  Journeys  end  !  How  can  such 
poor  Women  as  we,  hold  out  in  a  way  so  full  of 
Troubles  as  this  way  is,  without  a  Friend,  and 
Defender  ? 

James.  Then  said  James,  the  youngest  of  the 
Boys,  Pray  Sir,  be  perswaded  to  go  with  us,  and 
help  us,  because  we  are  so  weak,  and  the  way  so 
dangerous  as  it  is. 

Great-heart.  I  am  at  my  Lords  Commandment. 
If  he  shall  allot  me  to  be  your  Guide  quite 
thorouo-h,  I  will  willino:lv  wait  upon  vou  :  but  \\Qve  Heip  lo^t  for 

•  '^  .        *^  leant  of  ask- 

you  failed  at  first ;  for  when  he  bid  me  come  thus  hu^ /or. 
far  with  you,  then  you  should  have  begged  me  of 
him  to  have  gon  quite  thorough  wuth  you,  and  he 
would  have  granted  your  request.  However,  at 
present  I  must  withdraw,  and  so  good  Christiatia, 
Mercij,  and  my  brave  Children,  Adieu. 

Then  the  Porter,  Mr.  Watchful,  asked  Christiana  Yf^^^- 
of  her  Country,  and  of  her  Kindred,  and  she  said, 
I  came  from  the  City  of  Destruction,  /  am  a  Widdow  'Chnstiana 
Woman,   and  my  Husband  is  dead,   his  Name  was  ^ff'"^^'^  ^o 

^  %y  titC  PoTtf.7   h€ 

Christian  the  Pilar im.  How,  said  the  Porter,  was  ^f"'«^'/«« 
he  your  Husband  ?  Yes,  said  she,  and  these  are 
his  Children  ;  and  this,  pointing  to  Mercy,  is  one  of 
my  Towns  Women.  Then  the  Porter  rang  his 
Bell,  as  at  such  times  he  is  wont,  and  there  came 
to  the  Door  one  of  the  Damsels,  whose  Name  was 
humf)l£-mind.  And  to  her  the  Porter  said,  Go  tell 
it  within  that  Christiana  the  Wife  of  Christian  and 
her  Children  are  come  hither  on  Pilgrimage.  She  l^Z%m 
went  in  therefore   and  told  it.     But  Oh,  what  a^tlS/''^ 

*  Inserted  in  1687. 


266  ClK  ^tconti  ^^art  of 

Noise  for   gladness    was    there    within,   when   the 
Damsel  did  but  drop  that  word  out  of  her  Mouth  ? 
So  they  came  with  haste  to  the  Porter,  for  Chris- 
tiana stood  still  at  the  Door  ;  then  some  of  the  most 
grave,  said  unto  her,  Co)}ie  in  Christiana,  co??ie  in 
thou  Wife  of  that  Good  Man,  come  in  thou  Blessed 
Wo?nan,  come  in  ivith  all  that  are  with  thee.     So  she 
went  in,  and  they  followed  her  that  were  her  Chil- 
dren, and  her  Companions.     Now  when  they  were 
gone  in,   they  were  had  into  a  very  large   Room, 
where  they  were  bidden  to  sit  down  :  So  they  sat 
down,  and  the  chief  of  the  House  was  called  to  see, 
\ovefsHnd-  ^^<-l  wclcomc  thc  Guests.     Then  they  came  in,  and, 
%dlflne  understanding    who    they   were,    did    Salute    each 
another.      othcr  with  a  kiss,  and  said,  Welcome  ye  Vessels  of 
the  Grace  of  God,  welcome  to  us  your  Friends. 

Now  because  it  was  somewhat  late,  and  because 

the  Pilgrims  \vere  wear}'  with   their  Journey,  and 

also  made  faint  with  the  sight  of  the  Fight,  and  of 

the  terrible  Lyons :  Therefore  they  desired  as  soon 

Exo.  12. 38.  as  might  be,  to  prepare  to  go  to  Rest.     Nay,  said 

those  of  the  Family,  refresh  your  selves  first  with 

a  morsel  of  Meat.     For  they  had  prepared  for  them 

joh.  1.29.    a    Lamb,    with   the  accustomed    Sauce   belonging 

thereto.     For  the  Porter  had  heard  before  of  their 

coming,  and  had  told  it  to  them  within.     So  when 

they  had  Supped,  and  ended  their  Prayer  with  a 

Psalm,  they  desired  they  might  go  to  rest.     But  let 

us,   said  Christiana,  if  we  may  be  so   bold  as  to 

chuse,  be  in  that  Chamber  that  was  my  Husbands, 

msDi.^"^  when  he  was  here.     So  they  had  them  up  thither, 

and  they  lay  all  in  a  Room.     When  they  were  at 

Rest,  Christiana  and  Mercy  entred   into   discourse 

about  things  that  were  convenient. 

^'Z%%        Chris.  Little  did  I  think  once.,  that  when  my  Hus- 

aii  pugrims.  hand  wcnt  on  Pilgrimage,  I  should  ever  a  followed. 

Mercy.  And  you  as  little  thought  of  lying  in  his 
Bed,  and  in  his  Chamber  to  Rest,  as  you  do  now. 


Cf)e  ^ilgnmss  progresisi,  267 

Chris.  And  much  less  did  I  ever  think  of  seeing 
his  Face  with  Comfort,  and  of  Worshippincj  the  Lord 
the  Kinc)  with  him,  and  yet  now  I  believe  I  shall. 

Mercy.  Hark,  don't  you  hear  a  Noise  ? 

Christiana.  Yes,  'tis  as  I  believe,  a  Noise  of 
Musick,  for  Joy  that  we  are  here. 

Mer.  Wonderful !     Musick  in  the  House,  Musick  Mmick. 
in  the  Heart,  and  Musick  also  in  Heaven,  for  joy 
that  we  are  here. 

Thus  they  talked  a  while,  and  then  betook  them- 
selves to  sleep  ;  so  in  the  Morning,  when  they  were 
awake,  Christiana  said  to  Mercy. 

Chris,    What  ivas  the  matter  that    you  did  If^i^gh '^^^\^i^^ 
in  your  sleep  to  Night  f     I  suppose  you  was  in  a  '^'-'p-'  ' 
Dream  f 

Mercy.  So  I  was,  and  a  sweet  Dream  it  was  ;  but 
are  you  sure  I  laughed  ? 

Christiana,  Yes,  you  laughed  heartily  ;  but  prethee 
Mercy  tell  me  thy  Dream  f 

Mercy.  I  was  a  Dreamed  that  I  sat  all  alone  in  a  Percy's 
solitary  place,  and  was  bemoaning  of  the  hardness 
of  my  Heart. 

Now  I  had  not  sat  there  long,  but  methought 
many  were  gathered  about  me,  to  see  me,  and  to 
hear  what  it  was  that  I  said.  So  they  barkened, 
and  I  went  on  bemoaning  the  hardness  of  my 
Heart.  At  this,  some  of  them  laughed  at  me,  some 
called  me  Fool,  and  some  began  to  thrust  me  about. 
With  that,  methouo;ht  I  looked  up,  and  saw  one' what  her 

,  c  o         1  arearnwas'f 

coming  with  Wings  towards  me.  feo  he  came 
directly  to  me,  and  said,  Mercy,  what  aileth  thee  ? 
Now  when  he  had  heard  me  make  my  complaint  ; 
he  said.  Peace  be  to  thee  :  He  also  wiped  mine  Eyes  ^'^^j^^-^. 
with  his  Hankerchief,  and  clad  me  in  Silver  and 
Gold ;  he  put  a  Chain  about  my  Neck,  and  Ear- 
rings in  mine  Ears,  and  a  beautiful  Crown  upon  my 

^  Inserted  in  1687. 


268  Ci)e  ^ttonti  ^art  oi 

Head.  Then  he  took  me  by  the  Hand,  and  said, 
Merc?/,  come  after  me.  So  he  went  up,  and  I  fol- 
lowed, till  we  came  at  a  Golden  Gate.  Then  he 
knocked,  and  when  they  within  had  opened,  the 
man  went  in  and  I  followed  him  up  to  a  Throne, 
upon  which  one  sat,  and  he  said  to  me,  welcome 
DaucjJiter.  The  place  looked  bright,  and  twinkling 
like  the  Stars,  or  rather  like  the  Sun,  and  I  thought 
that  I  saw  your  Husband  there,  so  I  awoke  from  my 
Dream.     But  did  I  laugh  ? 

Christiana.  Laugh!  Ay,  and  well  you  might  to  see 
your  self  so  ivell.  For  you  must  give  me  leave  to  tell 
you,  that  I  believe  it  was  a  good  Dream,  and  that  as 
you  have  begun  to  find  the  first  part  true,  so  you  shall 
Job.  33. 14,  ji^i^  the  second  at  last.  God  speaks  once,  yea  twice, 
yet  Man  perceiveth  it  not.  In  a  Dream,  in  a 
Vision  of  the  Night,  when  deep  Sleep  falleth  upon 
men,  in  slumbring  upon  the  Bed.  We  need  not, 
when  a-Bed,  lie  awake  to  talk  with  God ;  he  can  visit 
us  while  we  sleep,  and  cause  us  then  to  hear  his  Voice. 
Our  Heart  oft  times  wakes  when  we  sleep,  and  God 
can  speak  to  that,  either  by  Words,  by  Proverbs, 
by  Signs,  and  Similitudes,  as  well  as  if  o?ie  was 
awake. 
'Xd7-iur  Mercy.  Well,  I  am  glad  of  my  Dream,  for  I  hope 
dream.-''  qj-q  long  to  scc  It  fulfilled,  to  the  making  of  me 
laugh  again. 

Christiana.  /  think  it  is  now  high  time  to  rise,  and 
to  ktiow  what  we  must  do  f 

Mercy.  Pray,  if  they  invite  us  to  stay  a  while, 
let  us  willingly  accept  of  the  proffer.  I  am  the 
willinger  to  stay  a  while  here,  to  grow  better 
acquainted  with  these  Maids ;  methinks  Prudence, 
Piety  and  Charity,  have  very  comly  and  sober  Coun- 
tenances. 

Chris.  We  shall  see  what  they  will  do.  So  when 
they  were   up   and  ready,  they  came  down.     And 

^  Inserted  in  1687. 


Cfte  ^il9:iimsi  ^rogre^sJ*  269 

they  asked  one  another  of  their  rest,  and  if  it  was 
Comfortable,  or  not  ? 

Mer.  Verij  good,  said  Mercy,  it  was  otie  of  the 
best  Nights  Lodging  that  ever  I  had  in  my  Life. 

Then   said  Prudence,  and  Piety,  if  you  will   be  f''«i'«toy 

'  tJ  '  J  here  some 

perswaded  to  stay  here  awhile,  you  shall  have  what  ^""^■ 
the  House  will  afford. 

Charity.  Ay^  and  that  with  a  very  good  will,  said 
Charity.    So  they  consented,  and  stayed  there  about 
a  Month  or  above  :     And  became  very  Profitable 
one  to  anotlier.     And  because  Prudence  would  see  '^Prudence 
how  Christiana  had  brought  up  her  Children,  she  eatechue 
asked  leave  of  her  to  Catechise  them?    So  she  gave  children: 
her  free  consent.     Then  she  began  at  the  youngest 
whose  Name  was  James. 

Pru.  A7id  she  said.  Come  James,   canst  thou  tell^f^^^'^'''^- 

'  '  chisea. 

who  made  thee  f 

Jam.  God  the  Father,  God  tlie  Son,  and  God 
the  Holy-Ghost. 

Pru.  Good  Boy.  And  canst  thou  tell  who  saves 
thee  f 

Jam.  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

Pru.  Good  Boy  still.  But  how  doth  God  the 
Father  save  thee  ? 

Jam.  By  his  Grace. 

Pru.  How  doth  God  the  Son  save  thee  f 

Jam.  By  his  Righteousness,  Death,  and  Blood, 
and  Life. 

Pru.  And  how  doth  God  the  Holy  Ghost  save 
theef 

Jam.  By  his  Illumination,  by  his  Renovation,  and 
by  his  Preservatio7i. 

Then  said  Prudence  to  Christiana,  You  are  to  be 
commended  for  thus  bringing  up  your  Children. 
I  suppose  I  need  not  ask  the  rest  these  Questions, 
since   the  youngest  of  them   can   answer  them  so 

■  Inserted  in  1687. 


270  €f)t  ^ttoixti  ^3art  ot 

well.     I   will  therefore  now  apply  my  self  to  the 
Youngest  next. 
c/S!"  '^"''"      Prudence,  Then  she  said,  Come  Joseph,  (for  his 
Name  was  Joseph)  will  you  let  me  Catechise  you  ? 

Joseph,  with  all  my  Heart. 

Pru.  What  is  Man  ? 

Joseph.  A  Reasonable  Creature,  so  made  by  God, 
as  my  Brother  said. 

Pru.    What  is  supposed  by  this  Word,  saved  f 

Joseph.  That  man  by  Sin  has  brought  himself 
into  a  State  of  Captivity  and  Misery. 

Pru.  What  is  supposed  by  his  being  saved  by  the 
Trinity  ? 

Joseph.  That  Sin  is  so  great  and  mighty  a  Ty- 
rant, that  none  can  pull  us  out  of  its  clutches  but 
God,  and  that  God  is  so  good  and  loving  to  man, 
as  to  pull  him  indeed  out  of  this  Miserable  State. 

Pru.  What  is  Gods  design  in  saving  of  poor 
Men  f 

Joseph.  The  glorifying  of  his  Name,  of  his  Grace, 
and  Justice,  S^c.  And  the  everlasting  Happiness  of 
his  Creature. 

Pru.    Who  are  they  that  must  be  saved  f 

Joseph.  Those  that  accept  of  his  Salvation. 

Good  Boy,  Joseph,  thy  Mother  has  taught  thee 
well,  and  thou  hast  barkened  to  what  she  has  said 
unto  thee. 

Then  said  Prudence  to  Samuel,  who  was  the  eldest 
but  one. 
Samuel  Prudeuce.  Come  Samuel,  are  vou  willing'  that  I 

Catechised.         iii/-~i  i   •  in 

should  Catechise  you  also  : 

Sam.  Yes,  forsooth,  if  you  please. 

Pru.    What  is  Heaven  f 

Sam.  A  ^place  and  State  most  blessed,  because 
God  dwelleth  there. 

Pru.    What  is  Hell  f 

^  'A  palace,'   1687;  and  so  in       pliical  error;  it   was  restored  to 
1693;  very   probably  a  .typogra-       '  place' iu  I7(>8. 


€\)t  ^pilgnmd  ^rogressf^  271 

Sam.  A  Place  and  State  most  woful,  because  it 
is  the  dwelling  place  of  Sin,  the  Devil,  and  Death. 

Prudence.    Whi/  wouldest  thou  go  to  Heaven  ? 

Sam.  That  I  may  see  God,  and  serve  him  with- 
out weariness ;  that  I  may  see  Christ,  and  love  him 
everlastingly ;  that  I  may  have  that  fulness  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  me,  that  I  can  by  no  means  here 
enjoy. 

Pru.  A  very  good  Boy  also,  and  one  that  has  learned 
ivell. 

Then  she  addressed  her  self  to  the  eldest,  whose 
Name  was  Mathew,  and  she  said  to  him.  Come  Ma- 
theiv,  shall  I  also  Catechise  you  ? 

Mat.    With  a  very  good  Will  _  ^„t'S,. 

Pru.  /  ask  then,  if  there  was  ever  any  thing  that 
had  a  being,  A  ntecedent  to,  or  before  God  f 

Mat.  No,  for  God  is  Eternal,  nor  is  there  any 
thing  excepting  himself,  that  had  a  being  until  the 
beginning  of  the  first  day.  For  in  six  days  the 
Lord  made  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Sea  and  all  that  in 
them  is. 

Pru.    What  do  ijou  think  of  the  Bible  f 

Mat.  It  is  the  Holy  Word  of  God. 

Pru.  Is  there  nothing  Written  therein,  but  what  you 
understand  ? 

Mat.  Yes,  a  great  deal. 

Pru.  What  do  you  do  when  you  yneet  with  such 
"places  therein,  that  you  do  not  understand  f 

Mai.  I  think  God  is  wiser  than  J.  I  pray  also 
that  he  will  please  to  let  me  know  all  therein  that 
he  knows  will  be  for  my  good. 

Pru.  How  believe  you  as  touching  the  Resurrection 
of  the  Dead  f 

Mat.  I  believe  they  shall  rise,  the  same  that  was 
buried  :  the  same  in  Nature,  tho'  not  in  Corruption. 
And  I  believe  this  upon  a  double  account.  First 
because  God  has  promised  it.  Secondly,  because 
he  is  able  to  perform  it. 


'  Prudences 
conclnjiion 


272  ClK  ^eronb  ^Sart  of 

Then  said  Prudence  to  the  Boys,  You  must  still 
harken  to  your  Mother,  for  she  can  learn  you  more. 
You  must  also  diligently  give  ear  to  what  good 
SSo/'  talk  you  shall  hear  from  others,  for  for  your  sakes 
theBoys:^  do  they  speak  good  things.  Observe  also  and  that 
with  carefulness,  what  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth 
do  teach  you  ;  but  especially  be  much  in  the  Medi- 
tation of  that  Book  that  was  the  cause  of  your 
Fathers  becoming  a  Pilgrim.  I  for  my  part,  my 
Children,  will  teach  you  what  I  can  while  you  are 
here,  and  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  ask  me  Questions 
that  tend  to  Godly  edifying. 

Now  by  that  these   Pilgrims  had  been  at  this 
Mercy  7.as  a  place  a  weck,  Mevcy  had  a  Visitor  that  pretended 
some  good  Will  unto  her,  and  his  name  was  Mr. 
Brisk.     A   man   of  some  breeding,   and    that   pre- 
tended to    Religion  ;    but  a  man  that  stuck   ver}'^ 
close  to  the  World.     So  he  came  once  or  twice,  or 
more  to  Mercy,  and  offered  love  unto  her.     Now 
Mercy  was  of  a  fair  Countenance,  and  therefore  the 
more  alluring. 
•Mercies         Hcr  mlud  also  was,  to  be  always  busvino;  of  her 
self  in  doing,  for  when  she  had  nothing  to  do  for 
her  self,  she  would  be  making  of  Hose  and  Gar- 
ments  for   others,    and   would   bestow  them   upon 
them  that  had  need.     And   Mr.  Brisk  not  knowing 
where  or   how    she    disposed    of  what  she  made, 
seemed  to  be  greatly  taken,  for  that  he  found  her 
never  Idle.     I   will  warrant  her  a  good  Huswife, 
quoth  he  to  himself. 
•  Mercy, n-       Merci/  tlicu  icvealcd  the  business  to  the  Maidens 
'uaidsVa-^  that  were  of  the  House,  and  enquired  of  them  con- 
BiTsk^s   '■  cerning  him  :  for  they  did  know  him  better  than 
she.     So  they  told   her  that  he  was  a  very  busie 
Young  Man,  and  one  that  pretended  to  Religion; 
but  was  as  they  feared,  a  stranger  to  the   Power  of 
that  which  was  good. 

,  *  Inserted  in  Ifi87. 


€i)t  pilgnms  ^rogre^£i»  273 

Nai/  then,  said  Mercy,  /  will  look  no  more  on  him, 
for  I  purpose  never  to  have  a  clog  to  my  Soul. 

Prudence  then  replied,  That  there  needed  no 
great  matter  of  discouragement  to  be  given  to  him, 
her  continuing  so  as  she  had  began  to  do  for  the 
Poor,  would  quickly  cool  his  Courage. 

So  the  next  time  he  comes,  he  finds  her  at  her 
old  work,  a  making;  of  thino-s  for  the  Poor.     Then  'Taiicu- 

•  1    1  iT/i  1  •      n         -S.T  •  1        1  •    1  tioixt  Mercy 

said  he,  What,  always  at  it  :      Yes,  said  she,  either  and  Mr 

*/  Brisk.*'' 

for  my  self  or  for  others.  And  what  canst  "thee 
earn  a  day,  quoth  he?  I  do  these  things,  said  she. 
That  I  maij  he  Rich  in  good  Works,  laying  up  in  L^^ia'  ^'  ^'^' 
store  a  good  Foundation  against  the  time  to  conie^  that 
I  may  lay  hold  on  Eternal  Life :  Why  prethee  what 
dost  thou  with  them  ?  said  he.  Cloath  tlie  naked, 
said  she.  With  that  his  Countenance  fell.  So  he  ueSdwly. 
forbore  to  come  at  her  again.  And  when  he  was 
asked  the  reason  why,  he  said,  That  Mercy  was  a 
pretty  lass,  but  trouhled  ivith  ill  Conditions. 

When  he  had  left  her.  Prudence  said.  Did  I  not  ^S'of 
tell  thee  that  Mr.  Brisk  would  soon  forsake  thee  l^lcMTMe 
yea  he  will  raise  up  an  ill  report  of  thee  :  For  not-  awo/  "'' 
withstanding   his   pretence   to   Religion,    and    hisj^i!",™^" 
seeming  love  to  Mercy :  Yet  Mercy  and  he  are  of 
tempers  so  different,  that  I  believe  they  will  never 
come  together. 

Mercy.  /  might  a  had  Husbands  afore  now,  tlid  I 
spake  not  of  it  to  any  ;  but  they  were  such  as  did  not 
like  my  Conditions,  tho'  never  did  any  of  them  find 
fault  with  my  Person  :  So  they  and  I  could  not  agree. 

Prudence.  Mercy  in  our  days  is  little  set  by,  any 
further  than  as  to  its  Name :  the  Practice,  which  is 
set  forth  by  thy  Conditions,  there  are  but  few  that 
can  abide. 

Mercy.  Well,  said  Mercy,  if  no  body  will  have  me,  i-Si^.'- 
/  will  dye  a  Maid,  or  my  Conditions  shall  be  to  me  as 
a  Husband.     For  I  cannot  change  my  Nature,  and  to 

*  '  canst  thou,'  1G87.  '  Inserted  in  1687. 


'How 


2,*7i  Z\)t  ^tto\\t\  part  of 

have  one  that  lies  cross  to  me  m  this,  that  I  pmyose 
never  to  admit  of,  as  long  as  I  live.  I  had  a  Sister 
named  Bountiful,  that  ivas  married  to  one  of  these 
Mercy's  ChurUs  ',  hut  he  arid  she  could  never  agree  ;  but  he- 
^Tr^dh^iier  cause  my  Sister  was  resohed  to  do  as  she  had  began, 
Huahandfi'  ^^^^^^  ^^^  ^^  ^j^^^  Khidness  to  the  Poor,  therefore  her 

Husband  first  cried  her  down  at  the  Cross,  and  then 
turned  her  out  of  his  Doors. 

Pru.  And  yet  he  was  a  Professor,  I  warrant  you? 

Mer.    Yes,  such  a  one  as  he  was,  and  of  such  as  he, 

the  World  is  now  full;  but  I  am  for  none  of  them  all. 

*  Now  Mathew  the  eldest  Son  of  Christiana,  fell 

}cduf^:^  Sick,  and  his  Sickness  was  sore  upon  him,  for  he 

was  much  pained  in  his  Bowels,  so  that  he  was  with 

it,   at  times,  pulled  as  'twere  both  ends  together. 

There  dwelt  also  not  far  from  thence,  one  Mr.  Skill, 

an    Antient,    and    well    approved    Physician.     So 

Christiana  desired  it,  and  they  sent  for  him,  and  he 

came.     When  he  was  entred  the  Room,  and  had  a 

little  observed  the  Boy,  he  concluded  that  he  was 

sick  of  the   Gripes.     Then  he  said  to  his  Mother, 

cZfJce.     What  Diet  has  Matthew  of  late  fed  upon  .^     Diet, 

said  Christiana,  nothing  but  that  which  is  wholsome. 

*  The  Physician  answered.  This  Boy  has  been  tam- 

'sic^m^^'^'  pcring  ivith  something  that  lies  in  his  Maw  undigested, 

jadgmtno'  ^^^^^  \]^g^  y^m  ^^qi  awaij  ivithout  means.     And  I  tell 

you  he  must  be  purged,  or  else  he  will  dye. 

Samuel.  Then  said  Samuel,  Mother,  Mother,  ichat 

'Samuel      was  that  which  my  Brother  did  gather  up  and  eat,  so 

^Mot/i'erin    soon  US  ivc  wcrc  come  from  the  Gate,  that  is  at  the 

fmit  his  Bro-  head  of  this   way  f      You  know  that  there  was  an 

Orchard  on  the  left  hand,  on   the  otherside   of  the 

Wall,  and  some  of  the  Trees  hung  over  the  Wall,  and 

my  Brother  did  '-Splash  and  did  eat. 

Christiana.  True  my   Child,  said    Christiana,  he 
did  take   thereof  and  did    eat ;    naughty   Boy   as 

"  Inserted  in  1687.  '  '  did  pluck,'  1687,  see  page  2.'33. 


mn  ^ilgi-ims;  ^rogits^si*          275 

he  was,  I  did  chide  him,  and  yet  he  would  eat 
thereof. 

Skill.  /  kneiv  he  had  eaten  something  that  was  not 
wholsome  Food.  And  that  Food,  to  wit,  that  Fruit, 
is  even  the  most  hurtful  of  all.  It  is  the  Fruit  of 
Beelzebubs  Orchard,  I  do  marvel  that  none  did 
warn  you  of  it ;  many  have  died  thereof. 

Christiana.  Then  Christiana  began  to  cry,  and 
she  said,  O  naughty  Boy,  and  O  careless  Mother 
what  shall  I  do  for  my  Son? 

Skill.  Come,  do  not  he  too  much  Dejected ;  the  Boy 
may  do  well  again  ;  hut  he  must  purge  and  Vomit. 

Christiana.  Pray  Sir  try  the  utmost  of  your  Skill 
with  him  whatever  it  costs. 

Skill,  Nay,  I  hope  I  shall  be  reasonable :  So  he 

made  him  a  Purge ;  but  it  was  too  weak,     'Twas 

said,  it  was  made  of  the  Blood  of  a  Goat,  the  Ashes  Heb.  lo.  i, 

-  .  234. 

of  an  ^Heifter,  and  with  some  of  the  Juice  of  Yiys- '' Motion  pre- 

sop,  Sfc.     When  Mr.  Skill  had  seen  that  that  Purge 

was  too  weak,  he  made  him  one  to  the  Purpose, 

'Twas  made  E^v  Came  S)   Sanguine  Christi.     (You  Joim  6.54, 

know   Physicians  give  strange   Medicines  to   their  Maik'9. 49.' 

Patients)   and   it  was  made   up   into  Pills  with  a/sonL?* 

Promise  or  two,  and  a  proportionable  quantity  of 

Salt.     Now  he  was  to  take  them  three  at  a  time 

fasting,  in  half  a  quarter  of  a  Pint  of  the  Tears  of 

Repentance,     When  this  potion  was  prepared,  andHeb.  9. 14. 

brouoht  to  the  Boy,*'  he  was  loth  to  take  it,   iho' '*  The  hoy 
•  11      /~\  •  'PI        1      111  111-    '"*''  *"  '°^^ 

torn  with  the  uripes,  as  11  he  should   be  pulled  inthePhyaick:-^ 

pieces.      Come,   come,  said  the  Physician,  you  must 

take  it.     It  goes  against  my  Stomach,  said  the  Boy. 

/  must  have  you  take  it,  said  his  Mother.     I  shall^«<=''-^2-^°- 

Vomit   it   up    again,    said    the    Bo3^      Pray    Sir, 

said   Christiana    to   Mr.  Skill,  how   does   it    taste  ? 

It   has   no   ill  taste,    said    the  Doctor,    and     with 

that    she    touched    one    of  the    pills    with  the   tip 

^  'a  Heifer,'  1687.  '  Inserted  in  1687. 


276  Cfte  ^erouli  |3art  of 

tlltsHmd  of  ^^^^  Tongue.     Oh,  Mathew,  said  she,  this  potion 
p^rmades    jg  swectcr  thanHonj.     If  thou  lovest  thy  Mother, 
if  thou  lovest  thy  Brothers,  if  thou  lovest  Mcrcij,  if 
thou  lovest  thy  Life,  take  it.     So  with  much  ado, 
after  a  short  Prayer  for  the  blessing  of  God  upon 
it ;  he  took   it ;  and   it  wrought  kindly  with  him. 
It  caused  him  to  purge,  it  caused  him  to  sleep,  and 
rest  quietly,  it  put  him  into  a  fine  heat  and  breath- 
ing sweat,  and  did  quite  rid  him  of  his  Gripes. 
So  in  little  time  he  got  up,  and  walked  about 
'ddin'thi  ^'^th  a  Staff,  and  would  go  from  Room  to  Room, 
S/s'"'  ^"d  ^^^^  ^^'i'^Ji  Prudence,  Piety,  and  Charity  of  his 
Distemper,  and  how  he  was  healed. 

So  when  the  Boy  was  healed,  Christiana  asked 
i2!i3a'4,i5.  Mr.  Skill,  saying,  Sir,  what  will  content  you  for 
your  pains  and  care  to  and  of  my  Child  ?  And  he 
said,  you  must  pay  the  Master  of  the  Colledge  of 
Physicians,  according  to  rules  made,  in  that  case, 
and  provided. 

Chris.  But  Sir,  said  she,  what  is  this  Pill  good  for 

else  f 

'vnimZ.r      Skill.  It  is  an  universal  Pill,  'tis  good  against  all 

Remedy.      ^}^g    Diseascs   that  Pilgrims   are  incident  to,   and 

when  it  is  well  prepared,  it  will  keep  good,  time  out 

of  inind. 

Christiana.  Pray  Sir,  make  me  up  twelve  Boxes 
of  them  :  For  if  I  can  get  these,  I  will  never  take 
other  Physick. 

Skill.  These  Pills  are  good  to  prevent  Diseases, 

as  well  as  to  cure  when  one  is  Sick.     Yea,  I  dare 

say  it,  and  stand  to  it,   that  if  a  Man  will  but  use 

joh.  C.50.    this  Physick  as  he  should,  it  will  make  him  live  for 

laaGiMsof  ever.     But,  sood  Christiana,  thou  must  o'ive  these 

the  Tears  of  '     O  '  ^ 

Repentance.  PiUs,  no  otlwr  waij  ',  but  as  I  have  prescribed  :  For 
if  yon  do,  they  will  do  no  good.  So  he  gave  unto 
Christiana  Physick  for  her  self,  and  her  Boys,  and 

•  Inserted  in  1U87. 


We  pilgrims!  ^rogredd*  277 

for  Mercy :  and  bid  Mathew  take  heed  how  he  eat 
any  more  Green  Plums,  and  kist  them  and  went  his 
way. 

It  was  told  you  before,  that  Prudence  bid  the 
Boys,  that  if  at  any  time  they  would,  they  should 
ask  her  some  Questions,  that  might  be  profitable, 
and  she  would  say  sometliing  to  them. 

Mat.  Then  Mathew  who  had   been    sick,  asked 
her,  Why  for  the  most  part  Phy sick  should  be  bitter  to  o/physki-. 
our  Palats  f 

Pru.  To  shew  how  unwelcome  the  word  of  God, 
and  the  Effects  thereof  are  to  a  Carnal  Heart. 

Mathew.     Why   does   Physick,  if  it   does   good,  ^f%^£l'!' 
Purge,  a?id  cause  that  we  Vomit  f 

Prudence.  To  shew  that  the  Word  when  it  works 
effectuall}',  cleanseth  the  Heart  and  Mind.  For 
look  what  the  one  doth  to  the  Body,  the  other  doth 
to  the  Soul. 

Mathew.    What  should  we  learn  by  seeing  the  Flame  ojiesS'^ 
of  our  Fire  go  upwards  f  and  by  seeing  the  Beams, 
and  sweet  Influences  of  the  Sun  strike  downwards  f 

Prudence.  By  the  going  up  of  the  Fire,  we  are 
taught  to  ascend  to  Heaven,  by  fervent  and  hot 
desires.  And  by  the  Sun  his  sending  his  Heat, 
Beams,  and  sweet  Influences  downwards,  we  are 
taught,  that  the  Saviour  of  the  World,  tho'  high, 
reaches  down  with  his  Grace  and  Love  to  us 
below. 

Mathew.    Ylhere  have  the  Clouds  their  Water  f         oftheciowis. 

Pru.  Out  of  the  Sea. 

Mathew.    What  may  ive  learn  from  that? 

Pru.  That  Ministers  should  fetch  their  Doctrine 
from  God. 

Mat.  Why  do  they  empty  themselves  upon  the 
Earth? 

Prudence.  To  shew  that  Ministers  should  give 
out  what  they  know  of  God  to  the  World. 

Mat.    Why  is  the  Rainbow  caused  by  the  Sun  f        f^f '  '^"'"■ 

u 


278  Cfee  ^erontr  ^3art  of 

Prudence.  To  shew  that  the  Covenant  of  Gods 
Grace  is  confirmed  to  us  in  Christ. 

MatheM^  ^¥Iiy  do  the  Springs  come  from  the  Sea 
to  us,  thorough  the  Earth. 

Prudence.  To  shew  that  tlie  Grace  of  God  comes 
to  us  thorough  the  Body  of  Christ. 
fn^         ^athew.    WM/  do  some  of  the  Springs  rise  out  of 
the  tojjs  of  high  Hills  ^-^ 

Prudence.  To  sliew  tliat  the  Spirit  of  Grace  shall 
spring  up  in  some  that  are  Great,  and  Mighty,  as 
well  as  in  many  that  are  Poor  and  low. 
%ndu         Mat,    Why  doth  the  Fire  fasten  upon  the  Candle- 
wick  ? 

Prudence.  To  shew  that  unless  Grace  doth  kindle 
upon  the  Heart,  there  will  be  no  true  Light  of  Life 
in  us. 

Mathew.  VJhy  is  the  Wick  and  Tallow  and  all, 
spent  to  maintain  the  light  of  the  Candle  f 

Prudence.  To  shew  that  Body  and  Soul  and  all, 

should  be  at  the  Service  of,  and  spend  themselves 

to  maintain  in  good  Condition  that  Grace  of  God 

that  is  in  us. 

Of  the  Mathew,    Whii   doth   the  Pelican  pierce  her  own 

Pelican.       _^  •   7    j  rt'jj 

Brest  IV? th  her  Bill  f 

Prudence.  To  nourish  her  Young  ones  with  her 
Blood,  and  thereby  to  shew  that  Christ  the  blessed, 
so  lovetli  his  Young,  liis  People,  as  to  save  them 
from  Death  by  his  Blood. 
Of  the  Cod:  Mat.  What  may  one  learn  by  hearing  the  Cock  to 
Crow? 

Prudence.  Learn  to  remember  Peters  Sin,  and 
Peter  s  Repentance.  The  Cocks  crowing  shews 
also  that  day  is  coming  on,  let  then  the  crowing  of 
the  Cock  put  thee  in  mind  of  that  last  and  terrible 
Day  of  Judgment. 

Now  about  this  time  their  Month  was  out,  where- 
fore they  signified  to  those  of  the  House,  that  'twas 
convenient  for  them    to   up  and  be   going.      Tlien 


said  Joseph  to  his  Mother,  It  is  convenient  that  you  f^*/,*"^;. 
forget  not  to  send  to  the  House  of  Mr.  Inter iweter.^i^^f ^^^'■ 
to  pray  him  to  grant  that  Mr.  Great-heart  should  ^'•'^s'«'« 
be  sent  unto  us,  that  he  may  be  our  Conductor  the 
rest  of  our  way.     Good  Boy,  said  she,  I  had  almost 
forgot.     So  she  drew  up  a  Petition,  and  prayed  Mr. 
Watchful  the  Porter  to  send  it  by  some  fit  man  to 
her  good  Friend  Mr.  Interpreter ;  who  when  it  was 
come,  and  he  had  seen  the  contents  of  the  Petition, 
said  to  the  Messenger,  Go  tell  them  that  I  will  send 
him. 

When  the  Family  where  Christiana  was,  saw  that 
they  had  a  purpose  to  go  forward,  they  called  the  'JJ^'m"' 
whole  House  together  to  give  thanks  to  their  King, '^"^'^^T  """' 
for  sending  of  them  such  profitable  Guests  as  these. 
Which  done  they  said  to  Christiana,  And  shall  we 
not  shew  thee  something,  according  as  our  Custom 
is  to  do  to  Pilgrims,  on  which  thou  mayest  medi- 
tate when  thou  art  upon  the  way  ?     So  they  took 
Christiana,  her  Children,  mid  Mercy  mto  the  Closet, 
and  shewed  them  one  of  the  Apples  that  Eve  did  eat  ^^^^.t 
of,  and  that  she  also  did  give  to  her  Husband,  and 
that  for  the  eating  of  which  they  both  were  turned 
out  of  Paradice,  and  asked  her  what  she  thought 
that  was  ?     Then  Christiana  said,  'Tis  Food  or  Poy-  i'^aS' 
son,  I  know  not  which  ;  so  they  opened  the  matter 
to  her,  and  she  held  up  her  hands  and  wondered  ?   ro"7.24.' 

Then  they  had  her  to  a  Place,  and  shewed  her 
Jacob's  Ladder.     Now  at  that  time  there  were  some  '^£:i 
Angels  ascending  upon   it.     So  Christia^ia  looked 
and  looked,  to  see  the  Angels  go  up,  and  so  did  the 
rest  of  the  Company.     Then  they  were  going  into 
another  place  to  shew  them   something  else:   But 
James  said  to  his  Mother,  Pray  bid  them  stay  here  ci^^u 
a  little  longer,  for  this  is  a  curious  sight.     So  they  ''^■"'^■ 
turned  again,  and  stood  feeding  their  Eyes  with  this 
so  pleasant  a  Prospect.     After  this   they  had   them  Gen.  2s.  12, 

^  Inserted  in  1687. 

u2 


280  Cf)e  ^ttonti  ^3ait  of 


'  Gnlden 
Anchor 


into  a  Place  where  did  hang  up  a  Go/den  Anchor, 
joh.  1. 51.    so  they  bid  Christiana  take  it  down  ;   for,  said  they, 
you  shall    have  it   with   you,   for  'tis   of  absolute 
necessity  that  you  should,  that  you  may  lay  hold 
Heb.  6.10.   of  that  Avithin  the  vail,  and  stand  stedfast,  in  case 
you  should  meet  with  turbulent  weather  :   So  they 
were  glad  thereof.     Then  they  took  them,  and  had 
hain^S'^ng  thcm  to  thc  mount  upon  which  Abraham  our  Father, 
up  Isaac."  |-,^(j  offered  up  Isaac  his  Son,  and  shewed  them  the 
Gen.  22. 9.   Altar,  thc  Wood,  the  Fire,  and  the  Knife,  for  they 
remain  to  be  seen  to  this  very  DaJ^     When  they 
had  seen   it,  they  held    up   their  hands  and   blest 
themselves,  and  said,  Oh  !  What  a  man,  for  love  to 
his  Master,  and  for  denial  to  himself  was  Abraham  f 
After  they  had  shewed  them  all  these  things,  Pru- 
dence took  them  into  the  Dining-Room,  where  stood 
nri!i!"r'^  ^  P^^^'  ^^  Excellent  Virginals,  so  she  plaved  upon 
them,  and  turned   what  she  had  shewed  them  into 
this  excellent  Song,  saying, 

Eve's  Apple  ice  have  shewed  you. 
Of  that  be  you  aware  : 
You  have  seen  Jacob's  Ladder  too, 
Upon  which  Angels  are. 

An  Anchor  you  received  have  ; 
But  let  not  these  suffice. 
Until  with  Abra'm  you  have  gave 

Your  best,  a  Sacrifice. 

Now  about  this  time  one  knocked  at  the  Door, 
So  the  Porter  opened,  and  behold  Mr.  Great-heart 
was  there ;  but  when  he  was  come  in,  what  Joy  was 
hearfcome'  thcrc  ?  For  it  came  now  fresh  again  into  their 
minds,  how  but  a  while  ago  he  had  slain  old  Grim 
Bloody-man,  the  Giant,  and  had  delivered  them 
from  the  Lions. 

Then   said  Mr.  Great-heart  to  Christiana,  and  to 

'  Inserted  in  1687. 


again. 


Ci)e  |3ilgn'msi  IJrogrts^*  28i 

Mercy ^  My  Lord  has  sent  each  of  you  a  Bottle  ^^ 'Ji'J^'^'%l„, 
Wine,  and  also  some  parched  Corn,  together  with  f^,^^?^^"'^'' 
a  couple  of  Pomgranates.     He   has  also  sent  the 
Boys  some  Figs,  and  Raisins  to  refresh  you  in  your 
way. 

Then  they  addressed  themselves  to  their  Journey, 
and  Prudence,  and  Fiety  went  along  with  them. 
When  they  came  at  the  Gate  Christiana  asked  the 
Porter,  if  any  of  late  went  by.  He  said,  No,  only 
one  some  time  since  :  who  also  told  me  that  of  late 
there  had  been  a  great  Robbery  committed  on  the 
Kings  High-way,  as  you  go  :  But  he  saith,  the  'nobieiy:^ 
Thieves  are  taken,  and  will  shortly  be  Tryed  for 
their  Lives.  Then  Christiana,  and  Mercy  was 
afraid  ;  but  Matheiu  said,  Mother  fear  nothing,  as 
long  as  Mr.  Great-heart  is  to  go  with  us,  and  to  be 
our  Conductor. 

Then  said  Christiaiia  to  the  Porter,  Sir,  I  am ' Christiana 
much  obli2:ed  to  you  for  all  the  Kindnesses  that  leaveofm 
you  have  shewed  me  since  I  came  hither ;  and  also 
for  that  you  have  been  so  loving  and  kind  to  my 
Children.  I  know  not  how  to  gratifie  your  Kind- 
ness :  Wherefore  pray  as  a  token  of  my  respects  to 
you,  accept  of  this  small  mite :  So  she  put  a  Gold 
Angel  in  his  Hand,  and  he  made  her  a  low  obey- 
sance,  and  said.  Let  thy  Garments  be  always  White,  j^^f^^^s"* 
and  let  thy  Head  want  no  Ointment.  Let  Mercy 
live  and  not  die,  and  let  not  her  Works  be  few. 
And  to  the  Boys  he  said,  Do  you  fly  Youthful 
lusts,  and  follow  after  Godliness  with  them  that  are 
Grave,  and  Wise,  so  shall  you  put  Gladness  into 
your  Mothers  Heart,  and  obtain  Praise  of  all  that 
are  sober  minded.  So  they  thanked  the  Porter  and 
departed. 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  that  they  went  forward 
until  they  were  come  to  the  Brow  of  the  Hill,  where 
Piety  bethinking  her  self  cried  out,  Alas  !  I  have 

*  Tuscrtod  in  1HS7. 


282  Cf)e  ^eronU  ^3art  of 

forgot  what  I  intended  to  bestow  upon  Christiana, 
and  her  Companions.  I  will  go  back  and  fetch  it. 
So  she  ran,  and  fetched  it.  While  she  was  gone, 
Christiana  thought  she  heard  in  a  Grove  a  little 
way  off,  on  the  Right-hand,  a  most  curious  Melo- 
dious Note,  with  Words  much  like  these. 

Through  all  my  Life  thy  Favour  is 

So  frankly  shew'd  to  me. 
That  in  thy  House  for  evermore 

My  dwellhu)  'place  shall  he. 

And  listening  still  she  thought  she  heard  another 
answer  it,  saying. 

For  why.  The  Lord  our  God  is  good. 

His  Mercy  is  forever  sure  : 
His  Truth  at  all  times  firmly  stood: 

Arid  shall  from  Acje  to  Age  endure. 

So  Christiana  asked  Prudence,  what  'twas  that 

made  those   curious  Notes  ?     They   are,  said  she, 

song2.ii.    our   Countrey  Birds:   They  sing  these  Notes   but 

seldom,  except  it  be  at  the  Spring,  when  the  Flowers 

appear,   and   the  Sun   shines  warm,  and   then  you 

may  hear  them  all  day  long.     I  often,  said  she,  go 

out  to  hear  them,  we  also  oft  times  keep  them  tame 

in  our  House.     They  are  very  fine  Company  for  us 

when  we  are  Melancholy,  also  they  make  the  Woods, 

and   Groves,   and   Solitary  places,  places  desirous 

to  be  in. 

^(Stw-       ^y  ^^^^^  Time  Piety  was  come  again,  so  she  said 

mmat       **^   Christiana,  look   here,    I    have   brought  thee    a 

parting.-^    Schcmc  of  all  those  things  that  thou  hast  seen  at  our 

House:   Upon  which  thou  may  est  look  when  thou 

findest   thy   self  forgetful,    and    call    those    things 

again    to   remembrance    for    thy   Edification,    and 

comfort. 

^  Inserted  in  IH87. 


Cf)e  ^ilgnmsi  ^rogregg*  28a 

Now  they  began  to  go  down  the  Hill  into  the  lf%lf^- 
Valley  of  Humiliation.  It  was  a  steep  Hill,  and 
the  way  was  slippery  ;  but  they  were  very  careful, 
so  they  got  down  pretty  well.  When  they  were 
down  in  the  Valley,  Piety  said  to  Christiana,  This  is 
the  place  where  Christian  your  Husband  met  with 
the  fold  Fiend,  Apollion,  and  where  the}'  had  that 
dreadful  fight  that  they  had.  I  know  you  cannot 
but  have  heard  thereof.  But  be  of  good  Courage, 
as  long  you  have  here  Mr.  Great-heart  to  be  your 
Guide  and  Conductor,  we  hope  you  will  fare  the 
better.  So  when  these  two  had  committed  the 
Pilgrims  unto  the  Conduct  of  their  Guide,  he  went 
forward  and  they  went  after. 

Great-heart.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-hearty  We  need  j^^^j;-  ^reat- 
not  to  be  so  afraid  of  this  Valley:  For  here  is  nothina*  ,f!«««y  0/ 
to  hurt  us,  unless  we  procure  it  to  our  selves.       lis'^""'' 
true,  Christian  did  here  meet  with  ApoUion,  with 
whom  he  also  had  a  sore  Combate  ;   but  that  frei/ 
was  the  fruit  of  those  slips  that  he  got  in  his  going 
down  the  Hill.     For  they  that  get  slips  there,  must 
look   for  Combats  here.     And   hence  it  is  that  this 
Valley  has  got  so  hard  a  name.      For  the  common  \^'f^^^{-^- 
People  when   they  hear   that   some  frightful  thing 
has  befallen  such  an  one  in  such  a  place,  are  of  an 
Opinion  that  that  place  is  haunted  with  some  foul 
Fiend,  or  evil  Spirit ;  when  alas  it  is  for  the  fruit  of 
their  doing,  that  such  things  do  befal  them  there. 

This  Valley  of  Humiliation  is  of  it  self  as  fruitful  'TUreas^.n 
a  place,  as  any  the  Crow  ilies  over  :  and  1  am  per- "^° i'™  "^. 

1      1    -f  "ill-  •  •     ^        I'       ^  beset  ha-t.  * 

swaded  it  we  could  hit  upon  it,  we  might  iind  some- 
where here  abouts  something  that  might  give  us  an 
account  why  Christian  was  so  hardly  beset  in  this 
place. 

Then  James  said  to  his  Mother,  Lo,  yonder  stands 
a  Pillar,  and  it  looks  as  if  something;  was  Written  ^.,f^"« 

'  O  ictlfi  an  . 

thereon  :    let  us  go  and  see  what  it  is.     So  they  ["^i/'"'" 

*  Inserted  in  1687. 


In- 


284  Cf)e  ^etonti  part  of 

went,  and  found  there  Written,  Let  Christian's  slips 
before  he  came  hither,  and  the  Battles  that  he  met  with 
in  this  place,  be  a  warning  to  those  that  come  after. 
Lo,  said  their  Guide,  did  not  I  tell  you,  that  there 
was  something  here  abouts  that  would  give  Intima- 
tion of  the  reason  why  Christian  was  so  hard  beset 
in  this  place  ?  Then  turning  himself  to  Christiana, 
he  said  :  No  disparagement  to  Christian  more  than 
to  many  others,  whose  Hap  and  Lot  his  was.  For 
'tis  easier  going  up,  than  down  this  Hill  ;  and  that 
can  be  said  but  of  few  Hills  in  all  these  parts  of 
the  World.  But  we  will  leave  the  good  Man,  he 
is  at  rest,  he  also  had  a  brave  Victory  over  his 
Enemy  ;  let  him  grant  that  dwelleth  above,  that 
we  fare  no  worse  when  we  come  to  be  trved  then 
he. 

But  we  will  come  again  to  this  Valley  oi Humilia- 
tion.    It  is  the   best,    and   most   fruitful    piece   of 
Tiiu  Valley  Ground  in  all  those  parts.     It  is  fat  Ground,  and  as 

a  brave  k  ' 

piace:^      you  scc,  consistcth   much  in   Meddows  :  and  if  a 

man  was  to  come  here  in  the  Summer-time  as  we 

do  now,  if  he  knew  not  any  thing  before,  thereof; 

and  if  he  also  delighted  himself  in  the  sight  of  his 

Eyes,  he  might  see  that  that  would  be  delightful  to 

him.      Behold,  how  green  this  Valley  is,  also  how 

Song,  2.1.    beautified  with  Lillies.     I  have  also  known  many 

Jam.  4. 6.    labouring  Men  that  have  got  good  Estates  in  this 

li'"';,"^-^'   Valley   of  Humiliation.       (For    God   resisteth    the 

Men  tknre      taii  •  /~(  ittii\ 

inthe  Valley  Pfoud  I  but  e^ives  morc,  more  Grace  to  the  Humble) 

of  Huniilia-  '  ,  ~,  .  r~<     .  • 

tion.  for  indeed  it  is  a  very  fruitful  Soil,  and  doth  bring 

forth  by  handfuls.  Some  also  have  wished  that  the 
next  way  to  their  Fathers  House  were  here,  that  they 
niiirht  be  troubled  no  more  with  either  Hills  or 
Mountains  to  go  over ;  but  the  way  is  the  way,  and 
theres  an  end. 

Now  as  they  were  going  along  and  talking,  they 
espied  a  Boy  feeding  his  Fathers  Sheep.     The  Boy 

'  Inserted  in  1687. 


Cf)e  pilgrims^  ^irogit^g*  285 

was  in  very  mean  Cloaths,  but  of  a  very  fresh  and 
welfavoured  Countenance,  and  as  he  sate  by  him- 
self he  Sung.  Hark,  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  to  what 
the  Shepherds  Boy  saith.  So  they  hearkened,  and 
he  said, 

He  that  is  dow7i,  needs  fear  no  fall. 
He  that  is  loic,  no  Pride  :  fs*;"-"-  ^'' 

He  that  is  humble,  ever  shall 
Have  God  to  be  his  Guide. 

I  am  content  with  what  I  have. 
Little  be  it,  or  much  : 
And,  Lord,  contentment  still  L  crave. 
Because  thou  savest  such. 

Fidness  to  such  a  burden  is 
That  go  on  Pilgrimage  :  "«^-  ^3-  s- 

Here  little,  and  hereafter  Bliss, 
Is  best  from  Age  to  Age. 

Then  said  their  Guide,  do  you  hear  him  ?  I  will 
dare  to  say,  that  this  Boy  lives  a  merrier  Life,  and 
wears  more  of  that  Herb  called  Hearts-ease  in  his 
Bosom,  then  he  that  is  clad  in  Silk,  and  Velvet ; 
but  we  will  proceed  in  our  Discourse. 

In  this  Valley,  our  Lord  formerly  had  his  Coun-  chrut,wh<:n 

TT  111  1  11  TT        1  1  ■'■ii  the  Flesh, 

trey-House,  he  loved  much  to  be  here.     He  iovea  ^adhis 

111  Ti/Ti  c  ^  c  11  A*      Couiitrey- 

also  to  walk  these  Medows,  for  he  lound  the  ^'^'^  f'^l^^^ 
was  pleasant.  Besides  here  a  man  shall  be  free  muiation. 
from  the  Noise,  and  from  the  hurryings  of  this  Life, 
all  States  are  full  of  Noise  and  Confusion,  only  the 
Valley  oi  Humiliation,  is  that  empty  and  Solitary 
Place.  Here  a  man  shall  not  be  so  let,  and  hin- 
dred  in  his  Contemplation,  as  in  other  places  he  is 
apt  to.  be.  This  is  a  Valley  that  no  body  walks  in, 
but  those  that  love  a  Pilgrim's  Life.  And  tho' 
Christian  had  the  hard  hap  to  meet  here  with  Apol- 
lion,  and  to  enter  with  him  a  brisk  encounter  :  Yet 
I  must  tell  you,  that  in  former  times  men  have  met 


286  €i)t  ^tton^  l^avt  of 

uos.  12.4, 5.  with  Angels  here,  have  found  Pearls  here,  and  have 
in  this  place  found  the  words  of  Life. 

Did  I  say,  our  Lord  had  here  in  former  Days  his 
Countrey-house,  and  that  he  loved  here  to  walk  ? 
I  will  add,  in  this  Place,  and  to  the  People  that  live, 

M;i;.  11.29.  and  trace  these  Grounds  he  has  left  a  yearly  re- 
venue to  [be  faithfully  payed  them  at  certain 
Seasons,  for  their  maintenance  by  the  way,  and  for 
their  further  incouragement  to  go  on  in  their  Pil- 
grimage. 

^ Simon.  Now  as  they  went  on,   ^ Simon  said  to 
Mr.  Great-heart.     Sir,  I  perceive  that  in  this  Valley, 
my  Father  and  Apollyon  had  their  Battel ;  but  where 
about  ivas  the   Fight,  for  I  perceive  this   Valley  is 
large  f 

Great-heart.  Your  Father  had  that  Battel  with 
Apollyon  at  a  place  yonder,  before  us,  in  a  narrow 

&*?^"^  Passage  just  beyond  Forgetful-Green.  And  indeed 
that  place  is  the  most  dangerous  place  in  all  these 
Parts.  For  if  at  any  time  the  Pilgrims  meet  with 
any  brunt,  it  is  when  they  forget  what  Favours  they 
have  received,  and  how  unworthy  they  are  of  them. 
This  is  the  Place  also  where  others  have  been  hard 
put  to  it.  But  more  of  the  place  when  we  are  come 
to  it;  for  I  perswade  my  self,  that  to  this  day  there 
remains  either  some  sign  of  the  Battel,  or  some 
Monument  to  testifie  that  such  a  Battle  there  was 
fought. 

Mercy.  Then  said  Mercy,  I  think  I  am  as  well  in 
this  Valley,  as  I  have  been  any  where  else  in  all  our 

fwZtGmce.  Joumcy  :  The  place  methinks  suits  with  my  Spirit. 
I.  love  to  be  in  such  places  where  there  is  no  ratling 
with  Coaches,  nor  rumbling  with  W  heels.  Me- 
thinks here  one  may  without  much  Molestation,  be 
thinking  what  he  is,  whence  he  came,  what  he  has 
done,  and  to  what  the  King  has  called  him.     Here 

Sung ;.  i.    one  may  think,  and  break  at  Heart,  and  melt  in 

'  Corrected  to  '  Sammt'  in  sub.  edits. 


€f)t  ^Bilffnms!  prcigresss.  287 

ones  Spirit  until  ones  Eyes  become  like  the  Fish 
Fools  of  HesJibon.  They  that  go  rightly  thorow  p^ai.84.5, 
this  Valley  of  Baca  make  it  a  Well,  the  Rain  that 
God  sends  down  from  Heaven  upon  them  that  are 
here  also  fiUetJi  the  Fools.  This  Valley  is  that  from 
whence  aiso  the  King  will  give  to  their  Vineyards, 
and  they  that  go  through  it,  shall  sing,  (as  Christian  hos.2.  is. 
did,  for  all  he  met  with  AjwUyon.) 

Great-heart.  'Tis  true,  said   their  Guide,  I  have  ^^j^^w;'- 
gon  thorough  this  Valley  many  a  time,  and  never 
was  better  than  when  here. 

I  have  also  been  a  Conduct  to  several  Pilgrims, 
and  they  have  confessed  the  same.  To  this  man  will 
I  look,  saith  the  King,  even  to  him  that  is  Poor,  and 
of  a  contrite  Spirit,  and  that  trembles  at  my  Word. 

Now  they  were  come  to  the  place  where  the  afore 
mentioned  Battel  was  fought.  Then  said  the 
Guide  to  Christiana,  her  Children,  and  Mercy: 
This  is  the  place,  on  this  Ground  Christian  stood, 
and  up  there  came  Apollt/on  against  him.  And 
look,  did  not  I  tell  you,  ^hear  is  some  of  your  Hus-  riiepiacc 
bands  Blood  upon  these  Stones  to  this  day  :   Behold  via.n  and  tile 

11  1  11  L    j_        ^  Fiend  did 

also  how  here,  and  there,  are  yet  to  be  seen  w^on fight,  some 
the  place,  some  of  the  Shivers  Oii  Apollyon  s  broken '/a«rf  re-" 
Darts.     See  also  how  they   did  beat  the  Ground "'""''' 
with  their  Feet,  as  they  fought  to  make  good  their 
Places  against  each  other,  how  also  with  their  by- 
blows,  they   did   split    the  very  Stones    in   pieces. 
Verily  Christian  did  here  play  the  Man,  and  shewed 
himself  as  stout,  as  could,  had   he  been  there,  even 
Hercules   himself.     When  Apollyon   was  beat,    he 
made  his  retreat  to  the  next  Valley,  that  is  called 
The  Valley  of  the  shadow  of  Death,  unto  which  we 
shall  come  anon. 

Lo  yonder  also  stands  a  Monument  on  which  is'-^^^" 
Engraven  this  Battle,  and  Christians  Victory  to  his  ^«««'- "' 

^  'Corrected  to  'here,'  in  sub.        '  Inserted  in  1687- 
edits. 


uu- 
of  the 


288 


Clje  ^^rontr  part  of 


J  Mmixi- 

iiirnt  of 

Christians 

Victory. 


Fame,  throughout  all  Ages.  So  because  it  stood 
just  on  the  way-side  before  them,  they  stept  to 
it  and  read  the  Writing,  AVhich  word  for  word 
was  this, 

Hard  hy,  here  was  a  Battle  fought, 
Most  strange,  and  yet  most  true. 
Christian  and  Apollyon  sought 
Each  other  to  subdue. 

The  Man  so  bravely  played  the  Alan, 
He  made  the  Fiend  to  Jly  : 
Of  which  a  Monument  I  stand. 
The  same  to  testifie. 


Groanings 
heaid. 


When  they  had  passed  by  this  place,  they  came 
ll^'m"^'  ^P^^^  t^^^  Borders  of  the  shadow  of  Death,  and  this 
Valley  was  longer  then  the  other,  a  place  also  most 
strangely  haunted  with  Evil  things,  as  many  are 
able  to  testifie.  But  these  Women  and  Children 
went  the  better  thorough  it,  because  they  had 
day-light,  and  because  Mr.  Great-heart  was  their 
Conductor. 

When  they  were  entred  upon  this  Valley,  they 
thought  that  they  heard  a  groaning  as  of  dead  men  : 
a  very  great  groaning.  They  thought  also  they  did 
hear  Words  of  Lamentation  spoken,  as  of  some  in 
extream  Torment.  These  things  made  the  Boys 
to  quake,  the  Women  also  looked  pale  and  wan  ; 
but  their  Guide  bid  tliem  be  of  good  Comfort. 

So  they  went  on  a  little  further,  and  they  thought 
that  they  felt  tlie  Ground  begin  to  shake  under 
them,  as  if  some  hollow  Place  was  there  ;  they 
heard  also  a  kind  of  a  hissing  as  of  Serpents;  but 
nothing  as  yet  appeared.  Then  said  the  Boys,  Are 
we  not  yet  at  the  end  of  this  Doleful  place  ?  But 
the  Guide  also  bid  them  be  of  good  Courage,  and 
look  well  to  their  Feet,  lest  ha})ly,  said  he,  you  be 
taken,  in  some  Snare. 


The  Ground 
iliakes. 


CI)e  ?pilcrrim<5  i3ro(rres(si*  289 

Now  James  began  to  be  Sick  ;  but  I  think  the  ^XJ-mn 
cause  thereof  was   Fear,  so  his  Mother  gave  him 
some  of  that  Glass  of  Spirits  that  she  had  given  her 
at  the   Interpreters   House,  and  three  of  the   Pills 
'^  that  Mr.  Skill  had  prepared,'  and  the  Boy  began 
to  revive.     Thus  they  went  on  till  they   came  to 
about  the  middle  of  the  Valley,  and  then  Christiana 
said,   Methinks   I  see  something  yonder  upon  the  ^^'J,!,®.'"^ 
Road  before  us,  a  thing  of  such  a  shape  such  as  I 
have  not  seen.     Then  said  Joseph,  Mother,  what  is 
it  ?     An   ugly  thing,   Child  ;  an  ugly  thing,  said  ;;^;;^^j!; 
she.     But  Mother,  what  is  it  like,  said  he  ?     'Tis  «/'«^-'' 
like  I  cannot  tell  M'hat,  said  she.     And  now  it  was 
but  a  little  way  off.     Then  said  she,  it  is  nigh. 

Well,  well,  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  let  them  that 
are  most  afraid  keep  close  to  me.  So  the  Fiend 
came  on,  and  the  Conductor  met  it;  but  when  it 
was  just  come  to  him,  it  vanished  to  all  their  sights. 
Then  remembred  they  what  had  been  said  some- 
time ago.     Resist  the  Devil,  and  he  will  fit/ from  you. 

They  went  therefore  on,   as  being:  a   little   re-  'Great-heart 
freshed;  but  they  had  not  gone  far,  before  3fe7'ci/ *'''"'■" 
looking  behind  her,  saw,  as  she  thought,  something, 
most  like  a  Lion,  and  it  came  a  great  padding  pace  ^  ^'°''- 
after ;  and  it  had  a  hollow  Voice  of  Roaring,  and 
at  every  Roar  that  it  gave,  it  made  all  the  Valley 
Eccho,   and    their  Hearts  to  ake,   save  the  Heart 
of  him  that  was  their  Guide.     So  it  came  up,  and 
Mr.  Great-heart  went  behind,  and  put  the  Pilgrims 
all  before  him.     The  Lion  also  came  on  a  pace,  and 
Mr.  Great-heart  addressed  himself  to  give  him  Bat- ^^*'•^•^'^• 
tel.     But  when  he  saw  that  it  was  determined  that 
resistance  should  be  made,  he  also  drew  back  and 
came  no  further. 

Then  they  went  on  again,  and  their  Conductor 
did  go  before  them,  till  they  came  at  a  place  where  i^^i^^. 
was  cast  up  a  pit,  the  whole  breadth  of  the  way, 

'  Added  in  1 GCT. 


290 


Cf)e  ^eronti  tiart  of 


Christiana 
now  knows 
what  her 
Huaband 
felt. 


'  Great- 
heart's 


and  before  they  could  be  prepared  to  go  over  that, 
a  great  mist  and  a  darkness  fell  upon  them,  so  that 
they  could  not  see.  Then  said  the  Pilgrims,  alas  ! 
now  what  shall  we  do?  But  their  Guide  made  an- 
swer, fear  not,  stand  still  and  see  what  an  end  will 
be  put  to  this  also  ;  so  they  stayed  there  because 
their  Path  was  marr'd.  They  then  also  thought 
that  they  did  hear  more  apparently  the  noise  and 
rushing  of  the  Enemies,  the  fire  also  and  the  smoke 
of  the  pit  was  much  easier  to  be  discerned.  Then 
said  Christiana  to  Mercy,  now  I  see  what  my  poor 
Husband  went  through.  I  have  heard  much  of  this 
place,  but  I  never  was  here  afore  now  ;  poor  man, 
he  went  here  all  alone  in  the  night ;  he  had  night 
almost  quite  through  the  way,  also  these  Fiends 
were  busie  about  him,  as  if  they  would  have  torn 
him  in  pieces.  Many  have  spoke  of  it,  but  none 
can  tell  what  the  Valley  of  the  shaddow  of  death 
should  mean,  until  they  come  in  it  themselves.  The 
heart  knows  its  own  bitterness,  and  a  stranger  inter- 
meddleth  7iot  with  its  Joij.  To  be  hei'e  is  a  fearful 
thing. 

Greath.  This  is  like  doing  business  in  great  Wa- 
ters, or  like  going  down  into  the  deep  ;  this  is  like 
being  in  the  heart  of  the  Sea,  and  like  going  down 
to  the  Bottoms  of  the  Mountains.  Now  it  seems  as 
if  the  Earth  with  its  bars  were  about  us  for  ever. 
But  let  them  that  umlk  in  darkness  and  have  no  licjht, 
trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  stay  upon  their  God. 
For  my  Part,  as  I  have  told  you  already,  I  have 
gone  often  through  this  Valley,  and  have  been 
much  harder  put  to  it,  than  now  I  am,  and  yet  you 
see  I  am  alive.  I  would  not  boast,  for  that  I  am 
not  mine  own  Saviour.  But  I  trust  we  shall  have 
a  good  deliverance.  Come  let  us  pray  for  liglit  to 
him  that  can  lighten  our  darkness,  and  that  can 
rebuke,  not  only  these,  but  all  the  Satans  in  Hell. 

*  Inserted  in  lfi87. 


€f)t  1  iTgn'msi  ^Srogress;*  291 

So  they  cried  and  prayed,  and  God  sent  light  ^''^^'""y- 
and  deliverance,  for  there  was  now  no  lett  in  their 
way,  no  not  there,  where  but  now  they  were  stopt 
with  a  pit : 

Yet  they  were  not  got  through  the  Valley ;  so 
they  went  on  still,  and  behold  great  stinks  and 
loathsome  smells,  to  the  great  annoyance  of  them. 
Then  said  Mercy  to  Christiana,  there  is  not  such 
pleasant  being  here,  as  at  the  Gate,  or  at  the  Inter- 
preters, or  at  the  House  where  we  lay  last. 

O  but,  said  one  of  the  Boys,  it  is  not  so  bad  to  f)0  'B%lffy,- 
t/irom/h  here,  as  it  is  to  abide  here  always,  and  for 
ought  I  know,  one  reason  ivhy  we  must  go  this  way  to 
the  House  prepared  for  us,  is,  that  our  home  might  be 
made  the  stveeter  to  us. 

Well  said,  Samuel^  quoth  the  Guide,  thou  hast 
now  spoke  like  a  man.  Why,  if  ever  I  get  out  here 
again,  said  the  Boy,  I  think  I  shall  prise  light,  and 
good  way  better  than  ever  I  did  in  all  my  life. 
Then  said  the  Guide,  we  shall  be  out  by  and  by. 

So  on  they  went,  and  Joseph  said,  Cannot  ive  see 
to  the  end  of  this  Valley  as  yet  ?  Then  said  the 
Guide,  Look  to  your  feet,  for  you  shall  presently  be 
among  the  Snares.  So  they  looked  to  their  feet 
and  went  on  ;  but  they  were  troubled  much  with 
the  Snares.  Now  when  they  were  come  among  the 
Snares,  they  espied  a  man  cast  into  the  Ditch  on 
the  left  hand,  with  his  flesh  all  rent  and  torn.  Then 
said  the  Guide,  That  is  one  Heedless,  that  was  a  Jf^^^f ^'„^/' 
going  this  way  ;  he  has  lain  there  a  great  while,  "^^^^^.^^a: 
There  was  one  Takeheed  with  him,  when  he  was 
taken,  and  slain,  but  he  escaped  their  hands.  You 
cannot  imagine,  how  many  are  killed  here  about, 
and .  yet  men  are  so  foolishly  venturous,  as  to  set 
out  lightly  on  Pilgrimage,  and  to  come  without  a 
Guide.  Poor  Christian,  it  was  a  wonder  that  he 
here  escaped,  but  he  was  beloved  of  his  God,  also 

^  Inserted  in  7  687 


292  CfK  ^wontr  fart  of 

he  had  a  good  heart  of  his  own,  or  else  he  could 
never  a-done  it.     Now  they  drew  towards  the  end 

lo^mmi  ^^*^^  way,  and  just  there  where  Christian  had  seen 
the  Cave  when  he  went  by,  out  thence  came  forth 

Mauii acy-  Maidl  a  Gyaut.  This  Maii'll  did  use  to  spoyl  young 
Pilgrims  with  Sophistry,  and  he  called  Great-heart 
by  his  name,  and  said  unto  him,  how  many  times 
have  you  been  forbidden  to  do  these  things  ?    Then 

1^7. gS-'' said  Mr.  Great-heart,  what  things?     Wliat  things, 

heart.'-  quotli  thc  Gyaut,  you  know  what  things;  but  I  will 
put  an  end  to  your  trade.  But  pray,  said  Mr. 
Great-heart,  before  we  fall  to  it,  let  us  understand 
wherefore  we  must  fight  (now  the  Women  and 
Children  stood  trembling,  and  know  not  what  to 
do)  quoth  the  Gyant,  ^^ou  rob  the  Countrey,  and 
rob  it  with  the  worst  of  Thefts.  These  are  but 
Generals,  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  come  to  particulars, 
man  : 

God-s  Minis-      Then  said  the  Giant,  Thou  practises  the  craft  of 

ters  counted  '  i 

f«  Kidnap-  a  Kidnapper,  thou  gatherest  up  VV  omen,  and  Cliild- 
ron,  and  carriest  them  into  a  strange  Countrey,  to 
the  weakning  of  m}'^  Masters  Kingdom.  But  now 
Great-heart  replied,  I  am  a  Servant  of  the  God  of 
Heaven,  my  business  is  to  perswade  sinners  to  Re- 
pentance, I  am  commanded  to  do  my  endeavour  to 
turn  Men,  Women,  and  Children,  from  darkness  to 

Ind^i7'^   light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  to  God,  and  if 

vuTt't'iT  ^^^^^  ^^  indeed  the  ground  of  thy  quarrel,  let  us  fall 
to  it  as  soon  as  thou  wilt. 

Then  the  Giant,  came  up,  and  Mr.  Great-heart 
went  to  meet  him,  and  as  he  went  he  drew  his 
Sword ;  but  the  Giant  had  a  Club.  So  with  out 
more  ado  they  fell  to  it,  and  at  the  first  blow  the 
Giant  stroke  Mr.  Great-heart  down  upon  one  of  his 

weahfoiki   knees :  with  that  the  Women,  and  Children  cried 

•prayers  do     „  nn/T/^  t  •  i   •  IPI'J 

fornetimes     ^out.     k5o  Mr.  Great-heart  recoverino;  himseli,  lain 

hdp  strong         .  i--piii  i  1/~»'i 

/Oiks  o-ies.    about  him  in  lull  lusty  manner,  and  gave  tlie  Lruint 

*  Inserted  in  1 687.  *  '  out,'  omitted  in  sub.  edits. 


Cl^e  ^iTgn'msi  progredsi*  293 

a  wound  in  his  arm  ;  thus  he  fought  for  the  space 
of  an  hour  to  that  height  of  heat,  that  the  breath 
came  out  of  the  Giants  nostrils,  as  the  heat  doth  out 
of  a  boiling  Caldron. 

Then  they  sat  down  to  rest  them,  but  Mr.  Great- 
heart  betook  him  to  prayer;  also  the  Women  and 
Children  did  nothing  but  sigh  and  cry  all  the  time 
that  the  Battle  did  last. 

When  they  had  rested  them,  and  taken  breath, 
they  both  fell  to  it  again,  and  Mr.  Great-heart  with 
a  full  blow,  fetcht  the  Giant  down  to  the  ground.  ^^f'JX™. 
Nay  hold,  and  let  me  recover,  quoth  he.  So  Mr. 
Great-heart  fairly  let  him  get  up;  so  to  it  they  went 
again ;  and  the  Giant  mist  but  little  of  all-to- 
breaking  Mr.  Great-hearfs  Scull  with  his  Club. 

Mr.  Great-heart  seeing  that,  runs  to  him  in  the 
full  heat  of  his  Spirit,  and  ^pierceth  him  under  the 
fifth  rib;  with  that  the  Giant  began  to  faint,  and 
could  hold  up  his  Club  no  longer.  Then  Mr. 
Great-heart  seconded  his  blow,  and  sniit  the  head  of 
the  Giant  from  his  shoulders.  Then  the  Women 
and  Children  rejoyced,  and  Mr.  Great-heart  also 
praised  God,  for  the  deliverance  he  had  wrought. 

When  this  was  done,  thev  among-st  them  erected  ^^r,''"/"'^ 
a   Pillar,  and  fastned   the   Gyant  s  head   thereon, '''*^''«"' "/ 
and   wrote  underneath  in   Letters   that  Passengers 
might  read. 

He  that  did  wear  this  head,  was  one 

That  Pilgrims  did  tnisuse  ; 

He  stopt  their  way,  he  spared  none, 

But  did  them  all  abuse; 

Until  that  /,  Great-heart,  arose^ 

The  Pilgrims  Guide  to  be ; 

Until  that  I  did  him  oppose, 

That  was  their  Enemy. 

^  '  and  pierced/  1G87. 
X 


294  Cfte  ^econtr  ^3art  oi 

iparfpag.       Now   I  saw,  that  they  went  to  the  Ascent  that 

107.  [77]  .  "^ 

was  a  little  way  off  cast  up  to  be  a  Prospect  for 
Pilgrims  (That  was  the  place  from  whence  Chris- 
tian had  the  first  sight  of  Faithful  his  Brother.) 
Wherefore  here  they  sat  down,  and  rested,  they  also 
here  did  eat  and  drink,  and  make  merry  ;  for  that 
they  had  gotten  deliverance  from  this  so  dangerous 
an  Enemy.  As  they  sat  thus  and  did  eat,  Chris- 
tiana asked  the  Guide,  If  he  had  caught  no  hurt  in 
the  battle.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  no,  save  a 
little  on  my  flesh;  yet  that  also  shall  be  so  far  from 
being  to  my  Determent,  that  it  is  at  present  a  proof 
of  my  love  to  my  Master,  and  you,  and  shall  be  a 
means  by  Grace  to  encrease  my  reward  at  last. 

2  Cor.  4.  But  was  you  not  afraid,  (pod  Sir,  when  you  see 

Discourse  of  Jiijn  cgme  '^  out  With  Ms  Cluh  ? 

thefighU.  .  •  i     i  t 

It  IS  my  Duty,   said  he,   to  distrust  mine  own 
ability,  that  I  ma}'-  have  reliance  on  him  that  is 
stronger  than  all.     But  ivhat  did  you  think  ivhen  he 
fetched  you  doivn   to   the   cjround  at  the  first  hlow? 
Why  I  thought,  quoth  he,  that  so  my  Master  him- 
self was  served,  and  yet  he  it  was  that  conquered  at 
the  last. 
MatAere         Mutt.    When  you  all  have  thought  ichat  you  please, 
Goodntss.    /  think  God  has  been  wonderful  (pod  unto  us,  both  in 
hnnging  us  out  of  this  Valley,  and  in  delivering  us  out 
of  the  hand  of  this  Enemy ;  for  my  part  I  see  no 
reason  why  we  shoidd  distrust  our  God  any  more,  since 
he  has  now,  and  in  such  a  place  as  this,  given  us  such 
testimony  of  his  love  as  this. 
ow  Honest       Tlieii  tlicy  got  up  and  went  forward,  now  a  little 
^»Xr  "^  before  them  stood  an  Oak,  and  under  it  when  they 
came  to  it,  they  found  an  old  Pilgrim  fast  asleep, 
they  knew  that  he  was  a  Pilgrim  by  his  Cloths,  and 
his  St(tff  and  his  Girdle. 

So  the  Guide  Mr.  Great-heart  awaked  him,  and 


■*  '  come  with,'  1687. 


Cfte  pilgnmg  progresis!*  295 

the  old  Gentleman,  as  he  lift  up  his  eyes,  cried  out; 
Whats  the  matter  ?  who  are  you?  and  what  is  your 
business  here  ? 

Great.  Come  man  he  not  so  hot,  here  is  none  but 
Friends ;  yet  the  old  man  gets  up  and  stands  upon 
his  guard,  and  will  know  of  them  what  they  were. 
Then  said  the  Guide,  my  name  is  Great-heart,  I  am 
the  guide  of  these  Pilgrims  which  are  going  to  the 
Celestial  Countrey. 

Honest.  Then  said  Mr.  Honest,  I  cry  vou  mercy:  omsaint 
I  fear'd  that  you  had  been  of  the  Company  of  those  l^f,'^""*'*^'' 
that  some  time  ago  did  rob  Little-faith  of  his  money;  ^"^^y- 
but  now  I  look  better  about  me,  I  perceive  you  are  <  Taik  be- 
honester  People,  hSa'T'" 

Greath.    Whi/  ivhat  woidd,  or  could  you  adone,  to  ''^' 
a  helped  your  self,  if  we  indeed  had  been  of  that  Com- 
pany f 

Hon.  Done  !  Why,  I  would  a  fought  as  long  as 
Breath  had  been  in  me  ;  and  had  I  so  done,  I  am 
sure  you  could  never  have  given  me  the  worst  on't, 
for  a  Christian  can  never  be  overcome,  unless  he 
shall  yield  of  himself. 

Greath.  Well  said.  Father  Honest,  quoth  the 
Guide,  for  by  this  I  know  thou  art  a  Cock  of  the  right 
kind,  for  thou  hast  said  the  Truth. 

Hon.  And  by  this  also  I  know  that  thou  knowest 
what  true  Pilgrimage  is ;  for  all  others  do  think 
that  we  are  the  soonest  overcome  of  any. 

Greath.    Well  noio  ive  are  so  happily  met,  pray  let  ^^'^^"^^  ^'' 
me  crave  your  Name,  and  the  name  of  the  Place  you  '"^'^^ 
came  from  f 

Hon.  My  Name  I  cannot,  but  I  came  from  the 
Town  of  Stupidity  ;  it  lieth  about  four  Degrees  be- 
yond the  City  of  Destruction. 

Greath.  Oh!  Are  you  that  Cottntry  man  then  f  I 
deem  I  have  half  a  guess  of  you,  your  name  is  old 
Honesty,  is  it  not  f     So  the  old  Gentleman  blushed, 

'  Inserted  in  1687. 

X  2 


worse  then 
those  tneerhj 
Carnal. 


296  C!k  ^erouti  ^part  of 

and  said,  Not  Honesty  in  the  abstract,  but  Honest  is 
mv  Name,  and  I  wish  that  my  Nature  shall  agree 
to  what  I  am  called. 

Hon.  But  Sir,  said  the  old  Gentleman,  how  could 
you  guess  that  I  am  such  a  Man,  since  I  came  from 
such  a  place  ? 
f"rK  Greath.  /  had  heard  of  you  before,  hy  my  Master, 

for  he  knows  all  thinf/s  that  are  done  on  the  Earth: 
But  I  have  often  irondered  that  any  should  come  from 
your  place  ;  for  your  Town  is  worse  than  is  the  City 
of  Destruction  it  self 

Hon.  Yes,  we  lie  more  ofF  from  the  Sun,  and  so 
are  more  cold  and  sensless ;  but  was  a  Man  in  a 
Mountain  of  Ice,  yet  if  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
will  arise  upon  him,  his  frozen  Heart  shall  feel  a 
Thaw  ;  and  thus  it  hath  been  with  me. 

Greath.  I  believe  it.  Father  Ho7iest,  I  believe  it, 
for  I  know  the  thino^  is  true. 

Then  the  old  Gentleman  saluted  all  the  Pilgrims 
with  a  holy  Kiss  of  Charity,  and  asked  them  of 
their  Names,  and  how  they  had  ^faired  since  they 
set  out  on  their  Pilgrimage. 

Christ.  Then  said  Christiana,  my  Name  I  suppose 
you  have  heard  of,  good  Christian  was  my  Husband, 
and  these  four  were  his  Children.  But  can  you 
think  how  the  old  Gentleman  was  taken,  when  she 
told  them  who  she  was  !  He  skip'd,  he  smiled,  and 
blessed  them  with  a  thousand  good  Wishes,  saying, 

Hon.  I  have  heard  much  of  your  Husband,  atid  of 
his  Travels  and  Wars  which  he  underwent  in  his  days. 
Be  it  spoken  to  your  Con  fort,  the  Name  of  your  Hus- 
band rings  all  over  these  parts  of  the  World :  His 
Faith,  his  Courage,  his  Enduring,  and  his  Sincerity 
under  all,  has  made  his  Name  Famous.  Then  he 
•^eaisota^a  turned  him  to  the  Boys,  and  asked  them  of  their 
t^ly       Names,  wliich   they   told   him  :   And   then  said  lie 

*  'had  fared,'  1687.  "  Inserted  in  1087. 


'OW.  Ho- 
nest and 
Christiana 


CI)e  iailgnmjj  piocrresfs;*  297 

unto  them,  Matthew,  be  thou  like  Matthew  the  Pub-  ^^I^IH:^ 
lican,  not  in  Vice,  but  in  Virtue.     Samuel,  said  he,  ^j;^'^"'* 
be  thou  like  Samuel  the  Prophet,  a  Man  of  Faith  ^^^^^/gO- 1 
atul   Prayer.     Joseph,  s,a\d  he,  be  thou  like  Joseph  ^""^^f^; .^^^^ 
in  Potiphars  House,  Chast,  and  one  that  flies  from 
Temptation.     And,  James,  be  thou  like  James  the 
Just,  and  like  James  the  Brother  of  our  Lord. 

Then  they  told  him  of  Mercy,  and  how  she  had  'Zp'"' 
left  her  Town  and  her  Kindred  to  come  along  with 
Christiana,  and  with  her  Sons.  At  that  the  old 
Honest  Man  said,  Mercy,  is  thy  Name  ?  by  Mercij 
shalt  thou  be  sustained,  and  carried  thorough  all 
those  Difficulties  that  shall  assault  thee  in  thy  way; 
till  thou  shalt  come  thither  where  thou  shalt  look 
the  Fountain  of  Mercy  in  the  Face  with  Comfort. 

All  this  while  the  Guide  Mr.  Great-heart,  was 
very  much  pleased,  and  smiled  upon  his  Compa- 
uion. 

Now  as  they  walked  along  together,  the  Guide  J;;!.V/aring. 
asked  the  old  Gentleman,   if  he  did  not  know  one 
Mr.  Fearing  that  came  on  Pilgrinuuje  out  of  his  Parts. 

Hon.  Yes,  very  well,  said  he  ;  he  was  a  Man 
tliat  had  the  Root  of  the  Matter  in  him,  but  he  was 
one  of  the  most  troublesom  Pilgrims  that  ever  I 
met  with  in  all  my  days. 

Greath.  I  perceive  you  knew  him,  for  you  have  given 
a  very  right  Character  of  him. 

Hon.  Knew  him  !  1  was  a  great  Companion  of 
his,  I  was  with  him  most  an  end  ;  when  he  first 
began  to  think  of  what  would  come  upon  us  here- 
after, I  was  with  him. 

Greath.  I  was  his  Guide  from  my  Masters  House, 
to  the  Gates  of  the  Celestial  City. 

Hon.  Then  you  knew  him  to  be  a  troublesom 
one. 

*  The  reference  in  the  first  and  1. 13,  were  added  in  the  18th  edit, 

all  the  early  editions  is  merely  to  1726. 

the    'Acts;'     the    chapter    and  *  Inserted  in  1687. 

verse,  in  error  put  1.14.  instead  of  _^ 


298 


Cf)e  ^eronti  part  of 


Mr.  Fear- 
ing's 

troiiblesom 
Pilgrimage. 


His  be- 
haviour at 
the  Slow  of 
Dispond. 


His  he- 
liarior  at 
the  Gate. 


Greath.  /  did  so,  bid  I  coidd  very  well  bear  it :  for 
Men  of  my  Calling,  are  oftentimes  intrusted  with  the 
Conduct  of  such  as  he  was. 

Hon.  Well  then,  pray  let  us  hear  a  little  of  him, 
and  how  he  mana2:ed  himself  under  your  Conduct? 

Greath,  Why  he  was  always  afraid  that  he  should 
come  short  of  whither  he  had  a  desire  to  go.  Every 
thing  frightned  him  that  he  heard  any  body  speak 
of,  that  had  but  the  least  appearance  of  Opposition 
in  it.  I  hear  that  he  lay  roaring  at  the  ^Slow  of 
Dispond,  for  above  a  Month  together,  nor  durst  he, 
for  all  he  saw  several  go  over  before  him,  venture, 
tho  they,  many  of  them,  offered  to  lend  him  their 
Hand.  He  woidd  not  go  back  again  neither.  The 
Celestial  City,  he  said  he  should  die  if  he  came  not 
to  it,  and  yet  was  dejected  at  every  Difficulty,  and 
stumbled  at  every  Straw  that  any  body  cast  in  his 
way.  Well,  after  he  had  layn  at  the  ^Sloiv  of  Dis- 
pond a  great  while,  as  I  have  told  you ;  one  sun- 
shine Morning,  I  do  not  know  how,  he  ventured, 
and  so  got  over.  But  when  he  was  over,  he  m  ould 
scarce  believe  it.  He  had,  I  think,  a  Slow  of  Dis- 
potid  in  his  Mind,  a  Slow  that  he  carried  every 
where  with  him,  or  else  he  could  never  have  been 
as  he  was.  So  he  came  up  to  the  Gate,  you  know 
what  I  mean,  that  stands  at  the  head  of  this  way, 
and  there  also  he  stood  a  good  while  before  he 
would  adventure  to  knock.  When  the  Gate  was 
opened  he  would  give  back,  and  give  place  to 
say  that  he  was  not  vvortliy.  For,  for 
before  some  to  the  Gate,  yet  many  of 
in  before  him.  There  the  poor  Man 
ig  and  shrinking  :  1  dare  say  it 
ones  Heart  to  have  seen  him : 


others,  and 
all  he  gat 
them   went 
would  stand  shaki no- 
would   have  pitied 


N^or  woidd  he  go  back  again.  At  last  he  took  the 
Hammer  that  hanged  on  the  Gate  in  his  hand,  and 
gave  a  small  Rapp  or  two  ;  then  one  opened  to  liini. 

'  '  the  Slough;  1687. 


i  be- 
havior at 


Cf)e  pilffiimd  progres^s!*  299 

but  he  shrunk  back  as  before.  He  that  opened 
stept  out  after  him,  and  said.  Thou  trembling  one, 
what  wantest  thou?  with  that  he  fell  '^down'  to 
the  Ground.  He  that  spoke  to  him  wondered  to 
see  him  so  faint.  So  he  said  to  him,  Peace  be  to 
thee,  up,  for  I  have  set  open  the  Door  to  thee  ; 
come  in,  for  thou  art  blest.  With  that  he  gat  up, 
and  went  in  trembling,  and  when  he  was  in,  he 
was  ashamed  to  shew  his  Face.  Well,  after  he  had 
been  entertained  there  a  while,  as  you  know  how 
the  manner  is,  he  was  bid  go  on  his  way,  and  also 
told  the  way  he  should  take.  So  he  came  till  he 
came  to  our  House,  but  as  he  behaved  himself  at 
the  Gate,  so  he  did  at  my  Master  the  Interpreters  "^^ 
Door.  He  lay  thereabout  in  the  Cold  a  good  while,  "^IJ^^]^'''' 
before  he  would  adventure  to  call ;  Yet  he  would  not 
go  back.  And  the  Nights  were  long  and  cold  then. 
Nay  he  had  a  Note  of  Necessity  in  his  Bosom  to  my 
Master,  to  receive  him,  and  grant  him  the  Comfort 
of  his  House,  and  also  to  allow  him  a  stout  and 
valiant  Conduct,  because  he  was  himself  so  ChicMn- 
hcarted  a  Man ;  and  yet  for  all  that  he  was  afraid  to 
call  at  the  Door.  So  he  lay  up  and  down  there 
abouts  till,  poor  man,  he  was  almost  starved  ;  yea 
so  great  was  his  Dejection,  that  tho  he  saw  several 
others  for  knocking  got  in,  yet  he  was  afraid  to  ven- 
ture. At  last,  I  think  I  looked  out  of  the  Window, 
and  perceiving  a  man  to  be  up  and  down  about  the 
Door,  I  went  out  to  him,  and  asked  what  he  was  ; 
but,  poor  man,  the  water  stood  in  his  Eyes.  So  I 
perceived  what  he  wanted.  I  went  therefore  in, 
and  told  it  in  the  House,  and  we  shewed  the  thing 
to  our  Lord  ;  So  he  sent  me  out  again,  to  entreat 
him  to  come  in,  but  I  dare  say  I  had  hard  work  to 
do  it.  At  last  he  came  in,  and  I  will  say  that  for 
my  Lord,  he  carried  it  wonderful  lovingly  to  \nm..  how  he  ims 
There  \\qyq  but  a  few   good  bits  at  the  Table,  but  fL^e"'"'^' 

*  '  down,'  added  in  1687. 


300  Cl)e  ^HOixt}  ^aart  of 

some  of  it  was  laid  upon  his  Trencher.     Then  he 
presented  the  N^ote,  and  my  Lord  looked  tliereon 
and  said,  his  Desire  should  be  granted.     So  when 
'JifJ^rawd' ^^^  had  bin   there  a  good  while,  he  seemed  to  get 
^reters"'^'^'  souie   Heart,  and  to  be  a  little  more  Comfortable. 
kouse."      p^)Y   niy    Master,  you   must  know,  is  one  of  very 
tender  Bowels,   specially  to   them  that  are  afraid, 
wherefore  he  carried  it  so  towards  him,  as  might 
tend  most  to  his  Incouragement.     Well,  when  he 
had  had  a  sight  of  the  things  of  the  place,  and  was 
ready   to  take   his  Journey  to  go  to  the  City,  my 
Lord,   as   he   did  to  Christian  before,  gave  him  a 
Bottle  of  Spirits,  and  some  comfortable  things  to 
eat.     Thus  we  set  forward,  and  I  went  before  him ; 
but  the  man  was  but  of  few  Words,  only  he  would 
sigh  aloud. 
m^oas  When  we  were  come  to  wdiere  the  three  Fellows 

%rraid  when  weTB  hanged,  he  said,   that  he  doubted  that  that 
Gibbu,  "    Mould  be  his  end  also.     Only  he  seemed  glad  when 
he's tZ"' he  saw  the  Cross  and  the  Sepulcher.     There  I  con- 
fess he   desired  to  stay  a  little  to  look  ;    and   he 
seemed  for  a  while  after  to  be  a  little  Chearij.    When 
we  came  at  the  Hill  Difficulty,  he  made  no  stick  at 
that,   nor  did   he  much  fear  the  Lyons  :  For  you 
must  know  that  his  Trouble  teas  7iot  about  such  things 
as  those,  his  Fear  was  about  his  Acceptance  at  last. 
Dumpuhat       I   got  him   in  at  the  House  Beautiful,   I  think 
BeautiM.     before   he  was   willing ;    also   when   he  w^as    in,    I 
brought   him    acquainted    with    the   Damsels   that 
were  of  the   Place,   but  he  was  ashamed  to  make 
himself  much  for  Company,  he  desired  much  to  be 
alone,  yet  he  always  loved   good  talk,  and   often 
would  get   behind   the  Screen  to  hear  it ;  he  also 
loved  much  to  see  antient  Things,  and  to  be  ponder- 
ing them  in  his  Mind.     He  told  me  afterwards,  that 
he  loved  to  be   in  those  two   Houses   from   which 
he  came  last,  to  wat,  at  the  Gate,  and  that  of  the 

'  Inserted  in  1687. 


Cfte  pilgrims  proffresisi*  30i 

Interpreters,   but  that  he   durst  not  be  so  bold  to 
ask. 

When   we  went  also  from  the  House  Beautiful,  Zwufmo, 
down  the  Hill,  into  the  Valley  of  Humiliation,  he  "^"y^'p^a- 
went  down  as  well  as  ever  I  saw  man  in  my  Life,  'ylaiiyj/ 
for  he  cared  not  how  mean  he  was,  so  he  might  be  h™"^'^*- 
happy  at  last.     Yea,  I  think  there  was  a  kind  of  a 
Sympathy   betwixt  that   Valley   and   him.     For   I 
never  saw  him  better  in  all  his  Pilgrimage,  then 
when  he  was  in  that  Valley. 

Here  he  would  lie  down,  imbrace  the  Ground, 
and  kiss  the  very  Flowers  that  grew  in  this  Valley.  Lam.  3. 27, 
He  would  now   be  up  every  Morning  by  break  of 
Day,  tracing,  and  walking  to  and  fro  in  this  Valley. 

But  when  he   was  come  to  the  entrance  of  the 
Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  I  thought  I  should  ;Sf^'- 
have  lost  my  Man  ;  not  for  that  he  had  any  Inclin-  ^^H^^^^^f 
ation  to  go  back,  that  he  always  abhorred,  but  he  "-^  ^«^''^- 
was  ready  to  dy^  for  Fear.     O,  the  Hobgoblins  will 
have  me,   the  Hobgoblins  will  have  me,  cried  he ; 
and  I  could  not  beat  him  out  on't.     He  made  such 
a  noyse,  andsuch  an  outcry  here,  that,  had  they  but 
heard    him,   'twas    enough  to  encourage   them  to 
come  and  fall  upon  us. 

But  this  I  took  very  great  notice  of,  that  this 
Valley  was  as  quiet  while  he  went  thorow  it,  as 
ever  I  knew  it  before  or  since.  I  suppose,  those 
Enemies  here,  had  now  a  special  Check  from  our 
Lord,  and  a  Command  not  to  meddle  until  Mr. 
Fearing  was  past  over  it. 

It  would  be  too  tedious  to  tell  you  of  all;   we  will 
therefore  'only'^  mention  a  Passage  or  two  more. 
When  he  was  come  at  Vanity  Fair,  I  thought  he  would  l,fj,'/^t°-' 
have  fought  with  all  the  men  in  the  Fair,  I  feared  J^*^\*y- 
there  we  should  both  have  been  knock 'd  o'  th  Head, 
so  hot  was  he  against  their  Fooleries ;  upon  the  in- 

*  Added  in  1687.  '  '  dye  for  Fear,'  1687. 


302  Cfte  ^erouli  fart  of 

cbauted  Ground,  he  was  also  very  wakeful.  But 
when  he  was  come  at  the  River  where  was  no  Brido-, 
there  again  he  was  in  a  heavy  Case  ;  now,  now  he 
said  he  should  be  drowned  for  ever,  and  so  never 
see  that  Face  with  Comfort,  that  he  had  come  so 
many  miles  to  behold. 

And  here  also  I  took  notice  of  what  was  very  re- 
markable, the  Water  of  that  River  was  lower  at  this 
time,  than  ever  I  saw  it  in  all  my  Life  ;  so  he  went 
over  at  last,  not  much  above  wet-shod.  When  he 
was  going  up  to  the  Gate,  Mr.  Great-heart  began 
to  take  his  Leave  of  him,  and  to  wish  him  a  good 
Reception  above  ;  So  he  said,  /  shall,  I  shall.  Then 
parted  we  asunder,  and  I  saw  him  no  more. 

'^ati^t,'i      Honest.   Then  it  seems  he  ivas  well  at  last. 

Greath.  Yes,  yes,  I  never  had  doubt  about  him, 
he  was  a  man  of  a  choyce  Spirit,  only  he  was  always 
kept  very  low,  and  that  made  his  Life  so  burthen- 

psai.  88.     some  to  himself,  and  so  troublesom  to  others.     He 

Rom.u.2i.  was  above  many,  tender  of  Sin  ;  he  was  so  affraid 
of  doing  Injuries  to  others,  that  he  often  would  deny 

1  Cor.  8. 13.  himself  of  that  which  was  lawful,  because  he  would 
not  offend. 

Hon.  But  what  should  be  the  reason  that  such  a 
good  Man  should  be  all  his  days  so  much  in  the  dark? 

'gfodmm^      Gr^'Gdth.  Therc  are  two  sorts  of  Reasons  for  it; 

dart''"'     ^^^  ^^'  "^^^^  wise  God  will  have  it  so,  Some  must 

Matt.  11. 16,  Pipe,  and  some  must  ^Ycep  :  Now  Mr.  Fearing 
'  '  was  one  that  played  upon  this  Base.  He  and  his 
Fellows  sound  the  Sackbut,  whose  Notes  are  more 
doleful,  than  the  Notes  of  other  Musick  are.  Tho 
indeed  some  say,  The  Base  is  the  Ground  of  Musick. 
And  for  my  part  I  care  not  at  all  for  that  Profession, 
that  begins  not  in  heaviness  of  Mind.  The  first 
string  that  the  Musitian  usually  touches,  is  the  Base, 
when  he  intends  to  put  all  in  tune  ;  God  also  plays 
upon  this  string  first,  when  he  sets  the  Soul  in  tune 

=*  Added  in  1()87. 


Ct)e  ^agn'mei  ^rdgred^.  303 

for  himself.  Only  here  was  the  imperfection  of 
Mr.  Fearing,  he  could  play  upon  no  other  Musick 
but  this,  till  towards  his  latter  end. 

I  make  bold  to  talk  thus  Metaphorically,  for  the 
ripening  of  the  Wits  of  young  Readers,  and  because  Revei.  s.  2. 
in  the  Book  of  the  Revelations,  the  Saved  are  com-  ^hap.  i4. 
pared  to  a  company  of  Musicians  that  play  upon 
their   Trunipets  and   Harps,   and  sing  their  Songs 
before  the  Throne. 

Hon.  He  ivas  a  very  zealous  man,  as  one  may  see  by 
what  Relation  you  have  given  of  him.  Difficulties, 
Lyons,  or  Vanity  Fair,  he  feared  not  at  all :  '  Twas 
only  Sin,  Death,  and  Hell,  that  was  to  him  a  Terror  ; 
because  he  had  some  Doubts  about  his  Interest  in 
that  Celestial  Country. 

Greath.  You  say  right.  Those  were  the  things  ^-^^^^^^o*^..  3 
that  were  his  Troublers,  and  they,  as  you  have  well 
observed,  arose  from  the  weakness  of  his  Mind  there 
about,  not  from  weakness  of  Spirit  as  to  the  practi- 
cal part  of  a  Pilgrims  Life.  I  dare  believe  that  as 
the  Proverb  is,  he  could  have  bitt  a  Firebrand,  had 
it  stood  in  his  Way  :  But  the  things  with  which  he 
was  oppressed,  no  man  ever  yet  could  shake  off  with 
ease. 

Christiana.  Then  said  Christiana,  This  Relation  'ciuistiana-s 
of  Mr.  Fearing  has  done  me  good.  I  thought  no  body 
had  been  like  me,  but  I  see  there  was  some  Semblance 
'twicvt  this  good  man  and  I,  only  we  differed  in  two 
tilings.  His  Troubles  were  so  great  they  brake  out, 
hut  mine  I  kept  within.  His  also  lay  so  hard  iipon 
him,  they  made  him  that  he  coidd  not  knock  at  the 
Houses  provided  for  Entertainment ;  but  my  Trouble 
was  always  such,  as  made  me  knock  the  loivder. 

Mer.  If  I   might  also  speak   my  Heart,  I  must 'Mercy's^ 
say  that  something  of  him  has  also  dwelt  in  me. 
For  I  have  ever  been  more  afraid  of  the  Lake  and 
the  loss  of  a  place  in  Paradice,  then  I  have  been  of 

*  Added  in  1687. 


'  Matthew's 
Senl.nce.'  ^ 


304  Cl)e  ^erontr  ^3art  of 

the  loss  of  other  things.  Oh,  thought  I,  may  I 
have  the  Happiness  to  have  a  Habitation  there,  'tis 
enough,  though  I  part  with  all  the  AYorld  to  win  it. 
Matt.  Then  said  Matthew,  Fear  was  one  thing  that 
made  me  think  that  I  was  far  from  havincf  that  ivithin 
me,  that  accompanies  Salvation,  but  if  it  ivas  so  ivith 
such  a  good  man  as  he,  why  may  it  not  also  (fo  well 
with  me  f 
S^^/3  J«?w.  No  fears,  no  Grace,  said  James.  Tho^  there 
is  not  always  Grace  where  there  is  the  fear  of  Hell ; 
yet  to  be  sure  there  is  no  Grace  where  there  is  no 
fear  of  God. 

Greath.  Well  said,  James,  thou  hast  hit  the  Mark, 
for  the  fear  of  God  is  the  heginnim)  of  Wisdom  ;  and 
to  be  sure  they  that  want  the  beginning,  have  neither 
middle,  nor  end.  But  ice  ivill  here  conclude  our  dis- 
course of  Mr.  Fearing  after  we  have  sent  after  him 
this  Farewel. 

Zu!!bmT'  ^^^^^  Master  Fearing,  thou  didst  fear 

'"'«•'  Thy  God  :  And  wast  afraid 

Of  doing  any  thing,  while  here, 

That  would  have  thee  bet  ray' d. 

And  didst  thou  fear  the  Lake  and  Pit  f 

Would  others  did  so  too  : 

For,  as  for  them  that  want  thy  Wit, 

They  do  themselves  undo. 

Now  I  saw,  that  they  still  went  on  in  their  Talk. 
For  after  Mr.  Greatheart  had  made  an  end  with  Mr. 
i^if^lii.  Fearing,  Mr.  Honest  began  to  tell  them  of  another, 
but  his  Name  was  Mr.  Selfwil.  He  pretended  him- 
self to  be  a  Pilgrim,  said  Mr.  Honest;  But  I  pcr- 
swade  my  self,  he  never  came  in  at  the  Gate  that 
stands  at  the  head  of  the  way. 

Greath.  Had  you  ever  any  talk  with  him  about  it  f 
/mS«r      Ho7i.  Yes,  more  than  once  or  twice  ;  but  he  would 

teith  him.' ' 

'  Added  in  1687.  "  '  Though,'  1087. 


CJje  ^pilffrims;  progitsis!*  305 

always  be  like  himself,  self -willed.  He  neither  cared 
for  man,  nor  Argument,  nor  yet  Example  ;  what 
his  Mind  prompted  him  to,  that  he  would  do,  and 
nothing  else  could  he  be  got  to. 

Greath.  Pray  what  Principles  did  he  hold,  for  I 
suppose  you  can  tell? 

Hon.  He  held  that  a  man  might  follow  the  Vices,  seifwm-s 
as  well  as  the  Virtues  of  the  Pilgrims,  and  that  if 
he  did  both,  he  should  be  certainly  saved. 

Greath.  Howf  If  he  had  said,  tis  possible  for  the 
best  to  be  guilty  of  the  Vices,  as  well  as  to  partake  of 
the  Virtues  of  Pikjrims,  he  could  not  much  ^a  been 
blamed.  For  indeed  we  are  exempted  from  no  Vice 
absolutely,  but  on  condition  that  we  Watch  and  Strive. 
But  this  I  perceive  is  not  the  thing.  But  if  I  under- 
stand you  right,  your  meaning  is,  that  he  was  of  that 
Ophiio7i,  that  it  was  allowable  so  to  be  f 

Hon.  Ai,  ai,  so  I  mean,  and  so  he  believed  and 
practised. 

Greath.  Bid  what  Ground  had  he  for  his  so 
saying  f 

Hon.  Why,  he  said  he  had  the  Scripture  for  his 
Warrant. 

Greath.  Prethee,  Mr.  Honest,  present  us  ivith  a 
feiv  Particulars. 

Hon.  So  I  will,  He  said  To  have  to  do  with  other 
mens  Wives,  had  been  practised  by  David,  God's 
Beloved,  and  therefore  he  could  do  it.  He  said  to 
have  more  Women  than  one,  was  a  thing  that 
Solomon  practised,  and  therefore  he  could  do  it. 
He  said  that  Sarah,  and  the  godly  Midwives  of 
Egypt  lied,  and  so  did  saved  Rahab,  and  therefore 
he  could  do  it.  He  said  that  the  Disciples  w^ent  at 
the  biding  of  their  Master,  and  took  away  the 
Owners  yl^^,  and  therefore  he  could  do  so  too.  He 
said  that  Jacob  got  the  Inheritance  of  his  Father  in 

*  'much  have  been,'  1687. 


306  Cfte  ^nonti  \Uvt  of 

a  way  of  Guile  and  Dissimulation,  and  therefore  lie 
could  do  so  too. 

Greath.  ffigh  base  !  indeed,  and  you  are  sure  he 
was  of  this  Ojnnion  ? 

Hon.  I  have  heard  him  jDlead  for  it,  bring  Scrip- 
ture for  it,  bring  Argument  for  it,  8^c. 

Greath.  An  Opinion  that  is  not  Jit  to  be,  with  any 
Allowance,  in  the  World. 

Hon.  You  must  understand  me  rightl3\  He  did 
not  say  that  any  man  might  do  this  ;  but,  that  those 
that  had  the  Virtues  of  those  that  did  such  things, 
might  also  do  the  same. 

Greath.  But  what  more  false  than  snch  a  Conclu- 
sion f  For  this  is  as  much  as  to  say,  that  because 
good  men  heretofore  have  sinned  of  Infirmity,  there- 
fore he  had  allowance  to  do  it  of  a  presumptuous 
Mind.  Or  if  because  a  Child,  by  the  blast  of  the 
Wind,  or  for  that  it  stumbled  at  a  stone,  fell  doicn 
and  defiled  it  self  in  My  re,  therefore  he  might  wilfully 
ly  down  and  wallow  like  a  Bore  therein.  Who  could 
a  thought  that  any  one  could  so  far  a  bin  blinded  by  the 
power  of  Lust?  But  what  is  ivritten  must  be  true. 
]  Pet.  2. 8.  They  stumble  at  the  Word,  being  disobedient,  where- 
unto  also  they  were  appointed. 

His  supposing  that  such  may  have  the  godly  Man's 
Virtues,  who  addict  themselves  to  their  Vices,  is  also  a 
Delusion  as  strong  as  the  other.  'Tis  Just  as  if  the 
Dog  should  say,  I  have,  or  may  have  the  Qualities  of 
the  Child,  because  I  lick  up  its  stinki?ig  Ea^crements. 
Hos.4.8.  J'q  Qdi  yp  iJif,  giji  QJ'  Qod's  People,  is  no  sign  of  one 
that  is  possessed  ivith  their  Virtues.  Nor  can  I  believe 
that  one  that  is  of  this  Opinion^  can  at  present  ham 
Faith  or  Love  in  him.  But  I  knmv  you  have  made 
strong  Objections  against  him,  prethee  what  can  he  say 
for  himself  f 

Hon.  Why,  he  says,  To  do  this  by  way  of  Opinion, 
seems  abundance  more  honest,  then  to  do  it,  and  yet 
hold  contrary  to  it  in  Opinion. 


Win  iilgnmsJ  prosred^*  307 

Greath.  A  very  wicked  Answer^  for  tho  to  let 
loose  the  Bridle  to  Lusts,  while  our  Opinions  are 
against  such  things,  is  bad ;  yet  to  sin  and  plead  a 
Toleration  so  to  do,  is  worse ;  the  one  stumbles  Be- 
holders accidentally,  the  other  pleads  them  into  the 
Snare. 

Hon.  There  are  many  of  this  mans  mind,  that 
have  not  this  mans  mouth,  and  that  makes  going  on 
Pilgrimage  of  so  little  esteem  as  it  is. 

Greath.  You  have  said  the  Truth,  and  it  is  to  be 
lamented.  But  he  that  fearetJi  the  King  of  Paradice 
shall  come  out  of  them  all. 

Christiana.  There  are  strange  Opinions  in  the 
World,  I  know  one  that  said,  'twas  time  enough  to 
repent  when  they  ^come  to  die. 

Greath.  Such  are  not  over  wise.     That  man  would 
a  bin  loth,  might  he  have  had  a  week  to  run  twenty 
mile  in  for  his  Life,  to  have  deferred  that  Journey  to 
.  the  last  hour  of  that  Week. 

Hon.  You  say  right,  and  yet  the  generality  of 
them  that  count  themselves  Pilgrims,  do  indeed  do 
thus.  I  am,  as  you  see,  an  old  Man,  and  have  bin 
a  Traveller  in  this  ^Rode  many  a  day  ;  and  I  have 
taken  notice  of  many  things. 

I  have  seen  some  that  liave  set  out  as  if  they 
would  drive  all  the  World  afore  them  :  Who  yet 
have  in  few  days,  died  as  they  in  the  Wilderness, 
and  so  never  gat  sight  of  the  promised  Land. 

I  have  seen  some  that  have  promised  nothing  at 
first  setting  out  to  be  Pilgrims,  and  that  one  would 
a  thought  could  not  have  lived  a  day,  that  have  yet 
proved  very  good  Pilgrims. 

I  have  seen  some,  that  have  run  hastily  forward, 
that  again  have  after  a  little  time,^run  as  fast  just 
back  again. 

I  have  seen  some  who  have  spoke  very  well  of  a 

^  '  when  they  came  to  die,'  1G87.  *  '  Road,'  1687. 


308  ClK  ^eauti  ^ait  of 

Pilgrims  Life  at  first,  that  after  a  while,  have  spoken 
as  much  against  it. 

I  have  heard  some,  when  they  first  set  out  for 
Paradice,  say  positively,  there  is  such  a  place,  who 
when  they  have  been  almost  there,  have  come  back 
again,  and  said  there  is  none. 

I  have  heard  some  vaunt  what  they  would  do  in 
case  they  should  be  opposed,  that  have  even  at  a 
false  Alarm  fled  Faith,  the  Pilgrims  way,  and  all. 
'o/iroubk^^^^'  Now  as  they  were  thus  in  their  way,  there  came 
'one  runing  to  meet  them,  and  said,  Gentlemen,  and 
you  of  the  weaker  sort,  if  you  love  Life,  shift  for 
your  selves,  for  the  Robbers  are  before  you. 

Greatli.  Then  said  Mr.    Grcatheart,  They  be  the 

\p^^^     three  that  set  upon  Little-faith  heretofore.     Well, 

h^arra'       ^^^^  ^^®»  ^'^  ^^"®  ready  for  them  ;   So  they  went  on 

■««"^«<«'«'' their   way.     Now    they    looked   at  every   Turning 

when  they  should   a  met  with  the  Villains.     But 

whether  they  heard  of  Mr.  Greatheart,  or  whether 

they  had  some  other  Game,  they  came  not  up  to 

the  Pilgrims. 

'Christiana       Cliris.  Ckvistiana  then  wished  for  an  Inn  for  her 

an  Inn:  i     sclf  aud  licr  Children ;  because  they  were  weary. 

Rom.  16.23.  Thcu  Said  M-Y.  Honest,  there  is  one  a  little  before  us, 

Gaius.        where  a  very  honorable  Disciple,  one  Gains,  dwells. 

So  they  all  concluded  to  turn  in  thither ;  and  the 

rather,  because  the  old  Gentleman  gave  him  so  good 

'JdohiT"  ^  Report.     So  when  they  came  to  the  Door,  they 

^oiM.s      went  in,  not  knocking,  for  Folks  use  not  to  knock 

at  the  Door  of  an  Inn.     Then  they  called  for  the 

Master  of  the  House,  and  he  came  to  them.     So 

tliey  asked  if  they  might  lie  there  that  Night  f 

'G&maEnter-      Gttius.  Ycs  Gentlcmcn,  if  you  be  true  Men,  for 

a«t<w'=   my    House   is  for  none   but  Pilgrims.     Then   was 

Christiana,  Mercy,  and  the  Boys,  the  more  glad,  for 

that  the  Innkeeper  was  a  Lover  of  Pilgrims.     So 

tliey  called  for  Rooms ;  and  he  shewed  them  one 

•  Added  in  1687. 


Cfte  pilgnms!  ^logitsisi*  309 

for  Christiana  and  her  Children  and  Mercy^  and  an 
other  for  Mr.  Great-heart  and  the  old  Gentleman. 

Greath.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  Good  Gains, 
what  hast  thou  for  Supper  ?  for  these  Pilcfrims  have 
come  far  to  day  and  are  lueary. 

Gains.  It  is  late,  said  Gains  ;  so  we  cannot  con- 
veniently go  out  to  seek  Food  ;  but  such  as  we  have 
you  shall  be  welcome  to,  if  that  will  content. 

Greath.  We  ivill  be  content  with  what  thou  hast  in 
the  House,  for  as  much  as  I  have  proved  thee  ;  thou 
art  never  destitute  of  that  which  is  convenient. 

Then  he  went  down,  and  spake  to  the  Cook,  c^o*-'^V"^ 
whose  Name  was  Taste-that-ivhich-is-good,  to  get 
ready  Supper  for  so  many  Pilgrims.  This  done,  he 
comes  up  again,  saying,  come  my  good  Friends, 
you  are  welcome  to  me,  and  I  am  glad  that  I  have 
an  House  to  entertain  you  ;  and  while  Supper  is 
making  ready,  if  you  please,  let  us  entertain  one 
another  with  some  good  Discourse.  So  they  all 
said,  content. 

Gains.  Then  said  Gains,  whose  Wife  is  this  aqed'Taiicbe 

_  _  7.7.  '^  y-.  7*  tween  Ga 

Matron,  and  whose  Daughter  is  this  young  Damsel  f     '^^J^f 

Greath.  The  Woman  is  the  Wife  of  one  Christian, 
a  Pilgrim  of  former  times,  and  these  are  his  four 
Children.  The  Maid  is  one  of  her  Acquaintance  ; 
one  that  she  hath  perswaded  to  come  with  her  on 
Pilgrimage.  The  Boys  take  all  after  their  Father,  'Markthu:^ 
and  covet  to  tread  in  his  Steps,  Yea,  if  they  do 
but  see  any  place  where  the  old  Pilgrim  hath  lain, 
or  any  print  of  his  Foot,  it  rainistreth  Joy  to  their 
Hearts,  and  they  covet  to  lie  or  tread  in  the  same. 

Gains.  Then  said  Gains,  Is  this  Christian'^  Wife, 
and  are  these  Christian's  Children  ?  I  knew  your 
Husband's  Father,  yea,  also,  his  Father's  Father. 
Many  have  been  oood  of  this  stock,  their  Ancestors 'Act  11.26. 

J  o  _  ^  '  ^  '  Qf  Chris- 

dwelt  first   at  Antioch.      Chi^istian's  Prog-enitors  (Itian's^n, 


cistors.'  6 


^  Added  in  1687.  Ps.  11.26  ;  but  corrected  to  Acts 

'  Quoted  in  the  first   edit,   as     11.  26,  in  sub.  edits. 

Y 


310  CI)e  ^ffonti  part  of 

suppose  you  have  heard  your  Husband  talk  of  them) 
were  very  worthy  men.  They  have  above  any  that 
I  know,  shewed  themselves  men  of  great  Virtue  and 
Courage,  for  the  Lord  of  the  Pilgrims,  his  ways,  and 
them   that   loved  him.      I    have  heard  of  many  of 

Acts  7. 59,  your  Husband's  Relations  that  have  stood  all  Tryals 
for  the  sake  of  the  Truth.  Stephen  that  was  one  of 
the  first  of  the  Family  from  whence  your  Husband 

ci.a.  12. 2.  sprang,  was  knocked  o'  th'  Head  with  Stones. 
James,  another  of  this  Generation,  was  slain  with 
the  edge  of  the  Sword.  To  say  nothing  of  P«w/and 
Peter,  men  antiently  of  the  Family  from  whence 
your  Husband  came.  There  was  Ignatius,^'  who  was 
cast  to  the  Lyons :  Romamis,  whose  Flesh  was  cut 
by  pieces  from  his  Bones  ;  and  Policarp,  that  played 
the  man  in  the  Fire.  There  was  he  that  was  hanged 
up  in  a  Basket  in  the  Sun,  for  the  Wasps  to  eat ;  and 
he  who  they  put  into  a  Sack  and  cast  him  into  the 
Sea,  to  be  drowned.  'Twould  be  impossible,  utterly 
to  count  up  all  of  that  Family  that  have  suffered 
Injuries  and  Death,  for  the  love  of  a  Pilgrims  Life. 
Nor  can  I,  but  be  glad,  to  see  that  thy  Husband  has 
left  behind  him  four  such  Boys  as  these.  I  hope 
they  will  bear  up  their  Fathers  Name,  and  tread  in 
their  Fathers  Steps,  and  come  to  their  Fathers  End. 
Greath.  Indeed  Sir,  they  are  likely  Lads  ;  they 
seem  to  chuse  heartily  their  Fathers  Ways. 

'■'Advice to       Gaius.  That  is  it  that  I  said,  wherefore  Christians 

abouthtr     Family  is  like  still  to  spread  abroad  upon  the  face 

Boys*  *^  ^ 

of  the  Ground,  and  yet  to  be  numerous  upon  the  face 
of  the  Earth.  Wherefore  let  Christiana  look  out 
some  Damsels  for  her  Sons,  to  wliom  the}'^  may  be 
betroathed,  S)'e.  that  the  Name  of  their  Father,  and 
the  House  of  his  Progenitors  may  never  be  forgotten 
in  the  World. 

Hon.  'Tispity  this  Family  should  fall,  andheeMinct. 

"*'  Ignatius,  Bishop  in  Antioch       Ignatius  Loyola,  founder  of  the 
early  in  the  second  century,  not       Jesuits.  ^  Added  in  1(38". 


CI)e  ^ilgnm0  laiogresig^*  3ii 

Gains.  Fall  it  cannot,  but  be  diminished  it  may  ; 
but  let  Christiana  take  my  Advice,  and  that's  the 
way  to  ujDhold  it. 

And  Christiana,  Said  This  Inkeeper,  I  am  glad  to 
see  thee  and  thy  Friend  Mercy  together  here,  a  lovely 
Couple.      And    may  I   advise,  take   Mercii  into    a'^Mercya»u« 

i  J  '  ^  «-/  Matthew 

nearer  Relation  to  thee.      If  she  will,  let  her  be  Marry. 
given  to  Matthew  thy  eldest  Son.      'Tis  the  way  to 
preserve  you   a  Posterity  in  the  Earth.     So    this 
Match  was  concluded,  and  in  process  of  time  they 
were  married.     But  more  of  that  hereafter. 

Gains  also  proceeded,  and  said,  I  will  now  speak 
on  the  behalf  of  Women,  to  take  away  their  Re- 
proach.     For  as  Death   and  the  Curse  came  into 
the  World    by    a   Woman,    so    also   did   Life   and  Gen.  3. 
Health  ;  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  Woman,  oai.  4. 
Yea,  to  shew  how  much  those  that  came  after,  did 
abhor  the  Act  of  their  Mother.     This  Sex,  in  the  whywomen 
old  Testament,  coveted  Children,  if  happily  this  or  wJ^sired 
that  Woman  might  be  the  Mother  of  the  Saviour    '   '^^' 
of  the  World.      I   will   say  again,  that   when    the 
Saviour  was  come.  Women  rejoyced  in  him,  before  Luke2. 
either   Man  or  Angel.     I  read  not  that  ever  any 
man   did  give  unto  Christ  so  much  as  one  Groat, 
but  the  Women  followed  him,  and  ministred  to  him  chap. 8.2,3- 
of  their  Substance.     'Twas  a  Woman  that  washed  ,     ,  „ 

chap.  7.  o7 . 

his  Feet  with  Tears,  and   a  Woman   that  anointed  ^o. 
his   Body  to  the  Burial.     They  were  Women  that 
wept,  when  he  was  going  to  the  Cross  ;  And  Women  johnii.  2. 
that  followed  him  from  the  Cross,  and  that  sat  by '^^'^p^^- 3- 

,  *^    Luk.  23.  27. 

his   Sepulcher  when  he   was  buried.      They  were  Matt.  27. ssi 
Women  that  was  first  with  him  at  his  Resurrection- ^^' ^^' 
morn,  and  Women  that  brouQ-ht  Tidino-  first  to  his  Luke  24. 22, 

0  c5  23. 

Disciples  that  he  was  risen  from  the  Dead.  Women 
therefore  are  highly  favoured,  and  shew  by  these 
things  that  they  are  sharers  with  us  in  the  Grace  of 
Life. 

»  Added  in  1687. 

y2 


312  CI)f  ^noixn  part  of 

rJjf-^"  Now  the  Cook  sent  up  to  signifie  that  Supper  was 
almost  ready,  and  sent  one  to  lay  the  Cloath,  the 
Trenshers,  and  to  set  the  Salt  and  Bread  in  order. 

Then  said  Mattheiv,  the  su/ht  of  this  Cloath,  and 

of  this  Forerunner  of  a   ^Supper,  hcgetteth  in  me  a 

greater  Appetite  to  my  Food  than  I  had  before. 

qaihrtd"^        Gains.  So  let  all  ministring  Doctrines  to  thee  in 

'Z-'aJVoard  *^^^s  Life,  beget  in  thee  a  greater  desire  to  sit  at  the 

aoathliid    Supper  of  the  great  King  in  his  Kingdom  ;  for  all 

Trenshers.    Preachiug,  Books  and  Ordinances  here,  are  but  as 

the  laj^ing  of  the  ^Trenshers,  and  as  setting  of  Salt 

upon  the  Board,  when  compared  with  the  Feast  that 

our  Lord  will    make  for   us  when  we  come  to   his 

House. 

^|'i'^'-32.      So  Supper  came  up,  and  first  a  Heave-shoulder, 

cap.  10. 14,  yi^fj  ^wave-Breast  was  set  on  the  Table  before  them. 

15. 

Tsahri^r,^.  'Y'q  shew    that  they    must  beoin   their   Meal  with 

Hm.  13. 15.  _       .'  O 

Prayer  and  Praise  to  God.  The  heave -shoulder 
David  lifted  his  Heart  up  to  God  with,  and  with  the 
ivave-Breast,  where  his  Heart  lay,  with  that  he  used 
to  lean  upon  his  Harp  when  he  played.  These  two 
Dishes  were  very  fresh  and  good,  and  they  all  eat 
heartily-well  thereof. 

Dcut.32.14.  The  next  they  brought  up,  was  a  Bottle  of  Wine, 
red  as  Blood.     So  Gains  said  to  them,  Drink  freely, 

Judg9.i3.   this  is  the  Juice  of  the  true  Vine,  that  makes  glad 

joh.  15. 1.  the  Heart  of  God  and  Man.  So  they  drank  and 
were  merry. 

1  Pet  2.1,2.      The  next  was  a  Dish  of  Milk  well  crumbed.    But 

ii^k.'"^  Gains  said.  Let  the  Boys  have  that,  that  they  may 
grow  thereby. 

%"'Bvtier  'JThen  they  brought  up  in  course  a  dish  oi Buttev 
and  Hony.  Then  said  Gains,  Eat  freely  of  this, 
for  this  is  good  to  chear  up,  and  strengthen  youi 
Judgments    and    Understandings.      This    was  oui 

isa.7. 15.     Lords   Dish  when    he    was   a  Child.      Butter  ana 

^  Added  iu  1687.  '  'Trenchers,'  lfi«7. 

'  'of  the  Supper,'  1G87. 


€i)t  ^Jilgnmsi  ^rogitsiei*  3i3 

Hony  shall  he  eat,  that  he  may  know  to  refuse  the 
Evil,  and  chuse  the  Good. 

Then   they  brought  them   up  a  dish  of  Apples, -j^;];^';5 
and  they  were  very  good  tasted  Fruit.     Then  said 
Matthew,  May  we  eat  Apples,  since  they  were  such, 
by,  and  with  which,  the  Serpent   beguiled  our  first 
Mother  ? 

Then  said  Gaius, 

Apples  were  they  with  which  we  ivere  hecjuiVd, 
Yet  Sin,  not  Apples  hath  our  Souls  defiVd. 
Apples  forbid,  if  eat,  corrupts  the  Blood. 
To  eat  such,  when  commanded,  does  us  good. 
Drink  of  his  Flagons  then,  thou  Church,  his  Dove, 
And  eat  his  Apples,  who  are  sick  of  Love. 

Then  said  Matthew,  I  made  the  Scruple,  because  I  a 
while  since,  was  sick  with  eating  of  Fruit. 

Gaius.  Forbidden  Fruit  will  make  you  sick,  but 
not  what  our  Lord  has  tolerated. 

While  they  were  thus  talking,  they  were  presented  ^ong^.  u. 
with  an  other  Dish  ;  and  'twas  a  dish  of  Nuts.   Then  ^^s^"-^ 
said  some  at  the  Table,  Nuts  spoyl  tender  Teeth  ; 
specially    the   Teeth   of   Children.      Which   when 
Gaius  heard,  he  said. 

Hard  Texts  «?•<?  Nuts    (I  ivill  not   call  them 

Cheaters,) 
Whose  Shells  do  keep   their  Kirnels  from  the 

Eaters. 
Ope  then  the  Shells,  and  you  shall  have  the  Meat, 
They  here  are  brought,  for  you  to  crack  and  eat. 

Then  were  they  very  Merry,  and  sat  at  the  Table 
a  long  time,  talking  of  many  Things.  Then  said  the 
Old  Gentleman,  M)^  good  Landlord,  while  we  are 
cracking  vour  Nuts,  if  vou  please,  do  you  open  this 
Riddle. 


314  CJ)e  ^twnD  fart  of 

A  Riddle.         j^  'jjian  there  was,  tho  some  did  count  him  mad, 

'  put  forth  mil 

byoiduo-         ThQ  more  he  cast  awaii,  the  more  he  had. 

nest.  ^y ' 

Tlien  they  all  gave  good  heed,  wondriiig  what 
good  Gains  would  say,  so  he  sat  still  a  while,  and 
then  thus  replyed  : 

Gaiusojj«w         ffg  iJidt  bestows  his  Goods  upon  the  Poor, 

Shall  have  as  much  again,  and  ten  times  more. 


'  Joseph 
wonders- 


Then  said  Joseph,  I  dare  say  Sir,  I  did  not  think 
you  could  a  found  it  out. 

Oh  !  Said  Gains,  I  have  bin  trained  up  in  this 
way  a  great  while.  Nothing  teaches  like  Experi- 
ence ;  I  have  learned  of  my  Lord  to  be  kind,  and 
have  found  by  experience,  that  I  have  gained  there- 

ch^'  13  f "  ^y*  There  is  that  scattereth,  yet  increaseth,  and  there 
is  that  ivitholdeth  more  then  is  meet,  but  it  tendeth  to 
Povertij.  There  is  that  maJaeth  himself  Rich,  yet 
hath  nothing,  There  is  that  maketh  himself  poor,  yet 
hath  great  Riches. 

Then  Simon"  wliispered  to  Christiana\\\%  Mother, 
and  said.  Mother,  this  is  a  very  good  mans  House, 
let  us  stay  here  a  good  while,  and  let  my  Brother 
Matthew  be  married  here  to  Mercy,  before  we  go 
any  further. 

aldMlrc*       '^^^^    which    Gaius   the  Host  overhearing,   said, 

aremarrud.'  ^{fh  a  vcvy  good  Will,  my  Child. 

So  they  staid  there  more  than  a  Month,  and 
Mercy  was  given  to  Matthew  to  Wife. 

While  they  stayed  here,  Mercy  as  her  Custom 
was,  would  be  making  Coats  and  Garments  to  give 
to  the  Poor,  by  which  she  brought  U])  a  very  good 
Report  upon  the  Pilgrims. 

got  bed"         ^ut  to  return  again  to  our  Story.    After  Supper, 

t^^restsit    i\^Q  ]a(ls  desired  a  Bed,  for  that  they  w^ere  weary 

'  Added  in  1687.  *  Corrected  to' AflWFi^f/' in  1(J87, 

and  sub.  edits. 


Cf)e  ^pilgnmsi  progitsss*  315 

with  Travelling'.  Then  Gains  called  to  shew  them 
their  Chamber,  but  said  Mercy ^  I  will  have  them  to 
Bed.  So  she  had  them  to  Bed,  and  they  slept 
well,  but  the  rest  sat  up  all  Night.  For  Gains  and 
they  were  such  sutable  Company,  that  they  could 
not  tell  how  to  part.  Then  after  much  talk  of 
their  Lord,  themselves,  and  their -Journey :  old  Mr. 
Honest,  he  that  put  forth  the  Riddle  to  Gains, 
began  to  nod.  Then  said  Great-heart,  What  Sir,  ^^,',f""*^'^ 
you  begin  to  be  drouzy,  come,  rub  up,  now  here's  a 
Riddle  for  you.  Then  said  Mr.  Holiest,  let's  hear 
it. 

Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart, 
He  that  loill  hill,  must  first  he  omrcome  :  a  RiMie 

Who  live  abroad  would,  first  7nust  die  at  home. 

Hah,  said  Mr.  Honest,  it  is  a  hard  one,  hard  to 
expound,  and  harder  to  practise.  But  come  Land- 
lord, said  he,  I  will  if  you  please,  leave  my  part  to 
you,  do  you  expound  it,  and  I  will  hear  what  you 
say. 

No  said  Gains,  'twas  put  to  you,  and  'tis  expected 
that  you  should  answer  it. 

Then  said  the  Old  Gentleman, 


opened.' 


He  first  by  Grace  must  conquer  d  he,  ^^Themddie 

That  Sin  loould  mortifie. 

And  who,  that  lives,  would  convince  me, 

Unto  himself  must  die. 

It  is  right,  said  Gains,  good  Doctrine  and  Expe- 
rience teaches  this.  For  first,  until  Grace  displays 
it  self,  and  overcomes  the  Soul  with  its  Glory,  it  is 
altogether  without  Heart  to  oppose  Sin.  Besides, 
if  Sin  is  Satan's  Cords,  by  which  the  Soul  lies 
bound,  how  should  it  make  Resistance,  before  it  is 
loosed  from  that  Infirmity  ? 

'  Added  in  KUJ?. 


316  Cl)e  ^ttonXi  ^I3art  oi 

Second/^,  Nor  will  any  that  knows  either  Reason 

or  Grace,  believe  that  such  a  man  can  be  a  living 

Monument  of  Grace,  that  is  a  Slave  to  his  own 

Corruptions. 

•*AQuatwn      Aucl  uow  it  coiBCS  ui  mv  mind,  I  will  tell  vou  a 

wort/i  the  -^  111-  mi  "  -\  IT 

miadh.g.-  fetorj,  vvorth  the  hearmg.  There  were  two  Men 
that  went  on  Pilgrimage,  the  one  began  when  he 
was  young,  the  other  when  he  was  old.  The  young 
Man  had  strong  Corruptions  to  grapple  with,  the 
old  Mans  were  decayed  with  the  decays  of  Nature. 
The  young  man  trod  his  steps  as  even  as  did  the 
old  one,  and  was  every  way  as  light  as  he  ;  who 
now,  or  which  of  them,  had  their  Graces  shining 
clearest,  since  both  seemed  to  be  alike  ? 

A  couipari-       Houest.     TJic   yoiinq   Mans   doubtless.     For  that 

toil.  _  ly  J 

wJiich  heads  it  against  the  greatest  Opposition,   (fives 
best  demonstration  that  it  is  strongest.    Specially  ichen 
it  also  holdeth  pace  with  that  that  meets  not  with  half 
so  much  ;  as  to  be  sure  old  Age  does  not. 
'\-4rnu-         Besides,   I   have    observed    that    old    men    have 

•  •  •  1  -IVT 

blessed  themselves  with  this  mistake  ;  Namely,  tak- 
ing the  decays  of  Nature,  for  a  gracious  Conquest 
over  Corruptions,  and  so  have  been  apt  to  beguile 
themselves.  Indeed  old  men  that  are  gracious,  are 
best  able  to  give  Advice  to  them  that  are  young, 
because  the}^  have  seen  most  of  the  emptiness  of 
things.  But  yet,  for  an  old  and  a  young  to  set  out 
both  together,  the  young  one  has  the  advantage  of 
the  fairest  discovery  of  a  work  of  Grace  within  him, 
tho  the  old  Mans  Corruptions  are  naturally  the 
weakest. 

Thus  they  sat  talking  till  break  of  Da}''.     Now 

when  the  Family  was  up,  Christiana  bid  her  Son 

James  that  he  should  read  a  Chapter;  so  he  read 

the  53d  of  Isaiah.    When  he  had  done,  Mr.  Honest 

Qii^ai^^'^    asked   why  it  was  said.  That  the  Savior  is  said  to 

*  Added  in  1687. 


ClK  19ilgiim5  |3rogrf^£i*  3i7 

come  out  of  a  dry  ground,  and  also  that  he  had  no 
Form  nor  Comliness  in  him  f 

Greath.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  To  the  first  I 
answer,  because,  The  Church  of  the  Jews,  of  which 
Christ  came,  had  then  lost  ahnost,  all  the  Sap  and 
Spirit  of  Religion.  To  the  second  I  say.  The 
Words  are  spoken  in  the  Person  of  the  Unbelievers, 
who  because  they  want  that  Eye,  that  can  see  into 
our  Princes  Heart,  therefore  they  judg  of  him  by 
the  meanness  of  his  Outside. 

Just  like  those  that  know  not  that  precious  Stones 
are  covered  over  with  a  homely  Crust ;  who  when 
they  have  found  one,  because  they  know  not  what 
they  have  found,  cast  it  again  away  as  men  do  a 
common  Stone. 

Well,  said  Gains,  Now  you  are  here,  and  since, 
as  I  know,  Mr.  Great-heart  is  good  at  his  Weapons, 
if  you  please,  after  we  have  refreshed  our  selves,  we 
will  walk  into  the  Fields,  to  see  if  we  can  do  any 
good.  About  a  mile  from  hence,  there  is  one  Slay- 
good,  a  Gyant  that  doth  much  annoy  the  Kings 
Highway  in  these  parts.  And  I  know  whereabout 
his  Haunt  is,  he  is  Master  of  a  number  of  Thieves  ;  (?ya«<siay- 
'Twould  be  well  if  we  could  clear  these  Parts  of  "'"'"^ «'"«'• 
him. 

So  they  consented  and  went,  Mr,  Great-heart 
with  his  Sivord,  Helmet,  and  Shield ;  and  the  rest 
with  Spears  and  Staves. 

When  they  came  to  the  place  where  he  was,  they  'He u found 
found  him  with  one  Feehle-mind  in  his  Hands,  whom  FeewJ-mind 
his  Servants  had  brought  unto  him,  having  taken 
him  in  the  Way ;    now  the  Gyant  was  rifling  of 
him,  with  a  purpose  after  that  to  pick  his   Bones. 
For  he  was  of  the  nature  of  Flesh-eaters. 

Well,  so  soon  as  he  saw  Mr.  Great-heart,  and  his 
Friends,  at  the  Mouth  of  his  Cave  with  their  \A  ca- 
pons, he  demanded  what  they  wanted  ? 

*  Added  in  1687. 


318  €i)t  ^nont}  part  of 

Greath.  We  want  thee  ;  for  we  are  come  to  re- 
venge the  Quarrel  of  the  many  that  thou  hast  slain 
of  the  Pilgrims,  when  thou  hast  dragged  them  out 
of  the  Kings  High-way;  wherefore  come  out  of  thy 
Cave,  So  he  armed  himself  and  came  out,  and  to 
a  Battel  they  went,  and  fought  for  above  an  Hour, 
and  then  stood  still  to  take  Wind, 

Slaygood,  Then  said  the  Gyant,  why  are  you  here 
on  my  Ground? 

Greath.  To  revenge  the  Blood  of  Pilgrims,  as  I 
also  told  thee  before ;  so  they  went  to  it  again,  and 
the  Gyant  made  Mr.  Great-heart  give  back,  but  he 
came  up  again,  and  in  the  greatness  of  his  Mind, 
he  let  fly  with  such  stoutness  at  the  Gyants  Head 
and  Sides,  that  he  made  him  let  his  Weapon  fall 
out  of  his  Hand.  So  he  smote  him  and  slew  him, 
and  cut  oft'  his  Head,  and  brought  it  away  to  the 
bie^mind^^"  •^^^^^-  Hc  also  took  Feeble-mind  the  Pilgrim,  and 
^1%^^°'"  brought  him  with  him  to  his  Lodgings.  M'hen 
they  were  come  home,  they  shewed  his  Head  to  the 
Family,  and  then  set  it  up  as  they  had  done  others 
before,  for  a  Terror  to  those  that  should  attempt  to 
do  as  he,  hereafter. 

Then  they  asked  Mr.  Feeble-mind  how  he  fell 
into  his  hands  ? 
^ndrami'''  Feeblem.  Then  said  the  poor  man,  I  am  a  sickly 
Jn*r^''"  man,  as  you  see,  and  because  Death  did  usually 
once  a  day,  knock  at  my  Door,  I  thought  I  should 
never  be  well  at  home.  So  I  betook  my  self  to  a 
Pilgrims  Life ;  and  have  travelled  hither  from  the 
Town  of  uncertain.,  where  I  and  my  Father  were 
born.  I  am  a  man  of  no  strength  at  all,  of  Body, 
nor  yet  of  Mind,  but  would,  if  I  could,  tho  I  can 
but  craid,  spend  my  Life  in  the  Pilgrims  way. 
When  I  came  at  the  Gate  that  is  at  the  head  of  the 
Way,  the  Lord  of  that  place  did  entertain  me  freely. 
Neither  objected  he  against  my  weakly  Looks,  nor 

■^  Added  in  1H87. 


mjt  iilffnms;  ^prosit^si.  3i9 

against  my  feeble  Mind ;  but  gave  me  such  things 
that  were  necessary  for  my  Journey,  and  bid  me 
hope  to  the  end.  When  1  came  to  the  House  of 
the  Literpretej',  I  received  much  Kindness  there, 
and  because  the  Hill  Difficulty  was  judged  too  hard 
for  me,  I  was  carried  up  that  by  one  of  his  Serv- 
ants. Indeed  I  have  found  much  Relief  from  Pil- 
grims, tho  none  was  willing  to  go  so  softly  as  I  am 
forced  to  do.  Yet  still  as  they  came  on,  they  bid 
me  be  of  good  Chear,  and  said,  that  it  was  the  will 
of  their  Lord,  that  Comfort  should  be  given  to  the  i  Thes  5. u. 
feeble-minded,  and  so  went  on  their  oivn  pace.  When 
I  was  come  up  to  assault-Lane,  then  this  Gyant  met 
with  me,  and  bid  me  prepare  for  an  Tncoiinter ;  but 
alas,  feeble  one  that  I  was,  I  had  more  need  of  a 
Cordial.  So  he  came  up  and  took  me,  I  conceited 
}je  should  not  kill  me  ;  also  when  he  had  got  me 
into  his  Den,  since  I  went  not  with  him  willingly,  I'MarhUdsfi- 
believed  I  should  come  out  alive  again.  For  I  have 
heard,  that  not  any  Pilgrim  that  is  taken  Captive 
by  violent  Hands,  if  he  keeps  Heart-whole  towards 
his  Master,  is  by  the  Laws  of  Providence  to  die  by 
the  Hand  of  the  Enemy.  Mobbed,  I  looked  to  be, 
and  Robbed  to  be  sure  I  am;  but  I  am  as  you  see 
escaped  with  Life,  for  the  which  I  thank  my  King 
as  Author,  and  you,  as  the  Means.  Other  Brunts 
I  also  look  for,  but  this  I  have  resolved  on,  to  wit, 
to  run  when  I  can,  to  go  when  I  cannot  run,  and  to  'Markthu.^- 
creep  when  I  cannot  c/o.  As  to  the  main,  I  thank 
him  that  loves  me,  I  am  fixed  ;  my  wa}^  is  before 
me,  my  Mind  is  beyond  the  River  that  has  no 
Bridg,  tho  I  am,  as  you  see,  but  of  a  feeble  Mind. 

Hon.  Then  said  old  Mr.  Honest,  Have  not  you 
some  time  ago,  been  acquainted  with  one  Mr.  Fearing, 
a  Pilgrim  ? 

Feeble.  Acquainted  with    him;    Yes.     He  came  ^^';  Feamg 
from  the  Town  of  Stupidity,  which  lieth  four  Dc-  ")ind'« 

"  Added  in  1637. 


320  m)t  ^ttoixi}  \Uvt  Of 

grces  to  the  Northward  of  the  City  of  Destruction, 

and  as  many  off,  of  where  I  was  born ;  Yet  we  were 

well  acquainted,  for  indeed  he  was  mine  Uncle,  my 

Fathers  Brother ;   he  and   I  have  been  much  of  a 

Temper,  he  was  a  little  shorter  than  I,  but  yet  we 

were  much  of  a  Complexion. 

^s^mind'  Hon.  /  perceive  you  knoiv  him,  and  I  am  apt  to 

iiMFear-""^  helicve  also  that  you  were  related  one  to  an  other ;  for 

l"S.^"''    you  have  his  whitely  Look,  a  Cast  like  his  with  your 

Eye,  and  your  Speech  is  much  alike. 

Feehl.  Most   have  said   so,  that  have  known  us 

both,  and  besides,  what  I  have  read  in  him,  I  have 

for  the  most  part,  found  in  my  self. 

Jon^uT'       Gaius.   Come  Sir,   said  good  Gaius,  he  of  cjood 

Chear,  you  are  welcome  to  me,  and  to  my  House ;  and 

what  thou  hast  a  mind  to,  call  for  freely ;  and  what 

thou  would'st  have  my  Servants  do  for  thee,  they  icill 

do  it  with  a  ready  Mind. 

fakenofplo-      Fechl.  Thcn  said  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  This  is  unex- 

vidence.       pectcd  Favor,  and  as  the  Sun,  shining  out  of  a  very 

dark  Cloud.     Did  Gyant  Slay-good  intend  me  this 

Favor  when  he  stop'd  me,  and  resolved  to  let  me  go 

no  further?     Did  he  intend  that  after  he  had  rifled 

my  Pockets,  I  should  go  to  Gaius  mine  Host !     Yet 

so  it  is. 

Tidrngs  how      Now,  just  as  Mr.  Feeble-7?iind,  and  Gaius  was  thus 

was  slain     jq  talk  I  thcrc  comes  one  running'  and  called  at  the 

with  (t  '  " 

Timwitr.     Door,  and  told,  That  about  a  Mile  and  an  half  off", 

holt    Q/flAi,  ^ 

Mr'.veeue-  thcrc  was  ouc  Mr.  Not-riqht,  a  Pile'rim,  struck  dead 

mind'*  Com-  J       ^  .    p  ' 

mentuponit.upQii  the  placc  whcrc  he  was,  with  a  I hunaer-bolt. 
Feehl.  Alas!  said  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  is  he  slain, 
he  overtook  me  some  days  before  I  came  so  far  as 
hither,  and  would  be  my  Company-keeper.  He 
also  was  with  me  when  Slay-good  the  Gyant  took 
me,  but  he  was  nimble  of  his  Heels,  and  escaped. 
But  it  seems,  he  escaped  to  die,  and  I  was  took  to 
live. 

•*  Added  in  1687. 


2Di)e  pilgrims?  progress*  321 

What,  one  would  think,  doth  seek  to  slay  outright. 

Ofttimes,  delivers  from  the  saddest  Plight. 

That  very  Providence,  whose  Face  is  Death, 

Doth  oft  times,  to  the  lowly,  Life  bequeath. 

/  was  taken}  he  did  escape  and  flee. 

Hands  Crost,  gives  Death  to  him,  and  Life  to  me. 

Now  about  this  time  Matthew  and  Mercy  ^was 
Married ;  also  Gains  gave  his  Daughter  Phehe  to 
James,  Matthew  s  Brother,  to  Wife ;  after  which 
time,  they  yet  stayed  above  ten  days,  at  Gains' s 
House,  spending  their  time,  and  the  Seasons,  like 
as  Pilgrims  use  to  do. 

When  they  were  to  dejDart,  Gains  made  them  a  Thepu- 
Feast,  and  they  did  eat  and  drink,  and  were  merry.  ^a«Vffo' 
Now  the  Hour  was  come  that  they  must  be  gon,-^'"'"^'"''^' 
wherefore  Mr.  Great-heart  called  for  a  Reckoning. 
But  Gains  told  him  that  at  his  House,  it  was  not 
the  Custom  for  Pilgrims  to  pay  for  their  Entertain- 
ment.    He  boarded  them  by  the  year,  but  looked 
for   his   Pay  from  the   good  Samaritane,  who   had  mke  lo.  33, 
promised   him  at  his  return,  whatsoever  Charge  he.^How%iey 
was* at  with  them,  faithfully  to  repay  him.     Then  SJottcr a« 
said  Mr.  Great-heart  to  him.  ^"'■""^• 

Greath.  Beloved,  thou  dost  faithfully,   whatsoever  ^^oh.  a? 
thou  dost,   to   the  Brethren  and  to  Strangers,  which 
have  home  Witness  of  thy  Charity  before  the  Church, 
whom  if  thou  (yet)  bring  forward  on  their  Journey 
after  a  Godly  sort,  thou  shall  do  well. 

Then  Gains  took  his  Leave  of  them  all  and  of  his  G3.mshis 
Children,  and  particularly  of  Mr.  Feeble-mind.     He  «o  Feewe-'^* 
also  gave  him  something  to  drink  by  the  way. 

Now  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  when  they  were  going  out 
of  the  door,  made  as  if  he  intended  to  linger.     The 

'  '  I  taken  was,'  1687.  ^  By  a  typographical  error  in 

*  Corrected  to  '  were '   in  the     the  first,  and   continued  in  sub. 

subseq.  edits.  editions,  this  reference  is  to  1  Joh. 

.5.  6. 


322  ili)t  ^noixH  yart  of 

which,  wlien  Mr.  Great-heart  espied,  he  said,  Come, 
Mr.  Feeble  '^mind'  Pray  do  you  go  along  with  iis, 
I  will  be  your  Conductor,  and  you  shall  fair  as  tlie 
rest. 
'Feeble-  Feebl.  Alas,  I  leant  a  sutable  Companion,  you  are 

'idticf^^^'  ^  '^^•*'(?/  (ind  strong,  but  I,  as  you  see,  am  weak  ;  I 
cliuse  therefore  rather  to  come  behind,  lest,  by  reason  of 
my  many  Infirmities,  I  should  be  both  a  Burthen  to 
my  self  and  to  you.  1  am^  as  I  said,  a  man  of  a 
iceak  and  feeble  Mind,  and  shall  be  offended  and  made 
weak  at  that  which  others  can  bear.  I  shall  like  no 
Laughing  ;  I  shall  like  no  gay  Attire,  I  shall  like  no 
nnprofitable  Questions.  Nay,  I  am  so  weak  a  Man, 
as  to  be  offended  with  that  ivhich  others  have  a  liberty 
'*msEx-    to  do.     I  do  not  yet  knoiu  all  the  Truth;  I  am  a  very 

cmejor  it.'      .  /~i  i      •      •  •  •  r    t     i 

ignorant   Christian  man  ;  sometimes  ij  I   hear  some 

rejoice  in  the  Lord,  it  troubles  me  because  I  cannot  do 

so  too.    It  is  icith  me  as  it  is  with  a  iveak  Man  amonq 

the  strong^  or  as  with  a  sick  Man  among  the  healthy. 

Job  12. 5.     or  as  a  Lainp  despised,  (He  that  is  ready  to  slip  with 

his  Feet,  is  as  a  Lamp  despised  in  the  Thought  of  him 

that  is  at  ease.)     So  that  I  know  not  what  to  do. 

hearth  Com-      Grcath.  But  Brother,  said  Mr.  Great-heart.  I  have 

mission.'*    \i  ii^  Commission,  to  comfort  the   feeble-minded,  and 

iThes.5.15.  to  support  the   weak.     You  must  needs  go  along 

ic™r.8.      with   us;  we  will  wait  for  you,  we  will  lend  you 

our  help,  we  will   deny  ourselves  of  some  things. 

Chap. 9. 22.  both  Opinionative  and  Practical,  for  3^our  sake;   we 

will  not   enter   into   Doubtful   Disputations   before 

you,  we  will  be  made  all  things  to  you  rather  than 

you  shall  be  left  behind. 

Now,  all   tliis  while  they  were  at  Gaius's  Door; 

'A  Christian  2ind  bchold  as  they  were  thus  in  the  heat  of  their 

Discourse,    Mr,  Ready-to-hault  came   by,   with   his 

Psaim38.i7.  Crutchcs  lu  his  hand,  and  he  also  was  sroing;  on  Pil- 

grim  age. 

Feebl.   Then  said  Mr.  Feeblemind   to  him,  Man ! 

*  Added  in  1687. 


How  earnest  thou  hither  f     I  was  hut  just  now  com-  'J^^^%,^ 
jjlaininc)  that  I  had  not  a  sutahle  Companion,  but  thou  'o.^au'u'"^^" 
art  according  to  mi/  Wish.      Welcome,  ivelcome,  good'">"'^^y''' 
Mr.  Ready-to-hault,  /  hope  thee  and  I  may  he  some 
help. 

Readyto.  I  shall  be  glad  of  thy  Company,  said 
the  other ;  and  good  Mr.  Feehle-mind,  rather  than 
we  will  part,  since  we  are  thus  happily  met,  I  will 
lend  thee  one  of  my  Crutches. 

Feebl.  Nay,  said  he,  tho  I  thank  thee  for  thy  good 
Will,  I  am  not  inclined  to  hault  ^  afore  I  am  Lame. 
How  he  it,  I  tldnk  ivhen  occasion  is,  it  may  help  me 
against  a  Dog. 

Readyto.  If  either  my  self,  or  my  Crutches  can  do 
thee  a  pleasure,  we  are  both  at  thy  Command,  good 
Mr.  Feehlemind. 

Thus  therefore  they  went  on,  Mr.  Greatheart,  and 
Mr.  Honest  went  before,  Christiaiia  and  her  Child- 
ren went  next,  and  Mr.  Feehle-mind,  and  Mr.  Ready- 
to-hault  came  behind  with  his  Crutches.  Then  said 
Mr.  Honest, 

Hon.  Pray  Sir,  now  we  are  upon  the  Road,  tell  us  ^' ^'^'^ ^"^^'■' 
some  profitable  things  of  some  that  have  gon  on  Pil- 
grimage hefore  us. 

Greath.  With  a  good  Will.     I  suppose  you  have 
heard  how  Christian  of  old,  did  meet  with  Apollyon 
in   the  Valley   of  Humiliation,  and  also  what  hard 
work  he  had  to  go  thorow  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  '\  van  from 
of  Death.     Also  I  think  you  cannot  but  have  heard  l«^« p- " 
how  Faithful  was  put  to  it  with  Madam    Wanton,  V90  '  ' 
with    Adam    the    first,    with    one    Discontent,    and 
Shame ;    four  as   deceitful    Villains,  as  a  man  can 
meet  with  upon  the  Road. 

Hon.  Yes,  I  have  heard  of  all  this ;  hut  indeed, 
good  Faithful,  teas  hardest  put  to  it  with  shame,  he 
was  an  unwearied  one. 

"  'before,'  1687.  ""  Added  in  ]fi87. 


Pag.  144.' 
[99] 


324  Cf)e  ^noixti  part  of 

Greath.  Ai,  for  as  the  Pilgrim  well  said,  He  of  all 
men  had  the  wrong  Name. 
i23%7?o        Hon.  But  p-mj  Sir  where  ivas  it  that  Christian 
Pag.  127.     ff^^d  Faithful  met  Talkative  ?    that  same  was  also  a 
notable  one. 

Greath.  He  was  a  confident  Fool,  yet  many  fol- 
low his  wayes, 

Hon.  He  had  like  to  a  beguiled  Faithful? 

Greath.  Ai,  But  Christian  put  him  into  a  way 
quickly  to  find  him  out.  Thus  they  went  on  till 
they  came  at  the  place  where  Evangelist  met  with 
Christian  and  Faithful,  and  prophecyed  to  them  of 
what  should  befal  them  at  Vanity-Fair. 

Greath.  Then  said  their  Guide,  hereabouts  did 
Christian  and  Faithful  meet  with  Evangelist,  who 
prophecyed  to  them  of  what  Troubles  they  should 
meet  with  at  Vanity- Fair. 

Hon.  Say  you  so!  I  dare  say  it  was  a  hard  Chap- 
ter that  then  he  did  read  unto  them  f 
\partpag.  Greath.  'Twas  so,  but  he  gave  them  Incourage- 
Liiu,  &c.]  ment  withall.  But  what  do  we  talk  of  them,  they 
were  a  couple  of  L3^on-like  Men;  they  had  set  their 
Faces  like  Flint.  Don't  you  remember  how  un- 
daunted they  were  when  they  stood  before  the 
Judg  ? 

Hon.    Well  Faithful  bravely  Suffered  f 

Greath.  So  he  did,  and  as  brave  things  came  on't : 
For  Hojyeful  and  some  others,  as  the  Story  relates 
it,  were  Converted  by  his  Death. 

^  Hon.    Well,  but  pray  go  on  ;  for  you  are  ivell  ac- 
quainted with  tilings. 
\Z'^liPS'3.-       Greath.  Above  all  that   Christian  met  with  after 
he  had  past  thorow  Vanity-Fair,  one  By-ends  was 
the  arch  one. 

Hon.  By-Ends  ;    What  was  he  f 

Greath.  A  very  arch  Fellow,  a  down-right  Hypo- 

^  By  a  typographical  error,  this      edit.,  but  corrected  in  tlie  subso- 
is   printed   '  (Jreatli.''  in   the  first      quent  ones. 


367.  [117.] 


are 
come  within 


€f)t  pilgrims;  progitsfsJ*  325 

crite  ;  one  that  would  be  Religious,  which  way  ever 
the  World  went,  but  so  cunning,  that  he  would  be 
sure  neither  to  lose,  nor  suffer  for  it. 

He  had  his  3£ode  of  Religion  for  every  fresh 
Occasion,  and  his  Wife  was  as  good  at  it  as  he. 
He  would  turn  and  change  from  Opinion  to  Opinion; 
yea,  and  plead  for  so  doing  too.  But  so  far  as  I 
could  learn,  he  came  to  an  ill  End  with  his  Bi/- 
Ends,  nor  did  I  ever  hear  that  any  of  his  Children 
'was  ever  of  any  Esteem  with  any  that  truly  feared 
God. 

Now  by  this  time,  they  were  come  within  sis^ht  o^  They 

1        rn  p    XT        •  1  T7        •  T^    '       •      ^  o      come  wu 

the  lown  or  Vamhi.  where  Vanity-rair  is  kept,    ^osiguof 

«y '  J  I  Vanity. 

when  they  saw  that  they  were  so  near  the  Town,  Psai.  21.  is. 
they  consulted  with  one  another  how  they  should 
pass  thorow  the  Town,  and  some  said  one  thing, 
and  some  an  other.  At  last  Mr.  Great-heart,  said, 
I  have,  as  you  may  understand,  often  been  a  Co7i- 
ductor  of  Pilgrims  thorow  this  Town  ;  Now  I  am 
acquainted  with  one  Mr.  Mnason,  a  Cimrusian  by  Theyemer 

AT       •  1  1     -TV       •     1  1  TT  2nto  one  Mr. 

JNation,  an  old  Disciple,  at  whose  House  we  may  *^^^'°ns '" 
Lodg.     If  you  think  good,  said  he,  we  will  turn  in 
there  ? 

Content,  said  Old  Honest ;  Content,  said  Chris- 
tiana ;  Content,  said  Mr,  Feeble  mind ;  and  so  they 
said  all.  Now  you  must  think  it  was  Even-tide,  by 
that  they  got  to  the  outside  of  the  Town,  but  Mr, 
Great-heart  knew  the  way  to  the  Old  Man's  House. 
So  thither  they  came ;  and  he  called  at  the  Door, 
and  the  old  Man  within  knew  his  Tongue  so  soon 
as  ever  he  heard  it ;  so  he  opened,  and  they  all 
came  in.  Then  said  Mnason  their  Host,  How  far 
have  ye  come  to  day  ?  so  they  said,  from  the  House 
of  Gaim  our  Friend.  I  promise  you,  said  he,  you 
have  gone  a  good  stitch,  you  may  well  be  a  weary ; 
sit  down.     So  they  sat  down. 


1  '  were;  1687. 
z 


326  mn  ^ttonti  fart  ot 

S"/"  Grcath.  Then  said  their  Guide,  Come,  ivhat  Chear 
*,"w<^""*"     Sirs,  I  dare  say  you  are  welcome  to  my  Friend. 

Mna.  I  also,  said  Mr.  Mnasou,  do  bid  yon  Wel- 
come ;  and  what  ever  you  want,  do  but  say,  and 
we  will  do  what  we  can  to  get  it  for  you. 

Hon.  Our  gi'eat  Want,  a  while  since,  ivas  Harbor, 
and  (food  Company,  and  now  I  hope  we  have  both. 

Mna.  For  Harbor  3'ou  see  what  it  is,  but  for  good 
Company,  that  will  appear  in  the  Tryal. 

Greath.  Well,  said  Air.  Great-heart,  will  you  have 
the  Pilgrims  np  into  their  Lodging? 

Mna.  I  will,  said  Mr.  Mnason.  So  he  had  them 
to  their  respective  Places ;  and  also  shewed  them  a 
very  fair  Dining-Room  where  they  might  be  and 
sup  together,  until  time  was  come  to  go  to  Rest. 

Now  when  they  were  set  in  their  places,  and 
were  a  little  cheary  after  their  Journey,  Mr.  Honest 
asked  his  Landlord  if  there  were  any  store  of  good 
People  in  the  Town  ? 

Mna.  We  have  a  few,  for  indeed  they  are  but  a 
few,  when  compared  with  them  on  the  other  Side. 

Ho7i.  But  hoiv  shall  ive  do  to  see  some  of  them? 
They  Denre  for  thc  Si(/ht  of  (lood  Mcn  to  tlicm  that  are  qoinq  on 

to  see  some    "^ ,^ . ,       .  •'     .      ^-t  j  •  r      j         II  f  / 

%oVinihe  P^'fP^^^f^^fl^f  ^^  "^^  lo  lh(^  appearing  oj  the  Moon  and 
^"icn.        the  Stars  to  them  that  are  sailing  upon  the  Seas. 

Mfia.  Then  Mr.  Mnason  stamped  with  his  Foot, 
and  his  Daughter  Grace  came  up  ;  so  he  said  unto 
Some  sent  ^er,  Gruce  go  you,  tell  my  Friends,  Mr.  Contrite, 
Mr.  Holy-man,  Mr.  Love-saint,  Mr.  Dare-not-ly,  and 
Mr.  Penitent ;  That  I  have  a  Friend  or  two  at  mj^ 
House,  that  have  a  mind  this  Evening  to  see  them. 
So  Grace  went  to  call  them,  and  they  came,  and 
after  Salutation  made,  they  sat  down  together  at  tlie 
Table. 

Then  said  Mi".  Mnason,  their  Landlord,  My 
Neighbours,  1  have,  as  you  see,  a  com})any  of 
Strangers  come  to  my  House,  they  are  Pilgrims  : 
Tliey   come  from  a  far,  and   are  going  to  Mount 


€\)t  pilgrim!^  ^arogitSsJ*  327 

Sion.  But  who,  quoth  he,  do  you  think  this  is  ? 
pointing  with  his  Fing-er  to  Christiana.  It  is  Chris- 
tiana, the  Wife  of  Christian,  that  famous  Pilgrim, 
who  with  Faithful  his  Brother  were  so  shamefully 
handled  in  our  Town.  At  that  they  stood  amazed, 
saying,  we  little  thought  to  see  Christiana,  when 
Grace  came  to  call  us,  wherefore  this  is  a  very  com- 
fortable Surprize.  Then  they  asked  her  of  her 
wellfare,  and  if  these  young  Men  were  her  Hus- 
bands Sons.  And  when  she  had  told  them  they 
were;  they  said,  The  King  whom  you  love,  and 
serve,  make  you  as  your  Father,  and  bring  you 
where  he  is  in  Peace. 

Hon.  Then  Mr.  Honest  {ivhen  they  were  all  <^«^^  f^';^- J*^^;. 
down)  asked  Mr.  Contrite  and  the  rest,  in  what  i»05- c^Xite""'* 
ture  their  Town  ivas  at  present. 

Cont.  You  may  be  sure  we  are  full  of  Hurry,  in 
Fair  time.  'Tis  hard  keeping  our  Hearts  and  Spi- 
rits in  any  good  Order,  when  we  are  in  a  cumbred  'ofwJt.c??ui- 
Condition.  He  that  lives  in  such  a  place  as  this  is, ''"''-" 
and  that  has  to  do  with  such  as  we  have,  has  Need 
of  an  Itum,  to  caution  him  to  take  heed,  every  Mo- 
ment of  the  Day. 

Hon.  But  hoiv  are  your  Neighbors  for  quietness  f 

Cont.  They  are  much  more  moderate  now  than  ^Z7^i^\t 
formerly.  You  know  how  Christian  and  Faithful  l^j^l!l;J^^[ 
were  used  at  our  Town;  but  of  late,  I  say,  they 
have  been  far  more  moderate.  I  think  the  Blood 
of  Faithful  lieth  with  load  upon  them  till  now  ;  for 
since  they  burned  him,  they  have  been  ashamed  to 
burn  any  more :  In  those  Days  we  were  afraid  to 
walk  the  Streets,  but  now  we  can  shew  our  Heads. 
Then  the  Name  of  a  Professor  was  odious,  now  spe- 
cially in  some  parts  of  our  Town  (for  you  know  our 
Town  is  large)  Religion  is  counted  Honourable. 

Then  said  Mr.  Contrite  to  them,  Pray  how  faireth 

»  Added  iu  1687. 

z2 


328  €\)t  ^noixts  i3ait  of 

it  unth  you  in  your  Pilyi'imafje^  hoiv  stands  the  Coun- 
try affected  toumrds  you  f 

Hon.  It  happens  to  us,  as  it  happeneth  to  Way- 
fairing  men  ;  sometimes  our  way  is  clean,  sometimes 
foul;  sometimes  up  hill,  sometimes  down  hill;  We 
are  seldom  at  a  Certainty.  The  Wind  is  not  al- 
ways on  our  Backs,  nor  is  every  one  a  Friend  that 
we  meet  with  in  the  Way.  We  have  met  with 
some  notable  Rubs  already  ;  and  what  are  yet  be- 
hind we  know  not,  but  for  the  most  part  we  find  it 
true,  that  has  been  talked  of  of  old :  A  good  Alan 
must  suffer  Trouble. 

Contrit.  You  talk  of  Rubs,  ivhat  Rubs  have  you 
met  withal  f 

Hon.  Nay,  ask  Mr,  Great-heart,  our  Guide,  for 
he  can  give  the  best  Account  of  that. 

Greath.  We  have  been  beset  three  or  four  times 
already:  First  Christiana  and  her  Children  were 
beset  with  two  Ruffians,  that  they  feared  would 
a  took  away  their  Lives;  We  was  beset  with 
Gyant  Bloody-man,  Gyant  Maul,  and  Gyant  Slay- 
good.  Indeed  we  did  rather  beset  the  last,  than 
were  beset  of  him.  And  thus  it  was  :  After  we 
had  been  some  time  at  the  House  of  Gaius,  mine 
Host  and  of  the  whole  Church,  we  were  minded 
upon  a  time  to  take  our  Weapons  with  us,  and 
so  go  see  if  we  could  light  upon  any  of  those  that 
were  Enemies  to  Pilgrims ;  (for  we  heard  that 
there  was  a  notable  one  thereabouts.)  Now  Gaius 
knew  his  Haunt  better  than  I,  because  he  dwelt 
thereabout,  so  we  looked  and  looked,  till  at  last 
we  discerned  the  Mouth  of  his  Cave ;  then  we 
were  glad  and  pluck'd  up  our  Spirits  So  we  ap- 
proached up  to  his  Den,  and  lo  when  w^e  came 
there,  he  had  dragged  by  meer  force  into  his  Net, 
this  j)f>or  man,  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  and  was  about  to 
bring  him  to  his  End.  But  when  he  saw  us,  sup- 
posing, as  we  thought,  he  had  had  an  other  Prey, 


^f)t  ^ilsrimsi  ^rtigitss;*  329 

he  left  the  poor  man  in  his  Hole,  and  came  out.  So 
we  fell  to  it  full  sore,  and  he  lustily  laid  about  him; 
but,  in  conclusion,  he  was  brought  down  to  the 
Ground,  and  his  Head  cut  oft",  and  set  up  by  the 
Way  side  for  a  Terror  to  such  as  should  after  prac- 
tise such  Ungodliness.  That  I  tell  you  the  Truth, 
here  is  the  man  himself  to  affirm  it,  who  was  as  a 
Lamb  taken  out  of  the  Mouth  of  the  Lyon. 

Feebl.  Then  said  Air.  Feeble-mind,  T  found  this 
true  to  my  Cost,  and  Comfort;  to  my  Cost,  when  he 
threatned  to  pick  my  Bones  every  Moment,  and  to  my 
Comfort,  when  I  saiv  Mr.  Great-heart  and  his  Friends 
with  their  Weapons  approach  so  ^neer  for  my  Deliver- 
ance. 

Holym.  Then  said  Mr.  Holy-man,  there  are  two  i>/>-.Hoiy- 
things   that   they  have  need   to   be  possessed   with  ^pfed. 
that  go  on  Pilgrimage,  Courage,  and  an  unspotted 
Life.     If  they  have  not  Courage,  they  can  never 
hold  on  their  way  ;  and  if  their  Lives  be  loose,  they 
will  make  the  very  Name  of  a  Pilgrim  stink. 

Loves.  Then   said    Mr.    Love-saint ;    I    hope  this  ^^'•-  Love- 

/-^  •  •  1  p    1  T»  1      saint's 

Caution  IS   not  neediul  amongst  you.     But   trul^' Si'ccc/i, 
there  are  many  that  go  upon  the  Road,  that  rather 
declare  themselves  Strangers,  to  Pilgrimage,  than 
Strangers  and  Pilgrims  in  the  Earth. 

Dareno.   Theii  said  Mr.   Dare-not-lv,  'Tis  true  ;^^':Pf^- 

J  '  '  not-ly  Ins 

they  neither  have  the  Pilgrims  Weed,  nor  the  Pilgrims  ^^'«'^^- 
Courage  ;  they  go  not  uprightly,  but  all  awrie  tvith 
their  Feet,  one  shoo  goes  inward,  an  other  outward, 
and  their  Hosen  out  behind ;  there  a  Rag,  and  there 
a  Rent,  to  the  Disparagement  of  their  Lord. 

Penit.  These  things  said  Mr.  Penitent,  they  ought  j^/;'jf^"'- 
to  be  troubled  for,  nor  are  the  Pilgrims  like  to  have  ^''"'■''• 
that  Grace  put  upon  them  and  their  pilgrims  Pro- 
gress, as  they   desire,   until  the  way  is  cleared  of 
such  Spots  and  Blemishes. 

Thus  tliey   sat  talking  and   spending  the  time, 

*  '  so  near,'  1 687. 


330  mn  M>ttoi\t  ^art  of 

until  Supper  was  set  upon  the  Table.  Unto  which 
they  went  and  refreshed  their  weary  Bodys,  so 
they  went  to  Rest.  Now  they  stayed  in  this  Fair  a 
great  while,  at  the  House  of  this  Mr.  AInason,  w^ho 
in  process  of  time,  gave  his  Daughter  Grace  unto 
^Simon,  Christiana's  Son,  to  Wife,  and  his  Daughter 
Alar t ha  to  Joseph. 

The  time  as  I  said,  that  they  lay  here,  was  long 
(for  it  was  not  now  as  in  former  times.)  Wherefore 
the  Pilgrims  grew  acquainted  with  many  of  the 
good  People  of  the  Town,  and  did  them  what 
Service  they  could.  Alercy,  as  she  was  wont,  la- 
boured much  for  the  Poor,  wherefore  their  Bellys 
and  Backs  blessed  her,  and  she  was  there  an  Orna- 
ment to  her  Profession.  And  to  say  the  truth,  for 
Grace^  Phebe,  and  Martha,  they  were  all  of  a  very 
good  Nature,  and  did  much  good  in  their  place. 
They  w^ere  alP  also  of  them  very  Fruitful,  so  that 
Christian's  Name,  as  was  said  before,  was  like  to 
live  in  the  World. 
A  MoMic:  While  they  lay  here,  there  came  a  Monster  out  of 
the  Woods,  and  slew  many  of  the  People  of  the 
Town.  It  would  also  carry  away  their  Children, 
and  teach  them  to  suck  its  Whelps.  Now  no  Man 
in  the  Town  durst  so  much  as  face  this  Monster ; 
but  all  Men  fled  when  they  heard  of  the  noise  of 
his  coming. 
Rev.  17. 3.  The  Monster  was  like  unto  no  one  Beast  upon 
Hu Nature,  thc  Earth.  Its  Body  was  like  a  Dragon,  and  it 
had  seven  Heads  and  ten  Horns.  It  made  (jrcat 
havock  of  Children,  and  yet  it  was  governed  by  a 
Woman.  This  Alonster  propounded  Conditions  to 
men  ;  and  such  men  as  loved  their  Lives  more  then 
their  Souls,  accepted  of  those  Conditions.  So  they 
came  under. 

Now  this  Mr.  Great  heart,  together  with  these  that 

'  Corrected  to  'Samuel,'  in  the  ^  '  also  all,'  1687. 

succeeding  editions. 


CI)e  IBiIgnmsf  ^rogres?^^  331 

came  to  visit  the  Pilgrims  at  Mr.  Mnasotis  House, 
entered  into  a  Covenant  to  go  and  ingage  this  Beast, 
if  perhaps  they  might  deliver  the  People  of  this 
Town,  from  the  Paw^  and  Mouths  of  this  so  de- 
vouring a  Serpent. 

Then  did  Mr.  Great-heart,  Mr.  Contrite,  Mr.  Holy- 
man,  Mr.  Dare-not-ly,  and  Mr.  Penitent,  with  their  ^^^/g^' 
Weapons  go  fortli  to  meet  him.  Now  the  Monster 
at  first  was  very  Rampant,  and  looked  upon  these 
Enemies  with  great  Disdain,  but  they  so  belabored 
him,  being  sturdy  men  at  Arms,  that  they  made 
him  make  a  Retreat ;  so  they  came  home  to  Mr. 
Mnasons  House  again. 

The  Monster,  you  must  know  had  his  certain  Sea- 
sons to  come  out  in,  and  to  make  his  Attempts  upon 
the  Children  of  the  People  of  the  Town  ;  also  these 
Seasons  did  these  valiant  Worthies  watch  him  in, 
and  did  still  continually  assault  him  ;  in  so  much, 
that  in  process  of  time,  he  became  not  only  wound- 
ed, but  lame;  also  he  has  not  made  that  havock  of 
the  Towns  mens  Children,  as  formerly  he  has  done. 
And  it  is  verily  believed  by  some,  that  this  Beast 
will  die  of  his  Wounds. 

This  therefore  made  Mr.  Great-heart  and  his  Fel- 
lows, of  great  Fame  in  this  Town,  so  that  many  of 
the  People  that  wanted  their  tast  of  things,  yet  had 
a  reverend  Esteem  and  Respect  for  them.  Upon 
this  account  therefore  it  was  that  these  Pilgrims  got 
not  much  hurt  here.  True,  there  were  some  of  the 
baser  sort  that  could  see  no  more  than  a  Mole,  nor 
understand  more  than  a  Beast,  these  had  no  reve- 
rence for  these  men,  nor  took  they  notice  of  their 
Valour  or  Adventures. 

Well,  the  time  grew  on  that  the  Pilgrims  must 
go  on  their  way,  wherefore  they  prepared  for  their 
Journey.  They  sent  for  their  Friends,  they  con- 
ferred  with  them,  they  had  some  time  set  apart ; 

'  'PiiM'S  and  Mouth;  1687. 


332  Cf)e  ^eronD  ^art  of 

therein  to  commit  each  other  to  the  protection  of 
their  Prince.  There  was  again,  that  brought  them 
of  such  things  as  they  had,  that  was  fit  for  the  weak, 
and  the  strong,  for  the  Women,  and  the  men;  and 
Acts  28. 10.  so  /aded  them,  witli  such  tilings  as  was  necessary. 

Then  they  set  forwards  on  their  way,  and  their 
Friends  accompan3'ing  them  so  far  as  was  conve- 
nient ;  they  again  committed  each  other  to  the 
Protection  of  their  King,  and  parted. 

They  therefore  that  were  of  the  Pilgrims  Com- 
pany went  on,  and  Mr.  Great-heart  went  before 
them  ;  now  the  Women  and  Children  being  weakly, 
they  were  forced  to  go  as  they  could  bear,  by  this 
means  Mr.  Ready- to -liauU,  and  Mr.  Feeble-mind, 
had  more  to  sympathize  W'ith  their  Condition. 

When  they  were  gone  from  the  Towns-men,  and 
when  their  Friends  had  bid  them  farewel,  they 
quickly  came  to  the  place  where  Faithful  was  put 
to  Death.  There  therefore  they  made  a  stand,  and 
thanked  him  that  had  enabled  him  to  bear  his 
Cross  so  well,  and  the  rather,  because  they  now 
found  that  they  had  a  benefit  by  such  a  Manly 
Sufl^ering  as  his  was. 

They  went  on  therefore  after  this,  a  good  way 
further,  talking  of  Christian  and  Faithful,  and  how 
Hopeful  joyned  himself  to  Christian  after  that 
Faithful  was  dead. 
issTilTf  Now  they  were  come  up  with  the  Hill  Lucre, 
where  the  Silver-mine  was,  which  took  Demas  oflT 
from  his  Pilgrimage,  and  into  which,  as  some 
think,  By-ends  fell  and  perished ;  wherefore  they 
considered  that.  But  when  they  were  come  to  the 
old  Monument  that  stood  over  against  the  Hill 
Lucre,  to  wit,  to  the  Pillar  of  Salt  that  stood  also 
within  view  o{  Sodom,  and  its  stinking  Lake  ;  they 
marvelled,  as  did  Christiati  before,  that  men  of  that 
Knowledg  and  ripeness  of  Wit  as  they  was,  should 
be   so   blinded  as  to  turn   aside  here.     Only  they 


Cfte  iilcrnmsi  ^Srogresid*  333 

considered  again,  that  Natnre  is  not  affected  with 
the  Harms  that  others  have  met  with,  specially  if 
that  thing  upon  which  they  look,  has  an  attracting 
Virtue  upon  the  foolish  Eye. 

I  saw  now  that  thev  went  on  till  thev  came  at  the  '^Pm-tvag. 

.''        .  "^  189.  risi-i 

River  that  was  on  this  Side  of  the  delectable  Moun- 
tains. To  the  River  where  the  fine  Trees  grow  on 
both  sides,  and  whose  Leaves,  if  taken  inwardly,  are 
good  against  Surfits  ;  where  the  Medows  are  green 
all  the  year  long,  and  where  they  might  lie  down  psai.  23. 
safely. 

By  this  River  side  in  the  medow,  there  were 
Cotes  and  Folds  for  Sheep,  an  House  built  for  the 
HOurisJiing,  and  bringing  up  of  those  Lambs,  the 
Babes   of  those   Women    that    p'o    on    Pilg:rima2-e.  p^i- ?; 

0,00        Isa.  40.  11. 

Also  there  was  here  one  that  was  intrusted  with 
them,  who  could  have  compassion,  and  that  could 
gather  these  Lambs  with  his  Arm,  and  carry  them 
in  his  Bosom,  and  that  could  gently,  lead  those  that 
were  with  young.  Now  to  the  Care  of  tJiis  Man, 
Christiana  admonished  her  four  Dauo-hters  to  com- 
mit  their  little  ones  ;  that  by  these  Waters  they 
might  be  housed,  harbored,  suckered,  and  nour- 
ished, and  that  none  of  them  might  be  lacking  in 
time  to  come.     This  mail,  if  any  of  them  p'o  astray,  J^""- 23- 4. 

.  *^  *  ^  "^      Ezek.  34.11 

or  be  lost,  he  will  brinp-  them  ag^ain,   he  will  also  12, 13,  li, 

-  O  -^  15   ]6 

bind  up  that  which  was  broken,  and  will  strengthen 
them  that  are  sick.  Here  they  will  never  want 
Meat  and  Drink  and  Cloathing,  here  they  will  be 
kept  from  Thieves  and  Robbers,  for  this  man  will 
die  before  one  of  those  committed  to  his  Trust, 
shall  be  lost.  Besides,  here  they  shall  besure  to 
have  good  ^Nurtriture  and  Admonition,  and  shall 
be  taught  to  walk  in  right  Paths,  and  that  you 
know  is  a  Favour  of  no  small  account.  Also  here, 
as  you  see,  are  delicate  Waters,  pleasant  Medows, 
dainty  Flowers,  Variety  of  Trees,  and  such  as  bear 

^  'Good  Nuiturts'  1687. 


334  mn  ^ffontr  ^ait  of 

ivhohoni  Fruit.  Fruit,  not  like  that  that  Matthew 
eat  of,  that  fell  over  the  Wall  out  oi  Belzebubs  Gar- 
den, but  Fruit  that  procureth  Health  where  there  is 
none,  and  that  continueth  and  increaseth  it  where 
it  is. 

So  they  were  content  to  commit  their  little  Ones 

to   him  ;  and   that  which   was  also  an   Incourage- 

ment  to  them  so  to  do,  was,  for  that  all  this  was  to 

be  at  the  Charge  of  the  King,  ^and  so  was  as  an 

Hospital  to  young  Children,  and  Orphans. 

romeh>%-       Now  they  went  on  :  And  when  they  were  come  to 

^u^cTmind  By-jmth  Medow,  to  the  Stile  over  which   Christian 

%uckTuh    went  with    his  Fellow   Hopcfid,    when   they   were 

SaS"'^'^'   taken    by     Gyant    dispair,    and    put    into    douhting 

l^.^'t'J"^-  Castle  :  They  sat  down  and  consulted  what  was  best 

191.  JU5.  "^  . 

[134-142].  to  be  done,  to  wit,  now  they  were  so  strong,  and 
had  got  such  a  man  as  Mr.  Great-heart  for  their 
Conductor  ;  whether  they  had  not  best  to  make  an 
Attempt  upon  the  Gyant,  demolish  his  Castle,  and 
if  there  were  any  Pilgrims  in  it,  to  set  them  at 
liberty  before  they  went  any  further.  So  one  said 
one  thing,  and  an  other  said  the  contrary.  One 
questioned  if  it  was  lawful  to  go  upon  unconsecrated 
Ground,  an  other  said  they  might,  provided  their 
end  was  good  ;  buf  Mr.  Great-heart  said.  Though 
that  Assertion  offered  last,  cannot  be  universally 
true,  yet  I  have  a  Commandment  to  resist  Sin,  to 
overcome  Evil,  to  fight  tiie  good  Fight  of  Faith. 
And  I  pray,  with  whom  should  I  fight  this  good 
Fight,  if  not  with  Gyant  dispair?  I  will  therefore 
attempt  the  taking  away  of  his  Life,  and  the  demo- 
lishing o^  Doubtinfi  Castle.     Then  said  he,  who  will 

\z^\l^'  go  with  me?  Then  said  old  Honest,  I  will,  and  so 
will  we  too,  said  Christians  four  Sons,  Matthew, 
"^Simon,  James,  and  Joseph,  for  they  were  yoimg 
men  and  strong. 

So  they  left  the  Women   in   the  Road,  and  with 

'  '  and  so  was  an  Hospital,'  1  (i87.  '  '  Altered  to  '  Samuel,'  1687. 


€f)t  ^ilcrnms;  ^Srosresie;*  335 

them  Mr.  Feeble-?nmd,  and  Mr.  Ready-to-halt,  with 
his  Crutches,  to  be  their  Guard,  until  they  came 
back,  for  in  that  place  tho  Gyant-Dispair  dwelt  so 
near,  they  keeping  in  the  Road,  yl  little  CJiild  might  is^n.e. 
lead  them. 

So  Mr.  Great-heart,  old  Honest,  and  the  four 
young  men,  went  to  go  up  to  Doubting-Castle,  to 
look  for  Gyant-Dispair.  When  they  came  at  the 
Castle  Gate  they  knocked  for  Entrance  with  an 
unusual  Noyse.  At  that  the  old  Gyant  comes  to 
the  Gate,  and  Diffidence  his  Wife  follows.  Then  said 
he.  Who,  and  what  is  he,  that  is  so  hardy,  as  after 
this  manner  to  molest  the  Gyant-Dispair  f  Mr. 
Great-heart  replyed.  It  is  I,  Great-heart,  one  of  the 
King  of  the  Celestial  Countries  Conductors  of  Pil- 
grims to  their  Place.  And  I  demand  of  thee  that 
thou  open  thy  Gates  for  my  Entrance,  prepare  thy 
self  also  to  Fight,  for  I  am  come  to  take  away  thy 
Head,  and  to  demolish  Douhtinc)  Castle. 

Now  Gyant-Dispair,  because  he  was  a  G'zmw^,  Dispah- /ws 
thought  no  man  could  overcome  him,  and  again,  -^m^^- 
thought  he,  since  heretofore  I  have  made  a  Con- 
quest of  Angels,  shall  Great-heart  make  me  afraid  ? 
So  he  harnessed  himself  and  went  out.  He  had 
a  Cap  of  Steel  upon  his  Head,  a  Brest-plate  of  Fire 
girded  to  him,  and  he  came  out  in  Iron-Shoos,  with 
a  great  Club  in  his  Hand.  Then  these  six  men 
made  up  to  him,  and  beset  him  behind  and  before ; 
also  when  Diffidence,  the  Gyantess,  came  up  to  help 
him,  old  Mr.  Honest  cut  her  down  at  one  Blow. 
Then  they  fought  for  their  Lives,  and  Gyant  Dis- 
pair  was  brought  down  to  the  Ground,  but  teas  very  f^^^^i'^^}^ 
loth  to  die.  He  strugled  hard,  and  had,  as  they  say, 
as  many  Lives  as  a  Cat,  but  Great-heart  was  his 
death,  for  he  left  him  not  till  he  had  severed  his 
Head  from  his  shoulders. 

Then  they  fell  to  demolishing  Doubting-Ccist\e,ooaumg- 
aiid  that  you  know  mio'ht  with  ease  be  done,  since  ««/'««. 


336  Cfte  ^ewnb  part  of 

Gyant-Dispair  was  dead.  They  Svas  seven  Days  in 
destroying  of  that  ;  and  in  it  of  Pilgrims,  they 
found  one  Mr.  Dispondencie,  almost  starved  to 
Death,  and  one  Much-afraid  his  Daughter;  these 
two  they  saved  alive.  But  it  would  a  made  you  a 
wondered  to  have  seen  the  dead  Bodies  that  lay 
here  and  there  in  the  Castle  Yard,  and  how  full  of 
dead  mens  Bones  the  Duno^eon  was. 

When  Mr.  Great-heart  and  his  Companions  had 
performed  this  Exploit,  they  took  Mr.  Dispondencie^ 
and  his  Daughter  J/;^cA- «/)•«?(/,  into  their  Protection, 
for  they  were  honest  People,  tlio  they  were  Prisoners 
in  Doubtimj- Castle  to  that  Tyrant  Gyant  Dispair. 
They  therefore  I  say,  took  with  them  the  Head  of  the 
Gyant  (for  his  Body  they  had  buried  under  a  heap 
of  Stones)  and  down  to  the  Road  and  to  their  Com- 
panions they  came,  and  shewed  them  what  they 
had  done.  Now  when  Feeble-mind  and  Ready-to- 
halt  saw  that  it  was  the  Head  of  Gyant-Dispair  in- 
deed, they  were  very  jocond  and  merry.  Now 
Christiana^  if  need  was,  could  play  upon  the  Vial^ 
TheyjMve    aud  hcr  Daughter  Mercy  upon  the  Lide  :   So,  since 

musick  and  O  i/        1  ' 

dmicingfor  thcy  wcrc  SO  merry  disposed,  she  plaid  them  a 
Lesson,  and  Ready-to-halt  would  Dance.  So  he 
took  Dispondencies  Daughter,  named  Much-afraid, 
by  the  Hand,  and  to  dancing  they  went  in  the 
Road.  True  he  could  not  dance  without  one 
Crutch  in  his  Hand,  but  I  promise  you,  he  footed 
it  well  ;  also  the  Girl  was  to  be  commended,  for 
she  answered  the  Musick  hansomely. 

As  for  Mr.  Despo?idencie,  the  Musick  was  not  much 
to  him,  he  was  for  feeding  rather  than  dancing,  for 
that  he  was  almost  starved.  So  Christiana  gave 
him  some  of  her  Bottle  of  Spirits  for  present  Relief, 
and  then  prepared  him  something  to  eat ;  and  in 
little  time  the  old  Gentleman  came  to  himself,  and 
began  to  be  finely  revived. 

*  'They  were,"  16H7. 


m)t  f  iTffnms!  proffitsis;* 


337 


Tho  doubting  Castle  be  demolished 
And  the  Gyant  dispair  hath  lost  his  head 
Sin  can  rebuild  the  Castle,  make't  remaine. 
And  make  despair  the  Gyant  live  againe. 


This  was  originally  engi-aved  on  copper,  but  after 
1687  it  was  replaced  by  the  wood-cut  from  which 
this  is  copied. 


338  CIK  ^UOIXO  \Uvt  Of 

Now  I  saw  in  my  Dream,  when  all  these  things 
were  finished,  Mr.  Great-heart  took  the  Head  of 
G?/ant-Dispair,  and  set  it  upon  a  Pole  by  the  High- 
way side,  right  over  against  the  Filler  that  Chris- 
tian erected  for  a  Caution  to  Pilgrims  that  came 
after,  to  take  heed  of  entering  into  his  Grounds. 

Then  he  writ  under  it  upon  a  Marble-stone,  these 
Verses  following. 

iefu°of'  '^^"'^  ^-^  ^^^^  Head  of  him,  Whose  Name  onh/ 

Deliverance.       Li  fomier  thues,  did  Pilgrims  terrify. 

His  Castle's  down,  and  Diffidence  his  Wife, 

Brave  Master  Great-heart  has  bereft  of  Life. 

Despondencie,  his  Dauffhter,  Much-afraid  ; 

Great- heart, /?>;•  them,  also  the  Man  has  plaid. 

Who  hereof  doubts ,  if  he' I  but  cast  his  Eye, 

Up  hither,  may  his  Scruples  satisfy. 

This  Head,  also  when  doubtinq  Cripples  dance, 

Doth  sh CIV  from  Fears  they  have  Deliverance. 

When  these  men  had  thus  bravely  shewed  them- 
selves against  Doubting  Castle,  and  had  slain  Gyant 
Dispair,  they  went  forward,  and  went  on  till  they 
came  to  the  Delectable  Mountains,  where  Christian 
and  Hopeful  refreshed  themselves  with  the  Varieties 
of  the  Place.  They  also  acquainted  themselves 
with  the  Shepherds  there,  who  welcomed  them  as 
they  had  done  Christian  before,  unto  the  delectable 
Mountains. 

Now  the  Shepherds  seeing  so  great  a  train  follow 
Mr.  Great-heart  (for  with  him  they  were  well 
acquainted  ;)  they  said  unto  him.  Good  Sir,  you 
have  got  a  goodly  Company  here  ;  pray  where  did 
you  find  all  these  ? 

Then  Mr.  Great-heart  replyed, 

TMGvMki        First  here's  Christiana  and  her  train, 

Speccli  to  the  J  y         ^^  i    t  r 

shephtnh.        Her  Sons,  and  her  Sons  Wives,  who  like  the  Wain, 


CI)f  lailgnms  |3rogred5*  339 

Keep  by  the  Pole,  mid  do  by  Compass  ^stere, 
From  Sin  to  Grace,  else  they  had  not  been  here. 
NeM  here's  old  Honest  come  on  Pilfirimage, 
Ready-to-halt  too,  loho  I  dare  ingage, 
True  hearted  is,  and  so  is  Feeble-mind, 
Who  willi7ig  urns,  not  to  be  left  behind. 
Dispondencie,  good-man,  is  coming  after. 
And  so  also  is  Much-afraid,  his  Daughter. 
May  we  have  Entertainment  here,  or  must 
We  further  go  f  let's  know  whereon  to  trust  f 

Then  said  the  Shepherds  :  This  is  a  comfortable  y'!*""- ^«'«- 

^-^  A    .  PIP        tainmext. 

Company,  you  are  welcome  to  us,  tor  we  have  tor  Mat.  2.1 40 
the  Feeble,  as  for  the  Strong  ;  our  Prince  has  an  Eye 
to  what  is  done  to  the  least  of  these.  Therefore  In- 
firmity must  not  be  a  block  to  our  Entertainment. 
So  they  had  them  to  the  Palace  Door,  and  then  said 
unto  them,  Come  in  3fr.  Feeble-mind,  come  in  Mr. 
Ready-to-halt,  come  in  Mr.  Dispondencie,  and  Mrs. 
Much-afraid,  his  Daughter,  .  These  Mr.  Great-heart, 
said  the  Shepherds  to  the  Guide,  we  call  in  byname, 
for  that  they  are  most  subject  to  draw  back  ;  but  as 
for  you,  and  the  rest  that  are  strong,  we  leave  you  to 
your  wonted  Liberty.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart, 
This  day  I  see  that  Grace  doth  shine  in  j^our  Faces, 
and  that  you  are  my  Lords  Shepherds  indeed;  for ^i^^o-ip- 
that  you  have  not  pushed  these  Diseased  neither  m-puvds. 
with  Side  nor  Shoulder,  but  have  rather  strewed 
their  way  into  the  Palace  with  Flowers,  as  you 
should. 

So  the  Feeble  and  weak  went  in,  and  Mr.  Great- 
heart,  and  the  rest  did  follow.  When  the}^  were 
also  set  down,  the  Shepherds  said  to  those  of  the 
weakest  sort,  what  is  it  that  you  would  have  ?  For 
said  they,  all  things  must  be  managed  here,  to  the 
supporting  of  the  weak,  as  well  as  the  warning  of 
the  Unruly. 

*  '  steer;  1687. 


340  Cfje  ^rcontr  ^art  of 

So  they  made  them  a  Feast  of  thinj>s,  easy  of 
Digestion,  and  that  were  pleasant  to  the  Palate, 
and  nourishing  ;  the  which  when  they  had  received, 
they  went  to  their  rest,  each  one  respectively  unto 
his  proper  place.  When  Morning  was  come,  be- 
cause the  mountains  were  high,  and  the  day  clear  ; 
and  because  it  was  the  Custom  of  the  Shepherds  to 
shew  to  the  Pilgrims,  before  their  Departure,  some 
Rarities ;  therefore  after  they  were  ready,  and  had 
refreshed  themselves,  the  Shepherds  took  them  out 
into  the  Fields,  and  shewed  them  first,  what  they 
had  shewed  to  Christian  before. 

Then  they  had  them  to  some  new  places.     The 

Mount Mav- ^Y%t  was  to  Moimt-Mavvel,  where  they  looked,  and 
beheld  a  man  at  a  Distance,  that  tumbled  the  Hills 
about  with  Words.  Then  they  asked  the  Shepherds 
what  that  should   mean  ?     So  they  told  him,  that 

226r[i5i.T  t^^^  man  was  the  Son  of  one  Great-grace,  of  whom 
you  read  in  the  first  part  of  the  Records  of  the  Pil- 
qrims  Procfress.       And    he   is    set    there    to  teach 

Mark  11. 23,  Pilo;rims  how  to  believe  down,  or  to  tumble  out  of 

24.  ~  ^  _  ' 

their  ways,  what  Difficulties  they  shall  meet  with,  by 
faith.  Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  I  know  him,  he 
is  a  man  above  man3^ 

Then  they  had  them  to  another  place,  called 
Mount  Innoceyit.  And  there  they  saw  a  man  cloathed 
all  in  White;  and  two  men.  Prejudice,  and  Ill-icill, 
continually  casting  Dirt  upon  him.  Now  behold 
the  Dirt,  whatsoever  they  cast  at  him,  would  in 
little  time  fall  oflf  again,  and  his  Garment  would 
look  as  clear  as  if  no  Dirt  had  been  cast  thereat. 

Then  said  the  Pilgrims  what  means  this  ?  The 
Shepherds  answered,  This  Man  is  named  Godly- 
man,  and  this  Garment  is  to  shew  the  Innocency  of 
his  Life.  Now  those  that  throw  Dirt  at  him,  are 
such  as  hate  his  Wcll-doinf/,  but  as  3'^ou  see  the  Dirt 
will  not  stick  upon  his  Cloths,  so  it  shall  be  with 
him    that   liveth   truly   Innocently    in   the   World. 


Mount  Inno 
ceiit. 


€l)t  ^Bilgnmsi  progresis!.  34i 

Whoever  they  be  that  would  make  such  men  dirty, 
they  labor  all  in  vain  ;  for  God,  by  that  a  little 
time  is  spent,  will  cause  that  their  Innocence  shall 
break  forth  as  the  Light,  and  their  Righteousness  as 
the  Noon  day. 

Then  they  took  them,  and  had  them  to  Mount-  ^^^ 
Charity^  where  they  shewed  them  a  man  that  had 
a  bundle  of  Cloth  lying  before  him,  out  of  which  he 
cut  Coats  and  Garments,  for  the  Poor  that  stood 
about  him  ;  yet  his  Bundle  or  Role  of  Cloth  was 
never  the  less. 

Then  said  they,  what  should  this  be  ?  This  is, 
said  the  Shepherds,  to  shew  you,  That  he  that  has 
a  Heart  to  give  of  his  Labor  to  the  Poor,  shall 
never  want  where-withal.  He  that  watereth  shall 
be  watered  himself  And  the  Cake  that  the  Wid- 
dow  gave  to  the  Prophet,  did  not  cause  that  she 
had  ever  the  less  in  her  Barrel. 

They  had  them  also  to  a  place  where  they  saw '  ne 7^)* 
one  Fool.,  and  one  Want-wit,  washing  of  an  EtJiio-  tnT^r^' 
pian  with  intention  to  make  him  white,   but  the  ^^^"'"'^"•' 
more  they  washed  him,  the  blacker  he  was.     They 
then  asked  the  Shepherds  what  that  should  mean. 
So  they  told  them,  saying.  Thus  shall  it  be  with 
the  vile  Person  ;  all  means  used  to  get  such  an  one 
a  good  Name,  shall  in  conclusion  tend  but  to  make 
him  more  abominable.     Thus  it  was  with  the  Pha- 
rises^  and  so  shall  '  it'^  be  with  all  Hypocrites. 

Then  said  Mercy  the  Wife  of  Matthew,  to  (7/^n^- 1  part,  pag. 
tiana  her  Mother,  Mother,  I  would,  if  it  might  be,  MerS'/fJ; 
see  the  hole  in  the  Hill ;  or  that,  commonly  called, '//'ftt'^* 
the  By-way  to  Hell.  So  her  Mother  brake  her""'''" 
mind  to  the  Shepherds.  Then  they  went  to  the 
Door ;  it  was  in  the  side  of  an  Hill,  and  they  opened 
it,  and  bid  Mercy  hearken  awhile.  So  she  bark- 
ened, and  heard  one  saying,  Cursed  be  my  Father 
for  holding  of  my  Feet  hack  from  the  way  of  Peace 

*  Inserted  in  1087. 
A  A 


ai  a. 


342  €f)t  ^ttonti  part  of 

and  Life  ;  and  an  other  said,  0  that  I  had  been  tor?! 
in  pieces  before  I  had,  to  save  my  Life,  lost  my  Soul ; 
and  an  other  said,  Lf  I  were  to  live  acjain,  how  would 
I  deny  my  self  rather  then  come  to  this  place.  Then 
there  was  as  if  the  very  Earth  had  groaned,  and 
quaked  under  the  Feet  of  this  young  \yoman  for 
fear ;  so  she  looked  white,  and  came  trembling 
away,  saying.  Blessed  be  he  and  she  that  is 
delivered  from  this  Place. 

Now  when  the  Shepherds  had  shewed  them  all 

these   things,   then    they   had    them    back  to    the 

Palace,  and  entertained  them  with  what  the  House 

rf/f  «w!/T  would  afford ;  But  Mercy  being  a  young  and  breed- 

vhat.        ij^g  Woman,  Longed  for  something  that  she  saw 

there,  but  was  ashamed  to  ask.     Her  Mother-in-law 

then  asked  her  what  she  ailed,  for  she  looked  as  one 

not  well.     Then  said  Mercy,  There  is  a  Lookimj- 

glass  hancfs  up  in  the  Dinincj-room,  off  of  which  I 

cannot  take  my  mind  ;  if  tlierefore  I  have  it  not,  I 

think  I  shall  Miscarry.     Then  said  her  Mother,  I 

will  mention  thy  Wants  to  the  Shepherds,  and  they 

will  not  deny  it  thee.     But  she  said,  I  am  ashamed 

that  these  men  should  know  that  I  longed.     Nay 

my  Daughter,  said  she,  it  is  no  Shame,  but  a  Virtue, 

to   long  for  such  a  thing  as  that ;   so  Mercy  said, 

Then  Mother,  if  you  please,  ask  the  Shepherds  if 

they  are  willing  to  sell  it. 

n  was  the        Now  the  Glass  was  one  of  a  thousand.     It  would 

jamca^^S  prcscut  a   man,  one  way,   with   his   own  Feature 

exactly,  and  turn  it  but  another  way,  and  it  would 

shew  one   the   very   Face    and   Similitude   of  the 

Prince  of  Pilgrims  himself.      Yea   1  have  talked 

with  them  that  can  tell,  and  they  have  said,  that 

icor.13.12.  they  have  seen  the  very  Crown  of  Thorns  upon  his 

Head,  by  looking  in  that  Glass,  they  have  therein 

also  seen  the  holes  in  his  Hands,  in  his  Feet,  and 

2 Cor. 3 18.  his  Side.     Yea  such  an  excellency  is  there  in  that 

Glass,  that  it  will  shew  him  to  one  where  they  have 


mn  iilgnms;  progresis;*  343 

a  mind  to  see  him  ;  whether  living  or  dead, 
whether  in  Earth  or  Heaven,  whether  in  a  State  of 
Humiliation,  or  in  his  Exaltation,  whether  coming 
to  Suffer,  or  coming  to  Reign. 

Christiana  therefore  went  to  the  Shepherds  apart.  207^144^ 
(Now  the  Names  of  the  Shepherds  are  Knowledge, 
Ecvperience,  WatcJiful^  and  Sincere)  and  said  unto 
them.  There  is  one  of  my  Daughters  a  breeding 
Woman,  that,  I  think  doth  long  for  something  that 
she  hath  seen  in  this  House,  and  she  thinks  she 
shall  miscarry  if  she  should  by  you  be  denyed. 

Eciperience.  Call  her,  call  her,  She  shall  assuredly  shedothmt 
have  what  we  can  help  her  to.  So  they  called  iZgii^. 
her,  and  said  to  her,  Mercy,  what  is  that  thing  thou 
wouldest  have  ?  Then  she  blushed  and  said.  The 
great  Glass  that  hangs  up  in  the  Dining-room,  so 
Sincere  ran  and  fetched  it,  and  with  a  joyful  Con- 
sent it  was  given  her.  Then  she  bowed  her  Head 
and  gave  Thanks,  and  said,  by  this  I  know  that  I 
have  obtained  Favor  in  your  Eyes. 

They  also  gave  to  the  other  young  Women  such 
things  as  they  desired,  and  to  their  Husbands  great 
Commendations  for  that  they  joyned  with  Mr. 
Great-heart  to  the  slaying  of  Gyant-Dispair,  and  the 
demolishing  of  Bouhtincj-  Castle. 

About  Christiana?)  Neck,   the  Shepherds  put  ^.•Hoiethe 
Bracelet,  and  so  they  did  about  the  Necks  of  hev  adomthe^^ 
four   Daughters,  also   they  put  Ear-rings  in  their  '  """ 
Ears,  and  Jewels  on  their  Fore-heads. 

When  they  were  minded  to  go  hence.  They  let 
them  go  in  Peace,  but  gave  not  to  them  those  cer- 
tain Cautions  which  before  ^was  2:iven  to  Christian '^^^rt.p^. 

213   ri48  1 

and  his  Companion.  The  Reason  was,  for  that 
these-  had  Great-heart  to  be  their  Guide,  who  was 
one  that  was  well  acquainted  with  things,  and  so 
could  give  them  their  Cautions  more  seasonably,  to 


Added  in  1687.  ^  'were  given,'  1687. 

aa2 


344  CI)e  ^eronti  }3art  of 

wit,  even  then  when  tlie  Danger  was  nigh  the 
approaching. 
23Mi6oT  What  Cautions  Christian  and  his  Companions 
had  received  of  the  Shepherds,  they  had  also  lost ; 
by  that  tlie  time  was  come  that  they  had  need  to 
put  them  in  practise.  Wherefore  here  was  the 
Advantage  that  this  Company  had  over  the  other. 

From   hence  they  went   on  Singing,   and   they 
said, 

Behold,  how  fitly  are  tlie  Stages  set ! 
For  their  Relief,  that  Pilfjrims  are  become ; 
And  how  they  us  receive  without  one  let. 
That  make  the  other  Life,  our  Mark  and 

Home. 
What  Novelties  thei/  have,  to  us  they  give, 
That  ice,  tho  Pilgrims,  joijf id  Lives  may  Live, 
They  do  upon  us  too  such  things  bestow. 
That  shew  we  Pilgrims  are,  where  ere  we  go. 

When  they  were  gone  from  the  Shepherds,  they 

2iK'5oo^**  quickly  came  to  the  place  where  Christian  met  with 

one  Turn-away,  that  dwelt  in  the  Town  o^ Apostacy. 

Wherefore  of  liim  Mr.  Great-heart  their  Guide  did 

now  put  them  in  mind  ;  saying.  This  is  the  place 

where    Christian   met   with   one    Turn-a-ivay,   who 

carried  with  him,  the  Character  of  his  Rebellion  at 

his  Back.     And  this  I  have  to  say  concerning  this 

Turn-I-way  Hiau,   Hc  would    harkcu   to  no  Counsel,   but  once 

^^TwZcl '"■' ^falling,  perswasion  could  not  stop  liim.     When  he 

^/yyS'  came  to  the  place  where  the  Cross  and  the  Sepul- 

cher  was,  he  did  meet  witli  one  that  did  bid  him 

look  there,  but    he   gnashed  with   his   Teeth,    and 

stamped,  and  said,  he  was  resolved  to  go  back  to 

his  own  Towai.     Before   he  came  to  the  Gate,  he 

met  with  Evangelist,  who  offered   to  lay  Hands  on 

liini,  to  turn   him    into  the   way  again.     But  this 

Turn-a-way  7'esisted  him,  and   having   done   much 


€i)t  ^ailgnmsi  progit5s>»  345 

despite  unto  him,  he  got  away  over  the  Wall,  and 
so  escaped  his  Hand. 

Then  they  went  on,  and  just  at  the  place  where 
Little-faith  formerly  was  Robbed,  there  stood  a  man 
with  his  Sword  drawn,  and  his  Face  all  bloody. 
Then  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  What  art  thou  ?  The 
man  made  Answer,  saying,  I  am  one  whose  Name 
is  VaUant-f or- Truth.  I  am  a  Pilgrim,  and  am:'o«5Vai- 
e'oino;  to  the  Celestial  City.  Now  as  I  was  in  my  Truth  ?-c«« 
way,  there  was  three  men  did  beset  me,  and  pro- 
pounded unto  me  these  three  things,  i.  Whether  I 
would  become  one  of  them  ?  2.  Or  go  back  from 
whence  I  came?  3.  Or  die  upon  the  place?  TofjY2V3\"4 
the  first  I  answered,  I  had  been  a  true  Man  a  long 
Season,  and  therefore,  it  could  not  be  expected  that 
I  now  should  cast  in  my  Lot  with  Thieves.  Then 
they  demanded  what  I  would  say  to  the  second. 
So  I  told  them  that  the  Place  from  whence  I  came, 
had  I  not  found  Incommodity  there,  I  had  not  for- 
saken it  at  all,  but  finding  it  altogether  unsutable 
to  me,  and  very  unprofitable  for  me,  I  forsook  it  for 
this  Way.  Then  they  asked  me  what  I  said  to  the 
third.  And  I  told  them,  my  Life  cost  more  dear 
far,  than  that  I  should  lightly  give  it  away.  Be- 
sides, you  have  nothing  to  do  thus  to  put  things  to 
my  Choice ;  wherefore  at  your  Peril  be  it,  if  you 
meddle.  Then  these  three,  to  wit,  Wild-head,  In- 
considerate, and  Pra()7natick,  drew  upon  me,  and  I 
also  drew  upon  them. 

So  we  fell  to  it,  one  ao;ainst  three,  for  the  space  of '/^t.-"^' 
above  three  Hours.      Ihey  have  left  upon  me,   as  ;j^>^««^'^"* 
you  see,  some  of  the  Marks  of  their  Valour,   and  '''^''*-' 
have  also  carried   away  with  them  some  of  mine. 
They  are  but  just  now  gone.    I  suppose  they  might, 
as  the  saying  is,  hear  your  Horse  dash,  and  so  they 
betook  them  to  flight. 

'  Added  in  1687. 


346  myt  ^(toixti  ^part  of 

*eart«o,i-        Greath.  But  here  was  great  Odds^   three  against 


heart  won 
ders  at  his 
Valour.' 


one. 

Valiant.  'Tis  true,  but  little  and  more,  are  nothing 

Psalm 27. 3.  to  lilm  that  has  the  Truth  on  his  side.  Though  an 
Host  shoidd  encamp  against  me,  said  07ie,  my  Heart 
shall  not  fear.  Tho  War  shoidd  rise  aqainst  me,  in 
this  will  I  be  Confident,  &c.  Besides,  said  he,  I  have 
read  in  some  Records,  that  one  man  has  fought  an 
Army ;  and  how  many  did  Sampson  slay  with  the 
Jaw-Bone  of  an  Ass. 

Greath.  The7i  said  the  Guide,  Why  did  you  not  cry 
out,  that  some  might  a  came  in  for  your  Succour. 

Valiant.  So  I  did,  to  my  King,  who  I  knew  could 
hear,  and  afford  invisible  Help,  and  that  was  suffi- 
cient for  me. 

Greath.  Theji  ^fltz'c?  Great-heart  to  J/r.Valiant-for- 
truth,  Thou  hast  worthily  behaved  tliij  self ;  Let  me 
see  thy  Sword ;  so  he  shewed  it  him. 

i8a.  2.3.  When  he  had  taken  it  in  his  Hand,  and  looked 

thereon  awhile,  he  said,  Ha  !  It  is  a  right  Jerusalem 
Blade. 

Valiant.  It  is  so.     Let  a  man  have  one  of  these 

iTh/iV^'  Blades,  with  a  Hand  to  wield  it,  and  skill  to  use  it, 

H4b.\  12.  and  he  may  venture  upon  an  Angel  with  it.  He 
need  not  fear  its  holding,  if  he  can  but  tell  how  to 
lay  on.  Its  Edges  will  never  blunt.  It  will  cut 
Flesh,  and  Bones,  and  Soul,  and  Spirit,  and  all. 

Greath.  But  you  fought  a  great  while,  I  wonder 
you  was  not  weary  f 

2^sani.  23.  Valiant.  I  fought  till  my  Sword  did  cleave  to  my 
Hand,  and  when  they  were  joyned  together,  as   if 

T^eS'    ^   Sword   grew   out   of  my  Arm,   and    when   the 

Bu,oe..  Blood  run  thorow  my  Fingers,  then  I  fought  with 
most  Courage. 

Greath.  Thou  hast  done  well,  thou  hast  resisted 
unto  Blood,  striving  against  Sin.     Thou  shalt  abide 

*  Added  in  1687. 


€i)t  pilgn'msi  progresssi*  347 

di/  us,  come  iti,  and  go  out  with  us  ;  for  we  are  thy 
Companions. 

Tlien  they  took  him  and  washed  his  Wounds,  and 
gave  him  of  what  they  had,  to  refresh  him,  and  so 
tiiey  went  on  together.  Now  as  they  went  on,  be- 
cause Mr.  Great-heart  was  delighted  in  him  (for  he 
loved  one  greatly  that  he  found  to  be  a  man  of  his 
Hands)  and  because  there  was  with  his  Company, 
them  that  was  feeble  and  weak  ;  Therefore  he  ques- 
tioned with  him  about  many  things;  as  first,  what 
Country -man  he  was  f 

Valiant  I  am  of  Dark-land,  for  there  I  was  born, 
and  there  my  Father  and  Mother  are  still. 

Greath.  Bark-land,  said  the  Guide,  Doth  not  that 
ly  upon  the  same  Coast  ivith  the  City  of  Destruction  ? 

Valiant.  Yes  it  doth.  Now  that  which  caused  f^^^^- 
me  to  come  on  Pilgrimage,  was  this,  We  had  one  p//''^^;^""" 
Mr.  Tell-true  came  in  to  our  parts,  and  he  told  it 
about,  what  Christian  had  done,  that  went  from  the 
City  of  Destruction.  Namely,  how  he  had  forsaken 
his  T7?/eand  Children,  and  had  betaken  himself  to  a 
Pilgrinis  Life.  It  was  also  confidently  reported 
how  he  had  killed  a  Serpent  that  did  come  out  to 
resist  him  in  his  Journey,  and  how  he  got  thorow 
to  whither  he  intended.  It  was  also  told  what 
Welcome  he  had  at  all  his  Lords  Lodgings;  spe- 
cially when  he  came  to  the  Gates  of  the  Celestial 
City.  For  there,  said  the  man,  He  was  received 
with  sound  of  Trumpet,  by  a  company  of  shining 
ones.  He  told  it  also,  how  all  the  Bells  in  the  City 
did  ring  for  Joy  at  his  Reception,  and  what  Golden 
Garments  he  was  cloathed  with  ;  with  many  other 
things  that  now  I  shall  forbear  to  relate.  In  a 
word,  that  man  so  told  the  Story  of  Christian  and 
his  Travels,  that  my  Heart  fell  into  a  burning  hast 
to  be  gone  after  him,  nor  could  Father  or  Mother 
stay  me,  so  I  got  from  them,  and  am  come  thus  far 
on  my  Way. 


348  C!;e  ^eronti  \Uvt  of 

Greath.    You  came  in  at  the  Gate^  did  you  not  f 
mbeghii  Valiant.  Yes,  yes.      For  the  same  man  also  told 

us,  that  all  would  be  nothing,  if  we  did  not  begin  to 
enter  this  way  at  the  Gate. 
^^rut'in's       Greath.  Looh  you,  said  the  Guide,  to  Christiana, 
farmuf.       The  Pilgrimage  of  your  Husband,  and  ivhat  he  has 
gotten  thereby,  is  spread  abroad  far  and  near. 
Valiant.  Why,  is  this  Christian'^  Wife  ? 
Greath.    Yes,  That  it  is;  and  these  are  also  her 
four  Sons. 

Valiant.  What !  and  going  on  Pilgrimage  too  ? 
Greath.  Yes  verily,  they  are  folloiving  after. 
Heismwh        Valiant.    It   salads   me    at  Heart  !     Good  man  ! 

rejoyced  to  ,  o 

»f  9",?:..  How  Joyful  will  he  be,  when  he  shall  see  them  that 
would  not  go  with  him,  yet  to  enter  alter  him,  m  at 
the  Gates  into  the  City  ? 

Greath.  Without  doubt  it  will  be  a  Comfort  to  him  ; 
For  next  to  the  Joy  of  seeing  himself  there,  it  will  be  a 
Joy  to  meet  there  his  Wife  and  his  Children. 

Valiant.  But  now  you  are  upon  that,  pray  let  me 
hear  your  Opinion  about  it.  Some  make  a  Question 
whether  we  shall  know  one  another  when  we  are  there?  ' 

Greath.  Do  they  think  they  shall  know  the?nselves 
then  f  Or  that  they  shall  rejoyce  to  see  themselves  in 
that  Bliss  f  And  if  they  think  they  shall  knoiv  and 
do  these ;  Why  not  knoiv  others,  and  rejoyce  in  their 
Welfare  also  f 

Again,  Since  Relations  are  our  second  self,  tho 
that  State  will  be  dissolved  there,  yet  ivhy  may  it  not 
he  rationally  concluded  that  we  shall  be  more  glad  to 
see  them  there,  then  to  see  they  are  wanting  ? 

Valiant.  Well,  I  perceive  whereabouts  you  are  as 
to  this.  Have  you  any  more  things  to  ask  me 
about  my  beginning  to  come  on  Pilgrimage? 

Greath.  Yes,  Was  your  Father  and  Mother  willing 
that  you  shoidd  become  a  Pilgrim  f 

Valiant.  Oh,  no.  They  used  all  means  imagin- 
able to  perswade  me  to  stay  at  Home. 


€\)t  pilgrims;  ^rogresfg*  349 

Greath.    Why,  what  could  they  say  against  it  f 

Valiant.  They  said  it  was  an  idle  Life,  and  if  I  ,SS- 
my  self  were  not  inclined  to  Sloath  and  Laziness,  I  g";'^^'*'"'' 
would  never  countenance  a  Pilgrim's  Condition.      uiTinm^ 

Greath.  And  ivhat  did  they  say  else?  ''■''^• 

Valiant.  Why,  They  told  me,  That  it  was  a  dan- 
gerous Way,  yea  the  most  dangerous  Way  in  the 
World,  said  they,  is  that  which  the  Pilgrims  go. 

Greath.  Did  they  show  wherein  this  way  is  so 
dangerous  f 

Valiant.  Yes.     And  that  in  many  Particulars. 

Greath.  Name  some  of  them. 

Valiant.  They  told  me  of  the  Slow  of  Dispond,  "^l^^^^ 
where  Christian  was  well-nigh  smuthered.  They  -8'<"^^- 
told  me  that  there  were  Archers  standing  ready  in 
Belzebub-Castle,  to  shoot  them  that  should  knock  at 
the  ^Vicket-G^iie  for  Entrance.  They  told  me  also 
of  the  Wood,  and  dark  Mountains,  of  the  Hill  Diffi- 
culty., of  the  Lyons,  and  also  of  the  three  Gyants, 
Bloody-man,  Maid,  and  Slay-good.  They  said  more- 
over, that  there  was  a  foul  Fiend  haunted  the  Valley 
of  Humiliation,  and  that  Christian  was,  by  him, 
almost  bereft  of  Life.  Besides,  said  they,  You  must 
go  over  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  where 
the  Hobgoblins  are,  where  the  Light  is  Darkness, 
where  the  Way  is  full  of  Snares,  Pits,  Traps,  and 
Ginns.  They  told  me  also  of  Gyant-Dispair,  of 
Doubting -Castle,  and  of  the  Ruins  that  the  Pil- 
grims met  with  there.  Further,  They  said,  I  must 
go  over  the  enchanted  Ground,  which  was  danger- 
ous. And  that  after  all  this,  I  should  find  a  River, 
over  which  I  should  find  no  Bridg,  and  that  that 
River  did  lie  betwixt  me  and  the  Celestial  Country. 

Greath.  And  was  this  all? 

Valiant.  No,  They  also  told  me  that  this  wayjvie&cond 
was  full  of  Deceivers,  and  of  Persons  that  laid  await 
there,  to  turn  good  men  out  of  the  Path. 

Greath.  But  how  did  they  mahe  that  out? 


350  iEin  ^noiin  ^art  of 

Thesecmd:  Valiant.  They  told  me  that  Mr.  Worldly-nme- 
man  did  there  lie  in  wait  to  deceive.  They  also 
said  that  there  was  Formality  and  Hypocrisie  con- 
tinually on  the  Road.  They  said  also  that  By-ends., 
Talkative,  or  Demas.,  would  go  near  to  gather  me 
up ;  That  the  Flatterer  would  catch  me  in  his  Net, 
or  that  with  green-headed  Ignorance  I  would  pre- 
sume to  go  on  to  the  Gate,  from  whence  he  alwa^'s 
was  sent  back  to  the  Hole  that  was  in  the  side  of 
the  Hill,  and  made  to  go  the  By-way  to  Hell. 

Greath.  I  promise  you,  TJiis  ivas  enough  to  dis- 
courage.    But  did  they  make  an  end  here  ? 

Tht  Third.-'  Valiant.  No,  stay.  They  told  me  also  of  many 
that  had  tryed  that  way  of  old,  and  that  had  gone 
a  great  way  therein,  to  see  if  they  could  find  some- 
thing of  the  Glory  there,  that  so  many  had  so  much 
talked  of  from  time  to  time  ;  and  how  they  came 
back  again,  and  befooled  themselves  for  setting  a 
Foot  out  of  Doors  in  that  Path,  to  the  Satisfaction 
of  all  the  Country.  And  they  named  several  that 
did  so,  as  Obstinate  and  Plyable,  Mistrust,  and  Timo- 
rous, Turn-a-way,  and  old  Atheist,  with  several 
more  ;  who,  they  said,  had,  some  of  them,  gone  far 
to  see  if  they  could  find,  but  not  one  of  them  found 
so  much  Advantage  by  going,  as  amounted  to  the 
iveight  of  a  Fether. 

Greath.  Said  they  any  thing  more  to  discourage 
you  f 

Tht  Fourth.^  Valiant.  Yes,  they  told  me  of  one  Mr.  Fearing, 
who  was  a  Pilgrim,  and  how  he  found  this  way  so 
Solitary,  that  he  never  had  comfortable  Hour  there- 
in, also  that  Mr,  Despondency  had  like  to  been 
starved  therein  ;  Yea,  and  also,  which  I  had  almost 
forgot,  that  Christian  himself,  about  whom  there 
has  been  such  a  Noise,  after  all  his  Ventures  for  a 
Celestial   Crown,    was   certainly   drowned    in    the 

^  Corrected  to  '  The  Third,"  1687.  '  Corrected  to  '  The  Fifth,' 

'  Corrected  to  'The  Fourth,'  1687.       1687. 


€i)t  f  ilgnmg  ^rogitse;*  351 

black  River,  and  never  went  foot  further,  how  ever 
it  was  smuthered  up. 

Greath.  A?id  did  none  of  these  things  discourage 
you  f 

Valiant.  No.  They  seemed  but  as  so  many  No- 
things to  me. 

Greath.  How  came  that  about  f  ^ll^hit 

Valiant.  Why,  I  still  believed  what  Mr.  Tell-true  'St^' 
had  said,  and  that  carried  me  beyond  them  all. 

Greath.  Then  this  was  your  Victory.,  even  your 
Faith. 

Valiant.  It  was  so,  I  believed  and  therefore  came 
out,  got  into  the  Way,  fought  all  that  set  themselves 
against  me,  and  by  believing  am  come  to  this 
Place. 

V^ho  would  true  Valour  see, 
Let  him  come  hither  ; 
One  here  will  constatit  de, 
Come  Witid,  come  Weather. 
There's  no  Discouragement, 
Shall  make  him  once  Relent, 
His  first  avow'd  Intent, 
To  be  a  Pilgrim. 

Who  so  beset  him  round., 
With  dismal  Storys, 
Do  hit  themselves  confomid ; 
His  Strength  the  more  is. 
No  Lyon  can  him  fright, 
Hel  with  a  Gyant  Fight, 
But  he  will  have  a  right. 
To  be  a  Pilo-rim. 


'O' 


Hobgoblin,  nor  foul  Fiend, 
Can  daunt  his  Spirit : 
He  knoias,  he  at  the  end, 
Shall  Life  Inherit, 


352  ^i)t  ^wonti  ^aart  of 

Then  Fancies  fly  away^ 
He  I  fear  not  ichat  men  say, 
He  I  labor  Night  and  Bay, 
To  be  a  Pilgrim. 

LrTieliT  By  this  time  tliey  were  got  to  the  enchanted  Ground, 
where  the  Air  naturally  tended  to  make  one  Droivzy. 
And  that  place  was  all  grown  over  with  Bryers  and 
Thorns ;  excepting  here  and  there,  where  was  an  in- 
chanted  Arbor,  upon  which,  if  a  Man  sits,  or  in  which 
if  a  man  sleeps/tis  a  question,  say  some,  whether  ever 
they  shall  rise  or  wake  again  in  this  World.  Over 
this  Forrest  therefore  they  went,  both  one  with  an 
other,  and  Mr.  Great-heart  went  before,  for  that  he 
was  the  Guide,  and  Mr.  Valiant-for-triith,  he  came 
behind,  being  there  a  Guard,  for  fear  lest  paradven- 
ture  some  Fiend,  or  Dragon,  or  Gyant,  or  Thief, 
should  fall  upon  their  Rere,  and  so  do  Mischief. 
They  went  on  here  each  man  with  his  SMord  drawn 
in  his  Hand  ;  for  they  knew  it  was  a  dangerous 
place.  Also  they  cheared  up  one  another  as  well 
as  they  could.  Feeble-mind,  Mr.  Great-heart  com- 
manded should  come  up  after  him,  and  Mr.  Dis- 
po7idency  was  under  the  Eye  of  Mr.  Valiant. 

Now  they  had  not  gone  far,  but  a  great  Mist  and 
a  Darkness  fell  upon  them  all ;  so  that  the}^  could 
scarse,  for  a  great  while,  see  the  one  the  other. 
AVherefore  they  were  forced  for  some  time,  to  feel 
for  one  another,  by  Words ;  for  they  walked  not  by 
Sight. 

But  any  one  must  think,  that  here  was  but  sorry 
going  for  the  best  of  them  all,  but  how  much  worse 
for  the  Women  and  Children,  who  both  of  Feet 
and  Heart  were  but  tender.  Yet  so  it  was,  that, 
thorow  the  incourasino-  Words  of  he  that  led  in  the 
Front,  and  of  him  that  brought  them  up  behind, 
they  made  a  pretty  good  shift  to  wagg  along. 

The  Wav  also  was  here  very  wcarv-som  thorow 


mjt  ^atlcyn'me;  pro^resis!.  353 

Dirt  and  Slabbiness.  Nor  was  there  on  a/l  this 
Ground,  so  much  as  one  Inn  or  Victualling-House, 
therein  to  refresh  the  feebler  sort.  Here  therefore 
was  grunting,  and  puffing,  and  sighing  :  While  one 
tumbleth  over  a  Bush,  another  sticks  fast  in  the 
Dirt,  and  the  Children,  some  of  them,  lost  their 
Shoos  in  the  Mire.  While  one  crys  out,  I  am 
down,  and  another,  Ho,  Where  are  you  ?  and  a 
third,  the  Bushes  have  got  such  fast  hold  on  me,  I 
think  I  cannot  get  away  from  them. 

Then  they  came  at  an  Arbor,  warm,  and  promis- 
ing much  Refreshing  to  the  Pilgrims;  for  it  was^^^'Arbwon 
finely  wrought  above-head,  beautified  with  G^^eens,  m  Grou7id. 
furnished  with  Benches  and  Settles.  It  also  had  in 
it  a  soft  Couch  whereon  the  weary  might  lean. 
This,  you  must  think,  all  things  considered,  was 
tempting  ;  for  the  Pilgrims  already  began  to  be 
foyled  with  the  badness  of  the  way ;  but  there  was 
not  one  of  them  that  made  so  much  as  a  motion  to 
stop  there.  Yea,  for  ought  I  could  perceive,  they 
continually  gave  so  good  heed  to  the  Advice  of 
their  Guide,  and  he  did  so  faithfuUv  tell  them  of 
Dangers,  and  of  the  Nature  of  Dangers  when  they 
were  at  them,  that  usually  when  they  were  nearest 
to  them,  they  did  most  pluck  up  their  Spirits,  and 
hearten  one  another  to  deny  the  Flesh.     This  ^;-(^orP'«^'<j™«<'/ 

•J  .  the  Arbor. 

was  called  The  sloathfids  Friend,  on  purpose  to 
allure,  if  it  might  be,  some  of  the  Pilgrims  there,  to 
take  up  their  Rest,  when  weary. 

I  saw  then  in  my  Dream,  that  they  went  on  in 
this  their  solitarii  Ground,  till  they  came  to  a  place  T^e'^'^y 
at  which  a  man  is  apt  to  lose  his  Way.     J\02u,  tho/'"'- 
when  it  was  light,  their  Guide  could  well  enough 
tell  how  to  miss  those  ways  that  led  wrong,  yet  in 
the  dark  he  was  put  to  a  stand  :  But  he  had  in  his  ^^/]£^fp 
Pocket  a  Map  of  all  ways  leading  to,  or  from  the  f4d",™/or 
Celestial  City  ;  wherefore  he  strook  a  Light  (for  he-^:^;;^"'« 
never  goes  also  without  his  Tinder-box)  and  takes 


354  Cf)e  J>eronti  ^iart  of 

a  view   of  his  Book  or  Map ;  which  bids  him  be 
careful  in  that  phice  to  turn  to  the  right-hand-way. 
And  had  he  not  here  been  careful  to  look  in  his 
Map,  they  had  all,  in  probability,  been  smuthered 
in  the  Mud,  for  just  a  little  before  them,  and  that 
at  the  end  of  the  cleanest  Way  too,  was  a  Pit,  none 
knows  how  deep,  full  of  nothing  but  Mud,  there 
made  on  purpose  to  destroy  the  Pilgrims  in. 
God's  Boo}:.       Then  thought  I  with  my  self,  who,  that  goeth  on 
Pilgrimage,   but   would    have  one   of  these   Maps 
about  him,  that  he  may  look  when  he  is  at  a  stand, 
which  is  the  way  he  must  take. 
in/two''        They  went  on  then  in  this  inchanted  Ground,  till 
<Xrfn.       ^^^y   came   to    where    was   an    other   Arbor,   and 
it  was    built  by  the  High-way-side.     And  in  that 
Arbor  there  lay  two  men  whose  Names  were  Heed- 
less and  Too-bold.     These  two  went  thus  far  on  Pil- 
grimage ;  but  here  being  wearied  with  their  Jour- 
ny,  they  sat  down  to  rest  themselves,  and  so  fell 
fast  asleep.     When  the   Pilgrims  saw  them,  they 
stood  still  and  shook  their  Heads ;  for  they  knew 
that  the   Sleepers   were  in  a  pitiful  Case.     Then 
they  consulted  what  to  do,  whether  to  go  on  and 
leave  them  in  their  Sleep,  or  to  step  to  them  and 
try  to  awake  them.     So  they  concluded  to  go  to 
them  and  wake  them ;  that  is,  if  they  could  ;  but 
with  this  Caution,  namely,  to  take  heed  that  them- 
selves did   not  sit  down  nor   imbrace  the  offered 
Benefit  of  that  Arbor. 
t^to^au'      ^^  ^^^y  went  in  and  spake  to  the  men,  and  called 
'''«'»•         each  by  his  Name,   (for  the  Guide,  it  seems,  did 
know  them)  but  there  was  no  Voice  nor  Answer. 
Then  the  Guide  did  shake  them,  and  do  what  he 
could  to  disturb  them.     Then  said  one  of  them,  / 
icill  pmj  you  ivlum  I  take  my  Mony ;  At  which  the 
Guide  shook  his  Head.     /  will  fight  so  long  as  I  can 
hold  my  Sivord  in  my  Hand,  said  the  other.      At 
that,  one  of  the  Children  laughed. 


€f)t  pilgnmsi  |3rogress;*  355 

Then  said  Christiana,  what  is  the  meaning  of^';^«;;;^":^ 
this  ?  The  Guide  said,  They  talk  in  their  Sleep.  If/'*"'"««- 
you  strike  them,  beat  them,  or  what  ever  else  you 
do  to  them,  they  will  answer  you  after  this  fashion  ; 
or  as  one  of  them  said  in  old  time,  when  the  Waves  S!^''' ^^^*' 
of  the  Sea  did  beat  upon  him,  and  he  slept  as  one 
upon  the  Mast  of  a  Ship,  When  I  awake  1  will  seek 
it  again.  You  know  when  men  talk  in  their  Sleeps, 
they  say  any  thing  ;  but  their  Words  are  not  go- 
verned, either  by  Faith  or  Reason.  There  is  an 
Tncoherencie  in  their  Words  now^  as  there  was 
before  betwixt  their  going  on  Pilgrimage,  and  sit- 
ting down  here.  This  then  is  the  Mischief  on't, 
when  heedless  ones  go  on  Pilgrimage,  'tis  twenty  to 
one,  but  they  are  served  thus.  For  this  inchanted 
Ground  is  one  of  the  last  Refuges  that  the  Enemy 
to  Pilgrims  has;  wherefore  it  is  as  you  see,  placed 
almost  at  the  end  of  the  Way,  and  so  it  standeth 
against  us  with  the  more  Advantage.  For  when, 
thinks  the  Enemy,  will  these  Fools  be  so  desirous 
to  sit  down,  as  when  they  are  weary  ;  and  when  so 
like  to  be  weary,  as  when  almost  at  their  Journys 
end?  Therefore  it  is,  I  say,  that  the  inchanted 
Ground  is  placed  so  nigh  to  the  Land  Beidah,  and 
so  neer  the  end  of  their  Race.  Wherefore  let  Pil- 
grims look  to  themselves,  lest  it  happen  to  them  as 
it  has  done  to  these,  that,  as  you  see,  are  fallen 
asleep,  and  none  can  wake  them. 

Then  the  Pilgrims  desired  with  trembling  to  go 
forward,  only  they  prayed  their  Guide  to  strike  a 
Light,  that  they  might  go  the  rest  of  their  way  by  Theughtof 
the  help  of  the  light  of  a  Lanthorn.  So  he  strook  2'pet.''L  19. 
a  light,  and  they  went  by  the  help  of  that  thorow 
the  rest  of  this  way,  tho  the  Darkness  was  very 
great. 

But  the  Children  began  to  be  sorely  weary,  and  rAccwwmi 
they  cryed  out  unto  him  that  loveth   Pilgrims,  to  wariness. 
make   their    way   more  Comfortable.     So  by  that 


356  €l)t  ^ttonXi  ^art  of 

they  had  gone  a  little  further,  a  Wind  arose  that 
drove  away  the  Fog,  so  the  Air  became  more  clear. 
Yet  they  were  not  off  (by  much)  of  the  iuchanted 
Ground  ;  only  now  they  could  see  one  another  bet- 
ter, and  the  way  wherein  they  should  walk. 

Now  when  they  were  almost  at  the  end  of  this 
Ground,  they  perceived  that  a  little  before  them, 
was  a  solemn  Noise,  as  of  one  that  was  much  con- 
cerned.    So  they  went  on  and  looked  before  them, 
and  behold,  they  saw,  as  they  thought,  a  Man  upon 
LpoS''"'  ^"*  Knees,  with  Hands  and  E^^es  lift  up,  and  speak- 
h^^ed^  ing,   as  they  thought,   earnestly  to   one   that   was 
Ground.'     abovc.     They  drew  nigh,  but  could  not  tell  what 
he  said ;    so  they   went  softly  till  he    had    done. 
When  he  had  done,  he  got  up  and  began  to  run 
towards  the  Celestial  City.     Then  Mr.  Great-heart 
called  after  him,  saying,  Soho,  Friend,  let  us  have 
your  Company  if  you  go,  as  I  suppose  you   do,  to 
the  Celestial  City.     So  the  man  stopped,  and  they 
came  up  to  him.     But  so  soon  as  Mr.  Honest  saw 
him,  he  said,  I  know   this   man.     Then  said  Mr. 
Tiiestoryof  VaUant-for-trutJi,  Prethee,  who  is  it?     'Tis  one,  said 
he,  that  comes  from  where-abouts  I  dwelt,  his  Name 
is  Stand-fast ,  he  is  certainly  a  right  good  Pilgrim. 

So  they  came  up  one  to  another  and  presently 
Stand-fast  said  to  old  Honest,  Ho,  Father  Honest,  are 
you  there?  Ai,  said  he,  that  I  am,  as  sure  as  you 
are  there.  Right  glad  am  I,  said  Mr.  Standfast, 
that  I  have  found  you  on  this  Road.  And  as  glad 
am  I,  said  the  other,  that  I  espied  you  upon  your 
Talk  betwixt  Kuccs.  Theu  Mr.  Stand-fast  blushed,  and  said. 
Honest. '^^'^'  But  why,  did  you  see  me  ?  Yes,  that  I  did,  quoth 
the  other,  and  with  my  Heart  was  glad  at  the 
Sight.  Why,  what  did  you  think,  said  Stand-fastf 
Think,  said  old  Honest,  what  should  I  think?  I 
thouglit  we  had  an  honest  Man  upon  the  Road,  and 
therefore  should  have  his  Company  by  and  by.     If 

»  Added  in  1 G87. 


Cf)e  pilgnms!  progitsis!*  357 

you  thought  not  amiss,  how  happy  am  I  ?  But  if  I 
be  not  as  I  should,  I  alone  must  bear  it.  That  is 
true,  said  the  other  ;  But  your  fear  doth  further 
confirm  me  that  things  are  right  betwixt  the  Prince 
of  Pilgrims  and  your  Soul.  For  he  saith,  Blessed 
is  the  Man  that  fear eth  always. 

Valiant.  Well,  But  Brother,  I  pray  thee  tell  us ^^^^^^^/"'""^ 
what  was  it  that  was  the  cause  of  thy  being  upon  ^'•«2'«''- 
thy  Knees,  even  now  ?     Was  it  for  that  some  spe- 
cial Mercy  laid  Obligations  upon  thee,  or  how  ? 

Stand.  Why  we  are  as  you  see,  upon  the  in- 
chanted  Ground,  and  as  I  was  coming  along,  I  was  l[at%fcheT 
musing  with  my  self  of  what  a  dangerous  Road,  the  f-^KnZ. 
Road  in  this  place  was,  and  how  many  that  had 
come  even  thus  far  on  Pilgrimage,  had  here  been 
stopt,  and  been  destroyed.  I  thought  also  of  the 
manner  of  the  Death,  with  which  this  place  de- 
stroyeth  Men.  Those  that  die  here,  die  of  no  vio- 
lent Distemper;  the  Death  which  such  die,  is  not 
grievous  to  them.  For  he  that  goeth  away  in  a 
Sleep,  begins  that  Journey  with  Desire  and  Plea- 
sure. Yea  such  acquiesce  in  the  Will  of  that  Dis- 
ease. 

Hon.  The7i  Mr.  Honest  Interrupting  of  him  said, 
did  you  see  the  two  Men  asleep  in  the  Arbor  f 

Stand.  Ai,  Ai,  I  saw  Heedless,  and  Too-bold  there; 
and  for  ought  I  know,  there  they  will  ly  till  they  P'''^^*' ^ 
Rot.  But  let  me  go  on  in  my  Tale?  As  I  was 
thus  Musing,  as  I  said,  there  was  one  in  very  plea- 
sant Attire,  but  old,  that  presented  herself  unto  me, 
and  offered  me  three  things,  to  wit,  her  Body,  her 
Purse,  and  her  Bed.  Now  the  Truth  is,  I  was  both 
aweary  and  sleepy,  I  am  also  as  i)oor  as  a  Howlet, 
and  that,  perhaps,  the  Witch  knew.  Well,  I  re- 
pulsed her  once  and  twice,  but  she  put  by  my 
Repulses,  and  smiled.  Then  I  began  to  be  angry, 
but  she  mattered  that  nothing  at  all.  Then  she 
made  Offers  again,  and  said.  If  I  would  be  ruled  by 

B    B 


358  Cf)e  J^etonti  imt  of 

her,  she  would  make  me  great  and  happy.  For, 
said  she,  I  am  the  Mistress  of  the  World,  and  men 
are  made  happy  by  me.     Then  I  asked  her  Name, 

B?bie™or  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^'  ^'^'^  Madam  Bubble.  This  set 
th^vam  me  further  from  her;  but  she  still  followed  me 
With  Inticements.  Ihen  1  betook  me,  as  you  see, 
to  my  Knees,  and  with  Hands  lift  up,  ancl  crys,  I 
pray'd  to  him  that  had  said,  he  would  help.  So 
just  as  you  came  up,  the  Gentlewoman  went  her 
way.  Then  I  continued  to  give  thanks  for  this  m^'^ 
great  Deliverance ;  for  I  verily  believe  she  intended 
no  good,  but  rather  sought  to  make  stop  of  me  in 
my  Journey. 

Hon.  Without  doubt  her  Designs  were  bad.  But 
stai/,  now  you  talk  of  her,  mcthinks  I  either  have  seen 
her,  or  have  read  some  story  of  her. 

Standf   Perhaps  you  have  done  both. 

Hon.  Madam  Buble !  Is  she  not  a  tall  comely 
Dame,  sometJmig  of  a  sivarthy  Complecvion  ? 

Standf.  Right,  you  hit  it,  she  is  just  such  an  one. 

Hon.  Doth  she  not  speak  very  smoothly,  and  (jive 
you  a  Smile  at  the  end  of  a  Sentence  ? 

Standf.  You  fall  right  upon  it  again,  for  these  are 
her  very  Actions. 

Hon.  Both  she  not  wear  a  great  Purse  by  her  Side, 
aiid  is  not  her  Hand  often  in  it,  fingering  her  Mony, 
as  if  that  was  her  Hearts  delight  f 

Standf  'Tis  just  so.  Had  she  stood  by  all  this 
while,  you  could  not  more  amply  have  set  her  forth 
before  me,  nor  have  better  described  her  Features. 

Hon.  Then  he  that  drew  her  Picture  was  a  good 
Limner,  and  he  that  wrote  of  lier,  said  true. 
The  World.  Grcath.  This  Woman  is  a  Witch,  and  it  is  by 
Virtue  o^  \\ev Sorceries  that  this  Ground  is  enchanted ; 
whoever  doth  lay  their  Head  down  in  her  Lap,  had 
as  good  lay  it  down  upon  tliat  Block  over  which 
the  Ax  doth  hang ;  and  whoever  lay  their  Eyes 
iToht2*i5  "Po^'^  ^^cr  Beauty,  are  counted  the  Enemies  of  God. 


Cfte  pilgrims!  progitsis;  359 

This  is  she  that  maintaineth  in  their  Splendor,  all 
those  that  are  the  Enemies  of  Pilgrims.  Yea,  This 
is  she  that  has  bought  off  many  a  man  from  a  Pil- 
grims Life.  She  is  a  great  Gossiper,  she  is  always, 
both  she  and  her  Daughters,  at  one  Pilgrim's  Heels 
or  other,  now  Commending,  and  then  preferring 
the  excellencies  of  this  Life,  She  is  a  bold  and  im- 
pudent Slut ;  She  will  talk  with  any  Man.  She 
always  laugheth  poor  Pilgrims  to  scorn,  but  highly 
commends  the  Rich.  If  there  be  one  cunning  to 
get  Mony  in  a  Place,  she  will  speak  well  of  him, 
from  House  to  House.  She  loveth  Banqueting,  and 
Feasting,  mainly  well;  she  is  always  at  one  full 
Table  or  another.  She  has  given  it  out  in  some 
places,  that  she  is  a  Goddess,  and  therefore  some  do 
Worship  her.  She  has  her  times  and  open  places 
of  Cheating,  and  she  will  say  and  avow  it,  that 
none  can  shew  a  Good  comparable  to  hers.  She 
promiseth  to  dwell  with  Childrens  Children,  if  they 
will  but  love  and  make  much  of  her.  She  will  cast 
out  of  her  Purse,  Gold  like  Dust,  in  some  places, 
and  to  some  Persons.  She  loves  to  be  sought  after, 
spoken  well  of,  and  to  ly  in  the  Bosoms  of  Men. 
She  is  never  weary  of  commending  her  Commodi- 
ties, and  she  loves  them  most  that  think  best  of 
her.  She  will  promise  to  some  Crowns,  and  King- 
doms, if  they  will  but  take  her  Advice,  yet  many 
has  she  brought  to  the  Halter,  and  ten  thousand 
times  more  to  Hell. 

Standf.  O  !  said  Stand- fast,  What  a  Mercy  is  it 
that  I  did  resist  her :  for  whither  might  she  a  drawn 
me  ? 

Greath.  Whither  !     Nay,  none  but  God   knows 
whither.     But  in  general  to  be  sure,  she  would  a 
drawn    thee    into    many  foolish    and  hurtful  Lusts,'^'^'™'-^^- 
which  droivn  men  in  Destruction  and  Perdition. 

'Twas  she  that  set  Absalom  against  his  Father, 
and  Jeroboam  against  his  Master.     'Twas  she  that 

B   B   2 


360  €i)t  ^econti  ^3art  of 

persuaded  Judas  to  sell  his  Lord,  and  that  prevailed 
with  Demas  to  forsake  the  Godly  Pilgrims  Life  ; 
none  can  tell  of  the  Mischief  that  she  doth.  She 
makes  Variance  betwixt  Rulers  and  Subjects,  be- 
twixt Parents  and  Children,  'twixt  Neighbor  and 
Neighbor,  'twixt  a  Man  and  his  Wife,  'twixt  a  Man 
and  himself,  'twixt  the  Flesh  and  the  Heart. 

Wherefore  good  Master  Stand-fad,  be  as  your 
Name  is,  and  when  you  have  done  all  stand. 

At  this  Discourse  there  was  among  the  Pilgrims 
a  mixture  of  Joy  and  Trembling,  but  at  length 
they  brake  out  and  Sang. 

What  Danger  is  the  Pikp-im  in  f 

How  many  are  his  Foes  f 

How  many  ways  there  are  to  Sin, 

No  living  Mortal  hnoivs. 

Some  of  the  Ditch  shy  are,  yet  can 

Lie  tumbling  on  the  My  re. 

Some  tho  they  shun  the  Frying-pan, 

Do  leap  into  the  Fire. 

\'^"27r^'  After  this  I  beheld,  until  they  were  come  unto 
[183.]  the  Land  of  Beulah,  where  the  Sun  shineth  Night 
and  Day.  Here,  because  they  was  weary,  they  be- 
took themselves  a  while  to  Rest.  And  because 
this  Country  was  common  for  Pilgrims,  and  be- 
cause the  Orchards  and  Vinyards  that  were  here, 
belonged  to  the  King  of  the  Celestial  Country  ; 
therefore  they  were  licensed  to  make  bold  with  any 
of  his  things. 

But  a  little  while  soon  refreshed  them  here,  for 
the  Bells  did  so  ring,  and  the  Trumpets  continually 
sound  so  melodiousl}^  that  they  could  not  sleep, 
and  yet  they  received  as  much  refreshing,  as  if  they 
had  slept  their  Sleep  never  so  soundly.  Here  also 
all  the  noise  of  them  that  walked  the  Streets,  was. 
More  Pilgrims  are  come  to   Town.     And  an  other 


Cf)e  ^^I'lgnms;  ^rocritsfs?*  36i 

would  answer,  saying,  And  so  many  went  over  the 
AYater,  and  were  let  in  at  the  Golden  Gates  to  Day, 
They  would  cry  again,  There  is  now  a  Legion  of 
Shining  ones,  just  come  to  Town  ;  by  which  we 
know  that  there  are  more  Pilgrims  upon  the  Road, 
for  here  they  come  to  wait  for  them,  and  to  comfort 
them  after  all  their  Sorrow.  Then  the  Pilgrims 
got  up  and  walked  to  and  fro  :  But  how  were  their 
Ears  now  filled  with  heavenly  Noises,  and  their 
Eyes  delighted  with  Celestial  Visions  ?  In  this 
Land,  they  heard  nothing,  saiv  nothing,  felt  nothing, 
sjnelt  nothing,  tasted  nothing,  that  was  offensive  to 
their  Stomach  or  Mind  ;  only  when  they  tasted  of 
the  Water  of  the  River,  over  which  they  were  to 
go,  they  thought  that  tasted  a  little  Bitterish  to  the  j^yf^^j"f 
Palat,  but  it  proved  sweeter  when  'twas  down.  ifsweato 

T  1    •  1  1  -r»  Soul. 

In  this  place  there  was  a  Record  kept  of  the 
Names  of  them  that  had  been  Pilgrims  of  old,  and 
a  History  of  all  the  famous  Acts  that  they  had  done. 
It  was  here  also  much  discoursed  how  the  River  to  ^f?''' ^'"*  *'/ 

bOoinffS  and 

some  had  had  its  Jiowings,  and  what  ebbings  it  has  ^^^''^/^f '*'' 
had  while  others  have  gone  over.     It  has  been  in  a 
manner  dry  for  some,  while  it  has  overflowed  its 
Banks  for  others. 

In  this  place,  the  Children  of  the  Town  would  go 
into  the  Kings  Gardens  and  gather  Nose-gaies  for 
the  Pilgrims,  and  bring  them  to  them  with  much 
Affection.  Here  also  grew  Camphire  with  Spick- 
nard,  and  Saffron,  Calamus,  and  Cinamon,  with  all 
its  Trees  of  Frankincense,  Myrrhe,  and  Aloes,  with 
all  chief  Spices.  With  these  the  Pilgrims  Cham- 
bers were  perfumed,  while  they  stayed  here ;  and 
with  these  were  their  Bodys  anointed  to  prepare 
them  to  go  over  the  River  when  the  time  appointed 
was  come. 

Now,  while  they  lay  here,  and  waited  for  the  ^  ^vew^jrer 
good  Hour;  there  was  a  Noyse  in  the  Town,  thatJochr^istian!.. 
there  was  a  Post  come  from  the  Celestial  City,  with 


362  Cfte  ^nonti  lart  of 

Matter  of"  great  Importance,  to  one  Christiana,  the 
^Vife  of  Christian  the  Pilgrim.  So  Enquiry  was 
made  for  her,  and  the  House  was  found  out  where 
she  was,  so  the  Post  presented  her  with  a  Letter ; 
His  Message.  The  Coutents  whereof  was,  Hail,  Good  Woman,  I 
bring  thee  Tidings  that  the  Master  calleth  for  thee,  and 
ea'pectcth  that  thou  shouldest  stand  in  his  Presence,  in 
Cloaths  of  Immortality,  ivithin  this  ten  Days. 

When  he  had  read  this  Letter  to  her,  he  gave 
her  therewith  a  sure  Token  that  he  was  a  true  Mes- 
senger, and  was  come  to  bid  her  make  hast  to  be 
How  welcome  ^QXie.     The  Tokcn  was,  An  Arrow  ivith  a  Point 
them  that     sharpened  ivith  Love,  let  easily  into  her  Heart,  ichich 

have  nothing  f  7  ,  />•  77  •   1      i  ii     1  7 

todobiuto  l)ij  degrees  ivromjlit  so  effectually  iintk  her,  that  at  the 
time  appoiiited  she  must  be  gone. 

When  Christiana  saw  that  her  time  was  come, 
and  that  she  was  the  first  of  this  Company  that  was 
to    go   over :  She   called  for  Mr.    Great-heart  her 

//«•  Speech  <o  Guide,  and  told  him  how  Matters  were.  So  he 
told  her  he  was  heartily  glad  of  the  News,  and 
could  a  been  glad  had  the  Post  came  for  him.  Then 
she  bid  that  he  should  give  Advice  how  all  things 
should  be  prepared  for  her  Journey, 

So  he  told  her,  saying,  Thus  and  thus  it  must  be, 
and  we  that  Survive  will  accompany  you  to  the 
River-side. 

Then  she  called  for  her  Children,  and  gave  them 

ToherciM-  ^'^^'^'  Blc-'^sing ,'  and  told  them  that  she  yet  read  with 

dren.  Comfort  the  Mark  that  was  set  in  their  Foreheads, 
and  was  glad  to  see  them  with  her  there,  and  that 
they  had  kept  their  Garments  so  white.  Lastly, 
She  bequeathed  to  the  Poor  that  little  she  had,  and 
commanded  her  Sons  and  her  Daughters  to  be 
ready  against  the  Messenger  should  come  for  them. 
When  she  had  spoken  these  Words  to  her  Guide 

To  Mr.  and  to  her  Children,  she  called  for  Mr.  Valiant-for- 
truth,  and  said  unto  him,  Sir,  You  have  in  all  places 
shewed   your  self   true-hearted,   be    Faithful    unto 


mn  ^Pilgrims  pioffresisi*  363 

Death,  and  my  King  will  give  you  a  Crown  of 
Life.  I  would  also  intreat  you  to  have  an  Eye  to 
my  Children,  and  if  at  any  time  you  see  them 
faint,  speak  comfortably  to  them.  For  my  Daugh- 
ters, my  Sons  Wives,  they  have  been  Faithful,  and 
a  fulfilling  of  tlie  Promise  upon  them,  will  be  their 
end.     But  she  gave  Mr.  Stand-fast  a  Ring.  stLnd-'fast. 

Then  she  called  for  old  Mr.  Honest,  and  said  of 
him.  Behold  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  ^l°'f^^_ 
Guile.  Then  said  he,  I  wish  you  a  fair  Day  when 
you  set  out  for  Mount  Sion,  and  shall  be  glad  to 
see  that  you  go  over  the  River  dry-shod.  But  she 
answered.  Come  Wet,  come  Dn/,  I  long  to  be  gone  ; 
for  however  tlie  Weather  is  in  my  Journey,  I  shall 
have  time  enough  when  I  come  there  to  sit  down 
and  rest  me,  and  dry  me. 

Then  came  in  that  good  Man  Mr:  Ready -to-lialt  Rea^V 
to  see  her.     So  she  said  to  him,  TJiy  Travel  hither ''''" 
has  been  with  Difficulty,  but  that  will  make  thy 
Rest  the  sweeter.     But  watch,  and  be  ready,  for  at 
an  Hour  when  you  think  not,  the  Messenger  may 
come. 

After  him,  came  in  Mr.  Despondencie,  and  his  J^„^i'^p°^j 
Daughter  Much-a-fraid.  To  whom  she  said,  You ''"^'""''"''■• 
ought  with  Thankfulness  for  ever,  to  remember 
your  Deliverance  from  the  Hands  of  Gyant  Dispaw, 
and  out  of  Doubting -Castle.  The  effect  of  that 
Mercy  is,  that  you  are  brought  with  Safety  hither. 
Be  ye  watchful,  and  cast  away  Fear ;  be  sober,  and 
hope  to  the  End. 

Then  she  said  to  Mr.  Feeble-Mind,  Thou  was  de-  .^•^j'^'^'^'^- 
livered  from  the  Mouth  of  Gyant  Slaij-good,  that 
thou  mightest  live  in  the  Light  of  the  Living  for 
ever,  and  see  thy  King  with  Comfort.  Only  I 
advise  thee  to  repent  thee  of  thy  aptness  to  fear  and 
doubt  of  his  Goodness  before  he  sends  for  thee,  lest 
thou  shouldest  when  he  comes,  be  forced  to  stand 
before  him  for  that  Fault  with  Bkishlng. 


mind. 


364  Cf)e  ^ewnb  ^Sart  of 

HeriaHDay,      Nqw  the  Dav  di'ew  OD  that  Christiana  must  be 

ana  manner  n  i         t-« 

ofDe^anure.  gone.  So  thc  Road  was  full  of  People  to  see  her 
take  her  Journey.  But  behold  all  the  Banks  be- 
yond the  River  were  full  of  Horses  and  Chariots, 
which  were  come  down  from  above  to  accompany 
her  to  the  City-Gate.  So  she  came  forth  and  en- 
tered the  River,  with  a  Beck'n  of  Fare  well,  to  those 
that  followed  her  to  the  River  side.  The  last  word 
she  was  heard  to  say  here,  was,  /  come  Lord,  to  be 
ivith  thee  and  bless  thee. 

So  her  Children  and  Friends  returned  to  their 
Place,  for  that  those  that  waited  for  Christiana,  had 
carried  her  out  of  their  Sight.  So  she  went,  and 
called,  and  entered  in  at  the  Gate  with  all  the 
Ceremonies  of  Joy  that  her  Husband  Christian  had 
done  before  her. 

At  her  Departure  her  Children  wept,  but  Mr. 
Great-heart,  and  Mr.  Valiant,  played  upon  the  well 
tuned  Cymbal  and  Harp  for  Joy.  So  all  departed 
to  their  respective  Places. 

In  process  of  time  there  came  a  Post  to  the  Town 
again,  and  his  Business  was  with  Mr.  Ready-to- 
halt.  So  he  enquired  him  out,  and  said  to  him,  I 
am  come  to  thee  in  the  Name  of  him  whom  thou 
hausu!,?-  ^^^^^  Loved  and  Followed,  tho  upon  Crutches,  And 
■tnoned.  jjjy  Mcssagc  is  to  tell  thee,  that  he  expects  thee  at 
his  Table  to  Sup  with  him  in  his  Kingdom  the  next 
Day  after  Easter.  Wherefore  prepare  thy  self  for 
this  Journey. 

Then   he  also  gave  him  a  Token  that  he  was  a 
EccieB.12.6.  true  Messenger,   saying,  /  have  broken  thy  golden 
Bowl,  and  loosed  thy  silver  Cord. 

After  this,  Mr.  Ready-to-halt  called  for  his  Fellow 
Pilgrims,  and  told  them,  saying,  I  am  sent  for,  and 
God  shall  surel}'  visit  you  also.  So  he  desired  Mr. 
Valiant  to  make  his  Will.  And  because  he  had 
nothing  to  bequeath   to  them   tlnit   should  Survive 


m)t  iiilgrimg  larogresfsf*  365 

him,  but  his  Crutches,  and  his  good  Wishes,  there- 
fore thus  he  said.  These  Crutches,  I  bequeath  to  my  Promues. 
So)i  that  shall  tread  in  my  Steps,  ivith  an  hundred 
ivarm  Wishes  that  he  may  prove  better  than  I  have  done. 
Then  he  thanked  Mr.  Great-heart  for  his  Con- 
duct, and  Kindness,  and  so  addressed  himself  to  his 
Journey.  When  he  came  at  the  brink  of  the  River, 
he  said,  Now  I  shall  have  no  more  need  of  these 
Crutches,  since  yonder  are  Chariots  and  Horses  for 
me  to  ride  on.  The  last  Words  he  was  heard  to  auiast 
say,  was,  Welcome  Life.     So  he  went  his  Way. 

After  this,  Mr.  Feeble-mind  had  Tidings  brought  Feewemind 
him,  that  the  Post  sounded  his  Horn  at  his  Cham- 
ber Door.  Then  he  came  in  and  told  him,  saying, 
I  am  come  to  tell  thee  that  thy  Master  has  need  of 
thee,  and  that  in  very  little  time  thou  must  behold 
his  Face  in  Brightness.  And  take  this  as  a  Token 
of  the  Truth  of  my  Message.  Those  that  look  out  at  Ewies  12.3. 
the  Windows  shall  ^  be  darkened. 

Then  Mr.  Feeble-mind  called  for  his  Friends,  and 
told  them  what  Errand  had  been  brought  unto  him, 
and  what  Token  he  had  received  of  the  truth  of  the 
Message.  Then  he  said,  Since  I  have  nothing  to  ^e  mate 
bequeath  to  any,  to  what  purpose  should  I  make  a 
Will  ?  As  for  my  feeble  Mind,  that  I  will  leave 
behind  me,  for  that  I  have  no  need  of  that  in  the 
place  whither  I  go  ;  nor  is  it  worth  bestowing  upon 
the  poorest  Pilgrim  :  Wherefore  when  I  am  gon,  I 
desire,  that  you,  Mr.  Valiant,  would  bury  it  in  a 
Dunghil.  This  done,  and  the  Day  being  come,  in 
which  he  was  to  depart ;  he  entered  the  River  as 
the  rest.  His  last  Words  were,  Hold  out  Faith  and  ^l'J.'^^[ 
Patience.     So  he  went  over  to  the  other  Side. 

When   Days,   had  many  of  them   passed  away  :  f^'^- pispon- 
Mr.  Dispondencie  was  sent  for.      For  a  Post  was  smmw*. 
come  and  brought  this  Message  to  him.     Trembling 

'  '  shall  be,"  continued  in  all  editions. 


366  €\)t  ^erontr  \Uvt  of 

Man,  These  are  to  summon  thee  to  be  ready  imili  thy 
King,  by  the  neM  Lords  Day,  to  shout  for  Joy  for  thy 
Deliverance  from  all  thy  Doiibtings. 

And  said   the  Messenger,  That  my  Message  is 
true,  take  this  for  a  Proof.     So   he  gave  him  The 

Eccie8.i2.5.  Grasshopper  to  be  a  Burthen  unto  him.     Now  Mr. 

ur  goes  too.  Disjwndencie^s  Daughter,  whose  Name  was  Much-a- 
fraid, said,  when  she  heard  what  was  done,  that  slie 
would  go  with  her  Father.  Then  Mr.  Dispondencie 
said  to  his  Friends ;  Myself,  and  my  Daughter, 
you  know  what  we  have  been,  and  how  trouble- 
somely  we  have  behaved  our  selves  in  every  Com- 

ihs  wiu.  pany.  My  will  and  my  Daughters  is.  That  our 
Disponds,  and  slavish  Fears,  be  by  no  man  ever 
received,  from  the  day  of  our  Departure,  for  ever ; 
For  I  know  that  after  my  Death  they  will  offer 
themselves  to  others.  For,  to  be  plain  with  you, 
they  are  Ghosts,  the  which  we  entertained  when  we 
first  began  to  be  Pilgrims,  and  could  never  shake 
them  off  after.  And  they  w^ill  walk  about  and  seek 
Entertainment  of  the  Pilgrims,  but  for  our  Sakes, 
shut  ye  the  Doors  upon  them. 

When  the  time  was  come  for  them  to  depart,  they 
went  to  the  Brink  of  the  River.     The  last  Words  of 

"vorS!  Mr.  Dispondencie,  were,  Farewel  Night,  Welcome  Day. 
His  Daughter  went  thorow  the  River  singing,  but 
none  could  understand  what  she  said. 

Then  it  came  to  pass,  a  while  after,  that  there  was 
ii/r.  Honest  ^  Post  iu  thc  Town  that  enquired  for  Mr.  Honest. 

Summoned.  tt  i 

So  he  came  to  his  House  where  he  was,  and 
delivered  to  his  Hand  these  Lines.  Thou  art  Com- 
manded to  be  ready  against  this  Day  seven  Night,  to 
present  thy  self  before  thy  Lord,  at  his  Fathers  House. 
And  for  a  Token  that  my  Message  is  true,  All  "thy 
Eccics.12.4.  ])ai(ghtcrs  of  Musick  shall  be  brought  low.  Then  Mr. 
Honest  called  for  his  Friends,  and  said  unto  them,  I 

*  Coi-rectcd  to  '  All  the,'  soon  after  Bunyan's  decease. 


€f)t  iilgn'me;  ^rogresfsi*  367 

Die,  but  shall  make  no  AVill.     As  for  my  Honesty,  ^^  makes 
it  shall  go  with  me ;   let  him  that  comes  after  be  "" 
told  of  this.  When  the  Day  that  he  was  to  be  gone, 
was  come,  he    addressed   himself  to  go   over  the 
River.     Now  the  River  at  that  time  overflowed  the 
Banks  in  some  places.     But  Mr.  Honest  in  his  Life 
time  had  spoken  to  one  Good-conscience  to  meet  him  OMdcon- 
there,   the  which    he   also   did,   and   lent  him  his  ^('- Honest 
Hand,  and  so  helped  him  over.     The  last  Words  of  ^"«»-- 
Mr.  Honest  were,   Grace  Reigns.     So  he   left   the 
World. 

After  this,  it  was  noised  abroad  that  Mr.  Valiant-  Mr.  vaiiant 
for-truth  was  taken  with  a  Summons,  by  the  same 
Post  as  the  other  ;   and  had  this  for  a  Token  that  the 
Summons  was  true,  That  his  Pitcher  was  broken  «^  Eccies.12.6. 
the  Fountain.     When  he  understood   it,  he   called 
for  his  Friends,  and  told  them  of  it.     Then  said  he, 
I  am  going  to  my  Fathers,  and  tho  with  great  Diffi- 
culty I  am  got  hither,  yet  now  I  do  not  repent  me 
of  all  the  Trouble  I  have  been  at  to  arrive  where  I 
am.     My  Sword,  I  give  to  him  that  shall  succeed  ^w  jra. 
me  in  my  Pilgrimage,  and  my  Courage  and  Skill, 
to   him  that  can  get  it.     My  Marks  and  Scarrs  I 
carry  with  me,  to  be  a  Witness  for  me,  that  I  have 
fought  his  Battels,  who  now  will  be  my  Rewarder. 
When  the  Day  that  he  must  go  hence,  was  come, 
many   accompanied   him    to  the   River  side,   into 
which,  as  he  went,   he  said.    Death,  ichere  is  thy  "i'^''f 
Sting  f      And  as   he  went  down  deeper,  he  said, 
Grave,  where  is  thy  Victory  f    So  he  passed  over,  and 
all  the  Trumpets  sounded  for  him  on  the  other  side. 

Then    there   came   forth    a    Summons    for   Mr.  ^^'^- stand- 
Stand-fast,  (This   Mr.   Stand-fast,  was  he   that  the  ™<"'«^- 
rest  of  the  Pilgrims  found  upon  his  Knees  in  the 
inchanted  Ground.)  For  the  Post  brought  it  him 
open   in    his  Hands.     The  Contents  whereof  were, 


368  ClK  ^ttontj  \^M  of 

That  he  must  prepare  for  a  Change  of  Life,  for  his 
Master  luas  not  willing  that  he  should  he  so  far  from 
him  any  longer.  At  this  Mr.  Stand-fast  was  put 
into  a  Muse  ;  Nay,  said  the  Messenger,  you  need 
not  doubt  of  the  Truth  of  my  Message  ;  for  here  is 
Ecti.  12.  c.  a  Token  of  the  Truth  thereof,  Thy  Wheel  is  broken 
ihcaiisfor  at  the  Cistern.  Then  he  called  to  him  Mr.  Great- 
Heart"^'  heart,  who  was  their  Guide,  and  said  unto  him,  Sir, 
Altho  it  was  not  my  hap  to  be  much  in  your  good 
Company  in  the  Days  of  my  Pilgrimage,  yet  since 
the  time  I  knew  you,  you  have  been  profitable  to 
ii%fmf''''  ™6.  When  I  came  from  home,  I  left  behind  me  a 
Wife,  and  five  small  Children.  Let  me  entreat 
you,  at  your  Return,  (for  I  know  that  you  will  go, 
and  return  to  your  Masters  House,  in  Hopes  that 
you  may  yet  be  a  Conductor  to  more  of  the  Holy 
Pilgrims,)  that  you  send  to  my  Family,  and  let 
them  be  acquainted  with  all  that  hath,  and  shall 
happen  unto  me.  Tell  them  moreover,  of  my 
happy  Arrival  to  this  Place,  and  of  the  present  late 
H^tifpandt  blessed  Condition  that  I  am  in.  Tell  them  also  of 
Christian  and  Christiana  his  Wife,  and  how  She  and 
her  Children  came  after  her  Husband.  Tell  them 
also  of  what  a  happy  End  she  made,  and  whither 
she  is  gone.  I  have  little  or  nothing  to  send  to  my 
Family,  except  it  be  Praiers,  and  Tears  for  them  ;  of 
which  it  will  suffice,  if  thou  acquaint  them,  if  per- 
adventure  they  may  prevail.  When  J/r.  Stand-fast 
had  thus  set  things  in  order,  and  the  time  being 
come  for  him  to  hast  him  away  ;  he  also  went  down 
to  the  River.  Now  there  was  a  great  Calm  at  that 
time  in  the  River,  wherefore  Ilr.  Stand-fast,  when 
he  was  about  half  way  in,  he  stood  a  while  and 
talked  to  liis  Companions  that  had  waited  upon  him 
thither.     And  he  said, 

Huiast  This  River  has  been  a  Terror  to  many,  yea  the 

thoughts  of  it   also  have  often   IVighted    rne.      But 


CI)e  iailgnmd  f  rogitss*  369 

now  metiiinks  I  stand  easie,  my  Foot  is  fixed  upon  jos.  3. 17 
that,  upon  which  the  Feet  of  the  Priests  that  bare 
the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  stood  while  Israel  went 
over  this  Jordan.  The  Waters  indeed  are  to  the 
Palate  bitter,  and  to  the  Stomack  cold  ;  yet  the 
thoughts  of  what  I  am  going  to,  and  of  the  Con- 
duct that  waits  for  me  on  the  other  side,  doth  lie 
as  a  glowing  Coal  at  my  Heart. 

I  see  my  self  now  at  the  end  of  my  Journey,  my 
toilesom  Days  are  ended.  I  am  going  now  to  see 
that  Head  that  was  Crowned  with  Thorns,  and  that 
Face  that  was  spit  upon,  for  me. 

I  have  formerly  lived  by  Hear-say,  and  Faith, 
but  now  I  go  where  I  shall  live  by  sight,  and 
shall  be  with  him,  in  whose  Company  I  delight  my 
self. 

I  have  loved  to  hear  my  Lord  spoken  of,  and 
wherever  I  have  seen  the  print  of  his  Shooe  in  the 
Earth,  there  I  have  coveted  to  set  my  Foot  too. 

His  Name  has  been  to  me  as  a  Civit-Bo^,  yea, 
sweeter  than  all  Perfumes.  His  Voice  to  me  has 
been  most  sweet,  and  his  Countenance,  I  have  more 
desired  then  they  that  have  most  desired  the  Light 
of  the  Sun.  His  Word  I  did  use  to  gather  for  my 
Food,  and  for  Antidotes  against  ray  Paintings.  He 
has  held  me,  and  I  have  kept  me  from  mine  In- 
iquities :  Yea,  my  Steps  hath  he  strengthened  in 
his  Way. 

Now  while  he  was  thus  in  Discourse,  his  Counte- 
nance changed,  his  strong  man  bowed  under  him, 
and  after  he  had  said.  Take  me,  for  I  come  unto  thee, 
he  ceased  to  be  seen  of  them. 

But  Glorious  it  was,  to  see  how  the  open  Region 
was  filled  with  Horses  and  Chariots,  with  Trumpet- 
ers and  Pipers,  with  Singers,  and  Players  on 
stringed  Instruments,  to  welcome  the  Pilgrims  as 
they  went  up,  and  followed  one  another  in  at  the  < 
beautiful  Gate  of  the  City. 


370  €i)e  ^^ilgn'ms  progresis;* 

As  for  Christian's  Children,  the  four  Boys  that 
Christiana  brought  with  her,  with  their  Wives  and 
Children,  I  did  not  stay  where  I  was,  till  they  were 
gone  over.  Also  since  I  came  away,  I  heard  one 
say,  that  they  were  yet  alive,  and  so  would  be  for 
the  Increase  of  the  Church  in  that  Place  where  they 
were  for  a  time. 

Shall  it  be  my  Lot  to  go  that  way  again  I  may 
give  those  that  desire  it,  an  Account  of  what  I  here 
am  silent  about ;  mean  time  I  bid  my  Reader 
AdieiL 


FINIS. 


INDEX. 


Adam  the  first,  of  the  city  of  Deceit,  as- 
saults Faithful,  80.  his  work  and  wages, 
81.  sells  his  servants  for  slaves,  81, 
gave  Faithful  a  deadly  twitch,  81. 
Admission  to  the  palace  called  Beautiful. 
Discretion  j)reviously  consulted,  51. 
can  only  be  according  to  the  laws  of 
the  house,  52.  examination  before  ad- 
mission, first  by  Discretion,  then  l)y 
Prudence,  Pietj^,  and  Charity,  after 
which  he  is  joyfully  received  by  the 
household,  5"2.  entertained,  armed,  and 
goes  on  his  way,  61. 

Anchor,  golden,  given  to  Christiana,  280. 

Angels.  Shining  ones,  as  ministering 
spirits,  help  the  pilgrims,  39,  160,  185, 
188,  191,  213,347,361. 

Any-thing,  a  relative  of  Byends,  117. 

Apollyon  meets  and  tempts  Christian,  62. 
reminds  him  of  his  failings,  66.  they 
fight,  67.  he  is  conquered  and  flies 
away  for  a  season,  69,  86,  283. 

Apostacy,the  to^\Ti  of  Turnaway,  150, 344. 

Apple  that  tempted  Eve  preserved  at 
Beautiful,  279. 

Arbour  on  the  hill  Difficulty,  44,  260.  on 
the  Enchanted  ground,  352,  353,  354, 
357. 

Armoury  at  the  house  Beautiful,  60. 

Arrogancv,  one  of  Faithful's  worldly 
friends^  83. 

Assault  lane,  near  the  den  of  Giant  Slay- 
good,  319. 

Atheist  meets  the  iJilgrims,  161. 

Backsliding,  the  gradations  of,  183. 

Bath  of  Sanctification  in  which  the  pil- 
grims wash,  249. 

Bats-eyes,  Mrs.  one  of  Christiana's  re- 
vilers,  222. 

Beautiful,  a  palace  by  the  way,  49.  for 
the  comfort  of  pilgrims,  51,  264 — 281, 
300. 

Beelzebub's  castle,  near  the  Wicket  Gate, 
24,  232. 


Beelzebub's  dog,  frights  pilgrims  from 
worse  to  better,  232. 

Beelzebub's  garden,  its  poisonous  fruit, 
233,  274,  334. 

Beulah,  the  pilgrims  arrive  at,  183,  360. 

Bible  represented  I)y  a  study,  59.  by  a 
looking-glass,  342,  343.  by  a  map, 
354. 

Blind  see  delightful  things.  Apology, 
page  xii. 

Blindman,  foreman  of  the  jury  on  Faith- 
ful's trial,  114. 

Bountiful,  a  sister  to  Mercy,  274. 

Brisk,  Mr.  pays  his  addresses  to  Mercv, 
272. 

Broadway  gate,  leading  to  Deadman's 
lane,  150. 

Bubble,  Madam,  assaults  Standfast,  357. 

Burden  of  sin  upon  the  awakened  sin- 
ner's conscience,  1,  4.  presses  Christian 
do^vn  in  the  Slough  of  Despond,  10. 
sighs  and  groans  under  it,  12.  sent  to 
Morality  to  get  rid  of  it,  14.  weary  of 
his  burden,  and  anxious  to  be  relieved 
at  the  Wicket  Gate,  26.  will  fall  oft' of 
itself  by  faith,  27.  falls  oft'  by  a  sight 
of  Christ  crucified,  39. 

Butcher  and  the  sheep  (an  emblem  of 
the  state  church  and  the  Christian),  243. 

By-ends  seeks  to  join  the  pilgrims,  117. 

endeavoiu-s  to   puzzle    Christian,    124. 

an  arch-hypocrite,  324.  his  fatal  end, 

128. 

By-path-meadow    tempts    the    pilgrims 

astrav,  132,  334. 
By-way  to  hell,  146,  147,  195,  341,  350. 

Carnal  Delight,  a  lord  of  the  city  of  Va-. 

nity,  112. 
Caraal    Policy,    the    town    of  Worldly 

Wiseman,  12. 
Catechising  the    children   bv  Prudence, 

Piety,  and  Charity,  269. 
Caution,  one  of  the  delectable  mountains, 

145,  343. 


372 


INDEX. 


Celestial  city,  gates  seen,   148.    clearer 

view,  184. 
Certificate  given   in  at  the  gate  of  the 

Celestial  city,  19.3.  see  Roll. 
Charity,  a  virgin  in  the  palace  Beautiful, 

52,  269. 
Children  to  be  commended  to   God  by 
prayer,  57.  duty  and  comfort  of  giving 
them  sound  instruction,  269. 
Children  of  the  spies  tempt  Christian,  70. 
Christ,  how  revealed  to  the  soul,  96,  170, 
177.  its  effects,    171.    passed  through 
Vanity  Fair,  104.  his  righteousness  of 
several  kinds,   252.    had    his   country 
house  in  the  valley    of    Humiliation, 
285. 
Christian   (see    Synopsis),  name   before 
conversion,  51.  his  description  of  the 
desired    land,    8.    humble   opinion    of 
himself,  25.  of  the  race  of  Japhet,  51. 
and  of  the  martyrs,  310.  anxiety  to  be 
rid  of  his  burden,  26.  weeps  over  hi^ 
unconverted   family,    and    seeks  their 
conversion,  56.  his  sorrows  a  blessing  to 
his  family,  215. 
Christiana  (see   Synopsis  of  the  Second 
Part)  and   her  sons  go  on  pilgrimage, 
214.  summoned  to  cross  the  river,  361. 
her  dying  blessing  on  her  children  and 
friends,  362.  entrance  into  the  Celes- 
tial city,  364. 
Church  fellowship  a  state  of  self-denial, 

322. 
Civility,  the  clever  son  of  Dr.  Legality, 

15. 
Clear,  one  of  the  Delectable  Mountains, 

147. 
Comfort  may  arise  from  false  hopes,  173. 
Conceit  (country  of),  the  birth-place  of 

Ignorance,  148. 
Conscience  must  be  sprinkled  before  sin 

can  be  swept  away,  29. 
Contrite,   a    Christian   living   at    Vanity  , 

Fair,  326. 
Convictions  of  sin,  1,  2,  165,215. 
Coveting,  county  of,  in  the  north,  1 20. 
Crooked  lane  leading  from  Conceit,  148. 
Convinced    sinner,   clothed  in    rags    and 
burdened,  1,  strives  to  alarm  his  fa-  j 
mily,  2.  driven  to  the  Bible  and  secret  ; 
prayer,  2.  i 

Corn-field    sown    but   unproductive,    an  j 
emblem,  243.  | 

Cross,  a  believing  sight  of  Christ  cruci-  | 
fied,  gives  ease  to  the  burdened  sinner, 
39,  54,  251.  communicates  jjcace,  for- 
giveness, dothinif,  a  mark,  and  a  sealed 
roll,  40,  54,  254. 
Cruelty,  one  of  the  jurymen  at  Faithful's 
trial,  114. 


Customs,  of  however  long  standing,  if 
contrary  to  the  Bible,  will  not  stand 
the  trial,  42. 

Dance  at  Mrs.  Wanton's,  223,  and  of  the 

pilgrims,  336. 
Danger,  the  road  that  Formalist  or  Hy- 
pocrisy took   to   avoid   Difficulty,  44, 
54,  258. 
Dare-not-lie,  one  of  the  Christian  flock 

at  Vanity  Fair,  326. 
Dark-land,  near  Destruction,  the  country 

of  Valiant,  347. 
David's  conflict  with  the  three  thieves, 

156. 
Dead-man's  Lane  leading  from   Broad- 
way Gate,  150. 
Death,  a  river  without  a  bridge,  186,  220, 
302,   319,   349.    an    object   of  dread, 
186,  368.  Christian's  fears  in  crossing 
through,    187.    the   black  river,    351. 
water  bitter  to  the  palate,  but  sweet 
when  down,  361.  deep  for  some  and 
shallow   for   others,    187,    361.    often 
most  peaceful  to  the  most  timid,  302, 
366.  crossing  with  composure  no  proof 
of  safety,  194. 
Deceit,  the  dwelling-place  of  Adam  the 

first,  80. 
Delectable  Mountains,  distant,  view,  61. 
called  Immanuel's  Land,  144  to  148; 
338  to  343. 
Demas   and   his  silver  mine  in   the  hill 
Lucre,  126,  332.  entices  By-ends  and 
his  company  to  their  destruction,  128. 
Den  in  which  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  was 
composed,  a  cell  in  jail,  1,  and  margiti. 
a  cell  in  Doubting  Castle,  140. 
Desire  of  Vain-glory,  a  lord  of  the  town 

of  Vanity,  112.   " 
Despair  cages  a  man   in  iron,   34,  240. 
and  shuts  up  the  believers  in  Doubting 
Castle,  136,344. 
Despair,   Giant,   the    lord    of    Doubting 
Castle,  134.  slain  by  Greathcart,  335. 
but  may  be  revived  by  sin,  poem  imder 
cut,  337. 
Despond,   Slough   of,  the  hasty  pilgrims 
fall  into  it,  9.  may  be  passed  in  safety, 
by  looking  at  the  promises,  11.  what  it 
is,  .and  the  attempts  to  fill  it  up,  10, 11, 
Christiana  escapes  with  difficulty,  226, 
246.  Mr.  Fearing  detained  a  month  at 
it,  298. 
Despondency  and  his  daughter.   Much- 
afraid,  timid    pilgrims,  released  from 
Doubting  Castle,  336.  his  happy  death, 
366. 
Destruction,  city  of.  Christian's  residence 
before  conversion,  5,  &c. 


INDEX. 


373 


Destruction,  a  road  bv  the  side  of  tiie 
hill  Difficulty,  44. 

Devil,  cannot  destroy  those  who  are  sup- 
ported by  Christ,  32. 

Difficulty,  a  steep  hill  in  the  pilgrim's 
road,  with  fatal  by-paths  at  its  foot, 
43,  258,  300,  319. 

Diffidence,  Giant  Despair's  wife,  advises 
her  husband  to  treat  the  pilgrims  with 
cruelty  to  drive  them  to  suicide,  136. 
slain  by  Mr.  Honest,  335. 

Discontent  assails  Faithful,  83. 

Discretion,  one  of  the  virgins  in  the  pa- 
lace Beautiful,  51. 

Ditch,  in  the  valley  of  the  Shadow  of 
Death,  71.  Ditch  digged  by  Mrs. 
Wanton,  into  which  the  abhorred  of 
the  Lord  fall,  80. 

Divorce,  a  curious  method  of,  by  crying 
down  at  the  [Market]  Cross,  and  turn- 
ing out  of  doors,  274. 

Dog  at  the  \vicket-gate,  227.  his  owner, 
the  devil,  232.  frights  the  pilgrims 
from  worse  to  better,  232. 

Doubting  Castle,  the  stronghold  of  Giant 
Despair  and  his  wife  Diffidence,  134. 
fearful  state  of  the  pilgrims  while 
confined  there,  135 — 141.  all  its  locks 
opened  by  one  key,  "promise,"  141. 
some  pilgrims  lose  their  sight  and  wan- 
der among  the  tombs,  146.  not  to  be 
seen  from  Beulah,  184.  destroyed  with 
the  giant  and  his  wife,  334.  may  be  re- 
built by  sin,  poem  under  the  cut,  337. 

Doubts  expressed  by  some  of  the  author's 
fanatic  friends  whether  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress  ought  to  be  published,  Apo- 
logy, vi. 

Dream,  awful,  of  the  day  of  judgment, 
36,  53,  240.  Christiana's  dream,  216, 
247.  Mercy's  sweet  dream,  267.  dreams 
may  be  useful,  if  good,  268. 

Dull,  a  young  woman  perverted  by  Simple 
and  Co.  257. 

Ease,  a  delightful  plain,  126. 

Elijah  and  Enoch  passed  to  the  Celestial 

city  wthout  entering  the  river,  186. 
Emmanuel's  land    seen  from   Beautiful, 

61.  visited,  144,  338. 
Enchanted  ground,  warned  of  the,  148. 

pass  it  in  safety,  163—183,  302,  352. 
Enmity,  one  of  the  jury  on  Faithful's 

trial,  l"l4. 
Envy,  one  of  the  witnesses  against  Faith- 
ful, 110.  answered,  112. 
Error,  hill  called,  145. 
Evangelist  instructs  Christian,  4,  16.  and 

Faithful,  forewarning   them    of    their 

persecutions,  99,  324. 


Examination  at  the  Wicket  Gate,  22, 
228.  at  the  Interpreter's  house,  27, 
238.  at  the  palace  Beautiful,  51,  265. 

Experience,  a  shepherd  on  the  Delectable 
mountains,  144,  343.  Christian  relates 
his,  53  to  58.  Faithful  narrates  his  to 
Christian,  79 — 86.  Hopeful  relates  his, 
164—172.  of  Feeblemind,  318.  of  Mr. 
Fearing,  298.  of  Valiant-for-truth,  347. 
of  Mr.  Standfast,  357. 

Facing-both-waj'S,  a  relation  to  By-ends, 
117. 

Faining,  Lady,  mother  to  By-ends's 
wife,  118. 

Faint-heart,  one  of  the  robbers  of  Little 
Faith,  151. 

Fair-speech,  Lord,  related  to  By-ends, 
1 17.  a  town,  the  residence  of  By-ends, 
117. 

Faith,  its  nature,  170.  the  faith  of  Igno- 
rance, 176, 177.  difference  between  false 
and  justifying  faith,  176. 

Faithful  passes  Beautiful,  62.  is  over- 
taken by  Christian,  77.  narrates  his 
experience,  78.  beguiled  by  Talkative, 
89.  forewarned  of  his  cruel  death,  101. 
trial,  sufferings,  death,  and  ascension, 
108—116. 

Fantastical  and  false  faith  described,  176. 

Fear,  true  or  right,  how  distinguished, 
46,  179,  304.  of  man  bringeth  a 
snare,  182. 

Fearing,  a  timid  pilgrim,  his  adventures, 
297. 

Feeble-mind  rescued  from  the  giant,  317. 
his  happy  death,  365. 

Filth,  Mrs.,  one  of  the  party  at  Madam 
Wanton's,  223. 

Fire,  burning,  although  water  is  thrown 
on  it,  32. 

Fisherman's  and  fowler's  arts.  Apology, 
vii. 

Flatterer,  warning  of  him,  148.  fall  into 
his  net,  159. 

Fool,  Mr.  trying  to  wash  an  Ethiopian 
white,  341. 

Forgetful-Green,  a  dangerous  place  in 
the  valley  of  Humiliation,  286. 

Formalist,  called  Formality,  in  the  se- 
cond part,  tumbles  over  the  wall,  4 1 , 
54.  perishes  in  a  by-path,  44,  55,  258, 
350. 

Gains  entertains  the  pilgrims,  308.  pro- 
motes the  match  between  Matthew 
and  Mercy,  311.  cirrious  dishes  at  sup- 
per, 312.  poeticriddles,  314,  315.  tells 
astory  worth  hearing,  316.  Miss  Phoebe 
Gaius  married  to  James,  321. 


C  C 


374 


INDEX. 


Garden  of  Christ,  with  a  variety  of  flow- 
ers, illustrative  of  many  sects  in  the 
church,  which  are  ornamental  mthout 
quarrelling,  243. 

Godly-man  has  dirt  thrown  at  him  by 
Prejudice  and  Ill-will,  340. 

Good-confidence,  the  town  of  Great 
Grace,  151. 

Good-will,  keeper  of  the  Wicket  Gate, 
directs  inquirers  the  way  to  the  Celes- 
tial city,  22,  228,  298,  318. 

Grace,  daughter  to  Mnason,  326.  marries 
Samuel,  330. 

Grace,  how  nourished  in  the  heart,  32. 
how  discovered,  94. 

Graceless,  of  the  race  of  Japhet,  Chris- 
tian's name  before  conversion,  51. 

Graceless,  a  town  two  miles  from  Ho- 
nesty, 180. 

Great -grace  the  king's  champion,  151. 
his  son  that  tumbled  the  hills  about, 
340. 

Great-heart,  the  pilgrim's  guide,  250,  &c. 
See  Synopsis. 

Grim,  or  Bloody  Man,  a  giant,  slain,  263. 

Gripeman,  a  schoolmaster  of  Lovegain, 
in  the  county  of  Coveting,  in  the 
north,  120. 

Guilt,  one  of  the  robbers  of  Little  Faith, 
151.  I 

Hategood,  Lord,  judge  on  Faithful's 
trial,  108. 

Hatelight,  one  of  the  jur}Tnen  on  Faith- 
ful's trial,  114. 

Having-greedy,  Sir,  one  of  the  nobles  at 
Vanity,  112. 

Heady,  one  of  the  jurymen  on  Faithful's 
trial,  114. 

Heart  of  man,  represented  by  a  dusty 
parlour,  29.  its  deceitfulness,  173. 

Heaven,  its  enjoyments  and  employments, 
189,  191.  personal  knowledge  and 
identity  in  heaven,  191,  348. 

Heedless  slain,  291.  and  Two-bold  in  a 
fatal  sleep,  354. 

Help  assists  Christian  from  Despond,  10. 

Heman  and  Hezekiah,  their  conflict,  156, 
157. 

Hen  and  Chickens,  an  illustration  of  the 
Christian's  call,  242. 

High-mind,  a  jiu-yman  at  Faithful's  trial, 
114. 

Hold-the-world,  a  time-server,  joins  By- 
ends,  120.  his  plausible  and  dangerous 
sophistry  detected,  124. 

Holv  Spirit,  his  comforting  influences, 
131,  132. 

Holy-man,  a  convert  in  the  town  of  Va- 
nity, 32C. 


Honest,  an  old  pilgrim,  joins  Christiana 
and  her  partv,  295.  his  happy  death, 
366. 

Honesty,  a  town  near  Graceless,  180. 

Hopeful,  converted  by  the  sufferings  of 
the  pilgrims  at  Vanity-fair,  joins  Chris- 
tian, 116,  324.  misled  by  him  into  a 
by-path,  132.  taken  by  Giant  Despair, 
136.  dissuades  Christian  from  self-mur- 
der, 138, 139.  harsh  words,  reproof,  and 
apology,  153,  155.  relates  his  experi- 
ence, 164.  gives  four  causes  for  back- 
sliding, 181.  assists  Christian  in  passing 
the  river,  187.  ascends  to  glory,  189. 

Humble-mind,  a  damsel  at  the  palace 
Beautiful,  265. 

Humiliation,  the  Valley  of,  with  its  diffi- 
cult descent,  62,  283.  pillar  of  warn- 
ing, 284.  beautified  with  lilies,  284. 
the  song  of  the  shepherd's  boy,  285. 
our  Lord's  country  house,  285.  the 
monument  of  the  fight  with  Apollyon, 
288. 

Hypocrisy  climbs  over  the  ■wall,  41. 
laughs  at  Christian,  43.  perishes  in  the 
dark  mountains,  44. 

Idle  life,  one  of  the  slanders  upon  the 
Christian  profession,  349. 

Ignatius,  Romanus,  Polycarp,  and  the 
martyrs,  the  Christian's  ancestors,  310. 

Ignorance,  from  the  country  of  Conceit, 
comes  dovn\  Crooked  Lane,  and  joins 
the  pilgrims,  148.  receives  faithful 
warnings,  and  loiters  behind,  149.  they 
wait  for  him,  172.  honest  dealing  of 
the  pilgrims  with  him,  173 — 178.  his 
a^vful  end,  194.  green-headed,  350. 

Ill-favoured  ones  appear  in  a  dream  to 
Christiana,  216.  assault  Christiana  and 
Mercy,  234.  make  the  pilgrims  cau- 
tious, 246,  247. 

Ill-will  pelts  Godly-man  with  dirt,  340. 

Imagination  accessible  to  Satan,  74. 

Implacable,  one  of  the  jury  on  Faithful's 
trial,  114. 

Inconsiderate,  Mr.,  attacks  Valiant-for- 
Truth,  and  is  beaten,  345. 

Inconsiderate,  Mrs.,  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Ti- 
morous, reviles  the  pilgrims,  223. 

Indictment  and  Trial  of  the  pilgrims  at 
Vanity  Fair,  108.  referred  to,  324. 

Indwelling  sin  the  Christian's  plague,  55. 
the  antidote,  5G. 

Innocent,  one  of  the  Delectable  moun- 
tains, 340. 

Innocent,  opens  the  door  at  the  Interpre- 
ter's house,  238. 

Interpreter  and  his  house,  299,  319. 
Christian  received,  27.    is  shown  tlie 


INDEX. 


375 


excellent  things — pictui-e  of  a  grave 
person,  28.  the  biggest  of  them  all, 
240.  sweeping  the  dusty  parlour,  29. 
Passion  and  Patience,  30.  fire  against 
the  wall,  32.  the  valiant  man,  33. 
man  in  the  iron  cage,  33.  the  dreadful 
dream,  36.  Christiana  received,  239.  the 
signihcant  rooms,  239,  240.  the  muck- 
rake, 240.  spider  in  the  best  room,  241 , 
hen  and  chickens,  242.  butcher  and 
sheep,  243.  Flower-garden,  243.  robin 
and  spider,  243.  wise  sayings,  244. 
Mercy's  experience,  247.  the  bath  and 
mark,  249. 

Jacob's  ladder  and  the  angels  seen  by 

the  pilgrims,  279. 
James,  Christiana's  son,  married  to  Phoebe 

Gains,  321. 
Joseph  married  to  Martha  Mnason,  330. 
Jury  on  the  trial  of  Faithful,  their  names, 

114. 
Justification,  not  by  works,  16,  17,  166, 

167,  253.  by  faith    only,  252,  269— 

271. 

Key  of  promise  unlocks  all  the  doors  in 

Doubting  Castle,  141. 
Kingdom  of  heaven  taken  by  violence, 

33,  54,  240. 
Knowledge,  one  of  the  shepherds,  144. 
Knowledge,  vnthout  practice,  useless,  95. 

two  kinds  of  knowledge,  95. 
Know-nothing,  one  of  the  friends  of  Mrs. 

Timorous,  222. 

Language  of  Canaan  spoken  by  pilgrims, 
105. 

Law,  the,  and  its  works,  cannot  save  the 
sinner,  21.  cannot  sanctify,  29.  shows 
no  mercy,  82. 

Lechery,  Lord,  a  nobleman  (so  called) 
of  Vanity,  112. 

Lechery,  Mr.  one  of  the  merrv  ones  at 
Mrs.' Wanton's  ball,  223. 

Legality,  a  quack,  of  the  town  of  Mora- 
lity, pretends  to  cure  a  wounded  con- 
science, 14.  exposed  by  Evangelist,  20. 

Liar,  a  juryman  on  Faithful's  trial,  114. 

Light-mind,  Mrs.,  a  reviler  of  pilgrims, 
and  one  of  Mrs.  Wanton's  party,  222, 
223. 

Linger-after-lust,  turned  out  of  the  way 
by  Sloth  and  Co.,  257. 

Lions  in  the  way,  49,  55,  262,  300. 

Little-faith,  of  the  town  of  Sincere,  robbed, 
151,295,308,345. 

Live-loose,  one  of  the  jurv  on  Faithful's 
trial,  114. 


Looking-glass  of  extraordinary  qualit\', 
given  to  Mercy,  342,  343. 

Lord  of  the  hill,  a  subject  of  discourse 
with  the  pilgrims,  58. 

Lord's  supper,  58,  266, 

Lot's  wife,  a  monument  to  warn  the  pil- 
grims, 128,  332. 

Love-gain,  in  Coveting  county,  in  the 
north,  120. 

Love-lust,  a  jiu-yman  at  Vanity  Fair, 
114. 

Love-saint,  one  of  the  converts  at  Vanity 
Fair,  326. 

Love-the-flesh,  one  of  the  party  at  Ma- 
dam Wanton's  ball,  223. 

Lucre,  a  dangerous  silver  mine,  126,  332. 

Lust-of-the-eyes,  a  daughter  of  Adam 
the  first,  81. 

Lust-of-the-ilesh,  another  of  Adam  the 
first's  daughters,  81. 

Lute,  an  instnunent  of  music  played  by 
Mercy,  336. 

Luxurious,  a  lord  of  the  city  of  Vanity,  1 1 2. 

Malice,  Mr.,  one  of  the  jury  at  Faithful's 
trial,  114. 

Map  of  the  way,  God's  book,  354. 

Marriage,  Mercy  betrothed  to  Matthew, 
311.  married  happily  after  a  very  short 
courtship,  321.  James  Christian  to 
Phffibe  Gains,  321.  Grace,  Mr.  Mna- 
son's  daughter,  to  Simon,  330.  Martha 
Mnason  to  Joseph  Christian,  330. 

Martyrdom  of  Faithful  produces  good 
fruit,  116,327. 

Marvel,  one  of  the  Delectable  Mountains, 
340. 

Matthew,  Christiana's  son,  taken  ill,  274. 
cured  by  Dr.  Skill,  276.  betrothed  to 
Mercy,  311.  marries  her,  321. 

Maul,  the  giant  of  sophistry,  slain  by 
Great  Heart,  292,  293. 

Mercy  sets  out  with  Christiana  on  her 
invitation,  221.  gets  over  the  Slough  of 
Despond,  226.  trembles  with  fear,  but 
is  received  at  the  Wicket-gate,  229. 
attacked  by  the  ill-favom-ed  ones,  234. 
is  surprised  to  find  trouble  after  she 
had  passed  the  gate,  236.  welcomed  to 
the  Interpreter's  house,  239.  with 
great  humility  relates  her  experience, 
247.  and  is  washed,  249.  feels  her 
weakness,  and  is  anxious  for  a  guide, 
265.  laughs  in  her  sleep,  267.  Mr. 
Brisk  offers  love  to  her,  272.  well  in 
the  valley  of  Humiliation,  286.  be- 
trothed to  Matthew,  311.  they  are 
married,  321.  plays  upon  the  lute 
while  the  pilgrims  dance,  336.  sees  the 
by-way    to    hell,   and    hears    doleful 


376 


INDEX. 


lamentations,  341,  342.  longs  for  and 
obtains  a  wonderful  looking-glass  [the 
Bible],  342,  343. 

Minister,  the  portraiture  of  a  faithful 
evangelist,  28.  importance  of  his  work, 
264.  to  be  earnestly  prayed  for,  265. 

Mistrust  runs  back  for  fear  of  the  lions, 
46.  punished,  262.  one  of  the  thieves 
that  robbed  Little  Faith,  151. 

Mnason  entertains  Christiana  and  the 
pilgrims,  325.  his  daughters  marry 
Christiana's  sons,  330. 

Money-love  a  companion  of  By-ends,  120. 
lost  ^rith  him,  128. 

Monster  (the),  [state  religion]  pro- 
pounded conditions  to  men,  330. 
obeyed  by  those  who  love  their  lives 
more  than  their  souls,  330.  slew  many 
of  the  people,  330,  carried  away  their 
children,  and  taught  them  to  suck  her 
whelpSjf  330.  very  rampant,  and 
looked  upon  the  pilgrims  with  great 
disdain,  331.  See  also  the  trial  of 
Faithful,  so  continually  assaulted  as 
to  be  not  only  wounded  but  lame, 
and  it  is  verily  believed  by  some  that 
this  beast  wll  die  of  his  wounds,  331. 

Monuments,  see  Pillar. 

Morality,  a  village  where  Dr.  Legality 
practises,  14. 

Moses  knocks  down  Faithful,  82. 

Mounts  Marvel,  Innocent,  and  Charity, 
340,341. 

Much- afraid,  the  daughter  of  Despond- 
ency, rescued  from  Doubting  Castle, 
336. 

Muck-rake  preferred  to  a  golden  crown, 
240. 

Names  by  which  the  inexhaustible  inven- 
tion of  Bunyan  indicated  the  character 
or  qualities  of  the  persons  or  places  to 
which  they  are  given.  [The  reference 
is  to  the  first  page  in  which  the  name 
occurs]: — Adam  the  First,  80.  Any- 
thing, 117.  Apostacy,  150.  Arrogancy, 
83.  Assault-lane,  319.  Atheist,  161. 
Bats'-eyes,  222.  Beautiful,  49.  Blind- 
man,  114.  Bountiful,  274.  Brisk,  272. 
Broadway-gate,  150.  Bubble,  358.  By- 
ends,  117.  By-path  Meadow,  132.  By- 
way to  hell,  147.  Carnal  Delight,  112. 
Carnal  Policy,  12.  Caution,  145. 
Charity,  52.  Civility,  15.  Clear,  147. 
Conceit,  148.  Contrite,  326.  Coveting, 
120.  Crueltv,  114.  Danger,  44.  Dare- 
not-lie,  326.  Dark-land,  347.  Dead- 
man's  Lane,  150.  Deceit,  80.    Delect- 

+  Sec  the  Act  of  Parliament,  XIV.  Charles 
the  Second,  called  th"  Act  of  Ujiiformity. 


able,  61.  Demas,  126.  Desire- of- vain- 
glory, 112.  Despair,  134.  Despond,  9. 
Despondency,  336.  Destruction,  5, 
44.  Difficidty,  43.  Diffidence,  136. 
Discontent,  83.  Discretion,  51.  Doubt- 
ing Castle,  134.  Dull,  257.  Ease,  126. 
Emmanuel's  Land,  61.  Enchanted 
Ground,  148.  Enmity,  114.  Envy,  HO. 
Error,  145.  Evangelist,  4.  Experience, 
144.  Facing-both-ways,  117.  Faining, 
118.  Faint-heart,  151.  Fair.Speech, 
Lord,  117.  a  town,  117.  Faithful,  62. 
Fearing,  297.  Feeble-mind,  317.  Filth, 
223.  Flatterer,  148.  Fool,  341.  For- 
getful Green,  286.  Formalist,  41. 
called  Formality  in  the  Second  Part, 
258.  Godly-man,  340.  Good-confi- 
dence, 151.  Good-will,  22.  Grace, 
326.  Grace-less,  51, 180.  Great-grace, 
151.  Great-heart.  250.  Grim,  or 
Bloody-man,  262.  Gripe-man,  120. 
Guilt,  151.  Hate-good,  108.  Hate- 
light,  114.  Sir  Having-greedy,  112. 
Heady,  114.  Heedless,  291,  354. 
Help,  10.  High-mind,  114.  Hold-the- 
world,  120.  Holv-man,  326.  Honest, 
295.  Honesty,  180.  Hopeful,  116. 
Humble-mind,  265.  Humiliation,  62. 
Hypocrisy,  41.  Ignorance,  148.  Ill- 
will,  340.  Implacable,  114.  Inconsi- 
derate, Mr.,  345.  Mrs., 222.  Innocent, 
238.  Moimt,  340.  Interpreter,  27. 
Knowledge,  144.  Know-nothing,  222. 
Lechery,  Lord,  112.  Mr.,  223.  Le- 
gality, 14.  Liar,  114.  Light-mind,  222. 
Linger -after -lust,  257.  Little  -  faith, 
151.  Live-loose,  114.  Love-gain,  120. 
Love-lust,  114.  Love-saint,  326.  Love- 
the-flesh,  223.  Lucre,  126.  Lust-of- 
the-eyes,  81.  Lust -of- the -flesh,  81. 
Luxurious,  112.  Malice,  114.  Marvel, 
340.  Maul,  292.  Mistrust,  46,  151. 
Money-love,  120.  Morality,  14.  Much- 
afraid,  336.  No.good,  114.  No-heart, 
257.  Not-right,  320.  Obstinate,  5. 
Old-man,  HI.  Pagan,  76.  Passion, 
30.  Patience,  30.  Peace,  59.  Penitent, 
326.  Pickthank,  110.  Piety,  52.  Pli- 
able, 5.  Pope,  76.  Pragmatick,  345. 
Prating-row,  90.  Prejudice,  340.  Pre- 
sumption, 40.  Pride,  83.  Pride-of-life, 
81.  Promise,  141.  Prudence,  52. 
Ready-to-halt,  322.  Reliever,  235. 
Sagacity,  212.  Salvation,  39.  Save-all, 
120.  Save-self,  181.  Say-well,  90. 
Secret,  217.  Self-conceit,"  83.  Self- 
will,  304.  Shadow  of  Death,  70.  Shame, 
83.  Shining  Ones,  160.  Short-wind, 
257.  Simple,  40.  Sincere,  144,150. 
Dr.  Skill,  274.  Slay-good,  31 7.  Slccp\  - 


INDEX. 


377 


head,  257.  Sloth,  40.  Slothiul's 
friend,  353.  Slow-pace,  257.  Smooth- 
man,  117.  Stand-fast,  356.  Stupidity, 
295.  Superstition,  110.  Take-heed, 
291.  Talkative,  87.  Taste-that-which- 

1  is-good,  309.  Tell-true,  347.  Tem- 
porary, 180.  Time-server,  117.  Timo- 
rous, Mr.,  46.  Mrs.,  255.  Miss,  219. 
Too-bold,  354.  Turn-about,  117. 
Turn-away,  150.  Turn-back,  180. 
Two-tongues,  117.  Uncertain,  318. 
Vain-confidence,  133.  Vain-glory,  41. 
Vain-hope,  194.  Valiant-for-truth,  345. 
Vanity  and  its  fair,  102.  Wanton,  79. 
Want-wit,  341.  Watchful,  49,  144. 
Wild-head,  345.  Worldly-glory,  83. 
Worldly- wiseman,  12. 

No-good,  one  of  the  jury  on  Faithful's 
trial,  114. 

No-heart  perverted  by  Simple,  Sloth, 
and  Presumption,  257. 

Not-right  struck  dead  with  a  thunder- 
bolt, 320. 

Obstinate  endeavours  to  bring  Christian 

back,  5,  221. 
Old-man  a  lord  of  the  city  of  Vanity,lll. 
Outside  professor  fit  only  to  be  tinder  for 

the  devil's  tinder-box,  245. 

Pagan,  a  giant  persecutor,  dead  many  a 

day,  76. 
Palace  guarded   by  armed  men,  an  em- 
blem, 32,  54.  Beautiful,  49,  264, 
Pardon  by  word  and  deed  explained,  251. 
Parlour  full  of  dust,  the  heart  of  man,  29. 
Passion  and  Patience,  an  emblem,  30. 
Peace,  a    bed-chamber   in    the    palace 

Beautiful,  59,  266. 
Pearls  in  a  toad's  head  or  an  oyster-shell. 

Apology,  viii. 
Penitent,  a  convert  at  Vanity  Fair,  326. 
Persecution  for  professing  Christ,  106. 
Personal     identity    and     knowledge    of 

others  in  heaven,  191,  348. 
Peter,  beset  by  Mistrust  and  Co.,  afraid 

of  a  sorry  girl,  157,  158. 
Phcebe  Gains  married  to  James  Christian, 

321, 
Physic  to  make  a  pilgrim  live  for  ever, 

276. 
Pickthank  one  of  the  witnesses  against 

Faithful,  1 1 0.    Answered,  1 1 3. 
Pietjf  one  of    the  virgins  in  the  palace 

Beautiful,  52. 
Pilgrimage,  objections  against  it,  13,  220, 

221,  349.  Two  things  needful  for  pil- 
grimage, 329. 
Pilgrims  by  nature  beggars,  made  princes 

by  Christ,  59. 


Pillar,  the  monument  of  Lot's  wife,  128, 
332.  on  the  cause  of  Christian's  fight 
with  Apollyon,  283.  on  the  victory  and 
flight  of  Apollyon,  288.  on  the  victory 
over  Maul  the  giant  of  sophistry,  293. 
to  Avarn  pilgrims  from  Doubting  Castle, 
142.  of  marble  on  the  destruction  of 
Despair,  338. 

Pills  for  the  mind.  Dr.  Skill's  valuable 
medicine,  276. 

Pliable  runs  after  Christian  to  bring  him 
back,  5.  persuaded  to  go  with  the  pil- 
grim, 6.  returns  to  Destruction,  and  is 
reviled,  10,  11,78. 

Poetry  by  Bunyan  :  Apology.  ,3,  18,  22, 
2.3,  33,  38,  39,  40,  44,  45,  50,  59,  63, 
68, 69,  73,  76,  77,  85,  86,  99,  103, 109, 
115,  116,  128,  132,  135,  142,  143, 
148,  150,  159,  161, 164,  1 78, 190, 196. 
On  sending  forth  the  Second  Part, 
199,  225,  226,  233,  246,  250,  256,  258, 
262,  280,  282,  285,  288,  293,  304,  313, 
314,  315,  321,  337,  338,  339, 344,  351, 
352,  360. 

Pope,  a  giant  enemy  to  the  pilgrims, 
crazy  and  stiff  in  his  joints,  76. 

Portrait  of  a  godly  minister,  28.  an  ad- 
mirable object  of  study. 

Pragmatick  fights  with  Valiant-for-truth, 
345. 

Prating  Row,  the  residence  of  Talkative, 
90. 

Prayer,  persevering,  eflTectual,  169,  170. 

Prejudice  and  Ill-will  in  vain  cast  dirt 
upon  Godly-man,  340. 

Presumption  asleep  on  the  road,  40. 
hanged,  255,  300. 

Pride  a  friend  in  the  flesh  to  Faithful, 
83.  of  life,  a  daughter  of  Adam  the 
First,  81. 

Profession  worthless  without  fruits  of 
holiness,  243. 

Professors,  loose,  bring  a  scandal  on  re- 
ligion, 94.  how  to  be  dealt  with,  93, 
94,  119. 

Promise,  a  key  unlocking  every  door  in 
Doubting  Castle,  141. 

Proverbs  put  forth  bv  the  Interpreter, 
244,  245. 

Prudence,  one  of  the  virgins  in  the  palace 
Beautiful,  52.  catechises  the  children, 
269. 

Quagmire  on  one  side  of  the  road  through 
the  valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  71. 

Questions  and  answers  profitable  and 
curious,  277,  278. 

Raiment  given  to  Christian  bv  the  angel, 
40.  to  Clirisfiana,  249,  250. 


378 


INDEX. 


Ready-to-halt  with  his  crutches  joins  tlie 
pilgrims  and  comforts  Feeble-mind, 
322.  his  happy  death,  '664. 

Reliever  rescues  the  pilgi-ims  from  the 
ill-favoured  ones,  235. 

Religion  for  the  world,  or  the  bag,  125. 

Repentance,  folly  of  deferring  it  to  the 
day  of  death,  307. 

Riddles,  and  their  solutions,  in  verse,  314, 
315. 

Righteousness  of  Christ  four-fold,  252. 

RiVer  of  death,  18G,  220,  302,  319,  349. 
called  the  Black  River,  351.  an  object 
of  dread,  186,  368.  often  most  peace- 
ful to  the  most  timid,  302,  366.  cross- 
ing with  composure  no  proof  of  safety, 
194. 

River  of  God,  or  of  the  water  of  life,  131, 
132,333. 

Robin  and  the  spider,  an  emblem,  243. 

Roll,  sealed  [Eph.  i.  13],  given  to  Chris- 
tian, 40.  his  assurance  of  life,  48.  his 
evidence,  51.  lost  while  sleeping  in  the 
day  time,  46, 81.  found  again  by  prayer, 
repentance,  and  effort,  48,  260.  given 
in  at  the  gate  of  the  Celestial  city, 
1 93. 

Sagacity  informs  the  dreamer  of  Chris- 
tiana's setting  out  on  pilgrimage,  212. 

Salvation,  a  wall  by  the  side  of  the  road, 
39. 

Samuel  Christian  marries  Grace  Mnason, 
330. 

Sanctifi  cation,  how  it  is  effected,  29. 

Save-all,  a  friend  and  companion  of  Mr. 
By-ends,  120. 

Save-self  turns  Temporary  out  of  the 
way,  181. 

Saying  and  doing,  the  difference  between, 
91,  92. 

Say-well,  the  f;vther  of  Talkative,  90. 

Seal  or  mark  on  Christian's  forehead,  40. 
upon  those  who  are  washed,  249. 

Secret,  a  heavenly  messenger,  comforts 
Christiana,  217. 

Self-abasement  exemplified  with  its  cause, 
250. 

Self-conceit,  one  of  Faithful's  friends  be- 
fore his  conversion,  83. 

Self-will,  a  pretended  pilgrim  who  cared 
for  neither  argument  or  example, 
304. 

Shadow  of  Death,  a  dismal  valley,  70, 
184,  288,  301.  Vjetter  to  pass  through 
than  to  reside  in,  29 1 . 

Shame,  a  shameless  enemy,  assaults 
Faithful,  83,  323,  324. 

Sheep,  sec  I3utcher. 

Shepherds  at  the  Delcctalilc  Mountains, 


Knowledge,  Experience,  Watchful,  and 
Sincere,  144. 

Shining  Ones,  see  Angels. 

Short-wind  hindered  by  Simple,  Sloth, 
and  Presumption,  257. 

Silver  mine,  see  Lucre. 

Simple,  asleep  and  fettered,  refuses  de- 
liverance, 40.  is  hung,  255.  300. 

Sin,  an  outcry  against,  no  proof  that  sin 
is  abhorred,  94. 

Sinai,  or  the  law,  terrible  to  the  awakened 
sinner,  15,  18,  25. 

Sincere,  a  shepherd  on  the  Delectable 
Mountains,  144. 

Sincere  (town  of),  the  birth-place  of 
Little-faith,  150. 

Skill,  an  ancient  physician,  cures  Mat- 
thew, 274.  his  scriptural  prescriptions, 
275. 

Slaves  to  sin  and  the  law  cannot  relieve 
a  burdened  sinner,  20. 

Slay-good,  a  giant  and  leader  of  thieves, 
destroyed,  317. 

Sleepy-head  ruined  bv  Sloth,  Simple, 
and  Co.,  257. 

Sloth,  asleep  and  fettered,  refuses  de- 
liverance, 40.  is  hung,  255,  300. 

Slothfuls'  friend  (the),  an  arbor  on  the 
Enchanted  Ground,  353. 

Slow-pace  hindered  and  ruined  by  Sim- 
ple and  Co.,  257. 

Smooth-man,  a  relation  of  Bj^-ends,  117. 

Sons  of  the  Spies  endeavour  to  turn 
Christian  back  from  the  valley  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death,  70. 

Spider  in  the  best  room,  an  emblem,  241. 

Spies,  two  children  of  the,  try  to  timi 
Christian  back,  70. 

Spring  at  the  hill  Difficulty  refreshes 
Christian,  43,  44.  dirty  with  enemies' 
feet,  but  when  cleansed  it  refreshed 
Christiana,  258. 

Stand-fast  caught  in  private  prayer,  356. 
joins  the  pilgrims,  357.  his  dying 
anxiety  for  the  happiness  and  salva- 
tion of  his  familv,  and  his  triumphant 
death,  368,  369. ' 

Strong  Christians  sometimes  mislead  weak 
ones,  1 33. 

Stupidity  the  town  of  old  Father  Honest, 
295. 

Suggestions  of  Satan  sometimes  mistaken 
for  our  o^vn  thoughts,  74. 

Suicide*  debated  at  length  by  the  pil- 
grims in   Doubting  Castle,  138 — 140. 

Superstition  an  evidence  against  Faithful, 
110.  answered,  112. 

*  Probably  arising  from  Bunyan's  hjiving 
heard  of  Dr.  Donne's  learned  treatise  to  prove 
that  Belf-homicidc  is  not  always  sinful.     IbW. 


INDEX. 


379 


Take-heed  escapes  while  Heedless  is 
slain,  291. 

Talkative  joins  the  pilgrims,  87.  proves 
to  be  the  son  of  Say-well  of  Prating 
Row,  90.   a  confident  fool,  324. 

Taste-that-which-is-good,  the  cook  at 
Gaius's  house,  .309. 

Tell-true  converts  Valiant-for-the- Truth 
by  the  Pilgrims'  Progi-ess,  347. 

Temporary,  a  backslider  of  the  town  of 
Graceless,  180. 

Temptations,  severe,  and  trials  succeed 
great  enjoyments,  62. 

Time-server  (Lord),  a  relation  of  By- 
ends,  1  ]  7. 

Timorous,  Mr.,  and  Mistrust,  ran  back 
terrified,  46,  261,  262. 

Timorous,  Mrs.,  endeavours  to  hinder 
Christiana,  219.  Christiana  wishes  her 
a  sight  of  the  Cross,  255. 

Trial  of  Faithful  at  Vanity  Fair,  108. 

Too-bold  and  Heedless  in  a  fatal  sleep, 
354. 

Tree  rotten  at  heart,  an  emblem,  245. 

Turn-about  (Lord),  a  relation  of  By- 
ends,  117. 

Turn-away,  of  the  town  of  Apostacy,  1 50 . 

Turn-back,  next  door  neighbom*  to  Tem- 
porary, 180. 

Two-tongues  (the  Rev.  Mr.),  the  parson 
of  By-ends's  parish,  117. 

Uncertain,  the  town  of  Mr.  Feeble-mind, 
318. 

V^ain-confidence  misleads  the  pilgrims, 
and  is  lost,  133. 

Vain-glory,  the  birth-place  of  Formalist, 
41. 

Vain-hope  ferries  Ignorance  over  the 
river  of  death,  1  94. 

Valiant-for-truth  attacked  by  Wild-head 
and  Co.,  345.  uses  a  sword  that  will 
cut  the  flesh,  bones,  soul,  and  spirit, 
and  all,  346.  narrates  his  experience, 
347.  his  happy  departure,  367. 

Vanity  Fair  founded  when  sin  entered 


into  the  world,  by  Beelzebub,  Apol- 
lyon,  Legion,  and  the  fallen  angels, 
102.  Christ  passed  through,  and  was 
tempted,  104.  Pilgi-ims  persecuted,  106. 
tried  in  order  to  their  condemnation, 
108.  Faithful's  painful  death,  115.  re- 
ferred to,  1 40.  Faithful's  death  Hope- 
ful's life,  164.  Mr.  Fearing  very  cou- 
rageous at  the  fair,  301.  Mnason  en- 
tertains Christiana  and  her  company, 
325.  much  reformed,  326,  327. 

Viol,  a  musical  instrument  played  by 
Christiana,  336. 

Virginals,  a  musical  instrument  played  by 
Prudence,  280. 

Wanton,  a  dangerous  tempter,  assaults 
Faithful,  79.  her  ball,  223.  Christiana's 
good  wishes  for  her,  255. 

Want-wit  trying  to  wash  an  Ethiopian 
white,  341. 

Watchful,  porter  at  the  palace  Beautiful, 
49. 

Watchful,  a  shepherd  on  the  Delectable 
Mountains,  144. 

Wicket-Gate  [Mat.  vii],  shining  lin;lit, 
[Ps.  cxix.  105],  5,22,53,  226,  Fearing 
afraid  to  knock,  298.  Feeble-mind  re- 
ceived, 318.  means  Christ  the  way, 
margin  of  224.  Formalist  and  Hypo- 
crisy refuse  the  gate,  and  climb  over  the 
wall,  41.  Ignorance  prefers  a  green  lane, 
149.    all  three  perish,  44,  195. 

Wild-head  and  Co.,  attack  Valiant-for- 
truth,  and  are  beaten,  345. 

Worldly-glory  one  of  Faithful's  friends 
before  conversion,  83. 

Wordly  wisdom  dangerous,  and  why,  19. 

Worldly-wiseman  encounters  and  mis- 
leads Christian,  12. 

Young  converts  zealous  to  awaken  the 

unconverted,  40,  54,  225. 
Youth  sometimes  cautioned  in  vain,  233. 

and  make  work  for  bitter  repentance, 

275. 


J.    HADDON,    PRINTKK,   CASTLE   STREET,    FINSBURV. 


THE 


FIRST  ANNUAL  REPORT 


HANSERD  KNOLLYS  SOCIETY, 


PUBLICATION  OF  THE  WORKS  OF  EARLY  ENGLISH 
AND  OTHER  BAPTIST  WRITERS. 


1845-6. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  BY  JOHN  HADDON,  CASTLE  STREET,  FINSBURY. 

1847. 


GENERAL    MEETING. 


Mr.  Charles  Jones  in  the  chair.  Prayer  by  Rev.  Mr.  Mills, 
of  Kidderminster.  Dr.  Davies  read  the  Report,  and  George 
Offok,  Esq.,  presented  the  Cash  Accounts  and  Financial  State- 
ment, 

It  was  moved  by  Dr.  Steane,  seconded  by  Rev.  T.  Pottenger, 
of  Bradford,  and  carried  unanimously  : — 

"  That  the  gratifying  Report  now  read  be  approved,  printed, 
and  circulated  among  the  Subscribers,  under  the  direction  of  the 
Council." 

It  was  moved  by  Rev.  C.  Stovel,  and  seconded  by  Rev.  J. 
Russell,  and  carried  unanimously  : — 

"  That  the  Gentlemen  whose  names  follow  be  the  Officers  and 
Council  for  the  year  ensuing. 

treasurer. 

CHARLES  JONES,  Esq. 

I^onorarg  Secretaries. 

Rev.  B.  DAVIES,  Ph.  D.  E.  B.  UNDERHILL,  Esq. 

(iTouncil. 


Rev.  J.  AcwoRTH. 
Rev.  J.  Angus,  M.A. 

Rev.  C.  M.  BiRRELL. 

Rev.  Caleb  Evans  Birt,  M.A. 

Rev.  W.  H.  Black. 

Rev.  W.  Brock. 

Rev.  Thomas  Burditt. 

Rev.  Jabez  Burns,  D.D. 

Rev.  F.  A.  Cox,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

Rev.  T.  S.  Crisp. 

Rev.  B.  Evans. 

Rev.  B.  Godwin,  D.D. 

Rev.  F.  W.  GoTCH,  M.A. 

Rev.  W.  Groser. 

Rev.  J.  H.  HiNTON,  M.A. 

Rev.  J..H0BY,  D.D. 

Charles  T.  Jones,  Esq. 

G.  F.  Kemp,  Esq. 


George  Lowe,  Esq.,  F.R.S. 
Rev.  W.  H.  MuRCH,  D.D. 
Rev.  J.  P.  Mursell. 
Rev.  Thomas  Fox  Newman. 
George  Offor,  Esq. 
Rev.  G.  H.  Orchard. 
Rev.  J.  J.  Owen. 
Rev.  T.  Pottenger. 
Rev.  Thomas  Price,  D.D. 
James  Read,  Esq. 
Rev.  Robert  Roff. 
Rev.  Joshua  Russell. 
Rev.  J.  Sprigg,  M.A. 
Rev.  E.  Steane,  D.D. 
Rev.  C.  Stovel. 
Rev.  Thomas  Thomas. 
Rev.  S.  Tompkins,  M.A. 
Rev.  F.  Trestrail." 


The  Meeting  was  closed  with  prayer  by  Rev.  W.  Groser. 


REPORT. 


The  Council  have  great  pleasure  in  presenting  their 
First  Annual  Report  to  the  Subscribers.  It  will  not  be 
deemed  uninteresting  to  retrace  the  steps  which  have  led 
to  the  present  favourable  position  of  your  Society. 

Early  in  the  year  1844  a  letter  appeared  in  the 
Baptist  Magazine,  suggesting  the  propriety  of  reprinting 
certain  of  the  works  of  early  English  Baptists.  Some 
interest  having  been  thus  excited,  a  meeting  of  several 
gentlemen  was  convened  in  the  Mission  House,  in  the 
month  of  August,  at  which  the  Rev.  Dr.  Steane  took  the 
chair.  After  much  conference  it  was  thought  to  be  both 
practicable  and  important  to  form  a  Society  for  this 
object.  A  Provisional  Committee  was  named,  and 
measures  were  at  once  taken  to  ascertain  the  feeling  of 
the  denomination  with  regard  to  it.  A  Circular,  calling 
attention  to  the  subject,  and  inviting  an  expression  of 
opinion,  was  widely  distributed,  to  which  most  favourable 
replies  were  returned.  Thus  encouraged,  the  Provisional 
Committee  convened  in  the  month  of  November,  by 
letter  and  advertisement,  a  meeting  at  the  Mission 
House,  of  such  as  were  inclined  to  assist  in  the  promotion 
of  the  object  in  view.  A  large  and  respectable  assembly 
met  on  that  occasion.  Its  deliberations  were  presided 
over  by  Dr.  Steane. 

A  sketch  of  the  history  of  the  denomination,  and 
of  its  early  literature,  was  given,  at  the  request  of  the 
Provisional  Committee,  by  Mr.  Underbill ;  and  a  report 
presented,  recommending  the  formation  of  a  Society.  It 
was  accordingly  resolved,  on  the  motion  of  Drs.  Cox  and 
Price,  that  such  a  Society  should  be  formed.     Its  laws 


and  constitution  were  freely  discussed,  and  a  Council  was 
named  to  cany  the  intentions  of  the  meeting  into  effect. 
Drs.  Murch,  Godmn,  Acworth,  Davies,  the  Revs.  C.  E. 
Birt,  Black,  Mursell,  Groser,  Stovel,  and  many  others 
took  part  in  the  proceedings. 

At  this  meeting,  and  subsequently  at  the  Session 
of  the  Baptist  Union  in  Leeds,  in  1845,  considerable 
difficulty  was  felt  in  adopting  the  designation  for  the 
Society  proposed  by  the  Provisional  Committee,  from  the 
general  wish  to  avoid  what  might  seem  to  be  a  recogni- 
tion of  any  man  as  master  on  earth.  This  question  was, 
liowever,  finally  settled  by  the  replies  to  a  Circular, 
forwarded  in  the  month  of  November,  1845,  to  all  the 
subscribers.  A  large  majority  detennined  to  retain  the 
name  first  announced. 

The  Society  being  thus  constituted,  a  Prospectus  of 
its  design  was  immediately  issued.  A  sufficient  number 
of  subscribers  at  once  appeared  to  justify  the  Council  in 
proceeding.  Early  in  1845,  the  publication  of  the 
volume  of  Tracts  on  Liberty  of  Conscience  and  Persecu- 
tion was  resolved  upon,  and  steps  were  taken  to  procure 
the  works  requisite  for  the  uses  of  the  Society.  A 
longer  time,  however,  elapsed  than  was  at  first  anticipated, 
owing  to  the  necessity  of  preparing,  as  far  as  possible,  an 
accurate  list  of  Baptist  authors  and  their  writings,  and 
of  ascertaining  the  existence  and  accessibility  of  the 
works  to  be  reprinted.  The  difficulties  also  attendant 
on  the  formation  of  a  new  Society,  the  complicated 
arrangements  to  be  made  for  the  printing  and  distri- 
bution of  the  volumes,  with  the  importance  of  allowing 
ample  time  for  editorial  labour,  delayed  the  appearance 
of  the  volume  to  the  spring  of  1846.  The  general 
approbation  with  which  that  work  has  been  received, 
justifies  to  the  Council  and  to  the  subscribers  the 
propriety  of  the  course  adopted. 

^Meanwhile,  efforts  were  made  to  increase  the  number 
of  subscribers.  Lectures  were  delivered  at  various  places 
in  London  by  the  Rev.  W.  H.  Black  and  Mr.  Underbill ; 
and  also  in  Abingdon,  Oxford,  Stroud,  Bristol,  Leeds, 
Bradford,  Liverpool,   and  Birmingham.     Commendation 


of  their  object  also  reached  the  Council  from  several 
Associations  ;  also  from  Calcutta,  Canada,  Nova  Scotia, 
and  the  United  States.  It  is  with  great  pleasure  they 
report,  that  a  considerable  number  of  copies  of  their 
works  have  been  subscribed  for  in  India  and  Canada. 
From  the  United  States  a  considerable  accession  of 
subscribers  is  likewise  anticipated.  The  number  of  sub- 
scribers now  on  the  register  amounts  to  1044. 

The  increase  of  business  consequent  on  the  publication 
of  the  volumes,  rendered  necessary  the  engagement  of  a 
competent  person  to  conduct  it ;  the  Council  have 
accordingly  engaged  the  services  of  Mr.  George  Offor, 
jun.,  at  a  small  remuneration. 

In  the  first  month  of  this  year  the  Council  were 
enabled  to  complete  the  first  year's  issue  by  the 
publication  of  the  Broadmead  Records.  The  value 
of  this  interesting  document  of  church  history  cannot 
be  over-estimated.  It  exhibits  the  origin  and  internal 
arrangements  of  a  church  of  Christ,  not  only  at  a  most 
interesting  period  of  its  existence, — that  of  its  early 
struggles  to  follow  the  teachings  of  the  Divine  Word  in 
all  their  fulness  and  integrity,  free  from  human  or 
traditional  legislation — but  also  during  a  series  of  years 
of  national  commotion  and  change,  when  the  principles 
of  its  formation  and  their  upholders  had  to  pass  through 
the  ordeal  of  bitter  persecution.  It  is,  moreover,  the 
only  known  existing  manuscript  among  our  churches, 
containing  so  full,  and  detailed  an  account  of  the 
sufferings  of  the  communities  of  the  Baptist  faith  and 
order,  endured  for  righteousness'  sake,  in  the  reign  of  the 
Second  Charles. 

The  Council  refer  with  gratification  to  the  handsome 
style  and  appearance  of  these  volumes,  and  to  the 
quantity  of  valuable  matter,  amounting  to  1154  octavo 
pages,  which  they  have  been  enabled  to  return  for  the 
moderate  subscription  received.  This  has  been  done  on 
the  calculation  that  the  1500  copies  printed  would  be 
disposed  of;  and  it  is  obvious  that  as  the  number  of 
subscribers  is  increased,  so  the  number  of  volumes 
annually  issued   will   increase   in    the   like  proportion. 


8 

This  increase  is  every  way  desirable,  if  only  to  shorten 
the  term  of  years  that  must  be  occupied  in  the  issue  of 
any  number  of  volumes.  Should,  however,  the  list 
remain  without  any  material  additions,  they  will 
necessarily  be  confined  to  the  issue  of  two  only  in  each 
year ;  but  even  then  equalling,  and  in  some  cases 
exceeding,  the  average  of  other  similar  societies. 

Arrangements  have  been  made  for  the  speedy  com- 
mittal to  the  press  of  the  volumes  for  the  present  year. 
The  first  of  these  will  be  a  critical  and  standard  edition 
of  the  immortal  Allegory  of  Bunyan.  The  Pilgrim's 
Progress,  as  a  literary  production  and  work  of  art,  has, 
by  common  consent,  taken  rank  as  the  finest  allegorical 
work  existing  in  this  or  in  any  other  language.  But  it 
is  yet  further  endeared  to  the  heart  of  Christendom  by 
its  truthful  delineations  of  the  spiritual  life  of  the  citi- 
zens of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  The  great  reputation 
it  has  thus  acquired,  has  rendered  every  particular  relat- 
ing to  its  conception  and  first  appearance  of  deep  in- 
terest. Fears  have,  however,  been  excited,  and  repeatedly 
expressed,  as  by  the  late  Robert  Southey,  that,  owing  to 
the  numberless  forms  and  editions  through  which  it  has 
passed,  there  have  arisen  many  changes  and  variations,  of 
no  slight  importance,  from  the  original  work  of  the  gifted 
author.  Investigation  has  proved  that  these  fears  were  not 
without  foundation  :  some  thousands  of  errors  have  been 
detected  in  professedly  the  most  correct  of  modern  editions. 

The  attention  of  the  Council  was  early  called  to  this 
matter,  and  it  appeared  to  them  that  no  one  could  more 
suitably  supply  this  desideratum — a  correct  edition  of 
the  original  text — than  a  literary  society  of  that  body  to 
which  Bunyan  confessedly  belonged.  Circumstances  at 
the  same  time  concurred  to  procure  for  the  Council  the 
use  of  the  only  copies  of  the  first  edition  now  known  to 
exist.  These  belong  respectively,  the  first  part  to  R.  S. 
Holford,  Esq.,  the  second  part  to  the  Executors  of  the 
late  Lea  Wilson,  Esq.  To  these  gentlemen  the  Council 
and  the  commonwealth  of  letters,  are  greatly  indebted 
for  the  permission  so  kindly  and  readily  granted,  to  re- 
print from  their  unique  and  therefore  extremely  valuable 


copies.  The  editorship  has  been  committed  to  the  able 
bauds  of  George  OfFor,  Esq.,  and  the  Council  anticipate 
the  gratification  of  shortly  presenting  the  subscribers 
with  a  correct  and  standard  edition  of  "  The  Pilgrim's 
Progress  from  this  world  to  that  which  is  to  come/'  by 
John  Bunyan;  reprinted  from  his  own  first  editions,  with 
a  collation  of  every  other  edition  published  under  the 
author's  own  eye  :  so  that  the  first  and  last  labours  of  this 
truly  great  writer,  on  this  noble  work  of  genius  and 
piety,  will  appear.  The  editor  will  prefix  a  biblio- 
graphical notice  of  early  English  allegories,  and  much 
interesting  and  curious  information  on  the  versions  and 
editions  of  this  renowned  work. 

Other  works,  either  determined  upon  or  under  con- 
sideration by  the  Council,  are  : — Henry  Danver's  Trea- 
tise of  Baptism,  to  be  edited  by  the  Rev.  W.  H.  Black  ; 
the  early  treatises  of  John  Canne,  on  the  Necessitie  of 
Separation  from  the  Church  of  England,  and  the  Unlaw- 
fulness of  Hearing  its  Ministers,  &c.,  to  be  edited  by  the 
Rev.  C.  Stovel ;  the  writings  of  the  justly  celebrated 
Roger  Williams  on  the  Bloudy  Tenent  of  Persecution, 
to  be  edited  by  Mr.  Uuderhill ;  the  works  of  William 
Dell,  at  one  time  master  of  Caius  College,  Cambridge, 
to  be  edited  by  the  Rev.  B.  Evans ;  the  works  of  Chris- 
topher Blackwood,  Benjamin  Reach,  Hercules  Collins, 
John  Smyth,  and  Thomas  Helwys.  Also  a  collection 
of  the  various  Confessions  of  Faith  issued  by  the  deno- 
mination in  the  seventeenth  century,  and  some  historical 
documents  of  importance  necessary  to  the  elucidation  of 
early  baptist  history  in  this  country. 

A  collection  of  the  Avritings  of  some  foreign  baptists, 
particularly  those  of  Simon  Menno,  and  a  translation  of 
portions,  if  not  of  the  whole,  of  the  remarkable  work 
known  as  the  Dutch  Martyrology,  or  Bloody  Theatre  of 
Martyrs  of  Baptist  Churches  down  to  the  seventeenth 
.  century,  have  been  proposed  to  the  Council.  Very 
much  has  to  be  done  by  way  of  wiping  off  the  reproach 
so  unjustly  attached  to  the  name  of  those  sufferers  for 
conscience'  sake.  At  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  in 
opposition  to  every  other  religious  body,  papal  and  pro- 


10 

testant,  they  asserted  the  right  of  freedom  of  thought, 
and  sought  the  }3urity  of  the  church  of  Christ.  It  is 
witliin  the  legitimate  object  of  your  Society  to  translate 
and  publish  their  writings,  to  give  in  their  own  form  the 
sentiments  they  held,  and,  through  the  medium  of  the 
deeply  affecting  narratives  of  their  sufferings  and  mar- 
tyrdoms, to  place  in  the  true  light  the  principles  and 
character  of  these  despised  and  calumniated  men. 
Whether  this  shall  be  done  must  rest  on  the  general 
support  and  wish  of  the  subscribers  themselves. 

In  conclusion,  the  Council  would  remark  that,  Avliile 
the  position  of  your  Society  is  encouraging,  and  indica- 
tive of  the  warm  support  of  the  denomination,  they 
desire  a  yet  wider  circulation  for  the  works  they  are 
privileged  to  issue.  As  the  first  direct  effort  ever  made 
to  provide  a  denominational  literature,  it  is  full  of  hope 
for  the  future.  Many  portions  of  the  country,  however, 
have  not  been  penetrated  by  our  publications.  A  large 
field  lies  yet  uncultivated  for  the  promotion  of  a  sound 
and  correct  literature,  which,  while  catholic  in  its  spirit, 
shall  neither  avoid  nor  withhold  the  enunciation  of  any 
portion  of  divine  truth.  We  have  a  history  and  a  litera- 
ture singularly  illustrative  of  the  divine  purposes  of  Him 
who  is  head  over  all  things  to  his  church,  and  answering 
through  every  age  to  the  prophetic  intimation  of  the 
great  apostle  of  the  gentiles, — "-All  that  tuill  live  godly 
in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution  T  Tlie  produc- 
tions of  these  suffering  pilgrims  are  fitted  to  animate  and 
cheer,  to  direct  and  guide,  those  who  follow  them,  and  to 
endear  to  our  hearts  the  noble  principles  which,  even  in 
the  most  favoured  times,  brought  them  under  disadvan- 
tages and  disal)ilities,  both  civil  and  religious,  from 
which  their  descendants  are  not  yet  wholly  free. 

The  individual  efforts  and  recommendation  of  the 
subscribers  are  therefore  earnestly  requested  to  enlarge 
the  circulation  of  the  records  of  their  thoughts  and 
deeds,  and  to  promote  the  extension  of  the  principles  of 
truth  and  righteousness,  which  must  ever  stand  in  peril 
while  the  world  practically  denies  the  supremacy  of  the 
Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth. 


g        «^ 


=a 


•^ 


^ 

o 

H 

Oh 

S 

^ 

O 

H 
^ 

CO 

u 

CC 

o 

zn 

o 

P3 

o 

< 

y^ 

H 

< 

S 

1 — 1 

Pm 

a 

< 

H 

5^ 

O 
El 

fe 

H 

O 

H 

P^ 

CO 

H 

P5 

«*^ 


Eh       bc 


6  o   a 


tf 


P5 


^ 


*-;    .2 


lllllllilfll  Ijl!;; 


I 


i!il!illi!(|;:v'f} 


ili  llli:ilM;li'' 


ill  m 


Wmmi 


if:'   \H 


