as 

£"00 
A53 


to  tjjc 


^(Mi^jL^     flabrarp 
0 


at 


TO. 


THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 

The  Buddha  of  Christendom.     A  Book  for 

the  Present  Crisis 5/- 

The  Silence  of  God. 

Sixth  Edition 2/€ 

Human  Destiny. 

Fifth  Edition 3/b 

The    Coming    Prince;    or,    The    Seventy 
Weeks  of  Daniel. 

Seventh  Edition 5/' 

Daniel  in  the  Critics'  Den.  A  Reply  to 
Prof.  Driver  and  the  (late)  Dean  of  Canter 
bury.  Second  Edition  .  .  .3/6  net. 

The  Gospel  and  its  Ministry.  A  Handbook 
of  Evangelical  Truth.  Twelfth  Edition, 
Revised 2/6 

Pseudo-Criticism  ;  or.The  Higher  Criticism 

and  its  Counterfeit          ....      3/6 

"  For  Us  Men " :  Chapters  on  Redemp 
tion  Truths 2/6  net' 

A  Doubter's    Doubts  about  Science  and 

Religion  (Out  of  print.) 


THE    BIBLE 


AND 


MODERN    CRITICISM 


BY 

SIR   ROBERT   ANDERSON,   K.C.B.,  LL.D. 


WITH    A    PREFACE 

BY  THE  RIGHT  REVEREND 

HANDLEY   C.   G.    MOULE,    D.D. 

BISHOP  OK  DURHAM 


FIFTH  EDITION 

LONDON 
HODDER    AND    STOUGHTON 

27  PATERNOSTER   ROW 

1905 


PREFACE 

I  ^HE  following  chapters  have  little  need  of 
-L  any  prefatory  remarks  of  mine.  Alike 
their  subject,  their  material,  and  the  author's 
handling  of  that  material,  will  command  the 
attention  of  a  wide  circle  of  readers,  and  will 
indeed  repay  it.  But  I  am  honoured  by  the 
request  to  prefix  these  few  paragraphs,  and  I 
obey. 

I  have  the  author's  full  leave  to  say  that  there 
are  details  in  the  matter  of  the  book,  and  even 
certain  aspects  of  the  treatment,  from  which  I 
hold  myself  detached.  For  example,  I  cannot 
commit  myself  to  concurrence  with  the  whole 
of  the  important  but  incidental  criticism  of  the 
Revised  Version.  I  am  in  suspense  on  some 
main  items  of  Sir  R.  Anderson's  discussion  of 
outlines  of  the  prophetic  future,  while  I  regard 
with  profound  respect  the  ability  and  the  sug- 
gestiveness  of  the  discussion.  Again,  I  must 
dissociate  myself  from  certain  passages  which 


vi  PREFACE 

reflect  upon  the  animus  of  some  representatives 
of  the  New  Criticism  with  a  severity  I  cannot 
follow.  Among  both  leaders  and  followers  in 
that  school  I  reckon  some  much-respected  friends, 
of  whose  reverent  and  Christian  aims  I  am 
sure ;  and  that  fact  is  continually  with  me  in 
any  expression  of  the  profound  anxiety  with 
which  I  view  the  tendency  of  the  school. 

But  when  I  have  said  this,  I  am  amply  free,  as 
I  am  earnestly  willing,  to  avow  my  mental  and 
spiritual  sympathy  with  the  great  envoi  of  this 
remarkable  book. 

What  is  the  book  ?  It  is  the  free  and  (to  use 
the  word  in  its  best  sense)  popular  presentation 
of  the  results  of  an  independent  study  of  the  New 
Criticism,  as  actually  put  before  us  in  representa 
tive  works,  done  by  a  student  entirely  free  from 
professional  bias,  and  trained  in  a  severe  school 
of  legal  and  judicial  investigation  to  sift  witnesses 
and  weigh  evidence.  It  is  an  example  of  exactly 
the  sort  of  work  which,  in  my  opinion,  the  Church 
needs  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  which  is,  I 
fear,  lamentably  rare  to-day — the  careful  study  of 
religious  problems  by  laymen  at  once  open-minded 
and  devout.  In  the  best  specimens  of  such  study 
there  is  often,  to  my  thinking,  a  quite  peculiar 
value ;  a  fresh  and  bracing  air  of  thought  all  their 


PREFACE  vii 

own,  a  faculty  for  throwing  wholesome  light  upon 
subjects  tangled  by  the  over-handling  of  experts. 
Experts,  as  Sir  R.  Anderson  often  pertinently 
reminds  us,  are  by  no  means,  as  such,  good 
judges. 

"  At  the  bar  we  sometimes  find  a  man's  logic 
swamped  by  his  learning ;  and  so  it  is  in  theo 
logy."  Thus  wrote  the  late  Lord  Hatherley  to 
me,  in  a  private  letter,  thirty  years  ago,  and  went 
on  to  say  that  he  wished  for  leisure  to  illustrate 
the  poor  reasoning  power  of  some  of  the  greatest 
German  literati.  Lord  Hatherley  was  one  of 
our  first  masters  of  evidence.  He  was  a  life-long 
student  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  And  the  modest 
Introduction  to  his  Continuity  is  a  fine  summing- 
up  in  favour  of  their  properly  supernatural 
character.  That  book  was  a  noble  lay  contribu 
tion  to  the  defence  of  faith.  Another  master  of 
the  practical  application  of  legal  science  gives  us 
another  here. 

And  is  there  not  a  cause?  The  attitude 
towards  Holy  Scripture  of  a  vast  deal  of  cultured 
thought  and  responsible  teaching  at  present  offers 
assuredly  a  problem  which  it  is  idle  to  dismiss  as 
if  it  were  not  portentous.  By  whatever  process 
it  has  come  to  be,  teachers  and  disciples  far  and 
wide  now  regard  the  Old  Testament  (to  speak 


viii  PREFACE 


of  it  only  for  the  instant)  from  an  angle  totally 
different  (I  use  the  words  deliberately)  from  that 
taken  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  alike  before  and 
after  His  Resurrection  from  the  dead.  To  Him, 
tempted,  teaching,  suffering,  dying,  risen,  "  it  is 
written"  was  a  formula  of  infinite  import.  The 
principle  this  expressed  lay  at  the  heart  of  His 
teaching.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  it 
belonged  to  the  pulse,  to  the  vital  breath,  of  His 
message  to  others,  and,  what  is  mysteriously  yet 
more,  to  His  certainty  about  Himself.  But  in 
wide  circles  of  our  Christendom  it  is  now  openly 
or  tacitly  taken  to  be  out  of  date,  to  be  narrow, 
to  be  uncultured,  to  make  much  of  "it  is  written;" 
as  if  an  appeal  to  a  definite  supernatural  book- 
revelation  were  a  thing  discredited  and  to  be 
given  up. 

If  a  severe  necessity  of  irrefragable  truth 
demands  this,  be  it  so.  But  let  not  the  conclu 
sion  be  reached,  or  rested  in,  light-heartedly,  and 
smoothly  decorated  with  the  comfortable  phrase 
ology  current  in  articles  and  reviews.  The  con 
clusion,  if  true,  is  portentous.  It  is  a  confession 
that  on  a  matter  central  in  His  message  our 
Master  was  much  mistaken.  He  appears  thus  as 
not  merely  capable  of  nescience ;  that  is  a  very 
different  matter ;  the  most  cautious,  the  most 


PREFACE  ix 


worshipping,  theology  may  hold  that  He  con 
sented,  in  His  Humanity,  to  limitations  of  His 
conscious  knowledge  and  to  silence  outside  those 
bounds.  But  here  He  appears  as  ignorant  with 
that  sort  of  ignorance  which  profoundly  impairs 
the  whole  value  of  a  teacher — the  ignorance  of 
the  man  who  does  not  know  where  his  knowledge 
ends,  and  so  makes  confident  affirmations,  and 
draws  confident  inferences,  where  his  basis  as  to 
facts  is  unsound. 

Such  a  fallible  Christ  lies  open  to  the  suspicion 
of  fallibility  on  other  matters  than  the  nature  and 
integrity  of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  reasonably. 
The  theology  which  denies  the  Lord  abnormal 
knowledge  of  facts  of  the  past  is  only  consistent 
when  it  extends  its  denial  to  the  future,  and  takes 
cum  grano  the  New  Testament  doctrine  of  His 
Return,  which  is  a  matter  either  of  revelation,  or 
of  the  vaguest  and  most  impalpable  forecast. 
Such  extensions  have  undoubtedly  come  to  be 
freely  made  within  Christian  circles ;  and  not 
only  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Biblica. 

If  these  conclusions  be  demanded  by  irrefutable 
fact,  let  them  be  made,  and  accepted.  But  not 
(I  repeat)  light-heartedly,  and  as  if  we  were  the 
freer  for  them,  and  could  talk  glibly  about  them 
in  the  best  modern  style.  Let  us  make  them 


x  PREFACE 

with  a  groan,  and  take  care  to  carve  no  more  the 
unauthentic  promise  on  the  tombs  of  our  beloved. 

But  first  let  us  be  absolutely  sure  that  our 
detraction  from  the  complete  infallibility  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  infallible  grounds.  Let 
us  take  particular  care  to  be  sure  that  its  basis  is 
no  a  priori  theory  of  the  genesis  of  Religion, 
which  may  even  already  be  on  its  way  to  discredit 
in  the  court  of  knowledge  and  thought. 

Wisely  does  Sir  R.  Anderson  disclaim  any 
neat  theory  of  inspiration ;  as  wisely  does  he 
emphasise  the  true,  the  profound,  humanity  of  the 
Bible.  But  all  the  more  is  he  in  the  right  when 
he  analyses  with  the  utmost  rigour  the  flaws  in 
the  modern  analysis  of  the  Book,  and  calls 
reverent  attention  to  the  mysterious  facts  of  its 
organic  structure,  and  gives  us  both  precept  and 
example  for  an  always  deepening  study  of  its 
hidden  treasures. 

The  matter  is  one  where,  while  the  fairness  of 
controversy  must  be  guarded,  as  ever,  its  mere 
courtesies  may  not  always  be  in  place.  For  the 
question  is  of  tremendous  urgency.  "  We  are 
contending  for  our  all." 

HANDLEY  DUNELM. 


PREFATORY   NOTE 

r  I  ^  H  E  title  of  this  book  is  borrowed  from  The 
-L  Times.  It  was  the  heading  given  to  an 
important  correspondence,  in  which  I  was  per 
mitted  to  take  a  prominent  part,  some  years  ago, 
in  the  columns  of  the  leading  journal. 

I  will  only  add  that  my  obligations  to  the 
Bishop  of  Durham  are  much  greater  even  than 
they  here  appear  to  be.  And  I  am  deeply 
indebted  to  two  other  friends  for  valuable  help. 
I  would  specially  name  the  Rev.  Robert  Sinker, 
D.D.,  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

R.  A. 


NOTE   TO   THE    FOURTH    EDITION 

THE  following  paragraphs  from  the  "  Note  to 
the  Second  Edition "  contain  all  that  seems 
necessary  by  way  of  preface  in  issuing  a  Fourth 
Edition  of  this  work.  Or  if  I  add  anything,  it 
will  be  merely  to  express  my  appreciation  of 
the  generosity  and  favour  with  which  the  book 
has  been  received  by  Christians  generally. 


xii  NOTE   TO   THE  FOURTH  EDITION 

Any  hostile  criticisms  which  have  been  offered 
on  statements  contained  in  these  pages  are  fully 
answered  by  other  portions  of  the  book  itself. 
And  my  apology  for  all  "  sins  of  omission  "  will 
be  found  in  the  opening  sentence  of  Chapter 
XIX.  Moreover,  a  detailed  reply  to  certain 
favourite  theories  of  the  critics,  which  I  am 
said  to  have  left  unnoticed,  would  have  no  weight 
with  the  critics  themselves,  and  is  not  needed 
by  those  for  whom  the  book  is  intended. 

Take  ex.  gr.  the  theory  as  to  the  late  date 
of  the  Books  of  Moses.  Even  if  the  case  made 
out  by  the  critics  were  as  strong  as  it  is  weak, 
it  would  be  refuted  by  the  single  fact  that  the 
Pentateuch  was  emphatically  the  Bible  of  the 
Samaritans.  That  the  Samaritans  would  have 
accorded  such  peculiar  and  unbounded  reverence 
to  purely  Jewish  Books,  and  to  Jewish  Books  of 
a  period  long  after  the  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes 
of  the  house  of  Israel,  is  a  figment  unworthy  of 
serious  discussion.  Its  acceptance  by  the  Higher 
Critics  gives  proof  that  they  are  incapable  of 
dealing  with  evidence. 

R.  A. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER   I 

The  purpose  of  the  book,  i.  Appeals  to  authority  barred,  2. 
The  Martyrs,  2.  Shallow  and  jaunty  scepticism,  4.  Prof. 
Cheyne's  Encyclopedia  Biblica,  5.  Credulity  of  the  critics,  9. 


CHAPTER   II 

The  Bible  a  human  book,  10.  Rationalists  and  Revolutionists, 
12.  Dean  Alford  quoted,  13.  The  Encyclopaedia  Biblica  and 
Hastings'  Bible.  Dictionary,  14.  Are  the  Gospels  inspired  ?  15. 
Police  officers  v.  the  Saints,  17.  Quotations  from  Goldwin 
Smith,  19  ;  and  from  Matthew  Arnold,  20.  The  question 
again  restated,  21. 


CHAPTER  III 

Origin  of  the  Higher  Criticism,  22.  The  Reformation  and  the 
Bible,  23.  Neglect  of  Scripture,  25.  How  to  meet  the 
critics,  27.  Professors  and  book  scholars,  28.  The  "  Ptole 
maic  System/'  29.  The  letter  of  a  penitent  sceptic,  31. 

CHAPTER   IV 

Charles  II.,  36.  Faith  and  morals,  37.  Robertson  Smith's 
apostasy,  38.  History  and  aims  of  the  Higher  Criticism,  39. 
Prof.  Cheyne,  41.  The  Higher  Criticism  not  a  preserve  of 
Hebraists,  42.  The  Pentateuch,  43.  Isaiah  II.,  45.  Harnack 
on  the  New  Testament,  48.  The  nature  of  prophecy,  50. 

xiii 


xiv  CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  V 

Charles  Reade  on  miracles,  52.  Christianised  sceptics,  53. 
Prayer,  and  a  silent  heaven,  54.  The  Divinity  of  Christ  the 
real  question,  55.  Matthew  Arnold  on  miracles,  56.  The 
rejection  of  Christ  and  of  the  Bible,  58. 

CHAPTER  VI 

Presumption  for  a  written  Revelation,  64.  "  Brainless  idiots," 
and  great  lawyers,  65.  Christianity  rests  on  a  Divine  revela 
tion,  67.  The  Old  Testament  accredited  by  Christ,  67. 
Christ  discredited  by  the  critics,  69.  Why  not  have  two 
wives?  70.  Kenosis  theories,  71.  The  two  sides  of  the 
tapestry,  77. 

CHAPTER  VII 

The  method  of  the  inspiration,  78.  David  and  his  sin  :  Carlyle's 
testimony,  80.  Verbal  inspiration,  facts  and  fallacies,  83. 
Yahweh  or  Jehovah,  87.  The  human  element  in  miracles,  88. 
Verbal  inspiration  discussed,  89. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

Verbal  inspiration,  continued,  95.  Dependent  on  translations,  96. 
Words  are  but  counters :  "  Eternal,"  97.  "  Priest,"  98. 
Original  records  lost,  101.  Various  readings,  102.  The 
Revised  Version  of  New  Testament,  104.  The  "Herald 
Angels'  Song,"  108. 

CHAPTER   IX 

The  Creation  story  of  Genesis,  in.  The  Gladstone- Huxley 
controversy,  112.  The  Times  correspondence  of  1892,  115. 
The  teaching  of  Genesis  and  the  creation  "day,"  119. 

CHAPTER  X 

The  Book  of  Daniel,  129.  Questions  of  language,  131.  "  His 
torical  Errors,"  135.  The  Canon,  138.  The  "Seventy 
Weeks,"  138. 


CONTENTS  xv 


CHAPTER  XI 

The  Book  of  Jonah.  An  Irish  story,  142.  Whale  or  shark,  143. 
The  miracle,  146.  Accredited  by  Christ,  147.  Historical 
difficulties,  149. 

CHAPTER  XII 

Moral  difficulties :  Queen  Victoria  and  a  homicide,  155.  Des 
truction  of  the  Canaanites,  157.  The  Jews  and  the  world, 
159.  The  price  of  Araunah's  threshing-floor,  161.  The 
chronology  of  the  Bible,  162. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

The  Higher  Criticism  and  the  New  Testament :  a  conversation 
with  a  Higher  Critic,  169.  Bishop  Gore's  school,  172.  In 
spiration  of  the  Gospels,  175.  The  Lord  accredited  the  Old 
Testament,  175.  He  assured  the  inspiration  of  the  New 
Testament,  176.  The  Epistles,  179.  The  Apocalypse,  183. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

Vaccination :  the  scepticism  virus,  185.  The  "  Ptolemaic 
System"  of  Bible  Study,  186.  The  First  and  Fourth  Gospels 
as  read  on  this  system,  187. 


CHAPTER  XV 

The  true  exegesis  of  the  Gospels,  194.  The  scope  of  Matthew, 
198.  The  Lord's  testimony,  201.  The  crisis  of  the  Ministry, 
204.  The  parables  of  chapter  xiii.,  205.  Other  effects  of 
His  rejection,  206. 

CHAPTER  XVI 

The  Parousia.  Amateur  detectives,  and  ignorance  of  the  Higher 
Critics,  210.  A  conference  on  the  Gospel,  and  the 
doctrine  of  the  types,  216. 


xvi  CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  XVII 

Errors  in  the  Gospels  :  an  Irish  story,  221.  The  blind  men 
outside  Jericho,  224.  Theudas's  insurrection,  226.  "This 
generation  shall  not  pass,"  227.  The  Inscription  on  the 
Cross,  227. 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

The  Last  Supper  and  the  day  of  the  Crucifixion,  232,  The 
"  Preparation,"  237.  The  day  of  the  "  First-fruits,"  238. 
The  Calendar  a  prophecy  :  Doctrine  of  the  Festivals,  243. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

Summary  and  conclusion,  249.  The  critics  and  their  com 
petence,  252.  Practical  advice,  255.  "Post-mortem  talk," 
258.  The  Genesis  "documents,"  260.  The  origin  of  Higher 
Criticism,  261.  Kenosis  teaching  of  the  Higher  Criticism, 
and  the  issue  at  stake,  264. 

APPENDIX — 

PAGE 

NOTE      I.  Isolated  Texts  relied  on  by  the   Higher 

Critics         .  .  .  .  .267 

NOTE    II.  The  Revised  Version  of  the  New  Testament  269 
NOTE  III.  "  Three  Days  and  Three  Nights  "    .  .271 

NOTE  IV.  The  Genealogies  of  our  Lord  «  .  273 

NOTE    V.  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  the  Kingdom  of 

God,  and  the  Church        .  .  .  275 


CHAPTER   I 

F  N  these  days  of  unrest  many  Christians  are 
1  distressed  by  doubts  whether  the  Bible 
may  be  received  with  the  settled  and  simple 
faith  accorded  to  it  in  the  past.  They  have  been 
corrupted  or  disturbed  by  the  Christianised 
scepticism  which  prevails;  and,  to  use  an  apt 
illustration,  their  anchor  has  dragged  and  they 
are  drifting.  It  may  be,  therefore,  that  one 
who  has  known  similar  experiences,  and  is  no 
stranger  to  such  doubts,  may  be  able  in  some 
measure  to  help  others  who  are  thus  troubled. 

In  the  history  of  Christendom,  Churches  of 
every  name,  and — as  judged  from  the  inquirer's 
point  of  view— of  every  degree  of  orthodoxy  or 
of  error,  have  agreed  in  regarding  the  Bible 
as  a  divinely  inspired  and  infallible  revelation. 
No  detailed  proof  of  this  statement  is  necessary 
here,  for  not  only  is  its  truth  acknowledged, 
but  the  grounds  on  which  the  historic  belief 


2         THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

is  challenged  lie  entirely  apart  from  all  appeals 
to  authority. 

And  no  appeals  of  this  kind  shall  prejudice 
my  discussion  of  the  question.  Being  by 
temperament  and  habit  a  sceptic,  they  weigh 
but  little  with  me  personally,  and  I  have  found 
a  firmer  basis  for  my  faith.  But  there  are  two 
sides  to  this.  Many  there  are  who  loudly  protest 
against  appeals  to  authority,  and  yet  their  own 
faith  in  Holy  Scripture  has  been  jettisoned 
solely  because  contemporary  scholars  of  a  certain 
school  have  declared  against  the  old  beliefs. 

If  authority  is  to  decide  the  question,  the 
issue  is  not  doubtful.  For  every  one  of  these 
apostles  of  unfaith,  scholars  of  equal  eminence 
may  be  cited  on  the  other  side.  And  behind 
them  is  the  overwhelming  testimony  of  "  the 
whole  congregation  of  Christian  people  dispersed 
throughout  the  whole  world,"  who,  all  down  the 
ages  until  recent  times,  have  spoken  with  one 
voice  upon  this  subject.  If  our  nineteenth  century 
critics  are  to  be  listened  to,  are  these  to  be  refused 
a  hearing  ? 

Nor  can  we  forget  the  martyrs,  who  in  un 
numbered  thousands — their  names  are  written  in 
heaven,  but  earth  has  kept  no  record  of  them — 
braved  every  kind  of  agony  of  mind  and  body 


CH.  I.]  THE   MARTYRS'  TESTIMONY  3 

that  could  be  devised  by  religious  hate — the  most 
fiendish  type  of  hate  that  fallen  human  nature 
knows.  It  was  not  strong  men  only  who  swelled 
their  ranks.  Weak  women  there  were,  too,  and 
even  children  were  not  wanting.  What  was  the 
secret  of  their  triumph  ?  Was  it  "  the  general 
sense  of  Scripture  corrected  in  the  light  of 
modern  research  "  ?  In  the  solitude  of  the  dungeon 
and  amidst  the  horrors  of  the  torture  chamber 
they  were  sustained  by  words  from  the  Bible, 
which  they  took  to  be  the  words  of  God.  Words, 
for  example,  such  as  these  :  "He  hath  said  '  I 
will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee,'  so  that 
we  may  boldly  say  *  The  Lord  is  my  helper,'  and 
1 1  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  unto  me.' ' 
But  further  knowledge  and  higher  culture,  forsooth, 
would  have  taught  them  that  the  words,  "  I  will 
never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee,"  are  but  an 
inaccurate  quotation  from  a  book  which  is  now 
known  not  to  have  the  authority  that  for  thousands 
of  years  has  been  attributed  to  it ;  and  that  the 
added  words  are  by  "a  sub-apostolic  writer" 
whose  treatise  is  separated  by  no  hard  and  fast 
lines  from  similar  writings  outside  the  canon  of 
Scripture. 

So  at  least  the  critics  would  have  us  believe. 
But  if  we  are  to  shut  out  the  testimony  of  the 


4         THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

martyrs,  as  well  as  that  of  "  Christian  people 
dispersed  throughout  the  whole  world,"  including 
contemporary  scholars  equal  in  fame  to  the  critics, 
let  us  not  be  guilty  of  the  unfairness  and  stupidity 
of  assuming  at  the  start  that  the  critics  are  right. 
Let  us  refuse  appeals  to  authority  on  either  side, 
and  deal  with  the  question  on  its  merits. 

And  this  leads  me,  by  way  of  further  preface, 
to  enter  a  protest  against  the  shallow  and  jaunty 
scepticism  of  the  day.  The  issues  at  stake  are 
tremendous,  and  in  dealing  with  them  no  degree 
of  earnestness  and  solemnity  can  be  excessive. 
One  of  the  apostles  of  unfaith  will  tell  us  that 
"  Milton  and  Shakespeare  and  Bacon,  and  Can 
ticles  and  the  Apocalypse  and  the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount,  and  the  eighth  chapter  of  Romans 
are  all  inspired."  That  "  there  is  a  true  inspira 
tion  in  the  instinct  of  the  owl ;  that  it  is  heard  in 
the  rushing  of  the  wind  ;  that  it  is  seen  in  the 
springing  of  a  blade  of  grass ;  that  it  murmurs 
along  the  streams  that  flow  among  the  hills." 
Such  trifling  is  deplorable.  A  mere  peasant  can 
see  that  if  this  be  the  meaning  of  inspiration,  we 
must  fall  back  upon  natural  religion.  If  the 
Bible  be  nothing  more  than  what  such  writers 
see  it  to  be,  Christianity  rests  on  no  rational  basis. 
This  is  no  argument  in  proof  that  the  Bible  is 


CH.  I.]      THE   "  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BIBLICA "  5 

inspired ;  but  it  ought  to  check  all  levity  in 
dealing  with  the  question.  If  my  bank-notes  are 
forgeries,  I  am  a  ruined  bankrupt ;  this  does  not 
prove  them  genuine,  but  it  will  prevent  my  parting 
with  them  unless  compelled  to  do  so  by  cogent 
proof  that  they  are  counterfeit. 

But  it  will  be  said,  perhaps,  that  in  England  at 
least  no  scholar  of  repute  among  the  Higher  Critics 
assumes  a  position  which  is  really  destructive  of 
Christianity.  Though  they  challenge  the  au 
thority  of  various  books  of  the  Canon,  they  leave 
untouched  all  that  is  vital.  Let  us  test  this. 
The  Encyclopedia  Biblica  is  the  most  recent 
exposition  of  the  views  of  this  school.  Its  editor 
is  Professor  Cheyne,  of  Oxford,1  a  man  who  is  a 
teacher  of  teachers,  and  whose  name  stands  high 
as  an  authority  on  all  subjects  of  this  kind.  The 
following  extracts  are  culled  from  the  article  on 
the  Gospels  : — 

"  Several  of  the  reported  sayings  of  Jesus  clearly  bear 
the  impress  of  a  time  which  he  did  not  live  to  see" 

(§  136). 

"  The  conclusion  is  inevitable  that  even  the  one 
Evangelist  whose  story  in  any  particular  case  involves 

1  To  give  him  his  full  title,  the  Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  M.A.,  D.D., 
Oriel  Professor  of  the  Interpretation  of  Holy  Scripture  at 
Oxford,  and  formerly  Fellow  of  Balliol  College ;  Canon  of 
Rochester. 


6        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

less  of  the  supernatural  than  that  of  the  others,  is  still 
very  far  from  being  entitled  on  that  account  to  claim 
implicit  acceptance  of  his  narrative"  (§  137). 

"  With  reference  to  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  .  .  .  the 
appearance  in  Jerusalem  to  the  two  women  is  almost 
universally  given  up.  .  .  .  The  statements  as  to  the 
empty  sepulchre  are  to  be  rejected  "  (§  138). 

"  As  for  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  and  the  four 
thousand,  so  also  for  the  withering  of  the  fig  tree,  we  still 
possess  a  clue  to  the  way  in  which  the  narrative  arose 
out  of  a  parable"  (§  142). 

"  It  is  very  conceivable  that  a  preacher  on  the  death 
of  Jesus  may  have  said,  purely  figuratively,  that  then 
was  the  veil  of  the  temple  rent  in  twain." 

"  We  must  endeavour  to  ascertain  how  many,  and  still 
more  what  sorts  of  cures  were  effected  by  Jesus.  It  is 
quite  possible  for  us  to  regard  as  historical  only  those  of 
the  class  which  even  at  the  present  day  physicians  are 
able  to  effect  by  psychical  methods, — as  more  especially 
cures  of  mental  maladies. 

"  It  is  not  at  all  difficult  to  understand  how  the 
contemporaries  of  Jesus,  after  seeing  some  wonderful 
deed  or  deeds  wrought  by  him  which  they  regarded  as 
miracles,  should  have  credited  him  with  every  other  kind 
of  miraculous  power  without  distinguishing,  as  the 
modern  mind  does,  between  those  maladies  which  are 
amenable  to  psychical  influences  and  those  which  are  not. 
It  is  also  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  cure  may 
often  have  been  only  temporary"  (§  144). 

No  one  who  reads  the  foregoing  extracts  will 
be  surprised  at  the  writer's  raising  the  question 


CH.  L]          AN   END   OF  CHRISTIANITY  7 

"  whether  any  credible  elements  were  to  be  found 
in  the  Gospels  at  all."  "  All  the  more  empha 
tically  "  therefore  he  enumerates  nine  passages 
which  he  saves  from  the  general  wreck.1  These, 
he  goes  on  to  say,  "  might  be  called  the  founda 
tion  pillars  of  a  truly  scientific  life  of  Jesus  ;  .  .  . 
they  prove  that  in  the  person  of  Jesus  we  have  to 
do  with  a  completely  human  being,  and  that  the 
Divine  is  to  be  sought  in  Him  only  in  the  form 
in  which  it  is  capable  of  being  found  in  a  man  ; 
they  also  prove  that  He  really  did  exist,  and 
that  the  Gospels  contain  at  least  some  absolutely 
trustworthy  facts  concerning  him."2 

Any  person  of  ordinary  intelligence  can  see 
that  this  teaching  makes  an  end  of  Christianity 
altogether.  The  public  facts  of  the  life  of  the  great 
Rabbi  of  Nazareth  are  not  questioned.  What 
the  world  saw  nineteen  centuries  ago,  the  world 
believes  to-day.  And  those  facts,  combined  with 
His  traditional  teaching,  may  be  made  the  basis 
of  a  Christianised  Buddhism  which  would  possibly 

1  These  are,  Matt.  xi.  5  (Luke  vii.  22) ;  Matt.  xii.  31,  f. ;  Mark  iii. 
21  ;  vi.  5,  f. ;  viii.  12 ;  viii.  14-21  ;  x.  17,  f. ;  xiii.  22,  and  xv.  34 
(Matt,  xxvii.  46). 

a  §  138.  I  trust  no  one  will  judge  me  harshly  for  thus 
reproducing  here  this  blasphemy.  I  deem  it  a  duty  to  do  so 
because  so  many  Christians  are  trifling  with  the  infidel  move 
ment  in  ignorance  of  its  aims  and  methods.  The  article  cited  is 
not  by  the  Editor. 


8         THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

be  the  best  of  all  human  religions.  But  Chris 
tianity  is  not  a  human  religion,  but  a  divine  revel 
ation  of  transcendental  truths  and  of  facts  that 
are  of  such  a  nature  that  no  amount  of  mere 
human  testimony  could  accredit  them. 

"  The  first  of  these  facts,  upon  which  all  the 
rest  depend,  is  that  the  Nazarene  was  the  Son  of 
God.  The  founder  of  Rome  was  believed  to  be 
the  divinely  begotten  child  of  a  vestal  Virgin. 
And  in  the  old  Babylonian  mysteries  a  similar 
parentage  was  ascribed  to  the  martyred  son  of  the 
Queen  of  Heaven.  What  reason  have  we  then 
for  distinguishing  the  birth  at  Bethlehem  from 
these  and  other  kindred  legends  of  the  ancient 
world?"' 

He  was,  we  read,  "  declared  to  be  the  Son  of 
God  o  •.  .  by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead." 
But  even  this  is  filched  from  us:  "  the  statements 
as  to  the  empty  sepulchre  are  to  be  rejected."  Some 
of  the  German  sceptics  formerly  accepted  the  public 
proofs  of  the  resurrection,  and  therefore  their 
teaching  seemed  to  imply  belief  in  that  supreme 
miracle.  Among  the  initiated,  however,  they  ex 
plained  the  "  resurrection  "  by  denying  the  death. 
The  cumulative  evidence  that  the  Nazarene  was 

1  The  Buddha  of  Christendom,  p.  96. 


CH.  I.]        CREDULITY  OF  THE  CRITICS  9 

seen  alive  after  the  Crucifixion  was  proof  that  He 
had  not  really  died.  As  He  hung  upon  the 
cross  He  swooned,  and  before  He  recovered  con 
sciousness  He  was  laid  in  the  sepulchre.  The 
superstitious  imagination  of  the  disciples,  unnerved 
by  the  terrible  ordeal  they  had  suffered,  gave  a 
colour  to  the  facts  ;  and  ere  the  Gospel  narratives 
came  to  be  written,  the  resurrection  legend  had 
gained  shape  and  substance.  But  the  Oxford 
infidelity  of  to-day  is  far  in  advance  of  German 
infidelity  of  half  a  century  ago.  The  Gospels  are 
now  romance  pure  and  simple,  with  no  foundation 
save  the  public  facts,  and  a  few  isolated  passages 
which  prove  that  the  great  Teacher  was  really  an 
historic  personage. 

And  the  objective  foundations  of  our  faith  being 
thus  destroyed,  Christianity  in  its  subjective  phase 
is  the  merest  superstition.  Not  one  of  the  nine 
authentic  passages,  thus  saved  from  the  wreck, 
will  avail  us  here.  Faith  is  impossible.  We 
must  fall  back  on  mere  opinions.  And  he  who 
would  die  for  his  opinions  is  a  silly  fanatic.  The 
man  who  has  nothing  to  rest  upon  but  Professor 
Cheyne's  Bible,  and  yet  believes  in  "  the  forgive 
ness  of  sins,  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the 
life  everlasting  "  is  obviously  a  credulous  person 
who  would  believe  anything. 


CHAPTER    II 

NO  error  lives  unless  it  rests  upon  some 
element  of  truth.  And  the  Higher 
Criticism  owes  its  vitality  to  the  fact  that 
the  Bible  is  a  human  book.  The  written 
Word  is  the  counterpart  of  the  Living 
Word.  And  the  ancient  controversies  about 
the  Christ  have  in  modern  times  their 
counterpart  in  controversies  about  the  Scrip 
tures.  Human  nature  being  what  it  is,  men 
in  their  eagerness  to  escape  from  one  error  are 
prone  to  rush  into  another.  The  old  Gnostic 
heresy,  in  that  development  of  it  which  main 
tained  that  everything  material  was  evil,  tended 
to  the  denial  of  the  humanity  of  Christ.  This 
led  to  an  assertion  of  His  humanity  in  a  way 
which  encroached  upon  the  doctrine  of  His 
Divine  nature.  In  the  swinging  of  the  pen 
dulum  of  opinion  the  mean  of  truth  was  lost, 
and  the  two  extremes  were  manifested  in  the 


CH.  II.]        THE   BIBLE   A   HUMAN   BOOK  u 

practical  denial  that  He  was  man  and  the 
practical  denial  that  He  was  God. 

So  has  it  been  with  the  Bible.  The  ration 
alism  of  the  post- Reformation  age  asserted  or 
assumed  that  the  Bible  was  only  and  altogether 
a  human  book.  An  unintelligent  orthodoxy 
maintained  that  it  was  only  and  altogether 
Divine.  And  both  these  extremes  find  advo 
cates  in  England  to-day.  The  sympathies  of 
the  Christian  are  naturally  with  those  who  give 
an  exclusive  prominence  to  the  Divine  side  of 
Scripture.  But  our  sympathies  must  not  betray 
us  into  a  participation  in  their  error.  Christ 
was  not  half  man  and  half  God  ;  He  was  abso 
lutely  human,  and  yet  absolutely  Divine.  And 
so  is  it  also  with  the  Bible.  While  it  is  absolutely 
the  Word  of  God,  it  is  also  the  most  thoroughly 
human  book  in  the  world.  Hence  its  amazing 
power  over  the  hearts  and  minds  of  men.  And 
our  condemnation  of  the  Higher  Critics  must 
not  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  if  they  have  not 
actually  rescued  this  truth,  they  have  brought 
it  into  prominence  and  made  it  real.  But  on 
the  other  hand  our  debt  to  them  in  this  regard 
cannot  be  allowed  to  outweigh,  or  even  to 
palliate,  the  evil  of  their  system. 

We  owe  a  debt  to  the  red  revolutionists  of 


12        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

a  century  ago.  But  what  lives  in  our  memory 
is  not  the  good  which  has  resulted  from  their 
work,  but  the  excesses  they  committed  in 
achieving  it.  The  German  rationalists  and 
their  imitators  and  disciples  of  the  Encyclo 
pedia  Biblica  are  in  their  own  sphere  on  a  par 
with  the  men  of  the  Reign  of  Terror  in  France. 
To  teach  us  that  a  queen  is  but  a  woman,  we 
do  not  need  the  shameful  spectacle  of  the  blood 
stained  guillotine,  the  debasing  lesson  that,  as 
Edmund  Burke  expressed  it,  "a  woman  is  but 
an  animal,  and  not  the  highest  kind  of  animal 
either."  And  we  can  know,  and  rejoice  in  the 
knowledge,  that  the  Bible  is  thoroughly,  ex 
quisitely  human,  without  having  to  suffer  the 
ordeal  of  seeing  our  adorable  Lord  thus 
patronised  and  blasphemed,  and  the  holy 
writings  which  testify  to  Him  perverted  and 
degraded. 

If  a  surgeon  thinks  only  of  his  patient's  dignity 
and  rank,  a  trembling  hand  perchance  may  unfit 
him  for  his  task.  But  the  man  who  plunges  his 
knife  into  a  living  human  body  as  though  it 
were  the  carcase  of  a  brute,  is  no  better  than 
a  butcher.  And  so  we  can  criticise  the  Bible 
on  its  human  side  without  ever  allowing 
ourselves  to  forget  that  it  is  "  the  living 


CH.  II.]          DEAN  ALFORD'S   ESTIMATE  13 

and  eternally  abiding  Word  of  God " ;  but  we 
search  in  vain  the  writings  of  the  critics  for 
any  indication  of  the  reverence  which  is  its  due. 

How  different  the  spirit  which  animates  them 
from  that  which  characterised  that  great  expositor 
and  divine,  Dean  Alford !  Here  are  the  closing 
words  of  his  New  Testament  Commentary  : — 

"  I  have  now  only  to  commend  to  my  gracious 
God  and  Father  this  feeble  attempt  to  explain 
the  most  mysterious  and  glorious  portion  of  His 
revealed  Scriptures  :  and  with  it,  this  my  labour 
of  now  eighteen  years,  herewith  completed.  I 
do  so  with  humble  thankfulness,  but  with  a  sense 
of  utter  weakness  before  the  power  of  His  Word, 
and  inability  to  sound  the  depths  even  of  its 
simplest  sentence.  May  He  spare  the  hand 
which  has  been  put  forward  to  touch  His  Ark." 
If  the  critics  know  anything  of  the  spirit  of 
these  words  they  are  consummate  masters  of 
the  art  of  concealing  their  emotions. 

It  will  be  said,  perhaps,  that  the  book  I  have 
cited  does  not  fairly  represent  the  teaching  of 
the  Critical  School.  If  the  objection  refers  to 
those  who  belong  to  the  Church  of  England, 
it  is  well  founded.  It  is  happily  unusual  for 
English  gentlemen  to  give  solemn  pledges  in 
entering  upon  positions  of  influence  and  trust. 


i4        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

and  then  to  flout  and  violate  those  pledges.  J 
But  the  Encyclopedia  Biblica  is  in  this  sphere 
what  the  enfant  terrible  is  in  the  family  circle — 
it  gives  out  unblushingly  what  many  of  the  critics 
themselves  would  deprecate. 

The  difference  between  the  work  in  question 
and  the  more  conservative  and  cautious  Dic 
tionary  of  the  Bible  edited  by  Dr.  Hastings, 
to  which  Professor  Driver,  of  Oxford,  has  lent 
his  name,  is  that  the  one  represents  the  Bible 
as  error  and  romance  mingled  with  truth,  and 
the  other  as  truth  mingled  with  romance  and 
error.  For  certain  purposes  the  distinction  is 
a  real  one,  but  here  it  is  immaterial.  For  the 
question  I  have  raised  is  whether  the  old- 
fashioned  belief  in  the  inspiration  of  Scripture 
can  be  maintained  ;  and  the  main  purpose 
of  every  work  emanating  from  these  writers 
is,  as  they  would  say,  to  remove  the  diffi 
culties  and  dangers  which  the  historic  view 
of  inspiration  is  supposed  to  create. 

The  one  set  of  writers  hand  me  a  purse  of 
coins,  with  an  assurance  that  most  of  them 
are  genuine.  The  other  set  of  writers  hand 

1  Ordination  in  the  Church  of  England  is  conditioned  on  an 
unequivocal  reply  to  the  question,  "  Do  you  unfeignedly  believe 
all  the  Canonical  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  ? " 


CH.  II.]      ARE   THE   GOSPELS   INSPIRED?  15 

me  a  purse  of  coins,  with  a  warning  that 
most  of  them  are  counterfeit.  But  as  I  am 
unable  to  distinguish  between  the  base  coins 
and  the  gold,  honesty  forbids  my  trading  with 
any  of  them,  and  therefore  all  my  seeming 
wealth  is  practically  useless.  In  either  case 
the  Bible  is  like  a  lottery  bag,  from  which 
blanks  and  prizes  must  be  drawn  at  random. 
If  the  one  section  of  the  critics  may  be  trusted, 
the  prizes  abound  ;  if  the  other  section  be  right, 
the  blanks  predominate.  But  in  either  case,  I 
repeat,  faith  is  impossible,  and  therefore  Chris 
tianity  is  destroyed. 

I  am  not  prejudging  the  question  raised  in 
my  opening  sentences :  I  am  merely  seeking  to 
state  it  clearly  and  intelligently,  and  to  enter 
a  protest  against  levity  in  dealing  with  it.  Let 
me  put  it  in  a  concrete  form  :  Are  the  Gospels, 
as  the  critics  of  every  section  tell  us,  merely 
human  documents,  based  in  part  upon  the 
memory  of  the  writers,  in  part  upon  earlier 
records,  in  part  upon  oral  traditions  of  the 
great  Teacher's  acts  and  words?  Or  are  they, 
as  Christians  have  heretofore  believed,  God- 
breathed  Scriptures  —  the  Word  of  God,  by 
which  the  sinner  may  be  born  again,  and 
the  disciple  may  "grow  in  grace"  and  be 
"  throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works "  ? 


16        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

For  example,  may  I  trust  the  record  contained 
in  the  third  chapter  of  John  ?  Not  one  of  the 
disciples,  we  may  be  sure,  was  with  the  Lord 
when  Nicodemus  "came  to  Him  by  night."  But, 
waiving  that,  what  reason  have  we  for  supposing 
the  interview  is  reported  accurately  ?  Very  many 
people  bear  testimony  that  the  words  of  the  i4th, 
1 5th,  and  i6th  verses  have  been  the  means  of 
producing  in  them  that  change  of  heart  and  life 
which  the  Bible  calls  being  born  again  and  being 
converted.  But  this  implies  that  the  words  are 
not  a  mere  fallible  human  record  of  a  conversation 
alleged  to  have  occurred  between  Christ  and  a 
Pharisee  ;  but  an  infallibly  inspired  proclamation 
of  Divine  love  to  the  lost,  bringing  everlasting 
life  to  all  who  believe  in  the  Son  of  God.  Now 
these  two  views  stand  entirely  apart.  One  or 
other  of  their,  must  be  false.  And  which  is  it  ? 

Take  another  case.  Who  vouches  for  the 
record  of  the  scene  enacted,  and  the  words 
spoken  by  our  Divine  Lord,  in  Gethsemane? 
The  three  disciples  who  alone  were  present  lay 
sleeping,  wholly  unconscious  of  the  solemnity  and 
significance  of  that  awful  hour.  And  the  critics 
tell  us  that  when  at  last  they  awoke  they  were 
so  utterly  dazed  and  stupid  that  they  mistook  the 
shimmer  of  the  moonlight  for  an  angelic  appa- 


CH.  II.]     POLICE   OFFICERS  v.  THE   SAINTS         17 

rition.     Either  the  record  is  in  the  strictest  sense 
inspired,  or  else  it  is  no  better  than  a  fairy  tale. 

I    have    often   wondered   at    the    definiteness 

with  which  some  police  officers  could  repeat  the 

identical  language  used  by  a  prisoner  on  arrest, 

or  in  the  course  of  a  railway  journey.     In  these 

men  habit  and  training  have  developed  a  natural 

aptitude  for  accuracy.     Eliminate,  as  the  critics 

do,  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  I  have 

no  hesitation  in  saying  that  if  I  had  on  one  side 

the   testimony   of    the   police   inspectors   of  the 

department    I    recently   controlled,    and   on   the 

other  side  that  of  all  the  apostles  and  evangelists, 

I  should  trust  to  the  memory  of  the  officers  rather 

than  to  that  of  the  saints.     But  an  officer's  duty 

requires  that  as  soon  as  practicable  after  hearing 

any  important  statement   he   shall   record   it  in 

writing  ;  and  if  some  months  after  the  event  I 

found  that  he  had  neglected  that  duty,  and  yet 

that  he  professed  to  repeat  the  exact  words  used 

in  a  prolonged   conversation,    I    should  lose  all 

confidence   both    in    his    judgment    and    in   his 

truthfulness. 

And  now  to  explain  my  parable.  What 
importance  am  I  to  attach  to  the  record  ol 
prolonged  discourses  supposed  to  have  been 
spoken  by  the  Lord  ;  such,  for  example,  as  "  the 

3 


1 8        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Sermon  on  the  Mount,"  I  "  the  Second  Sermon 
on  the  Mount,"  2  or  the  Lord's  last  words  before 
the  Passion,  3  recorded  more  than  forty  years 
after  they  were  uttered?  If  the  Gospels  are 
not  inspired  in  the  strictest  sense  in  which 
theologians  speak  of  inspiration,  these  records  are 
worthless.  Indeed  if  the  critics  are  right,  the 
Evangelists  belonged  to  the  class  of  "  chatty " 
and  imaginative  people  whose  presence  is  often 
welcome  in  social  life,  but  always  dreaded  in  the 
witness  chair  of  a  Court  of  Justice.  It  avails 
nothing  to  plead  that  the  apostles  were  very  holy 
men.  Experience  teaches  us  that  very  holy  men, 
and  very  learned  men,  too,  may  be  very  silly. 
And  if  some  of  the  critics  are  to  be  believed, 
silliness  was  as  marked  a  characteristic  of  the 
Evangelists  as  holiness.* 

In  all  this,  I  repeat,  I  am  not  "  laying  down 
the  law,"  but  only  "stating  the  case."  Neither 
am  I  specially  addressing  those  who  sympathise 
with  my  conclusions.  I  appeal  to  all  intelligent 
and  fair-minded  thinkers.  The  only  kind  of 


1  Matt,  v.,  vi.,  and  vii.  a  Ibid.  xxiv.  and  xxv. 

3  John  xiv.,  xv.,  xvi.,  and  xvii. 

4  Indeed  the  patronising  tone  of  their  criticisms  implies  that 
if  men  of  their  own  type  had  been  employed  to  write  the  Gospels, 
the  record  would  have  been  free  from  the  defects  and  errors 
which  now  mar  it. 


CH.  II.]      GOLD  WIN   SMITH'S   TESTIMONY  19 

person  I  wish  to  ignore  is  the  fool.  We  all 
know  the  sort  of  morbidly  active-brained  child 
who  will  pull  a  valuable  watch  to  pieces,  and 
then  tell  us  with  a  smile  that  "  there  was  nothing 
in  it  but  wheels  and  things."  He  has  his  counter 
part  in  the  foreign  infidel  type  of  scholar,  who, 
albeit  as  ignorant  of  man  and  his  needs  as  a 
monk,  and  as  ignorant  of  God  and  His  ways  as 
a  monkey,  sets  himself  with  a  light  heart  to  tear 
the  Bible  to  pieces.  If  the  Bible  must  be  given 
up,  it  is  a  disaster  unparalleled  in  the  history  of 
Christendom. 

"  The  Reformation  was  a  tremendous  earth 
quake  ;  it  shook  down  the  fabric  of  mediaeval 
religion,  and  as  a  consequence  of  the  disturbance 
in  the  religious  sphere,  filled  the  world  with 
revolutions  and  wars.  But  it  left  the  authority 
of  the  Bible  unshaken,  and  men  might  feel  that 
the  destructive  process  had  its  limit,  and  that 
adamant  was  still  beneath  their  feet.  But  a 
world  which  is  intellectual  and  keenly  alive  to 
the  significance  of  these  questions,  reading  all 
that  is  written  about  them  with  almost  passionate 
avidity,  finds  itself  brought  to  a  crisis  the  cha 
racter  of  which  any  one  may  realise  by  distinctly 
presenting  to  himself  the  idea  of  existence  without 
a  God." 


20        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

These  are  the  words  of  one  I  whose  thorough 
sympathy  with  "  science  and  criticism  "  could  not 
blind  him  to  the  gravity  of  the  crisis  they  have 
caused.  Fresh  and  vigorous  minds  will  press  on 
where  these  teachers  now  timidly  shrink  back. 
And  while  a  religious  agnosticism  may  afford  a 
doubtful  refuge  to  the  cultured  classes,  agnosticism 
with  no  element  whatever  of  religion  will  engulf 
the  unthinking  multitude.  Men  may  well  start 
back  at  sight  of  such  a  goal. 

Hear  another  witness,  a  veritable  apostle  of 
unfaith.  In  answer  to  the  infidel  taunt  that 
Christianity  was  "an  awful  plague,"  because 
its  success  involved  the  ruin  of  Roman  civilisa 
tion,  Matthew  Arnold  writes  :  "  It  was  worth 
while  to  have  that  civilisation  ruined  fifty  times 
over,  for  the  sake  of  planting  Christianity  through 
Europe  in  the  only  form  in  which  it  could  then 
be  planted  there."  2  And  surely  some  feeling  of 
deep  regret,  if  not  of  misgiving  about  his  own 
position  and  influence,  must  have  touched  his 
heart  as  he  penned  the  lines  : — 

"  The  sea  of  Faith 

Was  once,  too,  at  the  full,  and  round  earth's  shore 
Lay  like  the  folds  of  a  bright  girdle  furl'd  ; 


1  Professor  Goldwin  Smith. 
•  God  and  the  Bible  (Preface). 


CH.  II.]  THE  THESIS   RESTATED  21 

But  now  I  only  hear 

Its  melancholy,  long,  withdrawing  roar." 

I  have  already  restated  my  thesis  :  let  me  do 
so  once  again.  We  shall  gain  nothing  by  dealing 
with  generalities.  Let  us  open  the  Gospels  at 
the  last  of  the  test  passages  I  have  cited,  and  take 
the  well-known  words  : — 

"  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  :  ye  believe 
in  God,  believe  also  in  me. 

"In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions  : 
if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you.  I  go 
to  prepare  a  place  for  you. 

"And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I 
will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  myself; 
that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also." 

May  we  still  use  such  words  as  these  to 
comfort  us  in  sorrow,  and  to  cheer  and 
strengthen  us  when  life  is  failing,  and  its 
supreme  crisis  is  drawing  near?  May  we  still 
trust  them,  as  our  fathers  did,  as  a  message 
from  the  heart  and  lips  of  our  Saviour  and  Lord, 
ministered  to  us  by  the  Divine  Spirit  who 
inspired  His  servant  to  record  them?  May  we 
read  the  Gospels  thus  ?  Or  is  all  this  but  an  ex 
quisite  dream  from  which  we  must  awake  to  the 
clear,  cold  light  of  nineteenth-century  criticism  ? 


CHAPTER   III 

IN  this  enlightened  age  we  are  not  content 
with  checking  the  spread  of  a  disease  when 
it  appears  :  we  seek  to  diagnose  it  and  to  dis 
cover  its  origin.  And  an  inquiry  of  this  kind 
respecting  the  prevailing  epidemic  of  unbelief 
cannot  fail  to  be  useful. 

The  scepticism  of  the  day  may  be  clearly 
traced  to  the  rationalism  which  almost  swamped 
the  religious  life  of  Germany  in  the  second  half 
of  the  eighteenth  century.  But  the  chief  cause 
of  that  apostasy  has  never  been  fully  recognised. 
Not  even  in  the  darkest  periods  of  the  history  of 
Christendom  had  the  character  and  authority  of 
the  Bible  ever  been  questioned.1  It  was  always 
regarded  as  the  inspired  word  of  God,  the 
supreme  and  infallible  guide  in  all  questions  of 
faith  and  morals.  But  just  as  apostate  Jews  in  a 
preceding  age  had  "made  the  word  of  God  of 

1  Questioned  by  Christians,  I  mean  ;  and  speaking  broadly. 

22 


CH.  III.]    THE   REFORMERS   AND   THE   BIBLE     23 

none    effect   by   their    traditions,"    so    also    did 
apostate  Christians. 

In  England  the  law  is  supreme.  But  it  does 
not  rest  with  "the  man  in  the  street"  to 
interpret  the  law  :  that  is  the  function  of  the 
King's  Courts.  And  so  here.  The  supremacy 
of  the  Bible  was  unquestioned.  But  the  Church 
was  the  "keeper"  and  the  "interpreter"  of 
it;  and  it  so  kept  it  as  to  keep  it  from  the 
people,  and  it  so  interpreted  it  as  to  "change 
the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie."  An  open 
Bible  was  the  prize  at  stake  in  the  glorious 
Reformation  struggle.  The  leaders  in  that  great 
revolt  proclaimed  the  truth  of  salvation  in  Christ 
apart  from  the  Church,  and  without  the  interven 
tion  of  priests.  And  this  truth  set  the  conscience 
free  from  the  bondage  which  had  enthralled  it. 

But  justification  by  faith  was  not  the  only 
truth  that  had  been  lost  in  the  superstitions  of  a 
thousand  years.  Every  truth  of  the  Bible  had 
been  perverted  or  darkened.  And  yet  the  men 
who  came  after  the  Reformers  were  content  to 
maintain  the  ground  already  gained.  "  The 
Bible  the  religion  of  Protestants  "  was  a  proverb 
in  the  Reformation  age.  But  in  the  age  which 
followed  it,  the  religion  of  Protestants  became 
narrowed  to  the  special  truths  which  the  Refor- 


24        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

mation  brought  to  light.  And  with  what  result  ? 
In  course  of  time  the  memory  grew  dim  of  the 
darkness  and  perils  of  pre- Reformation  times, 
and  of  the  struggle  by  which  liberty  was  won. 
More  than  this,  the  methods  of  the  Reformers 
were  forgotten,  and  the  spirit  which  inspired 
them  had  died  out.  And  so  it  came  to  pass  that 
when  the  eighteenth  century  gave  a  new  impetus 
to  the  mental  activity  and  free  thought  promoted 
by  the  Reformation ;  and  the  German  mind,  so 
famed  for  its  analytical  subtlety,  turned  to  the 
study  of  Scripture  in  the  cold  light  of  reason, 
difficulties  innumerable  presented  themselves. 
And  to  these  difficulties  the  Evangelical  Churches 
had  no  adequate  answer  to  offer.  The  Bible  was 
discredited  by  the  ignorance  and  incapacity  of  its 
defenders ;  and  the  resulting  mischief  has  never 
been  retrieved. 

It  is  no  reproach  upon  the  Reformers  that  their 
writings  fail  to  help  us  in  such  bloodless  conflicts. 
For  theirs  was  a  life  and  death  struggle  such  as 
leaves  no  leisure  for  questions  like  those  which 
make  up  the  stock-in-trade  of  the  critics.  But  if 
they  could  revisit  the  scenes  of  their  labours  and 
their  triumphs,  how  deep  would  be  their  indignation 
and  distress  at  the  discovery  that  the  mass  even  of 
real  Christians  have  no  fuller  knowledge  of  Divine 


CH.  III.]      POST-REFORMATION  APOSTASY  25 

truth  than  they  themselves  had  attained.  And 
this  wholly  understates  the  case.  From  the 
great  truths  which  Luther  taught  with  a  fulness 
and  boldness  never  since  surpassed,  the  Lutheran 
Churches  have  largely  apostatised.  The  doctrines 
of  Grace  have  been  swamped  in  a  pagan  sacra- 
mentalism  which  destroys  true  Christianity. 

And  such  an  apostasy  can  only  be  explained  by 
ignorance  of  Scripture  as  a  whole.  It  was 
charged  upon  the  Hebrew  Christians  of 
apostolic  days  that  they  were  ignorant  of  the 
A  B  C  of  revealed  religion  ; J  and  a  like  charge 
can  be  sustained  against  the  Evangelicalism  of 
Germany  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
"  Truth  is  one  " ;  but  when  the  circle  of  Divine 
truth  is  broken,  men  soon  forget  its  unity,  and 
the  segments  that  remain  lie  open  to  attack. 
What  advance  had  been  made  in  the  knowledge 
of  Scripture  during  the  two  centuries  and  a  half 
from  the  date  of  the  Diet  of  Worms  ?  The 
Bible  as  a  whole  is,  of  course,  "  a  book  of 
piety "  ;  and  its  worth  in  that  respect  is  un 
challenged.  But,  ignoring  that  element,  the  Old 
Testament  naturally  admits  of  a  threefold  division 
—the  historical,  the  typical,  and  the  prophetical. 

1  Heb.  v.  12. 


26        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

But  history  lies  outside  the  special  province  of 
theology.  Prophecy  was  ostentatiously  neglected 
until  Hengstenberg  appealed  to  its  testimony  in 
answering  the  rationalists.  And  as  for  the  third 
division,  Hengstenberg  himself  lamented  the 
prevailing  ignorance  respecting  it.  "  The  eluci 
dation  of  the  doctrine  of  the  types,"  he  declared, 
"  now  entirely  neglected,  is  an  important  problem 
for  future  theologians." 

And  how  can  any  one  who  is  ignorant  of  "  the 
doctrine  of  the  types,"  and  of  the  grand  scheme  of 
Divine  prophecy,  understand  the  New  Testament 
aright?  Such  a  man  has  not  learned  even  the 
language  in  which  the  New  Testament  is  written. 
Nor  does  this  remark  apply  only  to  special 
passages  :  it  bears  upon  the  scope  and  meaning 
of  entire  books,  and  the  relation  of  the  books  to 
one  another — the  "hidden  harmony  "  of  Scripture 
as  a  whole. 

The  rationalistic  crusade  against  the  Bible, 
which  Eichhorn  christened  "  the  Higher  Criti 
cism,"  owed  its  strength  and  success  to  the  appeal 
it  made  to  the  human  element  in  the  Scriptures. 
The  Bible  is  called  "the  word  of  God"  for  the 
same  reason  that  Christ  is  called  "  the  Word  of 
God  " — it  expresses  the  mind  of  God.  But  as 
Christ  is  "very  God"  and  yet  perfect  man,  so  the 


CH.  III.]     CRITICISM   CANNOT   BE   STIFLED         27 

Bible,  while  absolutely  Divine,  is  yet  the  most 
human  book  in  all  the  world.  And  as  the  Living- 
Word  became  subject  to  all  the  infirmities  of 
humanity,  sin  excepted,  so  also  the  written  Word 
is  marked  by  all  the  characteristics  of  human 
writings,  error  excepted.1  German  Evangeli 
calism,  however,  had  neglected  the  human  side 
of  the  Bible,  as  indeed  a  certain  type  of  Evan 
gelicalism  does  to  the  present  day. 

But  to  attempt  to  stifle  criticism  of  Scripture 
by  the  cry  that  "  the  Bible  is  the  word  of  God  " 
only  serves  to  excite  distrust  on  the  part  of 
earnest  and  honest-hearted  inquirers.  There  never 
was  an  attack  made  upon  the  truth  that  could 
not  be  refuted.  "  Truth  is  one  "  ;  but  error  is  in 
its  very  nature  inconsistent,  and  therefore  absurd. 
And  while  Divine  truth  is  spiritual,  and  can  only 
be  spiritually  discerned,  human  error  is  natural, 
and  can  be  met  on  its  own  ground.  We  cannot 
"  reason  "  men  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  by 
reasoning  we  can  expose  errors  which  prejudice 
them  against  it. 

We  can  appeal  to  them,  moreover,  not  to 
expend  all  their  scepticism  upon  "  the  Biblical 
writers,"  but  to  reserve  a  little  of  it  for  the 

1  I  here  use  the  word  "  error  "  in  its  deeper  sense,  and  I  do  not 
prejudge  questions  which  shall  be  considered  in  the  sequel. 


28        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

critics  themselves — to  carry  the  Higher  Criticism 
one  step  further,  and  bring  the  exponents  of  the 
science  within  its  scope.  Take  Professor  Blank, 
for  example,  who  criticises  the  Bible  in  such  a 
patronising  way.  Surely  it  is  legitimate  to 
investigate  his  fitness  for  his  self-appointed  task. 
His  eminence  as  a  scholar  in  his  own  particular 
line  is  unquestioned.  But  would  those  who  know 
him  best  accept  him  as  an  arbitrator  in  any  case 
where  a  sound  judgment,  and  breadth  of  view, 
and^  common  sense  are  necessary  qualifications  ? 
Or  if  the  case  came  into  court,  and  Professor 
Blank  were  found  to  be  foreman  of  the  jury 
empanelled  to  try  it,  would  not  the  parties  ask 
for  half  an  hour's  adjournment,  and  retire  to 
consider  a  compromise  rather  than  go  to  trial  ? I 
"After  all,"  says  Matthew  Arnold,  "shut  a 


1  Some  years  ago  I  published  a  defence  of  one  book  of  Scrip 
ture  against  the  attack  of  an  eminent  critic,  and  Mr.  Gladstone 
was  at  the  pains  of  writing  two  successive  letters  to  impress  on 
me  that  the  distinguished  scholar  in  question  was  wholly  wanting 
in  the  judgment  requisite  for  dealing  with  questions  of  the  kind. 

One  of  the  prominent  figures  in  Charles  Lever's  most  popular 
novel  is  Dr.  Barrett,  who  was  Vice-Provost  of  Trinity  College, 
Dublin,  a  century  ago.  His  extraordinary  erudition  made  him  the 
envy  and  admiration  of  contemporary  scholars ;  his  extraordinary 
silliness  made  him  the  butt  of  every  undergraduate.  And  stories 
of  his  great  learning  and  his  great  folly  are  rife  to  the  present 
day.  And  in  no  department  of  scholarship  is  this  phenomenon 
more  likely  to  be  manifested  than  in  that  of  Philology. 


CH.  III.]  MATTHEW  ARNOLD  ON  THE  CRITICS  29 

number  of  men  up  to  make  study  and  learning 
the  business  of  their  lives,  and  how  many  of 
them,  from  want  of  some  discipline  or  other, 
seem  to  lose  all  balance  of  judgment,  all  common 
sense!"  In  the  same  connection,  he  speaks  of 
"  the  ordeal  of  the  Englishman's  strong  and  strict 
sense  for  fact,"  and  he  adds,  "  We  are  much 
mistaken  if  it  does  not  turn  out  that  this  ordeal 
makes  great  havoc  among  the  vigorous  and 
rigorous  theories  of  German  criticism  concerning 
the  Bible-documents."  And  "  German  criticism  " 
does  not  cease  to  be  German  because  during  the 
present  generation  it  has  been  fathered  by 
Englishmen. 

"  Great  men  are  not  always  wise,"  x  and  even 
in  the  natural  sphere  they  may  prove  to  be  blind 
guides.  The  "Ptolemaic  System"  is  a  monu 
mental  proof  of  this.  Pythagoras  had  taught 
men  to  regard  the  sun  as  the  centre  of  our 
system  ;  and  that  truth  held  sway  until,  by 
methods  analogous  to  those  of  the  Higher 
Critics  of  to-day,  Ptolemy  persuaded  his  con 
temporaries  to  abandon  it.  And  for  long 
centuries  all  the  wisdom  of  the  wise  was  on 
the  side  of  error.  And  when  we  turn  to  the 

1  Job  xxxii.  9. 


3o        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

religious  sphere  the  wonder  is  how  any  Protes 
tant,  with  the  history  of  Christendom  open  to 
him,  can  be  influenced  by  the  dicta  of  men  of 
intellect  and  genius.  Down  to  the  present  hour, 
have  not  men  of  the  highest  eminence  in  every 
branch  of  human  knowledge  bartered  the  truths 
of  Christianity  for  the  pagan  superstitions  which 
are  the  stock-in-trade  of  priestcraft  ? 

The  leaders  in  this  Higher  Criticism  crusade 
in  England  have  facile  pens  and  they  are 
prolific  authors.  And  yet  if  they  may  be  judged 
by  their  writings,  there  is  not  one  of  them 
who  is  a  student  of  prophetic  truth  or  of 
the  typology  of  Scripture.  Their  Bible  is 
but  an  ill-assorted  collection  of  Jewish  books. 
Their  "  Jesus "  came  to  found  a  new  religion, 
and  they  seem  very  hazy  about  His  coming 
back  again.  The  ground-plan  of  the  Bible  they 
know  nothing  of. 

"  The  whole  Scriptures  are  a  testimony  to 
Christ :  the  whole  history  of  the  chosen  people, 
with  its  types,  and  its  law,  and  its  prophecies, 
is  a  showing  forth  of  Him."  Thus  wrote  Dean 
Alford,  one  of  the  greatest  commentators  of 
our  age.  But  all  this  has  no  existence  for  the 
critics  ;  and  if  they  would  speak  out  plainly,  some 
of  them  would  brand  it  as  superstitious  drivel. 


CH.   III.]     WHY  THE   CRITICS   ARE   SCEPTICS     31 

As  the  spiritual  Christian  reads  their  books 
he  is  conscious  of  an  atmosphere  and  an  environ 
ment  that  are  uncongenial.  For  their  writings 
are  in  great  measure  but  a  post  mortem  upon 
dead  truth.  Some  of  them,  like  the  Jews  of 
old,  have  "a  zeal  for  God,  but  not  according 
to  knowledge."  But  these  are  a  minority.  As 
for  the  rest,  if  they  have  ever  known  what  it 
means — but  here  I  tread  on  delicate  ground, 
and  I  will  call  a  witness  from  the  grave  to 
express  my  meaning.  The  following  letter, 
which  appeared  many  years  ago  in  the  columns 
of  the  Record  newspaper,  made  a  profound  im 
pression  on  me  at  the  time,  and  it  may  appeal 
to  others  to-day.  The  writer  of  it  withheld  his 
name,  but  I  was  told  at  the  time  that  he  was 
Professor  Birks,  of  Cambridge.  Here  are  his 
words  : — 

"  You  well  observe  in  a  recent  article  that  the  public 
is  becoming  accustomed  to  the  strange  vagaries  on  the 
Bible  which  men  of  learning  and  high  position  in  the 
Church  seem  so  constantly  falling  into. 

"  I  should  be  glad  to  express,  through  the  medium  of 
your  columns,  what  appears  to  me  the  secret  of  all  this  ; 
and  I  the  rather  desire  to  do  so,  because  I  am  myself  a 
monument  of  the  delivering  power  and  mercy  of  God  in 
this  very  matter. 

"  It  is  very  observable  that  almost  all  the  men  who 


32        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

have  thus  notoriously  erred  from  the  way  of  truth  are 
men  of  some  kind  of  eminence  in  natural  ability.  Of 
Mr.  Maurice  I  cannot  say  I  think  that  even  in  natural 
things  he  excels  in  distinctness  of  ideas,  or  the  power  of 
clearly  discerning  nice  differences.  But  the  errors  of 
such  men  as  Heath,  and  especially  Bishop  Colenso, 
cannot  be  attributed  to  any  confusion  of  mind  as  to 
things  which  differ — their  eminent  honours  at  Cam 
bridge  forbid  our  taking  that  view.  Besides,  I  know 
from  past  experience  in  the  same  gloomy  school,  that 
the  possession  of  very  considerable  natural  acumen  does 
not  in  the  least  degree  aid  a  man  whose  mind  is  per 
plexed  about  the  foundations  of  Bible  truth. 

"  As  to  the  objections  urged  by  the  above  gentlemen 
to  the  generally-received  views  of  Scripture,  and  the 
doctrines  which  flow  so  immediately  from  its  simple 
and  spiritual  acceptance  as  the  Word  of  God,  they 
know  as  well  as  we  do  "that  they  are  hackneyed  and 
as  old  as  our  fallen  nature,  but  then  that  does  not 
remove  them  ;  they  cannot  receive  the  simple  accounts 
of  Scripture,  because  they  have  not  Divine  faith.  I 
remember  when  I  first  began  to  read  the  Bible  (and 
I  thought  I  was  sincerely  seeking  the  truth)  I  was 
miserable  because  I  could  not  believe  it ;  I  dared  not 
reject  any  statement  I  found  there,  but  I  could  not 
fully  believe  it  was  true.  The  Bishop  of  Natal  just 
expresses  what  I  felt,  and  the  fact  that  we  took  exactly 
the  same  University  honours  (in  different  years  of  course) 
makes  me  sympathise  with  him  peculiarly.  My  own 
history  was  just  this  : — I  had  read  and  studied  deeply 
in  mathematics,  had  mastered  every  fresh  subject  I 
entered  upon  with  ease  and  delight  ;  had  become 
accustomed  (as  every  exact  mathematician  must  do) 


CH.   III.]        THE   "RECORD"   LETTER  33 

to  investigate  and  discover  fundamental  differences 
between  things  which  seem  to  the  uninitiated  one 
and  the  same  ;  had  seen  my  way  into  physical 
astronomy  and  the  higher  parts  of  Newton's  immortal 
'Principia,'  and  been  frequently  lost  in  admiration  of 
his  genius  till  St.  Mary's  clock  warned  me  that  mid 
night  was  past  three  hours  ago.  I  had,  in  fact  (as  we 
say),  made  myself  master  of  dynamics,  and  become 
gradually  more  and  more  a  believer  in  the  unlimited 
capabilities  of  my  own  mind  !  This  self-conceited  idea 
was  only  flattered  and  fostered  by  eminent  success  in 
the  Senate  House,  and  by  subsequently  obtaining  a 
Fellowship  at  Trinity,  and  enjoying  very  considerable 
popularity  as  a  mathematical  lecturer. 

"  It  would  have  spared  me  many  an  hour  of  misery  in 
after  days  had  I  really  felt  what  I  so  often  said,  viz., 
that  the  deeper  a  man  went  in  science,  the  humbler  he 
ought  to  be,  and  the  more  cautious  in  pronouncing  an 
independent  opinion  on  a  subject  he  had  not  investigated 
or  could  not  thoroughly  sift.  But,  though  all  this  was 
true,  I  had  yet  to  learn  that  this  humility  in  spiritual 
things  is  never  found  in  a  natural  man. 

"  I  took  orders,  and  began  to  preach,  and  then,  like 
the  Bishop  among  the  Zulus,  I  found  out  the  grand 
deficit  in  my  theology.  I  had  not  the  Spirit's  teaching 
myself,  and  how  could  I  without  it  speak  "in  demon 
stration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power  "  ? 

"  In  vain  did  I  read  Chalmers,  Paley,  Butler,  Gaussen, 
&c.,  and  determine  that,  as  I  had  mastered  all  the  other 
subjects  I  had  grappled  with,  so  I  would  the  Bible,  and 
that  I  would  make  myself  a  believer.  I  found  a  poor, 
ignorant  old  woman  in  my  parish  more  than  a  match 
for  me  in  Divine  things.  I  was  distressed  to  find  that 

4 


34        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

she  was  often  happy  in  the  evident  mercy  of  the  Lord 
to  her,  and  that  she  found  prayer  answered,  and  that  all 
this  was  proved  sincere  by  her  blameless  and  harmless 
walk  amongst  her  neighbours  ;  whilst  I,  with  all  my 
science  and  investigation,  was  barren,  and  unprofitable, 
and  miserable — an  unbeliever  in  heart,  and  yet  not 
daring  to  avow  it,  partly  from  the  fear  of  man,  but 
more  from  a  certain  inward  conviction  that  all  my 
sceptical  difficulties  would  be  crushed  and  leaped  over 
by  the  experience  of  the  most  illiterate  Christian. 

"  I  was  perfectly  ashamed  to  feel  in  my  mind  like 
Voltaire,  Volney,  or  Tom  Paine.  I  could  claim  no 
originality  for  my  views  ;  and  I  found  they  were  no 
comfort,  but  a  constant  source  of  misery  to  me. 

"It  may  now  be  asked  how  I  came  ever  to  view 
Divine  truth  differently.  I  desire  to  ascribe  all  praise 
to  Him  to  whom  power  belongeth  ;  I  desire  to  put  my 
own  mouth  in  the  dust,  and  be  ashamed,  and  never 
open  my  mouth  any  more,  because  of  my  former  un 
belief.  I  cannot  describe  all  I  passed  through,  but  I 
desire  with  humility  and  gratitude  to  say,  I  was  made 
willing  in  a  day  of  Christ's  power.  He  melted  down 
my  proud  heart  with  His  love  ;  He  shut  my  mouth  for 
ever  from  cavilling  at  any  difficulties  in  the  written 
Word  ;  and  one  of  the  first  things  in  which  the  great 
change  appeared  was,  that  whereas  beforetime  preaching 
had  been  misery,  now  it  became  my  delight  to  be  able 
to  say,  without  a  host  of  sceptical  or  infidel  doubts 
rushing  into  my  mind,  'Thus  saith  the  Lord.'  Oh,  I 
am  quite  certain  no  natural  man  can  see  the  things  of 
God  ;  and  I  am  equally  certain  he  cannot  make  himself 
do  so.  *  It  was  the  Lord  that  exalted  Moses  and 
Aaron,'  said  Samuel ;  and,  '  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am 


CH.   III.]        THE   "RECORD"   LETTER  35 

what  I  am,'  said  St.  Paul ;  and  so,  in  a  modified  and 
humble  sense,  I  can  truly  say. 

"  It  used  to  be  a  terrible  stumbling-block  to  me  to 
find  so  many  learned  men,  so  many  acute  men,  so  many 
scientific  men,  infidels.  It  is  not  so  now  ;  I  see  that 
God  has  said, '  Not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not 
many  mighty,  not  many  noble* ;  I  see,  as  plainly  as  it 
is  possible  for  me  to  see  anything,  that  no  natural  man 
can  receive  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Hence  I 
expect  to  find  men  of  this  stamp  of  intellect  coming  out 
boldly  with  their  avowals  of  unbelief  in  the  written 
Word  of  God.  The  only  answer  I  can  give  to  them  is  : 
1  God  has  in  mercy  taught  me  better ' ;  and  never  do  I 
sing  those  beautiful  words  in  the  well-known  hymn  but 
I  feel  my  eyes  filling  with  tears  of  gratitude  to  the  God 
of  all  compassion — 

"  Jesus  sought  me  when  a  stranger, 
Wandering  from  the  fold  of  God." 

"  So  it  was  with  me  ;  so  it  must  be  with  any  one  of 
them  if  ever  they  are  to  know  the  truth  in  its  power,  or 
to  receive  the  love  of  the  truth  that  they  may  be  saved. 

"  I  feel  very  much  for  the  young  of  this  generation, 
remembering  the  conflicts  I  passed  through  in  conse 
quence  of  the  errors  of  men  of  ability."  l 

1  After  the  Third  Edition  of  this  book  had  gone  to  press,  the 
author  ascertained  that  the  writer  of  the  foregoing  letter  (which 
appeared  in  the  Record,  October,  1862)  was  the  Rev.  Robert 
Walker,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  Wymeswold,  Leicestershire. 


CHAPTER   IV 

I  HAVE  always  felt  that  the  death  of 
Charles  II.  left  a  stain  upon  the  fair  fame 
of  England.  No,  I  do  not  mean  Charles  I.  ; 
neither  would  I  endorse  the  words  of  Junius  that 
"he  ought  to  have  died  upon  the  same  scaffold." 
For  that  Whitehall  execution  is  a  matter  as  to 
which  opinions  may  differ.  But  that  the  nation 
that  beheaded  his  father  and  deposed  his  brother 
should  have  permitted  him,  after  such  a  reign,  to 
die  in  his  Palace  as  King  of  England— this  is 
a  fact  which  in  my  humble  judgment  is  discredit 
able  to  the  English  people. 

Even  during  that  infamous  reign  there  were 
multitudes  of  people  who  believed  in  the  virtue 
of  women.  But  no  person  of  culture — no  one 
who  was  abreast  of  the  times,  or  who  understood 
the  trend  of  contemporary  thought  —  acknow 
ledged  a  traditional  belief  of  that  kind.  And 
"Society"  tacitly  ignored  it.  In  fact  it  came  to 


CH.  IV.]  FAITH   AND   MORALS  37 


be  looked  upon  as  proof  of  narrow-mindedness  or 
boorishness.  The  profession  of  morality  became 
unfashionable.  The  standard  of  morality  was 
gone. 

The  analogy  between  faith  and  morals  is  close 
and  real.  And  the  decline  of  morality  in  the 
Restoration  period  is  finding  its  counterpart  in 
the  sphere  of  faith  to-day.  We  have  come 
within  sight  of  an  apostasy  unparalleled  in  the 
history  of  Christendom.  Every  attack  which  open 
infidelity  has  ever  launched  against  the  Bible  is 
now  being  repeated  by  men  "  who  profess  and  call 
themselves  Christians,"  and  who  claim  to  be  the 
apostles  of  a  new  movement  in  defence  of  the 
citadel  of  Christian  truth.  And  just  as  vice 
became  fashionable  in  the  days  of  Charles  II.,  so, 
as  Professor  Cheyne  naively  owns,  this  system  of 
attacking  truth  in  the  interests  of  truth  has 
become  "  fashionable "  in  Britain  to-day.  The 
appearance  of  his  Encyclopedia  has  checked 
the  movement  for  the  moment :  but  the  scare 
thus  caused  will  soon  subside.  It  has  fluttered 
the  lesser  lights  of  the  Higher  Criticism,  who 
have  been  serving  as  acolytes  in  the  worship  of 
this  new  goddess  of  Reason.  For  they  are  not 
clear-headed  enough  to  see  that  Professor  Cheyne 
has  only  pressed  their  own  principles  to  legitimate 


38        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

conclusions.  Without  help  from  France,  Charles  1 1. 
could  not  so  easily  have  overcome  what  he 
deemed  English  prudery  ;  and  so  here,  foreign 
critics  have  been  called  in  to  force  the  pace  with 
their  British  brethren.  The  French  women  were 
more  "advanced"  than  the  English;  that  was  all. 
And  this  is  precisely  what  is  said  about  the 
Encyclopedia  writers  as  compared  with  ordinary 
British  critics. 

The  late  Professor  Robertson  Smith  is  ap 
pealed  to  on  every  hand  in  proof  that  there  is 
nothing  in  the  Higher  Criticism  to  injure  or  alarm 
a  Christian.  By  far  the  most  interesting  per 
sonality  among  contemporary  critics,  his  apologia, 
published  soon  after  he  was  deprived  of  his  Chair 
in  Aberdeen,  was  marked  by  the  glow  of  real 
spirituality.  Evangelical  fervour,  too,  charac 
terised  the  man.  As  honest  and  upright  as  he 
was  amiable  and  attractive,  he  seemed  at  that 
time  to  be  a  martyr  to  the  cause  of  truth.  It  is 
this  very  element,  however,  that  makes  his  case 
such  a  warning. 

"  Thanks  to  the  cold  sluggishness  of  our 
national  character,"  well  -  seasoned  "  society 
ladies  "  may  possibly  have  spent  a  dozen  years 
at  the  court  of  Charles  without  becoming  much 
worse  than  when  they  entered  it.  But  no 


CH.  IV.]     ROBERTSON  SMITH'S  APOSTASY  39 

pure  woman  in  the  gush  and  glow  of  life  could 
pass  through  such  an  ordeal  without  sinking  to 
the  level  of  those  by  whom  she  was  surrounded. 
And  no  man  of  Robertson  Smith's  temperament 
could  allow  his  mind  year  after  year  to  be 
saturated  with  German  infidelity,  and  yet  end 
where  he  began.  His  Old  Testament  in  the 
Jewish  Church  discloses  what  he  was  in  1881  : 
the  Encyclopedia  Biblica  shows  what  he  became. 
For  by  him  it  was  that  this  sad  book  "  was 
originated."  He  it  was  "who  requested  Professor 
Cheyne  to  take  up  the  work  as  showing  his  own 
*  uncompromisingly  progressive  spirit.'  "  I 

People  are  led  to  suppose  that  the  Higher 
Criticism  is  the  outcome  of  an  honest  inquiry 
after  truth.  But  the  history  of  the  movement 
as  written  by  the  critics  themselves  explodes  such 
a  delusion.2  Of  Eichhorn,  "the  founder  of 
modern  Old  Testament  criticism,"  Professor 
Cheyne  writes  that  "  it  was  his  hope  to  contribute 
to  the  winning  back  of  the  educated  classes  to 
religion."  And  to  attain  this  end  he  set  himself 
to  eliminate  from  the  Bible  everything  to  which 
the  rationalists  took  exception.  "  Religion  "  is 


1  The  Times,  April  n,  1902. 

*  In  proof  of  my  words  I   need  but    appeal    to    Professor 
Cheyne's  Founders  of  Old  Testament  Criticism. 


40        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

fair  ground  for  compromise  ;  but  Christianity  is 
not  a  religion  but  a  faith  ;  and  faith,  like  morality, 
admits  of  no  compromise. 

Men  like  Matthew  Arnold  may  create  a 
mythical  "  Jesus  "  out  of  materials  supplied  by  an 
expurgated  edition  of  the  Gospels,  from  which 
everything  distasteful  to  their  fastidious  scepticism 
has  been  eliminated.  And  they  may  make  this 
"  Jesus  "  the  Buddha  of  an  ideal  religion  which 
will  please  every  one  except  the  sinner  who  is 
conscious  of  his  need  of  a  Divine  Saviour.  But 
all  this  is  treason  to  the  Christ  of  God ;  and  the 
Christian  who  sets  himself  to  " huckster"  J  the 
truth  in  this  way,  either  sinks  to  the  level  of  the 
rationalist,  or  leads  others  down  to  that  abyss. 
This  may  take  two  generations  to  accomplish. 
Eichhorn's  greatest  pupil,  Ewald,  was  as  devout 
as  himself,  but  his  criticisms  were  more  searching. 
Ewald's  greatest  pupil,  Wellhausen,  became  a 
mere  rationalist ;  and,  as  Professor  Cheyne  justly 
says,  he  only  applied  Ewald's  principles  more 
consistently.2 

1  2  Cor.  ii.  17.  The  primary  meaning  of  the  word  translated 
"  to  corrupt "  is  "  to  huckster,"  and  the  whole  passage  indicates 
that  it  is  in  this  sense  the  apostle  uses  it.  Eichhorn  treated  the 
Bible  on  the  principle  of  a  "Dutch  auction";  he  adapted  his 
wares  to  the  market,  huckstering  the  Scriptures  to  suit  the 
rationalists. 

*  Founders  of  Old  Testament  Criticism,  p.  107. 


CH.  IV.]     PROFESSOR   CHEYNE'S   POSITION          41 

Professor  Cheyne  himself  is  the  English  Well- 
hausen.1  He  is  our  only  critic  of  eminence  who 
is  clear-sighted  enough  to  see  the  end  of  the  road 
on  which  he  is  travelling,  or  courageous  enough 
to  follow  it.  In  his  judgment,  expressed  of 
course  in  veiled  language  and  with  perfect 
courtesy,  other  critics,  such  for  example  as  his 
distinguished  colleague  at  Oxford,  are  the  timid 
advocates  of  an  impossible  compromise.  Pro 
fessor  Driver's  "sympathy  with  old-fashioned 
readers"  has  led  him,  he  says,  "to  forget  the 
claims  of  criticism."2  It  is  this  "spirit  of  com 
promise  "  3  that  Professor  Cheyne  "  chiefly 
dreads."  And  the  compromise  he  deprecates  is 
not  Eichhorn's  compromise  with  rationalists,  but 
the  tendency  of  the  English  critics  to  pander  to 
the  weakness  of  those  who  revere  the  Bible  and 
believe  in  the  Divinity  of  Christ.  We  have 
already  seen  how  summarily  he  rejects  the 
foundations  of  Christianity,  and  we  need  not  be 
surprised  at  his  assertion  that  by  no  one  "  has  it 
yet  been  made  probable  that  there  was  a  his 
torical  individual  among  the  ancestors  of  tfie 


1  Only  in  the  sense  here  indicated.     For  unlike  Wellhausen, 
Professor  Cheyne  is  always  reverent  in  tone,  and  he  is  one  of  the 
fairest  of  the  critics. 

2  Founders  of  Old  Testament  Criticism,  p.  366.         3  ibid.,  p.  247. 


42        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Israelites  called  Abram."  I  The  existence  of 
Abraham  is  not  even  probable.  The  sceptic 
would  say  it  is  not  "  certain,"  and  thus  leave  an 
opening  for  discussion  ;  but  on  both  vital  and 
incidental  questions  Professor  Cheyne  has  the 
courage  of  his  convictions,  and  boldly  takes  the 
unassailable  ground  of  open  infidelity.2 

Here  I  would  wish  to  expose  another  popular 
blunder.  The  idea  prevails  that  the  Higher 
Criticism  is  the  special  preserve  of  Hebrew 
scholars.  Now  this  is  undoubtedly  true  of  the 
sort  of  study  for  which  Eichhorn  coined  the  title, 
namely,  a  critical  examination  of  the  text  of  a 
book  with  a  view  to  analysing  its  contents.  But 
any  one  can  see  that  there  is  no  connection  what 
soever  between  an  inquiry  of  that  kind  and  the 
rejection  of  the  supernatural  element  in  the  Bible 
in  order  to  propitiate  the  Rationalists.  We  must 

1  Founders  of  Old  Testament  Criticism,  p.  239. 

2  Infidelity  is  a  strong  term,  but  not  too  strong.     In  an  article 
in  The  Nineteenth  Century  for  January,  1902,   Professor  Cheyne 
says  that  Abraham  was  a  "  lunar  hero.''     Having  regard  to  our 
Lord's  references  to  the  Patriarch,  this  is  shockingly  profane ; 
and  having  regard  to  the  recent  discoveries  of  archaeology,  it 
is    on  other  grounds  extraordinary.     Professor  Cheyne  would 
possibly  deny  that  he  says  this.     But  he  says  that  Winckler,  the 
German,  says  it ;  and  he  repeats  it  with  approval,  calling  it  "A 
turning-point  in  Old  Testament  study,"  and  commending  it  to 
the  attention  of  English  scholars.     I  never  knew  a  receiver  of 
stolen  goods  who  did  not  resent  being  called  a  thief  ! 


CH.  IV.]      THE   MOSAIC   ERA  LITERARY  43 

avoid  the  stupid  pedantry  of  explaining  a  phrase 
by  its  origin  and  not  by  its  use.  The  Higher 
Criticism  at  once  degenerated  into  what  it  is  to-day 
— a  sceptical  crusade  against  the  Bible,  tending 
to  lower  it  to  the  level  of  a  purely  human  book. 

Here,  however,  the  pioneers  of  criticism  com 
pare  favourably  with  their  successors.  They 
had  the  excuse  of  the  ignorance  which  then 
prevailed  about  Old  Testament  times.  The 
attack  on  the  Pentateuch,  for  example,  was  based 
on  the  assumption  that  the  Mosaic  Era  was 
a  barbarous  age.  It  seemed  an  anachronism  to 
suppose  that  such  a  literature  could  have  existed 
at  such  a  time.  But  this,  as  Professor  Sayce  will 
tell  us,  was  "  a  baseless  assumption  due  to  the 
ignorance  of  the  critic."  *  Referring  to  the  work 
of  "  the  excavator  and  the  decipherer  "  in  Eastern 
lands,  the  same  writer  goes  on  to  say,  "  Discovery 
has  followed  there  upon  discovery,  each  more 
marvellous  than  the  last,  and  a  lost  world  of 
culture  and  civilisation  has  been  brought  to 
light.  .  .  .  We  can  follow  the  daily  life  of  the 
Egyptian  3,000  years  ago  more  minutely  than  the 
daily  life  of  a  mediaeval  Englishman  ;  .  .  and 
study  the  letters  of  Canaanites  who  lived  before 

1  Lex  Mosaica,  p.  7. 


44 


THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 


the  birth  of  Moses."  And  again,  "  In  the 
century  before  the  Exodus,  Palestine  was  a  land 
of  books  and  schools."1 

But  though  the  only  reasonable  foundation  of 
the  attack  on  the  Pentateuch  has  thus  been 
destroyed,  the  critics  go  on  repeating  the  state 
ments  made  in  ignorance  of  all  this  by  their  great 
predecessors.  Or  if  they  try  to  shore  up  their 
crumbling  edifice,  it  is  by  the  abuse  of  a  few 
isolated  texts  which  are  pressed  remorselessly  into 
the  service.2 

Let  this  fact,  then,  be  kept  prominently  in  view, 
that  a  knowledge  of  Hebrew  has  nothing  what 
ever  to  do  with  the  question  of  the  authenticity  of 
the  books  of  Moses.  And  speaking  generally, 
philology  has  only  an  incidental  importance  in 
the  whole  Higher  Criticism  controversy.  If,  for 
example,  Professor  Driver  declares  that  "the 
Hebrew  of  Daniel  is  that  of  a  much  later  age 
than  the  sixth  century  B.C.,"  he  is  answered  by 
Professor  Cheyne,  who,  though  a  more  uncom 
promising  critic,  is  a  safer  guide  on  matters 
of  this  kind.  We  may  therefore  dismiss  the 
Hebraists  altogether  from  this  part  of  the  inquiry. 

And    even    in    relation    to    questions    which 


Lex  Mosaica,  p.  9.  *  See  Appendix,  Note  I. 


CH.  IV.]     THE   SECOND   ISAIAH   THEORY  45 

specially  concern  them,  the  function  of  the 
experts  is  merely  to  prepare  the  proofs.  The 
decision  should  rest  with  those  who  have  practical 
experience  in  dealing  with  evidence.  To  allow 
the  critics  to  adjudicate  upon  the  evidence  they 
have  themselves  prepared  would  be  quite  as 
stupid  and  as  dangerous  as  to  permit  the  police 
to  try  the  prisoners  whose  cases  they  bring  into 
court.  And  yet  this  is,  speaking  generally,  the 
attitude  maintained  by  educated  Englishmen 
towards  every  question  raised  in  this  controversy. 
It  is  intellectually  as  deplorable  as  that  of  the 
Irish  Roman  Catholic  peasant  who  grovels  before 
his  priest  and  takes  the  law  from  his  mouth. 

Take  for  example  the  Isaiah  controversy.  The 
critical  attack  upon  Daniel  not  only  destroys  one 
of  the  great  Messianic  prophecies,  and  impairs  the 
authority  of  the  New  Testament,  but  impugns  the 
teaching  of  the  Lord  Himself.  But  this  "  second 
Isaiah  "  hypothesis  involves  no  element  of  this 
kind.  The  question  therefore  is  open  to  dis 
cussion,  and  the  Christian  may  consider  it  on  its 
merits.  The  reasons  urged  in  favour  of  it  are 
undoubtedly  striking  and  important.  They  are, 
first,  certain  literary  differences  which  mark  the 
various  sections  of  the  Book  ;  and  secondly,  the 
definiteness  of  the  references  to  the  exile  and  the 


46        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

return,  contained  in  the  latter  portion  of  it.  No 
one  will  dispute,  however,  that  were  it  not  for 
this  second  consideration  the  question  would  not 
be  pressed  ;  for  in  a  writer  so  "  versatile  "  as 
Isaiah,1  a  change  of  style  is  by  no  means  extra 
ordinary.  And  the  critics  do  not  deny  that  God 
might  have  inspired  Isaiah  to  utter  all  these 
prophecies. 

In  a  recent  sensational  murder  trial,  it  was 
suggested  that  the  real  delinquent  was  a  stranger 
who  resembled  the  accused.  The  suggestion 
was  a  reasonable  one,  and  its  acceptance  would 
have  explained  certain  difficulties  in  the  case  for 
the  prosecution.  But  an  experienced  judge  and 
a  sensible  jury  wanted  to  know  where  this  stranger 
had  come  from,  and  what  became  of  him.  And 
so  here.  We  want  to  know  something  about  this 
Isaiah  II.2 

If  it  were  possible  to  hold  that  the  "  second 
Isaiah"  was  the  real  Isaiah,  this  difficulty  might 
perhaps  be  ignored.  For  the  author  of  the  open- 


1  "  A  writer  so  versatile  and  dramatic."    Professor  G.  A.  Smith's 
Isaiah. 

2  I  fear  I  shall  be  deemed  ignorant  for  speaking  of  two  Isaiahs. 
I  really  forget  how  many  of  them  are  reckoned  by  some  of  the 
critics— sixteen,  I  think.     But  in  these  pages  I   wish   to  deal 
seriously  with  the  criticisms  of  sober  scholars,  and  to  ignore  the 
vagaries  of  faddists. 


CH.  IV.]  SECOND   ISAIAHS  47 

ing  prophecies  of  the  Book — those  scathing 
denunciations  of  the  religion  of  the  people — may 
well  have  been  hated  and  persecuted ;  and  it  is 
conceivable  that  his  very  name  should  have  been 
erased  from  the  popular  annals.  But  the  last 
twenty-seven  chapters  are  altogether  unique,  not 
merely  by  reason  of  their  unequalled  brilliancy 
and  power,  but  also  because  they  are  such  "  com 
fortable  words  "  as  never  before  or  since  were 
heard  in  Israel.  A  prophet  raised  up  in  the  dark 
days  of  the  exile  to  deliver  such  messages  of  hope 
and  joy  would  have  become  immortal.  He  would 
have  been  the  idol  of  the  whole  nation,  the  most 
famous  and  popular  personage  of  his  time.  But 
if  we  are  to  accept  the  theory  of  the  critics,  he 
appeared  and  vanished  again,  like  a  morning 
mist,  without  leaving  even  the  vaguest  tradition 
of  his  name,  his  personality,  or  his  career.  And 
this,  remember,  in  the  exilic  or  post-exilic  period, 
that  is  to  say  within  historic  times. 

And  when  we  are  told  that  there  were  several 
"second  Isaiahs,"  a  galaxy  of  the  most  brilliant 
prophetic  stars  that  ever  shone  in  the  national 
firmament  of  Israel,  the  suggestion  becomes  so 
utterly  preposterous  that  if  the  case  could  be 
brought  before  any  serious  judicial  tribunal  it 
would  be  "  laughed  out  of  court." 


48        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

But  as  usual  with  experts,  the  critics  look  only 
at  one  side  of  the  question.  And  while  experience 
refuses  to  sanction  an  hypothesis  so  wild  as  that 
which  they  propose,  it  warns  us  authoritatively  that 
in  common  with  all  experts  they  are  exceptionally 
liable  to  err. 

In  his  History  of  the  Criminal  Law,  Sir  James 
Fitzjames  Stephens  places  on  record  the  matured 
judgment  of  the  Judicial  Bench  that  no  kind  of 
evidence  needs  more  the  test  of  cross-examination 
than  that  of  experts.  In  no  other  sphere  save 
that  of  religious  controversy  would  sensible  people 
accept  the  dicta  of  experts  until  they  had  been 
thus  tested ;  and  yet  the  history  of  the  Higher 
Criticism  movement  gives  abundant  proof  that 
no  class  of  expert  is  more  untrustworthy  than  the 
critic. 

What  about  Schleiermacher,  and  Baur,  and 
Strauss,  and  their  several  schools  ?  Who  now 
defends  their  conclusions  ?  The  New  Testament 
fared  worse  at  their  hands  than  does  the  Old 
Testament  to-day  at  the  hands  of  their  successors. 
And  yet  the  lucubrations  of  those  brilliant  scholars 
and  critics  are  now  put  aside  as  "an  episode " 
even  by  such  an  arch-heretic  as  Professor  Har- 
nack  of  Berlin.  "  There  was  a  time  "  (he  writes) 
" — the  general  public  indeed  have  not  got  beyond 


CH.  IV.]        VAGARIES   OF  CRITICISM  49 

it — in  which  the  oldest  Christian  literature,  in 
cluding  the  New  Testament,  was  looked  upon  as 
a  tissue  of  deceptions  and  forgeries.  That  time 
is  passed.  For  science  it  was  an  episode  in  which 
it  learned  much,  and  after  which  it  has  much  to 
forget.  .  .  .  The  oldest  literature  of  the  Church 
in  all  main  points  and  in  most  details,  from  the 
point  of  view  of  literary  criticism,  is  genuine  and 
trustworthy."  * 

What  guarantee  have  we,  then,  that  the  vagaries 
of  present-day  criticism  about  the  Books  of  Moses, 
the  Prophets  and  the  Psalms,  will  not  be  dis 
missed  as  lightly  by  the  Higher  Critics  of  the 
future  ?  I  am  not  referring  here  to  the  puerilities 
of  "  the  Polychrome  Bible  " — such  puerilities 
offend  the  common  sense  of  all  intelligent  people. 
What  I  have  in  view  is  such  theories,  for  example, 
as  that  the  dispensation  of  the  prophets  preceded 
the  dispensation  of  the  law — a  very  slight 
acquaintance  with  the  general  scheme  of  revela 
tion  will  save  us  from  any  error  of  the  kind ;  or 
to  take  another  case,  that  prophetic  writings 
which  deal  with  the  events  of  the  captivity  must 
be  assigned  to  the  captivity  era.  This  theory 

1  He  adds  :  "  In  the  whole  New  Testament  there  is  in  all  pro 
bability  only  a  single  writing  which  can  be  looked  upon  as 
pseudonymous  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word — i.e.,  2  Peter." 

5 


50        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

originated  with  the  sceptics,  and  it  is  a  neces 
sary  part  of  the  rationalistic  crusade  against  the 
supernatural  element  in  Scripture.  But  it  is 
adopted  by  critics  of  a  different  school,  who 
defend  it  on  the  ground  that  to  suppose  a  prophet 
to  become  "  immersed  in  the  future  would  be  not 
only  without  parallel  in  the  Old  Testament,  it 
would  be  contrary  to  the  nature  of  prophecy."1 
Now  this  is  a  question  as  to  which  we  need  no 
help  from  the  philologist.  Any  Christian  who 
has  made  a  life  study  of  the  Bible  is  as  com 
petent  to  form  an  opinion  upon  it  as  the  ablest 
Hebraist  in  Christendom.  And  most  of  us  would 
insist  that  this  theory  is  utterly  opposed  to  fact. 
If  the  64th  chapter  of  Isaiah  was  necessarily 
written  after  the  captivity,  the  53rd  chapter 
was  necessarily  written  after  the  crucifixion.  And 
so  also  with  the  Messianic  Psalms,  and  number 
less  passages  in  the  minor  prophets.  Professor 
Driver  tells  us  that  "  the  prophet  never  abandons 
his  own  historical  position."  And  therefore  he 
calls  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  "  discourses."  In 
other  words,  the  prophecies  came  by  the  will  of 
man.  But  no  prophecy  of  the  Scripture  is  of  this 
character.  "  For  no  prophecy  ever  came  by  the 

1  Professor  Driver's  Introduction,  p.  224. 


CH.  IV.]    THE   PROPHETS   SPOKE   FROM   GOD     51 

will  of  man  ;  but  men  spake  from  God,  being 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost " — borne  along  as  a 
storm-caught  ship  is  driven  before  the  wind.1 

1  2  Peter  i.  21.  The  word  "  moved  "  is  literally  carried  along : 
see  its  use  in  Acts  xxvii.  15,  17  (driven}.  The  whole  passage  is  of 
great  importance  in  this  connection — "  No  prophecy  of  the  Scrip 
ture  is  of  any  private  interpretation."  The  word  rendered  "  inter 
pretation"  occurs  here  only.  The  verb  is  used  in  the  LXX. 
(Gen.  xli.  12)  as  the  translation  of  the  Hebrew  pathar,  to  open 
unfold,  disclose.  And  the  word  here  rendered  "  private  "  occurs 
113  times  in  the  New  Testament,  but  nowhere  else  is  it  so 
translated.  It  is  rendered  "  his  own  "  77  times.  And  the  word 
"  is  "  is  not  the  verb  to  be,  but  to  come  into  existence,  to  come  to  be. 
What  the  passage  declares,  therefore,  is  that  no  prophecy  ever 
originated  with  the  prophet's  own  unfolding  (or  sending  forth). 
It  speaks,  not  of  the  interpretation  of  the  prophecies,  but  of  their 
origin  and  source,  and  thus  disposes  of  the  theories  of  the 
critics.  (See  Dr.  Bullinger's  Figures  of  Speech  used  in  the  Bible, 
p.  130.) 


CHAPTER  V 

CHARLES  READE,  the  great  novelist, 
thus  states  in  his  own  inimitable  way  the 
attitude  of  the  Christianised  sceptic  toward  the 
miraculous  in  Scripture  :  "  Say  there  never  was 
a  miracle  and  never  will  be,  and  I  differ  with, 
but  cannot  confute  you.  Deny  the  creation  and 
the  possibility  of  a  re-creation  or  resurrection  ; 
call  David  a  fool  for  saying,  *  It  is  He  that  hath 

made  us  and  not  we   ourselves/  and a  wise 

man  for  suggesting  that,  on  the  contrary,  mole 
cules  created  themselves  without  a  miracle,  and 
we  made  ourselves  out  of  molecules  without  a 
miracle  ;  and  although  your  theory  contradicts 
experience  as  much  as,  and  staggers  credulity 
more  than,  any  miracle  that  has  ever  been 
ascribed  by  Christians  or  Jews  to  infinite  power, 
I  admit  it  is  consistent,  though  droll." 

But,  he  goes  on  to  say,  once  grant  the  creation 
of  the  world,  and  "it  is  a  little  too  childish  to 


CH.  V.]        CHRISTIANISED   SCEPTICISM  53 

draw  back  "  and  to  haggle  over  miracles  of  the 
kind  recorded  in  the  Bible. 

The  intelligent  and  consistent  sceptic  is  entitled 
to  respect  and  sympathy.  But  what  can  be  said 
for  the  man  who  professes  to  believe  in  the 
Apostles'  Creed,  and  yet  rejects  on  a  priori 
grounds  the  Gospel  miracles ! 

Here  is  the  preface  to  the  Fourth  Gospel : — 
"  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word 
was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.  The 
same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God.  All  things 
were  made  by  Him  ;  and  without  Him  was  not 
anything  made  that  was  made."  The  sceptic  at 
once  declares  his  unbelief.  And  from  his  own 
standpoint  he  is  right ;  for  he  regards  the  record 
as  human,  and  no  one  but  a  credulous  fool 
would  believe  such  statements  on  merely  human 
authority.  The  Christianised  sceptic,  on  the 
other  hand,  assures  us  that  "the  Nazarene"  was 
really  the  God  who  made  the  heavens  and  the 
earth;  and  yet  he  cannot  believe  in  His  healing 
a  case  of  paralysis,  or  raising  Lazarus  from  the 
dead.1  Was  there  ever  such  an  instance  of 
"straining  out  a  gnat  and  swallowing  a  camel"! 

For    not   only   do   the   minor    and    incidental 

1  John  v.  1-9 ;  xi.  44. 


54        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

miracles  of  the  Ministry  rest  upon  the  same 
testimony  as  the  great  foundation  miracle  of  the 
Incarnation,  but  if  that  greatest  of  the  miracles 
be  accepted,  the  others  are  in  such  sense  con 
nected  with  it  that,  even  if  no  record  of  them 
remained,  we  might  reasonably  assume  they  took 
place.  Will  my  readers  decide  this  question  for 
themselves  ?  Suppose  a  parent,  or  wife,  or  hus 
band,  or  child  were  lying  at  the  point  of  death, 
and  you  knew  that  He  who  made  the  world  was 
sojourning  in  our  midst  "in  fashion  as  a  man," 
would  all  the  Professors  and  sceptics  of  Christen 
dom  prevent  you  from  seeking  His  presence,  and 
casting  yourself  at  His  feet  with  the  appeal  that 
He  would  cure  your  loved  one  ? 

But  it  may  be  said,  if  this  argument  were  sound 
such  cures  would  be  as  frequent  now  as  in  the 
days  of  the  Ministry.  To  which  I  answer  first, 
that  this  objection  is  not  legitimate  with  the 
Christian,  for  the  Scriptures  themselves  explain 
the  mystery  of  a  silent  heaven  in  the  present  dis 
pensation  ;  and  secondly,  that  notwithstanding 
that  explanation,  the  silence  is  the  greatest  trial 
which  faith  has  to  endure.  Matthew  Arnold's 
God — "the  Eternal,  not  ourselves,  that  makes 
for  righteousness  " — may  satisfy  the  student  in  the 
dreamland  of  his  library  ;  but  men  who  have  to 


CH.  V.]          THE   DIVINITY  OF   CHRIST  55 

do  with  the  stern  realities  of  life  will  say  of  this 
fastidious  sceptic  what  Pascal  said  of  Descartes, 
that  the  only  God  he  admitted  was  a  God  who 
was  useless.  There  are  times  in  every  life  when 
"  heart  and  flesh  cry  out  for  the  Living  God  "  I— 
a  real,  personal  God.  Reason  revolts  against  the 
conception  of  a  God  that  could  not  cure  our  sick, 
and  heal  our  afflicted  ones.  His  power  is  beyond 
question.  If,  then,  He  does  not  do  it,  are  we  to 
conclude  that  His  goodness  and  love  are  at  fault? 
This  is  a  part  of  the  searching  discipline  of  the 
life  of  faith.2 

It  is  at  the  foundations  that  intelligent  and  true 
scepticism  challenges  the  truth  of  Christianity. 
The  miracles  controversy  is  the  merest  skirmish 
ing.  The  Divinity  of  Christ  is  the  field  upon 
which  must  be  fought  the  decisive  battle  between 
faith  and  unbelief.  From  the  human  standpoint, 
the  supreme  miracle  of  the  Incarnation  is  in 
credible.  Here  the  Christian  and  the  unbeliever 
measure  their  distance.  And  the  one  as  well  as 
the  other  holds  a  position  which  is  unassailable. 
It  is  the  attempted  compromise  of  the  Christianised 
sceptic  which  is  intellectually  contemptible.  The 
sceptic  says,  "  No  amount  of  human  testimony 

1  Psa.  Ixxxiv.  2. 

*  The  Silence  of  God  deals  specially  with  this  question. 


56        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

could  avail  to  accredit  such  a  miracle  ;  therefore 
I  reject  it."  The  Christian  leaves  that  position 
unchallenged,  but  he  answers,  "  The  truth  you 
refuse  does  not  rest  upon  human  testimony,  but 
upon  a  Divine  revelation  ;  therefore  I  accept  it." 

Let  me  repeat  my  question  in  another  form. 
And  here  I  appeal  to  any  honest,  sane,  and 
sensible  man,  I  care  not  whether  he  be  believer 
or  unbeliever,  Christian  or  Pagan  :  Suppose  the 
Divine  Being  who  made  heaven  and  earth  were 
sojourning  among  us,  would  you  expect  Him  to 
work  what  we  call  miracles  ?  In  other  words, 
would  you  attribute  to  Him  power  greater  than 
we  ourselves  possess  ?  The  question  needs  only 
to  be  stated;  for  the  answer  is  obvious.  Not  only 
should  we  look  for  miracles,  but  if,  in  circum 
stances  which  would  lead  any  good  man  to  act,  the 
miracles  were  wanting,  their  absence  would  dis 
credit  the  assumption  that  the  Being  was  Divine. 

The  more  closely  this  matter  is  investigated, 
the  more  clearly  it  will  appear  that  the  Divinity 
of  Christ  is  the  pivot  on  which  the  whole  con 
troversy  turns  ;  and  the  effect  of  sceptical  criti 
cism  upon  every  fearless  and  logical  thinker  will 
be  to  compel  him  to  make  choice  "  between  a 
deeper  faith  and  a  bolder  unbelief." 

Says   Matthew  Arnold,  "At  the  stage  of  ex- 


CH.  V.]     MATTHEW  ARNOLD   ON   MIRACLES       57 

perience  where  men  have  now  arrived,  it  is 
evident  to  whoever  looks  at  things  fairly  that 
the  miraculous  data  of  the  Bible  .  .  .  proceed 
from  a  medium  of  imperfect  observation  and 
boundless  credulity.  The  story  of  the  miraculous 
birth  and  resuscitation  of  Jesus  was  bred  in  such 
a  medium."  I  I  respect  a  thinker  and  writer  of 
this  type,  and  I  freely  acknowledge  that  if  the 
Bible  be  nothing  more  than  these  Higher  Critics 
would  have  us  believe,  he  is  entirely  in  the  right. 
The  Christian  believes,  while  the  sceptic  rejects, 
"  the  story  of  the  miraculous  birth."  But  the 
Christianised  sceptics  accept  the  Christian's  creed 
while  they  destroy  the  foundation  on  which  it 
rests.  And  yet  they  pose  as  persons  of  superior 
enlightenment  and  intelligence ! 

If  people  would  use  their  reason  and  common 
sense  in  this  matter,  the  battle  would  soon  be  joined 


1  God  and  the  Bible  (Preface).  His  argument  against  the 
evidential  value  of  miracles  (Lit.  and  Dogma,  chap.  vi. 
especially)  I  deal  with  in  my  Silence  of  God,  though  without 
citing  him.  With  much  of  it  I  agree.  The  assumption  that 
miracles  are  impossible  indicates  merely  the  stupid  tendency  of 
the  human  mind  to  become  enslaved  to  the  results  of  experience. 
It  reminds  me  of  Dean  Swift's  story  of  the  man  with  the  wonder 
ful  nose.  The  learned  society  of  the  place  met  to  discuss  the 
case,  and  passed  a  resolution  that  no  man  could  have  such  a 
nose.  At  which  juncture  the  man  himself  walked  in,  nose  and 
all !  Any  one  can  find  proofs  that  what  are  called  miracles 
occur  even  in  our  own  day. 


58        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

between  faith  and  unbelief,  and  we  should  be  rid 
of  the  shallow  and  illogical  half-scepticism  of  the 
critics.  A  teacher  appeared  in  Judea,  and  pro 
claimed  himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God  and  Israel's 
Messiah.  Utterly  unaccredited  by  the  established 
religion  of  the  time,  he  gathered  round  him  a 
company  of  disciples — humble  men  all  of  them, 
mostly  peasants  and  fishermen,  wholly  unknown 
to  fame.  Every  element  that,  in  our  own  day, 
we  should  call  orthodox  and  respectable  agreed 
in  repudiating  him.  We  are  apt  to  assume  that 
the  religious  leaders  of  the  Jews  were  either  fools 
or  fiends,  whereas  the  testimony  of  the  Apostle 
Paul  gives  proof  that  they  were  men  of  piety  and 
zeal — men  who  were  certainly  not  inferior  in  these 
respects  to  the  religious  leaders  of  Christendom 
at  any  period  of  its  history. 

But  these  men  rejected  Him  on  perfectly 
reasonable  grounds.  It  is,  perhaps,  impossible 
for  us  to  understand  their  position,  or  to  view 
the  facts  as  they  viewed  them.  But  here  is 
the  startling  testimony  of  one  who  in  early  life 
had  stood  where  they  did.  "  There  was  in  such 
a  Messiah,"  he  writes,  "absolutely  nothing — past, 
present,  or  possible ;  intellectually,  religiously,  or 
even  nationally — to  attract,  but  all  to  repel."  I 

*  Dr.  Edersheim,  Life  and  Times  of  the  Messiah  (vol.  i.,  p.  145). 


CH.  V.]  CHRIST   AND   THE   BIBLE  59 

How  was  it,  then,  that  His  disciples  believed 
on  Him  ?  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 
Living  God,"  was  the  Apostle  Peter's  testimony. 
To  which  the  Lord  made  answer,  "  Flesh  and 
blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven."1  The  facts  were 
the  same  for  both.  But  the  facts  were  regarded 
from  wholly  different  points  of  view.  The  Jews 
regarded  them  in  the  light  of  human  judgment : 
the  disciples  viewed  them  in  the  light  of  a  Divine 
revelation. 

And  the  reasons  given  for  disparaging  the 
Bible  to-day  are  but  the  echo  of  the  reasons 
urged  for  rejecting  Christ  in  the  days  of  the 
Ministry.  One  of  the  popular  exponents  of  the 
Higher  Criticism  has  denounced  the  "  baseless 
notion  that  a  book  written  by  human  pens  and 
handed  down  by  human  methods,  transcribed, 
translated,  compiled  by  fallible  minds,  is,  or  can 
be,  the  Word  of  God."  Yes  ;  this  is  so  very  like 
what  they  said  about  the  Lord.  "  Is  not  this  the 
carpenter,  the  son  of  Mary,  the  brother  of  James 
and  Joses  and  Judas  and  Simon  ?  And  are  not 
His  sisters  here  with  us  ?  And "  (the  record 
adds)  "they  were  offended  at  Him."2  Of  course 

1  Matt.  xvi.  16,  17.  •  Mark  vi.  3. 


60        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

they  were  ;  and  if  the  critics,  including  the  writer 
I  have  quoted,  had  lived  in  the  days  of  the 
Ministry,  their  principles  would  have  led  them 
to  take  sides  with  those  who  rejected  Him. 

"  But  the  Bible  contains  not  only  what  is  false, 
but  what  is  positively  immoral  and  evil."  Yes  ; 
and  they  said  of  Him,  "  Behold  a  gluttonous  man 
and  a  wine-bibber." I  They  even  called  Him 
Beelzebub ; 2  and  the  critics  have  never  gone  so 
far  as  this  in  denouncing  Holy  Scripture. 

These  grosser  charges  against  the  Lord  were 
altogether  blasphemous ;  and  so  are  these  baser 
libels  upon  the  Scriptures.  They  discredit  only 
those  who  make  them.  But  as  regards  what  may 
be  described  as  legitimate  criticisms,  it  will  be 
urged  that  the  critics  are  fair  and  intelligent  and 
devout,  and  that  they  can  prove  the  truth  of  all 
they  say.  Yes,  they  think  they  can  prove  the 
truth  of  it.  And  many  of  the  leaders  of  the 
Jews  were  quite  as  devout  and  intelligent  and 
fair  as  they.  The  facts,  moreover,  on  which  the 
Jews  relied  in  denying  that  the  Nazarene  could 
be  the  Son  of  God  were  indisputable ;  whereas 
the  grounds  on  which  the  critics  deny  that  the 
Bible  can  be  the  Word  of  God  are  most  of  them 

1  Matt.  xi.  19.  *  Ibid.  x.  25. 


CH.  V.]  CHRIST  AND   THE   BIBLE  61 

untenable,  and  all  of  them  disputed.1  And  those 
that  are  admitted  —  the  "  human  pens"  and 
"human  methods" — have  their  counterpart  in  the 
facts  of  the  family  and  workshop  at  Nazareth. 

I  am  not  playing  with  words.  Nor  am  I  using 
the  rejection  of  Christ  as  a  mere  illustration  of 
my  theme.  This  would  be  irreverent.  I  insist 
that  the  cases  are  parallel.  There  is  a  definite 
analogy  between  the  grounds  on  which  the  Jews 
rejected  Christ  and  the  grounds  on  which  some 
critics  reject  the  Bible.  And  the  cause  of  the 
rejection  is  the  same  in  both  cases — the  incapacity 
of  unspiritual  men  to  deal  with  spiritual  things. 
If  the  Lord  had  not  claimed  to  be  Divine,  they 
would  have  ranked  Him  among  the  greatest  of 
their  Rabbis.  And  if  the  Bible  did  not  claim  to 
be  Divine,  it  would  be  held  in  the  highest  honour 
by  many  who  now  disparage  it.  But  the  Jews 
insisted  that  the  Lord  should  be  judged  like  any 
other  human  being,  just  as  the  critics  maintain 
that  the  Bible  must  be  treated  like  any  human 
book.  And  the  inevitable  result  in  the  one  case 
was  the  crucifixion  of  Calvary  :  in  the  other,  it  is 
the  apostasy  of  the  Encyclopedia  Biblica. 

That  "a  book  written   by  human   pens,    and 

1  See  Chaps.  VII.  and  VIII.,  post. 


62        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

handed  down  by  human  methods,"  should  be  the 
Word  of  God,  does  not  seem  so  wild  a  suggestion 
as  that  "the  carpenter,  the  son  of  Mary,"  should 
be  the  Son  of  God.  As  for  the  book,  even  if  we 
throw  in  the  "transcribing"  and  "translating," 
not  only  does  the  notion  not  appear  "baseless"  at 
all,  but  the  objections  to  it  can  be  shown  to  be 
either  inapplicable  or  frivolous.1 

If  positive  proof  be  demanded  that  the  Bible  is 
the  Word  of  God,  we  must  rise  above  the  level  at 
which  the  critics  ply  their  trade — we  must  take 
account  of  its  deeper,  spiritual  meaning  ;  but  in 
answering  their  objections  and  criticisms  we  can 
meet  the  critics  on  their  own  ground.  Not  so 
with  the  truth  that  "  the  Nazarene"  was  the  Son 
of  God.  Here  we  are  confronted  with  that  which 
not  only  clashes  with  all  experience,  but  which 
transcends  all  human  thought.  Therefore  it  is 
that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  reveal  it. 

And  these  solemn  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  are  not  falsified  by  the  fact  that  there  are 
multitudes  who,  apart  from  any  spiritual  appre 
ciation  of  a  Divine  revelation,  profess  to  believe 
in  His  Divinity.  For  the  acceptance  of  what  is 
true  in  itself,  if  it  be  based  on  grounds  which  are 

•  See  Chaps.  VII.  and  VIII.,  post. 


CH.  V.]  PASCAL  ON  RELIGION  63 

either  false  or  inadequate,  is  not  faith  but  super 
stition.  And  of  this  character  are  all  beliefs 
begotten  of  mere  "  religion,"  whether  the  religion 
be  called  Christian  or  Pagan.  For,  as  Pascal 
wrote,  religion  makes  people  stupid.1 

1  The  passage  is  given  in  God  and  the  Bible  (Preface).  He  is 
dealing  with  the  difficulty  people  urge  that  they  cannot  believe, 
and  his  prescription  is  that  they  should  act  as  if  they  believed ; 
using  "the  ordinances  "—taking  holy  water,  having  masses  said, 
&c.,  and  he  adds  -.—Naturellement  meme  cela  vous  fera  croire  & 
vous  abetira.  No  wonder  that  the  Port  Royal  editors  suppressed 
a  passage  so  cruelly  cynical  but  so  true  !  For  while  Christianity 
elevates  and  ennobles  the  whole  being,  mere  religion  seems  to 
make  men  either  fools  or  fiends. 


CHAPTER    VI 

HIFTING  the  burden  of  proof  is  one  of  the 
commonest  tricks  of  casuistry.  By  this 
artifice  Infidelity  would  inveigle  us  into  allowing  a 
presumption  against  the  existence  of  a  written  reve 
lation.  But,  as  has  been  well  said,  "Agnosticism 
assumes  a  double  incompetence — the  incompetence 
not  only  of  man  to  know  God,  but  of  God  to  make 
Himself  known.  But  the  denial  of  competence  is 
the  negation  of  Deity.  For  the  God  who  could 
not  speak  would  not  be  rational,  and  the  God  who 
would  not  speak  would  not  be  moral."  And  the 
author  of  these  words  I  sums  up  his  argument  by 
declaring  that  "  the  idea  of  a  written  revelation 
may  be  said  to  be  logically  involved  in  the  notion 
of  a  living  God." 

This  might  be  stated  much  more  strongly. 
What  should  we  think  of  a  man  who,  living  in 
wealth  in  some  distant  colony,  never  communi- 

1  Principal  Fairbairn,  of  Oxford. 
64 


CH.  VI.]     THE   TESTIMONY  OF   LAWYERS  65 

cated  with  his  family  in  England,  even  though 
aware  of  their  being  in  perplexity  and  trouble  and 
want?  I  It  seems  inconceivable  that  a  good  and 
loving  God  could  leave  His  offspring  without  a 
revelation  during  their  sojourn  in  a  world  so  full 
of  doubt  and  care  and  sorrow  and  sin.  But  these 
pages  are  addressed  to  Christians,  and  every 
Christian  believes  that  we  have  a  revelation.  In 
spite  of  all  that  has  been  said  about  it,  indeed, 
some  of  us  believe  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of 
God.  But  this  only  proves  our  want  of  intelli 
gence.  For,  we  are  assured,  no  one  believes  it 
nowadays  unless  he  is  "  a  brainless  idiot."  2 

The  study  of  the  law,  Edmund  Burke  declares, 
"  does  more  to  quicken  and  invigorate  the  under 
standing  than  all  other  kinds  of  learning  put 
together."  Here  then  is  the  mature  and  deliberate 
testimony  of  a  great  lawyer  :  "  Frequent  peru 
sals  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  have  satisfied 
him  that  each  is  an  inspired  work,  such  as  no 
wisdom  of  man  could  have  framed  ;  and  further, 
that  the  earlier  Revelation  is  inseparably  con 
nected  with  the  later,  as  the  acorn  is  connected 

1  Even  among  criminals  it  is  only  the  most  degraded  of  men 
who  forget  their  families. 

8  If  the  author  I  quote  were  living  I  should  pillory  him  by 
giving  his  name.  But  as  he  has  gone  to  his  account,  I  abstain 
from  doing  so. 

6 


66        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

with  the  oak  which  springs  from  it." *  This 
"  brainless  idiot "  was  Lord  Chancellor  of 
England. 

Among  the  other  "  brainless  idiots  "  who  have 
in  the  full  blaze  of  modern  "  culture  "  cherished 
this  despised  belief  in  the  Bible,  may  be  reckoned 
his  immediate  successor,  Lord  Cairns,  the  greatest 
Lord  Chancellor  of  modern  times.  I  am  assured 
that  Lord  Selborne  may  be  classed  in  the  same 
category.  And  to  them  may  be  added  two  other 
very  eminent  lawyers  and  judges,  Lord  Justice 
Lush  and  Mr.  Justice  Archibald.  In  such  com 
pany  no  one  need  be  ashamed  of  belonging  to  the 
guild  of  the  "brainless  idiots."  And  if  the  faith 
of  the  Christian  rested  on  such  a  basis,  it  might 
be  shown  that  that  guild  includes  not  a  few  of  the 
greatest  of  living  scholars  and  thinkers. 

But  it  is  not  because  the  Bible  is  accredited  by 
the  faith  of  eminent  and  saintly  men  that  the 
Christian  reverences  it  as  the  Word  of  God. 
And  it  is  for  the  Christian  I  am  writing.  Were 
it  otherwise,  my  argument  would  run  on  wholly 
different  lines.  And  if  any  one  demands  my 
definition  of  a  Christian,  I  may  answer,  for  my 
present  purpose,  every  one  who  accepts  the 

1  Lord  Hatherley's  Continuity  of  Scripture. 


CH.VI.J    CHRIST   ACCREDITS   THE   BIBLE  67 

"  Apostles'  Creed  "  ;  every  one  who  believes  that 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Only-begotten  Son 
of  God.  Now  the  only  rational  basis  for  such  a 
belief  is  a  Divine  revelation.  The  man  who 
denies  the  inspiration  of  the  Gospels,  and  yet 
believes  in  the  Incarnation,  is,  I  repeat,  a  credu 
lous  person  who  would  believe  anything.  With 
the  honest  agnostic  or  infidel  I  should  wish  to 
discuss  this  question  in  a  patient  and  sympathetic 
spirit ;  but  with  fools  I  have  neither  sympathy 
nor  patience.  Here,  however,  I  am  addressing 
neither  honest  infidels  nor  credulous  fools,  but 
Christians  whose  faith  is  being  undermined  by 
both. 

And  the  moment  we  accept  the  Gospels  as  a 
Divine  revelation,  we  have  done  with  that  pro tig 6 
of  the  critics,  the  "  historic  Jesus,"  and  we  stand 
in  the  presence  of  our  Divine  Lord  and  Saviour. 
And  from  His  hands  it  is  that  we  receive  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures.  Three  times  over  in  the 
Temptation  He  appealed  to  the  Book  of  Deuter 
onomy  as  the  Word  of  God — His  only  defence 
and  answer  to  the  Devil's  arguments  and  claims. 
And  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  He  says : 
"Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  law  or 
the  prophets  ;  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to 
fulfil.  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  Till  heaven  and 


68        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

earth  pass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise 
pass  from  the  law  till  all  be  fulfilled."  The  "jot" 
is  the  smallest  letter  in  the  alphabet ;  the  "  tittle  " 
is  one  of  the  smallest  strokes — minute  points 
and  projections,  by  which  certain  letters  are  dis 
tinguished.  No  language  could  express  more 
unequivocally  the  Divine  authority  of  every 
detail  of  "  the  law  and  the  prophets."  I 

And  in  His  teaching  after  the  resurrection,  we 
are  told,  "  Beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  pro 
phets,  He  expounded  unto  them  in  all  the 
Scriptures  the  things  concerning  Himself."2  Dean 
Alford's  note  upon  this  is  so  admirable  and  so 
apt,  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting  it.  The 
" things  concerning  Himself,"  he  says,  "mean 
something  very  different  from  mere  prophetical 
passages.  The  whole  Scriptures  are  a  testimony  to 
Him:  the  whole  history  of  the  chosen  people, 
with  its  types,  and  its  law,  and  its  prophecies,  is 
a  shewing  forth  of  Him.  And  it  was  here  the 
whole  that  He  laid  out  before  them  .  ,  .  the 


1  "A  book  partly  legend,  partly  dishonest  legend,  fabrications 
for  a  purpose,  with  history  which  is  not  history,  with  a  Levitical 
code  made  1000  years  after  the  time  of  Moses,  .  .  . — can  such  a 
book  as  this  be  one  to  which  the  Son  of  God  puts  the  solemn 
declaration  above  given?" — Higher  Criticism,  What  is  itf  By 
Rev.  Robert  Sinker,  D.D.,  of  Cambridge,  p.  170. 

3  Luke  xxiv.  27. 


CH.  VI.]   THE  CRITICS  DISCREDIT  CHRIST  69 

meaning  of  the  whole,  as  a  whole,  fulfilled  in 
Him." 

That  this  was  the  Lord's  estimate  of  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures  I  need  not  delay  to  prove. 
For  it  is  not  disputed.  .  The  Higher  Critics 
acknowledge  it,  and  as  it  bars  advance  in  their 
sceptical  crusade  against  the  Bible, they  give  it  pro 
minent  notice.  To  avoid  risk  of  misrepresenta 
tion,  I  always  like  to  state  the  views  of  opponents 
in  their  own  words.  So  I  turn  again  to  the  most 
up-to-date  and  accredited  text-book  of  the  Higher 
Criticism.  And  here  I  read :  "  Both  Christ 
and  the  apostles  or  writers  of  the  New  Testa 
ment  held  the  current  Jewish  notions  respecting 
the  Divine  authority  and  revelation  of  the  Old 
Testament/' ' 

How  inferior  the  Christ  of  these  critics  is  to 
themselves,  both  in  spiritual  and  natural  intelli 
gence  !  But  the  profanity  of  the  words,  and  the 
folly  and  conceit  which  they  betoken,  will  be 
plain  to  every  Christian.  What  the  decoy  is  to 
the  libertine,  these  men  are,  though  unwittingly, 
to  the  avowed  infidel.  Just  as  a  pure  woman  is 
insidiously  trained  to  hear  language  and  to  tolerate 
suggestions  which  in  time  prepare  the  way  for 

1  Hastings'  Bible  Dictionary,  article  "  Old  Testament,"  p.  601. 


70        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

advances  of  a  kind  that  at  first  would  have  excited 
disgust  and  anger ;  so  the  holy  and  healthy 
spiritual  instincts  of  the  Christian  are  gradually 
deadened  by  his  becoming  accustomed  to  hear 
his  Divine  Lord  thus  patronised  and  disparaged. 

"  Writings  of  this  character  are  far  more  dan 
gerous  to  the  simple-minded  Christian  than  any 
direct  attack  on  his  Master.  They  are  very 
shockingly  irreverent.  A  patronising  tone  is 
assumed,  which  exhibits  the  critic  as  presuming 
to  judge  Him  who,  we  believe,  will  be  our  Judge." 
These  weighty  words,  which  the  Christian  will 
do  well  to  ponder,  are  from  the  pen  of  one  of  the 
Lord  Chancellors  whom  I  have  already  quoted. 

If  the  subject  were  not  too  sad  and  too  solemn 
for  ridicule,  I  would  illustrate  this  teaching  by 
applying  it  in  another  sphere.  Why  should  not  a 
man  have  two  wives  ? 

The  question  will  provoke  a  wild  scream  of 
indignation  :  in  view  of  the  teaching  of  the  New 
Testament,  how  can  any  one  dare  to  raise  it  ? 
Yes,  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament  is 
explicit,  but  "  both  Christ  and  the  apostles  or 
writers  of  the  New  Testament  held  the  current 
Jewish  notions  respecting"  marriage.  The  im 
portance  of  the  question  of  marriage  is  absolutely 
trivial  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  character 


CH.  VI.]  "KENOSIS"  THEORIES  71 

and  authority  of  Holy  Scripture.  And  if  the 
testimony  of  the  Gospels  and  Epistles  on  the  one 
question  may  be  thus  evaded,  it  is  mere  trifling  to 
appeal  to  it  on  the  other.  If  the  Higher  Critics' 
estimate  of  the  Bible  be  a  just  one,  then,  in  view 
of  the  history  of  the  Patriarchs,  the  position  of 
woman  and  the  sacredness  of  marriage  must  be 
classed  with  the  superstitions  which  the  Christian 
religion  has  borrowed  from  a  degenerate  Judaism. 

Most  true  it  is  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was 
man,  and  that  "  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man 
He  humbled  Himself."  Within  certain  limits 
therefore,  Kenosis1  theories  have  their  place.  But 
not  upon  the  question  here  at  issue.  To  assert 
that  His  teaching  had  no  higher  authority  than 
that  of  man,  is  a  perilous  position  for  a  Christian 
to  assume.  But  even  if  we  could  for  the  sake  of 
argument  concede  this,  it  would  not  touch  the 
fact  that  the  same  Holy  Spirit  who  inspired 
mere  men  to  speak  from  God,  was  given  to  Him 
without  measure;  and  on  that  Divine  fact  He 
based  His  claim  to  speak  "the  words  of  God."2 

What  mean  such  statements  as  these,  "He  that 
rejecteth  Me  and  receive th  not  My  words  hath 

1  A  Greek  word,  the  noun  of  the  verb  used  in  Phil.  ii.  7.    ("  He 
emptied  Himself,"  R.V.) 

2  John  iii.  34. 


72         THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

one  that  judgeth  him:  the  word  that  I  have 
spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day. 
For  I  have  not  spoken  of  Myself ;  but  the  Father 
which  sent  me,  He  gave  me  a  commandment, 
what  I  should  say,  and  what  I  should  speak.  "  l 
And  again,  "  Believest  thou  not  that  I  am  in  the 
Father,  and  the  Father  in  Me  ?  The  words  that  I 
speak  unto  you,  I  speak  not  of  Myself."  2  In  view 
of  such  language,  we  can  understand  His  solemn 
declaration,  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away, 
but  My  words  shall  not  pass  away."  3 

"  The  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us, 
full  of  grace  and  truth  " — not  grace  only,butTRUTH  ; 
for  "  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  4 
Hence  His  testimony  to  Himself,  "  I  am  the 
light  of  the  world  ;  "5  "I  am  the  way,  the  truth, 
and  the  life."  6  And  yet  we  are  told  deliberately 
by  men  who  claim  to  be  Christians  and  Christian 
ministers,  that  His  whole  teaching  respecting 
matters  of  vital  importance  in  relation  to  faith  and 
morals,  was  steeped  in  ignorance  and  superstition. 
For  let  the  facts  be  kept  clearly  in  view :  we  are 
called  " brainless  idiots"  for  believing  that  the 
Old  Testament  is  the  Word  of  God  ;  and  yet  in 
this  we  are  merely  following  our  Divine  Lord. 

1  John  xii.  48,  49.  2  Ibid.  xiv.  10.  *  Luke  xxi.  33. 

4  John  i.  14,  17.  s  ibid  viii.  12.  6  Ibid  xiv.  6. 


CH.  VI.]  "  KENOSIS "  THEORIES  73 

It  is  not  easy  to  write  calmly  upon  this  subject, 
but  I  will  maintain  a  studied  reserve.  Let  the 
plain  facts  speak.  I  claim  the  utmost  attention 
to  them,  for  their  importance  is  immense.  The 
Higher  Critics  admit  that  "the  Divine  authority 
and  revelation  of  the  Old  Testament"  was  ex 
pressly  taught  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  to 
avoid  the  consequences  of  this  admission,  they 
represent  that  in  this  matter  the  Lord  was  the 
dupe  of  "a  current  Jewish  notion,"  or  in  other 
words,  of  an  ignorant  error.  And  this,  remember, 
is  not  the  position  or  language  of  the  extreme 
section  represented  by  Professor  Cheyne,  but  of 
the  "  cautious "  and  "  conservative "  English 
critics  of  Professor  Driver's  school. 

To  raise  the  question,  as  some  do,  whether  the 
Lord  was  versed  in  higher  mathematics  or  the 
discoveries  of  modern  science,  would  be  a  mere 
quibble  were  it  not  for  its  profanity.  And  the 
objection  that  in  childhood  He  must  have  been 
subject  to  the  limitations  of  childhood  is  wholly 
irrelevant.  For  it  is  with  the  Christ  of  the 
Ministry  that  we  have  to  do.  And  the  question 
does  not  relate  to  limitations  upon  knowledge  in 
matters  as  to  which  He  was  silent,  but  to  ignor 
ance  leading  to  teaching  which  the  critics  allege 
to  be  false  and  mischievous,  on  subjects  of  vital 


74        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

moment  to  His  disciples  and  to  the  Church  for 
all  time.  But  even  this  is  not  all.  When  He 
appeared  to  His  disciples  after  His  resurrection, 
not  only  did  He  not  revise  the  teaching  of  the 
days  of  His  humiliation,  but  He  repeated  it  with 
increased  definiteness.1 

Counsel  in  a  lawsuit  has  sometimes  to  advise 
that  unless  some  adverse  witness  can  be  dis 
credited,  the  case  must  collapse.  In  this  Higher 
Criticism  campaign,  the  witness  who  must  be 
discredited  is  our  Divine  Lord.  No  straining  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  Kenosis  will  cover  this  :  it  brings 
us  within  sight  of  the  great  Anti-christian  apostasy 
of  the  latter  days.2 

As  we  proceed,  then,  let  us  keep  these  two  facts 
clearly  in  view.  First,  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  regarded  the  Old  Testament  as  Divinely 
inspired  in  the  very  sense  in  which  all  these 
critics  repudiate  inspiration ;  and  secondly,  that 

1  The  "  Jesus  "  of  Matthew  Arnold,  the  agnostic,  is  "  manifestly 
above  the  heads  of  his  reporters  "  (Lit.  and  Dogma,  Pref .  1888) ; 
the  "Jesus"  of  these  writers   who   claim  to  be  Christians,  is 
manifestly  on  a  level  with  them. 

2  There  lies  before  me  as  I  write,  the  current  number  of  a  weekly 
religious  paper  which  has  done  yeoman's  service  in  the  Higher 
Criticism  crusade.     It  contains  a  fierce  attack  upon  Prof.  Cheyne 
and  the  third  volume  of  his  Encyclopaedia.     I  turn  the  page  to 
find  a  notice  of  an  able  and  valuable  little  book  of  the   Rev. 
David  M'Intyre,  of  Glasgow,  entitled  The  Divine  Authority  of  the 
Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  here  I  read,  "  All  this  citatiou 


CH.  VI.]  "KENOSIS"  THEORIES  75 

the  only  escape  from  that  conclusion  is  to  dis 
parage  either  His  teaching  or  the  record  of  it. 
And  this  is  to  destroy  Christianity  altogether. 

Even  Professor  Cheyne  and  his  school  accept 
the  personality  of  "  the  historic  Jesus."  He  was 
they  tell  us,  "  undoubtedly  a  devout  Jew  ; "  and  as 
the  traditional  teaching  of  this  traditional  Jesus  is 
superior  to  that  of  Mahomet  or  Gautama,  "  the 
Christian  religion  "  would  no  doubt  survive  the 
collapse  of  Christianity.  But  that  is  not  what 
concerns  us  here.  The  Christian  is  not  the 
votary  of  the  best  of  all  human  religions.  He  is 
the  recipient  of  a  Divine  revelation  which  has 
brought  Him  the  knowledge  of  salvation  in  a 
personal  Saviour,  and  has  made  him  the  redeemed 
disciple  of  a  personal  Lord  and  Master.  We  are 
followers,  not  of  the  historic  Jesus  of  the  critics — 
the  dead  Buddha  of  nineteen  centuries  ago — but 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Only-begotten  Son 


of  passages  is  useless,  unless  it  first  be  made  good  that  our  Lord's 
knowledge  of  critical  questions  was  different  from  that  of  his  con 
temporaries."  This  suggests  Dr.  Pusey's  words,  "I  know  not 
whether  the  open  blasphemy  of  the  eighteenth  century  is  more 
offensive  than  the  cold-blooded  patronising  ways  of  the  nine 
teenth."  Can  anything  well  go  further  than  this — that  in  His 
apprehension  of  the  very  Scriptures  which  testified  of  Himself, 
our  Lord  was  less  intelligent  than  the  editor  and  staff  of  this 
newspaper  1  I  would  wish  to  believe  that  the  words  were  written 
hurriedly  and  thoughtlessly. 


76        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

of  God,  who  "died  for  our  sins  according  to  the 
Scriptures."  I 

Now  any  clear  thinker  can  see  that  if,  in  the 
words  I  have  just  quoted,  "  the  Scriptures " 
mean  mere  human  records,  this  whole  system 
rests  upon  a  foundation  of  sand.  The  death 
of  "  the  historic  Jesus  "  is  a  fact  so  well  accredited 
that  no  transcendental  proof  of  it  is  needed.  But 
that  "  Christ  died  for  our  sins  "  is  a  fact  which 
nothing  but  a  Divine  revelation  could  possibly 
accredit.  Therefore  it  is  that  those  who  give 
up  inspiration  generally  end  in  giving  up  the 
atonement. 

But  Christ  "rose  again  the  third  day,  according 
to  the  Scriptures"  What  Scriptures?  The  refer 
ence  is  to  the  Old  Testament,  of  course.  But 
where  does  the  Old  Testament  tell  us  that  Christ 
would  die  for  our  sins  and  rise  again  the  third 
day  ?  Here  comes  in  the  force  of  Dean  Alford's 
words:  "The  whole  Scriptures  are  a  testimony 
to  Him ;  the  whole  history  of  the  chosen  people, 
with  its  types,  its  law,  and  its  prophecies." 

But  just  as  the  unbelieving  Jews  were  entirely 
taken  up  with  the  humanity  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  He  was  nothing  to  them  but  "  the 

1  i  Cor.  xv.  3. 


CH.  VI.]    TWO   SIDES   TO  THE  TAPESTRY  77 

carpenter's  son,"  so  these  critics  are  engrossed 
with  the  human  side  of  Scripture.  Its  deep 
spiritual  significance  they  ignore.  They  study 
the  tapestry  upon  the  wrong  side,  and  write 
ponderous  tomes  replete  with  important  and  use 
ful  information  of  every  kind  about  the  materials 
used  in  the  making  of  it,  and  the  men  who  wove 
it,  and  the  marvellous  way  it  was  put  together 
at  different  periods  and  how  it  has  been  preserved 
to  our  own  day.  But  its  chief  defect — natural 
enough,  having  regard  to  its  history — is  the  utter 
want  of  design  or  pattern  of  any  kind.  We, 
however,  who  look  at  the  fabric  upon  the  upper 
side  are  filled  with  admiration  at  its  symmetry 
and  beauty.  And  as  we  think  of  the  Master 
mind  that  planned  it,  and  mark  the  way  in 
which  every  detail  of  His  plan  has  been  realised, 
all  that  those  who  are  busy  plodding  at  the 
other  side  of  it  can  tell  us  serves  only  to 
deepen  our  wonder  and  to  increase  our  delight, 


CHAPTER    VII 

WE  have  seen  that  our  belief  in  God 
tends  to  a  belief  in  the  existence  of 
a  written  revelation.1  And  having  reached  this 
point  it  would  be  idle  pedantry  to  discuss  the 
rival  claims  of  the  Bible  and  of  other  books. 
Moreover,  I  am  writing  for  Christians,  and 
with  the  Christian  the  only  question  open  is — 
How,  and  to  what  extent,  is  the  Bible  inspired  ? 
Now  it  is  admitted  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
has  taught  us  to  reverence  the  Hebrew  Scrip 
tures  as  inspired  in  the  strictest  sense.2  And 
we  have  seen  that  if  part  at  least  of  the  New 
Testament  be  not  inspired  in  that  same  sense, 
there  is  no  rational  basis  for  believing  any  of 
the  transcendental  truths  of  Christianity. 

What  concerns  us,  then,  is  the  method  of  the 
inspiration.  And  the  first  question  which  arises 
may  be  popularly  stated  thus,  Whether  did  God 

1  P.  64,  ante.  *  P.  67,  ante. 

78 


CH.  VII.]      THEORIES   OF   INSPIRATION  79 

inspire  the  Scriptures,  or  the  men  who  wrote 
them  ?  Now  I  am  not  going  to  enter  on  this 
well-worn  controversy.  Were  I  to  restate  the 
question  and  ask,  Are  the  Scriptures  inspired 
writings  ?  or  Are  they  the  writings  of  inspired 
men  ?  it  would  need  a  lengthy  chapter  to  explain 
the  point  at  issue.  I  take  note  of  the  fact,  first, 
that  the  Bible  itself  advances  no  theory  of 
inspiration ;  and  secondly,  that  none  was  ever 
formulated  until  modern  times.  And  further, 
I  would  urge  that  between  these  rival  theories 
there  is  no  such  antithesis  as  the  controversy 
supposes. 

True  it  is  that  "  Saul  among  the  prophets  " 
became  a  proverb ;  and  a  dumb  ass  was  once 
inspired  to  rebuke  a  prophet.  But  not  even 
the  Higher  Critics  have  suggested  that  either 
Balaam's  Ass  or  the  Son  of  Kish  made  any 
contribution  to  the  written  revelation.  If  by 
inspired  men  be  meant  men  filled  with  the 
Spirit,  and  specially  guided  by  the  Spirit,  then 
we  may  assert  with  confidence  that  the  Biblical 
writers  were  inspired  men. 

Which  of  course  will  call  out  the  taunt,  Was 
David  one  of  your  "  inspired  men  "  ?  That  sneer 
shall  be  answered  in  the  words  of  a  rugged, 
honest-hearted  man  of  the  world  : — 


8o        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

"  David,    the    Hebrew   king,    had    fallen    into 
sins   enough  ;    blackest    crimes  ;    there   was   no 
want   of    sins.     And    therefore    the   unbelievers 
sneer  and  ask,   Is   this  your  man  according  to 
God's   heart?     The   sneer,    I    must    say,    seems 
to   me    but   a   shallow    one.     What    are   faults, 
what   are  the  outward  details   of  a   life,  if  the 
inner    secret    of    it,    the    remorse,    temptations, 
true   often-baffled,    never-ended    struggle    of    it, 
be  forgotten  ?     *  It  is  not  in  man  that  walketh 
to  direct  his  steps.'     Of  all   acts,  is  not,  for  a 
man,  repentance  the  most  divine  ?     The  deadliest 
sin,    I    say,    were   that    same    supercilious   con 
sciousness  of  no  sin ; — that  is  death ;  the  heart 
so  conscious  is  divorced  from  sincerity,  humility 
and   fact ;    is   dead :    it   is    '  pure '   as   dead   dry 
sand    is    pure.      David's    life    and    history,    as 
written   for  us   in   those    Psalms  of  his,  I   con 
sider   to   be   the   truest   emblem   ever   given   of 
a  man's  moral  progress  and  warfare  here  below. 
All   earnest   souls   will    ever    discern    in   it   the 
faithful    struggle    of    an    earnest     human    soul 
towards  what  is  good  and  best.     Struggle  often 
baffled,  sore  baffled,  down  as  into  entire  wreck  ;  yet 
a  struggle  never  ended ;  ever,  with  tears,  repent 
ance,  true  unconquerable  purpose,  begun  anew."  I 

1  Thomas  Carlyle,  Heroes,  Sect.  II. 


CH.  VIL]  DAVID   AND   URIAH  81 

A  passing  word  about  the  "  blackest  crimes." 
I  am  no  apologist  of  evil.  But  the  matter  of 
Uriah's  wife  I  leave  to  each  man  to  settle  with 
his  own  conscience,  asking  him  only  not  to  forget 
the  facts.  Most  men  cater  for  the  sin  which 
brings  them  down ;  but  the  temptation  which 
led  to  David's  fall  was  not  of  his  seeking.  By 
accident  it  was  that  Bathsheba  crossed  his  path. 
Nor  did  he  even  know  that  she  was  married. 
And  when  he  had  brought  the  woman  into 
peril,  he  tried  to  save  her  by  recalling  her 
husband  to  Jerusalem.  But  in  this  he  was 
foiled  by  Uriah's  keenness  as  a  soldier.  He 
was  bent  on  ''returning  to  the  front";  and 
drunk  or  sober  he  could  not  be  turned  from 
his  purpose.  The  wretched  king  was  thus 
confronted  by  the  fact  that  the  death  of  the 
man  he  had  wronged  was  the  only  possible 
way  to  save  the  woman  he  had  tempted.  The 
horrible  doom  of  the  unfaithful  wife  awaited 
her.  And  in  desperation  he  framed  the  guilty 
plot.  It  is  a  terrible  instance  of  what  men 
have  so  often  proved,  that  one  sin  always 
leads  to  another,  and  immorality  often  leads 
to  crime.  The  only  unique  element  in  David's 
case  was  the  depth  and  permanency  of  his 
repentance.  Here  is  the  Divine  summary  of 

7 


82         THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

his  life  story :  "  Save  only  in  the  matter  of 
Uriah  the  Hittite,  David  did  right  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Lord,  and  turned  not  aside  from  any 
thing  that  He  commanded  him  all  the  days 
of  his  life."1  No  wonder  that  he  was  "a  man 
after  God's  heart!"2 

Yes,  it  was  men  like  David  that  God  used 
to  write  the  Bible.  And  the  fifty-first  Psalm 
betokens  more  fitness  for  the  part  than  the 
smug  pharisaism  and  self-confidence  of  all  the 
critics  of  Christendom. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  writers  were 
inspired  men.  And  those  whose  lives  are  un 
folded  to  us  were  severely  trained  in  the  school 
of  God.  They  knew  the  meaning  of  the  crucible 
and  the  refiner's  fire.  As  the  apostles  proved 
in  later  times,  they  were  made  a  spectacle  to 
angels  and  to  men.  Visions  of  unutterable  glory, 
like  those  vouchsafed  to  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel,  alter 
nated  with  sufferings  that  tore  their  very  heart 
strings.  And  here  it  may  be  said  in  passing, 
that  no  one  can  even  understand  the  Scriptures 
who  is  entirely  a  stranger  to  experiences 
like  those  of  the  men  who  wrote  them.  We 
can  beat  back  attacks  by  exposing  ignorance 

1  i  Kings  xv.  5. 

2  See    Professor    Margoliouth's  striking  passage  on  this  sub* 
ject  in  his  Defence  of  the  Biblical  Revelation,  pp.  209,  210. 


CH.  VII.]  VERBAL   INSPIRATION  83 

and  folly  and  error,  and  turning  the  weapons 
of  assailants  against  themselves.  But  "  the 
natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto 
him;  neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they 
are  spiritually  discerned."1  And  the  tenor  of 
a  spiritual  life  is  the  path  of  discipleship,  and 
discipleship  means  being  a  partaker  of  the 
sufferings  of  Him  who  was  called  "the  Man 
of  Sorrows,"  as  well  as  a  sharer  of  the  joy 
that  is  unspeakable  and  of  the  peace  that  passes 
understanding. 

But  some  will  say,  "All  this  is  unreservedly 
conceded  :  the  men  who  wrote  the  Scriptures  were 
inspired,  and  inspired  to  write  them ;  and  there 
fore  their  writings  are  inspired.  But  though  the 
thoughts  were  divinely  given  them,  the  words  in 
which  they  expressed  them  were  their  own.  Our 
difficulty  springs  from  the  dogma  of  verbal 
inspiration." 

Now  first,  let  us  face  the  facts ;  and  they  are 
facts  some  of  which  a  certain  phase  of  dull 
"orthodoxy"  blindly  ignores.  A  critical  examina 
tion  of  the  text  will  satisfy  us  that,  for  example, 
the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  were  written  in  Isaiah's 
language,  and  those  of  Jeremiah  in  Jeremiah's 

1  i  Cor.  ii.  14. 


84        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

language,  and  so  on.  The  inference  drawn  from 
this  is  that,  even  assuming  that  God  suggested 
the  ideas,  each  writer  must  have  been  left  free  to 
express  them  in  his  own  words  ;  and  therefore 
that  inspiration  is  no  guarantee  of  accuracy 
Whether  this  be  so  or  not,  must  be  decided  on 
other  grounds.  To  base  it  on  the  ground  stated 
involves  the  fallacy  of  supposing  that  God  has  a 
language  of  His  own,  and  therefore  that  human 
words  cannot  have  a  Divine  authority. 

A  more  egregious  fallacy  there  could  not  be. 
The  connection  between  language  and  thought  is 
one  of  the  most  interesting  problems  of  meta 
physics.  But  words  are  merely  sounds ;  and  in 
one  sense  the  relation  between  a  word  and  the 
idea  it  represents  to  a  trained  mind  is  as  arbitrary 
as  that  which  a  note  on  the  piano  bears  to  the 
musical  sound  produced  by  striking  it.  A  trained 
mind,  I  say,  because  if  the  idea  be  not  there,  the 
sound  will  not  call  it  up. 

But,  it  will  be  objected,  words  have  a  history, 
and  therefore  they  are  not  mere  arbitrarily  chosen 
sounds.  True,  but  this  only  adds  force  to  my 
argument.  Some  new  idea  arises  in  the  mind, 
or  some  new  object  is  presented  to  it.  The 
existing  vocabulary  contains  no  word  to  represent 
it,  and  a  new  one  is  framed  to  supply  the  want. 


CH.  VII.]    WORDS   ARE  BUT   COUNTERS  85 

To  those,  therefore,  who  frame  the  word,  it  seems 
to  carry  its  own  meaning  ;  but  this  is  due  solely 
to  its  connection  with  the  mental  processes  which 
led  to  its  birth.  To  others  it  is  but  a  sound. 
For  example,  the  fraudulent  way  in  which 
"  escheats  "  were  formerly  seized  by  the  Crown 
led  to  the  creation  of  the  word  "  cheat " ;  but 
there  is  not  one  person  in  ten  thousand  who  now 
thinks  of  its  origin,  and  to  such  it  is  a  mere  sound 
which  they  have  learned  to  connect  with  a 
particular  idea. 

If  a  man  has  not  the  conception  which  we 
associate  with  the  word  "  eternal,"  the  word,  even 
though  it  were  emblazoned  across  the  sky,  could 
not  evoke  it.  And  shouting  olatn  or  aionios  into 
his  ear  would  be  mere  noise  to  him.  "  Words 
are  the  counters  of  wise  men,  the  money  of  fools." 
They  represent  ideas,  but  they  have  no  intrinsic 
value.  And,  as  I  have  said,  their  relation  to  the 
ideas  they  represent  is  arbitrary.  Write  pain  on 
a  piece  of  paper,  and  show  it  on  Dover  pier :  you 
will  be  referred  to  a  doctor.  Cross  the  Channel 
and  exhibit  it  at  Calais  :  you  will  be  directed  to 
the  refreshment-room.1 

1  Some  one  may  object  that  the  sound  would  be  different. 
Very  well.  At  Calais,  call  out  the  French  word  for  lady,  and 
they  may  imagine  you  have  lost  a  travelling  companion  :  at 
Dover  they  would  certainly  think  you  most  profane. 


86        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

The  argument  is  that  as  Isaiah,  for  example, 
wrote  in  his  own  language,  his  writings  cannot 
be  called  "the  Word  of  God."  Will  the  critics 
tell  us  in  what  language  other  than  his  own  the 
prophet  could  have  written?  If  a  man  makes 
a  communication  to  another,  he  conveys  it  either 
in  his  own  language,  or  in  that  of  the  recipient 
But  as  God  has  no  language  of  His  own,  He 
speaks  to  men  in  theirs.  Would  the  Bible  be 
more  Divine  if  it  were  written  in  some  celestial 
volapuk,  with  a  superadded  miracle,  unparalleled 
in  the  whole  range  of  recorded  miracles,  to  make 
men  understand  it  ?  A  nice  sort  of  Bible  that 
would  be ! 

Of  course,  God  could  have  made  all  the 
prophets  use  the  same  words  and  idioms  as  the 
earliest  of  them.  But  what  would  have  been 
gained  by  this?  Some  people  would  persuade 
us  that  the  English  race  now  holds  the  place  once 
held  by  Israel.  If  this  were  so,  and  God  were  to 
give  us  a  special  revelation  to-day,  it  would  not 
be  in  ancient  Hebrew,  but  in  modern  English. 
Even  supposing,  for  example,  that  Yahweh  is  the 
correct  orthography  of  the  great  covenant  name, 
we  may  be  quite  sure  that  JEHOVAH  is  the  name 
by  which  God  would  call  Himself  in  addressing  us 
— that  name  which  is  enshrined  in  the  religious 


CH.  VII.]  THE   NAME  JEHOVAH  87 

thought  and  worship  of  all  the  English-speaking* 
races  of  the  world.  For  Yahweh  would  be  mere 
jargon  save  to  the  Hebraist ;  and  it  is  very 
doubtful  whether  the  Hebraist's  knowledge  of  the 
etymology  of  the  term  would  not  mislead  him  as 
to  its  significance. 

Take  these  words,  for  instance  :  "  The  Lord 
Jehovah  is  my  strength  and  my  song;  He  also  is 
become  my  salvation."  I  Now  to  the  believer, 
as  such,  the  question  of  the  spelling  or  the 
etymology  of  the  name  is  of  no  more  import 
ance  than  that  of  the  type  in  which  it  is  printed. 
The  only  practical  question  is  whether  he  has  the 
conception  which  the  name  is  intended  to  call  up. 
The  name  was  in  use  from  primeval  times  :  it 
was  the  great  covenant  name  of  God.  But  it 
was  not  till  He  identified  Himself  with  an  earthly 
people  that  men  could  know  what  it  really  meant 
to  have  a  Jehovah  God.2 

1  Isa.  xii.  2. 

2  This  is  the  meaning  of  Exod.  vi.  3  (see  Appendix,  Note  I).    I 
venture  to  suggest  that  the  use  of  Yahweh,  or  Yahveh,  savours  of 
pedantry.     It    is    justified    on    two    grounds  ;    ist,    traditional 
authority  (for  the  contempt  which  the  critics  feel  for  "  traditional 
beliefs"  does  not  apply  if  the    tradition   be   Rabbinical)  ;  and 
2ndly,  that  it  carries  its  own  meaning.    To  which  plea  I  answer 
that  its  etymological   meaning  is   not  its  meaning  as  used  in 
Scripture.    It  is  not  an  English  word,  and  its  use  is  therefore 
precisely  the  same  kind  of  pedantry  as,  e.g.,  using  Firenze  instead 
of  Florence. 

The  vowels  of  our  magnificent  word  Jehovah  are  accounted 


88        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Some  men,  no  doubt,  would  be  better  satisfied 
with  the  Bible  if  all  the  prophets  had  written  in 
exactly  the  same  dialect  and  style  ;  and  better 
still  if  they  had  written  in  Pauline  Greek  or 
modern  English.  That  would  have  been  a 
miracle  indeed,  and  really  worth  notice !  Of 
course,  God  might  have  inspired  the  Scriptures 
in  this  way.  Yes,  and  the  Lord  might  have  fed 
the  multitudes  without  using  up  the  disciples'  little 
store  of  loaves  and  fishes.  But  this  is  not  His 
way.  Divine  power  summoned  Lazarus  from 
the  grave,  but  it  was  left  to  human  hands  to  loose 
him  from  the  grave-clothes.  Divine  power  called 
Jairus's  daughter  back  to  life,  but  her  parents 
were  commanded  to  give  her  food.1  It  appears 
to  be  a  principle  with  God  never  to  put  forth 
Divine  power  save  in  so  far  as  human  means 
are  inadequate  or  unavailable.  And  any  one 
who  grasps  this  principle  holds  a  clew  to  the 

for  thus :  The  old  Hebrew  MSS.  had  no  vowels,  but  when  the 
name  occurred,  the  Jews  suppressed  it  from  feelings  of  reverence, 
and  read  Adonai  instead  ;  and  the  vowels  of  this  name  were 
inserted  under  the  line  to  remind  the  reader  of  the  keri,  or  word 
to  be  read.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  name  was  uttered  daily  in 
the  blessing  of  the  priests  (Diet.  Christ.  Ant.,  vol.  i.,  p.  198) ;  and 
the  spelling  of  the  many  names  with  which  it  is  incorporated 
(such  as  Jehoida.,  J^oshaphat,  &c.)  would  indicate  that  Jehovah 
may  be  correct.  Yahveh  is  a  mere  guess  which  may  be  right  or 
may  be  wrong. 
1  Luke  viii.  55. 


CH.  VII.]     THE   FACT   OF   INSPIRATION  89 

solution  of  many  a  difficulty  in  this  matter  of 
inspiration.  It  is  a  principle  which  mars  the 
dramatic  effect  of  most  of  the  miracles,  the  miracle 
of  inspiration  not  excepted  ;  but  dramatic  effect  is 
not  studied  in  Divine  miracles  at  all. 

In  this  aspect  of  it,  then,  the  verbal  inspiration 
difficulty  is  unworthy  of  notice.  The  only  ques 
tion  of  any  practical  importance  is  whether,  as 
the  New  Testament  so  plainly  teaches,  God 
spoke  " through"  (or  "in")  the  writers  of  the 
Old.  But  just  as  the  morbidly  inquisitive  brain 
of  a  certain  sort  of  child  insists  on  seeing  inside 
a  watch,  when  sober  common  sense  asks  only 
whether  it  can  be  trusted  to  tell  the  time  ;  so 
while  "the  common  sense  of  faith  "  is  content  to 
know  that  God  inspired  the  Bible,  there  are 
minds  that  demand  to  know  all  the  mysteries  of 
the  problem  of  inspiration.  And  some  people 
think  they  have  solved  these  mysteries,  just  as 
there  are  men  who  fancy  they  have  mastered  the 
infinite  wonders  of  Nature.  But  wiser  heads 
distinguish  between  the  facts,  whether  of  revela 
tion  or  of  nature,  and  the  theories  which  men 
offer  in  explanation  of  them.  We  do  well  to 
accept  with  intelligent  and  unfaltering  confidence 
the  fact  of  inspiration  so  clearly  taught  by  our 
Divine  Lord ;  but  we  do  well  also  to  view 


90        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

with  great   distrust   all   human  theories  relating 
to  it. 

"  But,"  some  one  will  here  interrupt,  "  any 
body  can  see  the  difference  between  a  man's 
recording  matters  within  his  own  knowledge,  and 
matters  or  truths  of  which  he  could  know  nothing 
except  by  direct  revelation."  Yes,  anybody  can 
see  it.  And  after  he  has  seen  it,  what  then  ? 
Does  the  interrupter  mean,  for  example,  that  the 
prophet  is  to  be  believed  implicitly  when  he 
declares  that  "  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall 
return,  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs,  and 
everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads " I  ;  but 
that  he  is  not  to  be  trusted  when  in  the  next 
sentence  he  records  that  "In  the  fourteenth 
year  of  king  Hezekiah,  Sennacherib  king  of 
Assyria  came  up  against  all  the  defenced  cities 
of  Judah  and  took  them  "  ?  2  And  if  he  does 
not  mean  this,  what  sense  is  there  in  the 
interruption?  Any  one  but  a  Higher  Critic 
would  test  a  chain  at  the  weakest  link,  and 
not  at  the  strongest.  He  would  say,  "If  you  can 
satisfy  me  that  God  made  the  prophet  write  those 
words  about  future  blessing  for  Zion,  I  shall  have 
no  doubt  about  the  Sennacherib  invasion."  The 

1  Isa.  xxxv.  10.  *  Ibid,  xxxvi.  i, 


CH.  VII.]          OBJECTIONS  ANSWERED  91 

problem  has  difficulties  for  those  who  want  to 
frame  theories  of  inspiration  ;  but  the  Christian 
who  merely  wants  to  be  assured  that  the  truth 
of  Scripture  is  Divinely  guaranteed,  brushes  the 
difficulties  aside. 

"But,"  the  objector  says  again,  "  the  manner 
in  which  the  Old  Testament  is  quoted  in  the 
New  —  loosely  quoted  sometimes  from  the 
notoriously  loose  Septuagint  translation -- ex 
plodes  all  your  theories  of  verbal  inspiration." 
Well,  so  much  the  worse  for  the  theories.  But 
will  the  objector  tell  us  in  what  way  this  affects 
the  fact  of  inspiration.  The  Bible  was  not 
written  for  the  wise  of  this  world  ;  still  less  for 
fools.  To  understand  it  aright  we  need  both 
spiritual  intelligence  and  common  sense.  The 
latter  quality  will  help  us  here.  Any  one  who 
possesses  it  can  see  that  in  the  historical  narrative 
of  Isaiah  xxxvi.-xxxix.,  for  example,  the  sense 
is  everything,  and  the  choice  of  words  is  a 
matter  of  comparative  indifference.  Whereas  in 
chapters  xxxv.  and  xl.  absolute  verbal  accuracy 
may  possibly  be  essential.  And  so  we  find  some 
times  a  quotation  so  loosely  given  that  care  is 
needed  to  trace  it  to  its  source,  while  in  other 
cases  emphasis  is  laid  upon  the  very  tense  of  a 
verb  or  the  number  of  a  noun.  It  is  not  that 


92        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

in  the  one  case  the  statement  is  less  true  than  in 
the  other,  but  that  less  importance,  or  possibly 
none,  attaches  to  the  particular  words  used  to 
express  it. 

Instances  of  this  are  familiar  to  every  Bible 
student.  Here,  for  example,  is  one  of  them.  Of 
those  who  denied  the  resurrection,  the  Lord 
demanded,  "  Have  ye  not  read  that  which  was 
spoken  unto  you  by  God,  saying,  I  am  the  God 
of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God 
of  Jacob  ?  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but 
of  the  living."  *  Now  here  the  whole  force  of  the 
argument  depends  on  the  tense  of  the  verb.  To 
say  that  the  language  of  Exodus  means  merely 
that  God  was  the  God  of  the  patriarchs,  would 
be  quite  in  keeping  with  the  loose  way  the  Bible 
is  treated  by  the  critics.  But  the  word  is  not  I 
was  the  God  of  Abraham,  but  "I  AM  the  God  of 
Abraham "  ;  and  therefore  Abraham  is  still  an 
existing  person,  a  person  in  being.  And  as  a 
clew  to  the  use  of  Scripture,  it  is  noteworthy  that 
these  words  were  spoken  "  by  God"  and  spoken 
to  those  whom  the  Lord  was  then  addressing. 

Take  another  instance  still  more  striking. 
"  Is  it  not  written  in  your  law,  *  I  said,  Ye 

1  Matt.  xxii.  31,  32. 


CH.  VII.]    THE  TESTIMONY  OF  CHRIST  93 

are  gods'?  If  He  called  them  gods  to  whom 
the  word  of  God  came  (and  the  Scripture 
cannot  be  broken),  say  ye,  &c."  Now  here 
Psa.  Ixxxii.  is  ascribed  to  God,  and  not  to  the 
Psalmist ;  it  is  declared  to  be  Scripture  which 
cannot  be  broken  ;  and  it  is  appealed  to  as 
making  "an  end  of  controversy."  And  as  in 
the  other  case,  the  force  of  the  argument  depends 
on  the  absolute  accuracy  of  the  words.1 

We  see,  then,  how  and  why  a  Divine  revelation 
must  be  made  in  the  language  of  those  to  whom 
it  comes.  And  upon  their  fitness  and  capacity 
to  receive  it  depend  any  limits  and  failure  of  the 
revelation.  For  words  are  merely  like  paper 
securities  for  money.  Intrinsically  valueless, 
their  worth  depends  on  the  gold  they  represent. 
If  the  gold  be  wanting,  the  paper  is  only  paper 
and  nothing  more.  If  the  thoughts  the  words 
represent  are  absent,  the  words  are  only  empty 
sounds.  Therefore  it  is  that  inspired  men  are 
needed  to  be  the  channels  of  a  revelation,  and 
spiritual  men  alone  can  understand  it  aright. 

"  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation ;  I  will  trust 
and  not  be  afraid  :  for  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  my 


1  John  x.  34,  35.  The  critics  meet  all  this  by  representing, 
the  Lord  as  an  ignorant  person  and  the  Evangelists  as  being 
untrustworthy.  See  Chapters  VI.  and  XIX. 


94        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

strength  and  my  song ;  He  also  is  become 
my  salvation."  We  are  dependent  on  Hebrew 
scholars  to  give  us  these  English  words  :  we 
are  absolutely  dependent  on  the  Spirit  of  God 
to  enable  us  to  understand  them.  True  exegesis 
consists  in  "  interpreting  spiritual  things  to  spiri 
tual  men."  l  And  therefore  Hebrew  scholars  as 
such  cannot  help  us  here ;  for  they  can  only 
explain  natural  things  to  natural  men. 

«  i  Cor.  ii.  13,  R.V.  marg. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

WHEN  Xerxes  issued  his  great  proclamation 
in  favour  of  the  Jews,  it  was  sent,  we  are 
told,  to  each  of  the  hundred  and  twenty-seven 
provinces  of  the  Empire,  from  India  to  Ethiopia, 
"and  unto  every  people  after  their  language."1 
Could  any  of  the  nations  have  pleaded  a  wrong 
or  a  disability  because  the  royal  commands 
reached  them  only  in  their  own  dialect  or  tongue  ? 
Was  this  not  altogether  an  advantage  and  a 
benefit  ?  We  may  be  sure  that  the  great  king 
would  have  made  short  work  of  such  a  grievance, 
and  of  those  who  urged  it.  He  would  have 
judged,  and  rightly  judged,  that  the  objection 
was  merely  an  excuse  for  disaffection  or  disobe 
dience. 

And  yet  one  of  the  popular  objections  urged 
against  "  verbal  inspiration  "  as  a  practical  truth 
is  that  ordinary  Christians  being  ignorant  of  the 


1  Esther  viii.  9. 

95 


96        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

language  in  which  the  revelation  was  given  are 
entirely  dependent  on  translations.  But  this  is 
only  another  phase  of  the  very  difficulty  discussed 
in  the  preceding  chapter.  It  is  based  upon  the 
fallacy  of  supposing  that  words  have  any  intrinsic 
or  essential  meaning.  As  we  have  seen,  the 
ablest  Hebraist  in  Christendom  has  not  neces 
sarily  any  better  knowledge  of  the  Old  Testament 
revelation  than  the  humblest  Christian  who  enjoys 
the  benefit  of  his  learned  labours.  And  if  he  be 
not  spiritually  enlightened,  it  may  be  confidently 
assumed  that  the  humble  Christian  will  have  the 
advantage.  The  pundit  indeed  can  trace  words 
to  their  roots,  but  this  sort  of  inquiry,  important 
and  interesting  though  it  be  to  the  philologist, 
may  for  practical  purposes  prove  misleading. 
The  meaning  of  a  word  depends,  not  upon  its 
origin,  but  upon  its  use  ;  and  its  use  may  vary 
at  different  periods  of  a  language's  development. 
For  example,  one  whom  we  call  an  uncultured 
peasant  our  forefathers  would  have  described  as 
a  "lewd  villain  "  ;  and  a  clever  youth  they  would 
have  called  a  "  crafty  knave." 

Every  ancient  language  has  a  history ;  but 
while  the  history  of  modern  English,  and,  to  a 
certain  extent,  of  New  Testament  Greek,  is  open 
to  our  view,  the  steps  by  which  the  language  of 


CH.  VIIL]     OBJECTIONS  TO   INSPIRATION  97 

Moses  and  the  prophets  had  reached  the  stage 
of  what  we  call  sacred  Hebrew,  are  unknown. 
One  thing  is  certain,  namely,  that  the  language 
of  the  Old  Testament,  like  that  of  the  New, 
was  an  adaptation  to  high  and  sacred  uses  of 
words  which  had  been  current  in  pagan  com 
munities.  And  this  being  so,  it  might  be 
plausibly  contended  that  our  own  language, 
having  been  formed  and  moulded  upon  Christian 
thought,  is  a  fitter  vehicle  for  the  communication 
of  Divine  truth  even  than  the  Hebrew  of  the 
prophets  or  the  Greek  of  the  apostles  and 
evangelists.  Words  are  but  counters  ;  and 
counters  which  were  rescued  from  base  or 
vulgar  uses  may  not  be  so  fit  to  stand  for  the 
gold  of  revealed  truth  as  ours  which  never  have 
been  thus  prostituted. 

Take  an  illustration.  The  English  peasant 
who  hears  of  eternal  life  through  faith  in  Christ 
may  grasp  fully  and  at  once  the  truth  those 
words  convey;  while  the  Jewish  peasant  was 
much  in  the  position  of  an  Englishman  with 
some  newfangled  translation  which  tells  him 
of  "  age-enduring  life  through  faith  in  the 
Anointed  One." 

As  a  matter  of  fact  the  heresies  of  the 
eschatological  controversy  largely  depend  on 


98        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

the  undoubted  fact  that  neither  ancient  Hebrew 
nor  classical  Greek  had  any  term  equivalent  to 
our  English  word  "  Eternal."  The  Pagan  mind 
had  no  such  conception.  Their  highest  thought 
was  of  prolonged  existence  in  time,  whereas 
eternal  life  in  Christ  is  outside  the  sphere  of 
time  both  in  its  origin  and  in  its  continuance. 

Or  take  a  different  sort  of  case.  If  the  word 
"  priest "  suggests  a  false  conception  to  a  man's 
mind,  the  study  of  its  Hebrew  or  Greek  equiva 
lent  will  in  no  way  correct  the  error.  During 
a  summer  holiday  in  the  West  of  Ireland  I  once 
had  opportunities  of  addressing  Roman  Catholics, 
and  I  conceived  the  plan  of  weaning  them  from 
the  errors  of  their  creed  by  speaking  of  the  priest 
hood  of  Christ.  But  I  found  that  while  my  words 
were  Scriptural  and  right,  the  meaning  they 
conveyed  to  my  hearers  was  wholly  false  and 
wrong.  They  understood  me  to  mean  that  what 
Roman  Catholic  priests  were  and  did,  Christ  was 
and  did. 

And  this  experience  gave  me  the  clew  to  the 
meaning  of  the  closing  verses  of  the  fifth  chapter 
of  Hebrews.  The  Hebrew  Christians,  in  ignor 
ance,  as  the  writer  says,  of  the  rudiments  even 
of  revealed  religion,  assumed  that  there  was  a 
necessary  connection  between  the  office  of  a  priest 


CH.  VIII.]    THE  PRIESTHOOD  OF  CHRIST  99 

and  the  offering  of  sacrifices  for  sins  ;  I  and  there 
fore  the  doctrine  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ 
operated  in  their  case  to  undermine  one  of  the 
great  truths  of  the  Epistle,  that  "there  is  no 
more  offering  for  sin."2 

All  objections  to  verbal  inspiration  which  are 
based  on  the  phenomena  of  language  may  be 
ruled  out,  for  they  rest  on  no  substantial  founda 
tion.  That  a  revelation  could  be  made  only  in 
human  language  is  a  necessity  from  the  limitations 
of  human  thought  ;  and  how  there  can  be  language 
without  words  —  how  there  can  be  inspiration 


1  Ignorance  which  the  most  elementary  knowledge  of  Scripture 
ought  to  have  removed  ;  for  there  were  sacrifices  long  before 
there  were  priests.  The  words  of  Heb.  v.  12  (R.V.)  are,  "  Ye 
have  need  that  one  teach  you  again  which  be  the  rudiments  of  the 
first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God."  The  words  of  vi.  i  are, 
"the  first  principles  of  Christ."  The  one  refers  to  revealed 
religion  generally,  the  other  to  the  special  revelation  of  Judaism. 

•  At  Professor  Sanday's  Oxford  Conference  on  this  subject,  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Puller,  of  the  "  Cowley  Fathers,"  was  the  only  member 
who  seemed  to  grasp  the  elementary  truth  that  the  work  of 
priesthood  began  after  the  sacrifice  had  been  killed,  and  that  the 
priesthood  of  Christ  dates  from  His  ascension.  "  On  earth  He 
could  not  be  a  priest  at  all"  (Heb.  viii.  4,  R.V.). 

The  R.V.  of  Heb.  v.  i  makes  havoc  of  the  truth.  It  tells  us 
that  every  high  priest  is  taken  from  among  men,  and  is  appointed 
to  offer  sacrifices  for  sins.  The  teaching  of  the  verse  is  correctly 
given  in  A.V.,  that  every  high-priest-taken-from-among-men 
(i.e.,  every  Aaronic  priest)  is  appointed  for  that  purpose.  But  our 
High  Priest  is  "  the  Son  of  God  "  (iv.  14),  and  His  priesthood  is 
based  upon  the  Sacrifice  which  has  for  ever  put  away  sin,  so  that 
now  "  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin  "  (x.  18). 


ioo       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

other  than  verbal  inspiration — is  a  metaphysical 
problem  which  I  confess  I  am  not  clever  enough 
to  be  able  to  solve.1  And  the  question  whether 
a  revelation  gains  or  loses  by  being  translated 
from  one  language  into  another  depends  on 
whether  the  language  into  which  it  is  rendered 
is  better  or  worse  fitted  to  clothe  and  express  the 
thoughts  contained  in  it. 

The  objections  which  some  writers  urge 
against  verbal  inspiration  are  analogous  to  those 
which  other  writers  urge  against  belief  in  a 
personal  God  who  thinks  and  loves.  They 
call  this  "  anthropomorphism."  But  let  no  one 
be  scared  at  being  called  by  such  a  hard 
name.  They  who  use  it — very  superior  persons 
they  are — are  like  silly  children  who  ape  full- 
grown  people.  When  the  silly  children  discover 
their  folly  by  some  disaster,  they  can  be  whipped 
and  put  to  bed  ;  but  the  philosophers  may  not 
discover  theirs  until  it  be  too  late  for  repentance. 
We  do  not  assume  that  God  really  has  ears  and 
nostrils  and  hands  and  feet,  any  more  than  that 
He  has  a  language  of  His  own.  But  the  wisest 
and  best  of  us  are  like  children — very  young  and 
very  foolish  children, — and  as  He  pities  us  as 

1  Of  course  a  revelation  may  be  by  way  of  visions,  as  in  the 
Apocalypse  ;  but  this  only  puts  the  question  one  step  back. 


CH.  VIIL]       ORIGINAL  RECORDS   LOST  101 

a  father  pities  his  children,  He  speaks  to  us  about 
Himself  in  a  way  we  can  understand.  Let  no 
one,  then,  be  cajoled  or  browbeaten  into  the 
mingled  pedantry  and  silliness  and  sin  of  thinking 
we  are  wiser  than  He  is,  or  that  we  can  do 
without  verbal  inspiration  and  the  God  of  the 
Bible. 

But  an  objection  of  another  kind  remains. 
The  original  records  of  the  Divine  revelation 
have  been  lost,  and  vast  periods  of  time  separate 
us  from  them.  For  example,  some  five  and 
thirty  centuries  have  passed  since  Moses  wrote, 
and  yet  the  oldest  Hebrew  record  we  possess  of 
his  writings  was  probably  written  after  the  time 
of  Alfred  the  Great  of  England.  We  deem  it 
a  disadvantage  to  have  access  only  to  a  copy  of 
an  important  document,  but  here  it  is  a  case  of 
repeated  copying  during  thousands  of  years,  and 
in  circumstances  of  which  we  know  but  little. 

Now  this  objection  is  a  real  one,  and  it  must  be 
owned  that  at  first  sight  it  seems  extremely  for 
midable.  But  its  practical  importance  grows 
less  and  less  the  more  closely  we  examine  it. 

In  the  first  place,  the  special  importance  to 
us  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  depends  on  their 
relation  to  Christianity ;  and  as  the  Jew  was 
the  custodian  of  them,  it  is  certain  that  if  they 


102        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

have  been  wilfully  tampered  with,  the  change 
has  not  been  made  in  the  interests  of  Christian 
truth.  But  in  the  second  place,  the  extreme 
reverence  with  which  the  Jews  regarded  their 
Scriptures  affords  a  powerful  guarantee  against 
any  deliberate  corruption  of  the  text.  It  may 
be  taken  as  certain  that  any  errors  which 
have  crept  in  are  errors  accidentally  made  in 
copying  the  manuscripts.  And  when  estimating 
the  number  and,  what  is  of  more  importance,  the 
character  of  such  errors,  the  Jewish  reverence  for 
the  text  claims  very  special  consideration.  For  it 
insured  such  care  in  copying  as  to  make  any 
blunder  of  a  really  serious  kind  improbable  in 
the  extreme. 

We  know,  for  example,  that  in  the  days  of  the 
Massoretes,  to  whom  we  practically  owe  our  text 
of  the  Old  Testament,  not  only  the  words,  but 
the  very  letters,  contained  in  the  sacred  books 
were  counted.  And  we  know  also  that  even 
when  words  were  believed  to  have  been  errone 
ously  inserted  or  omitted,  the  scribes  never  dared 
to  make  a  correction  save  by  a  marginal  note. 
And  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  these 
practices  were  based  on  the  habits  and  traditions 
of  earlier  days. 

Hostile  critics  have  sometimes  sought  to  score 


CH.  VIII.]  TEXTUAL  CRITICISM  103 

a  point  by  appealing  to  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch 
and  the  Septuagint  version.  But  not  even  a 
hostile  critic  would  deny  that  if  the  Massoretic 
text  were  revised  in  the  light  of  those  authorities, 
the  result  would  be  prejudicial  to  accuracy ;  and, 
further,  that  even  if  the  revision  were  drastic  and 
reckless,  it  would  not  affect  a  single  question  of 
morals  or  a  single  point  of  Christian  truth  or 
doctrine.  And  this  being  so,  the  whole  question, 
so  far  as  the  Old  Testament  is  concerned,  is  one 
of  purely  academic  interest. 

And  a  kindred  remark  applies  equally  in  regard 
to  the  New  Testament.  A  fact  which  is  all  the 
more  striking  and  important  because  the  materials 
for  hostile  criticism  here  are  vastly  greater  than 
in  the  case  of  the  Old  Testament.  All  our 
leading  commentators  have  grappled  with  the 
question.  As  it  has  been  well  said,  "  All  of  them 
face  that  formidable  phantom  of  textual  criticism, 
with  its  120,000  various  readings  in  the  New 
Testament  alone,  and  will  enable  us  to  march  up 
to  it,  and  discover  that  it  is  empty  air ;  that  still  we 
may  say  with  the  boldest  and  acutest  of  English 
critics,  Bentley,  Choose  (out  of  the  whole  MSS.) 
as  awkwardly  as  you  will,  choose  the  worst  by 
design  out  of  the  whole  lump  of  readings,  and  not 
one  article  of  faith  or  moral  precept  is  either 


104       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

perverted  or  lost  in  them.  Put  them  into  the 
hands  of  a  knave  or  a  fool,  and  even  with  the 
most  sinistrous  and  absurd  choice,  he  shall  not 
extinguish  the  light  of  any  one  chapter,  or  so 
disguise  Christianity  but  that  every  feature  of  it 
will  still  be  the  same/" 

These  words  have  since  received  most  striking 
confirmation.  In  the  Revised  Version  of  the 
New  Testament  textual  criticism  has  done  its 
worst.  It  is  inconceivable  that  it  will  ever  again 
be  allowed  to  run  riot  as  in  the  work  of  the 
Revisers  of  1881.  When  that  version  appeared, 
Bishop  Wordsworth  of  Lincoln  raised  the 
question  "  whether  the  Church  of  England, — 
which  in  her  Synod,  so  far  as  this  Province  is 
concerned,  sanctioned  a  Revision  of  her  Authorised 
Version  under  the  express  condition,  which  she 
most  wisely  imposed,  that  no  changes  should  be 
made  in  it  except  what  were  absolutely  necessary, 
—could  consistently  accept  a  version  in  which 
36,000  changes  have  been  made  ;  not  a  Jiftieth 
of  which  can  be  shown  to  be  needed,  or  even 
desirable." 

But  what  concerns  us  here  is  not  the  changes 
in  the  translation,  but  the  far  more  serious  matter 
of  the  changes  in  the  text.  The  question  at  issue 
between  the  majority  of  the  Revisers,  who  followed 


CH.  VIII.]        THE   REVISED   VERSION  105 

Doctors  Hort  and  Westcott,  and  the  very  able 
and  weighty  minority  led  by  Dr.  Scrivener,  the 
most  capable  and  eminent  "textual  critic"  of 
the  whole  company,  was  one  with  which  every 
lawyer  is  familiar,  but  of  which  the  Revisers  may 
have  had  no  experience,  and  with  which  they 
were  not  competent  to  deal. 

We  have  a  far  greater  number  of  MSS.  of 
the  New  Testament  than  of  the  heathen  classics  ; 
but,  strange  to  say,  with  four  exceptions,  none  of 
these  are  older  than  the  sixth  century  of  our  era. 
But  we  possess  "  versions  "  (or  translations)  which 
are  older  than  any  known  MSS.  ;  and  the  writings 
of  the  early  Fathers  abound  in  quotations  from  the 
New  Testament.1  We  are  thus  enabled  indirectly 
to  reach  MSS.  much  older  than  the  oldest  that 
have  survived.  And  as  the  Fathers  were 
scattered  over  the  Christendom  of  their  time, 
their  acquaintance  with  the  text  was  derived, 
of  course,  from  very  many  independent  sources. 
And  when  their  quotations  agree  with  one 
another,  and  also  with  the  "versions,"  as  well  as 
with  our  later  MSS.,  many  of  which  must  have 
been  copied  from  MSS.  more  ancient  than  any 

1  It  has  been  said  that  if  the  Gospels  were  lost  the  text  could 
be  regained,  with  trifling  gaps,  from  the  writings  of  the  Ante- 
Nicene  Fathers.  (Dr.  Sinker's  Higher  Criticism,  p.  177.) 


io6       THE  BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

which  have  survived,  this  agreement  will  satisfy 
any  one  who  is  versed  in  the  rudiments  of  the 
science  of  evidence. 

But  while  the  lawyer  understands  the  value  of 
indirect  evidence,  the  layman  is  always  inclined 
to  disparage  it  in  favour  of  the  direct.  Witnesses 
of  credit  and  repute  testify  that  they  saw  the 
accused  commit  the  crime  with  which  he  is 
charged.  What  more  can  any  one  want  ?  The 
average  juryman  is  ready  at  once  to  convict ;  and 
he  cannot  imagine  why  the  judge  should  allow 
further  time  to  be  spent  upon  the  case.  But  the 
judge  knows  well  that  evidence  of  this  kind  is  apt 
to  err,  and  needs  to  be  tested  with  the  utmost 
care.1  Now  the  old  MSS.  are  the  witnesses  of 
credit  and  repute,  and  the  Revisers  played  the 
part  of  the  average  juryman ;  and  there  being 
unfortunately  no  one  to  check  them,  they  con 
victed  the  Authorised  Version  of  inaccuracy  in 
numberless  instances.  But,  in  the  opinion  of 
the  greatest  critical  authority  among  the  Revisers, 
whose  protests  were  unavailing  to  prevent  this 
deplorable  mutilation  of  the  sacred  text,  the 

1  Of  course,  if  the  accused  is  seized  at  the  time,  the  evidence  of 
eye-witnesses  is  conclusive.  The  conflict  between  direct  and 
indirect  evidence  arises  where  the  accused  is  arrested  after 
an  interval,  and  his  identity  becomes  the  salient  question  in  the 
case. 


CH.  VIII.]        THE   REVISED  VERSION  107 

system  on  which  these  changes  were  made  "is 
entirely  destitute  of  historical  foundation."  I 

If  the  Revisers  had  kept  to  the  terms  of  their 
commission,  and  been  content  with  the  cor 
rection  of  "  manifest  errors,"  a  very  few  sessions 
would  have  sufficed  to  produce  a  text  which 
might  have  commanded  universal  acceptance. 
But  it  is  certain  that  errors  were  not  manifest 
when  many  of  the  greatest  of  contemporary 
critics  and  scholars  could  not  regard  them  as 
errors  at  all — men  like  the  minority  upon  their 
own  company,  men  like  the  eminent  prelate  I 
have  quoted,  and  the  learned  editor  of  The 
Speaker  s  Commentary.  And  as  several  of  the 
Revisers  themselves  have  explained  in  detail  the 
principles  on  which  the  revision  of  the  text  was 
conducted,  and  those  principles  are  found  to  be 
unsound  when  judged  by  the  science  of  evidence, 
our  confidence  in  the  result  of  their  labours  is 
destroyed. 

The  "argument"  of  the  present  volume 
demands  a  reference  to  this  question,  but  a 
fuller  discussion  of  it  would  be  out  of  place. 
I  will  therefore  dismiss  it  by  citing  a  single 
illustrative  instance  of  reckless  and  erroneous 

1  Dr.  Scrivener,  Plain  Introduction,  &c. 


io8       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

alteration  of  the  text.  And  instances  of  the 
kind  abound,  especially  in  the  Gospels. 

The  instance  I  select  is  "  the  Herald  Angels* 
song,"  and  I  choose  it  not  only  as  being 
thoroughly  typical  of  the  methods  of  the 
Revisers,  but  also  because  of  its  importance  and 
the  interest  attaching  to  it.  "  Glory  to  God  in 
the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward 
men  "  :  I  for  these  words,  which  hold  such  a  place 
in  the  memory  and  heart  of  every  English- 
speaking  Christian,  the  miserable  substitute 
offered  us  is,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and 
on  earth  peace  among  men  in  whom  He  is  well 
pleased."  This  one  piece  of  mutilation  might 
suffice  to  discredit  the  work  of  the  Revisers. 

Two  questions  are  here  involved,  the  altered 
text,  and  the  translation  of  that  text.  The 
English  of  the  Revisers,  says  one  of  the  most 
eminent  of  their  own  number,  "can  be  arrived  at 
only  through  some  process  which  would  make 
any  phrase  bear  almost  any  meaning  the  trans 
lator  might  like  to  put  upon  it."2  "'Men  in 
whom  He  is  well  pleased,'  "  says  the  editor  of 
The  Speaker  s  Commentary,  "  seems  to  me  im 
possible  as  a  translation  of  avOpw-n-ot.  eu 


Luke  ii.  14. 

Dr.  Scrivener's  Introduction  (Ed.  Miller),  vol.  ii.,  p.  347. 


CH.VIIL]     THE   HERALD   ANGELS'   SONG  109 

do  not  know  whether  those  Greek  words  have 
any  meaning,  but  if  they  have  they  must  desig 
nate  men  of  a  certain  quality  or  character." I 
Then  as  regards  the  text,  the  whole  difference  is 
the  addition  of  the  letter  s  to  the  word  eudokia  ; 
and  the  manuscript  authority  for  this  addition  is 
the  reading  of  four  ancient  Greek  MSS.,2  every 
other  known  copy  of  the  Gospels  being  against  it. 

Now  this  is  precisely  the  sort  of  question  in 
respect  of  which  any  one  who  has  practical 
acquaintance  with  the  science  of  evidence  would 
appeal  to  Patristic  authority,  and  that  appeal 
would  dispose  of  the  whole  matter ;  for  the 
testimony  of  the  Greek  Fathers  in  favour  of  the 
familiar  reading  is  overwhelming.3 

1  R.V.  of  the  First  Three  Gospels,  p.  30.  Canon  Cook  adds, 
"  What  is  meant  by  the  marginal  rendering  '  men  of  good 
pleasure*  I  am  utterly  at  a  loss  to  conjecture." 

8  Canon  Cook  enumerates  them  as  the  Sinaitic,  and  A,  B,  and 
D,  and  he  adds  that  the  text  of  the  first  and  third  of  these  "  was 
noted  as  incorrect  by  a  critical  scholar  at  the  time  when  the 
manuscript  was  written  "  (Ibid.,  pp.  27,  28). 

3  In  The  Revision  Revised  (pp.  42-44),  Dean  Burgon  gives  the 
list  of  Fathers  from  the  second  to  the  sixth  century,  indicating 
that  the  words  as  known  to  us,  i.e.,  as  given  in  our  A.V.,  were 
quoted  by  them  fifty-eight  times.  Speaking  generally,  the  Greek 
authorities  are  on  the  side  of  the  A.V.  ;  while  the  R.V.  can 
appeal  to  the  Latin  versions.  This  is  remarkable,  but  the 
explanation  of  it  is  simple.  Some  ancient  MS.  upon  which  the 
first  Latin  version  was  based,  evidently  omitted  the  preposition 
from  the  sentence,  and  as  this  destroyed  its  meaning  the  s  was 
added  to  eudokia  to  make  the  words  intelligible. 


no       THE  BIBLE  AND  MODERN  CRITICISM 

"  On  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men  " — 
the  Christian  may  still  rejoice  in  these  hallowed 
and  most  precious  words.  And  he  may  assume 
with  confidence  that  here,  as  in  so  many  other 
instances,  the  Revisers'  changes  in  the  text  are 
new  errors,  and  not  the  correction  of  old  errors. 
And  yet  the  fact  remains — indeed  it  is  uni 
versally  acknowledged — that  even  a  revision 
conducted  so  unwisely  and  on  a  system  so 
opposed  to  all  the  principles  and  rules  of  evidence, 
has  not  destroyed  a  single  truth  of  Christianity 
or  left  a  single  point  of  Christian  doctrine  or 
practice  in  jeopardy.  The  sceptical  taunt  that 
textual  criticism  undermines  the  truth  of  Inspira 
tion  is  for  ever  silenced  by  the  Revised  Version 
of  the  New  Testament.1 

1  See  App.  Note  II. 


CHAPTER   X 

SOME  there  are  who  will  have  read  the 
preceding  chapters  with  sympathy,  who  yet 
will  feel  that  their  own  special  difficulties  remain 
unnoticed.  They  love  the  Bible,  and  are  assured 
that  it  is  in  the  main  Divine,  but  there  is  much 
in  the  Old  Testament  which  unduly  tries  their 
faith.  "The  creation  story  of  Genesis,"  they 
would  say,  "is  discredited  by  science.  The  Book 
of  Jonah  is  incredible.  The  Book  of  Daniel  can 
no  longer  be  defended.  The  history  of  Israel  is 
marked  by  moral  difficulties  which  cannot  be 
explained  away.  And  no  one  can  now  defend 
the  correctness  of  Old  Testament  chronology. 

"  Nor  are  these  difficulties  confined  to  the  Old 
Testament.  Whatever  theoretical  defence  may 
be  made  for  the  inspiration  of  the  Gospels,  the 
fact  remains  that  they  are  marked  by  errors 
which  prove  that,  if  they  be  inspired,  inspiration 
affords  no  guarantee  of  truth." 


ii2        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

With  these  several  questions  I  will  now  pro 
ceed  to  deal.1  And  first  as  to  "  the  proem  to 
Genesis."  If  I  were  beginning  an  octavo  volume, 
I  should  seek  to  recapitulate  the  controversy  on 
this  subject,  and  to  define  the  stage  it  has  at 
present  reached.  I  should  mark  the  various 
positions  which  have  been  successively  occupied 
or  abandoned  by  the  disputants,  as  one  or 
another  of  the  fluctuating  theories  of  science  has 
gained  prominence,  or  newly  found  fossils  have 
added  to  "  the  testimony  of  the  rocks."  But  I 
will  content  myself  with  recalling  the  main  inci 
dents  of  the  discussion  between  Mr.  Gladstone 
and  Professor  Huxley  some  years  ago  in  the 
pages  of  the  Nineteenth  Century? 

In  The  Dawn  of  Creation  and  Worship  Mr. 
Gladstone  sought  to  show  that  the  order  of 
creation  as  recorded  in  Genesis  has  been  "so 
affirmed  in  our  time  by  natural  science  that  it 
may  be  taken  as  a  demonstrated  conclusion  and 
established  fact."  He  averred  that  science  was 
perfectly  in  accord  with  Moses  in  recognising 
that  life  appeared  upon  our  globe  in  the  order  of, 

1  This  chapter  is  based  in  part   upon  Chapter  VIII.  of  the 
author's  Doubters  Doubts  about  Science  and  Religion — a  book  long 
out  of  print. 

2  The  articles  in  question  appeared  in  the  later  months  of  1885, 
and  January  and  February,  1886. 


CH.  IX.]  THE   CREATION   STORY  113 

first,  the  water  population  ;  second,  the  air  popu 
lation  ;  and,  third,  the  land  population.  To 
which  Mr.  Huxley  replied  as  follows  : — 

"  It  is  agreed  on  all  hands  that  terrestrial  lizards  and 
other  reptiles  allied  to  lizards  occur  in  the  Permian 
strata.  It  is  further  agreed  that  the  Triassic  strata 
were  deposited  after  these.  Moreover,  it  is  well  known 
that,  even  if  certain  footprints  are  to  be  taken  as 
unquestionable  evidence  of  the  existence  of  birds,  they 
are  not  known  to  occur  in  rocks  earlier  than  the  Trias, 
while  indubitable  remains  of  birds  are  to  be  met  with 
only  much  later.  Hence  it  follows  that  natural  science 
does  not  '  affirm '  the  statement  that  birds  were  made 
on  the  fifth  day,  and  '  everything  that  creepeth  on  the 
ground '  on  the  sixth,  on  which  Mr.  Gladstone  rests  his 
order ;  for,  as  is  shown  by  Leviticus,  the  '  Mosaic 
writer1  includes  lizards  among  his  'creeping  things.'" 

The  following  is  the  quotation  from  Leviticus 
which  Mr.  Huxley  "commended  to  Mr.  Glad 
stone's  serious  attention  "  : — "  And  these  are  they 
which  are  unclean  unto  you  among  the  creeping 
things  that  creep  upon  the  earth  ;  the  weasel, 
and  the  mouse,  and  the  great  lizard  after  its  kind, 
and  the  gecko,  and  the  land-crocodile,  and  the 
lizard,  and  the  sand-lizard,  and  the  chameleon. 
These  are  they  which  are  unclean  unto  you 
among  all  that  creep"  (chap.  xi.  29-31,  R.V.). 
And  he  added,  "The  merest  Sunday-school 

9 


ii4       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

exegesis,  therefore,  suffices  to  prove  that  when 
the  Mosaic  writer  in  Gen.  i.  24  speaks  of  creep 
ing  things,  he  means  to  include  lizards  among 
them." 

A  charming  specimen  this  certainly  is  of  "  the 
merest  Sunday-school  exegesis."  The  argument 
which  so  completely  satisfied  its  author,  and 
silenced  his  opponent,  is  nothing  but  an  ad 
caplandum  appeal  to  the  chance  rendering  of 
our  English  Bible.  For  the  word  translated 
44 creeping  thing"  in  Leviticus  xi.  has  no  affinity 
with  the  word  so  rendered  in  Genesis  i.  24, 
whereas  it  is  the  identical  word  which  our  trans 
lators  have  rendered  "  moving  creature "  in 
the  twentieth  verse,  which  records  the  first 
appearance  of  animal  life.1 

Mr.  Huxley's  answer  was,  therefore,  an  over 
whelming  refutation  of  his  own  position.  Science 
proclaims  the  seniority  of  land  reptiles  in  the 
genesis  of  life  on  earth,  and  the  despised  Book  of 
Genesis  records  that  "  creeping  things,"  which,  as 
Mr.  Huxley  insists,  must  include  land  reptiles, 
were  the  first  "moving  creatures"  which  the 
Creator's  fiat  called  into  existence. 


1  The  word  in  verses  24  and  26,  relating  to  the  life  of  the 
sixth  day,  is  remes  ;  but  in  verse  20,  relating  to  the  fifth  day,  it  is 
sheretz,  which  occurs  ten  times  in  Lev.  xi. 


CH.  IX.]     HUXLEY'S   ATTACK   ON   GENESIS         115 

Some  may  think  that  if  Mr.  Huxley  were  still 
with  us  he  could  make  short  work  of  this.  But 
the  plea  will  not  avail.  In  the  Times  correspon 
dence  of  ten  years  ago  on  The  Bible  and  Modern 
Criticism,  I  put  him  on  his  defence  on  this  very 
question.  His  only  answer  was  to  repeat  his 
blunder.  Thereupon  Canon  Girdlestone  inter 
vened  to  assure  him  that  "  he  had  been  wholly 
misled  by  the  English  version,"  and  the  Duke  of 
Argyll  challenged  his  representation  "  both  of  the 
contention  of  Mr.  Gladstone  and  the  narrative  in 
Genesis."  My  own  rejoinder  was  to  repeat  his 
words  in  detail  and  to  hold  him  to  them. 

Lawyers  have  a  plea  of  "  confession  and  avoid- 
dance  "  ;  Mr.  Huxley's  next  letter  was  marked  by 
avoidance  without  confession,  and  ended  by  a 
sneer  at  my  reference  to  the  spiritual  side  of  Holy 
Scripture.  To  which  the  Duke  of  Argyll  replied 
as  follows  : 

"  In  Professor  Huxley's  letter  in  your  issue  of  yester 
day  he  completely  shifts  his  ground.  He  now  asserts 
that  Genesis  ascribes  creation  to  acts  which  he  calls 
'  supernatural/  whereas,  he  urges,  science  asserts  that  it 
originated  in  a  '  process  of  natural  evolution.' 

"  This  antithesis  is  absolutely  unknown  to  the  litera 
ture  both  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New.  It  is 
equally  unknown  to  science  and  also  to  philosophy.  The 
Bible  knows  nothing  of  what  men  now  call  '  the  super- 


n6       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

natural.'  It  regards  all  '  natural  processes  '  as  the  work 
of  a  Divine  Being.  Professor  Huxley  asserts  or  implies 
that  this  is  erroneous,  and  that  wherever  we  can  trace 
the  operation  of  natural  causes,  we  must  exclude  all 
idea  of  a  Divine  origin  or  direction.  I  venture  to 
assert,  on  the  contrary,  that  this  is  very  bad  science, 
and  still  worse  philosophy."  x 

The  letter  enlarges  upon  this,  and  ends  by 
noting  that  the  "  broad  issue "  for  which  Mr. 
Huxley  contended  was,  "that  in  ascribing  the 
creative  working  to  a  Divine  Being  the  narrative 
of  Genesis  is  in  '  irreconcilable  antagonism  '  with 
modern  science,"  an  issue  in  which  he  would  not 
have  "the  general  support  of  the  most  eminent 
men  of  science  in  the  United  Kingdom." 

My  own  final  reply  appeared  in  the  same  issue 
of  The  Times,  as  follows  : — 

My  rejoinder  to  Mr.  Huxley  shall  be  brief.  Any  one 
who  will  be  at  the  pains  to  turn  to  his  Nineteenth 
Century  articles  will  see  that  "his  argument  from 
Leviticus,"  instead  of  being,  as  he  now  pleads,  "inci 
dental  "  and  "  superfluous,"  was  vital  to  his  attack  upon 
Mr.  Gladstone's  position.  Upon  it  depended  the  only 
allegation  of  fact,  as  contrasted  with  theory,  in  his 
indictment  of  the  Mosaic  cosmogony.  According  to 

1  The  Times,  February  8,  1892.  Mr.  Huxley's  letter  here  re 
ferred  to  is  that  which  appeared  in  the  Times  of  the  3rd,  and 
which  is  reproduced  in  his  Life  (vol.  ii.,  p.  297). 


CH.  IX.]          REFUTATION   OF  HUXLEY  117 

science  reptiles  existed  before  birds,  but  according  to 
Genesis  birds  existed  before  reptiles.  So  he  asserted. 
And  the  ground  of  his  assertion  was  that,  while  birds 
belong  to  the  fifth  period  of  creation,  "  creeping  things  " 
belong  to  the  sixth,  and  that  "creeping  things"  are 
defined  by  "  the  Mosaic  writer  "  himself  in  Leviticus  xi. 
to  include  reptiles. 

Now  that  this  is  proved  to  be  merely  an  ad  captandum 
appeal  to  the  phraseology  of  the  English  Bible,  Mr. 
Huxley  takes  refuge  in  the  plea  that  the  word  used  in 
Genesis  i.  24  may  include  reptiles.  But  this,  even  if 
true,  will  not  help  him.  The  fact  remains  that  the 
word  in  Leviticus  xi.  is  wholly  different  from  the  word 
used  in  Genesis  i.  24,  whereas  the  validity  of  his  argu 
ment  depends  on  its  identity  with  it.  And  the  argument 
is  his,  not  mine.  He  it  is  who  insists  that  Genesis  i, 
must  be  interpreted  by  Leviticus  xi. ;  and,  adopting  his 
canon  of  interpretation,  I  have  shown  that  he  is  "  hoist 
with  his  own  petard." 

It  is  on  petty  points  of  this  sort  that  the  conventional 
attacks  upon  the  Bible  rest.  But  the  foundations  of 
faith  are  of  a  very  different  character.  If  facts  be 
adduced  to  prove  the  Bible  false,  I  shall  give  it  up,  and 
cease  to  be  a  Christian.  But  practical  men  and  men  of 
common  sense  care  little  for  mere  theories.  In  common 
with  many  other  Christians  I  regard  the  Darwinian  theory 
of  evolution  as  being,  within  strictly  defined  limits,  a 
reasonable  hypothesis.  But  the  peculiar  biological 
theories  with  which  Mr.  Huxley's  name  is  prominently 
identified,  are  in  a  different  category.  I  am  old  enough 
to  remember  the  time  when  they  first  gained  currency  in 
England.  I  am  young  enough  to  be  warranted  in 
hoping  I  may  outlive  their  popularity.  But  these 


n8       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

unproved,  and  possibly  ephemeral,  theories  of  the  hour, 
dignified  by  the  title  of  "  natural  science,"  are  put  for 
ward  as  the  grounds  on  which  the  Book  of  all  the  ages 
is  to  be  rejected ! 

Mr.  Huxley  wrote  another  letter,  but  it  con 
tained  nothing  save  pretentious  phrases  about 
science,  and  ungenerous  sneers  at  those  who 
believe  the  Bible.  So  far  as  this  controversy  is 
concerned  he  left  his  opponents  in  possession  of 
the  field.  The  fact  asserted  by  Mr.  Gladstone 
remains  established  by  this  searching  test.  It  is 
asserted,  and  it  will  still  be  asserted  as  unblush- 
ingly  as  if  this  correspondence  had  not  taken 
place,  that  Genesis  is  proved  false  by  the  facts  of 
science  ;  whereas  the  testimony  of  science,  what 
ever  it  be  worth,  confirms  the  Biblical  order  of 
creation.1  In  The  Nineteenth  Century  Mr. 
Huxley  wrote,  "There  is  no  one  to  whose 
authority  on  geological  questions  I  am  more 
readily  disposed  to  bow  than  that  of  my  eminent 
friend  Professor  Dana ; "  and  Professor  Dana's 
decision  was,  " 1  agree  in  all  essential  points  with 
Mr.  Gladstone,  and  believe  that  the  first  chapter 
of  Genesis  and  science  are  in  accord." 

1  And  if  any  one  now  seeks  to  get  rid  of  this  by  falling  back 
on  the  "  coincidence "  theory,  the  mathematician  will  cut  in  to 
tell  him  that  the  order  of  any  seven  events  can  be  given  in  no 
less  than  5,040  ways. 


CH.  IX.]         THE   MOSAIC  COSMOGONY 

For  my  part,  I  am  willing  to  make  the 
scientist  a  present  of  this  conclusion.  If  Pale 
ontology,  instead  of  confirming,  as  it  does, 
the  Mosaic  cosmogony,  seemed  to  discredit  it, 
the  fact  would  only  serve  to  strengthen  the 
belief  I  entertain  on  independent  grounds,  that 
the  fossils  may  be  relics  of  an  earlier  economy  of 
life,  which  was  engulfed  in  the  catastrophes  which 
produced  the  present  rock-formation  of  our  earth. 

Whether  the  origin  of  our  globe  was  nebular 
or  meteoric,  it  may  have  been  the  home  of  life 
for  ages  before  the  epoch  of  the  Adamic  creation. 
In  the  record  of  that  creation  the  conception  of  a 
making-out-of-nothing  has  no  place,  The  Bible 
is  merely  the  history  of  the  Adamic  world,  and 
even  that,  moreover,  only  as  a  background  on 
which  to  display  the  great  revelation  of  redemp 
tion.  The  opening  verses  of  Genesis,  therefore, 
mark  the  successive  eras  through  which  the 
Creator  rescued  our  planet  from  its  "  waste  and 
void "  l  condition,  and  prepared  it  as  a  fitting 
home  for  man ;  but  as  to  its  origin  and  earlier 
history  Holy  Writ  is  silent.  "  In  the  beginning 
God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth."  But 


1  Gen.  i.  2.  These  same  words  are  used  in  Jer.  iv.  23  of  the- 
ruin  brought  upon  the  land  by  the  judgment  of  "  the  Desolations." 
That  the  earth  was  not  originally  "  waste  "  Isa.  xlv.  18  declares. 


120       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

when  the  beginning  was,  we  cannot  even  con 
jecture  ;  and  if  we  go  on  to  inquire  the  meaning 
of  "creation,"  all  that  Scripture  will  tell  us  is 
that  "things  which  are  seen  were  not  made  of 
things  which  do  appear  " — a  statement  which  will 
bear  every  test  that  can  be  applied  to  it.  If  in 
the  past  this  earth  ever  suffered  a  catastrophe 
such  as  that  which  Scripture  declares  will  engulf 
it  in  the  future,  the  Mosaic  narrative  would  be  at 
once  accounted  for  and  explained. 

That  narrative  is  a  part  of  the  revelation  upon 
which  Christianity  is  based,  and  one  essential 
portion  of  it — the  recorded  origin  of  the  woman 
— is  enshrined  in  the  Christian  system  as  typical 
of  the  spiritual  union  between  Christ  and  His 
Church.  I  accept  that  narrative  as  a  Divine 
revelation.  And  I  endorse  Mr.  Huxley's  dictum, 
"that  it  is  vain  to  discuss  a  supposed  coincidence 
between  Genesis  and  science,  unless  we  have  first 
settled,  on  the  one  hand,  what  Genesis  says,  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  what  science  says."  The 
matter  is  not  ripe  for  discussion.  We  are  a  very 
long  way  indeed  from  settling  "  what  science 
says " ;  and  while  it  seems  to  be  taken  for 
granted  that  "  what  Genesis  says  "  is  known  to 
all,  closer  study  and  fuller  knowledge  will  destroy 
all  dogmatism  here. 


CH.  IX.]         THE  MOSAIC  COSMOGONY  121 

When  it  is  said  that  God  "  made  the  firma 
ment,"  and  the  "  two  great  lights,"  and  the 
*' beasts  of  the  earth,"  the  same  word  is  used 
as  when  Noah  "made"  the  ark,  and  Moses  the 
tabernacle.  If  abiogenesis  I  were  an  ascertained 
fact,  and  not  an  exploded  error,  the  advocate  of 
spontaneous  generation  might  appeal  to  the  lan 
guage  of  the  Creator's^/,  "Let  the  waters  bring 
forth,"  "  Let  the  earth  bring  forth."  If  evolution 
were  an  established  truth,  and  not  a  mere  theory, 
the  evolutionist  might  turn  to  Genesis,  and  mark 
how  order  and  life  were  slowly  evolved  in  the 
world.  Nor  need  he  find  any  difficulty  in  sup 
posing  that  mammals  may  have  been  developed 
among  the  "water  population,"  and  the  "  air  popu 
lation  "  too,  before  animals  of  that  order  appeared 
upon  the  land.  Mr.  Huxley's  argument  on  this 
point  is  valid  only  as  destroying  the  position  to 
which  his  "Sunday-school  exegesis"  forced  Mr. 
Gladstone  to  retreat. 

I  turn  to  the  narrative.  The  earth  existed,  but 
it  was  "  desolate  and  empty,"  a  mere  waste  of 
waters,  wrapped  in  impenetrable  darkness.  The 
changes  recorded  are,  first,  the  dawn  of  light,  and 
then  the  formation  of  an  atmosphere  followed  by 

1  A  term  coined  by  Huxley  himself  to  express  spontaneous 
generation. 


122      THE  BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

the  retreat  of  the  waters  to  their  ocean  bed  ;  then 
the  dry  land  became  clothed  with  verdure,  and 
sun  and  moon  and  stars  appeared.1 

But  the  question  remains,  What  was  the 
creation  day  ?  No  problem  connected  with  the 
cosmogony  has  greater  interest  and  importance. 
I  own  to  a  decided  conviction  that  while  the 
passage  clearly  indicates  our  ordinary  day,  the 
word  is  used  in  a  purely  symbolic  sense.  When 
dealing  with  a  period  before  man  existed  to  mark 
the  shadow  on  the  dial,  and  before  the  sun 
could  cast  that  shadow,  it  is  not  easy  to 
appreciate  the  reason,  or  indeed  the  meaning, 
of  such  a  division  of  time  as  our  natural  day. 
"  Days  and  years  and  seasons  "  seem  plainly  to 
belong  to  our  present  solar  system,  and  this  is 
the  express  teaching  of  the  fourteenth  verse.2 

The  problem  may  be  stated  thus :  As  man  is 
to  God,  so  his  day  of  four  and  twenty  hours  is  to 

1  The  laughter  formerly  excited  by  the  idea  of  light  apart  from 
the  sun  has  died  away  with  increasing  knowledge  (see  Dr.  Sinker's 
Higher  Criticism,  p.  121) ;  and,  in  our  ignorance  of  that  primaeval 
life,  it  is  idle  to  question  the  possibility  of  the  third-day  vegetation. 
It  may  possibly  have  been  the  "  rank  and  luxuriant  herbage  "  of 
which  our  coal-beds  have  been  formed  ;  for  one  statement  in  the 
narrative  seems  strongly  to  favour  the  suggestion  that  our  present 
vegetation  dates  only  from  the  fifth  or  sixth  day  (Gen.  ii.  5,  R.V.). 

8  That  the  earth  is  older  than  the  sun  may  at  one  time  have 
appeared  impossible.  But  it  seems  to  be  involved  in  the 
meteoric  hypothesis. 


CH.  IX.]  THE   CREATION    "DAY"  123 

the  Divine  day  of  creation.  And  here  I  would 
suggest  that  the  "  evening  and  morning "  may 
represent  the  interval  of  the  cessation  from  work, 
which  succeeds  and  completes  the  day.  The 
words  are,  "And  there  was  evening,  and  there 
was  morning,  one  day."1  The  symbolism  is 
maintained  throughout.  As  man's  working  day 
is  brought  to  a  close  by  evening,  which  ushers  in 
a  period  of  repose,  lasting  till  morning  calls  him 
back  to  his  daily  toil,  so  the  great  Artificer  is 
represented  as  turning  aside  from  His  work  at  the 
end  of  each  "day"  of  creation,  and  again  re 
suming  it  when  another  morning  dawned. 

And  is  not  this  in  keeping  with  the  mode  in 
which  Scripture  speaks  of  God  ?  It  tells  us  of 
His  mouth  and  eyes  and  nostrils,  His  hand  and 
arm.  It  speaks  of  His  sitting  in  the  heavens, 
and  bowing  Himself  to  hear  the  prayer  ascending 
from  the  earth.  It  talks  of  His  repenting  and 
being  angry.  And  if  one  cavils  at  this,  he  may 
fairly  be  asked,  In  what  other  language  could 
God  speak  to  men  ? 

Nor  let  any  one  fall  back  on  the  common 
fallacy  that  a  Divine  day  is  a  period  of  a  thousand 
years.  With  God,  we  are  told,  a  day  is  as  a 

1  If  the  creation  story  was  revealed  by  way  of  Apocalyptic 
visions,  these  words  are  fully  explained. 


i24       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day. 
In  a  word,  the  seeming  paradox  of  the  trans 
cendental  philosophy  is  endorsed  by  the  express 
teaching  of  Scripture,  that  time  is  merely  a  law 
of  human  thought.  When,  therefore,  God  speaks 
of  working  for  six  days  and  resting  on  the  seventh, 
we  must  understand  the  words  in  the  same  sym 
bolic  sense  as  when  He  declares  that  His  hand 
has  made  all  these  things.1 

But  the  mention  of  the  creation  sabbath  is  the 
crowning  proof  of  the  symbolic  character  of  the 
creation  "day."  God  " rested  on  the  seventh 
day  from  all  the  work  which  He  had  made." 
Are  we,  then,  to  suppose  that  He  resumed  the 
work  when  four  and  twenty  hours  had  passed  ? 
Here,  at  least,  revelation  and  science  are  at  one  : 
the  creation  sabbath  has  continued  during  all  the 
ages  of  historic  time.  God  is  active  in  His 
universe,  pace  the  atheist  and  the  infidel,  but  the 
CREATOR  rests.  Scripture,  indeed,  tells  of  a 
supreme  catastrophe  that  is  yet  to  engulf  our 
planet,  and  of  a  new  creation  which  is  to  follow 
it,  of  which  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  the 
earnest  and  pledge.  But  these  are  topics  I  must 
not  enter  upon.  I  content  myself  with  noticing 

1  Isa.  Ixvi.  2.    See  p.  100  ante. 


CH.  IX.]  THE   CREATION    "DAY"  125 

the  well-recognised  fact  that  the  creation  sabbath 
is  a  vast  period  of  time,  and  urging  that  the 
working  days  of  creation  must  be  estimated  on 
the  same  system. 

This  must  be  borne  in  mind  as  we  proceed. 
The  water  population  and  the  air  population 
belong  to  the  same  "  day"  ;  but  ages  of  time  may 
have  intervened  before  the  appearance  of  the 
latter.1  So  also  with  the  land  population  of  the 
sixth  day.  For  aught  that  we  can  tell,  the 
appearance  of  man  may  have  been  separated 
from  that  of  other  mammals  by  a  period  of  time 
as  prolonged  as  that  which  divides  the  present 
hour  from  the  close  of  the  creation  "  week."  2 

But  all  this  is  mere  conjecture.  And  my 
object  in  suggesting  it  is  not  to  frame  a  system 
of  interpretation,  but  to  enter  a  caveat  against 
confounding  the  teaching  of  Scripture  with  any 


1  Of  course  the  suggestion  of  the  Authorised  Version  is 
erroneous  that  the  water  was  the  birthplace  of  the  "  feathered 
tribe."  The  words  are,  "  Let  the  waters  bring  forth  abundantly 
the  moving  creature  that  hath  life,  and  let  fowl  fly  above  the 
earth  in  the  open  firmament  of  heaven." 

*  The  second  chapter  indicates  that  there  was  an  interval 
between  the  formation  of  the  man  and  of  the  woman.  The 
Paleontologists'  proofs  that  earth  was  the  dwelling-place  of 
intelligent  beings  at  a  much  earlier  period,  are  not  complete 
enough  to  justify  any  definite  comparison  between  those  earlier 
inhabitants  and  the  Adamic  race.  Indeed,  it  is  doubtful  whether 
they  afford  certainty  of  being  pre- Adamite  at  all. 


126       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

system  of  interpretation  whatever.  I  deprecate 
the  idea  that  I  am  posing  as  a  "  reconciler."  I 
have  no  such  ambitious  aim  as  that  of  seeking 
to  convince  the  scientists.  I  wish  rather  to  warn 
the  faithful  against  assaults  upon  the  Mosaic 
cosmogony,  based  on  "the  merest  Sunday-school 
exegesis "  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  theories 
of  science  on  the  other.  The/tf^s  of  science  in 
no  way  clash  with  Scripture.  They  serve  only 
to  assist  us  in  understanding  it  aright. 

Of  the  origin  of  our  world  the  first  chapter  of 
Genesis  tells  us  nothing,  save  that  "  in  the 
beginning,"  whenever  that  was,  God  created  it. 
It  may  be,  as  Mr.  Tyndall  said  in  his  Belfast 
address,  that  "  for  seons  embracing  untold 
millions  of  years,  this  earth  has  been  the  theatre 
of  life  and  death."  But  as  to  this  the  Book  of 
Genesis  is  silent.  It  deals  merely  with  the 
renewing  and  refurnishing  of  our  planet  as  a 
home  for  man.  And  this,  moreover,  as  I  have 
already  urged,  to  prepare  the  foundation  for  the 
supreme  revelation  of  redemption. 

In  conclusion,  I  would  guard  myself  from  any 
suspicion  of  seeking  uto  prove  the  truth  of  the 
Mosaic  narrative."  My  object  here  is  to  beat 
off  attacks  which  stumble  or  distress  ignorant  and 
weak-kneed  believers.  And  to  this  end  I  have 


CH.  IX.]  GENESIS   AND   SCIENCE  127 

shown  that  Professor  Huxley,  the  ablest  and 
most  bitter  assailant  of  Genesis  which  this  age 
has  produced,  has  been  met  and  routed  upon 
ground  of  his  own  choosing.  The  first  chapter 
of  Genesis  "was  not  written  to  teach  science"  ; 
but  not  a  single  "  fact  of  science  "  can  be  found  to 
discredit  it.  This  cannot  be  said  of  any  one  of 
"the  religious  books  of  the  East" — in  this  re 
spect  they  are  but  a  tangle  of  error  and  folly. 
Neither  can  it  be  said  of  any  scientific  book  pub 
lished  before  recent  years.  The  "  science "  of 
the  last  generation  is  discredited  by  the  dis 
coveries  of  our  own  times.  Never  until  our  own 
times  have  Scripture  and  science  been  in  accord  ; 
but  the  changes  which  have  harmonised  them 
have  been  in  science  and  not  in  Scripture.  And 
this  can  only  be  explained  on  one  of  two 
hypotheses.  Either  science  was  more  advanced 
when  Genesis  was  written  than  at  any  time 
during  all  the  Christian  era,  or  else  "  the  Mosaic 
narrative  "  is  a  Divine  revelation. I 


1  The  Times  correspondence  quoted  in  this  chapter  originated 
with  a  "  declaration  on  the  truth  of  Holy  Scripture,"  signed  by 
Dean  Goulbourn  and  a  number  of  other  clergymen,  which 
appeared  in  The  Times  of  December  18,  1891.  My  object  in 
intervening  was  to  point  out  that  these  clergymen  in  taking  their 
stand  upon  the  ground  that  the  Church  was  "  the  witness  and 
keeper  of  Holy  Writ,"  betrayed  the  cause  they  sought  to  defend, 


128       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

and  were  false  to  the  Church  of  England,  which  in  Article  XX. 
claims  only  to  be  "  a  witness,"  &c.  My  second  letter  (The  Times, 
January  23,  1892)  was  in  reply  to  the  letter  of  "  A  Beneficed 
English  Clergyman  of  Twenty-five  Years'  Standing,"  who  took 
infidel  ground.  Mr.  Huxley's  reply  appeared  in  The  Times  of 
January  26th.  Letters  from  the  Duke  of  Argyll,  Canon  Girdle- 
stone,  and  myself  appeared  on  February  ist,  and  were  answered 
by  Mr.  Huxley  on  February  3rd  and  4th.  My  last  letter  (quoted 
above)  appeared  on  February  8th,  and  Mr.  Huxley's  rejoinder 
on  the  nth.  The  title  "The  Bible  and  Modern  Criticism  "  was 
assigned  to  the  correspondence  by  the  editor  of  The  Times. 


CHAPTER  X 

MORE  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago, 
when  I  first  came  definitely  under  the 
influence  of  the  Higher  Criticism,  doubts  began 
to  undermine  my  faith  in  Holy  Scripture.  I 
then  knew  but  little  either  of  the  history  or  the 
aims  of  the  movement ;  and  a  taste  for  critical 
inquiries,  combined  with  impatience  of  mere 
"  orthodoxy,"  created  in  my  mind  a  prejudice  in 
its  favour.  At  the  same  time  I  had  a  sufficient 
acquaintance  with  the  general  scheme  of  revela 
tion,  and  especially  with  the  typology  and  pro 
phecy  of  Scripture,  to  prevent  my  being  misled 
by  the  teaching  of  the  critics  about  the  Pen 
tateuch,  or  by  their  theories  that  the  "  Priestly 
Code,"  as  they  call  it,  was  later  than  the  Prophets. 
This  being  so,  it  was  not  till  I  reached  the 
Book  of  Daniel  that  I  felt  any  serious  alarm. 
The  New  Testament  is  so  identified  with  that 
book  (as  the  critics  themselves  allow)  that  if 

10  139 


i3o       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Daniel  be  discredited,  the  authority  of  the  Gospels 
and  Epistles  is  impaired,  and  the  Apocalypse 
must  be  entirely  given  up.  And  yet  the  case 
against  the  book  seemed  overwhelming.  Not 
only  was  its  authenticity  destroyed  by  glaring 
historical  errors,  but  its  claim  to  genuineness  was 
vetoed  by  the  very  language  in  which  it  was 
written  :  its  Hebrew,  I  learned,  belonged  to  a 
later  period  than  the  Captivity,  and  the  Greek 
words  contained  in  it  absolutely  precluded  an 
earlier  origin  than  the  date  of  Alexander's  con 
quest. 

Now,  unlike  the  critics,  my  tenure  of  the  public 
position  I  held  was  not  conditioned  upon  any 
pledge  that  I  believed  the  Scriptures.  Had  I 
come  to  accept  the  conclusions  of  the  critics,  I 
might  have  continued  to  draw  the  emoluments  of 
my  office  without  any  twinges  of  conscience  or  any 
reflection  upon  my  honour.  When,  therefore,  I 
set  myself  to  investigate  the  case  against  Daniel, 
I  did  so  in  the  same  spirit  in  which  I  have  not 
infrequently  prosecuted  criminal  charges  against 
persons  whom,  though  I  greatly  wished  to  save, 
I  was  determined  to  bring  to  justice  if  guilty.  I 
say  this  because  it  is  the  fashion  to  assume  that 
to  attack  the  Bible  gives  proof  not  only  of  "  cul 
ture,"  but  of  mental  vigour  and  freedom,  and  that 


CH.X.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DANIEL  131 

its   defenders    are    always    narrow-minded    and 
prejudiced. 

I  first  took  up  the  special  question  upon  which 
I  was  dependent  upon  the  experts,  namely,  the 
philological  features  of  the  book.  And  here  I 
kept  to  the  writings  of  the  critics.  My  first  shock 
was  the  discovery  that,  according  to  the  evidence 
of  some  of  the  most  advanced  and  fearless  of  its 
assailants,  the  Hebrew  of  the  book  decides 
nothing  as  to  its  date.1  The  bold  statements 
to  the  contrary,  therefore,  are  proof  only  of 
recklessness  on  the  part  of  those  who  make  them. 

And  my  amazement  and  indignation  reached  a 
climax  when  I  discovered  that  the  supposed  Greek 
words  in  Daniel'haA,  one  after  another,  been  given 
up  by  the  critics,  until  only  two  or  three  remained  ; 
and  that  it  is  upon  these  words,  which  are  the 
names  of  musical  instruments,  that  the  critics  veto 
the  acceptance  of  the  book.2  If  the  instruments 

1  See,  e.g.,  Professor  Cheyne's  article  "  Daniel "  in  Encyc.  Brit. 

9  Professor  Driver  of  Oxford  declares  that  "  the  Greek  words 
demand,  the  Hebrew  supports,  and  the  Aramaic  permits,  a  date 
after  the  conquest  of  Palestine  by  Alexander  the  Great "  (Book 
of  Daniel,  p.  Ixiii.).  In  the  Introduction  to  Daniel  in  "  The  Temple 
Bible,"  Dr.  Sinker  writes  :  "  Yet  about  this  time  a  brother  of  the 
Greek  poet  Alcaeus  held  office  at  the  Court  of  Babylon.  Still 
earlier,  Sargon  mentions  the  Greeks  (Javanu]  of  Cyprus;  and 
much  earlier,  we  find  a  Greek  in  the  Tel-el-Amarna  tablets. 
Clearly  then  there  is  no  reason  why  in  the  time  of  Daniel  Greek 
musical  instruments  and  their  names  should  not  have  been  known 
in  Babylon." 


132       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

themselves  came  from  Greece,  it  might  be 
assumed  that  they  would  carry  with  them  to 
Babylon  the  names  by  which  they  were  known  in 
the  land  of  their  origin.  In  no  other  sphere 
would  men  listen  to  what  passes  for  proof  when 
Scripture  is  assailed.  In  no  other  sphere  would 
such  trifling  as  this  be  tolerated.  If  only  these 
men  could  be  "got  into  court,"  and  subjected  to 
cross-examination,  they  would  lose  not  only  their 
case  but  their  reputation ! 

The  argument  from  the  language  of  the  Book 
of  Daniel  having  thus  utterly  broken  down — in 
truth  it  is  an  insult  to  our  intelligence — we  dismiss 
the  Philologists  from  the  inquiry  altogether.  The 
remaining  question  is  one  of  evidence  of  a  wholly 
different  kind ;  and  no  university  professor,  how 
ever  eminent,  is  as  fit  to  deal  with  it  as  the 
trained  lawyer  or  the  experienced  juryman.  I 
press  this.  These  pages  will  be  read  by  many 
who  are  as  competent  to  decide  the  fate  of  Daniel 
as  any  of  the  critics  whose  dictum  about  the  book 
is  blindly  accepted  by  the  public.  And  those 
who  study  the  controversy  will  recognise  the 
truth  of  Hengstenberg's  statement,  that  the  attack 
upon  the  book  originated  in  a  prejudged  deter 
mination  to  eliminate  the  supernatural  element 
from  the  Bible.  Devout  men  like  Eichhorn  and 


CH.  X.]  THE  ATTACK  ON   DANIEL  133 

his  pupil  Ewald  sought  to  win  the  rationalists 
back  to  religion  by  joining  in  their  attack  upon 
the  only  true  basis  of  religion. 

A  criminal  prosecution  sometimes  originates  in 
some  virulent  prejudice  which  clouds  the  judg 
ment  even  of  fair  and  upright  men.  The  Dreyfus 
case  in  France  is  the  most  famous  example  of  this 
in  modern  times.  No  generous  mind  would 
tolerate  the  belief  that  men  like  the  French 
Ministers  of  State  were  the  guilty  accessories  to 
an  infamous  plot  against  an  innocent  man.  They 
deprecated  the  methods  of  the  prosecution,  but 
they  accepted  the  result.  And  so  here,  men  like 
Professor  Driver  accept  the  verdict  of  the  Higher 
Criticism  against  the  Book  of  Daniel,  while 
deprecating  the  " exaggerations  of  the  rationalists." 
But  whence  these  exaggerations?  The  Public 
Prosecutor  does  not  "  exaggerate  "  in  presenting 
a  case  to  the  court.  On  the  contrary  he  is 
careful  to  state  it  with  perfect  fairness,  and  to 
notice  every  point  in  favour  of  the  accused  as 
well  as  against  him.  Not  so,  however,  a  private 
prosecutor.  The  "  exaggerations  "  of  the  German 
critics  are  the  clearest  proof  that  the  crusade 
against  Daniel  was  the  outcome  of  prejudice  or 
malice. 

In  my  published  defence  of  the  book  I  have  not 


i34       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

sought  to  score  a  single  point  by  trading  on  these 
"  exaggerations."  The  popularity  of  the  Dean  of 
Canterbury  precluded  my  ignoring  him,  but  I 
have  taken  Professor  Driver  as  the  accredited 
exponent  of  the  case  of  the  English  critics.  And 
in  meeting  his  indictment  of  Daniel,  I  have 
accepted  his  own  statement  of  the  evidence.  Any 
competent  tribunal  would,  I  believe,  decide  that 
the  Septuagint  translation  of  the  book  is  older 
than  the  date  to  which  the  critics  assign  the 
Hebrew  original,  and  that  the  canon  of  the  Old 
Testament  was  closed  anterior  to  that  date. 
But  meeting  them  on  their  own  ground,  I  have 
shown  that  no  part  of  their  case  against  the  book 
will  stand  the  test  of  cross-examination.  And 
further,  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  its  great 
central  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled  in  Messianic 
times  with  absolute  definiteness  and  precision. 
And  this  demonstration  Professor  Driver  himself 
has  cited,1  only  to  leave  it  and  pass  on;  though 
if  it  remains  unchallenged  it  should  end  the 
controversy. 

If  there  are  those  whose  faith  in  Scripture 
depends  on  the  fate  of  Daniel,  a  brief  summary 
of  the  defence  of  the  book  may  serve  only  to 

1  Book  of  Daniel,  p.  149. 


CH.  X.]      DANIEL:   HISTORICAL   ERRORS  135 

prejudice  the  issue.  And  yet  the  briefest  sum 
mary  is  all  that  can  be  given  within  the  limits  of 
this  chapter.1 

The  critics'  attack  upon  the  book  rests  on  three 
grounds  : — philological  peculiarities,  historical 
errors,  and  its  position  in  the  canon.  The  first 
I  have  already  dealt  with.  As  regards  the  second, 
the  only  vital  "  error  "  is  the  opening  statement  of 
the  book,  that  Nebuchadnezzar  invaded  Judea  in 
the  third  year  of  Jehoiakim.  But  this  is  a  fact  in 
history  established  by  writers  sacred  and  profane. 

The  critics  here  rely  on  the  history  of  Berosus, 
quoted  by  Josephus.  That  historian  tells  that 
during  the  expedition  Nebuchadnezzar  heard  of 
his  father's  death,  and  at  once  handed  over  his 
Jewish  captives  to  others,  and  "  himself  hastened 
home  across  the  desert''  The  German  rationalists, 
mixing  up  Berosus  with  Scripture,2  and  under 
standing  neither,  infer  that  it  was  from  Car- 
chemish,  where  a  decisive  battle  was  fought  in 
the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim,  that  Nebuchadnezzar 
started  homewards.  But  Carchemish  is  on  the 


1  Dean  Farrar's  philippic  is  a  portly  volume  ;  and  in  Professor 
Driver's  Book  of  Daniel  the  "  Introduction  "  alone  occupies 
a  hundred  closely  printed  pages.  My  reply  to  both  occupies 
only  a  hundred  and  eighty  pages  of  large  and  leaded  type  (Daniel 
in  the  Critics'  Den,  1902).  Greater  condensation  is  impossible. 

a  Jer.  xlvi.  2. 


136       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Upper  Euphrates,  and  the  road  thence  to  Babylon 
is  clear  of  the  desert  altogether.  If,  as  Berosus 
tells  us,  Nebuchadnezzar  had  Jewish  captives,  he 
must  have  invaded  Judea ;  and  if  the  desert 
lay  between  him  and  his  capital,  it  must  have 
been  from  Judea  that  he  set  out  on  his  homeward 
journey. 

This  "historical  error"  is  a  blunder  so  glaring 
that  a  schoolboy  might  well  be  ashamed  of  it. 
And  yet  it  is  gravely  adopted  and  reproduced 
by  English  ecclesiastics  and  Professors  for  the 
enlightenment  of  a  much  deluded  public.1  It 
is  a  specimen  of  the  "  historical  errors "  of  the 
Higher  Critics.  Ex  uno  disce  omnes. 

Another  "historical  error"  deserves  a  passing 
notice.  When  the  sceptics  first  framed  their 
indictment  of  Daniel,  Belshazzar  appeared  to  be 
a  myth.  For  history  testifies  that  the  last  king 
of  Babylon  was  Nabonidus  ;  that  he  was  absent 


1  See  Professor  Driver's  Book  of  Daniel,  p.  2.  Dean  Farrar's 
words  are  :  "  Nor  did  Nebuchadnezzar  advance  against  the  Holy 
City  even  after  the  battle  of  Carchemish,  but  dashed  home 
across  the  desert."  One  does  not  expect  to  be  amused  by  a  book 
on  such  a  subject,  but  this  is  really  amusing.  The  fact  is  these 
English  scholars  copy  from  the  German  rationalists  without 
inquiry  or  independent  thought.  The  refutation  of  this  silly 
blunder  does  not  depend  merely  on  the  point  above  mentioned, 
but  upon  the  history  as  a  whole.  See  Daniel  in  the  Critics'  Den, 
App.  I. 


CH.  X.]          BELSHAZZAR   AND   DARIUS  137 

from  the  capital  when  Cyrus  entered  it,  and  that 
he  lived  many  years  after  the  Persian  conquest. 
The  contradiction  between  history  and  Scripture 
was  complete.  But  the  since  deciphered  inscrip 
tions  have  disclosed  that  Belshazzar  was  eldest 
son  and  heir  to  Nabonidus,  that  he  was  regent  in 
Babylon  during  his  father's  absence,  and  that  he 
was  killed  the  night  the  Persian  army  entered 
the  inner  city.1 

The  only  difficulty  still  unsolved  in  the  Daniel 
story  is  the  identity  of  Darius  the  Mede.  But 
here  again  the  inscriptions  tell  us  that,  in  the 
conquest  of  Babylon,  Cyrus  had  united  with  him 
a  Median  of  such  power  and  fame  that  it  was  he 
who  appointed  the  new  officials  ;  and  that  when 
an  amnesty  was  proclaimed,  it  was  issued  in  their 
joint  names.  The  absence  of  Darius's  name  from 
the  commercial  tablets  is  amply  explained  by  the 
fact  that,  as  Daniel  indicates,  he,  like  Belshazzar, 
was  only  a  viceroy  or  vassal  king. 

Not  one  single  new  point  against  Daniel  has 
been  brought  to  light  for  a  century.  Every 
decade  brings  to  light  some  new  proofs  of  its 
genuineness  and  authenticity. 

1  Professor  Sayce's  statements  on  this  are  but  a  false  inference 
from  a  false  reading  of  the  tablet.  See  Daniel  in  the  Critics'  Den, 
App.  II. 


i38       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Daniel's  place  in  the  Canon  is  too  large  a 
question  for  incidental  treatment.  But  the  mere 
fact  of  its  inclusion  would  satisfy  any  fair  tribunal 
of  the  genuineness  of  the  book,  and  it  renders  it 
absolutely  certain  that  the  Sanhedrim  regarded 
it  as  genuine.1  In  the  Septuagint  version,  more 
over,  it  is  placed  among  the  prophets,  as  in 
our  English  Bible ;  which  seems  to  indicate 
that  such  was  its  original  position.  And  if 
so  its  transfer  to  the  third  division  of  the 
Canon  was  effected,  no  doubt,  after  the  beginning 
of  the  Christian  era.  The  Hebrew  Bible  now 
brackets  it  with  the  Psalms  of  David  and 
other  books  held  by  the  Jews  in  the  very 
highest  esteem. 

Then,  again,  the  critics  cannot  tear  from  its 
pages  the  great  prophecy  of  the  "  Seventy 
Weeks."  And  that  prophecy,  so  far  as  its  fulfil 
ment  belongs  to  the  past,  was  fulfilled  with  such 
definiteness  and  precision  as  to  make  an  "end  of 
controversy  "  upon  the  whole  question.  Taking 
history  from  the  historian  and  chronology  from 
the  chronologist,  it  will  be  found  that  the  interval 
from  the  issue  of  the  decree  to  build  Jerusalem  to 
the  public  proclamation  of  the  Messiah,  was 

1  Sec  Daniel  in  the  Critics*  Den,  pp.  99-111. 


CH.  X.]    DANIEL  ACCREDITED  BY  CHRIST          139 

exactly  and  to  the  very  day  the  period  foretold 
by  Daniel.1 

Could  the  prediction  have  been  a  mere  guess 
by  some  learned  and  pious  Jew?  If  we  refer 
this  question  to  a  mathematician  he  will  tell  us 
that  in  such  a  forecast  the  chance  of  accuracy 
would  be  so  small,  and  the  probability  of  error 
so  great,  that  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  could 
be  expressed  arithmetically  in  figures.  The  calcu 
lation,  in  fact,  would  become  lost  in  infinity.  The 
attempt,  therefore,  to  dismiss  the  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecy  as  a  mere  coincidence  "is  not  intelligent 
scepticism,  but  a  crass  misbelief  which  is  sheer 
credulity." 

And  lastly  the  fact  claims  notice — and  this 
alone  should  satisfy  the  Christian — that  the  Book 
of  Daniel  bears  the  express  imprimatur  of  our 
Divine  Lord.  Witness  His  words  :  "  When  ye, 
therefore,  shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation, 
spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  stand  in  the  holy 


1  According  to  Dan.  ix.  25,  sixty-nine  sevens  of  prophetic  years 
were  to  elapse  between  the  issuing  of  the  edict  to  rebuild  the 
city,  and  "  Messiah  the  Prince"  ;  and  the  period  from  ist  Nisan  in 
the  2oth  year  of  Artaxerxes  (Neh.  ii.)  to  "  Palm  Sunday  "  when 
our  Lord  made  His  public  entry  into  Jerusalem  (Luke  xix.  36-38) 
was  exactly  173,880  days  (=69  x  7  X  360).  This  is  dealt  with  in 
detail  in  The  Coming  Prince,  and  also  in  Daniel  in  the  Critics,'  Den 
(1902). 


i4o       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

place."  The  attempt  to  evade  this  by  the  plea 
that  the  words  here  given  in  italics  are  a 
gloss,  is  so  unwarranted  that  no  English  writers 
would  have  suggested  it  were  it  not  that  they 
follow  the  German  sceptics  like  sheep.  The 
words  occur  in  the  great  prophecy  of  Matthew 
xxiv.  ;  and  the  reference  to  Daniel  is  so  unmis 
takable  that  the  omission  of  the  name  could  not 
even  obscure  it. 

Bishop  Westcott  declares  that  "  no  other 
book  of  the  Old  Testament  had  so  great  a  share 
in  the  development  of  Christianity."  It  is  Heng- 
stenberg's  testimony  that  "there  are  few  books 
whose  Divine  authority  is  so  fully  established  by 
the  testimony  of  the  New  Testament,  and  in 
particular  by  the  Lord  Himself."  And  even 
Professor  Bevan  of  Cambridge — one  of  the 
narrowest  of  the  critics — admits  that  "  the  in 
fluence  of  the  book  is  apparent  almost  every 
where." 

But  the  Christian  accepts  the  Book,  not  because 
its  rejection  would  be,  as  Sir  Isaac  Newton  urged, 
"  to  undermine  the  Christian  religion " ;  but 
because  its  claims  to  acceptance  are  complete 
and  convincing,  and  the  case  for  its  rejection 


CH.  X.]  THE   BOOK   OF   DANIEL  141 

owes  its  seeming  cogency  only  to  ignoring  some 
of  the  most  salient  facts,  and  misrepresenting 
others. I 


1  In  reading  this  chapter  in  the  proof  I  am  increasingly  im 
pressed  with  its  inadequacy  as  a  defence  of  Daniel ;  especially 
as  I  have  so  very  recently  (Easter,  1902)  published  my  full 
answer  to  the  indictment  as  formulated  by  Professor  Driver  and 
Dean  Farrar.  In  Daniel  in  the  Critics'  Den  (1902)  not  a  single  point 
urged  by  the  assailants  is  overlooked,  and  the  critics  are  put 
upon  their  defence.  I  have  only  now  had  the  benefit  of  reading 
the  "  Introduction  "  and  Notes  to  Daniel  in  The  Temple  Bible. 


CHAPTER  XI 

AMONG  the  many  stories  told  of  Chief 
Baron  O'Grady,  first  Lord  Guillamore,  of 
the  Irish  Court  of  Exchequer,  there  is  one  about 
a  judgment  of  his  which  is  probably  unique  in 
judicial  annals.  The  two  puisne  Barons  who 
were  sitting  with  him  in  bank  in  the  hearing  of 
an  important  case,  had  delivered  elaborate  judg 
ments,  taking  opposing  views  of  the  law  ;  and  the 
Chief  Baron's  judgment  which  followed  was  given 
in  the  single  sentence,  "  I  agree  with  my  brother 
Smith  for  the  reasons  assigned  by  my  brother 
McClelland." 

When  the  mind  is  wavering  in  its  acceptance 
of  what  seems  to  be  true  and  right,  there  is 
nothing  so  helpful  as  an  able  and  exhaustive 
statement  of  all  that  can  be  said  upon  the  other 
side.  In  this  way  I  owe  much  to  the  Higher 
Critics  for  settling  my  faith  in  Scripture ;  and  I 

confess  that  my  full  acceptance  of  the  Book  of 

142 


CH.  XL]  THE   BOOK  OF  JONAH  143 

Jonah  dates  from  my  study  of  their  reasons  for 
rejecting  it. 

We  all  know  the  old  woman  who  was  ready  to 
believe  that  Jonah  swallowed  the  whale,  if  only 
the  Bible  said  so ;  but  we  are  not  all  equal  to 
faith  feats  of  that  kind.  From  standard  books  of 
great  authority  I  learned  that  it  would  be  as 
impossible  for  a  whale  to  swallow  a  man  as  for 
a  man  to  swallow  a  whale ;  the  shark  was  said 
to  be  the  only  fish  in  the  sea  that  could  accom 
plish  it ;  and  my  faith  became  somewhat  knock- 
kneed  in  presence  of  the  shark.1 

But  I  was  reminded  of  the  words,  "  Now  the 
Lord  had  prepared  a  great  fish  to  swallow  up 
Jonah."  Yes,  there  is  no  doubt  that  Almighty 
God  could  extemporise  a  sea  monster  for  the 
purpose.  And  such  a  miracle  would  not  involve 
a  greater  display  of  power  than  many  others  ;  but 
it  would  be  a  miracle  of  a  kind  that  has  no  pre 
cedent  or  analogy  in  Scripture.  We  have  learned 
to  re-define  "supernatural  power"  ;  for  " nature" 
is  merely  a  way  of  expressing  one  sphere  of  God's 
working.  And  as  already  noticed,  Divine  miracles 
are  wholly  free  from  any  merely  dramatic  display 


1  I  am  not  justifying  my  scepticism.  For  the  word  translated 
"whale"  in  our  New  Testament  may  mean  any  large  fish.  But 
our  minds  easily  become  enslaved  not  only  to  ideas  but  to  words. 


i44       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

of  the  resources  of  the  Almighty.1  My  difficulty 
therefore  was,  not  that  what  was  narrated  was 
sz^matural,  but  that  it  seemed  ^natural. 

And  yet  the  fact  was  indisputable  that  nothing 
in  the  Old  Testament  was  accredited  more  de 
finitely  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  than  this  very 
miracle.  It  was  used  by  Him  not  as  an  inci 
dental  illustration,  but  as  a  prophecy  and  a  type  in 
the  strictest  sense,  of  His  death  and  resurrection. 
There  is  no  evading  this ;  and  therefore  the 
Christian  will  find  that  to  jettison  the  prophet 
Jonah,  so  far  from  calming  the  waves  of  scepti 
cism,  will  only  bring  the  barque  of  his  faith  into 
still  greater  peril. 

We  have  become  accustomed  to  find  that 
distinguished  Professors,  and  ecclesiastics  of  high 
degree,  in  criticising  the  Bible,  sometimes  display 
ignorance  of  spiritual  things  ;  but  in  the  sphere  of 
the  natural  one  does  expect  facts  from  their  lips 
and  pens.  A  friend  of  mine  put  up  a  new  summer- 
house  in  his  garden.  The  entrance  to  it  is  so 
wide  that  a  carriage  and  pair  might  drive  through 
it ;  and  that  entrance  consists  of  the  jaws  of  a 
sperm  whale ! 

A   whale  unable   to   swallow  a  man  !     In  his 

1  See  p.  88,  ante. 


CH.  XL]          JONAH   AND   THE   WHALE  145 

Cruise  of  the  "  Cache  lot"  Mr.  Bullen,  an  experi 
enced  whale  fisher  himself,  describes  the  creature's 
mouth  as  large  enough  to  hold  a  picnic  party,  and 
he  tells  of  a  shark  15  feet  long  being  found 
in  the  stomach  of  one  of  these  monsters.  A 
whale  that  he  himself  helped  to  kill  ejected  the 
food  it  had  swallowed  ;  and  it  was,  he  says,  "  in 
masses  of  enormous  size,  some  of  them  being 
estimated  to  be  of  the  size  of  our  hatch-house, 
viz.,  8  feet  x  6  feet  X  6  feet."  And  in  this 
connection  he  mentions  a  fact  of  special  interest 
here,  that  the  whale  when  dying  vomits  the 
contents  of  its  stomach. 

This  same  writer  discusses  the  question  how  a 
monster  so  unwieldy  can  get  hold  of  the  smaller 
fish.  "It  is  manifestly  absurd,"  he  says,  "to 
suppose  the  whale  capable  of  catching  fish  in  the 
ordinary  sense,  indicating  pursuit."  And  his 
explanation  of  it  is  that  "  as  the  cachelot  swims 
about  with  his  lower  jaw  hanging  down  in  its 
normal  position,  and  his  huge  gullet  gaping 
Like  a  submarine  cavern,  the  fish  unwittingly 
glide  down  it." 

When  in  the  light  of  these  facts  I  again  take 
up  the  Book  of  Jonah,  I  am  conscious  of  a  strange 
revulsion  of  feeling.  The  Hebrew  Concordance 
tells  me  that  when  I  read  that  "  God  prepared  a 

ii 


146        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

great  fish,"  the  word  used  is  the  same  as  when 
the  king  of  Babylon  "appointed"  a  certain  pro 
vision  for  Daniel  and  his  companions.  In  other 
words,  the  statement  means  that  in  the  providence 
of  God,  when  Jonah  was  thrown  overboard,  one 
of  these  huge  sea  monsters  was  swimming  by, 
"his  huge  gullet  gaping  like  a  submarine  cavern," 
and  Jonah  went  down  just  as  a  midge  might  go 
down  the  throat  of  a  man  when  running  against 
the  wind. 

This  part  of  the  miracle,  therefore,  which  I  was 
inclined  to  reject  as  being  unprecedented  and  un 
natural,  proves  to  be  no  miracle  at  all.  Neither 
is  there  any  miracle  in  Jonah's  being  vomited  out 
again :  that  was  a  process  as  natural  as  for  a  child 
to  get  rid  of  its  dinner.  Both  the  swallowing  and 
the  vomiting  were  perfectly  natural,  and  there 
was  nothing  about  either  to  excite  even  our 
wonder,  much  less  incredulity.  Where  the 
miracle  began  and  ended  was  that  God  preserved 
the  life  of  His  servant  through  it  all. 

And  here — to  repeat  a  favourite  phrase — faith 
and  unbelief  must  measure  their  distance.  To 
say  that  God  could  not  do  this  is  to  deny  God 
altogether  :  to  say  He  would  not  do  it  is  absurd 
— any  one  of  us  would  do  it  in  similar  circum 
stances  if  only  we  had  the  power :  to  say  He  did 


CH.  XI.]   JONAH  ACCREDITED  BY  CHRIST  147 

not  do  it  is  a  flagrant  case  of  begging  the 
question.  The  New  Testament  refers  to  Jonah 
as  a  prophecy  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  For 
"He  rose  again  the  third  day  according  to  the 
Scriptures"  ;*  and  where,  save  in  Jonah,  shall 
we  find  in  the  Old  Testament  a  plain  and  clear 
prophecy  of  His  rising  on  the  third  day?  And 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  most  definite  and 
solemn  manner,  identified  Himself  with  this  very 
miracle.  In  the  beginning  of  His  ministry 
"  signs  "  abounded  ;  but  when,  after  the  Council 
which  decreed  His  rejection,  the  Pharisees  again 
demanded  a  "sign,"  His  answer  was  that  the 
only  sign  they  should  have  was  "  the  sign  of  the 
prophet  Jonah."  His  words,  repeated  we  know 
not  how  often,  cannot  be  explained  away  : — "  As 
Jonah  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the 
whale's  belly,  so  shall  the  Son  of  Man  be  three 
days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth."2 
Some  people  seem  to  classify  the  miracles  of 
Scripture.  The  little  miracles  they  accept  as  a 
matter  of  course  :  it  is  only  the  big  ones  which 
try  their  faith.  I  would  suggest  to  such  people 


*  i  Cor.  xv.  4  (see  p.  76,  ante). 

3  Matt.  xii.  38-40,  and  xvi.  4.  The  Lord  may  have  given  the 
same  answer  a  score  of  times  for  aught  we  know.  And  see 
p.  144,  ante,  and  Appendix,  Note  III. 


148       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

to  enter  the  Jonah  miracle  low  down  on  their  list, 
but  at  the  top  to  place  those  most  stupendous  and 
seemingly  incredible  of  all  miracles,  the  incarna 
tion  and  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
And  when  in  some  little  measure  they  have 
realised  who  and  what  He  is,  His  words  will 
silence  unbelief;  and  they  will  recognise  that 
whatever  judgment  may  be  formed  upon  the 
Book  of  Jonah,  the  miracle  which  it  records  is 
inseparably  identified  with  the  truth  of  Christianity. 

That  it  was  on  account  of  the  miracle  that  the 
Germans  decreed  the  rejection  of  the  Book  no 
honest  person  would  dispute.  But  after  their 
manner,  they  heaped  up  incidental  reasons  for 
their  decision.  And  these  reasons  their  English 
followers  have,  with  childlike  simplicity,  adopted. 
Their  interpretation  is  of  the  nightmare  kind ; 
everything  in  the  book  ought  to  have  happened 
differently  ;  things  are  included  which  ought  to 
have  been  omitted,  and  things  are  omitted  which 
ought  to  have  been  included.  The  only  element 
of  doubt  is  whether  it  is  typical,  or  mythical,  or 
legendary,  or  allegorical.  Historical  it  certainly 
cannot  be. 

Now  this  sort  of  criticism  any  Old  Bailey 
practitioner  could  work  up  far  better  than  the 
Professors.  For  let  it  be  kept  in  view  that  the 


CH.  XL]  DR.    DRIVER   ON   JONAH  149 

whole  argument  from  the  language  of  the  Book 
may  be  ruled  out.  Professor  Driver  indeed 
asserts  that  "It  cannot  have  been  written  until 
long  after  the  time  of  Jonah."  But  this  is  only 
Professor  Driver's  way.  Even  such  an  uncom 
promising  critic  as  Professor  Cheyne  dissociates 
himself  from  such  a  conclusion  ;  r  and  as  any  one 
can  see,  the  grounds  set  out  in  support  of  it  are 
entirely  inadequate.  And  this  being  so,  we  may 
dismiss  the  Hebraists  from  the  inquiry,  and 
consider  the  general  question  on  its  merits. 

Though  Professor  Driver  denies  the  genuine 
ness  of  the  book,  he  is  careful,  as  usual,  to  dis 
sociate  himself  from  the  reckless  extremes  of 
the  more  advanced  critics.  "  No  doubt,"  he  says, 
"  the  outlines  of  the  narrative  are  historical." 
And  yet  "there  are  indications  that  it  is  not 
strictly  historical."  2  These  "indications"  are — 

That  the  conversion  of  the  Ninevites  is  "con 
trary  to  analogy." 

That  such  a  conversion  "should  have  pro 
duced  so  little  permanent  effect." 


1  He  somewhat  superciliously  remarks,  "The  evidences  of  date 
are  difficult  to  seize  "  (Encyclopedia  Britannica,  article  "  Jonah  "). 
And  see  Speaker's  Commentary,  "Jonah,"  Excursus  B ;  and  also  the 
late  Dr.  John  Kennedy's  valuable  monograph  On  the  Book  of 
Jonah  (chap.  viii.). 

•  Introduction,  "Jonah." 


150       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

That  it  is  not  "easy  to  imagine"  the  king 
acting  as  is  represented. 

This,  remember,  represents  the  superior 
enlightenment  and  intelligence  of  the  Higher 
Criticism.  Of  the  king  referred  to  we  know 
nothing ;  and  possibly  if  his  character  were 
known  it  would  not  be  "easy  to  imagine"  his 
acting  in  any  other  way  !  And  as  regards  the 
second  point,  it  is  only  a  student  among  his 
books,  who  knows  nothing  practically  of  human 
nature,  who  could  entertain  such  an  objection. 
I  put  it  on  this  ground  because  it  is  idle  to 
appeal  to  the  history  of  the  chosen  people  in 
the  wilderness,  for  these  critics  dismiss  the 
divinely  given  story  as  a  legend.  But  the 
repentance  of  the  Ninevites  is  "  contrary  to 
analogy."  Yes,  and  the  conduct  of  masses  of 
men  when  moved  by  any  powerful  passion 
is  generally  "contrary  to  analogy." 

But  there  is  something  else  which,  if  we 
extend  our  view  beyond  our  own  times,  is  also 
contrary  to  analogy  ;  and  that  is  that  any  man 
holding  the  position  of  an  English  clergyman 
should  treat  with  such  entire  indifference 
the  words  of  his  Divine  Lord.  "  The  men 
of  Nineveh  shall  rise  in  judgment  with  this 
generation,  and  shall  condemn  it ;  because 


CH.  XL]  A  TRAVESTY   OF  JONAH  151 

they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonah  ;  and, 
behold,  a  greater  than  Jonah  is  here."1  Let  the 
critics,  dealing  with  the  studies  which  alone  are 
within  their  competence,  give  us  reasons  to 
doubt  the  genuineness  of  the  Book  of  Jonah, 
and  we  will  consider  the  question  on  its  merits. 
But  that  the  men  of  Nineveh  repented  at  the 
preaching  of  Jonah  is  a  fact  which  rests,  not  on 
the  Book  of  Jonah  merely,  but  on  the  word  of 
"a  greater  than  Jonah" — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Himself.2 

The  view  of  the  Book  presented  by  these 
writers  is  but  a  grotesque  travesty.  We  seem 
to  see  a  dripping,  half-drowned  Jew  rushing 
through  Nineveh,  and  shouting  his  startling 
message,  like  an  escaped  lunatic  turned  town- 
crier.  And  presto !  all  the  inhabitants  repent 
and  turn  good  like  clockwork,  while  the  prophet 
himself  turns  sulky  and  bolts.  This  is  their 
reading  of  it.  This  is  Higher  Criticism  ! 

''Oh,  the  blindness  of  conventional  critics, 
groping  in  Hebrew  records  not  for  pearls  of 
facts,  but  for  pebbles  of  dogma !  They  have 
failed  to  observe  that  the  God  of  Jonah  is  the 
God  of  the  New  Testament.  Yet  it  is  so,  and 

1  Matt.  xii.  41.  *  See  note,  p.  74,  ante. 


152       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

this  great  book  connects  the  two  Bibles,  instead 
of  contrasting  them."  I 

The  Book  is  essentially  a  drama,  of  which  the 
brief  and  quickly  changing  scenes  present  a  story 
that  is  wonderfully  real  and  intensely  human. 
Can  men  who  scout  the  idea  of  a  prophet's 
refusing  a  call  to  service,  and  fleeing  from  the 
Lord,  know  anything  of  the  deeper  experiences 
of  a  spiritual  life  ?  And  in  such  cases  the 
Divine  action  is  generally  "  contrary  to  analogy." 
When  Paul  was  bidden  to  go  to  Rome,  and  yet 
turned  to  Jerusalem,  he  was  brought  to  Rome 
as  a  prisoner,  discredited  by  a  chain  :  when 
Jonah  was  bidden  to  go  to  Nineveh,  and  yet 
took  ship  for  Tarshish,  he  ended  by  entering 
Nineveh  as  a  prophet  accredited  by  a  miracle. 
For  the  fame  of  his  miraculous  deliverance  pre 
ceded  him 2  ;  and  when  he  proclaimed  that  the 
God  by  whom  he  had  been  thus  delivered  had 
decreed  the  destruction  of  their  city,  all  men 
naturally  hung  upon  his  words.  What  calls  to 
righteousness  he  uttered  upon  that  wonderful 


1  The  words  are  from  the  pen  of  Charles  Reade.  He  declares 
that  this  Book  of  "  1,328  English  words  "  "  is  the  most  beautiful 
story  ever  written  in  so  small  a  compass  "  (Bible  Characters). 

*  The  Lord's  words  in  Luke  xi.  30  admit  of  no  other  meaning. 
He  Himself  as  crucified  and  risen  was  to  be  "a  sign"  to  Israel, 
just  as  Jonah  rescued  from  death  was  a  sign  to  the  Ninevites. 


CH.  XL]     THE  TRUE   STORY   OF  JONAH  153 

text  during  the  forty  days  of  his  ministry  we 
know  not.  We  can  only  conjecture  what  such 
preaching  must  have  been. 

And  when  the  forty  days  were  expired,  he  left 
the  capital  and  made  a  hermit's  lodge  in  which  to 
wait  "till  he  might  see  what  would  become  of 
the  city."  But  the  days  went  by  and  nothing 
whatever  happened.  There  must  have  been 
critics  and  sceptics  in  plenty  in  a  place  like 
Nineveh,  and  we  can  well  imagine  how  they 
crowed.  The  men  of  faith,  the  "overcomers," 
are  "a  little  flock"  in  every  age  ;  with  the  many 
the  prophet  and  the  prophet's  God  must  soon 
have  become  a  byword  and  a  jest.  And  we 
can  realise  how  Jonah  would  murmur  against 
God,  even  as  Elijah  did,  and,  like  him,  exclaim, 
"  I  have  been  very  jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of 
hosts." 

Every  Christian  who  knows  what  it  is  to  have 
a  spiritual  history  has  in  some  little  measure  had 
such  experiences  as  these.  And  then  it  is  that 
a  silent  heaven  crushes  us  ;  then  it  is  that  the 
heart  craves  some  token  of  the  Divine  presence. 
And  we  can  imagine  with  what  gladness  Jonah 
recognised  such  a  token  in  the  gourd  raised  up 
to  shelter  him.  We  can  imagine,  too,  the  bitter 
ness  of  the  recoil  when  the  vulgar  facts  of  a 


154       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

waking  day — the  east  wind  and  the  garish  sun 
shine — destroyed  his  gourd  and  threw  him  back 
upon  himself.  And  as  the  curtain  falls  upon 
this  last  scene  we  almost  seem  to  hear  the 
closing  words,  "  Thou  hast  had  pity  on  the 
gourd,  for  which  thou  hast  not  laboured,  neither 
madest  it  to  grow  ;  which  came  up  in  a  night 
and  perished  in  a  night.  And  should  not  I 
spare  Nineveh,  that  great  city,  wherein  are 
more  than  six  score  thousand  persons  that 
cannot  discern  between  their  right  hand  and 
their  left?" 


CHAPTER  XII 

WHAT   I  am  about    to    narrate   may  well 
appear  so  incredible  that  I  am  prepared 
to  find  that  my  personal  guarantee  of  its  truth 
will  at  first  sight  fail  to  carry  conviction. 

A  few  years  ago — I  could  give  details  of  every 
part  of  my  narrative — a  certain  London  merchant 
killed  an  unfortunate  wretch  whom  circumstances 
had  placed  in  his  power.  He  did  not  actually 
kill  him  with  his  own  hands,  but  he  had  him 
brought  to  a  secluded  room  which  was  deliberately 
prepared  for  the  purpose,  and  there  he  stood  by 
while  his  victim  was  strangled  by  a  man  whom 
he  had  hired  to  do  the  deed.  I  myself  examined 
the  place.  I  can  testify,  moreover,  that  all  the 
facts  were  known,  not  only  to  the  authorities,  but 
to  the  Queen.  And  yet  not  only  did  the  homicide 
go  unpunished,  but,  with  full  knowledge  of  all  I 
have  narrated,  Her  Majesty  singled  him  out  for 
royal  favour  and  conferred  a  title  upon  him. 


155 


156        THE   BIBLE   AND    MODERN   CRITICISM 

What  estimate  will  my  readers  form  of  such 
conduct  on  the  part  of  one  whom  we  have  been 
taught  to  regard  as  a  pattern  and  paragon  of 
public  and  private  virtue? 

But  before  they  pass  judgment  upon  the  facts 
they  ought  to  know  a  few  additional  details.  The 
victim  of  the  tragedy  I  have  described  was  a  con 
demned  murderer ;  the  man  who  was  paid  to 
strangle  him  was  the  common  hangman,  the 
secluded  room  was  in  Newgate  prison,  and  the 
merchant  who  received  a  knighthood  was  the 
Sheriff  whose  official  duty  it  was  to  execute  the 
criminal. 

And  now  the  meaning  of  my  parable  will  begin 
to  dawn  upon  the  reader.  Let  these  added 
details  be  suppressed,  and  a  plain  narrative  which 
does  not  contain  a  syllable  that  is  untrue  or  even 
exaggerated,  may  seem  to  endanger  the  reputa 
tion  of  Queen  Victoria.  And  it  is  precisely  by 
this  sort  of  suppression  that  the  Bible  and  the 
God  of  the  Bible  are  misrepresented.  Will  any 
"  person  of  culture  "  in  our  day  dare  to  defend 
the  extermination  of  the  Canaanites  ?  Will  any 
one,  I  answer,  dare  to  defend  the  strangling  of  a 
poor  helpless  wretch  in  a  shut-in  room  ? 

It  is  not  God's  way  to  justify  Himself  at  the 
bar  of  His  creature's  judgment.  He  acts  and 


CH.  XII.]  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  CANAANITES  157 

speaks  autocratically.  But  in  this  matter  He  has 
deigned  to  explain  His  decrees.  Men  read  the 
Bible  story  in  the  false  light  of  the  evolution 
craze.  They  picture  to  themselves  a  number  of 
semi-civilised  tribes  on  the  upward  path  of  pro 
gress,  exterminated  by  an  invading  horde  of 
religious  fanatics.1  But  the  Christian  knows  that 
they  were  a  degenerate  and  apostate  race  whose 
destruction  was  decreed  by  a  God  of  infinite 
mercy,  because  they  had  given  themselves  up  to 
unnatural  and  loathsome  sin.  Four  centuries 
had  passed  since  Sodom  fell.  And  among  the 
citizens  of  Sodom  not  even  ten  could  be  found 
who  were  clear  of  the  evil.  What  then  must 
have  been  the  condition  of  the  land  when  God  at 
last  called  in  the  Israelites  as  His  executioners  ? 
Of  the  guilty  nations  there  was  one  that 
seemed  still  to  merit  pity,  and  on  account  of  that 
nation  the  judgment  was  delayed.  If  for  four 
generations  the  favoured  people  were  left  as 
strangers  in  a  strange  land,  it  was  "  because  the 
iniquity  of  the  Amorites  was  not  yet  full."  2 


1  The  discoveries  of  the  archeologist  make  it  plain  that  at  the 
era  of  the  Exodus,  Palestine  had  long  enjoyed  a  high  civilisation 
(Lex  Mosaica,  p.  9).  The  nations  were  lapsing  from  civilisation, 
not  emerging  from  barbarism. 

3  Gen.  xv.  16,  and  see  xiii.  15  and  xviii.  32,  and  compare  Rom. 
i.  21  ff.  This  is  not  a  subject  for  plain  speaking.  I  will  dismiss 


158        THE   BIBLE   AND    MODERN   CRITICISM 

Considering  that  the  historic  Church  of  Western 
Christendom,  by  disparaging  the  sacred  bond  of 
marriage,  affects  a  higher  standard  of  morality 
than  the  Divine  revelation  of  Christianity  will 
sanction,  it  is  not  strange  that  men  should  claim 
to  be  more  merciful  than  God.  But  the  Bible 
narrative  makes  it  clear  as  light  that  the  exter 
mination  of  the  Canaanites  was  the  carrying 
out  of  a  Divine  decree.  That  the  men  of  a 
wandering  tribe,  with  neither  cavalry  nor 
"military  base,"  and  encumbered  by  multitudes 
of  women  and  children  and  camp  followers, 
should  conquer  a  nation  with  walled  towns 
and  "  chariots  of  iron " — the  equivalent  of 
modern  artillery — this  is  a  feat  to  which  his 
tory  affords  no  parallel.  And  seven  such  nations 
fell  before  the  Israelite  invaders.  Such  facts 
seem  to  indicate  that  it  was  as  clearly  a  Divine 
judgment  as  was  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh's 
army  in  the  sea. 

To  the  solution  of  other  "  difficulties "  of  a 
kindred  type  my  parable  may  afford  the  clew  ;  as, 
for  example,  the  imprecatory  Messianic  Psalms, 


it  with  the  strange  confession  that  prior  to  knowledge  acquired  at 
Scotland  Yard,  these  Divine  judgments  upon  Canaan  were  a 
difficulty  to  my  faith.  There  are  some  kinds  of  vice  that  seem  to 
spread  like  leprosy,  and  to  become  hereditary. 


CH.  XII.]     THE  JEWS  AND   THE  WORLD  159 

which  are  prophetic  warnings  of  Divine  judg 
ments  upon  those  who  take  the  place  of  enemies 
of  God.  But  I  turn  away  to  notice  briefly 
difficulties  of  another  kind,  which  depend,  not  on 
ignoring  facts,  but  on  perverting  them.  I  will 
select  one  as  illustrating  the  class  to  which  I  refer. 
What  can  be  more  unlike  the  Christian's  God 
than  the  scheme  of  granting  to  the  Jews  a 
monopoly  of  Divine  favour,  and  leaving  the 
world  to  its  fate  ?  To  which  I  will  make  answer 
by  asking  another  question,  What  can  be  more 
unlike  the  Christian's  Bible  ? 

In  commerce  there  are  two  well-known 
systems  on  which  merchants  deal  with  the  public. 
The  one  is  to  sell  directly  to  every  one  who 
wishes  to  become  a  customer  ;  the  other  is  to 
deal  only  through  an  agent.  When  the  owner 
of  some  famous  French  vineyard,  for  instance, 
appoints  an  English  agent,  and  refuses  to  supply 
his  wines  except  through  that  agent,  his  object  is 
to  make  it  easier  for  the  English  public  to  obtain 
supplies,  and  to  ensure  them  against  adulteration 
and  fraud.  And  God's  purpose  for  Israel  was 
that  that  favoured  nation  should  be  His  agents 
upon  earth.  Jerusalem  was  to  be  "  the  place  of 
His  name."  But  "  the  house  of  God,"  designed 
to  become  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  nations,  they 


160       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

treated  as  their  own,  and  ended  by  making  it  "a 
den  of  thieves."1 

All  nations  are  to  be  blessed  in  Christ ;  and  the 
Israelites  as  a  people  were  a  type  of  Christ,  and 
ought  to  have  been  a  blessing  to  the  world.  But 
instead  of  bringing  honour  to  the  name  of  God, 
they  caused  His  name  to  be  blasphemed  among 
the  heathen.2  They  were  as  false  to  the  Divine 
trust  committed  to  them,  as  the  "historic  Church  " 
of  Christendom  has  been  in  this  Christian  dispen 
sation. 

In  cases  of  this  kind  human  error  either  ousts 
Divine  truth  altogether,  or  else  becomes  so 
identified  with  it  in  popular  estimation  that 
men  in  rejecting  the  error  reject  also  the  truth. 
And  in  this  respect  very  "superior  persons"  are 
often  the  greatest  offenders.  Matthew  Arnold, 
for  instance,  like  many  another  writer  of  the  same 
type,  identifies  the  truth  of  the  Eden  fall  with  that 
horror  of  Augustinian  theology,  the  damnation  of 
infants.3  Indeed  the  whole  Augustinian  doctrine 
of  election,  as  distinguished  from  the  truth  of 
election,  is  a  case  of  putting  the  new  wine  of  the 
Christian  revelation  into  the  old  bottles  of  a 
bygone  dispensation. 

1  i  Kings  viii.  41-43  ;  Isaiah  Ivi.  7  ;  Mark  xi.  17  (R.V.). 

2  Rom.  ii.  24;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  20,  23.  3  See  p.  219,  post. 


CH.  XII.]    ARAUNAH'S   THRESHINGFLOOR  161 

I  will  here  notice,  in  passing,  a  Biblical 
"blunder"  of  which  much  has  been  made.  In 
2  Sam.  xxiv.  24,  we  read  that  David  bought  the 
oxen  and  threshingfloor  of  Araunah  for  fifty 
shekels  of  silver.  From  i  Chron.  xxi.  25,  we 
learn  that  David  gave  600  shekels  of  gold  for  the 
place.  It  is  extraordinary  that  any  honest  and 
intelligent  mind  could  find  a  difficulty  here. 
Fifty  shekels  of  silver  were  presumably  a  fair 
price,  though  to  us  it  seems  very  little,  for  the 
oxen  and  for  the  temporary  use  of  the  threshing- 
floor,  for  the  purpose  of  the  sacrifice.1  And  this 
was  all  that  the  king  had  in  view  at  the  moment. 
But  does  any  one  imagine  that  the  fee-simple  of 
"  the  place  "—the  entire  site  of  the  Temple — was 
worth  only  fifty  silver  shekels  ?  David  went  on 
to  purchase  the  entire  homestead  out  and  out ; 
and  the  price  he  paid  for  it  was  600  shekels  of 
gold.  And  this  is  what  the  "  Chronicler  "  records. 

The  "  Chronological  errors "  of  the  Bible  fall 
within  the  same  category.  Mere  textual  blunders 
seem  scarcely  worth  notice  here,  such,  e.g.,  as  the 


1  The  English  reader  must  not  base  anything  on  the  force  of 
the  English  words  " buy"  and  "  bought "  in  2  Sam.  xxiv. 24.  The 
narrative  in  Chronicles  suggests  that  it  was  the  Lord's  "answering 
him  by  fire "  that  led  the  king  to  go  on  to  the  purchase  of  the 
place. 

12 


162        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

reading  seven  instead  of  three  in  2  Sam.  xxiv.  I3,1 
and  eight  instead  of  eighteen  in  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  9. 
Having  regard  to  all  the  circumstances,  the  wonder 
is  that  such  mistakes  are  so  rare.  But  the  whole 
scheme  of  Biblical  chronology  is  regarded  as 
proof  of  error.  This  will  repay  looking  into. 

No  sceptic  will  accept  the  wild  chronology  of 
the  Egyptologists.  If  the  English  people  were 
not  so  unimaginative,  they  would  reckon  the 
several  dynasties  of  the  Heptarchy  as  successive r, 
and  thus  lay  claim  to  a  really  imposing  national 
antiquity.  But  no  one  who  has  studied  the 
subject  will  dispute  that  the  story  of  man's 
tenancy  of  the  earth  reaches  back  to  an  earlier 
period  than  Biblical  chronology  appears  to 
warrant.  Such  a  discovery,  however,  troubles 
only  those  who  suppose  the  Bible  to  be  a  history 
of  the  human  race.2 

Upon  this  subject  the  intelligent  Bible  student 
will  not  fail  to  arrive  at  three  conclusions.  The 
first  is  that  there  is  a  definite  system  in  Biblical 
chronology ;  and  the  second  is  that  the  writers 
had  no  thought  of  any  system  whatever.  And, 
thirdly,  finding  that  there  is  a  system,  and  that  it 

1  LXX.  reads  three,  and  this  in  itself  proves  that  it  is  merely  an 
error  of  copying. 
9  See  p.  194,  post. 


CH.  XII.]          BIBLICAL   CHRONOLOGY  163 

is  not  the  outcome  of  human  thought  or  plan,  he 
will  accept  the  obvious  conclusion  that  it  is 
Divine. 

Some  of  our  chronologists  have  vaguely  noticed 
such  a  system,  but  all  of  them  have  been  misled 
by  the  universally  prevailing  error  of  regarding 
the  birth  of  Christ,  and  not  the  Crucifixion,  as  the 
crisis  and  close  of  the  Jewish  dispensation.  As 
to  His  birth  date  Scripture  is  silent;  but  His 
death  date  is  fixed  with  definiteness.  For  no  date 
in  history  is  indicated  more  precisely  than  the 
epoch  of  the  Ministry,  namely,  the  i5th  year  of 
Tiberius  Caesar  ;  and  as  the  Crucifixion  occurred 
at  the  fourth  Passover  of  the  Ministry,  its  date  is 
definitely  fixed  by  Scripture  itself  as  inA.D.  32. r 

On  a  subject  of  this  kind  all  heresies  and  fads 
are  to  be  deprecated.  Let  us  accept  the  dates  as 
given  by  our  greatest  chronologist,  Fynes  Clinton. 
But  with  one  slight  correction.  His  "Adam" 
date  is  B.C.  4138,  and  his  "Deluge"  date  2482  ; 
but  for  cogent  reasons  given  by  the  learned 
author  of  the  Ordo  sczclorum,  I  would  add  three 
years  to  the  Gen.  xii.-xiv.  period,  and  fix  the 

1  Luke  iii.  i  is  an  end  of  controversy  on  this  subject  with  all 
who  reject  the  nightmare  system  of  interpreting  Scripture.  The 
matter  is  fully  discussed  in  Daniel  in  the  Critics1  Den,  App.  vi., 
and  also  in  The  Coming  Prince,  to  which  I  beg  to  refer  the  reader. 


1 64       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Creation  at  B.C.  4141,  and  the  Deluge  at  B.C.  2485. 
Clinton  assigns  the  Call  of  Abraham  to  B.C.  2055, 
and  the  Exodus  to  B.C.  1625. 

Clinton  fixed  these  several  dates  without 
reference  to  any  system ;  but  their  striking 
significance  will  be  made  clear  by  the  following 
table  : — 

B.C. 

4141  Adam-The  Creation.       Jl6s6yearsv 

2485  Noah— The  Flood.  2°86  years- 

1430  years.  J 

2055  Abraham — The  Covenant  J 

[430  years.  } 
1625  Moses — The  Law.  J  ^2086  years. 

TU   r      -&   -       J-i656years.J 
A.D.32  Christ — The  Crucifixion.  J 

Now  to  dismiss  these  results  as  accidental  is 
simply  absurd.  Certain  it  is  that  they  are 
absolutely  accidental  in  the  sense  that  they  were 
not  designed  either  by  the  chronologist  or  by  the 
"  Biblical  writers."  But  the  proof  these  figures 
afford  of  a  Divine  plan  of  "  time  and  seasons  "  is 
overwhelming.  And  if  any  one  should  still  in 
sist  that  the  results  are  a  mere  coincidence,  the 
mathematician  will  tell  him  that  the  probabilities 
against  such  a  coincidence  are  altogether  incalcu 
lable.  In  a  word,  such  a  conclusion  is  a  misbelief 
which  revolts  our  intelligence. 


CH.  XII.]          BIBLICAL   CHRONOLOGY  165 

Are  we,  then,  to  conclude  that  the  period  from 
this  "  Coronation  year,"  1902,  to  the  first  appear 
ance  of  the  Adam  race  on  earth  was  exactly  6,042 
years?  By  no  means.  Scripture  itself  will  furnish 
us  with  a  clew  to  the  system  on  which  the  Divine 
chronology  is  framed. 

According  to  i  Kings  vi.  i,  Solomon's  temple 
was  begun  in  the  48oth  year  from  the  Exodus. 
"  If  a  little  of  the  time  and  energy  which  the  critics 
have  expended  in  denouncing  that  passage  as  a 
forgery  or  a  blunder  had  been  devoted  to  searching 
for  its  hidden  meaning,  their  labours  might  per 
chance  have  been  rewarded.  That  the  chronology 
of  the  period  was  known  is  plain  from  Acts  xiii., 
which  enables  us  to  reckon  the  very  same  era  as 
573  years.  How  then  can  this  seeming  error  of 
93  years  be  accounted  for  ?  It  is  precisely  the 
sum  of  the  several  eras  of  the  Servitudes.  The 
inference,  therefore,  is  clear  that  *  the  48oth  year  ' 
means  the  48oth  year  of  national  life  and  national 
responsibilities."  J 


1  Acts  xiii.  1  8-2  1  gives  40  years  in  the  wilderness,  450  years 
under  the  Judges,  and  40  years  for  the  reign  of  Saul.  To  which 
must  be  added  the  40  years  of  David's  reign,  and  the  first  three 
years  of  Solomon,  for  it  was  in  his  fourth  year  that  he  began  to 
build  the  Temple.  The  servitudes  were  to  Mesopotamia  for  8 
years,  to  Moab  for  18  years,  to  Canaan  for  20  years,  to  Midian  for 
7  years,  and  to  the  Philistines  for  40  years.  See  Judges  iii.  8,  14  ;. 
iv.  2,  3  ;  vi.  i.  ;  xiii.  i.  But  8  +  18  +  20  +  7  +  40  years  are  pre~ 


1 66       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Call  this  a  coincidence,  and  the  mathematician 
will  tell  you  again  that  the  probabilities  against 
such  a  coincidence  are  simply  incalculable. 
When  the  rejection  of  one  hypothesis  involves  the 
acceptance  of  another,  mere  unbelief  degenerates 
into  misbelief. 

A  life  without  God  is  death.  Righteousness 
must  keep  a  strict  account,  or  Grace  may  pardon. 
And  when  God  forgives  sin,  He  "  remembers  it 
no  more."  The  record  is  wiped  out,  and  the  time 
it  covers  is  treated  as  a  blank.  The  days  of  our 
servitude  to  sin  are  ignored  in  the  Divine  chron- 


cisely  equal  to  93  years.  To  believe  that  this  is  a  mere 
coincidence  would  involve  an  undue  strain  upon  our  faith. 

Acts.  xiii.  20  is  one  of  the  very  many  passages  where  the  New 
Testament  Revisers  have  corrupted  the  text  through  neglect  of 
the  well-known  principles  by  which  experts  are  guided  in  dealing 
with  conflicting  evidence.  It  is  certain  that  neither  the  apostle 
said,  nor  the  evangelist  wrote,  that  Israel's  enjoyment  of  the  land 
was  limited  to  450  years,  or  that  450  years  elapsed  before  the  era 
of  the  Judges.  The  text  adopted  by  R.V.  is  therefore  clearly 
wrong.  Dean  Alford  regards  it  "  as  an  attempt  at  correcting  the 
difficult  chronology  of  the  verse ; "  and  he  adds,  "  taking  the 
words  as  they  stand,  no  other  sense  can  be  given  to  them  than 
that  the  time  of  the  Judges  lasted  450  years."  That  is,  as  he 
explains,  not  that  the  Judges  ruled  for  450  years — in  which  case 
the  accusative  would  be  used,  as  in  verse  18— but,  as  the  use  of 
the  dative  implies,  that  the  period  until  Saul,  characterised  by  the 
rule  of  the  Judges,  lasted  450  years. 

The  objection  that  I  omit  the  servitude  of  Judges  x.  7,  8  is  met 
by  a  reference  to  the  R.V.  The  punctuation  of  the  passage  in 
Bagster's  Bible  perverts  the  sense.  That  servitude  affected  only 
the  tribes  beyond  Jordan. 


CH.  XII.]          BIBLICAL  CHRONOLOGY  167 

ology.  May  not  this  be  the  explanation  of  the 
enigma  ?  And  if  it  be,  we  shall  be  prepared  to 
find  that  possibly  the  Divine  chronology  of  the 
race  omits  as  many  periods  of  various  lengths  as 
does  the  480  years  era  of  i  Kings  vi. 

But  this  is  mere  conjecture.  What  concerns  us 
is  the  fact,  first,  that  the  chronology  of  the  Old 
Testament  is  framed  upon  a  system,  and  a  system, 
moreover,  which  is  not  of  human  design  ;  and 
secondly,  that  there  is  a  mystic  element  in  it. 
And  if  when  the  Egyptologists  have  been  brought 
to  reason  by  some  process  akin  to  "  cross-examin 
ation,"  it  should  become  clear  that  the  history  of 
our  race  extends  back  far  beyond  the  time  of 
which  Scripture  appears  to  take  cognisance,  the 
discrepancy  may  be  thus  accounted  for. 

The  element  of  design  is  beyond  question,  and 
the  clew  to  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  history  of  the 
favoured  people.  As  we  have  seen,  the  covenant 
with  Abraham  is  made  the  central  date  between 
the  Creation  and  the  Cross,  and  the  ages  measured 
back  and  forward  from  that  epoch  are  each 
divided  into  two  periods  of  equal  length,  but 
in  inverse  order.  And  the  history  of  that  people 
is  marked  throughout  by  cycles  of  "  seventy 
weeks  "  of  years. 

From  the  entrance  into  Canaan  (B.C.   1586-5) 


168       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

to  the  establishment  of  the  monarchy  (B.C.  1096) 
was  490  years. 

From  the  kingdom  (B.C.  1096)  to  the  Servitude 
to  Babylon  (B.C.  606)  was  490  years. 

From  the  conquest  by  Babylon  the  national 
history  of  Judah  was  suspended  until  the  royal 
edict  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus  of  Persia  ordered 
the  rebuilding  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and 
restored  the  old  polity  of  the  Judges  ;  and  then 
began  the  mystic  era  of  490  years  which  con 
stitute  the  "  seventy  weeks  "  of  Daniel's  prophecy. 

And  from  the  dedication  of  Solomon's  temple 
(B.C.  1005)  to  the  dedication  of  the  second  temple 
in  the  sixth  year  of  Darius  Hystaspis  (B.C.  515) 
was  also  a  period  of  490  years. 

Now  all  this  is  deduced  from  works  written  in 
different  ages  by  men  who  had  no  plan  or  purpose 
of  the  kind  in  view.  To  attribute  the  results  to 
chance  is  too  silly  for  discussion,  and  no  intelli 
gent  person  will  hesitate  to  conclude  that  the 
chronology  of  the  Old  Testament  is  part  of  a 
Divine  plan,  or  "  economy  of  times  and  seasons." 
I  deprecate  the  suggestion  that  the  Christian's 
faith  in  the  Bible  depends  on  such  incidental 
proofs  of  its  "hidden  harmony."  But  they  are 
not  altogether  without  value  as  an  antidote  to 
the  scepticism  of  the  critics. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

I  HAVE  a  vivid  recollection  of  a  conversation 
it  was  my  privilege  to  hold  some  years  ago 
with  one  whose  words,  whether  by  voice  or  pen, 
always  command  the  attention  of  the  public,  and 
who  has  identified  himself  to  some  extent  with 
the  Higher  Criticism.  He  took  exception  to  my 
saying  that  the  truth  of  Christianity  is  identified 
with  the  Divine  authority  of  the  Hebrew  Scrip 
tures.  The  teaching  of  the  Lord  Himself,  he 
averred,  was  its  full  and  sufficient  basis  ;  and  for 
that  teaching  we  are  dependent  only  on  the 
Gospels.  And  on  my  pressing  him  he  maintained 
that  the  Gospels  were  inspired  in  a  special  sense 
— in  the  strictest  sense,  indeed,  in  which  both 
Jews  and  Christians  have  spoken  of  inspiration — 
so  that  even  in  such  prolonged  discourses  as  "the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount,"  we  have  an  infallible 
record  of  the  very  words  of  Christ. 

"  But,"  I  urged,  "if  you  accept  the  inspiration 


170       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

of  the  Gospels — and  the  denial  of  it  destroys  the 
only  reasonable  foundation  for  our  faith  in  Christ 
— you  must  accept  also  the  Lord's  teaching  as  to 
the  Divine  authority  of  the  Old  Testament.  You 
want  me  to  believe,  moreover,  that  the  Gospel 
of  Luke,  for  example,  is  fully  and  strictly  inspired, 
but  that  the  Acts,  written  by  the  same  Evangelist, 
is  of  lower  authority  and  value;  and  that  the 
Epistles,  though  written  by  inspired  Apostles, 
were  not  inspired  in  the  same  sense  as  the 
Gospels,  two  of  which  are  by  men  who  were  not 
apostles  at  all." 

To  this  I  received  no  answer.  Nor  is  any 
answer  possible.  Every  free  and  fearless  thinker 
will  side  with  me  in  saying  that  no  compromise 
of  the  kind  thus  proposed  is  tenable.  We  must 
make  choice  between  two  positions  in  this  matter. 
Either  the  Bible  is  "  God-breathed "  (which  is 
the  traditional  belief  of  the  people  of  God  in  all 
ages),  or  else  its  claim  to  our  faith  is  merely  that 
it  consists  in  the  main  of  the  writings  of  men  who 
received  Divine  revelations,  and  therefore  that  it 
contains  such  revelations.  Or  to  state  the  prob 
lem  in  other  words,  either  the  Bible  is  the  Word 
of  God,  or  it  merely  contains  portions  and  truths 
which  may  in  a  sense  be  thus  described. 

And  the  question  here  involved  is  not  affected 


CH.  XIIL]     INSPIRATION   OF   SCRIPTURE  171 

by  doubts  as  to  the  genuineness  of  some  particular 
book  or  books.  If  an  expert  examines  the  con 
tents  of  my  purse  and  convinces  me  that  one  of 
my  coins  is  spurious,  the  discovery  only  serves  to 
give  me  increased  confidence  in  the  value  of  the 
rest.  This  is  not  in  the  least  what  people  usually 
mean  who  say  that  the  Bible  merely  contains  the 
Word  of  God.  They  mean  that  the  human 
element  so  permeates  the  mass  that  no  part  of  it 
is  absolutely  Divine.  The  Divine  element,  there 
fore,  which  is  also  present,  and  on  account  of 
which  they  maintain  in  a  sense  the  Inspiration 
of  the  Scriptures,  is  no  guarantee  of  absolute 
truth.  In  fact  they  give  to  the  word  Inspiration 
"  a  meaning  which  is  in  great  measure  independent 
of  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  writings  so 
inspired."  l 

Now  any  person  of  ordinary  intelligence  can 
see  that  a  Bible  of  this  kind  affords  no  ground 
for  faith.  We  may  say  "  I  think,"  "  I  hope ; " 
but  to  go  on  and  say  "  I  believe,"  "  I  know," 
would  be  unwarrantable.  This  does  not  trouble 
the  mere  library  student ;  but  those  who  are 
actively  engaged  in  the  Christian  ministry,  and 
have  practical  acquaintance  with  the  spiritual 

1  Prebendary  Wace,  D.D.,  Lex  Mosaica,  p.  610. 


172       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

needs  of  men,  know  well  that  this  half  scepticism 
will  not  satisfy  any  who  are  alive  to  the  great 
realities  of  "  sin  and  righteousness  and  judgment." 
For  nothing  short  of  certainty  will  satisfy  the 
awakened  soul. 

Until  recent  years,  in  Britain  at  least,  certainty 
was  found  in  the  Bible  regarded  as  Divinely 
inspired ;  and  here  it  was  that  faith  and  unbelief 
measured  their  distance.  But  it  is  a  notable  test 
of  the  growth  of  "  the  Christian  religion  "  and  the 
decline  of  Christianity,  that  so  many  of  those  who 
give  up  the  Bible  are  eager  to  claim  a  footing  in 
the  camp  of  faith.  The  compromise  which  satis 
fies  some  is  that  to  which  I  have  referred,  the 
setting  up  an  inner  Canon  within  the  Canon  of 
Scripture,  by  arbitrarily  selecting  certain  books 
as  being  in  a  special  sense  inspired.  But  this,  as 
we  have  seen,  is  not  even  consistent  with  itself. 

The  Lux  Mundi  school,  on  the  other  hand, 
has  fallen  back  on  "the  Church"  as  the  source 
of  authority.  In  this  matter  the  position  of  the 
Church  of  Rome  is  that  of  the  Latin  fathers  in 
the  teaching  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries.  It 
was  definitely  formulated  by  Augustine  of  Hippo, 
according  to  whom,  as  Professor  Harnack  puts  it, 
"The  Church  guaranteed  the  truth  of  the  faith, 
when  the  individual  could  not  perceive  it."  But 


CH.  XIIL]     THE   "LUX  MUNDI"   SCHOOL  173 

behind  the  Church  was  an  inspired,  and  therefore 
infallible,  Bible,  of  which  it  was  the  Divinely  ap 
pointed  custodian.1  Now  this  position  is  at  least 
intelligent,  and  it  may  be  stated  in  a  way  that  seems 
to  command  approval.  Our  Courts  of  Justice  are 
not  above  the  law,  but  they  are  the  accredited 
exponents  of  the  law  ;  and  it  rests  with  them,  and 
not  with  private  persons,  to  interpret  the  law. 
And  so  here,  the  Church  does  not  claim  to  supplant 
the  Bible,  but  merely  to  interpret  it  authoritatively 
and  infallibly. 

And  this  was,  with  certain  modifications,  the 
position  maintained  by  English  High  Churchmen 
of  the  last  generation.  But  the  new  school  of 
which  the  editor  of  Lux  Mundi  is  the  apostle, 
sets  up  the  Church,  not  because  the  private 
Christian  is  incompetent  to  interpret  the  infallible 
Bible,  but  because  the  Bible,  so  far  from  being 
infallible,  is  marred  by  error,  and  therefore  affords 
no  sure  basis  of  faith. 

The  ancient  theory  is  thus  described  by 
Professor  Huxley  in  his  last  letter  in  the  Times 
correspondence  cited  in  a  previous  chapter 2  : — 
"The  infallible  Church  guarantees  the  infallibility 


1  This  is  reaffirmed  in  that  wonderful  document,  the  Pope's 
Encyclical  letter  of  November  18,  1893. 
*  Chap.  IX.,  ante. 


174       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

of  the  Bible ;  and  the  infallible  Bible  guarantees 
the  infallibility  of  the  Church.  But  if  the  Hindoo 
who  rested  the  earth-bearing  elephant  upon  a 
tortoise,  and  was  met  by  the  question,  *  On  what 
then  does  the  tortoise  rest  ? '  had  answered,  '  On 
the  elephant,'  the  reply  would  not  have  very 
much  assisted  the  querist." 

But  this  writer's  '  'earth-bearing  elephant "  rests 
upon  a  tortoise  which  rests  upon  nothing.  He 
claims  belief  of  the  facts  recorded  in  the  Gospels, 
but  refuses  to  guarantee  that  the  Gospels  are  free 
from  error ;  and  when  we  demand  why  we  should 
believe  them,  the  answer  we  get  is,  "  To  these 
facts,  in  the  Church's  name,  we  claim  assent."  We 
are  to  accept  the  facts,  he  tells  us,  not  only  with 
out  raising  the  question  whether  the  Scriptures 
which  record  them  are  inspired,  but  without 
exacting  an  assurance  even  that  they  are  true.1 

I  cite  these  witnesses  merely  to  confirm  what 
every  intelligent  thinker  must  recognise,  that 
faith — or,  in  other  words,  Christianity — must 
have  some  fixed  and  sure  foundation.  And  this 
we  have  first  and  chiefly  in  the  words  of  the  Lord 


1  Bishop  Gore's  creed  on  this  subject  is  formulated  in  Lux 
Mundi  (see  p.  340  especially),  a  work  to  which  in  his  more  recent 
treatise  on  the  Church  he  expressly  refers  his  readers.  I  have 
more  fully  discussed  the  question  in  The  Buddha  of  Christendom. 


CH.  XIII.]         OUR  LORD'S  TESTIMONY  175 

Jesus  Christ  Himself.  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall 
pass  away,"  He  declared,  "  but  My  words  shall 
not  pass  away."  His  words  were  not  "  inspired"  : 
they  were  absolutely  Divine  :  it  is  the  record  of 
them  that  is  inspired.  Nor  let  any  one  object 
that  here  my  argument  moves  in  a  vicious  circle. 
For  these  pages  are  addressed  to  Christians,  and 
the  faith  of  the  Christian  can  have  no  other  basis 
than  the  Gospels,  regarded  as  God-breathed 
Scripture.  II  I  were  writing  for  sceptics — if  the 
question  at  issue  were  the  truth  of  Christianity— 
my  argument  would  run  on  different  lines. 

And  from  this  standpoint  it  is  that  we  proceed 
to  consider  the  character  of  the  Bible  as  a  whole. 
As  we  have  seen,  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  are 
accredited  to  us  by  the  Lord  Himself.1  His 
language  respecting  them  is  clear  and  explicit: 
"  The  Scriptures  cannot  be  broken."  "  They  are 
they  which  testify  of  Me."  "It  is  easier  for 
heaven  and  earth  to  pass,  than  one  tittle  of  the 
law  to  fail."  And  the  resurrection  brought  no 
change  in  His  teaching.  Kenosis  theories,  there 
fore,  will  avail  nothing  here.  "  Beginning  at 
Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  He  expounded  unto 
them  in  all  the  Scriptures  the  things  concerning 

1  See  pp.  67-69,  ante. 


176       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Himself."  "  And  He  said  unto  them,  These  are 
the  words  which  I  spake  unto  you  while  I  was 
yet  with  you,  that  all  things  must  be  fulfilled 
which  were  written  in  the  Law  of  Moses,  and  in 
the  Prophets,  and  in  the  Psalms,  concerning 
Me."  l  This  was  the  well  -  known  threefold 
division  of  the  Hebrew  Bible — the  Law,  the 
Prophets,  and  the  other  writings.  The  Book 
of  Psalms  came  first  in  the  last  division  of  the 
Canon,  and  thus  gave  its  name  to  the  whole. 
The  Bible  which  the  Lord  thus  unfolded  to  His 
disciples  was  identical  with  the  Old  Testament 
we  have  in  our  hands  to-day,  not  one  book  or 
chapter  less  or  more,  and  He  thus  accredited  it 
as  a  whole  and  in  every  part  as  being  a  testimony 
to  Himself.2 

But  the  question  remains  whether  the  New 
Testament  has  equal  claims  upon  our  faith. 

Now,  first,  let  us  mark  the  Lord's  assurances 
and  promises  to  those  whom  He  left  as  His 
witnesses  upon  earth.  In  view  of  persecution  to 
come,  He  said  this  to  them,  "  When  they  deliver 
you  up,  take  no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shall 
speak  ;  for  it  shall  be  given  you  in  that  same 
hour  what  ye  shall  speak.  For  it  is  not  ye  that 

1  Luke  xxiv.  27,  44.  a  See  p.  68,  ante. 


CH.  XIIL]          VERBAL   INSPIRATION  177 

speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  your  Father  which 
speaketh  in  you."  l  At  another  time,  and  in  a 
different  connection,  He  said  again,  "  When  they 
bring  you  before  the  synagogues,  and  the  rulers, 
and  the  authorities,  be  not  anxious  how  or  what 
ye  shall  answer,  or  what  ye  shall  say ;  for  the 
Holy  Spirit  shall  teach  you  in  that  very  hour 
what  ye  ought  to  say."  2 

If  "  verbal  inspiration "  is  not  here  implied, 
will  some  one  tell  us  how  it  could  be  more  clearly 
described  or  expressed  ?  Or  are  we  to  suppose 
that  these  men  were  to  utter  Divinely  given 
words  when  defending  themselves  before  the 
courts,  but  that  they  were  to  sink  to  some  lower 
level  of  inspiration  when  declaring  or  expound 
ing  truth  for  the  guidance  of  the  Church  in  all 
ages?  "  He  that  heareth  you  heareth  Me,"  He 
said  in  appointing  them  to  their  ministry  ;  3  and 
so  fully  was  their  testimony  to  rank  with  His 
own,  that  a  worse  doom  than  that  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  shall  befall  the  house  or  city  that 
refused  to  "  hear  their  words."  4 


1  Matt.  x.  19,  20.  *  Luke  xii.  n,  12  (R.V.). 

s  The  fact  that  these  words  have  been  prostituted  by  the 
Church  of  Rome  to  cover  the  gigantic  imposture  of  its  claims, 
must  not  be  allowed  to  rob  us  of  their  true  meaning  and 
legitimate  application. 

4  Matt.  x.  14,  15. 

13 


I78       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

At  the  first  great  Pentecost,  we  read,  "  They 
were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  began 
to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave 
them  utterance."  Again  I  ask,  if  this  be  not 
"  verbal  inspiration,"  what  is  ?  But  though  thus 
inspired  to  preach  to  a  Jerusalem  crowd,  these 
same  men  were  left  to  "  sanctified  mother  wit" 
when  they  sat  down  to  write  the  Gospels  which 
were  to  be  the  basis  of  His  people's  faith  to  the 

end  of  time  ! 

Here  was  His  promise  to  them :  '  The 
Comforter,  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father 
will  send  in  My  name,  He  shall  teach  you  all 
things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance, 
whatsoever  I  have  said  unto  you."  '  If  these 
words  were  fulfilled,  there  is  an  end  of  the 
inspiration  controversy  so  far  as  the  New 
Testament  is  concerned. 

Some  writers  on  Inspiration  convey  the  im 
pression  that  they  regard  it  as  a  sort  of  spiritual 
electricity  or  steam,  which  was  not  to  be  wasted 
by  supplying  more  than  absolutely  necessary. 
And  judging  God  by  their  own  mean  thoughts, 
they  suppose  the  supply  was  so  stingy  as  actually 
to  fail  of  its  purpose  altogether.  For  that 


1  John  xiv.  2.6. 


CH.  XIII.]   INSPIRATION   OF   THE   EPISTLES       179 

purpose  was  not  to  please  or  satisfy  cranks  or 
critics,  but  to  reveal  to  us  with  absolute  definite- 
ness  and  certainty  the  truth  of  God  for  faith  to 
rest  upon,  and  the  will  of  God  for  heart  and 
life  to  follow  and  obey.  And  any  inspiration 
which  comes  short  of  this  is  practically  worth 
less. 

Now  when  we  come  to  the  Epistles  we  must 
read  them  in  the  light  of  these  promises  of 
inspiration  and  infallible  guidance  to  those  who 
wrote  them.  We  know  the  estimate  in  which, 
under  the  Lord's  teaching,  the  Apostle  Peter 
held  the  Old  Testament  prophets ; J  and  yet 
he  makes  those  prophets  subordinate  to  the 
apostles.  "  Unto  whom  it  was  revealed,"  he 
writes,  "  that  not  unto  themselves,  but  unto  us 
did  they  minister  the  things  which  are  now 
reported  unto  you  by  them  that  have  preached 
the  Gospel  unto  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent 
down  from  heaven'' 2  For  they  had  the  presence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  a  new  and  peculiar  sense, 
unknown  even  to  the  prophets  of  Jehovah.  And 


1  See  p.  51,  ante. 

a  i  Pet.  i.  12.  This  is  to  be  understood  by  reference  to  the 
Lord's  promise  that  they  would  have  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  a  special  sense  different  from  that  in  which  He  was  with 
the  people  of  God  before  the  ascension  (John  xiv.  17  ;  xv.  26  ; 
xvi.  7,  13). 


i8o       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

therefore  their  words  were  Divine.  "  The  mouth 
of  Jehovah  hath  spoken  it,"  was  Isaiah's  language 
respecting  the  great  prophecy  of  comfort,  and  he 
added,  "the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for 
ever."  And  these  identical  words  are  applied 
by  the  apostle  to  the  apostolic  preaching.  Their 
word  was  "  the  Word  of  God "  by  which  be 
lieving  souls  were  born  again  to  God — that 
word  which  "  endure th  for  ever."1 

If  this  was  not  verbal  inspiration,  what  is  ? 
But  are  we  to  suppose  that  this  enlightenment 
was  limited  to  Gospel  sermons,  and  denied  them 
when  they  entered  upon  the  discharge  of  their 
highest  apostolic  functions  ?  2 

And  not  only  does  the  Apostle  Peter  place 
apostolic  words  on  a  par  with  those  of  the 
greatest  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  ;  he  goes 
further  and  brackets  the  Epistles  of  the  Apostle 
Paul  with  "  the  other  Scriptures  "  3 — those  holy 
writings  which  "  cannot  be  broken,"  which  were 
held  to  be  "the  Word  of  God"— "the  oracles 
of  God." 

1  i  Pet.  i.  23-25  ;  Isa.  xl.  5-8. 

a  The  Church  of  Christendom  regards  the  preaching  the  Gospel 
to  the  world  as  essentially  an  apostolic  function.  But  this  was 
precisely  the  ministry  which,  after  Pentecost,  the  apostles  left  to 
the  body  of  believers  (Acts  viii.  i,  4.  Mark  the  words,  "  except 
the  apostles."). 

3  2  Pet.  iii.  15,  16. 


CH.  XIII.]     THE   APOSTLE   PAUL'S   CLAIM  181 

And  the  Apostle  Paul  himself,  when  his 
authority  was  questioned  in  Corinth,  wrote  such 
words  as  these  :  "If  any  man  think  himself  to 
be  a  prophet,  or  spiritual,  let  him  acknowledge 
that  the  things  which  I  write  unto  you  are  the 
commandments  of  the  Lord."  I 

Now  in  these  pages  I  am  not  laying  down 
the  law,  or  defending  any  theory  of  inspiration. 
I  am  writing  merely  as  a  Christian  to  Christians, 
and  dealing  with  Scripture  as  I  find  it.  And  I 
have  done  so  in  an  unconventional  way  which 
will  shock  some  old-fashioned  people.  At  the 
risk  of  still  further  offending  them,  I  will  ask 
this  question  :  "If  this  is  not  the  language  of 
an  inspired  apostle,  and  intended  to  place  his 
Epistle  on  a  par  with  the  very  words  of  His  Lord 
and  Master,  must  we  not  write  him  down  as 
either  an  hysterical  fool  or  an  arrogant  and  pro 
fane  ecclesiastic  ?  " 

And  now  I  ask  for  special  attention  to  this 
Apostle's  language  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  same 
Epistle  :  it  is  the  nearest  thing  the  Bible  gives 
to  an  explanation  of  inspiration.  "  Now,"  he 
writes,  "  we  have  received,  not  the  spirit  of  the 
world,  but  the  spirit  which  is  of  God ;  that  we 

x  i  Cor.  xiv.  37. 


182        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

might  know  the  things  that  are  freely  given  us  by 
God.  Which  things  also  we  speak,  not  in  the 
words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth,  comparing  spiritual 
things  with  spiritual." l  For  the  translation  of 
these  last  words,  the  Revisers  suggest  two  alter 
natives.2  But  to  avoid  side  issues,  let  us  take 
the  passage  as  it  stands.  And  I  ask,  If  the 
apostle  had  in  view  the  suggestion  that  inspiration 
extended  only  to  the  " things"  he  wrote,  and  not 
to  the  words  in  which  he  wrote  them,  could  he 
have  met  it  more  definitely  ? 

Not  only  were  his  communications  about  things 
Divinely  revealed,  but  they  were  made,  not  in 
words  such  as  human  wisdom  would  suggest,  but 
in  words  taught  him  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Will 
some  one  tell  us  how  "  verbal  inspiration  "  could 
be  expressed,  if  this  does  not  express  it  ?  Or 
does  the  critic  again  try  to  escape  by  the  quibble 
that  this  kind  of  inspiration  applied  only  to 
apostolic  speaking,  and  not  to  apostolic  writing? 

Not,  I  repeat,  that  such  inspiration  places  the 
Apostle  in  the  position  of  the  Planchette  in  a 

1  i  Cor.  ii.  12,  13. 

2  The  one  is  to  read  combining  for  "comparing,"  in  which 
case  the  clause  means,  "  combining  the  things  of  the  Spirit  with 
the  words  which  the  Spirit  teaches  us  to  use  in  regard  to  them  "  ; 
and  the  other  is,  "  interpreting  spiritual  things  to  spiritual  men." 


CH.  XIII.]  THE   APOCALYPSE  183 

spiritualistic  stance — as  a  sort  of  animated  type 
writing  machine.  In  inspiration  God  uses  the 
mind  as  well  as  the  hand  of  man,  and  He  gives 
His  revelation  in  human  words — the  language 
of  the  agent  whom  He  thus  employs.1 

I  have  dealt  thus  briefly  with  the  Epistles.  Of 
the  Apocalypse  I  need  not  speak  at  all  ;  for  all 
must  recognise  that  if  it  be  not  what  it  claims  to 
be — a  Divine  revelation — its  visions  may  be 
dismissed  as  the  lucubration  of  a  disordered 
brain.  And  between  these  alternatives  the 
Christian  will  not  hesitate.  It  fitly  closes  the 
sacred  volume.  "It  recapitulates  and  confirms 
all  the  preceding  testimony  of  prophets  and 
apostles.  As  it  refers  to  the  history  of  God's 
kingdom  on  earth  from  the  Garden  of  Eden  to 
the  reign  of  David — so  it  brings  before  us,  in 
new  combinations,  and  with  a  light  fuller  and 
brighter,  the  symbolism  of  Isaiah  and  Daniel,  of 
Ezekiel  and  Zechariah.  The  glorious  facts  and 
doctrines  revealed  in  the  Gospels  and  Epistles,  are 
presented  here  in  the  most  condensed  form.  Only 
in  the  light  of  its  predecessors  can  this  Book  be 
understood.  The  wonderful  and  manifold  threads 
laid  during  many  centuries  are  here  connected  ; 

1  See  pp.  86,  87  ante. 


1 84       THE   BIBLE  AND    MODERN   CRITICISM 

the  voices  of  all  previous  witnesses  are  blended 
together  for  the  last  time,  in  harmony  majestic 
and  melodious."  I 

"But,"  it  will  be  said,  "if  we  come  down  to 
the  prosaic  level  of  fact,  all  this  is  met  and  answered 
by  the  errors  of  the  New  Testament ;  and  it  is 
chiefly  in  the  Gospels — the  pivot  on  which  all  the 
rest  is  made  to  turn,  that  these  errors  will  be 
found."  This  claims  consideration,  and  the 
following  chapters  shall  be  devoted  to  it. 

1  The  words  are  Adolph  Saphir's. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

TO  poison  a  healthy  body  with  the  virus  of 
a  foul  disease  is  horrible,  but  yet  when 
smallpox  is  raging  vaccination  becomes  a  duty. 
And  in  these  days  when  an  epidemic  of  scepticism 
prevails,  and  no  one  can  hear  a  sermon  or  read 
a  book  without  risk  of  infection,  inoculation  by 
a  friendly  hand  may  possiby  serve  to  avert  a 
malignant  attack  of  the  disease. 

Let  us  be  done  with  grandmotherly  theology. 
The  dark  ages  are  past  and  gone.  We  belong 
to  an  age  of  enlightenment,  The  Twentieth 
Century  has  dawned.  No  Protestant,  moreover, 
should  fear  free  thought.  To  fall  back  upon 
authority  and  traditional  beliefs  is  sheer  apostasy 
from  the  principles  of  the  Reformation. 

Beneath  appeals  like  these  there  lies  a  definite 
element  of  truth.  And,  truth  or  no  truth,  they 
are  always  popular.  I  am  bound,  moreover,  in 

honesty   to   confess   that   personally    I    am   pre- 

185 


186       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

disposed  to  respond  to  them.  Every  book  I 
have  written  gives  proof  of  fearlessness  in 
bringing  critical  methods  to  bear  upon  the  study 
of  Scripture.  I  cannot  associate  myself  with  any 
general  campaign  against  criticism.  My  quarrel 
with  the  Higher  Criticism  is  not  because  it  is 
criticism,  but  because,  instead  of  being  what  it 
claims  to  be,  it  is  criticism  of  a  spurious 
type. 

I  have  already  referred  to  the  Ptolemaic 
System.  "  Ptolemy  the  Astronomer  was  a 
*  Higher  Critic.'  The  belief  had  long  prevailed 
that  the  sun  was  the  centre  of  our  system  ;  but  he 
had  no  difficulty  in  proving  that  this  traditional 
belief  was  untenable.  Once  he  got  men  to 
consider  the  matter  from  their  own  standpoint, 
all  could  see  the  absurdity  of  supposing  that  the 
earth  on  which  they  lived  and  moved  was  flying 
helter-skelter  round  the  sun.  And  nothing  more 
was  needed  but  to  keep  the  mind  occupied  with 
the  many  apparent  difficulties  of  the  hypothesis 
he  opposed,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  thought  of 
the  few  but  insurmountable  difficulties  of  the 
theory  he  advocated.  The  Professors  and 
experts  were  convinced,  the  multitude  followed 
suit,  and  for  more  than  a  thousand  years  the 
puerilities  of  the  Ptolemaic  System  held  sway, 


CH.  XIV.]     THE   "PTOLEMAIC   SYSTEM"  187 

with  the  sanction  of  infallible  science  and  the 
blessing  of  an  infallible  Church."  I 

Let  us  then  turn  to  study  the  Scriptures  on 
the  "  Ptolemaic  System."  This  kind  of  work 
is  not  to  my  liking,  but  I  think  I  could  do  it  as 
well  as  the  Professors.  Shutting  out  God,  let  us 
insist  on  dealing  with  the  Bible  from  the  purely 
human  standpoint,  and  treat  it  as  a  purely  human 
book.  Were  I  writing  a  many-volumed  work, 
I  should  like  to  go  over  the  whole  of  the  Old  and 
New  Testament  in  this  way.  But  here  I  must 
be  content  to  take  a  test  case,  as  the  lawyers 
would  say  ;  and  I  cannot  do  better  than  keep  to 
the  Gospels.  And  still  further  to  limit  the 
subject,  I  will  confine  myself  to  the  First  and 
the  Fourth.  I  want  to  inoculate  the  reader  with 
the  scepticism  virus. 

Apart  from  superstition  and  the  thraldom  of 
received  opinions,  can  any  honest-minded  person 
fail  to  recognise  that  these  Gospels  receive  their 
colour  and  mould  from  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the 
men  who  wrote  them  ?  Could  we  not  name  a 
"  Matthew  "  and  a  "  John  "  within  the  circle  of 
our  own  acquaintance  ?  Matthew  is  a  man  of 
narrow  mind  and  heart,  who  has  not  a  thought 

1  Daniel  in  the  Critics'  Den,  1902  Ed.,  p.  146. 


i88        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN  CRITICISM 

beyond  the  interests  of  his  little  land  and  people. 
The  very  first  sentence  of  his  book  gives  proof 
of  this.  His  Messiah  is  the  son  of  Abraham  the 
Arab  chief,  and  of  David  the  petty  tribal  king. 
The  triviality  of  Joseph's  pedigree  is  his  next 
concern.  He  then  goes  on  to  record  the  birth 
of  the  sacred  child  as  connected  with  a  dream 
and  a  prophecy  ;  and  he  makes  occasion  to  bring 
in  a  story  of  his  being  hailed,  even  in  infancy,  as 
11  King  of  the  Jews,"  and  being  regarded  by 
king  Herod  as  a  rival  claimant  to  his  throne. 

The  preaching  attributed  to  the  Messiah  is 
another  indication  of  the  writer's  character.  We 
all  know  the  sort  of  man  who  delights  in  the 
pedantry  of  discarding  familiar  expressions,  and 
of  using  phrases  peculiar  to  himself.  Such  a  man 
was  Matthew.  Three-and-thirty  times  he  insists 
on  writing  "kingdom  of  heaven,"  though  not 
one  of  all  the  other  writers  of  the  New  Testament 
employs  the  expression  even  once.  It  was  not 
that  he  coined  it.  He  borrowed  it  from  the  Book 
of  Daniel,  which  relates  so  specially  to  the  fortunes 
of  the  Jewish  nation. 

Then  comes  "the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,"  that 
crux  of  the  orthodox.  People  of  a  certain  sort 
pretend  that  the  world  could  be  governed  on  the 
principles  there  enunciated  ;  but  they  are  careful 


CH.  XIV.]     THE  GOSPEL  OF   MATTHEW  189 

not  to  act  on  them  when  their  own  interests  are 
involved.  This  is  followed  by  the  record  of  a  few 
extraordinary  miracles  ;  and  next  we  come  to  the 
sending  out  of  the  disciples.  And  what  a  com 
mission  they  received,  if  Matthew  may  be  trusted  ! 
"  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,  and  into 
any  city  of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not :  but  go 
rather  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  House  of  Israel."  I 
Jews,  and  none  but  Jews,  are  even  to  hear  about 
the  Saviour  of  the  world  !  Could  the  wit  of  man 
frame  words  more  inconsistent  with  what  the  rest 
of  the  New  Testament  declares  to  be  the  spirit 
and  scope  of  Christianity ! 2 

But  why  go  on  ?  From  the  first  chapter  to  the 
last  we  shall  search  in  vain  for  a  single  sentence 
to  raise  the  narrative  above  the  plane  of  Jewish 
interests  and  hopes.  Even  the  great  prophecy 
recorded  in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter  has 
Jerusalem  for  its  centre.  And  the  vision  of 
judgment  in  the  chapter  which  follows  represents 
blessing  or  doom  to  the  Gentiles  according  as 

1  Matt.  x.  5,  6. 

*  "  If  Christianity  consist  of  the  doctrines  preached  in  the 
Fourth  Gospel  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  Synoptists  do  not 
teach  Christianity  at  all.  The  extraordinary  phenomenon  is 
presented  of  three  Gospels,  each  professing  to  be  complete  in 
itself,  and  to  convey  the  good  tidings  of  salvation  to  man,  which 
have  actually  omitted  the  doctrines  which  are  the  conditions  of 
that  salvation  "  (Supernatural  Religion,  ii.  465). 


1 90       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

they  befriended  or  persecuted  the  favoured  nation. 
And  finally,  even  the  great  commission  after  the 
resurrection  is  represented  here  as  addressed  to 
Jews,  charging  them  to  baptize  and  teach  the 
Gentiles.1 

The  change  from  the  First  Gospel  to  the  Fourth 
is  like  emerging  from  a  gloomy  cloister  to  the 
free  air  of  heaven  and  the  open  sunshine.  The 
True  Light  was  in  the  world — His  own  world, 
the  world  that  He  had  made.  "  The  Word  was 
made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us,  full  of  grace  and 
truth."  And  the  secret  of  His  coming  was 
because  God  loved  the  world  ;  and  the  purpose 
of  it  was  "  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life."  WHO 
SOEVER.  The  narrow  channel  of  a  nation's  hopes 
is  lost  in  the  great  wide  sea  of  Divine  love.  And 
there  is  life,  and  not  judgment,  for  the  sinner 
who  believes.  "  For  God  sent  not  His  Son  into 
the  world  to  condemn  the  world  ;  but  that  the 
world  through  Him  might  be  saved." 

But  here  a  doubt  obtrudes  itself :  a  cloud 
appears  and  shuts  out  our  sunshine.  If  the 
peculiarities  of  the  First  Gospel  be  due  to  the 

1  This  is  true  ;  but  the  inference  here  drawn  from  it  is,  I  need 
not  say,  entirely  false.  The  commission  is  a  prophetic  one. 
See  The  Buddha  of  Christendom,  pp.  270-273. 


CH.  XIV.]       DIFFICULTIES   AND   DOUBTS  191 

character  of  the  writer  of  it,  may  not  also  the 
distinctive  features  of  the  Fourth  be  thus  ac 
counted  for.  And  if  it  be  clear  that  both  cannot 
be  inspired,  what  ground  is  left  for  claiming  a 
Divine  authorship  for  either  ? 

Difficulties  and  doubts  of  this  kind  troubled  me 
even  before  I  left  school.  But  fortunately  I  did 
not  then  know  that  they  were  supposed  to  be 
proof  of  abnormal  cleverness.  For  though  in 
childhood  I  often  met  a  pundit  who,  as  I  after 
wards  discovered,  was  one  of  the  pioneers  of 
Higher  Criticism  in  this  country,  he  never  tried 
to  corrupt  the  faith  of  the  young,  as  so  many  of 
his  successors  do  to-day.  And  had  he  done  so  he 
might  possibly  have  failed  to  influence  me ;  for 
we  children  were  impressed  not  so  much  by  his 
great  learning  as  by  his  great  silliness.  So  in 
my  schoolboy  days,  instead  of  thinking  I  was 
very  clever,  I  took  for  granted  I  was  very 
wicked ;  and  I  generally  dismissed  the  matter  in 
the  hope  that  when  I  became  a  Christian  in  the 
true  and  real  sense,  I  should  be  able  to  read  the 
Bible  differently,  and  to  understand  things  which 
then  seemed  to  me  inexplicable — a  hope  that  was 
in  due  time  realised,  though  not  in  the  trans 
cendental  way  that  I  expected. 

Some    people    seem   to   enjoy  parading  their 


192       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

inner  experiences.  To  me  it  is  an  ordeal.  But 
I  will  submit  to  it  if  others  can  be  helped  thereby. 
In  the  first  enthusiasm  of  my  Christian  life  I 
gave  no  thought  to  difficulties  such  as  these. 
But  there  are  times,  as  every  Christian  knows, 
"when  neither  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days  appear, 
and  no  small  tempest  lies  on  us "  ;  and  at  a 
crisis  of  this  kind  these  difficulties  all  came  back  ; 
and  in  the  light  of  knowledge  gained  in  my 
college  days,  they  seemed  more  utterly  insoluble 
than  ever. 

Men  place  in  parallel  columns  the  events 
recorded  in  the  Evangelists'  narratives,  and  call 
this  a  "  Harmony  of  the  Gospels."  What  I 
wanted  was  a  clew  to  some  sort  of  harmony  in 
the  doctrines  they  taught.  A  systematic  study 
of  them  brought  me  no  relief.  I  could  make 
something  of  the  Synoptists,  as  they  are  called ; 
but  John  refused  to  blend  with  Matthew.  I 
turned  to  Commentaries  and  "  Introductions,"  and 
found  in  them  almost  everything  except  what  I 
was  in  search  of.  If  I  could  have  satisfied 
myself  that  the  Fourth  Gospel  was  Divinely  in 
spired,  I  should  have  been  willing  to  throw  over 
the  other  three.  But  proof  of  this  was  wanting. 
It  was  written  long  after  the  other  Gospels,  and 
therefore,  viewed  as  a  human  document,  it  was 
less  trustworthy  than  the  rest. 


193 


CH.  XIV.]    DIFFICULTIES  AND  DOUBTS 

Discoveries  of  this  kind  delight  a  Higher  Critic ; 
to  me  they  gave  only  pain.     If  a  man  has  cogent 
proof  that   his   father   is   a   rogue    or    his    wife 
unfaithful,   he   must  face  the  fact,  and  consider 
how  to  act  on  it.     But  one  who  would  accept  the 
proof  with  alacrity  and  pleasure  is  not  more  utterly 
contemptible  than  the  man  who  can  contemplate 
the  collapse  of  faith  in  the  Bible  without  distress, 
if  not  dismay.     I   kept  my  difficulties  to  myself, 
until  a  lecture  I  heard  one  evening  in  a  friend's 
drawing-room  gave  me  a  clew  to  the  solution  of 
them ;  and  the  Bible  became  a  new  book  to  me 
from   that  hour.     At  this  point  I  will  drop  the 
personal  element  in  my  narrative,  and  give   in 
another     chapter     the     results     attained.       To 
describe  the  steps  by  which  those  results  were 
reached  would  be,   if  not  uninteresting,  at  least 
unprofitable. 


CHAPTER  XV 

THE  Bible  is  the  history  of  man."     "The 
Gospels  were  written  to  teach  the  way  of 
salvation."     These  are  but  specimens  of  popular 
errors    which    serve    to   make   those   who    hold 
them  an  easy  prey  to  the  sceptics. 

Save  for  a  brief  preface  of  eleven  chapters, 
covering  a  period  measured  by  thousands  of  years, 
the  burden  of  the  Old  Testament  is  the  story  of 
the  Hebrew  race.  And  the  first  book  of  the 
New  Testament  is  the  sequel  and  conclusion  of 
the  Old.  The  Gospels  are  not  a  set  of  faulty  and 
erring  narratives,  written  with  a  common  object. 
Their  purpose  in  the  Divine  scheme  of  revelation 
is  to  present  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  four 
great  aspects  of  His  mission  and  work, I  as 
Israel's  Messiah,  Jehovah's  Servant,  Son  of  Man 
and  Son  of  God.  And  it  is  by  a  true  instinct 
that  earnest  souls  turn  to  the  Fourth  Gospel  when 

1  "  Four  discriminated  aspects  of  their  common  subject,  .  .  . 
but  one  portrait "  (Bampton  Lectures,  1864). 

194 


CH.  XV.] 


MATTHEW  AND   JOHN 


they  seek  the  path  of  life ;  for  the  words  which 
close  the  twentieth  chapter  describe  the  contents 
of  every  page,  "  These  are  written  that  ye  might 
believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ; 
and  that  believing  ye  might  have  life  through 
His  name." 

I  must  adhere  to  the  limits  I  have  set  myself, 
and  deal  only  here  with  Matthew  and  John. 
Does  any  Christian  really  believe  that  the  striking 
differences  between  the  two,  from  first  to  last,  can 
be  explained  on  the  theory  that  the  one  apostle 
was  a  bigoted  Jew  and  the  other  a  dreamy 
enthusiast  ? 

And  if  the  Gospels  be  mere  human  docu 
ments,  nothing  less  than  this  will  account  for  the 
facts.  Both  men  received  the  same  teaching 
throughout  the  whole  period  of  the  Ministry. 
Both  heard  those  "  most  sacred  of  all  sacred 
words  "  uttered  upon  the  eve  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Both  were  re-commissioned  in  the  same  terms 
after  the  resurrection.  And  yet  as  we  study  the 
First  Gospel — I  here  repeat  as  fact  and  truth  what 
I  have  already  suggested  as  a  sceptical  difficulty 
— "  From  the  first  chapter  to  the  last  we  shall 
search  in  vain  for  a  single  sentence  to  raise  the 
narrative  above  the  plane  of  Jewish  interests  and 
hopes." 


196       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Let  me  give  a  startling  instance  of  the  contrast 
in  the  teaching.  The  Fourth  Gospel  tells  of  eternal 
life  as  the  free  gift  of  God  to  every  sinner  who 
believes  in  Christ ;  whereas  in  the  First  Gospel 
the  only  passages  where  eternal  life  is  mentioned, l 
deal  with  it  on  strictly  Old  Testament  lines. 
There  are  two  possible  explanations  of  all  this. 
Either  one  of  the  apostles  of  the  Lord — men 
specially  chosen  to  be  His  witnesses  in  a  wholly 
peculiar  sense — deliberately  set  himself  to  mis 
represent  his  Master's  mission  and  pervert  His 
teaching ;  or  else  he  did  this  innocently,  through 
sheer  stupidity  and  ignorance.  Will  any  Chris 
tian  dare  to  identify  himself  with  either  of  these 
hypotheses  ?  Can  any  one — Christian  or  not — 
suggest  a  third  ? 

Yes,  a  third  is  possible  ;  but  it  assumes  that 
the  Gospels  arena?  mere  human  records.  " Christ 
was  a  minister  of  the  circumcision  for  the  truth 
of  God  to  confirm  the  promises  made  unto  the 
fathers."2  And  "  the  Hebrew  Gospel,"  as  it  is 


1  Matt.  xix.  1 6,  29  ;  xxv.  40-46. 

a  Rom.  xv.  8.  The  next  verse  runs  on,  "  And  that  the  Gentiles 
might  glorify  God  for  His  mercy."  To  the  people  of  the  cove 
nant  His  coming  was  a  matter  of  promise  :  to  Gentiles  (who  are 
"  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise  " — Ephes.  ii.  12),  it  was 
pure  mercy.  The  Divine  accuracy  of  Holy  Scripture  never 
misses  distinctions  such  as  this. 


CH.  XV.]  THE   GOSPEL  OF  JOHN  197 

sometimes  called,   is  the   Divine  record  of  this 
"  Ministry  of  the  Circumcision." 

With  this  clew  to  guide  us  we  shall  find  that 
the  very  same  characteristics  which,  in  my  case 
at  least,  tempted  to  unbelief,  now  establish  faith. 
People  read  the  New  Testament  backwards,  and 
with  erroneous  preconceptions  of  its  scheme  and 
scope ;  and  when  they  reach  its  preface  they 
demand,  "What  has  a  Jewish  genealogy  to  do 
with  the  advent  of  the  Son  of  God  as  the  Saviour 
of  the  world?"  The  answer  is,  " Absolutely 
nothing"  ;  and  the  Gospel  which  so  presents  Him 
omits  even  the  mention  of  His  birth.  The  Bible 
opens  with  the  declaration,  "In  the  beginning 
created  GOD  "  : l  so  here,  "  In  the  beginning  was 
THE  WORD.2  And  then,  "The  Word  was  made 
flesh  and  dwelt  among  us. "  How  made  flesh  it 
matters  not.  "  He  was  in  the  world,  and  the 
world  was  made  by  Him,  and  the  world  knew 
Him  not.  But  as  many  as  received  Him  to 
them  gave  He  the  right  to  become  children  of 
God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  His  name." 

The  casual  reader  will  miss  nothing  from  these 
words ;  and  yet  the  omission  I  have  made  is  one 
of  the  utmost  moment.  I  have  quoted  the  tenth 

1  Gen.  i.  i.     This  is  the  order  of  the  words  in  the  Hebrew. 

2  John  i.  i. 


198       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

and  twelfth  verses  ;  here  is  the  eleventh  :  "  He 
came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him 
not."* 

This  brief  sentence  gives  the  whole  purpose 
and  scope  of  the  First  Gospel.  Now  we  can 
appreciate  its  opening  words,  "  The  book  of  the 
generation  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  David,  the 
son  of  Abraham."  He  was  "a  minister  of  the 
circumcision,"  the  earthly  people  of  the  covenant 
— "  of  whom,"  as  the  Apostle  Paul  declares,  "  is 
Christ  as  concerning  the  flesh."2  And  he  speaks 
of  Him  again  as  "of  the  seed  of  David."3 
Hence  His  genealogy  is  traced  to  Abraham,  the 
father  of  the  covenant  and  the  founder  of  the 
race,  and  to  David,  the  head  of  the  royal 
house. 4  Hence,  too,  the  emphasis  laid  upon  the 
fact  of  his  birth  in  Bethlehem,  the  royal  city. 

Let  me  repeat  all  this  in  borrowed  words. 
"  The  record  of  St.  Matthew,  ever  recognised  as 
the  Hebrew  Gospel,  is  the  true  commencement  of 
the  New  Testament,  showing  how  it  grows  out  of 


1  Our  English  idiom  cannot  express  the  meaning  here  :  the 
margin  of  R.V.  gives  one  of  the  "  schoolboy  translations "  that 
so  often  mar  that  work.  The  French  is  more  apt :  "  II  est  venu 
chez  soi,  et  les  siens  ne  1'ont  point  recu." 

a  Rom.  ix.  5,  R.V.  3  2  Tim.  ii.  8. 

4  As  regards  the  difference  between  the  genealogies  of  Matthew 
and  Luke,  see  Appendix,  Note  IV. 


CH.  XV.]  CANON  BERNARD  ON  MATTHEW    199 

the  Old,  and  presenting  the  manifestation  of  the 
Son  of  God  not  as  a  detached  phenomenon,  but 
as  the  predestined  completion  of  the  long  course 
of  historic  dispensations.  It  is  the  Book  of  the 
generation  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  David,  the 
Son  of  Abraham.  It  founds  itself  on  the  ideas 
of  the  old  covenant.  It  refers  at  every  step, 
especially  in  its  earlier  chapters,  to  the  former 
Scriptures,  noting  how  that  was  fulfilled  which 
was  spoken  by  the  prophets.  It  is  a  history  of 
fulfilment,  presenting  the  Lord  as  the  fulfiller  of 
all  righteousness,  the  fulfiller  of  the  Law  and  the 
Prophets,  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil.  It 
sets  Him  forth  as  a  King  and  Lawgiver  in  that 
kingdom  of  heaven  for  which  a  birthplace  and  a 
home  had  been  prepared  in  Israel :  and  thus 
corresponds  to  that  period  in  the  historical  course 
of  events  when  the  word  was  preached  to  none 
but  to  the  Jews  only."1 

And  now  it  only  remains  for  me  to  give,  in 
this  new  light,  a  brief  sketch  of  the  contents  of 

1  Canon  Bernard's  Progress  of  Doctrine  in  the  New  Testament, 
being  the  "  Bampton  Lectures/'  1864.  This  book,  long  out  of 
print,  but  now  happily  reissued,  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  of 
the  Bampton  series.  Such  another,  though  of  a  wholly  different 
character,  is  Dr.  Hatch's  volume  of  1880.  Though  The  Organi 
sation  of  the  Early  Christian  Churches  is  one  of  the  greatest 
theological  books  of  the  age,  it  appears  to  be  systematically 
"boycotted"  by  High  Church  and  Low  Church  alike. 


200       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Matthew's  Gospel.  The  briefest  will  suffice  ;  for 
others  will  find,  as  I  did,  that  once  the  key  is  in 
their  hands,  they  can  open  the  treasure  for  them 
selves.  One  proviso,  however,  is  essential.  The 
Old  Testament  teems  with  prophecies  and  pro 
mises  relating  to  the  Jewish  race.  But  the 
way  some  people  dispose  of  these  is  to  appro 
priate  most  of  them  to  the  Gentile  Church  of 
this  dispensation,  and  to  dismiss  the  rest  as 
Hebrew  poetry.  And  with  this  sort  of  "  inter 
pretation"  of  Scripture  I  can  make  no  terms. 
Those  who  adopt  it  may  skip  the  rest  of  this 
chapter :  it  will  have  no  meaning  for  them. 

Between  the  second  chapter  of  Matthew  and 
the  third,  there  is  an  interval  of  more  than  thirty 
years.  The  third  chapter  speaks  of  the  Baptist's 
mission,  and  records  the  baptism  of  Christ.  The 
Old  Testament  closes  with  the  promise,  "  Behold, 
I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet " ;  and  the 
opening  page  of  the  New  Testament  tells  of  the 
ministry  of  him  who  came  "in  the  spirit  and 
power  of  Elias."  John  was  Elijah,  if  they  would 
receive  him. I  The  baptism  of  Christ  is  an  enigma 
to  those  who  attach  a  pagan  meaning  to  the 


1  Matt.  xi.  14,  R.V.  (margin}.  On  this  passage  see  by  all  means 
Dean  Alford's  note,  as  a  correction  to  the  prevailing  scepticism  on 
this  subject. 


CH.  XV.]      PREACHING  THE   KINGDOM  201 

ordinance.  His  purpose  was  to  identify  Himself 
with  the  true  remnant  of  the  nation.  Then 
followed  "  the  Temptation  "  ;  and  "  from  that 
time "  His  ministry  began.  The  Lord  Himself 
took  up  the  Baptist's  testimony,  "  Repent,  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."1  Literally, 
"  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  " — an  expression 
used  three  and  thirty  times  in  Matthew,  and  never 
once  again  in  the  New  Testament.2  The  fulfil 
ment  was  at  hand  of  all  that  God  had  prophesied 
and  promised  of  a  time  when  the  heavens  would 
rule  over  the  earth — a  reign  of  righteousness  and 
peace. 

The  closing  verses  of  the  fourth  chapter  receive 
but  little  notice,  and  yet  their  importance  in  the 
narrative  is  immense.  "  He  went  about  ALL 
Galilee  teaching  in  their  synagogues  and  preach 
ing  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  and  healing  ALL 
manner  of  sickness  and  ALL  manner  of  disease 
among  the  people.  And  His  fame  went  through 
out  all  Syria;  and  they  brought  unto  Him  ALL 
sick  people  .  .  .  and  He  healed  them.  And 
there  followed  Him  great  multitudes  of  people" 
from  every  part  of  all  the  land. 

The  seeming  triumph  of  this  first  circuit  of  the 

*  See  Matt.  iii.  2 ;  iv.  17  ;  x.  7. 

3  See  Appendix,  Note  V. 


202        THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Ministry  led  to  the  proclamation  of  the  principles 
of  that  kingdom  which  He  preached — the  spiritual 
and  moral  atmosphere  which  must  prevail  where 
God  rules.  For  such  is  the  purpose  of  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Men  are  always  ready 
for  Divine  blessing  if  only  they  can  have  it  on 
their  own  terms.  If  after  working  such  miracles 
the  Lord  had  proclaimed  a  holy  war,  the  nation 
would  have  rallied  round  Him.  Or  had  He  pro 
claimed  His  "  brotherhood  "with  fallen  man — had 
He  preached  a  " gospel  of  humanity" — their 
heathen  conquerors  even  might  have  hailed  Him 
as  a  deliverer  and  carried  Him  in  triumph  to  the 
deserted  palace  of  the  Caesars  ;  for  never,  perhaps, 
before  or  since,  was  the  pagan  world  so  full  of 
weariness  and  despair  as  in  the  hateful  reign  of 
Tiberius.1 

But  His  purpose  was  far  different.  Christen 
dom  has  taught,  throughout  its  history,  that  by 
His  advent  He  fulfilled  the  law  and  ignored  the 
prophets  ;  His  contemporaries  looked  to  Him  to 
fulfil  the  prophets  while  accepting  their  own  in 
terpretation  of  the  law.  But  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  makes  it  as  clear  as  light  that  if  the 


1  During  the  period  of  the  Ministry,  Tiberius  was  absent  from 
Rome.  He  had  withdrawn  to  the  island  of  Caprese,  where  he 
gave  himself  up  to  an  orgy  of  sensuality. 


CH.  XV.]          THE   LORD'S   MIRACLES  203 

heavens  are  to  rule  the  earth,  the  will  of  God 
must  be  "  done  on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven."  I 

The  narrative  next  records  a  series  of  miracles 
of  special  significance.  There  was  One  in  Israel 
who  could  put  His  hand  upon  a  leper  and  yet  be 
undefiled2;  who  could  heal  the  sick  by  a  word,  3 
or  by  a  touch  4 ;  who  could  command  the  winds 
and  waves, 5  and  control  the  powers  of  hell 6  ;  who 
could  not  only  heal  the  body,  but  cure  and  save 
the  soul. 7  And  as  a  crowning  public  proof  that 
His  power  reached  to  the  under  world,  He  could 
even  raise  the  dead.8 

This  was  the  period  of  His  personal  ministry. 
He  afterwards  commissioned  the  Apostles,  giving 
them  the  same  powers  He  Himself  had  exercised,9 
and  entrusting  them  with  the  same  testimony, 
"  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  Hence 
the  limit  placed  upon  their  ministry  ;  for  "  the 

1  That  the  question  should  even  be  raised  whether  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  should  guide  men  now  in  government  is  proof  of 
the  hopeless  ignorance  of  Scripture  which  prevails.  It  is  teach 
ing  for  the  governed  in  the  days  of  the  kingdom.  Its  principles 
are  eternal,  but  some  of  the  definite  precepts  of  this  "  kingdom  " 
teaching  were  expressly  cancelled  by  our  Lord  Himself  (see, 
e.g.,  Luke  xxii.  35,  36).  The  common  belief  appears  to  be  that 
the  Lord's  presence  or  absence  is  an  element  of  no  importance 
whatever.  But  that  is  not  His  view  of  the  matter  ! 

3  Matt.  viii.  3.  3  Ibid.  viii.  13.  4  Ibid.  viii.  15. 

s  Ibid.  viii.  26.  6  Ibid.  viii.  28-32.  *  Ibid.  ix.  2. 

8  Ibid.  ix.  25.  9  Ibid.  x.  8. 


204       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

kingdom  of  heaven "  is  the  Messianic  kingdom 
in  its  earthly  aspect. 

Chapter  xii.  records  the  crisis  which  changed 
the  entire  character  of  His  public  ministry.  The 
religious  leaders  of  the  nation  had  seen  His 
miracles  and  heard  His  words — they  had  received 
all  the  public  proofs  of  His  Messiahship ;  and 
what  was  their  response  ?  They  "  went  out  and 
took  counsel  against  Him  how  they  might  destroy 
Him."1  The  Lord's  answer  was  to  ''withdraw 
Himself;"  and  though  the  multitudes  which 
crowded  after  Him  still  proved  His  power  to 
heal,  instead  of  bidding  them,  as  in  the  past,  to 
tell  others  of  His  fame,  He  "  charged  them  that 
they  should  not  make  Him  known."  The  chapter 
closes  with  words  of  awful  judgment  upon  that 
"  wicked  generation  "  that  had  thus  rejected  Him.2 

His  rejection  gave  a  new  character  also  to  His 
teaching.  Till  then  it  had  been  open  :  now  it 
became  veiled  in  parables.  The  rejection  of  the 
light  brings  judicial  blindness.  The  parables 
were  given  that  all  might  hear  the  new  phase  of 
"kingdom"  teaching,  but  that  only  those  whose 
eyes  and  ears  were  spiritually  open  should  know 
and  understand  it.3 

1  Matt.  xii.  14.  *  Ver.  45.  a  Matt.  xiii.  10-17. 


CH.  XV.]     PARABLES  OF  MATTHEW  XIII.  205 

No  greater  contribution  has  ever  been  made  to 
theology  than  will  be  his  who  fully  and  intelligently 
elucidates  the  teaching  of  the  thirteenth  chapter 
of  Matthew.  It  contains  seven  parables.  The 
first  is  the  preface  to  the  rest,  and  governs  them 
all.  The  Divine  description  of  their  subject  and 
scope  is  "the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  I  There  was  nothing  secret  about  the 
kingdom  foretold  in  prophecy  and  preached  by 
the  Lord  and  His  apostles.  But  a  heavenly 
kingdom  in  which  a  king  reigning  in  righteous 
ness  gives  place  to  a  sower  sowing  seed,  is  an 
utter  enigma.  The  theories  of  expositors  here 
are  no  answer  to  the  ridicule  of  rationalists.  But 
the  Divine  explanation  of  the  "  mystery  "  silences 
both  the  ridicule  and  the  theories. 

Human  apostasy  and  sin  cannot  thwart  God's 
purposes,  but  they  may  and  do  postpone  the  ful 
filment  of  them.  The  disciples  themselves  came 
to  understand  that,  on  account  of  their  Lord's 
rejection,  there  was  to  be  another  " coming."2 
These  parables  give  us  the  key  to  the  whole 
intervening  period.  The  first  unfolds  the 
"  mystery  "  of  an  unseen  Sower  taking  the  place 
of  a  manifested  ruler.  The  next  three  describe 

1  Ver.  ii.  *  Matt.  xxiv.  3. 


2o6       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

the  public  effects  of  the  ministry  of  "the  Sower." 
These,  together  with  the  prefatory  parable,  were 
spoken  to  the  multitude :  the  final  three,  togethei 
with  the  interpretation  of  the  parable  of  the  tares 
were  spoken  privately  to  the  disciples,1  and  they 
teach  what  is  essential  and  secret. 

In  the  earlier  phase  of  the  Ministry  "  signs  *' 
were  openly  given,  abundantly  sufficient  to  satisfy 
the  doubts  and  silence  the  cavils  of  the  Pharisees.2 
But  when,  after  they  had  thus  proved  themselves 
to  be  "a  wicked  and  adulterous  generation,"  they 
again  sought  a  "sign,"  the  answer  they  received 
was  a  definite  refusal.  The  only  miracle  they 
were  to  witness  now  was  that  of  the  Prophet 
Jonah — the  death  and  resurrection  of  their  re 
jected  Messiah.3  And  following  upon  this,  He 
forbade  all  further  testimony  to  His  Messiahship. 
In  this  later  phase  of  His  ministry  He  had 
enjoined  silence  upon  those  who  benefited  by 
His  "signs";  now  He  forbade  even  His  dis 
ciples  to  tell  any  one  that  He  was  the  Christ,  and 
He  unfolded  to  them  the  mystery  of  His  Passion.4 

But  exigencies  of  space  forbid  my  pursuing  the 
subject  further  in  detail.  As  regards  the  great 
prophecy  of  the  twenty-fourth  chapter,  I  will  only 

1  Matt.  xiii.  36.  a  See,  e.g.,  John  ii.  23  ;  iii.  2,  R.V. 

3  Matt.  xvi.  1-4.  4  Ibid.  xvi.  20,  21,  R.V. 


CH.  XV.]      THE  ARGUMENT   RESTATED  207 

say  here  that  it  deals,  not  with  "the  end  of  the 
world,"  but  with  the  consummation  of  the  age  * — 
the  events  which  are  to  mark  the  close  of  "the 
evil  age  which  has  set  in."2 

In  conclusion  let  me  restate  this  part  of  my 
argument.  If  we  are  to  regard  Matthew  as  a 
merely  human  book,  we  find  ourselves  compelled 
to  account  for  its  peculiar  characteristics  in  either 
of  two  ways.  Either  the  writer,  albeit  he  was  an 
apostle  of  the  Lord,  and  shared  all  His  teaching, 
remained  in  utter  ignorance  of  the  distinctive 
truths  of  Christianity ;  or  else,  with  a  knowledge 
of  these  truths,  he  perversely  and  wickedly  con 
cealed  or  distorted  them. 

The  critic  must  make  choice  between  these 
alternatives.  But  the  Christian  refuses  both  ;  for 
he  rejects  the  assumption  on  which  both  are  based. 


1  Matt.  xxiv.  3  (R.V.  margin).  The  word  used  in  verse  3  is 
sunteleia  (cf.  Heb.  ix.  26) ;  the  word  telos  is  employed  in  verse  6. 
Matt.  xxiv.  has  been  well  described  by  Dean  Alford  as  "the 
anchor  of  apocalyptic  interpretation."  I  have  dealt  with  it  in 
chapter  xiii.  of  The  Coming  Prince. 

9  Gal.  i.  4.  The  "  age  "  here  intended  is  that  of  chapter  xiii. 
(see  p.  205,  ante),  which  is  to  end  with  the  return  of  Christ  to 
establish  His  kingdom.  And  then  "the  mystery  of  God  will 
be  finished" — the  mystery  that  a  God  of  infinite  power  and 
goodness  permits  evil  to  prevail  in  the  world  (Rev.  x.  7 ;  xi.  15). 
That  will  not  be  an  "  evil  age,"  and  God's  people  will  not  need 
deliverance  from  it.  "  The  evil  age  which  has  set  in  "  is  the  age 
during  which  Christ  is  rejected. 


208       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

To  him  the  First  Gospel  is  not  a  mere  human 
treatise,  but  a  Divine  revelation  ;  and  grasping 
the  thought  that  the  purpose  of  that  revelation 
was  to  present  Christ  as  Israel's  Messiah,  he 
accounts  for  the  extraordinary  phenomena  of  the 
book  in  the  only  way  in  which  they  can  be  reason 
ably  explained,  namely,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  so 
guided  and  restrained  both  the  mind  and  the  hand 
of  the  writer,  that  his  narrative  from  first  to  last 
does  not  contain  a  single  sentence  inconsistent 
with  the  Divine  purpose  with  which  it  was 
written. 

It  is  not  that  the  Lord's  words  were  not 
accurately  recorded  by  the  Evangelists,  but  that, 
while  His  teaching  covered  the  whole  field  of 
truth,  the  inspiring  Spirit  led  the  writers  to  dis 
criminate,  so  that  each  gave  prominence  to  that 
aspect  of  it  which  he  was  used  to  present.  A 
commander-in-chief  may  lay  before  his  generals  his 
whole  plan  of  battle,  but  when  he  issues  his  orders 
each  brigadier  receives  only  what  it  concerns  him 
to  know.  The  infantry  are  not  told  what  part 
the  cavalry  will  have  to  play,  and  neither  is  in 
formed  where  the  artillery  will  be  placed.  So 
was  it  with  the  Lord  and  His  teaching.  In  the 
very  same  discourses  probably  He  unfolded  to 
the  apostles  the  truth  relating  to  the  kingdom  of 


CH.XV.]      THE  ARGUMENT  RESTATED  209 

heaven,  and  kindred  truth  in  relation  to  the  wider 
sphere  of  the  kingdom  of  God.'  But  though 
these  men  heard  the  same  words,  and  though  no 
doubt  they  discussed  them  together  times  without 
number,  the  fact  remains  that  when  they  came  to 
'write,  these  various  aspects  of  truth  were  kept 
distinct.  If  this  is  to  be  explained  on  natural 
principles,  it  is  a  phenomenon  which  is  absolutely 
without  parallel  in  human  experience. 

1  See  Appendix,  Note  V. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

r  I  ^HESE  sceptical  critics  always  remind  me 
JL  of  the  amateur  detective.  The  amateur 
detective  is  strong  on  details.  But  he  generally 
enters  upon  an  inquiry  with  a  fixed  preconcep 
tion  as  to  what  he  is  going  to  find,  and  he 
exhausts  his  power  of  attention  upon  trifles  that 
seem  to  point  in  the  direction  on  which  his  mind 
is  set.  The  trained  expert,  on  the  other  hand, 
coming  in  with  an  open  mind  and  a  wider 
knowledge,  will  seize  on  clews  that  the  amateur 
has  missed. 

The  microscope  serves  to  make  the  wonders  of 
nature  seem  all  the  more  wonderful,  and  no  criti 
cism  of  Scripture  can  be  too  searching  and 
minute,  if  only  it  be  intelligent  and  spiritual. 
Such  criticism,  moreover,  is  an  antidote  to  the 
criticism  of  the  sceptics.  For  if  "  knowledge  is 
power,"  ignorance  is  weakness.  And  in  no 
sphere  is  this  more  true  than  in  the  spiritual. 


CH.  XVL]        THE   "SECOND   ADVENT"  211 

But  the  knowledge  that  is  wanting  is  the  know 
ledge  of  Holy  Scripture.  For  ALL  Scripture  is 
profitable,  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  "  ready 
at  every  point."  x  And  we  cannot  with  impunity 
neglect  large  sections  of  Scripture  which  are 
inextricably  interwoven  with  the  rest. 

The  doctrine  of  the  "  Second  Advent,"  as 
theologians  call  it,  will  serve  as  a  notable  illustra 
tion  of  this.  The  New  Testament  speaks  of  the 
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  to  earth,  to  bless  His 
people  upon  earth.  It  speaks  of  the  descent  of 
the  Lord  from  heaven,  and  of  His  people  being 
caught  up  from  earth  to  meet  Him.  It  speaks  of 
His  coming  as  a  bridegroom  to  claim  a  bride.  It 
speaks  of  His  coming  as  a  king  to  receive  a 
kingdom.  It  speaks  of  His  feet  standing  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  "in  like  manner"  as  He  stood 
there  with  His  disciples  on  the  day  of  His 
ascension.  It  speaks  of  His  being  revealed 
from  heaven  with  His  mighty  angels  in  flaming 
fire,  taking  vengeance.  It  speaks  of  the  dead, 
small  and  great,  being  arraigned  before  the  great 
white  throne  above.  It  speaks  of  the  living 
nations  upon  earth  being  gathered  before  His 
judgment  throne  of  glory. 

1  2  Tim.  iii.  17.    Thus  it  is  that.  Alford  renders  it. 


212       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Now  what  are  we  to  make  of  all  these  con 
flicting  statements  ?  A  dull  Evangelicalism  in 
the  past  was  content  to  read  them  at  different 
times,  and  to  believe  them  all  without  attempting 
to  understand  them.  But  to  maintain  such  an 
attitude  in  the  face  of  modern  criticism  is  to 
court  disaster  as  certainly  as  if  we  were  to  face 
modern  artillery  with  the  ordnance  used  at 
Waterloo.  Scripture  itself  must  teach  us  how 
all  these  apparently  irreconcilable  statements  can 
be  reconciled. 

But  first  let  us  hear  what  the  critics  have  to 
say  about  them.  We  turn  for  enlightenment  to 
the  standard  work  already  quoted,  Dr.  Hastings's 
Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  of  which  Professor  Driver 
of  Oxford  is  one  of  the  principal  editors.  The 
article  entitled  "Parousia"1  deals  with  this  subject. 
Its  effort  to  harmonise  the  passages  fails.  They 
represent,  we  are  told,  "  two  distinct  types  of 
thought."  In  the  one  "the  Parousia  is  conceived 
after  the  analogy  of  the  contemporary  Jewish 
Apocalypses":  in  the  other  "the  Parousia  is 
rather  the  completion  of  an  order  of  things 
already  existing."  "The  question  naturally  pre 
sents  itself  as  to  which  of  these  two  types  most 

1 A  Greek  word  meaning  "the  coming,"  or  (as,  e.g.,  in  2  Cor.  x.  10 
and  Phil.  ii.  12)  "the  presence." 


CH.XVI.]  THE  CRITICS  ON  THE  "PAROUSIA"  213 

fairly  represents  the  teaching  of  our  Lord."  If 
to  this  question  a  clear  answer  can  be  given,  all 
will  be  well.  But  the  general  result  is  that  the 
confusion  is  due  to  "  an  imperfect  apprehension 
by  the  disciples  of  the  Master's  meaning."  I 

The  only  certain  thing,  therefore,  is  the  utter 
uncertainty  that  exists  as  to  the  truth  upon  this 
subject.  Not  a  single  statement  in  the  New 
Testament  relating  to  the  future  Coming  is 
worthy  of  confidence.  And  as  the  New  Testa 
ment  writers  may  not  be  trusted  on  this  most 
vital  issue,  no  clear-headed,  sensible  person  will 
give  implicit  belief  to  their  words  respecting  any 
of  the  transcendental  doctrines  of  Christianity. 
Faith  is  impossible.  Agnosticism  becomes  the 
only  rational  attitude  of  mind. 

But  this  does  not  solve  the  difficulty.  How, 
then,  are  all  these  conflicting  statements  to  be 
explained  ?  Now  what  would  be  the  thought  of 
one  who  tried  to  reconcile  the  prescriptions  of 
some  eminent  physician,  and  then  denounced 
him  because  the  effort  failed  ?  Such  a  genius 


1  The  alternative,  we  are  told,  would  be  "  to  believe  that  He, 
who  in  all  other  respects  possessed  an  insight  so  much  clearer  than  His- 
contemporaries,  should,  in  the  matter  of  eschatology  alone,  have 
had  nothing  new  to  contribute."  The  italics  are  mine,  and  they 
are  designed  to  call  attention  to  the  manner  in  which  some  men. 
dare  to  speak  of  their  Divine  Lord. 


214       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

would  not  be  more  unintelligent  than  are  these 
exponents  of  "the  best  and  latest  scholarship." 
Prescriptions  differ  because  the  cases  to  which 
they  apply  are  different.  And  the  predictions  of 
the  Parousia  differ  for  a  like  reason. 

The  Bible  teems  with  prophecies  and  promises 
relating  to  earth,  which  still  await  fulfilment. 
And  not  one  of  these  shall  fail.  God  has  not 
41  cast  away  His  people  whom  He  foreknew." 
Israel's  rejected  Messiah  is  to  return  ;  and  "  they 
shall  look  upon  Him  whom  they  pierced,  and 
mourn."  Meanwhile  this  Gentile  dispensation 
has  intervened  ;  for  Israel's  temporary  loss  is  our 
eternal  gain.  And  God  has  purposes  for  earth  that 
reach  beyond  a  gathered  Church  and  a  restored 
nation.  "  The  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  know 
ledge  of  the  Lord " :  this  is  not  a  rhetorical 
shriek,  but  a  Divine  prophecy.  "  Thy  will  be 
done  on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven "  is  not  a 
day-dream  of  pious  fools,  but  an  inspired  prayer 
for  the  realisation  of  a  Divine  purpose  plainly 
revealed  in  Scripture.  This  very  earth,  so  cursed 
and  blighted  by  human  sin,  shall  yet  be  the  scene 
of  a  display  of  Divine  power  and  goodness, 
bringing  glory  to  God  and  blessing  to  mankind. 

Mingling  with  these  manifold  displays  of  grace 
there  will  be  sessions  of  judgment.  And  all  are 


CH.  XVI.]  THE  CRITICS  ON  THE  "PAROUSIA"  215 

included  in  "  the  doctrine  of  the  Parousia."  For 
every  purpose  of  God,  whether  of  judgment  or 
of  grace,  is  headed  up  in  Christ ;  and  therefore 
in  the  unfolding  of  these  purposes  there  will  be 
many  manifestations  of  Christ.  And  while  the 
Higher  Criticism,  in  keeping  writh  its  persistent 
ignorance  of  Divine  truth,  takes  all  these  many 
Scriptures,  and  throwing  them  into  "  hotch-pot " 
(as  the  lawyers  would  say),  parades  the  resulting 
mass  of  confusion  and  error  and  folly  as  the 
outcome  of  superior  enlightenment,  the  spiritual 
Christian  will  seek  humbly  and  reverently  to 
"  sort "  each  of  these  Divine  prophecies  (as  Lord 
Bacon  puts  it)  "  with  the  event  fulfilling  the 
same,"  assigning  to  each  its  right  place  in  the 
grand  scheme  of  revelation.1 

And  that  phase  of  Evangelicalism  which  shares 
the  ignorance  of  the  critics  leaves  the  Bible  an 
easy  prey  to  their  attacks.  If  the  Christian 
neglects  the  Bible  he  cannot  be  "  ready  at  every 


1  There  is  nothing  exceptional  about  this  "  Parousia  "  article. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  fair  specimen  of  the  pompous  pedantry 
of  book-scholarship,  combined  with  a  special  type  of  igno 
rance  characteristic  of  writers  of  this  school.  I  use  the  word 
"ignorance"  deliberately,  for  while  they  pose  as  the  apostles 
of  a  new  enlightenment  in  the  exposition  of  the  New  Testa 
ment,  their  writings  give  proof  that,  as  already  urged,  they 
are  ignorant  of  "the  word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ" — the 
very  language  in  which  the  book  is  written. 


216       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

point."  The  " doctrine  of  the  types,"  for  instance, 
is  not  an  abstruse  branch  of  study  which,  like  a 
"  special  subject "  in  a  school  curriculum,  may 
safely  be  ignored.  It  bears  upon  the  most 
elementary  truths. 

Many  years  ago  I  was  present  at  a  conference 
convened  to  consider  what  people  call  "  the 
simple  Gospel."  Among  the  clergymen  who  took 
part  in  the  discussion  there  were  two  of  con 
siderable  note  as  teachers.  Before  half  an  hour 
elapsed  one  of  them  had  practically  unfurled  the 
banner  of  Calvinism,  and  the  other  that  of 
Arminianism.  According  to  the  one,  Christ  has 
borne  the  sins  of  His  people  ;  and  though  the 
Gospel  is  to  be  preached  to  all,  salvation  is  only 
for  the  elect.  According  to  the  other,  Christ  has 
borne  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  and  the  doom 
of  the  impenitent  will  be  due  to  their  rejection  of 
the  Gospel. 

Now  both  these  positions  cannot  be  right,  and 
yet  both  can  appeal  to  numerous  passages  of  the 
New  Testament  which  seem  to  support  them. 
Where  then  are  we  to  find  the  key  to  the 
enigma  ?  The  typology  of  the  Pentateuch  is  the 
Divine  picture  alphabet  which  God  has  given  to 
enable  us  to  spell  out  these  truths  ;  and  if,  whether 
from  carelessness  or  arrogance,  we  neglect  it,  we 


CH.  XVI.]     THE   DOCTRINE   OF  THE   TYPES       217 

are  sure  to  fall  into  error.  Calvinism  assumes 
that  the  sin-offering  exhausts  the  doctrine  of  the 
Gospel.  But  the  sin-offering  is  only  one  of  many 
kindred  types,  and  all  are  needed  to  unfold  in  its 
fulness  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  True  it  is  that 
the  sin-offering  was  only  for  the  redeemed  people  ; 
but  it  was  not  by  the  sin-offering  that  they 
obtained  redemption.  When  we  speak  of  Christ's 
bearing  our  sins,  we  use  a  figurative  expression  ; 
but  the  figure  is  not  rhetorical  but  typical,  and 
the  sin-offering  is  the  type  which  explains  it. 
Therefore  it  is  that  Scripture  never  speaks  of 
Christ's  "  bearing  the  sins  of  the  world."  He 
is  " the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world  ; "  and  forgiveness  of  sins  is  to  be  preached 
to  all,  for  "  He  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  all ;  "  * 
He  came  to  be  "  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  2 

But  what  of  the  Baptist's  testimony,  "  Behold 
the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world  "  ?  3  I  do  not  forget  it.  But  in  the 
accuracy  of  Scripture  language  there  is  a  definite 
difference  between  "  bearing  the  sins  of  the  world," 
and  "  taking  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 

"  What  hair-splitting!"  some  one  will  here 
exclaim.  Yes  ;  in  attacking  or  perverting  Scrip- 

1  i  Tim.  ii.  6.  •  I  John  iv.  14.  3  John  i.  29. 


218       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

ture,  attention  to  the  minutest  and  most  trivial 
points  is  "  Higher  Criticism";  but  in  the  defence 
of  Scripture  it  is  hyper-criticism !  The  special 
truth  of  the  sin-offering  is  the  identification  of 
the  offerer  with  the  victim.  Substitution  is  but 
a  half-truth.  But  there  can  be  no  identification 
with  Christ  until  we  receive  the  Gospel.  Then 
it  is,  and  not  till  then,  that  we  become  one  with 
Him.  And  if  one  with  Him,  His  death  is  our 
death,  and  we  can  adopt  the  words,  "His  own 
self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree." 

This  is  the  language  of  the  sin-offering.  But  in 
the  Passover,  by  which  redemption  was  obtained, 
there  was  no  laying  on  of  hands,  no  previous 
identification  of  the  sinner  with  the  victim.  The 
victim  died  for  the  sinner's  sins,  but  it  was  by  the 
sprinkling  of  its  blood  that  the  sinner  obtained 
the  benefit  of  the  sacrifice.  The  Gospel  by 
which  we  are  saved  is  that  "  Christ  died  for 
our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures,"  and  faith 
is  the  counterpart  of  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood.1 

The  sin-offering  typified  Christ's  bearing  the 


1  Dean  Alford  explains  John  i.  29  by  reference  directly  to 
Isa.  liii.  7,  and  presumably  to  the  sin-offering.  But  the  bracketing 
of  the  slaughtered  lamb  with  the  shorn  sheep  in  the  prophecy 
clearly  proves  that  the  words  do  not  refer  to  the  offerings,  but 
present  the  Messiah  as  the  innocent  and  uncomplaining  victim 
of  the  violence  of  men.  Moreover  the  word  there  rendered 


CH.  XVI.]     THE    DOCTRINE   OF   ROM.   V.  219 

sins  of  His  people.  But  redemption  involves  a 
larger  question  than  this.  For  man  is  not  merely 
a  committer-of-sins,  but  a  sinner  in  a  deeper 
sense.  He  belongs  to  a  sinful  race.  I  am  not 
discussing  the  philosophy  of  sceptical  expositors, 
but  the  plain  teaching  of  Scripture.  "Through 
one  trespass  the  judgment  is  unto  all  men  to 
condemnation."  J  Not  that  all  men  shall  be  in 
fact  condemned,  for  the  believer  "  shall  not  come 
into  condemnation  "  ; 2  but  this  is  the  scope  and 
tendency  of  the  judgment.  And  "  Even  so, 
through  one  righteous  act,  3  the  free  gift  is  unto 
all  men  to  justification  of  life."  Not  that  all 
are  justified,  but  that  this  is  the  scope  and 
tendency  of  the  grace.  Words  could  not  teach 
more  plainly  that  the  death  of  Christ  is  as  far- 
reaching  as  the  sin  of  Adam.  By  that  death  He 
has  taken  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  God 
has  reconciled  the  world  to  Himself. 4 

With  the  critics  the  types  of  the  Pentateuch 
are  but  a  part  of  "  the  priestly  code,"  which  was 


"  slaughter  "  is  not  a  sacrificial  term.  It  is  never  used  of  killing 
for  sacrifice ;  never  at  all  in  the  Pentateuch,  save  in  Gen.  xliii.  16. 
And  the  word  translated  "  laid  on "  in  verse  6  is  never  once 
used  in  connection  with  the  offerings  or  sacrifices. 

1  Rom.  v.  1 8.  a  John  v.  24. 

3  AiKaiufia — "  an  amendment  of  a  wrong  ;  hence,  judgment, 
punishment "  (Liddell  and  Scott).  4  2  Cor.  v.  19. 


220       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

based  on  the  success  or  failure  (I  know  not 
which)  of  the  ministry  of  the  prophets.  They 
have  no  Divine  significance  whatever.  But  with 
the  intelligent  Christian  these  types  are  "  the 
word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ."  He  turns  to 
the  New  Testament  to  find  the  doctrine  relating 
to  each  one  of  them,  and  he  turns  back  to  the 
Pentateuch,  as  to  a  key-picture,  to  make  sure  that 
he  has  overlooked  nothing  in  the  doctrinal  teach 
ing  of  Christianity.  If,  for  example,  as  we  have 
seen,  he  reads  of  Christ  as  a  Sin-bearer,  he 
studies  the  Sin-offering ;  if  he  reads  of  the 
"lamb"  of  our  redemption,  the  Passover;  if  of 
the  blood  of  the  New  Covenant  by  which 
we  are  sanctified,  and  of  which  the  cup  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  the  sign  and  emblem,  then  the 
twenty-fourth  chapter  of  Exodus  unfolds  its  depth 
of  meaning. * 

These  paragraphs  are  humbly  offered  as 
instances  of  true  criticism  in  contrast  with  the 
criticisms  of  the  critics.  Such  instances  might 
be  multiplied  indefinitely.  And  in  such  proofs 
of  the  absolute  accuracy  and  hidden  unity  of 
Scripture,  the  Christian  finds  overwhelming 
cumulative  evidence  of  its  Divine  origin  and 
authority. 

1  See  The  Buddha  of  Christendom,  ch.  xii. 


CHAPTER  XVII 

IN  the  course  of  a  summer  visit  many  years 
ago  at  one  of  the  historic  homes  of  Ireland, 
an  incident  occurred  which  often  comes  to   my 
mind  as  I  read  the  criticisms  of  the  critics  upon 
the  Gospel  narratives. 

The  eldest  son  and  daughter  of  the  house  left 
us  one  morning  to  spend  the  day  with  relatives 
some  half-dozen  miles  away.  Late  at  night,  from 
my  bedroom  window,  I  saw  the  returning  carriage 
drive  up  to  the  hall  door.  The  lady  alighted 
with  a  gentleman  who  was  not  her  brother.  At 
breakfast  next  morning  she  told  us  that  her 
brother  had  remained  at  his  cousin's  house,  and 
she  had  brought  back  a  Mrs.  Somebody — men 
tioning  a  name  I  did  not  know.  Owing  to  the 
disturbed  state  of  the  country,  surprise  was 
expressed  that  two  ladies  should  have  thus  driven 
home  alone  at  night.  This  enabled  me  to  press 
the  question  whether  a  gentleman  had  not 


222       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

escorted  her ;  and  her  answer  was  unequivocal 
that  her  only  companion  had  been  the  lady  she 
named. 

When  in  my  official  life  I  have  found  a  conflict 
of  testimony  between  persons  of  known  integrity, 
I  have  always  sought  some  way  of  reconciling 
them.  But  in  this  case  I  confess  I  was  baffled  ; 
and  had  I  not  had  more  confidence  in  my  friend 
than  the  critics  have  in  the  Bible,  I  should  have 
given  her  up  as  being  utterly  untruthful,  and 
perhaps  worse.  But  I  afterwards  obtained  from 
her  the  solution  of  the  enigma.  The  lady  she 
named  was  the  wife  of  their  doctor.  His  house 
was  near  the  gate  of  the  park ;  and  when  his  wife 
alighted  he  took  her  place  in  the  carriage  and 
drove  with  my  friend  to  the  hall  door. 

Not  all  the  Biblical  critics  of  Christendom 
can  find  in  Scripture  a  more  hopeless  conflict 
of  testimony  than  would  have  been  my  friend's 
account,  and  my  own,  of  her  return  to  her  father's 
house  that  night.  If  we  had  both  written  about 
it  without  first  comparing  notes,  I  should  have 
asserted  that  her  only  companion  was  a  gentle 
man;  she  would  have  declared  that  her  only 
companion  was  a  lady.  "  Sherlock  Holmes  " 
himself  could  have  made  nothing  of  it.  And  yet 
the  solution  of  it  seems  ludicrously  simple  when 


CH.  XVII.]    DIFFICULTIES  IN  THE  GOSPELS        223 

all  the  facts  are  known.  She  was  thinking  of 
her  six  miles'  drive ;  I,  of  her  arrival  at  the 
house.  Both  accounts,  therefore,  would  have 
been  absolutely  true,  though  to  all  appearance 
one  or  other  would  have  seemed  absolutely  false ; 
and  any  one  who  attempted  to  play  the  role  of 
"  reconciler "  would  have  fared  badly  at  the 
hands  of  the  critics. 

There  are  difficulties  in  the  Gospel  narratives 
which  appear  equally  inexplicable.  And  the 
efforts  of  zealous  "  reconcilers  "  to  explain  them 
sometimes  do  more  harm  than  good.  They 
probably  admit  of  some  very  simple  explanation, 
which  would  be  obvious  if  all  the  circumstances 
were  in  view.  The  question,  however,  to  which 
they  give  rise  in  the  mind,  I  will  not  say  of  a 
competent  critic,  still  less  of  a  spiritual  Christian, 
but  of  any  person  endowed  with  common  sense — 
a  quality  which  seems  to  be  sometimes  lacking  to 
both  Christians  and  critics — concerns  the  general 
character  of  the  writings  thus  seemingly  impugned. 
And  here  I  am  not  assuming  that  the  Evangelists 
were  inspired,  but  merely  that  they  were  com 
petent  and  trustworthy  witnesses. 

To  introduce  into  this  book  a  glossary  of 
difficult  passages  would  be  wholly  foreign  to  its 
scope  :  indeed  it  would  make  it  unreadable.  In 


224       THE   EIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

the  preceding  chapters  I  have  selected  illustrative 
examples  of  the  objections  dealt  with,  and  I  will 
still  pursue  the  same  course.  I  will  proceed  to 
give  instances  of  difficulties  which  appear  insolu 
ble,  of  others  which  are  easily  explained,  and  of 
a  third  class  which  indicate  only  the  perversity  or 
the  ignorance  of  those  who  urge  them. 

Of  the  class  first  mentioned  I  know  of  no  case 
more  apt  than  that  of  the  blind  men  outside 
Jericho.1  A  definite  contradiction  seems  to  mark 
the  Gospel  narratives.  I  am  not  referring  to  the 
fact  that  Matthew  mentions  two  men  as  healed 
on  the  occasion,  whereas  Mark  and  Luke  speak 
of  one  only.  The  received  explanation  of  this — 
that  "  the  sources  from  which  each  Evangelist 
took  his  narrative"  differed  in  this  way — is 
strangely  shallow  and  unintelligent,  for  this  only 
puts  the  "  difficulty  "  one  step  back.  But  a  little 
knowledge  of  human  nature  and  of  real  life  will 
oust  that  "  difficulty"  altogether.  If  either 
Evangelist  said  that  the  Lord  cured  only  one 
blind  man  on  the  occasion,  the  matter  would  be 
different.  But  one  of  the  two  men  was  evidently 
a  well-known  character — "  blind  Bartimeus  " — 
while  the  other,  possibly,  was  a  stranger  to  the 

*  See  Matt.  xx.  29-34  ;  Mark  x.  46-52  ;  and  Luke  xviii.  35-43. 


CH.  XVII.]    THE  BLIND   MEN  AT  JERICHO       225 

locality.  Two  of  the  Evangelists  speak  only  of 
the  man  who  was  known:  Mark  names  him,  and 
Luke  refers  to  him  as  "  a  certain  blind  man." 
To  represent  this  as  a  "  contradiction  "  bespeaks 
the  perversity  of  fools. 

But  a  very  real  difficulty  remains  ;  Luke  repre 
sents  the  incident  as  occurring  when  the  Lord 
was  approaching  Jericho,  while  the  other  Gospels 
say  expressly  that  it  was  when  He  was  leaving 
the  town.  The  contradiction  here  seems  as 
hopeless  as  that  recorded  in  my  Irish  story. 
Possibly,  however,  the  explanation  of  it  would 
be  just  as  simple ;  but  I,  at  least,  decline  to 
play  the  role  of  "  Sherlock  Holmes  "  in  dealing 
with  Holy  Scripture. 

A  popular  preacher  and  writer  who  is  one  of 
the  lesser  lights  of  the  Higher  Criticism  has 
published  the  statement  that  in  his  Oxford  days 
"the  whole  foundation"  of  his  faith  was  shaken 
by  discovering  that,  in  Acts  v.  36,  Gamaliel  is 
said  to  have  mentioned  an  insurrection  under  one 
Theudas,  whereas  Josephus  records  an  insurrec 
tion  under  a  man  of  that  name  half  a  century 
later ;  the  inference  being,  of  course,  that  the 
Evangelist  was  thus  proved  to  have  blundered. 

Who  among  us  has  not  been  equally  silly  at 
times  !  But  some  of  us  are  shrewd  enough  to 

16 


226       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

conceal  our  silliness  from  other  people.  There 
are  three  possible  explanations  of  the  difficulty, 
any  one  of  which  would  suffice.  First,  in  any 
conflict  of  statement  between  a  writer  so  accurate 
as  Luke,  and  a  writer  so  notoriously  inaccurate 
as  Josephus,  the  presumption  of  error  is  entirely 
against  the  historian,  and  not  against  the 
Evangelist.1  Secondly,  it  is  very  probable  that 
the  Theudas  of  Gamaliel's  speech  is  one  of  the 
insurgents  mentioned  by  Josephus  under  another 
name.  But  thirdly,  the  whole  difficulty  assumes 
that  the  historian  enumerates  all  these  insurrec 
tions,  whereas,  in  fact,  he  declares  there  were 
"  thousands  "  of  them  ;  and  one  Theudas  may 
well  have  been  the  leader  of  such  an  outbreak 
before  "  the  days  of  the  taxing,"  and  another 
Theudas  may  have  headed  a  similar  revolt  during 
the  reign  of  Claudius.2 

Among  the  difficulties  which,  though  easily 
explained,  seem  to  unsettle  the  faith  of  a  certain 
sort  of  people,  there  is  one  that  may  serve 
to  illustrate  the  perverseness  of  some  of  the 


1  For  the  sake  of  argument  I  here  treat  the  Third  Gospel  as  a 
merely  human  book. 

9  Antiquities,  xvii.  10,4,  and  xx.  5,  i.  Josephus  mentions  three 
Judases  within  ten  years,  and  four  Simons  within  forty  years  as 
leaders  of  such  revolts.  There  may  well,  therefore,  have  been 
two  named  Theudas  in  the  same  half-century. 


CH.  XVII.]         "THIS   GENERATION"  227 

German  critics.  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,"  the 
Lord  declared  in  telling  of  the  dread  events 
which  are  to  herald  His  return,  "  this  genera 
tion  shall  not  pass  till  all  these  things  be 
fulfilled."  I  What  meaning  can  possibly  be  given 
to  these  words,  save  that  the  Parousia  was  to 
occur  in  the  lifetime  of  those  to  whom  He  spoke  ? 
The  question  is  answered  by  a  fact  well  known 
to  the  critics  themselves,  that  the  word  here 
rendered  generation  "has  in  Hellenistic  Greek 
the  meaning  of  a  race,  or  family  of  people."  3 
And  any  intelligent  reader  can  see  that  in  other 
passages  also  it  is  used  in  that  sense. 3  The  Jews, 
instead  of  suffering  the  fate  of  every  other 
conquered  race  in  all  the  world's  history,  were 
to  remain  a  separate  people  to  the  end.  The 
Lord's  words,  therefore,  instead  of  proving  a 
stumbling-block  ought  rather  to  establish  our 
faith. 

People  seem  to  be  strangely  troubled  about 
the  Inscription  upon  the  Cross.  Dean  Alford 
writes  : — 

"The  title  over  the  cross  was  written  in  Greek. 


1  Matt.  xxiv.  34. 

2  Alford's  Greek  Testament-,  and  see  any  Lexicon. 

3  See,  e.g.,  chap,  xxiii.  36,  and  various  passages  in  the  LXX.,  as, 
e.g.,  Gen.  xxxi.  3  ;  Jer.  viii.  3. 


228       THE   BIBLE  AND  MODERN  CRITICISM 

According  then  to  the  verbal-inspiration  theory, 
each  Evangelist  has  recorded  the  exact  words  of 
the  inscription  ;  not  the  general  sense,  but  the 
inscription  itself — not  a  letter  less  or  more.  This 
is  absolutely  necessary  to  the  theory." I 

Extraordinary  statements  these  from  a  writer 
who   is   usually   so    sensible    and    so    accurate. 
Whether  any  inspiration  other   than   verbal  in 
spiration  is  possible,  is  a  problem  of  metaphysics, 
and  I  am  not  going  to  discuss  it  here.     Neither 
shall   I    defend  any   "verbal-inspiration  theory." 
What  concerns  us  is  the  fact  of  inspiration,  so 
plainly  taught  by  the  Lord  Himself.     And  as  we 
have   seen   in   a   previous   chapter,    the   fact    of 
inspiration  is  consistent  with  sometimes  insisting 
upon  the  exact  words  of  Scripture  with  a  definite- 
ness   so   minute    that   men  would  call   it   "  hair 
splitting,"  and  in  other  instances  quoting  Scripture 
in  a  way  that  men  would  call  "  loose."     What 
ever  human  theories  of  inspiration  may  demand, 
verbal  inspiration   does   not  assume  that  "each 
Evangelist  has  recorded  the  exact  words  of  the 
inscription,"  but  that  the  record  as  given  by  each 
was  guided  and  controlled  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
And  no  one  who  has  studied  the  human  element 

1  Com.,  vol.  i.,  Prol.  I.  §  vi.  18. 


CH.  XVII.]    INSCRIPTION  ON  THE  CROSS          229 

in  other  Divine  miracles  will  be  surprised  at  find 
ing  a  human  element  in  this  miracle  of  inspiration. 

But  to  resume.  Each  of  the  four  Gospels 
gives  the  inscription  in  a  slightly  different  form. 
Here  is  the  text  of  each  : — 

"  This  is  Jesus,  the  King  of  the  Jews  "  (Matt, 
xxvii.  37). 

"  The  King  of  the  Jews  "  (Mark  xv.  26). 

"This  is  the  King  of  the  Jews"  (Luke  xxiii. 
38). 

"Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews" 
(John  xix.  19). 

Now  let  us  assume,  for  the  sake  of  argument, 
that  the  full  inscription  was,  "  This  is  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews."  Its  purpose 
was  clear — not  in  the  least  to  identify  the  accused, 
but  solely  to  give  the  accusation  on  which  he  was 
condemned.  Pilate  would  not  have  noticed  the 
charges  which  so  excited  the  religious  leaders  of 
the  Jews ;  but  the  claim  to  be  a  King  they 
represented  as  a  political  offence.  And  though 
he  saw  that  the  prisoner  was  no  rioter,  no  leader 
of  sedition,  and  that  the  accusation  was  dis 
honestly  preferred,  he  feared  lest  the  Sanhedrim 
should  make  trouble  for  him  with  Caesar  if  he 
refused  to  entertain  it.1  Therefore  he  yielded  to 

1  John  xix.  12. 


230       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

their  clamour.  But  he  revenged  himself  upon 
them  by  putting  up  the  charge  in  a  form  that 
brought  them  into  contempt,  giving  prominence 
to  the  royal  title.  Their  remonstrance  was  most 
noteworthy.  "  Write  not  *  The  King  of  the 
Jews,'  but  that  He  said,  *  I  am  King  of  the 
Jews.'"1  And  this,  which  alone  was  essential, 
or  important,  all  the  Gospels  agree  in  giving. 

But  this  is  not  all.  "  The  title  over  the  cross 
was  written  in  Greek."  If  Dean  Alford's  words 
are  to  be  judged  as  the  Bible  is  judged,  this 
statement  is  a  sheer  blunder.  "  The  title  "  was 
written  in  Hebrew  and  Greek  and  Latin ;  and 
this  is  probably  the  explanation  of  the  whole 
matter.  "The  Hebrew  Gospel "  might  be  ex 
pected  to  record  the  Hebrew  inscription.  Luke, 
writing  for  a  Roman  officer,  would,  not  unnaturally, 
reproduce  the  Latin.2  The  inscription  as  given 
by  John  may  well  be  the  Greek.  And  Mark 
gives  merely,  as  his  words  imply,  the  gist  of  the 
charge — "  the  inscription  of  the  accusation." 

I  have  dealt  thus  fully  with  this  matter  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  I  am  personally  unable  to 
sympathise  with  people  who  find  a  difficulty  in 


1  John  xix.  21. 

3  "  This  is  the   King  of  the  Jews  "   has  a   distinctly  Latin 
ring. 


CH.  XVII.]    INSCRIPTION  ON  THE  CROSS          231 

differences  of  the  kind.  Such  differences  only 
prove  that  the  Gospels  are  not,  as  the  critics 
would  tell  us,  copied  from  one  another,  or  from 
a  common  source,  but  that  they  are  wholly  in 
dependent  narratives.  And  they  weigh  nothing 
with  people  who  have  any  practical  knowledge 
of  men,  or  who  have  intelligent  views  of  in 
spiration.  For  nothing  tends  more  to  discredit 
witnesses  than  mechanical  uniformity  of  state 
ment  ;  and  in  revelation,  as  in  nature,  we  may 
expect  to  find  endless  variety  of  detail  combined 
with  absolute  unity  in  essentials. 

In  conclusion,  I  will  deal  with  a  difficulty  of  a 
totally  different  character.  But  it  is  important 
enough  to  deserve  a  chapter  to  itself.  The  three 
first  Gospels,  we  are  told,  are  at  variance  with 
the  fourth,  as  to  the  day  on  which  the  Lord  was 
crucified. 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

THE  reader  will  do  well  to  skip  this  chapter. 
If  it  were  written  to  prove  Scripture  to  be 
wrong,  it  would  be  interesting ;  and,  moreover, 
it  would  betoken  "  culture,"  and  might  even 
attract  the  notice  of  the  newspapers.  But  as  its 
object  is  merely  to  defend  Holy  Writ  on  a 
subject  about  which  enough  has  been  written 
against  it  to  fill  a  bookcase,  it  is  really  not  worth 
reading. 

The  first  three  Gospels  agree  that  the  Lord's 
Supper  was  instituted  at  the  Jewish  Passover  on 
the  night  before  the  Crucifixion.1  Here  is 
Matthew's  testimony  : — 

"On  the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread  the 
disciples  came  to  Jesus,  saying,  Where  wilt  thou 

1  Theories  of  an  "  anticipatory  celebration  "  by  the  Lord  and 
His  disciples  on  the  i3th  Nisan,  or  a  deferred  celebration  by  the 
leaders  of  the  Jews  on  the  isth,  are  preposterous.  Here  I  will 
but  refer  my  readers  to  Dr.  Edersheim's  Life  and  Times  of  the 
Messiah,  a  book  which  ought  to  be  an  "  end  of  controversy  "  on 
the  subject  of  the  present  chapter. 

232 


CH.  XVIII.]    DAY  OF  THE  CRUCIFIXION  233 

that  we  make  ready  for  Thee  to  eat  the  Pass 
over  ?  "  Not  "  the  first  day  of  the  Feast"  as  the 
A.V.  gives  it,  but  the  day  on  which  leaven  was 
put  away,  namely,  the  I4th  Nisan.  Mark  and 
Luke  state  even  more  explicitly  that  it  was  the 
day  when  the  Passover  was  killed.1 

But,  we  are  told,  "  It  appears  from  John  xviii. 
28  that  on  the  Friday  morning  the  Jews  who 
conducted  our  Lord  to  the  pretorium  had  not  yet 
eaten  the  Passover."  That  day,  therefore,  must 
have  been  the  I4th  Nisan.  And  this  is  confirmed 
by  the  fact  that  the  Evangelist  calls  it  "the 
preparation  of  the  Passover"  and  adds  that  the 
following  day  "  was  a  high  day,"  2  which  proves 
that  it  must  have  been  the  Feast  day,  or  i5th 
Nisan.3 

Now  at  this  stage  I  do  not  ask  that  the 
Evangelists  shall  be  believed  as  men  who  were 
inspired,  nor  that  their  writings  shall  be  accepted 

1  Matt.  xxvi.  17  ;  Mark  xiv.  12  ;  Luke  xxii.  7. 

a  John  xix.  14,  31. 

3  In  Hastings's  Bible  Dictionary  (vol.  ii.,  p.  634),  Prof.  Sanday, 
after  noticing  that  the  Synoptists  identify  the  Last  Supper  with 
the  Passover,  goes  on  to  say,  "  St.  John,  on  the  other  hand,  by  a 
number  of  clear  indications  (John  xiii.  i  ;  xviii.  28 ;  xix.  14,  31), 
implies  that  the  Last  Supper  was  eaten  before  the  time  of  the 
regular  Passover,  and  that  the  Lord  suffered  on  the  afternoon  of 
Nisan  14."  Prof.  Cheyne's  Encyclopedia  Biblica  says,  "The 
Synoptists  put  the  Crucifixion  on  Friday  the  i5th  Nisan,  John  on 
Friday  the  I4th  "  (article  "  Chronology,"  p.  806). 


234       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

as  Divine  oracles,  but  only  that  they  shall  be 
treated  as  intelligent  and  trustworthy  witnesses 
are  treated  in  our  courts  of  justice.  Three  of 
them  agree  in  giving  a  clear  and  explicit  account 
of  certain  facts ;  while  the  fourth  uses  language 
which  appears  to  some  to  conflict  with  that  of  the 
others.  The  first  question,  therefore,  would  be 
whether  either  the  competence  or  the  truthfulness 
of  any  of  them  is  open  to  suspicion.  And  to  this 
the  answer  is  an  emphatic  negative.  The  cir 
cumstances,  moreover,  veto  the  suggestion  of  a 
mistake  ;  for  the  events  of  those  dreadful  days 
must  have  been  burned  into  the  memories  of  all 
who  took  part  in  them.  This  being  so,  the  point 
upon  which  any  tribunal  would  fix  attention 
would  be  whether  the  evidence  of  the  witness 
that  seems  to  differ  from  the  rest  may  not  have 
been  misconstrued. 

I  seize  upon  that  point.  And  my  contention 
is  not  that,  by  straining  words  or  having  recourse 
to  far-fetched  explanations,  the  last  Gospel  can 
be  twisted  into  agreement  with  the  others  ;  but 
that  the  exegesis  which  makes  it  differ  from 
them  is  in  every  part  of  it  a  tangle  of  blunders. 
For  as  Lange  says,  "  If  the  expressions  of  John 
be  pondered  in  their  full  significance,  he  will  be 
found  to  have  declared  more  accurately  than  the 


CH.  XVIII.]    THE   SUPPER   NOT   THE   FEAST     235 

rest  of  the  Evangelists  that  [the  Lord]  Jesus  was 
crucified  on  a  Friday,  and  that  it  was  on  the  first 
day  of  the  [Feast  of  the]  Passover  (viz.,  on  the 
1 5th  Nisan)."1 

First  and  chiefest  among  the  blunders  which 
mark  this  controversy  is  that  of  confounding  the 
Passover  with  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread. 
Just  as  the  Feast  of  Weeks  came  to  be  known  as 
Pentecost,  so  the  earlier  feast  was  popularly 
called  the  Passover.2  But  no  intelligent  and 
devout  Jew  would  confound  the  Supper  with  the 
Feast.  The  language  of  the  Law  is  clear,  "  In 
the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month  at  even  is 
the  Lord's  passover  ;  and  on  the  fifteenth  day  of 
the  same  month  is  the  feast  of  unleavened 
bread."  3 

Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  open  John  xiii.  The 
scene  is  laid  at  the  Paschal  Supper,  before  the 
Feast  of  the  Passover  4 — that  is,  on  the  eve  of 
the  festival.  And  when  Judas  went  out,  the 
disciples  supposed  he  was  gone  to  buy  what  was 
needed  for  the  feast  (ver.  29).  The  feast  was  a 
Sabbath,  when  trading  was  unlawful ;  but  to 

1  Life  of  Christ,  pt.  vi.,  sect.  ii. 

a  See  Luke  xxii.  i,  and  cf.  Josephus,  Ant.  xiv.  2,  i,  and  xvii.  9, 3. 
3  Lev.  xxiii.  5,  6  ;  Numb,  xxviii.  16,  17. 

*  We  must  distinguish  this  from  such  passages  as  Matt.xxvi.  17, 
where  the  A.V.  wrongly  introduces  the  word  "  feast." 


236       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

make  provision  for  all  that  was  needful  for  the 
feast  was  lawful  on  the  preceding  night.1  For 
yet  another  blunder  is  the  assumption  that  always 
and  for  all  purposes  the  Jewish  day  began  in  the 
evening.2  The  Passover  was  eaten  during  the 
evening  of  the  I4th  Nisan ;  the  feast  day  began 
the  following  morning. 

The  weekly  Sabbath  was  reckoned  from 
evening  to  evening.  And  every  day  was  so 
reckoned  for  purposes  of  ceremonial  cleansing — 
a  fact  which  enables  us  to  detect  another  of  the 
blunders  of  this  theory.  Ceremonial  defilement 
lapsed  at  sundown. 3  Therefore,  as  the  Paschal 
Supper  was  not  eaten  until  the  evening,  the  Jew 
would  not  have  been  precluded  from  partaking, 
by  reason  of  his  having  entered  the  Pretorium 
early  in  the  day.  Not  so,  however,  with  the 
holy  offerings  of  the  feast  day,4  which  were  eaten 
before  evening.  The  only  question,  therefore,  is 
whether  partaking  of  them  could  properly  be 
described  as  "  eating  the  Passover."  The  law  of 
Moses  supplies  the  answer — "  Thou  shalt  sacri 
fice  the  Passover  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  of  the 

1  Edersheim's  Life  and  Times  of  Messiah,  vol.  ii.,  p.  508. 

2  One  source  of  error  here  is  the  assumption  that  either  the 
modern  Jewish  calendar  or  practice  is  the  same  as  in  the  days  of 
the  Ministry. 

3  Lev.  xxii.  7.  4  The  Chagigah  of  the  Talmud. 


CH.  XVIIL]        "THE   PREPARATION"  237 

flock  and  the  herd  .  .  .  seven  days  shalt  thou 
eat  unleavened  bread  therewith."  l 

And  further  still.  The  Pharisees  planned  the 
betrayal  on  the  night  of  the  Supper,  because  they 
feared  a  riot  if  they  seized  the  Lord  upon  the  day 
of  the  Feast.2  For  the  suggestion  that  it  was 
unlawful  to  be  out  of  doors  on  that  night  is  due 
to  confounding  the  law  of  the  Passover  in  Egypt 
with  the  law  of  the  annual  celebration. 

But  the  day  of  the  crucifixion  was  "  the  prepa 
ration  of  the  Passover  ; "  3  and  must  not  this 
mean  the  day  before  the  Passover  ?  My  answer 
is  that  not  a  single  writer,  sacred  or  profane,  can 
be  quoted  in  support  of  such  a  view.  "The 
preparation"  was  a  term  in  common  use  among 
the  Jews  to  describe  the  day  before  the  weekly 
Sabbath.  It  is  so  used  by  each  of  the  Evan 
gelists,  and  by  none  more  definitely  than  the 
Fourth,  in  this  very  chapter.  Every  Friday  was 
"  the  preparation "  ;  this  particular  Friday  was 
"the  Passover  preparation."  4 


1  Deut.  xvi.  2,  3,  cf.  2  Chron.  xxxv.  7,  8. 

9  Matt.  xxvi.  5  ;  Mark  xiv.  i,  2.  3  john  xix.  14. 

4  See  Matt,  xxvii.  62  ;  Mark  xv.  42  ;  Luke  xxiii.  54  ;  and  John 
xix.  31  and  42.  Josephus  (Ant.  xvi.  6)  cites  an  imperial  edict 
relieving  the  Jews  from  appearing  before  the  tribunals  either  on 
the  Sabbath  or  after  the  ninth  hour  of  preparation  day.  This 
term  was  so  universally  used  that  it  even  passed  into  the  Chris- 


238       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

One  point  still  remains  :  "  that  Sabbath  was  a 
high  day."  I  True  ;  for  not  only  was  it,  as  being 
the  Sabbath  of  Passover  week,  one  of  the 
greatest  Sabbaths  of  the  year,  but  further,  as 
being  the  second  day  of  the  Feast,  it  was  kept  by 
the  Jews  as  "  the  day  of  the  First-fruits  " — one  of 
the  "  red-letter  days  "  in  the  calendar. 

And  now  I  will  turn  away  to  criticisms  of 
another  kind,  far  higher  than  any  of  which  the 
Higher  Critics  take  cognizance.  Men  would  be 
happy  in  this  world  if  only  they  could  shut  out 
God.  And  every  human  religion  is  designed  as 
a  sort  of  backs heesh  to  appease  or  please  the 
Deity.  But  the  Divine  religion  of  Judaism  was 
for  a  redeemed  and  happy  people ;  and  its  special 
characteristic  was  a  series  of  festivals — seasons  of 
national  rejoicing.  The  month  Nisan  began  the 
sacred  year  ; 2  and  in  that  month  the  first  great 
festival  was  celebrated — the  Feast  of  Unleavened 
Bread,  or  of  Passover.  One  of  the  rites  per- 


tian  Church ;  and  in  his  note  on  Mark  xv.  42,  Dean  Alf  ord  quotes 
Bishop  Wordsworth  as  saying  that  it  is  "the  name  by  which 
Friday  is  now  generally  known  in  Asia  and  Greece."  See  also 
his  note  on  Matt,  xxvii.  62. 

1  John  xix.  31. 

2  Before  the  Exodus  it  was  the  seventh  month  (Exod.  xii.  2), 
a  position  it  still  holds  in  the  civil  year. 


CH.  XVIII.]     THE   JEWISH   FESTIVALS  239 

taining  to  it  was  the  cutting  of  the  first  sheaf  of 
the  ripened  grain,  and  presenting  it  in  the 
Temple.  During  the  seven  succeeding  weeks 
the  entire  grain  harvest  was  garnered ;  and  then 
took  place  the  "  Feast  of  Harvest,"  or  as  it  was 
commonly  called,  of  Pentecost.  But  in  Palestine 
the  harvest  of  the  trees  was  as  important  as  that 
of  the  field  ;  and  in  the  autumn,  when  all  had 
been  gathered  in,  was  celebrated  the  "  Feast  of 
In-gathering,"  or  of  Tabernacles  —  the  great 
''harvest-home"  of  the  nation.  Feasts  they 
were,  and  the  people  were  called  upon  "to 
rejoice "  as  they  celebrated  them.  All  human 
religion  is  marked  by  sadness  :  in  the  harmony  of 
the  Divine  religion  the  ruling  note  was  joy.1 

The  first  great  festival  immediately  followed 
the  Paschal  Supper  ;  the  last,  the  Day  of  Atone 
ment.  For  all  true  worship  and  all  real  joy  begin 
with,  and  are  based  upon,  redemption  and  for 
giveness.  The  sacred  calendar  was  thus  intended 
as  a  prophecy ;  and  every  part  of  it  has  its  fulfil 
ment  in  the  great  reconciliation.  Holy  Writ 
teaches  expressly  that  the  Sheaf  of  the  First- 
fruits  prefigured  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Its 
acceptance  was  the  public  proof  of  the  Divine 

1  The  law  of  the  Feasts  will  be  found  in  Exod.  xxiii.  14-17 ; 
Lev.  xxiii. ;  and  Deut.  xvi.  1-17. 


240       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

blessing  upon  the  harvest,  and  the  pledge  that 
all  would  be  safely  garnered.  And  so,  in  the 
antitype,  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  pledge 
and  proof  that  all  His  people  shall,  like  Him,  be 
raised — "  Christ  the  first-fruits  ;  afterward  they 
that  are  Christ's,  at  His  coming."  I 

But  in  the  post-captivity  revival,  the  Jews 
misread  the  long-neglected  law,  and  in  error 
appointed  the  day  after  the  feast  day,  instead 
of  "the  morrow  after  the  Sabbath,"  for  the  pre 
senting  of  the  first-fruits.  And  thus  it  came 
about  that  the  Lord  was  lying  in  the  grave 
upon  the  very  day  the  rite  was  celebrated  which 
prefigured  His  resurrection  from  the  dead.  That 
rite  belongs  not  to  the  Sabbath,  but  to  "  the 
morrow  after  the  Sabbath" — not  to  the  seventh 
day,  which  was  the  "rest"  of  the  old  creation, 
but  to  "  the  first  day  of  the  week,"  the  rest-day 
of  that  new  creation  of  which  He  is  the  First 
born  and  the  Head.2 


1  I  Cor.  XV.  23.      The  words  are  kv  ry  Trapovaig.  avrov.      It  is  not 

an  isolated  event,  but  the  time  of  His  presence  as  contrasted 
with  this,  the  time  of  His  absence. 

2  Deut.  xvi.  9  makes  it  clear  that  the  day  of  the  first-fruits  was 
not  to  be  a  Sabbath,  and  that  the  Divine  intention  was  that  a 
sheaf  of  corn,  cut  that  very  day,  should  be  carried  to  the  Temple 
and  waved  before  the  Lord.     And  it  follows,  of  course,  that  the 
true  day  of  Pentecost  (which  in  that  year  was  observed  upon 
a  Sabbath)  must  always  be  the  first  day  of  the  week — a  fact 


CH.  XVIIL]    THE   TEACHING   OF  THE   TYPES    241 

The  seeming  fitness  of  assigning  the  death 
of  Christ  to  the  very  day  the  Paschal  lamb  was 
killed  has  weight  with  many.1  But  this  is  owing 
to  the  almost  exclusive  prominence  which  popular 
theology  accords  to  that  most  popular  of  types. 
The  offerings  of  the  opening  chapters  of  Leviticus2 
have  a  still  larger  place  in  the  doctrinal  teaching 
of  the  New  Testaments;  and  these  great  sacri 
fices  of  the  law  marked  the  feast  day  on  which 
the  Lord  was  crucified.4 

Other  synchronisms,  too,  there  were.  The 
greatest  mystery  of  the  Passion  was  not  His 
suffering  from  men,  but  His  being  forsaken  of 
God.  In  a  real  sense,  indeed,  the  sufferings 
inflicted  upon  Him  by  men  were  but  a  conse 
quence  of  this.  Hence  His  reply  to  Pilate, 

which  confirms  the  presumption  that  it  was  when  assembled  on 
the  Lord's  Day  that  the  Church  received  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  It  is  held  by  some  that  the  ambiguous  word  employed 
in  Acts  ii.  i  means  "  fulfilled "  in  the  sense  of  passed  (Smith's 
Bible  Did.,  "  Pentecost,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  786). 

1  To  suppose  it  occurred  at  the  same  hour  is  a  blunder.    The 
lamb  was  killed  "  between  the  evenings,"  i.e.,  between  the  sun's 
decline  and  its  final  disappearance— about  6  p.m.  (Edersheim, 
ii.  490). 

2  The  burnt-offering  with  its  meat-offering,  the  peace-offering 
(the  Chagigah  of  the  Talmud)  and  the  sin-offering  (Lev.  i.-iv.). 

3  In   Hebrews,  e.g.,  the  offerings  of  the  law  are  prominently 
mentioned,  while  the  Passover  has  no  place  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
Epistle. 

4  Numb,  xxviii.  17-23.     (Comp.  Josephus,  Ant.  Hi.  10,  5.) 


242       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

"  Thou  couldest  have  no  power  at  all  against 
Me,  except  it  were  given  thee  from  above." 
If  men  seized  and  slew  Him,  it  was  because 
God  had  delivered  Him  up.  "  This  is  your 
hour  and  the  power  of  darkness,"  He  exclaimed 
in  Gethsemane.  And  not  till  that  destined  hour 
had  struck  was  the  Almighty  Hand  withdrawn 
which  till  then  had  shielded  Him  from  outrage. 
His  death  was  the  close,  and  not  the  beginning, 
of  His  sufferings  :  in  truth  it  was  the  hour  of  His 
triumph. 

The  yearly  Passover  was  merely  a  memorial 
of  the  Passover  in  Egypt ;  and  the  midnight 
agony  in  Gethsemane  was  the  great  antitype 
of  that  midnight  scene  when  the  destroying  angel 
flashed  through  the  land  of  the  Pharaohs.  And 
as  His  death  was  the  accomplishment  of  His 
people's  deliverance,  it  took  place  upon  the 
anniversary  of  "  that  selfsame  day  that  the 
Lord  did  bring  the  children  of  Israel  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt."1  And  that  day  again  was 
a  great  anniversary :  it  was  "  the  selfsame  day  " 
of  the  covenant  with  Abraham.2 

x  Exod.  xii.  51. 

2  Ibid.,  verse  41.  The  day  of  the  resurrection  was  also  an 
anniversary.  On  the  iyth  day  of  the  month  Nisan  (or  Abib) 
the  renewed  earth  emerged  from  the  waters  of  the  Flood  (Gen. 
viii.  4) ;  the  redeemed  people  emerged  from  the  waters  of  the 
sea,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  rose  from  the  dead. 


CH.  XVIIL]    THE   CALENDAR  A   PROPHECY      243 

As  we  have  seen,  then,  the  Sacred  Calendar 
of  Israel  is  a  prophecy  of  redemption.  In  the 
Temple  there  was  the  inner  shrine  within  the 
second  veil,  where  none  but  the  High  Priest 
might  ever  enter ;  the  holy  place,  into  which 
the  priests  might  come ;  and  the  court  without, 
where  all  the  people  could  approach.  And  in 
redemption  we  have  the  same  threefold  division  : 
first  the  Christ,  and  those  who,  as  "  partakers  of 
the  heavenly  calling,"  have,  in  Him,  the  right 
of  nearest  access  ;  secondly,  the  earthly  people, 
yet  to  become  a  kingdom  of  priests  ;  and,  thirdly, 
the  great  multitude  of  the  redeemed  of  earth. 
And  so  here.  The  sheaf  of  the  first  fruits  in  its 
primary  interpretation  stands  for  Christ  alone. 
But  the  prophecy  of  the  Calendar,  like  many 
another  prophecy,  has  a  double  fulfilment ;  and, 
in  its  secondary  application,  that  sheaf  represents 
not  merely  the  personal  Christ,  but  the  official 
Christ,  including  all  who  share  "  the  heavenly 
calling."1  And  the  wave  loaves  of  Pentecost 


1  "The  heavenly  calling"  is  not  limited  to  "  the  Church  which 
is  His  body"— the  special  election  of  the  present  dispensation  ; 
it  includes  also  the  Bride— a  special  election  out  of  Israel  in  the 
dispensation  to  follow.  John  the  Baptist— the  last  great  prophet 
of  the  earthly  people— speaks  of  the  Bride  (John  iii.  29) ;  and 
then  the  Bride  disappears  from  Scripture,  to  reappear  in  Rev. 
xix.  7,  xxi.  9  ff.,  which  relate  to  the  restoration  of  the  earthly 


244       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

represent   the  earthly   people,   as  such,  in  their 
special  place  of  privilege  and  blessing. 

But  the  covenant  promise  to  Abraham  included 
blessing  for  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  This  is 
in  the  book  of  the  beginnings — the  book  of 
Genesis ;  and  in  the  visions  of  the  Revelation, 
the  book  of  the  endings,  we  read  of  the  elect 
Pentecostal  company  of  the  redeemed  of  Israel 
on  earth,  and  then  of  the  palm-bearing  multitude 
of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles — "a  great  multitude 
which  no  man  could  number,  of  all  nations  and 
kindreds,  and  people  and  tongues."  I 

This  is  not  a  wild  inference  from  isolated  texts. 
It  is  the  burden  of  prophecy  as  a  whole.  The 
present  dispensation,  we  are  expressly  told,  is 
typified  by  the  first  of  the  sacred  festivals.  "  Our 
passover  has  been  sacrificed,  even  Christ,"  says  the 


people.  But  Christian  theology  more  suo  appropriates  all  Israel's 
blessings,  the  bridal  glory  not  excepted,  and  with  exemplary  dis 
crimination  apportions  the  curses  to  the  Jews  !  Holy  Scripture 
nowhere  speaks  of  the  Church  of  this  dispensation  as  the  bride  ; 
and  Eph.  v.  25-33  asserts  by  implication  that  it  is  not.  To  appeal 
to  2  Cor.  xi.  2  is  mere  trifling. 

1  Gen.  xxii.  18,  Rev.  vii.  3-9.  (The  carrying  of  branches  of 
palm  trees  marked  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  Lev.  xxiii.  40.)  And 
compare  Rev.  xiv.  1-6.  The  scene  here  again  is  laid  on  earth. 
First  we  have  the  144,000  of  the  redeemed  of  Israel ;  and  their 
promised  blessing  is  followed  by  the  proclamation  of  "  the  ever 
lasting  gospel "  to  "  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 
people."  Zech.  xiv.  gives  the  result  in  plain,  prosaic  words. 


CH.  XVIIL]  "RESTORATION  OF  ALL  THINGS"  245 

Apostle  in  enjoining  holiness  of  life,  "  wherefore 
let  us  keep  the  feast."1  And  the  true  Pentecost 
is  yet  to  come.  The  great  event  of  the  Church's 
baptism,  as  recorded  in  the  Acts,  was  within  the 
scope  of  Joel's  prophecy, 2  but  it  was  not  the  fulfil 
ment  of  it.  That  belongs  to  those  wonderful  and 
awful  days  of  mingled  blessing  and  judgment, 
which  are  to  herald  "  the  times  of  the  restitution 
of  all  things " — the  period  of  the  last  great 
festival,  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles. 

For  the  "restoration  of  all  things"  is  not,  as 
some  would  tell  us,  the  accomplishment  in  eter 
nity  of  a  scheme,  now  secret,  to  bring  all  the  lost 
to  heaven.  It  is  the  realisation  upon  earth,  and 
in  days  which  shall  yet  be  marked  and  measured 
in  human  calendars,  of  a  Divine  purpose  plainly 
declared  upon  the  open  page  of  Scripture.  Of 
these  "times  of  restoration  "  the  inspired  Apostle 
tells  us,  "  God  hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all 
His  holy  prophets  since  the  world  began."  And 
to  make  it  more  emphatic  still,  he  adds,  "  Yea, 
all  the  prophets,  from  Samuel  and  those  that 


1  i  Cor.  v.  7,  8  (R.V.)    The  subject  here  is,  not  the  Eucharist, 
but  the  Christian  life  on  earth. 

2  Joel  ii.  28-111.  2.     Mark  the  language  of  the  inspired  Apostle 
in  Acts  ii.  16.     In  the  accuracy  of  Scripture  a  distinction  is 
often  made  between  events  which  are  within  the  scope  of  a 
prophecy  and  events  which  fulfil  it. 


246       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

follow  after,  as  many  as  have  spoken,  have  like 
wise  foretold  of  these  days."  In  a  word,  they 
are  the  burden  of  all  prophetic  testimony,  from 
first  to  last,  in  relation  to  what  theologians  call 
"the  Second  Advent." 

In  the  simple  prose  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  this  same  truth  is  plainly  taught.  The 
"fall"  of  Israel  has  proved  "the  riches  of  the 
world";  the  setting  aside  of  Israel,  "the  recon 
ciling  of  the  world."  What  then,  the  Apostle 
asks,  shall  be  their  restoration  to  favour  but  "life 
from  the  dead  "  ?  Mark  the  force  and  meaning 
of  these  words.  When  the  coming  Pentecost — 
the  presentation  to  God  of  the  "  two  wave  loaves  " 
of  Israel  and  Judah  restored  to  Divine  favour  and 
blessing — leads  on  to  the  last  great  Feast  of 
Ingathering,  results  will  be  achieved  on  a 
scale  so  vast  and  wonderful  that,  in  contrast 
with  them,  the  greatest  present-day  successes 
in  evangelising  the  world  will  seem  like  death. 
In  comparison  with  the  Feast  of  Passover  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles- — that  coming  triumph  of 
redemption — will  be  "as  life  from  the  dead." 

But  in  the  great  mass  of  critical  literature  all 
this  is  absolutely  ignored.  And  yet  it  is  but 
the  realisation  of  the  prayer,  "  Thy  will  be 
done  on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven  " — words 


CH.  XVIII.]    THE  SCOPE  OF  THE  BIBLE  247 

which  are  daily  uttered  as  an  incantation  by 
multitudes  of  people  who  regard  the  hope  of 
their  fulfilment  as  a  dream  of  fanatics. 

Even  that  poor  type  of  Evangelicalism  whose 
horizon  of  truth  is  narrowed  to  what  might  be 
described  as  the  Police  Court  Gospel  which  tells 
how  Christ  has  paid  the  sinner's  penalty,  stands 
on  a  vastly  higher  level  than  the  mere  religionist, 
with  his  "carnal  ordinances,"  not  omitting  ritual 
and  millinery.  But  such  teachers,  one  and  all, 
leave  us  an  easy  prey  to  rationalistic  critics.  For 
while  they  vehemently  assert  that  the  Bible  is 
the  Word  of  God,  they  use  it  merely  as  a  book 
of  piety  or  of  religion. 

The  story  is  told  of  one  who  hid  himself  in  the 
library  of  a  famous  German  theologian  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  that  he  might  learn  the  secret 
of  his  fellowship  with  God.  Let  us  thus  take  the 
place  of  eavesdroppers  upon  the  Apostle  of  the 
Gentiles  as  he  writes  his  great  Redemption 
treatise.  He  first  unfolds  the  wonders  of  grace 
in  the  gospel.  Then  he  turns  aside  to  mark 
how  every  Divine  scheme  of  blessing  for  man 
on  earth  has  been  baffled  by  human  sin.  And 
lastly  he  goes  on  to  show  how  this  tale  of 
apostasy  and  ruin  is  but  a  dark  background 
for  the  display  of  a  supreme  purpose  which  is 


248        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

to  include  the  fulfilment  of  all  that  has  thus 
seemingly  been  thwarted  and  lost.  And  having 
thus  reached  the  climax  of  the  revelation  en 
trusted  to  him  for  the  Church,  nothing  remains 
but  to  enforce  by  exhortation  and  appeal  a  life 
of  holiness  and  righteousness  befitting  those  who 
are  recipients  of  such  "  mercies."  But  ere  he 
turns  the  page  he  exclaims  in  adoration,  "  O  the 
depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and 
knowledge  of  God!  how  unsearchable  are  His 
judgments  and  His  ways  past  finding  out.  For 
of  Him,  and  through  Him,  and  to  Him  are  all 
things  :  to  Him  be  the  glory  for  ever.  Amen." 


CHAPTER   XIX 

*"  I  "HIS  book  has  already  passed  the  limits  I 
-L  had  fixed  for  it ;  and  though  I  seem  to 
have  but  touched  the  fringe  of  a  subject  which 
is  inexhaustible,  the  present  chapter  must  be 
the  last. 

Here,  then,  is  my  answer  to  the  question  of 
the  opening  page,  Whether,  in  view  of  modern 
criticism,  the  Bible  may  still  be  received  with 
the  settled  and  simple  faith  accorded  to  it  in  the 
past?  "I  hold  no  man's  proxy,"  and  yet  in  a 
sense  I  represent  a  class  that  may  surely  claim  a 
right  to  be  heard  in  this  controversy.  Taught  in 
early  life  to  regard  the  Bible  as  the  inspired  Word 
of  God,  we  came  in  time  to  feel  the  power  of 
destructive  criticism.  And  our  faith  was  severely 
tested  by  the  strain.  For  the  man  who  believes 
on  mere  human  testimony  that  a  virgin  bore  a 
child,  and  that  a  dead  man  came  back  to  life,  is  a 
superstitious  creature  who  would  believe  anything. 


249 


250       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

The  question  at  issue,  therefore,  is  between 
agnosticism  and  Christianity.  And  we  have 
faced  that  question  in  the  light  of  all  that  the 
critics  have  to  urge.  Some  of  us  have  studied 
the  Bible  quite  as  diligently  as  they  have ;  and 
as  the  result,  while  wholly  free  from  the  trammels 
of  "articles"  and  "creeds,"  we  have  come  back 
to  the  faith  of  those  who  framed  those  formularies. 
We  do  not  look  upon  the  martyrs  with  patronising 
pity  as  fanatics  or  fools.  The  faith  they  died  for 
we  deem  worth  living  for.  And  if  belief  in  Holy 
Scripture  in  the  sense  in  which  they  believed  in 
it  led  to  the  same  consequences  now  as  in  dark 
days  gone  by,  we  trust  we  should  not  shrink  from 
them. 

My  answer,  then,  is  clear  and  unequivocal.  As 
for  the  manner  of  it  I  am  well  aware  of  its  faults 
and  imperfections.  But  one  characteristic  of  it, 
for  which  I  expect  to  be  taken  severely  to  task,  I 
refuse  to  regard  as  a  fault  at  all.  At  the  outset 
I  waived  appeals  to  authority,  and  therefore  I 
have  deliberately  abstained  from  paying  the 
critical  scholars  the  homage  to  which  they  are 
accustomed.  To  adopt  the  words  of  Dr.  Pusey, 
"  I  have  turned  against  sceptics  their  own 
weapons,  and  used  ridicule  against  the  would- 
be  arguments  of  a  false  criticism  which  thought 


CH.  XIX.]     MORALITY   OF  THE   CRITICS  251 

itself  '  free '  because  it  made  free  with  God's 
Word."  i 

My  treatment  of  the  critics  is  due  to  no  want 
of  deference  for  scholarship.  But  that  which 
gives  them  such  a  commanding  influence  upon 
the  public  mind  is  not  their  scholarship,  but  the 
vantage-ground  they  occupy  as  professors  of 
Christian  universities  or  colleges,  or  ministers  of 
Christian  Churches.  Their  power  to  attack  the 
Bible  is  mainly  due  to  positions  they  have  gained 
by  giving  solemn  pledges  to  defend  it.  Not  that 
I  accuse  them  of  conscious  dishonesty  in  this. 
They  are  above  the  suspicion  of  such  a  charge. 
But  they  do  not  view  things  as  others  view  them. 
The  morality  of  religious  men  seems  to  differ 
from  that  of  ordinary  men.  The  critics  see  no 
inconsistency  between  their  position  and  their 
teaching ;  just  as  they  cannot  see  the  obvious 
consequences  of  that  teaching.  Moreover,  with 
some  notable  exceptions,  they  are  mere  experts, 
and  experts  are  proverbially  lacking  in  judgment. 

To  speak  in  this  way  of  such  eminent  person 
ages  will  seem  to  some  people  almost  to  savour 
of  profanity.  Many  of  us  have  laughed  over 
David  Ross's  warning  to  his  wife  in  The  Days  of 

1  Dr.  Pusey's  Daniel  (Preface). 


252        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

Auld  Lang  Syne,  "  We  maun  be  cannie  wi' 
John's  title,  wumman,  for  ye  ken  professor  is  a 
by-ordinar'  word  :  a'  count  it  equal  tae  earl  at  the 
verra  least,  an'  it  wudna  dae  tae  be  aye  usin't." 
But  in  this  controversy  we  cannot  afford  to  be 
"  cannie."  The  issues  at  stake  are  too  tremen 
dous.  And  moreover,  nothing  sublunary  is 
sacred  to  a  lawyer. 

I  may  plead,  too,  that  I  have  merely  brought 
the  critics  within  the  meshes  of  their  own  net.  I 
have  treated  them  as  they  themselves  treat  the 
"Biblical  writers."  Appeals  to  the  New  Testa 
ment  they  refuse  on  the  ground  that  the  inspired 
Apostles  of  the  Lord,  and  even  the  Lord  Him 
self,  were  prejudiced  and  ignorant :  is  it  very 
shocking,  then,  to  question  their  own  competency  ? 
As  for  me,  I  would  say,  in  borrowed  language, 
how  deeply  I  feel  my  "  utter  weakness  before  the 
power  of  His  Word  and  my  inability  to  sound 
the  depths  even  of  its  simplest  sentence."  But 
yet  it  would  be  the  merest  affectation  in  one  who 
knows  even  a  little  of  the  spiritual  meaning  and 
"  hidden  harmony  "  of  Scripture,  to  pretend  that 
he  can  study  such  works  as  Hastings's  Bible 
Dictionary  and  The  Encyclopedia  Biblica  without 
being  conscious  of  living  in  a  sphere  which  most 
of  the  writers  seem  to  have  never  entered,  and 


CH.  XIX.]      COMPETENCE   OF  THE   CRITICS      253 

of  the  very  existence  of  which  they  display  no 
knowledge. 

It  will  be  said  perhaps  that  in  these  books  the 
editors  and  contributors  write  avowedly  as  critics, 
and  it  is  not  fair  to  assume  that  they  are  only 
critics.  But  can  any  one  point  to  anything  that 
has  come  from  their  facile  pens  which  gives  proof 
of  acquaintance  with  the  spiritual  power  of  Holy 
Scripture  as  "  the  living  and  eternally  abiding 
Word  of  God"?  (i  Pet.  i.  23.)' 

"  It  is  the  first  rule  of  criticism,"  one  of  the 
most  eminent  and  trusted  of  the  critics  tells  us, 
"  that  a  good  critic  must  be  a  good  interpreter  of 
the  thoughts  of  his  author  " ; 2  and  it  would  be 
difficult  to  frame  a  sentence  which  more  definitely 
discredits  the  whole  fraternity.  "  These  are  they 
which  bear  witness  of  Me "  3  is  the  Divine 
inscription  upon  the  Hebrew  Scriptures ;  and  in 
ignoring  this  the  critics  are  entirely  out  of  touch 

1  "  Robertson  Smith,"  exclaims  a  friend  at  my  elbow.   "  Oh  the 
pity  of  it !"  is  my  rejoinder ;  for  I  recall  such  words  as  these  : 
"Only  of  this  I  am  sure  at  the  outset,  that  the  Bible  does  speak 
to  the  heart  of  man  in  words  that  can  only  come  from  God" 
(Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish  Church}.     But  see  p.  39,  ante.     And 
one  of  the  most  notable  of   his  successors  in  Scotland  is  now 
running  the  same  course  ;   so  that  Professor  Cheyne  need  no 
longer  pity  his  weakness  (Old  Testament  Criticism,  p.  245). 

2  Robertson    Smith,    Old    Testament    in    the    Jewish    Church, 
Lecture  III. 

3  John  v.  39  (R.V.) 


254       THE  BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

with  the  thoughts  both  of  the  God  who  inspired 
the  Bible  and  of  its  human  authors. 

Our  quarrel  with  the  Higher  Criticism,  I  repeat 
with  emphasis,  is  not  because  it  is  criticism,  but 
because  it  is  purely  destructive,  and  therefore 
the  lowest  kind  of  criticism.  And,  moreover,  it 
systematically  ignores  the  science  of  evidence, 
on  which  all  true  criticism  rests.  In  fact,  when 
judged  by  every  test  that  can  be  applied  to  it, 
it  is  found  wanting. 

In  the  higher  sense  of  the  word  a  " critic" 
is  a  skilled  and  impartial  judge — all  that  here 
in  England  we  expect  a  judge  to  be.  Its 
secondary  meaning  is  that  of  "  a  harsh  examiner," 
a  hostile  fault-finder.  These  sceptical  writers 
belong  to  the  second  category.  And  let  this  be 
kept  in  view.  We  do  not  reject  the  ascertained 
results  of  true  criticism.  Our  protest  is  against 
the  assumptions  of  a  criticism  which  is  unsound 
in  principle,  and  which  is  carried  on  by  unsound 
methods.  "  We  are  prepared  as  Christian  men  to 
receive  and  welcome  the  fullest  light  of  the  new 
learning.  We  are  not  prepared  to  be  dragged  at 
the  wheels  of  those  who  would  give  us  a  dis 
credited  Old  Testament,  an  emasculated  New 
Testament,  a  fallible  Christ."1 

1  These  words  are  quoted  from  Dr.  Sinker's  valuable  treatise 
on  The  Higher  Criticism  (p.  184). 


CH.  XIX.]     SCEPTICISM  AND   SCHOLARSHIP      255 

If  therefore  I  may  venture  to  combine  practical 
counsel  with  this  summary  and  retrospect,  I  would 
say,  first,  let  no  one  be  "  browbeaten  out  of  belief" 
by  these  attacks  upon  Holy  Scripture.  The 
Bible  is  not  discredited  because  eminent  scholars 
have  turned  against  it  in  the  camp  of  faith. 
The  critics  represent  indeed  that  the  scholarship 
of  Christendom  is  with  them.  But  the  claim 
is  absolutely  unfounded.1  Their  apparent  pre 
eminence  is  due  largely  to  their  being  adepts  in 
the  art  of  what  the  Americans  call  "  literary  log 
rolling."  They  are  "  a  mutual  admiration  society." 
No  one  of  them  can  raise  a  cry  but  that  the  whole 
party  responds.  And  then  the  secular  Press  joins 
in.  For  the  Press  is  with  them.  Naturally. 
For  the  newspapers  represent  "the  world,"  and 
"  the  world  "  is  never  on  the  side  of  Divine 
truth. 

The  alarming  spread  of  scepticism  among  the 
Nonconformists  during  the  last  quarter  of  a 
century  has  been  largely  due  to  their  wincing 
under  this  charge  of  want  of  scholarship.  They 
long  refused  to  barter  the  faith  of  Christ  for 
German  rationalism.  But  Matthew  Arnold's 


1  Such  a  book  as  Lex  Mosaica  is  in  itself  an  answer  to  it.  That 
notable  work  is  a  complete  refutation  of  the  critical  attack  upon 
the  Pentateuch. 


256       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

appeal  for  "  culture  "  was  a  veiled  taunt  which 
they  keenly  felt ;  and  like  the  schoolboy  who  is 
shamed  into  evil  ways  by  the  fear  of  being  deemed 
unmanly,  they  betook  themselves  to  the  new  cult. 
Under  this  influence  many  of  the  younger  men 
are  now  ministers  of  "culture,"  instead  of  being 
ministers  of  the  gospel.  The  result  is  that  while, 
politically  and  socially,  Nonconformity  never  stood 
higher,  as  a  spiritual  power  it  has  sensibly 
declined.  It  is  bartering  its  birthright  for  a 
mess  of  pottage. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  this  boast  of  a  monopoly 
of  scholarship,  and  this  taunt  of  want  of  culture, 
were  among  the  weapons  used  by  the  Arians  in 
the  supreme  controversy  of  early  days.  Those 
who  stood  with  Athanasius  in  the  great  struggle 
for  the  faith  of  Christ  appeared  for  a  time  to  be  a 
weak  minority.  But  the  undeclared  suffrages  of 
"  the  whole  congregation  of  Christian  people " 
were  behind  them ;  and  in  the  end  the  truth 
triumphed. 

If  I  may  go  on  to  offer  advice  of  a  still  more 
practical  kind,  I  would  say  in  the  words  of  that 
most  sensible  of  men,  the  town  clerk  of  Ephesus, 
"  Seeing  that  these  things  cannot  be  gainsaid,  ye 
ought  to  be  quiet."  It  is  idle  to  hold  exciting 
meetings,  and  to  shout  for  "  about  the  space  of 


CH.  XIX.]       NEGLECT   OF  THE   BIBLE  257 

two  hours  "  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God. 
A  reaction  is  sure  to  follow ;  and  when  the  shout 
ing  is  over  thoughtful  people  will  turn  away  to 
listen  to  the  critics. 

The  success  of  the  sceptical  movement  is  not 
due  to  the  strength  of  the  attack,  but  to  the 
weakness  of  the  defence.  With  the  vast  majority 
of  Christians  the  Bible  is  nothing  more  than  "  a 
plan  of  salvation  "  and  "  a  book  of  piety."  Of 
"  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of 
God "  which  it  unfolds  they  are  content  to 
know  nothing.  The  golden  threads  of  type  and 
prophecy  which  are  in  the  warp  and  woof  of  it 
from  Genesis  to  Revelation,  they  ignore.  And 
some  who  pose  as  champions  of  the  Bible  share 
the  ignorance  of  those  whom  they  seek  to  lead. 
No  wonder,  therefore,  if  scepticism  prevails. 

I  once  asked  the  late  Bishop  of  Limerick,  when 
visiting  him  in  his  charming  summer  home  upon 
the  Kenmare  river,  whether,  when  separated  from 
his  library  and  his  work,  the  time  did  not  some 
times  hang  heavily.  I  well  remember  Dr.  Graves's 
answer.  "Give  me,"  said  he,  "a  single  square 
yard  on  the  side  of  a  dry  ditch,  and  I  can  find 
enough  to  interest  me  for  a  day."  To  me,  I 
confess,  a  Kerry  ditch,  wet  or  dry,  would  be 
nothing  but  a  ditch.  And  there  are  multitudes 

18 


258       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

"who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians"  to 
whom  the  Bible  is  nothing  but  a  book.  And  yet 
with  the  spiritually  intelligent  every  page  of  it  will 
bear  the  microscope.  Not  a  single  student  of 
prophecy  can  be  found  in  the  ranks  of  the  critics  ; 
not  a  single  individual  who  understands  the 
Pentateuch  as  "the  word  of  the  beginning  of 
Christ."  * 

Let  us  never  forget  that  the  Higher  Criticism 
is  what  has  been  called  "post-mortem  talk."  No 
one  could  make  a  constant  study  of  &  post-mortem 
report  upon  some  lost  relative  or  friend  without 
becoming  morbid  or  degraded.  And  a  like 
deterioration  seems  to  result  from  the  habitual 
study  of  the  critics.  Let  us  then  keep  their  books 
on  the  upper  shelf,  and  use  them  only  for  reference. 
These  writers  seem  to  miss  even  the  open  and 
obvious  scope  of  the  Old  Testament  as  the  Divine 
history  of  the  Abrahamic  race.  And  its  esoteric 
teaching  about  Christ,  which  pervades  not  merely 
the  writings  of  the  Prophets,  but  the  Law  and  the 
"  Former  Prophets  "  (as  the  historical  books  were 
called),  they  entirely  ignore.  And  it  is  neither 


1  In  other  words,  the  critics  know  nothing  of  the  typology  of 
Scripture.  And  therefore  they  are  ignorant  of  the  language  in 
which  Christian  doctrine  is  taught  in  the  New  Testament  (see 
p.  26,  ante). 


CH.  XIX.]     CONFIDENCE   IN   THE   BIBLE  259 

wholesome  nor  even  safe  for  the  Christian  to 
accustom  himself  to  a  system  of  Bible  study  in 
which  Christ  has  no  place.1 

Here  I  would  add  a  warning  against  being 
frightened  by  a  parade  of  seeming  errors  in  the 
Scriptures.  In  the  preceding  chapters  I  have 
selected  examples  of  various  classes  of  difficulties, 
and  have  shown  how  some  that  may  seem  to  be 
insoluble  can  not  only  be  explained,  but  so 
explained  as  to  become  helps  to  faith.  Others 
there  are,  no  doubt,  to  the  solution  of  which 
we  cannot  find  a  clew,  though  perhaps,  if  we 
had  all  the  facts  and  circumstances  in  view,  the 
solution  might  be  simple  and  obvious.  But  surely 
it  is  a  poor  sort  of  faith  that  depends  on  the 
absence  of  difficulties. 

Treat  your  Bible  as  you  would  treat  your  friend. 
A  friendship  that  cannot  bear  the  strain  of  a 
misunderstanding  does  not  deserve  the  name ; 
nor  a  faith  that  gives  way  in  presence  of  a  diffi 
culty.  But  with  many  the  place  the  Bible  holds 
resembles  that  not  of  a  friend  at  all,  but  rather 
that  of  a  mere  acquaintance.  For  proofs  that  it  is 
the  Word  of  God  are  clear  and  abundant.  But 


1  "  It  is  ignorance  of  Christ  which  turns  the  Scriptures  into  a 
dark,  inexplicable  riddle." — Birks's  Modern  Rationalism. 


260       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

they  do  not  lie  open  on  the  surface.  Gold  and 
diamonds  are  not  picked  up  upon  the  highway ; 
men  need  to  dig  for  them.  Even  Nature  hides 
her  treasures  from  the  trifler.  God  is  "  a  re  warder 
of  them  that  seek  Him  diligently." 

But  nothing  is  gained  by  exaggeration  or 
overstatement.  When,  adopting  the  language  of 
Scripture  itself,  we  call  it  the  Word  of  God,  the 
oracles  of  God,  we  make  full  allowance  for  possible 
errors  in  transcription,  and  imperfection  in  trans 
lation.  But  as  we  have  seen,  to  press  these 
considerations  to  a  point  that  would  impair 
its  Divine  authority  betokens  perverseness  and 
pedantry. 

And  this  leads  me  to  repeat  a  warning  against 
identifying  the  fact  of  inspiration  with  any 
definition  of  it,  or  with  popular  theories 
respecting  it.  Many  people,  for  instance,  seem 
to  assume  that  we  cannot  regard  Genesis  as 
inspired  unless  it  be  maintained  that  every 
portion  of  it  was  imparted  to  Moses  in  the 
same  way  that  the  53rd  chapter  of  Isaiah  was 
imparted  to  the  prophet.  But  what  warrant  is 
there  for  this?  If  the  Higher  Criticism  view 
of  Exodus,  for  example,  be  sustained,  that  book 
is  a  profane  fraud,  and  our  Divine  Lord  is  an 
unreliable  teacher.  But  if  the  a  priori  argument 


CH.  XIX.]     THE  GENESIS   "DOCUMENTS"  261 

in  favour  of  a  written  revelation  be  valid,1  it 
vetoes  the  assumption  that  there  was  no  such 
revelation  during  the  thousands  of  years  which 
preceded  the  Mosaic  age.  That  Genesis  was 
based  on  existing  " documents"  is  a  reasonable 
suggestion  ;  but  the  inference  that  this  disproves 
its  claim  to  inspiration  is  false.  Our  Lord  set 
His  seal  upon  the  book  as  a  whole,  but  He  said 
no  word  either  to  guide  or  to  restrain  the  efforts 
of  reverent  and  competent  criticism  to  analyse  it. 

While  therefore  the  absence  of  definitions  and 
theories  will  seem  to  some  a  serious  defect  in 
this  book,  it  is  a  defect  which  I  refuse  to  remedy. 
If  any  one  doubts  whether  God  could  make  His 
will  known  to  men,  unmistakably,  and  in  language 
they  can  understand,  the  question  at  issue  is  not 
inspiration  at  all,  but  the  power  and  character  of 
God.  And  while  an  intelligent  scepticism  will 
apply  the  severest  tests  to  anything  claiming  to 
be  a  Divine  revelation,  the  rejection  of  it  on 
a  priori  grounds  is  nothing  but  the  dull  stupidity 
of  an  ignorant  unbelief. 

The  Higher  Criticism  is,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
product,  not  of  nineteenth  century  enlightenment, 
but  of  eighteenth  century  rationalism.  And  yet 

1  See  p.  64,  ante. 


262       THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

it  can  boast  of  a  far  more  venerable  origin.  For 
while  there  is  plenty  that  is  novel  in  its  elaborate 
details,  in  its  main  outlines  there  is  nothing  new. 
People  talk  as  though  the  faith  of  the  Church  as 
to  Holy  Scripture  was  settled  in  an  uncritical  and 
ignorant  age  when  the  objections  and  difficulties 
which  now  influence  the  minds  of  men  were 
unknown.  The  thought  is  worthy  of  this 
conceited  age  of  ours.  The  faith  of  the  Church 
was  settled  under  a  fire  of  keen  and  intelligent 
criticism.  Names  such  as  Celsus  and  Porphyry, 
and  the  rest,  not  to  speak  of  the  Gnostics  and 
other  sects,  will  occur  to  every  student.  The 
"  Mosaic  narrative  >}  was,  then  as  now,  explained 
as  allegory,  or  dismissed  as  fable.  The  Mosaic 
books  were  declared  not  to  be  Mosaic  at  all,  but 
the  product  of  a  later  time.  The  historical  books 
were  discredited  as  being  unauthentic,  and  the 
miracles  were  ridiculed.  And  in  the  case  of 
such  books  as  Jonah  and  Daniel  it  may  be 
averred  that  the  modern  attack  adds  nothing 
that  will  stand  the  test  of  still  more  modern 
discoveries.  The  distinctive  element  in  the 
Higher  Criticism  is  merely  that  the  attack  is 
now  delivered  from  the  Christian  camp. 

And     in     conclusion     I     would     repeat    with 
emphasis  a  warning   against  being  deceived  as 


CH.  XIX.]  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  MOVEMENT  263 

to  the  significance  of  the  present  movement. 
There  is  nothing  which  proves  more  plainly  a 
critic's  want  of  judgment,  and  of  clearness  of 
vision,  than  the  incapacity  to  see  that  the 
Christ  controversy  of  the  Early  Church  is  re 
opened  by  the  Bible  controversy  of  to-day.  A 
supernatural  creed  which  does  not  rest  on  a 
supernatural  foundation  is  not  faith,  but  super 
stition.  Puzzle  -  headed  people  may  taunt  us 
with  putting  the  Bible  in  the  place  of  Christ, 
but  every  clear  thinker  recognises  that  once  we 
pass  out  of  the  sphere  where  reason  and  the 
senses  can  teach  us,  we  are  dependent  absolutely 
on  a  Divine  revelation. 

Not  that  "  the  historic  Jesus  "  is  a  myth.  The 
rejection  of  the  Evangelists'  testimony  betokens 
not  a  reasonable  scepticism,  but  the  stupidity  of 
the  "  boot-eating "  juror,  who  doggedly  refuses 
to  believe  the  evidence.  But  an  intelligent 
appreciation  of  the  evidence  for  the  public  facts 
of  His  life  and  ministry  stands  quite  apart  from 
belief  in  the  Divinity  of  Christ.  The  foundation 
truth  of  Christianity  is  that  the  Man  of  Calvary 
is  now  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  God.  And  I 
appeal  to  all  fair  minds  whether  I  am  not  justified 
in  saying  that  those  who  believe  this  upon  no 
better  authority  than  the  Higher  Critics'  Bible* 


264       THE   BIBLE   AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

are  credulous  and  superstitious.  We  can  reach 
the  Living  Word  only  through  the  written  Word, 
Therefore  in  contending  for  a  really  inspired — 
an  absolutely  authoritative — Bible,  we  can  say 
with  Athanasius,  "  We  are  fighting  for  our  all."  I 

But  it  is  not  merely  in  this  incidental  way  that 
the  Higher  Criticism  undermines  the  foundations 
of  Christianity.  It  attacks  them  directly.  The 
critics  freely  acknowledge  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  accredited  the  Old  Testament  as  being  the 
Word  of  God.  Unless,  therefore,  they  can  dis 
credit  His  testimony  their  whole  position  must 
be  condemned  as  not  only  false,  but  profane. 
And  from  this,  as  we  have  seen,2  they  do  not 
shrink. 

The  Christian  truth  of  the  Humiliation  is  that, 
with  the  full  realisation  of  all  that  He  was,  and 
the  clear  apprehension  of  all  that  God  had 
revealed  in  the  Scriptures  which  testified  of 

1  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  present  dearth  of  candidates 
for  Holy  Orders  is  due,  not  to  the  causes  publicly  put  forward, 
but  to  the  effects  of  the  Higher  Criticism  in  undermining  faith 
in  the  Incarnation  among  those  who  might  be  expected  to  offer 
themselves  for  ordination.    And  it  would  be  a  rash  statement  at 
this  moment  to  assert  that  the  majority  of  the  clergy  believe  the 
Apostles'  Creed.    The  book  Contentio  Veritatis,  by  "  Six  Oxford 
Tutors,"  bears  startling  testimony  to  the  extent  of  the  present 
apostasy.      Those  of    the  writers  who  clearly  believe  in  the 
supernatural  appear  to  do  so  as  Churchmen  and  not  as  Christians. 

2  Pp.  69-74,  ante. 


CH.  XIX.]  "KENOSIS"   HERESIES  265 

Him,  the  Lord  in  infinite  grace  stooped  to  the 
lowest  depths  of  self-emptying  and  self-effacement. 
But  the  Kenosis  of  this  new  theology  betokens 
not  Divine  grace  but  human  misfortune.  It  is 
not  the  humiliation  of  Christ,  but  His  degrada 
tion.  It  is  not  that  He  became  man,  but  that 
He  sank  to  the  level  of  a  Jew  of  that  age.  Not 
that  while  "  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given 
all  things  into  His  hands  and  that  He  was  come 
from  God  and  was  going  to  God,"  I  He  humbled 
Himself;  but  that  knowing  nothing  more  than 
His  contemporaries,  His  mind  was  warped  by 
prejudice  and  ignorance.2 

Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  critics  on  this 
question  of  transcendent  importance.  Nor  is  it 
an  excrescence  upon  their  theology  that  might 
be  got  rid  of :  it  is  vital  to  their  system.  They 
admit  that  they  are  challenging  what  has  been 
the  belief  of  the  Church  in  all  ages.  They  admit 
that  that  false  belief— as  they  deem  it — is  based 
upon  the  teaching  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Their  whole  position,  therefore,  is  untenable 
unless  they  can  disparage  His  authority  or  His 
competence. 

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  Higher  Criticism 

x  John  xiii.  3. 

8  This  is  merely  a  summary  of  the  argument  of  chap.  vi. 


266        THE   BIBLE  AND   MODERN   CRITICISM 

raises  again  in  a  new  and  more  subtle  phase 
the  same  issue  as  the  old  Arian  heresy.  It  is 
not  the  Bible  that  is  at  stake,  but  the  Christ  of 
the  Bible.  Is  it,  then,  the  language  of  exaggera 
tion  to  declare  that  in  resisting  it  "  we  are 
fighting  for  our  all"? 


APPENDIX 

NOTE  I. 

(Chap.  IV.  p.  44,  ante.) 
ISOLATED  TEXTS  RELIED  ON  BY  THE  HIGHER  CRITICS. 

IT  is  notorious  that  great  heresies  are  generally  based  on 
isolated  texts,  and  the  rationalistic  attack  on  the  Pentateuch 
relies  on  a  perversion  of  Exodus  vi.  3  and  Jeremiah  vii.  22. 

The  former  passage  is  used  by  the  critics  to  prove  that  the 
name  "Jehovah"  was  unknown  to  the  Patriarchs.  It  is  droll 
how  these  men  employ  arguments  which  refute  themselves;  for 
if  the  book  be  a  literary  forgery  it  is  certain  that  the  brilliant 
author  of  it  would  not  have  given  himself  away  like  this. 

Most  of  the  Tubingen  heresies  have  an  element  of 
truth  in  them,  and  the  figment  that  Jehovah  was  the  tribal 
deity  of  Israel  is  a  travesty  of  the  truth  that  this  was 
God's  covenant  name — His  name  in  relation  to  His  people  as 
brought  into  covenant  relationship  with  Himself.  To  Abraham 
the  covenant  was  a  promise;  it  was  not  till  four  centuries  after 
wards  that  it  was  established  as  a  public  fact.  The  Patriarchs 
received  private  revelations,  but  now  He  was  about  to  declare 
Himself  openly.  Hence  His  words  in  Exodus  vi. — "  Thou 
shalt  see  what  I  will  do  to  Pharaoh  "  And  He  adds,  "  I  am 
JEHOVAH;  and  I  appeared  unto  Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and 
unto  Jacob,  as  God  Almighty,  but  as  to  My  name  JEHOVAH  I 
was  not  known  to  them  "  (R.V.,  margin).  The  significance  of 
that  name  was  never  known  until  (as  He  goes  on  to  say)  He 

267 


268  APPENDIX 


" remembered "  His  covenant;  that  is,  until  the  time  had 
come  for  Him  in  fulfilment  of  it  (see  p.  87,  ante)  to  deliver 
His  people  from  their  sojournings  and  their  bondage. 
"  Wherefore,  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  am  Jehovah" 
(ver.  6). 

Jeremiah  vii.  22  reads  :  "  I  spake  not  unto  your  fathers,  nor 
commanded  them  in  the  day  that  I  brought  them  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  concerning  burnt- offerings  or  sacrifices."  And 
this  is  taken  as  proof  that  "  the  Levitical  Code  "  was  not  in 
existence  in  Jeremiah's  day. 

Such  a  perversion  of  the  prophet's  words  would  be  impos 
sible  but  for  the  prevailing  ignorance  of  the  teaching  of  the 
Pentateuch.  To  the  intelligent  Christian  they  appear  to  be 
merely  a  bare  statement  of  a  fact  which  is  plain  upon  the  open 
page  of  the  Book  of  Exodus.  The  prophet  adds,  "  But  this 
thing  commanded  I  them,  saying,  Obey  My  voice,  and  I  will 
be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  My  people."  This  was  the 
burden  of  all  the  Divine  teaching  at  the  Exodus.  When  God 
brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt  there  was  not  even  a  suggestion 
of  the  Levitical  code  of  sacrifices.  That  was  promulgated 
after  the  formal  dedication  of  the  covenant,  as  a  Divine 
provision  to  maintain  Israel  in  the  position  already  assured  to 
them  as  a  redeemed  and  holy  people.  And  its  significance 
was  twofold.  Its  esoteric  teaching  was  of  Christ.  Its  outward 
value  was  solely  as  a  test  of  obedience.  But  when,  in  the 
pre-exilic  apostasy,  the  Jews  made  it  a  mere  religion,  and  put 
it  in  the  place  of  heart-obedience  to  God,  it  became  only  a 
curse  to  them. 

I  will  risk  a  charge  of  egotism  by  referring  here  to  Chapter 
XII.  of  my  Buddha  of  Christendom.  I  do  so,  however,  because, 
though  it  affords  a  refutation  of  this  error  of  the  critics,  it  was 
written  without  any  reference  to  the  Pentateuch  controversy. 


NOTE   II. 

(Chap.  VIII.  p.  no,  ante.) 
THE  REVISED  VERSION  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

I  wish  to  bring  in  the  R.V.  controversy  only  in  so  far  as  my 
argument  demands  it.  The  method  on  which  the  revisers 
dealt  with  the  text  has  been  thus  described  by  one  of  the 
company  (Dr.  Newth),  whose  account  is  confirmed  by  Bishop 
Ellicott  himself.  The  Bishop,  as  chairman,  asked  whether 
any  textual  changes  were  proposed.  " By  tacit  consent"  Drs. 
Scrivener  and  Hort  were  left  to  reply  by  stating  their  respective 
views.  "Dr.  Scrivener  opens  up  the  matter  by  stating  the 
facts  of  the  case  and  giving  his  judgment  on  the  bearings  of 
the  evidence.  Dr.  Hort  follows,  .  .  .  and,  if  differing  from 
Dr.  S.'s  estimate  of  the  weight  of  the  evidence,  gives  his 
reasons  and  states  his  own  view.  After  discussion  the  vote 
of  the  company  is  taken,  and  the  proposed  reading  accepted 
or  rejected.  The  text  being  thus  settled,  the  chairman  asks 
for  proposals  on  the  rendering." 

Is  it  any  wonder  that  a  learned  writer  declared  that  if  this 
description  of  their  action  "  is  not  a  kind  of  joke,  it  is  quite 
enough  to  'settle'  this  Revised  Greek  Testament  in  a  very 
different  sense"?  Fancy  a  question  of  prescriptive  rights 
being  "  settled  "  in  such  a  manner  as  this  in  a  court  of  justice  ! 
And  remember  that,  while  "textual  criticism"  sounds  very 
recondite,  the  question  at  issue  in  every  instance  was  as 
definitely  a  matter  of  evidence  as  is  the  case  in  a  suit  about 
a  water-course  or  a  right  of  way.  And  it  ought  to  have 
been  dealt  with  according  to  the  established  principles  and 
rules  of  evidence. 

269 


270  APPENDIX 


If  the  four  or  five  most  ancient  MSS.  were  always  in  accord 
a  plausible  case  might  be  made  out  for  following  them  to  the 
exclusion  of  the  other  authorities.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact  they 
are  scarcely  ever  in  accord  in  any  instance  where  they  differ  from 
the  Received  Text.  Suppose  that  in  a  prescriptive  rights 
action  the  "ancient  witnesses  "  called  for  the  plaintiff  differed 
in  their  evidence,  and  the  jury  by  a  majority  vote  decided  to 
follow  some  of  them  in  opposition  to  the  others  and  also  to  the 
united  voice  of  the  rest  of  the  community  ;  and  you  have  in  a 
parable  the  action  of  the  Revisers  in  "  settling  "  the  Greek  text. 

And  in  numberless  cases  where  the  Revisers  happily 
refused  to  mutilate  the  text,  they  compromised  matters  by 
allowing  the  insertion  in  the  margin  of  an  alternative  reading, 
which,  though  possibly  quite  devoid  of  authority,  suggests 
a  doubt  as  to  the  right  reading  of  the  passage. 

The  question  of  the  translation  is  quite  outside  the  purpose 
of  this  reference  to  the  R.V.,  which  is  merely  to  emphasise 
the  fact  that  sceptical  objections  based  on  textual  criticism 
are  worthless.  I  will  therefore  dismiss  the  matter  with  a 
word  of  comment  and  a  word  of  advice. 

An  old  MS.  may  have  survived  its  fellows  for  the  same 
reason  that  an  old  pair  of  boots  sometimes  survives,  namely, 
through  having  been  put  aside  on  account  of  some  fault  or 
blemish.  Of  the  five  most  ancient  MSS.  which  the  Revisers 
chiefly  followed,  three  are  declared  by  critics  of  eminence  to 
be  corrupt  and  untrustworthy. 

And  the  advice  I  venture  to  offer  to  readers  who  cannot 
revise  the  R.V.  for  themselves  is  this  :  Read  the  Gospels 
always  in  the  Authorised  Version,  using  the  R.V.  only  as  a 
book  of  reference  ;  and  when  the  text  differs,  assume  that  the 
A.V.  is  right,  for  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  it  is  so. 


NOTE  III. 

(Chap.  XI.  p.  147,  ante.) 
"THREE  DAYS  AND  THREE  NIGHTS." 

Some  people  cannot  understand  how  the  Lord's  words  that 
He  would  be  "three  days  and  three  nights"  in  the  grave 
could  be  true  if  He  died  on  Friday  and  rose  on  Sunday 
morning.  This  is  a  notable  instance  of  the  common  blunder 
of  interpreting  words  and  phrases  otherwise  than  by  their  use. 
Words  are  but  counters ;  they  have  no  intrinsic  value.  The 
only  practical  question,  therefore,  is  What  do  they  stand  for  ? 
And  what  alone  concerns  us  here  is,  What  meaning  did  the 
Lord's  words  convey  to  those  to  whom  they  were  addressed  ? 
To  this  question  the  Gospels  afford  the  answer.  Four-and 
twenty  hours  after  His  burial  the  Jews  came  to  Pilate  and 
said,  "We  remember  that  that  deceiver  said,  while  he  was 
yet  alive,  After  three  days  I  will  rise  again ;  command  there 
fore  that  the  sepulchre  be  made  sure  until  the  third  day  " 
(Matt,  xxvii.  63,  64).  Compare  with  this  2  Chron.  x.  5-12, 
relative  to  the  new  king  and  his  Israelite  subjects.  "  He  said 
unto  them,  Come  again  unto  me  after  three  days.  ...  So 
Jeroboam  and  all  the  people  came  to  Rehoboam  on  the  third 
day."  Or  see  Esther  iv.  16 ;  v.  i.  The  Queen's  order  to  her 
people  was,  "  Fast  ye  for  me,  and  neither  eat  nor  drink,  three 
days,  night  or  day."  And  yet  "  On  the  third  day "  Esther 
held  the  banquet. 

In  either  case  the  words  conveyed  to  those  who  used  and 
heard  them  a  meaning  different  from  that  which  we  attach  to 


272  APPENDIX 


them.  Had  Jeroboam  not  come  on  the  third  day  it  would 
have  meant  rebellion.  Had  that  Easter  Sunday  passed  leaving 
the  seal  upon  the  tomb  unbroken,  the  guard  would  have  been 
withdrawn,  and  the  Pharisees  would  have  proclaimed  their 
triumph. 

A  prison  chaplain  would  find  no  difficulty  in  explaining 
this  to  his  congregation.  Our  civil  day  begins  at  midnight, 
and  the  law  reckons  any  part  of  a  day  as  a  day.  Therefore 
while  a  sentence  of  three  days  means  three  days  of  twenty 
four  hours,  equal  to  seventy-two  hours,  a  prisoner  under  such 
a  committal  is  seldom  more  than  forty  hours  in  gaol ;  and  I 
have  known  cases  where  the  period  was  in  fact  only  thirty- 
three  hours.  And  this  mode  of  reckoning  and  of  speaking 
was  as  familiar  to  the  Jew  as  it  is  to  the  habitues  of  our 
criminal  courts.  "  A  day  and  a  night  make  an  Onah,  and  a 
part  of  an  Onah  is  as  the  whole."  Dr.  Lightfoot  quotes  this 
Jewish  saying  in  his  Hora  Hebraica  (Matt.  xii.  40) ;  and  he 
adds  :  "  Therefore  Christ  may  truly  be  said  to  have  been  in 
his  grave  three  Onoth  ....  the  consent  of  the  schools  and 
the  dialect  of  the  nation  agreeing  thereunto." 

I  have  seen  it  stated  that  as  Jonah's  imprisonment  in  the 
whale  lasted  three  days  and  three  nights  the  Lord  must  have 
laid  for  as  long  a  period  in  the  grave.  But  this  is  only  another 
phase  of  the  same  blunder.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  Jonah's  "three  days  and  nights"  was  a  longer  period 
than  our  Lord's. 


NOTE   IV. 

(Chap.  XV.  p.  198,  ante.) 
THE  GENEALOGIES  OF  OUR  LORD. 

Some  people  seem  to  assume  that  the  gospel  "Genealogies" 
were  dictated  to  Matthew  and  Luke  by  the  Spirit  of  God: 
others,  that  they  were  based  on  the  gossip  of  Joseph's  family. 
It  is  not  easy  to  decide  which  view  is  the  more  extraordinary. 
These  genealogies  were  of  course  transcripts  of  Jewish  records ; 
for  such  pedigrees  were  a  speciality  with  the  Jews,  especially 
in  the  case  of  families  belonging  to  the  Royal  or  Priestly 
houses.  And  if  they  had  not  been  authentic  they  would  have 
been  promptly  exposed,  and  the  Gospels  discredited,  by 
the  Jewish  opponents  of  Christianity.  As  Dr.  Bloomfield 
writes  (Greek  Test.  Corn.)-.  "If  these  genealogies  of  Christ 
(which  must  be  understood  to  have  been  derived  from  the 
public  records  in  the  temple)  had  not  been  agreeable  thereto, 
the  deception  would  have  been  instantly  detected." 

This  is  so  obvious  that  I  should  not  notice  it  were  it  not  for 
the  use  made  of  these  genealogies  by  certain  of  the  critics. 
For  example,  one  of  the  lesser  lights,  quoted  more  than  once 
in  these  pages,  referring  to  the  very  probable  hypothesis  that 
Matthew  gives  the  pedigree  of  Joseph,  and  Luke  that  of  Mary, 
predicts  that  "  a  coming  generation  of  Bible  students  will  find 
it  almost  incredible  that  such  an  explanation  should  have  been 
seriously  urged."  He  goes  on  to  notice  superciliously  that 

19  273 


274  APPENDIX 


"  Joseph's  family  occupied  twenty-eight  generations,  while  in 
the  same  time  Mary's  family  got  through  thirty-eight  genera 
tions  ; "  and  ends,  "  Luke  inadvertently  states  that  Joseph  was 
the  son  of  Heli,  when  he  meant  that  Mary  was  the  daughter 
of  Heli."  This  is  meant  to  be  very  smart.  The  reader  must 
decide  whether  such  writing  does  not  justify  my  treatment  of 
the  critics.  The  real  question  thus  raised  is  not  at  all  the 
inspiration  of  the  Gospels,  but  whether  the  Evangelists  are 
deserving  of  any  attention  or  respect. 

An  alternative  explanation,  that  Matthew  gives  Joseph's 
genealogy  as  legal  successor  to  the  throne  of  David,  and  Luke 
his  private  genealogy,  is  maintained  with  much  erudition  and 
force  in  Lord  Arthur  Hervey's  Genealogies  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  An  epitome  of  his  argument  will  be  found  in  his 
article,  "Genealogy  of  Christ,"  in  Smith's  Bible  Dictionary. 
A  brief  notice  of  the  other  view  will  be  found  in  Dean 
Plumptre's  note  to  Luke  in.  23  in  Bishop  Ellicott's  New 
Testament  Commentary  for  English  Readers. 

Dr.  Bullinger  states  the  matter  thus: — "Matthew  gives 
the  royal  and  legal  line  through  Solomon ;  Luke  gives  the 
natural  and  lineal  line  through  Nathan.  The  former  is  the 
line  according  to  legal  succession  ;  the  latter  is  the  line  accord 
ing  to  natural  descent.  .  .  .  Both  lines  meet  in  Joseph,  the 
son  of  Jacob  by  birth,  and  the  son  of  Heli  by  marriage  with 
Mary,  Heli's  only  daughter." x 

1  Number  in  Scripture,  p.  159.  In  a  footnote  he  notices  that  the  verb 
used  in  Luke  iii.  23  means  "  to  own  as  a  custom  or  usage"  (Liddell  &  Scott). 
It  is  not  "  as  was  supposed,"  but  "  as  was  reckoned  by  Jewish  customs." 
<Bloomneld's  Gr.  Test.} 


NOTE   V. 
(Chap.  XV.  p.  201,  ante.) 

THE    DISTINCTION    BETWEEN   THE   KINGDOM   OF   HEAVEN, 
THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  AND  THE  CHURCH. 

The  term  "  Kingdom  of  Heaven,"  or,  to  be  strictly  accurate, 
11  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens,"  occurs  thirty-three  times  in 
the  First  Gospel,  and  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.1 

The  Greek  work  basileia  has  the  same  range  of  meaning  as 
our  English  word  "  Kingdom."  It  means  (i)  royal  authority ; 
sovereign  power;  rule;  or  (2)  the  territory  or  country  over 
which  a  king  rules.  Therefore  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens 
must  mean  either  (i)  the  rule  of  the  heavens  over  the  earth, 
or  else  (2)  the  heavens  as  the  scene  or  sphere  of  Divine  rule. 
We  cannot  hesitate  in  deciding  that  (i)  is  the  meaning  here, 
"  the  heavens  "  standing  for  "  God  "  by  a  well-known  figure  of 
speech.  And  our  best  commentators,  recognising  this,  refer 
to  the  Book  of  Daniel  to  explain  it ;  but,  having  thus  found 
the  key,  they  generally  throw  it  away  unused. 

"  That  the  heavens  do  rule  "  was  announced  to  Nebuchad 
nezzar  as  a  present  fact  and  truth  (Dan.  iv.  26).  But  yet  the 
visions  of  Daniel  ii.  and  vii.  foretold  a  future  kingdom — a 
kingdom  in  the  same  sense  in  which  Babylon,  Persia,  Greece, 
and  Rome  were  kingdoms — foretold  a  time  when  God  would 
take  back  the  sceptre  of  earthly  sovereignty  which  He  had 

1  The  expression  was  used  by  Jewish  writers  in  a  vague  sense  =  the 
inward  love  and  fear  of  God  (Horn  Hebraica^  Matt.  iii.  2). 

275 


276  APPENDIX 


entrusted  to  Nebuchadnezzar.  Now  this  Messianic  kingdom 
is  connected  in  prophecy  with  the  race  of  Abraham  and  the 
throne  of  David.  And  the  New  Testament  opens  with  a 
revelation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  heir  of  David  and 
of  Abraham  —  the  Messiah  of  the  Promises,  the  king  of 
Messianic  prophecy.  And  His  ministry  began  by  an  an 
nouncement  that  the  promised  rule  was  about  to  come. 
Matt.  iii.  2  was  not  the  statement  of  a  present  truth  or  fact, 
but  a  prophetic  declaration.  This  was  the  purpose  of  the 
First  Gospel ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  so  guided  and  restrained  the 
writer  of  it  that  it  contains  not  one  single  sentence  that  is 
inconsistent  with  that  purpose.  It  is  the  Gospel  of  the 
Kingdom  of  Heaven;  for  the  expression  is  peculiar  to 
Matthew,  who  uses  it  some  thirty-three  times,  meaning  always 
and  only  the  promised  Messianic  earthly  kingdom. 

The  expression  "  the  Kingdom  of  God  "  occurs  five  times 
in  Matthew  ;  fifteen  times  in  Mark ;  thirty-three  times  in  Luke; 
twice  in  John  (iii.  3,  5) ;  seven  times  in  Acts,  and  occasionally 
in  the  Epistles.  In  this  expression  the  word  "  Kingdom " 
has  no  longer  a  fixed  meaning.  In  some  of  the  passages  it 
means  the  rule  of  God  ;  in  others,  the  whole  sphere  in  which 
that  rule  is  exercised ;  and  in  others  again  it  has  an  ethical  or 
spiritual  meaning,  as  representing  the  state  of  blessedness 
pertaining  to  the  Divine  rule.  John  iii.  3,  5  affords  a  notable 
instance  of  this  third  category.  Scripture  would  never  say 
"  Except  a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot  see  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven"  Still  more  incongruous  would  it  be  to  say  "he 
cannot  see  the  Church"  Many  things  may  be  predicted  of 
both  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  and  of  the  Kingdom  of  God ; 
just  as  of  England  and  of  the  British  Empire.  But  though 
the  terms  may  often  be  used  interchangeably,  they  are  not 
synonymous. 


APPENDIX  277 


This  will  appear  very  plainly  if  we  examine  the  passage  in 
Matthew  where  the  term  "  the  Kingdom  of  God "  occurs. 
They  are  chaps,  vi.  33  ;  xii.  28  ;  xix.  24  ;  xxi.  31  and  43.  The 
intelligent  student  of  Scripture  will  see  that  in  no  one  of 
these  passages  could  "the  Kingdom  of  Heaven"  be  used. 

Chap.  xvi.  19  claims  special  notice.  It  has  been  said 
that  if  these  words  had  not  been  written  the  apostasy  of 
Rome  could  never  have  arisen.  If  the  distinction  I  am 
pleading  for  were  recognised,  the  pretensions  of  Rome  would 
collapse.  It  was  in  relation  to  the  Earthly  Messianic  Kingdom 
that  the  Lord  conferred  upon  Peter  this  "  power  of  the  keys." 
To  talk  of  "  the  Keys  of  the  Kingdom  of  God "  is  absurd. 
More  silly  still  does  it  seem  to  the  intelligent  Christian  to  talk 
of  the  Keys  of  the  Church  which  is  the  body  of  Christ.  But 
Rome,  though  claiming  to  be  the  inspired  keeper  of  the 
truth,  is  ignorant  of  these  distinctions,  albeit  they  are  so 
obvious  and  so  elementary. 

In  no  case  can  the  term  "Church  of  God"  be  used 
interchangeably  with  "Kingdom  of  Heaven."  For  the  one 
means  a  company  of  people,  and  the  other  a  system  of 
Government.  The  English  word  "Church"  has  meanings 
which  the  Greek  word  Ecdesia  does  not  possess.  In  the 
LXX.  Ecdesia  is  the  usual  rendering  for  the  Hebrew  Kahal 
(as  'Adah  is  usually  rendered  sunagoge).  And  whether  in 
the  LXX.,  in  the  New  Testament,  or  in  classical  Greek  it 
means  only  and  always  a  company  of  privileged  or  represen 
tative  people.  Acts  xix.  32,  39,  41  may  appear  an  exception, 
but  we  who  are  used  to  hearing  an  election  mob  addressed  as 
"  gentlemen  "  need  not  wonder  if  a  Greek  official  flattered  an 
Ephesian  mob  by  the  use  of  the  word  Ecdesia.  And  the 
English  rendering  of  i  Tim.  iii.  15  may  also  seem  an 
exception.  But  there,  as  in  verses  4,  5,  and  12  of  the  same 


278  APPENDIX 


chapter,  the  word  house  is  used  by  a  common  figure  of  speech 
for  household.  Paul  so  uses  the  word  again  in  i  Cor.  i.  16 ; 
and  it  is  so  used  in  several  passages  in  Acts.  The  language 
of  i  Pet.  ii.  5  cannot  be  strained  to  support  the  figment  that 
a  building  would  ever  be  an  Ecclesia. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  word  occurs  nowhere  in  the 
Gospels  save  in  Matt.  xvi.  18,  and  xviii.  17.  And  I  deprecate 
any  exposition  of  these  passages  which  makes  them  refer 
exclusively,  or  even  primarily,  to  the  present  dispensation. 
Such  an  exegesis  is,  I  think,  refuted  by  the  fact  that  it  is  in 
the  teaching  of  the  First  Gospel  that  these  words  are  recorded. 
But  may  I  here  hazard  the  opinion  that  a  right  understanding 
of  our  Lord's  words  in  Matt.  xvi.  16-19  would  suffice  to 
undermine  the  whole  fabric  of  the  apostate  religion  of 
Christendom  ? 

In  the  Epistles  to  the  Ephesians  and  Colossians  the  word 
eccksia  acquires  a  new  dignity.  In  every  other  occurrence  of 
it  in  the  New  Testament,  and  always  in  the  LXX.,  it  represents 
a  company  of  people  on  earth.  But  in  Ephesians  and  Colossians 
it  includes  saints  on  earth  and  saints  in  heaven.  Having  regard 
to  i  Cor.  xii.  12,  some  would  maintain  that  the  body  means 
only  the  saints  on  earth.  But  the  closing  words  of  Eph.  i. 
("His  body,  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all") 
precludes  any  such  limitation.  And  the  language  of  Ephesians 
and  Colossians  vetoes  the  suggestion  that  the  term  "body" 
is  merely  an  illustration  of  the  union  between  Christ  and  the 
Church.  It  is  a  figure,  of  course;  but  we  must  distinguish 
between  a  figure  which  is  the  expression  of  a  fact  and  a  figure 
which  is  merely  an  illustration  of  a  fact.  The  union  between 
Christ  and  those  who  are  members  of  His  body  must  be  more 
real,  not  less  real,  than  the  union  between  a  man  and  the 
members  of  his  natural  body. 


INDEX 


Abraham,  a  "lunar  hero,"  42 
Advent,  The  Second,  21  1  ff,  227,  246 
Alford,  Dean,  13,  30,  68,  76,  i66«, 


,  227,  238?* 
Anthropomorphism,  100 
Apocalypse,  The,  183 
Araunah,  The  threshing-floor  of,  161 
Argyll,  Duke  of,  115,  I28« 
Arnold,  Matthew,  20,  28,  40,  54, 
56»  57,  74*>  160,  255 

Bampton  Lectures,  Canon  Bernard's, 

I94«,  199 

,,     Dr.  Hatch's,  199^ 
Belshazzar,  136,  137 
Bentley,  103 
Berosus,  History  of,  135 
Bible,  Authority  of  the,  1,  15,  19,  22, 

I75ff,  249 
,,      Character  and  scope  of  the, 

15,  119,  194,  257 
„      a  human  book,  10,  II,  12,  27 
,,      a  Divine  book,  II,  27 
,,      MSS  of  the,  101,  105,  109, 

270 

Birks,  Prof.,  31,  35«,  25972 
Bullinger,  Dr.  E.  W.,  51^,  274 

Calendar,  The  sacred,  238,  243 
Calvinism,  216,  217 


Canaanites,  Extermination  of  the, 

156-158 

Carlyle,  Thomas,  80 
Charles  II.,  Death  of,  36,  37,  38 
Cheyne,  Prof.,  5,  9,  37,  39,  40,  41, 

42,  44,  75,  13 1  n,  149 
Christ,  The  Divinity  of,  II,  55,  56, 

175.  263 

„       Rejection  of,  58-61 
,,       Testimony  of,  to  the  Scrip 
tures,  69,  72,  74,  78,  175 
Chronological  errors,  161  ff 
Chronology,  Biblical,  163  ff 
Church,     The,      172,     24372    (see 

"Ecclesia") 
Creation,  The,  ii2ff 
Criticism,  see  "Higher  Criticism" 
Critics,  Capacity  of  the,  28,  30,  49, 

132,  210,  2i5«,  251,  255 
,,     Inconsistency  of  the,  53,  57, 

251 

„     Credulity  of  the,  9 
Crucifixion,  The  date  of  the,  163, 
232  ff 

Dana,  Prof.,  118 

Daniel,  Book  of,  44,  45,  129  ff 

Darius  the  Mede,  137 

David,  King,  79-82,  161 

"  Day,"  The  Creation,  122-125 


279 


280 


INDEX 


Driver,  Prof.,   14,  41,  44,  50,  73, 

133,   I34»  136,  149,  212 


Ecchsia,  Meaning  of  the  word,  277 
Edersheim,  Dr.,    58,  2$2n,   236^, 


Eichhorn,  26,  39,  40**,  41,  42,  132 
Encyclopedia  Biblica,  The,  5  ff,  12, 

14.  37.  39,  61,  233«,  252 
Epistles,  Inspiration  of  the,  I79ff 
Evidence,  Principles  of,  106 
Ewald,  40,  133 
Experts  as  witnesses,  45,  48 

Fairbairn,  Dr.,  64 
Farrar,  Dean,  134,  I35« 
Feasts,  The  Jewish,  238  ff 
First-fruits,  The,  239,  240,  243 

Gamaliel's  speech  (Acts  v.  36),  225, 

226 

Genealogy,  Our  Lord's,  198,  273 
Genesis,  Documents  of,  260,  261 
Genesis,  The  creation  story  of, 

in  ff 

Gethsemane,  16,  242 
Gladstone,  Mr.,  2&n,  H2ff 
Gospels,  Scope  of  the,  15,  16,  194 
Graves,  Bishop,  257 

Harnack,  Prof.,  48,  172 

Hastings'  Bible  Dictionary,  14,  69, 

212,  233«,  252 
Hatherley,  Lord,  65,  66,  70 
Hebrew  and  the  Higher  Criticism, 

42,  44,  50,  94,  96,  132,  149 
Hengstenberg,  26,  132,  140 
"  Herald  Angels'  Song,"  The,  108 
HigherCriticism,  Character  of,26,43, 
129,  150,  251, 
254,  258,  262 

»  ,»       Origin  of,  39,  261 

»»  „       Strength   of,    10, 

257,  267 


Higher  Criticism,  Tendency  of,   9, 

37,  43.  6l>  70,  264 
Humiliation,  The,  264  (see  Kenosis} 
Huxley,  Prof. ,  on  Genesis,  1 12  ff,  127 

,,  ,,       on  Infallibility,  173 

Incarnation,  The,  8,  55 
Infants,  The  damnation  of,  160 
Inscdption  on  the  Cross,  The,  227- 

230 
Inspiration,  4,  78  ff,  169  ff,  260 

Verbal,      83  ff,     95  ff, 

177  ff,  228 

,,  No  definition  of,  261 

Irish  story,  An,  221 
Isaiah,  Book  of,  45-47,  86,  90,  91 
Isaiah  II.,  45,  46 

Jehovah,  The  name,  86,  87,  267 
Jericho,  The  blind  men  at,  224,  225 
Jews,  Position  of  the,  159 

,,     Restoration  of  the,  246 
John,  Gospel  of,  53,  190,  194,  197 
Jonah,  Book  of,  142  ff 

Kenosis,  The,  71-74,  175,  265 
Kingdom  of  heaven,  The,  201  ff,  275 
Kingdom  of  God,  275 

Lange,  234 

Language  of  the  Prophets,  86,  93, 

97 

Lawyers,  Testimony  of  great,  65,  66 
Lux  Mundi  School,  The,  172-174 

Marriage,  70 

Martyrs,  The,  2,  3,  250 

Massoretes,  The,  102 

Matthew,  Gospel  of,  i87ff,  195  ff, 
276 

Miracles,  52-57,  88,  147,  203,  206 

Morality  and  Faith,  Analogy  be 
tween,  37-39,  69-70 

Mosaic  era  literary,  The,  43,  157** 


INDEX 


281 


Nicodemus,  16 

Nonconformists,  Scepticism  among 
the,  255 

O'Grady,  Chief  Baron,  142 
Ordination  pledges,  14,  251 

Parables  of  Matthew  xiii.,  204,  205 
Parousia,  The,  211  ff,  227 
Pascal,  55,  63 

Passover,  The,  218,  220,  233,  235  ff 
Pentateuch,  The,  43,  44,  129,  255^, 

258 

Pentecost,  Feast  of,  239,  243,  245 
Police  v.  Saints,  17 
Preparation,  The,  237 
Priesthood  of  Christ,  98,  99 
Prophecy,  Character  of,  50,  51 
Prophecy,  Study  of,  26,  30 
Ptolemaic  System,  The,  29,  186 
Pusey,  Dr.,  250 

Queen  Victoria  and  the  homicide, 
155,  156 

Reade,  Charles,  52,  I52» 
Reformation,  The,  19,  23,  24 
"  Restitution  of  all  things,"  The,  245 
Resurrection,  The,  8,  76,  147 
Revised  Version,  The,  99/2,  104  ff, 

i66n,  269 
Revolution,  The  French,  12 

Saphir,  Adolph,  184 
Sayce,  Prof.,  43,  137^ 
Scepticism  of  the  Day,  The,  4,  22,  53 
Scrivener,  Dr.,  105,  107,  108,  269 
"  Sermon  on  the  Mount,"  The,  188, 

202,  203« 

Servitudes,  The,  165 


Sinker,  Dr.   R.,  6Sn,   105^,   I22«, 

131*.  254 

Sin-offering,  The,  217,  218,  220 
Smith,  Goldwin,  19 
Smith,  Robertson,  38,  39,  253^ 
Speaker's    Commentary ,    Editor    of 

the,   107,  108 
Stephen,  Sir  J.  F.,  48 
Surgeon  and  patient,  12 
Swift,  Dean,  57^ 

Tabernacles,    Feast   of,    239,    244, 

246 

Tapestry,  Two  sides  to  the,  77 
Temptation,  The,  67 
Theudas,  The  insurrection  of,  225, 

226 
"Three   days  and    three    nights," 

147,  271 

Tiberius,  The  reign  of,  163,  202 
Times,  The,  39,  115,  127/2 
Tyndall,  Mr.,  126 
Types,    Doctrine   of  the,   26,  216, 

220,  238  ff,  258^ 

Verbal   Inspiration,  see   "  Inspira 
tion" 

Victoria,  Queen,  155 
Virgin  birth,  The,  8,  249 

Weeks,  The  Seventy,  138,  139,  168 
Wellhausen,  40,  41 
Westcott,  Bishop,  105,  140 
Whale  of  Jonah,  143-146 
Words,  Meaning  of,  84  ff,  96-98 
Wordsworth,  Bishop,  104 

Xerxes,  Proclamation  of,  95 
Yahveh,  The  name,  86,  87 


SOME   OF  THE   TEXTS   EXPLAINED 
OR    NOTICED. 


EXODUS. 

PAGE 

vi.  3     .       .       .       .     8;w,  267 

2  SAMUEL. 
xxiv.  24         ...  161 


i  KINGS. 


VI.    I 


DANIEL. 


ix.  25 


165 


i  CHRONICLES. 
xxi.  25 161 

ISAIAH. 
liii.  7 2i8w 

JEREMIAH. 
vii.  22 268 


139 


MATTHEW. 

xi.  14 200 

xii.  38-40      .        .        .        .147 

xiii 205 

xxii.  31,  32   .         .         .         .  92 

xxiv.  3           ....  207 

xxiv.  34         ....  227 

LUKE. 

ii.  14    •         •         .         .      108-110 
xxiv.  27,  44  .         .         .         .     176 


JOHN. 

PAGE 

L  r~3 53 

i.  10-12         ....  197 

i-  29 217 

x-  34,  35                •        •        •  93 

xiv.  1-3         ....  21 

ACTS. 

i"-  J9 245 

v.  36 225 

xiii.  18-21     ....   1657* 

ROMANS. 
xv.  8 196 

1  CORINTHIANS. 

ii.  13    •        •        .        •       94,  182 

xv.  3 76 

xv.  23 240 

2  CORINTHIANS. 

ii.  17     .        .        .        .        .40 

HEBREWS. 

v.  12    .        .        .        .  25,  98,  99 
2  PETER. 


i.  21 


UNWIN  BROTHERS.   LIMITED.  PRINTERS.  WOKING  AND  LONDON. 


SOME  PRESS  NOTICES  OF  THE  FIRST  EDITION. 


"  This  vigorous  criticism  of  the  methods  of  the  '  Higher  Critics.' 
.  .  .  The  title  of  the  volume  is  taken  from  the  heading  given  to 
a  correspondence  which  appeared  some  years  ago  in  our  columns, 
and  in  which  Sir  Robert  took  a  prominent  part." — The  Times. 

"  It  is  full  time  that  such  a  book  as  this  was  written.  ...  Sir  R. 
Anderson  is  well  known  to  thoughtful  readers  as  the  writer  of 
works  of  singular  logical  directness,  and  the  present  is  justly 
styled  by  the  Bishop  of  Durham,  in  a  Preface  of  striking  cogency, 
as  well  as  beauty,  'this  remarkable  book.'  ...  Sir  Robert  is 
happy  in  his  illustrative  stories.  The  story  of  Queen  Victoria 
and  the  homicide  shows  strikingly  the  danger  of  suppression  as 
to  the  Bible  and  the  God  of  the  Bible.  The  Irish  story  of  the 
apparent  conflict  of  testimony  is  most  relevant  to  the  assertion 
as  to  the  conflict  of  testimony  in  Scripture.  We  think  we  have 
said  enough  to  prove  to  our  readers  that  Sir  R.  Anderson's  treat 
ment  of  his  subject  deserves  a  profound  and  prayerful  study. 
He  has  seen,  and  plainly  points  out,  what  many  even  of  true- 
hearted  defenders  of  the  faith  have  seen  but  imperfectly — that 
more,  infinitely  more  is  at  stake  than  any  literary  question  affecting 
the  Bible."— The  Record. 

"  It  is  a  book  which  should  be  placed  in  the  library  of  all  who 
are  repelled  by  the  methods  of  the  critics." — Daily  Express. 

"  The  book  of  the  year."— Things  to  Come. 

"  Those  of  our  readers  who  cannot  buy  Sir  R.  Anderson's  book 
for  themselves  should  enquire  for  it  at  the  nearest  free  library, 
and  not  rest  content  until  it  is  put  into  circulation  there.  .  .  . 
We  doubt  whether  there  is  any  other  writer  on  this  subject  who 
can  be  considered  equally  successful  in  grasping  the  crucial 
points,  and  at  the  same  time  putting  them  before  the  general 
public  in  a  concise  and  intelligent  form." — Church  Family 
Newspaper. 

"  This  is  a  work  for  the  present  age.  Sir  Robert  Anderson  has 
rendered  immense  service  by  its  publication.  It  should  be  widely 
circulated."— The  News. 

"  We  sincerely  thank  Sir  Robert  Anderson  for  devoting  him 
self,  heart  and  mind,  to  the  good  cause  which  here  engages  him. 
He  shows,  as  we  have  many  a  time  pointed  out,  that,  when 
studied  with  care,  Holy  Scripture  justifies  to  the  full  all  the 
claims  which  it  makes  of  inspiration,  integrity,  and  authority. 
He  deals  with  many  men  and  topics  in  this  substantial  volume, 
and  in  an  appendix  he  discusses,  succinctly  but  to  good  pur 
pose,  several  important  questions  raised  in  the  course  of  the 
book.  We  trust  his  pages  will  have  many  readers,  and  that  his 
arguments  will  be  brought  under  the  notice  of  such  as  have  been 
unsettled  in  mind  through  disturbing  criticism." — The  Christian. 


PRESS  NOTICES  (continued)— 

"  Valuable  as  the  author's  former  works  were,  his  latest  volume 
excels  them.  .  .  .  '  The  Bible  and  Modern  Criticism '  should  be 
read  and  digested  by  all  thoughtful  Christians,  for  its  eloquent 
and  scholarly  testimony  in  favour  of  '  The  Scriptures  of  truth ' 
cannot  fail  to  confirm  believers  and  to  assist  waverers  and  all 
such  as  feel  perplexed  by  the  insidious  reasonings  of  the  New 
Critics.  We  could  wish  that  copies  of  Sir  Robert  Anderson's 
book  were  placed  on  the  study  shelves  of  all  ministers  and 
teachers  of  the  Gospel,  and  presented  to  the  libraries  of  our 
theological  colleges." — The  English  Churchman. 

"  A  terse  and  vigorous  style  is  a  striking  characteristic  of  this 
book.  .  .  .  The  book  throughout  is  excellent  reading,  and  is 
enlivened  with  apposite  anecdotes  which  illustrate  and  elucidate 
the  points  urged. — The  Church  Missionary  Intelligencer. 

"  The  time  has  come  for  spiritual  men  to  take  a  very  decided 
position,  and  to  use  the  plainest  speech,  in  relation  to  criticism. 
Nothing  is  to  be  gained  by  delaying  the  inevitable  issue  of  the 
conflict.  We  thank  Sir  Robert  Anderson  for  his  able,  indepen 
dent,  and  courageous  witness.'' — Life  of  Faith. 

"  Among  the  extending  list  of  works  from  his  able  pen  we 
have  read  none  with  more  intense  interest  than  this.  ...  It 
abounds  in  striking  and  peculiarly  apt  illustrations,  and  will 
repay  reading  more  than  once  or  twice." — The  Witness. 

"  A  work  of  singular  lucidity  of  style  and  of  remarkable  argu 
mentative  power.  ...  He  argues  with  cumulative  force  in  this 
book,  whether  he  is  dealing  with  the  proem  in  Genesis,  the 
structural  unity  of  the  Pentateuch,  the  records  of  Jonah  and 
Daniel,  the  history  of  Israel  or  the  harmony  of  the  Gospels,  that 
the  case  of  the  Higher  Critics  must  collapse  unless  they  can 
succeed  in  discrediting  the  testimony  of  the  chief  witness,  the 
Divine  Master.  ...  His  brusqueness  and  racy  invective  are 
intellectually  stimulative,  although  the  Higher  Critics  and  loose 
thinkers  are  irritated  by  his  book,  as  is  evident  from  the  tone  of 
some  of  the  reviews  of  it.  ...  Sir  Robert  Anderson  has  written 
a  trenchant  and  straightforward  book,  which  places  critics, 
whether  as  radical  as  Prof.  Cheyne  or  as  conservative  as  Prof 
Driver,  on  their  defence  before  men  of  common  sense.  — The 
New  York  Tribune. 


SOME   PRESS   NOTICES   OF  THE  AUTHOR'S 
WORKS 

The    Buddha    of  Christendom 

A  BOOK  FOR  THE  PRESENT  CRISIS. 
Crown  Sv0,  cloth,  $s. 

"Its  protests  are  timely,  its  historical  summaries  to  the 
point,  its  purpose  wholesome  and  sincere." — Speaker. 

"A  valuable  contribution  to  the  religious  literature  of  the 
time,  and  well  adapted  to  the  crisis  in  the  English  Church."— 
New  York  Tribune. 

"A  vigorous  and  well-supported  protest  against  the 
Romeward  tendencies  of  the  day." — Glasgow  Herald. 

"A  work  of  great  interest  and  importance.  ...  It  will 
help  the  Protestant  cause." — The  Christian. 

"A  leading  book  of  the  century." — News. 

"  Its  central  and  animating  thought  ...  is  one  to  which 
Englishmen  will  do  well  to  give  very  earnest  heed  just  now." 
— Record. 

"A  powerful  plea  for  true  Christianity." — Rock. 


The   Coming   Prince 

or,   The    Seventy   Weeks   of  Daniel. 

WITH   AN  ANSWER  TO  THE   HIGHER  CRITICISM. 
Seventh  Edition.         Cloth.  $s. 

"The  results  of  close  study  and  diligent  research  are  so  clearly 
stated  as  to  be  within  the  easy  apprehension  of  any  intelligent 
reader  who  gives  his  mind  to  the  subject ;  and  there  are  few 
books  on  prophecy  written  in  so  fair  and  impartial  a  spirit." 
— Christian. 

"  We  were  unable  to  lay  down  the  book  until  we  had  read 
it  to  the  last  page."— Daily  Express. 


The    Silence    of    God 

Sixth  Edition.     Cloth,  2S.  6d. 

"  We  are  profoundly  grateful  to  Dr.  Anderson  for  this  most 
striking  endeavour  to  move  a  terrible  stumbling-block  out  of 
the  way  of  many." — Record. 

"It  deals  with  a  problem  of  inexhaustible  interest." — 
Literature. 

"One  of  the  most  thoughtful  and  instructive  books  of 
modern  times." — Church  Bells. 

"He  writes  forcibly,  eloquently,  with  much  knowledge  of 
what  others  think  and  say,  and  with  profound  conviction  and 
confidence." — Daily  News. 

"  A  book  which  has  astonished  religious  Europe." — New 
York  Herald. 

Human  Destiny 

A    Handbook    of    the    Eschatological    Controversy    (being 

an  Answer  to  the  books  entitled   "  Eternal  Hope," 

"Life  in  Christ,"  "Salvator  Mundi,"  "The 

Restitution  of  all  Things"). 

Fifth    Edition.         Cloth,  35.  6d. 

"The  most  valuable  contribution  to  the  subject  I  have  evei 
seen." — The  late  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

"  In  these  days,  when  foundation  truths  are  undermined 
by  those  who  pass  for  evangelicals,  every  testimony  to  the 
truth  which  has  been  thoroughly  thought  out,  and  is  uncom 
promisingly  expressed,  is  a  great  gain  to  the  Church  of  God. 
As  such  we  commend  Dr.  Robert  Anderson's  new  book." 

"  Its  strength  lies  in  its  fidelity  to  revelation  and  its  vigorous 
exposure  of  mere  human  speculations." — Christian. 

"This  masterly  treatise  .  .  .  ought  to  become  a  treasured 
handbook  on  the  subject." — Christian  Leader. 

"It  is  seldom  that  we  take  up  a  book  that  we  wish  it  had 
been  longer,  but  this  is  such  a  book." — Record. 

All  the  foregoing  are  published  by 
HODDER  &  STOUGHTON,  27,  PATERNOSTER  Row. 


The    Gospel   and  its   Ministry 

A  Handbook  of  Evangelical  Truth 
Eleventh  Edition,  Revised.         Cloth,  2S.  6d. 

"  These  essays  contemplate  the  most  stupendous  subjects  which  can 
occupy  human  thought,  and  they  are  not  unworthy  of  their  themes.  .  .  . 
The  chapters  on  '  Grace '  and  '  The  Cross '  are  worth  their  weight  in 
gold. " —  Christian . 

Daniel  in  the   Critics'   Den 

A  Reply  to  Professor  Driver,  of  Oxford,  and  the 
(late)  Dean  of  Canterbury 

Second  Edition.         Cloth,  $s.  6d.  net. 

*'  We  welcome  Sir  Robert  Anderson's  extremely  able  defence  of  the 
truth  of  the  record  of  Daniel.  ...  In  its  cautious,  but  firm,  weighing 
of  evidence,  the  refutation  (of  the  critics)  is  crushing." — The  Record. 

Pseudo-Criticism 

or,  The   Higher   Criticism   and   its    Counterfeit. 

Cloth,  y.  6d. 

"A  masterpiece  of  apologetics." — English  Churchman. 

"  I  read  the  book  through  with  the  keenest  interest,  and  I  laid  it  down 
with  the  earnest  hope  that  God  would  use  it  very  widely  among  precisely 
the  men  for  which  it  was  written  with  such  masterly  force." — THE  BISHOP 
OF  DURHAM. 

JAMES   NISBET    &    CO.,   LTD.,    21,   BERNERS   ST.,    W. 

"  For  Us  Men  " 

Chapters  on  Redemption  Truths. 

Cloth,  2S.  6d.  net. 

(<  Intended  to  help  those  who  are  seeking  peace  with  God,  or  who 
desire  to  lead  others  into  the  way  of  life. " — Preface. 

"  He  glories  in  placing  in  a  plain  and  simple  light  the  fundamental 
truths  of  Holy  Writ.  With  much  heartiness,  therefore,  we  commend  the 
book  to  our  readers." — The  Christian. 

MORGAN  &  SCOTT,   12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.G. 


WORKS    BY    THE    RIGHT    REV. 

HANDLEY    C.   G.   MOULE,   D.D., 

LORD  BISHOP  OF  DURHAM. 
The  Epistle  to  the    Romans  .    Cr.  8vo,  cloth,  75.  6d. 

"The  spirit  in  which  he  expounds  it  is  beyond  our  praise." — 
Spectator. 

Ephesian  Studies.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  53. 

"  Dr.  Moule's  expositions  are  careful  and  scholarly  ;  and  it  need 
hardly  be  said  that  his  exhortations  and  teachings  are  earnest  and 
devout." — Glasgow  Herald. 

Colossian  Studies :  Lessons  in  Faith  and  Holiness 

from  St.  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  Philemon.    Cr.  8vo, 
cloth,  55, 

"  These  studies  are  the  work  of  a  profound  scholar,  who  never  makes 
the  apostle  say  what  he  did  not  say,  with  the  scholar's  caution,  which 
checks  undue  positiveness  where  the  meaning  is  doubtful ;  but  above 
all  the  work  of  a  believer  who  manifests  intense  earnestness  of 
coriviction  in  every  line." — Record. 

Philippian  Studies :    Lessons   in    Faith    and    Love 

from  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Philippians.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  55. 

"  Dr.  Moule  carefully  translates  and  paraphrases  each  section  of  St. 
Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  and  draws  out  the  permanent 
lessons  of  faith  and  love  which  it  contains  ;  he  has  made  a  wise 
choice  of  the  book  of  the  Bible  on  which  to  comment,  and  has  treated 
it  with  wisdom  and  reverence." — Guardian. 

Outlines   of   Christian   Doctrine.     Fcap.  8vo,  25.  6d. 

"  Mr.  Moule  has  attempted  a  very  difficult  task,  and  has  at  least 
succeeded  in  condensing  an  immense  mass  of  information  into  a  small 
compass.  It  is  perhaps  superfluous  to  say  that  his  work  is  characterised 
by  great  reverence  from  the  first  page  to  the  last.  At  every  point  the 
reader  feels  that  he  is  reading  a  statement  of  a  theology  which  is  the 
life  of  the  writer.  In  the  more  strictly  theological  part  the  summary  is 
as  a  rule  arranged  and  expressed  excellently." — Guardian. 

To  My  Younger  Brethren :     Chapters  on   Pastoral 

Life  and  Work.     Cr.  8vo,  cloth,  55. 

"Practical,  sensible,  and  devout." — Glasgow  Herald. 
"This   is   a  valuable   work,    thoughtful   and    practical    in   a  high 
degree. " —  Christian. 

Veni  Creator :  Thoughts  on  the  Person  and  Work 

of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Promise.     Cr.  8vo,  cloth,  53. 


LONDON  :    HODDER  &  STOUGHTON,  27,  PATERNOSTER   Row. 


iox  ex 

ON'i" 


